I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954jul26.pdf

============================================================

Challenge  to  the  Senate  in  the  1st  Amendment  Cases, Page 4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   II,  NUMBER 27
JULY  26,  1954WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
The  Enemy  Mendes-France  Defeated
Amid  the  general  inanity  of  American  newspaper  comment
whenever   peace  manages  to   break  out,   men  of   good   will
who  are  still  unafraid   to  think  clearly  will  give  thanks  for
the  ending  of  the  Indo-Chinese  war.   In  the  high  level  stra-
tegic  thinking  in  which  our  armchair  generals  of  the  press
engage,  no  one  stopped  to  think  of  the  bombed  out  villages
in  Indo-China  which  can  sleep  for   a  change  without  dread
of  what might  drop  upon  them  from  the  skies.  In  Indo  China,
as  in  Korea, Western  forces  had  grown  accustomed  to  dealing
out  death with  lordly  indifference  to  the  natives—there  is  an
unconscious  presumption  that  the  man  burned  out  by napalm
prefers  incineration  by  the  "free  world"  to  Communist   "en-
slavement."  From  this,  Indo  China  will  now  have  surcease.
We  also dare assert  that  the  world  owes a  debt  not  only  to
Mendes-France  but   to  the  negotiators  on  the  other  side—to
Molotov  and  Chou  En-lai  and  Ho  Chi-minh  for  taking  half
a  loaf   when  they  might   have  been  tempted  into   greed  by
military  successes  or  stung  into  obduracy  by  insulting  provo-
cations.   The   Geneva  conference  demonstrated  what   most
people  in  this  country  have  grown  afraid  to  recognize—that
peace  is  possible where  there  is a will  to  negotiate  and  a  readi-
ness to  compromise.  Our  own U.S.  attitude toward  peace  con-
ferences  has  too  long  been  that  these  are  places where  we  lay
down  our  terms  take-it-or-leave  it,  unconditional  surrender
style.   Mendes-France  in  his  last   broadcast   to   the  French
people  before  the  settlement   well  described  the  enemy  that
he had  to  vanquish:  "distrust.  Between the  men who  are seek-
ing  peace  together   here,"  the  Premier   said,  "one   notices  a
profound  distrust,  a  painful  distrust ...  It  is  the  heaviest
burden  that  weighs on  our  work,  it  is the  most  serious threat,
present  and  future,  for  the  maintenance of  peace."
North  Africa  The  Next  Test
In  the  wake  of  the  peace,  the  problem  for  Vietnam  is  to
avoid  a permanent  partition;  Korea  and  Germany  are  dreadful
examples  of  the  fate  which  awaits countries  split  between  the
spheres  of  influence  of  the  contending  Great  Powers.    The
peace  agreement  promises  elections;   it   is  a  shameful   com-
mentary  on  the  "free  world"  that  it  is  we  who  insisted  on
postponing   those  elections   as  long   as  possible.    Unless   the
neutral  Asian  powers  insist,  these  elections  and  the  reunifica-
tion  they  would  make possible  may  never  come  to  pass.   For
France,   the  problem  is  now  to  act  quickly  in  Tunisia   and
Morocco  to  grant   nationalist   aspirations  within   the  French
Union  before it  is too  late.  There  is little  time  left  if  Mendes-
France is to  save French  North Africa from  becoming  another
Indo-China.   In  this  task,  and in his wider  project  for  reviving
and  stabilizing  his  country,  he  will  have  the  good  wishes of
all  who  love France.   A  new star  has risen  in  her  time  of  need.
In  regard  to  Indo-China,  the  situation  here  in  Washington
is  not  quite  what  it  appears  to  be  in  the  headlines.   Those
conservative  forces  which  prevented  U.S.  intervention  earlier
and  spiked  the  guns  of  the  Radfords  and  Nixons  also  played
a  role  behind  the  scenes  in  sending  Walter  Bedell  Smith   to
Geneva.   Even  on  the  Hill,  where  the  Democrats   are  trying
to  compete  with  the  China  Lobby  Republicans  as fire-eaters in
preparation  for  the Fall election,  the  silent  are more  significant
than  the  noisy few  like  Knowland  and  Symington.
Co-Existence, But  By  Some  Other Name
At  his  press  conference  last  Monday  Secretary  of  Defense
Wilson  said  some  method  must  be  worked  out  whereby  the
free  world and communism can live  together.   When  a reporter
commented,  "That  sounds  like  co-existence,"  Wilson  drew
back  in  alarm  from  the  horrid  word—but  not  the  idea.   He
suggested  maybe  "cohabitation"  would  be  a  better  term  and
added  that  after  observing  two  world  wars  he  did  not  think
a   third   would  be  the  answer.   (Compare   this  with   George
Meany's  sneers  about  "massive  appeasement"  replacing   "mas-
sive  retaliation"  and  you  will  see how  much  more  peaceful  our
capitalists  are  than  our  labor  leaders).
Eisenhower  also  was  cautious  and  stressed   the   possibilities
of  world  peace.   The   tip-off   is  that  he  is  still  unwilling   to
give  Chiang  the  mutual  assistance  pact   the  latter  has  been
asking.   Another  indicative  straw   is  that  we  are   proposing
"consultation"  rather   than   automatic  action  in  that   South
East  Asia  pact  now  under  discussion.   There  are  men  within
the  Administration  who  would  be  relieved  if  somehow  Com-
munist   China   could   be  gotten  into  the  UN   after   election
without  too  much  of  an  uproar.
The  weak  and faltering  man  in  the White House must  wish
there  was  some similar way  to  dispose  of  the  McCarthy  prob-
lem  without   the  risk  of  taking  leadership  or   responsibility.
But  while  Mendes-France  has  won  a  great  victory  over   dis-
trust  abroad,  the  forces  which  fatten  politically  on  the  pro-
pagation  of  distrust  at  home  are  still  riding  high.   McCarthy
took  a  defeat  but  a  minor  one  in  the  loss  of  Cohn  and  the
switch  of   Surine.   He  retains  his  place;   even   the   Flanders
censure  motion   if  voted   will  be  no  setback.   His  plans   (if
the  Joint  Congressional  Committee   on  Atomic  Energy   does
not  interfere)   are  to  exploit  the  Oppenheimer  case  in  sensa-
tional  H   and  A  bomb  hearings.   Jenner  and  McCarran  are
getting  ready  to   compete   by  reopening   the  Harry  White
hearings with  Morgenthau  as a new target.  Brownell,  putting
on  the  heat  for  the  Fascist  police  style  legislation   discussed
on  pages  two  and  three,  plans  sensational  red  raids  to  keep  up
with  the  witch  hunting  Joneses.  The  next  few  months  will
be  as hectic  at  home  as they  will  be  peaceful  abroad.
!  3  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, July  28,  1954
A  Way to  Reenact  The Hiss  Case  and the  Chambers  Charges
The Dynamite Hidden  in  Brownell's  New  Espionage Bill
Without  a  hearing,  without  a  minority  report,  the  Senate
Judiciary   Committee  last   Monday   reported   favorably  HR
9580,  "an  act  to  revise  and  extend  the  laws  relating  to  espi-
onage  and  sabotage."   This  bill  embodies three  measures  re-
quested  by  the  Attorney  General  (HR  8749,  9021,  and  9023).
The  bill  provides  the  death  penalty  for  espionage  in  peace-
time—for  the  first time in the  history  of the  United  States.
In  the  House  the  bill  was  approved  on  July  8  with  little
debate.   Not  a  single  vote  was  recorded  in  opposition,  so
great  was  the  fear  of  appearing  to  oppose  anything  labelled
a  law  against  espionage.   Only one member Celler  (D.  N.Y.)
had  the  courage  to  voice  his  opposition to  the  death  penalty
(see  box at  the  bottom of this  page)  but  even he  did not  vote
against  the  bill.   Unless  public  opinion  makes  itself  felt  in
the  Senate, it  may pass  there  with  little  or no  debate.
This  bill,  if  passed,  will  yet  haunt  the  labor movement and
the  democratic  party.  The  definition  of  sabotage  is  so  broad
that  it  could  be  used  against  strikers,  on  the  ground  that
they  were  interfering  with  the  production  of  defense  essen-
tials  with  intent  to  injure  the  United  States.
The  espionage  provisions  would  make  it  possible  to  rake
up  old charges against New Dealers and scientists which have
failed  to  stand  up  in  the  courts,  or  been  aired  only  before
Congressional  committees.   The  bill,  in  this  respect,  would
(to  summarize roughly)  do three  new things.
1.  By  making death  a  possible  penalty  for  peacetime  es-
pionage,  the  present  10-year  statute  of  limitations  would  be
lifted  and  prosecutions  could  be  instituted  for  events  which
took  place in the  30's  or  the  20's.  Naturally  the  further  back
one  goes,  the  harder  it  is  for  a  man  to  defend  himself,  to
find  witnesses  and  to  uncover proof.
But  if  this  bill  passes, the  Whitaker  Chambers  story  could
be  taken  into  the  courts.   A  man  like  Alger  Hiss  could  be
rearrested  on  leaving  prison  and  made  the  center  of  another
political  bogeyman  circus.  If  there  was  no  evidence that  he
had  actually  passed  the  kind  of  information  required  for  an
espionage  conviction,  two  other modes  of  procedure would  be
open.  This  brings  us  to  the  second and  third  things  the  bill
would  do:
2.  The  bill  carries  a  conspiracy  provision  which  says  that
"If  two  or  more persons  conspire to  violate this  section,  and
one  or  more  of  such  persons  do  any  act  to  effect  the  object
of  the  conspiracy,  each of the  parties  to  such conspiracy  shall
be  subject  to the  punishment provided for  the  offense  .  .  ."
Forrester  (D.  Ga.)  in  the  debate  on  the  bill  asked  whether
this  would  not  make  equally  guilty   some  person  who  had
left  the  conspiracy  and  "has  fully  repented  and  has   fully
recanted?"
To this  Walter  (D. Pa.),  gave  a  cynical answer.   "The  fact
that  two  people  enter  a  conspiracy,"  Walter  told  Forrester,
"and  one  decides  not  to  go  through  with  it  certainly  would
not  make it  necessary  to  impose  any punishment .  .  . The
gentleman  with  all  his  years  of  experience  as  a  prosecutor
knows how many times he has gone to the court  and explained
that  a  criminal  has  been  quite  helpful  and  suggested  that
perhaps  the  case  ought  to  be nolle  pressed."
In  other  words the  death  penalty  could  be used  to  put  the
screws  on  accused  persons  to  make them  tools  of  the  prose-
cution.   Within  the   confines   of  this  roomy  conspiracy  pro-
vision,  many  might  be  convicted  against  whom  there  was
no  evidence of  actual  espionage.   Others  could be turned  into
informers,  testifying  to  real,  exaggerated  or  imaginary  ex-
perience  to  save  their  own necks.
3.  An  even  simpler  way  is   opened  by  the   bill  for   the
prosecution.  This  lies  in  the  provisions  of  Title  III  requiring
the  registration  of  persons  who  have  knowledge of,  or  been
trained  in,  espionage  or  sabotage.
"At  first  blush,"  as  Walter  explained  to  the  House,   "one
would  say  that  we  are  rather  naive  in  expecting  somebody
trained  in  espionage to  come forward and register.  But when
you  look  at  the  situation   a  little  more  carefully,  you  will
find  under  this  language  it  is  possible  to  prosecute   people
for  a  failure  to  register  when  you could  not  prove the  overt
acts  necessary  to  be proved in  spelling  out  another  offense,"
i.e.  actual  espionage  or  sabotage.
On  the  say-so  of  some  professional  ex-Communist  a  man
might  be  convicted  of  failure  to  register  and  go  to  jail  for
five years.   The  "warmed  over  spy"  we  have  been  promised
in  this  coming  election  campaign  could  be  warmed  over  in
the  courts.
When  the  registration  device is  added  to  the  lifting  of  any
statute  of  limitations, it  is  easy  to  see  how many  witnesses
who  pleaded  the  Fifth  could  be  put  through  the  hurdles  of
"non-registration"  and  how effectively  the  atmosphere  of  the
campaign  could  be  stoked up  and  stinked  up  by  such  tactics.
Even  if  the  courts  ultimately  held  that  a  man  could  not
under  the  Fifth   amendment  be  required  to  disclose  facts
which  might  be used to  send  him  to  his  death  for  espionage,
or  "conspiracy  to  commit  espionage," the  short  term  damage
would  be  done  long  before  the  courts  had  spoken.  Among
other  things,  the  United  Nations  might  be  fatally   smeared
by  reenacting  in  the  courts  in  "non-registration"   proceed-
ings  what  the  Jenner-McCarran  committee  so  recently  did
in  its  investigation  of  UN  personnel.
The  One Lone  Vote  Against  Death  for  Peacetime  Espionage
"For   a  society  which  takes  pride  in  the  high  value  it
places  on  human  life,  we  can find little  justification for  the
extension   of   the   death  penalty  for   peacetime  espionage.
Why  do  we  do  this?   Do  we  expect  the  penalty  to  act  as
a  deterrent?  Yet criminologists . . . insist  that it  is not so.
The  threat  of   punishment  is   among  the  least  considered
of  all  factors by  those intent  upon  the  commission  of crime.
That  holds  good  for  a  political crime.
"It  has  been  pointed  out  again  and again that  juries  are
less  willing  to  convict  when  the  possible  penalty  is  death.
Those  of  us  who  have  had wide  courtroom experience know
this  to  be  so.   Hence,  what  do  we  hope  to  accomplish?   An
act  of  revenge?  Or retribution?   This  is  the  death penalty,
I  beg  you to  note,  for  peacetime espionage.  This  means  the
heightening  of  emotionalism  in  an area  where,  by  all  means,
good  sense  and rationality must  prevail. . . .
"I  am  sure  when  future  historians  appraise our  present
era  they  will  note  the  baneful  influence  of  fear  of  com-
munism.   They  will  speak  of  consciousness  of  the  danger
of  communism  but  will  deplore  and severely  criticize us  for
our  monomania  on  the  subject of  fear  of  communism.  They
will  say  we  were  often  actuated  by  sensation,  not  sanity,
by  passion, not  patience.  They  will  charge that  the  appeal
was  too  often  to  our adrenal  glands.  That is  why  they  will
challenge  our passing this  bill  making peacetime espionage
a  capital  offense.
"Death  is  final  and  a  mistake  in  executing  an  innocent
man  is  irreparable.  Juries  are  not  infallible  and  are  cer-
tainly  open to  wider  error when dealing with the surcharged
climate  surrounding  espionage.   Remember,  too,  there  is  no
statute  of  limitation  in capital  offenses."
—Celler  (D.  N.Y.),  the  only  member  of  the  House  to  question
the  death  penalty   as  provided   in  HR   9580,  (Con.  Ree.
July  8,  1954, pps.  9529-30).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  26,  1954
Covering  The  Witch  Hunt Front  On Our Own  Broomstick
Worst  news of  the  week was  passage  by  the  House  (unani-
mously  by  voice  vote)  late  Wednesday afternoon  (July  21)
of  HE  7130,  the  Eisenhower-Brownell  bill  to  deprive  "con-
spirators"  of  their  citizenship  on conviction under  the  Smith
Act  and  similar  sedition  statutes  (for  full  discussion  see  the
Weekly  for  last  February  1, "An  Old Police  State  Custom")
.  .  .  The companion  measures  on the  Senate  side  are  still
buried  in Senate  Judiciary  subcommittee on immigration  . . .
The  only  good  news  was  minor.  In  the  Senate,  the  indefi-
nite  shelving by the  Senate  Judiciary  Committee of  a  Brown-
ell  bill  to   make  conviction  for   perjury   easier   by  merely
requiring  the   prosecution   to  prove  inconsistent    statement
instead  of  falsity   .  .  .  Aside  from   that,  Senator  Langer
(R.,N.D.),  chairman  of  the  committee,  said  everything  re-
quested  by  Brownell  would  be  reported  out,  except  the  wire-
tap  bill  and the immunity  bill  . . .
In  the  meantime  the  Senate  committee  voted  out  S  3428,
the  Brownell-Ferguson-Jenner  screening  bill  permitting   the
discharge  from  industry  of  "individuals  believed  to  be  dis-
posed  to  commit  acts  of  sabotage,  espionage  or  other  sub-
version"  .  .  .  This   blacklist  bill  is  opposed  by  the  labor
movement,  along  with  the  companion  Brownell  measure  to
liquidate or brand as subversive those trade unions, businesses
and  other  organizations found  to  be "Communist  infiltrated."
As  a  result  of  united  labor  pressure,  the  House  Judiciary
Committee  buried  these  two  Brownell  bills  and  reported   to
the  House  a  substitute  by  Walter   (D.,  Pa.),  HJ  Res.  527.
This  would  establish  a  Commission on  Security  in  Industry
with  12  members  to  be  appointed  by  the   President   from
labor,  management  and  the  public  to  "study  the   prevailing
practices  and  conditions  in  all  branches"  of  industry   with
regard  to  protection  against  "sabotage,  espionage  and  other
activities"  and report  their findings by January  IB  ...   The
committee   (Hse.  Rpt.  2280)  said  this  would  be  better  than
passing  "measures  hastily  drawn  and  obviously  inadequate"
and  added  that  it  was  "gratified   to  find"  that  Meany  and
Reuther  concurred . . .
But  as  we went to  press, there was  rumor of a  deal  where-
by  the  House  would  pass  the  Walter  bill  for  a  study  com-
mission  but  the  wild  men  would be  appeased  by  passage  of
a  bill  to  outlaw  the  Communist party  and  "front"  organiza-
tions ...  A  House  Judiciary   subcommittee   Wednesday
favorably  reported  HR  9915,  a bill "declaring  the Communist
party  and similar   revolutionary   organizations   illegal"  .  . .
The  penalties  are  ten  years  in  jail  or  $10,000  fine  or  both
and  the  jury  would take  into  account  among  other  things  in
determining  membership whether  the  accused had  "indicated
by  word,  action,  conduct, writing ...  a  willingness  to carry
out  in  any  manner  and  to  any  degree"  any  of  the  plans  or
purposes  of  the  organization ...  A  sermon  on  peace  or  an
editorial   against   the   witch   hunt   might   be  considered   as
evidence . . . Celler was the lone dissenter  . . .
Should the Walter  bill pass the  House, a battle may develop
in   conference   committee  of  the  two  Houses  .  .  .  Senator
Butler  (B.,  Md.),  sponsor with four  other  Senators  of  S 3706,
to  subject  "Communist infiltrated"  unions  and  other  organi-
zations  to  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board,  said  he
Even  Steven,  or  The  Marxist  Struggle
A  La  Mack  Sennett
"Just  because  the  FBI  says  there  are  25,000  Com-
munists  in  the  U.S.  is  no  reason  to  change  the  laws
protecting  the  homes  of  the   rest   of   the   160  million
Americans.   The   FBI   has,   say,   10,000  men  chasing
Communists.   Then  you  have  the  McCarthy  committee
chasers  and  the  Velde  committee  chasers.    When  you
put  them all  together,  it  looks like  about  25,000  persons
chasing  25,000  persons."
—Sen. Langer  (INS  interview,  July  19  Wash.  Post)
would fight the Walter  substitute  . . . "We don't  need a com-
mission,"  he  said,  "and   I  won't   support   one" ...  In  the
meantime  the  "filibuster"  on  the  atomic  energy  act  by  Sen-
ators  opposed  to  Eisenhower's  private power  grab  at  TVA is
so  holding  up  the  business  of  the  Senate  that  no  vote  has
been  scheduled  on this  key witch  hunt  bill  . . .
The  best  hope  of  blocking  this  and  similar  measures  is  to
suggest to your  Senator that  he vote  for  the  idea  of  study by
a   Presidential   commission  .  .  .  Meanwhile  the  House has
joined  the  Senate  in  passing  HR  9690  to  preserve  the  Re-
public  by  forcing  all   subversive   organizations   to  register
presses and mimeograph machines with  the SACB . . .  How
scared  can a  great  country  get?
Outlook  on  the  Immunity  Bill
Hearings  on a  high  level  of  fairness  by  the  committee  and
of  presentation  by the  witnesses  were held by House  Judiciary
last  week  on  bills  to  compel  testimony   despite   the   Fifth
amendment, the  so-called "immunity"  bills.
On  Monday, Theodore Pearson  for  the  Bar  Association  of
New  York  opposed the  grant  of  such  power to  Congressional
committees  under  any  circumstances  but  approved  immunity
powers  for  grand  juries  and  courts.  William Allen  Rahill of
the  Philadelphia bar,  for  the  Friends  Committee on  National
Legislation,  and  Leonard  B. Boudin  of the  New York  bar,  for
the  Emergency  Civil  Liberties  Committee,  eloquently  argued
the   case  for   preserving   the   full   protection   of  the   Fifth
amendment  in  all  types  of  proceedings.   Similar  testimony
was given on Wednesday by Irving Ferman for  the  American
Civil  Liberties  Union  and  by  Robert  J.  Silverstein  for   the
National  Lawyers  Guild.
We  hope to  give  a  full  summary  of  the  points  they  made
in  a  later  issue.   The  immunity  bill  at  the  moment  is  not
quite  as  near  possible  passage  as  other  witch  hunt  measures.
House  Judiciary  does  not  seem  too  favorably   disposed  and
that  last  of  the  civil  libertarians,  Celler   (D.,  N.Y.),   the
ranking  Democratic • member, made  his  own  opposition   evi-
dent.   We recommend to  our  readers  as  ammunition  and  one
of  the  best  studies  of  its  kind, the  article  on  "The  Immunity
Bill"  by  Leonard  B.  Boudin  which  has  just  been  published
by   the   Georgetown  Law  Journal   (Vol.  42,  No.  4,   $1.25,
Georgetown  Law  School, Washington,  B.C.).  It  is  a  work of
scholarship  and  penetration  which  you  will  enjoy  reading.
The  Weekly  Takes  Another  Bow  In  The  British  Press
Critic  in  the  incomparable  London New  Statesman  and Nation
for   July   10,  and  Laborite  M.P.  Tom  Driberg  in  his  vigorous
column   (June  27)   lor   Reynold's  News,  the   Sunday   paper   of
the  British  Cooperative   movement  (it  has several  million  read-
ers)/   both  lifted  items  from  our  Weekly,   and  gave   generous
credit.  The  former   picked   up  the   quote   we   unearthed  from
John  Foster  Dulles's  article  in   1935   on  "The   Road  to  Peace/'
the  prescription  then  being  to  give  in  to  the  expansionist  Axis
powers.   The latter  used parts of  our special issue on Guatemala.
There  I*  much  in  the  Week!/  you  won't  find  elsewhere,  not
because  we  have  a  crystal  ball  or  a  tap  on  the  White  House
telephone  but  because  there  is  so  much  of  importance  that  is
being  ignored by  other  publications  out of  indifference,  hostility
or  fear.   Do  a  little  missionary  work  for  us on  vacation.  Well
send  free  sample  copies  on  request.   There  is  a  blank  on  the
reverse   side  for  your  renewal,  subscription   or  a  gift  sub.   It
may  be a  small  publication  but  it  helps  to  fill  a  large  void.
-I. F. STONE.
1   1  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  Jvly  t8,  ISSJt
The  Lament, linger, Shadowitz  First  Amendment  Cases
Challenge to the Senate: Will It  Rubber  Stamp  McCarthy?
There are  several  reasons   why the  Senate  ought  not
to  vote  the  contempt resolutions asked  by  McCarthy  in  the
Lament,  Unger  and  Shadowitz  cases  without  real  debate.
The   basic  device  the  Senate  possesses  for   regulating   and
policing  the  conduct  of  its  own  committees—a  device  no one
seems  to  exercise—lies  in  the  vote  on  contempt   resolutions.
It  is  at  this  point  that  the  Senate  has  an  effective  check  on
abuse  of  power  by  committees.   It  can  refuse  to  vote  a con-
tempt  citation.
What  is  the  good  of  the  endless  debate     over  the
reform  of  committee  procedures  when  even  Senators  who  are
aroused  over  these  abuses do  not  use this  existing  check,  vote
like  rubber  stamps  when  contempt  resolutions  come  up?
A  shocking  exampk  was provided  by  the  Harvey  O'Connor
case.  In  the  midst  of  an  uproar of  protest  against McCarthy's
conduct  and  methods,  the  contempt   citation  was  passed  by
the  Senate  as a  routine  matter,  without  any  discussion  what-
ever,  as if  it  were a private  bill.
Some  slight  progress  has been made since then.   When
the  Lament,  Unger,  Shadowitz  contempt  resolutions  (S.  Res.
280,  281,  and  282)  were  called  up  for  a  vote  last  Saturday
(July  17),  Senator  Cooper   (R.  Tenn.),  a  member  of   the
calendar  committee,  said  "there  is  a  request  that  the  resolu-
tions  be passed  over."  Unanimous  consent  being denied, there
was no vote.  At  least one. Senator is preparing to  stage a  fight.
Even   the  busiest   Senator,  with  time  only  for   a  cursory
glance   at   the   reports   which   accompanied   these   contempt
resolutions  (Sen. Rpt.  1812, 1813 and  1814),  will  see that
these  involve  new  questions  on  which  it  is  the  duty  of  the
Senate to  pass. These  are novel  First, not  routine  Fifth,  amend-
ment  cases.
The  Unger  case   involves   the  right  of  the  McCarthy
committee  (the  old  Senate  Audit  and  Expenditures  commit-
tee)  to  investigate  the  personnel  of  the  United  Nations.   The
witness,  a  lawyer,  answered the  questions  about  UN  employes
but  balked on  several grounds  at  questions  as to  political  views
and  associations.   The  relevance of  the questions, the  authority
of  the  committee,  the  encroachment  on  the  right  of members
of  the  bar  to  be free  from  governmental inquisition, the  First
amendment  were  all  cited.  These  are substantial  questions.
Albert  Shadowitz,   who was drawn  into  the  vortex of
the   Fort   Monmouth   circus,   answered  questions  about  his
handling   of   classified   material,   and   denied  espionage.   But
he declined to  answer questions  about  political  views, invoking
the  First  amendment  and  citing  the  advice  given  American
intellectuals  by  Dr.  Albert  Einstein  to  resist  Inquisition.
Has  the  McCarthy  committee  the  right  to  inquire  into
political  views?  The  Jenner  committee,  under  the  terms  of
its  resolution,  may  claim  the   right.   There  is  nothing  in  the
resolution   establishing  McCarthy's   committee   which   gives
him  similar  power.
The  Corliss  Lament  case  is of  prime  interest.   He was
drawn  into  McCarthy's  orbit  on  the  excuse that  he was  cited
in  the  bibliography  of  one  book  on  Siberia  used  by  the  Army
and  had  contributed  a  chapter   to  another.   He  swore  that
he  had  never been a  Communist  but  refused  on  First  Amend-
ment  grounds  to  answer  questions  about  political  views  and
associations,  challenging   the  committee's  authority   to  make
such  inquiries.
McCarthy  claimed  jurisdiction  for  his  Government  Opera-
tions  committee  because  the  witness's  books  were purchased
by  the government.  In  a brief filed with  the  Attorney  General
in  the  Lamont  case,  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union  said:
"The naked question ...  is whether  the  government
can  investigate  any  author  or  any  book.   We  say  that   this
broad  question   is  involved   for   the  reason  that  every   book
published  in  the  United  States  occupies  a  place  in  the  Library
of  Congress;  almost  every  newspaper  is  published  by  one  or
more  government   agencies ... If  inquiries  into  associations
of  those  who  write  books  is  possible  in  Mr.  Lament's  case,  it
is  possible  in  the  case of  every  author,  of  the  editor  of  every
newspaper."
Can  Senators  of  conscience  permit  such  issues  to  be decided
by  default?   Will  they  allow  themselves  to  be  used  as  rubber
stamps  for  McCarthy  in  these  cases?  Their  duty  and  the  First
Amendment  are  involved.
A  Copy  of  This  Issue  Is Being  Sent  to  Every  U.  S.  Senator
L  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed !
N«n«
.Street
City                                               ZrniA             St*t«
Enter this  gift  sub for $4 more  (money enclosed) :
(To)  Name
Street
City                                       Zone             State
c.
5:
7-26-64
I.  F. Stone's Weekly
Room 205
301  E, Capitol  St.,  S.E.
Washington  3,  D. C
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Mattel
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED