I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954may31.pdf

============================================================

Can  Ex-Communists Redeem Themselves?  The  Galvan Ruling,  See Page  2.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL,   2,  NUMBER  19MAY  31,   1954WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
Why  Brownell  Had  to  Crawl  in  The  Lorwin  Case
Behind  the  sensational collapse of  the  Lorwin  perjury  case in
Federal  District  Court  here last  week  was a month's desperate
maneuvers  by  the  Attorney  General,  first  to  save  a  leading
Republican  brain  truster  from  being  made  to  appear  a  mali-
cious  fool  and  perhaps  a  perjurer  in  public,  and  then  to  save
himself   from  a  possible  citation  for  contempt.    The  extent
of   the  desperation  may   be  measured  by  the  gravity  of   the
steps  taken  to  resolve  the  crisis.
The  brain  truster  is  Harold  W.  Metz,  a  product  of  Brook-
ings  Institution,  the  academic  kept  woman  of  American big
business.  The  loyalty  board  testimony  by  Metz which  Federal
District  Court  Judge  Curran  ordered  the  Justice  Department
to produce would have done more than hurt  Metz's  reputation.
The  full  revelation  of  Metz's  political  illiteracy  would  have
damaged  the  Republican National  Committee,  for  which Metz
was  research  director  from  March,  1936  to  May,  1942,  and
the  Hoover   Commission,  on  which  he  currently   holds  the
same  position.
The  Lorwin  indictment  last  December,  coming  as  it   did
a  month  after  Brownell's  attack  on  Truman   in  the  Harry
White  case, was intended  to  be an  Eisenhower Administration
showpiece,  at  once  a  means  of  appeasing  McCarthy  with  a
personal   triumph  and  a  demonstration   that   the   Executive
department  could  be trusted  to  clean house on its  own.  Val  R.
Lorwin,  once  a  minor  State Department  official,  was  the  first
of  those  on  McCarthy's  famous  list  of  "81  Communists"   to
be indicted,  and  his trial  was in  effect  also to  try  and  condemn
the  "old   State  Department"  loyalty  board  officials   who  had
appraised  those  charges  and  cleared  Lorwin.
The  Government  Suddenly  Balks
Lorwin  was  indicted  for  falsely  denying  that  he  had  ever
been  a  member  of  the  Communist  party,  carried  a  party  card
and  held  a  Communist  party  meeting  in  his  home.   The  case
began   to   collapse  on  May  7  when  Federal  District   Judge
Curran  ordered  the  Justice Department  to  produce  the  tran-
script  of  the  testimony Metz  had  given  against Lorwin  before
the   State  Department   loyalty   board.   Though   the   specific
charges  depended upon  Metz  and  it  would have been necessary
to  produce  him  in  court  to  convict  Lorwin,  at  this  point  the
Justice Department  suddenly balked.  The  government  argued
that  production   of  the  hitherto  secret  testimony  would  en-
danger  internal  security,  breach  its  "confidential"   classifica-
tion,  endanger  sources of  information,  etc.
Unfortunately    for   the   government   these   familiar   pleas
were  impotent  on  this  occasion.   For  one  thing,  the  FBI  did
not  consider  Metz  a  "confidential  informant."    The  FBI  last
April  handed  over  the  text  of  the  statement  made  by  Metz
to  it  in  July,  19JO,  during  the  investigation  precipitated  by
the  McCarthy  charges  and  the  loyalty  inquiry.   This  state-
ment  had  been  produced  in  response  to   the  usual  pre-trial
defense  motion  for  examination of  any  statements by  prosecu-
tion  witnesses.   Ic  was  at  this  point  that  for  the  first  time
Lorwin  learned  that  his  accuser  was  Metz,  an  old  friend  and
one-rime associate of  his father, Lewis L.  Lorwin.   The  defense
then  moved  to  subpoena Metz's loyalty  board  testimony  under
a  recent  Circuit  court  ruling  (Fryer  v.  U.S.  207  F.  2d  135)
which  held  that  the  defense is entitled   (by  Rule  17c)   to  all
documentary  evidence  which  may  be  used  to  impeach   the
witness.
Judge  Curran  ruled  that  no  question  of  internal  security
was  involved  and  that  the  alleged  confidential  character  of
the   loyalty   board   proceedings   had   been  waived   when   the
government  gave Lorwin  a transcript  of  the  proceedings minus
Metz's  testimony.   Perhaps  the  Judge  was  also  impressed   by
an   affidavit   from  Benjamin  C   O'Sullivan,  Lorwin's   counsel
in  the loyalty  proceedings.  O'Sullivan  affirmed  that  the  loyalty
board,  when  asked  to  disclose  the  identity  and  testimony  of
the  accusing  witness  at  the  time,  saw no  reason  not  to  make
this  available if  the  witness  were  willing.
O'Sullivan  said  the  board  first  "invited"  Metz  to   appear
and  confront  Lorwin.  When  Metz  refused,  it  next  asked  him
to  permit  his  testimony  to  be  made  available  to  the  defense.
When  Metz  also  objected  to  this,  he  was  then  asked  by  the
board  whether  it  might  show  Lorwin  the  testimony  without
disclosing  Metz's  name.  This  was  also  refused.  Obviously  this
was  not   a  case  of  a  "confidential  informant"   (his  name  in
that   event   would  not   have  been  disclosed  to   the   loyalty
board)  but  of  a  man  who  was  afraid  or  ashamed to  repeat  in
public  the  testimony  he  had  given  in  private  against  an  old
friend,  with  whom  he  had  once  in  1935  shared  a  room.
A  Well-Known  Socialist  Family
The  loyalty  board  did not  think  much of  Metz's  testimony.
The  Lorwin-Strunsky  clan  to  which  Val  Lorwin  belongs  is
a  well-known  Socialist  family.   Among  the  99  witnesses  on
his  behalf  was  Norman   Thomas.   That  such  charges  should
ever  have  been  brought   against  Val  Lorwin  attests   the   in-
credible  ignorance  and  lack  of  elementary  political  sophistica-
tion  among  our inquisitors.  One of  the bits of  evidence  which
particularly  impressed  the  loyalty  board  was that   Communists
in  1935 did  not  have  party  "cards"  but  carried  little  16-page
booklets  while  Socialists  at  that  time  did  have  red  "cards."
This,  plus  a  Socialist  meeting  and  a  remark  made  in  jest,  all
remembered  15 years  later  by  a man  "hipped" on  the  question
of  Reds,  may  explain  the  accusation.
(Continued  on  Page   four)
1  i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  31, 1954
Can  Ex-Communists Ever  Redeem  Themselves?
The  Long  and  Sinister  Shadow  Cast  By  The  Galvan  Decision
The  case  of  Robert  Norbert  Galvan  decided  last  Monday
in  the  U.S.  Supreme Court  went  so far  in  its  invasion  of  civil
liberties  that  it  brought  together  in  his  defense  the  two ex-
tremes  within  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union.   Side  by
&We  on  his  brief   were  Osmond  K.  Praenkel  and  Morris  L.
Ernsu   Both  are  veteran  directors  of  the  ACLU  but  their
sharp  divergence  of  outlook  is  indicated  by  the  former's  ac-
tivity  as  a  leading  spirit  in the  National  Lawyers  Guild, the
latter's  as  personal  counsel  to J.  Edgar  Hoover.
Galvan v, Preis grew  out  of an  order  of deportation  against
a  Mexican cannery worker in Southern  California.  It  was the
first   test   of  the  constitutionality  of  that  provision  of   the
Internal   Security  Act  of  1950  ("the  McCarran  Act")   which
makes  aliens  deportable  for  past  membership  in  the  Com-
munist  party,  without  regard  to  why  they  joined,  how  they
left  or  what their  present  opinions  may be.
Galvan  himself  was  so  anxious  to  prove  the  sincerity  of
his  break  with  the  Communist party  that  he  had  offered  to
rejoin  it  as  an  informer  for  the  government.   If  Galvan  is
deportable  for  past  membership, then  so are  other  past mem-
bers  now  employed  as  informers  for  the  FBI  and  as  anti-
Communist  experts   by  other  branches  of  the   government.
The   Galvan   decision   is   in   this   respect   the   reductio   ad
absurdum  of  the  Red  hunt.
How  Are  Ex-Communists to  Be  Treated?
Fraenkel  and  Ernst  converged  on  the  case  from  opposite
directions.   Mr.   Fraenkel,   an   uncompromising  libertarian,
who  regards   civil  liberty   as  indivisible,  has  long   defended
the   rights   of  Communists.  Mr.  Ernst,  who  regards  Com-
munists  as  "conspirators"   and  therefore   outside  the   orbit
of  the  Bill  of  Rights,  has  set  himself  up  as  the  champion of
the  ex-Communist,  of  his  right  to  the  three  R's  of rehabilita-
tion,  redemption  and  respectability..  The  Galvan  case  raised
sharply,  in  the  field  of  deportations,  a  question that  must  be
resolved  in  other  areas  of  public  policy.   How  are  ex-Com-
munists  to  be  treated?
The  defense  in  the  Galvan  case  argued  the  thesis  put  for-
ward  two  years  ago  in  the  Ernst  and  Loth  book,  Report  on
the   American   Communist.   "Absent   a   special   juncture  in
Party  affairs  making  dissimulation  a  likelihood,"  the  brief
urged,  "it  is  much  more  probable than  not that  a  resignation
is  bona fide."
Indeed,  the  brief  continues, "the  basic  premise  of  our  dem-
ocracy,  that  truth  will  be  accepted  over  error,  indicates  the
likelihood   that   Communists  will   come  to   recognize   their
error."   On  the  basis  of  FBI  figures,  the  brief   notes,  most
Communists  do not  stay  in  the  party  long  enough  for  a  real
indoctrination:  "among  the  approximately  700,000 past  mem-
bers  of  the  Communist  party   in  this  country,  the  average
length  of  membership was  two or  three  years."
The  Law's   Inconsistency
One  provision  of  the  McCarran  Act  recognized the  possi-
bility  of  redemption by  allowing aliens  who  have  been mem-
bers  of  the  Communist  party  to  become citizens  if  ten  years
or  more  have  elapsed  since  they  left  the  Party.  Yet  the  pro-
vision  tested  in  the  Galvan  case  would make  the  same  alien
automatically  deportable,  though  his  membership  may  have
ended  20  or  30  years  before!   "Indeed,"   the  brief  said,  "as
here  interpreted,  a  past  member would  be  deportable  though
his  change of view had  been manifested  in his having 'actively
opposed'  the  Communist  ideology."
The  law  thus  embodies that  old joke  about  the  Sheriff  who
slugged  the  man  who  claimed  to  be  an  anti-Communist.   It
doesn't  care  what  kind  of  an  ex-Communist the  alien  is.   Pro
or   anti,  he   is  equally  deportable.    This   attitude   is  made
plainer  in  two  other  cases  recently  decided by  the  Board of
Immigration    Appeals,   Mita   v.   Brownell    and    Gomez   v.
Brnu'iiM.   The  Board  held  in  Mita's  case that  proof  of  active
hostility  to  Communism  and  present  loyalty  were  irrelevant.
The Board ordered  Gomez  deported  as  a  past  member  though
he  had  done  no  more  than  attend  two  meetings  in  1937  and
resigned   because  he  felt  that   membership  conflicted   with
his  faith  as  a  Catholic!
The  Cruel  Fiction  of  "Sending  Him  Home"
Like  so  many  current  deportees,   Galvan  came  here  as  a
child  and  spent  most of  his  life  in this  country;  he  is  "alien"
by  legal  rather  than   common  sense  definition.   He  was  six
and  a  half  when  he  emigrated  from   Mexico.   He  has  lived
here  36  years.   He  has  an  American  wife,  four   American
children  and  a  stepson  who  was  a  paratrooper   in  the   U.S.
Army.   It   is  a  cruel  fiction  that  deporting  him  to  Mexico
would  be  sending him  back  "to  his  own  country."
In  its  details,  as  in  its  over  all  significance, the  Galvan
case  is  an  affront  to  traditional  standards  of  fair  legal  pro-
cedure.   An  uneducated  cannery  worker,  Galvan  joined  the
Communists  in  1944  when  they  were  still  organized  in   the
Communist  Political  Association.  Then  the  program  (accord-
ing  to  the   U.S.  Supreme  Court  itself   in  the   Dennis  case)
was  "one of cooperation" with  the  government  (341  U.S.  498)
and  therefore  still  lawful.  He  left,  according  to  the  govern-
ment's  finding,  in  1946 shortly  after  the  "line"  had  changed.
There  was  none  of  the  usual  evidence  required  to  prove
membership—an  application,  a  card,  payment  of  dues,  adop-
tion  of  a  party  name.   Aside  from  one  confused  witness  on
whom  the  government  itself  did  not  rely  in  finding  the  dura-
tion  of  membership,  the  evidence  was  Galvan's   own  admis-
sion,  given  when   first  arrested   in   1948.    He  was   without
counsel  "and  a  perusal  of  the  examination  as  a  whole,"  the
main  defense brief  argued,  "clearly  indicates  he  had  been led
to  believe that  acquiescence and  docility,  rather  than  an  at-
tempt   at   self-defense,   was  his  best   chance   to   avoid   de-
portation."
Where  Galvan's  Fate  Was  Sealed
Poor   Galvan's   fate,   it   turned   out,   was   sealed   by   the
Harisiades  case   (342  U.S.  580).   In  that  case  the  Supreme
Court  in  March  1952 had  to  decide  for  the  first  time  whether
a  man could be deported  for  past  membership  in  an  organiza-
tion  that  advocates  overthrow  of  the  government  by  force
and  violence.
The  Galvan  case  involved  provisions  which  went  a  little
further  than  this  "extreme  application"  because  the  Internal
Security  Act makes past membership in the  Communist party
grounds  for  deportation  and  so eliminates  the  need  to  prove
that  the  party  advocates   overthrow  of  the  government  by
force  and violence.
The  facts  in  the  Galvan  case  were  also  more  extreme  than
in  Harisiades.   Galvan's  lawyers  argued  that  the  latter  in-
volved  persons  whose membership may  have  been  severed  by
What  The  Dissenters  Said  in  1893
Mr.  Justice  Brewer:  "It  is  said  that  the  power  here  as-
serted   [of  deportation]   is  inherent   in  sovereignty.   This
doctrine   of  powers  inherent   in   sovereignty   is   one   both
indefinite  and  dangerous.   Where  are  the  limits  to  such
powers  to  be  found,   and  by  whom  are  they  to   be  pro-
nounced? . .. The governments  of other  nations  have  elastic
powers.  Ours  are  fixed  by a  written  constitution.  The  ex-
pulsion  of  a  race  may  be  within  the  inherent  powers  of  a
despotism.  History, before the  adoption of this  constitution,
was not  destitute  of examples and its  framers  were  familiar
with  history,  and wisely  .  . .  gave  to  this  government no
inherent  power  to  banish."
—Fong  Yue  Ting  v.  UJS.  (149 U.S. 698).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May SI,  19S4
the  party  itself  for  reasons  of  legal  strategy  while  Galvan's
case  would  determine  the  fate  of  ex-Communists  who  could
demonstrate  that  they  had  broken  with  the  party.   The  dis-
tinction  was  of  no  avail.
In  Anything  But  Deportation
In  any  but  a  deportation  case,  a  statute  of this  kind  would
be vulnerable on many grounds.  It  could  be attacked  as  a  bill
of  attainder,  since  by  legislative   act  it  finds  a  whole  group
guilty  of  a  crime.  It  could  be held a  violation  of  due  process,
since  no proof  is  required that  the  alien  himself  agrees  with
any  unlawful  purpose  of  the  condemned group.  It  could  be
declared  unconstitutional  as  ex  post  facto  legislation,  since
membership  in  the  Communist party  was  not  unlawful   at
the  time  any  of  these  people  were  members  (and  indeed  is
not  unlawful  per  se  today).   It  could  be  criticized  as  unrea-
sonable,  since its  proclaimed objective  is  to  break  up  a Com-
munist  "conspiracy" yet  under  its  terms because  he was  once
a  Red  a  proven  anti-Communist may  be  punished.   It  would
be  open  to  attack  under  the  First  Amendment  since  it  pun-
ishes  for  associations and  activities  protected  by that Amend-
ment.
Mr. Justice  Frankfurter  held for  the majority  in the  Galvan
case last  week  as  Mr. Justice  Jackson  held  for  the  majority
in  the  Harisiades  case that  a  long line of  precedents too firm
to  be  shattered  made  none  of  these  pleas  applicable  in   the
deportation  of  an  alien.  The  law  as  they  handed  it  down  is
substantially  the  law  as  it  was  once  summed  up  in  a  famous
Circuit  Court  decision,  "There  is  no  constitutional  limit  to
the  power  of  Congress  to  exclude  or  expel  aliens."  (16  F.  2d
423).
Deportation  is  a  hideous  anomaly.  Aside from  that,  under
the  law  as  it  stands  an  alien  legally  resident  in  this  country
has  all  the  rights  of  a  citizen  except the right  to  vote  or  hold
office.   Neither  his  life  nor  his  liberty  nor  his  property  may
be  taken  without  due process  of law.  Yet the  severest punish-
ment  of  all,  in  some  cases  worse  than  death  itself,  banish-
ment  from  the  country  and  separation  from  his  family  may
be  imposed  without   due  process.   The  accepted  doctrine  is
that deportation  is not a  punishment, that  it  is a  civil rather
than  criminal  proceeding, that  the  usual  constitutional   safe-
guards  do not  apply  (though  they  do  to  other  civil  actions),
that  it  is  a  "political"  matter  outside the  jurisdiction  of  the
courts.
Mr.  Justice  Murphy  attacked  this  whole  web  of  ideas  in
the  Bridges  case  (326 U.S.  135).  Justices Black and  Douglas
protested  it  in  their  dissents  in  both  Harisiades  and  Galvan.
Only  two  years  ago  Mr.  Justice  Jackson   (with  Mr.  Justice
Frankfurter  concurring)  noted  uneasily  (343 U.S.  169)  that
this doctrine of the  special character  of deportation  "has  been
adhered  to  with  increasing  logical  difficulty."
Both   Jackson   and   Frankfurter   washed  their   hands  of
blame.  "Judicially,"  the  former  said  in  Harisiades,  "we must
tolerate  what  personally  we may regard  as  a legislative  mis-
take."  "One  merely  recognizes,"  the  latter  said  last  week  in
Galvan,  "that  the  place  to  resist  unwise  or  cruel  legislation
.touching  aliens  is  the  Congress,  not  the  Court."
These  wistful  expressions  do not flow inescapably from  the
nature  of the  law.  The unwary  reader  would gather  that  the
precedents  which  deny  aliens  full   constitutional   protection
in  deportation  cases  go  back  to  some  legal  Sinai  none  may
question.
Little  Older  Than  Plessy  v.  Ferguson
But  the  precedent  which  dictated   the  deportation   of  the
poor  Mexican  laborer  Galvan  is  only  two  years  older  than
the  precedent  the  Supreme  Court  overturned  the  preceding
Monday  when  it  ruled  against  segregation  in  the  schools.  If
Plessy  v.  Ferguson  was  not  too hoary  to be reversed,  neither
is  Fong   Yue   Ting  v.  U.S.   (149  U.S.  698).   The  latter  was
handed  down  in  1893,  also  by, a  split  Court,  with  Chief   Jus-
tice  Fuller  and Justices  Field  and  Brewer  dissenting.  It  was
not  until  then,  just  sixty  years  ago,  that  a  bitterly  divided
court  ruled for  the first time that  deportation  was not  a crim-
What  Black and Douglas Said
Mr.  Justice  Douglas  dissenting:  "As  Mr. Justice Black
states in his dissent,  the only  charge against  this alien is
an act that  was lawful  when done ... I cannot  agree  that
because  a  man  was  once  a  Communist  he  always must
carry  the  curse  .  .  .  Galvan  is  not  being  punished for
what  he  presently  is,  nor  for  an  unlawful  act,  nor  for
espionage  or conspiracy or intrigue  against  this country.
He is  being punished for what he once was, for a political
faith  he  briefly  expressed   over  six  years  ago  and  then
rejected."
inal  punishment and  therefore  not  fully  protected  by  the  due
process  and  ex  post  facto  clauses.   That  hardly  makes  the
doctrine  coeval  with  the  laws  of  Moses or  of Manu.
If  the  reversal  of  the  old Jim  Crow  ruling  can  hark  back
to  those  affirmations  of  human  equality  made  at  the  founda-
tion  of  the  Republic,  a  reversal  of  the  old  deportation   rule
can  invoke no less  venerable authority.  The  three  dissenters
in   1893  were  able  to  quote  the  Father  of  the   Constitution
himself  against  the  doctrine  being  laid  down by the  majority.
For  James  Madison, in  his  Report  on  the  Virginia  Resolu-
tions  against  the  Alien and  Sedition  Laws,  said  "it  can  never
be admitted that  the  removal  of aliens ... is to be  considered,
not  as  punishment for  an  offense,  but  as  a  measure  of  pre-
caution  and  prevention."   (4  Elliott's  Debates  555).
Majority  opinion  on  the  Court  now  accepts  the  principle
that  Congress  may  order  whole  groups  of  persons   deported
for  racial,  political  or other  reasons.   The government's  argu-
ment  in  the  Galvan case  is as  sinister  as  it  is  complacent.
"The   power  of  Congress  to  name  the   Communist  Party
specifically  is  also  supported,"  the  government  brief   argued
(p.  11),  "by  the  history  of the  country's  expulsion legislation
which  contains  some famous  precedents for  group   designation
without  regard  .to  individual  worthiness.   The  Chinese  de-
portation  laws  are  the  prime  illustration.   The  Alien  Enemy
Act  of  1798,  on  which  Congress  drew  by  way  of  analogy,  is
another,  as  is the  anarchist  deportation  statute."
The  terrible  words  are  "expulsion  .  .  .  without  regard  to
individual worthiness."  This is not justice  as we have thought
of  it  in the past.  If  a poor alien  like Galvan may be  separated
from  his wife  and  children  and  country  for  past  membership
in  the  Communist party, may not citizens  some day find them-
selves  divested  of  citizenship  and  deported  in  the  same  way
without regard  to "individual worthiness,"  guilt  or  innocence,
Communism  or anti-Communism?
The  Fatal  Progression
Closely  linked  with  deportation   is  denaturalization,  which
makes  aliens  of  citizens.  Eisenhower  has  asked  Congress  for
legislation   to   deprive   Communist  "conspirators"   of   their
citizenship,  whether  acquired  by  naturalization  or birth.  The
idea  is being  sedulously propagated,  often  by  people who will
be  themselves  victims  of  it,  that  all  Communists  are   con-
spirators.
If  conspirators,  will they  not prebend to be other  than  they
are?    Can  ex-Communists,  though  anti-Communists,   escape
the   widening   repercussions?     Will   not    some   argue,   as
McCarthy  did  in  Wechsler's  case,  that  the  anti-Communism
is  only assumed?   If  the  safety  of  the  state  rather  than  jus-
tice  to  the  individual  is  to  be  the  norm,  will  not  the  doubts
be  resolved  against  the  individual?
If  the  foreign  born  can  be made to  see the  menace  of that
old   1893   decision,   it   can   be   reversed   by  their   political
pressure  as  Plessy  v.  Ferguson  was  reversed  by the  political
pressure   and   growing   political   awareness   of   the   Negro.
Events  have  shown that  the  fundamental  rights  of alien  and
citizen,  naturalized  and native born, are  so closely intertwined
that  what  impairs  the  liberty  of  one eats  away  the  liberty
of  all.
7   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  31, 1994
Epilogue:  Though  the  Innocent  May  Sometimes  Go Free
The  Guilty  Continue  to  Sit In  The  Seats  of Power
(Continued  from  Page  One)
In  a competently  run  Department  of  Justice  someone would
have reviewed all this carefully before obtaining  an  indictment.
When  in  response  to  Judge  Curran's  order  the  record  was re-
viewed,  it  was  realized  how  poor  a  case  the  government  had
and  what  a  fool  Metz  would  appear.   But  by  that  time,  after
two  delays,  the  Attorney  General  was  faced  with  the   possi-
bility  of  a contempt  citation  if  he  failed  to  obey  the  order  to
produce.   To  drop  the  case  rather  than  obey  the  order  would
have  been  unseemly,  perhaps  risky.   The  dilemma  was  resolved
by  the  discovery  that  the  prosecutor,  William  Gallagher,  had
obtained  the  indictment  by  misrepresenting  the  facts  to  the
grand  jury   (1)   by  claiming  that  two  FBI  informants  were
ready  to  identify  Lorwin  as a  Communist  and  (2)  that  there
was no  point  in  questioning  Lorwin  (as the  grand  jury  desired
to  do)   because  he  would  plead  the  Fifth.   Both  were  untrue
and  the  latter   was  idiotic,  since  if  Lorwin  had  pleaded  the
Fifth  there  would  have  been  no way  to  indict  him  for  perjury
or  false  statement.   Gallagher  was  thereupon  suspended  and
made  the  "goat"  and on  the  basis of  these  new-revelations  the
government  was allowed  to  drop  the  indictment  without pro-
ducing  Metz's   testimony.
The  honorable  course  would  have  been  to  obey  the  court
order,  and  to  make  a  statement  clearly  saying  that  there  had
been  no  basis for  indicting  Lorwin.  But  this  would  have made
a  liar  of  Metz,  and  disclosed  the  kind  of  intellectual  who  had
been  chief  researcher  for   the  G.O.P.  in  the  1936  and 1940
campaigns  against  Roosevelt,  and  who  was  now  fulfilling  the
same  function  for  a  Commission  empowered  by  law  "to  study
and  investigate organization and  methods  of  operation  for  the
executive; branch  of  the  Government."   This  time  the egghead
was  a  Republican,  and  the  egg  smelled bad.
What  Wayne  Morse  Said  of  Metz's Work
Metz   through   the  Hoover   Commission   will   continue   to
occupy  an influential  place in  the  inner councils of  the  govern-
ment  while Lorwin  goes  back  to  .his  teaching  position  in  the
University   of   Chicago  with  his  name  still   not   completely
cleared.   The  Metz  testimony  recalls  the  controversy   stirred
in  1947  when  Senator  Wayne  Morse  in  the  May-June,  1947,
issue of  Labor and Nation, attacked a Brookings study  by Metz
and  Meyer  Jacobstein,  called  "A  National  Labor  Policy."
The  review  was  headed  "Brookings  Institution   Fixes  Facts
to  Anti-Union  Ends"  and  in  it   Senator   Morse  said,  "This
volume  is full  of  inaccuracy  and  distortion.   It  piles innuendo
upon   half-truth.    It   is  superficial  and   misleading   and   in-
accurate."   His  view was supported  in  the  American  Economic
Review, organ  of  the  American  Economic  Association.  In  the
June,  1947, issue  Herbert   R.  Northrup  said   of   this   book
and   Metz's   previous   Brookings  Institution   study   on   labor
policy  published  two  years  earlier,  that  the  two  "taken  to-
gether,  are  replete  with  errors  and  with  misstatements of  fact
and   policy,   which   are  in   turn   derived   from   questionable
sources   and   biased   or   unwarranted   interpretations."    The
bias  was indicated  by  Northrup's  observation  about  the 1947
book  that  its  recommendations  "present  a  curious  anomaly.
On  the  one  hand,  the  authors  would  reduce  unions  to  local
organizations.   On   the  other,   they   would   subject  them   to
enormous   federal  control."   This  is,  of   course,  the  kind  of
scholarship  now  in  favor  here.
Metz  has  been  saved  from  the  spotlight,  while  people  like
Lorwin,  despite clearance,  are  pushed  out  of  the   government.
Like  many  others  who  have  been  cleared,  he  resigned  on  re-
instatement   because  the  ordeal  and  the  state  of  mind  it  re-
vealed  made staying  in  public  service  too  unpleasant.   It  will
be  interesting  to  see when  and  whether  Gallagher's  suspension
will  be lifted;  his  past  conduct  in  this  and  similar  cases makes
the   government's   revelations   about   this   action   before   the
grand  jury  no  surprise.   Brownell,  having  run  away,  will  live
to  smear  another  day—perhaps  picking  his  next  victim   more
circumspectly.   As  for  Low  Blow Joe, his  crimes  are  so many,
who  will   bother   to  recall  this   ignominious   collapse  of   she
government's   case  against  the  only  one  of  his  "81"?  Such  is
the  dirty  smog  that  hangs  over  our  national  capital  in  1954.
The innocent  may still  sometimes obtain  justice, but  the  guilty
continue  to  sit  in  the  seats of  power.
Why  Not  Send
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street
City
a  Gift   Sub  Now?
301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Znnn             Stnto
Enter this  gift  sub  for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name      .  ..  -  _
Street
rsty
Zone            Rt»t*
6-31-54
I.  F. StoneV  Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington 3, D. C
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED