I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954jun21.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on Guatemala: Its  Poverty  Pushed  Even  U.S.  Bankers  Left,  Page  2.
. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   2, NUMBER 22
JUNE  21,  1954
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Return  To  Dollar  Diplomacy
With  that  gift  for  inauspicious  utterance  he  so
often  displays,  Secretary  of  State Dulles spoke of  "forced  labor
on  a  vast  scale"  in  his  speech  at  Caracas  calling  for  inter-
vention  in  Guatemala.  He  was  referring,  of  course,  to   the
Soviet  bloc,  but   the  phrase  itself  to  a  Latin  American  must
conjure  up  a  picture  closer  home.   "Forced  labor  on  a  vast
scale"   is   something   Latin   America   knows   all   too   well.
Guatemala's  history  in  particular  is  a history  of  slavery.   The
two-thirds   of   its  people  still  Indian  in  culture   and   speech
have  long  been  serfs  in  one form  or  another  to  the  one-third
of  its  people  who  are  "ladinos."*   These  in  turn  have  been
exploited  by  the  tiny  majority  of  their  own  great  landholders
and  a  few   foreign   companies,  notably  United  Fruit.    These
are  the  conditions  the  present  regime  in  Guatemala  has  been
seeking  to  eliminate  ever  since  the  dictator  Ubico  was  over-
thrown  in  1944.
All  this,  after  a  lifetime  in  Sullivan  &  Cromwell,  must  be
well  known  to  John  Foster  Dulles.  The  law  firm  in  which  he
was senior partner is counsel  for  International  Railways, which
controls  the  transport  system  of  Guatemala for  United  Fruit,
and   counsel  for   the   Schroder  bank,  which   served  German
coffee  interests  whose  plantations  in  Guatemala  were  expro-
priated  in  the  last  war.  It  is Guatemala's  misfortune  that  the
beginnings  of   free  government  and  of  social  reform   should
coincide  with  the  appearance  of   an  American  Secretary  of
State  who  was himself  closely  associated with  the  old  order  in
Central  America.   With  Mr.  Dulles,  we  are  back  in  the  era
of  Philander  C.  Knox.
Unfortunately  a  decade  of  ideological  inquisition
culminating  in  McCarthyism  has  so cowed  American  intellec-
tuals  that  no  one  in  the  government  and  few  outside  dare
raise their  voice  in  defense of  a regime which  has been  officially
stigmatized  as  "communistic."   Outside  the  government,   in
the  various  international   and  labor  organizations  which  make
Washington   their   headquarters  and  are  familiar  with   Latin
America,  there is a strong  current  of  sympathy for  Guatemala,
but  it  is  "off  the  record."   The  average American  ever  since
a  famous  Reader's  Digest  article  of  a  few  years  ago  has  seen
only  the  alarmist  picture  of  a  Communist  "beachhead"   estab-
lished  in  the  New  World  "midway  between  the  Panama Canal
and  the  Texas  oil  fields."  A  small  country  whose  total  popu-
lation  is  less  than  the  armed  forces of  the  U.S.  is  being  blown
up  by  propaganda  into  a  menace—as  was  Mexico  by  the  oil
interests  during  its  similar  but   more  revolutionary   agrarian
reform.
Is  the  Guatemalan  regime  Communist?   Even  the  unfair
National   Planning   Association  study,   "Communism   Versus
Progress  in  Guatemala"  (December,   1953),  with  its  scarcely
veiled  call  for   civil  war,  says  the  Guatemalan  Labor  Party
(Communist)   "is  the  smallest  group  in  the  governing  coali-
tion.  It  holds  only  four  of  the  fifty-one  seats  in  the  national
legislature  .  .  ."  To  bring  pressure  on  Guatemala  to  purge
them,  though  admittedly chosen  in fair  elections,  is to  go  back
on  all  we  preach.  To  do  so while wooing  Peron  and  support-
ing   Somoza  is  to   suggest  that  we  are  following   a   double
standard  in  Latin  American  relations.*   To  press  for  inter-
vention  against  social revolution  as a form  of  "internal  aggres-
sion"  is  to   revive   dollar   diplomacy  in   the   guise- of   anti-
communism.
The new regime in Guatemala may be overthrown,
but  that  will  hurt  us  more  than  the  Communists.   In  Latin
America   it   would  again  associate  the   U.S.   with   reaction.
American   intellectuals   of   all  kinds  must   see  that   in   the
dynamic  but  limited  confines  of  the  Guatemalan  revolution,
the  crushing of  the  Communists by  force  can only  lead  to  the
victory  of the  most backward native elements and  their  foreign
corporate   allies.   The   balance  of   forces   is   too   precarious.
Another   Army  dictatorship  could  be  the  only   result.    On
the  other  hand,  there  is  much  the  U.S.  could  do—if  it  chose
—to   prove  itself   a  friend  of   the   Guatemalan  people.    At
present  our  Embassy  has  no  contact  with  the  laboring  and
agricultural   masses,  and  our  "technical   assistance  program"
has  largely  helped  the  big  planters.   It  is in  this  context  that
we  wish  to  express  our  solidarity with  the  Guatemalan people
and  to  offer,  in  the  documentary  exhibits  of  this  special  issue,
a  glimpse of  the  other  side of  the  question.
We  believe  it  especially  important  to  call  attention  to  the
World  Bank  report,  because  this  shows  how  honest   observers,
no  matter  how  conservative,  were  impelled  to  see  the  need
for  radical  reforms and  socialistic development  of  resources  in
Guatemala.  Capitalist  interests  can  ultimately  survive  only  if
they  show  a  willingness  to  play  their  part  within  the  limits
of  such  a  program.   Force  may  set  the  process  back  a  few
years,  but  only  at  the  expense eventually  of  bringing  to  vic-
tory  the  very  things  we purport  to  fear.
*  "Until  1944,  the  Indians  were  recruited  for  this  work   ['heavy   unskilled
labor  on  the  Ladino  plantations,  farms  and  min«s']  under  a  succession  of
legal-economic   systems   of   forced   labor   and   debtor   servitude"—National
Planning  Association.  "Communism  vs.  Progress  in  Guatemala,"  p.  6.
*  An  example  was  the  speech  made  last  October  14 by  the  Hon.   John  M.
Cabot,  then  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  Inter-American  Affairs,  calling
at   one   and   the   same   time   for   intervention   against   "communism"   in
Guatemala  but  saying  of   Peron's  Argentina  that  its   "different   economic
and political  philosophy ..  . frankly  is  none of  our business." Mr. Cabot,  now
Ambassador  to  Sweden,  has  family  ties  with  the  First  National  of  Boston,
the  United  Fruit  Company  bank.
8
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'8  Weekly,  June  21,1954
The  World  Bank's  Mission  to  Guatemala  Proposed
To  do our part  in  deflating   the  Red  scare  campaign  against
Guatemala  and  to  provide  the  corrective  of  background  in-
formation  from  unimpeachably  conservative sources, we  here
present  a  bird's  eye  view  of  Guatemala's  basic  problems  as
set  forth   in   the  report   presented  .to  President  Arbem  of
Guatemala  on June  IS,  1951, by  Eugene  R.  Black,  president
of   the  International  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and   Develop-
ment.   This   was  a  300-page   study   by  a  Bank   mission  to
Guatemala  (Johns  Hopkins   Univ.  Press  published  the   text
as  a  book,  "The  Economic Development  of  Guatemala").   It
may   serve  to  indicate  that   the  abuses  of  which  the   little
Republic   complains  and   the  reforms    on  which  it   has  em-
barked  are  something  more  than   figments   of  conspiratorial
imagination.
Do the Foreign Enterprises Pay Their Fair Share  of Taxes?
"Related  to  the  question  of the  new income tax  [as  advocated
in  the  report,  IFS]  is  the  problem  of  taxation  of  foreign
enterprises,  such  as  Empress  Electrica  de  Guatemala, United
Fruit  Company  and  the  International   Railways  of   Central
America,  which  are  now  largely  exempt.   Substantial  possi-
bilities  appear  to  exist  here." p. 272.
What  About  Wage  Increases?  "There  are  indications  that,
since  1944  [when  the  revolution  began,  IFS],   real  wages—
aside  from  social  benefits—have  in  some  cases  not  increased
"substantially.   Money wages  have  barely  kept  pace  with  the
rise of the  general  price  level."  p.  255.
Poverty  and Illiteracy: "Better  methods  of crop  production,
livestock  breeding,  disease  control  and  marketing  cannot  be
learned  by  people  who  are  illiterate  and  who  have  no  clear
Why  They  Opposed  Land  Reform
"All  but  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  people  are
landless  . . .in  spite  of the fact  that  nominally public
land  is  still  available  to  buyers  in large  amounts  .  . .
Large  landowners  often   feel  that  if   a  thoroughgoing
distribution  of land to the Indians were  carried  through,
cheap   labor  might   no  longer   be  available;   and   the
economic  basis  of  the  life  of  the  republic  would thus  be
undermined."
—Guatemala,  Past   and  Present,   by  Chester  Lloyd
Jones,  Univ.  of  Minn.  Press.  1940. p.  176-179.
conception   of   the   conditions  of   the   outside   world   with
which .they  have  to  deal  as  purchasers  and  sellers.
"These   things   must  be  taught  in  the   schools.   But   the
schools  can  do little  for  children  who  are  too  anemic,  under-
nourished, or debilitated by disease to benefit from  instruction,,
or  are  so badly  needed  in  their  impoverished  households  that
they  attend  school only irregularly or not at  all."  p. 75.
Foreign  Companies  Must   Change  Their   Attitude:   "The
foreign  companies should refrain  from  any  direct  or  indirect
If  the USA Were Treated  Like
Guatemala
"Suppose  a  group  of  big  dailies  and  magazines  in
England,  France  or  Argentina  should  send  a  flock  of
reporters  to investigate  conditions in the United  States.
Suppose,  after   such  a  visit,  the  reports   sent   home
should  be  based  on nothing but  the  accusations  of  Sen-
ator   Joseph   McCarthy,  the  National   Association   of
Manufacturers,  or  Gerald  L.  K.  Smith  concerning  the
dominance  of  Communism in  the  Truman  Administra-
tion.   Suppose that  in questions  pertaining  to  labor,  the
foreign    correspondents   had    confined   themselves    to
quoting the  two  extremes  of  the  U.S.  Steel  Corporation
and  Harry  Bridges,  with   nothing   said   about   recent
advances  in  social  security,  community housing,  public
health,   rural  development,  new  schools  and   victories
in  racial  relations  and  human rights.  Suppose the  con-
clusions  reached  were  that  the  United  States  was  con-
trolled  by  the  Communists, who  would  soon  drive  out
private   enterprise   and   make  this   country  the  New
World  Center  for   Communism  unless  a  really  demo-
cratic  foreign  nation  should  intervene."
—Samuel   Guy  Inman:   A   New   Day  in  Guatemala
A  Study  of  the  Present  Social  Revolution.
(Worldover   Press,  Wilton,  Conn. 1951. 50  cents).
political  activity  against   the  government;  and  they  should
accept, perhaps less reservedly than  they have thus  far  done,
the  need  to  adapt  their  legal  status  and  their  operations  to
changed  conditions."  p.  283.
Public    Power    Development   Suggested:   "Establish    an
autonomous   National  Power   Authority:   (1)   to  plan  and
supervise  an  integrated  program  of  power  development;  (2)
to  construct  and  operate  publicly  owned  power   facilities."
p.  233.
Private  Power  Companies:  "Of the private  companies . . .
the  most  important  is  the  Empresa  Electrica  de  Guatemala,
a  subsidiary  of American and  Foreign  Power.  This  organiza-
tion  supplies  approximately  four  fifths  of  all  electric  service
in  the  country.   Of  this  large  fraction,  about  92  percent  is
sold  in the Guatemala  City  area  . . . Under a  50-year  agree-
ment dating  from  1923, this company supplies  electric  energy
to  the  capital  area  without  direct  government  control  except
as to maximum rates." p. 220.
Regulation  Proposed:"Private power companies . . . should,
of. course,  be  required  to  conform'  to  the  national  plan  for
power development and integration   (when such a plan exists)
and  should  also  come under  the  impartial  rate jurisdiction  of
the  Public  Utilities  Commission as  alsewhere  recommended."
p.  238.
A  Rightist Texas  Daily  on the  Red  Bogey in Guatemala
"Everyone  has  been  reading  about  Guatemala  being  the
center  of  world  communism  for  the   Western   Hemisphere.
The  story  goes that  Communist headquarters  are  set  up  in
Guatemala  with  the  idea  of  a  communist  Guatemala  that
would  dominate  Central  America  as  well  as  any  and  all
countries  in the  Western  Hemisphere.
"That  is  the  silliest  and  biggest  lie  to  ever  come  out  of
anyone's  mind.  In  the  first  place  this  same  story  has  been
told  so often  about  other  countries  that  it's  getting  a  little
shopworn.  We all  know that  a  few years  ago  the  Russians
were  supposed  to  set  up  the  Western   Hemisphere  of  com-
munism  in   Mexico  City.   And  for   the  propagandists  and
wild  eyed  boys  it  was  good  copy.  But  Mexico  proved  to  be
less   communistic  in  its  government  than  our  own  State
Department  which  gave  away  China!   So  the  ghost  story
writers  and  tombstone  shakers  have  now picked  a  country
which  couldn't  produce  as  much  gunfire  power  as  Peoria,
Illinois ...
"This  propaganda  is  boomeranging  against  the  U.S.  be-
cause  this  propaganda  is  coming from  friends  of three  U.S.
corporations.   These  corporations'  whole  purpose  is  to  con-
trol  Guatemala  and  get  a  stranglehold   over  her.   Certainly
the  United Fruit  Company is  important  to  Guatemala.  The
American   Power   &  Electric   Company  is   important    to
Guatemala  and  the  Grace  Steamship   Lines  are  important.
But  the  facts  are  that  through  their  concessions  they  have
a   strangelhold   on  the  future   generation   as   well  as   the
present  generation   of  Guatemala.   And  99  percent   of  all
the   propaganda   originates   from   friends   of  these  three
monopolies."
—Editorial  in  the  Laredo  (Texas)   Times,  Jan.. 28,  1954.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  SI,  1954
... A  6-Year  Plan  and a More  Socialistic  "New  Deal"
Port  Monopoly:  "Puerto  Barrios  is  the   only   deep-water
port  in  Guatemala  where vessels  can tie  up  alongside  a  pier.
The  International   Railway   Company  pier   is  the  only  one
existing  at  the port  . . . Puerto  Barrios  is isolated  from the
rest  of  the  Republic  as  far  as  highway  traffic  is concerned
because  of  the   inexplicable  failure   of  the   Government  to
construct  the  portion  of  National  Route  4 lying  between  Los
Amates  and Puerto  Barrios  . . . Access to the pier  areas and
'to the pier  itself  is limited to railway  facilities  . . . The situ-
ation  has  the  practical  effect  of  sending  all  traffic  over  one
pier  and  all  freight  movement  in  this  area  over  one  artery,
the railroad ... To all intents  and purposes, the area  is under
the  complete  control  of  the  United  Fruit  Company  and  the
Why  Land Reform  Was Needed
"Since  monoculture [one-crop agriculture]  rests upon
the  large   landholdings  (and  vice-versa),  raising   the
standard  of  living through  diversification  and  mechani-
zation  is  greatly  dependent upon changes  in  the  distri-
bution   of  the   profits   and/or  the   land.   The  foreign
corporations  and  the  native  large  landholders  oppose
diversification    and   the   development   of   a   domestic
market.
"To   increase   production   per   capita  in   the   mono-
cultural  products  only  benefits  the  owners  who  spend
their  profits  abroad during  trips  or  by  the  importation
of  foreign  luxury  items, or,  as  in the  case  of the  United
Fruit  Company,  the  major  portion  of  the  profits  goes
abroad  to  foreign  shareholders.   The  standard  of  living
under  these  conditions  can  not  move  strongly  upwards
without  some changes  in  the  distribution  of  profits  or
ownership."
—Aspects   of  Social  Reforms   in  Guatemala,  1944-49.
By   'Leo   A.  Suslow,  Colgate   Univ.  Studies.   1949.
p.  78.  Available  in  -mimeograph  form,  at  Library
of  Congress.
International   Railway  Company.  That  control  extends   over
the   movement  of  practically   all  import  and   export   cargo
through the Atlantic  areas. . . .
"Back  of  the  situation  lies  the   agreement,   or  series  of
agreements,  under  which  the  various   links  in  the   present
railway  system were constructed.   In brief,  Guatemala  agreed
that  until  about  the  year  2004, the  Railway  Company  might
operate  free  of taxation  on its  properties, free  of  payment of
duties  on  its  imports,  free  of  control  on  its  rates  except  as
to  certain  very  liberal  maxima,  and free  of  competition  from
other  railroads ... It  is inevitable that  this  situation  should
give  rise  to  charges  of  discrimination  in  rates  and  services
between  customers  and  to  complaints  of  excessive   charges
How They Used to Treat  Labor
"During   the  extensive   strikes  in  Guatemala,   Hon-
duras  and  Colombia  martial  law  was  declared  and  sol-
diers  were dispatched  to  the  scenes  of  conflict.   In  some
cases soldiers  sympathized  and fraternized  with  strikers,
with  the  result  that  soldiers  were  replaced  by  more
dependable  armed  forces.   In  Guatemala,  where  legal
strikes  are  practically   impossible  [this  was  written  in
1936,  IFS],  many  workers  were  killed,  imprisoned  or
deported  under  the  military  rule.  The  Colombia strike
was  suppressed  by the  military  with  terrific  bloodshed.
The   commander  of   the   army   estimated   that   forty
strikers  were  killed  and  over  100  wounded;  one  of  the
strike leaders  estimated that  1500  were killed and  3,000
wounded.   More reliable  estimates  range  between  these
two  extremes."
—Social  Aspects  of  the  Banana  Industry,  by Charles
David  Kepmer,  Jr.,  Columbia  Univ.  Press.   19SS.
p. 197.
against  the  public.*   Some of  these  complaints as  to  charges
may be justified,  as  a review of ton mile rates indicates.  Like-
wise  the  heavy  use  of  Puerto  Barrios  by  the  United  Fruit
Company,  a  large  stockholder  in the  Railway  Company, may
justify   some  complaints  as  to  the   slow  handling  of   other
cargo  . . ." p. 183-5.
Freight  Rates  Are  Higher  in  Guatemala  Than  in  the  U.S.:
"A  comparison  of  the  factors  affecting  costs  of  operation  of
the  IRCA  and  a  typical  railroad  in  the  United  States,  for
example, would indicate that  IRCA rates  should be the  lower
of  the  two.   Wages  are  substantially  higher  in  the  United
States  and  the  railroads  there  are  subject  to  heavy  taxes.
Legal  requirements  for  safety  measures  and  for  service  im-
pose added costs that do not now prevail  by law in  Guatemala.
Further,  winter  conditions  increase  operating   costs   in  the
colder  United  States  areas."  p.  172.
How  to  Beat  the  Rates  Down: "A  much less  expensive  and
less  hazardous  method  [than  nationalization of  the   railway,
IFS]   of  accomplishing the  same  benefits  would  be  through
regulation  by  the  Public  Utilities  Commission  recommended
above.   The  introduction  of  competition  in  freight   hauling,
through  highway construction  and  the  provision  of more  pier
facilities,  would  likewise  tend  to  insure  proper  rate  levels,
faster  service  to  ships  and  prompt  handling  of  merchandise.
Both  methods  would  be  more  certain   in  their  effects  than
* A  stockholders'  suit  against  United  Fruit  Company  by  minority"  stock-
holders  in  International   Railways,  alleging  unfair   rate  practices  for   the
benefit   of   the   former   is   now  being   tried   before   Judge   Hammer    in   the
Supreme   Court   of   New   York.    Secretary   Dulles'   law   firm.   Sullivan   &
Cromwell,    represents    the    management    of    International    Railways    in
fighting  the  suit.
Guatemala's  Answer  to  the  "Soviet  Arms" Charges
"For   several  years  the  Government  of  Guatemala  made
unsuccessful  efforts  to  buy  armament  in  the  United  States
with  the  object  of properly  equipping the  Guatemalan  Army
for   the  national  defense.   But  the   U.S.  Government  has
systematically  refused  to  furnish  it,  and  it  has  not  been
possible  to  obtain  even  pistols  to  fill  requirements   of  the
Police  Force.   This  situation  has  gone  to  the  extent  that
authorization  even  to  sell  low  caliber  ammunition  to  the
Hunting and Fishing Club of Guatemala has been denied .. .
"It  is  important  to  point  out  that  while  Guatemala  was
denied  the  most  essential  elements  for  its  defense  and  was
prevented  from  getting  them in other  countries,  the Govern-
ment  circles  in  the  United  States  were  not  only furnishing
arms  and  ammunition to  several   Governments  that  have
taken  an  unfriendly  and  even  aggressive  attitude  towards
the  Government of  Guatemala  but  also  concluded  military
treaties   with   these   governments,   thus   causing  justified
alarm in Guatemala  . . .
"The  Government  of  Guatemala  emphatically  states  that
it  has  never  negotiated  purchase  of  armament  from  the
Soviet  Union  or  from  Poland,   and,  furthermore,    declares
that in our territory there  is no armament  or military  equip-
ment whatsoever,  made in  any  of  the  above mentioned coun-
tries.  But it  considers  necessary to  state categorically that,
had   negotiations   taken   place  with   the   above  mentioned
countries,  the  government  would  have  been  exercising   its
legitimate  right  as  a  sovereign  nation  to  freely  trade  with
any   country   in  the  world.   Guatemala   is  not  a   United
States  colony . . ."
—Statement  by  the  Government of  Guatemala, May  21,1954
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June il,  1954
Conservative  U.S.  Bankers  Moved  Left  in  Guatemala
would  nationalization  of  the  railway  system  and  would  save
the  Government  the  financial  burden  of  acquiring  and  opera-
ting  the  Railway."  p.   174.
Why   Most  Guatemalans  Go  Barefoot:  "Most Guatemalan
shoes  are  made  by  hand ...  A  large  part  of  it  is  done  in
small  shops  .  .  .  There  are  two  mechanized shoe  factories  in
the   Republic.    Only  one  of   these,   at   Coban,   is   allowed  to
manufacture   shoes  for   domestic  consumption.   Apparently
to  avoid  competition with  inefficient  hand  workers,  the  In-
catecu  factory  in  the  Capital  is  required by  decree  to  export
its  output.   As  a  result,  both  domestic  and  imported  leather
shoes  are  extremely  expensive  and  most  people  wear  sandals
or  go  barefoot  despite the  fact  that  shoes  are  a  primary need
for  health  and  social  welfare."  p. 109-10.
Criticism  of Guatemalan Capitalists: "Guatemalan  manage-
ment   has  not  yet   been  won  over  to  the   economy  of   high
wages,  a  large  volume  of  production  and  low  prices.   Mark-
ups  and  profit  margins  are  usually  high.   It  is  argued  that
since  the  market  is  so  small  the  manufacturer   must  make  a
large  profit  on each  sale.  Local  manufacturers   are  not  easily
attracted  to  the  idea  that  lower  prices  might  broaden  their
market  . . . even  in cases  where it  appears  practicable,  there
has  been  reluctance  to  try  it."  pp.  96-7.
Profits  Hide  Abroad:  "Yet  financial  resources  for  produc-
tive  investment  are  not  lacking  in  Guatemala.   Their  impor-
tance  can  be  seen  from  the  large  amounts of funds  belonging
to  Guatemalans  but  held  outside  the  country.   According  to
the  latest  statistics  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  private
holdings  of  Guatemalan citizens  in  the  U.S.  alone amounted
to  around  Q14  (roughly  $14)   million  in  1950.   This  figure
is  conservative.
"It  is unfortunate  that  such  an  important  volume  of funds,
originating  in  a  country  that  is  so  much  in  need  of  produc-
tive  capital,  should  be kept  abroad."  p.  278.
Capital  Gains  Tax Proposed: "Yet  it  appears  necessary  not
only  to encourage productive investments,  as  has  been done so
far,  but  also to  discourage  unproductive ones.  The proportion
of   relatively   unproductive  capital  formation  is  very   high.
Probably   one  of  the   most   useful   correctives   would  be   the
capital   gains  tax   to  discourage  speculative,  nonproductive
investments,  particularly  in  real  estate  and  inventory  pur-
chases.   At  present   such  activities  are   taxed   only   at   low
rates."  p.  279-80.
Greater  Social  Investment  by  Government Advocated:  "It
is   clear   that   a   deliberate   government  policy  encouraging
business  and  the  provision  of  tax  incentives are  not  in  them-
selves  enough  to  allow  reliance  on  private   capital   as   the
main  source  of  economic  development.   It  would  be  too  opti-
mistic  to  expect  private  capital  to finance more than  a  small
Socialist  and Labor Warning
"Intervention   by  the   United   States   Government—
economic  or  in  any  other   form—would  be  disastrous.
One reason  the  Communists have  been able to rally  sup-
port  is  that  they  have  been  able  to  play  on  the  deep
nationalistic  strain  of  many  Guatemalans.   State  De-
partment  protests  on  behalf  of  the  United  Fruit  Com-
pany  gravely  offended  the  nationalistic    susceptibilities
of  many Guatemalans.  Any further  intervention  by  the
U.S.   would  only  serve  to  throw  into  the  arms  of  the
Communists  that  increasingly  large  element  which  is
concerned   with   Communist   influence   and   wants   to
combat   it."
—Hemispherica,   March-May,   1954.  Bulletin  of   the
U.S. .Committee  of  the  Inter-American  Association
for   Democracy  and  Freedom   (including    Norman
Thomas,  and  Serafino  Romualdi  of  the  A.  F.  of L.).
part  of  the  basic  improvements  required  in  transportation,
communications,   power,   warehousing,   education   or   health
facilities.   These,  in the  initial  stages  must  be  essentially  the
task   of   public  authorities   in   order   to  facilitate   economic
development."  p.  280.
Poverty   Makes  "Socialistic"   Measures   Easier:  "Finally,
the   unequal  distribution   of   national   income  in   Guatemala
tends  to  make it  easier  to  divert  resources  to  investment  pur-
poses.   In  more  developed  countries,  where  income  distribu-
tion  tends  to  be  more  uniform  and  living  standards  are  ap-
preciably  higher,  any  diversion  of  resources   towards   invest-
ment  by taxation  or  other  means  is  bound  to  reduce  the  real
incomes  of  most  consumers with  all  the  difficulties  involved in
any  such  downward  adjustment.   In  Guatemala,  on  the  con-
trary, the  measures  that  have  been  proposed  here  (including
the  tax  increases)   will  hardly  affect  the  traditional  way  of
life  of  the  great  majority  of  Guatemalans."  pp.  291-2.
Six  Year  Plan  Suggested:  "Amplify  a  broad  six  year  plan
of  economic  and  social development—along  the  lines  proposed
by  this  Mission—as  well as  more  specific  one-year  programs"
p.  246.  And  use  the  government  agency  INPOP  (Institute
for  the  Expansion  of  Production)  "to  increase  and  diversify
national  production  in fields where  private  entrepeneurs"  are
inactive.   "Such  an  institute,"  the  World  Bank  Report  said
of  this  government  institution,  "can   constitute   a  center  of
long  range   economic  programming. ...  It  can  pioneer  in
fields  too  new,  too  risky,  or  requiring  too  heavy  capital   in-
vestment  to  be  successfully  cultivated  by  private  initiative."
This  was  advice  from  Washington,  not  Moscow.
I.  F. Stone's Weekly, 301  E.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  su
Street
City                                  /one
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4 more
(Tn)  Name
Street.
City                          .       .     Zone
Capitol,  Wash. 3, D. C.
j  for  the  enclosed  $5:
State
(money  enclosed):
State
6-21-54
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3, D.  C
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED