I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954jan11.pdf

============================================================

Secret  War  in  Sidney  Hook's  Committee  Over  Burnham's  Atomic  Whopper,  Page  4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    1,  NUMBER  49JANUARY   11, 1964WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
News  You Won't  Find  Elsewhere
The  State  Department Finally Appoints That  Passport  Appeals  Board . . .  Sweden and Switzer-
land  Agree  Korean POWs  Didn't  Get a  Free  Choice ... The ACLU's Directors  Resort  to  Dictator-
ship ... See Inside  Pages.
No  "New  Look" In  This  New  Congress
The  new  session  of  Congress  is  likely  to  disgust  both   the
right-wingers  who  looked  to  Eisenhower  (not too  hopefully)
for  a  clean  sweep of  New  Deal  and  Fair,  and  the  liberals  and
left-wingers  who have  been  hoping  that  the  Democrats  might
put  up  a  fight  in  defense of  basic  liberties.
So far  as social  legislation  is concerned,  the  pattern  has  been
set  at  least  since  the  election  of  1940 when  the  Republicans
accepted  governmental  responsibility for  full  employment.   On
this  front,  including  farm  legislation  and Taft-Hartley,  intra-
party  battling  will  be  minor  because the  Administration   will
not  go very  far  in  an  election  year in  a direction  which  might
antagonize farmers and  workers.
Outlook  for  Civil  Liberties
So far  as civil  liberties  are  concerned,  there  will  be  fighting
on  three  fronts,   none  of  them  encouraging  to  liberals.   The
witch  hunters  will  continue   their  work.    Talk  of   curbing
McCarthy  is  not  to  be  taken  seriously,  neither  party  has  the
fortitude  and  Morse,  who  holds  the  balance  of  power  in  the
Senate,  went  along  with  McCarthy  and  Jenner  last  year when
an  effort  was  made  to  curb  their  funds.
The  Eisenhower  Administration,   chiefly  through   Attorney
General  Brownell, will  continue  the  effort  to  demonstrate  that
it  can  "handle  subversion"  without  interference  from  Con-
gress,  i.e.,  that  it  can  out-McCarthy   McCarthy.   The  Demo-
crats,  as  in   the   fact   sheet  on  Communism  issued  by   their
National  Committee,  will  try  to prove that  they  pioneered  the
witch hunt.  The opposition  to  the immunity  bill in  the  House
and  the  wire-tap  bill  will  come  from  a  few  on  both  sides of
the  aisle,  but  the  Democrats  do  not  have  the  nerve  to  take
leadership  against  the  bills  and  only  rival  viewpoints  among
the  sponsors  can  block  them.
Jealousy  Among  the  Witch  Hunters
The  biggest  factor  in  impelling  some  action  toward  a  curb
on  McCarthyism  comes  from  the  jealousy  of  the  witch  hunt
competitors  he has outdistanced  by  superior  effrontery.  Jenner,
Knowland, McCarran, Mundt  and  Dirksen would  like  nothing
better  than  to  see McCarthy   gagged  so  they  and  their  own
allies  could take over  the  tasks..and  rewards of  the  witch  hunt.
Nixon  and  McCarthy  see each  other  as  rivals  one  day  for  the
Presidency;  McCarthy  endangers  Nixon's  laurels  as "the man
who  sent  Hiss  to  jail."   Nixon   is  not  averse  to  using  anti-
McCarthyism  to  demonstrate  his  own  relative  "balance"  and
moderation.
More  Differences  on  Foreign  Policy
There  will  be  more  differences  between  the  two  parties  on
foreign  than  on  domestic  policy.   The  Democrats,  smarting
from  the  attack  on  them  in  the  White  affair,  are  anxious  to
demonstrate  their  superior  patriotism  by  accusing  the  Repub-
licans  of  "appeasement"   in   the  Far  East  and  of   sacrificing
defense  to  economy.     The  military  crowd,   particularly   the
Air  Force,  have  closer  liaison  with  the  Democrats   than   the
Republicans.
That  Korean Deadline
The  Administration   will  take  the  risks  of  releasing  all  pris-
oners  on  January  22;  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  Robertson
and  Admiral  Radford,  chairman of  the  Joint  Chiefs,  went  to
the Far East  to prepare the way for it,  and to see that  Syngman
Rhee  is  kept  under  wraps.   The  announcement  that  two  divi-
sions  would  be withdrawn  was intended  to  sweeten  the  release
for  the  Chinese  Communists.    The  Administration   is  anxious
to  reopen  talks before  January  22  as one way  to  prevent dan-
gerous eventualities.   The  truce  is almost  as unpopular  in  some
sectors  of  Pentagon  and  State  Department   as  it  is  with  Rhee
but  Eisenhower  wants  the  Korean  peace as the  party's  No.  1
talking  point  at  the  Congressional  elections,  and  he  also  wants
it—in  our  opinion—because  he wants peace.  This is one  hope-
ful  fact  amid  the  complexities,  fits-and-starts,  and  contradic-
tions  which  make  American  policy  so  bewildering.
Dean  on  Red  China
Unfortunately   the  Administration  is  also  timid,  slack,  un-
inspiring  and  (for all  the  B. B. D.  & O.  speech  makers)   quite
lacking  in  the  imponderable of  leadership.  It  is  impossible  to
learn  whether  Arthur  Dean's  interview  with  the  Providence,
R.  L,  Journal,  January  3,  urging  review  of  American  policy
toward  Red  China,  marks  some  change  in  official  policy  or  is
only  the  indiscreet  talk  of  a  thoughtful  and  affable  amateur
diplomat.    It   seems  to  have  been  the  latter,  but  should  the
Chinese  swallow  the  slight  involved  in  the  release of  prisoners
and  should  peace  slowly  continue  to  settle  down  on  the  Far
East,  there  is  no  doubt  (1)  that  Communist   China  will  be
recognized  and  (2)  that  this is being privately  admitted  in  the
State  Department  and  in  the  Senate,  oftentimes  by  men  who
still  take  a  different  position  in  public.
9  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   11, 1954
I  E  Stone's   Weekly
•   BtUtor  and  Publisher,  L F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  Ian  two  weeks  of  Auguit «  Room  205, 301
E.  Cipitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subicription  rates:  Domestic,  II
*   year;   Canada,  Mexico  and  elsewhere  in   the   Western  Hemisphere,    $(;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by,1st  clan  mail,  $1)   by  air;  for
brad,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,.$20  by  air mail.
Single  copy,  II   cents.   Tel.:  LI  4-7017.    Entered   as  Second  Class   mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C
January  11, 1954
Vol.  1,  No.  49
Passports: A Little  Progress
The  press  section   of  the   State  Department,   which  can
consume  a  forest  primeval  on releases  announcing  that  some
nonentity   has  been  appointed   second  vice  consul  at   Bang-
kok  or  giving the  full  text  of an  address  by a third  assistant
secretary  of  state  to  a  North  Carolina  woman's  club,  has
issued  no  release,  sought  no  publicity  on  one  major   event.
It  has finally set  up a  Board  of Passport  Appeals.
The  desire to  hide this light  under  a  bushel  is  understand-
able.  A  three  judge  Federal  court  ruled  here  July  9,  1952,
in  the  Anne Bauer  case that the  Department's hitherto omni-
potent  passport  division  could  not  refuse  a  passport  without
some  explanation   and  hearing.   On  September   2,  1952,  the
Department  bowed to the courts and  public clamor  and  issued
a  code  of  passport  regulations  providing  for  hearings  before
a  new  Board  of  Passport  Appeals.   Though  that  was  more
than  a  year  ago,  nothing  happened.  No Board  was appointed.
The  passport  division  avoided  the  necessity  of  hearings by
avoiding   decisions.    The   Department's   favorite   mode  of
government  has  been  by  evasion,  by  just  plain  failure   to
answer  communications  from  other  departments  or  ordinary
citizens.
This  tactic  met  its  nemesis  in  the  St.  Louis  physicist  and
college  teacher,  Martin  Kamen.  Kamen  had  been  trying  for
15 months  to  get  a  passport  without   eliciting   any  decision
from  the department.  On December 17, his counsel Nathan  H.
David, filed suit in  the  Federal  courts  here  against  the  pass-
port  division.   Rapid  action  followed.   On  December  21  the
passport  division  rejected   Kamen's  application.
On  December 21 Kamen's  counsel  threatened  to  amend  his
complaint  to  obtain  a  court  order  requiring  the  Department
to  state  its  reasons fully,  to  set up that  long  promised  board
of   passports  appeals  and  to   give   Kamen  a   hearing.   On
December   23—without  benefit  of  press  release—the  board
was  established,  though  not  a  line  about  it  appeared  in  the
press,  not  even in  the  New  York  Times.
So  far  the  Department  has  announced  the  names  only of
the chairman,  who will be Thruston  Morton,  Assistant  Secre-
tary  of  State  for  congressional   relations,  and  the  counsel,
John  William  Sipes,  who was  with  the  Department's  loyalty
and  security  board.  A  panel  of  five  will  serve  on  the  board,
but  their  names  have  not  yet  been  made  public.   When  the
press  section  was  asked  why  no  release  was  issued,  the  ex-
planation  given  was  (1)  "they  want  to  work  out  the  rules
first"  and  (2)  "everybody  seems  to  be  asking  about  it,  any-
way."   The "everybody"  may be read  as  hyperbole.
Were  POWs  Given
A Fair  Choice in  Korea?
Reports  with  unpalatable  facts  or  conclusions have  a  way
of  not  turning  up  at  State  Department  and  Pentagon.   The
mimeograph  machines  and  the  presses  roll  when  reports  fit
propaganda  patterns.  The  December  28 report  of the  United
Nations  Neutral  Repatriation  Commission seems  to be a  case
in  point.   Nobody in  Washington  seems  to  have  received  it,
and  the  UN  can't  decide  whether  it  is  a  UN  document.
Persistent  telephoning,  however, did turn  up  a  single  copy
of  the  majority  and  minority  conclusions  at  State  Depart-
ment,  which  this  correspondent   was  allowed  to  read.   The
striking   thing   about   them   is  that   the   majority    (India,
Poland,  Czechoslovakia)  and  the  minority  (Sweden,  Switzer-
land)  agreed that there was coercion in the camps against the
POW's,  and that  in the  anti-Communist  southern  camps  this
led  to  violence and  murder.
This  is what  the  minority  report  said:  "The  attitude of  the
PW  in  respect  of  explanations   has  apparently   to  a  large
extent  been  influenced  and  coordinated  by organizations  of  a
political  nature which are  to be found  among the  PWs in both
the  southern   [anti-Communist]   and  northern   [Communist]
camps.   The  commission  is  aware  of  the  existence  of  such
organizations.   These  organizations  undoubtedly exert  a  cer-
tain control  over the  prisoners,  and in the  southern  camp acts
of  violence and  even murders  have  been  committed."
The  minority report  also  says  the  decision not  to  use force
"except   for   purely  disciplinary   and  judicial  measures,  or
when  such  force  was  likely  to  lead  to  large  scale  killings"
made  it  impossible to  break  up  these organizations  and  "had
important  repercussions  on  almost  every  aspect  of  the  com-
mission's  activity."
The  Commission's (majority)  report  put this more strongly.
It  said, "Despite all the  care  the commission took in  endeavor-
ing  to  create  a  proper   atmosphere  for  the  conduct  of  ex-
planations  work  it  cannot  record  a  finding  that  even  those
PWs  in  its  custody  in  the  south  camp who went  through  the
process  of individual explanations  were  completely freed  from
force  or threat of force  arising  from  and  intimately  connected
with  the  camp  organization   and  its   leadership.    It   must,
When  Is  a  Parallel  Not a  Parallel?
The  theory  of  "parallelism"  underlies  the   procedure
used  in loyalty  clearances, in the  proceedings of the Sub-
versive  Activities  Control Board,  in  passport  regulations
and  in  the  witch  hunt generally.  If  it  can be shown that
a  man agreed with  the  Communists  on a certain  number
of  questions, it  is  assumed  that  he  was  somehow linked
with  it  in  conspiracy.   Proof  by  parallelism with  party
line is  so well  established  that few  question it  any more.
But  how  differently  the  courts  treat  parallelism  when
business  enterprise  and the  Clayton  Act  are  involved.
Last  Monday  Mr. Justice Tom  Clark  for  a  majority  of
the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  dealt  harshly  with  the  theory
of  parallelism  as  circumstantial  proof  of  conspiratorial
agreement.  A  suburban  movie  owner outside Baltimore
brought  suit against the  major film companies for treble
damages  and  an  injunction  under  the  Clayton Act.  The
petitioner   claimed  that  none  of  the   movie  companies
would  ever  let  him exhibit  a  first-run  picture  and cited
the  1948 Paramount anti-trust  case  to  show  the  same
companies  had  imposed  a  uniform  system  of  runs  and
clearances.
"To  be  sure,"  Justice  Clark  ruled,  "business behavior
is   admissible  circumstantial  evidence   from   which   the
fact  finder  may  infer  agreement.   But  this  court  has
never  held  that  proof  of  parallel  business  behavior con-
clusively  establishes  agreement  or,  phrased  differently,
that  such   behavior  itself   constituted  a   Sherman  Act
offense.  Circumstantial  evidence of  consciously  parallel
behavior  may  have  made  heavy  inroads  into  the  tradi-
tional   judicial   attitude  towards   conspiracy;   but  'con-
scions  parallelism' has  not  yet  read  conspiracy  out  of  the
Sherman  Act  entirely."
We  wait to  see  how the  same  justices  will  treat paral-
lel  behavior  when  on  appeal  from  the  Subversive Activi-
ties  Control  Board, political  ideas  rather  than  business
interests  are  at  stake.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  11, 1854
however,  be  stated  that  the   commission  could  not,  in  the
opinion  of the  majority,  in  the  circumstances  and  within  the
time  and resources  at  its  disposal,  do anything  more  than  to
provide  facilities  for   individual   explanations.   The  Czecho-
slovak  and  Polish members  of the  commission stated that this
was  not  enough,  and  that  it  was  necessary  at  the  time  to
reorganize the PW  camps and to  segregate the ring-leaders."
The  report  went  on  to  say  that  "The  Commission  cannot
record  a  finding  that  PWs  in  its  custody  in  the   southern
camp  were  completely  free  from  the  influence  of  the  former
detaining   camp,  and  in  particular  of  the  authority  of  the
Republic  of  Korea,  whose  incursions  made  it  impossible  for
the  commission to come to  any  other  conclusion."
The  prisoners  on  both  sides  rather  than  the   commission
determined  the  course  of the  explanations,  thanks to the  deci-
sion  not  to  break  up  the  camp  organizations  by force.   "The
cooperation  of the  prisoners," as  the  minority  report  phrases
it,  "became a  decisive  factor  in  the  conduct  of  the  explana-
tions.   In  the  southern  camp  the  prisoners  asked  for  shorter
explanations,  in  the  northern  camp  they  asked  for  prolonged
explanations;   when  in  both  cases  their  demands  were  re-
jected  by  the  explaining   side,  they  refused  to  come out  for
further  explanations."
The  ACLU's  Directors
Decide Dictatorship Is  Best
When  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union finally  holds  its
thrice  postponed  biennial  conference,  now  scheduled  for  the
February   12  week-end  in  New  York,  the  libertarian  left's
most  carefully   concealed  internal   controversy   will   finally
hit  the  front  pages.  Until  now it  has  been  covered  only  in
this  Weekly.  The latest  news,  again  leaked  via  the  January
bulletin   of  the  militant  Northern  California  branch  of  the
ACLU,  is  that  the  National   Board  on  November  30—by  a
vote  of  14  to  4,  with  five  members  not  voting—decided   to
override  a  national  referendum  of  the  membership and  adopt
new  policy statements  overwhelmingly  rejected  in  it.
These new policy statements  (see issue  of  October 31,  "The
ACLU's  Directors  Prepare to  Jettison  Its  Principles")  would
give  a  queasy  and  qualified  but  unmistakable  endorsement  to
the  basic methods and premises  of the witch hunt.  The  revered
Alexander  Meiklejohn  at  the  November 30 meeting  urged  the
Board  not  to  adopt  policies  which  the. ACLU's  affiliates  had
almost  unanimously  rejected,  and  which  would  undercut  its
traditional  libertarian  positions.   The vote  openly to  override
was  made  necessary  by  the  failure  of  internal  maneuvers
which  sought  to  change  the  vote  of  the  Chicago  affiliate   (see
our   issue   of  December  14,  "Convulsions  at   the   ACLU").
Under the  ACLU's complex system of voting, heavily  weighted
in  favor  of  the  National  Board, this  would  have  provided  a
majority  for  the  new policy statements, which were finally de-
feated  by  2,500 votes.
The  vote  to  ignore  the  referendum was  based  on an  extra-
ordinary  section  of the  by-laws  requiring the  National  Board
Freudian  Slip  by  the  FBI?
There  is  a  curious  omission  in  the  fact  sheet  issued
last  month  by  the  Democratic  National  Committee  to
show  how much the  party had accomplished  in the  strug-
gle  against  Communism.  An appendix lists  every indict-
ment  and  conviction  of  a  radical  back  to  the  pre-war
imprisonment  of  the  Minneapolis  Trotzkyites  under  the
Smith  Act.  Two  indictments  under  the  Foreign  Regis-
tration  Act  of  1940 are  cited,  but  no  mention is  made of
the  conviction  of  Jacob  Golos  under  that  act  in  March,
1940.   The  research  division  of  the  Democratic  National
Committee  said  the  information  was  obtained  from  the
Justice  Department. Goloe  (as  pointed out  in the   Weeklg
for  November  30,  "Was  J.  Edgar as  'Blind'  as  Harry?")
was  Elizabeth  Bentley's  lover.   Is  the   Department  of
Justice  "forgetting" this conviction, lest  too  many people
ask  how  Golos  in   1940-43  could  operate  a  spy  courier
system  out  of  Washington unbeknownst  to  the  FBI  after
he had been convicted and registered as a foreign agent?
to  act  in  accordance  with  the  majority  recommendations  on
any  referendum,  "except  where  it  believes  there  are  vitally
important  reasons  for  not  doing  so which it  shall  explain  to
the  corporation  members."   These  by-laws,'under  which  the
National  Board  can  exercise  Weimar   Republic  style  dicta-
torial "emergency" powers  against the  wishes  of the  member-
ship, are  themselves extra legal.  The by-laws  have never  been
formally  adopted  by  the  membership.  This,  too,  will  be aired
at  the  biennial  conference,  unless  it  is  again  postponed.
NEWS NOTES:  Americans  for  Democratic  Action  decided
to  favor  wire-tapping  "with  safeguards"   but  couldn't  make
up its mind on the immunity  bill. . . . The most hopeful  news
from  the  South  was that  Wall  Street  Journal  story  on Janu-
ary  4  discussing  the  tactics  merchants  there  were  using  to
obtain  Negro  trade,  including—and  this  will  really  turn  the
Daughters  of the  Confederacy albino—addressing  Negro  cus-
tomers  as  "Mister."  .  .  .  Earl  Browder  sent  the  New York
Times a letter protecting  and denying that  "dope" story from
Washington  that  the  House Un-American Activities  Commit-
tee  had  a  former  Communist leader  softened  up  to  the  point
where "in about six months"  he might  talk. . . . The Emspak
case,  the  first  in  which  the  Supreme -Court  will  pass  on  the
question  of the  First  Amendment  and  Congressional  Investi-
gation, will be argued  this week and trial of Harvey  O'Connor
for  contempt  has  been postponed  until  after  the  Emspak  deci-
sion has been  handed down.. . . IFS is taking to the hustings
on  the  subject  of  the  immunity  bill,  wire-tapping  and   the
general  threat  to  civil  liberties.   He  will  speak  on  Friday,
January  22, in  Washington  at  Odd Fellows'  Hall,  9th  and  T
Streets  N W,  under  the  auspices  of  a  newly  launched   public
affairs  forum  of  the  local  Progressive Party,  and  the  follow-
ing  Friday,  January  29, in  New  York,  at  Carnegie  Recital
Hall,  154 W.  57th  Street,  under  the  auspices  af  the   Emer-
gency  Civil  Liberties  Committee.
DON'T  BE  SURPRISED  WHEN  . . .
You  pick  up the  mail  and  find  another  copy  of  that  "success  story"  letter  we  sent  you  some  weeks  ago  In  launching  our  re-
newal  campaign.  Many  readers  asked  for  extra  copies to  send on to  friends, and  since we  had a  large  quantity  on hand a  "second
round"  mailing  seemed  an  inexpensive  way  (1)  to  provide  a  reminder  and a  prepaid  reply  envelope  for  those  of  you who  have
not  yet  renewed  and (2) a  way  those  who  have  already  renewed  can lend  us a  hand.  Just  send  the  "success story"  letter  and  the
prepaid  reply  envelope  to  a  friend  who  might  like  to   subscribe.
The  response so far  has been  extraordinary—we  don't  believe there  Is another  publication  In  America  which  can show  so large
a  percentage  of  renewals  In  advance  of  expiration.  Our  second year  of  publication  Is  assured—our  basic  expenses  for  the  new
year  are  covered.   But we'd  like—and  are  sure  you'd  like—  to  see the Weekly  reach as many  new  readers as possible.
So  if  you've  already  renewed—or  are  yourself  a  new  reader—simply  send  the  "success  story"  letter  and  the  reply  envelope
on  to a  friend, and  please  do  it  now before  you   forget.  And if  you  haven't  yet  renewed,  remember  the  next  Issue—No.  30—will
be  the  last  of our first  circulation year.  We  are  looking  forward  to  Vol.   2,  No.  1.   Be sure  to  get  It  by  filling  out  the  renewal
blank  on the  reverse  side  and—if  you  can—add  a  gift  sab for  a  friend.
With  many  thanks  and  best  wishes  for  the  New Year,  —I.  F.  STONE
1  9  9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   11, 1954
The  Secret  War  In Sidney  Hook's  Committee
James  Burnham  Endorses  An  Atomic Whopper
It  is  difficult  these days for  an intellectual   to fig-
ure  just  how  far  right  he  must  move  in  order  to  be  safely
respectable;   it  is  a  pity  there  are  no  Royalist   organizations
available.  The  Chicago  Tribune.on  New  Year's  Day  referred
to  "an  organization  of  pretended  intellectuals  who  call  them-
selves  anti-Communists."   This was an unexpected  and  doubly
unkind  way to  characterize  Sidney Hook's American  Commit-
tee  for  Cultural  Freedom.
The  occasion  for  this was the  internal  struggle  precipitated
within  the  committee  by  Eugene  Rabinowitch,  editor  of  the
respected  Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists.   Dr.   Rabinowitch,
a  member  of  the  committee,  sent  around  a  letter  to  various
members  objecting  to  a  preface  James  Burnham  had  written
for  a new  book  called,  "The  Secret  War  for  the  A-Bomb",  by
a  man  named  Medford  Evans.
The  first  account  of  the internal struggle  appeared in  Fulton
Lewis's  column  in the  New  York Journal  American of  Decem-
ber  29.   There  Lewis  reported  genially  that  the  book  showed
that  "a  goodly  number,  if  not  most,  of  our  atomic  scientists,
ranged  from  soft-to-communism,  to  pro-Communist  and  out-
right  Communist."
The  Evans thesis  is that  bits of fissionable materials can
and  are  being  smuggled  out  of  our  atomic  plants  for  fabrica-
tion  into  atomic  weapons in  preparation for  what  he  calls  "an
atomic  age Guy  Fawkes"  day.   He  sees  the  "dreadful   alterna-
tive" that  (instead of  an atomic attack by Russia on the U.  S.)
Communists  in  this  country  could  utilize  these  clandestinely
produced  atom  bombs  (Los  Alamos  in  a  cellar  washtub?)  to
"establish   the  dictatorship   of  the  proletariat  in  the  United
States."
Evans's  theory  is that  the  Soviets  cannot  produce  the  bomb
themselves  but  only  got  it  because Beria  may  have  "arranged
to  smuggle  out  of  the  United  States  enough  'nuclear  compo-
nents' for  a demonstration  or so for  the  Soviet high  command."
He   believes  that   secret   Communists  have  encouraged   ever
vaster  production  in  this  country  of  atomic  materials  and  de-
vices  in  order  to  steal  them  for  Russia.  "In  this  situation,"
Evans  writes,   "the   observable  activities  of  the   Communist
agents  and  of  the  patriots   will  be  indistinguishable."   Dick
Tracy  himself  would  find  that  a  tough  one.
The  A-bomb  was developed  by  refugees  and  they  could  not
be expected,  Evans sneers,  to  be  as sensitive  to  the  menace of
Communism  as  they  were  to  "racism."  The  book  will  make
strange  reading in  the  Navy,  where  Admiral "Hymie"  Rick-
over  had  so much  trouble  developing  the  atomic   submarine.
"Communist   agents,"  Evans  writes,  "may  or  may  not  have
had  to  nudge  policy-makers  to  get  top  priority,  after  weapon
manufacture,   for   submarine  development;   for   certainly   an
atomic  submarine  would  be very  useful  to  the  United  States,
even if  it  would be somewhat more useful  to the  Soviet Union."
This nightmare  is introduced  by Burnham in  his preface
to  the  book  with  an  accolade:  "On   the  political,  social  and
moral  phases  [of  atomic  development],  this  book  of  Medford
Evans*  seems  to  me not  merely  the  best  but  alone in  its  class."
It  is certainly alone in  its  class.
Burnham  terms  this  "old-fashioned  American  writing   for
Americans."   Rabinowitch  in  his letter  to  the  American  Com-
mittee  for  Cultural  Freedom,  said  he  did  not  see how  he  and
other  scientists  "whose  defamation"  Burnham  had  praised  in
this  way  "can  remain members of  the  committee  unless it  dis-
sociates itself  from  Mr. Burnham."  H.  J.  Muller, the  biologist,
a  vice  chairman  of   the   ACCF,   is  one  of   those   supporting
Rabinowitch.
Evans went  to  work  for  the  Atomic  Energy   Com-
mission  at  Oak  Ridge  in  1945 and  later  became a  "chief  of
training"  at  $9800  a year in  the  "division  of  organization  and
personnel"  in Washington.  His employment  record  shows that
he  resigned  in  March,  1952,  after   a  long  period   of  illness.
The  blurb  says  he  resigned  "when  he  found  none  of  his  rec-
ommendations  were  being  carried   out."
A  McCarran or  McCarthy  could  do a lot  with  this  bedtime
story.    Perhaps  it  is  fortunate  that  the  Congressional  Joint
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  is  in  such  powerful  and  reac-
tionary  hands.  Even  McCarthy  may  hesitate  to  embark  on  a.
course  which would picture  Senators Hickcnlooper  and Know-
land  as the  careless duped  guardians of  the  atom  bomb.
let  Us Send A Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  to A Friend—Or,  Better  Yet,  Start  A  Gift  Sub With  This  Issue
Doift   Rue  It,  Do   It.
PLEASE  RENEW NOW
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  f5:
Name    ______________________________
Street   ___________________________
City_____________   Zone____  State______
Enter  this  gift  sub   for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
fro)    Na
Street
City-
State______
1-11-64
I.  F. Stoned Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED