I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1954
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1954apr19.pdf

============================================================

Why  Brownell  Does Not  Want the  Communists Outlawed,  Page  Three
/, F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   2,  NUMBER  13
APRIL  19,  1954
*,       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Behind  the  Attack  on  Dr. Oppenheimer
The  most  important  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from
the  Oppenheimer  affair   is  that  the  United  States  is  becoming
a   sick  nation.    In   an  earlier   religious  age, it   would   have
seemed  that  a  curse  had  fallen  on  the  people  who  first  dared
use  against  other  human  beings  the  awful   potential  of   the
atom.    A  sense  of  insecurity  has  grown  among  us  ever  since
we  discovered  the  weapon which  seemed  to  promise an  almost
absolute  security.     Only   in   an   atmosphere  grown  morbid
would  so  much  public  energy  and  discussion  be  wasted  on
a  series  of  spurious  melodramas  at  a  time  when  war  and  de-
pression  are urgent  problems.
The   day  the   Oppenheimer  documents  were  released,  the
Washington  Evening  Star  in  an  editorial on  the  next  horror,
the  C-bomb,  said  the  fact   that  it  "might  bring   about  the
end  of  the  world"  was  "good  insurance  that  the  thing  will
never  be  produced  or  set  off."    This   assumes,  however,  the
paper  concluded,  "that  nations  and  their  governments   will
not  go  berserk,  like  Samson,  and  commit  suicide  by  pulling
down  all  the  pillars  of   civilization."     It.  also   assumes  that
after  the  agony in  store  for  Dr.  Oppenheimer  other  scientists
will  be  intrepid  enough  to  object  on  those  "moral   grounds"
which  are made  to  seem  so sinister  in  the  charges against  him.
II
Our  allies  must  now  take  seriously   into  account
the   pathological  state  of   our   politics.     The   nation   which
holds  the  greatest  destructive  power  in  all  history  is  itself  in
the  grip  of  panicky  fears  which  make  reasonable  policies  un-
likely.   Behind this  attack on  the  scientist  who  did  more  than
any  other  one  man  to  develop  the  atom  bomb  may  be  de-
scried  two  forces.    One, in  which the  FBI and McCarthy  bulk
large,  is  driving  toward  an  American  Fascism.    The  other
stems  from  the  Air  Force,  and particularly  from  the  Strategic
Air  Command, with  its  apocalyptic  conception  of  a new war.
The  issue  between Dr.  Oppenheimer  and  the  Strategic  Air
Command  is fundamental.    It  deserves to  be debated  as  policy
and  not  dramatized  as spy  soap  opera.    It  was  spelled  out  by
Dr.  Oppenheimer in  that  famous  article on  "Atomic  Weapons
and  American  Policy"  in  Foreign   Affairs    last  July  in  which
he  likened  the  U.  S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  "to   two  scorpions  in
a  bottle,  each  capable  of  killing  the  other,  but   only  at  the
risk  of  his  own  life."    The  issue  may   also  be  seen  in   the
article  which  alerted  McCarthy  to  this  new  opportunity   last
spring—the  unsigned  piece   (Charles  J.  V.  Murphy  was  the
author)   published  by  Fortune  last  May  called  "The  Hidden
Struggle  for  the  H-Bomb:  The  story  of  Dr.  Oppenheimer's
persistent  campaign  to  reverse  U.  S. military  strategy."   Thi«
was  of  Air  Force  inspiration.
The  issue  is  whether  national  resources  are  to  be  diverted
from  the  super  Wagnerian  glamor  of  the  overwhelming  air
attack  to  the  construction  of  defenses  against  a  similar   at-
tack  from   an  enemy.    "A  high   officer   of  the  Air   Defense
Command  said—and  this  only  a  few  months  ago  in  a  most
serious  discussion  of  measures  for  the  continental  defense  of
the  United  States—,"  Dr.  Oppenheimer  revealed  in  Foreign
Affairs,    "that  it  was  our  policy  to  attempt  to  protect   our
striking force, but  that it  was not  really our policy  to  attempt
to  protect  this  country,  for  that  is so big  a job  that  it  would
interfere  with  our  retaliatory  capabilities."    The  related  issue,
as  set forth  in  the  Fortune article,  is whether  both  sides  might
not  forswear  strategic  air  warfare,  thus  "bringing  the  battle
back  to  the  battlefield."
This  would  put   the  Strategic  Air  Command  out  of  busi-
ness  and  deprive  it   of  all  that   lovely  boom-boom.    At  one
point,   according  to   the  Fortune  article,  Dr.   Oppenheimer
"produced  an  explosion ...  by  a  veiled  suggestion  that  Air
Force  doctrine  was  based  on  the  slaughter  of  civilians."     It
would  be interesting  to  know  by  what  secret  device our  Hell
bombs  will  damage  only  uniformed  personnel.
The   Fortune  article  sneered   at   the   electronic   "Maginot
Line"  proposed  by  Dr.  Oppenheimer  and  his  associates:  "an
early  warning system of  interlocking  radar stations  far  out  on
the  Arctic  rim; and  behind  this  a  deep  air-defense  system
utilizing   guided  missiles,  supersonic  aircraft,  even  squadrons
of  aircraft  borne  by  'mother'  aircraft  on  continuous  patrol."
Fortune  complained  that  "he  (Dr. Oppenheimer)   and  his
followers  have no  confidence in  the  military's  assumption that
SAC  as  a  weapon  of  mass  destruction   is  a  real  deterrent   to
Soviet  action.   On  the contrary,  they  believe that, by  generat-
ing  fear  in  the  Kremlin,  it  has been  a goad  to  the  development
of  counter-atomic  weapons.   They  argue  that  it  has  aroused
misgivings  in  Western  Europe;   and  that   a  renunciation   of
atomic-offensive  powers  by  both  major  adversaries  is  essential
to  an easement of  world  tensions."   This led Dr.   Oppenheimer
to  argue  against  the  H-bomb.   This  is  the  heresy  for  which
he  must  now  be  destroyed.
in
There  is  a  hint  in  the Fortune  article  that  Eisenhower,
perhaps  'because  he  is  an  Army  man,  has  been  friendly  to  Dr.
Oppenheimer's    views.     "Sensing   defeat   in   the   Pentagon,"
Fortune  says  of  Dr.   Oppenheimer   and  his  allies,  they  "now
sought  the  support  of  the  man  charged  with  the  defense  of
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  19
f
  1954
Western  Europe.    Early  in  December,  1951,  they  turned  up
at  NATO  headquarters  with   the  Vista   report   [the report
which   carried   the   "veiled   suggestion"    about   slaughter   of
civilians,   IPS].   General   Eisenhower   was   heartened   by   its
optimistic   views  of  the  feasibility  of  holding  Europe.    It  is
doubtful,   however,  that  he  concerned  himself   with  its  impli-
cations  as  they  pertained  to  SAC."
The  italics  are  added.    Eisenhower  does  not  seem  to  have
objected   to  these  implications.    The  article   goes  on  to  say
that  his  air  adviser  did.  The  Air  Force  finally  defeated  the
plan.    Eisenhower  is  in  a  more  powerful  position  now  than
he  was  then.    And  his  atomic  address  to  the  UN   General
Assembly   last   December   echoed   Dr.   Oppenheimer's   views,
particularly  in  the  assertion  that  even  a  "vast  superiority"
such  as  we  possess  was  no  safeguard  against  the    "fearful"
toll  that  an  enemy  could  inflict.
IV
Those  Who were  pressing   for an "Operation  Candor"
to   debate  the   momentous  issues  of   "defense"   vs.   "massive
retaliation"  were  a  menace  to  the  Strategic  Air  Command,
since  any  revision  of  policy  would  be  at  its  expense.    Ques-
tions  of  judgment,  policy,  and  morality  have  been  submerged
in  the  hobgoblin   atmosphere  of  a  "loyalty"  proceeding.   The
mystery  lies  in  how  this  was  opened  and  why—since  it  was
opened—there  was  such  long  delay  in  revoking  Dr.   Oppen-
heimer's  security  clearance.    The  Eisenhower  security  order
of  last  May  did  require  a  security  review  for   all  employes
and   consultants  concerning   whom   there   was  "substantial"
derogatory   information.    But   who   decided  that   the   stale
earlier   charges  of   Communist   association  and   the   inflated
later  charges  of  delaying  the  H-bomb  were   "substantial"?
None   knew  better   than   Major   General   K.  D.   Nichols,
general   manager  of   the  AEC, the   signer   of   the   loyalty
"charges,"  how  insubstantial  they   were.     General   Nichols,
a  West  Pointer  and  an  engineer, was  General  Groves'  deputy
all  through  the  Manhattan District  experience.    The  charges
were  not   considered  "substantial"   by  Groves,  nor   later  by
those  including  President Truman  to  whom  the  same  charges
were  brought   by  the FBI.
We  come  here  to  another  strand  in  the  story.    The  FBI
had  been  excluded  from  the  most  important  intelligence  as-
signment  of  the  war—the  safeguarding  of  the  atom   bomb.
The   Manhattan  District   had   its   own   intelligence   service,
responsible  like  the  rest  of  the  project  to  General  Groves.    It
was  not  until  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  took  over  from
the   military   in  January,  1947, that   the   FBI   assumed  re-
sponsibility  for  atomic  security.
According  to  a  story  published  in  the  late  edition  of  the
New   York   Times  last  Tuesday,  the  loyalty  of  Dr.  'Oppen-
heimer  seemed  to  be  on  the  first  order  of  business  for   the
FBI.    Early  in  March  of  that  year,  J.  Edgar  Hoover  phoned
David  Lilienthal  asking  for  his  personal  attention  to  a  special
report   which  would  reach  him  soon.    The  report,   when  it
arrived  on  March  8,  dealt  with  Dr.   Oppenheimer,  who  had
been  made  chairman  of   the   General  Advisory    Committee.
The  charges  were  then  passed  on  by  the  Atomic  Energy  Com-
mission,  by  the  powerful  military  liaison  committee,  by  Sena-
tors  McMahon  and  Hickenlooper,  and  by  President  Truman.
Dr.   Oppenheimer   was  strongly   supported   then   as  he  is
now  by  General  Groves,    If  the  Times  story  is  correct,  Mr.
Hoover   shortly   afterward   resumed   the   attack   but   again
without   success.    Vice  President  Nixon  did  not  consider  the
charges  substantial  and  according  to  the  Washington  Evening
Star  of  last  Wednesday  dissuaded  the  McCarran   committee
in   1950  from   going   into  the  subject   after   the   California
State  Un-American  Activities  Committee  had  obtained  testi-
mony  from  Paul  Crouch   which  Dr.   Oppenheimer   was  able
to  prove  false.   What  made  them  substantial  again last  July?
The   old  charges  have not  even been brought  up to date.
The  Nichols  letter  refers  to  other  scientists.   An  outstanding
example   is   "Scientist   X,"   Joseph   W.   Weinberg   [see  the
Weekly,  Vol. 1,  No.  9,  "The Ordeal  of  Scientist  X"  for  the
full  story].  No  reference  is  made  to  the  fact  that  Weinberg
denied  the  charges  made  against  him, was  tried   for  perjury
and  acquitted.    Yet  the  government's  ignominious  failure  to
prove  a  case  after  so many  years  of  smearing  Weinberg  casts
a  doubt  on  the  charges against others named.
As  for  the  new  charges  of  opposing  and  delaying  the   H-
bomb,  Homer  Bigart  in  the  New  York  Herald-Tribune  last
Wednesday  reported  Dr.  Oppenheimer  " 'outraged'  that  such
a  charge  was  not  promptly   and  publicly  repudiated  by  Ad-
miral  Lewis L.  Strauss,  chairman  of  the  AEC,  and  Dr.  Henry
S.  Smyth,  another  member  of  the  AEC" who  "were  in  the
AEC  when  the  controversy  arose and  must  have  known  that
there  was nothing  sinister  in  the  arguments  advanced  openly
by  Dr.  Oppenheimer."
The  strangest   question  is  this:  if  last  July  these  old  and
new  charges  were  considered   substantial  enough  to  warrant
a  new  investigation  of  Dr.   Oppenheimer,  why  was  he  not
deprived  of  security  clearance  by  the  President  until  last  De-
cember,  six  months  later?    It  is  here  that  the  shadow  of  the
Harry  Dexter  White  case  may  fall   across  the  Oppenheimer
story.    Attorney  General  Brownell  in  November  accused  Mr.
Truman  of  ignoring  an FBI report  on Harry White.   Did  this
help  bring   pressure  on  Eisenhower?  Was  it  argued  that  he
ought  not  to  put  himself  in  the  same position  by  ignoring  an
FBI  report  on  Dr.  Oppenheimer?  On  December  8, Eisenhower
echoed  Dr.  Oppenheimer's  views  before  the  UN  General  As-
sembly.    On   December   23,  he  revoked   Dr.   Oppenheimer's
clearance.    That  same  day  General  Nichols  sent  Dr.  Oppen-
heimer  the  letter  which  put  "veracity,  conduct  and  even  your
loyalty"  in   question.
VI
So the  decision was  made  to initiate a case more explo-
sive  even  than  that  of  Hiss.   Dr.  Oppenheimer  has  far  more
powerful  friends;  to  destroy  him would  damage the reputation
of  many others, including  General Groves, Nixon  and the  mem-
bers  of  the  Joint  Congressional  Committee,  perhaps of  Eisen-
hower  himself.   The  outcome  is far  from  certain.    The  battle
joined  is  a  battle  for   the  future  of  America.   The  ruin  of
Dr.    Oppenheimer   would   intensify   political   paranoia   and
increase  the  power  of  those  like  McCarthy  who  live  upon  it.
His  vindication  would  be  a  setback  from  which  they   might
not   recover.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'*  Weekly,  April  19, 1954
Will  A Super  McWhoozis  Some Day  Think  This  Sinister?
Mr.  Brownell,  Too,  Opposes  Outlawing  The  Communists
It  seems  that  during  the  Administration  of  FOR  all  was
not   treason.     According   to   Attorney   General   Brownell,
preparations  for  the  recent  trial  oi  the  Detroit  Communist
leaders   began   during   the   Roosevelt   Administration.     At
that  time,  according  to  Brownell's  radio  and  TV  address  of
April  9,  several  FBI   undercover  informants   "began   their
training   in  counter-espionage."
Their  first  feat,  however, does  seem  a  little   disappointing.
"With   patience   and   skill,"   Brownell   said,   "(they)    were
able   to   become   members  of   the   Communist  party   cells"
and  thanks  to  their  indoctrination  "were  accepted  as  mem-
bers  in  the  Communist  party  without  suspicion."   This   is
less  than  breath-taking.    In  those  years,  at  least,  it  was  as
easy  to  join  the  Communist  party  as  to  join  the  YMCA.
Their   assignment,   as   Brownell  related,  was  to  uncover
Communist  efforts   "to  infiltrate  commerce  and  industry  in
that  great  industrial  center."   Detroit  is  full  of  plants  to  be
sabotaged   and   industrial   secrets   to   be  stolen;   the   radio
and  TV  audience  must  have  tingled  with  anticipation,  wait-
ing  to  hear  what  the  FBI  men  found  out.
This,  too,  proved  disappointing.   For  when  the  six  leaders
of  the   Communist Party  in  the  Detroit   area  were  finally
brought  to  trial,  it  was  not  for  stealing  defense  secrets  or
sabotaging   key  production  or  even  for  planning  to  do  so
some  time  in  the  future.    The  charge  was  indeed  "conspir-
ing"  but  only  "conspiring  to  advocate."    The  main  evidence
there  as  in  Smith  Act  trials  elsewhere  were  the  same books
—by  Marx,  Lenin  and  Stalin.   It  was  from  the  use  of  these
books  that  the  government  deduced  an  intent   some  time  in
the  future  to  advocate  revolutionary  doctrine.
The  Attorney   General  smirked  proudly   as   he  told  how
since  1948  (still,  though  he  did  not  mention  it,  part  of  those
20  years  of  Democratic treason),  105 of  the  principal  leaders
of  the  Communist party  had  been  indicted  and  67  convicted
of  this  same  crime,  "conspiracy  to  advocate."    It  must  have
been  disappointing  for  listeners  to  realize  that  not  a  single
leader  had  been  indicted  for  anything  more  dramatic.
Mr.  Brownell  smirked  again  and  said  that  the  success  of
the   FBI   had   been  "so   outstanding   that   the   Commubist
party  in  this  country  doesn't  know  which  of  its  Communist
members to trust."   He paused  and added, "I  assure  you that
makes  their  conspiracy  & very  hazardous  occupation."
It  is  a  measure  of  these  "crimes"  that  they  are hazardous
only  because  Congress  enacted  the  Smith  Act  in  1940,  with
the  first  peacetime  sedition  provisions  in  American  history
since  the   Alien  and   Sedition   Laws  of   1798,  making  "ad-
vocacy"  and  "conspiring  to  advocate"  a  crime.  From  1798  to
1940,   it  was  not  a  crime  to  advocate  revolutionary  ideas.
There  were  and  are,  of  course,  laws  against  disturbing   the
public  peace,  attempting   to  overthrow  the  government,  and
engaging  in  seditious  conspiracy,  laws  against  treason,  es-
pionage  and  sabotage,  but  the  FBI  was  not  able  in  the  (Case
of  a  single  Communist leader  among  the  105 to  find  enough
evidence  to  justify  even  an  indictment  for  these  more tangi-
ble  crimes.
If  there  were  evidence of -these  real  crimes,  it  would  not
be  necessary for  the  Attorney  General  to  be  asking  for  new
anti-Communist  laws.    These   (like  the   Smith  Act)  would
make  it  possible to  punish  people  for  their  ideas  (or  alleged
ideas)  alone  in  the  absence  of  evidence that  they  had  com-
mitted,  or  conspired  to  commit,  crimes  against  public  order.
Mr.  Brownell claims  to  be  acting  within  the  framework of
the  Constitution.   But  how  can  he  fit  into  the  Constitution
the   bill  he  wants   to  allow  an   employer  to   dismiss   from
defense  plants   "during   a  national  emergency"   (we  "emer-
gencies"  awful  easy)   "any   person  whose  record  shows  he
is  likely  to  engage  in  sabotage  or  espionage?"    Where  in
the  Constitution,  or  in  Anglo-American  tradition,   or  in  the
law  of  any  free  society,  will  he  find  precedent  for   legislation
which  determines  (by  peering  into  a  man's  skull?)  that  he
is  "likely"  to  commit  a  crime?    The  only  precedent  that
occurs  to  us  is  the   "preventive  arrest"  of  Hitler's  Reich.
By  now there  must  be so  many  FBI  men in the Communist
party  as to  give our secret  police a  vested  interest  in  keeping
the  party  alive.   In  past  years,  other  Attorney  Generals  and
J.  Edgar  Hoover  have  always  opposed  bills  to  outlaw  the
Communist  party.   Mr.  Brownell followed  in  their  footsteps
before  the  House  Judiciary  Committee last  Monday.
"To the  extent  that  such  a  bill  would  force the  Communist
movement   underground,"   the   Attorney   General   testified,
"cause  it  to close its  headquarters,  terminate  its  publications,
it  would  at  the  same  time  and  to  the  same  extent   increase
the  already  difficult  investigatory   job  of  the  FBI."    A  legal
Communist  party  is  a convenience.
No lawyer hired by the  Communist party could have  argued
more  ably  the  dubious  constitutionality  of  any  measure  to
outlaw  the  Communist party,  and  the  complications it  would
create  for  the  government.   The MeCarran Internal   Security
Act  rests  on provisions requiring  Communist and  Communist
front  organizations  to  register  their   officers   and  members.
But  under the  Fifth  amendment  (which  says  no person  shall
be compelled to  testify  against  himself), you cannot  make  a
person  register  himself  as  a  Communist if  at  the  same  time
being  a  Communist  is  made  a  crime.    Mr.  Brownell  said
enactment  of  a  bill to  oulaw  the  Communist party  and make
membership  a  crime  would  undercut  the  MeCarran  Act.
Mr.  Brownell said  a  bill  to  outlaw  Communists would  also
be  open to attack  as an  infringement  of the  First  amendment,
and  as  a  legislative  fiat  declaring  a  group  of  persons  guilty
of  a  crime  without  individual  proof.    The  party  would  go
underground,  destroying   all  membership  records.    "Thus,"
Mr.  Brownell  pleaded, "proof   of  party  membership  in  many
cases  might  well  be  established  only  through  the  oral  testi-
mony  of  confidential  informants,  people whose value for  such
purposes   would  be  thereafter   completely  destroyed."     To
protect  its  confidential informants, the  FBI  must  protect  the
Communist  party.
If  the  paranoid  delusions fostered  by the  American govern-
ment  for   a   decade  should  spread,   Mr.  Brownell   and   Mr.
Hoover  may  shudder  some  day   over  the   sinister   light   in
which  this  testimony  may  be  read  by  a  Super  McWhoozis.
Non-Communists   left-of-center    who  think   the   outlawry
of  the  Communist  party  would  solve  their  problems  are  very
foolish.     The   bills   before   Congress   would   do  more  than
declare  the  Communist party   illegal;   they  would  make  all
suspected  Communists guilty  of  a felony.
When and if a bill to outlaw the  Communist party is passed,
the  U.S.A.  will  have  taken  a  major  step  toward   Fascism.
The  Department  of  Justice  for  its   own  reasons  has   again
moved  to block  such legislation.   Its  reasons  are  quite simple.
It  believes  that  bills  to  outlaw  the  Communist  party  might
never  get  past  the  Supreme  Court,  that  the  same  end  may
be  achieved more  skilfully  by  the  use  of  the  MeCarran  Act.
Mr.  Brownell  never  said  so  too  plainly  but  the  steps  he
envisages  are  these:  The  Communists will  refuse  to  register
when   and   if   the   final   order   of  the   Subversive  Activities
Control  Board is upheld by the  Supreme Court.   In that  event
they can be prosecuted for  failure to  register, and  the  "they"
can  be  made  flexible enough to  hound  a  wide  assortment  of
other  radicals  and  liberals.    Instead  of  merely  being  black-
listed,  radicals  could then  be  prosecuted  for  non-registration.
This  is  the  meaning  of  the  position  taken  by  Mr.  Brownell.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  19, 1954
J  EN  N  INGS   PERRY'S     PAGE
Friends  Seed  Jenkins,  if  Scratched,  to  Skin  Joe
KNOXVILLE—The   first   congressional   district
of   Tennessee,  lying  between  Walden's   Ridge  and  the   Great
Smokies  and  including  the  site  of  the  Free  State  of  Franklin,
the  first  republic  organized  in  America,  proudly  claims to  be
"more  Republican  than  Maine."    Ray  Howard   Jenkins,   57-
year-old,  six-foot-three-inch  special  counsel  in  the  McCarthy-
army  "you're another" row, claims to  be as good  a Republican
as  any  in  the district.   He  supported  Taf t  before  the  conven-
tion,  Eisenhower  after.    He  has  no  preconceived  notions,  he
has  asserted,  as  to  the  merits  of  the  controversy   he  has  been
chosen  to  investigate—and,  furthermore,  that  he has expressed
no opinion  "publicly or privately"  on McCarthy  or  McCarthy-
ism.      His  friends  and  associates  here,  where  he  has  practiced
law. for  3 3  years,  say  they  believe him.
"He   just   wasn't   interested.     Ray  Jenkins,"   they   insist,
"is  interested  in  just  two   things—a  case  before  a  jury  and
the  size of  the fee."
Jenkins  was  recommended   to  the  Senate  sub-
committee  . after   the   quick   bow-out   of   Boston's   Sears  by
Sen.    Dirksen  of  Illinois  and  Rep.  Howard  Baker  of  Tennessee.
The  rising question  is whether  he  was  picked  for  a  mission of
pulling  the  party's  chestnuts out  of  the  showdown   fire.   His
own  law partner  predicts  that  Jenkins  will  be "on  the  lookout
for   ways   and   means  to   minimize   differences,   if   possible."
Concurring,'  other  Knoxville  lawyers  of  both  parties  declare
that  Jenkins  would  not  have  been  sponsored  by  Dirksen  and
Baker  "if  there, had  been  the  remotest  idea  that  he  would  try
to  wield  a switch-blade knife  on  McCarthy's  hide."
The truth  is, viewed ad hominem, that  the Republican  Party
can  expect  as much  service  from  its  Tennessee  son  as requires
no  self-sacrifice,  and  that  McCarthy's  hide  will  be safe  as long
as  (a)   McCarthy   refrains  from  scratching  Jenkins  and   (b)
Jenkins,   not  McCarthy,  takes   51.  per  cent  of  the  headlines.
For  the  tall,  lean  Knoxville lawyer  carries a switch-blade knife
in  his  head,  delicately  geared  to  the  liveliest  appreciation  of
the  main  chance for  himself.
Jenkins is  a trial  lawyer,   a  high-priced   trial  lawyer
in  his  neck  of  the  woods,  with  the  impressive  reputation  of
never  in  over  300 murder  cases  losing  a  client  to  the  "chair."
His   ambition   is  to  be  a  higher-priced   trial   lawyer  and   to
enlarge  his  woods.    Upon  his  appointment  by  the  committee,
Old  Guard  Republicans  in  his  state  rushed  to  propose  him
as  a  candidate  for   the  seat  of  Sen. Estes  Kefauver:   Jenkins
stomped  on that  promptly  and decisively.   To  him the  hearing
is  not  a  step  to  any  office,  but   possibly  a  ticket   to  $2J,000
and  $J 0,000  retainers in  tough  criminal  cases in  the  South—
and  perhaps  beyond.
He   does   not   like   being   tagged   a   "hill-billy   Darrow."
"Darrow,"   he   retorts,  "had  brains."     This   is   too   much
modesty;  Jenkins  has  brains,  but  on  the  lazy  side.   His  forte
is  pleading:  once  he  got  off  a  client  on  eight  separate charges
of   murder.     A  few   years  ago  in   a  case  celebrated  in  East
Tennessee  he  undoubtedly  saved  the  life  of  Clarence  Darden,
a  Negro,  charged  with  killing  his  restaurant-keeper  employer
with  a  penknife.    First  he  sent  Darden  back  to  his  church
to  raise  $5000,  then  Jenkins  took  the  case  and  melted  judge
and  jury  to  tears  with  a  demand  that  Northern   critics  be
shown  that  "justice  and  fairness"  lives  in  the  South.
Another  time,  he  won  acquittal  in  what  had  seemed
an  open  and  shut  arson  case  with  an  impassioned  appeal  to
the  jury  to  reveal  its  own  greatness  of  soul  by  freeing  "this
immigrant  Greek."    Whereupon  his  joyful  client  kissed  not
only  his  attorney  and  the  jurors,  but   the  witnesses  and  at-
torneys  for  the  prosecution   as  well.    Judges  and  juries  love
his  performances,  and  sedate jurists have  been  known  to  duck
behind  the  bench  to  laugh  at  his  salty  tales.
Conceivably  his  new  role  under  the  great  eye  of  TV  may
throw  him;  his  friends  think  not.    McCarthy   may  tangle
with  him; his  friends  say  McCarthy   would  be  a  fool.    For
Ray  Jenkins,  they  assure  you  here,  "knows  how  to  take  care
of  himself,  and, come  right  down  to  it,  that's  the  only  con-
cern  he  ever has."
We'll  Be Glad  fo  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  fo  Your  Friends
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
This  /•  Expiration   Time
PLEASE   RENEW NOW
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301  E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name     ——————————————————.——————————
Street   ____________._________________
Enter  this  gift  sub  for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)   Name    _________________________________
City ___ _ ._..
.._.._  Zone __State ___ _
4-19-54
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3, D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED