I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970jan12.pdf

============================================================

How LBJs  Comeback  May  Help  Nixon,  P.  2
The  Whole Truth About The  Arms  Race In  One Easy  Lesson
"Based  on  our  military  outlays  and  economic  strength,  if   we  are  six  feet  tall,  the  Russians  by  comparison  are  three
feet  tall  and  the  Chinese  six  inches."
—Sen.  Proxmire  (D.  Wis.)   as  he  released   a  report  Dec.  27,  The  Military   Budget   and  National   Priorities,  proposing  a
$10  billion  cut  next  year   in  Pentagon   spending.
F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.XVIII,  NO. 1
JANUARY  12,  1970
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Heading  for  A  Bigger  Arms  Race in  the  70's
Despite  euphoric reports  about  the  SALT  talks  and  the  $5.9
billion   cut  in   the   final  defense  budget   this   fiscal   year,   the
military  monster  is  far  from  being  subdued.   It  takes  a  long
time  before cuts in  Congressional authorization and  appropria-
tion  bills  actually  lead  to  cuts  in  expenditure.  The  best  guide
to  actual  expenditures  is  the   daily  U.S.  Treasury  statement.
Its  Jan.  2  statement covering all  but  the  last  two  days  of  the
first  half   of   the   1970  fiscal  year   is  not   encouraging.    The
cash   deficit   for   the  six  months  was  $12.4   billion  as  against
$7.8  billion  in  the  same  period  last  year.   To  this  deficit   the
military  establishment was   a  prime  contributor,   despite   the
first  withdrawals   from   Vietnam   and   talk  of   reduced   com-
mitments.  In  the  first  half  of  the  fiscal  year  the  military  drew
more   than   half   a   billion   ($685   million)   more   from   the
Treasury  than  in  the  corresponding  period   a  year  ago.   The
rate  of  increase  seemed  to  be  going  up.   In  December   alone
military  spending  was  more  than  $1  billion  higher  than  in
December   a   year   ago.    The   tempo   of   military   spending   is
still  feeding  the  fires  of  inflation.
Four  Trillion  on  Arms  Since  1900
The   Tax   Foundation   estimates  that   in   1970   the   average
tax  burden  per  American  family  for  defense  will  be   $1,250
a  year.  For  those  families  lucky  enough   to  be  on  the  gravy
train   of   the   military-industrial   complex,   this   tax   is  easily
outweighed  by  their  earnings.  Indeed  from  an  economic  point
of  view  the  arms  race  is  a  device  for  taxing  the  poor   to  the
profit   of  the   well-to-do.  The   prospect   for   a  change   in   the
70s   is   dim.   The   Arms   Control   and   Disarmament   Agency
estimates   that  the  world   has  spent   $4,000  billion   on  arms
since   1900   and   at   the   current  rate  of   increase   will   spend
that  much  again  in  the  coming  decade  alone.  That,  too,   will
not  help  our  chronic  inflationary  fevers.
There  is  little  reason   to  believe   that  the   Strategic   Arms
Limitation  Talks  (SALT)   will  change  the  picture   much,  if
at  all.  The  two  biggest  escalations  which  lie  ahead  are  those
to  be  sparked  by  MIRV,  the  multiple  independently  targeted
missile   warheads,   and   the   ABM,   the   anti-ballistic  missile.
There  is  no   sign   that  Washington   or   Moscow   is   prepared
to  halt  either.  The  constant  and  pleased  assurances  from  the
State   Department   and   the   Pentagon    that   the   Russians  at
Helsinki    were   behaving   splendidly   and   avoiding   "propa-
ganda"    are—in    our    opinion—cause    for    depression,    not
optimism.    If   Moscow   were   militantly  for   disarmament   or
arms  control,  we  may  be  sure  this  would   be  stigmatized   as
"propaganda."
Defense  Cutbacks  Through  Air  Force  Eyes
The  authorization bill  gives  almost  no  solace  to  the
more  vociferous  foes  of  military  spending.   In  general,
the  Defense  Department seems  certain to  get  approval
for  all  the  weapons  systems  and  most  of  the  research
and  development it  considers  most  critical  .  .  .  Senator
Stennis,  chairman of  Senate   Armed  Services Commit-
tee,  has  said  the  new  authorization  bill  has  not  skipped
a  major  weapon system  or  even  put  severe  restrictions
on  any  of  them.   "The  bone  and  muscle  are  still  there,"
the  Senator  declared  .  .  .  Cutting  the  first  $1.5  billion
was  the  easy   part  of   the  job.   After  all,  USAF  had
already    dropped    the    Manned    Orbiting   Laboratory
(MOL)   program,  and  the  Army  had  cancelled  its  ill-
fated   Cheyenne  helicopter   and   started   to   redeploy
troops   from   Vietnam.   The  Navy  sailed   some   of   its
ships   into   mothballs,  headed  by   the   battleship   New
Jersey,   which   had  proved   an  expensive  platform  for
lobbing  16-inch  shells  at  the Vietcong ...    So far  as the
impact  on  industry  is  concerned,  the  requirement  for
new  hardware  to  fill  the  void  stands  firm.
—Defense    Cutbacks    in   Air    Force/Space     Digest,
organ  of  the  Air  Force  Association,  Dec.  1969.
Disarmament  buffs  had   naively  assumed  that  a  main  pur-
pose  of  the  SALT  talks  was  to  block   MIRV,  for   once   the
missiles  on  both  sides  are   outfitted   with   the   multiple   war-
heads,  it  will  be  impossible  for  either  side  to  know  by  aerial
surveillance  how  many  warheads  there  are  atop  each   missile
on  the  other.  The  fog  and  the  fear  will  come   down   again,
and  it  will  be  hard  to  keep  the  arms  race  within  any  bounds
at  all.  But  the  Pentagon   is  now  leaking  the  revelation  that
there  has  never  been   much  if  any  intention   on  our  side  to
curb  MIRV.  William   Beecher,  who  covers  the  Pentagon   for
the  New   York   Times,  reported   in  a  dispatch   to  his  paper
Dec.   31  that  while  the  Johnson   Administration  in  the  sum-
mer  of   1968   was  prepared   to  propose  a  freeze  on  strategic
weapons,   there   was  to   be  no   limitation   on    "improvement
of   systems  within  the  limited  numbers,"   including   MIRVs.
This  was the  first  public  disclosure  of  the  Johnson   negotiating
position.  George  C.  Wilson,  who  covers  the  Pentagon  for  the
Washington   Post,  reported   (Jan.   1)   from  a  similar  briefing
with  unnamed  officials  that  "the  Nixon  Administration  view
is  that  multiple-warhead  submarines  are  a  fact  of  life  already"
so  MIRV  discussion  would   focus  on  the  land-based  missiles
"but,  according  to  informed  sources,  the  Soviets  showed  little
interest  at  the  SALT  talks  in  calling   off  the  flight   tests  of
MIRV   missiles."    Clearly   the   Nixon   Administration    shares
(Continued   On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Jan.  12,  1970
LBJ's  Comeback  and  The  Democratic  Cave-In  on  the  War
JOHNSON  SHOULD  BE  PAYING  CBS  for   its  interviews  with
him.   They   are   self-aggrandizing   commercials.    They   signal
Johnson's   well-planned   return   to  public   life.   As   an   actor,
LBJ   was   superb;    it   was   like   watching   Lyndon    Johnson
playing  Lionel  Barrymore playing  Johnson.  We  will  not  waste
time   or   space    exposing    his   mendacities;   they   have   been
amply   set  forth   in  press   comment.   It  is  more   important  to
observe  that,   despite  all  the  exposure   of   its  tricky  revisions
of  history,  this  debut  was  probably  a  success  with  the  average
viewer.   He  is  no  match  for  this  old  con  man.
Johnson   in  his  first  TV  appearance  cut  Humphrey's  throat
while  praising  Nixon.  "Candidate  Nixon,"  Johnson   said  after
criticizing  Humphrey   for  the  Salt  Lake  City  speech,   "did   not
make  any  change  in  policy,"  i.e.  Johnson's  policy.  A  few  days
later  in  an  interview  with  Laurence  Stern  of  the    Washington
Post   (Jan.   1),   Humphrey  said  weakly,  'Tbasically   support
President  Nixon's  policy.  I  believe  that  we  will  have  most
of  our  combat  forces  out  before  the  end  of  1970".  Humphrey
is   scared    stiff   of   Johnson.   So  are   most   of   the   Democratic
politicos.    This  helps  to  account   for  the  weak  turnabout  of
Senator   Fred  Harris  of  the  Democratic  National   Committee.
In   October   he  said  it  was  "time  to  take  the  gloves   off  the
war."   But  (as  the  sharp-eyed  Mary  McGrory  noted)   he  put
them  back  on  again  at  a  press  conference  two  days  after  the
Johnson   TV-cast.   "If   you  were  grading   him  on   Vietnam,"
was  all  Harris  would  say,  "the   President  had  an  T   for  in-
complete."  An  anemic white  paper   issued  by  the  Democratic
National    Committee   said   Nixon    had   "accurately   gauged"
the  national  mood  on  Vietnam.  Johnson  seems  to  think  so,  too.
Should  Nixon  Re-Escalate
The  question  is  how  Johnson  will  use  his  influence.  I  fear
it   will   be   thrown   behind   Nixon   in   the   next   military  or
political  crisis  in  and/or  over  Vietnam.  Nixon  has  threatened
some  form  of  re-escalation  if  enemy  action  upsets  " Vietnam! -
zation."  To  send  troops  back  would  be  unpopular.  The  easier
move  would   be  resumption   in  the   bombing   of   the  North,
but  this  time  aimed  at  the  railroad  lines  from  China  and  the
ports,   especially   Haiphong.    This   was   advocated   by   Gold-
water  in  a  Senate  speech  Dec.   18 on  his  return  from  Vietnam.
Goldwater   said  Nixon  had   already  "reached   a  fork  in   the
Vietnam   road",  one  leading   to   "a   complete   pullout,  which
he  will  not   do",   the  other   "to   a  never-ending   war  which
neither  the  President  nor  the  American  people  would   allow."
Goldwater  said  the  problem  was  "to  find  another  road",  and
he   sees   this   in   a  resumed   but   no   longer   limited   bombing
Complete  and  Smashing  Victory
Saigon  (Reuters)—A  Vietnamese legislator  said  to-
day  that  if  government  figures  are  to  be  believed  there
are   no   Communists  at   all   left   in   South  Vietnam.
Deputy   Nguyen   Dae   Dau   told   a   news  conference—
called  by  16  opposition  members  to  criticize President
Thieu's  administration—that according  to  the  govern-
ment  the  country  had  300,000  Communists  two   years
ago.  "But  now  the  government says  more  than  300,000
have  been  killed  by  the  armed  forces,  another  100,000
have  defected  under  the  open-arms  policy  and  100,000
are  in  jail,"  he  said.   "So  where  are  there Communists
now?"   he   asked.    The   news   conference   was   hastily
convened   after   government   supporters    boycotted   a
House  session  called  to  discuss  a  statement  last   week
in  which  Thieu  accused   some   deputies   of    supporting
neutralism.
—The  Washington   Post,  Dec. 19.
campaign.   This   speech   is  a  sample  of   the  advice  Nixon   is
getting  from  the  right,  and  it  is  on  the  right  that  his  whole
political  strategy  is focused.
The   truth  is  that  a   dead   end   lies  ahead   in  which   some
act  of   desperation   by  Nixon   is  to   be  feared.   I  would   not
even   exclude  the  possibility  of   our   using   "tactical"   nuclear
weapons,  perhaps  to  try  and   close  off  the  passes  out  of   the
North  and  "irradiate"  a  belt   across  the  Ho   Chi  Minh  trail
in  Laos.  Vietnam has  been,  like Spain  before  World  War  II,  a
testing  ground   for  new  weapons.    Only   the  nuclear  haven't
been   used,  and   there  must  be  military  men   itching  to  give
them  a  try,  too—though  of  course,  the  public  would  be  told,
in  "unpopulated  areas  only."
The   Democrats,   if  they  had   the  guts,  would   be  warning
the  country  of  these  dangers  ahead.  The  so-called  Nixon   doc-
trine  is  only  the  same  idea  which  led  under  Dulles   to   that
broken  reed,  the  SEATO  pact,  and  the  pipe-dream  of  letting
"Asians   fight   Asians"   for   us.  Nixon   still  wants  to  contain
China,  and  to  keep  Vietnam  as  a  base  for  that  purpose.   We
claim  to  be   fighting   there   for   "self-determination"  but   we
cannot   allow   a   more   representative   government   because   it
would  make  peace,  opt  for  neutrality and  invite  us  out.
Whatever   our  bombers  do  in  the  North,  they  cannot  solve
the   political  problem   in   the   South.   Should   they   hit   hard
enough  so that  Hanoi  collapses,  then  China  will  step  in  as  she
did   in   Korea   to  protect   her   borders.   A   wider  war,   a   big
war,   is  still   possible.   That   is   the   alarm   bell   which   needs
ringing.
How-   Nixon's  Frontiers  of  Freedom  Look  To  The  World's  Non-Communist  Editors
Geneva—Vice  President  Agnew's  attacks  on  newspapers
and  television  were  1969's  "most  serious  threat  to  the  free-
dom   of   information   in   the   Western   World,"  the   Inter-
national   Press   Institute    said   today.     The  Zurich-based
institute    represents    1,600   newspaper   editors   in   58   non-
Communist  countries.
—New  York  Times, Jan.  1.
Zurich   (Reuters)—The   International   Press  Institute   to-
day  devoted  the  last  section  of  its  annual  review  of   press
freedom   to   South   Vietnam   where,   it   said,   any  nominal
press   freedoms   were  a   "sop  to   the   outside   world."   The
review   said,   "The  bleakest  prospect   for  press  freedom  is,
paradoxically,  in  the  country  where  a  war  is  being  waged
in  the  name  of  freedom—South  Vietnam.  .  .  .  Even  so,  the
government   does    not   hesitate    to   take   ruthless    action
against   the   press   and   pressmen,   and   the   constitutional
guarantee  of   freedom  of   the   press   is  often   meaningless.
Numerous  publications were  suspended  for  varying  periods
throughout  the  year.
"It  is  impossible  to  draw  any  other  conclusion  than  that,
as  the  American withdrawal continues  throughout  1970 and
the   Saigon   government  finds  itself    confronted   with   the
military   and  civilian   problems  resultant,   the   position   of
the  press  in  South  Vietnam  will  deteriorate  further,"  the
review  said.
—Baltimore  Sun,  Jan.  2.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Jan.  12, 1970
The  Political  Miracle  in  That  Detention  Camp   Repealer
THE  SENATE  DEC.  22  PASSED  S.  1872  without  opposition.
This  bill  would  repeal  the .detention   camp  provisions  of  the
Internal  Security  Act  of   1950.  If  it  passes  the  House,   it  will
rid  the  law  books  of  a  Fascistic  piece  of  legislation.  It  would
allow  the  government,  in  an  "internal  security  emergency",  to
throw  suspected  dissidents into  concentration  camps  if  there  is
"reasonable   ground   to   believe"   they   "probably   will   with
others  engage  in  acts  of  espionage  or  sabotage."  Thus  people
could  be  jailed  not  for  committing  a  crime  but  because  some
official   thought   they  might.  This   is  what   the   Nazis  called
preventive  arrest.
A  Panicky   Attempt  at   "Compromise"
This  concentration   camp  bill  had  a  curious  history.   In  the
late  40s  liberals  and  conservative lawyers  alike  had  fought  the
Mundt-Nixon   bill  to  set  up   a  Subversive  Activities   Control
Board  as  a first American experiment in  thought  control.  With
the  Korean  war  in  1950,   the  anti-Communist hysteria  reached
a  new  pitch  and  it  was  all  set  for  passage.  A  group  of  Senate
liberals  then  made  a  panicky  effort  to  block  it  by  proposing
the  detention   camp  bill  as  a  substitute.   A  few  days  later   J.
Edgar  Hoover   told  the  Senate  Appropriations  Committee  he
could  seize  12,000  of  "the  most  dangerous  Communists  at  a
moment's  notice."   (Facts  on  File  p.  286M  1950).  The  right-
wingers   seized  joyfully   on  the  detention   camp  bill  but   in-
stead   of  making  it  a  substitute,  tacked  it  on  to  he  Mundt-
Nixon  bill  and  passed   the  whole  monstrosity over   Truman's
veto.
The  Supreme  Court  has  since  declared  most  of  the  Act  un-
constitutional.  But  the  Detention  Camp  provisions  are  still  on
the  books.  Liberals and  the  Left  have  staged  many  campaigns
against  it  with  little  effect;  members  of   Congress   are  queasy
about   voting   against  anything  anti-Communist.  The   Senate
passage  of  the  repealer  is something  of  a  miracle.  The  miracle
happened   because   this  time  the  attack   came  from   an   unex-
pected  non-Left  source. The  campaign  to  repeal  was  launched
in  1968  by  the  Japanese  American Citizens  League,  which  re-
members  how  110,000  Japanese  Americans  were  thrown  into
detention  camps  (on   Presidential  order)   after   Pearl   Harbor
though  their  sons  fought  in  the  U.S.  Army.  They  made  repeal
an  ethnic and  regional  issue  in  Hawaii and  on  the  West  Coast.
Inouye  of  Hawaii  introduced  the Senate repealer last April,  and
Matsunaga  of  Hawaii,  put  in  a  repealer  in  the  House.    They
soon  acquired  26  co-sponsors  in  the  Senate,  and   129  in  the
Small  Mercies  and  Slow  Poisons  Dept.
The  American   Army  has  given  up  the    manufacture
of  a  kind  of  air-gun   for  shooting  little  arrows,   which
had   been   intended   for   dispersing   demonstrators   and
looters.    The  arrows   were   treated   with   a    paralyzing
substance  which  would  have  prevented   the  person  hit
from   moving  for  several   minutes.    After   an  expendi-
ture  of  $48,000  on  research,  the  project  was   abandoned
because   the   targets   could   not   be   hit   with   sufficient
accuracy   and   because   the   paralyzing   substance   took
too long  to  work.
—UPI  in  Le  Monde  (Paris),  Nov. 27.
House,  where  a  similar  bill  by  Mikva  of  Illinois  attracted  12
additional  sponsors,   a  grand  total  in  the  House  of   143.
The  Inouye  bill  acquired  some  strange  co-sponsors,  includ-
ing  Mundt.   This  is  because  Eastland,  in  his  still  unsuccessful
effort  to  get  a  new  omnibus  repressive  measure   (S.  12)   the
Internal  Security  Act  of   1969   past  the   Senate,  had   tried  to
sweeten  it  by  putting  a  Detention   Camp  repealer  of  his  own
in  that  bill,  which  Mundt  supports.    In  the  civil  rights   coali-
tion,   the   Inouye   repealer   won   everybody's   support,   except
curiously  the  Bnai  Brith's  Anti-Defamation   League.
The  first  lucky  break  for  repeal  came  with  the  appearance
in  the  Atlantic  Monthly   last  May  of  an  article  in  which   Dep-
uty   Attorney  General   Kleindienst   was  quoted  by   Elizabeth
Drew,   its  energetic   Washington    editor,   as   saying  that   "If
people  demonstrate  in  a  manner  to  interfere with  others,  they
should  be  rounded   up  and  put   in  a  detention  camp."  This
provoked   sour  press  comment   and   stirred   an  uproar   in   the
black community.
A  second  unexpected   break  was  a  column   by  Evans  and
Novack  Nov.   16  disclosing  that  the  Justice  Department  was
privately  opposing  the  detention  camp  repealer.  This  put  more
heat  on  Kleindienst.   The   result   was  a  Justice   Department
statement  Dec.   3  by  Kleindienst  supporting  the  repealer  and
denying   the  quotation   in   the  Atlantic  Monthly.     So  it  was
that  on  Dec.   22  Majority  Leader  Mansfield  was  able  to  an-
nounce,  "I  am delighted  that  this  long  overdue  bill  has  passed
the  Senate  unanimously."    It  will  be  a  happy  New  Year  if  it
also  passes  the  House,   and  readers  can  help   by  urging  their
Congressman  to  vote  for  repeal.
A  Quaker  Report  Exposes  The Truth  Behind Nixon's Renunciation Of Bacterial War
Biological   weapons  constitute  less  than  10  percent  of  the
U.S.   arsenal   of   CBW  agents   (the   rest   being   chemical).
Furthermore,   at  least  part  of  this  BW  arsenal  will  not  be
covered   in  the   ban  because   of   a  re-defining  of    biological
toxins   which  was  one  result  of   U   Thant's   report   to   the
U.N.   General   Assembly  in  July,   1969.   That   report,   com-
piled  by  chemical  warfare  experts  from  all  over  the  world,
reclassified  the  non-reproductive  toxins,  which  are  produced
by   living   organisms,   as   chemical,   rather   than   biological,
warfare  agents.
It   was   discovered   that   the   first   chapter   of   the    U.N.
report,  which  included  the  changed   definition,  was   written
by   a   team   headed   by  Dr.  Ivan   Bennett,   Director   of   the
New   York   University   Medical  Center,   Research   Contract
Director   of   the   Chemical    Corps   and   an   advisor   to   the
Army  on  epidemiology   and  pathology.    His   staff   included
three  Pentagon   officials,   and  the   first   draft   of   Bennett's
chapter  was  written  by  the  Army's  CBW experts,  according
to  Representative  Richard  McCarthy   (D.  N.Y.).
In   a   telephone    conversation    with   Dr.   Bennett,    he   re-
ported   that   his   staff,   even   while   in   Geneva   working   on
negotiations  of  the  final  draft,   were  in  telephone  contact
with  the  Pentagon  "every  day."
Thus,   far  from  being   banned,   as  the  President   implied,
the  use  of  germs  in  warfare  has  merely   been  refined.   We
now  produce  a  "chemical"  agent  extracted   from  live  germs
to  induce  the  disease  directly.   This  allows  us  to  apply  the
disease  to  selected  targets  rather   than   to  rely  on  random
infection.    Botulin   bullets,   then,   could   be  effective  assas-
sination   or  counterinsurgency    weapons  which  would   need
only   to  nick  their  victims   to   produce   death   by  botulism,
the  disease  induced  by  the  powerful   toxin.   The  President
has   renounced   the   militarily   unreliable    part   of   the    U.S.
biological   arsenal,  and  has  reclassified   the  useful   part  as
"chemical  substances."
—From   a   report    by   Nation   Action/Research   on   the
Military-Industrial      Complex,   a   project    of   the   American
Friends   Service  Committee,  Philadelphia,   Pa.  19102.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  Jan.  12, 1970
Why   Spend  BilHons  on  ABM's  to  Protect  Obsolete  ICBM's?
(Continued   From  Page  One)
this  lack  of  interest.
The   second   biggest   item   of   future   arms  spending   is  the
ABM.  The  Pentagon   is  beginning  to  leak  stories  designed   to
build  up  support   for  its  escalation.  Beecher   reported   in   the
New   York   Times   Jan.  2,  "Administration  Expected   to  Back
ABM  Expansion."   The  Associated  Press  was  given  a  similar
backgrounder,     "Soviet    Buildup    Spurs    New    Anti-Missile
Plans"  (Washington  Star,  Jan.  3).   This  was  an  effort  to  re-
vive  the  first-strike  scare  of   last   spring.    The   AP  was  told
that   if   the   Russians  continue   building   SS$>s   at   the   current
rate,  they  will  have  420  by  1974-75  and  that  these  420  would
then  be  able  to  wipe  out  95%  of  our  1,000   Minutemen  in  a
surprise   attack.   The   arithmetic  sounds   like   pure    Pentagon
Munchhausen.   Unanswered   is  the   question   of   why   anyone
would   risk  a  first  strike  at  our  Minutemen  when  this  would
expose  the  Soviet  Union   to  destruction  from  our  submarine
missile  fleet.  Another   question   no   one   raised   at   the   back-
grounder   was—if  land  based  missiles  are  now  so  vulnerable
to  first  attack,  are  they  not  obsolete?  Indeed   the  House  Ap-
propriations   Committee   report   on   the   new   defense    budget
(Dec.   3,  p.  78)   suggests   that  instead  of  spending  millions
to  bury  the  missiles  in  "very  costly"  hard   rock  siloes  and  in
defending   them   with   more   ABMs,   it   would   be   better   to
replace  them  altogether  with  submarine  or  mobile  land  mis-
siles.   "The   final   argument   for   expansion,"    the   AP   account
said,  with  unintended  irony,  "is  that  it  would   cost  less  now
than   later   in   the   face   of   rising   prices   and   inflation."
Seven  Fold  Rise  in  Two  Decades
The   House   report   noted    that   the   fiscal   1969    military
budget   was  7  times  the  military  budget   of   1948,   just   two
decades   ago.   It  may  easily  double   and   redouble  within   the
next  ten  years. The  reductions  in  the  1970  budget  were  mostly
cuts   in   fat   and   waste;   old   ships   were   mothballed,   head-
quarter   staffs—military   and  civilian—were  cut  down.   Devel-
opment  contracts  were  stretched  out.  The  budget   cuts  were  a
tactical  retreat.  In  that  retreat  the  Pentagon   saved  the  major
new  weapons  systems whose  costs  will  proliferate  into  billions
during  the  next  decade.   Senator  Hatfield   (R.   Ore.)    spelled
out  a  few  of  them   in  his  speech  on  final  passage   Dec.   15.
On  Nixon's  New   Guru
I   would   like   to   correct   the   misunderstanding   here
on  the  part  Sir  Robert  Thompson  played  in   the  Ma-
layan  war.    Obviously   he  is  a  distinguished  man,   but
he  was  not,   as  President  Nixon  would   have  it,  one  of
the   major   architects  of   the  victory  in  Malaya.   They
were  in  fact   General  Briggs  and  High  Commissioner
Gurney.   The  successful  strategy  in  Malaya  was   known
from  the  beginning  as  the  Briggs  Plan.   Essentially  it
was  a  police   action,  and  I  do  not  believe  it  has   much
relevance  in  Vietnam.   .  .  ,  I  was  a  southeast  Asian
correspondent  of  The  Times  from   1951  to  1953,   during
which   period   I  spent  many   months  covering  the  Ma-
layan  war.   I  had  the   pleasure   of  meeting  Sir   Robert,
and  as  I  recall  he  was  for  the  most  of  that  period   an
assistant   to   the   British   Adviser   in   Johore.    An  im-
portant   job,    but   not   at   the   level   where   strategic
decisions  were  made.
—Louis   Keren,   American   Editor    of   the    London
Times,  in  a  letter  to  the   Washington   Post,   Dec.   25.
There  was  $100  million  for  AMSA,  the  new  strategic  bomber;
it  will  eventually  cost  from  $8  to  $23  billion.  The  $450  mil-
lion   for  the  new  F-14  plane  launches  a  program  that  will
cost  from   $15  to  $30  billion.   The   $425   million   for  a  new
nuclear  attack  aircraft  carrier  will  give  us  15  such  task  forces
eventually;  each  costs  $1  billion.  The  $5  million  for  the  new
Navy   underwater  missile   system   (ULMS)   in   another   item
which  will  escalate  into  billions.  These  are  but  a  few  samples
of  the  spiralling  expenditures  ahead.
Most  important   of  all,   despite   talk  of   cutbacks,  the   new
troop  level  strength   next  June  will  still  be  3.2  million  men,
down  only  260,000   from  the  previous  June,  and  three  quar-
ters  of  a  million  men  higher  than  in  the  first  Kennedy  year
when   the   military   buildup   began.   This   huge   force   is   the
embodiment   of   a   continued   Pax   Americana,   "a   projection
of   threats   and   contingencies,"    Hatfield   said,  "that   are   far
overdrawn  and  bear  little  relation  to  the  contemporary  reali-
ties  of  international  affairs."   This  year's  appropriation   though
reduced  somewhat  still  "allows  us  to  station  troops  on  foreign
soil  throughout   the  globe,   where  there  mere  presence   often
contributes  more   to  the   undermining  of   our   relations  with
foreign  nations  than  to  our  own  security."
We'll  Be Clod  to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
FOR   STONE'S    NEW   BOOK
For   the   enclosed   $7.50  send   I.  F.   Stone's  book,  The
Hidden   History  of  The  Korean  War  (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)    Name
Street
City                                            Zip....:            State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished   n
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                         Zip                 State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                 1/12/70
4420  29th  St.  N. W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
4420  29th   St.,   N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published  every  other  -Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.,   N.W.,   Washington,  D.C
An  independent  bi-weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED