I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970jun01.pdf

============================================================

Why  Blacks  Despair,  P.  2
Even Wall Street Lawyers Being  Radicalized
"We  can't abolish poverty  . . .  racial  inequality  . .  .  inflation  or pollution  overnight.  But we can't  start  on any of  them un-
less there is an end to the war in Southeast Asia."—Francis T.  P.  Plimpton,  president  of  the  Association  of  the  Bar  of  New
York,  who  led  the  "march"  of  Wall  Street  lawyers  on  Washington  last  week  to  lobby  for  peace.
r
. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL. XVIII,  NO. 11
JUNE   1,  1970
           I01
 =
WASHINGTON,  D. C.20  CENTS
Nixon,  Agnew  and Freedom  of  The  Press
The   next  time  Nixon  holds   a  press  conference  some  re-
porter  *  should  ask  him  just  where  he  now  stands  on  the
question   of   freedom  of   speech   and   press   in  wartime.  The
Vice  President's   renewed  attack  on  selected   newspapers  and
newspapermen  makes the  question  timely. In  1965,  after  John-
son  first  sent  combat  troops  into  Vietnam,  Nixon  in  a  letter  to
the  New   York   Times   (Oct.   29,  1965)   advocated  restriction
of   speech  and  press  in  wartime.  He  took  issue  with  Robert
Kennedy   for  defending  the  right  of   dissent  in  the   case  of
Professor   Eugene  Genovese  of   Rutgers.  Genovese  had   said
that  while he  deplored  the  loss of  American lives  he welcomed
the  political  victory  of  the  Vietcong.  Nixon's  letter  deserves  a
careful   re-reading  now   in   the   light   of   Agnew's  campaign
against  the media.
Evess  Lyndon  Never  Went  That  Far
In  the  first  place  the  letter  reveals  what  can  only  be  de-
scribed  as  a  very  overwrought  view  of  what  is  at  stake  in  the
Vietnam  war.  He  wrote  that  victory for  the  Vietcong   "would
mean  ultimately  the  destruction  of  freedom  of  speech  for  all
time  not  only  in  Asia but  in  the  United  States as well",  indeed
that  "if  the war in Vietnam  is lost.  . . the right of  free  speech
will  be  extinguished   throughout   the  world."   Even  Lyndon
never   claimed   that   much.   Against   that   apocalyptic   back-
ground  Nixon  saw a  conflict  between  the  government's  respon-
sibility  to  protect  the  individual's  right  to  free  speech  and  its
• responsibility  "to  defend  itself  against  enemies  whose victory
would  deny  freedom  of  speech  to  all."  Nixon  was  for  firing
Professor   Genovese   as   an   employee   of   a   State  university,
though   he  was  not   at  that  time  for  curtailing  the   freedom
of  peace  demonstrators  "and  those  participating  in   teach-ins"
as  long  as  they  were  "acting  in  an  individual  and  private ca-
pacity."  But  as  a  general  proposition   he  advocated  restriction
when  necessary. He  wrote—
America's   twentieth  century  war   Presidents  Woodrow
Wilson  and Franklin D. Roosevelt, were forced to  make  this
cruel  choice  and  in  both  instances  they  properly concluded
that  in  wartime  preservation  of  freedom  for  all  the  people
must  take  precedence  over  the  rights  of  an  individual  to
exercise  freedom of  speech  when it  would serve  the  enemies
of freedom.
But  what  of  those  who  believe  the  enemies  of  freedom  are
benefiting  from  our  stubborn  folly  in  bogging  down  American
military  power  in  a  land  war  in  Asia,  ruining  our  economy
and  tearing  the  country  apart  in  a  conflict  which  bears  little
relation  to  America's real  interests? What  of  those  who  think
freedom  of  speech  and  press  give  a  free  society  the  advantage
of  open  debate  as  a  means  of  correcting  a  disastrous  course?
* Newsletters  do not qualify  for  White House credentials  so
when  I  go  to  a  Presidential  press  conference  it  is  only  as  a
guest  with no right  to ask  questions.
Hedging  On  Withdrawal
Q.    And  you  say  that  the  United  States  will  get  its
combat  troops  completely out  of  Vietnam by mid-1971?
A.    I  said  we'd get  our troops out  of  combat in South
Vietnam.  Now,  we  have  made it  clear  all  the  time  that
there  will  have  to  be  some  combat  troops  remaining to
function  with  the  support of  elements that  are  left, but
the  objective is  to  get  American  troops  out  of  the com-
bat  role  in about  a year ...   [Italics  added.]
Q.    Mr.  Secretary,  on  this  mid-1971  target  date  for
getting  out  of  combat,  as  I  understand it  that  would
leave   250,000,  roughly,  of   American  troops   in   South
Vietnam.
A.    It  might  be  a  little  bit  more  than  that.  I'm  not
sure. I  think  the  mathematics are something like 280,000
or 275,000, something like that.
Q.    What's the target date  for  getting  all  out?  That's
what  the  young  people are  asking  now.
A.    Well,  we  haven't  announced  any  target  date  for
that...
Q.    Mr. Secretary,  can  you  state  with fair  confidence,
or  good  confidence,  that  American  troops  will  continue
to  be  withdrawn  from  South  Vietnam  after  1971?
A.    I  don't  want  to  comment  on  what  is   going  'to
happen after 1971.
—Secretary  of State Rogers, press  conference, May  13.
Nixon's    simple-minded   approach    recalls   his   reasoning   22
years  ago  when  he  first  introduced  the  Mundt-Nixon   bill  to
set  up  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board.  Then,  too,  he
justified  restriction  of  liberty  as a  means  of  defending  it.  This
is  the   standard   alibi  of   totalitarians,   Communist   and   anti-
Communist.   Have   similar   restrictions    been   discussed   lately
within  the  Nixon  official  family?  Could   this  perhaps  explain
why  Nixon's  new  Chief  Justice  Warren  Burger  took  the  occa-
sion  of  an  address  before  the  American  Law  Institute  May  19
to  take  issue  with  those  who  "say  that  we  must  'crack  down,'
that  we  must  'smash'   the  challengers   and  restore  tight  disci-
pline?"  "In  periods  of  stress,"  the  Chief  Justice  counselled,
"there  are  always  some  voices  raised  urging  that  we  suspend
fundamental  guarantees   and  take  short  cuts  as  a  method  of
self-protection.   But  this  is  not  our  way  of  doing  things  short
of  a  great  national  emergency."  What  did  the  Chief   Justice
hear  that  led him  to  deliver  that  warning?
If  criticism  of  the  war  is  to  be  equated  with  disloyalty,  the
Administration  will  find  itself   confronted   with  a  far  wider
spectrum  of  dissent  than  the  half  dozen  notorious   publications
Agnew  singled  out  in  his  $500  blueplate   special  at  Houston.
My  paper  and  Life,   the  New   Republic  and  the   Washington
Post,  the  New  York  Times  and  the  "leftist"  Arkansas  Gazette
are  hardly  exceptional  any more. There is John  S. Knight,  pub-
(Continued  on Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  1, 1970
When  Will  Nixon's  Top  Black  Officials  Walk  Out  In  Protest  . . . ?
IF  WE  WERE  BLACK,  we  would  be  filled  with  a bottomless
despair.  The  events  of  the  past  two  weeks  show  the  essential
indifference  if  not  downright hostility of  the  white majority  in
this  country.  The  killing of  six  blacks,  all  shot  in  the  back,  in
Augusta,  and  the  murderous  fusillade  against  a  black  women's
dormitory  in  Jackson,  Miss.,  where  two  girls  were killed, have
elicited  little  protest   in  the  white  community  and  very  little
reaction  even  among  blacks,  accustomed  to  such  brutality. The
President's  skimpy message  of  protest  was amazingly frigid  and
extraordinarily   non-committal.   The   Attorney   General   went
South  but  to  a  lily-white  upper   class  Delta   Council  meeting
where  he  discussed  the  stock  market!  "Since  he  became  At-
torney  General,"  Aaron  Henry  said  bitterly  in  a  story  on  that
appearance  which  the  Washington   Star  yanked  after  its  early
edition  May 20,  "he  has  done  more than  any one man  to create
the  climate that  makes white  policemen  feel  they can shoot  our
people  down,  like  they  did  at  Jackson  State."
Police  Perjury   and  Murder
A   Chicago   grand   jury   reports   police   perjury   and   wilful
murder  in  the  Black  Panther  raid  which  killed  Fred  Hampton
and  Mark  Clark  but  could  find  no  evidence  on  which  to  in-
dict!   "Few   things   would   contribute   more   to  bring  us  to-
gether,"  Samuel  C. Jackson,  black  assistant secretary of  housing
and  urban  development   said  in  a  speech  to  whites  here  May
22,  "than  the  growth  of  law  and  order  among  the  forces of
law  and  order."  Agnew  and  Mitchell  were  his  obvious  targets
and  he  had  sharp  words  to  say  of  the  Administration's D.C.
crime  bill  with  its  "no-knock"  and  pre-trial  detention  pro-
visions.  But  he  stays  in  the  Nixon   Administration. The  last
straw  for  Nixon's  black  officials  should  be. his  decision  to  sup-
port  tax  exemption  for  segregated  white  schools  in  the  South.
If  James  Farmer,  Assistant  HEW  Secretary,  and  the  other  top
blacks  in  Nixon's  entourage  had  any  guts  they  would  stage  a
mass resignation  in protest.
WE   CANNOT   PROVE   IT   BUT  WE    BELIEVE  THE   WHITE
HOUSE  put  a  media  blackout  on  Richard  Barnet's warnings  at
a  Businessmen   Move  for  Vietnam  Peace  meeting  here  May  20
against  the  danger  that  Nixon  might  escalate  to  nuclear  weap-
ons.  It  was  covered  by  all  the  networks  and  the  wire  services.
An  AP  story  was  prepared   but  never  went  on  the  wires  and
except  for  a  brief  mention  on  local  radio that  was  the  last any-
one heard  of  the  story.  Earner,  a  former  State  Department  man
now  with  the  Institute  for  Policy  Studies,  reported   (1)   as early
Laird  to  The  Rescue
SEN.  FULBRIGHT:  Has  your  opinion  been requested
with  regard  to  the  deployment  of  MIRV,  has  anybody
consulted you  about that?
FOSTER  [director  of  Pentagon research and  develop-
ment]: Yes, sir.
FULBRIGHT: Have you recommended it be deployed?
FOSTER: Yes, sir.
FULBRIGHT:  And  your  judgment  is  that  this  will
not  effect  the  SALT talks, the  deployment of  MIRVs?
FOSTER:  My  judgment  is,  sir,  that  they  will  effect
the  SALT talks and that they will  help the  U.S. position
in the SALT talks  ...
FULBRIGHT:  Do  you  know,  can  you  name one well-
known   physicist,  scientist,  in  this   general  area   who
agrees  with  your  estimate  of  the  effect  of  the  deploy-
ment  of  MIRV on SALT talks?
SEC.  LAIRD:  I  think  the  question  is  one  that  I  am
not  sure  Dr.  Foster  has  even  directed  such  a question-
naire  to  the  scientific  community  . . . [Laird even argued
at  length  that  it  would  have been  unethical  for  the  De-
partment  of  Defense  to have taken such a  poll.]
FULBRIGHT:  Now,  now,  Mr.  Secretary,  you  know
you  should  not  get   so  excited  just  because  he  is  in  a
tight  spot  and  cannot  think  of  one,  you  want  to  divert
his attention from  it. [LAUGHTER]
—Senate Foreign  Relations  Committee,  May  18.
as  1963  there  were  more  than  5,500 nuclear weapons  in  South-
east  Asia, mostly  on carriers, some in Thailand;  (2)   until  1965
the  Commander  in  Chief  Pacific  (CINPAC)   had  no  plans  for
large-scale  though  limited war  which  were  not  nuclear and  the
doctrine  for   such  use  of   nuclear  weapons  was  set  forth   in
an  Air  University  Review  article in  I960;  (3)   Nixon  in a  Chi-
cago  speech  March  17,  1955  termed  tactical  nuclear  weapons
conventional  and  said  it  was "foolish"  to  think we would  fight
in  the  Far  East without  using  them;  (4)   Nixon  in  his  May  8
press  conference   this   year  hinted   at   "decisive"   rather   than
piece-meal  escalation  in  the  event  of  major  enemy  action;   (5)
twice before  the  U.S.  military  urged  the  use of  nuclear weapons
in  Indochina, once  at Dienbienphu  ("Operation Vulture")  and
again  to  relieve the  garrison  at Khe  San in  1968  but  strong  op
:
position  behind  the  scenes  from  Congressional   and   scientific
sources  stopped  it;  (6)   as U.S.  troops  are  reduced  in  Vietnam,
the  use of  nuclear  weapons  may be  advocated  as a way  "to  save
The Black  Caucus  in Congress Protests Nixon's Indifference  to  "The  Black Nation"
For  more  than  90  days  the  nine  black  Members  of   the
House  of  Representatives   have  been  trying  to  arrange   a
meeting  with the  President.  On February  18,  1970, we  wrote
Mr.   Nixon   requesting   an   audience.   The   members  of   the
black  caucus  make known  at  this  time  our  outright  disgust
with  the  President's  policies  and  his  refusal  to  give  us  an
audience.  In  a  letter  dated  April  20,  Mr. Nixon  informed  us
through  his  staff  assistant, "We had hoped to be able  to  work
this  out,  but  the  President's  schedule  has  been  such  that  we
just  have  not  been  able  to  work  it  in.  At  this  point,  we  do
not  foresee  an  opportunity  in  the  immediate  future,  but  will
be  back  in  touch  with  you  if  an  appropriate  time  arises."
During  this  90-day  interval,   our  President   who  claimed
he  wanted  to  "bring  us  together"  found  time  to  meet  with
representatives   of  11  veterans   and  patriotic  groups  to  dis-
cuss  foreign  policy.  There  is  no  question  where  Mr.  Nixon
has  placed  his  priorities.  He  has  traveled  more  than  35,000
miles  in  foreign   countries.   He  has  entertained   hundreds  of
foreign  diplomats  but  refuses  to  meet  with  the  elected  rep-
resentatives  of  the  black   "nation"  within  this  country.  In
all  of  the  President's  travels  he  has  not  seen  the  suffering
and  deprivation in  Watts,  Hough,  Harlem,  Fillmore  or  any
of  the other  ghettos.
The  black citizens  of  the  United States  constitute  by  their
very  numbers  and  condition  one  of   the  largest  "underde-
veloped"  nations  in  the  world.  The  President,  despite   his
pledge to  serve  all  the people of this country, has ignored  his
responsibility  to  our  people.  The  President's  position  on  the
Voting Rights Act  extension  and on school  desegregation,  his
Supreme  Court  nominations  of   two   southern   racists,   his
veto  of  Federal  education  funds,  and  his  refusal  to  place  a
priority  on  the  domestic  concerns  of  hunger,  housing,  pov-
erty,  and  employment testify  to  his  apathy  not  only  toward
black  people—but toward  all  poor  Americans.
The  President   has  declared  his  disdain  for  military  de-
feat  and his  passion  for  honor  among  the  world community.
If  there  is  honor  to  be won,  it  is  here  in  this  country where
American  blood  is  staining  American  soil.  Six  murdered in
Augusta  and two in  Jackson.
—Rep.  Clay   (D.  Mo.)  in  the  House  May  18   (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,   June  1, 1970
...  New Escalation in Indochina  Increases the Danger  of War  in the  Mid-East
lives"   (as  in  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki).  Congress  should  act
now  to inquire why  nuclear weapons are in  the  Far  East and  re-
quire  their  removal.  An  anonymous White  House  official  in  a
press  briefing  (Washington  Post  May  10)   said  nuclear weap-
ons  would  not  be  used  under  any  circumstances. But  that  was
not  the  same as having Nixon  say it  clear  and  loud.
Diverting   Chinese   Pressure  on  Moscow
MIDDLE  EAST  FOOTNOTE:  Gen.  Gavin  told  Senate,  Foreign
Relations  May  12  the  Soviets  feel  free  to  act  in  the  Middle
East  because  our  escalation  in  Southeast   Asia  diverted  Chinese
pressure  from  the  Soviet  border.  The  situation  in  the  Middle
East  can  move  us  to  the  brink  of  World  War  III  at  any  time.
The  terrible  spiral  of  terrorism  and  reaction  on  the   Lebanese
border   is  a  blind   alley  from  which  Jew  and  Arab  alike  can
be  rescued  only  by  an   imposed   solution   restoring  the   West
Bank  to  the  Arabs  and  guaranteeing  Israel's  existence  in  her
pre-1967  borders  with   some  security  modifications.   But   the
fear  that  the  U.S.  may soon  bomb  Hanoi  and  Haiphong  again,
making Moscow  look  like a paper  tiger  to  its own  satellites, has
set  back  negotiations  for  a  Four  Power  agreement.  We  are  not
for  ending  one  war  in  order  to  leap  into  another  but  for  de-
escalation  and  negotiation  in both  areas.
THREE    HOPEFUL    DEVELOPMENTS:   The   tremendous   out-
pouring  of  mail  and  contributions  ($300,000  so  far)   in  re-
sponse  to  the  "End  the  War"   broadcast  of  May  12  by  Sen-
ators  McGovern,  Hatfield,  Goodell  and  Hughes  and  of  sup-
port  for  Fulbright,  Church   and  Cooper   in  their  fight  for  a
Congressional  resolution  to end  the  Cambodian  adventure. The
most  startling  development  of  all  was  the  arrival  here  May  20
of  a  thousand  or  more  New  York  lawyers  to  lobby  against  the
war.  When  a  legendary  Republican  Brahmin  like  Bruce  Brom-
ley  of  Cravath,  Swaine  &  Moore,  Wall   Street's  biggest  cor-
porate  law  firm,  "marches"  on  Washington   for  peace  and  is
joined  here  by  Edward  Burling  of  Acheson's   law  firm,  Cov-
ington  & Burling,  the  capital's  most  prestigious  law  factory, a
political earthquake  is really underway. Conversely  when  Nixon
set  out  to  muster  support  for  the  Cambodian  invasion, he  had
to  fall  back  on  the  associations  of  reserve  officers  and  of  mili-
tary-industrial   suppliers.    A   secret   meeting    at   the   White
House  two  nights  before  the  April  30  speech  to  disclose  the
new  escalation  included  only  one  representative  of  a  "civilian"
China  Is  Sanctuary   and  Arsenal  Too
FULBRIGHT:  Is  it  fair  to  conclude  that  in  the  Sen-
ator's  view  if  the  President  decided  next  month  or  next
year  without  consultation  or  approval  of   the   Senate,
that  in  order to  protect  the  lives  of  our soldiers  in Viet-
nam  it  was  necessary   to  invade  Laos  and  get   at  the
sanctuaries there, such action would be perfectly proper?
STENNIS:   That   depends   on   circumstances   some-
what,  but  I  say  as  long  as  we  are  staying  in Vietnam,
sending  men in there to  sacrifice  their  lives,  I will never
agree  to  having  the  President   cut  off  from  using   his
judgment  to  attack the  sanctuaries.  They  are  no  more a
part  of  a  foreign country  than  my  backyard is  at  home,
in  view  of  the  circumstances  that  they  have  been  used
as  an  arsenal  against  us  for  years,  and  they  are  not
under  the  control  of  this  foreign  country.  So  we  do  not
attack  this  other  country; we  attack  the  arsenal  that  is
permitted  to  be  used  there,  or  maybe  they  cannot  help
themselves.  We  go  after  the  arsenal.
FULBRIGHT:  Then   he   could  clearly   attack   China
without  consulting  the  Senate   or  the  House.  He  could
attack  China on the  same  theory.
—On the Senate floor, May  15.
organization—the   National    Rifle   Association!   Neither    the
bankers,  the  bar  nor   the  Chambers   of  Commerce   could  any
longer  be  trusted  for  support.  Senator  Gore  in  a  Senate  speech
May  21  put  into  the  Congressional  Record  a  letter  from  Vice
Admiral  Smedberg,  of  the  Retired  Officers'   Association,  dis-
closing  the meeting  and  drumming up  support  for  the invasion
against  "the  strident  minority . . . giving  great  comfort  and aid
to  the  enemy."  The  Air  Force  Association  and  the  ultra-right
National  Security  Council  were  among   those  present.   In  the
civilian   world   only  the  weapons  merchants   are  still   "trust-
worthy"  enough   for  an  advance  briefing.  There  could  be  no
better  index of  how  far  opposition  to the  war has  spread.
FROM  THE  AUTHOR  OF  THE  QUIET  AMERICAN:  "To  those
who  are  ignorant  of  geography,  Mr.  Nixon's  promise  to  with-
draw  his  troops  from  Cambodia  in  seven  weeks  may  seem  to
be  a  conciliatory  gesture.  But  in  fact  he  can  do  nothing  else.
Before  the  rains and  the  arrival  of  flooding of  the  Mekong  they
must  either  go  or  decide  to  act  as  pioneers  in  underwater  liv-
ing"—Graham   Greene  in  The  Times  (London)  May  11.
Fulbright:  How  Honduran Aid  to  Vietnam  Was Faked And Turned Into a Costly  Junket
DEAR   MR.  SECRETARY:  In   1967  the   Department  of
State   furnished  me  with  detailed   information  concerning
Free  World assistance  to Vietnam ...   In the list  of  countries
which  contributed  assistance  the  statement  is  made:  "Hon-
duras  has  contributed  drugs  and  dry  goods  for  refugees  in
Vietnam,  flown  there  on  a  Honduran Air  Force  plane."  A
recent  draft  report  by  the  General  Accounting   Office,  "Ad-
ministration  and  Effectiveness  of   United  States  Economic
and  Military Assistance  to  Honduras",  makes  the  following
statement: "Due  to  the  limited  range  of  Honduran Air  Force
cargo  aircraft   it  was  determined  by  United  States  author-
ities  to  use  a  USAF  plane  to  transport  the  supplies  from
Tegucigalpa,    Honduras,   to   Saigon,    South   Vietnam.   The
plane  was  flown  from  the  Panama  Canal  Zone  to  Teguci-
galpa,  repainted  with  Honduran  Air  Force  colors  and  with
a  United  States  navigator  aboard  made  the  trip  to   Saigon."
If  the  GAO report  is  correct,  then  the  Congress  was  clearly
misled by  the Department of  State  in 1967. Indeed,  the  whole
operation  smacks  of  a  particularly  offensive  kind  of  fraud.
—J.  W.  Fulbright
DEAR  MR. CHAIRMAN: The  Secretary  has  asked  that  I
reply  to  your  letter  of  March 26  ...     As  plans  for  the trip
developed   it   became   apparent   that   the   aircraft   was   not
equipped  for  a  trans-Pacific  flight  .  .  .  Under  the  circum-
stances,  the  Chief  of  Staff,  U.S.  Air  Force,   authorized  the
loan  of  a  USAF   C-54  .  .  .  This   aircraft   bore  Honduran
markings  and  was,  in  effect,  an  Honduran aircraft  for  the
duration  of  the  loan  .  .  .  With  regard  to  your  request   that
the  loan  and  repainting  of  the  aircraft  be  publicized,  I  feel
this  could  only  harm our  relations  with  Honduras.
—H.  G. Torbert,  Jr.,  Acting  Assistant   Secretary
After  a  stop  of  5 days  in Vietnam,  the  philanthropic   party
[there   were   26  aboard]   returned   in  even   more   leisurely
fashion  [it  took  13 days  from  Honduras to  Vietnam],  taking
16  days  from  February  17  to  March  5.  For  reasons  which  do
not  appear on the  record,  but which I think we  can all  guess,
it  was  found  desirable  to  return  via  a  different  route—one
which  naturally  included  Hong  Kong.  .  .  .  The  record   does
not  disclose  the  cost  of  this  pilgrimage,  but  I  think  we  can
take  judicial  notice  that  it  undoubtedly  exceeded  the  cost of
supplies delivered to the Vietnamese.
—Fulbright  to the Senate, May  6.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  1, 1970
Does  Nixon  Regard  A  Free  Press  As  Just  Another  Enemy  Sanctuary?
(Continued   from  Page One)
lisher  of  a  major  chain  of  newspapers,  who  called  the  Cam-
bodian  invasion  "of  questionable  legality  and  dubious moral-
ity."  There  is  the  Wall  Street  Journal  which  termed  it  a  poor
gamble.  There  is  Robert  Shaplen  of  the  New  Yorker,  who  has
been  in  Indochina  longer   than  any  American  reporter  and  in
the  past  has  been  second  only  to  Joe  Alsop  in  his  support  of
U.S.  intervention.   He  reports  from  Saigon  that  in  view  of  the
deteriorating  political  situation  in  South  Vietnam,  "the Cam-
bodian  adventure  may well  prove  disastrous",  that  few  observ-
ers  in  Saigon  share  Nixon's  hope  that  it  will  shorten  the war.
On  the  contrary,  Shaplen  writes,  "consistent   misunderstanding
and  mismanagement  .  .  .  have  now  brought  us  to  the  highly
dangerous   point   of  withdrawing  our  troops  and   broadening
our  commitment—a  script  worthy of  Lewis  Carroll."
Even  The  New  Leader  Turns  Anti-War
Even  the   New   Leader,  the   one  place   on   the  left   where
Nixon  could  find  support   and  sympathy  in  his  Red-hunting
' days  in  the  50s, has  defected.  In  an  article by  Roger  Hilsman,
written  on  the  eve  of  the  Cambodian  invasion,  it  declares  that
Nixon's  Vietnamization  policy  "represents   a  decision  to con-
tinue  the  war,  not  to  end  it."  Hilsman,  who  was  one  of  the
architects  of   intervention  in  Vietnam   under   Kennedy,  now
warns   against   "participation   in   a  Cambodian   offensive."  If
Nixon  and  Agnew  are  out  to  revive  McCarthyism,  the  num-
ber  and  variety  of  those  to  be  labelled  subversive  have  grown
fantastically.  When  I  began  publication  in  the  heyday  of  Mc-
Carthyism  18  years  ago  I  never  dreamt  that  some  day  I  would
share  the  pillory  with  a  Luce  publication!   In   journalism  at
least  Nixon  has  kept  his  pledge  and  brought  us  all  together.
Even  conservative  and  pro-war  papers  like  the    Washington
Star  regard   Agnew  with  disfavor.  It  sees  in  his  "verbal rab-
bit  punches" a factor making for  "a wide and  dangerous  polari-
. zation  of  opinion."  It  says  "many  who  support  the  decision  on
Cambodia  .  .  .  have  reacted  with  dismay  to  the Administra-
tion's  handling  of  the  predictable  crisis  that   action  precipi-
tated  on  the  home  front."   It  deplores  the  creation  of  an  at-
mosphere  in  which  "more  and  more,  those  who  disagree  with
a  given  opinion  are  looked  upon  not  as  countrymen  with dif-
fering  reasonable  points of  view but  as the  enemy."  That  illus-
trates  what  the  Wall  Street  Journal  was talking  about  the  other
day  when  it  sad  in  an  editorial,  "Toward  Conciliation,"    that
"the  Administration's  thinking  is  tainted  by  a  self-destructive
Editors  Growing  Nervous
As  reaction  to  campus  demonstrations  grows  in  this
country,  employment opportunities for  radicals  and  the
not-so-radical  have  begun  to  narrow—especially in  the
area  of  summer jobs.  Institutions as  diverse  as  the fed-
eral  government, the  New  York  Times  and Washington
Post  and  New  England  prep  schools  are  now  asking  di-
rect and possibly illegal questions about a job applicant's
political  history  .  .  .  After taking in  a  fistful  of  radical
interns  last  year,  the  Washington Post  drew  a  hard line
on  political activists this  year  in  response  to Agnew-led
attacks  on  the  "liberal"  press.  "We're  not. sure  we  can
afford   to  be  hiring  political  activists  any   more,"  Ben
Bagdikian,  the   Post's   national   editor  reportedly  told
one  intern applicant.
Both  the  Post  and   Times   asked  prospective  summer
interns  a  long  series   of  prospective  questions  having
little   relation   to   reportorial  skill   in   interviews  this
spring.  Examples  include:  What  was  the  last  political
demonstration  you  participated in?  Would  you  serve  in
the  Army?  How  do  you  plan to  get  out?
Post   editors  agonized  over  and  finally  rejected  one
student   they   considered   eminently  qualified   after   he
answered  that  he  would  go  to  jail  rather  than  serve  in
the   army.  Executive  Editor  Benjamin  C.  Bradlee  re-
portedly  argued  that  this  level  of  commitment might
hamper   his   journalistic  objectivity.  One   editor   later
admitted  that  the  person  would have  been  hired  had  he
answered  differently.
—Scott  W. Jacobs,  The  Harvard   Crimson,  May  14.
belief:  that  the  Administration  is  conservative,  that  the  public
has  turned   'conservative'   and   that   therefore   the  public  will
back  the  Administration come  what  may."  It  warned  that "un-
less  Administration  planners  treat  the  public  as  the   complex
and  sensitive  organism  it  is,  they  will  only  lose  their  very  real
chance  for  building  sustained   moral   and  political   backing."
Such  sober  second  thoughts  seem  to be  beyond  this Adminis-
tration.  Nixon  and  Agnew  seem  increasingly  to  regard  a  free
press  as  another  privileged   sanctuary.  Will  their  crusade  for
freedom  in  Asia finish by ending  it  at home?  It  is not  too early
to  begin  to  ask  the  question.  More  and  more,  as  anti-war dis-
sent  rises  in  every  class  and   region,   Nixon   and   Agnew   are
thrown  back  on  an  appeal  to  the  Know  Nothings  of  our  time.
May   25
The  1969 Index  Is  Now. Ready—You Can Have  A  Copy  Free  By  Sending  A  LONG  Self-Addressed  Stamped  Envelope  For  It
FOR  STONE'S  HIDDEN  HISTORY
For  the  enclosed   $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War  (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City                                        Zip                State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished   Q
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                        Zip                State.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly               6/i/-o
4420  29th  St.  N.W.,  Washington,   D. C.  20008
/.  F. Stone's   Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St., N.W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bl-Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C. Published  every  other  Monday  except  In  August  at  4420  20th  St..  N.W.. Washington   D C
An  independent   bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  K. Stone:  Circulation   Manager.   Esther   M.  Stone.   Subscription:  SS  in  the  U.S.:  »6  in  Canada-
»10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  S17 to  Europe:  S20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED