I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970may18.pdf

============================================================

Three  Dissenters  on  the New  Arms Budget,  P.  3
A  Warning Nixon  Did  Not  Heed
"If  the  Cambodian  war  accelerates,  we  are  witnessing  the  destruction of  the  American economic  system  as  we  know  it.
It  wilt  never  be the  same.—Banker Pierre  Rinfret   at  a  National  Bank  of  Washington  economic  outlook  luncheon  April  29.
He  was  one  of  five  economists  who  met  with  Nixon  two  days   before.
Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVIII,  NO.  10MAY   18,  1970
101
         WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Only  the  Bums  Can Save  the  Country  Now
The  race  is  on  between  protest  and  disaster.   Despite   the
first  four  martyr  "bums"  of  Nixon-Agnewism  at  Kent   State,
the  college  shutdown their  deaths  precipitated, the  outpouring
of  student  and  other  protesters  here  last  week-end,  the  campus
lobbyists  beginning  to  flood  the  halls  of  Congress,  the  Senate
resolutions  to  limit  or  end  Indochinese  military  operations,
and  the  smoldering near  revolt  within the  Nixon Administra-
tion  itself, we  are  still  on  the  brink.  We  are  in  the  first  stages
of   a  new   and   wider  war   from  which  withdrawal  will  be
difficult.   The  military  hold  the  reins  and  can  precipitate  new
provocations  and  stage new  alarms.   The  only  hope  is  that  the
students  can  create  such  a  Plague  for  Peace,  swarming  like
locusts  into  the  halls  of   Congress,  that  they  stop  all   other
business  and  make  an  end  to  the  war  the  No.   1  concern  it
ought  to  be.   Washington   must  no  longer  be  the  privileged
sanctuary  of  the  warmakers.  The  slogan  of  the  striking  stu-
dents  ought  to  be:   Suspend  Classes  and  Educate  the  Country.
I  see  no  other  visible  and  adequate  means  to  stop  the  slide
into  a  conflict  that  may  sweep  very  suddenly  beyond  the  con-
fines  of   Indochina  if   the  man   who   gambled   on  Cambodia
ends  by  gambling  on  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons.
The Unwilling  Led By  The  Unqualified
In  a  dispatch  from  a landing zone  in  Cambodia,  Jack  Foisie
of  the  Washington  Post  (May  8)  described GIs  jumping  from
helicopters  under  enemy  fire  with  derisive  denunciations  of
the  war  scrawled  on  their  helmets.   One  of  those  he  copied
down  sums up  the  situation of  the  whole  country  in  this war.
"We  are the  unwilling,"  it  said,  "led  by the unqualified, doing
the  unnecessary,  for  the  ungrateful."    As  usual  the  country
is not  being  told  the  truth  about  why we went  into  Cambodia.
In  his  war  address  of  April   30  Nixon   pictured  the  attack
across  the  border  as  a  pre-emptive exercise  to  hit  an  "enemy
building  up  to  launch massive attacks on  our  forces  and  those
of  South  Vietnam."   It  was  described  as  a  swift  preventive
action  from  -which  we  would  soon  withdraw  and  which  was
not  part  of   any  broader  intervention  in   Cambodian    affairs.
But  thanks  to  the  indiscretion  of  one  Congressman,  we  now
have  the  private—and  more  candid—version  given  members
of  Congress  at  special  State  Department  briefings.  This  puts
the  origins  and  purpose  of  the  Cambodian  action  in  a  very
different   light.    The   Congressman   is   Rep.   Hamilton   Fish
(R.  N.Y.),  a  right-winger who  has  long  questioned  the  logic
of  our  heavy commitment in  so peripheral  an  area  as  Southeast
Asia.   In  a  letter  to  constituents  released  May  13,  Mr.   Fish
summarizes   a  private  briefing   by  Under   Secretary  of   State
Richardson   for   selected   members  of   Congress.    Nixon   said
we  moved  across  the  border  to  nip  enemy plans  for  an  immi-
nent  attack.  But  from  Richardson's  briefing, Mr.  Fish  reports,
"It  was  dear  that  the  present  military  thrust  into   Cambodia
The Blood on Nixon's Hands and Agnew's
The  murder  of   four  young  students  at  Kent  State
University  last  night  by  units  of  the  National  Guard  is
in  a  way  the  direct  responsibility  of  the  President  of
the  United States. ...    The President  did not order this
action  directly, but  the  temper  of  administration  state-
ments,  the  tone  of  its  attacks  on dissent,  the demeaning
of  the  office  of  the  Presidency  by  its  present  holder led
to  it.  The characterization of  dissenters  as  "bums" has
polarized  our  people.  The  President  has  attempted  to
cut  off the  students  from  the  country, to  stifle their cry
by  ridicule  and  scorn.  The  illogical  extension  of  this
attempt  to  silence  dissent  is  death,  and  that  is  what
occurred  at  Kent  State  yesterday.
—Rep.  Cohelan (D. Cal.), May  5 Cong. Record.
hinged  largely  on  the  reportedly  surprise  overthrow  of  Prince
Sihanouk."   Nixon  said  in  his  April  30  speech  that  for  five
years   "neither   the   U.S.   nor   South   Vietnam  moved   against
those  enemy  sanctuaries  because  we  did  not  wish  to  violate
the  territory  of  a  neutral  nation."    But  Richardson  gave  the
Congressmen   a  different   story.   He  told   them   "U.S.   intelli-
gence  had  known  for  years  of  those  enclaves  from  which  at-
tacks  on   South  Vietnam  have   been   launched"  but   we  had
never  attacked  them  before  "because  it  was  feared  that  Sihan-
ouk  would  counter  any  invasion  by  allowing   NVA   [North
Vietnamese  Army]  forces  to  enlarge  their  occupied  areas."
Sihanouk  was  trying  to  maintain  a  precarious  neutrality by
playing  one  side  against  the  other.  Nixon  was  deceitful  when
he  said  in  the  April  30  speech  that  our  policy  since the  Geneva
conference   of   1954   "has   been   to   scrupulously   respect   the
neutrality  of  the  Cambodian  people"  and  adding—as  proof
of  our virtue—that  since last  August  we have had  a diplomatic
mission  in  Pnom  Penh  "of  fewer  than  15"  and  that  for  the
previous  four  years  "we  did  not  have  any  diplomatic  mission
whatever."   The  truth  is that  Sihanouk  ousted  our  mission and
broke  relations  in  1965  because  he  claimed  the  CIA  had  been
plotting   against  him   for  years  and  even  tried   twice  to  kill
him.   Sihanouk  was  especially   resentful  of  the  Khmer   Serei
(Free  Khmer)   mercenaries  the  CIA  and  our  Special  Forces
had  enlisted  from  among  Cambodians  living  in  South  Vietnam
and   Thailand   to   act  as  an  anti-Sihanouk   commando  force.
The  CIA  gave  it  facilities  to  broadcast  anti-Sihanouk  propa-
ganda  from   Saigon.
"For  the  past  five  years,"  Nixon  said  with  bland  hypocrisy,
"we  have  provided   no  military  assistance  and  no  economic
assistance  whatever  to  Cambodia."   He  did  not  explain  that
Sihanouk  threw  out  our  military mission  because he  said  it  had
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May 18,1970
(Continued  from  Page  One)
been  trying  to  turn  his  armed  forces  against  him,  and  gave
up  economic  aid,  too,  rather  than  have  it  used  as  a  cover  for
U.S.  agents  trying  to  overthrow  him.   This  was  not  a  figment
of  Sihanouk's  imagination.   As  far  back  as  1958,   in  a  police
raid  on  the  villa  of  one  of  his  Generals,   Sihanouk  found  a
letter  from  President  Eisenhower   pledging   full  support  to  a
projected  coup  and  to a reversal of  Cambodian  neutrality.  This
was  part  of  a  "Bangkok  plan"  worked  out  between   the  dic-
tators  of   South   Vietnam  and  Thailand   (Diem   and  Marshal
Sarit  Thanarit)   to   dismember   Cambodia   and   instigate  civil
war  (see  Wm.  Worthy's  account  in  the  York,  Pa.,  Gazette &
Daily  of  April  30).    When  Sihanouk  resumed   relations   last
August,   in  his  desperate   see-saw  between   the  two  sides,  his
condition  was  that  the  U.S.  mission  be  kept  small.   He  didn't
want  too  many  CIA  agents  roaming  around.
The CIA's Trojan  Horse
That  was  poor  Sihanouk's  mistake.    Cambodian   neutrality
was  ended  when  the  military  we  had  long  wooed  finally  over-
threw  Sihanouk  on  March  18.  The  most  complete  account  yet
published  of  the  events  leading  up  to  the  coup  is  to  be  found
in  Le  Monde   Diplomatique   for  April.   It  is  by  Daniel  Roy,
a  Frenchman  with  15  years'  experience  in  Indochina  who  was
for  a  time  press  attache  to  Prince  Sihanouk.   He  claims  that
funds  for  the  coup  were  provided  by a  Cambodian  adventurer
turned  banker  in  Bangkok who  was  associated  in  the  enterprise
with   the   notorious  Son  Ngoc  Thanh,   puppet   President  of
Cambodia  under  the  Japanese  occupation.   The  latter  fled  to
Thailand  after  the  war  and  according  to  M.  Roy  is  "today  in
the  service  of  the  CIA."   M.  Roy  also  charges  that  the  coup
was  prepared  by Khmer  Serei  forces  who  went  over  the  border
with  their  arms  and  wives  and  pretended   that  they  were  de-
fecting  to  Sihanouk.   They  infiltrated the  army  and  the  police
as  a  Trojan  Horse  for  the  CIA.
Let  us  now  return  to  Congressman   Fish's  account  of   the
private   State   Department    briefing.    "Following   the   fall  of
Sihanouk,"   the  Congressmen  were  told,  "the   new  anti-Com-
munist  government   cut  all  supply   lines   [of   the  NVA   and
Viet  Cong}  except  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  trail"  which,  of  course,
lies  largely  outside  Cambodian  territory.   "To   re-secure  their
severed  supply  routes,"  the  account  in  the  private  briefing  con-
tinued,  "VA   and  NVA    began  moving   out  of   the  enclaves,
thereby  threatening  the  overthrow  of  the   Cambodian  govern-
ment."    [Our   italics}.   It  is  "against  this  background,"   Rep.
Fish's  account  of  the  briefing  concludes,  "that  the  American-
South  Vietnamese  strikes  into  Cambodia  were   ordered."
The  sequence  is  quite  different  from  that  given  publicly  by
Mr.  Nixon.   Instead  of  preparing  an  attack  on  our  forces  in
South   Vietnam,  the  enemy  was  reacting  to  an  attack  on  its
supply  lines.   This  upset  the  status  quo,  and  risked  a  complete
Too  Godless  To Be  Good  Killers?
Adm.   Thomas   H.   Moorer,   a   41-year   Navy  veteran
and  chairman-designate  of   the   Joint   Chiefs   of   Staff,
said  yesterday  that  "an atheist  could  not  be  as  great  a
military  leader  as  one  who  is  not  an  atheist."  Moorer's
remarks  came  during   his  day-long  testimony  at   U.S.
District   Court  here  in  support   of   the   policy   of   com-
pulsory    chapel   attendance   at   West   Point,   Annapolis
and  the  Air  Force   Academy.
Lacing   his   testimony    with   paeans   to  the   military-
instilled  virtues   of   loyalty,   integrity   and  leadership,
Moorer   also  declared:  "I  don't  think   you  will  find  an
atheist  who has  reached  the  peak  in  the  Armed  Forces."
—Peter  Osnos, Washington  Post, April 29.
take-over   of  Cambodia   by  the  other  side.   We  intervened   to
save  it  from  the  consequences.   Did  our  government  give  the
new  Lon  Nol   government   of   Cambodia   assurances  that  we
would  defend  it  if  its  action  in  cutting  all  the  supply  routes
precipitated   an   attack   upon   it?
What If  Sihanouk  Regains  Power?
It   is  true  that  at   the   State   Department   briefing   "it   was
stressed  that  the  present  attacks  were  not  aimed  at  either  the
confrontation   of  the  estimated  40  to  50,000  VC  and   NVA
believed  operating  in  Cambodia  or  the  defense  of  the  present
government  of  Cambodia.   The  raids were  described  as strictly
'spoiling   actions',  aimed  at  supply,  bunker  and  communica-
tion  network  destruction"   and  to  give  the  South  Vietnamese
army  additional  time  while  the  enemy  rebuilds  its  supplies.
But  you have  to  be  pretty  feeble-minded  to  accept  this  at  face
value.  What  if  Sihanouk,  with  NVA  and  Peking  support,  is
restored  to  power,  this  time  not  as  a  precarious   neutral   but
as  an  ally  of  the  other  side?  What  if  we  are  then  faced  with
the  prospect,   not  just  of  restoring  the  old  supply  lines  and
bases  but   of   Cambodia   turning   into   one   big   enemy  base?
Who   can  believe  that   the  Nixon   administration  will  stand
by  and  let  this  happen?
This  is  the  wider  war  which  lies  ahead.   The  overthrow  of
Sihanouk  was  a  grave  political  mistake.  It  gave  the  other  side
a  new  ally  with  legitimacy  and  mass  support,  basic  necessities
for  the  Indochinese  Peoples  War  which  has  already  been  pro-
claimed  against  us.   The  situation  inside  Cambodia  was  suc-
cinctly  summed  up  in  an  interview  which  the  pro-Nixon   and
pro-war  US.  News  & World  Report  for  May  18 held  by  cable
with  its correspondent, James  N.  Wallace,  in  Pnom-Penh:
Q.  Have the  allied attacks  in  Eastern  Cambodia  saved
the  rest  of   the   country   from   a  Communist   take-over?
A.  No.  Unless  the  allied  drive  completely  overwhelms
the  Communists,   Cambodia's  position  remains  about   the
same  .  .  .  the  short-run  result  is  even  more  chaos  and
Lincoln  Gordon  Takes A Run-Out  Powder When The Truth Catches Up With Him On Brazil
Dr.   Lincoln   Gordon,   president   of   Johns   Hopkins    Uni-
versity,  was  sharply  criticized  yesterday  by  a  former   Bra-
zilian   congressman   for  his  alleged   role  in  the  ouster  of
Brazilian  President  Joao  Goulart  in  1964,  while  Dr.  Gordon
was  ambassador  to  Brazil.  Marcio  Moreira  Alves,  delivering
a lecture at the Hopkins yesterday.
Mr.  Alves  said  that  American  Embassy  officials  met  with
conspirators  of  the  coup  several  days  before  the  takeover
and  were   quick   to  assure  them  the   United  States   would
support  their  government.  ...    In  keeping  with  their   prom-
ises  to  the  military,  the  United  States  recognized  the  new
government immediately, even before it  had taken full  control
of  the  government,  Mr.  Alves  said.  "Dr.   Gordon  had  ample
opportunities  to  denounce  the  torture  in  Brazil  but  did  not
profit  by  them,"  Mr.  Alves  said.  He  pointed  out  that  Dr.
Gordon  stated  17  months  after  the  coup  that  "this  govern-
ment  represents  the  ideal  government  in  view  of  the  Al-
liance For Progress."  ...
Mr.   Alves   said   the   regime   has   become   nothing   more
than  a  puppet  government  of  the  United  States  "much  like
the  Diem  regime  in  South  Vietnam."
A  table  was  set  up  on  the  stage  in  Shriver  Hall,  where
Mr.  Alves  spoke,  with  two  chairs  and  microphones  in  the
hope  that   Dr.   Gordon   would   come   and  debate   with   him.
Dr.   Gordon   was   offered   an  invitation  to   talk  on  several
occasions,  and  had  stated  several  times  that  he  would   dis-
cuss  the  Brazilian issue  at  any  time,  but he  did not  show  up.
—Baltimore Sun,  April  23.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May  18,1970
confusion  .  .  .
Q.  Did  the  Cambodians welcome the  Allied move?
A.  Again,  No.  Cambodians do not like  .  .  .  the  idea of
South  Vietnamese troops'  rolling  across   Cambodia  .  .  .
Q.  What kind of  reception would Sihonouk get?
A.  Almost  certainly   he   would  receive  more   popular
support  than  the  Lon  Nol   government  cares  to  admit.
Sihanouk  still  is  popular  among  a  great  many  of Cam-
bodia's   5.5   million   peasants,   who  respected  his   tradi-
tional  status  as  a  god-king and liked his  earthy personal
relations with villagers.
Even If Nixon Wants To Withdraw
The  French  journalist,  Max  Clos,  who  has  been  covering
Indochina  for  years  during  both   the  French  and  U.S.  wars,
foresees  (in  Le  Figaro  May  2-3)  a  Cambodian  resistance  based
on  peasant  support,  doing  in  their  country  what  the  Viet  Cong
have  done  in  Vietnam  and  creating  a  "liberated  zone"  from
which  in  time  they  will  be  able  to  take  over   Pnom   Penh.
"Mr.  Nixon,"  M.  Clos  wrote,  "hopes  to  withdraw  his  troops
from  Cambodia  in  a  month  and  a  half.   Even  if  he  succeeds,
it  is  safe  to  predict  he  will  have  to  send  them  back  again."
The   political   folly  of   our  latest   move   is  not   limited   to
Cambodia.   The  newly  enlarged  war  must  add  to  the  shaky
character  of  the  Thieu  regime,  which  has  had  to  close  down
all the  South  Vietnamese  schools  in a rising student revolt much
like  our own.  The  idea  of  South  Vietnamese  troops  being  used
to bolster a government  which  has  been  massacring  Cambodian
citizens of  Vietnamese origin must  add  to Thieu's  unpopularity.
The  bitterness  between  the  Viets  and  the  Khmers  of  Cambodia
is  incomparably   older  and  more  bitter  than  the  recent   ani-
mosities  of  the  Russo-American  cold  war.   It  is  only  two  cen-
turies since the Viets seized the Mekong  delta from  the  Khmers.
Sihanouk,   unlike  his   successors,   never   stirred   up   the   mob
against  the   Vietnamese,   and   the   VC  and  NVA    intruders,
unlike  our  forces,   did   not   bomb  and   devastate   Cambodian
villages.   This  new  shift  strengthens  the  forces  opposing  our
puppets  on  both   sides.
Yet Another  Operation  Total  Victory
This  has   been   a  political   war   from   its   very   beginning
against  the  French.   We  go  on  believing  as  they  did  that  a
political  problem  can be  solved  by military  means.  The  annals
of  their  war,  like  ours,  is  full  of  sensationally  billed  search-
and-destroy   operations   which   were  finally  going  to   cripple
the  rebels,   like  this  latest   "Operation  Total  Victory"   across
the  Cambodian  border.   The  Communists  under  Ho  Chi  Minh
The  Hot  Air  About  Pollution
I'm  sick  and  tired  of  all  the  platitudes  about  pollu-
tion.  The  hot  air  from  the  politicians  is  a  lot   worse
than  the  hydrocarbons from  the  automobiles.  .  .  . The
fact   is,   there  simply  is   not  going  to  be  any  major
Federal  effort  to  clean  up  the  environment—no  matter
what  anyone tells  you—until the  war  in  Vietnam comes
to  an  end.  The  Nixon  administration  is  not  about  to
commit  billions  of  dollars  to  clear  the  air  as  long  as
they   continue  to   pour   billions  down   the   rathole   of
Vietnam.  .  .  .  America's  most  precious  resource  is  not
its  trees,  not  its  mountains, not  even  its  water.  Amer-
ica's   most   precious   resource   is   its   young   men—the
young  men  who  are  dying  in  Vietnam  simply  because
most  of  the  politicians  at  home  don't  care  enough  to
force  an end to  this  stupid war. Frankly, the  200 Amer-
ican  boys  who  died  in  Vietnam  last  week  don't  care
any  more whether  the  air  is  dirty or  clean.
—Rep.  Brown  (D. Cal.),  Earth Day  speech  at  UCLA.
seized  national  leadership  in  the  war  against  the  French,   as
the  adroit   Sihanouk  did  in  Cambodia.    Now   they  both  are
allied  against  us.   Sihanouk  will  now  make  it  possible  for  the
other  side  to  implement  the  basic  strategy  of  a  People's  war
on  a wider  scale.   The  strategy  is  to  force  maximum  dispersion
upon  the  hated  foreign  invader  to  make  him  widen  the  area
of  his  activity  and  stretch  his  lines  of  communication  so  that
the guerrillas  can pick  and  choose  the  most  advantageous  weak
points   for   their   concentrated   attacks.   We   have  picked   up
their   treacherous   gambit   by  invading  Cambodia   and   sooner
or  later  unless  we  get  out  of  Indochina  altogether,   we  must
send  ground   troops  into  Laos  and   Cambodia,  perhaps   even
into  North  Vietnam  where  a  fresh  army  of  250,000  or  more
awaits  our  landing.    Nowhere   has  airpower,   however   over-
whelming  and  unchallenged,  been  able  to  win  a  war.
What  will  happen  when  the  country  wakes  up  to  find  that
instead  of  withdrawing  troops  we  are  going  to  send  in  fresh
divisions?   What  happens   to  inflation,  the  budget   and   the
stock  market?   To  student   and  racial  unrest?   Nixon,  in  a
mood   of  self-pity,  complained  in  his  April   30  address   that
past  war  Presidents   did  not  have  to  face  a  nation  "assailed
by  counsels of  doubt  and  defeat  from  some  of  the  most  widely
known  opinion  leaders  of  the  nation."   He  seems  to  attribute
this  to  some  perversity.  He  takes  it  as  personal.   He  does  not
(Continued  on Page  Four)
Three  Dissenters  Protest  The Waste  And The ABM-Navy  Deal  In The New  Arms  Budget
At  a  time  when  the  very  air  we  breathe  is  becoming
unfit  to  sustain  life,  H.R.  17123 authorizes  the  Air  Force
to  develop prototypes of  a  new  bomber at  a  currently  esti-
mated cost of  $23.3 billion—for 5 planes.
At  a  time  when  budgetary limitations  have  been  used  to
justify  inaction  not  only  on  air  and  water  pollution,  but  on
our  schools  and slums, cities  and crime, drugs  and dropouts,
it  provides a  slush-fund of  $200  million from  the  Air  Force
to  one  corporation—money  which  the  Air  Force  says  is  not
owed  to  the  corporation. At  a  time  when the  twin  realities
of   inflation   and  depression   are   rampant   in   the   land,   it
squanders  over  $1  billion  in  deploying  and  enlarging  our
presently  authorized  2-site  ABM system  to  8  sites  against
a possible threat.
There  is  only  $100  million  in  this  bill  for  the  new  stra-
tegic  bomber  to  be  designated  the  B-l.  It  is  in  the  money
earmarked  for  Research and Development for  the  Air  Force.
With  this  authorization, however, the  Air  Force  has advised
us  that  it  will  enter  into  a  contract  to  build  just  5  proto-
types  of  a  new  bomber at  a  cost  they  now estimate  at  $2.33
billion,  or  almost  a  half-billion  each.
The  last  time we  went this  route  was  fairly  recently, and
then  the  bomber  was  called  the  B-70.  We  built  two  proto-
types  and  half  of   a  third  one.  The  2'/
2
   planes  cost   the
taxpayers  $l'/
2
  billion. One crashed, one  is  in  the  Air  Force
Museum at Wright-Patterson Field,  and no one is  quite  sure
where the pieces of the half are.
Two  years  ago  the  Administration requested  $1.7  billion
for  naval  ship  construction  and  conversion.  The  House  au-
thorized  only  $1.4  billion  for   that   purpose  and  Congress
appropriated  only  $821  million.  .  .  .  This  year  the  admin-
istration  requested  the  sum  of  $2,728 million  for  ship  con-
struction.  The  Committee   added  the  sum  of   $435   million.
Rather  than  hearing  that  the  Administration opposed  this
increase,  we  hear  this   year  that   a  deal  has   been   made
which  might be  loosely  described  as:  "You support  my  ship
increase,  I'll support  your ABM  increase."
—Minority  view  of  Pike  (D.  N.Y.), Nedzi  (D.  Mich.)  and
Whalen   (R.  Ohio)  in  House  Armed  Services  report  on  the
Fiscal  1971 Defense   Authorization  bill  April  Zk-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  May 18,1970
Nixon  Hints  At  Goldwater-LeMay  Style  Bombing  Tactics
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
stop   to  consider  why  this  war   has  aroused   so  much  more
opposition  than  any  past  war,  and  done  so  in  every  class  and
every  region  and  every  age-group,  from  Wall  Street  financiers
to  campus  radicals.   Even  National  Guardsmen  give  the  V-
sign  to  students,  and  soldiers  go  into  battle  with  peace  amu-
lets  around  their  necks.  He  seems  to  think  there  is  something
wrong  with  the  critics.   He  will  not  face  up  to  the  possibility
that  there  is  something  wrong  with  the  war.   Certainly  this
generation  of  Americans  would  prove  no  less  patriotic  and
brave than  any other  if  our  country were  really  in  danger.
COSVN Moved To Vietnam In April
It  is a measure  of  our  stupid  leadership that  the  Cambodian
war  was  started  on  the  phoney  pretext  that  just   across  the
border   was  a  kind  of  enemy  Pentagon   and   that  we  could
cripple  the  enemy  by  smashing  it.   One  measure  of  the  men-
dacity  may be  found  in  an  intelligence  briefing the  New  York
Times   reported   April   4,  two  weeks  after   Sihanouk's   over-
throw.   It  said  COSVN,  the  enemy HQ,  had  been  moved  from
Cambodian  to  South  Vietnamese  territory.  The  story  even  car-
ried  a map  showing  the  old  location  at  Mimot—which figures
in  recent  accounts  of  the  Cambodian  operation—in  the   "fish-
hook"  and  the  new  location  in  a  thick  jungle  area  described
as  "virtually  inaccessible  to  ground  troops"  and  "probably  not
seriously  vulnerable  to  air  attacks."    It  is  difficult   to  believe
that  Nixon  and  his  aides  are  such  idiots  as  not  to  be  aware
of  this  intelligence  information.
The  Eichmann  trial  taught  the  world  the  banality  of  evil.
Nixon  is  teaching  the  world  the  evil  of  banality.   The  man
so  foolish  as  to  talk  to  protesting  students  about  football  and
surfing  is  the  same  man  who  (like  Johnson)   sees  war  in  the
puerile  terms  of  "humiliation"  and  a  challenge  to  his virility.
He  doesn't  want us-to be a  "helpless  giant"  (which  we are  in
Indochina)  so he  is plunging  us  into a wider  quagmire  where
we will  end  up  more  helpless  than  ever.
The  past  week  is  the  .week  in  which  the  Nixon  Admin-
istration  began  to  come  apart.   Letters  like  Hickel's  showed
how  isolated  he  is  even  from  members  of  his  own  Cabinet
where  there  seems  to  be  a  silent  majority  against  him.   The
anti-war  round  robin  signed  by  more  than  200  employes  of
the  State  Department  shows  how  deeply  the  Cambodian  affair
has  stirred  even  the  most  timid,  conformist  and  conventional
section  of  the  bureaucracy.  Nothing  Nixon  says  can  be  taken
Herbert  Hoover Had  More  Sense
President   Nixon's  statement   Tuesday   ("Frankly,  if
I  had  any   money  I'd  be  baying   stocks  right   now.")
brought  to mind students  of  Wall  Street crises  a  similar
statement made by the  aging  John D. Rockefeller  as  the
stock  market  was  crashing  during  1929.  In  what  John
Galbraith  later  reported  was  Rockefeller's   first   public
statement   in  several  decades,  the  financier  said:  "Be-
lieving  that  fundamental  conditions  of  the  country  are
sound  .  .  .  my  son  and  I  have  for  some   days   been
purchasing  sound  common stocks." To which the  popular
comedian  Eddie  Cantor  responded:  "Sure,  who  else  had
any  money?"  President  Herbert  Hoover  had  been  asked
to  state  something  encouraging  about  the  failing  mar-
ket   ("for   example,  that  stocks  were  now  cheap,"  ac-
cording  to  Galbraith)—but  he  refused.
—Financial Page, Washington  Post, April SO.
at  face  value.   Even  when  he  said  on  April  20,  in  his  troop
withdrawal  announcement,  that  a   "just   peace"   was  at   last
in  sight,  he  must  have  been  planning  this  expansion  of  the
war.   Indeed  General  Westmoreland  as  Army  Chief  of   Staff
had  already begun  to  lobby  for  a  Cambodian  invasion  in  offr
the-record  briefings.
There  were  two  remarks  of  the  deepest  significance  in  the
Nixon  press  conference  of  April   30.   One  was  that   if  we
withdraw  from   Vietnam   "America   is  finished  insofar   as  a
peace-keeper  in  the  Asian  world  is  concerned."   This  revealed
that  he  is  still  committed,  despite  that  vague  "low  posture"
talk  on  Guam,  to  a  Pax  Americana  in  Asia.   If  we  are  to
police  Asia  we  are  in  for  many years of  war  and  internal  dis-
ruption.   The  folly  is  as  great  as  if  China   were  to  try  and
become  the  "Peace-keeper"   of  Latin  America.   The  other  re-
mark  was  that  unlike  Johnson  he  would  not  escalate  step  by
step  but  "move  decisively."  This  is the  Goldwater-LeMay  thesis
that  we  could  have  won  the  Vietnam  war  if  we  had  smashed
Hanoi  and  Haiphong  in  one  great  blow,  perhaps  with  nuclear
weapons.  Hanoi,  especially after  the  recent  big  bombing  raids,
expects  something  of  the  kind.   Moscow  and  Pekin   are  al-
ready  trying  to  patch  up  'their  differences  in  expectation  of  it.
If  Nixon  goes  to  nuclear  weapons,  the  end  result  may well  be
World  War  HI.   Unless  an  army  of  students  can  fan  out  to
the  grass  roots  and  make  the  country  aware  of  these  danger-
ous  possibilities,  terrible days  may lie  ahead.      Noon,  May  12
The  1969 Index  Is  Now  Ready—You Can Have A  Copy  Free  By  Sending  A  LONG  Self-Addressed   Stamped  Envelope  For  It
FOR   STONE'S   HIDDEN  HISTORY
For  the  enclosed   $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War  (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City
Indicate   if
Please  renew  -(or
Name
Street
City
I.  F
4420  29th  St.
Zip                State
gift   announcement wished  Q
enter)   a  sub  for  the   enclosed
Zip                 State
$5:
.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                5/18/70
N. W.,  Washington, D.C.  20008
/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N.W.
Washington,  D.C.  20008
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly. 2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.   D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..  N.W.,  Washington  D.C
4n   independent  bi-weekly published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  (j.S  •  16  in  Canada-
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  *17 to  Europe;  120  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.                                                 v»™u».
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED