I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970oct05.pdf

============================================================

As  SALT  Drags On, P. 2; New Light  on  The Peace Dividend, P.  3
Prize  Item  For  A  Boomerang Collection
Those  who  resort  to  the  rule  of  force  have  no  place  on  a  college campus.
—From  Nixon's  letter  to  University   Presidents  and   Trustees.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVIII,  No.  18
OCTOBER  5,  1970      '»'•
WASHINGTON,  D. C.20  CENTS
Too  Late to  Confuse Nixon  With  Lincoln
The  report  of  the  President's Commission  on  Campus  Un-
rest  falls  into  two  parts,  of  unequal  quality.  The  main  part
of  the  report  is first-rate. The  first  two  chapters on  the  students
provide  the  best  analysis  we have yet  read. Chapter  3  painfully
exposes  the  stepchild  status  of  black  colleges.  Chapter   5  is  a
thoughtful   guide  to  the  problems  facing  the  police.  Unfor-
tunately  few  will  read  the  report  itself  and  newspapers  have
done  little  more  than  cover  the  prefatory  remarks and  recom-
mendations.  These  are  of  a  lower  order,  and  read  like  one  of
those  sermons  against  sin   in  which  the  preacher   is   careful
not  to  get  too  specific about  sinners.
As  Irrefutable  As Decalogue
The   Recommendations  are   as  irrefutable   as   Decalogue—
"the  right  to  dissent  is  not  the  right  to  resort  to  violence."
Every  admonition to  one  side  is  balanced  off  with  an admoni-
tion  to  the  other—"Equally,  to  respond  to  peaceful   protest
with  repression and  brutal  tactics is  dangerously unwise."  One
sentence  says  that  a  nation  which  "has  lost  the  allegiance  of
a  part  of  its  youth  is  a  nation that  has  lost  part  of  its  future."
The  next  adds,  with  equal  truth,  that  a  nation  "whose  young
have  become  intolerant  of  diversity   .  .  .  has  no  generation
worthy  or  capable  of  assuming  leadership  .  .  ."  These   irre-
proachable  propositions  cancel  each  other   out.  One   suspects
that   a  majority   of   the  Commission  was  intimidated  by   the
attacks  the  Administration  has been  making  upon  it,  and  tried
hard  to  make  its  recommendations  non-controversial.  Perhaps
this  explains  why  its  findings  about   the  Kent   and   Jackson
State  killings  were  separated  from  the  main  report,  and  are
not  yet  available  as  this  is  written.  There  more  than  truisms
will be required.
The   Commission  pleads  for  reconciliation,  but  reconcilia-
tion  in  human  quarrels  depends  on  the  willingness  of  leader-
ship   to   risk  telling   its  own   constituency  unpleasant   truths
and  thus  clear  the  way  for   necessary  reforms.  That   is  very
different  from  pandering  to  the  prejudices  of  one's  own  side.
For  those  who  have  some  weight  with  the  students,   it  calls
for  debunking  some  of  the  half-baked  inflammatory  nonsense
which  passes  for  lofty  ideology  in  their  ranks.  For  a  Republi-
can  like  Scranton,  the  chairman  of  the  Commission,  it  means
saying  out  loud  what  needs  to  be  said  about  this   Republican
Administration.  It  is  too  late  to  say,  as  the  Commission  does,
that  "only  the  President  can offer  the  compassionate  reconciling
moral  leadership  that  can  bring  the  country  together   again."
It  is  clear  after  almost  two  years  of  Nixon   and   Agnew  that
this   Administration  has  been  a  major   factor   in  tearing   the
country apart.  Four  days before  the  Kent  State  massacre,  Nixon
was  calling   the  campus  radicals  "bums."   Two   weeks   after
hard-hats  beat  up  peace  demonstrators  in  New  York  last  May,
Nixon gave  the prowar  mobsters  his  blessing  at a White House
Nasser's  Achievements and Example
For   more  than  2,000  years,  from   Alexander  to  the
Turks,  foreigners  ruled  Egypt.  Nasser  freed  his  country
from   foreign  rule,   nationalized  the   Suez   Canal,   and
began  to  free its  hard-working  peasants  from  millennial
exploitation.  The  Aswan  Dam  will  be  his   monument.
It  could  also  have  been a  monument  of  American rather
than  Soviet  aid  but  for  the  imperial arrogance of  John
Foster  Dulles. Nasser  risked  much  for  peace  in accept-
ing   the   Rogers   plan,   as   Israeli   leaders   now  admit.
There  are  Israelis   who  believe  a  similar  turn  toward
peace  was  possible  in  1955  when  Moshe  Sharrett  had
opened   friendly  channels  to  Nasser.  It  is  tragic   that
Nasser   died  before  U.S.  diplomacy  could  explore  his
UN  Ambassador's suggestion, on  Face  The Nation Sept.
20  that  Egypt  might  pull  back  its  missiles  from  the
Canal   Zone   if   guaranteed  against   an   Israeli  attack.
Nasser's   death  makes  one  regret  more  than  ever  that
narrow   minds   blocked  his  invitation  to  Nahum   Gold-
mann,  president  of  the  World  Jewish  Congress,  for  a
talk  in  Cairo.  That,  too,  was  a  lost opportunity.
reception.   There   is   no   sign   whatsoever   of    "compassionate
reconciling   moral   leadership"    from   the   White   House.   Its
"Southern   Strategy,"   especially  its   effort   to  put   racists  like
Haynsworth  and  Carswell  on  the  high  court,  fuels  black  re-
sentment  while  it  seeks  to  gain  votes  among  older  whites  by
exploiting   hatred   of   the   young.   The   only   hope   of   better
leadership  from  the  White  House  in  the  two  remaining  years
of  Nixon  is  to  have  some  Republicans  say this  loud  and  clear.
This  is where  Scranton  failed.
Generalities  are  hot  enough.  Generalities  are   provocations
when  the  record  of  those  uttering  them  deprives  these  utter-
ances  of  credibility.  The   day  the   Commission   gave   out   its
report,  the  White  House  trotted  out  Moynihan  and  Finch  to
rebut   it   even   before   the  press  had   time   to   read   it.   They
claimed  that  Nixon  on  March  22,  1969,   had  already  said  what
the  Commission  did  in  its  recommendations.   "Student  unrest
does  not  exist  in  a  vacuum  but   reflects  a  deep  and  growing
social  unrest  .  .  .  Self-righteous   indignation   by  society  will
solve  none  of  them.  We  must  resolve  the  internal  contradic-
tions   of   our  communities."   That   sounds   like   the   Scranton
Commission,  but  it was Nixon  talking a year  and a half  earlier.
All  this  means  to  revolting   blacks  and  students   is  that   the
establishment  cannot  be  trusted  even  when  it  says  the  right
things.  The  record  creates  nausea,  not  confidence.
In  all  charity,  it  is  clear  that  Nixon  is  hopelessly  "square."
He  has  no  rapport  with  this  generation.  And  while  he  is  not
the  Red-baiter  he  was  20  years  ago,   he  slips  back  into  old
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October 5,1970
New  Billion  Dollar  Rathole  Opening Up  As  New  Sonars  Threaten to  Make  Polaris Vulnerable
Arms  Race Costs  Rise and  Dangers Multiply  As  SALT  Talks  Drag  On
.When   the   17-nation   UN   Disarmament   Committee   con-
vened  in  Geneva  in   1962,  to  work  on  Soviet  and  American
proposals  for  (believe  it  or  not!)   "complete  and  general  dis-
armament",  world  arms  expenditures  had  reached  $120  billion
a  year.  Last  year,  after  7  years  of  palaver,  arms  spending  had
risen  by  two-thirds,  to  $200  billion.   No  wonder  that   1970,
which  opens  the  Decade  of  Disarmament  proclaimed  by  the
UN,   is  marked  by  a  decline  of  interest   in  arms  talks,  even
cynicism.  The  figures  and  the  observations  are  from  the  joint
appeal  made at the  UN  by the  six living Nobel  peace  laureates.
They  repeated  the  all  too  familiar  apocalyptic  warnings,  and
pleaded  for  a mutual  moratorium  on  MIRVs  and  ABMs.   The
Secretary  General   in  his  annual   report   warned  that  conven-
tional  weapons,  too,  are becoming  more  deadly.  He  noted  sadly
that  the  military  budgets   of.  the   developing   countries  were
rising  at  a  faster  rate  than  those of  the  world  as  a  whole.   Like
McNamara   (see  box  below)  U  Thant  concluded  that  the  na-
tions  "cannot  move  away  from  the  abyss  of   self-destruction"
and  fulfill  the  "urgent  social  tasks"  unless  they  put  an  early
end  to  the  malignancy  of  the .arms  race.  There  is  no  sign  that
anyone  is  really  listening.
Destabilizing   The  Deterrent
New  dangers  turn  up  in  the  final  reports  emanating  from
the  latest  Pugwash   meeting.   This  brought   together   100  sci-
entists  from  35  countries,  including  the  Soviet  Union,  at  Lake
Geneva,  Wis.   The  reports  also  summarized  the  findings  of  26
exports on  arms  technology—including   several  from  the  Soviet
Union—at   a  pre-Pugwash  meeting  at  Racine  in  June.    The
most  alarming  news: Just  as land-based  missiles  are being  made
obsolete  by  increasing   accuracy   and   MIRV,   after   so  many
billions  were  spent  upon  them,  now  it  looks  as  if  in  the  next
decade  new  sonars  may  deprive  the  nuclear  submarine  of  its
invulnerability.    This   would   destabilize   the   deterrence   and
escalate  the  research  for  countermeasures   and  new  weapons.
To  allay  concern  about  this  new  threat,  the  Pugwash  meet-
ing  proposed  "An  agreement  to  prohibit  deployment  of  large
active  sonar  systems."  It  added,  somewhat  cryptically  (perhaps
because   classified   information   is  involved),   "there  would  be
no problems  in verifying  compliance  with  such  an  agreement."
It  suggested  this  be  considered  in  the  SALT   talks.   At  the
same  time  it  warned  "the  fact  that  the  SALT  negotiations  have
The  Arms  Race  and  Campaign  Coffers
Although  federal  law  forbids  corporations  to  donate
money  to  presidential, vice  presidential or  congression-
al   candidates,   officials   of   49   top   defense,   space  and
nuclear  contractors  in  1968 gave  more  than $1.2 million
to  political  campaigns during  that  presidential election
year.  The  gifts  favored  the  Republicans  nearly  6  to  1.
Seven  officers  and  four  directors  of  Litton Industries,
Inc.,  for  example,  donated  a  total  of   $151,000  to  Re-
publican  candidates.  They  gave  nothing  to  the  Demo-
crats.  The  donations  were  legal  because  the   Corrupt
Practices  Act  of  1925 does  not  prohibit corporate execu-
tives  from  contributing  to  political  campaigns as  indi-
viduals.
—Wayne   Kelley   (Congressional   Quarterly)    in   the
Washington  Post  Sept.  17  summarizing   a  study   by  the
Citizens'  Research  Foundation,  Princeton,  N.J.   Roy  L.
Ash,  Litton president,  is  one of  Nixon's  closest  advisers.
been  in  prospect   for  three  years  and   in  progress   for   almost
one"  has  diminished  other  arms  control   efforts   and   speeded
up  new  weapons  programs  as  each  side  seeks  a  stronger  bar-
gaining  position.   The   ABM  and  the  MIRV  are  examples.
Already  limits  on  the  latter  "would  now  be  much  more   diffi-
cult  than  one  year   ago."
The  final  Pugwash  report  sees  the  danger  of  a  new  bomber
race  as  land-based  missiles  grow   more  vulnerable.   It   fears
that  with  missiles  growing  more  accurate  there  will  be  pres-
sure  for  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons  in  less  than  all-out  war
on  the  ground  that  these  could  be  used  with  "surgical"   accu-
racy  against  purely  military  targets.   The   Pugwash  conferees
called   this  another   dangerous   delusion.   So-called   "tactical"
nuclear   weapons  are  now  powerful  enough   to  destroy   "the
population,  industry  and  fabric  of  society  in  many  countries."
The   Pugwash   meeting   concluded   that  the  whole   theory  of
deterrence  was  defective,  since  nuclear  war  was  more  likely
to  be  precipitated   by  accident,  miscalculation  or  uncontrolled
escalation  than  by a  deliberate  first  strike.  The  grimmest  note
of  all  (by  Dr.  George  Rathjens at  the  Racine meetings)  :   that
technology  threatened  soon  to  place  the  fate  of  the  superpowers
in  the  hands  of  radars,  sensors,  and  computers.   The  only  ef-
fects  of  these  warnings  seems  to  be  a  deeper  public  apathy.
McNamara's Passionate  Appeal  That  We Spend Less on Arms, More on World Development
For  the  so-called  security  of  an  ever  spiraling  arms  race,
the  world  is  spending   $180  billion  annually  and  the  figure
steadily  goes  up.  Four  years  ago  in  a  speech  in  Montreal,
I  tried  to  point  out  that  more  and  more  military hardware
does   not   provide   more   and   more  security.   Most   of   the
nations  of  both  the  developed  and  the  developing  world  are
beyond  that  point  of  diminishing   returns.
If   that  is  true,  it  is  tragic  that  the  developed   nations
hesitate  to  maintain  even  the  present  $7  billion  of   public
aid  expenditure.  That  twenty  times  more  should  be spent  on
military  power  than  on constructive  progress  appears  to  me
to  be  die  mark  of  an  ultimate,   and  I  sometimes   fear,  in-
curable  folly.  If  there  were  only  a  5%  shift  from  arms  to
development  we would be within sight of  the  Pearson  target
for   official   development   assistance.   And   who  among   us,
familiar  with  the  methods  and  audits   of   arms  planning,
would  not  admit  that  such  a  margin  could  be  provided from
convertible  waste  alone?
There   are  really  no  material   obstacles  to  a  sane,  man-
ageable,  and  progressive  response  to  the  world's  develop-
ment  needs.   The  obstacles  lie   in  the   minds  of   men.  Too
many   millennia  of  tribal  suspicion  and  hostility   are   still
at  work  in  our subconscious  minds. But  what  human  society
can   ultimately   survive  without   a   sense   of   community?
Today  we  are  in  fact  an  inescapable  community,  united  by
the   forces  of   communication  and  interdependence  in  our
new  technological   order.  We  must  apply  at  the  world level
that  same  moral responsibility,  that  same  sharing  of  wealth,
that  same standard  of  justice  and compassion, without which
our  own national  societies  would surely  fall  apart.
Thus  the  challenge  of  the  scientific  revolution  is  not  a.
tremendous  technological  conundrum like  putting  a  man on
the  moon.  It  is  much  more  a  straightforward  moral obliga-
tion,  like  getting  him  out  of  a  ghetto,  out  of  a  favella,  out
of   illiteracy   and  hunger   and  despair.  We  can   meet   this
challenge  if  we  have  the  wisdom and moral energy  to  do  so.
But  if  we  lack these qualities,  then  I fear,  we  lack  the  means
of  survival  on  this  planet.
—Robert  S.  McNamara   in  Copenhagen  Sept.  Zl   at  the
annual  meeting   of  the  World  Bank   he  now  heads.   (Abr.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  October  5,1970
Why  The  Military  Industrial  Complex  Must  Long  To  Get  Out  of   Vietnam
Two  New  Rifts  In  The  Curtain  Hiding  The  Fate  of The  Peace  Dividend
One  reason  for  keeping  secret  the  cost  of  the  Vietnam  war
in  the  last  budget  message  was  to  prevent  public  debate  over
what  was  happening   to  the  expected   peace   dividend.   Two
different   figures   have  now   slipped   out   on   the   reduction   in
Vietnam  spending.   At  San Clemente  on  his  return  from  Asia,
Agnew   (Wash.  Post  9/1/70)   said  the  cost  of  the  war  had
fallen  to  $14  billion  from  its  fiscal   1969  peak  of  $28  billion.
Then  in  a  talk  to  the  National   Security  Industrial  Association
(one  of  the  main  transmission  belts  of  the military-industrial
complex)   Pentagon   Comptroller   Moot  said  that  by  the  end
of  this fiscal year  next  June  30,  the  cost  of  the  war  would  be
down  to  $11 billion  (Wash.  Star 9/24/70).
Little  Drop  In  Pentagon  Spending
So  far  there  is  little  evidence  of  a  comparable  drop  in  total
military  spending.    This  means  that  rising  military  costs  and
wage   increases  are  absorbing   most   of   the   peace  dividends.
Total  "defense  by  function"  figures  for  fiscal  '70  ended   last
June  30  were  about  $80.2  billion,  only  a  billion  less  than  the
peak  war  year  of  fiscal  '69.   Total  military  spending  this fiscal
year  is supposed  to  be down  $7  billion.   This  would  mean  that
rising  Pentagon   costs   in  other   areas  had   absorbed   half   the
$14  billion  "peace  dividend"  figure  given  by  Agnew.
A  new  Gallup  poll  shows  that  in  every  section  of  the  coun-
try  except  the  South,  a  majority  favor  cutting  Pentagon  spend-
ing.    Only   10%   nationally   (and   12%   in  the  South)    favor
an  increase;  the  rest  are  for  holding  the  present  line.   In  the
Senate,  Proxmire  Sept.  24  called  attention   to  the  propaganda
campaign  the  military  is  staging   to  prevent   any  further  cuts
in  its  budget   "the   only  place  where  significant  cuts  can  be
made."   If  cuts  must  be  made,  the  Pentagon  prefers   to  cut
manpower,  foreign  commitments  and  ammunition  rather  than
weaponry  procurement.
Pentagon  planning,  according  to  a  DMS  (Defense  Market-
ing  Service)   memo  turned   up  by  National   Action  Research
on  the  Military  Industrial  Complex   (a  Friends  Service   Com-
mittee  project  in  Philadelphia)   calls  for  a  steady  rise  in  the
next  three  fiscal  years.   DMS  billed  this  as  "good  news"   for
its  armament  making  clientele.   To  maintain  procurement  and
still  meet  this  year's  budget,  the  Army must  be  cut  back  three
divisions   (Moot  revealed)   and   that   means   sharper   cuts   in
The  Witch  Hunt  Starts  Up  Again
Un-American   Activities   in   its   new   guise   as   the
Internal  Security  Committee  obtained  its  first  contempt
citation  from  the  House  Sept.  23.  The  witness—Arnold
Johnson,   National   Legislative   Director  of   the   Com-
munist  Party.  Committee  Member  Ashbrook  described
him  to  the  House  with  annoyance  as  a  man  "who  con-
veniently  looks  like  anyone's  grandfather."  What  could
be  more  insidious?   As  a  Communist,  Johnson   is   the
Committee's  first  and  (it  no doubt hopes)  easiest  target
in  its   attack   on  the  New  Mobilization  Committee  to
End  The   War  In  Vietnam.  He  refused   to   be   sworn.
His   counsel,   John   Abt,   argued   that   under   its   new
enabling  resolution  the  Committee  had  first  to  find  that
the   organization    under   inquiry   was   trying   to   over-
throw  the  government  or  inciting  violence.  Otherwise
the   Committee  would  have  "a  roving  Commission"  to
investigate  any organization, "precisely  what  the  House
intended  to  prevent  when  it  revoked  the  mandate"  of
HUAC.  Koch  (D.  N.Y.)   the  only  member  who  dared
speak  up against  the  motion on  the floor, said  the  effect
was   to   "chill   dissent"   and   deter   anti-war   activity.
Ichord  (D.  Mo.) a  veteran  of  HUAC, replied  in  classic
witch  hunt  language,  that  "We can  ill  afford  to  refrain
from   taking  any  steps  to  deter  subversive  manipula-
tion"  because  of  "fear  that  some  people  might  be  dis-
suaded  from  exercising  their  rights  of  free  association."
The  House  with  lopsided  cowardice voted  approval, 337
to   14.  Thirteen   uncowed   Democrats   joined   Koch   in
voting  "no"—Bingham,  Farbstein,  Rosenthal,  Ryan and
Scheuer  of  New  York; Brown,  Burton,  Edwards,  Rees
and  Roybal of  California, Clay  (Mo.), Conyers  (Mich.),
and Nix  (Pa.).
Vietnam  beyond  the  284,000  goal  Nixon  has  set  in  his  troop
withdrawal  schedule  for  next  May  1.   The  only  hope  of  sub-
stantially  increasing  weaponry   procurement   and  stepping   up
the  race  in  arms  technology   is  to  get  out  of  Vietnam  as  soon
as  possible.   That  is  why  the  new  Paris  offer  from  the   other
side  to  accept  elections  and  deal  with  the  present   government
if  Thieu,  Ky  and  Khiem  are  removed   may  interest  the  Ad-
ministration  more  than  it  lets  on  in  public.   This  is  one  issue
on  which  the  military  industrial  complex   is  with  the   doves.
A  Maverick FCC Commissioner  Replies  To  Agnew's  Attack  In  Las  Vegas  On  Rock  Music
The  Vice  President  has  asked  us  to  "Consider   .  .  .  the
influence  of  the  drug  culture  in  the  field  of  music  .  .  .  fl]n
too  many  of  the  lyrics  the  message  of  the  drug  culture  is
purveyed."  That's   where  he  makes  his  mistake.  No   song
writer  I  know  of  is  urging  as  a  Utopia  a  society  in  which
the  junkie's  life  is  a  rational  option.  Listen  to  the  music,
"Your  mind  might  think  it's  flying/On  those  little  pills/But
you  ought  to   know   it's   dying/Because   .  .  .  Speed  kills!"
That's   from   "Amphetamine   Annie."   Here's   Steppenwolf
singing,  "You know I've seen  a  lot  of  people walkin'  around/
With  tombstones  in  their  eyes/But  the  pusher  don't  care/
If  you live or if  you die."
No.  The  real  issue,   Mr.  Vice  President,   is  whether  you
have  done enough  to  alter  the  repressive,  absurd and unjust
forces   in  our  society   that  drive  people   to   drugs.   These
music  people aren't  really  urging  death  through  drugs;  they
are  urging  life  through  democracy.  It's  not  just  that   cor-
porate,   governmental   and  other   institutions   have   turned
away   from  our  original   goals.  They  are  encouraging   the
drug  life.  Senator  Moss  observed,   "The  drug  culture  finds
its  fullest flowering in  ...     advertising  which  mounts  the
message  that  pills   turn   rain   to   sunshine,  depression   to
euphoria."  TV   ran   almost   $20  million  worth  of   ads   for
sleeping  aids  alone  in  1969.  The  Vice  President   has  asked
each  of  us  to  "set  an  example."  Is  his  own  party  prepared
to  refuse  contributions  from  those  interests  that  feed  upon
the  artificially  induced  thirst  for  drugs,  pep  pills,  tranqui-
lizers, alcohol, cigarettes  ...?
This  Administration  repeats  that  it  is  not  censoring.  But
when  the  V.P.  starts  criticizing TV,  pretty  soon  the  "anal-
ysis"  of  the  President's   speeches   is  watered  down  or  dis-
appears,  and Nixon  builds up  a  record  of  (free)  prime  time
TV.  The  President   shows  up  on  a  Bob  Hope  special;  the
VP  opens   the   Skelton   show.   Now   they're   moving  in  on
radio.  FCC  Chairman  Burch  says   he's   interested  in   "ob-
scenity"  in  lyrics;  the  VP  is  concerned  about  mentioning
drugs.  You  don't  come  right  out  and  say,  "Cut  the   contro-
versial  stuff,  guys.  We  don't  like  people  getting  that  social
criticism  set  to  music."  But  the  radio  station   owners   get
the message.
—FCC   Commissioner   Nicholas   Johnson   in  a  panel   dis-
cussion  of  Rock  Music  before   the  VSIA   Sept.  17  (abr.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October 5,1970
Putting  1,000  FBI  Men  On  Campus  May  End  By  Sparking  More  Trouble
(Continued   from   Page   One)
grooves   in  a  crisis.  One  week  he  sends  college  presidents a
column  on  campus unrest  by  Sidney  Hook.  The  next  he  sends
them  J.  Edgar  Hoover's  recent  open  letter  to  college students.
Nixon  calls  this  "a  cogent  and  enlightening  analysis"  of  the
techniques   used   by   extremists   "to   trick   college   students."
Otherwise,   presumably,  they'd   all   join   the   YAF.   Nixon,
Hoover,  Hook—what  a triad  out  of  the  old  witch hunt!  What
strange  defenders of  academic  freedom!  Academic freedom  is
in  danger.  The  pendulum  has  swung  so  far  that  some  leftist
students  hoot  it  down  as  mindlessly—and often  loutishly—as
the  hard  hats.  But  it  won't  be  saved  by  defenders  as compro-
mised  as  Nixon,  Hoover  and  Hook.  All  three  of  them  were
in   the   forefront   of   the   attack   on   freedom,   academic  and
public,  in  the  haunted  forties  and   fifties.    Hook,   himself   a
victim  as  a  Marxist  in  the   30s,  helped  provide  philosophic
rationalizations  for  the  Red  hunt  in  the  50s.
When  Hoover  Moves  Left
Of  course  they're talking  a  different  language  now.  In  the
30s, J. Edgar  Hoover  had  difficulty  distinguishing New  Dealers
from  Communists.  In  the  50s,  he  and  Nixon  were  calling  the
period  of  Roosevelt  and  Truman  "20  years  of  treason."  Now
the  whole  political  spectrum  has  shifted  so  far  left  that  even
Hoover   has  been   radicalized.  He   now  talks  like   a  liberal.
"There's  nothing  wrong  with  student  dissent,"  he  said  in  the
open  letter,  "or  student demands  for  changes  in  society."  His
conversion  is too  recent. Nixon  proposes  to  give  Hoover  1,000
extra  FBI  men  so  he  can  extend  his  authority  to  the  campuses.
Insofar  as  black  campuses  are  concerned,  the  friendly  liaison
between  the  FBI  and  racist  Southern  police  forces  is  too  long
standing;  Hoover's  ugly  attacks  on  Martin  Luther  King  have
As  The  Egyptians  See  It
Your   ready-made   answer   in   America   to   each  new
Soviet   incursion   seems   simply   to   be,   "Arm  Israel.
Maybe  that  will  frighten  the  Russians  away."  But  it
doesn't,  and it  won't.  When  you  Americans bomb  Hanoi,
there   is   an  immediate  outcry   in  the   Western   press.
When  the  Israelis  bomb  Cairo  with  American  planes,
there  is  no outcry  at  all. Are  the  Arabs any  less  human
than  the  North Vietnamese?  Or  is  anti-Arab  prejudice
the  only  kind  of  racism  still  respectable for  the  liberals
of  the West?
—An  unnamed  Western  Ambassador  in  Cairo, quoted
by  Edward  Sheehan,  N.Y.  Times  Magazine,  Sept.  20.
not   been  forgotten.  The   blacks  see  him   as  an  enemy.   The
FBI  has  an  equally  poor   reputation  among  white  students.
Last  July  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch  called  attention  to  a
curious  passage  in  the  last  annual  FBI  report.   In  it   Hoover
disclosed  that  the  FBI  was  keeping  an  eye on  student  support
of   candidates  opposing   Administration  policy.   The   famous
Midwest  paper  commented,  "What  bothers  us  as  much  as  the
fact  that  the  FBI  is  monitoring  legitimate  political  activity  is
the  manner in  which  Mr.  Hoover  insinuates that  student  sup-
porters  of  anti-Administration  candidates are  trouble-makers."
It  said the  paragraph quoted  was  "sandwiched  in  between  one
giving statistics on  arson"  and  one  describing  "violent  attacks"
on  property.  The  FBI  has  always  had  trouble   distinguishing
between   dissent   and   law-breaking.    If   Congress    approves
'Nixon's  proposal  to  put  1,000  FBI  men  on  campus,  the  only
people  he  will  be  "bringing  together"  are  student   moderates
and  student radicals.
OWNERSHIP,   MANAGEMENT AND   CIRCULATION
(Act  of  October  23,  1962:  Section   4369,  Title  39,  United  States  Code)
1.  Date  of  Filing  Sept.  22, 1970.
2.  Title   of   Publication:    I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.
3.  Frequency  of  issue:   Every  other   week:   not  published  in   August.
4.  Location  of  known   office   of   publication:    4420  29th   St.,    N.W.,   Wash-
ington.  D.  C.  20008.
5.  Location   of   the   headquarters   or   general   business   offices   of   the   pub-
lishers:  4420  29th  St.,   N.W.,   Washington,   D.  C.  20008.
6.  Names  and  addresses   of  publisher,  editor,  and  managing  editor:  I.   F.
Stone,   same   address.
7.  Owner   (if   owned   by  a  partnership   or   other   unincorporated    firm,    its
name   and   address,    as   well   as   that    of   each   individual    must   be   given):
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  Inc.,  same  address.
8.  Known  bondholders,  mortgagees,  and  other   security   holders  owning  or
holding  1  percent   or  more   of   total   amount  of   bonds,   mortgages  or  other
securities   (If   there   are   none,   so  state):   none.
9.  Paragraphs   7  and  8  include,  in  cases  where   the  stockholder   or   secur-
ity   holder  appears   upon   the   books   of   the  company   as  trustee  or  in   any
other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person   or  corporation   for   whom
such  trustee  is  acting,  also  the  statements  in  the  two  paragraphs  show  the
affiant's   full  knowledge  and  belief   as  to  the  circumstances   and  conditions
under  which  stockholders  and  security  holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the
books  of  the  company  as  trustees,  hold  stock   and  securities  in  a  capacity
other  than  that  of  a  bonafide  owner.
Average  No.  Copi
Each  Issue  During   Si
Proceeding  12 months
62.271
A.  Total  No.   Copies   Printed
B.  Paid   Circulation
1. Sales  Through   Agents.   News
Dealers  or  Otherwise                        3,108
2. To  Term  Subscribers   by
Mail,  Carriers  Delivery,  or  by
other   means                                       56,866
C.  Total   Paid   Circulation                              69,974
D.  Free   Distribution  (including
samples)   by  Mail,  Carrier  De-
livery,   or   by   Other   Means                  800
E.   Total   No.  of   Copies   Distributed          60,774
F.   Office    Use,    Etc.                                          1,497
G.  Total                                                              62.271
I   certify   that  the  statements  made   by  me  above   are
plete.  I.  F.  Stone,   editor.
ngle  Issue  Nearest
To Filing  Date
67.500
3.250
62,159
65,409
800
66,209
1,291
67.500
correct  and   com-
FOR  STONE'S   HIDDEN   HISTORY
For  the  enclosed  $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War  (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City                                         Zip                 State
Indicate   if   gift    announcement wished    D
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City                                         Zip                 State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
                 10
/
6
/
70
4420  29th  St.  N.W,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420   29th  St.,   N.W.
Washington,  D. C.   20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published   every  other  Monday  except  In  August  at  4420  29th  St..   N.W..   Washington.   D.C.
An  independent   bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.     Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:   S20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED