I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970nov30.pdf

============================================================

How  the New  Bombings Recall  The  Tonkin  Gulf   Affair,   Pps. 2-3
Bobby  Kennedy's  Ultimate  Depravity  As  Exposed  By  J.  Edgar  Hoover
Until  Bobby  Kennedy  came  along,  I  never  had  trouble  with  Attorneys  General.  The trouble was  that  Kennedy wanted
to  loosen  up our  standards  and qualifications  ...     In  short  he  wanted  more  Negro  agents.
—J.  Edgar  Hoover  in  a  Washington  Post  interview  of  Nov.17  attacking   former   Attorney   General  Ramsey   Clark's  'new
book,  "Crime  in  America"   which  dared  to  criticize  Hoover  as  a  publicity  seeker.   Hoover  called  Clark  "worse  than  Ken-
nedy,"  which  under  the  circumstances  seems  quite  a  compliment.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVIII,   No.  22
NOVEMBER   30,   1970
           101
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
The  Costly  Fallacies  In  The  Nixon  Aid  Message
The   opening   sentence  of  President  Nixon's   new  military
aid  message  to  Congress  provides  a  succinct summary of  what
is  wrong  with  American  foreign  policy.   "In  today's  world,"
the  message  begins,  "peace  is synonymous with the  strength of
America  and  her  friends."   But  if  we  had  learned  anything at
all  from the  past decade, including ten  disastrous years of inter-
vention  in  Southeast  Asia,  it  is that  in  today's  world  the  main
danger  to  peace  is  not  the  military weakness  of  the  U.S.  and
its friends  but  Washington's  lack of  political  sagacity.   If  peace
were  synonymous with  the  strength  of  the  U.S.  and  its  friends,
peace  should  have  come  to  Southeast   Asia  long   ago.    There
could  hardly  be  a  greater  disproportion  in  military  and  eco-
nomic  power  than  between  the  U.S.  and  the  Vietnamese  forces
led  by  Hanoi.   It  was  not  military  muscle  our  side  lacked.   It
was  brains.
The  Same  Errors  In  Cambodia
This is what  Gen.  Lewis W.  Walt,  the  assistant commandant
of  the  Marine  Corps,  was trying to  say, though  more  tactfully,
in   his   recent   press  conference  here  and   in   his   new   book,
Strange  War,  Strange Strategy.  He  said  of  the  Vietnamese  war
that  we  failed  to  realize  it  was  "a  new  kind  of  war,"  a  war
"where  concern  for  the  people  was as  essential  to  the  battle  as
guns  or  ammunition,  where  restraint  was  as  necessary  as  food
or  water."  These  are  the  same  errors  we  are  now  committing
in  Cambodia.    As  in  South  Vietnam,  we  upset  the  country's
fragile  neutrality.   We  picked  the  government  we  preferred,
we  escalated   a  civil  wat,  and  then  tried  to  remedy  political
clumsiness  by overwhelming  firepower.  The  new  request  raises
the  bill  for  Cambodian  aid  to  $285  million,  and  the  message
assures  us—as  if  this  were  a  guarantee  that  the  money  will  be
well  spent—that  "70  percent  of  the  military assistance  will  be
ammunition."   Too  much  ammunition  is  exactly  what   Gen.
Walt  was  talking  about.   Indiscriminate  and   disproportionate
firepower  by  air  and  artillery  is  beginning  to  ravage  the  Cam-
bodian  countryside  as  it  did  the  Vietnamese,  and  to  fuel   the
rebellion  against  Lon Nol  as it  did  the  rebellion  against  Diem
and  his  successors.   "Concern  for  the  people"—in  Gen.  Walt's
phrase—is  as  absent  in  our  Cambodian  policy  as  it  was  in  our
Vietnamese.
The  Nixon  Administration  acts  as  if  it  had  discovered   some
new  formula   in   "Vietnamization."     Vietnamization   and   the
Nixon  Doctrine   are  only  new  variants   of  the  old   imperial
policy  of  fighting  colonial  wars  with  native  troops  and  con-
trolling  other  countries  through  puppet  native  rulers.   This  is
what  the  French  did  in  Africa  and  the  British  in  India.   It  is
a  recipe  for  endless  trouble  and  ultimate  defeat.   Nixon   gives
the  impression  that  we have  been  bearing  the  main  burden  of
Helpful  Hint  To  The  Peace Movement
Q.  Was  the  winding  down  of  the  war  an  issue   the
President  might  have  capitalized on?
A.  He  might  have,  but  for  whatever  reason,  he  did
not.  Our view is  that  the  President  may  have  been  just
as  wise  to  stay  away  from  Vietnam  lest  he  raise  false
hopes  for  a complete end to  the  war  by  1972.  If  the  war
still  is  going on at  any  substantial level  two  years  from
now,  this  could  hurt the  President's  chances for  re-elec-
tion.   What  you  see  starting  to  pop  up  when  you  do
surveys  is  a  feeling  that,  "Well,  the  war  is  over,   isn't
it?    How  come  American  boys  are  still  getting   killed
over  there   and  all  these  billions   still   being  spent?"
So  there  may  be  arising  a  new  definition  of  the  resent-
ment  toward  the  war.  Getting  out  slowly  may  not  be
enough.    We   get   the   indication   that   this   could   yet
become  a  major  problem  for  the  Administration.
—U.S.  News  & World  Report  interview  Nov.  2S with
Political  Pollster  John  F.  Kraft.    He  said  the  elections
left    the  Democrats  "in   much   better   shape  than   any-
one  would  have  thought  possible  a  year  ago."
these  wars,  and  that  he  has  found  a  way  to  shift  it  to  the
natives.   If  the  full  total  of  losses  is  ever  added  up  it  will  be
seen   that   the   carnage   suffered   by   the   Vietnamese    people,
North  and  South,  in  this  war  is comparable  only  to  the  terrible
losses  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  Poland  in  World  War  II.   It
is  blind  and  bitter  to  talk  of  "Vietnamizing"   it  now.   It  has
been  Vietnamized  since  it  began,  and  the  Nixon  Doctrine  of-
fers  people elsewhere  more  of  the  same.
Manichean  View  Of  The  World
There  is  another  hidden  and  equally  pernicious  premise  be-
hind  that  opening   sentence  in  the  Nixon   aid  message:    "In
today's world,  peace  is synonymous with  the  strength  of  Amer-
ica  and  her   friends."   This  implies  that   but   for   American
military  strength,   the   world   would   be  gobbled   up   by   evil
monsters.   It  divides  the  world  between  the  forces  of  light  and
darkness.  This  is one  of  the  oldest  delusions  of  mankind,  and
it  is time we all  outgrew  it.   If  there is to  be an enduring  peace
in  the  world,  there  must  be  some  readiness  to  understand  that
the  same  human  beings  live  on  both  sides,  and  that  everybody
has  the  same  fears  of  the  other.   If  confrontation   is  to  be  re-
placed  with  negotiation,  as  Nixon  himself   promised,  this  re-
quires  a  more  sophisticated  model   of  the  real  world   we  all
inhabit  than  the  simple-minded  cold  war  view  which  is indeed
(Continued  on Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weckly,  November  30, 1970
How  the New  Bombings of North Vietnam Recall The Tonkin  Gulf  Affair   ...
In  three  respects  the  renewed  attacks  on  North  Vietnam re-
call  the  Tonkin  Gulf  affair.   Firstly, because  the  "punishment"
was  so  disproportionate  to   the   "crime."    The   laws  of   war
restrict  reprisals  to  a  level  commensurate  with  the   offense—
but  two  days  of  attacks  by  "about  200"   fighter-bombers  (the
unofficial  Pentagon  estimate  in  the  Washington  Post Nov.   22)
would  seem  a  high  price  to  exact  for  the  reported   shooting
down  of  the  Phantom  plane  and  its  two-man crew.
They Were Looking For An Excuse
Secondly, the  new bombings  recall Tonkin  Gulf  in that  some
military  men  were  looking  for  an  excuse  to  resume  the  bomb-
ing,  and  did  use  it  for  far  wider  purposes,  including  that  of
instilling  terror  in  the  North.  The  Baltimore  Sun  (Nov.   22)
reported   that   some  military  men   have   been   arguing   for   a
limited  resumption  of  the  bombing  to  hit  at  supplies  being
built  up  for  a  .possible  new  offensive.   Our  air  raids  were  os-
tensibly  aimed  at  anti-aircraft  missile  and  gun   emplacements
endangering  our  reconnaissance planes.   But  Secretary  Laird's
first  statement  also  referred  to  "related  facilities"  as additional
targets.   According  to  the  Washington   Star  (Nov.   22)    "offi-
cials  later  confirmed" that  these  were  supply  and  ammunition
dumps.    Unofficially    there   was   acknowledgement   that   the
bombing  aims  were  also  to  terrorize.   The  New   York   Times
(Nov.   22)  was  told  one  purpose  was to  warn  the  North  not
to  take  advantage  of  U.S.  troop  withdrawals  to  step  up   infil-
tration  and  attacks.   One  "planner"  was  quoted  as  saying  our
new  bombing   raids  were   "inhibitory"   attacks  made  with  a
view  to  what  might  happen" "next  summer  and  beyond  when
our  force  levels  will  be  down  considerably."   Either  this  is  a
bluff  or  the  Administration  is  prepared  to  resume  the  air  war
on  the  North  to  protect   "Vietnamization"   in  the  South.   Is
Nixon  also  prepared  to  put  more  U.S.  troops  back  into  combat
if  bombing   fails  as  it  did  before  under  Johnson?
The  third  respect  in  which  this   affair   recalls  that  of   the
Tonkin  Gulf  is  in  the  ease  with  which  such  incidents  can  be
provoked  or  fabricated.  This  was  clearly  no  fabrication, since
the  downing  of  the  plane  was  announced  the   same  day  by
Hanoi  radio.  But there  is by now considerable reason to  believe
that  the  U.S.  has  taken  advantage  of  its  presumed   "under-
'  standing"   allowing   aerial  reconnaissance  to  carry  on  wide-
spread  bombing  and strafing. These can provoke  counter-attacks
any  time we  desire  them.
Two  days  after  our  plane  was  downed  on  Nov.   13,  Hanoi
radio  broadcast  a  Nhan  Danh  newspaper   article  complaining
that  in  October  alone  U.S.  aircraft  made  1,540  sorties  on  910
occasions.   It  said  this  included  B-52  raids  just  north  of  the
The  Pentagon  and  The  Peace  Dividend
During  the  elections Republicans  proclaimed  that  the
Nixon   administration   had   cut   $17   billion   from    the
defense  budget.  The  facts  are  different.   In  fiscal  1969,
when  Mr.  Nixon  took  office,  total  defense  outlays  were
$81.2  billion.   In  fiscal  1970 they  were  $79.4,  a  drop  of
only  $1.8 billion.  In  the  new  fiscal  year  national defense
spending  is  estimated at  $73.6  billion.   Instead  of  a  cut
of  $17 billion,  there  is  to  be  a  cut  of  $7.6 billion.   Where
have  the  billions  gone?   The  services  are  vying  with
each other over the  spoils.  The Air  Force is  pushing  for
a  new  manned  bomber.  The  Navy  insists  on  new  car-
riers.   The  Pentagon  has  put  its  vast  public  relations
machine  to  work  to  convince  the  public  that  there  are
few   or  no  savings  from  a  cut  in  Vietnam   from   peak
spending  of  $30  billion,  to  fiscal  1971 spending  of  $11
to  $12  billion.   We  are  told  that  there  are  few   if  any
savings  from   a  reduction  from   a  3.5  million  military
force  to  a  3   million  military  force.   The  Pentagon  has
usurped  the  peace  dividend.   It  is   poor  mouthing  our
relative  strength  with  the  Soviet  Union,  and  claiming,
as  they  have  claimed  countless  times  before,  that  we
are   in  deadly   peril   if   we   reorder  our   priorities  and
return  to  a  pre-Vietnam  level  of  defense spending.
—Proxmire  (D.  Wis)  in  the Senate  Nov.  16  (abr.)
DMZ  (where  there  seem  to  be  few  SAMs  to  endanger  them)
and that tactical  aircraft  dropped  some 2,000 demolition  bombs
and  85,000   steel-pellet  bombs  elsewhere  in  North  Vietnam.
The  latter  are—in  the  antiseptic phrase—anti-personnel weap-
ons.   This  is more than  "reconnaissance"  and  more  than   "pro-
tective-reaction",  whatever that  doubletalk  means.
There  is a natural  reluctance to  take enemy statements at  face
value  in  wartime.   No  doubt  both  sides exaggerate  in  all  wars.
But  the  time  has  come  for  the  U.S.  press  to  treat  Hanoi  radio
more   seriously.   These   new   raids  were   first   announced   by
Hanoi  radio at  1:30  p.m.  EST Friday, Nov.  21 but  the  news—
like many past  such broadcasts from Hanoi—was  not  used until
it  was  confirmed by  Laird  at  2:55  a.m.  EST  Saturday.   It  was
not  in  any Friday afternoon  papers  we  saw  nor  in  any  but  late
editions  of  the  Saturday morning  papers.   Laird  said  the  raids
were  confined  to  the  area  below  the  19th  parallel  while  Hanoi
claimed  that  bombs  had  been  dropped  as  far  north  as the  area
between  Hanoi  and  Haiphong.   This  was confirmed  by the  only
Western   press   agency  in  Hanoi.    An  Agence   France   Presse
dispatch   published   by   the   New    York   Times   Nov.  • 22   said
"Hanoi  shook  today  from  the  blast  of  bombs  only  25  miles
away."   Hanoi's  claim  that  we  struck  POW  camps  and  that  a
Creeping  Militarism  in  Japan  as  Programmed  by  Japanese  Big   Business
Big  business  leaders,  throwing  their  active  support behind
the  proposed  new  Fourth  Defense  Buildup  Program  covering
1972-6,  are  moving  to  lay  the  groundwork  in  next   year's
budget  to  assure  that  the  5,800,000-miHion  program  is  ade-
quately  funded.
The initial  version  of  the  program, revealed  by the  defense
agency  last  month,  calls  for  a  switch  in  Japan's  basic  de-
fense   policy  from  a  strictly  defensive   posture   to   tactical
offense  against  any external  attack.
Some   business   leaders   go   well    beyond   the    Defense
Agency's  cautious  policy  line.   Kazutaka  Kikawada,  presi-
dent  of  Tokyo  Electric  Power,  has  spoken  of  the  need  to
assure   the   security   of   the   Malacca  Strait,   and  Tekeshi
Sakurada,  a  retired  chief  executive  of  Nisshin  Spinning,  of
amending   the   no-war   Article   Nine   of   the   Constitution.
Kenzo  Okubo, president of  Mitsubishi  Electric, is  for  tripling
the  Maritime  Self-Defense   Force.
Business  plans  to  work  through the  Public Finance  Coun-
cil,  an  advisory  body  to  the  Finance  Ministry,  to  obtain  in-
creased   defense    appropriations.    The   Chairman   of    the
Public  Finance  Council  is   Ataru  Kobayashi,  president  of
Arabian  Oil  Co.  and  a  leading  business   figure.
Business  leaders  generally  share  the  view  that  for  Japan
with  a  gross  national  product  second  only  to  the  U.S.  in
the  free  world,  to  increase  her  own  capabilities  to  defend
herself  is  an  entirely  natural  and  appropriate  policy  objec-
tive.   To  avoid  antagonizing  public  opinion,  however,  they
feel  that  their  two-stage  approach of  giving  first  priority  to
social  problems,  and  then  increasing  tax  revenue  to  make
possible  a  bigger  budget  and  larger  defense   appropriations
would  be  the  wiser   course.
—Asahi  Evening  News,  Tokyo,  Nov.  11.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  November  SO,  1970
...  Renewed  Tension,  Arms Race and Wider War  Might  Be Nixon's Way Out
number  of  captured  U.S.  pilots  were wounded was  at  once dis-
missed  by  Laird  as  "erroneous."    How  could  he  be  so  sure?
We  have  too  often  bombed  our  own  and  friendly  troops  in
South  Vietnam to  be  certain  of  what we  hit  in  the  North.
The  legal  or  moral  excuse for  these  reprisal  raids was con-
siderably  undercut  by   Majority   Leader  Mike  Mansfield   on
ABC's  Issues  and  Answers  Nov.  22.   He  was  asked  about  the
alleged  "understandings" on  which  the Johnson  administration
agreed  to  end  the  bombing of  the  North.   One  of  them  is sup-
posed  to  have given us  the  right  to fly unarmed reconnaissance
planes  over the North.   Mansfield,  when  asked about this, said
he had  no knowledge of  any such "understandings,"  and  added
pointedly  that  the  bombings  had  ended  under  the  previous
Administration.   Under  Johnson   he  was  the  ranking   Demo-
cratic  Senator  and  presumably would  have  known.   He  said
there  were  no  such  understandings written  or  oral,  that  these
were  only  our   "assumptions."
What  If  Hanoi Overflew  Us?
In  any  case even  an  understanding to  allow  unarmed recon-
naissance  planes  would  hardly  cover  the  extensive  bombings
Hanoi  has  been  alleging.   The  North  Vietnamese  delegate  in
Paris  Nov.   21  charged  that  there  had   been   36  B-52  raids
in  1969  and  137  in  the  first  ten  months of  this year; that  total
U.S.  missions over  the  North  were  7,970  in  1969  and  11,180
up  to  the  end  of  October  this  year.  Even  if  these  figures  are
swollen,  they go  far  beyond  simple unarmed reconnaissance or
even  "protective-reaction."    The  Pentagon  itself   is  beginning
to   admit  this,   even   though   unofficially,   when   it   confirms
attacks  on  supply dumps and  for  "inhibitory"  purposes.   This
kind  of   overt  terrorism  is  only  possible  for  arrogant  great
powers.  What  if  North  Vietnam had  an  air  force and  claimed
the  right  to teconnaissance  over  South  Vietnam, or  an  air  force
big enough  to  overfly  the  U.S.,  and  then  shoot  us up  from  time
to  time just as an  "inhibitory" warning?
Behind  all  these  tricky  excuses  for  the  renewed bombing  lie
more  serious  matters  which  ought  to  be  opened  up  by  Senate
investigation  before  we  find  ourselves  drawn  back  into  the
Vietnamese  quagmire when  we  are  hardly half  out  of  it.   One
is  Nixon's   obsession  about  showing  that  he  is  "tough"  and
the  White   House   belief  that  it  is  good   strategy  to  try  and
scare  the  other  side  by  demonstrating  from  time  to  time  that
Nixon  is "unpredictable"  and  may make wild moves.  The  last
The  Arms  Lobby's  New  Line—
Social  Welfare   "Unproductive"
The  new  Congress  will  adopt  a  more  serious  attitude
toward  defense   problems.   Continued  Soviet   pressures
as  generated  by  their  vast  military  technology   develop-
ment  is  finally getting  through  to  both  the  White  House
and  Congress.   The  major defense  budget  cuts  in  pros-
pect  for  Fiscal   1972  have  already   evaporated   in  this
atmosphere.    Increases   over   Fiscal   1971   are   certain.
Criticism  of  the  supersonic  transport  program  has  also
passed   its   peak.   The  Fiscal   1971  SST    appropriation
should  clear  the  Senate   hurdle  and  get  this   program
really   rolling.    Economic   impact   of  the   aerospace  in-
dustry   cuts,   combined   with   other   softenings   in   the
economy,  will  force  both  the  White  House  and  Congress
to  explore  new  methods  of  trying  to  reverse  this  trend.
Boosting  technology  offers  a  quicker and  more  effective
stimulant  than the  unproductive drains of  social  welfare
programs.
—Aviation  Week  editorial  Nov.  9
practictioner  of  this  strategy  was  Adolf  Hitler,   a  precedent
which   does   not   recommend   it.   British   Conservatives   were
always  being  told  privately that  the  Fuehrer  was  unpredictable
and  if  he  wasn't  given  his  way  might  do  just  awful   things.
Bluffs  of  this  kind  may  work  up  to  a  point,  but  the  point  at
which  they are called  may prove  disastrous for  the  practitioner,
Nixon  is also growing  desperate  on  the  home  front.   He  has
just  about  turned full  circle  on fiscal policy.  He  has cheapened
money,  but  borrowings  remain  low  because  business  men  do
not  see enough  demand  to  warrant  expansion.   He  has  given
up  on  the balanced budget and  now looks  to  deficit  financing—
a  la Keynes—to stimulate business, though  just when  Galbraith
warns  that  Keynesianism will  no  longer  work  because  of  the
power  wielded  by  organized  labor  and  big  business.   Nixon
may  find  himself  pushed  even  to  wage-price  guidelines  if  he
cannot  find  some  other  way to  revive  the  economy  in  time  for
the  next  election  without  another  inflationary  spiral.   In  such
grim  circumstances, the  one  easy  way out  would  be  to  step  up
the  arms  race  again  and/or  stumble  into  a  wider  conflict  in
Southeast  Asia  or  somewhere  else.   This  is  the  line  of   least
resistance.   We  have  seen  it  happen   several  times  under  the
Democrats.   It  may happen  again.                                   Nov.  22
A  Bill  Which   Threatens  A  Revived  Witch
Academic  freedom  is  endangered  by the  Defense  Facilities
and  Industrial  Securities  Act  of  1970  now  pending  in  the
Senate.   This   bill  would  reinstitute  security   clearance   for
defense   workers.   The  Secretary   of  Defense  can  designate
"any  plant,  factory,  industry,  public  utility,  mine,  laboratory,
educational  institution,  research  organization,  railroad,  air-
port,  pier,  waterfront  installation,  canal  dam,  bridge,  high-
way,  vessel,  aircraft,   vehicle   and  pipeline"   as  a  defense
facility  if  he  declares  that  it  is  "in  whole  or  part  engaged
in  furnishing   defense   materials  or  services."   For   educa-
tional  institutions  any  classified  military  project  could  be  so
designated.
The  bill  would  overturn  eight  decisions   of  the  Supreme
Court  that  protect  the  right  of  individual  freedom   of  em-
ployment.   The  bill  proscribes  employment   or  federal   sup-
port  to  individuals  who  have  committed   acts  of   subversion
defined  as  follows:   "any  act  .  .  .  which  effects   any  plan,
policy,  recommendation,  directive,  tactic,  or  strategy  of  any
communist,   Marxist,   Leninist,   revolutionary   socialist,  an-
archist,   nihilist,   Nazi,   fascist,   or  any   other  organization
which has as  its  purpose the destruction of  the  constitutional
Hunt  in  Industry  and  Science  Laboratories
form   of   government   of  the   United   States  by  any   means
deemed  necessary   to  that  end."   Rep.  Louis  Stokes,   House
leader  of  the  opposition  to  the  bill   points   out  that   "The
range  of  activities,  which,  under  this  definition,  would  con-
stitute  an  act  of  subversion  is   boundless."
Among  the  dangers  to  liberty  in  this  measure  is  the  de-
nial of  recourse  to  the  courts  until  administrative  procedures
are exhausted.  There is no provision  either for full  disclosure
of  charges   or  for  cross-examination   of  adverse   witnesses;
it  also denies  the  right  of  individuals against  self-incrimina-
tion.  The  threat  from  H.R.  14864  to  academic  freedom  and
scholarly   pursuit  is  clear.   Science  editorialized  (2/27/70):
This  bill  "could   have  a  decisive  effect  on  the   employment
prospects  of   employment   of   many   people   and  an   equally
adverse  impact on the  careers of  people  who might  be  denied
access  to  research  information  or  research  facilities."    [Em-
phasis  in original].
—Petition  from  750  scientists  including  6  Nobel  winners
presented   Nov.   18  to  Senator   Kennedy   who  promised   to
oppose  it.   The  bill  passed  the  House  in  February,  and  could
come  up  in  the  Senate  at  any  time.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  November  SO,  1970
If  Poles  and  Germans  Can  Be Reconciled,  Why  Not  Arabs  and  Jews?
(Continued   from  Page  One)
the  obverse of  the  Communist view.  For  they,  too,  are  demon-
olo^ists  and Manicheans.
The  truth  is  that  American  military  aid  has  only  fostered
intransigance and  delayed peaceful settlements.  Regimes which
would  have been  forced  by  necessity to  conciliate domestic  op-
position   or  to   accept   foreign  policy  realities  have  been   en-
couraged   by  U.S.   aid  to  persist   in   costly  and  self-defeating
policies.   "The  decade  of  the  1960s,"  the  Nixon  message  says,
"taught  us  that  it  is  neither  necessary,  nor  even  possible,  for
the  U.S.  to  bear  the  principal  burden  for  the  defense  or  eco-
nomic  progress  of  all  our  allies  and   friends.    They  are  now
ready  and  willing to  assume an  increasing  share  of  the  burden
for  their  own  defense."   This  is wishful  thinking.
Brandt's Defection  From  Unreality
It   is  triply   misleading.    In   the   first   place,   as  the   newly
released  Symington hearings on NATO  disclose  (p.2112),  our
NATO  allies  including Canada  almost  doubled  their  arms ex-
penditures  between   1957  and   1969—they   rose  from  $13  to
almost  $2") billion.   In  the  second  place,  there  is little  evidence
of  their  readiness to  increase  them  much  further  in  an  endless
arms  race.   On  the  contrary—and  this  is  the  third  and   most
important  point—the  70s will  show  that  as the  U.S.  withdraws
militarily   from   abroad,  our   allies  will  grow   more   disposed
to  recognize realities.  The  Osipolitik   of  the  Brandt  regime  in
West  Germany  is  the  outstanding  example  of  what  we  must
come  to  expect.   The  original  idea  in  rearming West  Germany
was  that  its  military  power,  when  combined  with  NATO's,
would  force  a  rollback  of  Communist  power   to  the  Russian
borders.  That  turned  out  to  be  a  costly pipedream;  it  still  costs
us  $14  billion  a  year  in  NATO.   Now  we  see  West  Germany
accepting  the  Oder-Neisse  frontier  with  Poland  and  the  exist-
ence  of  a  separate  East  German   state.   All   that  might   have
happened   a  good  many  years,  and  a  good   many  billions  of
dollars,  ago.   Indeed  a  wiser  Western  policy  might  have  nego-
tiated  the  reunification of  Germany  in   1955.   In  Germany,  as
in  Korea  and  China  and  Vietnam,  American  military  aid  has
fostered   a  blind  faith  that  basic  political  problems   could   be
•solved  by  military  means.   These  divided  countries  have  been
the  focal  point  of  world  tension  and  of  heavy  military  costs.
Nixon   says  the  first  six  decades   of   the   Twentieth   Century
"taught  us  that  a  stable  and  tranquil  world  requires  American
On  Exploiting   Obscure  Persons
A   close   advisor  and   press   aid  to   President   Nixon
[Herbert  G.  Klein  in  a  lecture  at  Johns  Hopkins]  said
yesterday   that  the   news  media  had  "deserted"   their
responsibility  to  the  public  by  making  national  person-
alities  out  of  "obscure  persons"  taking  part  in  acts  of
violence.—Baltimore  Sim,  Nov.  17.
The  question  asked  about  the   hecklers  endemic  in
the  current campaign is,  are  they  for  real  or  are  they
for   hire?    Some  are  demonstrably  mercenaries.   So  it
was   in   Indiana.   There   the   Republican  organization
scoured  Chicago  for  the  most  scrofulous  yippies  to  be
found,  sent  a  band  of  them  to  break  up  a  rally  for  a
Republican  candidate  while  waving  placards  boosting
his  Democratic opponent, all  for  the  benefit of  television
cameras.   The  yippies  said  their  pay  was  $75.
—O'Neill:  Politics  and  People,  Bait.  Sun.   Nov.  23
participation  in  keeping  the  peace."   It  would  be  more  accurate
to  say  that   American  participation   in  maintaining   the   cold
war  has  kept  the  world  unstable  and  uneasy  ever  since  World
War  II.
In  a  complex   world,  one  simple  formula  will  not  fit  the
disparate  situations  covered  by  the  aid  message.    But  in  one
respect  the  problem  represented  by  Israel  and  the  Middle  East
is like the others. The  problem  there,  too,  is political  rather  than
military.    Until   some   viable   political   compromise   has   been
worked  out which will  reconcile  Israel  with  its Arab  neighbors,
ensure  the  survival  of  the  Jewish  State  while  providing   for
Palestinian  Arab  aspirations,  there  will  be  no  peace  and  there
will  be  the  continued   danger  of  a  world  conflagration.   Here
the  Nixon  policy  wavers  between  seeking  just  such  a  solution
and  giving  a blank  check  to  the  Jordanian  and  Israeli  regimes.
The  price of. U.S.  aid  should  be  the  acquiescence  of  both  King
Hussein  and  Golda  Meir  in  a  compromise   which  will  make
a  place  for  a  new  and  independent  Palestinian  Arab  state.  *It
would-be a happy  day if  that  half  billion  credit  for  new  Israeli
arms  could  be  used  instead  as  a  first  payment  for  Arab  refugee
restitution   and   resettlement.    Military  power   will   not   solve
political  problems  in  the  Middle  East  anymore  than  it  has  in
Southeast  Asia.   If   Poles  and  Germans   can  be  reconciled   on
the Oder-Neisse,  there  is no  reason  why Arabs  and  Jews  cannot
be  reconciled  on  the   1967   borders.
Of   Especial  Interest  to  Pacific  Coast  Readers—You Can  Now   Get  the  Bi-Weekly  Airmail  for  $10  Anywhere  in  the  USA
FOR  STONE'S   NEW  BOOK
For  the  enclosed  special  pre-publication   price  of  $8.95
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics  and  Prophecies:
1967-70  (Random  House).  Regularly  $10.
(To)   Name
Street
.City                                         Zip                 State
Indicate  if   gift   announcement   wished    D
Please  renew   (or  enter)   a  eub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                         Zip                 State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
               n
/
M
/7o
4420  29th  St.  N.W.,   Washington,   B.C.   20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N.W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Clara  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,   D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.   N.W..  Washington,   D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;
(10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe:   $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED