I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970oct19.pdf

============================================================

Special  6-Page  Issue  on  Those  Campus  Killings
A  Humanity Which  Shames The  Indifference  of  Society
You  remember  that  you  were under  our rule and  we  treated  you  more  humanely  than  you  treated  us  when  you  had  con-
trol of  the prison.
—Queens  House  of  Detention  inmate  to  a  guard  held  hostage  in  the  prison  revolt,  as  reported  by  a  Black  Muslim   Min-
ister in  the New York  Times, Oct. 5.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVIII,  No.  19OCTOBER  19,  1970
           101
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
What's  A  Little  Murder  (Of Blacks  and  Students)?
The  danger  in  the  Jackson  State  and  Kent  State  reports  by
the  President's   Commission  on  Campus  Unrest  lies  in  their
very quality. If  they had  whitewashed the  killings, the  findings
would  be  angrily dismissed by blacks  and  students  as  more-of-
the-same,  but  the  hope  would remain that  a better investigation
by better  men  might  have produced  better  results. The  destruc-
tive  potential  of  the  reports  comes  from  the  fact  that  they have
honestly  and  thoroughly   shown  that  the  killings  were unjusti-
fied  and  unnecessary.  The  established  order  mustered  its  best
and  they  fulfilled   their  moral  and  political  obligation.   And
yet  there  is  not  the  slightest  chance that  anything  will  be  done
about  it.  The  chairman of  the  Commission,  Scranton, will  turn
up  at  the  White  House  one  of  these  days  to  be  photographed
with   the  President,   an  innocuous  statement  will  issue  from
the  White  House,   and  that  will  be  the  end  of  the   findings.
The  message to blacks  and  students will  be that  even  when  the
established  order  does  its  highest  best,  there  is  no  discernible
effect.  Disillusion  will  be  deepened.  The  number  of  those  who
drop  out,  who  abandon  hope  in  normal  politics  and  reason,
will  increase.  The  reports,  by  their  very  honesty  and   courage,
will  have demonstrated  the  impotence  even  of  the  conventional
best  elements  in  our  society.  What  was  intended   to  further
reconciliation  will end  in  provocation.
Where  Scranton  Failed
The  Commission  can  be  criticized  on  two  points.  Its  main
business  was  to  investigate  the  killings  at  Jackson  State  and
Kent  State  but  it  chose  to  issue  its  findings  on  these  in  two
separate   reports   released   several   days  after   its  main   report.
These  two  were  released  separately  and  without  specially  tele-
vised  briefings.  Governor   Scranton   and  his  colleagues   could
have  put  on  the  nation's  television  screens  their  conclusion
that  the  killings  on  both   campuses  were  unjustified   and  un-
necessary.  They  chose  instead  to  televise  the  safe  and  even-
handed  generalities   of  their  main  recommendations,   and  left
town  before  the  other  reports  were  issued.  Apparently  all  the
advance  criticism  orchestrated  by the White  House  and  Agnew
had   made   them   afraid   of   becoming   too   controversial.   The
other  criticism  is  that  these  two  reports  do  not  put  the  spot-
light  on  those  responsible  for  the  killings.  The  Commission
had  a valid  excuse  for  this.  As  it  said  in  the  Kent  State  report,
it   did   not   wish   "to   interfere   with   the   criminal   process."
Unfortunately   the   "criminal   process"   at   Jackson   State   and
Kent  State  is apt to  end  like the  "criminal  process"  which  grew
out  of  the   Orangeburg    massacre   in   February,   1968.   There
three  students  were  killed  and  27  wounded  by  State  Highway
patrolmen  at  the  all-black  State  College  in  Orangeburg,  South
Carolina.  The  nine  highway  patrolmen  who  did  the  shooting
were   acquitted   last   year   (and   promoted!).   But   Cleveland
Sellers, the  young  SNCC worker  whom  the  authorities  arrested
Warning  From An Unexpected Source
When  bombings in  the  country approach  4,000  a year,
as  they  have  now,  it's  time  for  something  other  than
lamentations   .  .  .  But  the  government  will   have  its
hands   full  dealing  with  those   who  commit  crimes  of
terror  and  murder  without wading  into the  fuzzy  areas
of  advocacy and intent.  It  would  be  propelled into  those
sectors  by  a  bill  offered  by  Senator  Eastland. He  would
crack  down  on  "whoever knowingly  or  willfully  advo-
cates,   abets,   advises   or   teaches   the   duty,   necessity,
desirability  or  propriety of  overthrowing  or destroying"
the  government of  the  United  States  or  of  any  state.
The  act would be effective  "without regard to immediate
provable   effect   of  such  action"  by  an  individual   .  .  .
How   could  a  political  statement  be  punishable   if   no
effect  could be proven? .  .  .  Considering the  strain  upon
the   country,   extreme   proposals   are   inevitable.   The
Sedition  Act  of  1798 was  the  outgrowth of  only verbal
violence  .  .  .  Americans  today  are  demonstrating  more
coolness  under  worse  provocations, and  we  hope  they
will   continue   to   stand   well  back  from   the   brink  of
hysteria.
—Editorial,  the  conservative  Washington  Star, Oct. 9.
as  the  "outside  agitator"  responsible  has  just  been   convicted
and  sentenced  to  a  year  in  jail  though   the  original   charges
against  him  failed  to  stand  up.*
The  killers—police,   Guardsmen  or  state  highway   patrol—
will  go  free  and  the  only  people   punished  will  be   selected
scapegoats  from  among  their  victims. Some  organization  ought
to  take  the  offensive  on  the  findings  of  the  Scranton  Commis-
sion  before  this  all  too  familiar  pattern  adds  to  the  alienation
of  blacks and  students.  For  example,  every member  of  the  local
police   force  who   took   part   in  the   Jackson   State   shootings
was  interviewed   by  the  FBI.  Every  one  of  them  lied  to  the
FBI.  They  denied,  as  they  denied  to  the  Mayor  of   Jackson,
that  they had  ever  fired their  weapons.  Even  the  Hinds  County
grand   jury,  though   it  held  the  slayings   justified,   found  the
story  told  by  the  Jackson  police  "absolutely   false."  There  is  a
Federal   False   Claims   statute   which   provides   that   any  false
* He  was  arrested  after  the  "riot"  for  arson,  housebreak-
ing,  and grand larceny, assault  and battery  with intent  to  kill,
destruction  of  personal  property,  and damaging real property.
(Page  146 of a courageous new book  The Orangeburg   Massacre
by  Jack  Nelson  and  Jack  Bass,  World Publishing  $7.95.)  The
grand  jury  indicted  only  for  participating  in  a  riot,  incite-
ment  to  riot  and conspiracy  to  incite  others  to  riot.  The  trial
judge  directed  acquittal  on  the  second  and  third  counts   for
lack  of  evidence.  The  jury  then  convicted  on  the  one  remain-
ing  count  of  participating  in  a  riot—two  nights  before   the
slayings  occurred.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  October  19,1970
or  fraudulent  statement   made  wilfully  or  knowingly  to  any
agency   of   the   U.S.   government   is  punishable   by  a  fine  of
$10,000,  imprisonment  up  to  ten  years  or  both.  This  statute
was  used   against  Federal   employees   suspected   of  radicalism
in  the  witch  hunt   (Carl  Marzam  went  to  jail  under  it)   and
against  left-wing  labor  leaders  in Taft-Hartley  act  prosecutions.
If  local  authorities   refuse  even  to  indict  for  these   unjustified
killings  of  black  students,   the  Federal   government  could  use
this  statute  to  prosecute.  Or  doesn't  murder  matter  to  this law
and  order  administration   and  the  me-too   Democrats   as  long
as  the  dead  are  blacks  or  students ?
Destroying   The  Evidence
The  Commission  findings  also  show  that  Jackson  City  police
and  State  highway  patrolmen  engaged  in  conduct  which  could
.have  been  a  conspiracy  to  obstruct   justice  by  destroying  and
withholding  evidence.  One  way to  determine  responsibility  in
a  shooting   is  by  ballistic   tests   of   empty   shell   casings   and
police  guns.   "Immediately   after   the   shootings,"   the   report
says,   "highway   patrolmen    began    picking   up   empty   shell
casings."   Buckshot,    rifle   slugs,   a  submachine   gun,   carbines
.  with  military  ammunition,   and  two  30.06  rifles  loaded   with
armor   piercing  bullets   were  used   in  the  fusilade  against  the
students.  The  FBI  found  the  marks  of  nearly  400  bullets  on
Alexander  Hall  alone,  but  the  shell  casings  and  empty  cart-
ridges  disappeared.   The  city  police   replaced   the  ammunition
they  had  fired  so  that  when  their  guns  were  inspected  by  the
Mayor   after  the  shooting   he  thought   they  were  telling  the
truth  when  they  all  insisted  they  had  not  fired  a  single  shot.
The   state  highway   patrol   got   rid  of  their   own   shells—but
saved   a  few  of  the   buckshot   shells  fired  by  the   city   police
apparently  so  they  could  if  necessary  disprove  the  earlier  im-
pression  that  the  highway  patrolmen  alone  had fired.
Neither  the  city  police  nor  the  highway  patrol  admitted  to
the  FBI  that  they  had  disposed  of  such  critical  evidence.  The
highway  patrol  did  not  admit  that  it  held  any shell  casings  nor
hand  any  over  until   ordered   to  do  so  by  a  special   Federal
grand   jury.  The   FBI   then   traced   these   back   to   city   police
shotguns.   "When   confronted   with   this   fact,"   the   Scranton
report  says,  "at  least  three  city  policemen  admitted  shooting."
One  significant  detail  calls  for  further  exploration.  Ordinarily
We'll Just Have To Find Another War For Them
Another   problem   of   cutting  the   Army   down   "too
fast  and  too  far,"  he  [Deputy  Defense  Secretary Pack-
ard] said,  is  that a  lot  of  good  captains and majors who
have  had  two  tours  of  duty  in  Vietnam  would  face  the
prospect  of  waiting  10  to  15  years  for  their  next  pro-
motion.  In  that  situation,  he  said,  much  of  the   future
leadership of the Army might decide to leave the Army.
—From  "Defense   Spending   Due   to  Rise  in   '71"  an
interview  in  the  New York  Times,  Oct.  4.
FBI  men  are  instructed  in  investigative interrogations to  obtain
signed  statements.  A  Scranton  commission  source  told  me  this
was  not   done  in  questioning  the  Jackson  City  police.  This
might  make  prosecution  more  difficult.   In  any  case,  the   facts
clearly  seem   enough   to   justify   indictment   for   conspiracy  to
obstruct  justice. Yet  the  special  Federal  grand  jury,  after  hear-
ing  a  few  witnesses  and  turning over  the  shell  casings  to  the
FBI,  went  into  recess  last  June  and  hasn't  been  heard  from
since.  It  sat  for  only  one  week.
J.  Edgar  Hoover  finds  plenty  of  time  to  denounce  students
and  faculty.  Why  has  he  remained  silent  about  this  effort   to
sabotage   the  FBI  investigation  at  Jackson  State?  If  this  is  a
"law  and  order"  Administration, why  have  we  heard  nothing
from   our  voluble  Attorney  General   and   our  articulate  Vice
President   about   these  brazen  examples   of   interference  with
law   and  order?  The   Commission   report   "concludes   that   a
significant   cause  of   the  deaths  and   injuries   at  Jackson  State
College  is  the   confidence  of   white   officers   that   if   they  fire
weapons   during   a  black  campus   disturbance  they  will  face
neither  stern  departmental  discipline  nor  criminal  prosecution
or  convictions."  *  The  police  radio  order  that  night  was  "scat-
* The  State  Highway  patrol  in  Mississippi acts  like  a  law
unto  itself.  The  Mississippi-Louisiana  Press  Association,  the
week-end  after  the  Jackson State  killings,  passed  a  resolution
protesting   the  highway  patrol's  little   iron   curtain   on  any
attempt  to  cover  its  activities.  Ed  Williams,  one  of  Hodding
Carter's  bright  young  newsmen in  Jackson, wrote  in  a report
on the  Jackson State  killings  for  the  Southern  Regional Coun-
cil  that  the  patrol's refusal to  answer  any  questions  about  its
Three  Brave  Dissenters  Speak  Up  As  A  Panicky  House  Passes  Nixon's  Crime Bill
This  bill  is  more  likely  to  catch  poachers  and  prostitutes
than   pushers   and  pimps.  This   bill   is   not   the   answer   to
crime  in  the  streets—the  muggings,  the  robberies,  the  rapes
...    to the complex  problems  of  juvenile  crime  ...    to the
destructive  penal  system  which  breeds  criminals ...    to the
massive   backlog  of  cases  besetting   the  courts—a  backlog
which  accounts  for  criminals  roaming  free.
Were  this  bill  an  intelligent   approach  to  the  problem  of
organized  crime,  we  would  support  it.  We  are  offended   at
the  frequent  links  between  organized  crime and  politics;  and
concerned   about  infiltration  of   legitimate   business   by  or-
ganized  crime.  But  this  bill  directly  assaults  the  rights  of
all  Americans,  while  only flailing, out  at  organized  crime.
Title  I  authorizes   special   grand  juries  to  be  created  at
the  instance  of  the  Attorney  General [with]  power to  submit
reports   when  the   evidence   is   insufficient   to   warrant  an
indictment.  This  is  hardly  less  than  sanctified calumny. The
evidence   can   be   made   up   of   hearsay,   unconstitutionally
obtained   evidence,  unsubstantiated   slander  and  prejudicial
casuistry.  Nor  does  it  appear  that  he  [the  accused]  has  the
right  to  be  apprised  of  the  evidence  that  he  is   guilty  of
non-criminal   misconduct.   "Prove   to   us  that   you  are   not
guilty   of  anything  no  matter  what  anyone   has   told   us,"
seems  to  be  the  ground  rule  of  this  frightening  version  of
"I've  Got A  Secret."
Title  X  deploys   the  powers  of   the  government   to  seek
incarceration   of   so-called  special   offenders   for   up  to   25
years.  Were  mobsters   the  only  victims  of  this  assault  on
the  Constitution,  we  would  still  object.  The  fact  that   all
defendants  are  the  prey  of  its   provisions  makes  the  title
even more indefensible.
Title   XI  reflects  the  deep  distress   about   the  bombings
shaking  our  streets  and  campuses.  We  question  whether  it
is  wise  or  necessary.  The  title  opens  the  doors  to  prowling
FBI  agents,  whether  requested  or  not,  and  this  encourages
the  aura  of  repression  upon  which  extremists  feed.  We  also
question  the  wisdom  of  the  death  penalty  in  Title  XI,  [and
its  power  to]  deter.  The  death  penalty  is  one  of  the  very
issues  under  consideration  by  the  National  Commission  on
Reform  of  Federal  Criminal Laws—a  Commission  which  is
the  creation  of   the   Congress.   So  are   many  other   issues
which  this  bill  so  summarily treats.  At  the  very  least  we
ought  to  await its  conclusions  due in  November.
The  Organized Crime  Control  Act  seeks  easy  answers  to
hard  and  expensive  problems.  We  oppose  this  bill. We  must
conclude  with Mr. Justice  Stewart  (364  US  206)  that  "noth-
ing  can  destroy  a  government  more  quickly  than  its  failure
to   observe   its   own  laws,  or  worse,   its   disregard   of   the
charter  of  its  own  existence."
—Dissenting   report   from    the   Judiciary    Committee   by
Conyers,  Mikva  and  Ryan just  before  a  panicky  House   after
a  cursory   debate  passed   the  bill  by  341  to  26.   (Abridged)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  October19, 1970
ter  them  niggers."  How  do  Hoover  and  Agnew  and  Mitchell
and  Nixon  expect  blacks  to  feel  as  these  deaths  are  forgotten
and   nothing   is  done   about   the   killings,   the   lying,  the   de-
struction    of    evidence?  What    does    this   say   to   Southern
racist  law  officials  but  that  they  can  go  on  killing blacks  with
impunity?  How   wonderful   it  would  have  been  if  Governor
Scranton  had  asked  these  questions  himself  on   TV!
Complacent  Southern  Judges
The  Scranton  commission said  softly  what  needs  to  be  said
loud  and  clear.  It  left  unsaid  what  needs  to  be  added   for  a
full  picture  of  the  situation in  the  South.  The  report  on  Jack-
son   State   says   it   "understands  why   both   white  officers   and
black  people   in  Mississippi  gain  the  impression  that   police-
men  need  not  fear   official   punishment—or  even  censure—for
repressive  action  against  blacks."   It  illustrates  with  a  quota-
tion  from  the  Hinds  County  grand  jury  report.  This  not  only
justified   the   killings   but   said   that   any   action   against   the
Jackson  City  police  would  be  "unwarranted,   unjustified   and
political  in  nature."  The  Scranton  report   said  the  underlying
philosophy  of  the  grand   jury  report  was  summed  up  in  the
following  complacent  passage,  "When  people  .  .  .  engage  in
civil  disorders  and  riots,  they  must  be  expected  to  be  injured
or  killed  when   law  enforcement  officers   are  required  to  re-
establish   order."  The   Scranton   report   says  this   was  drawn
"almost  verbatim"  from  Federal  District  Judge  Harold   Cox's
charge   to  the   special   Federal   grand   jury   and   State   Circuit
Judge  Russell Moore's charge  to the  Hinds  County Grand  Jury.
The   report   does   not   observe   that   their   charges   remark-
ably  resemble  the  cold-blooded  statement  issued  by  the  White
House  on  May  4  after   the  Kent   State  killings.  Nixon  said
the  killings  "should  remind  us  all  once  again  that  when dis-
sent  turns  to  violence  it  invites  tragedy."  The  grand   jury  and
White  House  statements  are  alike  in  silently  making  no dis-
conduct  in  the  shooting  was  not  surprising.  He  told  a  story
to  illustrate  the  patrol's  high-handedness.  "Two months ago,"
Williams  wrote,  "a  highway  patrolman  took  a  drunk  to  the
emergency  room  of  University  Hospital  here  in  Jackson.  He
ordered  a  black  orderly  to  go  to  the  car  and bring the  man  in.
The  orderly,  busy  with  other  tasks,  said  he  would  have  to
check  with  his  supervisor.  That  angered  the  patrolman,  and
he  smashed  the   orderly  in  the   face,  knocking  him  over  a
patient  in  a  wheelchair.  Two  white  interns   rushed  up,  and
the  patrolman pulled his gun, waved  it  at  the  interns,  then ar-
rested  them." The charges  against  them  were  dropped but  the
only  result  of  a  patrol investigation  was  the  officer's  transfer
from  Jackson  to  Natchez.  There  was  no  fine  or  suspension.
Add Nuclear  Threats To The  Caribbean
Communications  with  6th  Fleet  and  with  the  Head-
quarters  Southern Alliance  of  NATO  need  desperately
to  be  corrected.  For  example, an  urgent  message   from
Secretary   Laird   to  the   subcommittee  at   Naples   was
misrouted  and  ended  up  in  Panama,  at  Southern Com-
mand  headquarters,  instead  of  coming  to  the  subcom-
mittee. The subcommittee was  advised that  this  is  a not
unusual  mixup  for  CINCSOUTH NATO Headquarters.
—Report  by  the  House  Armed  Servic.es  subcommittee
on  anti-submarine  warfare   about  its  trip   to  the  Middle
East,  released  for  publication  September  28.
If  a  6th  Fleet  Mediterranean  message  can  end  up  at
the  other  end of the  Caribbean  by mistake, an  electronic
overhaul  of the  fleet's  communications system  is urgent.
We'd  hate  to  think  of  the  fleet  taking aim, in  a  nuclear
crisis,  at  Odessa  and  hitting  Miami  Beach  instead.
tinction  between  a  rock  thrown  by  a  student  and   a   shotgun
fired by  police.  Both  are  alike  in  providing  blanket justification
for  the  killings  and  in  begging  all  the  questions  of  wise  law
enforcement   and  constitutional  rights  to  which  the  Jackson
State  report  tried  to  call  attention  when  it  said—
The   Commission  categorically  rejects   rhetorical  state-
ments  that  students  must  "expect"  injury  or  death  during
civil  disorders.  Such  statements   make   no  distinction  be-
tween  legitimate dissent  and violent  protest.  It  is  the  duty
of   public  officials   to  protect  human  life  and  to  safeguard
peaceful,  orderly  and  lawful  protest.  When  disorderly  pro-
test  exists,  it  is  their  duty to  deal  with it  firmly,  justly and
with  the  minimum  force  necessary;  lethal  force  should  be
used  only  to   protect  the  lives   of   officers   or  citizens  and
only  when  the  danger  to  innocent  persons  is  not  increased
by  the  use  of  such force.
The  Commission  did  not  say what  some  national  organiza-
tion  should  now  say—that  the  whole  system  of  law  and  order
in  Hinds  County  is  stacked  from  top  to  bottom  against   blacks.
The  report   does  not  say  that  Judge   Cox  is  notorious  as  the
South's   worst  Federal  judge  on  civil  rights   cases.  It  was  he
who  threw  out  the  indictments  in  the  slayings  of  Goodman,
Schwerner  and  Chaney—only   to  be  reversed  by a  higher  court
so  that  the  trials  were  able  to  proceed.   As  for   State   Circuit
Judge   Russell   Moore,   he   acted   as  campaign   chairman   for
Wallace in  Mississippi  in  1968 while  serving  as a judge!  From
a  black  point  of  view,  of  course,  this  is  how  the  law  and  order
system  of  the  South  has  always  been  shaped  as  an  instrument
of  white  supremacy  and  racial  oppression.  The  only  difference
On  That  Cuba  Nuclear  Sub  Scare  Just  Before  The  Vote  On This  Year's  Defense  Bill
Reports  that   the   Russians   may   be  building  a  nuclear
submarine  base  in  Cuba  are  part  of  a  Pentagon  attempt  to
hoodwink  the  American people and scare  Congress  into more
defense  spending,  according  to  Sen.  J.  William Fulbright,
D-Ark.   "It  happens  every   year   at   appropriations  time,"
Fulbright  said  in  an  interview.  "Last  year,  it  was  the  SS9
missiles.  Now  it's  a  submarine  base."
Officially,   the   Pentagon   has  said  only   that   it   detected
construction   activity  at  Cienfuegos  which  could  be  a  sub
support  base.  Unofficially,  some  administration officials  have
said  the  project  is  indeed  such  a  base.  But  Fulbright  said
Defense  Department officials  who  briefed  his  Foreign  Rela-
tions   Committee  last   week   had  no  evidence  a   base   was
being  built,  and  did  not  even  try  to  convince  the  committee
that   anything   was   going   on.  Fulbright  said   the   United
States  opposes  a  Soviet  base  in  Cuba,  90  miles  off  the U.S.
coast,   even  though  it  has  nuclear  weapons  of  its   own  in
Turkey,  which borders  Russia.
—UPI  in  Washington  Star,  Oct. 5.  The  briefing   to  which
Fulbright  referred   was  by  the  Defense  Intelligence   Agency.
Q.  Two weeks ago, the  Pentagon  said  that  there  had  been
detected  what  might  be  the  beginning  of   a  Russian sub-
marine  base  in  Cuba.  Considerable  comment  was   made  on
this  elsewhere  in  town  the  same  day. And  now  the  subject
seems  to  have  died  ...    Do you have  any  better information
as  to  what  this  is  there;  and  have   you  undertaken   any
diplomatic  steps  to  try  to  find  out  whether  it  is  a  Russian
base,  and whether  the  Russians  will  pull  it  out?
A.  Since   the   statement   from   the   Pentagon   and  subse-
quent  background briefing  in  the  White  House,  there  have
been  no  significant changes  in  the  situation  in  Cuba  .  .  .
Q.  Mr. Secretary,  you  set  out  on  several  points  here  what
appears  to  be  a  pattern  of  Soviet  conduct—participation in
the   violations   on  the  West   Bank  of   the   Suez,   the   Cuba
affair  ...
A.  In  terms  of  the  Cuban base  is  concerned  (sic),  we  are
not  sure.  I  noted  with  interest  that  the  Soviets  have  said
that  they  were  not  constructng  a  submarine  base  in  Cuba.
But  we  will  continue to  watch  that  carefully.
—Secretary  of  State  Rogers  in  a  press  conference,  Oct. 9.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October  10,1970
now   is  that  we  have   a  national  Administration  which   more
subtly  though  no  less  unmistakably  is  also  anti-black,  as  it  is
anti-student.
If  the  country  looks  the  other  way,  it  will  wake  up  to  find
that  the  only  people  punished  in  the  Jackson  State  affair   are
the  victims  and  those  who  tried  to  speak  up  for  them.  Three
of  the  Jackson   City  policemen  have  filed  a  $3,000,000  libel
suit  against  Joseph  Rhodes,  Jr.,  the  youngest  member  of  the
Commission  on  Campus  Unrest,  for  saying  publicly  that  they
lied  and  for  calling  Mississippi  "a  police  state  ruled  by terror"
in  which  black  people   "are   in  danger  of  being  murdered  by
law  enforcement   officials"   thus  implying  that  the   policemen
were  criminals.  Since  Rhodes  has  two  counts   against   him—
that  of  being  both  a  black  and  a  student  (from  Harvard  yet!)
—one  can  imagine  what  may  happen  to  him  when  this  suit  is
tried  in  Mississippi.
No  Students  Killed  At  Ole  Miss
Another  target  of  the  racists  is  a  fledgling  Jackson  lawyer,
Morris  Spivey,  admitted   to  the  bar  last  spring  on   graduation
from  the  law  school  at  Old   Miss.  Spivey,  a  native  of  Jackson,
js  far  from  being  a  radical. He  worked  two  years  for  Eastland
on  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Staff   1964-66.   He  was  put  on
the  Hinds   County  grand   jury  but  unexpectedly  turned   here-
tical.   Judges   Cox   and   Moore   instructed   their   grand    juries
that  police   were   justified   in  shooting   if   rocks   were   thrown
or  obscenities   shouted   at  them.  But  Spivey  was  at  Old   Miss
as  an  undergraduate  in  1962  when  white undergraduates  dem-
onstrated  violently against  integration,  not  only  hurling rocks
and  obscenities  against   Federal  marshals,   but  using  shotguns
against  them.  Twenty-five  U.S.   marshals  were   injured—one
seriously,   by   a   shotgun   blast.   Though    13,500    troops   and
Federalized  guardsmen  and  400  marshals  were  needed  to  deal
with   the   demonstrations,   far   larger   and   more   violent  than
any  the  country  has  seen  since,  no  students  were killed.
The  contrast  was  too  much  for  Spivey.  He  was  one  of  two
members  of  the  Hinds  county  grand  jury  who  did  not  sign  its
findings  and  he  was  the  only  one  boldly to  note  in  writing  on
the  report  that  he  did  not  concur  in  its  findings.  When  inter-
viewed  by  CBS  and  local  TV  afterwards,  he  said  he   thought
the  report   was  unfair  to   the   liberal  Mayor   of   Jackson   and
unfair   to   the   black   students.  As   a  result   he  was  cited   for
contempt   before   Judge   Russell   Moore  and   faces   trial  on   a
The  Old Maybe  Department
Sec.   Rogers.    We   are  making  the   proposal   because
we  feel  sure  that  the  Vietnamization  program  will  suc-
ceed   and  that   we   will   have  American   forces   out   of
combat  in Vietnam by  May  1st  .  .  .
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,  did  you  mention  just  now  that  on
May  1st  you expect  all  U.S. ground forces  not  to  engage
in  combat any longer?
A.  No.  I  said  that  I  think  that  by  May  1st,  as   the
President  said,  he  is  going  to—between  now  and  May
1st—withdraw  about  another  95,000  troops  from  South
Vietnam.  By  that time, most  of  our  forces  will  be  out  of
the  combat  role—maybe  some  in  the  combat  role,  but
by   and  large  they   will   be  out  of   the   combat   role  by
that time.
—Secretary  Rogers  at. press  conference,   Oct.  9.
charge   of  breaking  his  oath   as  a  grand   juror  not   to   reveal
its  secrets.  The   charge   is  pretty  flimsy  since  the   grand  jury
published   its   report   and   Spivey's  non-concurrence.   He   was
expressing  his  opinions,  not  discussing  what  went  on  in  the
grand  jury  room.  But  the  charge  may hurt  his  career.
A   scapegoat    has   been   prepared    at   Jackson   State   as   at
Orangeburg.   A  young  cement  finisher,  Ernest  Kyles,   arrested
in  the  wake  of  the  Jackson  State  shootings,  was  slated   to  go
on  trial  Oct.   L4 for  arson  and  inciting to  riot.  It  is  indicative
that  when  Mr.  Kyles  was  taken  before  a  local  magistrate  next
day,  the  latter  refused  to  bind  him  over  for  the  grand  jury,
ruling  that  there  was  insufficient   evidence   to  hold  him.   The
grand    jury   nevertheless   returned   an   indictment.   For    local
Jackson  blacks  all  this  seems   a  rerun  of   what   happened    in
1967   when   local   police   and   highway  patrolmen  fired  indis-
criminately  into  another  group  of  students  and  passersby   on
the  Jackson  State  campus  while  in  search  of  a  student  wanted
for  speeding.  They  killed  a  young  civil  rights  activist,  Benja-
min  Brown,  who  was  a  wholly  innocent  and   nonparticipating
bystander.  No  law  officer  was  punished  then  either.  The  only
difference    now   is   Washington's   attitude.    Harry    Huge,   a
Washington   attorney,  in  an  article  in  last  summer's   issue  of
The  New  South,  published  by  the  Southern  Regional   Council,
quotes   a  veteran  Southern   reporter   who  covered   the   Jackson
State  inquest  as  saying,  "People  here  think  that  the  way  the
This Year's  Performance  By  The Pentagon's  No.  1 Alarmist And Look Who Satirized Him
Without  revealing  information which  would  give  aid  and
comfort  to  the  Soviet  Union,  I  feel  compelled  to  tell   this
House  that  not  very  long  ago  I  was  told  that  the  combat
condition   of   our   cruisers   and  destroyers   in   the   Atlantic
Fleet  was  so  bad  that  more  than  half   of  them  were  in  a
condition  that   would  have  seriously  affected  their  combat
capability.  Some  of  these  ships  could  not  have  engaged   in
any  kind  of  naval  confrontation  ...      I  say  to  this  House
that  the  future of  this  nation  hangs  by  a thread.
—Mendel   Rivers   of   Charleston,  S.C.,   chairman   of   the
House  Armed  Services  Committee, in  the  House  Sept.  28, in
one  of  his  annual  speeches   an  the  imminent  sinking  of   the
U.S.  Navy.  This  year's  preceded  final  approval   of  a   defense
bill  authorizing   the  Navy   to  spend   $435  million  more  on
ship   construction  than  the  $2.7  billion  budgeted   by  Nixon.
Senator  Eagleton   (D.-Mo.)   said,   he   felt   he   could    safely
predict  that  this  $435 million  boost  would  not  meet  the  same
fate    as   the   $453  million   boost   in   education   funds    which
Nixon  vetoed  Aug.   11 as  inflationary.    Our  favorite  comment
on  Rivera  was  by  a  speaker  with  whom  we  do not  ordinarily
agree.  His  satirical  tribute  uias   meant  as  a  friendly    joke.
He  said:
I  would  like  to  lay   to  rest  the  ugly,  vicious,  dastardly
rumor  that  he  is  trying  to  move  the  Pentagon   piecemeal
to  South  Carolina. I  have  been  to  Charleston  several  times,
and  I  have  had  it  clearly  explained  to  me  that  the  military
facilities  so  evident  in  that  area  are  a  testament  of  Mendel
Rivers'  unselfish willingness  to  allow  his  own  First  District
of  South  Carolina to  accept  in  the  national  interest  military
installations  which  just  had  to  be  put  someplace.
When  the  Navy  was  desperate  to find  some  place to  put  a
Polaris   repair  facility,  I  am  told,  Mendel  Rivers   stepped
forth   and  graciously  volunteered  Charleston,  South  Caro-
lina.  When  the  Air  Force  simply  had  to  find  a  place  to  put
some   of   its   C-141  airlift   airplanes,   Mendel  Rivers   again
volunteered  his  home  area.  When  a  home  port  was   needed
for  the  Atlantic  Mine  Force,  again  he  came  forward. While
other  Congressmen  were  fighting  behind  the  scenes  to  pre-
vent   Congressional   committees   from   cluttering   up   their
districts  with  military  installations,  Mendel  Rivers  refused
to  lift  a  finger  to  block  the  construction  of  additional  facili-
ties   in   Charleston.   Even   when  it   looked   like   Charleston
might  sink  into  the  sea   from  the  burden,  Mendel  Rivers'
patriotic   response    was,   "I   regret    that    I   have   but   one
Congressional  district   to   give  my  country   to—I   mean   to
give  to my  country."
—The   speaker   was  Agnew  at  an  Air   Force  Association
luncheon  Aug.  12 in  Washington   in  Rivers'   honor.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October  19,1970
police  handled  the  students  at  Jackson  State  is  the  way  Nixon
and  Agnew  want  the  students  to  be treated."
A  Challenge  To  Mitchell
As  a  last  resort,  the  Lawyers  Committee  For  Civil  Rights
Under   Law,  organized   at  Bobby  Kennedy's  suggestion,  has
filed a $3,000,000  suit  against local  and  State police authorities
in  the  Federal  court  in  Mississippi  on  behalf  of  the  families
of  the  dead  and  wounded.   A  similar  suit  after  Ben  Brown's
killing  failed.  Under  Section  902  of  the  Civil  Rights  Act  of
1964,  the  Federal  government  could  intervene  in  the  suit  if
the   Attorney  General   certified   that   it  involved  a  matter  of
general  public  importance.  Attorney  General  Mitchell   should
be  pressed  to  do  so,  if  only  to  show  up  the  hypocrisy  of  the
Administration's  "law  and  order."
In  some  ways  the  story  of  Jackson  State  did  not  belong  in
a  campus  unrest  report   at  all.  The   shootings  there  May  14
were   no   different    from   the   killing  of   six   blacks   and   the
wounding  of  80  others  by  police  at  Augusta,  Ga.,  three  days
earlier.  The  Jackson  State  killings just  happened  to  take  place
on  a  campus.  "In  any normal  sense  of  the  term,"  the  Scranton
commission  reported,   " 'student  unrest'  does  not  exist  on  the
Jackson  state  campus."  Both  Jackson  and  Augusta  were  cases
of  police  repression  of  black  unrest.  As  the  Southern  Regional
Council   said   in   its  reports   on   Augusta   and   Jackson   State,
"The   current   natTonal  crisis  regarding   unlawful  dissent  and
terrible  police  overreaction  is  an  old  story  in  the  South."  It  is
on  its  way  to  becoming  an  old  story  in  the  North.  At   Kent
State  as  at  Jackson  State,  it  looks  as  if  the  killers  will   go
unpunished  and  only  demonstrators  will  be  prosecuted.
In  preparing  its  report  on  Kent  State,  the  Scranton  commis-
sion  said  it  had  the  benefit  of  8,000  pages  of  reports  by  the
FBI,  which  put   100  agents  on  campus  after  the  shootings   at
the  request  of  Ohio  Governor  Rhodes.  Their  findings  leaked
to  the  Akron,  Ohio,  Beacon-Journal,  the  home  paper  of  John
S.  Knight's   newspaper  chain.  On  July  23  it  splashed   across
its  front  page  the  news  that  the  FBI  had  concluded  that  the
shootings   were   "not   necessary  and  not   in  order,"   that   six
guardsmen   identified  through   witnesses  and  ballistics  tests  by
the   FBI  could   be  criminally  charged   for   their   role   in   the
shooting,  that  student  demonstrators  heckling  the  Guard  could
have  been  turned  back  without  firing  if  arrests  had  been  made
and  more  tear  gas  used,  and  that  the  confrontation  with  the
students   could'not   be  classed   as  a  riot.  This  was  a  major
finding  since  under  Ohio  law  if  there  was  a  riot,  no  Guards-
Slickly  Put,  But Thieu  Retains His  Veto
Q.  One of  the  reasons  it  is  evident  why  the  cease-fire
proposal  has  been  so  widely  welcomed  by  many  people
on  the  hawk  and  dove  side  is,  in  fact,   that  they  are
reading  different  things  into  it  as  the  Administration's
interpretation.  To  some  of  the  proponents  of  a  cease-
fire,  it  means  acknowledgement  of  the  existing  terri-
torial  control  that  the  communist  side  holds  in  Indo-
china.  To  others  it  evidently  means  freezing  in  place
the  existing   Government   headed  by  President  Thieu.
What  is  the  Administration's interpretation  of  what  the
political  implication  is  of  a  standstill  cease-fire.
A.  The  President's  statement  pointed  out  that  if  the
cease-fire   proposal  was  accepted  that  active  negotia-
tions  would  be  undertaken,  have  to  be  undertaken,  to
determine  the  modalities  of  that  cease-fire. The political
consequences  of  that  would  be  determined  by  the  pro-
visions  of  the  cease-fire  itself  .  .  .  The  political  conse-
quences  would  result  from  the  negotiations  that  would
occur  between  the  two  sides  in  South Vietnam.
—Secretary  Rogers  at  press  conference,  Oct.  9.
man  could  be  prosecuted   for  his  actions.  What  leaked  to  the
Beacon-Journal  was  a  memorandum  for  the  Ohio  authorities
summarizing  the  FBI  findings  and  signed  by  Jerris   Leonard,
chief   of  the   civil  rights  division.  After  the  Beacon-Journal
article  appeared,  a  Justice  Department  statement  confirmed  the
existence  of   the   memo   but   said   it   contained   "options   for
prosecution"  rather  than  conclusions.  The  findings  reported
by  the  Beacon-Journal  were  not  denied.
The  Scranton  Commission   said  its  Kent   State  inquiry  was
"especially  sensitive"  because  it  did  not  wish  to  interfere  with
the  "criminal  process"  begun  before  an  Ohio  grand  jury.  But
the  circumstances  under  which  the  grand  jury  was  convened
and  the  men.who   convened   it  make  the  grand  jury  suspect.
The  Scranton  report  criticized  Governor   Rhodes  for  putting
the  Guard   on  campus   and  said   it   replaced   the   Cambodian
invasion  as  the  main  focus  of  student  discontent.  Its  narrative
of  the  events  before  the  shootings  shows  the  link  between  the
Governor's  inflammatory attack  on  the  students  and  the  pri-
mary  election  two  days  later.  He  hoped  (in  vain,  as  it  turned
out)   to  defeat   Robert  Taft,   Jr.,   for  the  Republican    Senate
nomination  by  exploiting  popular  sentiment   against  the  stu-
dents.   The   Scranton   report   also   criticized   Ohio   National
Guard  commanders  for  giving  loaded  weapons  to  the  Guards-
Read  This  Carefully  And  You'll  See  The  Flim-Flam In  Nixon's  Latest  On Vietnam
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,   does   the   United  States  Government
have  any  indication  from  the  Communist  side  of  any  kind
that  it  was interested  in  proposals  of  this  sort  .  .  .?
A.  We  have  no  reason—based  on  conversations   with  the
other  side,   or  with  any   of   those   aligned   with  them—to
think  that  they  will  accept  this  peace  initiative  .  .  .
Q.  The  President  and  other  top  officials  have  often  said
that  serious  diplomacy should  be  conducted secretly  and  in
private.  In  view  of  that,  why  wasn't  this  proposal  proposed
to  the  communists in  Paris  in private?
A.  Well,   I   think   there   are   great   advantages   to   quiet
diplomacy;  but  in  this  case,  because  of  the  nature  of  the
conflict   and  because  there   has   been  division  in   our  own
country,  and  because   there   has   been   some   opposition   in
the  international community  to  some  of  the  actions  of  our
Government  in  the  past,  we  thought  it  was  desirable  for  the
President  to  make  a  major  statement  on  it  which  would be
so  forthcoming that  it  would  be widely  accepted .  .  .
Q.  The  State  Department spokesman  yesterday  expressed
the  hope  that  Russia  would  use  what  he  described  as   its
considerable   influence   on  Hanoi  to  cause   them   to   accept
the  five-point  plan.  In  the  light  of  that,  I  was  wondering
why  .  .  .  Mr. Dobrynin or  the  Russians,  according  to  your
people,  had  their  first  information from  you  in  a  telephone
call  about  an hour before  the  President  went  on  the  air  .  . .
A.  ...     we  tried  to  give  notification  to  the  governments
that  we  thought  should  be  notified  in  the  hope  that   they
would  consider  the   proposal   seriously   and  do  what   they
could  to  assist  in  having  the  other  side  accept  them  .  .  .
Q.  We  have  always  felt  in  the  past  that  the  Communists
would  not  negotiate  from  a  position  of  weakness,  which  you
imply  the  situation  is  now,  and  they  have  also   said  they
would  not  separate  the  military from  the  political  parts  of
the  conflict  in  Vietnam, which  the  cease-fire  attempts  to  do.
What  is  it  that  makes  you  think  now  they  are  willing  to
change  their  traditional  negotiating   stance?
A.  Well, it  just  makes  sense,  that's  why. They  can make
a  better  settlement  now  and  achieve  at  least  some  of  their
objectives,  if  they  have  any  political  strength,  by  doing  so
now.  Because  the  Vietnamization program is  working, their
chances  will diminish as  time  goes on.
—Secretary  of  State  Rogers  in  a  press  conference,  Oct.  9.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October 19,1970
men  in  violation   of  U.S. Army  guidelines   for  handling  civil
disorders.  All  this  was  in  line  with  the  Justice   Department
memo  to  the  Ohio  authorities  based  on  the  FBI's  reports.
"Facts"  The  FBI  Did  Not   Accept
The  Ohio  authorities  did  not  deny the  Beacon-Journal  story.
But  the  Adjutant  General   of  the  Ohio  guard   said  next  day
that  the  reported  findings  "fail  to  include  many  facts  which
we  provided."   Apparently  the  FBI  investigators  did  not  be-
lieve  they  were  facts.  The   commander  of  the   Ohio   Guard,
Major   General   Del   Corso,   said  he  found  the   FBI  findings
"just  unbelievable"  *  and  on  Aug. 1  asked  the  Governor  to
convene   a   grand   jury.   Two   days   later   Governor    Rhodes
ordered   his   Attorney   General   Brown   to   convene   a   special
Portage  County  grand  jury. Brown  had  already prejudged  the
case.  After  seeing  the  Justice  Department  and  FBI  materials,
he  was  quoted  as  saying  (NYT 8/14/70)   "On  the  evidence
we  have  available—and  we  have  as  much  as  anyone—I  don't
see  any  evidence  upon  which  a  grand  jury  would  indict  any
guardsmen,"   adding  that  if  a  grand  jury  did  he  would   feel
obliged   to  provide  a  defense  for  the  Guardsmen.  Add   the
.fact   that  public   sentiment  in   Portage   County—from  which
Brown  drew  his  grand  jury—is  overwhelmingly  anti-student,
and   the   chances   for   objective   judgment  from  the   jury   are
slim.  The   Washington   Post   (July  24)   said  the  Justice  De-
partment  was  gathering  evidence  for  possible  presentation  to
a  Federal  grand  jury  in  Cleveland  but  nothing  has  been  heard
since  of  possible  Federal  prosecution.
One   obstacle   to  a  Federal   prosecution   is  the   attitude  of
J.  Edgar  Hoover.  Hoover  could  have  cited  the  FBI's  investi-
gation  at  Kent  State  as  evidence  of  the  Bureau's impartiality
and  used  it  to  counter  the  bad  press  the  FBI  has  received  for
some  of  its  other  activities  on  campus.  For  example,  early  in
the  Kent   State  investigation,  the  Kent   State  chapters  of  the
American   Civil  Liberties  Union   and  the  American  Associa-
tion   of   University  Professors   sent   telegrams   of   protest   to
Ohio's  two  US  Senators  on  the  ground  that  FBI  men  were
inquiring  into  the  classroom  teachings  and  political  beliefs  of
instructors   at  the   university.   (Jack   Nelson   in  Los   Angeles
Times  June  2).   Then  Hoover   set  off  a  storm  of  protest  by
revealing  in  his  annual  report  on  FBI  activities  last  July  that
*  "The    Kent   State   tragedy,"   the   Scranton   report   said,
"must  surely  mark  the  last  time  that  loaded  rifles  are  issued
as   a  matter   of   course   to   guardsmen    confronting    student
demonstrators."  But  Gen.  Del  Corso's  reaction  was  to  state
that  Ohio  Guardsmen   would  continue   to  be  armed  with   live
ammunition    (Akron  Beacon-Journal  editorial,  Oct. 7.)
Southeast  Asia?   Latin  America?
Never   Heard  Of  Them!
No  world  leader   to  whom  I  have   talked   fears   that
the  United  States  will  use  its   power  to  dominate  an-
other  country  or  destroy   its   independence.
—Nixon's  TV  broadcast  October  8.
student   groups   organizing  anti-Administration   political  ac-
tivity  were  being  watched.  More  recently George  Dean  of  the
local  ACLU  charged  in  a  Tuscaloosa,  Alabama  court  that  an
FBI  undercover informant acted  as an  agent  provocateur  at  the
University  of  Alabama  and  had  himself  committed  arson  and
other unlawful  acts  which  led  to  police  action  against  students.
(Jack  Nelson,  LA  Times,  Sept. 11).
Only One Word Was  Wrong
The  FBI  could  have  pointed  with  pride  to  its  Kent  State
investigation.  But  Hoover  seems  to  have been  upset  by  protests
from  his  right wing constituency in  Ohio  and  elsewhere  in  the
wake  of  the  Beacon-Journal  revelations.  He  accused  John  S.
Knight,  its president and  editor,  of  distortion and  said  he  was
answering   letters   of  protest  about   the   Beacon-Journal  story
by  writing  them,  "I   can  assure  you  any  comments  you  may
have  seen  in  the  news  media  to  the  effect  that  the  FBI  drew
conclusions  indicating guilt  on  the  part  of  National  Guards-
men  in  the  shootings  at  Kent  State  are  absolutely  and   un-
equivocably  false."  But  when  Knight  published  Hoover's let-
ter  in  full   with  his  own  reply  (August   7)   he  pointed  out
that  Hoover   did  not  contest  the  veracity  of  the  information
his  paper  had  published  but  only  the  fact  that  it  had   spoken
of   FBI   "conclusions."   Mr.   Knight   admitted   that   the   FBI
does  not  make  conclusions  or  recommendations  in  its  reports
and  that  his  paper  should  have  written "reported"  rather  than
"concluded."   "But an   exercise  in   semantics,"   Knight pro-
tested,   "must   not  be  permitted  to  obscure  the   fact  that  our
article   was   essentially   correct   and    not   'distorted'   as   you
allege."  Knight  wrote  that  he  was  "surprised   at  the   hostile
tone   of   your  letter   which  is  evidently  intended   to  mollify
public,  opinion."    Knight   ended   by   writing,   "There   is   no
occasion  to  lecture  the  editor  for, as  you  know,  we  are  quite
as  dedicated  to  the  quest  for  truth  as the  FBI."  This  exchange
of  letters  throws  fresh  light  on  the  mentality of  the  FBI  chief.
This  is  the  man  who  lectures  students  and  blacks  on  law  and
order.  This  is the  man  who  will  decide  how  the  FBI  uses  the
wide  powers  over  the  nation's  campuses  given  it  a  few  days
ago  by  Congress  at  Nixon's  request.
I.  F. Stone  Can  Be Seen  (and Heard)  on ABC's  Dick  Cavett  Show  Oct.  27,  11:30 p.m.  Eastern  Time
For
Hiddei
Press.
(To)   1
Street
City   ..
Please
Name
Street
City
FOR  STONE'S  HIDDEN   HISTORY
the  enclosed  $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
i  History  of  The  Korean  War   (Monthly  Review
Name
Zip
Indicate   if   gift    announcement
renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for
7ln
State
wished   n
the   enclosed   $5:
State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly          "/"/7o
4420  29th  St.  N. W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St., N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Clan  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.G.  Published   every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.   N.W..  Washington   D C
An  independent   bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.   Subscription:  So  in  the  U.S.;   |6   in   Canada'
110  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED