I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970nov16.pdf

============================================================

Victory  at Kent  State;  Chile's Good Fortune,  P.  2
Looks  Like  Nixon  Can't Even  Trust  Police  Chiefs Anymore
"The  haters  surged  past  the  barricades  and  began  throwing  rocks.  Not  small  stones  .  .  .  and  not  just  directed  at  me,
though  some  hit  the  presidential car."     —Nixon  at  Phoenix  Oct. 31 on the San  Jose  riot.
"The  so-called  riot  has  been  exaggerated.  The  'barrage'  on  the  President  was  verbal,  not  physical.  To  my  knowledge
there  was not a rock thrown at the President."    —San  Jose  Police  Chief   Black-more:  UPI,  Washington  Star, Nov.  3.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVIII,  No.  21NOVEMBER  16,  1970
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
When  Sin,  $mut  and  Students  Failed
The  swiftest  if  most  cynical way  to  sum  up  the  election  is
that  Nixon   and  Agnew  misjudged  the  American  people.   Far
too  many of  them  may  sometimes  look  and  sound  like  morons.
But  they're  not  imbeciles.  At  a  time  when  the  country  faces  its
gravest   problems   since  the   Civil   War,   Nixon   and   Agnew
thought  they  could  win  by  campaigning  against  sin,  smut  and
students.  They  pitched  their  sales  talk  at  the  bright  but  mind-
less  level  of  the  TV  commercials.  They  assumed—and   no  as-
sumption  could   be  more  elitist,  a  favorite   Agnew   charge—
that  the  un-poor,  the  un-black and  the  un-young  were  also  the
un-thinking.  They  had  at  least  five  times  as  much  money  to
spend  as  the  Democrats*,  and  they  still couldn't  stampede  the
voters.  The  country proved  better  balanced,  more  humane,  and
far  less  susceptible  to  panic  than  Nixon  and  Agnew  assumed.
By  their  tactics,  though  inadvertently, they  for  the  first  time
did  something  to  create confidence in  America.
The  No.  1  Loss  Was  Gore
The  Republicans could  have  saved  a  lot  of  money  and  done
just  as  well,  perhaps  better,   by  a  low  key  performance.    The
country  is  still  where  it  has  been  for  more  than  a  generation,
in  the  middle  of  the  road,  just  a  little  left  of  center.  In  a time
of  immense  and  often  frightening  new  problems,  the  country
remains  steady,  perhaps  downright  stodgy,  but  not  about  to  be
swept  away  by  demagogy.  The  Southern  strategy  failed  in  the
South.  Except  for  border  state  Tennessee,  where  Gore's  defeat
was  the  biggest  single  loss  to  liberalism  in  this  election,   the
swing  was  toward  moderate  Democrats  and  away  from  race-
baiting  Republicans like Thurmond's  fellow  Dixiecrat  Watson
in  South  Carolina.  In  Nixon's  California  Reagan  was  reelected
despite  four years of  non-accomplishment. But a black  educator,
Wilson  Riles,  defeated  that  prize  reactionary Max  Rafferty  for
state   superintendent   of   education   by   nearly   a  half   million
votes,  outpolling  Reagan  and  Tunney,  and  the  Democrats  took
both   houses   of   the  legislature.  The   Conservatives  elected   a
Senator  in  New  York  State  but  only  because  the  majority  was
split  between   Goodell   and  Ottinger,   while  upstate   a  former
Democratic   Congressman,   John  G.  Dow,   one  of  the  first  to
advocate  recognition  of  Communist  China, defeated  a  conserva-
* A  survey  by  Bernard  Nossiter   in  the  Washington   Post
Nov.   3   showed   Republican  national   committees   reporting
$18.6  million in  campaign  gifts   as  compared to  $3.6  million
reported   by  the  Democrats.  Since  the  reporting  procedures
set  up  by  the  Corrupt Practices  Act  are  notoriously  lax  and
this  tally  does  not  cover  State  campaigns,  it  understates  the
amounts  spent  and  the  Republican  advantage.
6  *
Add  Agnew's  Dangerous  Radicals
Last  night  at  a  rally  in  Hammond,  Ind., Mr.  Agnew
said   Senator   Hartke   was   photographed  with   "well-
known   radicals,  giving  the   clenched-fist   salute"   and
added,  "I  think  it's  safe  to  say  he  curries  favor  with
the  revolutionary left."  The  photograph was  taken  at  a
rally  for  Negro  candidates  at  the  Northside  Church in
Indianapolis.  Besides  Mrs. [Coretta] King,  the  others  in
the  picture  included  the  Rev.  Win.  Birdsong  who  runs
Operation  Breadbasket  to  provide  meals  for  inner  city
children.  The  group  in  the  background  was  the  Opera-
tion  Breadbasket  Choir  composed  of  Negro  teenagers.
The  theme  of  her  [Mrs.  King's]   speech  was  the  need
for  Negroes  to  avoid  violence.  There  is  some  disagree-
ment   as   to   whether   Senator   Hartke   was   giving   a
clenched   fist   salute   because   the   picture   is   blurred.
Hartke  says  he  was  merely waving.
—The  Baltimore  Sun  November   1    (abridged).
tive  Republican.  Father  Drinan's   election   to  the  House  as  a
peace  candidate   from  Massachusetts  and  Bella  Abzug's   from
New  York  counterbalance  Allard  Lowenstein's  loss.  This  was
hardly  a  vintage  year  for  the  Nixon-Agnew   version  of   Know
Nothingism.
In  the  two  States  where  campus   violence  was  freshest  in
the  minds of  the  electorate,  the  results  show  that  whipping  up
hatred  for  students  is  not  the  vote  getter  Nixon  and   Agnew
thought  it  was.   Wisconsin   and  Ohio  were  among  the  States
in  which  the   Democrats   made  their   dramatic  sweep   of   the
Governorships.    Patrick  J.   Lucey,  a  McCarthy   lieutenant  in
1968,   organizer  of  the  New  Democratic  Coalition  in    1969,
was  elected  Governor  of  Wisconsin  despite  the  effort  to  brand
him,  in  alliterative Agnewism, as a coddler  of  campus  terrorists.
In   Ohio  John   J.   Gilligan   was  elected   Governor   despite   a
campaign  in  which  the  Republicans  tried  to  exploit  anti-stu-
dent   feeling  in  the   wake  of   the   Kent   State   shootings   and
accuse  him  of  "permissiveness."    Nixon's  favorite,   Governor
Rhodes,  by  an  inflammatory  speech   at  Kent   State  had  hoped
and   failed   to  win   the   Republican   Senate   nomination   from
the  more  moderate  Taft   who  has  now  won  the  Senate   seat.
Best  of  all  is  what  happened  to  the  Attorney  Generalship  of
Ohio,  an  elective   office.    Paul   W.   Brown,   the  Rhodes   lieu-
tenant  who  set  up  the  white-wash  special  Grand  Jury  in  the
Kent  State  killings,  will  be  replaced  by  a  Democrat,  Paul   W.
Brown.   This  may  make  a  crucial   difference   in  the  struggle
for  justice  at  Kent  State.
(Continued  on Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  16,1970
A  First  Amendment  Victory
THE    FIRST   VICTORY   IN   THE   STRUGGLE   FOR   JUSTICE    at
Kent  State  was  the  ACLU's  success  in  getting  Federal   Judge
Ben   Green   in   Cleveland   to   overturn   the   twin  injunction
issued  by  State  Judge  Edwin  Jones  forbidding   (1)   witnesses
before   the   special   Kent   State   Grand   Jury  to   comment  on
the  jury's whitewash  of  the  National  Guard  and  (2)   peaceful
picketing    and    leafleting   around    his   court    house.    Judge
Jones   pleaded   that   his   "gag"    order   affected   only   300  wit-
nesses   before  the  Grand   Jury.   Judge  Green   replied   that  it
not   only  forbade  these   300  from   speaking  but   the   rest  of
the   world   from   hearing  their  opinion   of   the   Grand   Jury
presentment,   "a  matter  of  national,  social,  political  and  moral
concern   and   debate."   The   effect   is  to   quash   the   contempt
orders   against  Prof.   Glenn   Frank,   who  challenged   the  gag
rule,  and  also  Seabury  Ford,  one  of  the  three  special  prose-
cutors  who  directed   the  grand  jury  and  showed  his  bias  by
telling   the   Akron   Beacon-Journal   the   Guard   should   have
shot  "all  the   trouble-makers."
Prof.   Frank's   defiance  put  Judge   Jones   on  the  spot.  He
could  not  cite  Frank  for  contempt   without  citing  Ford,  who
had  also  broken  the  Judge's  order.   So  Ford  had  to  be  cited,
too.   One  useful  byproduct  is  that  the  Board  of  Regents  can
no   longer   name  Ford   as  special  hearing   officer   for   campus
disorders  at  Kent  State;  his  prejudice  is  too  plainly  showing.
Best  of  all  the  decision  will  open  up  the  one-sided    Grand
Jury  presentment  to  full   debate,  and  help  to  build   pressure
for   a  Federal  grand   jury  under  a  prosecutor  of  stature  and
impartiality  to  review  the  Kent  State  massacre.
THERE  WAS  MORE  THAN  THE   SYMBOLISM  OF   INDEPEND-
ENCE  in  the  greetings   Chile's  new  President,   Allende,  gave
delegations   from   the   pariahs   of   American   politics:    Cuba,
Communist    China,   North    Vietnam    and    East    Germany.
Cuba's  victory  at  the  Bay  of  Pigs  and  the  resistance  of   the
Vietnamese  people  have  made  it  possible  for  a  Socialist  and
Marxist  to  take  office  peacefully in  Chile.   Times  have  changed
since  the  days  when  John  Foster  Dulles  with  the  enthusiastic
support   of  Lyndon  Johnson   as  Senate  minority  leader—and
not  a  single  opposition   vote  in  Congress—threw   a  blockade
around   Guatemala   and   overthrew   Arbenz,   denouncing   him
as  a  Communist   tool   when   he  tried   to   effect   land   reform
by  expropriating   some   of   United   Fruit's   unused   holdings.
Today  the  U.S.  is  so  tired  of  intervention  and  weary  of   the
Vietnam  war  that  a  Chilean   Popular   Front   can  take  power
Out  Of  The  Pentagon's  Own  Mouth
The  U.S.  is  now  No.  2  in  strategic  military  power.
Already  the  Soviet  Union has  gained a  6 to  1 superiori-
ty  in  missile  megatonnage  and, unless  we  try  harder,
the  Soviets  will  soon  be  able  to  have their  way  regard-
less of  our wishes.
—From  a  letter   by   the  _ American  Security   Council
asking   contributions   for   its   Operation  Alert   to  boost
arms   expenditures.
At  the  present  time  we  are  from  two  to  four  years
ahead  of  the  Soviet  Union  in  every  important  area  of
weapons  technology.  In  strategic   forces  we  now  have
better  ICBMS,  better  ABM technology  and better equip-
ment  at  every  level  of  detail  that  is  important. The
Soviets  have  larger  missiles  because  they  have  chosen
to  go  that  way,  not  because their  technology  is  better.
.  . .  Given  all  these  factors, I  believe we can afford  to  at
least  level  off  our  expenditures for  military  forces,  and
indeed  reduce them.to some  extent.
—Deputy   Defense  Secretary   Packard   before   the   In-
strument  Society   of  America  in  Philadelphia,   Oct.  26.
and   declare   its  intention   to   seize  U.S.   copper,   nitrate   and
iron  holdings  with  hardly  a  peep  out  of  Washington,   and  a
Nixon   Administration  at   that!
An  equally  momentous  portent   was  the  Mass  over  which
Chile's   Cardinal   Silva   presided   in   honor   of   Allende's   in-
auguration  and  the  tone  of  the  sermon  he  preached—a   plea
for   social   justice  in   terms  which   sounded   like  an   Allende
campaign   speech.  Only  a  few  years  ago  such  a  Mass  for  a
Marxist   President   would   have   been   unthinkable.    Allende,
a  Free  Mason  and  a  free  thinker,  joined  in  this  dramaturgy
of reconciliation.
Chile   is   doubly   fortunate:   unlike  the   poor   Dominican
Republic,  it  is  far   from   the   U.S.  and   unlike  poor   Czecho-
slovakia,  it  is  far  from  the  U.S.S.R.   It  thus  has  some  safety
from    those   Siamese   Twin    doctrines   of   imperialism:   the
Monroe   and  the  Brezhnev  doctrines.  We   hope  the   distance
will  make  it  possible  for  Allende  to  give  the  world  its  first
experiment   in   a  truly   democratic   socialist   regime,   able   to
bring  about  fundamental  economic  change  without  the  stulti-
fications  and  the  destruction  of   free  expression   which  have
made  Communism  repulsive.
WE   APPLAUD  THE  SENTIMENTS  expressed   in  Judge   Ger-
Rebutting  The  Latest  Arms  Race  Scare  Campaign  By  The  Military-Industrial    Complex
The  United  States  is  ahead,  not  behind,  the  Soviet  Union
by  any  important measure  of  strategic  force effectiveness.
The  United  States  is  not  in  any  sense  following  a  policy  of
"unilateral  disarmament"—as charged by  the  American Se-
curity   Council.   "Operation  Alert"   says   that   "Since   the
Cuban  missile  crisis  in  1962,  the   United  States  has  been
unilaterally  disarming  by  cutting  back  on  both'numbers of
strategic  weapons systems  and on deliverable megatonnage."
In  fact,  we  have-today more than twice the  number of  stra-
tegic  weapons  systems  we  had in  1962.
That  U.S.  security  is  dependent  on  total  megatonnage  is
basic  to  the  American Security  Council fears.  Numbers  of
warheads   and   bombs   and   their   invulnerability,  penetra-
bility,  and  accuracy are  much  more  significant  criteria.  In
order  to  increase  its  overall  effectiveness, the  Strategic  Air
Command   replaced   its   large   multi-megaton  bombs- with
several   smaller  bombs  whose  overall  yield  was  less.  Does
the   American  Security  Council  charge  the   Strategic   Air
Command  with  "unilateral disarmament"?
The  American Security  Council position  appears designed
primarily  to  scare  or  stampede  the  American  public.  For
example,  by  listing  Soviet  delivery  vehicles which cannot be
used,  or are  not  designed,  for  strategic  attack  on  the  United
States   and  by  failing  to  include  at  the  same  time  similar
U.S.  delivery vehicles,  such  as  those  based  on carriers or  in
Europe  that  can  attack  Soviet  allies   (and  in  many  cases,
Russia  itself),  the  American Security  Council table  gives  a
delivery  vehicles  lead  to  the  U.S.S.R.  In  fact,  the  U.S.  has
an  appreciable advantage  (of  about  2,260 to  1,668)  in  truly
strategic   vehicles,  i.e.,   those   capable  of   attacking  conti-
nental  U.S.  and Russia.
—Abridged   from   a  statement   Oct.  26  by  the  Strategic
Weapons   Committee   of   the  Federation   of  American  Scien-
tists   (203  C  St.   NE,   Wash   DC  20002)  in   reply   to   the
Operation   Alert   advertising    campaign   by   the   American
Security   Council,  a  sounding   board  for   the  military   indus-
trial  complex,  which  is  seeking  a new  escalation  in  the  arms
race.  Full  text  of  the  rebuttal  is  obtainable  from  the   FAS.
Its   Strategic   Weapons   Committee   is   chaired   by   Herbert
Scoville,   Jr.,   a  deputy   director   of  CIA   under    Eisenhower
and  Kennedy,  and  later  Assistant  Director  of  the  U.S.  Arms
Control  and  Disarmament   Agency.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  16,1970
hard   A.   Gesell's   order   forbidding   the   government    from
printing  and  distributing  a  House  Internal  Security  (HUAC)
report  listing  radical  campus  speakers  but  doubt  its  constitu-
tionality  and  wisdom.  We  don't  like injunctions against print-
ing;  they  would  set  precedents  dangerous  to  freedom  of  the
press.    And   we  do  not  like  judicial  interference  with   Con-
gressional   committees—even   committees   we   despise.   This
contains  the  seeds  of  danger  to  separation  of  powers.    The
Committee  has  circumvented  the  order  by  reading  the  names
into   the   Congressional    Record.    Can   a   Judge   enjoin   its
publication?   We  doubt  it.   Witch  hunt  committee  abuses  are
part  of  the  price  to  be  paid  for  an  independent  Congress  and
a  free  press.   We  believe  Judge  Gesell's  order  invalid under
the  First  Amendment.   We   hope   that  those  on  the   HUAC
list  will  treat  it  as  a  badge  of  honor,  and  that  young  people
will  show  their  contempt  for  the  Committee  by  inviting  more
of   these   blacklisted   radicals  to   speak   on   their   campuses.
That  is  the  best  answer  to  these  frightened   bigots.
Thieu  On  Way  Out?
CANADIAN   RECOGNITION   OF   CHINA,   and   indications  that
Italy  will  soon  follow  suit,  bring  nearer  the  date  on  which
Peking  will  be  admitted  to  the  UN.    If  this  Administration
has  a  modicum  of  good   sense,  it  will  prepare  for  the   shock
(or  reality)  by  some  such  face-saving device  (in  this  Washing-
ton   is   "oriental",   too!)    as   proposing   universal  admission
to  the  UN   of   all  existing  states.   This  would  take  care  of
the  Formosa  problem   and  increase  the  stature  and   efficacy   of
the  UN.   It  was  a  fantastic  anomaly  to  exclude  so  large  and
so gifted  a  portion  of  the  human  race  from  a  world  organiza-
tion  .  .  .  WHILE  ON  THE  SUBJECT   OF  REALITIES,  we  note
with  interest  the  hints  that  Thieu  may not  run  again  for  Presi-
dent   next   September.    He   should   be  encouraged   out.    His
replacement  by  some  such  figure  as  Big  Minh  who  is  accept-
able  to  the  other  side  would  pave  the  way  for  peace  at  last.
WE   SALUTE  WITH  SORROW  the  passing  of  the  York,   Pa.,
Gazette  and  Daily.   Its  publisher  Josiah  W.   (Jess)  Gitt  was
that   rarity—a  publisher   of   conscience.    Nothing   is  harder
than   independent  journalism  in  a  small  town.    In   55  years
of  publishing  he  made  it  pay  off.   He  gave  this  small  town
in  the  Pennsylvania  Dutch  country  a  paper  of  prize-winning
typographical   distinction,  with  internationally  famous  liberal
and   radical  contributors.   He   supported   Henry   Wallace   for
President   in   1948,   and  he  campaigned   unremittingly  against
the  cold  war,  the  witch  hunt  and  racial  injustice.   At  86  he
stands  as a living  monument  to  the  best  Jeffersonian   tradition.
FAS  Warns  SALT  Talks  May  Prove   Sham
We  are  concerned  that  the  Strategic   Arms  Limita-
tions  Talks  (SALT)  may  produce a  sham.  As  the  talks
reopen  in  Helsinki,  there  is  reason  to  fear  that  they
may  become only  an  umbrella  under  which  further  ex-
pansion  of  both  U.S.  and  Soviet  strategic   forces  con-
tinue.   We  note   reports   that   limitations   on  offensive
systems  might  take  the  form  only  of  an  agreed  ceiling
on  total  numbers of  missiles,  or  even  on  total  numbers
of  missiles  and  aircraft  combined, with  few  if  any  re-
strictions  on  the  replacement  of  existing   weapons  by
new   and  different  models.  Such  an  agreement  would
legalize  an  accelerated  arms  race  directed  toward quali-
tative  improvements and  the  deployment of  ever  more
dangerous   weapons.  We  urge  both  the   U.S.   and  the
Soviet  Union  to  spare  no  efforts  to  reach   agreement
preventing  the  production,  testing   and  deployment  of
MIRVs.  While  the  Soviets  have  not  yet  tested   MIRVs,
continued  Soviet  deployment  of   SS-9s   (and  other   of-
fensive  weapons)  and  U.S.  progress   in  deployment  of
MIRY  constitute   an  alarming  escalation  of   the  arms
race.
—Federation  of  American  Scientists,  Nov.  2  (abr.).
We  differed  with  him  only  once,  when  he  refused   Goldwater
ads   in   the   1964   campaign   as  he   also   refused   liquor   ads.
Liquor  ads  are  commerce  but  political  ads  involve  freedom
of  expression.  We  do  not  believe  a  newspaper  has  a  right  to
reject  political  advertising  because  it  disagrees  with  the   ideas
expressed.  Anyway poor  Goldwater   wasn't   all  that  wicked—
Lyndon  proved  trickier  and  almost  as  bad.
WE  WATCH  WITH  INTEREST  to  see  whether  Moscow   will
refuse  Solzhenitsyn  permission  to  accept  the  Nobel  prize,  as
they  did  Pasternak,  and  as  the  Nazis   did  von  Ossietzky.    It
is  a measure  of  what  Russia  owes  Khrushchev  that  he  allowed
Solzhenitsyn's  indictment  of  Stalin's  prison  camp  system,  One
Day  In  The  Life   of  Ivan  Denisovich,  to  be published  while  his
more  narrow-minded  successors  have  kept  "The   First  Circle"
and  "The   Cancer  Ward"  to  underground   circulation  in  type-
script.   No  country  has  produced  greater   writers  than  Russia,
none   more  profound   in  their  understanding   of   the  human
soul.   Almost  all  of  them  have  had  to  contend  with  censor-
ship,   suppression   or  exile.    But  it  has  been   harder   for   the
writers  under  the  Soviets  even  than  under  the  Czars.   Solzhen-
itsyn  stands  in  a  mighty  line  that  goes  back  to  Tolstoy  and
Dostoyevsky,  and this leaden  regime only  enhances his  renown.
A  Sober  Antidote   To  Propaganda  That  The  U.S.  Navy  Is  Now  2d  Rate  And   Obsolete
The  growth  of  the  Soviet  fleet  and  its  expanding  deploy-
ment  have  attracted  considerable  attention  in  recent  years.
From  1950  to  1960  the  rise  in  the  Warsaw  Pact   fighting
fleet  was  much  faster  than  the  rise  in  the  NATO  fleet.  In
1950   the  Warsaw Pact  fleet  was  relatively  small—only one-
sixth  the  size  of  that  of  NATO.  In  1960 it  was  rather  less
than  one-half  the  NATO  fleet.  After  1960,  the  growth-rate
of  the  Soviet  fleet  slowed  down and  that  of  the  NATO fleet
accelerated,  so  that  between  1960  and  1968  the  increase  in
the  NATO  fleet  was  slightly  the  faster  of  the  two.  In  1968,
therefore,  the  Warsaw Pact  fleet  still  was  less  than  half  the
size  of the NATO fleet.
The  Warsaw  Pact  is  superior  in  number  of  submarines.
In  1950,  the  Warsaw  Pact  fleet  had  100  more  submarines
than  the  NATO  fleet.  In  1968,  it   had  92  more.  The  pro-
portion  of  submarines  which  were  nuclear-powered  in  1968
was   28  per  cent   for   NATO  against   14  per  cent   for   the
Warsaw  Pact.   The  Soviet   ballistic-missile  submarines  are
in  general  inferior  in  their  capabilities  to  the  U.S.   Polaris
submarines.
One  reason  for  the  disquiet  expressed  by  some  people  in
the  West  is  simply  that  a  virtual monopoly has  been  lost.  In
1950   it  seemed  to  them  the  natural order of  things  that  the
naval  fleets  of  NATO nations  should move freely  around the
world's  oceans,  while  the  naval  fleets  of  Warsaw  Pact  na-
tions  did  not  appear  much  at  all.  It  now  is  considered  a
threat  in the  West  when Soviet  naval vessels  appear in  some
force   in   the   Mediterranean—whereas the   presence  of   an
even  larger  U.S.  naval  force  seems  in  some  sense  natural.
Secondly,  a  number  of  Western  commentators  appear  to
have  given  too  much  attention   to  those   areas   where  the
Soviet  Union  has  an  advantage,  and  too  little  attention  to
those  areas  where  NATO  has  an  advantage.  NATO  has  a
tremendous  superiority  in  naval  air  power.  Some   Western
appraisals,  however,  mention  this  very  briefly.  This  kind  of
approach  can  always  make  an  inferior  force  appear  su-
perior:  for  it  is  very  rare  for  one  side  to  have  superiority
in every weapon.
—Abridged  from   the  1969/70  Yearbook  of  the  Stockholm
International  Peace  Research  Institute,  released  Nov.  2.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  16,1970
Time  to  Treat  the  American  People  As Adults  Not  Boobs
(Continued  from  Page  One)
The   Democratic  party,  which  remains  the   majority  party,
ran  what  was  on  the  whole  a  defensive  and  uninspiring cam-
paign.    The   Republicans  failed   in   their   effort   to  treat  the
electorate  as  a  bunch  of  boobs.   It  is  time  the  Democrats mus-
tered  the  nerve to  treat  them  as adults.  We  believe the country
would  respond  to  thoughtful  discussion of  inflation,  and crime,
and  drugs,  and  campus  unrest,  and  violence,  and  racism,  and
pollution.   We  believe  it  would  welcome  the  admission  that
there  are no  easy answers.  We  believe it  needs a clearer under-
standing  of  the  Vietnam  war,  and  the  arms  race,  and  where
we  are  going  in  both.   We  believe  that  voters  would  respond
to sober  discussion.
Just  Thugs  and  Hoodlums?
There  were  disturbing  indications  in  the  Nixon   campaign
that  the  country is confronted  not  just by a  case  of  poor  tactics
but  of  deficient  understanding on  his  part.   This  can  danger-
ously  deepen   the  gap  between  the  generations  and  between
the   races.   Nixon   attacked  the   kind   of   mob   tactics   which
have  grown  up  on  campus  and  in  the  ghetto—the   refusal  to
hear  opposing  points  of  view,  the  substitution  of  four  letter
words  for  arguments,  the  throwing  of  bottles  and  bricks.   It
is  the  duty  of  everyone  who  retains  any  constituency  on  the
left  to  combat  this  loutishness,  as  it  is  a  duty  to  combat   the
growing  resort  to  the  bomb.   Bombings  ruined  the  anarchist
movement   in   the   Nineteenth   century  and   undermined  the
spiritual heritage  even of  those  saintly anarchists  Like  Kropotkin
who  were  not  advocates  of   "the   deed."   But  it  is  a  serious
error  for  Nixon   to  say  as  he  did  at  Phoenix  in  the   closing
days  of  the  campaign  that  today's  student  and   black  rebels
"are   not   romantic  revolutionaries  but   the   same  thugs   and
hoodlums  that  have  always  plagued  a  good  people."   This  is
an  echo  of  the  days when  every  Latin  American revolutionary
was  dismissed  as  a  bandit.   Not  to  recognize  the  deep  moral
convictions   from   which   today's   revolutionaries   draw   their
inner  strength  to  live  as outlaws  is  completely  to  misjudge the
task  of  dealing  with  them.
It is a positive menace to security to have in the White  House
a  man  who  talks  and  thinks  like  an  old-fashioned  cop.    At
Sacrilegious   Utterances   Dept.
The  FBI  reportedly  has  ordered  11 of  its  clerical  em-
ployees  to  drop out  of  a  course  at  American  University
because  a  lecturer  allegedly   made  derogatory  remarks
about  J.  Edgar  Hoover.  Hugh  Nugent,  director  of  the
university's  Center  for  the  Administration of  Justice  in
which  the  employees  are  enrolled  said  he  was  told  by  an
FBI  representative  the  Bureau  is  making  it  mandatory
that  they   drop  the   course.   Nugent   said   the  incident
stems  from  remarks  allegedly  made  by  Thomas  Rose,  a
part  time  instructor,  during  a  discussion  Oct.  6  about  a
guest  lecturer.  Nugent  said  ho  suggestions  were  forth-
coming  from  the  class,  so  Rose  raised  Hoover's  name  as
a  possibility   and  reportedly  made  remarks  derogatory
to  the  director.   Nugent  said  Rose  later  had  difficulty
recalling  details  of  the  incident  as  nothing  was  made of
it   when  it   occurred.   Last   week   the   FBI   ordered  15
agents  to  drop  out  of  John  Jay  College  in  New  York
following  criticism  of  the  FBI  and  Hoover  by  a  profes-
sor there.
—Washington  Evening  Star, Oct. 30  (abridged).
Phoenix  he  dismissed  as  fallacious  the  "approach   that   holds
that  violence  will  end  as  we  end  the  war  .  .  .  that  violence
will  end  as we  end  hunger  and  poverty  in  America."   He  said
"the  answer  to  violence  is the  strong  application  of  fair  Amer-
ican  justice."  The  phrases  themselves  will  prove  a  provocation
on  the  campus and  in  the  ghetto,  as will  his  urging  parents  to
"exercise  their  responsibility  for  moral  guidance."   This  adds
a  dash of  Billy Graham to  a  jigger  of  J.  Edgar Hoover.   Nixon
really  lives  in  the  past,  when  football  was  the  main  concern
of  students—and  blacks and  Chicanes were, if  not non-existent,
at  least  invisible on  the  other  side of  the  tracks.  It  is up  to  the
Democrats  to  provide  a  less  simple-minded  alternative leader-
ship.  Nixon  in  his  campaign  appeal  at  Phoenix  urged  voters
to  "bring  about  the  new tough-minded  approach  to  violence."
It  is  pretty  clear  from  the  results  that  even  in  the  deep  South
and  in  playgrounds  of  the  rich  and  retired  like  Florida,  voters
have  rejected  the   backward  looking   obtuseness   that   Nixon
calls  "tough-minded,"   but  which  is  only  another  variant  of
the  old  Bourbon  delusion  that  the  way  to  meet  .social  unrest
is  with  a  whiff  of  gun-powder.
Of  Especial  Interest  to  Pacific  Coast  Readers—You  Can  Now   Get  the  Bi-Weekly  Airmail  for  $10  Anywhere  in  the  USA
FOR  STONE'S  NEW  BOOK
For  the  enclosed  special pre-publication  price  of  $8.95
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics  and  Prophecies:
1967-70  (Random House). Regularly   $10.
(To)   Name                                                                      -
Street
City
Indicate
Please  renew
Street
City
I
4420  29th
Zip    .           State
if   gift   announcement  wished    D
(or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip                State
.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly            "/WTO
St.  N. W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.  Published   every  other  Monday  except  tn  August  at  4420  20th  St.,  N.W..  Washington   D C
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  Jo  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  S17 to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED