I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970feb09.pdf

============================================================

The  Crime  Bill Is  Itself  A   Crime  Against  Justice,  P.  4
The  Most  Candid  Definition  Yet  of   What  Vietnamization  Means
The  most  candid  definition  of  Vietnamization we  have  yet   seen  turned  up  in  an  editorial,  "How  Not  to  Win  The  War",
in  the  Jan.  15 weekly edition of  the  Paris  Le  Figaro,  which is  conservative  and  pro-American. It  said  Ambassador   Bunker
in  Saigon  once  admitted  that  Vietnamization  consisted  only   in  changing  "the  color  of  the   corpses."
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL  XVIII, NO.  3
FEBRUARY  9,  1970
<°<          WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
20   CENTS
Nixon, Inflation  and  The  War
Like  Lyndon  Johnson,  Nixon  plays  the  numbers  game.   In
his  TV  address  on  the  HEW  veto,  he  said  the  new  budget  for
fiscal   '71   would   call   for   "a   smaller  percentage   of   Federal
spending   for   defense   than   in   any  year   since   1950."   This
tricky wording  is deceptive. In fiscal '50  total  Federal  spending
was  $76.7   billion  and  the  military  took   $13  billion  or   about
16%.   The  fiscal  '71  Budget  on  the  other  hand  will  be  in  the
neighborhood   of  $198   billion.  The  best  information  available
(Aviation  Week,  Jan.  26)   as this  is written almost  a  week  be-
fore  the  new  budget  was  to  be  published,  places  the  military's
portion  at  $71.1  billion. That  is  about  35%   of  total   Federal
outlays,  or  twice  the  percentage  in  1950,  and  the  total  is five
and  a  half  times  as  great.  Is  is  $20  billion—or  40%—larger
than  military  spending  in  the  most  costly  year  of  the   Korean
war,   and   less  than  $20  billion  below   the  peak   year  of   the
Second   World  War.   That  is  not  much  to  boast  about   when
Vietnam  is  supposed  to  be  tapering off.
Still  Spending   More  Than  Last  Year
Despite  a  flood  of  figures  about  cuts,  military  spending  is
tapering   off  very  slowly.  So  is  the   Vietnam   war.   Although
Defense  Department  appropriations for  the  current  fiscal  year
are  $5.3  billion  below  last  year,  this  has  yet  to  be  reflected  in
actual   spending.   The   latest   Treasury   cash   disbursal  figures
show  that  on  Jan.  22,  after  almost  seven  months  of  this fiscal
year,  total   DOD   spending  was  almost  $400  million   greater
than  in  the  corresponding   period  of  fiscal  '69.   If  the  current
rate  is projected  for  the  rest  of  the  fiscal  year,  actual  spending
would  be  almost  $78  billion, or  $6  billion  more  than  has  been
budgeted.   This  is  possible  because   (as  the  House  appropria-
tions  report  on  fiscal  '70  noted)  the  military have  almost  $40
billion  in  unexpended  balances  from  past  years.  From  an  infla-
tionary  point  of   view,  it  is  the   spending   that   counts.  This
spending   record   makes  the  disputed   extra  $1  billion  on  the
HEW  bill  look  like a minor matter.  It  is  indeed  about  one-half
of  one  percent   of  the  total  budget  and  one-tenth  of  one  per-
cent   of   gross  national   product.  In   stressing   it,   Nixon   was
straining  at  a  gnat  while swallowing a  camel.
The  main  source  of  the  inflation  is  military  spending,   and
the  biggest  single  item  is still  the  Vietnam  war.  If  Nixon  were
seriously  preparing   to  get   out   of   it  as  soon   as  possible,   he
would   be  emphasizing  this.  Instead   the  veto   broadcast,  like
the  State  of  the  Union   message,   distracts  attention  from   the
role  of  the  war  in  inflation,  and   seeks   instead  to  blame   the
inflation  on  general  Democratic  spending  policies.  This  is  the
impression  created  when  he  said  the  inflation  was  caused  by  a
Free  and  Unlimited  (Deleted)  Debate
Mr.  FULBRIGHT. Nearly  everyone  that  has  spoken
out  recently  has  said  that  they  think  it  was  a  mistake
to  become involved  in Vietnam or,  in  this instance,  Laos.
[Deleted.]   This  is  a  major  operation.  [Deleted.]
Mr.  ELLENDER.  [Deleted.]
Mr.  FULBRIGHT.  [Deleted.]
Mr.  ELLENDER.  [Deleted.]
Mr.  FULBRIGHT.   [Deleted.]
Mr.  ELLENDER.  [Deleted.]
Mr.  FULBRIGHT.  [Deleted.]
Mr.  ELLENDER.  [Deleted.]
Mr.  FULBRIGHT.  [Deleted.]
I  think  we  should  know  how  much  we  are  spending
for   this   operation   which  is   beginning   to  be  a  major
war.  To  stretch  the  concept   of  the  SEATO  treaty  into
this  area  is  a  major expansion  of  it    ...
—From   the  Dec.  15  Senate  debate   on  Laos  after   it
was  censored—Cong.   Rec.  Jan.  21,   E155.
cumulative  $57   billion  deficit   in   the   decade   of   the   Sixties.
This  again  gives  a  false  picture.  Deficits  have  been  the   rule
during  the  past   two  decades.   The   Republicans   under   Eisen-
hower  and  Nixon   only  balanced  the  budget   in  3  of  their  8
years  in   office,   and  their  biggest   deficit,  $12   billion  in  fiscal
'59,  was  50%  greater  than  any  Democratic   deficit  until  John-
son  plunged   into  the  Vietnam  war  in   1965.
Truman,  by  raising  taxes  and  imposing  excess  profits  taxes,
kept   deficit  financing  within  bounds  during  the  Korean   war.
Johnson  used   deficit  financing  for  three  years  without  objec-
tion  from  the  Republicans  either  to  the  war  or  to  his  failure
to  prevent   inflation  by  raising  taxes  to  meet  the  cost.  The  re-
sult  was  a  cumulative deficit  of  almost  $38  billion  for  the  first
three  years  of  the  war,  from  fiscal  '66   (which  began  July  1,
1965)    through  fiscal  '68.   This  was  the  biggest   inflationary
shot  in  the  arm  for  the  economy  since  World  War   II.  By  the
Pentagon's  own   latest   figures,   the   Vietnamese   war   by   next
June   30  will  have  cost  us  $104.5  billions  in   5  years,  or  an
average  of  $25  billion  a  year.  It  is  this  stupendous  and  waste-
ful  expenditure  which  provided   a  stock  market  boom  for  the
well-to-do   and   set  off  the   inflation   eating   into   the   average
family's  budget.  This  is  why  we  are  paying  now  with  a  bus-
iness  contraction  and  an  unemployment   rise  to  get  the   infla-
tion  under  control.  The  poor  pay  the  most  but  every   family
pays  some  of  these  hidden  "taxes"  which   inflation  and   defla-
tion  impose.  The  cause  is the  Vietnam  war.
The   latest  Pentagon  projection  for  the  cost  of  the  war  in
(Continued  on  Page
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  Feb.  9, 1970
Nixon's  Emphasis  On  A  "Just"  Peace  Implies  A  Prolonged  War
(Continued  from  Page   One)
the  fiscal  year  beginning   next  July  1  is  $17  billion.  This  is
$6.2  billion  less  than  the  projected  cost  this  fiscal  year.  If  this
"peace  dividend"   were  made  available  to  civilian  needs  then
the  new  Department   of   Defense   budget   ought   to   be   $6.2
billion   below   the   $71.6   billion  budget   for  fiscal  '70.   The
figure  which   leaked   from   the  Pentagon   to  industry   sources
for  fiscal  '71,  however,  is  $71.1  billion.  If  this  is  correct  then
the  Pentagon  gets  all  but  half  a  billion  of  that  "peace  divi-
dend."  So .while Nixon  is  picking  a  major  political  fight  over
$1  billion  more  for  education,  and  representing  this  as  some-
how   crucial   in   the   battle   against   inflation,  the   military  is
quietly  adding  to  its  expenditures  $5  billion  or  more  in  ex-
pected   savings  on  the  Vietnam  war.
In  No  Hurry  to  End  the  Fighting
Nixon  is  playing  down  the  significance  of  the  Vietnam  war
in  the  inflationary  picture  because he  is  in  no  hurry  to  bring  it
to  a  close.  He  has  been  encouraged  in  this  by  public  apathy,
and  the  comfortable  belief  that  the  war  is  practically  over.  In
this  connection   I  want  to  call   attention   to  passages   in   the
State  of  the  Union  message  which  are  most  disturbing. These
repeatedly  emphasized  a  "just  peace."  Just  what  Nixon  means
by  a  just  peace  was  nowhere  made  clear.  He  wants  "our   gen-
eration"  to  be  remembered   "not   so  much  as  the  generation
that  suffered   in  war"  but  for  "the   courage   and  character"   to
win   "the   kind  of  a  just  peace  that  the  next  generation  was
able  to  keep."  Courage  and  character  are  only  necessary  if  the
struggle  is to  be  long  drawn  out.  This  is  an  echo  of  the  John-
son-Rusk  rhetoric  which  portrayed  the  leader  of  a  tiny  South-
east   Asian  country  as  if   he   were   Der   Fuehrer   of   a   major
Western  military power  which  threatened  world  conquest.  Any
compromise  in  this  perspective  was  "Munich"  all  over  again,
a  case  of  appeasement,   buying  peace  now  at  the  expense  of
war  later.  If  Vietnam  is  of  that  importance,   it  is  our  duty  to
stick  until  we  have  won  victory. That's  how  Johnson  and  Rusk
saw  it.  Is  that  how  Nixon  sees  it  too?
What  is  a  "just  peace"  in  Vietnam?  Is  it  "just"  to  keep
this   divided  country  plunged  into  bloodshed   until  we   have
Freedom   of   Information,   Army  Style
SAIGON   (UPI)—The   U.S.   Army   will   forbid  news-
men  to  speak  with  American  war  prisoners  when  they
are  released  by  the  Vietcong  because  some  have  spoken
well  of   their  captors,  informed  military  sources   said
today.  Commanders made the  decision,  the  sources  said,
after  three  Americans  released   in  November  and  two
in  December  spoke  highly  of  the  enemy.  One  said  he
could  never  fight  the  Vietcong  again.  The  sources   said
the   remarks   were   exploited   by   Communist   propa-
gandists   throughout  the   world  and  were   not   in   line
with   U.S.   Defense   Department  statements   about  bad
treatment  of  American  prisoners  .  .  .  Sources  said  the
Army  may  make  an  exception  if  a  former  prisoner   is
found  during debriefings to  be hostile  to his  captors  . . .
—Washington  Post, Jan.  16.
shown  that  the  Pax  Americana   dare  not  be  challenged?  Does
a  just  peace  mean  continuing  the  fighting,  whether   we  carry
the  main  military  burden  or  the  South  Vietnamese  army  does,
until   South   Vietnam  is  firmly  established   like   South   Korea
in  the  American  sphere  of  influence?  Is  it  a  just  peace  to  im-
pose  a  military  dictatorship  on  the  South  Vietnamese  people
in  the  process?  Is  it  just  to  support   a  regime  which   denies
them   freedom   of   press   and   political   activity?   Is   it   just   to
avoid  any  compromise  which  would  bring  the  terrible  blood-
shed  to  an  end?  What  does  Nixon  mean  by  "justice"   in  this
context? What  is he asking us to  show  "courage and  character"
for?  Was  he  afraid  to  use  the  plainer  term  "patience"  to  a
country  impatient  for  an  end  of  the  fighting?  Is  it  "just"  to
ask   the   American   people   to   go   on   tightening   their   belts,
eschewing  urgent  reforms,  postponing  necessary  social  expen-
ditures   to  pursue   the   same  Johnson-Rusk  dream   of   a  final
political   (and   therefore  military)  victory  in   a   far-off   Asian
country ?
Not   All  Combat  Troops  Out?
There  are  other  indications that  Nixon  is  settling  down  for
a  long  pull  in  Vietnam.  Stuart  H.  Loory  in  the  Los  Angeles
Times  Jan.  20  called  attention  to  one.  In  his  Dec.  8  press  con-
The  Best  Proposal  Yet  For  The  SALT  Talks  But  It Got Little  If  Any Press  Coverage
Many  members  of   this  body  hope  that  the  forthcoming
SALT  talks  will  result  in  significant  agreements  on  arms
control.  But  the  range  of  alternative  proposals  that  could
lead  to  agreements  is  severely limited.
There  are  only  three  basic  possibilities.  First,   we  might
seek  a  series  of  partial agreements.  We  might, for example,
try  to  limit  only  ballistic  missile  defenses,   or  the   testing
and  deployment of  multiple  warheads, or  the  introduction of
new  families  of  strategic  weapons.
Second,   we  might  seek   an  agreement   only  on  the  total
numbers  of  offensive and defensive  weapons.  Thus  we might,
for  example, permit each  side  to  have  1500 missiles  and 500
missile  defense  interceptors.  Such  an  agreement  of  course
would   not   halt   the   qualitative  arms   race   in   which   each
permitted  missile  can  be  made  larger,  or  fitted  with  a  more
powerful  or  more efficient  warhead.
Third,  we  might  seek  an  "in-place  halt."  Such  an  agree-
ment  would  freeze  not  only  numbers  but  characteristics  of
weapons.  This  would  truly  bring  the  arms  race  to  a   full
stop for a  period  of  a few years.
It  is  important  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  many political  and
strategic  advantages  of  negotiating  the  third  type of  agree-
ment.   It   would   avoid  the   time-consuming  negotiation  of
partial  measures  complicated by  an  ever-changing strategic
and   political   context.   Unlike  a   loose   overall   agreement,
which  would  limit  only  the  quantity  of   weapons,  the  "in-
place  halt" would  also  prohibit  a  qualitative arms  race.
Moreover,  an  "in-place  halt"  would  preserve   the  rough
parity  in  strategic  weapons  that  is  acknowledged  by  both
sides,   and  therefore  would  not  jeopardize  the  security  of
either  the  United  States  or  the  Soviet  Union.
Strategically,  a  failure  to  exploit  the  present  opportunity
for  a  successful  halt  to  the  arms  race  may  have  an  adverse
effect   on  American  security.  From  the  most  secure  nation
in   the   world  we  have  become  one  of   the   countries   most
likely  to  be  incinerated.  Our  security  can  be  still  further
eroded  by   the  development  of   ever  more  destructive  and
less  controllable weapons.
—Sen.   Gravel   (D.  Alaska).   Cong.   Rec.,  Jan.   20,  S200.
(Abridged.)  The  speech  got  almost  no  press   coverage.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  Feb.  !>,  1!>70
"Now   Or  Never"  On  Pollution  Requires  A  "Now  Or Never"  On  Vietnam
ferenre,  Nixon   said   "We   have  a  plan  for  the  reduction  of
American  forces  in  Vietnam,  for  removing all  combat  forces
from   Vietnam,  regardless  of   what  happens  in   the  negotia-
tions."  But  on  Jan.   19,  three  days  before   the  State   of   the
Union  message,  his  press  secretary,  Ron  Ziegler,  told  the  press
the  goal  was  "to  remove American troops  from  a  combat  role
in  Vietnam."  As  Mr.  Loory  pointed  out,  "There  is  a  big dif-
ference  between  removing  troops   from   i   combat  role,  while
possibly   leaving   them   in   Vietnam,  and   removing  combat
troops  from  the  country  altogether."  But  in  response  to  ques-
tions  Mr.  Ziegler  three  times  repeated  the  same  formula.   It
fits  with  earlier  indications  that  the  plan  is  to  leave   sufficient
combat   troops   in  Vietnam  to  protect  the   installations  from
which  our  air,  artillery  and  other  auxiliary  forces  would  op-
erate  in  support  of  the  South  Vietnamese army.  Obviously we
don't   have  enough   faith   in   "Vietnamization"  to  trust   these
installations   to  the  protection  of  the  ARVN  troops.
$17  Billion  A  Year  For  How  Many  More  Years?
To   "remove  American  troops  from   a  combat   role"   is  to
move  them  into  enclaves,  but  not  enclaves  in  preparation  for
a   cease-fire,   as  in   the   Gavin  plan,   but   into  enclaves  which
would   be  fortresses  from  which  our   support   troops  would
help  ARVN  continue  the  war  until  they  get  what  Nixon  and
Thieu  consider   a  just  peace.  Since  our  half   million   troops
were   about   equally   divided   between   combat   and    support
forces,   this   new   formula  could   easily  mean  a  minimum  of
300,000  troops  in  South  Vietnam  for  a  protracted  stay.   The
peak  year  of  Vietnam  expenditures  was  fiscal   '69,   Johnson's
last,  ending June  30,  1969.  The  Pentagon,  which  doesn't  over-
estimate  these  things,  figures  the  cost  that  year  at  $28.8  bil-
lions.  Half  that  would  be  $14  billion.  A  force  of  300,000,  or
50,000  more  than  half,  could  easily  cost  $17  billion,  which  is
what  the  Pentagon  figures  for  the  next   fiscal  year.  That's  a
lot  of  money  when  we're  pinching  everything  else.
Nixon's  State  of   the  Union   message   reminded  me  of   so
many  mediocre  sermons  I  covered  years  ago  as  a  cub  reporter.
It   had   the   same  innocuous   "inspirational"   rhetoric,  firmly
against  sin—in  this  case  pollution—but  not  so  specifically  as
to  alarm  any  rich  parishioners.   It   is  appalling   that   all  this
Stay-at-Home  But  Fly-to-Trouble
One  idea   [as   Lockheed  worries  over  the  cutback  in
Pentagon   procurement  of   the   C-5A   transport   plane]
is  to  sell  the  Air  Force  a  tanker  version  of  the   C-5A.
Lockheed  designers  are  hard  at  work  on  this  project.
The  flying  fuel  station,  goes  the  argument,  would  en-
able  other  American  aircraft   to  fly  farther  from  their
home  bases,  thus  offsetting the  loss  of  foreign  military
bases  as  President  Nixon  makes  good  on  his  pledge  to
pull  in  the  nation's  horns.  Fitting  in  with  this  stay-at-
home  strategy   for  American  military  forces  is  an  Air
Force  plan  to  expand  its  fleet  of  airplanes  for  trans-
porting  men  and  equipment  speedily   to  world  trouble
spots.
—George  C.  Wilson,  Pentagon  co-respondent    of   the
Washington  Post,  writing  from   the  Lockheed   plant  in
Marietta,  Ga. Jan.  23.
self-congratulatory    purple   prose   is   taken    so   seriously   by
our  communication media.  It  served  only  to  hide  a  reality  the
country  must  face.  Until  the  Vietnam  war  is  over,   the  fight
against  inflation  cannot  be  won.  Until  that  fight  is  won,  every
effort  at  ending  pollution  and  our  other  social  ills  is  doomed
by  high  interest  rates,  constricted  credit  and  a  business  slow-
down.  Peace  in  Vietnam  is  the  first  priority.  Withdrawal   is
the  first  necessity.  "It  is time,"  Nixon  said  of  the  litter  in  the
cities,  "for   those  who  make  massive  demands  on  our  society
to  make  some  minimal  demands  on  themselves."  This  a  dirty
dig  at  the  blacks  and  the  poor  in  the  ghettoes.  It will  be  much
appreciated  in  white  Southern  country  clubs.
Still  Making  Like  Billy   Graham
We  would  like to turn the dig  around. Who  makes  the  most
massive  demands  on  our  society? The  Pentagon.  It  is  time  the
military were forced  to  make  the minimal  acknowledgment that
the  Vietnam  war   is  not  worth   its  enormous   cost  from  any
point  of  view,  and  that  we  cannot  face  the  problems  crowding
in  on  us until we get  our  troops  out.  Until  then  talk  of  ending
the  pollution  of  our  air  and  water, the  erosion  of  our  resources,
the   decay   of   our   cities   and   the   racial   polarization   of   our
country  is  just  the  kind  of   Billy  Graham   hot   air   in   which
Richard  Nixon  loves  to  indulge.                                        Jan.  27
Why  We  Think  The  Chicago  Black  Panther  Killings  Were  a  Deliberate   Police  Ambush
We   believe  James   Montgomery,  counsel   for   the   Black
Panthers   in  Chicago,  was   thoroughly  justified   in  terming
the   special  coroner's   jury   in   the   Hampton-Clark  killings
"nothing    but  a   well-rehearsed   theatrical    performance   to
vindicate  the  police."  Its  verdict  was  that  the  police  fired
their  guns  in  their  Dec.  4  predawn  raid  in  the   "reasonable
belief"  that   it  was  necessary   to  prevent   death   or  bodily
harm  to  themselves.  This  is  cynical and disingenuous.
The  police  were  inviting  trouble  when  they  staged  their
raid  at  such  an  hour. The  Black  Panthers  feel  themselves  a
special   target.   They   would   reasonably   fear   this   was   a
police  ruse  to  get  them,  as  we  think  it  was.  If  the  police
didn't  want  a  shootout,  they  could have brought tear  gas  or
they  could  have  picked  a  daylight  hour.
Illegal   possession   of   weapons   is   a  common  offense.   A
predawn  raid  for  illegal  possession   would  risk  a  gun  battle
in   many   quarters    much   more   moderate   than   the   Black
Panthers,  including  the  white  suburbs.  It  is  in  our  opinion
a   "reasonable  belief"  that  the   timing  and  manner  of   the
raid  was  designed  to  provide  an  excuse  for  a  gun  battle
in  which  the  police  would  have  the  advantage  of   surprise.
The  word  for  this  is  ambush,  and  the  word  for  what  hap-
pened  is murder.
That   seems   to   us   obvious.   We  suspect   that   fuller   in-
vestigation    would    uncover   a   more   sinister    story.    The
Panthers  are  heavily  infiltrated.  The  Panthers  claim  some-
one  drugged   Fred   Hampton,  their  Illinois  chairman,  that
night.  A  private pathologist  retained  by  the  family  claims
to  have  found large traces  of  Seconal,  a  sleep-inducing drug
in  his  blood. Was  this  part  of  the  advance  planning  for  the
raid?
There  are  many  strange  discrepancies in  the  police  testi-
mony  at  the  inquest. Some  were  spelled  out  by  John Kifner
in  an  admirable analysis  published by  the  New  York  Times
Sunday  Jan.  25.  A  telling question  is  why, if  the  volume of
fire  was  as  heavy  as  police  claim,  "the  only   injuries   they
received  came  when  one  policeman  cut  his  hand  breaking  a
window  with  his  pistol  and  another  was  grazed  by  gunfire
coming   through   a  wall,   apparently  fired  by  the   police"?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  Feb.  9, 1970
The  Nixon-Mitchell  Crime  Bill Is  Itself  A  Crime  Against  Justice
It   is  the   duty  of   the   American   bar   to   mobilize   for   the
House  hearings   on  the  new  crime  bill.  It  was  passed   by  the
Senate  73  to   1  after   two  days  of   inadequate  discussion.   To
vote  against  an  anti-crime  bill  in  the  current  atmosphere   was
like  voting  for  sin.  Metcalf  of  Montana  was  the  only  "nay".
The  others  opposed   swallowed   their   misgivings   rather   than
have  such  a  vote  on  their  record.
Fortunately   neither   Chairman   Celler   of   House  Judiciary,
nor  its  ranking  Republican,  McCulloch   of  Ohio,  are   disposed
to  be  stampeded.  The  day  after   the  bill   passed  the  Senate,
Celler   said   "probably   most"   of   the   Nixon   anti-crime   pro-
posals  were  unconstitutional  "and   will  never   be  passed"  by
the  House.   McCulloch   said  he  had   no   intention   of   "rush-
ing  through"  any  measures  that  would  not  stand  up  in  court.
The  Primitive  Reaction  to  Crime
This  bill  represents   the  primitive reaction  that  the  way  to
'cope  with  crime  is  by  longer   punishment  and   by  short-cir-
cuiting constitutional guarantees  to  make  conviction  easier.  But
the  more  men  in  prison  the  more  crime  we  breed.   They   are
cesspools   of   demoralization.  To   clean   up   these   schools   of
crime  would   cost   billions,  but   it  would   do   more   than   any
other  measure  to  lessen crime.
A  major  pillar  of   organized  crime  and   official   corruption
is  gambling.  The  laws  against  it  reflect  an  unrealistic Puritan
ethic   and   a   lot   of   waste  motion.   Why   not   legalize   horse-
betting  and   lotteries,   thus   undercutting   the  crime   syndicates
and  saving  a  lot  of  effort  which  could  be  better  applied?
The  most  important  area  which  needs  fresh  thinking is  the
dope   traffic,  the  single  most  important  source  of  crime  in  the
streets  and   the   destruction  of   the  young.   A  comprehensive
program    to   provide   treatment   would   cost—but   would   be
worth—a  great  deal.  What  if  it  were  combined  with  registra-
tion  of  addicts  and  a  legalized  supply  of  drugs  until  treatment
could  take  hold?  This  would  undercut  the  drug  trade.
Another  source  of  crime  is  racial.  It  reflects  a  racism  which
condemns  many blacks, Puerto  Ricans,  Spanish  Americans and
Indians  to  a  life  of  despair.  To  make  conviction  easier  at  the
expense  of   legal  procedures  designed   to  prevent   injustice  is
Red-Baiter  As   Well   As  Race-Baiter
"The   defeatist   and   the   isolationist    of    1941   is   a
brother  under  the  skin  of  the  Communist  front  party
of   Henry  the  Treacherous   Wallace  today   who   plays
Stalin  . .  .  We shall  not  ever  sit  idly  by while the  sneak-
ing   and   persistent   efforts   of   the   Communist   snake
slithers  its  way  into  the  vitals of  our  nation."
—Front  Judge   Carswell'x   "white  supremacy"     speech
in  191tS,  as  reprinted   in  the  New  York  Times  Jan,   21.
to  deepen  their  feeling  that  they  are  expendable,  second-class
citizens,  and  are  justified  in  taking up  the  gun  against  a  society
that  treats  them  as  less-than-human  refuse.
The  bill  the  Senate  passed   is  called   the  Organized   Crime
Control  Act  of  1969.   But  as  Kennedy  and  Hart,  the  two  dis-
senting  members  of  Senate  Judiciary  objected,   its  reach   goes
far   beyond  organized  criminal  activity.  It  would   put   us  one
step  further  on  the  road  to  a  police  state  by undermining   Fifth
and  Fourth  amendment  guarantees,  by  revising  a  whole  series
of   Supreme  Court  decisions  going   back  to  the   1890s  which
put  a  curb  on  unlawful  police  methods,  and  by  further  weak-
ening  safeguards  against  wiretapping.  Goodell  and  Young  of
Ohio  joined  Hart  and  Kennedy  in  trying  to  amend   some  of
these  dangerous  provisions  but  20  votes  was  the  largest  num-
ber  they could  muster  in  opposition.
The   bill  runs  a  block-buster  through   established   rules  of
evidence  and  procedure.   It  even  eliminates  the  ancient   two-
witness   rule  in  perjury  which  goes  back  to  canon   law.   The
most  dangerous  innovation would  allow  sentences  of  up  to  30
years   for    "special    offenders"    convicted    more   than    twice
and  imprisoned  more  than  once  for  any  crime  punishable  by
imprisonment  for  more  than  one  year  even   if  the  earlier  of-
fense  was under  juvenile court  age.  As  the  ACLU  pointed  out
in   an   able   memorandum,   the   conspiracy   provisions   of   this
new  legislation  could  make  "special  offenders"  of  civil  rights
activists  or  political  demonstrators.  Senator   Kennedy   pointed
out  that  both  Dr.   Spock   and  the  defendants  in  the   Chicago
conspiracy  trials  might  well  come  under   these   provisions.   It
would  be  a  crime  against  justice  in  America   to  let  this  bill
pass  as written.
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
Anguished  apologies  to  Bernhardt J.  Hurwood and  maledictions  on  the  gremlin  which  made  his  name  turn  up as  Thurwood  on our
recent  flaps  advertising  Stone's  Hidden  History  which  he  reviewed so  generously  for  the  Saturday  Review.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
FOR   STONE'S   HIDDEN  HISTORY
For   the   enclosed   $7.50   send   I.   F.   Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History   of  The  Korean  War   (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City                                         Zip                 State
Indicate   if  gift   announcement  wished   D
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                       Zip                 State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                  2/9/70
4420  29th  St.   N. W.,  Washington,   D. C.  20008
4420  29th   St.,   N. W.
Washington,    D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Post
An  independent bi-weekly  --•'  '--
L
ss  Postage   Paid  at  Washington,  B.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  Aujrust  at  4420  20th  St..  N.W.,  Washington.   B.C.
imblished  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation Manner,  Esther   M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $u  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada;
$10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED