I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970jan26.pdf

============================================================

The  Peace Movement  and  the Black  Panthers,  P.  2
The  First   Challenge  of  the  New  Year  to  Richard  Nixon
"Is  investment in  medical  research,  vocational  education,  mental  retardation  programs,  air  pollution   control,   libraries,
and  training  nurses,  doctors  and  teachers  somehow  more  inflationary  than  spending  on  the  SST   and  running  up  billions
of  dollars  in  cost  over-runs  on  military  projects?"
—Reps.  Perkins   (D.  Ky.),   Brademas  (D.  Ind.),  Cohelan  (D.   Calif.)   and  Howard   (D.  N.J.),  protesting  Nixon's  threat-
ened  veto  of the  HEW  bill, Jan.  9.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL  XVIII,  NO.  2
JANUARY  26,  1970
101
          WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20   CENTS
Mr.  Computer  Calls  for  National  Planning
None   of   the   basic   problems   of   the   70s   is   going   to   be
sohtblc   without   fundamental    changes   in  the  structure  of
the  American  government.   The  most  important  of  these  is
national  planning.   Every   big  business  in  America   plans
but   the   biggest   business   of   all,   the   management   of   the
country's    resources    is   unplanned,    and   at   the   mercy   of
powerfully    organized   business   (and   labor)   groups,  which
exploit   tlie  weaker  sectors   of  the  economy.   National   plan-
ning   has   been  a  dii'ty   word   ever   since   the   early     Fifties,
when  merely   to  mention  it  was  politically   suspect.   On  the
eve   of   a  Presidential   message   expected    to  deal   with   the
suddenly   fashionable   problem   of  the  environment,  we  print
here   an,  unusual  speech   by   one   of   America's   biggest   big
business   mm    ivhirh    breaks    the   ice   on   the   question   of
national  planning.   It   was   originally    delivered   Jan.   7  to
the  Bond  Club  of  New   York.   The   interlocked   problems  of
pollution,  poverty,  racism,  urban  sprau'l   and  arms   spend-
ing  will  not  be  solved  unless  we  find   a  way   to  match  needs
with  resources   and  set  priorities  as  national  goals  fii'e  or
10  years  ahead.
By  THOMAS  J.  WATSON,   JR.
Chairman  of  the  Board,  IBM
Ten  years  back-,  in  the  twilight  years of  the  Eisenhower era,
I  served  with  some  very  distinguished Americans  on   a  com-
mittee  called  the   Commission  on   National  Goals.   Some  of
the  names  of  the  members  are  still  familiar:  Frank  Pace,  John
Gardner,  Clark  Kerr  and  August  Heckscher.  Our  job,  back  in
the  late  1950's,  was  to  suggest   goals  for  our  country  in  the
1960's,  and   two  things  surprised  me  at  the   time.   First  was
the  realization  that  this  country  had  no  very  specific  goals  set
down  on  paper;  and  second  was  the  realization  that  no  matter
what  goals  we  chose,   there  was  practically  no  mechanism  in
government   to  methodically  implement  them—and  there  isn't
now.
The  nation  was  bouncing  along  as  it  is  now,  geared  to  an-
nual  appropriations   by  Congress   in  about  the  way  it  had   in
the   19th  century.  There  was  no  road  map,  there  was  no  one
to  say—here's  where  we  are,  here's  where we want  to  go,  and
here's  the  route  to get  there.
In  most  businesses,  and  certainly  in  highly  technological  in-
dustries,  the  United  States  has  learned  how  to  set  fairly  pre-
cise  goals.  We've  learned  that  we  have  to  implement  them,
step-by-step,  in  a  disciplined way  over  a  long  period  of  time.
I  believe  that  the  complexity  of  our  modern   economy  de-
mands  national  goal  setting  and  planning  closely  paralleling
that  which  is commonplace  in industry.
Looking  at  the  goals  we  named  a  decade  ago  and  reviewing
A  Second   Haynsworth
Nixon's  new  appointee  to   the  Supreme  Court  is  a
Dixiecrat  judge  with  a  Dixiecrat  mentality.   He   engi-
neered   Senator  Russell's   successful   campaign  to   win
the   Florida  Democratic  primary  in   1952  over   Estes
Kefauver,   and   launched   a    Democrats-for-Ehenhower
campaign  when  Adlai  Stevenson   was   nominated.    He
turned  Republican after  Eisenhower's  victory  and  was
rewarded  by  appointment  as  U.S.  Attorney   for  North-
ern  Florida,  and  in  1958  as  a  Federal  District  Judge.
When   Nixon  elevated  him   to   the   Fifth   Circuit   last
June,  civil  rights  groups  declared  he  was  more  hostile
to   black   litigants  than   any   other   Federal   Judge   in
Florida.   The  Leadership Conference  on  Civil  Rights  in
a  statement  on  his  nomination  to  the  Supreme  Court
said   his   rulings   had   shown   "a   strong   bias   against
Negroes   asserting   civil   rights   claims."   He   seems   to
share  Judge  Haynsworth's  insensitivity  on  conflict   of
interest.   Last  Fall  he  went  along  with  two  colleagues
on  the  Fifth  Circuit  who  insisted  on  sitting  in  a  major
oil  and  gas  case  despite   substantial  holdings  in  these
industries.   He  is  made  to  order  for  Nixon's  old  friend,
J.  Edgar  Hoover.   Of  14  Circuit  judges,  Carswell   was
the   only   dissenter   from   a   decision  reversing   a   con-
viction  because  the  FBI  had  failed  to  apprise  a  suspect
of  his  rights.   Like  Nixon,  he  is  an  avid  football  fan.
Under  Nixon  we  are  heading  for  a  Supreme  Court  of
mediocrity,  with  little  sympathy for  the  disadvantaged
or  for  civil  liberties.   This  is  the  Southern  strategy   in
jurisprudence.
what   actually  happened    is  interesting.  The   nation   did   aim
toward  many of  those  recommendations  in  the  '60's.  We  saw.
vast  increases  in  higher  education, for  example,  and  enormous
growth  in  our  economy,  our  commission  really  didn't set  these
goals   and   identify   them   to  the   country  for   the   first  time;
rather  they  are  implicit  in  the  United   States—we  merely  em-
phasized  them.  But  we  missed  some  of   the  problems   of   the
time—pollution,  for  example,  did  not  get  much  attention  and
we  were  overly  concerned  about  others,  like  Appalachia  as  a
specific  area  of  poverty,  rather  than  a  country-wide condition.
And  our   call   to  stop  communism   anywhere—despite   the
price—drifted  us  into  an  unattainable goal  in  Vietnam.  Since
we  have  no  formal  mechanism  to  study,  adjust,  and  reset  our
national  priorities  in  an  integrated   fashion,  we  pursued   the
Vietnam  goal   to  a  costly  point.  The   lives  of  40,000  of   our
men   have   been   lost,   vast   resources   have   been   wasted,   and
the  morale  of  our  youth  eroded.
(Continued  On  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Jan
, 1970
(Continued  From  Page   One)
This  and  other  lessons  convince me  that  we  must   recognize
the  existence  of  national  goals.  They  are  not  formally  set,  but
they  are  there  nevertheless.   Today,  they  are  mixture  of  party
platforms,  State  of  the  Union  messages,  and  editorial  nagging
—from   it  all  comes  that  elusive  thing  called  public  opinion,
and  from  public  opinion  comes  direction.
The   national  goals  of  this  country  should   be  set  and  re-
studied  annually. The  should  be  costed   and  readjusted  on  an
integrated   basis  just  as  a  larger  industrial enterprise  sets  and
controls   its  goals.  This  process   cannot   come   about   by   the
periodic  appointment   of  national   goals   commissions   like  the
one  I  served  on.
A  New  Government  Agency
What  we   need   is  a  completely   new  governmental   body;
perhaps  a  Senate/House/Citizen    group,  to  sit  permanently on
this  matter  and  report  to  the  President,  Congress  would  have
to  pass  enabling  legislation giving  this  commission substantial
power   if   it's   to   do  the   job   that's   needed.   For   instance,  1
believe  we  can  pour  as  much  concrete  as  we  want  to  pour  in
this  country.  If  we're  serious  about  rebuilding  the  cities,  they
will  be  rebuilt;  if  we're  serious  about  cleaning  up  pollution,
Manhattan  will  have  Hudson  and  East  River  swimming  clubs
by   1980.
There's  another   lesson   from   the   '60's   which   is  basic  in
talking  about  the  coming  decade.  We  have  learned  something
about  economics   in  recent  years.  Depression   is  no  longer  in-
evitable;   in   fact,  we   can   look   forward   to   rapid   and    fairly
steady  economic  growth  if  we  are  wise  in  the  way  we  manage
the   economy.   This   is   essential   to   our   national   goals,   we
can  have  more  resources—we   can  do  more.
A  reasonable  estimate  for  ten  years  from  now  shows  a  $1.5
trillion  economy,   in  today's  dollars,  a  per  capita  income   that
has  grown  from  the  $3,140  of  today  to  $4,370,  and  govern-
ment  revenues,  Federal,   State  and  local,  that  will  have  grown
from   $303  billion   to  half   a  trillion.  The   resources   will  be
there,  but  what  are  we  trying  to  achieve  with  them?
Are  we  still  aiming  at  eliminating  communism? Well,  we'd
better  think  again.  It's   a  happy   comfortable   thought  to  be-
lieve  that  we  can  indeed  make   ourselves   relatively  safe  and
the  Soviet  Union  relatively   unsafe  with   anti-missile  missiles
and  so  forth.  But  think  a  little  deeper.  Our  efforts  might  leave
The  Peace  Movement  and  the   Black  Panthers
Richard  Nixon  is  an  evil  man.   This  is  the  mother-
fucker    that    unleashed   the   counter-insurgent   teams
upon  the  Black  Panther  Party.   This  is  the  man  that's
responsible  for  all  the  attacks  upon  the  Black  Panther
party   nationally.   This   is   the   man   that    sends    his
vicious,  murderous dogs  out  into  the  black community
and  invade upon our  Black  Panther  breakfast program,
destroy   food  that  we  have  for  hungry  kids  and  expect
us   to   accept   shit   like  that   idly.    Fuck  that  mother-
fucking  man,  we  will  kill  Richard  Nixon,  we  will  kill
any  motherfucker that  stands  in  the  way  of  our  free-
dom.   We  aint  here  for  no  goddam  peace,  because  we
know  that  we  can't  have  no  peace  because  this  coun-
try  was  ouilt  on  war.   And  if  you  want  peace  you  got
to fight for  it.
—David    Milliard,    Chief    of    Staff,     Black   Panther
Party,   at   the   Sail,  Francisco   peace   rally   Nov.   15  as
quoted   in  the  Nciv   Mobilization    Committee  statement
o-n  repression   at  a  Washington  press  conference   Jan. !>.
On   Dec.   3   Mr.  Milliard   was   arrested,  having  been
charged   with  making  in   his   Nov.  15  speech   "certain
threats  to  take  the   life  of  and  to  inflict   bodily  harm
upon   the   President   of    the   United    States,    Richard
Nixon."   The   New   Mobilization   Committee  denounces
the  U.S.  government  for  this  action.  The  rally  at which
Mr.  Hilliard  spoke   had   some   250,000  people   present.
He  spoke  in  the  language  of  the  streets.   In  charging
and   prosecuting   Mr.  Hilliard   the   government   is   di-
rectly  violating  his  First  Amendment rights  under  the
U.S. Constitution.
—From   the  same  Neio  Mobilization  statement.
Who  is  helped  by  Hilliard's  kind  of  wild  talk?    The
Black  Panthers  or  the  police?  The  peace   demonstrators
in  San  Francisco   booed  him.  The  Supreme   Court   may
decide  that  his threats  against  the  President  were  only
rhetoric,  and  as  such   protected   by  the  First  Amend-
ment.  It  is  a  very  dangerous  rhetoric.  Haven't  we had
enough   of   assassination?    It   was   appalling   at   the
Mobe  press  conference  to  hear  one  of  its  leaders  defend
"good"  as   distinguished   from   "bad"   violence.   Every
murderous  mob  in  history   from   Southern   lynchers   to
Nazis  to  the  Chicago  police  who  killed  Fred   Hampton
and   Mark   Clark   have   been   sure   their   violence   was
"good."    Such   rhetoric  is  suicidal   for  a  minority.   It
has  no  place   in  the   peace   movement.    It   invites   the
repression  of  which  it   complains.
50  million   survivors  here  at  home  instead  of   25  when   the
holocaust   is  over,  while  we  kill   two-thirds  of   the  Russians
Another  Example  Of  Lunatic  Political  Talk
Mr.  Mike  Wallace:  What  purpose  is  served  by  talking  of
shooting   your  way  into  the  Senate   of  the   United   States,
taking  off  the  head  of  Senator  McClellan and  shooting  your
way  back  out?   What  purpose  is  really  served  by  this  kind
of  talk  and  what  would  be  accomplished  —
Mr.  Eldridge  Cleaver:  The  goal  is  to  take  Senator  Mc-
Clellan's   head.    Now  the   process   of  getting  his   head  has
to  lie  in  the  strategic  technique.   I  can't  just  walk  in  and
take   his  head  and  walk  out,   see.    I  have  to   get   past   the
guards   and  get   past  those  who  might  try  to   protect   his
pig  head.   So  to  me  I  think  that  would  mean  shooting   my
way  in  and  shooting  my  way  out,  because  I  wouldn't  want
to  go  in,  take  his  head  and just  sit  there.
Mr.  Wallace:  But  right  now  we  are  at  the  point  of  trying
to   understand.    When  the  American   people   hear  that  you
want  to  shoot  your  way  into  the  U.S.  Senate,  take  off  the
head  of  a  Senator —
Mr.  Cleaver:   And  take   off  the   head  of   Richard   Nixon.
Which  Can  Only  Help  Forces  Of  Repression
Mr.  Wallace:  What  does   this   mean?    Is  this   rhetoric?
Mr.  Cleaver:  This  is  not  rhetoric.   I  am  telling   you  that
Richard  J.  Nixon, J.  Edgar  Hoover, Senator  John McClellan
et  al—not  just  them  but  all  of  the  pigs  of  the  power  struc-
ture  have  to  be  apprehended,  and  I  feel   myself,  you   see,
that   the   fate   that   they   receive   would   depend   upon   the
resistance  they  put  up.  I  feel  that  they  are  criminals,  that
they  are  the  decision  makers  who  are  programming  oppres-
sion  and  and  destruction   not  only  in  the   U.S.   but  around
the world.
—From  Algiers  on CBS  "60 Minutes",  January  6.
In   South   Vietnam,   Thieu   also  talks   of   beheading   his
enemies.  A Reuters  dispatch  from  Saigon  in  the  New  York
Times   Dec.   23  said   he   told   village   officials   that   if   the
legislature  failed   to  act  against  three  pro-peace  members
"the   people  and  the   armed  forces   will   cut   off  the  three
deputies' heads."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Jan.  26, 1970
instead  of  only  one-half.  This,  to  me,  is  only  half   thinking
and,  if  we  set our  national  goals  on  this  basis,  we'll  be  follow-
ing  an  impossible  path.
If  I'm  correct  then,  one  goal  which  we  should  have  in  our
minds  for  the  1970's,  is  a  more  relaxed  attitude,  a  detente,  if
you  will,  toward  the  more  tractable  communist   countries.
The  most  important  national  priority  is  first  reaching   some
kind  of  arrangement  with  the  Soviets.  A  lot  is riding  on  those
negotiations  that  began  in  Helsinki.  If   they  fail,  the   1970's
will  tend  to  be  a  replay  of  the   '60's   with  defense   absorbing
a  goodly  share  of  the  new  resources  we  generate.
When  There  Is  No  Slack
The  failures  of  the  60's  were  not  entirely  for  want  of  re-
sources.  While  defense  took  Yl%   of  our  new  money,  health,
welfare,  and  education  got  over  40%.   The  failures stem  from
different   reasons.   Let  me  mention   them,  for  I  have   come  to
believe  that  they  are  engrained  in  the  way  we  manage  our  na-
tional  affairs.  Money  is  essential,  but  is  no  longer   enough.   A
major  shortcoming,   I  believe,   is  that  we  don't   take  into  ac-
count  the  differences  between  a  fully  utilized  economy   and  an
economy  where  there  are  slack  and   unused   resources.   Essen-
tially,  throughout  the  late  '60's,  the  U.S.  was  an  economy  run-
ning  beyond  safe  limits and  it  is  likely  to  be  running  flat  out
through   the  '70's.  When  that  is  the  situation,  a  government
program  which  pours  money  into  one  section  of  the  economy
does   not   call  forth   unemployed   labor   or   idle  plants;  there
aren't  any.  What  it  does  is  reallocate.  It  takes  from  one  part
of  the  economy  and  gives  to  another.
I  don't  believe this was  understood,  for  instance, when  con-
gress  passed  the  Medicaid  Bill.  Medicaid  essentially  gave  one
group,  and  a  very  deserving   one,   the  purchasing  power   to
compete   for  an  already  scarce  resource,  health  care,  Medicaid
did  not  build  more  hospitals,  it did  not  train  more  doctors  and
nurses.  It  did  not,  so  far  as  I  know,  even  do  much  to  impact
our  worst  medical  shortcoming,  the  high   infant  mortality  rate
in  this  country—one  of  the  highest   in  the  developed   world.
I  don't   think  the  current   result  should   be  too  surprising—
spiralling  medical  costs  as  the  public  sector  bids  against  the
private  for  an  inelastic supply.
I'm  sure  this  was  not  understood  when  our  legislators,  with
Alarm  Signals  Over  Thailand
I   have   Anally   received   a   detailed   response   to   my
inquiry   on   the   training   in   this   country   of    foreign
military   personnel   in  chemical  and  biological   warfare
—CBW.   I  am  disturbed  over  some  of  the  more  specific
implications.  .  .  .  The  relatively  large  number  of  Thai
personnel,  24,  who have  received training  suggests  that
the  introduction of  tear  gases  and defoliants  into  Thai-
land  at  some  future  date  is  being  considered   seriously.
It  may  be  seen  from  the  information   provided  me  that
similar  training  was  given  to  a  number  of  South  Viet-
namese   personnel   prior  to   the  commencement  of   the
use  of   powerful  tear   gases  in  Vietnam  in   1965.  .  .  .
It   is  also   apparent  that  this   training  for  the   use  of
chemical   agents  in  Thailand  is   only   part   of   a   more
general   and  dangerous  involvement in  Southeast   Asia
at  a  time  when  we  are  purportedly trying  to  disengage
ourselves  from  the  tragic  mistake  in  Vietnam.
—Kastenmeier  (D.  Win.),  Dec.  29  Con.  Rec.,   E10992.
the  very  best  of  intentions,  voted   for   Medicaid.   I  use  it   to
illustrate  a  point  about  goals.   In  the  new  and  complex   econ-
omy,  without  the  luxury  of  idle  resources,  one  goal  diverts re-
sources   from   another,   and   we  have   to   factor   this   into   the
decision   making.
Just  as  General  Motors  can't  develop  two  new  Cadillacs  for
1971,   so  the   U.S.   must  balance  and  compromise   toward   an
integrated   set  of  goals" and   accomplishments.   If   health   care
is  not  adequate,  then  the  first  step  should  be  training  doctors
and   nurses;  the   second   is  bringing   into   the   system  people
who  have  been   neglected.   I  don't   object   to  seeing   both   of
those  steps  carried  out  simultaneously, but,  as  you  know,  the
step  that  we  took  was  the  second  one;  and  the  first  one  still
hasn't  been  attended  to.
We're  undertaking  change   through   the  instrument  of  gov-
ernment,  on  a  scale  of  vastness  that  we  never   even   contem-
plated  before.  We're  trying  to  get  the  results  of  detailed  plan-
ning  without  the  discipline of  planning.  Currently,  we're  talk-
ing   about   a  dreadful  housing   shortage  which   will   increase
during  the  '70's.   I  see  little  evidence  that  this  is  reflected  in
increased   enrollment   in   architectural   schools,   in   vocational
schools,  in  new  approaches  to  zoning  and  land   condemnation
(Continued  On  Page   Four)
The  Tribulations  Of  A  Soldier  Paper—And  A  Near   Atrocity   It   Reported
I  am  a  Canadian,  not  an  American.   I  am  in  the  Army
not  by  choice.    But   as   long   as   I  am  in  the   service  I  am
discouraged  from  voicing  my  opinion  by  my  unit  leaders.
But  I  feel  it  is  my  moral  obligation  to  voice  my  feelings
here  and now.  ...    I  spent  a  tour  in Vietnam as  an infantry-
man,  I  was  wounded five times.  . . .
During  my  tour  in  Vietnam  my  platoon  was  ordered  to
destroy   completely  a  small  village  in  the  northern  high-
lands  near  Dakto.   We  were  ordered  to  kill  everyone  in  the
village  including  women  and  babies,  bury  them  and  burn
the   village   within   24   hours.    Our   19-year-old  lieutenant
agreed   with   us   that   it   was   very   immoral  to   kill   these
people.  We told  the  villagers  to  gather  as  many  possessions
as  they   could   carry   and  leave   the   area   and  not   return.
When  the  commanding officer  came  by  to  check  the  village
the  following  day,  all  the  captain  found  were  the  remains
of   the   village  and   a   large   grave   containing  only  water
buffalo.    We  told   the   commanding  officer   the   bodies  were
buried  beneath  the animals. . . .
—From   the  Dec.-Jan.  issue   of   Aboveground,  an   under-
ground   newspaper    published   by   soldiers    in   the   Denver
area.   One  of   the   editors   is  Curtis  Stacker,  who   spoke   at
the    Washington   Mobilization    Nov.    15.    As    a   courtesy,
Stacker  and  co-editor   Thomas   Roberts  gave  army      officials
advance   proofs   of  the  issue.   The  result  follows:
The  December  issue  of   Aboveground  was   to  be  printed
Dec.   12   by   Peerless   Graphics  of   Colorado   Springs.    On
Dec.  11,  at  approximately  3  p.m.,  agents  of  the  FBI,  Mili-
tary  Intelligence and  the  local  police  visited  their  printshop,
intimidated  the  printers  and  consequently  halted  production
of  the paper.
—From  the  Dec.-Jan.   Aboveground.
The  Peerless   spokesman  was   asked  what  kind  of   "pres-
sure"  the  visiting  officials  applied.  "Well,"  he  said,  "we  try
to  do  business   in  a   town  where  we  are,   you  might   say,
respected.    See?    And  we  weren't   going   to   irritate   them
(the  officials  who  visited  him).   They  didn't  say  we  couldn't
print  it.   But  they  wanted  copies  of  the  paper.  They  wanted
this  and  they  wanted  that,  and  I  just  wasn't   going  into  a
thing  like  that."
—Denver  Post,  Dec.  18.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  Jan. 26, 1970
Can  the  National  Dinosaur  Only
(Continued  From  Page  Three)
or  in  relaxation  of  building  trades'  work  rules.  We   have  to
understand  that  if  you  want  another  26  million  housing  units
by  1980, a  lot  has  to  happen  in  1970, and  I  don't  think  that
it  is.
We  have  littered  the  last  decade  with  the  bones  of  good
intentions,  and  we've  come  out  disillusioned and  angry.  Just
as  we've  learned  something  about  economics,  imperfectly,  but
something,   we  have   the   beginnings  of   a   science   of   input/
output  analysis.  We're  beginning  to  understand  how  parts  of
the  economy   inter-relate,   how  things  fit  together   and    affect
each  other;  with  today's  rapid  communications  and   computer
abilities,  it  is  becoming  possible  to  test  alternatives—to  know
if  a  program  is workable and  to  get  some  feeling  on  what  its
real  costs  will  be  before  we  commit  this  enormous   nation  to
an  unrealistic or  incomplete goal.
Our  Resources   in  People
Less  developed, but  becoming  feasible,  are  some  new  ways
or  understanding our   people   resources;  and   we   know   that
people  are  not  infinitely  versatile.  A  bond  trader  makes  a very
fine   executive,   but   so  far   none  of   them   has  done  much  in
nuclear  physics.  To  what  degree  can  we  shift—to  what  degree
can  we  find  people  to  take  on  new  tasks?  That,   I  believe, is
our  greatest  constraint,  and   it  isn't  considered  very  often.   As
I  said  earlier,  if  we're  going  to  get  these  problems  solved  in
the  future,  goal  setting  and  goal  analysis  has  to  be  elevated in
government.    Presidential   commissions  aren't   enough,    and
we've  got  to  get  started.
In-the  final  analysis  it's  not   really  hard  to  set  most  of  our
goals—education,  health  care,  a  decent  standard   of  living—
there's  nothing  very  complicated  about  what  we  want.  It  will
be  harder  to  decide  on  priorities, but  that's  what  the  political
process  is  all  about.  The  real  gain,  if  what  I'm  suggesting can
be  made   to  work,   is  quite  different.   The   debate  about  the
priorities  could  be  limited  to  the  possible,  and  the   tradeoffs,
which  are  mostly  ignored  today, would  be  understood.  A  new
congressional  program   offered   to   the   country   as   a  congres-
sional  bill  would  have  to  be  integrated  to  the  overall  goals
Be  Moved  By  Noisily  Kicking  It?
Defense  Marches  On/Boeing  Never  Sleeps
Army  is  investigating   an  urban  missile  defense sys-
tem  called  Regional  Urban  Defense   Intercept  (RUDI)
in  which  high-explosive  warheads  of anti-missiles would
shower  gravel  in  the  path  of  oncoming  missile  targets.
The  study  is  one  of  many  in  the  service's  continuing
examination    of    ballistic    missile    defense    concepts.
Others  include  a  Boeing   idea   for  mounting  anti-mis-
siles  on  aircushion  vehicles  deployed  around  the  Polar
Cap.
—Industry  Observer,  Aviation  Week,  Dec. 8.
Why  not  avoid  cost  overruns  on  aircushions  by put-
ting  mobile  Boeing  anti-missiles   on  Polar  bears?
and  priorities  of  the   country  before   being   presented   to  the
public,  and  its  impact  on  all  of  the  other  programs  would  be
presented  at  the  same  time.
Finally,   I   believe   we   should   begin   to   acknowledge   our
successes.  One  by-product  of  the  way  we  manage  today  is  the
endless  dialogue  of  despair.  Well-intentioned    people   believe
the  only  way  the  national  dinosaur  can  be  moved  is  by noisily
kicking  it.  Their   criticism  is  magnified  in  minds  less  experi-
enced  and  less  aware  of  where  we've  come  from  and  where
other  societies  are  now. The  result  increasingly  is  nihilism  in
the  young—a  rejection  of   America  without  any   appreciation
of  what  it  is  achieving.  A  permanent   goals  body  would   not
only  set  the  goals—it  would  report  progress  and  achievement.
As  an  institution  begins  to  grow,   it  must  change  the  way
it  manages  its  affairs.  This  is  true  in  business,  and  it's no  less
true  in  government.  Without  goals,  Explicit  goals,  and  plans
for  getting  from  A  to  B  we  don't  know  where  we're   going,
and  we  don't  know  whether  or  not  we'll  have the  resources  to
get  there.
It's  a  sad  thing,  a  very  sad  thing  when  a  nation  like  this
one  has  to  creep  into  a  new  decade  with  its  tail  between   its
legs.  I  don't  want  to  do  that  again.  I  want  to   sail  into  the
1980's—and  I  want  to  see flags flying and  hear  bands  playing.
We  can do  that,  I'm  convinced,  if we're  willing to take  a hard,
cold  and  constant  look  at  how  we're  running  the  biggest  enter-
prise in  the  world.
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A   Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
This   issue   went   to   press   noon,   January   20,   1970
FOR  STONE'S   HIDDEN  HISTORY
For   the   enclosed   $7.50  send   I.   F.   Stone's   book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War   (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City                                           Zip                  State
Indicate   if  gift   announcement  wished   D
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                           Zip                  State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420   29th  St.   N.  W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  IM-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage   Paid  at  Washinsrton,  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except   in  Aujrust at  4420  29th  St.. N.W..  WashinKton.  D.C.
An   independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $.j  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  S17  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.          «
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED