I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970nov02.pdf

============================================================

Fulbright  on Our Secret  Air   War  in  Cambodia, P. 2
Why The Other Side  Is Dubious  Of Nixon's  "Free  Election"  Offer
We're  for  free  elections  but  we  insist  these  elections  must  take  place  under  the  aegis  of  Thieu  and  Ky.  In  Southeast
Asia  they have learned through  bitter  experience that  those  under  whom  an  election is  held  win  the  election.
—Former  Secretary   of  Defense   Clark  Clifford,    the  first  major  political  figure  to  attack   the  Nixon   "peace  plan,"  in  an
address  few  papers  covered   before   the  Woman's  National   Democratic  Club  Oct. 13  in  Washington.   Clifford     called   Viet-
namization  "a  plan  for  perpetual  war," and  urged  the  Democrats  to back total  withdrawal  by a  fixed  date.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVIII,  No.  20NOVEMBER  2,  1970      '<"
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Strange  Lessons  For  The  Young  At  Kent  State
Kent,  Ohio
Kent  is  indistinguishable from  hundreds  of  small  towns  be-
tween  the  Appalachians and  the  Rockies.  The  chief  feature of
the  dreary urban  landscape  are  the  filling  stations,  America's
No.  1 offense  against  nature. The  one  modernistic building on
Main  Street  is a dark brown two-story hulk  of  a city  hall whose
forbidding  windowless facade  makes it  look  like a  fortress jail.
The  only pathetic touch  of  antiquity is  the  red  brick, virtually
forgotten,  railroad  station,  a  relic  of  the  1890s;  the  one  re-
minder  on  Main  Street  of  the  troublesome  present  is  a  hippie
dress  shop,  the  Concrete  Flamingo,  its  pastel  facade  a  bright
orange  and  yellow. There  is a  peace  symbol  on  the  door.  The
population  is 26,000  and  its  sole link with the  wicked  world  of
the  Eastern press  establishment, where loyal  Americans may be
led  astray, is the  drug  store  at  Main  and  Water  streets,  which
gets  10  copies  of  the  New   York  Times  a  day  and  three  Wall
Street Journals.
Where The Revolt  Began
On  the  outskirts,  spread  across  low  rolling  hills,  is  Kent
State University, its modern  buildings  and  green  sloping  lawns
a  pleasant  contrast  to  the  down-at-the-heels  town.   Here   the
campus  revolt  against  the  Cambodian  invasion  began  last May,
forcing  Nixon  to  withdraw.  Here  a  new  national  battle  has
begun  with  a  special  Ohio  Grand  Jury  report  which,  as  ex-
pected,  absolved  the  National  Guard  and  the  Ohio  authorities
for  the  killing  of   four  students  and  the  wounding  of  nine
others  in  that  anti-war confrontation.  The  Grand  Jury  instead
indicted  25  persons  linked with  the  demonstration.
Kent  State   University   in  its  catalogue   describes   itself   as
"a  dynamic institution  of  growing  eminence."  The  grand  jury
pictures  Kent  State  as a hotbed  of  radicalism,  anarchy and per-
missiveness.  Some  of  the  faculty,  if  the  grand   jury  is  to  be
believed,   even   "devote   their  entire  class  periods"  to  urging
their   students   "openly   to  oppose"  the  government   "to  the
point  where  one  student  who  dared  to  defend  the  American
flag was ridiculed  by the  professor  before  his  classmates."   The
informer  who brought  in that tid-bit must  have  been  breathless.
Kent  State  is neither  that  dynamic nor  that  radical.  It  draws
85%   of  its  student  body  from  Ohio's  high   schools   without
admission  tests.  Ohio's  expenditures  per  capita  on  education
are  among  the  lowest  in  the  nation  and  not  much  above Mis-
sissippi's. The  cultural  level  is low. One  young  newspaper cor-
respondent   who  has  spent  much  of  his  time  on  the  campus
"rapping"  with  students  since  last  May told  me  he  had  never
met  a  Kent  State  student  excited  about  a  book.  One   faculty
member  described  the  student  body  as "the  insurance  salesmen
of  tomorrow."
Any  outside  agitator  drawn  to  Kent  State  by  the  glowing
No  Contract  Ever  Terminated
Skepticism  expressed  by  many  minority  group mem-
bers   about   the   genuineness   of   recent   Federal  pro-
nouncements   on  equal  employment  opportunity  is,   at
least  in  part,  a  legacy  of  the  history  of   discrimination
by  the Federal Government itself  . . . There is  a 29-year
history  of  ineffective  efforts to  require  Federal  contrac-
tors  to  be  nondiscriminatory  in  their  employment prac-
tices.   Lack  of   success  of   Executive  Order  11246,  the
most  recent  of  operative  Executive  Orders on  the  subj-
ect,   is  directly  related  to  inadequate executive  leader-
ship  provided by  the  Office  of  Federal  Contract  Compli-
ance  (OFCC), which  is  charged  with  responsibility  for
coordinating  and overseeing  the  entire  Federal  contract
compliance   program  .  .  .  No  contract  has  ever  been
terminated  nor  any   company  debarred  for   Executive
Order  violation.  Rarely  have  any  hearings   been  held
concerning  noncompliance.
—U.S. Commission on Civil Rights 1970  Report.
description  in the  grand  jury  report  will  be  disappointed.  This
is  a  campus  where  you  meet  activists  who  never  heard  of  The
Nation   or  read  the  New   Republic  and  students   who  think
themselves avant garde  because they  read  Time  and  Newsweek.
"Most  students,"  said  the  Scranton  commission   report  of  the
period   before  the  May  events,   "were   either   conservative  or
apolitical."  *  A  substantial  portion  still  are.  One  girl  activist
described  her  dormitory  mates  to  me  as  chiefly  interested   in
the   weekly   "happy   hour"   each   Friday  afternoon   when   the
town's  dingy  beer  joints  charge  ten  cents  less  per  glass.  To
judge  from  despairing  comment,  the  chief  menace  on  campus
is not  radicalism but indifference.
A  more  realistic  and  charitable  view  is  that  the  war,  the
campus  shootings  and  the  one-sided  grand   jury  report  have
succeeded   in  radicalizing  a  very  substantial   portion   of   the
student  body  on one  of  the  most  politically  backward   campuses
in  the  country. The  surprise  is not  that  there  is still  apathy and
indifference.  The  surprise  is that  there  is  so much  militancy,  so
* The  Scranton  report  said  there  were  six  organizations  on
campus  "considered  by  some  to  be  radical.  Almost  all  were
comparatively  small,  ranging  down  to  the  Young   Socialist
Alliance  with  only  8  to  12  members."  There  are  21,000 stu-
dents  at  Kent  State.  The  most   prominent  was  SDS  which
organized  in  the  spring  of  1968. "In  the  beginning   it  drew
poor  support, with less  than  10 persons  attending  most  of  its
meetings.  By  autumn, however,  attendance  grew  to  about  50
or  60  per meeting."  It  was  banned  in  the  spring  of  1969 after
a  sit-in  for  which  its   brightest   young  leader   is   serving   3
years   in  an  Ohio  maximum  security   prison.  This  is   harsh
repression  on a  campus the  grand  jury  calls  permissive.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  2, 1970
much  questioning, on  a  campus  which  draws  its  student  body
from   the  typical  small  towns  of   a  typical  Midwestern  state,
from  middle grade  students with middle grade records too  poor
to  enable  them  to  enter  universities of  more  fame  and  quality.
The  students who  have  been  running the  protest  meetings  and
writing  the  angry  editorials  in  the  Kent   Stater,   the   campus
newspaper,  are  average  Americans, neither geniuses  nor  freaks.
The  editor  of  the  Kent  Stater,  the  militant  student  daily,  is  a
Public  Relations   major.  One  of  the  leading  activists   is  in  the
business  school,  and  when  I  asked  him  what  course  had  par-
ticularly  moved  him,  he  told  me  he  had  been  "turned  on"  by
his  professor  of  marketing!
I  spoke  with  as many students  as  I  could  in  a  two  day visit.
By  the  time  I  left  I  had  a  real  feeling of  respect  and   affection
for  the  youngsters  I  had  met  and  I  understood  how  rewarding
they  could  seern  to  their  best  teachers.  I  had  the  privilege of
talking  with   a  sociology   class  run   by  Professor   Thomas  S.
Lough,  the  only  faculty  member  so  far  indicted  by  the  grand
jury,  a  man  I  had  known  when  he  worked  for  the  Arms  Con-
trol  and  Disarmament  Agency  in  Washington.   He  is  popular
with  the  students  because  he  is  in  sympathy  with  the  best  of
'them.  Among  those  in  the  class  were  veterans  of  the  Vietnam
war   radicalized  by  their  experience  and   frustrated  by  their
parents'  unwillingness  to  listen  to  them.
A Non-Violent Leader  Indicted
Perhaps   the   most   provoking   passage   in   the   grand   jury
report  was  its conclusion that  "all  the conditions  that  led  to  the
May  tragedy  still  exist,"  that  an  "apathetic  university commu-
nity"  has  allowed   "a  vocal  minority  to  seize  control   of   the
campus"   and  that  this  will  continue  until  such  time  as  the
faculty  and  the  students  "take  a strong  stand  against  the  radical
element  bent   on  violence."  This   "radical  element  bent  on
violence"   is  a  figment  of  the  Grand  Jury's  imagination.  The
day  the  Grand   Jury   report   came   down   the  Yippies   held   a
meeting  of  protest.  The  keynote  as  enunciated  by Jerry  Persky,
their  leader,  was "let's make Kent  State  into  a school  of  peace."
Non-violence  is  the  common  theme  of  campus  organizations.
The  school  year  opened  this  fall  with  a  "Think  Week"  organ-
ized  around  workshops   devoted   to  non-violent  protest.  Craig
Morgan,   an  ROTC  cadet,  was  elected  student  president  last
June  on  a  platform  of  non-violence  with  the  slogan,  "Power
to  the   Peaceful,"   emphasizing  political  change   through   the
ballot  box  and  lobbying.  His  reward   is  an  indictment  under  a
statute tailor-made'for  repression. This statute provides a $1,000
fine  or  one  year  in  jail  or  both  for  "second  degree   rioting."
This is defined  as participating with four  or  more  other  persons
Fueling  Another  Little  Arms  Race
"In  announcing  that   we   are   once   again  providing
lethal  weapons  to  Pakistan, it  could be  only  a  matter of
time   before  recent   history  repeats   itself   .   .   .  Since
Pakistan  regards  India  as  its  prime  enemy,  these  new
weapons,   particularly  the   planes,  will   appear  threat-
ening  to  Delhi.  In  turn,  India  will  no  doubt  seek  new
sophisticated  surface-to-air  missiles  for  defense  of   its
forward  cities,  stock  up  on  SU-7  bombers,  and  perhaps
add  more  Mig  jet  fighters  to  offset  the  New  Pakistani
Starfighters.   The  arms  race  on  the   subcontinent  will
accelerate,  increasing the  risk of  a fourth Indo-Pakistan
war.  The  new   American  arms  sale   to   Pakistan   is   a
major  policy  change  from  the  autumn of  1965 when  the
President   stopped  arms  shipments  to   both  countries.
It  now  appears  that  our  arms  bureaucracy  has  finally
prevailed on this  administration to  start  plying Pakistan
again  with  American weapons.  Unfortunately, this  will
not  win  over  the  military  elite  in  Rawalpindi.  Instead,
it  will  inject an unsettling influence,  stimulating another
arms  race  between  two  impoverished countries,  neither
of  which being  able  to  afford  it."
—Sen. Church, Cong.  Rec.  October  14,  abridged.
in  "tumultuous  conduct"  with  intent  to  do  "a  lawful  act with
unlawful  force."  Until  a  bill  of  particulars  is  made  public  no
one  knows  just  what  Morgan   is  accused  of  having  done.  But
the  grand  jury  couldn't  have  made  a  more  inflammatory  ges-
ture  than  indicting the  one  student  leader  who  has  done  most
to  organize  the  campus  against  violence.
It  is  important   to  build  a  national  movement  on  and  off
the  campuses  to  see  that  those  indicted  are  not  railroaded  to
prison  by  the  same  crass  political  processes  which  created  this
one-sided   special  grand   jury,  and  to  demand   that  a  Federal
grand  jury  be  convened  to  deal  with  the  May  4  shootings.  No
country  in  a  time  of  growing   crisis  ever  saw  a  sillier,   more
meretricious  campaign   than  Nixon   and  the  Republicans  are
running   against   sin,   smut   and   students.  The   Ohio  special
grand  jury fits the  political  strategy of  Ohio's Governor  Pvhodes
and  of  Nixon.  Even  Agnew   (as  so  many  people  have  forgot-
ten)   on  the  David   Frost   show   in  Los  Angeles   last  May  7,
three  days after  the  shooting,  said  of  the  Ohio National  Guard,
"I  don't  condone  their  action,"  and  called  it  murder  "but  not
first degree."
The  grand  jury report flies in  the  face  of  the  Scranton  Com-
mission  report,  of  the  FBI  findings  on  which  it  was  in  large
part  based,  and  of  the  earlier  8-page   special  report   into   the
tragedy  which  John  S.  Knight's  Akron,  Ohio,   Beacon-Journal
Only  Congress  and the  U.S.  Public  Kept  In  Ignorance  Of  Our Secret Air  War In Cambodia
"At  a  press  conference  on  May  8,  in  commenting  on  the
plan  for  withdrawal of  American  forces  from  Cambodia, the
President    said   that   he   expected    the   South    Vietnamese
forces  would  come  out  at  the  same  time  our  forces  did  be-
cause  'when  we  come  out  our  logistical  support  and  air  sup-
port  will  also  come  out  with  them.'   On June  3  the   President
backed  away  from  this  commitment  and  said  that  after  July
1  there  will  be US air  missions  in  Cambodia  .  . .
"Following   press  reports  that  American  fighter-bombers
were  flying  support  missions  for  Cambodian  troops   as  far
as  100  miles  from  the  South  Vietnamese   border,  I  wrote  to
the  Secretary   of  Defense  on  June  23  to  obtain  information
for  the  Committee  on  the  restrictions  applicable  to  US  air
operations  in  Cambodia.   On July  16  the  committee  received
a top secret letter from  Dennis  J. Doolin, Deputy  Asst. Sec'y.
of  Defense  for  International   Security  Affairs, which did  not
provide  any  specific details on the  nature  and extent  of  those
operations,   as   had  been  requested.   I,  therefore,    repeated
the  committee's  request  in  a  letter  dated  July  30.
"After  waiting  nearly  2  months  more,  while  reports  ap-
peared  daily  of  US  air  operations  in  support  of  Cambodian
forces,   Mr.  Doolin  finally  replied,  stating   that  he  was  'un-
able  to  respond  to  your  request  for  the  specific  details  .  .  .
inasmuch  as  this  would  involve  a  discussion  of  disclosure  of
specific  Rules  of  Engagement  and  operating   rules   relating
to  the  actual  conduct  of  the  war.'
"It  appears  that  the  executive   branch   learned  little,  if
anything,  from the  experience  of  trying  to  fight  a  secret  war
in  Laos.   It  has  now  switched  the  secrecy  to  Cambodia.  The
enemy   forces   know  where   and  to  what  extent  US   planes
are  conducting  air  operations  in  Cambodia.  The  Cambodians
and  the  South  Vietnamese   know  the  extent  of  the  air  sup-
port  their  ground  forces  receive  from  our  planes.   But  Con-
gress  ...    is  denied  the  same  information—information  es-
sential   to  appraising   the   course   of  the  war  in  Southeast
Asia  and our  current  policy.   It  shows  quite  clearly  how  far
the  pendulum  of  power  has  swung  to  the  executive   branch."
—Sen. Fulbright, Cong. Rec.  Oct. 14,  abridged.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  November  2,1970
published   last   May  24  and   for   which   it   richly  deserves   a
Pulitzer  Prize.  The  FBI  reports  confirmed the Beacon-Journal
findings.   A   memorandum  based   on   the   FBI   findings   and
signed  by  Jerris  Leonard,  chief  of  the  civil  rights  division  at
Justice,  listed  the  names,  ranks  and  addresses  of  six  National
Guardsmen  and  suggested  that  they  could  be  criminally  prose-
cuted  under  Ohio  law.
Fabrication By National Guardsmen
Now   a  new  revelation  underscores  the   need   for  Federal
grand  jury  action. On  Oct.  23 the  Beacon-Journal, to  its credit,
was  the  first  paper  in  the  country  to  call  attention  to  a  speech
Senator   Young   of   Ohio   had   made  in   the   Senate   10   days
earlier  but  which  had  gone  unreported.  Young  is  the   only
Senator  who  has  spoken  up  in  defense  of  the  students.  Theirs
—like  so many  other  unpopular causes—will lose  a  courageous
champion  when  he  retires  because of  age  (he  is 81)  at the  end
of  this  year.  Reading  from  a  Justice  Department  summary  of
the  FBI  findings,  Young  quoted  this  sensational  passage   to
the  Senate-
Most   of   the  National   Guardsmen  who  did  fire  their
weapons  do  not  specifically  claim  that  they  fired  because
their  lives  were  in  danger.  Rather,  they  generally  state
in  their  narrative that  they  fired  after  they  heard  others
fire.  WE  HAVE  REASON  TO  BELIEVE  THAT  THE
CLAIM  BY  THE  NATIONAL  GUARD  THAT  THEIR
LIVES  WERE  ENDANGERED BY  THE  STUDENTS
WAS  FABRICATED SUBSEQUENT  TO THE  EVENT.
[Emphasis  added].
Senator   Young,   reading   from  the   same  Justice   Department
summary,  added  that  "One   guardsmen  admitted  that  his  life
was  not  in  danger  and  that  he  fired  indiscriminately into  the
crowd"  and  "further  stated  that  the  guardsmen  had   gotten
together  after  the  shooting  and  decided  to  fabricate  the  story
that  they  were  in  danger  of  serious bodily  harm  or  death  from
the  students."
Senator  Young  also told  the  Senate that day—
One  hundred  FBI  agents  reported  that  of  the  four  stu-
dents   killed   and  nine  seriously   wounded   by  National
Guardsmen's  bullets  not  one  participated in  any  disorder
in  Kent  or  in  the  burning  of  the  ROTC  building  on  the
commons  of  the  university  at  any  time  during  the  pre-
ceding  Friday, Saturday  and  Sunday  nights.
The day after  the  Beacon-Journal called  attention  to  Young's
speech  it  ran an  interview  with  Seabury  Ford,  the  68-year-old
chairman  of  the  Republican  Party  in  Portage  County,  who  was
one  of  three  special  prosecutors  named  by  Governor  Rhodes
to  handle  the  special  Grand Jury  which  dealt  with  the  campus
shootings.  He  disclosed  the  spirit  in  which  the  grand  jury  was
Strange  Choice  For  The  UN
Unless  Nixon  makes  a  recess  appointment  while  the
Senate  is  out of  session,  the  United States  will be spared
the  ignominy of  being  represented  at  the  25th anniver-
sary   session   of   the   United   Nations   by   Gordon   H.
Severer,  a  former  Republican  Congressman  from  Cin-
cinnati,  who  has  distinguished himself  over  the  .years
by  smearing   as  soft   on  communism  just  about  every
leading   American  supporter  of   the   UN   from   Adlai
Stevenson   to   Fulbright.  Thanks  to   the   vigilance   of
Ohio's  Senator  Young,  Schersr   was  missing  from  the
U.S. delegation of  10 named by  Nixon  when the  General
Assembly   convened.   The  White   House   tried   to   get
Scherer   confirmed   by  sanding  the   nominations   up  so
late  that  there  was  almost  no  time  for  consideration.
The  names  went  to  the  Senate  on  Sept.  11, a  Friday,
though  the  Senate  had to  act  by  Monday  if  the  delega-
tion  was  to  be present  when the  Assembly  met  on  Sept.
15,  a  Tuesday.  Fortunately  Young  saw  Scherer's  name
and   sent   the   Foreign   Relations   Committee  a   letter
objecting  to  the  confirmation  and  demanding  that  he
be  allowed  to  testify   against  the  appointment.   Scherer
was  long  a  member  of  the  House  Un-American Activi-
ties  Committee,  a  bush  league  McCarthy  who  praised
the  way-out  Major  General  Walker  in  one  speech  on
the  floor  of  the  House  and  in  another  attacked   "The
hard  core  of  the  Communist conspiracy,  the  ADA,  the
Communist-dominated  Emergency  Civil  Liberties Com-
mittee  and  the  Washington  Post."  Young's  three-page
summary  of  Scherer's  record  led  the  Foreign  Relations
Committee  to  hold  up  the  Scherer  appointment.  It  is
hard  to  imagine a  more  unfit  choice  for  the  UN,  and  it
will  be  worth watching  to  see  if  the  White  House  now
makes  a  recess  appointment.  This  would  allow  Scherer
to  serve  for  40 days after  the  Senate  reconvenes  or well
past  the  adjournment date  of  the  UN  General  Assembly.
directed  when  he  said  the  National  Guard  "should  have  shot
all  the  troublemakers."  With  a judicious remark  like  that,  who
needs  outside  agitators  to  cause  trouble  on  campus?  The  in-
flammatory  reverberations  on  campus  were  intensified  by  the
news  that  the  State  Board  of  Regents  had  named  Ford  to  sit
as  "referee"  at  Kent  State  to  try  campus  cases  under  the  newly
enacted  and  savagely  repressive  Ohio  law  "to  control   campus
disorders,  and  to  provide  for  the  immediate  suspension  or  dis-
missal  of  students  and  faculty,  under  certain    circumstances."
Ford  promises  to  be  the  biggest  time-bomb  ever  planted  on
any  college  campus.
The  first   effect   of  Ford's  vigilante-type   statement   was  to
lead  a  respected  conservative  member  of  the  faculty,  Glenn  W.
The Agony  Of The Blacks  In  Southern  Africa Finds  Eloquent  Expression  At  The  UN
A  man  can  change  his  religion  if  he  wishes;  he  can  ac-
cept  a  different  political  belief—or  in  both  cases  give  the
appearance  of  doing  so—if  this  would  relieve  him  of   in-
tolerable  circumstances.   But  no  man  can  change  his  colour
or  his  race.   And  if  he  suffers  because  of  it,  he  must  either
become  less  than  a  man, or  he  must  fight.  And  for  good  or
evil,  mankind  has  been  so  created  that  many  will  refuse  to
acquiesce  in  their  own  degradation;  they  will  destroy  peace
rather  than  suffer  under  it.
That  is  the  position  in  southern  Africa  now.  The  apart-
heid   policy  of   South  Africa—now  being  imposed  also   in
Namibia—and  the  colonial  oppression  of  Portugal  in  Mo-
zambique,  Angola,  and  Guinea   (Bissau),   have  goaded  the
people  to  desperation.
No  one  can  say  that  the  people  of  these   territories  did
not try  to  secure  change—even  gome movement towards jus-
tice—by  peaceful  means.   They  tried  political  organization,
trade  union  organization,   and  tribal  welfare   organization.
They  tried  petitioning  to  their  rulers,  and  to  international
6
organizations;  they  tried  peaceful   public  rallies;  they  tried
the  publicizing  of  their  wrongs  through  the  press  of   the
world.  Indeed, perhaps  they  tried  too  long,  and thus  enabled
the  forces  of  oppression  to  strengthen  themselves  too much,
before   they   finally   recognized   the   situation   for   what   it
was .  ..
As  far  as  the  peoples  of  southern  Africa  are  concerned,
therefore,  the  choice  is  now  clear.   They  can  acquiesce  in
their  own  humiliation  and  accept   their   position  as   third
class  subjects  of  an  alien  ruling  Power,  or  they  can  fight
for  their  own  manhood.  They  are  now  making  that   choice.
And  they  are  doing  it  for  themselves.   They  are- choosing
future  life  at  the  cost  of  physical  death  and  suffering  for
many.   What  free  nation  or  what  free  people,  dares  to  tell
the  masses  of  South  Africa,  of  Rhodesia,  or  Namibia,  and
of  the  Portuguese  colonies,  that  they  are  wrong?   Who is  it
that  can tell  these  people  that  they  should  acquiesce  in  the
daily  humiliation of  themselves  and  their  children?
—President  Nyerere  of  Tanzania,at  the  UN,  Oct.  IS.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November 2,1970
A  Geology  Professor  Revolts  Against  Judicial  Gag Rule
Frank,  a  Professor  of  Geology,  to  issue  a  blistering  attack  on
Ford.  Professor  Frank  also  challenged  Common  Pleas  Judge
Edwin   Jones  to  arrest  him   for  contempt.  Judge  Jones  has
matched  Prosecutor  Ford  in  giving  the  campus peculiar lessons
in  Americanism. Judge  Ford  presided  over  the  special  grand
jury  and  when  he  released  its  findings  he  did  so with  an  order
forbidding  any  witness  before  it  to  comment  in  any  way  on
the jury's public  presentment. Normally grand  jury  proceedings
are  secret  but  it  is  not  normal  for  a  Judge  to  forbid  comment
on  a  grand  jury  presentment,  especially  when  it  is  as highly
controversial  and  damaging  as this  one.  In  effect  Judge  Jones
took  it  on  himself  to  suspend  First  Amendment  rights.  He
made  himself  ludicrous  as  well  as  dictatorial  when  he  majes-
tically  amended  the  gag  rule  to  allow  Kent  State  President
White  (who  was  severely  criticized  in  it)   to   "comment  in
general"  on  the  grand  jury  report  but  to  "refrain  from  any
critical  comment!"   This  allowed  the  grand   jury  to   defame
Dr.  White  while  denying  him,  under  pain  of  sentence  for
contempt,  the  right  to  defend  himself  and  the  University  by
answering  its  criticism.  This  is  constitutional  government,  as
taught  the  youngsters  in  the  State  of  Ohio!
Deliberate  And Deserved  Contempt
Professor   Frank,   as  a  witness  before  the  grand   jury,  is
subject  to  Judge  Jones's  order  but  Prosecutor   Ford's   blood-
thirsty  comment  was  too  much  for  him.  On  October   25  he
issued  a  statement  in  which  he  said  he  had  spent   17 years
"teaching   college  students  geology,  a  lust  for  life,  and  a  re-
spect  for  our  laws  and  system. I  speak  now,"  he  went  on,  "in
contempt  of  court,  in  contempt  of  the  naive  and  stupid  con-
clusions  of  the  Special  Grand  Jury,  specifically  as  to  their  rea-
sons  for  the  May  4  disturbances,  in  contempt  of  Judge  Jones
for  the  gag  rules  placed  on  President  White  and  in  personal
contempt  for  lawyer  Ford  for  his  lack  of  understanding  after
68 years of  what I believe  is a wasted  life."
Professor  Frank  said,  "There  is  no  middle  way  any  more.
Ford  is  a  trouble  maker.  It  is  my  feeling  that  the  Republican
party must smash the student uprising  in order to stay in  power.
Ford  has made  his  statement  in  order  to  convince people  who
do  not  know the  facts  that  he  is a law and  order  man  and  will
crack   down   on   anyone  who   disagrees   with   the   system   he
represents."
Mini-Mutiny  In  The  Marine  Corps
Gen.  Chapman,  Commandant  of  the  Marine  Corps,  is
reported  as  saying  in  Boston  that  "they  (opponents of
the  Vietnam  war) oppose our  efforts  only  because they
are  in  accord  with  the  principles  of  the  enemy." Gen.
Chapman  made  his  statement  as  an active duty  military
officer.  As  active  duty  military  officers  we  wish  to  dis-
sent. Gen. Chapman indiscriminately attacks  millions  of
loyal  Americans, including  United  States  Senators, Con-
gressmen,  businessmen and  students,  as  being  "in  ac-
cord  with  the  principles  of  the  enemy." Gen. Chapman
has  therefore also questioned  the  loyalty  of  Gen. Shoup,
former  Commandant  of  the  Marine  Corps,  who  said,  "I
want  to  tell  you, I  don't  think  the  whole  of  Southeast
Asia,  as  related  to  the  present  and  future  safety  and
freedom  of  the  people of  this  country, is  worth  the  life
or  limb of  a single  American." Gen Chapman's rhetoric,
impugning  the  patriotism  of  millions  of  Americans,  is
divisive.
—2d  Lt.  Jerry  M. Groseclos, 1st Lt.  David  L.  Jensen,
2d  Lt.  George  A.  Groneman, 2d  Lt.  Cecil  W.  Ebell, 2d
Lt.  Darrold  T.  Gumn,  all  of  The  Marine  Corps,  in  a
letter  to the  Washington  Post, Oct. SO.
"I  am a law and  order  man,"  Professor  Frank  continued.  "I
think  anyone guilty of  riot  charges  should  be prosecuted.  I was
between  the  ROTC  building  and  the  rioting  individuals  on
May  2 and  I  know  that  some  people  deserve  to  be  prosecuted.
However,"  he  went  on,  "this  should  not  allow  a judge,  a  jury
or  a  prosecutor  to  make  what  I  consider  to  be  a  farce  out  of
justice  for  their  own  gain  or  to  gain  favor  with  the  voters.
Freedom  of  speech  is  bigger  than  Judge  Jones.  I  defy  Judge
Jones  to  arrest  me  for  contempt  of  court  because  I  cannot  see
a  system I  believe  in  and  respect  subverted  by this  man."
Professor   Frank   ended   by  recounting,   "I   was  told   by  a
young  black  student  that  we  did  have  a  great  system  but  that
man  corrupts  it.  I  agree  with  this  student  and  I  understand
better  now what  he meant.  I cannot  live with  a  conscience  that
permits people to say they 'should  have shot  all  trouble-makers.'
I  am hoping  something  will  happen.  I  love  Kent  State  and  I
love  the  students  in  it.  I  can't  see this  happening."  We  urge
every  campus  in  the country to  circulate  and  support  this  brave
challenge.                                                                          Oct.  26
Of  Especial  Interest  to  Pacific  Coast  Readers—You Can  Now  Get  the  Bi-Weekly  Airmail  for  $10  Anywhere  in  the USA
FOR  STONE'S   HIDDEN   HISTORY
For  the  enclosed  $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean War  (Monthly Review
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City
Zip                 State
Indicate  if   gift    announcement  wished   D
Please   renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name
Street                                                                    ........
City                                       Zip                State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
              n
/
2
/
70
4420  29th  St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St., N.W.
Washington,  D.C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Bl-Weekly.  2d  Clan  Pottage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.  Published   every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..  N.W..  Washington,   D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  15  in  the  U.S.;   (6  in   Canada:
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED