I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970dec14.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  On  That  Prison Camp  Raid,  Ppf.   1-4
Nixon's  Secret  Plan  For  Peace  Turning  Out  To  Be  Warmed-Over  LBJ
If  it  is  now decided that  we must  go  for  an  all-out military victory  and  force  the  North  Vietnamese  to  surrender,  in  ef-
fect,  by  punishing  them,  I  think  we  ought  to  know  it.                               —Fulbriyht in  the Senate  November  23.
Nixon  should  tell  this  country  clear  and  loud  and  again  and  again  that  he  will  not  end  the  war  except  upon  a  favor-
able  basis  to  the  future  of  South  Vietnam  and  the  future   of  American  policy in Asia.  That  is  what he  wants,  and  there
is  nothing to  be  gained  by  hiding  his  real  purposes  behind  assurances that  the  war  will  be  over  by  1972.
—Richard  Wilson, a columnist  with  good  White  House  sources,  in  the Washington  Star  November 27.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVIII,  No.  23
DECEMBER  14,  1970
          101
°
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
The  Games  That  Pentagon  People  Play
One  question  about  Vietnamization must keep Nixon  awake
at  night.  This  may be  one  reason  for  the  POW  camp  raid.  If
Vietnamization  works,  then  the  enemy  just  "fades  away,"  as
the  U.S.  military  have so long  hoped.  But  then  how  and  when
does he  get  the  prisoners  back ?  A  prisoner  exchange normally
follows  the  ending  of  hostilities,  but  the  whole  point  of  Viet-
namization  is  so  to  strengthen  the  Saigon  regime  as  to   force
the  other  side to  accept  its terms or  face  defeat  in  a slow wind-
ing  down  of  the  war.   This  may  take  years.  At  best  sporadic
guerrilla  and  terrorist  activity could  continue  for  a  decade  or
more as in  Malaysia.  He  may have felt  that  some  drastic diver-
sionary  action  was  required  before  the  country  became  aware
of  the  dismal  outlook  for  the  prisoners under Vietnamization,
and  of  the  hopes  held  out  by  the  other  side's  new  8-point
proposal  of  September  17.  Last year's  10-point plan  suggested
that  the  release  of  prisoners  would  be  negotiated   only  after
the  total  withdrawal  of  U.S.  troops.   This  year's  8-point  pro-
posal  promised  to  begin  negotiations  on  the  release  of  prison-
ers  immediately,   once  the  U.S.  publicly  committed   itself   to
withdraw  all  its  forces  by  next  June  30,  or—as  privately sug-
gested  in  Paris—by  some  other  not  too  distant  fixed  date.   As
this  sinks  in,  the  government's  POW   propaganda  campaign
may  boomerang.   The   country  has  been   led  to  believe   that
Nixon  intends  to  get  out  of  Vietnam   soon   anyway.   People
may  begin  to  ask  why  not  set  a  fixed  date  if  the  enemy  does
indeed  promise  in  return  to  release  all  POWs.
Another  Numbers  Game
Before  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  Laird  said
we  were  ready  to  exchange  36,000  prisoners  on  our  side  for
the  3,000 he said  were being  held  in the North.*   "At  no time
in  the  history  of  the  world,"  Laird  said,  "has  there  been  such
a   dramatic  proposal."    In   a   normal   war,   between   equally
* Rampant inflation  seems  to  have  hit  our  POW  figures.
On   ABC-TV's   Issues   and   Answers,  Oct   11,  Laird   said   we
held   30,000   POWs  whom   we  were  ready  to   exchange   for
"slightly over  2,000" in  the  North  "and in the  hands  of  the VC."
On  November  24  he  increased  the  number  of  POWs  held  on
the  other  side  to  3,000.   In  Paris  Dec.  2  Ambassador Bruce
upped  it  again  to  "roughly  5,000."  The  latest  Pentagon  fig-  .
ures  as  of  Nov.  28 give  total  U.S.  missing  in  action  in  Indo-
china  as  966 and U.S.  POWs as  461  (379 in  the  North).  This
is  a  total  of  1,427 in  all  Southeast  Asia.   But  Laird  told  the
Committee   there  were  3,000  prisoners  in  the  North   alone.
When   Senator   Aiken   asked  him   how  many  of   these  were
South  Vietnamese,  Laird  replied, "Not  very  many  but  some."
Laird's  statistics  tend  to  be  slippery.
Cutest  Little  Prevaricator  In Town
Sen.  CHURCH:   What  do  you  expect   the  bombing
will accomplish?
Sec.  LAIRD: The bombing, I  think,  will  stop  the  vio-
lation  of  these  understandings.
CHURCH:   Has  the  bombing in  the  past  ever  caused
the  enemy  to  acquiesce  in  our  demands  or  to  make
concessions?
LAIRD:  Yes,  it  has.
CHURCH:   It  has?   When did  it  have  that  effect  in
the  past?
LAIRD:  Well,  the  last  protective  reaction  flight  that
was flown in the North was in May, and after  that  strike
there  was  an  indication  by  the  other  side  that   they
would  abide  by  those  understandings, and they  did  until
the  month  of  November  when  they  shot  down  an  un-
armed  reconnaissance  plane .  . .
CHURCH:   Was  this  the  only  attack  upon  a  recon-
naissance  plane  that  occurred or  were  there  a  series  of
attacks  on  reconnaissance   planes?
Sec.  LAIRD:   We  had  attacks  upon our  planes,  Sen-
ator  Church.   But  this  was  the  first  plane  shot  down.
—Before   Senate  Foreign  Relations,  November  24.
matched  opponents,  that  would  be  a  dramatic,  indeed  an  in-
conceivable  proposal   before   a   peace   agreement   had   been
reached.   As  ABC's  John  Scali  asked  after  Laird  put  this  pro-
posal   on  Issue   and  Answers   Oct.   11—"If   they  get   30,000
prisoners  back  in  one  fell  swoop  won't  that  help  solve  their
manpower  problem?"   Laird  replied  unctuously,  "We  are  con-
cerned  about  human  beings."   What  he  told  neither  Scali  nor
the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee   is  that  never  in  the
history  of  the  world—to  echo  his  phrase—has  there  ever  been
such  a  dramatic difference  between  the  investment  represented
by  the  36,000  prisoners  on  our  side  and  the  300  or  more  U.S.
pilots  held  by  Hanoi.
These  are  without  a  doubt  the  world's  most  expensive  sol-
diers.  The  mean  cost  of  training  a  combat  pilot  was  given  by
the  Pentagon  at the time we stopp'ed  the  bombing at  $450,000.
Pilots  for  an  advanced  aircraft  like the  F-105  in  use  over  Viet-
nam  cost  considerably more.   The  Pentagon's  current  figure  for
the  specialized  training  to fly an  F105  is  $471,400.  This  does
not  include the  $85,970  for  his  "wings,"  i.e.  his  general  train-
ing  as  a  flier  nor   such  minor   items  at  $1,200  for   survival
training.  These three add up to $558,570.  In dollar terms, 300
U.S.  combat  pilots  probably cost  many times  more  to  train  than
300,000  guerrillas.   At  the  time  of  the  bombing  halt  in   1968
(Continued  On  Page  2)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December 14, 1970
Laird's  Tactics  Hardly  Encourage  Better  POW  Treatment  By Hanoi  . . .
(Continued  From  Page  1)
it  was estimated that  it  had  cost  in  the  neighborhood  of  $200
million  to  train  the  "more  than"  450  pilots  killed  or  missing
in  the  air  war.  (The  total  cost  including  planes  and  ordnance
ran nearly to $4 billion.) The  339 prisoners North  Vietnam ad-
mits  to  holding  may  well  represent  an  investment  close  to
$150,000,000.    It  did  not  add  to  the  hope  of  their  release  for
Secretary  Laird  to  tell  the  Committee  in  public  that  many  of
the  men  held  captive were  ready to  come  back  and  fight  again.
A  Harmful  Performance
Laird's  performance  like  the  raid  on  the  abandoned  POW
camp  was  calculated  to  worsen  conditions  for  the  prisoners.
The  U.S.  has  been  trying  to  obtain  information  about missing
men.     When   Prof.   Sidney  Peck,   an  anti-war  leader,  visited
Hanoi  recently  he  was  asked  to  inquire  specifically  about  17
'men.    The  North   Vietnamese  authorities on  checking  the  list
reported  that  one  of  the  men  was  being  held  as  a  prisoner  of
war,  that  ten  others  had  never  been  captured  in North Vietnam
and  that  six  were  listed  as  dead.   With   this  information  he
also  brought  back  571  letters  from  POWs  to  their   families
and  word  that  all  prisoners  would  be  allowed  to  receive  an
11-Ib   package  and  a  postcard   for  Christmas,  and  that  these
should  be  mailed  via  Moscow.
Laird,  in  his  usual  tricky  fashion,  seized  on  the  new  infor-
mation  from  Peck  to  tell  the  press  that  "a  key  factor"  in  the
final decision  to  launch  the  abortive  POW  rescue  mission  "was
the new  information  received  this month  that  some  of  our  men
were  dying  in  prisoner  of  war  camps."   Prof.  Peck  protested
in  an  interview  with  the  Boston   Globe   (Dec.   2),   that  the
names   of   the   six   dead   were   given   him   only   with   their
military  serial  numbers  and  no  other  information.   "The  men
could  have  been  dead  when  captured  or  mortally   wounded,"
Prof.   Peck   said.   A  Washington   official,   whom   the   Globe
described   as  having   "access  to   all   government   information
concerning  the  prisoners",  confirmed  the  fact  that  there  had
been  no other  information  or  indication  of   maltreatment.
Prof.  Peck  told  the  Globe  that  the  information  he  brought
back  had  been  "intentionally   misused  by  the   government   to
Justify  the  military  adventure  in North  Vietnam."   Prof.  Peck
went  to  Hanoi   for  the   Committee   for   Liaison   With   U.S.
Servicemen   Captured   in   Vietnam.    Mrs.   Cora  Weiss,   who
organized  the  committee  on  her  return  from  North  Vietnam
What's   the   Good  Of  A  Fighter  Escort   If   It
Doesn't  Fight  Back  When  Attacked?
Sen.  CASE:   It  is  correct,  is  it  not,  that  our  recon-
naissance  planes  are  escorted  by  fighter-bombers?
Sec.  LAIRD:  That  is  correct.
Sen.  CASE:   If  retaliation   was  an  important  thing,
why  didn't  this  occur  with  the  use  of  the  escort  planes
rather  than  as  a  separate  item?
Sec.  LAIRD:  Well,  Senator,  as  far  as  the  standing
orders  are  concerned and  operating  orders  to  our  mili-
tary  forces,  particularly our  airmen,  I  would  prefer  not
to  discuss  those  in  open  session.
Sen.  CASE:  I  rely  on you to  do the  necessary  in this
regard.
Sec.  LAIRD:  But  I  want  you  to  know  there  was  no
violation of any standing  order  . . .
Sen.  CASE:   Well,  I  do  not  question  this,  but  I  do
think  we ought  to  know  a  little  bit  more  about  it.   If
it  is  a  wholly  useless  thing —
Sec.  LAIRD:  That  is  a  matter  that  I  am  giving  con-
sideration  to, to immediately retaliate . . .
—Before   Senate  Foreign  Relations,  Nov.  24.
last   December,   said   of   Laird's  performance,  "What   is   so
shocking,  is  that  until  this  stunt  by  Washington, information
about  the  prisoners  that  Americans  have  been  begging  for  was
beginning  to  come  out  of  Hanoi.   Now  this  information  has
been  abused  and  misused  to  justify  an  act  of  war."
The  Administration  has  been  hostile, since the  beginning  to
the  activities  of  Mrs.  Weiss's  committee.   The  improvement  in
communications  and  the  opening  of  mail  contacts  run  counter
to  the  Administration's hate  campaign.*   The  families  of  men
missing  in  action  have  been  sent  photographs   purporting  to
show  torture  of  prisoners.   Hanoi's  best  answer   is  to  allow
more  mail  to  and  from  U.S.  POWs.
Laird  made  only  one  specific  allegation  of  mistreatment   in
his.   testimony  to   the   Senate   Foreign   Relations    Committee,
*  Albert  Speer  in  his   recently   published  memoirs,  Inside
The  Third  Reich, has  a  footnote  (p.  250)  in  which  he  discloses
that  when  the  Soviet  Army  allowed  prisoners  taken  in  the
battle  of  Stalingrad  to  send  postcards  home,  Hitler  ordered
the  cards  destroyed   because   it   "might  have  mitigated   the
Russophobia" cultivated by  his  propaganda  apparatus.
As Corny  As That Old Joke:  The Operation  Was A Success But  The Patient  Died
Q.  On  whom do  you  blame  the  intelligence  failure?
Col.   Arthur  SIMONS  (U.S.  Army,  who  was  in  charge  of
the  rescue  raid  on  an  empty  POW camp):  I  can't  answer
that  question  at  all.   I  am  not  sure  I  know  what  you  mean
by  "intelligence   failure."
—Laird's  press  conference   at  the  Pentagon  November  23
to introduce  the  leaders  of  the  rescue  party.
Sen.  FULBRIGHT:  I  don't  like  to  say  it  was  all  a  bad
idea  simply  because   it  failed,  but  it  did  fail.   There  was
something  wrong  with  the   intelligence.
Sec.  LAIRD:  This  was  not  a  failure,  Mr.  Chairman, and
I  would —
Sen. FULBRIGHT: Well, it was a failure —
Sec.  LAIRD:  This  mission  was  carried  on  by  a  group  of
men that  performed  the  mission  with  100 percent   excellence.
Sen.   FULBRIGHT:  The  men  performed  perfectly,   but
whoever  directed  it  didn't,  I  mean.   [Laughter].
Sec.  LAIRD:  These  men  knew  full  well  the  chance  that
there  might  not  be POWs present.
Sen.  FULBRIGHT:  I'm  not  complaining   about  the  men,
but  those  men  responsible  for  it.
Sec.  LAIRD:  I  would  like  to  tell  you,  Mr. Chairman,  that
we  have  made tremendous  progress  as  far  as  intelligence   is
concerned.   [Laughter].
Sen. FULBRIGHT:  Yon mean since Friday?
—Before   the Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  Nov. 24-
"My  first  reaction  on  hearing  of  the  past  weekend's   at-
tempt  to  rescue   POWs   was  to  think  it   must  have   been
planned  by the  Saigon  Army, or  perhaps  by  the  scriptwriter
of  a  grade  'C' war  movie.  But  when I  read  that  the  colonel
in  charge  of  the  rescue   party  had  responded   to  the  press
question,  'On whom do  you  blame  the  intelligence  failure?'
with  'I  am  not  sure  what  you  mean  by  intelligence   failure,'
I realized  this  was,  indeed, an American operation.  Who else
could  launch a rescue  raid on a  camp from  which the  prison-
ers  had  been  evacuated  several   weeks  earlier—if   they  had
ever  been  there—and  say,  T'm not  sure  what  you  mean  by
intelligence failure?'"
—Rep.  Leggett   (D.-Calif.)   in  the  House  November  24.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December  14,1970
. . . The  U.S.  and  Saigon  Have  Set The  Other  Side  A  Bad  Example
though  he  said  he  had  talked  to  all  nine  of  the  released  pris-
oners.   "I  talked to  two  of  the  last three right  here  in  Bethesda
Hospital,"  he  said,  "and  I know  the  kind  of  medical  treatment
they  received,  and  it  was  not  adequate."    Inadequate  medical
treatment  is  a  far  cry  from  torture  and  not  surprising  in  an
underdeveloped  country we had  done  our  best to  bomb  back  to
the   Stone   Age.    The   medical  treatment  may  not   have   been
adequate  by  our  standards  but  it  seems  in  the  case  of  at  least
one  of  the  three  most  recently  released  prisoners  to  have  been
much  better  than  he  expected.   No  Senator  asked  Laird  about
Lt. Robert F. Frishman, one  of  the  three most  recently released.
His  right  arm  was  badly  shattered  at  the  elbow  when  he  was
shot  down  during  a  bombing  raid  over  North  Vietnam.   He
said  he  feared   his  captors  would  amputate  but  his  arm  was
saved  by North  Vietnamese  surgeons.   He  and  his  two  fellow
prisoners  said  at  their  first  meeting  with  the  press  here    (New
York   Times  Aug.  8,   1969)    that  they  had  been  well   treated
and  that  their  diet,  while  unappetizing,  was  nourishing.
Only  Two  "Telling   It"  To  Hanoi
Only   two   of   the   nine   prisoners   who   returned   have   en-
listed  in  the  "Tell  It  To  Hanoi"  lecture campaign.   Lt.  Frish-
man   has  changed   his  tune  and  turned   to  lecturing  on   the
inhumanity  of  his  captors.   A  Boston  Globe  reporter  Min  S.
Yee,  after  talking  to  the  others  reported   (Oct.  27)   that  those
he  interviewed   disagreed   with   Lt.   Frishman   but   could   not
speak  out  because  they  were  still  in  the  service.   The  only  one
he  quoted   was  Major  Norris   Overly,  whose  B-57  was   shot
down  in  1967  north  of  the  DMZ.    "I  was  abused,  threatened,
spat  on  and  beaten,"   Major   Overly  told   Yee.    "But   I  could
understand  why  those   people  would   want   to  kill  me.   My
guards   saved  my  life   three   times.    It  was  all  strange:   one
moment  someone  would  want  to  kill  me.   The  next   moment
another  Vietnamese  would  act  toward  me  with  such  compas-
sion  that  it  staggered   me."    Of   his  time  in  captivity,  Major
Overly  said,  "We  were  well  treated.   I  got  no  indoctrination,
just  a  few  books  on  Vietnamese  history.   We   got  plenty   to
eat  and  medical  care  when  needed."    But  Major   Overly  has
now  also  gone  on  the  Tell  It  To  Hanoi  circuit  and  Newsweek
(Nov.   30)  reports  that  "his  recollections  of  his  captivity"  are
now  "chilling."   Newsweek   seems  to  think  his   recollections
A  Body  Count  (We'd  Bet)   Nobody  Ever  Made
Sen.  FULBRIGHT:  You  have  information, I  believe,
that  six  of  our men have died in  prisoner-of-war camps?
Sec.  LAIRD:   That  is  correct.   We  had  this  informa-
tion  well  over  a  week  ago,  and  we  have  further infor-
mation  of  11  others.
Sen.   FULBRIGHT:  That  is  over  what  period,  just
recently,  or  over  the  last  two  or  three  years?
Sec.  LAIRD:  It   was  the  first  notification   we  have
had  of  prisoners dying  in  North  Vietnam prison camps
Sen.  FULBRIGHT:   Do  you  know  how  many of  their
prisoners  held  by  our  side  have  died  during  this  same
period?
Sec.  LAIRD:   I  will  be  very  pleased  to  supply  that
information  for you ...    I did not bring the  total  medical
records  with  me today.
—Before   Senate  Foreign  Relations  November  24.
may  be  overrefrigerated.   It  quotes  one  recent  unnamed visitor
to  Hanoi  as  finding  the  "U.S.  interpretation"  of  prisoner  treat-
ment   by   Hanoi   "somewhat   questionable."     "For   while  ac-
cepting  the  fact  that  the  POWs  are  surely under  psychological
pressures,  this  source  believes,"  according  to  Newsu'eek,   "that
the  rations and  treatment—however  bad  they may  seem  by  U.S.
standards—are   probably  similar  to  those   received   by  North
Vietnamese  troops."
The   treatment   of  prisoners   on  our  side  has  hardly  set  a
good   example.   When   Senator   Fulbright   brought   up   condi-
tions  at  the  "tiger  cage"  Con  San  prison  in  South   Vietnam,
Secretary  Laird  quickly  shut  him  off  by  replying,  "Senator,   I
do  not  want  to get that particular story confused with  prisoners
of  war."   But  as  recently as  last  July  24  the  International  Red
Cross   made   public  a  report   charging   that   24  North   Viet-
namese  soldiers  were  imprisoned  in  this  notorious  camp,  and
that   seven  had   been   mistreated   in  violation   of   the   Geneva
Convention.   The  report  said  they  were  confined  in  their  cells
all  day,  kept  in  chains  for  13 hours  a  day  and  were  not  given
enough    fresh    food    or   drinking   water."     (Facts    on   File,
p.568El,  1970).   A   copy  of  the   report   was  sent   the   U.S.
(Continued  On  Page  4)
Now  You See It, Now  You Don't:  That Unarmed Reconnaissance "Understanding"
There  has  been  some  talk  about  an  understanding between
North  Vietnam  and  this  government  relative  to  the  use  of
reconnaissance  planes  over  the  past  two  years.   Frankly,  I
know  of  no such understanding.
—Majority   Leader  Mansfield   in  the Senate Nov.  34
Sen.  CHURCH:  Are  you  familiar,  Mr.  Secretary,   with
any  understanding  that  permits the  United  States  to  fly  re-
connaissance  missions over Vietnam?
Sec.  LAIRD:  Yes,  I  am.
Sen. CHURCH: Is that  understanding  in writing?
Sec.  LAIRD:  No.  It  is  not.
Sen.  CHURCH:  What  was  the  nature  of  that  unwritten
understanding?
Sec.  LAIRD:   .  .  .  The  enemy  knows  full  well  what  those
understandings  are  and  every  person  that  was  involved  in
our   government   in  a  major  negotiating   role   certainly   is
thoroughly  familiar with  that  .  .  .
Sen.  CASE:  I  take  it  what  happened,  in  substance,  when
we  said  we  would  stop  bombing,  was  that   we  announced
three   conditions  that   we   expected   to   be   fulfilled.    There
wasn't  any  kind  of  affirmative  agreement,  whether  oral  or
tacit  or  anything  else  on the  part  of  the  other  side,  or  any-
thing very formal.  Is that  correct?
Sec.  LAIRD:   There  was  quite  a  debate,  Senator  Case.   I
spent  a  considerable amount  of  time  reading  the  notes  .  .  .
and  there  was  a  great  deal  of  discussion,  and the  other  side
was,  the  North  Vietnamese  were,  certainly—they  certainly
had the understanding  after  that debate  . . .
Sen.   SYMINGTON:   You  are  operating  against   a   good
many  forces  now.   You  are  operating  against   Pathet   Lao
and  the  North  Vietnamese and  the  Cambodian army  and  the
Viet  Cong,  and  it  just  might  be  that  some  of  those   forces
do not  agree  with what was  established  in  this  verbal  agree-
ment  that  you  referred  to  ...     so  I  am  just  saying  that  if
we  are  going   to  react  by  bombing  the  North  with  fighter
bombers  based  on  something  that  happens  in  another coun-
try,  I  think  we  have  to  be  careful  that  the  people  agree  to
what  was  agreed  on, about which this  country  does  not know
the  details  in  any  way  nor,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,
does  the  Armed  Services  Committee.*
—Before   Senate  Foreign  Relations  November   24.
* Armed  Services,  an  ally  of  the  Pentagon, is  usually  kept
well  informed   by  it.   Symington   is  the   only  Senator  who
serves  on both  those  Committees.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,   December U, 1970
Our Geneva  Convention Has Been "The Only Good Gook Is A  Dead  Gook"
(Continued   From  Page  3)
Government.   Under  the  Geneva  convention  the  power  which
captures  a  prisoner  remains  responsible  for  his  treatment  even
if  he  has  been  handed  over,  as we  hand  over  all  our  prisoners,
to  the  South   Vietnamese.
North  Vietnam's  ratification  of  the  Geneva  Convention  in
the  50s  was  qualified,  as  was  that  of  the  other   Soviet  states,
by  the  proviso  that  it  would  not  be  applied  to  war  criminals.
Our  indiscriminate bombing  raids North  and  South—including
the  use of  napalm  and  "anti-personnel"  bombs—have  for years
violated  international  conventions  designed  to  protect  civilian
populations.    Our  own  Army's  handbook,   The   Law  of  Land
Warfare,    says  that  belligerents  are  required  to  refrain   "from
employing  any kind  or  degree of  violence  which  is  not  actually
necessary  for  military  purposes  and  that  they  conduct  hostili-
ties  with  regard  for  the  principles  of  humanity and  chivalry."
This  reads  like  a  cruel  satire  after   what   we  have  done   in
Vietnam.  The  truth  is that  U.S.  forces have  been  as  indifferent
to  international  law  in  handling  prisoners  as  in  dealing  with
the  civilian  population   generally.    "The   only  good   gook   is
a  dead  gook"  has  been  the  rule  of  thumb.
Torture   Taken  For  Granted
The  horrifying  testimony taken  here  in  Washington  in  three
days  of  hearings  by  the  National  Veterans  Inquiry  Into   U.S.
War  Crimes  has  only  revealed  again  what  has  been  common
knowledge  for  years.  I  spoke  to  three  witnesses who  had  been
engaged   in  prisoner  interrogation  as  part  of  their  work   for
military  intelligence  in  South  Vietnam,  and  they  all  told   the
same  terrible  story  of  torture  and  murder.   "The   only  time  I
ever  heard  of  the  Geneva  convention,"  one  of  them  told  me,
"was  when  I  was  given  the  card  issued  to  all  soldiers  in  case
of  capture,  saying that  I  had  abided  by  the  Geneva  convention
and  should  be treated  in  accordance with  it."   This  forbids  the
torture  of  prisoners  to  exact  more  from  them  than  their  rank
and  unit,  and  it  extends  this  protection  to  guerrillas  as well  as
regular  forces.  All  three  said  the  use  of  torture  was  taken  for
granted  in  the  interrogation  of  soldiers  and  suspects.
The   POW   issue  is  being  used   to  prepare   the  public  for
intensification  of  the  war.   Our  military  leaders  have  learned
little  from  more  than   15  years  in  Indochina.    "Some   senior
officers,"  William  Beecher  reported  from  the  Pentagon  to  the
New   York   Times  Nov.   26,  in  his  special  story  on  how  the
POW   camp   raid   was  planned,   "even   talked   among   them-
Footnote  on  Humanitarianism
This  is  a  humanitarian subject  matter.
—Laird  on  the  POW  camp  raid  to  Fulbright  at  the
Senate  Foreign  Relations  hearing  Nov.  24.
"Ten days ago  the  worst  hurricane in  history smashed
into  the  Ganges Delta,  killing  perhaps  as  many  as  half
a  million people.  There  is  ample food available in Dacca
for  all  those  who  survived.   But  10  days  after  the  dis-
aster,   there  is  no  transportation.   The  United  States
sent  only  four  helicopters.    Consider  the   contrast   be-
tween  this  situation,  the  near  indifference  with  which
the  United States  has responded to this catastrophe, and
the  events  in  Vietnam.  According  to  Secretary   Laird,
200  multi-million  dollar  aircraft  were  sent  into   North
Vietnam  to  'remind  Hanoi  what  the  rules  of  the  game
are.'   For  such  deadly  war  games  we  can  deploy  any
amount of  force, but for  the  disaster-stricken  East Paki-
stanis,  we  can  only  send  four  helicopters."
—Rep.  Don Edwards,   (D.-Cal.)  in  the  House  Nov.  23.
selves   of   an   amphibious   landing   by   a   Marine   division   in
North  Vietnam  aimed  at  so  unnerving  Hanoi's   leaders  they
might  quickly sue  for  peace  and  release  all  prisoners."   "Some
senior  officers"  should  have their  heads  examined.   The  notion
that  one  Marine  division  could  accomplish  overnight   in  the
North  what  the   French  army  couldn't  do  in  eight  years  of
war  could  occur  only  to  a  "Hogan's  Heroes"  mentality.    "But
these  and  other   officers,"   Beecher's   account  continues,    "con-
vinced  that the White House would  never  permit  such  a widen-
ing  of  the  war,  argued  that  the  job  could  be  done  by  small
hand-picked  teams,  using  surprise  to  overwhelm  local   guards
and   extricate  the  prisoners  by  helicopter."   The   use  of   the
plurals  indicates  that  the  raid,  like  any good  TV  script,  was  to
be part  of  a  series  of  such  exploits.   This  second  proposal  was
put  before  Laird  "in  late  spring  or  early  summer"  this  year.
We  still  do  not  know  what  contingency  plans  were   accepted
with  it.   What  if  the  raiding  party  had  itself  been   captured,
or  besieged  in  the  POW  camp,  and  sent  out  a cry for  help  lest
it  and  the  prisoners  be  wiped  out?   Were  there   contingency
plans   to  rescue  the   rescuers?    Nixon   and   Laird   have  both
clearly  hinted  that  they  may  try  again.   Next  time  we   could
find   ourselves   drawn   into  a  wider   invasion   of   the   North,
sentimentally  fueled  by  an  appeal  to  bring  our  boys  home  by
Christmas—some   Christmas  in  the  1980s,  that  is.
We'll   Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed Envelope
FOR   STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  special  pre-publication  price  of  $8.95
send  I.  P.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics  and  Prophecies:
1967-70  (Random  House).  Regularly  $10.
(To)   Name-
Street
City
Indicate
Please   renew
Name
Street
City
I
4420  29th
Zip
if   gift    announcement
(or  enter)   a  sub  for
Zip
State
wished   Q
the   enclosed   $5:
State
.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly               12/14/70
St.  N. W.,  Washington,   D.C.   20008
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly. 2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington. D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  In  August  at  4420  29th  St..  N.W..  Washington.   D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published and  edited  by  1.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  to  in  the  U.S.;   16  in   Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED