I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970jul27.pdf

============================================================

Israel  and  the Atom Bomb, P.  2
Chet  Huntley's Devastating Final  Good  Night  To the  White House
I've  been  with  Nixon  socially;  I've  travelled  with  him  in  his   private  plane;  I've  seen  him  under  many  conditions.  The
shallowness  of  the  man overwhelms me; the  fact  that  he  is  President  frightens  me.
—Chet  Huntley   interviewed   on  his  retirement  in  Life   Magazine  July  17
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL. XVIII,  No. 15
JULY  27,  1970     <°'»
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
How  The  Pentagon  Poisons  The  Public  Mind  On  SALT
Secretary  Laird  launched  new  alarms  at  his  press  conference
of  July  9.  "Laird  Says  Soviet  Builds  Up   ICBMs   At  An   In-
tensive  Rate,"   said  a  headline  in  the  New   York   Times  next
day.   "Reports  A  Broad  Effort   to  Expand  Offensive   Force   In
Spite  of  Arms  Parley."  The  impression  created  was  that  while
we  were  trying  to  negotiate  some  limits  on  the  arms  race  at
the  SALT  talks  in  Vienna,  the  Russians  were  forging  ahead.
"They  have  developed  more  SS-9  missiles .  .  .  They  have  pro-
ceeded  with  this  program  since  the  talks  started  at  Helsinki,"
Secretary  Laird  told  his  press  conference.  "I  would   like  not
to  confirm  that,"  Laird  added,  "it  would  please  me  if  I  could
report  differently  to  you.  But  in  all  frankness,  I  must  give  you
an  honest   answer."    Whenever   Laird   sounds   like  Abraham
Lincoln  walking  ten  miles  to  return  six  cents,  it  is  a   good
idea  for  the  press  corps  quickly  to  feel  its  wallet  pocket.
Contradicted  By  Intelligence  Leaks
Unfortunately  for  Laird  he  was  too  clever  for  his   purpose.
•For  several  months  there  have  been  leaks  from   the  govern-
ment's  vast  and  varied  intelligence  establishment  to  the   effect
that  the  Russians,  far  from  expanding  their  SS-9  force,   had
halted  its  development  ever  since  last  August,  three  months
before  the  SALT  talks  opened  in  Helsinki. These  intelligence
leaks,  whether  from  CIA,  State  Department  or  the  not-always-
monolithic  Pentagon   itself,  achieved  publication  first  in  Stew-
art  Alsop's  column  in  Newsweek   last  April  27.  He  wrote  that
it  was  "a  hopeful   fact  that  U.S.  intelligence has  detected   no
new  starts  on  the  SS-9  launch  sites,  which  take  18  months  to
complete,  since  last  August."   He  added,  "This  may mean  that
the   Soviets  have  already  at  least  tentatively  decided   to  halt
SS-9   production   at   the   present   level,   as  part   of   a   SALT
agreement."
The   alarmist  headlines  generated   by  the  Laird  press   con-
ference    sent   some    of    us   back   to    the    newly   published
testimony   last  May   28  of   three   former   Presidential  science
advisers  to  the  Gore  disarmament  subcommittee  on  the  SALT
talks.  Dr.  Kistiakowsky—who advised Eisenhower—submitted
a  chart  showing  that  the  curve  of  SS-9  deployment  was  flat-
tening  out.   Dr.  Jerome  Wiesner,  who  served  under  Kennedy,
suggested   that  the   committee   look   at  what   the   Soviets   are
"actually  doing"  and  called  its  attention  to  a  "persistent"  in-
telligence  story  that   "no  new  SS-9  sites  under   construction"
had  been  observed  for  several  months.  Dr.  Donald  F.  Hornig,
who was Johnson's  science adviser, volunteered  that  he  thought
the  committee  ought  to  look  into  this  report  and  indicated  that
he  took  it   seriously.
Laird's   alarms  boomeranged   with   newspapermen    covering
the  Pentagon.  George  C.  Wilson  in  the  Washington   Post  and
Neil  Sheehan  in  the  New  York  Times  next  day noted  (in  the
words  of  the  latter)   that  Laird's  assertions   "directly   contra-
dicted  reports  from   senior  Administration   officials   to  the  ef-
It Certainly Has
In  Cambodia  the  futility  of  expanded aggression  has
been demonstrated.
•—Nixon's  TV  report  on Cambodia June SO.
Pnom  Penh—The  U.S.   effort   to  gather  military  in-
formation  in  Cambodia  is  being  hampered  because  the
Embassy  here  lacks  a  plane that  would  enable  its  eight
military  attaches  to  travel  from  Pnom  Penh  to  isolated
areas  in  the  interior.  Since  none  of  Cambodia's  roads
are  secure  any  longer,  air  travel  is  the  only  way  infor-
mation can be gathered first hand.
—New   York   Times  dispatch   from  Cambodia  July  12
feet  that  the  Soviet  Union  had  constructed  no  new  sites  for
SS-9s  since  last  August."  Next  day  those  reporters  with  in-
telligence  sources  checked  back  with  them  and  discovered that
the   SS-9   deployments  had   not   been   continuous  during  the
SALT  talks  but  had  just  been  resumed.  Apparently  this  was
another  Laird  whopper.  Chalmers  Roberts  in  the   Washington
Post  July  11  reported  that  as  late  as  June  24,  when  America's
chief  negotiator  Gerard  C.  Smith  met  with  President   Nixon
"no  new  SS-9  starts  had  been  discovered  since  prior  to  Hel-
sinki."
Why  had  this  nine-month  hiatus  in  the  deployment  of  the
SS-9  never  been  publicly acknowledged  by  the  Nixon  Admin-
istration?  Robert  C.  Toth  in  the  Los  Angeles  Times  July  11,
after   checking   Laird  against   "authoritative   sources"   of   his
own,  suggested  that  if  the  pause  had  been  admitted   "support
might   dwindle  for   the  ABM   phase-2  appropriations  to  be
voted  on  in  a  few  weeks."  More  important,  Mr.  Toth  went  on
to speculate,  "is whether  the Russians were signalling  deliberate
restraint  on  multi-headed  missiles  with  the   SS-9  construction
pause."  He  added  that  it  was  "arguable"  that  when  the  U.S.
failed  to  respond  and  in  fact  went  ahead  with  MIRV   "only
then  did  the  Russians decide  to  resume  deployment  of   SS-9s."
The  one  member  of  Congress  to  speak  up  as  this  is written
•was  Jonathan  B.  Bingham,  a  Democrat  from  Riverdale,   N.Y.
In  a  one-minute  speech  plus  revision  of  remarks  he  was  al-
lowed  in  the  House  July  13,  Bingham  pointed  out  that  "three
weeks  after  the  first  Minutemen  were  armed  with  MIRV,  new
SS-9  missile  site  starts  were  detected."   Addressing   Laird  he
asked,   "Did   you  suppose  for   one  moment   that  the  Soviets
would  not  go  ahead  with  the  SS-9  if  the  U.S.  went  ahead  with
the  MIRV?   Why   did  you  never  tell  the   American   people
about   the  long  suspension   of   SS-9  starts,   which  might   well
have  been  interpreted   as  a  sign  of  restraint  calling  for   some
reciprocal   action?"   Reciprocal   action  is  just  what  Laird  and
the  Pentagon  chiefs  feared.  A  Soviet  resumption   serves   their
purpose   as  an  excuse  to  go  forward  with  ABM  and  MIRV.
(Continued   On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,   July  27,1970
THE  URGENCY  OF  FORCING  Israel  and  the  Arabs  into  peace
negotiations  is  intensified  by  realization  that  the  local   conflict
may  sooner  or  later  take  on  nuclear  dimensions. We  should  all
be  indebted  to  Senator  Symington  for  opening  up  the  dread
subject  on  CBS Face  The  Nation  July  12 and  to  the  New   York
Times  for  pursuing  it with  a Hedrick  Smith  story July  18 on  the
progress  Israel  seems  to  have made  toward  becoming  a  nuclear
power.   Senator  Symington,  who  has  access  to  classified  infor-
mation  as a  member  of  the  Senate  Armed  Services  and  Foreign
Relations  Committees,  said,  "I  don't  think  there's  any question
about  the  fact  that  Israel  is  doing  its  best  to  develop  nuclear
weapons  .  .  .  And  it  would  be a  very  relatively  simple  matter
for  the  Soviet  Union   to  give  nuclear  weapons  to  any  of  the
Arab  countries."   When  Mr.  Smith   investigated  for  the  New
York   Times  he  came  up  with  two  alarming  reports.    One  is
that  the  Israelis  in  the  original  purchase  of  the  50  Phantom-4
planes  in  December   1969   asked  the  Pentagon   to  equip  some
of  them  with-racks  for  nuclear  bombs.   The  other  was  that  an
attempt  to   make   Israel   sign   the-  Nuclear    Non-Proliferation
Pact  as a  condition  of  the  plane  deal  was  abandoned  on  White
House  instructions  after  the  Israelis  objected.
The  day  after  the  Times  story,  Israel's   Ambassador  to  the
U.S.,  Itzhak  Rabin,  was on  Meet  The  Press.  He  was  an  evasive
witness,  a  humorless  hard-liner.   He  is  a  Lieut.  Gen.  who  was
Israel's  commander  in  the  June  war.   If  men  of  his  mentality
make  Israeli   policy  we  are  all  heading  for  trouble.    He  said
Israeli  policy  was  not  to  be  the  first  to  introduce  nuclear  arms
into  the  Middle  East.   He  was  then  asked  why,  if  that  were   '
true,   Israel   had   not   signed   the   Nuclear    Non-Proliferation
Pact.  He  never  gave  a clear  answer.   It was under  study.  It was
a  complicated  question.  He  was not  a scientist,  etc.
One  does  not  need  to  be  a  scientist  or  to  take  more  than  a
year  of  study  (as  Israel's  government  has)  to  realize that  noth-
ing  could  be  worse  for  Israel,  the  Middle  East  and  the  world
than  the  injection  of  nuclear  arms  into  this  inflamed  area.   It
was  bad  enough  to  commit  the  folly   of  bombing  Cairo  —
thus  bringing  Soviet  SAM-3s  and  pilots  into  the  area.   It  would
be  worse   if  some  day  Arab  fear  of   Israeli  nuclear  weapons
brought   Soviet  nuclear  arms  and  Soviet  technicians  to  handle
them,  into  the  Middle  East.
This  is  the  direction  in  which  we  are  heading,  and  I  think
the  American Jewish community should  become  aware  of  it  and
•  help  impose  restraint  on  hard-liners like Rabin.  He  was  much
too complacent  about  linking Isreal to a  "global struggle."  It  is
time,  for  Israel's  good  and  the  world's,  to  step  up  the  pressure
for  a settlement  as part  of  a  different  global  struggle,  a  struggle
for  disengagement   and  detente  in  which  humanity  can  move
Just  What  Cyrus  Eaton  Meant
The   abrupt   resignation  of   seven   Penn   Central  di-
rectors  because  of   conflicts   of   interest   arising   from
their  affiliation  with  financial  institutions holding  Penn
Central  loans  points  to  the  necessity  for  legislative re-
form.  Officers  of  banks and  insurance companies should
not   be   permitted  to   be   directors   of   corporations  to
which  they  lend  money.  Not  involved  in  the  Penn  Cen-
tral  case,  but  relating  to  the  conflict  of  interest  prob-
lem,  is  the  reprehensible  practice  of  bank  officers  per-
petuating  themselves  in   office   by  voting  the   stock  of
their  own  bank  held  in  a  fiduciary  capacity. This  abuse
should be prohibited by law.
—Cyrus  Eaton,  chairman   of  the   board  of   the  C.&O.
RR  to  the  Joint  Economic  Committee  July  IS
While  the  nation's  largest  railroad  plunged  toward
financial  disaster  in  1969  and  early  1970,  fifteen  Penn
Central  executives  took  action  that  was  to  save  them
substantial  sums  as  the  company's  stock  price   plum-
meted  in  succeeding  months.  These  corporate  insiders
unloaded  more  than 40,000  of  their  Penn  Central  shares
for   an  estimated  total   of   more  than  $2  million.  The
prices  received per  share,  mostly  ranging between  $40
and  $70, were  far  above the  stock's  recent  low  of  $5.62.
This  insider  selling  occurred  at  a  time  when  the   in-
vesting  public  was  only  dimly  aware, if  at  all, that  the
Penn   Central  Transportation  Co.  was   in  big   trouble.
—Fred  Zimmerman,  Wall  Street  Journal,  July  14
away  from  the  nuclear brink.   An  atom-free  Middle  East  is  far
better  for  Israel's  future  than  a  temporary  advantage  in  being
the  first  to  produce  the  weapons  of  suicide.
WE   HOPE   SOME   PUBLISHER  will  commission  Thomas   R.
Harkin  to  tell  the  full  story of  Con  San prison  and  of  his  deci-
sion  to  resign  and  expose  it  rather  than  let  a  House   investi-
gating  commission white-wash  it.   The  full  story  would  tell  a
lot  not  only  about  Vietnam  but  about  the  habits  which  keep
bureaucrats   and   Congressmen   from   telling   the   truth.    Rep.
Conyers  of  Detroit  told  the  House  July  16  that  the  U.S.  Study
Team,   on   Political   and   Religious   Freedom   in   Vietnam   on
which  he  served  gave  Henry  Kissinger  a  report  on  Con  San  in
June  1969  and  that  there  have  been  at  least  four  other  reports
since,  one  by  an  International  Red  Cross  team  made available
to  both  Nixon  and  Thieu  and  separate  reports  by  the  South
Vietnamese  Senate  and  Assembly  on  the  torture  of  students.
Yet  Frank  Walton,  chief  American  adviser  on  public  safety  in
Saigon,  compared  Con  San  to  a  "Boy  Scout  recreation  camp"!
Cyrus  Eaton  Warns Nixon  Of  Hoover's
The  Nixon  Administration was  elected  on  the  strength  of
a  purported but  still  undisclosed  plan  to  terminate  the  war
in  Vietnam. Three  of  the  key  figures  in  the Administration,
the   President,   the   Secretary   of   State   and  the  Attorney
General,   are  Wall  Street   lawyers  who  have  been  closely
associated   with  the   problems  of   corporate  and  municipal
finance.  Their  failure to  recognize the  portents  of impending
economic  doom  and  to  conclude  the  rash  military adventure
responsible  for  those  portents  is  incredible.
As  a  concerned  capitalist,  I  have  communicated my  mis-
givings   to  the  Administration.  Last  November,  when  Bell
Telephone  bonds  were  sold  at  the,  up to  then,  highest  inter-
est   rates  in  American  corporate  history,   I  called  this   to
President  Nixon's  attention.  My  message  stated:   "Unless
there   are   immediate   and  drastic   changes   in  our  foreign
policies,  I  feel  we  are  headed  for  a  panic  that  could  destroy
the   Nixon   Administration   even   as   the   debacle   of   1929
destroyed  the  political  career  of  Herbert  Hoover."
If  the  President  will  not  act,   then  Congress  must.   This
Fate  If  The War Is  Not  Speedily  Ended
nation  simply cannot  afford  to  continue spending  $80 billion
a  year  for  military  purposes.  The   $25  billion  included  in
that  budget  for  the  Vietnam  adventure  is  money completely
down'the  drain,  while  much  of  the  remainder  goes  for  the
development   and  production  of   weapons  that   would   ex-
tinguish  the  human  race  if  ever  used.
Less  than  a  week  ago  I  received  a  letter  from  Viscount
Montgomery.  The  great   general  makes  this  judgment  on
President   Nixon's   conduct  of   the   war   in   Vietnam:  "He
should  realize  that  a  political  end  to  the  war  in  Vietnam  is
the  only  possible  way  to  end  that  war."
The  allegation  that  North  Vietnam  and  the  Provisional
Revolutionary  Government of  South Vietnam will  not  nego-
tiate   is  not  in  accord  with  the   facts.   I  suggest   for   the
Congress'  consideration that  a  small  committee  of  the  Sen-
ate  and  House  meet  informally in  Canada or  in  France  with
a  similar  group  from  North  Vietnam  and  the  Provisional
Revolutionary Government.
—Mr.  Eaton  to  the  Joint  Economic Committee  July  IS  (abr)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July  27,1970
WITH   SUCH   ALLIES,   WHO   NEEDS   ENEMIES  DEPT:     The
Thai  mission  to  the  UN  issued  an  angry  press release June  29
that  no  one printed attacking  Sen. Symington.   It  asked,  "Who
made  Thailand  vulnerable  to  the  Chinese  Communists?" and
answered  "The   Americans,  by  putting  7  enormous  air  bases
there."   Do  the  Thais want  us  to  conclude that they'd  be  safer
if  we withdrew?  .  .  .  "TURKS  ANGRY  AT U.S.,"  a  dispatch to
the  Washington  Star  reported  July  19,  "Over  Curbs  On  Opi-
um."   Apparently this  NATO  ally  would  feel  happier  if  more
Americans  took  dope  .  .  .  LOOKS  LIKE  NIXON   RISKS  JAIL  if
he  returns  to  Saigon:   The  AP  reported  July  19  that  Nixon
was  preparing to  work  out  fresh   initiatives  for  the  Paris  talks
with his new Paris negotiator, Bruce, looking toward  some  form
of  coalition settlement.  The  same day on  CBS Face  The  Nation,
Thieu  said  "anyone  who  talks  about  coalition  should  be  put
in  jail"  .  . .
THE   BASTION  OF   FREEDOM  BADLY  NEEDS  EDUCATION   IN
WHAT   FREEDOM  MEANS:    An   AP  reporter  in  Miami  spent
July  4  approaching pedestrians  with  a  copy  of  the Declaration
of  Independence  and  asking  them  to  sign.  Only one  man  out
of  50 agreed.  Two  called  it  "Commie  junk."  Another warned,
"Be  careful  who  you  show  that  kind  of  anti-government stuff
to,  Buddy."   Similar  experiments on  other  occasions with  the
Bill  of  Rights  indicates  how  poorly  educated  most  Americans
are  in  the  fundamentals  of  the  freedom  we  claim  to  be  defend-
ing  elsewhere  .  .  .  THIS  SEEMS  To   APPLY  To  THE DEPART-
MENT  OF  JUSTICE,  Too  in overruling State Dept.  and  refusing
an  entry  visa  to  Mrs.  Shirley  Graham  DuBois.   The  refusal  is
a  slap in  the  face  of  the  black community  for  she  is  the  widow
of  W.E.B.  DuBois.   It  is  also  an  affront   to  freedom  and  de-
cency.   She  was born  in  New  York  71  years  ago  and  later  be-
came  a  citizen  of  Ghana  to  escape  the  McCarthy period  witch
hunt.   Mitchell's men  think  she's  too  "subversive"  to  be  al-
lowed  reentry to her native country  . .  . WE  APPLAUD  JAMES  J.
KILPATRICK,  a  conservative columnist,  for  exposing  the  "Dus-
seldorf   Rules   For   Revolution,"   now   circulating  widely   in
rightist  circles,  as  a  patent  fraud.   It  takes  courage  to   affront
some  of  one's  own  constituency  .  .  .  Two   BIRCHITES  have
been  elected to Congress from California as Republicans.  Imag-
ine  the  outcry  if  two  Communists  were  elected  as  Democrats.
DEPT.  OF  PENITENCE:   Sen. Young  of  Ohio  was  misled  in
the  speech  we  reported   in  our  last  issue  and  we  did   James
Reston  of  the  New   York   Times  an  injustice  in  reporting  it
without  investigation.  Not  only did  Reston  resist White  House
pressure  to  hush  up  the  100-plane  bombing   raid  on   North
The  Black  Soldier  In  Vietnam
The  militant  young  black  soldier  in  Vietnam  is  one
of  the  war's  touchiest  aspects.  I  was  always  suspicious-
ly   regarded  by  top  brass   whenever  I  talked  to  black
soldiers  apart  from  their  officers.
Even  in  the  military  stockade  at  Long  Bien  when  I
requested  the  opportunity  to  meet  privately  with  sol-
diers  from  my  own  state,  the  group  assembled   for  me
did  not  contain  a  single  black  soldier  although  61  per-
cent  of  the  stockade  population is  black.
When  asked  the  reason  for  this  high  percentage,  Col-
onel   Jones,  the   Confinement   Officer,   himself   a  Negro
replied:   "The  black  soldier  is   anti-establishment   and
anti-war."   I  suppose  in  this  respect  our  black  soldiers
and  South  Vietnamese  people  are   soul   brothers.   But
other  reasons  may  lie  beneath:   racial  bias,  unequal  as-
signment,  double  standards,  and  a  lack  of   understand-
ing at the command level.
—Rep.  Augustus  F.  Hawkins,  (D.-Calif),   filing   Sup-
plemental   Views  to  Report   of  the  Select  Committee  on
US  Involvement   in  Southeast  Asia,  Cong.  Rec.  July   7.
Vietnam  at  the  beginning of  May  but  he  also  disclosed  (May
4)  the  efforts  made by the White  House  to  keep  reporters  from
printing  the  fact  that the  raid  occurred.  Apologies  and  bravo!
We  were  also  wrong  in  saying  the  AP  ticker  did  not  carry
Richard  Barnet's  press  conference  warning  against  the  use  of
atomic  bombs  in  Indochina.   It's  just  that  neither  I,  Barnet
nor  anyone else  we talked with  ever  saw  it  in print.  Sorry.
HATS  OFF:  To  the  Australian  newspaperman Peter  Arnett
and  the  German  photographer  Horst  Faas  about  to  be  reas-
signed  by  the  AP  out  of  South  Vietnam  after  years  in  which
they have provided the  bravest and  the most independent cover-
age  of  the  war.  We  owe  Faas  that  heart-rending picture  of  a
Vietnamese  father  with   a  napalm-burned  son   in   his  arms.
Arnett  said  he  had  hoped  to  cover the  end  of  the  war, but  now
feels  that  it  will  go  on  for  years.   That  offhand   remark  from
the  reporter  least  taken  in  by U.S.  propaganda  all  these  years is
an  item  to  file  but  not  to  forget.
AGONY  FOOTNOTE:  How keep  the  young  in  line  to  work
within  "the  system"  when  they  see  the  obscene  spectacle of
the  Democratic  leadership  in  the  House  joining  hands  with
the  White  House  to  allow  only  7  minutes  of  debate  before
voting  down  the  Cooper-Church  amendment.   This   is   oli-
garchy  and  gerontocracy  rather  than  democracy.
From  Professionalism   To Pot:  How The Army In Vietnam  Has  Changed  In Five Years
It   is   almost   exactly   five   years   since   I  first  arrived  in
Vietnam.  In  1965,  when  the  American  buildup  was  just  get-
ting   under  way,  the   troops   seemed   mostly   to   be   para-
troopers  and Marines. The  haircuts  were  all  short  and disci-
pline  could  be  pretty   strict.   Even  a  couple  of   years   ago
GI's  in  some  outfits  were  being  given  six  months  in  jail  for
smoking   pot.  Now,  as  one  wanders  about  the  country,   it
looks  like  a  different  army. Half  the  troops  in  the  field  seem
to  be  wearing  peace  symbols  around their  necks  and  every-
where  they  greet  each  other  with the  V-for-peace sign.
A  lot  of  GI's,  an  awful  lot  of  GI's,  are  casually  smoking
pot.  Even  officially  the  army  seems  to  be  facing  up  to  the
facts.  The  ones  who  are  caught  get  off  with  much  lighter
sentences  these  days—a  $50  fine  being  pretty  typical. "We
can't  put  them  in  jail  or  we  wouldn't  have  any  people   left
out  here  (in  the  field),"  one  officer  said.
The   force   now   in   Vietnam—especially  in   the   combat
units—is   also   now   overwhelmingly  draftee   rather   than
regular   army.  The  troops   say   their   companies   are   gen-
erally  80  to  90  percent  draftees.  And  the  draftees   complain
that   the  regulars   and  veterans   by  now  have   pretty   well
managed  to  get  assigned  to  safe  and comfortable   rear  area
jobs.
Instead   of   all   the   moral   arguments   one   hears   among
student  protesters,  one  hears  from  the  GI's  talk  about  how
pointless  the  war is  and how  it  can't  be  won anyhow  so  why
get  hurt or killed. "I think  they're  against  the  army  and  the
whole  system   more  than   (the   politics   of)   the  war,"  said
Specialist-4  Robert  Mantel],  25,  who  has  a  master's  degree
in   political  science  and  whose   father   is  a  career   colonel.
"It's   a  stupid  war,"  said  another   GI  who  worked  in  cam-
paigns   for   both   Goldwater   and   Reagan   before   getting
drafted  and still  considers  himself  something  of  a  conserva-
tive.  "Our battalion  commander will  tell  you  that  we'll  have
ambushes   set  out  tonight,"  he  said,  "and  maybe  he'll  even
believe  it.  But  there  won't  be  any.  The  Grunts  will  call  in
by  radio  and  say  they've  set  up  at  the  ambush  point.  But
they'll  really  check  into  some  ARVN  compound  and  smoke
pot  and  make  out  with  the  boom-boom  girls."
—Raymond    Coffey   from  Saigon,  Wash.  Star,  July  12  (abr.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July  27,1970
The  Same  Falsifications  in  the  Laird-Foster  Talks to  AP  and  ANPA
(Continued  From  Page One)
The  Pentagon  not  only  withheld  information  on  the  Soviet
pause  but  there  is  now  evidence  that  it  gave  false information
about  SS-9 deployments   last  winter  to  the  Senate  Armed  Serv-
ices  Committee.  Dr.   John   S.  Foster,   the  Pentagon's   research
chief,   as  slick  an  operator   as  Laird  himself,   was  before   the
committee  in  closed  session   last  Feb.  24.  A  series  of  written
questions    was   submitted    to   him   by   Senator     Symington.*
The  Second-Rate  Power  Nonsense
Symington   pointed   out  that  Nixon  had  said  he  was  deter-
mined  "to  postpone   additional  actions  on  U.S. offensive sys-
tems   this  year   in  order   to   advance  prospects   for   success  at
SALT."  Symington  wanted  to  know  how  Dr.   Foster   recon-
ciled  this  with  budget  requests  for  MIRVing  Minuteman   III
and  our  Polaris  submarines.   "It  would   undercut   our  position
in  SALT,"  Dr.   Foster  said  in  his  written  reply  on  p.  254, "if
we  took  unilateral action  to  not  continue  with  these  programs.
This   is  particularly    true   in  view  of   the   fact   that   the  Soviet
'  Union  is  continuing  deployment   of  SS-9s  .  .  ."  [Italics  added]
That  was  the  end  of  February.  No  new  starts  on  the  SS-9 had
been  sighted   since  August.  Two  months   later  Secretary  Laird
on  April  20  and  Dr.   Foster  on  April   23  made  speeches  re-
spectively  to  the  editors   of  the   Associated  Press  and  to   the
American   Newspaper   Publishers  Association   in   which   they
said  America  was  in  danger  of  becoming  a  second   rate  power
as  the  Soviet  Union,  despite  the  SALT  talks,  forged   ahead  in
offensive  and   defensive   missiles.  Neither  mentioned   that   no
* The  Senator  seems  more  than  skeptical  of  Pentagon  state-
ments.  At  pps. 1712-14  of  last  year's  Armed  Services  Commit-
tee  hearings,  he  confronted  Dr.  Foster  with  a  series  of  ques-
tions  Symington  had  put  to  the  CIA on  the  SS-9 and asked  Dr.
Foster  for  his  own  answer  to  each  of  these   questions.   Both
the  CIA  and  Dr.  Foster's  answers  are  heavily  censored  to  re-
move  all  contradictions  and  discrepancies  but  it  is  clear  from
the  context  that  they  differed.  Further evidence  of  Dr.  Foster's
tendency  to  indulge  in  alarms  not  justified by  the  intelligence
establishment  may  be  seen  at  p.  1790 of  last  year's   hearings
where  he  says  in  discussing  the  SS-9 "Although  the  National
Intelligence  Estimates  are  the  basis  of  this  discussion,  I  will
'consider  possibilities  which  are  not  part  of  the  current  esti-
mates."  [Italics  added].  This  means  basing  budgets  and alarms
on   iffy   possibilities   beyond   those   the   intelligence    agencies
thought  likely.
Tortuous  Evasions   and  Bleak  Outlook
Q.  Mr. Secretary,  while  you  were  in  London  you  said
you   thought   the   probable  outcome   of   the   conflict  in
South   Vietnam   would   be  a  state   of   no   war   and  no
peace.  This  leaves  a  very  serious  question  as  to  whether
the  American  people  now  look  forward  to  a  very pro-
longed  commitment  of  American  troops  to  that  coun-
try  ...     A.  I  did not say  that  was  my  prediction.   I did
say that is a possibility   ...
Q.  Does    the   Administration   believe    that    it    can't
complete  its  Vietnamization  process—that   is,  withdraw
all   American  troops—until  there   is   a   political   settle-
ment?   A.  No.  I  don't  think  that's  the  case.   The  Presi-
dent  has  never  made  any  statement  about  our  plans  for
withdrawal   beyond   next  spring   and  we   don't   intend
to  ...
Q.  I  take  it  ...     that  President  Thieu  does  not buy
what   President   Nixon   said   on  April   20   [that  he  did
not  insist  upon  an  election  but  was  ready  to  accept  a
settlement  reached  some  other  way] and  that  the  only
formula  he  [Thieu]   agrees  to  is  the  election   formula.
A.  No,  I  didn't  say  that.   I  just  said  he  hadn't   said
one  way  or  the  other  and  I  don't  think  he  should.
Q.  Well  you  said  before  you  left  that  you  were  going
to   talk   about   the   possibility  of   new   initiatives.   The
stories  from  out  there  indicated  that  you  got  a  rather
negative  reaction  from  the  Saigon   government.
A.  No,  that  isn't  correct  and  I  have  a  witness   [indi-
cating  Mr.  McCIoskey, his  chief  press  officer].
[Laughter.]   It's  quite  incorrect  ...     no  decision  has
been   made  .  .  .  but  I  must  say  that  President  Thieu
has been very cooperative   ...
Q.  Well,  Mr. Secretary,  can  you  say  now  whether  the
U.S.   does  plan  new  diplomatic  initiatives  on  the  Viet-
nam problem?
A.  Well,  not  beyond  what  I've said.  We're  consider-
ing  them.
—Secretary  of State Rogers July  15.
new  starts  on  the  SS-9 had  been  sighted  for  eight  months.*
How  can  any  real  success  be  expected  from   the  SALT  talks
with  men  like  Laird  and  Foster  in  the  high   command?
"See  my  Memo  To  the  AP  Editors:  How  Laird  Lied  in  the
New   York  Review  June  4.  No  AP  editor   incidentally  has  yet
shown  any  sign  of  caring  that  he  was  lied  to.
The  Bi-Weekly  Is' Not  Published  In  August—The   Next  Issue  Will  Be  That  Of  Labor  Day—Best  Wishes  and  Many  Thanks
To  All  Our  Readers.
FOR  STONE'S  HIDDEN   HISTORY
For  the  enclosed   $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War  (Monthly   Review
Press.)
(To)    Name
Street
City
Zip                  State
Indicate  if   gift   announcement  wished    O
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                         Zip                State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
               7
/
27
/
70
4420  29th  St.  N. W.,  Washington,   D.C.  20008
1. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St., N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.. N.W.,  Washington, D.C.
An  independent bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription: $5  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe;  $20 to.Isrnel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED