I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970apr06.pdf

============================================================

Wider   War  Has Already  Begun  In  Southeast  Asia, P.  2
How   Freedom   of   The  Press  Marches  On In  Our  Outposts  of   Freedom
Saigon  (UPI)—An   influential  Saigon  newspaper  said  today  the  South  Vietnamese  government  was  "seriously  studying"
a   peace   proposal  that   would  involve  coexistence   with   the  VietconE  and  their  participation  in  elections.  Police  seized
copies  of  the  paper  Doc  Lap  (Independence)  at  gunpoint  from   newsstands.—Washington    Post,  March  26.
Athens—loannis  Zigdis  a  former   Minister  was  arrested  today  for  an  interview  in  which  he  called  for  the  restoration  of
democracy  in  Greece.  So  were  the  two  publishers  and  two  editors  of  the  paper  "Ethnos"  which  published  it.  They  will  be
tried  for  "causing  anxiety  and fear  to  citizens  by  false  rumors."—New    York   Times,  March  27.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL  XVIII,  NO.  7
APRIL  6,  1970
'<"          WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
From  All  Deliberate  Speed  to  Deliberate  Slowdown
Behind  Nixon's  message  on  school  desegregation  there  is
a  covert  alliance  between  the  President  and  certain  black  mili-
tants.  Black  power  theoreticians  and   separatists  became  fav-
orite  White  House  visitors  as  the  message  was  being  framed.
It  recalls  the  days  when  some  members  of  the  Stern  gang,  a
fringe  of  Zionist  terrorists,  decided  with  impeccable  but   in-
sane  logic  that  they  and  Hitler  had  aims  in  common:  to  de-
stroy  the  British  empire  and  to  get  the  Jews  out  of  Europe.
They  overlooked  a  slight  difference:  they  wanted  the  Jews  in
Palestine,  he  wanted  them  in  his  human  furnaces.  Before  the
militants  succumb  to  Nixon's   seductive  hints  of  separate  but
equal  schools  under  their  control,   they  had  better   remember
the  obvious:  the  President  who  is  trying  to  pack  the  Supreme
Court  with  white  supremacists  is  no  friend  of  black  liberation.
In  the  event  of  widespread  black  uprising,  the  logic  of   the
Southern  strategy  may  some  day  bring  its  advocates  around  to
a  separate  black  Republic,  but  it  will  be  a  South  African style
Bantustan   where   blacks   can   more   easily   be   subdued    and
fenced  off.
Supreme  Court  Justice  Nixon?
From   a   constitutional   point   of   view   the   message   is   an
anomaly.  It  is  as  if,  in  frustration   over  the  Haynsworth   and
Carswell   nominations,   Nixon   and  Mitchell   decided   to  sit  on
the  Supreme   Court   themselves.   There  is  no  precedent   for  a
President's  intrusion  into  a  complex  field  of  litigation  to  pick
and  choose  among  Federal  court  decisions  in  advance  of  final
judgments  by  the  Supreme  Court.  The   effect   is  to  make  the
White  House  a  rival  interpreter  of  the  Constitution,  to intimi-
date  the  lower  courts,  and  to  encourage   local  defiance  of rul-
ings  Nixon  singles  out  as  too  extreme.  It  raises  the  shadow  of
serious   conflict  should   the  Supreme   Court   ultimately   decide
differently  from  Nixon.  It  may,  for  example,  disagree  with  his
basic  premise  that  a line  has to be  drawn  between  de  facto  and
de  jure  segregation.  Many  lower  courts  have  already held  that
if  de  facto  segregation  is  examined  closely  it  usually turns  out
to  be  de  jure, too,  since  black  neighborhoods  in  most  areas  are
the  result  of  a network  of  housing,  zoning,  urban  renewal  and
school  boundary  decisions   intended   to  create  ghettoes  and  to
isolate  colored  Americans  from  white.
Ever   since   he   took    office   Nixon   has   been   blowing   the
bugles  of  retreat  on  civil  rights.  This  message  is  the  loudest
yet.   One   of   the   earlier   ones   was  the   joint   Mitchell-Finch
statement  of  last  July  3  which  watered  down  enforcement   in
The  Higher  The  Body  Count
LONG  BINH,  Vietnam  (UPI)—Two  young   American
infantry   officers   told   an  Army   court  today  they  were
under  pressure  from  their  commanders  to  report  killing
as  many   communist   soldiers  as  possible.  A  civilian  de-
fense   attorney   called   the   officers   to   the  stand   in  an
effort   to  prove  Army  "body  count"  policies  forced  Lt.
James  B.  Duffy,  22,  of  Claremont,  Calif.,  to  order  the
execution  of  a  Vietnamese  man  seized  by  his  platoon  in
September  40  miles  southwest  of  Saigon.
Attorney   Henry   Rothblatt   of   New   York   called   Lt.
John  D.  Kruger,  23,  of  New  Orleans,  and  Lt.  Ralph  C.
Krueger  Jr., 25,  of  Wilmington,  Del., fellow  officers  of
Lt.  Duffy  in  the  3d brigade  of  the  9th  U.S. Infantry  Di-
vision.  Both  testified   "body  counts"  were  a  gauge  for
advancement   in   the   Army.   "Your   OER   (Officer   Effi-
ciency  Report)  is  based  on  how  many  enemy  killed," Lt.
Kreuger  told  the  court.  "It's that  simple."
—Washington   Daily   News,  (abr.),  March  25.
the  South  on  the  excuse  that  it  was  necessary  to  move  "mas-
sively"  against  de  facto  segregation   in  the  North.  The  Presi-
dent  now  turns  around  and  proposes   to  allow  de  facto  segre-
gation  in  both  sections.  He  says that  because  we  are  "one  na-
tion  .  .  .  one  people"  we  must  be  as  lenient  with  the  South
as we have  hitherto  been  with  the North!  Instead  of outlawing
de  facto  segregation  as  de  jure,  he  moves—in  his  crafty  anal-
ysis  of  "mixed"  situations—in  the  direction  of  tolerating  de
jure  segregation  as  de  facto.  Even when  there  is  openly  a  dual
school  system,  which  Nixon   says  he  opposes,  he  skilfully  un-
dercuts  the  effort  to  end  it  by  calling  on  the  courts  to  assume
the  "good  faith"  of  local  school  board  leadership.  But  the local
leadership   is  almost   always  lily-white.  To   assume   its   good
faith  is  to  shut one's  eyes  to  the  clear  history  of  how  segrega-
tion  was  brought  about.  How  the  Sophists  of  ancient   Greece
would  have  welcomed  Richard  Nixon  to  their  ranks!
As  an  expositor  of  the  law,  Mr.  Justice Nixon  fills  one  with
alarm.   He  invokes  two  canons  of  interpretation  with  a  sin-
ister  history.  One  is "the  rule  of  reason"  and  the  other   "bal-
ancing."  The  former  is the  doctrine  by which  the  Court  in  the
90s  gutted   the   Sherman   act  and   managed   to  discover  that
some  of   the  country's  greatest   trusts   somehow   were  not  in
violation  of  that  anti-trust law!  The  other  was  the  doctrine by
which,  in  the  McCarthyite  50s,  over, the  objections  of  Black
and  Douglas,  a  Supreme   Court   majority  undercut   the   First
Amendment  by  "balancing"  freedom   of  speech  against   other
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-We.kly,  April  6,  1970
Sihanouk  Alone  In  Southeast  Asia  Cost  Us  Neither  Lives  Nor  Dollars  . . .
He  [Sihanouk]  has  been  accused  of  a  number  of   other
things  but  he  can  never  be  accused  of  lack  of  dedication  to
Cambodia  .  .  .  Before  there  is  too  much   rejoicing  at  his
overthrow,  it  would  be  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  of  all  the
countries  in   Indochina,   Cambodia   under   Sihanouk   is   the
only   country   into  which  we   have  not   poured   billions  in
aid  .  .  .  the  only  country  in  which  we  have  not  had  Ameri-
cans  fighting  and dying  .  .  .  What  are  we  to  expect  now?
Aid  programs  for  Cambodia?  An  extension  of  military   op-
erations  into that  country?
Majority    Leader    Mansfield     to   the   Senate   March   26.
SECRET    GOVERNMENT,     SECRET    ARMIES,   SECRET  WAR:
These  have  begun   a  wider  Asian  conflict.   Certain  forces  in
the  military and  the  CIA  may  see this  as a way  to  stop  further
withdrawal  from  Vietnam,  and  Gen.  Westmoreland  has  asked
a   6-month   delay  in   any  further   pullout.  Organizations  like
the  CIA  are  made  to  order  for  the  kind  of  distant  intrigue
by  which  the  tail  can  wag  the  dog.  The  situation  in  Laos  has
fallen  apart  because  the  CIA's  secret  armies  violated  the  un-
• derstandings  that  supported  the  1962  territorial  status  quo.  In
Cambodia  the  CIA  has  long  gunned   for  Sihanouk.   The  ce-
lerity  with  which  the  State  Department   recognized   the  new
regime,  and  its  arrogance  in  still  keeping  secret  the  Symington
hearings  on  Laos  which  concluded  five  months  ago,  point  to
connivance  in  Washington.   South  Vietnamese  and  American
forces  have  extended  their  operations  into  Cambodia,  where
there  is evidence  of  popular  revolt  for  Sihanouk;  we  may  soon
be  invited  to  put  it  down  with  military  aid  and  troops.  Thai
forces  are  fighting  in  Laos.  The   Chinese,  possibly  better  in-
formed  than  the  American  people,  warn  (as  they  did  in  Korea
20  years  ago)   that  they  will  not  "sit   idly  by"  if  we  move  in
force  into  Laos  and  Cambodia.  It  is  time  for  the  peace  move-
ment  to  sound  the  alarms  against  a  second   Indochinese  war,
a  second  Korean-style conflict  with  China.
NAHUM   GOLDMANN,   PRESIDENT  OF  THE  WORLD   JEWISH
CONGRESS,   a  Zionist   leader   for   more   than   half   a  century,
pleads  in  "The   Future  of  Israel"  (Foreign   Affairs,    April)   for
a  neutralized  and  demilitarized  Israel  under  international  pro-
tection.  He  sees  as  a  precondition  "a  basic  settlement  of   the
greatest  human  and  emotional  obstacle  to  Arab-Israel  under-
' standing,  namely  the  Arab  refugee  problem."  He  admits  his
idea  is  visionary  but  not  more   so  than  was  Herzl's   Zionist
dream  only  75  years  ago.  A  besieged  and  militaristic  Israel,  if
not  overwhelmed  from  without,  will  be  destroyed  spiritually
from  within.  Goldmann's  idea  in  the  long  run  can  alone  pre-
Like  Baby  Bear's  Porridge
By  continuing   deployment   just  a  short   time   longer,
the  Soviet   Union  could   neutralize   the  Safeguard    sys-
tem.  Especially   because  of  the  vulnerability  of  the  Mis-
sile  Site  Radars—the  eyes  of  the  defense—it  was  clear
that   Safeguard   was   both   an   impractical    and   ill-de-
signed  method  of  defending  the  Minuteman  missile.  The
MSRs  can  be  destroyed  by  overpressures  just  one-tenth
as  powerful  as  would  be  required  to  destroy  a  hardened
Minuteman.   [Secretary  Laird]  said  they  [the   Russians]
may  deploy  multiple  independently-targetable  warheads,
improve   accuracy   and  continue   SS-9    deployments   at
the  present  rate.  If  this  happens,  Laird  said,  we  will  be
faced  in  the  mid-1970s  with  a  threat  which  is   "much
too  large  to-be  handled  by  the  level  of  defense  envi-
sioned  in  the  Safeguard  system  without  substantial  im-
provement  and  modification."  In  other  words,  what  the
Secretary   seems  to  be  saying  is   that   Russian   forces
must  be  not  too  small,  or  we  will  not  need  Safeguard;
not  too  large,  or  Safeguard  cannot  work.  They  must  be,
like  Baby   Bear's  porridge,  "just  right"  to  fit  our  de-
fense.
—McGovem  (D.  S.D.)  in  the Senate  (abr.),  Mar.  20.
serve' the  Zion  of  which  so  many  dreamed,  a  center  of  light
and  learning,  in  the  best  Jewish  tradition,  for  all mankind.
CAMUS  WROTE  THAT  EVERY  REVOLUTIONARY  in   the   end
becomes  an  oppressor  or  a heretic. Anna Louise  Strong  evaded
that  fate  by  moving  on  from   service  to  one  revolution,  the
Russian,   to   another   and   younger,  the   Chinese.   She  was  a
romantic.  She  fell  in  love  with  revolution,  and  as  a  lover  she
always  saw  it  through  misty  eyes.  This   made  her   a  propa-
gandist.  Even  after  the  ugly  Stalin  regime  branded  her  a  spy
and  expelled  her  in  1949,   she  could  not  bear  to  speak  of  the
evils  she  had  seen  grow  up  around  her  in  Moscow.  In  Peking,
where  other  American  exiles  fell  under  suspicion,  she  alone
was  accepted—in  her  80s!—bythe  Red  Guards.  She  died  of
arteriosclerosis  at  84,  but  her  heart  remained  somehow  girlish
and  innocent to  the  end.
A  REPORT  JUST  RELEASED  by  Sen.  McGovern's  Select  Com-
mittee  on  Nutrition  and  Human  Needs  shows  that the  Supple-
mental   Food   Program—for    infants,  children   and   pregnant
women—is  not  working  because  the  people  can't get  the  food:
"Distribution   centers   are   rarely  located   in   client  neighbor-
hoods;  the  centers  are  not  open  at  hours  convenient,to  work-
The  Author  Of  Babi  Yar,  Self-Exiled  In  London,  Answers  A  Soviet  Anti-Zionist  Canard
Sir:  On  March  12  the  Soviet  newspaper  Pravda  published
what  purported  to  be  an  appeal  by  Jews.  It  included  the
following  passage:  "The   tragedy  of   Babi  Yar  will  remain
forever  a  symbol,  not  only  of  the  cannibalism  of  the  Nazis
but  also  of  the  ineradicable shame  of  their collaborators and
followers—the  Zionists."
I  lived  through  the  whole  of   the  German  occupation  of
Kiev,  in  Kurenyovka,  next  to  Babi  Yar.   In  1941   I  was  12,
and  at  such  an  age  one  remembers  even  the  most  insignifi-
cant  details.  But  I  went  further  and  recorded  them  all  in  a
fat  notebook.  When  I  set  about  writing  "Babi  Yar"  in  earn-
est  I  did  not  rely  only  on  my  own  memory  or  on  my  notes;
I   spent   many   years   gathering   material,   re-living   those
years,  so  to  speak.  Nowhere  and  at  no  time  did  I  come
across  the  slightest  suggestion  of  any  collaboration  between
the  Nazis  and the  Ukrainian  Zionists.
I  am  now  about  to  publish  the  full  text  of  "Babi  Yar,"  in
which  there  is  a  detailed  account  of  how  between  Sept.  24
and  Sept.  28,   1941,   immediately   after   the  Germans  occu-
pied  Kiev,  the  whole  of  the  centre  of  the  city  was  blown  up,
having  previously  been  mined  by  the  Soviet  secret  police.
A  great  many   Germans  and  civilians  perished.  On  Sept.
29, as  a reprisal  for  this  action,  the  infuriated   Nazis  rounded
up  all  the  Jews  of  Kiev,  numbering  some  70,000,  and   exe-
cuted  them  in  Babi  Yar.  Thus  it  was  in fact  the  Soviet  secret
police  who  provoked  the  Nazis  into  committing  this   out-
rageous  act.  To  say  then  that  Zionists  were  involved  in  the
tragedy  of  Babi  Yar is  to  carry  cynicism  beyond  the  bounds
of  comprehension.
I  am  not  making  any  accusations  against  the  people  who
signed  the  slander  in  Pravda.  They  did  not  write  it.  I  know
some  of  them  personally  and  moreover  some  of  them  helped
me  to  reconstruct  the  events.  Presumably  they  were  forced
to do it.  It  seems that  the  Jews  in  the  Ukraine  are so  intimi-
dated  today  that  they  are  ready  to  sign  anything.
—A.  Anatoli  (Kuznetsov)   in  a letter  to  the  London  Daily
Telegraph,  March  23.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  6, 1970
. . . Eastland's  "Welfare  Check" From  Agriculture  Fatter  Than  Last  Year
ing  people;  there  is  not  always public  transportation available
to  the  centers;  and,  in  any  case,  public  transportation  is  not
always  feasible  due  to  the  bulk  and  weight  of  the  food  pack-
ages  which  were  distributed  only  once  a  month."   The  study
entitled   "Special   Summer  Project:  An  Evaluation"  was  pre-
pared  by  a  team  of  law  students  working  with  committee  staff.
THE  FARM  SUBSIDY  PROGRAM  continues  to  be  another  wel-
fare  program  for  the  rich.  Williams  (R.  Del.)   told  the  Senate
March  24  that  last  year  7,795  "farmers"—including   six  banks
—drew  more  than  $25,000  each.  J.  G.  Boswell  Co.  of  Calif,
again   received  the   largest   subsidy,   $4,370,657.   Seven   com-
panies  got  more  than  $1  million. Among  House  members  who
took  the  floor  briefly  that  day to protest,  Rep.  Findley  (D.   111.)
estimated  that  by placing  a  ceiling  of  $20,000  on  subsidies  we
could  save  $200-$300  million  annually.  One  voice  not  raised
belonged   to  Sen.  Eastland.  The  Eastland  Plantation   of  Sun-
flower  County,  Miss.,  last  year   collected   $146,792   in  subsi-
dies—$29,814  more  than  in   1968.
MAJ.  GEN.  WINSTON   PEABODY  "WIMPY"  WILSON,   the
National   Guard   commander   who   asked   all   Guardsmen   to
drive  with  their  car  lights  on  last  November  during  the  Viet-
nam  Mobilization,  is  about  to  be  rewarded.  On  March  16  the
House  voted  269-44  to  make  him  a  Lieutenant  General.  Only
Congressmen   Jacobs,  Koch,   Bingham  and   Ryan  bothered   to
ask  what  business  a  General  had  meddling   in  politics.   "Per-
haps,"  said  Koch,  "we  should  consider  not  the  promotion  of
the  General,   but  the  removal  of  a  star."  The  bill  has  yet  to
reach  the  Senate.  Maybe  it  will  recommend   a  medal   instead
for  intrepid gallantry.
STEVE   NELSON,   COMMANDER  OF   THE   AMERICAN  VOL-
UNTEERS  who   fought  against  Fascism   in  Spain   in   1936-39,
filed  an  action  in  the  U.S.  District  Court   in  Washington   to
force  the  Attorney  General  to  obey  a three-year  old  court  order
that   he   either   remove   the   Veterans   of   the   Abraham   Lin-
coln  Brigade  from  the  Justice  Dept.  "subversive  list"  or  state
the  grounds  on  which  it  remains  there.  To  date  neither  de-
letion  nor  statement  has  been  forthcoming.
BRAVO  To   RYAN  (D.   N.Y.)    FOR AGAIN  leading   a  Quix-
otic  fight  against  the  annual  HUAC  (now   Internal  Security
The  Very  Latest  in
Mitchell-Nixon  Jurisprudence
The  House-passed  version  of  the  District  of  Columbia
crime  bill  is  ...     a  garbage  pail  of  some  of  the  most
repressive,   near-sighted,    intolerant,   unfair   and  vin-
dictive  legislation  that  the  Senate  has  ever  been  pre-
sented.  It  contains  broad  and  general  wiretap authority
going  far  beyond  the  limited  authority  of  title  III  of
the   1968   Omnibus   Crime   Act;   uncontrolled   and   ex-
tremely   permissive   authority  for   no-knock  searches;
some   of   the   most  vindictive  juvenile  offender  proce-
dures  imaginable;  mandatory  sentencing   for  offenders
of  up  to  20  years  in  some  instances;   and,  finally,  the
Dept.  of  Justice's  unconstitutional,   unworkable  and  un-
justified  preventive detention  bill.  Just  one  more  item.
The  Department,  in  another  gesture  toward  the  police
state  around the  corner,  would  make  the  policeman  the
unjustified  beneficiary of  his  own unlawful  action. If  any
citizen  in  this  city  sues  a  policeman for  unlawful  arrest
and  wins  his  suit  by  showing  that  the  police  officer  did
indeed  violate the  law, the  innocent  citizen  must  never-
theless  pay  the  lawbreaking  policeman's  attorney  fees.
—Ervin  (D.  N.C.)   in  the  Senate  March  24.
Committee)   appropriation.   The  anti-witch  hunt   bloc  got  52
votes  Mar.  25 against  an appropriation  of  $450,000 or  $50,000
more  than  in  1969,   $100,000  more  than  in  1967.   This  gives
it  the  fifth  largest   staff   (48)   of  the  21  standing   committees
of  the  House.   "The   committee's   very  existence,"  Ryan  said,
"signals  the  urge  toward  repression  which  is egging  on  bigotry
throughout  our  nation."  No  one  defended  the  Committee  but
the  House  steamroller  piled  up  307  votes  for  it.
NICEST   LITTLE   JOKE   OF   THE  WEEK:  "President   Nixon
wants  to  de-escalate  the  war,  so  we  thought  we'd  help  him  a
bit."—Clyde  McKay,   one  of  the  two  "S.D.S."  mutineers   who
hijacked   the  munitions  ship  Columbia  Eagle  to  Cambodia.
HAT'S   OFF:   To   Fulbright    for   his   motion   to   recommit
Carswell's  nomination,  no  small  feat  of  courage  for  a  South-
ern  Senator.
How  An  (Establishment)  Black  Felt  at  the  Gridiron  Club  Dinner
The  guests  [at  the  Gridiron Club  banquet]  are  generally
grateful  and  gracious.  But  the  event's  importance is  beyond
the   structure  of   graciousness    because   it   shows   the   most
powerful  elements  of  the  nation's  daily  press   and  all   ele-
ments   of   the   nation's   government   locked   in  a   symbiotic
embrace.  The  rich  and  the  powerful  in jest  tell  many truths
about  themselves  and  about  their  country.  I  don't  feel  very
gracious  about  what  they  told  me .  .  .
One  thing  quickly became  clear  about  those  faces.  Apart
from  Walter  Washington—who,   I  suppose,   as  Mayor  had
to  be  invited—mine was  the  only  face  in  a  crowd  of  some
500  that  was  not  white. There  were  no  Indians,  there  were
no   Asians,   there  were   no  Puerto   Ricans,  there  were   no
Mexican-Americans.  There  were  just  the Mayor and me .  . .
But  it  was  not  the  people  so  much who  shaped  the  even-
ing.   It   was   the   humor  amidst   that   pervasive   whiteness
about  what  was  going   on  in  this  country  these  days  that
gave  the  evening  its  form  and  substance.   There  were  many
jokes   about   the   "Southern   strategy."  White   people   have
funny  senses  of  humor.  Some  of  them  found  something  to
laugh  about  in  the  Southern  strategy.   Black  people   don't
think  it's  funny  at  all.  That  strategy  hits  men  where  they
live—in  their   hopes   for   themselves   and  their  dreams   for
their  children. We find it  sinister  and frightening  . . .
There  was  a  joke  about  the  amendments  to  the  Constitu-
tion  (so  what  if  we  rescind  the  First  Amendment,  there'll
still  be  25 left),  and about  repression  (you  stop  bugging  me,
I'll   stop   bugging   you),   and  there  were  warm,  almost   ad-
miring   jokes   about   the   lady   who  despises   "liberal   Com-
munists"  and  thinks  something  like  the  Russian  Revolution
occurred  in  Washington  on  Nov.  15.  There  was  applause—
explosive  and  prolonged—for  Judges   Clement  Haynsworth
and Julius Hoffman  (the  largest  hands  of  the  evening  by  my
reckoning)  .  ..
And  when  it  came  to  the  end,  the  President  and  the  Vice
President  of  the  United  States,  in  an  act  which  they  had
consciously  worked  up,  put  on  a  Mr.  Bones   routine   about
the  Southern  strategy  with  the  biggest  boffo  coming  as  the
Vice  President   affected  a  deep  Southern  accent.   And  then
they  played  their  duets—the   President   playing  his  songs,
the Vice President  playing  "Dixie,"  the  whole  thing  climaxed
by  "God  Bless  America" and  "Auld  Lang  Syne." The  crowd
ate  it  up. They  roared.  As  they  roared  I  thought  that  after
our  black  decade  of  imploring,  suing,   marching,   lobbying,
singing,  rebelling,  praying  and dying  we  had  come  to  this:
a  Vice  Presidential  Dixie  with  the  President  as  his  straight
man.
—Former   Assistant   Attorney    General   Roger     Wilkins,
now  with  the  Ford   Foundation,   in  the  Washington  Post
March  26.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  6, 1970
(Continued   from   Page   One)
social  values  like  stability  and  order—the  very  kind  of  earlier
English  common  law  "balancing"  the  First  Amendment was
intended  to  prevent.  Mr.  Justice  Nixon  would  apply  similar
doctrines  to  nullify  the  Brown  decision  by  "balancing"  school
desegregation  against  better  education,  when  the  whole  point
of  that  landmark   case  was  that  segregation  i/self    was  the  great-
est  obstacle  to  better   education,
A  Computer-Created   Nightmare
Nixon's   presentation   of   the   facts  is  treacherously  unfair.
Who  would  guess  from  his  message  that  in  Concordia  Parish,
La.,  black  students  were  bussed  for  years  to  schools   50  miles
away  when  white  schools   were  in  little  more  than  walking
distance,  that  this  is  only one  of  many  cases  in  which  desegre-
gation   requires  less   bussing  than  before.   He   turns  the  Los
Angeles   school   case  into   a  bussing  horror   story.   He   holds
State  Court  Judge  Alfred   Gitelson   up   to  national  derision.
He  says  the  ruling  will  cost   $40  million  and   require 1600
. buses.  He   does  not  explain  that  Judge   Gitelson   found   this
computation   (by  a  recalcitrant school  board)   was  merely  "an
exercise  in  mathematics"  reached  by  feeding  into  a  computer
the  largest  possible  estimates of  bussing  based  on  the  assump-
tion  that  only  bussing  would  be  used  to  correct  racial   imbal-
ance   when   almost   half   might   be   accomplished   by   "pair-
ing"  schools  and  redrawing school  boundaries.Nixon  is all  for
the  "neighborhood   school"  but  not,  apparently,  when  it  is  an
easy  way  to  bring  about  racial mixing.
This   bedtime   hobgoblin   was   matched   by   Nixon's    fairy
tale  about  the  "dramatic"  progress  in  the  South.  He  claimed
40  percent of  the Negro population  was attending schools  held
to   be   "in   compliance,"    a   tricky   phrase.   Prof.   Alexander
Bickel's  New   Republic   article  (Feb.  7),   which  is  an  advance
blueprint   for   the   Nixon    message,   said   the   percentage   of
Negroes  in   school   with  whites  in  the   South   "is  only  18."
A  Civil  Rights  Commission  report  on  figures  like  Nixon's  in
the  Mitchell-Finch  statement  of  July  3  accused  the  Adminis-
tration  of  a  "numbers  game".  It  said  the  figures  were  padded
.by  including  Border  States  with  few  Negroes,  and  that  even
these  figures  showed   only  12l/
2
%   of   black  children   in   the
7  deep  South  states  in  "completely   desegregated   schools."  It
quoted   a  Fifth   Circuit  decision  as  saying  that  many  of   the
schools   so  listed   (after  accepting  innocuous  court   decrees   to
A  Searching  Question  By  A  Black  Congressman
There  is  much  confusion  surrounding the  trial  of  H.
Rap   Brown.  Mr.  Brown,  who  has   spoken  out   against
racial  injustices  with  the  revolutionary fervor  of  other
great  American patriots,  finds  himself  threatened with
imprisonment  not  because   of   an  overt  illegal  act  but
because  in  a  speech  he  was  accused  of  inciting  to  riot.
Let  us  assume for  the  sake  of  argument that  Mr. Brown
did.   Let  us  assume  further   that  such  statements  are
not    protected    by   constitutional   guarantees   of    free
speech.  Then we  would  have  to  assume  that  it  would be
proper  to  prosecute  Mr.  Brown.  If  this  is  the  case,  if
Mr.  Brown  has  committed  a  crime  which  merits prose-
cution,  why   is  the  Congressman  from   South Carolina
[Watson]  not  being prosecuted?  Are  we  to  believe that
his   inflammatory   speech,   inciting   a   mob   at   Lamar,
S.C.,  to  riot  is  not  a  violation  of  the  law?  Or should we
believe  what  everyone  in  this  country  knows  to  be  the
truth—that  a  double  standard  of  justice  exists—one  for
whites  and one  for blacks?
—Clay   (D.  Mo.)   in   the   House,   Mar.   17   (abr).
qualify  for   Federal  funds)  "had not  moved  an  inch  toward
desegregation."
The  growing  black  disillusion  with  integration  is  not  with
the  principle   but  with   the  practice,   with   the   devices   local
white  leadership  has  adopted  to  make  it  as  unpleasant  as  pos-
sible  for  blacks.  Their  bitterness  attests  the  triumph  of  white
strategy.  Nixon   says  desegregation   requires  "a  sense  of   com-
passionate  balance"   and   must  be  "adapted   to   local  circum-
stances."   But  his  compassion  and  his  balance  are  all  on   the
side  of   easing  white   discomfort.  He   shuts   his   eyes   to   the
"local  circumstances"  that  exclude  blacks  from  school  boards
and  intimidate  blacks  who   dare  exercise  freedom   of   choice.
He  is  not  ready  to  expend  a  penny  of  the  working  capital  he
has  built  up  among  frightened  whites  to  make  them   a  little
more  understanding  of  how  the  black  parent  and  child   feel.
To  do  so  would  be  really  to  help  bring  us  together  again,  as
he   promised   to  do  in   the   campaign.   Instead   this    message,
softly  pitched  as  it  is,  can  only  serve  the  polarization   Agnew
advocates.  It  is  the  soft-sell,  and  may  fool   some  white  mod-
erates  and  some  black  extremists,  but  most   blacks  and  other
minorities  of  color  will  see  it  as  a  soft  sell-out,  a  further  step
in   that   second  1877 which   began   with   his   inauguration,   a
second  abandonment  of  a  second  hoped-for   Reconstruction.
The  1969  Index  Is  Now  Ready—You  Can Have A  Copy  Free   By  Sending  A  LONG  Self-Addressed   Stamped  Envelope   For
It—Why  Not  Save  The  Index  and Past  Issues  For  Ready  Reference  In  A  Spring   Binder?
For
Hidden
Press.)
(To)  1
Street
City
Please
Name
Street
City
FOR  STONE'S  HIDDEN   HISTORY
the  enclosed   $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
History  of  The  Korean   War   (Monthly  Review
sfome
Zip
Indicate  if  gift   announcement
renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for
Zin
State
wished  Q
the   enclosed   $5:
State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                  4/6/70
4420  29th  St.  N. W.,  Washington,  D.C. 20008
/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St., N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday except  in  August  at  4420  29th St.. N.W..  Washington.   D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation Manager. Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and .Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED