I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970sep07.pdf

============================================================

The  Draftee's  Dirty  Deal In  Southeast  Asia, P.  3
Words  To Be Remembered As  The  Peace  Talks  Start
I  consider  peace  more  important  than territory.  The  area  we  had  before the  Six-Day  War  would  be  enough  to  take  in
all  the  Jews.   For  peace,  I  would  be  for  giving  back  all  the  captured  areas, with  the  exception of  Jerusalem  and  the  Golan
Heights.                                         —David  Ben-Gurion, interviewed  iti  the  June  1 Time Magazine.
IF.   Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVIII,  No.  16
SEPTEMBER  7,  1970
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Golda  Meir  and  God's  Cruel  Prank
This year, happily, the guns of  August were stilled. It would
be  a  crime  against  humanity  if  they  were  allowed  to  blaze  up
again  this  fall.   It  would also be  a  disaster  for  both  branches of
the  Semitic  people.  The  extremists on  either  side  are  mad  if
they  think they  can  attain  their aims by war. Al  Fatah's dream
of  destroying the Jewish State cannot be accomplished. It would
end  only  in  a  new  holocaust, this time  for  Jew  and  Arab alike,
and  it  would  be  a  miracle  if  the  flames  did   not  engulf  the
world.   Equally  foolish  are those  Israelis who  think they  can  go
on  for  another generation  besieged  and  dependent  on  an  ever
more  frantic  and   costly  effort   to  maintain  air  superiority.  A
fourth  of  Israel's  gross  national  product  and  85%   of  her  taxes
are  already  going  to defense. In  the  tense and  clamorous weeks
ahead  the  one  essential po<int  should  not  be  lost  to  sight.  The
international  climate, and  particularly  the  relations  between  the
two  superpowers,  have  unexpectedly provided  a  precious  op-
portunity  in  which  it  may  be  possible  at  last  to  guarantee  the
existence  of  Israel  and  to  construct a Palestinian State  in which
Arab  refugees  may be  helped  to  build  a  new  life.  That  oppor-
tunity  must  not  be  lost.
The Need For Speed
Two  steps  are  urgent.  One  is  to  set  up  some  joint  system  of
inspection which will  deal quickly with the  charges of  cease-fire
violation.  The  other  is to  speed  up  the  Jarring mission by mak-
ing  the  Arabs spell  out just how  they  are  prepared  to recognize
Israel  and  its rights in a settlement and  at the  same time making
the  Israelis spell  out  just  how  and  where  they  are  prepared  to
withdraw.  When  parallel  discussions have  forced  both  sides to
begin  putting  their  cards  on  the  table,  it  will  then  be  the  task
of  the  UN  and  the  superpowers  to  pare  down  the  positions of
both  sides  so  they  will  fit  into  the  framework  of  the    1967
Security  Council  resolution.  The  faster  this  is  done  the  better.
Contending  peoples who  haven't  agreed  in  3,000 years  are  not
going to  come  to terms in  30 days.  Basically the  agreement  will
have  to  be  imposed,  as the  cease-fire  itself  was  imposed.
In  a  real  sense  the  coerced  agreement  to  begin  talks  may  be
seen  not  so  much  as  an  imposition  by  the  big  powers  as  a
liberation  of  Israeli  and  Arab  politics  from  sacrosanct but  stale
rigidities.  What  had  long  been  deemed  politically  impossible
turned  out  to  be  politically popular.  The  war  weary  people  on
both  sides  greeted  news  of  the  cease-fire with  relief.  The  big
powers   have  not   only  isolated   the  extremists  but   unleashed
hopes  for  peace which  make  it  more  difficult  for  the  leadership
to turn  back  from  negotiations.
For  many years here  and  in  Israel  I  have  heard  it  said  that
Nasser  alone  among  the  Arab  rulers  was  strong  enough   some
day  to make peace with Israel.  Now  that this day seems  precari-
ously  to  be  dawning,  Israeli  leaders  are  unwilling to  acknowl-
edge  what  is happening.  It  took  courage  for  Nasser  to  accept
the  U.S.  proposal,  and  Israel  has  already  reaped  political  divi-
Why Not  An Imposed  Solution?
Because  the  conflict  is  a  threat  to  the  outside  world,
it  cannot  be left  solely  to  the  humors of  the belligerents.
I  have never  fully  understood  why  some  of  our  states-
men  feel  that  it  would  be  a  heinous crime  for  external
parties  to  "impose"  a  solution.    Under  the  United  Na-
tions  Charter the  Security  Council has  full  authority—
possibly   even  the  obligation—to  impose   a  settlement
upon  warring  parties  who  fail  to  make  peace  on  their
own.   The  very  premise of  the  Charter is  that  warring
nations  can  no  longer  be  permitted  immunity   from  a
world police power....
As  to  the  Arabs  and Israelis,  they  too  are  signatories
to  the  Charter  and no one  can say  they have been denied
a  fair  opportunity  to  settle  their  differences  peacefully
and  on  their  own.  They might now  be reminded  of  their
•commitment   under   Article  25   of   the   Charter,  which
states  that  "The  Members of  the  United  Nations  agree
to  accept  and  carry  out  the  decisions  of  the  Security
Council  in  accordance  with  the  present   Charter."
I think  it  would be a fine thing—a  useful  step  forward
for  civilization—if,  in  the  absence  of  a  voluntary settle-
ment  by  the  parties,  the  United  Nations  were  to "im-
pose"  a   peaceful   settlement   in  the   Middle   East.    It
would  be  an  equally  fine  thing  if  the  United  Nations
could  "impose" a  settlement  in  Southeast  Asia.
—Fulbright  on. the Middle East, August 23.
dends  from  his  action.  Arab  unity  has  been  shattered.  The
ranks  of  the  fedayeen  are  split.  Nasser  shut  down  the  radio
facilities  of  the  guerrillas  in  Cairo  and  they  may lose  their sub-
sidies  from  Saudi  Arabia,  Libya  and  Kuwait, all  of  which have
accepted  the  cease-fire.  El  Path  has  termed  the  talks  a  crime.
What  better  earnest  could  Nasser  and  Hussein  give  of  their
sincerity?  Would  Israel  prefer   Arab  unity  and  continuation
of  the  war ?
In  a period  of  world-wide detente, the  Israeli  leadership  is in
danger  of  becoming  the  last  stronghold  of  the  cold  war.  The
joint  moves  toward  a  Middle  Eastern  settlement  are  part  of  a
larger  trend.  When  West  Germany  and  Moscow  make  peace,
when   Moscow   embraces   the   hated   Social    Democrats   and
revanchards  of  yesterday,  when  Bonn  accepts  the   Oder-Neisse
line,  and  Washington  acquiesces,  we  are  in  a  new  period  of
history.  If  Germans  and  Russians  can  agree,  why not  Arab and
Israeli?  The  Israeli  leadership  finds  it  hard  to  adjust  to  this.
As  recently  as  July   20  Mrs.   Meir  in  an  interview  with  the
German  weekly Der Spiegel  suggested that NATO and  the U.S.
should  force the Russians out of  the  Middle  East  in a confronta-
tion  like  that  of  the  Cuban  missile  crisis!
The  basic  trouble  between   the  Israeli  government   and  the
Nixon  Administration  is  that  Nixon  is  becoming  too  much of
(Continued  On  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September   7,1970
(Continued  From Page  One}
a  dove  to  suit  Jerusalem's  taste.   The  Israeli  government  hoped
for  confrontation, and  Nixon  seems set on negotiation.  The  di-
vergence  extends  beyond  the  question  of  Soviet  relations. The
Israeli  government  for  some  time  has  sought  to  polarize  the
situation,  to  push  the  Arab  states  so  completely  into  the  arms
of  Moscow  that  Israel  would  become the  one firm friend  of  the
U.S.  in  the  Middle  East.  This  would  assure U.S.  support  in  a
continuous  arms  race.  "Do  you think President Nixon's  era of
negotiation  with  the  Soviet  Union,"  Mrs.  Meir  was  asked  on
CBS  Face  The  Nation  August  30,  "is  reacting  to  Israel's dis-
advantage?"  Mrs.  Meir  dodged  the  question  with  a  lengthy
answer  to  a  previous  inquiry.   The  recent  suggestion   from  San
Clemente  of  joint Soviet-American teams  to  safeguard the  new
borders  must  have  alarmed  the  Israeli  government  because  it
fears  great  power   collaboration.   But  what  kind  of   security
would  Israel  have  if  the  cold  war  intensified  and  grew  hot  in
the Middle  East?
The  Background Of Oil
U.S.  policy is  to  save U.S.  interests in  Egypt and  the  Middle
• East  by bringing  about  a  settlement.  The  oil  companies which
draw  $2  billion  a  year  for  .the U.S.  balance  of  payments  from
the  Middle East  and have  a growing  investment  in  Egypt  want
peace.  If  the  price  of  that  settlement,  realistically,  is  a  kind  of
superpower  partnership in  enforcing  the  peace,  the  oil compa-
nies are prepared  to pay it.  So is Nixon.   I myself believe this is
to  Israel's  interest,  and  that  it is far  better for  Israel  if  the Arab
states  are  not   completely   dependent  on  Moscow   and  if   the
U.S.  maintains sufficient  leverage on  both  sides for  peace.
Fulbright  sees   the  conjuncture  of   forces   as  providing   an
ideal  opportunity  not  only for  peace  in  the  Middle  East but  to
revive  the  United  Nations.   His   speech  of  last  week  on   the
Middle  East,  from  which  we  present  excerpts  in  these  pages,
gives  Nixon  and  Rogers  valuable  help.  From  all indications
the  Nixon  Administration has  been  giving  Israel  assurance of
new  safeguards  if  it  goes  along  with  a  settlement  within  the
framework   of   the   1967   UN   resolution.  Nixon's   hand   is
strengthened   when  Fulbright,  the  leading  foe  of  America's
effort  to  be  a  world  policeman,  declares  his  readiness  in  this
case to support  a U.S.  treaty underwriting a UN  settlement and
guaranteeing  Israel's  security. Three  fourths  of  the  Senate  in
' two  open  letters to Nixon  in the past  two months have put their
names  to  hawkish  declarations of  support  for  confrontation  in
Not A Substitute For  Negotiations
Sen.  Percy:   By  the  distinguished   Senator's   proposal
did  he  wish  to  remove  from  the  area  of  negotiation   the
possibility  that the  belligerent  parties  themselves  might
agree   that  it   makes  sense  for  Israel   to  retain   small
areas  which have  no  great  value economically  but which
strategically  may give  great  assurance  to  the  people?
Sen.  Fulbright:   Of  course  not.   If  the  parties   agree
to  that,  I  would  welcome  it.   In  anticipation   that  they
may   not,   I  simply  suggested   as   an  alternative   that
the  Security   Council  undertake  to  station   United   Na-
tions  troops  at  those  critical  areas.
.Sen.  Percy:   In  other  words,  just  on  the  eve  of  talks,
it  is  not  the  Senator's  intention  to  remove  the  initiative
from   the   parties   themselves   or  to   impose   from   the
outside  the  details  of  an  arrangement  or  settlement   on
the parties  themselves.
Sen.  Fulbright:  Not at  all.
Sen. Percy:  They  could work out these  details.
Sen.   Fulbright:   The  only   reason   for   that   is   that,
as  the  Senator  knows,  this  has  been  going  on  for  a  long
time,  and they  have  been  unable  to  work out  the  details.
It  would  be  much  more  acceptable  if  the  parties  them-
selves  could  work  it  out.   It  is  only  as  a  last  resort,
in  recognition  of  the  danger  of  this  to  us,  that  I  make
this  proposal—on  the   theory   that  these   proposals,   if
they  are  taken  seriously,  might  be  a  further  incentive
for  the parties  to work it  out.
—Senate  discussion  of  the  Fulbright   Speech,  August ZU.
the  Middle East and  new  arms shipments to  Israel. Fulbright's
speech  on  the  other  hand  provides  support  for  negotiation
rather  than  confrontation. This  accounts for  the  sour  response
it  received in  hawkish  and  Israeli quarters.
The  Fulbright  speech,  in  its  humanity,  its  idealism  and  its
concern  for  both  Arab and  Jewish rights  and  susceptibilities,  is
one  of  the  greatest  he  ever  delivered.* But  we  must  confess
considerable  misgiving  about  a  security  treaty  between  the  U.S.
and  Israel. History  too  often  has  seen  such  relationships begin
in  benevolence  and  end  in  imperialism.  It  would  create  serious
risks for  both  America and  Israel, and  the  Israeli reactions indi-
*  It  deserves  a  full  and  careful  reading.   The  text  may  be
obtained   by  writing  the   Senator   at   the   New   Senate    Office
Building  in Washington.   The text as  printed  in the  New  York
Times   Aug.   23  was   truncated   and  much  of   value   omitted.
Geopolitical   Myths  Which  Convert   A  Regional   Conflict  Into  A  Cold  War  Battleground
As  if  the  Arab-Israeli  problem  were  not  enough,  the  great
powers   have   made   their   own  special   contribution   to   the
mythology  of  the  Middle East  by infusing  the  crisis with  the
hocus  pocus  of  geopolitics.   The  Middle East,  in  geopolitical
terms,   is   something    far   more   abstract   than   an   oil-rich
desert  contested  by  feuding  Semitic  people.   Beyond  that,  it
is  the  "gateway  to  the  East,"  the  "hinge   of  NATO,"  and
the crucial  cockpit  of  the  historic  Russian drive toward warm
water.   By  sending  planes  and  missiles  to  Egypt   the  Rus-
sians  are  not  merely  bolstering  a  shaky  client;  to  the  z-ray
eyes  of  the  geopolitician,  they  are  embarked  upon  a drive  to
convert  the  Mediterranean  into a "Soviet lake."  The  concept
is  admittedly  vague:   would  the  Russians  close  the  Mediter-
ranean  to  foreign   shipping?   prohibit  fishing?  use  it  as  a
vacation  resort?  . . .
When  ideological  and  moral  pronouncements   are  set  aside
—as  every  now  and  then  honesty  commands—the   American
perspective  on  the  Middle  East  is  in  a  number  of   important
respects  the  mirror  image  of  that  of  the  Russians.   We  too
attach  great  importance   to  our  fleet  plying    Mediterranean
waters;  we  too   have   an  economic  stake   in  the    region—
though  not  as  great  as  that  of  some  of  our  allies,  who  get
most  of  their  oil  from  the  Middle  East;  we  too  derive  ego-
gratification  from  wielding  "influence"  in  various  parts  of
the  world—although,  like  the  Russians,  we  prefer  to  dress
up our egoism  in  unctuous  pieties; and, like our rival,  we  are
a  pushover  for  geopolitical   grandiosities  .  .  .
Only  in  one  respect   is  our  interest  in  the  Middle  East
fundamentally  different  from  that  of  other  outside  powers:
we  are  tied  to  Israel  by  bonds  of  culture  and  sentiment  and
by  the  special  attachment  of  our  American  Jewish  popula-
tion.   These  bonds  represent  a  perfectly   valid  basis  for  the
definition  of  a  "national  interest"  and  for  the  making  of  a
valid  commitment  based  on that  interest—provided   that  the
commitment   is   made   in   an   appropriately   constitutional
manner,  and  provided  too  that  it  does  not  infringe  upon  or
derogate  from  other  valid  interests.  As  matters  now  stand
our  commitment  to  Israel  is  de  facto   and  undefined:  we  do
not  really  know  the  extent  of  our  obligation,  which  could  be
very  great,  while  Israel  does  not  know  what  in  the  way  of
American  support  she  can  rely  on.  This  uncertainty  in  turn
appears  to  have  driven  Israel  to  greater  militancy  and  in-
flexibility  in  her  attitude  toward  the   Arabs.
—Fulbright  on the Middle  East, August 23.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September   7,1970
cate  that  they  also  are  doubtful.  Israel's  security would  be  bet-
ter  served  by strengthening  the  United  Nations  and solidifying
the  world  detente.  Her  long  range  future  depends  on  her  be-
coming  an  accepted  part  of  a  Semitic Middle  East,  not  an  out-
post  of  any  superpower.  But  Fulbright's  suggestion,  even  if  it
never  materializes  in  a  treaty,  must  give  added   assurance  to
Israel  that  the  U.S.  will  not  let her  down  in a  peace settlement.
A  consensus which  extends  from  Nixon  to  Fulbright  is  more
assurance  than  any  treaty.
This Time The Arabs Stayed
The  peace  talks  flow  from  the   carefully   drawn  Nov.   22,
1967,  resolution  of  the  Security Council. Its  cornerstone is  "the
inadmissibility   of   the   acquisition  of   territory   by  war."   The
principle  is  important  from  the  standpoint  of  world  law  and
its  reconciliation with  Israeli  security needs  is not  as difficult  as
may  appear  at  first  glance.   The  problem  is eased  first  of  all  be-
cause the bulk of  the  inhabited areas taken over  by the  Israelis in
the  1967  war  are  occupied  territories  in  a  double  sense.  They
are  occupied   by  Israeli  forces  but  they  are  also  occupied  by
Arabs. That  occupation  is an  obstacle to Israeli annexation.  The
Gaza  strip  is  jammed  with  refugees  from  the  1948  and   1956
wars.  On  the West  Bank  this  time the  Arabs did  not flee or  let
themselves  be  frightened  into  flight.  Gaza  and  the  West Bank
together  have  so  many  Arabs  that  their  annexation  would  at
once  create  the  binational  State  which  majority  Zionist  opinion
has   opposed   and—given   the  higher   Arab  birthrate—would
threaten  soon  to  create  what  Al  Fatah  seeks:  a  Palestine  with
an  Arab majority. The  only  way to preserve  a Jewish state  is to
relinquish  those  territories.
This   leaves   three  genuine   security  problems:   the   Golan
Heights,  from  which  Jewish  settlements  in  the  Jordan  valley
were  so  long  shelled  by  Arab  guerrillas:    Sharm  El   Sheikh,
which  guards  the  Tiran  straits  and  Israel's  access  to  the  Red
Sea;  and  Latrun,  which  protects  the  vital  road  from  Tel  Aviv
to  Jerusalem.  Some  form  of  demilitarization  and  international
force  should  be  a  feasible  compromise  at  the  first  two  points.
According  to  the  able  Israeli  journalist,  Victor  Cygielman,  in
Trading  One  Insecure  Frontier  For  Another
Surrounded  by  hostile  neighbors,  holding  down  occu-
pied  lands  inhabited  by  a  million  Arabs,  plagued  by
fedayeen  attacks  and  oppressed  by  the  costs  of  arma-
ment,  Israel  is  a  desperately  insecure  nation.   That  is
clear, but it is  anything  but clear that her present  policy
of  relying  on military  superiority  is  ever  going  to  alter
the   situation.    If   the   Suez  frontier   does   not  provide
security,  what  boundaries  would?  .  .  .  Israel  will  be
secure  when  and if  the  Arabs  lose  the  wish  to  threaten
her.   Eliminating  that  wish  should  be  an  object  worth
pursuing  from   Israel's   point  of  view.   As  victors  the
Israelis   are  in  a  position   to  be  magnanimous  without
being  suspected  of  weakness—which is  something  na-
tions  worry  about  whenever  they  are  thinking  of  be-
having  sensibly.   But  thus  far  they   have  shown  little
inclination  to  trade  their  conquests  for  peace.   Instead
they  cling  to  the  advantages  won  by  their  military vic-
tory  of   1967,  a  wasting   asset.   One  insecure   frontier
has  been  traded  for   another   and  all  that  the  future
seems  to  hold  is  continuing  conflict,  as  threatening   to
the  outside  world as  it  is  to  the  Arabs  and Israelis.
—Fulbright  on  the  Middle  East  Aug.  25.
Le  Noui-el   Observateiir  (Aug.   24),   the  U.S.   would  not  be
opposed   to  rectification  of  the   old   Israel-Jordan  frontier  at
Latrun  (and  the  retention  by  Israel  of  Kfar  Etzion  in  the  hills
to  the  North)  if  Israel  is  ready  to  cede  a  territory  of  the  same
extent  to Jordan  in a  peace  settlement.  Cygielman  reported  that
Israel   was   disposed   to   cede   the   region   of    Oum-el-Fakham
which  is  inhabited  by  Israeli  Arabs.
This  leaves  the  problem   of  Jerusalem.   Cygielman  says  the
Rogers  proposals  would  demilitarize Jerusalem,  leave  the  city
united  but  with  Israeli  police  and  municipal  authorities  in  the
Jewish  section  and  Arab  authorities  in  the  Arab.  There  would
be  a  common  council  for  Greater  Jerusalem   representing   both
sides  with  free  access  to  the  Holy  Places  guaranteed   for   all.
There  is  no  reason  why  Jerusalem  under  some  such  ingenious
(Continued  On  Page  Four)
The Dirty  Deal  The Army Gives  The Draftee  in  Southeast   Asia  Finally  Revealed
Army  draftees  were  killed in  Vietnam last  year  at  nearly
double  the  rate  of  non-draftee  enlisted  men.   During  1969,
Army  draftees  were being  killed  in  action  or wounded at  the
rate  of  234  per  1,000.  Draftee  deaths  were  31  per  1,000.  By
contrast,   Army  enlisted  volunteers  were  killed  or  wounded
at  a  rate  of  137  per  1,000,  and  17  per  1,000  died.
Draftees   comprised  88  per  cent  of  infantry  riflemen   in
Vietnam  last  year  while  first-term  Regular Army  men com-
prised  10 per  cent of  the  riflemen.  The  remaining  2 per  cent
were career  Army men  ...
Previously  unavailable  draftee  casualty  statistics  reveal
that  over  the  five  years  in  which  Americans  have  been  in
combat  in  Vietnam, draftee  casualties  (killed and wounded)
have  run  130  per  1,000  per  year  and  non-draftee  casualties
have  run  84  per  1,000.   The  Army  General  Staff  prepared
the  study  at the request  of National  Journal  . . .
The disparity  between draftee  and volunteer  casualty rates
directly  reflects  the  tasks that  the  Army assigns  each  group
of  soldiers.  .  .  .   Three-year  volunteers  have  the  option  of
selecting  their  Army  jobs  and  four  out  of  five  make  their
own  choice.  In 1970, less than 3 percent  have  asked  to  serve
in the infantry   ...
An  Army  general  who has  served  more than  two  years  in
Vietnam  and  who  asked  anonymity  said:   "Given  the  way
draftees  are used  by the Army,  it's  quite obvious that  they'll
take  the  brunt  of  the  casualties.    It's  very  sad,  really.   But
the  whole  goddam  war is  very  sad."  . . .
—From   the   National  Journal  by  its   Congressional  cor-
respondent,   Andrew   J.   Glass,  put   into   the   Congressional
Record  Aug.  21  (p.  S1393S)  by  Senator  Proxmire, author  of
a  pending   amendment   to  the  military  authorization  bill  to
stop   sending   draftees    to  Southeast   Asia.   The   National
Journal  ($i50  a  year,  17SO M  St   NW,   Washington    D.C.)
specializes  in  in-depth   political  research.   This    information
on  draftees   has  long  been  denied  not  only   to  the  press  but
to  Congress.   A   CBS   broadcast  provides   a    supplementary
glimpse   of  how  regular  Army  men  treat  themselves:
This  is  Long  Binh  Army  Post,  16 miles  from  Saigon.   It's
one  of  the  biggest  American  bases  in  Vietnam,  a  city  of
26,000  men.   One  sergeant   here  told  me  that  being  in  Long
Binh  was the  next  best  thing  to  not  being  in Vietnam  at  all.
But  Long  Binh, like the  rest  of  Vietnam, is  a combat  zone—'
everyone  gets  combat  pay.   You  can  spend   your  year   in
Vietnam  at   Long   Binh  with  very  little  feeling   of  a  war
going   on.    These   are   the   air-conditioned   soldiers.    One
colonel,  the  head of  information here,  has  a staff  of  45,  three
of   whom  put  out  the   headquarters   magazine,   called  "Up
Tight."   The  colonel  admits  that  his  42  other   information
personnel  have  very  little  to do    ...
Many  of  the  combat  companies   in  Vietnam  are  40  men
under  strength.  At  Long  Binh  Post  there  are  units  with  as
many   as   400  men  over  strength.   Of   more  than  400,000
Americans  in Vietnam,  in  all  only  75,000 men are  considered
to  be combat troops.   A  disproportionate  number of  draftees
are  engaged  in  direct  combat.   In  the  rifle  companies,  eight
out  of  ten  men are draftees.   Long  Binh  has a disproportion-
ate  number of  career  officers  and  NCO's.
—Morley  Safer,  CBS  News, Long Binh, July  17.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weckly,  September  7, 1970
No  Firm  Peace  Possible  Without  The  Palestinian  Arabs
(Continued  From  Page   Three)
scheme   should  not   become   an  open   city   for  Jew   and   Arab,
perhaps  some  day  the  joint  capital  of  a  Palestinian confedera-
tion.   The   Holy  City  deserves   a  solution  of  imagination  and
magnanimity.    Its  present   Mayor,  Teddy   Kolleck,  has  paved
the  way  by  his  own  liberal  and  large-minded  policies  for  an
evolution  of  this kind.
A Time  Bomb Bound  To  Explode
The  crux  of  the  problem,  the  key  to  future  peace,  lies with
the  Palestinian Arabs,  whether  in  the  occupied  territories  or  in
the  refugee   camps.  Unfortunately  the  Rogers  plan   does  not
provide  for  their  representation.   Nathan   Yalin-Mor,  head  of
the  so-called  Stern  Gang  in the  Jewish  terror against the  British
in  the  1940s,  and  now  one  of  the  leading  spokesmen  in  Israel
for   Arab-Jewish  reconciliation, spoke  of  this  on  Radio  Stock-
holm  Aug.  20.   "Without  the  Palestinians being  part  of,  and
partner  in,  any  political  settlement,  as  an  autonomous   body,"
Mr.  Yalin-Mor  said,  "no  solution  will  be  of  lasting  value.   A
•new  selling  out  of   the  Palestinian  people   would   amount   to
planting  a  time  bomb  bound   to  explode   after   a  few  years."
Unfortunately,  he  added,  the  Arabs  in  the  occupied  territories,
though  they  favor  Nasser's   decision  for  peace  talks,  have  no
representative   body.  On  the  other   hand  those   in  the   refugee
camps  are  under  guerrilla  leadership  which  opposed  the  cease-
fire and  any kind  of  compromise.   This  is the  same 'intransigent
and  fanatic  line  which  has  led  Arab  resistance into  one  debacle
after  another.    "The   result,"  Mr.  Yalin-Mor  said,  "may  be  the
same  as for  the  last 50 years:  disaster for  the  Palestinian  people
and   the   missing  of   a   promising   historical   opportunity   for
national   self-determination."
Friends  of  peace  must  deeply  regret  the  way  in  which   Mrs.
Meir   handled   questions   about   the  Palestinian  Arabs   in  her
appearance  on  Face  The  Nation.  She  rejected  any  idea  of  talks
with   them   and   any  responsibility  whatsoever   for   the   Arab
refugees.   She  implied  that  they  had  only  themselves  to  blame
because   they  had  not  accepted   the   1947   UN   partition  plan.
But  how  can  Mrs.  Meir  invoke  the   1947  partition  resolution,
the  legal  basis  of  Israel's  existence,  and  then  ignore  the   1948
UN  refugee  resolution,  which  is  the  legal  basis  of  Arab  rights
to  repatriation  or  compensation  ?
We  know  the  situation  is  a  complex  one  for  Israel  but  we
wish  Mrs.   Meir  had  voiced   some  sympathy  for   their   plight,
some  readiness  to  help,  some hope  for  reconciliation. Her  cold-
ness  was  unworthy  of  a  Jewish  leader.  It   is  said  that  Moses
Israel's Right  of Hot Pursuit
Sen.   Ribicoff:    What  if   terrorist   attacks   on   Israel
mounted  from Syria and Jordan continued?   Does  Israel
still  retain the  legitimate  right  of  self-defense  to  cross
borders  to  get   the  attackers  who  now  enjoy  the  pro-
tection  of  Jordan  and  Syria?
Sen.  Fulbright:  First,  if  Jordan and  Syria  consented
to  or  harbored  this   kind   of   attack,  they  would  be  in
violation  of  the  Security  Council  guarantee  and  I  think
the  Security  Council  ought  to  take.action.  But  if  they
do  not,  and  if  the  occurrence  is  a  clear  violation,  Israel
of   course   reserves   the   right   of   self-defense   if   it   is
attacked.   By  agreeing  to  the  guarantee  and  the   settle-
ment,  they  do not  give  up all  rights  of  self-defense.
Sen.   Ribicoff:   Suppose   Arab  attackers  flee   back  to
Jordan,  Lebanon, and  Syria.  Does  the  Senator  conceive
that  Israelis,  in  hot  pursuit, could  not  cross  the  borders
of   Jordan,  Syria,   Lebanon,  or   Egypt   to   get   to   the
terrorist  bases   in  those  countries?
Sen.  Fulbright:  If  it  is  hot  pursuit,  I think  they  could
do  that.   But  here  you  raise  a  difficult  factual  matter.
It  is  not  unlike  questions  which  have  been  raised  with
us  in  recent  months  in  Southeast   Asia.
This  must  be  judged  by  rule  of  reason.   If  guerrillas
are  going  back  and  forth  across  the  borders,  I  think  the
rule  of  reason  would  say,  yes,  the  Israelis  could  defend
themselves,  even  to  the  extent  of  following  the   guer-
rillas  across  the  borders.   Then,  you  get  to  the  question:
Suppose  they  go  all  the  way  to  Amman;  suppose  they
go  to  the  extent  of  attacking  Jordan.  That  exceeds  hot
pursuit.   They  should  not  be  allowed  to  use  hot  pursuit
as  an  excuse  to'occupy  Egypt  or  Jordan;  they  should
not  be  allowed  to   go  beyond  what   a  reasonable   man
would  say  was  repelling  an  attack.
—In  the  Senate,  August  24.
kept  the  Jews  40  years in  the  desert  to purge  them  of  the  habits
acquired  in  slavery.  Leadership,  like  hers,  in  40  years  of  siege
and  war,  will  purge  the  Jews  of  the  compassion   acquired   in
Exile.  -While   the   Palestinian  Arabs   are  beginning    in   their
homelessness  to  talk  like  Jews  in  a  new  Diaspora*,  the  Israeli
leadership  is beginning  to  sound  more  and  more  like  unfeeling
goyim.  This  reversal  of  roles  is  the  cruellest  prank  God   ever
played  on  His  Chosen  People.
*  See  the  burning  eloquence  of  the  article  by  F.  Turki,  a
Palestinian  Arab,  in  the  Aug-. 10  Paris  Herald-Tribune.
Why  Not  Send A  Gift  Sub To That Boy Or  Girl  Going  Off  To College
FOR   STONE'S   HIDDEN    HISTORY
For  the  enclosed  $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's   book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War  (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)    Name
Street
City
Indicate
Please   renew
Name
Street             ...
City
I
4420  29th
Zip                  State
if   gift    announcement   -wished    D
(or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip                   State
.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                 9/7/70
St.  N. W.,  Washington,   D.C.   20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th   St.,  N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday except  In  August  at  4420  29th  St.,  N.W..  Washington,  D.C.
An  independent bi-weekly published  and  edited  by  1.  K. Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:  J20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED