I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970apr20.pdf

============================================================

The  Nuclear  Dinosaurs Meet  at  Vienna,  P.  2
The  Most  Un-Nerving   Rumor  Of  The  Week
Could  it  be  that  Martha  Mitchell  Is  really  a  Weatherworn an,  the  biggest   rock-thrower  and  window-smasher  of  them
all?  Is  it  possible  she  was  recruited  by  the  Young  Anarchist  League  in  Pine  Bluff,  Ark.,  and  assigned  at  a  tender  age  to
work  inside  the  Hepublican Party?  Our sympathy  for  the  Attorney  General transcends  our  political  differences.  At  press
time  he  had  neither  divorced nor  murdered  his  wife.  We  nominate  him  the  Most  Forbearing  Husband  of  the  year.
Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVIII,  NO. 8
APRIL  20,  1970
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
The  Real  Meaning  Of  Nixon's  Judicial  Philosophies
In   the  general   condemnation   of   the   President's   outburst
over  the   Carswell   rejection,  one  point   seems  to  have  been
rarely  made,  if  at  all.  When  Nixon  spoke  of  the  right  of  the
South   and   "its   legal   philosophy"   to   be  represented   on   the
Supreme   Court,   few  commentators  observed   that   this  only
referred   to  the  white  South.  Of  the  50  million  Southerners,
about   10  million  are  black.  For  them,  the  Haynsworth   and
Carswell  appointments,  far   from   being   representative,   were
an  affront.  The  "legal  philosophy"—as  Nixon  so pretentiously
called  it—of  these  two  mediocre Southern  judges  is only white
supremacy,  as  reflected  in  their  foot-dragging  on  civil  rights.
It  Was—Remember?—Lincoln  Who  WOE
It  is  a  very  serious  matter  for  the  country  that  in  this  time
of   racial  crisis,  we  have  a  President   for   whom   10  million
Southern  blacks  are  invisible,  politically  non-existent.  This  is
far   less  excusable  in  a  Northern   President  than  it  is  in   the
average  white  Southerner.  Nixon's  predecessor,  Lyndon  John-
son,  whatever  his  other   faults,   never  showed   such   a  blind
spot  to  blacks,  though  a  Southerner,  nor  to  Mexican-Amer-
icans,  though   a  Texan.  On  the  contrary,  he  named  the  first
Negro Judge to the  Supreme Court.  Johnson  would  never dare
imply,  as  Nixon   did   in  his  statement   protesting    Carswell's
rejection,  that  the  South   had  a  regional  philosophy    different
from  the  rest  of  the  country's.  There  is,  after   all,  only  one
basic American philosophy,  as expressed  in  the  Declaration  and
the  Constitution,   and  imposed  on  a  rebellious  South   by  the
Civil  War.   It  is  a  little  late  in  the  day  to  dignify   racial  in-
equality  as  an  alternative  American  philosophy  with  a  right  to
a  seat  on  the  Supreme  Court,  and  more  than  strange  to  watch
a  Republican  President  march  to  the  strain  of  Dixie.
There  is today another white  South  which  the  President  also
ignores.  It  may  be  a  minority white  South,  but  when  you  add
its  numbers  to  the  blacks  and  other  minorities  of  color,  it  is
big  enough   to  elect  a  Yarborough   in  Texas  and  to  lead   the
recent  (and  integrated!)  Democratic  State  convention  in  South
Carolina  to  reject  a  "freedom   of  choice"  school  plank.  Indeed
there  are  few  places  left  in  the  South  where  a  candidate  for
public   office   can  treat  blacks  as  politically  non-existent.    To
act  as  if   the  South  were  still  lily-white  and   monolithic,   to
key  one's   whole  strategy  opportunistically  to  Wallace,  is  to
undermine  that  growing  more  thoughtful  white  minority  in
the   South  and  on  its  courts.  When  Nixon   says  the   Senate
would  not  accept  a  Southern  nominee,  he  is  really  saying  that
it  will  not  accept  the  only  kind  of  nominee  which  serves  his
short-sighted   strategy.  To   nominate  a  Judge  like  Frank   M.
Johnson  or  Elbert Tuttle  or  Bryan Simpson  from  the  Southern
Federal  bench  (as  the  Rev.  Ralph  Abernathy  suggested   here
the  other  night)  would  not  fit  into  Nixon's  plans  because  this
First  Strike  As  U.S.   Air  Force  Policy
A   startling   revelation   was   made  by   Senator   Fiji-
bright   during   McGeorge  Bundy's   testimony   on   the
SALT  talks  before   the  Foreign  Relations  Committee
April  18. Fulbright  read  from  the  U.S.  Air  Force  Basic
Doctrine  manual  (AFM  1-1:  Par.  3-11)  that  the  U.S.
must  be  prepared under  certain  circumstances  to  make
a  nuclear  first  strike.  Under   "First  Strike   Considera-
tions",  it  says—
"Since   we  cannot   preclude   contingencies   in   which
the  U.S.  may   be  the  first  to-4nitiate  the  limited  use  of
strategic   force,   our   force   posture   and   general   war
plans   must   consider   the   requirements    for   both   first
and  second  strike  operations.  It  is  necessary   to  recog-
nize  also  that  the  onset  of  general  war  may   blur  any
strict  distinction   between  first  and  second  strike,  par-
ticularly   if   the  war   develops  by  stages   of  escalation."
Fulbright   said   such  doctrine   was   an  obstacle   to   the
success  of  the  SALT  talks.  The  Manual carries  a  fore-
word  by  General  LeMay.  An  Air  Force  spokesman  said
the  manual  was  current  but  added  defensively  that  it
was   "just  a   reflection   of   U.S.   policy".  It  is   strange
that  an  unclassified   manual  embodying  doctrine  with
such  fateful  implications  should  have  been  kept  from
public  knowledge all  these  years.  It  is  also  strange  that
it   should  surface  only   now   when  it   may   hurt   the
atmosphere  of  the  talks.  We  would  not  put  it  past  the
Pentagon   to   arrange   such   a   leak   deliberately.   The
manual  is  dated  Aug.  14, 1964.
would  please  the  blacks  and  the  non-bigoted  whites,  and  give
their    South    another    representative,     alongside    Black    and
Marshall.   The   issue  is  not   sectionalism   but   Nixon's    effort
—as  Rev.  Abernathy  so  well  said—"to  revive  a  dead  order".
Instead  of  building  on  a  coalition  of  enlightened  whites  and
blacks,  Nixon   is  playing  to  the  white  mob.  There  could  be
no  greater  disservice to  our  country,  no  more  serious  violation
of  his  oath  of  office.
Nixon's  other  complaint  was that  Haynsworth  and  Carswell
were  rejected  because  of  "their  philosophy  of  strict  construc-
tion  of  the  Constitution—a  philosophy  that  I  share."  This  also
will  not  stand  up  under  closer  examination.  Hugo  Black  is  a
"strict   constructionist"—he   applies   the   Bill   of   Rights   and
other  constitutional guaranties strictly. Nixon  and  Mitchell  are
the  loose  constructionists. Most  crime,  especially  of   violence,
has  always  been  a  State  and  local  police  matter.  What  could
be  a  looser   construction  of   the   Constitution   than   to  bring
them  under   Federal  control,  as  in  their  recent  proposals   on
dynamiting?  In  the  past  three  generations  liberals  have  used
(Continued  On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's Bi-Weekly,  April  20, 1970
The  Only  Hope Is To  Block  ABM  and  MIRV  Funds  In  The  Senate
THE  Two    ATOMIC  SUPERPOWERS,  THE  DINOSAURS  of   our
nuclear   age,   both  muscle-bound   monsters  with  more  brawn
than  brain,  too  stupid  to  agree  even  when  mutual  advantage
cries  out  for  it,  were  about  to  meet   in  Vienna   for  the  sub-
stantive  stage  of  the  SALT  talks  as  we  went  to  press.   But
hopes  for  an  agreement  in  time  to  stop  another  spiral  in  the
arms  race  were  dim.  This,  like  its  predecessors  in  a  series of
disarmament  talks  during  the  past  century*,  will  serve  only  to
disarm  world   public  opinion   into  believing  that   something
serious  is  being   done   about  the  mounting   cost   and   danger
when  in  fact  the  huge  military-industrial complexes   on  both
sides  have  no  intention  of  allowing  a  brake  on  their  activities,
and   the  political   leadership   is  too  weak   and   uninspired  to
overcome  them.  The  Soviet  Union,  too,  is  now  ruled  by  Nix-
ons,  Lairds and  Mitchells.
Through  the  thick  veils  of  Soviet-style secrecy,  one  can  still
see  (as  we  pointed  out  in  a  close  analysis,  Why  SALT  Spells
Fraud,  in  the  Bi-Weekly   of  last  July  14)  that  the  negotiating
position   of   the  Nixon   Administration,  if   any,  does  not   go
'  beyond  an  agreement  which  would  legalize  a  new  and  higher
level  of  the  arms  race  under  cover  of  placng  some  numerical
(but  not  qualitative)   limitation  on  ABMs  and  MIR Vs.  The
combination,  considering   the  rapid  progress   being  made  in
accuracy  of  delivery,  will  soon   offer   the  U.S.  the  temptations
—and  the  Soviet  Union  the  fear—of   a  first  strike.  The  hor-
rors  ahead  were  indicated  by  the  latest  world  arms  survey  by
the  London  Institute  of  Strategic  Studies  which  estimates  that
we  have  4,235  deliverable  warheads  now  against  the  Soviets
1,880   and  that  MIRV  will  expand   ours  to  11,000  by  1975.
The  only  hope  of  stopping  a  new  era  of  fear  and  tension  is
for   the   Senate  to  follow  up   its  72-6  vote  for   the   Brooke-
Cooper  resolution  to  halt  MIRV  testing  by  refusing  to  vote
appropriations  for  ABM  and  MIRV.
IN   AN   INTERVIEW  WITH  THE   EVANS  AND  NOVACK   col-
umn   (Washington   Post,  April   12)   Thieu   said   pacification
"will  take  years"  and  suggested   "U.S.   troops  should  stay  here
and  guarantee  the  peace,  like  in  Korea  and  Germany."   Korea
and   Germany  are  still  garrisoned   by  U.S.   troops   and   cost
together  easily  $13  billion  a  year  because  there  as  in  Vietnam
the  U.S.  has  taken  the  path  of  occupation  rather  than  negotia-
tion.  These  unsettled  civil  wars  in  which  we  are  caught   are
terribly   expensive.   We   are  on   the   verge   of   edging   into  a
new  one  in  Cambodia   and   are  already  in  another   in   Laos.
The  Formosa  protectorate   represents  a  similar  involvement  in
the  unsettled   China  civil  war.  However   difficult    negotiations
*  See  my  4-part  study,  "A  Century  of  Futility",  now  being
published   by  the  New  York  Review  of  Books.
Out  Of  Poland's  Stifling  Depths
The  chief   characteristic   of   Communist  society   is  a
moral  immobility.  As  in  my  case,  the  government  de-
cides   the   point  of  view:  the   whole  nation   is   for  the
invasion   of   Czechoslovakia,  that's  all.  It's   more   than
not  having  freedom  of  speech.  It's  a  sin  against  reality.
—Slawomir  Mrozek,  self-exiled   Polish  playwright,  in
an  interview  in  the  Washington   Post  April   5  in  con-
nection  with   the   opening   of   two   of   his    plays—"The
Police"    and    "Enchanted     Night"—at       Washington's
Arena Stage.
It  is  the  first  book  I  could  write  in  complete   freedom.
American   institutions   —   which   are   here   taken   for
granted,  like  oxygen  —  are  the  subject  of  our  wildest
dreams  in  Eastern  Europe.   I  have  a  certain  pity   for
the   Americans,    because    they   do   not   know   how   to
cherish  what  they  have.
—Leopold   Tyrmand   on  "Notebooks   of  a  Dilettante,"
the  first   book  he  has  written  since   leaving  Poland   in
1966,  in  an  interview  with  Israel   Shenker,  New  York
Times, April  7.
may  be,  they  are  preferable  to  permanent  intervention.  It  is
time  to  see  these  situations  in  a  larger  -framework.  The  mili-
tary   in   all   these   cases   sabotage   negotiation   because   these
unsettled  quarrels  provide  an  excuse  for  an  ever  larger  mili-
tary  establishment. This  is  the  basic truth  at  the  bottom  of  all
these  costly entanglements.
OUR    MILITARY   SEEM   To    BE   PREPARING   A   NEW    Me-
CARTHYISM.  In  an  interview,  "Will  Dissent  Wreck Military?
Why  Defense  Planners  Worry",  in  the  April  20  U.S.   News
&  World  Report,  Gen.  Wheeler,  chairman of  the  Joint  Chiefs
of  Staff,   sees  an  old-fashioned  Red  plot  behind  the   growing
hostility  to  the  military.  "I  don't  mean  that  everybody who  is
against  the  American  military  ...     is  a  Communist  agent  or
Communist-inspired,"  he  said.  "But  I  certainly think  it's  more
than  mere  coincidence  that  this  kind  of  thing  is going  on    ...
I'm  certain  that  people  outside  the  country  are  contributing  to
it,   but   I   couldn't   document   that   in   any  way."   Townsend
Hoopes   in   The   Limits    of   Intervention    relates   that    Dean
Acheson  told  President  Johnson,  after  investigating  the  Viet-
nam  mess,  "the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  don't  know  what  they're
talking  about."   Wheeler   was  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs,
then,  too.  How  convenient  if  criticism of  bad  judgment  by  the
military  can  be  dismissed  as  subversive.  The   interview   gives
new  weight   to  the   American  Civil  Liberties  Union   suit  to
end   Army  surveillance  of  political   dissenters   as  exposed   in
the  February  issue  of  the  Washington   Monthly   by  a  former
From The Former  Chief  Justice Whose Liberal  Work  Nixon  Would  Like  To Blot  Out
I  start  from  a  firm  conviction  that  our  nation  stands  at
the  crossroads  of  freedom  with  equality   for  all  on  the  one
hand   and  on   the   other   racial   distinction   with   resulting
bitterness,  disillusionment  and  discord  for  our  children  and
their  children  into  the  indefinite  future.  .  .  .
(A)t   least  by  the  time  of  our  bicentennial  in   1976  we
should   have   the  slate  wiped  clean  and  be  starting  a  new
century  of   progress  with   a  feeling  of   amity   between   all
people   of   every   race,  color   and  creed   who  live  under  the
protection  of  the  flag  of  the  United  States  of  America.  .  .  .
In  all  candor,  I  cannot  say  that  in  my  view  the  organized
bar  of  the  nation  has,  on  the  whole  discharged  that  obliga-
tion  [to  end divisiveness  and foster  justice]  in   praiseworthy
fashion.  Throughout   the  McCarthy  era,  and  for  years  fol-
lowing  that  shameful   period,  while  the  Federal   courts  were
struggling  to  make  the  Bill  of  Rights  and  the  Civil  War
amendments   meaningful   in  our  society,  the  organized  bar
of  the  nation  did  precious  little  to  assist.  On  the  contrary,
it  occupied  itself  with  trying  to  establish  to  the  world  that
the   Supreme   Court   of   the   United  States  was   the   hand-
maiden  of  Communism.
There   were  exceptions,  of   course,  on  the   part   of   some
courageous   and   responsible    lawyers,   and  some   local   bar
associations,   including   notably   this   one.   But   these   were
exceptions.  And  their   voices  were   muted   in  the  national
councils.  I  suggest  that  is  not  good  enough  for  a  profession
that  prides  itself  in  the  role  of  its   members  as  officers  of
the  court  and  defenders  of  the   Constitution.
—Earl  Warren:  27th  annual  Cardoza  lecture,  before   the
Association   of  the  Bar   of  the  City  of  New   York,  April   9.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Bi-Weekly, April  20,  1970
Army  intelligence   officer.
THE  GREEK  MILITARY  DICTATORSHIP,   which  our   military
support,  is  only  the  latest  warning of  what  can  happen  when
the  military  get  out  of  hand.  Like  Gen.  Wheeler,  the  Greek
court  which  has  just  convicted  27  Greeks  accused  of  plotting
the  restoration  of  democracy,  lumps  criticism  of  the  military
with  the  Communists.  The  Greek  oppositionists  included  Lt.
Gen.    George  lordanides,   once   the   Greek  representative   at
NATO,  who  was  given  eight  years  in  prison.  Though   they
represented  a  variety  of  views  from  left-of-center   to  conserva-
tive   pro-democrat,   they   were   all   tried   under   the   military
junta's  anti-Communist  law  which  sets  a  maximum  penalty  of
death.  Eleven  of  the  defendants  bravely  retracted  confessions
in  court,  claiming  they  were  exacted  under  torture,  but  they
were  nevertheless  convicted.  One  shudders  to  think  of  what
may  happen  to  them  now  that  they  are  back  in  the  hands of
their   jailers.  Few  Americans  realize  how  this  regime  is  ab-
horred  in  Western  Europe.  The  Greek  junta  extends  to  the
Eastern  Mediterranean  the  kind  of  military  regime  our  mili-
tary  favors  in  Brazil  and  elsewhere  in  Latin  America.
A  TIP  OF  THE  HAT to  the  Armed  Forces  Journal  (April
11)  for  exposing that  film  shown  Congress,  and  later  on  TV,
of   a   Maverick   anti-tank   missile   destroying   an   M-4.1  tank.
Gen.   Ferguson  of  Air  Force  Systems  Command  said  the  tank
was   destroyed   even   though  there  was  no   warhead   on   the
missile.  His  statement,  the  AFf   noted,  led  some cynics  to  ask
"why    bother  to  equip  it  with  a  warhead  if  the  missile  is  so
effective  without  one?"  When  an  Air  Force  spokesman  was
asked  how  the  "miracle"  was  accomplished,  he  said  the mis-
sile  is  so  heavy  that  "it  can  create  enough  damage  to  consider
it  a  tank  kill."  He  added  that  in  this  case  "the  target"  was
not  resisting! The  AFJ  learned  from  a  "reliable source" that
the  kill  was  achieved  by  loading  the  tank  with  gasoline  and
explosives  so  that  the  hit  set  it  aflame.  Naturally  this wasn't
mentioned  to Congress or on  TV.
WE  APPLAUD  ISRAELI YOUTH  for  the  signs  "Goldmann  to
Cairo,  Golda  to  the  Kitchen."  She  was  as  usual  too  intran-
sigent  in  blocking  the  private  feeler  extended  Nahum  Gold-
mann  for  a  talk with  Nasser  after  the  former's  April  Foreign
Affairs     article  suggesting  a  demilitarized  Israel  under  world
(and    Arab)  protection. What  harm  in  hearing  how  Nasser
reacted?  We  are  also  glad  to  see  that  Israeli  youth  is  demon-
A  New  Myth  But   An  Old  Reality
The  administration   is  trying   to  strike  a  "low   pos-
ture"  in  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia   while   preserving
an  American  base  in  Vietnam,  and  the  Communists  are
not  allowing  them  to  do  it.  They  cannot  drive  us  out
of  Indochina,  but  they  can  force  upon  us  the  choice  of
either  plunging  in  altogether  or  getting  out  altogether.
It  is  this  choice  that  the  Nixon  administration  has  thus
far  refused  to  make.  With  one  foot  in  the  swamp  and
the  other  foot   out,  they  are  trapped  ...     In  Vietnam
they  are  plodding  along  with  pacification and  Vietnami-
zation;  in   Laos  they   are  reduced  to  hoping   that  the
Communists   will   not   choose   to   conquer   the   country;
in  Cambodia  they  are  no  doubt  torn:  glad   in  a  way
for  the  anti-Communist  takeover  but  fearful  that  their
new  found  friends  will  ask  for  help  that   they   hardly
dare  grant   and  hardly  dare  refuse.   "Myth"  is  a  mild
word  for  madness  on  so  grand  a  scale.  Not  only   has
the   rationale   for   Vietnam   proved   unfounded;   it   has
shown  itself   to   be  disastrously    mistaken.   Instead   of
deterring   Communist   intervention   in  Southeast  Asia,
American  military  involvement  has  turned  out  to  be  a
powerful  magnet  for  it.
—Fulbright  (D.  Ark.)  in the Senate, April  2.
strafing  against  the plan for  Jewish  settlements around  Hebron.
These  can  become  another  obstacle  to  withdrawal   from   the
West  Bank  as  part  of  a  peace  settlement. Mrs.  Meier  takes
risks  for  war  but  not  for  peace.  What  if  Egypt  had  bombed
a  school  near  Tel  Aviv  killing  30  children  and  claimed  the
bombing  was  a  mistake?  Imagine  the  outcry  from  our  side!
Are  we  to  shut  our  eyes  and  hearts  when  this  happens  on  the
other ?
BRAVO  To  THE  DEMOCRATS  for  challenging the  legality of
giving  Clark  Mollenhoff,  reporter-turned-White-House-snoop-
er,  access  to  confidential  Federal  income  tax  returns.  But  we
can't  suppress  the  sour   comment  that  for   years  when  they
were  in  power,  one  Democratic President after  another  at  the
beginning  of  his  Administration  signed  orders  allowing  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee to  examine income
tax  returns,  a  power  its  renamed  successor  Internal Security
Committee  still   wields.  Will   they  cancel  this  when  and  if
they  return  to power ? We  hope  to  be watching for  it.
On-The-Scene  Reports  Which  Conflict  With  Official  Optimism  About  The  Vietnam   War
From  the   air-conditioned  briefing  rooms   of   Saigon   and
Long  Binh  to  the  nearest   of  the  sun-baked  artillery  bases
maintained  by  American  air  cavalrymen   along   the   Cam-
bodian  border  is  less  than  a  half  hour  trip  by   helicopter.
That  quick  hop  seems  to  cover  much  of  the  vast  gulf  be-
tween  Washington,  where  it  has  become  possible  to  wonder
how  things  can  be  going  so  well  in  Vietnam,  and  the  jungle
camps  north  of  Saigon,  where  it  is  still  possible  to  wonder
if  the  war will  ever  end.
In  the  air-conditioned  briefing  rooms  the  speakers  were
saying   earlier   this   week   that   enemy   troops   in   the   area
around  Saigon  had largely  retreated  to  their  border  sanctu-
aries  desperately   lacking  food  and  ammunition and  flagging
seriously   in  both  morale  and  discipline.   The  night   before
the   briefers   spoke,   Communist   troops   poured   more   than
100  mortar  and  rocket  rounds  into  Fire  Base  Jay  near  the
Cambodian  border  and  then  assaulted  it.  Thirteen   Amer-
icans  died  in  the   fight,   and  34  more  were   wounded.  Two
nights   later,   the  enemy   attacked   next  door  at   Fire   Base
Illingsworth,  killing  25  Americans  and  wounding  54   more.
It   had  been  nearly   two  years  since   so   many    Americans
died  in a single  engagement.
The  two   attacks   were  the  enemy's   most  serious   efforts
so  far  in  Third  Corps  area   around  Saigon  in  this  week's
"high   point"  of   Communist  activity.   In  neither  battle  did
the  Americans  find  their  attackers   undernourished,   under-
fed,  undisciplined  or  dispirited.
—John  E.   Woodruff     in  the  Baltimore Sun,  April  5.
Cai   Lay,  Vietnam—The   only  man  awake   at   Fire  Base
Schroeder  was  the  guard  at  the  main gate,  and  they  cut  his
throat.  Then  the  Viet  Cong  sappers  crept  unchallenged   into
the  base  and methodically  began  blasting  it  to  pieces  with
dynamite  satchel   charges.  First  they  destroyed  six  105mm
howitzers.    Then   they   blew   up   20   trucks.    Finally    they
worked  over  the  perimeter  bunkers  where  scores  of   Vietna-
mese  soldiers  were  bivouacked  with  their  families.  That  is
how  American  sources  describe  the overrunning  of  Fire  Base
Schroeder,  one of  the  first  U.S.  Army  fire  bases ever  handed
over  to  the  Vietnamese  army.  The  attack  took  place  early
Wednesday  but  few  details  were  released.  Only  by   weekend
did  the  extent  of  the  disaster  become   known.  The  action
was  one  of  the  worst  setbacks  to  the  Vietnamese  army  in
months   .  .  .  Only  one  American   was  there,  an  infantry
captain,  because  U.S.   advisers   have  been  cut  back  in  the
7th  Division.  He  was  killed  in  the  first  few  minutes.
—Peter  Arnett  in  the  Washington  Star,  April  5.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  20, 1970
What  Could  Be Looser  Construction  Than  Preventive  Detention?
(Continued   From  Page  One)
the  commerce  clause  to  make  possible  all  kinds  of  social  re-
form.  Nixon  and  Mitchell  are  using  it  to  create  a  Federal  po-
lice,  and  to  police  not  only  criminals  but  the  transportation of
ideas  across  State  lines,  as  in  the  prosecution  of  the  Chicago  7.
A  Challenge  From  A  Southern  Senator
When   the   Supreme   Court   recently  held   7-to-l    that   the
double  jeopardy  clause  of  the  Constitution  forbids  a  State  to
prosecute  an  acquitted  man  a  second  time  on  substantially  the
same  evidence,  who  was  construing  the  Constitution  strictly—
the  majority  or  the  lone  dissenter,  a  Nixon-style  "strict   con-
structionist,"  his Chief  Justice  Burger?  Or  let  us take a  favorite
proposal   of   the   Nixon-Mitchell   era,   preventive   detention.
What  could  be  a  looser  construction  of  the  Constitution  than
to  hold  a  man  in  jail  before  trial  because  you  think  he  might
commit   some   other   crime  in   the   meantime?  You   have   to
construe  the  Constitution  with  extraordinary looseness,  in  fact
'you  have  to  ignore   its  guarantees  of   fair   trial  and  bail,   to
arrive  at  any  such  result.  Yet  the  Administration has  a  bill  in
Congress   to  allow  preventive  detention  in  Federal   cases  in-
volving  "violent"  crimes. It  is trying to  slip  the  same  proposal
through  Congress  this  year  in  the  District  of  Columbia  crime
bill  "by  hiding  it  under  a  misleading  title."  The  quotation  is
from   a  speech   by  a  Southern  strict  constructionist,   Ervin  of
North  Carolina.  He  called  the  attention  of  the  Senate  April  8
to  a  study  made  by  the  National  Bureau  of  Standards  for  the
Law  Enforcement  Assistance  Administration  of   the   Depart-
ment  of   Justice.   This   showed   how   spurious   were   Attorney
General  Mitchell's  arguments  for  preventive  detention.
Mitchell   claimed  that   "the   pre-trial  release  of  potentially
dangerous   'defendants   constitutes   one   of   the   most   serious
factors  in  the  present  crime  wave."  But  the  study  showed  that
only   5  percent   of   those   originally  charged   with   a   violent
crime  are  rearrested  for  another  violent  crime—arrested, notice,
not  proven   guilty  and  convicted.  Ervin  said  the  Nixon   Ad-
ministration  was  ignoring  one  of  the  most   meaningful   con-
clusions  of  the  study.  He  said  it  "clearly  shows  that   speedy
trial  alone  would  eliminate  almost  completely  the  small  num-
ber   of  crimes  committed  by  persons   on  bail."   He  told   the
Senate  "our  task  is not  to  enact  an  unconstitutional  and  unwise
preventive  detention  law  but  to  insure  that  the  constitutionally
Quis  Custodiet  Dept.
Sens.   McClellan   (D.   Ark.)   and   Tower    (R.   Tex.)
yesterday   praised   General   Dynamics,   maker   of   the
trouble-plagued  F-lll  fighter-bomber.  McClellan,  con-
ductor  of   a  critical  inquiry   into  the   high-cost   plane,
said:  "I  have  nothing  against   the   General  Dynamics
company.  It  has  made  a  great  contribution."  The  com-
pany  opened  a  plant  in  East  Camden,  Ark.,  3   years
ago   after   McClellan   urged  General  Dynamics'   chair-
man,   Roger   Lewis,   to   examine   Arkansas'   industrial
potential  .  .  .  Tower  assured  him  [McClellan]  that  it
[the  F-lll] is  "the  best  thing  going"  and urged  spend-
ing  "only  $1.5  billion"  for  another  324  planes.  On  the
basis  of  a  chart  prepared  by  General  Dynamics,  Tower
declared  the  F-lll  had  the  best  safety   record  of  any
current  fighter-bomber.
—Bernard  D.  Nossiter:  Washington   Post  April  10.
This   story  brings  to  light  for  the  first  time  that
General   Dynamics  put   a  plant   in   McClellan's   home
state  three  years  ago.  The  McClellan  committee  broke
off   its   investigation   of  the  F-lll   (the   TFX)    seven
years  ago.  The  resumed  hearings   seem  aimed  to  criti-
cize  McNamara  and  to  whitewash   General   Dynamics.
guaranteed   right   of   speedy   trial   for   all   criminal   suspects
becomes  a  reality."  He   accused  the  Administration  of   using
"the   law  and  order  slogan"   to  justify  a  "fundamental   nega-
tion  of  America's  constitutional   traditions."
Behind  Nixon's  talk  of  the  philosophy  of  strict  construction,
as  behind  his  talk  of  the  philosophy   of  the  South,   is  plain
and  simple  white  middle  class  prejudice.  Preventive   detention
means   putting   blacks   in   jail   more   easily.   His   strict   con-
structionism   is  only   a   legislative   device   for   restricting   the
rights  of  the  blacks  and  the  poor  generally,   as  when   Chief
Justice  Burger  dissented  from  a  recent   decision  holding  that
welfare  payments  could  not  be  cut  off  without  first  granting
the  recipients  a  formal  hearing.   The    Nixon-Mitchell-Burger
philosophy  is  to  give  fewer  rights  to  the  disadvantaged.   It  is
the  philosophy  of  the  smug,  the  unsympathetic  rich  and   the
Southern   white   supremacist.   That   is   the   kind   of  majority
outlook  he  hopes  to  create  on  the   Supreme   Court,  whether
by  appointing  mediocrities  from  South  or  North.
The  1969  Index  Is  Now  Ready—Yon Can Have  A  Copy  Free  By  Sending  A  LONG  Self-Addressed   Stamped  Envelope   For
It—Why  Not  Save  The  Index  and Past  Issues  For  Ready  Reference  In  A  Spring  Binder?
FOR  STONE'S  HIDDEN  HISTORY
For  the  enclosed  $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War  (Monthly  Review-
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City                                       Zip                State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement wished   D
Please  renew   (or   enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                       Zip                State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                 4/20/70
4420  29th  St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I. F. Stone's   Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,    N.W.
Washington,   D.C.   20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
L  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.   N.W..   Washington.  D C
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Meil  rates:  $17 to  Europe:  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED