I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970may04.pdf

============================================================

Nine  Years  After  The Bay  of  Pigs,  P.  2
D«*ja  Vu  Dept.
Tell  Washington  we  could  use  200,000  American  troops  and  after  two  years  we  could  handle  the  situation  by  ourselves
like the South Vietnamese.—Commander of  a  Cambodian  battalion  to  the  Washington  Post's  Laurence Stern April  22.
I. F, Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVIII, NO.  9MAY  4,  1970
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
How  Earth  Day  Was  Polluted
The  week  the  devoted  band  of  youngsters who  ran  the  Viet-
nam  Moratorium  gave  up  in  despair  was  the  week  in  which
other  youngsters  all  over  the  country,  with  the  full  support
of  the  Establishment  and  its  press,  celebrated  Earth  Day.  On
the  grassy  slopes  of  the  Sylvan  Theatre  in  the  shadow  of  the
Washington    Monument,  where   so  many  anti-war  teach-ins
have  been  held,  a  predominantly youthful   audience  jumped
with  joy as the  rock  bands played. Looking out  at that  tumultu-
ous  sea of  sweet  faces,  in their long  hair and  bizarre costumes,  I
felt  that  just  as  the  Caesars  once  used  bread  and  circuses  so
ours  were  at  last  learning  to  use  rock-and-roll,  idealism  and
non-inflammatory  social  issues  to  turn  the  youth off from  more
urgent  concerns  which  might  really  threaten  the  power  struc-
ture.  And  I  said  so  in  my  speech.
Already  Rifles  For  Cambodia
The   pollution   issue  is  real  enough,   though   a  little  exag-
gerated,  but  it  cannot  be  solved  in  isolation.  From  one  view-
point,  the  Earth  Day  affair  was  a  gigantic snow  job. Here  was
the  country  slipping  into  a  wider  war  in  Southeast  Asia. Even
as we  spoke  the  news  was  leaking  that  U.S.  officers  in  civilian
clothes,  either  CIA  or  military,  were  directing  a  South  Viet-
namese  offensive  into  Cambodia  and  that  six  days  earlier  the
U.S.  had  already  promised  the  new  Cambodian  regime  a  few
thousand  rifles  but  had  asked  them   (NYT    4/23/70)  to  keep
the  shipment  secret.  Two  days before  the  Earth  Day  rally, Sec-
retary  of  Defense   Laird  had  made  a  speech  to  the  Associated
Press  which  can  only  be  read  as  a  deliberate  effort  to  sabotage
the  SALT  talks, but  here  we were  talking  as if  we had  nothing
to  worry  about  but  our  drains.
The  anti-pollution  campaign  was  saved  providentially  from
a   Nixon   message   but  half   the   Cabinet   were   on   the  day's
soap-boxes.  The  only  bright  note  was  provided  by  the  oldest
section   of  the  American  revolutionary  movement,  the   DAR.
Their   convention   denounced   anti-pollution   as   a  subversive
movement.  The  clear  proof:  It  was  being  entertained  by  Pete
Seeger   "a  documented   Communist."    "It's   strange,   isn't   it,"
one  DAR  speaker  noted  astutely  (ah,  if  only  the  CIA  and  the
FBI  were   as  sharp  as  these  old  dowagers!),  "that  today  is
Lenin  Day and  Earth Day."  If  it was anybody else  in the White
House  but  Richard Nixon  they'd  have  been  calling  him  Vlad-
imir  Ilyitch.
The  Nixon  budget  should  clear  him  of  suspicion. He  called
air  and  water  pollution  a  "now  or  never"  task  but  turned  in  a
budget  which  allocates  52  cents  of  every  general  revenue  dol-
lar  to  the  military and  space,  but  only  four-tenths  of  one  cent
per  dollar   to  air  and  water  pollution.   New   weaponry   alone
gets   $5.4   billion   while   air   and   water   pollution   get   $569
million.  Senator  Tydings  at  the  University  of  Maryland  Earth
Day  said  we  ought  to  be  spending  on  pollution  what  we  are
spending  on  the  Vietnam  war.  But nobody  knows what  that  is.
Laird  said  months  ago  it would  be $17  billion  but  this year  for
Another   Heroic  Stand   At   Credibility  Gulch
We finally  have  in sight the just  peace  we are seeking
.  .  .  pacification  is  succeeding.  We  can  say  with  confi-
dence  that  the  South  Vietnamese  can  develop the  capa-
bility  for  their own  defense.  .  .  .  The  enemy  has  failed
to win the war.  ...
—President  Nixon from  San  Clemente  April 20.
The  [Nixon]  announcement  also  surprised  some  Pen-
tagon  officers  who  told  the  AP  South Vietnamese troops
hare  yet   to  face  a   major   battlefield   test.   .  .  .  "The
moment  of  truth  is  approaching," AP  military  writer
Fred  Hoffman  quoted  one  General as  saying.  "Some  of
their  divisions  are  not  the   greatest."   .  .  .  Asked  if
there  would  be any  withdrawals in the  next  two  months,
a  Pentagon  spokesman declined to  say.
—Washington  Post April 22.
Perhaps  more  typical  of  informed  South  Vietnamese
opinion   [than    official   optimism]   were   the  comments
today  of  Nguyen  Van  An,  chairman of  the  defense  com-
mittee  of  the  lower  house.  An  said  it  would  be  wiser
not  to raise  the  question of  the  South Vietnamese army's
ability  to  take  over  from  the  Americans.  He  added  it
would  be  better  if  the  Americans  stayed.
—Same  paper  same  day  from  Saigon.
the  first  time  in  history  part  of  the  military  budget  is  blacked
out,  and  no figures are given  for  certain  items,  Vietnam  among
them.
Unless  there  is  a  sharp  change  of  course  we  are  already  in
the  first  stages  of  a  wider  and  more  costly  Second   Indochinese
War.   Our  secret   services  brought   it  on,  upsetting   the  status
quo  in  Cambodia  by  encouraging   the  anti-Sihanouk  coup,  as
they   upset   the  Laotian  status  quo  with   their   Plain   of  Jars
offensive  last  year.  The  enemy  took  up  the  challenge,  and  now
Nixon's  latest  Vietnam  message  has  raised  the  stakes  by  put-
ting  Cambodia  and  Laos  squarely  into  the  area  of  our  concern.
We  must  either  get  out  altogether  or  plunge  in  further,  for  the
military  consequences   otherwise  would   leave  South   Vietnam
outflanked.  You  can  kiss  good-bye  to  any  hope  of   controlling
inflation  if  Nixon  takes  the  plunge.
What  a  time  to  talk  about  pollution!  What  a  time  to  fill
the  campuses,  the  press,   the  radio  and  TV  with  Earth  Day
talk  when  such  momentous  secret  decisions  are being  made.  Ed-
ucation  on  the  complex   tasks  of  air  and  water  control  are  all
to  the  good,  and  should  be  sharpened   to  a  fundamental  dis-
cussion  of  governmental   and  corporate   policy  the  Establish-
ment  doesn't  want.  But  how  much  more  urgent  and  important
to  educate  the  public  while   there   is  still  time  to  the   more
critical  issues  of  the  widening  war  in  Southeast  Asia  and  the
SALT  talks  in  Vienna.  On  both  Nixon  is waging  a  con  game,
and  Earth  Day  distracted  from  it.  In  the  former  he  remains  a
(Continued  on Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May 4,  1970
SENATOR  KENNEDY   CHOSE  THE  9TH  ANNIVERSARY  of   the
Bay  of  Pigs  April  17  and  the  annual Mansfield  lecture  at  the
University  of  Montana,  to  add  up  the  sombre  score  on   the
failure   of   the  Alliance  for   Progress.   The   rate  of  economic
growth  since it was launched has  averaged  1.8%  per  capita, less
than  before;  U.S.  economic  assistance  has  averaged  less  than
half  what  was  promised;  in  the  last  8  years  U.S.  business has
repatriated    $8.3   billion   in  private  profits,  more  than   three
times  the  total  of  new  investments;  the  land  remains  in  the
hands  of  a  few;  one-third  the  rural  labor  force  is unemployed,
and  13 constitutional governments have  been  overthrown  since
the  Alliance  was  launched.  The  same  political  oppression  and
torture   for   which   the   Council  of   Europe   has  expelled   the
Greek   junta   are   rife   in   Latin   America   but   the   Organi-
zation  of  American  States  is silent.  Kennedy  proposed  that  we
abolish  all  our  military missions as  hotbeds  of  dictatorship  and
end  sale of  arms on  credit. It  is a pleasure to  add  that  a member
of  the  family  which ostracized Castro  Cuba and  tried to  strangle
it  by  economic  blockade  also  called  for  the  first  steps  to  end
that  blockade  and  to  readmit  Cuba  to  the  hemisphere  family.
Truman  Veto  Finally  Upheld
A    BELATED   85TH    BIRTHDAY   PRESENT    FOR    PRESIDENT
TRUMAN:  Twenty  years after  Congress  overrode  Truman's  veto
of  the  Internal Security Act which  set up  the  Subversive  Activi-
ties  Control  Board,  the  Supreme  Court  has  thrown  the  Board
on  the  political junk  heap  by refusing  to  hear  the  Justice  De-
partment  appeal  in  the  Boorda  case.  Some  years  ago  the  Court
ruled  that  the  Board  could  not  force  Communists  to  register
because  that  would   be  a  violation  of  the  Fifth  Amendment.
Thereupon   Dirksen   put   through   an  amendment  authorizing
the  Board  to  run  a  blacklist of  suspected  Communists  without
requiring   them   to   register.   The   Court   of   Appeals   for   the
District  of  Columbia  held  unanimously in  an  opinion  by Chief
Judge  Bazelon  that  this  was  a  violation  of  the  First  amend-
ment.  "The    effect   of   the  decision,"   the   Justice   Department
pleaded  in  asking  the  Supreme  Court  to  reverse,  "would  be  the
substantial  destruction  of  the  statutory  disclosure  scheme  and
the  frustration  of  the  SACB's  reason  for  existence."   The  re-
fusal  to  review  leaves  the  Board's five $35,000-a-year members
with  no  real  powers  or  duties.  Successive  decisions  have  out-
lawed   the  travel,   registration,  defense  facilities   employment
and  blacklist provisions  of  this witch hunt  statute,  designed  to
set up  America's  first  thought  control  agency.  A  respectful  tip
Required   Reading   For  Nixon  and   Mitchell
House   Republicans   insist   their   talk   of    impeaching
Supreme  Court  Justice  William  O.  Douglas  in  no  way
stems  from   the  Senate's  rejection  of  two  Presidential
nominees to  the  Court.  Anyone  who accepts  that  at  face
value  probably  also can  believe  that  politics  had nothing
to  do  with  the  Senate  votes  on  Clement  F.  Haynsworth
Jr. and G. Harrold Carswell....
In  the  case  of  Justice  Douglas  the  House  Republicans
emphasize  his  involvement  with  the  Parvin  Foundation,
which  had ties  to  Las  Vegas  gambling  enterprises,  and
some  of  his  published statements that appear to  condone
revolutionary  behavior  by  dissenters.  It  is  difficult  not
to   conclude,   however,  that  their   major   objection   has
something  to  do  with  the  fact  that  the  Justice  is   per-
haps  the  Court's  farthest-out  liberal.
What   the   House   Republicans   propose   to   try,   with
little  hope  of  success,  could  only  continue  the  deteriora-
tion  of  the  Court's  prestige,  something  the  nation  can
ill  afford.  If  the  GOP lawmakers  would  serve  the  Court
and  their  country,  they  can  do  it  by  abandoning  this
foolishness  now.
—Wall  St. Journal  editorial  April  4.
of  the  hat  to  Attorneys John  Abt  and  Joseph  Forer  who  won
this and  many of  the earlier cases against great  odds  in  a hostile
atmosphere  as  counsel  for  Communists,  real  or  alleged,   who
were  being  hounded  under  the  statute.
IN   A   HALF-PAGE   ADVERTISEMENT  in   the   London   Times
April  17,  68  clergymen,  representing  every  religious  group  in
Great  Britain, and  including three  Lord  Bishops  of  the  Church
of  England,  appealed  to  the  government  to  reverse  its  stand
of  last  Feb.  2 exempting  tear  gases  from  the  Geneva  Protocal.
They  pointed  out  that  every  British  government  for  over  40
years  had  held  to  the  contrary, as  did  the  UN  General  Assem-
bly  by  80  votes  to  3  (with  36  abstentions)   last  December   16.
Some  day  we  may know  what  price  or  pressure  enabled  Nixon
to  win  Harold  Wilson's  approval  for  this  U.S.  position.
NEW  Low   IN  REPUBLICAN  JURISPRUDENCE:  House  Repub-
lican  leader  Gerald  Ford's   contention  in  his  attacks  on  Mr.
Justice   Douglas   that   an   impeachable   offense   is  anything  a
majority  of  the  House  says  it  is.  Rep.  McCloskey  (R.  Cal.)  in
a  House  speech   April   21  attacking  Ford   said  this   doctrine
How  Nixon's  ABM  Proposals  Undercut  SALT  And  Entail  A  More  Intense  Arms  Race
I   have   demonstrated   that   Safeguard   is   ineffective    in
defending  Minuteman,  and is  incapable  of  providing  a  tight
umbrella   over  the   U.S.   to  defend   reliably  against   ICBM
attacks  which  Mainland  China  might  be  able  to  launch  late
this  decade.  Despite  the  clear  technical  limitations  of  Safe-
guard  as  an  anti-Chinese  defense  the  very  fact  that  the
President  has  stated  such  a  defense  to  be  a  U.S.   policy  ob-
jective  creates  a  danger  to  the  success  of  SALT.  Once  the
Congress  approves  an  expanded  Safeguard,  the  Soviets  will
find it  impossible  to  agree  to  ABM levels  of  their  own  below
those proposed by the   U.S.
Current  Soviet  ABM deployment  levels  consist  of  only  the
few   interceptors   and  associated   radars   deployed   around
Moscow.  The  expanded   Safeguard  system  now  before  the
Congress   involves   more   interceptor   missiles   than   those
deployed   around   Moscow   and   is   technically   much   more
advanced.  An  ABM  freeze  agreed  at  SALT  at  a  level  no
lower  than  that  of  the  expanded  Safeguard  system  would
thus  permit  and  in  fact  encourage  the  Soviets  to  further
expand  and improve their  ABM.
If  the  agreed  ABM  levels  are  high  then  both  sides  will
insist  on  higher  levels  of  offensive  arms  in  order  to  retain
their  deterrent.  Thus  the  level  of  ABM   defenses   ultimately
will  control  the  limit  which  one  has  any   hope  of  imposing
on   offensive     and   defensive    strategic   weapons.   [Italics  in
original].
The  level  of  ABM  deployment  is  even  more  critical  than
the  question  of  prohibition  of  MIRV  testing  and  deployment
and  the  associated  questions  of  verification.  A  highly   ac-
curate  MIRV  can  only  threaten  the  fixed  land-based  deter-
rent  of  the   other  side;  for  example  the   multiple  nuclear
warheads  of  the  SS-9's  may  endanger  our  Minutemen,  and
Soviet   fears   that   upgrading   and   accuracy   of   the     U.S.
Poseidon   and  Minuteman   III   MIRV's   may   endanger   the
Soviet  land-based  missile  silos  are  well   justified.   In   con-
trast,  ABM's  threaten  to  intercept  ballistic  missiles   from
wherever  they  are  launched—land  or   sea.
In  short,  the  world  is  embarking  on  the  next  large  step
of  the  arms  race.  Yet  the  world  has  now  strategic  nuclear
armament  sufficient  to  destroy  life  as  we  know  it  on  both
the  European  and  North  American  continents.
—W.  K.  H.  Panofsky,   a  scientific   adviser  to  the  military
since  1955,  before   Senate  Foreign  Relations  April  IS.  (abr.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May 4, 1970
would  undermine the  independence of  the  judiciary  and sub-
ject  the  court  to  political  press  .  .  .  SHEIKH  JAABARI,   MAYOR
OF  HEBRON,  suggested  in an  interview with the  London  Times
April  15  that  the  West  Bank  and  other  occupied  areas  be  put
under  UN  trusteeship for  five  years while  a  final  settlement is
negotiated.  He   said   that   if  Jews  were  to  settle  in   Hebron,
Arabs  should  be  allowed  to  settle  in   Jaffa,   Haifa  and  Beer-
sheeba   .  .  .  GEN.  WESTMORELAND'S   PRIZE   REMARK  to  the
DAR  meeting  here  April  20,  "Our own  revolution  has  ended
the  need  for  revolution  forever."
Aviation  Journal  Opposes  ABM
AN  EDITORIAL IN  SPACE/AERONAUTICS  for  March  says  "it
would  cost  the  Chinese  very little time  and  effort  to  raise  their
ICBM  forces  a  notch  or  two, in  either  numbers or  design,  to  a
level  at which  it  could saturate any area defense the  U.S. might
put  up."  It  asks  why  we  need  area  defense  "against   a  weak
Chinese  threat,  seeing  that  we got  along  without  one  when  the
Soviets  had  no  more  ICBMs  than  China  will have  a  few  years
from  now?"  It  concludes  that  "as  much  as anything else,  it  has
been  a  succession  of  technically  and  strategically feeble  argu-
ment  for  new  weapon  systems that  has  led  to  a  crisis of  confi-
dence  in  the  leadership of  America's  defense."
SENATOR  RIBICOFF  has  fired  the  opening  gun  in  the  battle
to  upgrade  Nixon's  niggardly  family  assistance  act  as  passed
by  the  House.   "The  $30  a  month  allowable  income,"  Rep.
Stokes  (D.  Ohio)  told  the  House  before  passage,  "is  barely
enough  to  cover  the  cost  of  going  to  and  from  the  job  .  .  .
There  is no  provision for  cost  of  living increases.  And  perhaps
most  pernicious  of  all,  the  whole  scheme  seems  still   to  be
premised  on  the  attitude  that  the  recipient  is  basically  a  lazy,
booze-guzzling   ne'er    do   well—an    attitude   proved   totally
fallacious  long  ago  to  those  who  cared  to  listen."  The  bill's
only  virtue  is  that  it  establishes  the  minimum  income  in U.S.
law.  Now  it  must  be  raised  to  livable  levels.
THE   LATEST   REPORT   BY  AMNESTY   INTERNATIONAL  dis-
cusses  the  practice  in  the   Soviet  Union   of  treating  political
dissenters  as  insane,  putting  them  in  cells  with  disturbed  pa-
tients  and  allowing  orderlies  recruited  from  the  security  police
to  administer  "shock"  treatment  for  purposes  of  interrogation.
The  report  says  there  are  six  "special"  psychiatric hospitals  foi
this  purpose  and  that  political  prisoners   are  "the  victims  of
daily  beatings  and  sadistic  humiliations."
PRESIDENTIAL  ADVISER  HENRY   KISSINGER walked  out  of   an
The  Personal  Views  of  a  Leading  Banker
If   a   company   in   private   business   were   guilty   of
making  such  a  bad  judgment as  we  have  made in Viet-
nam,   and then  of  pursuing that  judgment until  so  large
a   part  of   its   total   resources   were  committed  to   the
ill-starred   project,  the   management  would  be  under
attack  by  the  directors  and  shareholders.  .  .  .  Because
I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  good  faith  of  the  with-
drawal  plans  announced  by  the  President,  I  might  have
continued  to  remain silent.  But  when I  read  12 days  ago
that   the  President   is   under  pressure   to   expand  our
military  role  in  Asia,  it  seemed  to  me  that   the  time
had come to speak up and speak out.... Our enlightened
self-interest   dictates  that  we  help  other  countries   in
their  economic development. .  .  .  But it  does  not  dictate
.  .  .  that  we  set  ourselves  up as  the  self-appointed  and
solo  policeman of  the  entire  world.
—L,  B.  Lundborg,   Bank   of  America,  to  Senate For-
eign Relations, April  15. See  box below.
off  the  record  discussion  with  students  of  the  Johns  Hopkins
School  of  International Studies  after  a student  read  a  statement
blaming  him  for  his  role  in  the  Vietnam  war  and  a  student
asked,  "Do  you  consider  yourself  a  war  criminal?"  (Washing-
ton  Star,  April  18.)  ...     JUDGE  CARSWELL  WOULD  HAVE   To
BE  an  out  and  out  Fascist  to  be  worse  than  Rep. Cramer   (R.
Fla)  Nixon's  original  choice  for  the  Republican  Senate  nomi-
nation  in  Florida.  Cramer  was  the  author   of  those  anti-riot
provisions  of  the  1968 Civil  Rights  Act  under  which  the Chi-
cago   7  were   convicted.  The   American  Conservative   Union
gives  Cramer  a  cumulative  rating  of  88  while  the  ADA  has
rated  him  0  in  seven of  the  last  10 years ...    IN  AN  EXCLUSIVE
April  20,  Louis  Heren,  chief  Washington  correspondent  of  the
London  Times,  says the  Pentagon  will withdraw  25,000  troops
from  Europe  in  the  next  12  months,  despite  official  assurances
to  the  contrary.  The   latest   House   defense   budget   hearings
(Pt.   2)    show   the   total   cost   of   maintaining   300,000  U.S.
soldiers  and sailors  in Europe is $14 billion a year  . . .
OUR  FAVORITE REMARK OF  THE WEEK:  "I  don't  think  we
should  go  on  doing  things  blindly,  just  because  we  are  told
to."—Mrs.  Winifred  D.  Cockfield,  wife  of  the  skipper  of  the
nuclear  sub Nautilus  and  daughter  of  a  retired  Admiral, when
asked  at  the  court  martial of  Roger  Priest  for  sedition  why  she
distributed   copies   of   his   anti-war  paper   OM   at   an   Army
commissary. Mrs. Cockfield,  though  a  prosecution  witness,  said
she thought  the  Vietnam  war  "a  terrible  mistake."
The Chairman of The Country's  Biggest Bank  on The Economic Impact of The Vietnam War
Despite  the  protestations  of  the  New  Left,  the  fact  is  that
an  end  to  the  war  would  be  good,  not  bad, for  American
business.  In the  middle of  1964 when the  Vietnam  escalation
began,  the  economy was  in quite  good  shape.  We had at  that
time  an  uninterrupted  economic  advance  of  52  months—a
peacetime  record—unemployment  averaged  4'/
2
 percent,  the
consumer  price  index  had  increased  only  1.2  percent during
the  first  6  months  of  1965, and  the  average  operating  rate
of  industrial  capacity  was  at  90  percent.
The  Vietnam  war  has  not  been  good  for  business  profits.
During  the  four  years  prior  to  the  escalation  of  the  conflict
in  Vietnam, corporate  profits  after  taxes  rose  71.0 percent.
From  1966 through  1969  corporate  profits  after  taxes  rose
only  9.2  percent.
It  is  important  to  comment  briefly  on  what  has  happened
to  the  U.S. balance  of  payments.  The  best  measure  of  what
happened  to  the  long  run position  is  the  balance  on  current
account.  This  balance  declined  from  a  surplus  of  $7.8  billion
in  1964 to  about  $4  billion  in  1967 and  $1.4 billion  in 1968
and  less  than  $1  billion  in  1969. A  good   part  of  the pro-
gressive  deterioration  of  this  position  over  the  years   since
1964,   the  year  before  the  major  acceleration  of  the  Vietnam
war,   may  be  accounted  for  by  the  large  increase  in  foreign
exchange   outflows  associated   with   military   expenditures.
These  rose  from  less  than  $3  billion  in  1964 to  nearly  $5
billion  in  1969.
In  the  five-year  period  prior  to  the  Vietnam  escalation,
defense  spending  in  the  United  States  averaged  $50  billion
per  year.   If   we  assume   that   this   level   would  have   been
maintained  over   the   most   recent   five-year   period  in   the
absence  of  escalation,  the  increase  in actual  spending  totaled
$118   billion.  During  the  past  four  years,  total  spending  for
residential   construction   in  the  United  States  totaled  only
$112   billion.  When  we  survey  the  very  real  needs   in  our
economy  in  the  areas  of   housing,   urban  transit,  environ-
mental  pollution,  etc., it  is  clearly  evident  that  we  do  not
need  to  create  war-related  demand  for  resources  in  order  to
maintain  full  employment.
—Louis   B.  Lundborg,   Chairman  of   the  Board,  Bank  of
America,  before   Senate  Foreign  Relations  April  15  (abr.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May 4, 1970
Laird  Is  Washington's   Biggest  Liar  Since  John  Foster  Dulles
(Continued  from  Page  One)
prisoner   of  the  terrible  power   of  inertia.  He  still  wants  to
avoid  humiliation.  How  to  avoid some  humiliation for  so many
disastrous mistakes? He  still wants victory of  some  sort:  indeed
he  speaks  as if  it  were  possible  and  imminent. And  what  is  the
meaning  of  the  message  leaked  through  James  Reston     (NYT
4/22/70)  that  he  will  use  "any"  weapon   to  prevent  a  major
military  defeat  as  and  when  more  troops  are  withdrawn?  Are
we  back  in  desperation  to  the  lunatic  nonsense  of  threatening
to use nuclear weapons ?
Toward  A  First  Strike
The   campuses  and  the   communications    media   should  be
full   of   these  questions,  as  they  should  be  full  of  discussion
about  SALT.  There  the  battle  to  curb  the  arms  race  is  being
lost  even  as  it  begins.  The  day the  SALT  talks  opened,   Nixon
had  leading  Senators  in  for  a  snow  job.  What  Nixon  is really
trying  to  pull  off was  indicated  four .days  earlier  when  Nixon
won  the  support  of  Mendel  Rivers  and  House  Armed  Services
for  a  $1.4   billion  expansion  of  the  ABM  in  return  for  $300
million  more  for  the  Navy.  The  ABM  expansion  was  cleared
publicly  the  day the  SALT  talks  reopened.  Seen  from  the  other
side  this  signals  a  U.S.  drive  for  an  area  defense  and  an  area
defense  is  a  necessity  for  a  first  strike  strategy.  The  night  be-
fore  the  SALT  talks opened,  Secretary Rogers  chose  the  signifi-
cant  vehicle  of  an  interview  with  Radio  Free  Berlin to  declare
again  our  intention  to  go  ahead  with  MIRV.  Add  MIRV  to
ABM  and  there  is  nothing  for  SALT  to  do  but  ratify  a  new
spiral  in  the  arms  race.  That  has  been  Nixon's  intention  from
the  beginning.
Senator  Jackson,  whom  Nixon  wanted  as  Secretary  of  De-
fense,  is working hard  on the Hill,  and Laird, whom  Nixon  took
as  second  choice,  is working  hard  out  of  the  Pentagon  to  make
sure  that  SALT  does  not  succeed.  The  Laird  speech  to  the  AP
April  20  is  the  most  mendacious  performance  by  a  U.S.   offi-
cial  since the  days  of  John  Foster  Dulles.  The  Soviets  are  sev-
eral  years behind  us  in  nuclear  proficiency.  They  have  just be-
gun  to  deploy  a solid  fuel  equivalent of  Minuteman.  They  have
just  begun  to  develop  MRV.  We  had  it  several  years  ago  and
are  already  developing  MIRV.  The  latest  report   of  the  Lon-
don  Institute  of  Strategic Studies released  April  11 showed  that
On   Lenin's  100th:   Without   Varnish
A  few   years  ago,  during  the  "thaw"  in  the  Soviet
Union,  the   rebels  called   the  conservative  writers  the
"varnishers"—those  who  varnished  reality  to  suit  the
party   line.  On  the   100th  anniversary  of   the   birth  of
Lenin,  the  unvarnished truth  about  the  State  he  estab-
lished is that nowhere  in the  world  is there  a more  stuffy
society,  led  by  more timid  conservatives.  Nowhere—not
even  in  Franco Spain—is  there less  freedom  of  expres-
sion.  The  best  writers  are  in  labor  camps  or  cowed.
A  half century ago  in  America,  in  the  Western  Pennsyl-
vania  coal  and steel  towns,  there  was  a  bitter  struggle
against    company   towns,   company   police,   company
unions.  The  Soviet  Union  today  is  like  a  huge  company
town  with  company  unions and a  company  press.  To  put
it  in  terms  of  the  dialectic,  the  liberation  of  1917  has
become   a   new  enslavement,  and  waits   the   cleansing
broom  of   a  new  revolution,  in  which   men  again  can
speak their minds.
thanks  to  MIRV  our  present  total  of  4200  deliverable war-
heads   (as  against  the  Soviet's  just  under   1,900)   would  be-
come  11,000  by  1975—a  stupendous  imbalance, clearly raising
the  threat  of  a  first  strike.  Yet  Laird  told  the  AP  editors  we
had  been  standing  still  for  five  years  while  the  Russians have
been  forging  ahead!
•  Laird  achieved  this  bit  of  trickery by  ignoring  the  enormous
qualitative  advances  we  have   made   in   those  five  years  and
focusing  on  the  Soviet's  effort  to  make  up  in  numbers  and  in
megatonnage   (which  is  wasteful)   for   their  lag  in  accuracy,
multiple   independently  targeted   warheads  and  numbers.   He
continued  to  impute  to  the  Russians  a  desire  to  achieve  what
our  Air  Force  has  long  sought—first  strike  capacity.  If   the
roles  were  reversed  and   a  Soviet   official   were  to  present   so
false   and   inflammatory   a  picture  of   the   power   balance  we
would  decide  that  it  was  time  to  pack  our  bags  and  head  for
home.  Let pollution  buffs  notice Dr.  Panofsky's  testimony   (box
p.  2)   that  we  already  have  enough   weapons   between  us  to
make  the  entire  Northern   Hemisphere  unlivable  in  one  swift
nuclear  exchange.  If  SALT  fails  and  we  up  the  firepower,  we
may  wake  up  one  morning  and  find  there  is  nothing  left  of
Earth  to  pollute.                                                          April  23.
The  1969 Index  Is  Now  Ready—You Can Have  A  Copy Free  By  Sending  A  LONG  Self-Addressed  Stamped  Envelope  For
It—Why  Not  Save  The  Index  and  Past  Issues  For  Ready  Reference  In  A  Spring  Binder?
And  Send a Gift  Sub With Your Request  for The Index?
FOR   STONE'S   HIDDEN   HISTORY
For  the  enclosed  $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War  (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City
Indicate   if
Please   renew   (or
Name
Street
City
I.  F
4420  29th  St.
•
Zip                 State
gift   announcement  wished   Q
enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip                  State
.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                  5/4/70
N. W.
(
  Washington,  D.C.  20008
1. F. Stone's   Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N.W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly. 2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.,  N.W.   Washington    D C
An  independent bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription: $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $11  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED