I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970jun15.pdf

============================================================

Half-Justice  for  Huey  Newton, P.  2
Subversion  Marches  On And  Upward  To The Very Top of  The Republican Party
The  Republican  National  Chairman,  Rep. Rogers  C.  B.  Morton,  said  today  the  Vietnam  war  no  longer served the  national
interest,  and predicted  that  the  Cambodian  foray  would  help make  it  possible to  "get  the  hell  out  of  there." "The national  in-
terest  is  not  there  anymore,"  he  said  in  a  lunchtime  discussion  with  newsmen.—New  York  Times,  June  1.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL. XVIII, No. 12
JUNE  15,1970
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
When  Doves  Turn  Hawk
The  American Jewish  Congress  placed  an  advertisement in
the  New   Yank  Times  June  2  containing  an  open  letter  to  the
President   signed   by  seven  Senators.  The   seven  have  been
leaders  of  the  fight  to  end  the  Indochinese  war.  In  that  ad  the
seven  doves  turned  hawk  on  the  Middle East.  The  seven  were
Me  Govern,  Hughes,  Goodell,  Cranston,  Hart,  Eagleton  and
Young  of  Ohio.   We  found  their  reversal  appalling.  We  be-
lieve  these  Senators  and  the  American  Jewish  Congress  did  a
disservice  to  the  cause  of  peace  and  to  the  American  Jewish
community   by   a   blatant   turnabout  which   offered   Nixon   a
blank  check  for  a  new  war.
Another  Nuclear  Confrontation?
The  letter  was  part  of  the  campaign  to  pressure the  U.S.  to
sell  Israel  125  more  Phantom  and  Skyhawk planes.  But  it  went
beyond  the  sale  of  planes.  It  went so  far  as  to hint  support  for
another  nuclear  confrontation  like  that  in  the  Cuban  missile
crisis.  "The   night  you  announced  that  American  troops  were
crossing  the  border  into  Cambodia,"  the  letter  said,  "you  spoke
of   the  firmness  displayed   by  President  John   F.  Kennedy,   a
firmness  backed  by  the  entire  nation,  when  the  Soviet  Union
attempted  to place missiles in Cuba. It  may well  be that  we  now
face  in  the  Middle  East  a  Soviet threat  that  is equally ominous
and  provocative."  That  sounds  more  like  Strom   Thurmond
than  George  McGovern.
The  situation  in  the  Middle East  is indeed  a  dangerous  one,
far  more  dangerous  than  in  Indochina.  Huge  U.S.  and  Soviet
fleets,  armed  with  nuclear  weapons,  all  but  jostle  each  other  in
the  Mediterranean.  The  Middle  East  contains  a  major  part  of
the  world's  oil  resources, much of  it in  American hands. A  shift
of  the  Arab states from  the  Western  to  the  Soviet  sphere  of  in-
fluence would  change  the  strategic  balance  of  power,  outflank-
ing  Western  Europe  and  Africa.  The   danger  is  real   enough
without  the  kind  of  reckless  exaggeration  which  equates   long
range  Soviet  nuclear  missiles  in  Cuba,  missiles  which  could
attack  the  United  States, with  conventional SAM-3  anti-aircraft
missiles  in  Egypt.  Their  purpose  is  to  prevent  a  repetition  of
last  winter's  Israeli  attacks  upon  Cairo.  The  SAM3s  have  not
prevented  the  Israeli  air  force  from  relentlessly  pounding   the
Egyptian   side  of  the  Canal  zone  itself  in  the  savage  war  of
attrition  being  waged  there,  from  Egypt's  side  by  artillery,  in
which  the  Israeli  are vastly outnumbered,  and  from  Israel's  side
by air,  where  she has supremacy.
The  Brink  At  Suez
A  tacit  but  precarious  agreement   between   the  Soviets   and
Israel  has  so  far   avoided   an  armed   clash   between   them   by
keeping  the  Soviet  forces  away from  the  Canal  Zone.  A  clash
of  the  utmost  gravity  could  come  at  any time  if  Israeli  pilots
again  raided  deep  into  Egypt  or  Soviet  pilots  intervened  in  the
The  Kind  of  Bums  Nixon   Likes
The  hard  hat  is  symbolically  important,  of  course, not
only  because  of   the   peaceful   demonstration organized
by  the  White  House visitors,  but  also  because  of  earlier
events ...    [in which]  enraged  mobs of  workers  paraded
through  the  financial  district,  overwhelming  the  police
and  beating  the  unfaithful   along  the  way.  While  the
President    has    certainly    not    praised   this   behavior,
neither  has  he—or  any  other  Administration   official—
publicly  condemned  it.  In  the  circumstances, it  is  pos-
sible  to  imagine  that  the  Administration  considers kick-
ing   bystanders  in   the   head,  swinging  and  throwing
tools,  spitting upon  and assaulting  individuals  for mak-
ing  "V" signs  with  their  fingers,  all  less  reprehensible
than,  say,  throwing  stones  at  armed,  helmeted National
Guardsmen.  Now  that  the  President  has  donned  a  hard
hat   we   would   forgive   any   construction  worker   who
believed  Mr.  Nixon's  embrace  included  not  only  those
who  attended  the  rally  but  those  who  bashed  heads  as
well. We think  this  is  no time  for  such ambiguity.
—Wall  Street Journal  editorial,  May 28. (abridged)
battle  over  the  Suez. Otherwise  Israel  controls  the  skies over  all
her  borders.  "Even  sympathetic Western   observers  here,"  Os-
wald   Johnston   wrote  from  Tel   Aviv   in  the  Baltimore   Sun
June  7,  "recognize  that  the  recent  urgent  cry  for   125  more
Skyhawks  and  Phantoms   reflect  not   so  much  a  real  military
need  as  a  desire to  have the  United  States  underwrite uncondi-
tionally  the  hard-line policies of  the  present  [Israeli]  govern-
ment  for  the  foreseeable   future."
Here  we  come  to  the  nub  of  the  problem.  The   doves-turned-
hawk  said  in their  letter  that  they  did  not  want their  opposition
to the  Indochinese war to be misinterpreted  in the  Soviet Union
"as  a  sign  that  our  nation  will  not  take  effective  steps  to  pro-
tect  our  vital national  interests  in  the  Middle  East."  But  this  is
hawk  talk  and  the  hawk  mentality. We  have  a  right  to  a  more
thoughtful  view from  McGovern  and  his  six colleagues.  Amer-
ica's  vital  national  interest  in  the  Middle  East  is  not   funda-
mentally   different   from  that   in   the   Far   East.   Our   national
interest  lies  in  the  resolution   of  basic  conflicts  by  negotiation.
So  does  Israel's.
Force   Has  Failed  In  Both  Areas
The  doves-turned-hawk said  there  were  "fundamental   differ-
ences"  between   the  situations  in  the   Far  and   Middle   East.
"The   government  of  Israel  is  a  democracy,"   they  said.  "This
is  hot  true  of  the  regimes  our  armed  forces  are  supporting  in
Southeast  Asia."   This  may  be  true  but  it  is  irrelevant.    The
essential  similarities between  the  two  situations  is that,  in  each,
an  effort  is being made  to  solve  a  political  problem  by  military
(Continued   On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  15, 1970
The  Truth  Begins  To  Leak  Out  On  Nixon's  Captured  Weapon  Figures
ANY   SOCIETY  TREATS  ITS  CONFORMISTS  WELL   and   even
the  worst  dictatorship  allow  freedom  of  expression  to  those
who  support  it.  The  test  of  a  legal  system  is  how  it  treats  the
hated,   the   feared   and   the   despised.   The   reversal  of   Huey
Newton's  conviction  for  voluntary  manslaughter  by  the  Cali-
fornia  Court   of  Appeals  chalks  up  a  half-victory  for   justice
in  our  society  but  only  half  because he  is still being  denied bail
on  appeal.   The   "error"  on  which  reversal  was  based   is  no
technicality.   Mr.  Newton  claimed  that  he  couldn't  have killed
a  policeman   in  the  shoot-out  which  led  to  his  conviction  be-
cause  he  was himself  unconscious  from  a  police  bullet  wound.
The  trial judge failed  to  instruct the  jury  that  if  it  believed  the
evidence  of  his  unconsciousness,  it  could  not  find  him  guilty.
Behind  the  whole  affair  and  the  continued  denial of  bail  is  the
deep  animosity  of  police  to  black  militants,  indeed  to  any
black  who  will  not  accept  humiliation.  I  believe  not  only  Mr.
Newton  but  the  New  York  Panther  defendants  will eventually
go  free;  more  reversible  errors  and  much  evidence  of  police
misconduct  is  turning  up  in  the  New  York  pre-trial  proceed-
'  ing.   Justice  for  the  Panthers  would  go  a  long  way toward  re-
building that  faith  in  our  judicial system  so essential  to  domes-
tic  peace.
Wallace  Pushed  Finch  Out
FINCH'S  TRANSFER  FROM  HEW   to  the  White  House  is  the
first fruit  of  Wallace's  victory in  Alabama.  Nixon's  response  to
the Wallace victory will  be to  intensify  his  "Southern  strategy."
This increased  the danger  that  Finch might  defect  with a public
protest.   He  will  be  safer  under  political   lock  and  key  in  the
White  House.   Richardson,  from  whom  much  was  hoped,  was
a  patsy  in  State  and  will  be  a  pushover   in  HEW.   .  .  .
IT  Is  A  PITY  THE  WHOLE   COUNTRY  could   not  have  lis-
tened  in  when  Nixon  met  with  the  high  brass  at  San Clemente
before  his June  3  soothing  syrup  report  on  the  Cambodian  in-
vasion.   Except  for  Kissinger,  the  President  met  only  with  the
military.   The   State  Department   was  conspicuous   by  its  ob-
sence.   Aoheson   warned  Johnson,   "the   Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff
don't know  what  they're  talking  about"  but  no  ranking civilian
was there to challenge  the  pap  they gave  the  President.   It was
. reflected  in  the  June  3  speech  which  will  turn  out  to  be  the
kind  of  malarkey  which.led  to  Johnson's  undoing.   A briefing
in  Saigon June  8 of  which  the  best  account  was John  E.  Wood-
ruff's  in  the  Baltimore  Sun  June  9  began  to  disclose  the  truth
about those bloated figures and silly photographs Nixon  showed
on  TV.   The  Saigon  briefer  admitted   that  of  8,332   weapons
captured by forces  from  III  Corps,  half  were  pistols or  obsolete
weapons  and  only  about  550  were  the  AK-47,  the   standard
infantry  weapon  used  by the  enemy.  Nixon's  body  count  will
Even  The  Questions   Were  Censored  Out
I  have  sat  on  the  Foreign  Operations  Subcommittee
for  12 years ...    I  have never  leaked  anything  out  of  the
committee that  was  of  secret  or confidential  nature.  Now
during  the  hearings on  April  23  with  Secretary of State
Rogers,  I  asked  questions on  a  great  number  of things.
I  asked  about  Latin  America,  especially  in  light  of  the
Rockefeller  report.  I  asked about  the  French  sale  of jets
to  Libya  and the  effect  it  would  have  upon  the  balance of
arms in  the  Middle  East.  I asked  about  the  entire  Middle
East  situation,  which  is  one  of  the  most explosive ones
facing  the  world  today  .  .  .
These   are   all   important   questions   that   the   public
should  know  about. Yet  now  they  are  buried  in  the com-
mittee  where nobody can  read  them.  .  .  .  My  questions
were  classified.  How  is  the  national  security  adversely
affected  by  what  I  have  to  ask?  They  were  just  plain
frank  questions  that   are  being  'asked  each  and  every
day  by constituents coming  into our  offices.
—Rep. Silvio Conte,  (R.-Mass),  Cong. Rec. June  4.
prove  as spurious.  If  his  figures  were  right,  we  killed  a  fourth
of  the  enemy  forces  in  Cambodia,  though  they  fought  only
rearguard  actions!   Now   Saigon  intelligence has  added  to  its
estimates  of  enemy  forces  in  Cambodia  36,000  men,  or  four
times  the  number  we  claimed  to  have  killed!   This  number
game  is typical  of  the  J.  Walter  Thompson  war  being waged by
Nixon's  entourage.   What  he  says  is  about  on  a  par  with  the
soap  and  aspirin advertising so many of  the  White  House  staff
were  trained  to  write.
THE  CREEPING  CENSORSHIP  that  is  slowly lowering the  cur-
tain  on  our  open  society  reached  a  new  stage  when  Chairman
Passman  (D.  La.)  of  the  House  Appropriations subcommittee
on  foreign  aid,  without  consulting  his  subcommittee,  allowed
Secretary of  State Rogers  to  black  out  every question and answer
in  his  appearance  to  discuss  U.S.   aid  operations  the   world
over.   This  was  the   State   Department's   panicky  reaction   to
the  leak  from  the  subcommittee  of  testimony  in  which  Rogers
on  the  eve  of  the  Cambodian  invasion said  no  such  move  was
contemplated.   State  Dept.  claimed this  was  taken  our  of  con-
text  but  confessed  that  this was untrue when  the entire  context
was   censored   out   of   the   hearings.   When   the   Secretary  of
State  is  that  uninformed, and  censorship  can  be  used  to  black
out  his  words  to  a  Congressional   committee,  we  are  further
down  the  road  to  a  military-dominated  government.
WHILE  THE  ADMINISTRATION  CONTINUED  To   LEAK  opti-
mistic  stories  about  the  SALT  talks,  Aviation  Week   (June  8)
said  Pentagon  and  State  Dept.  officials   "do   not  believe  any
major  move  toward  disarmament  will  come  from  SALT.    At
National  Editor  of  The  Washington  Post  Answers  Charges Made by The Harvard  Crimson
I  was  sorry  to  see  your  June  1 issue  quoting  the  Harvard
Crimson  quoting  me  as  saying   that  the  Washington   Post
would  hire  no  more  political  activists.  The  fact  is  that  most
of  the  applicants  for  summer  internships  that  Ben  Bradlee
and  I  interviewed  were  activists  of  one  kind or  another.  The
most   intelligent   and  responsible   students   today   are   pas-
sionately  involved  in contemporary  issues  and to  reject  them
out  of  hand  would  defeat   the  whole  purpose  of  the  intern-
ship  program,  which  is  to  get  the  best  young  people  into
journalism.   What  we  did  with  each  applicant  was  to  pose
the  question,   sometimes   with  a  hypothetical   situation,   of
how  one  separates  the  role  of  professional   journalist  whose
job  is  to  report  an  event  to  the  whole  community  from  his
personal  desires  as a citizen.  It's  a  tough  question  for  which
there is no easy  answer.  But I think  it's  a legitimate question.
A   man  wearing  a  big,   "Down  with  Fulbright"  button
showing  up to interview Fulbright, or going  to  a presidential
press  conference carrying an anti-war banner, has  altered an
event  he  is  there  to  report. The  answers  we  got  from  appli-
cants  varied  enormously.  We  were  less  interested  in  their
absolute  position  than  in  the  thoughtfulness  of  their  replies.
If  men with strong  personal  convictions, liberal or  conserva-
tive,  were  excluded  from   journalism,  the   news   would  be
nothing  but  pabulum. But  if  journalistic  institutions  made
no  distinction in  their  news  columns  between   their  private
desires  and  a  fair   account   of   what  they   observe,  public
paranoia  and  incredulousness   would  reach  even  more  dan-
gerous  levels  than  they  have  already.
—Letter  to  the  Editor  of  the  Bi-Weekly  by  Ben  Bagdikian,  National  Editor,  Washington  Post.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  15, 1970
Nobody  Mentioned  Bloodbath s When  Suharto  Came to  Washington
best  they  foresee  slight   reductions—or  ceilings—in   deployed
weapons."   AW    says  the  Russians  want  to  scrap  the  ABM  al-
together  while  the  U.S.  is  holding  out  for  "a  limited   ABM."
"Pentagon  Says ABM  and  MIRV  Can  Be  Halted  If  Arms  Pact
Develops,"  a  New   York   Times   headline  proclaimed  June  5
but  AW   reports  "On  the  MIRV  ban,  U.S.  officials  believe talks
are  exactly  one  year  late  from  the  point  of  view  of   stopping
deployment  because  critical tests  have already been   conducted."
Nobody  Listening?
THOUGH  IT  PUTS  THE  FINGER  on  the  very  nerve  center  of
the  arms   race,  a  petition   signed   by  436   MIT   professors,   a
majority   of   the   faculty,   was  almost  entirely   ignored   by   the
press   when   presented    at   a   conference  June   4   by  Senator
Brooke.   "The   security of  the  United  States,"  the  petition said,
"is  not   automatically  increased  by  the  construction  of  every
weapon  that  is  technically  feasible."   It  called  on  the  President
and  Congress   to  discontinue  the  secret  projects  aimed  to  de-
velop  MIRVs  which  can  home  in  on  enemy  missiles so  accur-
ately  they  can  be  used  for  a  first  strike.   The   petitioners  said
this  threatens  to  heighten  tension  and  stimulate  a  new,  costly
and  more unstabilizing phase of  the  arms  race.  MIT  is the  cen-
ter  of  these  missile  projects,  but  nobody  seems  to  be  listening.
SPEAKING OF  BLOODBATHS:  Nixon  keeps  saying that  a  Com-
munist  take-over  in  South  Vietnam  would  lead  to  a  bloodbath.
In  his  Nov.  3 speech  he  claimed  50,000 were  killed  when  they
took  over   in  North  Vietnam   15  years  ago.   More  than  twice
that  number  were  killed  when  Suharto  took  over  in  Indonesia
but  Nixon  said  nothing  of  bloodbaths  when  he  welcomed  the
Indonesian  military  dictator   to  Washington   a  few  days  ago.
The  May  26  Congressional   Record  contains  several  pages  of
documentary  "bloodbath"  materials  put  in  by  Senator  Kennedy
(pps.   7805-10)  which  cast  a  great  deal  of  doubt  on  Nixon's
50,000  figure  for  Vietnam  in  1954.
UNDER   PAPANDREOU  GREECE  TRIED  to   raise   compulsory
schooling  to  nine  years.   The  Greek  dictatorship  is  trying  to
lower  it  to  five  or  four.   Papadapoulous  in  an  address  last  year
The  Military  Black-Out  In  The   Budget
Our  deficits  and  our  debts   [in  the  national   budget]
are  planned and ordered in  the  Pentagon—which  directs
the   deployment   of   300,000  military   men   in   Western
Europe,  another  contingent  almost  as  large  in  Japan,
Okinawa,  and the  western  Pacific.  To  this  must  be added
the  horrendous  cost   of   men  and  material  in  Vietnam
and  Cambodio. These  costs  are  a  secret  to  almost  every-
one.   Neither   operation  or   incursion   appears   in   the
Federal  deficit  or  in  an  explanation of  the  Federal  debt.
Neither  the  Ways  and  Means  Committee nor  the  Con-
gress  has  an  accurate  irieu  of   the  fiscal  1970  costs  of
either  Vietnam  or  Cambouia or  the  cost  projection  for
fiscal  1971.  This  is  an  incredible way  to  run  a  country.
The  most crucial  costs  are confounded and concealed  . . .
—Rep.  Vanik  (D. Ohio), Congressional  Record,  June 3.
attributed  much  of  the  unrest  in  the  world  to  excess  knowledge.
This  recalls  Agnew's   speech   at  Des  Moines  April  13,  "I   do
not  accept  the  proposition  that  every  American   boy  and   girl
should  go  to  a  4-year  college  .  .  ."
LABOR'S  LEADING OSTRICH:  George  Meany  issued  a  lengthy
statement  about the  rise of  unemployment  to  5%  and  "the   com-
plete failure of  the Administration's economic  policies"  without
once  mentioning  the  war  as a  cause  of  inflation!  .  .  .  AFTER  A
QUARTER  CENTURY  in  missile electronics,  A.T.  & T.  is opting
out  of  anti-missile  work   after   its  Safeguard   contract  is  over.
Science  News  (May  30)  reports that  in  a  secret  meeting  a  year
ago Bell  officials  told  Laird  the  latest Pentagon-ordered  changes
in  the  original  Sentinel  system  had  made  it  unworkable.     "One
could  hardly  expect,"  Dr.  Ralph  Lapp  is  quoted  in  comment,
"that  you  could  make  a  Volkswagen  do  what  a  Cadillac  could
do."    Chances   of  blocking   the  second   stage  of  Safeguard   in
Congress  are  good  .  .  .  WE  SALUTE  THE  MILITANT   ANTI-
WAR  position   taken  by  the  UAW's  new  President   Leonard
Woodcock   and   see  in   him   a   worthy    successor    to   Walter
Reuther  as a leavening  influence in  our  stodgy  labor   movement.
How  TV Networks  Keep  National  Debate  on  The  War  And  Other  Basic  Issues  One-Sided
The  Congress  is  at  a  disadvantage  in  the  war  powers de-
bate,  as  it  is  discussing  most  issues,  because  the  Executive
has  a  near  monopoly  on  effective  access  to  public  attention.
The  President  can  command a national  television  audience to
hear  his  views  on  controversial  matters  at  prime  time,  on
short  notice,  at  whatever  length  he  chooses,   and  at  no  ex-
pense  to  the  Federal  government or  to  his  party.  Other  con-
stitutional   office-holders   are   compelled  to   rely   on   highly
selective  newspaper  articles  and  TV  news  spots,  which  at
most  will  convey  bits  and  snatches  of  their  points  of  view,
usually  selected  in  such  a  way  as  to  create  an  impression  of
cranky  carping  at  an  heroic  and  beleaguered  President  .  .  .
The  problem  for  a  Senator   or  Senate  committee   is  not
simply  one  of  being  heard.  Anything  that  has  the  color  of
scandal,  accusation,  or prediction will  command eager  atten-
tion  from  the  media.  What  you  cannot  easily  interest  them
in  is  an  idea,  or  a  carefully  exposited  point  of  view,  or  an
unfamiliar  perspective,  or  a  reasoned  rebuttal  to  a  highly
controversial   Presidential   statement.   In  recent   weeks   for
example  the  Foreign  Relations  committee has heard thought-
ful  and  significant  statements  on  the  war  by  eminent  busi-
ness  men,  political and  military  leaders  and  theologians  but
owing  to  the  lack  of  interest  of  the  media, these  proceedings
have  been  a  well-kept  secret  between  the  witnesses  and  the
members of  the committee  . ..  the only way to  get  the media
to swallow an  idea  is  by candy coating  it  with  a  prediction or
an  accusation.
Take  for  example  the  issue  now  under  discussion   about
the  war  powers  of  the  Congress.   .  .  .  The  whole  country
heard  the  President  hold forth  in  his  recent  press  conference
about  how  he  alone—and  I  emphasize  he  alone—as   Com-
mander  in  Chief  was  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  the war,
the  expansion  of  the  war  into  a  neutral  country,  and  the
safety  of  our  fighting  men.  The  very  words  "Commander  in
Chief"  are  intoned  with  a  reverential  awe  appropriate  to
18th   century  courtiers  .  .  .  but  virtually  no  one  outside  of
this  Chamber  has  heard  the  thoughtful  and  learned  exposi-
tions  of  Senators  on constitutional  doctrine and  the  intent  of
the  Framers. The result  is  that  the  country  is  suffused with
the  constitutional  theories  of  Lyndon  Johnson  and  Richard
Nixon,  while  the  contrasting  views  of  Jefferson,  Hamilton,
and  Madison  remain  buried  in  history.  .  .  .
The  networks  have  not  only  denied  the  opposition  equal
time  to  reply  to  Presidential  statements,  but  will  not  even
permit   the   Democratic   National   Committee   to   purchase
broadcasting  time at  commercial  rates.  CBS has  said  that  it
has  a  general  rule  against  selling  time  for  the  presentation
of  controversial  views except  during election  campaigns.  The
network,  of  course,  sets itself  up as  the sole judge  of  what  is
"controversial."  In  my  opinion  the  moon  flights  are  contro-
versial—I  think  them  an  extravagant   waste—but   the   net-
works  provide millions of  dollars  worth of  time to  permit  us
to  view  every  last  boring  detail  in  living  color.
—Fulbright  in  a  Senate  speech  June  2  asking    legislation
to  require   the   TV   chains  to  give  Congress   equal   time   to
answer  presidential    speeches.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Bi-We^kly,  June  15, 1970
Peace In  The  Middle  East  Depends  on  Justice  For  Arab  Refugees
(Continued  From  Page  One)
means. That  has not  worked  in the  Far  East and  it will  not work
in  the  Middle  East. Neither  our  military  superiority in  the  Far
East  nor   Israel's  in   the  Middle   East  has   been   successful   in
bringing  about  a  settlement.   In  both  areas  military  force  has
only   intensified   counter-action. While   the   innocent  on   both
sides  in  the  Middle  East suffer,  the  Arab guerrillas have gained
political  leverage  as hate  and  despair  grow.
A  Goliath  Beyond  David's   Power
Escalation   neared   a  more   perilous  stage  when   the  Soviet
Sam-3  missiles and  pilots  appeared  in  Egypt.  Israel's Chief  of
Staff  admitted  in  a  speech  May  7  that  "the  Russians  might  not
have  come  on  the  scene"  but  for  Israel's  air  attacks  on  Cairo.
These,  it  was  foolishly  hoped  in  Israel,  would  create such panic
as  to topple  Nasser.  The  Russians,  if  they  had  not  come  to  his
defense,  would  have  looked  like  a  paper  tiger.   The  next  step
up  in  escalation  would  be  a  clash  between   Israeli  and  Soviet
pilots.  In  a  speech  on  May  26  Mrs.  Meir  said  Israel would  not
'be  deterred  from  risking  such  a  clash  if  necessary  to  prevent
installation  of  missile  bases  on  the  Egyptian  side  of  the  Canal
Zone.  Her  words  were  bold  but  this is not  a David  and Goliath
contest  Israel  could  hope  to  win.
The   seven  Senators  wrote  Nixon  that  in  providing Israel
with  more  planes to  meet  this situation  "we  would be  fulfilling
the  doctrine  which  you  announced  at  Guam."    This   is  syco-
phantic   nonsense.   Nixon's   so-called  Guam   Doctrine   was   a
warmed-over  version  of  John  Foster  Dulles's  "let  Asians fight
Asians,"  a  doctrine  of  which  SEATO   is  a  melancholy  monu-
ment.  A  conflict  between  Israel  and  the  Soviet Union  would  not
be  "Asians  fighting  Asians."  It  would  not  be  war  by  proxy.
The  Senators  say that  our  Asian allies  "ask  that  we  spill Ameri-
can  blood"  while  "Israel   makes  no  such  demand  upon   us."
Maybe.  They  themselves  indicate how  dubious this  may  prove
to  be  when  they go  on  to  suggest  that  we  may be  approaching
another  nuclear confrontation like  Kennedy's  over  Cuba.  Cer-
tainly  ten  times  125  new  planes  will  not  be  enough  to  save
Israel   if  her  valiant  but  tiny  air  force  clashes  with  Russia's.
The  U.S.  would  have  to  lay  it  on  the  line  in  Israel's  defense.
And  that  could  spell  World  War  III.
Apparently  the  Nixon   Administration  is  more  dovish  than
the  doves  when   it  comes  to  the  Middle  East.  Vietnamese  ex-
perience  and  oil  company  pressure  have  fortified   more   sober
policies.  We  are  glad  to  see from  Secretary Rogers'  appearance
IBM's  Chief   on  The   Revolt  of  Youth
The   key  fact   is  this:  5091-  of  the   poulation  of   this
country  is  under  2:>, and  the  longer  the  war   continues
the  more  it  broadens  the  gap  between  the  older   genera-
tion  .  .  .  and our  young  men and  women.  Prolongation
of  the  war  may  well  set  up  a  continuing revolution  of
our youth. Our  actions in Vietnam are  losing us valuable
and  traditional friends.  We  present  a  picture  of  a  ter-
ribly  powerful  nation unable to  manage  itself  in  a  disci-
plined  fashion. Our  prestige  is  suffering  abroad.  Let  me
illustrate  by  giving  you  a  rundown  of  actions   against
IBM  properties  in various parts  of  the  world  during  the
last  six  weeks. In  West  Berlin nearly  all  the  windows in
one of  our  buildings were  broken  by  young rioters.  Then
gasoline  was  poured  about  and  it  was  set  on  fire.  The
windows  in  one  of  our  Dutch  facilities  were  broken  by
students.  A  powerful   bomb  was  discovered  just  before
it  was  timed  to  explode in an  IBM Argentine office.  Here
at  home we had one actual  bombing  at  425 Park  Avenue
in  New  York  City—our Eastern  Regional  headquarters.
—Thomas  J.  Watson   Jr.,  chairman  of  the  board  IBM
testifying     on   June    2   against   the   icar   in    Indochina
before   Senate  Foreign  Relations.  Text  in  Con.  Rec.  (1/4.
June  7  on  CBS  Face  The  !\ation  that  the  Administration policy
is  to   offer   Israel   some  planes  but   tied  to   conditions  which
would  facilitate  a  new  attempt  at  peace  negotiations.  Nasser's
latest  statements indicate  that  with  Soviet  air  defenses  he  feels
strong  enough  to  recognize  Israel's  existence  and  rights  in  a
settlement.  In  Tel  Aviv  Mrs. Meir  by accepting the  Nov.   1967
UN  resolution  and  the  Rhodes formula for  talks  indicates that
she  is  ready  to  risk   a  break  with  the   right  wingers   in   her
Cabinet  if  negotiations can  be initiated.
A  Last  Chance  for  Peace
This   may  be  a  last   chance   for   peace.    We   do   not   want
America   locked   into  the   hard-line  policy   so  natural   in   Is-
raeli  internal  politics.   America  can  best  help  Israel  by  bring-
ing  Arab  and  Israeli  together  in  a  settlement.  A  basic  element
of  that  settlement  must  be  satisfaction   for  die  Arab   refugees
and  the  recognition  of  the  Palestinian Arabs  as a  people.   Only
on   such  a  basis  can  a  permanent   peace   be  made  and   Israel
accepted   by  the  Arab  world.  Israel's  future  depends  upon   it.
The  ideal  of  justice  which  is  at  the  core  of  Judaism   demands
it.   No  amount  of  airpower  can  be  a  substitute.                 June  9
The  1969  Index  Is  Now Ready—You Can  Have  A  Copy  Free  By  Sending  A  LONG  Self-Addressed   Stamped  Envelope  For   It
We'll  Be  Clod  to  Send  A   Free  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —  Send  A  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
For
Hidden
Press.)
(To)   I
Street
City   ..
Please
Name
Street
City  ..
44
FOR  STONE'S   HIDDEN   HISTORY
the  enclosed   $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
History  of  The  Korean  War   (Monthly   Review
4ame
Zip                State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished   Q
renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip                State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                6/15/70
20  29th  St.  N. W.,  Washington, D.C.  20008
/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bl-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.   Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.   N.W..   Washington   D C
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  1.  K.  Stone:  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:   $5  in  the   U.S.;    $6  in  Canada-
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.                                                             '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED