I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970mar09.pdf

============================================================

IMixon's   "Low Posture"  The Same  Old  Pax  Americana,,  P.  3
The  Key  Questions  As  A  New   Vietnam  Threatens  In  Laos
"Can   the  reservation  of  war  powers  to  the  Congress  be  circumvented by  redesignating  soldiers  as  agents  of  the  Central
Intelligence  Agency?   Can  such  military  actions  by  the  CIA  be  accorded  the  clandestine  status  of  authentic  intelligence
operations?"   —Mathias   (R.  Md.)  in  the  Senate   Feb.  25.
Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL  XVIII,  NO.  5
MARCH  9,   1970
101
          WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Who  Are The Real Kooks  In Our  Society?
It's   hard   to  judge   which   is  worse—the   vulgarity  or   the
stupidity  of  government  officials   in  dealing  with  the  Chicago
conspiracy   trial.   The   U.S.   Attorney,  Foran,   attacks  the   de-
fendants   as   "fags",   sneaks   and   scum.    The    Cook    County
Sheriff   has  them  sheared   of   their  long  hair  in  jail  and   ex-
hibits  the  photos  at  a  political  rally  as  an  example  of   "how
Republicans  get  things  done."    Vice  President   Agnew   calls
them  "kooks."    If  the  Administration wants  to  provoke   more
student   rioting,  this  is  the  course  to  pursue.   Nothing  could
make  a  sizeable  portion   of   our  youth   more   sympathetic  to
the  defendants   than   forcible  hair-cuts,  for  their  hair   is  the
symbol  of  their  revulsion  against  a  society  they  see  as  morally
bankrupt.   The  name-calling will  sound  all  too  reminiscent  of
parents  too  dense  to  understand  the  anguish  of  youth.
Mitchell  Was  Warned
Agnew  asked  that  these  "kooks  .  .  .  demagogues  .  .  . social
misfits"  be  kept  off  the  front  pages  and  the  TV   screens.    If
the  Administration  wanted  to  keep  them  off,  it  should   have
had  more  sense  than  to  bring  them  to  trial.   An   Associated
Press  dispatch*   reveals  that  there  were  lawyers  in  the  Justice
Department   who  warned  that  the  statute  making  it  a  crime
to  cross  state  lines  to  incite a  riot  was  of  doubtful  constitution-
ality,  that  the  trial  would  inevitably  become  political  and  that
the  accused  might  turn  it  into  a  circus  which  would   embar-
rass   the   government.     Attorney   General   Mitchell   overruled
them  and  now  the  Vice  President  seems  to  want  more  of  the
same.  He  told  the  Governors  Conference  in  Washington,   "Let
us  react  automatically,  briskly  and  effectively   to  the  threat  of
violent   revolution  and  recognize   it  for  the  clear  and   present
danger  it  constitutes."    To  call  it  "a  clear  and  present  danger"
is  to  invoke  the  Supreme  Court's  rationale  for  justifying  the
restriction   of   fundamental   liberties   in   a  time   of   imminent
danger.   Only  the  far-out  Weatherman  faction   of  the  SDS  is
kooky   enough   to  join  Agnew   in  imagining   that   a  rash   of
window-breaking    by  students   puts   the   government    of   the
United  States  in  imminent  danger  of  overthrow.   And  nothing
would   do   more   to   foster   blind   revolutionary   rage   on   the
campuses  and  in  the  ghettoes  than  to  start  filling  the  jails
with  more  student  and  radical   leaders.
An  Agnew   at  large  poses  more   danger  to  social   stability
than  the  Chicago  defendants.    One  passage  in  his  appeal   to
the  Governors  was  the  authentic  voice  of  repressionist   ideol-
ogy.   He  called  on  the  Governors  "to  withstand   the  criticism
Senator  McGovern  On  Judge  Hoffman
His   unfair   and  injudicious  conduct  may   have  done
more   to   alienate   and  radicalize  many  of   our  young
people   than  all   of   the   defendants  have  succeeded  in
doing over the  years        He refused to  allow the jury to
hear  one  single   word  of   the  testimony   from  Ramsey
Clark,  who  was   the   Attorney   General  of   the   United
States   at   the   time  of   the   convention.   I  regard   that
ruling  as  outrageous.  He  personally held  the  defendants
and  their  attorneys  in  contempt,  instead  of  disqualify-
ing  himself  and  referring  the  matter  to  another  judge.
.  .  .  The  judge  made  what  is  to  me  an  extraordinary
and  appalling  ruling when  he  held that  the  Government
had  an  automatic  right  to  wiretap  or  bug  the  defend-
ants  without  any  prior  authorization  by  a  court.  .  .  .
This  doctrine  ...    is  repugnant  to  our basic  system  of
equal  justice.  Of  like import is  the  denial  of  bail  to  the
defendants  pending  appeal. .  . . The  real  test  of  a  judge
is   not  how  he  conducts  himself  when  the  defendants
are   well-behaved  and   respectful,   but   rather,   how   he
presides  when  the  defendants are  neither well-behaved
nor  respectful.
—McGovern   (D.  S.D.)   in  the   U.S.  Senate  Feb.  25.
*Jean  Heller,  AP,  in  the  Washington  Post  Feb.  27
of   the   liberal  community,  who   are  presently   so  blinded  by
total   dedication  to  individual  freedom   that   they  cannot  see
the  steady  erosion  of  collective  freedom   .  .  ."   To  speak  of
being  "blinded   by  total  dedication  to  individual  freedom"   is
strange   language   from   an   American  Vice   President   in   the
capital   of   the   so-called   free   world.    This   is  not    Jefferson-
ianism.   It  is  a  compote   of   decayed  Leninism   and   left-overs
from  the  Fascist  era.   The  only  meaningful  freedom   is  indi-
vidual.     "Collective    freedom"    is   the   jailhouse   liberty   the
Communist   bureaucracy   imposes   on   dissidents   in    Moscow,
Warsaw   and  Prague,   and  the  military  junta  of   Papadapoulos
on  Athens.   There  are  a  few  wacky  Maoists  on  the  fringes  of
the  youth  movement  who  sound  in  this  respect  just  like  Ag-
new.   The  Vice  President  has  taken  a  Great  Leap  Forward.
The  Nixon  Administration   is  exhibiting  the  classic  symp-
toms  of  a  regime  headed  for  deep  trouble.    A   revolutionary
is  to  a  society  what  a  pain  is  to  an  organism,  a  warning  that
something  is wrong.  Not  to  heed  the  pain  is  to  let  the  disease
proceed  until  it  is  too  late  for  remedy.   It  would  be  wiser  to
listen  to  these  "kooks"  than  to  try  and  suppress  them.   I  know
most  of  the  Chicago  defendants   and  their  lawyers   personally
and  I  regard  them—and  history  will—as   among  the  best  of
our  time.   Not   many  people  are  willing  to  risk  jail  to  warn
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  9, 1970
Behind  Nixon's  Blackout  On  His  5-Year  Plan  for  Military  Spending
Nothing  makes  life  more   interesting   than   outwitting  cen-
sorship.   In  our  last  issue  we  called  attention  to  the  fact   that'
Nixon   had   blacked   out   the  cost   of   the  war   from   his  new
budget  and   also  the  military  side  of  his  new   5-year   Federal
program   projections.   The   best   clue   to   the  first  figure,  we
pointed  out,  was  that  the  Pentagon   itself,  ten  days  before  the
budget   was  released,   was  still  giving  $17  billion  as  the  cost
of  the  Vietnam  war  next  year.  We   can  now  offer   some   light
on  the  blacked  out  projections  which  hide  how  Nixon  plans  to
divide  resources  between  military  and   civilian  needs.
A  One-Third  Rise  In  Strategic   Forces
The  first  clue  appeared,  though   unnoticed,  in  Deputy   Sec-
retary  of  Defense  Packard's  statement  on  the  ABM  to  Senate
Armed  Services  Feb.  24.  He  said  current  ABM  plans  "should
keep  the  total  costs  for  investment  and  operation  of  our  stra-
tegic  forces  at  about  $12  billion  dollars  (1969   level)   in future
years."       A  briefing   officer   at  the  Pentagon   agreed   that  this
was  the  first  public  clue  to  the  planned  level  of  future military
spending,   and  said  he  was  himself  surprised  by  its  inclusion
in  Packard's  statement.  Perhaps  to  make  the  $12  billion  figure
look  like  less  of  a jump,  he  gave  me  actual  expenditure  figures
for   strategic  forces—$9.1    billion  in   '69   and  $10   billion  in
'71.*  Using  these  figures  we  can  see the  Administration  plans
an  increase  of  about  one-third  in  spending  on  strategic  forces
over  '69  in  terms   of  '69  dollars.    The   actual  dollar  amounts
will  be  higher   if  inflation  continues.  Since  strategic  forces—
which  include  ABM  and  MIRV—are   the  heart  of  the  nuclear
arms  race,  this  is  no  small  escalation.  And   if  strategic   forces
rise  by  a  third  in  cost,  we  may  expect  much  the  same  rise  for
"general  purpose"  forces,  which  include  the  Navy,  especially
in   view  of   the   strategy  Nixon   has  just  unveiled    (see   next
page).
A  second  clue  to  what  lies  ahead  in  military  spending  may
be  found  in  the  Comptroller   General's   report   (Feb.   6)   on
"Status  of  Acquisition of  Selected  Major  Weapons   Systems."
This  is partial only  for  it turns  out  that  the  Pentagon   does  not
Footnote   on  The  Anti-Busing  Hysteria
Now  a  word  on  busing.  I  know  how  inflammatory it
is  in  the  districts  of  some  of  my  colleagues.  The  fact
of  the  matter  is  that  there  is  more  busing  when  there
are  two  school   systems   than  there  can  ever  be  when
there  is  either  de  facto  segregation   or  an  attempt  to
create   some   racial  balance.  The  Secretary   of  Health,
Education  and  Welfare  has  testified  that  in  300  cases
where  districts  have  submitted  school  plans,  in  290  of
them  there  was  less  busing  as  a  result  of  these   plans
which  ended  the  dual  system.  In  less  than  10  was  there
more  busing.  I  am  asking  you  to  disregard  the  hysteric
conversation  that  has  gone  on  in  the  cloakrooms  about
busing.  How  they   get  to  school   is  not  nearly   as  im-
portant  as  the  fact  that  they  all  go  to  unified,  desegre-
gated   schools   with  the   best   available curriculums.
—Rep.  Conyers   (D.  Mich.),  Feb.  19  (abr.)  Con.  Rec.,
HI  097.
*  These  figures  are  not  in  the  budget.  The  budget  only  gives
obligational   figures   for   strategic   forces   and   other   major
programs.  This   tends   to   hide  the   size   of   actual   spending.
The  budget  gives  obligational  authority  for  strategic   forces
as  $8.6   billion  for  '69  and  $7.9  billion  for  '71.  The  spending
runs  higher  because  of  the  huge  backlog  in  unspent   Penta-
gon  funds.
maintain  "a  central  file  on  the  total  number  of  systems  being
acquired  or  their  costs."   Perhaps   it's  more  convenient  not  to
know.  The   General   Accounting   Office   as  of  June  30,    1969,
was  able  to get figures only  on  131  "major  programs  ...     in
various  phases  of   the 'acquisition  process."  Total   costs  were
estimated  at  "about   $141   billion"   of  which  only  $55  billion
has  been  funded  by  Congress.  This  leaves  $86  billion  still  to
be  appropriated   to  pay  for   them   as   they  reach    completion.
On   a   10-year  basis  that   is  $8.6   billion  a  year;  on   a  5-year
basis,  which  seems  more  realistic, since  these  are  items  in  the
works,  it  would  be  $17  billion  a  year.  The   total  figures  are
likely  to   be  an   underestimate,   since  the   same   GAO   report
says  that  current  cost  estimates  were  running 50  percent  higher
than  originally  planned.  If  that  same  trend  continues, the  $86
billion  could  turn  out  to  be  more   than   $120   billion  before
the final bills are  paid.
Compare   these   monstrous   expenditures   for   new   weapons
with  the  table  on  five  year  projections  at  p.  80  of  the  Eco-
nomic  Report.  These  are  deliberately  opaque.  But  under   "new
initiatives"   we  find  grants-in-aid   (which   include  anti-pollu-
tion)  rising from  $2  billion  in  fiscal  '71  to  $7  billion  in fiscal
'75  while  "transfer  payments  to  persons"  which  include  the
new  Nixon  social  welfare  program)   rise  from   $3  billion  in
fiscal  '71   to   $5   billion   in  fiscal  '75.   Human   and   natural
resources  are  still  the  stepchildren  of  the   budget.
Senator  McCarthy on  Vietnamization and  His  Talks With  The  Other  Side  In  Paris
The   President   speaks   of   "honorable   settlement"    or   a
"just   peace".  What  honor   has   been   gained   by   the   death
and  destruction  that  has  gone   along  with  our overwhelm-
ing  military  power,  and  what  will  be  gained  from  the  con-
tinuation  of  the  war?  Vietnamization will  not  work.  It  has
been  tried  repeatedly  over  the  past  20  years—first  by  the
French   and  later  by  us.   It   was   after   all   the  inability  of
the  South  Vietnamese  army  to  fight  effectively   after  more
than  10  years  of  training  and  equipment  by  the  U.S.  that
prompted  the  dispatch  of  American combat  troops  in  1965.
Even   [if   it   worked]  there  would  still   be  the   question  of
whether  Vietnamization  is  desirable.   Asians  would  be kill-
ing  Asians  with  American  arms.   We  will  have  made  of  the
Vietnamese  army,  if  the  Nixon  policy  is  "successful",   essen-
tially   a   mercenary  army   fighting   its   own   people  for   an
unrepresentative  government.
I   believe   that   a   negotiated   settlement    of   the   war   is
possible  and  that  the  time  to  seek  such  a  settlement  is  now.
What  will  happen  if  the  level  of  our  involvement  becomes
insufficient   to   avoid  defeat?   Will  we   escalate   our  efforts
or  will  we  then  negotiate   from  weakness?
Serious  negotiations  cannot  proceed  unless  we  are  willing
to  support  a  coalition  government  to  control  the  process  of
transition.  The  task  of  the  interim  government.would be  to
arrange  a  cease-fire  and  to  assure  the  orderly withdrawal
of  foreign  forces.  My  conversations  with  the  NLF   and  the
.North   Vietnamese  delegations   in  Paris   lead  me  to  these
conclusions:   (1)   The  North   Vietnamese  are  not  counting
on  winning  the  war  in  Washington.  (2)   They  say   that  no
such   [massive  post-settlement]   executions   [as  are  feared]
would  occur.  (3)  They  anticipate  that  North  Vietnam  would
not  take  over  South  Vietnam  and  that  for  years  some  di-
vision  would exist  between  North  and  South.  (4)   They  seek
a  commitment  on  troop  withdrawal.  This  would  be  accom-
panied  by  an  agreement   on  a  provisional  government  and
immediate  negotiations   with  reference  to  prisoners  of  war.
—Sen.  Eugene  McCarthy    (D.  Minn.),   before   the  Senate
Foreign  Relations  Committee,  Feb.   19     (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  9, 1970
The  ABM  In  Nixon's  Strategy  For  A  U.S.  Protectorate  Over  Asia
Nixon   in  his  quiet   way  is  a  more  skilful   con  man   than
Johnson.   His  pretentious  State  of  the  World  message  was,  as
the   Washington   Post   called   it,   "an   advertising    brochure"
rather  than  a  state  paper:  typical  J.  Walter  Thompson  soap
copy  garnished  fore  and  aft  with  Nixon's  own unmistakable
purple   prose.    The   Washington   Star,   normally   rather   pro-
Nixon,   agreed   and  put   its  finger  in  a  biting  editorial    (Feb.
19)  on  what  Nixon  did  not  say:  "He  did  not  say that  the  U.S.
never  again  will  allow  itself  to  be  lured  into  a  land  war  on
the  Asian  mainland"  nor  what  he  would   do  in  the   Middle
East,  or  if  Romania  were  invaded  or  if  Vietnamization   failed.
"That,"  it  commented,  "is  quite  a  few  rather  important   nots."
"Greater  Than  Expected  Threats"
Read  carefully,  the  Nixon  message  and  the  Laird  "posture"
statement  which   followed   it  spell   out   not   a   "low    posture"
policy  in  Asia  but  the  clear  intent  to  establish   an  American
protectorate   there.  Nixon's  "ly-j"
   war
    strategy  includes  keep-
ing   "general    purpose"   forces   adequate   "for   simultaneously
meeting  a  major  Communist  attack  in  either  Europe  or  Asia,
assisting  allies  against  non-Chinese  threats  in  Asia,  and   con-
tending  with  a  contingency elsewhere"   (as  in  Latin  America).
This  is  still  the  Pax  Americana.  He  intends  to  keep   sufficient
forces  in  Europe  to  insure even  against  "greater  than  expected
threats"   (a  little  phrase  which  spells   billions  in  unnecessary
outlays)   of   conventional  attack.  "To   meet   the   requirements
for  this  strategy,"  Nixon  said,  "we  will  maintain  the  required
ground   and  supporting  tactical  air  forces  in  Europe  and  Asia,
together   with  naval  and   air   forces."    (Our   italics.)   Where
will  he  keep  the  ground  troops?  In Vietnam?
Nixon's  "grand  design"  for  Asia calls  for  an  ABM  in  order
to   be  able   to   threaten   a  first  strike  against   China  without
suffering   damage  from   a  "death   spasm"  retaliatory  blow  on
an  American city  some  day  from  the  handful  of  ICBMs  China
may  have  in  the  mid-'70s.  This  strategy  surfaces  at  p.  43  of
the  Laird  posture  statement.  Nixon  has  been   fed  some   non-
sense  by  his  advisers  on  the  ABM.   At  his  Jan.  30  press  con-
ference   he   said   he   was   going   ahead   on   an   ABM    "area
defense"   because  it  would   be  "virtually  infallible"  against  a
Chinese   attack.   There   is   no   infallible   ABM.   Even   Laird,
slippery   as  he   is,  went   no  further  in  his   Feb.   24  presenta-
tion  to  Senate  Armed   Services  than  to  say  a  complete   12-site
area   defense   would  provide   "substantial"   protection   "for   a
number  of  years"  against  China.  We  hope  that  in  the   closed
NATO   Far  More  Inflationary  Than  HEW
Today,  25  years  after  the  end  of  World  War  II,  1.2
million    American   troops    are    overseas—310,000,    or
more  than  25  percent,  are  in  Europe.   Of  the  troops  in
Europe,   about   220,000  are   in   West   Germany.   Along
with  our  troops  in  Europe  are  235,000  dependents  and
14,000    U.S.    civilian    employees—a    total   of    559,000
Americans  in Western  Europe.  This  represents  a  larger
U.S.   military   presence   than   the   United   States   cur-
rently  has  in  Vietnam  where  an  actual  war  is  going  on.
To   support  this  military  presence   in   Europe   a   tre-
mendous  drain  is   placed  on  the   U.S.   budget.  It  costs
$14  billion  annually  to  support  our  troops   in  NATO.
In  addition,  associated   with  the  military  commitment,
is  a  $1.5  billion  balance  of  payments,  deficit—a  $1  bil-
lion  deficit  in  Germany alone.  .  .  .  But  just  last  month,
because   of   inflation   and  budget   strain,   the   President
had   to  veto  the  HEW  appropriation  bill  as   he  felt—
desirable   as   the   purposes   of   the   bill  were—that   the
budget  could  not  afford  the  extra   $1.2  billion  level  of
spending  called  for  in  the  bill.
—Sen.  Percy   (R.   III.),   Feb.   20  Cong.  Rec.,   S2058.
door   session   he   was  asked   what   "substantial"    means—how
many  people  might  still  be  killed?—and   for  how  many  years
would  this  shield  last?
Two   days   later   Dr.    Foster,    the   Pentagon's   Director   of
Defense  Research  and  Engineering,  made  two  admissions  be-
fore   the   same   committee   which  confirm  what   critics  of   the
ABM  said  last  year.  Admission  No.   1:  "If   the  Soviet   forces
continue  to  grow,  Minuteman  defense  may  not  be  economical
with  a  system using  only  Safeguard  radars."  Why,  then,  spend
money  on  these  radars when  Dr.  Foster  says  better  and  cheaper
ones  are  under  development?   More  fundamental  was  Admis-
sion  No.  2:  "We  are  not  sure  that  the  problems  of  land-based
missile  survivability can  be  solved   permanently."   The   critics
last  year  said  these  missiles  were   rapidly  approaching   obso-
lescence.    Dr.   Foster   admitted   we  may  soon   have   to   switch
to  sea-based  forces.  Why  then  embark  on  a  program   that  may
cost  $50  billion  to  replace  Minuteman   I  with  the   MIRV-ed
Minuteman   III   and   to   defend   soon-to-be-obsolete    missiles
with  a  soon-to-be-obsolete  ABM?  Is  this  national  defense  or
a  guaranteed  welfare  system  for  A.T.&T.  and  the  electronics
industry?
Symington   Learns  The  One  Firm  Date  for   Our  Withdrawal   From   Vietnam   Is  Mariana
Sen.  SYMINGTON: When  I  was  out  there  in  early  1967
and   late   1967  there   was   the   same   amount   of  optimism
about  the  program,  but  it  did  not  work  out  that  way,  and
I  imagine that  is  one  of  the  reasons  they  sent  you.
Ambassador  W.  E.  COLBY   [a  former  CIA  man  now  in
charge  of  "revolutionary   development"   in  Vietnam,  recently
renamed  "rural development".  It  should  more accurately be
called   "counter-revolutionary"  development]:   I  would  not
say  that,  Senator.
Sen.  SYMINGTON: If  the  U.S.  troops  and  support  left,
do  you  believe that  the  Thieu-Key government,  provided the
North   Vietnamese   retreated,   that   they   could   control   the
country  as  against  the  Viet  Cong?
Mr.  COLBY: I  believe  so.
Sen.  SYMINGTON: And if  the  North  Vietnamese  stayed
interested  after  all  this  training  you  are  doing  and  all  the
material  we  have  given  them,  how  long  do  you  think  it  will
be  before  we  can  get  out?
Mr.  COLBY: I  frankly  cannot  give  you  a  date  on  it.
Sen.  SYMINGTON: Would you  say  five  years?
Mr.  COLBY: I  really  don't  have  a  number.  It  depends  on
a  lot  of  things.
Sen.  SYMINGTON: If  you  are  not  sure  about  five,  how
about  ten  years?  When  I  was  in  the  Executive  branch,  they
promised  the  troops  in  Germany  would  stay  a  maximum of
18  months,  and  they  have  been  there  for  a  quarter   of  a
century.  Then  Korea  was  going  to  be  pretty  fast,  and  they
have  been  there  20  years,  so  I  am  not  being  facetious.
Mr.  COLBY:  I  think  they  could  get   out  if  nothing  else
arose  during  those  ten  years  that  caused  a  revision  of  the
estimate,  no  new  situation  arose.
Sen  SYMINGTON: Like  what?
Mr.  COLBY:  Like  a  change  in  the  overall  situation  in
the  Far  East.  [This  implies  we  might  keep  Vietnam  as  a
base  against  China  or  some  other   Asian   power—IPS].
Sen.   SYMINGTON:  You  were  not   sure   about  five,  but
you  are  pretty  sure  about  ten.  How  about  seven,  seriously?
Mr.  COLBY: I  don't  think  I  can  really  fix  a  time  for  you,
Senator.
—Before   Senate  Foreign  Relations   Feb.   17    (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,   March  9, 1970
The  Only  Way  To  Restore  Faith  In  The  Courts  And  In  Orderly  Change
(Continued   from   Page   One)
society  of  its  perils.   However,  and  to  whatever  degree,  right
or   wrong,   they  deserve  a  thoughtful  hearing,   because  they
speak   for   a  better   generation.    They   reflect   the   despair  of
younger   people   who   fear   atomic  annihilation  within  their
lifetime  unless  the  nuclear  buildup  and  all  the  sheer  suicidal
institutional  folly  behind  it  can  somehow  be  reversed.   They
see  America  drifting  toward   race  war   at  home   and   abroad
unless  the  conscience  of   the  dominant  whites  can  be  raised
to  a level  where  equality  would  make  fraternity possible.   They
have   increasingly   lost   faith   in   the   possibility   of   peaceful
change  as  they  confront  the  baffling  immobility of  the  estab-
lishment,  military  and  civilian.
Agnew  Sounds  Hysterical
Governments   are  not  overthrown.    They   overthrow  them-
selves.   They  see  critics  as  plotters.   They  over-react  and   lose
their  balance.    From   the  Bourbons   to  Batista  one  may  read
this  same  story.   Agnew  showed   the  all  too  familiar  blind-
ness.     He    told    the    Governors    the   greatest    issue    facing
the  country  was  "not  the  war  in  Vietnam,  nor  inflation,  nor
the   environment."    It   is,   he   said,   "Will   the   government
of   this  country  remain  in   the  hands   of   its  elected    officials
or  will  it  descend  to  the  streets?"   This  is  as  topsy-turvy  as  it
is   hysterically   overwrought.    Vietnam,   inflation,    pollution
are  major  causes  of  the  unrest  and  major  proofs  of  the  gov-
ernment's   incapacity.   Without   them,   there   would   be  little
turbulence  on   the   campus   and   in  the   streets.    With   them,
the  turbulence will  grow.  Who  is Agnew  to  speak  of  "kooks"?
What  could  be kookier  than  continuing a  cruel,  costly, divisive
and  unwinnable  war?  What  could  be  kookier  than  spending
53  cents  of   every  general   revenue   dollar   on   the   Pentagon
for   more  overkill  and   four-tenths  of   one   cent  per  general
revenue  dollar  (as  Nixon   proposes  in  his  new  budget)   on
what  he  himself  says  is  a  "now  or  never"  attempt  to  save  the
air   we   breathe   and   the   water   we  drink?   What   could   be
kookier  than  the  priorities  of  our  society?
I  do  not  share  the  revolutionary  outlook   because  I  think
it   is  gimmicky,  another   "instant"    recipe   in   our   world   of
commercials.   The  problems  of  war,  racism,  bureaucracy  and
pollution   are  everywhere;  no  society  has  solved  them;  their
roots  are  deep  in  the  ancient  conditioning  of  man  and  in  his
Suppose  It  Were  Hammers  and  Sickles?
As  a  black  woman,  I  am  dismayed  by  the  fact  that
within   the   Capitol  Restaurant   he   [Gov.   Maddox  of
Georgia]  was  allowed  to  pass  out  ax  handles,  his  per-
sonal  symbol of  resistance  to  the  order  of  the  highest
court  and  the  laws  of  this  Congress  .  .  .  I  would  like
to  pose  this  question to  my  esteemed  colleagues.  What
would  your  reaction  and  the   reaction   of   the  Capitol
Police  Force  have  been  if  this  anti-American display
had  been  carried out  by members of  the  Black  Panthers,
the  SDS,  the  American  Nazi  Party  or  the  Communist
Party  of  America  and  the  symbolic  weapons  they  had
chosen  were  toy  guns  and  not  ax  handles?  How  many
of  them  would be  in  jail  at  this  very  moment?
—Rep.  Chisholm   (D.  N.Y.)    in   the  House   Feb.  24.
inability  to  control  technology.   Man  himself  is  obsolete   un-
less   he   can   change.    That   change   requires   more   altruism;
more  kindness,  more—no   one  need   be  ashamed   to  say  it—
love.   It  will  not  come  about  by  calling   other  people  "pigs"
instead  of  liberating  ourselves  by  seeing  them  with   compas-
sion  as  fellow  prisoners  of   conditioned   reflexes  and  institu-
tional  molds.   But  if  there  were  no  handful  of  the  desperate
in  the  ghetto  and  on  the  campus   to  make  threats  and   hurl
rocks,   who   in   our   smug   and   complacent   established   order
would   begin   to  listen   and   to  move  a  little?
I   do  not   think   the   revolutionaries,   black   or   white,   can
remake  our  society  but  I  think  they  can  make  it  increasingly
unliveable.   The  antidote  is  justice,  justice  in  the  courts  and
the  justice of  social  equality.   The  cost  will  not  be  light  but  it
will  be  lighter   than   the   cost  of   injustice.    Either  we  learn
from   the   Chicago   prosecution   or  we   compound   its  follies.
The  wiser  course  began  in  the  Seventh  Circuit  Court  of  Ap-
peals  when  it  unanimously  reversed  Judge  Hoffman's  refusal
of  bail  to  defendants  and  counsel.   The  courts  can  save  their
reputation  in  the  eyes  of  our  youth,  and  restore  faith  in  law
and   in   orderly  change,   by  going   on   to   reverse   the   whole
mess   of   convictions,   the   contempts   included,   and   to   hold
unconstitutional   the   new   statute   under   which    they   were
reached.   In  a  vast  Republic,  which  prospered  by  the  lack  of
barriers  to  free  travel  and  free  trade  among  its  many  States,
this  law  would  make  it  hazardous  to  speek  freely  once  a  state
line  had  been   crossed.    It  would   suspend   the  First   Amend-
ment  in  interstate  travel  and  set  the  traps  of   repression.
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
/.  F. Stone's  I
FOR  STONE'S  HIDDEN  HISTORY
For  the  enclosed  $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's   book, The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War  (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City                                          Zip                  State
Indicate   if  gift   announcement   wished  Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                         Zip                  State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                  3/9/70
4420  29th  St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
4420  29th   St.,   N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone s  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.   N.W.   Washington   D C
An  independent bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription: $5  in  the  U.S.;  $6  in  Canada-'     '  '
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  {17  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel. Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED