I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970dec28.pdf

============================================================

Why  Nixon  Picked  Connolly, P. 2; Hoover and  the Berrigans, P.  3
Speaking  of  International  Outlaws
He  (Capt.  Edward  Medina,  the  company  commander)  ordered  the  village  burned,  the  animals  shot,  the  wells  contami-
nated  and every living thing  in that  area killed.
—George  W.  Latimer, Lt.  Wm.  L.  Galley's  chief   defense   counsel;  in  his  opening  statement  Dec.  10, the  same  day  Nixon
at  press  conference   called  North  Vietnam  "an  international   outlaw."
IF.   Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL. XVIII,  No. 24
DECEMBER  28,  1970
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Nixon's  Secret  New  Obstacle  to  A  Prisoner  Exchange
In  the  negotiations  to  end  the  Korean  conflict,  the  prisoner
of  war  issue  delayed  a  settlement  by  18  months.   During  that
time  the   United   Nations   Command   suffered   an  additional
140,000  casualties,   including   nearly   9,000  more   Americans
killed.   The  delay  and  the  additional  casualties  were  due  to
a  prolonged   but  little  publicized campaign  of   "re-education"
in  the  POW   camps.   This  was  designed  to  bring  about  mass
defections.   Chinese  and  North   Korean  soldiers  were   offered
asylum  and  other  inducements if  they  turned  anti-Communist.
When  truce  talks  began  the  U.S.  then  insisted  that  prisoners
be  given  freedom  of  choice  to  return  home  or  remain  on  our
side.  The  stage  is being  set  for  a  replay  of  that  long  and  costly
wrangle  by  an  unnoticed  phrase   in  Nixon's   Oct.   7   speech
offering   a  5-point  plan  to  end  the  war.  "I  propose,"   Nixon
then  said,  "all  prisoners  of  war,  without  exception,  without
condition,   be   released  now   to   return   to   the   place   of   their
choice."   (Our  italics.)   It  is  typical  of  Nixon's   tricky  tactics
that  a  sentence  which  began  by  speaking  of  no  exceptions  or
conditions  should  end  by  covertly  setting  the  same  condition
that  proved  so  costly  in  the  Korean  negotiations.  The   "place
of   their  choice"   is  the   Korean   war   principle  of   "voluntary
repatriation"   rephrased.  It  means  that  instead  of  simply  ex-
changing  all  prisoners  on  both   sides,  we  enter   into  another
long  wrangle  over  who  wants  to  go  home.  The  purpose  then
was to  impose a cold  war  political  defeat  on  the  other  side,  and
(for  those  who  still  wanted  a  military  victory  in  Korea)   to
delay  a  peaceful  settlement  in  the  hope  that  the  war  could  be
re-escalated.
No  Right  To  Know?
The  Korean  war  began  on  June  25,  1950;  the  truce  negotia-
tors  first  met  a  year  later  on  July  10,  1951.  The  talks  seemed
to  have  reached  their  end  when  the  prisoner  of  war  argument
began  on  Dec.  11,  1951.  The  talks  did  not  end  until  July  27,
1953  when  the  armistice  was  finally  signed  after   the  longest
truce  talks  in  history.  The  casualty  total  was  305,000   when
the  truce  talks  began.  It  was  445,000  before  the  POW   issue
was  resolved.  A  simple exchange  of  all  prisoners  on  both  sides
"without  exception"  and  "without  condition"—to   use Nixon's
words—would   have   brought   U.S.   POWs   home   18   months
earlier  last  time.  Their  suffering  and  that  of  their  families  was
prolonged  to  pay  for  a  propaganda  victory.  It  enabled   Chiang
Kai-shek  to  impose  loss  of  face  on  Peking—and  Syngman  Rhee
a  similar defeat  on  Norh  Korea.  Most  of  the  Chinese   "volun-
teers"  and  the North  Korean  soldiers  elected  not  to  go  home.
To suggest a  "place  of  their  choice"  release  again  is to  prepare
the   ground    for   a   repetition   of   all   this   agony.   Surely   the
country and  POW  families have  a  right  to  know  what  is  being
planned   and  to  make  their  views  known  before  so  crucial  a
Clifford  on  Nixon's  Back-to-Bombing  Policy
The  policy  that  he  [Nixon]  enunciated  last  night  is
a  complete  departure  from  any  understanding  that  was
had  between  the  parties.   This  is  a  new  element  that  he
has  added to  it.  I think it  is  really  a distressing   change.
I  might  say  that  if  there  is  any  one  lesson  that   I've
learned,  maybe  with  5  years  of  experience  about  Viet-
nam,  it  is  that  the  application of  military  force—in  this
instance,  the  increased  application  of  military  force—
will  not  bring  peace  in  Vietnam.   That's  why   I  think
this  policy  could turn out  to  have tragic   results.
We've  been  all  through  the  bombing  of  Vietnam.  We
started  in  1965,  and  in  '66  and  '67  and  '68  we  bombed
North  Vietnam.   It  was  not  effective  then,  and  it  will
not  prove  to  be  effective  now.   It  did  not  bring  peace
then,  and  I  assure  you  it  will  not  bring  peace  now.   I
tell  you  what  the  bombing will  do,  if  he  starts  it  again.
It  will  mean more  war,  and  more  destruction,  and  more
fighting,  and  more dying.
—Former  Defense   Secretary   Clifford:     CBS   Dec.  11.
policy  decision  is made.
It  is characteristic of  this  Administration and  of  the  military
bureaucracy  that  at  the  very time  they  are  running  a  campaign
to  exploit  the  POW   issue  they  should   secretly  be  preparing
negotiating  positions  that  can  only  prolong  POW   suffering.
Nothing   could   better   demonstrate   the   cynicism  behind   the
campaign.  For  months  the  appeals  of  POW  wives  and  mothers
were   treated   coldly  or   ignored   until  the   Pentagon   and   the
White   House   decided  this  was  a  useful  way  to  build  up  the
hate  required  if  they  found  it  necessary  again   to  escalate  the
war  as they  have  begun  to  do.  But  when  talks  reach  the   POW
issue  again  we  will  find  the  appeal  to  bring  our  POWs  home
muted  and  a  new  propaganda   campaign  begun   to  guarantee
the  POWs  we  hold  the  right  "to  return  to  the  place  of  their
choice."  This  is the  trap  which  lies  ahead.
In  the  Korean  war the  South  Korean  regime,  like the  Saigon
regime,  balked  at  peace  talks  altogether   because  it  wanted  the
U.S.  to  go  on  and  reunite  Korea  by  force,  though  China  dem-
onstrated  that  she  would  not  allow  this  and  had  pushed  our
troops   back  to  the  38th  parallel,  the  old  dividing  line,  with
terrible   losses  on  both  sides.  The  South   Korean   regime   and
those  U.S.  military  who,   like  MacArthur   saw  "no   substitute
for  victory,"  seized  on  the  POW  issue  to  prolong  the  fighting
in  the  hope  that  the  peace  talks  would  break  down  altogether,
and  full  scale  war  could  be  renewed.  Any  resemblance   between
the  situation  then  and  the  situation  now  is  not  coincidental.
A  debate  on  this  question  should  begin  now  and  not  when
the  country finds itself  before  another  costly  fait  accompli.  Two
(Continued  On  Page  4)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December  28, 1970
Nixon  Picks An LBJ  Man As  He Shifts  to  LBJ's  War  and  Inflation  Course
After  Deficit  Financing,  Can  Arms  Race  and  More  War  Be  Far  Behind?
NIXON'S   SPEECH   To   THE  NAM    marked  his  conversion
almost  40  years  later  to  Keynesianisnv.  deficit  financing  New
Deal   style  as  a  means  of  stimulating business  recovery.  Un-
fortunately   John   Kenneth   Galbraith's   recent   Fabian   Society
lecture  shows  (see  text  in  the  London  New  Statesman  Dec.  4)
it  is  too  late  for  Keynesianism.  Big  Business  and   Big   Labor
have  made  it  obsolete.  Only  wage  and  price  controls, Galbraith
argues,  can  combine  "adequate   employment  with  reasonable
price  stability."  But  though  labor  leadership  is  ready  for  this,
it  is  too  big  a  pill  for  the  G.O.P.  to  swallow.
The  basic undertow  will  carry  Nixon  from  deficit  financing
toward   resumed  arms  race  and  more  war.  This  is  the  historic
Democratic  way  out,  the  profitable  way  to  combat  unemploy-
ment.   Joblessness   is  now   back   to  the   1963   level   when   the
involvement  in  Vietnam  began   to  mount.  As   the  war  began
to  ebb,  unemployment   began  to  rise.  These  are  the  objective
factors  which  make return to  tension  and  tough  policies seduc-
tive.  But  it  is  too  soon  after  the  last  inflationary  binge  to  start
a  new  one,  and  the  road  leads  to disaster.
Just  Gambling  On  More  Inflation
RESUMED   BOMBING   OF   THE   NORTH   will   reactivate   the
peace  movement  here  and  the  war  spirit   there.  And   it  will
further  undermine the  confidence of  the  business  community.
As  it  is,  business  loans  have  not  responded   to  cheap  money.
All   it  has  done  is  to  set  off  a  stock  market  boomlet  which
Nixon  wants  for  his  election  campaign.  But  there  is  no  sub-
stance behind  it;  it  is  just gambling  on  more  inflation.
THE   REPLACEMENT  OF   KENNEDY  BY  CONNALLY  symbo-
lizes  Nixon's  shift  toward  deficit  financing.  It  also  reflects  his
preference  for  yes-men  in  the  Cabinet;  just  as  Hickel  was  too
independent-minded  on  his  left,  the  Chicago  banker, Kennedy,
has  been  too  outspoken  on  Nixon's  right.  Only  a  few  weeks
ago,  Kennedy  toured  Western  Europe  to  assure  officials   there
that  the  U.S.  was working  to  strengthen  the  dollar  and  to  curb
inflation  at  home.  He  must  have  been  surprised  to  return  and
find  Nixon  encouraging  inflationary  speculation  at  home  while
risking  a  deterioration  in  the  balance  of  payments  by  re-esca-
lating the war.
CONNALLY  Is  DESCRIBED  by  Texans  who  know  him  well  as
a  "stuffed   shirt"  with  no  qualifications  for  the  Treasury  post
other  than  his  self-assurance. The  appointment  is  seen  by  them
as  a  move  to  "sew   up  oil  money"   for  Nixon   in   1972.   The
deeper  significance lies  in  Connally's  lifelong  association  with
Lyndon  Johnson.  As  Nixon  turns  back  to  Johnson's   bombing-
and-inflation  policies, he  can use  a Johnson  man  in  the  Cabinet
as  a  bi-partisan  front  for  escalated  war.  Connally  led  the  fight
Do  They  Keep  Dossiers  on  Senators,  Too?
FULBRIGHT:  There  have  been  two  stories  recently,
one  in the  Washiityon  Star  Dec.  9  by  Frank  Getlein and
another   by   Carl   Rowan   on   the   military  intelligence
apparatus  activities  as  to  civilians,  including  members
of   Congress.   The  first  says,   "The  big  news  so  far  in
December  certainly  has  been  the  revelations  on  NBC's
First  Tuesday  that  various branches of  military  intelli-
gence   have   been   involved'  in   investigating  American
citizens  not  in  the  least  subject  to  legitimate  military
authority  (including)  candidates for  the  Presidency  and
the  widow  of  Martin  Luther  King"  and  the  other  one
says,  "At  Fort  Holabird the  Army  was  keeping  a  com-
puterized   master   file   of   dissenters,    protesters,    and
others  suspected  of  being  less  than  100% loyal  to  what
the   military   agents   regard   as   the   American  way  of
life."   I  wonder,  in  view  of  that,  if  I  should  happen  to
vote  against  this  appropriation  (for   Cambodia)   would
that  be  added  to  my  dossier?    [Laughter].
LAIRD:   Well,  I  would  question  that,  Mr. Chairman
FULBRIGHT:    Can  you   say   categorically   whether
they  do  have  dossiers  on  members  of  the  Senate   .  .  .
LAIRD: I  would  not think  so   ...
FULBRIGHT:   Would  you  let  me  see  the  dossier   if
they  have  one.
LAIRD:  I would be pleased  to.    [Laughter].
—Before   Senate  Foreign  Relations  Dec.  11
against  a peace  plank  at  the  1968  Democratic  convention.
GEORGE  BUSH,  To  REPLACE  Yost  at  the  UN,  is better  quali-
fied for  the  Treasury;  he  was on  the  Ways  and  Means  Commit-
tee  in  the  House.  But  he  does  not  have  Connally's   political
advantages.   Bush  is  completely   unqualified  for  the  UN   job;
it's  just a  reward  for  a  defeated  Republican.  We  regret  Charles
Yost's  removal;  his  knowledge   and  impartial  sympathies  on
the  Middle   East  made   him   ideal   for   the   UN   post   as  the
Jarring  talks  resume.  He  symbolized  the  "even-handed"   policy
and   the   effort   at   reconciliation,   and   his   going   may   reflect
pressure  from  the  Zionist   movement.
IF  THE  BASQUE  TRIALS  set  off  an  explosion   in  Spain,  will
U.S.   forces  be  used   to  support   Franco?  Will   Europe's   last
surviving   Fascist  dictator,   whose   forces   fought   on  the   other
side   in  World   War   II,   be   defended   by   U.S.   troops   and
planes?  Lawrence  Fernsworth,  who  covered  the  Spanish  Civil
War  for  the  London  Times,  spelled  out  the  evidence  of   secret
American  commitments  to  Franco  in  The  Nation  last  Novem-
ber  16. The  time  to  prevent  intervention  is  now.
Senator  McCarthy Exposes Two Steps Backward  In The Nixon Welfare  Plan
The  family  assistance   plan  has  been  widely  praised  for
providing  a  minimum income floor—$1,600, which  is  really  a
subbasic  level.   Few  people  realize  that  it  also  sets  forth  a
maximum   benefit   ceiling   for   Federal   matching   purposes.
This  is  more  significant  and  really  more  effective.   Benefits
would  be  cut  off  at  a  level  determined  by  reference   to  the
poverty  level  stated  in  the  bill; thus,  families  are effectively
prohibited  from  receiving  payments  in  an  amount  above  the
poverty  level.   Two  States,  New  York  and  New  Jersey,  al-
ready  pay  benefits  at  a  level  above  the  poverty  line.   By
establishing  a  ceiling,  the  administration plan  would  reduce
benefits  for  over  1,450,000  persons  in  these  two  States  alone.
Moveover,  it  would effectively prohibit other States  from any
future  increases  in  benefits  above  the  poverty  line.
The  forced-work  program  is   a  major  feature.    In  fact,
the  program  was  referred  to  in  the  recent  campaign  as  'not
a  welfare  program  but  a  work-fare  program.'   Today,  when
an  employer  is  not  covered  by  minimum  wage  laws,  he  is
forced  by  the  market to  pay  a  subsistence   wage.   If  he  pays
less,  it  is  difficult  for  him  to  get  anyone  to  work  for  him.
But  under  the  administration  plan,  he  could  offer  as  low  a
wage  as  he wanted  and still  be  assured  a  continual  supply  of
cheap  labor.   He  need  only  inform  the  local   welfare   office
that  jobs  are  available;  the  poor  must  then  work  for  him
no  matter  what  he pays  or lose  their  benefits.  This,  it  seems
to  me,  encourages   practices  which  even  the  free  market  by
itself  would not  allow.  It  is  a  modern  version  of  the  debtor's
prison—without  walls.
—Sen.  McCarthy   (D.  Minn.)  in  the  Senate,  Dec.  2,  sum-
marizing  his  hearings  on the  Nixon  welfare   bill.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December  28, 1970
Why Does The No. 1 G-Man Cany On A Posthumous Slander  Campaign Against King?
Hoover's  Preposterous  Charges  Against  The  Berrigan  Brothers
If   it  was  anybody  else  but  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  he'd   be  put
down  as  a  first  class  idiot  for  his  attack  on  the  jailed  brothers
Berrigan.  If  they  are  indeed  head  of   a  bomb  ring  planning
to  disrupt  Washington  and  kidnap  a  high  official   in  order  to
stop  the  war,  he  disrupted a  valuable intelligence operation  by
talking  about  it  in  public   and  thus  warning   the  plotters   to
cover  their  tracks.   Secondly,  if  there  is  such  a  plot   (and  our
prison  system  is  so  poor  that  these  two  priests  can  direct  such
a  far  flung  operation   from  inside  Danbuiy)  and  they  should
be  brought  to  court  for  this  criminal  conspiracy,  the  prosecu-
tion  has  been   put   in  jeopardy  by  Hoover's   babbling.    They
can  claim  a  mistrial on  the  ground  that  his  conviction of  them
in  the  headlines  before  they  were  even  indicted  had  destroyed
any  possibility  of  a  fair  trial.  Nixon  was  evasive  when  asked
about  Hoover's charges. Nixon  said  the  Justice  Department was
studying Hoover's  testimony "and  will take appropriate  action."
The  truth,  of  course,   is  that   both   the  charges  and  Hoover's
conduct  are  preposterous  by  any  rational standard.
Hoover's Sick Obsession With King
A  more  serious  issue  was  raised  by  the  second  part  of  that
same  question,  which  Nixon  also  dodged.  This  concerned  the
Time   (Dec.   14)   interview  in  which  Hoover   again  called  the
late  Rev.  Dr.  Martin  Luther King  "a  liar."   At  a  time  of  deep
racial  tension,   it  is  a  positive  menace  to  national   security  in
a  real  sense  of  that  term  to  have  the  head  of  the  FBI continue
a  campaign   of  posthumous  character  assassination  against  the
greatest   black  American  of  our  time  and   the  first  American
black  to  win  the  Nobel  peace  prize—"he  was  the  last  one  in
the  world   who  should   ever   have   received  it,"   Hoover   said
to  Time,
Hoover   has  some   kind   of   sick  obsession  with  King.    He
keeps  hitting  at  him,  like  a  frenzied  lyncher  kicking  a  corpse.
Add  the  King   campaign   to  his  renewed  attack  in  Th/ie   on
Bobby  Kennedy  (for  suggesting   more  black  FBI  men!)   and
his  slurs  on  Puerto  Ricans  and  Chicanos   (also  in  Time)   and
the  racial  prejudice is unmistakable.
Hoover's  attack  on  the  Berrigans   is  beginning   to  make  a
dove  of  Rep.   Wm.  R.  Anderson   (D.   Teiinj.    His  counter-
The  FBI  May  Not  Draw  Conclusions
But  J.  Edgar  Certainly  Does
Mr.   (Frank   T.)   BOW  (R.  Ohio):   How  did  this  so-
called  leak  get  out  with  regard  to  Kent  State?
Mr.  (J.  Edgar)  HOOVER:  That  did  not  come  from
the  FBI.   But  it  did  cause  me  great  concern.  The  first
time  I  knew  of  it  was  when  the  Akron   Beacon-Journal
had  a  great  headline—it  is  part  of  the  Knight chain of
newspapers—saying  "FBI:   No  Reason  For  Guard  To
Shoot   at  Kent   State."    I  knew  this  was   untrue.   We
never  make  any  conclusions  .  .  .   There  were  certainly
extenuating  circumstances  which  caused  the   guard   to
resort  to  the  use  of  firearms.  Perhaps  they  were  not
as   completely  trained   as   they  should  have  been,  but
certainly  some  stated   they   feared  for  their  lives  and
then  fired;  some  of  the  students  were  throwing  bricks
and  rocks  and  taunting  the  National   Guardsmen.
Mr.  BOW:  Do  you  mind this  being  on  the  record?
Mr.  Hoover:  Not  at  all.
—pp.   609-10.  House   Appropriations   hearings  on  the
11)71  supplemental,   released  Dec.  8.
attack  on  Hoover  in  the  House  Dec.  9  should  be  circulated by
the   peace   movement.    Anderson   represents   a   rural   district
west  of  Nashville.   He  is  an  Annapolis  graduate  who  won  a
Bronze  Star  in  combat  in  the   Pacific  in  World   War   II   and
commanded    the   nuclear   submarine   Nautilus   in   its   historic
voyage  under  the  North  Pole.   Anderson  not  only  defended
the   Berrigans,  as  he  had  already  done  in  several  newspaper
interviews,   but   protested   their  harassment  in   prison*,    sug-
gested   that   Hoover   was  insensitive  to  the   deeper   causes  of
crime,  and  for  the  first  time  began  to  question  the  war  itself.
Four  Congressmen,  including Win.   F.  Ryan  (D)   and  Ogden
R.  Reid   (R)   of  New  York  rose  to  support  Anderson.
*  He  protested  the  use  of  leg  shackles  in  moving  the  Rev.
Daniel  Berrigan.   "The  last  time  I  saw  leg  shackles,"  he  told
the  House,  "was  in  Con  Son  Island  prison  camp,  in  the  tiger
cages  of  the  South  Vietnamese  government."   Rep.  Anderson
exposed  Con Son last summer.
From Speeches In The House Criticizing Hoover's Attacks  On The Berrigans  And Others
As  a  lifelong  admirer  of  Mr.  Hoover  and  the  FBI,  I  am
convinced  that  he  would  not  purposely   subvert  the  Consti-
tution  or  undermine  our  democratic  processes.    Yet   it   is
manifest  that  on  Friday, Nov.  27  he  did so  ...    Mr. Hoover
testified  that  Fathers   Philip  and  Daniel  Berrigan  are  "the
prinicpal  leaders  of  a  conspiracy planning to  blow  up under-
ground   electrical    conduits   and   steam   pipes   serving   the
Washington,  D.C.  area."  Mr.  Hoover  went  on  to  add,  "The
plotters  are  also  concocting  a  scheme   to  kidnap  a  highly
placed  government   official   ...       If  successful,  the  plotters
would  demand  an  end  to   the   U.S.   bombing  operations  in
Southeast  Asia  and  the  release  of  all  political   prisoners.
Knowing  the  Berrigan  brothers  ...     I find it impossible
to  believe  that  Mr.  Hoover's  allegations   are  true.   Even  in
destroying   draft  files,  illegal  acts   which   they  committed
to  dramatize the  death  toll  of  young  American boys  in Viet-
nam,  they  were  meticulously   careful   to  plan  the  events  so
that  no  physical  harm  could  possibly  befall  clerks, bystand-
ers,  police or anyone  else  ...    If  his  [Hoover's]  actions  stem
from  such  a  degree  of  rage  or  fear  that  his  purpose  is  to
discredit  all  who  peaceably  and  without violence  oppose  the
Vietnam  war, then I  must  again  conclude  with  much  sadness
that  he,  too,  is  a  victim  of  that  war.
—Rep.  Wm.  R.  Anderson   (D.   Tenn)  in  the  House  Dec. .9
Mr.  (Abner  J.)  Mikva  (D.  Ill):  The  unsupportable  testi-
mony  Mr. Hoover has  given the  committee is  yet  another  bit
of  evidence  that  the  FBI  has  become  in  itself   a  center  of
political  action  within the  U.S.  generating  a  force  from  the
"right"   that  has  the  potential   of  becoming   as  destructive
as  it  is  divisive.
Mr.  (Don)  Edwards  (D. Cal):  I  was  a  special  agent  of  the
FBI  in  the  years  1940 and  1941  .  .  .  Punishment  of  Ameri-
cans  by  accusation  of  crime  by  a  high  government depart-
ment  official  such  as  the  Director  of  the  FBI  is  an  unconsti-
tutional  and improper  action  .  .  .  The  U.S.  with  its immense
size,  its  varied  ethnic  groups,  ...     is  a  complicated  difficult
country  to  govern.  High  Federal  officials  should  set  an  ex-
ample  of  responsible  dialogue  free  from  invective ...     It  is
certainly   not  appropriate   .  .  .  for  Mr.  Hoover   to  say   as
reported  in  this  week's  Time  Magazine, "You never  have  to
bother  about  a  President   being  shot   by  Puerto  Ricans  or
Mexicans.    They   don't   shoot   very   straight.    But   if   they
come  at  you with a  knife,  beware." .  . .  (nor)  to  brand  Nobel
Peace  Prize  Winner  Dr.  Martin  Luther King,  Jr.  "a liar."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December  28, 1970
Not  Much  Free  Choice  In  The  Free  Choice  Last  Time
(Continued  From  Page  1)
issues  are  entangled  here.  One  is  the  right  of  anti-Communist
prisoners  not to go  home,  the  right  to asylum. The  other,  which
has  been   cloaked   in   secrecy,  is  the   right  of   prisoners  to  be
free  from  coercion  and  discrimination designed  to  make  them
defect.  On  the  first  issue,  Article  118  of  the  Geneva  Conven-
tion   says   only   "Prisoners   of   war   shall   be   released   and   re-
patriated  without  delay after  the  cessation  of  active  hostilities."
The  principle  of  voluntary repatriation  was  rejected, largely  on
'the   insistence  of  Britain.  Since  a  detaining  power   has  many
means  of  preventing  free  choice,  it  was  feared  that  "voluntary
repatriation"   might   be  seized  on  as  an  excuse  to  hold   back
POWs.  The  framers  of  the  Convention  feared  a  repetition  of
what  happened   after  World  War   II  when  the  Soviet  Union
held  back  millions  of  German,  Italian  and  Japanese   prisoners
for  years  after  the  war  was  over.
Political  Discrimination   Forbidden
On  the  second   issue,  the  right  of  prisoners  to  be  free  from
coercion  and   discrimination   in  the  camps,  the  Geneva   Con-
vention  provided  (Article  116)  that  all POWs must  be  "treated
alike, without  any adverse  distinction  based  on  race, nationality,
religious  belief  or  political  opinion."  This  provision  was  vio-
lated   when   the   U.S.   and   the   South   Koreans   within   a  few
months  of  the  war's  outbreak  began  their  POW    "re-education"
campaign.  This  led  to  scandalous  outbreaks   in  the  camps  in
which  many  prisoners  were  killed.  In  January  of   1952   pris-
oners   who   had   declared   for   the  anti-Communist   side   were
segregated   in  separate  camps  from  those  who  had  refused  to
be  "re-educated."  In  April  of   1952  the  allied  command   an-
nounced  that  it  had  finished  screening  the  prisoners  and  that
only  70,000  of  the  170,000  wanted  to  go  home.
Secretary  of  State  Acheson  said  unctuously  at  the  time  that
the  right  of  the  POWs  to  choose  whether   to  return  or  stay
was the  key issue of  the  Korean  negotiations  because  we  upheld
"the  worth  of  the  individual"  while  the  Communists  did  not.
The  circumstances  hardly  lived  up  to  the  ideal  of  free  choice.
A   recent   study*   reports   that   "small  groups   of    Communist
*  See  Mass  Behavior   in  Battle  and  Captivity:   The  Com-
munist   Soldier   in  the   Korean  War.    Edited  by  Meyers  and
Biderman,  Univ.  of  Chicago  Press  1968.   The  writers   tread
softly  lest  they  step  on  too  many  toes  in  our  military  estab-
lishment  but  this  only   makes  their  queasy   revelations  the
more  significant.
On  Those  Poor   Little  Unarmed  Planes
SYMINGTON:   Why  do  we  constantly  give  the  im-
pression  to  the  American  people  that  all  we  send  over
there  are  unarmed reconnaissance  planes  when  we  have
considerably  more  fighter  planes  with  the  unarmed  re-
connaissance  planes  and  probably  the  same  plane,  the
KF-4  and  the  F-4   [i.e.  the  "recon"  and  fighter  models
of  the  same  plane].
LAIRD:   I  have  never  given  that  impression.
SYMINGTON:   If  the  North  Vietnamese  see  a  group
of   planes  come  over,  and  the   RF,   the  reconnaissance
plane  is  indistinguishable to  them  on  the  ground  from
the   fighter  planes  that   are  with  them,  how  does   the
gunner  on  the  ground know  whether  he  should  let  them
go  over  or  whether  he  should  not?
LAIRD:  He  does  not.
—Before  Senate Foreign  Relations Dec. 11   (abridged)
and  anti-Communist  activists battled  physically  for  control  of
individual  compounds.  Whichever  group  achieved  control  was
able  to  extend  its management  over  most  of  the  prisoners."  In
the  months  before  the  screening  "the  great  majority  of  POWs
were  subjected to  sustained,  one-sided  indoctrination and  social
pressures."   Not   unnaturally  the   side   which   had   the   camp
authorities  behind   them,  and  could   offer   the  greater   induce-
ments,  won  out.  Is  a  similar  process  going  on  in  the  camps
today  and  will  we  again  learn  about  it  only  years  later,  and
after  it  has  played  its  part  in  delaying a  settlement ?
"At  no  time  in  the  history of  the  world,"  Laird  told  Senate
Foreign    Relations,   "has   there   been   such   a   dramatic   pro-
posal"  as our  offer  to  exchange  the  36,000  POWs  we  hold  for
the   3,000  he  claims  the  other   side   holds.   But   once   before
in  history,  that  of  the  Korean  war,  it  turned  out  that  we  had
coerced  and  brain-washed  most  of  the  POWs  on  our  side  into
defecting.  Can  Nixon  and  Laird  assure  us  that  "re-education"
has  not  been  underway  again  in  our  POW   camps?  Why  did
Laird  omit  any  reference  to  the  meaning  of  that  phrase—"the
place of  their  choice"  in  Nixon's  offer?  Do  the  families of  our
POWs  want  to  go  through   this  kind  of   tragicomedy   again
before  our  own  men  are  released ? Do  we want  months  more  of
casualties  while  the  tangled   issues  are  again  resolved,  with  all
the  risk  that the  talks may break  down  altogether  and   full-scale
war  resume?                                                                           Dec.  14
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed  Envelope
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  special  pre-publication  price  of  $8.95
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics  and  Prophecies:
1967-70  (Random  House).  Regularly   $10.
(To)    Name
Street
City
Indicate
Please   renew
Name
Street
City
I
4420   29th
Zip
*/  9^ft   Announcement
(or  enter)  a  sub  for
Zip
State
wished    Q
the   enclosed   $5:
Statp
.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
                  12
/
2
8/'»
St.  N. W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th   St.,  N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly. 2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  20th  St..  N.W..  Washington.  D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.:   (6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  517  to  Europe:  520  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED