I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970jun29.pdf

============================================================

Stage-Managing  That  White  House Probe In   Vietnam, P.  3
The  Black Revolt  Brewing  In  The  South's  "Integrated"  Schools
Black  students  will  not sit  in segregated classrooms  in  "integrated"  schools;  will  not  attend  educational dumping  grounds
on  the  basis  of  standardized tests;  will  not  arrive  and  leave,  eat,  and  have  recess,   at  separate   times  from  their  white
schoolmates;  will  not  allow  "Dixie"  to  be  sung  at  school  assemblies;  will  not  be expelled  from  schools  for  defending  their
rights;  will  not  be  excluded from  honor societies  and  football  teams,  and  will  not  allow  their  black  teachers  and principals
to  be dismissed  and demoted."—Julian  Band,  before   the  Senate Select Committee  on Equal  Education  Opportunity,   June  15,
IF.   Stone's Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVIII,  No.  13
JUNE  29,  1970       ">'
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
The  Realities  Behind  Nixon's  Inane  Economic  Report
Even  Nixon  didn't  think  much  of  his  speech  on  the  econo-
my.  He   avoided   prime  TV   time   and   spoke  at  noon   when
millions  fewer  would  be  listening.  The   Wall   Street   Journal
disclosed  next  day  that  he  had  tried  to  limit  the  broadcast  to
the  radio and  went  on  TV  only  because  the  television  networks
pressed  for  permission  to  carry  it. When  Nixon  and  his  public
relations  men  prefer  to  hide  his  light  under   a  bushel,   they
themselves  must think  it  rather  dim. Not  since  Herbert  Hoover
has  a  President  faced   an  economic   crisis  with  proposals   so
feeble  and  a  rhetoric  so  irrelevant.  "Wall  Streeters  Yawn  at
Nixon  Statement,"   said  a  derisive headline  across  the  financial
page  of  the  Washington   Post  next  morning.   Before  Nixon
spoke,  trading on  the  stock  exchange  was  brisk.  In  expectation
of   some   invigorating  announcement,   the   Dow-Jones   index
jumped   5  points  in  the  first  hour.  After  the  speech,  it  went
down  steadily  and   closed   1.58  points  below  the  day   before.
Nixon  must  feel  that  Wall  Street,   too,  is  full  of   bums.
An  Odd Kind of  Activism
The  rhetoric,   in  its  simple-minded  evocation  of  free  enter-
prise  and  its  benefits,   sounded   like  Hoover.  So  did  Nixon's
remedies:   evangelistic  exhortations,   this  time   against   price-
wage   sinners—Billy  Grahamism  in   economics—and    the   ap-
pointment  of  another  investigating  commission,   this  time  on
productivity.   As  a  young  editorial   writer   during   the   Great
Depression,    I   remember    vividly   how   Hoover   like   Nixon
evaded  decisions  by  appointing  fact-finding  commissions*  and
then  in  turn  evaded  the  facts  when  found.  "This  is  an  activist
administration,"   Nixon   said  in  his  economic   address.  Dodg-
ing  hard  issues  is not  usually described  as  activism.
The  more  the  Nixon   speech  is  studied  the  sillier  and  more
confused  it  appears  to be. "I  will not  take  this  nation  down  the
road   of   wage   and   price   controls,"    Nixon    said,   "however
politically  expedient  they  may  seem."  The  implication  is  that
he   is  a  big,   bold   fellow  who   eschews  political   expediency.
But  though   wage  and  price  controls  in  some  form  look   more
and  more  necessary,  it  is  doubtful  that  their  imposition  would
be  politically  expedient.   Labor  doesn't   like  wage  control   and
business  doesn't  like  price  control.   Everybody  would   like   to
control  the  other  fellow's  prices  but  not  his  own.  Nixon  said
this  was no  time  for  Congress  "to  play  politics  with  inflation"
by  passing  legislation  giving  him  standby  powers  to  impose
such  controls.  The  reference  is to  HR  17880  introduced  June 2
by  Congressmen  Patman,  Reuss and  others  giving  the  President
authority  to  institute  a  temporary   freeze  on  all  prices,  rents,
wages   and   salaries.   "Playing  politics"   is  a   curious   way  to
•Another example:  Nixon's  appointment  of  a commission  to
investigate  campus  disorders  (a  euphemism  for  student   kill-
ings)  on  which  Agnew  made  a  fool  of  himself  again.
Telling  Both  Sides  Of  The  Story  Department
(As  Agnew  Admonished  Us)
President  Nixon  has  criticized  Congress  for  inaction
on  an  emergency  housing  message  of  Feb.  2  but  there
was  no  such  message,  Rep.  Patman  (D.,  Texas)   said
today.   "The   truth  is   that   the   President   was  talking
about   a   nonexistent    presidential   message.   He   even
purported   to   quote   from  this   nonexistent   message,"
Mr.  Patman  said.   "The  only  thing  that   happened  on
housing  on  February  2  was  the  opening  of  hearings  in
the   House   Banking   and   Currency   Committee."   Mr.
Patman   said   administration   witnesses   appeared  only
late  in  February  before  his  committee  and  even  then
had  no  specifics  to  offer.  It  was  only  after  the   Senate
passed  a  bill,  he  went  on,  that  the  administration asked
for  House  approval April 28, calling  this  the  Emergency
Home  Finance  Act  of  1970.
—Baltimore  Sun,  June  16.
An  aide  to  Romney  who  was  present  when  the  Presi-
dent  spoke  out  on  Friday  acknowledged  yesterday  that
he had winced when Mr. Nixon  claimed  he sent   Congress
a  housing  bill  and  a  message.  The  aide,  who  asked  not
to  be  identified,  said  he  promptly  told  John Erlichman,
Mr. Nixon's  top domestic  assistant. .  ..
—Bernard  Nossiter, Washington  Post, June  16.
describe  an  offer  by  the  Democratic  liberals  in  the  House   to
share   with   a  Republican   President   the   political   risks   of   a
wage-price  freeze.
Nixon  said  at  one  point,  "We  cannot  protect  the  value  of
the  dollar  by  passing  the  buck."  This  bargain  basement  ban
mot  boomerangs.   He  himself  passes  the  buck  by  discovering  a
new  "social  responsibility"  in  labor  and  capital  and  says   "Now
is  the  time  for  the  social  concern   to  take  the  form  of  specific
action  on  the  wage-price  front."  He  is  not  even  specific about
what  he  wants  them  to  do.  Some  anonymous  cad  at  the  White
House   briefing   called   this   "wish-boning,    not    jaw-boning."
Nowhere  does  Nixon  face  up  to  the  tough  question  hidden  in
such  exhortation.  How  can  a  business   man  afford   to  exercise
social  responsibility  by maintaining  or  reducing  prices  without
some  firm  assurance  that  his  competitors  and  suppliers  will  do
likewise?  How  does  a  labor  leader   risk  his  job  by  opposing
his  own  rank-and-file's demand  for  higher  wages without  simi-
lar  assurance  that  his  workers,  after  they  forego  a  wage  rise,
will  not  have to  face  higher prices from  less  socially  responsible
business men ?
Obviously  such  assurances  can  only  be  provided  if  the  gov-
ernment    takes   the   lead   by   setting   standards   and   warning
(Continued  On Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  29,1970
(Continued  From Page  One)
that it  will by coercion or unpleasant publicity put  the heat  on
the  less  socially  responsible.   Nixon  shut   the   door  on  such
leadership   by  his   remark   about   "some   people"   who   "get
satisfaction  out  of  seeing  an  individual business  man  or  labor
leader  called  on  the  carpet   and  browbeaten  by  government
officials."  The  phrasing  is  intended  to  show  what  a  humane
fellow   he  is.  Less  prominent  people  who  act   in  a  socially
irresponsible  way  by  humbler  forms  of  pocket-picking  are
lucky  to  get  away  with  no  more  than  a  browbeating.
Everybody's  Business Nobody's  Business
"The  fight  against  inflation,"  Nixon  said,  "is   everybody's
business."  Everybody, it  seems,  but  Nixon's.  Everbody's  busi-
ness  in  a  capitalist   society  is  nobody's  business.  Where  the
government  does  not  lead,  others  will  not—indeed very  often
cannot—follow.  Capitalist   economics  does  not  rest  on  social
responsibility  but  on  the  natural  forces  which  police  a  free
market.  Nixon  said  at  his first press conference last  year  that
he  did  not  go  along  with  the   notion  that  inflation  can  be
controlled  "by exhorting  labor  and  management  and  industry
to  follow  certain  guidelines."  Now he  is  going  in  for  exhorta-
tion  without  even  providing  guidelines.  At  that  press  con-
ference   Nixon  explained  that  while  the   leaders   of  capital
and  labor  "might  personally  want  to  do what  is  in  the  best
interests  of  the   nation,"   they   have  to  be  "guided   by   the
interests  of  the  organizations  they  represent."  The  common
interest  calls  for   a  curb  on  inflation.  But  each  individual
business  and  labor  union  hopes  it  can  grab  a  slightly  larger
slice  of  the  pie  by  being  a  little  less   socially   responsible
than  the others.
As  soon  as  you  mention  social  responsibility,  you  bid  good-
bye  to  the  philosophy of  free  enterprise.  Classical  economics
was  not  based  on  any  idea  that  capitalists  would  or  could be
socially  responsible.  Adam Smith,  its founder, took  a  low view
of  their  morals  and  had  a  realistic  view  of  their  behavior.*
His  economics  was  based  on  the  belief  that  the  competitive
mechanisms  of  a  free  market   would  eliminate  the  gouger.
He  envisioned the  natural  forces  of  supply  and  demand  turn-
ing  the  sum  total  of  private  greed,  providentially,  into  the
•Almost  200 years  ago, in  a  famous passage  of  The  Wealth
of  Nations,  Smith  wrote  "manufacturers complain  much  of
the  bad effect  of  high  wages  in raising the  price,  and thereby
lessening   the  sale  of  their  goods  both  at  home  and abroad.
They  say  nothing  concerning the  bad  effects  of  high  profits.
They  are  silent  with  regard  to  the  pernicious effects  of  their
own  gains.   They  complain  only  of   those   of   other   people."
Savage, Yes,  But Not Entirely Gratuitous
The  Viet  Cong's  massacre  of  villagers  17 miles south-
east  of  Da Nang  is  a  hideous example of  senseless  fury
...   Since in such hideous circumstances the mind  grasps
for  explanations,  the  official  assumption  is  that  because
the  hamlet  was  a  so-called  pacified  area  the  Viet  Cong
.  . .  simply  slaughtered   helpless   fellow  countrymen in
an act  of gratuitous  savagery.
—Baltimore Sun editorial June  IS.
Thanh  My, South  Vietnam.  (Reuters)—The Viet Cong
massacred  residents  of  this  village last  Friday  because
they gave  U.S.  forces information about  guerrilla move-
ments,  an  American  officer  said  today.  The  officer   said
villagers  had  led  U.S.  troops  to  a  Viet  Cong  rice cache
and  supplied  information  about  the  re-suits  of  a   U.S.
artillery   strike.  "Because   of  this  the   VC  decided  to
make  the  people  here  suffer," said  Lt. Thomas  S. Miller,
27,  leader  of  a  U.S.  Marine  Civic  Action  group.
—Same paper June  17.
public  good. In  a  free  market  as  ideally  conceived  there  is no
need  for  social  responsibility.  When  Nixon  appeals  to  social
responsibility   he  admits  that  we  no  longer  have  a  wholly
free  market  but  one in  which  powerfully  organized  sectors  of
capital  and  labor  can  fix  prices  and  wages  at  the  expense of
the  unorganized,  whether  smaller  business  men,  unorganized
workers  or  elderly  pensioners.
"Long  before  the  art   of  economics  had  a  name,"  Nixon
said,   "it   was  called   'political  arithmetic.'"  It   is   political
arithmetic  again.  Democracy  created  the  welfare  state,  and
put   limits   on  exploitation.  An  under-class   of  varied   colors
is  now stirring  in  open  revolt,  and  imposes  new  restrictions
on  policy .It  is  no longer  politically  possible  to  try  to  do  what
Hoover  attempted   in  the   1930s  and   ask   people  to  starve
patiently  until  the  forces  of  supply  and  demand make  labor
so  cheap  that  capitalists  will  be  lured  by  the   prospect  of
widening   profit   margins   to   invest   again.   Today   political
danger  signals  flash  red when the  rate  of unemployment gets
to  5%,  a  very  small  margin   indeed  when  compared  to  the
Great   Depression.  Between  popular  social  welfare   expecta-
tions   and  the   rigidities   of  administered   prices   and   wages,
there  is  little  leeway  for  "normal"  market  mechanisms  to
operate  any  longer.  Nixon  sounds  like  Hoover  but  he  cannot
really act  like him.
No  one  has  solved  the  problem  of  creeping  inflation  in  the
modern  social  welfare  capitalist  state  where  full  employment
Songs  Helicopter  Pilots Sing  On Flag  Day In  Vietnam':  "Napalm  Sticks  To  Kids'
Phuoc  Vinh,  Vietnam—Across the  border  in  Cambodia, it
was  just  another  Sunday  of  mud and  cold C-rations, but  for
the  palace  guard  at  division  headquarters  it  was  a  grand
old  Flag  Day.  In  the  Downtown  Club,  the  main  entertain-
ment  center,  the  concert  band  of  the  1st  Cavalry  Division
(Airmobile)  was  blaring  out  "Stars  and  Stripes   Forever."
In  a  hooch  on  the  other  side  of  the  base,  a  tape  recorder
reproduced  the  voices  of  a  chorus  of  skytroopers  singing  a
song  entitled  "Napalm Sticks  to Kids":
Napalm sticks  to kids, napalm sticks to kids,
When'U those damn gooks  ever learn?
We shoot the sick, the young, the lame,
We do our best  to kill and maim,
Because  the "kills" all  count the  same,
Napalm sticks  to kids.
Agreement  was  by  no  means  complete  on  whether  the
skytroopers  who  wrote  the  song  were  protesting  the  war  or
mocking  a   "bad  image"  that   many  helicopter  pilots  and
gunners  feel  they  have  acquired unfairly  in  the  course  of
the  war.  "I  guess  it's  just  a  sign  of  how  sick  and  confused
the  whole business  has  gotten  when  we  can't  decide  why  we
wrote  something  like  this,"  one  junior  officer  said.
Another  skytrooper  surveyed  the  giggling  newsmen  and
soldiers  gathered  about  the  tape  recorder  and  added: "You
got  to  admit  it  captures  the  essence  of  something or  other."
None  of  the  nearly  two  dozen  verses  written  for  the  song
to  date  ever  sets  forth  precisely  what  that  "something  or
other" is. One says:
There's a gook down on his knees,
Launch some  fleshettes  into the. breeze,
Find his arms nailed to the trees,
Napalm sticks  to kids.
Another says:
Blues  (helicopter gunships)  out on a road recon,
See some children with their mom,
What  the hell, lets  drop the bomb,
Napalm sticks  to kids.
A  cavalryman with  access  to  a  typewriter  has  made  a
mimeograph  stencil  of  the  song,  but it  is  yet  to  be  printed.
The men in  charge  of  the  mimeograph  machine, he explains,
"said  it  wasn't  official   business."
—John  E.  Woodruff    from  Saigon,  Baltimore  Sun,  June  15.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  29,1970
is   a   political   necessity.   No  one  has   fully   mastered   this
arithmetic.  The real  criticism  of  Nixon  is that  while  resisting
the  various forms  of  interventionism  which  liberals  advocate
to  stem  inflation,  he  does  not  have  the  courage  honestly  to
apply  consistent  conservative  remedies either.  "All  of  us have
to  make  decisions  now,"  he  said,  in  his   leader-of-the-free-
world  stance,  "which  will  profoundly  affect  the  survival  of  a
free  economic system  throughout  the  world  ...    we shall set
an  example  that  will  have  great  impact  on  the  kind  of  eco-
nomic  system  others  choose."  But  his  actions  do  not  match
his  self-dramatization.  The  inflation  which  has  been  chronic
since  World  War  II  in  the  capitalist  world  has  been  exacer-
bated  by  the  Vietnamese war;  we  have  been  exporting  our
inflation  to  Western  Europe  and  Japan.  Nixon  says  we  are
in  a  transition  from  a  war-time  economy.  The  truth  is  that
we   did  not—and   still   do  not—have  a   war-time  economy.
Truman  fought the  Korean war  with  only  moderate  inflation
by  imposing  excess  profits  and  other  wartime  taxes  along
with  wage  and  price  controls.   Johnson  fought  the  Vietna-
mese  war  without  such  ceilings  on  profits,  prices  and  wages
just  as  Nixon  is  continuing to  do. Johnson  financed  the  war
by  what  is  called  monetary  expansion, the  modern  form  of
"printing  press"  money. The  result  was  a  speculative  boom.
The  whole  "free   world"  is   suffering   from  the  inflationary
after  effects.
The First Essential:  End The War
The  first  essential  to  ending the  inflation  is  to  end the  war.
The  second, if  Nixon  wants  to  apply  conservative  remedies,
is  to  create   a  budget  surplus  by  imposing  higher  income
taxes  especially in  the  higher  brackets.  He  shows  no willing-
ness  to  do  either.  The  Cambodian  "incursion"  was  only  the
first  step  into  a  larger  quagmire  and  a  longer  war.  In  the
coming  fiscal  year,  he  boasts,  "we  plan  to  spend  $5.2  billion
less"  on the  military  than  in  fiscal  '69.  The  actual  cost  of  the
Vietnamese  war   is  still   secret   but  before  the   curtain   fell
Secretary  Laird  said  that  by  June  30  of  this  year  the  cost
would  be  down  to  an  annual  rate  of  $17 billion.  He  implied
that  this  would  fall  even  lower during the  coming fiscal year
as  more  troops  are  withdrawn.  All  that  was  before  Cam-
bodia.  But even if  all  goes as  well as  Nixon  forecasts  this  $5.2
billion  is  a  pretty  poor  showing.  In  fiscal  '69  the  war   cost
$28  billion.  If  it  costs  less  than  $17 billion  in  fiscal  '71,   as
Laird  indicated, the  saving  should  be  more  than  $11 billion
or  twice  the  $5.2  billion  Nixon  claims  he  will  save.  The  rest
of  that  vanished  "peace  dividend"  would  be  enough  to  more
than  wipe  out  the  deficits  he  now  projects  for  '70  and   '71.
From  The One Dissenting  "Fact-Finder"
The  acid  test  of  the  Cambodian action  is  not  the  tac-
tical  gains  or losses; it  is  whether we  have  widened the
war  or  whether  the  action  will  help  us  get  out  of  Viet-
nam  more  quickly.  I  could  not  obtain   an  unequivocal
reply   to   my   inquiry  about   whether   the  Cambodian
action  justified  an  earlier  withdrawal. Not  one  Ameri-
can   official   with   whom   I   talked—from   Ambassador
Bunker  and  General  Abrams  on  down—would  recom-
mend  an  acceleration  of  troop  withdrawals  as  a  result
of  our operations  in Cambodia.
I  do  know,  however,  that   the   monthly  withdrawal
rate  proposed  between  now  and  October  is  20  percent
below  the  schedule  followed  during  the  early  months  of
this  year.  The  use  of  American  and  South  Vietnamese
troops  in  Cambodia  already  has  led  to  a  reduction  in
allied  troop  strength  in  South  Vietnam.  Further  reduc-
tion  at  the  present  time  might  spread   the  remaining
forces  too  thin.
—Sen.  Mclntyre   (D.,  N.H.)  the  one dissenter  on  that
White  House  fact  finding  mission  to  Indochina.  Text  at
p.  S8805  Congressional  Record  June  11.
Despite  cutbacks  in  personnel  and  in  procurement,  our  mili-
tary  machine  is  still  fueling  the  fires  of  inflation,  in  a  time
of  fiscal  crisis.  There  is  no  real  sign  of  that  "historic  re-
ordering  of  our  national  priorities" which Nixon claims to  be
instituting.  The  phrase   is  another   example  of  how  every
promising  national  slogan  turns  up  in  his  speeches  in  bogus
form.  Another  was  his  "we  need  no  artificial  dependence on
the   production  of  weapons  of  war."   Even  as   he  spoke  he
pushed  ahead  with  ABM and  MIRV  to  a  more  costly  stage of
the  arms  race  without  waiting  to  see  what  the  SALT  talks
can  produce. Nowhere are  his  promises  more counterfeit  than
in the  sphere  of military policy.
Even  his conservatism  is bogus.  In a  free  enterprise  system
the  biggest  contribution  the  government  can  make  to  stabi-
lization  and  recovery  is  not  only  to  balance  the  budget  but  to
create  a  budgetary  surplus.  The  effect  of  a  surplus  would  be
to  make  the  government  a  net  lender  instead  of  a  net  bor-
rower  in  the  credit  markets,   thus  stimulating   business  by
reducing  the  cost  of  money.  But  the  Nixon  Administration
now  admits  that  in  its  first  two  fiscal  years—'70  and  '71—it
faces  deficits  instead  of  the  slight  surpluses  it  predicted  last
(Continued  On  Page  Four)
A  Vivid On The  Scene  Report:  The White  House  "Investigators" In  The War  Zones
President  Nixon's  fact  finding  mission  returned  to  Wash-
ington   recently  after  a  tour  of  South  Vietnam  and  allied
bases  in  Cambodia. This  VIP  visit  had  something  of  a   "see
Europe  in  seven  days"  quality.  The  VIPs  inspected  three
armies   (American,  Vietnamese,   Cambodian)  in  the   course
of  a  single  day.
The  Congressional   delegates  are  all  members  of  Senate
and  House  Armed Services  Committees  and,  with  the  excep-
tion   of   Sen.   Mclntyre,   Administration   supporters   on  the
war.  (At   an  American  fire  support  base  ten  miles  inside
Cambodia,  a  young  U.S.  Army  lieutenant   looked  over  the
names  of  the  VIPs  and commented:  "looks  like  the  President
has  preprogramed his   feedback.")
The  VIPs,   in  spanking  new  army  fatigues,   visited   the
Mekong  Delta   south   of  Saigon.  The  VIP   cavalcade—with
screaming   sirens  and  flashing  red  lights—roared    through
the  shantytown   suburbs  of  Can  Tho  to  a  defector   center
where  former  Vietcong  were   lined  up  to  give  them   three
well orchestrated  cheers.
The   group  then  helicoptered  to   Huu  Thanh   village  in
Vinh  Long  province,  a community destroyed  during  the  1968
Tet  offensive,  recently  pacified  and  rebuilt.  Briefers  several
times  told  the  VIPs  that  the  village  had  been   "100%  de-
stroyed   by  the   VC."  Local  Vietnamese   officials   and  Amer-
ican  advisers  noted  privately  at  least  half  the  village  had
been  destroyed  by American air  strikes.
At  the  headquarters  of  General  Ngo   Dzu  the  VIPs  in-
spected  neatly   arranged   mountains   of   captured   weapons.
General  Dzu  plucked  out  a  Communist  rifle  for   President
Nixon.  Mr. Harlow  of  the  White  House  gave  the  General  a
Nixon  tieclip.
Half  an  hour  before  the  visitors  arrived  [at  a  fire  base]
combat  troops  were  kneeling  in  the  mud taping  VIP  name
tags on the  backs  of  folding  chairs  flown  in  for  the  occasion.
Other  GIs  were  putting  finishing   touches   on  an  expanded
latrine.   Others   were   arranging   a  table   of   cake  and   soft
drinks, also specially flown in.
The  VIPs   were   not  aware   that   prior   to   their   arrival
Army   barbers  had  arrived  by  helicopter   to  trim  the  GIs
hair and shave  off their  beards.  This  was  an unpopular  move.
"Morale  is  bad,  man,  we're  dragging," says one of  a  group
of  ten  GIs.  Others  agree.  "We're  bushed  and  we're   scared,"
says  another.  The  VIP  party  arrives  in  a  bevy  of  choppers.
Mr.  Klein  of  the  White House  staff  asks  about  the  morale  of
the  GIs.  "Exceptional,"  says  the  Colonel  giving  the  briefing.
—Peter Kann from  Saigon: Wall St. Journal June  16 (abr).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  29,1970
Nixon  Moves Toward  Fresh  Inflation  To  Win  The  Next  Election
(Continued  From Page  Three)
February  and  that  there  will  also  be  a  deficit  in  '72.  Three
deficits  in  a  row  is  a  strange  record  for  a  conservative  Ad-
ministration  which  claims  to  be  fighting  inflation.
A  Counterfeit Keynesianism
The  fact  is  that  Nixon  has  already  eased  up  on  the  fight
for  a  balanced  budget  and  on  the  tight  money  policy because
he  would  like  a  stock  market  boomlet  in  time  for  the  No-
vember  elections.  It  is  indicative  that  the  U.S.  Chamber of
Commerce,  one  of   his   firmest   supporters,   has   shifted   its
position   in   line  with  his  new  political   tack.  Its   board  of
directors  has  just  passed  resolutions  endorsing  the   Nixon
message  and  reaffirming  its  belief  in  a  balanced  budget  but
asserting  "this  may   not   be  possible   for   fiscal   1971   since
under   present   circumstances   efforts   to   achieve   a   balance
might frustrate  recovery  later this year  and early  next year."
Apparently  to  keep the  Republicans  in  power  the  U.S. Cham-
ber  of  Commerce is  prepared  to  abandon  classical  economics
for  a  counterfeit  Keynesianism and  renewed  inflation.
A  genuine  "free  enterprise"  policy  would  increase  income
taxes  in  the  upper  brackets,   or  at  least  reinstitute  the  10
percent  surtax.  That  would  bring  in  about   $10 billion, more
than  enough  to  take  care  of  current   deficits   and  create   a
surplus.  The  easing  of  interest  rates would help  hard-pressed
state  and  municipal governments  to  borrow  for  badly needed
public  services.  This  in turn  would  ease  social  discontent  and
increase  employment, especially in  construction.  The  spectacle
of  a  conservative  government  with  the  courage  to  tax   the
well-to-do  in  order  consistently  to  follow  classic  deflationary
policies  without  imposing  socially  explosive  burdens  on  the
black  and  the   poor   would  really  set  the  rest  of  the   "free
world"  an  inspiring  example.
A  conservative  Republican  Senator,  Miller  of  Iowa,  'raised
the  question  of  the  surtax  with  Secretary  of  the  Treasury
Kennedy  a  few  days  ago.  Kennedy  was  before  the   Senate
Finance  Committee  June  18  to  testify   for  Nixon's  request
that  the  debt  ceiling be  raised  $18 billion  to  take  care  of  the
growing  deficits.  Miller  wanted  to  know  why  the  Adminis-
tration  didn't  ask  instead  for   continuation  of  the   surtax.
Kennedy  replied  that  he  didn't  think  this  would  be  wise  in
the  present  unsettled  state  of  the  economy.  What  he  really
meant  was  that  it  wasn't  politically  wise  for  Nixon  with  an
election  coming  on.  The  removal  of  the  surtax  entirely  June
30  is  most  unwise  from  an  economic  point  of  view  because
it  will  give  inflation  a  fresh  shot  in  the  arm.
Nixon's   policies  are  geared  not  to  free  enterprise  (under
the  limitations  imposed  by  the  welfare  state)  but  simply  to
Buying Asians To Fight  Asians
Sen.   Murphy:  I  do  not  consider  these   people  mer-
cenaries.  They  are not  being hired by  the  United  States
to   fight   for  the   United   States.   They  are  asking  for
arms   from  the  U.S.  with  which  to  defend  their  own
freedom,  their own right to  self-determination,  and their
own  right  to  carry  out  the  policies of  this  Nation fixed
by the last  four Presidents.  (Sic!)
Sen:  Aiken: Is  the  Senator  aware  that  H is  far  more
profitable   for   the   soldiers   of   some   governments   to
fight  in  Vietnam  than  to  fight  insurgents  in  their  own
country?  That  a  Thai  lieutenant   general  receives  $370
if  he  stays  home?  He  receives  a  $450  bonus  if  he  goes
to  Vietnam. That  makes a  total  of  $820  in  all.  And that
applies  all  down  the  line.  Is  the  Senator  aware  that  a
captain  in  Thailand  receives  $70  a  month  at  home  and
that  we  pay  him  a  $150 bonus, making  $220  if  he  goes
to  Vietnam?  So,  when  we  talk  about  their  not  being
mercenaries,  I  think  the  fact  that  they  can  get  twice
as   much  by   fighting   for  us  in  a  foreign  country  as
they  can  by  protecting  their  own  country  answers  the
question.
—In  the  Senate,  June  11  (Con.  Rec.  p.  SSS28,   abr).
a  political   expediency   designed   to  rally  his  well-to-do   con-
stituency.   He  sought   last  year  to  cut  taxes  in  the   upper
brackets,  though  the  loopholes  even  after   "tax   reform"   re-
main  scandalously  high.  Senator  Gore in  a  Senate  speech  the
other  day  put  them  at  $45 billion  a  year!  If  there  are  to  be
new  taxes  Nixon  prefers  the  value-added  tax,  a  form  of  sales
tax.
Nixon  is  setting  up  a  phoney  system  of  inflation  "alerts."
The  real  "alert" the  country  needs  is to  the  political   arithme-
tic   with   which  Nixon  hopes   to  win  the   next   election   by
covert  encouragement  to fresh  inflation. Let  us  put  the  course
of  events  into  perspective.   Johnson  put  the  cost  of  the  war
on the  poor  and the  helpless  elderly  by financing it  from  their
living  standards  by  inflation  instead  of by  taxing  war   profits.
Nixon   has   been  trying  to  deflate  through   a  tight  money
policy  and  high  interest  rates  which  again  put  the   burden
on  those  who can  least  bear  it—the  small  business  man,  the
elderly  pensioner,  the  unskilled  worker   and  the   poor.  Now
he  is resorting to  "reflation"  to  help his  own political  chances.
Again  this  promises  quick  speculative  returns  for  the  well-
to-do  and a  fresh  upsurge  in  living  costs  for  the  poor.  I  will
return  to this subject  in my next letter.                         June  22
The  1969 Index  Is  Now Ready—Yon Can Have  A  Copy Free  B y  Sending  A  LONG  Self-Addressed   Stamped  Envelope  For   It
We'll  Be  Clad  to  Send  A  Free  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —  Send  A  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
FOR  STONE'S  HIDDEN   HISTORY
For  the  enclosed  $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War   (Monthly Review
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City
Indicate   if
Please  renew   (or
Name
Street
City
I.  F
4420  29th  St.
Zip   . ...        State
gift   announcement  wished  D
enter)  a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip                State
.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly               «/29/io
N. W.,  Washington,   D.C.  20008
7. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage -
An  independent  bi-weekly  published a—  ,.—_„  „
(10  elsewhere,
Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.,  N.W.  Washington   D C
and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription: $5  in  the  U.S.;  $6  in   Canada*'     * *
10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  S17 to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED