I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970mar23.pdf

============================================================

The  Air  Force Sabotages SALT,  P.  2
Unfit   For  Any  Bench
"Quite   apart   from  any  ideas  of  white   supremacy   and  ugly  racism,  he  [Judge  Carswell]  does  not  have  the  legal  or
mental  qualifications  essential   for  service  on  the   Supreme   Court  or  on  any  high  court   in  the   land,  including  the  one
where  he  now  sits."—From  a  protest  by  457  leaders   of  the  bar  including  former  Attorney  General  Ramsey  Clark.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL  XVIII, NO.  6
MARCH  23,  1970
'°'           WASHINGTON,   D. C.
20   CENTS
Where  The  Fuse  On  That  Dynamite  Leads
The  search  of  the  youth today  is  for  ways  and  means  to
make  the  machine—and the  vast  bureaucracy  of  the  corpo-
ration  state   and  of  government that  runs  that  machine—
the  servant  of  man.  That  is  the  revolution that  is  coming.
That  revolution  .  .  .  need  not  be  a  repetition   of   1776.  It
could  be  a  revolution  in  the  nature of  an  explosive  political
regeneration.  It  depends on  how  wise  the  Establishment  is.
If,  with  its  stockpile  of  arms,  it  resolves  to  suppress   the
dissenters,  America  will  face,  I  fear,  an  awful  ordeal.
—Justice  Douglas:  Points  of Rebellion.
The   Kew   York   Times  editorial  Friday  March   13  on   the
rash   of   bombings  and   bomb   scares   in  New   York   City   was
called  "Not    Idealists-.  Criminals."   This  was  the  standard   re-
action  of  a  liberal  publication, the  easy  way  to  clear  its  skirts
of  any  suspicion  of  the  slightest  sympathy  with revolutionary
radicalism.   But  it  is  a  dangerous  cliche.   Falsely  to   diagnose
the  trouble   is  to  move  toward  the  wrong   remedies,  and   the
wrong   remedies  will  worsen  the  disease.   Statistics  on  bomb-
ings  from  cities  around  the  country  suggest  that  we  may  be
entering  the  first  stages  of  an  urban  guerrilla   movement.   A
guerrilla  movement  is  a  political, not  a  criminal   phenomenon,
however   many  crimes  it  may  commit.   Experience  has  shown
over   and  over   again  that  a  guerrilla  movement   can  only   be
defeated   by  political  means.   The   effort   to  treat   it  simply  as
a  criminal  matter,  without  resolving  its  political  causes,   ends
by  increasing  the  number  of  the  guerrillas  and  widening  their
support  in  the  larger  community.
Like  A  New   Children's   Crusade
Whether  the  New  York  bombings   prove  to  be  a  spasm  in
the  wake  of  the  Greenwich  Village  explosion,  when   a  radical
arsenal  blew  up,  or  the  beginning  of  a  serious  terrorist  move-
ment   will  now  depend  on   the   authorities,  and   their   ability
to  keep  their  cool.   The  first  requisite—and   the  second,  and
the  third—is   understanding.   The   Weatherman    kids   can  be
seen  in  various ways, and  it  is  necessary  to  see  them  in  as many
as  possible.   The  Weatherman   faction  of  SDS,  whence  several
different  "direct  action"  splinter  groups  seem  to  derive,  can  be
looked   at   like   a  distraught   child.   They   can   be   viewed   as
spoiled   brats,   in   a   tantrum   with   a   world   which   will   not
change   overnight  to  suit  them.    But   they  are   also   the   most
sensitive  of   a  generation   which   feels   in   its   bones   what   we
older   people   only   grasp   as  an   unreal   abstraction,   that   the
world  is  headed   for  nuclear  annihilation and  something   must
be   done   to   stop    it.    The    Weatherman     manifesto    from
which   they   take   their   name   is   from   one   point   of   view   a
mishmash   of   ill-digested   pseudo-Marxist   rubbish,   an    effort
to  compete  with  their  bitterest  rivals,  the  "square"  sectarian
ideologists   of  that  other   Far  Out   splinter  group,    Progressive
Labor.   The   manifesto  spurns   every  normal   base  of   revolu-
Happy  Tidings For  Harlem
The  Attorney  General's  caustically-conservative  wife
and   the   liberal   Republican  lawmaker   [Sen.    Charles
Percy]  from  Illinois  found  themselves  dinner  partners
at   a   farewell  party   for   Australian   Ambassador   and
Lady  Keith  Waller  here  this   week.  And  from  all  re-
ports,  Percy  is  the  latest   to  get  the  benefit  of  one  of
Mrs.  Mitchell's lectures  on  what's  wrong  with  the  coun-
try.  "It's  liberals  like  you  who  are  selling  this  nation
down  the  river  to  the  Communists," she  accused,  after
an   hour's   discourse   and   an   emotional   declaration  of
how  much  she  personally  loves  "those  colored   people."
—Maxiiie  Cheshire  in  The  Washington  Post, March  5.
tionary   support   and   ends   up   squarely   in   the   clouds:    the
middle  class  is,  of  course,  no  good;  the  working   class  is  cor-
rupted;  the  college  generation   will  soon   sell   out;   their   only
hope  is  in  the  juvenile  Robespierres   of  the  high   schools.    It
sounded  like  the  Children's  Crusade  come  back  to  life,   a  St.
Vitus  dance   of   hysterical   politics.
It  is  from  just  such  despair  that   terrorist  movements   have
grown.   This  recalls   the  Russian  pre-revolutionary   Narodnya
Volya   (People's  Will)  through  which  a handful  of  disaffected
middle  class  and  noble  youths  sought  by  bomb  and  pistol  to
overthrow  the  mighty  Czarist order,  with  roots  so  deep  in  the
religious  reverence  of  the  peasant   masses  as  to  seem   impreg-
nable.    How   to  overturn   their   Little  Father?    A   movement
which   has   no   faith   in   the   masses   seeks   out   the    desperate
few   idealists  willing  to   sacrifice   their   lives  in   gestures   they
realize   may   be   futile.    Some   of   our   young   revolutionaries
are  chillingly  sober  and  disconcertingly  sensible.    Their   criti-
cism  of  conventional  dissenters  like   myself   and   our   futility,
as  the  war  goes  on,  is  hard  to  rebut.   Others  in  recent  months
have  displayed  a  morbid   development,  a  tendency  to  glorify
violence   for   its   own   sake,   as   when   they   make   Manson   a
hero,  for  killing  "bourgeois pigs",  i.e.  people  exactly  like their
fathers  and  mothers.   The   ultimate  menace   they   fear   is  their
own  secret  selves  in  their  own  parents.   This  is  what  they  are
acting  out  on  the  stage  of  national  politics.
But  these  psychological  aspects  are  only  a  part  of  the  whole
complex   picture.   These  wild   and   wonderful—yes,   wonder-
ful!—kids   also  serve  quite   rational  political  ends.    I   became
strongly  aware  of  this    when   I  ran  into  an  old  friend   on  an
early  morning   Washington    street   corner   the  other   day  who
is  working  hard   in  a  respectable   do-good  reformist  organiza-
tion,  the  very  kind  the  youthful   radicals  despise.    I  told  him
that   in   talks  on   various  campuses   I   had   tried   to   talk   the
young  people  out  of  the  typically  American   idea  that  revolu-
tion  could  be  "instant"   like  coffee   or   iced   tea.   "Don't  dis-
(Continued  on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  23, 1970
Sabotaging  The  SALT  Talks
WHEN  SECRETARY  OF  THE  Am   FORCE   SEAMANS  told   the
Senate  Armed  Services  Committee  Minuteman  III  with  MIRV
would  be  deployed  in  June,  one  can  only  conclude  this  was
deliberately   intended  to  have   a  negative  effect   on  the  SALT
talks.  Senator  Brooke  (R.  Mass.),  who  has  led  the  fight  for  a
stand-still  on  MIRV,  at  once  protested  and  the  Administration
felt  it  necessary  to  make  some  reassuring   reply.  But  the  reply
came  neither  from  the  White  House  nor  from  Secretary  Laird
but   from   as   low   an   echelon   as   the   Administration    could
muster—Jerry    Friedheim,   the   Defense   Department's    press
spoksman.  The  Pentagon  did  not  even  dignify  it  by  providing
a   transcript.    Friedheim   said   everything   was   negotiable   at
SALT  but  that   if  no  agreement  to  halt  MIRV  were   reached
in  the  talks  reopening  April  16, the  U.S.  would  go  ahead  with
deployment  in  June.  That  is  pretty  tricky.   It   allows   only  a
month  and  a  half  to  reach  an  agreement.  The  Pentagon  ex-
perts  can  easily  delay  an  agreement  for  months.  The  way  to
stop   it  is  by  unilateral   announcement,   asking   the   Russians
likewise   not  to  test  or  deploy   the  MRIV  on  which  they  are
far   behind   us.   We   can   easily   learn   by  satellite   and    other
means  whether  the  stand-still  is  mutual.  But  once   deployment
begins,   we  enter   a  new   and   more   dangerous   phase   of   the
arms  race  and  the  SALT  talks  will  lose  all  significance  except
as  a  propaganda  exercise   designed  to  delude   public   opinion
into  believing  that  something  is  being  done,   when   in  fact  it
will  be  too  late.
THE    SOVIET  UNION'S  PRESS   CAMPAIGN   AGAINST   ISRAEL
has  the   vulgarity,   the   transparent   mendacity   and   the   gross
oversimplification    characteristic    of    the    Kremlin's    decayed
bureaucratic   apparatus.   The   massive   press   conference   at   the
Ministry  of  Foreign   Affairs   served  to  show   that,  despite   the
widespread   anti-Semitism   in   the   Soviet   Union,   many   Jews
occupy  high  positions  in  military  and  civilian  life.  But  I  know
from   my  own  visit  in   1956   how   deeply  sympathetic  Russian
Jewish  youth   is  to  Israel   and   how   it  distrusts  the   dull  and
monolithic  Soviet  press  on  all  subjects,  as  does  the  best  Soviet
youth   generally.   The   facts  are   that   the   Jews   are   the   only
nationality  in  the  Soviet  Union   not   allowed   its  own  cultural
life,  and  that  the  result  of  this  discrimination  is  an  awakening
Freudian  Slip  Dept.,  S.E.   Asia  Division
The  fact   that   we  are  violating  the  Geneva  accords
would  seem  to  be  tacitly  admitted  by  the  fact  that  the
U.S.   Embassy   in  Laos,  a  while   back,  printed  and  re-
leased   in  that  country  a  copy  of  the  protocols   to  the
declaration  of  the  neutrality of  Laos.  Our  Embassy  left
out   the   article   which,   when   read,   would   be  plainly
recognized  as  the  article  that  we  are  violating.  When
this  was  pointed  out  to  the  Embassy,  they  said  it  was
a  mistake  and  they  reprinted  the  protocols  in  full  .  .  .
—Cranston  (D.  Cal.), in  the  Senate  Mar.  12.
The  missing  article  was  Article  4:  "The introduction
of   foreign  and  irregular  troops,   foreign  para-military
formations  and  foreign  military  personnel  into  Laos  is
prohibited."
of  Jewish  national  feeling   in  otherwise   assimilated  and  non-
religious  Russian  Jews.   Some   are  Zionists.   Some  want  equal
treatment   and   cultural   freedom   in   their   Russian   homeland.
These  forced   anti-Israel  statements  will  increase  their  aliena-
tion.  The  fact  that  groups   of  dissident  Jews  in  Moscow  and
Leningrad   dared   circulate  protests   to  the   foreign   press   and
sign  their  names  to  it  was  an  extraordinary  demonstration  of
courage.  We  salute  them  fraternally  for  it.
THE  NEWSPAPERS  GENERALLY  AND THE  NETWORKS  seem
to   respond   to   criticism  (unless   it   comes   from   Agnew)   by
burying   it.  Most  papers   March   15  buried  the   report   of   the
Lawyers'  Task   Force   on  the  November   Moratorium,   though
the  chairmen  were  former  Assistant  Attorney  General   Ramsey
Clark   and   the   deans   of   two   Washington    law   schools.   The
57-page  report  embodied   the  work  of  more  than  300  lawyer-
observers.   The   report   criticized  the   Justice   Department    for
statements  which  "tended  to  incite"  violence  and  issuing  "pre-
dictions   of   impending   holocaust."    It   said   that   though   the
demonstration  brought   between   250,000  and  300,000  persons
to  Washington,   the  largest  of  its  kind  in  the  nation's  history,
the  TV  networks  provided  no  live  coverage  and  news  reports
focused   "almost  exclusively"  on  a  few  relatively  isolated  inci-
dents  of  violence.  The  police  were  condemned   for  using   tear
Another  Way  To Elude  The  Censor  And  See  The Fate  In Store For  That  "Peace  Dividend'
There  is  another  clue  (beside  those  mentioned  in  our  last
issue)  to  the  military  spending  figures  blacked  out  in  the
new  Nixon  budget  projections.  At  page  8  of  the  Economic
Report  of  the  President  there  is   a  Table   14,  which  gives
projected  Federal  expenditures  from  1970  to  1975 inclusive
in  1969  prices.  This  is  part  of  what  the  Nixon Administra-
tion  says  is  its   effort  "to  formulate  the  larger   choices   it
faces   in  the  allocation  of   national  output  in  the  light  of
competing   options."   They   include  military   spending   but
the  military  projections  are  nowhere  given.
One  way  to  get  some  conception   of  the  military  spending
is   to   start   with  the  figures   this   table   gives   on   Federal
purchases  of   goods   and  services.   From   a  table  on  p.  177,
one   can   with   a   little   arithmetic   learn   that   78%   of   all
Federal   purchases  of  goods   and  services   in  fiscal  '69  were
for   national  defense.  From   p.  587  of   the   budget   message
one  can  also  figure  out  that   97%  of   all   national  defense
expenditures   are   for   goods   and   services.    Assuming   that
these  two  ratios   will  remain  about  the  same,  we  can  then
apply  them  to  the  yearly  projections  for  goods  and  services
and  deduce  how  much  will  be  spent  on  national  defense   in
those  six  years  '70  to  '75.  The  total  is  $415  billion.
In  the  first  six  fiscal  years  of  the  60's  before  the  cost  of
Vietnam  war  played  havoc  with  the  budget,  the  total   spent
on  national  defense   was  $300  billion.  That  was  a  period  of
rapid  military  expansion.  Yet   it  looks   as  though  the  first
six  years  of  the  70s  will  be  a  third,  or  $100  billion  higher.
One  can   take   the   five   fiscal   years   '65  to   '69  inclusive
when  we  spent  about  $100  billion  on  the  Vietnam  war  and
compare  it  with  this  projection  for  the  five  fiscal  years  '71
to  '75  inclusive  when   (we  have  been  led  by  Nixon  to  be-
lieve)   we   should   be  out   of   Vietnam.  The   total   spent   in
'65-'69  was   $338  billion.  The  total   projected   for  '71-'75  is
$342  billion.  Even   allowing  for  inflation  that   looks   as   if
most   of   the   "peace   dividend"   will   be   absorbed   by   the
Pentagon.
Another  way  to  look  at  it:  The  table  at  p.  80  shows  pro-
jected   spending   year   by   year   from   '70   to   '75   for   "new
initiatives."  These  include  welfare,  pollution  and  education.
These  start  at  $1  billion in  fiscal  '70  and  rise  to  $15  billion
in  fiscal  '75,  a  total  of   $58  billion   for  six   years.   But  na-
tional  defense  in  those  same  years  will  absorb  $100  billion
more  than  in  the  first  six  years  of  the  '60s  or  $342 billion,
roughly   as   much   as   we   spent   during   the   Vietnam   war
years!  No  wonder  the  Nixon   Administration  would  rather
keep  these  figures  secret.  But  why  is  there  so  little   protest
in   Congress    over   this   secrecy?    How   can   it   debate   the
priorities   when  the   military   figures   are   hidden   from   it?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,   March  23, 1970
gas  without  sufficient  warning   in  excessive  quantities  and  for
questionable   purposes   on   two   occasions   but  were    otherwise
praised.   "After   the   event   and   contrary   to   plain   fact,"   the
report  says,  "the   Administration  sought  to  portray   the  week-
end  as  one  characterized  by  violence.  Even  the  spectre  of   the
Russian    Revolution    was   raised   to   describe   what   happened
here."  The  man  who  raised  it  was  Attorney  General   Mitchell.
Alabama's  Integrated  Democrats
REP.   CONYERS   (D.   Aiich)   ACCUSES  THE   PRESS  of  virtu-
ally  blacking  out  the  activities of  a  new  political  movement  in
Alabama,   the   State's   integrated    National   Democratic   Party
which  he  says  now  holds  the  balance  of  power  in  the   State
and  will  elect  as  many  as  200  black   and   liberal  white   office
holders   in   the   next   election   .   .   .  THE  TIMES   (LONDON)
MARCH   5  PUBLISHED  an  editorial  criticizing Australia  for   re-
fusing   Wilfred    Burchett   a   passport.   This   courageous    and
sympathetic   reporter,   to  whom   Western   journalists  owe   so
much,   is  again  forced   to  travel  as  a  man  without  a  country,
hardly  an  advertisement  for  the  Free  World  .  .  .  THE  JONES
CASE  MAY  SIGNAL   a  harsher   Supreme   Court  attitude  toward
the   rights   of   school   and   college   students.   A   year   ago   in
Tinker   v.  Des  Moines  Independent   Community   School,  Mr.
Justice  Fortas  in  a  7-to-2  decision  upheld  the  right  of  school-
children  to  wear  black  armbands  in  protest   against  the  Viet-
nam  war.  An  anti-armband regulation  was  held  to  be  a  viola-
tion  of  their  First  Amendment  rights  so  long  as  their  protest
was  peaceful.   Black  and   Harlan   dissented.   Now   in  Jones   v.
Tennessee   the   Court   in   a   per   curiam  opinion   takes   a   step
backward  and   refuses  to  adjudicate  an  appeal  from  a  student
indefinitely  suspended  at  Tennessee  A.  &  I.  State  for  a  protest
leaflet.   The   Court   says  that   a  charge   that  Jones   lied  at   the
hearing  against  him  beclouds  the  record.   Douglas   and  Bren-
nan   dissented,  arguing  that   the   leaflet   was   in   no   way  dis-
ruptive  and  that  if  the  charge  was  lying  he  should  have  had  a
hearing  on  that  charge.  Mr.  Justice  Black,  normally  libertarian,
took  the  position,  as  he  did  in  Tinker,  that  school  discipline
takes  precedence  over  First  Amendment  rights.  Black's  dissent
The  Cost  Of  U.S.   Aid
"We  could  have  had  the  billions  of  American  dollars
you  see  spent  in  Saigon,  the  skyscrapers  and  the   traffic
jams  of  Bangkok and  the  low-cost  imported  luxuries  of
Vientiane,   if   we   had   wished,"   said   one    government
official   recently.   "But   we   also   would   have   had,   like
those  countries,  American planes  bombing  our  country-
side,  our  cities  filled  with  unemployed  youths,   a   com-
munist   insurrection  all   arpund  us,   galloping   inflation
and  an  enormous  trade deficit."
—From  Cambodia  in  the Washington   Post, March   H.
in  Tinker  was emotional  and  hostile  to  student  protest.  Harlan,
the  conservative, was more  moderate.  .  . .
THE   PENTAGON'S   APPEAL   TO 'NixoN   to  postpone  plans
for   a  volunteer  army  did   not  mention   its  principal  reason—•
re-enlistments  have  been  dropping  sharply.  In  the  years  before
the  Vietnam  war,   they  ran  from   22  to  25  percent.   In    1968
they  had  dropped  to  20
r
/
f
    and  in   1969   to  15%-   It  fears  that
even  with  better  pay  it  could  not  get  enough   volunteers  .  .  .
ON   DRUG   ABUSES,   as  in   other   HEW    areas,   Nixon's   over-
blown   rhetoric  contrasts  with  his   niggardly   actions.   Nixon
made   the   headlines   with   a   statement   "there   is  no   priority
higher"  than  drug   abuse  education  in  the  schools  but  all  he
released  was  $6
l
/
2
   million  in  frozen  HEW   funds  and  he  has
yet  to  get  behind  the  Brademas-Meeds   bill  the  House  passed
last  Oct.  31  (over  White  House  opposition)   for  a  $29  million
3-year   drug   education   program.    Will   Nixon    still   oppose
passage  of  the  bill  in  the  Senate  .  .  .  ?
THE   LESSON  OF  THE   LAOTIAN  WAR  is  that   the   U.S.   can
destroy  a  country  without  winning  a  war.   The  Plain  of   Jars
was  cleared  of  its  people  for  B-52  bombardment  without  stop-
ping  the  enemy.   The  only  result  was  to  bring  the  number  of
homeless   up.  to  about  one-fourth  of  the  Laotian  people.
What   The  Record  Reveals   About   the  Origins  of  The  Disorder   In  The  Chicago  7  Trial
The   easy   way   to   dispose   of   the   Chicago   7  trial  is   to
blame  the  Judge  and  the  defendants  equally   for   the  dis-
order.  This  is  what  most  editors  have  done.  But  a  study  of
the  contempt citations  shows  that  it  was  not  until  the  fifth
week  of  the  trial  that  disruptive  protest   began.  This   was
when  Bobby  Seale's  effort  to  represent  himself—as  he  had
a   legal   right  to   do—culminated   in   his   being   bound   and
gagged   and   then   sentenced   to   four   years   for   contempt,
while  his  case  was  severed  for  separate  trial.*
Until  the  transcript  is  available,  the  place  to  study  these
citations  is  in  the  Chicago Tribune which  printed  a  full  list
Feb.  16. Except  for  the  refusals  to  rise,  all  carry  the  dates,
a  description  and  the  sentence.  The  refusals  to  rise occurred
on  Oct. 28,  29  and  30  in  the  fifth  week  of   the  trial.  Of   the
121  contempts  for   which   the   remaining  seven  defendants
were  cited,  only  four  were dated during  the  first  four  weeks.
These  were  minor.  The  first,  on  Sept.  26,  was  against  Abbie
Hoffman   for  blowing  a  kiss  to  one  of  the  jurors  (1  day).
The  second,  on  Oct.  1,  was  against  Rennie  Davis  for  being
20  minutes  late  and  presenting  a  birthday  cake   to   Scale.
Even  the  usually  irrepressible Jerry  Rubin  was  not  cited
for  contempt  until  Oct.  30  when  he  protested  the   gagging
of  Seale.  Tom  Hayden's  first  two  counts were  on  Oct.  29  for
"making   remarks"  and  on  Oct.  30  for  "making  speech   in
*  A  week  after  Judge  Hoffman  gave  a  lawyer   a  6-week
delay  for  a  Caribbean vacation, he  refused  Seale's  attorney,
Charles  Garry,  a  7-week  delay  to  recover from  an  operation.
defense   of   Seale."   Rennie  Davis's   second   offense   did   not
occur  until  Nov.  26  and  it  was  for  asking  the  Judge,  "Why
don't   you  gag   all  of   us?"   Until  Dellinger   was   cited   for
"shouting  support  of  Bobby  Seale"  on  Oct.  25,  his   offenses
were  minor:  calling the  Judge  "Mr." in  an  argument  Oct. 15
(6  months!)   and  for  sarcastic  remarks  to  a  witness  Oct.  16
(1  month).  The  first  offense  of  John  Froines  was  laughing
at   a  witness   (1   month)   on   Oct.   28  and   Lee   Weiner   for
refusing  to  rise  that  same  day.  Of  the  95  dated  contempts
in  the  Chicago Tribune, more  than  half  (53)  occurred  in  the
last  two  months  of  this  5-month  trial.  If  it  turned  toward
the   end   into   guerrilla   theatre,   the   producer   was   Julius
Hoffman.
The defense  began  on  the  assumption  that  it  could  expose
the   hollowness  of   the   charges   in   an   open   trial.  The   de-
fendants   were  veterans   of   the  civil   rights   movement  and
were  still  influenced  by  the  fact  that  then  their  only  hope
lay   in  the  courts.  The  gifted   and  thoughtful   Tom  Hayden
dominated   the   preparations   for   the   trial   and   they   were
painstaking.  The  disorder  was  not  a  plot  but  the  result  of
their  frustrating  inability day-after-day  to  get  the  evidence
they  had  gathered  into  the  record.**  The  trial   itself   turned
defendants  and  counsel  into  revolutionaries.
** The  outstanding   example,  of  course,  was   the  Judge's
refusal   to   hear   former   Attorney    General   Ramsey   Clark
testify   that  the  Justice   Dept.  warned   Mayor  Daley  not  to
provoke   trouble   by   refusing   the   demonstrators   a   permit.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  23, 1970
(Continued  from   Page One)
courage  them,"  was  his  unexpected   plea.   "If   they  stop  acting
up,  we'll  never  get  the  Establishment  to  budge."
From  a  longer  range  political  point  of  view,  the  New  Left
and   the   hippies   and   the  Yippies  may, in  however   weird   a
form,  also  forecast   the  future.    They   see  Soviet  Communism
merely   as   a  further  stage   of   capitalism,   a   mass   production
bureaucratic  society  concentrated  on  the  production  of   goods
rather  than  the  liberation of  the  spirit.  They  see  the  working
class  becoming  "middle   class"   under   it,  and   the   need   for   a
newer   revolution   against  making   the   individual   a   thing   in
a   mindless  industrial   process   rather   than   the   loving  center
of   a  universe  meant  to   be   joyous   in   our   brief   moment   of
passage  through   it.   To  study  their  irrationality is  to   become
aware  of  ours.
No  Salvation   In  Holocaust
The  immediate lesson  is  this:   If  the  police   authorities  are
high-handed  and  arbitrary  in  their  hunt  for  the   bombers—as
some   already  are—they  will   turn   more   moderates   into  ac-
tivists.   The   answer  to  the   revolutionaries  is  to  behave  with
justice,  to  demonstrate  that  the  system  can  operate  under  pres-
sure  in  accordance  with  its  own   best   ideals.   And    first   and
above  all  to  end  the  war. Again  and  again,  the  over-reaction
and  panic  of   an   established  order   has  turned   a  handful  of
conspirators  into a  revolutionary  movement.   This  is,  of  course,
exactly  what  the  Chicago  trial  has  done  in  radicalizing  youth
and  destroying  its  faith   in  the  courts.   What   happens  on  ap-
peal   may  represent   the  last  chance  of  winning  them   back  to
rational   discourse   and   faith   in   peaceful   change.     In   these,
rather  than   a  blind   and   volcanic  upheaval,  I  see mankind's
only  chance.    For  the  problems   which   confront   us  lie   deep
in  the  conditioning  of  man  and   in  the  power  of   technology
to  enslave  him.  No  one  is  yet  wise  enough   to  chart  the  way
out,   as  the   most   perceptive   of   the   kids   themselves   admit.
They  merely  hope  something   better   will  turn  up  out  of  the
ruins.   But  I  do  not  believe   in  salvation  by  holocaust.    Hate
and  hysteria  certainly  will  not  create   a  new  man  or  build  a
better  world.   Political  suicide  is  not  revolution.
But  I  must   confess   that   I  almost  feel  like  throwing   rocks
through  windows   myself   when   I  see  Judge   Julius   Hoffman
turn  up  as  an  honored  guest  at  the  White  House  and  when  I
see  Billy  Graham   like  a  smoother   Rasputin   dishing  out sac-
charine  religiosity  there:   If  all  Americans  would   only   repeat
the  Lord's  Prayer  together,  he  said,  "He  could  lead  us  out  of
our  dilemma"—and  at  no   increase   in   taxes   either!  I   sense
And   Lockheed   Duns  The U.S.!
By   letter   of   March  2,  1970 Lockheed   Aircraft   in-
formed   Deputy   Secretary   of   Defense   David   Packard
that  .  .  .  for  it  to  complete  delivery  of  81  C-5A  aircraft
during  1971  and  1972  "an  additional  $435  to  $500 mil-
lion  will  be  required  to  cover  production  expenditures."
Mr.   Packard  [who later   granted   Lockheed's   request]
admits   that  C-5A costs   have   grown    astronomically.
Not  including spares,  the  Secretary  stated   in  his  testi-
mony  that  115 C-5As—excluding  five  research  models—
were  to  have  cost  $1.9 billion. That  grew  to  $3.2  billion
for   the  same   115  planes.   Now   81  planes   are  to  cost
almost  $3.2 billion .  .  .  This  plane  is  built  in  a  Govern-
ment  owned  plant.  Much  of 'the machinery  is  owned  by
the   Government.  The  Government  has   made  progress
payments   of   90   percent   of   the   "costs   incurred,"   or
according  to  the  General  Accounting  Office's  informal
report  to  me,  $2.04  billion  of   $2.27  billion  of  the  costs
incurred  through  March  6,  1970.  Yet   we  have  only  11
planes  with 26  more  in the  pipeline.
—Proxmire   (D.  Wis.) in  the  Senate  Mar. 10.
in   Nixon   and   his  entourage   no   anguish,  no   awareness,   no
real   comprehension.    When   has   there    been    a   more   inane
leadership  as  storm  clouds  gather?  Not  since  Marie  Antoinette
has  there  been  a remark  to  match  Moynihan's  "benign  neglect."
On  the  Edge of  Black  Upheaval
Between  the  disaffected  white  youth  and  the  growing   anger
of  the  blacks,  we  could  be  on  the  verge  of  a  wild  upheaval.
I  hold  my  breath  as  I  go  to  press  waiting  to  see  whether   Rap
Brown   is  dead   or   alive.    In   the   black   community   here   in
Washington   those   who  knew   Ralph   Featherstone   best,   and
remember    his   efforts    only   two   weeks   ago   to   advise   the
ghetto  youth  against  violence,   do  not   believe  he  was  trans-
porting   explosives.    They  think  he  was  murdered.    They  see
the  police  and   the   FBI   engaged   in  an   effort   to   throw   the
blame   upon   the   dead   men   themselves.     Hoover's    name   at
the   bottom   of   that   cryptic  FBI   report   on   the   bombing   is
a  provocation   to  the  blacks.  For  them   Hoover   is  an  old   ally
of  the  Southern  racists  in  Congress.   In  the  black  community,
too,  the  established  order  is  recruiting  the  forces  which  threat-
en   it.   Until  the  war   in  Southeast   Asia  is  ended,   until   the
Pentagon   is  cut  down   drastically,  until  priorities  are  revised
to   make   racial   reconciliation   and   social   reconstruction    our
No.   1  concerns,   the  dynamite  that   threatens  us  sizzles  on  a
fuse  that  leads  straight  back  to  the  White  House.
We'll  Be Clad to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed    Envelope
FOR  STONE'S  HIDDEN  HISTORY
For  the  enclosed   $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History   of  The  Korean  .War  (Monthly   Review
Press.)
(To)    Name
Street
City                                          Zip                 State
Indicate   if  gift   announcement   wished   Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                         Zip                 State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                 3/23/70
4420  29th  St.  N.  W.,  Washington,   D. C.  20008
I. F. Stone's   Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St., N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly. 2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th St.,  N.W..  Washington   D C
An  independent bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED