I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970feb23.pdf

============================================================

Vietnam  War  Far  From  Over,  P.  4
A  Lightning  Flash  From  The  Lower  Depths
Michael  Tabor  said  he  had  become  addicted  to  heroin  at  the  age  of  13 because  he  "began  to  feel  very  depressed"  and  the
drug  "served  the  purpose  of  blurring  certain  ugly  realities of  ghetto  experience,"  Heroin  helped  "my  nose  not  to  smell  the
urine-soaked  hallways.  I  didn't  feel  the  garbage  underfoot,   I  didn't  hear  the  sound  of  police  sirens  tearing  through  the
black  jungle."   —Testimony  at  the  Panther  21  trial.  New   York   Times,  Feb.  12.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL  XVIII,  NO.  4FEBRUARY  23,  1970'<"          WASHINGTON, D. C.
20  CENTS
Nixon's  Iron  Curtain  on  the  Cost  of the  War
Nixon's  new  budget  takes  secrecy  in  government  two  steps
beyond   LBJ.  Nixon  has  blacked  out  the  cost  of   the   war  in
Vietnam  and  he  has  also  blacked  out  military  spending   from
his  budgetary  projections  for  the  next  four  years.  "A  budget,"
Nixon   said  in  his  message,  "must  be  a  blueprint for  the  fu-
ture."  In  his  blueprint  these  two  main  parts  are  missing.  "In
the  past,"  Nixon  said  about his  new  four-year  projections, "the
Federal  government   has  been  unwilling  to  pull  all  the  pieces
together  and  present  the  results of  projecting  Government  fi-
nances  into the  future."  He  said this was  essential  for  "an  en-
lightened   discussion   of   public  policies  even   though   precise
figures  are,  of  course,  impossible."   Why   then  omit  expendi-
tures  which  eat  up  more  than  half  the  general  revenues  of  the
government  ?
The  Explanations  Are   Contradictory
Contradictory  explanations have  been  given  for  blacking out
the  cost  of  the  war.  In  the  press  briefings  which  preceded   the
release  of  the  budget,  the  Pentagon  briefers  disagreed  with  the
Budget  Bureau  briefers. The  Pentagon  briefers  said  the figures
had  been  left  out  deliberately,  so  as  not  to  tip  off  the  Presi-
dent's  plans.   Budget   Director  Robert  P.  Mayo,  on  the  other
hand,  implied  that  no  such  figure  had  been  calculated.  A  Pen-
tagon   official  put  it  bluntly  to  a  persistent  newsman,  "I  didn't
say  there  wasn't  a  dollar  figure.  I  am  saying  I  am  not  going  to
tell  you  what  it  is."   The  clearest  statement  on  the  record  is
hidden  away  on  p.  81  of  the  main  budget   volume.  "We  ex-
pect,"  it  says  —
that  further  troop  withdrawals can  be  made  in  the  future.
However,  U.S.  actions  depend  upon  the  actions  of  the  other
side  in  Paris  and  on  the  battlefield,  as  well  as  progress  in
Vietnamization.   Consequently estimates  are  not  shown  for
either  the  size  or  the  timing of  our  future  actions.  Because
of  the  need  to  maintain  the  security  of  the  plan,  certain
information   included  in   recent  budgets   does   not   appear
this  year.
The  first  part  of  this  statement  implies  that  there  is  no  time-
table  because  this  depends  on  Hanoi  and  Saigon.  The  final
sentence  implies  that  Nixon   does  have  one  but  is  keeping  it
secret  so  as  not  to  tip  his  hand.  We   expect  this  will  confuse
the  enemy  as  much  as  it  will  the   Congress.
Until  now  the  only  items  known  to  be  kept  secret   in  the
U.S.   budget  have  been  the  expenditures  of  the  CIA  and  the
various  military  intelligence  agencies.  Now  the  Vietnam   war
has  been  added.  This  should  be  an  issue  for  the   Democrats.
Yet   the  statement   on   national   priorities   just   issued   by   the
The  Culprit  Was  On  The  Bench
The  jury  in  the  Chicago  7  case  was  still  out  after
three  days  when  we  went  to  press.   One  of  the  Judge's
final  remarks  was  illuminating.  In  imposing  a  savage
4-year  contempt sentence  on  the  chief  defense  counsel,
Mr.  Kunstler,  Judge  Hoffman   said   crime  was   on  the
increase   because  such  lawyers  were  "waiting  in   the
wings"   to  help  criminals.   The  remark   indicated  how
foggy   was   his   understanding  of   the  case   before  him
when  he  could somehow confuse  these  anti-war  idealists
with  common  criminals  and  their  devoted  counsel,  all
honorable  veterans  of  the  civil  rights  movement,  with
"mouthpieces."   The  remark  helps  to  explain  why  this
became  probably  the  most  unfair  trial  in  U.S.  history.
When  the  full  record is  studied,  we  believe  it  will  show
that   the   disorder   in  the   courtroom   was   the   product
neither  of  a  revolutionary  plot  nor  of  Yippie  "theatre"
but  of  the  sheer  unbearable exasperation  created  day
after  day  for  20  weeks by the  Judge's  one-sided rulings.
We  think  the  prime  responsibility  for  these  disgrace-
ful  spectacles  rests  upon the  Judge, that  he has  brought
the  courts into disrepute with  the  young and  the blacks,
and   ought   to   be  impeached.   "Public  respect   for   the
Federal  judiciary,"  Mr. Justice  Frankfurter   said   acidly
in   the  similar  Harry  Sacher  contempt  case   17   years
ago,  "is  best  enhanced  by  exacting  high  standards  of
judicial   competence."   The  culprit  was   on  the   bench.
Democratic   Policy  Council,  their  more  militant  or   less  pusil-
lanimous  wing,  does  no  more  than  say  weakly  that  while  it
welcomes   the  cuts  announced  in  the  Pentagon   budget,    "the
Administration's  figures  on   expenditures   make   it   difficult   to
assess  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  military  reductions  which
have  been  proposed."  Protest   could   hardly  be  worded   more
feebly.    This  is  what  happens   when   certain  lobbyist-lawyers
double  in  brass  as  Nixon   advisers  and  liberal  Democrats.
The  blackout hides  the  size  of  the  peace  dividend.  The  Ad-
ministration  would  like  to  expunge   even   the  phrase.  Budget
Director  Mayo  referred  to  it  scornfully   as  a  "rather  oddball
concept."   The  decision  to  keep  it  secret  must  have  been  taken
at  the  last  moment.  About  ten  days  before  the  budget  was  re-
leased  the  Pentagon  information  office  was  still  telling  report-
ers  that  the  cost  of  the  war  during  the  next  fiscal  year  would
be  about  $17  billion. When  Secretary  Laird  first  gave  out  this
figure  last  October,  he  said  this  would  mean  a  $15  billion  sav-
ing  over  the  $30  billion  the  war  cost  in  fiscal  '69,   its  peak.
(Continued  on Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,   Feb.  23, 1970
(Continued   from  Page  One)
Total   military  costs   in   '69   ("defense    by  function")   were
|81.2    billion.  But  total  military costs  budgeted  for  fiscal  '71,
instead  of  being  $13  billion  less  than  that  (or   $68.2  billion)  _
are  $73.5  billion,  or  only  $7.7   billion  less.  This  means  that
non-Vietnam  military spending  is  up  by'$5.3  billion. This  in-
crease  in  non-Vietnam   military  spending   is  itself  more  than
twice  as  large  as  total  outlays  budgeted   for  natural  resources
($2.5   billion)   including  air  and  water  despite  all   Nixon's
"now  or  never"  rhetoric on  pollution.
No  Austerity   On  Strategic   Arms
This   may  understate   the   realities.   Proxmire   in   a  Senate
speech  Feb.  10  estimated  that  the  Pentagon   "has  heisted  $10
billion  of  the  peace  dividend."   He  takes  into  account not  only
Laird's  predicted   cut  in  Vietnam  war  costs  but  his  announce-
ment  last  Oct.  16 that  henceforth  the  Pentagon  would  plan  its
level  of  forces  for  one  major  and  one  minor  wars  instead  of
two  major  and  one  minor  wars  as  it  has  since  the  Kennedy-
Mc  Namara   period.  Proxmire  said  the  money  thus  saved  is
going  to  strategic hardware,  including the  second  phase  of  the
ABM,  conversion  of  Polaris  into  the  MIRVed   Poseidon,   on
which  the  overruns  are  now  $3  billion; into  MIRVed Minute-
man  III,  where  the  overruns  are  also  about  $3 billion; into  the
Navy,  which  is  getting  $2.6  billion  to  modernize the  fleet,  an
increase  of  $1  billion  over  1967-69  expenditures;  and  into  a
huge   AWACS,   over-the-horizon  warning  system.  "Some   $18
billion  has already  been  spent  for  SAGE  and  AWACS,"  Prox-
mire  said  of  these  two  anti-bomber  systems,  "even  though  the
Russians  have  no  modern  intercontinental bomber.  These  huge
funds  were  expended   to  meet  a  non-existent  threat."  This  is
hardly  austere military budgeting.
This  brings  me  to  the  related  blackout  the  Nixon  admin-
istration  is  imposing  on  military  spending  and  planning.  "We
have  learned," Nixon  said  in  the  economic  report,  "that  1-year
planning  leads  to  almost  as  much  confusion  as  no  planning  at
all."  He  said  that  was why  he  was opening  up  the  books,  and
, making  long-range  projections  "that  will  enable  the  people  to
discuss  their  choices  more  effectively."   He  published  a  four
year  projection  which  shows,  among  other  things,  that  Nixon's
new  civilian  initiatives including welfare and  pollution  will  go
up  from  $3  billion  in  the first year  to $18  billion in the  fourth.
Yet  there  are  no  similar projections  on  the  military  side.
When  Budget  Director  Mayo was on Meet  The  Press Feb.  8,
Get  A  Whiff   Of  This
The  Nixon  administration  has  come   up  with  a  new
definition  of  chemical warfare  that  would  permit  agents
"whose  effects  are  not  lasting."  .  .  .  Under  the   Nixon
administration's  definition,  the  way  the  United   States
uses  tear  gas  and herbicides in Vietnam is  not  chemical
warfare.    But  there   is   no  attempt   to   perpetuate   the
Kennedy administration's  contention  that  GIs  use  chem-
icals  in  Vietnam  to  protect   civilians,  not  gain   military
advantage.   Chemical  warfare,  as  newly  defined  by  the
Defense   Department,  is   "the  employment  of   chemical
agents   which   result    in   prolonged   incapacitation   or
death  in  contrast  to  the  temporary  nature  of  riot  con-
trol   agents   (CS)   whose   effects   are   not   lasting   and
dissipate  quickly."
—George  C.  Wilson  in  the  Washington  Post,  Jan.  31.
Edwin  L.  Dale,  Jr.,  of  the  New   York   Times   said  "your  four
year  projection  of   the  'grand  total  of   government   spending
under  current programs of  something  like $240  billion is hard
to  make  sense  of  unless you have  an  idea of  what  the  Defense
assumptions  are."   Mr.  Dale   asked  whether  the  grand   totals
assumed  "the  current force levels, the  pre-Vietnam force  levels,
the  levels  at  the  end  of  the  new  fiscal  year?  What?"   The
Budget  Director  replied  "we  preferred  not  to  be  too  specific."
Mr.  Mayo  would  disclose  no  more  than  that  the  overall 4-year
projections  assumed  "a  considerable lessening  of  the  expendi-
tures  for  Vietnam"  and  also  "the  effect  of  higher  prices  on  all
weapons  systems"  though   at  a  lower  rate  of   inflation.    "We
have  also  worked  in,"  he  added  as  a  final  concession,  "what
we  think  is  a  reasonable  projection  on  the  military  side."  But
both   the   details   and   the   totals  on   the   military   side   were
blacked  out.
There  is  an  interesting revelation  in  this  connection  at  page
77  of  the  annual report  of  the  President's  Council  of  Economic
Advisers.  It  shows  that  elaborate  studies  and  projections  have
been  made on  the  military  as well  as the  civilian  side.  It  says—•
Among   the   most   important   steps   in  this   direction    have
been   the   interrelated   studies   conducted   through   the   Na-
tional   Security   Council   and   the   Cabinet    Committee    on
Economic  Policy.  These studies examined  alternative  defense
strategies  with  their  associated   costs  and  alternative   non-
defense   programs.    Various  defense  strategies  were   trans-
lated  with  rough  accuracy  into  a  large  number  of  possible
forces  and  budgets.   Similarly  alternative   nondefense   Fed-
eral  programs  were   developed.
How  can  Nixon   say  that  he  is  making  long  range  4-year
A  Witch  Hunt  Bill  Straight  Out  Of  The  McCarthy  Era  Passes  The  House
I   am   for   national   security   but   I   am   against    national
hysteria  that  sees  an  enemy   under  every   bed  and  a   sub-
versive  in  every  closet.   This  bill  gives  uninhibited   power,
without  direction  or  standard,   to  the  Secretary   of   Defense
to  tell  who can  hold  a  job or  have  access  to  defense  projects
and  facilities,  whether   or  not  classified   information   is  in-
volved.   Just  let  me  read   carefully   what  facilities  can  be
designated  as  defense  facilities.   Sections  402  (a)   and 404
include:
"(a)    any   plant,   factory,  industry,   public   utility,   mine,
laboratory,   educational   institution,   research   organization,
railroad,   airport,  pier,  waterfront  installation,  canal,   dam,
bridge,  highway,  vessel,  aircraft,  vehicle,  pipeline."
Such  a  facility  need  not  have  anything  to  do  with  classi-
fied  information.   It  would  give  the  Secretary  of  Defense
the  power  to  decide  who  can  hare  "access"  [to  any  such
facility].   The  bill  would  grant  virtually  dictatorial  powers
to  the  Secretary  of  Defense.   Also,  the  President  would  have
untrammeled  power  to  investigate  persons  or  organizations
whether  or  not  they  are  under  consideration   for  access  to
classified  material.   The  President  must  rely  upon   subordi-
nates.   Thus   an  underling   would  exercise   such    inordinate
power.   An  investigation  could  be  inaugurated  in  the  nature
of   thought   control.    Dissent,   in   Vice   President   Agnew's
version,  could  trigger  an  inquiry.
—Congressman  Celler,  dean  of  the  House  and   Chairman
of  House  Judiciary   Committee, speaking   (abridged)   Jan.  29
against   HR   14864,  the   Defense   Facilities   and   Industrial
Security   Act   of   1970,  which   passed   the   House   that   day
274-65  in  a  typical  spasm  of  war-time  hysteria.   It  can  still
be  stopped   in   the  Senate.   The   bill  was   produced   by   the
House   Committee   on  Internal  Security   (as   the    Un-Amer-
ican  Activities  Committee   is  now  known)  where  it  drew  a
strong  dissent  from   Rep.  Stokes  (D.  Ohio).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  Feb.  23, 1970
projections   available  to  "enable   the   people   to   discuss  their
choices  more  effectively"  when  the  military  side  of  these  pro-
jections—much    the   biggest   single   share—is    hidden    from
them?  "We  must  become  increasingly aware,"  Nixon  also  said
in  the  Budget  Message,  "that  small  decisions today often  lead
to  large  cash  outlays  in  the  future."  Of  no  part  of  the  budget
is  this  more   resoundingly  true   than   the   military   sector.   A
speech  by  Congressman  Reuss  in  Milwaukee Feb.  10  provided
a  swift  glimpse  of  such  "small  decisions"  and  the  large  cash
outlays   they  entail.   "There   is   a   $1.5   billion  item   for   the
ABM,"  Reuss  said  of  the  new  budget,  "expected  ultimately to
cost  anywhere  from  $10  to  $50  billion. There  is  $87  million
for  AWACS,   a  new  airborne  radar  system  with  an  ultimate
$15  billion price  tag.  There  is  almost  a  billion  dollars  for  con-
tinued  deployment  of  the  Navy's  new  F-14  fighter  plane,  with
an  expected  total  program  cost  of  up  to  $36  billion.  There  is
$370  million  in  the  budget   for  a  start  on  the  F-15,   the  Air
Force's  new  superiority  jet  fighter.  Costs  of  this  program   are
expected    to   exceed   $25   billion."   These   programs    impose
a  heavy  mortgage   on   future   budgets,   but   these  are   among
the  military commitments  blacked  out.
"Peanuts"  For  Pollution
If  the  budget  were  candid,  the  public would  see that  all  the
projected  spending  on  welfare  and  pollution  are  peanuts  com-
pared  to  the  military  outlays.   Of  the  grand   4-year  total  of
$240  billion,  the  military portion  must  be  somewhere  between
a  third  and  a  half,  or  between  $80  and  $120  billion.  These
colossal  sums  imply  a  continuation  of  the  arms  race,  indeed  a
new  spiral  in  it,  for  that  is  what  the  go-ahead   decisions  on
ABM  and  MIRV  mean.  The  military  only  have  to  drag  their
heels  a  few  months   longer   and   it  will  be  too  late   for   the
SALT  talks  to  be  anything more  than  futile  palaver.
The  budget  presentation  is  shot  through  with  deceit.    "For
the  first  time  in  two  full  decades,"  Nixon  boasted  in  the  mes-
sage,   "the   Federal   government   will   spend   more   money  on
human  resource  programs  than  on  national  defense."  This was
illustrated  with   a  pie  chart   showing   41  cents  of  the   budget
dollar  going  to  human  resources  and  only  36  cents  to  national
defense.  But  if  the  government's  huge  social  security  and  other
Add  Advocates  Of  Force  And  Violence
Governor  Lester  Maddox  urged  Georgia   school  chil-
dren  yesterday  to  steal  the  tires  off  their  school  buses
rather   than   allow  themselves   to   be   transported    for
purposes  of  desegregation.   Reacting  to  a  ruling  Thurs-
day   by   the   Fifth  Circuit  Court  of   Appeals   ordering
integration   by   Feb.   16,   Maddox  declared:    "Students
should  continue to  go  back  to  their  old  schools  and  not
get  on  the  first  darned  bus.   They  ought  to  flatten  the
tires.   Somebody  ought  to  let  the  air  out  of  them  and
steal  them."
—Sari  Francisco  Chronicle,  Feb.  7.
More  men  like  Chief  Justice  Burger  and  Judge  Cars-
well   should   be  sitting   on   the   bench   of   the    highest
judicial  authority  of  this  country.   If  those  disruptive
justices  now  holding  rein  on  that  Court  are  permitted
to   continue  their  wanton  destruction  of   our  govern-
mental  process  through  their  usurpation  of  the   legis-
lative authority invested  in  Congress,  this  country  truly
will  be  ready  for  revolution.  I  may  well  be  leading  the
vanguard.
—Rep.  Edwards  (R.  Ala.), Con.  Rec.  Feb.  5, H639.
trust  fund  receipts  are  deducted,  we  can  see  that  the  military
spends   53  cents  of   every  dollar   of   the  general   revenues.
If  the  huge  social  security  payments  and  other  trust   funds
are  deducted  from  the  "human   resources"   account,   then  we
see  that  these  get   only   7  cents   of   every   dollar   of  general
revenues.  Even  so,  "human  resources"  are  padded  by  including
in  them  $8.5  billion  of  veterans  benefits,  although   up  to  now
these  have  been  on  the  national  defense  side  of  the  budget  as
part  of  the  cost  of  fighting  past  wars.  As  for  the  fight  against
pollution,  this is buried in  "natural  resources"  which   altogether
get  one  and  two-tenths  cents  of  every  dollar   in  the   consoli-
dated  budget,  one  tenth  of  a  cent  less  than  last  year.  The  total
appropriations   asked  to  fight  pollution  of  the  air  ($106   mil-
lion)  and  water  ($465  million)  next  year  total  $571   billion.
In  a  budget  in  which  53  cents  of  every  general  revenue  dollar
goes  to  the  military, only four  tenths  of  a  cent  will  go  to  save
the  air  we  breathe  and  the  water  we  drink  though  it  may  soon
be  too  late  to  save  them.   Nixon's   anti-pollution   rhetoric   is
miles  from  his  budgetary  realities.
How  A  Narrow-Minded Judge  Can  Invite  Contempt  And  Provoke  Disorder
A  trial  like  that  of  the  D.C.  Nine  poses  formidable prob-
lems   for   the   courts.    The  issues   are   moral   rather   than
legal.   The  Nine  did  not  break  into  the  Washington   offices
of   Dow   Chemical   for   purposes   of   larceny   or   mischief.
They   were   protesting   its   production  of   napalm  to  burn
people   alive   not   only   in   Vietnam   but   elsewhere   in   the
course  of  American counter-insurgency  operations.  Respect
for  the  courts  is  destroyed  when  nine  Catholics,  clergy  and
lay,  acting  out  of  the  deepest   moral  anguish,  are   treated
on  trial  as  if  they  were,  simply,  burglars.
When  a  similar group of  religious  dissidents,  the  Catons-
ville  Nine,  were  convicted  in  Baltimore for  destroying  draft
records,   U.S.   District   Judge   Roswell   Thomsen   gave   the
defendants  wide  lattitude  in  presenting  their  case.   There
was  no  disorder  in  that  courtroom.  But  U.S.  District  Judge
John  H.  Pratt   made  the  D.C.  Nine  and  counsel  feel  from
the  first  that  his  mind  was  closed.   Their  request  to  defend
themselves,  though  made  in  writing  to  the  Judge  about  two
weeks  before  trial  began,  was  summarily denied  at  the  last
moment  on  the  dubious  ground that  they  had  no  legal  train-
ing.   The  Judge's  remarks  from  the  bench  about   "rumors"
he   had   heard   made   the   defense   feel   he   was   acting   on
information  to  which  it  was  not  privy  and  which  had  not
been  aired  in  open  court.
Early  in  the  trial  Defense   Counsel  Philip  J.   Hirschkop
asked   the   Judge  to  disqualify  himself.  "You've   made  up
your  mind," he  said  with  less  tact  than  truth,  "about  every-
thing   in  the  case  except   the  length  of   the  sentence."   A
serious   outburst   occurred  when  the   Judge   cut   off   Sister
Malone  on  the  stand  when  she  tried  to  explain  her  actions.
The  Judge  said  neither  the  Vietnam  war  nor  Dow's  prod-
ucts  could  be  mentioned.  This  provoked  a  youthful  spectator
and  precipitated  a brawl.
The  Judge's   face  turned  red  when  the  jury  found  them
not  guilty  of  burglary  (15  years  maximum)  and  convicted
them  instead  of  unlawful entry  (a  misdemeanor,  6  months)
and  two  counts  of  destroying  property  (which  could  be  10
years  each).  The verdict, though  illogical,  showed  the  jury's
sensitivity  to  the  moral  issues.
The   Judge's   anger   over   the   verdict   may   explain   the
preemptory  way   he  held  Mr.  Hirschkop  in  contempt   and
gave  him  30  days  in  jail.   His  own  lawyer's   request   for
trial  before  another  judge  or  for  three  days  to  prepare  a
defense  were  both  denied.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Ri-Wcckly,  Feb.  23,
Senate  Committee  Investigators  Fi nd  Vietnam  War  Far  from  Over
The   staff   report   released  by  the  Senate  Foreign   Relations
Committee   Feb.   2,  "Vietnam:   Dec.   1969,"  deserves  a  wide
reading   in  the   peace   movement.  The   main  conclusion  that
emerges   is  that  we  Americans  don't   really  know  what  we're
doing  in  Vietnam  nor  what  is  really  happening  there.   "We
were  struck,"  the  authors   (staff   members  James  G.   Lowen-
stein  and  Richard M.  Moose)   report,  "by  the  fact  that  no  con-
clusion  seems  to  stand  up  from  one  conversation or  experience
to the  next."
The  Language   Barrier
The   language  barrier  is  basic.  Even  when  accompanied  by
some  of  the  few  U.S.  officers  who  speak  Vietnamese,  the  staff
members   decided  it  was  an  "almost   hopeless   task"   to  deter-
mine  what  the  Vietnamese   really  think.  They   visited  one vil-
lage with  a bilingual U.S.  Colonel  and  a  bilingual U.S.  Major.
The  former  reported   the  villagers  were  "relaxed"   and  happy
despite  intermittent mortar  fire.  The  latter  said  they  were  un-
happy  and  had   little   faith  .either  in  the  Government  or   the
' Communists.
There  were  briefings  at  every  stop.  "Facts  and  figures  are
given  in  such  profusion  and  with  such  rapidity  that  it  is  im-
possible  to  analyze or  correlate  the  information." The  briefings
resemble   "commercials."     Being   briefed,   the   Foreign   Rela-
tions  men  reported,  "is  somewhat  like  being  told  to  buy  prod-
uct  X  without  being  told  what  is wrong  with  it  or  why "to buy
product  Y."   Most  significant   of  all  were  the   subjects  never
mentioned  in  any  briefings:  the  outlook  for  negotiations,  the
number  of  desertions  from   the   South   Vietnamese  army  and
land  reform.
There  are  statistics  on  everything  else,   all  optimistic.  But
not  many  are  believed  or  believable.  "Almost   no   one,"   the
report   says,  "seems  to  believe  the  HES   (Hamlet  Evaluation
System)    statistic   that   92%    of   the   population   is  'relatively
secure'."  The  number  of  refugees  has  been   reduced  but   "in
some  cases,  apparently,  by  declaring  that  refugee  camps  were
now   economically   and   socially  viable   settlements   and    no
longer  camps."
Despite   the   "Phoenix"   program   to   "neutralize"   (kill   or
jail)  members  of  the  VC  infrastructure,  it  seems  to  be  pretty
much  intact.  The  Chieu  Hoi  (Open  Arms)   program   for  VC
defectors  seems  to  get  mostly  low  level  VC.  One  senior   U.S.
official  told  them  he  thought   "only  about  25%   of  the  ralliers
Even  In  The  Glamorous  First  Cav
Saigon—Indifference,   rancor,  disgust,   hostility:   the
war  less  and  less  pleases  the  Americans who  wage  it.
In   four  months,  109  soldiers  of   the  First   Cav,  Amer-
ica's  first  air  cavalry  division,  have  been  charged  with
refusal  to  fight.  At  Saigon,  as  at  Danang,  the security
services   pursue   deserters.    In   most   units,   more  than
half  the  soldiers  smoke  marijuana.   A  common  sight   is
the  black  soldier, with  his  left  fist  clenched,  in  defiance
of   a  war  he  has  never  considered  his  own  .   .  .   Yet
most   of   the   troops   fight  well.   The   pilots   drop  their
bombs  on  a  countryside they  do  not  always  know;  the
artillery  men  adjust  their  guns  by  radar,  the   foot-sol-
diers   look   for   "contact"   with   the   enemy.    For   them,
after  6  months  in  Vietnam,  in  the  field  or  in  barracks,
all  the   Vietnamese  are  Viet  Cong.
—Jean-Claude  Pomonti  in  Le  Monde,  Jan.  2U.
are  genuinely  defectors."  Despite  all  the  talk  of  elected   offi-
cials  in  the  countryside  "it  should  be  noted  that  all  province
and  district  chiefs are  still  military  officers."  The  province  and
municipal   councils  to   be  elected   in   April   will  be   advisory
only,  "and  the  power  will  remain in  military hands."
Though   no   U.S.   combat   troops   are   left   in   the   Mekong
Delta,   there   are  some   23,000   U.S.   advisers  there   or   "only
about  15%  less  than  estimated enemy  strength  in  the  Delta  in
December."    "Planning   in  connection   with  Victimization,"
the  report   says,  "seems  vague  and   incomplete   when  viewed
from  the  field."  Construction work  on  American  bases   appears
to  be  continuing.  "The   talk  in  Saigon,  among  Vietnamese  as
well  as Americans, is  in  terms  of  keeping  some  250,000  troops
there  for  years."
On  the  political  scene  "the  most  frequently  heard   criticism"
of  Thieu  is  that  he  is  becoming  like  Diem  "increasingly  auto-
cratic,  secretive and  isolated."  Many  believe he  has  the  support
of  no  more  than  20%  of  the  population;  they  give  the   Com-
munists  15%.   The  chances  of  broadening  his  government  are
slight.-  "Most   opposition    politicians  give   the   impression   of
being   sincerely  nationalist  and   anti-Communist"   but   at   the
same  time  "many   favor  negotiations  and  compromise."   The
report  concludes   that  the  war,  whether  seen  from   a  political
or  a  military  point  of  view,  "appears  to  be  not  only  far  from
won  but  far  from  over."
We  record  with  sorrow  the  passing  of  Bertrand  Russell,  the  lifelong  inspiration  for  the  best  of  three  generations   the
world  over.  No  one  excelled  him  in  clarity  or  courage,  or  the  capacity to  go  on  caring.   As  did  others  in  many  far  corners
of  the  earth,  we  loved  him  like  a  father.
FOR  STONE'S  HIDDEN   HISTORY
For   the   enclosed   $7.50   send   I.  F.   Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War   (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)    Name
Street
City                                          Zip                  State
Indicate   if  gift   announcement   wished   D
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                          Zip                  State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                2/23/70
4420  29th  St.  N. W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
I.  F.  Stone's   Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,   B.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.,  N.W..  Washington.  D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription: $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED