I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970sep21.pdf

============================================================

Why  It's  Wise  To  Keep  Hands  Off   Chile, P.  3
Hans  Christian  Agnew  Takes  To  The  Stump
There  is  a  new  deadlock  of  democracy  today between  a  progressive President, carrying out  his  mandate  for  reform,  and
a  reactionary  Congress in  the  grip  of  bitter men  who  forfeited  that  mandate.
—Vice  President  Agnew,  opening  the  GOP's  political  campa  gn  in  a  speech  at  Springfield,   III. Sept.  10.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVIII,  No.  17
SEPTEMBER  21,  1970     '°'o«|g|i*          WASHINGTON, D. C.
The  Only  Way  To  End Terrorism
20  CENTS
As  a  young  newspaperman  during  the  world   depression   I
never  felt  the  despair  I  am  beginning  to  feel  now  about  the
future  of  our  country.  When  I  try  to  analyze the  difference  I
think   one  reason  is  that  then  even   the   revolutionaries   had
rational  goals,  not  just  a blind  frustrated  urge  to  destroy.  And,
of  course,  the  election  of  1932  soon  provided  a  fresh,  electric
and  responsive  leadership.  It  was  as  if  in   1968  McCarthy  or
Bobby  Kennedy  had  won  the  election  and  transformed  despair
into  hope  overnight.
Today  there  is  a  loss  of  confidence  that  extends  into  every
sector  of  society,  even  those  which  usually  find  it  reassuring
to  have a Republican President. The  feeble  little  stock  boomlet
that  Nixon  and  the  Federal  Reserve  are trying to  pump  up  for
November,   at  the  expense  of  letting  up  on  the  fight  against
inflation,   barely  covers  over  a   precarious   business  situation.
The  banks  are  carrying ort  their  books  many  businesses  which
are  overripe  for  the  bankruptcy  courts,  lest  a  general   collapse
engulf   the  banks  with  them.  The   social   landscape   does   not
encourage  long-range  investment.  Black and  Chicano  minorities
are  in  revolt,  and  an  urban  guerrilla  movement  confronts  us  in
the  cities  and  on  the  campuses.  Another  Kent  State  could  set
off   a  tidal  wave  of  violence  on   the  nation's  campuses.   The
police  have  become  a  target  for  snipers,  as have  firemen.  Guns
are  ready  everywhere.  A  tiny  minority  of  firebrand  youngsters
is making  good  on  its threat  to  "bring  the  war home."
Easy  to Destroy,  Hard to Rebuild
It  begins  to  look  as  if  it  may  be  easy  to  break  down   the
fabric  of  American  society.  To  rebuild   it  will  be  very  hard.
Anarchy  and  barbarity,  race  war  and  gang  rule,  not  Utopia, lie
at  the  end  of  the  road  on  which   our  instant   revolutionaries
would  put   us.  The  power  of  the  guerrillas  is  that   they  can
start  a  widening  chain  reaction  it  is  almost  impossible  to  pre-
vent.  The  inescapable  counter-measures  necessitated   by  a  rash
of   bombings   threatens   to   precipitate   wider   clashes   in   the
ghettoes  and  on  the  campuses,  mobilizing   whole  communities
in  war with  the  police  and  the  National  Guard.  One  looks  on,
helpless  to  avoid  the  collision  one  sees  coming.
The  panic,  hysteria,  and  hate  which  may  soon  be  set  loose
can  hardly  provide  the  crucible  in  which  to  create  that  New
Man  of  whom   Mao  and  Che  dreamed.  The   reforms   society
needs   all  require—no   matter   under   what   "system"—an   in-
crease  in  every  man's  concern  for  his  fellows,   a  greater   readi-
ness  to  understand,  to  forgive   and  to  share.  Without  these
qualities,  communism  has  already  failed.  You  cannot  beat  men
into  angels,  nor  make  them  better  by calling  them  "pigs."  But
how  do  you  preach  to  youth  the  sanctity  or  human  lite  when
established  society,  in  its institutionalized  violence and  exploita-
tion,  treats it  so lightly?  How  often  have we heard  it  said  here
in  Washington,  in  cold-blooded  defense   of   bombing  North
5
Radicalism—Or  Posturing   For
The  TV  Cameras?
The  American  radical  all  too  frequently  wears  one
set   of   blinders  that  enables  him  to  see  only  the  dis-
appointments  and  ugliness  of  our  society  while  another
set  of  blinders  enables  him  to  see  only  the  virtues  of
the   Utopian  alternatives   he   reads   about   in   radical
literature.  What  I  personally  resent  most  about  some
American  radicals is  their  willingness  to  jeopardize the
chances  of  constructive  change  by  such  antics  as  dis-
playing  Vietcong  flags,  disrupting courtrooms,  shouting
obscenities   and  other   obnoxious   patterns   of   conduct.
Instead  of  building  a  broader  base  on  the  nearly  uni-
versal  hunger  of  man  for  peace,  they  seem  determined
to  isolate  the  peace  movement  from  any  kind  of  effec-
tive  relationship with  other  human  beings.  This 'kind
of  reckless political action  may  be enjoyable  for  affluent
youth  cut  off  from   the  real   world  but  it   is  a   grave
injustice   to  those  who  seek   an  end  to   the   war  and
misery.
—Senator   McGovern   in   a   letter   to   Congressional
interns   (Con.   Rec.   Sept.   1,  p.  S14S15)   taking   Tom
Hayden   to  task  for  reported   remarks  at  the   National
Student  Association  (Wash.  Star,  Aug.  19)   glorifying
the  kidnapping    a~nd  murder  of  a  California   judge.   We
have   been   unable   to   reach   Hayden    and   verify    the
accuracy  of  the  remarks  attributed  to  him.
Vietnam   that   "hurting  them"   would   force   them   to   make
peace?  Now  our  country  is  hurting.
There  is  no  moral  arithmetic   to   cancel   out  the  crime  of
murder.   But  how  do  you  answer  those  who  say  coolly  of  the
young  man  who  died  in  that  Army  Mathematics   building  at
Wisconsin,  "What  if  he  had  been  drafted   and  died  in  Viet-
nam?"  How  do  you  restore  the  moral  bearings  of  the  young
when  we  now  learn  from  the  private  papers  in  the  John  F.
Kennedy   library   that   he   and   former   Senator   Smafchers   of
Florida  on many occasions  discussed  the  feasibility  of  arranging
the  assassination  of  Fidel Castro ? The  craziest  of  our  mixed-up
kids  are  no  crazier  than  the  end-justifies-the-means   morality  of
American   imperialism.
Human  society,  as  it  grows  more  complex,  grows  more  vul-
nerable.  Hi-jackings,  bombings,  snipers,  and  political  kidnap-
pings;  fedayeen,  Tupamaros,  and  Weathermen,  all  reflect  the
power  this  gives  a  desperate  few.  But  technology  is  not  the
essence  of  their  power.  At  its  inner  core  is  a  sustaining  moral
indignation  which  gives  these  few  the  strength  to  live  and  die
as  outlaws.  They  will  not  be  stopped  until  this  inner  sense of
righteousness  is  undermined,  and  this  can  be  done  only  by
(Continued  On  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  21, 1970
(Continued  From  Page   One)
society's  willingness  to  take  a  fresh  look  at  the  morality of  its
own  behavior,  and  to  begin  to  right  the  wrongs  which  provoke
the  resistance.  Isaiah  says, "Zion  shall  be  redeemed  by justice."
Rereading  that  sublime  poetry .on  vacation  last  August,  I  felt
that  the  prophet  here  offered  us  the  cryptic key  to  the  problem
of  terrorism  everywhere,  in  the  Middle  East  as  at  home.
Society's Double Standard
Society's  moral  weakness  is  its  double  standard.  The   suffer-
ings  of  the hi-jacked in the  desert  aroused  world-wide sympathy
and  their  release  world-wide  relief.  But  how  many  stopped  to
think  that  several hundred  thousand  of  the  Arab  refugees  from
Palestine  have  been  living for  two  decades  in  a  similar stinking
horror  in  desert  camps,   stifling  by  day,  freezing  by  night,  on
a  beggar's  pittance?  The  papers  are  full  of  proposals  to  deal
with  the  hi-jackers  but  little  about  the  need  to  deal  with  the
grievances   behind   them.   The  editorial   outburst  about   Arab
"barbarism"   hardly  accords  with  the  testimony  of  all  the  hi-
jacked  travellers—including   the  Israeli—that   the   commandos
treated   them   kindly.  Such   exaggeration    is  not   the   path   to
peace.  I  covered  the  Jewish  terror  against  the  British  in  Pales-
tine  in  the  postwar  40s.   I  know  that  if  the  present  situation
were  reversed,  and  Jews  were  in  the  refugee   camps,   and  no
one  cared,  Jewish  commandos  would   be  hi-jacking  planes   to
call  attention  to  their  plight,   and  those   of   us  who  are  Jews
would  feel  the  same  thrill  over  these  exploits  as  the  Arabs  do
over  theirs.  What  surer  way  to  reconciliation  than  honestly  to
recognize  ourselves  in  the  visage  of  our  enemy?
The  permanent  answer to  the  Arab  hi-jackings was indicated
courageously  by.the  Washington  Post  in  an  editorial  Sept.  13,
"A  Palestinian  State  Now."    The  way to  deprive  the  fedayeen
of   their   motive   force   is  to   deal   with   the   grievance   which
fuels  it.  The  way  to  deal  with  those  who  have  nothing  to  lose
is  to  give  them  something  to  lose.  To  erect  a  Palestinian  Arab
state  alongside  the  Jewish  state  would  be  to  redeem  Zion  by
justice.
Men  are  moral  beings,  and  to  take  from  the  terrorists  their
moral  justification  is  the  only  way  to  strike  at  the  heart  of  the
terror  spreading  around  the  globe.  A  society  operates  by  habit
and  consent,  and  if  these  begin  to  break  down,  it  is  helpless.
Police    are   effective    only   if   they   confront    occasional    and
peripheral   disorder.   If   even   a  sizeable  minority  declines   to
obey  the  rules,  the  task  of  law  and  order  becomes   insuperable.
This   is  especially   true  when   the   authorities   confront   dedi-
cated,   scattered   terrorists   so  loosely  organized   that  they   are
The  "Fear   Of  Humiliation" In  Indochina
Courage  is  a  personal  quality,  not  one  belonging  to
nations  apart  from  their  individual  citizens. It  takes no
individual  courage  for  a  President  to  send  young  men
to  risk  their  lives  in  a  jungle  10,000  miles  from  home.
It  takes  great  moral  courage,  on  the  other  hand,  for
Senator   McGovern  to  acknowledge  a  mistake  and   to
take  an  initiative to  end  the  war  in  Indochina,  just  as
it  took  physical  courage  when  he  flew  36  combat  mis-
sions  as  a  B-26 bomber  pilot in  World  War  II,  for  which
he   was   awarded  the   Distinguished  Flying   Cross.   It
diverts  us  from  the  real  question  when  the  President
invokes  the  specter  of   'This  first  defeat  in  American
history."  We  are  not  really in  danger of  being  militarily
defeated  in  Indochina. Within hours  we  could  wipe  those
little  countries  off  the  face  of  the  map. It  is  not  weak-
ness  that   prevents   us,   but  decency   and  civilized  re-
straint.  A  war   is  fought  for   political  objectives,  and
when   it   is   recognized  that   those   objectives  are  un-
attainable  at  a  reasonable  cost,  the  appropriate course
of  action  [is]   to  end  that  war.  Correcting  a  mistake  is
a  rational  and  honorable  way  of  coming  to  grips  with
reality.
•—Sen.  Fulbright  in  a  TV  interview,  NBC  August  31
(abr.).
hard  to  infiltrate  and   cannot  be  crushed  by  striking  at  their
head,  for  they  have  no  centralized  direction.  They  are  like  the
Hydra   of   fable,   which   grew   two   new   heads   for   each   one
Hercules  cut off.
If  By  Some Miracle
If   by  some   miracle,  we   could   acquire   new   leadership   in
the  White  House,  if  that  leadership  recognized  the  evils  of  our
society  and  mobilized  to  deal  with   them,  we  could  not  only
separate  the  mass  of  the  youth,  the  blacks,  the  Chicanoes  and
the  other  discontented   from  the  desperadoes   but  deprive  the
desperadoes   themselves   of  the  self-righteousness   that  sustains
them.   I  imagine  an   America  with  a  new   Roosevelt,   with   a
President  who  said—and  made  us  feel  he  meant  it—"We  are
embarking  on  a  10-year  crusade  to  wipe  out  racism,  illiteracy,
pollution,  urban  blight  and  war.  To  do  so we  are  withdrawing
from   Vietnam  and   cutting  our  military  down   to  bare-bones
size.  Come   and  help  us  build   a  new  and  shining   America."
Think  of  what we  could  do  with  the  zeal  that  now  moves  some
of  our  best  youth  to  destruction.                                       Sept.   14
Open Letter  (Unheeded) Warns Laird Against Using  The Lethal M-16 In Civil Disturbances
Dear  Mr.  Secretary:  I   have  just   learned   that,  without
public   announcement,  the   Department   of   the   Army   has
decided  to  supply  National  Guard  units  with  228,000 M-16
combat  rifles  by  April,  1971.  Since  the  primary  use  of  the
National  Guard  over  the  past  quarter of  a  century  has  been
to  control  crowds  and  quell  domestic  civil  disturbances,  the
decision  to   place  a  lethal   weapon  of   war  in  their   hands
seems  to  be  unwise,  imprudent  and improper.
The  M-16  fires  at  the  phenomenal  rate  of  850  shots  per
minute  and  instantly  can  spray   a  large   area  with  deadly
firepower.
It  is  not  the  type  of  weapon  the  National   Guard  needs.
In   1967  testimony   before   a  special   subcommittee   of   the
House  Committee on  Armed  Services,  a  commanding  gen-
eral   of   the   California   National   Guard   and   the   adjutant
general  of  the  Wisconsin  National  Guard  spoke  out  against
the  use  of  infantry  type  rifles  during  civil  disorders.  Com-
manding  General  Ott  of  California  told  the   subcommittee:
"We  need  some  kind of  a  low  velocity  weapon.  I  hate  to  see
a  man shooting  at  a sniper  upon the  roof  with the  knowledge
that  the  bullet  may  land  three  blocks  away  and  injure  or
kill  some  innocent  person."  And  the  U.S.  Riot   Commission
Report  concluded after  the  tragic  summer  of  1967 that much
of  the  Guard's "equipment is  inappropriate for  dealing  with
civil  disorders."
Effective   crowd  control  demands  disciplined  troops,  well
versed   in  civil   disorder  tactics,   with  weapons  specifically
designed  for  bringing  riots  under  control  with  a minimum
of  permanent  injuries,  particularly  to  innocent  bystanders.
This  does  not  call  for  the  use  of  automatic  combat  rifles.
Instead,  non-lethal  bullets  and  the  like  should  be  used.  In
circumstances   in   which   civil   or   military   authorities   are
menaced   by   snipers,   specially   riot-trained   counter-sniper
teams  should  be  used.  Such  teams  would  be  trained  to  pick
targets  with  care.  This  would enhance  public  appreciation of
the  vital  role  the  National  Guard  must  play  in  quelling civil
disorders.  I  hope  that   you  will  personally  review  and  re-
verse  the  decision  made  by  the  Army  to  equip the  National
Guard  with M-16 combat  rifles.
—Rep.  Paul  Findley  (R.  III.)  to Sec.  Laird,  Aug.  31.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  September  21,1970
Why  Washington  Would  Be Wise  To  Be Patient  With  Chile's  Allende
It  is  fortunate  for  us  and   for   Chile  that  the  Republicans
are  in power  here.   If  the  Democrats  were  in  the  White  House,
the  Republicans would  be  attacking  them  for  standing  idly  by
while  "a  new  Castro"  takes over  in  the  hemisphere.  Humphrey
would  never have dared  the  low key,  low  posture  stance  Nixon
has  so  far  been  following, as  he  did  over  Peru.   The  Chilean
election  marks  another  step  in  the  liquidation of  U.S.  invest-
ments  in  Latin  America,  but   it  will  be  cheaper   to  let   U.S.
copper  and  steel  companies  in  Chile  take  their nationalization
as  a  tax  loss  than  to  set  out  on  the  path   of  an intervention
which  could  convert  South  America  into  a  giant Vietnam.
Not  Chile's First  Popular Front
Chile  has  been  moving left  for  a  long  time.  For  101  turbu-
lent  days  during  the  depth   of  the  world  depression  in   1932
Chile  was  declared  a  Socialist  Republic.   In   1938,   after  native
Nazis  attempted  to  seize  power,  Chile  elected  the  first  Popular
Front  regime in  the  hemisphere, an  anti-Fascist coalition of  the
Radical,  Democratic,  Socialist  and  Communist  parties.   A  new
Popular  Front  in   1958  came  within  35,000  votes  of  electing
Dr.  Allende President  in  a  3-way  race.   In  1964  the  right  and
the   U.S.   supported   Frei   and   gave   Chile  its  first  Christian
Democratic  regime  in  fear   of  a  Popular  Front   victory.   But
while   the   oligarchy  gave   Frei   the   votes   for   a   majority,   it
blocked  the  "revolution  in  liberty" he  had  promised.   The  re-
sult  was  to  push  the  Christian  Democratic  movement  left.   A
split-off  joined  the  Popular  Front.
The  traditional  order  in  Chile,  as  in  most  of  Latin America,
rested   on  the  trinity  of  the  priest,  the  Army  officer   and   the
landowner.   This  has  broken  down.   While  the  armed  forces
have   become   socially  adventurous,   the   Church   has   moved
left.    The   Christian  Democratic  candidate,  Tomic,   ran   on  a
platform  almost  as  radical  as  Allende's;  both  called  for   com-
plete   nationalization   of   the   U.S.-owned   copper    companies.
Allende   promises   recognition   of   Cuba,   and   an   end   of   the
economic  blockade,  but  Frei  had  already  been  doing  a  sizeable
business  with  Cuba  in   foodstuffs.
This  convergence  of  the  two  movements  makes  any  deal  to
deny Allende  the  Presidency unlikely.  Normally  it  would  seem
hazardous  to  launch  so fundamental a change  as Allende  prom-
ises  on  a mandate  which  represents  a  36%  plurality, only  frac-
tionally  larger  than  the  34%  given  the  conservative candidate.
But a sizeable portion of  the  "other third," the Christian  Demo-
crats,  is  as  radical  as  the  Popular  Front.   It  needs  only  21  of
the  75  Christian  Democratic  votes  in  Congress   for  Allende's
election.  The  London  Times  reports  from  Santiago  (Sept.  11)
McGovern:  "This  Chamber Reeks  Of  Blood"
All  my  life,  I  have  heard  Republicans  and  conserva-
tive  Democrats  complaining  about  the  growth  of  cen-
tralized  power  in  the  Federal   executive.  Vietnam  and
Cambodia   have   convinced  me   that   the   conservatives
were  right.  Do  they  really  believe  their  own  rhetoric?
We  have  permitted  the  war  power  which  the  authors
of  the  Constitution  wisely  gave  to  us  as  the   people's
representatives  to  slip  out  of  our  hands  until  it  now
resides   behind  closed  doors  at  the  State  Department,
the  CIA, the  Pentagon,  and  the  basement  of  the  White
House.
Every  Senator  in  this  Chamber  is  partly  responsible
for  sending  50,000  young  Americans  to  an  early   grave.
This   Chamber  reeks   of   blood.  Every  Senator   here   is
partly  responsible  for  that  human  wreckage  at  Walter
Reed   and  Bethesda   Naval  and  all   across   our  land—
young  men  without legs,  or  arms,  or  genitals,  or  faces,
or  hopes.  There  are  not  very  many  of  these  blasted  and
broken  boys  who  think  this  war  is  a  glorious   venture.
.  .  .  And  if  we  do  not  end  this  damnable  war,  those
young   men  will   some   day   curse   us   for   our  pitiful
willingness  to  let  the  Executive  carry  the  burden  that
the  Constitution places  on  us.
—McGovern  on the  End-the-War  Amendment  Sept.  1.
that  there  are  about  20  Christian  Democrats   "who  would   sup-
port   Dr.  Allende  under   any  circumstances."     Since  the   elec-
tion   Dr.   Allende   has   repeated   his   assurances   of   freedom
of  expression,  multi-party  politics,  and  adherence  to  the  con-
stitution.   Dr.  Allende,  an  aristocrat  and  a  socialist,  is  tempera-
mentally  and  philosophically  neither  a  Castro  nor  a  Lenin.
Chile  is  already  highly  socialized.   Its  main  exports,  copper
and  iron,  are  in  too  short  supply  to  be  boycotted  as  we  boycott
Cuban  sugar.   In  charting  a  take-over  of  the  big  landed  estates,
the  monopolies  and  the  banks, while  leaving  middle  and  small
business  in  private  hands,  Dr.  Allende  seeks  agrarian   reform
and  social  planning  for  full  employment.   His  most   dangerous
enemies  may  be  on  the  left.   He  must  hold  down   wages  to
curb  galloping  inflation  and  curb  the  violence  of  Chile's  own
"instant  revolutionaries."   He  must  achieve  results  fast   enough
to win mass  support  for  austerity.  If  he  fails,  the  result  may be
a  collapse   into  civil  disorder  which   could   easily  spread  else-
where in  South  America  and  make  it  more  difficult  for  the  U.S.
to  keep  hands  off.  That's  why  Nixon  would  be  wise  to  be
patient with  Allende.
Gore Warns: Behind  Power  Shortages  and Soaring  Fuel  Prices  Is  A  New  Energy  Cartel
Coal  stocks  at  many  of  TVA's  generating  plants,  as  well
as   plants  of   many   utilities  around  the  country,  stand   at
dangerously  low  levels.  A  national  crisis  in  energy  impends.
This  sorry   situation   has   been  in  the   making  for  several
years,  even  though  it  has  become  apparent  with  disconcert-
ing  suddenness.
Coal   production  is   more  than   10  million  tons  short   of
probable  consumption  this  year.  We  must  depend  on  oil,
gas,   coal  and  nuclear  energy  to  meet  increased  electricity
demand. The frightening  thing  is  that  we now have  a  quasi-
monopoly in these  fuels.
Already  the  squeeze  on  the  consumer  is  tight.  Coal  prices
are  being  raised  at  the  rate  of  56%  per  year;  fuel  oil  is  up
about  48%. The  additional  cost  to  the  consumer  amounts  to
a  billion  dollars   a  year  through   higher  electric  bills.  An
overriding  reason  for  coal  shortages  and  increased   prices
lies  in  the  concentration  of  ownership  of  coal  supplies  in  a
few  giant  corporations  which  also  own  oil  and  gas  opera-
tions.  Beginning   in   1965  the   independent   coal    companies
began  to  disappear.  Many  of  the  largest  were  being  bought
up  by  oil  companies.  I  warned  about  this  in  1966,
The   only   remaining   hope   for   competition   rests   with
nuclear  fuels.  And  whose  tracks  do  we  find  in  the  nuclear
field?   Oil  companies  now  control  45%  of   known  uranium
reserves.  Oil  companies  control  uranium  milling.  Oil  com-
panies  own  four  out  of  five  plants   for  reprocessing   used
nuclear   fuel   elements.   About   the   only   operation   in   the
nuclear  field  not  already  dominated  by  oil  companies  is  the
enrichment  process  which  the  Federal  government  controls.
President  Nixon,  true  to  form,  has  been  busying  himself  to
find a  way  to  "sell"  these  enrichment  plants  at  Oak  Ridge,
Paducah  and  Portsmouth.
—Gore  in  the  Senate  Sept.  1.  These   same  interests  are
pouring  money  into  Tennessee   to  defeat   him.  No  one  needs
or   deserves    help   more   in   the   coming   election   than  this
courageous  Populist  Senator  from   Tennessee.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  21, 1970
Golda  Meir's  Visit  To  Nixon  As  Seen  By  An  Israeli  "Peacenik"
By Nathan Yalin-Mor
Tel  Aviv, Sept. 8
So  the   talks  under   Jarring   are   not   going   to   start   soon.
Israel's  government   decided  that  "as  long  as  the  cease  fire  and
standstill  agreement  are  not  fully  implemented,  and  the previ-
ous  situation  restored,   Israel  will  not  be  able  to  participate  in
the  (Jarring)   talks".
It  is  no  secret  here  that  this  decision  was  forced  upon  the
majority  by  Defence   Minister   Dayan  under   a  threat   to  quit
the  Cabinet.  After  the  walk-out  of  the  Gahal  bloc,  this  would
create  a  precarious   situation  for  the  traditional   Labour  Party
leadership.   It  could  lead  to  a  new  general  election,  in  a  differ-
ent  party  setup,  with  uncertain   outcome.
Another   Eyeball-To-Eyeball?
Moshe  Dayan  is  reputed  to  be  pragmatic  and  very  realistic.
Does  he  really believe  that  the  United  States  is  able  to  compel
the  Soviets  to  withdraw  their  SAM-2  and  SAM-3  installations
from  the  restricted Canal  zone,  as in  the  case of  Cuba ?  Doesn't
he  understand  that  a  course  like  that  would  run  counter  to  the
American  aim  to  solve  the  Middle  East  crisis  by  cooperation
with  the   USSR   rather   than  by  confrontation?    What,   then,
is  his  real  intention?
In  a  televised  interview  Dayan  introduced  a significant form-
ula:   "Either  to  withdraw  the  missiles  to  their  previous  place,
or  to  discuss  and  talk  about  everything  anew,  as  if  the  former
(cease-fire)   agreement   didn't  exist."   Speculations  about  the
meaning  of   this  formula  vary.   One   thing   is  clear:    Dayan
would  like  to  cancel  Israel's  signature  on  the  Rogers   affidavit
transmitted  to  Jarring.   He  was  not  happy  that  Israel  was ob-
liged   to   start   negotiations   when   the   Arab   states   enjoy   the
unconditional   support  of  one  of  the  two  superpowers   while
the  other  tries hard  to make  its policy  appear  even-handed.   He
would  like  the  Nixon  Administration to  commit  itself  strongly
to  support  Israel  in  some  of  its  demands—if   not  to  keep  all
the  territories,  at  least  those  specified   (on   his  insistence)   in
the  "unwritten   doctrine"   of   the  Labour   Party's   last   election
platform:    Jerusalem,   the  Golan  Heights,  the  Gaza  Strip  and
Sharm   esh-Sheikh.
American  consent  to  this  program  might  come,  in  Dayan's
speculation,  as a result  of  a bilateral  US-Israel  agreement  which
could  be  tantamount  to  a binding  military  alliance,  even  if  not
"a  treaty  consented  to  by  the  Senate",   as  proposed  by  Senator
Fulbright.   This would  mean  a considerable  arms  supply,  main-
ly  jet  planes,  but  first  and  foremost   an  increased,   almost  un-
Dayan's  New   Openings   For   Diplomacy
There  were  surprises  of  content  and  tone  in  Moshe
Dayan's  talk  on  the  Israeli   radio  Sept.   5  which   offer
openings  and  face-savers in  the  stalled  peace  talks.  The
biggest   was  to  hear  Dayan,  who  had  hitherto  warned
Israel  to  prepare  for  a  long  war,  say  that  he  thought
the  conflct  was  coming  to  an  end  and  that  negotiations
would  lead  to  an  accord  because  Israel,  Egypt,  Russia
and   America,  despite   their   divergent   positions,   all
wanted   a   settlement.   The   second   surprise   was   that
Dayan,  who  had  hitherto  warned  against  the  dangers
of  Soviet  intervention, now  said  "One  should  not  exag-
gerate   the   degree   of   active   Soviet   participation  in
combat."  He  said  the  Soviets  had  put  a  limit  on  their
role  and  were  keeping  within  it.  Dayan  suggested  that
if   the   missiles   moved  in   violation   of   the   cease-fire
could  not  be  removed, then  discussions  ought  to  go  for-
ward  as  if  the  new  cease-fire  did  not  exist.  This  would
force  Nasser  either  to  give  up  his  "war  of  attrition"
and  reinstate   the   old  cease-fire,  or  leave   Israel   free
to  retaliate if  Cairo broke the  cease-fire again.  Another
idea  put  forward  is   for  a  demilitarized  zone  on  both
sides  of  the   Canal.   This   would  seem  to   be  the   best
solution.  At  the  same  time  Dayan  warned  Cairo  that
the  Israeli   forces   on  the   Canal   were   far   better  en-
trenched  than  six   months  ago,  and  that   any  attempt
at  an  attack  across  the  canal  would  be  disastrous  for
the  U.A.R.  Dayan's  talk  seems  to  offer  ways  out  of  the
impasse  for  both  Washington  and  Moscow. The  former,
by   its   sloppy  handling  of   the   cease-fire   accord,   has
badly  hurt  its  credibility  in  Israel  while  the  Russians
appear   to   be   both  incredibly  stupid  and   (as   in   the
Cuban  missile  crisis)  guilty  of  falsehood  in  the  missile
violations.  This  casts  over  arms  negotiations  and future
cooperation  between  the  two  superpowers  a  shadow  of
the utmost gravity.
limited,  bargaining  power.   It  seems  that  this  will  be  the  main
theme  of  Mrs.  Meir's   talk  with  President  Nixon,  to  be  held
within  a few  days.  The  big  question  is:  What  if  America  will
not  agree  to  lose  all  the  advantages,   real  or  illusory,   of   the
even-handed  policy  pursued  during  the  last  few  months?   Are
we  to  return   to  the  situation   before   the   Rogers  initiative?
Is  America  going  to  deliver  Israel  all  the  arms  needed   for  a
long confrontation  in  face of  growing  Soviet  involvement,  with
all  the  global   repercussions?
The  Weekly   Now  Available  On  Microfilm  Back To  1953  From  Xerox's  University  Microfilms
FOR  STONE'S  HIDDEN  HISTORY
For  the  enclosed  $7.50  send  I.  P.  Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War  (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)   Name   ..:
Street
City                                         Zip                 State
Indicate   if   gift    announcement   wished    Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                        Zip                 State
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly               9/21/70
4420  29th  St.  N.W.,   Washington,  D. C.  20008
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  0.  C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..  N.W.,  Washington.  B.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager. Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  S5  in  the  U.S.;   S6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED