I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1970
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1970jul13.pdf

============================================================

Inflation   and   "Free  Enterprise"  In  Saigon, P.  3
The Most Overwhelming, Voluminous, Crushingly Documented Non-Revelation  Of All Time
Our  screening  of  more than  six  tons  of  documents  captured  in  the  Cambodian operations  has  provided  conclusive proof
of  Communist  reliance  on  Cambodia  as  a  logistic  and  infiltration corridor.
—From  President  Nixon's  report  on the  Cambodian   operation.
How did the  CIA go through more than  six tons  of documents so quickly ?   With  steam  shovels ?
F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XVIII,  No.  14
JULY  13,  1970WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Nixon  In  The  Footsteps  of  Popeye's  Elder  Statesman
A  President  with  troops  scattered  around  the  globe  can  al-
ways  find  some  excuse  for  action  "to  protect  them."   The  suc-
cessful   assertion   of   Congressional   authority  over   the   war-
making  powers  of  the  President is not  a constitutional problem.
The  real  problem  to  which  Congress  and  the  country  should
address  themselves  lies  in  the  nature of  our  foreign  policy  and
the  size  of  our  military  establishment.   As  long  as  we  have
navies  on  every  sea,  bases  on  every  Continent,  Green  Berets
for  intervention  and  C-5As for  swift  intercontinental transport,
the  chances  of  stumbling  into  new Vietnams and   Cambodias—
or  worse—will  remain  high.
Too Busy Splitting Legal Hairs
This  basic  question  was hardly  touched  upon  in  the  Senate
debate over  the  Cooper  Church  amendment.   The  rationale  for
the  expansionist  course  we  have  been  pursuing  since  the  Tru-
man  Doctrine  was  put  by  one  of  Nixon's  Republican  support-
ers,  Senator  Hansen   of  Wyoming.   He  said  World  Wars   I
and  II  had  taught  us  the  "hard  lesson"  that  we  had  to main-
tain  an  active role  in  keeping  the  peace  "or  we  will  be  forced
to  fight  big  wars."   To  pull  out  of  the  war  in  Southeast  Asia,
or  anywhere  else  that  the  President  thought  our  involvement
necessary,  "would  be,"  Hansen  said,  "to  abdicate our  responsi-
bilities  as  a great  nation  and  as  a  force  for  justice and  liberty."
This is the  basic premise of  our  disastrous  involvement  in  Indo-
china  but  it was not  challenged.   The  supporters  of  the  Cooper-
Church   amendment  were  too  busy  splitting  enough  constitu-
tional  hairs  to  muster  a  majority.
The  real  lesson  of  the  two  World  Wars  was  just  the  op-
posite.   The  lesson  was  that  no  single  power,  or  combination
of  powers,  was  strong  enough  to  keep  the  peace,  that  only  a
world   organization  could   save  mankind  from   a  fresh   catas-
trophe.   It  was  this  realization  which   led  to  the   League  of
Nations  and  afterwards  to  the  United  Nations.    If  the   UN
fails,  it   is  unlikely  that  mankind  will  have  another   chance.
These   vital   truths   are   receding   from   public   consciousness.
When   the   UN   held   its  25th  anniversary  June   26   in  San
Francisco  neither  the  President  nor  the  Secretary  of  State  put
in  an  appearance  or  bothered  to  send  a message.  This  was  the
first  anniversary   not   addressed   by  an   Americatn   President.
Truman,   Eisenhower  and   Johnson   each   honored   the    UN's
birthday.   This  may well  be  dismissed  as  hypocrisy  but  at  least
the  sinners  turned  up  in  church.   This  time  the  affair  was  ig-
nored.   Even  in  the  rebellious   Senate  no  one  marked  the  oc-
casion.   U  Thant's  anniversary  address  was  hardly  noticed   in
the  press  though  its  insight  and  humanism   (see  boxes  on  pps.
1  and  4)   shine  like  secular  Gospel  beside  the  inanities  and
evasions  of  Nixon's  efforts  to  represent  his  Cambodian  search-
and-destroy  operation  as  an  Indoohinese    Stalingrad.
In  his  TV  interview  on  Cambodia,  Nixon  conjured  up  the
4  *
The  Truth  All  Recognize  and  None  Heed
First   and  foremost  there   must   be  on  the   part  of
governments  a  radical  change  from  present  power  poli-
tics   to   a   policy   of   collective   responsibility    towards
mankind.   The  world  is   too   small  to   allow   continued
blind  acceptance  of  the  sacrosanct  concept  of  national
interest.  Where  has   national  interest   led  us?   To  an
arsenel   of   ugly   weapons,   which   cost   $200  billion  a
year;  to  the  greatest   historical  deadlock  between  big
powers  that  the  world  has  ever  seen;  to  north-south,
east-west,   ideological,  racial  and  economic  cleavages;
to  a belt of  divided  countries; to  a  series  of  smouldering
or  active  conflicts  stretching  across  the  globe.  No  big
power  will  ever  be  able  to  solve  these   problems  alone.
No  big  power will  ever  rule  the  world alone.  No  nation
will  ever  be  able  to  live  again   in  splendid  isolation.
On  this  most  solemn  occasion  I  must  most emphatically
warn  nations  not  to  pursue their  present  outmoded and
fratricidal  course.  Time  is  running  short.
—Secretary   General   U  Thant   speaking   June   26  in
San  Francisco  on  the  25th  anniversary   of  the  VN.   He
pleaded   for   making   the   UN   universal    by   admitting
Communist   China  and  the  divided  nations.    (Abridged)
danger  of  a  "rampant  isolationism"  if  we  were  forced  out  of
Indochina.    A  President  who  says  he  fears  isolationism   ought
to  be  a  supporter  of  the  UN.    But  when  people  like  Nixon
speak   against   isolationism   they   are   not   advocating   inter-
nationalism.   What  they  fear  is  a  revulsion  against  militarism
and  imperialism.  The  Pax Americana  is the  "internationalism"
of  Standard  Oil,   Chase  Manhattan  and  the  Pentagon.    Nixon
is,  it  is  true,  trying  somewhat  to  cut  down  American  commit-
ments  abroad  under  irresistible  fiscal  pressures.   White  House
briefers  speak  of  abandoning  our  world  policeman  role,  but  the
alternative  they  offer  is  not  a  revitalized  UN  but  the  so-called
Guam  Doctrine.   This  is  imperialism  by  proxy.   We  may  be
on  the  verge  of  imposing  quotas  against  the  Orient's  low-wage
textiles  but  we  are  eager   to  buy  its  low-wage   soldier-power.
The  Guam  Doctrine  will  be  seen  in  Asia  as a  rich  white  man's
idea  of  fighting  a  war:   we  handle  the  elite  airpower   while
coolies  do  the killing  on  the  ground.
Combat  By  Coolie
Unfortunately  faith  in  victory  by  airpower  and  combat-by-
coolie  is  so  deeply  ingrained  in  American  thinking  that  it  was
sometimes  hard  to tell  doves  from  hawks  in the  Cooper-Church
debate.    "The   argument  has  been  made,"  Cooper  said,  "that
our  amendment   scuttles   the   Guam   Doctrine."    He   said  its
purpose  was  merely  to  require  Congressional  approval  before
(Continued  On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July  IS, 1970
IF   EVER  THERE  WERE   A   CASE  FOR  SECRET  DIPLOMACY,
it  is  in  the  present  Middle  Eastern  crisis.  Both  the  Arab  and
the  Israeli  governments  are  locked  in  by  hard-liners,  so  sensi-
ble   discussion   can   only   be   in   private.   We   therefore   think
Secretary   Rogers   justified  in  being  as  non-committal   on   the
content  of  the  new  U.S.  peace  initiative as  he  was  at  his  last
press  conference.  From  Israel's  point  of  view  several   proposi-
tions  seem  to  us  incontestable:   compromise   is  preferable   to  a
new  war;  Israel  is  unlikely  ever  again  to  occupy  such  a  situa-
tion  of  strength  as  today,  when  she  dominates  the  air  on  all
her  borders;   it  is  as  true  now  as  it  was  just  after   the  6-day
war,  when   almost   all  Israeli   leaders  admitted  it,  that   recog-
nition  and  peace were  worth  more  than  the  occupied  territories;
and  finally  that   in  the   renunciation   of   these   territories   lies
the  one  hope  of  resettling   the  Arab  refugees  and  giving  the
Palestinians  a  State  of  their  own.  Resettlement  and  restitution
will  be  a  billion  dollar  proposition  but  far  cheaper  than  the
cost  of  a  new  war.  Israel's  hope  of  survival  lies  in  the  rebirth
of  an  Arab  Palestine  with  which  the  Jewish  state  can  eventu-
ally   develop   fraternal   ties   much   as  was   envisaged   in   the
original  UN  partition  plan.
THE   FIRST   MEETING   BETWEEN   a  Jewish   leader   and    an
Arab ruler  took  place  on June  24 when  Dr. Nahum  Goldmann,
president   of   the   World   Jewish   Congress,   met   with   King
Hassan  II  of  Morocco,  two  days after  being  received  at  Brioni
by  Marshal  Tito.  Last  April  the   Israeli  government   created
something  of  a  furore  by  refusing  to  allow  Dr.  Goldmann  to
talk  with  Nasser.  It  appears   that  this  time  he  acted  without
permission,  but   the   Israeli  government   says  he   violated   no
law   because   Morocco   is   not    officially    at   war   with   Israel.
According  to  Le  Monde    (June   24)   Arab  diplomats  in  the
Yugoslav  capital  were  informed  in  advance  of  the  Goldmann
visit.  We  would  like to  see Dr.  Goldmann  talk  next  with  Nas-
ser.   Such  private  unofficial  discussions  may  help  pave  the  way
for  a settlement.   Among the  more  wicked  repercussions  of  the
Middle  Eastern  crisis   is  Nelson   Rockefeller's   proposal   that
the   U.S.   buy   a   pro-Israel   solution,   in    effect,    by    offering
Moscow   an   entente   and   perhaps  aid   in   a  Sino-Soviet  war.
In  the  same  vein  of  idiot  politics  was  a  recent  Tass  dispatch
(London   Times  June  25)  linking  Peking  to  a  pro-Zionist  plot
and   declaring that  most   American  experts   advocating   better
relations with  Peking  were  Jews  trying  to  divert  Moscow  from
the Middle  East!
WE  APPEAL  To   JOURNALISTS  here  and  abroad, particularly
How  Cambodia  Looks  From  The  Other  Side
From   behind   guerilla   lines   the   great   success   that
President   Nixon   has   claimed  in   Cambodia  has   the
doubtful   look   of   imminent  failure.  What  I   saw   and
heard  convinced me  that  Nixon's  policies inadvertently
were  helping  to   create   conditions  for   a  Communist-
controlled  "people's  war."  We  travelled through a  large
area  of  eastern  Cambodia where enemy  forces appeared
to  operate  at  will  despite  the  presence  of  thousands  of
American  and  South Vietnamese troops.  The  Cambodian
"sanctuaries,"  far   from   getting   wiped  out,  are  being
forced   to   spread   out   over   wider   territory   with   no
foreseeable   limit   on   their   westward  expansion.   The
Cambodian  countryside,  where  most  of  the population
live,  is   being  radicalized   and  turned  into  a  massive,
dedicated  and  effective  revolutionary base.
—Abridged   from   the  final  installment   (Washington
Star,  June   28)   of   Richard   Dud-man's  account   of   his
captivity   with  two  other   Western  reporters.   The  New
York  Times did  not  publish  the  conclusion  of  this  series
frcpn   the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch.
those   of   the   left,   to  organize  a  defense   committee  for   the
forthcoming  trial  of  Jiri  Hochman,  the  Czech  journalist  who
played  so  inspiring  a  role  on  the  Reporter,  the  liberal journal
during  the  Dubcek  period.  Since  its  closure  in  April  1969,   he
has  been  blacklisted  and  works  as  a  mechanic  to  support  his
family.  I  knew  him  well  when  he  was  correspondent  here  in
Washington  for  Rude   Pravo.  Like  the  Polish   correspondents
of   that   period   (now   either  exiled   or   house-broken   by   the
degenerate  Gomulka  regime),  he  was  a  loyal  Communist  but
one  with  whom  it  was  possible  to  talk  sense  instead  of  ex-
changing  empty party cliches.  The  hope  of  some  day combining
socialism  with  freedom   of  expression   (as  Rosa   Luxembourg
vainly  urged  early  in  the  Russian  revolution)  rests  with  such
brave  men  as  Hochman.   Freedom   of   the  press  represents   a
universal  necessity  for  any  good   society,  and  we  who  believe
in  it  should  rally  to  help  him  in  his  coming  "purge"  trial by
the  Russian  occupiers  and  their  Czech  flunkies.  Would  Jean-
Paul  Sartre be  willing  to  take  the  lead  in  the  Hochman  case?
MEMO   To     SENATE    FOREIGN    RELATIONS:   U.S.    combat
operations  are  legally forbidden  in  Laos  but  Tammy  Arbuckle,
the  best  correspondent  there,  reported  in  the  Washington  Star
(June   10)   after   Saravane  fell,   "U.S.   ground   combat   teams
Goodell  and  Proxmire   Introduce  A  Bill  To
If   Congress   is  to  do  something   realistic   about   inflation,
a  starting  point  is  information  on  the  costs—past,  current
and  projected—of  the  Vietnam  war.  Over  the   years   Con-
gress  has  been  hampered  in  obtaining  accurate information
on  Vietnam  war  spending.  Over  and  over  again   Congress
has  been  presented  with  underestimations  of  the  cost  of  the
war  by  successive   administrations.  This  year  the Adminis-
tration  has  decided  to  withhold  from  Congress  the  current
cost  of  the war.
The  President   said  last  week,  "We  must  deal  with  the
problems  of  a  nation  in  transition  from  a  wartime economy
to  a  peacetime  economy."   How  are  we  to  deal  with  these
problems  when  we  are  not  told  what  the  war  is  costing?
How  are  we  to  know  the  size  of  the  peace  dividend when
we  are  not  told  how  much  war  spending  has  been reduced?
How   are   we   to   help  minimize  the   disruptive  effects  of
needed  cutbacks  in  wasteful  defense  spending  on  local  em-
ployment  and  the  economy  of  local  communities  when  we
are  not  told  where  and  when  and  what  job  sectors  will  be
affected?
The  purpose  of  the  Goodell-Proxmire amendment  requir-
Lift  The  Blackout  On  The  Cost  Of  The  War
ing  an  annual  report  on  military expenditures  is  to provide
Congress  with  information over  several  fiscal  years  on  the
impact  of  national  defense  expenditures  on  wages,  prices,
employment  and  the  general  state   of  the  economy.  Infor-
mation  is  to  include  costs  of  the  Vietnam  war,  the  amount
of  the  peace  dividend,  the  costs  of  planned  military  assist-
ance  to  Southeast  Asian  countries,  and  the  level  of  overall
weapons   spending.   In   addition,  the   report  is   to   contain
programs  and  policies  which  the  Federal  government  pro-
poses   to   institute   to   minimize   the   disruptive   effects   of
reductions   or   increases   in   defense   expenditures  on   local
employment  and  the  economy  of  local communities.
—Goodell  (R.  N.Y.)  in  the  Senate  June  22.
The  Council  of   Economic  Advisers  now  makes  a  5-year
projection  for  the  economy.  In  making that  projection  they
must   of   necessity   project  defense  expenditures.  But  that
information  is  not  available  to  Congress.  Defense  spending
plans  are  made  that  far  in  advance. We  should  know  their
economic  consequences.
—Proxmire   (D.  Wis.)  in  the  Senate  same  day   (abr.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July  13,1970
conducting   trail   reconnaissance  near   Saravane  were   not   at-
tacked. ..."...  ON  PRECISION   BOMBING:  Aviation   Week
(June  29)   says  U.S.  air  strikes  in  Cambodia  will  be "carefully
controlled"   through  Cambodian  forward  air  controllers   "ac-
companying  at  least some of  the  missions to  'verify'  the  target."
ft  adds,  "Just  how  the  non-English  speaking  controllers  com-
municate  with  the  non-Cambodian  pilots was  unclear  last  week
at  the  Pentagon."   Peasants  murdered  by  mistake please  excuse
.  .  .  STATISTICS:  We   call  attention  to  two  dispatches  on  the
inflation   of   statistics  in  our  computerized   Indochinese   opera-
tions:  Michael  Parks  in  the  Baltimore  Sun   (June  26)   on  the
exaggeration  of  the  arms  haul  in  Cambodia.  A  platoon  leader
told  Parks  the  figures  are  only  estimates  in  the   first  place  but
"If   the  Major  thinks  they're  too  low  he  just  increases  them
anywhere  from  20  to  40%   although  he  rarely  sees  the  caches."
Max  CIos  in  Le  Figaro   (June   23)   indicates  inflation   in  the
pacification   figures.   Village  chiefs  tend   to   report   what   will
bring  them  congratulations and  material  benefits.  Computerized
operations  seem  to  combine  the  delusions of  certitude with  the
comforts  of  self-deception.
TONKIN  GULF:  Though  the   resolution  has  now   been  re-
pealed,   only   McCarthy  supported  Young  of  Ohio  when   he
challenged  the  nomination of  Admiral Moorer  to  be  Chairman
of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff   on  the  ground   that  Moorer  was
Pacific  commander  at  the  time of  Tonkin  Gulf  and  responsible
for  the  two  "incidents,"   one  provoked,  one  imaginary,  which
led  to  the  resolution. The  Senate's  power  to  reject  such military
promotions  is  one  weapon  it  has  to  police  the  high  brass  but
it   weakly   looks   the   other   way   instead   .   .   .   SPEAKER   Mc-
CORMACK.:  Nothing  we  have  ever  seen  in  Washington   is quite
as  extraordinary   as  how   the   Speaker   has   escaped   attack   or
questioning  in  the  scandalous  Voloshen-Sweig   lobbying   affair
now   being  tried   in   New   York   City.  It   strains  credulity  to
believe  that  McCormack   was  so  monumental   a  fool   as  to  be
unaware   of   what   these   two   influence   peddlers   were   doing
so  many  years  in  his   office   and   on  his  telephone,   sometimes
with his direct  help!
LAW   AND  ORDER:   Alan   and    Margaret    McSurely,   anti-
poverty  workers,  convicted  here  for  contempt  of  the  McClellan
When   Railroad  Directors  Don't  Know
From  Nothing
Howard  Butcher  3rd  of   Butcher  &  Sherrerd,  Phila-
delphia  [stock  brokers],   was  until  recently  one  of  the
Penn  Central's  biggest  supporters.  Mr. Butcher's  recom-
mendation   of   January  when  the   stock   was  28%—"I
don't   know  of   any   other   stock   that   could  go  to  five
times  what  it  is  selling  at  now."  At  that  time  Butcher
&   Sherrerd,   its    customers    and   the   Butcher   family
owned  some  $1.5  million  worth  of  Penn  Central  shares.
He  said   he  went  sour   on  the   stock   May   15  "when  I
saw  that  the  company  had  lost  $193  million  from rail-
roading  last  year  and  $101.6  million  this  year."
He  said  none  of  the  directors  had  any  idea  the  Penn
Central  was  losing  that  much  money  from  railroading.
"Even  when  I  was  on  the  board  of  directors  I  never  saw
the  raw  railroad  operating  results."  Mr.  Butcher   was
asked  why  he  had  not  seen  those  results.  "Why  not?
Because   they   didn't   show   them  to   you—that's   why."
—Robert  Metz:  Market  Place  in  the  financial  pages
of   the  New  York  Times  June  24.
committee,   will   test  on  appeal  whether   "law   and  order"  is
for   real  or   only  for   racial  oppression.  The   subpoenas   they
refused  to  obey  were wrongfully based  on  information  illegally
obtained.  Their  Kentucky  home  was  raided  in   1967   and   they
were  charged  with  sedition on  the  basis  of  "documents"  seized.
A   Federal   appeals   court   ordered   the   charges   dismissed   and
the  documents  returned.  Is  a  Senate  committee  above  the  law?
Can   it  use  such   documents   for   McCarthy-era  harassment   of
activist-idealists like the  McSurelys?
JOURNALISTIC  FOOTNOTE  (SouR) : Young of  Ohio  told  the
Senate  June  29  that  during  the  week   of  May  15  the  White
House  asked   a  group  of   reporters,   including  Reston   of   the
Neiv  York  Times,  "not  to  embarrass  the  Government  by print-
ing  the  details"   of  U.S.   air  raids  over   Cambodia,   Laos   and
North   Vietnam   the   previous    week-end    after   they    became
known   through   news   dispatches   from   Hanoi.  But  no   paper
reported  his  remarks  or  the  pressure  from  the  White  House.
The  Cost  Of  Fighting  The  War  In  South
As  of   Oct.  26,  1969,   the   Government  of   Vietnam    [sic]
decreed   a   whole  set   of   new  austerity   taxes   designed   to
increase   the  cost  of   less-essential    commodities  while  pro-
tecting  the  purchasing  power of  the  poor  people  by  exempt-
ing  essential  commodities  .  .  .  Even  this  measure,  designed
to  progressively   tax  higher  incomes,  has  confronted   Presi-
dent  Thieu  with  serious  political  opposition.
—State   Dept.   letter   Jan.   2   to  Chairman   Moss   of   the
House    Foreign   Operations    and   Government    Information
subcommittee   rejecting   his   proposal   that   the   U.S.   press
Thieu  to  curb  inflation   by  devaluing  the  piaster.
Since   1965,   U.S.   piaster   purchases   have   totalled   more
than  $1.3  billion.  The  U.S.   must  pay  for  its   piaster   needs
two  to  three  times  the  number of  dollars  that  it  would  have
to  pay  if  the  exchange  rate  were  realistic.
The  Oct.  1969 austerity  tax  lined  the  pockets  of  profiteers
at  the  expense  of  the  poor.  Although  the  tax  was   designed
to   double  and  triple  the   price  of   luxury  type   items,   the
result   was  an  overall   price  increase   in  virtually  all  com-
modities,  including  rice.  Between   June  1966  and  February
1970,    the   Saigon   retail   price   index   for   all   commodities
climbed  from  193  to  579,  an  increase   of   300%  while   the
index  for  food  climbed  330%.
The  failure  of  the  GVN  to  enact  wage  and  price  controls
and   other   belt-tightening    procedures   has   contributed   to
inflation.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  war  "business  as  usual"
Vietnam  On "Free  Enterprise"  Principles
has  continued  to  be  conducted  throughout   South   Vietnam
and  the  businessmen  and  profiteers  who  control  most  of  the
Vietnamese   economy  continue  to  get  rich  at  the  American
taxpayers'  expense.
The  subcommittee  compared  economic  conditions  in  North
Vietnam.  The  North  has  experienced  inflation, particularly
for  basic  commodities  such  as  rice.
To   control   the   rate   of   inflation  the   North   has   relied
primarily  upon  rationing,  price  controls  and  Communist bloc
imports,  primarily  in  the  form  of  grants.  Rationing  in  the
North   allows   the  average   peasant   about   2,000  calories   a
day.    A   recent   study   by   the   Stanford   Research   Institute
determined  that  the  basic   diet   for  the  Far  East   peasant
should  be  1SOO calories  a  day.
The  estimated   total   economic   aid  to  the   North   by  the
Communist  bloc  through   1969  amounted   to   $2.7  billion  as
compared  to  $4.0  billion  provided  the  South  by  the   U.S.—
in  addition  to  the  tens  of  billions  of  dollars  in  military  aid.
Obviously  the  stringent  controls   and  rigidly  enforced   aus-
terity  enacted  in  the  North,  as  compared  to  the  uncontrolled
"free   enterprise"   speculative   economy   in  the   South,   is  a
reason   why  the   U.S.   has  had  to   provide   about   twice   as
much  economic  aid  as  the  Communist  bloc.
—From   the   report   on  the  South   Vietnamese     inflation,
its  cost  and  corrupting  influence,   by  the  House  Subcommit-
tee  on  Government  Operations  June  28   (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July   13,1970
"Free  Asia"  In  No  Rush  to  Man  Cambodia's  "Frontier  of  Freedom"
(Continued  From  Page   One)
extending  the  doctrine  to  Cambodia  again.   "Nothing  in  the
Cooper-Church    amendment,"     Church    assured    the    Senate,
"would  prevent  Asians  from  helping  Asians."   He  called  this
"a  viable  and   valid  cause."   Helping  is  quite  a   euphemism
for  what  we  have  been  getting  Asians  to  do  to  each   other.
Church   said  the  amendment  would  not  prevent  the  Thais  or
the  South  Vietnamese  from  fighting  "for  the  Lon  Nol  govern-
ment."   It  would  merely  require -prior  Congressional   approval
for   "the  kind  of  undercover  arrangements  that  were  used  to
make   it   so  profitable  for   Thailand,   South   Korea   and   the
Philippines   to  send  their  forces  to  Vietnam."    It  may  sound
to  Asians  as  if   the   doves  merely  wanted  to  drive  a  harder
bargain   for  their  services.
Another   Subtly   Split  Hair
The  Cooper-Church   restrictions  on  U.S.  airpower  over  Cam-
bodia  may  also  prove  too  subtle  for  the  Oriental  mind.   The
amendment   does   not   prohibit   U.S.   bombing   of   Cambodia
nor  U.S.  close  air  support  of  South  Vietnamese  or  Thai  forces
in   Cambodia.    It   only   forbids   "direct"   air   support   to  Lon
Nol's  forces.   The   word   "direct"  was  added   on  motion  of
Senator  Jackson.    It   was   foreshadowed   by  Secretary  Laird's
earlier  explanation   that   while  we  were  only  going  to  bomb
enemy  supply  lines  in  Cambodia,   Lon  Nol   troops  who  just
happened  to  be  in  the  same  area  might  derive  "ancillary  bene-
fits"  from   it.   No   Secretary  of   Defense   has   shown   a  finer
genius   for  semantics.
The  Guam  Doctrine  may  be  traced  back  to  that  elder  states-
man,  Wimpy,   in  the  Popeye  comic  strip.   Wimpy   in  a  crisis
always   manfully   suggests,   "Let's   you   and   him    fight."    In
trying  this  out  on  Asia,  Nixon  hardly  pays  a  compliment   to
the  astuteness  of   its  ruling  classes,  the   world's   oldest   mer-
chants.   They  were  taking  customers  tenderly  to  the  cleaners
in   their   bazaars   when   the   progenitors   of   Anglo-American
civilization  were  still  painting  themselves  a  bright  baby  blue.
The  first  time  we  tried  Wimpy-Nixon   statecraft  was  in  China.
There  the  Asians  on  our  side  ended   by  making  business  not
war.   They  sold  whole  armies  to  the  Asians  on  the  other  side
and  retired  with  the  swag  to Taiwan.   SEATO's  latest  meeting,
like  that  of  "free  Asia"  in  Djakarta  a  few  weeks  earlier,  indi-
cates  no  rush  to  man  the  Cambodian   "frontier  of   freedom."
Indonesia,   the  pride  and   joy  of  our  anti-Communists,   flatly
The Old Bloody Religious  Wars In Secular  Guise
The  crisis  of  extreme  inward-looking  nationalism   is
further  aggravated  by  the  superimposition  of  ideologies
or  political  systems  which  claim  that  they  alone  have
the  key  to  man's  future.  There  has  been  nothing   more
damaging  in  human history  than  the-claim of  exclusiv-
ism.  To  it  we  owe  the  long  religious  wars,  all  waged  in
the  name  of   exclusive  possession  of   the  truth.   It   is
only   recently  that   there   has   been   evidence   of   some
mutual   understanding  in   the   pursuit   of   common   re-
ligious  objectives.  Should  we  again  lose  precious  years
in  a  similar  divisive  exercise?  Is  it  so  difficult  to  recog-
nize  that  ideologies  are  perfect  only  in  theory?   The
world  has  become  so  complex,  the  pace  of  change   so
rapid  and  the  newly  emerging  problems   so  numerous
that  no  rigid  system  is  able  to  cope  with  all  problems.
I  believe we  are about to  embark on the  most  variegated
search  for  political,  institutional,  legal  and  moral  solu-
tions.  There  can  be  no  universal  recipe  or  system.
—U   Thant   on  the   UN's   25th  birthday      (abridged).
turned  down  Pnom  Penh's   request   for  arms.   SEATO's  final
communique  "expressed  understanding"  for  Lon Nol's  appeal.
The  Thais  are waiting  to  see how  much  we  are  willing  to  pay.
If   the  price  isn't   high   enough,   they'll   come   to   terms   with
China.   To  them  this  may  not  seem  to  be  the  fate  worse  than
death  we proclaim  it.  Japan  deals  with  China.  So does Burma.
No  Chinese  planes,  after  all,  are devastating  Asia.  Mao's Little
Red  Book  doesn't  look  as  scary  as  a  B-52.   Why  be  an  Ameri-
can  style  anti-Communist  if  you  can't   make   an  honest  buck
on  it?
The  McGovern-Hatfield  Deadline
"The   prospect  suddenly  loomed,"  Nixon  said  in  his  formal
report  explaining  his  latest  incursion,   "of  Cambodia's   becom-
ing   virtually   one  large  base   area   for   attack   anywhere   into
South  Vietnam  along  the  600  miles  of  the  Cambodian   fron-
tier."   What  happens  when  that  prospect  suddenly  looms  up
again?   This   is  the  question   he  never  answered   in  his   TV
interview.   Do  we  go  back  in,  bomb  Hanoi,  invade  the  North
or  commit  some  larger  folly?   The  least  Congress  can  do  is
pass  the  McGovern-Hatfield  bill  and  set  a  firm  date  on  our
withdrawal  from  the  Indochinese  morass.  Not  enough  Asians
are  going  to .fight  Asians  for  us  even  if  the  price  is  right.
The  1969  Index  Is  Now Ready—You Can  Have  A  Copy Free  B y  Sending  A  LONG  Self-Addressed   Stamped  Envelope  For  It
We'll  Be  Clad  to  Send  A  Free  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —  Send  A  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
FOR  STONE'S  HIDDEN   HISTORY
For  the  enclosed  $7.50  send  I.  F.  Stone's  book,  The
Hidden  History   of  The  Korean  War   (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City
Indicate
Please  renew
Name
Street
City
I
4420  29th
Zip                State
if   ffift   announcement  wished    D
(or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed
Zip                State
$5:
.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                 '/IS/TO
St.  N. W.,  Washington,   D. C.  20008
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington, D.C
An  independent  bi-weekly published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;
Publish
Circulat
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th   St.,   N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED