I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959nov02.pdf

============================================================

Special   Issue  on  Our   Thought  Police
How  FBI   Operations  Have   Cast   A  Pall  on  Free  Opinion  and  Free   Association,  Pages  1-4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,   NO.  41
NOVEMBER   2,   1959
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
The  New  York  Post,  and  J. Edgar  Hoover
"The  FBI  cannot  become  a  repressive  arm  of   government,"
Don   Whitehead  wrote  at  the   conclusion   of   his  glamorized
official  portrait, The  FBI  Story,  "or  of  a  clique  as  long  as    ...
Congress  watches  the  FBI's  spending  and  operating  policies
with  a  critical eye  .  .  .  [and]   the  nation's  press  has  the  free-
dom  and  courage  to  expose  wrongdoing."     By  these  stand-
ards,  the  danger point  is  already here.    The  most  striking as-
pect  of  the  12-installment  series  on  J.  Edgar  Hoove?  and  the
FBI  published  by  the  New   York   Post  (Oct.   7-20  inclusive)
was  not  so  much  what  it  disclosed  but  what  it  demonstrated.
Members  of  Congress  and  other  newspapermen  are  by  now
so  afraid  of  Mr.  Hoover  and  the  G-men  that  the  six  report-
ers  the  Post  assigned  to  the  job  could  not  find  a  single  public
figure  willing  on  the  record  to  say  anything  critical  of  him.
"An  important   member  of  Congress   who  has  intimate  deal-
ings  with  the  FBI  in  the  course  of  his  official   duties"  told
them,  "the  FBI  has  detailed  dossiers  on  every  one  in  Wash-
ington."    But  he  would  not  let  his  name  be  used.    "A  liberal
Senator  from  the  Midwest"  told  them,  "Those  who  were  con-
cerned  with  the  growth  of  the  Federal  police—men  like  Sen-
ator  Norris  and  others—are  dead  now,  or  back  home.    Those
that  are  here  cannot  afford   to  speak  up."     Even  so  vigorous
a  public  servant  as  Chairman  Emanuel  Celler  of   House   Ju-
diciary,  after  giving  the  Post  interviewers  "a  frank,  balanced
appraisal  of  Hoover,"  called   the  editor   "and   asked  that  his
remarks  be  withdrawn  entirely."    Harry  Truman   himself,  no
mean   fighter   and   the   main   living   target   of   the   "twenty
years  of  treason"   cry  Hoover   helped   the  Republicans   drum
up  with  the  Harry  White  story,  evaded  the  interviewers  and
praised  the  G-man.
Only  Official  Who  Can't   Be   Questioned
Every  other  public  official   in  Washington  from  the  Presi-
dent  and  the  Secretary  of  State  down  is  accessible  to  the  press,
and  often  subject  to  embarrassing  questions   in  public.    But
J.  Edgar  Hoover   never  holds  a  press  conference,  though   no
one   in  the   capital   is  more   publicity   conscious.     The   Post
writers were  not  only  unable  to  interview  the  top  G-man,  they
couldn't   even  get  to  see  his  public  relations  man.    Yet  the
American  Legion  and  the  National   Association  of  Manufac-
turers  were   prevailed   upon   to   attack   the   Post   series   even
before   it   was  written.     According   to   Dorothy    Schiff,   the
Post's  publisher,   efforts  were  made  through   an  advertiser   to
put  pressure  on  the  paper   against  publishing  its  series,  and
hints  were  dropped   that  the  editor's  wife  might  be  exposed
as  an  ex-Communist  if  it  did  so.    Mrs.  Schiff  has  been  justly
criticized  for  overwriting  this  part  of  the  story  in  her  prelimi-
nary  two-part,  "My  Secret  Life  With  J.  Edgar  Hoover,"  just
before  the  series  started.    But  few  if  any  of  the  newspaper-
men  I  have  heard  on  this  subject  have  the  nerve  to  take  on
1  1 *                                                                                                        16
Justice  Jackson's  Posthumous  Warning
"All  that  is  necessary   is  to  have  a  national  police
competent   to  investigate  all   manner  of   offenses,   and
then,  in  the  parlance  of  the  street,  it  will  have  enough
on  enough  people,  even  if  it  does  not  have  enough  to
prosecute  them,  so  that  it  will find no  opposition  to  its
policies.   Even  those  who  are  supposed  to  supervise  it
are likely to fear  it.
"I  believe  that  the  safeguard  of  our  liberty  lies   in
limiting  any  national  policing  or  investigative  organi-
zation,  first  of  all  to  a  small  number of  strictly  federal
offenses,"  and  secondly  to  non-political  ones."
—The  late  Justice  Robert  H.  Jackson  in  his  posthum-
ous, The Supreme  Court  in  the American  System.
the  FBI  themselves.    The  Nation   courageously   published   a
special  supplement,  The   FBI  Story,  October   18,   1958,   but
it  has  been  years  since  any  daily  paper  dared  touch  this  sub-
ject  and  my  guess  is  it  will  be  many  years  before  it  happens
again.    The  FBI  has  become  one  of  those  evils  many  recog-
nize  but  few  talk  about;   it  is  too  dangerous  to  fight,  but  it
grows  like  a  cancer  within  our  free   society.
No  Enthusiasm   for  Nazi   Hunting
The  real  criticism of  the  Post  12-point  series  is  that  it  was
so  diffuse  and  tenuous  the  average  reader  may  find  it   difficult
to  understand  just  what  all  the  excitement's  about.     Some-
times  six  reporters,  like  six  cooks,  are  worse  than  one.     The
series   sprawled   all   over   the   map,   missing   as   much   as   it
covered  in  the  voluminous  record.    I  don't  understand  why
they  did   not   touch   on  the   contrast  between   Mr.   Hoover's
boundless  enthusiasm  as  a  hunter  of  assorted  Leftists  and  his
reluctance  before  the   war   to  take  on  Nazis  and   Bundists.
Don  Whitehead,   for  example,  discloses  that  when  Heywood
Broun  in  March   1937   exposed  the  fact  that  "Actual   recruit-
ing  is  going  on,  and  there  is  already  a  considerable  body  of
storm  troops  here  in  America,"  President  Roosevelt  passed  it
on  to  the  Army's  G-2  with  a  recommendation  that  it  check.
Army  intelligence  passed  the  buck  to  Justice  and  Justice,  ac-
cording   to  Whitehead,   "approached   the   problem    gingerly,
asking  the  FBI  whether  an  investigation  could  be  made  quiet-
ly  and  without  any  publicity,  although   the  Bund's   activities
by  this  time  were  becoming  an  open  scandal  if  not  a  viola-
tion  of  the  law."    Whitehead  reveals  that  the  FBI  was  against
an  investigation.    "The   FBI  told  Justice  officials,"  he  reports
cryptically,   "it  was  doubtful   that   an  investigation   could   be
made  without  a  challenge  from  some  pro-Nazi  organization.*
* Did  Mr.  Hoover  know  of  pro-Nazi  organizations power-
ful   enough  to  challenge  such  an  investigation?    There  may
be  some  interesting  history  hidden  here.
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  2,1959
(Continued   from   Page   One)
But  the  Department  finally  did  make  the  decision  to  go  ahead
with  the  inquiry."    Training  storm  troopers  is  not  a  matter
of   discussing   abstract   ideas,   and   would   seem   to   constitute
conspiracy* to  prepare  for  an  insurrection.    But  the  upshot  of
the  inquiry  was  the  remarkably  restrained  verdict,   according
to  Whitehead,  that  "while  the  Bund's  general  teachings  had  a
tendency  to  be  subversive,  they  did  not  violate  any  law  of  the
United  States."    This  evaded  the  real  point  which  was not  the
Bund's  teachings  but  its  para-military  training.
When  Opinion  Becomes  A  Test  of  Loyalty
The  case  against   the  FBI  is  that  it  has  used  the   counter-
espionage  powers  given  it  in   1.939  to  make  opinion  the  test
of  loyalty,  to  spread  a  network  of  snoopers  through  all  kinds
of  liberal  and  radical  organizations,  and  to  establish   the  cus-
tom  of  permitting  faceless  informer  testimony  to  be  used  in
a  growing   variety  of  administrative  procedures   which    affect
people's  right  to  work  and   travel,   and   damage   reputations
without  fair  trial.    This  is  slowly  establishing   the   principle
that  the  convenience  of  the  police  in  using  secret  informers
is  more  important  than   the   citizen's  right   to  confront  any
accuser.    Some  day,  if  the  power  of  the  FBI  grows,  this  may
spill  over  from  administrative  proceedings  into  criminal  trial.
Of   the   habit   of  making   opinion   the   test  of   loyalty,   Prof.
Walter   Gellhorn   of   Columbia   concluded   (p.   232)   in  his
Security,  Loyalty  and  Science,  one  of  the  Cornell   Studies  in
Civil  Liberties,  "Effectively,  if  unintentionally,  the  focus  upon
opinion  as  a  measure  of  loyalty  tends  to  discourage  the  hold-
ing  of  any  opinion  at  all.    No  scientist  who  has  confined  his
.interests  to  his  laboratory,  his  flower  garden   and   his   golf
game  has  been  touched  by  scandal.    In  the  main,  those  to
whom  the  Government  has  brought  distressing embarrassment
were  ones  who   became  concerned  in  a  perfectly  legal  way
about  racial  discrimination or  the  Franco  government  or  the
importance   of   peaceful   relations   with   the   Soviet   Union."
On  the  other  hand,  as  the  Post  pointed  out,  Judith   Coplon,
employed  under  the  FBI's  nose  in  the  sensitive  Internal  Se-
curity  division  of  Justice,  had  survived  at  least  three  security-
loyalty  checks.    The   loyalty-security  apparatus  after  years  of
ruining   many  innocent   men,   has  yet  to  turn   up   a  spy  or
saboteur,  but  it  has  certainly  inhibited   opinion.     I  am  not
Greater  Faith  Hath  No. Marxist-Leninist
"The  Communist  Party  in  this  country  is  at  a  low
point  both  in  numbers and  from  the  standpoint  of  or-
ganization  but ...  I  cannot  emphasize  too  strongly
.that   the  numerical  strength  of   the   Communist  Party
means nothing."
—J.  Edgar  Hoover,  testifying   on the  1959 FBI   budget,
House  Appropriations  Committee,  pages  104  and  173.
sure  that  this  was  altogether  unintentional;  the  effect  was  to
purge  the  government  of  most  liberals as well  its  few  radicals.
Even  The  Respectable   Must  Be  Watched
The  reader  of  the  Post  series  will  get  little  conception  of
just  how  extensive  the  FBI's  political  spy  apparatus  is.    The
figures  given  by  Mr.   Hoover   on  two  recent  occasions  indi-
cate   its  wide   orbit.     At   the   1958   budget   hearings   before
House  Appropriations,  in  discussing  front  groups  which  "pro-
vide  a very  fertile  auxiliary corps  of  dupes,  misguided  pseudo-
liberals   and   do-gooders,"   Mr.   Hoover   approvingly  cited   a
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  report  listing  628
"such  Communist  front  organizations."   ,At  the  I960  budget
hearings,  Mr.  Hoover  said  "We  now  have  155 known,  or  sus-
pected,  Communist  front  and  Communist-infiltrated organiza-
tions  under  investigation.  .  .  .  Supplementing  this  group  are
some  men  and  women  who  pretend  to  be  interested  in  sup-
porting  measures  to  solve  racial,  labor  and  general  welfare
problems.    Actually,  they  have  no  sincere  or  honest  interest
at  all  in  these  problems.    The  truth  is  that  such  people  are
closely  allied  to  subversive  forces  in  this  nation  and  are  ex-
ploiting  shamelessly  racial,  labor,  and  welfare  issues  in  car-
rying  out  the  Communist  party  line."    This  description  of
unnamed   social   welfare   organizations  which   "supplement"
the   activities  of  the   155  "known   or  suspected"   Communist
fronts   is  venomous.    The   point,   for  anyone  at  all  familiar
with  realities on  the  shrunken  left,  is  that  to  reach  such  large
figures  Mr.   Hoover   must   regard   with   suspicion  practically
every  group  to  the  left  of  the  NAM  and  the  DAR.    Indeed
the  Newark   Star-Ledger  series  which  embodied  "the   rebut-
. tal  from   spokesmen  of  the  FBI"   to  the  Nation   supplement
(reprinted  as  Senate  Document,  No.   10  last  session),   hints
that  the  FBI  must  stand  secret  watch  to  protect  even  the  most
How  the  Working  Press  Is  Allowed  to  "Interview"  J.  Edgar   Hoover
"For  the  ultimate picture of  Hoover's status  in American
political  life  we  are  indebted  to  an  habitue  of  the  Justice
Dept.  press  room,  a  member  of  the  group  of  reporters  who
are  physically, at  least,  closest  to  the  Director.  On routine
stories,  these  are  the  men, rather than the main office  heavies,
assigned  to  talk  to  Hoover.  It's  the  press  room  that's  re-
sponsible  for  the day-by-day news of  the  FBI.
" The  procedure  on  getting  an  interview  with  Hoover  is
one  that  I  have  never   seen  before  for   any  other   public
figure,'  our  correspondent—who  similarly  has  asked  us  for
anonymity—told  us.   'If  you  wanted  an  interview  yon  would
approach   the  communications  head—that   is,   Lou  Nichols,
when  he  was  here,  or John McGuire,  or whoever is  in  charge
today—and  tell  him  you  would  like  Hoover's  comments  on
such-and-such.  You would  tell  him what  the  gist  of  the  in-
terview  would be, and its  chief  angle.
" 'Within  a  couple  of  weeks,  whoever  it  was  would  notify
you  whether Hoover  chose  to  talk  about  that  subject.   If  he
didn't,  that  ended  it.   If   he  did,  the  publicity  man  would
draw  up  a  list  of  questions—NOT  THE  REPORTER  [em-
phasis  in original].  The questions were  in  turn examined by
the  reporter to  see  if  they  fitted  in  with  the  intended  angle
of   the  story.   Whatever  the   reporter  wanted  changed  or
added,  the  publicity  man  would  be  the  final  editing  voice
on  it.
"'The  questions  which  resulted  then  were  answered  in
writing  by  Hoover, presumably after  some  discussion  with
his  aides,  though the  writing  was  done  by  the  publicity  man
or  whoever  was  chosen  to  put  Hoover  into  words.   Presum-
ably,  too,  Hoover would  look  at  the  answers  written  in  his
behalf  and have the  final  say.
"'The  answers  would  then  be  returned  to  the  reporter,
along  with  the  questions.   The  reporter  would  be   shuffled
into  Hoover's  inner  sanctum to  shake  hands  with  the  man.
He  would  chat  about  the  weather  for  a  few   minutes  and
then  be shuffled  back  out.  That way  he  could  at  least  say  he
talked  to  Hoover  and  here  are  the  answers.  Technically,  he
would not be lying.'"
—New  York  Post: Hoover and  the FBI,  Oct. 20.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  8,1959
respectable  organizations.     "Unceasing   efforts,"  it  says,   "are
also  being  made  to  infiltrate  and  ultimately  control  lethargic,
legitimate  groups."
Beware  Those   Young  Married  Couples
The  infection  has  its  roots  in  the  outlawry  of  the  Commu-
nists,   theoretically  a   legal   party,   actually   a  faction   against
which  all  kinds  of  legal  and   extra-legal   sanctions  are  per-
mitted.    The  Communists  being  outlawed,  it  is  assumed  that
Communists  will  prefer  the   pretense  of   conformity  to   the
risk  of  martyrdom.    This  then   provides   an   excuse  for   the
surveillance  not  only  of  people  who  are  not  Communists  but
who  are  even  anti-Communist.    In  the  hearings  on  the   1956
budget  before  House  Appropriations  Committee,  Mr.  Hoover
(p.  168)   painted  a new nightmare.  "Young  married  couples"
were  being  sent  by  the  Communists  "into  different   areas  to
enter  industry  and  assume  the  role  of  mild  liberals."     It  is
therefore  necessary  to  watch  all  young  married  couples  who
seem  to  be  mildly  liberal.     Usually  liberals  are  referred  to
by  Mr.   Hoover   as  "pseudo-liberals"    and  coupled  with   "do-
gooders,"   the   latter   a  favorite  term  of   contempt   with   the
G-man,  reflecting  a  basic  dislike  for  anyone  concerned   with
humanitarianism  and  social  reform.    Anyone  opposed   to  the
use  of  faceless  informers  or   to  abridgment   of  fundamental
rights   is  a   "pseudo-liberal"    in  Mr.   Hoover's   lexicon   even
though  anti-Communist.    Indeed  he  seems  to  have  a  special
hatred  for  liberal  organizations  (like  the  ADA?)  which  bar
Communists.     "They   hypocritically   bar   Communists   from
their  membership,"  Mr.  Hoover  told  the  same committee  dur-
ing  the  hearings   on  the   1959   budget   (p.   172),   "but   they
seek  to  discredit  all  persons  who  abhor  Communists  and  com-
munism.    They  claim  to  be  anti-Communist  but  they  launch
attacks   against   congressional    legislation    designed'  to   curb
communism.    They  distort  and  misrepresent  and  ridicule  the
Government's  security  efforts."    Obviously  anybody  who  dis-
agrees   with   the   FBI   is  suspect.     This   attitude   hardly  en-
courages  lively  debate  on  constitutional   issues.
The  Faces  Behind  The  Faceless  Informer
Perhaps   the  most   damaging   aspect   of  J.  Edgar   Hoover's
career  was  virtually  untouched   in  the  Post  series.    This  re-
A  Quote  the  New  York  Post  Missed
Like  Benedict  Arnold  and  Judas  Iscariot?
"The  confidential   informant  is  more  than  a  valued
ally  of  the  modern  day  law  enforcement agency.   He  is
an  institution,  and  indispensable  part  of  all  walks  of
life.   While it  is  a  simple  matter  to  trace  the  use  of  in-
formants   back  through  the   American  Revolution  and
into biblical times...."
—/. Edgar  Hoover, Syracuse  Law  Review,  Fall 1956.
lates  to  the  kind  of  people  on  whom  the  FBI  has  relied  as
confidential  informants.   Little  by  little,  in  various  court  pro-
ceedings  around  the  country,  the  truth  has  begun   to   come
out  about  the  informants who  have  ruined  so  many  people's
lives  and   reputations  because  the  FBI   shielded   them   from
cross-examination.    An  amazing  collection   of  poor   tortured
alcoholics  and  psychotics, persons  of  irregular  sex  habits,  psy-
chopathic  liars  and  plain  cheap  moochers  have  been  disclosed.
It  is a  pity  the  Post  did  not  spend  less  time  on  gangster  stor-
ies  of   the  prohibition   period   and   more  time   exposing   the
faces  behind  the  faceless  informer.
Our  Hero Was  Also  an  Alcoholic  for  the  FBI
I  have  space  here  only  to  touch  on  a  few  of  them.    There
was  Matthew   Cvetic,  hero   of  the  movie,   "I   Was   A  Com-
munist  for  the  FBI";   his  hospital  record  when  made  public
in  Pittsburgh   by  the  Steve  Nelson   defense  in  1955   showed
repeated  hospitalization   for  alcoholism  and  attendant  psychic
disorders.    There  was  Joseph  D.  Mazzei,  also  of   Pittsburgh,
for   12  years  an  FBI  undercover  man  until  he  was  produced
as  a  witness  in  1953  in  the  Pittsburgh  Smith  Act  trial.     In
1956   the  Solicitor  General  of  the  United   States  himself   set
forth  the  record  of  Mazzei's  perjuries  and  unsavory  past  in
an  unusual  petition   to  the  U.  S.  Supreme   Court   for  a  re-
mand  to  test  his  reliability.   There  was  the  evidence  which
turned  up  in  the  California  Smith  Act  pleadings  of  the  way
in   which   informers  are  recruited.     The   witness,   Saunders,
screened   out  of  the  Coast  Guard  as  a  Communist  in    1948,
was  reinstated   when  he  went  to  the  FBI  and  offered   to  in-
form  in   1951.     The  witness,  Honig,  at  first  refused  to   talk
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
Comic  Item  the  Post  Sleuths  Missed: On
"The  second  case  in  this  group  [where  loyalty  boards  did
succeed  in  making  the  anonymous  informants  testify]   was
based  almost exclusively  on  the  testimony of  two  fellow  em-
ployes,  who,  as  it  turned  out,  had  misinterpreted  scraps  of
telephone  and  other  conversations  that  they  had  overheard.
The  hearing   was   postponed  until  both  accusers  could  be
present.    It  then  developed  that  the  employee  had  been  ac-
tive  in  his  local  civic  association   and  had  decided  to  take
some  courses  in  public  speaking  to  help  him  in  his  organi-
zational  work.  In  connection  with  these  activities  he  did  a
great  deal  of  telephoning  from  the  agency.
"When  he  began  his  course,  he  discovered  that  the  pro-
fessor  had  selected  communism  as  the  topic  around  which
the   class  exercises  would  center,  chiefly  because  he thought
it  would  be easy  for  the  students  to  find  current  material on
this  subject.   During  the  course  the  employee  had  clipped
material  on  communism from  the  papers  and  had  assembled
on  his  desk relevant books from  the  department library. The
material  he  gathered  contained  some  of  J.  Edgar  Hoover's
strongest   anti-Communist  speeches   and  statements.    The
fellow  employees  had  noticed  the  subject  matter of  the  col-
the Dangers  of Reading J. Edgar  Hoover
lection,  had  understood  him  to  say  something  on  the  tele-
phone  about  'the  communism  we  teach',   and  had  jumped
to  the  conclusion  that  he  was  teaching  communism  to  chil-
dren in night  school.
"This comedy of  errors  was  completely cleared  up through
the  testimony  of  all  the  witnesses  at  the  hearing,  including
the  informants.   One  of  them  repudiated  the  signed  state-
ment  he  had given  to  the  FBI  and denied  that  the  employee
had  said,  as  reported,  'I  prefer  the  Communist form  of  gov-
ernment  to  that  which  we  now  have.'"
—Bontecou:  The Federal Loyalty  Security  Program,  P.  ISO.
This volume  is  one of the  Cornell  Studies in  Civil  Liberties
edited  by  Robert  E.  Cushman  under  a  Rockefeller   Founda-
tion  grant.  This  victim  was  one of  the  lucky  few.  The inci-
dent  shows  (1)  what  injustice   can  occur  when   informants
are  kept  anonymous as  the  FBI  insists  they  should  be and
(2)  what  sloppy  jobs  FBI  men can  do.  They  are  so ready  to
believe  any  anti-Red  scuttlebutt that  they  can  swallow  with-
out  a  gulp  so  improbable  a  tale  as  a  government   worker
using  his  office  to  prepare for  "teaching  communism  to  chil-
dren  in night  school."—IPS
1   6   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  2,1959
(Continued  from  Page   Three)
to  the  FBI,  but  later  changed  his  mind  after  being  arrested
on  a  shoplifting  charge  which  he  claimed  was mistaken.    The
charge  was  dropped.    The  FBI  is  the  only  government  agen-
cy  which  regularly  employes  as  informers  exactly  the  type  of
character   regarded   as  a   "security  risk"   by  the   rest   of   the
government.
Informer  Casualties  at  The  3ACB
It  would  have  been  enlightening  if  the  Post  had  summar-
ized   for   its  readers   what  has   been  happening   to   some  of
the  FBI's  most  famous  informers  in  the  prolonged  proceed-
ings  to  force  the  Communist  Party  to  register  with  the  Sub-
versive  Activities  Control  Board  under  the  Internal  Security
Act.    This  case  is  now  in  its  ninth  year,  largely  because  each
time  it  comes  up  to  the  Circuit  Court  from   the  SACB,  the
testimony  of  more  informers  is  stricken  by  the  Court  as  un-
reliable.    The  score-card  when  the  Court  ruled  on  this  case
for  the  third  time  last  August  stands  like  this:  The  testimony
of  three  informers—Manning  Johnson,  Paul  Crouch  and  Har-
vey  Matusow—have  been   stricken   from   the*  record   entirely.
The   testimony  of  four  others,   Scarletto,   Cummings,.  Honig
and  Mrs.  Markward,  have  been  stricken  in  part.    The  case
has  now  gone  back, to  test  the  reliability  of  the  Budenz testi-
mony.    Wherever  these  informers  have  had  to  come  out  into
the  open  and   face  cross-examination  in  a  court  of  law  they
have  fared  badly.    Yet  Mr.  Hoover  is  still  waging  a  battle
in  Congress  to  keep  such  people  immune  from  confrontation
in  loyalty-security, industrial  employment  and  passport  cases.
The  most  intriguing  story  of  all  lies  in  the  sequel  to  Mr.
Hoover's  most  famous  informer,  Elizabeth  Bentley.    It  had
been  thought  that  resort  to  the  Fifth  amendment  saved  those
she  named.    As  a  result  there  was  a  prolonged  fight  in  Con-
gress  which  resulted  in  the  passage  of  the  Compulsory  Testi-
mony   (Immunity)   Act  and   this  was  finally  upheld   by  the
Supreme  Court  in  1956.    Thereupon  the  government  brought
William  Ludwig  Ullmann,  the  man  who  was  supposed   to
have  photographed   secret  documents  for, her,  before  a  grand
jury  in  New  York.    He  was  compelled  to  testify,   and  was
examined  for  six  days  between  May  23  and  May  31,   1956.
The  FBI  and  the   Poplarville  Lynching
In  discussing  the  Poplarville,   Miss.,  lynching,  the  Post
series  reflects  the  line  handed  out  by  the  FBI  to  Negro
leaders  (but  not  Southern  Congressmen)  that  J.  Edgar
Hoover  was  'rarin  to  prosecute.   It  is  hard  to  believe
that   Mr.  Hoover   did  not   have  the   power   to   force   a
prosecution  if  he  wanted  one.  It  is  harder  to  believe
that   the   man  who  consistently   treats   Negro  rights
agitation  as  evidence of  Communist  plotting  would  have
welcomed  a  frontal  encounter  with  his  Southern  friends.
The  Post  series  also  reports  another  faHacy  fostered
by  the  Dept.  of  Justice.  It  says  there  were  two  possible
bases   for   Federal   action,   one   under   the   kidnapping
statute  and  the  other  under  the  Civil  Rights  Law  but
that  "After  an  intensive  month-long  FBI  investigation,
the  Justice  Dept.  announced  the  Bureau  had  no  juris-
diction."  This  is  not  true.   The  FBI  press  release  said
the  decision  to  withdraw  was  "based  upon  a  ruling  that
the  persons  responsible  for  the  death  [note  how  deli-
cately  the  word  lynching  was  avoided—IPS]  of  Parker
had  not  violated  the  Federal  Kidnapping  statute,  and
no  other  successful  Federal  prosecution  could  be   main-
tained."
Parker's  return  from  a  safe  jail  in  Jackson  on  the
eve  of  the  lynching  and  the  ease  with  which  the  lynch-
ers  got  the  key  to  the  jail  point  to  connivance  by  local
officials,  a  clear  violation  of  civil  rights.   The  press  re-
lease  says  it  was  decided  that  "no other  successful Fed-
eral   prosecution   could  be  maintained,"  i.e.  under   the
Civil  Rights  Law.
This  is  a  matter  of  opinion.   Southern  white  juries
have  sometimes  convicted  in  such  cases.   Even  an  un-
successful  Federal  prosecution  may  be  a  deterrent.   We
are  sorry  the   Post's  investigators  did  not   look   more
closely.
He  not  only  denied  espionage  but  also  denied  having  been  a
Communist.    The   immunity  law  does  not  confer  immunity
from  prosecution   for  perjury.    Three  and  a  half   years  have
passed   without   further   action.     If   Miss   Bentley  told    the
truth,  Mr.  Ullmann  is  a  perjurer.    If  he  is  not  a  perjurer,
then  she  is—but  I  may  say  more  of  this  next  week  when  I
come  to  the  most  important   area  of  all  which  the  Post  left
untouched,   and   that   is   the   close   cooperation   between   the
FBI  and  our  Congressional  and  State  witch  hunts.
Extra   Copies   This   Issue   Available  at  Bulk  Rates  for   Wider   Distribution
I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City    ........................................Zone............State....................
11/2/B9
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)    Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
/F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebrosko  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
1.  F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays but   pub-
Uihed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December at   5818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15, D.  C.
An   Independent  weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
IS  ID  the  U.  S.:  $6  In  Canada;  *10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  »20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED