I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959mar16.pdf

============================================================

Teacher  Loyalty  Defended   in  Congress, P.  2
The  Berlin  Problem  Is  Political,  Not  Military—More  Money  for  Arms  Won't  Solve  It,  See  Page  4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII, NO.  11
MARCH  16, 1959
'<"       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
IS   CENTS
Are  We  Interested  Only  In  Defending  Freedom  Abroad?
We  are  so  concerned  over  the  preservation  of  freedom  in
West  Berlin  that  we  would  risk  a  world  war  rather  than  ac-
cept  a  change  in  its  status.   In  what  does  this  freedom con-
sist?   In  the  right  to  speak  freely  and  to  be  secure  from   fear
of  the  police.   Were  the  Communists  to  engulf  Berlin,  this
freedom  would  be  extinguished.   To  save  it,  we  would  fight.
So  highly  do  we  prize  freedom,  at  least  at  a  distance.
The  uproar  in  Congress  over  Berlin  contrasts  with  the  in-
difference   when   freedom  is  threatened   at  home.   What  are
the   symbols  and   safeguards  of   our   own  freedom?   One   is
the  Bill  of  Rights.   The  other  is  the  Supreme  Court.   Both
are  under  attack  in  Congress  yet  no  one  talks  of mobilizing
in  their  defense.  When  Senator Eastland attacked the Supreme
Court  and  introduced  seven  bills  to  circumvent  recent  deci-
sions,   a   few   meagre   words   of   protest   from   two  Senators
(Kuchel  of  California   and  Clark   of  Pennsylvania)  were  all
it  elicited.   When  freedom  is  threatened   in  Berlin,  we  get
ready  to  march.  When  it  is  threatened  at  home,  we  get  ready
to run.
Many  Bills  But  One  Feature  in  Common
A   bewildering   variety  of   bills  have   been   introduced  by
critics  of  the  Court.   But  all  have  one  feature  in  common.
They  would  increase  the  power  of  the  State  at  the  expense  of
the  rights  of   the  individual.   They   move,  in  other  words,
exactly  in  the  direction  we  are  supposed   to  be  combatting
abroad.   Here  it  is  said  we  are  merely  trying  to  restrict  the
activities  and  movements  of  persons  suspected  of  being  Com-
munist.   But  there  it  is  said  they  are  only  trying  to  restrict  the
liberties  of  persons  suspected  of  being  anti-Communist.    Each
side  is,  in  this  respect,  the  mirror  image  of  the  other.
The  truth  is that  though  the  repressionists on  each side  hate
each  other  fiercely,  their  mentality  and  philosophy  are  identi-
cal.   The  mentality  sees  little  men  plotting  everywhere.   The
philosophy  is  that  the  safety  of  the  State must  take  precedence
over   justice  to   the   individual.    The   repressionists  on   both
sides -make  any  criticism  of  the  existing  order  unhealthy. "Re-
visionism"   is  a  bogeyman  word  on  their  side,  while  here  the
Eastland-Walter  crowd   would  make   life   hazardous  for  any
non-conformist.   The  police  state  is  the  result  there.    It  could
be  the  result  here.
The  standards  of  the  witch  hunt  are  the  same  everywhere.
The   American   Bar  Association  committee   report   criticizing
the  Supreme  Court,  which  Eastland   read   into  the   Congres-
sional  Record,  expresses  horror  over  the  disbarment  of  lawyers
in  Communist   Hungary   because  "they  were  deemed  to  lack
approved  political  qualifications."    But  the  ABA  report  ap-
provingly  echoes  recent   Un-American   Activities   Committee
recommendations   that  lawyers  suspected   of  being  you-know-
what  be  disbarred  on  the  same  grounds  here.
Both  Sides  Use  Faceless  Informers
The   notion   that   Communists  have   no   rights    endangers
everyone's  liberties  here,  just  as  the  notion  that  anti  or non-
Communists  have  no  rights  poisons  the  atmosphere  for  every-
body  there.    The  fact  that  a  Supreme  Court  decision  helped
Communists  does  not  mean  that  it  may not  have  helped non-
Communists,  too.  Example:  thanks  to  due  process  and  the
Jencks  rule,  the  prolonged  hearings  on  the  Communist  Party
before  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  have  exposed
half   a  dozen  notorious  FBI   informers  as  unreliable   if   not
downright  prejurious or  cracked.  The  testimony  of  such wit-
nesses  has  been  allowed  to  shadow  the  good  name  of  many
innocent  persons  in   loyalty-security  hearings.    Much   of   the
Eastland  anti-Supreme Court  program  is  designed  to  perpetu-
ate  the  use  of   such  informers  in  determining  the  right  to
travel  and  the  right  to  work  in  government  or  defense  in-
dustry  without  giving   accused  persons  the  right  to    confront
and   cross-examine  them.   The   faceless  informer  is  a  pillar
of  the  police  state everywhere.
Many  of  the  same  men  who  talk  self-righteously  about  the
Iron  Curtain are ready  to  support  the  new  bill  (Si303)  which
Eastland  introduced  to  legalize the  arbitrary  travel  restrictions
initiated  under  Acheson  and   expanded  under   Dulles.    The
bill  picks up  verbatim our  own  State Department's  travel  bars,
as  held  invalid  by the  Supreme  Court  last  year.  It  would  for-
bid  passports  not  only  to  persons  suspected  of  helping  Com-
munist  causes  but  also  to  anyone—no  matter  how  orthodox
his  politics—when  the  Secretary of  State  "is  not  satisfied  that
such  person's  trip  or  such   person's  activities   abroad   would
not ...  be  prejudicial to  the  orderly  conduct  of  foreign  re-
lations."    Such   are   the   standards  Moscow   applies,   too—it
does  not  allow  critics  of  government  policy  to  travel.
Why  They  Resent  the  Mallory  Decision
In  the  same way, men  (like  Senator  Keating  of  New  York)
ready  to  make  war  to  protect  the  people  of  West  Berlin  from
arbitrary  police  practices attack  the  Supreme  Court  because  it
held  in  the  Mallory  case  that  a  confession   was  invalid  if  ob-
tained   by   holding   a   prisoner    incommunicado   instead    of
speedily   arraigning  him  before  a  magistrate.   In  this  case  of
a  poor  Negro  accused  of  rape,  the  smoke-screen  of  Commu-
nism   was   absent.     The   choice   was   between    constitutional
rights  and  the  convenience  of  the  cops.
Anti  Supreme  Court  legislation  failed  last  year  by  only  one
vote  in  the  Senate.   It  might  pass  this  year.  The  very  hysteria
about  danger  to  freedom  in  Berlin  makes  it  easier  to  under-
mine  freedom   at  home.  It's  easier  to  run  with  the  pack  and
call  for  more  troops  in  Germany  than  to  stand  up  and  chal-
lenge  the  enemies  of  freedom  at  home.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly,  March  16,1959
For the  First  Time in Years  Liberals Fighting  Back  on  Civil  Liberties  Issue
Oregon  Congresswoman,  Herself  A  Teacher,  Attacks  School  Loyalty  Oaths
For  the   first  time  in  many  years,  the   House  is  seeing  a
fight-back  by  liberals  on  a  civil  liberties  issue.   On  March  5,
John  V.  Lindsay,  the  spunky young Republican who  was elect-
ed  last  Fall  from  New  York's  17th  District   (which   includes
Greenwich  Village),  delivered  a  speech  against  the   loyalty
oath  provisions  of  die National  Education Act  and  made pub-
lic  a  letter  on  the  subject  by  Yale's  President,  A.  Whitney
Griswold   (see  box below).
Then   last  Monday,  March  9,  a  more  extended  attack  on
the  loyalty  oath  was  made  by  Mrs.  Edith  Green,  of  Portland,
Oregon,  a  progressive  third  term  Democrat  and  a  member of
the  Education  and  Labor  Committee  which  will  decide  the
fate  of  the  five  oath  repeal  bills  so  far  introduced.
Speaking  against  the  background  of   14  years  as  a  school-
teacher,  Mrs.  Green  said  the  education  loyalty  oath   "seems
to  affirm   the  contention  that  was  raised  in  an  earlier  fit  of
national  hysteria,  that  teachers  are  somehow  especially  sensi-
tive  to  the  blandishments  of  Communism."
Are  Brains  Still  Suspect?
Mrs.  Green  said  this  was  not  only  false  but  "especially  in-
congruous  when  attached  to  a  bill  which  was  made  possible
by  the  belated  realization  that  our  brain  power  is  the  best
defense  we  have  against  external  enemies,  and  that  the  cul-
tivation  and  furthering  of  scholarship  is  at  least  as  necessary
a  contribution  to  our  national  security  as  is  drafting  young
men  to  learn  close-order  drill."
The   Oregon   Congresswoman  cited  that   provision  of   the
Constitution  which  says  "no  religious  Test  shall  ever  be  re-
quired  as  a  Qualification  to  any  Office  or  public  Trust  under
the  United  States."
The   Framers,   Mrs.   Green   told   the   House,   "hated   and
despised  the  only  test  oaths  with  which  they  were  familiar  in
the  age  of  autocracy  in  which  they  lived.   That  age  was  an
age  of  intolerance   in  the  religious  field,  and  the   religious
orthodoxies  which  European  nations  established  were  a  part
and  parcel  of  the  political  structure  of  the  nations  involved."
"The  test  oaths,"  Mrs.  Green  continued,  "were  designed  to
Oath  Repealers  in  House  and  Senate
Five  bills  in  the  House,  one  in  the  Senate,  would  re-
peal  the  loyalty  oath  tacked  on  to  the  Education  Act
last  year  by  Mundt  (R.  S.  Dak.).  The  Senate  bill  is
S  819 by  Kennedy  (D.  Mass.)  and  Clark  (D.  Pa.).
The  House  repealers are  HR  4066 by Green  (D. Ore.),
HR  5315  by  Lindsay  (R.  N.  Y.),  HR  2437  by  Roosevelt
(D.  Cal.),  HR  2332  by  Frelinghuysen  (R.  N.  J.),   and
HR  284 by  Thompson   (D.  N.  J.),  the  last  an  omnibus
bill  for  20,000 National  Defense  scholarships  containing
an  oath  repeal provision.  All the repealers are  virtually
identical.
eliminate from  public life  not  only adherents  of  other  religions
than  the  locally  approved   one,  but  adherents  of  the   tenets
of  toleration.   The  Founding  Fathers  knew  bitterly  the   les-
sons  which  they  thought  humanity  had  learned  during   the
age  of  religious  wars,  and  they  were  determined that  no  such
nonsense  would  plague  the  country  they  had  founded."
"It  has  remained  for  our  time,"   Mrs.   Green   added,   "to
revive  the  principle  of  the  test  oath,  not  attaching  it  to  re-
ligion,  but  to  patriotism;  an  equally  sacred  emotion,  and  one
which,  like  religion,  is  too  fine  an  expression  of  man's  high-
est  aspirations  to  be  made  a  vehicle  for  the  fears  of  the  in-
secure."
Mrs.  Green  praised  the  seven  colleges—Reed,  Bryn  Mawr,
Swarthmore,  Oberlin,  Haverford,  Wilmington   (Ohio),  and
Goucher—which  have  refused  to  participate  in  the  National
Defense  Education  Art  as  long  as  the  special  loyalty  oath  is
required  of  participants.   The  Oregon   Congresswoman  went
on,  in  a burst  of  satirical humor  rare  in  the  rather  dull  House,
to  suggest  that  either  special  educational  loyalty  oaths  should
be   abolished   or   loyalty  oaths   should   be   required   also   of
"bankers,  dentists,  hod  carriers  and   farmers."
This  unusual  speech  deserves  study  in  its  full  text   (Con-
gressional  Record,  March  9).    It  is  important  to  press   for
public  hearings  in  both  Houses.    Repeal  of  the  loyalty  oath
would  be  the  first  Congressional  victory  over  the  witch  hunt
mentality,  and  help  to  cleanse  the  atmosphere.
Yale's  President  Quotes  "Dr.  Zhivago"
Hon. Arthur S.  Flemming,
Secretary, Dept. Health, Education,   Welfare.
Dear  Mr.  Secretary:  May  I  commend  your  statement  as
reported  by  the  Associated   Press  on  December   15  concern-
ing  the  affidavit  and  oath  required  by  the  National   Defense
Education  Act  of  1958?
There  are  four  main  reasons  why  those  of  us  who  par-
ticipate  in  the  educational  process,   whether  as  students  or
teachers,  dislike  such  measures.  .  . .  The first reason  is  that
we  recall  many  instances  in  the  long  history   of  the  educa-
tional  process  in  which  it  has  been  distorted   and  disrupted
by  forces  operating  under  the  shelter  of  test  oaths.  .  .  .
In  the  second  place,  as  you  yourself   have  pointed  out,  it
is  hard  to  understand  why  anyone  should  believe  such  oaths
to  be  efficacious  as  public  safeguard.  .  .  .
Thirdly,  it  is  our conviction  that  belief  cannot  be  coerced
or  compelled.   On  this  principle  the  Russian  novelist,  Boris
Pasternak,   whose  treatment   by  his  own  government    with
respect  to  the  Nobel  Prize  has  been  the  object  of  indignant
protest  in  the  United  States,  has  recently   spoken   eloquently
in  his  novel,  "Dr.   Zhivago":
in  Arguing  Against  Education  Oaths
"I  think  that  if  the  beast  in  man  could  be  held  down  by
threats—any  kind  of  threat,  whether  of  jail  or  of   retribu-
tion   after   death—then   the   highest   emblem   of   humanity
would  be  the  lion  tamer  in  the  circus  with  his  whip,  not
the  prophet  who  sacrificed  himself.   But  don't  you  see  this
is  just  the  point—what  has  for  centuries  raised  man  above
the  beast   is  not  the  cudgel  but  an  inward  music;   the  ir-
resistable  power  of  unarmed  truth,  the  powerful   attraction
of  its  example."
Thus  we  feel—and  we  think  the  overwhelming    majority
of  those  who  have  ever  had  any  experience   in  teaching  stu-
dents  of  any  age  will  agree  with  us  —  that  belief  in  the
Tightness  of  our  cause  which  assumes  the  positive  form  of
loyalty   .  .  .  "can   only  be  won  by  the  powerful   attraction
of  unarmed  truth." ...  It  cannot  be  assured  by  oaths  ex-
acted  in  advance.  .  . .
Finally,   oaths  and  affidavits   of  this  sort   are  especially
distasteful   when   they  are  required   of  young   people.  .  .  .
They  seem  to  represent  a  lack  of  confidence  in  these  young
people  as  well  as  in  the  educational   process  itself.  .  .  .
—A.  Whitney   Griswold,  President,  Yale   University.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly,  March  16,1959
How  the  Housing  Bill  Was  Jammed  Through  Before  Its   Critics  Could  Attack
Proxmire's  2nd:  No  Real  Policy  Committee,  Either,  in  Johnson's  Realm
In  the  Senate last  Monday, March  9,  Senator  William  Prox-
mire   (D.   Wis.)   delivered  the   second   in  a  series  of  what
promise  to  be  historic  speeches.   The  first  on  February   23
dealt  with  the  failure  of  Majority  Leader  Lyndon  Johnson  to
call  caucuses in  which  Democratic  Senators could  discuss  their
party  program  and  determine  legislative  strategy.   The  new
speech  set  out  to  show  that  Johnson  ignores  not  only  the  de-
vice   of   the   caucus  but   also   the   Senate  Democratic  Policy
Committee.   Then,  as  an  example  of  the  helter-skelter  way
legislation  is  put  through  the  Senate  by  Johnson,  Proxmire
discussed   the   velocity  with   which  the   Housing   bill   went
through  committee  and  passage  earlier  this  session.
Senator  Proxmire  said  that  some  13  years  ago  a  Joint  Com-
mittee  on  the  Organization  of  Congress  held   hearings  with
a  view  to  providing  a  framework  "within  which  the  policies
of  our  parties  could  be  determined."   He  said  there  was  "no
visible  similarity"  between  the  purposes  of  the  Policy  Com-
mittee,  as  set  forth  in  the  report  of  that  Joint  Committee,
and  the  way the  Democratic  Policy  Committee  operates  today.
The  report   (March  4,  1946)   recommended  that  the  Policy
Committees  be  freshly  chosen  at  each  session,  that  they  for-
mulate  party  policy,  that  they  meet  frequently   to   expedite
pledged  legislation,  and  that  they  keep  formal records  of  their
proceedings   "available  to  the  public  as  a  means  of  holding
both  the  party  and  the  individual   accountable."
Testimony  by  A  Johnson  Admirer
Senator  Proxmire  called  attention  to  two  scholarly  studies
by  an  admirer  of  Lyndon Johnson,  Professor  Hugh  Bone  of
the  University  of  Washington   (in  the  June  1956  American
Political  Science  Review  and  in  a  1958   publication,   "Party
Committees   and  National   Politics").    Professor   Bone  con-
cluded  that  the  policy  committees  have  never  functioned  as
they  were  intended  to  function.   Senator  Proxmire  said  the
"service   and   research"   facilities  of   the   Democratic   Policy
Committee  were  available  only  to  the  Majority  Leader,  that
its  "education"  function  was  limited  to  providing  vote  cards
after  roll  call  votes and  as for  "legislative  scheduling,"  Bone's
studies  showed  little  of  this  "in  the  real  sense  of  the  word."
Proxmire  said  Bone  found  that  so-called   Policy  Committee
meetings  were  no  more  than  private  meetings  of  the  more
powerful   Democratic  Senators  and  that  "no   reports  of  any
kind   are   made   to   other   Democratic   Senators."     Proxmire
quoted  Bone's  conclusion,  "Chairman  Lyndon  Johnson  more
than his predecessors has perceived  (sic)  the  Policy  Committee
as  a  strategic  device  and  weapon.   The  Committee  is  used  to
set  up  issues  in  a  way  that  will  permit  a  maximum  number
of  Democrats  to  go  along  with  the  position  of  the   leader-
Lyndon  Does  the  Calculating
"The  cold fact  is  that  Democratic  policy  in  the  Sen-
ate  is   made  entirely   on  an  ad-lib,  off-the-cuff   basis.
The  initiative  as  well  as  the  final  decision  is  almost  al-
ways  resolved by  the  Majority  Leader  himself  on  the
basis  of  his  own  judgment  of  what  is  desirable  and
what  is  possible.
"This  is  not  to  say  that  the  individual  Democratic
Senator  doesn't  play  a  part  in  determining  policy.   His
individual  vote  and  whatever  influence   he  may  have
that  goes  beyond  his  individual  vote  is  a  factor  in  the
Majority   Leader's  calculus.   But   it   is   the   Majority
Leader  who  does  the  computing  of  the  possible."
—Proxwire'a  2d  Senate  speech  on Johnson,  March  9.
ship."   Proxmire  added  that  it  was  Johnson  not  the  Policy
Committee  who  determines  "what  in  his  judgment  is  possible
in  the  Senate."
Bow  the  Housing  Bill  Whizzed  Past
On  the housing  bill,  S57,  Senator Proxmire  said that  though
a  member of  the  Banking and  Currency  Committee which  was
in  charge  of  the  bill,  "I  was  never  informed,  and  I  am  still
not  informed,  on  the  methods  and  procedures  by  which  this
year's  Senate  bill  was  handled  by  the  majority   leadership."
Proxmire  said  he  had  no  criticism  of  committee  procedures
or  of  the  committee  chairman,  Sparkman  of  Alabama,   "but
I  still  remember  vividly  the  atmosphere  of  haste  that  per-
meated  the Committee's  deliberations  .  .  . and again  in  rush-
ing  the  bill  to  the  Senate floor for  debate  two  days  after  the
Committee  completed  its  work  on  the  bill,  even  though  five
out  of  the  15 members  needed  time  for  stating  their  separate
views."
Senator   Proxmire  said,   "It   was  like   being  in  a   railroad
station,  being  assured  by the  station master  that  the  train  will
stop  at  the  station  to  take  on  passengers,  while  right  in  front
of  your  eyes  you  see  the  train  barrelling  by."   Proxmire  said
that  when  the  bill  came  to  the  floor,  Lausche  of  Ohio  and
Clark  of  Pennsylvania both objected to  the  haste.   He  declared
the  Senate  was  nevertheless  called  into  session  next  morning
at  11 a.  m.  and  kept  in  session  until  7:16  p.  m.  and  the  next
day  from  11 a. m. until  the  bill  "flashed  through  and  passed"
at  10:35  p.  m.   Proxmire  said  that  except  for  the  passage  of
the  airports  bill  next  day,  a  full  month  passed  in  which   "not
a  single  significant  legislative  matter  came  before  this  body."
The  housing  bill  is  still  before  the  House  "so  that   literally
nothing,"  Proxmire  said,  "was  accomplished  by  this  haste,"
except   of   course  that  the  leadership   pushed  its  bill  through
so fast  that critics did  not  have time  to  make the  country  aware
of   its shortcomings.
Two  Veteran  Reporters  (One  Liberal,  One
"Public  controversy  is  bad—bad  for  the  party  and  bad
•for  the country.  That  is  the heart  of  the  Johnson  conviction.
You  have  to  work  things  out  in  the  cloakroom  and  then
when  you've  got  them  worked  out,  you  can  debate  a  little
before  you vote.  In  the  politics  of  manipulation and maneu-
ver,  Johnson has  proved once again  he is  a  master.  But  this
ignores  the  content,  the  substance,  of  political  give  and
take.   It  draws  off the  fight,  the  conviction,  the  zeal."
—'•Marquis  Childs,  Washington Post, January  18.
Rightist)  Quoted in  Agreement  by  Proxmire
"Lyndon  Johnson  . .  . has elevated  the unanimous  vote
to  a  legislative  ideal.   Under  his  leadership  a  system  of
backstage  bargaining  for votes  . .  .  means  brief  and per-
functory   debate;  a  lack  of  intelligent   questioning;  sparse
attendance;  the absence  of quorum  calls  .  . . the omission
of  record  roll  calls without  which the  public can  never know
which  Senators  were  present  and  how they  voted;  the  ap-
proval  of  legislation  in  obvious  ignorance  of  its  meaning."
—Wittard  Edwards  (Chi.  Trib)  in  Nat'1 Review, Jan.  17.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  March  16,1959
The  Problem  Is  Not  Military  and  Will Not  Be  Solved  by  A  Bigger  Defense  Budget
The  Uproar  Over  Berlin  Here  in  Washington  Grows  Ever  Sillier
Washington   is  working  itself  up  into  an  ever  sillier  state
on  the  Berlin  crisis.   It  can hardly  go  to  war  on  the  issue  of
whether  West  Berlin  is  to  guarded   by  3-power  or   4-power
troops,  or  whether  access  permits  are  to  be  stamped  by  East
German  Communists  or  Russians.
The  Russians  have  a  powerful  card  up  their  sleeve.    They
can  make  a  separate  peace  with  East  Germany  and  pull  out
of  East  Berlin,  instructing  the  East  Germans  to  behave them-
selves  and  cause  our  troops  no  trouble.   Then  East  Germans
will  be  stamping  military  passes,  as  they  already  stamp  the
passes  for  the  much  heavier  civilian  traffic.   What  do  we  do
then?   Declare  war?
What  the  Russians want  to  do  is  to  solidify  the  status  quo
in  Eastern  Europe.   The' East  German  regime  wants  greater
recognition,  not  trouble.   So  long  as  we  let  them  stamp  the
passes,  we  accord  them  a  certain  amount  of  recognition.    We
may  be  sure  they  will  be  very  "correct."
What  the  West  Berliners  Fear
The   real   causes  of   alarm  are  political.   Such   a   prospect
would  deepen  the  division  of  Germany.  The  West  German
government  would  like  to  keep  the  situation  fluid until  it can
get  reunification  on  its  own  terms.   The  West   Berliners,  the
orphans  in  this  storm,  fear  that  in  a  divided  Germany their
long  range  future  is  insecure,  either  because  the  U.  S.  will
get  tired  of  the  whole  situation  one of  these days and  go  home
or  because  as  the  East  German  regime  grows  stronger  it  will
begin  to  tighten  controls  around  West  Berlin  in  small  ways
difficult   to  resist.
This  is  not  a  military  problem.    It   arises   from   the   geo-
graphical  position  of  Berlin.  Nothing  could  be  more absurd
than  the  current  uproar  in  Congress  linking the  Berlin  crisis
with  the   defense  budget.   A   larger  defense  budget  would
solve  the  problem  only  if  it  gave  us  so big  an  airlift we  could
pick  up  West  Berlin  and  transplant  it  to  a  safer  spot.
Vaster  defense  expenditures,  enabling   us  in   a  few  years
time  to  threaten  to  destroy  all  Russia  three  or  four  different
ways   (instead  of  only  one  or  two  ways,  as  now)   will  not
make  a   difference   in   the   current  situation.   This   is  where
Book  Corner
A   Room   in   Moscow,   by   Sally   Belfrage   (Reynal:
$3.50).  As  good  as  a  trip  to  the  Soviet  Union,  a  fresh,
human  chronicle  free  from  party  line  cant  or  bias.
Rededication    to    Freedom,    by    Benjamin    Ginzburg
(Simon  &  Schuster:  $3.50).   A  brilliant   attack  on  the
security-loyalty    mania   and  a   defense   of   freedom   in
classic  terms,  written  with  style  and passion  by  the  for-
mer  research  director  for  the  Senate  Subcommittee  on
Constitutional  Rights  (Hennings).
Island  in  the  Sun:  The  World  of  Spanish  Harlem,  by
Dan   Wakefleld    (Houghton-Mifflin:  $4).  The   Puerto
Ricans  are  the  newest  and  most  unfairly  treated  of  our
immigrants.    This  is   vivid  reportage  by  a  promising
young  writer  who  lived  among   them.
The   Great   Decision,   by   Michael   Amrine   (Putnam:
$3.95).    A   conscientious  and  engrossing   effort   to   re-
construct  the  secret  history  of  the  fateful  decision  to
drop   the  A-bomb  on  human  beings  at   Hiroshima,   in-
cluding  the  doubts  and discussions  among  the  scientists.
Eisenhower's  calm  reflects  more  sense than  Acheson's  hysteria.
If  big  weapons were  the  solution,  we  have  enough  now  to
threaten  to  bomb  the  Kremlin  unless  Khrushchev  positively
promises  not  to  withdraw  Russian  troops  from  East  Berlin.
As  for  small,  "clean"  weapons,  there  is  no  way  to  fight  a
limited  nuclear  war  in  the  heart  of   Europe.
The  Two  Bones  of  Contention
A  separate  peace  with  East  Germany  holds  out  advantages
for  Germany's  eastern  neighbors.   It  means  acceptance  of  the
Oder-Neisse  line,  which  would  at  once  be  called  in  question
by  a  reunified  Germany.   It  offers  a  buffer  between  them  and
a  nuclear  rearmed  Germany  in  NATO.
Either  we  make  some  concessions  on  these  two  points,  or
we  see the  status  quo  harden.   We  cannot  have  it  both  ways.
We  won't  even  be  given  a good  excuse to  fight.
For  years  our  diplomacy  has  grown   rusty  while  we  met
every  problem  by  flexing  our  military  muscles.   Now  we  are
up  against one  which  can  only  be  solved  by negotiation.   This
is  really what  has  everybody so  upset.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample   Copy   to  A  Friend  If  You   Send  A  Long  Stamped   Self-Addressed     Envelope
L  P.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ..._..„..............-..._......_...._........_...............................
Street   ....................~™.....~..™.—.~.~.~......-...........~~~.™..
City   ....™.™......................._.......Zone.__.......State..™.._......™..
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  jr.)  additional:
a/ie/59
(To)    Name  ....................—
Street   ..„.._..„.........._..-..—.
City  ..._....._.....................™...Zone............State......™..........
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?       Yes  n    No.  D
IE  Stone's Weekly
5618  Nebraska  ATI..  N.  W.
WosWnaton  15.  D.  C
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
Stone  on Way to  Europe -   Next  Issue  March  30 from  Germany -  No Issue  March 23
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED