I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959nov30.pdf

============================================================

Norman   Thomas's  75th  Birthday   Speech,  Pps. 2-3
Extra:  Adenauer  Preparing  German  Opinion  for  Relinquishment  of  Eastern  Territories,  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  45
NOVEMBER  30,  1959
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  UN  Demonstrates  Its  Independence
United  Nations,  N.   Y.
The   nuclear  votes  in   the   United  Nations   last  week-end
again  demonstrated  that  the  General  Assembly  can  no  longer
be  controlled by  the  United  States.    Not  only the  Afro-Asian
bloc  but   Latin  America,  Scandinavia  and  Canada  showed  a
remarkable  independence.    This  promises well  for  the  future
of  the  UN;   its  vitality  and  moral  power  will  grow  the  more
it  shows  that  it  is  not  an  instrument  of  cold  war  policy,  and
the  tool  of  neither  side  in  the  Russo-American  tug  of  war.
The  biggest  defeat  for  Washington  was  the  51-to-16  vote
in  favor  of  the  resolution  calling  on  France  to  desist   from
testing  an  atom  bomb  in  the  Sahara.    In  committee,  on  No-
vember   12,  U.   S.  influence   had   lined   up   enough   votes   to
block  the  two-thirds required  for  passage.    The  vote  then  was
46-to-26.    But  when  the  resolution  came  before  the  General
Assembly  Nov.  20,  Denmark,  Mexico,  Bolivia,  Ecuador  and
Panama  shifted  to  vote  in  favor  of  it  and  7  Latin  American
countries  which  had  voted   "no"   abstained.    The  result  was
to  marshal  better  than  two-thirds for  the  resolution.
Despite   Lodge's  Opposition
A  double  defeat  was  suffered   by  the  U.  S.  the  day  before
when  four  NATO  members,  Canada,  'Denmark,  Iceland  and
Norway,   joined   14  Latin   American  nations,   Ireland,   New
Zealand   and  Sweden,  to  pile  up   60  votes  for   a  24-nation
resolution  calling  on  the  three  nuclear  powers  and  all  other
nations  to  desist  from  further  nuclear  testing.    The  vote  came
after  Henry Cabot  Lodge  expressed  his  opposition  to  the  reso-
lution  which  was,  of  course,  opposed  by  France.    The  U.  S.
and   19  other  nations  showed  their  disapproval   by  abstaining
(see  list  in  box  on  this  page).
A  less  obvious  but  more  important  defeat  came  in  a  vote
a  few  minutes  earlier  on  a  three  power  substitute   resolution
which  Austria,  Japan  and   Sweden   had  put  forward.    This
omitted  any  reference  to  testing  by  powers  not  now  mem-
bers  of  the  nuclear  club  but  did   call  on  the  three   nuclear
powers  "to  continue  their  present  voluntary  discontinuance  of
the  testing  of  nuclear  weapons."    No  one  voted  against  this,
and  only  France  and  Afghanistan  abstained.    It  passed   76-
to-0.    But  though  the  U.  S.  voted  for  it,  Mr.  Lodge  made
clear  that  he  did  not  agree  with  it.    "We  do  not  think,"  he
told  the  Assembly,  "that  an  indefinite  continuation  of  a  vol-
untary  uncontrolled   suspension   of   tests  will   contribute"   to
the  U.  S.  objective  of  test  cessation  with  controls.     He  de-
clared  that   "we  consider  that   test   suspension  which   is  not
subject   to  verification   is  incompatible  with  requirements  of
national  security,"  and  he  made  clear  that  whether  the  U.  S.
continues  its  voluntary  moratorium  after  the  first  of  the  year
depends  "on  circumstances  which  have  yet  to  develop."    Ob-
The Line-Up in Three  Significant  Nuclear  Votes
On  the  resolution  in  the  UN  General  Assembly  Nov.
20  asking  France to  refrain  from  testing  an  atom  bomb
in  the  Sahara,  adopted  51  votes  to  16  with  15  absten-
tions.    Those  who  voted  against  were:  Dominican  Re-
public,   France,  Honduras,   Israel,  Italy,  Luxembourg,
Netherlands,  Nicaragua,  Peru,  Portugal,  Spain,  Union
of  South  Africa,  Great  Britain, the  U.  S.  A.,  Belgium
and  Brazil.    Those  who  abstained were:  El  Salvador,
Greece,   Guatemala,   Haiti,   Laos,  Paraguay,  Thailand,
Turkey,   Uruguay,  Argentina,  Australia,  Chile,  China,
Colombia,  and  Costa  Rica.
On  the   24-nation  resolution  Nov.  21  appealing  not
only   to  the  three  nuclear  powers  but  to  non-nuclear
powers  not  to  engage  in  testing,  adopted  60  to  1, with
20   abstentions.     The  vote  against:  France.    The  ab-
stainers:   Dominican   Republic,   Luxembourg,   Nether-
lands,    Nicaragua,   Peru,   Portugal,   Spain,   Thailand,
Turkey,   Union   of   South  Africa,   Great   Britain,   the
U.  S.  A.,  Belgium,  Brazil,   China,  Greece,  Haiti,  Hon-
duras,  Israel  and Italy.
On  the  Irish  resolution  Nov.  20  against  the  spread
of  nuclear  weapons,  adopted 68-0  with  12  abstentions.
The  abstainers  were:  China,   Czechoslovakia,   France,
Hungary,    Peru,    Poland,    Romania,    Ukraine   SSR,
USSR,  Albania,  Bulgaria,  Byelorussian  SSR.
viously  some  of  our  closest  allies  do  not  think  the  possibility
of  some  undetected  testing  underground  in  the  range  of  very
small  weapons   is  serious   enough   to  justify   the   end  of   the
present  voluntary  stand-still  on  testing.     In  this  respect   the
vote  was  a  victory  for  the  Soviet  point  of  view.
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  Soviet  Union   opposed   the
Irish  resolution  against  the  dissemination  of  nuclear  weapons
as  "delusive,"  it  lost  its  allies.    Just  as  the  U.  S.  did  not  dare
vote  against  the  two  resolutions   which  called  for  an  erid  of
testing,  so the  Soviet  Union  did  not  dare  to  do  more  than  ab-
stain  on  the  Irish  resolution.    This  was adopted  68-to-O.   The
Soviet  bloc  found  itself   in  the  odd  company  of  Nationalist
China,  France,  and  Peru,  the  only  other  abstainers.    The  Irish
resolution  had   obviously   been   watered   down   to  muster   so
large  a  vote.    The   Soviet   bloc  complained   that  it  did  not
deal  with  the  problem  of  stationing   nuclear  weapons  on  the
territory  of  other  countries,  and  that  it  merely  proposed  that
the   10-nation  disarmament   committee   study   the  problem   of
how  to  prevent  the  spread  of  nuclear  weapons.    The  Soyiet
bloc  also  seemed  to  fear  suggestions  in  the  resolution   for  a
system  of  inspection  to  make  sure  that  non-nuclear  powers  do
not  begin  to  produce  nuclear  weapons.    Obviously  most  other
nations  either  felt  that  the  Irish  resolution  was  at  least  a  good
first  moral  gesture  against  the  spread  of  nuclear  weapons  or
voted  for  it  from  fear  of  world  public  opinion.
1  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  SO,  1959
Given Peace, Norman Thomas Says US and USSR Economies Will Grow Alike...
By  Norman  Thomas
I  doubt  if  Karl  Marx,  risen  from  the  dead  and  listening  to
Mr.   Khrushchev   and   his   American   hosts   describing   their
respective   systems  would   recognize  them  for  what  he   called
socialism   and   capitalism.     Both   can  more  accurately  be  de-
fined  as  very  different  forms  of  state  capitalism;  the  Russian
under   control   of   a   totalitarian   government,    ours   far   less
centralized  with  far  more  room  for  private  profit.    I  am  of
the  school   of  those  who  believe  that  if  we  can  avoid  catas-
trophe  and  if  we  should  continue  our  present  directions  of
economic  evolution  in  both  the  USA  and  the  USSR  our  two
economic  systems  in  the  coming  decade  will  be  so nearly  simi-
lar  as  to  abolish  acute  ideological   conflict.    Neither  will  be
truly  socialist  although   both  will  have  to  be  consciously con-
cerned  with  popular  welfare  as  original   laissez  faire  capital-
ism  was not.
The  tremendously  significant  difference   between  our   social
order  today  and  the  Russian  is  political;  our  glory  is  our  en-
joyment  of  democracy  and  individual  right.    It  is  a  glory  we
tarnish  by  our  racism  at  home,  by  remnants  of  McCarthyism,
and  by  our  habit  of  calling  nations  under  cruel  dictators—
Franco's   Spain,   for   instance—"free"   just  as  long  as   their
dictators  are  not   Communist.
A World of  the  Many Poor and the  Few  Rich
Even  if  there  were  no  cold  war  C.  P.  Snow's   prediction
that  the  present  disparity   between  rich  men  and  nations  and
poor   cannot  survive  is  sound.     For   example,   an   economic
system  by  any  name  will   be  intolerable   under   which   in   a
world   with   exploding   populations   an   essential   natural   re-
source  like  petroleum  is  so  managed  as  to  make  the  King  of
Saudi   Arabia  and  Mr.   Paul   Getty  the   richest   men  in   the
world.
But  not  even  the  extraordinary'boon  of  the  release  of  men,
money   and   natural  resources  consequent  upon   general dis-
armament  down  to  a  police   level  would  automatically  solve
the  problem  of  the  adequate  production  and  equitable  distri-
bution  of  goods  and  services  necessary  for  the  conquest  of  the
poverty  of   70  percent  of   our  world's  inhabitants  who   live
habitually  on  the  margin between hunger  and  starvation  while
in  our  country  Tiffany's  advertises  solid  gold  putters.    That
cannot  be  the  consequence of  competitive  struggle  for  private
profit  in  a  world  of  fantastically  disparate  nations  all  claim-
ing  absolute  sovereignty  over  their  people.     Planning,   and
what's   more   international  planning,   is   absolutely   essential.
The  farther  we  move  into  a  world  where  only  complex sci-
entific  processes  can  supply  us  with  energy  and  resources  es-
sential  to  a  decent  life,  the  more  essential correlated  planning
will  be.   Its  overriding  principle  must  be  socialist,  that  is  the
dominance  of  production  for  use  in  order  that  men  may  be
served  by  things  rather  than  mastered  by  them.
Planning  Without  Coercion
In   general   we  believers   in   democracy  are   challenged    to
prove  that  this  planning  can  successfully  be  carried  on   espe-
cially  in  non-industrialized  countries  without  some  approaches
to  the  terrible  coercion  of  communism  in  the  Soviet   Union
.and  China.   This  planning  will  insist on  industrialization  and
far  greater   efficiency   in  agriculture and  heretofore  this  kind
of  planning   has  seemed   to  mean  inescapable  growth   in  bu-
What  No  Presidential  Candidate  Will  Say
Next  year  will  be  a  Presidential  year,  our  quadren-
nial  contest  in  evasion, exaggeration  and  stultification.
It  is  a  pity  that  there  will  be  no  candidate in  the  field
to  speak  the  language of  peace  and  socialism  as  Nor-
man  Thomas  did  at  his  75th  birthday  dinner  in   New
York  last  week.    The  speech  was  broadcast  over  the
radio  network  of  NBC  and  said  things  no  one  has  said
to  a  nationwide  audience  since  the  Wallace campaign
of   1948.   We   reprint    an   abridged   version   of    the
Thomas  speech  here,  and  we  offer  reprints  in  bulk  lots
to peace and church  groups around the  country.
reaucracy.    Our   own  nation  is  already  highly   indusl  ialized
through   an  historical  process  impossible  of   close   imitation.
But  in  it,  despite  our  loud  talk  of  free  enterprise  and  the  real
vigor   of  our  imperfect   democracy   we  live  and  work   under
four   bureaucracies:  of  civil  government,   of   the   military,  of
Big  Business,  and  Big  Unions.    My  Democratic  and  Republi-
can  friends   will  not   escape  the  problems  of  the  place   and
limitation   of   bureaucracies  in   an   efficient   democracy  simply
by  denying  an  extension  of  public  ownership.
Socialism  No  Panacea
I  grant   that  this   problem   of   democratic  controls   in  our
modern  industrialized  society  is  of  major  concern  to   us  so-
cialists  who  have  arrived  at  no  panacea  for  its  solution.    Our
concern   over  bureaucracy  is  one  reason  for  our  lessened  em-
phasis  on  social  ownership  of  the  means  of  production   and
distribution.    Certainly  such  ownership  is  not  a  singL    track
road  to  Utopia.    Democratic  controls  through   taxation, col-
lective  bargaining  and  the  growth  of  cooperatives  are  at  least
as  important  as  an  extension  of  social  ownership.    Neverthe-
less,  it  would  be  far  easier  to  deal  with  the  problem  raised
by  the  steel  strike  were  this  absolutely  basic  industry  to  be
socially  owned  and  operated  like  TV A  with  labor  and con-
sumer  representation   in   the  authority.    It   is  certain  that  a
democratic  society  cannot  forever  be  as  impotent       ours  has
been   in   dealing   with   the   steel   oligopoly,   its   administered
prices  and   their  inflationary   effect,   its  obduracy   i     collective
bargaining,  its  power  to  paralyze  our  economy.
But  as  I  look  at  the  present  and  toward  the  future,  more
and  more  I  find  myself  thinking  that  if  men  in  this  thermo-
nuclear  age  can put  war  out  of  the  world  they will  surely  have
the  wisdom  and  strength  to  deal  with  their  other   problems.
If  they  cannot  put  war  out  of  the  world,  these  pr.  bk-   is  will
scarcely  matter.    Mankind  will  end  its  extraordinary  siory  of
shame  and  glory  by  suicide  of  its  civilization  if  not  of  itself.
Our  only  hope,  the  only  hope  of  generations  yet  unborn,  is
a  world  without  war.   To   accept   that  fact   is  the   essential
beginning  of  wisdom.
There  are  some  encouraging  developments.    It  is  good  that
Secretary  Herter  said  that  today  we  face  a  challenge  that  no
society  has  ever  fully  met, how  to  make  competition   the  life,
not  the  death,   of  nations.    This  indicates  a  possible   better
climate  for   negotiation,  as  does   also  the   recent   increase  of
public  interest  in  disarmament.    Against  this  however   must
be  set  the  sorrowful  fact  that  men  of  the  stature  of  former
President   Truman   and   Governor   Rockefeller   should    have
asked  the  immediate resumption  of  thermonuclear  tests  which
carried   on   even  underground  are,  according   to  none   other
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  SO,  1959
... Attacks Truman and Rockefeller on Testing, Thinks Mr. K. Wants Arms Cuts
than  Dr.   Libby  a  possible  danger,  depending  on  the   char-
acteristics  of  the  rock.    What  is  far  worse  is that  our  resump-
tion   of   tests  without   any   evidence   of   Russian   resumption
would  deprive  us  of  any  moral  leadership  in  the  world.
Moreover,  there  is  now  what  looks   like  an  organized  ef-
fort  to  minimize  our  peril  in  war.    On  the  basis  of  various
studies,  official  and  unofficial,  we  are  assured  that  one  attack
on  the  United  States,  admittedly  comparatively  "moderate,"
would  destroy  only  some  20  percent  of  us  and  half  of   our
homes.    The  rest  of  us  might  survive  especially  if  we  should
make  nice  little  concrete  block  shelters  to  keep  in  our  cellars
or  drag  around  behind  our  cars.    Then,  as  I  heard  Mr.  Her-
man  Kalm  say on  TV,  "the  human  fertility  rate  is high."
The  Vested  Interests  in  the  Arms  Race
Among  those  preaching  or  easily  accepting  one  or  another
of   these  false  hopes   are  members   of  very  powerful   groups
with  an  immense  stake  in  continuance  of  the  cold  war  and  a
speeding  up  of  the  arms  race.    To  the  military  it  means  such
power  and   prestige   as  they  never  before  enjoyed   except   in
actual  war.    To  many  scientists  and  to  a  great  many  colleges
and   universities  it  means  better  support   for   fascinating  sci-
entific  research  than  they  could  have  imagined.    To  innumer-
able  corporations,   great   and   small,   it  means  contracts   with
guaranteed  profits.    To  workers  it  means  jobs.
The  bitter  irony  is  that  the  hideous   social  and   economic
waste  of  the  arms  race  is  a  major  source  of  what  we  Ameri-
cans  call  prosperity.    Obviously   an  intelligent  plan  for  dis-
armament  must  take  account   of   the   economic   factor.     We
must  plan  to  use  a  large  part  of  what  we  have  on  arms,  on
health,   education,   the   cooperative   war   against   the   world's
poverty  and   then  make  some  intelligent   reduction  in  taxes.
Of  course  it  could  be  done.
I  do  not  charge  that  the  passionate  supporters  of  the  cold
war  desire  it  to  become  World  War  III.    They  are  probably
sincere  but  deluded  in  believing  in  the  possibility of  indefinite
if   not   perpetual   peace   by   the   deterrence   of   horror.     But
where  your  treasure  is  there  will  your  heart  be  also—I  am
quoting  Scripture  and  not  Das  Kapital—and   their  treasure  is
in  continuing  the   cold  war.    We   rationalize  easily  what  is
to  our  immediate interest.
A Common  Eagerness to Live
To  deny this  is  by  no  means  to  deny  the  magnitude  of  the
threat  that  Stalinist  communism   has  offered   and   still   offers
to  the  peace  and  freedom  of  mankind.    We   can  deal  with
that   threat  constructively  only  by  mutual  agreement   that   a
common  eagerness  to  live  compels  us  to  accept  controlled  dis-
armament  -under  a  strengthened  UN.    I  happen  to  believe
that  Khrushchov  in  his  own  interest  and  his  country's  may  be
more  serious  about  disarmament  than  our  Pentagon;   the  dif-
ficulty will  arise  from  his  attitude   toward  countries  and  the
necessary  strengthening  of  the   UN.
In  my  recent  book,   The   Prerequisites  of   Peace,  I   argued
that  by  a  combination  and   only  by  a  combination   of   con-
trolled   universal  disarmament  down   to   a   police   level,   a
strengthened  UN,  disengagement  and  a  cooperative  attack  on
the  poverty  of  many  nations  can  we  hope  for  a  secure  peace.
A   reviewer  commented  that   my  "prescription"   is  "too   far-
reaching  and  too  contrary  to  big  power  politics  to  win  sub-
Those  Dirty  Materialists   Reject
Two-Cars-in-Every-Garage
"Theirs   [i.e.   the  Soviet]  is  a  materialistic  society.
They   assign  a  low  priority   to  those  endeavors  which
would  lead  to  a  fuller  life  for  their  people.    The  atti-
tude  they   take  toward   automobiles   is  a  good  illustra-
tion  of  this  policy.    Mr.  Khrushchov   was  undoubtedly
impressed  by  the   view   he  gained  of  our  overall   eco-
nomic  strength.    He  was  by  no  means  persuaded  that
he  should  emulate  us  in  the  automotive  field."
—Cl A  Chief   Allen  W.  Dulles  to  the  Joint  Economic
Committee  on Soviet  economic progress, Nov.  IS.
stantial   support,  but  it  is  a  thesis  unassailable  in  terms  of
common  sense."    I  don't  believe  that  big  power  politics  any-
where  could   so  easily  prevail  over  common   sense  when  the
stake  is  the  future  of  our  human  race  except  for  the  fact  that
war  is  so  much  a  part  of  our  common  heritage,  older   than
any  institution   except   some  form  of  the  family.  .  .  .  There
was  a  time  when  war  had  its  code  of  honor,  even  its  own
ethics.    Total  destruction  was  not  its  objective—not  even  for
the   Tartar   hordes.     There   were   things   honorable   soldiers
would  not  do.    But  no  more.
Democracy,  The  FBI  and  the  ICBM
We   come  home  from  our  churches  and   synagogues   after
listening  to  the  words  of  Isaiah  or  Micah  or  Jesus  and  in  our
comfortable  homes  discuss  the  necessity  we  are  under  to  pro-
vide  our  sons  if  not  ourselves  with  weapons  wherewith   they
may  destroy  literally  millions  of  their  fellow  human  beings
whom  they  have  never  seen,  and  leave  chance  survivors   in
such  misery that  they  will  pray  for  death  as  their  sole  deliver-
ance.    And  then  we wonder  that  our  slums  spawn  gangs  with
an  insensate  love  of  lesser  violence,  a  violence not  consecrated
by  the  God-State  but  only  by  the  gang.    We   self-professed
champions  of  democracy  regard  her  as  a  delicate  maiden  only
safe  in  a  wicked world  between  an  FBI  man  on  one  side  and
an  intercontinental  ballistic missile  on  the  other.
There  is  beauty  and  joy  in  love  of  one's  country.  .  .  . But
the  nationalism which  bids  us  forget  that  above  all  nations  is
humanity,  the  nationalism  which  in  the  absolute  nation-state
has  usurped  the  place  of  God,   is  the  most  hideous  idolatry
the  world  has  known.   Today  it  is the  nation-state even  under
some  democratic  controls which  tells  us:  "Thou  shalt  have  no
other  Gods  before  me  ...     whatsoever  I  command  becomes
your  duty  .  .  . Thou  shalt  not  kill  except  at  my command  and
then  the  absolute  destruction  of  my  rivals  shall  become  your
holy  mission."
If  from  some  distant  star  I  looked  at  this  human  scene,  I
should  judge  its  madness   incurable   and  its  consequences  in-
evitable   destruction.     But  I  am  no  onlooker   from  a   distant
star  but  a  man  among  men,  a  man  privileged  to  drink  deep
of  the  living  waters of  human  friendship.    I  know  something
of  the  follies  and  perils  that  our  ancestors  survived  and  of  the
courage  and  wisdom  without  which  men  would  have  had  no
history.    We,  the  living,  are  not  yet  destroyed,  and  surely  we
have  found  that  the  struggle  for  a  sane  society  is  of  itself  an
antidote  to  despair.    A  very  brave  man,  facing  death,  once
wrote:  "How  hard  death  must  be  for  those  who  meet  it  hav-
ing  done  nothing."    We  can  do  something and  do  it  for  the
life  of  our  country  and  mankind.
1   8  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  SO,  1959
Little  Noticed   Speech   Could  Clear  Way  for  Franco-German  Deal  With  Russia
Adenauer  Preparing  Germany  for  Relinquishment  of  Eastern   Lands
Surprises   are  possible  on   the   way  to   the   summit.     Not
enough  attention  has  been  paid  de  Gaulle's  acceptance  of  the
Oder-Neisse    line   as   the   boundary   between   Germany   and
Poland.     In  the  recent  one-day  debate  on  foreign   policy  in
Bonn,   the   Social   Democrats   wanted   to   know   whether   de
Gaulle's  declaration  was  made  after  consultation  with  Ade-
nauer.    They  got  no  answer;  the  debate  merely demonstrated
how  feeble  parliamentary  government  is  in  Germany  and  how
paternalistically  authoritarian  is  the  Adenauer  regime.    Since
de  Gaulle  coordinates  basic  economic  and  political  policy  with
the  Chancellor,  it  is  unbelievable  that  de  Gaulle  would  mak.:
so  fundamental  a  declaration  without  Adenauer's  approval.
Social  Democratic  Surmise Confirmed
The   Social   Democratic   surmise   is   now   confirmed  by   a
speech  which  got  little  attention  in  the  U.  S.  press.    Franz
Thedieck,  Adenauer's  State  Secretary of  the  Ministry  for  All-
German   Affairs,   told   the   Upper   Silesian  Association   in   a
speech   at  Bonn  Nov.   21  to  spare  itself  illusions  and  realize
that  the  Germans  driven  out  of  Upper  Silesia  had  been  re-
placed  by  millions  of  Poles.    He  said  this  shift  in  the  popu-
lation   of  the  Oder-Neisse  territory  would  have  to  be  taken
account  of  in  any  peace  treaty.
This  was  the  first  open  signal  to  German   refugee  associa-
tions   that   they  must   prepare   to   accept   the   present   Polish-
German   boundary.     Thedieck   said   the   peace   treaty   would
have  to  reflect  "the   guilt   of  those  Germans  who  sought  to
introduce  a  'new  order'  in  Eastern  Europe  by  suppressing  and
exterminating   other  nations."    This  was  a  fresh  and  whole-
some  note,  as  was  his  advice  to  the  refugees  to  give  up  the
old  "drang  nach  Osteri"  idea.
Were  Germany   to   reconcile   itself   to   its  present   borders
and  give  up  the  old  dream  of  establishing  its  hegemony  over
Eastern  Europe,  Adenauer  and  de  Gaulle  would  be  in  a  posi-
tion  to  deal  independently  with  Russia.    De  Gaulle's  dream
is  a  new  "Carolingian  empire"  based   on  a   Franco-German
union  as  the  core  of  a  continental  Third  Force  under   French
leadership.     The   second   fiddle   role   France   has   played   in
NATO  has  always  irked   de  Gaulle.     He   dislikes  "Anglo-
Saxon"  domination.    He  has  already  rid   France  of  NATO
Another Way to Make Us  Safer  Yet
"Another   project   is   the   Air   Force   Minuteman—a
solid   propellant   intercontinental missile.   Our  studies
show  that  it  will  be  entirely  feasible  to  deploy  Minute-
man  missiles  on  railroad  cars—which   could  move   at
random  over  the  nation's  vast  rail  network. Obviously
a  mobile  missile  force  such  as  this  will  compound  an
enemy's   targeting   problems—thus   further   increasing
the  ability  of  our  missile  force  to  survive  an  enemy's
surprise  attack. ...  A  Minuteman  force  composed of
both  hardened  and  mobile  sites  will  greatly  increase
the  security  of  our  deterrent  posture."
—Gen.  Thomas  D.  White,  Chief   of   Staff,     USAF,   at
the  NATO  Parliamentarian  Conference,   Nov.  16.
This  reassuring   new  national  safety  measure  should
also  make  railroad  travel  less  humdrum.   The  traveller
who  buys  a  ticket  for  some  place  no  more  exotic  than
New  Brunswick  may  find  himself  landing—with  other
Minuteman  fragments—in  Irkutsk.
atomic  bases.    He  is  a  bold  and  ingenious  man,  and  his  dec-
laration  on  Oder-Neisse  may  prefigure  some  new  plan  of  his
own  for  German  reunification.
Khrushchov's  curious  calm  about  the  delayed  summit time-
table  may  mean  he  feels  he  can  do  some  interesting  business
on  his  visit  to  France  before  the  summit.    In  the  past,  before
World  War   I  and  World  War   II,  France  allied   itself   with
Russia   as  a  form   of   insurance  against   Germany.    Now   a
friendly  agreement  with  Russia  would  give  the  new  Franco-
German  entente  independence  of  NATO,  and  Franco-German
industry  an  inside  track  to  the  Russian  and  Chinese  markets.
All  this  is  only  speculation,   but  it  is  well  to  keep  in  mind
that  fresh  combinations  are  possible  on  the  deadlocked  Euro-
pean  chess-board.
The   time  may  well  be  near   when   Adenauer,   fearing  an
East-West   deal   on  Germany   over   his  head,   may  prefer   to
negotiate  directly on  his own  with  de  Gaulle  at  his  side.    The
acceptance  of  the  present   Eastern  borders,   and  the  prepara-
tion  of  the  German' public  for  the  relinquishment  of  Silesia
and   East  Prussia,  are  necessary  preludes   to  any  such   move.
The  Thedieck  speech  merits  close  attention.
Please   Help   Vs  By  Putting   Gift   Subs  to  the  Weekly   on  Your  Xmas  Shopping   List
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name    .....................................,..........................................—•—•
Street
City    ............:...........................Zone............State....................
11/30/59
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ......................................................................................
City ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tes  D    No  D
IF. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Aye.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   P.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  bnt   pnt>
llahed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  8618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W..  Washington  IK  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
tS  In  the  C.  8.;  $8  In  Canada;  *10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED