I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jun22.pdf

============================================================

Black  on  the Bill  of  Rights,  P.  2
Liberal  Democrats  Silent  But  Two  Peace  Congressman  Challenge  the  Arms  Race Budget,  P.  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  24
JUNE  22,  1959
«>'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Meet  the  State  Dept's  New  Chief  for  Far  Eastern   Affairs
If  J.  Graham  Parsons  our  new  Assistant  Secretary  of  State
for   Far  Eastern  Affairs   had   once  given  $5  to  help  Loyalist
Spain  or  been  on  the  mailing  list  of  the  Washington   Book-
shop,  one  may  be  sure  the  FBI  would  have  brought  it  to  the
attention  of  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee.     As  it
is  Parsons  managed  to  get  himself  unanimously  endorsed  by
the  committee in  executive  session  on  May  26,  and   approved
by  the  Senate without  discussion on  June  5  although  as  Am-
bassador  to  Laos  from   1955  to  1957  he  presided  over  what
was  probably the  sloppiest and  most corrupt of  all  our  mutual
security  operations.     Assistant   Secretary   of   State  Robertson,
who  picked  Parsons  as  his  successor,  admitted  to  the   House
Foreign  Affairs  Committee that  the  aid  program  in  Laos  "has
probably   received  more  adverse  publicity  than  any  one   that
we  have  ever  had.    The  GAO  made  a  report. ...  There was
a  highly critical  article  in  the  Wall  Street  Journal,  which  was
also  published  in  the  Reader's  Digest."    All  this  might  just
as  well  have  been  stamped  top  secret.   Even  Senator  Morse  in
committee  commended  the  the  President  "for  selecting  some-
one  with  this  background  in  the  career  service."
An  Auditor  "Unable to Adjust"
The  background  appears  in  a  report  on  Laos  by  the  Porter
Hardy  subcommittee  of  the  House  Committee  on  Government
Operations.    The  report,  released  just  ten  days  after  the  Sen-
ate  confirmed   Parsons,  tells  a  story  of  bribery,  perjury,   and
wasted  millions which  doubled  the  cost  of  living  in  Laos  and
enriched  a  small  clique  of  merchants  and  officials.    A  GAO
(General   Accounting  Office)   auditor  who  dug  too  far   into
this  mess  for  the  comfort  of  U.  S.  officials   "was  'railroaded'
out  of  Laos,"  the  House  subcommittee  report  concludes,   "be-
cause  he  was  close  to  discovering  the  truth  about  Universal
[Construction   Co.],   its  monopoly  of  U.  S.  aid  construction
projects  in  Laos,  its  bribes,  and  its  woefully  inadequate  per-
formance."    The  auditor,  Haynes  Miller  (he  told  his  story  in
The   Reporter  last  November  13),  was  declared  "unable  to
adjust", and  invited  to  resign,  according  to  a  telegram  by  then
Ambassador   Parsons,   "because   of   obvious   signs   of   nervous
disorder."    On  his  return  to  Washington,  after  a  full  medical
examination,   he  was  declared  qualified   for  general  duty  and
offered  another  job  but  quit  in   disgust.
The  subcommittee  contrasted  the  treatment  accorded  U.  S.
Operations   Mission  Director  Carter  de  Paul.     De  Paul  was
allowed  by  Parsons,  over  protests  from  other  officials,  to  sell
a  broken  down  Cadillac  worth  less  than  $600  to  the  Universal
Construction  Company  for  $3,000.    De  Paul,  "violated   ICA
contract  regulations"   in  dealing  with  Universal,  and  told  the
subcommittee   a  false   story  under  oath  about  the  car  transac-
tion.    "Uncontroverted  evidence  indicates  the  vehicle  was  at
that  time  inoperable,  and  shortly  thereafter  it  was  cut  up  and
How  U.  S.  Aid—Aided  the  Reds
"The  concentration  of  the  benefits  of  the  aid program
to  the  area  around  Vientiane  .  .  .  and  the  enrichment
of,   and  speculation  by,   Lao  merchants and  public   of-
ficials  .  .  .  tended  to  lend  credence  to  the  Communist
allegation  that  the  Royal  Lao Government  was  'corrupt'
and  'indifferent'  to  the  needs of  the  people."
—U.S.  Aid   Operations   in  Laos,  Report   to  the
House   by  the  Porter  Hardy    subcommittee.
the  pieces  dropped  down  an  abandoned well.    In  the  interim,"
the  subcommittee  report  says,  "it  had  stood  rusting  in  front
of  Universal's  main  office,  where  it  was  the  subject  of  scornful
amusement  by  Lao  and  Americans  alike."    This  sounds  like
an  episode  from   "The   Ugly   American."     De   Paul   was  re-
warded  by  promotion  to  Deputy  Assistant  to  the  Director  of
ICA,   on  matters  concerning  the  National   Security   Council.
Such  are  the  mysteries  of  promotion  in  our  bureaucracy.
Robertson  recommended Parsons  highly  but  when  Congress-
man  William  H.  Meyer  (D.  Vt.)  asked  him  at  a  House  For-
eign  Affairs  hearing  April  21  about  the  Universal   Construc-
tion  Company  scandal  in  Laos  and  whether  Parsons  had  ap-
proved  its  transactions,  Robertson  replied  "I  can't  answer  the
questions  because  I  don't  know  the  facts."    When   Chairman
Morgan  asked  whether  Mr.  Parsons  "has  been  back  to  testify"
before  the  Porter  Hardy  subcommittee,  Robertson  replied,  "He
appeared  before  them  for  two  days,"  he  said,  "and  they  have
a  full  record  of  his  testimony."    An  inconsistent  but  equally
misleading  reply  was  made  by  the  State  Department   spokes
1
man  last  Monday  when  questioned  about  the  Porter   Hardy
report   by  reporters:   "Parsons   wrote   twice  to   Congressman
Hardy offering to  testify  on  this subject."    The  facts,  as Hardy
put  them  before  the   House   next  day,  are  that  Parsons   ap-
peared  before  the  subcommittee  on  March  18  and  19  at  the
very  beginning  of  its  investigation.   When  later  witnesses  de-
veloped  the  unseemly  side of  the  whole  Laos  operation,  Hardy
invited  Parsons  to  return.    Reply  No.   1,  dated  April  3,  was
that  he  had  to  go  to  Australia  on   official   business.     Reply
No.  2,  dated  May  20,  was  that  he  thought  the  hearings  were
over.    The  truth  is  that  State  Department  Congressional  liai-
son  decided  it  would  be  better  for  Parsons  to  stay  away.
The  prize  joke  of  Parsons'  service  in  Laos  was  the  creation
—  against  the  advice  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff   —   of  a
25,000-man  army.    This,  with  a  5,000-man   constabulary,  is
now  unable  to  cope  with  one  battalion  of  800   Communists,
but  that  is  another  story.    So  is  the  mystery  of  how  all  this
was  kept   a  secret  from  the  usually  vigilant   Senate   Foreign
Relations  Committee  until  after   it  had  safely  approved  this
choice  State  Department  candidate  for  top  post  in  the   area
where  peace  is  most  fragile.
9    S
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'a  Weekly,  June  SS, 1959
Humphrey  Provides  First  Expose  of  Those  Growing  "Deletions"  in  Congressional   Hearings
How the Army Tried to Censor Testimony  on Its Limited  Nuclear War Games
Those  who  read  Congressional   hearings  know  with   what
increasing  frequency  one  encounters,  without  explanation,  that
tell-tale  notation  "deleted."    All  kinds  of  information  is  cen-
sored  out  of  the  public  versions  of  executive  committee  testi-
mony.    In  a  statement  before  the  Special  House  Subcommittee
on  Government  Information  last  Monday,  Senator  Humphrey
provided  the  first  documented  study  of  this  censorship.     His
statement  was  based  on  the  experience  of  his  Senate  disarma-
ment  subcommittee,  one  of  the  few  which  puts  up  a  fight with
the  censors.    The  Senator   advised   other   Congressional   com-
mittees  to  do  the  same,  charging  that  often  the  deletions  have
nothing  to  do  with  real  security  considerations.
CIA  Disagreed With  Hans Bethe
Among  the  instances  cited  by  Humphrey  was  a  CIA  censor
who  tried  to  delete  testimony  of  Dr.  Hans  Bethe  on  earth-
quakes  in  China  because  he  claimed  it  was  "incorrect."    The
testimony  was restored.    The  AEC tried  to  delete  testimony by
one  of  its  own  officials  saying  there  was  no  evidence  the  So-
viets  were  experimenting  with  so-called  "clean"  nuclear  weap-
ons.    The  State  Department  tried  to  delete  testimony  regard-
ing  overseas  bases  "because  it  seemed  irrelevant."     The  De-
fense  Department  tried  to  delete  testimony  on  Operation  Sage
Brush,  the  "limited"  nuclear  war  maneuvers  in  Louisiana  in
1955,   though   much   of   the   information   had   already   been
leaked   by  the  Army  to  Hanson  Baldwin  of  the  New    York
Times.
Senator  Humphrey  said,  "Part  of  the  reason  why  the  Army
wished  to  continue  to  classify  the  information,  according   to
one   officer,   was  that   the   results   indicated   the  Army  didn't
quite  know  what  it  was doing  in  the  maneuvers.    Even  if  this
were  true,  said  the  officer,  the  information  should  not  be  re-
leased."    The  Army  also  tried  to  censor  out  several  portions
of   testimony  by  its  own   Chief   of   Staff,   Gen.   Maxwell   D.
Earthquakes  Military  Secrets?
Senator  Humphrey  complained to  the  House Subcom-
mittee  on  Government  Information that  his  Senate  dis-
armament   subcommittee   "has  never  received  a  satis-
factory   explanation"  as  to  why  the  Government  con-
tinues   to  censor  so   much  information   on  seismology,
the  study  of  earthquakes  and  earth  waves.   The  Sena-
tor  said  more  information  should be  made available be-
cause  of  its  relevance  to  the  problem  of  detecting  un-
derground  testing  and  the  feasibility of  a  control  sys-
tem.     He  indicated  that   the   supposed  "Berkner   Re-
port"  released   June   12  actually  included  only  "some
material"  contained in  it.
Humphrey  said  some scientists  recently  in  the  USSR
say  the  Russians are  doing more in  the  field  of  seismol-
ogy  than  we  are.   Humphrey  said an  expanded  research
program  is  necessary  to  provide  "a better conception of
the  capabilities of  a  control system."    Maybe  the  Pen-
tagon  and  AEC  fear  a  better  conception  would  allay
the  apprehensions they  have  fostered  about  the  possi-
bility  of  adequate controls.
Taylor,   but  finally  restored   90  percent   of   the  cuts.    These
ranged  from  a  discussion  of  the  need  for  non-atomic  weapons
to  his  views  on  the  psychological  impact  of  a  nuclear  test  ban
on  world  opinion.
The   Senator  urged  more   Congressional   committees   to  be
"vigilant"  in  demanding   explanations   from  the   anonymous
censors  who  swarm  in  the  executive  agencies  of  the  govern-
ment.    One  problem   he  did  not  discuss  is  that  of  commit-
tees  like  Appropriations  which  are  under  pressure  to  get  their
hearings  out  fast  for  floor  votes  on  money  bills.    The   staffs
simply  do  not  have  time  to  dicker  with  the  executive  agencies
which  are  past  masters  at  slow  motion  delaying  tactics.    Con-
sequently   they  get  away  with   a  wide  range   of   unnecessary
censorship  in  hearings  dealing  with  military  and  mutual  se-
curity  matters.   This  is a  new  and  growing  evil.
Text  of  New  5-4  Liberal  Dissent  by  Black  Protesting  Erosion  of  Basic  Rights
"In  re  Groban,  352  US  330, decided two  years  ago,  upheld
as  constitutional the  action  of  a  state  fire  marshal  in  com-
pelling  persons  suspected  of  burning  a  building  to  testify
about  the  fire  in  secret  and  without  benefit  of  the  presence
of  their  counsel.   Four  of  us  [Black,  Warren,  Douglas  and
Brennan]  dissented  on  the  ground that  such  secret  inquisi-
tions  violated  the  Due  Process  Clause  of  the  14th Amend-
ment.   In  this  [new]  case  the  Court  upholds the  action  of  a
State  judge in  compelling testimony from  persons suspected
of   getting   statements  of   defendants  in  negligence   cases
under  false  pretenses  and later  'tampering' with  these  state-
ments.    I  think  it  violates  due  process  for  a  judge  no  less
than  for  a  fire  marshal  to  compel  testimony  to  be  given
incommunicado.    In  fact  it  was  Star  Chamber  judges  who
helped  to  make  closed-door  court  proceedings  so  obnoxious
in  this  country  that  the  Bill  of  Rights  guarantees  public
trials  and the  assistance  of  counsel.   And secretly  compelled
testimony  does  not  lose  its  highly  dangerous  potentialities
merely  because  it  represents  only  a  'preliminary  inquisition
.  .  .  whereby the court  is  given  information  that  may move
it  to  other  acts  thereafter.'    Nor  does  this  record  justify  a
holding  that  this  inquisition  adopted  the  mantle  of  secrecy
and  barred  counsel  from  the  room  out  of  tender  solicitude
for  the  reputation of  the  defendants  in  this  contempt  case.
Doubtless  the  defendants' lawyers  and the  defendants them-
selves  are  at  least  as  capable  and  perhaps  as  much  inter-
ested  in  saving  thir  reputations as  the  judge  who  is  send-
ing  them  to  jail.
"The   naked,   stark   issue   here  is   whether  a  judge,  who
must  actually  try  cases  in  public—or  any  other government
official   for  that  matter—can  consistently  with  due  process
compel  persons  to  testify   and  perhaps  to  lay  the  ground-
work  for  their later conviction of  crime,  in  secret chambers,
where  counsel  for  the  State  can  be  present  but  where coun-
sel  for  the  suspect  cannot.   In  upholding such  secret inqui-
sitions  the  Court  once  again  retreats  from  what  I  conceive
to  be  its  highest  duty,  that  of  maintaining unimpaired  the
rights  and liberties  guaranteed by  the  14th Amendment  and
the   Bill  of   Rights.     Cf.  Bartkus  v.  Illinois,  359  US   121
[double  jeopardy];  Frank  v.  Maryland  [inspection  without
search  warrant];  Barenblatt  v.  U.  S.   [contempt  of  House
Un-American  Committee];  Uphaus  v.  Wyman [State witch-
hunt].    Here  as  in  Groban  my  answer  would  be  that  no
public  official  can  constitutionally  exercise  such  a  dangerous
power  over  any  individual.   I  would  therefore  reverse  this
conviction."
—Anon.  v.  Baker,  June  15,  1959, dissent  by  Black, in  which  Warren,  Douglas  and Brennan  joined.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  22,1959
Liberal  Democrats  Sit  Silent  and  Vote  Yes  on  Astronomical  Arms  Race  Billions
Two  Peace  Congressmen  Challenge  the  Rubber  Stamp  Vote  on  "Defense"
The  House  of  Representatives  passed  the  annual  defense
budget  393-3  on  June  3  after  two  days  of  ill-attended  de-
bate,  though  the  $38 billion  appropriated  is  so  staggering
that  as  Ostertag   (R.  N.  Y.)  pointed  out,  "if   you  spent
$1,000,000  a  day,  it   would  take  110  years   to  spend  that
amount."   No challenge  came from  the  liberals  and  the  real
issue  of  whether  this  huge  expenditure on  the  arms  race
would  safeguard peace or  assure  war  was  only  discussed  by
two  first  term  maverick Democrats.   One was  Byron  John-
son,  a  University of  Denver  economics professor  who cam-
paigned  on  a  peace  platform,  and  is  a  member  of  the   Fel-
lowship  of  Reconciliation. The  other was  William H.  Meyer,
a  Vermont forester,  who also  waged an  unusual peace cam-
paign.    Only  they  spoke  for  the  conscience  of  a  humane
and  less  fearful   America.    We  give  a   glimpse  of   their
speeches  on  this  page.   Another  first  term  Democrat,  Ran-
dall  S.  Harmon,  of  Muncie,  Indiana,  joined  them  in  voting
against  the  arms  budget.   A  U.  A.  W.  tool  engineer,  who
worked  for  General  Motors,  Harmon told  friends  he  cast  a
protest  vote because he  knew  of  cases  in  which already  ob-
solete  armament  went  from   the  factory  straight  to  the
scrap   heap.    Harmon  also   voted  against   the  draft.    An
abridged  version  of  Johnson's   speech  of  June  3  follows:
"Mr.  Chairman,  I  think  the  time  has  come  in  our  national
existence  when  we  must  re-examine the  meaning  of  common
defense.    If  our  nation  used  its  atomic arsenal, and  our  adver-
sary  did  not  retaliate,  we  would  destroy  not  only  our  adver-
sary  but  hundreds  of  millions of  neutrals,  and  millions  of  our
own  people  as  well,  from   the  effects   of  radioactivity.
"This  represents  a  practical  reason,  in  addition  to  the  over-
whelming  moral  reasons,  for   ruling  out  preventive   or   pre-
emptive  war.    If  our  adversary  were  to  retaliate,  as,many  as
half   of  the  population   of  the  United   States  might   well  be
vaporized  within  six  hours  of  the  outbreak  of  hostilities  and
another  one-fourth  might  be  stricken  by  radioactivity.
"To   speak  of  preparation  for  such  a  war  as  common  de-
fense  is  to  believe  that  neither  side  will  ever  resort  to  the  use
of  the  weapons  with  which  each  is  provided.    Yet  it  is  the
history  of  every  arms  race .that  it  has  ended  in  hostilities   in
which  the  arms  are  employed.
"Mr.  Chairman,  we  must  provide  for  the  common  defense,
not  merely  of  our  Nation,   but,  even  more,  of  the  right  of
human  life  to  exist on  earth.    It  was  said  that  justice  consisted
of  an  eye  for  ari  eye and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth.    In  this  budget,
we  are  preparing  to  raise that  law  to  a  civilization  for  a  civil-
ization.    And  yet  the  man  from  Galillee  gave  us  a  new  law
that  you  overcome  evil  with  good.
The  Nightmare  to  Which  We  Drift
"In  considering  the  horrible  results  which  would en-
sue  from   a  general   atomic  war,   General   Nathan   F.
Twining,  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,   was
asked  a  question  as  to  the  effect  of  a  surprise  atomic
attack  upon  the  United  States.    In  response  he  said:
'It  would  be beyond  one's  imagination  to  know how bad
it   would  be.    Whether  the   people  will  crack,   or   go
crazy  or  not  I  don't  know.   There  would be  a  lot  left,
I think, who would  get  back together  again  but  it would
be  a  different  kind  of  a  world,  a  different  life'."
—House  Approp.  Com. Report,  1960 Defense   Budget.
"Mr.  Chairman,  the  total  national  defense  and  mutual  se-
curity  budget  this  year  will  require  about  $260  per  capita  in
the  United  States.   The  world's  population  today  is  something
over  two  and  a half  billion  persons.   Every year we are  spend-
ing  $18  for  every  man,  woman  and  child  on  the  face  of  the
globe  in  preparing  for  man's  destruction.
"Yet  the  Congress  appropriated  last  year  only  $50,000  for
the  Senate  Subcommittee  on  Disarmament  to  work  on  alter-
natives  to  the  arms  race.    The  Communist   offensive   now  is
increasingly  one  of  economic  aid  and  penetration.     For  eco-
nomic  aid   [of  all  kinds]   these  appropriations   amounted   to
little  more  than  $1.4   billion.    That  represents  $8  per  U.  S.
citizen,  or  about  50  cents  per  capita  globally.
All  in  The  Name of  Peace
"We  are  told  this  is  a  peace  budget.    Peace  will  be  built,
not  by  terror,  but  by  the  settlement  of  disputes  by  peaceful
means—however  difficult  negotiations  may  be—by  all-out  sup-
port  of  the  United  Nations,  and  by earnest  support  of  general
disarmament.    The  hundreds  of  millions  of  hungry   persons
in  Asia  and  Africa  cannot  eat  our  bayonets,  do  not  want  to
be  blanketed  with  fall-out  from  our  bombs.
"I  submit,  Mr.  Chairman,  that  in  providing  for  the  com-
mon  defense  we  are  operating  too  heavily  from  our  fears  and
too  little  from  our  faith.    This  generation  has  it  within  its
power  to  attack  successfully  man's  ancient  enemies—hunger,
misery,  illiteracy, disease
5
 and  poverty.    If  we  could  significant-
ly  reduce  this  military  budget  and  apply  only  a  third  of  the
budget  to  a  global  war  on  these  enemies,  I  believe  that  we
would  by  so  doing  more  truly  provide  for  our  common  de-
fense."
Billions  Voted  With  Little  Debate  in  An  Almost Empty  House  of  Representatives
"We  do  not  know  very  much  about  where  we  are  going.
We  do not  know  very  much about  a  military  or  defense  pro-
gram  for  this  country.    We  have  not  gotten  anywhere  in
developing  a  unified  service  that  would  promote  economy.
As  we talk  about  strategy  and  things  of  that  kind,  it  seems
most  clear  to  me  that   we  are  unable  to  depart   from  old
ideas  and  we  accept  the  new  fetish  of  a  military  deterrent.
I  am certain  that  this  country  is  going  to  have  a  very  rude
awakening.   In  the  meantime, we are  spending  and  wasting
our  substance.    For   every  $3  we  spend,  we  could  do  the
same  job  for   $2.    We  have  about  $60  billion  of   obsolete
equipment.
"In  all  the  debate   we  have  had,  we  develop  nothing  but
propaganda,   a  war  spirit  and  a  spirit  of  hate.    These  old
military  methods  will   not  work,  yet   we  do  not  have  the
courage  to find a  new  way.   When  people  want  to  speak  a
little  bit  about  a  different  way, they  do not  get  the  time  to
speak.    I  was  rather  ashamed  as  I  sat  around   yesterday
afternoon  to  note  that  there  were  about  26 members  on  the
floor  of  the  House  when  we  were  discussing   a  bill  which
includes  more than  50  percent  of  the  budget  of  the  U.  S.
What  interest  do we have  in  the  welfare  of  the  American
people  if  only  about  26  of  us  will  sit  here  when  such  a-
subject  is  discussed?    What  use  is  there  in  such  a  debate?
I know I  will  get the  gavel  pretty  quickly.   So I  think  I  will
sit  down,  but  I  think  it  is  about  time  this  Congress  does
something  constructive  about  the  issue  of  war  and   peace,
and   not   keep  on  voting  billions  of  dollars  and  throwing
about  one-third  of  those  dollars  down  the  drain."
—Wm. H. Meyer,  D. Vt. in  the House, June  S.
9  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  22, 1959
Judge  Prettyman  Thinks  Up  Some  Prize  Arguments  for  Passport  Control
Time  to  Inhibit  Those  "Yens"  We  Derive  From  the  First  Amendment
An   anthology   of   a  kind   could   be  compiled   from   Chief
Judge  Prettyman's  decision  in  the  Court  of  Appeals  here  up-
holding  the  denial  of  a  passport  to  William  Worthy,  Jr., the
young  Negro  journalist who  had  the  audacity  (from  the  State
Department's  point  of  view)  to  visit  China  in  1955.  Renewal
of  his passport  was denied  in  1957 when  he  declined  to  prom-
ise  that  he  would  never  again  visit  any  other  country  declared
off   limits  by  the   Department.
The  Judge  begins  by complaining  that  the  "simple,  succinct
phrases  of  the  Bill  of  Rights,"  which  he  terms  "indestructible
protections  to  some  of  the  fundamentals  of  our  way  of  life,"
have  been  "expanded   by  rhetorical  inflation  beyond  all sem-
blance  to  the  realities  with  which  they  were  meant  to  deal."
He  then  proceeds  to  argue  that  "Liberty  itself  is  inherently  a
restricted  thing."    (If  liberty  is  "inherently"   restricted,  what
is  lack  of  liberty  inherently?)
Human  Sacrifices  and  Annie  Oakleys
Judge  Prettyman  thinks  up  a  series  of  horrible  examples.
He  says  "A  man  with  a  contagious  disease  can  be  locked  in
his  house."     He  argues   "Merely   because  a  newsman  has  a
right  to  travel  does  not  mean  he  can  go  anywhere he  wishes.
He  cannot  attend  . . . meetings  of  the  President's  Cabinet  .  . .
or  enter  a  ball  park  without  a  ticket  of  admission."    He  says
even  "freedom  of  worship as  one  chooses  is  restricted  in  some
ways.    Worship   by  human  sacrifice  is  forbidden."     We  just
can't  wait  until  the  Druids  file  for  certiorari.
In  defending  the  right  to  forbid   travel  into  certain  areas,
Judge  Prettyman  says  "the plight  of  airmen  who  have  crossed
borders,  and  the  tense  crises  thereby  created,  are  recent  com-
mon  knowledge.    Surely  the  Executive  can  forbid  such  cross-
ings.  .  .  ."   (The  only  problem  is  to  get  the  Air  Force  and
the  Cl A  to  obey  the  orders).
"In  foreign  affairs,"  the  Judge  rules,  "especially  in  the  in-
timate  posture  of   today's  world   of   jets,   radio  and   atomic
power,  an  individual's  uninhibited  yen  to  go  and  to  inquire
may  be  circumscribed."    That  "uninhibited  yen," we  believe,
used  to  be  called  an  inquiring mind.
In  Judge   Prettyman's  opinion,  the  authority  to   determine
As  Libertarian  As  Old  Queen  Bess
In  the  Free  State  of  Maryland  founded   to  give per-
secuted   English   Catholics   a   haven,   a   Baltimore   Sun
columnist   last   Monday   morning   discovered   that   the
Barenblatt  and  Uphaus  decisions  are  "in  our  central
libertarian   tradition"  since   Queen   Elizabeth    enacted
"security  laws  against  'papists' " and John  Milton in ap-
pealing  to  Parliament  for  religious  toleration  expressly
excluded   Catholics   on  the   ground   that   their   religion
was  "but a   Roman   principalitie    .  .  .  endeavoring    to
keep  up  her  old  universal  dominion."
In  penalizing  religious   non-conformity  "the English
kings   and  parliamentarians,"   the   Baltimore   Sun col-
umnist  argued,  "were  not  pursuing  men  for  their  ideas
any  more  than  was  Monday's  majority  of  the  Supreme
Court."    They   were  merely   making  a  distinction  be-
tween  "faith  and  .  .  .  sedition."    This  revision  of his-
tory  neatly  matches  the  Frankfurter-Harlan  revision of
the  First  Amendment.   We now  expect  to  hear  the  saga
of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers   and  the  story  of   Lord  Calvert
retold  as  episodes   in  misguided  contumacy.    It  would
appear  that  Plymouth  Rock  was  that  place  where  sedi-
tionists   landed,  seeking   in  the   wilderness   a  place   to
carry  on  with  impunity their  evil  plottings  against  the
English  Crown.
where one  may travel  "is  not  vested  in  individual citizens, even
though  they  be  newsmen,  any  more  than  authority  to  declare
a  damaged  wall  in  a  newsman's  home  town  dangerous.  .  .  .
The   Fire   Chief   determines   that   condition   and  enforces  his
conclusion."    Hail  to  The  (Fire)  Chief!
On  these  luminous  principles,  the  State  Department  should
be  able  not  only  to  deny  Mr.  Worthy  an  unrestricted  passport
but  to  bar  him  from  its  press  conferences.    Reporters like  him
have  been  making  our  Wall  (if   the  Chinese  have  one,  why
can't  we?)  dangerously  unsteady.    Like  any  good  Fire  Chief,
the  Secretary  of  State  may  refuse  to  recognize  his   reporter's
credentials  and  order  him  kept  at  a  safe  distance.
Judge  Prettyman  would  agree,  we  feel  sure,  that  the  un-
inhibited   yen  to  write   about   foreign   policy   may  be  as  dan-
gerous  as  the  yen  to  travel  and  should  be  regulated—just  like
all  those  other  "yens"  in  the  First  Amendment.
You   Can  Have  A  Free  Copy   of   Our  1958  Index   If   You   Send   A   Self-Addressed     Stamped    Envelope
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City  .
Enter
(To)
Street
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
....... ..................................Zone........
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
.........................................Zone........
we  send  gift   announcement?
.. ..State.. ......
6/22/B9
(1 yr.) additional:
....State........
Yes  DNO. 0
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except   the  last  two  Thursdays   of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED