I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959mar09.pdf

============================================================

Warning  Bulletin on  Geneva, P.  3
The  ABA  Runs  With  the  Witch  Hunters Yet  Claims  to  Stand  by  the  Supreme  Court.  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  10
MARCH  9,  1959
">'       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
IB  CENTS
What  the  Berlin  Crisis   Really   Shows
No  one  asks  us  whether  we  want  to  die  for  Berlin,  and  no
one  asks  the  Russians  whether  they  want  to  die  for  Berlin,
though  we  are  presumed  to  be  free  and  they  are  supposed  to
be  slaves.   And  of  course  neither  side,  though  each  considers
itself  morally superior,  ours  as  the  Bearer  of  the  Cross  against
Atheistic  Communism  and   theirs  as   the   Champion  of   the
Oppressed   against  Capitalist  Imperialism,  thinks  of  consult-
ing  the  millions  of  other  people   on  the  earth  a  conflict  be-
tween  us  might destroy.  Though  the  devices  in  readiness  may
poison  the  air  and  pollute  the  soil,  the  leaders  on  both  sides
talk  as  calmly  of  resorting to  war  over  Berlin  as  if  the  con-
flict were  to  be  fought  with  muskets.   The  Berlin  crisis  lights
up  the  criminal  anarchy  to  which  the  world  is  exposed  by  a
system  of   national  states  which  recognize  no   law   but  their
own  will  and  share  a  common  belief   in  their  sacred  right  to
consign  millions  to  death  if  they  so  choose.
An   Odd  Collection  of   Old  Tumblers
The   difference   in  our  forms  of  government  are  said  to  be
the  source  of  inescapable  conflict  between  us.    Every  govern-
ment  is  a  device by which  a  few  control  the  actions of  many.
The  governors  may be  chosen  by birth,  ballot  or  intrigue,  but
in  any  case  a  few  govern,  the  rest  obey.   On  both  sides  at  the
moment  complex  human  societies  depend  for  the  final  deci-
sions  of  war  and  peace  on  a  group  of  elderly  men  any  sen-
sible  plant  personnel  manager,  whether  under  capitalism  or
communism,  would  hesitate  to  hire.
Here  we  have  at  the  top  a  cardiac  case  whose  chief  interest
is  in  getting  away  from  his  job  as  often   as  possible  for   golf
and  bridge;  his  No.   2  man  is  in  a  hospital  with  cancer;  the
next  highest  ranking  foreign  policy  official   is  an  arthritic  on
crutches.   On  the  other  side,  there  is  an  ebullient  dictator  in
his  mid-sixties,  eager  after  long  years  of  humiliating  subservi-
ence  to  a  brutal  predecessor   to  enjoy  the  pleasures   of  power
in  the  few  years  left  him;  a  clever  man,  but  much  too  fond
of  his  own  wit;  a  man  who  may  not  drink  too  much  but  cer-
tainly  talks  too  much;  above  all,  a  man  with  the  unsureness
of  the  newly  arrived,  anxious  to  make  more  legitimate  rulers
recognize  and  confer  with  him  and  thus  give  him  more  solid
status,  ready  to  create  a  crisis  and  risk  a  war  to  get  himself
a  Summit.  Who  anointed  these  senescent  fumblers?   Who  are
they  that  the  fate  of  the  species  should  be  in  their  hands?
Deterrence  Fails  at  Its  First  Test
It  is  plain  to  see  that  deterrence  does  not  deter.   We   have
been  living  on  the  comfortable  calculation  that  the  new  weap-
ons are so terrible that  only  a madman  would  use them.   Now
we  can  see that  the  conventional  minded  may be  fully  as  dan-
gerous  as  the  mad.   The  closer  we  come  to  a  showdown,   the
more  men  forget   all  they  have  been   saying  about  war  now
We're   So  Pure  and  They're  So  Wicked
Sen.  DODD  (D.  Conn.)  Mr. Dulles  sees  this  conflict
as  a  great  moral  struggle  between  the  forces  of   good
and  the  forces  of  evil.  .  .  .  We  live  in  an  age  so  poi-
soned   with   the  false  doctrine  of   secularism  and  ma-
terialism   that   even   God-fearing   men  seem  strangely
embarrassed  and  ashamed  to  acknowledge  publicly  the
role  of  morality  in  international  relations.  John  Foster
Dulles  deserves  the   gratitude  of  mankind  because  he
based  his  policies on moral  grounds. .  .  .
Sen.    BYRD   (D.  W.  Va.)   I  commend  my  colleague,
the  Senator  from  Connecticut,  for  taking  the  position
that  there  are  moral  principles  and  religious principles
involved. ...  It  is  a  matter  of  record  that  the men
with  whom  we  are  dealing  have  no  religion.  They  say
that  there is  no  God  above  the  state.   I  say  to  my  col-
leagues  that  when  one  deals  with  an  atheist   he  deals
with  an   individual   who  will  break   his   word,   an   indi-
vidual  whose  agreement is  worthless,  an  individual  who
will  rape,  pillage,  burn  and  murder.
—U. S. Senate, Debate  on Berlin, Feb.  26.
being  obsolete.   In  Congress  even  the  faltering  voices  of  con-
ciliation  say  that  of  course  on  Berlin  we  cannot   compromise
and  of  course  if  the  top  men  give  the  signal  we  will  all  march
as  one  into  the   fire.   No   one  says  it  would  be  as  insane  to
risk  a  world   conflagration   over  one  city  as  it  would   be   to
allow   two  quarrelling  home-owners  to  burn  down   a   whole
town  in  their  readiness to  spite  each  other.   Such  thoughts,  on
both  sides,  are  suspect.   The  issue,  we  are  told,  is  not  Berlin.
Berlin  is  a  symbol.   The   issue  is  that  neither  side  wishes  to
lose  face;  neither  wishes  to  back  down;  both  fear  irreparable
damage  to  their  prestige;  both  see  allies  drifting  away  if  they
do  not  stand  firm;  both  fear  other  nations  will  think  less  of
them  if  they  do  not  show  a  readiness  to  fight  for  their  rights.
In  short,  the  motivations  of  the  duel  and  the  momentum  of
the  bar-room  brawl,  first  the  bluff  and  then  the  fight,  are  the
determinants  of  national  policy  on  both  sides.
Mass  Murder  Becomes  A  Sacred  Duty
All  this  immemorial  puerility  of  the  human  species  is  cov-
ered  over  with  an  equally  ancient  self-righteousness.   The  old
moldy  nonsense  is  reappearing   in  the  pulpit,  the  newspaper
columns  and   the  halls   of   Congress.    This   (like  every  war
known  to  history)  is  a  conflict  between  freedom  and  slavery,
right  and  wrong,   good  and  evil.   Compromise   would   there-
fore  be wicked  and  only  the  slaughter  of  millions  devout.   The
other  fellow  is  No  Good;  he  eats  pig;   he  does  not  worship
the  walrus;  he  defiles  our  totem  pole;  he  knows  not  Allah;
he  is  not  Godly  like  us.   To  kill  him  is  a  virtue  which  will
earn  us  Paradise.
3   i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  9,1959
The   ABA   Runs  With   the   Witch   Hunters   But   Claims  to  Stand  by  The  Supreme  Court
It  Voted  to  Approve  "But Not  Endorse" A  Report Few  Had  Time  to  Read
The  American   Bar  Association  has  been  in  the   forefront
of  progress  backward.   It  once  upheld  the  constitutional  right
of  small  children  to  work  without  interference  by  child  labor
laws  and  it  opposed minimum wage  legislation  as  an  infringe-
ment  on  liberty  of  contract.   For  a  short  period  in  the  late
30's  under  the  influence  of  Grenville  Clark,  its  Bill  of  Eights
committee  began  to  defend  fundamental  liberties  of  the  kind
that  carry  no  dollar  sign.   But  with  the  cold  war  this  com-
mittee  became moribund  and  the  ABA set  up  a  Special  Com-
mittee  on  Communist  Tactics,  Strategy  and  Objectives.   This
has   provided   the  annual   meetings   ever  since  with  copious
quotations  from  Lenin, Stalin  and the  Daily  Worker.
This  Committee's  high  point  was  the  1957  meeting  in  Lon-
don  where  it  implied that  the  Supreme  Court  was  subverting
the  American  Way  of  Life  by  upholding the   Bill  of  Rights.
Last  year,  however,  the  Committee met  with  a  setback  when
the  ABA declined  to  accept  its  recommendation that  the  ap-
pellate  jurisdiction  of  the   Supreme  Court  be  cut  down  via
the  Jenner  bill.  This  year  at  Chicago  it  did better.
Splitting  A Mighty  Fine  Hair
The  Committee  turned  in  a  report  objecting  to  just  about
everything   the   Warren   court  has   done  and  recommending
legislation   to  get  around  the   Watkins,   Yates,   Nelson  and
other  decisions.  The  Board  of  Governors transmitted  all  this
to  the   House  of  Delegates   with  only  one  minor  correction
but   said   its   "recommendation  for   approval"  of  the  report
"does  not  constitute   endorsement  of  the  report   itself."   To
recommend  a  report  for  approval  without  endorsing  its  con-
tents  is  quite  a  feat,  matched  only  by  the  Board's   further
disclaimer  of  any  intention  "to  indicate  censure  of  the   Su-
preme  Court."  That,  too,  is  a  fine  hair  to  split.
The  most  striking   example  of  the  ABA's  capacity   to  re-
main  chastely  unaware  was  its  approval  of  the  recommenda-
tion  that  the  Smith  Act  be amended  to  get  around  the   Yates
decision,  which  required   some  evidence  of   incitement—not
mere  advocacy—for  conviction.  Just  how  this  can  be  done
without  running  afoul  of  the  First  Amendment  was  left  un-
answered.
The  "Liberals"  Do  A  Vanishing  Act
The   outcome  at   Chicago   might   have   been   worse.   Two
liberal  victories  were  won,  one  of  them  by  a  disappearing
act.   Last  year  the  House  of  Delegates   evaded  recommenda-
tions  from  the  Committee  on  Communist  Tactics  for   exten-
sion  of  the  security  program   to  non-sensitive  positions  and
for  denial  of  passports  on  the  basis  of  confidential  informa-
tion.   The  Committee  was  instructed  .to  confer  with   another
ABA  Special  Committee, that  on Individual  Rights  as  Affect-
ed by  National  Security. This  high-sounding  committee  seems
to  have  vanished  so  completely  that  no  conference  could  be
arranged.    Ergo  the  -Board  of  Governors  again  withheld  ac-
tion  on these   proposals.
The  other  liberal  victory  was  the  elimination  of  a  reference
which  seemed  to  dismiss  basic  constitutional   safeguards   as
"technicalities."   The  New  York   Times,  to  its  credit,  spoke
out   sharply   against  this   in  an   editorial   February   23.   A
liberal  revolt  struck  the  phrase  out,  but  did  not  succeed  in
delaying  action  on the  report  itself  until  delegates  could have
time  to  read  the  50-page  document on which they were  voting.
The  Committee  on  Communist  Tactics  is  about  as  repre-
sentative   of  different   legal  points  of  view  as  the   Women's
Christian  Temperance  Union  was  of  whiskey-drinkers.    The
chairman, Peter  Campbell  Brown,  was  so  injudicious as  head
of  the  Subversive  Activities   Control  Board  he  drove  its  one
liberal  member  into  public protest;  as  a  New  York  City  of-
ficial, Mr.  Brown  distinguished  himself  by  leading  the  move-
men  to   make  teachers  inform.    Louis   C.  Wyman,  another
member,  is  the  New  Hampshire   Attorney   General  who  was
Backward  and  Forward  But   Ever
Onward  and  Downward
"Also  during  the  past  year, the  Communists went for-
ward  with  the  rocks and garbage  thrown  at  Vice  Presi-
dent  Nixon in South America; backward  with  the  smiles
of  Menshikov; forward  with the  executions  of  Nagy  and
Maleter; backward  by allowing Tito to make a  few anti-
Soviet  statements; forward  with  the  defeats  of  anti-
Communists  in  Syria  and  Indonesia.  .  .  ."
—Report   to   the  American  Bar   Association   by  its
Special   Committee   on  Communist    Tactics.
rebuked  by  the  Court  in  the  Sweezy  case.   Ray  Murphy  was
once  head  of  the  American  Legion  and  Louis  B.  Nichols  was
long  the  right  hand  man  of  J.  Edgar  Hoover.  At  least  one
or  two  of  the  other  members  struck  reporters  in  Chicago  as
badly  in  need  of  a  long,  quiet  rest.   They  were  unanimous
in  finding  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee  practically
beyond   reproach,  though   they   felt   its   enabling   resolution
needed  some  face-lifting.
Theology  and  Economics  as  Well  as  Law
Their  report  covers diplomacy, economics, and  theology  as
well  as  law.   It   goes  back  to  a  statement   by  Secretary  of
State  Colby  in   1920  refusing  recognition  of  the   Bolsheviks
and  it  ends  up  with  quotations  from  such  eminent  divines  as
J.  Edgar   Hoover,  John  Foster  Dulles  and  Pius  XI  on  the
moral  incompatibility of  co-existence.  It  objects  to  a  summit
conference,   cultural   exchanges,   recognition   of   Red   China,
East-West   trade   and  any  agreement  to  halt  nuclear  tests.
Its  fruity  collection  of  horrendous  quotations  even  includes
proof  that  Stalin  misled  the  good  people  of  St.  Petersburg
in  the  election  of  Jan.   12,   1913.
Splashing  frenetically  about  on  so  many  diverse   aspects
of  the  Red  Peril,  the  report's  discoveries  do not  always  seem
to  fit  its  preconceptions.  It  finds  that  due  to  the  arms  race,
U.  S.  gold  reserves  "are   becoming  alarmingly  low,"  inviting
the  subversive  idea  that  maybe  we  ought  to  try  and  nego-
tiate  an  arms  agreement   after   all.   It  says  Soviet   advances
into  outer  space  "have  doubtless  been  aided  by  the  theft  of
secrets  from   American  scientists,"  suggesting  that   perhaps
we  ought  to  steal  those  secrets  back  again.
Mustn't  Repeat  the  Reichstag's  Mistake
The  FBI  in  this  report  rates  neck-and-neck  with  mother-
hood.  Yet  at  one point  the  report  says  experience  shows   "the
danger of restricting  legislative investigations . . . the  Reich-
stag  never  exposed  the  Nazis,  purges  by  Hitler,   concentra-
tions  camps  and  secret  police."   The  moral  here  seems  to  be
that  Congress  ought  to  investigate  our  secret  police  before
it  is too late.
At  times  the  report  is  disappointing.    The  reader  learns
with  a  thrill  of  horror  that  in  December,  1957,  "the  Commu-
nist  Daily  Worker   desecrated   the  greatest  religious  holiday
in  Christendom."    He  expects  to find at  least  that  the  paper
freshened  up  its  holiday  ink that  year  with  the  blood  of new
born  Christian  babes.   It  is  a  let-down  finally  to  be  told  that
these  dastardly  conspirators   merely  suggested  that   cultural
exchanges  with  the  Soviet  Union  was  Santa's  best  Christmas
present  that  year  to  the  American  people.
Nowhere  does  the  report  strike  out  more  strongly  than  at
the  popular  belief  that  "Communism  in  the  U.  S.  is  dwindl-
ing  in  power  because  the  Party  is  dwindling  in  numbers."
The  ABA Committee says  this  shows  "a  complete  misunder-
standing  of  Leninism."   It  says  Lenin  coined  the  phrase,  "the
fewer  the  better."  From  this  one can  only  conclude  that  the
Communist  Party  USA  is  getting  better  every   day.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  9,1959
Bulktin;   All  Who  Want  Peace   Must  Press  Hard  to   Keep  the   Geneva  Parley   Going
Dulles When  in  London  Tried  to  Persuade  Macmillan  to  End  Test  Talks
I  am  reliably  informed  that  Mr.  Dulles  when  he  was  in
London  recently  tried  to  get  Macmillan to  agree  to  break off
the  talks  in  Geneva  for  a  test  cessation  agreement.   Pressure
is building up  within  the  Administration  for  a  break-off,  and
some  officials  hope  to  be  able  to  announce it  as  soon  as  the
British  Prime  Minister returns  from Moscow.
The  crucial  point  is  the  voting  procedure  in  the   control
commission  to  be  set  up  to  monitor  explosions.   Whether  a
satisfactory   agreement  can   be   reached  no  one,  of  course,
knows  but  one  thing  can  be  said  with  certainty.   The  possi-
bilities  of  compromise have  not  been exhausted.   Indeed,  they
have  not  been  fully  explored.
Two  items  which  have  gone  almost  unnoticed indicate  the
possibilities.  A  statement  issued  by  the  USSR  Foreign  Min-
istry  on  February  16 and  circulated  here  by  the  Soviet  Em-
bassy  to  the  press  says,  "In  order  to  preclude the  possibility
of  the  control  commission's  being  exploited  in  the   interests
of  any  single  country,  it  is  necessary  to  find  a  voting  pro-
cedure  in this  agency  which would  assure  equal  status for  all
parties  and  equally take  into  consideration  their  security  in-
terests.  The  Soviet  Government  is  ready  to  cooperate  in  the
search  for  such  a  procedure."
Obviously  this   is  different   from   insistence   on  unanimity
or  a  veto.  Senator  Humphrey at  a  Senate  disarmament   sub-
committee  meeting  February  25  indicated  one  possible  com-
promise  along this  line.  "I  have  thought," he said, "that what
we might  do is  to  have  at  each  of these  points,  control  points,
or  in  the  control  commission  over  the  test  ban,  not  only  the
three  participants—the  United  Kingdom,  the  U.  S.  and  the
U.  S.  S. R—but  to  permit  the  USSR  to  select  what  it  calls
a  neutral,  and to  permit  the  UK  and the  USA  to  select  what
they  call  a  neutral,  and  therefore  have  two  neutrals,  so that
if  the  Soviet  Union  does  have  a  valid  case,  it  will  at  least
have  an  opportunity  to  have  a  majority,  and  the   principle
of  majority  rule  would  be  controlling."   Senator   Humphrey
'  added, "For  us to  permit  this  conference to  break  up  without
searching   out   every   alternative   on  our   initiative,   in   my
mind,  would  be  a  sad,  sad  mistake."
Time  For  Those  New  House  Liberals  to  Follow  Proxmire's  Example
Senator  Proxmire  got  a  sour  reaction  to  his  courageous
speech  Feb.  23  against   Lyndon  Johnson's   one  man  control
of  the  Senate.
But  it  is  important  to  notice  (1)  that  no  one  denied  that
there hadn't  been  a  real  party  caucus in the  Senate  for  years
and   (2)  not  even  the   Southern  conservatives  rose  to  deny
that   Lyndon  more  and  more  runs  the  show.    The  only  an-
swer,  Neuberger's,  was  on  a  petty  plane—it  merely  added  up
to  a  sneer  about  Proxmire's  having  accepted  favors   from
Johnson.   But  is  the   T'ight  to  serve  on  committees  a  favor,
for  which  one  must  pay  with  lifelong  fealty  to  the  Leader?
The  real  point  is  not  Lyndon  Johnson;  he  is  an  able  man,
and  a  man  of  good will.  But  he  tailors  the  party  program  to
fit  the  needs  of  Texas.   He  makes  the  center  of  gravity  the
Southern  moderates  rather  than  the  majority  forces  of  the
Democratic  party,   not   merely   on  civil  rights  but   on   such
social-economic  needs  as  school  construction.
The  real  point  is  that  without  democratic  discussion  with-
in  the  ranks  of  the  Democratic party  in  the  Senate,  the  will
of  the  voters  is  to  a  large  extent  negatived.   The   Senator,
instead  of  being  dependent  on  his  constituents,   is  dependent
on  the  leadership  and  disproportionately  influenced  by  lead-
ership  decisions, decisions  taken  without  consulting  the  party
Consulting  With  Lyndon
Mrs.  McCLENDON  [San  Antonio Light]:  He  [Lyn-
don  Johnson]  calls  nearly  all  the  Democratic  Senators.
Does  he  call  you  from  time  to  time  to  ask  your  advice?
Senator   Wm.  PROXMIRE  (D.  Wis.):  I  have  come
into  Senator  Johnson's  office,  and  it  is  a  very  interest-
ing  experience. ... It  is  usually a  one-way  conversa-
tion.   Regardless  of  who  the  person  is,  no  matter  how
vigorous  they  are  or  how  articulate  they  are  or  how
well-informed  they  are  on  the  measure,   it  is  usually
Lyndon  Johnson  talking  and  this  is  so  at  the  beginning
of  the  meeting  and  at  the  end  of  the  meeting.
—Meet  the  Press, March  1.
caucus.   The  result  is  Congressional monarchy.
Proxmire,  like  La  Follette  in  his  attack   a  half   century
ago  on "Boss" Aldrich  in  the  Senate,  has  opened up  a  crucial
issue  and  deserves  the  widest  support  and  applause  for  it.
Now,  in  Proxmire's   wake,  is  the  time  for  the  new  young
liberals  in  the  House to  speak  up  along  the  same  lines.   Sam
Rayburn,  too,  hasn't  had  a  real  caucus  in  years.
An  Eye-Witness  Report  on the  New  Cuban Regime by  Congressman  Porter
"Fidel   Castro,   President   Manuel  Urrutia,   Ambassador
Dihigo,  his  Cabinet  Ministers  and  the  'barbados'  or  bearded
ones  in  the  26th  of  July  Movement  are  not  the  kind  of  peo-
ple  who countenance 'blood  baths',  much less  arrange  them.
.  .  . The Castro  men never  looted,  they  never  raped,  they
never  tortured  or killed  prisoners.  .  .  .  Yes,  an army  is in
control  of  Cuba,  the  rebel  army.   But  there  are  civil  liber-
ties,  including freedom  of  the  press,  and  there  is  a  promise
of  free  and  honest  elections  in  less than  two years.  The  men
who  are  in  command  are  decent  men  worthy  of  our  support
and  sympathy. . . .
"The  press  has  been  free  and  wide-ranging  since  Batista
left,  yet  I  have  to date  seen  not  even  one allegation  that  an
innocent  person  has  been  executed  or  that  any  one  of  those
condemned  had no opportunity to defend  himself,  . . . The
persons  being  executed are  not  shot  because  they  are  'Ba-
tista  supporters'  as  one news  story  stated,  but  because  they
were  murderers  of  defenseless  men,  women  and  children.
Castro  can  predict  that  about  400 will  be  executed  because
he  knows  very  well  the  files  on  the  notorious  murderers  in
the  police  and in  Masferrer's  'tiger'  army.  .  .  .  Batista's
men  helped  by  not  trying  to  hide  many  of  their  atrocities,
thinking  to  intimidate  the  Cubans.
"I  knew  about  these  atrocities  and  I  blamed  Batista  for
them  while  he  was  in  office.   Many  Cubans  and  others  sent
me  stories  and  photographs.  Why  didn't  the  nation  know?
One  reason  is  that  Batista  corrupted  the  press,  even  some
of  our  own.  He bought good words or,  at  least,  silence.  The
Associated  Press  fired  one  of  its  employes in  Havana,  Ar-
royo  Maldonado,  a  Cuban citizen,  about  a  year  ago  when  it
found  he was receiving  money from  Batista. . . .
"The   shoe  is   ROW on  the  other   foot  in  Latin   America.
Not  long  ago  the  lovers  of  freedom  were  running  and  hid-
ing  from  torture  and  death.   Now the  forces  of  decency  and
democracy  are  growing  stronger.   They  control  Cuba  and
Venezuela,  both  potentially  wealthy  countries.   Their   lead-
ers  speak  out  against  Trujillo.   They  are  justified  in  doing
so.  I think this is in keeping with the most  sacred  traditions
of  the  United  States,  a  country  which  was  born  out  of  revo-
lution  against  a  tyrant."
—Cong.  Chas.  O. Porter  (D.  Ore.),  "Eye-Witness  Report",   to  the  Cleveland,  Ohio, City  Club,  Feb.  28.
4   i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I..F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  8,1959
We   Seem   to  Notice  A  Resemblance
Sen.  DODD  (D.  Conn.)  To me.  flexibility  implies   com-
promise  and  concession.   When  applied  to  fundamental
principles,  right  principles,  flexibility  is  not  only  with-
out   virtue;   it   becomes   a   vice.   What   concessions  or
compromises  can  we  make  on  the  basic  principles  of
our  Berlin  policy?  . . .
Mr.  Krushchev  stated,  only  a  few  days  ago, that  the
Soviet  policy  is  absolutely  inflexible;  that  the  Kremlin
will  make  no  concessions;  that  they  do  not  even  want
a  Foreign  Ministers'  Conference.  The  Communists  have
remained   intransigeant.  . . .
—U. S.  Senate, Feb.  2U,  Debate  on Berlin.
The  Basic  Clues  to  the  Tense  and  Tangled  Negotiations  Now  Beginning  on  Berlin
Neither  Side  Would  Win  A  Free  German  Election  on  Its  Own  Future
Certain  basic observations  may help  us  find  our  way through
the  labyrinthine and  tense  negotiations  beginning  about  Berlin.
1.  A  nuclear   rearmed  West  Germany  in  NATO  means  a
permanently  divided Germany  and  therefore  a  divided   Europe.
2.  As  long  as  Germany  and  Europe  are  divided,  West  Ber-
lin  will  remain  an  exposed   salient  difficult  to  defend.
3.  The   Soviet   bloc  can  take  advantage   of   that   salient   at
any  time  to  exert  pressure  on  the  West.   Moscow   holds   the
initiative  at  that  point,  and  it  can  throw  the  West  into  a  bad
case  of  hysterics  and  then  make  it  look  silly,  as  we  will  look
silly  for  example  if  East  German  border  guards  make  no  ef-
fort   to   interfere  with   military   convoys   and   merely   stamp
passes,  as  they  do  now  on  the  civilian   traffic.
A  UN   Garrison  for  A  Free  West  Berlin?
4.  A  conference  on  Berlin  alone  cannot  succeed;  the  area
of   negotiations   is  too  narrow;  one  side  or  the  other   would
have  to  back  down,  though   sensibly  considered  a  Free  West
Berlin  guaranteed   by  all   the   powers  and   garrisoned   perma-
nently   by  United   Nations  troops   (a  point  the  Russians  have
not  offered)  might  be  just  as  secure  and  get  us  off  the  hook.
5.  If  there  were  no  exposed  West  Berlin  in  the  middle  of
East   Germany,   the   two   parts  of   Germany  might   not   only
settle  down  to  an  uneasy co-existence but  come  into  ever  closer
relations  as  they have  been  doing.
6.  In  the  same  way  that  West  Berlin  complicates  the  fu-
ture  of  Germany,  so  Germany  complicates  the  future  of  Eu-
rope.    If  the  two  Germanics  were  somewhere  off  on  a  sepa-
rate  island,  their  division would  not  matter  much.   But  since
they  are  in  the  heart  of  Europe,  neither  side  wants  to  with-
draw  and  let  Europe  unite  again  until  they  are  sure  a  united
Germany  won't  end  up  in  the  other  camp.
7.  So  crucial  a  struggle  can  only  be  settled  peacefully  by
bargaining  if  the   field  of  negotiations  is  broad  enough   to  en-
able  both  sides  to  gain  something  from  the  settlement.   That
is  why  the  agenda  offered  by  the  Russians  for  a  Foreign   Min-
isters'  meeting  is  too  narrow  for  success—it  covers  only  West
Berlin  and  a  peace  treaty  with  the  separate  Germanics—but
the  agenda   offered   for  a  summit  meeting   is  hopeful   because
it  also  covers  disengagement,  disarmament,  cessation  of   test-
ing  and  abolition  of  atomic  weapons.   On  so  broad  a  terrain
a  successful  agreement  is  possible  /'/  both  sides  want   it.
8.  The   trouble  is  that  the  Adenauer-Dulles  axis  is  deter-
mined  not  to  settle  now,  believing  that  better  terms  can  be
exacted  from  the  Russians later  when  the  Germans  have  a  fully
armed  nuclear army.
On  This  They  Agree  With  The  Kremlin
9.  This  is  a  very  dangerous  poker  game  to  play,  and  while
we  talk  a  lot  about  the  peoples  of  the  Soviet  zone  being "en-
slaved"—and  certainly  they  have  little  freedom—on  this  cen-
tral  issue  there  is  no  doubt  the  Kremlin  speaks  for  the  vast
majority  of  them.   If  Russians, Poles,  Czechs  and   Hungarians
could  vote  in  a  free  election  on  whether  to  allow  the  Germans
to  have  nuclear  arms,  the  "No" vote  would  be  overwhelming.
10.  As   for   Germany  itself,  it   is  generally   agreed   that   a
reunited  Germany  would  have  a  Social  Democratic   majority.
The  Social  Democrats,   like  the  British   laborites,   would  trade
free   elections  in  the   East  Zone  for   a  denuclearized  neutral
Germany.
It  is  a  pity  the  world's  neutrals  aren't  strong  enough   to
challenge   both   Moscow  and  Washington  to  agree  to  a   free
plebiscite  in  Germany  on  its  future.   There  is  little  doubt  the
result  would  be  to  liquidate  the  East  German   regime  but  to
neutralize  a  reunited  Reich.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample   Copy   to  A  Friend  If  You   Send   A  Long  Stamped   Self-Addressed     Envelope
LF.
Please
Name
Street
City  .
Enter
(To)
Street
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
........................................Zone............State....................
gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
3/9/80
..........._.................^.......i««............Stote..-.-.-..«...
we  oend  gift  announcement?        Yes  O    No.  O
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  N«kroiko  Av«.,  N.  W.
W«thi»«t«*  1J,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except   the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5818  Nebraska  Ave..   N.  W., Washington  15, D.  C.
An    Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
?r>  in  (hr.  r.  S.:  $0  in  Canada:  ?10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates :  S15  to  Europe:  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED