I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jan12.pdf

============================================================

Still  Using  Faceless Informers,   P.  3
Exclusive:  Is  Underground  Testing  As  Harmless  As  We Have  Been  Led  to  Believe?    See Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VII,   NO.  2
JANUARY  12,  1959
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15   CENTS
Another  Underground  Triumph  for  Dr.  Teller?
We   hope  the   scientific   community  will  demand  that   the
White  House  reveal  full   details  about  the  seismic  study  on
which   its  alarming   but   vague   announcement   about  under-
ground  nuclear  testing  rests.   Who  were  the  seismologists  on
the  panel   referred  to  in  the  White  House  statement?    Why
wete  their  names  not  made  public?  Were  they  agreed  on  the
conclusions  which  promise  to  make  test  cessation  more  dif-
ficult?   Was  there  a  formal  report?   Did  some  members  dis-
sent?   The  two  days  of  executive  hearings  scheduled  by  the
Joint   Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  for  January  12  and   13
are  to  include  testimony,  according   to  the   advance  release,
from   "representatives  of  the  panel."   Will  these  be  repre-
sentatives  of  all  points  of  view?  Or  only  of  those  on  which
the   Administration   relies?    Despite   the   heavy   blanket  of
secrecy,  informed  scientific  circles  in  .the  capital  report  that
there  were  differences  of  opinion  on  the  panel.   Why  all  the
secrecy,  anyway,  when   it  was  agreed   at  Geneva  that  in   the
future  there  would   be  full   publicity  about  methods   for   de-
tecting  nuclear  tests?    Why  can't  this  new  data  be  released?
Is  Successful  Negotiation   Feared?
There  is  something  fishy about  the  timing  and  the  content
of  the  White   House   announcement.   Is  this  another  under-
ground  triumph  for  Dr.  Teller?   A  year  ago  the  AEC's  scien-
tists  were  telling  us  falsely  that  underground   tests  could   not
be  detected  at  all  beyond  a  few  hundred   miles.   Now  they
tell  us  that  it  is  more  difficult  to  detect  them  than  the  experts
at  Geneva   thought.    Are  they  jumping  to  conclusions  they
have  long  sought  in  order  to  block  a  test  cessation  they  have
always opposed?   Did  they  catch  the  President  in  one  of  those
flashes of  angry  impulse  which  appear  like  summer   lightning
in  the  torpid  climate  of  the  Eisenhower  regime?   Was   there
a  backlash  of  anger  over  Berlin  or  a  sudden  flare-up  of  presi-
dential  activity  because  of  the  new  Soviet  rocket?   Did   some
fear   Mikoyan   might   have   come   bearing   gifts—perhaps   a
major   Soviet  concession  on  inspection?   That  such  a  conces-
sion   is  possible   was  indicated  in  the   second   installment  of
the  notable  account  published  by  the  London  Observer   (Dec.
21  and  Dec.  28)  of  Krushchev's  interview  with  Philip  Noel-
Baker,   Britain's   veteran   fighter   for   disarmament.     "Repeat-
edly  he,"   i.e.  Krushchev,   the   report   of   the   interview  says,
"emphasized   that  his  Government   still  hoped  eventually  to
negotiate  a  comprehensive   settlement,   and   an  all-round   dis-
armament  agreement  with  the  West.   Then,  he  would   even
accept   an   effective   international   inspectorate   in   Soviet   in-
stallations  to  prevent  the  manufacture  or  concealment  of  nu-
clear  weapons."   Did   reports  of  this  kind  alarm  the  bitter
end  opponents  of  an  agreement?
Twice  before  the  Eisenhower  Administration  has  met  major
Soviet   concessions  with  a  sudden   change   of   policy  to   avoid
agreement.   One  occasion,  which  Noel-Baker  calls  "The   Mo-
ment   of   Hope"   in  his   indispensable  book   on   "The   Arms
Race,"  came  on  May   10,  1955,  when   the  Russians  gave   in
and   agreed   to  the   Anglo-French   memorandum   linking   re-
duction  in  conventional   arms  with  reduction   in  nuclear.   The
Russians  agreed  to  the  suggested   military  manpower  ceilings
of  between  one  and  one  and  a  half  million  men,  thus  meet-
ing  the  argument  that  we  could  not  afford  to  give  up  nuclear
weapons  because  of  their  superiority  in  conventional  armies.
This   Russian   reversal  was  at  first  welcomed   but  then   after
a  silence of  months  the  West  dropped   the  whole  idea,  sub-
stituting   the   aerial   inspection    razzle-dazzle   Nelson   Rocke-
feller   worked  out   for   Eisenhower's  presentation   at  the  Ge-
neva   summit  conference.    The   second   occasion   when   our
government  shifted  policy  just  as  agreement  seemed   possible
came  in  the  spring  of   1957  when  Stassen  had  persuaded   the
Russians—and   Eisenhower—to   enter   into   a   test    cessation
agreement   apart   from   other   issues.   It   was  then   that   Dr.
Teller  was  dramatically   rushed  to  the  White  House  by  Ad-
miral   Strauss  to   pleacl   fur   another  five  years  of   testing   to
perfect  a  "clean"  bomb.
Planning  to   Hear   Only  One  Side?
The   only  witnesses  named   in  the   Joint   Committee's   an-
nouncement  of  its  executive hearings  this  week  are  Dr.  Teller
and   three  other   AEC-Pentagon   executives,   all  of   them   op-
posed   to  a   test   cessation  agreement   even   before   this   new
discovery  that  detection  of  underground  tests  may  be  more
difficult   than  hitherto  supposed.    They   are  Gen.   Herbert  B,
Loper,   assistant   to   the   Secretary   of   Defense    for   Atomic
Energy;  Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  D.  Starbird,  director  of  the  Divi-
sion   of   Military  Applications  of   the   Atomic  Energy   Com-
mission,  and  Dr.  Norris  Bradbury,  director  of  the  Los Alamos
Laboratory.  All  four  have professional  stakes  in  the  continued
testing   and   development   of   nuclear   weapons.    While   the
White   House   announcement  is  coached  purely  in  terms  of
new  scientific  observations  on  the  difficulty  of  detecting  tests,
the  Joint  Committee  says  it  will  hear  testimony  "on  the  status
of   the  Geneva  negotiations  and   the   effects     of   a  test  ban   on
the  nuclear  weapons  program."   (Italics  added).    This  is  to
reopen   the   whole   subject  mid-way  in  the   negotiations   and
to  give  opponents   of   any  agreement   a  chance  to   speak   in
private,  free  from  rebuttal  by  other  scientists.
Some  New  Revelations
Now  we  want  to  turn  to  another   aspect  of  this  question
and  call  attention  to  certain  matters  which  have  so  far   escaped
public   attention.    Dr.   Teller,   former   AEC    Commissioner
Murray,  consultant  to  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic   Energy;
{Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  12,  1959
Subsoil  Nuclear  Blasts  May Not  Be  As  Safe  as  Dr.  Teller  Would  Like  Us  to  Believe
The  Evidence Indicates  Two  Underground  Tests  Were  Not  "Contained"
{Continued  from  Page  One)
and  Senator  Gore  of  Tennessee,   a  member  of  the  Committee
whom  Lyndon  Johnson  named  as  the  Senate's  observer  at  the
Geneva  talks  on  testing,  all  favor  (Dr.  Teller  as  a  second  line
of  defense)   continuation  of  testing  underground.   The  new
tack  may  be  to  settle  for  underground  testing  if  world  public
opinion   is  too  strong   to  allow  for   continued   aerial   testing
with  its  attendant  atmospheric  pollution.
The  Basic  Assumption  May  Not  Be  True
But  all  this   depends   on  the  assumption   that  testing  can
be contained  harmlessly  underground  without  attendant  atmo-
spheric  or ground-water contamination.  The  first  official  Liver-
more  Laboratory  report   (UCRL  5124)   on  the  underground
nuclear  detonation  "Rainier"  of  September  19,  1957,  claimed
it  had  been  contained  "within  a  radius of  about  60  feet,"  that
"the   likelihood  of  ground-water  contamination  is  believed  to
be  zero"  and  finally  that  "because  of  the  effectiveness  of  con-
tainment   and  the  negligible  seismic  effects,  it  was  clear  that
detonation,  even  at  much  larger  magnitudes,  could  be  safely
fired  in  many  locations."    This   Weekly   last  year  forced   the
AEC  to  admit  that  the  seismic  effects  were  not  "negligible"
and  that  seismic detection, far  from  being  confined  to  a radius
of  some  200  miles,  had  occurred   2300  miles  north  in  Alaska
and   some   1200   miles  east  in  Arkansas.   We   now  want  to
show  that  "the  effectiveness  of  containment"  is  also  open   to
question.
A  New  Report  Which  Has  Gone  Unnoticed
We  want  to  call  the  attention  of  the  scientific community
to- a  more  recent  but  unnoticed  report  by  the  Livermore  Lab-
oratory  on  that  first  underground  explosion   (UCRL  5281).
It   is  obtainable  through   the   Office   of  Technical   Services  at
the   Department   of   Commerce.    It   is  called    "Temperatures
and  Pressures  Associated   With  the  Cavity  Produced  by  The
Rainier  Event."    This  shows  that  the  Rainier  explosion  was
not   contained   underground   "within   a   radius   of   about   60
feet"   but  vented   underground  through   one  or  more  major
fractures  in  the  earth.   "None  of  these  fractures  communicated
with- the  surface"  so  there  was  no  escape  of  residual  radio-
activity  to  the  atmosphere.   The  report  does  not  disclose  how
far   the   noxious   gases   escaped   underground   through   these
fissures nor  does  it  discuss  the  problem  of  contaminating  un-
derground   water   sources   by  such  underground    "accidents."
But  it  is  clear  that  Livermore  Laboratory  in  its  original  re-
port  and  Dr.  Teller  in  his  public  pronouncements  overstated
the  extent  to  which  one  could  be  sure  of  safely  "containing"
underground   explosions.
Secondly  we  want  to   call  attention  to   the   circumstances
surrounding the  bigger  20-kiloton  underground  test,  "Blanca,"
at  the  same  site  in  Nevada  on  October  30,  the  final  explosion
of   last  Fall's  series.   Gladwin  Hill's   dispatch   in  the   New
York   Times  next  day  was  written  in  the  same  vein  of   AEC
ballyhoo  as  his  deceptive account  in  1957  of  the  first  under-
ground  test  to  which  we  called  attention  last  year.   Mr.  Hill
s.iid  the  tunnel  blast  "brought  only  a  fleeting  jar  to  observers
four   miles  away,"  that  "the  holocaust  of   radiation  and   the
explosive  force  of  20,000  tons  of  TNT  were  almost  entirely
[our  italics]  bottled  up  within  the  mountain"  and  that   "the
only   visual  evidence  was   a   thick   column  of   dust"   which
"surged  slowly  up  from  the  mountainside"   and  "was  mostly
dissipated  within  ten  minutes."   He  went  on dithyrambically
to  say  that  this  new  test  "indicated  an  incalculable  scope  for
pursuing  weapons  tests  free  of  the  radiation  hazards  that  have
alarmed  the  world"  and  that  "on  the  peaceful  side"  it  marked
"a  major  step  toward  the  underground   testing  of   immensely
more  powerful  explosions  involving hydrogen  bombs:"   Then
he  went  on  to  describe  how  "The   explosion's  force  was  bot-
tled  up  by curving the  inner  end  of  the  tunnel  back on  itself,
like  the  crook  of  a  cane,  during  construction.  The  explosion
caved  in  the  tunnel  ahead  of  the  chamber  where  it  occurred,
thus  'corking'  its  own   force."
The   "Cork"  Didn't  Stay  Put
But  there  seerns  to  be  some  doubt  about  the    "corking."
The   Associated  Press  dispatch  from   the  scene   (see   the  San
Francisco  Chronicle,  Oct.  31)  spoke  of  an  underground  blast
"that  ripped  a  huge  hole  in  the  mesa  at  the  Nevada  test  site
and  triggered  a  fallout  scare  in  the  Los  Angeles  area."    The
AP  story  said   "The   charge  fired  at  7  a.  m.  rent  the  calm
of  a  desert  sunrise with  a  tremendous  explosion  that  sent  a
500-foot  wide  column   of   debris  soaring  1,000   feet   above
the  mesa."    It  went  to  to  report  that   "newsmen  4i/
2
   miles
away  from  the  'Blanca'  test  first  felt  a  jolting earthquake-like
shock,   then   saw  the   great   fountain  of   rock  and   sand   rise
majestically  upward  from  a  point  of  the  mesa's  slope  directly
above  the  blast  chamber.   Great  rocks  along  the  mesa's  rim
above  the  yucca flat were  dislodged  and  thundered   downward.
A  jet  pilot  flying  overhead  said  the  entire  mesa  shook,   then
was  dimmed  by  rising  dust."
The  AEC  Makes  An  Admission
Someone  at  the  New  York   Times  seems  to  have  been  puz-
zled  by  the  differences   between   these   accounts   and  directed
an  inquiry  to  the  AEC.  The  Late  City Edition, Oct.  31 carried
a  short  item  from  Washington   which  shows  that  this  elicited
an  interesting admission:
"Washington,   Oct.   30—The   underground   atomic   explo-
sion  in  Nevada  today  broke  through  the  surface  'slightly',
Atomic    Energy   Commission   sources   said   tonight.    This
statement  apparently  explained  the  thick  column  of   dust
near  the  entrance  of  the  shaft  in  which  the  device  was  ex-
ploded.     A   BREAK-THROUGH    HAD   NOT  BEEN   EX-
PECTED.    [Our   emphasis—IPS]  Commission  sources  said
that  this  development  had  not  been  evaluated."
Will  some  member  of  the  Joint  Committee  ask  the  AEC
at  this  week's  secret  hearings  about  that   unexpected   break-
through?   The  evidence  shows   (1)   that  the  first  small  1.7
kiloton   shot  was  not   "contained"   as  originally  thought   but
that   noxious  gases   vented   underground,  and   (2)    that   the
first  "Hiroshima"   size   underground    test,   "Blanca"  burst  a
hole  in  the  side  of  the  mesa.   Did  it  carry  radioactivity with
it?   Did  it  add  to  the  heavy  fallout  alarming  Los  Angeles  at
the   time?    If   unexpected  break-throughs  can  occur  with   a
mere  20-kiloton  explosion,  can  we  trust  the  optimistic  fore-
casts   about  underground   hydrogen   bomb   blasts  measurable
in  megatons,  i.e.  1,000  kilotons?   Are  underground  tests  as
safe  and  containable as  we  have  been  led  to  suppose?
Reprints  of  this  Issue  Available  in  Lots  of  100  at  3c  Each  —  Smaller  Quantities  5c
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  IS,  1959
2,000,000  U.  S.  Employes  and  3.000,000   Defense  Workers  Still  Subjected   to  McCarthyism
The  Government  Beats  A  Cowardly  Retreat  on  the  Faceless  Informer  Issue
Government  employes  have  been  trying  for   ten  years  to
get  the  Supreme  Court  to  decide whether  in  loyalty  cases  the
government  could  use  "faceless  informers",   i.e.   unidentified
accusers  not   subject   to  confrontation  and  cross-examination.
The  first  test,  the  Dorothy  Bailey  case,  began  in  July,   1948,
but  when  it  finally  reached  our  highest  tribunal  in   1951,   the
Court  split  4-4  and  the  issue was  left  unresolved.
When  the  next  appeal,  the  Peters  case,  reached  the   Court
in  1955  (after  the  then  Solicitor  General,  now  Circuit  Court
Judge,  Simon  Sobeloff   refused   as  a  matter  of   conscience  to
sign  the  government's  brief  defending  faceless  informers),  a
majority  could  only  be  mustered  for  deciding  the  case  on  a
minor  issue.  Over  the  protest  of  Justices  Black  and  Douglas,
the  Court  evaded  the  question  of  anonymous accusation.
Later  that  year,  when  the  Ninth   Circuit  Court  of   Appeals
in  California  held  that  the  Coast  Guard  could  not  bar  sea-
men  from  employment  on  undisclosed  security  charges—the
first   Circuit   Court   decision  against   faceless   informers—the
government  decided  not  to  appeal  even  at  the  cost  of  leaving
the  law  uncertain.  Now,  on  the  verge  of  a  new  test  in  the
Charles  Allen  Taylor  case,  the  government  has  suddenly  beat
another  cowardly retreat, ordering  the  victim  cleared  and  ask-
ing  the  Court  to  dismiss  the  appeal  as  moot.
Police  State  Practice
Mr.  Taylor's  counsel,  Joseph  L.  Rauh,  Jr.,  and  Harold   A.
Cranefield,  have  announced  their  intention  to  fight  nonethe-
less  for  a  decision.   The  case  is  not  really  moot  by  any  com-
mon  sense standard  so  long  as  the  blot  remains  on  Mr.  Tay-
lor's  reputation  and  so  long  as  2,000,000  Federal   employes
and  more  than  3,000,000  persons  employed  on  Defense  De-
partment  contracts  remain  subject  to  such   procedures.
Mr.  Taylor   was  a  tool  maker  at  Bell  Aircraft  in   Buffalo
from   1941  until  1956  when  he  was  suddenly deprived  of  his
clearance  and  discharged  from  his  job  on  a  charge  of  having
been   a  member   of   the   Communist  Party   13   or   14  years
earlier.   As  in  the   Bailey  case,  everything  on  the   record   in
the  ensuing  hearings  was  in  Mr.  Taylor's  favor;  his  sworn
denials  were  supported   by  11  witnesses.
The  government   presented  no  witnesses  against  him.    In-
stead  it  read  into  the  record  anonymous  synopses  of  informer
reports,  one  of  which  indicated  considerable  confusion  since
it  accused  Mr.  Taylor  of  being  a  member  of  the   Trotzkyist
Socialist   Workers   Party   when   he   is   charged   with   being
a  Communist.   The  Hearing  Board,  according  to  the  petition
to  the  Supreme  Court,   "refused   to  indicate  whether  it  had
ever  examined  the  confidential  informants,  what  if  anything
it  knew  about  their  past  criminal  or  other   records,  what  de-
gree   of   hearsay   was   involved/'    Such   procedures   put   the
burden  of  proof   on  the  accused,   requiring  him  to  prove  a
negative.    This  is  police  state  practice.
A  Sudden  Reversal
As   recently  as  October   13,  the   Industrial   Personnel  Se-
curity   Review  Board  of   the   Defense   Department   not   only
upheld   the  charges   against  Mr.  Taylor   but   accused  him  of
perjury.    But  when  the  Supreme  Court   took   the  rather  un-
usual  step  of  allowing  the  Taylor  case  to  be  appealed   directly
Correction   and   Apology
In   the   first   line  on  page  one  last  week,  the   word
"veto"  turned  up  as  "vote,"  painfully   depriving   the
sentence  of  sense.   It  should  have  read,   "A  minority
of  Southerners  can exercise  a  veto.  .  .  ."
from  the  District  Court,  skipping  the  Court  of  Appeals,  the
government   became  alarmed.   On   January   2,   his   counsel,
Mr.  Rauh,  received  a  letter  from  A.  Taylor  Port,  director  of
the  Security  Review  Office,   saying  that  Secretary  of   Defense
Neil   H.   McElroy  had   decided  that   Mr.   Taylor's   clearance
for   access  to  secret  information  had  suddenly  been  found  to
be  "in  the national  interest."
There   was   no   apology,   no   offer   of   a   public   statement
clearing  Mr.  Taylor,  no  retraction  of  the  perjury  charge,  and
of   course  no  promise  to  recompense  him   for   the  cost   and
agony  of  almost  two  and  a  half  years  of  litigation.   Nor   was
there  any  promise  to  change  the  hearing   procedures.     One
suspects   that   "the   national  interest"  as  reinterpreted   by  the
Defense  Department  is  its  own  bureaucratic interest  in  avoid-
ing  a  possible  Supreme  Court   defeat.   To   declare  the   case
moot  would  be  to  let  official  trickery  elude  justice.
Like  Fighting  A  Fog
If  the  Taylor  appeal  is  dismissed  as  moot,  the  Court  will
still  have before  it  the  companion  case  of  William  L.  Greene,
which  also  tests  Defense  Dept.  security  procedures.   The  gov-
ernment  may  hope  it  can  evade  the  faceless  informer  issue  in
that  one.    Mr.  Greene's  tragedy  is  spelled  out  in  an  Ameri-
can  Civil  Liberties  Union  brief  filed  on  his  behalf.
Mr.  Greene's   career  was  wrecked   in   1953   by   withdrawal
of  clearance  on  security  charges.   He  had  been  making  $18,-
000  a  year  plus  bonuses;  he  was  quickly  reduced   to  minor
jobs  at  low  pay  under  a  cloud  of  suspicion.   He,   too,   was
denied  the  right  to  confront  accusers,  to  see  the  actual  find-
ings  of  the  Hearings  Board  against  him,  or  even  to  read  the
report  by  FBI  men  on  his  own  interrogation.
But  Mr.  Greene  is  not  accused  of  being  a  Communist,  a
charge  at  least  open  to  proof  or  disproof.   He  fights  a  typical
McCarthyite  miasma:  that  he   associated  with   alleged   Com-
munists;  that   he  was  a  member  of   the  Washington    Book-
shop;  that  his  ex-wife  was  a  Communist;  and  that  he  put
money  in  a  good  music  station  allegedly   controlled  by  pro-
Communists.   Mr.  Greene  does  not  "deny"  these  "charges";
he  merely  asserts  that  he  joined  the  bookshop  for   discounts,
that  he  did  not  know  his  ex-wife  was  a  Communist,  and  that
he  invested  in  the  station  solely  because  he  liked  good   music.
The   government  may  hope   to  evade  the   anonymous  in-
former  issue  by claiming  that  what  is  involved  in  the   Greene
case is the  evaluation  of  political  reliability,  on  which  it  should
be  allowed  to  act without  interference  by the  courts.   The  case
shows  that,  though   McCarthy   is  dead,  McCarthyism  is  still
being  practiced  by  the  U.  S.  government.   How  much  longer
will  the  Supreme  Court  evade  the  issue?   The  issue  revolves
around  what  Judge  Edgerton,  dissenting  nine  years  ago  in  the
Bailey  case,  called  "the  ominous  theory  that  the  right  of  fair
trial  ends  where  defense  of  security  begins."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   January   12,  1959
In  Politics  as  in  Supermarkets,   There  Are  Lessons  Here  for  Old Bolsheviks
One  of  the  Sights  on  Capitol  Hill  That  Mikoyan  May  Have  Missed
We're  glad  Mikoyan  saw  the  Jefferson   chandelier  and  the
Dolly  Madison  mirror  in  Nixon's   office,   but  we're  sorry  he
missed  other  sights  on  Capitol  Hill  which  would  have  taken
some  of  the  strangeness  from  the  scene  and  made  our  visitor
feel  more  at  home.
An   example    was   the   revolt   of   the   liberal    Democrats
against   the   House   Rules   Committee   which   Speaker   Ray-
burn  put   down  with  an   efficiency   Mikoyan  might   not   have
believed  possible  in  our   looser   form  of   government.
It   is  a  pity  Mikoyan   wasn't  outside   the   Speaker's    office
when   the  half   dozen   leaders   of   the   liberal   revolt  arrived,
with  that  anxious   air  of   uncertainty  he  himself   must   have
seen  and  felt  in  the  Kremlin  on  many  occasions.
The  Self-Service   Principle  in   Politics
Mikoyan  would  have  been  surprised  to  see  that  such  mat-
ters/ can  be  handled   with  the   slick  dispatch   he   admires  in
our  supermarkets and  automats—and  on  the  same  mechanized
principle  that  the  customer  serves  himself.
Only   one   member   of   trie   delegation,   Chet   Holifield   of
California,  was  allowed   into  the  Speaker's  office—the   others
had  to  wait  outside—and  when  Holifield  emerged  he  had  to
wrap  up  his  own  package.
It  wasn't   much.   The   delegation   was  there   on   behalf   of
some   150   new   liberal   Congressmen   who   didn't   want   the
legislation  they  had  promised  their  constituents  bottled  up  in
the   Rules   committee.    Rayburn   did   not   bother   to   issue  a
statement  of  his  own.   All  the  rebels  had  to  take  away  with
them  and  give  the  press  was  a  statement  by  Holifield  saying
that  Rayburn  had  said  he  wouldn't  let  any  essential   legisla-
tion  be  bottled  up.   Rayburn  had  not  only  rejected  their  de-
mand  for   re-imposition  of   the  old   21-day  rule  but   refused
to  commit  himself  on  any  of  the  other  parliamentary  devices
for  curbing  the  Rules  committee.
Our  Own  Cult  of   Personality
All   this  was  larded   over   in  the  Holifield   statement   with
thickly  spread  flattery,  of  a  kind  that  Mikoyan  must  remem-
ber  from  the  Cult  of  Personality  era,  about  what  a  wonder-
ful  fellow  the  Speaker  was—and  so  kind  to  liberals:  he  may
have  barked  a  little  but  he  didn't  bite.
And   so  the  Great  Liberal  Democratic  Revolt  of   1959   in
the  wake  of  the  Liberal  Sweep  in  the  elections  of   1958  was
ended  peacefully,  and  in  the  good  old  democratic tradition,
with  a  count  of  heads,  i.e.  Rayburn's  head.   And  despite  his
promise  to  keep  an  eye  on  the  Rules  committee,  there  were
no  hard  feelings.   The   papers   a  few  days  later  carried  pic-
tures  of  Rayburn  with  Chairman  Smith  of  Rules  and  Chair-
man  Mills  of  Ways  and  Means  and  all  three  were  smiling.
Somebody  might  explain  to  Mikoyan  that  these  three  men
are  in  the  innermost  circle  of  the  little  Politbureau  that  runs
the  House  of  Representatives.   A   full   explanation  might   do
much  to  rid  our  visitor of  irrational fears  about  free  elections
and   two-party  systems.    He   could   be  shown   that   we   have
developed  techniques  for  making them  as  manageable  as  the
cruder  one-party  dictatorship.
Levers  Not  to  Be  Found  in  Polling  Booths
The  Soviet  system  isn't  the  only  one  in  which  a  pyramided
structure-and   wheels  within  wheels   enable   a  select   few   to
make  the  real  decisions.   Fewer   than   half   a  dozen   men   in
the  House  of  Representatives  wield  levers  far  more   powerful
than  those  which  voters  are  allowed  to  pull  in  their  voting
booths.
Rayburn,  Smith,  Mills  and  Cannon  of  Appropriations  can
easily  cut  down  to  size  those  notions  about  civil  rights  and
more  money  for   slum  clearance,  schools   and   social   welfare
voters  thought  they  were  voting  for  last   November.
At  home,  campaigning,  their  Representatives  were  all  lion-
hearted  fellows.  But  once  they  get  here  they  soon  learn  they
must  speak  softly.   The  way  to  get  ahead  in  the  House  is  to
curry   favor   with   the   inner   clique.    "Revolts"  are  allowed,
to  keep  the  scene  livelier,  but  only  if  the  rebels  let  the  lead-
ership  understand  they  didn't  really  mean  it.
None  of  this  is  in  the  Constitution,  of  course,  but  Mikoyan
will   recall   that   there   was  nothing   in   Stalin's   Constitution,
either,  about  Stalinism.
The  Filibuster  Rule  Fight  Began  at  Press  Time—We   Report  on  It  Next   Week
IE  Stones  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name     ........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
1/12/59
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send   gift   announcement?     Yes  D    No  Q
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
I    F    Stone's   Weekly.     Entered  as   Second  Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  nnder  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every   Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5018  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
Au   independent    weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  r.  S.:  $8  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED