I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959mar30.pdf

============================================================

No  Crisis Atmosphere  in  Bonn
Report  from   Germany:  The  Bundesrcpublik  Is   Prosperous,  Smug  and  Unconcerned
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  12
MARCH  30,  1959
»,'<"      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Germans  Never  Cared  Less
Bonn,  March  20
In  Frankfort,  in  the  spring  of  1946,  I  could  still  smell  the
unburied  bodies in  the  massive ruins around  the  main  railroad
station.    The  scene,  as  one  stepped  into  it  then,  was  a  night-
marish  backdrop  for  a  Wellsian  movie  of  war  between  the
worlds.   In  the  Park  Hotel  nearby,  where  American journal-
ists  were  quartered, shellholes  made  it  hazardous to  go  to  the
bathroom  at  night.
Now,   13 years  later,  one would  hardly  know  there had  been
a  war.   The  railroad  square is  lined  with  luxurious shops  and
high  office  buildings.    The  streets  and  trams  are  full  of  rosy-
cheeked  people,  ponderously  well-fed.   The  Park  Hotel  has
acquired   a   full   contingent   of   obsequious   and   resplendent
flunkies.
Driving  out  of  the  city,  on  a  lovely  spring  Saturday,  the
roads  are  filled  with   autos,  scooters,  motorcycles  and  bikes
headed  for  the  sports  stadiums.  Small  black cars which remind
one  of  tin  lizzies,  with  "Polizei"  painted  in  white  on   their
hoods,  are  perched  on  the  grassy  edges  of  the  roads,  ready  to
swoop  down  on  lawbreakers.   Police   guards   in  pairs  stand
at  the  stadium  entrances  with  benevolent  mien  and  military
bearing.   At  one  point  a  mounted  police  commander  sits  his
steed  with  the  grace  of  a  cavalry  officer.
Few  Scars  Are  Left
Farther  north   in  the  Rhineland   next   day,  in   Dusseldorf
where  two-thirds  of  the  city  was  destroyed,  the  rebuilt  streets
are  full  of  promenaders  enjoying  a  spring-time  Sunday.   The
Koenigsallee,  the  Champs  Elysees  Napoleon  created  when  he
rebuilt  Duesseldorf  as a  French  bridgehead  on  the  Rhine,  is as
lovely  as ever.   Travelling up  and  down  the  intensely  battered
Rhineland,  it  is only  occasionally,  near  the  railroad  stations,  a
special  target,  that  one  can  still  see  a  bit  of  ruins.    The  war
has  left  few  scars  on  the  German  landscape,  and  even  fewer
perhaps  on the German  soul.
It  is  not  difficult  to  like  the  Germans  again—there  are  so
many  nice  people  among  them—but  it  is  hard  not  to  end  by
being  bored  with  them.    They  make  dull  fare.    They  have
many  virtues  but  there  is  no  anguish  in  them.   It  is  not  an
accident   that  they  never  produced  a  Dostoyevsky.     Though
their   future   may  depend   on   learning   from   their  past,   the
problem  of   How   it  Happened—of   how  a  civilized   people
could  be  organized  to  the  point  of  shovelling  other   peoples
into  gas  furnaces—is  a  problem  nice  people  don't  talk  about
in  Germany.  In  some  extraordinary  way the  whole  nation  has
acquired  a warmly comforting  amnesia,  like  a  German  feather
bed.    Often   in  talking  with  Germans,  one  has  the  feeling
that  the  years  between  1933  and  1945  were  a  blank  through
which,  like  Rip  Van  Winkle,  they  slept  to  awaken  untouched
and  unchanged.
My  first  travelling  companion  turned  out  to  be  a  Frankfort
Why  Germany  Fears  A  'Summit'  Parley
"German  politics  .  .  .  must  see  to  it  that  the  great
powers  do  not  by-pass  the  German  problem,  and  come
to  an  agreement  among  themselves  on  the  basis  of  the
status  quo, i.e.  on  the  basis  of  the  division  of  Germany.
... A relaxation  [of  tension]  includes in itself  the very
danger  that  the  great powers  might  simply  by-pass the
inconvenient  German  problem.  .  .  .  Only  reluctantly  and
most  hesitatingly did  Bonn  finally  agree  that  at  least  a
'first  phase'  of  disarmament might  be  tackled without
simultaneous  solution  of  the  German  problem.  .  .  .
"This  attitude   reflects   the   fear   of   many  Germans,
and  not  the  least  those responsible for  German politics,
that  a  'big  deal'  might  be  arrived  at  by  the  two  world
powers  behind  the   back  of   Europe,  and  especially  of
Germany,  by  'locking  out'  the  German  issue.  .  .  .  Thus,
for   some  time,   the  Federal  Government  opposed  the
convocation  of   another  'summit'  conference  if   such  a
conference  were  not  also  to  include  in  its  agenda  the
issue  of  German  reunification."
—Meet  Germany,  Semi-Official    Handbook.
4   7
leather  merchant,  a  good  man.    He  had  been  a  prisoner  of
war  in  England  and  liked  the  English.    He  was  against  re-
armament  of  Germany.   When  I  asked  whether  there   were
any  Jews  now  in  his  native  Frankfort,   he   said  a  part   had
come  back,  but  people  had  little  to  do  with  them.  The  Jews
themselves  were  "reserved"  and  kept   apart.   He   said   there
was  some  feeling  against  the  Jews;  they were  more  clever  than
Germans  in  business.   The  few  Jews  who  were  bad  hurt  the
reputation   of  the  rest.   There  was  also  animosity  because  of
restitution;  Jews  who  sold  a  house  in  1934  or  1937  or   1938
now  came  and  got  the  houses  back.   This  caused  ill   feeling.
There  was  no  mention  of  why  they  had  to  sell  the  houses,
no  reference to  persecution.   When  he  said  only  part  of  the
Jews  had  come  back,  he  explained   that  some  of  course  had
passed  away.   One  would  never  have  gathered  from  a  word
he  said  that  there  were  any  special  reasons  for  their  mortality.
Nazism,  of  course,  was  never  mentioned.
Snug  and  Smug
Not  all  Germans  are  like  that.   I  met  some  who  are  still
haunted  by  those  terrible  years,  though  often  they  turned  out
to  be  men  with  Jewish  or  Polish  wives  whose  own  children
suffered   in  the  storm.   I  met  a  young  student  of  law  who,
to  the  question   "But   what   if  Hitler  had  won?",  answered
with  deep  feeling,  "I  would   rather  have  died  than   live  on
in  such  a  world."   But  Germans  of  that  kind,  far  from  being
typical,  often  tell  you  they  do  not  feel  at  home  in  their  own
country.    The  mood  of  the  Bundesrepublik  is  content,  self-
satisfied,  wholly  materialistic;  snug  and  smug.
Lucifer  is  a  tragic  hero  in  Paradise  Lost,  but  this  is  not  a
nation   of   Lucifers.    It   is  capable   of   committing   the' most
{Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, March  SO,  19B8
Nothing Bad Really Happened But If It  Did,  They Were Doing Their Duty...
(Continued   -from   Page   One)
grandiose  crimes in  the  most  commonplace  spirit.   One  begins
to  feel,  in  talking  with  them,  that  there  are  among  the  Ger-
mans  large  numbers  of  people  capable  of  putting  on  various
kinds  of  uniforms  and  committing  the  most  awful  crimes  in
an  unimaginative,  bureaucratic  and   paper-shuffling   way  and
then  going  home  and  taking  off  their  uniforms and  becoming
good  fathers  and  good  neighbors  again  and  being  not  only
surprised  but  offended   if  someone  later  has  the  bad  taste  to
bring  the  matter  up.   The  prevailing  mood  in  Germany today
when  the  question  of  Nazism  comes  up  is  that  somehow they
are  being  unjustly  persecuted  about  matters  which  (1)   never
happened,  but  (2)   were  no  different   from  what  happens  in
every  war  and  anyway  (3)   they  were  only  doing  their  duty.
Odd  Concept  of  Duty
Duty—Pflicht—is    a  word   which  represents  an  important
component  in  the  German's  idealized  image  of  himself.   The
word  has  a  special  flavor.  Mme.  de  Stael,  who  admired  the
Germans,   but  wondered   two   centuries   ago  at  the  contrast
between  their  boldness  in  philosophy  and  their  submissive-
ness   in  politics,   observed   that   they  obeyed  their   superiors
"comme  si  tout  ordre  etait  un  devoir"—as  if  every  order  was
a  duty.  I  heard  many  anecdotes  about  this  conception  of  duty.
A  schoolmaster who  was also  the  Nazi  leader  in  a  small  town
led  his  little   Stoftn   Troop   to  battle  when  a  demonstration
against  the  Jews  was  ordered.   The  daughter  of  one  of  the
local  Jews  was  his  favorite  pupil.   She opened  the  door  when
the  Nazis  arrived.   The   schoolmaster   leader  patted   her  af-
fectionately  on  the  head  and  said  comfortingly,  "Don't  be  up-
set,  we  are  only  doing  our  duty."   He  then  proceeded  con-
scientiously  to  beat  up  her  father.  A  Jewess,  baptized  at  birth,
who  managed  to  live  through  the  Third   Reich  because  she
had  an  influential Aryan  husband  told  me  this  anecdote.   She
said  it  epitomized  the  Hitler  years,  that  a  kind  of  moral  im-
becility  was  more  characteristic  than  sadism  or  hate.
This  conception  of  duty  is  especially  strong  when  it  comes
to  serving  as  a  soldier,  an  almost  sacred  profession  in  Ger-
man   eyes  even  now,  as  illustrated  by  the  Niemoeller   affair.
Niemoeller  comes  closest  in  contemporary  Germany  to  being
a  heroic  spiritual  figure,  and  a  characteristically  German  one
at  that,   since  he  first  appeared   on  the  national   scene  as  a
Bonn's  Dominating  Delusion
"The   stronger  the  West  becomes  and  the  closer   its
integration  materializes,  the  sooner  will  the  Russians
recognize  that  their  present  policy   toward   Germany,
aimed  at  its  division,  only  imposes  a  burden  upon  them
and  brings  them  no  advantage.   On  the  other  hand,' if
Moscow   were   ready   to  concede  free   elections  in   the
Russian-occupied   part  of  Germany,  it  would  be  possible
to  satisfy   the  security   needs  of   the  Soviet  Union  by
international   agreements  as  well  as  to  come  to  terms
regarding  big  economic  concessions  to  be  given  Russia
by  Germany."
—Meet  Germany,  Semi-Official    Handbook.
U-boat  commander  in  the  first  World   War,   winning   Ger-
many's  highest  decoration.  Then  he  became a  pastor.   Though
a  man  of  the  nationalist  right,  he  fought  the  Nazi  attempt  to
take  over  the  Protestant  Church  and  he  opposed  persecution
of   the   Jews.   He   was  sent   to  a  concentration  camp,  from
which—again  characteristically—he  tried  —to  volunteer  as  a
soldier  and  do. his  duty   when  war  began.*   Since  the  war,
he has opposed  the  rearmament of  Germany and  seems to  have
become a  pacifist.
Criminal  To  Oppose  Rearmament?
Several  months  ago  Defense  Minister  Strauss  declared  that
anyone  who  opposed  the  rearmament  of  Germany  was  a  po-
tential  war-criminal.  Pastor  Niemoeller  replied  with  a  speech
in  which  he  said  that  the  army,  in  training  commanders and
commandoes,  was  producing  the  next  crop  of  war  criminals.
The  Defense  Ministry  thereupon   instituted  a  legal   proceed-
ing  against  the  pastor  for  "insulting"  the  armed  forces.  This
prosecution  of  Niemoeller   aroused  only  mild  protest;  Nie-
*Just  how  mixed  up  Pastor  Niemoeller  was  in  his  attitude
toward   the  Hitler  regime  is  indicated  by  a  sermon  he  de-
livered  in  August,  1935,   which  was  reprinted  in  the  March,
1959,  issue  of  Deutsche  Soldaten-Zeitung,  as  its   own   com-
ment  on  the  current  controversy.  In  this  sermon  Pastor   Nie-
moeller  declared  that  war service  was  not  against  God's  com-
mandments  but  was  "ein  echtes  weltliches  Amt" a  true  world-
ly  office  necesary  in  this  world  and  which  could  be   performed
properly   despite  the  Fifth   commandment,    "Thou   shall  not
kill."  Hitler  was  then  in  process  of  creating  the  Wehrmacht.
No  country  is  as  rich  as  Germany   in  these  fine  types  of  In-
tellectual  confusion.
German  Socialists  Protest  the  Intelligence  Ordeal  Which  Greets  Refugees
"Interrogations  by  intelligence   officers   of   the   Western
Allies  are  a  part  of  the  procedure  which  all  Central    [i.e.
East  Zone]  German  refugees  have  to  undergo  when  they
enter  West   Berlin  in  the  first  stage  of   their   flight   from
Central   Germany.    These  interrogations  through  Allied  in-
telligence  services  are  undignified   and  provocative.   People
who come  to  West  Berlin  do not  want  to  furnish  intelligence
services  with  material.   They  want  to  leave  the  atmosphere
of  the  Cold  War  at  last.   The  first  meeting  with  the  'Free
World'  for  some  of  these  poor   refugees  ends  with   bitter
disappointment,  for  they  are  asked  to  do  just  that  before
which  they fled—to act  as  informers  or  spies.  This  practice,
which  has  been  going  on  for  some  years,  means  new  spiri-
tual  pains  for  those  to  whom  it  happens.  .  .  .
"These  interrogations  by  Allied  secret  services  are  also
a  scandal  because  they  exploit  the  misery  of  the  refugees.
Real  spies  and  agents,  who  are  sent  to  the  West  by  the
German   Communist   authorities  cannot  be  caught  in  this
manner  anyway  because  they  will  have their  papers  in  order
and  choose   different   ways   to   reach  West   Germany.    Of-
ficials  in  West  Berlin  have  no way  of  telling  refugees  before
they  are  questioned  that  their  answers  will  not   influence
the  decision  whether  they  will  be accepted  as  refugees.  .  .  .
Besides,  the  Allies  insist  on  the  right  of  interrogation  on
the  basis  of  the  occupation  statute  which  is  valid  in  Berlin.
"This  undignified  situation,  which  depresses  refugees  and
puts  us  to  shame,  must  be  ended.   The  West  German   gov-
ernment  insists  on  its  sovereignty  on  all  possible  occasions.
It  should  be  sovereign  enough  to  tell  Paris,   London  and
Washington  that  it  is  time  to  stop  this  procedure  in  Berlin.
The  allied  governments,  whom   no  one  wants  to  deny  the
right  to  security  and  protection  against  spies,  should  use
sources  other  than  the  moral  misery  of  men,  who  have  no
other  wish  than  to  be  left  in  peace  and  quiet."
—Newt  from  Germany,  November  1958,.a,  monthly  published  by  the  Social Democratic  Party  of  Germany.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  SO,  1959
Rearmament  Reviving  the  Old Habits  of  Obedience to  An  Officer  Class
moeller  had  to  back  down  and   insist  that  he  meant   only
commandoes   and   not   commanders.   Then  a  few   days  ago,
President  Heuss,  who  is  supposed  to  be  a  great  German  lib-
eral,  made  a  speech  at  the  Bundeswehr  training  academy  in
which,  without  naming  Niemoeller,  he  warned  the  cadets  of
the  academy  against  "demagogy  clad  as   Christian."
"Why   do  you  Americans  give   them   arms?"   a   German
woman  doctor  asked  me  indignantly.   It  is  the  rearmament
of  Germany which more  than  any  other  single  factor  is  facili-
tating  the  rebirth  of  the  old  submissive  Reich.   Just  after  the
war,  among  the  youth,  there  was  a  real  yearning  for  a  new
way;   among  the  older  people,   "ohne  mich"—"without   us,"
i.e.  count  us  out  of  the  next  war  —  reflected  the  dominant
mood.   The  most  dangerous  thing  about  German  rearmament
is  its  effect   internally,  upon  the  German  people.   If  there  is
to  be  an  army,  it  must  have  officers.    If  there  is  again  to  be
an  officer  class,  it  must  be  obeyed  and  respected.    Soldiering
must  become  an  honored   occupation  again.   Just  how  easily
the  youth  can  slip  back  into  the  old  ways  was  illustrated  for
me  by  a  young  man  in  his  middle  twenties  who  called  him-
self  a  pacifist  and  a  follower  of  Niemoeller.   Yet  he  had  a
deep  respect  for  the  German  officer  class.   He  saw no  internal
danger  in  its  rebirth.    The  fact  that  these  cultivated   aristo-
crats  had  been  disloyal  to  the  Republic   from   the  start  and
had  connived  in  the  coming  to  power  of  the  Nazi  rabble  (as
they   considered  them   to   be)   had   never   occurred   to   him.
This  same  young  man  told  me  that  while  his  age  group  was
still  hostile  to  military  service,  the  younger  group  between  17
and  the  early  twenties  had  begun  to  feel  it  would   not  be
"anstaendig"   (becoming,  decorous,  proper)   for  Germans  not
to  share  in  NATO's  defense  of  Germany.   This  is  the  new
propaganda   line,  and  it  has  caught  on.    The  era  of  "ohne
mich,"   as  President  Heuss  proclaimed   in  that  same  address
recently  to  the  Bundeswehr  officer  academy,  is  over.
An  Old  Comedy  Revived
It  is  as  if  an  old  comedy  is  being  replayed  here,  but  at  a
much  swifter  tempo.   The  comedy is  the  rebuilding  of  a  "re-
publican"  German  army by  "good  European"  liberals.'  Strese-
mann  in  the  twenties  was  the   "good   European"   liberal   as
Heuss  and  Adenauer  are  now.   Papers  seized  by  our   troops
in  Germany  after-the   war  have  revealed   the   double   game
And  Now  Khrushchev  Toasts  Krupp
"As  time  went  on,  the  undercover  activities  of   the
Reichswehr  [after  World  War I]  changed  from  passive
obstruction  of  disarmament  to  more  acute  measures  of
rearmament.   At  this  stage  the  aid  of  certain  large  in-
dustrialists    notably    Krupp    and    of    Soviet    Russia
emerged   as   decisive   factors.    Russo-German  military
contacts  can  be   traced   with   certainty   back   to   early
1921,    and   the   first   agreement   between   the   firm   of
Krupp   and  the   Defense   Ministry   to   circumvent   the
military   restrictions   of   Versailles   was   concluded   in
January  of  1922."
—Hans   W.   Gatzke:  Stresemann   and   the   Rearma-
ment   of   Germany,  Johns   Hopkins     University
Press,  1954.
Stresemann  played  in  the  secret  rearmament  of  Germany  be-
hind  the  backs  of  his  Anglo-French  colleagues.    (See   Hans
W.   Gatzke:  Stresemann  and  the  Rearmament  of  Germany,
Johns  Hopkins  University  Press,  1954).   It  is  useful  to  re-
call   the   Reichstag  debates  in  the   twenties   when   men  like
Chancellor   Marx  assured  the  Socialists  that  the   officers   and
men  recruited  for  the  Reichswehr were being carefully  screened
to  insure  that   the  new  army  would   be  loyally   republican.
Adenauer  and  Heuss  may  not  be  Stresemanns  but  thanks  to
rearmament  they  have  provided  a  facade  behind  which  re-
actionary  elements  and  real Nazis  (not  just opportunists)   have
infiltrated  the  armed  forces  and  the  government  to  the  point
where  they  could  easily  take  it  over  if  an  economic  depres-
sion  or  an  international  crisis  required  a  change  of   policy.
The  Nazis  are  especially  numerous  in  the  Foreign    Office.
At  present,  all  goes  well.  The  masses  are  content  with  the
republic  since  they  have  jobs  and  bread.   The  leadership  has
only  one  real  fear,  an  agreement  between  East  and  West  over
the  heads  of  the  Germans.   The   prospect   that  peaceful  re-
unification   is  impossible   does  not  alarm  the  leadership;   on
the  contrary this  is essential  to  their  plans.   Unlike  the  Ameri-
cans,   the   German   leadership   has  never   felt   that   war  was
imminent  and  does  not  think  so  today;  Bonn  is  far  more  re-
laxed  than  Washington.    This   estimate  of  the   international
situation   plus  the   desire  to  extort  political   concessions  ex-
plains  why  the  leadership  has  moved  so  slowly  in   recreating
a  new  German  army.   It  did  not  want  to  rush  into  the  crea-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
Germany's  Military  Plans,  As  Explained   By  Its  Own Propaganda    Pamphlet
".  .  .  It  was  not  until   1955   that  a  start  could  be  made
with  German  rearmament,  after  a  break  of  ten  years.   The
organizational  requirements,  which  had  already  been  made,
were  based   on  the   political   requirement  of   the  Western
powers,   that   a   German   army   of   500,000  men  should  be
established  within  three  or  four  years.   Meanwhile,  it  be-
came   clear,   after   one   year,   that   this   was   not  possible.
These  plans  were  dropped  in the  autumn  of  1956.  .  . .
"An  equally  important  consideration  in  Bonn   [for   drop-
ping  these  plans]  was  the  growing  doubt  about  the  military
policies  pursued  up  to  this  point.  In  the  United  States  and
Great   Britain,   a   change-over   from   conventionally-armed
forces   to  a  smaller  army,   equipped  with  atomic  weapons
giving  it a fantastic firepower, was being  prepared.  In  Bonn
the  politicians  drew  their  first  conclusions  from   this  new
development.  They  saw  a  mass  army  based  on  general   con-
scription  as  an  anachronism  and  were  in  favor  of  a  nu-
—Meet   Germany,   An  Introductory   Pamphlet   Given
merically  smaller  army.   This  army  was  to  be  given  the
most  modern  equipment  possible  and  was  to  be  composed
primarily  of ...    professional  soldiers.  .  .  .
"The  outward  expression  of  this  'New  Look' . . . was the
replacement  of  Defense  Minister  Blank.   His  successor  was
an   advocate  of   the   new  military  philosophy,   the   former
Minister  for  Nuclear  Energy,  Franz-Josef  Strauss.   He  had
led  the attack  against  the  outmoded  plans.  .  .  .
"The  outcome  of  his  military  policy  is  the  more  circum-
spect   build-up   of   the   Bundeswehr   and  the   very   careful
choice  of  armaments,  to  avoid  the  danger  of  being  over-
taken  by  rapid  technical  developments.
"There   exists   no   revolutionary   plans   for   the   further
build-up  of  the  Bundeswehr.   The  tremendous  technical  de-
velopments,  especially  in  the  sphere  of  rockets  and  the   air-
force  necessitate  continual  reappraisal  of   the  armaments
and  the  organizational  set-up  of  the  forces."
Foreign  Journalists   in  Bonn  by  the  Federal  Press      Office.
4  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  SO, 1959
(Continued  from  page  Three)
tion  of  a  mass  army  with  obsolete  weapons.   It  wants  to  wait
(see  box on  page three)  and  develop  a  small  army  with  maxi-
mum  nuclear  striking  power.   If  it  thought  war  at  all   likely,
it  would   not:  have  proceeded   so  slowly.
An  urgent  immediate  objective  is  to  block  any  agreement
for   denuclearization  of   Central   Europe.    By  the  time   Ade-
nauer  was  through   with  Maonillan,  mutual   withdrawal   of
forces  had  been  changed  not  only  to  "thinning  out"  and  pos-
sibly merely  to  a freezing  of  the  military  status  quo,  but  quali-
fied  by  the  promise  that  an  agreement  would  not  "discrimi-
nate  against  any  particular  kind   of  weapons  or  any  nation."
The  German  army  wants  to  be  sure  of  having  nuclear  arms.
If  Adenauer  were  the  "good  European"   he  claims  to  be,  if
he  were  as  distrustful   of   his  own  people   as  he   says  he  is
whenever  reunification  is  discussed  privately,  he  would  hardly
be  so  anxious  to  give  them  such  dangerous  weapons  to  play
with.
Like  a  Modern  High  School  in  Tel  Aviv
There  is  something   precarious,   unreal   and   "un-German"
about  the  antiseptic  white  Bundeshaus  from  which  Germany
is  now  governed.   It  looks  more  like  a  modern  gymnasium
in  Tel  Aviv  than  a  German  Parliament.   It  bears  no  relation-
ship   to  the   dominant   style  of   this   lovely  little   Rhineland
university  town.  In  the  corridors  of  the  Bundeshaus,  the  depu-
ties  do  not  look  at  all  like  the  natural  rulers  of  the  Reich.
The  military  bearing,  the  schmiss,  the  arrogance,   are  com-
pletely  lacking.    The   deputies   look   like  out-of-work   Shake-
spearian  actors  and  slightly  shady  Balkan  travelling   salesmen
as  they  rush  by  with  their  bulging  brief-cases.  Their   clothes
are   ill-fitting,   their   overcoats   shapeless,   their   lack   of   style
painful.   Their  hair-dos  tend  to  be  those  of  German   profes-
sors,  a nimbus of  unkempt  hair  around  a  balding  brow.  Many
are  returned  exiles;   there  is  about  them   all  an  air   of   not
quite  belonging.    One  feels  that  when  comes  der  Tag   again
they  will  easily  be  swept  away.
I  was at  the  press  conference  at  which  the  Socialist  leaders,
Carlo   Schmid   and   Fritz   Erler,   reported   on   their   unhappy
mission  to  Moscow.    The  press  conference  was  held   in  the
modernistic   assembly   hall   in   the   SPD   (German    Socialist
Party)  wing  of  the  Bundeshaus.   It  was  like  a  big  classroom,
adorned  with  one  picture,  that  of  the  lean-faced  Schumacher.
But  The  Others  Won't   Admit  It
"He  [Khrushchev]  said:  'Who  is  really  interested  to-
day   in   the   reunification    of   Germany—Adenauer,   the
French,  the  Americans,  the  English?—No  one.'  At  this
point  he  lifted  his  forefinger   and  repeated:  'No  one!'
So   Schmid   and   Erler   were   forced   to   conclude   that
Khrushchev  himself  wasn't  interested  in  it  either."
—Moscow  dispatch,  Sueddeutsche  Zeitung,  March  18.
Their  melancholy   report  was  music  to  the  ears  of   Adenauer.
Khrushchev's    indifference   to   reunification   was  emphasized
even  more  strongly  in  private  (so  a  Socialist  deputy  told  me)
by  Zorin  who  said  flatly,  "We  want  Germany  divided."   This
was  the  end  of  the  hope  to  which  the   Opposition   had  so
long  clung   that  maybe  Moscow  would   agree  to   free   elec-
tions,  i.e.  to  relinquish  East  Germany,  if  Germany  were  de-
nuclearized  and  out  of  NATO.  The  Adenauer crowd  felt  that
Khrushchev  had  destroyed  the  opposition   for  them.    When
the  Socialists  shortly  afterward  issued  their  elaborate  step-by-
step  plan  for  German  reunification  no  one  took  it  very  seri-
ously.   A  few  years  ago,  it  might  have  been  possible.  Now  it
seems  to  be too  late.
The  whole  Adenauer  policy  of   "containing"   Russia  until
Moscow  surrendered  East  Germany  on  Western  terms  is  also
in  ruins,  but  it  has  been  a  long  time  since  those  on  the  inside
believed  in  it.   Its  purpose  was  to  anchor  Germany securely
to   the   U.   S.  and   prevent   a   Moscow-Washington   entente.
What  the  Socialists  fear  is  that  the  right  will  soon  be saying
that   "democracy"   failed   to  reunite  Germany.   The  Socialists
fear  that  when  the  army  is  fully  grown,  the  right  will  look
for  a  deal  with  Russia,  and  that  an  anti-democratic  regime
will  ally  itself   for   reasons  of  power  and  commercial  expan-
sion  with  Moscow.
But  all  this  is  still  in  the  future.   At  the  moment  the  placid
German   folk   aren't  very  interested   in   anything.   They   are
capable  of  wild  moods  of  enthusiasm but  rarely for  republics,
and  their  lack  of  fervor  today  extends  even  to  national  ques-
tions.   I  found  no  one who  thought  the  West  German  people
were  very  concerned  about  the  "fate  of  their  brothers"  in  the
East  or  would  be  ready,  if  asked,  to  accept  a  lower  standard
of  living  for  a  while  to  liberate  them.    It  may  be  different  in
Berlin,  to  which  I  go  next,  but  here  in  the  West  the  Germans
never  cared  less.
Why  Not  Start  A  Gift   Subscription   With   This  Week's  Special  Issue  from   Germany?
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street    .............................
City   ...................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  ....................
Street
5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  ?5:
.......Zone.. ........ ..State....................
mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
8/30/69
City   ....................... _ ...........Zone.....».....State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
IE   Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Clan  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1878.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska   Are.,  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$8  In  the  U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;  J10  «l««wher«.    Air  Mall  rate*:  $16 to  Bnrop*;  $20 to  Israel.  Alia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED