I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959apr06.pdf

============================================================

Report  from  Berlin
Two  Typical  Figures  Interviewed:   Gerhart  Eisler  in  the  East,  Sen.  Hertz  in  West,  Pages 2-3.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VII,  NO.  13
APRIL  6,  1959».'
01
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
A  Divided  City  In  A  Divided  World
Berlin,   March  25
To  go  from  capitalist West  Berlin  to  Communist  East  Berlin
and  back  only  costs  20  pfennigs  each  way  on  the  subway  or
the  elevated, and  is as easy  as going  from  Manhattan  to  Brook-
lyn,    but  this  swift  and  unimpeded  transit  is  deceptive.    The
subway  or elevated rider, unlike the  motorist or  pedestrian  who
goes  by way  of  the  Brandenburger  Tor,  does  not  even  have  to
pass   a  border  guard.    Indeed   the   stranger   does   not   know
whether  he  is  getting  off  in  West  or  East  Berlin.   The   same
people,  the  same  faces,  are  on  both  sides  of  the  border,  and
there  is  a constant coming  and  going  among  them.   The  huge
MGM  theatre on  the  Kurfurstendamm  in  West  Berlin,  where
Die  Katze    attf   dem   heissen  Blechdach   (Cat   on  a  Hot   Tin
Roof)   is  now  playing,  advertises  "Ostbesucher  1:1"  in  huge
letters.   This  means  that  MGM  is  offering  to  take  East  Berlin
marks  at  1-to-l  parity  with  West  Marks  from  East  Berliners
buying  admission  tickets,  a  bargain  rate  since  the  West  City
mark  is worth  three  and  a  half  times  the  East  Berlin  Mark  on
the  free  market.   But then  the  Berlin  crisis  has hurt  the  tourist
business  and  West  Berlin  is glad  to  get  East  Berlin  trade  even
at  a  discount.   Yet   though   communication  is  easy,  the   cleft
between  them  is nonetheless very real.
Light  on  One  Side,  Dark  on  The  Other
Flying  into  Berlin  from  Bonn,  looking  down  upon  the  city
at  night  for  the  first  time,  West  Berlin  is  festive  with  light,
East   Berlin  is   ill-lit   and   dark.   The   Kurfurstendamm,  the
shiny  front  West  Berlin puts  on  to  the  world,  is as bright  with
advertising  signs  as  Broadway,  and   as  invitingly  lined  with
cafes  and  shops  as  the  Champs  Elysees.   At  one  end  one  sees
the  dark  hulk  of  the  ruined  Gedaechtniskirche,  the  Memorial
Church   from  which   the   Kurfurstendamm  radiates   outward
as  the  Champs  Elysees  does  from  the  Etoile  in  Paris.   A  bell
tolls  the  hours  from  the  ruined  tower.   Far  down  toward  the
other  end,  high  against  the  night   sky  is  the  familiar  Bayer
Aspirin  sign  in  blue  and  under  it  Agfa  in  red;  the  church
may  have  taken  a  beating  but  I.  G.  Farben's  main   products
flourish   again.   In   between,  around   the  walls  and  atop   the
buildings  along  this   broad   avenue,  the  great   capitalist   con-
cerns   of  the  world  proclaim  their  wares,  here  on  the   city
border,  deep  within  the  East  Zone,  as  if  in  defiance  of   that
Communist   -world  which  stretches   from  the  Elbe  to  the   far
Pacific.   Here  is Ford  and  GM's  Opel,  Ufa  and  MGM,   Philips
and  Telefunken,   Lufthansa  and  Pan  Am,  Esso  and  Veedol,
Mercedes-Benz  and   Bosch,  Siemens  and  Olivetti,  AEG  and
Janssen.   The  great   German  banks  and  insurance   companies
light  up  the  night  sky with  them.   In  the  shop  windows,  the
stroller  may  see  the  latest  cars'  and  rich  furs,  fine  foods  and
fruits  from  all  over  the  world,   jewels  and  champagnes,   the
sausages  and  hams  Germans  love,  and  delicacies  like   aspara-
gus  at  7.50  DM  a  jar,  or  about  $1.75.   The  window  shopper
4 *
is  never  far  from  the  black  and  white  display  with  which  the
giant  Deutsche  Bank  in  every  few  blocks  supplies  that  day's
quotations  for  every  stock  on  the  Berlin  bourse.   The  capital-
ist  who  takes  a  spazier  here  may  stop  often  to  study  and  re-
flect on  the  state of  his  investments. The  Kurfurstendamm  says
to  the  glowering  east,  "Look  how  rich  capitalism  is.  How  can
you  ever  hope  to  equal  this?"   It  is  a  system  and  an   ideology
that  all  this  electric power  advertises.
The  East's  Own  Show  Windows
The   guide   in  the   rubberneck  bus  which   took  us   around
both  Berlins  early  Palm   Sunday  morning   referred   ironically
to  the  Kurfurstendamm   as  the  "Propagandastrasse."   Only  a
block  off  this  dazzling  thoroughfare,   the   scenes  are  less  im-
pressive.    There   is  hardly   a   back   street   without   its   ruins,
though   these  are  not  as  shocking  as  in  the   East  where   the
tourist  is  introduced  to  the  grimier  back   streets  and   to   the
untouched   wreckage   and   rubble   of   Wilhelm's   empire   and
Hitler's   along   the   Wilhelmstrasse.      We   saw  the   block   of
waste    where   Hitler   killed   himself   in   his   bunker.     We
saw  the  memorial  garden  for  the  Russian  war  dead  built  with
the  stones  from  his  Chancellery.    We   saw  Russian  soldiers,
many  of   whom   looked   like   young   boys  just  off  the   farm,
wandering  about,  taking  each  other's  pictures  in  front  of  the
touching   statue  of   Mother   Russia  mourning   her   sons;   the
face  is  the  worn  and  tender  face  of  an  old  babushka.   We  saw
the  tablet  which   says  in  Russian  and  German,   "Die   Heimat
Wird   Ihre   Helden   Nicht   Vergessen"   (the   homeland    will
never  forget  her  heroes).   The  streets  of  East  Berlin   seemed
deserted,  bare  and  unprepossessing   after  the  Kurfutstendamm.
But  when  another  American  newspaperman  and  I  came  back
after  lunch  to  look  around  on  our  own,  we  found  the  show-
place   streets  of   East  Berlin,  the   Stalinallee  and   Unter   den
Linden,   full   of   promenaders.    Children   were   playing   with
hoops.   A  boom  business  was  being  done  in  Eskimo  pies   (ice
cream  with  chocolate  covering)   by street  vendors.   The  Buda-
pest  cafe was full  and  we  found  a  dance  building  doing  a  rush
business,  a  top  floor  with  waltzes  for  the  elderly  and  a  lower
floor  for  the  younger  set.
Better  Off  Than  In  Moscow  or  Warsaw
That  Sunday  afternoon  and  a  prowl  about   East  Berlin  on
my  own  next  day  showed  how  much  our  own  propaganda  has
oversold  us  on  how  bad  things  are  in  East  Berlin.   The  people
look  well  dressed  and  well-fed,  more  so  than  the  crowds   I
saw   in   Moscow   and   Warsaw  three  years   ago.    Along   the
Stalinallee  and  Unter   den  Linden,  the  Soviet   world   has  its
own  propaganda   show.   There  are  rich   shops  with   tasteful
displays  showing  luxury  goods,   clothing,   foodstuffs,   jewelry,
candies,  books  and  toys.   The  Ministry  of  Light  Industry  had
an  Easter  display  that  was  as  lovely  as  anything  in  the  West.
(Continued   on  Page  Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  6,  1959
An  Interview  With  West  Berlin's  Economic  Director,  A  Veteran  Socialist  .  . .
How Do You Reunify  Socialist and Communist Points of View In Germany...
In  the  two  Berlins  I  had  the  privilege  of  interviewing  two
men  who typify  the  two  mentalities  which  clash  here.    Both
men' lived  in  exile  in  America.   Both  men  are  Jewish,  a  fact
which  in  Germany makes  me  fearful  for  both  of  them.   Both
returned  to  important  positions.    One was  the  lifelong Com-
munist,  Gerhart  Eisler,  a  German  Old  Bolshevik,  now  vice-
president  of  the  radio  and  television  broadcasting  service  of
the  German  Democratic  Republic.  The  other  was  Dr.  Paul
Hertz,  West  Berlin's  Senator,  i.e.  Cabinet  Minister,  for  Eco-
nomics  and  Credit,  a  Socialist  since  his  youth.  When one con-
siders  their   respective   backgrounds,   one  despairs   of   ever
getting  such  men  to  work  together.    Indeed  neither   thinks
they  can, neither  even  pays  much  lip  service  to  reunification.
Eisler  is  a  Communist who has  stuck  with  the  party  through
all  the  terrible  turns  and twists  of party  line  since  the  early
20's;  he  was  with  the  International   Brigade  in  Spain  as  a
kind  of  commissar.   The  last  time  I  saw  him  was  before  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  a  decade  ago  when
his  sister, who broke with  the  party  in the  early  20's,  accused
him  of being  a  Comintern  agent.  He later fled America  while
his  sentence  for  contempt  of  the  committee  was  being  ap-
pealed.  He  asked  me to  lunch  at  the  rather  dingy  press  club
on  Friedrichstrasse  in  East  Berlin;  he  looked  older  but  well,
and  he  spoke  with  that  assurance  and lack  of party  line  cant
one  encounters  in  Communist  circles  only  among  officials  se-
curely near the  top.   His wife,  Hilda, who joined  us  for  a  few
minutes,  edits  a  periodical  called  Magazin  which  is  said  to
be  the   only   publication  between  the   Elbe   and  the   Pacific
which  publishes pictures  of  pin-up girls,  a  daring  innovation
in  Soviet  journalism  which wins  no  laurels  for  liveliness.
A  Spiritual  Son  of  Kautsky
Hertz  received me next  day  in  his  big  office  overlooking  the
lovely  little  park  and  fountain  near  West  Berlin's  old  fash-
ioned  Rathaus.  The Senator  is  a  living  link  with  the  greatest
days  and  names  of  German  Socialism.  With  Karl  Kautsky,
he  left  the  party  to  oppose the  first  World  War.   He  boasts
that  Kautsky,  who  had  three  sons  of  his  own,  called  Hertz
his  "fourth  son."   With  Hilferding,  Hertz  helped  to  edit  the
famous  Socialist  organ  Freiheit.  Martov,  the  grand  old  man
of  Russian  Social  Democracy, took refuge  with  Hertz  in  Ber-
lin  after  fleeing  the  Soviet  Union.  From   1919  to  1933,  Hertz
was  a  Social  Democratic  deputy  and  general  secretary  of  the
Social  Democratic  fraction  in  the  Reichstag.  He  left  in  1933
with  the  party  executive  committee  which  settled   down  for
five years  in  Prague  and  then  one  year  in  Paris  before  the
war  broke  out.   He  lived  in  the  United  States  from   1939  to
1949,  becoming  an  American  citizen  in  1946  and  earning  his
living  as  economic  adviser  to   a  small  brokerage  house  in
New  York.  His  two  children,  one  of  them  a  psychology  pro-
fessor   at   Ohio  State,  stayed  behind  when  in   1949  his  old
friend,  Mayor Ernst  Reuter  of  Berlin,  persuaded  him  to  come
back.  In  1951  he became a German  citizen  again.  He was  the
"Erhard"  of  West   Berlin,  the  chief  director  of  its   amazing
economic  recovery  and  reconstruction   since  the  war  and  the
blockade.    Now  71, he  has  an  energy,  forcefulness  and  zest
that  belie  his  years,  but  he  has  moved  from  the  left  to  the
right  of  the  Socialist  movement.
How  They  See  Each  Other
These  two  able  old men  see  the  world  from  extraordinarily
different  points  of  view;  the  conflict  between  their   philoso-
phies  is  deeper  than  between  communist  and  capitalist.  They
share  the  same  Marxist  tradition  up  to  the  point  where  the
Russian   revolution    split   the   Marxist   movement   into   two
wings  with  that  deep  mutual  hatred  only  the  fraternal  feel
for  each  other.  These  feelings  have  been  made  more  intense
because  they  are  Germans,  and share the  peculiar German ex-
perience.   For  Eisler  the  lesson  of  German  history  between
1919  and  1938  is  that  the  weakness  of  the  Social   Democrats
was  criminal, that  a  ruthless  purge  of  reactionary   elements,
Russian  style,  shortly  after   World  War  I  and  a  Bolshevik
dictatorship  in  Germany  would have  nipped  Hitlerism  at  its
roots  and prevented  a world  war.   For  men like  Eisler,  Social
Democracy  merely  provided a facade behind  which the  forces
of   reaction  were  able  to  reconstitute   themselves   after   the
fall  of  the  Hohenzollerns.
For  men  like  Hertz,  on  the  other  hand,  Eisler   represents
a   force   which  helped  to  undermine   the   prewar   Republic,
which  joined hands  often  with  the  Nazis  in  specific  situations
against  the  Social  Democrats,  which  divided the  Left  until  it  .
was  too  late,  and  which turned  the  Socialist  dream  in  Russia
into  a  dictatorial  horror,  a  kind  of  Red  Fascism,  extinguish-
ing  all  liberty.
These  two  men  share  a  common  tendency—they  see  the
only  hope  of  rebuilding  a  decent  Germany  in  close  reliance
upon  a  foreign  power,  Eisler  on  Russia,  Hertz  on  America.
Both, in  consequence, really  favor  its  continued  division.  Both
are  typical,  the  former  of  the  East  zone  German   mentality
which  tends  in  faithful  imitation  to  be  more  rigid  even  than
the  Russians,  the  latter  of  the  Berlin  type  of  socialism  —
pragmatic,  Americanized in  its  distrust  of  old  fashioned  so-
cialist  ideology,  indeed  rather  New  Dealish  than   socialistic,
and  primarily  concerned  with  the  city's  defense  against  the
East.
The  Berlin  Point  of  View
Hertz  is  also  a  Berliner.   For  Berliners,  Berlin  is  not  just
the  centre  of  the  world;  it  is  the  world.  So  I  was  not  sur-
prised  (after  hints  dropped  to  me  by  socialists  in  Bonn)  at
the  opinions Senator  Hertz  expressed.   Like  most  of  the  West
Berlin  socialists,  he  does  not  like  the  step-by-step   plan  for
reunification  put  forward  last  week by  the  West  German So-
cialist  party.    "If  that  plan   leads  to  reunification  at    all,"
Senator  Hertz  said,  "it  would be  the  kind  of  reunification we
saw   in   Poland   and   Czechoslovakia  where   the   Communist
party  ended by  swallowing  up  the  Socialist  party."   Senator
Hertz  sees  a  parallel  with  Munich.  "Weakness,"  Hertz  said,
"is  not  the  way  to  peace."   He  says  Khrushchev's  purpose  is
to  make  all  Germany  Communist.   He  says  the  solution  of
the  German  problem  depends  upon  a  world  settlement.   But
when  I  suggested  that  the  German  question  in  turn  blocked
a  world  settlement,   creating  a  really  vicious  circle,  he  re-
plied  in  a  typically  Berlin  way.   He  said  if  the  Allies  only
stood  firm  and  insisted  on their  rights  to  access,  then  Berlin
would  grow  and  prosper.   He  pictured  with  pride  the  success
already   achieved.   In   1950  there  were   350,000  jobless   and
only  550,000  at  work;  today  there  are  only  60,000  jobless  and
900,000  at  work.   He  spoke  gratefully   of  U.  S.   counterpart
funds  which  supplied  the  capital   for  this  development  and
emphasized  the  fact  that  the  city  government  had  forced  the
private  business  men to  whom it  loaned  this  capital  to  pay
interest   and  amortization   in  a  normal   banking   way.    "In
1950  we  could  pay  for  only  half  our  imports,"  Senator  Hertz
said.  "Today  we  can  pay  for  86 percent.  Give us  a  few  more
years  and  we  will  wholly  pay  our  way."   The  crisis  has  not
caused  a  flight  of  capital.  The  Berliners  were  standing  firm.
For  him,  as  for   an  ancient   Greek,  it  was  the   City  which
counted;  he  spoke  "with  satisfaction   of  the  fact  that  one  day
he  addressed   the  metal  workers   union;  the  next   day,  the
Chamber  of  Commerce.  Civic patriotism rather than  ideology
or  class  feeling  was  reflected  in  all  he  said.
Militarist  Danger  Disparaged
The  Berlin  point  of  view  colored  his  attitude  toward   West
German  developments.   In  this,  he  resembled   the   dominant
American  point  of  view  far  more  than  the  West  German  So-
cialist.   He  is  not  afraid   of  German  rearmament;  he  thinks
the  German  people have  changed;  he thinks they have  learned
their  lesson  and  will  never  try  again  for  world   domination.
"I  know,"  he  told  me,  "this  is  what  the  outside  world  fears
—a  Germany  dominated  again  by  the  Hitler  clique  and  of
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  6, 1959
3
.  .  .  And  With  Gerhart  Eisler,  the  Old Bolshevik  who  Fled  A  U.  S.  Contempt  Conviction
.  . . After  A  Lifetime  of Bitter  Differences  Over  Hitler  and  Soviet  Russia?
course  we  have to  be  careful.  No  member  of  the  Berlin  gov-
ernment  ever  had  anything  to  do with  the  Nazis.  That's  not
true  of  Federal  Germany.  They  have  some  among  their  of-
ficers and  in  their  courts."   This  was  putting  it  more mildly
than  the  Socialists  do in  Bonn;  there  I  was  told  that  65 per-
cent  of  the  Foreign  Office  was  staffed  by  Nazis—not  just  op-
portunists  but  convinced  Nazis.   In  the  same  way,  Hertz  dis-
parages  the  danger  of  anti-Semitism.   "The  fact  is,"  he  said,
"that  the  Nazis  have  had  no  success  whatever  at  the  polls."
Sure  there  was  some  anti-Semitism;  it  would take  years  to
get  rid  of  it  all.   But  he  and  Mayor  Brandt's   press    officer
and  the  head  of  the  white  collar  workers'   union  in  Berlin
were  all  Jews  returned  from  exile;  never  had  a  single  anti-
Semitic  word  been  said  against  them.   Was  this,  perhaps,  I
asked,   peculiar   to   Berlin?    Here   municipal   pride   broke
through  again  and  he  agreed.   "Berlin  never  gave  in  to  Hit-
ler,"  the  Senator  said  proudly.
Berlin  As  A  Warning  Bell
I  got  quite  a  different  picture  on  the  outside  of  the  lines in
East   Berlin.   "We  know  the   Germans,"   Eisler   said.   "We
know  what  they're  thinking  in  the  West.   The  old  military
crowd  is  saying,  'we  lost  the  last  war  because  we  had  poor
allies—the  Italians  and  the  Japanese.   Now we  have  a  good
ally,  the   United   States.    This  time  we  can  win.'    To  let
matters  slide, to  let  the  rearmament  of  West  Germany  go on,
particularly  in  atomic  weapons,  is  for  both  sides  to  lose  all
control   over  the   situation.   People   like  the   West   German
Defense   Minister,   Strauss,   will   determine   the   course   of
events.   We have  raised  the  question  of  Berlin  as  a  warning
bell.  The  question  of  Berlin  itself  is  easy  to  settle.  We have
no  designs  on  West  Berlin.   We  have  no  desire  to  conquer
it  or  to  interfere  in  it.   We already  control  99 percent  of  the
traffic  between  West  Germany  and  West  Berlin.   We're  not
going  to  interfere  with  the  rest.   We're  not  crazy.  We  don't
want  trouble.   We  want  a  peaceful  life.   We  believe  we  can
build  a  new kind  of  Germany  here—a  Germany without  mili-
tarism.   We're  prepared  to  join  in  all  kinds  of  international
guarantees   for  West   Berlin.   Neutral   troops  could  be   sta-
tioned  there,  but  we  don't  want  to  see  occupation  troops—
using  the  city  as  a  bridgehead  for  a future  war.   We want  to
get   rid   of  the   forces  which  right  here   in  the   middle  of
the   German  Democratic   Republic  exploit   West   Berlin   for
trouble-making,  preparing  for  Der  Tag.   We  want  to  liqui-
date  the  centers  of  provocative  action  but  we're  not  worried
about   people   fleeing.   Many  are   beginning   to   come   back.
We're  going  to  solve  the  refugee  problem  by  social   improve-
ment.   But  don't  forget  that  a  few  thousand  people  in  West
Berlin  can start  serious  trouble;  we  were  close  to  it  when  a
mob formed  at  the  Brandenburger  Tor  during the  Hungarian
uprising,  ready  to  march  in  and  storm  the  Soviet  Embassy.
If  they  had  marched,  we  would  have  had  to  shoot  and  the
consequences  would  have   been   serious.   Anywhere   else   a
demonstration  is  a  minor  matter  but  here  it  could  start  a
world  war."
Bricklayer  to  General  Via  The  Underground
When  I  asked  about  the  rearmament  in  East  Germany and
its  social dangers,  Eisler  said,  "We're  developing  a  new kind
of  army.   Our  officers  are  carefully  screened.   Our  command-
ing  general  and  Minister  of  Defense,  Willi  Stoph,  is  a  brick-
layer  by  trade- and  was  in  the  underground  against  Hitler.
His  second-in-command, Gen.  Heinz  Hoffman,  fought  in  the
International  Brigade  in  Spain. Another  General,  Heinz  Kess-
ler,  was  a  Luftwaffe  flight  sergeant  who  held  up  his   pilot
with  a gun  during the  war  and  forced  him to  land  behind  the
Russian  lines.   We're  not  using  the  old-time  officers   of  the
Free   German   Committee.   All   our   officers   are   politically
tested.   Our  militia  groups  in  the  factory  are  made  up  only
of  selected  class  conscious workers.   We have  no mass  militia.
We  have  no  general   conscription.   It's   too  expensive.   We
need  the  labor."
Unlike  the  East  German press,  which  greeted  the  new So-
cialist  reunification plan  with  hostility,  Eisler  spoke  of  it  as
constructive but  it  was  evident that he  did not  put  much  faith
in  the  possibility  of reunification.  I  asked  whether  he thought
the  Russians  might  agree  to  real  reunification if  Washington
made  large  credits  available  for  the  Soviet  bloc.   "Not  even
for  ten  billions,"  Eisler  said.   "A  new  world  war  would  cost
many  times  more  than  that  and  a  Germany  reunified  under
Bonn  would mean  a  new  war."
A  Slow  Fuse
Eisler    spoke   with   warmth   and   sincerity,   but   for   all
his  affability  and intelligence, he  has  the  familiar  Communist
mentality.   He really  cannot  understand  why  Socialists  in  the
West  distrust  the  promises  of  the  East.  The  swallowing  up
of  socialist  parties  seems  a  natural  development  to  him;  the
Hungarian   revolution   a   simple   case   of  counter-revolution
crushed.   "I  know,"  he  said  fiercely,  "how  a  counter-revolu-
tion  should  be  dealt  with."   Was  it  not  difficult,  I  asked,  to
have  co-existence  when  the   Soviet  bloc,  by  ostracizing   the
Yugoslavs  again,  dramatized  their  renewed  belief  that  there
was  only  one  way—theirs—to  socialism?   Eisler  could  not
see  the  point.   Like  the   Russians,  Eisler  will  admit    "mis-
takes,"  but  like  the  Russians,  too,  he  draws  few conclusions
from   them  except  within   his   own  inflexible  frame  of   ref-
erence.   I  understand  the  East  German  Communist  fears  of
developments  in   West   Germany—many   Socialists   in   West
Germany  share  them—but  I  also  understand   West  German
Socialist  distrust  of  Communist  promises.    I  see  no  way  to
get  them  to  work  together.  Yet  failure  here  in  Berlin  may
be  catastrophic  for  all  of  us.  I  see  no  immediate  crisis  but
I  see trouble  later,  when  the  East  Germans  are  stronger and
the  West  Germans  have  atomic  arms.   Berlin  is  a  slow  fuse
which  some  day  could  detonate  the  world.
A  Russian Play  Which  Proved  to  Be Too Much of  A Hit  In East Berlin
At  least  one  Russian play  made  a  big  hit  in  East  Berlin,
indeed  it  was  withdrawn  as  too  popular.   This  was  Maya-
kovsky's   "The   Turkish  Bath,"  a   satire   on  bureaucracy,
played in the  Soviet  Union and produced in  Berlin  by  a  Rus-
sian  director but  just  a  little  too  hot  for  the  German Com-
munists.
The villain is  a stuffy  bureaucrat, who quotes  Marx  every-
where,  including   an  uproarious  cabaret  scene.   In   another
scene  much  enjoyed in  East  Berlin,  a  bookkeeper  is  brought
before  the  bureaucrat on  a  charge  of  gambling  with  state
funds.
The  bureaucrat waved at  a  picture  of  Marx  over  his  desk
and said pompously,  "Our great  teacher  never played  cards."
"Ah,"  said  the  bookkeeper,  "but  don't  you  remember  that
on  page   247  of   Feuerbach  it   is   said   that   Marx  played
cards?"
"Yes,  of  course  I  know  my  Feuerbach,"  the  bureaucrat
replied,   "but  Marx  never  played  cards   for   money."   The
bookkeeper  again  eruditely  objected,  "But  Franz  Mehring
says  Marx  did play  cards  for  money."
Again  the  bureaucrat did not  wish  to  confess  that  he had
not  read  the  Marxist  classic  the  bookkeeper  pretended  to be*
quoting.   "But,"  the  bureaucrat encountered,  "at  least  Marx
never  played  cards  for  money  with  State   funds."   "Ah,"
said  the  bookkeeper, "but surely  you  remember  that  famous
passage  in  Volume  III  of  Das  Kapital  .  .  .  7"
At  this  point,  as  described   to  me  by  an  East   Berliner,
the  bureaucrat  and  the  audience  both  collapse.
5  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  6,  1959
Thought  Control  Irksome,  Party  Line  Heavy,  But  East  Berliners  Are  Not  "Slaves"
We  Are  In  Danger  of  Being  Blinded  by  Our  Own  Propaganda
(Continued  from  Page   One)
I   saw  Hungarian   champagnes,   orange  juice   bottled   by  the
China   National   Fruit   Export   Corporation,   Bulgarian   fruits
and  Russian  preserves  in  jars.   'The  prices  were  obviously  be-
yond   those  of  ordinary  workers   in  the   East  City,   but   then
ordinary  workers  in  West  Berlin  don't  buy  $10  shirts  or  $5
ties   either.    Visitors   from   other   Soviet   countries   were   not
only  impressed,  I  was  told,  but  even  a  little  jealous  of  what
the  Germans   were  getting.   By  Soviet   standards,   Stalinallee
is  as  striking  a  display  of  luxury  as  the  Kurfurstendamm.   A
young  man  who  attached  himself  to  us  Sunday  afternoon  said
only  police   officials,   higher   party  bureaucrats  and   specialists
could  afford  these  luxuries.    In  any  society  such  luxury  helps
to  solidify  the  ruling  class,  whether  capitalist  or  bureaucratic,
and  to  assuage  the  conscience  and  maintain  the  loyalty  of  the
intellectuals.    Like   the   rest   of   the   Soviet   world,   East   Ger-
many  has  its  own  bourgeoisie.
The  Pets  on  Both  Sides
The  two  Germanics  and  the  two  Berlins have  one  thing  in
common—they  are  the  pets  of  the  occupation  powers.   Com-
petition  between  East  and  West  for  the  Germans  is  reflected
on  the  Soviet  side  as  well  as  on  ours.   Much  reconstruction  is
under  way  in  East  Berlin.   I  saw  many  new  apartment  house
developments  for  workers.   The  presence  of  West  Berlin  in-
side  the  German  Democratic  Republic,  and  the  open   frontier
within   the  divided   city,  have  made  the   East   Berlin   regime
milder  than  that  which  exists  in  the  East  Zone  beyond   the
closely  guarded  frontier   around  all  Berlin.    The   East  Zone
regime  itself   has  been  the   beneficiary   of   favored   treatment.
Just  as West  Germany has  made  a  dominant  place  for  itself  in
Western  Europe  through  the  Common  Market,  Euratom  and
similar   agreements,  so  East  Germany  has  become   the   most
important  industrial  area  of  the  Soviet  world  outside  the  So-
viet  Union   itself.     German   know-how,   German   Fleissigkeh
(diligence)  is  paying  off  on  both  sides.   East  Germany  is  the
vorld's  largest producer of  soft  coal,  and  this  is  being  utilized
as  the  basis  for  a  huge  chemical  industry, with  all  this  makes
possible  in  variegated   plastics  and  synthetics.    So  important  is
this  becoming  that  the  wasteful  use  of  soft  coal  for  synthetic
gasoline  is being  tapered  off and  a pipeline  built  to  bring  gaso-
line  from   the  Urals  so  the  soft  coal  can  be  used   for   more
economic   purposes.     Division    of    labor    is    making   itself
felt  in  the  Soviet  bloc  and  East Germany  is  becoming  the  most
important  source  for  the  products  of  special  skills.   The  stand-
ard  of  living  is rising;  the  people  are  off a  bread  diet;  I  visited
huge  food   stores  well   stocked   with   meats,   fruits,   fish   and
much  frozen  food—the  last  seems  to  be  a  Bulgarian  specialty.
The   new  economic  relations  which  bind   each  part  of   Ger-
many  so  profitably   to   its  respective  bloc  make   reunification
less  and   less  likely  as  the  years  go  on.   This   is  a  factor  as
important   as  the  political.
East  Berlin   Freer   Than  Rest  of  East  Zone
We   have  been  oversold   on   the   "slavery"   of   East  Berlin
and  East Germany.   In  the  former  at  least  people  speak  rather
freely  and  critically  on  the  streets.  The  chief  complaint,  oddly
enough,  is  the  high  cost  and  poor  quality  of  the  coffee.     In-
tellectually,  the  Iron  Curtain  exists.   The  government   owned
kiosks   sell   only  Communist  papers,   including   papers   from
China  and  Albania;  no  Western  literature  is  on  sale.   An  in-
tellectual  with  whom  I  struck  up  a  conversation  on  the  street
said  he  brought  newspapers  in  from  West  Berlin  regularly  by
hiding  them  inside  his  socks  and  that  they  were  passed  from
hand  to  hand.   He  said  things  were  easier  in  East  Berlin  than
in  the  rest  of   the  East  Zone;   there  people  were   constantly
under  "observation."    He  said  he  worked  in  the  theatre,   that
the  public  was  bored  with  worker  plays  ("we  see workers  all
day  long,  at  night  we  want  to  see well-dressed  people  on  the
stage"  is  the  public  reaction)  and  with  plays  about  the  Rus-
sian  revolution.   At  a  theatre  ticket  agency  nearby  I  saw  "The
Diary  of  Anne  Frank"  and  Synge's  "Playboy  of  the  Western
World"  advertised.    Thought  control  is  real  here,  tempered
by  the   presence  of  West  Berlin  so  close   by.   The   German
Democratic  Republic  is  not  at  all  democratic  but  the   picture
of  the  East  as  "slave"  is  silly  and  dangerous.   We  only  blind
ourselves  with  our  own  oversimplifications  when  careful  nego-
tiation  and  thought  are  so  necessary.
This  Is  the  2d  of  Stone's  Reports  from  Germany  —  You  Can  Start  A  Gift   Sub  /Vow  With  the  First
I.F. Stone's   Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's
Please  renew
dtraat
City    ..............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)    Name  ..
Street    ..........
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
........................... Zone............State........ ............
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
4/6/59
...........................Zone............State....................
gift  announcement?      Yes  d    No Q
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second    Class   Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.   C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-d«ced  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  I". S.;  $6  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED