I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959aug10.pdf

============================================================

Javits  Swings  Toward  Preventive  War,  P.  2
Behind  A  Press  Blackout:  14 Democratic  Senators  In  Letter  to  Ike  Question  Arms  Give-Away,  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  31
AUGUST  10,  1959
»
101
        WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Good  News  for  All  Mankind
The   coming  exchange  of  visits  by  Khrushchev  and  Elsen-
hower  is good  news  for  mankind. We  believe the  Russian will
prove  a  hit  in  this  country,  and  that  the  President  will  get  a
hero's  welcome  in  the  Soviet  Union.  The   issues  between  the
U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  are  terribly complicated,  have  been  ren-
dered  more  so  by  those  with  an  interest  in  continued  tension,
and  are  now  tangled  beyond  comprehension.  There  will  be  a
satisfying  symbolism  all  the  earth's  millions  can  understand
when   the  Russian  leader  and  the  American  President  shake
hands  on  the  steps  of  the  White   House.   We   applaud   Mr.
Eisenhower's announcement that  the  visit will not  be  for  nego-
tiations  but  for  "informal  talks"  and  "an  exchange  of  views."
The  first  necessity  is  the  creation  of  a  better  atmosphere.  Re-
laxation  of  tension  will  itself  make  easier  the  discovery of  so-
lutions.  Above  all,  it  is  necessary  for  America  and  Russia  to
discover  that  they  are  both  inhabited  by human  beings  not  ab-
stract  monsters known  as  "Communists"  and  "capitalists."   For
this  purpose  Khrushchev,  a  one-man  travelling  circus and  per-
manent  presidential  campaign,  should  prove  most  effective;  he
has  worked  hard  to  end  a  glowering  Stalinism  at  home  and
abroad  and  deserves  praise  for  it.
Adenauer Being  By-Passed
In  the  decision  to  have  the  exchange,  credit  here  must  go
first  of  all  to  Mr.  Eisenhower.   History  will  see  the  death  of
John  Foster  Dulles  as  a  turning  point.   Mr.  Dulles  had  long
vetoed  a  Nixon  trip  to  Russia,  and  a  Khrushchev  visit  here.
With  his  death,  the  ice began  to melt.   Mr.  Eisenhower's  eight
years  in  office  would  be  historic—all  else  would  be  forgiven
—if   the  President  who  began   by  ending  the  war  in   Korea
finished   by  laying  the  foundations  for   peaceful   co-existence
with  the  Soviet  Union.   There  were  some  interesting   revela-
tions  in  the  President's  special  press  conference  last  Monday.
They   disclosed  that  "some  time  back"   Mr.  Eisenhower  sug-
gested  to  the  State  Department  that  we  try  "to  melt  a  little  bit
of  the  ice"  in  our  relations  with  Russia,  and  that  the  President
himself  in  early  July  "initiated"  the  correspondence that  led  to
the   invitation   for   the   Khrushchev   visit.    Apparently   even
Nixon  did  not  know  about  this  correspondence   until  the  eve
of  his own trip,  for  Mr.  Eisenhower  says he  told  the  Vice  Pres-
ident  about  it  "so that  you will  not  be  astonished  or  surprised
and  feel  let  down  by your government."  It  is also  cleat that  the
President  did  not  wait  for  an  approval   which  Bonn  and  per-
haps Paris  among the  allied  capitals  might  not  have  given,  for
he  told  the  press   "the   heads  of  state  were  notified   just  re-
cently  about  this  impending  visit,  and  some  of  them  have  been
able  to  answer."   When  this  is  added  to  the  President's  re-
mark  that  "somewhere along the  line" he would  see  Adenauer,
By  Contrast  With  Nixon
"Governor  Rockefeller  avoided  making  even courtesy
calls  on the two  Russian dignitaries  who recently  visited
New  York,  Vice  Premiers Anastas  I.  Mikoyan  and  Frol
K.  Kozlov.   He  turned  down  an  invitation  to  the opening
of  the  Soviet  exhibit  in  New  York  even  though  it  was
attended  by  the  President  and  the  Vice President.  And
clearly  he  does  not  share  the  enthusiasm demonstrated
by  many  U.S.  businessmen in  entertaining  the  Soviet
visitors  as  though  they  were  close  friends."
—W.  H.  Lawrence  in  New  York   Times  Aug.   ^   from
Puerto  Rico  the  day  Khrushchev   visit  announced
it  is evident  that  the  Bonn-Washington  axis is  not  what  it  used
to  be  when  Dulles  was  alive.
The  British have played a  crucial role  in  all  this.   Ever  since
the  death  of  Stalin  and  Churchill's   visit  here   in   1953,   the
British  have  been  trying to  bring about  a  Russo-American  set-
tlement.    Churchill's   desire  for  a  summit  meeting  was   frus-
trated.   Eden  brought  about  a  reluctant  summit  meeting   in
1955  only  to have  its results  undercut  by Dulles  in  the  Foreign
Ministers'  Conference  which  followed  it  at  Geneva.   Dulles
had  done  his  best  to  discourage Macrnillan's  one-man  voyage
of  exploration  to  Moscow  which  paved  the  way  for  the  ex-
change  now  announced.   Myopically  considered,  this  new  sum-
mit  like  the  last  reflects  the  requirements of  British  domestic
politics;  this  has  been  the  big  talking  point  in  Washington—
that  a  summit was necessary to  defeat  the  Labor  party.   Indeed
we  see  by the  London  Sunday  Times  (Aug.  2)   that  the  Con-
servatives  may  hold  the  General  Election  on  October  15  or  22
while  the  exchanges  for  which  they  can  claim  credit  are  still
going  on.   But  the  longer  view  is  that  Britain,  which   needed
Russo-American  tension  after  the  war  to  obtain  American  aid,
now  sees  only  certain  disaster  in  the  drift  to  war  and  in  a  con-
tinued  arms  race  beyond  its  resources.   In  Britain,  as  elsewhere
peace  is  the  issue  which  wins  elections.
Mr.  Nixon   sees  that  here,  and   spoke  in  Moscow   in  one
world  tones  that  recalled  Willkie  and  Wallace.   Between  him
and  his  rival  Rockefeller  a  gulf   is  opening  up.   Nixon  has
made   himself   the   advocate  of   co-existence;  Rockefeller   of
civilian  fallout  shelters.   One  says  there  is  now  no   alternative
to  peace;  the  other  that  we  can  -wage  nuclear  war  and  save
enough  people  to  start  over  again.   Both  parties  are  split  wide
open.   Rockefeller  stands  with  Truman  and  Acheson  in  want-
ing  the  cold   -war  stepped  up.   Eisenhower  and  Nixon  agree
with  Democrats  like  Stevenson,  Harriman   and  Humphrey  in
wanting  the  arms race  cut down.  The  old  cold  war  bi-partisan-
ship  is  over  and  a  real  debate  on  foreign  policy  is  shaping  up
at  last.
1   2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  10, 1959
Civil  Defense  Stressed  to  Make  "First  Strike"  and  "Stronger"  Foreign  Policy  Possible
Javits  Swinging   Over  to  Rockefeller-Holifield   Preventive   War   View
Javits  seems  to  be  the  latest  member  of  the  Senate  to  be
swept  along  in  the  preventive  war  undertow  created  on  the
Republican  side  by  Governor  Rockefeller's   influence   and  on
the  Democratic by  Congressman Chet  Holifield  of  California.
His  speech  in  the  Senate  July  29  is  disturbing.   It  was  made
in  answer  to  a  speech  by  Senator  Young of  Ohio  on  July  27
'deriding  the  Rockefeller  compulsory  shelter  program  as  part
of  a civil defense  "hoax  and  fraud,"  particularly  for  an  apart-
ment  house  city  like New  York  where  (Young  said)  "some-
one  living  on  the  20th  floor  would  probably,  from  the  time
the  first  warning  is  given,  get  down  to  about  the  6th  floor
before  an atomic warhead  would explode. . .  ."
Protecting  Civilians or Gambling  With Their  Lives?
Javits  urged  "personal  consideration  to  the  protection  of
millions  of  the  innocent and  defenseless  whose lives would be
endangered  in  the  event of  conflict."    But  the  emphasis  of  his
speech  is not  on  the  prevention  of  thermonuclear  war, the  only
sure  way  to  protect  people  (see  boxes  on  this page),  but  on
civil  defense  as  a  mechanism  for  making feasible  a  policy  of
initiating  thermonuclear  war.
Thus  Javits  quoted  with  approval  a  passage  from  a  recent
civil  defense  report  by  the  Holifield  subcommittee  of  House
Government  Operations which said,  "From  the  enemy's stand-
point,  a strong civil defense in  the  United  States  would mean
first  of  all  that  our  strategic strike  forces  will  be  used  if nec-
essary,   despite  the   consequences   of   a   return   blow  by   the
enemy."    (Italics added.)
This  means we would strike  first.  The  Lebanese-Iraqi crisis
like the  earlier Indo-Chinese crisis of  1954  showed  how wrong
our  military  and  intelligence estimates  could  be;  in  such  situa-
tions  we  might  easily  ignite  the  world.    Javits  followed  this
up  with  similar  quotations from  the  (Herman Kahn)  Rand
Corporation  studies and  the  Rockefeller  Brothers  report  (see
box  at  top  of  col.  2).    These  reports  are  concerned  not  so
much with protecting the  civilian  population as with gambling
that  even  if  millions  died  enough  could  be  saved  to  make
CIA  Chief  Seems  to  Differ  With Rockefeller
"If   relations   with   the   Soviet   bloc   ever   reach   the
showdown  stage,  the  edge  of  difference,  which  may  be
very  fine,  may  well depend  on  the  strength  of  the  com-
peting  wills.   This  in  turn  is  likely  to  reflect  the  rela-
tive  vulnerabilities.  .  .  .  An  enemy  who  felt  confident
that  he  could  disrupt and  disorganize  our  society  while
preserving  the  substance  of  his  own  might  be  tempted
to  launch   an  all-out   blow.    Conversely   the  ability  to
afford  reasonable  protection  to  our  population  may  en-
able  us  to  act  with  firmness  and  resolution  in  time  of
crisis."
—Rockefeller   Bros.  Report,  "International   Security:
The  Military   Aspect"  quoted  by  Javits  July   29.
". .  .  the  theory  that  either  of  the  great  nuclear pow-
ers  could  destroy  the  other,  without  the  attacker  him-
self  being  devastated,  is  not,  I  believe,  subscribed  to  on
either  side  of  the  Iron  Curtain.   The  threat  of  mutual
nuclear  destruction  is  a  nightmare  that  cannot  be  dis-
missed,  but  even  though  international  communism  ex-
pects  to  gain  the  world,  it  does  not  wish  to  acquire  a
world  in  ashes."
—Allen  W.  Duttes,  director  of  Central   Intelligence,
concluding  the  National  Strategy  Seminar  for  Reserve
Officers    at  the  National  War  College  July   24  (text   at
page  A   6468,  Congressional   Record  July    27).
victory  meaningful.
Implicit  in  the  calculations  of  the  preventive  war  bloc—
though  little  understood  by  the  public—is  a  willingness  to
write  off what  they  call  Country  A  and  concentrate  on  saving
what  they  call Country  B.    Country  A  is made up  of  the  large
cities  where they  acknowledged  that  no  protection is possible
against   the   volcanic   radioactive  hell   into  which  an   attack
would  convert  our  cities.    Country  B  is made  up  of  rural  and
small  towns  distant  enough  from   these  urban  areas  so  that
their  only  problem  would be  heavy  fallout.   The  shelter  pro-
gram  is  designed  only  to  deal  with  the  problem in  such  re-
gions.    New  York  City  would,  of  course,  be  written off.
13  Famous City  Planners Say  Ban  on  A-Bombs   and  Tests  Only  Effective  Defense
Warn  Against  Creating  False  Sense  of  Security  in  Shelter Programs
"We,  as  members  of  the  American  Institute  of  Planners,
believe  that  our professional  responsibilities  now include  the
urgent   need   to  help   protect  our  urban  communities   from
total  destruction  by  nuclear  weapons  and  radioactive  pollu-
tion.
"We  recognize  that  our  ability  to  effectively  reduce  the
vulnerability   of  cities  has  been  nullified  by  the  awful  in-
crease  in  the  destructive  power  of  nuclear  weapons   during
the   past   decade.     We  have  no  faith   in  'the  concept   of  a
'limited  war'  which  would  spare  our  cities—we  agree  with
our  military  leaders  that  nuclear  weapons  of  indescribably
great  power  would  inevitably  be  used  to  destroy  our  cities,
should  a  major  war  break  out.
"We  assert  that  there  is  no  longer  any  possibility  of  ade-
quate  civil   defense  against  a  major  nuclear  war,  and  we
assert  that  the  fall-out  shelter  programs  are  utterly  incap-
able  of  providing  even  a  modicum  of  protection  against   a
determined  enemy.    We  believe   that  such  policies   tend  to
lull  the  country  into  a  false  sense  of  security  about  the  ef-
fects  of  nuclear  war  by  continuing  to  hold  out  hope  for  sur-
—Charles  S.  Ascher, Frederick   Bigger,  Hans   Blumenfeld,
Albert  Mayer,  Lewis  Mumford,   Flavel  Shurtleff,    Clarence  S.
vival  where  there  is  none.
"We  recognize  that  the  positive  steps  to  be  taken  to  pro-
tect  our  cities  from  nuclear  destruction  lie  in  political  ac-
tion,  but  as  professional  planners  we  feel  compelled  to  as-
sert  the  following  technical  judgments:
"1.  That   the   present   civil   defense   and  fall-out   shelter
programs  are  incapable  of  protecting  American  cities  and
their  citizens  in  the  event  of  a  nuclear  war.
"2.  That  the  only  way  to  protect  our  cities  against  nu-
clear   attack   is   through   negotiation   for   the  cessation  of
testing  and  use  of  nuclear  weapons.
"We  urge  that  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  American
Institute  of  Planners  consider  a  resolution  and  appropriate
action  with  respect  to  these  points  at  the  forthcoming  na-
tional  conference  in  Seattle   (July-August  1959).    We  also
urge  the  Board  of  Governors  to  appoint  an  official  commit-
tee  to  report  on  further  steps  the  profession  should  take  to
help  insure  that  the  destructive  potential  of  nuclear   explo-
sions  and  radioactive  pollutions  are  never  used  against  our
communities."
Henry  S.  Churchill,  Louis P. Dolbeare,  Eugene  Henry  Klaber,
Stein,  Walter  Thabit,  Robert  Weinberg,   Roger   Willcox.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  10,  1959
Heavy  Protest   Mail  Forces  Token  Gesture;  Still  Not  Too Late  to  Suspend  Nuclear  Pacts
Senators Led by Humphrey Express Misgivings to Ike Over Atomic Give-Away
We  reprint  below  the  full  text  of  an  exchange  of  letters
between  14  Democratic  Senators  and  the  President  expressing
misgivings   about   the   new   nuclear   give-away  agreements.
We  reprint these letters here because:
(1)  The  text  is available  nowhere  else.    Indeed,  except  for
a  news  story  by  Joseph  P.  Lash  in  the  New   York   Post  July
31,  the  day  the  letters  were  released,  no  other  newspaper  we
have  seen  mentioned  them.    The  Neiv   York   Times  did  not
carry  the  news.    Neither  did  the  Washington   papers.    This
is  part  of  a  continued  press  blackout.
(2)   Despite  the  press  blackout,  there  has  been  a  greater
outpouring  of  mail  on  these  agreements,  particularly  on  nu-
clear  arms  for  West  Germany, than  on  any  comparable  issue
in  years.   The  exchange of  letters  reflects  the  growing  concern
in  the  country  and  the  rising  pressure  on  Congress.
Say-It-Ain't-So  Letter
(3)  The  letter  by the  Democratic Senators was  designed  to
take  them  off  the  hook  but  the  position  taken  is  so  weak  it
looks  as  if  it  might  have  been  framed  by Kennedy, the  weak-
est  of  its  signers.   In  vulgar,  brief  but  accurate terms,  it  might
be  termed  a  say-it-ain't-so-letter.
It   is  obvious  that  to  rearm  West   Germany  with  nuclear
weapons  will  be  a  fatal  obstacle  to  peaceful  reunification of
the  Reich.   Russia will not  relinquish East Germany to  a Bonn
armed with  atomic weapons,  allied  with NATO  and  equipped
for   revenge.    For  these  Senators  to  ask  the  President  to  say
that  the  agreements  "in  no  -way  prejudice the  reunification  of
Germany"  is  to  ask  the  White  House  to  give  them  an  excuse
for  their  inaction  by making an  untrue declaration.
It  is also  obvious  that  one  does  not  make international  con-
trol  of  atomic  weapons   easier   by  training  more  nations  in
Press Time Bulletin
According  to  the  Aug. 2-3 issue of  Le  Monde,  30 lead-
ing  French scientists  have  appealed to  their government
urging  it  to  seek  an  agreement  forbidding  the  testing,
manufacture,  stockpiling  and  use  of  atomic weapons.
their  use  and  stockpiling  such  weapons  in  those  countries  for
their  armies in  the  event  of  war.    The  Senators  ask  the  Presi-
dent  for  a  declaration   which  would   show  our  "peaceful   in-
tentions  .  .  .  and our willingness ...  for  the  reduction and
control  of  nuclear  weapons."    Our  actions  speak  louder  than
any  such  words.    The  letter  got  the  brushoff.
(4)   The  joint  statement,  the   brushoff   and   the   pressure
'  may  stiffen  Senator  Humphrey's  position  to  the  point  where
he  might  do  in  the  Senate  what  the  insurgents  led  by  Meyer
of  Vermont  did  in  the  House,  and  force  a  vote  by  an  amend-
ment  to  the  foreign  aid  bill.
Humphrey  could  offer   an  amendment  suspending  the  use
of  foreign aid  funds  for  this purpose  until  after  current  nego-
tiations  at  Geneva  on  Berlin  and  on  nuclear  testing were  over.
Certainly  with  a  summit  meeting  in  prospect  at  which  prog-
ress  on  disarmament might  be  made,  is  it  not  folly  to  tie  our
hands  by  these  agreements?    It  is  true  that  they  have  certain
legalistic  loopholes  which  might  be  utilized  by  the  President
to  make  them  a  dead-letter  but  not  without  a  charge  of  bad
faith  by  the  other  parties  to  them.
The  Senate  has  not  yet  held  hearings  on  the  foreign  aid
bill.   The  bill may not  come before  it until  the  end  of  August.
If  pressure is  stepped  up  on  the  Senate, there  is still  a  fighting
chance  to  force  a  debate,  perhaps  even  to  suspend  the  agree-
ments.    Now's  the  time  to  write your  Senator.
Text of the Letters Exchanged With  the President on Nuclear Sharing Pacts
July  25
My  dear Mr.  President:
We  write  to  you  regarding   the  proposed  agreements  be-
tween  the  United  States  and  seven  NATO  countries  on  the
transfer  of  United  States nuclear  information and  equipment.
As  you  are   aware,   the   Atomic  Energy   Act  of   1954,   as
amended, specifies that  agreements  on nuclear  sharing  go  into
effect  unless  Congress,  within  60  days  after  the   agreements
have   been   submitted   to   the   Joint   Committee   on  Atomic
Energy,   acts  by  concurrent  resolution  to  reject  the   agree-
ments.
Although  we  have  misgivings  with  respect  to  the  United
States  entering  into these  agreements  at  this particular  time,
we have  concluded that  the  problems  involved  in  these  agree-
ments  cannot  be  solved  by  the  Senate  and  House  passing  a
resolution  of  rejection.
A  number  of  people  in  this  country  and  abroad,  neverthe-
less,  question  the  necessity  and  wisdom  of  these  agreements
on  sharing  nuclear  weapons  material   and  data.    In  view  of
this  concern  here  and  abroad,  we  respectfully  suggest,  Mr.
President, that  serious  consideration  be  given  to  the  issuance
of   a  declaration   of  policy  by  you  on  behalf   of  the   United
States.   We  have  in  mind  a  declaration  which  would  clearly
show  that  the  dictates  of  military  policy  do  not  take  prece-
dence  over  U.  S.  political  and  diplomatic   policies.    It   could
reassure  our  people that  the  agreements  in  no  way  preclude
the  United  States  from  entering   into  agreements  in  the  fu-
ture  with  the  Soviet  Union  and  other  nations  concerning  the
control   and  reduction   of  armaments,  that  they  in  no  way
prejudice  the  reunification  of  Germany,  and  that  they  in  no
way bind the  United States to continue to supply the  recipient
governments  with  nuclear  information  and  materials  if  this
action  should be prohibited by  international  agreements  deal-
ing  with  arms  control  arrangements  in  Europe  or  agreement
on  the  reunification  of  Germany.
Such  a  declaration  by  you or  by  all  the  governments  to  be
parties  to  the  agreements  would, demonstrate  that  military,
decisions  are  subordinate  to  larger  political  and  diplomatic
objectives.    It  would  also  indicate  the  peaceful  intentions  of
the  United  States  and  our  willingness  at  any  time  to  con-
sider  proposals  for  the  solution   of  outstanding  political  dif-
ferences  such  as  the  reunification   of  Germany  and  for   the
reduction  and  control  of  nuclear  weapons  and  other  arma-
ments. ,
Respectfully,
Senators  Humphrey,  Carroll,  Church,  McCarthy,   Morse,
Hart,   Neuberger,  Clark,  Kennedy,  Proxmire,   Young,
Williams,  Muskie  and    Mansfield.
July  28
Dear  Senator  Humphrey :
I  assure  you, and  request  that  you transmit  this  assurance
to  your  co-signers  of  the  letter  you  sent  me  on July  25, that
your  communication will  receive  the  earnest  consideration  of
the  Executive  Branch.   I  shall  also  see that  you are  further
advised.
I  appreciate  this  expression  of  your  convictions  on  a  most
important   subject.
Sincerely,
Dwight  D. Eisenhower
1   2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  10,  1959
The  Basic  Question  Still  Is:  Can A  Free  Society  Police  Against  Dangerous  Thoughts?
Court  of  Appeals  Falls  Back  on  Guilt  by  Association  in  SACB  Case
The  U.  S.  Court  of  Appeals  here  has  just handed  down  its
third  decision  in  the  case  of  the  Communist  Party  vs.  the  Sub-
versive  Activities  Control  Board.   This  tests  the  constitutional-
ity   of   the   Internal   Security  Act   of    1950   which   Congress
passed  over  Truman's  veto,  and  is  one  of  the  most  long  drawn
out  cases  in  the  history  of  our  courts.    It  began  nine years  ago.
It  will  reach  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  for  the  second  time  on
appeal  next  Fall,  and  it  looks  as  if  it  will  be  sent  back  for  a
fourth   round   in  the   Court  of  Appeals  before  the   Supreme
Court  passes  on  the  basic  constitutional  issue.    The  basic  con-
stitutional  issue  is  whether  in  a  free  society  the   government
may   label   certain   ideas  as  dangerous,   force   those   who   dis-
seminate  them  to  register  with  a  government  board,  and  mark
their  publications   and  radio  broadcasts  as  "subversive."     Its
basic  assumption   is  the   basic  assumption   of   all   totalitarian
regimes,  whether   Fascist  or  Communist,  that  the  government
has  a  right  to  act  as  a  policeman  in  the  field  of  ideas.
In  one  sense  the  protracted   appeals   represent   a  kind   of
"cooling  off"  operation  in  disposing  of  an  act  which   (as  the
Mundt-Nixon   bill)   was  long  opposed  by  many  of  the   most
conservative  lawyers of  our  time,  failed  year  after  year  of  pas-
sage  and  only  achieved  enactment  in  the  wake  of  anti-Com-
munist  hysteria  after  the  Korean  war  began.    The  chances  are
that  the  law  will  finally  be  declared  unconstitutional  and  that
our  highest  court will  uphold  the  reasoning  of  Judge  Bazelon's
original   dissent   on  the   Court   of   Appeals   in   1954.      Judge
Bazelon  argued  that  under  the  Fifth  amendment  the  govern-
ment   cannot  force  a  man  or  an  organization  to  register  as
Communist  pr  Communist  controlled  since  this  would  open
the  way  to  incrimination  under  various  laws,  including   the
Smith  Act,  which  penalizes  advocates  of  revolutionary  ideas.
When  Informers  Have  to  Take  the  Stand
So  far,  the  Supreme  Court  has  passed
1
 only  on  questions  of
evidence.    Here  the  byproducts  of  this  long   litigation   have
been  most  useful.     Since  this  is  a  criminal  proceeding   sub-
ject  to  all  the  traditional safeguards  of  due  process,  the  gov-
ernment  had  to  put  its  professional  Communist  informants  in
the  witness  stand  where  they  were  subjected  to  cross-exami-
nation   and   to   judicial  scrutiny.    There  were   not   so-called
"casual  informants"  but  those  FBI  professionals  whom   some
liberals  would   protect   from   confrontation  in  loyalty-security
cases.    The  result  has  been  to  deflate  one  after  another  of  the
government's  most  famous informers  as unrealiable, perjurious
or  psychotic.
The  testimony of  three,  Manning  Johnson,  Paul  Crouch  and
Harvey  Matusow,  were  stricken  entirely  from  the  record.    The
testimony   of   four   others,   Scarletto,   Cummings,   Honig   and
Mrs.  Markward  was  stricken  in  part.   This  new  round  of  liti-
gation  involves  the  reliability  of  Louis  Budenz.    The   record
shows  an  amazing  facility  for  remembering  years  later  more
than  he  could  recall  when  he  first  left  the  Communist  Party
and  became an  FBI  informant.    New  evidence  cast new  doubts
upon   him   but   his   illness  prevented   his   cross-examination.
Judge   Bazelon,   dissenting   in   this   new   decision,   thinks   all
Budenz's  testimony  should  have  been  stricken,  too.
As  If  Written  by  Gilbert  and  Sullivan
The  majority  on  the  Court  of  Appeals,  Judges  Prettyman
and  Danaher,  confronted  by ever  diminishing evidence  as  more
and  more  testimony  is striken  as unreliable,  falls  back  on  guilt
by  association.    The   majority   says  "guilt  by  association  is  a
concept  we  will  not  even  entertain  for  consideration,  but  this
proceeding  is  not  to  determine  guilt.    It  is  to  ascertain  char-
acteristics,   and   association   is  surely  one   of   the   best-known
sources  of  information  about   characteristics."     These   words
of  Judge  Prettyman's  are  worthy  of  Gilbert  and   Sullivan.
We  may  hear  more  on  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court  about
Point  1 of  the  decision.    Prettyman  and  Danaher  ordered  the
Subversive  Activities  Control   Board  three  years  ago  to  strike
its  findings  on  alleged   Communist   "secret   practices"   on  the
ground  that  it  was  not  supported  by  "a  preponderance  of  the
evidence."    The  Board  did  not  obey  the  Court's  mandate  to
strike,  though  there  is  less  evidence  now.    The  majority  says
it  thinks  the  Board  is  "entitled  to  adhere  to  its  view  on  the
point  until  our  view  of   it  has  been   tested   in  the   Supreme
Court."    This  seems  pretty  silly,  too,  and  may  prove  grounds
for  reversal.
Going   Off   on   Two   Week   Vacation—Next    Issue    Will    Be   That   of   August    31
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ..............................................................................••••••—.
Street  ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
8/10/59
Enter   Rift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)    Name ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ...................,....................Zone............State.......
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D
NO  n
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
stonf'n   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C.   under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but    pub-
lished  every  Thursday   except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   f»018  Nebraska   Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
\  ii     iM<lf'iH>mlfnt    weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$r>  in   the   U.  S.:   $(i  in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED