I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jun01.pdf

============================================================

Bonn  Gets An  Atomic  Veto,  P. 4
Press  Ignores   Senator   Engle's  Plea  for  A  Less  Rigid  Policy  Toward  Red  China,  Pages  2-3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VII,  NO.  21
JUNE  1,  1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
The  Ugly   Questions  Unanswered  In  That  Lynching
In  The  Untold  Story of  Little Rock  (Saturday  Evening  Post,
May   23),   Virgil   T.   Blossom,   the   former   school   superin-
tendent,  criticizes  the  failure  of  the  Justice  Department   "to
indict  or  prosecute  a  single  individual involved  in  mob  action
to  thwart  integration,  although  more  than  50  were  arrested
by  local  police."    The  untold  story  of  the  Poplarville  lynch-
ing  is  proceeding  along   the  same  lines.    The   Federal  gov-
ernment  has  withdrawn  from  the  case,  and  handed  over  the
results  of  an  FBI  investigation  to  Governor  Coleman  of  Mis-
sissippi.    Instead  of  summoning  a  special  grand   jury,  Gov-
ernor  Coleman  says  he  will  await  the  regular  grand  jury  next
November.    By  November  the  ashes  will  be  cold.
Victim Just An Untermensch
Those  wise  in  the  ways of  official  double-talk'will  note  the
peculiar  wording   of   the   Attorney  General's  announcement.
It  says  the  decision  to  withdraw  was  "based   upon   a  ruling
that  FBI  investigation  had  clearly  established  that  the  persons
responsible  for   the  death*   of   Parker   had   not  violated   the
Federal  Kidnapping  Statute,  and  no  other  successful  Federal
prosecution  could  be  maintained."    This  is  tantalizing.    It  is
"clearly  established"   that   the  anti-kidnapping  law  was  not
violated,  i.e.   the  murdered  man  was  not  taken   across  State
lines.    But  what  of  the  Civil  Rights  statutes  which  make  it  a
crime  for  a  State  official   to  conspire  with  a  lynch  mob,  or
even  to  fail  in  his  duty  to  protect  against  it?    Of  this  other
possibility,  we  are  told  only  that  "no  other  successful  Federal
prosecution   could   be   maintained."     For   lack   of   evidence?
The  atmosphere?   Because witnesses  might  fear  reprisals  from
State  officials?     And  why  the  word   "successful"?     Even  an
unsuccessful   Federal  prosecution   may  serve  as  a   deterrent.
Were  this  not  the  murder  of  one  whom  we  white  Americans
consider,  to  borrow  the  German  word  with  all  its  ugly  impli-
cations,  an  untermensch, the  Attorney General  would  never  be
able  to  get  away  with  such  meagre   explanation.
The  doubts  raised  by  the  cryptic  wording  of  the  press  re-
lease  are  sharpened   by  the   letter   New   York   radio   station
WMCA   received   from  Poplarville,   Miss.,   in   answer   to   a
$5,000  reward  offer.    The  well-known  Negro  journalist  Ted
Poston  was allowed  to  read  the  letter.    In  the  New  York  Post
of  Friday,  May  22,  he  reported  it  "named  an  elected   official
of  Pearl  River  County  as  a  close  collaborator"  of  the  lynch
mob.   This  official  arranged  to  have  the  Negro  prisoner  trans-
ferred   back  to  Poplarville  from  a  safe  jail  in  Jackson,  and
served  as  "lookout",  telling  the  mobsters  where  the  jail  keys
could   be  found.     Station   WMCA   officials   verified   the   ac-
curacy  of  Mr.   Poston's   report  when  we  phoned   them  and
added  that  they  were  trying  to  retrieve  the  letter  from  the
Same  Cracked  Record
"Attorney  General Bruce  Bennett  of  Arkansas  testi-
fied yesterday  the  Arkansas Legislature's  Special  Edu-
cation  Committee  'is  convinced  racial  unrest  in  Arkan-
sas  was  deliberately  planned by  the  Communist Party.'
Bennett  presented  to  a  Senate  Judiciary subcommittee
the  opposition  of  his  state  to  civil  rights  bills."
—Associated  Press from  Washington, May  21.
"The  Communist  Party,  USA,  poses  a  formidable do-
mestic  threat.  .  .  .  Diligent  efforts  are  being  made  to
infiltrate  Negro  and  labor  groups,  so  as  to  create  agi-
tation  and confusion. .  .  .  We  now  have  155  known,  or
suspected,  Communist  front  and Communist-infiltrated
organizations  under  investigation.   These  front  groups
provide  a  fertile  auxiliary  corps  of  dupes, sympathiz-
ers,  misguided pseudo liberals.  .  .  .  Supplementing  this
group  are  some  men  and  women who  pretend  to  be  in-
terested  in  measures  to  solve   racial   .  .  .   problems.
Actually  they  .  .  .  are exploiting shamelessly  racial,  la-
bor  and  welfare issues  in  carrying out  the Communist
Party  line."
—J.  Edgar  Hoover  testifying   on  the  1960 budget   to
House  Appropriations   Com.,  released  May   11.
•"Death",  not  "lynching".    Note  how  delicately  the  words
have  been  chosen,  as  if  to  spare  Southern  susceptibility.
FBI  before  it  could  be  handed  over  to  Mississippi  authorities,
lest  the  writer  of   it   be  exposed   to  retaliation.    Why   was
Parker  moved   back  to  Poplarville?     And  why  was  the  jail
unguarded  when  the  lynch  mob  arrived?    Was  County  At-
torney  William  Stewart,  the  responsible   official,   questioned?
The  morning  this  issue  went  to  press,  Governor    Coleman
was  to  testify   before  the   Hennings   committee   against   civil
rights  legislation.    We  are  waiting  to  see whether  any  Sena-
tor  asks  him  about  these  loose  ends.    Will  anyone  question
him  about  the  mysterious  suicide  attempts  by  Poplarville's  jail
janitor,  Houston   Amacker,  and  Helen  Van  Ness  "a  woman
prisoner  who",  according  to  an  AP  dispatch  from   Poplarville
(N.   Y.  Post,  May  12)   "witnessed  the  abduction."     Both  are
white.    Shouldn't  these  witnesses  be  moved  to  a  safer  place?
Never A Harsh Word for Racists
We  invite  the  attention  of  the  Hennings  committee,  too,  to
the   House   Appropriations   testimony   by  J.   Edgar   Hoover
quoted  in  the  box  on  this  page.   Why  is he  so venomous  and
suspicious  about  anyone who  seeks  to  help  the  Negro?    Why
does  he,  so  vocal  on  the  dangers  of  Communism,  never  raise
his  voice  on  the  dangers  of  racism,  though  a  sense  of  rankling
injustice  on  the  part  of  a  newer  Negro  generation  may  some
day  tear  our  great  cities  apart?    Year  after  year  his  testimony
chimes  in  with  Southern  racist  attempts  to  picture  the  Negro's
struggle  for  justice  and  equality  as  a  Red  plot.    How  reliable
are  FBI  investigations  of  lynchings  when  its  chief  approaches
the  problem  in  the  same lurid  frame  of  reference  as  the  more
benighted  elements of  the  South?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  1,1959
Excerpts  from  Senator  Engle's  Largely  Ignored  Senate  Speech  of  May  21 . .
The  extent  to  which  the  reactions  of  the  press  are  con-
ditioned  by  official  policy  was  again  demonstrated  by  the
almost complete blanketing given  Senator  Clair  Engle's  full
dress  speech  in  the  Senate  May  21 calling  for  a  more  flex-
ible   China   policy.    Though  the  newly  elected   California
Democrat's  speech  brought a friendly  response  from  Demo-
cratic  Senators  as  different  as  Morse, Gore, Proxmire,  Long
and  Dodd,  though  Clark  of  Pennsylvania  pointedly praised
Engle   for   being   "more   realistic"   than   his   predecessor
Knowland,'  the  speech  was  largely  ignored  by  newspapers
outside  Washington.   We present  striking  excerpts  from  it
here,  along with significant  glimpses  of  testimony on China
policy  released  the  day  before  from  the  House Appropria-
tions  Committee.   These  show  the  interrogation  of  retir-
ing  Assistant   Secretary  of  State  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs
Robertson  by  Congressman  Meyer  of  Vermont,  who  cam-
paigned  on  a  platform  calling  for  recognition  of  Commu-
nist  China.
The  Engle  speech  and  Senate  reactions  to  it  should  be
read  also  as   background  for   the   forthcoming  Harriman
visit   to   China.    When  former  Secretary  of   State  Dean
Acheson  appeared at  the  State  Department  to  get  a  pass- <
port   for   the   former  Governor  of   New   York,   two   elder
statesmen  of  the  Democratic party  were  joining  in  a  mass
foray  to  break  down  the  Chinese  Wall  we  have  ourselves
erected  to  keep  our  newsmen  out  of  China,  and  to  make
way  for  a change  in  China policy.   It  should be remembered
that  Acheson, while rigid on  European affairs,  was  prepar-
ing  for  a  more  flexible  position  on  China  in  the  winter  of
1949-50  when  he  was  thwarted  first  by  the  McCarthy on-
slaught   (in   which  the  China  lobby  played  a  major  part)
and  then  by  the  Korean  war.
The  box  below,  correcting  the  distortions  of  the   State
Department  on  the  question  of  newsmen  for  China,  is  use-
ful  background for  its  grant  of  a  passport  to  Harriman  as
a   "bona  fide"  newsman  (for  North  American  Newspaper
Alliance).     Hope  for  a  change  in  the  Far  East  is  in  the
air.—IPS.
". . . The State  Department  [Senator  Engle  began]  regards
this  area  of  our  foreign   policy  as  one  that  should  not  be
touched.   I  do not  see why  our  policy  in  China  should  be  any
more  sacrosanct  than  our policy  in Europe.  . . .
"... in a general way we are aware that the  sleeping Asian
giant  has  awakened;  that  colonialism  is  dead  .  .  .  what  the
people  really  want,  regardless  of  the   form   the   revolution
takes  . . .  (is)  to replace  poverty  with  plenty  . . .  inequality
with  equality.  .  .  .  We cannot  dispose  of  this  community of
interest  by  attaching  labels  to  the   effect  that  this  or  that
country  is  Communist  or neutral  or a  staunch  ally.  . .  . The
assumption  that  we  can  or  should  guide  this  change  in  our
own  image  is  itself  a  denial  of  the  very  equality  and  right of
self-determination   these  nations  of Asia  are seeking. . . .
"I  do not  contend  that  we can  or  should  recognize  the  Mao
government  under  the  conditions  of hostility  which  now  pre-
vail. ... I  cannot  take the  position  that  the Mao  government
should  represent  China  in  the  United  Nations  until  changes
take  place. ... I  suggest  the  need  for  examining  the  many
possible  alternative  middle  courses  . . . which  may serve the
The Secret  War Against  China
Mr.  [Wm.  H.]  MEYER  (D.  Vt.).    Could  you  describe
briefly   the  activities  of  the   CIA  from  Formosa,   For-
mosa  against  China, the  overt  actions  from  1950, 1954,
1958,  and  then  indicate  how  these   actions  themselves
may   have  contributed  to   the  hostile   and   aggressive
attitude  of  the  Chinese  Reds?
Mr.  [Walter  S.]  ROBERTSON  [Ass't  Sec'y  of  State
for  Far  Eastern  Affairs],    I  could  not,  Mr.  Congress-
man.     I  suggest   that  you  summon  Mr.  Allen  Dulles
down  to  testify   about  his  activities  abroad.
Mr.  MEYER.   The  reason  I  ask  this  question  is  that
it  is  definitely  stated  that  these  actions  are  affecting
American  foreign  policy  and,  therefore,  they  are within
the  realm  of  your  jurisdiction,  as  I  see  it.    It  would
seem  to  me  that  you  should  know  something  about  it
and  be  able  to comment.
Mr.  ROBERTSON.  I  can sincerely  say  I  do not think
the  activities of  the  CIA  in  Asia  have  been  contrary  to
American  interests.    To  the  contrary,  I  feel  they  have
served  American  objectives  effectively.
Mr.   MEYER.    You  don't  feel   that  they  have  con-
tributed  to  the  hostility  and  the  acts   of  the   Chinese
Reds,  which they have  done  more  or less  in retaliation?
Mr.  ROBERTSON.    Indeed,  I  don't.
—Mutual   Security   Act   of  1959,  exec.  hearing   April
21  before   House Foreign  Affairs,   released  May  20.
national  interest   10  years  from   now  far   better  than   our
present  policy.  . . .
Our Own Chinese  Wall
"It  is  simplicity  itself  to  respond  to  a  threat  by  attempt-
ing   to   build   a  military,   economic  and   psychological    wall
around   China.    This  response  of  containment ...  is  the
'maginot  line'  response.    It  is  the  'moat'  psychology   of  me-
dieval  days. ...  It  denies  the  United  States  the  advantage
of  those  relationships  essential  to  affect  change.  . . .  Among
most  of  our  allies  and the  neutral  nations  of  Asia  it  puts  the
United  States  in the  ludicrous  position ... of attempting  to
escape  behind  the flimsy curtain  we have  created, rather  than
facing  the reality of Communist  China.  . . . These  allies  seem
embarrassed  at  having  to  defer  to  the  efforts  of  the  U.  S.  to
keep  alive  the  myth  that  Communist  China  does  not  exist.
"At  the  opposite  extreme,  two  allies—the  Republic  of  Ko-
rea  and  the  Republic  of  China  on  Formosa—hold  an  interest
in  having  the  U.  S.  involved  in  a  total  war  with  Communist
China  .  . .they  employ  every  device  and  opportunity  avail-
able  to  identify  the  U.  S.  with  the  eventual  liberation   of  the
mainland.    The  U.  S.  is  placed  in  the  position   of  being  the
dog  wagged  by  the  tail. ...  In  sharp  contrast  [to  the  Ge-
neva  talks  on  Berlin]  our  China  policy  for  all  practical  pur-
poses  rules  out  the  use  of  instruments  other  than  the  ulti-
mate  recourse to war.  . . . Even  Assistant  Secretary  of State
for  Far  Eastern  Affairs  Walter  S.  Robertson   testified  to  the
effect  that  the  participation  of  China  would  be  necessary  if
any  arms  inspection  system  were  to be effective.  . . .
Senator  Engle  Corrects  State  Dept.
"It  was   charged   by   the   Chinese   Communists   that   we
would  not   grant   them  reciprocity.     What  they  meant  by
reciprocity  was  that  we  should  lift  our  passport  regulations
and  grant  26  visas  to  26  unknown people  without  individual
application.  .  .  .  The Secretary  of  State  practically  invited
them  to  make  an  application."
—Ass't  Secretary  'of  State for  Far  Eastern Affairs    Walter
S.  Robertson  April   21  before   House  Foreign     Affairs
on  the  Mutual  Security   Act   of  1959  (released   May
20),  in  answer  to  a  question  about  why  the  S8  U.S.
Distortions  About  Newsmen  to  China
newsmen  granted  passports  for  China  couldn't  get in,
"We  should  be  willing  to  negotiate  the  entrance  of  Chi-
nese  correspondents   to  the  United   States  on  a  basis  of
reciprocity  and equality  with  U.  S.  correspondents  admitted
to  China.    We  should  be  willing   to  place  the  issuance  of
visas  to  the  Chinese  on  the  same  basis  and  under  the  same
controls  as  now  apply  to  citizens  of  the  Soviet  Union  pro-
vided  that  the  Chinese  are  willing  to  admit  American  cor-
respondents."
—Sen. Clair Engle  (D.  Cal.)  J7.S. Senate May  21.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  1,1959
Challenging  Our Sacred  Cow  and  Calling  for  A  New  China  Policy
Preventing or Provoking Aggression?
"We  aim  at  preventing  aggression.   This  is  a  worthy  ob-
jective,  but  .  .  .  such  aspects  of  our  relations  as  the  trade
embargo;  the  boycott  on travel;  our  refusal  to  negotiate  on
questions  of  substantive   importance  at  a  level  higher  than
the  Ambassador  level  . . . our measures  which  have  been in-
terpreted  as  threatened  liberation—all  these  go  beyond  what
would  be necessary  to halt  any aggression  . . . there  is  even
good  reason  to  believe  that  in  carrying  out  these  measures
we  are  provoking  political  aggression.  .  .  .
"A  few  weeks  ago,  President  Eisenhower  ruled  out  fight-
ing  a  ground  war  in  Europe.    How  much  more  reason   for
ruling  out a  ground  war in the  vast  expanse  of  China?  .  . .
".  . . the present  trade  embargo  . . .  creates  a  future  re-
liance  upon  Moscow  for  technicians  and  for  spare  parts.    It
Military  Rathole Economies
Mr.  [Alvin  M-]  BENTLEY  (R.  Mich).    Do  we  have
any  hope,  with  respect  to  Korea,  Vietnam  and  Taiwan,
where  so  much  of  this  money is  going,  that  by building
up  these  military  establishments  and  the  economies  of
these   countries,  have   we   any   guarantee   that   those
economies  will  become  so  attractive  that   their  Com-
munist  counterparts might  thereby be attracted to come
over  on  our  terms  and  not  on  theirs?
Mr.   [Walter  S.]   ROBERTSON   [Ass't   Sect'y   Far
Eastern  Affairs].    I  don't  think, Mr. Congressman,  that
as  long  as  it  is  necessary  to  maintain  military  forces
in  these  three  countries  of  the  size  and  magnitude  we
now  have  to  maintain  in  view  of  the  threat  opposing
them,  that  we  can  do  much  more  than  to  keep  their
economies  from  deteriorating,  plus  a  small  measure  of
advance  toward viability.
—Mutual  Security   Act   of  1959,  ey.ec.  hearing   April
21, House Foreign  Affairs    Com., released May  20.
serves  as  a  reason  for  a  small  army  of  Soviet  technicians  in
China. ...  On the  basis  of  the  epithets  directed  by  high-
ranking  Chinese  officials  toward  the  Soviet  Union  during  the
Hundred  Flowers  experiment;  on  the  basis  of  the  hard   bar-
gaining  which   accompanies   each   Sino-Soviet   trade   agree-
ment ... on the  basis  of  overtures  which  already  have  been
made  by  China  to  discuss trade with  the  U.  S., there  is  fairly
good  reason  to  assume  that ...  a  normal  working  relation-
ship  could be  established   .  .  . the  ties  binding  the Commu-
nist  bloc  together  would  be  weakened  and  China's  ties  with
the  free  world  would be strengthened. ...
No  Elections on  Formosa  Since  Chiang  Arrived
Mr.  [Wm.  H.]  MEYER  (D.  Vt.).   'Aren't  they   [the
Formosans  or  Taiwanese]   also  claiming  they  are  not
represented  in  their  own  governments at  all proportion-
ately?
Mr.  [Walter S.]  ROBERTSON  [Ass't  Sec'y  of  State
for  Far  Eastern  Affairs],    You  will  certainly  find  dis-
sidents  among  the  Taiwanese as  you  will  in  every  coun-
try.
But  insofar  as  their local  governments are  concerned,
the  Taiwanese have  a  large  responsibility.
The  Federal  Government—that  isn't  a  good  name for
it—the  National  Government of  the  Republic of  China
is  largely  in  the hands  of  the mainland Chinese.  .  .  .
Mr.  MEYER.   Have they  had  a  free  election,  and  are
they  represented at  all?
Mr.   ROBERTSON.    Indeed  they  do  have  elections
for  their  local  governments.
Mr.  MEYER.    I  am  speaking  of  the  whole—
Mr.  ROBERTSON.   There  hasn't   been  any   election
for  the  legislative  Yuan  [the  "Congress"  of   Formosa]
since  the  Government  moved  to  Taipei  [i.e.  since  it  fled
from  the  mainland],
—Mutual  Security   Act   of  1959, exec.  hearing   April
21, House Foreign  Affairs    Com., released  May  20.
The Stakes Which  Call for A Change
"Free  Asia  endorses  the  legitimate  measures  of  the  U.  S.
to  prevent  Communist  aggression.   But  when  the  balance  of
Asia  opposes  those  provocative  aspects  of  U.  S.  policy  which
go beyond the  need  of  containment,  when  the  balance  of  Free
Asia  registers  even  a  partial  lack  of  confidence  as  a  result
of  the  failure  of  the  U.  S.  to  establish  more  constructive  re-
lations  with  China,  the  evident  conclusion  is that  some  change
in  our  China  policy  would  not  result  in  the  Communist  domi-
nation  of  all  Asia.    To  the  contrary,  such  change  is  neces-
sary  if  we  are  to  have  the  continued  confidence  of  the   peo-
ples  of Asia.  . . .
"I  think we have  to  make  a  distinction  between  our  obliga-
tions   to  the  Nationalist   Government   as  a  government  on
Formosa  and  to  this  same  government   as  the   government
of  all China.  . . .
"The  challenge  to  our  foreign  policy  in  the  next  decade  is
to  prevent  the  total marriage  of  China  and  the  Soviet  Union.
The  resulting  economic, political,  and  military  collosus  would
include  nearly  one-third  of  the  world's  population.  .  .  ."
Our  First  India-Born  Congressman  Elicits  An  Admission About Formosa
Mr.  [D.  S.]  SAUND  (D.  CaL,  first  Indian-born American
in  Congress).    Mr. Secretary,  I  am sincerely  disturbed when
I  hear  an  Assistant   Secretary   of  State   in  the  year   1959
make  the  statement  that  the  people  of  Formosa—because
their  standard  of  living  is  a  little  better  today—are  satis-
fied with  a  foreign  people  governing  them.
Mr.  Secretary,  the  European colonial  powers  had the  same
belief  a  quarter  century  ago.    They  honestly  and  sincerely
believed  that  they  had  conferred  so  many  benefits  on  the
colonial  people  that  the  colonial  people  were  really  happy
with  their  situation. ...  In  spite  of  what  happened  in
Indochina,  what  happened  in  Indonesia,  what  happened  all
over  the  world,  for  the  Department  of  State   to   honestly
believe  that  the  people  of  Formosa   are  happy  with  their
situation  under  the  Chinese  or  anybody  else,  that  is  some-
thing  very,  very  serious.
I would  say  this—I  won't  deny  that  we  have  to  hold  For-
—Mutual  Security  Act  of  1959, exec. hearing April  81,
mosa.   Maybe  like  the  British  had to  hold  Cyprus.   That  is
one  thing,  but  to  believe  that  the  Formosans  voluntarily ac-
cept  this  situation  and are  happy  to  have  the  Chinese  come
come  there  and  rule  them,  will  be  a  very  serious  mistake
in  my  opinion.
Mr.  [Walter  S.]  ROBERTSON [Ass't  Sec'y  of  State  for
Far  Eastern  Affairs].    Judge  Saund,  I  should  like  to  em-
phatically  say  that  I  did  not  make  the  statement,  which  you
charge  me  with  making.
Mr.  SAUND.    If  you  didn't,  I  am  very  happy.
Mr.  ROBERTSON.   All  you  have  to  do  is   to  read  the
record  of  what  I  said.    I  didn't  use  the  word  'happy'  once..
I  said  that  the  farmers  on  Taiwan  were  enjoying  a  better
standard  of  living  than  they   ever  enjoyed  before.    I  said
the  merchants  were  more  prosperous  than  they  had  ever
been  before.    I  did not  say  that  they  were  happy  about  the
Chinese  coming  over  there  from  the  mainland.
House  Foreign  Affairs    Committee,  released  Stay  SO.
8  S
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  1,1959
Crucial  But  Unnoticed   Effect  of  the  New  Nuclear  Arms  Training   Agreements
Giving  Bonn  A  Veto  Over  Any  Plan  for  An  Atom-Free  Central  Europe
The  texts  of  the  actual  agreements  to  train  German,   Dutch,
Turkish  and  Canadian  forces  in  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons
are  not  yet  at  hand  as  this  is  written,  but  we  notice  an  inter-
esting  difference  among  them  in  the  summaries  sent  to Con-
gress  by President  Eisenhower with  his  special  message  on  the
subject.
While  the  agreement  with  Canada  for  the  transfer  of  nu-
clear  information  and  military  equipment   may  be   terminated
by  either  party  on  one  year's  notice,  the  agreement  with  West
Germany  provides   that   the  pact  can  be  terminated   only  by
agreement  of  both  parties.
This  amounts  to  giving  the  West  Germans  a  veto  over  any
possible  arrangements  to  create  an  atom-free  zone  in  Europe.
We  grant  them  a  power  over  our  foreign  policy  we  do  not
give  our  Canadian  neighbors.    In  the  middle  of  the  first  stage
in  East-West  negotiations,  we ait  down  our  freedom  of  action
and  make  it  subject  to  Bonn's  wishes.    No  matter  what  the
Russians  may  offer  in  return  for  an  atom  free  central  Europe,
this  agreement—if   accepted  by  Congress—will  make  impos-
sible  any  such  deal  unless  Bonn  agrees,   and  Bonn  is  set  on
having  a  nuclear  West   German   army,  as  is  the   Pentagon.
Through  Bonn,  the  military  will  determine  policy.
Sideshows Which Distract  Attraction
To  conclude  such  an  agreement  in  the  midst  of  the  nego-
tiations  now  getting underway  at  Geneva  is neither  good  faith
nor  good  sense.    It  reflects  the  anxiety  of  the  American  and
German   military  chiefs   to  let  nothing   interfere  with   their
plans  to  proceed  with  the  nuclearization  of  war.  This  is  the
main  drive  of  policy—the  talks  on  testing  and  the  talks  on
Germany   are   side-shows   which   distract   attention   from   the
main  event.
It  is  said  that  the  warheads  will  be  kept  in  our  custody  but
this  is only the  first  stage.    Plans  were  disrupted  by the  restric-
tive  amendments  imposed  by  Anderson  and  Holifield  last  year
on  the  nuclear  arms  give-away  bill  asked  by  the  Administra-
tion.    The  ultimate  plan   is  to  give  atomic  arms  to  all  our
allies.    An  anonymous  article,  The  Case  Against  the  Nuclear
Test  Ban,  in  the  May  issue  of  Air  Force  Magazine  (put into
Free  World Crisis  on  Capitol Hill
In  our  world  crusade   for   freedom,  our   government
recalls  the  broad-minded  anti-Semite:  some  of  our  best
friends  are  dictators.    This  makes   embarrassing  two
resolutions   newly   introduced   in   Congress.      One   by
Senator   Long  is   designed   to  set   up  international  ar-
rangements   for  the  trial  of  fugitive  dictators.     Long
wants  us  to  make  clear  that  we  do not  propose  to  grant
sanctuary  to  "the Batistas,  Jimenezes,  Perons,  Farouks,
Bao Dais"  nor  to  let  them  use  foreign  aid  funds  "to live
it   up  on  the   Isle   of   Capri  and  the   French   Riviera."
The  other,  by  Congressman  Saund  (D.  Cal.)  would  ask
all  nations  receiving  military  assistance   to   guarantee
freedom  of  speech  and  press.
Since  the  Saund resolution would  disrupt  all  our mili-
tary  allies  in  Asia  and the  Long  resolution  would  alarm
friends  in  Latin  America  like  Trnjillo,  we  suggest  the
State   Department  ask  both  legislators   in  for  private
talks.
The  casuistical  task  should  not  be  beyond  the  young
men  trained  by  Father  Walsh  at  Georgetown  for  our
diplomatic  service.     Ours  is  the  free   world;   freedom
includes   the  freedom   to  be  unfree;   the   Soviet   Union
forces   its  satellites  to  be  unfree,  but  we  let  them  be
free  or  unfree  as  they  please;  the  existence  of  so  many
dictators  in  the  free  world  thus  proves  that  it  is  really
free.     As  for   the  swag   with  which  dictators   flee,   to
question  the  source  of  private  funds  would  be  to  ques-
tion   the   moral   foundations   of   capitalism   which  rest
firmly  on  the  ancient  maxim,  "pecunia  non  olet",  or  no
matter  how  you  got  it,  it  still  smells   sweet.
the  Congressional  Record  April  30  by  Congressman   Hosmer
of  California)   provides  a  preview  of  these  plans.    They  en-
visage  "small  combat  teams armed with  portable  nuclear  weap-
ons,   which  would   combine   the   invulnerability   of   guerrillas
with  the  firepower  of  divisions"—and  give  desperadoes   like
Rhee  and  Chiang  increased  potential  for   trouble.
Congress  by joint  resolution  within  60  days can  block  these
agreements.     Even  a  losing  fight  against   them  would   help
educate  the  country  and  slow  up  the  next  step,  which  is  to
hand  over  custody  of  the  atomic  arms  themselves.    Can  peace
groups  arouse  the  country  in  time?
Reprints   of  Our  Special   Issue  on  the  Radiation  Hearings  Still  Available  In  Bulk  at  3  Cents  Each
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or   enter)
Street    .............................
City    ...................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
......Zone.......,....State....................
6/1/B9
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
City    ......................................... J!one............State..._.......'..._...
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  S,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Angust  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  15.  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation   Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
Jr>    IT.   the   TJ. S.:  $6  In  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED