I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959oct26.pdf

============================================================

Peking's  Peace   Offer    to  Chiang,  P.   3
U.  S.  Chamber of  Commerce  Sees  New  Boom,  Not  Depression,  in  Disarmament,  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  40
OCTOBER   26,   1959
'»'       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Is  Krupp  to  Be  Our  Partner  in  Merchandising  Death?
Those  who  recall  the  revelations  made  by Thurman  Arnold
before   the   Truman   committee   after   Pearl   Harbor   on   the
secret   agreements  between  I.  G.   Farben   and   Standard   Oil
which  hobbled  U.  S.  defense  production  will  take  very  seri-
ously  the  news  from   Bonn   (New    York   Times,   Oct.    14),
"U.   S.  Arms  Makers  Are  Pouring   Capital  Into  West   Ger-
many."    All  too  familiar  names  like  Krupp's  appear  in  the
reports  of  new  armament alliances between  U.  S. and  German
firms.   Their  agreements,  like  many  of  the  cartel  pacts which
the  Truman  committee exposed,  may well  contain  clauses  con-
trary  to  American interests,  and  some  steps  ought  to  be  taken
by  Congress  at   least  to   force  the   filing   of   all   such  agree-
ments  with  the  U.  S.  government,  particularly  the  anti-trust
division  of  Justice.   The  men  who  made  and  survived  Hitler
are  not  the  most  trustworthy  of  partners.    It  was  bad  enough
to  give  the  signal  for  rearmament of  the  Reich.    It  is  a  new
and  worse  step  to  allow  the  development  of  a  private  arms
business  in  partnership with  American arms  makers  like  Gen-
eral  Dynamics  and  the  aircraft  companies.    This  will  create
vested  interests  in  international  trouble  to  maintain  a  market
for   their  arms.    Of  course,  Germany  is  now  our  ally  against
Communism.    But  it  is  well  to  remember  that  she  was  our
"bulwark  against  Bolshevism"  then,  too.
Next  A  German Nuclear  Arms  Business
The   emergence  of   powerful   German-American  combines
in  the  arms business is made the  more  serious  by the  campaign
developing  for  further  amendment of  the  Atomic  Energy  Act
at  the  next  session  of  Congress  in  order  to  permit  us  to  en-
gage  in  the   nuclear   rearmament  of   Germany.     The   ax  of
German  nuclear  rearmament  is  again  ground  in  a  report  made
on  contract  to  the   Senate  Foreign   Relations   Committee   by
something  called  the  Foreign  Policy  Research  Institute  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  another  of  those  mechanisms  by
which  cold  war  intellectuals  can  climb  on  the  gravy  train  of
the  arms  program,  providing   high   class   rationalizations  for
the  Pentagon   and  other   official   agencies.     Having   consulted
among  others  with  Dr.  Henry  A.  Kissinger,  the  limited  nu-
clear  war  sage  on  the  Rockefeller  Brothers  Fund  payroll,  the
report  rehashes  the  argument  for  giving  nuclear  arms  to  our
allies,  the  nightmare  dreamed  up  in  his  latter  years  by  John
Foster  Dulles.    The  notion  that  the  world  will  be  made  a
safer   and   saner   place   by  spreading   deadly   weapons   more
widely  requires for  its  defense  intellectual  contortions  so ardu-
ous  that  they  deserve  to  be  well  paid,  though   we  don't  see
why  the  Senate  Foreign   Relations  Committee  should  pay  for
what   General   Dynamics  or   the   Rockefeller   Brothers    Fund
would  otherwise  finance.  Who  deserves  contempt  more  than
intellectuals   who  choose  to  serve  the  forces  of   destruction?
The  next  step  after  a  nuclear  rearmed  Germany  will  be a  pri-
Children  Safe  at  Last
"The   child  .  .  .  shall  be  brought  up  in  a  spirit  of
understanding,   tolerance,   friendship    among   peoples,
peace  and  universal  brotherhood. .  .  ."
—Draft    Declaration   of    the   Rights   of    the   Child
adopted   70-0  at   the   United  Nations   Oct.  19,
And,   of  course,  secure  in  the  knowledge  that  should
his  right  to  grow  up  as  a  capitalist  and/or  Marxist-
Leninist  seem  to  be  endangered,  his  elders  stand  ready
to  protect  him  by  blowing the  world  to  bits.
vate  German  atomic  arms  industry  (Krupp   already  has  an
interest  in  the  first  German  reactor).   The  industrial  genuises
to  whom  we  owe  the  crematorium will  then  be  able  to  apply
their  talents  more  widely.
Too  Alert  For  Our  Own  Good
On  Thursday,   Oct.   15,  Major  Gen.   Caldera,  Deputy   In-
spector  General  for   Safety  of   the   Air   Force,   disclosed   that
since   1950   the   Air  Force  had   lost   3,471   pilots   and   7,062
planes  in  accidents.    This  is  an  average  of   about   700   Air
Force  plane  crashes  a  year,  no  slight  number.    Some  of  these
are  Strategic  Air  Command  planes  carrying  atom  bombs  on
their  round-the-clock   "alert"  and  sure  enough   next  day  an
8-jet   B-52  carrying  two  nuclear   bombs  collided   with   a  jet
tanker   over  Hardinsburg,   Ky.    The   crash  was   accompanied
by  the  usual  reassuring  statements.    SAC  claimed  it  was  the
first  accident   of   its  kind   on   its   round-the-clock     refuelling
program    and   Pentagon    briefings   boasted    that   the    crash
"proved"  atom   bombs  cannot  be  exploded   by  accident   be-
cause  they  are  carried  "unarmed,"   i.e.  the  firing  mechanism
is  detached  from  the  bomb  and  can  only  be  set  in  place  by
the   plane   commander.    There   was  some   danger   that   the
bombs  might  break  open,  scattering  radioactive dust,  but  they
were  found  intact  and  ready  for  use  all  over  again,  with  no
extra  cost  to  the  taxpayer  except  maybe  for  a  little  spit  and
polish.     Somehow  we're  not   as  reassured  as  we  should   be.
Some  day,  just  by  the  law  of  probability,  a  real  atomic  acci-
dent  would  seem  bound  to  happen.    It  seems  to  us  that  if
we  go  on  with  this  tense-trigger  operation  long   enough   and
the  Russians  don't  bomb  us,  the  SAC  will.
Another  Beria  at  Work?
Since  every  head  of  the  Soviet secret  police  in  the  last  quar-
ter  century  (Yagoda,  Yehzov,  Beria)  has  eventually  been  ex-
ecuted  as an  imperialist agent,  we  can  only  hope  that  the  latest
spy-fuss  in  Moscow  was  not  a  deliberate  provocation   against
a  member  of  the  U.  S.  Embassy  staff   by  a  new  crop  of  im-
perialist  agents  in  order  to  "upset  the  spirit  of  Camp  David"
on  direct  orders,  of  course,  from  the  CIA.
15
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  S6 1958
Documentary.  Boom  Forecast  As  A  Result  of  Arms  Cuts  in Survey  by "Nation's Business"
U.S.   Chamber  of  Commerce  Organ  Sees  No  Need  to  Fear  Peace
(From  Nation's Business)
"Any  abrupt  softening  of  cold  war  pressures—if  it  comes
—can  bring  this  country  a  boom,  not  the  recession  suggested
by  such  phrases  as  'peace  scare."    It  will  bring  changes  likely
to   affect   your  business.     The   principle   changes  you  should
expect  are:
"A   rise  in  consumer  spending   far   surpassing   the  cut  in
military  spending  and  concentrated  on  such  things  as  houses,
automobiles,  furniture  and  household   appliances.     A   terrific
upsurge  in  spending  for  new  plants  and  equipment.    Larger
incomes  for  everybody to  spend  and  invest.    A  higher  stand-
ard  of  living.    Lower  taxes.    A  larger  labor  force.    Increased
pressure  for  federal  aid  of  various  kinds.    A  temporary  threat
of  inflation  which  can  readily  be  countered.
Some Hurt Temporarily
"Some  industries  and   individuals  would   be  hurt   tempo-
rarily.    Soon  these  industries  and  all  the  rest  of  us  would  be
wondering  how  we  ever  paid   such  high   taxes  and   denied
ourselves   so  many  of   the   benefits   our   productive   capacity
makes  possible.    Those  who  feel  that  the  present  $46  billion
of  spending  for  national  security  is  a  necessary  prop  to  the
economy  overlook  the  fact  that  this  expenditure  is  a  pressure
as  well  as a  stimulant.  . .  . The  question  then  becomes:  How
quickly  and  to  wnat  extent  would  consumer  buying  take  up
the  slack  left  by  reduced  military spending?
"The   answer  is:  Probably  in  one  year—certainly  in  two—
the  economy  would  be  stronger  than  ever.    What   has  hap-
pened  after  previous  cuts  in  military  spending  supports  this
prediction:
"In  1919  military spending  was $18  billion—more  than  20
percent  of  all  business  done  that  year.    These   expenditures
dropped  to  $6.5  billion  in  1920  and  to  about  $5  billion  in
1921.    But  the  total  spending  dropped  less  than  five  percent
in  constant  dollars  in  1920,  nine  percent  more  in  1921.    By
1922  the  economy was  back  to  the  1919  level;  in  1923  it  was
10  percent  higher.
"After  World  War  II,  defense  spending  was  cut  90  per-
cent  or  $145   billion   (in   1958   dollars),   but   total   business
dropped  only  13  percent  in  1945,  unemployment  never  went
above  four  percent  and  recovery came  as  quickly  as  in   1919.
"After  Korea,  defense  spending  dropped   25  percent,  but
the  total  volume  of  business  done  dropped  less  than  two  per-
cent  from   1953  to  1954  and  by  1955  business  was  six  per-
On  its   cover  the  latest,  October   1959,   issue  of   Na-
tion's  Business,  organ  of  the   U.S.    Chamber   of   Com-
merce,  carries  the  headline,  "What  Peace  Would  Do  to
You."    The  survey  is  so  optimistic  we  excerpt  it  here.
That  this  big  business  organ  should  take  so  hopeful  a
view  of  disarmament  is  good  news  on  the  peace  front.
cent  above  previous  peaks.
"In  all  these  cases  consumer  shortages  and  inadequate  fac-
tory  capacity  helped   hurry  the  upturn.    Today  industry  has
nearly  adequate  capacity  in  most  lines  and  consumers  are  well
stocked.    Standards  of  living  are  high.    The  need  to  spend
is  less  urgent  than  after  a  war  period.
"To  estimate  how  much  these  changes  would  delay  an  up-
turn  in  consumer  spending  to  fill  the  void  left  by  a   defense
cutback, we  must  assume the  answers  to  some questions:  How
much  will  defense  spending  be cut?   Will  the  cut  come  slow-
ly  or  gradually?    How  quickly  will  taxes  be  cut  and  how?
Will  the  cut  come  in  a  period  of  boom  or  recession?
'How  much  cut?   Even  assuming  the  end  of  the  cold  war,
we  would  not  stop  all  defense  spending.    A  reasonable  first
step  would  be  to  reduce  our  offensive  forces.    We  could  cut
back  on  atomic  submarines,  on  foreign  bases,  and  reduce  the
size  of  the  armed  forces.    We  might  maintain  our   defense
establishment  and  continue  work  on  missiles  because  of   the
value  of  the  research  and  as  a  deterrent  to  attack.    Such  a
program  might  cut  spending  in  half,  or  by  $23  billion  a  year.
"How  quick  the  cut?   It  would  take  a  lot  of  persuading  to
convince  the  government   that   such   a  cut  should   be  made
abruptly.     Precautions,   both   military   and   economic,   would
suggest  that  it  should  be  spread  over  two  years  at  least.
"Tax   cuts?    All  of  this  money  would  not  be  returned  to
the  people.     Some  would  undoubtedly  be  used  to  give   ad-
ditional  support  to  present  activities—highways,  for  instance.
.  .  .  Assuming  that  these  (pressure)   groups  should  win  $3
billion  for  their  new  schemes,  a  tax  cut  of  $20  billion  would
be  possible.  . . .
"All   this  adds  up  to  the  fact  that  in  the  long   run  the
economy  can  grow  as  fast  with  a  low,  as  with  a  high,  mili-
tary  component.     It  should  be  noted,   too,   that  the  civilian
market  grows  in  more  stable  fashion  than  does  the  military
... if  the  day ever  comes  when  the  Soviet  is willing  to fight
with  ploughshares  rather  than  swords,  our  standard  of  living
will  rise  faster  than  ever  and  cylical  swings  will  be  reduced."
Justice  Dept.  Opposes  The  One  Effective  Way  to  Enforce  Negro  Voting  Rights
We   call   the   attention  of   those  concerned  with   Negro
rights  to  an  exclusive  interview  carried  by  the  Washington
Sunday  Star  October  18  with  a  "high-ranking  Justice  of-
ficial" expressing  bitter  and contemptuous  opposition  to  the
recent  Civil  Rights  Commission  proposal  for  safeguarding
voting  rights  in  the  South.    Despite  a  formal  denial  issued
as  we  go  to  press,  The  Star  insists  that  its  interview  came
from   "a  responsible  and  authoritative   official."
The  most  important  recommendation  by  the  Civil  Rights
Commission  was  for  the  establishment  of  Federal  registrars
for  Federal  elections.  This  would  end  the  run-around  given
Negroes  who  try  to  register,  and stop  the  notorious  misuse
of  literacy  laws.    The  importance  of  this  recommendation
lies  not  only  in  the  ease  with  which  it  could  be  enacted  but
also  in  the  fact  that  two  of  the  three  Southern  r  -mbers  of
the   Commission  joined  in  it.    The  "high-ranking   official"
said  the  registrar  proposal  would  do  more  harm  than  good
and  remarked   acidly,  "the  best  thing  the  Civil  Rights  Com-
mission  could  do  would  be  to  go  out  of  business."
The  Commission's  report  criticized  the  Justice  Depart-
ment  for  having  taken  only  three  actions  to  enforce  Negro
voting  rights  in  the  two  years  since  the  Civil  Rights  law
was   passed.     "Department   officials,"   the   Star   reported,
"take  angry  issue  with  this  appraisal.   They  feel  their  own
Civil   Rights  Division  is  proceeding  at  the  proper  pace  to
achieve  gradual  progress  without  inflaming   the  south  un-
necessarily."    At  such  a  pace  there  is  no  danger  of  Mr.
Rogers  whizzing  past  Senator  Eastland.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  26,1959
Laotian  Premier's  Paper  Points  Way  to  Settlement  of  Trouble  We  Precipitated
Moscow May Make Peking "Behave" But Who'll Sober Down Washington?
State  Department  speech  writers  are  turning  out  a  flood  of
warnings  to   Moscow  that  we  expect   Khrushchev   to   make
Peking  behave.   Khrushchev's  recent  speeches  in  Peking  show
he  is  doing  his  part.    But  are  we?    It  takes  two  to  make
peace.    Stability  will  never  be  achieved   in  the   Far   East  if
we  think  we  can  impose  humiliating  conditions  on  Commu-
nist  China.   One  place  where  we  could  show  good  faith  with-
out  too  much  difficulty  is  in  Laos.
The  first  sign  of  good  sense  was an  editorial  in  the  Laotian
Premier's   paper,  L'lndefendant,    which  U.   S.  news  services
failed  to  report  but  which  we  saw  in  a  Reuters  dispatch  pub-
lished  by the  Washington  Post  Oct.  17.   L'lndependent   fore-
cast  a  compromise  by  which  the  Laotian  government  would
release  eight  jailed  leftwing   leaders,   and  guarantee  the  fu-
ture  existence  of  their  Neo  Lao  Haksat  Party,  in  return   for
an  end  of  rebel  activity  and  of  North  Vietnamese  aid  for  it.
This  would  turn  back  the  clock  to  the  point  where  U.  S.
military  influence  precipitated  trouble  by  urging  the   Laotians
to  outlaw  the  Leftists  in  violation   of   the   Geneva   accords.
Discreet   Elision
United   Nations,   N.   Y.—A   revised   edition   of   the
biographies  of  the  U.  S.  delegation  to  the  current   ses-
sion  of  the  UN  General  Assembly,  as  circulated to  the
press,  has  dropped  one sentence  from  the  earlier  sketch
of   Harold  Riegelman.    This  said,  "Since  1938  he  has
served  as  American legal  adviser  to  the  Chinese  Em-
bassy  in  Washington,  D.  C."
Peace  could  be  reestablished   firmly  if  the  International   Con-
trol  Commission  were  invited  back  to  guarantee  a  settlement.
Our  U.  S. attitude  toward  these  tripartite  commissions   (In-
dian,  Polish  and  Canadian)   set  up  by  the  1954  Indochinesc
agreements  are  inconsistent.     We  favor  the  one  in  Vietnam
to  help  protect  the  South  from  the  Communist  North.    We
have  been  trying  to  get  rid  of  the  one  in  Cambodia  in  order
to  pressure   that  neutralist   country.    In  Laos,  by  a  ruse,  we
encouraged   the  government   to  get  rid  of  the  commission  in
order to  violate the  accords  and throw  the  left-wingers  in jail.
These  control  commissions  have  wider  significance.    They
represent  Communist  willingness   to  abandon  the  kind  of   ISO-
50  divided  commissions   which  proved  so  exasperatlngly  fu-
tile  in  Korea  and  to  allow  neutral  chairmanship  instead.   Ap-
Peking's Peace  Offer  to  Chiang
The  London  Sunday  Times  of  Oct.  18  carried a cable
from   Hong  Kong  giving  fuller  details  than  have  ap-
peared  in  the  U.  S.  press  on  the  new  Peking  offer  to
Chiang  Kai-shek.    Chiang's  elder  son,  General Chiang
Ching-kuo,  was  invited  to  Peking  and  peace  proposed
on  the  following lines:
Both  sides  to  recognize  Formosa  as  part  of  China;
all   foreign   troops   and  technicians   to   be  withdrawn
from  it;  the  present  Nationalist  government  would re-
tain  'independent'  status,  exercising  its   own  form  of
election,   and  maintaining  its   own  armed  forces,  na-
tional  flag  and  political  organization.
The  Sunday Times  said  the  invitation was  made pub-
licly   and  the   peace  proposals  advanced  privately   on
behalf  of  the  Chinese  Communists  by  former National-
ist  General,  Chang  Chi-chung, who defected  to  Peking.
The  British  paper  regards  the  offer   as  a  mere  anti-
American    provocation.    We   think    it    makes   sense.
Why  would  not  such  a  settlement,  if  Formosan  autono-
my   were  safeguarded  by   the   UN   (with  Peking  ad-
mitted  to  membership), offer  an  honorable  way  out?
plied   in   Indochina,   they   represent  constructive  mechanisms
for  co-existence.    Upsetting  these  commissions where  it  serves
our  purpose  makes  the  U.  S. look  hypocritical  in  China's  eyes
and  anxious  to  make  trouble  on  its  southern  border.
The  Laotian  problem  cannot  be  solved  by  military  means;
handfuls  of  guerrillas  can  operate  too  easily  in  these  jungle
fastnesses.    The  problem  is  political  and  can  only  be  solved
by  political  means.    We  hope  that  L'Independent's    sugges-
tion  will  be  noted  when  the  UN's  debate  on  Laos  begins.
The  U.  S.  press  in  the  meantime  seems  to  grow  phonier
and  sillier  in  its  treatment  of  news from  Laos.    In  the  form?    •
category  is  the  story  out  of  Tokyo  that  the  UN  investigatin;;
team  had  evidence  that  the  Laotian  rebels  were  fighting  un-
der  the  direct  supervision  of  Marshal  Peng  Teh-huai.    This
was- officially   denied  by  the   Japanese   Foreign   Ministry  and
by  the  Argentine  member  of  the  UN  inquiry  group.
In  the  latter  category  was  the  AP  story  in  last   Monday's
(Oct.   19). papers  saying  that  Southern   Laos  was  "seething
with   pro-Communist   Pathet   Lao  rebels."     The   story  itself
estimates  the  number  of  rebels  at  500  to  600  and  the  gov-
ernment  soldiers  in  the  area  at  5,000.    Laos  seems  to  seethe
very  easily.
Rare  Insight  from  An  Official  Source:  Ignored  by  Most  of  the  Press
The   basic  trouble  in the  world results  from  the  fact  that
we live in a primitive international  society, with little  recog-
nized  international  law  and  no way  to  sustain  it.    I  go  so
far  as  to  say  that  if  communism were  to  disappear  tomor-
row  and  the  Soviet  Union  were  to  become  a  Jeffersonian
or  Lincolnian democracy,  there  would  still  exist  very  seri-
ious  danger of  conflict  between  the  two  great  power centers
in  the  world.
"I  emphasize  this  because  there  seems  to  be  a  tendency
on'  the  part  of  many  people  to  think  that  all  the  troubles
of  the  world  come  from  the  fact  that  Soviet  Russia  is  a
communist  state.    The  situation  is  not  that  simple;   Even
if  we  had  a  solution  of  the-ideological  differences,  we  still
would  have  to  organize  the. world's  international   relations
in  a  way  to  prevent  national  sovereignties  from  clashing
head-on.    Britain  and  Russia  quarrelled  for  100  years  be-
fore  1914.   Most  Christian  nations  have  fought  each  other
as  readily  as  Christian  against  pagan.    Nations  pay  little
attention   to  race,  religion   or  ideology   when  they   choose
partners in what  they  conceive  to be their  national  interests.
The   important  point  is  this:  We  must  not  overly  con-
centrate  on  the  ideological  differences  and  come  to  the  eon-
elusion  that  if  only  we  can  solve  those,  the  world will  be  at
peace.    We  must  realize  that  while  these  ideological  dif-
ferences, add  to. the  immediacy  of  the  problem, a  more  im-
portant  task  is  to  create  an  international  law  enforcement*
body  with  sufficient  strength  and  authority  to  settle  inter-
national  disputes.    Once  this  is  done,  perhaps  co-existence
of  all  races  and ideologies  will  be possible."
—George  V.  Allen,  director  UJ3.  Information  Agency,  be-
fore  the  Public Relations Society  of  America, Oct.  15.
t    6   •;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  S6  1959
Three  Items  From  the  Global  Struggle  for  Freedom  of  Thought
Thirty  Intellectuals  Facing  Jail  Here  in  First  Amendment  Cases
So  far  as  we  can  recall,  Joe  McCarthy  never  succeeded   in
sending   a.  single  American  to  jail:  those  like  Harvey  O'Con-
nor  who  were  held  in  contempt  of  the  McCarthy  committee
were  all  finally  acquitted  on  one  technicality  or  another.    But
now  in  the  wake  of  the  Barenblatt-Uphaus  rulings,  some  30
American  intellectuals   are  heading  for   jail  because  they  re-
fused  on  grounds  of  conscience  and  First  Amendment  to  in^
form  on  other  radicals  or  discuss  their  views  before  various
witch   hunt   bodies,   Congressional    and
1
  State.     This   is   an
anomaly  that  cries  out  for  attention  in  an  America that  boasts
of   recovery  from   McCarthyism  and  talks  self-righteously   at
the   UN   and   abroad   about  being  the   leader   of   "the   free
world."    The  first  of  these  intellectuals   to  enter  jail  will  be
Lloyd  Barenblatt   and  Willard  Uphaus,  and  the  send-off   to
be  given  them  the  night  of  Thursday,  November   5,  at  the
New  York  Center,  227 W.  46th  St.,  should  be  turned  into  a
demonstration  against  our  American  Inquisition   by  all  who
still  believe  in  intellectual  freedom  from  interference   by  the
State.
Tito's Radio Uses Djilas's Line  (In Polish)
"Practice   has  shown,"   said  a  Yugoslav   broadcast  to  East
Europe  in  Polish  Oct.  14,  "that  in  the  initial  stages  of  social-
ist  building  .  .  .  there  emerges  in  the  community a  more  or
less  strong  stratum of  bureaucracy which  is  in  a  definite, often
very  privileged   position."     This  is  the  thesis,  of  course,  ex-
pounded   by  Milovan  Djilas's  book,   "The   New   Class,"  'for
which  he  is  serving  seven  years  at  hard  labor.    Now   that
Yugoslavia  is. under  attack by.the  Soviet  bloc,  its  official  radio
uses  the  Djilas  line  to  needle  its  neighbors,  calling   for  an
"open,  frank  and  objective  examination   of  deformations   of
socialism."     Yugoslavia  itself   remains  an  unsafe  place   for
such  discussion.    In  Warsaw  the,  heretical  Marxist   philoso-
pher,  Kulakowski,  goes  on  teaching  at  the  university.    In  -the
Soviet'Union,  Pasternak  goes  on  writing  and  receives  foreign
visitors  unmolested.    But  Djilas  is  still   in  jail.    Tito  con-
tinues  to  be  Stalinist  in  his  attitude toward  writers  who  dare
to  be  critical.    Radio  Warsaw   o'ught  to  answer  Radio  Bel-
On Limited  Warfare
Don'tcha   worry,  honey  chile,
I)oi?tcha  cry  no  more;
It's  jest  a  li'l  ole  atom  bomb
In  a  li'l  ole  lim'ted  war.
It's  jest  a  bitsy  warhead,  chile,
On  a  li'l  ole  tactical  shell,
And  all  it'll  do  is  blow  us—all
To  a  li'l  old  lim'ted  hell.
Anonymous
—Bulletin  of  the  Atomic Scientists, Oct.  '59.
grade  by  broadcasting  this  back  in  Serbo-Croatian.
Khrushchev and the McCarran Act
Those  who  took  part  in  the  long  fight  against  the  Mundt-
Nixon   bill   which   the   late   Senator   McCarran  finally  - put
through  Congress  as  the  Internal  Security  Act  of   1950  will
find  a  familiar  note  in  Khrushchev's  speech  Oct.   11  at  Kras-
noyarsk.   The  Soviet  Premier  touch  on  discussions  he  had  on
his  visit  here  "about  the  so-called  free  dissemination  of  ideas"
:
and  said,  "They  want  to  foist  upon  us  all  kinds  of  trash  that
would  poison  the  minds  of  Soviet  people.    Can  we  agree  to
this?    Of  course  not!    Our  people  do  not  want  to consume
bad  food  poisoned  with  the  venom  of  bourgeois  ideas."  This
remarkably  parallels  the  views  which  led  Mundt,  Nixon  and
McCarran  to  frame  the  Internal  Security  Act.    It  sets  up  a
Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  to  act  as  a  kind  of  ideo-
logical  Pure  Food  and  Drug  Administration, with  power  to
require  all  organizations  adjudged  communistic to  label  their
publications  and  broadcasts  subversive  so'the  reader  or  listen-
er  would  know he  was  in  danger  of  imbibing  poisonous  ideas.
With  Khrushchev,  they  thought  the  State—like  the  medieval
church—had  a  duty,  to  decide  which  ideas  were, bad  and   to
protect  people  from  them.    Our  Supreme  Court  has  yet  to
decide  whether  this  can  somehow  be  reconciled  with   Jeffer-
sonianism.    For  that  matter-there  is  no  advocacy  of  thought
control in  Marx  or  Engels  either  (or  even  Lenin);
If   You  Send  A  Stamped   Self-Addressed    Envelope,   We'll  Mail  A  Free  Sample  Copy  For  You  to  A  Friend
1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclMed  $5:*
Name   ......._..~............;.............................................................
Street   ...«.........i......................................................................•>•'
City    ...»......«..........................2one...-.......SUte....................
.     10/26/09
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name  ...............................-..................................-....—..
Street   ....................................«.........~..-..................~.....».««—.
•,
City    ......._.._...........................Zone........L.State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
LRStone'sWeekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
, Post  Office
L  F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  nnder  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  bnt   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   561S  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the  U.  8.;  $6  In  Canada:  110  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED