I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jan19.pdf

============================================================

How  the Negro  Was  Sold  Out,  P.  3
Exclusive;  Hopeful  Aspect  of  New  Nuclear  Underground  Data  Given  No  Publicity,  See  Page  2
I. R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VII,   NO.  3
JANUARY   19,   1959
»
101
      WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
The New  Move to Abolish the Un-American Committee
No  nation  speaks  more  than  ours  about  freedom  and  cares
less.   The  day  the  President  delivered  his  State  of  the  Union
message,   Congressman  James  Roosevelt   (D.   Ca!.)   called  a
press  conference  to  launch  a  resolution  to  abolish  the  House
Un-American   Activities  Committee.   Mr.   Eisenhower  in  his
address  included  one  of   those  standard  invocations  of   "the
concepts  of  freedom,  justice and  human  dignity"  we  claim  to
defend  but  the  real  measure  of  our  devotion  was  in  the  turn-
out   two   hours   earlier  at   the   Roosevelt   press   conference.
Though  the  House  Committee  has  for  two  decades  used  the
public  pillory  and  the  blacklist  to  undermine  "freedom,  jus-
tice  and  human  dignity",  only  seven  reporters  showed   up.
Back Tracking  Before  He  Started
The  low  state  of  freedom  in  America  was  also  evident  in
the  character  of  its  champion.   In  a  speech  to  the  House  last
May  22,  Mr.  Roosevelt  supported  the  Supreme  Court's  criti-
cal  view  of  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee.   In   the
advance  text  of  a  new  speech  given  out  at  his  press confer-
ence,  he  had  begun  to  back-track.  He  was making  "no  direct
or  implied  criticism"  of  the  Committee.   He  was  merely say-
ing  that  in  view  of  the  Watkins   decision  undercutting  the
right  to  harass  people  for  something  as  vague  as  "un-Ameri-
can  activities",   he  thought   a  new  committee  ought   to  take
over.   He  suggested  House  Judiciary  and  that  its  powers  be
expanded  by  adding  "seditious  activity"  to  its  authority.   He
topped   this  off  by  pointing  out  that  on  the  Judiciary  Com-
mittee  "we  will  have  the  experience  of  two  present  members
of   the   Committee   on   Un-American  Activities  to   guide   its
work—the  Chairman,  Mr.  Walter,  and  Mr.  Willis  of  Louisi-
ana."   This  is  high  recommendation   indeed.
Merely  Cleaning  the  Dragon's  Teeth
When  Mr.  Roosevelt   delivered   the   speech   iri  the  House
last  Monday  he  added  two  new  sections  which  further  blurred
his  course.  One  denned  "seditious  activity."  When  the  vague-
ness  of  the  term  and  the  danger  of  a   "Seditious   Activities
Investigating  Committee"   were  brought  up  at  press  confer-
ence,  Mr.  Roosevelt  said  he  would   define  the  phrase  as  did
the  Supreme  Court  in  the  California  Smith  Act  cases,  i.e.  as
requiring   some  evidence  of  incitement  to  act.   In  the  speech
as  delivered,  he  made  no  such  reference  but  used  as definition
"attempts  made  by  meeting  or  speeches  or  by  publications  to
disturb   the   tranquillity   of   the  state",  though  "wanting   an
overt  act."    This  is  tailor-made  for  a  continued   witch  hunt.
Our  St.  George  is  telling  the  dragon  that  he  merely  wants  to
clean  and  sharpen  its teeth.
St.  George  not  only  truckled  to  the  dragon  but  cast  asper-
sions  on  the  virtue  of  the  maiden  to  be  rescued.    The  day
Mr.   Roosevelt   held  his  press  conference,  Chairman  Walter
rose  on  the   House  floor  to  attack  a  group  including   Mrs.
Eleanor  Roosevelt  which  had  placed  an  ad  in  the   Washing-
ton  Post  calling  for  abolition  of  the  Committee.   Mr.  Walter
attacked   this  as  Communist  inspired  and   singled   out   such
signers  as  Prof.  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Clarence  Pickett,   Dr.
Reinhold  Niebuhr   and  Justine  Wise   Polier   for   a   spurious
political  smearing.   Far  from  defending  them,  Mr.  Roosevelt
added  a  section  to  his  speech  as  delivered  in  which  he  said
"there  is no  doubt  in  my mind"  that  "a  fringe"  of  the  groups
working  for   abolition  of  the  House  Committee  "have   been
Communist  dominated  or  Communist  inspired."    He  said  he
wanted  to  make  it  "unequivocably  clear"   that  his  resolution
"has  no  relevance"  to  this  abolition  campaign  but  was  "de-
signed  simply  to  carve  out  of  the  recent legal  decisions  a  con-
stitutionally   permissible  area  for   congressional   investigation
of  seditious  activity."
Waiting  for  the  Barenblatt Decision
Chairman  Walter  in  an  unusually  mild  reply  to  Mr.  Roose-
velt  suggested  that  the  House  wait  until  the  Barenblatt  deci-
sion  which  is  expected  any  day  now  from  the  Supreme  Court.
The  anxious  strategy  of  the  witch  hunters  was  indicated   in
the  reply  to  Mr.  Roosevelt  by  Gordon  H.  Scherer,  the  Ohio
Republican  who  is probably  the  wildest  member  of  the  House
Committee.   Mr.  Scherer  talked  hysterically  about  "2,000  po-
tential  saboteurs  in  defense  plants  today"  and  paid  Congress-
man  Celler  the  high  compliment  of  saying  that  Mr.  Roose-
velt's  resolution  would  hand  the  Committee's  work  over  to  a
Committee   (Judiciary)   whose   chairman   (Celler)   was   "to
say  the  least,   totally  unsympathetic"  with   the  Un-American
Activities   Committee.     But  Mr.   Scherer  ended  by  admitting
that  if   "the   gentleman   from  California  is  correct"   and   the
Barenblatt  contempt  decision  proves  as  unfavorable  as   Wat-
kins,  the  House  would  have  to  "change  the  language  of  the
charter"  of  the  Un-American  Committee.
Mr.  Roosevelt's  resolution  could  then  be  used  to  extend  the
witch  hunt  it  was  supposed  to  abolish.    It  could  go  on  as  a
"Seditious  Activities  Investigating  Committee."    (Mr.   Roose-
velt  said  he  was  not  "wedded"  to  the  idea  of  giving  the  new
powers  to  House  Judiciary).   This  would  be  as  alien  to  the
First  Amendment  but  it  might  be  years  before  the  Supreme
Court  got  around  to  saying  so.  The  only  virtue  of  the  Roose-
velt  resolution  is  that  it  could  be  the  vehicle  for  public  hear-
ings  before  the  Rules  committee.   Now  that  battle  has  been
joined,  though  in  this  slippery  way,  it  behooves  everyone  to
bestir   themselves   to   arouse  opinion,   to   demand   that   their
congressmen  press  for  a  public  hearing,  and  to  urge   plainly
the  abolition  and  end  of  the  American  Inquisition.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly, January  19,  1959
New  Revelations  on  The  Testing  Hassle;  Defense  Dept.  Ran  the  Study Panel  on  the  New  Data
One  Hopeful  Result  of  New  Nuclear  Blasts  Given  No  Publicity
Our  report  last  week  on  the  new  underground  test  detec-
tion  developments  was  wrong  in  one  respect.   The  timing  of
the  releases  from  the  White  House  and  the  Joint  Committee
on  Atomic  Energy  misled  us  as  to  the  sequence  of  events.
The  fact  is  that  the  Joint  Committee  planned  its  new  execu-
tive  hearings  with  Dr.  Teller  and  others  in  December.   The
Killian  committee issued  the  White  House  release  in  fear  that
otherwise  reports  of  the  new  observations last  October.would
leak  in  a  more  alarmist  form,  and  be  utilized  by  the  enemies
of   a  test   cessation  agreement.    Unfortunately  between   the
Nervous  Nellie  attitude  of  the  Killian  Committee  and   the
blue  pencils  of  AEC,  Defense  and  State,  the  announcement
was  so  vague  that  it  only  added  to  the  alarm.   Though   the
London  Times  (Jan.  7)   from  Geneva  disclosed  that  a  "bulky
and  highly  technical"  document  embodying  the  new  obser-
vations  had  been  handed  over  to  the  Russians,  detailed  data
is  still  being  withheld  here.   If  the  Russians can  see  the  data,
why  can't  American scientists and  newspapermen?
The  New  Findings
Now  as  for  the  new  findings.   There  were,  according  to
reliable  and  informed  sources  within  the  government,   three
—two  negative  but  one  hopeful.   The  hopeful   development
has  been  given  no  publicity.  This  is  what  it  is.   Those  who
look   at  the  final  report  of  the  experts  who  conferred  last
summer  at  Geneva  will  see  that  they  believed  there  was  a
"shadow  zone"  in  a  band  extending  from   1,000   kilometers
to  2,000  kilometers  from  the  scene  in  which  the  underground
nuclear   explosions   could   not   be   detected.    The   new   tests
show  this  is  not  true.   This  means  that  within  this  area  it
will  be  possible  to  detect  underground  blasts.   The  two  new
unfavorable  observations  were  these.  The  signals  registered  by
the  two  larger  lasts  last  October  were  smaller  than  it  had  been
assumed  they  would  be  on  the  basis  of  the  first  Nevada  ex-
losion  in  August,   1957.   The  other  observation   is  that   the
"direction  of  first  motion"  registered  by the  new  underground
tests  were  associated  in  some  cases  with  compression  waves
but   in  others  with  rarefaction  waves.    It  had   earlier  been
thought  that  the  latter  were  only  associated  with  earthquakes.
There  were  four   shots   last   October,   two   of   them  very
small.   On  October  8  there  was  a  shot  called   "Tamalpais"
which  was  only  eight  one-hundredths  of  a  kiloton  or  80  tons,
as  compared  with  the  1.7  kilotons  or  1,700   tons  of  the  first
underground   test,   the   so-called   "Rainier."    This   tiny   shot
produced  a  "wiggle"  at  San  Juan,  Puerto  Rico,  but  seems  to
have  been  registered  by  no  other  seismic station.  On   October
15  there  was a  4.5  kiloton  shot,  "Logan"  which  was  detected
by  37  stations on  the  Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey network  and
as  far  away  as  College,  Alaska,  but  was  missed  by  three  sta-
tions  within  600  miles.   Four  other  stations  within  600  miles
which  did  get  it,  reported  rarefaction  instead  of  compression
waves.
On   October   28  there  was  another   small  shot,  "Evans",
which   was   15  one-hundredths   of   a  kiloton   or   150  tons.
This  was  not  detected  anywhere  except  by  three  stations  con-
structed  within  3,000  feet  of  the  test  site  area.   On   October
30  there was  the  fourth  and  final  underground  shot  "Blanca"
of   23  kilotons,  slightly  larger   than  the  original   Hiroshima
bomb.   This  was  registered  by  all  37  Coast  and  Geodetic  sur-
vey  stations  but  again  the  direction  of  first  motion  was  asso-
ciated  with  rarefaction  waves  at  some  stations  and  compres-
sion  waves at  others.  Nine  of  the  ten  stations  in  the  "shadow
zone"  registered  "Logan"  and  all  11  of  the  stations  in  the
"shadow  zone"  of  "Blanca"  registered  that   explosion.
What  all  this  adds  up  to  is  that  (1)  if  you  make  nuclear
shots  small  enough  you get  to a  point  where  they may not  be
detectable  and  (2)   there  is  much  that  no  one  knows  about
them  since  there  have  been  so  few  such  explosions.
The   enemies  of   agreement—which   includes  many  if   not
most  members of  the  Joint  Committee—are  prepared  to  blow
all  this  tentative  data  up  into  a  wave  of  alarm  with  which  to
block  an  agreement.   It  is  necessary  to  remember  that  we  are
dealing  here  only  with  a  fringe  of  a  fringe—all  atmospheric
tests  can  be  detected  from  a  distance.   So  can  all  the   larger
underground  tests.   But  in  the  lower  range  it  may  be  difficult
without  on-the-spot  inspection   to   distinguish   nuclear   blasts
from   earthquakes  and  in  the  "popgun"  range  like  "Tamal-
pais"  and  "Evans",  there  may be  no  recourse  but  to  let  test-
ing  continue  beneath  a  certain  level.
Panel  Hardly  Objective
In   the   meantime  the   Killian   office   declined   on   security
grounds  to  make  public  the  names  of  the  seismologists  con-
sulted  and  even  denied  the  existence  of  a  formal  panel  but
later  added  some  important  facts.   It  said  the  panel  was  "run
by  the  Defense  Department"   at  the  request   of  the   Killian
Committee  and  was  limited  to  the  one  question  of  the  direc-
tion  of  first  motion.   On  this  one  point,  it  said  there  was
"no  significant  difference  of   opinion."
This  disclosure  means  (1)   that  the  evaluation  panel  was
picked  by  a  department,  Defense,  which  is  opposed  to  cessa-
tion  of  testing  and  (2)  that  it  was  restricted  to  considering
data  on  the  most  unfavorable  of  the  new  observations.   This
was  hardly  a  formula  for  obtaining  objective  conclusions.
Britain's Present  Defense Minister  Also  Applauded  Hitler's  Rearmament
"Germany's  rearmament  is  something  more  than simply
the  fruit  of  cold-blooded  military  calculations.  The rearma-
ment  is  the  outward  sign  of  a  strong  people's  inspired po-
litical  enthusiasm. .  .  .  Isn't  it  just  too  obvious,  and only
human,  that  the  hum of  the  new  German  air  force  [so  soon
to   'hum'  over  London—IFS]   —   forbidden   by   the  Peace
Treaty—makes  every  German  heart  beat  faster  with  pa-
triotic  pride?"
—Duncan Sandys,  Europaisehe  Revue, October 1936.
"We  are  glad  to  see   the  progress  of  the  new  German
Army,  and  we  welcome  the  accession  of  strength  which  it
brings, to  NATO.  I  am glad to  say  that  in  the  present dan-
gerous  situation we have Germany  as our ally .  . .  the more
efficient  her  army  can  be  made  the  better  it  will  be  for  the
peace  and  safety  of  Europe."
—Duncan  Sandys,  now  Britain's  Minister  of  Defense    in
the  Commons  debate  on  foreign   affairs,    Dec. 1958
(quotes   taken  from   the  London  Tribune,  Dee.  IS).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  19,1959
Behind  That  Liberal  Betrayal  in  the  Senate  Was  Northern  White  Men's  Indifference
The  Negro  Was  Sold  Out  for  Dams,  Airports  and  Committee  Posts
The  basic  reason  for  the  defeat  of  the  anti-filibuster  forces
in  the  Senate  does  not  lie  in  Lyndon  Johnson's   agility.    It
lies  in  the  indifference  of  Northern   and  Western  white  men
to  the  Negro's  struggle   for   equality.   If   white  men   cared,
Senators  from  the  West  and  the  new  liberals   from   Alaska
could  not  and  would  not  have  sold  out  so  easily  for  the  com-
mittee  assignments  and   special  favors  Lyndon  Johnson   had
to  offer.    "Every  possible  dam  and  airport  appropriation   for
a  generation,"  said  one  disgusted  Senate  observer,  "has   been
mortgaged  to  buy  votes  in  this   fight."   But  just  as  the  South-
ern  poor  white  holds  himself  down  in  squalor  for  the  pleas-
ure  of  retarding the  Negro,  so the  moral  indifference  of  white
men  in  North  and  West  carries  a  similar  retribution.   For
Johnson's  victory marked the  reconstitution  of  that  alliance  by
which  a  minority of  wealthy  Southerners  allied  with  a  minor-
ity  of  wealthy  Northerners  is  able  to  block  social   legislation
in  Congress  against  majority  wishes.   What  is  lost  in  terms
of  Negro  rights  will  also  be  lost  in  terms  of  housing,   public
education,   and   other   social  welfare  measures.   This   begin-
ning  is  the  end  of  our  "liberal"  Congress.   Its  liberalism  will
be  largely  evident  only  in  more  liberal  armament  expenditure.
Racism  Cloaked  as   Constitutionalism
As  the  short,   doomed   battle  unfolded,  it  was  difficult   to
decide  which was  the  more  nauseating:  the  betrayal  of  liberals
like  Gruening  and  Bartlett,   (Ala.),  Murray  and  Mansfield
(Mont.)  McGee  and  O'Mahoney  (Wyo.),  Chavez  (N.M.),
Church  (Idaho),  Hartke  (Ind.)  and  Cannon  (Nev.)  or  the
impassioned  constitutionalism  of  the  Southerners.   No   section
of  our  country shows  less  respect  for  basic constitutional  rights
than  the  South.   The  only  "right"  about  which  its  Russells
and  Thurmonds  are  concerned  is the  right  to  oppress  Negroes.
Its  Eastland  succeeded  McCarthy  as  the  No.   1  menace  to
civil  liberties.   Yet  Northern   liberals  like  Walter  Lippman
and  Northern   liberal  papers  like  the  Washington  Post  were
able  without  regurgitation  to  join  hands  with  them  on  those
same  lofty  grounds;  once  they  invoked  the   Constitution   in
defense  of  slavery,  now  they  invoke  it  in  defense  of  racism.
The  change  brought  about  by  the  Lyndon   Johnson   com-
promise  is an  optical  illusion.  Only  two-thirds  of  those  present
will  now  be  necessary  to  impose  cloture.   But  by  the   same
token,  only  one-third  of  those  present  is  required  to  block  it.
Under  the  old  rule,  the  South  had  to  muster  one-third   the
total  membership,  or  33  votes,  to  block  cloture.   Now  it  need
only  muster one-third  of  those  present.   If  only  half  the  Sen-
ate  is  present,  it  will  only  take  17  votes  to  block  cloture  and
No  Settlement   With  Moscow  in  Sight
The  public  relations success  registered  by  the  Miko-
yan  visit  should  deceive  no  one  as  to  the  realities  of
Soviet-American  relations.   The  new  Soviet  draft   for
a   German  peace  treaty  would  forbid   the  Reich  "any
nuclear  weapons  or  other  means  of  mass  destruction.
.  .  ."   The  new  West  Germany,  which  more  and  more
resembles  the  old  one   (Krupp  is  again  a  power,   the
banks   are  again  centralized,  anti-Semitism   is   again
developing,  the military caste  is  no longer unemployed),
is  determined to  avoid meaningful negotiations  until  it
has  atomic  arms.   U.  S.  policy  stays  rigid  in  response
to  our  junior  partners  in  Bonn.   Fritz  Brier,  defense
expert  of  the  German  Social  Democrats,  held  a  press
conference   here   in   Washington  last   week  which  no
U.  S.  paper  seems  to  have  reported  (though American
correspondents  were  there).   Erler  pleaded  for  disen-
gagement,  said  that without  it  the  West  must  abandon
hope  of  reuniting  Germany   and  liberating  East   Eu-
rope.  But  the  masters of  the  Reich  still  hope some  day
to  "liberate" East  Europe  into  German  domination  by
threat  and  force,  as  under  the  Kaiser  and  Hitler.  This
German  pipe-dream  is  the  major  obstacle  to  peace.
continue  a  filibuster.  No  matter  which  way  you  look  at  it,
this  is  a  minority  veto  in  the  Senate  in  an  area  in  which  the
•  Constitution  provided  for   majority  decision.   True,  the  Lyn-
don  Johnson   formula  also  allows  this  kind  of  cloture  on  a
change  of  the  rules.   But  that  was  a  small  price  to  pay  for
avoiding a future  Senate  majority  vote on  a ruling  like Nixon's
which  would  allow  a  majority  at  the  beginning   of  a  session
to  change  the  rules.   For  allowing  two-thirds  cloture  on  rules
changes,  the  South  was  appeased  by  a  Senate  vote  declaring
that  it  was  a  continuous  body,  which  means  that  the   rules
cannot   be  changed   by  majority  vote.    No   circus  performer
ever  got  together  a  cuter  bag  of  tricks.
Lyndon  Johnson  is  too  clever  and  too  ambitious  to  top  off
this  victory  by  shutting  off  all  civil  rights  legislation   at  this
this   session.   Working   with  the  White  House   to flim-flam
the  Negro,  the  coalition  will  pass  some  minor  measures   such
as  an  extension  of  the  life  of  the  Civil  Rights  Commission
and  some  legislation   to  deal  with  interstate  shipment  of  ex-
plosions  for  "hate"  bombings.   His  only  hope  for  the  Presi-
dency   is  to   demonstrate  that   some   progress   can   be   made
under  moderate  Southern  leadership.   The  Negro  will  be  al-
lowed   some  progress   forward,  but   only   inch   by  inch   and
slowly.
Dulcet  Aftermath  of  That  Fierce  Revolt  by  the  GOP Liberals  in  the  Senate
KEATING:  This  is  Senator  Ken Keating.   I  am  delighted
to  welcome you  once  again  to  my  new  'Let's  Look  at  Con-
gress'  series.   I  am  particularly  pleased  to  present  as  my
first  guest  of  1959 the  Minority  Leader  of  the  U.  S.  Senate.
...  It  is  indicative of  the fine spirit  which has  followed the
vote  on  the  post  of  Senate  Minority  Leader  that,  although
I  supported  another candidate, the  winner  has  so  graciously
consented  to  be on this  program. .  .  .  Everett, do you think
this  recent  scrap  over the  post  of  Minority  Leader  is  going
to  leave  any  scars?
DIRKSEN:  Kenneth,  I  do  not  believe  so.   I  have  never
been  in  a  contest  where  there  were  such  good  tempers,  so
much  grace  and  spirit,  and  where  there  was  a  felicity  that
was  somehow  registered  on the  faces  of  everybody. .  .  .
KEATING:  Do  you  plan  any  reprisals  on  your  part?
DIRKSEN: Oh, Kenneth, you know  that politics is  a cruel
business  and sometimes  vindictive, but  there  isn't  any  place
for  reprisals  . .  .  within  our party.
—Hon.  Everett  M.  Dirksen,  GOP  Senator  from   Illinois,
interviewed  on  TV  Jan.  11  by  Keating  of  New   York.
1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  19,  1959
Two Thoughtful Passages  in  the  Mish-Mash  of  the  State of  the  Union Message
If  Ike  Were A  Democrat, He'd Be Accused  of Launching  A  Five  Year  Plan
Two  passages  in  the  uninspired  mish-mash  of  the  Eisen-
hower  State  of  the  Union  message  deserve  more  attention.
One  is a  first,  faint  step  toward  the  idea  of  national  economic
planning.    The  President  did  not  use  the  word  "planning"
—a  dirty   word   in   American  political   debate—but   that   is
what  he  indicated  by  his  proposal   to   establish   "long  term
guides  extending  far  ahead,  certainly  five,  possibly  even  ten
years."   If  Eisenhower  were  a  Democrat,  he  would  have  been
accused  of  suggesting  an  American Five  Year   Plan.
Sooner  or  later  some  system  of  meshing  private,  corporate
and  public  enterprise  into  a  national  plan  will  become  neces-
sary  if  the  U.  S.  rate  of  growth  is  to  match  that  of  the  So-
viet  bloc.   Mr.  Eisenhower  spoke  of   our  living   "in   an  era
of  remarkable  productivity  and  growth."    But  a  new  set  of
economic  indices  initiated  by  the  December  issue  of  the  De-
partment   of   Commerce  Survey   of   Current  Business   reveals
that   most   of   our   sensational  supposed   growth   in   the   past
decade  has  been  price  inflation.   The   new  series  shows  the
Gross  National   Product   in  terms  of   constant  1950 dollars.
It  appears  from  the  new  series  that  while  the  GNP   rose  54
percent   in  terms  of   current  dollars "between  1950 and   the
third  quarter  of  1958, the  rise  in  terms  of  the  1950 dollar
was  only  25  percent  and  the  per  capita  rise  in  terms  of  con-
stant  dollars  was  only  8.3  percent  or  less  than  one  percent  a
year.    This  may  be  worrying  the  White  House.    It  should.
"If  It  Works,  It's  Obsolete"
The   other   passage  which  deserves  amplification  was   the
President's  warning  "against  feverish  building  of  vast  arma-
ments  to  meet  glibly  predicted  moments  of   so-called   'maxi-
mum  peril.' ...  In  these  days  of  uncreasing   technological
advance,  we  must  plan  our  defense  expenditures  systemati-
cally  and  with  care,  fully  recognizing  that  obsolescence  com-
pels   the   never-ending  replacement   of   older   weapons  with
new  ones."   The   rate  of  obsolescence  in  the  arms  race  has
become  fantastically  swift.    As  an  unnamed  General  at  the
Pentagon   told   the   Washington   Post   last   summer,   "If   it
works,  it's obsolete."
A  Madison  Avenue  "Snow  Job"
Setting  the  Record  Straight  on  Atlas
"In  every  respect,  in  weight  and  size,  but   especially
in  its  instrumentation,   the  Atlas  demonstrates   that,
after   an  initial   lag  due  to  Pentagon   economics,   the
U.  S.  has  not  only  caught  up  with  the  Soviets  but  has
gone  beyond  them."
—New   York   Times  editorial,  Dec.  20,  1158  (in  its
special  post-strike  issue, Dec. 31).
"Possibly  the  most  blatant  management  of  the  news
about  satellite  activities  occurred  when  the   Pentagon
announced  the  launching  of  the  4'/i  ton  talking  satel-
lite  last  month.  The  satellite,  sent  into  orbit  with  a
highly-developed  guidance  system,  was  a  great  techni-
cal  achievement,  but  the  Pentagon's   promotion  of  the
achievement  put  it  in  the  light  of  a  publicity stunt."
—Cong.  John  E.  Moss,  chairman  House  Government
Information   Committee,  accepting  a  Peter  Zen-
ger  award,  Tucson, Arizona,  Jan. 10.
"The  launching of  the  Atlas  into  orbit  represents  an
important  American accomplishment, with  its  4.3  tons
of  weight  and   150  pounds  of  instruments.    The  best
available   estimates   of   weight   suggest   that   possibly
Sputnik   I   (41,2  months  earlier)  and  almost   certainly
Sputniks  II   (13 '/£  months  earlier)  and  III   (7  months
earlier)  put  greater  weights  into  orbit.   But  more  im-
portant,  the  useful   payload  of  Sputnik  III   reportedly
is  more  than  tenfold  that  of  the  Atlas."
—House   Space   Committee  Report,  Jan. 11.
The  hysterical  cry  rising  from  the  Democrats  and  the lib-
erals,   "We   can't   afford   a   second  best   defense"   (as   if,   in
an  arms  race,  one  could  buy  a  "first  class"  defense  and  then
relax!),  adds  up  to  no  more  than  an  echo  of  the  aviation-
missiles  lobby.   There  is  little  sign  of   thought   here   on  the
related   problems  of   economic  expansion,   price   control   and
negotiations  for  arms  control  to  make  possible   diversion  of
human  effort  to  the  creation  of  wealth,  not  obsolete  weapons.
In  this  respect  Ike, feeble  as  he  is,  makes  more  sense   than
most  of  his  Democratic  critics.
With  Your  Renewal,  Why  Not  Send  A  Gift   Sub  to  A  Friend  Who  Needs  to  Be  Prodded  into  Thinking  Again
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name    ....................................................••••—••—•••••••••••••••••»•••••
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone...«.......State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
l/lfl/89
Nflinc
Street
City  ......,...................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15, D.  C
Entered as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
I    F    Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondayt  bnt  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W., Washington  15, D.  C.
Ail  independent   weekly  published  and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
16  in  the  D.  8.;  $6 in  Canada;  tlO  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED