I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959oct05.pdf

============================================================

Our  Stake  in  Algerian  Peace, P.  3
A   Glimpse  of   The  "Evidence"  of   Aggression   Being Used  in  Laos,  See  Page  Four
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VII,  NO.  37
OCTOBER  5,  1959
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
From  Rigid  Hostility  to  Rigid  Friendship
What  we  have  been  seeing  is  an  extraordinary  example  of
leadership  in  its  most  elementary form.   We  had  been march-
ing  in  one  direction  and  we  are  now  marching   in  another.
With  Mr.  Eisenhower  at  our  head  we  had  been   proceeding
on  the  assumption  that  the  world  was  menaced  by  a  diabolic
conspiracy  run  from  Moscow,  and  that  our  own  safety  lay  in
piling  up  an  ever  larger  supply  of  ever  more  destructive  arms.
With  Mr.  Eisenhower  at  our  head  we  have  now  executed  an
about   face   and   are  proceeding  on   the   assumption   that   the
Russians  want  peace  as  much  as  we  do,  and   that  we  must
slowly   by  patient   negotiation   disentangle   the   issues   which
hinder  peaceful  co-existence.    Quite  suddenly  peace  has  be-
come  a  respectable  word  again.
No  Agreement  on  Anything  Specific
This  momentous  change  is  the  more  striking  inasmuch  as
in  other  ways  nothing  has  changed  at  all.    One  searches  the
joint  communique  which  ended  the  Eisenhower-Khrushchev
visit  in  vain  for   any  sign  of  any  agreement  on  any  specific
question.    On  disarmament,  all  the  American  President   and
the   Soviet  Premier   could   agree  on  was  a  pledge  "to   make
every  effort  to  achieve  a  constructive  solution";  on  Germany,
"the  positions  of  both  sides  were expounded";   on  Berlin,  they
will  resume  negotiations;  on  trade,  there  were  discussions  but
they  drew  a  blank;  with  respect  to  "an  exchange   of  persons
and   ideas"  certain  agreements  are  "expected"   (as  they  had
been  for  some  time)   "in  the  near  future."     Of  nuclear  mat-
ters,  either  with  respect  to  cessation  of  testing  or  cooperation
for   peaceful   purposes,   there  was  no   mention.    There  was
agreement  only  "that  all  outstanding   international   questions
should  be settled  not  by the  application  of  force  but  by peace-
ful   means  through  negotiation."    Beyond  this  generality  they
were  unable to  go.
But  the  atmosphere  miraculously has  been  changed.    Before
they  were  rigidly hostile.    Now  they  are,  so  to  speak,  rigidly
friendly.
The  rigidity extends  so  far  that  Mr.  Khrushchev  really  did
not  go  beyond Mr.  Gromyko's  previous  assurances  at  Geneva
that  in  reopening  the  Berlin  question,  Moscow  was  in  no  sense
laying  down  an  ultimatum,  or  setting  a  fixed  deadline.     The
President  had  hoped  to  get  Khrushchev  to  agree  that  Allied
rights  in  Berlin  would  continue  until  a  change  could  be  nego-
tiated.    All  he  got  and  this  not  until  the  final  talks  on  Sun-
day  was  an  oral  agreement  allowing  Mr.  Eisenhower  to  state
that  there  was  no  fixed  time  limit  on  the  talks.    Even  on  this
there  was  a  subtle  but   unmistakable  difference   in  emphasis
between  the  way  the  President  stated  this  agreement  at  press
conference  and  the  way  the  Soviet  Premier  confirmed  it  next
day  in .Moscow.    Mr.  Eisenhower  said  they  agreed  that  while
negotiations  on  Berlin  "should  not  be  prolonged  indefinitely
.  . . there  could  be no fixed time limit  on  them."    In  Moscow,
1  0  *
Speaking  of  Freedom of Communication
The  Associated  Press   ticker  reported  from  Moscow
Sept. 24 that  the  Soviet  physicist  Dmitri  Skobeltsyn  had
been  refused  a  visa  to  the  United  States.    Skobeltsyn
is   director  of   the   Soviet   Physics   Institute   and   also
chairman   of   the   committee  which   awards  the  Lenin
Peace  Prizes.   He  wanted to  come here  in  order to  con-
fer  the  prize  on  Dr.  W.  E.  B.  Du  Bois,  founder  of  the
NAACP,  next  to  Paul  Robeson  the  American  Negro
most  famous abroad,  and like him  a Soviet  sympathizer.
"American  authorities  said,"  the  AP  reported,  "there
was  no  objection  to  Skobeltsyn personally,  but  that  the
purpose  of  his  trip was  not approved."
Wo  recall   the   avalanche   of   disapproving   editorials
in   the   American  press   when  the   Soviet   government
blocked  the  award  of  the  Nobel  prize  to  Pasternak  be-
cause  it  didn't  like  his  political views,  and  the  more  re-
cent  chorus  during the  Khrushchev  trip  on  the  wicked-
ness  of  censorship  and  Iron  Curtains.   We're  listening
hard  for  a  roar  of  protest  against  this  interference  by
the  State  Department with  freedom  to  travel  and  free-
dom  of  ideas.    So  far  we  haven't  caught  a  beep.
where  Tass  dutifully  omitted   this  from  its  summary  of  the
Eisenhower   press   conference   until  it   could   check  with  the
boss,  Mr.  Khrushchev  said  they  agreed  that  in  resuming  nego-
tiations  "a  restricted  period  of  time  cannot  be  given  but  that
on  the  other  hand  they  must  not  be  drawn  out  indefinitely."
One  emphasized  the  lack  of  a  time  limit,  the  other  that  the
talks  must  not  be  dragged  out  indefinitely.   This  still  leaves  it
clear  that  if  no  new  status  for  West  Berlin  is  negotiated,   the
Soviet  Union  intends  to  take  action  on  its  own  in  a  separate
treaty  with  East  Germany.    The  carrot  is  small  and  the  stick
almost  invisible  but  still  there.    Neither  side  really  budged.
The  Difference  Is  In  The  Smiles
Certainly  on  the  crucial  question  of  Germany,  Mr.  Khrush-
chev  differs   little  if  any  from  Mr.   Molotov   and  Mr.  Eisen-
hower  little  if  any  from  Mr.  Truman.    The  difference  is  that
both  men  emerged  from  Camp  David  not  only  smiling  but
apparently  in  genuine  friendliness—and  the  vast   propaganda
apparatus  at  the  command  of   both  men   in  their    respective
countries  is  signalling   friendship.     This  is  to  the  good,  but
signals   can   be   reversed  if   the   better   atmosphere   does   not
yield  concrete  agreements.
What   gives  one  hope  is  that  this   signal  finds  a  willing
audience  on  both  sides.    In  a  sense  Mr.  Khrushchev  by  his
whistle-stop  tour  of  America won  an  election  in  Russia.    His
trip  here,  his  reception,  the  buildup  in  the  Soviet  press,  solidi-
fied  his  position  at  home.    We  have  made  him  unmistakably
Moscow's  No.  1  man  at  last.    Peace  is  popular  in  the  Soviet
Union,   and   in   this   he   embodies   the   deepest   longings   of
the  Soviet  people.   The  picture here  is  not  so  simple.   There
(^Continued   on   Page   Two~)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 5, 1959
How  the  Democrats  (If  They  Dare)  Might  Win   the  1960   Elections
(Continued  from  Page  One)
exist  pressure  groups  here  advancing policies  which  could  lead
only  to  war,  yet  the  Gallup  poll  showed  that  only  19  percent
of  our  people  disapproved  of  the  Khrushchev  visit  and  there
is political  timing  in  postponing  Mr.  Eisenhower's  return  trip
until  next  May  or  June,  on  the  threshold  of  the  I960  elec-
tions.    It  was  the  cutest  press  agentry  in  years  to  blame  this
postponement   on  the  grandchildren;  they  may  not  grow  up
under  communism,  as  Khrushchev  predicted,  but  it  looks  as
if  they  may  live  four  more  years  under  Republicanism.
The  Providential    Dialectic
Co-existence  has  moved  so  far  along  in  recent  weeks  that
each   side's   political   campaigns   suddenly  seem   now.  to   be
waged  on  the  other's  territory.    Just  as  Khrushchev   solidified
himself  at  home  by  his  successful  tour  here,   so  Eisenhower
is  likely  to  win  the  U.  S.  election  by  barnstorming  the  Soviet
Union   next   spring.     Even  if   the   results  again   are  mainly
atmospheric,  they  will  sharpen  the  image  of  his  party  as  the
party  of  peace  and  prosperity.    While  the  Communists  here
still  want  to  work  within  the  Democratic  party,  Mr.  Khrush-
chev  is  going  to  make  it  very  difficult   for  the  Democrats  to
win  next  year.    Such,  his  comrades  may  well   muse,   is   the
mysterious  way  the  dialectic  moves  its  wonders  to  perform.
The  exchange  of  visits,  that  ice-breaking  for  which  we  are
thankful  to  both  men,  will  reshape  our  politics  in  many ways
if  no  upset  intervenes.    It  will  make  Nixon  the  candidate  of
the  Republicans  as  the  heir  of  Eisenhower  and  his  advance
scout  in  Moscow.    It  will  smother  the  hopes  of  Rockefeller,
who  belongs  with  George  Meany,  Cardinal  Spellman  and  the
cold  war  Democrats.    It  may make  Adlai  Stevenson,  the  only
top  echelon  Democrat   to  welcome  Khrushchev  and   support
Eisenhower,  the  Democratic  nominee  again.    For  the  Demo-
crats  will  need  a  man  who  can  compete  as  a  symbol  of  peace
and  who  has  broken  with  the  stale  stereotypes  of   Truman
and  Acheson.    Humphrey  is  the  only  other  choice  in  this  re-
spect,  but  Adlai outranks him  in  age  and  fame  and  the  prom-
ise  of  being  able  to  carry  the  conservatives  of  the  party  along
with  him.
If  Ike,  who  began  by making  peace  in  Korea  ends  by mak-
ing  peace  with  Russia,  the  Democrats  must  change  their  cold
war  tune.    A  worthy  new  score  could   be  composed,  if  they
have  the  courage  to  sing  it.    Only  a  conservative  and  a  gen-
eral  could  really  make  a  settlement  with  Russia;  this  much  is
true.    But  once  that  peace  is  made  only  a  liberal  Democrat,
in  the  tradition  of  FDR,  can  do  the  job  of  successfully  sub-
stituting   ploughshares   production   for  armament.    Only   the
Democrats   can  move  toward  that  pragmatic  combination  of
Monkish  Murder  in  the  Holy  Island  of   Ceylon
A   Trendex   poll  finds  few   Americans  believe  in  the
possibility  of  an  arms  agreement  with  Moscow.   "Many,
in  holding   the  Russians  untrustworthy,"   the  pollsters
reported   (Wash.  Star,  Sept.  27),   "mentioned  their  lack
of  religion."  This  curious  American  myth,   which  seems
to  imply  that  war  ended  with  the  coming  of  Christ  and
resumed   again   with   the   foundation   of   the   Third   In-
ternational,   is  probably  as  impervious   to  facts  as  most
superstitions.    Otherwise  one  might  hope  that  the  bul-
let   which   killed   Ceylon's  Premier   would   help   to   dis-
sipate  it.    The  assassination  is  nevertheless   worth   a
moment's   reflection.
The  Indian  religions  are  even  more  peaceful   in  their
teaching  than  Christianity.     Hinduism   goes  far   beyond
the  Gospel  in  preaching  non-violence;  the  doctrine  of
ahimsa  forbids  the  killing  of  an  insect;  yet  a  Hindu  felt
so  deeply  about  its  teaching  that  he  murdered   Gandhi,
who  dared  treat  Muslims  kindly  as  well  as  cockroaches.
Buddhism   is   more   pacifist   than   Hinduism,   and   more
tolerant.    But  Bandaranaike   was  the  victim  of  a  Bud-
dhist   monk.    For  some  time   the  most   devout   of   the
Buddhists  have  wanted   to  end  secular  government  in
Ceylon  and  make  the  holy  island  where  Buddha  rested
an  uncomfortable   place  for  non-Buddhists  to  tarry.
On  the  basis  of  the  evidence,  extending  over  many
centuries,  it  would  be  logical  for  the  Russian   Commu-
nists  to  doubt  whether  a  trustworthy   arms  agreement
could  be  reached  with  us  because  we  are  religious,  and
religion   so  often  makes  men  cruel  and  treacherous.
free  enterprise  with  economic  planning  which  is  essential  to
assure  America's  growth  in  coming  years.
Each  side,  in  the   great   Russo-American   race,   fears   what
is genuine in  the  other.    Our  Republicans  fear  economic  plan-
ning.    Russia's  stuffy  new  managerial  class  with  its  bourgeois
outlook  fears  the   fresh   winds   of  free   ideas.    For   all   foxy
Grandpa  Khrushchev's  boasting  in  that  glamorized  farewell
TV  version  of  the  Soviet  system,  they're  so  unsure  of  them-
selves  they're  frightened  of  free  competition   in  ideas.     The
printed  word  is still  the  weapon  they  fear  most.    Their  work-
ers'   state  gives  the  worker  very  little   in  the  way  of   rights
against  his  bosses;  they  fear  uncensored  comparison.    I  have
seen  the  Soviet  Union  and—peace  to  the  shade  of  John  Reed,
who  died  before  he  could  be  disillusioned—it  is  not  the  fu-
ture.    Our   Republicans,  on  the   other   hand,   showed   their
bankruptcy  in  the  thirties  when  FDR  demonstrated  that  we
could  make  democracy work  to  satisfy  the  aspirations  of  work-
er  and  farmer.    We  have  nothing  to  fear  from  peaceful  co-
existence,  but  the  road  to  it  will  bring  a  similar  challenge
and   in  meeting  it  we  can  again   demonstrate  our  country's
greatness.
STATEMENT  REQUIRED  BY  THE  ACT  OF  AUGUST  24,  1912,  AS
AMENDED  BY  THE  ACTS  OF  MARCH  3,  1933,  AND   JULY  2,   1946
(Title  39,  United  States  Code,  Section   233)  SHOWING  THE  OWNER-
SHIP,  MANAGEMENT,  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  I.  F.  Stone's  Week-
ly  published  48  times  a  year  at  Washington,  D.  C.  (or  1959.    1.  The
names  and  addresses  of  the  publisher,  editor,   managing  editor,  and
business  managers  are:   Publisher,  Editor,   and  Managing   Editor,   I.
F.  Stone,  5618  Nebraska  Avenue,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.;  Business
Manager  Esther  M.  Stone,  5818  Nebraska   Avenue,  N.  W.  Washington,
D.  C.   2.  The  owner  is:   (If   owned   by  a  corporation,    Its   name   and
address  must  be  stated  and  also  Immediately  thereunder  the  names
and  addresses  of  stockholders  owning  or  holding  1  percent  or  more
of  total  amount  of  stock.   If  not  owned  by  a  corporation,  the  names
and  addresses  of  the  individual  owners  must  be  given.    If  owned  by
a  partnership  or  other  unincorporated  firm,  its  name  and  address,  as
well  ae  that  of  each  Individual  member,  must  be  given.)    I.  F.  Stone,
6618  Nebraska  Avenae,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   Esther  M.  Stone,
5618  Nebraska  Avenue,   N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    Celia  M.  Gilbert,
Cambridge,  Mass.    Jeremy  J.  Stone,  Menlo  Park,  Calif.    Christopher
D.  Stone,  New  Haven,  Conn.   3.  The  known  bondholders,  mortgagees,
and  other  security  holders  owning  or  holding   1  percent  or  more  of
total   amount   of   bonds,   mortgages,   or   other   securities   are:   none.
4.  Paragraphs  2  and  3  include,  in  cases  where  the  stockholder  or  se-
curity   holder  appears  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trustee  or
in  any  other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person  or   corporation
for   whom   such  trustee  Is  acting;  also  the   statements  in   the   two
paragraphs  show  the  affiant's  full  knowledge  and  belief  as  to  the  cir-
cumstances   and  conditions   under   which   stockholders   and   security
holders   who  do  not  appear  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trus-
tees,   hold   stock  and  securities  in  a  capacity   other   than   that  of  a
bona  fide  owner.    5.  The  average  number  of  copies  of  each  issue  of
this  publication  sold  or  distributed,   through  the  mails  or   otherwise,
to  paid  subscribers  during   the  12  months  preceding   the  date  shown
above  was:  (This  information   is  required   from  daily,  weekly,   semi-
weekly  and  triweekly  newspapers  only.)     11,081.    Signed,   I.  F.  Stone.
Sworn  to  and  subscribed  before   me  this  28th  day  of  September  1958.
Alvin  Bernstein,  Notary   Public,  Washington,  D.  C.    (My  commission
expires  7-31-1962.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 5, 1959
America's  Stake  in  Seeing  Peaceful   Negotiation  Over   Algeria
The  Algerian  rebel  government  has  answered  de  Gaulle's
initiative  in  statesmanlike fashion.    The   Provisional  govern-
ment  does  not  ask  recognition  by  France  as  the  government
of  Algeria,  but  it  does  ask  for  recognition  of  the  inescapable
fact  that  it  speaks  for  the  rebels  and  that  peace  cannot  be
obtained  without  talks  between  it  and  Paris.    "Peace  could
be  immediate,"  Premier  Ferhat  Abbas  declared  in  his  formal
statement  in  Tunis  and  his  government  is  ready  "to  discuss
the  political  and  military  conditions  of  a  cease-fire   and   the
conditions   and   guarantees  of   the   application   of   self-deter-
mination."
The   dialogue   has   begun,   as  those  in   France  who   have
shown   themselves   most   sympathetic  to   the   Algerians   had
hoped.   In  Prance-Observateur  (Sept.  24)  just  before  the  Al-
Iron  Curtain Bulletin
At  the  end  of  the  first  round  in  what  will  be  an  his-
toric  test   case,   Federal   District  Judge   McGuire  ruled
here  last  week  that  the  State  Department  had  a  right
to  bar  Congressman   Charles  O.  Porter   (D.  Ore.)  from
travel  in  Communist  China.   The  Judge  declared   that
since  the  Congressman  had  no  special  authorization  for
the  trip  from  Congress   or  one  of  its  committees,  his
status   was  no  different  from  that  of  an  ordinary  citi-
zen.    If  there  had  been  such  special  authorization,  the
Judge  added,  "It  might  be  a  different  story,  but  even
then  I  would  doubt  it."  This  would  allow  the  executive
branch  not  only  to  make  foreign  policy  but  to  shut  off
members  of  Congress   from  first-hand  contact  with  the
facts   on  which  policy   was   made.    This  merges   into
fantasy  when  it  becomes  a  question  of  the  State  De-
partment's  insistence  on  acting  as  if  the  largest  coun-
try  in  the  world  did  not  exist,  and  the  greatest  revolu-
tion  of  our  times  had  never   happened.
gerian  reply,  Claude  Bourdet,  long  the  champion  of  justice
for  the  North  Africans,  hoped  M.  Abbas  and  his   colleagues
would  be  wise  enough  to  seize  on  de  Gaulle's  recognition  of
Algeria's  right  to  self-determination.
The   principle   having   been   accepted   by  both   sides,   two
questions   follow  and  the  rebels  raise  them.    There  must  be
a  free  vote,  and  a  free  vote  is  impossible  if  the  elections  are
to  be  run  by  the  French  army.    Secondly,   self-determination,
the  rebels  says,  cannot  be  used  to  break  up  Algeria  "into  ra-
On  Meany's  Clash  With Randolph
Three  points  stand  out  for  us  in  the  battle   between
George  Meany  and  A.  Philip  Randolph  at  the  close  of
the  AFL-CIO  Convention.   Like a  flash  of  lightning,  it
threw  a  vivid  light   on  certain   realities   in  the   labor
movement  which  people  left-of-centre  would  rather  not
talk  about.   The  first  is  that  Meany  has  a  bad  case  of
what  the  Russians  call  personality  cult,  and  few  dare
talk  back  to  him  at  Council  meetings.     The  second   is
that  while  the  AFL-CIO,  as  a  matter  of  policy,  expels
unions  when  they   vote  for  men  with  pro-Communist
leanings,   and  (under  pressure)   sometimes   tosses  out
corruptionists,  it  does  not  regard   racialism   as  an  of-
fense.   Lily-white unions  which  bar Negroes  are  tacitly
favored  and Jim  Crow unions  established by  Negroes  in
self-defense    are   fostered.     When   Randolph,   of    the
Sleeping   Car  Porters,   wanted  to  know  why  the  AFL-
CIO  took  one  attitude  toward  Communists  and  corrup-
tionists  and  another  toward  racists,  Meany  had  no  an-
swer  but  abuse  and only  one  non-Negro  leader  voted  for
Randolph's  motion  to  make  the  railroad   brotherhoods
begin  to  admit  Negroes.   The  third  point  is  that   noth-
ing  could  be  worse,  for  a  world  facing  a  new  wave  of
racialist  poison  from  both  sides  in  Africa,  than  the  fail-
ure of  whites  to  practice  brotherhood  even  in  the  trade-
union  movement.    This  is,  of  course,   an  old  story  but
we  cannot  afford  a  fresh  retelling.
cial  or  religious  communities,"  destroying  its  national  entity.
Nor   can  Algeria's  greatest   resource,   Saharan   oil,   be  mort-
gaged  in  advance  to  France;  the  rebels  demand  a  chance  to
participate  in  its  development  by  "wise  and  fruitful   coopera-
tion."    It  also  is  not  self-determination for  Algeria  if  subject
to  confirmation by  a  referendum  in  France.    Even  so  skillful
a  player  as  de  Gaulle  will  be  hard  put  to  parry  these  moves.
Few  Americans realize  the  stake  we  have  in  the  success  of
these  efforts.    Their  failure  will  endanger  world  peace.    Too
few   have   noticed   the   growing   ties   between   the   Algerian
rebels  and  Peking.    If  the  war  flares  up,  Communist   China
will  make  itself  felt  for  the  first  time  in  a  crucial  struggle
in  the  West  and  draw  the  American  government  in  on  the
undemocratic   and   colonial   side.     It   would   be   better   and
cheaper  now,  by  a  discreet   offer   of  financial  aid  in  the  gi-
gantic   task  of  raising  Algeria   from   poverty,   to  facilitate  a
settlement  while  moderates  are  still  at  the  rebel  helm.
A  Voice  from  the  Past  Challenges Mr. K  on A Key Episode in U.  S.-Soviet Relations
"Mr.   Khrushchev  at  Los  Angeles  stated:  'American   sol-
diers  went  onto  our  soil,  headed  by  their  generals,  to  help
our  White  Guard  combat  the  revolution.  .  .  .  The  British,
all  the  capitalist  countries  of  Europe  and  America,  marched
upon  our country  to  strangle  the  new revolution.  .  .  . Yet
we  routed  those  who  attacked  us  and  threw  them  into  the
sea.'
"This  is  completely  false.   The  fact  is  that  the  Chief  of
Staff  of  the  U.  S.  Army  violently   opposed  this   expedition,
but  President  Wilson  bowed  to  the  allied  request.    This  ex-
pedition  was  commanded  by  Gen.  William  S.  Graves.  .  .  .
The  American  troops  at  no  time  fought  against  the  Reds,
Whites  or  other  factions.  .  .  .  The  American   forces  num-
bered  7,000  and  were  not  pushed  into  the  sea,  but  left  vol-
untarily.
"Gen   Graves  in  his  book,  'America's  Siberian  Adventure,'
tells  all  the facts  and the  Soviet  government  was  so  pleased
with  the  account  that  they  sent  him a  nice  check  for  use  of
the  book.    This  astonished   General  Graves,  since  it  is  well
known   that  the   Soviets   pirate   anything   they   please  and
never  pay  royalties  to  anyone.  .  .  ."
—Letter  by  Cora March,  widow  of  Gen, Peyton  C.  March,
U.  S.  Army   Chief    of   Staff,     World   War   I,   Wash.
Star, Sept.  U-
Gen.   Graves  had  to  fight  a  rearguard  action  against  the
British,  the  Japanese  and the  State  Department.    The State
Department  wanted  to  back  Kolchak,  of  whom  Gen.  Graves
took  the  dim  view  that  "at  no  time  while  I  was  in  Siberia
was  there  enough  popular  support  behind  Kolchak ...  to-
have  lasted  one  month  if  all  Allied  supports  had  been  re-
moved."     (America's   Siberian   Adventure,   p.   157).     Gen.
March  supported  Gen.  Graves  in  his  attitude  of  strict  neu-
trality.    President   Wilson's  role   in  the  intervention  was
equivocal.    The  presence   o.f  our  troops  blocked  Japanese
ambitions  in  Siberia.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 5, 1959
Can   Failure   to   Say   "Thank   You"   for   Flowers   Be  Used  as  Evidence  of   Aggression?
SEATO  Foreign  Ministers  At  Washington  Meeting  Downgrade  Laos  Crisis
There  are  welcome signs  that  the  Laos  crisis  is  being  down-
graded.    The  special  meeting  of  the  SEATO  Foreign  Min-
isters  in  Washington   last  Monday  ended   after   three  hours
with   a   remarkably  calm   and   non-committal   communique.
The  Foreign  Ministers made  it  appear  that  they  discussed  "a
wide  range  of  topics"  among  which  was  "the current  situa-
tion  in  Laos."    They  fully  supported  "the  prompt  action  of
the  United  Nations  Security  Council."    There  was  no  refer-
ence  to  foreign  aggression   or   intervention.
A  Sudden  Outburst   of  Restraint
The   Washington   communique   in   its   astringent   and   re-
strained  tone  contrasted  sharply  with  the  communique  issued
48  hours  earlier  in  Bangkok  at  the  close  of  a  SEATO  coun-
cil  on  the  Ambassadorial  level.   This  said  SEATO  had  taken
steps  to  act  promptly  "in  the  event  of  it  becoming  necessary
to  defend  the  integrity  of  Laos  against  outside   intervention."
The  diplomatic  correspondent  of  the  London  Observer  (Sept.
27)    interpreted  the   Bangkok   statement   as   taking   Britain,
which  is  of  course  on  the  SEATO  Council,  "a  small  but  per-
ceptible  step  nearer  direct  military  involvement  in  Laos."
At  the  State  Department,  however,  it  was  denied  after  the
SEATO   Foreign  Ministers  meeting  that  there  had  been  any
discussion  here  of   military  intervention.     It   was  even   said
that  Laos  came  up  only  as  part  of  a  brief  historical   review
of  the  situation in  the  Far  East.   The  word  military,  we  were
told,  had  not  even  been  mentioned.    To  believe  the   official
explanation,  the  Foreign  Ministers  of  SEATO  had  met  only
for  a  kind  of  glorified  "bull  session"   on  world   affairs.
It  looks  as  if  the  UN  investigating  team  may  serve  the  use-
ful   purpose  of  giving  Laos  and   the  U.   S.  military  there  a
face-saving  way  out  by  claiming  that,  with  the  arrival  of   UN
investigators,  intervention  stopped.
In  the  meantime the  search  for  evidence  of  invasion  goes
on.    Richard  Dudman,  in  a  vivid  series  of  deeply  skeptical
reports  from  the  "battlefront"  to  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch,
provided   two  piquant  samples  of   this   evidence  in   a   cable
printed  by  his  paper  Sept.  22.
In  one  case  six  rusty  flintlocks  were  being  loaded   at  Sam
As  We  Were  Saying,  Let's  Stop  Mixing
Politics  With  Science
New  York,  Sept.  25—Red  China  already  could  have
her  own A-bombs.   Her  leaders  might  make  this  stun-
ning  announcement  or  stage  a  nuclear  test  October  1,
when   China  celebrates  the   10th  anniversary  of  Com-
munist  rule.   'It  wouldn't  surprise  me  if  China  could
now  make  a  small  number  of  crude  bombs,'  says  one
famous  U.  S.  scientist  who  played   a  leading  role  in
creating  America's first  A-bombs.  .  .  .  All  scientists
surveyed  stress  that  China  is  embarking  on  a  tremen-
dous  program  of training scientists  .  .  .  using  science
as  a  major  springboard  for  her  'great  leap  forward'."
—Alton  Blakeslee,  Associated   Press   science  writer,
Washington  Evening  Star, Sept. 25.
Vienna,  Sept.   25  (AP)—The  International   Atomic
Energy  Authority  rejected  a   Soviet-sponsored  bid  by
Communist  China to  gain  membership in  the  atoms-for-
peace  organization.    By  a  30-20  vote,  delegates  to  the
IAEA's  third  general  conference  adopted  a  U.  S.  reso-
lution  to  disregard  any  proposals  for  admission  of  Red
China  . . . following  a  spirited  discussion  in which  Paul
F.  Foster,  U.  S.  chief  delegate,  urged  the  Soviet  Union
to  clear  the  way  for  IAEA  to  pursue  its  scientific  and
technical  work  and  stop  mixing  political  strife  into  the
agency's  scientific  activities."
—Same  paper,  same  day.
Teu  for  shipment  as  evidence  to  Vientiane  where  the   UN
investigators   were  waiting.    "The flintlocks,"   Dudman   re-
ported,  "were  said  to  be  weapons  of  rebel  Meo   tribesmen."
Since  there  are   Meos   on   both   sides  of   the   Laotian-North
Vietnamese  border,  it  is  hard  to  be  sure  what  the  flintlocks
prove.
Dudman  also  reported  that  when  the  commander  at  Sam
Teu  was  asked  for  proof  of  foreign  invasion  he  said  villagers
at  Oantlo,   ten  miles  away,  had  seen   15  Viet  Namese.     He
explained  "that  the  village  girls   had   offered  flowers  to  the
strangers"  and  "since  the  men  did  not  thank  them  or  say  a
single  word,   the   villagers   concluded   they   could   not   speak
Laotian  and  must  be North  Viet  Namese."
Or  maybe  they  were  just  impolite.
Give  A  Gift   Sub  to  A  College  Student—A  Widening  Circle  Now  Reads  and  Likes  the   Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name   .......................................................................................
Street  ........................................................................................
City    ..............................:......... Zone............State....................
10/5/59
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City     ..............,.........................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
I.F. Stones  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
P.  Stone'8  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  bnt   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  IB,  D.  C.
An   independent   weelfiy   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:
$5  In  the  U.  S.:  $6  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED