I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959sep07.pdf

============================================================

That  Federal  Radiation  Council,  P.  2
Russell's  Letter  to  the  Pugwash  Conference  on  Germ  and  Chemical  Warfare,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VII,  NO.  33
SEPTEMBER  7,  1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
On   the  Various  Ikes  — New,   Old  and  In-Between
The  favorite  excuse  of  the  Elsenhower  Administration  for
avoiding  conferences  at  the  summit  is  that  failure  to  reach
agreement  would  dishearten  public  opinion.    Public  opinion
here  and   abroad  may  also  be  disheartened   by  an   excessive
publicity  build-up  of  the  "new  Ike."    The  gap  between  Hag-
erty's  ability  as  a  press  agent  and  Mr.  Elsenhower's  capacity
as  a  national  leader  is  becoming  apparent  in  the  wake  of  that
inane  TV  chat  between  the  President  and  the  Prime Minister
in  London.
Public  Relations  Disguised  as  Journalism
After  the  invitation  to  Khrushchev and  the announcement of
the visit  to England, the White  House  and  the  British Embassy
set  out  to  give  Eisenhower  a  build-up  in  the  British  press.
Leading British correspondents  were called  in,  and  given  what
is  known  as  a  not-for-attribution  backgrounder  on  the  Presi-
dent;  he  was portrayed both  as "a  new  Ike"  and  "the  old  Ike"
of  the  war  period.    It  is  unfortunate  that  in  such  cases  the
public  does  not  know  what  the  White  House  and  the  British
Embassy  are  doing;  all  the  public  knows  is  that  suddenly  it
seems  to  be  the  unanimous  impression  of  British  correspond-
ents  that  there  is  "a  new  Ike"  very  much  like  "the  old   Ike"
they  loved  in  war-time.   Thus  public  relations  is  disguised  as
objective   reporting.
A  Soldier   Not  A  Mahomet
Obviously  able  newspapermen  could  not  be  sold  a  bill  of
goods  if  there  were  not  some  truth  in  it.    The  partial  truth,
not  the  big  lie,  is  the  effective  propaganda.     Mr.  Eisenhower
has  been  in  better  health.   The  death  of  Dulles  put  the  Presi-
dent  in  command on  foreign  policy.   Mr.  Eisenhower  is a  sol-
dier  with  a  sober  view  of  war,  not  a  Messianic  corporation
lawyer, a Mahomet  of  capitalism like his  late Secretary of  State.
The  President  has  always  thrown  his  weight  on  the  side  of
peace;  at  press  conference,  on  the  eve  of  his  departure   for
Europe,  he  spoke  with  an  eloquence   all  the  more  touching
because  it  was  clumsy  of  the  urgent  need  to  search  for  peace.
There  is  sufficient  truth  here  to  win  British  reporters  who  fol-
low their  government  in favoring  summit negotiations;  wishful
thinking,   private  conversation   with   "high   sources"—always
flattering—and   the   romantic  haze  which   afflicts   our  profes-
sion  did  the  rest.    Imagination   outran  reality,  and  soon  en-
countered   disillusion.    There  followed   the   angry  scenes  at
press  briefings  in  London  with  Hagerty.    It  was  hard  for  the
press  to  realize  that  if  little  hard  news  came out  of  the  Eisen-
hower-Macmillan  talks  it  was probably  because the  talks  never
did  get  down  to  the  hard  facts  with  which  negotiation  must
grapple.    Mr.  Eisenhower  does  not  like  to  grapple.
Mr.  Eisenhower  likes  to  be  loved.    He  enjoys  the  cheering
crowds  and  the  waving  flags.  They  remind  him  of  his  great-
9  *                                                                                                         13
est  days  during  the  war.    He  knows  he  means  well,  and  be-
lieves  he  deserves  popular   affection.     And  so  he  does.    But
men   do  not   change   their   character.    The   "new    Dee"   like
"the  old  Ike"  and  the  Ike  in-between  all  share  one  character-
istic.    They  don't  like  to  be bothered  with  details.    They  like
to  save  their  strength  for  ceremonial  occasions,  and  the  pri-
vate  little  dinners  at  which  personal  charm  can  smooth  over
difficulties.    This  was  enough  in  war-time  when  huge   staffs
and  military  machines  worked  under  him  toward  the  one  end
of  victory.   It  will  not  be  enough  in  the  search  for  peace.
Now  They  Work  Against  Eisenhower
Today  the  situation  is  quite  different.    The  huge  machine
at  whose wheel  Ike  sits  is geared  for  war,  not  peace.    Most  of
its  expenditures,  most  of  its  energy,  goes  into  preparation  for
war,  and  above all  the preparation  of  the  public mind  for  war.
Able  and  energetic  men  all  around  him  are  geared  toward  the
war  tasks.    It  is  not  that  they  want  war,  but  their  job  is  to
prepare  for  it,  and  to  get  the  best  possible  weapons.    When
the  President  goes  out  in  search  of  peace,  there  is  no  machine
behind  him,  no  staff  around  him,  geared  to  this  purpose.    On
the  contrary,  all  around  him  are  men,  at  the  AEC,  in  the
Pentagon,   at  CIA,  in  the  State  Department,   quick  to  distort
and  exaggerate  every  border  skirmish  from  the  Himalayas  to
Laos,  in  order  to  poison  the  public  mind  against   the  very
search  for  peace  on  which  the  President  is  engaged.
There  May  Be  Rough  Weather Ahead
In  such  a  context  we  must  be  grateful  that  at  the  head  of
state  at  least  there  sits  a  man  who  is  not  a  pyromaniac.    But
in  the  interests  of  clear  thinking  it  is  important  to  see  the
divergence   between  the  President  and  his  own  bureaucracy.
The  burdens  of  the  Presidency  are  so  immense  and  various
today  as  to  bow  down  even  a  gay  genius  like  FDR.     Ike  is
not  a  genius.    And  peace  will  not  be  won  by  platitudes.
Mr.  Eisenhower  for  example  really  seems  to  think—and  in
this  is  as  simple-minded   as  some  on  the   other  side—that
"peace  with  justice"  is  a  firm  diplomatic yardstick.   But  "jus-
tice"  is  not  attainable  in  the  tangled  disputes  that  have  set
men  fighting  in  Europe  for  centuries;  no  IBM  machine  can
determine  with  just   accuracy  where  the   frontier  should   be
between  Poles  and  Germans,  Ukrainians  and  Poles.    All  we
can  hope  for  is  to  establish  a  world  order  stable  enough  and
roughly  fair   enough  to  satisfy  the  aspirations  and  allay  the
fears  on  both  sides.    This  is  job  of  compromise  and  negotia-
tion  which  requires  work  and  entails  risk.    Mr.  Eisenhower
has  little taste  for  either,  and  may  easily  be  deflected  by  craft-
ier  men  who  want  no  settlement.    So  we  must  be  prepared
for  disheartening  ups-and-downs  in  that  search  for  peace  on
which  human  survival  now  depends.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  7, 1959
AEC   Using   the   Joint   Committee   to   Undercut   The  Public  Health   Service
A  Glimpse  of  Intra-Administration  Intrigue  Over  Radiation  Hazards
Last  winter  there  was  an   outburst  of   criticism  over   the
AEC's  lack  of  candor  in  dealing  with  the  dangers  of  radio-
activity.   In  March,  a National  Advisory Committee  on  Radia-
tion  appointed  by  the  Surgeon  General  warned  that  the  U.  S.
lacked  any  comprehensive  program  for  protecting  the  public
against  radiation  hazards.   The  committee,  under  the  respect-
ed  chairmanship  of  Dr.  Russell  H.  Morgan,  Professor  of  Ra-
diology  at  Johns  Hopkins,   expressed  the  opinion  that  it  was
unwise  to  leave  the  regulation  of  these  dangers  to  an  agency
like  the  AEC  which  was  itself   engaged   in  operating   reactors
and  making  weapons  tests.    The  committee  recommended  leg-
islation  charging  the    U.  S.  Public  Health  Service  with  re-
sponsibility  for  promulgating  "uniform  national  standards  on
radiation  protection."    A  bill   (S.   1628)    embodying   these
recommendations  was  introduced  by  Senator  Hill  of  Alabama
but  after  two  days  of  hearings  before  the  Senate  Labor  and
Welfare  Committee  he  did  little  to  push  it.    Opposition  was
centered  in  the  AEC with  its military and  industrial  allies,  the
latter  fearful  of  the  higher  costs  in  stricter  safety  standards.
How  Discussion  Was  Tamped   Down
The  opening  maneuver  was  to  get  the  White  House   to
order  Administration  officials  not  to  discuss the  Hill  bill  while
the  Budget  Bureau  studied   the  question.     This  gagged   the
Public  Health  Service  which  favored  the  bill.    Nothing  hap-
pened  until  August  14, when  opponents  seemed  to  have  held
any  change  to  a  weak  compromise.    On  that  date  the  Presi-
dent  established  a  Federal  Radiation  Council  of  four  men—
the  Secretary of  Health,  Education and  Welfare,  the  chairman
of   the  AEC,  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and   the  Secretary  of
Commerce.
The  duties  of  this  council fell  far  short of  the  clear mandate
m  the  Hill   bill.    These   duties,  as  set  forth   in  the  bureau-
cratic  gibberish   of   the  executive  order,   were  to  advise  the
President—
"with   respect   to  radiation  matters   directly  or   indirectly
affecting  health,  including matters  pertinent  to  the  general
guidance  of  executive  agencies  by  the  President   with  re-
spect  to  the  development by  such  agencies  of  criteria   for
the  protection  of  humans  against   ionizing  radiation  ap-
plicable  to  the  affairs  of  the  respective  agencies."
The  day the  order was released  AEC Chairman McCone under-
scored  its  vagueness  by  rushing  into  print  with  a  statement
that  "radiological  health  and  safety  questions"  would   continue
to  be  "a  primary  concern"  of  the  AEC.
But  on  August  22,  McCone  suffered  a defeat.    On  that  day,
in  naming  the  Secretary of  Health,  Education  and  Welfare  as
chairman  of  the  new  Radiation  Council,  the  President  went
beyond  the  executive order  and  give  HEW  "primary  responsi-
bility  .  .  .  for  the  collation,   analysis  and  interpretation  of
data  on  environmental  radiation  levels  such  as  natural  back-
ground,  radiography,  medical  and  industrial  use  of   isotopes
and  X-rays,  and  fall-out,  so that  the  Secretary  of  Health,  Edu-
cation  and  Welfare  may  advise  the  President  and  the'general
public."   This was a mandate  to  pass  independently  on  fallout
and  to  report  to  the  public  as  well  as  the  President.
Secretary  Flemming  followed  this  up  on  August  26  with  a
press   conference   at  which  he   released   a  new   departmental
directive  on  radiation  health.    This  disclosed  that  the  Bureau
of  the  Budget  had  recommended  the  vesting  of  primary  re-
sponsibility  in  HEW.    The  most  important  part  of  the  direc-
tive was its  instruction  to  the  Public  Health  Service  to  develop
"operating   standards  or  recommendations  to  achieve  accept-
able  levels  of  exposure  from  air,  water  and  milk,  medical  pro-
cedures  and  the  general  environment."    This  was the  first  step
toward  Federal  radiation  health  standards to  replace  the purely
permissive  recommendations  of  the  National  Committee  on
Radiological   Protection,   a  private  body  on  which  industrial
interests  but  not  labor  are  strongly   represented.
McCone  Tries  to  Circumvent  the  White  House
In  the  meantime McCone  had  gone  into  action.   The  Presi-
dent's   executive   order,   establishing   a   four-man   Radiation
Council,  was  issued  on  a  Friday.   On  Monday,  McCone  went
to  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy.    By  Wednesday
the  19th  Senator  Anderson  had  been  persuaded  to  introduce  a
new  version  of  a pending  Administration  bill  (S.  1987)   with
respect  to  atomic  cooperation  with  the  States.    Into  this  had
been   inserted  a   new   section   establishing   a   9-man   Federal
Radiation  Council  instead  of  that  set  up  by  the  President.
The  Anderson  bill  specified  the  addition  to  the  council  of
the  Secretary  of  Labor,  the  Chairman  of  the  National  Acad-
emy  of   Sciences,  the   Chairman  of   the  National  Committee
on  Radiation  Protection  "and  two  members  appointed  by  the
President,"   one  to  be  "a  qualified  expert  in  the  field  of  bi-
ology  and  medicine  and  one  in  the  field  of  health  physics."
This  offered  the  hope  that  the  AEC could  pack  the  new Coun-
cil with  a  majority  since  both  the  National  Academy and  the
NCRP  are  AEC allies.   The  "qualified  expert  in  the  field  of
biology  and  medicine"  might  be  Dr.  Shields  Warren  or  some
facsimile  securely  in  the  AEC's  orbit.    This  bill  was  reported
out  on  August  27.    Secretary  Flemming  asked  for  reconsid-
eration  in  a  letter  to  Anderson  on  the  28th.    When  the  Joint
Committee  met  on  August  31,  it  approved  a  favorable  report
on  the  bill  but  revised  the  section  on  the  Radiation  Council,
leaving  in—of  the  proposed  additions—only  the  Secretary  of
Labor   and   substituting   "and   such   other   members"   as   the
President  shall  choose.
Anderson   Critical  Last  March  But  Now   Wavers
We   cannot  understand  the  wavering   position   of  Senator
Anderson.    Holifield  has  so  clearly  gone  over  to  the  AEC's
side  that  his  constant  belittling  of  proposals  for  a  shift  to  the
Public  Health  Service  are  not  surprising.    But  Anderson  last
March  was  criticizing the  AEC  for  hiding  the  facts  on  fallout
and  agreeing  with  Dr.  Russell Morgan  on the  need  for  putting
radiation  control  in  the  Public  Health  Service.    The  new  An-
derson  bill  (S.  2568)  which  the  Joint  Committee  is  rushing
toward  passage,  could  strengthen   the  AEC's  position   in  the
field  of  radiation  hazards  and  pave  the  way  for   relinquishing
controls  at  least  in  part  to  the  States.    It  reflects  the  industry
"states  rights"  point  of  view.    To  rush  the  bill  to  the  floor
before  earlier  hearings  on  this  question  have  even  been  printed
is  to  force  members  of   Congress   to  vote   in  the  dark  on  a
complex   problem.     The   effect  will  be  to  sidetrack  the  Hill
bill, which  one would  have  expected  Anderson  to  support,  and
may  enable  the  AEC  to  undermine  the  new  authority  given
HEW  and  the  Public  Health  Service  by the  President.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  7,1959
Press   Largely   Ignores   5th   Pugwash   Conference   Warnings  Against  Germ  and  Chemical  War
UN  Commission  Proposed  to  Protect  World  from  Jitters  Over  CBR
In  his  welcoming  address  at  the  opening  of  the  Pugwash
Conference  on  Biological  and  Chemical  Warfare,  Cyrus Eaton
said  it  was  inconceivable  to  him  that  "a  nation  nurtured  in
such  high   moral  standards"   as  the   United   States   "and   so
strongly   dedicated   to   the   alleviation   of   human    suffering,
should  even  for  a  moment  consider  embarking  upon  a  lunatic
campaign  to  ravage  and  destroy  defenseless  women  and  chil-
dren  with  monstrous   disease."
The  fact  is,  however,  that  the  U.  S.  Army  Chemical  War-
fare  Service has  embarked  on  a  campaign  to  sell  the  idea  that
chemical   and  bacteriological  veapons  offer   a  more  humane
(and   less   expensive)   form   of   warfare.    The    newspapers
which  open   their  pages  to  this  military  propaganda   almost
entirely  ignored  the  meeting  at  Pugwash,  Nova  Scotia,  where
26  scientists  from  erght  nations  of  East  and  West  met   from
August   24  to  29  to  warn  against  these  new  techniques  of
extermination.    During   a  period   in   which   any  mysterious
movement  in  the  bushes  of  Laos  made  scare  headlines  in  the
U.  S.  press,  no  space  seemed  available  for  the  sober  discus-
sions  at  Pugwash.    Indeed  like  other  meetings  to  warn against
the  dangers  of  war,  it  was  regarded   as  "controversial,"   not
quite  respectable  and  perhaps  even  a  little  subversive.
How  to  Freshen  Your  Nightmares
We  think  the  campaign  to  convince  the  American  people
that  germ  warfare  is  humane  will  fall  as  flat  as  the  similar
campaign   about   clean   and   humane   thermonuclear   bombs.
Though  the  military  have  means  of  mass  communication  at
their  disposal,  the  public  is  not  that  gullible.    But  -the  fight
cannot  be  won  without  counter-measures,  and  we  hope  that
for  this  purpose  Mr.  Eaton  may  publish   the  proceedings  at
Pugwash  for  general  distribution.    In  the  meantime,  those  who
cannot   obtain   the   speeches   and   resolutions   against   CBR
(chemical,   biological  and  radiological)   warfare  may  do  just
as  well  by  reading  the  testimony  of  those  who  favor  it.    The
House  Science  Committee  released  a  report  on  CBR  August
10  (House  Report  No.  815)   and  has  available  printed   copies
Another  Form  of   Human-  Suicide
"The  ideologists  of  biological warfare see  advantages
in  the  negligible cost  of  producing a  microbial weapon
and  in  its  ability  to  crush  the  resistance  of  an  enemy
without  destroying  the  economy  of  the  country.   Bio-
logical  warfare  is  directed  mainly,  against  the  life  of
the  peaceful.population  and against  the  sources  of  food
(livestock  and crops);  it  does  not  destroy buildings and
machines  and  is  therefore  regarded by  its  military ad-
herents  as  the  best  method of  capturing  territory freed
of  its  population. .  .  .  The specialists  in  bacteriological
war  strive  to  sow  despair  and  horror and to  plunge  the
peoples  of  this  earth into the  Dark Ages  with  their ter-
rible  epidemics  of  plague,  smallpox  and  cholera.   They
forget  that  biological  war,  like  atomic  war,  is  suicide.
...  It  is  no accident  that  even  Hitler  and his  criminal
generals  did  not  dare  begin  a  biological  war,  for  they
were  well  aware  that  the  danger  cuts  both  ways."
—Prof.   A.  A.  Smorodintsev   (Soviet   Union)  at  the
Pugwash Conference, Aug.  28.
of  its  hearings.    They  will  freshen  your  nightmares.
Germ  and  chemical  warfare is being  oversold  in  the  Sunday
supplements.     It  may  always  remain  too  unpredictable   in  its
effects,  too  difficult  to  "distribute"  and  too  likely  to  recoil  on
its  users.    But  the  chemical  warfare  corps  by  its  very  cam-
paign  adds  to  the  sum  total  of  fear,  hatred  and  suspicion.
"The   most  hopeful  approach  to  international  regulation,"
the   Pugwash   conference   said   in   its   concluding    statement,
"seems  to  comprise  (a)   a  general  agreement  to  prohibit  the
use  of   such  weapons,   and   (b)    the   renunciation  of    official
secrecy  and  security  controls  over  microbiological,   toxicologi-
cal,  pharmaceutical  and  chemical-biologic  research."
The  conference  proposed  that  the  United  Nations  set  up  a
permanent   commission   on  biological   and   chemical   warfare
which   "could   help   to   dispel   apprehension,"    among    other
things  by  investigating  "impartially  the  claims  by  plaintiff  na-
tions  that  others  had  openly  or  surreptitiously  used   methods
of  biological  or  chemical  warfare  against  them."
Bertrand  Russell Comments  Ironically on  the  Humane Excuses  for  Horrible Weapons
"It  is  a  general  feature  of  the  progress  of  science  and
technology  that  it  makes  easier  both  living  and  dying;  it
brings  about  an  improvement of  means  of  production  and
a  lowering of  prices  of  commodities, but  it  also  lowers  the
price  of  death.
"In the last  war the  cost  of  killing  one  person  by  military
weapons  amounted  on  the  average  to  some  thousands  of
pounds.   After  the  development of  the  atom  bomb, the  cost
of  extermination fell  to  a  few  pounds per  head;  the  hydro-
gen  bomb  has  brought it  down  much further  and the  cost  is
now  reckoned in  pennies.   And  now  we  are  told  that  killing
by  means of  biological  weapons may  be  even  cheaper.
"This  may  be  true  or  not,  but  it  is  a  fact  that  a  great
deal  of  research  has  been  going  on in  utmost  secrecy  on  the
development  of  biological  and  chemical  weapons,  and  that
many  attempts  have  been  made  to  justify  the  use  of  such
weapons.    In  a  speech  I  made  at  Vienna  after  the  Kitz-
buhel  Conference,  I  said  that  should  a  sudden  outbreak  of
rabies  occur, say  in  Berlin,  it  would  be  absurd to  think  that
the  Eastern  and  Western  authorities  would  not  instantly
confbine   to  find  measures   of   extirpating   the   mad  dogs.
However,  after  reading  the  statements  which have  recently
been   made   by  some   generals,   I   am   not   so   sure  about
this.
"General  Creasy,  the  retired  head  of  the  U.  S.  Army's
Chemical  Warfare  Service,  has  been  reported  to  have  ad-
vocated  before  a  Congressional  Committee  to  put  chemical
and  biological  warfare  in  the  same  category  as  the  atom
bomb.    He  is  reported  to  have  said,  'We  would  use  them
as  we damn well  see  fit  in the interests  of  the  United  States
and  its  allies,'  and  he  went  on  to  justify  these  weapons  as
humane.    It  is  curious  that  the  advocates  of  the  most  hor-
rible  weapons of  mass destruction always  appear to  be moti-
vated  by  merciful  reasons.    Admiral  Strauss,  when  Chair-
man  of  the  U.  S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  referred  to
the  'clean'  hydrogen  bomb as  the  'humanitarian  bomb.'
"It  is,  of  course,  a  matter  of  great  regret  that  science—.
particularly  medical  and  biological   science—should  be  de-
based  and  developed  in  a  spirit  contrary  to  everything   it
stands  for.    It  is  even  more  distressing   that  a   situation
should  have  developed  in  which  scientists  find  it  possible
and  indeed desirable  to  pursue  such  research."
—From  the  Opening Address  Sent  by Earl  Russell  to  the Fifth  Pugwash  Conference,  August  21.
1   3   :,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  7,1959
After   Months  of   Investigation,   Calif.   School   Boards  Offered   Only  Names
How  House  Un-Americans  Backed  Down  When  Asked  for   Evidence
When  the  House  Un-American   Activities   Committee  first
postponed  its  teacher   hearings  in  California  early  last  June,
Chairman  Walter  said  this  was  because  "the ramifications of
the  Communist  operation   in  California  are  so  extensive  and
malignant   that  additional  investigative  work  must  be  done."
Now  almost  three  months  later  Chairman  Walter  has  de-
cided  not  to  hold  hearings  but  instead  to  pass  on  his  infor-
mation  for  action  by  local  school  boards  in  California.    It  ap-
pears  that  after   all  these  weeks  of  supposedly  intensive  in-
vestigation,  the  school  boards  will  not  get  much  to  work  on.
One  Way  to  Take  A  Run-Out  Powder
In  Walter's  letter  of  August  21  to Arthur Corey of  the Cali-
fornia  Teachers  Association,  announcing  abandonment  of  the
thrice  postponed  hearings,  the  Chairman  said  he  was instruct-
ing  the  Committee  staff   to  turn  over  the  names  of  teachers
"and   in  cases  in  which  information  respecting  the  persons
subpoenaed   can  be  disclosed  without  jeopardi2ing  sources  of
information  or  security  procedures,  to  make  such  information
available  in  confidence.   I  am  advised,  however,"  he  added,
"that  most  of  the  names  reflect  information which  could not,
because  of  the  foregoing,  be made available  to  the  boards."
This  will  put  the  school  boards  in  an  impossible  situation.
It  means  that  in  most  cases  the  boards will  get  only  the  names
of  suspected  teachers,  and  will  not  be  given  concrete  charges
against  them  even  in confidence.
Walter   suggests  that  the  teachers  "be  interrogated  by  such
boards  which  would  then  transmit to  the  Committee  a  copy of
the  transcript  of  the  proceedings."     How  does  the  board  in-
terrogate  a  teacher  without  knowing  why  he  was  subpoenaed
by  the  Committee?    How  does  a  teacher  answer  "charges"
without  knowing  what  they  are?
Of   course,   the   board   can   always   ask  general   questions.
Q.  Are you a Communist? A.  No.  Q.  Sure?  A.  Yes.  Q.  Well,
if  you're  not  a  Communist  or  some  other  kind  of  subversive,
why  did  the  House   Committee  subpoena  you?    A.  I  don't
know.    Why  don't  you  ask  the  Committee?    Q.  The  Com-
mittee  says  it  cannot  tell  us  why  "without  jeopardizing  sourc-
es  of  information   or  security  procedures."    A.  Well,  what  do
you  want  me to  do?    Subpoena   Walter?
Corey's  letter  to  Walter,  weak  as  it  was,  contained  a  chal-
lenge.    It  pointed  out  that  California  teachers  are  required  to
take  two  separate  loyalty oaths.    "If  there  is  evidence,"  Corey
wrote,  "that  teachers have perjured themselves  in signing  these
oaths,  this  information  should  be  turned  over  to  state  officials
responsible  for  prosecuting  offenders  and  for  revoking  teacher
certificates."     By  subpoenaing   110  teachers,  Walter   implied
that  he  had  reason  to  doubt  their  loyalty.    But  he  backs  away
when  challenged  to  produce  the  evidence.
Walter's  excuse,  that  to  do  so would  jeopardize his  sources
of  information, would  not  save him—if  he  did  not  have  Con-
gressional   immunity—from   suit  for   damages  to  the  reputa-
tion  of  these  teachers.    If  a  district  attorney thought  a  crime
had  been  committed,  even  Congressional  immunity would  not
save  Walter   from   being  brought   before   a  grand   jury  and
forced  to  testify.    All  this  talk  of  protecting  sources  is  a  con-
fession   that  Walter  has  nothing  but  scuttlebutt  to  back  his
attack  on  the  teachers.
There  Seems  to  Be  Nothing  to  Hide
The  trouble  with  the  suit  brought  by  the  American  Civil
Liberties Union  in Southern  California  to enjoin  the  committee
from  passing  on  names  to  the  school  boards  is  not  only  that
the precedents are against  enjoining a Congressional  committee
but  also  that  the  action  implies  the  teachers  are  trying  des-
perately  to  keep  information  from  the  school  boards.
The  fact  is that  the  Committee  is  out  on  a limb    Can any-
one  doubt  that  it  would  be  only  too  glad  to  supply  the evi-
dence,   if   it   had  any, which   could   be  used   to   send   some
teacher  to  jail  for  perjury?
We  suggest  that  the  teachers  take  the  offensive,  that  they
make  the  California  affair  a  case  study  in  the  smear-and-run
procedures  of  the  Committee,  that  they  embody this  study  in  a
formal  complaint  to  the  Speaker  of  the  House  and  make  it
public  as  an  indictment  of  the  Committee.    Walter's   tricky
retreat  is  as  unfair  to  the  school  boards  as  to  the  teachers.
Why   Not  Send  A  Gift   Subscription   to  Your  Pastor  or  Your  Local  Editor?
I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City    ........................................Zone............State....................
9/7/59
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ..........._...........................Zone......._..^tate....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
L  1*.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  bnt  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  6818  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.,  Washington  IS,  D.  C.
An  Independent   -weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the    XT.  8.;  M  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED