I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959sep28.pdf

============================================================

De  Gaulle  and  Algeria,  P.  4
Mr.  K's  All-or-Nothing  Arms  Plan  May  Hide  New  Obstacles  to  Agreement, See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  36
SEPTEMBER   28,  1959
«>'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Nikita  Khrushchev,  On  Closer  Acquaintance
Writing   midway  in  the  Khrushchev  visit,  while  he  is  en
route  to  Iowa,  I  would  say  that  the  net  effect  of  his  tour  will
be  about  the  same  as  the   effect   on  Americans  of  a  visit  to
Russia.
Those   Americans   who   go   to   Russia  with  right-of-centre
preconceptions  tend  to  come  back with  a  more  friendly,  more
human  conception  of  it;  the  Soviet  Union,  they  can  see,  is  not
the  "slave society"  of  State Department rhetoric.   On  the  other
hand  most  of  those  Americans who  go  to  Russia  with   left-of-
centre  preconceptions  tend  to  come  back  appalled   by  its  din-
giness,  its  low  living  standards,  its  stuffy  atmosphere  of  con-
formity;  the  Soviet  Union,  they  can  see,  is  hardly  the  "work-
ers'   paradise"  of  Communist  propaganda.
The  visit,  unless  there  is  some  striking  change  before  this
issue  appears,  is  likely  to  have  a  similar  effect.   ' Mr.   Khrush-
chev's   sense  of   humor,   his   gusto,   his  very  failings,   cannot
help  but  break  up   some  hostile   stereotypes.     On  the   other
hand,  for  those  of  us  who  believe  deeply  in  peace  and  co-
existence,  the  Soviet  Premier  has  focussed  attention  on  aspects
of   his  character  which  make  us  realize  with   a  pungent  im-
mediacy  that  negotiation  with  him  will  not  be  easy,  nor  a  real-
ly  peaceful  co-existence readily  achieved.
Not   Good  Salesmanship
Indeed  in  some  respects  the  trip  already  seems  too  long.   In
some  ways  Mr.  Khrushchev  has  turned  out  surprisingly to  be
a  poor  salesman.    The  most  elementary  rule  of  salesmanship
is  not  to  offend   the  customers.    Mr.  Khrushchev   has  hardly
arrived  in  a  new  city  before  he  is  telling   the  Mayor  or   the
reception  committee  that  ours  will   soon   be  a  second-rate  or
third-rate  country.   This  is  no  way  to  make  friends.
Mr.  Khrushchev   is  also  wiping  out  good  first  impressions
in  another  way.    He   is  constantly  talking  of   what   a  plain
spoken  and  undiplomatic  man  he  is.   But  when  people  speak
to  him  plainly,  he  flies  off  the  handle.     If  he  wanted  to  be
reserved  and  dignified,  people  would  be  reserved  and  digni-
fied with  him.    But  since he  affects  the  breezy  and  democratic,
he  cannot  fall  back  huffily  on  his  dignity  when  discussion  be-
comes   straightforward.      Mr.  Khrushchev  is  creating  the  im-
pression  that  he  likes  to  dish  it  out,  but  he  can't  take  it.
Part  of  this  thin-skinned  quality  is  a  product  of  the  Soviet
system.   Mr.  Khrushchev  has  grown  up  in  a  society  where  the
rulers  have  lost  the  habit  of  persuasion.    For  many  years,  ex-
cept  in  the highest  and  innermost  councils,  the  "line"  has  been
determined  from  above  and  ladled  out  uniformly  by  a  com-
pletely  controlled  press.    "They"  decide  how  much  the  people
shall  know  and  what  the  people  shall  think.    The  Russians
are  a  very  democratic  people  in  their  manners,  their  instincts
and  their  approach  to  life  but  their  government   is  a  hierarchi-
cal  bureaucracy  in  which  each  echelon  expects  the  one   below
1  0
it  to  obey  orders  without  question.    This  does  not  make  them
easy  to  get  along  with,  except  on  their  own  terms.
We  had  been  told  that  Mr.  Khrushchev   was  a   formidable
debater,  but  he  seems  to  be  more  adept  at  evading  than  at
meeting  issues.    This  is  particularly  striking   on  the  question
of  censorship.    In  his  speech  to  the  Economic  Club  in  New
York  he  protested   against  the  view  "that  the  policy  of  co-
existence  we  are  offering  to  you  means  in  effect  the   establish-
ment  of  a  'disunited  world'."    Mr.  Khrushchev   said  that  "in
reality   it  is  exactly  the  opposite   that  we  want   to  achieve."
Peaceful   co-existence,  he   declared,   "implies   ever    increasing
economic   and   cultural   intercourse   between   peoples."    But
when  he  was  asked  afterwards  why  his  Government   did  not
allow   foreign   magazines   and   newspapers   to   be    distributed
freely  in  the  Soviet  Union,  and  why  it  censored   "the  dispatcli-
es  of  American  correspondents  in  the  Soviet  Union,"  he  com-
plained  that  he  was  a  guest  of  the  President,  that  this  was  in-
terference  in  internal  affairs,  that  he  was  an  old  sparrow  afld
could  not  be  muddled,  that  we  also  engaged  in  "jamming"
and  that  we  had  not  allowed   Paul  Robeson  to  sing  abroad.
This  series   of  non-sequiturs  does  not  add   to  Mr.   Khrush-
chev's  lustre as a  debater.    How  does  one  have  "cultural  inter-
course"  without  exchanging  ideas?
The  Legion of  Decency  Acquires A  Left  Wing
When  Walter  Reuther  at  the  labor  dinner  in  San  Francisco
pressed  the  same  question,  "how  come  you  oppose  a  free  flow
of  ideas?"  Mr.  Khrushchev  did  an  imitation  of  the  girls  he
had  seen  doing  the  "can-can"   in  Hollywood   and  said,  "This
is  what  you  call  freedom—freedom  for  the  girls  to  show  their
backsides.    To  us  it's  pornography.    The  culture  of  people
who  want  pornography.    It's  capitalism  that  makes  the  girls
that  way. ..."    This  is  difficult  to  characterize  politely.    It
should  qualify  Mr.  Khrushchev  for  the left  wing of  the  Legion
of   Decency.    When  Mr.  Reuther  persisted,   "That  has  noth-
ing  to  do  with  our  question  of  why  not  a  free  flow  of   ideas
between  our countries."   Mr.  Khrushchev  retorted,  "why  don't
you  want  to  trade  with  us?    The  sausage  tastes  the  same  in
all  countries."    This  was  not  brilliant,  either.
Mr.  Khrushchev  on  closer  inspection  has  showed   himself
to  be  both  a  conceited   and  a  limited  man.    He  reminds   me
in  some  ways  of  Mr.  Truman.     Mr.  Truman  is  also  a   self-
made  man  whose  earlier  humility  soon  turned  into  a  vast  con-
ceit.    Both  men  show  that  a  little  knowledge  is  a  dangerous
thing.    Both  are  inordinately  proud  of  their  half-baked   his-
tory.   Mr.  Khrushchev's  constant  references  to  how  capitalism
replaced  feudalism  recall  Mr.  Truman's  appeals  to  history  in
their   ostentation  and   their   callow   over-simplification.     The
stereotypes  in  Mr.  Khrushchev's  mind  are  those  of  a  kind  of
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  28, 1959
Serious  Misconceptions  About  American   Society
(Continued  from   Page   One)
schoolboy  third-grade Marxism,  and  their  variance from  reality
has  hurt  his  mission  and  endangers  the  cause  of  co-existence.
I  first  felt  this  on  listening  to  his  address  before  the  Eco-
nomics  Club  in  New  York.     This   was  an  arrogant    speech
which  made   enemies   when   he  might   so  easily   have   made
friends.    Here  were  a  group  of  leading  American  capitalists
gathered   to   treat  him  as  an  honored   guest.    Their   dinner
demonstrated   their  readiness  for   co-existence.    In   arranging
it,  they  had  shown  themselves  quite  different  from  the  leaders
of  the  American  labor  movement,  who  either  flatly  refused  to
sit  down  with  him  or  arranged  a  meeting  only  in  order   to
lecture him.   Mr.  Khrushchev,  by turning  on  his  charm,  could
easily  have  won  that. Economics   Club  audience.    Instead  he
read  a  cold,  boastful  and  unfriendly  speech,
The  Stereotypes  and  the   Realities
This  speech  had  inferiority  complex  written  all  over  it.    It
also   showed   the    effects   of    Communist    stereotypes.     Mr.
Khrushchev  seems  to have felt  that  he  was  facing  an  audience
of  capitalist   monsters.    He  told  them  he  had  no  horns,  but
he  could  not  shake  off the  Communist  demonology  which  put
horns  on them.   His  message  sounded  like a warning  that  they
had  better  be  friendly  to  Russia  while  there  was  yet  time  be-
cause  they  would  soon  be  beaten.    This  engaging  theme  was
topped  off  by  a  patronizing  prediction.    "Although  I  do  not
claim  to  be  a  prophet,"  Mr.  Khrushchev  said  smugly,  "I  can
say  that  some  [business  men]  apparently  will  have  a  few  bit-
ter  moments  when  they  realize  that  they  have  incorrectly  as-
sessed  the  situation   and  erred  in  their  calculations.    If  they
are  business-like  and  clever  people,  then,  as  the  experience  of
the  socialist  countries  has  shown,  after  the  transition  to  the
new  social  system, the  American people  will  give  them  an  op-
portunity  to  apply   their   knowledge,   their   energy  and   their
abilities."    This  left  a  bad  taste,  especially  since  many  of  the
capitalists  at  that  dinner  represented   the  only  forces   which
have  been pressuring  the  White  House  for  relaxation  of  inter-
national  tension  and  a  slowdown  in  the  arms  race.    It  is  un-
fortunately  true  that  the  only  class  which  is  striving  at  all
against  the  arms  race  in  America  today  is  that  section  of  the
capitalist  class  which  is  (1)    concerned   with  fiscal  solvency
and  (2)  much  too  confident  of  its  own  ability  in  mass  pro-
duction  and  distribution  to  be  afraid  of  peaceful   competition
with  the  Soviet  Union.    The  trade  union  movement,  by  con-
trast,  is  afraid  that  any  letup  in  the  arms  race  will  bring  un-
employment.    The  worried  worker,  not  the  bloodthirsty  capi-
talist,  is  the  big  political   obstacle.    This  reality,   so   unlike
Marxist  stereotypes, has  yet  to  get  across  to  Mr.   Khrushchev.
Only  One  Road  to   Socialism
There  is  a  second  and  more  fundamental  stereotype  which
blocks  peaceful  co-existence.    This  is  related  to  the  formula
of  different  roads  to  socialism  which  Mr.  Khrushchev   seemed
ready  to  accept  in   1956.     If  one  conceives  of  the  world  in
terms  of  black-and-white,  here  something  called   "capitalism"
and  there  something  called  "socialism,'  two  diametrically  op-
posed   systems,   then   peaceful   co-existence   between   them   is
really  only  possible  on  the  rather  unfriendly  basis  of  a  world
split  in  two,  with  the  "socialist"  world  quarantined  off  against
the  "bad"  ideas  coming  from  the  "capitalist"   world.    But  if
one  recognizes  that  "creeping   socialism"  is  the  hallmark  of
our  time,  that  socialism  has  been  advancing  everywhere,  that
all countries are moving toward  it  in  their  own  way, in  accord-
ance  with  their  own  past  and  traditions,  then  instead   of  a
sharply  contrasted  world  of  black-and-white  we  have  a  med-
ley  of  systems  in  which  peaceful  co-existence  and  mutual  bor-
rowing  of   ideas  between  countries  becomes  easy.    But   Mr.
Khrushchev  seems  to  be  as  afraid  to  say anything  good  about
capitalism  as  the  average  politician   in  this  country  is  to  say
anything  good  about  communism.    Indeed  it  was  curious  to
notice  how  often,  as  if  with  one  eye  nervously  on  the  Polit-
bureau,  Mr.  Khrushchev  assured  his  various audiences  that  he
could  not  be  converted  to  capitalism.
Mr.  Khrushchev  went  out  to  Hyde  Park  to  pay  tribute  to
the  memory  of  Franklin   D.   Roosevelt.    But  if  he  had   the
foggiest  notion  of  what  FDR  represents  in  American  history,
Mr.  Khrushchev  could hardly have  said  at  the  luncheon  given
him  in  New  York  that  he  could  see  no  difference   between
present-day  American  capitalism  and  the  capitalism  described
by  Marx.    To  see  our  present  society  as  no  different  from  the
ugly  horror  of  mid-Victorian  industrialism  described  in  Das
Kapital   can  lead  to  all  kinds  of  Communist  delusions:  of  an
American  working   class  living   in   increasing   misery,  of   an
American  capitalist  class  forced  desperately  into  widening  im-
perialist  adventure  to  make  up  for  the  dwindling  market  at
home.    Something  like  this  is  served  up  in  the  Soviet  press
and  Mr.  Khrushchev  seems  to  be  affected   by  it.    The  Ameri-
can  worker  today has  a  lot  more  than  his  chains  to  lose.
A  Claim  to  A  Monopoly  on  Truth
To  recognize  this  would  smooth  the  path  of  peaceful  co-
existence.    On  the  other  hand,  it  would  shake  the  philosophi-
cal  foundations  of  the  Soviet  world,  its  simple-minded  claim
to  a  monopoly  of  the  truth.    If  there  are  different  roads  to
socialism,  then  the  way  is  cleared  for  modifications  of  the  So-
viet  system  in  satellite  countries  like  Hungary  and  the  Soviet
Union  itself.    But  then  the  Communist  Party  of  the  Soviet
Union  can no  longer  claim  to  be the  possessor  of  the  only  sole
truth,  and  of  the  right  to  censor  and  bar  all  other  ideas  in
order  to  protect  this  truth.    Here  we  come  to  the  foundations
of   the   closed   society,  and   the   closed  society  is  a  very  real
hindrance  to  peaceful  co-existence.
The  black-and-white view  degenerates  easily  into  the  men-
tality  revealed  by Mr.  Khrushchev  when  the  labor  leaders  who
met  with  him  in  San Francisco  asked  about  Hungary.    "There
was  no  interference,"  he  said.    "There  was  a  counter-revolu-
tion,  thugs  and  hooligans  who  received  arms  from  outside  and
took  power  in  Budapest."    When  Walter  Reuther  interjected,
"Was  Nagy a Fascist?   I  thought  he  was a Communist?",  Mr.
Khrushchev  replied  testily  "Don't  mix  good  things  with  dirt."
The  Hungarian  revolt  was not  an  uprising  of  thugs  and  hooli-
gans;  it  began  with  Hungary's  finest  Communist  intellectuals
and  the  most  advanced  section  of  its  working  class.    A  man
who  talks  in  this  coarse  way  is  capable  of  repeating  the  same
mistakes  of  bureaucratic blindness  which  provoked  the   Hun-
garian  revolt  in  the  first  place.    This  is  disturbing  since  one
of  the  ways  in  which  that  new  war  nobody  wants  may  be  acci-
dentally  sparked  is by a  new  uprising  against  the  Russians.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  28,  1959
Was  Mr.  K.  Saying  No  Inspection  Without  Total  Pie-in-The-Sky    Disarmament?
If  Ike  Had  The  Daring  to  Challenge  Khrushchev
One  of  the  silliest  advertisements  with  which  Mr.  Khrush-
chev  was greeted  appeared  on  the  back page  of  the  New   York
Times  the  day before  he  unveiled  his  disarmament plan  at  the
United  Nations.    The  ad  was  headlined,  "Let's  Ask  Mr.  K.
Why  There's   No   Madison  Avenue  in  Moscow."     Madison
Avenue,  of  course,  was  used  as  a  symbol  of  advertising  and
public  relations.    But  Mr.  Khrushchev's  speech  demonstrated
that  Moscow  does  have  a  Madison  Avenue.
This  grandiose plan  for  total  disarmament within  four  years
was  (in  Madison  Avenue  language)   a  "snow   job."     It  dis-
appointed  those  of  us  who  were  naive  enough  to  expect  some
genuine  new  initiative  in  the  speech.    It  was  a  play  to  the
simple-minded  in  the  bleachers.    The  State  Department  was
afraid  to  say  so  because  it  has  been  carrying  on  as  phoney  a
series  of  maneuvers  on  disarmament for  years.    Mr.  Khrush-
chev  himself  indicated  that  he  didn't  take  his  four  year  plan
for  universal  disarmament too  seriously by  tacking  on  to  it  a
medley  of  familiar  limited  steps  his  government  was  ready  to
negotiate  "if  at  present  due  to  certain  reasons"  the  Western
Powers  are  not  ready  for  total  disarmament.
No  Mention  of  the  Veto
Mr.   Khrushchev's  grand  gesture  of   total  disarmament  in
four   years  would  have  taken  on  completely  new  force  if   it
were  coupled  with  certain  clear  declarations.   Had  he  said  the
Soviet  Union   was  prepared   under  such  conditions  to   allow
inspections  by  a  veto-free  international  enforcing  organism,
he  would  have  impressed  his  audience at  the  UN  General  As-
sembly.   There would  have  been  real  attention,  too,  if  he  had
touched  soberly  upon   the   difficult   political   questions   which
need  to  be  solved  before  nations  would  be  willing  to  give  up
their  armies.   Putting  aside for  the  moment  the  political  ques-
tions which divide the  American and  Russian  blocs,  let  us  look
at  Kashmir,  or  the  unsettled  relations  of  Israel  and  the  Arab
States.    The  need  for  some  kind  of  international  mechanism
to  arbitrate  and  to  enforce  peace  on  these  dangerous  borders
is  obvious.    That   means  an   international   police   force.     It
means  the  beginning  of  a  world   government  but  none  are
more  jealous  than  the  Russians  of  that  obsolete   sovereignty
which  stands  in'the  way.
If  our  government  had  the  daring  and  the  imagination  it
could  seize  the  leadership  and  win  the  gratitude  of  mankind
by  challenging   Mr.  Khrushchev  to  join  with  it  in  an  inter-
national  commission  to  study  the  problem   of  how  to   police
and   govern   a   disarmed  world.     How   are   present   barriers
against  the  free  movement  of  peoples  and  ideas  to  be handled ?
How  could  Communist  planned  societies  be  brought  into  one
world   system  with   the   less  closely  controlled   economies  of
Western   Europe  and   the   Americas?     These   are  the   ques-
tions  which  face  us  once  we  think  of  getting  rid  of  armies.
Joint  study  by  an  international  body  of  savants  might  be  use-
ful.    Would   someone  initiate  it?
In  the  absence  of  some  such  initiative,  little  will  come  of
Khrushchev's  revival  of  Litvinov's  old  proposal   of  the   20's.
Indeed  one  way  to  block  progress  on  what  is  practical   is  to
trot  out  the  perfectionist  impossible.    Hidden  in  Mr.  Khrush-
chev's  speech  is  a  hint  that  endangers  progress  already  made.
He  seemed  at  one  point  to  be  saying  that  Russia  could  not
The  Bursting  of  A  Bubble
"The  freedom  and  independence   of   Laos  have   been
threatened  by  forces  from  outside  its  borders.  .  .  ."
—Secretary  Herter  to the  UN  Gen'l  Assembly,  Sept.  17
"The  degree  to  which  that  situation  has  been  brought
about  entirely  by  the  Pathet  Lao,  who  were  Communist
sympathizers. ...  I  don't  know.    I  don't  know  that  any-
body  knows  the  degree  of  complicity  of  the  Vietminh.
...  I  doubt  whether we  will  get  very  much  of  a  clari-
fication  unless  either  active  warfare  breaks  out  or  this
[UN]   Commission can  come  in  with  very  accurate  find-
ings."
—Herter  to the  UN  Correspondents Ass'n, Sept.  22
"Vientiane,  Sept.  22  (AP)—The  Laotian  government
today  banned correspondents  from  Sam Neua ...  charg-
ing   'some   incorrect   reports'   on   the   actual    situation
there.  .  .  . The  government  had claimed  the  border  post
of  Sam  Teu  changed  four  times  in  five  days  of  fierce
fighting.    Correspondents  reported  from  the  scene  that
Sam  Teu  was  practically  unscathed  and quoted  the  local
commander  as  saying  that  it  had  never  been  occupied
by  procommunist  rebels."
—Washington  Evening  Star, Sept.  22
"Vientiane,  Sept.  22  (AP)—The  Laotian  government
disclosed  today  that  it  had  avoided  accusing   Communist
North  Vietnam  of  aggression   in  documents  put  before
the  special  United  Nations  fact-finding   commission."
—New  York  Times, Sept.  23
agree  to  any  measures  of  control  and  inspection  unless   there
was  total  disarmament.    Since  total  disarmament  is  likely  to
remain  pie-in-the-sky,  does  that  mean  the  Russians  will  not
agree  to  the  kind  of  limited  inspection  envisaged  by  the  Ge-
neva  talks  on  cessation?    "In   the   atmosphere   of   the   'cold
war'  and  mutual  suspicion,"  Mr.  Khrushchev  said,  "no  state,
speaking  seriously  and  not  for  propaganda,   could   reveal  its
military  secrets."    But  no  State  is  being  asked  to  reveal  all  its
military  secrets and  every State  has  an  interest  in  cutting  down
suspicion  and  the  arms  race  by  consenting  to  some  inspection
in  the  interest  of  an  agreement.    Is  there  not  a  virtue  in  step-
by-step  progress  with  limited  inspection  for  enforcement  as  a
means  of   developing  mutual  confidence?    Here   we  see  the
dangers  in  a  grandiose  all-or-nothing   approach.
In  proposing   international  agreement  to  divert  savings  on
arms  to  the  development  of  the  newer  countries,  Mr.  Khrush-
chev  said  "that  in  the  question  of  economic  aid  it  would  not
do  to  place  on  the  same  footing  those  who  do  not  take  part
in  the  exploitation  of  former  colonial  countries,  and  never  did,
and   those  who  continue  without  qualms  to  sap  the   natural
wealth  of  the  underdeveloped   countries.    It  would  be  legal,
and  just,  for  the  foreign  exploiters   to  return  if  only  a  part
of  the  riches  which  they  have  accumulated.  .  .  ."
Who  is  going  to  decide  how  much  was  fairly  paid  in  the
past  for  processing  and  marketing  Chilean  copper  or  Arab  oil
and  how  much  should  be  rebated?    Who   is  to  decide   hcjw
much  of  the  rebate  is  to  finance  new  royal  Cadillacs  and  how
much  development ?   What  will  Moscow  say  if  counter-claims
are filed on  behalf  of  Polish  coal  or  Hungarian  uranium ?    We
need  only  examine  the  practical  questions  involved  to  see that
this  passage  in  the  Khrushchev   speech  was  an  excursion  in
demagogy  inconsistent  with  better  relations.
1   4   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  28,1959
Will  the  Rebels,  by  A  Counter-Offer,  Force  Negotiations  on   "Independence"?
De Gaulle Uses the Word  on  Algeria  No  Other  Leader  Could  Have  Uttered
When  de  Gaulle  speaks,  he  makes  all  the  other  leaders  of
the  great  powers  seem  banal.    His  mind  is  as  subtle  and  de-
ceptively  simple  as  his  style.    This  deceptive  simplicity  was
striking   in  his  statement  on  Algeria.
De  Gaulle  said  it  was  to  the  interest  of  all  concerned   that
the  question  of  Algeria's  future  should  be  answered  "with  no
room  for  ambiguity."    Without  ambiguity,  however,  he  would
have  no  room  for  maneuver.   His  statement  skillfully  created
new  ambiguities,  the  most  important  of  them  his  use  of  the
term  "independence."
This  word,  long  awaited,  was  designed,  on  the  eve  of  the
UN  General  Assembly,  to  ward  off  a  two-thirds  vote  against
France.    It  was  intended  to  create  the  impression  that  at  last
the  Algerians  would  have  a  free  choice.
Secession  Into  Hopeless   Poverty
But  the  text  showed  de  Gaulle  was  offering  not  independ-
ence  for  Algeria,  but  partition  of  the  country.    After  the "re-
grouping   and  resettlement"   of  its  people,   the  fertile  seacoast
and  the  territory  traversed  by  the  pipelines   for   Saharan  oil
could  become  part  of  France  while  the  scrubby  back  country
of  mountain  and  desert  would  have  "independence."     Under
these  circumstances,  as  de  Gaulle  said,  "secession  would  carry
in  its wake  the  most  appalling  poverty."
Partition  flows  logically  for  de  Gaulle  from  his  denial  of
Algerian  nationhood.     "Since  the  beginning   of  the  world,"
he  declared,  "there  has  never  been  any  true  Algerian  unity."
This  is  so  no  longer.    In  Algeria,  as  in  so many  parts  of  Asia
and  Africa,  colonialism  awakened  the  counter-force of  nation-
alism.    The  failure  of  France  to  keep  past  promises  of  equal-
ity  to  Algeria's  diverse  non-European  peoples  has  given  them
a  sense  of  common  destiny; unity has  been  forged  in  rebellion.
That  there  is  an  Algeria  was indeed  implicit  in  de  Gaulle's
ironic  treatment  of  the  notion  that  Algeria  may  be  fully  inte-
grated   with   France.    The   solution   he  obviously  favors  is  a
"Government  of  Algeria  by  Algerians ...  in  narrow  rela-
tionship with  her  [France]  for  economy,  teaching,  defense  and
foreign  relations."    But  he  would  seek  to  dissolve  the  grow-
ing  sense  of  nationhood  by creating  a  Federal  Algeria  divided
among  various  communities,  "French,   Arab,  Kabylie,  Moza-
bite.  .  .  ."    This  would  turn  "self-determination"  into  a new
variant  of  the  classic "divide  and  rule"  formula.
For  this  poor  choice  rebels  who  have  fought  against  great
odds  with  heroic  valor  for  years  are  asked  to  lay  down  their
arms.    If   they  fear  that  in  doing  so  "they  will  be  yielding
themselves  up  to  justice,"  de  Gaulle  declared,  "then  it  is  en-
tirely  up  to  them  to  settle  with  the  authorities  the  conditions
for  their unhindered return."    This  is not  even  the  firm  prom-
ise  of  an  amnesty.
From  the  standpoint  of  the  rebels,  this  is   flim-flam.   But
the  terrible necessities of  French  politics are  forcing  de  Gaulle
to  play  a  game  in  which  he  must try  to  cajole  and  confuse  not
only  the  rebels but  the  headstrong  French  Army and  the  forces
which  brought  him  to  power.    It  was  a  bitter moment  for  the
Algiers  mob  to  hear  their  slogan  of  "integration"   shelved.
De  Gaulle  has  uttered   the  word   no  other   French   leader
could  have  used  without  being  overthrown.    "Independence,"
once  said  aloud,  however  ambiguously,  is  irreversible, an his-
toric admission the  rebel  leaders can  utilize  to  open  a  dialogue
with  France.   By astute counter-offer,  they can  force de  Gaulle
into  a  negotiation  he  may privately desire  but  cannot  publicly
offer  without  losing  control  of  the  Army.
Still  A  Basis  for  Peaceful   Settlement
There  remain  grounds  for  settlement of  a  war  France  can-
not  win,  a  war  which  is  poisoning  her  political  life,  under-
mining  her   economy,  and   endangering  her   ties  with   Black
Africa.    The  leaders  of  the  rebellion  are  still  French-educated
moderates who  draw  their  inspiration not  from  Islam  but  from
the  revolutionary  egalitarianism  of  France  herself.
A  North  African  federation of  Algeria,  Tunisia  and  Moroc-
co  linked  to  France  in  freedom  is  still  possible.    Within  its
broad   confines,   the   European  settlers  of   Algeria  could   still
avoid  a  tragedy.    But  only a  few  scant  moments  are  left.
Make   Friends   and   Influence     People    by    Using   the   Blank   Below   Io   Send   A   Gift    Sub
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Name   ...............................
Street  ...............................
City    .................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
...... Zone............State....................
9/28/59
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
City    ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
IE   Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15.  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;   Circulation    Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED