I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jun15.pdf

============================================================

The  Case  Against  Limited  Nuclear   War
Abridged  Text:  Humphrey's  Historic   Senate  Speech  Against  the  Murray-Teller  Thesis,  Fps.  2-3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  23JUNE  15,  1959WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
A  Black  Day  At  The   U. S.  Supreme  Court
A  new  majority  on  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  is  beating  a
hasty  retreat  from  the  liberal  decisions  of  the  last  few  years
on  fundamental  liberties  and  Negro  rights.    Two   5-to-4  de-
cisions  handed  down  last  Monday  give  the  signal  for  resump-
tion  of  the  witch  hunt  by  Congressional  committees and  their
"little  un-American" imitators  in  the  States.    A  third  decision
indicated  to  the  South  that  the  Court   is  being  softened   up
on  the  race  issue.    The  Barenblatt  decision  gives  the   House
Un-American  Activities  Committee   judicial  approval   beyond
Walter's   dreams.    The   Uphaus   decision,   written   by   Tom
Clark,  not  only grants  a similar amplitude  of  authority to  State
witch  hunts  but  spells  out  sharply  the  limits  of  the   Nelson
case,  indicating  point  by  point  all  the  States  may  do  to  harass
radicals.    This  will  be  read  in  the  South  as  a  mandate  for
white  supremacists,  irrespective  of  what  happens  to  the  bills
before  House  and  Senate  to  restore  concurrent  jurisdiction  to
the  States  in the  field  of  sedition.   The  Virginia NAACP  case
abdicates  the  special  jurisdiction  of  the  Federal  courts  in  civil
rights  cases  and  makes  easier  the  South's  strategy  of  nullifica-
tion  by  prolonged   litigation.     Monday,  June  8,  was  a  black
day  in  the  history  of  the  Court.
The  Blame  Rests  on  Frankfurter
The  sharp  shift   rightward  occurred  when  the  supposedly
liberal Frankfurter and  the  conservative  Harlan  abandoned  the
position  they  took  in  the  Watkins  case  two  years  ago  and car-
ried  the  two  new  judges,  Whittaker  and  Stewart,  with  them.
When   the  Court  ruled  7-1  against  the  House  Committee  in
the  Watkins   case,  Clark  was  the  only  dissenter.     Whittaker
did  not  participate;  Stewart  was not  yet on  the  Court.    Frank-
furter  concurred  in  a  separate  opinion.    Now  the  Court,  in
upholding  the  Barenblatt  conviction,  is  5-to-4  the  other way.
It  is  Frankfurter  who  deserves  most  to  be  criticized  for   the
shift.    In  deserting  the  liberals  more  openly  than  at  any  other
time  in  his  tortuous  judicial  course,  Frankfurter  provided  not
only  the  swing  vote  but  the  philosophy  for  the  victorious  re-
action.
The  new majority  does  not  deny  that  Congress  through  the
Un-American   Activities   Committee   makes   people  afraid   to
exercise  freedom  of   speech,   press  and   assembly   in   disagree-
ment  with  the  government   lest  they  be  pilloried   as  Commu-
nists.    Congress  thus  does  what  the  First  Amendment  forbids
when  it  says  "Congress  shall  make  no  law .  .  .  abridging  the
freedom  of  speech,  or  of  the  press."    The  new  majority  does
not  deny  that  the  law  establishing  the  Un-American Com-
mittee  does  abridge  basic  freedoms.    But  it  says  that   where
First  Amendment  rights  are  asserted  "resolution  of  the  issue
always  involves  a  balancing  by  the  courts  of  the  competing
private and public  interests at stake."   This  "balancing" theory
is  Frankfurter's  pernicious  contribution  to  constitutional law.
The  Sharp  Swing  to  the  Right
"It  would  be  difficult   to  imagine  a  less  explicit   au-
thorizing   resolution.   Who  can  define  the  meaning  of
the  word  'un-American?'  .  .  .  From  this  core  .  .  . the
Committee  can radiate outward  infinitely.  . . . The outer
reaches  of  this  domain  are  known  only  by  the  content
of  'un-American  activities.*"
—Supreme   Court  reversing   the  contempt   conviction
of   Watkins,  June  17, 1957, through  Chief   Justice
Warren,  7-1,  only  Clark  dissenting.
"Granting  the  vagueness  of  the  Rule  [authorizing  the
Un-American  Activities  Committee], we  may  not  read
it   in  isolation  from   its   long  history  in  the  House  of
Representatives. ... In pursuance of its  legislative  con-
cerns  in  the  domain  of  'national  security'  the  House  has
clothed   the   Un-American   Activities  Committee  with
pervasive  authority to  investigate Communist  activities
in  this  country. ...  In  this  framework  .  .  .  the  Rule
cannot  be  said  to  be  constitutionally infirm  on  the  score
of  vagueness."
—Supreme  Court  upholding  the  contempt   conviction
of  Barenblatt, June  8, 1959, through  Harlan, 5-4,
with  Warren,   Black,  Douglas  and  Brennan dis-
senting.
It  cuts  the  heart  out  of  the  First  Amendment.    "To  apply  the
Court's  balancing  test  under  such  circumstances,"  Mr.  Justice
Black  protested  for  the  minority,  "is  to  read  the  First Amend-
ment  to  say, 'Congress  shall  make  no  law  abridging  freedom
of  speech,  press,  assembly  and  petition,   unless  Congress   and
the  Supreme  Court  reach  the  joint  conclusion  that  on  balance
the  interests  of  the  government   in  stifling  these  freedoms  is
greater  than  the  interest  of  the  people  in  having  them  exer-
cised'."    It  is Frankfurter,  with  his  reputation  as a  liberal  and
a  scholar,  who  has  recruited  a  new  rightist  majority  by  win-
ning  Harlan  and  the  two  newer  judges  over  to  this  doctrine.
Felix  Frankfurter  betrayed the  cause  of  liberty  in  America  last
Monday.
The  new  syllogism  starts  with  the  Frankfurter   thesis   that
abridgement   is  constitutional   if   reasonable   and   proceeds   to
the  minor  premise  that  regulation  is  reasonable  if  it  is  aimed
at  Communists.    The  conclusion  is that  the  witch  hunters may
do  pretty  much  as  they  please  so  long  as  they  claim   to  be
hunting  Communists.    The  effect  is  to  outlaw  the  Communist
party,  a  step   (as  Black  points  out)  which  Congress  has sev-
eral  times  refused  to  take,  and  to  declare  unlawful  ideas  which
may  be  regarded  as  communistic.     Harlan  for   the   majority
bases  this  on  the  "right  of  self-preservation"   that  oldest  and
mangiest   crotchet   of   despotic  government.    "That  notion,"
Black  points  out  in  a  dissent  which  will  rank  as  a  classic  in
the  literature  of  freedom,   "rests  on  the  unarticulated  premise
(Continued   on  Page   Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  15,  1959
An  Abridged  Version  of  Humphrey's  Historic  Senate  Speech  June  4
A  drive  is  on  to  convince  the  people  of  this  country  that
their  only  safety  lies  in  a  continued  nuclear  arms  race  and
that  continued  testing  is  necessary   to  develop  small  clean
nuclear  weapons  so  that  nuclear  war  if  it  comes  can  be
safely   limited.    Former   AEC   Commissioner  Thomas   E.
Murray,  now  consultant  to  the  Joint  Committee on  Atomic
Energy,   is   a   spokesman   for   these   views.    The   hearings
which  Congressman  Chet  Holifield  opens  today,  June  15, on
"the  effects   of   nuclear  war",  may  spread  them.   Senator
Humphrey  effectively  answered  the  limited  war  advocates
in  a   Senate  speech  June  4  which  the   New   York   Times
buried  in  two  paragraphs  of  another  story  next   day  and
many  papers  ignored  altogether.    We  present  an  abridged
version  here.—IPS.
"Those who  oppose  an international  agreement  on  the cessa-
tion  of  nuclear  weapons  tests  have  two  main  arguments,"  Sen-
ator  Humphrey  began.    "One  argument  is that  the  control and
inspection  system  would  not  be  good  enough  to  detect  secret
tests  in violation of  any test  ban  treaty that  might  be  agreed  to.
"I  do  not  agree  with  those  who  say that  the  control  system
cannot  be  made  to  work.   Furthermore  I  do  not  agree  with
those  who  say  that  the  United  States  has  already  accepted  as-
pects  of  a  control  system  which  are  not  sufficient  to  deter  a
violator  or  to  catch  him  if  he  tries  to  sneak  a  few  tests  unde-
tected.
"The  more  we promote  the  expansion  of  nuclear  tech-
nology  along  with  guided  missiles,  the  more  we  shall
have  to  rely  upon the  individual officer  at  a  control  post
always  being  mentally  stable,   emotionally  stable,  hav-
ing  a  sound  mind and a  sound  body,  one  who will  never
do anything  which will  in  any  way  jeopardize  the  peace
of  the  world."
—Sen.  Humphrey,   V.  S.  Senate,  June  4.
"The   second  argument  that  is  given  in  opposition  to  a  test
ban  treaty  concerns  a  thesis  of  military  strategy.
"First,  they believe that  war with  the  Soviet  Union  and  per-
haps  Communist  China  is probable  and,  therefore,  we must  do
everything  in  our  power  to  prepare  for  such  a  war.
""Second,  since  a  war  is  likely,  they  believe  it  is  vital  that
we  try  to  prevent  it  from   spreading   to  envelop  the   whole
world  in  a  nuclear  holocaust  with  the  consequent  possible  re-
sult  of  the  end  of  civilization  as  we  know  it.
"Third,  if  we  are  to  limit the  weapons  and  restrict  the  area
of  combat,  they  believe  it  is  imperative  that  we  have  a  large
family  of  tactical  nuclear  weapons  at  our  disposal.
"The  advocates  of  a program  of  continuous  atomic  weapons
tests  say that  when  big  hydrogen  bombs  are  eliminated  as  too
powerful  and  when  conventional  armaments  are  eliminated  as
Putting  the  Finger  on  The  Pentagon
"If  the  day  ever  comes  when  weapons can  be launched
from  countries other  than  the  major  powers,  how  will
we  know  at  what  country  to  strike back?  .  .  .  What  if
we  make  a  mistake  and  unleash  our  retaliatory  power
on  the wrong nation? ...    '
"I  do  not  wish  to  be  an  alarmist,  but  it  seems  to  me
that  greater  effort  must  be  made  to  attempt  to  deter-
mine  how  to  control  this  situation  rather  than  as  I  be-
lieve  has  been  happening  in  the  last  month,  namely,  a
concerted  effort  somewhere  in  Washington—I  imagine
in  the  Defense  Establishment  itself—to  get  the  Ameri-
can  people  to  believe  that  it  is  not  possible  to  reach  an
agreement  to  control  these   weapons."
—Sen.  Humphrey,   U. S.  Senate,  June  4.
not  powerful  enough,  the  only  thing  left  is  the  category  of
small  atomic  weapons.   They  conclude  that  under  no  circum-.
stances  should  the  United  States  enter  into  an  agreement  to
discontinue  tests  of  atomic-weapons  at  this  time.   Let  us  take
a  look  at  the  weaknesses of  the  limited  atomic war  thesis.
"Weakness  No.  1: The  assumption  that  small  nuclear  weap-
ons  must  be  used  as  a  defense  against  the  large  armies  of  the
Soviet  Union  and  Communist China  fails  to  recognize  that  the
Soviet  Union  also  has  a  large  supply  of  nuclear  weapons.   If
small  atomic  tactical  weapons  are  effective  against  the   large
armies of  the  Communist bloc,  they are  no  less  effective  against
smaller  armies  of  the  Western   bloc.
"Weakness   No.   2:  If   the  United   States  ever  became  in-
volved  in using  nuclear weapons  against  the  land  armies  of  the
Chinese  Communists  and  the  Soviet  Union  this  would  prob-
ably  not   remain  a  limited  war.    It  would   become  a   major
conflict.
"The  advocates  of  limited atomic war  are thinking primarily
in   terms  of   conflict   on   territory  controlled   neither   by   the
United  States  nor  the  Soviet  Union.    It  is not  at  all  clear  that
third  parties  welcome  the   idea  of   being  used   as  a  nuclear
battlefield.
"Weakness   No.   3:  If  the  United  States  is  the  first  to  use
nuclear  weapons,  be  they  tactical  or  strategic,  this  country  will
be stigmatized throughout  many  parts  of  the  world.  We  would
deliver  to  the  Communists  a  political  victory  of  such  propor-
tions that  any military  victory, if  one  were  achieved,  might  not
offset  the  political  defeat.
"Weakness   No.   4:  We   cannot  assume  that   all   countries
would   risk  the  total  devastation  that  would  probably   result
from   the   use  of   nuclear  weapons  as  the   price  of   defense
against  Communist  imperialism.
As  the  Nuclear  Club  Begins  to  Enlarge,  So  Does  the  Danger  of  War
Sen.  ANDERSON.  These  memoranda  [on  the.pending nu-
clear  give-away  agreements  with  Canada,  France,  Germany,
Holland  and  Turkey]  are  indicative  of  the  fact  that  pretty
soon  other  nations  will  join  the  nuclear  power  club.   The
Senator  from  Minnesota  has  said  that  it  would be  desirable
to  limit  the  membership  of  the  nuclear   power  club.    Here
they  come. ...
Sen.   HUMPHREY.   The  Senator   from   New   Mexico  is
right.     I   have   heard   some   persons   speak   about   nuclear
weapons  being  made  available  for  sovereign  possession  by
other  nations.   There  is  a  difference  between  weapons  being
in  our possession  in  Europe  and under  our control  .  .  . and
those  weapons  being  in  the  possession  of  the  host  country.
[Citing  Germany as  an example] ... If  we were  to give our
major   allies   complete   and   unlimited   control    over   such
weapons,   with  no  restraint   upon  them,   the   Soviet    Union
would  do  the  same.
Sen.  ANDERSON.   I  have  examined  some  installations  of
nuclear  weapons  in  countries   other  than  the  United  States.
Without  trying  to  say  where  those  installations   may  be,  I
have  seen  many  of  the  installations,   and  I  do  not   believe
that  these  installations   are  manned  with  a  sufficient   staff
...  a small  group  in the foreign  country  could  very  quickly
take  control  of  those  weapons.    My  question  is  what  would
happen  if  they  got  control?    Obviously  it  would  be  a  group
of  irresponsible   people.  .  .  .     —U.  S.  Senate,  June  4,  1959.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  15,  1959
... Attacking the Delusion that  Nuclear War Can Be Limited to Small Weapons
"There  is  a  tendency  to  talk   about   small  tactical   nuclear
weapons  as though  they were similar to  the  weapons  of  World
War  II,  but  these  weapons  are not  similar.   Our  small  tactical
nuclear  weapons  contain  enormous  destructive  power.     They
are  small  in  size  only,  not  in  destructive capability.   This  de-
structive  power  is  not  only  inherent  in  the  weapon  itself,  but
it  also  comes  from  local  radioactive  fallout.   This  local  fallout
can  affect  the  water  supply,  the  soil,   foodstuffs.
"I  call  the  attention  of  Senators  to  a  very  important  mili-
tary  operation  which  I  think  substantiates  my argument.    Four
years  ago,   the  U.  S.  Army  and   Air  Force  held   some  joint
maneuvers  in  Louisiana called  Operation  Sage  Brush. This was
one  of  the  first  attempts  to  use  tactical  nuclear  weapons  in  a
simulated  way  in  local  warfare.    Mr.   Hanson   Baldwin,   the
eminent  military specialist  of  the  New   York   Times,  who  wit-
nessed  these  maneuvers,  termed  them  a  "frightening   experi-
ence".   It  was  found  that  not  only  the  State  of  Louisiana,  but
also  an  area  the  size of  12  States  would  have  been  devastated,
the   cities   partially  destroyed   and   the   surviving   inhabitants
completely  affected  by radioactivity.  The  size  of  weapons  used
in  this  maneuver  were  the   so-called   small   tactical,   nuclear
weapons,   ranging  from  2  kilotons  to  more  than  40  kilotons.
Ten  Bombs  Would  Do  It—and   Us
Sen.  HUMPHREY.   If  it  takes  only  1,000  bombs  to
destroy  the  United States—
Sen.  ANDERSON.  Ten  bombs.   I  suggest  that  the
Senator  need not  go  above ten  bombs.  Ten  bombs of  the
size   we  have  now,  if   properly  dropped   on  populous
areas  of  the  United  States,  would  do  such  damage that
the  Senator  and  I  would  not  be  much  interested  in  what
could  happen  to  the  country afterward."
—U.  S.  Senate,  June  4, 1959.
"Operation   Sage  Brush  took  place  4  years  ago.    It  is  pos-
sible  that  the  Armed  Forces  have  learned  how  to  use  tactical
nuclear  weapons  to  better  advantage  since  that  time,  so  that
the  residual  radioactivity will  not  be  so  damaging  to  civilian
populations.     I  tried  to  learn  something  about  this   problem
when  the  members  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  testified  earlier
this  year  before  the  Disarmament   Subcommittee.     Unfortu-
nately,  they  would   not   be  communicative  even   in   executive
session.    Their   lack   of   candor   makes  me   suspect   that   our
ability  to  reduce  local  fallout  in  a  limited  atomic  war  has  not
increased  in  4 years.
"I  question  whether  any  nation  wants  to  be  the  battlefield
for   a  limited   atomic  war,  to  defeat  an  enemy  only  to   turn
around  and  find  even  its  agricultural   produce  has  been  well
fertilized  with  radioactive   dust.
"It   is  in  the  area  of  conventional   armaments  and  Armed
Small  Bombs  Dirtier
Sen.  ANDERSON.  I  only  wish  to  say  to  the  Senator
from  Minnesota  that  without  getting into  classified in-
formation,   the   present  designs  of   the   small  nuclear
weapons  are  much  more  deadly  per  pound  or  ton  of
bang  than  the  large  weapons,  because  they  are  fission
weapons.  That  is  well  established  and  well  known.
Sen.  CARROLL.   This  is  the  first  time  that  I  have
heard  .  .  . that  the small nuclear weapon is  dirtier from
the  standpoint  of  fallout  than  a  large bomb.
—U.  S.  Senate, June  4, 1959.
Forces  that  the  United  States  and  the  free  world  should  build
up   their   defenses.    Unfortunately,   the   administration   and
some   of   the   advocates   of   continued   nuclear   testing   at   all
costs  have  persuaded  the  American  people  that  a  defense  con-
sisting  of  nuclear  weapons  is  about  all  that  we  need  to  have.
"I  wish  to  make  it  quite  clear  that  I  am  not  arguing  that
we  should  unilaterally  forego  the  use of  atomic  weapons, their
testing,  development  and  production,  and  the  determination  to
employ  them  if  the  world  situation  became  so  intolerable  that
our  very  existence  and  survival  were  at  stake.
"Where  I  part  company  with  many  of  my  friends  in  the
atomic  weapons  field  is  in  their  notion  that  continued   atomic
weapons  development  is  more  important  than  anything  else
we  can  do,  that  it  is  more  important  than  trying  to  have  an
effective  test  ban  agreement  based  on  effective  controls,   more
important  than  trying  to  slow  down  the  arms  race,  more  im-
portant  than  trying  to  prevent  the  spread  of  nuclear  weapons
production   throughout   many  countries,  and  more   important
than  getting  the  Soviet  Union  to  accept  and  implement   the
principle  that   control   and   inspection  must  be  parts   of   the
reduction  of  armaments.   It  is here  that  the  fatalism  about  the
inevitability  of  another  war  and  the  skepticism  and  cynicism
about  the  prospects   for  progress  on  disarmament  produce  a
distorted  concept  of  what  the  goals  of  our  defense  and  for-
eign  policy  should  be.
"So  long  as  the  United  States  views  the  world   crisis  pri-
marily  in military terms  and  exclusively  as a  crisis  against  com-
munism,  its  moral  stature  and  its  leadership  qualities  will  be
seriously   questioned.     It   is  one  thing   to  build   varied   and
strong  defenses,  but  quite  another  to  say  this  defense  is  all
we have.    If  the  democracies  of  the  world  are  to  survive,  they
must  place  more  emphasis  and  put  more  effort  into  works  of
peace.    Defense  is  a  shield  designed  to  give  protection  and
buy  time while  we  pursue with  courage,  imagination,  and  pur-
pose  the  war  against  man's  ancient  and  relentless  enemies—
poverty,   hunger,   disease,   illiteracy,   injustice,   and    economic
stagnation."
What  Could  Be  Less  Foolproof   and  More
Sen.  HUMPHREY.  We have been told repeatedly, both  in
public  and  in  executive  session,  that  the  U.  S.  has  a  more
diversified  arsenel  and more sophisticated  weapons. .  .  . But
I  have  heard  from  the  evaluation  experts  of  the  AEC  that
we  were much further ahead 3  years  ago  than now.  If  test-
ing  continues,  the  gap  will be  narrowed. .  .  .
I  realize  also  that  there  is  no  absolute  guarantee  of  any
perfect  control  system.   There  is  no absolute  guarantee  that
a  pilot  who  is  flying  a  plane  with  a  bomb  load  will  not  go
berserk  and  drop  his  bombs.  Mental  illness  and  emotional
Hazardous  Than  A  Nuclear  Arms  Race?
instability  are  characteristic  of  our  times.   Men  who  are  in
the  very  sensitive,  highly  important  service  of  the  defense
of  our country are  under  terrific  strain.  .  .  .
When  I  hear  people  say  that  we  must  be  absolutely  and
positively  certain  that  a  control  system  is  foolproof,  then  I
ask  them,  What  is  foolproof  about  the  continuation  of  the
nuclear  race?  . . . There  is  as  yet  no one who can prove  that
in  an  uncontrolled  arms  race,  humanity  would  have  any  as-
surance  of  peace  and  tranquillity.
—U.  S.  Senate,  June  4,  1959.
9   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  15,  1959
The  Fight  for  Peace  Cannot  Be  Won   If  the  Fight  for  Free  Speech  Is  Lost
(Continued  from  Page   One)
that  this  Nation's   security  hangs  upon  its  power  to  punish
people  because  of  what  they  think,  speak  or  write  about,  or
because  of  those  with  whom  they  associate  for  political  pur-
poses.    The  Government  in  its  brief  virtually  admits  this  po-
sition   when   it   speaks   of   the   'communication   of   unlawful
ideas.'    I  challenge  this  premise,  and  deny  that  ideas  can  be
proscribed  under  our  Constitution."     If  the  government  can
police  against  what  it  considers  false  ideas,  "if  we  begin  to
punish  speech,"   then,  Black  concluded,  "we  cannot  honestly
claim  to  be  a  free  nation."
Hamilton's  Warning  in  the  Federalist  Papers
By  now,  after   the  experience  of  the  McCarthy  years,  few
will  be naive  enough  to suppose  that the outlawry  of  the  Com-
munists  is  of  importance  only  to  that  broken  little  faction  of
elderly  sectarians.    The  fear  of  being  suspected  of  sympathy
with  them  has  cast  a  pall  on  public  discussion  of  all  the  most
momentous  issues  before  us  as  a  people.    A  whole  generation
of   intellectuals  has  moved  into  a  sterile  suburbia  and  abdi-
cated  its  rights  and  duties  in  order  to  escape  the  witch  hunt.
The  mild  recovery which  followed  on  the  censure  of  McCar-
thy  and   the   liberal  decisions  of   the   Warren   court   is  now
jeopardized.    The  test  is  the  test  of  the  people.     The  Con-
gress  has  been afraid  to  vote  against  the  House  Committee  and
Eastland's  Senate  counterpart  on  internal  security.    Many  in
Congress  hoped  the  Court  would  dispose  of  these  odoriferous
vehicles  for  crypto-Fascism.    Now  the  Court  has surrendered,
too.    Almost  two  centuries ago,  Alexander Hamilton,  defend-
ing  in  the  Federalist  Papers  (No.  LXXXIV)   the  absence  of
a  Bill   of  Rights  in  the   original  draft   of   the  Constitution,
warned  that  the  most  explicit  guarantee  of  speech  and   press
could  be  twisted  by  legalistic  exegesis  into  authority  for   the
very  restrictions  it  forbade.    The  Frankfurter  doctrine  fulfils
the  Hamiltonian  prophecy.    Hamilton  also  argued  that  basic
liberties  depend  ultimately on  "the  general  spirit  of  the  peo-
ple."     If  their  concern  for  freedom  decays,  no  Bill  of  Rights
can  preserve  it.
This,  then,  is  the  challenge to  ourselves  and  our  neighbors.
Will  there  be  sufficient   intelligence  and  courage  to  preserve
Both  New  York  Senators  Deceiving
Harlem  on  That  Lynching
"A  restaurant  operator  in  Harlem  asks,  'Why  has  the
FBI  stopped  investigating  the  Mack  Parker  lynching  in
Mississippi?'   Because  it  found  no  violation  of  Federal
law...."—Keating,  WOR-TV,  June  7.
"They  [the  FBI] had  to  pull  out  because  there  is  no
Federal  statute   which   enables  a  prosecution   to  take
place." —Javits,  WP1X,  June  7.
Neither  Senator  told  the  truth.  The Justice  Depart-
ment  in  dropping  the  Mack  Parker  case  did  not  say  it
found  no  Federal  law  violated.  It  said  it  found  no  vio-
lation   of   the  Federal   anti-kidnapping    statute.   It   did
not  say  it  found  no violation  of  the  Federal  civil  rights
law.   Here  is  the  wording  of  the   FBI  release  of  May
25  announcing  withdrawal   from   the   case—
"This  action  on  the  part  of  the  Justice  Department
was  based   upon  a  ruling  that  FBI   investigation  had
clearly  established  that  the  persons  responsible  for  the
death   of  Parker   had   not   violated   the   Federal Kid-
napping Statute,  and  no  other  successful   Federal   prose-
cution  could  be  maintained."     (Italics  added.)
There   are  indications   that  the  Federal   civil  rights
law  was  violated   (1)   because  county  officials   connived
in  the  lynching  and   (2)  the  lynchers  were  masked.   If
either  is  true,  the  lynching  was  a  violation  of  Federal
law.   The Justice  Department  release  did  not  say  there
was  no  evidence  of  a  civil  rights  violation.   It  said  "no
other   successful   Federal   prosecution    could   be  main-
tained."    This   is  a  matter   of   opinion.    Keating   and
Javits  are   covering  up  for   Attorney   General   Rogers
who  would  rather  not  get  in  hot  water  with  Southern
Senators  by  trying  to  prosecute   the  lynchers  in   the
Federal courts.
what  an  earlier  generation   established   with  so  much  insight
and   sacrifice?     We   urge   the  widest  possible  circulation   in
discussion  groups  of  the  Black  dissent  in  Earenblatt  and  the
Brennan  dissent in  Uphaus.    We  urge  support  for  all  victims
of   the  witch  hunt.    We   urge  a  national  emergency  confer-
ence  to  defend  the  First  Amendment.    We  believe  the  fight
can  be  won  despite  cowardice  in  Congress  and  betrayal  in  the
Supreme  Court  if  enough  people  bestir  themselves.    The  fight
for  peace cannot  be  won  if  the  fight  for  free  discussion is  lost.
Please  Do  Your  Part  By  Ordering  Extra  Copies  (2  Cents  in  Bulk)  and  Distributing  As  Many  As  Possible
I.  F.
Please
Cffdrtf
City  .
Enter
(To)
Qf -root-
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
.............. ...................... ....Zone............State....................
6/15/59
gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
........................................ Zone.. ....... ...State.... ................
we  send  gift   announcement?         Yes  Q    No.  n
I.F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
Norman  Thomas  and  I.  F. Stone  Speak  Monday,  June  22  on
"Fallout and  Nuclear  War"—Mt.  Vernon  Place  M.  E. Church
900  Mass.  Ave.,  N. W.,  Washington,  D.  C., 8:30 P.M
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED