I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959sep14.pdf

============================================================

Germs for  Brush-Fire  Wars?  P.  2
Walter  Defeated  In  House  on  Faceless  Informers  in  Passport  Cases,  See  Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO  34SEPTEMBER  14,  1959
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
IB  CENTS
Before  We  Turn  Laos  Into  Another  Korea
The  irony  in  the  crisis  over  Laos  is  that  this  little  country
was  for  a  short  time  last  year  the  only  country  in  the  world
which  had  succeeded  in  achieving  national  unity by our  favor-
ite  American  formula—unification   by  free  elections.    Indeed
the  elections  were  held  in  exactly   the  way  favored   by  our
friend  Syngman Rhee  in  Korea,  i.e.  the  elections  which  finally
unified  the  country  were  not  nationwide  but  confined  to  the
northern  provinces  which  had  hitherto  been  under  the  control
of  the  Communist-led  Pathet  Lao.    The  balloting  in  May  of
1958  was  for  21  new  seats  which  were  added  to  the  National
Assembly,  raising  its  total  membership  to  59.    Because  of  a
split  in  the  conservative  forces,  the  Pathet  Lao  won  9  of  the
21  new  seats  and  a  smaller  neutralist party  won  four.    This
gave  the  Left  13  votes  in  a  National   Assembly  dominated  by
the  36  votes  of  the  anti-Communist  Rally  of  the  Lao  People.
The  Left   "still  was  not  anywhere  near  a  majority,"   as  Eric
Kocher,  director  of  the   State. Department's   South-East  Asia
Affairs   told   a  House   Government   Operations  subcommittee
last  March.*    The  Pathet   Lao  were  given  two  seats  in  the
Cabinet,  their  leader  Prince  Souphanouvong  being  made  Min-
ister  for  Planning.    The  other  post  which  went  to  the  Left,
perhaps  in  that  whimsicality  supposed  to  be  characteristic of
Laos,  was  the  Ministry  of  Religion  and  Fine  Arts.
Successful  Trickery
The  agreement  which  brought  about  these  elections and  this
coalition,  ending  a  continuously  smoldering  state  of  civil  war
in  Laos,  was  opposed   by  the  U.  S.  government.    Mr.   Dulles
had  refused  to take part  in  the  1954  Geneva  talks which ended
the  war  in  Indo-China,  and  encouraged  the  Diem  government
in  the  southern  part  of  divided  Vietnam  to  break  that  part
of  the  Geneva  accord  which  called  for  the  unification  of  Viet-
nam  by free  elections;  Dulles  and  Diem  feared  that these  elec-
tions  would  be  won  by  Ho  Chi-minh  and  the  Communist  led
forces  of  the  north.    In  Laos,  the  State  Department   opposed
the  agreement  for  a  coalition  and  elections  because  it  feared
a  Czech-style  take-over  from  within.    "We  did  everything we
could,"  Walter  S. Robertson,  then  Assistant  Secretary of  State
for  Far .Eastern  Affairs,  told  the  Porter  Hardy  subcommittee
last  March,  "to  keep  it   [i.e.  a  coalition]   from   happening."
But  the  alternative,  a  divided  country  and  endemic  civil  war,
was  unpopular  in  Laos.    (See  box  on  this  page).   The  Pathet
Lao,  fearing  trickery,  had  insisted  that  the  elections  be  held
under  the  supervision  of  a  coalition  Cabinet.    The  outcome
showed  that  their  fears  were  well-founded.    The  Geneva  ac-
cord  had  set up  an  International  Control  Commission  of  India,
Canada  and  Poland  to  bring  about  peaceful  unification  of  Laos
*  See  Page  33 of  the  newly released  censored  transcript  of
hearings  on  U.  S.  Aid  Operations in  Laos before  the  Porter
Hardy  subcommittee  of  House  Government Operations,  a  rich
mine  of  background information  on  the  current  crisis.
How  U.S.  Blocked Laotian Unity
Mr.   [John  T.  M.]  REDDAN  [chief  counsel  subcom-
mittee] :  Who was  putting  the  pressure  on  the  [Laos]
government  to  enter  into  this  coalition  [with  Pathet
Lao]?
Mr.  [Eric]   KOCHER   [Director,   Office   of   Southeast
Asian  Affairs,  Dept. of  State]:  These  were  mostly Cab-
inet  members,  and they  also  said there was  a  feeling,  a
strong  feeling  among  the  population  for  unity.  They
had  been  disunified  for  so  long  that  now  for  the  first
time  they  really  wanted to  get  together  as  one country
with  all  the  Lao  people  together  and  then  everything
would  work  out  fine.
[Security  Deletion]
Mr. REDDAN: You say  the  Lao Government  was  told
that  if  they  went  through  with  this  coalition  we  might
withhold  aid  from  them?   Is  that  a  correct  interpreta-
tion?
Mr.  KOCHER:  I  don't  think  it  was  quite  as  strong
as  that.    That  we  would  have  to  consider  reassessing
our policy  toward  Laos. ...
Mr.  REDDAN:  No  one  laid  it  on  the  line,  in  other
words,  that  if  you  go  through  with  this  coalition,  no
more  aid?
Mr.  KOCHER:  It  wasn't  done  as  bluntly  as  that.  .  .  .
As  I  said,  many  times  it  appeared  as  if  the coalition
government  was  about  to  take  place,  even  before  that,
over  a  period  of  perhaps  two  years  before  it  actually
did  take place.  We  each  time  bent  every  effort  to pre-
vent  that.
—Executive   session,  Porter   Hardy   subcommittee  of
Gov't  Operations,  March  11,  on  U.S.  aid  in  Laos.
1   3
by  free  elections.     On  July  19,  1958,   after  the  May  election
results   had   been   certified   and   the   two   northern   provinces
united  with  the  rest  of  the  country,  the  Control  Commission
voted  2-to-l,  Poland  being  the  dissenter,  to  adjourn  sine  die.
Three  days later  the  Prime  Minister  of  Laos  resigned  and  then
formed  a  new  government   without  the  two  Pathet  Lao  min-
isters.    "The  point  is,"  as Mr.  Robertson  told  the Porter  Hardy
subcommittee,   "they   did  get  their  provinces   back  from   the
Communists  and  they  did  get  rid  of  the  coalition."
Just  Like de  Gaulle
This  was  neat  footwork,  though  somewhat  below  the  high
moral  plane  of  formal  State  Department   declarations.     Ever
since   the   government   of   Laos  has   become   less   democratic.
Last  January  the  National  Assembly  dissolved  itself  and  voted
the  Prime  Minister  emergency  powers  which  Under  Secretary
of  State  Dillon  described  to  the  Porter   Hardy   subcommittee
as  "generally  similar  to  the  types  of  powers  that  were  voted
to  General   de  Gaulle's  government   in  France."    The   sub-
committee  report   last  June  described   them   less  delicately   as
"dictatorial"  and  said  one  of  the  first  acts  of  the  new  govern-
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  14,1959
Kastenmeier,  Freshman   Democrat  from  Wisconsin,  Offers Resolution  Against  Germ  Weapons
First Protest in Congress Against New Horrors for "Little Wars" (Like Laos?)
"Mr.  Speaker,  I  have  taken  the  floor  today  to  speak  to you
about  a  problem  which  I  feel  is  important  to  us  as  a nation
of  free  people who  honor  and  protect  life,  and  hopefully, rep-
resent  and  live  as  a  moral  and  good  people.    My  talk  is  the
increased  emphasis  by  the  Defense  Department  on  the  CBR
program;   that   is,  the   chemical,  biological,   and   radiological
warfare  program.    The  Defense  Department  is  interested  in
increasing  the  CBR  program  from   an  approximately current
level  of  $40  million  to  $125  million.
"We  should  note  that  it  does  not  take a  great  level  of  tech-
nological  skill  or  great  amounts  of  money  to  build  chemical
anT  biological  weapons.     It  is  not  unlikely  that  smaller  na-
tions  that  are  less  responsible  would  begin  using  these  dead-
ly  weapons  against  each  other.    This,  of  course,  is  why  it  is
of  paramount  importance  that  the  United   States  set  a  moral
tone  in  this  area.
Not  for  Preventive   War  But—
"I  wish  to  consider  the  subtle  but  real  change  in  policy  for
which  adoption  is  pressed  by  those  connected  with  the  CBR
program.    The  purpose  is to  gain  acceptance for  chemical and
biological  weapons,   as  just  another  weapon   in  our  arsenal.
Gen.   [Wm.  A.]  Creasy  [former  head  of  the  Army  Chemical
Corps]   suggested   before  the   House   Space  Committee  that
CR  be  used  as  an  offensive  weapon.    He  stated  on  page  15
of  the  hearings  [before  that  committee]—
I  am  not  advocating preventive war  but  we must  change
our  policy,  which  is  that  we don't  hit  back  until  you hit  us.
"The  argument  of  the  Defense  Department,  through  Gen-
eral  Stubbs,  is  that  a  war  fought  with  chemical  weapons  is  a
more  humane  war.    They   talk  about  their  psychochemicals
which  can  make  cowards  out  of  brave  men  and  vice  versa;
they  tell  of  the  possibilities  of  sleep  chemicals which  will  put
populations  to  sleep  for  hours,  while  soldiers  march  in  and
take  over  the  area.    This,  of  course,  is  not  the  whole  story.
General   Creasy  has  stated  that  CBR  weapons  are  as  deadly
or  deadlier  than  nuclear  warfare.
CBR  for  Brush-Fire  Wars
"How   would  these  weapons  be  used?    Judging  from  the
testimony  before  the  Space  Committee,  these  instruments  of
warfare  would  be  used   in  the   so-called  brush-fire   localized
war.    CBR  would  take  the  place  of  nuclear  weapons  in  this
kind  of  encounter.    Depending   on  the  kind  of  bacteria  or
chemical  used,  the  results  could  be  just  as  horrendous,  indis-
criminate  and  inhumane  as  if  nuclear  weapons  were,  in  fact,
used.    Indeed,  there  are  those  that  take  the  position  that  we
should  not  build  these  weapons,  arguing  that  the  range  of
The Kastenmeier  Resolution
"House   Concurrent  Resolution   33,   Reaffirming    the
long-standing  policy  of  the  U.S.  that  the  U.S.  shall  not
engage in biological  or gas  warfare unless  such  weapons
are  first  used  by our  enemies.
"Resolved  by  the  House  of  Representatives  (the  Sen-
ate  concurring),  That  the  Congress  hereby  reaffirms  the
long-standing  policy  of  the  United  States  that  in  the
event  of  war,  the  United  States  shall  under  no circum-
stances  resort  to  the  use  of  biological  weapons  or  the
use  of  poisonous   or  obnoxious  gasses  unless  they  are
first  used  by  our enemies."
—Introduced  Sept.  3 by Kastenmeier  (.  Wis.)
destruction  which  we  have  in  our  defense  arsenel  would  seem
to  be quite  complete  without  an  expended  CBR program.
Kastenmeier  Himself  Partly  Won Over
"Given  the  present  world  situation,  I  am  sure  that  this  is
not  a  realistic  position.    There  is  strong  evidence  to  suggest
that  the  Soviet  Union  is  engaging  in  a  build-up  of   biological
and  chemical  weapons.    Hence,  the  realities  of  the  situation
appear  to  demand  that  we  ourselves  engage  in  an  increased
program.    I  might  add  that  I  agree  to  this  view  only  reluc-
tantly.
"The   fact,  however,  that  we  might  have  to  have  an  ex-
panded  program  in  this  field  does  not  mean  that  we  should
change  the   basic  policies   of   the  United   States  which  were
reiterated  by  President  Roosevelt  on  June  8,  1943,  when  he
stated  that  the  U.  S. under  no  circumstances would  use  poison-
ous  or  obnoxious  gases  unless  used  first  by  our  enemies.   This
policy  is  being  attacked  on  all  fronts  by  various  officials  close
to  the  Defense  Department.     For  example,  General  Roths-
child  stated  [in  Harpers  for June]:
We  must  reject  once  and  for  all  the  position  stated  by
President  Roosevelt  that  an  enemy  can  have  the  first  chem-
ical   or  biological   blow  wherever  or  whenever   he   wishes.
That  blow  could  be  disastrous.    We must  make it  clear  that
we  consider  these  weapons  among  the  normal  usable  means
of  war.
Mr.  Speaker,  unless  we  are  willing  to  express  publicly  a
moral  national  policy  on  this  issue  we  will  be  creating  the
impression   that  we  are  oblivious  to  the  horrors  that   these
weapons  bring  if  unleashed.    I  am  introducing  today  a  con-
current  resolution   which  will   reaffirm   our  policy  of  non-use
of  biological  and  chemical  weapons  unless  they  are  first  used
by  our  enemy.    This  is  the  way  our  historical  heritage  and
our  moral  values  can  be   reaffirmed."
—Kastenmeier  (D.  Wis.)  in  the  House Sept.  3   (Abridged)
Williams  (N.J.)  Introduces  Bill  for  World  Action  Against  Radioactivity
Senator  Harrison  A.  Williams  (D.  N.J.)   introduced  a  bill,
S  2645, on Sept.  3 which  would  lay  the  foundations  for  inter-
national  cooperation  in  combatting  radiation  hazards.   Sena-
tor  Williams  said  Senator  Hill  had  already  introduced  a  bill
(S.   1628,  discussed  in  our  last  week's  issue)  which  would
give  the  U.  S.  Public  Health  Service  authority  to  establish
radiation   health   standards.    Williams   said   his   bill   would
authorize  the  Surgeon   General,  as  head  of  USPHS,   to  in-
vite  other  nations  to  participate  in  a  world-wide  project  to
"first,   accumulate  and  disseminate   reliable  data  on  actual
atomic  fallout  and  other  sources  of  radiation;  second,  pro-
mote  accelerated  research  by  all  governments  and  agencies
into  the  precise  health  effects  of  radiation  and the  means  for
curbing  it;  and  third,  disseminate  to  the  medical  and  health
professions  and the  peoples  of  the  world  .  .  .  the  results  of
these  studies."   The bill  was  referred  to  the  Senate  Commit-
tee  on  Labor  and  Public  Welfare  where  it  may  be  pigeon-
holed  with  the  Hill  bill  unless  there  is  public  pressure.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone'8  Weekly,  September  U, 1959
Compromise  Passport   Bill   Approved   Allowing   Ban  on  Travel  to  China
Walter  Defeated  in  House  Vote  on  Faceless  Informer   Issue
Bulletin:  The  18  votes  for  unrestricted  freedom  to  travel
and  against   the  Selden  passport   bill,  all  Democratic,   were
cast  by  Anderson  (Mont),  Barr  (Ind),  Celler  (NY),  Dingell
(Mich),  Flynn  (Wis),  Green  (Ore),  Harmon  (Ind),  Johnson
(Col),  Kasem  (Cal),  Kastenmeier  (Wis),   Metcalf   (Mont),
Meyer  (Vt),   O'Hara  (Mich),  Porter   (Ore),  Reuss   (Wis),
Thompson  (NJ),   Ullman  (Ore),  and  Wier  (Minn).
For  the  first  time  in  many  years  Chairman  Walter   of  the
House  Un-American   Activities   Committee   suffered  a   defeat
on  the  floor  of  the  House  last  Tuesday  on  a  civil  liberties
issue.    He  was  voted  down   98  to   29  when   he   offered   an
amendment  which  would  have  allowed  the  State  Department
to  use  confidential   informants   in   denying   passports.    Two
similar  amendments  by  Bentley  (R.  Mich.)   were  also  voted
down.     The   House   then   approved   an   amendment  to   the
pending   Selden   passport   control   bill   (HR   9069)   which
struck  out  the  words,  "adherence  to  unpopular  views, or  criti-
cisms  of  the  United  States  or  its  domestic or  foreign  policies"
at  the  end  of  a  sentence  beginning,  "The   Secretary  of  State
shall  not  deny  a  passport  to  any  person  solely on  the  basis  of
membership  in  any  organization  or  association  with  any  in-
dividual  or  group."   This  amendment  was  offered   by   Coffin
(D.  Me.)   on  behalf  of  the  House  Foreign  Affairs  Committee
which  had  rushed  the  bill  to  the  floor  on  Monday  under  a
rarely  used  procedure  allowing  it  to  bypass  the  Rules  com-
mittee   but   requiring   only   a   majority   vote.     The   words
stricken  by  the  House  had  been  criticized  as  a  restriction  on
freedom  of  speech.    Congressman  Meyer  (D.  Vt.),  the  sole
dissenter  on  the   Committee  in  reporting  out  the   bill,  said
the  House  was  being  "panicked"   into  passage  without   full
consideration.    The  bill  passed  371  to  18.
State  Dept.  Against  Disclosure
The  bill  as  passed  requires  a  hearing  in  passport  cases  and
judicial  review  "on  the  record."    This  was  criticized  as vague
by  Celler   and   Meyer.    The   sponsor   of   the  bill,   Selden  of
Alabama,  joined  Hays,  Coffin,   Fascell  of  Florida  and   O'Hara
of  Illinois in  assuring  the House it was the  intent  of  the phrase
to   outlaw   faceless  informers.     Walter   thereupon   tried   un-
successfully  to  strike the  words  "on  the  record"  from  the  bill.
Meyer  told  the  House  the  State  Department's  security  officer,
John  W.  Hanes,  had  said  the  Department   preferred   no  bill
at  all  to  one  which  would  require  it  to  disclose the  sources of
accusation   against   passport   applicants.     There   seems  little
Abner  Green
To  his  family   and  to  the  much  maligned  American
Committee  for  the  Protection  of  the  Foreign  Born  we
extend  our  sympathy  in  the  death  at  46 of  its  long  time
executive  secretary,  Abner  Green.   The  Committee  was
Abner  Green's  life  work for  25  years.    He  was  a  radical
without  rancor,  a  man  of   great  purity  of  spirit.    He
leaves the example of  a life lived with  genuine devotion.
likelihood  that  a  companion  bill  will  pass  the  Senate  before
adjournment.
Fear  of  Porter's  Suit?
No  action  had  been  expected  in  the  House  either  and  no
one  outside the  inner  leadership circle seems  to  know  just why
the  Selden  bill  was  suddenly   rushed   to  passage.     There  is
some  reason  to  suspect  that  the  Department  wanted  the  bill
approved  because  it  contains  a  section  allowing  the  President
by  annual  declaration  to  shut  off  certain  areas  if  he  thinks
travel  there  would   "seriously  impair  the  foreign  relations  of
the  United  States."    Communist  China  is  the  main  considera-
tion,  and  Judd  was  for  the  bill  though  conceding  regretfully
that  it  might  force  the  Department  to  grant  certain  passport
applications  rather  than  reveal  confidential sources.  An  amend-
ment  by  Porter   (D.   Ore.)    to  strike  area  control  was  voted
down.  The  bill  seems  to  be a  China  Lobby operation  designed
to undercut  Porter's  pending  suit  challenging  the  Department's
refusal  to  give  him  a  passport  to  visit  China.
In  an  able  speech  on  the  floor  the  preceding  Saturday  (Sept.
5),  Porter  told  the  House,  "I  do  not  think  we  should  be  a
party  to  tying  the  hands  of  Congress  and  its  committee  and
its  members  who  want  to  travel  throughout  the  world,  to  see
for  themselves  as  best  they  can  the  facts  which  underlie  any
sensible,  effective  foreign  policy."    Porter's  independent   pro-
democratic activities in  Latin America have  irked  the  State  De-
partment  which  finds  dictators  easier  to  get  along  with.
A  noteworthy  feature  of  the  Selden  bill  as  passed  is  that  it
allows  refusal  of  passports  to  Communists  or  those  furthering
Communist  causes abroad only in  cases  where  the  membership
or  activities  occurred   after  January  1,  1951.   Pre-Korean  war
Communism  is thus  "forgiven."    This  is  another  index of  the
improving  atmosphere.
Latest  Bulletins  from  UN  and  Moscow  on Nuclear Test  Ban  Talks Hopeful
"After   their   talk   with   Mr.  Khrushchev   yesterday,   Mr.
Gaitskell  and  Mr.  Bevan  are  convinced  that  we  are  on  the
verge  of  an  agreed  ban on  testing  of  nuclear  weapons.   Mat-
ters  of  detail,  not  principle,  separate  the  two  sides,  and
compromise  not  detrimental  to  either  is  in  sight.   They  be-
lieve  Mr. Khrushchev  has  decided  on  such  an  agreement  but
wants  to  save  it  for  the  prestige  of  a  fully  fledged  summit
conference.    Before  that,  his  forthcoming  talks  with   Pres.
Eisenhower  can  easily  resolve  outstanding  differences   with
the  Americans."
—London  Observer  (Sept.  6)  from,  Moscow.
"I understand  that  some  people feel  that  the  [Geneva  Nu-
clear  Testing]  Conference  has  made  no progress  to  speak  of
and  that  the  Soviet  delegation  remains  completely  intran-
sigent  on all  fronts.  .  .  .  Even  though  several  thorny  ques-
tions  remain  to  be  answered,   we  cannot  dismiss   the  hard-
won  progress  of   the   Conference  .as  being   of  little   or  no
importance....
"When  you  stop  to  consider  that  for  the  first  time  since
disarmament  talks  began  in  1946,  the  Soviet   Union   is  ex-
pressing  adherence  to  a  system  of  control  which  embodies
permanent  control  posts  manned  at  least  in  part  by  foreign
personnel,  mobile  inspection teams with  access  to  Soviet  ter-
ritory  and  over-flights  of  Soviet   territory,  the   significance
of  these  negotiations   for  the  future  of  disarmament  become
apparent."
—Ambassador  James  J.  Wadsworth,  head  of  the  U.S.  dele-
gation  at  Geneva, press  conference   United  Nations  Sept. 3.
1   3   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,   September  U,  1959
Was  This  Lao  Crisis  Appeal  to  the  United  Nations  Planned  in  Advance?
(Continued  from  Page  One)
ment  was  to  purge   the  Communists.    To   the  risks  of  civil
conflict   there   were  added   international  complications  when
this  new  government  on  February  11  declared  itself  no  longer
bound   by  the  Geneva   agreements  which  sought   to  insulate
Laos  from  the  cold  war  and  to  keep  it  out  of  either  bloc.    A
dispatch  from  Hong  Kong  in  the  New   York   Times  last  Feb-
ruary  13  noted  that  this  denunciation  of  the  Geneva  accords
left  Laos  "free  to  join  SEATO,  though  it  is  understood   the
government   does  not  plan  any  such  move  at  present.     Closer
ties  with  SEATO, however," Tillman  Durdin  cabled  his  paper,
"are  in  prospect  through  increased  Laotian  cooperation  with
the  United  States."    These  moves were  risky and  seem  to  have
been   taken   only   on   the   urging   of   American  officials   and
on  their  promise  of  aid  if  trouble  broke  out.
Who  Is  Making  Policy  on  Laos?
Senator  Mansfield,  warning  the  Senate  last  Monday  "to  go
slow  on  any  direct  military  involvement"  in  Laos,  wondered
whether  policy there  had  been  firmly  in  the  hands of  the  Pres-
ident  and  the  Secretary  of  State  or  whether  we  really  have  "a
policy   based   on   executive  agency  accommodation,  with   the
Defense  Department,   the  ICA,  the  CIA,  or  whatever,  each
putting  in  an  oar  and  the  State  Department   trying  to  guide
the  boat  while  it  does  not  really  have  the  power  to  control  the
rudder."    We  should  like  to  see this  delicate hint  widen  into
a  full-scale  investigation  before  our  country  is  drawn  into  an-
other  Korea  in  the  Far  East.   Since Senator Mansfield cited  the
Porter  Hardy  subcommittee  report  on  the  corruption  and  in-
eptitude  of   our  mutual  security  program   in   Laos   (see  this
Weekly   for  last  June  22  on  that  report),  we  would  like  to
call  his  attention  to  a  puzzling  passage  in  the  recently  pub-
lished  hearings  held  by  that  subcommittee.   This  would  seem
to  indicate  (see  box  on  this  page)  that  in  January of  this year
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  for  the  first  time  began  setting  forth
tasks  for  the  Laotian  army  and  that  one  of  them  (elided  by
the   security  censor)   seems  to  have  involved   some  kind   of
holding  operation  "for  the  time  required  to  invoke  the  UN
Charter  or  the  SEATO  Treaty.'     Could  it  be  that  the  present
crisis—including  the  appeal   to  the  UN—was   foreseen   and
planned  in  advance  at  the  Pentagon?
Secret  Instructions to the  Laotian  Army
Mr.  [John  L.]   HOLCOMBE  [Director,  Office  of   Pro-
graming   and   Control,    International    Security   Affairs,
Dept.  of  Defense]:  The  actual  JCS   [Joint   Chiefs   of
Staff]   recommendation   reached  us  in  the  same  form  as
they  have  for  past  years,  in  a  letter  to  the  Secretary  of
Defense. ...  In  this  most  recent  one,  1959,  JCS for the
first  time  gave  us  tasks  for  the  Laotian  military  forces.
[Security  Deletion]
Mr.  [John  T.  M.]  REDDAN   [Chief  Counsel,   subcom-
mittee]:  What  is  that  period  of  time?
Mr.  HOLCOMBE:  For   the  time  required   to   invoke
the  UN  Charter  or  the  SEATO  Treaty.
Mr.  REDDAN:  What   period   of   time   would   be  re-
quired  to do that?
Mr.  HOLCOMBE:  I  do  not  remember  that  there  is  in
the  record  anywhere  a  military  evaluation  of  what   that
time  would be.
Mr.  REDDAN:  You  mean  they  are  aiming  at  a  time
limit for  a holding  action?
Mr.  HOLCOMBE: That  is  correct.
—Executive  Session, March  12, 1959,  U.S.  Aid  Opera-
tions  in  Laos.   Hearings  before   the  Porter  Hardy    SM&-
committee  of  the  House  Committee  on  Government  Op-
erations, censored  transcript,  newly  published,  page  68.
Neither  A-Bomb  Nor  Germ  War Will  Do
It  may  be  that  we  misread  the  passage  and  that  there  are
less  sinister  explanations  for   it.    In  that  case  some  Senator
should  examine  the  uncensored  record  and  give  assurance  to
the  contrary.   In  any  case,  the  situation  in  Laos  is  really  quite
simple.    Either  we  have  enough  faith  in  free  elections  to  let
Laos  work  out  its  problems  peacefully  or  we  push  the  coun-
try  further  into  dictatorship  and  war.    In  a  country  like  Laos
which  is  mostly  trackless  jungle,  small  groups  of   guerrillas
can  fight  on  for  years.    Our  atom  bombs  and  the  more  "hu-
mane"  germ  and  biological  weapons  we  are  now  touting  for
brush-fire  wars  (see  page  2)   are  alike  helpless  in  this  situa-
tion.    The  key  to  it  is  political,  not  military,  and  without  a
political  solution,  civil  strife  cannot  be  prevented.    There  on
the  borders  of  China  it  may  easily  ignite  a  broader  conflict.
Either we move  toward  war  or  we  find  some face-saving means
to  patch  up  again  the  truce  we  upset  last  year.
Extra  Copies   This   Issue  Available  at  Bulk  Rates  for   Wider   Distribution
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Are,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Street   ...........................................................................__.....
City     ....................................... -Zone............State...............~...
9A4/59
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name  .......................................................—...................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ..........._...........................Zone......._..5tate....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
L  V.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Clam  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  nnder  the  Act  of  March  3.  1870.    Post-dated  Mondays  bat  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   6818   Nebraska  Aye..  N.  W.,  Washington  IS.  D.  C.
An  Independent   weekly   published   and   edited  by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$6  In  the  U.  S.;  $8  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED