I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959dec07.pdf

============================================================

Kennedy  and  Birth  Control,  P.  4
Question  for  Khrushchev:  If  Rakosi  Was  to  Blame  in  Hungary,  Why  Are  His  Critics  in  Jail?    P.  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  46
DECEMBER  7,  1959
°
10t
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Chinese  Communists  Dig  Up  Kublai  Khan
Coleridge   would   have   been   delighted   with   the   Indo-
Chinese  crisis.    I  have  been  reading  the  two  White   Papers
issued  by  the  Indian  government  and  a  Yellow  Book,  "Con-
cerning  the  Question  of  Tibet",  published  by  Peking.    In  the
latter,  to  support  China's  right  to  govern  Tibet,  I  found  the
Communists  invoking Kublai  Khan,  whom  I  had  thought  of
as  a  figment  of  Coleridge's  poetic  trances.   It  seems  Kublai
not   only   decreed  himself   a  pleasure  dome  in  Xanadu   but
made  his  contribution  five  centuries  in  advance  to  the  cur-
rent  controversy.    In  1275  the  Khan  graciously  recognized  a
certain  Pagspa  as  jointly  the  religious  and  political  ruler  of
Tibet,  initiating what  our  devout  press  calls  "God-king"   rule,
but   of   course  under  Peking's   suzerainty.    The   Indians,  in
this   opening   fusillade  of   historical  documentation,  disdain
such  relatively  recent  events.   New   Delhi   goes   back  to   the
Rig-Veda,  about  1,500  B.C.  and  the  Kena  Upanishad,   about
1,000  B.C.,  to  prove  that  the  Himalayan  border  regions  now
in  dispute,  though  often   overrun  by  Tibetans  and   Chinese,
were  always part  of  India.    "The   Bbagavad  Gita,  describing
the  perfection  of  the  Almighty,"  says  the  Indian  Ministry  of
External   Affairs,   clinching   the   argument   with   a   quotation
from  the  Hindu  Bible,  "states  that  of  immovable  things  He
is the  Himalayas."
A Road in No  Man's Land
When   one   descends   from   these   sublime   heights   to   the
actual   border   dispute,   the   atmosphere   turns   murky.     The
Chinese  built  a  road  from  Sinkiang  to  Tibet   across  one  of
these  high  uninhabitable  plateaus  in  1956.     Two  years  later
the  Indians  protested  that  it  crossed  a  part  of  Ladakh  which
has  been  Indian  since  1842.   There  is  probably  no  other  place
in  the  world  where  one  country  could  build  a  road   across
part  of  another  country  without  that  other  country  knowing
about   it   immediately.    At   other   disputed   points,  the   news
seems   to   have   travelled   less   leisurely.     On   the   Northeast
Frontier,  at  the  other  end  of  this  2500-mile border,  a  Chinese
officer   and   50  men  penetrated   into  Indian  territory  in  Sep-
tember   1958.   New   Delhi  found  out  about  the  invasion  in
less  than  three  months.   One  of  the  early  clashes  concerned
a  Tibetan   official  who  collected   a  grazing  tax  from  Indians
tending  goats  in  an  area  India  claims  is  Bara  Hoti  and  part
of  India  but  which  the  Chinese  claim  is  Wu-je  and  part  of
Tibet.   Then  there  was  a  dispute  about  two  check  posts  on
what  the  Indians  claimed  was  their  side  of  the  Balcha  Dhura
Pass.   The  Indian  protest  explained  that  these  border  posts
are   evacuated   by  their   guards   at   the   end   of   the   summer
months    "due    to    climatic   conditions."    "The      government
of   India   has   been   informed"   that   when   its  guards   with-
drew  for  the  winter,  Chinese   personnel   took   over.   Even  in
the  prosaic  words  one  can  feel  the  cold,  lonely  desolation.
Just  where  the   border   should   be  in   these   icy  mountain
passes  is  not  easily  decided.   "Indeed,"  Nehru  admitted  in  a
letter  of  Sept.  26  to  Peking,  "the  terrain  of  the  Sino-Indian
border  in  many  places  makes  such  physical  demarcation  on
the  ground  impossible."    In  the  East  there  is  the   McMahon
line   which   the   Chinese  never  formally  accepted.     In   the
West,   including  Ladakh,  the   frontier   has   never   been   de-
limited.    The   differences   strategically  are  of  no   real  conse-
quence.     India   has   never   been   invaded   from   Tibet;   this
border  is  a  series  of  Thermopylae  difficult  of  approach   from
either  side.    Yet  petty  border  quarrels  began  in   1954;  pris-
oners  were  taken  and  shots  exchanged;  some  soldiers  were
killed;  each  side  blamed  the  other;  ill-feeling  grew.    Then
came  the  Tibetan  revolt  last  March,  the  flight  of  the  Dalai
Lama.    Suddenly this  became  a  sensitive  border.    As  Nehru
told   a  press  conference  Oct.   23,  "There  were   no  Chinese
forces  on  the  other  side of  the  border  before  the  Tibet  rebel-
lion.    But  after  the  rebellion  Chinese  forces  came  partly  to
crush  the  rebellion  and  partly to  stop  the  Tibetan  people  from
coming  to  India."    When   there  were  Indian demonstrations
of  sympathy  with  Tibet,  and  a  crowd  in  Calcutta   threw  to-
matoes  at  a  picture  of  Mao  Tse-tung,  the  Chinese  called  this
"an  act  of  connivance" and  "a  huge  insult"  for  which  Peking
would  not  cease to demand  satisfaction  "even  for  one  hundred
years."    It  was  as  if  a  holy  image  had  been  defaced.
Overnight  Gandhi and  Non-Violence  Are  Forgotten
So  all  the  pledges  of  Panchen  Shila  began  to  fade.     The
quarrel  shows  how  little  the  conduct  of  men  and  nations  is
affected  by great  Teachers  and  great  Revolutions.    The  people
of  Gandhi  and  the  leaders  of  the  new  China  are  as  ready  to
fight  over  a  few  barren  acres  as  their  benighted  forerunners.
Millions   of    Indians    who    never    saw   a    Himalaya,    too
lethargic  to  fight  against  disease,  superstition   and  misery,  are
ready  to  march  lest  a  few  distant  areas  change  colors  on  maps
few  of  them  can  even  read.    Leaders  like  Jayaprakash  Nara-
yan  and  Asoka  Mehta  who  are  supposed  to  be saintly  spoke  as
light-headedly  in  the  Indian  Parliament's   foreign   policy  de-
bate   last  week  as  the   silliest   Austrian  courtier   in   August,
1914.    Mehta  even  suggested  that  Nehru  was  wrong  in  not
trying  to  utilize  the   "threat  to  our  frontiers"    in   order   to
"create  national  cohesion,"   i.e.  to  mobilize  the  people  by  the
drums   of   fear   and   hate.    Nehru   deserves   world    applause
for  standing  firm  against  the  mob  spirit  at  home  and  against
the   rudeness  of   Peking.     War   between   India   and    China
would  be no  backyard brawl;  it  could  not  be  contained.    Even
prolonged   hostility   between   the   two   countries   would   cost
dearly  in  the  diversion  of  resources  from  their  fight  against
poverty.    We  have   reason  to  believe  that  Elsenhower,  like
Khrushchev,  is  exerting  a  good  influence  behind   the  scenes.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  7,1959
How  Can  "Cult  of  Personality"  Be  Ended.  If  Men Fear  to  Combat  It?
If  Rakosi  Was  to  Blame  in  Hungary,  Why   Are  His  Critics  in  Jail?
Last  summer,  when  the  Greek  Communist  editor  and  war
hero,  Emanuel Glezos  was  on  trial  on  trumped  up  charges  of
espionage,  Soviet  President  Voroshilov  addressed  an  appeal  to
King  Paul  of   Greece  on  his  behalf;  crowds  demonstrated  in
Moscow  before  the  Greek  Embassy; Pravda  covered  the  trial.
But  when  Tibor  Dery,  an  old  Communist militant  and  one
of  the  masters  of  Hungarian  prose,  and  Gyula  Hay,  a  lead-
ing  Hungarian  dramatist, who  spent  the  Horthy  years in  exile
in  Moscow,  were  brought  to  trial  on  trumped  up  charges  of
counter   revolution,   the  trials  were  held  in  secret.    No   for-
eign  correspondents   were  admitted.     Appeals   for   clemency
on  behalf   of   imprisoned   Hungarian   editors   and  writers  by
the  International  Pen  Club  and  by  the  United  Nations  were
contemptuously   rejected.
Premier  Khrushchov  in  his  speech  to  the  Hungarian  Party
Congress  last  week  put  the  primary blame  for  the  Hungarian
revolt  on  the  abuses  of  the  Rakosi  regime.    But  can  he  deny
that  Sir  Leslie  Munro  in  his  report  a  few  days  earlier  to  the
United  Nations   on  Hungary  spoke  the  truth  when  he  said
these  writers  were   imprisoned   for   the  part  they  played  in
protesting   "the   oppressive   practices"   of   the   regime  which
Khrushchov  himself criticizes?
Khrushchov  Defends  Himself
Khrushchov's  speech  in  Hungary  contains  a  passage  which
seems  to  reflect  criticism  of  himself  in  the  inner  councils  of
the  Kremlin.    He   recognizes  that  the  revelations  he  made
about  the  Stalin  regime  at  the  Twentieth   Congress   created
"certain   difficulties,   something  of  a  fever"   in  many  of   the
Communist  parties  such  as  Hungary's.    It   was  in   fact   the
Khrushchov  speech  that  sparked  the  revolt.
Khrushchov  says  that  "some  people  have  said  .  .  .  that  the
question  should  not  have  been  raised  so  sharply."     He  de-
fends  himself  and  says  "it  had  to  be  done.    It  was  necessary
to  get  cleansed. .  .  ."    It  was  necessary  to  attack  "the  mistakes
produced  by  the  cult  of  personality."    Why,  then,  are  those
who  spoke  out  most  courageously in  Hungary  against  those
mistakes  in  jail  while the  time-servers  return  to  power?
We  come  here  again  to  the   inadequacies  of  the   "cult  of
personality"  concept.    Why   did  it  grow  up?     Because  even
the  most  loyal  Communists  were afraid  to  speak  out  lest  they
be  denounced  as  counter-revolutionaries.    Because they  knew
Crisis in  the  Krupp Empire
We   note   in   the   London   Times   of   Nov.   28  that  a
tragedy  has  befallen  the  Kriipps.   Everything  had  been
in  readiness  for  a  campaign  to  repeal  the  allied occupa-
tion  law  requiring  Krupp  to  dispose  of  his  steel  and
coal  holdings.   Krupp  has  been  arguing  that  no  one  was
bidding  to  buy  them.   In  the  close  knit  family  of  Ger-
man  capitalism, no  one  would  dare.
But  now  a  Dutch  scrap  dealer,  Louis  Worms,  has  of-
fered   to  buy  the   Krupp  steel  works  at   Rheinhausen.
"This   offer,"   the   Bonn   correspondent   of   the   London
Times   reported,   "presumably   prompted   Herr   Krupp
and  his  managing  director,  Herr  Beitz,  to  call  on  Dr.
Adenauer   and  afterwards   Herr  Beitz   flew   off   to   the
United  States."  Perhaps  it  is  hoped  that  U.  S.  pressure
through   the   Dutch   government   may   persuade    Herr
Worms  to  withdraw his  impertinent  bid.
Intimate  Question  for  "Rocky"
Though   carried  by   the   Associated   Press   wire  and
printed  by  the  Washington  Evening   Star,  most   news-
papers  next   morning,  including   the  New   York  Times,
published  nothing  on  the  hearing   held  Dec.  1  by  the
House  Ways  and Means  Committee on  the  depletion  al-
lowances  by  which  the  American  oil   industry   largely
escapes income  and profits taxes.
Since  Governor  Nelson  Rockefeller  of  New  York  has
been  suggesting  that  the  rest  of  us  pay  higher  taxes  to
support  a  stepped   up  arms  race,  we  wonder   whether
any  New  York  newspapers  will  have   the  temerity   to
ask  him  how he feels  about  depletion  allowances.   Or  is
that  too  intimate  a  family  matter?
that  if  so  accused  there  were  no  firm  safeguards  which  would
assure  them  of  a  chance  to  have  a  fair  trial.
Because   honest   men   were   afraid   to   speak,   Khrushchov
made  the  mistake of  replacing  Nagy  with  Rakosi in  1954,  and
of  keeping  the  old  scoundrel  in  power  in  1956  long  after  it
was  obvious that  a new  regime  was  needed  in  Hungary.    Had
Rakosi  been  cashiered  in  the  spring  of  1956  and  Kadar  freed
from  jail  at  that  time  to  head  a  new  regime  with  Nagy,   the
terrible  events  of  October-November   might  have  been  avoid-
ed.    And  a  reformed   Hungarian   regime   responsive   to   the
better   elements   of   the   country   and   the   Communist   party
would  have  been  a  great  help  in  the  struggle  for  peace  and
co-existence.    As  it  is,  Hungary  haunts   Khrushchov.
The  U.  S.  in  raising  the  Hungarian   issue  at  the   United
Nations  may  indeed  be  more  interested  in  making  cold  war
propaganda   than  in  helping  the  Hungarian   people.    Nora
Beloff,   back  from   a  three  week  trip  to  Hungary,  reports   in
the  London  Observer  (Nov.   29)   that  Hungarians  have  "no
use  for  our  oratorical solicitude"  and  see their  only  hope  in  a
general   relaxation  of   the   international  atmosphere.      "For
many  anti-Communists  there,"  she  writes,  "it  may  make  the
difference  between freedom  or  arrest,  continued imprisonment
or  amnesty.  .  .  .  For  a  far  wider  group  it  means  the  ending
of   intellectual  claustrophobia.  .  .  .  For  tens  of  thousands  of
heart-broken  Hungarian  families   it  is  the  ony  chance  of  re-
covering  contact with  missing  refugee  members."
In  this  sense,  Khrushchov  in  his  own  way,  by  trying  to
crack  the  ice,  is  moving  in  a  hopeful  direction;  his  fall  from
power  if  his  efforts   fail  would  almost  certainly  lead  to  a  re-
action  back  toward  Stalinist  methods  in  the  Kremlin.    But
we  hope  the  Russian   leaders  are  not  blinded  by  their  own
cliches  about  Hungary.    It  is  a  confession  of  weakness,  not
strength,  that  they  should  fear  a  visit  from  a  UN   commis-
sion  of  inquiry;  that  they  dare  not  withdraw  the  Red  Army;
that  they  should  have  to  punish savagely  some  of  the  greatest
names   in   Hungarian   literature   and   journalism;   that   they
should  have  to  resort  in  Hungary   to  the   Stalinist   methods
they  boast  of  having abandoned  in  the  Soviet  Union.
All  Eastern  Europe west  of  the  Soviet  border  will  continue
to  be  basically  unstable  as  long  as  the   Communists  cannot
find  a  genuinely  popular  and  national  basis  for   their   rule.
The  iron  hand  may  work  but  only  at  the  cost  of  future  ex-
plosions  and  these  will  be  terribly  dangerous  for  the  world
peace  they  and  we  desire.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, December  7,1959
Why  Shouldn't  Government  Propaganda  Scripts  Be  Labelled  As  Such?
That  TV  Play  "Security  Risk"  Was  Army  Public  Relations   Not  Art
The  Armstrong  Circle  Theatre   presented   a  drama  called
"Security  Risk"  over TV  on Nov.  25.   It  dealt  with  the  clear-
ance  of  a  scientist  for  an  Army  job.   The  New  York  Times
reviewer,  John  P.  Shanley,  commenting  on  it  two  days  later,
said  the  play  "offered   a  refreshing  reminder"  that  security
procedures  "when  properly  pursued"  can  "lead  to  vindication
as  well  as  to  condemnation  of  a  suspect."
The   reminder  would  have  seemed  a  good   deal   less  re-
freshing  if  the  play had  carried captions telling  viewers  frank-
ly  that  it  originated  in  the  Army's  public  relations  section,
and  had   been   prepared   in  collaboration   with   the  Counter
Intelligence  Corps.
The   sophisticated   viewer  guessed   something   of   this   sort
when  the  play  ended  with  a  shot  of  Major  Gen.  Wm.  W.
Quinn,  chief  of  U.  S.  Army  Information.    The  General  ex-
plained  that  the  play  showed  clearance  procedures  were  not
"a  witch  hunt"  but  were  designed  to  "protect  our  freedom."
Frank  Admissions at The  Pentagon
The  General's   epilogue  stirred  our  curiosity.    We   called
the  Pentagon  next  day  to'ask. whether  the  Counter   Intelli-
gence  Corps  had  a  hand  in  this  TV  play.    We  were  finally
shunted  to  something  called  the  "audio-visual   branch."
There  an  officer  told  us  that  this  branch  keeps  in  "almost
constant  contact"  with  film  and  TV  producers,  that  the  idea
for  this  particular  play  originated  "here,"  i.e.  with  the  audio-
visual  branch,  and  that  the  Counter   Intelligence   Corps  co-
operated  in  "working  up  the script."
The  hero  of  the  play was a  scientist  whose  aid 'was  asked by
the  Army.    The   scientist  was  soon   involved   in  trouble  by
clearance  procedures.    An  anonymous letter   accused  him  of
being  a  Communist.    When  CIC  checked  with  the  FBI,  the
latter's  criminal  branch  declared  him  "clean"  but  its  subver-
sive  file  showed  blemishes on  his  record.
The  scientist had  been quoted  in  the  Soviet  press  on  nuclear
policy.    He  was  a  sponsor  of  a  Committee  for  the  Freedom
of   American  Science  which  was  on  the  Attorney  General's
list.    A  South  African  paper  called  "Conscience"  had  quoted
him   as  accusing  the   U.   S.  of   spreading  Strontium  90   by
secret  nuclear  testing.    He  had  received  copies  of  a  subver-
sive  paper  called  "Arise"   issued  by  a  Patrick  Henry  Asso-
ciation.    His  son  was  a  dues  paying  member  of  this  associa-
tion.
Just  what  was  subversive  about  any  of  these  publications
or  associations  was  not  explained.    The  viewer  certainly  got
the  idea  that  young  men  who  hoped  to  do  scientific  work  for
the  government  would  do  well  to  avoid  criticism  of  nuclear
policy  and  keep  out  of  organizations  which  concerned  such
controversial  matters  as  the  freedom  of  science  or  bore  sus-
picious  names  like  those  of  Patrick  Henry.
All  turned  out  well  in  the  end,  however.   The  Soviet  press
and   "Conscience"   had  misquoted  the  scientist.    He  had  be-
come  a  sponsor  of  the  free  science  committee  without   real-
izing  it;  his  son  was  only   19  when  he  joined   the   Patrick
Henry  Association  and  had  resigned  after  a  year.    There  is
a  shot  in  which  the  scientist  realizes  with  a  shock  that  he
should   have  spent   more  time  with   the   boy  to   keep   him
straight.    He  himself  traces  the  anonymous  note  to  the  jani-
tor  of  an  apartment  house  in  which  he  once  lived;  the  jani-
tor  bore him a grudge.    Father  and  son are  cleared  in  the  end
by  a  benign  CIC.
A Less Happy Ending in Real Life
A  somewhat  different  play  might  have  been  written  which
would  have  given   another  picture  of   how  these   clearances
often  work.    The  janitor  with  a  grudge  might  have  turned
up  as  an  informant  who  asked  that  his  information  be  kept
confidential.    In  that  case  the  scientist  would  never  have  got-
ten  a  chance to  face  his  accuser  and  demonstrate  that  this  was
an  old  grudge.    The  scientist  would  have  lost  his  reputation
and  the  Army  would  have  lost  his  services.
We  hear  a  great  deal  in  this  country  about  how  literature
in  the  Soviet  Union  has  to  serve  the  government  and   the
party.    When   our  military  bureaucracy  and  our  secret  serv-
ices  work  with  film  and  TV  writers  and  producers  on  scripts
which glorify  their  activities, we too are slipping  into  the  same
Orwellian  habits.
This   is  propaganda  and   ought   to  be  clearly  labelled   as
such.    It  is  more noxious  than  false  toothpaste  advertising  or
rigged  quiz  shows.   It.rigs  the  public mind.
What  Most  Liberal  Editors  Fear  to  Say
New  York City's  refusal  to  reinstate  five  teachers   despite
court  orders  upholding  their  refusal  to  act  as  informers has
again  drawn an  editorial  protest  from  the  New  York  Times
(Nov.  30)  which  does  that  paper  honor.   But  the  basic  issue
—the  right .of  teachers  to  teach  irrespective  of  their  politi-
cal  opinions—still  makes  liberal   editors   qnail.
"Consistently  opposed  as  we  are  to  permitting   Commu-
nists  to  teach  in  the  schools,"  said  the  Times  editorial,  "we
do  not  believe  that  requiring  men  and  women  to  become  in-
formers  under  penalty  of  dismissal  is  a  good  or  reasonable
way   of   guarding  against   subversion."   But  to  accept   the
premise  is  to  make  it  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion.  The
fundamental  syllogism  of  all  witch  hunts  start  with  an  as-
sumption  of  danger  so  baneful  as  to  make  respectable   the
inference  that  normal  standards  may  be  suspended.   If  one
accepts   the  view  that   Communists  are  so  supernaturally
noxious  that  they  may  be  barred  without  proof  of  wrong-
doing,  how  combat  the  view  that  it  then  becomes    a,  sacred
duty  to  inform upon  them?   The  miasma  can only  be  cleared
on  Teacher  Informers  and Loyalty Oaths
up  by a  return  to  first  principles—the  right  of  every  citizen
to  pursue  any  calling  unless  proven  guilty  of  some  crime.
In  this  connection  we  wish  liberal  editors  would  abandon
the  cowardly  argument  that  loyalty  oaths  are  wrong  be-
cause  only  non-Communists—Communists  being  ipso   facto
bad—would  hesitate  to  take  them.  To  risk  a  five  year  term
in  jail  for  perjury  is  a  serious  matter.   The  threat  works
not  only  against   Communists  but  against   others  who  may
honestly  feel  that  they  can  take  a  loyalty  oath  or  disclaim
membership   in   subversive    organizations    but   fear   later
prosecution  in  a  change  of  climate  when  a  prosecutor  may
take  a  different   interpretation   of  what  constitutes   loyalty
and  that  vaguest  of  all  categories,  "subversion."  The  effect
is  to  make  students  and others  subject  to  such  oaths  decide
that  discretion  is  the  better  part  of  citizenship  and  eschew
membership  in  all  organizations.  This  is  the  real  argument
against  the  oaths—their  inhibitory  effect  on  the  exercise  of
First  Amendment rights,  and their  tendency  to  spread a dull
conformity  and  an  uneasy  anxiety.
1   8  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  7, 1959
Authoritative  New  Study  Show  67%  of  U.  S.  Catholic  Families  Use  Contraceptives
One  Birth  the  Bishops  Prevented  Is  A  Catholic  for  President
The   Roman  Catholic   Bishops   in   their   statement   against
birth  control  cited  favorably  the  view  expressed  by  a  Russian
delegate   at   the   United   Nations   Economic   Commission   on
Asia.   "The key  to  progress,"  they  quote  him,  "does  not  lie
in  a  limitation  of  population   .  .  .  but  in  the  speedy  defeat
of   the   economic   backwardness   of   these   countries."      The
Bishops  hastened  to  add,  lest  they  be  thought  Marxistic, "The
Communist  record  of  contempt  for  the  value  of  human  life
gives  the  lie  to  this  hypocritical  propaganda   but  to   peoples
aspiring  to  economic  development  ...  the  deceit  is  not im-
mediately   evident."     We   ourselves,   though   not   under-de-
veloped,   would  have  been  taken  in  if  Their   Eminences  had
not  set  us  straight.
Kennedy  Courageous for The First  Time
The  immediate  effect   of  the  Bishops'   pronouncement   may
be  to  abort   the  possibility  of   electing  a  Catholic   President
next  year.    Senator  John  F.  Kennedy,  who  managed  to  keep
discreetly  silent  on  McCarthy  all  through  the  years  of  the  lat-
ter's  ascendancy,  chose  birth  control  as  the  issue  on  which  to
be  courageous  for  the  first  time  in  his  career.    His  swift  en-
dorsement   of   the   stand   by  the   Bishops   may   cost   him   his
chances  for   the   Democratic   nomination   and   the   Presidency
in   a  country  which   still  regards   separation  of   church   and
state  as fundamental.
This  is  one  issue on  which  Kennedy  could  have  kept  silent
without  losing  even  Catholic  votes.    An  authoritative study,
the  first  of  its kind,  published  this  year  by  the  Scripps  Foun-
dation  for   Research  in  Population  Problems   at  the  Univer-
sity  of  Michigan  (Family   Planning,  Sterility  and   Population
Growth   by  Freedman,  Whelpton  and  Campbell)   shows  that
85   percent   of   our   Protestant   and   67   percent   of   our   own
Catholic  families  are  users  of  contraceptives.
Birth  control  is  a  fairly  new  issue;  its  pioneers  were  pros-
ecuted  in  England  in  the  1870's  and  here  as  recently  as 1916.
The  Pope  did  not  speak  out  against  it  until  1930,  the  year  the
Lambeth  Conference  of  the  Anglican  Church  reversed  itself
and  accepted  birth  control.    While  Pius  XI  in  his  encyclical,
Casti  Connubii   (Chaste  Wedlock),  invoked  authority  as  an-
Criminals and Political Heretics
Those   who  read  for  themselves  the  decision   by  Mr.
Justice  Douglas  in  Henry  v.  U.  S.  and  the  dissent  by
Mr.  Justice   Clark  will   see   that   this  ruling   has  been
highly  overrated.   The  fact   that   Chief  Justice   Warren
joined  in  the  Clark  dissent  is  indicative.   The  question
at  issue  was  whether  FBI  men arresting  two  thieves en-
gaged   in  looting   interstate   shipments   had   "probable
cause" for  their  action.   The  facts  made  it  a  very  close
question  since  a  preliminary  tip  and  extensive  surveil-
lance   made  this   no   simple   case   of   arbitrary   arrest.
What   annoys  us  is  that  Justices  like  Frankfurter  and
Harlan   are   prepared  to  take  an   ultra-strict   view   of
the  Fourth  Amendment  on  search  and  seizure   but  en-
gage  in  nullificatory   "balancing   acts"  when   the  First
Amendment  comes  up  as  in  Barenblatt  and  Sweezy.   If
one  amendment  can  be  "balanced",  why  not   another?
The  fact   is   that   here—as  in  the   Soviet   Union—it   is
much  easier  for  judges   to  uphold  basic  safeguards   in
the  case  of  criminals  than  in  those   of  politicals.
cient  as  St.  Augustine's  against  birth  control,  the  latter  in  the
passage   quoted   was  really  citing  Scripture  against   onanism
not  modern  birth  control,  and  it  is  not  clear  whether   Onan
was  condemned  for  spilling  his  seed  upon  the  ground  or  for
failing  to  do  his  duty  according  to  Mosaic  law  by  his  dead
brother's  widow.
The  Church  invokes natural  law  against  birth  control  but
its  conception  of  nature  is  derived  not   from   the   Stoics  but
from  Paul,  who  reluctantly  tolerated  sex—even  in  the marital
state—as  a  necessary  evil.    In  any  case,  there  is  a  wide dif-
ference  among   coitus  intemiptus,   sterilization,  abortion  and
planned  parenthood  by  contraceptives  just  as  there  is  only  a
thin  line  between  the  last  and  that  "natural  rhythm"   method
of  birth  control  the  Church  permits.    The  Church  may  come
around  to  planned  parenthood   as  it  has  come  to  accept  evo-
lution,  and  other  heresies.
The   theological   ingenuity   which   is   prepared   to   hasten
millions  out  of  this  world  via  "just  wars"  should  not  find  it
impossible  to  accept  the  idea  of  spacing  their   entrance  into
it  more  intelligently.
IPS  Speaks  on  "Is McCarthyism  Really  Dead?"  at All-Souls  Unitarian  Church,  Wash.,  9:45  a.m. Sun., Dec. 13
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
12/7/59
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ...............................................................................:........
City     ........................................Zone..........:.State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?           Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I!   F.  STONi  TO   GET  TOM   PAINE  AWARD
at  the  Emergency  Civil  Liberties  Committee's  annual  dinner  on  Bill  of  Rights  Day. Senator  Stephen  M.  Young
of  Ohio and Myles  Norton of  Highlander  Folk  School  will  speak,  and  Judge  Hubert  T.  Deianey  will  be
toastmaster.   The  Hotel  New Yorker, 7  p.m., Dec. 15.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED