I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jul06.pdf

============================================================

Inside  the A-War  Hearings
Navy  Scientist   Explains  How  Nuclear  War  May  Even  Breed  A Better  Race  of  Men,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  26
JULY  6,  1959
«"       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
First  Judicial  Blow  Against   Faceless    Informers
A   deeply   and   almost   evenly  divided   Supreme   Court,   in
which  the  opposing  sides  are  often  mutually repelled  into  po-
sitions  more   extreme   than   they  would   adopt   in   a   calmer
atmosphere,  may  be  descried  in  the  actions  and  between  the
lines  of  the  decisions with  which  this  term  ended  last  Mon-
day.     Perhaps  the  best  index  of  the  turbulence which  reigns
within  the  closely  gjarded   confines   of   the  conference  room
was  the  order  setting  down  the  Scales  case  for  a  second  re-
argument  next  Fall.    It   is  difficult   to  believe  that  so  much
reargument  would  have  been  required  18  months  ago,  when
the  Court  was  riding  the   crest  of   its  brief  Warren   period
liberalism,   before  the   impact  of   the   campaign   from   white
supremacist  and  rightist  had  built  up  such  fierce  pressure  on
the  Court.    The  Scales case  is  the  first  test  of  the  membership
clause  of  the  Smith  Act,  and  this  clause  if  read  literally  re-
quires  a  fundamental  break  with  past  legal  procedures.    Can
a  man  be  convicted  for  mere  membership  in  an  organization
espousing  revolutionary ideas without  proof  of  individual  guilt
—without  evidence  that  he  knew,  shared   and  intended  the
unlawful  purposes  of  the  organization?    Such  mass  proscrip-
tion  and  collective  guilt  are  clearly  foreign  to  our  best  tradi-
tions,  and  their  adoption   reflects  the  philosophical  contamina-
tions  of  the   cold  war,  the  domestication  in  our  country  by
rightists  and  FBI  men  of  just  those  totalitarian  concepts  they
claim  to  be   fighting.   One  can  easily  imagine  Harlan  striking
down  this  membership  provision   18  months   ago,  with  per-
haps  only  Clark  dissenting.
Guilt  by  Association   in   Marriage
Three  decisions Monday  showed  that  the  liberals are  not yet
permanently   in  a  minority  of   four.     Justice  Potter   Stewart
tipped  the  scales by joining Warren,  Black,  Douglas and  Bren-
nan  in  ruling  against  the  use  of  "faceless   informers"   in  loy-
alty-security  cases,  in  reversing   the  suspension   from   practice
imposed   on  defense  counsel  in  the  Hawaii  Smith  Act  trials,
and  in  finding  a  clear  First  Amendment  issue  in  the  censor-
ing  of  the  film,  "Lady  Chatterley's   Lover,"  where  the   Court
was  unanimous  in  upholding  the  film  but  bitterly  split  and
even  fragmented  in  charting  the  legal  route  to  the  agreed  re-
sult.    The  most  important  of  these  three  cases  was  the  deci-
sion  in  Greene  v.  McElroy,  which  involved   an  appeal  from
an   engineer   whose   career  in   industry  had   been   ruined   by
anonymous  accusation  in  a  typical  industrial   security  proced-
ure.    Here  one  had  the  feeling  that   if  Stewart  had  decided
to  vote  the  other  way,  Frankfurter,   Harlan   and  Whittaker
might  have  been  led  to  join  him  and  Clark  in  finding  some
rationale  to  uphold   these  procedures.     Rather  than  be  in  a
minority,  and  seeming  to  champion   loyalty  standards   which
included   in  this  case  not  only  guilt  by  association  but  guilt
How  Informers   Are  Recruited
"said  has   a  friend   who  worked  for   sears,  roebuck
and  has  family  of  three children and  wife,    he  made  a
terrible  mistake one  time,   in  1941 he  lived in  the  same
house   as   jack   hall   [Hawaii's  longshoremen's  leader
prosecuted  under  the  Smith  Act],    the  fbi  wanted him
to  testify,    he  said  i  feel  jack  hall  is  one  of  the  finest
people  i  have  known,    apparently  the   fbi   didn't  like
this,    so  they  suggested  to  sears  and  roebuck  to  (ire
him  because  he  wouldn't cooperate ...  he  wasn't fired
so  they  went  to  the  Los  Angeles  and  Chicago  offices  of
scars  and   roebuck   and  convinced   them   he  had  to  be
fi-ed.    hs  was  fired  because  he  refused  to  be  a  stool
pigeon  and  informer,    the  government gets  away with
it  by  making  people  fear  if  they  don't  do  as  it  wants
they'll  be  branded  red  and  lose  their   jobs."
—From  the  newspaper  reporter's  notes  on  the  speech
by  Harriet  Bouslog  Sawyer,  defense   counsel  in  the  Ha-
waii Smith  Act  cases, which  led to  her  disciplinary  sus-
pension  for   one  year   on  the  ground   that   the   speech,
made  during  the  trial,  reflected   on  the  presiding   judge
and  violated  legal  ethics.  The  conviction  was  reversed
5-lt,   by  Brennan,   Warren,   Black   and   Douglas   with
Stewart  concurring.
by  association  with   one's   own   wife,   they  concurred   in   the
result  but  declined  to  join  in  the  reasoning  of  the  majority.
The  Greene  case  is  another  example  of  the  way  in  which
the  cold  war,  with  the  enhanced  power  it  gives  the  military
and  the  secret  police,  is  eating  away  the  foundations   of  our
free  society.    Justice  Clark,  who  sees  the  world  very  much  as
does  J.  Edgar  Hoover,   protested   in  his  lone  dissent  that  no
one  has  a  constitutional  right  of  access  "to  the   Government's
military  secrets."    But  that  is  not  the  real  issue.    The  real  is-
sue  must  be  seen  in  the  context  of  a  situation  in  which  the
category  of  government   secrets  is  spreading  all  over  the  bu-
reaucratic  and   industrial  landscape;   our   military  mania   for
secrecy  is  beginning  to  approach   Russian  proportions.    Some
3,000,000  workers  in  industry  are  directly  affected   by  indus-
trial  clearance  procedures.    Ordinary  clearance  alone  does  not
mean  access  to  top  secrets,  and  top  secret  clearance  is  hedged
about  by need-to-know  regulations  which  require  even  the  most
politically  purified  and  homogenized  to  show  special  need  for
specific  information.     In  this  context  can  the  government  set
up  what  purports   to  be  a  fair  trial  procedure   for   clearance
and  ruin  a  man  as  disloyal  without   giving  him  a  chance  to
confront   and  cross-examine   his  accusers?    A  man   does   not
have  a  right  to  see military  secrets  but  he  does  have  a  right  to
protect   his   reputation   and   livelihood   from  kangaroo    court
destruction  by  faceless  informers.    The  government  may  arbi-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
1   0   .!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  6,  1959
Preventive War  Crowd  Used  Holifield  Hearings to  Spread  the  Idea  . . .
The   hastily  prepared   Holifield   subcommittee  hearings   on
nuclear  war  were  largely  a  re-play of  the  hearings  he  has  held
in  earlier  years on  civil  defense, with  one  new  element  added.
This  was  the  use made  of  the  hearings  by  the  preventive  war
crowd  in  the  military  bureaucracy to  try  out  publicly  the  ideas
they  have  been  putting  forward  privately  to  small  groups  "by
invitation  only."    Holifield's  earlier  hearings  in  a  subcommit-
tee  of  House  Government  Operations  were  used  to  advocate  a
civil  defense  shelter  program.    These  new  hearings  in  a  sub-
committee  of  the  Joint   Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  were
used  to  point  up  the  idea  that  nuclear  war,  though  horrible,
could  still  be  waged   successfully.    The  Washington   evening
paper  headlines  the  day  after  the  hearings   closed  —  "Most
Would  Survive  A-War,  Experts Find"   (Star)   and  "H-Bombs
Can't  Kill  Off  the  Human   Race"   (Daily   News)—represent
just  the  kind  of  tranquillizers  some  of  our  Big  Brothers  at
the  Pentagon   prescribe.
The   summary  in  the  Washington   Star,  the   home   news-
paper   of   the   Associated  Press,   reflected  the   success  of   ad-
venturistic  military  elements  seeking  to  sugar-coat  a  thermo-
nuclear  Apocalypse.    The  Star  said  the  first  four  days  of  the
hearings  were   "old   stuff"   —  everyone  knew  that   hydrogen
bombs  "would  kill  millions  of  people  and  leave  others  living
in  caves."   From  the  final  day's  discussions,  however,  "a  more
constructive  theme  emerged."    The  Star  said  "the  moral  to  be
drawn ... is not that  millions  would  die but that  most  Amer-
icans would  survive—and  democracy and  the  national  economy
would,   too."
How the  Happy Ending Was Arranged
This  Hollywood   scenario  ending   was  invited   by  the  as-
sumptions  on  which  the  hearings  were  based  and  the  man
Chairman  Holifield  picked  to  sum  up  their  implications.    As
may  have  been  expected,  the  final  optimistic  stories  nowhere
mentioned   that   the   war   assumed   by   the   hearings   was   a
"limited,"  or  as  Holifield  later   called   it   "a  medium-sized,"
nuclear  war  and  did  not  purport  to  give  a  picture  of  what  an
all-out  war  would  do.   The  public  had  a  right  to  know  how
these  assumptions  were  arrived  at,  and  what  chance  there  was
that  any  such  conflict  would  be  kept  so  conveniently   limited,
but  every  time  these  questions  obtruded  themselves,   Holifield
changed   the  subject.    The  hearings  assumed  that  260  bombs
with  a  total  power  of  1453  megatons  would  be dropped  upon
our  country*.    At  one point  in  the  hearings  (June  25)  when
pressed  by  other  members  of  the  subcommittee,   Holifield   ad-
mitted  "It  would  be  ridiculous  to  assume  that  only  260  weap-
*It  was  also  assumed  that  2500  additional megatons  would
be  dropped abroad  by  the  enemy  on  our  bases  and  by  us  on
the  enemy.    We  were  incorrect  last  week  in  saying  that  no
retaliation  was assumed.
The  Survivors  Must  Carry  On The  War
"Another  alternative  would  be  to  move  the  popula-
tion  after  about  two  weeks to  areas  of  the  country that
had  not  experienced  significant  levels  of  fallout  .  .  .
there  are  fairly  large  areas,  mainly  in  the  western half
of   the  country,   that   would  be  available.   Since   these
areas  are  sparsely  inhabited  regions  of  desert,  moun-
tains  and plains,  the  task  of  providing minimal  housing
and  other  living  accommodations for  millions  of   sur-
vivors  would  appear  to  demand a  major  effort.
"In  any  event,  neither  of  the  foregoing alternatives
[the  other  is  a  system  of  shelters  for  long  term  oc-
cupancy—IPS]  is  very  satisfying  because  we  are  in-
terested  in  more  than  safe  living  areas  for  our popu-
lation.    We  are  interested in  reviving the  economic and
political  life  of  the  country' and  in  bringing  the  war
to  a  successful  conclusion. .  .  ."
—Walmer  E.  Strope,   U.S.  Naval   Radiological  De-
fense  Laboratory,  Holifield   subcommittee, June  25.
ons  would  be  used  in  an  attack  upon  any  major  nation  when
many  hundreds  of  thousands  of  weapons  exist  and  thousands
of  bombers are  available  and  four  to five hundred  submarines,
as  one  nation   has."
No   one  explained   just  why  this  "ridiculous"  figure  was
nonetheless   used.    Holifield,   after   producing   a  letter   from
Lieut.  Gen.  James  M.  Gavin  saying  that  the  attack  envisaged
was  "well  within  the  capabilities  of  a  potential   aggressor",
declared,  "It  could  happen  here  and  it  could  happen  in  much
worse  form  than  we  have  here."    A  question  shortly   after-
ward  by  Congressman  Van  Zandt  unexpectedly   disclosed  that
two  years  ago  civil  defense  authorities  had  presented   figures
to  the  committee  on  a  hypothetical   attack  with  250  weapons
but  estimated  the  total  megatonnage  at  2500,  or  1,000   mega-
tons  more  than  that   assumed   this  year.    Van  Zandt   asked
Eugene  J.  Quindlen  of  the  Office  of  Civil  Defense  Mobiliza-
tion,  whether  new information  had  since  "made it  possible  for
you  to  give  us  a  better  estimate  of  what  would  happen  under
these   circumstances?"    The   witness   replied   cryptically,   "I
would  not  put  it  exactly  that  way,  Mr.  Van  Zandt."    Quind-
len  thought   the   assumptions   underlying   the   new   estimates
more  realistic  than  those  in  1957  but,  "this  was  not  too  im-
portant   at  the  time,"  he  added,   "because   this  was  not  in-
tended  for  public  use. ...  It  was  intended   more  as  an  in-
ternal  staff  exercise."    Just  what  Quindlen   meant  was  never
made  clear.
There   is  a  striking   contrast   between   the   assumptions   of
these   hearings   and   the   attacks   assumed   in   the   Rand   Cor-
poration's  preventive  war  study,  Report  on  A  Study  of   Non-
Military   Defense   (July   1,   1958,   Report  R-322-RC)    whose
principal  author,  Herman  Kahn,  turned  up  as  a  star  witness
the  last  day  of  the  Holifield   hearings.    The  Rand  Corpora-
Lectures  by  That  Rand  Corp.  Sage  on
"Outlines  of  Lectures  —  I.  The  Nature  and  Impact  of
Various  Kinds  of  Thermonuclear War.    This  lecture  asks
the  question,  'Could  it  ever  be  profitable  to  initiate  a  ther-
monuclear  war?'    It  is  concluded  that  there  are  plausible,
even  probable,  circumstances  in  which  this  question  could
be  answered  in  the affirmative. ...
"II.  The  Formulation and  Testing  of  Strategic  Objectives
and  Plans.    This  lecture  asks  such  questions  as,  'Why  and
how  might  thermonuclear war be  initiated?'
Preventive  War—and  World  War  VIII
"III.  World War  I  Through World War  VIII.   Some  char-
acteristics  of  eight  wars,  real  or hypothetical,  are  analyzed.
.  .  .  The eight  wars  are  assumed  to  have  occurred  as  fol-
lows:  1914,  1939,  1951,  1956,  1961,  1965,  1969,  and  1972."
—From  pages  2  and  S  (first   page  withheld)   of  a  prospec-
tus  on  the  lectures  Herman  Kahn  of  Rand  Corp.  has  been
giving  to  select  groups  around  the  country.  This  description
was  put   on  the  press  tables  as  background   before   he   ap-
peared  Friday,  June  28, to sum  up  the nuclear  war  hearings.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  6, 1959
. . . That  Nuclear  War  Is Not  Yet Suicidal  and Can Be Waged  Successfully
tion  study  figured  that  a  20,000  megaton  attack  hitting  150
U.   S.  cities  even  with  as  much   as  six  hours  warning  time
would  kill  160  million  of  180  million  Americans.    They  also
figured  that  a  1500  megaton   attack  on   50  American  cities
would  kill  90  million  Americans.   But  the  Holifield  hearings
assumed  that  a megatonnage  almost  the  same as  this—1,453—
could  hit  71  metropolitan areas  and  result  in  only   40,000,000
deaths  or  50,000,000  fewer  than  the  Rand  study  assumed.    It
would  be  interesting  to  know  more  about  the  numbers  game
behind  these  figures,  how  much  was  science,  and  how  much
public  relations.
Rand  (the name  comes  from  the  initials  of  Research  and
Development)   is an  "independent,  non-profit"  corporation  set
up  by  the  Air  Force  in  1948 to  handle  long  range   research
problems.    The  preventive war  study  here  referred  to  was  the
But  Suppose  It's a  Leg  Without  A  Head?
"We  do  not  wish  to  conclude  our  testimony   in  this
matter  without  reiterating  most  strongly  our conviction
that  we  should  emphasize  the  survivors  rather  than  the
casualties.    I,  personally,   like  the  phrase  which  is  used
in  the  rehabilitation   of  handicapped  workers:  'It  is  not
what   you   have   lost   that's   important,   but   what   you
have  left'."
—Eugene  3.  Quindlen,  Office    of  Civil  Defense    Mobili-
zation,  to  the  Holifield   subcommittee,  June  26.
work  of  a  group  directed  by  Herman  Kahn.    Kahn,  now  on
leave  of  absence  from   Rand  to  the   Center  of   International
Studies  at  Princeton,  is a  Caltech M.A.  (1947)  in  physics  and
mathematics  who  worked  for  Northrup  and  Douglas   aircraft
companies  before  joining  the  physics  division  of  Rand.    Ac-
cording  to  the  local  Rand  office,  from  which  these  facts  were
gleaned,  "He  has  spent  considerable  time  working  on  the  ap-
plication  of  Monte  Carlo  problems."     The  local   office   could
not  explain  what  "Monte  Carlo  problems"  meant  but  judging
by  his  report  this  may  be  a  cute  code  term  for  gambling  with
the  populations  of  the  U.  S.  and  the  world  in  a  theoretical
thermonuclear  war  game.   When  the  hearing  ended  on  Thurs-
day,  June  25,  Holifield  announced  that  next  day  at  the  final
session  Kahn  would   "make  a  presentation   on  the  final  im-
plications   of   these  hearings."     By  picking   Kahn,   Holifield
picked  a man calculated  to put  a preventive  war  gloss  on  them.
Kahn,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  lecture  prospectus  printed  at
Shelters  Are  For  Those  Lucky  to  Survive
Sen.   HICKENLOOPER.    In  other  words ...  if  you
don't  get  killed  in  the  blast,  you  may  get  killed  in  the
radiation.     If  you  don't  get  killed  in  the  radiation,  you
get  killed  in  the  fire  storm.    If  you  do  not  get  killed
by  the  fire,  you  get   killed   by  lack   of  oxygen  in  this
area.    I  am  asking  you  seriously  what   object  is  there
particularly   in  putting  tremendous  effort  into  building
shelters.
Dr.   [Wm.  T.]   HAM,  Jr., [testifying  on  thermal   ef-
fects]   I  said   that  I  felt   in  a  certain  sense  we  might
possibly  have  the  cart  before  the  horse.   We  would  have
to  survive  first  and  then  see  whether  we  could  protect
ourselves  from  the  fallout.
—Holifield   subcommittee, June  S3.
the  bottom  of  page  two), has  been  delivering  private  talks
around  the  country  on  the  wisdom,  feasibility  and   mechanics
of  preventive  war  and  illustrating with  a  series  of   hypothetical
conflicts  down  to  and  including  World  War  VIII,  which  is
scheduled  to  start  in  1972.    Rand  likes  cheerful   scientists.
Kahn,  when  he  took  the  stand  after  demonstrations  of  the
Banshee  Fallout  Alarm and  a small  device  called  FIDO  (Fall-
out  Intensity  Detection  Oscillator),  turned  out  to  be  a  big  fat
expansive  young  man  with  thick  glasses  and  a  habit  of  speak-
ing  with  machine  gun  rapidity.    The  implications   he   drew
were   what   one   might   have   expected.     Kahn   is   a    loqua-
cious  man,  not  easily  pinned  down,  but  a  listener  was  apt  to
conclude  (1)   that  if  war  does  not  come  soon  it  may  be  too
late  to  fight  one  successfully,   (2)   that  our  capacity  to  deter
and  to  fight  if  necessary,  down  to  striking  the  first  blow,  will
be  enhanced  if  we  take  steps  in  advance  to  protect  our  civilian
population  and   (3)   although  we  must  write  off  our   metro-
politan  areas,  the  rural  parts  of  the  country  can  be   protected
from  fallout  by  shelters  and  the  country  later  rebuilt.    This
means  consigning  millions  of  city  dwellers  to  the  most hor-
rible  kind  of   death   by  incineration  and   creating  a  race  of
survivors  among  whom  cancer  may  be  as  common  as   colds
but  as  Kahn  said,  improving  on  Sherman,  "war  is   horrible.
There  is  no  question  about  it.    But  so  is  peace."    No   one
ventured  to  question  this  nonsense.    The  hearings   disclosed
no  greater   menace  than   these   radioactive   scientists   on   the
military  research  gravy  train  for  whom  human  beings  are  but
digits  to  be  fed  into  an  IBM  machine.
Navy  Scientist  Says  Nuclear  War Might  Even  Breed  A  Healthier  Race
"In  the  threat  of  nuclear  warfare  we  face  the  expecta-
tion  of  a  great  influx  of  mutations  into  our  human  heredity.
We'd  like  to  put a better  face  upon  U.   Not  every  geneticist
takes   an   increase   in   mutations   as   an   unqualified    evil.
ASIDE  FROM  THE  ONE  IN  A  BILLION  CHANCE  OP
A  REALLY   BENEFICIAL  MUTATION  [emphasis  added],
we   have   to   realize  .  .  .  the   unmeasured   advantages   of
heterosis  .  .  .  the  evolutionary  value  of  genetic  variabil-
ity.  . . .
"I  would  like  to  stand  back  and  look  again  at  the  nuclear
bombing  here  assumed. ...  It  is  doubtful   whether  after
such  an  attack  it  [radiation]  will  come  down  even  in  many
years  to  our present  maximum  permissible  limits.  .  .  . The
casualties  on this field of  battle  will  be  falling  for  years  and
generations  to  come.
"Fortunately  the  human  race  has  the  power  to  go  on,
leaving  the  fallen  behind  and cleansing  itself  of  the  genetic
injuries  inflicted.    We  can  even  draw  an  ideal  picture  of  the
survivors  of  the  world-wide  irradiation,  emerging  as  a big-
ger,  stronger,  wiser,  gentler,  healthier  race  than  would  oth-
erwise  have  developed.    The  price  would  be:  A  large  or
major   fraction   of  the  population  killed,  or  dying  within  a
few  months; survivors  carrying  many  radiation-induced mu-
tations:  high  infant  and  adult  mortality  for  many  genera-
tions,  straining  the  naturally  high  fecundity  of  women  to
maintain   the   population.     Then   as   populations   begin   to
build  up  again,  would   come  the  opportunity  for  conscious
eugenic  management,  with  large  families  limited  to  parents
of  superior  native  endowments.  .  . .
"It  is  possible  to  come  out  all  right,  but  the  path  to  sal-
vation  is  obstructed  by  many  a  cherished  sentiment  as  well
as  the  self-indulgence  of  our  'affluent  society'."
—Dr. Robert  R.  Newell,  U.S. Naval  Radiological  Defense   Laboratory,  before   the  Holifield   subcommittee, June
1  0
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  6,  1959
Greene  Case  Again  Documents  the  Gossipy  Mish-Mash  Used  to  Test  Security
Several  Supreme  Court  Justices  Were  at  That  Same  "Disloyal"  Dinner
(Continued  from  Page  One)
trarily  shut  off  access  to  secrets.    But  when  it  pretends  to  try
a  man,  may  it  do  so  unfairly?    This  is  the  issue.
Where  Washington  Resembles   Moscow
The  situation  is  made  worse  when  the  screening  is  in  the
hands  of  a  secret  police  network  which  regards  any  liberal  or
do-gooder   as  prima  facie   suspect.    The   test  of  political  reli-
ability  here,  as the  facts  in  the  Greene  case again  demonstrate,
is  a stodgy  conformity,  just  as in  the  Soviet  Union.    Any  con-
tact  with  Russians—like  any  Russian  contact  with  Americans
in  Moscow—puts  a  damning  stain  on  a  man's  reputation  no
amount  of  evidence  can  later   erase.    Attending  social  func-
tions  at   the   Russian  Embassy  in  Washington    1944-47   and
meeting  at  that  time  with  Russian  officials   were  among  the
counts  against Greene,  though  top  level executives of  his  com-
pany  "whose   right  to  clearance  [the  Court  says]  was  never
challenged"   corroborated  his  testimony that  he  was  trying  to
sell  his  company's  products.     Another  count  against   Greene
was  that  in  1947  he  attended  the  Third  Annual  Dinner  of  the
Southern  Conference   for   Human   Welfare.     "This   dinner,"
says  a  footnote  to  the  decision,  "was  also  attended  by  many
Washington    notables,    including   several   members   of   this
Court."     The  weight  attached  to  the  scuttlebutt  collected  by
the  FBI  from  unknown  informants seems  to  have  varied  with
the  atmosphere.    Clearance  was  three  times  given  Greene  be-
fore  the Korean  War  (top  secret  in  February,  1950)   and  then
revoked  in  November,   1951.     It  was  restored  in  1952  after  a
hearing  but  revoked  again  in  1953  when  McCarthy's  shadow
fell  across  the  Pentagon.
The  determination of  loyalty  is  obviously  far  from  being  a
science.    The  value  of  allowing  confrontation  and  cross-ex-
amination  is that,  as  in  any  other  proceeding,  they  are  the  best
method  we  have  for  sifting  out  error,  mistaken  identity,  false
accusation  and  malice.    Though  these   cases  are  usually  dis-
cussed  as  if  only  the  accused  had  an  interest  in  the  outcome,
the  public  has  an  interest  in  keeping  the  atmosphere  of   free
discussion  from  being  poisoned  by  fear  of  informers,  and  the
government   has  an  interest  in  keeping   the  services   of  valu-
Unused  Perhaps  to  Sexy  Movies
The  divisions  in  the  Court  are  nowhere  more  evident
than  in  the  way  it  agreed  unanimously—in  six  separate
opinions—that  the  film,  "Lady  Chatterley's  Lover"  was
not  obscene.    Justice  Frankfurter  quoted  D.  H.   Law-
rence  in  favor  of  censoring  pornography  and  used  the
film  as  a  peg  on  which  to  expound  his  theory  of  regu-
lation   under    the   First    Amendment.    Justice   Potter
Stewart,  for  a  five  man  majority,  declared  in  full  blown
Holmes-Brandeis   accents   that   the   First   Amendment
protects   advocacy   of   adultery   as   well   as   socialism.
Black  joined   in  that  opinion,  in  a  separate  opinion  by
Douglas  opposing  all  censorship  as  prior  restraint  and
in  a  third  opinion  of  his  own  (as  the  only  Justice  who
had  not  seen  the  film)  objecting  that  precedent  would
require  the  Court   to  "appraise  each  movie,  on  a  case
by  case  method."    He  sideswiped  Frankfurter  by  de-
claring  that  the  latter's  quotation   from  D.  H.  Lawrence
implied  that  censorship  "should  be  applied  only  to  pub-
lications  that  make  sex  look  less  ugly,  that  is  ...    less
alluring."    We  have   rarely   seen   the   Court  so   over-
heated.    Sex  seems  to  be  worse  even  than  communism
for  judicial   composure.
able  people   like  Greene,  who  had  don;   good  work  for  the
Navy  in  the  fields  of  electronics  and  rocket  launchers.    If  in-
formers  are  kept  anonymous,  irresponsible  gossip   is  encour-
aged  and,  among  the  so-called  "professional  informers,"  psy-
chopathic  liars  are  long  shielded  from  view,  as  has  now  been
demonstrated  in  a  number  of  proceedings  where  famous  FBI
undercover  spies  had  to  stand  up  in  the  witness  box.    Chief
Justice  Warren   mustered  a  majority  of  eight  for  the   propo-
sition  that  such  procedures  have  not  been  authorized   explicitly
by  either  Congress  or  the  President.    He  spoke  for  a  group  of
five who  intimate  that  such  unfair  trial  methods  would   be  a
violation   of   the   Constitution   even   if   so   authorized   while
Frankfurter,  Harlan   and  Whittaker   joined  only  in  the   result
but  "intimating  no  views  as  to  the  validity  of  these   proced-
ures."    There  will  now  be  a  demand  for  action  in  Congress
and  the  reaction  will  test  the  country's  recollection  of  its  fun-
damental  principles.    Only  the  first  round  has  been  won  in
the  fight  against  the  faceless  informer.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Are.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $6:*
Name   .............................................................—..............—......
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone...~.......State.......»..™.....
7/6/S9
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ..............................................................._...................._.
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?        Tea  Q    No.  D
//  Somebody  Keeps  Borrowing  Your  Weekly,  Gel Him,  to Subscribe  on  the Blank  Below
IE   Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
L   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class  Hatter  at   Washington,  D.  C,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but    p«b-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the   U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  MaU  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED