I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959feb23.pdf

============================================================

Where  A   Witch Hunt  of  the Bar  Leads,  P.  4
Humphrey  Lifts  the  Curtain  on  Censorship  of  Nuclear  and  Foreign   Policy   Matters,  Page  3
I. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  8FEBRUARY  23,  1959'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
An  Indispensable  Man  — For  German  Military  Revival
A  mixture  of  identification  and  superstition,  humanity  and
cant,  leads  critics  to  offer   the  tributes  Mr.  Dulles  has  been
receiving  in  his  illness.   That  primitive  fear  lest  the  departed
come  back  and  take  vengeance  leads  men  to  say  nothing   but
good  not  only  of  the  dead  but  of  those  who  might  be  dying.
The   chorus  is  swelled   by  the   courtier-like  tendency  of   of-
ficials  and  journalists  to  demonstrate  their  own  sense  of  pro-
priety  and  deference  to  fashion  by  repeating  the  cliches  of  the
moment.  The  labored  articles  on  the  Secretary's  indispensabil-
ity  which fill the  newspaper  pages  are  an  up-to-date  version  of
the  whispers  that  filled  royal  courts  when  a  dominant   Min-
ister   lay   stricken.   This   deafening   buzz-buzz   stupefies   the
public  mind.
A  Man Who  Trusts  Nobody
It  is  noteworthy that  even  in  this  chorus  one  note  is  miss-
ing.   No  one  pretends  that  in  his  six  years  at  State  Depart-
ment  Mr.  Dulles  has  won  affection.   The  Department   knows
the  Secretary  as  a  cold,  arrogant  and  ruthless  man  who  has
been  exhausting  himself   running   around  the  world   because
he  really  trusts  no  one.   Since  the  world   each  man  inhabits
is his  own  mirror,  the  man  who  thinks  no  one  is  to  be  trusted
is  the  man  who  concludes  from  observation  of  himself   that
others,  too,  are  not  what  they  seem.    Indeed  no  man  in  our
time  has  so  succeeded  in  creating  an  image  of  himself   which
he  must  know  to  be  false.    A  lifelong   servant  of  the   most
materialistic  forces  in  our  society,  a  Big  Lawyer  for  the  Big
Money,  a  pre-war  apologist  for  Japanese  aggression  and  Nazi
expansion,  an  exponent  of  Macchiavellianism  so  long  as  the
Axis  was  winning,  an  advocate  of  a  Christian   peace  as  soon
as  its  defeat  was  foreseen,  Mr.  Dulles  by  his  constant  invoca-
tion   of   Christianity  and   freedom  has  succeeded  in   making
these  ideals  suspect  in   the   minds  of   uncommitted   millions
who  hear  in  them  only  the  tom-toms  beating  for  a  new  war.
A  Heady  Readiness  to  Gamble  With  Death
It  is  a  commentary  on  the  limitation  of  men's   imagination
that  one  elderly  man's  struggle  with  a  terrible  illness   evokes
sympathy  even  from  those  who  dislike  all  he  stands  for,  but
his  proclaimed  readiness  to  plunge  the  world  into  war  over
Berlin   evokes  no  protesting   image   of  the   countless   human
beings  he  would  thus  consign  to  agony.   How  often  this  man
who  clings  so  fiercely  to  life  has  been  ready  to  plunge  the
world  into  death!   Ever  since  that  first  Indo-Chinese  crisis  in
1954,   he  has  shown  a  heady  readiness  to  gamble  the   lives
of   all  of  us.   A  psychologist   looking   at  the  pattern   would
infer   self-destructive   tendencies  unwholesome   in  a  Secretary
of   State.   The   same  sense  of   humanity  which  leads  one   to
wish  Mr.  Dulles  well  in  his  personal  struggle  must  also  lead
one  to  hope  that  he  will  not  return  to   office.
Krupp  Ready for  His  Old Business  Again
People  the  world  over  would  feel  safer  if  Mr.  Dulles  were
to  retire,  particularly  because  of  the  issue  which  is  his  main
concern.   As  a  State  Department  official  told  the  Wall  Street
Journal   (Feb.    16),    in  forecasting  the  possibility   that   Mr.
Dulles   might   continue   part-time,   "He's    not  going  to   fuss
with  the  future  of  Cuba  or  Japan's  troubles  with  Korea.    He's
saving  himself  for  Germany."   His  retirement  would   seem  in
this  respect  an  historic  turning-point.   The  speech  by  Senator
Mansfield   the  day  before  the  news  of  the  Secretary's   illness
was  another  indication  of  the  revolt  within  Democratic   ranks
against  bi-partisan  cold  war  policies  which  serve  only  to  fur-
ther   the   revival   in   Germany   and   Japan   of   those    same
strongly  centralized  States,  combining  a  highly   monopolistic
capitalism  with  a  strong  military  tradition,  which  we  so  re-
cently  spent  so  much  blood  and  treasure  to  put  down.   Krupp
is  back  on  the  scene,  participating  disturbingly   in   Germany's
first  nuclear   project.    An   interview  with  him   (Washington
Star,  Feb.  15)  concludes  cutely  that  while  "Krupp  is  reluctant
to  get  into  a  field  that  twice  has  reduced  the  family  firm  to
rubble"  if  NATO  pressed  him  to  manufacture  arms  he  would
"under   certain  conditions"  do  it  again.    "We  must  not  for-
get   reality,"   Krupp   told   his   interviewer   smugly.    Neither
must  we.
Germans Want  to  Deal  With  Moscow Themselves
The  weakness  of  the  Mansfield  speech  was  its  readiness  to
leave  the  German  problem   to  be  settled   between  East  and
West  Germans.     The   terms   of  the  peace  can  only  provide
safeguards  against  a  third  German  try  if  written  by  the  Al-
lies  of  the  last  war.   Our   safety   as  well   as  theirs  calls   for
strict  provisions against  allowing  the  Germans  to  have  atomic,
bacteriological  or  chemical  weapons.   But  Mr.  Dulles  and  the
Adenauer  regime  want  to  keep  the  cold  war  going  until  the
West  is  begging   them  to  make  such  weapons   again.   Then,
in  their  own  time,  the  Germans  will  deal  with  Moscow  them-
selves.  When  that  day comes,  the  West  will  have  lost  control.
All  the  talk  here  of  a  new  flexibility  on  the  part  of   Mr.
Dulles  reveals  when  examined  only  a  deft  reshuffling  of   the
same  stale  cards.    The  strategy  is  to  give  the  appearance  of
flexibility without  the  reality.    For  all  our  supposed   concern
with  free  elections,  the  one  offer  we  will  not  make  is  to  de-
militarize  and  neutralize  Germany  in  return  for  them.   This
would  liquidate  the  East  German  dictatorship,  open  the  way
for   disengagement,  and  allow  East  Europe  to  breathe   more
freely   again.    The   choice   is  between  East  European   libera-
tion  and  German  military  revival.   The  two  are  incompatible.
The  latter  has  been  Mr.  Dulles'  real  concern.    His  retirement
might  make  possible  a  shift  toward  wiser  policies.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, February S3,1959
Lord  Simon  and  Earl  Russell  Launch  A  New  Move  to  Stop  Spread  of  Atomic Weapons
Britain Urged  to Renounce  the Bomb and Form Club of Non-Nuclear  Powers
Everyone  admits  the  spread   of  nuclear  weapons  will  in-
crease  the  danger  of war  but  few  are  doing  anything  to  stop
it.  In  the  House  of  Lords  Feb.   11,  Lord  Simon  of  Wythens-
hawe  with  the  support  of  Bertrand  Russell,  filed  a  motion
which may launch a world-wide campaign. It  urged the British
government  (1)  to  negotiate  an. agreement  with  the  non-nu-
clear  powers  "to  renounce  the  manufacture,  ownership  and
use  of  nuclear  weapons",  (2)  "to  offer  ourselves  similarly  to
renounce  any  such  weapons"  and  (3)  to  persuade  the  U.S.
and  the  U.S.S.R.  "jointly  to  sponsor  a  worldwide  system  of
inspection  under  the  auspices  of  the  United  Nations  to  en-
force  effectively  any  such  agreement."
Conventional  Thinking  Still  Predominates
The  House  of  Lords  is  now  England's, most  influential  de-
bating  society  rather  than  a  legislative  chamber, and the mo-
tion  (like  more than  90 percent  of  the  motions in  the  upper
House)  "was,  by  leave,  withdrawn."   But  Earl  Russell  (see
box  below)  indicated  that  Lord  Simon's  motion was  only  "a
first  move."    The  motion  was  at  once  opposed  by  the  Con-
servative   and  Labour  spokesmen  in  the  Lords  but  drew  a
friendly  response  from  the  Liberal  leader,  Lord  Rea.  The de-
bate  strikingly  illustrated  the  hold  of  conventional  thinking
on  the  minds  of the  leadership  in  Britain,  as  elsewhere.
Almost  Tongue-in-Cheek Parody
There  were  passages  which sounded as  if  they  might  have
been written  by  Max Beerbohm.  The  Earl  of  Home,  the  Con-
servative leader,  soared  gracefully  into the proposition that he
did  not  "believe  it  was  possible  to  insulate  invention  and
sources   of  power  from  possible  use  in  war.   Medicine,   the
most  humane  of  science,"  the  Earl  explained,  "could  at  once
cure  and kill."  No one rose to  ask the  eloquent  peer  whether
there might not be a  strong  case for  the  abolition of medicine,
too,  if  its  practitioners  spent  all  their  energies  on developing
better  ways  to  kill  more patients.
Hard  Man  to  Convince
The  most  interesting  theory  put  forward  in  opposition  to
the  Simon  motion was  by  Lord  Strang,  who  as  Sir  William
Strang was  Permanent  Under-Secretary  of  the  Foreign   Office
before  World  War  II.    Sir  William  in  1938  was  one  of  the
principal  architects  of the  Munich Pact, and in  1939  facilitated
the  Nazi-Soviet Pact  by  taking  a  slow  boat  to  Moscow  while
Ribbentrop  negotiated  that  coup  with  Molotov.  Sir  William
was thereupon elevated to the  peerage. In  opposing the  Simon
motion, Lord  Strang  "was  not  entirely  convinced that  a  mere
increase  in  the  number of  States  possessing  nuclear weapons
would  necessarily  increase  the  danger  of  war.   There  was  at
least  a  possibility  that  this  would  broaden  the  basis  of    ...
stability."  Lord' Strang  is  a  strong-minded  man.   Last  time
he  was  "not  entirely  convinced" that  Hitler  meant  war  until
bombs  fell  on  London.
Lord  Coleraine  on  the  same high  plane  opposed the  Simon
motion  as  constituting  "a  moral  surrender."  Lord Henderson
Comforting  News
"In  addition  to  the  growing  stock  of  kiloton  bombs,
the  production  of  British  megaton weapons is  proceed-
ing  steadily.   The  last  series  of  British  tests  and  the
valuable   exchange  of   information   with   the   United
States  have enabled important  technical advances  to tie
made in  the  design  of nuclear  warheads.   This  will per-
mit  a  significant  increase  in  the  rate  of  production."
—New  British  White Paper  on Defense,  Feb. 195S.
said  it   was  "not  practical  politics."    The  Earl   of  Dundee
thought  the  important  thing  "was  never  to  allow  Russia  to
believe  that   she   would   have  a   preponderance  in  nuclear
power."   Lord  Birdwood  exclaimed, "I  would  rather contem-
plate  a  world in  which there  was  nothing  left  to  rescue  than
live  on in  a  world  which  had  been  absorbed  into  a  system  of
life which I abhor...."
Church  Lords  Oppose  Nuclear Arms
But  all  the  response  was  not  negative.   Lord  Rea  asked,
"Why  should  we  attract  an  onslaught   on  this   undefended
island  by  the  provocative  possession  of  a  virtually   useless
contribution  to  American nuclear  arms?   That  would  be  the
very  reverse  of  a  deterrent."  Three  Church  Lords  supported
Lord  Simon.  The  Bishop  of  Manchester  thought  the  use  of
nuclear  arms  "was  in  all  circumstances morally indefensible;"
the  Bishop  of  Portsmouth  said  it  was  "utterly  repulsive  to
man's  moral  sense,"  and  found  the  Simon  motion "a  refresh-
ing  approach."    So did  the  Bishop of  Chichester.
Lord Wilmot said renunciation of nuclear weapons by  Britain
and  the  smaller  powers  "would  make  war  less  likely."   Lord
Wise,  who  said  he  was  speaking for  East  Anglia,  where  the
nuclear  bases are,  said  people  "could no longer wait  passively
for  the  statesmen,  who  were  becoming  weary."   Lord  John
Boyd-Orr drew back, saying  the  Simon motion implied  Britain
withdraw  from  NATO  "and  try  to assume the  role  of a world
peace  party.   That  was  pretty  strong  medicine  for  either  of
the  political parties  here."  He  seemed  still  to  believe in  the
deterrent  value of  Britain's  H-bombs.
Dangerous  Symbols of Independence
A famous  physician, once a noted professor of physiology at
Cambridge,  now Lord Adrian, warned that  "if  nuclear  bombs
became  one  of  the  symbols  of  national  independence,  no  one
could  doubt  that  the  danger  of  a  general  war  would  be  far
greater."   He  thought  Britain  would  deserve  thanks  of  the
world  "if  we  could  prevent  this  happening  by  denying  our-
selves  the  right  to  use  them."
Lord Simon, one time Liberal Lord Mayor of Manchester (no
relation  to  Sir  John  Simon), saw  his  motion as  a  chance  for
Britain  to recover in the  moral  realm  that world leadership  it
can no longer  exercise  on the  military plane.  He has launched
a  hopeful  initiative  which deserves  world-wide support.
Russell  Says  Mankind  Must  Unite  Against the  Bomb  as Against A New Plague
"He  [Earl  Bertrand  Russell]  regarded  the  [Simon]  mo-
tion  as  a  first  move,  and  a  practicable  move  he  hoped,  in  a
long  campaign  to  ensure  the  continued  existence  of   the
human  race. . . . There  was a feeling  that  in any opposition
to war  there  was  something  that  was  left-wing  or  pro-Rus-
sion.  That  was not his feeling at  all.  He was concerned  with
man,  be  he  Chinese,  French,  Russian,  American or  British.
"What   was   wanted   was  a   different   land   of   outlook.
Hitherto  we had  thought of  nuclear  weapons  as  being  in  the
possession  of the  east  and west,  with the  east  being a threat
to  the  west  and  the  west  being  a  threat  to  the  east.   This
was not a  sensible way to  look at  it. Nuclear weapons were a
threat  to  mankind, and  against  this  threat   man  ought  to
unite.  They  would unite  if  it  was  the  Black  Death,  in  order
to  take the  sanitary  measures to  avoid this  appalling evil.....
"We had got  used to  war.  We had to  get  unused  to it  and
it  was  not  an  easy  effort.   Unless  we  did,  those  who  could
not  make  the  effort  were contributing  their  little  bit  to  the
extinction  of  our  species.  (Cheers)."
—House  of  Lords, Feb. 11, The  Times  (London)  Feb. IS.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, February  S3,1969
In  the   Name  of  Security,  Advocates of  Nuclear Test  Cessation  Gagged
Senator  Humphrey  Lifts  the  Curtain  on  Foreign  Policy  Censorship
While  increasing  Congressional  attention  has  been  paid  in
recent  years  to  "freedom  of  information"  in  the   executive
branch  of  the  government, little  has  been  focussed  on  the
mushrooming  habit  of  holding  more  and  more  Congressional
hearings behind closed  doors and  censoring  the  transcript be-
fore  release.
Senator  Hubert  H.  Humphrey, in  a  speech  Feb.  13  accept-
ing  a  "Speaker  of  the  Year"  award  at  Northwestern  Univer-
sity,  provided  the  first  public analysis  of  the  peculiar  stand-
ards  applied  in  making  these  so-called   "security  deletions"
from  the  text  of  executive  committee  sessions.
At  the  same time he called attention  to a  paradoxical  situa-
tion  in  information policy  on  nuclear  testing.   He  said  that
while  the  stated  policy  of the  government  was  to  seek  for  an
agreement  on test  cessation,  "defenders  of  this  public  policy
are 'gagged' while those who oppose it  within the  Administra-
tion  have relatively free  hand in  expressing  their   opposition."
Why  Can't  Dr.  Killian  Speak  Out, Too?
Senator  Humphrey  said  that  while  the  AEC  and  the  De-
fense  Department  are  allowed  to  question  nuclear  test  policy
publicly, neither  Dr. James  R. Killian, head  of  the  President's
Science  Advisory  Committee, nor  any  of  its   members  "can
publicly  say they agree  with the  policy if  their  statements im-
ply  they  are  speaking  as  a  member  of the  Committee."
"All  I  can  say  is,"   Senator  Humphrey continued,  "that
this  is  a  rather  peculiar  way  to  run  a  government.   One
might  even  ask,  what  about  the  fellow  at  the  top?   What
does  he  think about  all  this?  Why  doesn't  he  speak  out  so
that  we  might  know  just  how  firm  the  policy  is?
Senator  Humphrey  said  it  took  his  Senate   disarmament
subcommittee last  year  "literally  months to find people in  the
executive  branch  of  the  Government who were  willing  to  dis-
cuss  the  problem  of  the  detection  of  nuclear  weapon's  tests."
He  said  much  of  the  information necessary  to  intelligent  dis-
cussion  is  still  classified "some  of  it  for  reasons  that  are  dif-
ficult to  understand."
How  the  Censor's  Erratic  Blue-Pencil Works
The  Senator  gave  some  cases  to  illustrate.   The  first  was
"information  relating  to  the  weight  of  atomic  weapons  rela-
tive  to  their  yield is  classified."   With  this he  had  no quarrel.
He felt  it  was  "clearly  sensitive."
Case  No. 2 he called "questionable".  This  was  a  case  where
a  private witness  who had  been  serving  the  government  in  a
specific  capacity  "makes  recommendations  regarding  future
policies on the  relation  between disarmament  and surprise  at-
tack.  His  views are  censored  because  they  are  agreed  to  by
one  agency  but  may  be  opposed by  another."
Case  No. 3 was  the  complete blanket  of censorship  covering
the  problems  of  distinguishing  earthquakes  from  nuclear  ex-
plosions  and  of  perfecting  new  instruments  of  detection  and
identification.   The  Senator  said  this  had  nothing  to  do  with
weapons  but  only with  seismology.
"We are  told," the  Senator  revealed,  "that  if  instruments
Hopeful  Nuclear  Test  Bulletin
The  Feb.  15 issue  of  the  London Observer  says  that
Dr.  P.  J.  Kellogg  of  the  University  of  Minnesota,  in
an  article  for  the  British  science  journal  Nature,  re-
ports  that  the  newly  discovered  belt  of  intense  radia-
tion surrounding the  earth  in space "may  provide a new
method  of  detecting  high-altitude  nuclear  explosions."
High  altitude  explosions,   like  the  underground  ones,
have  been played  up  by  the  AEC  as  obstacles  to  effec-
tive  inspection  of  test  agreement.   The  Observer   said
Dr.  Kellogg's   observations  "agree  fairly  closely  with
views  held  by  scientists  who  have  been  working  on
somewhat  similar  lines  at  Bristol  University"  in  Eng-
land.  It  is interesting  that  first  news of  this  important
work  by  an  American  should  come  from  abroad.   If
Dr. Kellogg reported  that  high  altitude  tests  positively
could  not  be  detected  we  are  sure  it  would  be  on  our
front  pages.
are  placed  deep in the earth,  this  may be an  excellent  means
of  detecting  and  identifying nuclear  explosions  and  earth-
quakes.  But  you cannot  be told how the experiments will be
conducted,  where they  will be conducted, who is  responsible
for  carrying  on  the  research,  and  when  it  is  expected  to  be
completed.  Yet the  experiments  would  have  great  interest
for   seismologists  the  world  over  and  could  have  a  sig-
nificant  impact  on  the  Geneva negotiations."
The fourth  case  cited by  the  Senator  is  the  deletion  of  tes-
timony  "on the ground  that  the witness  is a  consultant  to  the
advisory  body  to  the  President."   This  is  used  to  "gag"   Dr.
Killian  and  his  committee members.
Blacking  Out  the  Soviet  Viewpoint
Case  No. 5 in  the  Senator's  indictment  is  classification  "in
our  recent  hearings"  of  information  which  "has   to  do  with
the  validity  of  arguments  presented  by  the   Soviet   Union."
He  said,  "A  government  witness  in  the  course  of  his  testi-
mony  suggested  that  the  Soviet  Union  possibly  had  a  valid
objection  to  one of  our  arguments,  but  the  Executive  branch
decided  this  ought  to  be  censored."
The  Senator  agreed  there  was  "considerable   merit  in  not
conceding too many points  to your opponent in  the  course  of a.
debate  or in  the  course  of delicate  negotiations.   On the  other
hand,  if  the  American people are  constantly  fed  the  line that
every  Soviet  proposal  is by definition full  of  evil for  us  or that
every  Soviet  fear  is  a  trumped  up  Communist plot,  then how
shall  we ever   judge  the  genuine points  of view  of that nation
and  its  people?"
The  Senator's  final  thrust  was  that  maybe  there  was  so
much censorship  in  the field of foreign  policy because the  gov-
ernment  couldn't make up its  own mind on just what  its  policy
was.
You  Really  Can't  Trust  Those
Mrs.  (M.  S.)  CHURCH  (R.  111.)  I  have  been  rather  in-
terested  in  the  comments that  have  come  from  certain  of
the  industrialists  in  Chicago  who  were  thrown  in  contact
with  him  (Mikoyan),  as  to  why  they  were  in  touch  and
how;  and  I  wondered at  what  stage  of  the  game  the  State
Dept.  became aware that  there  waa being  set  up  perhaps  a
pattern  for  non-governmental activity—almost   under-the-
table  diplomacy.  Or  am  I  exaggerating  what happened?
Secretary  DULLES.  Well,  I  don't  think  it  really  did  a
great  deal  of harm.
(Security  Deletion)  Capitalists
(Security  deletion).
Secretary  DULLES.  I  will  say  at  thia  juncture  that  the
representatives  of  labor  took  a  position  which  is,  I  think,
far  sounder  in  the  national  interests  than  some  of  the  rep- •
resentatives  of  business  whom  he  met.
(Security  deletion).
Secretary  DULLES.  The  labor  people  really  stood  up  to
him  and  gave  him  a  really  strong  statement  of  position.
Of  course,  Mr.  Meany  refused  to  meet  with  him  at   all.
—House  Foreign Affairs   Committee, Jan.  &S.
3    3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  23,1959
The  Hidden  Logic  of  the  House  Committee's  New  Attack  on  Communist   Lawyers
A  Witch  Hunt  of  the  Bar Leads  to  A  Witch  Hunt  of  the  Bench
One  of  the  crucial  weaknesses  of   the  Soviet  legal  system
is  that  a  Soviet  lawyer  is  afraid  to  defend  a  man  accused  of
being  counter-revolutionary  or  anti-Communist.    The  lawyers
assigned   by  the  State  are  not  trusted  by  defendants  because
in  so many cases they  merely facilitate  the  obtaining  of  a  con-
fession,  true  or  false.
I  could  not  help  but  think  of  this  as I  read  the  new  report
issued   by  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee   on
"Communist   Legal  Subversion:  The  Role  of  the   Communist
Lawyer."  The  Committee says unctuously that its  report  "must
not  be  construed  as  a  reflection  on  the  right  and  privilege  of
legal  representation  for  Communists."
But  how  do  Communists,  real  or  alleged,   get  counsel  in
an  atmosphere  where  it  is  dangerous  to  defend  them  lest  one
be  tagged  as  a  Communist lawyer?
Making  Lawyers  More Fearful
When  the   House   Committee   issues  a  report   naming  39
lawyers  as  Communists  and   concluding  with  a  plea   to   bar
associations  "for   prompt   action"   against  them,  it   undercuts
that  right  to  counsel  it  purports  to  respect.
Over  and   over  again  these   lawyers  are  accused  of  trying
"to  pervert  our  democratic  processes."    But  what  of  the  per-
versions  in  which  the  Committee  engages?    Is  it  fair,  without
trial,  to  issue  a  report  stigmatizing  39  members  of  the  bar
as  Communists  and  trying  to  initiate  their  disbarment?
Justice   Requires  An  Independent  Bar
An  independent  bar  is  as  important  to  justice  as  an  inde-
pendent  judiciary.    The  bar  is  best  policed  by  its  own  mem-
bership  under  the  supervision  of  the  courts.    The  standards
should   be  those  of  probity  not: politics.    We   think  the   bar
can  only   suffer   by   the   kind   of   surveillance   to   which   the
House  committee  has  been  subjecting  it.
The  report  says  that  "more  than   100"   lawyers  have  been
identified   as  Communists  by  former   Communists  testifying
before  the  Committee  since  1947.    Some  of  the  accused   seem
. to   have  gained   immunity  by  informing:   "Approximately   a
dozen  of  them  informed  this  Committee  that  they  were   no
longer   part   of   the   conspiracy  and  presented   valuable   testi-
mony  regarding  their  past  activities  in  the  party."
The  report  complains  that  "no  less  than  67  other  lawyers
have  refused   to  answer  questions  .  .  .  despite   sworn  testi-
mony  regarding   their   affiliation   with   the   conspiracy."    The
Committee  itself  seems  to  doubt   some  of  that  "sworn  testi-
mony"   since  its  report   only   identifies   39  lawyers  as   Com-
munists.
Should  Communist  Lawyers  Be  Disbarred?
Shall  we  assume  that  a  proven  Communist  should  not  be
allowed  to  practice  law?   If  the  test  is  to  be  ideas,  what  of
non-Communists  who  share  some  of  the  same  ideas?
Let  us,  for   example,   look  at  the  standards  by  which   the
Committee  proves  to  its  own  satisfaction  what  the  Attorney
General   failed   to  prove—that  the  National   Lawyers'   Guild
is  a  Communist  front?   The  "subversion"   alleged  against  the
Guild  consists  of  nine  points,  all  of  them  having  to  do  with
defense   of   civil   liberties.     It   is   against   the    Congressional
witch  hunt—that,  of  course,  is  Point  No.   1.    It  is  for   repeal
of  the  Internal  Security  Act  (which  Truman  vetoed).    It  is
(like  a  whole  group  of  Senators)   for   "unrestricted  issuance
of  passports."    It  would  (like  the  Supreme  Court)  put  "limi-
tations  on  the  right  of  the  Defense  Department  to  discharge
subversives  from  the  Armed  Forces."
If   we  disbar  Communist  lawyers,  what   of   other   radical,
liberal  and  conservative  lawyers  who  agree  with  many  of  the
civil  liberties  issues  raised  by  the  National   Lawyers'  Guild?
Shall  they  be  disbarred,  too?    And  if  it  furthers  a  subversive
conspiracy   to  acgue  for   strict  enforcement  of   constitutional
rights,  what  of  Judges  who  rule  that  way?
A  witch  hunt  of  the  bar  leads  logically  to  a  witch  hunt  of
the  bench.    Senator  Eastland  has  already  presented  a  statisti-
cal  summary  intended  to  cast  suspicion  on  the  courts.     The
really  subversive  conspiracy  is  being  carried  on  by  Eastland's
Committee   and  Walter's  in  purported  search  for  subversives.
This  is  the  paradox  of  which  one  should  never  lose  sight.
IPS   Speaks   Sane  Nuclear  Policy   Rally,   Club  65,  13  Astor  Place,  ATC,  8  p.m.,    Thursday,   Feb.   26
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
2/23/50
(To)  Name
Street   ..........
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?        Yes  D    No. n
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
I    F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Entered   as   Second  Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Augjust^and  December^ at  5618  Nebraska^Ave.^ N^W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   ind«         "                      ""          -----        ..,.._,.     -           «..       .  /-..       i-»i                                   „*               o*
$5
y   -Lnursaav  except  cne  last  twu   -Luuiauaya   ui.   .O.UKUBI.   <*uu  ^evcm^d    «*i.  «w*u   *<V.VLU».»U  a.,*,.,   *.,.  ,,.,  ,           ^
independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
55  In  the   U.  S.;  $6  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Ma 11  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED