I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959apr20.pdf

============================================================

Cloak-and-Dagger  Dirty   Work  in Berlin, P.  4
What  Can  Be  Learned   (Despite   An  Iron  Curtain  Mentality)   in  Ulbricht's   Realm,  Pages  2  and  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  15
APRIL  20,  1959
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
16  CENTS
Back  From  Europe  With  Slim  Hope
Whether  seen  from  near  or  from  far,  the  Berlin  crisis  looks
pretty  close to  hopeless.   As  long  as Germany  is divided, West
Berlin's  position  will  be  precarious,  and  this  will  create  fear,
tension  and  instability  between  the  great  powers.   But—and
this  is perhaps  the  basic factor  in  the  German  situation—both
the  West  German  and  the  East  German  regimes  have  noth-
ing  to  gain  by  reunification.   Ulbricht  is  fully  as  intransigeant
as  Adenauer,  and  Erhard—who  would  be  better  than   Etzel
as  Adenauer's  successor—has  already  explained   (see   Gaston
Coblentz's   interview  with   him   in   the   New   York   Herald-
Tribune  April  14)  that  like  der  Alle  he  is unwilling  "to  give
an  inch"  on  disengagement,  or  Berlin.
Free  elections  would  bring  into  being  a  Socialist Germany,
ending  Communist  rule  in  the  East  and  removing  that  Chris-
tian   Democratic   facade   behind   which   the   German   military
and  the  industrial  monopolists  have  been  returning  to  power
in  the  West.   The  West  German  ruling  clique  needs  tension
to  proceed   with  its  plans  for   nuclear  armament;  Ulbricht's
hard  line  and  very  existence  would   be  threatened  should  a
thaw  bring  gentler  Soviet  policies.   In  this  sense,  Ulbricht  is
Khrushchev's  Chiang  Kai-shek,  fearing  a  world  settlement  as
his  own  demise.  And  just as Chiang  has  his  means of  manipu-
lating  American  politics  from  within,  so  (one  suspects)   the
wily  Ulbricht  has  his  own  China  Lobby—knows  how  to  play
for   his  own  ends  on  the  still   unsteady  balance  within   the
Kremlin  and  between  it  and  Peking.
Strange  Swap  Suggested
A   second   factor  which   makes  settlement   difficult   is   that
the  West  Berlin  Socialists are  closer  to  Adenauer  than  to  their
own  comrades  in  West  Germany.  Bitter  experience  has  made
them  distrustful  of  any  solution,  even  within  the  United   Na-
tions,  which  involves  cooperation  with  the  Communists.   They
want  the  Western   troops  to  stay.   They  realize  their  position
is  unsafe  as long  as Germany remains  divided.   But  they  hope
that  within  the   confines  of   a  world   settlement   reunification
can  be  achieved.   One  West  Berlin  official   suggested   to  me
that  maybe  if  America  would  agree  to  Red  China's  admission
into  the  United  Nations,  the  Soviet  bloc  in  return  would  re-
linquish  its  hold  on  East  Germany!
The  real  obstacle  is  that  no  one  except  the  Berliners  and
the  West  German  Socialists  wants   reunification.   Britain  has
just  been  edged  out  of  second  place  among  the  world's  ex-
porters  by West  Germany,  and  fears  Bonn's  aspiration  to  take
London's  place  as Washington's  prime  ally.   De  Gaulle  likes
Adenauer  because he  symbolizes  a  truncated   Reich.   The  Rus-
sians,  Poles  and  Czechs  fear  not  only  German  rearmament  but
the  strongly  nationalistic  tendencies  the  German  Social  Demo-
crats  have  shown  since  the  war.   The  American  military  pre-
fer  West  Germany  in  NATO  to  the  hazards  of  unification,
and  the  Russian  military  may  feel  the  same  way  about   their
hold  on  Saxony's  uranium  mines.   The  truth  is  that  no  one
trusts  the  Germans—not  even  their  own  leaders.   Even  the
West  German  Socialists  see  question  marks.   They  regard  re-
viving  anti-Semitism—as  yet  minor  and  sporadic—as  an  index
of  political  recovery,  and   they  confess  their   fear  that   hard
times  might  bring  a  rightist  revival.
The  story  of  Berlin,  of  Germany,  of  Poland  and  of  Europe
calls  for  a  Sophocles.   The  European  peoples—and  we Ameri-
cans  with  them—are  caught  in  a  snare  of  old  fears,  and  old
grievances,  from  which  there  seems  to  be  none  but  a  tragic
exit.   It  is  only  by  lifting  our  eyes  from  the  immediate  issues
that  we may hope  to  find  a  way out.   Nowhere  but  in  Europe
can  one  see so  clearly  the  menace  which  is  held  for  mankind
by  the   nation   state,  with  all  its  vested   emotional   interests.
Tiny  countries  one  can  cross  by  plane  in  an  hour   insist   on
their   right   to  be  a  law  unto  themselves,  and  to  kill   their
neighbors  wholesale.   The  crematorium was  only  the   efficient
German  way  to  fulfill   the  hatred  they  all  nourish.   Just  as
German   hates  Pole,   so  Pole  hates  Ukrainian  and  Ukrainian
hates  Russian.   Europe  is  a  festering  mass of  national  hatreds.
If  it  were  not  Berlin,  it  would  be  Breslau  or  Lwow  or  Kiev
which  could  start  them  all  fighting  again.   A  world  of  nation
states  without  law  is  a  world  in  which  war  is  inevitable.
Despite  Their  Masters  and  Their  Myths
Only   in  such  a  perspective,  sustained  by  a  new  sense  of
common  humanity,  can  we  work  our  way  back  slowly  from
the  abyss.    It  was  Easter  time  in  Germany  and  Poland,  and
the  colorful  street  crowds  stirred  one's  love  and  pity.    In  this,
the  spring  festival  of  the  resurrected  god,  one  could  see  the
greater   miracle,  the  resurrection  of  man.    Everywhere,  with
a  vitality  that  commands  awe,  under  whatever  system  of  rule
and  mastery,  men  have  been  digging   new  homes   and   lives
out  of  the  rubble.   Here  this  is  advertised  as  a  triumph  of
free  enterprise  and  there  of  economic  planning;  the  truth  is
that  on   both   sides  men   are   rebuilding    despite   myth   and
muddle.   A  new  crop  of  rosy-cheeked  babies  could   be  seen
on  the  Kurfurstendamm  and  the  Nowy  Swiat;  a  new  crop  of
lovers  held  hands  in  the  warm  sunshine  along  the  Rhine  and
the Vistula.   But on both  sides  there  also  appeared  fresh  youths
in  the  old  uniforms.   Twice  in  our  lifetime  Europe  has  been
crushed   and  rebuilt.   Could   it  rise  again  if  crushed  a  third
time?   Would  there  still  be  enough  vitality  to  well  up  from
the  human  roots  for  another  resurrection?   Any  effort  at  com-
promise  over  Berlin  seems  inconsequential   beside  so  fearful
a  gamble.    Maybe  with   Mr.   Dulles  finally  retired   we   will
really  make  that  effort.
5   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  20,1959
An   Official   Exhibit   Reveals   How  Unrevolutionary  the  CP  Was  Under  Hitler
After  Warsaw, A  Visit  to  East  Berlin  Is  Like A Return  to  Stalinism  . . .
Berlin   (East)
To  return  from   Warsaw  to  East  Berlin  is  like   stepping
back  into  the  era  of  Stalinism.   In  Poland,  once  one  has  his
visitor's visa,  one may  go where one likes and  talk  with  whom
one  pleases.   But  admission  to  the  DDR,  the  German Demo-
cratic  Republic, the  East  Zone Communist  regime,  is  as  dif-
ficult  as  admission  to  the   Soviet  Union  before  Stalin   died.
Journalists  allowed  in—with  the  air  of  having  a  favor  con-
ferred  upon  them—must  follow  a  planned  route  and  be  ac-
companied  by  an   official  translator  and  guide.
I  was  offered  a  two  day  tour  but  this  included  only  two
visits,  one  to  a  collective  farm,  the   other   to  Stalinstadt.
Most  of  my  time  would have  been  spent  travelling  in  a  car,
and  I  would not  have  had  what  I  wanted—a  chance to  roam
the  streets  of  an  East  Zone  city  unaccompanied  and  to  try
to  talk  freely  to  its  people.   I  decided  instead  to  spend  my
limited  time  talking  to  journalists   and  officials  of  the  DDR.
Even  Poland's  "Official"  Journalists
But  in  this,  too,  East  Berlin  was  strikingly  different  from
Warsaw.   Officials  are  not  afraid  to  talk  in  Warsaw.   Despite
a  certain  slow  retrogression   since  1956,  Warsaw  is  still  the
one  place  in  the  world where  one  can  talk  sense  with  Com-
munists  instead  of  merely  exchanging  slogans.    Even  jour-
nalists on the  official  paper,  Trybunu  Ludu, talk  with  a  free-
dom  and  a  sophistication,  a  feeling  for  reality  and  nuances,
a  familiarity   with  the  outside  world,  that  makes  a  visit  to
Warsaw  memorable.
Though  Gomulka is  slowly  being  pushed  into   participating
in  the  campaign  underway  in  all  the  Soviet  states  against
writers   and   intellectuals,   Poland   remains    extraordinarily
free.   The "revisionist" philosopher,  Kolakowski, for  example,
still  teaches  philosophy at  Warsaw  University  and  is  still  a
member  of  the  United  Workers  Party.   The  government  is
still  full  of  Left  Socialists  who talk  and  think  like  socialists,
not  Communists, that  is,  as  men who share  the  traditions of
free   society,  and  prize  the  virtues   of  persuasion   over   the
shortcuts  of  coercion.
In  East  Berlin, I  explained  at  the  Foreign   Office  that  hav-
ing  spoken  in  Warsaw  with  an  editor  of  Trybunu  Ludu,  I
would  like  to  talk  with  an  editor  of  Neues  Deutschland.    I
said  that having had a fill-in at  the Foreign  Office  in  Warsaw,
I  would  like  one  in  Pankow.   I  suggested  that  since  I  had
spoken  with  economic  planners   in  Poland,  it   would  be  in-
teresting  to  talk  with  their  opposite  numbers  in  the  DDR.
Every  suggestion  was  carefully  taken  down,  but  everybody
—withput  exception—seemed  to  be  too  busy.   Since American
newspapermen  rarely   appear  in  the  East  Zone,  one  might
have  imagined  that  there  would  be  curiosity   and   eagerness
for  an  exchange  of  ideas.   I  had  much better  luck  talking  to
people  in  Moscow  three  years  ago  than  in  East  Berlin.   I
had  the  distinct  feeling  that—as  in  Stalin's  day—meeting  a
foreigner   (even  though  an  "anti-Fascist")  was  indiscreet.
Creating  A  Closed  World
In  roaming  the  streets  of  East  Berlin  and  talking   with
people,  one  can  see  the  effort  to  create  a  closed  world.   No
Western  papers  are  on  sale  at  the  many  newsstands.   Travel
agencies   display  bright   posters   on  Unter   den  Linden  but
travel  is  channelled  to  the  Soviet  sphere  and  even  there  the
lucky  voyager  must  travel  in  a  group  and  on  a  group  visa
rather  than  with  an  individual  passport.   This  means  that
any  traveller  who  wanders  away  from  his  supervised  group
is  in  danger  of  being  picked up  by  the  police  since  he  has  no
identification  papers  or  visa  of  his  own.
The  East  German regime,  like the  Western,  is  governed  by
old  men,  Rip  Van  Winkles who  have  come  back  to  life  after
the  cataclysm  of  Hitler   and  the  war,  bringing  with  them
experiences  and  views  which  have  little  meaning  for  a  new
generation.  I  felt  this  strongly  in  talking  with  Socialists  in
the  West and  I  felt  it  again  when I  happened  into  an  exhibit
at  the  Museum  of  German  History  in  East  Berlin.  This  cov-
ered  "forty  years  of  the   November  Revolution  1918-1958."
Its  reproductions  of  newspapers,  photographs,  banners,  uni-
forms  and weaponry provided  a  party  line  history  in  minia-
ture  of  Germany  from  the  fall  of  the  Kaiser  until   1958.
One  of  the  first  things  which  struck  one about  the  exhibits
was  that  their  emotional roots  were  in  the  fierce  struggles
between  Communists  and   Socialists   in  the   early  20's,  the
period  when  the  present   rulers   of  the  DDR  were  in  their
prime.   The  '"treason"  of  the  Social  Democrats  in  utilizing
the  army  to  put   down  revolutionary  uprising   was  vividly
portrayed,  but  there  was  no  real  presentation  of  the  forces
which  later  brought  Hitler  to  power.  It  is  as  if  Nazism was
an  inexplicable  natural  phenomena, an  overwhelming  hurri-
cane, interrupting the  familiar  party  struggle with  the  Social
Democrats.
The  Fate  Luxembourg  Missed
The   second  impression  was   of  the   lack   of  heroes   with
which  to  impress the  young.  Here were Liebknecht  and  Rosa
Luxembourg  (the  latter  a  Polish  Jewess)   murdered  by  the
reactionaries  in  1919.   Here  was  the  Bulgarian  Dimitrov  de-
fying the  Nazis in the Leipzig trial.  Here was La  Passionaria
addressing  the  German  volunteers  in  the  anti-Fascist  ranks
in   Spain.   But  where  were  the   Germans?   The  KPD—the
German  Communist Party—is  proclaimed  as  "the  soul  of  the
resistance"   to  Hitler  but  nowhere  could  one  find  a  photo-
graph  or  a  newspaper  story  showing  a  single  act  of  revolt,
terror  or  sabotage  against  Hitler.
Ulbricht  modestly  reappears   (his  role  was  indeed  modest)
throughout  the  picture  history  but  just  what  he  did  during
the  Hitler  period  is  a  mystery.   A  picture  shows  him  with
Ernst  Thaelmann  addressing  the  last  public meeting  in  Ber-
lin  January  25,  1933,  before  the  Nazis  took  full  power.   Ul-
bricht   next  reappears,   warmly  dressed,   on  the   Stalingrad
front   in  1943,  ten  years  later.   The  most  truthful  part  of
this  exhibit,  and the  most eloquent, is  the  blank  which covers
the  years  when the  "soul  of  the  resistance" was  supposed  to
be  resisting  Hitler.   The  most  revolutionary   section  of  the
working  class  submitted   without   throwing   a   single   bomb
while  its  leaders—like  Ulbricht—sat  out  the  terrible  years  in
Moscow.
The  third  impression  left  upon  one by  the  exhibit  was  the
oversimplified  view  it  represented  of  German  history.   The
Nazi-Soviet  pact,  of  course,  was  omitted;  there  were  no  pic-
tures  of  Molotov  and  Ribbentrop  in  fraternal   accord.   No
youngster,   seeing  the  story  as  told  here   of  Rosa  Luxem-
bourg's  martyrdom,  would guess  that  she was  already  critical
of  Lenin  for  abolishing  freedom  of  the  press  and  free  elec-
tions;  if  the  rightists  had  not  killed  her  in  1919,  Ulbricht's
comrades  would  have  expelled  or  liquidated  her  later  as  a
deviator,  or  "revisionist."   The  follies  of  the   "united   front
from  below"  and  the  crucial  error  of  the  Communists in  pic-
turing   the   Socialists   as   "Social   Fascists"   and  the   main
enemy  never  appear.
No  Way  to  Create  Democracy
These   evasions   and   oversimplifications    are    capped   by
placards  which  proclaim  the  DDR  as  "the   first  real  demo-
cratic  state  in  German  history"  and  descend  into  Stalinist
gibberish  by explaining that this  is so because the  DDR rests
on  "the  principle  of  democratic  centralism."   This  is  history
and  politics  as  it  is  being  taught  to  German  youth  in  the
DDR  today.   Instead  of  a  clean  wind  after  Nazism,  we  have
here  only  more  half-truths,   more  propagandist^   confusion,
more  regimentation   and  more  dictatorship.    This  is  no  way
to  create  a  new democratic  generation.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  20,1959
A  Parliamentary   Guide  Explains  The  World's  "Most  Democratic" Republic
. . The  East  German  Regime  Has The Old Iron  Curtain  Mentality
The  mentality   created  by  such  education  was  on  display
in  the  minor  official   who  took  me  on  a  tour  of  the   Volka-
kammer, the  DDK's parliament,  which  is  housed  in  a  former
building  of  Berlin  University  on  Luisenstrasse.    The  main
chamber,  with  its   circular   desks,   looks  like  what   it   is—a
lecture  hall.    Behind   the   rostrum   was  the   symbol  of   the
DDK, combining the hammer  (the  working  class), the  artist's
compass  (the  intellectuals)  and  a  blade  of  corn  (the  peasan-
try).
Dissenting  Votes  Unknown
The   official   explained  that   in  many  capitalist  countries,
parties  often  put  forward  a  common  list.   "Here,"  he  said,
with  a  gleeful  smile,  as  if  announcing  a  new  stage  of  prog-
ress,  "we  have  one list  which  represents   all  parties."   The
list  represents  five  parties   (the   Nationalists,  the   Liberal
Democrats,  the  Christian  Democrats,  the  Peasants  and  the
governing  SED,  the  Socialist  Unity  party)  and five mass  or-
ganizations  (the  Trade  Unions, the  Free  German  Youth,  the
Democratic  Women  of  Germany,  the  Peasants  and  the  Kul-
turbund).    All  these  parties  and  groups  are  represented   in
the  Volkalcammer  and its committees.
With  so  many  parties,  one  would  expect  some  differences
of  opinion.  My  guide  explained that  proposed  laws  were  al-
most  always  modified  in  committee.  "Do you," I  asked,  "ever
have  a  vote  cast  against  a  bill in  committee?"  He  explained,
almost  with  a  note  of  horror,  that  there  was  never  a  "gegen
stimme"  (a  vote  against).  Were  there  ever  speeches  against
a  bill  in  the  Volkskammer?   This,  too,  was  unheard   of.   I
was  told  I  must  remember that  all  these  parties  had  "a  com-
mon  idea."
Some  People Are  Unregenerate
My  guide  said  that  actually  this  was  the  most  democratic
government  in  the  world.  As proof, he  cited  the  fact  that  at
the  last  elections  99 percent  of  the  voters  had  voted  for  the
common  list.
"What   happened,"  I   asked   mischievously,  "to  the  other
one  percent?"
"Ach," my guide sighed, "they voted nein."
So unregenerate  is human nature  even under the  most  ideal
conditions.   My  guide  did  go  on  to  point  out,  however,  that
in  the  previous  elections  the  common  list  had  only  obtained
98  percent.   Progress  had  been  made.
When  I  tried  to  draw  the  guide  out  later  into  a  discussion
of  free  elections,  he  said  the  German  people  had  had  a  bad
experience  with  free  elections.    "Hitler,"  he  said,  "came  to
power  by  free  elections."   So  as  a  solution  we  were  back  at
dictatorship   again.
Fear  of  West  German  Militarism
This  submissive  party  hack  mentality,  which  the  Ulbricht
regime  favors  and  fosters,  is  not  typical  even  in  Germany.
There  are,  among  the  youth,  those  who  think  and  doubt  as
elsewhere.   Here  the  regime's  strongest  support  is  not  its
own  virtues  but  the  worst  aspects  of  the  other  side.   A  stu-
dent who is pro-regime  but  holds  back from  joining  the  Party
because  he has  his  misgivings  told  me, "We students  listened
to  the  broadcasts  of  the  Bundestag  debates  on  nuclear   re-
armament.   When  we  heard  Strauss  (the  West  German  de-
fense  minister)  say  that  he was  ready  to  use  nuclear  arms if
necessary  even against his  brothers  of  the  East  Zone, we  saw
that  our  government  was right."  Fear  of  West  German  mili-
tarism  provides  support  for  the  Ulbricht  regime.
But  there  was  a  time, three  years  ago,  when  the  winds of
a  new  freedom  blew  in  East  Germany  as  well  as  in  Poland
and  Hungary.   There  were  even  national  forums, town  meet-
ings,  in  which  differences  were  debated.   The  Germans,  who
always  seek  a theory  to  explain  events,  wanted  a  theory  with
which  to  explain  Stalinism.   The  "cult  of  personality"  con-
cept  put  forward  by  Krushchev  in  his  famous  secret  speech
at  the  20th  Congress  did  not  satisfy  them.   Inevitably  their
questioning   also   questioned   the   methods   of   the    Ulbricht
1
  regime.
Ulbricht  Had  A  Rival
A  faction  in  the  party  led  by Karl  Schirdewan,  once  secre-
tary  of  the  Central  Committee, now  relegated  to  an  obscure
post,  wanted  a  loosening  up  Polish  style,  a  slowing  up  of
collectivization   in  the   countryside  and  greater  freedom  of
expression  for  the  intellectuals.   At  one time  he  took  refuge
in  Moscow  and  it  looked  as  if  Khrushchev  might  back  him
against   Ulbricht,   who   advocated   the   continuance   of   the
"hard"  Stalinist  line.
"It  was  the  Hungarian   revolt,"  one  astute  East   German
told  me,  "which  saved  Ulbricht.   It  frightened  the   Russians
back  into  a  hard  line.   Since  then,  Ulbricht  has   consolidated
his  position  in  our  Politbureau.    He  has  also  delivered  the
goods.  Wages  are  up  and  prices  down.  Our  lower  paid  work-
ers  are  now about  as  well  off as  lower  paid  workers  in  West
Germany,  though   skilled   workers   are  not  as  well  paid   as
their  opposite  numbers  across  the  border.   There  is  no  un-
employment,  indeed  there  is  a  labor  shortage.  The  students
and  the  intellectuals  want  more freedom,  but  the  people  gen-
erally   are  quiet  so  long  as  conditions  improve.   The  worst
repressions   are  over.   There  is  a  kind  of  uninspired  bureau-
cratic  revolution  underway  that  harnesses   little  enthusiasm
but  makes progress  on the  economic  plane.  The  young  people
withdraw  into  themselves  and  conform."
Dangerous  Delusions
A  member  of  the   ruling   strata  I   encountered   privately
dismissed  the  discontent  of  the  intellectuals  with  contempt.
"We'll  get  along,"  he  said,  "without   the  intellectuals."   He
had  recently  been  to  Hungary  and  found  the  situation   there
quite   satisfactory.    In  the  ruling  class,  there   is  a  compla-
cency  about  the  use  of force,  a  smugness  about  past  "errors"
however  costly  in  human  terms,  that  does  not  bode  well  for
the  future.   The  bureaucrats   prefer  time-servers  to   honest
men,  obedience to  zeal,  submissiveness  to  initiative.   In  East
Berlin  one smells strongly  that  atmosphere  of  mediocrity  and
vulgarization,   that   nouveau   riche   self-satisfaction,   which
marks  the  ruling  strata  of  the  Soviet  world  everywhere  but
in  Poland.   These  people  enjoy  the  comforts  of  self-delusion
and  are  capable of  mistakes  which can  again,  as  in  Hungary,
endanger  world  peace.
Sample  of  the  Completely  False  Picture   of  Berlin  Given  by  the  Soviet  Press
"East  Berlin  attracts  the  inhabitants  of  the  West  sector
by  its surplus  of goods  and their  low price. . . .The  popu-
lation  of  West  Berlin visits  the  democratic sector  of  the  city
because  of  its  countless  theatres.   There  are' none  in  the
Western  portion of the city. . . .
"In  search  of  the  real  truth,  thousands  of  West  Berliners
travel  daily  to  East  Berlin  in  order  to  obtain  newspapers
and  periodicals.   They  stand  in  long  lines  in  front   of  the
newspaper   stands  near  the  sector   frontier   awaiting  the
latest  papers.  . . .
"The  West  Berliners  are  attracted  not  only  by  the  sur-
plus  of  goods  and  the  low prices  in  East  Berlin  but  also  by
its  cheerful and joyful  atmosphere.  . .  ."
—G. Deborin, Prof,  of  Economics, in  Trud,  Jan.  8.
6  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  20,1959
Memo  to  Senator  Mansfield;  Another  Reason  for  Subjecting   Cloak-and-Dagger  to  Congressional  Scrutiny
What  U. S. Agency   Financed  These  Murderous  Screwballs  in  West  Berlin?
I  want  to  call  a  sensational  story  to  the  attention  of  those
in  Washington,  like  Senator  Mansfield,  who have  long  sought
to  establish  some form  of  Congressional  supervision  over  the
Central   Intelligence  Agency.
It  indicates  that  there  is  a  kind  of underground  of  twisted
minds within  our government, and  it  is also a glimpse  of their
peculiar   activities   in   Berlin.     Mayor   Willy  Brandt—at   a
luncheon   given   him   here   in   Washington   by  the    Socialist
party  during  his  recent  visit—touched  on  the  need  to  curb
such  provocative  agencies   if  West   Berlin  were  to  be   safe-
guarded.
The  first  I  heard  of the  story  was when  I  picked up  a  copy
of  the  March 29 issue  of  the  respected  London Sunday   Times
in   West   Berlin.     I   checked  it   with   an   official   in   Mayor
Brandt's   office.    When  I  got  back  I  inquired  among  other
newspapermen  whether  the  story  was  known,  but  it  seemed
news  to  all  of  them.    So  I  give  the  gist  of  it  here.
Like  A  Hollywood  Scenario
The  London  Sunday   Times  reported  that  a  luxury  villa  in
West  Berlin  had  just  been  stripped  of  its  belongings  as  the
result  of  a  decision to  close  down  a  group  known  as  "Battle-
group  Against  Inhumanity."   It  said  "the fantastic  goings-on
in  the  red  villa  .  .  . included the  manufacture  of  incendiary
and  high   explosive  materials,   the   use   of  Oriental  poisons
against  its  political  enemies,  the  use  of  children  for  sabotage
operations  in  East  Germany and  the  employment of  an  army
of  spies  and  informers.
The  Sunday   Times  correspondent  went  on  to  report  that
their  task   "included  the  setting-up   of  secret   'black-lists'  of
officials"  in  West  as  well  as  in  East  Berlin.
"The   shutdown  is  taken   as  a  sign,"  the  Sunday    Times
went  on to  report,  "that  the  West  is  showing its  readiness  to
meet   Mr.   Khrushchev's   complaint  about   the   existence   in
West  Berlin  of  'sabotage'  organizations  before  the  start  of
four-Power  talks  on  the  city's  future.    Western   intelligence
officials  in  Berlin  have  found  the  Russians  willing  to  accept
the  existence  of  straight  spying  and  counter-spying, provided
that  it  is  done by  professionals."
Public  resentment   in  West  Berlin  against  "Battlegroup"
activities   rose,   according  to  the  Sunday   Times,  "following
severe  sentences  meted out to its  ill-trained  teenage  saboteurs
by  the  People's  Police."    The  Sunday   Times  said  "American
backing  for  the  organization   was  withdrawn   when  it  was
clear  that  its  activities  were  not  only imprudent  and  exceed-
ing  the  original   purpose  of  aiding  refugees  but   also   well
known  to  the  Communists."   Later,  according  to  the  Sunday
Times,  "financial support  from  the  Bonn  Ministry  of  All  Ger-
man  Affairs  was  also   withdrawn."
The  only part  of this  story  which  was  denied was  that  the
Bonn   Ministry  of  All  German  Affairs   has   subsidized  this
group.   But  the  official  with  whom  I  spoke  confirmed  the  rest
of  the  story,  saying  that  efforts  had  been  made  long  ago  to
stop  its  activities.     He  said  the  group  began  as  a  conven-
tional  anti-Communist  organization  but  rapidly  degenerated
under  the  pressure  of  providing "results" for  its   paymasters.
"Even  the  U.S.  Embassy  didn't  know where  it  go its  funds,"
the  official  said,  "but efforts  to  stop  it  were  blocked because
it  had  protection  from   unknown  sources  in   Washington."
A  McCarthy Style  Campaign
I  asked  specifically  about  the  reference  to  "black-lists" of
West  Berlin  officials  and  was told that  the  "Battlegroup"  ran
a  kind  of  McCarthyite undercover  campaign,  naming  certain
West   Berlin   city  employes  as   Communists.    He  gave  me
specific   examples   off  the   record   which   he   said   had   been
thoroughly  disproven.  The  whole  affair   seems  to  have  been
a  perpetual  headache  and  an  internal   scandal  for  the  West
Berlin  government.
The  West  Berlin  affair  recalls  a  sensational   investigation
by  the  Bundestag.    In  the  autumn  of  1952  it  was  learned
that  a  secret  German  youth organization  had  been organized
under  U.S.   auspices.    The  German  police  found  that  this
group  had  been furnished  a  list  of  "unreliables" who were  to
be  liquidated  in  the  event  of  a  Russian  invasion and  that  the
list   included  80  prominent  Social  Democrats,  including  the
Mayors  of  Hamburg  and  Bremen  and  the  leader  of  the  Ger-
man   Socialists,  Herr  Ollenhauer.
A  full  account  of  this  affair   may  be  found  in  the   British
newspaperman  Alistair   Home's  book  on  postwar  Germany,
Return to Power  (published here  by Praeger).   "The  Ameri-
can  body  responsible," Mr.  Home  wrote,  "was  apparently  the
cloak-and-dagger  Central  Intelligence  Agency,  of  the  activi-
ties  of  which  the  High  Commissioner  appeared  to  be gen-
uinely  ignorant  .  .  .  Dr.  Adenauer  solemnly  relayed  to  the
outraged  Bundestag  a  pledge  of  the  U.S. Government not  to
form  any  more  partisan  groups."
Apparently,  despite  that  pledge,  some  secret  U.S. Govern-
ment  organization  financed  and  protected  a  similar   gang  of
murderous  screwballs   in  Berlin.
Please  A  Friend,   While  Copies   Last,  by  Starling   A  Gift    Sub   With   This  Four-Part   Series  from   Abroad
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name    .........................................................................................
Street    ......................................_............................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
4/20/59
(To)   Name
Street    .......
City    ......................._............Zone............State..._...._.........
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?      Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15, D.  C
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  I8TO.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  eiccpt  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December   at  5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published    and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5   In  the  U.  S.;  $8  In  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $16  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED