I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jan05.pdf

============================================================

Our  Timid  Scientists,  P.  3
Cong.  Walter's  Drive  to   "Abolish"   the   Un-American  Activities  Committee,  See  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
>VOL.  VII,  NO.  1
JANUARY  5,  1959°'°'      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
16  CENTS
Prospects  and  Paradoxes  of  the  Coming  Filibuster  Fight
A  minority  of   Southerners  can  exercise  a  vote  in  either
House  of  Congress.   In  the  Senate, it  can  block  action through
unlimited  debate.   In  the  House,  on  the  other  hand,  it  can
operate  by  preventing  debate  altogether.   In  the   Senate,  it
operates  through  threat  of  filibuster;  in  the  House,   through
the  pigeonhole.   In  the  former,  this  minority  insists  on  the
right  to  go  on  talking  forever.   In  the  latter,  it  wields  the
power  to  shut  off  any  talk  at  all.   In  the  Senate,  the  minor-
ity   operates   by  making  cloture   almost   impossible;   in   the
House,   by  making  cloture  so  easy  that  a  few  key  Southern-
ers  can  gag  the  House  almost  at  will.   In  the   Senate,  this
minority  exercises  its  power  in  the  name  of  free  debate;  in
the   House,   it  restricts  debate  in  the  name  of   orderly  pro-
cedure.   Though  the  methods  and  principles  are  at  variance,
the  purpose  in  both  Houses  is  the  same—to  give  the  South
a   sectional   veto.    This   veto  has   been   defended  since  Cal-
houn's   day   as  a   means   of   protecting   the   Southern   white
minority  against  the  Northern  majority.  The  paradox  is  that
the   minority  right   the   South   so  passionately  defends   is  a
right  to  exploit  and  humiliate  its  own  Negro  minority.  This
is  the   essence  of   the   conflict   which   will   explode   in   both
Houses  of  Congress  when  it  convenes  Wednesday.
Behind  These  Obscure  Technicalities
The  liberals  in  the  Senate  will  try  to  change  the  rules  so
that  after  eight  weeks  of  debate  a  majority  can  impose  cloture
and  force  a  vote  on  measures  the  Southerners  do  not   like.
The   liberals  in  the  House  will  try  to  change  the   rules  so
that  important  bills  pigeonholed  in  the  Rules  Committee  can
be  forced  out  on  the  floor  for  a  vote.   The  Senate  fight  will
center  about  its  famous  Rule  XXII.   The   House  fight  will
seek  to  restore  the   21-day  rule  which   briefly   governed   the
1949-50   session.   Under   this  rule,  bills  already  reported  by
a  standing  committee  of  the  House  can  be  called  up  for  a
vote  by  the  chairman of  the  reporting  committee  if  the  meas-
ure   has  been  bottled   up  more  than   21  days  in  the   Rules
Committee.    On   the   outcome   of   the   opening   battle   over
these  obscure  procedural  technicalities  wiir  depend  momen-
tous  issues:  in  the  Senate,  more  effective   Civil  Rights  legis-
lation  to  fulfill   the  Negro's  aspiration  for  first  class  citizen-
ship;  in  the  House,  all  kinds  of  social  welfare  measures   to
fulfill  the  hopes  of  voters  who  returned  so  many  liberals  to
Congress.    In  the  past,  the   House  Rules  Committee,   under
Howard  Smith  of  Virginia  (who  gave  his  name  to  the  Smith
Act)    has  often   been   able   to   pigeonhole   minimum   wage,
education,   housing,   labor-management   and   welfare  as   well
as  civil  rights  measures  desired  by  a  majority.   If  the  liberals
in  the  House  lose  this  opening  day  fight,  the  stage  is  set  for
their  frustration  all  through  the  session.
1  *
A  Renewed South-West  Alliance
The  lineup  in  the  two  Houses  will  be  somewhat   different.
The  Senate  fight  turns  on  the  civil  rights  issue.   It  is  nakedly
sectional.   The  growing  political  power  of  the  Negro  in  the
North   forces  the  Republicans  of  the  industrial   States,  East,
Midwest  and  Pacific,  wherever  there  are  sizeable  Negro  and
other   racial  minorities,  to   join   forces  with   the   liberals   on
this  issue.  Nixon  ruled  in  favor  of  the  civil  rights  coalition
two  years  ago  and  will   do  so  again;  otherwise   he  has  no
hope  of   achieving  the   Presidency.   The   Republican   leader-
ship  dare  not  openly  stand  with  the  Southerners.   So  in  the
Senate  the  Republicans will  temporarily  relinquish  that  coali-
tion   of   Southern   planter   and   Northern   big   business   man
which  has generally  held  sway  there  since a  filibuster  in   1890
stopped  a  measure  for  Federal  supervision  of   Congressional
elections   in   the   South—the   so-called   "Force   Bill."     The
South  called  it  that  because  it  represented  the  last  post-Re-
construction   effort   of  the  North  to  enforce  Negro  rights   in
the  South.    The  filibuster  against  the   Force   Bill   succeeded
because  the   Southerners  temporarily   allied   themselves   with
Western   mine-interests  anxious  for   subsidized   Free   Silver.
Now  again,  the  South  will  turn  for  allies  to  States  between
the  Pacific  Coast  and  the  Mississippi  Valley  which  have  few
Negroes  and  will  bid  for  anti   civil  rights  votes  with   the
promise  of  Southern  support  on  Western  mining,  public  land
and  natural  resource  bills.   This  alliance  was  already  visible
last  year  in  the  whittling  down  of  the  Civil  Rights  Bill.   On
the  other  hand,  in  the  House,  where  the  race  issue  is  in  the
background,   the   usual   alliance  of   conservative   Republican
and  conservative Democrat  will  hold  the  fort  against  the  band
of   liberal  Democratic  insurgents   led   by  Frank   Thompson,
Jr.,  of  New  Jersey.
The  Outlook  Is  Not  Promising
In  the  Senate,  its  future  as  a  forum  of  free  debate  is  not
the  issue.   The  form  of  majority  cloture  advocated  by  Doug-
las,  Javits and  others  would  allow  ample  debate. The  real  issue
is  not  minority  rights   in  the   Senate  but  minority  rights  in
the  South.   The  Southerners  defend  oppression   in  the  name
of  liberty.   True,  the  filibuster  they  fight  to  retain  has  been
used  by liberals  as well  as conservatives.  How  one  feels  about
it  at this  juncture will  be  determined  by how  deeply  one  feels
about  Negro  rights.  To  this  one  must  add  that  in  the  House
one  can  see  how  the  dominant  Southern  white   supremacist
uses  his  strategic  powers  against  poor  white  as  well  as  black.
Unfortunately,  writing  a week  before  Congress  opens,  advance
soundings  offer  little  hope  in  the  House  and  indicate  only  a
limited,  very  limited,  victory  in  the  Senate.    The  country  is
not  sufficiently   aroused.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  5,  1959
Holiday  Tidings  from  Outer  Space;  Ike  as  Our  Da Vinci;  Madison  Ave. and  the  Milky  Way
House  Report  Says Space Law Urgent  to Prevent  Accidental  Outbreak  of  War
Christmas  Day  was  supersonic.   In  Washington  the  morn-
ing  paper,  over  a  color photo of  a  modernistic  Nativity,   car-
ried  double banner  headlines  across  page  one,  "Missile  Fired
By  Supersonic  Bomber  May  Alter  Course  of  Arms  Program.
Launching  Is  Made  at  1100  Mph.  Air  Force  Jubilant."  The
afternoon  paper  brought  news of  a  speech  in  Moscow  by Gro-
myko, warning  that  any  aggression  against  East  Germany in
the  Berlin  crisis  could  trigger  off  an  atomic  world  war  that
would  spread  to  the  United  States,  "Death  Toll  of Millions
Seen."    We  began  to  write  a  new  Christmas   hymn  begin-
ning,  "Hark  the  Herald  Missiles  Sing."
Traffic  is  piling  up  overhead.   A  few  days  before  Christ-
mas  mankind  was  treated  to  its  first  broadcast  from   outer
space.   But  the  voice  from  the  new Atlas  satellite  was  not  a
recording  of  Gandhi  or  Einstein,  or  a  message  from  some
world  figure  like Bertrand  Russell  or  Schweitzer,  -which  might
have  made  the  event  more  than  a  minor  technological   tri-
umph.  It  was  only a  tape  recording  of  a  tepid  little  banality
by   a  retired   General  named  Elsenhower,  who  will  be  re-
membered  as  one  of  the  lesser  American  Presidents.  A  Sun-
day  paper  survey  of  the  new  wonders  proclaimed  "Waning
IGY  Likely  Charted  New  Renaissance."   The  symbol  of  the
other   Renaissance  was  that  universal  genius,  Leonardo  da
Vinci.  Perhaps  a  superannuated  military  man  fumbling  with
the  new  thunderbolts  is  as  fitting  a  symbol for  ours.
Less  Lonely  for  Poets
Free enterprise ie being  stimulated by our new access to  the
heavens.   According  to  Andrew  G.  Haley,  a  Washington  at-
torney  who  is  president  of  the  International   Astronautical
Federation,  both  Ford  and  Coca  Cola are  discussing  the  pos-
sibility   of  using   satellites  which   could  travel   over   U.  S.
territory  "several  times  a  day, continually broadcasting  some
kind  of  singing  commercial."  This  will  make  the  nights  less
lonely  for  poets.   Next,  we  suppose,  will  be  the  outer  space
flying  billboard.   The  Milky  Way  may  yet  become  an  exten-
sion  of  Madison  Avenue.  The  prospects  illustrate  the  domi-
nance  of  mind  over  matter.   Put  a  Babbitt  in  a   space-craft
and  after  a  million  mile  spurt  and  a  week-end  on  Mars  he
will  emerge  a  little  cracked  perhaps  but  otherwise  the  same
banal  little   man  he  was  when  he  left.   It   seems  we  can't
think  of  anything  better  to  do with  the  universe than  to  use
it  to  sell  aspirin,  "Heavenly  for  That  Headache."
Outer  space,  like  the  high  seas  and  the  airways,  will  soon
have  to  be  regulated.   The  Select  Committee on  Astronautics
and  Space  Exploration  of  the  House  of  Representatives   re-
leased  a report  three  days before  Christmas  called "A  Survey
of  Space  Law."   It  suggests  that  man  will  be  able  to  travel
into  outer  space  and  return  by  1962,  and  that  various  forms
of  traffic  and  other  control  will  soon  be  necessary  as  space
vehicles,  manned  and  unmanned, multiply.
War  by  Miscalculation
The  report   warns  that  the  danger  .of  accidental  war  will
otherwise  increase.    "It  will  take  a  careful  look,"  the  report
quotes  Dr.  John  P.  Hagen,  director  of  the  Vanguard  project
as  testifying,  "to  determine in  a  very  short  time  whether  the
object  you  see  coming is  some  old  satellite,  an  ICBM coming
from   across  the  water,  or  a  stray  meteor  coming  into  the
earth.  .  .  .  Filling  the air  with  a  great  many  dead  satellite
bodies  is  simply going  to  make that  task  extremely  difficult."
Some  system  whereby  all  nations  will  be  required  to  file
international  flight  plans  will  soon  be  a  necessity.   "With-
out  them,"  the  report  says,  "the  technically advanced nations
could  some  day  obliterate   themselves  —  not  for   any  real
cause,  but  purely  through   accident—by  throwing  the  auto-
matic  war  switch  in  the  mistaken  belief  that  an  attack  is
being  made."   The  division  of  the  earth  into   nation-States
will  soon  reach  a  new  danger  level  of obsolescence.
The  House  report  suggests  that  the  early  development  of
space  law  "could  be  a  powerful,  positive  force  for  peace"
and  quotes  one scholar  as  saying  that  "outer  space  opens up
a  new  area  for  finding  accommodations which,  if  properly
exploited,  could  at  last  reverse  the  trend"  which  has  been
pushing  the  world through  cold war  and  unlimited  arms race
toward  a  precipice.
U.S. Insists  on A Built-in Majority  at  the  UN
Unfortunately   neither   here   in   Washington   nor   at   the
United  Nations  is  there  much  evidence to  support  optimism.
The  UN  held  its  first  full  dress  debate  on  outer  space  from
November  12  to  20.    The  U.  S.  put   in  a  resolution  for   a
committee   to   explore  the   problem   of  assuring  the  use  of
space  for  peaceful  purposes.   The  U.  S.  S.  R.  put  in  a  reso-
lution  for   (1)  a  ban  on  the  use  of  the  space  for   military
purposes,  (2)  the  elimination  of  foreign  military  bases  and
(3)  international  cooperation  in  the  study  of  space.
To  meet  U.  S.  objections,  the   Soviet  Union  then  revised
its  resolution  to  omit  the  first  two  points  but  insisted  on  a
committee  of  four  Communist, four  Western  and  three  neu-
tralist  nations,  the  kind  of  a  committee  in  which  Western
majorities  would  not  be  a  foregone  conclusion  but   Moscow
might  win  some  of  the  arguments.   Instead  of  meeting   the
Soviets  half-way  with  concessions  of  our  own,  we  insisted
on   an   18-nation   committee,   containing   12  Western,   three
Communist   and  three   neutralist   powers.     Moscow   angrily
declared  it  would  boycott  this  committee,  which  would  have
a  built-in  pro-U.S.  majority.   We may yet  regret  our  success.
Here  in  Washington,   Lyndon  Johnson,  least   imaginative
of  party  leaders,  who  took  part   at   the  UN  in  that   space
maneuver,  has  just  appointed  a  retired  Army  colonel,  Ken-
neth   BeLieu,  as   staff   director   of  the   Senate's   new  Com-
mittee  on  Aeronautical   and  Space  Science.    Colonel  BeLieu
is  one  of  those  men  the  military  bureaucracy  uses  to  steer
supposedly  civilian  officials  and  agencies;  he  served  as  assist-
ant  to  two  former  Secretaries  of  the  Army,  Pace  and  Stev-
ens,  and has  more  recently  been  a  professional  staff  member
of  the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee.   His  new appoint-
ment  gives  the   Pentagon   point  of  view  a  key  position  in
Senate  space  councils.
Washington  Post  Calls  Launching  of
In  an  editorial  Dec.  20, the  Washington  Post  pointed  out
that  the  4'/i  ton  figure  for  Atlas  was  achieved  only  by  de-
signing  the  rocket  to  stay  in  orbit  with  the  nose  cone  and
said  that  had  the  Russians  done  the  same  with  Sputnik  III,
it  would  have  weighed  5'/2  tons.   On  December 21,  it  criti-
cized  the  secrecy  which surrounded the  launching.  On  De-
cember  23, in  an  editorial "Candor  Didn't  Orbit,"  the  paper
said,  "The  more  that  is  learned  of  the  new  Atlas  satellite,
the  less  impressive  are  the  extravagant  boasts  that  attend-
Atlas  A  Misleading  Publicity  Stunt
ed  its  launching. ... It  is now pretty  clear,  however, that
the  project  was principally a  publicity  stunt.  . . . The last
Soviet  Sputnik  had  instrumentation of  greater  weight than
the  Atlas  carried  and  the  rocket  used  to  propel it  had  con-
siderably  more  thrust."   A  Soviet  scientist  in  a  UPI  story
from    Moscow   published  by   the   paper   Dec.  21  said   the
payload  of  Atlas  was  133 pounds compared with  184 pounds
for  Sputnik I  and  2,919 pounds for  Sputnik III.   Most  papers
and  newsreels,  however, maintained misleading impressions.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  5,1959
AAAS  Resolutions  Show  Our  Free  World  Savants  As  Nervous  About  Big  Brother  Aa  Moscow's
Scientists  Outspoken  on  Spiders'  Knees  But  Queasy  on  Nuclear  Testing
Viewed  from  any  of  those  new  seeing-eye  satellites,  Amer-
ican  scientists  must  seem as  nervous  as  their  Soviet  counter-
parts  about  saying  anything  which might  get  them  in  wrong
with   their   government,   whence   fellowships,   grants   and
dachas  flow.  As  we  go  to  press,  Washington  has  been  inun-
dated  with  a  horde  of  scientists,  fanned  out  in  giant  conven-
tion  through  five  huge  hotels,  and  not  easily   distinguish-
able  from  Rotarians.   The  awed local  press  has  been  devoting
whole   pages   to   Science.    "Ancient   Man's   Use   of   Hands
Viewed  As  Cause  of  Shrinkage  in  Human  Jaw",   "Spiders'
Hearing   Traced  to  Knees"  and  "Psychologist   Keveals  Fish
Smarter   Than  You  Think"   are   sample  tid-bits  from  this
Feast  of  Learning  to  which  the  public  was  invited.
Dodge  on  Loyalty  Oath
But  when the  governing  Council of  the  various  profession-
al  groups  which  make  up  the  American  Association  for  the
Advancement  of  Science  took  up  the  political  questions  on
which  science  impinges,  it  went  into  session  behind  closed
doors  and  came  out  with  a  few  meagre   resolutions   vague
enough  to  be  submitted   to  the  platform   committee  of   the
next  Republican  convention.  The  Council  "notes  with  grati-
fication that  changes  in  U.  S.  passport  regulations  have  im-
proved  international  communication  in  science"  but  is  silent
on  the  State  Department's   campaign  for  restrictive  legisla-
tion  to  undo these  good  effects  of  a  Supreme  Court  decision.
The  Council  "welcome  the  National  Defense  Education  Act
of   1958"  but  did  not  muster  the  nerve  to  join  in  Secretary
Flemming's recommendation  that  its  loyalty  oath  be  repealed.
The  most  important  resolution,  on  nuclear  weapons  tests,
was  well  watered  down,  as  could  be  seen  in  the  press  room
by  comparing  the  first  proposal  with  the  final  version.   The
earlier  phrase  about  attempts  to  negotiate  "an   international
system  to  prevent   the  further   explosion  of  such  Weapons"
was   changed   to   "suspend."   The  earlier   version   had   the
Council  expressing  its  "profound  hope  that  the  Geneva  Con-
ference  negotiations  will  prove  successful  in   effectively    end-
Downgrading   Disarmament?
Striking   omissions  may  be  found  in  the  recent   ex-
change  of  letters   between  the  President  and   Senator
Green  (D.  R.  I.)  chairman  of  the  Senate  Foreign  Re-
lations    Committee.   Senator    Green   sent   the    White
House  a  proposed  outline  for  a  series  of  four  executive
session  hearings  to  bring  the  Committee  fully  abreast
of  all  developments in  foreign  policy,  an  idea  the  Pres-
ident  approved.   The  proposed  outline  is  broken  down
by  Senator  Green  into 13 subheadings.   Not  one  of  them
refers  to  disarmament,  to  the  current   negotiations  on
testing  and  surprise   attack,  nor  to  proposals  such  as
disengagement   for  finding  an  over-all  solution  to  the
Berlin  impasse.   There  is no reference  to  relations  with
Communist  China.  No category  or  sub-head  covers  dis-
cussion  of  proposals  for  unfreezing  our  rigid  cold  war
diplomacy.   The  outline  is  as  non-specific  and  sterile,
i.e.   free   from   controversial  bacilli,   as  if  prepared   by
the  State Department,  and  invites  one of  those  briefings
from   Mr.  Duties  of   which  Senators   have  often  com-
plained;  the  Secretary  is  an  adept  at  giving  the   For-
eign  Relations   Committee  inside   information   on   the
Ten  Commandments.
ing  test  explosions  of  nuclear  weapons,  and  that  this  inter-
national  agreement  will  be  the  first  step  toward  the  preven-
tion  of  catastrophe."    The  phrases   in  italics  were   omitted
from  the  final  version.   This  queasy  caution  does  hot  augur
well  for  the  new  standing  committees  on  the  Social  Aspects
of   Science  the   Council  approved  to  help  the  public  under-
stand  "the   inescapable  problems  of  adapting   society  to  the
age  of  science."    Since  our  scientists   never  had  it  so  good
working  on  new  ways  to  help  humanity  blow  its  brains  out,
they   should   not   be  allowed  to   salve   their   consciences  so
easily.   Plain words are  called  for.
Useful   Contrasting  Background  Against   Which  to  Read  the  Forthcoming  NATO Note  on  Berlin
George  Kennan  Argues  For  Disengagement  and Against  Nuclear  Arms for  Germany
"It  is  said  that  Moscow can  never  permit  the  peoples  of
this  area  [East  Europe]   to  abandon  the  'achievements  of
socialism'.   To  this  one  can  only  reply  by  asking  whether
it  is  necessary  for  the  question  to  be  put  that  way.   If  the
experiences  of  recent   years  have  proved  anything  in   the
realm  of  economic and  political  theory,  it  is  that  ownership
of  the  means  of  production is  a  far  less  important  question
than  the  Marxists  have  considered  it  to  be,  and  represents
a  feature  of  national  economy  in  which  the  differences  be-
tween  'socialism'  and  'capitalism'  are  of  steadily  diminish-
ing  significance.  It  would  not  really  be  so  drastic  a  tran-
sition  today  from  the  institutions   of  contemporary   Poland
to   those  of  the   more  extreme   examples  of  the  Western
welfare  state.   The  West   can   afford   to  be  relatively   re-
laxed  about  the  name  by  which  the   social   and  economic
institutions  of  the  East   European   peoples  are    described.
What   is   immediately   important   is   that   development  of
national  life  there  should  not  be  impeded by  abnormal  mili-
tary  strictures,  that  the  very  real  dangers  of  the   Berlin
situation  be  in  some  way  removed,  and  that  some  progress
should  become  possible  in  the  creation  of  the   prerequisites
of  a  true  European community.  That  these  prospects  would
be  improved  if  at   least   the  military  deadlock  in   Central
Europe  could be loosened  seems  obvious. . . .
"There   is   no   conceivable   agreement   with   the   Soviet
Union  . . .  which  would not involve  concessions  in the mili-
tary  field  and  the  acceptance  of  new risks  disagreeable  and
shocking  to  Western  military  planners.   The  ideal  military
posture   is  simply  the  enemy  of  every  political  detente  or
compromise;  and  whoever  is  not  prepared  to' make  sacri-
fices  and  accept  risks  in  the  military  field  should  not  lay
claim  to  any  serious  desire  to  see  world  problems  settled
by  any means  short  of  war. ... It  is  primarily  in the  mat-
ter   of  missile   sites,  if   anywhere,  that   the  real   military
sacrifice  involved  in  a  possible   disengagement   must,   from
the  NATO  standpoint,  be  seen.  But  is  this  really  so  griev-
ous  a  sacrifice?    Western   Germany  is  not  the  only  place
where  such  missiles   can  be  stationed  or  from   which  they
can be  launched. . . .
"Confronted  with  such  a  force  [a  German  army  depend-
ent  on  nuclear  weapons]  on  the  Western  side  of  the  Elbe,
the  Soviet  Government  . . .  will  see no choice but to  keep
its  own  forces,  themselves  armed  with  atomic  weapons,  in
substantially  the  positions  they  occupy  today.   The  atomic
armament  of  Western  Germany is  in  fact  the  enemy  of  any
real  progress  in  the  matter  of  unification.   The  Western
chanceries  could  not  have  been  oblivious  to  this  fact  when
they  refused  even  to  consider  the  Rapacki  proposals  for  an
atom-free   zone  in  the  centre  of  the  continent,  and  when
they  took  the  decision  to  introduce atomic  weapons  into  the
NATO  defenses  on  German  soil."
—George  F. Kennan, Foreign  Affairs,    Jan.    1959.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  5, 1959
Opening  Day  of  Congress  May  See  A  Strange  Maneuver  in  "Operation  Abolition"
Walter's Drive for Enlarged and Renamed Un-American Activities Committee
Unless  much  more  opposition   develops  than  was  visible  a
week   before   Congress   opened,   the   chances   are  good   that
Congressman   Walter  will   succeed   in   "abolishing"   the   Un-
American  Activities  Committee  and  replacing  it  with  an  en-
larged   and   renamed   witch-hunting   body,   which   may   take
jurisdiction  from  House  Judiciary  not  only  over  immigration
but   over  such  "internal   security"   questions  as  wire-tapping
and  passport   control.
The  right  wing  Pennsylvania  Democrat,  one  of  the  most
powerful   members   of   the   House,   can  move  to  amend   the
rules  on  opening  day,  or  he  can  introduce  a  resolution  later
to  amend  the  Legislative  Reorganization  Act  to  set  up   the
new  committee.    The  former  is  more  likely.
Give  the  Dog  A  Better   Name
The  new  Committee  would  probably  be  called  the   House
Internal   Security  Committee.    A  change   of   name  would   be
useful   in  throwing  off  the  growing   campaign,  especially  in
California,  for  abolition  of  the  Un-American   Activities  Com-
mittee  altogether.   The  name  has  become  a  liability.   A  new
resolution,   substituting   the   equally   vague   term    "internal
security"  for  "un-American"  as the  Committee's  witch-hunting
standard,  might  help  circumvent  past  Court   decisions   (like
Watkins)   which  objected  that   "un-American"  was  so  vague
a  standard  it  could  be  applied  to  any unpopular  man  or  idea.*
The   fate   of   the  Walter   maneuver   rests   with   one   man,
Speaker  Rayburn.   If  he  decides  in  favor  of  it,  a  motion  to
amend  the  rules will  be entertained  opening  day and  approved
by  a  voice  vote  to  save  members  from  the  embarrassment  of
having  to  be  recorded  publicly  for  or  against.   To  judge  from
the  conflicting  reports   at   press   time,   Rayburn  had   not  yet
made  up  his  mind.   It  seemed  that  the  Speaker  had  thrown
gloom   into   the   camp  of   those   opposed   by  dismissing   the
•latest  witch  hunt  defeat  In  the   Supreme   Court,  the   unanimous
reversal   In  the   Abram  Flaxer  appeal   Dec.    16,  Involved  the   Senate
Internal   Security   Committee   but   rested • on   the   technicality   of   an
Improperly   dated  Indictment.   Flaxer   In   1951   courageously   refused
to   hand   over   the   membership  list   of  the   United   Public   Workers
Union  he  headed.   The  failure  of  the  labor  movement  to  support  his
appeal  demonstrated  Its  Indifference   even  to  civil  liberties  Questions
which  threaten  trade  union  rights.
objection  that  it  would  be  an  insult  to  immigrants  and  chil-
dren  of  immigrants. to  lump  immigration   matters  with  "un-
Americanism"  and  "subversion."   The  Speaker  suggested  that
this  could  be handled  by changing  the  name of  the  Committee.
On  the  other hand,  the  Speaker  seems to  have  created  some
gloom   in   the   Walter   camp   by  suggesting   that   the   House
needed  more,  not  fewer,  committees  so  he  could  have  avail-
able  a  greater  variety  of  important  assignments  for  the  new
bumper  crop  of  Democrats.   There  has  been  talk  of   taking
immigration   and   naturalization   from   House   Judiciary   and
establishing  them  in  a  new  Committee.
Some  Other  Possibilities
Chairman   Celler   of  House  Judiciary  is  willing   to   relin-
quish  immigration  and  naturalization but  not  to  Walter.   The
two  men  are  old  antagonists.   Celler,  a  senior  Democrat  from
Brooklyn,  one  of   the  few  surviving  liberals   in  the   House,
a  tireless  battler  against  hopeless  odds,  is  an   enemy  of  the
Nordic-myth   "national  origins"  provisions  which  U.  S.  fore-
runners  of  Nazi-style  racial  ideologists   wrote  into  the  Immi-
gration  Law  in  the  early  20's  to  discriminate against  "lesser
breeds"—Slavs,  Latins  and  Jews.  Walter,  author  of  a  famous
"dear   Dago"   letter,   tends   to   lump   the   foreign   born   and
radicals  together  as  prima  facie  suspect.   Big  city  Democrats
sensitive  to  pressure  from  foreign  born   citizens  have  been
bringing  pressure  against  Walter,  principally  through  Major-
ity  Leader  McCormack.   The   outcome  in  a  sense  will  be  a
test  of  strength  as  between  Walter  and  McCormack.
Much  less  opposition  is  visible  on  the  other  aspect  of  the
change,   continuation   under   a   new   name   of   Un-American
Activities.   The  Washington  Post  (Dec.  19)  spoke  out  strong-
ly,  saying the  committee  "should  be  abolished,  not  reorganiz-
ed  and  expanded."    Congressman  James  Roosevelt  promised
his  California constituents to  introduce  an  abolition  resolution.
In   the  meantime,  also  awaiting   action   by  the   Speaker,   are
contempt   actions  voted  by  House  Un-American   against  Har-
vey  O'Connor   and  Donald   Wheeldin,   the  first  subpeonaed
witnesses  in  its  history  who  simply  refused  to  appear.
Many   Thanks  for   the  Warm.  Response  in  Gift   Subs—Special   Rates  Stay   in   Effect    Through   January
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone...«.......State.......«...........
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  jr.)  additional:
1/5/59
(To)    Name
Street   .........
City  ..™.....................................Zone............State......._...........
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?        Yes  D    No.  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave,,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,   D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington   15, D. C.
An   independent    weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
K>  in  the  U.  S.;  18  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  ?20  to  Israel,  Asia  ana   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED