I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959dec14.pdf

============================================================

Eliz.  Bentley   Victim  Wins  Passport,  P.  4
The  New  Rockefeller  Report Calls  for  Nuclear  Brinksmanship  and  Stepped Up  Arms  Race,  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VI.  NO.    <t7DECEMBER  14,   1959
D
ioi       WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
What  the  Democrats  Did   Not  Say  in  10,000  Words
The   Democratic  Advisory  Council  in  its  policy  statement
for   the  I960  campaign  accuses  the  Elsenhower Administra-
tion  of  failing  to  provide  "the   bold  and  creative leadership
required ...  in  the  nuclear  age."     But  even  the  Council,
which  speaks for  the  liberal  wing  of  the  party, was  so  timid,
divided  and  uncreative that  it managed  to  issue  a  10,000  word
statement  without  saying  one  word  on  the  most   immediate
and  urgent  of  our  nuclear  problems.    Are  they  for  or  against
a  cessation  of  nuclear  testing?   Would   they  continue  or  drop
the  negotiations in  Geneva  for  a  test  ban?    One  searches  the
statement  in  vain  for   an  answer.    "The   Republicans,"   says
the  statement,  "permitted  Mr.  Khrushchov  to  take  from   us
the  mantle  of  leadership which  we  had  for  so  long  held  in
proposals  for   disarmament."    But  the  Democrats   offer   less
leadership  than  the  Republicans.    Last-minute revisions  took
out  of  the  statement,  as  drafted   originally  under  Mr.  Ache-
son's  aegis,  those  continued  cold  war  phrases  which  would
have  made  ludicrous the  criticism  of  the  Eisenhower Admin-
istration   for   "extreme   rigidity   in   our   relations   with   the
U.S.S.R."    But  Mrs.  Roosevelt  and  the  more  liberal elements
were  unable  to  substitute  constructive  proposals.    The  road-
block  became obvious when  Mr.  Truman  made  a  bitter attack
on  the  New   York   Post  which  recently  criticized  him  for  ad-
vocating  a  resumption  of   testing.    Until   Mr.   Truman   and
Mr.   Aches in  are  retired  from  the  councils  of   the  party,  it
will  never  be  able  to  convince  the  country  that  it  stands  for
peace.
They  Don't  Really  Like Disarmament
The  eloquent  silence  on  the  No.  1  peace  issue  was  made
the   more   resounding   by  the   presence   of   Adlai   Stevenson.
The  party could so  easily have  claimed  that  Eisenhower  in  the
test  ban  negotiations  was  merely  following  the  lead  Mr.  Stev-
enson  suggested   in   1956   and  Mr.  Nixon  rejected  so  scorn-
fully.    The  Advisory  Council,  in  discussing  other  issues,  made
room   for   much   that   forward-looking   Democrats   have   pio-
neered:  excellent  sections  on  power  and  water  resources,  on
medical  aid,  on  tax  reform.    Even  Kefauver,  whom  the  party
bosses   hate,   was  paid  the  tribute   of   a  section   summarizing
the  pioneering  work  he  has  done  in  the  field  of  administered
prices.    But  when  the  statement  came  to  disarmament,  it  con-
fined  itself  to  generalities—and  to  warnings  against  a  "rash
and   reckless  .  .  .  unilateral   disarmament"   no  one  has  pro-
posed.    "We  are  not  afraid,"   said  the  statement,  "to  have  the
United  States  raise  the  banner  of  idealism."    But  there  was
no  section  summarizing  the  work  done  by  Senator  Humphrey,
the  one  Democrat  who  has  not  been  afraid  to  translate  ideal-
ism  into  concrete   proposals  on  disarmament.     At  Yale,  only
24  hours  earlier,  he  had  outlined  a  program  for  control  of
long-range   missiles   and   bombers,   for   cessation   of   nuclear
1    3                                                                                                                                                   I
Allen  Dulles  Imagines  Himself  Secretary
of   State
Ours  is  so  far  as  we  know  the  only  country  in  the
world  whose spy  chiefs  go  around  making  speeches  on
public  policy.    In  England  it  would  be  unthinkable  for
the  head of  British intelligence  to  deliver  public  speech-
es.    Here  Allen  W.  Dulles  of  CIA  is  joining  J.  Edgar
Hoover  as  a  publicity  seeker, and a would-be  moulder  of
policy.    His  speech  Dec. 4  before  the  National Associa-
tion  of  Manufacturers  in  New   York  trespassed  in  two
areas  on  the  prerogatives of  the  President and  the  Sec-
retary  of  State.    One  is  in  Latin  America; it   under-
cut   some  wise   efforts   by   Mr.  Eisenhower  and   Mr.
Herter  for  better  relations  with  Panama  by  picturing
nationalist   difficulties   there  as   a  Communist  plot;  he
slurred  the  new  Cuban  government in  the  same way.
The  other  area is  that  of  Soviet relations; like  J. Edgar
Hoover  he  thinks  moves  toward  co-existence  are  sub-
versive.    Mr. Dulles  told  the  NAM  danger  will  increase
if  the  Russians feel  it  safe  to  shift  their spending  from
military  to  non-military  purposes.    This  is  to  say  that
non-military  competition,  with  all  the  hope  it  offers  of
constructive  aid  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  would  be more
dangerous  than  the  wastes  and  tensions  of  a  continued
arms  race.    We  note  that  a  Soviet  commentator,  Igor
Orlov,  said  of  the  speech  that  Mr.  Dulles  "displays  a
surprising  lack  of  confidence  in  the  ability  of  the  sys-
tem  he  represents to  compete  with  the  Socialist coun-
tries  on  a  fair  and honest basis."   Mr. Dulles laid  him-
self—and  our  country—wide  open  to  that  one.
weapons  production  (as  well  as  testing)   and  for   a   world-
wide  multi-nation  system  against  surprise  attack.    Here  was
the  creative  leadership  the  Advisory  Council  claimed  it  want-
ed,  but  not  a  line  of  this  crept  into  their  statement.    Trim-
mers  like  Kennedy were  hailed  by  Truman  as  fighting  liberals
and   nonentities  like   Symington,   who  is  the  darling   of   the
arms  lobby,  were  hailed  as  statesmen.     But  Humphrey,   just
because   of  his   work   on   disarmament,   is  a  party   stepchild,
though  one  who  has  to  be  handled   carefully  because  of  his
grass  roots  support.
We  found   the  statement's  attack  on  the  Republican  party
for   its  "age-old   affinity   for   the  moneyed  interests"   nauseat-
ing,  an  echo  of  Mr.  Truman's  courthouse  tub-thumping  man-
ner.    How  little  these  Democrats  do  about  "the   moneyed  in-
terests"  when   (see  page  3)   in  power!    How  little  they  did
in  the  last  session  of  Congress!     How   frightened   they  are,
when   discussing  the  key  problem   of   national  growth,   even
to  use  the  word   planning!     On   civil   liberties   they   offered
nothing  but  a  "me,   too"   to  the  President's  position  in  favor
of  repealing  the  non-Communist  disclaimer  provisions  of  the
scholarship  act.    And  we  deplore,  in  the  interests  of  better
Latin  American  relations,  their  Red  menace   smear  of   Cuba.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  December  14,  1959
Creation  of  A  Nuclear  Arms Pool  for  West  Europe  and  Stepped  Up  Arms Race Envisaged
Nuclear Brinksmanship the Implicit Doctrine of the New  Rockefeller  Report
The   latest   Rockefeller   Report   is  called   The   Mid-Century
Challenge   to   U.  S.   Foreign  Policy.     It   manages   to   discuss
the  Middle   East  without   once   mentioning   the   word   "oil."
It  discusses  our  relations  with  Communist  China  without  say-
ing  whether  we  ought  to  recognize  it.    "The  value  of  diplo-
matic  recognition  and  admission   to  the  United  Nations,"  it
says  bravely,   "can   be  variously  debated.     In   any  case   these
somewhat  technical  problems  do  not  go  to  the  heart  of  the
problem."    The  heart  of  the  problem   is  never  identified.
The  report  is  for  peace  but.    "Peace,"  it  says,  "is  obviously
one   of   the   grand   objectives   of   American  foreign   policy."
But   "a   foreign   policy   which   devoted   itself   exclusively   to
avoiding  war  would   neglect  the  constructive   aspects  out  of
which  a  true  peace  must  develop."    The  report  seems  to  be
recommending  brinksmanship.    "The   risks  which  arise  from
the  possibility of  war,"   it  says,  "are  great.    But  by  resolutely
accepting   the   risk—and   by  that   alone—we   gain   a   decent
chance  of  avoiding  it."  This  is the  Dulles  doctrine  100  proof.
Teller  and  Kissinger  Influence
A  note  explains  that  Henry  A.  Kissinger,  the  poet  laureate
of   limited  nuclear  war,   "was  consulted   in  the  preparation"
of   this  new   report.    Edward   Teller   is  on   the    Rockefeller
panel.    Their   views  are  discernible behind  the  rhetoric  about
the  need  to  face  up  to  the  possibility  of  nuclear  war.
A  basic  American  objective,  says  the  report  ponderously,   is
"national  survival."   The  nuclear  stalemate  presents  this  issue
"in   its  starkest  form."    But  the  issue  is  to  be  met,   not  by
learning  to  live  together,  but  by a  stepped  up  arms  race.    "In
the  moral  crises  which  these  new  weapons   present,"  the  re-
port   continues   pompously,   "there   is  particular   need   to   be
clear  on  the  issue  of  the  continued  existence  of  our  nation.
Cheerful  Note
We  were  cheered  no  end  by  one  piece  of  news  from
the  annual  meeting just  held  by  the  National Associa-
tion  of  Manufacturers  in  New  York.   At  a  civil defense
seminar,   Esso   Standard  Oil  Company  and  its   Rocke-
feller   family   bank,  Chase   Manhattan,  disclosed   that
they   have  both  established  duplicate   headquarters  in
the  rural  areas  of  New   York  State  where  microfilmed
records   are   maintained   daily   in   underground   vaults
with   skeleton  staffs   ''to   assure   continuity   of  opera-
tions"  in  the  event  of  a  nuclear  attack.   We  know  it
will  be  a  source  of  satisfaction  to  the  rest  of  ws,  look-
ing  down  on  earth  from  our  heavenly  abode  after   the
holocaust,  to  know  that  within  a  few  years  the  Stand-
ard  oil  trust  will  be  operating again,  a  little  radioactive
perhaps   but   as   vigilant  as   ever   in   the   defense   of
freedom.
The  price  of  survival will  not  be  cheap  in  terms  of  the  effort
and  the  will  which  go  into  maintaining  strong  arms."     The
U.  S.  must  have   "the   kind  of  military  establishment  which
allows  it  to  respond   to  limited  attacks  with  limited  means."
And   "if  worst  comes  to  worst"  all-out   nuclear  war  must  be
faced.    "The   destruction   it  could  wreak  on  us  and  on  others
is  fearful  to  consider,"  the  report   says,  "but   failure  to  face
up  to  the  threat  of  such  a war  undermines  the  hope  of  achiev-
ing  any  sort  of  tolerable  world  order."
The  report   seems  to  be  synchronized  with  a  drive  for  the
establishment  of  a  nuclear   arms  pool  under  West   European
control   (see   box  below).    "Assuming  Europe  will  possess
atomic  arms,"  the  report  says,  readily  assuming  what   thought-
ful  people  would  like  to  avoid,  "it  would  seem  desirable  that
it  create  an  atomic  pool  which  will  complement   other  forms
of  European  cooperation."
Some  Items  That  Point  to  the  Spread of  Nuclear Weapons:  Canada  and  Germany  Next
Another  of  those  reports  to  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations
Committee  by  what  might  irreverently be  termed  the  cold
war  eggheads*  foresees  that  nuclear  engineering  will  soon
make  fissionable  materials  more  plentiful  and  less  expen-
sive.
"Such   achievements,"  says  this  report  released   Dec.  6,
"can   be   expected  to   facilitate   the   nuclearizing  of   small
wars,  the  nuclear  arming  of  allies,  and  the  spread  of  nu-
clear   power   to   additional   countries.    It   seems  unlikely,
however,  that  these  effects  will  be  significantly  assymetri-
cal  in  their  impact  on  the  US-USSR  power equation."
This  is  academic gobblydegook meaning  that  the  spread
of  nuclear  weapons won't  change  the  balance  of  terror  be-
tween  the  two  big  powers.   It  will  just  spread  the  number
of  countries sitting tensely  at  atomic  triggers.
Before  someone  rushes  up  to  say   that  all  this  is  con-
trary  to  the  spirit  of  Camp  David,  it  would  be  well  to  ask
which   meeting  at   Camp   David.    In  Ottawa  Dec.   3,   the
Canadian  Defense  Minister  disclosed   that  the  question   of
supplying   Canada's   armed  forces   with   nuclear   warheads
was  discussed  at  a  U.  S.-Canadian  Cabinet  Defense  Com-
mittee  meeting  at  Camp  David  in  November.
Britain  and  West  Germany have  concluded  an   agreement
•Developments  in  Military  Technology  and  Their  Impact
on  U.  S.  Strategy   and  Foreign   Policy  by  the  Washington
Center  of  Foreign   Policy   Research,   Johns   Hopkins   Univ.,
Arnold  Wolf ers,   director.
to  share  and  develop  certain  strategic   armaments,   includ-
ing   guided   missiles.    According  to   the   London  Observer
(Dec.   6)   the   Germans  will   use   Britain's  atomic  testing
grounds  in  Woomera.   Should  nuclear  warheads  be  issued
to  the  Germans,  these  "would be  kept  under  British  control
under  a  scheme  similar to  that  by  which  the  U.  S. controls
the   warheads  of   the   RAF's   long   range   Thors   in   East
Anglia."    Who  knows  how  long  before  the  Germans con-
trol  Egyptian  warheads  while  the  British  control  German
warheads  .  .  .  ?  If  only  someone  dependable  would  then
hold  ours.
The  defense  committee  of  the  Western  European  Union
meeting  in  Paris   (London  Times,  Dec.  3)   recommended  a
European  strategic  nuclear  force  independent  of  the  U.  S.
and  NATO.   German Socialists  at  the  meeting  opposed  the
idea   but  Christian  Democrats  approved  it   "provided  that
Germany   did  not  have  to  take  part  in  the  production  of
nuclear  weapons."
That  same  day  the  West  German  Defense  Ministry  an-
nounced  it  had  no  intention  of  asking  for  the  removal  of
restrictions   on   the   manufacture  of   atomic,   bacterial   or
chemical  weapons.   It  admitted, however,  that  the  Western
European  Defense  Committee  had  recommended  that  Ger-
many  be  allowed  to  build  bigger  warships   and  submarines.
Eighty  Laborites  in  the  House  of  Commons,  according  to
a  New  York  Times  dispatch  (Dec.  4),  have  signed  a  pro-
test  against   supplying  West  Germany  with  tactical   atomic
weapons.    This  is  the  way  the  wind  is  blowing.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   December  14, 1959
Challenging  "Rocky"  to  Begin  Those  Arms  Race  Sacrifices  With  Esso's  Tax  Privileges
The  Democrats  Talk  Big But  Do  Nothing  About  Oil  Depletion  Allowances
There  is  always  a  large  gap  between  the  social  demagogy
of  the  Democrats and  their performance.   An  example  is their
position  on  depletion  allowances,  one  of  the  biggest scandals
of  the  whole  tax  structure.   The  Democratic  Advisory  Coun-
cil  in  its  new  statement  praises  the  House  Ways  and  Means
Committee  for   its  current  hearings  on   these  and   other   tax
loopholes.     But  the  Democratic  party  in  the  whole  period
of   its  ascendancy  from   1932  to   1952  never  made  a  dent  in
the  depletion  privilege.
Just  how  little  the  Democrats  can  be  relied  upon  was  illus-
trated  in  this  past  year's  Congress  which  they  controlled.    An
attempt  by  Senators  Douglas,  Proxmire  and  Clark  to  reduce
depletion   allowances  never  got   out   of   committee.     When
Douglas  tried  to  move  it  as  an  amendment  to  another  bill  on
June  25,  it  was  defeated  54  to  21.    More  scandalous  was  the
failure   of   the  Democrats  to  do  anything  about   a   growing
extension  of  the  depletion  privilege  which  is  so  bad  that  even
the  Eisenhower  Administration  tried  to  do  something  about
it,  for  it  may  mean  several  billions  in  lost  revenue.    Here  is
the  little known  story:
A  New  Steal  in  Steel
Depletion  allowances  now  cover  a  wide  range  of  extractive
industries,  though   none  get  as  high   a  rate  as  oil.     Recent
court  decisions  have   begun  to  allow  producers   to  take   this
allowance  not  on  the  gross  value  of  the  ore  but  on  the  gross
value  of  products  manufactured  from  it.    An  example   from
the  steel  industry,  as  given  by  a  Treasury   witness   to   House
Ways  and  Means  last  March  will   illustrate.
Two  tons  of  iron  ore  sell  at  about  $16.     The  one  ton  of
pig  iron  produced  from  these  two  tons  of  ore  sells  at  about
$60.     The   Treasury    insists   that   the   depletion     allowance
should  be  taken  on  the  ore.    This  would  be  about  $2.40.  The
producers  want  it  taken  on  the  pig  iron,  which  would   give
them  a  tax  deduction  of  $9.   At  least  one  steel  producer  takes
A  Spur  to  Waste  and  Monopoly
"In  addition  to  impairing  the   public  revenue,  per-
petrating    social   injustice,   and  creating   a   powerful
vested   interest,   the   depletion   allowance   has   certain
other  adverse  economic  consequences.  .  .  .
"It  stimulates  excessive   and  unnecessary   investment
in  the  areas  affected,  thereby  producing  excess capacity
and  wasting  scarce  capital. ...  It  tends  to  stimulate
the  hasty,  inefficient  and wasteful exploitation  of  scarce
and  exhaustible  natural  resources. ...  It  tends  to  con-
centrate  the  wealth  and  income  in  the  hands  of   those
strategically  situated.  .  .  .  The  depletion  allowance  is
fraught   with  so  much  evil  and  is  so  devoid  of   merit
that  it  should  be  discontinued  forthwith  as  an  instru-
ment  of  public  policy."
—Prof.    Horace   M.   Gray,   Univ.   of   Illinois,   pps.
981-2,  Tax  Revision  Compendium,  Current  House
Ways   and  Means  Committee    Hearings.
the  position  that  it  is  entitled  to  compute  depletion  on   the
selling  price  of  the  finished  steel  products.   If  this  position
were  to  prevail,  the  deduction  in  the  case  of  structural  steel
would   be  $16.50,  and   in  the   case  of  structural   steel   bolts
$44.25,   or  more  than  18  times  the  deduction   based  on   the
value  of  the  iron  ore.   The  Eisenhower  Administration  intro-
duced  legislation  to  limit  depletion  allowances  to  the  value  of
the  ore.   The  bill  never  got  out  of  committee.
The  latest  Rockefeller  report  asks  us  to  show  a  "capacity
for   sacrifice"   in   meeting   the   costs   of   larger   military  ex-
penditures.     A  good   place  for   sacrifice  to  begin  would   be
with  the  depletion   allowances   of   the  oil  and  gas  industry.
Figures  marshalled  by  Senator  Douglas  showed  that  while  al!
corporations   in  1954  paid  an  effective  rate  of  48  percent,  the
24  largest  oil  companies  paid  only  22  percent  and  Esso's  main
domestic   producing    subsidiary   Humble    only   16   percent,
thanks  to  depletion  allowances.    Will  "Rocky"  prevail  on  the
Standard  Oil  Companies  to  lead  the  way?
How  $200,000  In  An  Oil  Well  Becomes  A  $600,000  Draft  on  the  U.  S. Treasury
How  tax  depletion  allowances  can  be  used  to  turn  a  $200,-
000  investment  in  an  oil  well  into  a  $600,000  tax  credit  at
the  expense  of  the  U.  S.  Treasury  is  demonstrated  by  Prof.
John  A.  Menge  of   Dartmouth  in  one  of   the   papers   con-
tributed  to  the  current  tax  base  hearings  being  held  by  the
House  Ways  and  Means  Committee   (see   Vol.  2,  p.  967  of
the  Tax  Revision  Compendium,  published  by  the  Commit-
tee).
Prof.   Menge   begins   by   showing   that   in   any   ordinary
business,   the   capitalized  investment   is   recovered   in   the
form  of  tax  credits  for  depreciation  or  amortization,  "but
never  both.   To  allow  a  firm  to  depreciate  and  amortize  the
same  asset   would  allow  the   deduction  of   the   same   cost
twice. ...  A  good  trick  if  you can do it—and  you can  do it.
You  can  do  it  if   you  happen  to  own  mineral  deposits,  an
oil  well,  for  example."
Prof.   Menge  takes   the  case  of   an  Acme  Oil  Co.  which
spends  $500,000  in  exploratory  drilling.    It  drills  20  holes
and  one  proves   to  be  productive.    It  charges  off  $300,000
as   current   drilling   costs   and   capitalizes    the   remaining
$200,000,  to  be  depreciated  in  10  years  at  $20,000  a  year.
If  its  current  revenue  from  the  successful   well  is  $500,000,
it  deducts  from  this  $300,000  in  current  drilling  costs,  $100,-
000  in  sales  and  miscellaneous  expense  and  $20,000  in  de-
preciation.    This  leaves  a  net  income  of  $80,000.    So  far  it
writes  off  its  investment  like  any  other  business.
But  now  the  depletion  allowance  comes  into  play.    Acme
Oil  Co.  is  allowed  to  take  27 Vz  percent  of  its  current   reve-
nues  as  a  depletion  allowance  up  to  50  percent  of  net  in-
come;  27'/2  percent  of  $500,000  is  $137,500.    But  since  net
income  is  only  $80,000,  all  Acme  can  take  is  50  percent  of
that  or  $40,000.   This  reduces  Us  total  taxable  net  income
to  $40,000.
"Now  the  average  oil  well,"  Prof.  Menge  explains,  "has
a  life  of  approximately  20  years  and  if   a  fairly   constant
rate  of  exhaustion  is  assumed  .  .  .  the average  annual- total
income   over   its   productive  life   will   be   about   $40,000  a
year.    Determining  the  depletion  allowance  on  the  basis  of
50  percent   of  total  income,   the   average   annual   depletion
allowance   would   amount   to   $20,000.     Multiplied   by   20
years,  this  is  $400,000.
"Therefore,   an  asset,  an  oil  well   that   cost   $200,000  is
written   off   against    revenue   to   the   extent   of    $600,000,
$200,000  as  depreciation  and  $400,000  as  depletion.     There
is  the  possibility   that  firms  can  do  even  better   than  this,
especially  where  the  net  profit  is  sufficiently  great  to  allow
the  full  27'/2  percent  of  gross  revenue  to  be  deducted   from
profit."
1   8   .3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   December  U,  1959
Black  and  Douglas  Dissent  From  Rejection  of  Chandler  Davis  First  Amendment Appeal
The  Supreme  Court  Refuses   to  Interfere  With  Our  Own  Iron  Curtain
How  easily  we take  to  Iron  Curtainism.  The  Supreme   Court
last   Monday   refused   to   hear   the   appeals   of   Congressman
Charles   Q.   Porter   (D.   Ore.),  Waldo   Frank   and   William
Worthy, Jr., against arbitrary State  Department  action  shutting
off  travel  to  Communist  China.   In  the  Kent  and  Briehl  cases,
the   Court   held   that   without   specific  statutory    authorization
the  State Department  could  not  deny  passports  on  the  grounds
of   political   belief   and   association.    The   Supreme   Court   in
these   cases  was  asked   to  answer  two  similar  questions.   Can
the  State  Department  without   specific  authorization   shut  off
whole  countries  from  travel  by  American  citizens,  including
members  of  Congress?   Can  it  pick-and-choose,  allowing cer-
tain  newspapermen  passports  for  China,  but  not  others?   The
Court  declined  to  answer.
If  Congress  Cared  About  Its  Right  to Know
If  Congress  were  jealous  of  its  prerogatives,   it  would   now
pass  a  resolution  directing  Mr.  Porter  to  visit  China  and  re-
port  on  conditions  there,  thus  sharply  challenging  the  Depart-
ment's  power  under  more  precise  circumstances.
The   Department   in  its  original  "Memorandum   of  Points
and  Authorities"  in  the  Porter  case  in  the  District  Court,   said
"stripped  of  its  trappings  the  contemplated  travel  to  China  is
not   that   of   an   authorized   member   of   Congress  having   an
authorized  legislative  purpose,  but  that  of  a  U.S. citizen  who
desires  to  enter  an  area  which  has  been  restricted  for  travel  in
the  public interest  (including the  ultimate  interest  of  prevent-
ing  war).  .  .  ."   The  petition for  a-rtiorari  in  the  Porter  case
called  the  Supreme  Court's attention  to  the  fact  that  the  words
in  italics  were  "deleted   by  typewritten  x's".   Obviously   the
Department  is  not  quite  sure  what  it  would  do  if  Congress
authorized  a  member  or  a  committee to  enter  China.
If   American  editors   cared   deeply   about   freedom   of   the
press  and  ideas,  they would  protest  the  denial of  a  passport  to
Mr.  Frank  and  the  withdrawal  of  Mr.  Worthy's  passport  be-
cause   he   would   not   promise  naughty-boy-to-irare-nursemaid
fashion   that  he  would  never,  but   never,  visit  China   again.
They  would  also  protest  the  idea  that  the  State  Department
should  be  allowed  to  handpick   30  reporters  for  China  travel
and  bar  others.
Eliz.  Bentley  Victim  Wins  Passport
The  State  Department last  Monday  delivered a  pass-
port  to  the  economist  Victor  Perlo,  one  time  New  Deal
government  employe who  was  smeared  in  the Elizabeth
Bentley   affair.     Mr.  Perlo   applied  for   a  passport  in
May,  and a  month later  was  served  with   interrogatories
asking  him  whether he  had  ever  engaged  in  espionage,
known  Miss  Bentley  or  Whittaker  Chambers, etc.  In
July  Mr. Perlo  submitted  a  sworn  reply  saying  that  he
had  never  engaged  in  espionage  and  that  the  Bentley
charges   had  been  before  several   grand  juries   in   14
years  without  action.    The  Department  procrastinated
and  on  Dec.  1,  Mr.  Perlo  filed  suit.    The  Department's
answer  was  to  issue  the  passport.
There   was   an   unnoticed    passport   angle   in   the   Horace
Chandler  Davis  contempt   case  which  the  Supreme  Court  also
refused  to  hear  last  week.   One  of  the  three  areas  in  which
the   House   Un-American   Activities   Committee   tried   unsuc-
cessfully  to  question  Dr.  Davis  in  Lansing,  Michigan,  in  1954
was  his  failure   to  protest  or  appeal  a  State  Dept.  action  re-
voking   his   passport   as  the   result   of   information  from   an
anonymous  informant.   The  other  two  areas  were  his  political
views  and  associations  while  a  student  at  Harvard  in  the  30s
and  his part  in  a  pamphlet,  "Operation  Mind"  which attacked
the  Committee.    Justice  Black  and   Douglas   noted   that   they
thought  the  Davis  case  should  have  been  heard.   But  of  all  the
pending  30  First  Amendment  contempt   cases,  that  of   Davis
was  most  like  the  Barenblatt  case  and  the  appeal  looked  hope-
less   from   the   start.   This  young  mathematics  teacher   must
now  serve  6  months  in  jail  and  pay  a  $250  fine.  If  a  mathe-
matician  were  fired  from  his  academic  post  and  sent  to  jail
somewhere  in  the  Soviet  bloc  for  refusing  to  inform  on sus-
pected   oppositionists,  our  "free  world"  press  would  be  mak-
ing  him  a  hero.   As  it  is,  the  rejection  of  his  appeal  by  the
Supreme  Court  is  dismissed  in  a  few  obscure  paragraphs.  As
we  go  to  press,  word   comes  that  Dr.  Willard  Uphaus sur-
renders  Monday,  Dec. 14,  to  the  authorities  in  Concord,  New
Hampshire.   They  can  hold  him  in  jail  for  the  rest  of  his  life
if  he  refuses to  turn  over  the  guest  list  of  his  peace  fellowship
summer  camp.   This  is  freedom  in  our  "free  world."
Why   Not  A  Christinas   Gift   Sub  to  Your  Pastor,  Congressman,  Local  Editor  or  Public  Library?
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave,
Washington   15,  D
N.  W.
.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
........................................Zone..._.......State.......
12/ii/59
gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.) additional:
........................................Zone............State.......
we  send  gift  announcement?           Yes  D
"NO n
IE   Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I    F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1878.    Post-dated  Mondays  bnt  pub-
lished  every   Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5R18 Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published    and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager^  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U   8  ;  $8  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  ?15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED