I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959apr13.pdf

============================================================

Report  from  Poland
The  German Problem  and  the  Berlin  Crisis  Look  Differently  When  Seen  Through  Polish  Eyes
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  14
APRIL  13,  1959
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
From  the  Other  Side  of  the  Oder-Neisse  Frontier
Warsaw
We  Americans  are  conditioned  by  our  press  and  by  official
propaganda  to  see  the  German  problem  largely  through  Ger-
man  eyes.   I  wanted  to  see  it  as  it  looks  from  the  other  side
of   the  Oder-Neisse  frontier,   through  Polish   eyes.   I  had   a
Polish  visa.   I  obtained  a  transit  visa  through  the  East  Zone
of  Germany  without   difficulty   and  I  set  out  one  night  east-
ward  from  Berlin.   A  taxi  took  me  from   my  hotel  in  West
Berlin  past  the  floodlit  monument  celebrating  Bismarck's  vic-
tory  over  France  in  1871   and  the  dimly  lit  Russian  war  me-
morial  down  to the Brandenburger Tor.   There  we were waved
past  by  a  guard  on  the  Western  side  and  stopped   for  a  mo-
ment  by  a  guard  on  the  Eastern.   He  asked  neither  to  see my
passport  nor  to  examine  my  bags.   The  driver  explained   he
was  taking  me  to  the  Eastern railroad  station  and  would  soon
be  back.    In  East  Berlin,  we  sped  past  the  smart  shops  on
Unter  den  Linden  and  caught  a  glimpse  on  Alexanderplatz
of  the  fact  that  East  Berlin  (like  West)  now  has  an  "Auto-
mat-Imbiss"   restaurant,   American   style.    The    Ostbahnhof,
known  as  the  Silesian  station  in  the  days  when  it  was  Kaiser
Germany's  gateway  to  the  East,  the  beginning  of  that  Berlin-
Baghdad  railway  dream,  is  now  the  East's  gateway  into  the
heart  of  Central  Europe.   The  bookstall  was  full   of   Com-
munist  (but  no  Western)   papers  from  as  far  as  China.   The
station  swarmed  with  young  East  German  soldiers  setting  off
to  their  posts  and  with  a  crowd  in  holiday  mood,  among  them
many  Slavic  faces.   There  was  much  kissing  on  both  cheeks
and  tearful  farewells  as we  boarded  the  Paris-Moscow  express
at  9:08  p.  m.  for  Poznan,  where  we were  to  change  trains  for
Breslau,  now  Wroczlaw.
East  Berlin  "The Big  City" for Them
In  our  second  class  carriage  were  a  young  Indian  diplomat
and  his wife  returning  to  service  in  their  country's  embassy  in
Warsaw,  and  a  Polish  carpenter  from  Danzig  returning   with
his  17-year  old  daughter  from  a  holiday  in  East  Berlin.   For
him  the  sights  of  Stalinallee,  Unter   den  Linden   and   Alex-
anderplatz  in  East  Berlin  were  "the  big  city."   It  was  his first
visit  to  "the  West"  but  he  had  not  gone  to  see  West  Berlin.
He  explained  that  he  worked  in  the  Danzig  shipyards.   We
talked   in  German—a  language  neither  of  us  spoke  well—
and  he  said   that   while   at  first  all  was  "verkehrt"   (topsy-
turvy)  in  the  shipyards,  now  the  workers  were  better  trained
and  the  work  went  well.
Apparently   the   news   spread   quickly   that   there  was  an
American  aboard  the  train  and  a  man  appeared  from  a  neigh-
boring  compartment  to  deliver  a  short  but  passionate  address
in  broken  English  on  Poland's  right  to  the  Oder-Neisse  ter-
ritory.   A  small  crowd  gathered  in  the  aisle  to  listen  in,  ob-
serving  me with  wonder  as  if  I were  a  visitor  from  the  moon.
In  less  than  two  hours  from  Berlin  we  were  past   Frankfurt
How  the  Poles  Feel About  Adenauer
"Thanks  to  the  existence  of  the  DDR  (the  East Ger-
man  Communist  State),   we  will  never  see  Herr  Ade-
nauer  on  our  frontier,  unless indeed  he  should exchange
the    Crusader   cloak   he   symbolically  wears   for    the
mantle  of   repentance,  in  order  to  come  and  beg   our
forgiveness  for  all  we  have  suffered from  German mili-
tarists   and  war  criminals.   And  even  then  he   would
have  to  obtain  a  transit  visa  from  the DDR."
—President  Cyrankiewicz  in  Warsaw  March  19.
on  Oder,  and  at  the  frontier.  On  the  Polish  side  we  passed
many  flatcars  loaded   with  tanks  moving  westward,   perhaps
for   spring  military  maneuvers.   At  2:30   a.  m.  we  left   the
comparative  comfort  of  the  Paris-Moscow  express  at   Poznan
to  take  the  local  going  south  to  Wroczlaw   (Breslau).   This
was  made  up  of  the  hardest  old-fashioned   "hand  carriages"
I  had  seen  since  I  travelled  in  early  1946  with  Jewish   refu-
gees  from  the  Polish-Czech  border  to  Bratislava  on  the  first
leg  of  an  illegal  journey  to  Palestine.
The  cars  on  the  train  to  Wroczlaw  were  cold;  the  broken
down  windows  would  not  stay  closed;  sleeping  on  the  seats
was  like  trying  to  sleep  on  the  cold  floor  of  a  moving  dun-
geon.   Outside,  as  the  sky  grew  gray,  one  passed  towns  still
haunted  by  skeletal  ruins.   There  was  an  overwhelming   im-
pression   of  wreckage  and  poverty.   The   thought   that   came
into my mind was,  "These are the  lands  to which the  Marshall
Plan   never  came."    But  while  the   industrial  landscape   was
bleak  and  grimy,  the  dawn  showed  that  the  farms  were  well
kept,  the  slender   birches  were  lovely  in  the  morning   light
and  the  fruit  trees  whitewashed against  pest.   At  every  stop,
sleepy-eyed  unwashed  workers  rumbled  into  the  train  bound
for  the  factories at  Wroczlaw.   Our  carriage was jammed  tight
by  the  time  we  got  into  its  huge  cavernous  station.   We  had
arrived  in  the  industrial  capital  of  the  Oder-Neisse  country
annexed  by  Poland.
Not  As Chic As  Warsaw
Three  years  earlier  we  had  been  in  Moscow  and   Warsaw.
Wroczlaw  is  not  as  chic as  Warsaw.    Old  women  with  wisps
of  broom  clean  the  streets as in  Moscow.  The  Monopol Hotel,
to  which  an  ancient  taxi  took  us,  was  heavily  and   tastelessly
ornate  in  the  Russian  manner.   But  the  early  morning  streets
outside   reflected  an   enormous   vitality.    Everywhere   Parisian
style  kiosks  advertised  theatres,  cabarets  and  films.  The  opera
house  nearby  was  playing  Faust,  Carmen  and  the  premier  of
a  new  Polish  romantic  operetta.   There  seemed   to  be  book-
stores   everywhere,   their   windows   crammed   with   technical
works  in  Russian,  Polish  and  Western  languages.   They  were
also  well  stocked  with  classics,  sets  of  Shakespeare  and  Sigrid
Undset,  and  with  Jack  London,  James  Fenimore  Cooper   and
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  13, 1959
An  Ebullient  "Boosterism"  Midwest  Style  Marks  the  Oder-Neisse  Lands  . . .
(Continued  from  Page  One)
James  Oliver  Curwood—just  why  the  last  two  are  so widely
read  abroad  Is  a  mystery; perhaps  the  Europeans  still  like  to
think   of   America   as   a   cowboy-and-Indian   frontier.      The
shops  seemed  full  not  only  of  consumer  goods  but  of  many
luxuries—crystalware,  fine  porcelains   and   cameras.   Crowds
were  waiting  outside  a  big  department  store  for  the  doors  to
open.   The  window  displays  were  tasteful.   Everywhere there
were  street  stalls  selling  sacred  pictures  and  cards  for  the  com-
ing  Easter.   There  was  also  a  shop  window  display  by  a  Free
Thinkers'  Club  in  which  I  recognized  a  Polish  translation  of
a  once  famous  anti-religious  work  by  Feuerbach.
An  SS Fortress
I  had  a  letter   of  introduction  to  the  editor  of  the  local
newspaper,   and  he  took  me  on  a  tour  of  the  city.   Warsaw
was  demolished  by  the  Germans;  Stettin,  the  seaport  in  the
northern  end  of  the  Oder-Neisse  was  worked  over  by  Allied
bombers;  Wroczlaw  was  wrecked  in  a  long  drawn  out  battle
with  the  Russians.   It  was  a  German  fortress  and  it  held  out
long  after  the  Soviet  armies  had  bypassed  it.   The   city  was
held  by  crack  divisions  of  the  SS  and  of  Vlassov's  renegade
Russian  troops;  they  had  nothing  to  lose,  and  the  city  had  to
be  taken  street  by  street  and  house  by  house.   A  huge  area  of
the  city  was  razed  by  its  defenders  to  create  an  inner  airfield
so  that  supplies  could  be  flown  in.   Huge  mounds  of  rubble
over  which  the  grass  has  begun  to  grow  remain  as  monuments
of  the  fighting,  and  even  in  the  largely  rebuilt  center  of  the
city,  there  are  ruined  houses  and  patches  of  wreckage.  Wrocz-
law  looks  like  Warsaw  did  in  1949.   "Warsaw  had  priority in
reconstruction,"  the  local  editor  told  me,  "but  now  we're  be-
ginning  to  get  more  attention."   Before the  war  800,000  peo-
ple  lived  in  Wroczlaw.   Now  there  are  400,000.   But  in  the
city,  as  in  everything  which  has  to  do  with  the   Oder-Neisse
lands,  one  feels  a  pioneering   spirit,  an   ebullient    "booster-
ism"   Middle   Western   style.     In   Warsaw,   as  elsewhere   in
Poland,  the  exuberance  of  three  years ago  has  faded  with  the
promise  of   "October."    The   Polish   spirit   is   slowly   being
tamed  and  proceeds  morosely.  But  the  Oder-Neisse  lands  har-
ness   nationalist   fervor   as   well   as   communist   fanaticism.
Wroczlaw's  famous  railroad  equipment  shops,  though  entirely
razed  during  the  fighting,  are now  bigger  than  before  the .war,
and  I was to  leave  Poland  later  on a bright  new shiny  sleeping
car  manufactured  in  Wroczlaw.   The  city  is  being  developed
as  a  center  for   electrical  equipment,  airplanes,  small  autos,
bicycles,  chemicals  and  eletronks;  it  hopes  soon  to  build  cal-
culating  machines.  Before  the  war,  when  the  city was  German,
there  were   3,000   students  in  its  ancient  university.   Now,   I
was  told  proudly,  there  are  17,000  in  the  higher  schools,  in-
cluding  a  new  polytechnical   institution,   and   it  was   hoped
from  these  to  develop  the  new  cadres  of  engineers  and  tech-
nicians  for  advanced  work  in  electronics.
The  editor,  Roman  Werfel,  told  me  that  70  percent  of  the
city  was  destroyed  in  the  war  but  that  they  hoped  to  have  it
completely  rebuilt  by  1964  or  1965.   He  showed  me  the  his-
toric  sites  of  the  city,  in  particular  its  Cathedral  with  its  pure
early  Gothic  arches,  a  lofty  choir  singing  in  stone.   The  Ger-
mans  had  their  staff  headquarters  under  the  Cathedral  and  it
was  burned  out  in  the  fighting.  State  and  Church  are  sharing
the  cost  of  its  reconstruction.   Ancient  burial  tablets  within  it
As  Seen  Through  German Eyes
"The  second world  war  uprooted  more than  18 million
Germans.   About  10  million  of  them  had  always  been
German  citizens, with  their  homes in  the  German  prov-
inces  of  East  and  West  Prussia,  Pomerania,  Upper  and
Lower   Silesia   and  the  Eastern   part  of   Brandenburg.
In  these  provinces lived  300,000  Polish-speaking  people,
but  the Potsdam  agreement  of August  1945 placed  these
areas  under  Polish  administration.  . . . Another  8 mil-
lion  uprooted  people  were  foreign  citizens  of  German
ethnic  origin  living  in  Czechoslovakia,  Russia,   Poland,
Latvia,  Estonia,  Lithuania,  Hungary  and  other   eastern
European  countries.   The  families  of  these  people  had
their   homes  in   these   countries   for   many   centuries.
Their  ancestors  had,  at  the  request  of  Slavonic  princes,
brought  law  and  Christianity,  skill  and   craftsmanship
to  this  part  of  Europe."
—Meet  Germany,  Official    Handbook.
mark  the  tombs  of  monks  and  knights  with  Slavic  names,  a
prized  testimonial  to  former  ages  when  Wroczlaw  was  Polish.
Across  from   the  Cathedral  is  a  monastery.   Outside   it  is  a
bulletin  board  with  a notice on  it,  "Parents  you are  responsible
before  God  for  the  religious  education  of  your  children."    It
also  has  a  typed  list  of   approved  moving  pictures.   The  co-
existence  of  Roman  Catholicism  and  Communism  in   Poland
grows  deeper  roots  as  a  new  generation  is  raised  on  a  pre-
fabricated   "Marxism",   imposed   from  above,   absorbed   with
a  minimum  of  persuasion  and  a  maximum of  mechanical  com-
pulsion,   vulgarized  in  the  process  until  little  more  than  the
slogans  remain.  In  such a context,  it  is  possible  to  have  young
Communists  who  are  also  good   Catholics,   piously  accepting
two  sets  of  superstitions  instead  of  merely  one.   To  serve  God
and  Marx  in  Poland  is  really  no  different  than  serving  God
and  Mammon  in  the  West.
Where 300,000 Died in Lodz
I  drove  from   Wroczlaw   through   the  strikingly   well-kept
(perhaps  because  uncollectivized)  Polish  countryside  to  Lodz
where  the  Grand  Hotel  seemed  to  be  doing  a  boom  business
at  tea  time.   The  streets  of  the  rather  gray  and  colorless  city
were  jammed.  In  the  center  whole  blocks  stood  empty  where
the  Germans  had  razed  the  ghetto  in  which   300,000   Jews
died.   From  there  we went  on  to  Warsaw,  where  I  was struck
by  the  progress  made  since   1956.    Ruins  were  fewer.    The
shops  were  stocked  with  consumer  goods.   Popular   cafeterias
and  restaurants  served  good  food.   The  people  looked  much
better  dressed  and  better  fed  than  three  years  ago.   It  was  in
Warsaw,  from  Prof.   Oskar  Lange,  Poland's   chief   economist
and  planner,  and  from  a  bright  young  Polish  economist  at  the
Planning   Commission  who  studied   recently  at   Columbia,  a
Professor   Josef  Pajestka,  that  I  got  a  comprehensive   picture
of  just  how  much  the  so-called  "recovered  territories"  had
played  in  Poland's  reconstruction  since  the  war.
Prof.  Lange,  one-time  professor  of  economics  at  the  Uni-
versity  of  Chicago,  a  Left  Socialist  who  went  home  to  Poland
after   the  war,  remains  his  old  bubbling   self,   unmistakably
happy  and  multifariously useful  as  a  teacher  of  economics  at
Warsaw  University  and  holder  of  half  a  dozen   government
jobs.   He  showed  me  a  cartoon  from  the  satirical   magazine
Szpilki   (needles)  which  showed  14  Langes  around  one  con-
ference  table,  each  with  a  different   governmental   title.   One
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  13, 1959
... An Interview With Ex-American Prof. Oskar Lange, Poland's Top Planner
Lange  is  turning  to  another  Lange  and  asking,  "Where  have
•we  met  before?"   He  is,  among  other  things,  vice  president
of  the  Council  of  State,  president  of  the  Economic  Council,
chairman   of   the   Planning  and   Budget   Commission  of   the
Sejm  (the  Polish  Parliament)   and  a  member  of  the  Academy
of   Sciences.   He   received  me   in  his   office   in   the   Sejm,   an
exquisitely  beautiful   parliament  building,  every  detail  of   its
white  marble  and   metal  work   as  impeccably  finished  as  a
perfect  gem,  and  devoid  of  any  "cult  of  personality"  busts  or
portraits.   I  saw  it  first  in  1956  after  Moscow  and  again  this
year  after  Bonn;  both  times  it  was  refreshing.   It  looks  like
a  Capitol,  and  like  the  Capitol  of  a  truly  civilized  country.
No Well Financed  "Miracle" in Poland
Poland  had  the  twin  problems  after  the  war  of  reconstruct-
ing  Europe's  most  badly  damaged  country  and  of  industrial-
izing  an  underdeveloped  still  basically  peasant  land.   It  had
to  meet  them  with  a  sharply  reduced  labor  force.   Of  35  mil-
lion  Poles,  six  million—including  3,500,000  Jews—lost  their
lives  in  the  fighting and  in  the  crematoria.  It  had  to  tackle  its
giant   tasks   without   that   massive   inflow   of   Marshall   Plan
funds,   occupation  dollars  and  substantial  private  investment
which  made West  Germany's  recovery  a  relatively  easy  "Wirt-
schaftswunder"   (economic  miracle).   Today  Poland's  indus-
trial  output  in  real  terms,  according  to  Prof.  Lange,  is  five
times  greater   than  before  the  war.   Its  industrial  output   is
scheduled  to  increase  another  80  percent  in  the  next  seven
years  and   its  agricultural  output   30  .percent.    In   this   swift
progress,  the  so-called   "recovered   territories"   annexed   from
Germany  played  a  crucial  role.   The  Oder-Neisse  question  is
not  just  a  question  of  chauvinism  for  the  Poles;  it  is  a  ques-
tion  of  bread  and  butter.    Without   the  new  lands,  their  re-
covery  would  have  been  crippled.   To  lose  them  now  would
be  to  amputate  Poland's  most  productive  areas.
The  bare  figures  are  eloquent.   The  "recovered   territories"
are  Eastern  Pomerania  (Poland's  share  of  what  was  East  Prus-
sia),  Western  Pomerania  and  German  Silesia.  The  latter  two
are  the  so-called  "Oder-Neisse  lands."  The  old  German  Reich
had  two  areas  of  heavy  industry—the  Ruhr  in  the  West  and
Silesia  in  the  East.   Poland  by  annexing  Silesia  acquired  coal,
steel  and  machinery.   Twenty-five  percent  of  the  Polish   peo-
ple,  many  of  them  colonists  displaced  from  the  Eastern  ter-
ritories  annexed  from  Poland  by  the  Soviet  Union,  now  live
in  the  so-called  "recovered  territories"   (so  called  because  the
Poles  can claim that  at many periods  this  constant  battleground
between  Slav  and  Teuton  was  Polish).    Between  one-fourth
and  one-third  of  total  Polish  production   is  in  the  new  west-
ern  lands  taken  from  Germany.   These  produce   a  third  of
Poland's   electrical   energy  and   almost   one-third   of   its   coal.
The  two  Pomeranias  are  agricultural,  and  thanks  to  them  the
new  territories  account  for  28  percent  of  Poland's  grain  and
a  fourth  of  its  cattle  and  pigs.   To  lose  these  lands  now  would
mean  a  sharp  drop  in  Poland's  standard  of  living,   still  far
from  high.
The  industrial  potential  of  Silesia  was  Poland's  own  form
of  reparations.   Not  all  of  it  was  as badly  damaged  as Wrocz-
law  and  Stettin.    Even  in  the  badly  damaged  areas,  the  rubble
yielded  bits  and  pieces  of  valuable  machinery;  parts  of  build-
ings  still  stood,  simplifying  reconstruction.   In  the  earth  was
wealth—coal,  iron   ore,   sulphur   and  copper.   On  the  earth,
Heuss  in  1939  Applauded  Poland's  Fate
"What  in  the  years  between 1914-1918 happened only
by   degrees,  uncertainly  and  gropingly  is  now   estab-
lished  at  the  very  beginning as  a  recognized  necessity.
No  intelligent  man  will  even  grumble  against  it.   The
naive   and   often   dangerous   crudities   (Roheiten)   of
August   1914  have  not  recurred.
"There  is  no  Englishman and  no  Frenchman who  can
seriously  believe, after  the  overwhelming victory of  the
German  troops in  Poland, that  it  will be  possible  to  re-
deem  the  'guaranty'  which  their countries gave  for  the
existence  of  the  former  Polish  State.  Whether the mili-
tary  and  political  events  of  September  have  a calming
or  an  alarming effect  is  rather  unimportant  beside  the
fact  that  a  position of  power  (Machtbestand)  has  been
created."
—Theodore  Heuss  (now  the  liberal  President  of   the
West  German  Republic)  writing  on  the  defeat   of
Poland   in   Die   Hilfe,   October  10,  1939,  Herr
Heuss  was  editor  of  Die  Hilfe  from  1933 to 193G,
the  first  three  years  of  the  Nazi  regime.     This
quotation,  given  me  in  Warsaw  and  verified    in
the  New  York  Public  Library,   has  never    before
been  published  in  the   USA.    It  illustrates  the
mentality  the  Poles  fear.
scarred  and  torn  but  relatively  easy  to  rebuild  was  a  network
of  railroad  lines.   With  these,  thanks  to  economic   planning
and  dictatorship,  Poland  was  able  to  make  giant   if   painful
strides  forward  after  the  terrible  years  of  the  war.
Poland's  Basic   Resources
These  were  the  resources  which  Poland  had  available  for
its  swift   industrialization.    First,  like  every  peasant   country,
it  had  idle  labor  power  on  the  farm,  "hidden   unemployment."
Second,   it  had   new   idle  capacity,  even  though   much  of   it
badly  damaged,  in  the  "recovered  territories"  with  which  this
surplus  labor  could  be  put  profitably  to  work.   Third,  it  had
in  Silesia,  in  that  battered  railroad  network,   a  relatively  in-
expensive  means  of  soaking  up   labor  from  the  countryside
without   the  social  costs  of  new  housing  in  the  cities.    The
new   worker   peasants   could   "commute"   to   work.    Finally,
postwar  Poland  had  huge  surpluses  of  easily mined  coal  avail-
able  at  a  time  of  world-wide  coal  shortages.    The   price  of
coal,  now  $10  to  $12  a  ton,  went  as  high  as  $25  a  ton.   In
both  Western  Europe  and  the  Soviet  Union,  the  demand  for
coal  was  high.   Before  the  war,  Poland  had  produced   about
33  million  tons  of  hard  coal  a  year.   This  jumped  after  the
war  to  70  million  tons  and  now  to  95  million  tons.   Much  of
this  is  needed  at  home.   But  the  coal  deposits  of  the  new  ter-
ritories  alone  were  enough  to  account  for  25  million  tons  of
exports  annually during  the  best  postwar  years.  With  the  new
lands,  Poland  had  not  only  enough  coal  for  itself  but  a  much
sought  after  commodity with  which  it  could  buy the  machinery
and  equipment  needed  to  reconstruct  and  expand.
A  few  figures  may  be  of  interest.   Before  the  war,  Poland's
rate  of  capital  accumulation  was  often  zero.   Since  the   war,
it  has  been  running  at  a  rate  of  about  8  percent.   Much  of
this  was achieved  by a  deliberate  overemployment  in  industry.
Untrained   and   inefficient   workers  made  a  poor  showing  by
Western  standards,  but  they  produced  something  and  that was
a  net  gain  over  the  idle peasant  scratching  himself  in  the  sun.
Total  non-agricultural   employment   almost  doubled  in  eight
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
5   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  13,  1959
Ulbricht  Regime  A  Buffer  Against  A  Germany   Which  May  Push  Eastward  Again
Poles  See  the  Berlin  Crisis  As  An  Attempt  at  Stabilization
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
years,  rising  from   3.6  millions  in   1949   to  6.2   millions   in
1957.   The  Silesian railroad  network  and  its  idle  capacity made
rapid  absorption   in  industry  relatively  easy  and   inexpensive.
Polish  passenger   traffic  figures  in  billions  of  passenger  kilo-
meters  are  indicative.  Here  is  a  glimpse  of  pre-war  and  post-
war:
1937                         6.9
1946                       15.6
1949                      21.1
1953                       35.9
1957                       37.7
This  steep  rise  in  travel  reflects  a  change  of   social  habits
and  it  also  reflects  the  rise  in  the  number  of  former  peasants
who  "commute"  to  work  in  Silesia.  This  combination  of  idle
plant,  a railroad network, surplus  farm  labor  within  easy  reach
of  the  cities,  and  coal  with  which  to  buy  equipment   explains
Poland's   swift   reconstruction,  and   each  of  these  factors  was
contributed  by the  new  western  lands  annexed  from  Germany.
Poland's  Recurrent  Nightmares
Of  all  the many people  with  whom  I  spoke  in  Poland,  none
had  any  illusions  about  the  East  German  regime.   But  for  the
Poles,  the  German  Democratic  Republic  represents  an   oppor-
tunity  in  which  to  gain  time,  and  to  solidify   their  hold   on
the  new  lands.   The  people  in  the  new  West  of  Poland   are
younger,   the   birthrate  higher.    In   a   generation,   the   Oder-
Neisse   frontier  might  become  permanent,  the  new  lands  se-
curely  Polonized.   The  Ulbricht  regime  represents  a  buffer  for
Poland,  the  one  German  government  which  has  accepted   the
Oder-Neisse  boundary.  Were  West  Germany  to  accept  it,  too,
the  outlook  for  Poland  would  be  transformed.   But  since  the
German  Social  Democrats  dare  not   (one  of  them   suggested
to  me  that  the  great  Powers  would  confer  a  favor  on  the  Ger-
mans  if  they  among  themselves  made  the  Oder-Neisse  a   fait
accompli)   and  the  Adenauer  government  will  not  give  up  the
hope  of  recovery,  the  Poles  have  no  recourse  but  a  close  al-
liance  with  Moscow  and  support  of  Ulbricht's  puppet   regime
in   Pankow.    Poland's   history   is   a   recurrent   nightmare;   it
fears   renewed  German  aggression   some  day  with   a  nuclear
The  Words  Which  Pleased  the  Poles
"The   reunification  of  the  two  parts  into  a  single   Ger-
many  which  would  be  entirely  free  seems  to  us  the    nor-
mal   destiny   of   the   German  people,   provided  they  do
not  reopen  the  question  of   their  present  frontiers   to
the  west,  the  east,  the  north  and  the  south,  and  that
they  move  toward  integrating  themselves  one  day  in  a
contractual  organization  of  all  Europe  for  cooperation,
liberty  and  peace."                    —De  Gaulle,  March  25.
Wehrmacht;   it  suspects  that  once  again  .an  aggressive   Ger-
many  might  partition  Poland   with  Russia  and  create  a  new
Russo-German  entente  at  Poland's   expense.    When   Moscow
proposes  a  settlement  on  the  basis  of  the  status  quo,   i.  e.  a
divided  Germany,  it  speaks  on  this  issue  for  all  Poland.    The
Poles  consequently  see  no  reason  why  West  Berlin  could  not
be  rendered  secure  by  United  Nations  or  neutral  troops.   They
believe  Khrushchev  wants  peace,  sees  West  Berlin  as  a  center
of  provocations, desires  the  stabilization of  the  status  quo  not
a  new  source  of   conflict.    "Khrushchev,"   one  of  them  said,
"wants  to  go  down  in  history as  a  'good  Czar,'  as  a  man  who
brought  peace  and  a  better  life  to  his  peole.   He  has  little
time;  he  is already in  his  middle  60's.   He  is looking  for  a  set-
tlement  not  for  trouble.   But  he  feels  Russia's  new  power  and
wants  a  settlement  only  on  the  basis  of  the  status  quo."
As  seen  from  Poland,  the  Berlin  crisis  is not  a  sinister  plot.
For  the  Poles,  the  sinister  plot  is  the  steady  progress   toward
the  nuclear  rearmament  of  West  Germany.   They  know  that
if  the  last  war  had  stopped  with  their  annihilation,  the  great
majority  of  the  German  people  would  have  applauded   Hitler
and  settled  down  quite content  to  exploit  the  new  Polish  lands
and  their  Slavic  slave  laborers.   Their  cities  and   their   land-
scape  are  a  constant  reminder to  them  of  what  the  Germans
did  so  recently.  The  Oder-Neisse  country  for  them  is  a  small
price   exacted   for   German   war   crimes.    They   prefer   Ger-
many  divided  if  it  is  to  be  rearmed.   This  is  how  they  see  it,
and  if  there  is  to  be  peace  with  justice,  their  wishes  and  their
viewpoints,  too,  must  be  taken  into  account.
Next   Week:  The  Contrast   Between  Stalinist
East    Germany   and   Still    "Liberal"   Poland
This   Is  The  Third  Article  from  Abroad  on  the  German  Problem—You  Can  Start  A  Gift   Sub  With  the  First
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Name     .............................
Qrraat
City    ....................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street    .............................
City    ....................................
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
......Zone............State....................
mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
4/13/59
......Zone............State....................
Shall  we send  gift  announcement?      Tes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
1.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5fll8  Nebraska  ATC.,  N.  W.. Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly    published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager.   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the   U.  S.;  $0  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED