I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959may25.pdf

============================================================

Is  There  A  Red  Menace? P.  2
Teller  and  Murray  Campaign   ("Unscientific"   and  "Immoral")  Against  A  Test  Agreement,  P.  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  20
MAY  25,  1959
°'°'       WASHINGTON, D. C.
15  CENTS
The  Four  Powers  Share  A  Common  Illusion  at  Geneva
The  news  from  Geneva  is  about  as  reliable  as  the   briefing
a  man  gives his wife  after  dinner on  a quarrel which  happened
at  the  office.    The  blow  by  blow  account  tends  imperceptibly
to  include  not  only  the  blows  actually  exchanged  but  those
crushing  remarks  he  would   certainly  have  made  if   he   had
thought  of  them  before  the  train  passed  Stamford  on  his  way
home.    Each  of  the  four  big  Powers  has  a  briefing  officer  and
each  of  them,  like Thucydides,  is free  to  primp  up  the  speech-
es.    The  assembled  reporters  know  as much  about  what actual-
ly  happened  inside the  conference  room  as  we  do  about  what
Pericles   really   said  to  the   Athenians,  which  may  also  have
been  less  eloquent.    An  enterprising  reporter  could  attend  all
four   briefings  and   collate   the  texts  critically,  as  scholars  do
variorum  readings  were  it  not  for  the  fact  that  the  four  brief-
ings  are  simultaneous.   So each  nation's journalistic flock tends
to  pick  its own  propaganda  ministerium  and  their  readers  back
home   are   comforted   by  seeing   in  print   the  preconceptions
they  regard  as  objectivity.
The  Secret  of  Perpetual  Negotiation
Thus  I  read  in  the  augustly  impartial  Associated  Press  from
Geneva   that  the  Soviets  had   "dashed   Western   hopes   for  a
quick  break  through  on  a  suspension  of  nuclear  weapons  tests"
because   they   "profess   to   fear  that   reopening   the   technical
aspects"   will   "delay   completion  of   a  treaty."     I  recall  that
AEC  Chairman  John  McCone  told  the  National  Press   Club
here  in  Washington   on  May  5—hopefully—that   he   thought
technical  negotiations   on  underground   and  outer   space  tests
could  "take  time,  possibly  years."    Perpetual  motion  is still  in
the  future  but  the   secret  of   perpetual  negotiation  has   been
with  us  for  some  time.
Of   no  problem   is  this  more  true  than   the  German.     If
cybernetics  can  give  us  a  machine  to  play  chess,  it  should  cer-
tainly  have  no   difficulty   in  constructing   a  metallic   Foreign
Minister  capable  of  attending  to  international  conferences  on
the  reunification of  Germany.    A  mechanical  diplomat   would
have  an  advantage  over  the flesh-and-blood variety.   He  would
not  become  bored  with  his  lines,  as  Herter  and  his  confreres
seem  to  be  at  Geneva.    He—or  rather  /'/—would  not  break
down  as  the  American  official   spokesman  did  the  other  day
in  a  demonstration  of  human  undependability  and  admit  that,
the  old  records  having  been  replayed,  maybe  the  participants
would  now  get  down  to  discussing  the  Berlin  situation.    Only
a  machine  could  go  on  suggesting  without  blushes  that  a  nu-
clear  rearmed  West  Germany  would  increase  European  secu-
rity,  or  that  a  stable  Europe  could  be  constructed  on  the  basis
of  separate peace  treaties  with  the  separate  halves  of  a  divided
Gerrriany.
Senator  Mansfield  made  a  thoughtful  speech  on  Germany
in   Pittsburgh   earlier  this  month   (the   text  may  be  found   at
Chit-Chat  on  Capitol Hill
"Two    very   prominent   authorities,   one  on   disarma-
ment  and  the  other  on  science,  stated  in  my  presence
the  other  day  their  belief  that  we  would  all  be  dead  in
10  years  and  that  the  earth  would  be  'an  incinerated
relic'."
—From  the  May,  1959,  newsletter  to  constituents  by
Cong.  Chas.  O.  Porter   (D.  Ore.).
page  A3874  of  the  May  11  Congressional  Record).    He  sug-
gested   that   our   whole   approach   had   been   outmoded   long
before  Khrushchev's   challenge  on  Berlin,  "the   defeated   Ger-
many,  the  disarmed  Germany,  the  shattered,  starving  Germany
for   which   the   present   improvised   arrangements   of   stability
were  revised  no  longer  exists."     It  is  an  illusion   to  suppose,
as  the  four  Powers  do,  that  at  Geneva  they  are  deciding   the
fate  of  Germany.    Instead   it  is  Germany—the  Germany  of
Adenauer  and  Krupp—which  is  deciding  the  fate  of  Europe.
The  Berlin  problem   on  Bonn's  insistence  has  been   rendered
inextricable  by  a  package  plan  which  includes  everything  but
reunification   of   the   Roman   Catholic   and   Greek   Orthodox
rites.    The  truth  is  that  the  real  masters  of  West  Germany
welcome   Khrushchev's   challenge   on   Berlin   as  a  means  of
maintaining  tension.    They  don't  want  to  negotiate until  their
nuclear  rearmament  is  completed,  partly  at  U.  S. expense,  and
then  they  want  to  do  the  negotiating  with  Moscow.    Krupp
and  Khrushchev  already  seem  to  be  flirting  behind  the  backs
of  the  West,  and  the  Ruhr-Rhineland  industrialists  may  hope
to  negotiate   a  package   of   their   own   when   they  are  ready.
This  might  include  rectification  of  the  Oder-Neisse   line,  and
reunification  on  their  own  terms,  in  return  for  generous  credits
to  Russia and  China  plus  a  treaty  of  "friendship  and  neutral-
ity"   a  la  Ribbentrop-Molotov.
Amnesia,  Too,  Can  Be  A  Weapon
The  dominance  of  Germany  in  Western  councils  was  dra-
matically  demonstrated   when   Selwyn   Lloyd   pictured   restric-
tions  on  German  possession  of  thermonuclear  weapons  as  an
attempt  to  "impose  certain  discriminatory  servitudes  on  Ger-
many."    This  is  Adenauer's  language,  a  reversal  of  the  posi-
tion  Macmillan  took  on  his  voyage  of  exploration  to  Moscow
in  an  effort   to  find  a  basis  for  solution.     To   deny  thermo-
nuclear  weapons  to  Germany  is  not  "discriminatory  servitude"
but  to  save Europe and  Germany  itself  from  the  danger  repre-
sented  by  that  coalition  of  monopoly  industrialists  and   officer
class  which  has  produced  two  world  wars  in  one  generation.
Little  more  than  20  years  ago  this  same  coalition  won  West-
ern  acquiescence  in  Hitler's  rearmament  on  the  same  whisper
that  they would  only  march  eastward.   Amnesia  seems  to  be  a
major  German  weapon.
7  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May 25, 1959
J.  Edgar  Hoover  Challenged  in  Testimony  Against  Bills  to  Reverse  Cole  Ruling
Former  Hennings   Committee  Research  Chief   Calls  Red   Menace  A  Myth
By  Benjamin  Ginzburg
As  a  result  of  my  intimate  contacts  with  the  operation  of
the   loyalty-security   programs,   I   became   convinced  that
these  programs,  as  well  as  the  whole  government  campaign
against  domestic  communism,  rest  on  two  illusions.
The   first   illusion   is  that  the   protections   of  the   Bill  of
Rights  are  -divisible—that  we  can  strike   out  against   Com-
munists  in  violation  of  the  Bill  of  Rights,  and  still  keep  the
protections   of  the   Bill  of  Rights  intact  for   the  rest  of  us.
The  second,  and  far   more  disastrous,   illusion  is  the   belief
that  communism in  the  United  States  poses  such  a  life-and-
death  threat  to  the  nation   that  it   justifies  laying  violent
hands  on  the  Bill  of  Rights.
In   my   opinion  the   so-called   Communist  menace  in   the
United  States is an emotionally created  myth.   In  saying  this,
I  am far  from  denying  the  potential  dangers.   I  have  fought
Communist  ideas  and tactics  all my  adult  life—I  fought  them
when  some  of  the  present   advocates  of  government  thought
control  were  active  members  of  the  Communist Party.   I  still
believe  in  fighting  Communist  ideas  and  tactics,  but   in  ac-
cordance  with  our  established  way  of  life  I  believe  that  the
fighting  should  be  done  by  private  individual  and  organiza-
tional  effort,  and  not  by  calling  in  the  state—the  policeman
—for  help.   For  a  policeman  is  just  not  equipped  to  be  able
to  distinguish  one  political  idea  from  another.    As  an  illus-
tration  of  this  inability  to  tell  one  idea  from  another,  I  may
mention  that  in  the  published  record  of  the  Greene  industrial
security  case   (which  is  now  before  the  Supreme  Court)  we
find  the  security   officer  holding  that  the  word  "liberals"  is
synonymous  with   Communists.
Only  Confusing  Ourselves
There  is  certainly  no life-and-death  menace today  from  the
handful  of  American  Communists.   Their  number  was   esti-
mated  by the  New  York  Times  more than  a  year  ago  as  any-
where  from  two  to  five  thousand,  and  it  must  be  much  less
now.    The  threat  of  Russian  communism  is  of  course  a  dif-
ferent   story,  but  we  are  meeting  that  threat  by   military
and  diplomatic  means.    I  don't  see  how  a  government  cam-
paign   against   freedom   of   opinion  helps   us   to   meet   that
threat.   On the  contrary  it  confuses  us.
In  the  past  few  years  we  have  seen  the  tide  of  hysteria
fed  by  the  myth  of  the  Communist  menace recede  bit  by  bit.
The   1956  Supreme   Court   decision   in   the   case   of   Cole   v.
Young,  invalidating the  application  of  the  Eisenhower  secu-
rity  program  to  non-sensitive  positions  in  the  Federal  gov-
ernment,  reflects  this  ebb  in  the  tide  of  hysteria.
I  do not regard  the  Cole  decision as  constituting  a  definitive
rational  solution  of  the  security  problem,  as  so many  liberals
seem  to  believe.   Far-fetched,  hysterical  charges  about  opin-
ions  and  associations  make  no  more  sense  in  sensitive  areas
of  government  operations  than  they  do in  non-sensitive  areas.
If  you  examine  the  published  records  in  the  two  industrial
security   cases  now  before  the   Supreme  Court—the  William
L.  Greene  case  and  the  Charles  Allen  Taylor  case—you  will
come  away  appalled  by the  spectacle  of  our  great  government
spending  literally  billions of  dollars  in  investigating  and  con-
We  reprint   here   an   abridged   version   of  testimony
before  the  House  Civil  Service  Committee  on  May  14
by  Benjamin  Ginzburg, former  research   director  of  the
Senate  subcommittee on  Constitutional  Rights.    In  his
testimony  against  pending  bills  to  restore  security  pro-
cedures  for  non-sensitive  jobs,  as  in  his  earlier   testi-
mony  before  the  Eastland  committee  hearings  on  anti-
Supreme  Court  legislation,  Dr.  Ginzburg  was  the  one
witness  forthrightly  to  attack  the  myth  of  a  domestic
Red  menace.    His  thesis  may  be  found  fully  and  bril-
liantly  argued  in  his  new  book,  Rededication  to  Free-
dom.    (Simon  and  Schuster,  $3.50.)
demning  people  on  such  trivia  as  membership  20  years  ago
in  the  Washington Cooperative Bookshop,  or  attendance  at  a
public  dinner  of  the  Southern Conference  for  Human Welfare.
I  know that  certain  sections  of the  public  violently  disagree
with  my  assessment  of  the  situation.    They  feel  that  a  na-
tional  crisis  has  been  posed  by  the   Cole decision.
But  I  say  to  these  people:  Where  is  the  crisis?    Where  is
the   fire?   At  the  time  the  High  Tribunal  promulgated  its
ruling  in  1946, Attorney  General  Herbert  Brownell,  Jr.,   and
Civil   Service   Chairman  Philip   Young  predicted  that   the
country   would   be   ruined   unless  the   court's   decision   was
promptly  overridden.   Each  year  since  that  time,  we  have
had  similar  predictions  of  impending  doom.    But   each  year
—in   1956,  in  1957,  and  in   1958—the  legislation  to  override
Cole   v.   Young   failed   of  enactment.    I   challenge  the  sup-
porters  of  this  legislation  to  show  objectively  in  what  way
the national interest  has  been harmed by the failure to restore
security  procedures  for  non-sensitive employees.
I  say  that  the  crisis  exists  only  in  the  minds  of  those  who
proclaim  it.    In  support  of  my  assertion  I  may  cite  the  re-
cent   statement   of   FBI   Director  J.   Edgar   Hoover  in   the
April  issue of  the  FBI  Enforcement   Bulletin.   In  that  state-
ment  Mr.  Hoover  bemoans  the  present   apathy  in  regard  to
the  Communist menace.   He  calls  this  apathy  "alarming  and
shameful"  and  attributes  it  to  a  "deceitful Red  plot."
Why  the  Public  Yawns
What  Mr.  Hoover  is  saying  in  effect  is  that  the   American
people  after  having  been  indoctrinated  for  20 years  with  the
notion  of  a  life-and-death  Communist  menace  in  the  United
States  is  today   inclined  to   yawn   when  the   Red  threat   is
brought  up.   If  there  was  any  substantial  reality  to  the  Red
menace  in   the   United   States,  there   would  be  no   need  of
forced  draft  propaganda  in  order  to  sell  the  American  peo-
ple  on  the  Communist  threat.
I  submit  that  no  overriding  legislation   ought  to  be  passed
by  the  Congress  without  first  finding  out  objectively  whether
a  serious  Communist  menace  exists  in  the  United  States.    I
propose  to  you,  as  I  proposed  to  the  Internal  Security   Sub-
committee,  that  an  impartial   non-political  body  such  as  the
Social  Science  Research   Council  be  invited  to  name  a  com-
mittee  of  social  and  political  scientists  to  con'duct  a  scientific
inquiry  into  the  gravity  of  the  domestic  Communist  threat.
Three  Liberal  Senators  Join  Dirksen  and  Mundt  in  Tributes  to  J.  Edgar  Hoover
"Mr.  Hoover  and  his  FBI  .  .  .  have  avidly  protected  the
rights  of  the  accused."—Proxmire
"I  think  it  is  fortunate  to  have  as  the  head  of  the  FBI
an  individual  like  Mr.  Hoover  who  has  likewise  been  con-
cerned  about civil liberties and civil  rights."—Neuberger
"I  wish  to  associate  myself  with  the  fine  comments  my
colleagues   have   made  with  respect   to   J.   Edgar   Hoover,
especially  for  .  .  .  his  deep  understanding  of  the  need  for
the  preservations  of  the  constitutional  freedoms  which  are
involved  in  his  work." —Javits
From  the  tributes  (mostly  rightist)  in  the  Senate May
11 on  the  35th  anniversary  of  J.  Edgar  Hoover's  director-
ship  of  the  FBI.'   Nobody,  of  course,  mentioned   Hoover's
admiration   for   McCarthy,   his   close   cooperation   with   the
House  Un-American  Activities   Committee,  the  aid  he  gave
Brownell   in  launching   the   "20  years  of  treason"  charge
against  the  Democrats  in  1953,  nor  the  growing  number  of
noted  FBI  informers  who have  been  adjudged  perjurers.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. f.  Stone's  Weekly,  May K,  1959
Hazardous  Type  Reactor  Approved  for  Detroit  Despite Adverse  Safety  Report
Why   Organized   Labor  Has  Joined  in  the  Fight  Against  Strauss
The  fight  on the  Strauss nomination is  far  from  over.  Sen-
ator  Anderson  is  encouraged by  the  one-vote margin  which is
all  that  the  pro-Strauss  forces  were  able  to  muster  in  report-
ing  the  nomination  out  of  Commerce Committee.   The  odds
are  still  in  favor  of  confirmation  but  grow  steadily  slimmer.
The  outcome  may  depend  on  any  new  revelations Anderson
can  make  on  the  Senate  floor  and  on  the  strength  the  utility
interests  spear-headed by  A. T.  & T.  can  mobilize for  Strauss.
Organized  labor finally entered  the  fight  against  confirma-
tion  when James  B. Carey  of the  Electrical  Workers   appeared
to  testify  against  Strauss  on  May  13.   Carey  put  on  the  rec-
ord  the  story  of  the  suit  brought  by  the  Auto  Workers,   the
Electrical  Workers  and  the  United  Papermakers  challenging
the  conditional  AEG  permit  granted  Detroit  Edison  for   the
construction  of  the  Lagoona  Beach  reactor.
Behind  the  suit  lies  the  insistence  of  Strauss—despite  an
adverse  safety  report—in  speeding the  erection  of  a  new  and
hazardous  type  of  reactor  in  the  heart  of  a  great  industrial
area.   The  Lagoona  Beach  site,  opposite Windsor, Canada,  is
12  miles  from   Toledo  and   30  miles  from   Detroit.    About
2,225,000  people live  within  a  radius  of  30  miles.
The  British  Chose  A  Remote  Spot  for  Theirs
The  British,  in building a fast  breeder  reactor  of  this  type,
chose  about  as  remote  a  point  as  they   could  find  in   the
British  Isles—Dounreay  in  the  far   north  of  Scotland.    Un-
like  other  reactors  these  fast  breeders  do not  have  a modera-
tor  to  slow  down  their  neutrons,  and  can  "run  away",  i.e.  get
out  of  control,  in  two  ten-thousandths  of  a  second.   EBR-1,
the   first   model  plant,  in  Idaho,  "ran   away"   in  November,
1955. but  Strauss  went  ahead  with  the  Detroit  plant  without
waiting  for  the  second  model, EBR-II,  to  be  tried  out.    The
Detroit  plant  was  rushed  to  head  off the  growing  demand  in
Congress  for  a public atomic power  program.
The   model   which   "ran   away"   was  built  by  the   Bechtel
Corporation,  headed  by  John  McCone,  whom  Strauss  picked
as  his  successor  as  chairman  of  AEC.    During  hearings  be-
fore  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  last  February,
McCone  admitted to  Senator  Hickenlooper in  another  context
that  he  thought  it  "bad  timing"  to  go  ahead  with  the  Detroit
plant  without  waiting  for  the  results  from  the  second  model
plant.
Carey  told  the  Senate  Committee  that  Strauss  authorized
construction  of  the  Lagoona  Beach  plant  although  the  AEC's
Advisory  Committee on  Reactor  Safeguards   advised  against
it  on  health   and  safety   grounds.    The  adverse   report   was
made  on June  6,  1956  but  knowledge  of  it  was  withheld  from
the  House  Appropriations  Committee  when  Admiral  Strauss
on  June  25 advised  the  committee that  he  had  been  invited  to
ground  breaking  ceremonies  for   the  reactor  on  August  8,
1956.    "These  plans  were  made,"  Carey  testified,  "and   the
invitation  accepted,  despite  the  adverse  report,  and   despite
the  fact  that  a  construction  permit  had  not  yet  been  issued."
AEC  Commissioner Thomas  E.  Murray  disclosed  the   ad-
verse  report to the  Appropriations  Committee  four  days  later.
Physicists Vote  'No''
Senator  Douglas  (D.  111.)  sent  a  letter  to  720 mem-
bers  of  the  American Physical  Society  in  Illinois  (which
includes  some  of  our  most  important  atomic  establish-
ments)  asking  their  advice on  confirmation  of  Lewis  L.
Strauss   as   Secretary   of  Commerce.    He  reported   to
the  Senate  on  Friday,  May  15,  that  of  252  replies  re-
ceived  by  noon  of  that  day,   63  percent  were  against
confirmation,  27.7  percent  for  Strauss  and  9.1  percent
did  not   feel   qualified   to  give  an  opinion.    As  Secre-
tary  of  Commerce, Strauss  would  exercise  an  important
influence  in  science  through  the  U.  S.  Bureau  of  Stand-
ards,  the  Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey,  and  the  Weather
Bureau  which  are  all  in  the  Department  of  Commerce.
Independent   research   by   Weather   Bureau   scientists
proved  the  AEC  wrong  on  the  distribution  of  fallout
and  observations  by  Coast  and  Geodetic Survey  showed
the  AEC had  misinformed the  public on the  first  under-
ground  nuclear  test.
When  Chairman  Cannon  angrily   asked  Strauss,  "Why  was
this  not mentioned to  us?",  Strauss  replied,  "It  was.    It  was
stated  that  this  fast  breeder  was  the  most  hazardous  of  all
reactors."
"The  gentleman  did  not  mention,"  Cannon  said  reproach-
fully,  "that  there  had  been no  approval  of  the  design  on that
account."   "We  were  trying  to  make  our  answers  responsive
to  the  questions,"  Strauss  countered  slickly.
Another  Abuse  of   "Confidential"
Carey  put  into  the  record  the  text  of  a  telegram  from  Gov-
ernor  Williams  of  Michigan  to  Admiral  Strauss  demanding
access  to  the  adverse  safety  report.    A  reply  next  day  from
the  AEC  said  "The  Commission considers  it  would  be  inap-
propriate  to  disclose  the  contents   of  internal  documents  de-
veloped  by  its  staff."    The  adverse  report  was  stamped  con-
fidential  and  only became  public  the  following  October  when
Commissioner  Murray  appended a  copy  of  the  adverse  report
to  a  dissenting opinion.
The  unions  filed  suit  in  August,  1956,  challenging  the  va-
lidity  of   a  conditional  construction   permit.    The  State  of
Michigan  joined  in  as  intervenor.    But  almost   three  years
have  passed  and  the  AEC has  not  yet  issued  a  final  ruling  on
the  suit.   This  must  be made before  it  can be  appealed  to  the
courts.   Construction  of  the  plant  is  90 percent  completed.
Carey  testified  that  Strauss  tried  to  give  Detroit  Edison  a
hidden  subsidy  of  almost  $16,000,000 by  guaranteeing  to  buy
its  plutonium  output  for  ten  years  at  $45 a  gram.   The  price
was  "classified"  but  the  secret  was  uncovered  by  the  unions
in  their  suit.   The  AEC  thereupon  reduced  the  price  to  $30
a  gram.    The  British   were  only  paying  $12 a  gram  at  the
time,  and  expected  the  price  to  go  lower.
Setting   the  Record  Straight   on  the  Dixon-Yates Power  Contract
Lewis  L. Strauss,  defending  the  Dixon-Yates  contract  be-
fore  the  Senate  Commerce  Committee:  "It  would  have  cost
the  people  a  great  deal  less  than  the  plant  is  now  going
to  cost."
The  facts,  as  dug  up  by  Elsie  Carper,  Washington  Post
staff   (May  17):  The  publicly  owned  Memphis,  Tenn.,   plant
will  cost   13  percent  more  than  the  projected   Dixon-Yates
plant  but   generates   15  percent   more  power.    The  Dixon-
Yates  plant  would  have  cost  $165  per  kilowatt  of  capacity,
the  Memphis municipal plant  is  costing  $161.33.
"The  Memphis plant  is  being  built  at  no  cost  to  the  Fed-
eral  taxpayer   while  under   Dixon-Yatea,"  the  Washington
Post  reported,  "the  Government  was  obligated  to  spend  6.5
million  for  transmission   lines   and  guarantee   Dixon-Yates
a  profit."
Though  Memphis  had  to  float  revenue  bonds  at  4.4  per-
cent  to  finance  the  plant,  it  expects  operation  to  be  profit-
able  at  TVA rate  levels.   Interest  and  amortization  will  be
paid  out  of  revenue,  and  the  cost  is  expected  to  be  paid off
entirely  by  1992.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  25, 195  fl
Teller:  It  Would  Hamper  Science  and  Murray:  It   Would   Hurt  Morality
Warning  Bulletin:  A  New   Scare   Campaign  to  Block  A  Test  Agreement
In  1956,  just  as  an  agreement  with  the  Russians on  testing
seemed   imminent,  Edward  Teller   turned  up  on  the  White
House  lawn  with  the  clean  bomb  plea.    Now   he  is  making
the  rounds  of  important  editors  with  the  same  worn gimmick.
The   only  important  question  which  now  separates  East  and
West  on  a  test  agreement  is  the  number  of  veto-free  inspec-
tions.     The   compromise   Senator   Humphrey   suggested   on
March   5  to  the  President   (see  the  text  and  Humphrey's  im-
portant  but  neglected  speech  in  the  Congressional  Record  for
March   12)  and  the  similar  compromise  Macmillan   suggested
during  his  visit  at  the  time  to  the  Kremlin  have  borne  fruit.
Now,   as  on  other  occasions  when  agreement  on   disarmament
seemed  possible,  the  opposition  is  mobilizing  suspicion,  hate,
fear  and  ignorance;  all  the  appalling  irrationality  of  mankind
is  being  mustered.
The  Morality  of  Murder  by  Kiloton
Teller  is telling the  editors that  an  agreement  would  hamper
science  and  Thomas  E. Murray is telling  us  it  would  be  down-
right   immoral.     Even  the  Washington   Post   (May   19)   sud-
denly  fears  "It   is  not  beyond  speculation  that  they,"   i.e.  the
Russians,  "would  use  a  test  agreement  as  a  peg  for  a  propa-
ganda   offensive  to  ban  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons."     That
would   be  wicked.    Mr.  Murray  in  a  memorandum  to  Sena-
tor  Clinton   P.  Anderson  appeals   in  anguish   to   "first   moral
principles"  against  the  drift  to  agreement.
Mr.  Murray  is  back  on  his  familiar   theme,  which  is  that
mass  murder  by  megaton  may  be  wrong   (unless  necessary  of
course  as  a  last  resort   against  heathen   Muscovy)   but   mass
murder  by  kiloton  is  moral.    He  wants  continued  testing  and
sees  "a  rational  test  program,  safely  conducted ...  as a  means
of   moral  education   as  well   as  of   military  security."     Even
Mr.  Dulles  could  hardly have  surpassed Mr.  Murray's climactic
exhortation   to   "a   sound   philosophy   of   the   uses  of   nuclear
force   in  the   furtherance   of  the   American  purpose,"   the  re-
organization  of  the  world  on  "the  principles which  God  Him-
self   has  established  for  the  rule  of  human   societies."
This   rhapsodical  self-righteousness by  a  man  who  is  sup-
In  the  Army  as  Well  as  The  Womb
"I  assure  you  that  a  pregnant   woman's  normal  fears
are   multiplied   by  the   thought    that   her   unborn   child
might   be  deformed  by  invisible   particles  coming   from
bombs   manufactured   and  tested  by  her  fellow    men."
—Mrs.  Lucille  Harris,  a  pregnant  mother,   testifying
nn   behalf    of   the   Washington   Committee   for   a
Sane  Nuclear  Policy,  May  18, Senate  subcommit-
tee  on  HEW   Appropriations,  asking  more   funds
for  fallout   research  by  the  Public Health  Service.
"It  is  possible  that  the  average  body  burden  of  Sr-90
in  young  children   over   much   of  the   U.  S.   could   rise
to  10 strontium   units  from  testing  to  date. ...  In  this
country   there  would   occur  not  more  than  500  greater
or   lesser   tragedies   of   this   nature    ["genetic   defects,
stillbirths  and  the  like"]  to  add  to  the  some  1400   fa-
talities   and  a   large   number   of   serious  injuries  each
year    readily    identifiable   with   other   aspects   of   our
defense   efforts."
—Dr.  Charles  L.  Dunham,  Division  of  Biology   and
Medicine,   AEC,    opening   the  radiation  hearings,
May   5.
We   might   even   award   such   babies  a  Purple  Heart,
with  a  citation   reading,  "Deformed   for  Defense."
posed  to  be  consultant  to  the  Joint  Atomic  Energy  Commit-
tee  on  nuclear  engineering,   not  nuclear  theology,   is  a  little
more  than  the  Joint  Committee   dares  yet  espouse   in  public.
A  majority  of  its  members  tried  to  block  the  Humphrey  reso-
lution  for  test  cessation  in  private  but  none  dared  vote  against
it  in  public  when  it  passed  the  Senate  unanimously  on  April
30.    Congressman  John   S.  Monagan   (D.   Conn.)  has  intro-
duced  it  in  the  House  where  they  will  try  to  keep  it  from  the
floor  for  the  same  reasons;  the  nuclear  warriors  fear  to  stand
up  and  be  counted  against  it.    Somehow  the  American  people
refuse   to  swallow  the  nonsense  about  clean   bombs  and   the
Jesuitical  argument  that  nuclear  weapons,   at  least  the  little
Hiroshima  size  fellows,  are  instruments  of  moral  persuasion.
But  we  are  on  the  verge  of  a  new  scare  campaign  against  a
testing  agreement.
7958  Index   Ready   Free  If  You  Send  A  Long   Stamped   Self~Addressed    Envelope   For   It
I.  F.  Stone's
Please   renew
Street     ..........
r*if v
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street    ..........
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Zone           State
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
5/25/59
................ ...........Zone............State...
gift  announcement?     Yes  D
NO n
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.   C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C..  uoder  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays   but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December   at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED