I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jan26.pdf

============================================================

What  Mikoyan  Could Have Said,  P.  4
New  Nuclear  Insights:  A  Letter   by  Jay  Orcar;  Humphrey   Offers  Hope,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  4
JANUARY  26,  1959
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Un-American  Inquisitors  Create  A  New  Crime
In   the  Inquisition  the   most  frightful   evidence  of  heresy
was  to  criticize  the  Holy  Office  itself.    Next  to  this  crime  in
awfulness,  and  linked with  it,  was  to  question  the  power  of
the  devil.   For  if  one  disparaged  the  devil's  might,  one  im-
plied  less  need  for  the  men  working  with  scourge  and  fagot
to  expose  his  secret  collaborators.   These  old  manias  flourish
in  full  vigor  in  the  speeches  which  Chairman Walter  of  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  and  his   colleagues
have  been  making  in  the  House.
To  read  the  speeches  is to  believe  that  a  new  heinous crime
exists  in  our  country,  the  crime  of  advocating  the  overthrow
of   the   House   Un-American  Activities  Committee.    Linked
with  it  are  criticism  of  the  FBI,  any  disparagement  of   the
power  of  the  Communist  Party  (J.  Edgar  Hoover*  and   Wil-
liam  Z.  Foster  stand  shoulder  to  shoulder  on  its  potency  to
the   last),   and   any  opposition   to   legislation   limiting  basic
political  liberties  in  the  name  of  security.  Where  a  few years
ago  the  witch  hunters  were  hunting  alleged  Communists  now
their  targets  are  those  who  dare  criticize political  persecution.
Proof  of  such  criticism is  made  proof  of   "subversion."
"Notorious"—For  Defending  The  Bill  of  Rights
The  Washington  Post which  said  (Dec.   19)  that  the  House
Committee  "should   be  abolished,  not   reorganized,"   was  in
turn  attacked  by  Mr.  Walter  on  the  floor  of  the   House  as
"notorious"   i.e.,   notorious  for   its  defense  of   civil  liberties.
Its  distinguished  editorial  writer,  Alan  Barth,  who  spoke  in
California   for   abolition   of  the  Committee  was   "identified,"
as  one  who  had  often  criticized  the  FBI.   Linking  attacks  on
the  Committee  with  attacks  on  the  FBI  chills   Congressmen
to  the   bone.     The   New   York   Post  and   its  editor,   James
Wechsler,    were    similarly   exposed   by   Cong.   Gordon    H.
Scherer  (R.  Ohio)   in  an  extension  of  remarks  on  January  15.
Mr.  Scherer  said  they  had  assigned  "a   staff   of  reporters  in
the  United  States  and  abroad  in  a  far  flung  attempt  to  dig
up  dirt  for  a  professed  objective study  of  the   FBI."
Any  talk  of  studying  the  FBI  objectively  at  once  becomes
"professed."    Only  a  heretic  would   seek   to   be    objective.
The  Nation   and  its  editor,  Carey  McWilliams,  come  in  for
smear,   extending  even  to  the  "Ford  Foundation's  Fund   for
the  Republic"  for  having  had  an  advertisement  in  the  same
issue  of  the  Nation  which  carried  Fred  J.  Cook's  study  of  the
FBI.   The  corkscrew  twist  of  the  Inquisitorial  mind  may  be
found  in  Mr.  Walter's  attack  on  Reinhold  Niebuhr,  one  of
the  signers  of  an  ad  for  abolition.   "He  has  denounced  the
Communist  Party  of  the  United   States  in  recent  years,"   Mr.
*"The  Communist  Party  In  the  U.  S.  is  not  out  of  business;  it  Is
not  dead;  it  is  not  even   dormant.  .  .  .  Those  who  try  to  minimize
its  danger  are  either  uninformed  or  they  have  a  deadly  ax  to  grind."
—Mr.  Hoover  quoted  by   Air.  Scherer,   Jan.   15.
2
Testimonial   From  An  Old  Friend
"We  in  the  FBI  have  the  highest appreciation for  the
contributions  rendered  by  the  congressional  committees
dealing  with  Un-American  Activities."
—Letter  from  J.  Edgar  Hoover read  to  the  House  by
Cong.  Clyde   Doyle  (D.  Cal.)  Jan.  15  in   attack-
ing  the  Roosevelt  "abolition"   resolution.
"I  am  not  passing  on  the   technique  of  McCarthy's
committee,  or other  Senate committees.  That's  the Sena-
tor's  responsibility.   But  the  investigating  committees
do  a  valuable job.  I  never  knew  Senator McCarthy  un-
til  he  came  to  the  Senate.   I've  come  to  know  him  well
officially   and  personally.  I  view  him  as  a  friend  and
believe  he  so  views  me.  Certainly,  he  is  a controversial
man.    He  is  earnest  and he  is  honest."
—J.  Edgar   Hoover,  San  Diego,  Cal.,  Eve.   Tribune,
Aug.  22, 1953,  N.  Y.  Times,  Aug.  24, 1953.
"The  closest relationship exists  between this  Commit-
tee  and the  FBI. ...  It  is  something,  however,  that
we  cannot  talk  too  much about."
—J.  Parnell  Thomas, then  chairman  of  the   Un-Amer,-
ican  Committee,  at  a  public  hearing  July  31,  '48.
Walter  said,  "while  at  the  same  time  seeking  the  release  from
prison  of  Communists  convicted  under  the  Smith  Act."   This
might  be  described  as  the  non-sequitur  used  as  proof  positive.
All  this  would  be very amusing  were  it  not  that  in  this  sup-
posedly  liberal  Congress  not  a  single  member  rose  to  answer,
to  counter-attack  or  to  lampoon.    Though  the  floor  of   the
House   echoes   ad   nauseam  with   attacks   on   totalitarianism
(that  is, over there),  no  one  dared  mention  its  symptoms  over
here.   When  the  secret  police  become  sacrosanct,  when  none
dare  criticize  it  without  being  smeared  as  subversive,   when
non-conformists  continue  to  be  blacklisted  by  the  House  Un-
American  Activities  Committee,  when  invocation  of  the   Bill
of  Rights  is dismissed  as  "commie stuff,"  then  we  have  slipped
a  long  way.  Weak  as  James  Roosevelt's  speech  in  defense  of
his  "abolition"  resolution  was,  he  deserves  credit.   No   other
member   dared   even  to  go  that  far.   The  spectacle  deserves
close   attention   by  those   who   too   easily  assume  that   "Mc-
Carthyism"  is  over.   Its  power   is  still   deep-rooted.
What  Can  Be  Done
Speaker  Rayburn  says  he  will  not  let  the  Roosevelt   reso-
lution  even  come  to  a  vote   (perhaps  saving  it  from  too  ig-
nominious   a  defeat)   but   attack  is  still   possible   if   enough
people  of  standing  ask  Chairman   Omar  Burleson  of  House
Administration   Committe   to   hold   hearings   on   this   year's
appropriation   for   the   Un-American   Committee.     The   time
is  short;  let  your  Congressman  know  how  you  feel.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  26,  1959
Soviet   Scientists   Charge   Falsification   in   New   U.  S.  Test  Data
Humphrey  Decries  Pessimism  and  Reveals New  Detection  Methods  Found
Senator    Humphrey   delivered   a   moat   informative   and
thoughtful   speech  to  an  empty  Senate  Jan.   20  on  the  new
developments   in  nuclear   test   inspection.    It   was   scantily
covered  in  the  newspapers   and  came  too  late  for  adequate
coverage   in  this  issue.  'Serious  students   should   read   the
text for  themselves in the  Congressional Record.
The   Senator   announced  that   his  disarmament   subcom-
mittee   would  begin  hearings  in  a  few  days  on  the  signifi-
cance  of  the   new  data  developed  in  last  October's  under-
ground  tests.   He  quoted  from   the  January   12  issues  of
this  Weekly   and   of  Time  Magazine  as  illustrations   of  ex-
aggerated  alarm  at  opposite  poles of  political  approach.   He
said  this   new  data   was  neither   something  cooked   up  by
Dr.  Edward  Teller,  as  our  first  questions  seemed  to  imply,
nor  did  it  mean   (as  Time  said)  that  now  "chances  of  de-
ception  are  so great  as  to  be  a  major  risk.to  survival."
Hopeful  Aspects  Confirmed
The  Senator  called  for  less  secrecy.   He  revealed "already
new  methods  of  detection  have  been  found."   He   confirmed
what  we  reported  last  week—that  the  new  data  also  had  a
hopeful  side.  He said  "Actually  the  data  appeared  to indicate
that  in  some respects  it  may  be easier  to  detect  nuclear  tests
than  the  Conference  of  Experts  at  Geneva  had   concluded."
We  hope  the  Senator,  in  his  hearings,  will  also  look  into
the  public  relations   aspect.   The  Defense  Department  press
release  of  Jan.   16  (No.  41-69)  disclosed,  "these   new  data
are  still  undergoing  evaluation  by  U.  S.  experts  and   only
preliminary  interpretations"  were  available.   Why, then,  the
alarmist  rush into print?
When  this  reporter   tried   earlier   at   State  and   Defense
Departments  to  get  more  information  about  the  new  data
and  the  panel  of  experts  who  evaluated  it,  he  was  told 'that
the  information  could  not  be  given  out  here  (although  given
the  Kussians  at  Geneva)  because  we  had  promised  to  keep
such  technical  matters  a  secret  while  the  talks  were  going
on.  If  there  was  such an  agreement  did  not  the  White House
release  of Jan.  5 violate  it?
The  answer  from   Killian  committee  sources  was  that  it
released  the  statement   in  fear  that  persons  like  Dr.  Teller
would  begin  to  leak  the  new  data.   The  Time  story  to  which
the  Senator  objected was  such a  leak;  their  deadline  is  Sun-
day  night;  they  did not  know the  Killian release  was coming
out  the  very  next  afternoon.    Prof.  D.  T.  Griggs  of  UCLA,
Dr.  Teller's  right  hand  man,  was  on  the  panel  which  evalu-
ated  the new data.
The  question  of  why  the  data  was  released  now  and  in
this  form  is  given  added  point  by  a  dispatch  in  the  Balti-
more Sun  (Jan.  21).  Its  Moscow  bureau  reports  that  Pravda
carried  an  article  by two  Soviet  scientists  accusing American
scientists   of  using  "preliminary   and   insufficiently   verified
data."   The  Russians,   according  to  the  Sun,  also  "charged
that  the  Americans did not  tell  the  truth  when  they  reported
that  they   used  in   their   recent   tests  the   kind   of  seismic
equipment  recommended  by  the   East-West   Geneva  confer-
ence."  We  hope  the  hearings  will  throw  light  on  this,  too.
Scientist  Charges  Secrecy Exaggerating
Jan. 17
"To  the Editor  of  the  New  York  Times:
"On  the  basis  of  the   two  recent   official   releases   about
the  new data  from  the  Nevada underground tests,  the  pub-
lic  is  being  led  to  question  the  feasibility  of  a  bomb  test
detection  system.   I  feel  the  public  is  being  deceived.   For
some  reason,  the  other  half  of  the  story  is  not  being  told.
Pertinent   seismological   research   projects   are  still  being
classified.  In  our  free  society  there  is  no  reason  to  classify
anything  that   has   to  do  with  the  science  of  seismology.
The  last  sentence  in  today's  New York  Times  article  indi-
cates  that  there  is  more  to  be  told.   The  sentence  reads,
'There  is  still  some  hope  among seismologists  that  the  re-
liability  of  the  inspection  system  can  be  restored  through
improved  instrumentation.'
"An  indication  of  the  type  of  deception  that  is  going  on
is  contained in  the  January  6 issue  of  the  New York  Times
which  says  'However,  the  general  theory  (of  direction  of
first  motion)  did  not  hold  true  in  experiments conducted
by  the super-secret   detection  agency  .  .  .  downward first
motions  were  recorded  by  three  of  the  best  seismographic
stations  in  the  United  States.'   Actually  this   information
was  not  released  until  today,  January   17,  so  that  it  was
not   possible  for  responsible  scientists  to  check  this  and
tell  the  full  story.   The  part  of  the  facts  not  told  by  the
press  on  January  6  is  that  these  downward  first  motions
only  occurred  in  what  is  called  the  'skip  region.'  To  with-
hold  this  fact  completely  changes  the  meaning  in  the  eyes
of  the  scientific  community.  The  Geneva  experts  designed
their  system  in  such  a  way  that  data  from  the  skip  region
would  not  be  used.  AS  LONG  AS SIGNALS IN  THE  SKIP
REGION  ARE  IGNORED,  THE  DIRECTION-OF-FIRST-
MOTION  TECHNIQUE IS  STILL  JUST  AS FOOLPROOF
AS  THE  GENEVA EXPERTS  HAD PLANNED.  However,
the  new  Nevada  data   does  show  that  the  seismic  signals
are   somewhat   weaker   than   originally   estimated   by   the
Alarm  About  Nuclear  Test Detection
Geneva  experts.  It  turns  out  that  the  Geneva  experts  un-
derestimated  the  number of  natural  earthquakes of  energy
comparable  to  nuclear  explosions  by  38  percent.   One  does
not  get  this  impression   from   the  article  in  today's  New
York  Times  which  says:  'From  this  finding  (Nevada  data)
came  the  conclusion  that  there  were  far  more  earthquakes
of  energy  comparable to  nuclear  explosions than  had  been
estimated  by  the  East-West  experts.'
"It   should  be  stressed  that  the  capability  of  the  detec-
tion  system  can  be  restored  to  the  original  proposed  level
by  improvements  in  the  sensitivity  of  the  seismic  detec-
tion  system.   One  straight-forward  way  to  improve  sensi-
tivity  is  to  increase   the   number  of  instruments  in  each
array.   Another  obvious  way  to  obtain  a  vast  increase  in
sensitivity  was  mentioned in  the  book  INSPECTION  FOR
DISARMAMENT  (Columbia  Univ.  Press  1958).   The  pro-
posal  is  to  use a  large  number  of  auxiliary  unmanned  seis-
mographs  which  can  telemeter  their  data  to  the  manned
stations.   Another  proposal  from   my  article   in  the  same
book  is  that  a  given  detection  system  can  be  greatly  im-
proved  in  effectiveness  with  the  help  of  calibration  explo-
sions.  Most  of  these  refinements would  constitute relatively
minor  concessions  on  the  part  of  the  Russians.   If  the  Rus-
sians  really  want  to  end  testing,  things  are  not  nearly  as
gloomy  as  implied  by  the  recent  releases.
"From  the  fact  that   certain   seismological  projects   are
still  classified,  I  would  guess  that  there  are  other  fairly
simple  ways  of  achieving  substantial  increases   in  seismic
sensitivity.   Certainly that  part  of  science  that  tells  how  to
make  secret  weapons  should  be  classified.   But  in  a   free
society  other  fields  of  science  such  as  seismology must  be
completely  free  from  security  regulations.   One  of  the  many
dangers  of  such  security  regulations  is  that  the  public may
be  told  only  part   of  the  truth.   Crucial  information   can
be  withheld  to  serve  partisan  interests."
Jay  Orear
Associate  Professor   of  Physics,  Cornell  University
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  26, 1959
Southern   Oligarchy   in   Firm   Control   Rewards  Its   Pro-Filibuster  Friends
Inside  the  Senate  Clockworks:  A  Glimpse  of  the  New   Committees
The  new  Committee  assignments  in  the  Senate  have  been
hailed  as  evidence that  Lyndon  Johnson  is  a  very  magnani-
mous  fellow.   The  Washington  Star  said   (Jan.   18),   "Some
who   voted  with  the  liberals"  i.e.  against  Johnson,  in   the
anti-filibuster  fight,  "even  won  assignment   to  two  or  more
major   committees.   Dodd  of  Connecticut  was  the   outstand-
ing
1
  example."
This  misreads  what  happened.   On January  14 the  Senate
passed   a  new  rule   which  says  that  "Each   Senator   shall
serve  on  two  and  no  more  of  the  following  12 standing  com-
mittees"  —  Agriculture,   Appropriations,   Armed   Services,
Banking  and   Currency,  Finance,  Foreign   Relations,  Com-
merce,  Judiciary,  Labor,  Interior,  Public  Works  and  Rules.
It  also  provided  that  no  Senator   could  serve  on  more  than
one  of  four  lesser   committees:  District  of  Columbia, Gov-
ernment  Operations, Post  Office  and  Civil Service, and  Space.
This   added   18  new  seats,   and   gave   the   leadership   more
"patronage,"  but   it   required   two  major   committee   posts
for   every  Senator.    So  Johnson  had  to  give  assignments  to
those  who voted against him.
Subtleties  of  the  New  Rule
The  wisdom  of  the  new  rule  is  debatable.   By  increasing
the  size  of  already  large  committees,  it  enhances  the  power
of  the  chairman  and  reduces  the  value  of  membership.   Since
questions  at  hearings  are  asked  in  order  of  seniority,  it  is
often  late   (and  most  of  the  press  has  left)   before  junior
members  get their  chance.
Senator   Long  said   there  would  be  enough  posts  to  go
around  if  there  were  agreement  that  no  Senator   could  have
a   second   choice  committee  assignment   until  every  Senator
had  had  his  first  choice.   This  would  prevent  older  Senators
from  monopolizing committees.   But  Long's  was  a  lone  voice.
Johnson   had  persuaded   the   older   Southerners   to  -give  up
more  than  two  major  posts  and  to  enlarge  the  committees
so that  he would have  extra  seats  with  which  to  reward  with
first  choice  those  who  voted  with  him.
The  three   most  important   Committees  in  the  Senate  are
Appropriations,   Finance  and  Judiciary   in  that  order.   The
six  Democratic  vacancies  created   on  the  first  went  to  Ke-
fauver   (Tenn),   Monroney  (Okla),  Bible  (Nev),   Byrd   (W.
Va),  McGee   (Wyo)   and   Dodd   (Conn).   Dodd  was  the  only
one  of  these  six  not  to  vote  with  Johnson  straight  through
the  filibuster  fight  but  he  did  desert  the  civil  rights  forces
on  the  first  crucial  vote  when  he  helped  Johnson  table   the
Anderson   motion.     Dodd   got   two   other   prize   plums  —
Judiciary  and  Space.
Three   new  Democratic  seats  were   created   on  Finance.
These  went  to  Talmadge  (Ga),  Hartke  (Ind)    and  McCarthy
(Minn).   Hartke  went  down  the  line  for  Johnson.   McCarthy
opposed  him  on  (1)   motion  to  table,  (2)   the  Douglas  pro-
posal  for  majority   rule  and   (3)   the  Morton  motion  for  a
three-fifths  rule,  voting  with  Johnson  only  on  the  final  vote
for  the  Texan's  own  proposal.   To Judiciary  two  new  Demo-
cratic  seats  were   added,  one  went  to  Dodd,  the   other   to
Hart   (Mich)   who  voted  100 percent  against  Johnson.   Hart
adds  a  liberal   vote;   Dodd  will  be  found  on  the  right.
The  two  new  Senators  from  Alaska  fared  well  in  switch-
ing  100  percent  to  Johnson   though   they  had  been  pledged
Unwritten  Rule  No.  1  in  Congress
"Let  me  tell  you  a  little  story  [Lyndon  Johnson  to
Senator  Hart,  D.,  Mich.,  one  of  the  freshman  rebels  on
civil  rights]   when  Sam   Rayburn  first  came  to  Con-
gress,   the  Speaker  told  him:  'Young  .man,   you  vote
against  the  leadership whenever  your  conscience  or  the
interests  of  your  state  require  it.   But  don't  do  it  very
often  and  don't  do  it  on  anything  important'."
—Drew  Pearson, Jan.  17.
to  support  the  civil  rights  forces.   Gruening  was  assigned  to
Interior,   Public   Works  and   Government   Operations.    The
first  two  (Interior  has  jurisdiction  over  public lands)  are  of
prime  importance to  Alaska.  Bartlett  got  Interior,  too,   (giv-
ing  Alaska   two  votes  on  it)   and  Armed  Services.
The  other  new  Western  liberals  who  lined  up  with  John-
son  also  did  well.   Cannon  of  Nevada  got  Armed   Services,
Rules  and  Space;   McGee  of  Wyoming,  Appropriations   and
Interior.  On the  other  hand, Moss  (Utah)  who voted  against
Johnson  on  the  Anderson,  Douglas  and  Morton  motions  got
Interior  and  Public  Works.
Clark  Pays for  His  Independence
Three  new  Democratic  seats  were  created  on  Foreign  Re-
lations.  Clark   (Penna)   has  been  trying  to  get  on that  Com-
mittee;   it  is  of  major  importance   to  any  presidential   as-
pirant.   He  is  one  of  the  best  minds  in  the  Senate.   But  he
has  been  too  independent  and  a  leader   in  the  civil  rights
fight.  He was  passed  over for  Lausche  (Ohio),  the  pro-John-
son  Church   (Idaho)    and  Gore  (Tenn)   who  has   won  favor
with  the  forces   opposing  a  nuclear  test  agreement.
Church  was  one  of  the  five  Western  Democrats  who  de-
serted  the  civil  rights  forces  this  year.  The  other  four  were
Mansfield   (Mont),   Murray  (Mont),   O'Mahoney   (Wyo)   and
Chavez  (N.  M.).   Chavez, just  reelected,  is  the  only  Senator
of  Spanish-Mexican  ancestry;  his  people are  much  discrimi-
nated  against  in  the  Southwest;  yet  he voted  with  the  South.
The  Senate  committees  emerge  in  the  new  Congress  with
the   Southerners   and  .their   small   State   Western   allies   as
usual  firmly  in  the  saddle,  thanks  to  seniority   and  shrewd
footwork.   Of  the   15 standing  committees,  eight  are  headed
by  Southerners.    Except  for  the  tiny  State  of  Rhode   Island,
not  a  single  State  north  of   the   Potomac  and   east   of   the
Mississippi,   the  most  populous  area  of   the   country,   has  a
Senate  chairmanship.   The  one  exception  is  Green,  who  got
the   Foreign   Relations  post  in  an  earlier   civil  rights   deal.
Five  small  States  outside  the   South—New   Mexico,   Ari-
zona,  Nevada,  Montana  and  Rhode  Island—have  five  of  the
15  chairmanships,   all  of  them  held  by  men  who  are   allies
of   the   Southern   oligarchy.    The   other   two  are    Hennings
(Mo),  chairman  of  Rules,  a  minor  committee  in  the  Senate
(unlike   its    counterpart    in   the   House)    and   Magnuson
(Wash),   who  heads   Interstate   and   Foreign   Commerce.
Magnuson,  elected  as  a  liberal,  may  now  best  be  described
as an extinct  volcano.
Next  Week:  The  New  Committees  in  The  House
Where the  Body  Lies  Buried  in  the
"The  other  coalition   [against  civil  rights]  was  a  revival
of  cooperation  between  the  Southern  and  Western  Demo-
crats  together with the  remaining hard core  of  the  Republi-
can  right  wing  .  .  .  this  coalition  was not new ...  it has
operated  for  years  on  such  economic issues  common to  both
areas  as  legislation  on  sugar  cane  and  sugar  beets,  rivers
and  harbors  and  reclamation  projects,  the  wool  tariff,   the
Senate  Battle  Over  Civil  Rights
silver   subsidy,   aid  to  the  Western  mining   Industry,   and'
similar  matters  .  .  .  civil  rights,  apparently,  was  added  as
a  part  of  the  bargain."
—Senate  Rules  and  the  Civil  Rights  Bill,  by  Howard  E.
Shuman,  American  Political   Science   Review,   Dec.
1957.  This  survey,  by  a  legislative  assistant  to Sena-
tor  Douglas,  is  the  best  we  have  come across.
1  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  26,  1959
Let's   Hope   There'll   Be   More  Trips   Back   and   Forth  in  the  Wake  of  Mikoyan's
How  the  Old  Bolshevik  Could  Have  Handled  Those  'Hot'  Questions
Mikoyan  had  two  alternatives  on  his  trip  to  out   country.
He  could  have  made  himself  a  hero,  by  answering  all  those
hot    questions    exactly   as   we   newspapermen   would    have
liked  him  to—and  then  applied  for  asylum  in  the  U.  S.,  set-
tling  down  as  a  successful  capitalist.   But  he  wouldn't   have
done  anything  for   the  cause  of  peace.
Assuming  that  Mikoyan  is  a  thoughtful  human  being  like
the  rest  of  and  noting   (from  past  experience)*  that  he  is
one  of  the   less   rigid   Russian   Communist  leaders  and sup-
posing   for   a  moment   that   he  wanted   to   do  something   to
avert  a  war  that  may end  civilization, what  could  he  do?
Travel   Can  Be  Dangerous
He  could  do  just  about  what  he  did.   That  is,  he  could  try
to  create  a  more  friendly   image  of  his  government  and  lay
the  basis  for  further  visits  and  talks.   At  the  same time,  being
a  politician,   he  also  had  to  watch  his  step.    He   could   no
more  afford   to  let  the   die-hards  in  Moscow   accuse  him  of
straying  off  party  line  than  Humphrey  could  afford   to  come
back  from   seeing  Krushchev  without  that  little  pad   (repro-
duced  in  Life)    by  which  he  could  prove  that  he  remained  so
loyal  amid  the  lures  of  the  Kremlin  that  he  even  defended
John  Foster  Dulles.
As  it  is,  Mikoyan  was  pretty  daring.   When  he  defended
Moscow's  intervention  in  Hungary  by  comparing  it  with  ours
in  the  Lebanon,  many  Americans were  insulted.   But  so  were
a  lot  of  Communists—not  all  of  them  in  Russia.  To  hear  the
party  faithful,  the  Lebanese  affair  was  dirty  imperialism  while
the  Red  Army in  Hungary  waged  a  crusade  to  save  its  people
from   feudal  landlords  and  Fascist  aristocrats  who  had  been
laying   low   for   years,  disguised   as  Communist   writers   and
Csespel  working  stiffs.
Such   people   would   have  no   difficulty   in   believing   it  if
Mikoyan  were  suddenly  exposed  as  a  "revisionist,"   seduced
by  that  notorious  FBI  agent  Cyrus  Eaton.   Neither   side  has
*It   was   Mikoyan  who  made   the  first  public  attack   on  Stalin  at
the   Twentieth   Congress   before   Krushchev    grot   on   the   bandwagon
with   that   secret   speech;   some   Hungarians   think   Mikoyan   really
tried   for   peaco   in   Budapest   but   lost   out   to   panicky   diehards   In
Moscow.
In  What  Cold  War  Constitution  Does  HST
Find   His   Presidential    Personality    Cult?
"Under   our   Constitution,    there   is   only   one   place
where  foreign  policy  is  made,  and  that  is  in  the  White
House,  and  by  no  one  other  than  the  President  himself
.  .  . who has  access  to  sources  and types  of   information
available  to  no  one  else."
—Harry  S.  Truman,  on the Mikoyan  visit, Jan.  19.
"The  President  shall  be  Commander   in  Chief  of   the
Army  and Navy  .  .  .  He  shall  have  Power,  by  and with
the  Advice  and  Consent  of  the  Senate,  to  make  Treaties
. .. The Congress  shall  have  Power ... to declare   war."
—All  the  Constitution says  on  the  subject.
"Mr.  Gerry   never  expected   to  hear   in  a  republic  a
motion  to  empower   the  Executive   alone  to  declare  war
.  .  .  Mr.  Mason  was  against  giving  the  power  of  war
to  the  Executive,  because  not  safely  to  be  trusted  with
it  ...      He  was  for  clogging  rather  than  facilitating
war,  but  for  facilitating   peace."
—Madison's   Notes  on  the  Convention  which   framed
the  Constitution in  1787.
a  monopoly  on  screwballs,  with  a  genius   for  getting   their
facts  mixed.
There  are  hotheads  in  Moscow  as  in  Washington,   and  we
hope  they  won't  be  foolish  enough  to  be  disappointed   be-
cause  Mikoyan didn't  come  back  with  an  Export-Import  Bank
loan.   The  trip  will  be  valuable  if  it  makes  the  ruling   group
realize  (1)   that  friendly  gestures  will  always  evoke   friendly
responses   from   the  American  people,   (2)    that   brinksman-
ship  and  threats   (as  about  Berlin)   are  as  foolhardy  when
they  come  from  Moscow  as  when  they  come  from   Washing-
ton,  (3)   that  it  is hard  to get  people  to  take  pledges  seriously
about  West  Berlin  when  pledges  were  broken  as  terribly  as
were  those  given  Nagy  and  Maleter,   (4)   that  it  is  better  to
deal  with   Ike  than   wait   for   the   Democrats    (even   Dulles
flexed a  little),  and  (5)   that  only  the  Germans  our  countries
have  had  to  fight  twice  in  one  generation   benefit  by  Soviet-
American   disagreement.
To  Give  A  Gift   Sub  Is  To  Widen  The   Audience  for  Peace  and  Civil  Liberties
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ........................................................................................
Street  ........................................................................................
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
1/26/59
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City       ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  Bend  gift   announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C.,  under  tbe  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  tbe   TJ.  S.;  $6  In  Canada.;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED