I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959dec21.pdf

============================================================

Two  Pages  on Drugs
Free  Enterprise?    Medicines  Cheaper  in  Both  Cartelized  Europe  and  Socialized  Russia,  See  Box  P.  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL. VII, NO.  48
DECEMBER  21, 1959
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Whittling  Away  of  the  First  Amendment
The  deep  cleft  within  the  Supreme  Court  on  First  Amend-
ment  rights  was  again  visible  in  the  California  obscenity  case
decided  last  week.    On  one  side,  Mr.  Justice  Black  believes
that  the  First  Amendment  means  what  it  says,  that  Congress
shall  make  "no  law  .  .  .  abridging  the  freedom  of  speech  or
of  the  press"  and  that  the  word   "liberty"   in  the   Fourteenth
Amendment,  which  binds  the  State  Legislatures,  must  be  read
almost   as  strictly.    On   the   other   side,  Mr.   Justice   Frank-
furter  would  blur  the  clear  mandate  of  the  First  Amendment
by  reading  it  as  if  it  said  that  the  interest  in  free  expression
can   be   balanced   against   other   interests  of   the   community.
The   "balancing"  doctrine  invites  exceptions.    The   excep-
tions  as  they  accumulate  undermine  fundamental  safeguards.
Sometimes  the  motives  may  seem  good   or  bad, but  the   net
effect    is   the   same.     Mr.   Justice   Frankfurter's   first   major
success  was   the   Beauharnais  case   in  1952.   With   Jackson
Black,   Douglas   and   Reed   dissenting,   Frankfurter  wrote   a
5-4  decision upholding  an  Illinois  racial  libel  law.  There  he
balanced   the   interest  in  free   speech   against  the   interest  in
racial  peace.    Two  years  ago, on  the  issue  of  obscene  litera-
ture,  he  won  over  the  otherwise  liberal  Mr.  Justice  Brennan
to   the   "balancing"   doctrine  in   the   Roth   case.     There   the
interest  in  a  free  press  was  balanced  against  a  public  interest
in  suppressing  pornographic  literature.
What  Interest  More  Important  Than  Free   Speech?
In  the  California  case,  the  Court  was  unanimous  in  agree-
ing  that  the  California   obscene  literature  statute  was  uncon-
stitutional,  but  the  court  split  five  ways  in  reaching  the  result.
The  position  most  favorable  to  censorship  was  taken  by  Mr.
Justice   Frankfurter,   who   insists   on   interpreting   the   First
Amendment  in  the  light  of  the  Eighteenth  Century  common
law   though   the   purpose   of   the   Amendment  was   to   make
sure  that  the   English   law's   restrictive  doctrines   in   politics,
morality  and  religion  would  not  be  applicable  to  speech  and
press  in  this  country.    Mr.   Justice  Brennan  held   the  Cali-
fornia' law  void  on  a  thin  technicality easily remedied  by  those
who  want  censorship.     In  the  very  act  of   opposing   censor-
ship  in  this  case,  the  majority  repeated  the  "balancing" doc-
trine  which  opens  the  way to  it  in  others.  Mr.  Justice  Brennan
quoted  the  words  he  used  two  years ago  in  the  Roth  decision
saying  "the door  barring  federal  and  state  intrusion"  into  the
area  of  free  speech   and   press   "must  be  kept  tightly   closed
and  opened  only  the  slightest   crack  necessary  to  prevent  en-
croachment  upon   more  important   interests."
It  is  these   "slight  cracks"  which  Mr.  Justice   Black   fears.
"What,"  he  asks,  "are the  'more  important'  interests  for  the
protection   of   which   constitutional   freedoms   of   speech   and
press  must  be  given  second  place?"    He  wants  to  know  what
is  the  standard   "by  which   one  can  determine   when   abridg-
ment  of  speech  and  press  goes  'too  far'?"   He  sees  censorship
as  "the deadly  enemy  of  freedom  and  progress"  and   protests,
"the   plain   language  of   the   Constitution   forbids   it."     He
warns,  "While  it  is  'obscenity  and  indecency'  before  us  today,
the   experience   of   mankind—both   ancient   and   modern—
shows  that  this  type  of   elastic   phrase  can, and   most   likely
will,  be  synonymous  with  the  political,  and  maybe  with   the
religious  unorthodoxy  of  tomorrow."
A  Handy  Weapon  for  Southern  Racists
The   "balancing"   theory  has  already  borne   bitter  fruit   in
the  political  field.  The  Barenblatt  and  Uphaus  decisions  were
based  on  the  view  that  the  right  of   Congress   or  the   States
to  investigate  supposed   Communist   conspiracy   overbalanced
the   inhibitory   effect   of   witch   hunt   investigations   on   First
Amendment  freedoms.    The  day  the  Court  handed  down  the
California   decision,  Dr.   Willard   Uphaus   was  sentenced   to
one  year  in  jail  in  New  Hampshire  for  refusing  to  hand  over
to   a  Red-hunting  Attorney  General   a  list  of   guests   at   his
"peace  fellowship"   camp  in  that  State.    Some  30  others   are
headed  for  jail  under  the  interpretation  of  the  First  Amend-
ment  applied   in  the  Barenblatt  and   Uphaus   decisions.     In
the  case  of  one  of  them,  Carl  Braden,  the  Fifth  Circuit  Court
of  Appeals  in Atlanta a  few  days before*  showed  how  effective
a  weapon  this  placed  in  the  hands  of  Southern  white  racists.
The    Fifth    Circuit   upheld   Mr.    Braden's   conviction   for
contempt   of   the   Un-American   Activities   Committee.      He
had  refused  on  First Amendment grounds  to  answer  questions
about  his  activities  on  behalf  of  racial  justice  in  the   South.
The   Court   ruled   that   "Legislative   purposes   might   be fur-
thered  by  a  determination of  whether  organizations ostensibly
active  in  championing  timely  objectives,  such  as  integration
and   civil  rights,   are   in   fact   being   used   for   the   spread   of
the  propaganda   of   a  foreign  dominated  Communist   organi-
zation  with  subversive  designs   .  .  .  one  who  is  known   or
believed   to  be  a  Communist  and   is  suspected   of   being   en-
gaged   in  un-American  activities  does   not   acquire  immunity
by  adopting  the  role  of  a  racial  integrationist."
J.  B.  Matthews  Back  at  Work
This,  which  applies  the  "balancing"  doctrine  as  embodied
in  Barenblatt,  is  made  to  order  for  Southern   bigots  who  see
the  struggle  of   the  Negro  for   full   emancipation   as  a  Red
plot.     They   can   use   Congressional    and   State   witch   hunt
committees  to  pillory   every  man, white  or  black,  who  fights
for   racial  justice,  as  J.  B.  Matthews,   long  discredited  in  the
North,   is  even  now  doing  for  a  Mississippi  legislative com-
mittee  which  recently  smeared   Hodding  Carter  as  a Red.
At  press  time  we  learned  the  same  Circuit  had  upheld  the  con-
tempt  conviction of  Frank  Wllklnson.
\  9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/, Fi  Stone's  Weekly,.December  Zl, 1959
New  Kefauver  Hearings  Expose  Gypping  of   Sick  and  Aged  by  Medicine  Combines
The  Realities  of  "Free  Enterprise"  As  Practiced  in  the  Drug   Business
For   two   years  a  Senate  Judiciary  subcommittee  on   anti-
trust  and  monopoly  under  Senator  Estes  Kefauver  of   Ten-
nessee  has  been  exploring  the  realities  of  the  free  enterprise
system  with  little   or  no  attention   in   the   press.     Hearings
have  covered,  the  way  in  which  the  steel,  auto,  bread,  oil  and
milk  industries  have  managed  to  exempt  themselves  at  con-
sumer   expense   from   the   free   market,   substituting  admin-
istered  prices  fixed  at  whatever  the  commissars  of  big  busi-
ness  think  the  traffic  will  bear.
But   nobody   seemed   to   care   until   this   month   Kefauver
extended  his  inquiry  into  the  drug   business.    His  week  of
hearings   Dec.   7-12   into  the   pricing   of   the   new   "wonder
drugs"  for  arthritis  and  rheumatism  for  the  first  time  drew
full  coverage  by  press,  TV  and  radio.    Among  the  contribut-
ing  reasons:   the  hearings  were  held  at  the  dullest   time  of
the  year  for  news-hungry  Washington   reporters;  the  so-called
ethical   pharmaceutical   industry   which   makes   these   drugs
confines  its  advertising  to  special  publications  for  physicians
only  and  thus  has  no  hold  over  the  press;  high  drug  prices
painfully   affect  elderly  folk  living  on  inadequate  pensions.
The  Doctor  Orders,  the  Patient  Pays
The   keystone  of   the   high   price   system  in   ethical   drugs
(as  distinct  from  patent  medicines)  is that  they can  be  bought
only  on  a  doctor's   prescription.     He  usually  orders   by  the
brand  name,  though  the  identical  product  meeting  the  same
USP  standards  is  often  available  much  cheaper  from  smaller
manufacturers   under   the   drug's   generic   or   "real"   name.
"The   drug   industry   is  unusual,"   as   Senator   Kefauver   ex-
plained  in  opening  the  hearings,  "in  that  he  who  buys  does
not  order  and  he who orders does not  buy."   Thus  prednisone,
one  of  the  new  variations of  the  cortisteroids, can  be  obtained
in  bulk  from   Syntex,  Inc.,   a  Mexico-based  independent,   at
$11.80  and   1,000   5  mgm   tablets  produced   from  it   (after
allowance   for   wastage,   tableting   and   bottling)    at   $13.60.
The  same  quantity  purchased  by  the  druggist  from  Schering,
Merck  or  Upjohn  costs  $170  and  the  price  to  the  consumer
On  Salk  Vaccine
"The   large   pharmaceutical   manufacturers   have   no
monopoly  on  research  .  .  .  they  do  have  a   monopoly
on  the  profits  derived  from  the  basic  research  done  by
others  .  .  .  the  funds  necessary  for  the  development   of
the   Salk   vaccine   were   contributed   mainly   by    public
donations.     The  profit   from   the   $53,000,000   sales,   at
wholesale   level,   was   shared   by  five  large   drug   con-
cerns."
—Seymour   N.   Blackman,  Premo   Pharmaceutical
Lab.,  to  the  Kefauver   drug  hearings,  Dec. 11.
is   $283.33.     A   public  relations  firm  hastily  submitted   an
analysis  from  something  called  the  U.  S.  Economics Corpora-
tion  which  also  showed  a  wide  spread  between  wheat  and
bread,  cotton  and  cotton  shirts.    "This  would  be  pertinent,"
Kefauver  commented  dryly,  "if   you  bought  a  loaf  of  bread
and  all  you  did  was  put  a  wrapper  on  it  and  then  resold   it."
The   high   sales  costs  cited  by  the  companies  in   defense  of
such   1,000   percent  or   more  spreads  goes   for   high   priced
salesmen   called   "detail   men"   who   talk   the   physician   into
prescribing  by  brand  name.    The  result  has  been  a  bonanza
for   the   big  drug   manufacturers;   the   more   they  spend   on
propagandizing  the  physician,  the  higher  the  price  they  can
exact  from  his  patients.
This   is  only  the   first   in   a  series  of   hearings   Kefauver
plans   into  the   drug   business.    He   presided   over   the  first
week   with   admirable  grasp   of   complicated   details   and   a
capacity  to   cut   swiftly   through   the   fog   generated   by  slick
drug   executives.      Wisconsin's    Republican    Senator    Wiley,
battling  manfully  to  defend  the  drug  companies,   protested,
"What  business  has  this committee got  to  tell  anybody in  any
business  what  they  should  charge?"    But  before  the  hearings
are  over,  millions  may  be  asking  why  medicines  should  be  at
the  mercy of  drug  combines, exploiting  overworked  physicians
and  patent  monopolies  to  get  every  penny  they  can  from  the
sick  and  aged.    On  this  and  the  next  page  we  present  a  few
samplings  of  the  realities  and  the  slippery  apologetics.
Nothing   Like  Good  Old Fashioned  U.  S.  Competition  to  Keep  Drug  Prices  Down
"So  let   Europe   have  its   cartels,   and  Russia   its   state
monopoly.    We'll  take  a  thousand  fiercely  competitive  com-
panies  duplicating   each  other's  efforts,   driving   each  other's
prices  down  .  .  ."
—Editorial  in  Current  Medical  Digest, Nov.  1959, quoted
as  the peroration  of  an address by Austin Smith, M.D.,  pres-
ident  of  the  Pharmaceutical  Mfrs.   Assoc., New  York,  Dec. 9,
in  which  he  attacked  the  Kefauver   inquiry  into  high  drug
prices  as  a  move  to  socialize  medicine.
Sen.  KEFAUVER:   I  still  don't  understand  why  people  in
London  get  this  [anti-arthritic]  drug  at  the  drug  stores  at
$7.53  and  our  drug  stores  have  to  pay  $17.90?
Mr.  CONNOR  [Pres.  of  Merck]:  Mr.  Chairman  we  meet
different   market   conditions   in   different   countries.
—Kefauver   committee drug  hearings, Dec. 9.
Sen.  KEFAUVER:   How  did  it  happen  that  you  [Merck]
and  Upjohn  and  Schering  all  arrived  at  exactly  the  same
price   of   $17.90?
Mr.  KURYLOSKI  [Merck's  director  of  marketing]:  Well,
sir,   we   entered   the   market   later   following   Schering   by
several    months,    and   as   with   any   commodity    which    is
identical,   we  felt  it  to  our  advantage  to  meet  their  price.
Sen.  KEFAUVER:  You just  followed  their  price  exactly?
Mr.  KURYLOSKI:  Yes,  we  did.
—Same  hearing,  same  day.
"This  particular  matter   [of  high  drug  prices]  was  called
to  my  attention   when  our  very  fine  Governor,  Leroy  Collins,
made  a  trip  with  ten  other  Governors  to  the  Soviet  Union
just  this  year,   and  when  he  returned  he  told  me  that  he
suffered  from  an  illness  while  in  the  Soviet  Union,  a  recur-
rence  of  an  illness  which  he  had  here  in  Florida.    He  took
the   same   prescription    which   had   been   given   to   him   in
Florida   and  whereas   it   cost   him  here  in   Florida   in   the
neighborhood   of  something  like  $18  for  the  little  bottle  of
pills  which  he  had  to  have,  over  there  it  cost  him  actually
less  than  $2  and he  said  it  began  to  make  him  wonder  what
it  was  all  about."
—Sen. Smathers  (Fla.)  Kefauver  drug  hearing, Dec. 7.
"Schering  cannot  expand  its  markets  by  lowering  prices
.  .  .  Undoubtedly   some  people  find  it   difficult   to  pay  for
needed  medication.     They  will  also  have  difficulty  in  meet-
ing  their  rent  and food  bills  as  well ...  It  is  a  matter  of
inadequate   income   rather  than  excessive  prices."
Francis  C.  Brown,  Pres.  of  Schering,  Dee.  7.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 21,1959
How  Serious  Side  Effects  of  the  Latest  Anti-Arthritic  "Wonder  Drug" Were  Explained  Away
Nobel Prize Winner  Appears  As Witness  to  Defend  Merck's  Advertising
Dr.   [John   M.]    BLAIR   [Chief   Economist,  Kefauver   com-
mittee] :   Mr.    Chairman,   the   first   [Merck]   advertisement
which  I  will  read  .  .  .  goes  on  to  state,  "In  the  past  it  was
frequently  impossible  to  administer corticosteroids  in  adequate
amounts   because   therapeutic  dosage  was  perilously  close  to
that   capable   of   causing   major   undesirable   effects.     With
decadron,  a  far  more  specific  anti-inflammatory steroid,  side
effects  are  no  longer   serious  limitation ..."
Senator   JFiLEY:  Is  that  an  improper  statement?
Dr.   [Louis]   LASAGNA   [Johns   Hopkins   Univ.,   consultant
to  the  American  Medical  Association   on. advertising  for  its
Journal]:  Yes,  sir,  I  think  it  is.
Senator   WILEY:  In  what  way?
Dr.   LASAGNA:  The  clinical  literature  that  I  have  read  indi-
cates  the side  effects  are a  serious  consideration  . .  .
Dr.  BLAIR:  The  next  one  I  have  says  .  .  .  "decadron  marks
the  end  of  the  transitional  product  development  era  and  the
arrival  of  mature  corticosteroid  therapy."
Dr.    LASAGNA:   If   I   understand  that   ad,   it  would   imply
that   a   qualitative   advance   has   been   made   with   decadron
which  I  do  not  believe  to  be  the  case.
Mr.   DIXON:  Do  you  think  it  perhaps   would  mislead  an
ordinary  physician?
Dr.   LASAGNA:  In  my  opinion,  sir,  it  would  imply  a  safety
for  this  drug  which  I  do not  thinks  it  possesses  .  .  .
Wiley  Sees  Nothing  Wrong
Sen.  WILEY:  Will  you  tell  us  specifically  what  was  wrong
with  it?
Dr.   LASAGNA:   It  implies  that  this  drug  as  contrasted  with
the  previous  steroids   .  .  .  has  almost   no  danger   associated
with  it  ...     I  think  that  is  not  the  case,  sir.
Sen.  WILEY:  Is  that  the  only  objection  you  have  to  it?
Dr.   LASAGNA:   That  is  a  pretty  big  objection,   sir,   in  my
book,  I  don't  know  about  yours.    I  speak  only  as  a  physician,
sir  ...
Mr.  John  T.  CONNOR,  president  of  Merck  & Co.    In  view
of  Dr.  Lasagna's  testimony,  Mr.  Chairman,   I  would  suggest
that  you call  Dr.  Philip  S. Hench ...  the  outstanding  rheu-
matologist  who  won  a  Nobel  Prize  for  his  work  in  this  very
field . . .
Mr.   DIXON:  The   point   here   of   these   advertisements,   as
they  appear  to  me,  all  the  favorable  things  have  been  stated,
but  how  about  the  unfavorable  things?  .  .  .
Dr.  HENCH:  With  all  respect  to  you  I  had  hoped   that  I
might   be  able  to  give   some  generalizations   before  we  got
down  to  these   individual  points.   .  .  .  May  I  say  that  the
most  important  thing  that  has  been  left  out  is  the  definition
of   what  we   mean   by  side  effects.     Side   effects   is  actually
nothing  more  or  less  than  the  normal  effects  of  cortisone  .  . .
Mr.   DIXON:  I  have  heard   it  mentioned   that   in   treating
rheumatoid   arthritis,   that   one   of   the   most   common    toxic
effects   or  what  you  call  side  effects  might   be  a  peptic   ulcer
.  .  .  would  you  call  that  a  toxic  effect?
Dr.  HENCH: You  are  without  impropriety  forcing  me  to
antedate  myself  but  I  will  answer  that.  .  .  .  Most  physicians
do  not   distinguish   properly   between   side   effects   and   what
you  are  trying  to  express   which  I  would   call   complications,
On Selling  Medicines Like Mouse  Traps
"Today  the  builder  of  better  mouse  traps  will  sell
more  mouse traps  only if  he  builds a  path  to  the  world
and   presents  the   advantages  of   his   trap  with  more
igenuity   and  impact   than  his   competitor.
"It  is  such  activity  as  this  which,  in  the  aggregate,
has  caused  the  ethical  pharmaceutical industry  of  this
country  to  provide,  during  the  past  year,  3,790,908,000
pages   of   paid   journal  advertising;  741,213,700  direct
mail  impressions,  and well  in  excess  of  18  to  20  million
physician  and  pharmacist  calls."
—Walter   I.    Griffith,     director   product    advertising
Parke, Dams  &  Co., Proceedings  of  the  Mid  Year  1959
Conference    of   Apothecaries,  quoted   by   Seymour    N.
Blackman  of  Premo  Pharmaceutical   to   the    Kefauver
Committee  drug  inquiry,  Dec. 11.
and  they  are not  the  same  .  . :
Sen.    KEFAUVER:   Have  you  examined  this   last   advertise-
ment  sent  out  by Merck  the  front  page  of  which  said,  "Thera-
peutic  response  highest   ever  reported  decadron   incidence  of
side  effects  the  lowest  ever  reported."   Have  you? ...  Do you
subscribe  to  that ?
Dr.  HENCH:  I'm  sorry ...
Sen.   KEFAUVER:   I  am  just  asking  you  about   what   is  on
the  front  page  of  this.
Dr.   HENCH:   I  am  not  trying  to  avoid   the  issue.
Sen.   KEFAUVER:   Lowest  side   effects   ever   reported.      Do
you  agree  to  that?  .  .  .
Dr.  HENCH:  I  am  not  going  to  avoid  the  answer.    May  I
say  this:  That  at  the  very  beginning  or  in  the  first  year  or  two
much  of  the  publicity  on  Merck  and  Company  was  submitted
to  me  and  my  colleagues,   and  the  same  as  to  Upjohn.    They
were  very  careful.    They  were  most  responsive  to  our  sugges-
tions,   and   without   any   feeling   of   responsibility   except   a
moral  one  on  my  part  I  approved  the  tendencies,  the  trends
and  the  type  of  publicity  they  had  had.    In  general,  I  do.
However,  realize  this:  that  any  publicity,  any  publicity  is
for   a  particular  purpose.     For   example,   if   you   have  only
three  or  four  sentences  on  a  whole  page,  that  is  merely  in  the
line   of   being   a  headline.    Well,   now,   the   newspapermen
know  the  limitations and  virtues  of  a  headline.    Every  head-
line  has  to  be  qualified  by  what   follows  it,  and  these  short
statements  are  qualified  in  advertisements  in  all  sorts  of  ways
in  the  Merck  handbook  and  papers  that  are  put  out  by  them
and  by  other  companies  so  that  when  you  get  down,  when
you  have  read   the   whole   thing,   any  misinterpretation   that
you  might  have  had  in  one  way  or  the  other  from  a headline
should  be  fairly  well   corrected.
Mr.  DIXON:  Dr.  Hench,   you  said  earlier  that  these  state-
ments  were  submitted  to  you.
Dr.  HENCH:  I  merely  meant  that  I  haven't   seen  them  in
the  last  four  or  five  years  except  as  I  see  them  in  the  mail.
Mr.   DIXON:  When   they  were  received   by  you,  did   you
receive  any  compensation  for  your—
Dr.  HENCH:  None  whatsoever,  sir.    I  have  no  connection
whatever  with.  Merck's.
Mr.  DIXON:  You  have  none?
Dr.  HENCH:  I  came  here  voluntarily  because  of  my admira-
tion  for  Merck  .  .  .             —Kefauver   drug  hearings,  Dec.  10
1   9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  21,1959
Senator   Young  on  Loyalty  Oaths  for  School  Lunches;  More  Mush  Than  Message   in  "On the  Beach"
Invite  Franco  to  Return  Ike's  Visit,  But  Only  If  He  Intends  to   Stay
Franco's  well-heeled  Washington   lobby  is  working  hard  to
get  him  an  invitation  to  visit  the  U.  S.,  and  counter  pressure
is  needed   fast  if  they  are  not  to  succeed;  a  few  months ago,
the   President's   visit  to   Spain   seemed   impossible,   but   they
pulled   it  off.    Friends   of   Spanish   freedom   ought   to  raise
the  slogan,   "Invite  Franco  Here,  But  Only  If  He  Intends  to
Stay."    The   New   York   Times  (Dec. 16)   reports  a  protest
from   Salvador  de  Madariaga  against  Ike's  visit  to  France  as
dangerous  "for  the  moral  defenses of  the  West."  The  London
Times   (Dec. 9)    reports   from   Madrid   that   monarchists  as
well   as   moderate   republicans   are   circulating  secret   leaflets
deploring   the  visit.     It  makes  "free  world"   rhetoric  seem  a
mockery   to   every   section   of    the    Spanish   people   except
Franco's   hangers-on.
Our  Hat  Is  Off  to  Senator   Young
Senator  Stephen  M.  Young   (D.  Ohio)   provided  a  breath
of  free  air  in  telling  off  the  American  Legion  and  appearing—
despite  its  protests—to  speak  at  the  Emergency  Civil  Liberties
Committee   Bill  of  Rights  dinner  last  week.    Thanks  to  the
Legion's  protest  and  the  Senator's  salty  blast  in  reply,  which
the  New   York   Times  played  on  page  one,  the  dinner  was  a
sell-out  and  the  largest  ever.   The  Legion  seems  to  have  been
alerted   by  the  FBI,  which  thinks  itself  authorized  to  spend
public   funds   harassing   any   organization   which   dares   to
criticize  G-men.   High  point  of  the  Senator's  speech  was  his
suggestion,   in   attacking  education  act   loyalty   oaths, "Why
not   require  a  child  receiving  lunch  under  the  school   lunch
program  to take the  same oath  before being  permitted  to drink
a  glass  of  milk."    The  Legion  may  like  the  idea.
Too Much Mush Per Megaton
As  a   Hollywood   product,   "On   the   Beach"   deserves   the
highest   applause   and   everybody   should   see  this   film   about
the  world's  end  in  nuclear  war.    But  from  an  adult  point  of
view,  it  was  disappointing.    Most  of  it  was  boy-meet-girl of
the  callowest   moon   calf   type.    There  was  only  one   speech
that  hit  anywhere  near  the  theme,  an  outburst  by  a  scientist
in   a   U.   S.  submarine   but   his   message   seemed   to   be  that
Personal  Bows  (and  Blushes)  Dept.
"I  am  delighted  to  hear   that   Mr.  I.  F.   Stone  will
receive  the  Tom  Paine  Award  on  Dec.  15,  and  I  wish  I
could   be   with   you   on   this   occasion.     Since   this   is
impossible,    I   would   like   to   send   my   greetings   and
warm  congratulations  to  Mr. Stone.    He  richly  deserves
the  tribute  you  are  paying   him."
—Eleanor  Roosevelt
"I  am  very  glad  indeed   that  Mr.  I.  F.  Stone  is  re-
ceiving  the  Tom  Paine  Award.    I  am  a  regular   reader
of  his  Weekly  which  I  find  full  of  valuable   information
not   easily   attainable  elsewhere.     I   value   highly   his
services   in  the   cause   of   peace   and  sanity,   and  it   is
good  to  know  that  the  Emergency   Civil  Liberties  Com-
mittee  is  recognizing   them  as  they  deserve."
—Bertrand   Russell
"I  have  great  admiration  for  I.  F.  Stone,  and  I  hope
you  will  express  to  him  my  appreciation   for  his  news-
letter,   for   the  careful   research   he  does  on  important
measures  in Washington,  and for  the  clear  way  in  which
he  reports  them.    It  is  one  of  the  best  jobs  of  report-
ing  that  comes  across  my  desk.    He  succeeds  in  being
analytical  and  critical  without  being  bitter,  and  that  is
a  real accomplishment."
—Clarence  E.  Pickett
From  letters  to  the  Emergency  Civil  Liberties  Com-
mittee  on  its  Tom Paine  Award  to  I.  F.  Stone,  Dec.  15.
the  world  had  destroyed itself  because  men  relied  on  weapons
they  couldn't  use  without  mutual  suicide.    The  lesson   seemed
to  be  that  they  would  have  been  better  advised  to  kill  each
other  with  less  comprehensive  weapons.     The   deadliness  of
human  hatred,  the   need  for   co-existence   (practically   a sub-
versive  word!),  were  not  touched   upon.    The  final  shot  of
a  Salvation Army  banner,  "There's  Still Time Brother",  helped
to   redeem   the   picture.     But  we   found   it   defeatist.     This
picture  of  Australians  lying  down  to  die  reflects  the   current
American  mood,  we'd rather   drift   to  catastrophe   than  fight
against  the  sterotyped  thinking  and  mindless  military  machine
that  rolls  on  to   disaster.
Warmest   Holiday   Greetings   and   Best   Wishes  for   the  1960's  to  All  Our  Good  Readers
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew
Street   ............
City    ..............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street   ............
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
(or  enter)  my  sub  for
___*«_
for   $2  (6  moa.) or  $4
gift   announcement?
the  enclosed  $5:*
"""'12/21/59
(1 yr.) additional:
Yes  D    No  D
5618    Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
The  Weekly  Is  Not   Published  the   Last  Two  Thursdays  in  December,  Next  Issue  Jan.  11
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED