I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959feb02.pdf

============================================================

Rising  Tide for  Disengagement, P.  2
Our  Own Red  Expose:  Lifting  the  Lid  on  Chairman  Walter's  Anti  Anti-Communist  Past,  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VII,  NO.  5
FEBRUARY  2,   1959«"       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
How  We   Rule  Russia,  and  They  Rule  Us
In  a  very  real  sense,  the  U.S.   is  ruled  from  Moscow   and
Russia   in  turn  is  ruled  from  Washington.   The   size  of   our
arms  budget  this year and  next,  as everyone knows,  is likely to
be  shaped  by whether  concessions from  the  Kremlin  offer   the
possibility  of  a meaningful disarmament agreement.  A  burst  of
bellicosity  on  our  part  could  in  turn  take  the  shoes  from  mil-
lions  of  Russian  consumers  by  stimulating a  greater  diversion
of   effort   there  away  from  consumer  goods  to  war  materials.
Both  governments,  like  all  governments,  whatever  their  ideo-
logies,  may  be  divided   in  their  directing  personnel  between
"hards"  and   "softs."   The  former  believe  that   safety  lies  in
being  as  tough  and  unyielding as  possible;  the  latter,  in  seek-
ing  a  modus  vivendi by conciliation. Their  "hards"  help  ours,
and  our  "softs"  strengthen  theirs. When  a  general  on  one  side
talks  of  how  easily  he  can  bomb  umteen  cities  on  the  other,
his  opposite  number  generals  have  a  clincher  in  their  argu-
ment  for  larger  arms appropriations. When  their  side  talks  in
conciliatory  tones,  it  strengthens  the  hand  of  those  who  be-
lieve  in  conciliation  here.  The  Germans  may  still  be  divided
but  we and  the  Russians live  in  a  curious  confederation,  bound
together   by  hatred,   anxiety   and   fear,   giant   Siamese   twins
doomed  to  live  or  die  together   on  the  same  small  earth.
Some  on  Our Side,  Too,  Prefer   Stalinism
As  in  a  marriage,  one  partner  can  influence  the  other  for
good  or  ill,  and  it  is  hard  to  avoid  the  feeling  that  we  are
again  missing a  chance  to  mold  Russia  closer  to  the  image  we
would  like  it  to  assume.  The  Krushchev  regime  is  if  anything
exaggerating  the  success  of  the  Mikoyan  visit  in  order  to  sell
its  people  and  party  on  the  possibility   of  more  peaceful  rela-
tions  with  the  U.S.   Should  it  fail  to  come  up  with  some  con-
crete  agreements  in  the  next  few  months  moderating  the  cold
war  and  moving, toward  a general  relaxation  of  tension,  it may
be  replaced  by  a  Stalinist  old  guard  with  a  tougher  line.  We
missed   a  bet  in  not  dealing  with  Malenkov.   Krushchev  is
tougher.   His  successor  may  be  worse.  To  meet  advances  with
rigidity  is  to  strengthen  rigidity  there.  To  make  the  Russians
feel  that  it  is  hopeless  to  try  and  be  friendly  is  to  encourage
all  the  elements  there  who  believe  the  only  safety  lies  in  an
omnipresent  secret  police,  an  iron  curtain  and  a grim  face  out-
ward.  There  is  no  doubt  that  there  are  elements  here  which
would  prefer  a  Stalinist  Russia,  as  there  are  elements   there
which  would  prefer  us to  prove  for  them  the  thesis  that  noth-
ing  but  hatred  and  war  is  to  be  expected  from  an   encircling
capitalism.
The  first  reports  here  of  the  Krushchev   speech  to  the  new
party  congress  suggest  fruitful  avenues  of  mutually  profitable
negotiation.   He  added  Hungary  to  the  list  of  countries  from
which  he would  withdraw  troops  in  a  Central  European  disen-
gagement.   He  asked  for  international  agreement  to   destroy
not  only  nuclear  but  missile  stockpiles.   Most  significantly  of
2  *                                                                                                     13
Speaking of  Monolithic Societies
Peter   Lisagor   (Chicago   Daily   News):   I   wonder
whether  you  could  tell  us  whether  you  have  had  any
personal   reflections  from   friends  in  private  life,  who
may   have  talked  with  Mr.  Mikoyan,  that  the  United
States  Government  might  make  agreements  with Rus-
sia  if  it  had  a  less  rigid  position?
The President:  No, no, I  never did. ...  I  had reports
from  friends around  the  country  that called me  up,  one
of   them  in  California  I  recall,  saying  it  was  obvious
there  was  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Mikoyan  to
make  this interpretation,  that  the  people in  the  govern-
ment  were  particularly  divided  on certain  points.  .  .  .
Now,    because  of   these  reports  .  .  .  these   friends
made  a  special  point  of  meetings—a  meeting  with  Mr.
Mikoyan  during  the  course  of  the  evening,  and  assert-
ing  their  belief  that  the  United  States,  in  its  firmness
in  refusing  to  retreat a  single  inch  from  its  rights and
from  its  obligations  and  responsibility, that  all  of   us
were  one.  .  . .        —Press  Conference, January 28
all,  he'spoke  of  creating  an  "atom  free"  area  in  the  Far  East
and  the  Pacific;  such  an  agreement  might  be  one  way  to  pre-
vent  the  new  China  from  becoming  a  nuclear  power,  a  devel-
opment  which  would  enormously  add  to  our  problems.    One
has  only  to  read  the  vivid  reports  Richard  Crossman  has  been
writing  for  the  London   New   Statesman  and  Nation   on  his
visit  to  Peking  to  see  that  the  Chinese  Communists  in  their
isolation  are  developing  a  mentality  far  more  rigid  than  that
of  the  most  hidebound  Russian Communists.  Their   propaganda
is  constructing  for  their  people  an  unreal  world  in  which  it
will  become  increasingly  difficult  to  deal  with  them.
Yet  there  is  no  real  sign  here  of  any  readiness  for  genuine
negotiations.   Mr.  Eisenhower  at  press  conference  was  well-
meaning  but  inane.    Mr.  Dulles  the  day  before  showed   his
genius  for  the  equivocal,   arousing  some  hope  among  those
who  looked  between  the  right  lines.   But  next  day  before  the
Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  what  seemed  to  be  cracks
in  the  ice had  frozen  over  solidly.  Though  he  volunteered   the
extraordinary  admission  that  "We  never  had,  and  do  not  now
have,  any  substantial  differences  with  the  Soviet  Union,"  he
was   soon   producing  quotations   from   his   favorite   bedside
book,   Stalin's  Problems  of  Leninism   (1926)   to  prove  there
could  be  no  common  ground  between  us  and  a  regime  "based
upon  atheism  and  materialism  and  upon  the  belief  that  human
beings  are but  animated  particles  of  matter.  .  .  ."   It  would
seem  from  this that  the  cold  war will  end  as soon  as there is a
mass  baptism  in  the  Kremlin.
Mr.  Acheson  is reported  to be happy  again  with  Mr.  Dulles,
as  may  easily  be  believed  from  the  Secretary's  remark  to  the
Senate  Committee,   "The   principles  of  our  policy  were  first
announced  in  1947."  That  was the  year  the  Truman-Acheson
cold  war  policy   began.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  S, 1959
Hope  Reflected  in  Sixth  Annual  Conference  on  World  Disarmament   and  Development
Need  to  Combine  Disengagement  With  Arms  Control  Stressed
Measured  against  the  urgency  of  the  issues,  the  turnout  and
news  coverage  of  the  Sixth  National  Conference  on  World
Disarmament  and   Development   held   here  the  week-end  of
January  23-24  was  small.   Measured  against  the  realities  of
popular   apathy,  an  indifferent   press  and  the  conferences  of
past  year,  it  was  a  vibrant  affair;   the  several  hundred   dele-
gates  from'  20  organizations   reflected   perhaps   for   the  first
time  an  atmosphere  of  hope  and   a  consciousness  that  they
really  spoke  for  a  voiceless  majority.   I  have  never  attended  a
conference  in  which  the  ratio  of  useful  discussion  to  windy
generalities  was  so  refreshingly  high,  and  I  hope  readers  will
write  the  Friends  Committee  on National  Legislation   (104  C
St. NE,  Wash.,  DC)   for  the  prepared  papers  and  summaries
available.  The  Conference,  which  was  originally  a  Women's
International  League  for  Peace  and  Freedom  project,  is  taking
on momentum;  its 20 sponsoring  organizations operate  through
a  coordinating  committee  during  the  year.
Labor  Unions  Conspicuously   Absent
The   biggest   gap  to  be  filled  is  represented  by  the   labor
movement.  Though  the  National  Farmers  Union  was a  spon-
sor  and  even  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce participated   (in
the  panel  on  the  problems  of  reconverting  industry  from  the
arms  race),  no  labor  organization  was  on  the  list  of  sponsors
and  only  two  unions  took  part  in  the  panels:  Reuther's  Auto
Workers,   to  his  and  their  credit,  sent  three  able   panelists:
Paul   Sifton,   Lee  Goodman   and   Samuel  Jacobs;  the   State,
County  and  Municipal  Employes was  represented  by  Sanford
Gottlieb,   administrative  assistant   to   its  progressive  minded
president,  Arnold  S.  Zander.
Of  all  the  Presidential  hopefuls,  the  only  one  to  turn  up  at
the  conference was Humphrey, who  has made disarmament his
cause  and  pushed  it  tirelessly  against  heavy  obstacles.    Two
Congressmen,  Reuss  of  Wisconsin  and  Porter  of  Oregon  took
part  in  panels:  Edith  Green  (Ore.),  Byron  Johnson  (Col.),
John  Brademas  (Ind.)  and  Leonard  Wolf  (Iowa),  all  Demo-
crats,  were  among  the  Congressmen  who  attended.   Senator
Green  put  in  an  appearance.   From  the  inner  councils  of  the
Democratic  party  came  Benjamin  V.  Cohen  and  Leon  Key-
serling.   Former  Senator  Flanders  of  Vermont,  who  did  so
much  to  destroy McCarthy's  power,  was there  on  the  platform
with  Norman  Thomas,  who  spoke  with  all  his  old  inspiring
pungency:  "What  I  have  to  say  cannot  be  dismissed  by  in-
No  Hurry
Q.  Dr.  [Bans]  Bothe  said  a  few  days  ago  that  he
thought  more  sensitive  instruments could  be  developed
for  detection  [of  nuclear  tests].    Are  there  any  plans
for  such  a  development  by  the  AEC?
Chairman  McCone:  Not  at  the  present  time;  no.
—AEC  Press  Conference,  Jan.  21. '
sisting  that  since  Russia  is  or  has  been  worse  than  we,  we
don't  need  to try  to  be better.  The  insistence  that  no  valid  and
secure  agreements  for  proper   sanctions  can  be  reached  with
the  Kremlin  can't  be  proved  until  far  more  earnest,  imagina-
tive,  yes, and  realistic  efforts  are  made.    We  are  working  for
peace,  not  for  a  better  or  less  bad  record  on  some  celestial
scoreboard."
Of  the  new  data  on  nuclear  testing,  Humphrey  said   "we
should  not  appear  to  be trying to  find  an  excuse for  calling  the
whole  thing  off."  He  welcomed  the  new  Western   concession
at  Geneva  in  agreeing  not  to  make  test  cessation  dependent  on
other  arms  issues.  He  warned  the  Russians "without  the  right
of  inspection  of  events which  could  be  suspected  of  being  nu-
clear  explosions,  it  is  difficult  to  see how  the  Geneva  negotia-
tions  can  be  successful,"   and   said  that  "enough   foreigners
must  be on  the  staff  of  the  control  apparatus  in  each  country"
to  maintain  confidence.  He  told  of  his  annual  struggle  to  get
a  few thousand  dollars  for  his disarmament subcommittee amid
the  billions  spent  for  arms  and  added  wryly,  "you  can  pretty
well  tell  where a nation's  heart  is by where  it  puts  its  money."
Perhaps  the  most  striking  aspect  of  the  discussions  is  that
at  least  five  speakers  in  their  various  ways  stressed  the  need
for  combining meaures  of  "disengagement"  in  central Europe
with  arms  control:   Humphrey,   Thomas,   Cohen,   Reuss  and
Frederick  Kuh  of  the  Chicago  Sun-Times.   Congressman  Reuss
was  impressively literate  and  informed on  the  subject.
Mr.  Cohen,  veteran  of  the  New  Deal,  and  of  the  State  De-
partment,  and  of  many  parlays  with  the  Russians,  spoke  with
a  patient  wisdom  and  a  weary irony  of  the  necessity for  nego-
tiation  and  co-existence.   Mr.  Cohen  said  "Some  people  who
study  their  ideology  end  up  by  becoming  more  enamored  of
it  than  the  Russians themselves.  They  come  to  believe  that  co-
existence  not  only  cannot  but  should  not  succeed."   The  por-
trait  seemed  strikingly  to  resemble  John  Foster  Dulles,  who  is
quite  vain  about  his  Marxism-Leninism.
Next  Step  Must  Be  Missile  Control-
"Owing  to  the  high  destructive  capability  of  larger  mis-
sile  warheads,  even  a  minor  proportion  of  attacking mis-
siles  would  devastate  major  industrial areas.
"At   the   present  time,  however,  long-range  interconti-
nental  missiles  with  such  capability,  well-concealed  in  pre-
pared  launching  sites,  are  apparently  as  yet  unavailable  to
the  major  powers in  quantity.   This  fact  may  soon become
out-dated  owing  to  the  massive  resources  being  applied  to
the  development of  missile  technologies.  The  present condi-
tion,  however,  still  offers  major  opportunities for  interna-
tional  disarmament  agreements  which,  by  inspection,  could
serve  to  prevent the  further  development of  the  missile  art
and  thereby  relieve  the  major  industrial  populations of  the
earth  from  this  source  of  surprise  attack ...  an interna-
tional  agreement,  making  use  of  a  network  of  stations  simi-
-The   Fallacy  of   The  "Fool-Proof"
lar  to  the  one  now  proposed for  the  bomb  test  agreement,
could    efficiently    police    an   international   missile-testing
moratorium.  .  . .
"In  assessing  the  worth  of  disarmament agreements  and
their  allied  inspection  systems,  it  is  essential   to  keep  in
view   a  realistic  understanding  of   the  reliability  problem
. .. uncertainty  and risk are always present in an inspection
system.  The choice that must be made is  between the  uncer-
tainties  of  inspected  disarmament agreements,  as  against
the  well-assured  extinction  of  humankind.  .  .  .
".  .  .  to  insist  upon  'fool-proof  inspection'  ia  tantamount
to  excluding the  acceptability of  any  disarmament and  any
inspection  system."
.  Seymour  Melman  of  Columbia, at  the  Sixth  Nat'1
Cow/, on  World  Disarmament, Washington, D.C. Jan. SS
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  2,1959
Why   the   Un-American  Chairman   Ought  to  Be   Subpoenaed  in  the  Braden-Wilkinson  Trial
Let's  Lift  A  Curtain  on  Mr.  Walter's  Own  Anti  Anti-Communist  Past
We  hope  the  defense  in  the  forthcoming  contempt  trials of
Harvey O'Connor,  Carl  Braden  and  Frank  Wilkinson  will sub-
poena  Chairman Francis E. Walter  of  the  House  Un-American
Activities   Committee,   and   ask   him   under   oath   why   these
three  men  were  ever  summoned  by  the  Committee.  We   be-
lieve  the  answer  and  the  circumstances  will  show  that  even
under  the  vague  mandate on  which  the  Committee  operates,  it
had  no  authority to  call  them.  Whatever  "un-American  activi-
ties"  may mean they  can hardly  be  stretched  to  cover  criticism
of  the  Committee  itself.
The  trials  in  Atlanta  which  have  just  ended  with  the  con-
viction  of  Braden  and  Wilkinson   (and  the  imposition   of  a
maximum   12-month  sentence  on  the  latter)   show  that  they
were  subpoenaed  for  trying  to  help  victims  of  the  Committee
and  to  bring  about  its  abolition.   It  would  be  strange  if  in  a
section  of  the  country where  the  sharpest  criticism  of  the  Su-
preme  Court  is  a  commonplace,  criticism  of  the  Un-American
Committee is a crime.   We  believe  the  outcome  on  appeal  will
be  another  defeat  for   the   Committee,   another   blow   at   its
crumbling  power.
Joining  Forces  With  Eastland
We  also  believe  the  two  Atlanta  cases,  when  the  facts  come
fully  to  public  knowledge,  will  provide  an  answer  to  Chair-
man  Walter's  indignant  denial  on  the  floor  of  the  House  Jan-
uary  9  that  his  Committee  had  ever  "harassed  Americans who
work  for  racial  equality  and  justice."  Among  the   questions
Braden  refused  to  answer  were  several  dealing  with  his  activi-
ties  in  connection  with  the  Southern  Conference  Educational
Fund,  which  has  been  working  for  inter-racial  justice  in  the
South.  Wilkinson was subpoenaed  (under  circumstances  which
seem  to  indicate wire-tapping  by  Committee  agents)  when  he
went  to  Atlanta  to  help  Braden.
Hate  bombers  seem  to  be  able  to  operate  in  the  South  with
impunity,  but  idealists  who have  devoted  their  lives  to helping
the  Negro  and  to  fighting  for  civil  liberties  are  easily  con-
victed.   In  this  respect  the  Walter  committee  has  been  imitat-
ing  the  Eastland  committee.   Both  have  been  contributing  to
the  dangerous  delusion  that  grips  a  sizeable  portion   of  the
South,  the  notion  that  the  colored  man's  struggle  for  equality
is  a  Communist- plot.
When  We  Praised  Walter
We  hope  that  on  the  stand  Chairman  Walter  will  be  inter-
rogated   about  some  of  his  own  past  activities.    In  a   speech
prepared  for  delivery as we were  going  to  press,   Congressman
James  Roosevelt read  the  House  the  full  text  of  the front  page
article  we  published  in  our  issue  of  January  19  criticizing  the
way  he  was  going  about  his  move  to  abolish  the  Committee.
We  emphasized the  danger  of substituting a Seditious Activities
Committee.  Mr.  Roosevelt  seemed  to  be using  our  criticism of
him  as  a  way  to  clear  himself  in  the  eyes  of  the   House  by
showing  that  he  was  being  attacked  from   the  left.     If   the
Weekly's   attitude  is  to  be  a  kind  of  loyalty  standard,  then  it
clears  Mr.  Roosevelt but  puts  Mr.  Walter  in  jeopardy.  For  on
two  occasions  the  Weekly  has  reported  favorably on  Mr.  Wal-
ter's  activities.   Once  was  when 'he  gave  us  an  interview  at-
tacking  as  unconstitutional  the  Smith-Ferguson  bill  to  deprive
of  citizenship native  born  persons  convicted  under  the  Smith
Act.   The  second  was  when  he  (along  with  Clyde  Doyle  of
California)  filed  a minority  report  from  the  Un-American Ac-
tivities  Committee  opposing  the  Brownell-Butler  bill.  Indeed
the  Weekly  was the  only  publication  which  published  the  text
of  their  report.
That  report  (HR  Rept.  2651  Part  2,  83rd  Cong.  2d  Sess.)
makes  relevant  reading  now.  The  bill  was  designed  to  add  a
new  category  of  suspect  organizations  to  those  already  sub-
jected  by  the  Internal  Security  Act  of   1950   to   registration
with  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board.   In  addition  to
"Communist"  and  "Communist  Action"  organizations,  "Com-
munist  infiltrated"   unions  and  other   organizations  were  to
register.   These were organizations which  were  not  Communist
controlled  but  into  which  it  could  be  shown  that  Communists
had   "infiltrated."
Some  Guilty  Associations
Mr.  Walter,  the  Wall  Street  Journal  and  the  Weekly  were
guilty  of  association  in  the  fight  against  that  bill,  and  if  it  had
not  been  for  a panicky stampede  by liberals  in  the  Senate,  Mr.
Walter  would  have  blocked  it.   As  it  was,  it  became  part  of
the   Anti-Communist  Control   Act  of   1954.   The   important
point  to  notice  is that  the  grounds on  which  Mr.  Walter  (and
Mr.  Doyle)   objected  to  the  legislation   then  are  exactly  the
grounds   on  which  they  attack  the   "abolition"  forces   now.
They  objected  then  that  the  bill  "fails  to  make  clear  that  an
organization  is to  be  proscribed  only if  it  was  deliberately used
for  the purpose  and with the  motive of promoting  communism.
It  seems—though  surely that  would  not  be the  intent—to  per-
mit  conviction upon  a  mere  showing  of  a  coincidence of  views
on  some  subjects  between  the  accused  organization  and   the
Communist  party."
Isn't  Mr. Walter  now attacking  people who want  to  abolish
•the  Committee  on  just  such  grounds  of  "coincidence"?   If  it
is  a  crime  to  agitate  for  abolition  of  the  Committee,  is  Mr.
Walter  himself   guiltless?   It  is  hardly  a  secret  in  the  news-
paper  corps  here  that  Mr.  Walter  on  several  occasions  in  the
past  few  years has  expressed  disgust  with  the  witch  hunt,  and
told  reporters  that  he  himself  was  going  to  move  to  abolish
it.   Mr.  Walter  is  too  good  a  lawyer  not  to  be  acutely uncom-
fortable  on  occasion  about  the  Committee's  activities.   All  this
too  ought  to  be  opened  up  when  and  if  Mr.  Walter  is  sub-
poenaed  in the  forthcoming  trials  of  the  "abolitionist"  leaders,
O'Connor,  Braden  and  Wilkinson.
Fight  Building  Up
As  for  Mr.  Roosevelt,  his  new  speech  began  gingerly  to
fight,  though  he  was  still  trying  to  make  it  clear  that  he  had
come  not  to  bury  Caesar  but  to  rehabilitate  him.   For  all  his
queasy  approach,  he  alone  is  carrying  on  a  fight  on  the  House
floor and  deserves applause  for  it.   He  has  opened  up  an  ave-
nue  through  which  full  hearings  may  yet  be  forced  in  Houje
Rules.   Every  American who  believes in  liberty ought  to  write
his  Congressman   and  ask  that  he  fight  for  hearings  on  the
Roosevelt  resolution,  and  oppose  on  the floor the  $327,000  ap-
propriation   for   Un-American  Activities  approved   by  House
Administration  without  the  public hearing  its  chairman,  Omar
Burleson,  has  often  promised.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  S, 1959
Fears  of  A  Spanish  Castro;  New  French  Premier  for  Co-Existence;  Our  Unapproachable Speaker
Kefauver  Ignored When  He  Exposes  the Real Nature  of Our  Price  Inflation
Though  inflation  is a  No.  1  topic  here,  an  almost  complete
blanket  of  silence  covered  the  opening  of  a  new  round  of
hearings  by Kefauver's  anti-trust  and  monopoly  subcommittee
into  administered  prices.  The  liberal  Democrats  and  their  labor
allies  are  content  to  talk  demagogically  of  more  spending  as
an   economic  cure-all,   ducking   the  hard   problems.    Senator
Kefauver's  opening   statement  pointed  out  that  current  price
rises  do not  follow  the  classical pattern  of  rising  demand  with
inadequate  supply.  "The 1957  increase  in  steel  prices,"  he
pointed  out, "came  on  the  heels  of  six  months  in  which  the
industry's  operating  rate  averaged  little  more  than  half  capac-
ity.  Automobile  prices  were  increased  sharply  last  fall,  at  a
time  when  buyers were  willing  to  take  only  about  half  of  the
cars  which  the  industry  actually  produced  in  1955."   Prices
rise  while  production  and  employment fall.   The  market  is  no
longer  free.   The  problem  is  whether  it  is  to  be  planned  and
controlled   by  a  few  great   industries   so  they  can   maintain
profits  in  a  restricted  market.
Double  Standard  on  Dictatorships
When  the  Hungarian  revolutionaries  lynched  secret  police
agents   in  Budapest,  they  were  applauded   but  when   Castro
(with   much  more  orderly  procedure)   executes  Batista's tor-
turers,  there  is a manufactured storm  of  indignation.  Without
wishing  to  endorse  "revolutionary  justice"  (sometimes  only  a
mask  for  ignorant  mob  violence),  it  strikes  us  Latin  Ameri-
cans  must  be  disgusted,  remembering  the  silence  of  our  press
and  Congress  in  the  years when  Batista and  other  Latin  Amer-
ican  dictators killed  and  tortured  with  impunity.  We  are  even
now  sending  a  Marine  mission  to  train  the  forces  of  the dic-
tator  in  Haiti,  and  they  will  be  available  to  help  Trujillo  in
neighboring  Santo  Domingo,  where  Batista  has  taken  refuge.
The  two  dictatorships on  that  island  of  Hispaniola,  and  those
in  Nicaragua  and  Paraguay,  are  the  last  left  in  Latin  America.
What  Washington   fears  is  that  the  contagion  of  the  success-
ful  uprisings  (and the  generally  friendly  attitude  taken  by  the
dominant  Roman  Catholic  Church  toward  them)  will  encour-
age  similar  action  in  the  shaky  Spanish  mother  country  where
we   have   many   bases.   What   happens   if   revolution    comes
New  House  Foreign  Affairs  Appointments
Lack   of   space   in   a  flood  of   more   urgent   matters
forces  us  to  postpone  our  promised  survey  of  new  com-
mittee  assignments  in  the  House.  We  note  with  satis-
faction,  however,  that  Chester  Bowles   (D.  Conn.)  and
Wm.  H.  Meyer  (D.  Vt.) have  been  placed  on  Foreign
Affairs.    Few  men  in  Washington  are  as  well equipped
as  Mr. Bowles  for  that  post,  Mr. Meyer campaigned  for
an  independent  foreign   policy,   advocating  recognition
of  Communist China and  an  end  of  nuclear  testing.  The
other  successful   "peace"  candidate,  Byron  L.  Johnson
(D.  Col.),  a  member  of  the  Fellowship  of  Reconcilia-
tion,  was   given  his   second  choice,   Banking  and Cur-
rency  (his  first  was  Agriculture);  he  is  a  former  pro-
fessor  of  economics  at  the  University  of  Denver.
We  also  note  that   Chas.  O.  Porter  (D.  Ore.),  now
serving  his  second  term,  was  punished  by  the   House
leadership  for  his  courageous  exposure  of  the Galindez
case  and the Trujillo regime's  complicity  in  it.   Mr. Por-
ter  asked  for  Appropriations,  Foreign  Affairs,  or  Judi-
ciary  but  was  given  no  new  post  and  left  on  Post  Of-
fice   and   Civil   Service.   This   liberal   Democrat   from
Oregon  is  a hero  in Latin America;  he  has  created much
good  will  below   the   border  for   our  country;  he   has
made  Latin Americans  feel  they  again  have  a champion
in   Congress.    But   the   friends   of   Trujillo   (including
Majority   Leader  McCormack)  were  stronger.
against  Franco?  Will  we  supply him?
Except  for  a  Reuters  dispatch  in  the  Chicago  Tribune,  no
U.S.   paper  we  saw  covered  the   fact   that  the   new   French
Premier  Michel  Debre  in  his  opening  policy  statement  to  the
new  National   Assembly  said  in   discussing  NATO  that   it
"must  constantly  show  that  it  is  ready  for  co-existence"  and
stressed  "the unparalleled  suffering  that  would  result  from  a
rejection  of  co-existence."   His  government  insists,  however,
that  France  must  become  "an  atomic  military  power."
Our  favorite Freudian slip  of  the  new  Congress  was  in  the
statement  with  which   Cong.   Ashley  (D.   Ohio)   refused   to
serve  as  assistant  Democratic  whip  of  the  House  in  protest
against  the  Southern  oligarchy.   But  he  said,  "I'm  not  taking
on  Rayburn.  As  a  Speaker,  he's beyond  approach."
Why   Not  Send  Your  New  Congressman  A   Gift    Sub   to   the    Weekly?
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ......................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
2/2/50
(To)    Name
Street   ..........
City  .........................................^one..._.......State..............._
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  Q    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post Office
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  et   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  S,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  6618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  is,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the  U.  8.;  W  In  Canada;  HO •Inwlwn.   All  Hail  rates:  «1B  to  Europe;  120  to  Israel. Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED