I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jul13.pdf

============================================================

Congress Dislikes the Bill  of  Rights,  P.  4
On  Nuclear  Weapons Training  (and  Israeli  Arms)   for  the  Germans,  See  Pages  2  and  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  27
JULY  13,  1959
.«°'       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
What  Could Be More  Refreshing  Than  A  Pentagon  Fire?
That  fire  over  at  the  Pentagon  filled  us  with  refreshing
thoughts.     Millions   of   people   everywhere  would    breathe
more  easily  if  one  wonderful  day  fire  destroyed  the  military
headquarters  of  the  U.  S.  and  the  U.  S.  S.  R.,  including  the
mechanical  brains  into  which  we  and  our  children  are  fed  as
data.    It  might  take  years  to  duplicate  the  computations,   to
redraw  the  war  maps,  to  prepare  new  secret  plans.    In  the
meantime  we  could  go  fishing  nearby  in  the   Potomac   and
our  friend  Ivan in  the  Dnieper  without having  to  worry  about
the  horrors tensely leashed  to  protect  us.    The  wacky fallacies
of  mutual  deterrence  come  to  the  surface  when  a  fire  ,at  the
Pentagon  reminds  us  how  the  world  would  feel  if  suddenly
the  deterrents  went  up  in  mutual  smoke.    Our  planet  would
be  like  one  of  those  frontier  towns  when  one  day  a  Sheriff
arrived  and  made  everybody put   away  the  six-shooters  with
which  they  had   been  deterring  each  other.     In  the   blessed
silence  which  followed,  people  learned  to  walk  without  being
jumpy,  secure  at  last  in  the  knowledge  that  any  sudden  shot
could  only  be  an  automobile  backfiring  or  a  fire-cracker  left
over  from  the  Fourth  of  July.
Helpful  Hints  for  Geneva  Negotiators
As   the   Berlin   talks   resume   in   Geneva,   our    negotiators
may  be  helped  by  the  strange  blueprints  worked  out  by  the
Pentagon's  pet  scientists  on  the  mechanics  of  limiting  a  nu-
clear  war.    They  start  with  the  premise  that  all-out   nuclear
war  should  be  avoided  because  it  would   be  mutual  suicide.
They  move  on  to  the  proposition  that  war  can  only  be limited
if  the  enemy  is  asked  for   less  than  unconditional  surrender.
They  conclude  that  nuclear  war  must  be  waged  for  aims  so
reasonable  that  the  enemy  will  prefer  to  settle  rather  than
fight  on  to  extermination.    Thus  Henry  A.  Kissinger  in  his
Nuclear  Weapons  and  Foreign  Policy  says  (p.  169)   we  "must
pay  special  attention  to  the  importance  of   diplomatic  over-
tures  which  make  clear  [i.e.  to  the  enemy]  that  national  sur-
vival  is  not  at  stake  and  that  a  settlement  is  possible  on  rea-
sonable  terms.    Otherwise  the  result  is  almost  certain  to  be
either  stalemate  or  all-out  war."     There  was  testimony  in  a
similar  vein  by  Dr.   Robert  R.  Newell  of   the  U.  S.  Naval
Radiological  Defense  Laboratory—the  scientist  we  quoted  last
week who thinks a nuclear  war might  improve  the  human  race.
The  problem,   as  disclosed   before  the   recent   nuclear   war
hearings   by  Dr.   Newell,   is  how  to   keep   the  war   limited
enough   so  some   people   will   survive.     "If   and   when   we
actually  engage   in  combat,"  Dr.  Newell  advised,   "we  must
push  the  adversary only a limited  amount.    We  must  not  push
the  war  so  fast  as  to  frighten  him  into  the  thought   that  he
might  lose  it.    We  must  give  him  time  to  make   intelligent
decisions.    We  must  go  after  very  limited   objectives.     We
must  accept  a  small  surrender—maybe  merely  the   abandon-
Footnote  on  Some  Breathless  Journalism
"The    inner  circle  of   the  American  Government   has
been   shaken   and   alarmed   by   a   Hitler-like  interview
given  to  W.  Averell  Harriman  by  Nikita  S.  Krushchev.
The  crude  threats  that  the  Soviet  leader  indulged  in,
the  brutal  tone  and  the  unprintable  language  that  he
employed,  are  considered to  mark  a  new  phase  in  the
world  situation."
—Joseph   Alsop's   column,  July   2
"But   Mr.  Harriman,  talking  to  The  Star  from  Bonn
in  West  Germany,  denied  the  'rough  talk' story categor-
ically. The report,  he observed, 'sounds like a botched-up
leak  from  the State  Department.  It  seems like anything
you  say  to  the  State  Department  comes  out  the  other
end  like  sausage  meat.'"
—Washington  Sunday  Star  Review  of  the  Week  July  5
ment  of  a  single  activity  that  we  find  intolerable.    The   ob-
jective  must  be  limited.  .  .  ."    Dr.   Newell   admitted   this
would  constitute a  "revolution  in  diplomacy  and  an  emergent
ideal   of   national  purpose   to   plan   cooperatively   with   our
enemy  to  regain  the  peace."    This  is  indeed  a  new  tune.
What  puzzles  us,  as  an  ignorant  layman,  is  this.    If  we're
going   to   be  so  diplomatic  and   ready   to   compromise   after
umteen  million  of  our  people  and  theirs have  been  killed  in  a
nuclear  attack,  why  not   try  some  of   that  conciliatory   tactic
before   part  of  our  population  is  dead  and  part  of  our  cities
in  ruin?   Why  be  so  intransigeant at  the  conference  table  if
we  are  prepared  to  be  so  reasonable  after   war  has  begun?
Even  a  teensy-weensy nuclear  war  would  leave  little  left  on
either  side  of  the  line  in  divided  Berlin,  and  a  really  hearty
nuclear   salvo  might  be  the  end  of  Germany.    What  would
we  do  then?     Offer   to   call  off  the  war   on  condition   that
Berlin   be  made  a  free   city  radioactively  off  limits  to   both
sides ?
If  Only  the  Negro  Problem  Were  in  Irkutsk
Our  leadership,  so  morally  intransigeant  abroad,   continues
to  be  tepid  at  home.    Mr.  Eisenhower  was  taken  aback  when
a  reporter  ventured  to  ask  whether   he  thought   segregation
morally   wrong.    He   fumbled   into   a   queasy   statement    so
equivocal   his   Southern   bridge-playing   friends   may   easily
equate  it with  the  racist  doctrine  that  segregation  is only  wrong
when  the  Negro  is  not  given  equal  though  separate  facilities.
Segregation  as  a  system  of  humiliation  designed  to  make  the
colored  child  feel  a  nigger  (only  the  brutal word  matches  the
brutal  fact)  from  his  first  days  in  school  is  beyond  the  Presi-
dent's  ken.   If  only  the  Negro  problem  were  in  Irkutsk,  the
CIA  would   be  briefing   him   on   it  every  morning,   and   Air
Force  Generals  would  sound  like  the  NAACP.
1     Q
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  IS, 1959
No  Voice  in  Senate  and  Few  in  Country  Question  A-Weapons  for  Germans
Seven  Maverick  Democratic  Congressmen   Challenge  Nuclear  Give-A way
A  little  band  of  seven  Congressmen  have  introduced  reso-
lutions  to  block  the  spread  of  nuclear  training  and  arms.    All
are  Democrats  and  four  are  freshmen.    These  four  are  Wil-
liam  H.   Meyer   of   Vermont;   Byron  Johnson  of   Colorado;
Leonard  G.  Wolf   of  Iowa;  and  Clement  Woodnut  Miller  of
Marin  County,  California.    They  have  been  joined  by  three
older  members:  Roy  Wier   of  Minnesota,  in  Congress  since
1948;   Edith  S.  Green  of  Oregon,  first  elected  in  1954;   and
second-termer  George  S.  McGovern  of  South  Dakota.
Mrs.   Green  favors  sharing  atomic  information  only  with
Britain  and  Canada,  and  Miller  only  with  Britain,  but  have
joined  the  other  five  in  introducing  resolutions  to  veto  the
pending  NATO  nuclear  arms  agreements  with  France,  Ger-
many,  Holland,  Greece  and  Turkey.    The  other five are  spon-
soring  bills  to  veto  the  proposed  British  and  Canadian  agree-
ments  as  well.
A  Pacifist  and  A  War Hero
The   seven  mavericks  bold   enough   to  question   bipartisan
acquiescence  in predigested military decisions range from  Colo-
rado's  Johnson,   a  member  of  the  Pacifist  Fellowship   of  Re-
conciliation,   to   Dakota's   McGovern   who   few   35   combat
missions  as  the  pilot  of  a  B-24  in  the  European  Theatre,  and
holds  the  Distinguished  Flying  Cross  and  the  Air  Medal  with
three  Oak  Leaf  Clusters.
The  pending  agreements  automatically go  into  effect  within
60   days  of   their   submission   unless   during   that   time  both
houses  of  Congress  pass  a  concurrent resolution  vetoing  them.
The  deadline  on  the  British  and  French   agreements  is  July
18;  on  the  Canadian,  German,  Dutch  and  Turkish,  July  25;
and  on  the  Greek,  August  10.   A  blanket  of  silence  has  cov-
ered  the  agreements.    Senator  Pastore  announced  on  June  23
that  public  hearings   would   be  held   July  1  and  2  but  few
newspapers  published   this  announcement.     One  day  of   the
public  hearings  was  taken  up  with  routine  presentations  by
State  and  Defense   (they  had  already  appeared   in  executive
session  before  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy).   By
the  time  "the  public"  was heard  on  July  2,  only  16  days were
left  before  the  British  and  French  treaty  deadlines  and  only
23  days  on  the  Canadian,  German,  Dutch  and  Turkish.     If
there  is  no  public  pressure,  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic
Energy  can  easily  bottle  up  the  veto  resolutions  until  it  is  too
Not  Isaiah's  Vision
Not   the  least  painful  aspect   of   the  Israeli-German
arms  deal  is  that  it  was  exposed  by  a  German  weekly,
Der  Spiegel,  which  is  friendly  to  Israel  and  has   been
vigilant   in   exposing   neo-Nazi   influences   within   the
Bonn  government  and  in  combatting  anti-Semitism.
The  German  and  Jewish  peoples  must  be reconciled,
for  humanity if  it  is  to  survive must  become  one  family.
Not  to  trade  would  be  unfriendly  but  to  trade  in  arms
is  to  betray  the  best  elements  of  both  peoples  and  to
shame  the  memory of  the  martyred.   Ben  Gurion  may
live  to  regret  his complacency.
Those  of  us  who  were  in  on  the  struggles  which  led
to  the  birth  of  Israel  hoped  that  from  it  would radiate
a  universal  and  healing  message.   As  is  said  in  Isaiah,
"Out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth the  law,  and  the  word of  the
Lord   from   Jerusalem  .  .  .  and  they  shall  beat   their
swords  into  ploughshares."  We  did not  expect  to  see  an
emporium  for  the  arms   traffic.
late  for   passage.    Holifield,   who   raised  the   alarm  on   this
question  last  year,  has  gone  over  to  the  AEC  point  of  view.
Senator   Anderson,  who   last   year  fought   the   amendments
authorizing  these  agreements,  has  yet  to  speak  up  this  year.
Humphrey,   Mansfield  and  Fulbright,  all  enlightened  on  the
German  question,  are  also  silent.
The  silence  is  appalling.    At  the  July  2  hearing,  no  voice
spoke up  from  the  labor movement.   No  churches were  heard
in  protest  except  the  Quakers.    Though   this  means  nuclear
arms  for   the  Germans,  the  only  Jewish  representative  who
turned  up  was Rabbi  Isidor  Hoffman,  who  heads  a  tiny  group
called  the  Jewish  Peace  Fellowship.    There  was  a  message  of
protest  from  Norman  Thomas,  a  moving  statement  by  Mrs.
Josephine  Pomerance  of  the  Women's   International  League
for   Peace  and  Freedom,  an  eloquent  declaration  by  Donald
Keys  of  the  National  Committee for  A  Sane  Nuclear   Policy,
an  illuminating  presentation  by  the  Federation  of  American
Scientists  (see  page  3)  and  a  statement  by  William   Price  of
the  United   Independent-Socialist  Committee  of  New   York.
Congressman  Meyer testified.    Never  did  testimony on  so  high
a  level  meet  with  such  obvious  indifference  from  a  rump  sub-
comittee.    Unless  Senators hear  from  home  quickly  a  fateful
move  in  foreign  and  military  policy  will  be  taken  without
debate  in  Congress.    These  lines  are  written  in  despair.
Words  of  Warning  and  Wisdom  From  A  Saintly  Member  of  the  Friends
"Is  it  not  ironic,  15  years  after  D-Day  and  after  the  role
which  Germany  played  in  the  coming  of  two  world  wars,
that  the  U.S.  should  be  rearming  West  Germany with  infor-
mation regarding  atomic weapons. . .  . These  transfer  agree-
ments  .  .  .  practically close  the  door  on  any  serious  negotia-
tions  on 'denuclearization' or 'disengagement' in Europe.  . . .
"We  have  recently  been  reminded  by  the  hearings  on  nu-
clear  war ... of the tremendous  choice  before  us ...    untold
millions  dead  or abundant  peace.  .  .  .  With  stakes  so  great
we  should  make ventures on the  very  best  and deepest  in our
national   life.  We  should  not  cower  in  fear  in  underground
shelters  waiting  for  the  final  blow.  This  is  spiritual   sur-
render.  We  can find no true  security  in  military  power  which
only  breeds  an  opposing  force. ...
"The  motto  on  our  coins  says,  'In  God We  Trust'.   Do  we
have  the  faith  as  a  nation  to  abandon  our  present   faith  in
military  strength,  to  adopt  a  policy  of   outgoing   goodwill
toward   all   countries  including   the   Soviet   Union   and  the
people's  Republic of  China ...  to  seek  a  series  of  regular
conferences   aimed  at  negotiating   outstanding   differences,
and   to   see   as   our  overriding  common   goal   a   disarmed
world  where  the  judicial  process  settles  disputes?  .  .  .
"Perhaps  we  need  some  of  the  faith  of  George   Washing
ton  who,  speaking  at  the  Constitutional  Convention  of  1789,
said:  'Let  us  raise  a  standard  to  which  the  wise  and  honest
can  repair.  .  .  .'   Certainly   there  are  risks,  but  does  our
present   course,   which   may   bring   48   million   dead   in   a
'limited'  attack,  involve  no  risk?  .  .  .
"Our  nation  today  is  at  the  pinnacle  of  its  power.   If  it
exerted   that  power  in  this   kind  of   moral  leadership,   the
course  of  history  on this  planet  could be  materially  altered."
—Clarence  E.  Pickett, executive  secretary  emeritus  of  the
American   Friends   Service   Committee,   testifying    July   2
against  nuclear  arms  agreements  with  7 NATO   nations.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  13, 1959
Scientist  Spells  Out  the  Dangers  in  the  Shift   from  Conventional   Arms
Even  the  Smallest  Nuclear  Weapons  Pack  A  Fiery  Poisonous  Super-Punch
By  Dr.  Wm.  C.   Davidon
1.  Is   there  a  sharp   distinction   between   conventional  and
small  nuclear  weapons?
In  1958,  W.  Libby  referred  to  the  1.7 kiloton  Rainier  shot
as  among  the  smallest  of  nuclear  explosions,  yet  this  is  nearly
three  times  greater  than  the  total  of  all  explosives   dropped
by  Germans  in  the  biggest  raid  on  London  in  World   War
II,  in  which  .59  kilotons  were  dropped   (on  May  10,  1941).
A  second  major  distinction  is  in  the  gross  differences  in  the
temperatures   reached   in   the   explosion.     The   military  sig-
nificance  of  this  difference   is  that  at  the  high   temperatures
of   a  nuclear  explosion,  a  substantial  fraction  of   the  energy
radiates   away  as  heat   and   light,   producing   large-scale  in-
cendiary  effects,  while  in  a  conventional  explosion,  this  radi-
ated  heat  and  light  is  negligible.    The  incendiary effects  alone
from  the  Hiroshima  explosion   are  reported  to  have  exceeded
that  which  would  have  been  produced  by  1,000  tons  of  care-
fully  dispersed  chemical  incendiary  bombs.
A  third  major  distinction  between  nuclear  and  non-nuclear
weapons   is  in   the   radioactive  poisoning   which   the   former
alone  produce.     In   low-yield  nuclear   explosions,  when   the
amount  of  fission  products  is  reduced,  the  unused  fissionable
material  itself  can  be  one  of  the  most  deadly  poisons  known,
Plutonium.     Hence,  .to  produce  the   effects  of  one  small  nu-
clear  weapon  with  World  War   II  techniques  would  take  a
massive  raid  with  conventional  explosives,  a  heavy  fire  raid
and  the  use  of  'poison  gas.'
2.   What    effect    will  the  proposed   agreements  have  on  the
more  widespread    reliance  upon  nuclear  weapons  by  additional
countries?
From  considerations of  manpower and  cost,  countries which
we  aid  with  nuclear  weapons  systems  will  be  under  consid-
erable   pressure   to   reduce   their   emphasis   on   conventional
forces.     Then   their   motivation   for   acquiring   nuclear  war-
heads   under   their   own   control   will   be   intensified.     Their
motivation  for  independent  manufacture is  further  increased
by  the  provisions  of  the  amendment  to  the  Atomic  Energy
Act  of  July  3,  1958  which  permits  transfer  of  nuclear  weap-
ons  and  components  to  countries  which  have  made  substan-
tial  progress  in  nuclear  weapons  development.     In  addition,
other   countries,   whether   neutral,   communist   or   capitalist,
will  in  turn  be  subject  to  pressure  to  acquire  nuclear  weapons.
3.  What   are  the   capabilities   of   the  NATO   countries  in-
dependently   to  manufacture   nuclear  weapons  to  use  with   the
weapons  systems  we  would  be  providing?
Our  study  of  the  "Nth   Country  Problem"   concluded  that
France, Canada and  West Germany could  independently manu-
facture   nuclear  weapons   in   the   immediate  future.    Canada
has  a  long  experience   with  nuclear  technology.    France  has
been  operating  reactors  producing  weapons-grade  plutonium
for   a  considerable   time.    West  Germany  has  an   active  re-
actor  construction  program  under  way.    In  addition  to  sev-
eral  low  power  reactors,  the  U.  S.  has  a  bilateral  agreement
with  West  Germany  to  supply  a  58  megawatt  power  reactor.
A  reactor  of  this  type  would  be  capable  of  making  enough
plutonium   for  a  Hiroshima  size  atomic  bomb  in  less  than  a
year.   Though  controls  are  incorporated  in  the  bilateral   agree-
ment  between  the  U.  S.  and  Germany  to  prevent  the  utiliza-
We  present  here  slightly  abridged  the  testimony  July
2 by  Dr. William  C. Davidon  on behalf  of  the  Federation
of  American  Scientists  before  the  Pastore  subcommittee
of  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  against  the
pending   nuclear   arms   agreements  with   seven   NATO
countries.    Dr.  Davidon,  an  Associate  Physicist  at  the
Argonne   National   Laboratory,  is  Chairman  of  the  Chi-
cago   Chapter   of   the   Federation.     His   testimony    was
based  on  a  study   of  the  "Nth  Country  Problem"  made
by  a  subcommittee   (of   which  he  was  chairman)  of  a
Committee   on  Technical  Problems   of  Arms   Limitation
of  the  American   Academy   of  Arts  and  Sciences.   This
study  will  soon  be  published  by  the  Committee  on  Secu-
rity   Through   Arms  Control   of  the  National  Planning
Association  of  which  he  is  also  a  member.
tion   of   this  plutonium  in   weapons,   a  growing   reliance   on
nuclear  weapons  by  the  German  military might  have  serious
future  consequences.
4.  What  capabilities  do  Communist  countries have for  inde-
pendent   manufacture    of   nuclear  weapons?
The  Joint  Institute  of  Nuclear  Research  includes   Albania,
Bulgaria,   China,   Czechoslovakia,   East   Germany,   Hungary,
Mongolia,   North   Korea,   Poland,   Rumania,   the   USSR   and
Vietnam.    Nuclear  reactors  are  built  or  currently  planned  in
Bulgaria,   China,   Czechoslovakia,  East   Germany,    Hungary,
Poland  and  Rumania  with  assistance  from  the  USSR.
Of  these  countries  the  only  one  which  is  reportedly  devel-
oping  nuclear  weapons  is  Communist  China.    The   status  of
China's  nuclear  weapons  program  may  be  further  along  than
is  generally  realized,  and  it  may  well  be  that  the  world  may
soon  be in  for  a shock comparable to  the  Soviet  Sputnik  should
China  test  an  A-bomb.    China's  first  reactor  is  reported   to
have  started operation  in  July  1957.    It  has  also  been  reported
from  Warsaw  (NYT 8/18/58)  that  the  Soviet  Union  has an
agreement  with  China  to  provide  nuclear  weapons  assistance.
5.   What   ejects   on   our  future   security,  on  eventual  dis-
armament,  and  on  political  settlements  would  result  from   in-
dependent   possession  of  nuclear weapons  by  many  countries?
Few  people  regard  the  "balance  of  terror"  as  a  long  range
solution.    Even  if  it  were  completely   effective  in   eliminating
the  possibility of  rationally planned  all-out  attack,  the  danger
remains  that  accidental,  catalytic wars,  or  the  spread  of  a  local
conflict   will  bring  world   disaster.    With   more   individuals
capable  of   initiating  nuclear  war,   the   danger   of   accidental
war   increases.    Furthermore,  the  polarization   of   the   world
between  two  great  powers  now  existing  may  tend  to  splinter
into  additional  power  groups,  and  leaders  of  a  Germany  or
China  might  believe  that  catalyzing  a  war  between  the  US
and  the  USSR  would  be  to  their  advantage.
If  we  believe  that  our  civilization  must  not  be  interrupted,
then   progress   towards   disarmament    is   essential.     Yet   the
failure  to  make  such  progress  and  the  growing   world-wide
reliance  on  nuclear  weapons   each   contributes  to  the   other.
The  absence  of  progress  towards  disarmament  drives  men  to
the  belief  that  security  can  be  achieved  only  by  their  having
control  of  more  destructive  weapons  and  the  acquisition  of
these  weapons  by  more  powers  makes  progress   toward   dis-
armament  more  difficult.     As  a  result  the  world  situation  is
spiralling  downward.    It  is  for  these  reasons  that  we  oppose
the  proposed    agreements.
1   0   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  13,1959
Most  Liberal  Congressmen   Staunch   on  India  and  Firm  on  Missile   Money
The  House  of  Representatives   Just  Doesn't  Like  the  Bill  of  Rights
A  mob-like hostility  to  the  Bill  of  Rights  and  to  Supreme
Court  decisions  upholding  it  has  long  been  evident  in   the
House  of  Representatives.   Two  recent  test  votes  show  some
ebb  in  the  repressionist  tide  but  intolerance  still  commands
ample  majorities.    The   bill  to  reverse  the  Mallory   decision
and   weaken   the   bars  against   police   third   degree   methods
passed  the  House   last  Tuesday  262-138.    This  was  a  slight
improvement  over  the  vote  of  294-79  with  which  it  passed
last  year, only  to  die  in  the  Senate.
Not  much  comfort  can  be  drawn  from  the  vote  with  which
the  House  on  June  24  passed  HR  3,  the  bill  which  has  its
emotional   roots   in   animosity   against   the   Nelson   decision.
The  vote  was  225-192  as  compared  with  241-151   the  year
before.    This  bill  is  a  blunderbuss  measure  which  threatens
to  disrupt  150  years  of  careful  adjudication in  many  tangled
problems  of  Federal-State  relations.
Walter  Quotes  Sokolsky  on  Frankfurter
Even  Congressman  Walter   appealed  to  the  House  not  to
pass  the  bill.    He  read  into  the  record  a  column  by  George
Sokolsky  in  praise  of  Justice  Frankfurter  and  the  new  right
wing  majority   on  the  Supreme  Court.    Walter   assured  the
House   that   Justice  Clark's  ruling  for   this  new   majority   in
the  Uphaus  case  cleared  the  way  for  state  sedition  prosecu-
tions   despite  the   Steve  Nelson   decision.    The   mob   spirit
could  not  be  stemmed.
Walter  himself  mobilized  this  spirit  last  Monday  when  in
double-quick  time,  under  suspension  of  the  rules,  without  a
voice  vote,  the  House  passed  his  bill  HR  2807,  seriously re-
stricting  the  right  of  appeal  by  aliens  in  deportation  and  ex-
clusion  cases.    The  House  ignored  a  minority  report  against
the  bill  by  Celler  and  Libonati, and  protests  by  the  American
Civil   Liberties   Union   and   by   Monsignor   Wycislo,   acting
chairman  of  a  Committee on  Refugee  Problems  which  speaks
for   the  Friends,  the  Lutherans,  the  National   Catholic   Wel-
fare   Council  and  HIAS.     A   similar  bill  passed   the   House
last  year  and  died  in  the  Senate.
Southern  hostility  to  the  Court  and  the  familiar  tendency
of  most  House  liberals to  look  the  other  way  when  basic  con-
Un-American   From  Way  Back
We  expect  Congress  to  stand  fast   against   the  cam-
paign   to  erect   a  national  memorial  to  Madison,  "the
Father   of   the   Constitution,"   a   document   which   has
made  it  so   difficult   to  deal  expeditiously  with  subver-
sives.    Up-standing  Americans  rarely  refer  to  the  Con-
stitution   but   "commies"   (as   is   well  known)   may  be
spotted  by  their  tendency  to  quote  from  it  and  from
Madison's   resolution   against   the   Alien   and   Sedition
Laws.    No  memorial  should  be  authorized  without  a
full  field  investigation  by  the  Un-American  Activities
Committee.    If   its   investigators   look   into  the  works
of  the  late  Charles  Beard,  himself  a  D.A.R.  suspect  in
his   time,   they   will  find  evidence   that   Madison   even
shared  Marx's  views  on  class  conflict.    Madison  should
have  been  subpoenaed  long   ago.
stitutional   rights  are  at  stake  played  their  part   in  Walter's
victory.    Two  grim  if  subtle  jokes  are  hidden  in  the  complex
issues.     Walter   is   furious   because   the   Supreme   Court   ex-
tended  to  aliens  some  of  the  elaborate  protections  for   prop-
erty  rights Walter  erected against  the New  Deal  in  the  pre-war
Walter-Logan  bill  (the  Administrative Procedures Act).    One
of   the  decisions  which  did  this  was  written  by  Justice   Tom
Clark,  the  darling  of  the  right.     (Seems  like  you  just  can't
trust  Judges.)
The   ACLU   pleaded   that   "Fair   treatment  of   persons  in-
volved  with  the  Government—citizen  or  alien—is  one  con-
cept  that  each  day  provides  a  showcase  for   the  democratic
ideal."    Walter—as  in  his  attitude toward  the  arts,  which  so
resembles   the   "socialist   realism"   favored   by   the   Babbitts
who  run  the  Soviet  bureaucracy—insists  on  putting un-Ameri-
can   monstrosities  in   that   showcase.     The   bill   reflects   his
xenophobia.
All  this  is  well  known  to  the  liberals  in  the  House—but
most  of  them  prefer  to  be  liberal  at  a  safe  distance, on  India,
or  on  more  money  for   missiles.    Little  warning  bells   ring
and  their  blood  chills  when  certain words  are  uttered.    Label
the  measure  a  bill  against  "aliens"   and  "Reds"   (as  Walter
did  this  one)   and  you  could  get  the  House  to  suspend   the
rules  and  repeal  the  Ten  Commandments.
Make  Friends  and  Influence   People  By  Giving  Them  A  Gift   Subscription   Using   the  Blank  Below
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   AYe
M
  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
7/1S/59
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
StTeet   .........._._.................._...._..............*..-..........«..«...—..
City  ..........................................Zone..._.......State..™.........._...
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?        Tea  D    No.  Q
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
I    F   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  nnder  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.    Post-dated  Monday*  bat  p«b-
lixhed  every  Thursday  except  the  laat  two  Thursdays  of  Angnat  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,   Bather  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
**i  in   *ho  TT  s  •   <tn  In  fnn«.l».  *in  olaownArp     Air  Mull  rntoR:  ftIS  tn   TTCiirnno •   STH1  tn  Tamol     Aatm   nno
1
  i*^t<-a
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED