I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959aug31.pdf

============================================================

What   War  In  Laos? P.  3
Calif.  Teachers  Force  Un-American  Committee  to  Back  Down, Page  4;  The  Fall-Out Report,  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  32
AUGUST  31,  1959
">'       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
IB  CENTS
Patriotic  Reflections  on  the  Eve of A  Foreign  Invasion
One  gets  the  impression,  on  plunging  again  into  the  over-
heated  atmosphere  of  Washington  after  a  blissful  two  weeks
away,  that  the  United  States is  in  a  panic,  on  the  verge  of  an
invasion, in  imminent peril  from  the  expected  arrival of  a man
named   Khrushchev.    Full   page   newspaper   advertisements,
speeches  in  Congress,  letters  to  the  editor,  debate  the  best
way  of  meeting  the  menace.   Some  would  have  us  greet  his
arrival  by  staying home  behind  closed  shutters.    Others  want
to  organize  public  meetings  of  protest.    A  retired  admiral
suggests  a  nation-wide day  of  prayer,  perhaps  to  ask  God  to
reward  us  righteous  with  a  new  ultimate  weapon.     Russian
intelligence,  studying  the  press  clippings   from   America  on
the  eve  of  the  visit,  may  reasonably conclude  that  we  Ameri-
cans  are  a  highly  nervous people.
We  hope  Khrushchev  will  not  be  taken  in  by  all  this  flat-
tery.    It  implies  that  he  is  a  foreign  wizard  in  whose  sub-
versive  wake  our  drug  stores  may  begin  to  sell  paper-backed
editions  of  Das  Kapital  and  our  bewitched  women's  clubs  to
schedule  lectures  on  dialetical  materialism.   We  suspect  that
the  Russians  would  be  behaving  as  neurotically  as  we  are  if
they,  too,  enjoyed  a  free  press.    We  can  see  a  syndicated se-
ries  by Molotov  (like  Truman's)  warning  against  the  danger
of   visits   to  the  perfidious  capitalists,   and   insinuating   that
Khrushchev  (like  Eisenhower)  is  about  to  relinquish   Russia's
most  prized  possession,  perpetual  cold  war.   We  can visualize
an  opposition  paper  in  Moscow  demanding  that  Khrushchev
agree  to  no  relaxation  of  tension  until   Eisenhower  has  set
free  the  captive  Eskimoes  and  restored  Alaska's  rightful  place
as  the  49th  State  in  the  Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics.
We  can  hear  a  Soviet  General  warning  that  the  exchange  of
visits  must  not  beguile Russia  into  lowering  its  guard  (and  its
Air  Force  expenditures)   because  America  was  still  intent  on
spreading  its philosophy  of  free  enterprise to  the  whole  world.
We  can  even  imagine the  obliging  Orthodox  Patriarch  urging
a  day  of  prayer  for  the  peaceful  conversion  of  the  Americans
to  Marxism-Leninism.   In  short  we believe that  the  great  Rus-
sian  people,  freed  from  the  shackles  of  despotism,  could  be
as  screwy  as  we  are.
Urgent  Bulletin:   The  No.  1  Task  for  Those  Who  Want  Peace
The  key  to  world  peace  now  lies  in  the  question  of  nu-
clear  testing.    Both  sides  are  reconciled  to  a  deadlock  over
Germany,  but  a  decision  on  nuclear  testing  cannot be  avoided.
The  one-year moratorium announced  by the  U.  S.  expires  Oct.
31,  and  the   AEC,  the   Pentagon,   the   Joint   Committee  on
Atomic Energy, and  a powerful  armaments lobby  are all  press-
ing  for  resumption  of  testing.    Either  the  world  moves  for-
ward  to  an  agreement  in  this  crucial  area,  paving  the  way  for
further   progress  on  disarmament,  or  slips  back  to  increased
tension  and  suspicion.    This  question  is  the  crossroads  from
which  mankind  moves  either  toward  war  or  peace,  and  now
—as  the  Oct.  31  deadline  approaches—is  the  time  for  meet-
ings  all  over  the  country to  alert  the  public.
The  best  discussion  of  where  the  suspended  nuclear  talks
stand  may be  found  in  an  able  speech  Humphrey  delivered  in
the  Senate  August  18  which  the  New   York  Times  and  most
papers  ignored.    It  was  answered  next  day  by  Benneft   (R.
Utah),   one-time  president  of   the   National   Association  of
Manufacturers,  in  a  speech  which  deserves  to  be  read  for  its
suffocating   self-righteousness  and  its  repetition  of  the  argu-
ment  that  we  need  testing  to  develop  cleaner  and  more  hu-
mane  bombs.
The  basic  facts  are  these.    We  can  detect  all  atmospheric
tests  from  afar.    Underground, tests  are  of  limited  usefulness
and  outer  space  tests  are  still  in  the  realm  of  Buck  Rogers.
The  armed  forces want  resumption  of  atmospheric  testing  be-
cause  only  testing  in  the  open  can  show  the  military effects  of
9                                                                                                                                      1  2
new weapons.   They  have  sold  the  Joint  Atomic  Energy  Com-
mittee  on  negotiating  an  agreement  to  limit  rather  than  to
stop   testing.     But   negotiations   to   limit   tests   can   also   be
dragged  out  for  years.   In  the  meantime the  military  hope  to
go  on  testing.    Limitation of  tests  implies  that  mankind's  only
concern  is  to  keep   fallout  poisons  within   tolerable   limits.
Equally  important,  however,  is  to  stop  tests  as  a  brake  on-  a
nuclear  arms  race.
The  basic  issues  between  East  and  West  are  now  quantita-
tive.    What  is  to  be  the  ratio  of  foreign  to  native  inspectors
in  the  seismic  "listening"  posts  to  be  set  up  under  any  agree-
ment?    How  many  veto-free  inspections  are  to  be  allowed?
The  Humphrey  speech  revealed  that  the  AEC  crowd  is  talk-
ing  of   366  inspections  a  year,  or  one  a  day,  in  the   Soviet
Union  and  only  a  slightly  lower  number  in  the  U.  S.    This
idea  of  inspectors  digging  deep  holes   for   suspected  under-
ground  detonations  every  day  of  the  week  in  both  countries
is pure  Mad  Hatter.  Unfortunately the  Administration,  accord-
ing  to  Humphrey,  has yet to work  out a  position  on  this  ques-
tion   of  how  many  veto-free  inspections;  the   AEC  and   the
Pentagon  are  campaigning  against  any agreement  whatever.
In  the  meantime we  call  attention  to  unnoticed  passages  in
the  Draper  report  on  military  security  which  recommend  the
supply of  nuclear weapons minus warheads not  only to NATO
powers  but  "to  certain  other  selected  countries"  (p.  34)  and
modern  weapons  priority  equal  to  NATO's  for  the  Far  East
(p.  53).  Are  Chiang  and  Rhee  next  in  line  for  nuclear arms?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  SI, 1959
Short-Lived  Isotopes  and  Carbon-14  Make  Resumed  Testing  More Dangerous  Than  It  Calculates
Some Major  Questions Evaded in the Holifield  Committee Report on Fallout
The  first  question  on  which  Congress  and  the  public  had  a
right  to  look  to  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  for
an  answer  was  whether  to  take  responsibility  for  monitoring
the  fallout  danger  from  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  and
give  it  to  some  such  agency as the  Public  Health  Service which
is  not  involved  in  weapons  testing.
Several  bills  proposing  steps  of  this  kind  are  now  before
Congress,  but  the  Joint  Committee  report  on  its  fallout  hear-
ings  evades  this  question:  ".  .  .  it  is  not  the  intent  of  the
(Holifield)   subcommittee,"  the  report  says  "to  make  recom-
mendations   at   this   time   as  to   where   such  responsibilities
should  lie."
Joins  the  White  House  in  Buck-Passing
The  report  complains  that  the  fallout  monitoring  program
"as  a  whole  has  not  received  the  high  level   administrative
support  and  impetus  which  it  needs  and  merits."    But  in  this
respect  the  Joint  Committee  is  as  remiss  as  the  Administra-
tion.     Last  March   26  a  National  Advisory   Committee   on
Radiation  set  up  by  the  Surgeon  General  recommended  that
responsibility  for  watching  fallout  be  given  the  Public  Health
Service.   The  White  House  dodged  the  issue  by  passing  it  to
the Budget  Bureau. The Joint  Committee  dodges  the  issue,  too.
The  second  question  on  which  the  country  had  a  right  to
expect  answers  was  on  radioactive  "hot  spots,"  a  subject  the
AEC  evades  because  these  "hot   spots"   upset  the  reassuring
global   averages  in  which  the  AEC  prefers  to  deal:     These
"hot  spots"  are of  two kinds.   One  are  in  the  bone.   Swedish
scientists   (see  this   Weekly   last  May  4)   discovered  that  at
certain  points  the  amount  of  strontium  90  may vary  by sixty-
fold  from  the  average.    Since  cancer  is  a  cellular  disease,  the
high  concentrations  at  such  points  may  be  enough  to  set  its
mysterious  morbidities  in  motion.   This  discovery  showed that
safe  limits  based  on  average  concentrations  in  the  bone  may
prove  delusive.   No  reference was made  to  these  "hot  spots"
in  the  report.
The  other  type  of  "hot  spot"  is  geographical.    There  are
areas,  as  in  the  Dakotas  and  Minnesota,  where  the  amount of
strontium   90   in   milk   and   wheat   has   reached   proportions
alarmingly  above  national  averages.
A  footnote  on  page   six  of   the  report   discloses  that   the
AEC  ignored  an  invitation  from  the  committee  to  discuss  this
at  the  hearings  last  May.    But  the  Joint  Committee  was  as
bad  as  the  AEC.    None  of  the  independent  scientists  who
have  been  working  in  these  "hot  spot"  areas  was  invited  to
testify  and  the  final  report  is  disingenuous  when  it  discusses
this  question.
The  report  says  "there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  ex-
istence  of  such  'hot  spots'  at  currently known  levels  of  radio-
activity  constitute  an  overt hazard  to  individuals."    The  word
"overt,"  which  we  italicized,  is  tricky.
Prize  Double-Talk
The  prize  double-talk  was the  report's  next  statement  which
said,  "the  trend  of  testimony  appeared  to  indicate  that  local
'hot  spots'  have  no  special  significance  to  individuals  so  long
as  criteria  are  used  which  have  meaning  only  in  terms  of  a
large  population."    This  sentence  seems  to  cancel  itself   out.
The  whole  point  about  "hot   spots"  is  that  criteria   "which
have  meaning  only  in  terms  of  a  large  population"   are  by
definition  no  guide  to  the  danger  which  may  exist  to  indi-
viduals  in  a North  Dakota  town  which  is getting  several times
as  much  strontium  90  as  the  national  average.
It  is  in  this  feeble  spirit  that  the  report   tackles  the  key
problem  of  how  a  resumption  of  testing  would  affect  fallout.
The  report  admits  there  is  danger  if  testing  is  resumed  but
makes  it  sound  distant  and  theoretical.    It  estimates  that  if
testing  resumed  for  40  years at  the  level  of  the  past five years,
"the  predicted  average  concentration  in  bone  will  be  about  48
strontium  units.    This  is  close  enough  to  the  maximum  per-
missible  body  burden  of  67  strontium  units  recommended  by
the  International   Commission  on  Radiological  Protection   to
suggest  that  a  hazard  to  the  world's  population  could  result
during  this   period."
Greater  Danger   for  the  Orient
This  is  putting  it  very  conservatively.     The  48   strontium
unit  average  is  for  the  U.  S.   The  world  northern  hemisphere
average  would  be  64.   The  average  in  the  Orient,  where  rice
rather  than  milk  is  a  staple  of  diet,  would  be  80  strontium
units,  well  above  the  67  fixed  as  a  safe  population   limit  by
the  ICRP.
In  addition, as pre-publication  objections to the  report point-
ed  out  (page  31),   these  estimated  doses  "do  not  provide  for
sources  of  radiation  other  than  strontium  90  and  cesium  37.
This  is  not  considered  too  significant  if  no  more  large-scale
atmospheric  tests  are  conducted.    However,  under  a  program
of   continued  testing,   the  short-lived  isotopes  become  much
more important  as contributors  to  the  yearly  radiation  exposure
levels."
The  discussion on  pages  24  and  25  of  the  report  indicates,
for  example,  that  the  short-lived  isotope  Sr  89  may  turn  out
to  provide  a  dose  comparable  to  that  of  Sr  90  if  testing  re-
sumes.   There  are other  short  lived  isotopes  such  as Iodine-131
which  also  loom  up  as new  health  hazards.
Linus  Pauling  Was  Right
To  these fission poisons  must  be  added  the  effects  of  carbon
14.    Dr.   Linus  Pauling's   warnings   about   carbon-14,  which
were  dismissed  as  alarmist  a  year  ago,  are  now  being  treated
very  seriously.    Though  Dr.  Pauling  was  not  invited  to  tes-
tify   (his  world-wide  campaign  against  testing  has  made  him
persona  non  grata  with  the  AEC  and  the  Joint  Committee),
three  pages  in  the  fallout  report  are  devoted  to  Carbon-14.
It  appears  from  papers  submitted  for  the  record  that  (1)
"the  long  term  genetic  and  somatic  effects"  of  carbon  14 may
be  as  great  as  all  the  radioactive  fission  products   combined
and   (2)   so-called  "clean"  (fusion)   weapons  produce  about
the  same  amount  of  carbon  14  as  so-called   "dirty"   (fission)
weapons.
No  full   evaluation   of  the  fallout   report  is  possible  until
the  printed  record  is  available,  which  may  not  be  for  several
weeks.    But  a  close  reading  of  the  report  itself  indicates  that
resumption  of  testing  would  create  a  more  immediate   danger
than  the  committee's   calculations   indicate.    The  report  also
shows  what  a  toothless  old  watchdog  the  Joint  Committee  has
become.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  31,1959
Some   Antidotes   From   England   to   the   Official   Propaganda  Campaign   in  Our  Press
Manchester  Guardian Protests  False  Version  of  Laos  Crisis  by  U.S.  Embassy
Propaganda   from   Washington   and  Laos  is  building   up  a
false  picture  of  events  in  that  far  country.    The  facts  are  that
though  we  talk  a  great  deal  about  believing  in  free  elections,
we  balked  at  them  in  Indochina.    The  U.  S.  used  its   influence
to  prevent  the  free  elections  promised  in  Vietnam   by  the  Ge-
neva  agreements,  and  when  free   elections  were  held  in  Laos
we  used  our  influence   to  oust  the  freely   elected   government
and  to  put  in  a  new  one  which  last  January  suspended  consti-
tutional  guaranties  altogether  and  resumed  the  political  war-
fare   the   Geneva  agreements  were  supposed   to  have   ended.
Though   Laos  was  to  be  a  neutral  state,  it  is  the  one  country
where  (1)   the  U.  S.  pays  the  whole  bill  for  the  native  army
and   (2)   has  never  been  able  to  find   out  exactly  how   many
soldiers   it   subsidizes.     Much   of   our  military   aid   has  been
siphoned    off,    as  the  recent  Porter  Hardy  subcommittee  report
on  Laos  showed,  into  the  pockets  of  a  little  clique  of  Laotian
smoothies.     Laotian   difficulties     are   being   utilized   here   to
poison  the  atmosphere  for  the  Khrushchev   visit.    We  present
some  antidotes  from  the  British  press to  the  overblown  reports
in  ours,  beginning  with  an  unusual  editorial  the  Manchester
Guardian  published   on  August  11  protesting   falsification    of
the  facts  by  the  U. S.  Embassy.   An  excerpt  from  the  editorial
What  Really  Happened,   follows—
"The  information  office  of  the  U.  S. Embassy in  London  has
sent  to newspapers  what  it  calls  a  'backgrounder'  on  the  events
in  Laos.    It  gives  a  fair  summary  of  the  agreement   in   1957
between  the  Royal  Laotian   Government   and  the   quasi-Com-
munist  Pathet  Lao  forces;  the  political  clauses,  as it  points  out,
provided   for   a  coalition   Government   with   two  Pathet   Lao
leaders   in  it,  and  for  elections  for  20  new  seats  in  the  As-
sembly.    The   'backgrounder'   continues:
The  Neo  Lao  party  won  nine  seats  in  the  election,  held
in  May  of  1958.   The  coalition  Government containing  the
two  Pathet  Lao members  resigned,  an  anti-Communist  Gov-
ernment   came  into   office,   and  the   Pathet   Lao  Ministers
were   dropped  from   the   Cabinet.    In  August,   1958,   the
Canadian  and  Indian delegations  on  the  International  Con-
trol  Commission  agreed  to  adjourn  the  commission   after
accepting  the  1957 arrangements,  the  settlement  called  for
in  the Geneva  agreements.  .  .  .
This  is  disingenuous,  to  say the  least.    It  suggests  surely  that
Two  Views  of   How  the   Trouble  Started
"The  U.  S.  said  the  conflict  erupted when Communist
dissidents  in  the  northern  provinces  balked  at  integra-
tion  into  the  Government, as  agreed  to  last  year.   The
insurgents  then  escaped  into  Communist Vietnam  .  .  .
regrouped  their  forces  and  returned  to  invade  Laos."
—New  York  Times,  Review  of  the News, Aug.  23.
"It  is  less  than  two  years  since  the  Pathet  Lao,  6,000
hard-fighting  Communist guerrillas,  came  marching  de-
fiantly  out  of  the  jungles of  Northern Laos  to  'lay  down
their  arms'.  .  .  .  Those  6,000 men ...  it  had been un-
easily   agreed,   should   be  'integrated'  into   the  Royal
Laotian  Army.
"Gen.  Ouane  Rattinkoun,  ruthless  Chief  of   Staff   of
the  Royal  Army,  herded  the  battalions  of  hand-picked
terrorists  into  two  'protective  camps'  and for  more than
a  year  blandly  looked  the  other  way  whenever  anyone
naively  recalled  the  pledge  of  'integration'  .  .  .  the  dis-
armed  guerrillas were  held  in  what  were  virtually  con-
centration  camps . .. one of  the two detained  battalions
managed  to  escape,  and  these  fanatics  are undoubtedly
the  hard  core  of  the  current  skirmishing;  it  is  as  yet
nothing  more."        —London  Sunday   Times,  Aug.  16.
the  Government  changed  as a  result  of  the  elections,  and  that
the  Commission   accepted   the  change.    What  happened  was
this.   The  Neo  Lao Hakxat  (Pathet  Lao functioning  as  a  po-
litical  party)   together  with  a  left  wing  ally  called-the  Santi-
phab  party,  won  13  out  of  the  21  seats  contested.    This  was
taken,  both  in  Laos  and  in  Washington,  as  a  bad  sign  for  the
general  elections  that  were  to  have  been  held  this  year, and  an
indication  that  unless  something  was  done  Laos  might  go  the
way  of  Czechoslovakia.    However,   the  coalition    government
did  not  resign   until   July  22,  and  the  new   anti-Communist
Government   took   office  in  August.     As  for  the   international
commission,  it  adjourned  on  July  19  (not  August)—that  is,
before  the  change  of  government.    At  that  time,  since  elections
had  been  held  and  Pathet  Lao  Ministers  were  in  the  Cabinet,
the  Laotian  Government  could  reasonably  argue that  the  agree-
ments  had  been  carried  out.    But  no  sooner  had  the  commis-
sion  gone  than  the  situation  was  radically   altered."   (Italics
added).
British  Press  Gives  Very  Different  Picture  of  That  War  "Raging"  in  Laos
"Let  us  clear  up  this  nonsense  about  a  civil  war  in  Laos.
There  is  none.   Any  war  going  on  is  political—and  that  is
real  enough.    But  not  a  shot  has  been  fired  by  the  Govern-
ment  troops  or the  Communist  rebels  for  10 days.  .  .  . The
toughest  battle  being  fought  in  Laos  today  is  the  one I am
waging  to  capture  facts.
"Government  casualty  figures  vary  between  30  and  300—
it   depends   which  spokesman  you  see   and  at   what   time.
Totals  that  look  reliable  and solid  at  11 a.  m. have  vanished
like  a  jungle  vapour  and  reshaped  themselves  by  mid-day.
"When   the   Laos   propaganda   machine   starts   whirring,
Samneua,  a  northern  township  of  2500, begins  to  sound  like
Dienbienphu  (France's last  stand  in  Indo-China).   But  Sam-
neua  is  two  days'  march  from  where  the  last  rebel  raids
were  reported."
—Dispatch  from  Vientiane  by a  reporter  sent  to  the  scene
.    by the London  Daily  Express,  August 12.
"A  senior  French  officer  who is  in  close  and  frequent  con-
tact  with  the  Royal  Laotian  Army  today  discounted  reports
of  large  Communist  forces  in  Northern  Laos  and  declared
the  problem  there  would be  solved  by  political,  not  by  mili-
tary  action.    The  officer,  who  has  returned  from  a  liaison
mission  to  Sam  Neua   province,  said  that  there  were  no
Communist   units  in  the  field  larger   than  a  platoon,   and
that  there  were  few  even  of  this  strength.
"Most  of  the attacks  on army  posts,  he  said,  had been  car-
ried  out  by  groups  of  10 to  15 men  armed with  old  weapons.
In  the  initial   panic  and  confusion   several  posts  had  been
abandoned  unnecessarily  by  Government   troops,   who  had
fled with  their  wives  and children  to  Sam Neua.   Since  then,
he  said,  the  royal   Government  had  been  doing  a  certain-
amount  of  'face-saving.'
"This   officer  describes  the  rebels   as  'disgruntled  people'
who  were  acting  with  political  motives  but  who  did  not  add
up  to  significant  military  forces.    There  was  no  real   evi-
dence  that  their  arms  had  recently  entered  the  country."
—London  Times, Aug.  12, dispatch  from  Vientiane.
1   2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  31,1959
State   Labor   Federation   Convention   Attacks   House  Committee  as  Un-American
Wide  Protest  Forces  Walter  to  Call  Off  Calif.  Teacher  Hearings
California  has  just  demonstrated  that  public  opinion  can
stop  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  despite  its
recent   victory  in  the  Supreme  Court.     In  the  wake  of   the
fiarenblatt   decision   which   seemed   to  give   it  a   free   hand,
especially  in  dealing  with  teachers,  the  Committee  has  been
forced  to  call  off  its  teacher  hearings  in  California.
The  latest  blow,  at  the  State  Convention  (Aug.  13)  of  the
California  Labor Federation,  AFL-CIO,  was passage of  a  reso-
lution   protesting   the  teacher   inquisition   and   declaring   the
Committee   "one  of  the  greatest  violators  of  civil   liberties."
Mrs.  Eleanor  Roosevelt,  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch,  the  San
Francisco  Chronicle, the  Bee  Newspapers  (Sacramento,  Fresno
and   Modesto),   and   the   State's   Methodist   and   Episcopal
Churches  had  all  joined  in  protest.    Only  California's  liberal
Congressmen  remained  silent.
A  Tricky  One-Sided  Release
Chairman  Walter  seized  on  a  letter  from  Arthur  F.  Corey,
state   executive  secretary  of   the   right-wing   anti-Communist
California   Teachers  Association  (rival  of  the  more  militant
but  weaker  A.F.L.  teachers  union  in  California)  to  cover  his
retreat.    Walter  announced   the   calling   off  of  the   hearings
August  21  in  releasing  a  letter  to  Corey  welcoming  a  sugges-
tion  that  the  Committee  hand  over  the  names  of  suspects  to
local  school  boards  for  action  under  the  State's  Dilworth  Act.
Corey's  letter  was  withheld  and  Walter's   reply  gave  the  im-
pression  that  Corey  was  in  sympathy with  him.
Corey  denied  this  when  reached  by  telephone  in  California
and  supplied  the  text  of  his  letter  by  airmail  to  the   Weekly.
The  text  showed  Corey  did  not  ask  Walter  to  call  off  the
California  hearings  but  to  pass  on  the  names  of  suspects  to
local  school  boards  for  private  hearings  under  the  Dilworth
act  and  then  to  excuse from  appearance before  the  Committee
those  teachers  who  had  answered  the  questions  of  the  local
boards.
At  the  same  time  Corey  did  protest  "the   damage already
threatened   to   individual  rights"   by  the   advance  publicity,
questioned  whether the  proposed hearings  "have  any recogniz-
able  relationship  to  legislation"   and  deplored  the   "issuance
Another  Security  Case  Victory
Mrs.  Rachel  M. Brawner,  the  mother  of  nine  children,
had  been  a  short  order  cook  for  six  and  a  half   years
in   the   cafeteria   at   the   Naval   Gun  Factory   here  in
Washington.   In  November,   1956,  she  was  suddenly   ex-
cluded  from  the  premises  on  security  grounds.    No  one
told  either  her  or  the cafeteria  firm  which  employed  her
what  the  security  requirements   were,  or  how  she  failed
to  meet  them.    The  Cafeteria  and  Restaurant    Workers
Union  brought  suit  in  Mrs.  Brawner's  behalf.     District
Judge  Edward  M.  Curran  issued  a  summary   judgment
dismissing  the  complaint   against  the  employer  on  the
ground  that  there  was  no  breach  of  contract   since  the
Navy   had  blocked   compliance.
But  the  U.  S.  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  District  of
Columbia   decided   August   21  that  while   Judge   Curran
was  right  in  dismissing  the  suit  against  the   employer,
he  was  wrong  in  dismissing  her  claim  against   the  gov-
ernment.    Judge   Edgerton   (with  Fahy  concurring   and
Danaher   dissenting)  held  on  the  authority   of  the  Su-
preme  Court's  recent  decision  in  the  Greene  case  that
Mrs.  Brawner   could  not  be  denied  access  to  her  place
of  employment  on  security  grounds  without  a  hearing.
of  alarmist public  statements"  by  the  Committee.
Corey's  letter  said  the  disloyal  teacher  was  "a  rarity"  and
"even   the  Dilworth  Art   constituted  unnecessary  legislation.
However,"  he  continued,  "since  these  laws  are  on  the  statute
books,  they provide  one  means by  which  the  damaging  effects
of  the  Committee's  past  course  of  action  can  be  minimized."
Corey's  letter  was  dated  the  18th—Walter's  reply,  calling off
the  hearings  altogether,   incorrectly  put  the  date  back  to  the
17th,  perhaps  to  hide  the  speed  with  which  he  seized  on  it
for  a  climb-down.
The  Southern California  branch  of  the  American Civil Lib-
erties  Union,  which had  sued  to  enjoin  the  hearings,  moved  at
once  to  amend  its  petition  and  bar  the  Committee from  pass-
ing  on  the  names of  teachers  to  school  boards.   Walter's   let-
ter  says mysteriously that  in  most cases the  Committee can only
transmit  names since  to  pass  on  specific  evidence to  the  school
board,  even  in  confidence,   would  jeopardize  "sources   of  in-
formation  or  security  procedures."
You  Can  Help    Us  By  Getting  Your  Renewal  in  Early   and  Adding  A  Gift    Sub
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ........................................Zone............State....................
8/81/59
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name,..............................—-...........................................
Street        ........................................................................................
City        ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tes  D    No  D
IE   Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I    F   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.     Post-dated  Mondays  but    pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.  J\   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the  U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED