I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959nov09.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  No.  2  on  the  FBI
Its   Undercover  Cooperation  with  House  Un-American  and  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,   NO.  42
NOVEMBER   9,   1959
'°'       WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS
J.  Edgar  Hoover  and  the  Witch  Hunters
The   darkest  corner  of  the   witch  hunt  is  the  relationship
between  the  FBI  and  the  various  State  and  Congressional  in-
vestigating  committees.    Most  writers  have  shied  away  from
this  area.    It  is  a  pity  the  New   York   Post,  in  the   12-part
series  on  J.  Edgar  Hoover  and  the  FBI  which  we discussed
last  week,  did  not  devote  attention  to  it.   There  is  evidence
which  suggests  that  the  FBI  works with  Senate Internal  Secu-
rity   and   House   Un-American,  furnishing   them  with   leads,
witnesses  and  undercover  informers,  as  seems  to  be  the  case
again  in  the  current  California  hearings.
Dies Got That First List
The  earliest indication  of  such  cooperation that  I  have  been
able  to  find  is  in  the  sensation  Martin  Dies  created  in  late
September,   1939,   when  he  announced  that  the  Roosevelt  Ad-
ministration  was  getting  ready  to  purge  the  government  of
"about   2,850  known  Communists"   (no   less)   in   "key  posi-
tions."    This   was   denied   by  Justice  Department.     August
Raymond   Ogden's   scholarly  study  of   the  Un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee  under  Dies  (1938-43)  reports  that accord-
ing  to  the  Chicago Tribune  "the  list  of  Communists had  been
compiled  by  the  FBI  two  years  previously and  had  been  sup-
pressed   and   J.   Edgar   Hoover   had   been   rebuked  for  over-
stepping  his  authority."
Some  indications  of  cooperation  between  the  FBI  and  the
witch  hunt  may be found  in  the  Cornell  Studies in  Civil  Liber-
ties.    Prof.  Edward  L.  Barrett,  Jr.'s  volume  on  California's
Tenney  committee  quotes  from  its  1943  report,  "The  commit-
tee,  at  all  times,  cooperated  closely  with  the  intelligence  units
of  the  armed  forces  and  with  the  FBI.   Representatives  of  the
committee  have  worked  for  weeks  at  a  time with  the  agents  of
Federal   departments."    Considering  the  notorious  quality  of
the   Tenney   committee's  work,   the   liaison  does   not   reflect
credit  on  the  Federal  agencies.
Prof.  Vern  Countryman  in  his  volume  on  the  Canwell  com-
mittee  in  the  State  of  Washington  traces  the  sensation  with
which   Canwell   launched   his  activities  in  January,   1948,   to
FBI  reports.  The  committee  "exposed"  Jesse  Epstein,  regional
director  of  the  Federal  Housing  Administration  as  a  Commu-
nist.    Canwell   admitted   to   Countryman   that   his   committee
"worked   closely  with  some  Federal  agencies"  but  declined  to
identify  them.   Mr.  Epstein  denied  any  affiliation  with  com-
munism.   After  he  managed  to  get  the  two  FBI  informants
who  were  the  source  of  the  accusation  before  a  loyalty  board,
the  board  unanimously  cleared  him.
The  Canwell  committee  "scooped"  House  Un-American  by
almost  two  weeks  on  the  Bentley-Chambers  revelations   of  a
spy  ring  in  Washington.   A  Federal  grand  jury  in  New  York
had  barely  finished  indicting  the  12  Communist  leaders  under
How  the  Committees  Are  Useful
"Mr.    [J.  Edgar]  HOOVER.    That  is  where  commit-
tees  of  Congress  have  served  a  very  useful  purpose in
exposing   some   of   these   activities  which   no  Federal
agency  is  in  a  position  to  do,  because  the information
we  obtain  in  the  Bureau is  either  for  intelligence pur-
poses  or  for  use  in  prosecution, and committees of  Con-
gress   have  wider  latitude  in  that  respect."
(Discussion  held  off  the  record.)
—Hearings  on  the  1957 Justice  Dept.  Budget,  House
Appropriations    Committee,   p.   247.
the  Smith  Act  in  July,   1948,   when  Howard  Rushmore  was
complaining  to  the  Canwell  committee  that  it  had  failed  to
indict  any  "concealed  Communists."   He  read  to  the  commit-
tee  from  what  he  claimed  was  an  FBI  report   given  to  the
grand  jury.   The  report  dealt  with  "  a  highly  secret  cell  of
the  Communist  Party  in  Washington,   D.  C."   Rushmore  told
the  Canwell  committee  that  Alger  Hiss  had  been  named  as  a
Communist   by  Whittaker   Chambers  to   the   FBI   in    1943.
In  his  study of  the  House  Un-American Activities Commit-
tee  for  the  Cornell  series,  Prof.  Robert  K.  Carr  observes  of  its
hearings  in  this  period,  "A  surprisingly  large  number  of  them
made  public  information  already  well  known  to  the   FBI,"
noting   that   "Often   the  leading  witness  was  an   undercover
FBI  agent  who  had   infiltrated   the  Communist   movement."
Prof.   Carr  added,   "It   is  quite   apparent   that  these  hearings
were  designed  to  serve  the  purpose  of  publicizing   information
in  the  FBI   files."   (Italics  added).
"Something  We Cannot Talk Too Much About"
The  most  striking  case,  of  course,  was  the  appearance  of
Miss   Bentley,   fresh   from   the   unsuccessful  grand   jury   pro-
ceedings.    Prof.  Carr  failed  to  notice  a  revealing  remark  on
that  occasion  by  J.  Parnell  Thomas,  who  was  then  chairman
of  the  House  Committee.   When  Miss  Bentley  had  finished
her  story,  Richard Nixon  suggested  that  the  FBI  Chief  be sub-
poenaed  to  obtain   "any  corroborative  evidence  he  may  have
as  to  these activities."  The  Chairman's   reply  contained  a  hint
which  led  Nixon  to  drop  the  subject.   "The   closest  relation-
ship  exists  between   this  committee  and  the  FBI,"   Chairman
Thomas  said.   "I  cannot  say  as  much  as  (sic)   between  this
committee  and  the  Attorney  General's  office,  but  the  closest
relationship   exists   between   this  committee  and  the  FBI.     I
think  there  is  a  very  good  understanding  between   us.    It  is
something,  however,  that  we  cannot  talk  too  much  about."
Mr.  Hoover  had  been   before  the  committee   the  previous
year  as  a  witness  (along  with  a  U.S.  Chamber  of   Commerce
spokesman)   against  a  bill  to  outlaw   the  Communist   party.
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
1    6   V
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone'8  Weekly,  November  9, 1959
(Continued   from   Page   One)
He  had  then  expounded   his  own  strategy.   "Victory  will  be
assured,"  he  said,  "when  Communists  are  identified  and  ex-
posed,  because  the  people  will  take  the  first  step  of  quaran-
tining  them  so  they  can  do  no  harm."    "Quarantine"   here
seems  to  be  a  euphemism  for  blacklist.   In  his  grand  design,
the  committee  could  play  a  key  role.   "This  committee,"  the
FBI  chief  said,  "renders  a  distinct  service when  it  publicly  re-
veals  the  diabolic  machination  of  sinister  figures  engaged   in
un-American  activities."    But  he  could  hardly  have  appeared
as  a  "corroborative"  witness  for  Miss  Bentley  without   (1)
appearing  too  openly  in  alliance  with  a Republican-dominated
committee  exploiting  her  testimony  to  smear  the  Truman  ad-
ministration  and  (2)   appearing  to  be  violating  the  secrecy of
the  grand  jury.
The Division  of  Labor in the Witch Hunt
That   task   he   left   to   the   House   Un-American  Activities
Committee.   The  division  of  labor  as the  committee  conceived
it  was  set  forth   in  the  Interim  Report  on  Espionage  in  the
U.S.   Government   with  which   it  rushed   into  print  with  the
Bentley-Chambers  stories  August  28,  1949.    "The   FBI",   said
the  report,  "functions  to find and  assimilate  all  the  facts.  .  .  .
The  Federal  grand  jury  functions  to consider  the  evidence.  . . .
The  House  Committee   on  Un-American  Activities  functions
to  alert  the  public."
The  Committee  in  its  report  said  it  "knew  that  certain  divi-
sions  of  the  Government  were  under  rigid  surveillance  by  the
FBI."   It  was  "aware  that  a  secret  blue  ribbon  grand  jury  had
been  convened   in  New  York. City  to  consider  this  Govern-
ment  espionage."   It  said  that  "in  deference  to  the  functions
of  the  grand   jury"  and  of   "the   investigative  agencies",   the
committee  took  no  action.   But  when  the  grand  jury  "recessed
after  sitting  for  14  months  without  returning  any  indictment"
the  committee  "felt  compelled  to  bring  to  the  attention  of  the
American  people  the  information  that  it  had  before  it."   A
close  liaison  with  the  FBI  was  implied  when  the  report  went
on  to  say,  "When  we  called  Elizabeth  T.  Bentley  before  our
committee  on  July  31,  we  were  fully  aware  that  her  informa-
tion  and  allegations  had  been  thoroughly  checked  by the  FBI,
and  that  they  had  been   substantiated."
Not  Much Could Be  Checked
Mr.  Hoover  himself  put  it  more  cautiously  when  five  years
later   he   finally   appeared   before    Senate   Internal    Security
to  backstop  Attorney  General  Brownell's  "revelations"  about
Harry   Dexter  White   (Nov.    17,  1953).    "All   information
furnished  by  Miss  Bentley,  which  was susceptible  to  check  has
proven  to  be correct,"  Mr.  Hoover  told  the  committee.     (Our
italics.)     Apparently  not  much  was  susceptible  of   checking.
The  Newark   Evening   News   disclosed   (Nov.   8,  1953)    that
500  FBI  agents  had  worked  for  a  year  in  an  effort   to  check
the  Bentley  charges.     "No   move  was  made  all   year  by  the
FBI  against  White  or  any  other  suspect,"  an  unnamed  official
told  that  paper,  "The   agency  did  not  want  to  arouse  the sus-
picions  of  persons  on  whom  it  was  checking."    In  January,
1947,  the  FBI  gave  up.
In  allowing  Miss  Bentley  to  appear  as  a  witness before  the
Un-American   Activities  Committee,   the   FBI   was   alerting
those  she  accused.   Those  she  named  were  not  informed  of
this  by  the  grand  jury  and  did  not  know  of  the  part  she  had
played  until  her  public  appearance.   Either  the  FBI  thought
the  political   bombshell  was  worth   the   sacrifice   of   counter-
espionage  considerations  or  it  had  decided  she  had  nothing  of
value   to   offer   either   for   counter-espionage   or   prosecution.
Perhaps   the  Bentley  affair   parallels  the   House   Committee's
now   forgotten   sensations   about   "Scientist   X"   and   atomic
espionage.    Prof.  Carr  observes  in  his  book  that  those  hear-
ings,  too,  were  based  on  "ground  that  had  long  been  explored
by  the  FBI"   and  that  when  Justice  Department   "did  under-
take  to  prosecute  certain  individuals for  atomic  espionage,  the
persons  involved  had  never  figured  in  any  House  committee
investigations."    The  material  regurgitated  was  good  for  noth-
ing  but  smear  purposes.
Not A Non-Partisan  'Loan'
Another  item  linking  the  FBI  chief  with  the  witch   hunt
came  to  light  when  Robert  E.  Lee  was  appointed   a  Federal
Communications   Commissioner   in   1954.    The   biography  he
supplied   the  Senate  Commerce  Committee  disclosed   for   the
first time that  he had  been  "loaned"  (the  word  was Mr.  Lee's)
to  the  House   Appropriations   Committee  in   1946.     Mr.  Lee
was  an  FBI  man  who  had  risen  to  be  Mr.  Hoover's  adminis-
trative  assistant.   The  year  1946  was  the  year  the  U.S.   Cham-
ber  of  Commerce  blueprinted  its  drive  against  subversives  in
government,   labor,   Hollywood,   the  press  and   radio.   Taber
of  New  York,  the  ranking  Republican  on  Appropriations,   was
talking  as  early  as  April,  1946,  of  the  need  for  purging  Reds
from  the  State  Department.    In  1947  Mr.  Lee  went  into  the
State  Department  files  and  compiled  that  list  of  108  "subver-
sives"  from  which  McCarthy  drew  most  of  his  sensational  ma-
terial,  as  the  Tydings   committee  reported   in   1950.    Mr.  Lee
seems  to  have  been  a  less  than  non-partisan   borrowing   from
the  FBI.   When  the  Republicans  won  in  1946  and  Mr.  Taber
became  chairman  of  House  Appropriations,   Mr.  Lee  was  ap-
pointed   chief  of  staff.   When  the  Republicans   lost  in    1948,
he  became  minority  clerk.   Mr.  Lee  in  1950  helped  McCarthy
defeat   Tydings,   and   in   the   course   of   that   unusually   dirty
campaign   banked   a  $5,000  contribution   through   his   wife's
account   without   reporting   it,  an  election   law   offense.    Mr.
Senator  Mundt  Lifted  the  Curtain   on  How the  FBI  Works  With  The  Witch  Hunt
"In  Salt  Lake City,  Senator  Mundt,  member of  the  perm-
anent  Senate  Investigating  Committee,  told  the  Bonneville
Knife  and  Fork  Club  of  three  current  or  recent   espionage
investigations—one  which  disclosed  the  existence  of  a  spy
ring  at  the  Army's  secret   radar  laboratory  at  Fort  Mon-
mouth, N. J....
"One  point  he   made  in  justification   of   continued  Con-
gressional   investigation  was  that  these  probes  are  a  valu-
able  supplement  to  the  investigative  work  of  the  FBI.   The
FBI  may  compile  much  evidence  on  Communist  infiltration,
but  not  enough  to  justify  indictments.    Often  in  such  cases,
said  the  Senator,  the  FBI  will  tip  off  a  Congressional  com-
mittee  as  to  a  situation  where  it  is   convinced  American
security  is  endangered.
"The  committee's  inquiry thus  makes  it  possible  to  bring
the  case  into  the  open  and,  with  the  suspected  Communist
spy  usually  taking  refuge  in  the  fifth  amendment's  protec-
tion  against   incriminating  himself,  it  is  possible  to  elimi-
nate  that  particular  threat.    Just  that,  the   Senator   said,
has  happened  in  a  number of  cases,  and he  implied it  would
and should continue to  happen."
—Editorial,  Salt  Lake  City,   Utah,  Tribune,  Nov.  SI,   1953.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  9, 1959
Lee  denied  that  McCarthy  had  anything  to  .do  with  his  ap-
pointment  but  added  "McCarthy  is  a  friend  of  mine.    I  like
him.    I  think  he  is  a  great  guy."
Mr.    Hoover    shared   this   enthusiasm.     The    Post    series
printed   the   FBI   Chief's   hero-worshipping   tribute  to   Mc-
Carthy  in  an  interview  with  the  San  Diego  Evening   News
(Aug.   22,   1953)    when   McCarthy   and   Hoover   were   both
vacationing  at  La  Jolla,  California.   But  it  does  not  go  into
the  evidence of  a  close  working  relationship  between  the  two
men.   Mr.  Hoover  extended  a  helping  hand  to  McCarthy  in
the  latter's  first  setback.   This  was  in  July   1953  when  Mc-
Carthy  was  forced  to  drop  J.  B.  Matthews  as  staff   director
after   the  latter's   attack  on  the  Protestant  clergy.   McCarthy
covered  his  retreat  by  letting  it  be  known  that  he  was  con-
ferring  with  the  FBI  Chief   on  the  choice  of  a  successor.   A
few   days  afterward   Frank  P.  Carr,  supervisor  of   the  FBI's
New  York   office,   took  the  job  with  McCarthy.   This  was  a
warning  to  McCarthy's   enemies  that  the  G-man  was  in  his
comer.
A Fatal  Alliance for McCarthy
The  Hoover  alliance  may  have  been  McCarthy's  downfall.
In  the  Fall  of   1953,  McCarthy  set  out  on  a  series  of  sensa-
tional  investigations  which  made  it  appear  that  Army  Intelli-
gence  was  doing  a  bad  job.   In  the  now  forgotten  case  of  the
Siberian  pamphlet,   in  those  of  Dr.   Irving  Peress  and  Annie
Lee  Moss,  and  above  all  in  the  Fort  Monmouth  affair,  Mc-
Carthy  took  on  that  fight  with  the  military  which  lead  to  his
censure.   Back  of  this  attack  on  military  intelligence,  as  we
reported  at  the  time  (Oct.   3.  1953),  was  "the  long-time  am-
bition  of  McCarthy's  ally,  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  to  take  over  all
intelligence."  It  was  in  the  course  of  this  battle  with  Army
intelligence  that  McCarthy  began  to  come  up  with  portions  of
secret  reports  from J.  Edgar  Hoover.  This was so in  the  Annie
Lee  Moss  case;  this  poor  Negro  woman's   appearance  before
the  McCarthy  committee  and  her  reinstatement  in  her   War
Dept. job  was  a defeat  not  only  for  McCarthy but  for  Hoover.
The  best  known  case  of  this  kind,  of  course,  involves  the
Army  Signal  Corps  installation at  Fort  Monmouth.     McCarthy
turned  up  at  the  Army  hearings  in  1954  with  portions  of  a
letter  written  by  Hoover  January  26,  1951,  to  Major  General
Boiling,  chief  of  Army  intelligence,   containing  the  names  of
34  allegedly  disloyal  employes  at  Ft.  Monmouth.   These  poor
people  were  suspended  in  1951  and  then  reinstated  after  an
investigation.   This  seems  to  have  angered  the  FBI.   McCarthy
frightened  the  Army  into  a  second  round  of  suspensions  and
investigation.   The  final  upshot  was  (1)  the  clearance  of  all
those  accused  but  (2)   the  disruption  of  Army  work  on  mis-
siles,  particularly their  guidance  systems.*
One  good   Washington   source  the  Post   reporters  seem  to
have  overlooked  was  Senator  Fulbright,  the  only  man  to  vote
against  the  McCarthy  committee  appropriation  in   1954.    He
told  an  Associated  Press  reporter  at  the  time  that  he  was  no
longer  giving  information  to  the  FBI  because  he  was  con-
vinced  the  McCarthy  committee  had   access  to  its  files.  Mc-
Carthy  at  a  Senate  Appropriations  Committee  hearing  March
22,  1954,  called  this  -"a  most  irresponsible,  a  most  vicious  at-
tack  upon  the  FBI."    This  led  Senator  Fulbright  next  day  to
amplify  his  offhand  remark in  a formal  statement  (AP,  Wash-
' Post,  March   24,   1954)    in  which  he  cited  several  instances
during  discussion  of  the  Ft.  Monmouth   affair   in  which  Mc-
Carthy  claimed  access  to  FBI  sources,  including  an  FBI  report
on  an  Army major.   Senator  Fulbright  in  that  same  statement
called  attention  to  a  speech  by  Senator  Mundt  in  Salt  Lake
City  which  had  not  been  carried  on  the  news  services.   In  this
speech   (see   textual   excerpts   in   box  on   page   two)    Mundt
{Continued  on  Page   Four)
*  The  Washington  Star  study  of  "leaks"  from  the  FBI  files
quoted  in  the  box  on  this  page  said  of  this  affair:  "Although
Mr.  Hoover  denied  that  the  McCarthy  document  was  a  'copy'
of  any  FBI  letter  or  report,  it  became  clear   at  the   hearing
that  the  Senator's  document  contained  much  of  the  informa-
tion  included  in  a  15-page  memorandum  which  the  FBI  di-
rector  acknowledged  he  dispatched  to  General  Boiling  on  the
same  date—January  26,  1951.   Later,  the  Senator   said  that  a
young  Army intelligence  officer,  whom  he  declined  to  identify,
slipped  him  the  FBI  material.   Although   the  Wisconsin   Re-
publican's   explanation  has  not  been  generally   questioned  by
the  press  and  public,  Army  sources   take  it  with  a  grain  of
salt.  They  point  out  that  despite  an  exhaustive  G-2  investiga-
tion,  the  leak'  has  never  been  found.   They  assert  that  Sena-
tor   McCarthy,  who   then   was   at   war   with   the   Army   and
friendly  with  the  FBI,   could  have  protected   the  Bureau  and
given  the  Army  a  black  eye  at  one  stroke  by  pinning  the  leak
on a G-2 officer."
"We  Wouldn't  Be  Able  to  Stay  in  Business  If   It  Weren't  for   the  FBI"
" 'We  wouldn't  be  able  to  stay  in  business  overnight  if  it
weren't  for  the  Bureau.'
"This  statement  was  made  to  this  reporter  some  time  ago
by  a  former  special  agent  of  the  FBI  who  then  was  a  staff
investigator   for   a   congressional   committee   dealing   with
communism  and subversion.
"His  statement  is  in  direct  conflict  with  the  FBI's  posi-
tion   that   it   does  not  violate   a   presidential    directive   and
make  available  confidential  security  information  to  the  Con-
gress.   And  it  is  in  conflict  with  disclaimers  from  congres-
sional  committee  members,  who say  they  do not  have  access
to FBI  data.
"The  evidence  is  clear,  however,   that  confidential  FBI  in-
formation   does  find  its  way  into  committee  files  by  some
means....
"The  former  agent's  statement  about  congressional   reli-
ance  on the  FBI  is  exaggerated.  Congressional  Red-hunting
committees  have  developed  cases  of  their  own,  with  little  or
no  help  from  the  FBI  or  other  executive  investigative  arms.
"But  the  ex-agent's basic  point  is  a  valid  one.  Without  ac-
cess  to  information  developed  by  FBI  and,  to  a  lesser  ex-
tent,  military  intelligence  operatives—data  which,  by  presi-
dential   directive,   they   are  not  supposed   to  have—Commu-
nist-hunting  committees  would find it  difficult  to carry on....
"Most   of   the  executive   investigative   agencies   maintain
close  liaison  with  the  two  congressional  Red-hunting  groups
each  of  which  has  had  former  FBI  agents  on  its  staff  for
years.
"The  Un-American  Activities  Committee  in  1954  had  four
former  bureau  agents  and  one  ex-Secret  Service   operative
on  its  staff  of  investigators.  The  FBI  has  had  one  or  more
special  agents  assigned  to  gleaning  data  from  the  extensive
files   of   the   Un-American   Activities    Committee   since   the
1940s.
"Information  developed  by  the  FBI  which  finds  its  way  to
the  committees   does  not  necessarily  have  to  come   directly
from  the  Bureau  nor  does  it  have  to  be  a  formal  report  or
memorandum.   It  can  be  passed  by  word  of  mouth,  tips  or
summaries  of  reports.  Or it  can  be  a  report  turned  over  by
another  executive  agency  which  received  it  from  the   FBI."
—Washington  Sunday  Star,  April  S8,  1957,  FBI  Data
and  Congress:  It  Finds  Its   Way,   by  L.  Edgar   Prina.
1   6  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  9, 1959
U. S. Chamber  of Commerce  Recommended  This Kind  of" Exposure" in 1935
(Continued  from   Page   Three)
lifted   the  curtain  on  the  cooperation   between  the  FBI  and
Congressional   investigation  of   "subversives."
The  only  other  publication  we  know  of  that  has  gone  at  all
thoroughly   into  this  aspect  of  the  FBI  story  is  the  conserva-
tive  but  independent   Washington  Evening  Star which  assigned
a  staff  reporter  to  investigate  in  1957  after  Herbert  Norman,
the  Canadian  Ambassador  to  Egypt,  committed  suicide.   The
Senate  Internal  Security  Committee  had  rehashed  charges  that
he  had  Communist  associations  and  Robert  Morris,  the  com-
mittee's   counsel,   based  these   accusations  on  a  report   by  "a
security  agency."   The  reporter  assigned  by  the  Star,  L.  Edgar
Prina,  had  friendly  ties  with  the  witch  hunt  committees.   He
quoted  one  witch  hunter  as  saying,  "We  wouldn't  be  able  to
stay  in  business  overnight  if  it  weren't  for  the  Bureau," i.e.
the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  (see  the  heart  of  his  re-
port  in  the  box  on  page  three).    Mr.  Prina  concluded  that
the  committees  were  fed  by  the  FBI  and  that  information  did
not  have  to  come  directly  out  of  the  files  but  could  be  passed
by  "word  of  mouth,  tips  and  summaries."   I  might  add  that
such  tips  could   enable  committee  investigators  to  find  docu-
ments  in  other  places.    This  may  be  how  the  Un-American
Activities  Committee  learned  about  the  letter  j.  Edgar  Hoover
had  sent  Secretary of  Commerce  W.  Averill  Harriman  smear-
ing   Dr.   Edward   U.   Condon,   then   head   of   the   Bureau  of
Standards.    The   Committee   found   the   letter   in   Commerce
Dept. files.
"Whether Communist  or  Not"
One  of  the  main  sources  to  which  one  must  look  for  the
origins  of  the  witch  hunt  is  in  the  files  of  the  U.S.  Chamber
of  Commerce.   As  early  as  November  1934, its  committee  on
communism  and  socialism  recommended  the  setting  up  of  a
Federal  agency  in  the  Department  of  Justice  "to  investigate,
record,  control,   and  prosecute  all  subversive  agitators   .  .  .
whether  or  not  affiliated   with  the  Communist  party"  and  by
publicity   "to   check   subversive  activities  in   advance,   to   un-
mask  Communist-controlled  organizations and  to  alienate sup-
port  by  law-abiding Americans .  .  .  from  all  movements  hav-
ing  subversive  aims."  *   (Recommendations   approved   at  the
You  Con  Still  Start  A  Gift   Sub   With  These  Two  Issues  on  .the  FBI  If   You   Fill   Out   the  Blank  Below
J.  Edgar  Clears  Horse-Racing
Q.  Why  are  you  a  race  fan, Mr.  Hoover?
A.  I  have  found  that  an  afternoon  at  the  races  gives
me  complete  relaxation   from  a  gruelling  week  of  work
at  the FBI. ...  I  have  found  racing  to  be  a  wholesome
diversion.
Q.  Are  there  any  moral  issues  involved  in  thorough-
bred  racing  of  which  you  are   aware?
A.  No. .  .  .  The only  moral  issue  that  I  see  is  not one
of  racing  itself  but  of  the  individual.    I  think   anyone
who overbets  on the  races  is  a fool...  .
Q.  Then  you  don't  feel  the  wagering   in  racing  is  ob-
jectionable?
A.  Not  if  it  is  done  in  moderation.  .  .  .  Many  church
groups  find  bingo  a  diversion.  .  .  .  Actually,  from  a law
enforcement   standpoint,  a  well-conducted   race-track   is
a  help  if   only   for  the  reason   that   the  people  at   the
track  are  finding  an  outlet  for  their  emotions.
—From  an  intervieiv  last  Aug. 7  with  the   Morning
Telegraph,  photostatically  reproduced   on  the  first  page
of   a  6-page   special   advertising   section  in   the   Wash-
ington  Daily   Neivs  Oct. 27  announcing  the  opening   of
the  Laurel,  Md.,  Race  Track  next day.
23rd  annual  meeting  of  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce,  May
2,  1935,  and  published  by  the  Chamber  in  a  pamphlet  "Corn-
batting   Subversive   Activities  in   the   United   States.")      The
Chamber  of  Commerce  never  succeeded  in  establishing such  a
Federal   agency  but  this  is  the  job  the  FBI  and  the  investi-
gating  committees  do  between   them.    It  has  nothing  to  do
with  "counter-espionage"   by  the  FBI  nor  with  the  Commit-
tees'   claims  to  be  engaging   in  legislative  activity.    It  repre-
sents  the  use  of  a  secret  political  police  to  feed  unproven  in-
formation  into  inquisitorial committees  set  up  to  pillory  and
ostracize   radicals.    This   aspect   of   the   FBI's   activities con-
tinues  to  cast  its  pall  on   free   opinion  and   free  association.
*  Some  idea  of  the  political  preconceptions   behind  this  re-
port  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact  that,   among  other evi-
dence  of   world-wide   conspiracy,    it  lists   "1933^—Communist
threat  to  the  German  government  .  .  ."  Writing  in  Novem-
ber,  1934,  after   almost  two  years  experience   with  Hitler,   it
thus  accepts  his  version  of  why  he  took  power.   No   mention
is  made  by  the  report  of  Nazism,  racism   or  Fascism.
I.  F.  Stone'
Please  renew
Street   ............
City    ..............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name   ..
Street   ............
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
S  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
.........................Zone............State.. ..................
11/9/50
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
.........................Zone............State....................
gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Secorfd  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I    F    Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pnb-
'    tinned  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Auguat  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the  U   S.;  $6  In  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED