I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959mar02.pdf

============================================================

Now  It  Can Be  Told
Special Issue;  How Public Opinion  Was  Misled and the  Geneva Talks  on  Test  Control  Endangered
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.   !)
MARCH  2,  1959
°'°'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16   CENTS
The   Case  History  of  Another  Nuclear  Deception
On   January  5  last  the  White   House   created   world-wide
consternation  by  issuing a  statement which  said  that  new  data
showed  it  was  more  difficult  to  identify  underground   nuclear
explosions  than  had  been  thought  by  the  Geneva   Conference
of   Experts  last  summer.   The   news  coincided  with   the   re-
sumption,  after  the  holiday  recess,  of  the  negotiations  at  Ge-
neva  for   a  nuclear  test  suspension  agreement.    The   general
impression  in Washington  as elsewhere  was  accurately  summed
up  by the  New  York  Times  the  following  Sunday  in  its News
of  the  Week:  "the  view  was  that  the  doubts  cast  on  the  reli-
ability  of  the  proposed  detection   system  make  agreement   on
a  workable  nuclear  test  ban  more  remote."   The  prospect  was
pictured  more  darkly  by  Time  Magazine  in  a  story  leaked   to
it  and  in  type  before  the  White  House  announcement.   Time
said  the  new  data  "were   enough   to  curl  the  scientists'  hair"
and   it  raised  a  "soul-searching   question"   designed   to  make
the  public's  hair  stand  up   in  a  permanent   wave  of  horror.
"Should  the  U.  S.,"  Time  asked,  "trust  to  any  stop-test  agree-
ment  where  the  chances  of  deception  are  so  great  as  to  be  a
major  risk  to  survival?"  Similar  fears  were  expressed  in  Con-
gress.   Senator  Albert  Gore  (D.  Tenn.)  whom  Lyndon  John-
son  had  appointed  observer  at  the  new  Geneva  talks,  rose  on
the  Senate  floor  January  17  to  call  the  system  of   inspection
unanimously  recommended  by  the  East-West  experts  last  sum-
mer  "impractical  and  unreliable"  and  to  say  anti-climactically
this  was  "now  clearly  demonstrated"   by  the  new  data  "to  be
inadequate."   Next   day  Hanson   Baldwin   in  the  New    York
Times   (Jan.  18)   recalled  Dr.  Edward  Tellers  constant  argu-
ment  that  "the  Geneva  system  might  provide  the  shadow  of
a  monitoring  system without  its  substance"  and  concluded  that
he  had  been  "proven  right  once'again—his  critics wrong—on
an  issue  of  high  importance  to  the  world."   Time  soon  went
even  further   (Feb.   2)   and  said  the  new  data  showed    "the
Russians  could  presumably  cheat  on  any  agreement  at  will."
The  Art  of  Misinforming  the  Public
All  this  high-pitched,  almost  hysterical  alarm,  was  the  re-
sult  of  well-calculated  deception.   Thanks   to  a  series  of  ex-
ecutive  session  hearings  by  the  Humphrey  disarmament  sub-
committee,  the  censored  transcripts  of  which  have  just  been
made  available, the  truth  can  now  be  seen  and  told.  Carefully
and  literally  re-read  in  the  light  of  those  hearings  and  of  a
speech   by  Humphrey  in  the   Senate  January  20,  the  White
House  statement   of  January  5  and  the  Defense  Department
release  amplifying  it  on  January  16  contain  no  untruths.   But
looked  at  from  the  standpoint  of  public  relations,  i.e.  the  art
of   public  misinformation,  both   statements  were   designed   to
create  a  false  impression  by  the  facts  they  omitted.    Like  the
clean  bomb  affair,  this  was  another  bit  of  nuclear  flim-flam.
When  Philip  J.  Parley,  special  assistant  to  the  Secretary  of
State   for   disarmament   and   atomic   energy,   was   before   the
Interesting   Admission
"It  must  be  recognized  that   the   Soviet   Union  has
suspicions  of   us  also.   The  Soviet   Union   claims,  and
no  doubt  to  some  extent believes,  that  the  United  States
does  not  want  any  disarmament  agreement   and  that
evidence  of  this  fact  can  be  seen  in  our  alleged  past
withdrawals  from  proposals  put  forward  by  us  just  as
soon   as   there  is   any   prospect   of   Soviet    acceptance.
This  Soviet  suspicion  was  somewhat  apparent  in  their
reception  of  the  important  new  data  on  detection  and
identification   of   underground  tests   which   we   intro-
duced  on  January  5."
—Philip  J.  Parley,  special  assistant  to  the   Secretary
of  State  for  disarmament   and  atomic  energy,  ex-
ecutive  committee  testimony  Jan.  13  to  the  Joint
Committee  on Atomic  Energy.
subcommittee  in  an  executive  session  on  January  28,  Senator
Humphrey  asked  him,  "Why   was  no  attempt  made  by  those
responsible  for  releasing  this  new  data  to  really  explain  its
significance?"   Mr.  Parley  admitted  lamely,  "I  think  it  is  true
that  the  implications  that  were  inferred  by  most  of  the  news-
papers  went  in  one  direction,"   i.e.  the  direction   of  assuming
that  the  results  of  the  new  data  were  wholly  bad  and  upset
the  basis of  the  Geneva  technical  agreement  last  summer.    Mr.
Parley  said  "It  was  an  awkward  situation   because   it  was,  in
effect,   technical   data   whose   meaning   was   not   fully   under-
stood."   But  the  trained  propaganda   analyst  and  the  shrewd
public  relations  man  who  reviews  the  record  will  see  that  the
real   fault  was  not   "awkwardness."    On   the   contrary   great
skill  was  shown  in  arranging  the  releases  to  make  sure  that
the  inferences  drawn  by  the  press  would  all  go  "in  one  di-
rection",   i.e.  of  pessimism  and  alarm.
Just  Fair  Play  and  the  Public's  Right  to  Know
Testifying  that  day  behind  closed   doors  and  before   Sena-
tors  with   access  to  information   not  available  to  the  public,
Mr.  Parley  treated  the  new  data  derived  from  last  October's
underground  tests  in  Nevada   with  striking   equanimity.    He
declared  the  new  information  bore   "only   on  a  limited   part
of  the  control   system  described  last  summer  by  the  Geneva
experts"  and  that  "prospects  are  encouraging   that  ways  will
be  found  to  maintain  the  full  effectiveness  of  that  system."
He  even  went  so  far  as  to  concede  that  "There  has  been  an
understandable   initial   Soviet  suspicion  of   U.   S.  motives  in
transmitting  and  subsequently  publishing   the  new  data;  we
need  only  ask  ourselves  how  we  should  have  reacted  had  the
Soviet  Union   come  up  with  such  new  information  and   pro-
posed   reopening   the  Geneva   report."   This  unwonted   mag-
nanimity   was   balanced   off   immediately   afterward   however
with  a  passage  of  pure   Pecksniffianism.
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 2,1959
Public Not  Told We Didn't Use Instrumentation Recommended at Geneva...
(Continued  from   Page   One)
"The   Soviet  Union,"   Mr.   Parley  said,  "does  not  readily
grasp  the  conviction  of   our  Government  that  it  has  a  re-
sponsibility  to  inform  the  public  of  the  United  States  of  such
important  developments,  nor  does  it  appreciate  the  sense  of
fair  play  that  led  us  to  bring  these  data  promptly  to  the  at-
tention  of  the  Soviets.   When   our  continuing  studies  of   the
possible  ways  of  overcoming  these  technical  difficulties   have
reached   the  stage  when  they  can  be  communicated  in  their
turn  to  the  Soviet  Union,  this  may help  persuade  them  of  the
probity  of  our   intentions."
The  information  given  out  by  White   House  and   Defense
Department  not  only misled  our  own people  and  poisoned  the
atmosphere  of  the  Geneva  negotiations  but  the  harm  has  not
been  undone.   Little  attention  has  been  paid  by  the  press  to
the  testimony  released  by the  Humphrey  subcommittee.  What
remains  in  the  public mind  is  the  impress  of  those  first  head-
lines  and  of  the  alarmist  treatment  given  them  by  mass  cir-
culation   periodicals   like  Time   which  are  opposed,  like   the
Atomic  Energy   Commission   and   the   Defense    Department,
to  any  agreement  for  the  cessation  of  nuclear  testing.   Here
are  some  of  the  basic  facts  which  were   withheld:
1.  Instrumentation.    The   Defense   Department   release  of
January   16  said  the  new  underground   tests  in  Nevada   last
October   were   "extensively   instrumented   with   seismographs
and  as  a  result  a  great  deal  of  very  significant  data"  was  ob-
tained.  This  sounded  impressive.
What  the  Defense  Department  release  did  not  say was  that
the   instruments  used   were  not   those   recommended   by   the
Geneva  conference  last  summer,  and  that  the  instrumentation
of  the  special  "listening  posts"  set  up  for  the  October   tests
were  inferior  to  those  recommended  at  Geneva.
Soviet  Scientists  Question  U.  S.  Findings
The  fact  that  the  instrumentation was  not  that recommend-
ed  at  Geneva  was  charged  in  an  article  by  two  Soviet  scien-
tists   discussing  the   new   American   test   data   in   Pravda   on
January  20*.    This  was  reported  next  morning  by  the  Balti-
more Sun  in  a  cable from  its  Moscow  bureau and  a translation
was  later  furnished   this  correspondent  at  the   State   Depart-
ment  when  he  inquired  about  it.    Later  at  an  executive  hear-
ing  on  January  28  Senator  Humphrey  questioned  Dr.   Carl
Romney,  the  Air  Force  seismologist  who  headed  the  Defense
Department  panel  on  the  new  test   data,  about  this   Soviet
charge.   "Is  the  criticism valid,"  Humphrey  asked,  "that  the
instrumentation  was  not  according  to  that  recommended  by
the  experts  at  Geneva?"  -Dr.  Romney  replied,   "It  was  not
claimed  that  the  equipment  at  these  stations  is  identical   to
what  a  control  post  would   have,  according  to  the   Geneva
recommendations."   But  it  is  also  true  that  neither  the  White
House   nor   the   Defense  Department   disclosed   this   to   the
public  nor  explained  that  the  instrumentation  was  not  as  sen-
sitive  as  that  recommended  at  Geneva.
The  Pravda  article also  claimed  that  the  temporary  stations
set  up  specially  to  monitor  the  new  tests  last  October   were
not  even  as  good  as  the  regular   Coast  and  Geodetic  survey
stations.   Dr.  Romney  denied  this,  saying  that  "on  the  aver-
•"New  Attempts  of  the  United  States  to  Hamper  Negotiations  on
Discontinuance  of  Nuclear  Weapons  Tests",  by  Y.  Blrnlchenko  and
L.  Brekhovklkh,  corresponding  members  of  the  Academy  of  Science
of  the  USSR,  Fravda,  Jan.   20.
Significant   Cheating  Not  Possible
Mr.  PARLEY,  Special  Assistant  to  the  Secretary  of
State:  I  agree  that   it  is  always  going  to  be  possible
that  an  underground   shot  might  be  conducted  without
being  detected.    It  is  very   unlikely   that   anyone  could
achieve  a  significant  new  nuclear  capability   or  a   sig-
nificant  improvement  of  his  existing  capability  without
being  clearly  and  publicly  in  the  position  of  having  vio-
lated  or  otherwise  evaded  the  agreement.
—Humphrey   Disarmament  Subcommittee,  Jan.   &&.
age"  the  temporary  stations  gave  better  results   because  they
had   "better   equipment   than   the   average  of   the   permanent
stations  at  the  same  distance.'    Just  what  this  reference   to
"averages"   meant  was  never  explained.   But  when  Dr.  Hans
Bethe,  who  was  himself  a  member  of  the  Defense   Depart-
ment   panel   headed   by  Dr.   Romney,  appeared   before   the
Humphrey  subcommittee  on  February  2,  he  gave  a  somewhat
different  answer.'  "These  special  stations  set  up  for  the  pur-
pose   of  observing   Logan   and  Blanca,"   i.e.  the  two   larger
underground  shots  last  October,  Dr.  Bethe  said,  "were  not  as
good   in  general  as  the  permanent  stations,  but  the   Geneva
proposal  stations  are  much  better  still  than  almost  any  now
existing  stations."
Some  Dubious  Arithmetic
2.  Unidentifiable    earthquakes.  The  signals  emitted  by  the
underground   blasts  as  registered  by  these  instruments  were
found  to  be smaller  than  was  expected.   It  was  also  concluded
that  the  magnitude of  the first nuclear underground  explosion,
Rainier,  should  be revised  downward from  4.25  on  the  Richter
earthquake  measuring  scale  to  4.1.   As  a  result  of  the  fainter
signals  and  the  revision,  it  was  estimated  that  the  number  of
unidentifiable  earthquakes  equivalent  to  5  kilotons  or  larger
would   be  about  ten  times  as  great  as  that  forecast  at  last
summer's  conference  in  Geneva.   If  true,  this  seemed  to  mean
that  there would  be ten  times as many  occasions when  it  would
be   impossible  to   determine  without   on-the-spot   inspection
whether  a  blast  was  nuclear  or  an  earthquake.
All  this  alarming  arithmetic  is  dubious.   Apparently  in  our
as  yet unpublished note  to  the  Russians we  admitted  what  did
not  appear  in  the  press  releases—that  the  precision  of  these
calculations  is  not  high.   The  Soviet  scientists  in  Pravda  said,
"The   precision  of  the  calculations  and  specifications,  as  the
authors  of  the  [U.  S.]  note  themselves  admit,  is  not  high."
Senator  Humphrey  asked  Dr.  Romney whether  this  was  cor-
rect  and  the  latter  answered,  "That  is  correct."   The   article
in  Pravda   said   "the   seismic  intensity  of  the   explosions  ex-
pressed  by figures  between  4.1  and  5  is  gauged  with  the  mar-
gin  of  0.4  more  or  less."   Just  how  much  a  margin  of   0.4
more  or  less  means  on  the  earthquake  scale  was  brought  out
by  the  Senator's  interrogation  of  Dr.  Romney.
What  O.4  "More  or  Less"  Can  Mean
The  Senator  first  elicited  the  information  that  the  revision
of  Rainier on  the  earthquake  scale  had  been  from  4.25  down
to  4.1,  i.e.  a  revision  of  only  .15—as  against  the  0.4  general
margin  of  imprecision   "more  or  less"  in  the  new  data  cal-
culations.   Yet  this  .15  as  the  Senator  pointed  out  "meant  for
identification   purposes  about   10,000  more   earthquakes."
"If   the  Rainier  calculation,"   the  Senator   asked,   "was  re-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 2,  1959
... Nor That Our "Unidentifiable Earthquake" Estimates Were Very Imprecise
adjusted  downward  from  4.25  to  4.1,   and  therefore,   made  it
appear  there  would  be  many  more  earthquakes  to   identify
than   believed  previously,  then   do  not  these   estimates  with
margins  of  error  of  0.4  [more  than  2l/a  times  as  great—IPS]
for  the  Blanca  and  Logan  explosions  [the  new  ones  last  Oc-
tober]  become very  important  in  the  problem  of identification
of   earthquakes  and   nuclear   explosions?"    In   other   words,
how  useful   were  figures  with  such  wide  margins  of  error?
After  many  evasions,  Humphrey  finally  got  these  replies:
Dr.  ROMNEY.  Seismologists  do  not  claim  the  estimates
are  very  precise. .  .  .  When  a  seismologist  says  there  are
so  many  earthquakes  of  a  given  size,  he  is  tempted  not  to
say  that  there  are  a  thousand  earthquakes, but  there  are
500 to  2,000  earthquakes.
Sen.  HUMPHREY.   Yes.
Dr.  ROMNEY.  We  do  not  know  exactly.
Sen.  HUMPHREY.   I  would  like  to  ask  Mr.  Murphy,  the
Chief  of  the  Seismology  Branch  of  the  Coast  and  Geodetic
Survey,  if  he has  any  comments  on this technical  field  that
can enlighten a layman.
Mr.  MURPHY. ...  It  seems   that  we  can  determine
magnitudes  probably  more  accurately  than  plus  or  minus
0.4  of  a  unit.   That  does  seem  to  me  to  be  a  rather  wide
range.  .  .  .
Where  there  is  a  good  distribution of  earthquakes  in  an
area,  there  are  good  instruments, well  calibrated,  and  peo-
ple  who  are  fairly  well  acquainted  with  magnitude  deter-
mination,  we  are  able  to  reduce  the  range  to  0.1  or  0.2.
Sen.   HUMPHREY.  Are  you  saying   that   the   plus   or
minus  0.4  is  rather  large?
Mr.  MURPHY.  It  seems  to be  large.  .  .  .  Even  for  most
distant  earthquakes  it  does  seem  to  be  a  somewhat  large
range.
The  Hopeful  Was  Suppressed
3.  Favorable  results  withheld  from   public  knowledge.    In
two  respects  the  new  data  was hopeful,  but  both  were  omitted
from   the  White   House   and   Defense   Department    releases.
The  first  was  the   discovery  that   so-called   "surface   waves"
could  also  be used  (as  at  least  two  seismologists  had  predicted
a  year  ago  in  reply  to  questionnaires  sent  out  by  the   Hum-
phrey   committee)   to   distinguish   nuclear   explosions   from
earthquakes.
The  other  was  the  discovery—as  we  reported  exclusively  in
our  issue  of  Jan.  19—that  signals  much  better  than   expected
could  be  obtained  in  the  so-called   "shadow   zone;"   As  Dr.
Bethe  testified  before  the  Humphrey  subcommittee  in  execu-
tive  session  Feb.  2  [censored   transcript  released  to  the   press
Sidelight  on  the  Earthquake  Problem
Sen.  HUMPHREY. With  high  seismicity,  would  it  be
hard  to  conceal  underground  tests  more readily?
Mr.    [Leonard   M.]    MURPHY,   chief    seismologist,
Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey.  The  greater  the  seismicity
[earthquakes]  the  more  difficult  identification  becomes.
—Disarmament  Subcommittee, Jan. 28.
Dr.  [Bans]  BETHE  [in  answer  to  a  question  from
Senator  Wiley].   There  are  certain  areas  of  the  globe
where  earthquakes  are  extremely rare.   For  instance  in
Washington,  and  over  most  of   the  Soviet  Union,  the
same  is  the  case.   It  is  only  the  eastern  border  of  Si-
beria,  and  a  little  bit  of  the  southern border which has
frequent  earthquakes,  and likewise in  this  country, only
CaHfornia  has  frequent  earthquakes. —Same,  Feb. 2.
Mr.  MURPHY.   It   [China]   has  seismicity  equal   to
the  USSR  or  the  United  States. —Same, January  28.
Censor  Blacks  Out  Possible  Compromise
Sen.  HUMPHREY.   Have  you  contemplated the  pos-
sibility  of  both  parties  [US  and  USSR]  agreeing  upon
a   neutral   chairman   of   the   [nuclear  test]   inspection
team?
Mr.  Philip  J.  PARLEY,  Special Assistant  to  the  Sec-
retary  of  State  for  Disarmament and  Atomic  Energy:
[Deleted]   We  see   some   difficulties   for   a  number  of
practical  reasons.   [Deleted.]
—Disarmament  Subcommittee,  Jan.  28.
Feb.   19],   "There  was  one  result  which  was  surprisingly   fa-
vorable,  namely,  it  was  possible  to  see the  signal,  to  percieve
the  seismic signal  in  the  so-called  shadow  region.   It  is  known
from  earthquakes,"   Dr.  Bethe  explained,  "that,  at  a  distance
between  600  and  about  1,400  miles,  the  seismic  signal  is  very
weak  and  quite  anomalous,  and  this  was  taken  into   account
by  the  Conference  of  Experts  last  summer  in  Geneva.   The
Conference  of  Experts  decided  not  to  pay  any  attention   to
signals  received   in  this  intervening   region,   in  this   shadow
zone,  but  to  rely  on  signals   received   at  stations  within   600
miles,  which  is  called  the  first  zone,  and  stations  beyond    1400
miles,  which  is  called  the  second  zone  of  detection.   Now,   it
turned  out  in  the  October  tests  that  there  were  Signals  even
in  the  shadow  zone."   Dr.  Bethe  said  these  signals  would  be
useful   in  detecting  explosions  though  not  in  distinguishing
them  from   earthquakes.
The  No.  1  Whopper
4.  A   shocking   distortion.    Dr.   Bethe's   explanation  now
enables  us  to  understand  the  most  shocking  distortion   in  the
Defense  Department  release
(
of  January  16.   This  said—and
it  sounded   impressively  scientific—"It   appears  from  the  re-
cent  data  that  first  motion  is  not  usable  as  an  identification
characteristic  of  earthquakes  which  are  equivalent  to  20 kilo-
tons  or  less  when  recorded  at  distances  between   1100  kilo-
meters  and   2500  kilometers."    This  trickery   misrepresented
the  significance  of  the  signals  to  which  Dr.   Bethe   referred.
It  gave  a  completely  false  impression  to  lay  readers  because
it  did  not  explain  that  this  referred   only  to  signals  in  the
so-called   shadow  zone  or  "skip  region"  which  the   Geneva
experts  did   not   rely  upon  anyway.   As  Prof.   Jay  Orear   of
Cornell  at  once  pointed  out  in  a  letter  January  17  to  the  New
York   Times   (which   that   paper  declined  to  publish   but  we
printed   in  our  issue  of  January  26),   "The   Geneva   experts
designed  their  system  in  such  a  way  that  data  from  the  skip
region   would  not  be  used.   As  long  as  signals   in  the   skip
region  are  ignored,  the  direction-of-first-motion   technique  is
still  just  as  foolproof   as  the  Geneva  experts  had   planned."
5.  New   detection  techniques  already   available.   The   most
important  thing  hidden  from  the  public  by the  White  House
and  the  Defense  Department  is  that  new  and  improved  de-
tection  techniques  are  already  available  which  promise  the  op-
eration  at  full, efficiency  of  the  system recommended  at  Geneva.
Indeed  Senator  Humphrey   revealed  in  a  Senate  speech "on
January   20,   "the    new   data   on   underground     explosions
prompted  further  research.  .  .  .  Already  new methods  of de-
tection  have  been  found.  . . . We have now been  able,  through
a  special  study  panel  appointed  by  the  President's   Science
(Continued   on  Page  Pour)
3  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  2, 1959
Humphrey   Hearings  Show  Obstacles  to  Agreement  Political,  Not  Technical
Full  Story  of Improved  Detection  Techniques  Still  Hidden  by  Censorship
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
Advisor)'  Committee  to  find  new  and  improved  methods  of
detection. ...  I  understand  there  are several  promising  tech-
niques  to  improve  the  capabilities without  increasing the  size
of  the  system  recommended  by the  experts  at  Geneva. ...  I
hope  and  urge  that  its report  be made  public  .  .  . many of  the
scientists  who   have  studied  these   results   feel   that   through
improvements   in   scientific   instruments  and   further  research
the  capabilities  of   the   control   system  can  be  increased.    In
fact,   the  President's  Science  Advisory  Committee  has  so  in-
dicated."   But  its  report  is  still  kept  secret.
Revelations  No  One  Challenged
It   is  significant  that   Senator   Humphrey's   assertions  were
not  challenged  by a  single  member  of  the  Joint   Congressional
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  which  held  four  days of  execu-
tive  sessions  the  week  of  January  12,  hearing  Dr.   Bethe  as
well  as  Dr.   Teller   and  his  supporters   behind  closed   doors.
It   has   released   neither   this   testimony   nor   the   findings   it
promised  on  "the  dependability  of  the  detection  system  pro-
posed   by  the  Geneva   panel  last  summer."    Since  a  majority
of  the  Joint  Committee  is  opposed   to  a  test  cessation   agree-
ment,  the  inference  is  strong  that  its  findings  do  not   support
its   preconceptions.
The  transcript  released  by  the  Humphrey  subcommittee  on
February  8  showed  that  in  executive  session  January  28,  Dr.
James  Fisk,  chairman  of  the  Western   delegation  to  the  Ge-
neva  talks  last  summer,  testified  that  "new  or  modified  meth-
ods  .  .  .  give  real  promise  of  restoring  the  Geneva  system  to
the  capability  which  was  stated  in  last  summer's  report."   Dr.
Romney,  head  of  the  Defense  Department  panel  on  the  new
data,  agreed  with  Dr.   Fisk,  "the   door  is  not  closed   for  im-
provements,  and  the  methods  by  which  one  would  proceed  to
detect  small  shots  are  quite  clear,"   though  he  added  invidi-
ously,   "Whether   we   could   get   the   Russians   to   agree   is  a
question  we  cannot  answer."
There  would  seem  to  be  sufficient  answer  in  last  summer's
Geneva  agreement which  provides  at  two  points  for   constant
If   This  Is  The  First  Time   You   Have  Seen   the
I.  F.
Please
Street
City  .
Enter
(To)
Street
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
...................................... ..Zone.. ...... ....State....................
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
3/2/50
.................. ......................Zone............State....................
we  send  gift  announcement?       Yes  D    No.  D
The  Basic  Military    Opposition
Sen.    HICKENLOOPER.   The   Defense  Department
considers  that  there  are  vast  areas  in  which many be-
lieve  that   knowledge   vital   for   the   national  security
could  be  obtained  from   various  future  tests.   I  do  not
know  of  any  responsible military people who are  happy
over  this matter  [suspension of  nuclear tests]  from  the
standpoint  of  the  military.   It  is  like  a  battleship  ad-
miral,  he  never has  too  many  battleships.
—Humphrey   Disarmament  Subcommittee,  Jan.  S8.
research  by  the   test  control   agency  to  improve  methods   of
detection.   The   importance   of   such   constant    improvement
was  also  stressed  by  the  two  Soviet  scientists  in  the   Pravda
article,  which  concluded  that  "Allowance  for  and  application
of   new   scientific  data  on  methods   for   the   detection   of   ex-
plosions  will  be  part  and  parcel  of  the  functions  of  the  con-
trol  organization."
A  One-Sided   Race
More  light  was  cast  on  improved  techniques  by  Dr.  Bethe.
"In   my  opinion,"  Dr.   Bethe  testified,   "there  are  a  number,
actually  a  large  number,  of  very  good   methods   to  improve
the  system which  was  devised  last  summer  in  Geneva."   Some
of  these  were  already  described  by  Senator  Humphrey  in  his
Senate  speech  of  January  20.   "It   is  clear  from  Dr.   Beche's
testimony,"  Senator  Humphrey  said  in  a  statement  February
19  which  most  papers  ignored,  "that  technical  problems   are
not  the  main  obstacle  to  an  agreement   on  the   stopping   of
nuclear  weapons  tests.   The  main  problem  is  political."   This
is  the  exact  reverse  of  the  impression  so  skillfully  created  by
the   White   House   and   Defense   Department   statements   in
January.   They  made  it  appear  that  unexpected  technical  dif-
ficulties  had  upset  the  very  basis  of  last  summer's   agreement
at  Geneva.   Unfortunately this  is  the  impression  most  people
still  have,  thanks to  the  poor  press  coverage  of  the  testimony
taken  by  the  Humphrey  committee.   This  one-sided  race  be-
tween  distortion and  truth  is painful  to  watch,  especially  when
it  concerns  a  matter  so  vital  to  the  survival  of  mankind.
Weekly,   Why   Not  Subscribe  Now — Only   $5
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  AY..,  N.  W.
Washington  IS.  0.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1870.   Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  VV., Washington   15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   anil   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the   U.  S.;  $0  io  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED