I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959nov23.pdf

============================================================

A   Truer  Picture  of  Castro,  P.  4
Ireland  Fights  Again  Against  the  Spread  of  Nuclear  Weapons,  P.  2;  Sidelight  on  Cranberries,  P.  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VI,  NO.  44
NOVEMBER  23,   1959
101
       WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS
Ike  and Herter "Security Risks" in  the  Eyes of CIA  and  FBI
We  congratulate  the  Secretary of  State  on  his  address  last
Monday  night  to  the  National  Foreign  Trade  Council.  After
the   long   years  of   hateful   sterilities   propagated   during  the
Acheson  and  Dulles  periods,  it  was  heartening  to  hear  Mr.
Herter  say plainly  that  he  thought  we  could  "find  a  common
language"  with the  Soviet Union  "because  we  have  a common
interest"  and  "that  interest lies  simply in  the  basic will  to sur-
vive,  shared  by  free  men  and  Communists alike."   He  charted
a  course  in  which  we  would  seek  to  develop   "some  rules  of
the  game"  for  co-existence as a  way  "to  temper  acute  political
problems  which  cannot  now  be  fully  solved,  and  to  bring  un-
der  control  the  spiraling  arms race which those  problems  goad
onward."   The  State  Department,  at  least  in  its  upper  levels,
seems  finally  coming  into  line  with  the  Eisenhower  policy.
We  are  sorry  that  after  the  brisk  and  hopeful  opening  sec-
tions  of  the  speech,  it  tailed  off  with  some  of  that  suffocating
Dulles-style   self-righteousness   about   how   »o«-materialistic
we  are,  how  devoted  to  "the  God-given  multiformity of  man"
and  how  "our   chief  source  of  strength"  is  in  "our   faith   in
freedom."   This  unctuous hogwash  fools  no  one  but  ourselves.
We  are  probably  the  most  materialistic  nation  on  earth;  no-
where  else  is  a  man  measured  more  completely  by  the  size  of
his  bank  account  and  the  length  of  his  car.    "Multiformity"
may  indeed  be  "God-given"  but  in  the  U.S.A.  »«/formity  and
wwformity  are  a  lot  safer.    A  web  of  loyalty-security regula-
tions  and  a  network  of  political  informers  continue  to  make
life  hazardous  for  non-conformists and  radicals.   Despite  "our
faith  in  freedom",  there  isn't  more  than  a  handful  of  men  in
public  life  prepared  to  stand  up  and  call  for  the  abolition  of
the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee,  or  Eastland's
Senate  counterpart.    Mr.  Herter's  own  State  Department  still
hopes  at  the  next  session  of  Congress  to  get  legislation  enabl-
ing  it  to  restrict the  right  to  travel  on  political  grounds  and  to
deny  passport  applicants  the  right  to  face  accusers.    The  rest
of  the  world  not  only  understands  this  but  even  tends  to  ex-
aggerate  it,  forgetting  that  we  still  have  a  degree  of   political
freedom  and  personal security sharply different  from  the  Soviet
bloc  even  in  its  milder  post-Stalinist  phase.    But  in  peaceful
competition  we'd  better  start  to  talk  less  and  do  more  about
this  asset.    It's  been  dwindling  badly.
Spy Chiefs Should Neither  Be  Seen  Nor  Heard
In this connection we do not  welcome the  debut of  Allen  W.
Dulles,  director  of  Central  Intelligence,  as a  witness  on  public
policy   matters   before   Congressional   committees.     His   first
such  appearance,  before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee   Nov.
13,  was  temperate  and  restrained.   His  analysis  of  Soviet  eco-
nomic  growth,  which  opened  a  week  of  hearings  before  that
committee,  was  fair  and  objective.   But  we  think  intelligence
12                                                                                           ,
Backdown  by State Dept. on Laos
The  real  news  in  the  new  report  on  Laos  issued  by
the  State  Dept.  for  the  Sunday  papers  of  Nov.  15  was
nowhere  reported:  the  new  report  no  longer  alleges  a
foreign  invasion  of  Laos.
The new account still tries to  link  Khruschov with  the
outbreak  of  fighting  in  mid-July  by  "assuming"  that
Ho  Chi-minh  of  North  Vietnam  must  have  discussed  it
with  Khruschchov  during  their  talk  hi  Moscow  July  2!
But  the  new  report  no  longer  speaks  of  an  invasion,  of
bombardment  from  across  the  border  nor  of  participa-
tion by North Vietnamese troops.  It  pictures  a  guerrilla
uprising  within  Laos  and  "the  main  elements  of  the  at-
tacking   forces"   are  described   as  "former   Pathet   Lao
soldiers  and  members  of  several  ethnic-minority   groups
straddling  the  Lao-North  Vietnamese  border."
Military  aid to the  rebels  is no longer  alleged  and  the
report  does  not  go  beyond  the  charge  that  they  were
"vigorously   supported"  by  "the  propaganda  and  diplo-
matic  resources  of  the  Soviet  bloc."
chiefs  should  neither  be  seen  nor  heard.    Our   government
suffers  already  from  entirely  too  much  centrifugal  anarchism
in  which  military and  civilian  chiefs  are  constantly  shooting
off  their  mouths in  a way contrary to  Administration policy.   A
little  of  this  is  good;  we  are  overdoing  it.    But  one  agency
which  should  not  be  heard  from   is  Central   Intelligence.    So
long  as  it  limits itself  to  private  studies  for  the  White  House,
it  is  free  to  agree  or  differ   as  it  pleases  with  official   policy.
But  to  allow  it  to  express  itself  in  public  is  to  invite  serious
consequences  when  it  differs  with  the  President.   What  if  it
thinks  his  present  course  dangerous ?  Should  it  be  allowed  .to
campaign  openly  against  it,  putting  its  prestige  behind  alter-
native policies ?  Mr.  Dulles  was discreet but  his  Deputy  Direc-
tor,  General  C.  P.  Cabell,  in  a  speech  to  the  National  Security
Commission  of  the  American Legion  Aug.  21  and  another  to
the  National  Guard  Association  Oct.  6  has  already  joined  the
chorus  of   rightwing  paranoids  criticizing  the   very  idea   of
peaceful  co-existence.
Consulting  spy  chiefs  on  foreign  policy  is  like   consulting
private  detectives on  marriage;  both  are  obsessed  by the  seamy
side  of  things;  they  see  plots  and  potential  opportunities   for
adultery  everywhere.  That's  their  business.    In  this  respect,
though  they  be  bitter  rivals  in  all  else,  FBI  and  CIA  seem  to
agree.    General   Cabell   and   J.   Edgar   Hoover   both   believe
that  co-existence  is a  delusion  and  a  snare,  and  that  those  who
advocate  it  are  either  dupes  or  worse.    By  the  standards  they
apply,  the  positions  taken  by  the  President   and  the  Secretary
of  State  would  be  enough  to  make  lesser  government   employes
suspect  as security risks.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November 23,1959
From  Frank  Aiken's  Speech  Warning  the  UN  to  Act  While  Still  Time
Ireland  Tries  Again  to  Stop  the  Spread  of  Nuclear  Weapons
A  resolution against  the  spread of  nuclear  weapons was  in-
troduced  in  the  General  Assembly  NOT.  13  by  Frank Aiken,
Ireland's  Minister  for  External  Affairs.   A  similar  resolution
was  introduced  by  him  last  year.   In  the  First   Committee,
last  year  no  nation  dared  vote  against  it  but  only  37  voted
for  it  and the vote was  limited  to  the  first  clause  which recog-
nized  the  danger.  The clause  calling  for  an  ad  hoc committee
to  do  something  about  the  danger  was   never  voted  upon.
Mr.   Aiken  thereupon  withdrew   the   resolution,  expressing
hope  that  the  new  81-power  disarmament  commission  would
take  note  of  the  danger  recognized  by  the  First Committee.
The   Commission,  however,  in   this  characteristic  perpetual
motion  tragicomedy,  did  nothing   but   welcome  the  Geneva
agreement  to  set  up a  new  10-nation  committee  on  disarma-
ment.  Mr. Aiken's  new  resolution  asks  the  10-nation commit-
tee  to  consider  means  (1)   to  prevent  the  spread  of  nuclear
weapons  by  transfer  from  nuclear  powers  and  (2)   to  police
an  agreement  by  which  non-nuclear  powers  agreed  not   to
produce  such  weapons.  We reprint  below  an  abridged portion
of  Mr. Aiken's  speech  introducing it.  Note  at  press-time: The
resolution  passed  60  to  0,  with  13  abstentions  including  the
Soviet  bloc,  China,  France,  Pern  and  Spain.
"There  are  today  two  distinct  dangers  facing  us  and  they
require  different  sets  of  measures  aimed  at  averting  them.  The
first  set  of  dangers  arises  from  the  situation  with  which  man-
kind  has  been  trying  to  live  since  the  end  of  the  last  war.
That  is  the  situation where the  two  great power  blocs confront   .
each  other,  divided  by  deep  mutual  distrust  and   ideological
antagonism,  and  strenuously competing  in  a  worldwide  diplo-
matic  and  propaganda   effort,   backed  ultimately  by  the   mili-
tary  capacity,  possessed  by  each  set  of  powers,  to  annihilate
civilization.    That  situation,  fraught  with  danger  as  it  is,  is
nonetheless  one  with  which  we  have  managed  to  live  for  a
number  of  years.
The New  Dangers
"But  for  the  second  set,  the  new  dangers,  not  only  do  no
techniques  exist, but  we can hardly  assess  the  scope and  magni-
tude  of  the  dangers  themselves.   These  new  dangers  are,  of
course,  those  which  are  likely to flow from  the  wider  dissemi-
nation  of  nuclear weapons.  The  present  deadlock  between  the
two power systems makes it all  the harder to prevent  the  spread
of  these  weapons.
"As  delegates  are  aware,  plutonium  which  is  the  fissionable
core  of  some  nuclear  weapons  has  for   some  years  been  ob-
tained  as  a  by-product of  one  type   of  nuclear  electric  power
station.   Countries which may build  this type of  electric  power
plant  will  find  themselves  with  the  basic  material  for  nuclear
weapons  on  their  hands.   It  will  become  increasingly  hard  for
.  How  Quickly Times  (and  Men)   Can  Change
"Wisconsin   Rapids,   Wis.,   Nov.   12—Vice  President
Nixon  said  tonight  that  anyone  urging  a  resumption of
nuclear  weapons testing  was  ignorant  of  the  facts.  Mr.
Nixon  did not  mention by  name either  former  President
Truman  or  Governor  Rockefeller,  both  of   whom  have
urged  test  resumption."
—New  York  Times, Nov.  IS, 1959.
"Vice  President  Nixon,  in  a  Philadelphia speech  Oct.
3,  denounced  Stevenson's  H-test  [suspension]  proposal
as 'catastrophic nonsense.'"
—Facts  on File, Oct. 3-9,1956.
the  governments  of  these  countries  to  resist  domestic  pressure
to  take  the  further  step  of  producing  nuclear  weapons.    They
will  be pressed  to  do  so  on  the  grounds of  economy and  secu-
rity  if  not  for  considerations  of  prestige.
"Nor  is the  possibility of  wider  dissemination  even confined
to  states.   Revolutionary  organizations  and  groups  can  come
into  the  possession  of  such  weapons  by various  means  as  these
weapons   become  more  numerous,   more   easily  transportable
and  part  of  standard military equipment.                               »
"Granted  that  an  agreement  at  Geneva  were  followed  by a
world  agreement  not  to  test,  it  would  still  do  little  to  check
the  actual  dissemination,  as distinct  from  the  testing,  of  weap-
ons.   They  could  still be manufactured  and  be transferred from
one  country  to  another  without  in  any way infringing  interna-
tional  law,  or  breaking  any  agreement.   Our  suggestion,   Mr.
President,  is  that  if  the  nuclear  powers  agree  not  to  transfer
nuclear  weapons  to  non-nuclear  states,  the  non-nuclear  states
should   agree  not  to  produce  or  acquire  these  weapons  and
agree also to accept  inspection.
"There  is  no  military  or  political  advantage  to  be  gained
that  outweighs  the  danger  involved  in spreading  these  weapons
to  more  countries  and  thus  giving  their  governments  or  their
revolutionary  groups  the  power  to  start  a  nuclear  war,  or  to
engage in  nuclear  blackmail.
"There  is  little  doubt,  we  believe,  that  the  safest  and  most
effective   use  the  nuclear  powers  can  make  of   their  nuclear
weapons  is  to  stockpile  them  under  their  own  lock  and  key
until  they  can  safely  deliver  them  to  a  United  Nations  force
upholding  a  world  system  of  law  and  security  in  which  they
have  learned   to   trust   by  seeing   it   operate   successfully   in
limited  areas."
NATO  HQ.  Thinks  It  Can  Buy  Off  De
Passage  of   the  Irish  resolution  at  the   United  Nations
might  help  to  inhibit  plans  for  further  amendment  of  the
Atomic  Energy  Act  at  the  coming  session  of  Congress  in
the  direction of  a  wider  nuclear give-away.
A  Paris dispatch from  Crosby  S.  Noyes,  the  gifted  roving
foreign  correspondent  of  the  Washington  Star,  which  his
paper  published Sunday  Nov.  15,  said  the  possibility of  sup-
plying  France  "with  a  ready-made arsenel  of  atomic weap-
ons   is   being   given   serious   consideration   by   high-level
Western  officials."
NATO  headquarters  in  Paris  seems  to  be  disturbed  by  a
recent  speech  of  deGaulle's  at  the  French  war  college.   He
Gaulle  By  Giving Him  Nuclear  Arsenel
said  that  since  France  eventually  may  be  destroyed  from
any  point in  the  world,  it  must  build  an  independent nuclear
force  "effective anywhere in  the  world."  DeGaulIe  said  the
basis  of  this  force  would  be  an  atomic armament  "which  we
may  build  or which we  may buy."
The  Noyes  dispatch  foreshadows  two  arguments  for  sell-
ing  or  giving  deGanlle  this  nuclear  armament.  One  is  that
this  would  keep  him  from  embarking  on  a  long  series  of
tests  bound  to  upset  the  Geneva  negotiations.  The  other  is
that  he  might  thus  be  bought  off  and  reconciled  to  integra-
tion  of  his  forces  with  NATO's  and to  lifting  his  ban on  the
stationing  of  U.S.  nuclear  forces  on  French  soil.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  23,  1959
Some  Unanswered   Questions  in  the  Furore  Over  Possibly  Contaminated   Cranberries
State  Dept.  Still  Flim-Flamming  on  Exchange  of  Newsmen  with  China
State  Department  is still  engaging  in flim-flam on  the  ques-
tion  of  permitting U.S. newsmen  to  visit  Communist   China.
The  main  obstacle  is  not  the  passport  reference  to  "those por-
tions  of  China  under  Communist  control"  which  will  now  be
blacked  out  but  State's  unwillingness  to  grant  reciprocal  privi-
leges  to Chinese newsmen.   It was clear  two years ago  (1)  that
Peking  would  not  admit  our  two  dozen  hand-picked   corre-
spondents   unless   we  agreed   to  admit  an   equal   number   of
Chinese  and  (2)   that  Dulles  was  well  aware  that  this   affront
-would  keep  the  touchy  Chinese  from  agreeing  to  an  exchange
he did  not  want.
Bi-Partisanship in The Cranberry Bogs
It  would  have  been  refreshing  if  at  least  one   presidential
candidate,  instead of  heartily eating  possibly tainted  1959 crop
cranberries,  had   saluted  Secretary  Flemming  for   his   courage
in  bucking powerful  farm  interests  to  protect  the  public  from
a  cancerous  danger.    The  cranberry furore  parallels  the  fallout
controversy  in  that  defenders  of  the  cranberry also  rely  on  de-
ceptive  averages  and  scientists  in  both  cases  just  don't  know
enough  to  assess  the  dangers  from  minute  amounts  of   these
poisons.    The  question  is why, after  destroying some  3,000,000
pounds  of  berries  from   the  1957 crop  because  of   pesticide
contamination,  the  Food   and  Drug   Administration  failed  to
police  the  1958 crop  and  relied  weakly on  self-policing  by  the
national  cranberry association.
NOT  THAT PATRIOTIC:  The  country gained  by  Charles
L.  Critchfield's  decision  not  to  become  director  of  the  Penta-
gon's  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency.   His   appointment
would  have  meant  a further  breakdown  in  sound  principles  of
government.   A  1951 law  permitting  the  Defense   Department
to  employ  up  to  ten  unpaid  consultants  was  to  be  stretched  to
allow  Mr.  Critchfield  to  serve  as  head  of  ARPA  while con-
tinuing to  receive his $40,000 a year salary as research  chief  for
Convair,  the   aircraft   and   missile  subsidiary  of  General   Dy-
namics.   Since  General  Dynamics  is  now  our   second   largest
arms  contractor  and  bulks  large  in  the  very  fields with  which
ARPA  deals, the  relationship  would  be  so  obviously  improper
that  it  is  disturbing  it  was  ever  considered.   Mr.  Critchfield
said  he was eager  to work  for  the government  out of  patriotism
but  he  did  not  want  to  exchange  his  $40,000  salary at  Convair
for   the  $19,000  the  Pentagon   job  pays.
THE   MAN   WHO   PRAYS  FOR  THE   SENATE:   The
Chaplain  of  the  Senate,  the  Rev. Dr.  Frederick  Brown  Harris,
delivered  a  sermon  here Nov.  15  which  charged  that  some  re-
Tribute  to  Meyer of  Vermont
In  an  unusual  tribute  to  a  freshman   Congressman
who  has  taken  some  of  the  boldest  liberal  positions  in
the  House,  32 members of  Congress  placed  an  advertise-
ment  in  the  Burlington,  Vt., Free  Press,  praising Ver-
mont's  Congressman-at-Large William H.  Meyer.   "Bill
Meyer,"  the .signers  said,  in  a  "memo" addressed  to  the
people  of  Vermont,  "represents   to  us  the  epitome  of
granite  integrity" and  the  "finest  tradition  not  only  of
Vermont  but  of  America."   They  hailed  him  as   "that
voice  of  conscience  which  prompts us  all  to  think  more
deeply."
Two   surprises   among   the   signers   were   Majority
Leader  John  W.  McCormack  and  Clyde  Doyle   of   the
Un-American   Activities   Committee.    The   signatures
were  obtained  by  Meyer's  fellow  "peace"  Congressman,
Byron  L.  Johnson  of  Colorado.   The  other  signers,   all
Democrats,  were:
James  Roosevelt,  Clem Miller, George  A.  Kasem,  and
Jeffery  Cohelan, California; Emanuel  Celler  and Alfred
E.  Santangelo,  New  York;  Frank  Thompson,  Jr.,  N.J.;
Edith  Green  and  Al  Ullman,  Oregon;  Frank  M.  Clark,
John  H.  Dent,  and  Thomas  E.  Morgan,  Pa.;  Henry  S.
Reuss   and   Robert  W.   Kastenmeier,  Wis.;   Frank  M.
Coffin   and  James  C.  Oliver,  Maine;  Frank   Kowalski,
Conn.;  Stewart  L.  Udall,  Arizona;  Leonard G.  Wolf  and
Neal   Smith,  Iowa;  John   A.   Blatnik   and  Joseph   E.
Karth,   Minn.;   Richard   Boiling,   Mo.;   John   Brademas,
Ind.;  Lee  Metcalf,  Mont.;  George  S.  McGovern,  S.  Dak.;
Quentin  Burdick,   N.  Dak. Robert  W.  Levering,  Ohio;
and James G. O'Hara of Michigan.
ligious   leaders   were   promoting   a   second   Munich   by   their
blindness  toward  communism  and  by  their  "moral  flabbiness"
in  being  willing  to  "grasp  unrepentant,  bloodstained  hands,"
an  indictment which  would  seem  also to  cover  President  Eisen-
hower.    According  to the  Washington  Post, Dr.  Harris  singled
out  the  Rev. A.  J.  Muste  of  the  Fellowship  of   Reconciliation
"as a  religious  leader  who has been  'bewitched.' "  The  Cotton
Matherish  vocabulary  implies  that  to  believe  in  peace  is evi-
dence  of  diabolic  possession.   This  is  the  man  who  opens  the
Senate  each  day  with  prayer.
FORBIDDEN  TOPIC:  The  Baltimore  Sun's  political com-
mentator,  Thomas  O'Neill,   touched  (Nov.  15)   on  a  subject
nice  people  don't  talk  about,  the  Esso  sign  behind  the  Rocke-
feller   candidacy.   "There  is     strong   hint,"  O'Neill   wrote,
"that  the  extensive  Rockefeller  business  interests  can  be  de-
pended  upon  to  influence  local  leaders  across the  country when
the  signal  is given."
British   Medical  Officer   Links  Leukemia  Rise  to  Strontium  90  Deposits
"Deaths  from  Leukemia (blood  cancer)  have  increased  in
five  British  counties  by  well  over  50  percent   since 1950.
Four   of   these   'black'  counties  are   mountainous  Western
counties   with   a   heavy   rainfall:   Carnarvonshire   (80%),
Montgomeryshire  (59%),  Cumberland (59%)  and Westmor-
land  (140%).   These  facts  were  presented  last  week  in  an
article  in The  Lancet by Dr. T. Alun  Phillips, Medical Health
Officer.   Suggestions  that  the  rapidly rising  leukemia  death
rate  in  the  counties  is  linked with  the  intake  of  Strontium
90  (which  comes  down  in  rain)  have  factual  support.
"Dr.   Phillips  studied  figures  from  local  health  authorities
over  eight  years,  and  compared  the  two  four-year  periods
1950   to  1953 and  1954 to  1957. The  average  national  in-
crease  in  Leukemia  deaths  over  these  periods  was  13 per-
cent.   In  1920  the  death  rate  from  leukemia in  England  and
Wales  was  1.1  per  100,000.   By  1957 the  rate  rose   to 5.3.
'Areas   in   the   Northern  hemisphere,'  wrote   Dr.   Phillips,
'have  deposits  three  times  heavier  than  the  world  average.
The  amount of  deposits  of  radioactive dust  varies  also with-
in  Britain,  so that  mountain areas  of  high  rainfall  show  high
levels of  Strontium  90.' "
—Peace  News  (London)  Nov. 6.
1  2  *
1   7  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  23,1959
Cuba's  Latest  Note  Impressively   Provides  Perspective  on  Castro's   Struggle
The  Colonialism  We  Oppose  Elsewhere   and  Practice  Still  in  Cuba
We  are grateful  to  the  New  York  Times  for  making  avail-
able  in  its  late  City  Edition  of  Nov. 14  the  full  text  of  the
Castro  government's  note  to  our  Ambassador  in  Havana.    It
is  an  impressive and  eloquent  State  document.  Like  the  Irish,
who  cannot  begin  any  dispute  with  the  British  without  going
back  to  Cromwell,  the  Cubans go  back  to the  Platt amendment
and  the  Hawley-Smoot  tariff.   But  these,  though  forgotten  in-
cidents  to  us,  are  key  threads  in  a  still  fresh  history  for  the
youthful  nation  of  Cuba  which  we  helped  to  free  from  Spain
only  to  make  it  a  ward  of  our  sugar  trust.
We  believe  this  document  deserves  close  study.   A  hostile
press  has  pictured  the  Castro  revolt  as  somehow  a Communist
plot;   even  friendly   newspapermen  have  tended  to  caricature
it  as  an  uprising  of  bearded  beatniks.   To  see  it  properly  re-
quires  economic  and  historical  perspectives.   These  the  Cuban
note  provides.
Why  Cuba Needs Land Reform
"The   Revolutionary  Government,"   says  this  Cuban  State
paper,  "admits  that  North  American  capital  investments  have
positively   contributed   to   the   material   advancement  of   our
country;  but  it  cannot  help  pointing  out that  these  investments
have  also  contributed   to  give  the   Cuban   economy  a  semi-
colonial  character, evidenced  by  its  absolute  subordination  to
our  sugar  production,  the  inefficiency  of  the  agricultural  pro-
duction  to  fill  our  own  consumption  requirements,  and  by  the
advantageous  position  of  many industrial  products  when  they
compete  with  their  Cuban   counterparts."
This  is  the  heart  of  Cuba's  economic  complaint.   Its  tariffs
on  our  products  are  fixed  by negotiation,  but  our  sugar  quotas
—which  control  their  bread  and  butter—are  fixed  by our  uni-
lateral  action.    Cuba  seeks  "the transformation  of  the  system
under  which  the  nation's  land  has  been  controlled   heretofore,
the  industrial development  of  the  country."   It  sees  the  "real
source  of  political  despotism,  of  social  backwardness and  wide-
spread  insufficient  consumption  of  critical  commodities  in  our
America"  in  "her  economic underdevelopment,  which  is main-
tained  and  exploited  in  a  great  measure  by foreign  interests."
This  is colonialism.   We  protest  against  it  in  Algeria,  in  Indo-
A  More Objective View of  Castro
"The   government  of  Fidel  Castro  is  broadly   based
and  has  as  its  keynote a  sweeping  program  of political
reform,  economic nationalism  and  social  revolution.  It
is  still  too  early  to  tell  whether the  movement  will  be
successful   or  be  perverted  either  by  the   inexperience
and  overambitiousness of   Fidel  Castro  or  by  the   in-
trigues  of the Communists. ...  (p. 16)
'•The  opposition  to  Castro  in  Cuba  comes  from  Ba-
tista's  group,  dissatisfied  business  men  and  persons  af-
fected  by  the  drastic reform  laws,  but it  has little popu-
lar  backing  (p. 71)."
—U.S.-Latin  American  Relations,  A  Study   Prepared
for   the  Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee   by   the
University    of   New   Mexico  School  of   Inter-American
Affairs,   released November  19.
neisa,  and   in  Kenya  but  maintain  it  in  our  own  backyard.
The  political  complaint  is  as  familiar.   It  is  the  friendliness,
of  the American government  and  press  to dictators to the  South
of  us,  no  matter  how  bloody,  so  long  as  they  play  ball  with
U.S.  oil, sugar,  banana  and  other  private  interests.    Trujillo^.
as  bloody  a  monster  as  ever  ruled  in  this  hemisphere,  is  our
pet,  the  recipient  of  loans  and  military  supplies  while  we  have
been  using  our  influence  in  other  Western  capitals  to  prevent
Castro   from   buying   arms.   While   anti-Batista   exiles   were
hounded  by the  FBI  and  sent  back  to  death,  anti-Castro  rebels
have  somehow  been  able  from   our  territory  to  bomb  sugar
mills and  Havana.
These  little  funny  excitable  men  with  beards  are  heroes  in
Latin  America, as they  should  be here.    Fidel  Castro  is exactly
the  kind  of  human  being  we  would  applaud  if  we  still  held
truly  to  American  ideals;  indeed  if  he  had  turned  up  in  Hun-
gary  instead  of  Cuba,  we  would  have  gone  wild  over  him,  he
could  have  had  anything  from  us  he  wanted.    That  a  handful
of  patriots  loving  liberty  more  than  life  could  overthrow   a
powerfully  armed  dictator  in  the  days  of  jet  planes  and  atom
bombs  reaffirmed  the  human  spirit's  primacy.   Latin  America
will  judge  all  our  hi-falutin  pronunciamentoes  about  liberty  as.
sheer hot air  if we don't  extend  a helping  hand  to Fidel Castro.
Say  Merry  Xmas  to  Your  Friends  With  A  Gift   Subscription—Vse   Blank  Below  and  We'll  Send  A  Xmas  Card
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ........................................................................................
Street   ......................................I.................................................
City
.2one....State..
11/23/50
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington    T5.   D.   C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
.  I.  F.  Stone'i  Weekly.    Entered  ••   Second  CUu  Hitter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  bat  p«b-
llsbed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Aonit  and  December  at  8618 Nebraska  Are..  N.  W..  Washington  IB.  D. C.
An  independent  weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.  F.   Btone;  Circulation  Manager.  Either  H.  Stone.    Subscription:
«  IB  tfeo  O.  •.;  W  In  Canada;  «10  alaswaei*.    Air  Mali  rate*:  $18 to  Knrope;  *20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED