I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959feb09.pdf

============================================================

The  Un-Americans  Use Gag Rule, P.  4
Exclusive  Text:  Kennan's  Case  for  Disengagement  and  Against   Atomic  German  Arms,  See  Page  2
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  6FEBRUARY  9,  1959
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The   South   Begins  A  Strategic   Retreat
A  brief  glance  back  at  the  history of  Negro  voting  in  the
South  may  serve  to  deflate  the  wild  expansion  of  hope  blown
up  by the  peaceful admission of  21 Negroes  to  7 white  schools
in  Virginia.    This  is  not  the  decisive  battle  of  a  great  war;
it  is  only  the  beginning  of  a  long  drawn  out  delaying  action.
The   South   is  turning   to   token   compliance  rather   than   to
massive  resistance.  Where  the  latter  tends  to  provoke  frontal
clashes  with  the  Federal  government  which  the  South  cannot
win,  the  former  may lull  Northern  opinion  to  the  point  where
real  integration  of  schools  may  be  indefinitely  delayed.
The  Negro's  right  to  vote  has  an  older  and  firmer  founda-
tion  than  his  right  not  to  be  segregated  at  school.    His  right
to  vote  is  based  upon  a  constitutional  amendment  a  century
old,  explicitly  forbidding any  State  to  abridge  or  deny  voting
rights   "on   account  of   race,   color   or   previous  condition  of
servitude."   One  evasive device  after  another  has  been  stricken
down  in  the  courts.   But  by and  large  there  has  been  no  more
than  token  compliance,  enough  to  reward  a  few  "good"  Ne-
groes,   to   exploit   their   votes   when   necessary  and   to   show
enough  compliance  to  refute  the  charge  of  unconstitutionality.
College  Profs  But  Not  Literate  Enough  to  Vote
• In  education,  as  in  voting,  the  Northern  liberal  must   not
mistake  the  letter  of  the  law  for  the  realities  of  Southern  life.
Literacy  tests,  upheld  by  the  Supreme  Court  long  ago  as   "not
on  their  face"  discriminatory, make  it  possible  to  this  very day
for  Negro  college  professors  to  be  disfranchised by white  reg-
istrars  who  can  only  read  by moving  their  lips.   An  analogous
device,   school   placement   statutes,  allowing   pupils   to  be  as-
signed  to  various  schools  on  the  basis  of  morals,  culture,  fam-
ily  background,  health,  etc.,  are  beginning  to  provide  a  "non-
racial"  means  of  maintaining  segregation.   The  Federal  courts,
in  the  Alabama  case,  have  already  ruled  that  such  statutes  are
"not  on  their  face"  discriminatory,  and  review  was  denied  by
the  Supreme  Court  on  November  24.
Where  such   statutes  or  similar  devices  serve  to  keep   all
Negro  students  out  of  white  schools  the  task  of  proving  them
discriminatory  and  unconstitutional  will  be  easy.   But  where
Southern  States,  as  in  North  Carolina  and  Virginia,  are  will-
ing  to  allow  some  token  integration,  the  task  of  proving  that
any  specific Negro  child  has  really  been  refused  admission  to
a  white  school  on  racial  grounds  will  be  difficult.    Every  ap-
plication  for  admission  will  require  prolonged  litigation  be-
cause  each  time  it  will  be  necessary  to  prove  all  over   again
that  the  placement  act  is  being  used  for  purposes  other  than
its  stated  non-racial   reasons.
If   the  pace  of  integration  is  to  depend   on  expensive   and
burdensome   suits   by  individual  Negro  plaintiffs   of   meagre
means,  helped  by an  NAACP  which  is  already  effectively  out-
lawed  in  much  of  the  South,  it  will  be  slow  enough   to  pla-
cate  all  but  the  most  senseless  racist.   Just  as  the  Negro  who
wants  to  register  faces  all  kinds  of  extra-legal  difficulties   and
obstacles  so  does  the  Negro  parent  who  dares  think  of  send-
ing  his  child  to  a  decent  white  school.   It  is  worth  recalling
that  of  the  five  original  school  appeals  decided   by  the  Su-
preme  Court  almost  five  years  ago,  the  two  from  the   deep
South—Clarendon  County, South  Carolina, and  Prince Edward
County,  Virginia—are  still  lost  somewhere  in  a  fog  of  inter-
minable  legalisms  and  the  fear  created  by  white  supremacists.
Cunningly  Constructed Legal  Labyrinths
School  placement  acts  plus   token   defiance  are   formidable
unless  the  Federal  government  is  authorized  to  take  the  initia-
tive  in  working  with  local  school  boards  to  draw  up  and  to
enforce  plans  of  integration.  This  is  what  the  new  Douglas
bill  S.  810,  the  Civil  Rights  Act  of  1959*,  would  do.   As  an
enlightened  North  Carolinian  summed  it  up  in  a  speech  cited
by  Senator  Douglas   in  introducing  his  bill  January  29,   "A
lone  Negro  child,  seeking  a  right  under  the  Constitution,  a
qualified  person  seeking  to  register  to vote,  a  skilled  and  quali-
fied  workmen  seeking  a  job—these  must  not  be  left  to  pit
their   puny  strength  against  the   massed  power   of   a  State."
Without   the  Douglas  legislation,  even  those  private   litigants
who  dare  to  risk  economic  boycott  and  physical  threat  will
find  themselves  in  a  cunningly  constructed  labyrinth,  a  legal
rat's  race  in  which  their  funds  and  patience  may  be  drained
away  long  before  they  have  "exhausted   their   administrative
remedies"  and  qualified  for  admission  to  the  final  lap  in  the
Federal  courts.
"Conciliation"  Can  Be  Evasion
On  this  fundamental  issue  both  our  "Presidents"  are  eva-
sive.   Mr.  Eisenhower  continues  to  pass  the  buck  to  the  courts
with  all  an  old  soldier's  facility  for  dodging  unpleasant  duties;
this  is whence  the  word  "soldiering"  and  the  phrase  "soldier-
ing  on  the  job"  are  derived.   Our  other  "President",  Lyndon
Johnson,   would  palm  us  off  with  a  plan   for   "conciliating"
the  problem.   But  conciliation  will  work  best  when  and  where
the Negro has some more  effective  power  to  enforce  his  rights.
The  Douglas  bill  would  have the  Federal  government  shoulder
the  responsibility  for  this  noble  task  of  giving  the  Negro  full
citizenship  at  last,  and  making  the  name  America shine  out  in
its  old  splendor.    Must  a  nation  as  great  as  ours  depend   for
its  honor  on  the  courage  of  a  few  Negro  children,  willing  to
walk  that  fearsome path  to  school  alone,  while  our   leadership
cowers  in  its  plushy  foxholes?
*Also   sponsored   initially   by   Humphrey   (Minn.),   Hen-
nings   (Mo.),   Case   (N.   J.),   Morse   (Ore.),   Clark   (Penna.),
Allott   (Col.),  Neuberger  (Ore.),  McNamara   (Mich.),  Javits
(N.  Y.),  Proxmire  (Wis.),   Beall   (Md.),  Hart  (Mich.),  Mc-
Carthy  (Minn.),  Dodd  (Conn.),  Pastore  (R.  I.),  and  Carroll
(Col.).
2  i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  9,1959
The  Case  Against  Atomic  Arms  for  Germany  and  for  Disengagement  in  Central  Europe
Text of Geo.  Kennan's Statement Feb. 4 to Humphrey Disarmament Committee
A.  Questions  of  Arms  Control
1.  There  are  weighty  and  cogent   reasons  which  militate   generally
against  the  success  of  any  eifort  to  bring  about  the  reduction  and  con-
trol  of  armaments  by formal  international  agreement,  particularly  mul-
tilateral  agreement,  and  why  history,  though   affording  plenty  of  ex-
amples  of  efforts  in  this  direction,  records  tew  successful  ones,  except
where  the  weapons  in  question   were  obsolescent  or  particularly  in-
human,  or  where  the  political  incentive  to  military  competition   had
already  been  removed.   But  beyond  these  general  difficulties,  there  are
certain  special  inhibitions  and  fears  which  now  burden  the  chances  for
any  progress   towards  arms  control   by  agreement.
In  Russia,  the  chief  difficulty   lies  in  two  phenomena,  both   deeply
rooted  in  Russian   statesmanship   of  the  Tzarist  as  well  as  the  Soviet
period;  first  a  passion  for  secrecy  and  an  extreme,  often   unreasoned,
fear   of   any   foreign   observation   of   life   and   conditions   within   the
country;  secondly,  the  habit  of  maintaining  ground  forces  on  a  massive
scale,  exceeding  any  visible  requirement  ot  external  defense.   The  first
of  these  phenomena  complicates  at  every  turn  questions  of   inspection
and  enforcement  of  any  conceivable  agreements  on  arms  controls;   the
second  helps  to  produce  so  great  a  disparity  in  size  between   Soviet
and  Western  ground  establishments   that  it   becomes   difficult   to  find
any   workable   criteria   for   mutual  reduction  of   such   forces.     About
these  conditions,   there  is  little  we  can  do  at  this  time.
2.  There  are,   however,   certain  similar  abnormal  rigidities  in  our
own  position   which  also  deserve  attention.
First,  we  have  allowed  military  costs  and  administrative   procedure
to  develop  in   such  a  way  that  it  is  difficult   for  us  to  maintain   in
peacetime  anything  more  than  a  relatively small  ground   establishment.
This  means  that  we  have  little  to  offer,   as  a  bargaining   counter,  in
any   negotiations    looking   to   the   reduction   or   limitation   of   ground
forces.     By   maintaining   too   small   a   conventional   force,   in   other
words,  we  contribute  to  the  disparity  that  complicates  agreement,  just
as  the  Russians  contribute  to  it  by  maintaining  too  large  a   one.
Secondly,   precisely   because  we  have  convinced  ourselves   that   we
could  not  compete  in  the  development  of  conventional  forces,  we  have
allowed  ourselves  to  become  dependent,  in  our  planning  and  calcula-
tions, on  atomic weapons,  and  have  committed ourselves  to  the first-use
of   such  weapons  in  any  serious  military  encounter,   whether   or   not
they  are  used  against  us.   Aside  from  the  fact  that  these  weapons  now
have  virtually  suicidal  implications,  so  that  a  war  in  which  both  sides
used  them  would  be  a  catastrophe  in  itself,  this  staking  of  our  defense
policy  on  atomic  weapons  has  placed  us  in  a  position  where  we  could
not  accept  abolition  of  the  weapon  even  if  our  major  adversaries,   who
have  repeatedly   invited  us  to  join  in  its  .general  abolition,  were  to
offer  us  the  most  ideal  facilities  for  inspection  as  a  means  of  assuring
ourselves  of  their  good  faith  in  such  a  move.
We   are  thus  barred  from  progress   in  the  control   of   conventional
armaments  by  the  extreme  disparity  in  size  between  our  conventional
establishments  and  theirs.    And  we  are  barred  from  going  very  far  in
the  direction  of  reduction  or  limitation  of    atomic  armaments  by  the
fact  that  we  would,  as  things  stand  today,  feel  ourselves  dependent  on
the  continued  cultivation   of  such  armaments  and  on  their  use  in  the
event  of  war,  even  if  our  adversaries had  dispensed  with  them  entirely.
3.  These  observations  lead  me  to  conclude  that  the  element  in  our
own  posture  in  matters  of  disarmament  which  requires   most   careful
re-examination  is  the  question  of  our  own  military  costs  and  of  the
reasons  why  we  are  unable,  for  the  amount  we  spend,  to  maintain   a
larger  combat  force.
In  the  absence  of  the  creation  by  this  country  of  a  much  stronger
conventional   establishment,   I  see  little  chance  of  progress  in  negotia-
tion  for  control  of  armaments,  beyond  the  testing  of  atomic  weapons.
B.  The  Relation  of  Arms  Control  to  European  Security
While there  is  extensive  interaction  between  armaments and  political
issues  in  the  development  of  international  conflict,  it  is  my  view  that
it  is  the  political  issues  which  are  basic;  that  armaments  are  more  apt
to  be  a  function  of  political  disagreement  than  vice  versa;  and  that,
accordingly,  efforts  to  reduce  tensions  by  seeking  agreement  on  arma-
ments,  while  leaving the  political  issue  unresolved,  are  not   hopeful.
Nevertheless,  I  must  point  out  that  in  the  present  instance,   certain
developments,  notably  the  decision  to  introduce  atomic  missiles   and
tactical  weapons  into  the  NATO  defenses  on  the  European  continent,
the   trend   toward   the   extension  of   the   atomic  capability  to   other
western  powers  beside  the  U.  S.  and  the  U.  K.,  and,  particularly,  the
organization   and  training  of  the  West  German  armed  forces  in  a  man-
ner   which   practically   implies   their   use   and   possession   of   atomic
weapons  at  a  later  date,  all  operate  to  heighten  greatly  Soviet  nervous-
ness  about  the  unresolved  German  problem,  and  complicate  the  solu-
tion  of  that  problem.    If,  therefore,  means  could  be  found  to  alter  this
trend  of  western  policy, or  at  least  to  hold  out  the  possibility of  such
alteration  as  a  part  of  a  suitable  settlement  of  the  German  question
and  the  problem  of  European  security,  it  would  in  my  opinion  have  a
useful  political  effect.
C.  Soviet   Intentions
1. The  concept  of  Soviet  intentions  which  is  common  in  this  country
and   which  underlies   much  of   our   public  discussion  appears   to  as-
sume  that  what  we  are  faced   with  in  Moscow  is  not  only  a  single
mind,  but  also  a  mind  already  made  up,  committed,  and  not  impor-
tantly  to  be  influenced  by  what  we  may  or  may  not  do.    I   disagree
with  this  view.    I  believe  that  Soviet  policy  is  the  product  not  of  any
single  mind,  but  of  many;  that  these  are  not  always  in  agreement  and
that  Soviet  policy  often  represents  a  compromise  between  them;  that
Soviet  intentions  change  as  the  world  situation  develops;  and  that  our
own  actions  and  attitudes  are  an  important  determinant of  them.
2.  With  these  reservations  I  can  say  that  I  do  not  believe  that  the
Soviet  leaders  want  another  major  war,  or  that  they  would  be  likely
to  inaugurate  one  by  surprise  attack  just  because  they  felt  that  they
had  a  temporary  advantage  in  long-range  striking   power.    There  is
only  one  contingency  in  which  I  believe  that  they  would  consider  such
an  attack;  and  that  is  if  a  situation  were  to  arise  which  caused  them
to  feel  that  major  war  between  themselves  and  the  United  States  was
both  inevitable  and  imminent.   In  this  case  we  should  expect  them  to
take  any  and  all  measures  that  might  seem suitable to  them,  including
the  exploitation  of  the  element  ot  surprise,  in  order   to  reduce  to  a
minimum  the  dangers  which  such  a  major  war  could involve for  them.
I  think,  therefore,  that  it  ought  to  be  a  constant  aim  of  our  statesman-
ship  to  see that  no  such situation  develops.
3.  It  is  my belief  that  the  Soviet government  regretted  the  introduc-
tion  of  atomic  armaments  into  the  world  balance  of  power  and   was,
until  recently  at  least,  sincere  in  the  desire  to  see  them  abolished  and
eliminated   from   national  armaments,  although  unwilling   to   provide
adequate  facilities  for   inspection.    As  Soviet  military  pians  and   dis-
positions    become,   under   present   conditions,    increasingly    centered
around  atomic  weapons,  rigidities  will  also  be  created  on  the  Soviet
side  which  will  be  adverse  to  any  elimination  of  these  weapons  from
national  arsenals;  and  this  has  no  doubt  happened  to  some  extent.
Nevertheless,  it  is  my  belief  that  the  Soviet  government  would  still
prefer,   on  balance,  to  see  these  weapons  eliminated  from   the   scene.
The  cost  of  their  cultivation  represents  a  heavier  burden  on  the  Soviet
economy  than  is  commonly  supposed  in  this  country.
4.  In  any negotiations  looking  to  the  elimination  of  atomic  weapons,
the  Soviet  leaders  would  not  be  likely  to  grant  us  inspection  facilities
that  would  give  us  complete  protection   against  clandestine   violations
of  the  agreement  on  their  side.   On  the  other  hand,  I  do  not  feel  that
this  means  that  there   might  not  be  agreements  on  this  subject  that
would  be  profitable and  acceptable  to  both  parties.    In  the  long   run,
the  reliability  of  agreements  on  the  control  of  armaments  will  always
depend   primarily  on  the  political  and  psychological  climate  in  which
they  operate;  and  the  best  security  we  can  have  against  violation  will
be not  the  inspection  provisions  themselves,  which  can  never  be wholly
foolproof,   but  the  absence  of  incentive  to  violation.
5.  The  first  and  immediate  concern  of  the  Soviet  government  with
respect  to  Germany  is  to  bring  about  an  alteration,  in  their  favor,  of
the  situation  of  Berlin.    The  Soviet  leaders  feel  that  the  present  situa-
tion  there  has  become  a  serious  obstacle  to  the  consolidation  of  their
political  position   in  Eastern  Europe,   and  in  some  ways  a  threat   to
their  political  security.    They  consider  that  they  have it  in  their  power
to  make  the  Western  position  in  that  city  an  awkward   one  if   the
Western  powers   decline  to  agree   to  a  new  status  of   Berlin   which
would  render  the  city  less  of  a  thorn  in  the  communist side.    I  do  not
think  the  Soviet  leaders  want  war  over  Berlin;  but  they  are  prepared
in  this  instance,  for   reasons   not  fully   apparent,  to  play  particularly
close  to  the  edge;  they  have  committed  themselves  extensively;  and  it
would  not  be  wise  for  the  West  to  take  the  matter  too  lightly.
6.  With  regard  to  more  long-term  problem  of  Germany  in  general,
the  main  Soviet  concern  is  to  assure:
a.  That  the  eastern  zone  is  not  swallowed  up  by  the  German  Fed-
eral  Republic in  so  drastic  and  violent  a  way  as  to  constitute  a  major
blow  to  communist  and  Soviet  prestige;  that  in  any  possible  German
settlement  the  East  German  communist  leaders  should  have  a  voice;
and  that  if  possible  some  of  the  social  and  economic  changes  intro-
duced  by  the  communists  in  East  Berlin  should  be  retained;
b.  That  atomic  armaments  should  not  be  introduced  into  the  de-
fenses  of  Western  Germany; and
c.  That   the  armed  forces  of  Western   Germany,  or  of   a   possible
united  Germany,  should  not  be  allied  with,  and  should  not  constitute
an  extension  of,  the  armed  forces  of  the  United  States.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  9, 1959
Glimpses  of  Testimony  in  Kefauver's  Recent  3-Day  Hearings  on  Administered  Prices
"Creeping  Admonitionism"  No
From  the  brilliant  and  witty  testimony  by  Prof.   Ben  W.
Lewis  of  Oberlin,  Jan.  23,  to  the  Kefauver   Committee:
"Leaders  of  business  and  leaders  of  labor  in  recent  years
have  been  increasingly  admonished  to  behave  like  statesmen,
to  consult  their  consciences,  to  seek  the  general  good,  to  hold
their   power   over  prices  and   wages   in  check.    Admonitions
are  delivered  in  the  name  of  our  way  of  life.
"Our   way  of  life,  meaning  our  economic  way  of  life,  tra-
ditionally  is  geared  to  gain,  not  to  goodness.   If  we  were  op-
erating on  schedule,  admonitions marinated in  goodness  would
be  as  pointless  as  they  are  bound  to  be   ineffective.
Economizing   by  Conscience  Inadequate
"May  I  suggest  that  creeping  admonitionism is  wholly  for-
eign  to  our  economic  life,  and  that  economizing  by  conscience
is  a  symptom  of,  and  not  a  cure  for  organic  disabilities?
"The   persistent  flow  of   admonitions   strongly   suggests   a
very  disturbed  state  of  mind  on  the  part   of  those   in   high
places—their  growing  suspicion  that  things  in  the  economy
are  getting  out  of  hand  and  that  something  needs  to  be  done
about  it  that  the  free  market,  unassisted,  cannot  be  expected
to  accomplish.
"It  is  quite  possible  that  our  admonishers  are  catching  a
glimpse   of   a   phenomenon   which   many   observers   of   the
American  economy  have  been  commenting  on  for  many  years,
but  increasingly  of  late:
"In   significant  proportions,  society's  economizing  decisions
are  made, out  of  hand,  by relatively  few  people  who  sit  above
the  market  in  key positions  within  huge  conglomerates  of  eco-
nomic  power.   I  suggest  that  the  admonishers  are  beginning
to  sense  the  fact  that  the  significance  of  the  possession   by  a
few  of  great  power  over  the  economy,  and  are  pleading  that
this  power  be  used  responsibly  in  the  broad  social  interest.
Big  Business  Well  Manicured
"The  behavior  of  big  business  today  is  spotless,  at  least  no
spots  remain  unremoved  for  long.   Tutored   by  its  attorneys,
bathed,  barbered  and  cosmeticized  by  Madison  Avenue,  nour-
ished  and  sanctified  by war  and  cold  war,  bigness  exhibits  the
gracious  assurance that  bespeaks  status  and  a  clear  conscience.
Bigness  was  once  the  bad  boy  in  Sunday  School;  now  it  sits
on  the  vestry.   It  may not  yet  have  acquired  a  full-sized  soul,
but  the  contract  has  been  let  and  the  press   alerted.
"It  is  urged   that,  along  with  the  growth  of  the  big  cor-
poration  as  the  repository  of  great  economic  power,  will  come
the  growth  of  the  corporate  conscience.
"It   isn't  going  to  happen;   if  it  did  happen,   it   wouldn't
work;  and  if  it  did  work,  it  would  still  be  intolerable  to  free
men.   An  economy  is  a  mechanism  designed  to  pick  up  and
Substitute  for  Public  Control
Per  Capita  Income  Declining
Sen.   KEFAUVER.  We hear  a  lot  of  people  say  that
we  have  got  more  money  than  we  had  before.   If  you
take current  prices  in  1955  as  compared  with  1958,  there
has  been  a  growth  of  $39 billion.   But  if  you  use    1958
prices,  then  the  national  [gross  national  product]—
Dr.  Edwin  G.  NOURSE  (first  chairman  of  the  Pres-
ident's  Council   of  Economic  Advisers).   Evaporates  in
inflation.
Sen.   KEFAUVER. ...  [as  for  the]   per  capita  in-
come,  if  you  use  the  same  value  of  the  dollar  in  1955,
which  was  $1,790,  in  1958  it  dropped  to  $1,784.
Dr.  NOURSE.   We  made  a  very  small  gain  for  the
economy  as  a  whole.   It  was  not  proportionate  to  our
gain  in  population,  so  the  individual  is  actually  worse
off  after  the  four  year  period.
—Hearing  on Administered  Prices, Jan.  S3.
discharge   the   wishes  of   society  in   the   management   of   its
resources;  it  is  not  an  instrument  for  the  rendering  of   gra-
cious  music  by  kindly  disposed  improvisers.
"When   170  million  men  live  and   make  their   living   to-
gether,  the  fact  that  every  one  of  them  is  equipped   with  a
burning  24-hour  conscience  does  not  make  less  necessary  the
active  presence  of  an  overall  organizing  and  directing  force
to  work  out  the  level  and  trend  and  allocation  of  resource  use
and  the  division  of  profit.   To  rely  for  this  on  the  unguided,
uncoordinated  consciences  of   the  managements  of   economic
blocs  is  to  abandon  order  as  well  as  human  dignity.
"The  White  House,  which  wants  high  production,  full  em-
ployment,   healthy  wages,   abundant  profits  and   low   prices,
now  admonishes industrial  statesmen  to  recognize  their  public
responsibility  and  to  adopt  measures  'appropriate.'   The  man-
agement—as  allocator,   distributor,  stabilizer,  trustee,   conser-
vator,  prophet  and  chaplain,  as  well  as  manager—consults  its
conscience.   The  diagnosis  of  the  attending  psychiatrist   will
be  'multiple  schizophrenia'  —  the  management's  personality
will  not  be split,  it  will  be  shredded  and  powdered!
Collective   Planning  Lies   Ahead
"My  own  prediction  is  (and  I  stress  that  I  am  predicting,
not  prescribing)   that  the  years  ahead  will  see a  great  increase
in  conscious,  collective,  governmental  controls  and  of  govern-
mental  enterprise.    The   development   will   reflect   a  growing
intensified   concern   over  the  private  possession   of   economic
power  so  vast  that  even  its  possessors  are  frightened   by  the
implications  of  their  holdings.
"Our  giant  firms  are  sitting  like  fat,  delectable  ducks,  vir-
tually  inviting  the  government   to  open  fire  with  something
more  effective  than  anti-trust.  The  invitation  will  be  accepted."
Inflation   of  Last  Five  Years  Due  to  Controlled   or  Administered   Prices
"I  have  one more  chart  which  brings  this  administrative
inflation  more  nearly  up  to  date.  This  Chart  IV carries  the
inflation   from    1953   to  October   1958.    In  this  chart  I  have
divided  metals  and  metal  products  into  three  categories—
steel,  steel  products  and other  metal  products  .  .  .  these
steel  and  steel  using  groups  account  for  two-thirds  of  the
gross increase  in prices shown.  This  whole  area,  two-thirds,
—Gardiner  C.  Means,  Jan.   24,  to  the
2
is  represented  by  the  steel  and  steel-using  industries.  The
administered  price  groups  marked  in  black  account  for  85
percent  of  the  gross  increase  in  the  wholesale  price  index.
"If  these  groups  had  not  gone  up  in  price,  the  wholesale
price index  would  have  risen  less  than  1 percent,  and so  far
as  the  wholesale  price  index  is  concerned,  there  would  have
been  no  inflation."
Kefauver   subcommittee  study  of  administered  prices.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  9,1959
Another  $327,000  Rammed  Through  the  House  Under  Gag  Rule  Without  Debate  or  Roll  Call
The  Un-Americans (Fittingly) Get  More  Money  by  Un-American  Procedure
Under  a gag  rule procedure  about  as  American as  a  meeting
of   the   Supreme   Soviet,  the   House   Un-American  Activities
Committee  got  itself  another  $327,000,  more  than  any  other
House   Committee   except   multifarious   Government    Opera-
tions.   The  amount  asked  was  approved  by House  Administra-
tions   Committee   without   the   public  hearing   its  chairman,
Omar  Burleson   of  Texas,  has  often  promised,  and  reported
to  the  floor  of  the  House  under  a  privileged   rule  allowing
neither  amendment  nor  debate.   Mr.  Burleson  even  arose  to
remind  the  bill's  manager  that  Speaker  Rayburn  had  ruled  he
need  not  recognize  any member  who  asked  for  the  floor  with-
out  first  requiring  that   member  to  state  his  intention,  and
refusing  him  the  right  to  speak  if  he  did  not  approve.
The   bill's  manager,   Friedel  of  Maryland,  nevertheless  al-
lowed  Congressman  James  Roosevelt  of  California to  state  for
the  record  that  he  would  have  moved  to  reduce  the  amount
asked  if  amendments  had  been  permitted,  and  that  he  would
still  press  the  chairman  of  the  Rules  committee  for   hearing
on  his  bill  to  abolish  the  Un-American Committee.    Since  the
Chairman  is  Smith  of  Virginia, father  of  the  Smith  Act,  long
a  card-carrying  anti-Communist,  the  prospects  for  a  full  and
fair  public  hearing  are  about  as  promising  as  a  motion   to
admit  Mrs.  Daisy  Bates  to  the  Daughters  of  the  Confederacy.
Friedel   magnanimously  allowed  Wjer   of   Minnesota,   last
of  the  public  dissenters  against  the  Un-Americans,  to  say that
this  time  like  last  he  would  have  voted  "no" if  a  vote  had
been  permitted.   Then,  without another voice  being  raised,  the
Speaker  called  the  question  and  "the resolution  was  agreed
to,  and  a  motion  to  reconsider  was  laid  on  the  table."    The
un-American   procedure   of   the   House   nicely   matched   the
un-American  preconceptions  of  the   Committee.
On  the  Senate  side  the  same  date,  Jan. 29,  the  Committee
on  Rules  and   Administration  approved   an  appropriation  of
$224,000   for  the  other  witch  hunting  committee,  Senate  In-
ternal  Security.  This  will  probably be  approved  by  the  Senate
before  we  get  to  press  with  as  little  debate  as  in  the  House.
The  President's  budget,  we  notice,  asks  $400,000  for  the  Sub-
versive  Activities  Control  Board.   Between  these  three  groups,
Brighter  Civil  Liberties   News
While  the  Administration  is  preparing  new  restric-
tive  travel  legislation,  Senators   Humphrey  and   Hen-
nings  (supported  initially  by  Chavez,  Anderson,  Sym-
ington,  Morse  and  Neuberger)   have  introduced  a  bill,
S  806, to  protect  the  right  to  travel.   It  says  "no  tests
of  beliefs or  associations  shall  be  applied  to  issuance  of
passports."    The  bill  would   forbid  the  State   Depart-
ment  to  shut  off certain  countries  from  travel  in  peace-
time.   Faceless  informers   would  be  barred  in  passport
hearings.   The  only  political  restrictions  would be  those
in  the  Internal  Security  Act  of  1950  still  to  be reviewed
by   the   Supreme  Court.   This   Act   forbids   travel   by
members  of  organizations  under  final  orders  to  register
with  the  Subversive Activities Control  Board.   No  such
order  has  yet  been  upheld.
Senator   Kennedy  (with  Clark   of  Penn.)   has  intro-
duced  a  bill,  S  819,  to  take  loyalty  oath  provisions  out
of  the  National Defense  Education  Act  of  1958. These
originated  with  an  amendment by  Senator   Mundt  and
have  been  protested  by  many  college  heads,  including
those  of  Yale, Harvard  and  Princeton.   This  is  the  first
time  Kennedy,  strikingly  silent   during  McCarthyism,
has  spoken  up  for  civil  liberty.
and  the  FBI's   own  informer  stable,   there  should   be   ample
funds  to  save  from  the  breadline  that  dwindling  battalion  of
ex-Communists,  anti-Communist frenetics, adventurers,  mooch-
ers  and  plain  "nuts"  who  use  the  witch  hunt  as  their  private
WPA,  raking  over  the  dead  leaves  of  the  Daily   Worker.
Those  liberals  foolish  enough  to  be  pressing  for  postal  cen-
sorship  of  "hate  mail"   (remember   the  Un-American  Activi-
ties  Committee  began  with a liberal  resolution  to  expose  Nazis,
anti-Semites  and  Fascists)  should  take  note  of  House  Res.  78
called  up  by Smith  of  Virginia  and  passed  by  the  House  with-
out  objection  a  few  minutes  before  its  action  on  House  Un-
American.   This  authorizes  an  investigation   into  "the mail-
ability  of  articles  .  .  .  which  reasonably  may  be  expected   to
arouse  or  activate  racial,  religious,  or  class  hatred  or  animos-
ity."   This  too  will  be  no  monument  to   Jeffersonianism.
Get  Your  Renewal  In  Early  So  You  Won't  Miss  Any  Issues  and  Help  Wider  Our  Audience  by Adding  A  Gift   Sub
I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ........................................................................................
Street  ....................;................................................................„.
City  ..........................................Zone............State..............._...
Enter  gift  sub for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
2/9/59
(To)    Name
Street  .........
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?    Yes  Q    No  D
/ F. Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Av...  N.  W.
Washington  15, D.  C
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5B18  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  15, D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.  F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the   U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $13 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED