I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959may18.pdf

============================================================

4  Pages  of  Fallout  Revelations
The  Truth  At  Last  About  Project  Argus,  Anti-Missile Defense  and  Outer  Space  Tests,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VJI,  NO.  19
MAY  18,  1959
'°'       WASHINGTON, D. C.
15 CENTS
The   Real  Lesson   of  the   Radiation   Hearings
The  contamination  of  man's  atmosphere  and  food  by  fall-
out  is  increasing at  a  much  faster  rate  than  was  expected  two
years  ago.    Should  testing  of  nuclear  weapons  resume  it  will
soon  become  a  health  hazard.    This  is  the  real  lesson  to  be
drawn   from   the   hearings   just  ended   by  the   radiation   sub-
committee  of  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy.
Two   years  ago,   after   the  first  hearings   of  this  kind,  the
Joint  Committee  concluded  that  further  testing  "over  the  next
several  generations  .  .  .  could  constitute  a  hazard."    Now  it
seems  that  if  testing  resumes,  the  hazard  will  be with  us  with-
in  our  lifetime.    When  the  first  Kulp  studies  of  human  bone
appeared  in  Science  two years ago,  he  estimated  that  strontium
90  would   reach  a  peak  of  one  or  two  micromicrocuries  per
gram  of  calcium  in  human  bone  by  1970.    Now   the   Fallout
Prediction  Panel,  as  it  reported  to  the  new  radiation hearings,
expects  5  to  10  micromicrocuries in  the  peoples  of  the  north-
ern  hemispheres  by  1962-65.    The  year  of  maximum  danger
is  thought  to  be  8  to  5  years  closer;  the  maximum  level  ex-
pected  is  now  5  times  as  great.    This  is  progress,  but  not  to
any  pleasant  destination.
But  Holifield  Thinks Testing  Could  Resume
These  new  figures  are  based  on  the  results  of  testing  so far.
The  panel  made  no  predictions  as  to  what  levels  would  be
if  testing  resumed.     "Since  testing   by  the  three  present  nu-
clear  powers  essentially  doubled  the  biospheric  contamination
in  a  single  year,"  Wright  Langham  and   E.  C.  Anderson  re-
ported  from  Los  Alamos,  "prediction   of  levels  with  continued
testing  is  fruitless.    The  extent  of  future  biospheric  contami-
nation  will   depend   largely   on  the   number   of   nations  that
choose  to  became  independent  nuclear  powers,   the  time  se-
quence  of  their  development  and   probably  on  the   locations
of  their  respective  test  sites."
These  sober   perspectives  have  been  hidden  from   view  by
a  cloud   of   reassuring  AEC  statements  which   preceded   and
accompanied  the  hearings.   Whereas  two  years  ago,  the  radia-
tion  subcommittee  chairman,  Chet  Holifield,  of  Los  Angeles,
was  probing  and  critical,  this  time  he  revolved  in  the  AEC's
orbit.    It  will  take  months  fully  to  evaluate  the  mass  of  docu-
ments  poured   raw  into   the   record,   but   the   hearings   were
hardly  ended  when  Chairman  Holifield   told  the   Washington
Evening  Star   (May   11),    "It   is  clear  now  that   the   possible
hazard  is  very  small  in  comparison   to  the  needs  of  our  de-
fense,"   and  added,   "I   believe   testing   could   be  resumed,  if
necessary,  at  a  limited  rate."
The   Star  quoted   Holifield   as  saying  that   radiation   from
fallout   was  "roughly   10  percent  of  the  natural   background
radiation  that  always  has  existed."    But  E.  A.  Martell,   Geo-
physics Research  Director,  Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Cen-
ter,  reporting  to  the  subcommittee  on  "Global  Fallout  and  Its
Adequate  Enough  For  An  Unlovely Subject?
"It  is  the  opinion  of  the  Committee that  the  level  of
effort  the  AEC has  devoted  to  its  research  programs  on
radiation   standards  and  protection,  in   their  broadest
sense,  has  been  quite  adequate."
—AEC's  General  Advisory   Committee  Report,  May  7.
Mr.   [James  T.]   RAMEY   [executive  director,  Joint
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy].    I  think  a  newspaper
reporter   who  happens  to  be  in  the  room  pointed  out
that  the   [Atomic  Energy]  Commission  only  had  two
full-time   employees  who  were  concerned  with  fallout
as  such.
Dr.  [Charles  L.]  DUNHAM  [M.D.,  director, Division
of  Biology  and  Medicine,  Atomic  Energy  Commission],
This  is  true,   Mr.  Ramey.    Unfortunately  fallout  is  a
sort  of  an  unlovely subject."
—Radiation  Subcommittee   Hearing,  May  S.
Variability"  had  less  reassuring  figures  to  offer.    "In  areas  of
high   fallout   in   the   northern   hemisphere  during   1957   and
1958,"   Dr.   Martell   told   the   subcommittee,   "the    external
gamma  radiation  from   fallout   is  estimated  to  be  about  one-
half  of  that from  natural  sources."   Should  testing  resume,  the
increase  in  external  gamma  radiation  will  become   serious.
A  Rather  Cavalier  Optimism
Congressman  Holifield admitted the  great unknown  was  the
biological  effect  of  small  quantities of  radiation but  thinks  the
answer  will  never  be learned.   "The   effect,"  he  told  his inter-
viewer,  "is  too  small  to  be  measured exactly."   The  Prediction
Panel  at  his  hearings  was  more  cautious.     "The   panel,  as  a
group,"  it  reported,  "felt  that  no  single  or  simple  relation  be-
tween  radiation  dosage  and  biological   effect   has  as  yet  been
established,  particularly at the  low  dosages  to  be  expected  from
offsite  fallout.   Therefore,  no  attempt  was made  to  convert  the
predicted  concentrations  of  Cs-137  and  Sr-90  into  the  number
of  tumors,  cases  of  leukemia, genetic  effects  and  the  like.   The
biological  effects,  if  any,  to  be  expected  from  past  tests  would
be  manifest  in  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  world's  popula-
tion,  but  because the  population  is  so  large,  the  absolute  num-
bers  calculated  under   certain  assumed  relations  appear   start-
lingly  large."   The  italics  are  added.   Nobody  on  the  subcom-
mittee  asked  what  these  startlingly  large  numbers  were,   nor
asked  how  much  larger  they  would  be  if  testing  resumed.
Only   Senator   Anderson  of  New   Mexico,  the  chairman  of
the  Joint  Committee,  sharply  questioned  the  official   witnesses.
Unfortunately  most  of  his time  was taken  up  with  the  hearings
before  the  Senate  Commerce  Committee  on  the  nomination  of
Lewis  Strauss  to  be  Secretary  of  Commerce.   The  other  mem-
(Contintied   on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  18, 1959
{Continued  from  Page   One)
bers  of  the  radiation  subcommittee  acted  like  dutiful  listeners
to  an  official  briefing  rather  than  Congressional   investigators
digging  sharply  beneath  official   double-talk.
Rapid-Fire  Hearings
The  first  radiation  hearings  took  eight  full  days.  This year's
lasted  only  three  and  a  half.   The  bulk  of  them  was  taken  up
with   the   official   AEC   briefings.    The   panel   discussions,  on
which  a  few  independent  voices  made  themselves  heard,  were
opened   and  shut  with  rapid  fire  attention  to  a  narrow   time
schedule.   'I  think  it  is important,"  Mr.  Holifield  told  his  sub-
committee,  "that  no  pertinent  points  be  swept  under  the   rug."
Those  who  study  the  record   for  themselves   when   it  is  pub-
lished  some  time  in  August  will  see  that  there  is  considerable
important  debris  beneath  the  rug.
A  striking  example  are  the  new  results  and  anxieties report-
ed  by  two  researchers  in  the  field  of  iodine-131,  which  Dr.  E.
B.  Lewis,   professor   of   biology   at  Caltech,   called   "a  serious
fallout  hazard  whose  importance  had  not  yet  been  fully  appre-
ciated  at  the  time  of  the  1957  hearings."    Dr.  Lewis  reported
that  "for  the  last  few  years  testing"  the  thyroid  glands  of  in-
fants  and  children   in  the  United  States  have  been  exposed  to
"average  annual   doses"   from   this  short-lived   isotope  which
are  one  to  two  times  as  great  as  natural  radiation  and  "could
produce  some  cases  of  thyroid  cancer  in  the  exposed  popula-
tion."   Dr.  Arthur  H.  Wolff,   of  the  division  of   radiological
health,   U.  S.  Public   Health   Service,  reported   that   levels  of
iodine-131  have   reached  the  point  where   the  public  health
service  has  included   it  "as  well   as  certain  other   short-lived
radionuclides   in  its  milk  surveillance  program."    Their   pre-
pared   papers  were   included   in  the  bewildering  mountain  of
material  thrown  on  the  press  tables  but  Dr.  Lewis  was  not  in-
vited  to  appear  and  Dr.  Wolff  managed  only  to  achieve  some
references  to  this  new  danger  in  one  of  the  panels.   Yet  the
Just  Russian Propaganda? *
"If  this  process  of  testing  .  .  .  can  continue without
contamination  of  the  world's atmosphere, you certainly
take  away from  the  Soviets one  of  their  greatest  weap-
ons  of propaganda."
—Gong.  Chet  Holifield    to  Dr.  Willard   F.  Libby,
Radiation  Subcommittee,  May  8.
"Evidence  is  increasing that  exposures  of  the  popu-
lation  to  ionizing radiation, at  levels previously thought
safe,  are,  in  fact,  injurious.  .  .  .  Because  radiation  ef-
fects  are  cumulative  and  irreversible and  because  of  in-
creasing  levels of  radiation exposure  of  the  public from
all  sources,  including  medical  and  dental  x-rays, indus-
trial  applications of  radiation-producing  devices  and  nu-
clear  energy,  and  world-wide  weapons  tests,  it  is  most
urgent  that  there  be  no  delay  in  the  further develop-
ment  and  application  of  measures  to  protect  the  public
from   radiation  hazards."
—Public  Health  Service  Report   to  the  House   Approp.
Committee, p. 147, I960  Budget  Hearings,  Apr.  24.
discovery  that  fallout  is  coming  down   faster   than   expected,
and  that  Russian  tests  in  the  Arctic  circle  drop  their  fallout  in
the  northern  hemisphere  within  a  year,  means  that  more  short-
lived  isotopes  reach  the  earth  while  still  virulent  and  that  we
can  no  longer  assume  that  only  long-lived  isotopes  like  stron-
tium-90,  caesium-137  and   carbon-14  are  all  we  need   worry-
about.    Surely  the   danger   of   radio-iodine  to  small  children
was  worth  fuller  attention.
More  New  Poisons  In  The  Air
It  is  tantalizing  to  rummage  in  the  heap  of  press   releases
and  find  so  much  left  at  loose  ends.    In  the  Langham-Ander-
son  analysis  quoted  above,  for  example,  one  reads  that  present
levels  of  caesium-137  in  the  general  population  now   average
67  micromicrocuries  per  gram  of  potassium  but  that  "levels
may  not  go  much  higher  if  weapons  tests  stop  because  Cs-137
The  Delusions  Created  by  Project  Argus
Project   Argus,   after   its   disclosure  by   the   New   York
Times   on   March   19,   created   the   impression   that   these
atomic  shots  300  miles  out  in  space  provided  (1)   a  new
defense  technique against  enemy  missiles  and,(2)  a  way  to
test  nuclear  weapons  without creating  fallout.
We  now  offer  for  the  record  official  denials  of  both  these
misconceptions.    On Thursday, May  7,  Dr.  Herbert  F.  York,
director   of   Defense   Research   and  Engineering,   the   man
who  was  in  charge  of  Project  Argus,  appeared  before  the
Senate   Space  Committee.
Speaking  of  both  Project  Argus  and  the  earlier  Johnstou
Island  shots  in  the  lower  atmosphere,  Dr.  York  said   that
while  much  of  military  interest  was  classified,  "I  can  say
though  that  nothing  was  found  which  represents  either   a
breakthrough  with  respect  to  how  to  stop  missiles  or  with
respect   to  how  to  prevent  their  being   stopped."
Though  Dr.  York  thought  this  "worth  having  on  the  pub-
lic  record,"  he  did  not  put  this  in  his  prepared   statement
and  few  papers  published  his   disclosure.
Dr.  York's  testimony  supports  the  letter  by  Dr.  Walter
Selove,  Associate  Professor  of  Physics  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,   which   the   New   York   Times   published   on
March  29.    Dr.  Selove  Called  it  "a  delusion  to  think  that  a
radiation   film   produced  by   nuclear   explosions   above   the
atmosphere  can  provide  a  shield  against  missiles."
The  second  bit  of  evidence  to  which  I  would  call  atten-
tion  is  also  due  to  the  quick  ey«  and  sharp  wit  of  Dr.  Se-
love.    He  was  a  member  of  the  panel  which  was  questioned
at  the  radiation  subcommittee hearing  on  May  8  about  the
About  "Fallout  Free"  Outer  Space  Shots
possibility  of  fallout  free  nuclear  tests  in  outer  space.
While  Dr.  Libby  hedged  on  the  possibility  of  doing  ade-
quate  testing  in  outer space,  he  did  say  "As  far  as  the  fall-
out  hearings  are  concerned,  I  think  we  can  say  pretty  cer-
tainly  that  this  kind  of  testing  gets  rid  of  most  of  the  fall-
out."   Congressman Holifield  then  asked  Dr.  Frank  Shelton,
technical  director,  Armed  Forces   Special  Weapons  Project,
"Dr.  Shelton,  you  agree  to  that?"    "Yes,"  said  Dr.  Shelton,
"I  have  nothing  to  add  to  that  statement."
The  record,  had  it  ended  there,  would have  been  mislead-
ing.    But  Dr.  Selove  broke  in  to  say  that  a  nuclear  explo-
sion  "carried  out  even  a  few  hundred  miles  above  the  sur-
face  of  the  earth  directs  the  radioactive  particles  half   to-
ward  the  earth  and  half  away.   The  half  which  are  directed
toward  the  earth  .  .  .  would  travel  down  toward  the  atmo-
sphere  until  it  finally  became  imbedded  in  it."
"I have  observed,"  Dr.  Selove  added,  "in  the  official  state-
ments  that  have  been  made  by  the  U.  S.  Government  there
has  been  no  direct  statement, that  fallout  from  shots  above
30  miles  will  be  sharply  reduced,  although  I  must  say  the
statements  are  phrased  in  such  a  way  that  one  easily   reads
them  to  mean  that."
When  Dr.  Libby  was  asked  by  Congressman  Holifield  to
comment,  assuming  nuclear  explosions  held  500  to  600  miles
out   in  space,   he  said   Dr.  Selove   was   "completely    right,"
that  "something   like  half"  the  radioactive  particles  would
come  down  into  the  earth's  atmosphere.
This  disposes  of  the  idea  that  tests  above  a  30-mile  limit
would  not  create  fallout.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  18, 1959
seems  to  be  contaminating  the  biosphere   largely  by  direct  fall-
out  on  vegetation  and  not  through   soil   integration."   What
does  this  level  mean  as  a  health  hazard?   It  is  tantalizing  in
Dr.  Karl Z. Morgan's paper  on  maximum  permissible   exposure
of  the  population   at  large  to  get  a  glimpse  of  "other  bone-
seeking   radionuclides   besides   SR-90   in   the   fallout  material
(e.g.,  Sr89,  Cel44,  Zr95)"  which  are  serious  enough   so  that
the  safe  limits  for  Sr-90  "should  be  reduced   by  a  factor   (we
might  take   50  percent   as  an  average  value)   which   depends
upon  many  things  such  as  the  type  weapon,  yield,  elevation of
shot,  time  since  detonation,  distance  from   shot,   etc."   What
are  these  other  new  poisons ?
Misleading  Averages
The  whole  problem  of  maximum  permissible  limits  of  ex-
posure  was  handled  with   more  speed  than   sense.   Dr.   Jack
Schubert,  of   Argonne  National   Laboratories,   co-author  with
Ralph  Lapp  of  an  excellent  book,  Radiation:   What   Is  Is  and
How  It  Affects    You,  was  one  of  the  few  independents  heard.
He  insisted  on  reading  a  prepared  paper,  though  he  was  only
a  panel  member,  in  which  he  threw  more  light  on  this  subject
in  a  few  minutes  than  had  been  heard  in  several  days  of  of-
ficial reassurances.   Dr.  Schubert  said  it  was  sometimes  not  ap-
preciated   that  maximum  permissible  levels   are   set  as   if   no
other  radiation  exposure  was  to  be  expected  except  from  that
one  isotope  and  natural  radiation.  "Thus,"  he  said,  "when  the
maximum  permissible  level  of  strontium-90  is  stated  to  be 6
7
strontium  units   [as  it  is  by  the  International  Commission  on
Radiological  Protection—IPS]   it  must  be  kept  in  mind  that
it  is  impossible  to  receive  radiation only  from  strontium-90  in
the  case  of  fallout."    He  said  the  practical  limit  should  be  set
at  half  that  amount  for  Sr-90  since  any  person  who  gets  that
much  Sr-90  from  fallout  will  get  a  roughly  equivalent amount
of   radiation  from   other   isotopes   in  fallout.
Dr.  Schubert  also  touched  on  the  deceptive  use  of  averages.
These may be misleadingly  dangerous  (1)   because so  few  sam-
Not  One Biologist  Among  Them
Although   the   General  Advisory   Committee   to   the
AEC   issued   a   report  discounting   the  biological   dan-
gers   of  fallout,   there  is  not  a  single  biologist   on  the
Committee.    Its  members  include  business  and  college
executives,  from  institutions with  AEC  contracts.
The  signers  of  the  report  were:  Eger  V.  Murphree,
president  ESSO  Research  and  Engineering;  Dr.  James
W.  McKae,  vice-president,  A.  T.  &  T.;  Dr.  J.  C. War-
ner,  president,  Carnegie  Tech;  Dr.  Kenneth  S.  Pfizer,
dean,  College  of  Chemistry, Univ.  of  Calif.,  Berkeley;
Dr.   Jesse   W.  Beams,  chairman,  Physics   Dept.,   Univ.
of  Va.;  Dr.  Manson  Benedict,  professor   of  nuclear  en-
gineering,  M.  I.  T.;  Dr.  Robert E.  Wilson,  retired chair-
man,  Standard Oil  of  Indiana; and  Dr.  Warren C. John-
son,  dean  of  Physical  Sciences,   Univ.  of  Chicago.
'  pies  have  been  examined  and   (2)   the  variations  in  the  popu-
lation  may  be  so  wide.   Dr.   Schubert  said  maximum  permis-
sible  levels  should  not  be  based  wholly  on  average  values   "but
attention  should  be  given  to  that  fraction  of  the  most  sensitive
population   whose    radiation   exposure    exceeds    the    average
values  by  two,  three,  or  more,"  as  long  as  these  constitute  sig-
nificantly  large  numbers.   He  said  that  insofar  as  cancer  pro-
duced  by radiation  is concerned,  "the  most  susceptible  segment
of  our  population  appears  to  be  the  unborn  child."    He  said
studies  of  the  effects  of  radiation  on  the  human  fetus indicate
"that  radiation doses  so  low  as  to  approach  the  radiation  levels
from   fallout  and   natural  background   cause  a  significant   in-
crease  in  childhood   cancer  deaths."    All   this   deserved  more
attention.
Though Chairman Holifield  said at  the  opening  of  the  hear-
ings  that  they  would  deal  with  "hot  spots",  i.e.  areas  with  un-
usually  high   radioactivity,  the  subcommittee  passed   over   the
most  important  "hot  spot"  of  all with  the  barest  mention.   This
(Continued   on  Page   Pour)
That  Double-Talk  About  the  AEC  Releasing  All  "Significant" Fallout  Data
"We  find  that   the   Atomic   Energy  Commission   has   re-
leased  all  significant   fallout  data  to  other  agencies  and  to
the   public.   Certain  information   as   to  the  estimated  yield
of  various  weapons  tests  and  certain  other  factors  bearing
on   the   radioactive  content   of   the   upper  atmosphere  have
defense   implications  which  require  classification,  but   the
significant  information  on  actual fallout throughout  the  free
world  that  the  AEC  has  developed has  been  released."
—AEC's  General  Advisory   Committee  Report,  May  7.
Chairman   [Sen.   Clinton   P.]   ANDERSON   [Joint  Com-
mittee  on  Atomic  Energy].    In  your  position  did  you  re-
ceive  the  report  of  the  General  Advisory  Committee?
Dr.  [Charles  L.]  DUNHAM  [M.D.,  director,  AEC's  Divi-
sion  of  Biology  and  Medicine].    Yes,  sir.
Chairman  ANDERSON.   Did  you  think  it  a  clear  report
and  a  satisfactory  one?
Dr.  DUNHAM.   I  thought,  considering  the  time  that  was
available  to  them,  they  made  a  very  considered  statement,
yes,  sir. .  . .
Chairman  ANDERSON.   What  do  you  mean  by  the  time
available  to  them?
Dr.  DUNHAM.   They   met  in  Washington,  I  think,  and
for  a  period  of  three  days,  and  received  information  which
was  provided by  the  [AEC]   Division  of  Biology  and  Medi-
cine,  by Admiral  Parke  and AFSWP   [Armed  Forces  Special
Weapons  Project],  and  by  the  Surgeon  General  of  the  Pub-
lic  Health Service.
Chairman  ANDERSON.   We  won't  quibble.    It  was  two
and  a  half  days,  wasn't  it?
Dr.  DUNHAM.   Yes,  I  guess  it  was.
Chairman  ANDERSON.    In  that   two   and  a   half  days,
you  gave  them  the  material  and  they  digested  it  and  came
out  with  this  report?
Dr.  DUNHAM.   That  is  right.
Chairman  ANDERSON.    They  said  all  their  information
on  fallout  had  been  released.     I  referred  the  other  day   to
the  Langham  report  that  is  not  released.    Were  they  told
how   much   had  been  released,  and  how   much   was   not   re-
leased,  so  they  would  not  have  made  that  erroneous  state-
ment  about all  the  information being  released?
Dr.  DUNHAM.   May  I  look  at  a  copy  of  their  statement
before  I  answer  the  question?
Chairman  ANDERSON.     Yes.
Dr.  DUNHAM.    I  think  they  used  the  word  'significant'
fallout  data,  and  I  don't  pretend  to  know  what  their  inter-
pretation  of  the  word  'significant'  is.
Chairman  ANDERSON.    Then  you  can't  tell  whether  the
report  was   good  or  bad  until  you  know  what   'significant'
meant. ...  Do  you find on  that  basis  that  all  'significant'
fallout  data  has  been  released   to  the  public?
Dr.  DUNHAM.   It  is  possible  that  that  sentence  and  the
one  that  follows  are  mutually  incompatible.
—Radiation Subcommittee  Hearing,  May  8.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May 18, 195?
New  Swedish  Cancer  Discoveries  Ignored  by  Subcommittee
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
is   the  problem   of   bone  cells  which  receive  a  high   dose  of
strontium,  as  discussed  by  Swedish  and  Minnesota  researchers
to  whose  work  we  called  attention  in  our  issue of  May  4.   The
volume  containing  the  Swedish  results,  and  advance  proofs  of
the  article  by  Prof.  W.  O.  Caster  in  the  Minnesota   Chemist
discussing  them,  were  shown  the  Joint  Committee  staff  director
two weeks  before  we published  our  summary.  The  Joint  Com-
mittee wrote  and  obtained  18  copies  of  the  Minnesota  Chemist
article. But    it  was  neither  made  available  with  other   reprints
to  the  press  nor  was  Prof.  Caster  or  any  of  his  Minnesota  co-
workers  invited  to   testify.
An Irrelevant Reply
Instead  there  was  put  on  the  press  table  a  reprint   of  an
article  by  Dr.   Libby   in  the  February  issue  of   the  National
Academy   of   Sciences  Annals  which  refers  to   the   Swedish
findings.    But  it  is  four  pages  of  mathematical  formulas  in-
comprehensible  to  the  layman.   It  begins  by  assuming  a  uni-
formity  of  distribution  in  the  bone  which  the  jSwedes  claim
does  not  exist  and  it  ends  with  conclusions  which  stem  from
its  assumptions.    Since cancer  is  a  cellular disease  and  one  cell
is   enough   to   set   off   its  mysterious  processes,  non-uniform
deposition  of  strontium  in  the  cell  structure of  the  bone  may
require  serious  downward  adjustments  in  maximum  permis-
sible  limits  of   exposure.     If   the   Swedes  are  right,  current
limits  are  dangerously  high.    Surely  this  deserved  discussion.
Except  for  Senator  Anderson,  no  member  of  the  radiation
subcommittee  tried  to  get  at  the  truth  behind  the  cutest  bit  of
AEC  press  agentry at  the  hearings.   This  was  the  statement  in
the  General  Advisory  Committee  report  to  the  AEC  that  Sr-90
in  .food  and  water  "is  less  of  a  hazard  than  the  amount  of
radium  normally  present  in  public  drinking  water  supply  in
certain   places   in   the  United   States,   and   in   public  use   for
many   decades."    This   translates  reassuringly  in   the   public
mind  as  "no  more  dangerous  than  drinking  water."
Senator  Anderson  drew  from  Dr.  Dunham  the  information
"actually  what   they  are  referring   to   is  the   drinking  water
which  serves  a  population  of  several  hundred   thousand   peo-
ple"  in  the  Midwest  who  use  well  water  with  a  higher  than
average  radium  content.    "Mostly  Illinois  has  been  studied,"
Fast  Fellow
"We will  try  at  the  end  of  the  hearing  to  have  a  cold-
blooded   analysis   of   the   testimony   giving   both   view-
points  on  any  subject.  .  .   We  will  not  try  to  editorial-
ize  on  the  hearings  nor  to  suggest  that  you  stop  bomb
testing  or  that  you  continue  it."
—Cong. Chet  Holifield,   radiation hearings. May  6.
"It   is   clear  now  that   the   possible   hazard   is   very
small  in  comparison  to  the  needs  of  our  defense.   I  be-
lieve testing  could  be resumed,  if  necessary,  at  a  limited
rate."
—Cong. Chet  Holifield,  Washington  Star,-May  11.
Dr.  Dunham  said.    I  asked  the  AEC  press  division  after  the
hearings   what  these  studies  had  found.    The   answer,   after
consultation  with  the  Argonne  lab  in  Chicago,   was  that  the
studies  were  still  in  progress  and  no  specific  findings  had  yet
been  made.    If  these  studies  are  still  in  process  and  no  find-
ings  have  yet  been  made,  the  GAC  does  not  know  how  much
of  a  hazard  these  special  situations  represent   and  it  had   no
scientific  basis  for  its  glib  comparison.
The  Bias Showed  .
Congressman  Holifield  and  Senator  Pastore  swallowed  this
flim-flam without  a  gulp,  and  did  not  appeal  to  the  press  to
put  it  in  "proportion."    But  they  publicly  rebuked   Edward
Gamarekian,  Washington   Post  science  writer,  one  of  the  few
independent  minded  journalists covering  the  hearings,  for   "ir-
responsible   reporting."    He  played  up  figures  from  an  AEC
report  which  showed   that  white  bread   sold  in  a  New  York
City supermarket on  February  19 had  four  times  the  maximum
permissible   limit   of   strontium-90.     Holifield   admitted   the
story  was  "accurate"   but  complained  that  the  facts  were  put
"into  disproportion."  The  sudden journalistic  fastidiousness of
Holifield  and  Pastore  was  explained  when  the  latter  said  he
was  glad  the  truth   about   the  Gamarekian  figures  had   been
"cleared   up"   because  "only   today  I  heard  a  suggestion   that
we  go  ahead  with  another  plan  on  cessation  of  tests  only  be-
cause  of  this  story."    Trie bias behind  these  hearings  is the  de-
sire  of  a  majority on  the  Joint  Committee  to  make  a  case  for
a  resumption  of  testing.    On  this  they  stand  arm-in-arm  with
the AEC.
1958  Index   Ready   Free   If   You  Send  A  Long   Stamped   Self-Addressed     Envelope   For   it
HOW  YOU  CAN   HELP
Except  for  papers  like  the  Washington  Post  and  the  St.
Louis  Post-Dispatch,  press  coverage  of  the  radiation  hear-
ings  has  been  poor,  and  our  greatest   newspaper,   the   New
York  Times,  has been  among  the  worst.    The  only  full  text
it  supplied   was  the  soothing  syrup  of  the  General  Advisory
Committee.     Everything   having  to  do  with  the  AEC,   from
Admiral  Strauss  to  nuclear   testing,  gets  sacred  cow  treat-
ment  from   it.    Reassuring  statements   make  its  front   page
but  bad  news  about  fallout  is  generally   pushed  back  to  the
shipping  news.
There  is  much  in  our  issue  this  week  which   more   people
ought  to  know  about.    You  can  help  by  buying  reprints  of
this   issue  in  bulk  at   nominal  prices—3   cents  a   copy  per
thousand   postpaid—for  organizational  distribution  and  by
forming    neighborhood   study   groups   on   nuclear    problems.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday   except  the  last  two  Thursdays   of  August  and  December  at  0618  Nebraska   Ave..  N.  W., Washington  15, D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED