I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959feb16.pdf

============================================================

More  Informers   Unmasked.,  P.  4
Debunking  That   Time-Teller  Nuclear  Scare   Campaign,  P.  3;  Freshmen   Democrats   Fight  Draft,  P.  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VII,  NO.  7
FEBRUARY  16,  1959
»""       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Checking on the Jack Benny  Program at the Soviet Border?
What  first  strikes  one  about  the  tape  recording  released  by
the  State  Department  in  the  case  of  the  C-130  is  the  extent
to  which  we  now  listen  in  across  the   Soviet  border.    Tech-
niques  for  radio  eavesdropping  seem  to  be  so  widely   utilized
that  one  wonders  whether  on-the-spot  inspection  really  is  re-
quired  to  police  an  arms  and  nuclear  test  agreement.
Constant  Secret  Surveillance
Why  can't  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations   Committee's  mili-
tant  new  chairman,  Fulbright,   look   into  this  affair,   at  least
behind  closed  doors?   In  the  January  1958  issue  of  Missiles
and  Rockets,  "numerous  and  continuous"  Strategic Air  Com-
mand  flights  over  Soviet  territory were  reported.   Last  spring
two  former   members  of  a  secret  branch   of  the  Royal  Navy
now  editors  of  the  Oxford  magazine  Isis  were  convicted  of
violating  the  Official   Secrets  Act  by  disclosing  that  monitor-
ing   devices   all   along   the   Soviet  frontier  record   "the   least
squeak   from   Russian   transmitters,  ships,   tanks,   airplanes,
troops  and  control  stations"  and  provide   "accurate   estimates
of  the  size and  type  of  Russian arms  and  troops  and  the nature
of  their  tactical  methods."
The  President  was asked  last  week  about  reports  that  in  the
pursuit  of  intelligence  U.  S.  planes  "sometimes  play  fox  and
drake  along  the  Turkish  border  to  cause  Soviet   interceptors
to  scramble."   Isis  described  this  game  more  fully,   "An  air-
plane  loses  its  way.   Behind  the  frontier,  tape  recorders  ex-
citedly   read   the   irritated   exchanges   of   Russian  pilots,   and
when  the  latter  sometimes  force  an  airplane  to  land,  an  in-
ternational   incident   is  created."   Mr.  Eisenhower   said    "the
orders  on  this  are very strict"  and  "any  thought  of  playing  fox
and  hounds,  as you  call  it  ...     is  contrary to  orders."   In ex-
ecutive  session  officials  might  be  asked  how  such  strict  orders
came  to  be  issued  and  why  we  court  more  trouble  with  new
military  routes  which  skirt  Soviet  bases  on   Kamchatka.
Testing  U.  S. Radio Waves  at  the  Black  Sea?
What  next   strikes  one  about  the  incident  are  certain  im-
plausibilities  in  the   official   statements.   If  this  USAF   C-130
was  merely   engaged  in  studying   "the   propagation  of  radio
waves  transmitted  by  U.  S.  radio  stations",  why  did  it  have
to  go  so  close  to  the  Soviet  frontier  and  why  did  it  need  17
men?   If   Soviet  planes   came  as  close  to  our  frontiers,  we'd
be  shooting  them  down  and  giving  the  U.  S.  pilots  who  did
it  a  ticker  tape  parade.   The  Air  Force  runs  a  project   called
AFOAT,  to  "inspect"  Soviet  atomic  tests  and  stockpiles  from
afar;  this  seems  more  likely  an  explanation   for   such   flights
than  a  desire  to  see how  well  the  Jack  Benny  program  can  be
heard  at  the  Black  Sea.
As  for  the  missing  11—a  real  mystery—what  newspaper-
men  wonder  about  among  themselves  but  few print  is  whether
this  may  not  have  been  a  CIA  operation  to  drop  a  few  more
agents  into  Russia.   "American  officials   scoffed   as  expected,"
Earl  H.  Voss  reported   in  the   Washington   Star  February  8,
"at  the  idea  that  a  C-130  transport,   unarmed,   slow  and  un-
maneuverable,   would   be  .sent   on   a   dangerous    intelligence
mission.   Others  wonder,  however,  whether  just  this  kind  of
plane  might  not  make  a  good   'cover',  particularly if   agents
were  to  be  dropped.   The  C-130  was  designed  as  a  paratroop
carrier.    The   'lure'  attributed   to  Soviet   radio  beacons  could
then  be  regarded  as  a  'cover'  or  a  prefabricated  excuse  for  the
American  plane's  flying  into  Soviet  territory."
Those  Senators like Mansfield who  have  long  been  demand-
ing  a  Joint  Congressional  Committee  to  keep  some  check  on
CIA  activities  ought  to  look  into  this.   We  need  only  imagine
how  Americans  would  feel  if  similar  hanky-pank  were  going
on  along  our  borders  to  realize  how  dangerous  it  is  to  let  the
military  and  a  secret  agency  like  CIA  engage  in  such  activi-
ties.   The  European  correspondents here  seem  to  take  the  af-
fair  cynically  as one  of  those  hazardous  intelligence  operations
in  which  one  usually  cuts  one's  losses  quietly  rather  than  try-
ing  to  build  it  up  as  an  "incident"  demonstrating  the  wicked
duplicity  of  the  other  side.    As  propaganda  it  fell  flat  even
with  normally  pro-American  papers  abroad.
Even the Conservative  Star  Dubious
In  Washington   itself  newspaper  reaction  was  sour.   Chal-
mers  Roberts  of  the  Washington   Post  performed  a  service  by
forcing  the  other  papers  to  take  note  of  the  Isis  case  and  his
paper  said  editorially,   "the   timing  of  the  affair   seems  to  be
a  deliberate  effort  by  the  Administration to  stir  Congressional
and   public  resentment,"   just  when   new   peace   explorations
were  underway.   The   conservative  Washington    Star   agreed
with  the  Post and  in  an  editorial  the  same day  (Feb.  7)   won-
dered  why  neither  the  Vice  President   nor  Mr.  Dulles  men-
tioned   the  tape  recording  to  Mikoyan.   "It   seems  strange,"
the  Star  said,  "that,  when  Mr.  Mikoyan  asked  why  we  were
so suspicious, he  was not  invited  to  listen to  the  recording  and
decide  for  himself.   The  after-the-event indictment  of  him  as
a  liar  would  be  stronger  had  that  been  done."   The  Star  con-
cluded  by  recalling  that  the  shooting  down  of  two  planes  by
the  Yugoslavs   in  1946  with  five  dead  did  not  keep  us  from
making  Tito  an  ally  later.    "Who   can  say,"  it  asked   sagely,
"what  our  national  mood  will  be  12  or  even  two  years  hence?
We  have  made  peace  with   the  Germans,   the  Japanese   and
with  Tito.    It  would   be  unwise  to  assume,   because  of   this
latest  incident,  that  we  will  never  come  to  an   understanding
with  the  Russians."
Perhaps  this  astringent  response  explains  why  the  State  De-
partment  is  now  leaking  the  story  that  the  tape  recording  re-
lease  was  forced  on  it  by  the  Air   Force.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  16,1959
Less  One-Sided  Battle  May  Be  Sparked  in  the  Senate  By  Surprise   Resistance
Four  Freshmen  Democrats  Stage A  Dramatic  House  Fight  Against  the  Draft
When  the  House  of  Representatives  four  years  ago  voted
a  four-year   extension  of  the  draft,  only  four  members  voted
"no",   three   of  them   Midwest  isolationist   Republicans  of  a
rightist  troglodyte  breed  still  in  the  House:  Noah  Mason of
Illinois,  Clare  Hoffman  of  Michigan  and  Wint  Smith  of  Kan-
sas. The fourth  was  a  one-time  radical  Non-Partisan  Leaguer
turned  Republican,  Usher  L.  Burdick  of  North  Dakota,  now
retired.
When  the  House  last  week  voted  another  four  year  exten-
sion,  opposition  appeared  from  the  other  end  of  the   political
spectrum.   A  group  of  newer  liberals   (joined  by  two  Mis-
sissippi  Democrats  and  a  Massachusetts   Republican)  helped
swell  the  total  of  recorded  negatives   to  22  (see   adjoining
box).    Four  freshmen  defied  House  precedent  and  the  lead-
ership  steamroller  to  fight  the  military   bureaucracy   from
the floor.
Retired  Colonel Joins  in Attack
Only two  of these four  new  men voted  "no"  but  all  of  them
challenged   apathetic   acceptance  of   Pentagon   wishes.    The
most  striking  attack   came  from   a  retired   Army  colonel,  a
West  Pointer  with  33  years  of  service,  an  Army  personnel
expert,  newly  elected  as  a  Democrat  from  Connecticut.   Col.
Frank  Kowalski  questioned  the  value  of  the  draft   and  gave
the  House a  glimpse  (see  box below) of how the  Army  wastes
men  on  menial  tasks.
Appointed  to" a   House  Armed   Services   subcommittee   to
look  into  military  manpower wastage,  Col. Kowalski  told  the
House  he  thought  the  Army  powerless  to  correct  this  waste
and  urged  Congress  to  do  it.   Unfortunately,  as  the  swiftly
closed  debate  and  the  381 "yea"   votes  showed, the  Pentagon
is  a  sacred  cow on  the  Hill.
May Spark  A Senate  Fight
Nevertheless  the  unexpected  fight  staged  by  the  rebellious
freshmen   (and  the  wide  sympathy   it  evoked  among  mem-
bers  afraid   to  speak  up)   should  help  to  spark  a  less  one-
sided  battle  when  the  bill  comes before  the  Senate.
Leonard   G.  Wolf,   first   term   Democrat  from   Iowa,   dis-
tinguished  himself  by  a  valiant  fight  to  cut  the  extension  to
two  years  while  Congress  restudies  the  whole  question  of
the  draft.   This  is  the  position  supported  by  both  the  AFL-
CIO  and  the  U.  S.  Chamber  of  Commerce  but  the  military
bureaucracy   proved   stronger   than   labor   and  capital   com-
bined.
Wolf  summed  up  the  case  against  conscription  as  put  by
many  military  experts   from  Britain's  Liddell  Hart  to  Gen.
Harold  Maddux, manpower  director  for  the  Defense  Depart-
ment.   The  latter  asked  last  May  for  "dramatic  changes  in
pay  and  attitudes"  to  create  a  professional  military  service,
protesting that  modern  military needs were not  met by "huge
numbers  of  men  compelled  to  serve  against  their  will."
Freshman   Wolf  drew  support  on  the  floor  from  two  cour-
ageous   older  Oregon  Democrats,  Mrs.  Edith   S.  Green  and
Chas.  O.  Porter  and  from  a  Republican,  Philbin   of   Massa-
chusetts,  who  called  the   draft   "the   labored   application   of
The 22 Recorded Against The  Draft
Carter  (D.  Iowa),  Dorn  (D.  S.  C.),  Green  (D.  Ore.),
Gross   (R.   Iowa),   Harmon   (D.   Ind.),   Hoffman    (R.
Midi.),   Kastenmeier   (D.   Wis.),   Lane   (R.   Mass.),
Marshall  (D.  Minn.),  Mason  (R.  111.),  Meyer  (D.  Vt.),
Moulder  (D.  Mo.), Philbin  (R.  Mass.),  Porter  (D. Ore.),
Shipley   (D.   111.),  Siler   (D.  Ky.),  Smith   (R.  Kans.),
Wier   (D.  Minn.),  Williams  (D.  Miss.),  and  Winstead
(D.  Miss.),  voted  "no."    Johnson  (D.  Col.)  and  Powell
(D.  N.  Y.)  were  paired  against  the  draft.
19th   century,   Prussianized   military   techniques  to  the   in-
credibly   complex,  technical   and   scientific  problems   of  the
nuclear,  space   age."
The  weak  presentation   by  the   House  leadership—Demo-
cratic  but  indistinguishable  from  the  Republicans,  as  on  so
many  issues—showed  it  was  concerned  with  political   effect
abroad   rather   than   with   military    efficiency.     Vinson   of
Georgia,  powerful  chairman  of  Armed  Services,  echoed Army
Chief   of   Staff   Taylor's   plea  that  "in  the   present   interna-
tional  climate"  any  reduction  of  the  draft  might  suggest  to
our  allies  "that  perhaps  we  don't  think  the  situation  is  par-
ticularly  serious."
Coupled  with  this  was  (1)  the  usual   argument  that  the
draft   was  needed  to  pressure   more  men  into  enlisting  and
(2)  a  fatalistic  acceptance  of  continued  conflict.   "We  know,"
Vinson  said,  "that  the  cold  war  will  continue.  We  know that
there   will   probably  be  future   Lebanons  and   future    For-
mosas."
The Two New "Peace"  Congressmen  Speak  Up
This  attitude  was  eloquently  challenged  by  two  Democratic
House   freshmen   elected  as   "peace"  candidates,   Bryon   L.
Johnson  of  Colorado and  William  H.  Meyer  of  Vermont.   The
former  declared  "for  too  long  this  nation  has  been  governed
by  its  fears"  and urged  that  Congress  pay  more  attention  to
mobilizing  its  youth  not  "to  man  missiles  of  mass   destruc-
tion  but  rather  to  training  young  men  as  technical  mission-
aries  with  slide  rules,  with  medical kits,  to  fight  communism
on  a  positive  basis ...  as  missionaries  of  peace."
Meyer  told  the  House  the  Pentagon   "itself   knows"  that
the  draft  system  is wrong  and  pushes  the  extension  bill  "only
because  they  are  afraid  to try  to  change  it."   "I  wish," Meyer
said,  "that  I  did not  have  to  conclude that  a  cancerous  mili-
tarism  is  growing  in this  country.  It  poses  a  threat  to  moat
of  our  institutions  and  creates  an  unevaluated  inner  peril."
He  protested   that  the  bill  was  being  rammed  through   the
House  without  even  waiting  for  the  hearings   to  be  printed
so  members   could  evaluate  the  measure  more  thoughtfully.
Silliest  remark  of  the  debate:  "In  many  ways,"  said  GOP
whip  Leslie  C. Arends   (III.)   unctuously,  "the  draft  law  is  a
tribute  to  the  Christian  principles  of  our  people."  He  meant
that  Americans  were  so  opposed to  war  that  they  had  to  be
drafted!
West  Pointer  Tells  Congress  How the  Army  Brass  Wastes  Soldiers  to  Get Servants
"In  the  light  of  my  experience,  I  have  no  hesitation  in
telling  you  that  there  are  thousands  of  American  soldiers
performing  duties  completely  unrelated to  our  security  ef-
forts  and  contributing nothing  to  our  capability  to  defend
this  Nation.   Hundreds  of  men  are  serving  as  houseboys,
cooks,  laundry boys,  maids  and  servants  for  our  senior   of-
ficers.
"In  the  Pentagon,  there  are  sergeants,  on  whose  training
we  have spent  thousands  of  dollars,  being used  as  mess boys
and  waiters.   There  are  a  large  number of  senior  non-com-
missioned  officers   in  the  Pentagon  who  have  not  worn  a
uniform  of  their  service  for  years,  but  are  dressed  instead
in  the  neat  black  suits  of chauffeurs.
"Very  bluntly,  Mr.  Chairman,  I  do  not  want  my  son  or
the  sons  of  my  constituents  to  be  drafted   to  serve  as  a
laundry  boy  or  a  waiter.
"I  am  convinced that  Congress  has  the  obligation  to  take
a  hard, critical  look at  the  utilization  of  enlisted  men in  the
military   services.    I  believe  that  after   this  hard   look   la
taken,  this   Congress   can  literally   shake   out  one  or  two
divisions  of  troops  in  the   Army."
—Rep.  Frank  Kowalski  (D. Conn.), Feb.  S.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  16,  1959
U.  S.  Scientists  Say  Known  Techniques Already  Available  to  Improve Detection  Methods
Newly  Released Testimony  Debunks  Time-Teller Scare Campaign on  Testing
Time   (Feb.  2):  "The   AEC's  long-standing   doubts   about
the  Eisenhower-Dulles disarmament policy  came  to a  boil last
month  when  a  panel  of  U.S.  scientists  who  had  found  that
detection  of  nuclear  tests  was  dependable—the  scientific  un-
derpinning  of  the  Eisenhower-Dulles  policy—reversed  them-
selves  and  admitted  that  underground blasts even up to  Hiro-
shima  size  were  not  detectable   (Time,  Jan.   12).   Thus   the
Russians  could  presumably  cheat  on any  agreement  at  will."
Humphrey  disarmament  subcommittee  testimony  Jan.   28
(released  Feb.  8)  by  Dr.  James  FISK,  chairman  of  the  West-
ern  delegation  to  the  Geneva Technical  Conference  last  sum-
mer:
"Now  we had  concluded last  summer,  and  stated  in  our  re-
port,  that  tests  of  6  kilotons,  conducted  underground,  could
be  detected  with  a  very  high  probability  and  that  about  90
percent  of seismic events  of this  yield equivalent  could  be  defi-
nitely  identified  as  earthquakes.
"The  newest  data  in  the  Nevada  tests  last  Fall  show  that
there  are  about  twice  as  many  earthquakes  of  about  that
equivalent  size  as  we had  thought.   Mr.  [Carl]  Romney  [seis-
mologist  with  the  Air  Force  and  chairman  of  the  scientists
panel  which evaluated  the  new data]  will confirm  thia or  cor-
rect me.
"It  also  turns  out that  the  actual  signal ... is  somewhat
less, I  believe, about  60 percent  or  two-thirds  of  what  we  had
assumed  on  the  basis  of  earlier  information.
"Taking  these  two  things  together,  the  problem  of identifi-
cation  is  more  difficult  than  we had  thought,  and  therefore,  if
the  system  that  is  described  in  this  [Geneva technical]  report
were  adopted  without  any  modification   whatever  [italics  add-
ed—IFS],  the   requirement  of  on-site  inspection  by  people
would be about ten times as great  as we had anticipated.  . . .
"Meanwhile,  a  careful  look  has  been  going  on at  the  ways
in  which the  present  system  described  in  this  report  could  be
improved  with  known   techniques,  available  technology  and
science  [italics  added—IFS],  to  restore  the  capability  of  the
system  to  the  capability  which was  stated  in this  report, and
I  can say that  these  new or  modified  methods .  .  .  give  real
promise  of  restoring  the  system  to  the  capability  which  was
stated  in this  report. . . .
Senator  WILEY.  "In  the  Geneva  Conference  did  you  arrive
with  the  Soviet  representatives  at  any  arrangement  limiting
our  right  in  any  way  to  improve our  detection   system?"
Dr.  FlSK. "No,  sir.   On the  contrary  we all  of  us recognized
there,  and  it  is  stated  in  more  than  one place  in  this  report,
that  it  is  only to  be expected that  improvements would  follow
with   the   sort  of   scientific   research   and   development  that
would  be normal  in  a field like  this.  .  .  ."
Dr.  ROMNEY. ". . . Dr. Fisk  is certainly  correct,  the  door is
not  closed  for  improvements,  and  the  -methods  by  which  one
would  proceed  to detect  small  shots  are quite  clear.  .  .  ."
This  new  evidence,  which  press  coverage  ignored,  shows
(1)  the  new nuclear  test  detection data  released  by the De-
fense  Dept.  was  not  obtained  by  using  the   instrumentation
recommended  by the  experts at  Geneva last  summer,  (2)  it
does  not  provide  a  test  of how that  detection  system  would
work,  (3)  the  head  of  the  Defense  Dept.  panel  admits  those
instruments  would  give  better  results  and  (4)  we  already
have  known  methods  for  improving  the  Geneva  system  to
reach  its  projected  level  of  efficiency.—IFS
[Italics  added—IFS]
Senator   HUMPHREY. "An  article appeared on January  20 in
Pravda  by  two  of  the  Soviet  scientists  that  attended  these
Geneva  talks,  Y.  V. Riznichenko  and  L.  Brekhovski  .  .  .
(they)   criticize   the  equipment  used  to  record   these  three
,  [new]  underground  blasts.  They  state,
"'. . . The Conference of Experts  recommended the estab-
lishment  by  the  control  posts  of  a  set  of  10 grouped  vertical
seismographs  with  an  amplification of  about  a  million  and  a
maximal  sensitivity  for  registering   vibrations  with  a  period
of  about one  second  and  a  sufficiently  wide pass  band.   In  ad-
dition,  the  establishment  of  several  sets  of  equipment  with  a
wider  pass  band  was  also  recommended.
" The  American  seismologists,  however, applied  equipment
with  a  considerable  lesser  amplification.   A narrow  pass  band
and  a  maximum of  sensitivity  for  vibrations  with  a  period  of
about  0.3 second.  There  was  no  equipment  with  a  wide  pass
band.  To a  specialist  it  is  clear  that  such  equipment  does  not
tally  with  the  recommendations  of  the  experts'  conference
AND   IS  LESS  SENSITIVE   IN   PARTICULAR  ALSO  IN
REGISTERING  THE AMPLITUDE OF THE  FIRST VIBRA-
TION  OF  A  LONGITUDINAL WAVE   [emphasis   added—
IFS]   which  is  an  important  factor  in  determining  the  period
of  the source  of  the seismic  feature.  . . .'
Senator   HUMPHREY. "Is  the  criticism  valid  that  the  instru-
mentation  was  not  according  to that  recommended  by  the  ex-
perts at Geneva?
Dr.   ROMNEY.  "It  was  not  claimed  that  the  equipment   at
these  stations  is  identical  to  what  a  control  post  would  have,
according  to  the  Geneva  recommendations.  This  is  an  impos-
sibility,  for  very  good  reasons,  if  you  read  what  the  recom-
mended  equipment  was.   These  are  very  elaborate  stations,
and  we could  not  do it;  but  neither  do we claim,  and  in  what
was  given to the Russians  it  was not  claimed, that  these  were
Geneva-type stations.. . .
"Now    the  improvement  you  would  get  by  having  ten   in-
struments   instead  of  one  can  be  calculated  rather   simply.
The  improvements  you would get  by  using  other  kinds  of  in-
struments  are  more  difficult  to  account for.   That  ia certainly
true."
Our  Experts  Confirm  Soviet Denial
"There  were  available  to  the  Conference  of  Experts   [at
Geneva]  data  on  only  one  nuclear  explosion."
—Defense  Dept.  release on new  test  data Jan.  16.
"In   April  a  new  presidential   science  panel,   headed  by
Cornell's  Bethe,  reported  after  studying  results  of  just  one
U.  S.  test  shot  in  Nevada  that  test  detection  was  depend-
able."                                                     —Time,  February  2.
Senator  HUMPHREY.  The  Soviet  scientists  [in  Pravda
Jan.  20]  appear  to  object  to  the  inference  that  the  Geneva
technical  conclusions  on  the   seismic  method  of   detecting
tests  were  based  primarily  on  the  results  of  one  nuclear
underground  test. . . .
Dr.  ROMNEY  [chairman  of  the  Defense  Dept.  panel  on
the  new data],   I  don't  think  it  was  claimed  that  the  con-
clusions  were based entirely  on Rainier  [the  1.7 kiloton  first
Nevada   test].   This   statement,   I   believe,   is    misleading,
Geneva Pact  Based on One Test Only
simply  that.  The  Soviet  statement  is  misleading.
Senator  HUMPHREY.  What  about  the  Soviet   statement
to the  effect  that  the  conclusions drawn by  the  experts  were
based  on,  "many  years  experience  in  the  investigation  of
many  thousands  of earth  tremors  as  well as  many  hundreds
of  seismic  registrations  of  large  TNT  explosions"?
Dr.  ROMNEY.  That  is  certainly   true.
Dr.  FISK  [chairman  of  the  U.  S.  delegation  at  the  Ge-
neva  technical  talks].   Yes,  this is entirely  true. . . .  There
have  been  many  seismic  investigations  of  underground  ex-
plosions  of  TNT,  and  we spent  a  good  deal  of  time  discuss-
ing  these,  our  data,  Canadian data,  Russian  data,  and  so on.
And   of  course   the   U.  S.  Government  has   made  seismic
measurements  on  nuclear  shots  that  are  above  the  ground,
which  are  not  completely  irrelevant.
—Executive  Hearing  Jan. t8, released Feb. 8.
2   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  16,  1959
Unnoticed   Revelations  in  the  Latest  SACB  Order  Against  the  Communist  Party
Exposing  the  True  Faces  Behind   Some  of  Those  Faceless  Informers
Mrs.  Mary  Markward  was  one  of  the  heroines  of  the  witch
hunt.  Hers  was  the  story  of  a  humble  hairdresser  who  joined
the  Communist  party  to  put  the  finger  on  its  members  in  the
District  of  Columbia  area  for  the FBI.
She  was  a  star  witness  in  many  radical  prosecutions  includ-
ing  that  which  the  Attorney  General  began  nine  years  ago  to
force   the  Communist  Party  to  register  with  the   Subversive
Activities  Control  Board.
The  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  has  just  issued  its
third  order  requiring  the  Communist  Party  to  register—the
two  earlier  ones  were  sent  back  to  it  by  the  Courts.
"Sincere,  Forthright  .  .  ."
In  its first order  in  1953 Mrs. Markward  was a  key witness;
in  its  second  in  1956, even  after  FBI  records  in  the  Philadel-
phia  Smith  Act case  cast  doubt  upon  her, the  Board  still  found
her  "sincere,  forthright  .  .  . not . .  . one who would  deliber-
ately  fabricate   testimony."
The  latest  order,  however,  finds  that  she  did  not  tell  the
truth  when  she  testified  that  she  worked  for  the  FBI  without
pay:  "she  received  substantial  payments."   It  also  throws  out
her  testimony  that  Philip  Frankfeld,  once  head  of  the  party
in   the  District-Maryland   area,  said  Communists   would   not
bear  arms  against  the  Soviet Union.    The  Board  does  not  find
that  Mrs. Markward  "palpably  lied"  but  decides  her  testimony
"should  be  assayed  with   caution."
So  one  by  one, in  this  obscure  prosecution  of  a  hated  and
isolated  minority  party,  the  government's  informers  are  being
exposed.   When  the  Supreme  Court  sent  the  original   order
back,  holding  that  "a  fastidious  regard  for  the  honor  of  the
administration  of  justice"  required  full  inquiry into  the  charg-
es  of   perjury  against  the  informers  Paul   Crouch,   Manning
Johnson  and  Harvey  Matusow,  the  Justice  Department   indi-
cated  its  own  opinion  by  failing  to  defend  them.   Their  testi-
mony  was  stricken  from  the   record.
When   discrepancies  in  testimony  given   in  various   Smith
Act  and   deportation   cases  threw   doubt  on  others,   and   the
Jencks  rule  gave  the  defense  a  chance  to  examine  the  original
No  Need  to  Be  Alarmed
President   Eisenhower's  recommendation   in  his  State
of   the   Union  Message   for   a  Committee  on  National
Goals  was  "welcomed"  in  a  tongue-in-cheek  resolution
adopted  by  the  National  Executive  Committee  of   the
Socialist   Party  —  Social  Democratic  Federation  at  a
meeting   in   Washington   February   8.     The    National
Committee   noted  however  that   (according   to   a   New
York  Herald-Tribune story  of  January  27)  some  White
House  advisers  were  turning  against  the  idea  "because
they  fear  the  next  step  would  be  economic  planning."
The   Socialists   said,   "It   is   time   Americans   stopped
thinking  of  planning as  a  dirty  word."  The  Washington
Star,  in  reporting  the  Socialist  resolution,   added pro-
tectively  that  the  Eisenhower  proposal  was  "in  fact,  a
revival  of  a  project  of  another Republican-conservative,
Herbert  Hoover,  no  Socialist.  .  .  ."   We  are  happy  to
pass  on  this  reassurance   to  our  readers.
FBI  reports,  more  turned  out  to  be  tainted.   Key  portions  of
the  testimony  of   informers   Honig,   Cummings  and   Scarletto
were  stricken  on  the  second  round.
Now  with  the  third  order,  the  Board  strikes down  not  only
two  key points  in  Mrs. Markward's  testimony  but  two  of  the
most  sensational  stories  told   by  Louis  Budenz:  the  alleged
"Starobin  letter"  and  the  "Wiener  conversation."
The  original  FBI  records  of  Budenz's  prolonged   interro-
gation   on   leaving   the   party   supported   neither   story.    The
Board  concludes that while  these were not  "deliberately  false",
"the  fair  thing  is  to  strike the  testimony"  since  Budenz  is  too
ill  with  heart  disease  to  be  cross-examined  on  the  discrepancy.
We  dwell  on  this  dreary  record  because  it  has  wider  im-
plications.   In  hundreds  of  cases  lives  have  been  ruined   and
reputations  destroyed  by  these  and   other   informers   because
the  right  to  confront  them  has  been  denied  in loyalty-security
cases.   The  government  is  even  now  preparing   a  bill  which
would  permit  it  to  restrict  the  right  to  travel  without  allow-
ing  passport  applicants  to  cross-examine  such  accusers.
Here  we  can  see  the  true  face  behind  some  of  those  face-
less  informers.
IPS   Speaks    Cleveland    Feb.   20   for    WILPF    and   Feb.   21   for   City   Club   Lunch  Forum
8:15  p.m. Friday,  Feb. 20,  Church  of  the  Saviour,  2537   Lee  Road,  Cleveland   Heights
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave., N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ...........................................^....................................^......
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone...........^!^..................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
2/16/59
(To)  Name
Street   ..........
City  ..........................................Zone............State......._...........
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Entered as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
Notice  -    Please  Renew  If  You Are  Due to  Keep   Your  Weekly   Coming
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED