I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959apr27.pdf

============================================================

Castro and  Clare Luce, P.  3
Sidney  Lens Describes  the  Jobless  Issue  Splitting  Labor—Reuther  from  Meany,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  16
APRIL  27,  1959
«"       WASHINGTON,  D. C.
16  CENTS
Is  Nixon  the  Key  to  Peace  With  Russia?
A  new  constellation  of  forces  is  slowly  becoming  visible  in
the   West   and,   unless   some   misadventure  intervenes   or   is
provoked,  may  set  the  stage  for  a  world  settlement  with  the
Soviet  Union.   Three  key  figures  in  the  cold  war  have  been
moved,  Mr.  Dulles  into  retirement,  Dr.  Adenauer  into  a  deci-
sion  to  leave  the  Chancellery,  Mr.  Churchill  into  a  new  posi-
tion.   In   1946,   at  Fulton,  Missouri,  Mr.  Churchill  signalled
the  beginning  of  the  cold  war;  in  August,  1950,  he  launched
the  rearmament of  Germany.  Now  he  warns  the  West  against
being  "rigid,"  and   calls  Russian  fears  of  a  resurgent   Ger-
many  "reasonable."    The  most  sensitive  and  masterly  baton
in  the  West  is  orchestrating  a  new  policy.   In  1953,  after  the
death  of  Stalin,  he  tried  to  bring  about  a  settlement  but  was
thwarted  by  Mr.  Dulles  and  Dr.  Adenauer.   This  time,  with
his  old  adversaries  weakened,  Mr.  Churchill  has  roused  him-
self  for  another,  perhaps  final,  effort  at  peace,  an  effort  which
reflects  Britain's fear  that  German  revival has  gone  too  far  for
its  own  safety  and  that  the  balance  must  be  redressed  before
the  Reich,  with  nuclear  arms,  can  play  an  independent   role.
Nixon  Picks  Up  The  Wallace  Line
In   1953  Mr.  Churchill  had  to  deal  with  a  newly  elected
and  confident  Mr.  Eisenhower,  flanked  by  an  exuberant  Mr.
Dulles  who  was sure that  he  could  find  something  more  posi-
tive  than   "containment"   with   which  to  fight  Communism.
Today,  Mr.  Churchill  can work  against  the  background  of  an
American  public  opinion  disillusioned  with  containment  and
skeptical  of  deterrence,  anxious  if  possible  for  a  settlement.
The  Mikoyan visit  indicated  that  under  the  ice of  official   pol-
icy  there  existed  in  American  business  circles  a  warm  readi-
ness  for  trade  and  co-existence.   Most  important  of  all,  it  ap-
pears  that  with  the  exit  of  Mr.  Dulles,  a  fresh  hand—that  of
Mr. Nixon—is  grasping  for  the  helm,  prepared  to  exploit  this
new  situation.   Two  days  before  Mr.  Dulles's  resignation  was
reluctantly  announced   by  the  President,   Mr.  Nixon  had  al-
ready  indicated  a  new  course  when  he  spoke  to  the Academy
of  Political   Science  on  the  need  for  something  more  "posi-
tive"  than   "massive   military   deterrence."    While  the   press
played  up  his  proposal  to  use the  World  Court  for  East-West
disputes,   a  more  significant  aspect   of   his   speech   was   Mr.
Nixon's  appeal  to the Kremlin,  "let  us compete  in  peace.  . . .
Let the  stronger  system win,  knowing  that  both  systems  would
be  moving  in  a  direction  of  world  peace,  with  increasing  ma-
terial  prosperity."    Mr.  Nixon  was  thereby   saying  in   1959
what  Henry  Wallace  suggested  in   1948.
Time   and  again   in  the  past  two  years,  Mr.   Nixon   has
wanted  to  do  a  mission  to  Moscow.    Each  time  the  idea  has
been  vetoed  by Mr.  Dulles.  Now  48  hours  after  the  announce-
ment  that  Mr.  Dulles  was  too  sick  to  carry  on,  the  news  was
Nuclear  Bulletin
S.  Res.  96,  a  resolution  to  put  the  Senate  on  record
as  favoring  a  suspension  of  nuclear  weapons  tests  un-
der   effective   inspection,  introduced  by   Senator  Hum-
phrey  on  March  26  and  long  delayed by  a  wrangle  in-
side  the  Joint  Committee  on Atomic  Energy, was  finally
reported  to  the  Senate  by  the  Foreign  Relations Com-
mittee  on  Friday,  April  17.   A  swift  vote  of  approval
was  hoped  for  that day, then  expected on  April 20,  but
differences  made  their appearance in  the  cloakroom and
a  vote  was  postponed.
The resolution was  reported with amendments linking
a  cessation of  testing with  control of  conventional arms
but  still  urges  the  government to  "continue  to  negoti-
ate"  at  Geneva.    The  main  obstacle  seemed  to  be  the
attitude  of  former  AEC  Commissioner Thomas E. Mur-
ray,    consultant  to   the   Joint   Committee,   who   favors
wider  development  of  small  atomic weapons.
Why  the  President  sent  his  message   for  a  limited
cessation of  tests  (in  the  lower atmosphere only)  at  the
very  resumption  of  the  Geneva  talks is  a  mystery. That
was  supposed to  be  a  move  of  last  resort.  It  would  al-
low  the  nuclear  arms race to continue and new countries
•  to  enter the  race.
released  that  Mr.  Nixon  would  visit  Moscow  at  the  end  of
July  to  open  the  U.  S.  exhibition   at  the  fair.   His  visit  will
come  after  the  Foreign  Ministers  Conference  in  Geneva  and
before  the  expected  summit  meeting  in  August  or   September.
Mr.  Nixon  has  long  wanted  to  visit   Moscow;   the  friendly
laying  on  of  hands  in  the  Kremlin  would  finally  cure  him  of
the  curse  laid   upon  him  in  the   American  left   by  his  red-
baiting  campaign  of  1948.   Mr.  Nixon  has  the  right  wing  of
the  Republican  party  securely  in  his  pocket;  it  has  nowhere
else  to  lodge.   Were  he  now,  after  an  unsuccessful  Foreign
Ministers  Conference,  to  pave  the  -way  for  a  Berlin  agreement
at  the  summit  and  some  beginning   of  a  world   stabilization,
he  might  be  laying  the  foundations  for  a  Republican  victory
and  his  election   in  I960.   "Peace  in  Korea"  helped   Eisen-
hower  win  in  1952.   A  world  settlement   by  Eisenhower  and
Nixon  would  be  a  powerful  elixir  with  which  to  perk  up  the
G.  O.  P.'s  chances  this  time.   One  more  factor  must  be noted.
If  there  is  to  be  a  settlement  with  the  Russians,  it  will  take
conservatives  to  do  it.   Only  they  can  make  a  deal  with  Mos-
cow  without   being  effectively   accused  of  appeasement   or  of
secret  Communist  sympathies.   Peace  with  Russia  is  Nixon's
opportunity,  and  Nixon  in  turn  may  be  a  chance  for  peace.
Bypassing   Germany  At  Last
Such  possibilities,   and  such  new  perspectives,   are   opened
only  by a  tacit  readiness  to  by-pass  the  German  problem,  and
(Continued   on  Page  Pour)
6   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  27,1959
Crisis  Compared  to  That   Which  Split   Lewis   and   CIO Off  from  Green  and  AFL
The  Jobless  Issue  Driving  A  Wedge  Between  Meany   and  Reuther
By  Sidney  Lens
Walter  Reuther  was  in  rare  form  at  the  recent  AFL-CIO
conference  on  unemployment.    The  setting  of  klieg  lights  and
television  cameras  was  1959  but  the  words  carried  the  bite  of
a  bygone  era.   Following  Secretary  of  Labor  Mitchell  to  the
microphone   he   put   the   needle   to   the   Republican    regime.
"When  Mr.  Mitchell  said  he  was  going   to  talk   about   the
Eisenhower   efforts  to  check  unemployment,  I  said  to  myself:
'this  is  going  to  be  the  shortest  speech  of  his  career'."   The
7,000  unionists—both  employed  and  unemployed—rose  from
their   chairs  to  roar  their   agreement.    Catchwords   rolled  off
Reuther's  tongue  like  a waterfall,  and  each  one  brought  waves
of  applause.   He  spoke  of  the  "deficit  of  leadership,"   charged
that  when  Ike  "stands  behind  the  golf  ball  he  puts  the  nation
behind  the  eight  ball,"  demanded  that  the  nation  balance  the
family  budget  before  it  balances  the  federal  budget,  and  called
for  a  moratorium  on  debts  for  the  jobless.   Though   he  paid
the  usual  fealty  to  the  free  enterprise  system  and  made  the
necessary  obeisances  towards  damning  communism,   some  of
his  proposals  had  that  quality  of  which  militancy  is  made.
Building  Trades  Not  So  Hard  Hit
But  while  the  crowd  belonged  to  Reuther,  the  conference
was  steered  towards  impotency  by  George  Meany.   Meany,  a
tough,  honest  but  conservative  man  who  has  never  walked  a
picket   line,   looks   askance  at   action  from   below.    He   had
yielded  to  the  meeting  in  the  first  place  only  as  a  compromise
for  Reuther's  proposal  to  mobilize  tens  of  thousands  for  a
march  on  Washington.   The  building  trades  unions  that  are
Meany's  mainstay are  nowhere  near  as  hard-hit  by  layoffs  as
the  mass  industry unions  for  which  Reuther  speaks.
Everything  was done  to  tone  things  down.  Getting  into  the
Washington  armory, where  the  all-day  session  was  held,  was
almost  as  difficult   as  crashing  Fort  Knox.    Each  "delegate"
had  to  present  a badge  and  a  fancy  credential to  the  sergeants-
at-arms.  Groups  from  Buffalo  and  other  cities where  the  prob-
lem  is  acute,  were  told  not  to  come.
Those  who  did  come  —  in  six  chartered  coach  trains,  35
buses,  and  a  hundred  autos—spent  a  frustrating  day  listening
to  23  speeches.   They  wanted  to  demonstrate  in  the  center  of
town,  put  a  picket  line  around  the  White   House,   raise  cain
with  their  Congressmen.  But  they  sat  in  an  armory  two  miles
from   the  Capitol   doing  nothing   more  dramatic  than   listen.
Senator   Paul   Douglas   made  a  stirring   speech,  but  the  old
switchman   from   Texas,   Lyndon   Johnson,   sidetracked   the
whole   effort   onto  an  empty  rail.   His  proposal   to  set  up  a
"commission"    to   study   the   "stark   but   true"   facts   caught
Meany's  fancy,  and  the  AFL-CIO  head  latched  onto  it  like  a
trapeze  artist  catching  a  rope.
Jobs  and  Wages   Declining
The  facts  are already  well-known.   There were  13.1   million
production  employees  in  February  1957;   only  11.9   this  year
though  the  production   index  is  about  the  same.   Despite  a
I4c  rise  in  hourly  earnings,  industry was  paying  out  $43  mil-
lion  less per  week  for  its  factory hands.   Jobs  are  disappearing
as  if  into  a  squall,   and  new  ones  are  not  being  made   fast
enough  to  absorb  the  900,000  youth  who  annually  enter  the
labor  force.   As  Pat  McNamara  observed:  "What  we  need  is
Sidney  Lens  has  been  in  the  labor  movement all  his
adult  life.    He  is  the  author  of  four  books,  the  latest
of  which—The  Crisis  of  American Labor—will  be pub-
lished  next  month.    His  articles have  appeared  in  such
publications  as  Harper's, Reporter,  Nation, Progressive,
and  Harvard  Business Review.
action,  not  a  study."
Both  Reuther  and  Meany  are  in  a  box.   Their  Democratic
Party  allies  in  Congress  have  struck  out.   Improved  unemploy-
ment  compensation  is  dead  for   this  year.    So  is  the   shorter
work  week.   So  probably  is  an  effective  program  for  the  267
depressed  areas.  But  for  Meany  the  effects  are  not  yet  acute;
he  prefers  to  sit  on  the  status-quo,  or  at  least  near  it.   For
Reuther  the  crisis  runs  deeper  than  lost  jobs.
For  the  first  time  in  two  decades  the  mass  industry  unions
are  on  the  wane.   After  uninterrupted  growth  they  are  losing
members, finances,  influence  and  bargaining  power.   The  signs
are  visible  everywhere.   Reuther's  own  union,  the  UAW,   is
down  400,000  from  its  peak.   Last  year  it  trimmed  101  men
from  its  750  member  staff;  this  year  another  78—and  it  cut
the  wages  of  those  who  remained  by  5 percent.   Its  1958  con-
tract  package  with  auto's  Big  Three  was  the  smallest  of  any
in  the  post-war period.   The  mass industry  unions  which  gave
labor  its  "insurgent   impulse"   in  the   1930's—and  still   have
some   of   it   left,   despite   increasing   institutionalization—are
losing  their  specific  gravity in  the  movement  as the  blue  collar
work  force  is  reduced  and  the  unorganized  white  collar  and
technician work  force expands.
This   is  labor's  dilemma.   It  can't  stand   still,   but  it   has.
When   the  AFL  and  CIO  were  merged  in  December   1955
there  was  much  talk  of   a  grand  organizational  drive.   Ex-
CIO  unions  pledged  $8  million  to  get  it  rolling—but  it  never
got  off  the  ground.    AFL-CIO  was   15  million  members  at
birth.   It  is  now  barely   13  million,  after   expelling   the   1.5
million   Teamsters.
Unemployed   Councils   Reappear
The  crisis  thus  turns  full  circle.   The  laid-off  auto  or  steel
worker  not  only  is  downgraded  30  to  50  percent  in  his  wage
rates,  as he  finds  work  in  an  unorganized retail  store  or  motel,
but  becomes  a  political  pressure  on  his  union  to  "do   some-
thing."   The  weakened  economy  weakens  not  only  the  indi-
vidual  worker  but  labor's  bargaining  power  as  well.   It  cries
for  some political  solutions.   To  regain  momentum  the  unions
need  political  gains,  but  their  political   weight   is  lighter  by
each  laid-off  member.
To   redress  this   balance  Reuther   is  forming   unemployed
councils  in  each  region  and  local  of  his  union.   Speaking  to
his  executive  board  he  argued  that  unless  labor  enrolls  the  un-
employed  they  will  drift  to  more  radical  leadership.   This  is
reminiscent  of  the  words  of  John  L.  Lewis  in  1935  when  he
warned  William   Green   that   unless   the  AFL  organized   the
mass  industries  more  radical  forces  would  take  over  the  task.
Joblessness  thus  drives  wedges  in  the  house  of  labor   itself
—between  those  who  need  and  seek  dramatic action,  and  those
who  are  immobilized.   It  has  brought  to  the  surface  what  is
probably  the  most  serious  difference   in  labor  philosophy   in
many  years.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, April  87,1959
Fulbright  and  Morse  Fight   the  Sending  of  Clare  Soothe  Luce  to  Brazil
Castro's  Queasy  Welcome:  All  We   Care  About  Is  Anti-Communism
Time after  time  under  Truman  and Eisenhower, I  have  seen
Washington   bedecked  with  flags,  crowds  assembled  and  the
President  on  hand  to  greet  some  bemedalled  little  turkey  cock
of  a dictator  raised to  power  by oil  or  banana  politics  in  Latin
America  and  kept  in  power  by military  force.  But  when  Fidel
Castro,  one  of  the  heroes  of  our  time,  comes  to  town,  he  has
to  arrive  by  the  non-protocol  back  door  and  the  President  is
too  busy playing  golf  to  greet  him.   The  Castro  story is  almost
anachronistic,  like  something  out  of  the  romantic  Nineteenth
Century.   In  the  age  of  the  atom  bomb,  when  military  force
is  supposed  to  be overwhelming,  a  handful  of  brave  men  take
to  the  hills  and  wage  a  successful  struggle  to  free  their  coun-
try  from  a  dictator  whose  forces have been  trained  and  armed
by  the  Colossus  of  the  North.  Not  since  Bolivar  has  any  man
so  thrilled  the  youth  of  Latin  America, and  much  would  have
been  forgiven  us  if  Mr.  Elsenhower  had  embraced  him  on  the
steps  of  the  White  House.
No  one would  guess  from  the  queasy  reception  given  Castro
that  there  was a  time  when  this  country actively  supported  the
struggle  for  freedom  in  Latin  America;  Bolivar,  inspired  by
Washington,   was  our  hero,  too—and  the  Monroe  Doctrine
was designed  to protect  the  Castros of  that  time  from  the  Holy
Alliance, which  sought  in  the  name of  religion  to  stifle  democ-
racy  everywhere.  Now  we  have  our  own  Holy  Alliance;   the
Vatican  is  our  ally;  clerical  parties  our  favorite   collaborators
in  Europe.  When  a  fighter  for  freedom  faces  Meet  the  Press,
he  is  greeted  with  shrill   questions  about  Communism.    We
don't  really  care  whether  a  man  is  a  democrat;  all  we  ask of
him  is that  he  be anti-Communist.   When  the  Russians  execute
a  Nagy  or  look  with  suspicion  on  a  Gomulka,  wanting  to  be
sure  that  he  is  firmly  anti-capitalist,  we  call  it   intervention.
But when a bloody dictator  is overthrown  in  Cuba, all  we want
to  be  assured  of  is  that  the  liberator  won't  be  "neutral,"  that
his  brother  is  not  a  Communist,  and  that  he  will  keep  hands
off   the  sugar  plantations.
A  Female  McCarthy
That  our  country  is no  longer  the  hearth  of  a generous  revo-
lutionary  idealism may also be brought  home to  Latin  America
by  the  appointment  of  Care  Booth  Luce  as  Ambassador  to
Brazil.   Senators  Fulbright  and  Morse  mobilized  little  support
when  they  focussed  attention  at  a  Senate  Foreign  Relations
All  We Have to  Do Is  Exterminate
The Russian People
"While   in  our  simplicity   we  continue  to   fight   the
ghosts   of   'internationalist   communism',   'Soviet  com-
munism'  and  'Marxist  ideology',  behind  these   smoke-
screens  the  Muscovites  capably  apply  the  borderlands
policy  of  the  past  tyrants  of  Muscovy.  .  .  .  Russian
Communism  is  the  third  form  of  Russian  imperialism,
the  dominant   preceding  forms  being  the  Third  Rome
ideology  and Pan-Slavism. .  .  .  Our further  reverses in
the  unending  cold  war  .  .  .  will  be  the  direct  result  of
a   protracted  misconception  of  the  real  nature  of   the
enemy,  his traditional  modes of conspiracy ...  duplicity
.  .  .  and centuries long  messianism."
—Dr.  Lev  E.  Dobrutnsky,  professor   at  Georgetown
University    (Jesuit)    and   chairman,   Ukrainian
Congress    Committee    of    America,    criticizing
Voice   of  America  before    the  House   Appropria-
tions  Committee,  April  17.
hearing  on  the  record  which  makes  her  a  poor  choice  for  the
Brazilian post.  To  Latin  America, FDR  was the  man  who  re-
placed  Dollar  Diplomacy-with  the  Good  Neighbor  policy  but
to Mrs.  Luce he  was  "the  only President  who  ever  lied  us  into
war"  (speech  of  Oct.  11,  1944)   and  his  party  an  organism  in
which  "for  20 years mortal  enemies of  ours  have  been  growing
and  thriving"   (speech  of  Sept.  30,  1952).   She  is  a  female
McCarthy,  a  spoiled  rich  woman with  more energy  than  sense,
and  more  ambition  than   integrity,  the  wife  of  a   publisher
whose Time  and  Life   are  notorious  in  Latin  America for  slan-
dering popular  forces and propagandizing  the  cause of  the  rich
and  privileged.   In  Italy,  as  Senator  Morse  brought  out,  she
supported   the   monarchists   ("practical   politics"   was   Mrs.
Luce's  excuse),  intervened  openly  in  Italian  politics  (a  matter
she  explained  was  picked  up  "not   by  the  proper  American
press,  but  by the  Communist and  Socialist  press,"  a  sideswipe
at  Reporter  Magazine)  and  helped  those  who  were  trying  to
get  Italy  to  hand  over  its  oil  monopoly  to  private  U.  S. com-
panies.  Brazil has a government  oil  monopoly,  too.   The  prize
glimpse  of  her  inner  self  at  the  hearing  was  her  afterthought
about  the  "lie"   charge  against  FDR.   She  said  that  now  that
she had  become a politician  and  a  diplomat,  she  realized  "one
cannot  always in a high  position  approach  the  people  with  the
coldest  and hardest  facts  in  seeking  to win  them  over.  .  .  ."
The  Best  Analysis  We  Have  Seen
"Both  sides,  inevitably,  draw  a  parallel  with  Hungary.
The rising  is  represented  as a plot by a clique of  reactionary
landlords,   allied   to   foreign  imperialism,   from   which  the
Tibetan people have been rescued by  their  Chinese brothers;
and   alternatively  as   a   popular  struggle   waged   by   the
Tibetans  for  their  freedom.
"But  the  comparison  is  absurd.  In  Hungary, landlordism
and  capitalism had ceased  to  exist  years  before  the  rising,
which  was  caused by Soviet resistance  to  demands for politi-
cal  and economic  democracy.
"In  Tibet,  the  Communists  have  been  content  to  tolerate
the  medieval  theocracy that  has  kept  the  country out  of  the
modern  world,  in  order  to  prevent trouble.  The  question  of
a  chance  for  the  common people  to  gain  anything  that  eon
be  called  freedom  was  simply  never  on  the  agenda.
of  the  Tangled  Situation  in  Tibet
"Certainly  nothing of  this  kind  ia  offered  by  the  tribes-
men—or  rather nomadic highway  bandits—who  spearheaded
the  revolt,  nor  by  the  wealthy  monasteries   living  off  the
backs  of  the  Tibetan  villagers.
"The  Chinese,  on  the  other  hand,  can  claim  little  support
among  the  people.  There are no Tibetans—as  there were no
Hungarians—fighting   on  the  Communist  side.
"The  struggle,  in  fact,  is  going  on  over  the  heads  of  the.
Tibetans,  who have  not  yet  entered the  stage  of  history.   If
there  is  a  parallel,  it  is  with  the  Indian  Mutiny—when  pa-
triotic  sentiment  gathered  around  dispossessed  princes  as-
serting  their powers,  and an outworn social  system  put  up  a
futile  struggle  against  the  British  for  survival."
—London  Tribune,  April  S.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  27,  1959
Indications That Herter Does Not  Share Dulles's Black-and-White Views
(Continued  -from   Page  One)
leave  the  reunification  of  the  Reich  to  the  better  atmosphere
of  an  indefinite future.   Until  now,  Germany has  occupied  the
center  of  the  stage,  and  all  else  has  been  subordinated  to  the
maintenance  of  that  East-West  tension  so  essential  to  the  re-
vival  of  the  German  military  and  the  German   monopolists.
Mr.  Dulles  symbolized  their  supremacy.   It  is  significant that
amid  the  columns  of  biographical  material  about  Mr.  Dulles,
there  was  almost  no  mention  of  his  pre-war  record:  his  life-
long  service as counsel  to  the  great  German  cartels,  the  friend-
ly  relations  Mr.  Dulles  enjoyed  from  the  start  with  the  new
Nazi  regime,   his  defense  of   Hitler's   rearmament  policy  in
the  Atlantic  Monthly  in  1935, his  pre-war  debate  as  an iso-
lationist  with  Wendell  Willkie,  his  1939 book  "War, Peace
and  Change"—a  Macchiavellian  apologia   for   the  Axis—his
opposition  to  aid  for  Britain and  France  before Pearl  Harbor.
History  will  record  that  he  went  into  politics  after  the  war
and  succeeded  in  rehabilitating  the  same  German  industrial
monopolists   he  had  served  before  as  private   counsel.   This
was a moralist  who never  expressed  moral  objections to  Hitler.
Biggest  Man  In  The  Job  Since  Borah
The  possibilities  of  a  detente  are  aided  by  the  appearance
in  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  chairmanship  of  a
humane  and   cultivated   mind.    Senator  Fulbright's   speeches
before  the  American  Society  of  Newspaper  Editors  and  at  the
tenth  anniversary  banquet  of  The  Reporter  magazine  may  be
found  in  the  Congressional  Record of  April  17 and  are  worth
reading.   Not  since William  E.  Borah  in  the  twenties  has  the
Foreign   Relations   Committee   had   a  chairman   of   this  sta-
ture.   "We  are  going  to  have  to  realize,"  he  told  the  editors,
"that  a  way  of  life  is  not  necessarily  inferior  to  ours  simply
because  it   is  different."    At   The   Reporter  banquet,   he   at-
tacked  bipartisanship  in  foreign  policy  as  "in   theory  an  in-
strument  of  national  unity  .  .  .  more  often  in  recent  practice
a  gag  on  legitimate   discussion."    Senator  Fulbright   said  he
thought  what  our  European  allies  feared  was  "not a  healthy
debate  conducted  by  Americans on  foreign  policy  issues"  but
rather   "precipitate   announcements  of   foreign   policy  which
neither  Congress  nor  the  country  has  properly   considered."
For  Fulbright  negotiation  is a  matter of  good  sense and  neces-
You   Can  Have  A  Free   Copy   of   Our  1958  Index   If
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  AYC.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:'
Name
Street
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
4/27/69
(To)   Name .....
Street     .............
City    ........................_............Zone............State...»...™«..-.
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?     Yes  D    No  D
How  to  Get  Harry  Bridges  at  Last
Since  Harry  Bridges has  spent  most  of  his  adult  life
fighting  charges  that  he  was  once  a  Communist,  and
one  tribunal   after   another   has   ruled   the  charge  un-
proven,  the  presumption  is  that  he never  was  a  member
of  the  party.   In  that  case,  he  had  no  right  to  invoke
the  Fifth  amendment  when  asked the  question again by
the  House Un-American Activities  Committee last week.
Strictly  speaking,  the  amendment  can  only  be  invoked
when  an  honest  answer  might  incriminate.   The  House
Committee could  convict  him of  contempt  for  improperly
invoking  the  Fifth  if  it  now  turned  around  and  proved
he was  never  a  Communist.  We don't  expect Mr. Walter
to leap on this suggestion, but it  would  provide  his com-
mittee  with  what   old  time  vaudeville  used  to  call  a
change of pace.
sity.   This  is  a  long  way  from  the  Acheson-Dulles  view  that
negotiation  is  something  to  be  avoided,  lest  it  relax  the ten-
sion  so long  relied  upon  to  bring  Moscow  to  its  knees.
West  Germans  Dubious  of  Herter
The  new  Secretary  of  State  is  a  minor  and  unknown  star
in  this  new  constellation.   Fulbright  has  been  lobbying   for
him;  David  Lawrence's U.  S.  News  and  World  Report   (April
27)   reports  that   the  West   Germans  view  Herter   "with  a
jaundiced  eye."  The   best  full   length   portrait   of   the   new
Secretary,  by  Henry  Brandon  in  the  London  Sunday   Times
(April   19)   says  that  while  Mr.  Dulles   saw  the   East-West
conflict  as  a  "struggle  between  good  and  evil,"  his  successor
"shares  the  European  approach  that  Communism  is  danger-
ous,  but  that  it  is  an  ideology  in  which  many  people   believe
and  that  one  must  seek  some  way  of  living  with  it.   He  does
not  see things  in  black  and  white.  .  .  ."   These  are  impres-
sive  testimonials.   Mr.  Herter  himself,  handled  by  the  Senate
Foreign  Relations  Committee  as  if  he  were  too  fragile   for
real  questions,  gave  the  impression  of  a  rather  colorless,   not
too  vital,  stratospherically  upper  class  gentleman.    Just  why
the  President  treated  him  so  coldly  in  introducing  him  to  the
press  at  Augusta  remains  a  mystery; there  is  reason  to  believe
there  were  kst  minute  attempts  to  get  Herter  to  work  under
another  Secretary.
You   Send   A   Self-Addressed     Stamped    Envelope
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  ever;  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W., Washington  15,  D. C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
K  in  the  U.  S.;  f6  in  Canada;  *10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED