I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jun08.pdf

============================================================

McCone  As  Tricky  As  Strauss, P.  4
The  Military's  Real  Fear  About  Underground  Testing,  P.  2;  More  on  That  Lynching,  P.  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  22JUNE   8,  1959°'°'       WASHINGTON, D. C.
15  CENTS
Assuring  the   Survival   of  the   Unfittest
The   importance  of   the  Vitarelli  decision,  in   itself   a  very
limited  ruling,  is  that  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  for  the first-
time—although  only  in  a  footnote—takes  cognizance  of   the
rubbish  which  serves  as  standard  of   loyalty  and   security  in
screening  persons  for  government   service.    We   reprint  the
gist  of  that  footnote  in  an  adjoining  box  so  the  reader  may
savor  for  himself  the  full  flavor  of  political  illiteracy in  these
proceedings.    As  in  the  days  of  Metternich  and  the  Holy  Al-
liance,  when  the  priest  and  the  secret  informer  policed   Con-
tinental  Europe  against   the   slightest   whisper   of   democratic
idealism,  so  today  the  effect  of  these  screenings is  to  filter  out
all  who  feel  deeply  and  generously  for  the  fate  of  their  fel-
low  men  and  to  reserve  government  employment,   scholastic
fellowships  and  many  other  professions  and  privileges  to  the
mediocre,  the  insensitive,  the  opportunist,  and  the  crafty.    At
a  time  when  our  country  and  humanity  never  had  more  need
for   imagination  and  magnanimity,  loyalty-security screenings
are  a  mechanism for  the  survival  in  government  of  those  least
fit  to  cope  with  the  unprecedented  problems  of  our  time.
Darwinianism in Reverse
The  Vitarelli  case illustrates  this reverse Darwinianism.   The
Department   of  the  Interior  was  looking   for  an  educator   to
serve   in  a  Pacific  Islands   Trust  Territory.     Common   sense
called  for  a  man  who  would  show  sympathy  for  the  colored
peoples  the  U.  S. rules  in  these  areas,  and  sensitivity for  those
as  yet  without  the  rights  of  citizenship.    The   understanding
that  Dr.  William   Vincent  Vitarelli  had  shown  for  minority
rights  in  his  academic  and  political  past  was  some   assurance
of  fitness  for  the  task,  but  these  qualifications were  treated  by
the  ignoramuses  of  the  screening  board  as  cause  for   suspicion
and  grounds  for  removal.    Had  he  been  a  bigot,  a  white  su-
premacist,  a  person   equally  contemptuous  of  natives  and  do-
gooders,  the  screening  officials  would  have  welcomed   him  as
a  kindred  spirit  and  sent  him  off to  give  those  Pacific  peoples
the   worst   possible   impression   of   Uncle   Sam.    This  is   the
nemesis  that  lies  in  wait  for  a  government  which  makes  con-
formity  the  test  of  loyalty.
These  evils  will  not  be  cured  by  litigation.     Dr.   Vitarelli
and  his  counsel,  Clifford   Hynning,  struggled  six  years  to  get
this   case  into  our  highest   court.    But  all   they  won,   beside
$30,000  in  back-pay,  was  reinstatement  in  a  position   from
which   (as  the  Court  admits)   he  may  be  discharged  without
explanation  before  the  ink  is  dry  on  its  order.    The  stigma  of
a  loyalty-security  discharge  which  reduced  this  gifted  man  to
taking  a  job  as  high  school  manual  training  instructor  at  an
unskilled  worker's  pay  will  not  be  removed.     Indeed   a  new
discharge  may only  deepen  it.   The  slim  technicality   on  which
Even  McCarthy  Didn't  Go This  Far
" 'Mr.  ARMSTRONG   [the   Interior  Departmental  se-
curity  officer  inquiring  about petitioner's activities as  a
teacher  in  a  Georgia college]: What were  your  feelings
at  the  time  concerning  race  equality?  .  .  .  How  about
civil  rights? ...  Do  I  interpret  your  statement  cor-
rectly  that  maybe  Negroes   and  Jews  are  denied  some
of  their  constitutional rights  at  present?
'Mr.  VITARELLI:  Yes.
'Mr.  ARMSTRONG:  In  what  way?
'Mr. VITARELLI: I  saw  it  in  the  South  where certain
jobs  were open to  white people and not  open  to  Negroes
...  In  our  own  university,  there  was  a  quota  at Co-
lumbia  College  for  the  medical students.    Because  they
were  Jewish.  .  .  .
'Chairman  TOWSON  [of  the  security  hearing board]:
Isn't  it  true  that  the  quota  system  is  designed  by  the
college  in  order  to  make  it  available  to  persons  other
than  live  in  New   York  City  .  .  .  rather  than  the  race,
creed  or  color?
'Mr.  VITARELLI:  I  think  that  is  the  way  the  policy
is stated.
'Chairman  TOWSON: Is  it  not  a  fact?
'Mr.  VITARELLI:  I  don't  think  so.     ...
'Mr.  ARMSTRONG:  I  think  you  indicated  in  an  an-
swer  to  an  interrogatory  that  you  at  times  voted  for
and  sponsored  the  principles  of  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt,
Norman  A.  Thomas  and Henry  Wallace?  .  .  .  The file
indicates  too  that  you  were  quite  hepped  up  over  the
one  world  idea  at  one  time;  is  that  right?'
"Witnesses  presented by  petitioner  were  asked  by  the
security  officer  and  board  members  such  questions  as:
'Did  you  consider  Dr.  Vitarelli  as  a  religious  man?
.  .  .  Was  he  an  extremist  on  equality  of  races'?"
—Supreme  Court  footnote  in  Vitarelli  v.  Seaton.
he  achieved  some  small  measure  of  justice  is  no  remedy   for
our  national  problem  in  getting  rid  of  a  McCarthyism  which
antedates  and  survives  the  Wisconsin  adventurer.    So long  as
the  government   is  dealing   with  "sensitive"  jobs—Vitarelli's
was  not  one  of  them—it  is  free  to  use  this  kind  of  screening
and  to  protect  its  "confidential  informants"   from  cross-exami-
nation.     Two   cases  which  involve   these  broader   issues  still
await  decision  by  the  court,  and  in  Congress  a  powerful   bloc
of  troglodytes  is  fighting  to  reverse  the  Cole  decision  of   1956
and  extend  loyalty-security  proceedings—the  star  chamber  and
the  faceless  informer—to  all  government   jobs,  "sensitive"  or
not.     A  queasy  public  uneasiness   about  these  procedures  is
making  itself  felt,  but  as  yet  there  has  been  no  cleansing  re-
vival  of  real  feeling   for   justice  and  liberty.    Until  we  stop
producing   these  for  export'only,  the  loyalty-security  miasma
will  not  be  dissipated.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  8, 1959
Can't  "Detect"  Enough  About  Such  Tests  to  Give  the  Results  They   Need
What  the  Military  Really  Fear  About  Underground  Testing
We  want  to  call  attention   to  an  almost  unnoticed   speech
made  before  the  Second   Missile  Industry   Conference  here  in
Washington  on  May  27  by  Brigadier  General  J.  A.   Barclay,
commander,  Army  Ballistic  Missile   Agency.     In   it  he   said
that  while  world  opinion  "may  dissuade  the  United   States  at
least  from  testing  nuclear  weapons  on  the  surface  of  the  earth
or   in   the   denser   atmosphere,   because   of   fallout"   tests   by
"underground  explosions  on  a  large  scale  are  not   feasible."
He  did  not  elaborate  but  went  on  to  suggest  "outer  space  as
a proving ground  . . . because  attendant  fallout  is minimized."
Dr. Libby  Was Suspiciously  Cautious
The  General's  remark   becomes   clearer  if  read  against   the
background   of  a  panel   discussion   the  last  day  of  the  recent
radiation  hearings.    Dr.  Libby  was  very  cautious  when   ques-
tioned  about  the  feasibility  of  underground   testing.    He  said
such  tests  so  far  had  been  limited  in  size  "for   obvious   rea-
sons."    He  would  not  go  beyond   saying  that  "it  looks  quite
hopeful   that  we  can  tell  how  the  thing  works  and  most  of
what we need  to know."    Later  Dr.  Libby  admitted  that  while
there was no  air  or  water  contamination  from  the  Rainier  shot
in  Nevada,  "This  was  a  good  rock  for  this  particular  kind  of
experiment," adding "We  don't know  for  sure  that  some  other
kind  of  rock  would  seal  it  in  as  well."
Why  Not  1454  Megatons  on  225  Targets?
"Our  Committee  is  aware  that  their  attack  pattern
has  been  arbitrarily  set  forth.  .  .  .  Our pattern  of  at-
tack  is  based  on  the  net  delivery  of  1453  megatons  of
nuclear   weapons  on  224  United   States   target   areas,
using  260  separate  nuclear  weapons.   This  pattern  fur-
nishes  a base  which is  necessary  for  mathematical  com-
putation  and  biological  estimation  of  effects."
—Con.  Chet   Holifield,   announcing   public  hearings
June   15  on  "the   effects    of  nuclear   war."
Dr.  Shelton  of  the  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Project,
who was on  the  same panel,  objected  that  testing   underground
or  in "outer  space  was  not  satisfactory  because  both   provided
"very  little  information  on  the  main  purpose  of  the  weapon,
that  is,  how  to  use  it  and  whether  to  use  it  and  what  it  will
do."     The  military  are  not  so  much  worried   about  an  enemy
testing  underground  without  being  detected  as that  they  them-
selves   when   testing   underground    can't   "detect"   enough   to
make  such  tests  useful.
The  question  of  underground   testing  has  been  blown  up  out
of  all  proportion   in  the  hope  that  it  can  be  used  to  upset  an
agreement  altogether.    What  the  military  want  is  to   resume
testing  in  the  atmosphere  where  they  can  see the  results.
Anderson Disagrees  With Holifield  and the  AEC's Advisory Committee on Radiation Peril
Miss  DAWSON; Senator,  as  Chairman of  the  Joint Com-
mittee  on  Atomic  Energy,  you  have  the  responsibility  for
hearings  on  radiation  fallout.    Are  you  satisfied  with  the
results  of  these  hearings?
Senator  ANDERSON:  Well,  let  me  start  out,  Carol,  by
saying  that  Congressman  Chet  Holifield  of  California really
had  responsibility  for  these  hearings   and  I  thought  did  a
very  fine  job.    I  think  he  was- better  satisfied  with  them
than  I  was.    I  was  not  so  satisfied  because  I  did  not  think
that  the  hearings  looked ahead.   They  dealt  with the  fallout
that  now exists,  instead  of  concerning  themselves  with  what
might  happen  if  we  continued  testing  for  the  next  ten  or
15  years.
Miss  DAWSON:  Well,  then,  Senator,  do  you  think  that  if
the   State   Department   declassified  the   three   secret   docu-
ments  which  may  relate  to  possible  detection  of  atomic  nu-
clear  tests,  do you believe  that  a  nuclear test  ban would  still
be  feasible?
Senator  ANDERSON:  Well,  I  don't  believe  the  declassifi-
cation  of  these   documents  is  the  real  question  whether  a
nuclear  test  ban  is  feasible.    The  real  problem  is,  do  we
want  one,  do  the  other  countries  want  one  or  are  we  just
going   to  find  places  on  which  we  can  dispute  and  argue.
We  can  always  do  that  and  we  seem  to  have  done  it   suc-
cessfully  for  months.    I  am  afraid  we  are  going  to  keep
on  doing it  for many  more  months.  .  .  .
Mr.  MEANS:  I  would  like  to  get  back  to  the  hearings
for   a  moment,  Senator.    You  pointed  out  that  they   only
tried  to  assess  the  amount  of  radiation that  does  exist,  but
there  has  been  great  criticism  of  this.    One  group,  for  ex-
ample,  from  the  College of  Physicians  and Surgeons  in  New
York,  charged  that  the. report  was   misleading.
Senator  ANDERSON:  Well,  I  said  the  report  was  mis-
leading  also.   I  was  trying  to find a  quotation  here  to  show
you  what  I  mean.    In  one  spot  they  said,  about  strontium
90,  'The  amount  of  Strontium  90  which  has  been  found  in
food   and  water  is  less  of  a  hazard  than  the  amount  of
radium  normally  present  in  public  drinking  water  supply
in  certain places  in  the  United  States.'
Now   you  would  think   from  that  that  a  good  drink  of
Sr90  was   about  as   dangerous  as   drinking  spring   water.
Well  that  isn't  the  story  at  all.   These  does  happen  to  be  a
well  that  carries  quite a  heavy  radium content  and  the  peo-
ple  who  have  been  drinking  it   have  not   yet   shown  any
substantial  deterioration.  .  .  .
The  fact  that  we  are  taking in  a  very  large  dose  and  you
don't  see  a  man  drop  dead  in  the  street  doesn't  necessarily
mean  there  is  not  some  deterioration.    I  would  have  liked
the report better if  there had been  a biologist  on it.   I would
have  liked  the  report, much  better  if  somebody  was  paying
some  attention  to  the final  genetic  effects  of  it.   That  wasn't
true.    We  had  chemists  and  engineers  on  it  and  that  isn't
my  idea  of  how  best  to  measure  the  hazards  of  this  situa-
tion.  . . .
Mr.  HUTCHISON: Senator,  returning  to  the  problem  of
radiation  fallout,  in  your  opinion  how  great  is  the  danger
from  fallout, if  we  continue  our  nuclear  testing?
Senator  ANDERSON: Obviously it  is  not  too  great  today
.'.  . but  if  we  continue  to  test  at  the  same  rate  we  could  do
damage  some  day soon.  .  .  .
Mr.  HUTCHISON:  Then  I  take  it   you  agree   with  the
AEC  Advisory   Committee  report   that   there   is   no   great
danger  at  present?
Senator  ANDERSON:  No,  I  don't  agree  with  it  at  all.
The  Advisory  Committee  report  somehow  got  to  the  hear-
ings  at   a  very  opportune  moment  for   those   people  who
didn't  want  a  very  thorough  probing  of  this.    It  hung  like
a  sword  of  Damocles  over  the  whole  hearing.   Any  scientist
who  got  up  and  testified  on  fallout  had  to  realize  here  was
the  official  position  of  the  AEC  hanging   over  him. ...  I
think  it  would  have  been  far  better  if  the  Advisory  Com-
mittee  report,  which  had  been  long  delayed,  had  been  de-
layed  five  or  six  more  days  until  the  hearings   could  have
been  over.
—Ruth  Hagy'a   College News  Conference,  ABC  Network,  May  31.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  8, 1959
A  Portrait  of  Coleman  Before  the  Senate  Constitutional   Rights  Subcommittee
Governor  Turns  Uncertain  About  Special  Grand  Jury  in  Lynching
Governor  James  P.  Coleman  of  Mississippi,  in  his  appear-
ance  here  before  the   Senate  subcommittee  on  constitutional
rights,  turned  out  to  be  a  shrewd,  lanky  and  relaxed  gentle-
man  with  a  big  toothy  smile.'   His  hair   is  greying  at   the
temples;  his  dark  silk  suit  was well-tailored.    He  pronounced
"Negro"  without  slurring  and  under  questioning  by  Senator
Langer   produced   one   of   the   year's   finest   understatements.
"I  am  not  here,"  he  declared,  "to  say  to  this  committee  that
every  Negro  in  the  State  of  Mississippi  is  voting  today."
Most  of  the  Governor's  time  on  the  stand  was  taken  up
by  a  warm  and   friendly   duet  with  Senator  Ervin  of  North
Carolina  in  which  the  two of  them,  without a  single  disagree-
ment,  touched  on  Thad  Stevens, the  horrors  of  Reconstruction,
and  the  iniquities  of  the  Federal   courts  in  granting  Negro
plaintiffs  writs of  habeas  corpus.    As  the  Governor  summed  it
all  up  philosophically,  "one  excess  always  provokes  another."
Somehow  judges and  lynchers emerged  on  the  same plane.
When Trial Not Required
The  Governor  referred  with  pride  to  his  four   years  as  a
Judge,  but  his  standards  as  a  jurist  appeared  to  be  flexible.
He  admitted  that  some  people  had  criticized  him  for  saying
after  the  Poplarville  lynching,  "The  proof  of  this  man's  guilt
of  rape  was  conclusive."    He  defended  this  verdict  without
trial.    But  when  Senator  Carroll  (D.  Col.)   said  that  Federal
courts  in  the  South  had  held  that  where  not  a  single  Negro
voter   is  registered,   "as   a  matter  of   simple  arithmetic,  you
don't  have  to  prove  anything,  that  discrimination  is  obvious
on  its  face",  the  Governor  objected.    "Well,  sir,"   he  said,
"that   is  establishing  a  rule  that  some  things  don't  have  to
be  proven  in  court."
Governor   Coleman   several  times  defended  the   failure   to
summon  a  special  grand  jury  in  the  Poplarville  lynching  on
the  ground  that  the  State  Supreme  Court  would  invalidate  in-
dictments  brought  by  a  grand  jury  if  summoned  specially  to
consider  a particular crime.   "But  supposing,"  Senator  Carroll
asked  him,  "a  special  grand  jury  were  called  for  the  purpose
We  hope  readers  will  press  their  Senators  to  demand
an  explanation  from  the  Attorney  General  as  to  why  he
dropped  any  effort  to  prosecute  the  Poplarville   lynch-
ing  in  the  Federal  courts.    There  is  growing  reason  to
believe  the  lynchers  were  masked  and  had  the  coopera-
tion  of  country  officials.    Either,  if  proven,  would  bring
the  lynching  clearly   within  the  Civil  Rights  statutes
even  as  emasculated  by  judicial  decision.
of  investigating  the  breakdown  of  law  and  order  in  that  area?
How  did  they  get  the  key?    How  did  they  get  into  the  jail?
Did  they  break  the  doors?    Was  there  a  conspiracy  on  that
part  of  the  sheriff,  or  the  jailers ?   Suppose  that  you  launched
an  investigation  into  that  by  virtue  of  a  special  grand  jury,
and  incidentally but  not  primarily,  indictments  were   returned.
Do  you  think  they  would  be  sustained?"
The  Governor  was uncertain.    "I  am  not  quite  sure  on  the
decisions which have already  been  rendered,"  he  replied,  "that
they  would  not  be  sustained.    In  getting  away  from   home
and  coming  up  here  to  make  this  appearance,  I  wanted  an
opportunity  to  look  up  these  decisions.   I  have  not  seen  them
in  10  years—not  since  1950.     And  I  would  like  to  ask  the
privilege  of  checking these  decisions and  filing  with  this  com-
mittee  within the  next  day  or  two."    As  this  was  being  writ-
ten,  no  reply  had  yet  been  received.
Senator  Carroll  told  reporters  the  government  had  "more
than  enough  grounds"  on  which  to  press  a  Federal  prosecu-
tion.    "Government   sources"  quoted  by  the  Chicago  Tribune
and  the  Associated  Press  May  28  on  the  FBI  report  turned
over  to  the  Governor  described  the  lynchers  as  masked.    If
they  were  masked,  the  lynching  can  be  prosecuted  under  the
civil  rights  statutes.   When  Senator  Carroll  asked  the  Gover-
nor  whether  the  lynchers  were  masked,  Coleman  declined  to
answer.    "If   I  were  to  discuss  the  contents  of  the  reports,"
he  told  the  Senator,  "it  would  in  effect  be  trying  the  case  in
the  newspapers."
That  Lynch  Witness  Just  Happened  to  Scratch  Her Throat  With  A  Razor?
Sen.  [Win.]  Langer  (R.  N.  D.).   What  I  am interested  in
is  this  Associated  Press  report  of  May  12  that  a  woman
prisoner  and the  janitor  [of  the  jail]  had attempted  to  com-
mit  suicide  at  Poplarville,  both  white  people.    Do  you  know
anything  about  these   incidents?
Gov.   [James   P.]   Coleman  of   Mississippi.    My  best   in-
formation,   sir,   is   that   that   had  absolutely   no   connection
whatever  with  the  lynching  episode  but  were  two  individual
occurrences  growing  out  of  separate  circumstances   peculiar-
ly  personal  to  these  two  people  and  which  shed  no  light  on
the  lynching  at  all.   I  make  that  statement  on  my  responsi-
bility  as  Governor of  the  State.
Sen.  Langer.    As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  there  was  any  con-
nection  at  all,  you  would  offer  protection  to  those  two  white
people,  would  you not?
Gov.  Coleman.    Yes,  sir,  but  I  can  assure  you  they  stand
in  no  need  of  protection  from  anybody   under  any   circum-
stances.  . . .
Mr.   [Charles   H.]   Slayman,   [Jr.,   chief   counsel   to   the
Senate  subcommittee].    Governor,  the  reference  to  one  of
these  people,  this  white  woman  in  the  jail,  Helen  Van  Ness,
was   that  she  had  witnessed   the  abduction   [reading   from
AP  story]  'Miss  Van  Ness,  who  witnessed  the  beating  and
abduction  of  Parker  April  25,  cut  her  throat  with  a  razor
blade  last  Thursday.    She  was  treated  at  Pearl  River  Coun-
ty  Hospital  one  day  and  returned  to  the  jail.'
Gov.  Coleman.   I  think  that  would  give  you  some  idea  of
the  seriousness   of  her  injuries  when  she  received   treatment
for   only   one  day  for  cutting   her  throat.     It  was  just   a
superficial  scratch  that  the  newspapers   made  a  great  deal
of.       —May  28, Senate  Constitutional  Rights   subcommittee.
The  matter  was  dropped  after  the  Governor's  unrespon-
sive  answer.    No  one  asked  whether  he  had  personally  in-
vestigated  the  attempted  suicides.   If  Miss  Van  Ness   wit-
nessed  the  abduction,  she  is  a  key  witness.   The  janitor of
the  jail  may  also  know  a  good  deal.   If  county  authorities
connived  at  the  lynching,  as  was  charged  in  a  letter  from
Poplarville  to  Station  WMCA  in  New  York,  then  the  Fed-
eral  Civil  Rights  Acts  were  violated.    County  authorities
have  in  their  power   two  important  prospective  witnesses
who  might  involve  them.   Why  should  they  be  left   in  the
county  jail  from  which Parker  was  so easily  abducted?
8  9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  8, 1959
The  AEC  Chairman's  Hand  on  Dr.  Inglis  Proves  Quicker  Than  The  Senate's  Eye
McCone  Shows  the  Same  Genius  for  Flim-Flam  As  Strauss
When   Admiral  Strauss  was  before   the  Senate   Commerce
Committee  on  May  11  he  denied  that  he  had  tried  to  obtain
information  from  the  AEC  security  files  on  Dr.  David   Inglis.
"You   can call  the  security  people  at  the  Atomic  Energy  Com-
mission  down  here  and  ask  them,"  Strauss  said  indignantly  to
Senator   McGee.
McGee  took  Strauss  up  on  the  suggestion.     Through  Sena-
tor  Anderson,  chairman  of  the  Joint   Committee  on  Atomic
Energy,  he  did  ask  Chairman  McCone  of  the  AEC.    On  May
28  McGee  produced  a  letter  by  McCone.    The  letter  by  Mc-
Cone  disclosed  that  Strauss  phoned  McCone's   office  about  In-
glis  on  April  20,  ten  days  before  Inglis  testified  against  him.
The  "Three  Weeks"  Were  Carefully  Chosen
Another   falsehood   by  Strauss  has  little  news  value.     The
real  news—unnoticed  in  the  Senate—in  the  McCone  letter  is
that   the  new  AEC  chairman  is  as  tricky  as  his   predecessor.
(See   May  28   Congressional  Record.)     The   first   paragraph
says  the  security file on  Dr.  Inglis  is at  the  AEC'office  in  Chi-
cago.     "No  one," McCone   then  asserts,  "has reviewed  this
file  or  furnished  directly  or  indirectly, any  information  from
it  to  anyone  during   the  past  three  weeks."   (Italics  added)".
This  is  as  neat  a  bit  of  flim-flam  as  anything  by  Strauss.
Why   did   McCone   specify   three  weeks?     His   letter  was
dated  May  13.    The  three  weeks  preceding  began  on  Thurs-
day,  April  23.    Now  if  you  read  further  in  the  McCone  letter
you  find  that  it  was  during  the  week  before   that  Strauss  made
his  inquiry.    He  phoned   McCone's   office  on  April  20.     He
got  a  reply  on  April  21.    The  summary  security  file  on  Inglis
in  Washington   was  examined  on  April  22,  the  day  before  the
three  weeks   began.
The   McCone   letter   admits  the   summary   security  file  in
Washington  was  examined  on  April  22  but  it  is  silent  on  the
original  security  file  at  Chicago.    Was  that  too  examined  on
April  20,  21  or  22  as  a  result  of  the  Strauss  phone  call?   The
McCone   letter  only  says  no  information  had  been  furnished
anyone  from  it  "during  the  past  three  weeks."    Won't  some
Senator   please  ask  McCone   about  the  fourth  week?
Marxian  and  Anti-American
"Erpf   was   told   that   Congress   might   also   wonder
whether  he  could  be  fair  to  trucks,  ships  and  airlines  in
the  light  of  Loeb,  Rhoades'  rail  stake.   He replied,  'This
reminds  me  of  a  Marxian  notion.'    He  added  that  any
suggestion    that    Loeb,    Rhoades'    investments    would
shape   his  advice  to   the   administration  was   'an   anti-
American  attitude'."
—From   the   story   by   Bernard   D.  Nossiter   in   the
Washington   Post   May    2$   which   first   disclosed   that
Armand  G.  Erpf,    the  man  picked   by  Admiral  Strauss
to   head   a   Commerce   Department   study    of   national
transportation  policy,  is  a  partner  in  Loeb,  Rhoades  &
Company,   a   leading   railroad   banking   house.      Erpf
bowed  out  three  days   after    the  Nossifer   interview  ap-
peared.
An  Idyllic  But  Obscure   Narrative
McCone's  account  of  why  Strauss  called  and  why  his   office
examined   the   summary  of   Dr.   Inglis's   security   file   strains
credibility.    It  says  Strauss  phoned   because  he  heard  Dr.   In-
glis  might  testify  and  it  "would  be  helpful  to  know  whether
he  was  employed  by  an  AEC  contractor,  and, if  so,  the  name
of  his  profession."     It  hardly  required  a  security  file  check  to
know  that  Dr.  Inglis  was a  famous  physicist  long  employed  at
AEC s  Argonne  lab  and  newly  elected  chairman  of  the Fed-
eration  of  American  Scientists.    McCone  says  Strauss  was  in-
formed   on   the   21st—"since  both   points   were  a   matter   of
public  information—that  Dr.  Inglis  was  at  Argonne  and  that
American  Men  of  Science  "listed  several  fields  of  competence."
Such  circumspection  is   admirable.
Why,  then,  was  the  summary of  Dr.  Inglis's  file  examined
next  day, the 22d?   This,  according  to  McCone,  was to  "alert"
him   "to  any  public  information  contained   in  the  record  re
Dr.  Inglis  which  might  suggest  whether  his  general   testimony
would  involve  the  AEC.  . . . No  such  information  was  found."
The  phrasing  shows  a genius  for  obscurity.    It  also  makes  one
wonder   why  the  AEC  chairman—who  presumably  has   full
clearance—only  wanted  to  be  alerted  to  "public   information."
Strauss  certainly  picked  a  kindred  spirit  as  his  successor.
You   Can  Have   A  Free  Copy   of   Our  1958  Index   If    You   Send   A   Self-Addressed     Stamped    Envelope
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
I. F.
Please
Name
Street
City  .
Enter
(To)
Street
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618, Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
....................................... .Zone.......
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4
....State....................
6/8/59
(1 yr.)
................................... .....Zone............State
we  send  gift   announcement?        Yes
additional:
D    No. d
5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED