I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jul20.pdf

============================================================

Five  Speak  Out  in  the House  on Nuclear Arms, P.  2
Norman  Thomas  Sees  Preventive  War Build-Up  in  Rockefeller  Fallout  Shelter  Plan,  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VII,  NO. 28JULY  20,  1959
'<>'       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
IB  CENTS
The  Silence  in  the  Senate  on  the  Atomic  War  Pacts
The   Senate  is  full  of  constitutional  lawyers.    There   is  a
basic  constitutional problem in  the pending  agreements  to  give
nuclear  training  and  nuclear  weapons  (all-but-the-bullets)  to
our   non-nuclear  allies.    The  Constitution   provides   that   the
President  may  make  treaties  only  with  the  consent  of  a  two-
thirds  vote  by  the  Senate.   The  agreements  with  France,  Ger-
many,  Holland,  Greece  and  Turkey  for  the  nuclearization  of
their  armed  forces  are  treaties  in  every  real  sense.    They  are
among  the  most momentous treaties  ever made  by this country.
They  embody  decisions  to  spread  nuclear  military  training  to
our  allies—and  we  often  boast  that  we  have  no  less  than  44
around  the  world.    They  reflect  the  decision  to  make  any  fu-
ture  conflict  nuclear  from  the  very  start  irrespective  of  what
weapons  the  enemy uses.   These  policies  were  fashioned  with-
in  the  Pentagon  and  adopted  in  the  NATO  Council   almost
two  years  ago  without  public  discussion.    They  first  leaked
out  in  veiled  communiques  few  understood;   the   reality  has
crept  up  on  us.   Yet  the  first  international  agreements  which
embody  them  are  now  before  Congress  not  as  treaties  but  as
"executive   agreements."     Such  agreements  in  the  past  have
always  required  a  majority  vote  of  both   House   and  Senate.
These  atomic war pacts require no  affirmative  vote at  all.   They
become  law  within  60  days  of  submission  unless  within  that
short   time  Congress   passes  a  concurrent  resolution   of   dis-
approval.  This  procedure  is a  clear  evasion of  the  treaty provi-
sions of  the  Constitution.   Yet  as this  is written  (July  15)  not
a  single protest  has  been  heard  from  any Senator—even  Morse
—on this basic point,  although  the 60-day deadline  draws  near.
II
The  most  important  of  these  pacts  is  with  the   Germans.
Whichever  way  you  look  at  the  German  question,  this  new
move  does not  make  sense.   There  are  basically  two  approach-
es  to  the  German  problem  in  Washington.     The  first  is  that
the  only  real  way to  guarantee  ourselves  against  another  Ger-
man  switch  is to bind  West  Germany securely to  us  in NATO.
This  implies that  we do  not  really trust  the  Germans  and  their
new  army;  we  are  afraid  that  a  neutral  Germany  or  an  un-
committed  Reich  might  swing  over  to  a  deal  with   Moscow,
as  did  that  other  bulwark-against-Bolshevism,    Hitler,  in   1939.
But  if  we  don't  trust  the  Germans,  why  trust  them  with  nu-
clear weapons ?
The  other  approach  to  the  German  problem  is  that  Eastern
Europe  can  only  be  liberated  from  the  heavy  Russian  hand
and  Europe  from   the  fear  of .a  German  militarist  revival  if
some  agreement is  reached  to  make Germany part  of  an  atom
free  zone  in  Europe.   This  alone  offers  a  chance  for  German
reunification,  relaxation  of  tension  and  a  slowing-down  of  the
arms   race  as  Mansfield,  Fulbright  and   Humphrey   have   so
often  argued  on  the  Senate  floor.  Only  in  such  a  context  can
West  Berlin's  freedom  be preserved.    Yet  except  for  the  ques-
tions  raised  by  Humphrey   (see  page  two),  none  of  these  or
any  other  Senators   has  tried  to  block  the  atomic  war  pacts
which  would  foreclose  such  solutions,  and  foreclose   them  in
the  midst  of  the  Geneva  negotiations.     The  Adenauer   gov-
ernment  seems  to  want  these  negotiations   to  fail;  its  brink-
manship  is  reflected   in  the  Foreign   Office   statement   (Balti-
more  Sun,  July  14)   that  even  an  agreement  to  ban  atomic
arms  from  "Berlin  is  "very  dangerous!"    The  Germans,  whom
we  have  fought  twice  in  one  generation,  are  cooking  up  an-
other  hot  broth  for  us,  but  the  Senate  is  silent.
III
Almost  everyone  admits  that  World  War  HI,  like  World
War  I,  is  most  likely  to  be  sparked  by  some  incident  none  of
the  Great  Powers  planned  or  desired.    World  War  I  started
with the  assassination at  Sarajevo in the Balkans.   The  Balkans
are  still  unstajjle.    Yugoslavia  switched  sides.    Greece  had  to
fight  a  civil  warNigainst  Communism.    Turkey   is   explosive
with  discontent  over  a  growing  one-party  dictatorship  and  an
inflation   brought   on   by  heavy  military   burdens.    The   old
Macedonian  question  still  haunts  Bulgaria,  Greece  and  Yugo-
slavia.     Albania,  Moscow's   outpost   on   the   Adriatic,   is   a
primitive  tribal  land.    Yet  these  Greek  and  Turkish  agree-
ments  are  the  first  step  toward  making  the  unstable  Balkans
the  site  of  numerous  nuclear  rocket  bases.    We're  going  to
place  them  on  our  side.   The  Soviets  will  counter  on  theirs.
A  Russian  offer   to  make  the  Balkans  atom-free  has  strong
support   in  Greece  and  Yugoslavia   but  was  rejected  out  of
hand  in Washington  and  London.   The  result  will  be to  leave
the  Powers  again,  as  in  1914,  at  the  mercy of  reckless  action
by   unstable   Balkan  satellites   obsessed   with   their   own   Lil-
liputian  feuds.    On  this,  too,  there  is  silence  in  the  Senate.
IV
Of  all  the  lessons  of  recent  history  none  is  clearer  than  that
told  in  the  ruin  twice  brought  on  Germany  by  its  military
since  1914.    No  principle  seemed more  important  to  the  foun-
ders  of  our  own  country  than  subordination   of  the  military
to  civilian  control.   Yet  the  reason  for  the  silence  in  the  Sen-
ate  is  that  few  dare  any  longer  challenge   the  military.    An
Anderson  can  take  on  and  defeat  a  Strauss  but  falls  silent
at  this  juncture.    Nuclear  weapons  and  the  desirability  of  a
German  alliance are  the  Pentagon's  sacred  cows.   To  question
them  is  to  risk  one's  political  career,  to  find  oneself   outside
the  pale  of  respectability.   The  silence  in  the  Senate  says  that
we,  too,  like  the  Germans  before  1914  and  1939  are  falling
under  military  domination.
1  1 1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, July  20,1959
Opposition  Rising  in  Congress  to  Agreements  for  Spread  of  Nuclear  Weapons
Text  of the  Questions  Raised  by  Humphrey  — First  Protest  in  the  Senate
"I.  Are  these  agreements  welcomed  by  the  people  and  the
political  and  military  leaders  of  Western  Europe?
"2.  Do  these  agreements  take  us  further  down  the  road  of
a  NATO  defense policy  consisting  primarily  of  a  reliance  on
nuclear  weapons  at  the  expense  of  a  balanced  defense  policy
capable  of  using  conventional  or  nuclear  weapons,  depending
on  the  nature  of  the  emergency?
"3.  Have  the  United  States  and  its  NATO  allies   satisfied
themselves  that  these  agreements,  particularly  the  agreement
with  West  Germany,  will  not  jeopardize  our  efforts  to  make
progress  on  the  control  and  reduction  of  armaments ?
"4.  If   the   President's   contention   is   true,   i.e.   that   the
strength  of  any  alliance  depends  'in  the  last  analysis upon  the
sense  of  shared  mutual  interests  among  its  members,'  then  to
what  extent will  this  be true  of  the  Baghdad  Part,  the  SEATO
part,  the  Rio  Treaty,  the  Part  with  Nationalist   China,  and
the  Treaty  With  South  Korea?
"6.  Can  it  not  be  argued  that  the  agreements  are  in  con-
flirt  with  an  important  aspect  of  our  foreign  policy,  the  pre-
vention  of  the  proliferation  of  nuclear  weapons  among many
countries;  or,  has  the  United  States  abandoned  its  policy  of
trying  to  restrict  the'membership  of  the  nuclear  club?
"Since  it  is  the  intention  of  the  United  States,  according  to
Press  Blackout  Broken
After   an   almost   complete  blackout  in  most  news-
papers  (including the  New  York  Times)  on the  nuclear
give-away agreements, the  public hearings  on them  July
2 and  the  protests on the  floor  of  the  House July  9  (see
excerpts  below),  Senator  Humphrey broke  through  the
journalistic  iron  curtain  July  13 with  a  statement  rais-
ing  questions  about  these  agreements  and   suggesting
that  if  they  could  not  be  answered  satisfactorily   "per-
haps  a  resolution  is  in  order  to  direct  the  Executive
Branch  to refrain  from  entering  into  the  agreements  at
this  time."    (Seven  members  of  Congress,  as  we  re-
ported  last  week,  have  already  introduced  such  resolu-
tions  in  the  House).    We  print  here  the  text  of  the
questions  raised  by  Humphrey, but  note  that  not  even
he  has  introduced  a  veto resolution  in  the  Senate.
the  President's  statement,  to  enter  into  additional  agreements
on  the  sharing  of  nuclear  weapons  information  and   equip-
ment,  I  believe  that  the  answers  to  the  above  questions  should
be  given  before  the  proposed  agreements   are   consummated.
The  time  for  the  Senate  to  examine  the  foreign  policy  and
defense   policy   implications   and   commitments   involved   in
these  proposed  agreements is now.  . . .
—Sen. Hubert H.  Humphrey,  July  13.
Five  Members of  Congress  Challenge
Mr.  [Wm. H.]  MEYER  (D. Vt.).   This  is  the beginning of
a  policy  which  will  spread  nuclear  know-how  to  country
after  country.   The  President   in  his  message  to  Congress
on  May  26,  and  again  on  June  11,  stated  that  he   antici-
pated   the  conclusion  of  similar  agreements  with  certain
other   NATO  nations.    I   believe   the   executing  of   these
agreements  would  increase  tension,  lessen  chances  for   set-
tlement  and  make  it  appear  as  though  the  United  States
was  less  interested  in  negotiations  for  an  honorable  peace
than  in  making further  preparations  for  war.
Mr.  [Clem]  MILLER  (D.  Cal.).   I  strongly  share  these
sentiments.    The  more  we  study  this  field  of  nuclear  ac-
tivity  the  more  we  realize  there  has  got  to  be  some  place
where  we  call  a  halt  and  turn  back.    If  we  go  on,  then
through  accident  or  some  other  means,  we  will  be  led  in-
evitably  to  some holocaust  from  which the  world  will  never
recover.
Mr. MEYER.   Mr. Speaker,  I  would like to raise the  ques-
tion  of  whether  it  is  not  ironic  that  we  have  gone  to  the
extent  of  developing  a  security   system  because  we  were
afraid  of  what  might  happen  to  our  atomic  secrets.   This
security  system has  brought  hardship on many of our  scien-
tists,  such  as  Dr.  Oppenheimer.   The  civil  liberties  of  all
American   people   have   suffered.     Even   at   certain   times
Members  of  Congress  are  required  to  have  a  check  to  be
in  on  certain  hearings  and  discussions.    Now  our  secrets
may  very  easily  go  to  a  former  enemy,  Germany.    They
may  also  go to  the  unstable  government  of  France,  also  to
a  military  party  in  Turkey,  which  is  our  good  ally  at  the
present  time but  may  not  be  such  a  good  risk  perhaps.
Mr.   [Byron  L.]  JOHNSON  (D.  Col.).    Mr.  Speaker,  a
very  competent  professor   of   theoretical   physics,  Herbert
Jehle,  has  submitted a  memorandum  in  which he points out:
"Do  we  have  the  moral  vigor  to  stop  this  criminal  race?
We  can  stop  it  only  if  we  refuse  to  be  ready  to  do  by  re-
mote  control  what  no  sensitive  human being  could  do  with
his  own  hand:  bring  untold  suffering  and  obliteration  to
innocent  children.    We  need  to  develop  non-violent  tech-
niques  to  resolve areas  of  conflict."
Mr.   [Leonard   G.]   WOLF   (D.  Iowa).    On  August  29,
the  Nuclear  Give-Away  in  The  House
1957  [at   the  close  of  the  London  disarmament  talks]  the
U.  S.,  Great  Britain,  France  and  Canada  put  forth  to  the
Soviet  Union  as  part  of  a  package  disarmament  program  a
suggestion  that  the  advanced  nuclear  nations  should  agree
not  to  transfer  nuclear  weapons  to  another  country.
The  representatives  of  the  Soviet  Union  questioned  our
sincerity  in  this  matter  and  concluded that  the  policy  of  the
U.  S.  was  geared  to  transferring  these  weapons.    The  ex-
ecutive  agreements  with  the  NATO countries  do  much  to
substantiate  the  Soviet   claims.
Mrs.  [Edith]  Green  (D.  Ore.).   Ten  years  ago  the  sug-
gestion that we equip a German Army with  crossbows, much
less  with  atomic  bombs,  would  have  been  laughed  to  scorn
in  this  Chamber.   I  am  the  first  to  admit  that  the  West
Germany  of  today  is  not  the  Third  Reich  of  14  years  ago.
But  who  can  do  more  than  surmise  that  the  Germany of
14  years  hence  will  be  the  Germany of  today.   I  hope  the
Congress  will be inspired  to prevent  the  playing  of  guessing
games  with  the  germ  plasm  of  our  children.
Mr.  Speaker,  we  are  being  told  that  it  is  necessary  in
order  to  boost  the  morale  of  some  military  and   political
figures  in  Western  Europe,  to  give  them  guns—guns  with
barrels,  with triggers,  with  gunsights,  with  manuals  on  the
care   and  use  of  the   gun—with,  in  short,  everything  but
bullets—just  yet,  anyway.
In  brief:  Unless  we  show  the  West  Germans,  the  French,
the  Dutch,  the  Turks  and  the  Greeks  that  we  think  they,
too,  ought   to  have  their   own  do-it-yourself   annihilation
kits, their feelings  will be  hurt.
I  cannot  believe  that  the  people  of  these  countries  are  in
any  real  haste  to  become  members  of  the  Nuclear  Power
Club.   The  average  person  in  Western   Europe  is  too  sen-
sible  to  look  forward  with  eagerness  to  the  creation  of new
atomic  stockpiles  on  the  soil  of  their  native  lands.    Very
possibly,  Mr.  Speaker,   the  generals   and  admirals  in  these
countries want  to see their troops  equipped with  these  geno-
cidal  weapons.   It  has  been  wisely  said  that  war  is  too im-
portant   to  be  left   to  the  Generals.    The  same   aphorism
would  apply  to human survival.
—House  of  Representatives, July  9   (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  July   SO,  1959
Open  Letter  to  Rockefeller Notes  We  Still  Have  Rat-Infested   Slums
Norman Thomas  Sees Build-Up for Preventive War in Fallout Shelter  Program
Dear  Governor  Rockefeller:
My morning paper  gives  the  summary  of  the  report  of  your
Special  Task   Force  on   Protection   from  Radioactive  Fallout
whose  recommendations,  we  are  told,  you  heartily  approve.
I  would  not  lightly  oppose  recommendations  looking  to  the
savings  of  any  lives  in  the  horror  of  nuclear  war.    But  the
report  raises  some  unanswered  questions.
With  probably  unconscious  irony  the  TV  program,   Today,
followed   its  account  of   your  Committee's   recommendations
of  compulsory  requirement  of  fallout  shelters  by  a  story  of
the  campaign  against  rats  in  the  slum districts  in  which  a  child
died of a rat  bite.  (Her  pathetic  mother  appeared  on a screen).
It  is  indeed  a  mad  world  wherein  the  state  must  impose  on
us  a great  expense  for  dubious  protection  against  radioactivity
in  possible  war  before  it  has  protected  its  children  from  rats
and  the  slums  that  breed  them.
Peace  Is  Horrible?
Dear  Mr. Stone:
Although  Herman  Kahn may  give the  impression that
he  invented  everything,  Monte  Carlo  Problem  is  not  a
name  coined  for   the  occasion.    More  properly Monte
Carlo  Method  is  the  name  for  the  method  used  by  J.
von   Neumann  and  Stanislaus  Ulam  whereby  the   an-
swer  to  a  mathematical  problem  may  be  obtained from
the  results  of  a  related  problem   in  statistics.    Poor
H.  K.    Peace  is  horrible?    He  never  had  it  so  good!
A Scientist  Reader in  Texas
Our  New  Breed  of  Mad Scientists
But  perhaps  we must  accept  Blaise  Pascal's  judgment:  'Men
are  mad  so  unavoidably that  not  to  be  mad  would  constitute
one  a  madman  of  another  order  of  madness."    Anyway  as
long  as  scientists  like  Herman  Kahn,  directly  or  indirectly  in
the  employ  of  our  government,  go  around  testifying  that  the
question  "Is  it ever profitable  to initiate a thermonuclear  war?"
(italics  mine)  must  under  some  circumstances  be  answered  in
the  affirmative,  we  are  faced  with  a  type  of  madness, Ameri-
can  as  well  as  Russian,  that  might  justify  our  government  in
the  year  of  our  Lord   1959   in  compelling  this  provision  of
poor  shelters  against  a  possibly  suicidal  annihilation   of  our
race.
That  they  are  proor  protectors  of  our  lives  to  say  nothing
of  our  civilization  is  obvious.    What   scientists  say  they  are
adequate?    Remember  recent  testimony  that  one   "moderate"
sized  attack with  hydrogen  bombs,  without  follow-up  or  sup-
plementary  use  of  bacteriological  weapons,  would  kill  6,089,-
000  people   in  the  New   York   area  while   destroying   some
quarter   of  our   national   population   and   about   half   of   our
homes.    We  would  get  no  warning  of  this   attack.    Who
would  get  into  shelters?    How  long  would  those  outside  the
immediate  area  of  total  destruction  and  great  fallout  have  to
stay  inside  crowded  shelters   sustained  by  the  supplies   your
Committee   recommends   us  to  hoard?    Would  they  be  in-
sensible  to  the  misery  outside  the  dubious  shelters?    What
would  happen  to  orderly  processes  of  life  and  government,
especially  since  we  should  have  to  expect  a  second  attack  to
follow  the first ?   These  questions  demand  something  far  more
definite  than  your  Committee's  cheerful  assurance  of   survival
to  "millions."    Might  the  survivors  not  envy  the  dead?
Survival  is  not  the  only  concern  of  your  Committee.     It
hopes  to  inspire  confidence  in  our  people—all  of  whom  will
identify  themselves  with  survivors—and  scare  off  a  potential
enemy.    Compulsory  provision  of  shelters  it  says  "can   instill
in  all  our  people  a  confidence  that,  while  nuclear  war  need
not  come,  if  it  is  brought  to  our  continent  by  an  attacking
enemy,  we  will  respond  with  vigor  and  success.    It  will  pro-
vide  abundant  notice  of  our  purpose  to  achieve  peace  by  as-
suring  the  survival  of  our  people  and  democratic  institutions."
Perhaps—provided,  of   course,   that  our  survivors   manage
indiscriminately to kill more human  beings  called  the  enemy in
or  out  of  their  shelters.    But  this  rush  to  compel  the  building
of  shelters  will  everywhere  be  coupled  with  growing  talk  of
"preemptive,"  i.e.  preventive  war  and  with  our  Federal  gov-
ernment's  zeal  to  enlarge  the  nuclear   club  by  gifts  to   Ger-
many,  Turkey,  Greece  and  others.    May  it  not  then  be  inter-
preted  by  the  Russian  people  as  final  proof  that  we  plan  ag-
gressive  war  and  by  their  dictator  as  a  stimulus  to  attack  be-
fore  shelters  are  built  if  he  thinks he  has  the  missile  superior-
ity  which  some  experts  credit  him  with?    Such  questions  are
not  rhetorical.     They  require  an  answer.
Sincerely  yours,  Norman   Thomas
Harriman  Explains  Why  He  Thinks  Krushchev  Wants   Armament  Reduction
Mr.  COLLING WOOD:  Did  you  get  any  impression  from
him  [Khrushchev]  that  this  [i.e.  the  arms  burden]  is  cans-
ing  a  conflict  with  his  desires  and  his  promises  to  raise  the
standard  of  living  of  the  ordinary  Soviet  citizen?
Governor  HARRIMAN:  Oh,  very  definitely.    He   didn't
say  so  in  so  many  words.   But he  talked in  such  a  way  that
I  had  the  idea  that  there  was  a  heavy  load.
Mr.  COLLINGWOOD:  What  kind  of  thing  did  he  say?
Governor  HARRIMAN:  He  asked  me  who  would be  the
next  President  of  the  United  States.    And  I  told  him  that
I didn't know,  but I was quite convinced it  would be a Demo-
crat.   I  gave  him  the  names  of  the  five  leading  candidates.
He  didn't have  any  comment on  any  of  them.   But  then  he
said  what  would  be the  change  in  policy.   And I  said,  'Well,
of  course,  the  Democrats  wouldn't  be  so  concerned  about
balancing  the  budget—they  would  be  ready  to  spend  the
money  necessary  to  keep abreast  of  yon  in  the  missile  race
and  in  the  nuclear  field,  or  in  any  other  aspect  of  defense.'
And  he  said,  'You  mean  to  say   they  would  spend  more
money?'    And I  said,  'Yes,  that's  just  what  I  mean.'   He
said,  'Well,  that will mean well  have  to  spend  more money.'
I  got  the  very  great  impression  that  not  only  did  he  not
want   to  spend  more  money,  but  the  money  he  was  now
spending  was  a  burden  to  him,  and  he  recognized  it  was
competitive with the  promises he hopes to  fulfil
Therefore,   I   think   the   summit   conference   should   be
thought  of,  not in terms  of  Berlin—I  think there  is  too much
emphasis  on  Berlin.   I  would like  to  see  the  Foreign  'Min-
isters  get  off it  and get  on  the  subject  of  control  of  nuclear,
tests  and  other  aspects  of  disarmament  which  have  been
discussed  between us  for  years  and  years  and  years,  where
at'least  we know  where there are points of  differences.   And
I  cannot help but believe  that  there  would be  some  progress
made  in  this  field,  because  I  think  this  is  an  area  that  he
wants  to  come to  some  understanding.
—Report  on Russia:  The Harriman Trip,  CBS, July   IS.
1  1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  20,1959
Hearings   Open  on  Travel  Bills,  Including  Humphrey's   Measure  to  Guarantee  It
Fulbright  Bill  Would  Bar  Faceless  Informers  in  Passport  Hearings
A  welcome  change  in  atmosphere   is  reflected  in  the  pass-
port  bills  on  which  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee
began  hearings  last  week.    Two  years  ago,  as  readers  will  re-
member,  the  State  Department  was  able  to  get  liberal  Demo-
crats  to  sponsor  a bill which  would  have  written  its  star  cham-
ber  passport  hearings  procedures  into  law.
This  year  only  Wiley  of  Wisconsin   could  be  prevailed  on
to introduce S. 2315,  the  State  Department  bill. Liberal  Demo-
crats  led  by  Humphrey   (with  Anderson,  Chavez,   Hennings,
Morse,  Neuberger,  and   Symington)   are  sponsoring   S.  806
which  would  affirm  the  right  to  travel  and  forbid  the  denial
of  passports  on  political  grounds.    This  bill,  S.  806,  is  sup-
ported  by the  American Civil  Liberties Union,  the  ADA,  and
the  Emergency Civil  Liberties  Committee.
The  Right  to  Confront   Accusers
A  kind  of  compromise  measure,  S.  2287,  is  sponsored  by
Fulbright,  the  chairman of  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Com-
mittee.    His  bill  deserves  praise  for  one  striking  feature.    It
is  the  first  bill  to  exclude  "faceless  informer"  testimony  from
an  administrative hearing  dealing  with  loyalty-security matters.
The  bill  would  allow  an  applicant  in  passport  hearings   "to
examine  all  documentary evidence,  including  confidential data,
introduced  against  him  to  cross-examine  the  sources   thereof;
to  cross-examine  all  witnesses,  including   confidential  infor-
mants."
But  the  Fulbright  bill  does  allow  a  passport  to  be  denied
where  "there  are  reasonable  grounds  to  believe"  that  the  ap-
plicant  when  abroad  would  transit  "highly   classified   secrets"
or  endanger  the  national  security by  "inciting,  or  conspiring
to  bring  about,"  hostilities  which  might  involve  the  United
States  or  attempts  to  overthrow  its  government.    Since  con-
spiracy  to  commit  any  of  these  acts  would  be  a  crime,  it  can
and  should  be  punished  by  indictment  or  trial  if  there  is  evi-
dence  to  prove  it.    If  the  evidence  is  not   sufficient,   why  it
should   be  the  basis  of   denying  the   right   to  travel?     The
ACLU  is  opposing  the  bill  on  these  grounds.
Senator  Fulbright,  in  a  memorandum  on  his  bill,  stresses
the   fact   that  its  provisions  "would   not  permit  the  Depart-
Affirming  the  Right  to  Travel
"Congress finds . . . the right  to travel  abroad  a  part
of  the  liberty  of  which  citizens .  .  .  cannot be  deprived
.. . under the Fifth Amendment. ... It is  also the sense
of  the  Congress  .  .  .  that  no  test  of  beliefs  or  associa-
tions  shall be applied  to  issuance  of  passports."
—S.  806,  by   Humphrey    (with   Anderson,   Chavez,
Hennings,  Morse,  Neuberger  and   Symington).
ment  to  inquire  into   [Communist]   Party  affiliations   in   the
1930's  and  40's,  since  in  those  days  the  nature  of  the  Com-
munist  threat  was unknown to  many loyal,  law-abiding  Amer-
icans."    Nor  would  the  bill  "sanction  inquiry  into  the  activi-
ties  of  applicants  relating  to  so-called   'left-wing'   or   'front'
organizations"   unless  linked  to  proof  of  attempts  to  transmit
secrets  or  overthrow  the  government.
"My  bill,"  Senator  Fulbright   said,  "focusses   on   conduct
that  presents  a  clear  and  present  danger  to  the  security of  the
United  States  and  in  no  way  attempts  to  curb  expression  of
unpopular  beliefs or  association  with  unpopular  groups."
It  still  seems  to  us  that  if  the  danger  is  clear  and  present,
it  should  be  clear  enough  for  criminal  prosecution  under  the
conspiracy  laws.    Otherwise  we  create  a  dangerous   twilight
zone  of  surmise  and  suspicion  in  which  due  process  in  any
real   sense   becomes   impossible.     Yet   refusal   of   the   right
to  travel  on  loyalty-security  grounds  creates  as much  of  a stain
on  a  man's  reputation  as  conviction  of  a  crime.
Scott  Nearing's   Passport  Revoked
We  also  think  the  bill  objectionable  in  that  it  allows  the
Department  to  use  passport  control  to  shut  off  travel  to  cer-
tain  countries.    This   is  really  a  modified   form  of  thought
control,  an  invasion  of  freedom  of  the  press,  a  denial  to  the
public of  access to  the  facts  on  which  to  reach  its  own  opinion
on  such  matters  as  recognition  of  Communist  China.    In  this
connection  we  want  to   call   attention   to  the   Department's
action  in  revoking  the  passports  of  Scott  and  Helen  Nearing
for   having  gone  to  China.    This  is  the  Iron   Curtain  men-
tality  in  our  own  country.
Make  Friends  and  Influence    People  By  Giving  Them  A  Gift   Subscription   Using   the  Blank  Below
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Piease  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ........................................................................................
Street  ......................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone............State.
7/20/B9
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name ..............................................................................
Street   ......................................................._..._..............„..._.
City  ..........................................Zone............State..................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?        Tes  D    No.  Q
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  bat  P«D-
lished  every  Thursday  except  tna  last  two  Thursday*  of  August  and  December  at  5818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  IB,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Better  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
«5  In  the  U.  S.;  «6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  M»U  rates:  $16  to  Europe;  fso  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED