I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jul27.pdf

============================================================

Ike   Off-the-Record    On  the Brink,  P.  4
Holifield  Joins  Nelson  Rockefeller  in  Building  Up  Preventive   War  Delusions,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  29
JULY  27,  1959
'<"       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Congress  Says  "Da"  on  Nuclear  Arms  for  Germany
Even  the  Supreme  Soviet  in  Moscow  could  hardly  rubber-
stamp  party  line  with  more  alacrity  than  did  the  Congress  of
the  United  States  in  approving  the  Pentagon's  party  line  on
the  wisdom  of  spreading  nuclear  arms  to  our  allies,  particu-
larly  to  the  Germans.  Never  was  a  more  momentous decision
taken  with  less  discussion.  In  the  House  a  handful  of  rebels
led  by  Meyer of  Vermont  had  put  in  resolutions  to  block  the
nuclear  sharing  agreements  but  the  House  Rules  Committee
refused   to  report  them  out  and  Speaker  Rayburn  refused  to
recognize Congressman Meyer for  a unanimous consent request.
Meyer  and  Byron  Johnson  (D.   Col.)   were  allowed  a  few  re-
marks  in  protest  on  July  16  covering  little  more  than  a  single
page  of  the  Congressional Record. Though  40  members of  the
House  had  signed  a  letter  asking  for  discussion'  of  the  agree-
ments,  the  leadership  steam-roller  applied  gag  rule.
Senate  Worse  Than  The  House
The  Senate  next  day  provided  a worse  spectacle.  Not  a sin-
gle  Senator  dared  introduce  a  resolution  to  block  any  of  the
agreements.   Senator  Humphrey  had   gone  so  far   as  to  raise
some  questions  (which  we  reprinted  in  last  week's  issue).   He
took  the  floor  on  July  17  to  stultify  himself  by  answering  the
questions  to  his  own  satisfaction  and  throwing  in  the   sponge.
Morse  spoke  up  and  said  he  had  so  many  reservations about
the  agreements  he  wasn't  sure  he  would  vote  for  them.    Ap-
parently  he  was unaware that  the  law  is so  rigged  that  no  vote
to   confirm   these   treaties-disguised-as-executive-agreements   is
required  and  that  no  concurrent  resolution  to  block  them with-
in  the  60-day  deadline was before the  Senate.  Church  of  Idaho
expressed  some misgivings  and  exchanged flowery compliments
with  Humphrey-;  the  latter  even  compared  Church  with  Borah,
thus  laying it on with  an  over-size  shovel.  The  other  liberals in
the  Senate,  apprised  in  advance  that  Humphrey  would  speak
on  the  nuclear agreements,  were  discreetly  silent  or  absent.
An   anthology  of   fatuity   could   be  compiled   from   Hum-
phrey's  speech  answering  his  own  questions.  While  he  recog-
nized  at  one point  that  the  nuclear  sharing  agreements  are  part
of  a  series  of  steps  which  may  take  the  world   "just  a  little
closer  to  the  day of  ultimate war,"  he  soon  hastened  to  say that
on   the   other   hand   these   agreements   "could   actually  help
chances  for  a  test  ban"  by  stepping  up  pressure  on  the  Rus-
sians.  This  theory  of  pressure  for  peace  by  speeding  up   the
arms  race  has  long  been  the  favorite  rationalization  of  biparti-
san  foreign  policy.   If  Humphrey  believes  it,  why  has  he  been
leading  the  fight  for  disarmament?   If  he  is  for  disarmament,
why  does  he  year  after  year  give  in  so  easily  on  the  greatest
obstacle  to it—the various  steps  to rearm  the Germans with nu-
clear   weapons?   Humphrey's   final   question   to   himself   was
8  *                                                                                        1
Reformed  Radical
John  Strachey,  author of  the  pre-war  Coming Strug-
gle  for  Power, whom  the  State  Department  tried  to  bar
in  the  30's  as  a  dangerous  radical,  is  here  again  but
this  time on  a  tour  arranged  and financed by  the  State
Department.   Now  a  right-wing British  Laborite,  and  a
prospective  War  Minister,  Strachey lobbied privately in
Washington  liberal  circles in  favor  of  the  nuclear arms
sharing  agreements.  Strachey explained that  the  Labor
Party's  -proposal   for   a   non-nuclear   club   of   nations
(other  than  the  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.)  calls  only  for  re-
nouncing  the  production,  not  the  use,  of  nuclear  weap-
ons,  and  assumes  the  U.S.  would  supply  these  arms  to
its  allies.  There  is  a  growing demand  in  the  rank-and-
filc  of  British Labor  for  unilateral  renunciation of  ther-
monuclear  weapons.   The  London  Economist  (June  27)
cynically   and  approvingly  described  adoption  by   the
leadership  of  the  non-nuclear club  idea  as  "a  ruse  for
baffling  the  unilateral disarmers."
whether  the  people  of  Western  Europe  wanted  nuclear  weap-
ons.   He  assured  himself  that  the  State  Department  had  told
the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  in  executive  session
that  "the  people  welcome  them."  This  will  be  news  in  Eng-
land,  where  the  British  Labor  Party is  deeply  split  over  the  is-
sue;   in  Germany,  where  the  Social  Democrats  and  the  labor
movement  are  opposed  to  nuclear  weapons;  in  Greece,  where
the  opposition  parties  have  so  far  blocked  acceptance  of  nu-
clear  missile bases.
The  extent  to  which  our  military  bureaucracy  takes  control
of  Congress  for  granted  was  revealed  July  23  when  the  House
Appropriations  Committee  made  public  its  hearings  on  Mu-
tual  Security.  These  showed  that  an  Assistant  Secretary of  De-
fense  in  executive session  on  June  3  and  Gen.  Lauris  Norstad
on  June  8  explained  that  by the  end  of  this  calendar  year  they
would  have  nuclear  missiles  and  other  "advanced  weapons"  in
the  hands  of  ten  NATO  powers—Norway,  Denmark,   Hol-
land,  Belgium,  France,  Britain,  Germany,  Italy,  Greece  and
Turkey.   No   such  agreements  had  yet  been   approved.   The
British, French,  German,  Dutch,  Turkish  and  Greek  pacts  were
still  before  Congress.  The  Norwegian,   Danish,   Belgian   and
Italian  agreements  have not yet been  submitted  to it.  Yet  all of
them,  and  their  approval,  were  taken  for  granted.   Krushchev
could  not  be  more  sure  of  his  Supreme  Soviet  than  our  Gen-
erals  are  of   Congress.
The  next  step  will  come  next  year.   Congress  will  be  asked
to amend  the  Atomic Energy Act to hand  over  the  nuclear  war-
heads  to  our  allies.   Friends  of  peace  had  better  start  getting
ready  early  to  fight  that  one.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  27,  1959
Majority  Leader  McCormack  Chimes  In  On Approving  First  Strike  Strategy
Holifield  Joins  Nelson  Rockefeller  in  Build-Up  for  Preventive  War
Congressman  Chet  Holifield  (D.  Cat.)  this'year  has  joined
Nelspn  Rockefeller,  the  AEC  and  certain  elements  of  the  Pen-
tagon  in  spreading  the  idea that  nuclear war  can  be kept  neatly
limited,  and   that  we  may  therefore  threaten  nuclear  war  if
necessary.
Holifield   made  a  major  speech   on  this  theme  before  the
House  July  15.    He  began  by  reading  the  introductory  section
of  the  report  to  Governor  Rockefeller  on  a  fallout  shelter  pro-
gram  with  its  complacent  assurance  that  "if  a  test  of  military
strength"  become  necessary  "our   people   and  our   democratic
society  can be  successfully defended"  and  its hint  that  a  shelter
program  would  increase  "the  sense  of  purpose  of  our  negotia-
tors  at  the  international  conference  tables."   Holifield   differs
from   Rockefeller  only  in  arguing   that  the   shelter   program
should  be financed by the  Federal  government.
Fears  We May Deter  Ourselves
Holifield  said  he  was  not  espousing  preventive  or  pre-emp-
tive war  but  his reasoning  leads  straight in  that  direction.  After
mentioning  the  Quemoy  and  Lebanon  crises  of  last  year,  he
said,  "our   deterrent  striking  force  is  also  designed  to  prevent
small-scale  aggression  or  even  extremely  provocative   behavior
on  the  part  of  the  Soiet  Union"  but  "if  the  launching  of  our
attacking  forces will mean  inevitable destruction of  our  Nation
by  a  counter  blow  from  the  Soviet  Union,  we  ourselves  will
be  deterred  from  using  such  an  extreme  measure."  This  means
he  envisages the  use  of  nuclear  striking  power,  not  as  a  last-
resort  of  defense,  but  as  a  means  of  enforcing  our  will  politi-
cally.   In   the  Lebanese-Iraqi  crisis,  which   dissolved  without
war,  this  route  would  have  culminated  in  a  disastrous  nuclear
exchange  between  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.
The  point  Holifield  was  making  became  clearer  when  Ma-
jority  Leader McCormack  of  Massachusetts  interjected, "While
we  should  not  adopt  a  policy  of  a  surprise  attack,  certainly  it
seems  to  me  we  should  get  away from  the  policy  of  non  attack
under  any  circumstances."  Mr.  Holifield  agreed  that  "a  policy
of   massive  retaliation  after   attack  is  a  completely  fallacious
doctrine."   Holifield  made his  real  position  plain  when  he  said,
"In   other  words,  unless  we  are  clearly  willing  to  use,  in  ex-
treme  necessity,  our  deterrent  striking  force,  that  force  is  not
really  a  deterrent."  This  is  the  philosophy  of  preventive   nu-
clear  war.
Holifield's  optimistic  adventurism  is  based  on  the   loaded
To  Make  It  Easier  to  Gamble  With  Our  Lives
"This  study  was  initiated   in  the  belief  that   non-mili-
tary  defense  measures  .  .  .  might  make  two  significant
contributions  to  the  national  defense.   First,  they  might
alleviate   the   catastrophe   of   a   nuclear   attack.   .   .   .
Second,  they  might  increase  U.  S.  freedom  of  action  .  . .
willingness  to  make  foreign  policy  decisions  carrying  a
risk  of   war  may  be  important  to   meet   major   Soviet
challenges.   .  .  .  Deterrence   of   extremely   provocative
enemy  behavior  other  than  a  direct  attack  on  the  United
States  might   thus  be  maintained  as  a  credible  national
policy ...  we  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the
United   States,   faced   with   a   major   Soviet   challenge,
might   sometime  be  forced  to  resist  militarily,   even  at
the  risk  of  devastation.  .  .  .  Control  of  the  military   sit-
uation   could  be  more  quickly   seized ...  if  the  United
States  were  compelled  to  launch  an  attack.  .  .  .
"Warning  measured  in  terms  of  days  is  possible  if
nuclear  attack  occurs  as  an  extension  of  a  local  war,  or
after  a  period  of  severe  international  tension,  or  as  a
last-resort  decision  by  the  United  States.  .  .  .  Strategic
evacuation  would  then  be  possible. ...  A  dramatic and
unequivocal   signal,   such  as  exploding  a  small  atomic
weapon  at   a  very  high  altitude  over  the  city,   would
help  in  getting  people  to  move  quickly."
—The  Rand  Corp.  (Herman  Kahn)  Report  on  A
Study   of  Non-Military   Defense,   pps.    1-9.
assumptions  and  the  unreliable  figures  of  his  recent  nuclear
war  hearings.   He  admitted  in  passing  that  in  arriving  at  his
figures,  "We  chose  a  limited  attack".   But  he  is  not  willing  to
discuss  what  would  happen   if  the  nuclear  first  strike  he  pro-
poses  unleashed  a  total  war.  He  quotes  the  less  revealing por-
tions  of  the  Rand  report  (but  not  those  in  the  box  above).
He  has  failed  to  explain  why  his  figures  assume  only  50,000,-
000  dead  from  an  attack  of   1,446   megatons   on  the   United
States while  the  Rand  study  estimated 90,000,000 from  a  1500-
megaton  attack.   Nor   has  he  ever  discussed  the  other,  more
realistic  Rand  estimate  of  a  20,000  megaton  attack,  with  160
million  deaths.
The  idea that  nuclear  war  can be limited  is folly.  The  notion
that  it  might  ever  be  wise  to  initiate  it  is  criminal.  The  belief
that  fallout  shelters could  save  the  life  we know  and  the  coun-
try  we  love  is  a  delusion.  There  is  now  no  sane  alternative  to
peace,  but  the  search  for  it  is  hard  and  to  challenge  the  mili-
tary  cave-man  mind  takes  courage.
City  Plan  Experts  Says  Fallout  Shelters  Would  Be  Tombs  in  A  Real  Atom  War
"It  is  incredible  that  Governor  Rockefeller  and  his    Spe-
cial   Task   Force   on  Protection   from   Radioactive   Fallout
have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  people  of  the  State  of
New   York   should   build   thick-walled   protective   shelters.
This  is  either  an  astonishing  display  of  ignorance,  an  at-
tempt  to  stiffen  our  resolve  in  the  cold  war,   or  perhaps  to
give  us  a  sense  of  security.
"The   concept  of  fall-out  shelters  has  validity  only  in  an
'exercise  war*—a  war  which  produces  fewer  casualties  in  the
entire state  than  would be sustained  from  a single  20- mega-
ton hydrogen  bomb  exploded  over  New  York  City.  The  prob-
able  cause  of  a  real  war  will  be  far  different. ...  If  our
cities  are  attacked,  our  enemy  will  send  dozens  of  big  bombs
against  a  city  like  New  York.  .  .  .
"The    fall-out    shelter   program   would   only   be   useful
against  radiation  fallout.    Such shelters  do not  protect  from
heat  and blast  effects.   They  serve  only  as  tombs ...  if our
cities  are  attacked,  there  are  very  few  people  who  will   sur-
vive  the  blasts  and  heat  effects.
"It  cannot  be  an  exercise  war—it  will  either  be  annihila-
tive  or  it  will  not  start.    Once  started,  it  cannot  stop—there
will  be ...  no  house  doctor  to  call  a  technical  knock-out.
The  few  unlucky  ones  remaining  alive  would  not  have  long
to  live."
—Walter  Thabit,  formerly   of  the  Baltimore  City  Planning  Dept.,  Letter  to  the  New  York  Times,  July  20.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  27,  1959
Sharp  Questions  Cut  Through  Double  Talk  to  Some  Startling   Admissions
Have  We  Enough  Bombs  in  Our  Stockpile  Now  to  Destroy  the  World?
We  provide here  some  glimpses  of  the  hearings   released
July   17  by   the   House   Appropriations  Committee  on   the
AEG  1960  budget.    This  committee   under  Clarence   Cannon
is   much   more   searching    than   the   Joint   Committee   on
Atomic  Energy  which  (except  for  Chairman Anderson)   has
become  a  toothless  watchdog.  This  deals  with  bomb  stocks:
MR.  CANNON  (D.  Mo.~):  We  are  continuing to  add  to  our
stockpile ...  if  we  can  only  use  a  certain  amount  without
jeopardizing the  life  of  this  generation and  the  coming genera-
tions,  when  we  reach  that  level  in  our  stockpile  would  it  be
advisable  to  stop?  .  .  .
MR.  McCoNE:  With  respect  to  the  first  part  of  your ques-
tion,  your  conjecture  of  the  possibility  that  a nuclear war  might
create   an   environment  in  which  mankind   could   not   exist,
growing  out  of  the  Neville   Shute  book,   'On  the  Beach',  a
year  or  two  ago,  the  studies  that  have  been  conducted recently
have  indicated despite—
MR.  CANNON.   Off  the  record.  (Discussion  off the  record).
MR. McCoNE:  Despite  the  effects  of  the  nuclear war  on  the
countries  that  are  involved  and  the  less  serious but  still serious
effects  on  the  countries  immediately adjoining  them,  the  bal-
ance  of  the  world  would  not  be  disastrously  affected.
MR.  CANNON:  Only  the  combatants would  be disastrously
affected?
MR.  McCoNE:  The   combatant  countries  would   be  disas-
trously  affected.   The  countries  immediately  adjoining  would
be  affected  seriously but  the  distant countries would  not  be  af-
fected  seriously.
MR.  CANNON:  In  that  event,  we  might  wind  up  with  a
world  population   limited  to  the  inhabitants  of  Tibet.
MR.  McCoNE:   Yes,  and  the  South  Americans  might  get
along  all  right.    You  could  imagine  a  situation  like  that.
MR.  CANNON:  Well,  that  is  a  practical  question.    If  there
is  a  limit,  and  scientists tell  us  there  is  a  limit  beyond  which
we  cannot  go  without  destruction,  why  should  we  not  deter-
mine  where  that  line  of  demarcation  is and  stop  there?
MR.  McCoNE:  I  think  that  is a very good  question,  sir.  .  . .
Now,   if  you  are  building  for  a  single  purpose,   such  as  the
strategic   counteroffensive,   there  would   be  a  limit,  and   you
would  say that  limit would  be  probably  enough.    Maybe  some
military  planners  would  not  agree,  but  it would  be  my  opinion
that you would  reach  that  point.   However,  we  find  as  weapons
become  smaller  and  different  configurations  they  are  useful  in
a  variety of  ways. ...  As a  consequence,  the  requirements  are
shifting  now,  so  you  are  meeting  the  needs  of  these  various
weapons  systems.  .  .  .
MR.  CANNON:  If  you limit  this  to  bombs,  the  accumulation
Memorable  Admission  from  McCone  on  Testing
Mr.  McCONE: I  have  reached  two  conclusions  in  my
mind.  One is  that  all  of  the  tests  conducted  to  date,  the
Soviets  and the  British  and ours,  have  not  created  .  .  .
consequent   fallout  that  appears  to  offer  serious   danger
to  the  people  of  this  country  or  the  world.   Secondly,   it
is  my  opinion  that   if   testing   were   to  continue   unre-
stricted  for  a  period  of  years,  a  very  serious   situation
might  result.  .  .  .
We  feel   that  if  ...     we  are  to  be  deprived  of  these
developments  because   of  a  restriction  on  testing,  then
we  must  be  sure  that  the  Soviets  are  likewise  deprived
of  an  opportunity  of  development  themselves.   We  have
no  ambition  to  develop  these  means  of  destruction  just
for  the  purpose  of  developing  them.   If  we  felt  that  no
one  was  proceeding,  then  it  might  be  a  good  thing  from
the  standpoint  of  the  world  situation  for  everybody   to
stop.                 .         —Use.  App.   Com.  AEC  Hearings
of  stockpiles  for  enemy  destruction,  isn't  there  a  limit  of  re-
serves  beyond  which  we  need  not  go  because  to  go  beyond
that limit would  be  to produce  a supply of  bombs which  cannot
be  used  without  certain  destruction.  What  about  that ?
MR.  McCoNE:  Yes,  I  would  think  there  would  be  a  limit.
MR.  CANNON:  Have  you  in  your  cooperation  with  the  De-
fense  Department  discussed  that limit?
MR.  McCoNE:  No,  we  have  discussed their  future  require-
ments ...  for the next  four  years.
MR.  CANNON:  I  don't  know  that  it  would  be  a  matter  of
requirement.   It  would  be  a matter  of  tolerance.   It  would  be  a
matter  of  how  much  we  could  detonate  without  injury  to  the
human  race.  .  .  . Now,  do  you produce  more  for  our stockpile
or  our  reserves  than  we  dare  use?
MR.  McCoNE:  I  do not  think that  that  is a situation that  we
are  approaching.   Perhaps  General  [A.D.]  Starbird   (Director,
AEC  Military  Application  Division),   who  is  much  closer  to
the  actual  planning  figures  than  I  am  could  comment  on  that.
MR.  CANNON:  I  would  like  to  ask  one  question.   Do  we  at
this  time  have  more  bombs  than  we  could  safely  detonate  in  a
month?    In  a  week?    In  a  day?
GENERAL  STARBIRD:  Considering  what  we  believe  could  be
delivered,  I  believe  the  answer  is  'No.'
MR.   CANNON:   We   have  not   reached   a  point   where   we
could  at  this  time  explode  everything  we  have  in  stock,  being
everything  we  have  in  reserve,  and  still  it  would  not  be   suffi-
cient  to  imperil  the  race?
GENERAL  STARBIRD:  I  said  considering  what  we  could  ex-
pect  to  deliver.
Armament  Salesmen  on  Both  Sides  Exaggerate  Each  Other's Achievements
Mr.   CANNON:   What   do   we   know,   Admiral   Rickover,
about  the  progress  being  made  by  Russia  in  these   various
fields,  in  the  nuclear   propelled   ship,  and  the  proposed  nu-
clear  propelled   airplane?
.   Admiral   RICKOVER:   I   will   take   the  nuclear   airplane
first,  sir.   I  think  they  have  done  a  good  job  of  copying  our
propaganda.   Now  we  are  copying  their  propaganda.    If  you
read   their   propaganda   carefully,   it   is  almost   a   verbatim
copy  of  the  stuff  that  some  of  our  people  put  out.   I  think  it
is  an  interchange  between  groups  in  both  countries  that  are
interested   in  doing  that  job  and getting  funds.  .  .  .
The  stories   you  hear  coming   from  individuals  and   con-
tractors  in  the  United  States  depend  on  what  they  are  try-
ing  to  sell.   For  example,  if  an  industrial  organization   is  in-*
terested  in  building  more  or  different   types  of  atomic  sub-
marines  or  parts  of  them,  they   come  out  and  make  state-
ments  that  the  Russians  are  doing  this  or  that,  and  that  it
is  essential  to  our  national   defense  to  embark   immediately
on  what  they  recommend.
—House  Appr.  Com. AEC  Hearings,  released  July  17.
1   1  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  27, 1959
Affair  for  Favored  Few  Reporters  Discloses  the  Old  Familiar  Rigidity
Ike  at  "Off   the  Record"  Dinner  Shows  He  Prefers  Drift  to  the  Brink
The  stories  in  the  afternoon papers  of  July  21 and  the morn-
ing  papers  of  July  22 purporting  to  explain  what  the  President
is  thinking,  as  disclosed  by an  anonymous  "high  source",  were
based  on  an  "off  the  record"  dinner  given  by  Mr.  Eisenhower
at  the  White  House   the  night  of  July  20.    Fourteen  corre-
spondents  were  invited,  including  all  those  regularly  assigned
to  the  White  House  beat,  and  Mr.  Eisenhower  said  he  might
hold  similar  get-togethers  with  the  press  again.   These  off-the-
record  affairs  enlighten  the  press  but  confuse  the  public.
There  will  be  a  temptation  to  read  too  much  into  this  new
off-the-record  affair  by  those  who  pore  over  every  scrap  of  in-
formation  in  an  effort  to  solve  the  riddle  of  the  Geneva  talks.
Little  if anything was disclosed  that  was not  known  before,  but
what  came  out  of  the  talk  emphasized  the  danger.   Mr.  Eisen-
hower  recognized  that  the  Russians are against  reunifying  Ger-
many  because  they  fear  a  strong  resurgent  Reich,  yet  we  go
ahead  with  German  nuclear  rearmament.   He  recognized   that
small  incidents  over  Berlin  may  easily  lead  to  a  war  neither
great  Power  wants,  and  that  this  would  be  an  all-out  nuclear
war,  but  he  is still  unwilling  to  sit  down  and  talk  with  Krush-
chev  unless  the  latter  first  signs  on  the  dotted  line  at  Geneva.
To  recognize Western  occupation rights  in  Berlin  permanently,
i.e. until that  millennial day when  Germany  is reunified,  would
be  a  major  concession  Krushchev  might  make  to  Eisenhower
at  a  summit  conference  as  part  of  a  general   settlement   but
which  we  can  hardly  get  from  Gromyko  as  the  mere  price  of
admission  to the White House. The  Eisenhower  attitude  means
that  he  would  risk  those  small  incidents  which  might  trigger
World  War  III  rather than  explore  every  possibility  for  a  set-
tlement  first.  This  is drifting brinkmanship.
One  Way  to   Make  A   Correction
"The   inner  circle  of   the  American  government   has
been  shaken  and  alarmed  by  a   'Hitler-like'  interview
given   to  Harriman  by   Krushchev."
—Joseph  Alsop's  column,  July  2
"Mr.   Harriman,  talking   to   The   Star   from   Bonn,
denied  the  'rough  talk'  story  categorically  .  .  .  'sounds
like  a  botched  up  leak  from  the  State  Department  .  .  .
anything  you  say  to  the  State  Department  comes  out
the  other  end  like  sausage  meat.'"
—Washington  Sunday  Star, July  5
"Harriman  greatly  diluted  his  published  accounts  of
his  Krushchev interview, and deplored  Washington's  de-
scription  of   this  interview  as  'Hitler-like.'   He   feared
impairment  of  his  ability to  negotiate  with  the  Kremlin.
...  It  is  also  true  that  Krushchev  does  not  resemble
Hitler,   in   the  sense  of   positively   wanting  war.   But
Krushchev's   tactics   most   certainly   resemble    Hitler's
tactics.  .  .  .  Equally   certain.  .  .  ."
—Joseph  Alsop's  column, July  20
Franco  and  Castro
The  Mutual  Security  hearings  by  House  Appropriations  re-
leased  July 23  show  total aid  to  Franco  Spain  through  June  30
of  this  year  was  $1,254,000,000.    His  shaky  regime  has  now
been  bolstered  by  $375,000,000  in  public  and  private  credits
and  admission  to  the  OEEC  (Organization  for  European   Eco-
nomic  Cooperation).    A   powerful   pro-Franco   lobby   orches-
trates  his  praises in  Congress,  which  are  led  by Walter  of  the
Un-American  Activities  Committee.    (Apparently   Fascism  is
not  "un-American".)    Latin  America  will  contrast  this  with
whipped  up  Congressional  hostility  to  Castro,  led  by  Eastland,
Trujillo's  friend,  and  such  Senators  as  Dodd  of   Connecticut.
Despite  the  President's  tactful  disclaimer  at  a  recent  press  con-
ference  of  any  wish  to  smear  Castro  as  Red,  a  remark  which
did   our  country  a  lot   good   in  Latin  America,  the   Spanish
speaking  world  will  conclude  the  U.  S.  prefers  Fascist  dicta-
tors.  When  the  chips  are  down  Congress  stands with  the  U.  S.
sugar  companies  against  Cuban  freedom  and  agrarian  reform.
In  Tribute  to  Eugene   Meyer
When   Eugene  Meyer,  a  multimillionaire  associate  of Her-
bert  Hoover,  bought  the  Washington   Post  in  1933, no  one
dreamed   that  he  would   turn   it  into  an  enlightened   liberal
paper.   Mr.  Meyer  grew  more  liberal  as he  grew  older,  and  he
treated  newspaper  publishing  as  a  public  service,  not  a  busi-
ness.  We  salute  his  passing.
Use   the  Blank  Below  to  Sell   Your   Friends   A  Subscription   to   the    Weekly
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
>  renew  (or  enter)   my   sub   for
.................................. ......Zone.......
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
Name  ............................................
we  send  gift   announcement?
the  enclosed   $5:*
....State....................
7/27/59
(1 yr.) additional:
....State....................
Yes  D    No  D
I.F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave., N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays   but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the  U.  S.;  $6  in  Canada;  510  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED