I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959may11.pdf

============================================================

The  Case Against Admiral  Strauss
Two  Physicists  Lift  the  Curtain on  His  Arms  and  Security  Policies,  See  Pages  2  and  3
/. P. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VII,  NO.  18
MAY  11,  1959
i°'       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
IB  CENTS
A  Tricky  Man  With  A  Tricky  Record
The  most  sensational  though  unnoticed  news  in  the  poorly
reported  hearings  on  the  nomination  of  Admiral Strauss  to  be
Secretary  of  Commerce  was  the  revelation  by  Senator  Ander-
son  that  the  H-bomb  originated  in  a  "Disclosure  of  Inven-
tion"  filed  on  May  26,  1946,  by  the  late  Dr.  John  von  Neu-
mann  and  Dr.  Klaus  Fuchs  now  finishing  a  jail  term  in  Britain
as  a  Soviet  spy.    The   minor  incident  which   revealed   most
about  the  tactics which  have  earned  Admiral  Strauss  so  much
ill-will  in  Congress   was  also  in  the  Anderson  testimony.   In
discussing  the  Admiral's misuse  of  security  regulations  while
Chairman  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Senator  Ander-
son  said  he  invited  Strauss  to  make  a  speech  in  New  Mexico,
the  Senator's  home  State,  in  January,  1956.    When   Strauss
took  advantage of  the  occasion  to  attack  the  Senator, Anderson
wrote  him " a pretty strong  letter."   Strauss  sent  a  letter  in re-
ply  on  January  24,  1956,  but  stamped  the  letter   "classified"!
The  Strauss letter, by quoting most  of  the  Anderson  letter,  had
the  effect  of  classifying  that,  too.   Senator  Anderson  said  that
two  days  later  he  was  asked  by  the  AEC  to  sign  a  classified
materials  receipt  and  thus  warned  that  he  could  not  disclose
the  correspondence  without  violating  the  law.
A  Dictator  in  The  AEC
The  President  was  only  telling  half  the  story  when  at  press
conference  he  attributed  the  attacks  on  Strauss  to   "personal
antagonisms."   These   personal   antogonisms   with    important
members  of  Congress  and  with  the  scientific  community  have
been  created  by  a  history  of  petty  trickery.  This  trickery  has
been  designed  not  only  to  keep  from  Congress  and  the  public
information  to  which  they  were  entitled  but  to  mislead   them
on  matters of  importance.   In  his  dealings  with  the  Joint  Com-
mittee  on  Atomic  Energy  and  with  its  chairman,  Senator  An-
derson,  and  indeed  with  his  fellow  members  of  the   Atomic
Energy  Commission,  Admiral  Strauss  circumvented  their  statu-
tory  right  to  participate  in  decision   making  and  turned   the
AEC  into  a  little  kingdom.   A  President  has  a  right  to  have
like-minded  people in his  Cabinet,  and  the  Senate  cannot  prop-
erly  base  refusal  to  confirm   on  public  policy  grounds.    But
confirmation  may  justly  be  denied  where  over  many  years,  in
a  field  as  crucial  as  atomic  energy,  a  public  official  has  shown
that  he  cannot  be  trusted  to  be  candid  in  his  dealings   with
Congress  and  the  public.  Few men in  the  Senate are  as patient,
fair  and  magnanimous  as  Senator  Anderson.   It  takes  a  lot  of
provocation  to  drive  him  into  the  two  days  of  documented  at-
tack  he  was  delivering  on  Strauss  as we  were  going  to  press.
How  the  "Clean  Bomb"  Story  Was  Launched
Here is  another  sample  from  the  voluminous  case  presented
by  Senator  Anderson.   The   1954   Atomic  Energy  Act  amend-
ments  required  the  AEC to  keep  the  Joint  Committee  fully  in-
formed.    "His  technique,"  Anderson  testified,  "was  to  deluge
the  Committee  with  considerable  numbers  of  individual  letters
and  reports.    But  on  key  questions  he  would   hold   out  im-
portant  information  until  its  disclosure   would  serve  his  pur-
poses,  or  sometimes  until  the  Joint   Committee  got  wind  of
something and  forced  his hand.   A  typical practice was to  send
up  a  letter  with  a  press  release  after   hours  or  on  a  Friday
night  or  a week-end, so that  he  could  get  his  story  out  without
comment  by  Joint   Committee  members."    Senator  Anderson
said  a  striking  case  was  the  first  "clean  bomb"  announcement
of  July  19,  1956.   The  Joint  Committee had  no  advance notice.
Chairman  Strauss's  alibi  was  that  his  liaison  officers  had  tried
to  get  in  touch  with  the  Committee  at  6:40  p.m.  the  evening
before  publication but  that  the  offices  were  closed.  Senator  An-
derson  said  Joint  Committee  records  showed  the   Committee
was  open  that  night  until  6:35  p.m.    "Mr.  Strauss  must  have
posted  a  watchman at  our  door,"  the  Senator  said,  "to  permit
his  office  to  deliver  to  our  office  the  information  five  minutes
after  the  office  closed."  The  result,  the  Senator  concluded,  "was
that  Mr.  Strauss  stole  a  march  in  his  ill-starred  effort  to  per-
suade  the  people  of  this  country  and  the  world  that  the  'clean
bomb'  is  'humanitarian.'   As  you  know,  the  effort  fell  flat  and
has  been  allowed  to  die  on  the  vine."
The  Dixon-Yates Story  Still  Unfinished
The  Admiral's  record  on  the  AEC  is  not  irrelevant  to  his
fitness to  be Secretary of  Commerce.  The  Department  of  Com-
merce  has  a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  scientific  community
where  Strauss  is  deservedly  unpopular.   The  Bureau  of  Stand-
ards,  which  issues  the  handbooks  on  nuclear  radiation  protec-
tion;   the   Coast  and   Geodetic   Survey,  which   checks  on   the
seismic  effects  of  underground  testing  and  the  means  of   its
detection;   the   Weather   Bureau,   which   studies   atmospheric
contamination;  these  are  all  in  the  Department  of   Commerce.
There  is  no  doubt  that  Admiral  Strauss  has  only  been  doing
what he passionately  believes  to  be the  best  for  his  country  but
there  is  also  no  doubt  that  he  is  high-handed,   secretive,   arro-
gant  and  unscrupulous  in  pursuing  these  objectives.  There  are
also  the  unresolved  questions  in  the  Dixon-Yates  affair,  where
a  banker  who  was  a  vice  president  of  First  Boston  served  at
the  same  time  as  a  Budget  Bureau  consultant   in  working  out
the contract  in which  his firm had  an interest.  The  government
itself  in  the  Court  of  Claims  has  been  arguing  that  the  con-
flict  is void  because  of  this  conflict  of  interest.  Senator  Ander-
son,  like  Senator  Kefauver,  feels  that  the  serious   contradiction
between  Strauss'  testimony   and  that  of  other  officials  in  this
affair   ought  to  be  cleared   up  before  confirmation.     And   no
one  ought  to  be  more  anxious  for  this  than  Strauss  himself.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, May 11,1959
Two  Pages  of  Excerpts  from  Scientist   Testimony  Against  Lewis  Strauss
"Single  Track"  Reliance  on  Nuclear  Arms  Race  Called   Disastrous
On  these  two  pages   we  present   excerpts  from  testimony
by  scientists   against   the  conlirmation of  Lewis  Strauss   as
Secretary  of  Commerce.   Dr.  David R. Inglis,  incoming chair-
man  of  the  Federation  of  American  Scientists,  a  theoretical
physicist  with  the  Argonne  National  Laboratory  for  the  last
nine  years,  testified before  the  Senate  Commerce Committee
on  April  30.   David  L.  Hill,  a  former  chairman  of  the  FAS,
a  physicist  who  worked  six  years  at  Los  Alamos,  appeared
on  May  1.    Their  testimony  has  been  so  misrepresented  we
thought  readers  would  like  to  see  their  own  words.
(From  the  Testimony  of  Dr.  David  R.  Inglis)
"We  are  marching  almost  blindly  into  an  intolerably dan-
gerous  situation, and  our  chances  for  surviving as  a  recogniz-
able  nation  through  many  decades  seems  rather  small.    Our
national  guilt—if  I  may put  it  that way—for  getting ourselves
and  the  world  into  this  unhappy  fix  without  looking  really
seriously  for  acceptable  alternatives is  due  in  no  small  meas-
ure,  in  my  opinion,  to  the  narrow  dedication  of  Mr.  Strauss
to  the   single-track  approach  of  modern  weaponry  with   no
toleration  for  negotiations  as  a  parallel  track  toward  future
security.
"The   world   crisis  we  are   dealing  with   is   primarily   an
atomic  crisis, and  in  meeting it  President Eisenhower has  been
dependent  most  heavily  on  advice  on  atomic  matters.    He
made  Mr.  Strauss  the  head  of  the  AEC,  in  recognition  not
only  of  his  great  personal  charm,  an  example  of  which  we
have  seen  here  this  morning,  but  also  of  his  effectiveness  in
getting  things  done  and  the  importance  of  his  dedication  to
modern  atomic weaponry.
"Not  Always  Strictly  Ethical"
"I   presume  the  President  had  in  mind  keeping  decisions
simple  within his  team  when  he  further  selected  Mr.  Strauss
as  his  special  adviser  on  atomic  matters.    I  doubt  that   the
President  fully  realized  to  what  extent  he  was  cutting  himself
off   from   a  balanced  view  in  confining  himself   to  a   single
channel  of  highly  opinionated  information  and  judgment  on
the  problem  of  atomic  energy  as  related  to  diplomacy.    I  be-
lieve  he  underestimated  Mr.  Strauss'  ability  to  shatter  oppos-
ing  views  by  tactics  which  seem  to  me  not   always  strictly
ethical.
In  speaking of  negotiation,  I  do  not  mean  to  imply,  either,
that  it  is  easy  to  negotiate  with  Russia—we  all  know  some of
the   difficulties—nor   that   the   most   carefully   prepared   and
earnestly   motivated   negotiations   would   with   certainty  have
ended  in  useful  agreements.    I  do  mean  that  we  and   the
Russians  have  very  strong  mutual  interests  in  trying  to  avoid
a  war of  annihilation—for  example,  that  we  should  both  want
very  much  right  now  to  keep  the  nuclear  club  small,  and  that
we hare  not  as a nation  sincerely  put  our  shoulders  to  the  job
of  trying  to  take  advantage  of  these  mutual   interests.
Bulganin  Offered  Ground  Check  Posts
"As  an  example  of  the  degree  to  which  we  have  not  even
been  really  alive  to  the  idea  of  negotiation,  I  want  to  mention
one  isolated  instance,  the  fact  that  in  1955  Premier   Bulganin,
who  was  then  a  top  man  in  the  USSR,  suggested  in  a  letter
to  President  Eisenhower  the  setting  up  of  ground  inspection
Beginning  to Sound Like Strauss
"It   is   the   unanimous  position   of   all   the   eighteen
members   of   the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy
that  these  tests  are  not  detrimental, in  a  global  way,
to  the  people  of  the  world.  If  there  is  any  danger  in-
volved,  it  would  be  of  such  an  infinitesimal  amount that
I  doubt  if  it  could  be  proven  in  a  laboratory  to  be  of
deleterious  effect  upon  a  human  being."
—Cong. diet  Holifield,   Face  The  Nation,  May  3.
"Gordon  Fair,  Professor  of  Public  Health  Engineer-
ing  at  Harvard University, when  he  gave  the Chadwick
lecture  here  today  .  .  .  speaking  before  experts   from
many   parts  of   the   world  on   the   second   day   of   the
Royal   Society   of   Health  Congress,   said  the   increase
in   the   incidence  of   disease   ascribed   to   fallout   from
weapon   tests   conducted  before   1957  was  reported  to
'account  for  the  birth  of  2,500  to  13,000  genetically   de-
fective  children  in  the  world  and  from  25,000  to  100,-
000  cases  of  leukemia  and  bone  tumor  considered   to-
gether.' Some people believe  these  estimates  to  be  low."
—The  Times  (London)  April  29.
posts  at  different  places  throughout  both  our  countries,  as  one
means  of  suppressing  surprise  attack.    To  this  small  extent,
he  was  offering  to  open  up  the  iron  curtain.
"Instead  of  simply  accepting  this  offer,   or  even   exploring
how  much  observation  equipment  could  be  put  in  the  control
posts,  what  we  did  was  in  effect  simply  to  turn  it  down,  by
attaching  unacceptable  strings.    Even prior  to  this,  there  were
people  who urged  that we should  stop  nuclear tests as a  means
of  controlling  the  development  of  nuclear  weapons,  but  not
until  this  last  year  have  some  of  our  policy  makers  come  to
realize  how  important  it  could  have  been  if  we  then  set  up
ground  inspection  posts.
The  Assumption of  Innate Superiority
"The   reason  our  negotiators   at  that  time  were  not   given
more  scope  was  that  Mr.  Strauss  and  his  close  associates   pro-
moted  their  belief  that  a  one-track  atomic  policy  would  keep
us  safe,  or,  more  specifically,  that  we  are  inherently  so  much
better  than  the  Russians  at  research  and  development  that  in
a  free   race  without  any  limiting  ground   rules  we  can  keep
ahead  forever.
"I  sincerely  believe  that  we  would  quite  probably  be  in  a
better  position  today  and  face  a  much  better  situation  in  the
future—and  in  any  event  would  be  no  worse  off—if   we  had
tried  much  harder  in  the  past,  perhaps  starting  with  a  large-
scale  research  project  to  discover  and  exploit  all  the  possibili-
ties  of  increasing   national   security  through  negotiations.
The  Need  for  Alternatives
"Such  an  effort  need  not  and  should  not  have  involved  one
whit  of  reduction  in  our  buildup  of  weapons  systems   except
as  we  might  be  able  to  elicit  matching   and  verifiable  con-
cessions  from  the  Russians  and  eventually  from  other   poten-
tial  nuclear  nations.    This  second  track  would  not   interfere
with  the   first.   Two  tracks  would  be  better  than  one  in  try-
ing  to  avoid  a  collision.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  11,  1959
Physicist  Lifts  Curtain  on  Other  Cases  and  Sheds  New  Light  on  Oppenheimer
Strauss  Accused  of  Using  Security  Procedures  for  Personal  Revenge
(From  the  Testimony  of  David  L.  Hill)
"I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  a  second  trait  of  character,
which   I  believe  should  have  some  attention   in   considering
the  qualifications  of  the  nominee.    I  refer  to  his  record  of
personal vindictiveness  against those who  have persisted  in dis-
agreeing  with  him  regarding  policies  he  has  promoted.
"I  recall  the  remark  of  a  good   friend   of  mine  who  had
served  closely  with  Lewis  Strauss  in  an   official   capacity  for
some  years.    He  commented  that  if  you  disagree  with  Lewis
Strauss  on  a  matter  of  official  policy,  he  concludes  at  first  that
you  must   be   misinformed.     If   the   disagreement  continues
after  an  effort  on  his  part  to  provide  more  information,  then
he  tends to  suggest  that  you may be  either  stupid  or  just  stub-
born.    But   if   the   disagreement  continues  beyond  a   second
round  of  argument,  then  he  comes  seriously  to  question your
loyalty  to  the  country and  even  your sanity.
Carroll  Wilson  His  First  Victim
"Shortly  after  the  nominee  became  Chairman  of  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission  he  apparently  started  to  work  on  a  few
of  the  people  who  had  dared  to  disagree with  him  in  the  past.
The  first  to  receive his  attention  was Carroll Wilson,  who  had
been  General  Manager  of  the  AEC  during  the  period  when
Strauss  was  a  minority of  one  on  most  of  the  issues  coming
before  the  Commission.
"Wilson  had  left  the  Commission  for  private employment
some  time  earlier  but  had  retained  his  Q-clearance.   Immedi-
ately  after  Strauss'  appointment  an  unusually  intensive security
investigation  was  suddenly  initiated  on  Wilson.    At  the  same
time,  his  employer,  the  Climax  Uranium  Company,  of  which
Wilson  was an  officer,  received  a strong  indication  that  Strauss
felt   he   should   have   been   consulted   before   such  a  man  as
Wilson  had  been  hired.
"Then  there  is  the  case  of  Malcolm  Henderson.    He  had
designed  the  long-range  detection   system  to  warn  of   Soviet
atom  bomb  tests,  but  he  also  had  disagreed  with  Strauss  in
the  past  on  policy  matters.    Henderson   retained  his  Q-clear-
ance  after  leaving  the  employ  of  the  AEC  and  was   offered
and  accepted  the  post  of  scientific  adviser  to  the  Secretary  of
the  National   Security  Council,  General   Robert  Cutler.    Ad-
miral  Strauss  heard  about  it,  however,  and  the  offer  was  im-
mediately  withdrawn.    Next  he  took  a  position  at  the  Civil
Defense  Administration  only  to  be  notified  that  his  Q-clear-
ance  had  been  withdrawn.
"R.  Gordon  Arneson  had  served  for  eight  years  and  with
considerable   distinction   as   State   Department   liaison    officer
with  the  AEC,  but  he  too  had  argued  on  questions  of  policy
with  Mr.  Strauss.    Consequently   one  day  he  was  summoned
Lying  About  The  'Cleaner' Bomb
"During   a   recent   test   series   in   the   Pacific,   Mr.
Strauss   commented   that   the   current   test   series   was
engaged  in  making  'cleaner'  bombs.   A  few  days  later
a  colleague  of  mine  at  Los  Alamos  came  to  me  and
remarked,  'At  the  very  time  that  Mr. Strauss  was mak-
ing  that  statement I  was  engaged in  experiments in  the
Pacific  designed  to  increase  the  amount  of  poisonous
fallout   from  nuclear  bombs.'   Then  he  asked  me,  with
a  sense  of  dismay  in  his  voice,  'Why  does  Strauss have
to  volunteer  such  outright  lies'?"
—David  L.  Hill  testimony.
to  the  office  of  Under  Secretary  of  State  Walter  Bedell  Smith
and  was  bluntly  informed  that  Strauss did  not  like  him,  that
he  could  have  another  job,  but  that  he  must  end  his  work
immediately  as  AEC  Liaison   Officer.
"From  the  standpoint  of  the  public  welfare,  the  most  in-
jurious   exercise  of   personal   vindictiveness   in   which   Lewis
Strauss  has  engaged  was  in  the  personnel  security  prosecution
of  J.  Robert  Oppenheimer.    Oppenheimer  had  not  hesitated
to  express  his  disagreement  with  Mr.  Strauss  on  certain  ques-
tion  of  fundamental policy.    One  of  these  was  the  govern-
ment  policy  of   shipment  abroad   of   radioisotopes.      During
Congressional   hearings   in   1949,    Oppenheimer    had   made
mincemeat  out  of  Strauss'  position  of  opposition  to  the  ship-
ments  and  Strauss  never  forgave  him  for  this  public  humilia-
tion.
The  H-Bomb  Controversy
"Another  controversy between  them  centered  around  their
differences   in   judgment  on   how   the   H-bomb   would   con-
tribute  to  the  national  security.    He  had  considerable   influ-
ence  and  prestige  in-government  circles.    To  eliminate  this
influence,  Strauss  again  found  it  advantageous  to  turn  to  the
personnel  security system in  order  to  destroy  his  effectiveness.
He  took  advantage  of  a  letter  written  by  William  Borden  to
the  FBI  as the  basis  for  bringing  the  file  once  more  before  the
Atomic  Energy  Commissioners for  review.    It  contained  noth-
ing  of  significance  that  had  not  already  been   reviewed   and
rehashed  many  times  before.
"The   other  Commissioners  did  not  realize  what  was  afoot
when  the  matter  first  came  up  and  the  majority  were  wholly
unimpressed  by the  new data.   They  expected  nothing  to  hap-
pen,  but  Strauss  went  privately  to  the  President  without  con-
sulting  his  colleagues.    As  a  result  of  that  meeting  the  Presi-
dent  gave  the  famous  'blank  wall'  order  and  Strauss  then  con-
fronted  the  other  Commissioners  with  this  accomplished   fact."
The  Holifield  Radiation Hearings  Seem  Stacked  for  the  AEC  Viewpoint
The  Holifield  subcommittee  of   the   Joint  Committee  on
Atomic  Energy  began  four  days  of  hearings  May  5  "on
fallout  from  nuclear  weapons  tests."   We  expect  to  report
on  them  next  week.    The  schedule   of  witnesses  is   disap-
pointing.   The  witnesses  are  heavily  weighted  on  the  ABC
official  side.  No witnesses  were invited from  the  independent
scientists  who  have  been  working  in  Minnesota,  South  Da-
kota  and  St.  Louis  nor  has  a  hearing  been  granted  to  Dr.
Linus  Pauling  for  all  his  eminence  in  the  field.  The  sched-
ule  looks  like  a  series  of  AEC  briefings  with  some  very
familiar  scientific  stuffed  shirts.    A  few  independents  like
Jack   Schubert  will  be   heard  on  the   round  tables.    The
chairman,  Chet  Holifield,  we  are  sorry  to  say,  showed  on
Face  The  Nation  May  3,  two  days  before  the  hearings,  that
he  had  prejudged many  of  the  issues  he  is  supposed  to  in-
vestigate  and in  one striking case—his  discussion  of  genetic
effects—that  he  was  not  clear  on  a  fact  which no  one  in  the
scientific  community  doubts.
7  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 11,1959
With  Stew art   Confirmed, the  Supreme  Court  May  Now  Decide  on  Barenblatt
The  Scull  Case  Foreshadows A New Judicial Ruling Against the Witch Hunt
The  starkly  sectional  minority  vote  again  Mr.  Justice Pot-
ter  Stewart  proved that the five months  delay  before  his  con-
firmation  was a kind  of  filibuster.  The  character  of the  nomi-
nee  was  not  questioned;  even  Eastland   called  him  "a  man
of  integrity."   It  was  simply  that  every  Senator  from  every
Southern  State  except  Texas  and  Tennessee  felt  compelled
to  vote  "no" either  out  of hatred  for  the  Court  or  in  fear  of
the  mob  spirit  in  their  home  States.
It  would  be  better  to  let  the  Supreme  Court  sit  with  one
or  two  temporary   vacancies   than   subject   it   again  to   the
. humiliations   risked   by   recess   appointments.    Mr.  Justice
Stewart   has   been  sitting   since   October   14.    What   if   the
nominee  had  been  with  the  majority  in  a  5-to-4  decision  and
had  then  been  rejected  by  the  Senate?    The  moral  force  of
the  decision  might  be  questioned.    What  if  the  new  nominee
had  been  in  a  5-to-4  decision  which  angered  Northern  right-
ists  and  led them  to  join the  South  against  his  confirmation ?
Waiting  for  Something  to  Turn  Up?
Eastland,   using  his  key  position   as  chairman   of   Senate
Judiciary,  may have  delayed  action  in the  hope that  just  such
a  decision might  give  the  South  some  allies.    There  has  been
unusual  delay  by  the  Court  in  deciding  three  contempt  cases
argued  together  last  Fall.    The  Court  did not  hand  down  its
decision  in  the  first  of  these—the  Scull  case—until  the   day
before  the  Senate  voted.
In  this  case,  the  Virginia  legislature   used  the   device  of
what  might  be  called  an  "un-Southern  activities" committee
to  harass  a  brave  printer,  David  H.  Scull,  for  daring  to  or-
ganize  a  group  in  Virginia  to  help  enforce  the  law  of  the
land  on  integration.    A  unanimous Court,  speaking  through
Mr.  Justice  Black,  reversed  Mr.  Scull's  conviction  for con-
tempt   in  refusing  to   answer   questions  about  his  political
views  and  associations.    The  ruling  was  similar  to  that  in
the  Watkins  case.    The  Court  held  that  the  Committee  had
failed  to  make  clear  the  pertinence  of  these  questions  to  any
lawful  legislative  purpose,  and  warned  that  the  Court  would
scrutinize  any  such  questions sharply where  they  threatened
to  inhibit  the  exercise  of  First  Amendment rights.
This  failed  to  produce  a  single  Northern  vote  against  the
Stewart   nomination.    Mr.  Scull  is  a  Quaker;  he  was sus-
pected   of  association   with   the   NAACP,  a   hobgoblin   only
below  the  Mason-Dixon  line.    But  the  two  remaining  cases,
Barenblatt     and    Uphaus     involve    association    with Com-
munists,  and  will  affect  the  powers  of  the  House   Un-Ameri-
can   Activities   Committee   and   its   imitators   in   Northern
States.    Eastland  may  have  been  waiting  for  these  rulings;
Fuzzy White  House  and  Indifferent  Senate
"I  hadn't  thought  even  about  the  idea  that  it   needs
new  law. ...  I  don't  know  how you can make  the  law
stronger  except  to  have  it. ...  I  know  the  FBI is on
the  job,  and  I  have  every  confidence  that  they  and  the
State  Department  (sic) . . .  will find some way of pun-
ishing  the  guilty,  if  they  can  find  them."
—Eisenhower  on the  Miss,  lynching,  May  S.
"In checking. ... I was surprised  to find that no pro-
posed  legislation  on  this  subject  [lynching]  has  as  yet
been  introduced  in  the  Senate  during  this  session,  al-
though  four  bills are now  before the House  [which]  . . .
has  passed  legislation  on  this  subject  five  times  since
1937."
—Hart  (D. Mick.),  U. S. Senate, April  30.
the  Court  may  have  outwaited  him.
We  believe  the  new  decisions  will  further  undermine  the
witch  hunt.    Former   President  Truman  has  been  doughtily
celebrating  his  75th  birthday  by  a  series  of  speeches  calling
the  House  Committee   the  most  un-American   institution  in
American  life;  his  attacks  should  help  buttress  any  new rul-
ings  of this  kind by  the  Court;  every  American  who  cherishes
the  First  Amendment is  grateful  to  him  for  speaking out.
The  Right  of  Privacy  Eroded
The  Court split  5-to-4  in  the  Frank  case  last  Monday  with
Frankfurter,  Clark,  Harlan,  Whittaker  and  Stewart  against
Douglas,  Warren,  Black  and  Brennan.    The   effect   was   to
erode  constitutional safeguards  against   searches  without  a
warrant.    Mr. Justice  Frankfurter  for  the  majority  held  that
a   Baltimore  health   inspector   could   enter   a  private   house
without  a  warrant  because he  was not  seeking evidence for  a
criminal   prosecution  and   such  inspections   had   been   custo-
mary  in  Baltimore  for  more  than  a  century.    Mr.  Justice
Douglas  for  the  minority  objected  that  acquiescence  did  not
create  constitutionality  and  (quoting  Judge  Prettyman)  that
it  was a  "fantastic  absurdity"  to  hold  that  a  man  suspected
of  no  crime  had  less  protection  in  the  privacy   of  his  home
than  a  criminal  suspect.
NOTE  TO  WASHINGTON  SUBSCRIBERS
All  copies  of  last  week's  issue addressed  to  District  of  Colombia
subscribers   Inexplicably   disappeared   in   the   local   postofflce;   a
duplicate  mailing  went  out  last  Tuesday.    Let  us  know  if   yon
have  not  received  the  May 4 issue.
1958  Index   Ready   Free  If  You  Send   A  Long   Stamped   Self-Addressed     Envelope   For   It
IE  Stones  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name    .......................................................................................
Street      ....................................„.._............................................
City     .........................................Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
6/11/89
(To)   Name
Street    ........
City    ..........................................Zohe............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?     Tea  D    No  D
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  pnb-
llshed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  15, D. C.
An   Independent    weekly   published   and  edited   by  I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:
$5  In  the   U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED