I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959may04.pdf

============================================================

Four  Pages  of  Nuclear  Revelations
Exclusive  Text:  The  AFL-CIO  Protest  Against  the  New  Strontium  90  Safety  Standards,  See  Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  17
MAY  4,  1959
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Strontium  May  Be  60 Times  Deadlier Than  the  AEC  Says
While  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  has  just  published
new  regulations  which  double  the  amount  of  strontium  90  re-
garded   as  a  safe  limit  of   exposure,  a  team  of   scientists  in
Sweden  after   ten  years  of  study  has  come  to  the  conclusion
that  this  new  man-made  poison  may  be  60  times  more  dan-
gerous  to  humans  than  the  AEC  assumes.
These findings — the  result  of  a  joint  project  by  the  Swed-
ish  Research  Institute  of  National  Defense  and   the  Depart-
ment  of  Medical  Physics at  Karolinska  Institute — run  counter
to  the  new  safety  limits  recommended  by  the  National  Com-
mittee  on  Radiation  Protection.   The  way  in  which  these  rec-
ommendations  were  released  to  the  press  by  the  Department
of  Commerce  last  week  has  created  the  impression  that  stron-
tium  90  is  only  half  as  dangerous  as  hitherto  believed.    This
implies   that   we   are  more   concerned  than   necessary   by   the
dangers  from   fallout.
The  Dangerous   "Hot  Spots"  In  The  Bone
But  the  results  which  turned  up  (see  adjoining box)   when
the   Swedish  scientists  applied   new  methods   of   microscopic
examination  to  strontium 90  in  human  bones  indicate  that  the
danger  has  been  underestimated.   Their findings — in  brief —
were  that  strontium  90  is  so  unevenly distributed in  the  bone
structure  that  safety  calculations  based  on   averages  are  mis-
leading.    At  certain   "hot   spots,"  the  amount   of   SR90  may
vary  by sixty-fold  from  the  average — and  these  spots — though
tiny — may  be  enough  to  set  off  the  beginnings   of   a  cancer.
The   Swedish  scientists  concluded  that  safety  standards  must
allow  for  this  wide  range  of  observable  variation  if  they  are
really  to  protect  nuclear  workers  and  the  public.
The  fact  that  radiostrontium  is  not  uniformly  distributed  in
the  bone  structure  is  not  a  new  observation.    Some  bones  may
have  four  times  as much  of  the  poison  as others.   The  Swedish
scientists,   however,   took   the   study  of  non-uniform   distribu-
tion  a  step  further.   Cancer  is  a  cellular  disease.   One  malig-
nant  cell  is  enough  to  set  off  the  deadly  process.   To  under-
stand  fully  the  danger  from  radioactive  isotopes  it  is  necessary
to  study  their   distribution  and   effect   in   terms   of   the   cell.
Using  autoradiographs  and  microradiographs,   embodying  the
most   sensitive   techniques  science   possesses,   the   Swedish  re-
searchers  were  able  to  study  the  microscopic  structure  of  the
bone   and    "see"     exactly   where   radioactive   elements   were
lodged  and  in  what  proportions.   They  found  that  in  terms  of
the  cell  the  distribution  of  radioactive  elements  varied  from
six  to  60  times  the  average.   This  means  that  while  the  body
burden  average  may  be  within  safe  limits,  certain  cells  may
have  as  much  as  60  times  the  average,  and   these  cells  may
become   malignant.    They   therefore   concluded   that   safety
limits  must  allow  for   these  variations  if  they  are  to   protect
against  cancer.
What  the  Swedes  Discovered
"Dr.   [W.  O.]  Caster would  call  attention to  reference
7,  the   report   of   a  Swedish  investigation  published  in
May  1958  [Bone  and  Radiostrontium  by  Arne Bngstrom
and   others].     In   his   opinion,   the   conclusions  of   the
Swedish  study  are  based  upon  a  very  meticulous  and
elegant  experimental  work,  and  it  is  important  in  that
it  provides,  for  the  first  time,  a  direct  but  fairly  rigor-
ous  calculation  procedure  for  estimating  the  radiation
dosage   (in  roentgen  units)   to  be  expected  at   various
points  in  the  skeleton of  a  person  with  known  amounts
of  SR90  [radiostrontium]  in  his  skeleton.  It  is  known
that  SR90  is  not  homogeneously  distributed throughout
the   skeleton,  but   is   concentrated  at   certain   points.
Thus,  any  calculation relating to  radiation  dosage  from
SR90  must  take  into  account  the  nonhomogeneity  fac-
tor,   N.   The  Swedish  study  tends  to  show  that  N  is  not
a  constant,  but  will  vary  with  experimental conditions,
and  that  at  the  present  time it  has  a  value much  higher
than  any  that  had  previously been  assumed.   The  sig-
nificance  of  this  to  the  general  public  lies  in  the  con-
clusion  that  SR90  is  60  times  more  dangerous  to  hu-
mans  than  AEC  statements  usually  assume.  .  .  ."
—Basic  Data:   the   Minnesota   Atomic   Development
Problems   Committee,   Addendum   June   15,  1958.
5
6     i
The   danger   estimates  and   safety   limits  arrived  at  by  the
Swedish  scientists  differ  strikingly from  those  now  adopted  by
the  AEC  and  the  NCRP.   They  may  be  found    dramatically
contrasted   in   an   article  just  published   in   the   March-April
issue  of  the  Minnesota  Chemist.   The  article  is  by  Dr.  W.  O.
Caster  of  the  Department   of  Physiological  Chemistry  at   the
University  of  Minnesota,  well  known  in  his  field.  Here  is  a
comparison  in  "sunshine  units"  from  Dr.  Caster's  tables:
Swedish                        AEC
Population  MFC                                    3                         200  S.U.
Occupational  MFC                             30                     2,000  S.U.
50-100%  Increase  Leukemia             90                       6,000  S.U.
Bone  Damage                                    500                     10,000  S.U.
Bone  Cancer  Threshold                   750                     50,000  S.U.
(MFC  is  Maximum  Permissible  Concentration)
The  actual  data on  which  the  Swedish  results  are  based  were
published  last  year  in  Sweden  and  in  this  country  (Bone  and
Radiostrontium   by  Arne  Engstrom,   Rolf   Bjornerstedt,  Carl-
Johan  Clemedson  and  Arne Nelson;  published  by John  Wiley,
New  York)   but  little  public  attention   has  been  paid   them.
Dr.  Caster,  summarizing  in  the  Minnesota  Chemist,  said,
"The   current  AEC  valuation  would  estimate  that   180  SU
would  produce  a radiation  intensity in bone  of  0.45  r/yr  which
is  below  the  maximum permissible  for  the  general  population,
and  furnishes  the  skeleton  with  radiation  only  slightly  above
the  natural  background   levels.    Hence,   it  is  'safe'   and  well
below  levels  that  might  cause  biological  effect  or  should  rea-
(Contmued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  4, 1959
How the NPRC Withheld News of Population Safeguard  Proposed by IPRC...
(Continued  from  Page   One)
sonably   be  termed   a   basis  for   concern.    Using  Engstrom's
factor  of  N  =  60,  on  the  other  hand,  [N  is  the  non-homo-
geneity  factor  in  the  safety  equation—IPS],  one  would  be  led
to  say  that  180  SU  is  about  60-fold  above  maximum permis-
sible  levels  for  the  general  population,  and  would  double  and
perhaps   triple   a  person's   chances   of   having  leukemia,  and
places  him  just  above  the  threshold  for  bone  damage."
More  Research  Urgent
Writing  before  the  new  safety  standards  were  adopted,  Dr.
Caster  continued,  "This,  briefly,  describes  the  background  of
the  problem  faced  by  Subcommittee  2  of  the  National  Com-
mittee   on   Radiation  Protection   and   Measurement   as   it   at-
tempts  to  revise  the  maximum permissible  level  for  the  bone-
seekers  [like  SR90].   In  the  interim there  is  honest  confusion.
No   single  value   can  claim  universal   acceptance   as  denning
the   border   between  hazard   and   safety.    According   to   AEC
logic,  the  old  maximum  figure  of  100  SU  is  overly  conserva-
tive  and  should  be  raised  to  200  S.U. At  the  other  extreme  a
figure  as  low  as  3  SU  could  be  justified.   There  is  an  urgent
need  for  more  research,  and  for  a  dispassionate  application  of
what  we  already  know."   The  committee  has  adopted  the fig-
ure  advocated  by  the  AEC.
This   brings  me  to   a  point   which   I   respectfully   suggest
should  be  investigated   by  the  Holifield   subcommittee  of   the
Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  in  the  radiation  hearings
which  open   tomorrow  (May 5).   The   subcommittee  would
perform  a public  service not  only in  bringing  the  Swedish  find-
ings  to  public  attention  but  in  determining  what  weight  has
been  given  them  by the  National  Committee on  Radiation  Pro-
tection  and  by  the  International  Commission  on  Radiological
Protection  in  establishing  the  new  safety  standards.  The  press
release  issued  by  the  Department  of  Commerce  last  week (see
box  below)   on  the  new  safety  standards  withheld  from   the
public  the  fact  that  the  International  Commission   suggested
that  the  maximum permissible dose  for  general  populations  be
held  to  one-hundredth  of  the  occupational  MFC  for   genetic
hazards  and  to  one-thirtieth of  the  occupational  MFC  for  such
somatic  hazards  as  represented  by  strontium  90.   The   NPRC
suggested   instead  that  industry,  in  dealing  with  safety  meas-
Not  Very  Safe
"If  bomb  tests  were  to  continue  and  a  whole  genera-
tion  of  children  in  the  United  States  (100  million)  were
to  receive  this  maximum   permissible  amount   [10 per-
cent  of  the  2  microcuries   SR90  body   burden   newly   set
for  occupational  workers],  about   100,000  of  them  would
die  of  leukemia  caused  by  this  radioactive   poison."
—Linus  Pauling,  letter  to the New  York  Times,  April
28  on  the  new  strontium  safety     standards.
ures  for  the  general  population,   could  go  on  using  the  older
ten  percent  standard.   The  NPRC  and  the  AEC  would  thus
allow  200  sunshine  units  to  be  used  as  the  maximum for  gen-
eral  population  while  the  IPRC  would  reduce  this  to  60  sun-
shine  units.  There  is  reason  to  suspect  that  there  has  been  a
prolonged   tug-of-war  between  the   U.   S.  representatives  on
the  International  Commission  and  the  others.   The  latter  may
have  agreed  to  double  the  occupational  MFC  strontium  90  if
the   U.   S.  representatives   in  return  would  permit   a  general
population  MFC  to  be  established  at  one-thirtieth  of  that  fig-
ure.   The  National  Committee  has  promulgated  the  doubling
of  the  occupational  safety  standard  but  suspended   application
of  the  new  population MPC.
The  Key  to  Those  MFC's
Until  now  there  have  been  two  standards—a  maximum per-
missible  concentration  for  workers  who  come  in  contact  with
radioactive  materials  in  nuclear  plants  and   a  maximum per-
missible  concentration  for   others  who   live  or  work   in   the
vicinity  of  nuclear  plants.   The  latter  figure  is  10  percent  of
the  former.   The  new  SR90  standard,  in  terms  of  sunshine
units  are  2,000  and  200  respectively.  This   10  percent  figure
has  been  used  in  the  past  as  the  general  population  standard
governing  waste  disposal  and   purification   problems,   though
strictly   speaking—as   the   Dept.  of   Commerce   press   release
admitted—the   10  percent   figure  should  only  be  applied   to
the  two  or  three  percent  of   our  population   which  lives  or
works  in  close  proximity to  nuclear  operations.   The  problem
of  arriving at an  MPC  for  the  whole  population  involves  many
unknowns,  including  the  long  term   effects   of  low  level dos-
age  and  subtle  problems  of  statistical  analysis  requiring  much
more  data  than  we  now  possess  to  determine  the  curve  of  dis-
The  Official   Double-Talk  on  Population  Safeguards  and  What  It  Hides
"Where   radioactive   material   may  escape   from   the con-
trolled   area  and  expose  the  neighboring  public,  the  NCRP
recommended   in  1955 that  the  levels  be  1/10 those  for  oc-
cupational    exposure.    This   recommendation    continues.    It
must  be  emphasized,   however,  that  the  factor  of  1/10 is  for
the   primary   purposes   of   controlling   the   radioactive    ma-
terials  discharged  from   an  operation  involving  the  use  of
such  materials.  •  •  .
"Exposure  of  the  whole  population  to  natural  and  man-
made  sources  of  radiation   presents  a  different  problem  and
involves  many  factors  beyond  technical  control.   The  NCRP
reports,  thus  far, contain  recommendations  only  on  matters
subject   to   control.     The   recommended   values   for   MFC's
[maximum    permissible   concentration]   and  MPD's   [maxi-
mum   permissible  dose]  apply   specifically    only   to   occupa-
tional  conditions  and conditions  in  the  neighborhood  of con-
trolled  areas.   Until  more  specific  information  is  available,
it  is  believed  that  with  the  exercise  of  some  judgment  simi-
lar  principles  may  be  applied  as  guides  in  application  to
problems   involving   exposure   of   the   whole   population   to
radiation.
"The    ICBP   has   made   some   tentative   recommendations
relative   to  whole  population   exposure.   These  are  designed
for  long-range  planning  purposes  and  in  this  connection   the
NCRP  considers  them  to  be  good.   They  are  not, however,
subject  to  direct  control  in  the  immediate  future.   In  the
meantime  the  NCRP  considers  that  undue  risks  to  the  popu-
lation   will  not  be  incurred   by  following  current  practices
for  a  while  longer.  .  .  ."
—Press  Release,  Dept.  of  Commerce,  (TRG-6245)   on  new
radioactive   safety    limits,  April  23,  1959.
What  the  release  held  back,  while  suggesting  that  the
standard  of  one-tenth  was  good  enough  for  general  popula-
tion  protection,  is  that  the  ICRP  last  September  9  recom-
mended  that  the  safe  limit  for  genetic  hazard  be  l/100th
of  the  occupational  standard  and that  for  isotopes that con-
centrate   in   specific   organs  other   than   the   gonads   (like
SR90)  the  safe  limit  be  l/30th.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 4, 1959
... Higher Safety Standards Opposed as Costly by Nuclear Industry Spokesmen
tribution   in   whole   populations.    The   IRPC   figure   of   one-
thirtieth   for   somatic  and   one-hundred   for   genetic  hazards
would  go  a  long  way  toward  protecting  against  the  uneven
distribution  of  radioactive  poison   uncovered   by  the  Swedish
study  of  radiostrontium in  the  bone.
But  the  adoption  of  these  MFC's  for  general  populations
would  create  problems  at  once   for  the   military  and   for  in-
dustry.   If  the  population  safety  standard  is  to  be one-thirtieth
or  one-hundredth  respectively  of   the   occupational  MFC  in-
stead  of  one-tenth,  then  milk  and  water  supplies  in  certain
parts  of  the  country  will  turn  out  to  be  uncomfortably  close
to  the  danger  limits, perhaps  even  above  them  in  some  locali-
ties.   This  will  add  to  pressure  against  further  testing.   From
an  industrial  point  of  view, the  adoption  of  the recommended
population  MFC's  would   be  expensive.   These,  like   all  in-
dustrial  safety  regulations,  add  to  costs.   In  nuclear  industry
they  mean  more  shielding,  medical  supervision,  finer  filter  and
purification  methods,  higher  insurance costs,  more  waste  dis-
posal   expense  and   workmen's   compensation  problems.
Like  Self-Regulated  Industries
The   National   Committee  on  Radiation  Protection,   which
recommends  the  basic  safety  standards  for   the  growing   nu-
cleonics  industry  (as  of  last  November   30,  there  were   1,463
industrial  concerns licensed  by  the  AEC  to  handle  radioactive
materials,  an  increase  of  23  percent  in  one  year),  resembles
the  self-regulatory  industry committees  set up  during  the  war.
Does  Secrecy  Cloak  A  Worse  Danger
Than   SR  90?
A  tantalizing  reference  in  a  newly. published   scien-
tific  article  seems  to  indicate  that  military  censorship
is  hiding  from   the   public  a   radioactive  bomb   debris
danger   greater   than   strontium    90.   The   article   is
"Strontium   90  Fallout   in   Minnesota"   by   Dr.   W.  O.
Caster,   Department  of  Physiological   Chemistry,   Uni-
versity   of   Minnesota.    It   has   just   appeared   in   the
March-April  issue  of  the  Minnesota  Chemist.
In  discussing  the  radioactive  debris  of  a  nuclear  ex-
plosion,  Dr.  Caster  writes,  "Biochemically  we know very
little  about  most  of these  elements.  . . .  Biologically  the
most  dangerous  among  these  may  well  be  the   unex-
pended  fuel  elements,  U  [Uranium]  and  P  [Plutonium].
Detailed  information  on  these  is  lacking—PERHAPS
BECAUSE  IT  RELATES  DIRECTLY  TO  BOMB  EF-
FICIENCIES   [emphasis   added].    Next  comes  SR90."
This  suggests  that  data  on  unexpended uranium  and
Plutonium  in  bomb  debris  is  withheld  because  it  would
provide  intelligence  on  the   efficiency   of  the  bomb  ex-
ploded.
It  is  heavily  weighted  with  representatives  of  nuclear  indus-
try,  of  the  military  agencies  and  of  scientific  agencies  which
work   closely  with   them.    Labor  is  not   represented,   though
several  hundred  thousand  workers  are  now  employed  in  nu-
clear  plants  and  they  and  their  families  have  a  life-and-death
interest  in  safety  standards.
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
Full  Text  of  the  AFL-CIO  Protest  Against  the  New  Strontium  Safety  Limits
On  April  24  the  following  letter  of  protest  was  sent  by
Benjamin   C.  Sigal,  chairman  of   the   AFL-CIO  Industrial
Union  Dept.  Atomic  Energy  Technical  Committee  to  Sena-
tor  Clinton  P.  Anderson,  chairman  of  the  Joint  Committee
on  Atomic  Energy.   Since  it   was  ignored   by  most  of   the
press,  we  give  the  full  text  here:
"On  April  23,  1959,  a  report  was  issued  by  the  National
Committee  for  Radiation  Protection   setting  forth  its  latest
revisions   of   the   maximum  permissible   concentrations   of
radioactive  materials   in  the  human  body  and  in  air   and
water.
"These   revisions   gravely   disturb   us.   They   raise  basic
questions  not  only  of  scientific method, but  of  governmental
procedure  as  well.   While  the  NCRP  has  no  governmental
or   official   status,   its   recommendations  are   relied   upon  by
government  agencies  as  well  as  private  organizations.   You
will  recall  that  a  short  time  ago  questions  were  raised  in
testimony  before  you  regarding  the  procedures  followed  by
NCRP,  and  the  validity  of  the  standards  they  have  set.   The
latest  action  of  NCRP again brings  this problem  to  the  fore.
"The  recommendations  of  the  NCRP  purport  to  be  based
on  a  5-year  study.   The  inference  certainly  is  that  sufficient
information   has  been  collected  to  warrant  reliable   scientific
conclusions  necessitating  the  revision  of  the  previous  stand-
ards.  The  fact  of  the  matter  appears  to  be,  however,  that
the  Committee does  not  have  adequate  information  on  which
to  base  its  conclusions.   Its  own statement  declares:
" 'When  we can measure  more  accurately  the body  bur-
den  of  radioisotopes  in  the  various  body  organs,  we  will
have  advanced  further  towards  a  practical  solution  of  the
problem.'
"This  appears  to  us  to  be  a  confession  that  criteria  and
knowledge  do  not   now  exist  by   which   reliable  maximum
permissible  concentrations  in  the  human  body  can  be   set.
Under  these  circumstances  it  appears  to be a  highly  danger-
ous  business  to  double the  limits  for  occupational  exposure.
We  are  constrained  to  suspect  that  issuance  of  these  revi-
sions  at  this  time,  following  wide  public  concern  over   the
extent  and  speed  of  radioactive  fallout,  is  not  a  mere  coinci-
dence.  If  our  suspicions  are  justified, the  procedures  of  this
Committee,  to  say  the  least,  are  open  to  question.
"In  the  past,  the  method of calculating  the  maximum  per-
missible  limit  for  each  radioisotope  was  described  by   Dr.
[K.  Z.]  Morgan  as  follows:
" 'For  the  most  part  these  values  are  based  on  the  as-
sumption  that  the  permissible  amount  of  a   radioisotope
in  the  body  is  one  which  will  result  in  the  accumulation
of  the  radioisotope  in  the  critical  body  organ,  such  that
the  critical  organ  will be  exposed  at  a rate  of  .3 rents  per
week.'
"In   1957,  the  permissible   exposure  rate  was  reduced  to
.1  rem   per   week.   If   the   Committee  were   consistent,   it
should  then  have  recalculated  the  permissible  level  of  con-
centration  based  on  that  reduced  exposure  standard.   They
failed  to  do  this.
"The  release  of  the  Committee fails  to state,  except  in  the
most  general  terms,  the  nature  of  the  information  on which
it  has  based  its  revisions.   It  is  our  understanding  that  this
information  is  not  now available  to  the  scientific community.
"In   the  light  of  the  extreme  importance  of  this  whole
problem,  we urge the  Joint  Committee on Atomic Energy  to
make  a  thorough  investigation,  at  the  earliest   possible  mo-
ment,  into  the  methods  by  which  the  NCRP  arrived  at  its
conclusions.   We  urge  the  committee  to  demand  that   Dr.
Lauriston  Taylor  present  to  your  committee  for  publication
the  information  upon  which  the  NCRP  revisions  were  made •
We  also  urge  your  committee  to  examine  the  problem  of
whether  or  not  the  NCRP,  a  private  organization,   should
provide -the  standards  by  which  government  agencies  deter-
mine  the  possible  limits  of  radiation  exposure.   In  our  view
it  is  imperative  that  such  a  group  should  be  under  govern-
mental  direction."
6   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 4,  1959
Strauss,  at  Commerce  as in  AEC,   Master  of  Misleading  Press  Releases
(Continued   from   Page    Three)
The  Key  Scientist  Regulator
The  key  scientific  figure  in  the  regulatory   picture   is   Dr.
Lauriston  S. Taylor.   He  is  chairman  of  both  the   International
Commission   on   Radiological   Protection,   which   recommends
world  safety  standards,  and  the National  Committee  on Radia-
tion  Protection,  which  recommends  the  way  they  shall  be  ap-
plied  at  home.   Dr.  Taylor  is  chief  of  the  Atomic  and  Radia-
tion  Physics  Division   of  the  National   Bureau  of  Standards,
which  is  in  turn  part  of  the  Department   of   Commerce,   al-
ways  a  business-oriented part  of  the  government.   The  Bureau
of   Standards  publishes   the   safety   handbook   embodying   the
NCRP's  recommendations.    Since  Admiral   Lewis  L.   Strauss,
formerly   head  of   the   AEC,  is  now   Secretary  of   Commerce,
awaiting  final  Senate  confirmation,  he  is  a  commanding  figure
in  this   sector  of  the  nuclear  policy  field,  and   Dr.   Taylor's
superior  officer.   The  way  the  latest  safety  release was  handled
bears  the  familiar  earmarks  of  the  Admiral's  press   relations
skill  at  the  AEC.   On  the  eve  of  the  Joint  Committee  hear-
ings,  without  scientific  explanation,  two  months   in  advance
of  publication  of  the  new  handbook,  the  release  was  handled
in  such  a  way  as  to  create  quite  false  public  impressions  of
the  fallout  danger.
Dr.  Taylor  himself  has  the  nuclear  industry  point  of  view
when  it  comes  to  safety  problems.   As  chairman  of  the  Inter-
national  Commission,  he  has  been  fighting  a  rear  guard  action
against  the promulgation  of  population  MFC's  and  against  the
recent  reduction  of  the  general  exposure  level  for   radiation
workers  from  15  rems  to  5  rems  per  year.   On  September  9,
1957,  he  told  a  Unesco  conference in  Paris  that  this  reduction
(which  has  since  been  put  into  effect)   "could  be  very  costly
and  could  seriously  retard  the  atomic  energy  industry."    Last
February  3,  Dr.  Taylor  told  the  nuclear  waste  disposal   hear-
ings  held  by  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  that  he
saw  "no  serious  risk"  in  suspending  the  application   of   the
population  maximums  proposed   by  the  IPRC  last  September
9.   Of   the  proposed  new   safety   standards,  Dr.   Taylor   said
'There  is  a  very  real  danger   if  one  keeps  going  down  and
down   [i.e.  lowering  the  permissible  levels  of  exposure]   that
you  will   price  us  out  of   the  adequate  use  of   this  new   and
The  Men  Who  Set  the  New  Standards
Dominated  by  the  AEC  Crowd
The   NCRP   Subcommittee   on   Permissible   Internal
Dose  which  set  the  new  safety  standards  for  strontium
90  and  other  radioisotopes  is  made  up  of  ten  scientists.
Four  are  AEC  employes—K.  Z.  Morgan,  the  chairman,
Oak  Ridge;  J.  W.  Healy,  Hanford;  L.  D.  Marinelli,  and
A.  M. Brues,  Argonne.    Two  others  are  well  known  for
sharing  the  AEC  point  of  view  on  testing  and  fallout:
Lauriston   S.  Taylor  of  the  National  Bureau  of  Stand-
ards  and  Shields  Warren  of  the  New  England  Deacon-
ess   Hospital.    The   other   four    (we   would   appreciate
hearing  from  any  readers  who  know  their  basic  point  of
view)  are  P.  Durbin,  Univ.  of  Calif.;  G.  Failla,  Colum-
bia; J.  B.  Hursh,  Univ.  of  Rochester;  and W.  S.  Snyder,
Univ.  of  Tenn.
very  valuable tool."    Dr.  Taylor  said  he  was  fully  in  accord
with  another witness, the  chief sanitary  engineer of  the  Illinois
Dept.  of  Public  Health,  who  had  testified  on  the  importance
of  a  "common  sense"  approach  to  radiation  dangers  in  waste
disposal  'lest   the   atomic  energy   business  be    "economically
purified   out   of   business."
Dr.  Taylor,  judging  from  his  past  speeches,   seems  to  con-
ceive  his  task  as  in  part  the  job  of  protecting  atomic  industry
from   public   pressure   for   greater   safety   precautions.    This
attitude   seems  to  extend   to  the   point   of  withholding  vital
information  from  the  press.   Dr.   Taylor  has  given  reporters
the   impression  that   the   ICPR   report   was  an   almost  secret
document—"it  won't  be  available  here  until  June  or  July"—
although   it  was  reviewed  in  the  London   Times   of  April  17
and   1,000   copies  consigned  to  the  New  York   office   of  Per-
gamon  Press,  the  publisher,  were  being  help  up  in  the  New
York  customs  office  as  we  went  to  press.   Fortunately,  despite
Dr.   Taylor,   we  obtained  a  copy  from   London   and   learned
what   seems  to  be   the  most   important   item   of   information
withheld—that   the   ICPR   had   recommended   a   population
MPC  for  such  poisons  as  SR90  at  one-thirtieth  of  the  occupa-
tional   MPC.     We   hope   the  Joint" Committee  will   ask   Dr.
Taylor   why   this   fact   was   not   included   in   the   Commerce
Department  press  release  which  gave  rise  to  that  New   York
Times   headline,  "Panel  Downgrades   Strontium  90  Peril."
Use  the  Blank  Below  to  Start  A  Gift   Sub   With  This  Special   Issue  at  Only   $4
I.  F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Street     ..........
City    ..............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)  Name
Street    ..........
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
Weekly,    5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
........................ .Zone............State..
.................
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
5/4/59
........................ ..Zone............State..
gift  announcement?     Yes  DNO  a
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.   C.
Post   Office
I.   P.   Stone's   Weekly.      Entered   as   Second  Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  S.  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished   every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays   of  August  and  December  at  B01S  Nebraska   Ave..  N.  W., Washington  15,  D.  C.
An    independent   weekly    published    and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$f>   in   the   U.  S.;   $fi   in  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall   ratcti:  $1'i  Io  Europe:  Kit   to   Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED