I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959jun29.pdf

============================================================

FBI   Victory  in  the Supreme  Court, P.  2
Calif.  Democrats  Hit  Back  at  The  House  Un-American   Committee  In  Defense  of  Teachers,  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VII,  NO.  25
JUNE  29,  1959
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D. C.
16  CENTS
No  Worse  Than  A  Bad  Cold
There  was  a  time  when  men-of-the-world  advised   younger
males  just  emerging  from  adolescence  that  a  certain  venereal
disease  was  no  worse  than  a  bad  cold.    This  sage  advice  is
recalled  to  us  by  the  current  activities  of  Congressman   Chet
Holifield   as  chairman  of   the  radiation  subcommittee   of   the
Joint  Committee on  Atomic Energy.   A  few weeks  ago he  held
hearings  which  showed  that  fallout  from   testing  wasn't   too
bad,  certainly  not  as  bad  as  the  fallout  to  be  expected   in  a
nuclear  war.    Now   he  is  holding   hearings  which   seem  de-
signed  to  prove  that  nuclear  war  isn't  too  bad  either,  certainly
not  as  bad  as total  extinction.   Next  we  suppose  the  Holifield
subcommittee  will  hold  hearings  on  the  problem  of  extinction
and  turn  up  with  two  Rand  Corporation  yogis,  complete  with
declassified  crystal  balls,  to  testify  that  after  all  extinction  is
only  an  unscientific term  for  nirvana,  the  blissful  state  of  pure
Not-Being,  once  achievable  only  by  a  select  few  but  now  hap-
pily  put  within  the  reach  of  millions everywhere  thanks  to  the
development—by  testing—of  thermonuclear   weapons.
Our Military Go Profound
The  star  witness  of  the  opening   session  was  a  Dr.   Frank
Shelton,  who  appeared  as Technical  Director,  Defense  Atomic
Support  Agency,  Department  of  Defense.    He  read  a  lengthy
scientific  paper  called  "Basic  Effects  of  the  Specific  Weapons
Used  in the  Assumption"  (no  theological  reference  intended).
It  began—with  dazzling  Clausewitz-like  precision—"The  ef-
fect  of  a  nuclear  war  is  the  sum  of  the  effects  of  the   weap-
ons  employed  against  the  individual  targets.    The   individual
weapons  effects  thus  form  the  building  blocks  for  the  sum  of
the  effects.  .  . .  Finally,  world-wide  fallout  is the  sum of  each
of  the  individual's  weapon's  contribution."    This  reduction  of
nuclear  war to  adding  machine  clarity  must  impress  the  Army
War   College   as  sheer   latter-day  Isaac  Newton,  the  kind   of
profound   stuff  the  old  regular  army  lacked.
Dr.  Shelton  spoke  of  nuclear  war  in  the  pleasant   elocution-
ary  tone  of  a  real  estate  salesman  showing  off  a  new  suburban
development.      "Few   people,"  he  told  the   subcommittee   at
one  point,   "appreciate   the  fact  that   second   degree   burns  on
the  exposed  face  and  hands  and  the  ignition  of  fine  kindling
fuels  can  encompass  an  area  within  25  miles  or  about   2,000
square  miles  in  the  immediate  and  perhaps   dense   population
of  the  target  area.   This  thermally  affected  area  could  be  sub-
stantially  larger  than  that  of  the lethal  fallout  area.  .  .  .  Fall-
out  and  its  potentially   lethal  areas  are  important,   but  so  are
the  areas  of  the  other  effects."    Dr.   Shelton  on  initial  and
residual  radiation  had  the  gusto  of  a  man  leading  a   guided
tour.    All  in  his  narration  was. calm  and  scientific.    Thus  he
explained   that   "blast   pressure   in   itself   is  not   a   significant
casualty  agent"  but  hastened  to  add  with  the  true   researcher's
devotion   to  exactitude.    "However,  the  secondary   effects  of
7 *
Pentagon  Expert   Reassures  The  World
Dr.   Frank   SHELTON,  Technical   Director,   Atomic
Support  Agency, Dept. of  Defense: "... even  for a very
large   scale   war,  the   worldwide  hazard  to   the   coun-
tries  not  attacked would  not  be  very important in  terms
of  their  survival.   For  those  who  are  familiar  with  the
novel  "On The  Beach"  [which  pictures  the  extinction  of
the  human  race  in  nuclear  war]—
Rep.  HOLIFIELD:  Dr.  Shelton,  if   I  may  interrupt
you,  you  are  talking  there  about  it  would  not  be  im-
portant  for  their immediate survival?
Dr.  SHELTON: Yes.
Rep.  HOLIFIELD: It  might  be  important  genetically
over  the  generations,  but  it  is  not  important  from  the
standpoint  of  an  immediate  casualty.
Dr.  SHELTON: That  is  right.   I  did say  in  terms  of
their  survival.   They  can worry  about  the  genetics.  .  .  .
Sen.  ANDERSON: Is  this  [hopeful  forecast]   a  little
confusing  to  people  who  are  trying  to  understand  the
European  attitude  toward  testing  and so  forth?  .  .  .
Can  we  go  to  them  and  say  you  people  in  France  don't
need  to  worry.   The  British  will  be  firing  at  the  Rus-
sians  and  vice  versa,  and  there  will  be  fallout  between
both,  but it  won't hurt  you any?  .  .  .  AH you have  to do
is  to  take  this  sentence  and  you  can  say,  Dr.  Shelton
says  nothing  will  happen.  "It  will  be  like  a  shower  of
ceremonial  spray  of  some  kind,  and  it  won't  hurt  you
at  all."    Is  that  what  you  are  saying?
Dr.  SHELTON:  I  am  saying  as  far   as  the  world-
wide  hazard. ...  It  certainly  depends on  one's  point of
view  and  the  proximity  of  one's  country  to  the  closest
bomb.    The   bomb's  fallout  will  have   no   respect   for
boundaries  or countries. .  . .
Sen.  ANDERSON:  A  shot  that  is  fired  from  Russia
close  to  the  coast  of  Country  A  right  next  to  the  Bel-
gians  would  go  clear   across   all   of   Belgium  and  the
Netherlands.
Dr.  SHELTON:  That  is  right.
Sen.  ANDERSON: Those  people  should  look  at  that
with calm?
Dr.  SHELTON:  Certainly  not,  sir.  .  .  .  They  are in
the  local  fallout area.
Sen.   ANDERSON:  But   the  statement   will   not   be
interpreted  bv  them  as  the  local  fallout   area.
Dr.  SHELTON:  There  is  always  a  hazard  of  pulling
a  sentence  out  of  context,  I  agree.    If  one  is  in  the
proximity  of  war,  there  will  be  no  respect  of  country
boundaries.
Sen.  ANDERSON:  Wouldn't  you  agree  that  if  there
was  a  very  large  scale  atomic  war  that  nearly  every-
body  in  Eurone  would be  affected  by  it?
Dr.  SHELTON: Yes,  sir.   I  was  going  to say  to  those
familiar  with  "On the  Beach,"  it  is  probably  pure  fic-
tion."
—Nuclear  War  Hearings, June  22.
injuries  caused  by crumbling  buildings,  flying  debris  and  trans-
lation  of  the  man  himself,   are  certainly   significant."     This
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
9   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  29,1959
Frankfurter   Abandons   His  Favorite  Rule  of  Restraint  in  Palermo   Case
Way Cleared for FBI to Evade Jencks Law by Using Summaries in Pre-Trial Quiz
Two   important   principles    were   involved    in   the    three
"Jencks  rule"  decisions  by  a  Supreme  Court  split  5-to-4  last
Monday.    The  first  is that  a defendant  is  entitled  for  purposes
of  impeachment  to  see  prior  reports  or  statements  by  a  gov-
ernment  witness.    The  other  is  that  the  Supreme  Court  ought
not  to  decide  questions   before  they  arise.    The   latter   is  a
favorite  of  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter,  who  is  always  preaching
the  virtues  of  judicial restraint.   His  signal  failure  to  exercise
those  virtues  put  the  liberals  in  a  minority  of  four  again,  and
gave  the  FBI  a  victory.
The  Jencks  decision,  by Mr.  Justice  Brennan  two  years  ago,
gave   Clinton   E.  Jencks  a  new  trial  for  perjury  on  a   non-
Communist  affidavit,   ruling  that  the  trial  court  erred  in  not
letting  the  defense  see  prior   reports  to  the  FBI  by  two  no-
torious  informers,  J.  W.  Ford  and  Harvey  Matusow.    Clark,
the  Justice  most  sensitive  to  the  FBI  point  of  view,  objected
that  this  would  open  its  informer  files  to  inspection.    He was
then  the  sole  dissenter  but  the  Court  was  oddly  divided.
Four  Man  "Majority"  Now  Minority
The  newly  appointed  Whittaker  took  no  part  in  the  Jencks
case,  so  the  decision  was  by  an  8-man  court,    Brennan  wrote
the  decision  for  himself,  Warren,  Black  and  Douglas.    Frank-
furter  joined  the  opinion  of  the  Court  but  agreed  on  a  dif-
ferent  point  with  a  concurring  opinion  by Burton  and  Harlan.
Now  Frankfurter  and  Harlan  have  joined  Clark  and  the  two
new  members,  Whittaker  and  Stewart,  in  a  restrictive  reading
of  the  law.    The  four  judges  who  delivered  the  decision  two
years  ago  are  now  the  minority.
The  split  between  the  new  liberal  minority  and  the  new
right-of-center  majority  came  on  the  interpretation  of  the  law
passed   by  Congress  last   year  under   pressure  from   an   FBI-
orchestrated  campaign  to  protect  its  informer  files.  The  law
as  passed   represented  a  compromise.    The   most   important
point  the  FBI  won  was  a  restrictive  definition  of  what  kind
of  prior  statements  should  be  made  available  to  the  defense.
These   were  limited  to  signed  written  statements   or  a   sub-
stantially   verbatim   recording.-    The   liberals   in   the   Senate
fought  this  on  the  grounds  that  the  FBI  would   be  able  to
evade  the  law  by recording  prior  interviews  in  summary  form
instead  of  verbatim.    This  is  the  issue  on  which  the   Court
split  in  the  key  "Jencks  case,"  that  of  a  New  York  physician,
Palermo,  convicted  of  income  tax  evasion.    He  appealed  the
failure  of  the  trial  judge  to  make  available  to  the  defense  just
such  a  summary, although  the  defense  had  already  obtained  a
transcript  of  the  witness's  pre-trial  interrogation  and   affidavit.
The  liberal  minority  agreed  with  the  majority   in  denying
a  new  trial;  the  liberals  did  not  seem  to  think  the  summary
essential  in  the  circumstances.   What  the  liberal  four,  speak-
ing  through  Brennan  objected  to,  was  the  sweeping  language
of  the  majority  decision  by  Frankfurter.    The  minority  pro-
tested  that  this  went  beyond  the  issue  in  this  case  to  decide
in  advance that  last  year's  statute  "is  tHe  sole  vehicle  whereby
production   of   prior   statements  of   government   witnesses   to
government  agents  may be made  to  the   defense."
An  Issue  of  Fair   Trial
Brennan  cited  as  an  example,  "Take  the  case  of  a  memo-
randum  of  a  government   agent  simply  stating  that  a  person
interrogated  for  several  hours  as  to  his  knowledge  of  the  de-
fendant's  alleged  criminal  transactions,  denied  any -knowledge
of  them.   Then  suppose  that  person  is called  as  a  government
witness  at  the  trial  and  testifies  in  great  detail  as  to  the  de-
fendant's  alleged  criminal  conduct ...  it is inconceivable  that
Congress  intended,  by  the   Jencks   statute,   to  strip  the   trial
judge  of  discretion to  order  such  a  summary produced  to  the
defense.    Even  the  Government,  in  oral  argument,  conceded
that  the  statute  did  not  strip  the  district  judges  of  discretion
to  order  production  of  such  a  statement  under  some  circum-
stances."    Brennan indicated  that  to  deny  the  judge  such  dis-
cretion  would   be  to  raise  a  question   of  constitutionality  as
allowing  less  than  fair  trial.
The   real   issue  appears   in  the   concluding   section   of   the
Brennan  dissent  where  he  warns,  'There  inheres  in  an  over-
rigid  interpretation  and  application  of  the  statute  the  hazard
of  encouraging  a  practice  of  government  agents'  taking  state-
ments  in  a  fashion  calculated  to  insulate  them  from   produc-
tion."   To  open  this  avenue of  evasion  was indeed  the  strategy
of  the  pro-FBI  bloc  in  Congress  led  by Keating  of  New  York,
then  in  the  House.    Frankfurter,  speaking  for  a  new  major-
ity,  blocked  the  effort  of  the  liberals  to  leave  Judges  a  little
more  leeway.
Three  State  Witch  Hunt  Defendants  Go  Free  on  "Fifth  Amendment" Grounds
Two  years  ago  the  Supreme  Court  remanded  to  the  Ohio
Courts   four  cases   involving  contempt   of   the   Ohio   "Un-
American  Activities  Commission"  for  reconsideration   in  the
light  of  the  Sweezy  and Watkins  decisions.   The  remand  is
made  to  look  silly  by  the  way  the  Supreme  Court  disposed
of   these  cases  last   Monday.    It   reversed   three  contempt
convictions  and  upheld  one  on  grounds  which  had  nothing  to
do   with   either   Sweezy   or  Watkins.     The   Ohio   Supreme
Court  (Justice  Stewart  Potter's  father  dissenting)   had  held
that  these  witnesses   had  no  right   to  claim  their   privilege
against  self-incrimination  because  there  is  an  Ohio  statute
which  grants  a  limited immunity  from  State  prosecution  to
witnesses  before  legislative  committees.
Because   of  his   father,   Justice   Stewart   took  no  part   in
the  case,  so  it  was  decided  by  an  8-man  court.    The  Court
in  effect  upheld  Judge  Stewart's  dissent  on  the  Ohio  bench.
He  argued  that  since  the  Ohio  Un-American  Activities  Com-
mission  itself  seemed  unaware  of  the  existence  of  this  im-
munity  statute  and  had  instructed  the  witnesses  that   they
could  plead  their  "Fifth  Amendment"  privilege,  it  was  un-
fair  to  hold  them  in  contempt  for  doing  so.  .Judge  Stew-
art  upheld  the  conviction of  a  fourth  witness,  however,  since
he  had  been  instructed  by  the  Commission  to  answer   after
he  claimed   the  privilege  on  the  question,  "Where   do  you
reside?"
Brennan,  Warren,  Black  and  Douglas  were  for  reversing
this   fourth  witness's  conviction,   too.     Clark,  with   Frank-
furter,  Harlan  and  Whittaker,  voted  for  upholding  the  con-
viction.    The  rule  is  that  a  divided  court  upholds  the  court
below  so  this  fourth  conviction   stands.    The  issues  which
divided  the  court  in  this  fourth  case  are  too  subtle  for  dis-
entanglement   without  more  space  than  they  are  worth.    The
essential  point  again  is  the  new  division  on  the  court,  and
the  disposition   of   a  new  majority   to  give  witch   hunters,
State  and  Federal,  rather  than  their  victims,   the  benefit  of
the  doubt.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  29,1959
Is  There  A  Secret  Anglo-Soviet  Deal  on  Iraq?    Herter  Admits  Some  Progress  on  Berlin
Even  the  Big  Money  (Rockefeller,   Kuhn,  Loeb)  Failed  to  Win   for  Strauss
The  most  extraordinary aspect  of  the  Senate  vote  against
Strauss  (a  Rockefeller and  Kuhn,  Loeb  man)  was  the  failure
of  the  drive put  on  by  big  money interests on  his  behalf,  and
the  most  important  effect   of  his  defeat   is  to  strengthen   the
hand  of  Senator  Clinton  P.  Anderson,  chairman of  the  Joint
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  and  the  last  member  of  that
committee  who  remains  independent  of  the  AEC.    The  only
three  Northern  Democratic  votes  for  Strauss  came  from  two
members  of   the  Joint  Committee,  Pastore  of  Rhode   Island
and  Gore  of  Tennessee,  both  spokesman  for  the  AEC  anti-
test  cessation point  of  view,  and  from  Dodd  of   Connecticut,
who  shares  the  "holy  war"   outlook  of  Thomas   E.  Murray.
The  Strauss  defeat  will  have  a  sobering  effect  on  other  execu-
tive   office   occupants,  like  his   successor  McCone,   and   make
them  realize  that  a  policy  of  constantly  misleading  Congress
and  the  public  is  politically  dangerous.    No  man  more  richly
deserved  the  defeat  he  got  than  Lewis  Strauss,  not  least  for
his  false  injection  of  an  anti-Semitic issue.
Secret  Deal  on  Iraq?
We  hope  to  discuss  the  Geneva  Berlin  talks  more  fully  in
an  early  issue.   We  suggest  that  the  labyrinthine talks  become
clearer  if  regarded  as  a  hidden  tug-of-war  between  the  Ger-
mans,  who  want  no  agreement  until  they  are  fully  rearmed,
and  the  British,  who  want  a  settlement  with  the  Russians be-
fore  the  Germans become too powerful.   We  also  suggest  that
there  are  reasons  to  believe  that  Macmillan  and  Khrushchev
reached  a  side  agreement  of  their  own  on  Iraq.    The  loss  of
Iraq  to  the  Communists  would  imperil  Britain's  last   major
source  of  sterling  oil,  and  make  it  dependent  almost  entirely
on  dollar  sources of  supply.    In  the  aftermath of  Macmillan's
visit  to  Moscow,  while  the  British  plugged  for  summit  talks,
Bulletin on Nuclear  Give-A way
Just  as  we  were  going  to  press,  Senator  Pastore  (D.
R.I.),   announced  that   public  hearings   would  be   held
July  1  and  2,  on  the  new  nuclear  "give-away"   agree-
ments  including  one  to  train  the  German  army  in  nu-
clear  warfare  and  to  give  it  non-nuclear  parts  of  nu-
clear   weapons   systems.    Persons   desiring   to    testify
should  notify  Pastore  by  June  29.   These  nuclear   give-
away  agreements  can  be  blocked  by  the  passage—with-
in  60 days  of  submission—of  a joint  Congressional reso-
lution  of   disapproval.
the  Iraqi  Communists  suddenly  took  a  back  seat  and  Britain
announced  it would  resume the  supply of  arms to  Iraq.   There
seems  to  be  an  Anglo-Soviet  understanding which  has  grown
up  alongside  Anglo-German   "misunderstanding."
Some  Progress  Was  Made  on  Berlin
The  most  important  part  of  the  Herter  radio  report  was  its
recognition,  after  all  the  inflammatory  cold  war  rhetoric  which
has  become  ritual  in  such  matters,  that   "the   conference   re-
vealed   possible  areas  of   agreement  concerning   specific   ar-
rangements   for   Berlin."     Both  sides  have  made  significant
concessions  on  this.    Indeed  the  British  had  about  convinced
State  Department  to  start  negotiating  in  this  area  the  second
week  of  the  conference  when  Adenauer  intervened.    There-
after  while  both  sides  publicly  took  their  old  incompatible  po-
sitions  on  the  future  of  Germany,  the  Russians  actually  gave
up  everything but  their insistence on  some  day  (now  extended
to  18  months)  negotiating  a  new  agreement  on  Berlin.    If
they  accepted the  occupation  status, there would  be  nothing  to
negotiate—and  nothing  left  for  Khrushchev  to  concede  at  a
summit  conference.
Calif.  Democrats  and  San  Francisco  Chronicle  Hit  Back  at Un-Americans
"The  House  Un-American  Activities   Committee's   recent
attempt  to  investigate   education  in  California   has  cast   a
cloud  of  suspicion  over  a  group  of  teachers  without  giving
those  individuals,  who  were  not  charged  with  any  crime,  a
chance  to  defend  their  reputations.
"These  hit  and  run  tactics  violate  basic  principles  of  fair
play.    They  do  serious  damage,  not  only  to  the  individual
teachers,   but  to  the  educational  system   as  a  whole.    The
California  Democratic  Council  Board  of  Directors  expresses
its   condemnation  of  this  action  by  this   Committee  in  the
strongest   terms,  and  urges  Governor  Brown  and  California
Congressman  to  employ  all  means  at  their  disposal  to  bring
about  the  cancellation  of  the  existing  subpoenas  and  to  pre-
vent  any  further  maligning  of  the  reputations  of  California
citizens.
"We  praise  such  newspapers  as  the  Fresno  Bee  and  the
San  Francisco  Chronicle  for  their  forthright   and  immediate
action  in  similarly   objecting   to  this  action  of   the   House
Un-American  Activities   Committee."
—Jlesolution  by the  Calif.  Democratic  Council June  H.
"The  bhrilly  publicized  hearings   on  Communist   activities
by  California teachers,  scheduled  to  open  in  San  Francisco
next  week,  have  been  abruptly  postponed  for  almost  three
months.    Meanwhile  40  Northern  California   teachers  (plus
70  Southern  California)  who  are  under  subpoena  and  whose
names  have  been  made  public  (though  not  printed  by  this
newspaper)   stand   accused,   with  no   opportunity   to   clear
themselves.    This  kind  of  procedure is  hardly  in  accord  with
the  best  American  practice,  though  it  is  not  new  with  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee.
"Chairman   Francis   E.  Walter   (D.  Pa.)   says   ominously
that  the  hearings  were  postponed  because  'the  ramifications
of  the  Communist  operation  in  California  are  so  extensive
and  malignant   that  additional  investigative   work  must   be
done  before  the  actual  hearings  can be  held.'   This  phrasing
was  doubtless  meant  to  be  devastating—an  effect  which  it
must  be  having  upon  California's  own  Un-American  Activi-
ties  Committee  whose  newly  submitted  $50,000  report   com-
pletely  missed  the malignancy  Walter  describes.
"Two  years  of  work  by  this  committee  on  its  own  home
grounds  turned  up  nothing  more  alarming  than  an  opinion
that  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  has  handed  down  some  ragged
opinions,  that  Chief  Justice  Earl  Warren  is  not  a  Red,  that
writers  who plead the  Fifth  Amendment  are  now eligible  for
Oscars,   and  that   the  problem   of  infiltration  into  the   Los
Angeles  County  Medical  Association  is  slight.
"It  may  be  inferred  from  this  conjunction  of  events  that*
either  Walter  is  talking  nonsense  for  the  sake  of  more  pub-
licity  for  his  committee,  or  that  the  California   committee
has no valid reason  for  existence  and is  just  frittering  away
$50,000  of  public  money  each  biennium.    There  is  the  fur-
ther  possibility,  of  course,  that  both  inferences  are  correct."
—Son Francisco  Chronicle, June  It.
1   0   1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  29,1959
The  Holifield  Hearings  Rest  on  Improbable  Assumptions
(Continued  from  Page  One)
piquant  use of  the  term  "translation"  shows  that  the  new  Pen-
tagon   intellectuals  are  also  making  their  contribution  to  the
language  of  warfare.    We  assume  the  casualty  reports  of  the
future   will   contain   the   number   of   persons   "translated"   in
each  nuclear   bombardment.
An  "Off  the  Record"  Buildup  for  Preventive   War?
A  peripatetic  Rand  Corporation  sage  named  Kahn  has  been
making  off  the  record   speeches   to  select   groups  around   the
country  and  (according  to  a  speech  in  Washington   last  Mon-
day  by Norman  Thomas)   ever  so gently raising  the  question  of
whether  it  might  not  be  profitable   under  certain  conditions  for
us  to  initiate  a  thermonuclear  war.    Since  Rand   Corporation
is  a  Defense  Department   subsidiary  and   Kahn   presumably
cleared   for  top  secret,  need-to-know,   one  can  only   conclude
that  this  is  the  beginning  of  a  campaign  to  sell  the  idea  of
preventive  or  pre-emptive  war.    Since  it  would  be  impossible
to  sell  the  idea  of  initiating  a  war  none  would  survive,  it  is
necessary  to  sell  the  corollary  that  thermonuclear  war  would
not  be  the  end  of  everything  but  that  after  smashing  commu-
nism   in  Russia  we  could   (from   the   nearest  nonradioactive
caves)   rebuild  the  free  enterprise  system  at  our  leisure.     Dr.
Shelton  along  these  lines  devoted  a major  part  of  his  paper  to
some  elaborate calculations  showing  that  the  SR90  and  genetic
hazards  piled  up  by  the  "limited"  nuclear  war  assumed   in
these  hearings   "would   not  be  very  important"   in   terms  of
the  survival  of  the  countries  not  attacked.
I  will  have  more  to  report  on  this  after  the  hearings end.
The  Shelton figures and  the  "assumptions"   behind  the  nuclear
war  dreamed  up  for  the  Holifield  subcommittee  are  a  succes-
sion  of  delusive  improbabilities.   In  the  limited  war  they  as-
sume,  70  American  urban  industrial  areas,  112  air  force  in-
stallations  and  21 AEC plants  among  others  would  be hit  with
almost  1500  megatons  of  bombs  in  one  day  without  our  re-
taliating  and  with  the  war  kept  "limited."     It  is  assumed  that
2500  megatons  would  be  hurled  the  same  day  at  our  over-
seas  bases—and  again  that  there  will  be  no  reply.    The  Shel-
ton  figures  on  how  little  all  the  resultant  "world-wide"   fall-
out  will  affect  "the  countries  not  attacked"  omits  the  fact  that
thanks  to  our  far-flung  bases  some  of  that  2500-megatonnage
and  its  attendant  "local  fallout"   (which  he  tacitly  excludes
from  his  "worldwide  fallout")   will  blanket  most  areas  of  the
"free  world,"   much  of  the  neutral  world  and  indeed   large
areas  of  the  adjacent  Soviet  realm.    Little  of  the   Northern
hemisphere   would   be   left   in   the   comfortable   category   of
"countries  not  attacked."     Secondly,  if  one  figures  an   equal
"limited"  counter-attack  of   4,000   megatons  from   our   side,
then  the  SR90  and  genetic  hazard  figures  for  "countries   not
attacked"  have  to  be  doubled  even  by  his  dubious  arithmetic
and  at  once  become  dangerous  even  for  distant  survivors.
The  Kind  of  Dirty  Bomb  Attack  More  Likely
The  hidden  key  to  these  assumptions  may  be  found  if  one
compares  the  Holifield  hearing  figures  with  those  given  in  a
study  called  "The  Distribution  Effects  of  Fallout  in  Large  Nu-
clear  Weapons   Campaigns"   which  was  published  in   Opera-
tions  Research for  March-April  1959.  This  study  was  made
by  two  employes of  something  called  the  Weapons  Evaluations
Division,  Institute  for  Defense  Analysis.   It  purports  to  carry
on  a  topic  initiated  by  a  Rand  Corporation  study  (Rand  RM-
1969,   January  1956) by  S.  M.  Greenfield   on    "Radioactive
Contamination  from  a Multibomb  campaign."    The  new  study
shows  that  by using  dirty  bombs  (two-thirds  fission)  one  can
effectively  blanket  a  country  with  "lethality"  without   coming
closer  than  100 miles  to  key  targets.    The  22  pages  of  lovely
mathematics  and  charts  in  Operations  Research  may  explain
why  the  men behind  the  Holifield  hearings  assumed  only  1453
megatons  falling  on  this  country.    At  that  level   "only"  20
percent  of  our  people  would  be  killed  whereas  after  that  the
curves  rise  sharply.   After  20,000  megatons—the  amount  our
Strategic  Air  Command  is  supposed  to  be  ready  to  deliver  in
one  day—the  curves  of  casualties  and  death  meet  in  total  ex-
tinction.    It   is  only  by  assuming  this  fantasy  of   a   limited
attack  without  reprisal  by  ourselves   (to   add  to  the   various
kinds  of  fallout  on  our  allies  and  enemies  alike)  that  it  is  pos-
sible  even  to  conceive  of  a  nuclear  war,  and  of  anything  and
anyone  left  to  rebuild.
//   You  Send  A  Stamped,  Addressed  Envelope,  We'll  Mail  A  Free  Copy   of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street   ...............................
City   ....................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name  .....................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
..... .Zone.. ........ ..State.... ....... .........
6/29/BO
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
City  .............«...........................Zone............State..._.™.._ __
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?        Yes  O    No. d
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington    15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
L  7.   Stone's  Weekly.     Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Post-dated  Monday!  bat  pab-
llsbed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington  15,  D. C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.  S.;  $8  in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Hail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED