I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959nov16.pdf

============================================================

The   UN   Deflates   the  Laos   'Crisis]   P.  2
For  the  First  Time  in  A  Decade;  A  Senate  Report  Talks  Sense  on  Red  China,  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VI,  NO.  43
NOVEMBER   16,  1959°'°
T
        WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15 CENTS
How   to  Break   the  Nuclear  Deadlock  at   Geneva
Too  little  attention  has  been  paid  Senator  Humphrey's  pro-
posal  for  a  way  to  break  the  deadlock  in  the  nuclear  testing
talks.    He  proposed  in  a  recent  speech  at  Pontiac,  Michigan,
that  we  .extend   the  present  moratorium  on   testing  for   an-
other  year  from  December  31,  and  that  we  use  the  extra  time
to  negotiate a  ban  with  complete  inspection  on  all  tests  over
5  kilotons.    In  this  range,  only  a  limited  number  of  on-the-
spot  inspections would  be  required  to  police  suspicious  events.
Then,  from  the  date  on  which that  agreement went  into  effect,
Senator  Humphrey  would  allow  a  further   two-year  morator-
ium  on  shots  below  the   5-kiloton  range.    In  those  two years
he  would  have us  conduct  an  expanded  research program with
the  Soviet  Union  and  the  United  Nations  to  improve detec-
tion   devices  to   the   point  where  the   task  of  distinguishing
small   nuclear  explosions  from   small   earthquakes  would   be
made  much  easier,  and  no  longer   require  those   "hundreds"
of  annual  inspections we  have  been  demanding.   This  makes
sense  and  deserves  wider  discussion.
A  Technological   Solution  to  A  Political  Problem
We  have  been  pouring  millions of  dollars  into the develop-
ment  of  weapons  and  more  recently  into  the  task  of  how  to
hide  underground   tests  but  little  money  or   effort   has  been
spent  on  the  problem   of  detection.    Perhaps  this  is  b3cause
the  Defense   Department   and   the   AEC,  which   control   the
funds,  are'not  interested   in  efforts   which  would  clear  away
an  obstacle  to  an-agreement  they  do  not  desire.    The   Fed-
eration   of   American  Scientists,   in   a  statement   urging  con-
tinuance  for  another  year  at  least  of  the  present  moratorium,
emphasized   the  contribution  that   technological   discovery  in
this  field  might  make  to  the  solution  of  political   difficulties.
"First,"  the  FAS  statement  said
t
  "if  more  sensitive  devices
could  be  perfected  there  might  be  less  frequent  need  to  send
inspectors  to  verify  the  cause  of  any  given  seismographic  dis-
turbance.     Second,   if   robot   detectors   of   sufficient   reliability
were  perfected   these   could   be  positioned   within   the  terri-
tories  being   monitored   and   would   only   require   infrequent
checking.    Finally,  if  there  are  special  areas  within  the  Soviet
Union  to  which  Premier  Khrushchov  does  not  want  to  admit
inspector  teams,  at  least  these  could   be  monitored  by  robot
devices  at  the  perimeter   and  thus   solve  the  'unwelcome  in-
spectors   problem'."    The   FAS  called   attention  to  the   fact
that  Senator  Humphrey   almost  six  months  ago  pointed   out
that,   despite   the   recommendations   of   the   Berkner   report,
little  was  being  done   about   improving   means  of   detection.
Those  aspects  of  the  Berkner  report  which  could  be  used  to
make  agreement  more  difficult  were  high-lighted;  those  which
called  for   improvement  in  detection  techniques  were   disre-
garded.    The  National  Planning   Association,  in  its  own  re-
For  Norman  Thomas  at  75
Norman Thomas will  be  75 next  Friday,  Nov.  20.    He
is  the  one  big  man  the  Left  in  America  has developed
in  our  lifetime,  and  one  of  the  few   figures   in  the  de-
clining  world  socialist  movement  who  has  stature  and
has   made  his  name  a   moral  force.   His   warmth  and
magnanimity  have  been  an  inspiration.  One  marvels  at
the  deep springs  from  which  he  continues to  draw  hope
and  zest  in  the  gilded  but  barren desert  of  present  day
America.    We   add  our  own  grateful  salute   and  best
wishes  to  those  which  will  be  expressed  at  the  dinner
being  given  him  this  Wednesday night,  Nov.  18,  at  the
Waldorf-Astoria.   We  hope  the  love  so  many  of  us  feel
for  him will  give  him  strength  to  go  on  for  many  years
to  come.   There  is  none  to  take  his  place.
port  urging  such  development  and  a  one-year extension  of  the
present   test  moratorium,  even  envisages  the  possibility   that
"if   unilateral  inspection  possibilities  improve,"   we  might  be
able  to  police  underground  tests  from   afar   as  we  now   do
atmospheric  tests.
We  do  not  understand why  Premier  Khrushchov  does  not
take  the  initiative  in  this  field  with  some  dramatic   proposal
for  international  cooperation  in  developing   better  means   for
detecting  underground  tests.    There   is  real  fear   and   resent-
ment  in  Washington,   as  the  Geneva  talks  drag  on,  that  the
Russians may be  "pulling  a  fast  one"  in  that  the  current  mora-
torium,   indefinitely   extended,   would   give   them   what   they
would   prefer—test   suspension  without  any  kind   of   inspec-
tion.    One   way  to  clear  the   air  of   suspicion  would   be   to
initiate  an  international  project  of  this  kind.    Otherwise,   it
will  become  more  difficult  to  fight  off  those  who,  like  former
President  Truman  and  Governor  Rockefeller,  do  not  want  an
•  agreement  of  any  kind  because  they  believe-in  perpetual  arms
race,  and  would  welcome  a  step  up  in  world  tension.    This,
rather  than  fallout,  is  the  heart  of  the  problem.     As  Senator
Humphrey   said  in  that   same  speech  at  Pontiac,   "if   all  our
testing  were  done  underground,   I  think  this  would   result  in
an  increase  rather  than  a  reduction  of  world  tension.    With
all  countries  burrowing   down  into  the  ground   to  test  their
weapons,   each  would  have  less  knowledge  of  what  the  other
was  doing,  thereby  increasing  suspicion  and  distrust."
While  the  friends  of  peace  have  been  doped  into  a  sense
of   euphoria   by  the  Khrushchov   visit,  the   enemies   of   peace
have  not  given  up   hope.    Their  grand   design   depends   on
the  breakdown  of. the  nuclear  talks  in  the  West  and  the  deep-
ening  of  trouble  over  the  McMahon   line  in  the  East.     The
abominable   snow  man  Khrushchov   needs   to  hunt   down  is
Chou  En-lai,  who  puts  possession  of  a  few  hundred   square
miles  of  uninhabited   and  uninhabitable   mountain  top  ahead
of  good  neighborly   relations  with  India  and  world  peace.
1   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  16,  1959
Even  One-Sided  and  Limited  Inquiry  Leaves  That  Laotian  Crisis  Deflated
Washington  Star  Rebukes   State  Dept.  in  Comment  on  UN   Laos  Report
There  could  hardly have  been  a  more one-sided and  limited
investigation   than   that  made  by  the   UN   Security   Council
Subcommittee  into   the  situation  in  Laos.    It   received  only
the  documents  furnished  it  by  the  Laotian  government;  in-
terviewed  only  the  witnesses  that  government  brought  for-
ward;  made  no   effort   to  speak  with  the  jailed  Pathet  Lao
leaders  for  their  side  of  the  story.
Yet   even   under   these   circumstances  the   sub-committee
found   no  clear  evidence  of   invasion  by  North   Vietnamese
troops,  as  alleged   by  Laos  and   broadcast   by  the   State  De-
partment.    The  Laotians  claimed   (see  page  9,  annex  3)   to
have  "won  over"  7  of  the  enemy,  "among  them  one  senior
and  two  junior  Vietminh  officers."     If  so,  they  would  have
been   the   best   witnesses  with  which  to  prove  North   Viet-
namese  aggression,   but  apparently  they  were  never  brought
forward.    Of  70  prisoners,  only  12  were  made  available  for
questioning  by  the  subcommittee.    These  were  all  Laotians.
Ten   of   the   12  declared   that  there  were   Viet-Minh  armed
men  in  their  Pathet  Lao  detachments,  but  the  circumstances
cast  some  doubt  on  their  testimony  since  they  were  picked
by  the  Laotians  rather  than  by  the  subcommittee  for   ques-
tioning.     The  captured   armament  of  the  guerrillas  was  no
more   conclusive.     "The    rifles,"   the   subcommittee   reports,
"were  of   American,  Chinese,   Czechoslovakian   and  Trench
types,  made  between  1917  and  1953.    The  ammunition  could
not  be  identified."    The  hand  grenades  seem  to  have  been,
made  in  China.
A  Curious  Kind of  Editing
The  U.  S.  delegation  to  the  United  Nations  tried  its  best
to  save  face  by issuing  a  press  release  which  did  some  curious
culling  from  the  UN  report.    "Anyone  who  reads  the  report
and  examines  the  evidence  submitted,"   said  the  U.  S.  dele-
gation,  "will   agree   with   the   Subcommittee's  members   fhat
"...  it  would  appear  that  various  degrees  and  kinds  of  sup-
port   have   been   accorded   to   these   hostile   elements   from
That  Steel Injunction
The  most  dangerous  aspect   of  the  Supreme  Court's
8-1  decision  upholding  the  Taft-Hartley  Act  injunction
in  the  steel  strike  lies  in  the  tenuous  findings  of  fact  on
which  it  is  based.   The  key  findings  on  the  danger   to
the  "national  safety"  are  remarkably  thin.   As  Justice
Douglas  pointed out  in  his  cogent  dissent,  less  than  one
percent  of  all  our  steel  has  been  going  to  defense.   The
trial  court  found  that  lack  of  steel  might  hamper   (1)
missile   programs,   (2)   the   manned  satellite   program,
(3)   nuclear  submarines  and  (4)   foreign   bases.    Since
the  first  three  are  more  or  less  experimental,  and  the
last  could  be  supplied  abroad,  we  do  not  see  that  they
measure  up  to  the  statutory  requirement  of  "peril"  to
the  national  safety.   In  any  case,  by  some  quick  conver-
sions,  all  military  needs  could  quickly  be  supplied  from
the  15  percent  of  the  industry  not  affected  by  the  strike.
If  the right  to strike can be impaired  this easily,  trouble
lies  ahead  for  the  labor   movement.
sources  on  the  North  Vietnamese  side  of  the  border'."
This   skilfully   omits  the   opening  phrase   of   the   sentence
quoted   from   the  UN   report.     It   began,   "From   the   docu-
ments  submitted  by  the  Liaison  Committee  [of   the  Laotian
government],  it  would  appear. ..."    In  specifying  the  kind
of  aid  from  across  the  border,  the  Subcommittee  was  careful
to  say,  "The   documentaton  provided  the  Sub-Committee  re-
veals  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  Laotian  government  this  aid
and  support  includes  the  granting  to  the  Pathet  Lao  of  ac-
cess  to North  Vietnamese  territory.  .  .  ."  (Italics  added).
We  were  glad  to  see  the  conservative  Washington  Star  in
an  editorial  last  Monday  on  the  UN  report  say,  "This  is  the
flimsy  basis  which  led   to  the   State  Department   indictment
of  the  'Communist  bloc'  in  connection  with  the  fighting  in
Laos—an   indictment   which  implied  that   the   Kremlin  was
involved.    It  is  also  the  flimsy  basis  on  which  some  of  our
more  easily  excited  politicians  called  for  cancellation  of   the
invitation  to  Mr.  Khrashchov  to  visit  the  United  States."
Barenblatt  Goes  to  Jail  But  In  Other Areas Two 1st 'Amendment Victories
The   invocation   of   First   Amendment  rights   in   loyalty-
security   cases   is   being   accorded   greater   respect   by  the
courts  and  administrative  agencies  than  its   invocation  by
witnesses  before  investigating  committees.   Edgar  W.  Gra-
ham,  a  once  blacklisted   merchant  seaman  and  marine  engi-
neer,  won a 2-to-l  decision  in  the  U.S.   Court  of  Appeals  for
the  District   of   Columbia  November   5.   Judges  Fahy   and
Danaher,  with  Burger  dissenting,  ruled  that  Graham  could
not  be  denied  a  U.S.   Coast  Guard  hearing  for  clearance  in
maritime   employment   because   he   had   refused   on   First
Amendment  grounds  to  answer  three  of  14  questions  put  to
him  in  a  preliminary  questionnaire.    Graham  answered   in
the negative  all  questions  having  to do with  sedition,  espion-
age  or  sabotage  and  their  advocacy  but  refused  on  principle
to  say  whether  he  was  ever  a  member  of  the  Communist
Party,  a  reader  of  the  Daily   Worker  or  a  distributor  of
Soviet  literature.   This  was  Graham's  second  victory   this
year.   A  few  months   ago  he  won  restoration   to  the  New
York  State  Civil  Service list  and  $4,000  in  back  pay  to  com-
pensate  him  for  the  loss  of  his  job  as  stationery  engineer
in  a  State  hospital  on  loyalty-security   grounds.   There,  too,
he  had  invoked  the  First  Amendment.
The  current  is  running  the  other  way  in  the  field  of  the
witch  hunt.   Last  Tuesday   Lloyd  Barenblatt  surrendered  in
Federal   Judge  Pine's  court   in  Washington   to  serve  his  6-
month  sentence  for  contempt  in  refusing   on  First  Amend-
ment  grounds   to  answer  political   questions  and  inform  on
others  before  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee
in  1954.  The  Committee  wrecked  his  career  as  a  promising
young  college  teacher  and  the  5-4  decision  in  the   Supreme
Court  upholding  his  conviction  may  have  wrecked  the  First
Amendment  as  a  safeguard   against  the  Congressional  in-
quisition.   But  his  going  to  jail  has  aroused  little  protest
either  among  newspapers  so  sensitive  to  the  rights  of  intel-
lectuals  in  the  Soviet  Union  or  among  intellectuals  them-
selves.  He held  a  press conference  in  New  York a  few  days
earlier  but  only  one  of  its  daily  papers,   the  Post,   covered
the  story.   A  meeting   for  him  and  Willard   Uphans  that,
night   raised   $1100  but  drew  only  a  few   hundred   people,
mostly  the  old faithful  who turn  out  for  every  such   meeting.
Though  he  is  the  first  victim  of  the  witch  hunt  to  go  to  jail
since  the  Hollywood  Ten  and  some  30  other   victims  ma]
soon  follow  him,  there  was  no  demonstration   in  the  court-
room  such  as  there  might  have  been  20  years  ago.   One old
friend  and  Prof.  Alexander  Meiklejohn  accompanied  Baren-
blatt  to  court.  As  Barenblatt  disappeared  through  the little
door,  Prof.  Meiklejohn said  "We  have  just  seen  a  piece  of
senseless  brutality."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  16, 1959
Recognition  and  Admission  to  UN   Recommended,   Offshore  Islands  to  Be  Abandoned
First  Time  in  A  Decade:  Senate  Report  Looks  at  Realities  in  China
For  the  first  time  in  a  decade,  a  report   has  been  released
by   a  Congressional   committee   advocating   a   -more  realistic
policy   toward  Communist   China.    The  China   lobby  in  1950
played  a  major  part  in  the  launching  of  a  McCarthyism  that
had  as  one  of  its   objects   to  drive  out   of   the  State   Depart-
ment  and  out  of  academic  life   all  critics  of  the  Kuomintang.
Chiang  Kai-shek   lost  control   of   the   mainland   in   1949  and
became  a  power  in  Washington   in  1950.   Against  this  back-
ground,  the  report   on  Asian  policy  prepared   for  the  Senate
Foreign  Relations  Committee  by  Conlon  Associates, Ltd.,  one
of   a  series  of  special  studies  contracted  for   by  the  committee,
is  an  event  of  major  political  importance.     Released   Novem-
ber  1,  it  deserved   more  attention  than  it  got.     The   report
recognizes  that  "Communist   China  is  very   likely   to  emerge
as  one  of  the  major  world  powers  of  the  late  20th   century"
and  thinks  its  industrial  revolution  "may   be  one  of  the  most
rapid  the  world  has  seen."    We  recommend  it  for  study  and
present  its  proposals  for  breaking   the  ice  of  China  policy:
"I.  Stage  One  :(a)   An  offer   for  the  mutual  exchange  of
journalists  with   Communist   China,   if   this   program   is  suc-
cessfully   inaugurated,   to   be  followed   by  proposals   for   the
exchange  of  scholars  and   commercial  representatives.
Wanted: A Mission to Peking
"(b)   Permission  for  some  prominent  individual  or  group
not  in  the  national   executive   branch   of  the  Government   to
go  to  Communist  China  and   conduct   such  informal  discus-
sions  with  the  leaders  as  are  possible.
"(c)  The   launching   of   informal,  private   discussions  be-
tween  the  United  States  and  our  European  allies,  Japan,  and
some  of  the  leading  'neutrals',  particularly  India,  Burma  and
Indonesia  to  solicit ideas  and  some  cooperative  thinking about
the  problem  of  China.    If  the  results  snowed  some  promise—
"Stage  Two  (a)   Abandonment  of  CHINCOM  restrictions
and  permission  for  trade  on  the  same  basis  as with  the  USSR.
"(b)    Informal  discussion  with  our  allies  and  'neutrals'  on
the   following   4-point   program:    admission   of    Communist
China  to  the  UN;   recognition  of   the   Republic  of   Taiwan;
the  seating  of  this  Republic  in  the  Assembly;  the  enlargement
of  the  Security  Council  to  include  India  and  Japan  as  perma-
nent  members  as  well  as  China.
"Simultaneous   special   discussions  with  the  National   Gov-
On  China's Right  to Be in The  UN
"Irrespective  of  the  noble  sentiments  expressed  in  the
Charter,  the  United  Nations  cannot  in  fact  be  consid-
ered  a  league  of  the  pure.   The  UN   already   contains
members  that  the  United  States considers  guilty  of  past
acts  of  aggression,  including  some  of  our  allies.   Speak-
ing   in  practical  terms,  moreover,  it   must  be  realized
that  some  non-Communist countries  regard  Chinese  ag-
gression   in  Korea  as   more  complicated  than   Russian
aggression  in  Hungary.   This  is  due  to  the  prior   U.S.
decision  to  cross   the  38th  parallel  despite  threatened
Chinese  intervention,  a  decision  which  is  felt  by  many
to  have  expanded  the  original  purposes  of  the  UN  in
Korea."
—U.S.  Foreign  Policy:  Asia,  Report   to  Senate  For-
eign  Relations   by  Conlon  Associates,   (abridged).
ernment  on  Taiwan,  looking  toward  the  following   agreement:
"1.  The  U.  S.  would  continue  to  honor   its  existing   obli-
gations  to  Taiwan   and  the  Pescadores.    It  would   underwrite
the  defense  of  the  Republic  of  Taiwan,   and  would   support
an  expanded   economic-technical  assistance   program.
"2.  The   military  forces   of   Taiwan   would   be   withdrawn
from   the  offshore   islands,  together  with   those  civilians   de-
siring  to  leave.
"3.  The  U.  S. would  help  in  the  resettlement  of  any  main-
land   refugees   who   wished   to   leave   Taiwan   following   the
establishment  of  the  Republic  of   Taiwan.
"If   feasible,   the  U.   S.  would   negotiate   a  treaty  of   com-
merce  with  Communist  China,  and   if  successful,  this  would
be  followed   by  de  facto  recognition.
"The   offshore  island  issue  is  extremely  serious.     It   might
become   critical  again  at  any  point.     Thus  it  is  possible  to
argue  that  irrespective  of  this  program,   we  should    extricate
the  Nationalists  and  ourselves  from  this  area.    These  islands
bear  no  relation  to  the  defense  of  Taiwan,   and  can  only  be
considered  stepping  stones  to  the  mainland.    Militarily  they
are  very  vulnerable.    Politically,  they  are  a  liability,  both   in
terms  of  world  opinion  and   in  terms  of  the  unhealthy  psy-
chology  they  foster  in   Taiwan."
A  Realistic  Picture  of  Life  on  That
"Taiwan   remains   heavily   dependent   on   American   aid.
Both  industrial  and  agrarian  gains  have  been  substantial  in
the  last  7  years.   Unless  remedial  measures  are  taken,  the
population  density  of  Taiwan  may  become  one  of  the  high-
est  in  the  world;  it  is  already  greater  than  that  of  Japan.
Rural living standards  are undoubtedly high  and in the  cities
also  economic  conditions  for  the  common man  are  generally
improved  over  earlier  periods.
"However  Taiwan  supports  a  huge  army  in  proportion  to
the  size  of its  population.  Despite  the  fact  that  military  pay
is  extremely  low,  the  total  costs  constitute  a  heavy  drain.
In  addition to  its  military forces,  the  National Government
maintains  a  sizable  bureaucracy.   Most  of  the  two  million
refugees  presently  in  Taiwan  must  be  supported  directly  or
indirectly   by  the  Government.    Not  a  few  Taiwanese  feel
that  they  have  to  support  a  large  number  of  'unproductive'
people,  and  are  at  the  same  time  denied  access  to   official
position.    Serious   inflation   is   always   a  threat.    This   rich
island  would  have  a  fairly  bright  economic  future,  if  it  did
not  face   a  population  explosion   and  unrealistic   military-
Formosan  "Free  China" We  Support
political ambitions.
"The  Kuomintang remains  an  elitist  party  with  limited
public   appeal  and  with   serious   factional   problems.    The
party  still  tends  to  fall  between  two  stools.   It  does  not  al-
low  the  range   of  political  freedom  and  competition  asso-
ciated  with political democracy  on  the  one  hand,  and  it  does
not   possess   the   ruthlessness,   dynamism  and   efficiency   of
Communist  totalitarianism on  the  other  hand.  Power  seems
held  at  the  moment  by  rather  tired  hands.
"Essentially  the  Kuomintang continues  to  follow  the Com-
munist  organizational  model  which  it  acquired  after  World
War  I.   It  has  made  some  progress  in  establishing  cell  or-
ganizations  throughout  the  island  and  channelling  political
action  through  them.   There   is  little  indication,  however,
that  the party has really  appealed  to  the Taiwanese,  or that
it  has  genuine  mass  support.   In  all  probability,  most  Tai-
wanese  would  regard  'independence'  in  some  form  as  their
ideal."
—U.S.  Foreign  Policy  in  Asia,  Report   to  Senate   Foreign
Relations  by  Conlon  Associates    (abridged).
i  7   :>
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  16, 1959
Indifference  and  Cynicism   Greet  the   Reopening   of   the  Poplarville  Case
If  Only  Mack   Parker   Had  Gotten  Himself   Lynched  in  Hungary
Except  for  editorials  in  the  Washington  Post  and  The   New
York   Post,  the  press  reaction  to  the  reopening   of  the  Parker
lynching   by   the   Federal   government    has   been    indifferent.
The  New   York   Times  did  not  think   the  story  worth   page
one  nor   mention   it  several   days  later  in   its  Sunday   review
of  the  news.    If  Parker  had   been  lynched  in  Hungary,  our
press  would  have  been  in  self-righteous  convulsion,  but  since
it's  only  a  Negro  in  our  own   South   everybody  takes  it  for
granted,  including many  Negroes  who  lost  faith  so  long  ago
in  the  possibility  of  white  justice  that  they  expect  nothing  to
come  of  this  either.
To Expect  Nothing  Is  to  Be  Sure  of  Getting  It
This   general   air   of   lassitude  and   cynical   indifference   is
dangerous   and   may   allow   the   Justice   Department    to   go
through   the   motions   of   impanelling   a   Federal   grand   jury
without  making  a  real  effort  to  obtain  indictments.    Its  origi-
nal  announcement  withdrawing  from  the  case  last  May  said
—after  declaring  that  the  kidnapping  law  had  not  been  vio-
lated—"no   other   successful   Federal    prosecution    could    be
maintained,"   a  reference  to   the   civil  rights  statute.     Some-
body  in  the  department  now  has  a  vested  interest  in  proving
that  forecast  right.
Obviously  the  chances  of  getting  an  indictment  are  not  too
good  and  the  possibility  of  a  conviction  slim.    But  there  are
few  men  whose  hearts  and  minds  cannot  be  reached  if  enough
effort   is  made.
The   Pearl   River  County  Grand   Jury   never   looked  at  the
FBI  report  on  the  Parker  lynching nor  called  any  of  the  FBI
men  as  witnesses.    This  was  a  deliberate   and   calculated   af-
front.     If   the  Justice  Department   now   sends  first-rate  men
down  to  help  the  U.  S.  Attorney  in  Mississippi,  if  the   FBI
men  are  brought  before  a  Federal  grand  jury,  if  that  body  is
compelled  to  look  fully  at  the  facts,  it  is  by  no  means  certain
that  it  cannot  be  brought  to  indict.   There  are  many  indica-
tions  that  certain  local  officials  connived  in  the  lynching  and
are  thus  liable  under  the  civil  rights law.
Unless j there   is  pressure  on   Justice  Department,  however,
the  tendency  will  be  to  slide  into  a  more  or  less  routine  ef-
fort,  doing  just  enough   to  make  a  record   for  the  next   elec-
Un-Mississippian  Activities
A   striking  increase   in  radical  activity   is   reported
from   Mississippi,  hitherto   a   model   State.    The   even
tenor  of   a  Mississippi   general  election  was   disturbed
this  month when  a  Republican  turned  up  to  contest  the
lawful  nominee  chosen  at  the  Democratic  primaries  for
State  Senator  from  Jackson.
Senator  Eastland,  ever  alert  to  internal  security,  en-
tered   the   campaign   to   warn   voters   that   this  was   a
move  "to  establish  a  two-party  system  in  Mississippi,"
a  subject  on  which  the  Senator  is  an  orthodox Marxist-
Leiiinist.    The   Senator  declared  that   abandonment  of
the   one-party  system   would  "lead   to   the   control  of
government  by  radical  minorities"  and  urged  voters  to
"crush  this  move  of  the  national  Republican  party  be-
fore  it  gets  started."
Thanks  to  this warning,  the  Republican  was  defeated.
Unfortunately,   while  attention  was   focussed   on   the
,State  Senate  race,  another  scalawag  qualified  by  peti-
tion  in  Holmes  county  for  coroner  and  by  a  fluke  was
elected.   As   a  result  the   State   Republican  leadership
has  been  emboldened  to  announce this  is  "just  a  begin-
ning"  and  that  next  year  it  will  enter  a  ticket  in  the
Congressional  elections.
We  see  no  easy  way  to  cope  with  this  upsurge.    The
Mississippi  Republicans are  too  canny  to  be  caught  in
outright  violation of  the  Smith  Act  and,  the  rest  of  the
country  being  what  it  is,  can  hardly  be  forced  to  regis-
ter  with  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board.   Nor
can  Walter be  relied  up  to  expose  them  as un-American
for  opposing  the  one-party  system.    What  is  needed  is
an  un-Southern,  or  at  least  an  un-Mississippian Activi-
ties  Committee.
We  can  hear  its  counsel   asking  a  Republican  candi-
date  courteously,  "Is  it  true,  suh,  that  you  advised  your
sister  to  marry  a  Nigrah?"
tion.    Unless   figures  of  national  prominence   speak   up,   and
there  is  organized   pressure   from  the  Negro  community,   not
much  will  happen.   The  Attorney  General  is  silent;  he  hasn't
held  a  press  conference  in  months;  he  ought  to  be  forced   to
hold   one  now.   If   the   conscience   of  white  men  sleeps,  if
black  men  don't  care  to  bestir  themselves,   justice  will   never
be  done.
IPS   Speaks   8:30  p.m.  Monday,   Nov.  23,   Carnegie   Lecture   Hall,   Oakland,    Pittsburgh
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ........................................................................................
Street
City     .............................. ..........Zone............State....................
11/16/59
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City     ............. ...........................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I    F    Stone's   Wepklv.     Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Auenst  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska   Aye..  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
\n   Independent  weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
15  In  the  tJ.  S.;  J6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED