I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959oct12.pdf

============================================================

How  Steel  Facts   Were  Distorted,  P.  3
All  the  Opium  That's  Fit  to  Smoke:  the  New  York  Times  and the  Truth  About Cambodia,  See  Page 2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  38
OCTOBER  12,  1959
J°'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Doesn't  Anybody  Pay  Any  Attention  to  the  President?
Mr.  Khrushchev,  so  I  am  told,  was  willing  as  a  guest  to
humor   our  quaint  idea  that  we  have  two   distinct  political
parties.    But  when  he  was  given  a  curt  welcome  at  the  Los
Angeles  airport  by  a  Mayor  who  was  a  Republican,  he  was
ready  to  pack  up  and  go  home.    It  took  Mr.   Lodge  many
hours   to  persuade   Mr.  Khrushchev   that  though  Mr.   Eisen-
hower  was  a  Republican  President,  he   had   no   power  over
Republican  Mayors.    Even  this  confusing  introduction  to  the
anarchistic  vagaries  of  the  American  political  system  can  hard-
ly  have  prepared  Mr.  Khrushchev  for  the  turn—or   perhaps
it  would   be  better  to   say,  lack  of   turn—in   U.   S.  foreign
policy  in  the  wake  of  his  visit.    He  must  begin  to  wonder
just  what  Mr.  Eisenhower  does  control  in  this  country beyond
the  right  to  take  foreign  visitors on  free  helicopter  rides.
Surely  the  Russians  cannot  be  blamed  for  expecting  some
resemblance  between  the  policies  of  a  Republican  President
and  those  of  a  Republican  National  Committee.    But  the  re-
port  just released  by the  latter  on  National  Security and  Peace
reads  as  if  it  were  written  by  Dean  Acheson.    It  puts  foreign
policy  back  in  bi-partisan deep  freeze.    Indeed  the  Vice  Chair-
man   of   the   "Task  Force"   (a   term  borrowed   appropriately
from   the  Pentagon)   which  prepared   it  is  Professor  Lev  E.
Dobriansky   of   Georgetown   University,  that   same   fantastic
spokesman  for  Ukrainian Nationalism  who  sold  Acheson  the
idea  that  the  cold  war  must go  on  until  the  Russians had  been
rolled  back  to  the  original Muscovy  of  500  years  ago.
Atomic  Survival  by  Do-It-Yourself  Kit
While  the  President  and  the  Soviet  Premier  agreed  that  war
was  now  mutual  suicide,  the  Republican  National  Committee
"firmly  believes  that  our  civilian  population,  the  innocent  vic-
tims  of  modern  warfare,  can  survive  an  attack  if  a  fully  ade-
quate  program  of  civil  defense  is  undertaken  immediately"—
but  at  private  not  public  expense.   The  President  has  thrown
his  influence  on  the  side  of  those  who  want  an  end  of  nuclear
testing  but  his  party's  national  committee   thinks   "the   risks
we  may  incur  from  such  tests  are  far  less  dangerous,  and  af-
fect  far  fewer  people,  than  the  risk  of  permitting  Communist
military  superiority",  but  is willing  to  concede  that  in  the  ab-
sence  of  an  agreement  "wherever   possible,   testing  should   be
confined  to  underground  experiments."     The  Republican   re-
port  complacently  asks  us  to  be  "prepared   for  a  world  where
Communist  China,  as  well  as  many  other  nations,  will  have
a  full  range  of  nuclear  weapons,"   but  is  against  recognizing
it  or  admitting  it  to  the  UN   lest  it  gain   "international   re-
spectability  and  prestige."    This  is  to  treat  the  UN  as a  club.
Our  Cold  War Delegation  to  the  UN
Inertia  seems  to  be  a  prime  principle  of  politics  as  well  as
physics.    It  is  difficult  to  push  any  organization   out  of  its  ac-
customed  rut.     Our   State  Department  rolls  along  as  if   not
only  John  Foster  Dulles  but  Josef  Stalin  were  still  alive.    It
picks  for  our  delegation  to  the  United  Nations  labor  leaders
like   Meany,   Congressman   like  Zablocki   and   China   Lobby
heroes   like  Walter   Robertson,  men   calculated  to   undercut
everything  the  President  has  been  trying  to  do  in  the  way of
—as  he  put  it—melting  the  ice  a  little.    A  glimpse  of  their
activities  was  afforded  by  the  luncheon  clash  between  Robert-
son  and  a  Filipino  diplomat  at  the  UN  who  "remarked", ac-
cording  to  the   Associated  Press  account  in  the   Washington
Post  of  October  2,  "that  he  thought  some  Asian nations  were
reluctant  to  get  into  any  full-scale  debate  on  Tibet,  on  the
ground  that  that  would  bring  cold  war  issues  into  the  As-
sembly  at  a  time  when  East-West  tensions  were  beginning  to
relax."    Robertson  has  also  presided  over  the  folly  of  round-
ing  up  votes  to  keep  Poland  off  the  Security  Council,  though
Poland's  election  would  strengthen  its  ability   to  pursue  its
partially  independent  course,  and  the   seat  properly   belongs
to  Eastern Europe.
A  Doctrine  Made  to  Order  for Trouble-Makers
It  is  a  pity  that  the  Chinese  can  read  English.    Develop-
ments  here  and  Mr.  Herter's  press  conference  last  week  must
make  them  think  Mr.  Khrushchev  was  touched  in  the  head
when  he  tried so eloquently  (as  Mr.  Herter  admitted)  to  con-
vince  Peking  that  the  U.  S. was  ready  for  more  peaceful  rela-
tions.    When  this  correspondent   asked  the  Secretary  under
what   circumstances  we  might   recognize   Communist  China,
Mr.  Herter  wouldn't   say  that  the  U.  S.  would  do  so  even  if
all  our  grievances  were  rectified.   This  will  hardly  encourage
Peking  to  be  conciliatory.    Mr.  Herter   recognized  that   Mr.
Khrushchev    seemed   to   have   great    difficulty    in   swinging
Peking  over  to  his  line  but  at  the  same  time  he  enunciated  a
doctrine  which  attributes   to  Moscow   "a  degree  of  responsi-
bility"  for  all  that  happens  in  the  Soviet  bloc.    But  the  de-
gree—like  U.  S.  influence  in  the  "free  world"—varies   from
country  to  country  and  from  situation  to  situation.    Unfortu-
nately   the   qualification,   which   begs   the   question,   is  easily
forgotten,   and  the  view  may  easily  degenerate  into  an  over-
simplification  which  could  poison  relations  by  crediting  Mos-
cow  with  omnipotence   and  equating   China  with  Albania  as
satellites.    Such  a  view  is  made  to  order  for   trouble-makers
out  to  blame  on  Moscow  their  own  provocations  in  far  places
like  Laos  and  Cambodia  while  luridly  portraying  as  "subver-
sion"   (see   page  4)   the  natural  stirrings  in   underdeveloped
areas.   This  way lies  Cl A  melodrama.
Perhaps   the  most  abnormal   of  situations  in  a  world   full
of   them   is  a  President   unable   to  make  his  own  party   and
Administration  follow  his  direction.
1   5   :
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 12,  1959
Another  Hot  Spot  Which  Must  Make  Peking  Dubious  of  U.  S.  Sincerity  on  Peace
Putting  the  Spotlight  on  the  Trouble  Brewing  Over   Cambodia
Cambodia  is  another  of  those  far  countries  in  which  our
military  and  intelligence  agents  do  pretty  much  as  they  please.
It  is  in  such  aros  that  wars  can  be  hatched.    We  invite  at-
tention   to  it   bei  ause  trouble  is  brewing  there  now,  and  be-
cause  to  see  Ca.nbodia  as  it  must  appear  from   Peking  is  a
useful   mote-in-our-own-eye  exercise.
Cambodia  is one  of  the  three  independent countries created
by the  Geneva  accords  of  1954  which ended  the  war  in French
Indo-China.    Cambodia  has  an  ancient history and  a  curious
present;    its   dominant   political   figure   is   Prince   Norodom
Sihanouk  who  gave  up  the  throne  to  head  a  Popular  Socialist
party  and  become  Prime  Minister.   He  is a  shrewd  man  who
has  made  neutralism  pay  by getting  aid  from  China  and  Rus-
sia  on  the  one  hand  and  the  U.  S.  and  France  on  the  other.
The   result  of  this  competition,  incidentally,  is  that  our  aid
program  in  Cambodia  is  said  to  be  one  of  the  best  in  Asia.
A  Pledge  We  Have  Not  Honored
The  U.  S.  under  the  direction  of  John  Foster  Dulles  dis-
liked  the  Geneva  accords  on  Indochina,  declined  to  take  part
in  the  conference   which  ended  that  war,  but  pledged  itself
reluctantly  not  to  upset  the  settlement.   This  pledge  has  not
been  honored.   For  a  long  time  we  seem  to  have  been  giving
covert  encouragement  to  forces  from  neighboring  South  Viet
Nam   and   Thailand   which   have   been   trying  to   overthrow
Sihanouk's  neutralist   regime.
Early   this   year   an   attempt   to   overthrow   Sihanouk   was
thwarted   when   Communist  and   Western   embassies  in   the
capital  tipped  the  plot.    But  when  Realties   Cambodgiennes,
(a   Cambodian  French   language  weekly  available  at  the  Li-
brary   of   Congress)    asked   the   Prince   (issue   of   Jan.   24)
whether  the  U.  S.  Embassy  was  among  those  which  helped
him,  he  replied  "Although  our  American  friends  have  a  very
active  and  richly  endowed  intelligence  service,  with  assured
facilities  in  our  neighbors of  the  West  and  East.  [i.e.  Thailand
and  South  Viet  Nam]   they  did  not  think  it  their  duty  to  in-
form   us,  thus  allowing   many   of   our   compatriots  to   doubt
their  impartiality."
On  February  26  Prince  Sihanouk  called  in  all  the  Ambassa-
dors  in  his  capital  and  laid  before  them  the  evidence  that  this
plot  was  financed  and  armed  from  South  Viet  Nam,  a  U.  S.
satellite.    On  March  2  the  Ambassador  of  South  Viet   Nam
was  recalled   on  the  request  of  the  Cambodian   government.
All  the  Opium  That's  Fit  to  Smoke  Dept.
"Peiping's  tacit   support  of   the  assault   on  Laos   is
best   expressed   by  the  repeated  objection  to  the  sup-
positious  'intervention'  of  the  United  States  on  behalf
of   'imperialism.'    And   Red   China  has   just   increased
the  pressure   on  Cambodia."
—New  York  Times  editorial, Oct. 5.
Pnom   Penh,   Cambodia,  Oct.   2—Sixteen   men   have
been  sentenced   to  death  here  for  alleged  complicity   in
a  plot  last   February  to  create  a  rebel  government  in
Cambodia  .  .  .  the  Cambodian  Prime  Minister,  Prince
Norodom  Sihanouk,  accused  Siam  and  South  Viet  Nam
of  using  U.  S.  arms  and  money  to  plot  the  overthrow
of  his  neutralist  regime."
—The  London  Times, Oct 3.
Then  last  August  31  there  was  an  attempt  to  assassinate  the
King   and   Queen   of   Cambodia  with   a  bomb  which   killed
Prince   Norodom   Vakrivan,  assistant  director   of   the   royal
household.     The   government   charged   that   this,   too,   was
"plotted   from   abroad."
In  Cambodia,  as  in  Laos  and  Viet  Nam,   the  Geneva  ac-
cord  set  up  an  International Commission for  Observation  and
Control  made up  of  a  Polish,  a Canadian  and  an  Indian mem-
ber,  the  latter  being  the  neutral  chairman.   The  existence  of
this  Commission  in  Cambodia  is  of   some  protection   to   its
neutral  government.    Now  the  Soviet  government  in  a  note
to  the  British  government   (these  two  provided  the  co-chair-
men  who  still  preside  over  the  Geneva  settlement)  accuses  the
latter   of   trying  to  liquidate   the   Commission  in  Cambodia.
Moscow  based  its  note  on  a  British  proposal  passed  on  to  it
by  the  Cambodian  government.     The   lame  British  reply  of
October  4  was  to  deny  that  it  proposed  the  dissolution  of  the
Commission  but  admit  that  it  suggested   the  Commission  ad-
journ,  subject  to  recall.    This  is  what  happened  to  the  Com-
mission  in  Laos  last  year,  and   it  has  proven   impossible   to
recall  it.
As  seen  from  Peking,  these  maneuvers  must  appear  a  series
of   attempts   to   upset   a  peaceful   settlement   in   neighboring
Indochina  and  to  end  a  successful  experiment  in  peaceful  co-
existence.    Under  the  circumstances  it  could  not  have  been
easy   for   Khrushchev  to   make  Mao   Tse-tung   believe   that,
nevertheless,  our  President  wants  peace.
Some  Light  on  A  Neutrality  in  Cambodia  the  U.S.  Military  Disliked
"In  Cambodia,  King  Norodom  Sihanouk  pursued  his  own
independent   course.  .  .  .   Sihanouk   found   himself   under
American  pressure  to  take  advantage  of  the  clause   in  the
Geneva  accord  which  authorized  Cambodia  to  accept  foreign
military  aid  if  the  country   regarded  itself   as   threatened.
Sihanouk,  however,  apparently  felt  that  there  was  no imme-
diate  danger  and  that  the  country  would  find  greater  secu-
rity  in  friendship  with  India  and  the   Colombo  bloc,   with
which  it  was  racially  and  culturally  linked,  than  in  an  'ac-
tivist'  American  military  policy.  .  .  .  His  actions,  in  their
own  way,  were  as  rude a  shock  for  American  policy-makers
as  the  near  collapse  of  Southern  Viet  Nam.'
—Ellen  J.  Hammer:   The  Struggle   for   Indochina  Con-
tinues   (The   Pacific   Spectator,   Summer   1955).
"We  are  wedged  in  between  two  medium-sized  nations  of
the  Western  bloc  [Thailand  and  South  Viet  Nam]   and  only
thinly  screened  by  Laos  from  two  countries  of  the  Eastern
bloc,  North   Viet   Nam  and  the  vast   People's  Republic  of
China.   What   choice   have   we  but   to  try   to   maintain  an
equal  balance  between  the  'blocs'?  .  .  .
"I  have  sometimes  been  represented  to  the  American  pub-
lic  as  trying  to  'flirt  with  the  Reds.' ...  If  I  have  no par-
ticular  liking  for  Communism,  neither  have  I  any  cause  or
means  to  join  a  crusade—even  a  moral   one—against  the
nations  that  have  adopted  that  ideology. ...  It  would  be
absurd  to  suppose  that  a  tiny  country  like  mine,   geographi-
cally  situated  as  it  is,  would  risk  provoking  the  Chinese  and
Soviet  colossi.  .  .  .  We  are  not  a  'breach'  in  the   Western
bloc  merely  because  we  cannot  be  a  'rampart.'"
—Prince  Sihanouk  in  Foreign  Affairs    (July  1958)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October n, 1959
Documentary:  Two  Ignored   Kefauver   Speeches  Exposing  Mitchell's  "Fact  Finding"  Report
Behind  the  Steel  Crisis:  The  Real  Facts  on  Productivity  and  Profits
"Fundamentally,  it  is  the  persistent  advance in productivity
that  gives  rise  to  the  problem  now  plaguing  us  in  the  steel
industry—one  which  will  increasingly  confront  us  in  other
industries  in  years  to  come.    This  is  the  problem  of  how  to
effect   an   equitable  distribution  of   productivity  gains  made
possible  by  progress  in  non-competitive industries.   Both  la-
bor  and  management  lay  claim  to  these  gains.    But  the  con-
sumer  also  has  a  rightful  claim  to  at  least  part  of  the  benefits
made  possible  by  technological  progress.    In  competitive  in-
dustries  the   functions  of   distributing  gains  is  solved  auto-
matically  by  the  free  play  of  competitive forces.    But  where
there  is  no  price  competition,  as  in  the   steel   industry,   the
dividing  up  of  the  gains  is  likely  to  be  resolved  as  a  com-
promise  between  two  great  organized  groups—big  business
and  organized  labor—with  the  consumer  occupying  the  un-
happy  role  of  the  forgotten  man.  .  .  .
How  the  1959  Picture  Was  Blurred
"What   facts   does   Secretary  Mitchell  have  to  present  on
this  important  issue  of   productivity?     Of   most  interest  to
those  concerned  with  the  present  steel  dispute  is  the  extent
to  which  productivity  has  risen  in  the  first  half  of  this  year.
Here,  the  Secretary's presentation  leaves  much  to  be  desired.
From  the  way  in  which he  has  presented  his  findings  it  is  im-
possible  to  determine what  in  fact  did  happen  in  the  first  half
of   1959.
"What  he  has  done  is  to  present  his  facts  for  prior  years
on  a  calendar  year  basis,  but  for   1959  on  a  fiscal  year  basis.
(Italics  in  original).     Since  the  rate  of  productivity  advance
was  relatively  low  in  the  recession  year  of  1958,  the  combin-
ing  of  the  last  half  of  1958  with  the  first  half  of  1959  makes
it  impossible  to  compare  this  latest  period  against  past  years
with  similar  operating   rates.
"Mr.  President,  in  order  that  we  can  have  a  comparison of
We can think of  no better  introduction for  our  readers
to  the  growing   steel   crisis  than   to  present   here   the
heart  of  two  little  noticed  speeches  by  Senator  Kefau-
ver  (D.  Tenn.)  criticizing  the  distorted  picture  of  steel
productivity  and profits  in  Secretary  of  Labor  Mitchell's
report  to  the  White  House  last  August.
the  first  half  of  this  year  against  past  years  I  have  had  pre-
pared  a  rough  index  of  labor  productivity  based  on  data  pub-
lished  by the  American Iron  and  Steel  Institute.  .  .
"According  to  this  measure,  between  1958  and  the  first  6
months   of   1959,   shipments   of   finished   steel   products   per
thousand  man-hours  increased  19.9  percent  in  terms  of  pro-
.  duction   and   maintainance  worker   man-hours  worked,   and
26.4  percent  in terms  of  all  employee man-hours worked.  .  . .
Even  when  comparison  is  between  two  periods  of  relatively
similar  operating  rates,  the  increase  in  productivity,  as  reveal-
ed  by  this  measure,  is substantial.
"Thus  the  6-month  operating  rate  in  1959  of  87.8  percent
of  capacity  is  quite  close  to  the  84.5  percent  rate  for  the  year
1957.     Shipments  per    1,000   production   and   maintenance
hours  worked,  however,  were  90.1  tons  in  the  current  period
as  compared  with  76.8  tons  in  the  earlier  year.    This  repre-
sents  a  gain  of  17.3  percent  in  less  than  two  years.  .  .  .
With  the  first  half  of  1959  included,  the  annual  rate  of  in-
crease  is  over  4  percent  for  any  period  beginning  with   1951.
"The    increase   in   labor   productivity  reflected    by   these
figures,  plus  the  highly  satisfactory  profits  for  the  first  half
of    the    year   recently   announced   by   the   steel    companies,
strengthens  my  conclusion  that  the   steel   industry   can  well
afford   to  make  a  price  reduction  and  perhaps  a  modest  in-
crease  in  wages  without  impairing  their  ability  to  make  what
reasonable  men  would  call  reasonable   profits."
—Kefauver   in  U. S.  Senate,  Aug.  20.
How  Sec'y  Mitchell's  Steel  "Fact-Finding"  Report  Distorted  the  Profits  Picture
"The  profit  data  in  Secretary   Mitchell's   report   are  pre-
sented  in  the  form  of  charts  showing  profits  as  a  percent  of
revenue  (or  sales)  and  as  a  percent  of  stockholders'  equity
(or  net  worth).    In  the  former,  the  trend  is  slightly  down-
ward  and  in  the  latter   distinctly   downward.
"Except  for  one  chart  which  includes  the  year  1940,  the
trend  lines  begin  with  1947  and  end  with  1958.    The  year
1947,  of  course,  was  a  period  of  pronounced  steel   shortages
and  followed  hard  on  the  heels  of  the  repeal  of  the  excess
profits  tax,  the  effect  of  which  was  of  course  to  result  in  a
sharp  rise  in  profits after  taxes.    Beginning  a  trend  line  in
a  year  such  as  that  and ending  it  with  the  recession  year  of
1958  would  almost   inevitably   produce  the  impression  of  a
general  decline  in profits. ...
"But  the  principal  basis   for  criticizing  the   handling   of
the  profit  data  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  report  ignores  the
effect  on  profit  rates  of  the  level  of  steel  production  as  a
percent  of  capacity,  or  the  operating   rate.
"To  show  that  the  industry  had  a  lower  profit  rate  in  a
recession  year,  such  as  1958,  than  in  a  year  of  high  produc-
tion  does  not  in  any  way  indicate  a  decline  in  the  industry's
profitability.    This  can  only  be  determined  by  using  meth-
ods of  analysis  which  .  .  .  compare  profits  in  two  years  of
roughly  similar  operating  rates.
"I  have  had  prepared  a  comparison   of  this  type   between
the  first  half  of  1959  and  1953,  both  periods  of  high  produc-
tion  .  .  .  for  the  industry's  four  largest  companies—U.  S.
Steel,  Bethlehem,  Republic and  Jones  and Laughlin.
"In  the  case  of  U.  S.  Steel,  its  profits  per  ton  more  than
doubled;  its  profits  as  a  percent  of  net  worth  increased  over
60   percent;   and  its   profits  as   a  percent   of   sales  nearly
doubled.    For  the  steel  industry  as  a  whole,   profits  as  a
percent  of  net  worth  rose  from  11.2  percent  in  1953  to  15.0
percent  in  the  first  half  of  1959.    The  general   showing   is
therefore   not  one  of  decreasing   profitability,  as  might  be
inferred   from   the   Secretary's   report,   but   of   increasing
profitability.
"In addition  to  his  failure  to  relate  profits rates  to  oper-
ating  rates,  Secretary  Mitchell  also  used  a  statistical   meas-
ure  which  significantly  understates  the  level  of  profits.   The
industry  category  which  he  uses  for  his  profits  figures,  'pri-
mary  iron  and  steel',  includes  not  only  steel  companies  but
.  .  .  foundries  .  .  .  they  represent   about  one-fifth  of  the
value  of  'primary  iron  and  steel.'    Since  foundries  tend  to
be  highly  competitive  and  have  been  adversely   affected  by
substitute  products,  it  is  not  surprising  that  their  inclusion
tends  to  depress  the profit rate  of the industry. ...  It  is un-
fortunate  that  in  presenting   his  figures  on  profits  he  uses  a
measure  which  is  biased  downward  by  the  inclusion  of  com-
panies  that  are  not  parties  to  the  steel  dispute   nor  even
part  of  the  steel   industry."
—Kefauver   in  U. S. Senate, Sept. 1.
1   5  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 12, 1959
Western  Experience  Seems  Irrelevant  Says  NPA  Report  on  Competitive  Coexistence
Why   the  Underdeveloped  Countries  Are  Attracted  to  Communism
The   National   Planning   Association   has  just   released
another  in  its  studies  of  "competitive    coexistence"—Com-
munist   Economic  Strategy:  Soviet   Growth   and  Capabili-
ties,  by  Alec  Nove,  a  Russian-born  British  economist,  who
sees  little  likelihood  of  the  USSR   overtaking  the  West   in
living   standards   or   of   launching   "a   devastating    all-out
trade-and-aid   drive."     While  these  conclusions  made  head-
lines,  little  attention  was  paid  to  his  analysis   of  why   the
underdeveloped    countries   are   attracted   to    Communism.
This   is   a   problem   which   cannot   be  solved   by   military
threats.   We  think  his  analysis—excerpted    below—should
be  required  reading  at  the  Pentagon.  (The pamphlet   can
be  obtained  for   $2.25  from   the  NPA   at  1606  New   Hamp-
shire  Avenue, N.  W.,  Washington   9, D. C.)
"There  is  a  tendency  in  some  quarters  to  view  the  Soviet
danger  in  terms  of  some  specific  actions—military,  'economic
penetration',  etc.—by  the  USSR  and  her  allies.    Yet  an  am-
portant  part  of  our   difficulties   arises  from  the  psychological
effects  of  Soviet achievements on  the  climate  of  opinion  in  un-
derdeveloped   countries.  .  .  .  They  generally  wish  to  stimulate
economic   development,   especially  industrialization,   so  as   to
reduce  poverty  and  to  raise  the  status  of  their  country.    But
they  face  a  number  of  obstacles:
"1.  The  social and  often  also  the  political  structure  belongs
to  a  pre-industrial  age  and  acts  as  a  brake  on  development.
For  instance,  the  few  possessors  of  great  wealth  are  not gen-
erally  disposed  to  use  it  for  productive   investment.
Can  They  Vote  Away Superstition?
"2.  The  bulk  of  the  people  are  generally  illiterate  and  po-
litically  helpless,  and/or  in  the  grip  of  ancient superstitions.
Democratic  forms,  where  they  exist,  seem  quite  ineffective  as
a  means  of  securing changes  necessary  for  modernization.    It
is  like  expecting  a  population  brought  up  on  witch-doctors  to
vote  for  modern  medicine.  .  .  .
"3.    Industrialization   of   a   peasant   country,   by   methods
which  the  West  regards  as  normal,  causes  acute  difficulties  in
the  purely   economic   field.   The  beginnings   of  industrializa-
tion  lead  to  a  large  increase  in  imports  (for instance  of  ma-
chinery  and  chemicals),  and  a  continuing  burden  of  interest
on  foreign   loans.     A  growing  urban   population  meanwhile
To Mrs. Roosevelt
To  Eleanor  Roosevelt,  First  of  all  First  Ladies,  we
extend  warmest  greetings  on  her  75th  birthday,  grate-
ful   for  her  unwearied  goodness,   awed  by  her  energy,
inspired  by  her  enduring  devotion;  the  oppressed   have
always  looked  to   her   as   a  champion;  the  benighted
have  ceased  to  hate her;  we  count  ourselves  among  the
millions  who  love  her, and  hope  their   affection   may
keep  her  shining  presence  with  us  for  many  years  to
come.
absorbs  more  food  and  raw  materials  and  reduces  the  export-
able  surplus.  .  .  .  The  result  is  a  balance  of  payments  crisis
which  painfully  restricts  the  growth  of  the  economy.
"It  is  apt  to  cite  here  the  words  of  Professor  Simon  Kuz-
nets:   'The  most  serious  obstacle  to  the  rapid  spread   of   the
industrial  system  is  one  which  it  shares  with  many  major  in-
novations:   It  means  a  marked  break  in  established   patterns
of  social  and  economic  life;  it  destroys  established  interests.
...  In  short,  it  is  a  thorough-going   revolution,  in  the  full
sense  of  the  word.'    It  is  in  this  context  that  the  political  ap-
peal  and  the  force  of  Russia's  example  must  be  seen.  .  .  .
"For   all  these  reasons  thoughtful  men  in   underdeveloped
countries  are  often  predisposed   toward  radical,  revolutionary
solutions,  and  see  no  hope  in  gradualism.    Democracy  means
little   to  them,   respect   for   existing  interests  or   for   existing
popular   prejudices  appears   to   be  the   negation   of   progress.
Russia,  they  argue,  was  one  of  us  and  has  become  a  great  in-
dustrial  power.   .  .  .  The  experience  of  Western   countries
seems  simply  irrelevant.  .  .  .  All  this  gives  the  Soviet  bloc  a
strong  psychological-political  advantage,   even  if  no  'penetra-
tion'  of  the  familiar  kind  is  occurring.
"The  political  advantage  is much  enhanced  by actions  of  the
West  when,  with  immediate  strategic  aims  in  mind,  we  under-
pin  the  existing  regimes  in  many  of  these  countries.  .  .  . Rus-
sians  do  not  fail  to  point  out  that  there  is  no  tyrant  so  blood-
thirsty  and  so  obscurantist   who  would   not  be  supported  by
the  United   States,  provided   he  took   the   correct   anti-Soviet
posture.  . .  ."
Help   lls  Reach  the   Younger   Generation   By  Giving  Gift   Subs  to  High  School  and  College   Students
I.  F.  Stone'8  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name     ........................................................................................
Street     ........................................................................................
City     .......................................JSone............State....................
10/12/59
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I    F    Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.,  Washington  18, D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5 In  the  V.  S.;  $8  in  Canada-,  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED