I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959oct19.pdf

============================================================

For  Barenblatt  and   Uphaw,  P.  2
Add  Signs  of  Thaw:  Anti-Communist  U.S.  Labor  Leaders  May Visit  Soviet Union, See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  39
OCTOBER  19,  1959
«"       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
16   CENTS
Why  Labor  in  Steel  Needs  New  Leadership
The  important point  to  observe  about  the  steel  strike  is that
the  steel  companies have  not  suffered   from   it.    On   the  con-
trary,   they  benefited   by  it,   and   invited  it.    Early  this  year
they   told   their  customers  to   stock  up   in   expectation  of   a
strike,  and  on  the  basis  of  the  advance orders  so accumulated,
the  steel  companies  enjoyed   a  boom  in  business  during  the
first  half  of  the  year,  turning  out  a  record  breaking  64  mil-
lion  tons  and  working  the  mills  on  the  average  nearly  90
percent  of  capacity.    By  the  time  the  walkout  began  on  July
14,  the  steel  companies  had  produced  enough  in  six  months
to  keep  the  economy  going  for   ten;   in  mid-September,  ac-
cording  to   Secretary  of   Labor  Mitchell,  most  steel-using   in-
dustries  were  still  working  off  supplies  built  up  before   the
strike.    It  was  much  more  profitable  for  the  steel  companies
to  run  the  mills  at  a  high  rate  of  capacity  for  six  months  than
to  keep  them  working  at  a  lower  rate  for  ten,  and  it  was,  of
course,  far  cheaper  to  have  the  workers  out  on  strike  than  to
lay  some  of  them  off  and  have  to  pay  them  supplementary
unemployment  benefits.    During  the  first  six  months  of  this
year,  U.  S.  Steel  earned  16.7  percent  after  taxes  on  net  worth,
enough  to  give  it  a  respectable  return  for  the  year  even  if  the
mills  don't  reopen  until  I960.    The  workers,  not  the  com-
panies,  were  hurt.
Why  Bargaining  Power  Has  Weakened
Organized  labor   in  steel  has  lost  a  great   deal  of  its  bar-
gaining   power.    There  was  a  time  when   steel  labor   leader-
ship  could  think  in  the  same  public-be-damned  terms  as  the
steel   magnates,  pushing  up   wages   without   concern   for   the
fact  that  wage  increases  might  be  paid  for  several  times  over
by  the  public in  exorbitant  price  increases.    The  big  organized
industries  and  the  big  organized  unions  could  benefit  within
this   inflationary  spiral  at  the   expense  of   the  smaller   com-
petitive  industries,  the  weaker   unions,  the  unorganized   and
the  people  living  on  fixed  incomes.    Even  as  late  as  last  Feb-
ruary,  when   Senator  Kefauver   suggested   it  would  be  wise
policy  for  the  steel  workers  to  limit  their  wage  demands  to
the  increase  in  labor  productivity  on  condition  that  the  com-
panies  make  no  further   increase  in  price,  David  McDonald
of   the   United   Steel   Workers   retorted   that   he   wished   the
Senator  would   "keep  his   nose  out   of  my  business."      (No
doubt  Roger  Blough,   chairman  of  U.  S.  Steel,  to  whom   the
Senator  also  addressed  this  proposal,   felt  the  same  way  but
he  was  wise  enough  not  to  say  so).
Not   only  is  the  steel  price-wage  structure  very  much   the
public's  business  but  McDonald's  union  is  soon  going  to  need
the  public's  help   and  good-will.     The  situation   which   con-
fronts  the  steel  workers  can  no  longer  be  met  by  conventional
trade  union   tactics.     The   steel   industry,   confronted   with   a
steady  decline   in  demand*   has  met  the  situation  in  a  way
that  spells  trouble  for   labor.     Instead   of  cutting  costs  and
seeking  new  markets,  the   industry   has  raised  prices  to   the
point  where  it  can  break  even  below  35  percent  of  capacity,
and  U.  S.  Steel  perhaps  below  30.   This  means  steel  can  get
along  with  fewer  workers,  and   an  annual  strike  of   several
months  a  year  would  be  a  great  convenience.
Private  Socialism—Private  Economic  Planning
In  this  changing  situation  the  steel  workers  are  going  to
need  something  different   from  the  tough  guy  postures  of  an
uninspired  AFL-CIO  leadership.     Ever  since  the  merger,  ef-
forts   to  think  in  terms  of   social  policy  have  been   suspect.
What  the  steel  workers  and  the  rest  of  us  are  up  against  is
a  kind  of  economic  planning.     Steel  and  a  number  of   basic
industries  are  the  scene  of  successful  experiments  in  private
socialism—their  masters  have  long  freed  themselves  from  the
bracing  rigors  of  the  free  market  and  plan  for  profitable  pric-
ing   at   a  comfortable  level   of   output   well   below   capacity.
While  the  market  for  steel  declines,  the  price  goes  steadily
up;  testimony  by Gardiner  C.  Means  and  John  Kenneth  Gal-
braith  before  the  Kefauver  monopoly  subcommittee   hearings
on  Administered Prices  last  March  showed   that  the  price  of
steel  is  now  doubling  every  ten  years.   This  profitably  man-
aged  under-utilization  in  the  production  of  modern  industry's
basic  material  puts  a  drag  on  economic  growth  and—with  the
spread  of  automation—could  add  every  year  to  the  ranks  of
the  permanently  unemployed  in  steel  and  other  basic  indus-
tries.    At  the  same  time  the  labor  movement   is  being  weak-
ened  by  a  parallel  development:   the  increased  ratio  of  white
collar,  technical  and  supervisory  employes  to  industrial  work-
ers.     The  former  are  harder  to  organize  and  non-proletarian
in  outlook.    The  foundations  of  the  labor  movement  as  we
knew  it  are  slipping.
The  labor  movement  now  has  a  common  interest  with  the
general  public  in  working  out  new  mechanisms to  check   the
inflationary  spiral  fed  by  monopolistic  and  administered  prices
in   basic  industries  controlled   by  a  managerial   few,   and   a
common  interest  in  making  public  welfare  and   development
the  standards  of  economic  planning  in  these  industries.    But
when  in  April  and  May,  hearings  were  held  by  the  Kefauver
subcommittee  on  the  first  tentative  step  in  that  direction_
legislation  to  require  price  notification  hearings  in  such  con-
trolled   industries  as  steel—McDonald  though  aware  of   the
broader   issues  opposed   it  and  Walter   Reuther   was  the  only
labor  leader  who  turned  up  in  support.
* Its  old  mainstay,  the  railroads,  are  virtually going  out  of
business;   armament  has   switched  from   steel   to   aircraft,
newer  metals  and  electronics;  a  glut  of  oil  has  reduced  the
demand  for  oil  well  equipment  and  the  decline   in  farm  in-
come  has  cut  into  farm  equipment  gales.
1   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 19,1959
Their  Prospective  Imprisonment  A  Shameful  Anomaly  in  Post-McCarthy  America
Calling  for  A  Demonstration  to  Honor  Barenblatt  and  Uphaus
The  Supreme  Court's   refusal  to  grant  a  re-hearing  in  the
Barenblatt  and  Uphaus  cases  means that  the  fight  against  the
witch  hunt  must  be  shifted  from   the  judicial  to  the  public
forum.    There  could  be  no  more  dramatic  way  to  focus  at-
tention   on  the  basic  issues  than  by  a  demonstration   in  New
York   City  honoring   Lloyd  Barenblatt  and  Dr.  Willard  Up-
haus  before  they  go  off  to  jail.
The  former  faces  six  months  for  refusing on  First  Amend-
ment  grounds  to  submit to  ideological  inquistion by the  House
Un-American  Activities Committee.   The  latter  could  be  kept
in  jail  in  New  Hampshire  for  the  rest  of  his  life  if  he  per-
sisted   in  his   refusal   to  give   the   Attorney  General  of   that
State,  acting  as  a  one-man  inquisitor  into  "un-American  Ac-
tivities,"  the  names  of  guests  at  the  World  Fellowship   Cen-
ter  camp  in  Conway,  New   Hampshire.
In  an  America that  boasts  of  its  recovery  from  McCarthy-
ism,  their  prospective  imprisonment  is  a  shameful  anomaly
to  which  world-wide  attention  should  be  called  and   around
which  a  new  public  campaign  against  the  witch  hunt   should
be  launched.     We   print  the   statements   issued   by  them   in
the  wake  of  the  Supreme  Court's  action  last  Monday:
Thirty Others Face Jail
LLOYD  BARENBLATT  (who  taught  at  Vassar):  "As  it  now
stands,  ours  is  the  only  democracy with  openly  legalized  gov-
ernment  bodies  which  extract  information  under  duress  from
people   as  to  their  beliefs  and   political   associations,   requir-
ing  them  also  to  inform  on  others.    There  are  about  30  other
Americans  now  in  the  courts  who,  on  the  basis  of  conscience
and  the  First  Amendment  are  risking jail  for  refusing  to  in-
form  or  to  have  their  beliefs  held  to  account.    Perhaps   these
cases  will  focus  continuing  attention  on  the  issues  involved.
I  am  hopeful  that  our  democratic  system  will  lead  to  a  res-
toration  of  the  First  Amendment  as  it  applies  to  the   powers
of  legislative  investigating   committees."
DR.  WILLARD  UPHAUS  (a  lifelong  worker  in  the  religious
peace  movement):  "The   refusal  of  the  U.  S.  Supreme   Court
in  no  way  changes  the  fact  that  it  is  morally  wrong  to  sub-
ject   innocent   people  to   suspicion,   possible   harassment   and
Our  Hat  Is  Off to  the  New  York  Post
We   applaud   Publisher   Dorothy   Schiff    and   Editor
James  Wechsler  of  the  New  York  Post  for  enterprise
and  courage  in  taking  on  the  most  sacred  of  all  Wash-
ington's  sacred  cows,  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  despite  pressure
and  threats.   We  hope  to  comment  on  the  Post's   Por-
trait  of  Hoover  in  our  next  week's  issue  after  the  Post
series  has  been  completed, and  urge  the  Post  to  reprint
it   in  pamphlet   form  for  readers  outside   New  York.
Those  who  missed  the  series  can  catch  up  by  starting
with  the  New  York  Post  of  October   6  which  carried
both    installments    of    the    curtain    raiser—Dorothy
Schiff's    piquant   "My   Secret    Life   With   J.   Edgar
Hoover."
public  scorn.    Those  whose  names  I  was  asked  to  give  came
to  the  World  Fellowship  Center  in  Conway, New   Hampshire,
simply  to  enjoy  a  vacation  and  to  work  for  peace.
"In  refusing  to  give  names  of  innocent  persons  to  our  of-
ficial  inquisition,  I  take  my  stand  not  only  on  my  own  con-
science  but  on  the  age  old  teaching  of  the  Bible  and  through-
out  the  ages  that  it  is  wrong  to  bear  false  witness.    World
Fellowship  has  upheld  the  New  Hampshire  Bill  of  Rights  and
the  First  Amendment  by  holding  peaceful  assemblies  to  dis-
cuss  social  justice  and  world   peace.
"The   decision  in  this  case  emphasizes  the  danger  to  these
rights  from  inquisitorial  investigations  by  officials   and   com-
mittees  of   government.     If   the   Attorney  General   of   New
Hampshire   and   the   courts   refuse   to   disown   their   actions
against  me,  I  shall  have  to  take  the  consequences.     In  my
case,  this  may mean  a  life  sentence.    It  is hard  to  believe  the
people   of   the   state   will   permit   this   destruction   of   their
precious  Bill  of   Rights."
Dr.  Uphaus  is 68.   One  reason  Dr.  Uphaus  refused  to  give
the  names  of   guests   at  his  camp  is  that   Attorney  General
Louis  C.  Wyman  admitted   37  State  Attorneys  General   ex-
change  such  names  for  a  cross-index  file  of   "subversives."
We   urge   all   intellectuals,   irrespective   of   political   differ-
ences,  to  join  in  honoring   these  two  men  for  resisting   the
American   Inquisition.
Unless  Congress Acts, Pupil Placement Laws
Pupil's  Placement  laws  now  offer   the   South  an  instru-
ment  with which  it  can  put  off  more than  token  compliance
with  school  integration  indefinitely.    While  avoiding  refer-
ence  to  race,  they  can  block  transfer  of  Negro  children on
other  grounds,  imposing prolonged litigation  on each  family.
In  this  they  are  like  the  literacy  laws  which  have  been  so
effective   in  disfranchising  the   Negro.
So  far,  however,  the  Supreme  Court  has  been  unwilling
to  hear  an  appeal  in  a  pupils'  placement  case.    Two  such
appeals  from  North  Carolina  were  denied  a  hearing   last
Monday.    In  one  of  them, a  suit  against  the  Raleigh  school
board,   the   Fourth   Circuit   speaking   through   Chief  Judge
Sobeloff,   pointed  out  that  the  regulations  adopted  by   the
school  board  pursuant  to  the  pupil  placement  law  "tended
to  perpetuate the  system,  for  each  child  attending  a  school
by  assignment  of  the  board was  assigned  to  the  same  school
for   the  ensuing  year."    This  seems  to  imply  that  school
boards  under  placement  laws  must  adopt  some  measures
of  desegregation  on  their  own,  but  the  Fourth  Circuit  held
that  the  Negro  parents  in  the  Raleigh  case  had  "failed  to
Can  Put  Off  School  Integration Indefinitely
exhaust  their administrative remedies"  in  not  appearing be-
fore  a  meeting  of  the  school  board.
The  other  case,  Covington  v.  Montgomery County, argued
by  the  NAACP,  attacks  pupil  placement  laws  as  on  their
face  evasive  since  they  presuppose  the  continued  existence
of  segregated  schools.  The  Fourth  Circuit  nevertheless  held
that  the  NAACP could not  bring  such  a  suit  on  behalf  of  a
group  of  Negro  students  until  they  had  individually   gone
through  the  motions  required  by  the  state  law.  Obviously
the  Supreme Court  is  waiting  for  an  appeal  in  which  there
has  been  full  compliance with  procedural  decorum,  though
Justice  Douglas  noted  that  he   thought  the   Court  should
have  heard  the  Montgomery  County  case.
In  the  absence  of  action  by  Congress  to  bring  about com-
pliance,  the  Supreme  Court  cannot  hope  to  keep  up  with
ingenious  evasive  action.  These  cases  are  the  best  argument
for  that  provision  of  the  Douglas-Celler  bill  which would
give  the  Secretary  of  Health,  Education and Welfare  power
to  formulate  and  impose  de-segregation   plans  in  recalci-
trant  areas.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 19, 1959
Though  AFL-CIO  Old  Guard  Ignores  Khrushchev's  Visit,  The  Ice  Was  Broken
Anti-Communist  U.S.  Labor  Leaders  May  Visit  Soviet  Union
By  Sanford  Gottlieb
Formerly   the   Executive   Editor   of   Labor's  Daily,    Mr.
Gottlieb  has  written  extensively  on  labor  questions.
For  the  first  time  in  a  cold-war  decade,  a  few  anti-Com-
munist   American   labor   leaders   may   soon   visit   the   Soviet
Union.    If  the  visits materialize, the  unionists will  go  as  tour-
ists,  steadfastly  refusing  to  accept  formal  invitations from  the
USSR's   government-dominated  trade   unions.      Nonetheless,
the  significance  of  such  contacts  can  be  measured  by  the  fact
that,  since  1949,  the  only  top  American union  officials  to  tour
Communist  countries  were  left-wingers  like  Harry  Bridges.
Despite  Khrushchev's  evasions,  bluster  and  outbursts  at  San
Francisco,  the  meeting  there  set  the  stage  for  the  present  talk
of   further   contacts.     The   American  participants  were  im-
pressed  that  the  number  one  man  of  world  Communism  will-
ingly  participated  in  the  conference, knowing  well  in  advance
the kind  of  no-holds-barred  treatment  he  would  get.    When  a
small  group   of   AFL-CIO   vice-presidents  met   last   January
with  Deputy  Premier  Anastas  Mikoyan  in  Washington,   they
subjected  him  to  an  interrogation  which  amounted  to  an  in-
dictment  of   the   Soviet  system.    Mikoyan  surely  briefed  his
boss   on   this   first   stormy   encounter   with   American   labor
leaders.
Tass  Gives  Fairly  Full  Account
The  American  unionists  were  also  impressed  that   Izvestia
published  a  relatively full  Tass  account  of  the  meeting,  show-
ing  Soviet   readers  that  Khrushchev   had  been   asked  pointed
questions   about   socialism  with   freedom,   disarmament  con-
trols,  and  the  flight  of  workers from  Communist  nations.  This
must  have  made  interesting  between-the-lines  reading  in  the
USSR.    Moreover,   Khrushchev  used   the   forum   of   the  San
Francisco   meeting   to   appeal   for   greater   contacts.      Signifi-
cantly,  the  Tass  version  expanded  his  appeal  into  a  plea  di-
rected  squarely  at  American  labor  leaders.    As  if  the  point
had  not  been  sufficiently  underscored,  Tass  added:  "There  are
good  reasons to  believe that  this  meeting  may serve  as a  good
start,  that  it  may  help  to  pave  the  way  for  the   establishment
of  necessary  contacts  between  the  trade  unions  of  the   United
States  and  the  Soviet  Union.    These  contacts  are  necessary,
and   may  be  very  fruitful   in  the   struggle   for   the   common
cause  of  strengthening   world  peace."
Two   weeks   later,   President   James   Carey  of   the   Interna-
tional  Union   of   Electrical  Workers,   who   served  as  host   at
the  meeting,  carefully  kept  the  dialogue  going  when  he  told
a  union  convention:   "Whether  these  contacts   are  increased,
whether  any  exchange  of  visits  develops,   these  are   decisions
for  the  future.    For  the  present  we  can  only  repeat  that  men
cannot  fight  as  long  as  they  keep  on  talking."    Carey's  cre-
dentials  as a  spokesman  on  this  subject  are  in  very  good  order.
The  president  of  the  only  union  which  successfully   replaced
a  labor  organization  expelled  on  charges  of  Communist  domi-
nation,  Carey  visited  the  Soviet  Union  three  time  in  the  late
1940's.    He  personally  knows  a  number  of  top  Soviet   diplo-
mats  and  trade  union  functionaries.
Carey  and  Walter  Reuther  arranged  the  meetings  with  Mi-
koyan  and  Khrushchev   in  the  face  of  intense  pressure  from
AFL-CIO  President  George  Meany,  whose  opposition  to  any
Carey  for   Co-Existence
"If  we  of  labor  are  given  any  opportunity  to  decrease
the  tensions  between  our country  and the  Soviet  Union;
if  we  are  given  any  opportunity  to  unthaw  the  cold  war
even  to  a  very  small  extent; if  we  are  given  any  oppor-
tunity   to  encourage  the  slow  unfolding  of  democracy
where  democracy   does  not  now  flourish—then  we  shall
seize   those   opportunities    and   develop   them   as   God
gives  us  strength  and  guidance.
"For   at  stake  today  in  the  holocaust  that  faces  us—
as  never  before  in  human  history—are  not  just  princi-
ples  and  ideals  or  millions   of  lives  or  whole  nations.
At  stake  today,  in  everything  we  can  do  to  reestablish
contact  and  reason  and  common  sense,  is  civilization
itself,  the  human  race,  perhaps  all  life."
—James  Carey,  president  of  International   Union  of
Electrical   Workers,  in  address  to  convention  of
Oil,   Chemical   &  Atomic  Workers,   Oct.   8,   1959.
and  all  contact  with  Communists  has  always  served  as  official
policy  for  the  merged  labor  federation.   When  it  became  ap-
parent  the  conference with  Khrushchev  could  not  be  stopped,
most  of  the  pressure  centered  on  Paul  Phillips,  president  of
the  United  Papermakers  and  Paperworkers.    As  the  only  for-
mer  AFL  official  to  announce  his  attendance   at  the  meeting,
Phillips  was  in  a  position  to  spoil  the  generalizations  others
might  have  made  about  "the  CIO  gathering  for  Khrushchev."
Phillips  did  not  succumb  to  the  pressure.
The  moves  by the  Reuther-Carey group  to  establish  a  more
flexible  approach   in  dealing   with  the  challenge   of   Commu-
nism  have  opened  a  running  debate  within  the  top  ranks  of
the  AFL-CIO.     While   the   official   policy  of   non-intercourse
has  not  been  modified,  it is at least being animatedly  discussed.
In  addition,  by  holding  the  meetings  with  high  Soviet   lead-
ers  despite  the  pressures,  the  Reuther-Carey  forces  have  won
for  themselves  greater  freedom  to  maneuver  within  the  AFL-
CIO.     The  way  is  now  open  for  individual  labor  leaders   to
take  some  personal  initiatives.
No  Recognition  for  Soviet  Trade  Unions
A  few  discreet  soundings  about  the  possibility  of   obtain-
ing  tourist  visas  to  the  Soviet  Union  and  other   Communist
countries  have  been  made  by  unionists  both  absent  from  and
in  attendance  at  the  San  Francisco  meeting.    This  type  of  in-
formal,   unofficial  visit  is  likely  to  become  the  extent  of   the
contact  between'American  union  leaders  and  the  Soviets  in
the  foreseeable  future.    No   matter  how  they  may   disagree
about   how  to   deal   with   Communist   power,  all    AFL-CIO
chiefs  agree  that  the  Soviet  trade  unions  must  not  be  recog-
nized  through   official  exchanges.  .
Personal  contacts  of  any  kind  could  help  at  least  to   dispel
some  of  the  air  of  unreality  which  has  so  long   surrounded
organized  labor's  foreign   policy  pronouncements.    Only  the
day  after  the  meeting  with  Khrushchev,   the  AFL-CIO   con-
vention  passed  a  resolution  declaring:   "Khrushchev  has  been
more  truculent  and  demanding  in  his  aggression  than  Stalin."
No  amount  of  contrary  information   seems  to  have  had  the
slightest  influence  and  the  AFL-CIO   News  vividly  illustrated
the  dominant  Old  Guard  attitude  by-printing  not  one  word
about  Khrushchev's   meeting  with  the  Reuther-Carey   group.
1  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  19, 1959
Kuznetsov  Strikes  New  Note  at  UN: U.S.  Economy Not  Dependent on Arms Race
That  British  Conservative   Landslide  Was  An  Optical   Illusion
All  kinds  of  nonsense   is  being  inferred  from  the   British
election   by  ignoring  the  fact  that  the  Conservative   landslide
is  an  optical  illusion:  the  Tories  won  a  net  of  20  new   seats,
Labor  lost  a  net  of  19,  thanks  to  a  shift  of  1.1  percent  in  the
vote,   strategically   distributed  in  certain  contested   constituen-
cies.    The   real  picture  of  the  British  electorate   is  that   of  a
placid  sea.   Prosperity  helped  the  Conservative   "ins."     The
Laborite  "outs"  failed  to  inspire  with  a  campaign   pitched   to
that   lower   class   envy  which   is  the   obverse   of   upper   class
snobbery   in  a  sometimes  too  tightly  undemocratic   little  isle.
Only   differences   of  emphasis  in  the  further  development   of
the  welfare  state  separate  the  two  parties  at  home,   and  the
electorate  is  so  closely  divided  that  neither  in  office  can  make
radical  changes  right  or  leftward.    In  foreign  policy,   Labor
had  the  better  program  but  voters,  remembering  Labor's  habit
of   forgetting  its  foreign   policy  pledges   in   office,   may  have
been  skeptical.    Macmillan's  fruitful   mission  to  Moscow   was
impressive.    The   Tories   may  do  a  better   job  of   wheedling
Washington   into  more  sensible  policies.     Basically  both par-
ties   reflect  Britain's  need  for  an  end  of  the  cold  war.   The
most  dramatic  evidence  of  this  is  that  while  peace  news  in-
variably  depresses  prices  on  the  New   York  stock   exchange,
it  pushes  prices  up  on  London's.
Death  Need  Not  Be Their Merchandise
An  important  new  note  struck  by  Kuznetsov  in  his  speech
on  disarmament  at  the  United   Nations   October   9  seems   to
have  been   overlooked   in  most   news  dispatches.    The   Soviet
line  has  been  that  the  U.  S.  economy   depended   on  the  arms
race.    But  Kuznetsov  told  the  UN   General   Assembly's  First
Committee,   "Many   sober  minded  economists   share  the   opin-
ion   that   disarmament  will   not   have   any  negative   effect   on
economy.    Thus  the  organ  of  the  U.  S.  business  circles  'Jour-
nal  of  Commerce'  wrote  on  August   10,  1959, that  so  far  as
economic  effects  of  full  and  final  disarmament  are   concerned
different   experts  have  come  in  general   to  one  and  the   same
conclusion  that  economy  can  stand  disarmament.     One  could
refer  to  the  recent  statement  of  a  prominent  American  finan-
cier   McCloy,   President  of   the   Chase   Manhattan   Bank,   who
said  that  the  dynamism  of  the  U.  S.  economy  did  not  depend
Free  Asia   Footnotes
"President    JN'go   Dinh  Diem  today  opened   the   first
session    of   the   newly   elected   National   Assembly   of
South  Viet-nam  with   44  of   the   45  members  present.
The  forty-fifth,  Dr.  Phan  Quang  Dan,  the  only  success-
ful   Opposition  candidate,  who  had  a  landslide  victory
in  Saigon,  was  detained  by  the  police  when  he  left  his
home  for  the  Assembly.
"Despite  strongly  worded  advice  from  Western  diplo-
mats  in  Saigon,  the  President  appears  determined  to
prevent  Dr. Dan, who has  a  big  following in  South Viet-
nam,  from  taking  his  seat  in  the  Assembly.    Dr.  Dan
has  already  been  fined  more  than  £  80  for  alleged vio-
lations  of  the  electoral  laws.    He  faced  three  charges:
intimidation   of   voters,   having   used  illegal   means  of
propaganda  and  having  bribed  voters  by  offering  free
medical  attention.  .  .  .
"In  country  areas,  Opposition  candidates  were sim-
ply  refused   permission  to  take  part  in  the   elections.
In  Saigon,  in  the  hope  of  giving  the  election  a  demo-
cratic  facade,  they  were  permitted  to  stand  but   given
little  opportunity to  win."
—London  Daily  Telegraph,  Oct.  6, from  Saigon.
'The  84-year-old President  Syngman  Rhee  is running
for   reelection   [in   South   Korea]   determined   to per-
petuate  the  hold  of  his  Liberal  Party.   His   government
has  used  every  sort  of  authoritarian  maneuver  and  in-
timidation  to  blight  the  opposition,  including  the  muz-
zling  of  the  principal critical  newspaper."
—Editorial,  Washington  Post, Oct.  11.
on  armaments.    He  also  said  that  every  military   industrialist
would   prefer   to  produce   civilian  goods,  and   that  they  also
had  many  other,   more   pleasant   needs  to  make  use  of  their
resources,  say,  for  schools,  houses  and  roads."    Read  by  Rus-
sians  in  their  own  press,  this  will  come  as  a  fresh   breeze.
The  whole  truth  is  that  the  U.  S.  economy   has  become ter-
ribly  dependent  on  the   inflationary   crutch  of  the  arms   race,
but  many  thoughtful  business  men  are  disturbed   by  this  and
the  problem  of  finding  a  peaceful  substitute  is  not  impossible
in   a  capitalism  still  as  dynamic  and   as  geared   to   consumer
durables  as  America's.    Kuznetzov's  emphasis  on  the  hopeful
aspects  is  wise  and   welcome.
Why   Not  Give  Your  Local  Library   A   Gift   Subscription   to   the   Weekly?
I.  F.  Stone's
Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,
Washington   15,  D
N.  W.
. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Street   .............
City    ...............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ...
Street   .............
City    ...............
Shall  we  send
.......,................Zone............State.......
10/19/59
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
.........................Zone............State......
gift  announcement?         Yes  D
'NO n
I. E Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
SPECIAL  ATTENTION NEW  YORK  READERS—Dr.  Linus  Pauling  will  speak  at  Carnegie  Hall,  8  P.  M.,
Sunday  night,  October  25 on  "Radiation  and International  Agreement"  under  auspices  of   National
Committee  for A Sane  Nuclear  Policy: Please Turn  Out  and  Help  Make  the  Meeting  A  Success
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED