I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959sep21.pdf

============================================================

More  Revelations  on  Laos,  Pages  2-3
Khrushchev   at   White   House   and  Press   Club  Succeeds  in  Humanizing  Our Image  of  Russia,  See  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VII,  NO.  35
SEPTEMBER   21,  1959
'°<       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
IB  CENTS
The  Arrival  of A  Dangerous  Wizard
When  I  got  to  the  Rochambeau monument  at  the  corner  of
Lafayette  Square which  is nearest  Blair  House,  the  ropes  were
up  along  Pennsylvania  Avenue  but   there  were  few   people
waiting.    It  was 9:30  a.  m.   Two  photographers  squatted  out-
side  Blair  House.   Three eager  beaver  students,  one in a bright
red  shirt,  were  sitting  on  the  curb.   There  were  half  a  dozen
cops  on  the  corner  in  the  sunshine.    The  air  was  crisp  and
autumnal.    Four  poorly  dressed  Negroes  had  anticipated  me
in  finding  vantage  points  around  the  high  base  of  the  monu-
ment  from  which  to  see  Khrushchev  arrive.
What  one  noticed  first  was  that  there  were  no  displays  of
flags along  Pennsylvania  avenue;  every  bantam-weight visiting
dictator  from  Latin  America  sees  his flag  hung  from  the  lamp-
posts  between  the Capitol  and the White House but there were
no  hammer-and-sickles  in  sight.   What  one  noticed  next,  as
the  morning  wore  on  and  the  streets  slowly  filled,  was  how
vigilantly  the  police  were  weeding  out  hostile  banners.    An
Army  sergeant  came  striding  angrily  across  from  the  White
House  and  pointed  out  to  police  a  soldier  with  a  mourning
arm-band   and   a   black   skull-and-crossbones    flag.    He   was
quickly  hauled  away  to  await  the  arrival  of  MP's,  and  could
be  heard  muttering  indignantly  about  "a  thug  like  Khrush-
chev."   A  stout  shapeless  woman  in  blue  who  tried  to  unfurl
a   banner   reading   "Khrushchev    Not   Welcome   Here"   got
similar  treatment.
A  Welcome   "Muted"  As   Planned
The   State  Department   had  long  planned   "a  muted  wel-
come,"  and  Government  employes  had  not  been  released  from
work  to  swell  out  the  crowds  as  is  usual  when  foreign  poten-
tates  are  expected.    Lafayette  Square  filled  up  slowly.    There
were  many tourists,  recognizable  by cameras  carried  on  should-
er  straps;  the  kind  of  white-haired  ladies  who  still  go  faith-
fully  to  peace  rallies;  a  sprinkling  of  students  and  a  high  pro-
portion  of  Negroes.    The  latter  were  guarded  and  non-com-
mittal.    The  sidewalks  did  not  fill  out  until  the  lunch  hour,
and  the  crowds  were  oddly  quiet.    Nobody  seemed  to  speak
to  his  neighbor;  there  was  no  joking;  one  felt  that  both  the
hostile and  the  friendly were  afraid  to  be heard.    The  miasma
of   the  loyalty-security   program   may  have  affected  the   latter
while   new  immigrants  like  the   Hungarians   brought   police
state  fears  with  them.    A  crowd  in  Moscow   in  Stalin's  day
might  have   been   just  this  unsure  about  how  to  welcome  a
foreign   visitor.
It  was not  so much a cold  as a confused  and  inhibited  crowd
which  stood  waiting  to  see  the  Soviet  Premier.    For  days  in
advance,  it  had  been  warned  that  his  would  be  a  malignant,
almost  occult,  presence.    The  Most  Rev.  Patrick  A.  O'Boyle,
Archbishop  of  Washington, had  publicly  requested  that  Catho-
lic  priests  and  members  of  religious   orders  stay  away  from
Khrushchev  during  his  visit,  as  if  something  hypnotic  in  his
very  gaze  might  impel  priests  to  sign  up  for  private  lessons
in   Marxism-Leninism.     The   newspapers  were   full   of   ads
warning  against  the  ill  effects  of  the  visit.    One  intrepid  fel-
low  named  Leon  Ackerman  insetted  a  full  page subversively
bearing the  quotation  "Love Thy Neighbor  as Thyself"  in  the
Evening  Star  the  night  before  Khrushchev's  arrival  but  dared
not  openly  suggest  that  this  might  apply  to  our  Soviet  neigh-
bors.    Cardinal  Spellman  astutely  prescribed  three  extra  Hail
Mary's  daily  in  the  parochial  schools  to  protect  children dur-
ing  the  visit   from  ideological  fallout.    No   visiting  wizard
ever  had  a  bigger  advance  build-up.
They  Made  The  Sign  in  The  Sky
When  a  loud  speaker  finally  announced  the  arrival  at  An-
drews  Field,  a  white  streak  appeared  in  the  cloudless heavens
overhead  and  then  a  second  white  streak  turned  it  into  a cross,
as  if  to  ward  off  maleficence.    Anti-Communists had  hired  a
sky-writing  plane.     As  Khrushchev's  unexpectedly  pleasant
voice  and  soft  Russian began  to  come over  the  amplifier,  a lone
policeman   appeared  high  up  on  the  roof  of  the   rococo  old
State  Department  building and  stood  with  folded  arms against
the  sky.   When  the  translation  brought  across Khrushchev's
little  joke  about  the  earth  being  several  hundred  kilograms
lighter  and  the  moon  that  much  heavier,  there  was no  chuckle
in  the  crowd.    But  there  was  an  angry  rumble,  the  first  and
only  reaction  I heard,  as Khrushchev went on  to  say that when
the  U.  S.  pennant  reached  the  moon  it  would  be  greeted  by
the  Soviet  pennant  "as  an  old  resident."    A  bright  eyed  lady
nearby  answered  the  indignant  "heys"  of  the  crowd  by  saying
tongue-in-cheek,  "he  thinks  we  have  a  sense  of  humor."     It
began  to  look  as  if  this  were  another  of  Khrushchev's  mis-
conceptions  about  the  U.  S.  A.
When  the  parade  started  past,  there  was  a  burst  of  ap-
plause  for   the  mounted  police,  riding  a  troop  of  horses  as
graceful  as  ballet  dancers.    But  there  was  only  light  applause
and  a  few  timid  cheers  for  the  ebullient Khrushchev when  he
swept  by, waving his  black hornburg above his  shiny  bald head.
Ike,   seated  between  him  and  the  motherly looking  Mrs.  K.,
did  not  seem  at  all  happy,  and  indeed  on  the  TV  screens  later
that  night  it  began  to  look  as  if  the  CIA  had  advised  him  to
keep  his  famous  smile  carefully  hidden  lest  the  visiting  Old
Bolshevik  expropriate  it.    Ike  will  get  a  heartier  reception   in
Moscow.    Our  capital was lovelier  than  ever  in  the  bright  sun
but  its  bewildered  people   must  have  seemed  cold.     Moscow
will  be  dark,  gloomy  and  chill  but  its  people's  welcome  will
be  warm.   The  Russians  must  remember  that  peace  has  long
been  regarded  as  a  suspect  word  here;  that  these  visits  repre-
sent  a  sharp  turn  of  policy;  and  that  only  Ike  could  have  got-
ten  away  with  this  first  ice-breaking prelude  to  what  so  many
of  us  hope  will  be  a  thaw.   The  cold  war  has  too  long  kept
our  minds in  deep  freeze.
1    3    5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly, September 21,1959
Still  No   Evidence  of   Invasion  But   More  Indications  of  Pentagon  Connivance
Pity  That  UN  Investigating  Committee  Can't  Come  to  Washington  . . .
Mr.  Elsenhower's TV  report  on  his  European  trip  consisted
largely  of  that  vague  and  watery  soup  of  thinned  out  moral-
isms  which  are  customarily served  up  to  us  as  foreign   policy.
It  was disturbing  to  find that  the  President  seemed  to  be  con-
crete  only  in  discussing  Laos.    Apparently  Mr.   Eisenhower
discussed  the  situation  in  Laos  when  he  was  in  Bonn,  London
and  Paris as another  example of  "the  aggressive  actions  of  the
Communists  in  Asia"  and  lined  up  support  for  United  Na-
tions  action.    It  looks  as  if  the  President,  who  was  persuaded
to  veto  intervention  in  Indochina  in   1954,   has  been  sold  a
bill  of  goods  on  Laos.
It  is a  pity the  UN  investigating  committee  now  on  its way
to  Laos  cannot  spend  a  few  days in  Washington.    We  suspect
that  the  committee  could  learn  a  great  deal  more  in  the  Pen-
tagon  and  at  the  State  Department  about  the  genesis  of  the
fighting  in  Laos  than  on  the  untracked  border  between  that
country  and  North  Vietnam.
Threats  to  Freedom?
The  President  said  in  his TV  talk,  "We  must  be  concerned
about  threats  to  freedom,  no  matter  where  they  occur."    The
most  effective  threat  to  freedom  in  Indochina  since  1954  has
come  from  our  own  country.    Our  influence  has  brought  into
being  undemocratic  regimes  in  both  South  Vietnam  and  Laos.
The  elections  held  in  the  former  last  month  were  in  all  but
name  the  same  kind  of  phoney  one-party  "elections"  which
are  held   in  Communist  countries.    As  the  Associated  Press
put  it  delicately  in  a  cable  (Aug.   27)   from   Saigon  on  the
eve  of  those  elections,  "the  460  candidates   running  for  123
seats  include  no  opposition   candidates  in  the  western  sense
of  the  word."
In  Laos  on  U.  S.  encouragement  the  government  has  been
growing   progressively   more  dictatorial  since  the  summer  of
1958   when  the  International  Control  Commission   left.    A
good   part  of  the  current  alarums  about  "invasions"   which
never  turn  up  seems  to  be  motivated  by  the  desire  of   the
Laotian  army to  take  over  completely  from  the  civilians.    Our
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  seems  to  have  been  throwing  its  weight
behind   these  incompetent  Laotian  military  men,   xnd  encour-
"Their  Just   Hopes  for_A  Better^      __
"The  Communist   bloc  apparently   intends   to   foment
and  direct   rebellion   within  Laos  and  to  give  extensive
support   to  the  attempt   to  seize  important   areas  and
otherwise  to  prevent  the  establishment  of  those  peace-
ful   conditions  necessary   to  implement   basic  economic
and  social  programs.    In  short,  the  Communist   inter-
vention   is   apparently    aimed   at   preventing    the   Lao
people  from  realizing  their  just  hopes  for  a better  life."
—State Department  Press Release No. 636, Sept.  5.
"There  are  some  indications,   in  fact,  that  this  latest
flare-up  of  East-West  tension  was  not  a  long  planned
Communist  plot  to  strike  at  a  Free  World  weak  spot,
but  a  reaction  against  an  American-encouraged  Laotian
internal  anti-Communist   drive."
—Wash.  Post  military  expert  John  G. Norris,  Sept.  13.
aged  them  to  launch  that  clean-up  operation  against  Commu-
nists  and  other oppositionists  which  seems to  have sparked  the
present  troubles.    It  is a  pity  the  UN  investigating committee
can't  have  access  to  the  censored  material  to  which  we  called
attention  last  week.   This  material,  deleted  from  page  68  of
the   recently  published  Porter   Hardy  subcommittee  hearings
on  U.  S.  Aid   Operations  in  Laos  shows  that  last  January  our
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  for  the  first  time set  tasks  for  the  Laotian
army.    One  of  them was  to  fight  some kind  of  holding  action
"for   the  time  required  to   invoke  the  UN   Charter  or   the
SEATO   Treaty."
That  Alleged  Invasion
There  is  reason  to  suspect  that  this  operation  was  a  politi-
cal  clean-up  of  oppositionists  which  might  set  off  civil  war
and  possibly invasion  from  North  Vietnam; the  Laotian  army
to  hold  the  fighting  until  the  U.  S.  or  its  Asian  allies  could
intervene  via  the  UN  or  SEATO.    Even  if  the  UN  Commit-
tee  cannot  come  to  Washington,  it  may  be  able  to  learn  more
about  this  possibility  if  it  looks  closely  enough  in  Laos.    It
is  curious to  notice  that  the  Laotian  appeal  to  the  United  Na-
tions  of  September 4  said,  "Since  16  July  1959  foreign  troops
have been  crossing  the frontier  and  engaging  in  actions  against
London  Daily  Telegraph  Correspondent  on  The  Background  of  the  "Invasions"
"Plans  are  being  made  to  fly  UN  Committee  members  to
areas  of  tension  in  Northern  Laos,  notably  Samneua,  the
source  of  so  much  misinformation   in  recent  weeks.    In  this
pretty  little  mountain   town,  with   its   hair-raising   airfield
approach,  Gen.  Amkhan,  regional  commander   for  four  prov-
inces,  has  been  giving  out  totally  inaccurate  military  infor-
mation, wielding  the  red pencil  which  he  uses to  mark  enemy
positions  on  his  situation  map  with  the  verve   and  sweep
of  an  inspired  abstract  painter.
"Thus  a  few  days  ago  he  told  a  group  of  correspondents
of  a  sharp  skirmish  some  15 miles  from  his  spacious  bunga-
low  headquarters,  unaware  that  at  the  same  time  the   com-
pany  commander  in  the  village  referred  to  was  telling  a
second  group  that  his  area  had  been  quiet  for  weeks.    The
same  thing  has  been  happening  at  Army   headquarters  in
Vientiane.
"One  is  tempted  to  conclude  from  this  that  the  Laotian
crisis was  artificially  created by  the  Government  to  cover  its
own  deficiencies,   or  for  material   gain.    But  this  is   far
short  of  a  full  explanation.
"There  were  a  number  of  border  crossings  in  July  by
Pathet  Lao  and  Black  Thai  forces,  and  it  is  likely  that  a
number  of  the  latter  were  technically  Viet  Minh,  since" this
hardy   tribal   group   occupies  an  area  extending  across  the
line  so  that  many  Black  Thai  are  legal  residents  of   Com-
munist  North  Vietnam.     .
These  incursions  created  something  close  to-panic  in  a
Government   suddenly  fully  aware  that  its  neglect  of  tribal
groups  who  constitute  almost  half  of  the  population   and  of
rural  dwellers  generally  had  caused  much  disaffection."
—Frank   Robertson  from   Vientiane,   London   Telegraph
Sept.  11.
"Representatives  of  the  United  States,  which  is  obviously
prepared  to  make  some  sort   of   stand  in  support  of   the
Laotian   government,   have   been   almost   as   busy   as   the
Laotians  in their  attempts  to  uncover  evidence  of  Viet  Minh
participation,  but  with  no  greater  success."  —Same.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'8  Weekly,  September  21,1959
We've   Already   Poured   A   Quarter   Billion   Down   That  Military   Rathole  in  Laos
...  It  Might  Learn  More  Here  Than  in  Vientiane  of  the  Laotian  "War"
garrison  units  of  the  Royal  Army  stationed  along  the  north-
eastern  frontier  of  Laos.  .  .  ."
But  with  all  the  Americans  there  are  in  Laos,  in  close  touch
with  its  army  through  military  assistance,  there  was  no  news
of  this  alleged  invasion.   There was nothing  in  the  New   York
Times  until  July  31  two  weeks  later.    Then  a  special   from
neighboring  Saigon,  in  South  Vietnam,  spoke  not  of  invasion
but  of  "large  scale  terrorist  activities   [which]  had  broken  out
in  Laos"  and  said  the  leaders  of  the  Pathet  Lao  party  includ-
ing   Prince  Souphanouvong   "had    been   placed   in   detention
camps."   Why  no mention  of  any  invasion  at  the  time?    Why
no  direct  word  from  the  Laotian  capital,  Vientiane ?   Had  cen-
sorship been  used  to keep from  the  outside  world  the  news that
oppositionists   had  been  thrown   into  detention  camps?    Was
the  talk  of  "terrorist  activities"  only  a  smoke-screen   for  an
anti-Communist  terror?
We   present   on  these  two  pages  further   evidence   of   the
realities  being  kept  from   the   American   people.    We   have
spent  close  to  a  quarter  billion  dollars  on  the  Laotian   army
since  military  assistance  was  instituted  and  we  are  now  begin-
ning  to  pour  more  millions   in  aid  down   this   same  rathole.
Even  the  inflated  figures  emanating  from  Laos  have  never  put
the  size  of  the  rebels  at  more  than  5,000  men.    There  must
be  something   rotten  in  the  state  of  Laos  if  it  cannot  handle
One  Rumor   Refuted
"Government   sources   said   there   is   absolutely   no
truth   in   rumors,   apparently  planted  by   Communist
agents,   that  authorities  here  are  negotiating   or  plan-
ning  to  negotiate   with  the  Reds.    They  said  the  only
Communist   'representatives'   in  Vientiane  —  pro-Red
Prince  Souphanouvang  and  10  others—are  in  jail."
—VP1  from  Vientiane,  Wash.  Daily  News,  Sept  1&
"The  government  only  yesterday   rejected  a   Pathet
Lao bid for  negotiations.   The  official  publication  of  Neo
Lao  Haksak,  Pathet  Lao's  political  party,  had  stated
that  the  rebels  were  ready  to  resolve  the  Laos  problem
by  peaceful  means  'if  such  a  settlement  is  truly  desired
by  the  Royal  Lao  Government'."
—Wall  St.  Journal  special  from  Vientiane,  Sept.  10.
the  rebels  with  the  25,000  soldiers  and  the  15,000  policemen
we have been  supporting so royally,  at  an  average  cost  of  more
than  $1,000  a  man  per  year  as  against  the  less  than  $500  per
man  it  costs   to  support  a  soldier  in  comparable  Greece  or
Pakistan.    We  have  been  "had"   by a  small  group  of   Laotian
sharpies  in  and  around  Vientiane  who  have  made  theVnselves
fortunes  on  U.  S. aid  and  are  now  using  a  highly  exaggerated
crisis  to  get  more  out  of  us.    The  swindle  would  be  comic  if
it-did  not  threaten   the  peace  of  the  world,  for  a  new  Korea
may  not  be  as  easily  contained   as  was  the  last.
Asia's  Most Highly  Paid  Army But
Mr.  [Richard P.]  BRAY  [Jr.  counsel  to Porter  Hardy sub-
committee] :  We  have  numerous  documents  in  the   record
.  .  .  showing  that  over  a  period of  some  4  or  5  years  past,
all   departments,  including  Defense,   State   and  ICA,  have
gone  on  record  numerous  times  that  the  Lao  soldier  is  the
highest  paid  soldier  in  Asia.    Do  you  think  that  is  wrong?
Is  that  information  erroneous?
Mr.  [Brig.   Gen  Rothwell  H.]   BROWN   [US  Army  Ret.,
former  chief  in  Laos  of  the  Programs  Evaluation  Office  for
Dept.  of  Defense  until  Feb.  27 of  this  year]:  No,  it  isn't.
—Exee.  Session,  April  Zl,  Hardy    subcommittee    House
Gov't   Operations   on  V.  S.  Aid  Operations  in  Laos
p.  7S4.
Mr.  [Porter]  HARDY  [chairman  subcommittee]:  I  think
you  said the  army  was  engaged  in  a civic  action  pre-election
program?
Mr.  BROWN: Yes,  sir.   They  put  on,  through  the  Army,
what  we  have  called  out  there  a  civic  action  program,  Mr.
Chairman.    That  consisted  of  the  dissemination  of  Govern-
ment  propaganda,  of  Government  programs,  of  placing  of
posters  for  the  conservative  candidates  all  over  the  country,
of  going  out  and  making  speeches  for  the  Government can-
didates,  of  maintaining  order  around  the  election  booths...
Mr. HARDY: General, insofar  as  the election  is  concerned,
-the ^election  didn't  come  out too  successfully,  did it  ...     the
Communists  picked  up an awful  lot of  representation.  .  . .
Mr.  BROWN: Sir,  if  the  program  hadn't  been  put  on,  I
don't  know  what  would  have  happened.
Mr.  HARDY:  Conceivably   they  might  have  elected  more
Communists.
—Same, P.  737.
Mr.  [Charles  M.]  BAILEY  [General  Accounting  Office]:
The  Military Assistance  Program  [in  Laos]  is  administered
by  a  group known as  a  Programs  Evaluation  Office  or  PEO
. .. PEO did not know the actual  strength of  forces. ... At
the  time  of  our last  visit,  PEO  still  had no  means  of  verify-
ing  that  rations  or  financial  support  furnished  to  the  Lao
army  actually  reached  the  troops.  .  .  .  Our review  disclosed
Good  Neither  for  Politics  or War
that  annual programs  have  been  developed  for  Laos  without
adequate  knowledge of  the  forces  being  supported,  the  needs
of  these  forces,  or  the  military supplies  already  delivered  to
Laos.    These  programs  do  not  appear  always  to  have  been
motivated  by  military  consideration.
[Security  Deletion]
.  .  .  For example we found  an excess  of  from  3 to  5  years
supply  of  tires  and  tubes  on  hand  or  due  in  but  additional
quantities  were  included in  the  program  submission. .....
Staff   personnel  have  not  had  training  or  experience  in
logistics,  and the PEO has  estimated  that  the  logistical  sys-
tem  would  collapse  even  more  quickly  than  the  Lao  forces
would  disintegrate.
—Same, Exee. Session March  19, Pages 248-t.
"In  summary,  the  decision  to  support  a  25,000-man  army
—motivated  by  a  Department of  State  desire  to  PROMOTE  '
political  stability—seems  to  have  been  the  foundation  for  a
series of  developments which DETRACT from that  stability.
[Emphasis  in  original],
"Given  that  decision,  the  minimum  size  of  the   necessary
aid  program  was  inexorably  established  at  a  dollar  value
far  beyond  the  estimated  rate  at  which  the  Lao  economy
could  absorb  it.    From  this  grew  intensive  speculation  in
commodities   and  foreign  exchange,  productive   of  inflation,
congenial  to  an  atmosphere  of  corruption,  and   destructive
of  ANY  stability,  political  or  economic.
"With  so  much  of  the  aid  available  for  Laos  earmarked
for  support  of  military  forces,  little  attention  was  paid  to
programs  which  might  reach  the  people  of  the  villages. The
aid  program  has  not  prevented  the  spread  of  communism
in  Laos.   In  fact,  the  Communist victory  in  last  year's  elec-
tion,  based  on  the  slogans  of  'Government  corruption'  and
'Government  indifference'  might  lead  one  to  conclude   that
the  U.  S.  aid  program  has  contributed  to  ah  atmosphere  in
which  the  ordinary  people  of   Laos  question   the  value  of
the  friendship  of  the  United  States."
—17.  S.  Aid   Operations   in  Laos,  report   of   the  Porter
Hardy  subcommittee, June 15, p. SO.
1  4  !
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  21, 1959
What   the   Enemies  of  Peace  Feared   in  Fighting  the  Exchange   of  Visits
Krushchev's  First  Appearances  Here  Are  Humanizing  the  Russian  Image
Mr.  Khrushchev's  first  appearance  here,  at  the  White  House
dinner  and  before  the  National  Press  Club,  demonstrated  that
the  worst  fears  about  his  visit  were  justified.    What  the  ene-
mies  of  peace  feared   is  that  he  would  humanize  our  picture
of  the  Russian  people  and  of  their  leader.
Man,  for  all  his  love  of  war,  is  reluctant  to  kill  his  brother.
Before  every  war, it  is  necessary  to  picture  the  enemy  as  un-
human.    The   enemy  must   be  pictured   both   as  sub-human,
so  that  it  is  no  sin  to  kill  him, and  super-human,  so  that  to
kill  him  is  sheer  self-preservation.
Mr.  Khrushchev   is  destroying   both   these   images,   and   in
this   sense  he  is  disarming  us,  deflating   hatred   and  making
easier  the  search  for  peace.    He  has  a  homely  way  of   talking,
a  peasant's   shrewdness,   a  very  bright   man's  mental   agility.
In  replying  to  the  President's   toast  at  the  White  House din-
ner,  for  example,   he  was  quick  to  exploit  Mr.  Eisenhower's
reference   to  our   establishment   of   diplomatic   relations   with
Alexander  The  First.
Czar  Feared  Those  American   Revolutionists
"I  don't  think  the  Emperor  trusted  your  Ambassador  too
much,"  Khrushchev  said,  scoring  a  point  for  the  co-existence
of  different  social  systems,  "because  after  all  the  United  States
was  a  Republic  and  Alexander  was  a  Czar,  but  all  the  same
there  did  exist  mutual  understanding  between  the  two  coun-
tries.  . .  ."
Mr.   Khrushchev's   appearance   before   the   National   Press
Club  was  a  success.    It  is  difficult   to  imagine  how  little  ac-
customed  a  dictator  is  in  a  Communist country  to  being  faced
in  public  with  difficult,   unpleasant  and   even  rude  questions.
Russia  has  made  progress  when  the  head  of  its  government,
with  power  beyond  that  of  a  Czar,  can  stand  up  to  the  kind
of  questions  which  were  put  to  Mr.  Khrushchev.
Not   all   the   answers   were   entirely   responsive,   but   Mr.
Khrushchev  had  to  keep  in  mind  not  only  the  press  club  but
his  audiences  in  Russia  and  China.    He  snowed  spunk  in  tak-
ing  the  first  one, a  right-to-the-chin  about  the  famous  apoc-
ryphal  story  on  what  he  was  doing  during  the  Stalin  period.
He  was weakest  on  Hungary,  but  it  was  revealing  that  he  was
defensive  and  that  he  did  not  fall  back  on  Communist  cliches.
His  answer  on  the  Jewish  question,  that  Jewish  scientists
had  a  place  of  honor  in  the  launching  of  the  recent  moon-
shot,  will  be  helpful  if  given  publicity  in  Russia  where  race
prejudice  is  far  from  wiped  out  and  much  covert discrimina-
tion  exists.    It  was  impressive  that  Mr.  Khrushchev  did  not
deny  the   "bury  you" statement  but   gave  an  honest  answer,
according  to  his  lights.   We  believe he  will  make  a deservedly
good  impression  in  our  country.
Still  Long  Way  to  Go  on  The  German   Question
Mr.   Khrushchev's   remarks   on   Germany   in   his   prepared
text,  however,   indicate  that  no  miracles  are  to  be   expected
from  this  visit.    A  German  peace  treaty  is  a  first  essential  for
the  stabilization  of   Europe   but   the   Communist   formula  of
separate   peace   treaties  with  the  separate  parts  of   a  divided
Germany  is  a  dangerous  optical   delusion.     So  long  as Ger-
many  is divided,  Europe  and  the  world  are  divided.   The  East
German  regime  is  not  a  real  regime  but  an  artificial  creation
imposed   by  Russian  force  of   arms.     A  new   war   can  easily
start  in  this  divided  land.
Unfortunately  neither  side  shows  any  readiness  to  face  up
to  the  German  reality.    The  Russians  understandably  will  not
consent  to  a  reunified  rearmed  Germany,  especially one  linked
with  NATO.   While  we  show  no  disposition  to  give  on  this
point,  the  Russians in  turn  (as  both  the  German  Social  Demo-
crats  and  more  recently  the  British  Laborites  learned  in  Mos-
cow)   have  become  less  and  less  interested  in  unification.    A
status  quo  which  includes  a  divided  Germany  is intrinsically
unstable  yet  this  is  the  status  quo  on  which  Mr.  Khrushchev
wants  to  settle.
The  existence  of  Berlin  as  an  island  within  the  Soviet  zone
makes  reunification  a necessity.   The  Germans,  who  know  each
other  only  too well,  do  not  trust  the  East  German  Communists
to  honor  their  pledges  about  "a  free  Berlin"  once  they  feel
strong  enough  to  take  it  over.
We  shall  have  to  tackle  less  difficult   problems  first  before
we  can  hope  to  solve  this  one.  Relaxation  of  tension,   espec-
ially  if  it  slows  up  the  nuclear  rearmament  of  Germany,  may
make  the  German  question   easier  to  solve.     In  this  respect,
too,  the  Khrushchev  visit  may  make  its  contribution.
Make   Friends   and   Influence    People    by    Using   the   Blank   Below   to   Send   A   Gift     Sub
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name    ........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
9/21/59
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington    15,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5018  Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15, D.  C.
An   Independent  weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;   Circulation  Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
Sr.  in  tlin  TT s :  Sfi  in  rvirmrln :  Sin  ^IxpTvticrf.    A(r  Mall  rntps :  S15 to  Kiirrmpr   S2O  tn  Tsrnpl.   AR?H  nnrt   Afrtfn.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED