I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1959
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1959aug03.pdf

============================================================

Norstad  Thinks Limited   War   Unlikely.,  P.  3
Cheering   Bulletin;   Surprise   Maneuver   Forces  Vote  in  House  on  Nuclear  Give-Away,  See  Page  4
/. F. Stone's Weekly
VOL.   VII,  NO.  30
AUGUST  3,  1959
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
On  Various  Kinds  of  Captivity  Among  Nations
The  resemblances are  more  striking  than  the  differences  in
the Nixon  visit with  Khrushchev.   Both  men  are opportunists.
The  Red-baiter of  1948  now  preaches  co-existence in  Moscow
while  Stalin's hatchet-man  for  the  Ukraine  blossoms  out  as  a
liberalizer.    They  signal  a  welcome  change  of  climate on  both
sides.    Both  are  shrewd,  not  too  cultured,  organization  men.
For  Nixon,  color  television—judging  by how  often  he  stressed
it—seems  to  be  the  apogee  of  American  civilization,  but  we
may  be  sure  that  when  the  Russians  get  color  TV,  too,  they
will  acclaim  it  as  the  full  flower  of  Marxism-Leninism.   These
are the  spokesmen  for  two  mass production  civilizations geared
to the  common  man.    In  both  countries vast political  machines
conflict  with  the  idealized images,  here  of  democracy,  there  of
Communism,  and  regard  non-conformists with  suspicion.   The
last-minute  removal  of  suspect  books  from  the  U.  S.  fair  in
Moscow  demonstrates  the  phobia which  characterizes a  debased
socialism,  but  Nixon—who  climbed  to  power  as  comrade-in-
arms  of  Mundt  and  Walter—is  no  Jeffersonian   either.    The
Russians  complain  of  our  Captive  Nations  Week,  but  like  us
have  long  taught  their  people  that  the  other  side  holds  mil-
lions  in  captivity,  waiting  to  be  liberated.    The  H-bomb  for-
tunately  promises  to  be  too  liberating,  and  so  they  have  begun
to  talk,  though   still  belligerently,  and  are  in  process  of  dis-
covering  with  surprise  that  the  other  is  human.    This  is  all
to  the  good,  for  the  two  most  captive  nations  on  earth  are
ours,  captives  of  a mutual  fear  which  spells  mutual destruction
unless  dissipated.
When  It's   Civil  Rights  for  Eastern  Europe
Mr.   Walter   Lippmann's   thoughtful   column   July   28   on
Nixon  in  Russia  gives  the  impression   that  our  Captive  Na-
tions Week  resolution  originated  with  "that  notorious  lover  of
liberty,  Mr.  Eastland."   The  fact  is  that  it  was  introduced  by
Douglas   and  Javits.    The  former  thanked  Eastland  "for   his
courteous  assistance  in  securing  prompt  consideration"  by  the
Senate  Judiciary  Committee  which  reported   it  out  with  a  ce-
lerity  rarely  shown  in  dealing  with  measures  which   seek  to
liberate  another  oppressed  people  closer  to  Mr.  Eastland's  na-
tive  Mississippi.    The  co-sponsors  included  liberals  acting  ir-
responsibly  and  rightists  who  think  war  inevitable.*    Most  of
them  were,  of  course,  playing  to  the  voters  of  East  European
origin  in  their  home  states,  and  the  resolution   passed  July  6
without  discussion  as a cynical  gesture.    But  some  of  the  spon-
sors  must  blush  to  think  that  Douglas  said  action  "prior  to  the
resumption"  of  the  Geneva  talks  was  urgent  because  it  would
*The  co-sponsors  were  Moss  (D.  Utah),  Bush   (R.  Conn.),  Lausche
(D.  Ohio),  Scott  <R. Pa.),  Hartke  (D.  Ind.),  Green   (D.  R.  I.),  Dodd
(D.   Conn.),  Humphrey   (D.  Mlnn.),  Hart   (D.  Mlch.),  Neuberger   (D.
Ore.),  Keating  (H.  N.  Y.),  Young  (R.  N.  D.),  Engle  (D.  Cal.),  Curtls
(R.  Neb.),  Langer  (R.  N.  D.),  Morse  (D.  Ore.)   and  Case  (R.  N.   J.).
"strengthen  the  hand"  of  our negotiators.
Presumably  the  resolution  was  meant  to  encourage  the  vic-
tims  of  Communist  expansion  since  1918   but  its  list  of  coun-
tries  to  be  liberated  includes  areas  acquired  by  the  Russians
long  before  communism.   The  resolution  names  the  Ukraine,
which  the  Russians annexed  more  than  300  years  ago,  White
Ruthenia,  Armenia, Azerbaijan,  Georgia,  Idel-Ural  (whatever
that  it  is),  "Cossackia"  and  Turkestan.    Were  the  Russians to
pass  a  similar  Captive  Nations   resolution  aimed  at  us,  they
would  propose  to  give  California  back  to  Mexico,  Louisiana
Territory  to  France,  Florida  to  Spain  and  Roanoke  Island  to
the   descendants  of   Pocahontas,  leaving  us   a  generous   area
around   the   District   of   Columbia.    The   listing   betrays  the
hands  of  certain  fanatical  Ukrainian  nationalists  under  Jesuit
patronage  here  who  have  long  insisted  that  our  enemy  is  not
Communism   but   Muscovy.    Just   to   strengthen   further   the
hand  of  our  negotiators  at  Geneva,  they  threw  into  their  list
"mainland  China"  and  Tibet.    Were  Khrushchev  to  free  all
these  territories, and  allow  Cardinal  Spellman  to  baptize  him,
these  Ukrainians  would  be  prepared  to  negotiate.
The  German  Captivity  Was   Worse
Those  really  interested  in  lightening  the  Russian  hold  on
such  countries  as  Poland  and  Hungary  are  invited  to  notice
an  instructive coincidence.    Majority  Leader  McCormack  put
the  Captive  Nations  resolution  through  the  House  on  July  9
just  before  the  hour  allotted  Congressman  Meyer  of  Vermont
and  a  half  a  dozen  others  to  make  a  forlorn  stand  against  the
agreements  to  give  nuclear  training  and  nuclear  weapons   to
the  Germans  and  other   allies.    The  press  galleries  emptied
after  the  oratory  over  Captive  Nations  Week  and  few  stayed
on  to  hear  the  nuclear  pacts  questioned,  though   they   affect
East  Europe.    If  the  West  Germans  are  to  have  nuclear  arms,
the  Russians  will  be  forced  either  to  give  nuclear  weapons  to
the  satellite  armies  or  to  establish  strong  nuclear  bases  of  their
own  in  the  satellite  states.   In  either  case this  will  spell  tighter
political  control,  a  deeper  captivity for  those  Captive  Nations.
In   the   Senate,   Humphrey   similarly  prefaced   his   weak   and
equivocal  remarks  about  the  nuclear  pacts  on  July  17  with  a
demogogic   speech   on  "Kozlov's  Visit  and  the  Captive   Na-
tion."    An  atom  free  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  would  be
the first  step  toward  milder  regimes  in  the  area.   But  the  Ger-
mans  want  nuclear  arms  to  extend  their  own  power  again  into
East  Europe,  and  our  foreign   policy  has  long  been  geared  not
to  a  freer   East  Europe  but  to  a  stronger   Germany.     Who
bothers  to  remember  that  these  "captive  nations"  were  all  too
recently  the  victims  of  a  captivity  worse  than  Russian  control,
with  all  the  Slavic  peoples  treated  as  sub-human?
!   1  9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  3, 1959
A  New  McCarthy  Speaks  Up  Against  Non-Communist  Affidavits  As  the  McCarthyism  Ebbs
Close  Senate  Vote  on  Student  Loyalty   Oaths  Shows  Witch  Hunt  Dying
The  non-Communist  affidavit  in  the  National  Defense  Edu-
cation  Act  escaped  repeal  by  a  narrow  margin  in  the  U.  S.
Senate  after  a  two  day  debate  July  23.    The  Senate  by  a  vote
of  46-45  had  actually  approved  a  Javits  compromise  substitut-
ing   an  oath   of   allegiance.     But  then,  on  motion   by  Long
(La.),  the  Senate  voted  49-42  to  recommit,  killing  the  pos-
sibility  of  action  this  session.
Three  Democrats   (Hartke  of  Indiana,  Hayden  of  Arizona,
and  Sparkman  of  Alabama)  and  two  Republicans  (Langer  of
North  Dakota  and  Scott  of  Pennsylvania)  switched  their  votes
to  make  this  outcome  possible:   they  were  recorded   for   the
Javits   compromise  but  then  voted   to  recommit.     (The   dis-
crepancy  in  the  totals  arises  because  Kefauver—absent  in  the
vote  on  the  Javits  compromise—turned  up  to  vote  against  the
motion   to   recommit   while   Chavez   of   New   Mexico   voted
against  the  Javits  motion  but  was  absent  from  the  later  vote.)
The  close  vote  should  encourage  educators  and  students  to
plan, now  for  a  bigger   campaign  next  year  to  eliminate   the
non-Communist  affidavit  not  only from  the  1958  Act  but  from
the   older  National  Science  Foundation   scholarships.     Secre-
Now  A  Geological  Problem
"I  am not  willing to  accept  the  idea  that  there  are  no
Communists  left   in  this  country.    I  think  that  if   we
lift  enough  rocks,  we  will  find  some."
—Goldwater  (R.  Ariz)  in Senate  debate July  23.
tary  Flemming  of  the  Department   of  Health,  Education   and
Welfare  and  the  powerful  Bureau  of  the  Budget   supported
repeal   both  of  the  non-Communist   affidavit   and   the   special
oath  of  allegiance  required  for  scholarships  under  the  1958  act.
Despite   Administration   support   only   eight   Republicans:
Aiken  (Vt.),  Bush  (Conn.),  Case  (N.  /.),    Cooper    (Ky.),
Javits  (N.  Y.),   Keating  (N.  Y.),  Kuchel  (Col.)  and  Salton-
stall  (Mass.)   voted  against  the  motion  to  recommit.     So  did
five liberal  Southerners—Fulbright  (Ark.),  Hill  (Ala.),  Yar-
borpugh   (Tex.),   and  Gore   and  Kefauver   (Tenn.).     They
broke  away  from  the  Bourbon   coalition  of  Republicans   and
Southern  Democrats  which  put  over  the  motion  to   recommit.
The  three  big  Ivy  League  colleges  opposed   the  loyalty   oath,
swinging  the  Senators  from  their  States  with  the  exception  of
Connecticut's  Dodd  who  was  ill  and  unrecorded.     Williams
and  Case  of  New  Jersey,  Bush  of  Connecticut  and   Saltonstall
of  Massachusetts  voted  for  the  Javits  compromise.
Why  Not   Add  to  the  Student  Oath
'And  I Solemnly  Swear  Not  to  Support  Castro'?
"The  aggressive  onward  march  of  atheistic  commu-
nism  has  now  reached  Cuba,  90  miles  from  the  United
States. ...  Is  that  any  reason for  us  to  burn  down  the
jail  and  shoot  the  policeman  and say,  'We  are  not  going
to  be  as  tough  on  communism  as  we  were  a  year  ago,
when  we  enacted  the  Nat'1 Defense  Education  Act'?"
—Mundt  (R.  S.  D.)  opposing  oath repeal,  July  23.
Little  Courage  in  That   Profile
Kennedy,  though  co-sponsor  of  the  original  bill  with  Clark
of  Pennsylvania,  seemed  strikingly  lukewarm  about  his  own
measure,  opened  the  debate  by  offering  the  same  compromise
as  Javits  and  said  little  in  defense  of  his  bill  until  the   last
few  minutes of  debate.   His  profile  still  exhibits  as little cour-
age  as  it  did  in  McCarthy's heyday; he  had  to  be  against  the
non-Communist   affidavit   in  view  of   Harvard's  attitude  and
Saltonstall's   but   let   his   co-sponsor,   Clark,   carry   the   fight.
There  is a  satisfying  symbolism in  the  fact  that  the  best  speech
for  repeal  of  the  non-Communist  affidavit  was  made  by  a  Mc-
Carthy,  but  this  time  young  Eugene  J.  McCarthy  of  Minne-
sota,  a  freshman  Democratic  liberal  and  himself  a  sociology
professor  and  an  "egg  head."
Four  other  freshmen  Democrats,  Williams   (N.  /.),  Young
(Ohio),   Church   (Idaho)    and   McGee   (Wyo.)    spoke   up
strongly  against   educational  test  oaths,  the  last  named   as  a
former  president  of  the  American  Association  of   University
Presidents.    John  Sherman  Cooper   (R.  Ky.),  who  has  shown
more  devotion  to  civil  liberties than  any  other  member  of  the
Senate,  was  the  one  eloquent   voice  on  the  Republican  side,
asking  whether  behind   the  loyalty  oath  was  a  fundamental
distrust  of  "the  search  for  ideas  and  the  search  for  truth."
Clark  at  one  point  challenged  Mundt  to  join  him  in  spon-
soring  an  amendment  to  subject  all  recipients  of  government
loans  or  bounties—including  farmers—to  loyalty  oath   provi-
sions.    Mundt  backed  down.    It  was  disappointing   that  no
proponents  of  repeal  talked  of  the  general  atmosphere   which
inhibits  students  today  from  talking  as  freely  and  "joining"
as  freely  as  in  the   30's,   or  showed  how  these  loyalty  oaths
are  mechanism  of  thought   control.    The  right,   nevertheless,
was  on  the  defense,  and  the  academic  community—if  it  starts
now—has  a  good  chance  of  winning  next  year.
Legal Subtleties  (Before-or-After Problems) of  the  Hunt for  Subversive Students
Sen.  PROUTY  (R.  Vt.)    Suppose  I  took  the  oath  of  al-
legiance  tomorrow, but  later  found  that  I  might  have  been
engaged  in  subversive activities.   How could I  prove that  at
the  time  I  took  the  oath,  I  was  not  a subversive?
Sen.  PASTORE  (D.  R.  I.).    No  matter  what  was  done,
the  thing  which  counts  occurs  at  the  time  of  the  taking  of
the  money.   When  a  person  takes the  money, he  must  prove
his  allegiance to the United  States.   That is  controlling.  .  . .
Sen.  HOLLAND  (D.  Fla.).   Mr. President, I dislike  to dis-
agree  completely  with  the  Senator  from  Rhode  Island  but
.  .  .  the  crime  of  perjury  is  committed, if  it  is  committed
at  all,  when the  oath is  taken.   The  oath  of  allegiance which
is  contained  in  the  so-called  Javits  amendment  might  be
violated  by  a  perjurer who  is  a  Communist  at  the  time  he
took  the  oath.    But  if  he  was  not  such  at  the  time  he  took
the  oath,  and  then  during the  four-year  course  of  his  edu-
cation  he  went  ahead  and  decided  to  become  a Communist
or  a  subversive .  .  .  the  Mundt  amendment  would cover  the
acceptance  of  any  money  at  any  time  during  the  course  of
the  operation,  whereas  the  oath  of  loyalty  would  not.  .  .  .
Sen.  PASTORE.   The  idea  that  if  he  takes  the  oath  of
allegiance  today,  and if  tomorrow he  decides to  join a Com-
munist   group,  he  then  will  be  free  to  accept  the  money,
is  a rather far-fetched  notion.  .  . .
Sen.  HOLLAND.   The only  way  .  .  .  would  be  to require
—although  the  law  does  not  require  it—that   the  student
renew  the  oath  every  time  he  receives  an  additional check.
—Debate,  U. S.  Senate  July  S3.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  3, 1959
General  Undercuts  Argument  Nuclear  Arms  Necessary  Against   "Red  Hordes"
Norstad  Figures  Disclose  NATO  Armed  Forces  Larger  Than  Warsaw  Pact's
Newly   released   testimony   by  NATO   Commander   Gen.
Lauris  Norstad  undercuts  two  of  the  favorite  arguments  used
by  the  State  and  Defense  Departments   for  spreading  nuclear
arms  to  our  NATO  allies.
One  is  that  the  NATO  countries  need  nuclear  weapons  to
deal  with  "the  overwhelming  numerical  superiority  of  Soviet
forces."    The  other  is  that  nuclear  weapons  will  enable  our
NATO  allies  to  resist  Soviet  aggression   short  of  all-out  war.
The  Norstad   testimony   begins  at  page  793  of  the   hear-
ings  on  the  I960  Mutual  Security  Budget  which  the   House
Appropriations   Committee   released   on   July   23.     General
Norstad  explained  (p.  814)   that  our  military  assistance  pro-
gram  was  helping  to  finance  3,500,000  men  under  arms  in
NATO,  "exclusive  of  the  U.  S.  and  Canadian  armed   forces."
As  against  this,   he   estimated   the   Russian   armed   forces   at
4,000,000   to  4,500,000   men.
U.  S.  and  Canadian  armed  forces  total  better  than  2,500,-
000.    Added  to  the  3,500,000  figure  above,  this  brings  the
total  NATO  forces  to  6,000,000  men.    Russia's  seven  Euro-
pean  satellite  states  in  the  Warsaw   Pact   have  among   them
about  1,000,000   men  under  arms.    This  brings  the   Warsaw
Pact  total,  if we use Norstad's  top  estimate of  Russian  strength,
to  4,500,000  men.    So  this  is  how  the  two  sides  stack  up:
NATO  Pact  Armed  Forces                       6,000,000  men
Warsaw  Pact  Powers                                   5,500,000  men
Western  Advantage                                     500,000  men
These  figures  do  not  fit  the  nightmarish  propaganda  picture
of   the  West  confronted   by  overwhelming    Soviet   "hordes."
The  fact  is'that  the  Atlantic Alliance,  in  addition  to  controll-
ing  most  of  the  world's  wealth  and  productive  capacity,  has
a  total  population  of  more  than  400,000,000,   or  twice  that
of   the   Soviet  Union   alone,   and   50  percent  more   than   the
,300,000,000   of   the   U.   S.  S.  R.  and   its  European   satellites
combined.
With  this  manpower  and  these  resources,  the  Atlantic  Pact
powers  are  quite  capable of  holding  their  own  in  Europe  with
conventional  arms.    They  may  not  get  as  many  divisions  out
of  their  manpower  but  this  is  because  they  use  up  resources
on  lavish  equipment  and  supply.
Pentagon  Official  Thinks  "Baby  Bombs"  Can  Make  Berlin  A  Baby  Dispute
But  NATO  Commander  Doesn't  Believe  Nuclear  War  Can  Be  Limited
We   now  come  to  the   second   argument  advanced   by  the
State  Department  for  spreading  nuclear  arms  to  NATO.    In
the  Department  statement  made  public  by  Senator  Fulbright
July  17, it was argued  that  nuclear  arms  would  make NATO's
defense  more  "balanced   and  flexible."
The  statement  said,  "As  General  Norstad   has  pointed   out,
the  shield  forces,  in  addition  to  constituting  an  essential  ele-
ment  of the  deterrent to  general  war"  would  also—if  equipped
with  nuclear  arms  —  be  able  to  prevent  "less  than   general
war,"  provide  added  means  for  dealing   with   "localized  ag-
gression"  and  compel  an  aggressor  to  "pause  and  make  a  con-
scious  decision whether  to  cease  and  desist,  or  whether  to  per-
sist  in  aggressive  action,  thereby  bringing  into  play  the  West-
ern  retaliatory  force."
Norstad   Differs  With  Pentagon
This  may  reflect  dominant  Pentagon   thinking   but  it  gives
a  false  impression  of  General  Norstad's  views.    The   domi-
nant  Pentagon   view  seems  to  have  been  expressed  by  Major
Gen.  John  S.  Guthrie,  Director,  European  Region,   Office  of
the  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  International   Security  Af-
fairs,  when  he  was questioned  on  this  point  by Senator  Church
(D.  Idaho)  before  Senate  Foreign  Relations  last  May 7.*
General  Guthrie  said  the  original  NATO  plans,  as  formu-
lated  at  Lisbon  in  1952,   called   for   defense  by  conventional
armies  but  that  in  1954  "all  the NATO  countries  agreed  that
the  tactical  atomic  weapons  had  arrived,  the  smaller   weapon,
the  so-called  baby bombs ...  so that  it  [i.e.,  atomic war] was
not   necessarily  going  to  result   in   complete   devastation   for
some  local  country."    So,  he  said,  we  need  no  longer   rely  on
"all-or-nothing"    operations    "if,   for   example,   the   Russians
closed  in  on  Berlin  and  occupied   it."
"See  that  committee's  hearings  on  the  Mutual   Security  Act
*of  1959,  part  I,  p.  297.
So  here  we  have   the   idea   that  with   "baby   bombs"   the
NATO  powers  could  hold  off  the  Russians  in  limited  nuclear
war  and  force  them  to  "pause  and  make  a  conscious  decision
whether  to  cease  and  desist"   [as  if  in  response  to  a  Federal
Trade  Commission order!—IPS].
General  Norstad  was  scornful   of  this  view  when  he  was
before   the   House   Appropriations   Committee   in   executive
session   June   8.     Congressman   Gary   (D.   Va.)   asked   him,
"could  you  not  have  a  limited  war  and  still  use  atomic  weap-
ons?    If  you  started  out  to  drop  bombs  immediately  on  Mos-
cow  and  on  all  strategic  points  in  Russia,  you  would  have  an
all-out  war,  but  could  you not  use the  battlefield weapons  with
atomic warheads on  battlefield operations?"
General  Norstad   did  not  think  that  military  action,  once
begun  in  so critical  an  area as NATO's,  especially  with  atomic
weapons,  could  be  broken  off.   He  did  not  think  the  forces
"could   easily  disengage   as  if   it  were  a  baseball   game   and
say,  'we  will  play  it  tomorrow  afternoon  if  it  is  not  raining'."
"I  do not  agree,"  General  Norstad  said,  "with  those  people
who  say that  you  can  control  the  size  of  this  fire,  the  size  of
this  blast,  neatly  cold-bloodedly,   once  it  starts.    I  think  it  is
the  most   dangerous   and   disastrous   thing   in  the  world.     I
think  you  must  prevent  the  thing  from  starting  in  the  first
place  because once  it  starts  in  a critical  area  such  as the  NATO
area,  it  is  more  likely  than  not,  in  my  opinion,   to   explode
into  the  whole  thing,  whether  we  like  it  or  the  Russians  like
it  or  anybody  likes   it."
General   Norstad   did  not  think   the  Russians  would  start
World  War  III  but  saw  "a  very  great  danger  of  our  maneu-
vering  ourselves   into  a  position   where  we  might  very  well
become  involved  in  a  war  as  a  result  of  an  error  or  mistake
in   judgment."     The   errors  will   not   become   less   dangerous
when  more  countries  have  nuclear  arms  with  which  to  make
them.
1   2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  3,  1959
Despite  Press  Blackout,  Third  of  Those  Present  Vote   "No"    on  Atomic  Arms
House  Insurgents  by  Surprise  Maneuver  Force Vote  on  Nuclear  Give-Away
In  an  unexpected  last-ditch  battle,  a  small  valiant  group  in
the  House  last  Tuesday   forced  a  vote  on  the  nuclear   give-
away  agreements   by  an  amendment  to  the  foreign   aid  bill.
The   amendment,  submitted  for   the  group   by  Bennett    (D.
Fla.),  would  have  forbidden  the  use  of  foreign  aid  funds  to
finance  the  nuclear   training   or  nuclear   equipment   of  allied
armies  under  the  new  agreements.    All  of  these   agreements,
except   that  with  Greece,   had   become  law  by  midnight   July
26  without  a  vote  since  the  Rules  committee  had  refused  to
report  out  any  of  the  resolutions  seeking  to  veto   them.
Taber   (R.  N.  Y.),  ranking  Republican  on  House   Appro-
priations,  tried  to raise a point  of  order.    Durham  (D.  N.  C.),
ranking  Democrat  on  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,
threw  his  prestige  against  the  amendment,  telling  the  House
that  the  nuclear  armament  of  the  West  Germans  and   other
NATO  allies  "is  not  a  matter  which  can  be  fully  discussed  in
open  session."
Only  Four  Percent  Voted   "No"    Last  Year
Despite  this  invocation  of  military  hush-hush,  almost  one-
third  of  those  present  voted  for  the  amendment  and   against
the   nuclear   give-away.    The   vote  was   137  to  61.     It  was
not  a  roll-call.    Two  Republicans  and  59  Democrats   (about
half  the  Democrats  on  the  floor)  voted  against  the  financing
of  nuclear  armament.    This  shows  a  rising  tide  of   concern.
Last   year,   on   a   roll-call   vote,   on   the   Atomic   Energy   Act
amendments  first  authorizing   these   agreements,   the   opposi-
tion  was  snowed  under  345  to  12.    The  vote  against  the  nu-
clear  give-away  was  less  than  four  percent  last  year;  it  was
better  than  30  percent  this  year.
The   procedure   adopted   by  the   insurgents   in   the   House
could   also   be   used   in   the   Senate   where   no   one   had   the
nerve   to   introduce   a   resolution.     Humphrey   threw   in   the
sponge  on  the  fight  with  a  weak  speech  July  17  which  ended
by  approving  the  pending  agreements,  including  that  for  the
nuclear  rearmament  of   Germany.
But  there  seems  to  have  been  an  extraordinary  outpouring
of  letters  from  all  over  the  county  despite  a  pretty  complete
press  blackout.     (The   New   York   Times,  unlike  the   Wash-
ington  Post  and  the  Baltimore  Sun  did  not  even  mention  the
vote  on  the  anti-nuclear give-away amendment).
An  index  of  popular  pressure  was  the  changed  attitude  of
Senator   Javits.     Earlier  he  brusquely  told   a  delegation   from
the  New  York  Committee  for  A  Sane  Nuclear  Policy  that  it
did  not  know  what  it  was  talking  about.    On  Friday  July  24,
however,  Javits  rose   in  the   Senate  to  say  that   "thousands"
of  his  constituents  had  written  him  about  the  agreements.
On  the  one hand,  Javits  said  he  had  come  to  the  conclusion
that  the  agreements   would   strengthen   "our   military  defense
posture."    On  the  other  hand,  he  sympathized witli  the  con-
cern  expressed  and  promised  "the  most  scrupulous  attention"
to  future  developments.    "I  pledge  myself,"  he  said,  "to  act
as a vigilant sentinel"  and added  that  Senator  Humphrey   "who
has  analyzed this  subject  very  carefully,  takes  pretty  much  the
same  position  that  I  do."     The  position  seems  to  be  that  of
viligant  sentinels  over  a  barn  from  which  the  horse  has  al-
ready  been  stolen.    They  could  still  do  what  the   insurgents
did  in  the  House,  when  the  foreign  aid  bill  reaches the  Senate.
The  Senate  may  not  vote  on  it  until  the  end  of  August.
A  Freshman  Vote  Led  by  Meyer
A  group  of  freshmen  in  the  House,  as  yet  unbroken  by  its
steamroller  leadership,  deserve  the  credit  for  forcing  the  only
vote  so  far  this  session  on  a  step  so  momentous  as  the   nu-
clear  rearmament  of  Germany.    Meyer  of  Vermont  was  ably
seconded  by  Johnson  of  Colorado,  Clem  Miller  of  California,
Wolf   of  Iowa.    Old-timers  like  Wier  of  Minnesota  and  the
eloquent  Mrs.  Edith  Green  of  Oregon   (she  called  it  a  "share-
the-doom"  program)   joined  in,  as  did  the  war  hero  and  air
ace  McGovern  of  South  Dakota  and   (a  new  recruit  in  Tues-
day's  debate  )Kowalski   of  Connecticut,  a  West  Pointer   and
regular  Army  man,  who  said  all  Poles—Communist  or   not
—share  a  common  fear  of  a  resurgent  Germany  armed  with
nuclear  weapons.
Florida's  Bennett  was  one  of  a  small  number  of  Southern
Democrats   who  voted   against   the   give-away  last  year.    He
emphasized  that  today's  allies  may  easily  become   tomorrow's
enemies  and  added,   "A   fanatically  anti-Communist  ally  can
use  weapons   developed   with   these  secrets  to  bring   about   a
war  which  we  are  attempting  to  avoid."
Extra  Copies  Recent  Issues  Available  for  Circulation  in  Fight  Against  Nuclear   Give-Away
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name   ........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City          .................................Zone............State....................
8/3/59
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ........................................Zone............State................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618     Nebrosko   Ave.,    N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Enforce!   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.     Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   r>018  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   \veoklv   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the   U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED