I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962dec03.pdf

============================================================

A  Calmer  View  of  the Sino-Indian  Border  Conflict,,  P.  2
JFK's  Housing  Order:  A  Reform  The  White  Majority  and  Moneyed Interests  Oppose, See  Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  44DECEMBER  3,  1962•>«>'       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Cuba's  Challenge  to  Our  Sincerity  on  Inspection
A  petty  but  significant  instance  indicates  the  attitude  here
on  all  matters Cuban.   The  CIA  makes available to  the  press
a  daily  transcript of  radio  broadcasts;  it  is  enormously  useful,
for    it   contains   many   texts,   particularly   from   Communist
countries,  which  are  nowhere  else  available.    But  when  the
Cuban  government  November   26  broadcast  its  formal  reply
to  President  Kennedy's  press  conference  statement,  the  text
did  not  appear  next  day  in  this  daily  service.   The  transcript
for   official  use,  otherwise  identical  with  that  given  the  press,
did  contain  the  Cuban text.    Those  pages  were  simply  omitted
from  the  volume  as  given  out  to  newspapermen.   //  is  as  if,
with   crucial  negotiations  still  underway,  the  government  did
not  want  the  press  to  see  or  report  Cuba's  side  of  the  case  as
stated  in  its  own  words.   Not  that  the  press  would  have paid
much  attention anyway. For  that  same afternoon, Nov.  27,  the
text  was  made public  in New  York  as a United  Nations  docu-
ment.    No  reference to  it  appeared  on  the  wire  services,  and
as  this  is  written  on  the  morning  of  the  28th  I  have  yet  to
see  it  in  the  newspapers.    The  New   York   Times  prints  the
texts  of  statements  from  Moscow  and  from  Peking   but  not
from  Havana.    It  is  only  the  big  and  the  powerful'to  whom
we   give   attention.     Cuba   is   something   we  would   like   to
trample  under  our  feet.
What  Do "Other  Efforts"  Mean?
There   is  a  good   reason   for   keeping   the   document   from
the  American public.    It  has  been  conditioned  to  think  of  the
Cuban  leaders  as  some  kind  of  lunatics.   This  constant  brain
washing  would  be  interfered  with  if  people   read  for  them-
selves  what -the  Cubans  had  to  say.    This  latest  document,  as
may  be  seen  from  the  excerpt  in  the  box  on  this  page,  has  a
dignity  and  an.  eloquence   worthy  of  any  big  power's  state
papers.    It  also  touches  some  tender  spots,  particularly  on  the
question  of  international   law,  a  subject  on  which   we  ordi-
narily  like  to  lecture  other  countries,  and  on  the  question  of
ends  justifying  the  means,  on  which  we  otherwise  take  a  lofty
position.     The   Cubans,   in  this   formal   statement   signed   by
Castro  and  Dorticos,  want  to  know  what  Kennedy  meant  by
"other  efforts"  when  he  said  that  even  if  we  give  them  a  no-
invasion  pledge,  "We  will  not,  of  course,  abandon  the  politi-
cal,  economic  and  other   efforts   of  this  hemisphere"   against
Cuba.    "What  is  meant  by  'other   efforts'   against   Cuba?",
Havana   asked.     "Internal   subversion,   sabotage,  acts  of   ter-
rorism,  pirate  raids,  infiltration  by  CIA  agents,  the  landing
and  dropping  of  weapons  in  out  territory,  invasions  by  mer-
cenaries—in   fact   everything   which,   in   Pentagon   jargon,   is
termed   'paramilitary'   warfare.'..'
Cuba  says  it  will  agree  to  UN   inspection   on  its  territory
if  the  U.S.  in  return  will  let  the  UN  "verify  in  the  territory
of  the  United  States,  in  Puerto  Rico  and  in  other  places  where
12
                                                                                                                          1
Words  Which  Should  Make  Us  Blush
"Respect   for   international   law   is   an  indispensable
condition   for   the   co-existence  of  the   world's  nations,
independently  of  their  social  or  economic systems.    The
only   effective   guarantee  there  is  for   maintaining  in-
ternational  legality  and  guaranteeing  obedience  to  the
rules  of  law  is  respect  by  all  nations  for  the  established
standards.    In  this  hour  of sharp  confrontation between
two  conceptions of  society,  the  United  States  has  arro-
gated  to  itself  the  right  to  break  existing  international
rules  and  establish  new  formulas  at  its  own discretion.
We   believe   that   when   this   dangerous   situation   is
reached   and   a  country  decides,   entirely   on  its  own,
how  it  will  apply  the  law  in  its  relations  with  other
countries  of  the  world,  there  is  no  other  course  but  to
resist  these  pretensions  firmly.  The United  States tries
to  dictate  what  kinds  of  weapons  we  must  or  must  not
have.   North  American leaders  who  forced  us  to  spend
vast  resources  to  defend  ourselves  from  the  aggressions
of  which  we  have  been  the  object  for  the  four  years  of
our  Revolution's  progress  also  want  to  be  the  judges
to  decide  what  must  be  the  limit  of  the  armament  with
which  to  defend  our  freedom."
—From  Cuba's  Appeal  to the  United Nations,  Nov.  26.
attacks  on  Cuba  are  in  preparation,  the  dismantling of   the
training  camps  for  mercenaries,  spies,   saboteurs  and  terror-
ists;  of  the  centres  where  subversion  is  prepared;  and  of  the
bases  from  which  pirate  vessels  set  out  from  our  coasts."    If
such  reciprocal   inspection  were  established,   the  Cuban  note
says,  Cuba  would  "need  no  strategic  weapons,"  its  staff  of  for-
eign  military  technicians  "would  be  reduced  to  the  minimum"
and  "the  necessary conditions  would  be  created  for  the  normal
development    of   our   relations   with   the   countries   of   this
hemisphere."
This,  and  its  demand  that  we  end  the  policy  of  economic
strangulation,   a  policy  in  violation   of  international  law  and
inter-American  treaty,  is  the  heart  of  the  Cuban  reply.    It  is
no  wonder  the  American  government   does  not  want  it  fully
understood   by  our  own  people.    It  is  a  challenge  to  our  big-
ness  and  a  challenge  to  our  sincerity.    Inspection—we  have
stressed  it  over  and  over  again—is  the  key  word  in  all  our
peace  and  disarmament  programs.    Well,  here  is  a  chance  to
demonstrate  it.    We  don't  want  strategic  weapons   in  Cuba;
the  strategic  weapons  have  been  removed.    We  want  to  in-
spect  and  be  sure.    Cuba  says  she  will  allow  inspection  if  we
in  turn  allow  the  UN  to  verify  the  dismantling  of  the  hostile
camps  aimed  against  her.    What  could  be  more  fair?    What
better  opportunity   to  give  the  world  a  demonstration  in  the
application   of  our  favorite  panacea—mutual  inspection?    Or
have  we,  in  dealing  with  Cuba,  given  up  fairness  for  force,
in  the  immemorial  manner  of  the  strong  confronting the  weak?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  3,1962
Either  A  Strong  China  or  A  Strong  Tibet  Would  Have  The  Same  Border  Claims
A  Longer  and  Calmer  View  of the  Dispute  Between  India  and  China
A  few  elementary observations  may  help  us  to  keep  a  sense
of  balance  in  the  Sino-Indian  dispute.     India  and  China  en-
joyed  several  millennia  of  peace  in  the  past  because  they  were
too  far  apart  to  clash.     In   recent  years  a  common   struggle
against  Western   imperialism  brought  them  together,  but  once
India  had  achieved  her  freedom,  friction  with  China  made  its
appearance.    The  Indians  found  the  Chiang  Kai-shek  govern-
ment  haughty.    The  main  point  of   friction   was  over  Tibet
which  had  been  a  British  sphere  of  influence.
The  Manchus  were  weak,  and  content  with  theoretical  su-
zerainty  over  Tibet.    But  the  upsurge  of  Chinese  nationalism,
first under  the  Kuomintang  and  then  the  Communists  spelled
trouble  not  only  for  Indian  trading  rights  in  Tibet  but  also
for  the  control  India  had  inherited  from  the  British  over  the
peoples  related  to  the  Tibetans  in  creed  and  race  in  Ladakh,
Sikkim,  Bhutan,  Nepal  and  other  frontier  areas.    Sun  Yat-sen
had  called  for  a  United  Chinese  Republic  of  "Manchus,   Mon-
gols,  Tibetans,  Tartars  and  Chinese.  .  . ."   While  the  Tibetans
have  always  struggled   against  China  for   autonomy  and   re-
garded    Dr.    Sun's   formulation   as   Chinese   imperialism,   a
strong  Tibet  would  create  similar  border  problems  for   India.
H.   E.  Richardson's  new  Short   History   of   Tibet   reminds  us
that  one  of  the  first  acts  of  the  Tibetan   regime  after   India
became  independent  was to  demand  "the  'return'  of  what  were
described  as  Tibetan  territories'  from  Assam  to  Ladakh.  .  .  ."
Grim  Fact  The  US  Press  Hides
"Mr.   Nehru  is   not   the   only   Premier  to   whom  the
Chinese  have  set  a  puzzle.    As  the  American and  Brit-
ish   military   missions   gather   in   Delhi,   the   West   is
startling!}'  confronted with  the  possibility that  it  could
itself  once  again  become  involved  in  a  war  with  China.
.   .  .   India   has   asked   both  America  and  Britain  for
combat  equipment  which  no  Indian  at  present  is  trained
to  use.    This  implies, if  the  war  is  to  continue,  that  it
will  have  to  be  used  by  Americans  and  British."
—New   Delhi  dispatch,  London   Observer   Nov.   25.
A  Long  Abandoned Trail
The   immediate   issue   between   India   and   China   lies   in
Ladakh  where  the  Chinese  built  a  road  across  the  Aksai  Chin
plateau,  its northeastern  corner.    This  high,  bleak  land  where,
as  Nehru  once  said,  no   people   live  and  no  blade  of   grass
grows,  is  claimed  by  both   China  and   India  but  neither  had
ever  administered   the  area.    The   boundary  had   never   been
marked,   though    Ladakh   passed    to   British   control   in   the
1840s.    The   contested  Aksai  Chin   region  of   Ladakh  which
juts  out  in  an  enclave  between  Tibet  and  Sinkiang  is,  accord-
ing  to  Tibor   Mende's   China  and  Her  Shadow,    "inaccessible
from  the  Indian  side  over  the  major  part  of  the  year."     An
old  trail  across  Aksai  Chin   offers  an  all-year  round  route  be-
tween  Sinkiang (Chinese  Turkestan)   and  Tibet  but  had  "long
been  abandoned  by  traders  and  other  travellers  because  of  the
dreaded  summer  heat  and  absence  of  water"   (Asian   Survey,
Oct.    1962,   Ladakh   and   the   Sino-Indian   Border   Crisis  by
Margaret  E.  Fisher  and  Leo  E.  Rose).
Once  before  in  the  early  18th   century  the  Dsungaris   had
used  this  route  to  invade  Tibet  from  the  West.    The  Chinese
Communists   used   it   in   Oct.   1950   to   occupy  Tibet.     From
China  the  supply  route  through  the  Khampa  country  was  tur-
bulent  with  guerrillas.     The   best   route,   through   the   south,
went   through   Indian   controlled   territory.    The   Aksai   Chin
offered  the  Chinese  a  supply  route  from  the  West  under  their
control.     It  consolidated  their  hold  on  Tibet.    They   built  a
road  across  it  in  1956-7  which  the  Indians  did  not  learn  about
until  two  years  later,  itself  a  commentary  on  their  claim  that
this  was  their  territory.    Indeed  Chou  En-lai  in  his  Nov.   15
letter  to  the  Afro-Asian   bloc  claimed,  "It   was  only  from  a
pictorial  magazine  published  in  China  that  the  Indian  govern-
ment  came  to  know  that  China  had  built  the  highway."     Ever
since  the  main  trend  of  Sino-Indian  negotiation   and  conflict,
down  to  the  present  unilateral  cease-fire,  has  been  an  effort  by
Peking  to  swap   recognition  of  the  British  drawn   McMahon
line  in  the  northeast  if  India  in  turn  would  recognize  China's
claim  to  the  Aksai  Chin  area  of  Ladakh  in  the   northwest.
This  would   exchange  land  useless  to  India  for   recognition
of  a  boundary  no  Chinese  government  has  ever  accepted  be-
fore.     Indeed   the  Kuomintang   regime  on  Formosa   protested
in  recent  weeks  against   U.S.  support  of  the  McMahon   line.
But  nationalistic  pride  and  warlike  fever  in  Indian   block   a
sensible  settlement,  as  does  the  desire  of  our  cold  warriors  to
draw  India  into  the  cold  war.
How  the  Conflict  Looked  to  Peking  and  Pakistan  Before  the  Cease-Fire
'-With   India's  present  strong  foreign  backing  it   is  now
felt  here   [in  Peking]  that  the  conflict   may  simply  'hiber-
nate'  and  flare  up  again  with  the  spring  thaw.    A  Chinese
official   told  me  disgustedly  yesterday:  'As  long  as  the  In-
dians  go  on  attacking  us  they  will  get  anything  they  want
from  the  United  States.   They're  making millions of  dollars
out  of  these  skirmishes.    They'll  probably  go  on  forever.'
"The  word  'skirmishes',  while  never   used  in   official   re-
ports,   is  typical  of   the   tendency  which  China  has   shown
throughout,  and still  shows,  to  minimize  the  conflict.  News-
paper  coverage   is   more  political  than  military,  and  even
Chinese  successes  have  constantly   been  played  down.  .  .  .
On   October  23,  when  the   fighting   was   said   to  be  at   its
height   the   Communist  Party   organ,   the   'People's  Daily',
discussed  agricultural  problems ....  It  is  considered   cer-
tain  by  foreign  observers   that  it  was  never  China's  inten-
tion  to  force  a  military  decision  and  that  her  troops   went
into  action  only  to  impress   upon  India  the  wisdom  of  an
early   negotiated  revision  of  the   Sino-Indian  border.  .  .  .
"Now  that  talks  have  become  most  unlikely,  China  finds
herself  holding  useless  territory  in  the  Eastern  sector  and
still  not  in  full  control  of  those   tracts  she  looks  upon  as
rightfully  hers  in  the  West."
—Jacques  Marcus  of  Agence  France-Presse  from   Peking
in  the  London   Sunday    Times,  Nov.   4.
"He  [President  Ayub]  has  given  a  frank  indication  that
India  is  making an  exaggerated  fuss  about  her  conflict  with
China.    This  incidentally  is  an  opinion  shared  by  a number
of   Indians.     New   Delhi   newspapers   have   commented  as-
tringently  that  the  scale  of  frontier  fighting  does  not justify
the  drastic  expedient   of   declaring   a  state  of   emergency,
nor  warrant  Mr.  Nehru's   gloomy   comparisons  with  Dun-
kirk.    Pakistanis  .  .  .  are  united  in  believing  that  India  is
using   the  bogy   of   the   Chinese   Communist  aggression   to
obtain   Western    arms   for   the   purpose   of   blackmailing
Pakistan."     —London  Sunday  Times  from  Karachi,  Nov.  11.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  3, 1962
How  Do  You  Get  A  Reform  The  White  Majority  and   Moneyed  Interests   Oppose?
Some  of  the  Realities  Behind  JFK's  Order  Against  Racial  Housing  Bars
The   President's  executive  order   against  racial  segregation
in  housing would  be  a  good  place  to  begin  a  class  in  the  reali-
ties  of  American government.    If  the  U.S.  were a  pure  democ-
racy,  i.e.  ruled  by  majority  will,  it  is  unlikely  that  such  an
order  would   be  approved.    The   point  on  which  the  white
majority  in  the  North  comes  closest  to  the  white  majority  in
the  South  is  in  prejudice  against  having  Negroes   as   neigh-
bors.    If  the  U.S.  were  simply  ruled  by  a  capitalist  class,  cer-
tainly  no   such  order  would   have  been   issued.     The   upper
reaches  of  American  wealth  are  largely  white,  Protestant  and
Anglo-Saxon.    Negroes  are  not  the  only  group  against  which
the  gates  of  their  exclusive  suburbs  have  been  shut  by  racial
covenants.*
Obviously  the  wheels  and  pulleys  of  our  political  machinery
are   more   complex   than   those   conjured   up   by   words   like
democratic  or  capitalist.    The  order  reflects  the  rising  power
of  a  Negro  minority  holding  the  balance  of  power  in  many
areas;  foreign  policy  considerations  vis  a  vis  newly  emerging
African   and  Asian  nations,  and  the  influence—however  im-
perfectly   realized—of   the  national  ideal,  which   is   equality.
Only  On  and  From  the  President
The  order  also  tells  us  a  good  deal  about  the  nature  of  the
Presidency  and   the   President.     Congress   would   never   pass
such  an  order.    It  is  not  only  that  the  Southerners  occupy  too
many  strategic  committee  posts.    The  white  small  town  busi-
ness  man  and  lawyer  who  is  the  dominant  element   in  Con-
gress  is  the  very  type  who  has  all  along  favored  racial  cove-
nants  in  housing.  It  is only  on  the  President  that  the  equation
of   minority   votes,   foreign   policy   and   national   ideal   could
work.    And  it  is  only  from  the  Presidency,  with  its  vast  reser-
voir  of  unspecified  powers,  that  such  an  order  could  issue.
Again,  the  nature  and  timing  of  the  order  reveal  the  char-
acter  of   the  President   himself.     In   his   campaign   Kennedy
challenged  Eisenhower  to  wipe  out  discrimination  in  public
housing  "by a  stroke  of  the  pen"  as recommended  by the  Civil
*In  a  case   uncovered  by  the  Civil  Rights  Commission  in
its   1961  report  on  housing  applicants  for  homes  in   Grosse
Point,   Mich.,  had  to  pass  a   screening   system   under  which
"a  passing   grade  was  50  points.    However,  those  of  Polish
descent  had  to'score  55  points;  southern  Europeans,  includ-
ing  those  of  Italian,  Greek,  Spanish  or  Lebanese  origin  had
to  score  65  points,  and  those  of  Jewish  faith  had  to  score  85
points.    Negroes  and  Orientals   were   excluded   altogether."
A  Subject   in  Which  AH Negroes  Are  Ph.D.'s
"We  American  Negroes   know  something   about   the
difficulties  of  getting  our  nation  to  move  on political,
economic   and  social  inequalities  and  injustices  where
race  and  color  are  involved.    In  fact  most  American
Negroes,  whether they  be  semi-literate  or  graduates  of
our  finest  colleges,  are  all  doctors  of  philosophy on  this
issue."              —Roy  Wilkins  of  the  NAACP,   Nov.  24.
Rights  Commission   11  months   earlier.    But  Kennedy   him-
self  waited  22  months  before  doing  so.   He  waited  until  after
election.    Did  he  think  it  would  hurt  more  in  the  South  than
it  would  help  him  in  urban  Negro  areas?    And  with  all  his
flair  for   publicity,  he  also—perhaps  shrewdly   sizing  up  the
real  feelings  of  the  white  majority—announced   it  on  a  day
when  the  news  was  overshadowed  by  a  victory  over   Castro.
The  order,   as  issued,  reflected  Mr.   Kennedy's   innate  and
extreme  caution.    The   order  went  beyond  the   Civil   Rights
Commission  recommendations  of  1959  to  Eisenhower  but  fell
short  of  the  Commission's  1961  recommendations  to  Kennedy.
The  former  were  limited  to  public  housing,   while  the  Ken-
nedy  order  goes  beyond  public  to  private  housing  financed  by
FHA   and  VA,  or  roughly   a  fourth  of  new  housing   starts.
But  the  majority  on  the  Commission   wanted   to  extend   the
order  to  cover  all  financial  institutions  under  Federal  super-
vision   in   the  home   mortgage   field:   almost   all   the   savings
and  loan  institutions  and  most  of  the  nation's  banks.    But  of
the  two  Southerners   on  the  Commission,   one  dissented   en-
tirely  from  this  recommendation   while  the  other  would   have
extended  the  order  only  to  savings  and  loan  associations.  The
order   as  issued   followed   the   Commission's    lowest   common
Southern   denominator.
The   limited   character   of  the  order   may  create   difficulties
in   real  estate;  far-sighted   men  in  the  home  financing  field
like  Earl  Schwulst  of'New  York's  Bowery  Savings   (the   na-
tion's  largest  mutual)  wanted  an  across  the  board  order.    On
the  other  hand,  a  more  sweeping  order  might  have   created
difficulties   in   the   courts.     Administration    spokesmen    have
called  this  only  a  first  step,  and  as  such  it  represents  progress.
But  it  is  still  only  the  wealthier  Negro  few  who  will  benefit
by  it.   Most Negroes  are  still  too poor  for  FHA  or  VA  hous-
ing,  and  not  many  are  eager,  anyway, to  subject  themselves  to
slights  from  white- neighbors.
Four  Years  Experience  in  New  York  Allays  White  Fears,   Sours  Negro   Hopes
"One  builder  the  other  day  in  a  part  of  New  York  said
he  would  be  very  much  against   the  housing   order  because
it   would  hurt  his  development,  and  he  was  reminded  that
there  was  a  more  stringent  law  in  effect  in  New  York  at
the  time.    So  I  think  some  of  the  fears  have  been   exag-
gerated."
—President   Kennedy   at  press  conference,  Nov.   21.
'Two  cities,  Pittsburgh   and  New   York,  have  had  ordi-
nances  prohibiting discrimination  in  the  sale  and  rental  of
private  housing  for  several  years.  .  . .  These  are  some  con-
clusions  after  visiting  Pittsburgh  and  New  York:
"1.  The  number  of  Negroes   who  had  used  the  law   was
infinitesimal.     2.  Those   Negroes  who  used  the   law   were
highly   educated  with  high   incomes;   the   great   mass   of
Negroes  had  never  heard  of  the  law.    3.  There  had  been
few—in  most  cases,  no—reprisals  .or  adverse  effects  when
Negroes  have  used  the  law  to  gain  a  home  in  a  white  area.
Whites  have  not  moved  out.    4.  Real  estate   dealers   have
developed  techniques  for  getting  around  the  law...  .  ."
"In  four  years  the  [New  York]  Commission  has  satisfied
only   437  complaints,  nearly   all  from  Negroes.    Only  127*
of  those  who  claimed  discrimination  received  the  apartment
or  house  they  originally   wanted.    As  one  real  estate  man
quipped,  'At  that  rate  it  would  take  about  16,500  years  to
integrate   the   1.8  million  apartment   units   in   New   York
City.
1  2  *
—From  a  survey   by  Staff    Writer  Hugh  Wells  in  the  Washington  Evening  Star,  Nov.  22.
177
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 3, 1962
San  Francisco  Chronicle's  "Our   Man  Hoppe"  Unveils  A  Most  Fiendish   Plot
Why  Not  Give  The  Kremlin  A  Peace  Scare  For  A  Change?
By  Arthur   Hoppe *
Sound  the  tocsins!   Gird  your  loins!   Man  the  battlements!
We  are  face  to  face  with  another  Peace  Scare.
As  you   will   recall,   Peace   Scares   invariably  follow   War
Threats.  And  while not  quite  as exciting,  they're pretty  awful.
"Communists   Launch   Peace   Offensive"   shout  the   headlines
and   everybody  gets  mighty  worried.
This  time,  the  evidence  of  a  Peace  Scare  is  unmistakable.
Mr.  Khrushchev  is  saying  what  Russia  needs  is  a  little  more
Capitalism  around  there.   Mr.  Castro  is going  around  moodily
kicking   the   tires   of   his   IL-28   bombers   and   claiming   he
wouldn't   have  any  such  lousy  old  merchandise  cluttering   up
his  parking  lots.    And  over  in  India,  just  when  Mr.   Nehru
was  getting   ready  to  defend   pacifism   to  the   last  man,  Red
China  says  it  was  only  kidding.
From  Bomb  Shelter  to  Broker's   Office
Obviously,  the  whole  thing  is  a  Communist  plot.    All  the
experts  agree  on  this.    The  experts  have  long  since  held  the
Communists  do  this  to  us  to  "keep  us  off  balance."     Which
it  certainly  does.    One  minute  we  are  all  in  our  backyards
digging  shelters.  And  the  next  we  are all  down  at  our  brokers
selling  our  missile  stocks.    This  is  very  hard  on  all  of  us.
So  what  do  the  experts  advise  when  we  are  hit  by  a  Peace
Scare?   They  advise:  "We  must not  let our guard  down!"    Or
to  vary  things  a  little:  "We  must  keep  our  guard  up!"
Thus  we  always  keep  our  guard  up.    Which  now  costs  us
$50  billion  a  year.    And  while  this  is  very  good  for  missile
stocks,  I,  personally,  am  getting  a  bit  jangled  from  being  buf-
feted  this  way and  that  by Communist  War  Threats  and  Com-
munist  Peace   Scares.
So  out  of  sheer  jittery  irritability  I  have  come  up  with  a
fiendishly  clever  plan:  This  time,  when  we  consider  what  to
do  with  our  guard,  let's  drop  it.
First,  Mr.  Kennedy  announces  that  what  we  need  is  a  little
Communism  around  here.  Prime  Minister  Macmillan  prompt-
ly  denounces  him  as  "an  Adam  Smith  revisionist."     If  not  a
"Norman   Thomas   deviationary."     And   headlines  bloom   in
Pravda  about  the  "irreconcilable  split  in  the  Capitalistic  bloc."
Intellectuals  We  Can  Do  Without
"One  of  the  young  defense  intellectuals   tried  to  ex-
plain  this  'counterforce  doctrine'  in  simple  terms:  This
country  and  the   Soviet   Union  are  like  two  men  with
cocked  pistols.    Both  know  that  if  one  trigger  is pulled
the  other  will  be  pulled.    Both  want  to  be  able  to  aim
at  the  heart.    But both  have  a  mutual interest  in avoid-
ing  death.    So both  will  want  to  be  able  to  aim  at  the
shoulder,  say,  or  the  hand  holding  the  pistol,  as  in  one
of  those  duels  where  both  duelists  want  to  stop   short
of  killing.    The  trouble  is,  of  course,  that   to  hit   the
shoulder  and  not  the  heart  you've  got  to  have  a  damn
good  aim.    And  if  you  aim  at   the   shoulder,   and   the
other   fellow   aims  at   your  heart,  you've  got   to  have
another  bullet  left  to  aim  at  his  heart."
—Saturday   Evening  Post's  Stewart   Alsop   explain-
ing  McNamara's   New  Strategy,  Dec.  1.
And  if  both  sides  only  hit   each  other's  "shoulder"?
What  do  they  do?    Shake  hands  and  try   peaceful  co-
existence?     Or  what   if   both   sides   use  that   "second
bullet"?     What   do  we  do  then?     Call  off  the   game
on  account  of  (radioactive)  rain?    We  never   thought
we'd  live  to  long  for  the  days  when  the  Pentagon  was
run  by  just  plain  safely  unintellectual  brass  hats.
* From   the   San  Francisco   Chronicle,   Nov.  22.
This  sets  the  stage.    Next,  a  group  of  young  Turkish   offi-
cers  inspect  those  old  Jupiter  missiles  we  gave  them.     After
thumping  the  sides  and  slamming  the  doors  they  angrily  de-
mand  we  remove  these  rusty  junkpiles  from  their  landscape.
Izvestia  nervously  decries  this  as  "a  typical  Wall  Street  power
play."
As  a  final  fillip,  we  withdraw  all  our   troops   12.5  miles
from  Miami,  toss  half   our  nuclear  bombs   in  the   ocean  and
convert  the  Pentagon  into  Disneyland  East.    Which  wouldn't
cost   very  much.
Talk  about  Peace  Scares!  This  would  frighten  the  Kremlin
witless.    "What  are  those  Capitalist  imperialists  up  to  now?"
Mr.  Khrushchev  would  mumble  between  gnawn  nails.  "What
secret  threat  lies  behind  these  devious  machinations!"     And
he  would  toss  and  turn  twice  as  much  nightly  as  we  are  now.
Yes,  sir,  let's  give  those  Communists  a  taste  of  their  own
medicine.  But  meanwhile,   remember:  It's  perfectly  logical  to
be  scared  of  peace  these  days.    Just  don't  panic.
Remember  Our  Standing   Offer    of  Free  Sample  Copies   To   Friends   If   You   Send   Stamped   Long   Envelopes
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .
Street
City   ............—.........................Zone........_...State....................
12/3/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name
Street   .........
City  ..........._.........................Zone........_..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Teg  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone'i  Weekly.    Second  Clan  Portage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday  In  December
and  the  first  in  January  at   E618  Kebnuka  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington.  D.  G.   An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.
Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  1C.  Stone.   Subscription:  $6  in  the  U.  S.;   $6  in  Canada:   SIO  elsewhere.
*                                                           Air  Mail  rates:  $16 to  Europe;  (20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED