I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962nov26.pdf

============================================================

Disarmament  "Ambush"  on  Capitol  Hill,  P.  3
Documentary:  From  the  Southern  Regional  Council  Report  Criticizing  The  President  and  the  FBI,  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  43
NOVEMBER  26,  1962
= '»'       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
A  New  Proposal  for  Ensuring   Peace*
The  narrow straits  between  Soviet  Siberia and  the  American
Aleutians  are  no  more  distant,  and  if  anything  less   desolate,
than  the  Himalayan frontiers  between  India  and  China.    But
in  all  these  years  of  Soviet-American  tension,  the  border  be-
tween  them  has  never  been  the  scene  of   fighting.   It  is  only
non-nuclear  powers   like  India  and   China  which   indulge   in
such  clashes.    The  nuclear  powers  are  more  careful.
At  the United Nations a  Brazilian  proposal  for  a  denuclear-
ized   Latin  America   has  just  been   withdrawn;  it   had   been
hoped   that  it  might  bridge  the  way  to  a  Cuban   settlement.
Would  it  not  be  better—judging  by  the  behavior  of  the  nu-
clear  powers—to  try  nuclearizing  those  areas  of  the  world  still
rendered  unstable  by  the  possession   of  conventional weapons
only?    China  will  soon  be  making atom  bombs  anyway;  India
is  talking  of  total  war  and  calling for  massive aid.    Why  risk
waiting  while  their  conventional  war  escalates?    Why   not  a
Russo-American  agreement   to  outfit  both  sides  as  rapidly  as
possible  with  thermonuclear  weapons?    With  them  in  hand,
Mao  might  become  as  sober  as Khrushchev,  Nehru  as cautious
as  Kennedy.
As  The  Bible  Predicted
There are,  of  course,  complications.  Pakistan  would  demand
nuclear arms,  too,  if  we  gave  them  to  India.    If  we  gave  them
to  the  Pakistanis,  the  Russians  would   have  to  give  them   to
the  Afghans.    This  would  bring  nuclear  weapons  to  the  gates
of  the  Middle  East,  where  Moscow   and  Washington    would
race  to  see who  could  give  them  first  to  the  Arabs  while  Israel
was  left  to  make  its  own.    Eventually   everybody  would   sit
peacefully,   as  the  Bible  predicted,  beneath  his  own  fig  tree,
with  a  missile  snugly  beside  him.
Difficulties  would  still  arise.     In  nuclearizing Latin  Amer-
ica,   trouble  might  be  encountered  in  persuading  the  Russians
to  take  those  missiles back  to  Cuba.    The  peaceful  settlement
of  disputes  among  thermonuclear powers  also  presents  prob-
lems.    The  Americans  and  the  Russians  solve  theirs—as   the-
recent   Cuban   crisis  showed—by   a  simple   rule.    Whenever
one  side  gets  exasperated  enough  to  reach  for  the  button  that
may  mean  extinction,  the  other  side  backs  down.
This,  however,   cannot   be  done  too  often;  it  makes   some
people  nervous.    Yet   disputes   requiring  peaceful   settlement
arise  all  the  time.    For  instance,  only  a  few  weeks  ago  we
forced  the  Russians  by  this  peaceful  means  to  withdraw  their
missiles.    But  now  a  new  dispute  has  arisen  over  the   11-28
bombers.     Everybody  admits  these   are  obsolete.    But   "it  is
felt  here,"  i.e.  in  Washington,  as  Chalmers  Roberts   reported
in  the  Washington   Post   (Nov.   20)   that  while  the  bombers
With  Three  Hand  Grenades
"If  the  FBI  had failed  to  smash  a  Cuban  plot  geared
to  spreading  death,  terror  and destruction  in  the  Metro-
politan   Area,  Government   sources   said   the   three   ar-
rested  saboteurs  planned  to:
"Destroy   national  defense  materials,  sites  and  util-
ities  in  New  York  City.  .  .  .  Blow  up  gasoline  and  oil
refineries.  .  ,  .  The expected   result  .  .  .   $100,000,000
worth  of  damage.  .  .  .  Plant  incendiary  bombs  in     ...
New   York  City's  .  .  .  largest  department  stores.  .  .  .
Train   10  other  pro-Cast roites  in  the   art   of   sabotage.
These  10 were  already  undergoing training clandestine-
ly.  ...     The  expected  result:  a  stepped  up  program  of
sabotage   that   in  time  might  completely  paralyze  the
city.   The  blowing  up  of  bridges  and  subway  facilities,
for  example,  might  have  been  part  of  the  plot  for  the
future.
"In  order  to  accomplish these  acts  the  saboteurs  had
the  following  arsenal:
"Six   French   delayed  action   incendiary  devices;   12
acid  type  fuses;   three  US  Army  hand  grenades;   two
pistols,  three  loaded  pistol  clips;  instructions  in  French
and  English  [not  Spanish?].  .  .  .
—New  York  Journal-American, Nov.  18.
* Written  before  the  President's  press  conference  of  Nov.
20  to  meet  an  early  Thanksgiving  deadline.
are  not   "of   major  military  importance"  if   they  are   not  re-
moved   "the   U.S.   will   seem   to  have   accepted   a   diplomatic
backdown."    Should  we  threaten   again  to  press  the  button?
A  way  could  be  found  to  prevent  too  frequent  resort  to  the
button.    An  international  regulatory  commission  could  be  set
up,  presided  over  by  some  respected  savant  of  thermonuclear
war.   (Who   better  than  Herman  Kahn?).    This   commission
would  establish  a  rationing,  or  time  limit,   system.    Thus  it
might  decide  that  no  nation  could  lawfully threaten extinction
more  than  once  in  any  six  month  period.
*       *       *
Footnote  on  Two  Prickly  Satellites:  The  U.S.  first  supported
and  then  shelved  the  Brazilian  resolution   at  the  UN   for  a
nuclear   free   Latin   America   after   Castro   moved   to   include
Puerto  Rico  and  the  Canal  Zone  in  it.    Castro's  inclusion  of
Puerto  Rico  was  demagogy,  not  diplomacy.    It  follows  from
the   Castroite   line   that   Puerto   Rico   must   be    "liberated."
The   Brazilians,  who  have  been   trying  hard  to  help  Castro,
must  have  been  exasperated.    It  is as if  he  were  trying to  make
settlement  impossible,  though  the  next  step—an  oil   blockade
--would  bring  the  collapse  of  the  Cuban  economy.   One  of
the  beneficiaries  of  1'idel's  obduracy  was  Adenauer.     In   the
House  of  Commons  Nov.   12  Labor  Party  leaders were already
citing  the  Brazilian  resolution  as precedent  for  something  like
the  Rapacki  Plan  to  denuclearize  Central  Europe.    This  would
end  Germany's  chances  of  getting  nuclear  weapons.  Adenauer
fears  detente  anywhere until  that  aim  is  achieved.  The  tougher
Fidel  is,  the  better  Adenauer  likes  it.                             5> a.m.  Nov.  20
I 7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  26,1962
Report  on  Albany,  Ga.,  Proposes  New  Civil  Rights  Federal  Police  Agents  to  Replace  FBI
President  Criticized  for  Failing  to  Give  Moral  Leadership  in  the  South
The   deepening    Mississippi    crisis,  and   the   prospect   of
worse   to  come  in  Alabama,  gives  special   interest   to  the
moving    report   just   released   by   the   respected   Southern
Regional   Council   (5  Forsyth   St.,   W.,  Atlanta  3,  Ga.)   on
the  militant  struggle  of   the  Negroes  in  Albany,  Go..,   for
their  rights.    It   was  written  by  Howard   Zinn,   professor
of   history   and   social  science   at  Spelman   College  and   its
concluding  observations  on  the  weaknesses  of  the  FBI   and
the  President  apply   everywhere  in  the  South:
"There  is  a  considerable  amount  of  distrust  among  Albany
Negroes  for  local  members  of  the  FBI.    'They're  a  bunch  of
racists,'  a  young  Negro   told  me  bitterly.    FBI  men  appear
to  Albany   Negroes   as  vaguely-interested  observers  of   injus-
tice,  who  diffidently  write  down  complaints   and  do  no  more.
With  all  the  clear  violations  by  local  police  of  constitutional
rights,  with  undisputed   evidence  of  beatings  by  sheriffs  and
deputy   sheriffs,  the  FBI  has  not   made   a  single  arrest  on
behalf   of  Negro  citizens.    The  one  arrest  made  by  the   FBI
in  connection  with  the  Albany  situation  came  in  early   Sep-
tember   [1962],   and  this   when   ah   FBI   man   himself    was
attacked  by  a  white  man  near  the  site  of  a  burned   church.
FBI  and  Cops  Too  Close
"In   its    1961   volume,  Justice,   the   Commission   on   Civil
Rights  implied  that  the  FBI  may  be  fundamentally  incapable
of  enforcing  the  civil  rights  of  American  citizens,  and   sug-
gested  the  possibility  of  'a  new  administrative  arrangement
within  the  Dept.  of Justice  to  ease  the  problem  of  FBI  agents
having  to  investigate   police  officers   with   whom   they   work
daily  on  other  cases.'
"One  solution  might   be  the  creation   of  a  special   corps  of
federal  agents—similar  to  the  T-men  used  by  the  Treasury
Dept.—for  the  sole  purpose  of  enforcing  federally  guaranteed
constitutional  rights  in  many  parts  of  the   country.
"As  for  the  President,  he  could  play,  but  so  far   has  not
played,  a  key  role  in  crises  such  as  Albany.    The  Commis-
sion  of  Civil  Rights  last  year  called  for  'the  exertion  of  lead-
ership  by  the  President.'
"President   Kennedy's   first   substantive    public   statement
came  after  eight  months  of  trouble  in  Albany  when,  respond-
ing  to  a  question   at  his  Aug.  1,  1962,  press  conference,  he
called  the  situation  'unsatisfactory',  declared  he  could  not  un-
derstand   why  Albany  city   officials  would  not  negotiate  with
Negroes  and  said:  'We  are  going  to  attempt  as  we  have  in
the  past  to try  to  provide  a  satisfactory  solution  for  the  pro-
tection  of  the  constitutional  rights  of  the  people  of  Albany,
and  we  will  continue  to  do  so.'    The  trouble  with  this  latter
statement  was that  'in  the  past'  the  national  government  had
Just  One of  the  World's  Most  Powerful   People
"Perhaps  there  is  a  quality  of  harshness   in  the  re-
port.    If   so,  it   may  come  from  some   of   the   things   I
heard  and  saw.    I  recall  particularly driving  from  dirt
road  onto  dirt   road  deep  into  the   cotton  and  peanut
land  of  Lee  County  to  talk  to  James  Mays,  a   teacher
and  farmer.    He   showed   me  the   damage   done   by  30
bullets  which,  hours  before,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,
had  been  fired  through  doors  and  windows  and  crashed
into  the  walls  around  the  heads  of  19  sleeping   persons,
most  of  them  children.   With  the  coming  of  dawn  he
had  quickly  lettered  a  sign  of  protest   and  stood   with
it   out   on  the   main  road   to   Leesburg   in   front   of   a
Negro  school.    It  was  clear   that   although   he  was  a
member  of  a  nation  whose  power  stretched   around  the
globe  and  into  space,  James  Mays  was  on  his  own."
—Howard  Zinn's  postscript   to  his  report   on  Albany.
done  extremely  little,  and  if  its  future  attempts  were  to  be
of  the  same  magnitude,  this  was  a  puny  promise   indeed.
"In  another  press  conference   on  Sept.  14,  1962,   again  in
response to  a  question,  President  Kennedy  strongly  denounced
the  burning  of  the  Negro  churches  in  Lee  and  Terrell  Coun-
ties.    This  was  commendable.    But  it  also  indicates  the  level
of  tolerance   at  which  our  leaders—and  perhaps  most  white
Americans—operate.    They  will  be  aroused  by  open   violence,
particularly  against  places  of  worship   (Governor  Vandiver of
Georgia   offered   a   $250  reward   for  the  apprehension  of   the
arsonists).    But  they  will  not  be  made   sufficiently  indignant
by  mass jailings, by the  deprivation  of free  speech  and  assem-
bly,  by  beatings   and   intimidation,   by   the   perpetuation  of
segregation.   The  nation  as  a  whole—not  only  the  President
—needs  to  expand  its  capacity  for  outrage.
"Only  once  in  the  Albany  troubles  did  the  national  admin-
istration  show  a  real  burst  of  energy;  that  was  when  Martin
Luther  King  was  jailed  on  July  10.   The  President  asked  for
a  report,  the  Attorney   General  got  busy,  and  the  next  day
King  was  out  of  jail.    But  there  was  no  such  deep   concern
for  the  hundreds  of  ordinary  citizens  in  Albany  who  went  to
jail  for   basically   the   same   reason.     Special. favors   to   dis-
tinguished   individuals  are  too  easy  a  substitute  for  genuine
assistance  to  troubled  groups.  Jackie  Robinson,  who last  sum-
mer  received  elaborate  greetings  from  the  President  on  the
occasion   of  his  election  to  the  Baseball  Hall  of  Fame,  noted
the   Albany   situation  and  wrote,  'I'd  rather  have   freedom
than flowers'."
What  the  Federal Government  Could  Do  To  End  Police  State  Practices  in  Albany
"1.  Begin   immediate  prosecution   under   Section   242   of
local   officials   who  have  deprived  Negroes   of   their  consti-
tuional  rights.  Such  trials,  since  they  involve  misdemeanors,
do  not  even  require  grand  jury  indictments.  .  .  .  The  FBI
has  in  its  hands  piles  of   affidavits  from  Albany  citizens—
accumulated   over  a  period  of   nine  months—testifying   to
violations  of  Federal  laws.  .  .  .
"2.  Station  in  the  area  a  substantial  number  of   Federal
agents   to  protect  citizens   from  intimidation,  beating  and
false  arrest.    Such  agents  should  not  confine  themselves   to
standing  by  and  taking  notes  .  .  .  but  should  have  the  au-
thority  to  make  arrests  on  the   spot.
"3.  Go  into  Federal  court  and  ask  for  injunctions  to  pre-
vent   local   officers   from   a)   enforcing   segregation,    and  b)
interfering  with  peaceful  assembly,  picketing  and speech....
"4.  The  President  should  address  himself  directly  to  the
people    of    Albany,    white    and    Negro,    speaking    forth-
rightly....
"5.  There  is  a  procedure  outlined  in  the  U.S.  Attorney's
Manual,  Title   10,  Civil   Rights  Division,   which  says   that
where  there  is  insufficient  evidence  for  Federal  prosecution
but  'repetitive  civil  rights  violations'  exist,  the  U.S.  Attor-
ney  may  initiate  a  mediative  conference  'with   responsible
local  officials.  .  .  .'
"6.  The  President  should  refuse  to  appoint   segregationist
Federal   judges.    Judgeships  left   vacant  are  preferable  to
those  filled  for  life  by  men  who,  on  their  public records,  are
opponents  of  racial  equality.
"7.  The  Commission  on  Civil  Rights  might  well  investi-
gate   the   Albany   situation   and  make   appropriate  recom-
mendations.    There  are  a  hundred  potential  Albanys  in  the
Deep  South.
"These   proposed   actions   require   boldness,  imagination,
vigorous   initiative   —   precisely   those   qualities   that   were
promised  by  Mr.  Kennedy  in  his  campaign  for  the   Presi-
dency.    As  yet, however, no  new  Frontiers  have  been  carved
out  in  the  social  wilderness  which  surrounds Albany."
—From  the  Conclusions   to  the  Zinn  Report   on  Albany.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  26,1962
Goldwater  and  Thurmond Join  Hands  With  Symington  and  Jackson  in  Hearings
A New Sounding Board for Military-Industrial Complex Against  Disarmament
Too  little  attention  was   paid   the   disarmament    hearings
just  released   by  the  Preparedness   Investigating   Subcommit-
tee  of  the   Senate   Military  Affairs   Committee.    These   were
held   behind  closed   doors   in   September.     Their   significance
is  that  this  subcommittee, a  frequent  sounding  board  for  the
military-industrial  complex,  is  moving  into  the   field   of  dis-
armament,  and  can  do  a  great   deal  of  damage  just   when
hopes  of  agreement  are  beginning  to  rise  again.    Chairman
Stennis  announced  that  these  were  the  first  of  a  series,  and
claimed  jurisdiction  because  Military   Affairs   is   responsible
"for  matters  affecting  the  size,  composition  and  equipage  of
the  Armed  Forces."   He  said  the  committee wanted  to  know
whether  technology  had  advanced  to  the  point  where  "rigid
and  foolproof"  inspection  was  possible.    "We  cannot   afford
a  reckless  gamble,"  he  said,  "with  our  national  security  and
survival."   The hearings  opened with  Senators  Goldwater  and
Thurmond  as  invited   guests  and  with   Senators   Symington
and  Jackson  on  the  panel.   The  course  of  questioning  showed
the   two  rightists  and  the  two  Democratic  "liberals",   both
mouthpieces   of   the   aviation   lobby,  were   making   common
cause  against   disarmament.
Humphrey's  Subcommittee  Moribund
Pressure   is  needed  to  reactivate  Humphrey's disarmament
subcommittee.    For  three  years,  from  1955  to  1958,  it  was  a
special  subcommittee,  with  membership  drawn  from  the  com-
mittees  on  Foreign   Relations,  Military  Affairs   and  Atomic
Energy.     Fulbright   was  hostile,  wanted   disarmament   kept
within  his   Foreign   Relations  committee.    In   1958,   he  won
his  fight  to  make  disarmament  a  subcommittee  of  Foreign
Relations.   In  that  new status,  it  soon  lost  its  separate   offices
and  separate  staff.   It  has  now become pretty  much moribund.
Humphrey  is  still   chairman   and  uses  it   occasionally   as   a
sounding  board.    But  between  Humphrey's  duties   as  whip
and  the  indifference  of  Fulbright   and  the  Foreign   Relations
staff,  the  disarmament   subcommittee  has  become  a   stepchild.
If  the  Stennis  subcommittee is  allowed  to  take  over,  we  will
have  an  anti,  rather  than  a  pro,  disarmament  subcommittee
in  the  field.
It   is  indicative  that   at   the   very   beginning   of  the   first
day's  questioning,  Senator  Goldwater  (an  Air  Force  Reserve
Brigadier  General  as  Thurmond  is  an  Army  Reserve  Major
General)  wanted  to  know  whether   the   Chief  of  Staff,   U.S.
Air   Force,   was  consulted  on  that  portion  of  the   U.S.  dis-
armament  plan which calls  for  reduction  of  strategic  weapons
delivery  systems.    "I  believe he  was,  sir,"   was  the  reply  'of
Paul  H.  Nitze,  Assistant   Secretary   of  Defense  for   Interna-
tional   Security   Affairs.     Goldwater   was   not   satisfied   with
the  reply,  and  there  were  signs  that  in  future  hearings  this
subcommittee   would   try   to   air   military,   particularly   Air
Force,  dissatisfaction  with  Kennedy  disarmament   proposals.
Symington's   questions   showed  the   earmarks  of  Tellerite
inspiration.    He  seemed  to  think  the  American  people  were
too  worried  about  fallout.    "One  of  the  great  experts  in  this
field" told  him  "that  damage  from  all  the  fallout  to  date  to
human  beings  would  be  less  than  if  a  family  took  a  vacation
in  the  high  Rockies  of  Colorado."     He  also  came   prepared
Why  Should Moscow  Agree If  It's  Behind?
Sen.  THURMOND  (D.  S.C.):  Do  you  really  feel  deep
down  in  your  heart,   Mr.  Secretary,   that   the  Commu-
nists  are  going  to  agree  to  stop  testing  until  they  feel
they  are  ahead  or  they  feel  testing  can  be done  through
some  other  Communist  nation  so  that   they  feel  they
can  get  ahead  or  stay  ahead?
Secretary   of  State   RUSK:  I  am  sure  that  they  un-
derstand   beyond  any  doubt  whatever  that   they  could
not  use  any  other  nation  to  test  in  their  place  because
the  treaty  would  be  immediately  dissolved   if  any  other
nation  tested.    I  think  there  may  come  a  point  where
the  Soviets  would  consider  that  it  is  in  their  interest
to  stop  testing.   They  are  concerned,  I  suspect,  about
how  to  do everything that  they  want  to  try  to  do  with
the  resources  they  have  available.    When  you  look  out
ahead  as to what  the  next  steps  are  in this nuclear field
and  missile field, there  are  steps  that  already  tax  the
capacity   of  the   mind  of  man,  and   they  involve  enor-
mous   resources,    new   resources,    additional   resources
committed  to  the  anti-missile missile;  the  missile  that
can  penetrate  the  anti-missile  missile,  and  on  and  on,
a  qualitative race  that  means  many  tens  of  billions  of
dollars  of  investment  of  a  rather  precious  and  chancy
result  in  terms  of  what  may  come  out  of  it.    Yet  if  the
arms  race  goes  on,  we  will  have  to  do  it,  and  they  will
have  to  do  it.
—Newly   released  Senate  Military   Affairs    testimony.
with  an  anonymous  memorandum  on  how  easily  underground
tests  could  be  hidden  in  the   soil  called  alluvium.
Last  year  the  Tellerites   were  explaining  how  easily  tests
could  be  hidden  in  salt  or  granite.    Now that  it  has  turned
out  that  these  mediums magnify  instead  of  muffling   under-
ground  shots,  they  are  talking  of  alluvium.   Wm.  C.  Foster,
director  of  the  Arms  Control  and  Disarmament   Agency,  ex-
plained  that  wnen  shots  are   set   off  in  alluvium  "there  de-
velops   a  tremendous   depression   which   is   visible  from   the
surface  quite  readily."   In  addition  a  memorandum  from  the
ACDA  put  into  the  record  at  pages  49-51  said  a  seismic   sta-
tion  in  Canada  with  only one seismometer,  had  been able  2700
miles  away  to  detect  "several  nuclear  explosions  of  the  order
of  5  kilotons  in  Nevada  alluvium."
When  Symington  brought  up  Teller's  "big   hole"  theory  of
concealment,  Foster  said  preparation  of  such  a  hole  is  expen-
sive  and  difficult   "as  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  we  have
been  trying   for   3  years   to  get   one  to  prove  the  theory."
Thurmond  and  Jackson's  questions  indicated  they  placed  their
hope  of  blocking  a  nuclear  test  ban  agreement  in   Chinese
Communist  recalcitrance.    Nitze,  Foster,  his  scientific  assist-
ant  Franklin   Long,  and  Secretary  Rusk  did  an  excellent  job
of  advocacy  at  these  first  hearings.   They  were  the  only  wit-
nesses.    But  watch  for   trouble  when  the   military   and   the
Teller  crowd  have  their  inning.
Why  The  U.S.  Has  Most  to  Gain  From  A  Final  End  of  All  Nuclear  Testing
Wm!  C.  FOSTER   (Director  of  the  Arms  Control  and  Dis-
armament  Agency):  Even  though  any  test  ban  would  entail
some  risk  of  cheating  by  the  Soviet  Union,  we  believe  that
risk  is  outweighed by  the  dangers  to  our  security  resulting
from   a  continuation  of  unlimited  testing.
Paul  H.  NITZE  (Ass't  Sec'ty  of  Defense for   International
Security  Affairs):  If  testing  continues  by  both  sides,  there
would  be  further  increases  in  efficiency   of  the  higher  yield
warheads.    The  U.S.  advantage  in  small  weight-high  yield
weapons  will  undoubtedly diminish. . . .  Overall,  the  trend,
with   unlimited   testing,   will   be  toward   equality  in   major
nuclear   forces  between  the  U.S.  and the  USSR.  .  .  .  More
important,  both  sides  might  develop the  pure  fusion  weapon
which  could  be  very  much  cheaper  in  nuclear  material  than
present  weapons  and  free  the  USSR  from  her   dependence
on fisssionable materials  for  weapons.  .  . .
—Disarmament  Hearings   Before   Senate  Armed  Services
held  in  September   and  rleased  in  censored  form   Nov.   16.
1  7  'i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's   Weekly,  November  26,
Mystery:  How  Did  Department Stores,  Wall  Street  and  Oil  Refineries  Get  Into  the  Cuban Plot?
New  York  Press  (Except   for  The  Times)   Whoops  Up   Sabotage  Story
The  New  York  Times  in  its news columns treated  the Cuban
sabotage  arrests with  astringency  and  restraint.    But  the  other
Sunday   (Nov.   18)   papers  outdid  themselves  in melodrama.
The  New   York   Herald-Tribune   pulled  out  the  stops  in  its
description  of  what  the  saboteurs  were  going   to  do,   "Set   a
fast-speeding  fire  into  Wall  St. ...     burn  and  kill  and  maim,
strike  in  the  daylight  and  the  dark.    It  sounds  like  Middle
Europe,  or  a  bad  novel.  .  . ."    It  did  indeed.    The  New  York
Journal-American,  as  can  be  seen  from   our  front   page  box,
whacked  itself  over  the  head  with  a  resounding  anti-climax;
how  were  the  notoriously  inefficient  Cubans  going  to  accom-
plish  so much with  six bombs  and  three hand  grenades ?   Next
day  it  carried  an  eight  column  picture  of  "NJ.  Refineries .  . .
Target  of   Saboteurs"   across  page   one.     But   its  story,  after
asking  dramatically,  "Could   Cuban   saboteurs  wreck  one  of
those  big  oil  refineries?" had  to  answer,  "they  probably  would
not  succeed."    It  sounded  regretful.
J.  Edgar  Identifies   Them
The   press  handling   was  juiced  up  by  the  Department  of
Justice.  The   very  wording   seemed   to   reflect   an   inner   office
tussle  among  the  publicity-conscious  prima  donnas.    The  first
paragraph  said  "Attorney  General  Robert  F.  Kennedy  has  an-
nounced  that  FBI  agents.  .  .  ."    The  second  paragraph  said
"J.  Edgar  Hoover,  director  of  the  FBI,   identified  the  arrested
persons  as. .  . ."   He  was in a hospital  with a minor  operation.
About  all  he  could  identify  was  the  man  who  wrote  the  press
release.     The   Federal   complaint  said  that   the  arrested  men
conspired  to  gather  information  concerning  U.S.  military  in-
stallations  but   for   some  reason   espionage   was  not   charged.
Perhaps   it  was  too   commonplace.
The  charge  was conspiracy to obtain  "incendiary  devices .  . .
for   the  purpose   of  injuring  and  destroying  national  defense
materials."  *     Somehow   this,   too,   wasn't   dramatic   enough
for  the  papers.    Somehow  department  stores  got  into  the  pic-
ture,  perhaps  because  our  CIA  was  once  accused  of  throwing
incendiary  bombs  into  Havana  department  stores,  or  because
Why   Bother  Waiting  For  Trial?
".  .  .  in  typical  Communist  fashion,  the  Castro forces
have   started   to   export  terror."
—New  York   Times  editorial,  Nov.  IS.
"On  the   basis  of   the   evidence   so  far,  this   was   no
crack-brained  or  isolated scheme.  .  .  .  The  plot  was  not
aimed   exclusively   against   military   or  naval  installa-
tions. ...  It  was,  instead,  designed  to  strike  directly
at  the  populace,  by  setting  off  a  grenade  in  a  depart-
ment  store,  starting  a  fire  in  Wall  St.,  or  blowing  up  an
oil  refinery  on  the  Jersey  shore  in  full  view  of  horrified
Manhattanites."
—New  York  Herald-Tribtme  editorial,  Nov.  19.
'The  extent  of   the   monstrous  terror   which  Castro
planned   to   unloose   on   the   16,000,000  people   of   the
metropolitan  area  shocks  the  imagination."
—New  York  Journal-American  editorial,  Nov.  19.
"The   Castro  government  is   fantastically  ill-advised
if-it  believes such  tactics  can help. . .  . Disclosure  of  the
arson   and   sabotage   plans   of   that   regime   can   only
silence  the  voices  of   restraint."                               ~~
—New  York  Post  editorial,  Nov.  19.
* Just  to  make  sure  to  get  them on  something  if  the wilder
charges  don't  stick  they  were  also  charged  with  being  un-
registered  foreign  agents.
it   just  sounded  nice  and   gory.     The   oil   refinery   angle   was
pure  gravy,  unplanned,  the  result  according  to  Milton  Brack-
er's  follow-up  story  in  the  New   York   Times  Nov.   19  of  a
telephone  call  to  the  big  Esso  Bayway  Refinery,   "Either   the
caller  or  the  receiver  of  the  call  or  both,  had  misinterpreted
the  announcement  of  the  arrests."      In  all  other   papers   the
refineries  continued  to  be   endangered.
It  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  how  all  this  looked   to  a   UN
delegate  from  another  country:  The  TV  thriller  handling  of
the  story,  the  anxiety  of  the  secret  police  chief   to  get  in  on
the  act,  the  roughing  up  of  a  diplomat,  the  denial  of  immu-
nity  though   he  travelled  here  on   a  diplomatic  visa  we   had
issued,  the  fomenting  of  hysteria  about  Cuban  refugees.
No  one,  of  course,  dared  comment  that  when  our  CIA  does
such  things  in  other countries,  we  glorify  them  in  slick  maga-
zine  stories.    And  of  course  no  one  questioned   the   charges,
or  suggested  waiting  until  the  evidence  was  in.    They're  Cas-
troites,  aren't  they?    Isn't  that  crime  enough?
Free  Copies  This  Or  Any  Other  Issue  Sent  Free  If  You  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed    LONG  Envelopes
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name   ......................................................................................—
Street
..Zone.............State...
City   ............_................
11/26/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ...............................................................................
Street    ........._.........................................................................
City  ............_.........................Zone.........-..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
56 J 8   Nebraska  Aye.,   N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'3  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  during  August  and  the  last   Monday  in  December
and  the  first  in  January  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.
Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;   $6  in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.
Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED