I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jul02.pdf

============================================================

Detroit  Already  Being" Disarmed",  P.  3
The  Supreme  Court  Ruling  on  School  Prayers:  A  Bonanza  for  the  Paranoids,  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  26
JULY  2,  1962
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.16  CENTS
Neither  Marx Nor  Gandhi  Nor  Hunger  Holds  Them  Back
Everywhere,  from  Berlin  to  the  Formosa  strait, storm  clouds
hang  over  mankind.    Algeria  provides  fresh  daily  reminders
of  the  savagery  which  lies  just  beneath  the  skin  of  the  osten-
sibly  civilized.   It  is  not  in  the  details  of  these  tense  and  san-
guinary  quarrels  that  their  peaceful  resolution  is  to  be  found.
It  is  only  in  self-knowledge  that  the   race  of  man   can  find
safety.    For  this  purpose  we  invite  attention  to  the   conflict
between  India  and  China  over  Ladakh,  as  a  healing  reductio
ad  absurdum  of  what  ails  us  all.    The  are  in  dispute  between
these  two  giant  Asian  powers  is  the  closest  to  a  lunar  land-
scape  to  be  found  on  our  planet;  this  bit  of  territory  between
the  Karakorum  and  the  Himalayas  is  desolate,  uncultivatable,
uninhabited  and  uninhabitable.    The  frontier  has  never  really
been  demarcated  and  it  is  so  inaccessible  that  some  three  years
passed  before  India  became aware  that  China  had  built  a  road
across  one  corner  of  Ladakh  between  Chinese  Turkestan   and
Tibet,  over  territory  which  India  claims  as  hers.    How  many
camels  a  year  will  pass  over  this  road  we  do  not  know  but  it
will be a  long  time  before traffic  lights  are  required.    The  road
is,  in  a  sense,  strategic  but  only  in  the  sense  that  brass  hats
like  to  draw  lines  on  maps.    For  this  line  some  Peking  Gen-
eral  is  ready  to  sacrifice  all  the  promise  of  Bandung,  all  the
talk  of  Indians  and  Chinese  being  brothers.    For  easier  access
to the  far  side  of  Tibet,  they would  shut  China's  last  open  door
to  the  outside  world.    Peking's  folly  completes  the   isolation
U.S.  policy  has  imposed   upon   it.
The  Mahatma's  Heirs  Speak  Pentagon's   Language
Two  overpopulated   Asian  countries,  striving  to  pull  them-
selves  out  of  centuries-old  exploitation  and  misery,  desperately
short  of  capital,  one of  them  haunted  by terrible  droughts  and
crop  failures,   near  to  famine,   are   ready  to  divert   precious
materials  and  men  to  war  over  this  dismal  bit  of  land.    Under
the  banner  of  Marx,  which  promised  an  end  of  poverty  and
war,   Mao  Tse-tung  leads  the  Chinese  people  for  the  first  time
in  their  history  toward  an  armed  conflict  with  India.    Under
the  banner  of  Gandhi,  a  modern  Jesus,  preacher  of  non-vio-
lence,  his  successor  Nehru,  the  Socialist  and  the  idealist,  is as
ready  for  war  as any professional  soldier.  His  right  hand  man,
Krishna  Menon,   tells  the  UN   (this  time  over  Kashmir),   in
accents  indistinguishable  from  the  Pentagon's,  "We  ate  not
pacifists."    Millions  of  Indians  who  haven't  the  slightest  con-
ception   of  where  Ladakh  is  are  ready  to  march  in  patriotic
zeal  for  its recovery;  indeed Nehru dare  not  be moderate  about
Ladakh,  any  more  than  about  Goa  or  Kashmir,  lest  his  oppo-
sition  attack  him  for  weakness,  cowardice,  appeasement.     And
this  chauvinistic  opposition,  be  it  noted,  includes  not  only  the
rightist  Hindu  party  but  the  Indian  Socialists.     Even  the  In-
Stale  Slogans  Out of  The  20's
A  country cannot solve  its  problems  unless  its  leaders
are  willing  to  talk  sense.    The  Elsenhower  speech  to
the  Republican  House  and  Senate  Campaign  Commit-
tees  was   full   of   nonsense   the  country   cannot   afford.
The  devaluation  of  the  Canadian  dollar,  on  top  of  the
continued  fall  in  the  stock  market,  warns  that   serious
difficulties  lie  ahead.    As  in  1929,  the  bursting  of  the
speculative  bubble  in  the  U.S.  is  a  blow  to  the  weaker
economies  of  the  raw  material  producing  countries  and
threatens  a  chain  reaction  of   economic  hardship  and
political  unrest.   At  such a  time  the  leader of  the  oppo-
sition  in  this  country  comes  forward  with  a  rehash  of
stale  1920 slogans  in  answer  to  the  President's attempt
at  Yale  to  open up some sensible  discussion.   Mr. Eisen-
hower  has   about  as   much  qualification   for  leadership
as  Ulysses   S.  Grant,  and  it  shows  in  this  speech.    He
speaks  freely  in  that extensive area  from  fiscal  to farm
policy   where   he   has   never   displayed  comprehension,
while  in  the  one  sphere  of  his  competence, the  defense
and  related  space  programs,  he  drops  a  few  sensible
warnings  but  is  afraid  to  speak up strongly since  these
permit  such  lush  profits  for  the  favored  few  that  they
are  firmly  supported by  both  parties.   There  is  a  limit
to  how  much  economic  waste  and  political  idiocy  even
a  country  as  rich  as  ours  can  take,  and  we  are  getting
closer  to  that  limit.
dian  Communists  are  split  by the  quarrel  with  China.*    Here
we  see  neither  Marxism  nor  Gandhi-ism  nor  hunger  inhibits
nation  states  and  their  leaders  from   moving  toward  war  in
quarrels  about  as  rational  as  any  schoolboy's.
Were  China  or  India  armed  with  nuclear  weapons,  we may
be  sure  that  they  would  threaten  their  use  in  this  conflict,  and
resort to  them  in  last  resort  rather  than  face  defeat.    Not  many
years  hence  they will  have them.   The  Chinese and  the  Indians
will  be  as  ready  to  incinerate  mankind  over  Ladakh,  perhaps
much  readier, than  Russians and  Americans  over  West  Berlin.
The  independent  nuclear deterrent which  we  fear  in  the  hands
of  de  Gaulle  will  soon  be  in  a  dozen  others.   Ladakh  shows
us  that  the  danger  does  not  lie  primarily  in  the  stupendous
firepower  but  in  the  stupidity  of  mankind,  and   in  a  lawless-
world  where  any  nation  can  decree death  for  others whenever
it  so wishes.    It  is  this  at  which  we  must  look  long  and  hard
if  we  are  to  save  the  species,  not  who  is  right  or  wrong  in
Ladakh  or  Quemoy  or  Berlin.    These  are  only  the   occasions
and  not  the  causes  of  our  peril.
* Here  our  rightists  dp  not  seem  to  realize  that  if  Nehru
buys  the  Migs  offered  him  by  Russia  for  use  against  China
this  will  be  the  biggest   affront   Moscow  could  giv«  Peking
and  would  split   the  Communist  bloc  wide  open.
1   0   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  2, 1962
Basic  American   Principles   Too  Little   Understood  in  This   Generation
Supreme  Court  Will  Be  Accused  of  Barring  Prayer  and  Allowing  Smut
I  am  not  frightened  often   or  easily,  but   frankly   the   last
day  of  this  term  of  the  Supreme  Court  has  me  frightened.  The
ruling  in  the  New  York   public  school  prayer  case  will  give
the  paranoid  and  crypto-Fascist  elements  in  our  society  fresh
ammunition  against  the  Court.    I  shudder  to  think  what  they
will  do  with  the  coincidence  of  the  prayer  ruling  with  that  in
the  Manual  Enterprise case,  which  reversed  a  Post  Office  order
barring  a  homosexual  nude  picture  magazine from  the  mails.
The   Court   will  be   accused  of   barring  prayer  and   allowing
smut.
In  principle  I  agree  with  the  noble  words  of  Mr.  Justice
Black  in  the  prayer  case;  the  First  Amendment  should   allow
no  breach   in  the  separation   of  Church  and   State,   though   I
recall  that  15  years ago  Mr.  Justice  Black  ruled  in  the  Everson
decision  that  New  Jersey  tax  funds  could  provide  bus  services
to  parochial as  well  as  public  schools  while  it  was  Mr.  Justice
Rutledge  in  dissent  who  argued   the  absolutist  point  of  view
put  forward  now  by Mr.  Justice Black.
Hardly  An  Urgent  Concern
Basically  the   case  seems   to  me  much  ado  about   nothing.
The  nonsectarian  prayer,  from  which  any  student  who  wishes
may  be  excused,  is no  different  from  those  used  in  both  Houses
of  Congress  and  on  State  occasions.    I  regard  religion  as  su-
perstition,  but  I  believe  the  public  schools  on  the  whole  have
handled   it  with  admirable  freedom   from   sectarian   bias   or
offense,  and  the  crusade  against  school  prayers  seems  to  me  to
show  little  political  sense,  and  to  rank  very  far  down  on  the
list  of  urgent  concerns  at  this  moment.    I  am  sorry  to  see  the
Court  burdened  with  it  at  a  time  when  its  resources  of  public
respect  and  submission  are  strained  to  the  utmost  by the heroic
and  historic  task  it  has  assumed  to  bring  about  racial equality.
The  Court  and  its  Judges  are  the  closest  repository  that  our
society  has   to  absolute  power;   only  the   difficult   process   of
Constitutional  amendment  can  overrule  them   if  they  do   not
eventually  overrule  themselves,  as  happened  in  the  New  Deal
period.     Life   tenure  and   tradition  enable  them   to  do  what
no  elected  official  would  dare,  as  in  the  prayer  case.    All  kinds
of  heavy  tasks,  like  that  of  desegregation,   are  theirs  to  bear
with  little  help  from  Congress  or  the  Executive.    This  situa-
tion  has  grave  dangers,  for  the  crust  of  law  and  order  is  rela-
tively  thin  in  every  society  and   recent  history  has  shown   us
the  bloody  abyss  beneath  it.
The   greatest   threat   to  law  and  order,   and  to  the   Court,
which  embodies  it,  is  the  gap  between   the  universe  of  values
For Mercy to the  Drug Addict
"In  15th  Century   England  one  prescription  for   in-
sanity  was  to  beat the  subject  'until  he  had regained  his
reason.'    Deutsch,  The  Mentally   111  in  America.  .  .  .
Today  .  .  .  while  afflicted  people  may  be  confined  either
for   treatment   or   for   the   protection   of   society,   they
are  not  branded  as  criminals.   Yet  .  .  .  that  approach
continues  as  regards  drug  addicts.    Drug  addiction  is
more  prevalent  in  this country than  in  any  other  nation
of  the  Western  world.  .  .  .
"Great   Britain,   beginning   in   1920  placed   addiction
and  the  treatment  of  addicts  squarely  and  exclusively
into  the  hands  of  the  medical  profession.   .  .  .  Under
British  law  'addicts  are  patients,  not  criminals.'    Ad-
dicts  have  not  disappeared  in  England  but  they   have
decreased   in   number   and  there   is   now  little   'addict-
crime'  there.  .  .  .  The  Council on  Mental Health  reports
that  criminal  sentences  for  addicts  interfere  "with  the
possible   treatment   and   rehabilitation  of   addicts  and
should  be  abolished.'  .  .  .  We  would  forget  the  teaching
of  the  Eighth  Amendment  [against   'cruel  and  unusual
punishments']   if   we   allowed  sickness   to   be   made   a
crime."
—Douglas  concurring  in  Calif.  Drug  Case  June  25.
in  which  the  Judgest   operate   and  the  understanding   of   the
ordinary  American.   The  Bill of  Rights,  the  philosophy  it  em-
bodies,  the  experience  from  which  it  is  distilled,  have   peril-
ously  little meaning  for  this generation  of  Americans.    One  of
those  Foundations,  choked  with  funds  but  looking   only   for
respectable  causes,  could  do  worse  than  finance  a  campaign   in
the  schools  and  out  to  teach  America's  fading  traditions.
How  few  will  see  the  connection  between  the  school  prayer
case  and  the  long  struggle  for  religious  liberty  in  which   the
Pilgrims  and  rhe  very  foundation  of  our  country  were  a  part.
How  few will understand  in the  homosexual magazine  case  the
importance  of  setting  up  safeguards  against  censorship  and  of
not  permitting a  publication  to  be  suppressed  by administrative
action  without  its  day  in  court.
I  cannot  resist  the  wry  reflection,  however,  that  while   con-
servative  Judges   like  Harlan   can  . see  the   First   Amendment
issue  in  the  homosexual  magazine  case,  and  both  Harlan  and
Clark  joined  in  the  school  prayer  case,  they  so  often   forget
these  principles  when  the  far  more  important  matter  of   free
political  activity  is  before  them.     Some  Judges  are  almost  as
frightened   as  the   common   man   when   they   hear   the   word
"Communist."
Court  Falters   and  Orders  Reargument
The  precarious  liberal   majority   and  the  timidity  of   the
Court   in  dealing  with   a  fundamental  problem  in   political
liberty  were demonstrated in its  disposal  last  Monday of  the
three  remaining  cases  on  its  calendar  involving contempt  of
the  House  Un-American Activities  Committee.
In  two  cases,  those  of  Louis Hartman and  Bernard  Silber,
which  could  be  disposed  of   on  minor  technical  issues,   the
four   liberals,  Warren,  Black,   Douglas   and   Brennan,  won
Mr.  Justice  Stewart  to  their  side  and  the  convictions  were
reversed.     Clark   and  Harlan  dissented.     Frankfurter  and
White  did  not  take  part.    The  reversal  was  based  on  flaws
in  the  indictment,  and  this  brought  the  total  of  contempt
reversal  this  term  on  similar  grounds  to  nine.
in  Basic  Un-American  Contempt  Appeal
But  in  confronting the  case  of  Edward  Yellin,  which  will
have  to  be  decided  on  more  basic  grounds,  a  majority  opin-
ion  could  not  be  achieved  and  the  case  was  set   down  for
reargument   next  term.    This  will   allow   the  new   Justice,
White,  to  take  part.
Mr.   Yellin   pleaded  the   First   Amendment  in   the   Gary,
Indiana,  hearings  of  House  Un-American  in  1958,  and  his
appeal  goes  to  the  heart  of  the  Committee's  authority.   He
was  sentenced  to  a  year in jail  and  a  $250  One;  an additional
punishment,   typical   of   the  witch  hunt,  was   the   revoking
by   the   National   Science  Foundation  of   a   $3800  graduate
fellowship  it  had  awarded him.   The  revocation  was  a  sur-
render  to  pressures  from  the  Committee  and  its  friends.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  2, 1962
Why  We  Can  Spend  $50  Billion  A  Year  on  War  and  Have  Joblessness  in  Detroit
Pentagon  Report  Shows  Heavy  Industry  Already  Hit  By  "Disarmament"
Those  interested  in  the  problems  of  peace  should   carefully
examine  a  report  newly  released  by  the  Office  of  the Secretary
of   Defense   called   "The   Changing   Pattern   of   Defense   Pro-
curement."    It  discloses  a dramatic change  in armament orders.
This  change  is hopeful,  when  regarded  from  the  viewpoint of
weaning   U.S.   industry  away   from   dependence   on   an   arms
economy.    In  a  sense,  it  no  longer  is.
The  key  to  the  report   lies  in  one  sentence  from  the  fore-
ward   by  Roswell   L.  Gilpatric,  deputy   secretary  of   defense.
"We  have  moved  swiftly,"  Mr.  Gilpatric  writes,  "away  from
mass  production  into  research,  development  and  small   quan-
tity   production    as  the   normal  character  of   modern   weapon
system  procurement."    The  italics  are  ours.
Armament   No  Longer   Mass   Produced
Armament  is  no  longer  a  heavy  industry, mass production
business.    The  days  when  armorplate  for  naval  vessels  was  a
large  part  of  the  steel  business  have  long   passed  away.    So
have  the  days  when  Detroit  was  the  nation's  arsenal.
In  World  War   II  more  than  26%   of  military  hard  goods
procurement  was  for  ships;  in  fiscal  1961,  this  percentage  had
fallen  to  less  than  8%.     This  explains why  you  can  have  de-
pression,   unemployment  and   stagnation   in  the   steel   industry
when  you  are  spending  $50  billions  a  year  on  the  U.S.  war
machine.
The  figures  tell  the  same  story  for  Detroit.    "Tanks,  other
vehicles,  weapons  and  ammunition,  plus  production,  construc-
tion,  and  other  commercial  types  of  equipment  and  hardware,"
the   report   says,  "constituted   50%   of  the  military  hardware
goods  delivered in  fiscal  year  1953,  the  last year of  the  Korean
conflict.    By  fiscal  year  1961,  these  were  only  12.4%  of   the
total  of  prime  contract  awards.    In  eight  years,  they  fell  from
one-half  to  one-eighth  of  the  hard  goods  buy."
This  shift  has  hit  the  great  industrial  complex  around  the
Great  Lakes  hard.    "Michigan,  for  example,"  the  report  says,
"obtained  10.5%   of  military  prime  contracts  in World  War  II
and  9.5%   during  Korea;  yet  had  only  2.7%   of  the  smaller
FY   1961   contract  total.    The   States  of   Illinois,   Ohio,   Indi-
ana   and   Wisconsin    combined,   had   21.9%    of   the   total   in
World   War   II,   17.8%    during   Korea,   and   only   9.1%    in
FY  1961."
Cleveland   and  Gary  and  Milwaukee  do  not  need  to  be  per-
suaded  to  prepare  for  the  possibility   of  disarmament.    They
are  already  in  the  painful  process.   These  five  industrial  States
around  the  Great  Lakes  have to adjust to a drop  in arms  orders
Disarming  A  Problem  Even  In  Laos
"While  the  Laotians  generally   are  an   exceptionally
peaceful   people  who  have  been  content   to   eke  out  a
living   from   their  jungle  rice  paddies,  worship  at   the
Buddhist   shrines   and  joyfully   celebrate   most   any  oc-
casion,   the   competing  Russians   and  Americans   have
given  them  a  taste  for  some  of  the  trappings  of  a  more
advanced  economy.    Although  the  Laotian  troops,  left
to  themselves,  rarely  have  shown  any  desire  for  battle,
they  are  showing  signs  of  enjoying  the  material   bene-
fits  of  being  a  soldier—clothing,  food  and  money—that
come  without  too  much  work.   This  may  yet  prove  the
greatest   impediment  to  dissolving  the  Laotian  armies
and  getting   an  economy  moving  again."
—Earl  Voss  from.  Vientiane  in  Wash.  Star  June  25.
from  $8.7  billion  a year during  Korea  to  $2.6  billion  in   1961,
and   "the   loss  of   $6.1   billion  per  year  in  defense   contracts
means  hundreds  of   thousands  of  jobs.     It  is  not    surprising
that  many  communities  in  these  five  States  have   encountered
recurrent  employment   problems."
"Peace"  is  already  descending  on  the  assembly  line.   As  the
report   says,  "Revolutionary  changes  in  weaponry   have   been
reflected,  naturally  enough,   in  manufacturing processes.     Pro-
duction  lines  were  a  large  part  of  the  FY   1953  hard  goods
buy;  but  by  FY  1961   these  had  dwindled,  comparatively.    In-
stead  the  more  recent  emphasis  has  been   upon   research   and
development,  and  upon  fewer,  far  more  costly,  weapon   units.
Traditional  metal  fabricating processes  are  giving  way to  more
intricate  and  sophisticated   techniques.     In  consequence,   blue
collar  workers  are  fewer,  while  scientists, engineers,  and  tech-
nicians  multiply  in  establishments   seeking   defense   procure-
ment   needs."
Missiles,   specialized   aircraft   and  electronics  now  take   the
major   place  in  procurement.    And   in  these  sectors  an   ever
larger   share   of   the   dollar   goes   for   research,    development,
testing   and   engineering   rather   than   for   production.      The
RDT&E  share  ranges  from  57.9%   in  missiles  through    24.9%
in  electronics  to  20.3%   in  ships  and   10.1%    in  aircraft.
Armament   more   and   more   is   becoming   the   province   of
specialized  industries  and  specialized  intellectuals  outside  the
main  stream  of  American  business.    Mass  production  industry
must   reconvert   from   war   work.     The   intellectuals   have   a
growing   interest   in   the   war   machine.     That   is  the   other,
darker  side,  of  this  picture.    An  ever  larger  share  of  the  arms
dollar  is going  to the  universities and  the  "Rand  Corporations"
of  the  Eastern  seaboard  and  the  Pacific  Coast.
U.S.  Air  Force  Chief  Discloses  How  German  Luftwaffe   Was  Secretly  Revived
Wiesbaden,   Germany,  June   21—Details   of   undercover
work   that  led  to   the  creation  of   the   modern  German  air
force  were  disclosed   today   after  ceremonies   marking   the
assignment  of  the  first  ultra-modern  jet  fighter  planes  to
the  Luftwaffe.    The  fighters,  swift  F-104-Cs,  will  eventually
replace  older  and  slower  jets.
Allied  officers  now  generally  agree  that  the  German  air
force  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  elements  in  NATO,  but
according   to  Gen.  Truman  H.  Landon,  commander  of   the
U.S.  air  forces  in  Europe,  the  situation very  nearly  turned
out  differently.    Not  long   after  the   1948  Berlin  crisis,  he
disclosed,  certain  Western  officials  concluded  that  West  Ger-
many   should  be  trained  and  equipped  militarily   to   stand
with  the  West  against  the  Communist threat.  Consequently,
he  said,  a  number  of  former  officers  in  the  World  War  II
Luftwaffe  were hired as  civilians at  various  Allied  facilities.
Some  of  them  were  brought  up  to  date  in  jet  flying  tech-
niques  by  training  in  T-33  jet   trainers,  Gen.  Landon  said.
This   activity   was   performed  secretly   because   some   West
European   officials,   still  wary   of   German  military   might,
might  have  objected.    Even  now  the  subject  is  of   sufficient
delicacy  that  Landon  declined  to  identify  any  of  the  Luft-
waffe  officials  involved.
—Los  Angeles  Times  dispatch   in  Wash.  Post  June  22.
1    U
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  2,1962
Better  Than  A  Poor  Compromise   Would  Be  A  Fresh  Chance  in  the  Next  Congress
It  Looks  As  If  There  Will  Be  No  Drug  Bill  This   Session
By  Marvin Caplan
There   is  little  chance  of   Congress  passing  any  new  drug
legislation  this  year.    The  Kefauver  drug  bill,  with  its  prom-
ise  of  cheaper  and  better  drugs,  has  been  so  badly  butchered
by  Congressional  opposition,  drug  industry  lobbying  and  Ad-
istration  spinelessness,  the  most  sensible  thing  is  to  let  it  die
and  try  again  next  term.
What  will  not  die,  however,  is  speculation   over  the  Ad-
ministration's  responsibility  for  the  destruction  of  the  bill.  At
one  point  it  had  the  President's  support.    In  April,  he  sent  a
letter  to  Sen.  Eastland, Chairman of  the  Senate Judiciary Com-
mittee,  which  is  considering  the   measure,  and   strongly  en-
dorsed   it.    Two  HEW   attorneys  worked   several  days  with
Kefauver's  Antitrust subcommittee staff  in  an  attempt  to  adapt
the  bill  more  fully   to  the  President's   recommendations  for
new  drug  legislation.
To  The  Drug  Industry's  Measure
But  when  it  became  clear  that  Kefauver  could  not  command
committee  support  for  his  bill,  the  two  attorneys,  without  Ke-
fauver's  knowledge,   met  and  worked  out  a  compromise  with
representatives   of   Eastland   and   of   Senators   Dirksen   and
Hruska, the  two major  opponents  of  the  measure.    Industry at-
torneys  probably  had  a  hand  in  the  revision,  too.    There  are
striking  resemblances  between  some  of  the  changes  and  recom-
mendations  put  forth  by the  head  of  the  Pharmaceutical  Manu-
facturers  Association  when  he  testified  on  the  bill  last  year.
And  now  the  contradictions  and  questions  begin  to  mount.
What  was HEW's  role  in  all  this?   In  the  stormy  floor  debate
in  which  he  attacked  the  secret  meeting  on  his  bill  Kefauver
said  he  had  called  HEW  and  no  top  official  there  seemed  to
know  anything  about  their  attorneys'  participation.
Eastland  replied  that  a high  HEW  official,  whom he  refused
to  name,  had  told  him  the  agency  favored  at  least  one  major
amendment,  one  Kefauver  said  would  give  PDA   ineffectual
control  over  drug  plants.
The  two  HEW  attorneys  seemed  satisfied  with  the  changes.
Discussing  them  with  the  press  one  said  impulsively,  "we're
going  to  have  a  good  bill."    He  later  backtracked  a  bit.
On  the  Eve  of  JFK's  Visit  to Mexico
"Q.  Does  it  bother  you  at  all  to  have  a  Soviet  satel-
lite  so  near,  in  Cuba?
"A.  Mexico  is  not  concerned  at  having  as  neighbors
countries  with  political systems  different  from  its  own,
because  the  Mexican government always  bases  its  con-
duct  unreservedly  upon  the  principles  of  non-interven-
tion.    This  gives  us  the  right  to  expect  similar treat-
ment  from  others."
—Interview  with  President  Adolfo   Lopez  Mateos   in
U.S.  News  &  World  Report,  July   2.
But  he  seemed  to  speak  without  authority.    At  least  HEW
Secretary  Ribicoff  suggested  that.    He  testified  recently  before
the  House  Commerce Committee  on  two  Administration  meas-
ures  designed  to  tighten  present  laws  on  drugs,  food  additives
and  cosmetics.    Asked  about  the  changes  in  die  Kefauver  bill,
he  told  the  committee  "they  differ  substantially  enough   (from
the  President's  proposals)   to make us quite  unhappy  about   it."
As  for  the  attorneys,  he  said  to  reporters  later  that  they  were
minor  officials  who  did  not  represent  the  Administration   and
gave  only  technical  assistance  to  the  Eastland  Committee.     It
is  hard  to  believe  they  would  attend  the  compromise  meeting
without  HEW's   knowledge.
Where  does  this  leave  drug  legislation?    Precisely  nowhere.
Still  pending  in  House  Judiciary  is  Rep.  Celler's  version  of
the  Kefauver  drag  bill.    But  either  through  design  or  inepti-
tude one of  the  Administration  bills  in  House  Commerce  over-
laps  it.    Assuming  the  jurisdictional  knots  can  be  untangled
and  the  bills  combined;  assuming  that  measure  could  pass  the
House,  it  would  still  have  to  be  referred  to  a  Senate  commit-
tee.    And  either  Senate  Judiciary  or  Senate  Labor  and  Public
Welfare  can  be  expected  to  knife  it.   There  will  be  no  drug
bill  this  term.
There may not  even  be a  cosmetic  bill.   The  nation's  beauty
industry  is  furious  about  a  provision  it  says,  with  little  justi-
fication, will  force  hair  dyes  off  the  market.   Will  an  Admin-
istration,  increasingly  shy  about  offending  business,  fight  off
even  this  attack?
Don't   Forget   To   Give   Old   Address   in  Sending   In  Change   to  New   Address
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Are,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .............................................................................>......._
Street   .......................................................................„........_
City   ............_............................Zone.............State....................
7/2/62'
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  .........................................................................._..
Street    ........._..„..............._................................,....................
City  ..........._.........................Zone........_..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Ye»  D    No  D
LR Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone'i  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except   the  last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  In  January  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave..  N. W..  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  L  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M. Stone.   Subscription:  S6  in  the  U.  S.:  W  f-
Canada:   $10   •
Air  Mail  rate*:  115  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED