I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962mar05.pdf

============================================================

English  Press  Subversive  on  Cuba,  P.  2
Severe  Sentences  and  One-Sided Trial  Stir  Sympathy  for  Britain's  Nuclear  Demonstrators,  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  9
MARCH  5,  1962
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The   Same   Old   Byplay   on   The  Way   to  The  Summit
The  dramaturgy  of  the  Approaching Summit  is  as  stale  as
any  TV  Western.    Again,  as  under  Eisenhower,  Khrushchev
is  the  Eager  Suitor,  Macmillan (like  Eden  and  Churchill be-
fore  him  ever  since  Stalin  died)   is  the  Tireless  Broker,  and
Kennedy  the  Reluctant  President,  being  dragged   unwillingly
to  the  conference  table.  Again the  State Department's  briefing
officers  explain  that  we  are  going  only  for  British  "domestic
considerations,"  i.e.  to  help  the  Conservatives  win  the  next
election;  we  have heard  this  so  often  that  we  begin  to  believe
the  Department  would  be  relieved  if  England stopped  having
elections  and  adopted  a  less  annoying  system  of  government,
like  Diem's  in  South  Vietnam or  Gen.  Park's  in  South  Korea.
Peace—It's—Frightful
The  background  music  for  the  Approaching  Summit  is  as
familiar.  There is the  same lunatic chorus  of  American Legion-
naires,  J.  Edgar  Hoover   and  Senators  like  Dodd   and  Thur-
mond  keening  peace-it's-frightful,   coexistence-it's-a-trap;   for
them  safety  is  certain  only  in  extinction.    In  the  outer  wings,
from  Bonn,  there  is Adenauer, who  celebrates  Yom  Kippur  at
any  mention  of  a  Summit;  to  hear  his  anguished  cries  is  to
believe  that  Kennedy  and  Khrushchev  are planning  a  pogrom,
with  the  helpless  Germans  as  the  innocent  victims:  might  it
not  deprive  them  of  those  long-desired  toys, atomic arms ?  The
reassurances are the  same.    "Few  sources  here," the New   York
Times  reports  soothingly  from  Washington   as  we write  (Feb.
28),   "expect  much  of  the  Geneva  conference.    The  resulting
letdown,  they  say,  will  reduce  the  stress  among  the  West."
This,  too,  can be duplicated  virtually verbatim  from  the files—
this  idea  that  unsuccessful summitry  is  successful  diplomacy  in
that  it  cements  the  Western  alliance.    If  this  is  true,  why  the
reluctance  to  attend?    Is  Washington   haunted  by  fear   of  a
miscalculation ? • The   excuse  for  stepping  up  the  arms  race  is
that  it  will  force  the  Russians  some  day  to  accept  our  terms.
But  if   Moscow   in  a  fit  of  Ultimate  Malevolence   were  ever
to  give  up,  what  would  the  missile  industry  do?    How  run  a
government   whose  smooth   operation   depends   on   anti-Com-
munism?    If  the  cold  war  ever  ends  we'll  be  as  stricken   as
an   Eskimo  suddenly  transplanted  gasping   to  Miami   Beach.
Fidel  Castro  will  be  our  last  sustaining  hope.
If  the  preliminary  exchange  between  Washington  and  Mos-
cow  is  regarded  as a Great Debate  for  the  esteem  of   mankind,
we  come  off  second  best.   Mrs.  Khrushchev's  appeal  to  Amer-
ican  women  was  not  answered.    The  State  Department   *ried
to  sell a draft  reply  to women  members  of  Congress  but  failed;
the  cautious  didn't  want  to  get  mixed  up  with   peace  either
pro  or  con;  the  peace-minded  -disliked  the  tone  of  the  depart-
mental   draft.     Mrs.   Khrushchev    said   simply,   "We    Soviet
women' vividly remember  the  horrors of  the  last  war.    It  came
into  the  home  of  literally  every  Soviet  family."    What  do  we
reply?    With  a  summary  of  the  new  arms  budget,  an  auto-
3  *
Advice  From  Nehru
Q.  You  gave  us  a  warning  about  China  coining  into
North  Korea  if  we  crossed-the  Yaltt  River.    Are  you
warning  us  now  about  our  military  buildup  in  South
Vietnam?
A.  In  Korea  we  had  been  told  that  they  would come
in.   We passed  it  on. .  .  .  [Hiatus  in  version  as pub-
lished].    As  for  the  American  military  in  South  Viet-
nam,    you  can't   deal  with   these   matters   in  a  purely
military  way  unless  there  is  some  political  urge  behind
it.   There  is  no doubt that  in  South  Vietnam,  the  rural
areas  especially,   there  are    a-  considerable   number  of
people   opposed   to   Diem.    They   may   get   help   from
North  Vietnam,  but  essentially  it  is  local   trouble.
—Interview  with  Nehru,  in  New  Delhi  as  published
by  the  Washington  Post  Feb.  25.
graphed  portrait  of  Atlas  II,  and  a  warning  that  next  time  it
will  be  worse?    Mrs.  Roosevelt  could  have  answered.    Mrs.
Kennedy   might   have;   Ed   Murrow    suggested    weakly   he
couldn't  see  "any  harm"  if  she  did.    We,  the  world's  greatest
experts  in  salesmanship, who  can  turn  a  mouthwash  like  Coca
Cola  into  a  refreshing  urink,  suddenly  bumble  when  it  comes
to  peace.    The  onlooker  can only  decide that  it's  not  a  product
we're  passionate  about  selling.
The    opening   message   of   Kennedy   and    Macmillan   to
Khrushchev  on  Feb.  12  did  speak  eloquently  of  making  a  "su-
preme  effort"  at  the  coming  Geneva  arms  conference.    They
said  it  "must  not  be  allowed  to  drift  into  failure";  they  pro-
posed  "that  we  three  accept  a  personal  responsibility."    Then
they  were  startled  when  Khrushchev  took  their  words  at  face
value  and  suggested  that  they  open  the  conference  themselves
if  only  to  give  "the   right  direction  to  further   negotiations."
The  Russians didn't  seem  to  realize  that  "supreme   effort"  is
like  "colossal"  in  Hollywood.     The  New   York   Times   two
days later  reported  that one of  the  things  which worried  Wash-
ington  about  the  Geneva  conference,  summit  or  no,  was  "how
to  obtain  understanding  for  the  West's  need  to  set  off  giant
bombs   after   the  disarmament   talks  get  down   to  business."
Mr.  Kennedy  would  rather  turn  up  after  furor  over  the  new
tests  die  down.*    (See  footnote  P.  4.)
A  Way  Around The  Berlin  Problem
The  value  of  a  summit  meeting  is not  that  it  will  magically
clear  away the  almost  impenetrable  underbrush  of   technicalities
that  thrive  like  weeds  around  disarmament  conferences.     The
value  of  a  confrontation   is  that  the  leaders  may  say  to  each
other  what  they  cannot  say through  subordinates;  there  is  logic
in  Khrushchev's  second  message  of  Feb.  23  when  he  said  that
the  "certain  measure  of  trust  and  confidence,  without  which
it  is  impossible   even  to  approach  a  solution  of  the  disarma-
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  5,  19U2
Cuban  Papers  Embargoed—Why  Not  Keep  Out  These  Subversive  English  Sheets,  Too?
Some  British  Reactions   to  U.S.  Plea  for  NATO  Action  Against   Cuba
One   effect     of   the  new   trade   embargo   oil  Cuba  is  to   bar
Cuban  neivspapers  from  this  country.  An  AP  dispatch   from
Miami   in   the   Washington   Star   (Feb.   21,)   reported   that
Revolucion,   the   Castro   organ,   "has   not   been   on   Miami
newsstands  for  nearly   two  weeks."    A  customs  bureau    of-
ficial  explained   this  was  because  newspaper   shipments   in
bulk   were   "banned   by   the   trade   shutdown."
Perhaps   some  way   ought   to  be  found   to  keep   British
papers   out,  too.   Their  comments  an  Prof.   W.  W.  Rostow's
plea  that  NATO  join  in  our  embargo   of  Cuba  are   hardly
wholesome  fare  for  sheltered  American readers.  The  Wash-
ington  correspondent   of  the  London   Times  had  the  temer-
ity   to  suggest   (Feb.   19)   that   this   reversed    the   Monroe
Doctrine  which  (he   said)   was   propounded   to   discourage
rather  than  to  invite  European  intervention  in  the  New
World.  In  an  editorial   the  same  day  his  paper   was   more
than   doubtful    of  NATO   action.  This   elicited   two   letters
from  readers  which  we  reprint  here  along  with  an  editorial
from   the  London    Telegraph.
British  hostility   to  our  aims  in   the   hemisphere    is  no
doubt   due  to  the   notoriously   disproportionate    role   played
in  their  politics  by  large  landowners.    These    latifundistas
are  said  to  dominate   the  House  of  Lords  and  probably   fear
Mr.  Kennedy's   campaign  for  land    reforms.—IFS
"As  one  who  has  recently  returned  from  a  second  visit  in
6   months   to   Cuba,   I   should   like   to   support   Mr.   Graham
Greene    [see   adjoining  box]   in  his  support   of   your  critical
attitude  towards  any  suggestion  of  Britain  becoming   involved
in  efforts  to  suppress  the  regime  of  Dr.  Castro.    Whatever   the
merits  or  demerits  of  the  system  of  government  at  present  in
operation,  it  is  difficult   for  a  visitor  to  that  delightful  island
country  to  come  to  any  other  conclusion  than  that  Dr.   Castro
and  his  colleagues  enjoy the  overwhelming  support  of  the  great
bulk  of  its  population.
"The   purely  material  reasons  for  this  lie  in  the  simple  fact
that,  for  the  first  time,  the  poorer  sections  of  the   population
are  getting   a  fairer   share  of   the   basic  necessities  of   life   in
terms  of  both  food  and  clothing.    It  has  been  necessary  to  en-
force  some  rationing, particularly of  meat  and  fats,  to  accom-
plish  this  and  a  real  decline  in  the  consumer  standards  enjoyed
by  the  middle  class  has  occurred  in  consequence.    In  turn  this
has  resulted,  understandably,  in  a  volume  of  bitter  criticism
which  is  aired  quite  openly  in  the  more  expensive  hotels  and
restaurants   in  Havana.  .  .  .
"Although  my  own  trips  were  not  sponsored  in  any  way by
the  Cuban  Government,  I  found  myself  free  to  travel   wherever
I  wished  on  the  island, without any 'guide'  or  'interpreter.  .  . .
From   "Their"  Man  In   Havana
"To  the  Editor  of  The  [London]  Times,  Sir—
"Your  excellent  leading article  today  [Feb.  19]  criti-
cizing  the  American  suggestion  that  NATO  countries
should  aid  in  the  suppression  of  Dr.  Castor's  Cuba will,
I  feel  sure,  be  welcomed  in  Brazil  and  Argentina  and
in   Europe  by   all   who   saw   something  of   the  regime
which   Dr.   Castro  overthrew.
"President  Batista's  police  state,  addicted  like  most
police  states  to  the  practice of  torture,  was  supported
not  only  by  the  American government  of  the  time,  not
only  by  the  more  influential  racketeers  of   Las  Vegas,
who  controlled   the  gambling  concessions   and  brothels
of  Havana,  but  also,  in  a  blinkered  way,  by  the  present
British  Government.  .  .  .
''With  this  past  happily  behind  us  let  us  be  sure,  be-
fore   we  support  the  policy  of   the   State  Department,
that  Dr.  Castro's  regime is  really regarded by  the popu-
lation  of  Cuba as  despotic and unjust. ...  I  cannot help
remembering   a   morning  in   Santiago,   then  under   the
military discipline of  President  Batista, when  the  streets
were  full   of   young  children,  who  had  gone  on  strike
from  their  schools,   as  a  portest  against  the  midnight
kidnapping  of  three  girls,  the  oldest  13,  who  were  held
as   hostages    in   the   military   barracks   because   their
father  had  fled  to  the  mountains.  .  .  .
"Is  it  reasonable  that  I,  like  any  other  passer-by  that
day  in  Santiago,  should  be  distressed  at  the  idea  that
the  measures  the  Government  failed  to  apply  against
President  Batista  should  now  be  employed  against   Dr.
Castro?"                "Yours  truly,  GRAHAM  GREENE."
—The  Times  (London)  Feb.  21.
"There  were  many  criticisms,  comparable  to  those  which  we
in  Britain  are  accustomed  to  level  against  the  Government   of
the  day, of  Cuba's  rulers.    But  there  was  a fierce pride  in  what
they  were  seeking  to  do  and  of  which,  indeed,  there  is  abun-
dant  evidence  for  those  who  care  to  see—notably  in  housing,
education  and  employment.
"It  is to  be  hoped  that  western  statesmen,  including  particu-
larly  our  own,  will  take  heed  of  the  historic  futility  of  em-
bargoes  and   sanctions  as  a  means   of   producing   'acceptable'
governments.  .  . .
"Live  and  let  live  can,  of  course,  always  be  interpreted   as
appeasement,   but  in  the  context   of  the  modern   world  it  is
more  likely  to  avoid  the  mutual   mass  extinction   which   cor-
porate  intolerance   seems  hell-bent   on  accomplishing."
—Donald  W.  T.  Bruce  in  The  Times  (London)   Feb.  23.
London's  Leading  Tory  Newspaper  Reads  U.  S.  A  Lecture  on  Cuba
"It  appears  that  a  renewed  plea  for  an  effective  ban  on
the  shipment of  arms  and  strategic  materials to  Dr.  Castro
is  about  to  be  made  in  Washington.    Since  Britain  already
bans  the  sale  of  arms  and strategic  materials  to  the  Castro
regime  the  scope  for  further  action  is  limited.  .  .  .
"Should   the   intention  turn  out  to   be,  however,  to   per-
suade  NATO  members  to  adopt  the  kind  of  trade  embargo
which  is  already practiced by  the  U.S.,  far  deeper  and  more
difficult   issues  would  be   raised.     The   quantities  involved
are  not,  of  course,  large.    Until  recently  Western   Europe
and   Japan  have   been   supplying   only   about   one-fifth   of
Cuba's  imports,  to  a  total  value  of  £40m.  to  £50m.  a  year.
Almost  all  the  rest,  now  cut  off, has  been  coming  from  the
U.S.    The  first  effect   of   the   U.S.   embargo  on  trade  with
Cuba  will  therefore  be  to  increase  Dr.  Castro's  reliance  still
further  on Soviet  assistance. ...
"Whether  the   second   effect  will  be  to  bring  the   Castro
regime  to  its  knees  is  much  more  doubtful.   It  seems  much
more  likely  that  siege  tactics  of  this  kind  will  heighten  the
puritan  zeal  of   the   Cuban  revolutionaries   and   consolidate
their  attachment  to  Moscow.    It  is  ironical  that  elsewhere
in   Latin   America  the   U.S.   philosophy   is   that   prosperity,
rather  than  tightened  belts,  combined  with  social  and  eco-
nomic  development  and  increased   trade  with  the  West   are
the  best  defenses  against  Communism. But  the  Cuban issue
is  something  over  which  the  cool   good  sense  of  President
Kennedy's  anti-Communist policies  elsewhere  has  had  little
influence.    It  has  become,  in  many  ways,  an  obsession.    It
is  one  which  the  rest   of  the  free  world  should  try  not  to
share."—Editorial  in  The  London  Daily  Telegraph,   Feb.  19.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  5,  19(12
Severe  Sentences  and  One-Sided  Trial  Stir  Sympathy  for  Nuclear  Demonstrators
British  Government's  Blunders  Helping  Bertrand  Russell's  Campaign
The  British  government  stumbles  from  one  blunder  to  an-
other  in  handling  Bertrand  Russell's  Committee  of  100,  which
is  trying  by  civil  disobedience  to  awaken  England  to  the  dan-
gers  of  nuclear  war.  One  blunder  was  the  heavy  punishment
meted  out  to  the  six  arrested  for  the  mass  demonstration  at
the  Wethersfield  air  base  on  December  9:  18  months  for  the
men,  12  months  for  the  one  woman  though  the  jury  recom-
mended  leniency.   These  unusually severe  terms  have  aroused
sympathy.
What  Official  Secrets?
A  second  blunder  lay  in  the  charge.     Instead   of  arresting
for  trespass,  nuisance,  or  disorderly  conduct,  the  six were  con-
victed  under  the  Official  Secrets  Act,  though  the  Chief   Police
Inspector  admitted  at  the  trial  there  was  "absolutely  nothing"
in  the  evidence  to  show  the  accused  were  trying  to  obtain  se-
cret  information.     The   result  was  the  expression  of   concern
in  Parliament that  this  Act  was  being  abused  for  suppressing
freedom  of  opinion.    A  group  of  Laborites led  by  the  former
Minister  of  Defense  Shinwell  is  collecting  signatures  petition-
ing  for  a  speedy  release.    Many  of  these  Laborites  were  too
conventional  hitherto  to  associate  themselves  with  anything so
offbeat  as  the  Committee  for   100.
There  were  other  blunders  useful  to  the  movement   in  the
conduct  of  the  trial.   The  accused  were  charged  with  conduct
"prejudicial  to  the  interest  and  safety  of  the  state,"   but  the
Attorney  General  called  no  witnesses  to  prove  this.    The  de-
fense  on  the  other  hand  sought,  in  the  words  of  the  one  wom-
an  defendant,  to  show  that  "the   state's  action  is  contrary  to
the  interests of  the  people  who  live  in  it."    The  defense  was
not   allowed   to  introduce  evidence  to  support   this  point  of
view.    Sir  Robert  Watson-Watt,    the  inventor  of   radar,  and
Dr.   Linus  Pauling  both  flew  over   from   the   U.S.   to   testify
along  these  lines  for  the  defense  but  were  not  given  the  op-
portunity.     A  Canadian  scientist  was  not   allowed   to   testify
that  the  warning  system  against  nuclear  missiles  was  unstable
and  the  likelihood  of  a  false  alarm  sooner  or  later  very  high.
Defense  counsel  was  cut  off  in  mid-sentence  on  asking  a
Roman   Catholic   Archbishop,   "Which   in  your  view,   is   the
No  'Best  Seller'  Even   Free  of  Charge
"There's   at  least  one  thing  to  be  said  about  Amer-
ica's  post  offices:  they've  got  a  wonderful  inventory  of
'Fallout  Protection'  booklets.    Fact   is,   about   the   only
things  that  aren't  moving  in  those  post  offices  are  the
free  booklets  issued  by  the  Defense  Department.  Wash-
ington's  mam  post   office  has  about  17,000  of  them  out
of  an  original  allotment  of  25,000.   It  dispersed   nearly
100,000   to   branches   in   Virgina   and   Maryland,   and
they've   experienced   no   great   rush   either,   spokesmen
said.  .  .  .  Despite  the  lack  of  demand,  the  first  run  of
25  million  copies  is  being  augmented  by  another  print-
ing  of  10  million  copies,  apparently destined  mainly  for
post   office   shelves."
—News  story  in  Washington  Post, Feb. 25.
higher  law,  the  moral  law or  . . .?"   The  Judge  said  the  Court
was  not  interested  in  morality.   When  the  defense   began  to
ask  an  Air  Commodore,  "When  you  said  you  would    accept
any  order  from  the  State,  Adolph  Eichmann's  defense  .  .  .",
the  Judge  interrupted  again  and  said,  "You   cannot  mention
Eichmann  in  this  case."    But  if  the  "superior  orders"  of  the
State  were  not  accepted  as  an  excuse  at  Nuremberg  for  oper-
ating  crematoriums,  are  such  orders  any  more  valid   morally
for   actions   which   would   cremate  millions   by  nuclear  war?
The  defense  could  not  ask  this  question  of  the  witness.    But
no  judge can keep  it from  haunting  the  conscience  of  our  time.
Finally  the  prosecution  entangled  itself  in  all  kinds  of  con-
tradictions  by  trying  only  6  members  of   the   Committee  of
100.    Bertrand  Russell,  its outstanding  figure,  testified  that  he
too   had   "conspired   and   incited"   people   to   march   on   the
Wethersfield   base:   the  government   was  afraid  to  send   Eng-
land's   foremost   philosopher   now   nearing   90   to   jail   again.
His  purpose,  Lord  Russell  testified,  was  "to  try  and  avoid  the
extermination  of  the  people  of  this  country  and  of  many mil-
lions  elsewhere."     From  the  standpoint  of  this  purpose,  the
trial  must  be  accounted  a  success.    Its  reverberations,   and  the
coming  appeals,  will  serve  further  to  awaken  public  opinion
there  and  elsewhere  to  the  insane  folly  of  "defending"  people
by  nuclear  war.
The  Judgment  at  Nuremberg—and
'•The  real  trial  at  the  Old  Bailey  was  not  of  the  defend-
ants,  but  of  two  sets  of  values  and  two  completely opposed
views  of  the  world.   The  facts  of  the  case  were  not  in  dis-
pute.    The  defendants  agreed  that  they  had  conspired  to
enter  the  Wethersfield air  base  in  an  attempt  to  prevent  it
from  operating.   The  only  question  was  whether  the  action
was,  as  the  charge  put  it,  'prejudicial  to  the  interest   and
safety  of  the  State.'    But  this  matter  was  never  debated  in
court.    The  Attorney-General  argued  that  the  only  judge of
the  State's  interests  must  be  the  State  itself.  .  .  .
"The   Judge  upheld  this   view;  accordingly   the   defense
were  unable to  use  expert  witnesses  like  Dr.  Linus  Pauling
and  Sir  Robert  Watson-Watt  [inventor  of  radar]  to  ques-
tion  whether the  existence  of  the  Wethersfield  air  base  was
in  the  interests  of  the  State. ...  As  this  theory  runs,  if
everybody  in  the  country  has  a  right  to  decide  what  The
interests  of  the  State  are,  and to  take  illegal  action,  if  they
disagree   with   the   interpretation of   the   State  authorities,
then  government  would  be  impossible.  .  .  .
"But   however  well   established  this   theory   is,   it   isn't
the   Judgment  at   the   Old  Bailey
very  appropriate to  our  times.   It  was  formulated when  the
State  had a  good  deal  less  power  than  it  has  now,  when  its
power  to  kill  millions  of  people  in  a  very  short  time  was
unthought  of.    But  the  twentieth  century  has  changed  all
that.  .  .
"Our  experience,  in  fact,  shows  that  the  State  is  the  most
dangerous  criminal  in  the  twentieth  century.    In  the   face
of  ...    policies  of  mass  extermination,  it  is  ludicrous  to  say
that  you  must  wait  five  years  for  an  election  before  you  can
pass  judgment  on  these  policies.    It  is  the  plain  duty  of
every  man  to  make continual judgments  about  the  morality
of  his  Government's  acts.    It  is  not  only  Committee  of  100
supporters  who  are  aware  of  this.   It  was  made  clear  at  the
Nuremberg  trial  that  Governments  are  also  aware  of   it:
but  for  obvious  reasons  Governments are  only  prepared  to
apply  these  principles to  the  actions  of  others.    It  is  a  differ-
ent  matter  when  it  comes  to  your  own  Government.     Hence
the  refusal  to  allow  Eifhmann  to  be  mentioned  in  the  Old
Bailey."
—Peace  News  (London),  February  23.
3        .-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  5,  19U2
In  Vietnam,  as  In   Guatemala   and  Turkey,  U.S. Trained  Rebels  Appear
(Continued   from   Page One)
merit  problem"  can  be  achieved  only  "by  those  who  bear  the
supreme  responsibility."     If  such  meetings  are  taken  as  matter
of   course,   their   failure  to  achieve  results  at   once   will   also
be  taken  for  granted.    Another  value  lies  in  the  chance  to  ex-
plore  other  problems.    The  British are  eager  and  the  Germans
frantic  over  the  idea  that  the  impossibly narrow  limits  imposed
by  Adenauer  on  Berlin  negotiations  may  be  circumvented  via
the  arms  conference.    If  the  top  leaders  agree  not  to  give  nu-
clear  arms  to  nations  which  do  not  already  possess  them,  this
cannot  be  attacked  as  "discriminating"  against  the   Germans
but  may  ease  Russian  anxieties  in  Central  Europe  and  provide
a  bargaining  counter  on  Berlin.    A  third  point  should  be  kept
in  mind.    If  Khrushchev  cannot  get  results  on  arms  or  Berlin
by  his  co-existence  policy,  a  new  sharp  turn  on  Moscow's  part
may  be  in  the  cards.    The   cold  warriors  here  and  in  Bonn
would,  of  course,  welcome  it.
Can  You  Liberate  With Napalm?
In  the  meantime  we  drift  toward  trouble  in  the  Far   East,
drugged  by  our  own  public  relations  hashish.    We  tell our-
selves  that  we  are  now  strong  on  anti-guerrilla  activities  when
we are only  blundering  into  the  morass  from  which  the  French
barely  extricated  themselves.    Just  as  our  government   changed
its  line  on  Diem  and  put  out  a  flood  of  optimistic  estimates of
his  strength  and  popularity,  two  fliers  bombed  his  palace.     It
turns  out  that  these  desperate  rebels  "belonged  to  the   most
westernized  of  Vietnam's  military services,"  according  to  Hom-
er  Bigart's  ever  sharp  and  independent  eye  in  the  New   York
Times  Feb.  28  from  Saigon,  and  "had  been  trained  by  Ameri-
can  military  advisers  in  the  techniques  of  dropping  napalm"
which  they  did  on  the  Presidential  palace.    Diem's  Secretary
denies  this  because  as  Bigart  cabled  "there  is  some  sensitivity
here  on  the  subject  of  napalm,  which  was  used  against  Viet-
nam  by the  French."   Dropping  napalm,  as the  ad  men  would
say,   provides  the  wrong  image  for  a  liberating   army.     The
warning  bells  toll  but  we  do  not  listen.    In  Guatemala,  as  we
pointed  out  last  week,  the  latest  uprising  was  by  dissident   offi-
cers  trained  in  our  anti-guerrilla  school  at  Fort  Gulick.     In
Turkey,  American-trained  and  armed  officers  have  just  tried  to
Power  Sellout  on  The  New  Frontier
It  is  a  tragedy  there is  no  independent  Congressional
committee   to   investigate   Secretary   of    the   Interior
U<lall's  hasty  shelving  of   the  plan  to  build   a  Federal
transmission   system   for   the   Colorado  River   Storage
Project.    This  plan  was  approved  by  Congress  and  set
in   motion  by  his   predecessor,  Eisenhower's  Secretary
of  the  Interior  Seaton.    Udall  was  pledgee!  to  it.    The
pledge  has  been  broken  in  a  most  suspicious fashion.
The  plan  for  a  Federal  transmission  system   has  been
jettisoned  on  the  basis  of   "letters   of  intent"  filed  by
the  big  power companies serving  Wyoming,  Utah, Ari-
zona,  Colorado,  and  New   Mexico.   "Letters  of  intent"
are  not  firm  contracts.    For  a  purported saving  of  $27
million  on  a  $150  million  project,  the  government  sur-
renders   transmission  to   the   private  companies.    The
power   to   be   generated   is   publicly   owned.     The   law
promised  nonprofit  distributors such  as  rural  coops  and
public  power  districts  priority  in  the  purchase  of  this
power.    Private  companies  will  now  control   the   "toll
gate"  in  between.    Senator  Anderson  of   New  Mexico
has  already given  his  blessing  as  Chairman of  the  Sen-
ate  Interior  Committee  to  this  sellout.
overthrow   the  government,   impatient   for   long   overdue   re-
forms,  as  in  South  Vietnam.    You  can  show  a  man  how   to
fight  but  it's harder  to  keep  him  from  thinking.   It's  safer  to
send  in  GI's  who  won't  know  what  it's all  about.
* At  his  press  conference  Feb. 21  Mr.  Kennedy  gave   the
game  away.    He  was   asked  "in  considering   the   conditions
under  which  the  U.S.  might  refrain  from   a  resumption  of
nuclear  testing"  if  he  would  comment  on  a  recent   letter   to
the  New  York  Times  suggesting   that  "both  sides  be  allowed
to  maintain  preparations  at  the  ready  for  immediate  tests
should  the  other  side  be  detected  setting   off  a  surprise   ex-
plosion."    Mr.  Kennedy  replied  that  this  would  not  meet "all
of  the  problem," since  the  Soviets  had  already  set   off   their
tests  and  "we  have  to  consider  the  effects  upon  our  security
of  those  tests."   To  speak  plainly  this  means  that  since  they
had  a  round,  we  have  to  have  a  round,  too.  Talk  of  condi-
tions  under  which  we  might  refrain  is  like  the  patter  with
which   the   sleight-of-hand  artist   diverts   the   audience's   at-
tention   from  what  he's  really   doing.
Total  Anti-Test  Letters  to  the  President  Now  2,713—Keep   Them   Coining
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name
8/6/62
Street    .......................................................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ...............................................................................
Street    ...........................................................................................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.,  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M. Stone.   Subscription:  *6  in  the  U.  S.;   *6  in
Canada;   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   $16  to  Europe;  120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED