I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962feb05.pdf

============================================================

More  on McCone,  P.  2
Army's  Choice  for  CIA's  No.  2  Man Dislikes  Fabian  Socialists  and  Thinks  Rightists  Maligned,  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  5FEBRUARY  5,  1962
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Where  There  Is  Still  Hope  of  a  Nuclear  Test  Agreement
In  the  wake of  the  breakdown in  the  Geneva  test  talks,  we
appeal   to  Senator   Humphrey   to  reactivate   his   disarmament
subcommittee  and  give  the  country  a  full   report  on  what  is
happening  in  the  field  of  underground  test  detection.    Who-
ever  is  responsible  for  the  breakdown  in  the  talks,  the  need
for  a  new  test  cessation  agreement will  come  up  again, wheth-
er  the  Russians want  it  to  or  not,  when  the  new  United  Na-
tions disarmament negotiating  group  begins  its work in March.
It  was  the  neutrals,   led  by  India,  who  first  focused   public
attention  on  the  fallout  peril,  and  they  may  be  expected   to
make  their  influence  felt  on  the  new  UN   committee.    The
key  to  agreement  may  lie  in  new  discoveries  in  long  range
underground  test  detection.    These  may  make  surveillance  as
feasible   for   underground   testing   as   it   is   for   atmospheric,
underwater  and  outer  space  tests.
Dr.  Teller  Wrong  Again
The  public  has a  right  to know  more  about  several  matters.
One  is the  report,  as carried  at the  time by both  the  New  York
Times  and  the  Washington  Post,  that  one  of  the  tests  in  the
recent   Soviet   series   which   we   detected   was   underground.
Most  of  the  tests  in  the  Soviet  series was in  the  one  to  5 mega-
ton  range.    The  recent  Project Gnome  in  New  Mexico  showed
that  nuclear  blasts  in  this  low  range  can  be  detected  on  the
other  side of  the  world.    A  second  question  on which we  need
to  know  more  is  the   incorrectness   of  Dr.   Edward  Teller's
famous    decoupling   computations   as   revealed   by   Project
Gnome.    The  salt  formation  in  which  it  was  exploded  was
supposed  to  cut  down  the  strength  of  the  waves  generated  by
about  3 times.    Instead  the  salt  seems  to  have  magnified  them.
David  Perlman,  science  editor  of  the  San  Francisco  Chronicle,
in  a  fuller  report   (Dec.   20)   than  the  Eastern  press  carried,
revealed  that  the  waves were  stronger  and  faster than  expected
to  be.    In  verifying  the  Chronicle's story,  we  learn  that  a  full
report  on  Project  Gnome  should  be  ready  in  two  or  three
weeks.    We  hope  Senator  Humphrey,  who  has  done  so much
in  this  field, will  make  sure  that  the  results  are  not  withheld.
The  Chronicle said  the  very  earliest  waves  produced  by  the
blast—the  so-called  compression  waves,  which  show  the  direc-
tion  of  first  motion  and  are  the  characteristic  "signature"  of
nuclear  explosions  as  distinct  from  earthquakes—were  trans-
mitted  clearly  to  stations  as  far  off  as  Finland,  Sweden,  Japan
and  the  Philippines,  up  to  7200  miles  away.   The  Chronicle
quoted  Leonard  M.  Murphy,  chief  seismologist   of  the   U.S.
Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey  as" saying that  "this  phenomenon,
coupled  with unexpectedly  long  range  detection,  would  almost
surely  indicate that  underground  nuclear  blasts  may eventually
prove  quite  distinguishable  from  natural  earthquakes."     In
2  *
Our  Little  Joke  About  Punta  del  Este
The  Punta  del  Este  conference had not  ended in time
for  comment  in  this  week's  issue,  but  perhaps  we  can
hold  the  fort  with  a  little  joke.   Unfortunately nobody
seems  to  think  it  funny.  We  tried  it  out  last  Monday
at  a  Soviet  Embassy  reception for  Izvestia's  very like-
able  Mr. Adzhubei.    We  suggested  it  was  odd  that  the
world's  two  most  powerful  nations  seemed  so  afraid of
two  of  the  smallest.   "We're  neurotic  about  Cuba,"  I
said,  "and  you're neurotic about  Albania."   Neither  the
Russians  nor  the  Americans  thought  this  funny.    The
only  laugh  we  got  was  from  a   Pole.
We  brooded  over  the  misfire  on  our  way  home.   The
Russians  think  we've  been  making  a  spectacle  of  our-
selves over Cuba.   But  they have been  engaged  in  a not
too  dissimilar  Latin  American  operation.    On  Jan.  12,
Pravda  published  a  manifesto  by  the  Communist Party
of  Paraguay loyally condemning Albania.   On checking
we  found  that  the  last  estimate  our  State  Department
got  from  Paraguay's  secret  police  put  its  Communist
Party,  all  underground,  at  500.   This  sizeable reinforce-
ment  should  make  Russia  feel  more  secure.
We  have  another  suggestion.    It  is  that  the neutral
bloc  apply some  therapeutic  humor  by  offering  to  make
Punta  del  Este  available  to  Khrushchev  so  he  can  use
the  place,  once  Kennedy  is  through with  it,  for  a  Latin
American  conference  of  his   own,  to  marshal  support
for   Albania's  expulsion,  or  at  least   suspension,   from
the  Warsaw  Pact.
Indeed,  if  the  U.S.  would  only  be  patient,  it  is  not
hard  to  foresee  yet  another  Punta  del  Este  conference,
this  time  of  exasperated  Latin  American  Communists
trying  desperately  to  decide  what  to  do  when  Castro's
notions   of   Marxism-Leninism   grow  too  outrageously
heretical,  as  one  can  be  sure  they  will.
checking  this  we  learn  that  U.S.  experts  were  much  impressed
because  the  Finnish  station,  for   example,   identified   Project
Gnome  on  its  seismograph  as  a  nuclear  test  even  though  the
shot,  unbeknownst to  the  Finns, had  been  delayed  four  hours.
//  stations in  Japan,  Finland,  and  Sweden  can detect  a mere 5
kilvton  shot  underground  in  far   off   New  Mexico,   they  can
certainly  detect  shots in  the  neighboring  Soviet  Union.
Here  may  lie  the  way to  agreement,  by making unnecessary
elaborate   "listening   posts"  the  Soviets  regard   as  intelligence
threatening  their  security.    The  inspection  problem  has  been
exaggerated  to  the  point  where  the  Adminlstrttion  is  its  pris-
oner.    Senator  Humphrey  could  help  by  throwing  a  spotlight
on  this  area.   We  hope  readers will  keep  this  in mind  in writ-
ing   the   President  not   to   resume   tests.     As    *<rf   Wednesday
morning,  Jan.  31,  readers  had  sent  him  963  ittters.    Keep
them  coming.
1    .•
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February   5,  19(ii2
How  Reconcile  Mr. Kennedy's  Ethics  Message  With  His  New  CIA  Chief's   Stockholdings?
CIA's  Conflict-of-interest  Rules  Were  Kept  A  Secret  From  McCone!
During  last  week's   Senate  debate  on  the  McCone   nomina-
tion,   Clark   (D.   Pa.)    dug   up   the   conflict   of   interest  rules
which  CIA  established   for  its  employes.    When  he  put   these
in  the  Congressional  Record   (Jan.  29)   Symington   (D.    Mo.)
objected   that  McCone  had   not   been   furnished   them   by  the
CIA  "and   therefore  knew  nothing  of  the  rules."     Symington
even   asserted   that   Allen  W.  Dulles,   McCone's   predecessor,
was  also  kept  in  the  dark,  but  expunged  this remark  later  from
the  Record.    Either  Dulles  and  McCone  were  not   considered
sufficiently   cleared,  or  had  not  established—in  the  linguistics
of  intelligence—"need  to  know."    Or  else  the  CIA  does  not
take  the  rules   seriously.
No  Conflict  With  The  Oil  Business?
These  rules,  and  their  disappearance  into  the  topmost  secret
files, have  an  interesting  history.    Last  April  27  Mr.  Kennedy
sent  Congress  a  special  message  on  ethical  conduct  in  the  gov-
ernment  in  which  he  asked  overhaul  of  the  laws  to  eliminate
any  conflict of  interest  "not  only  in  reality but  in  appearance."
Mr.  Kennedy   followed   this  up  on  May  5  with  an  executive
order   instructing  all  agencies  to  adopt   stricter  conflict  of   in-
terest  rules.    In  pursuance  of  these  instructions,  CIA   adopted
new  rules  last  Aug.  29  so strictly worded  as  to  seem  to  require
Mr.  McCone  to  divest  himself  of  a million  dollar   stockholding
in  Standard  of  California  and  of  wholly  owned  shipping  con-
cerns  whose  main  business  is carrying oil  for  the  big  oil  com-
panies.    These  companies   are  deep   in   the   intrigues   of   the
Middle  East  and  Latin  America  where  a  too  objective  intelli-
gence  could  be  harmful   to  their  interests.
The   day  after   Clark   called   attention  to  CIA's   cbnflict   of
interest   regulations,   Symington   turned   up   with   an   opinion
from   CIA's  General   Counsel  which  saw  no  conflict   between
Mr.  McCone's  business  interests  and  his  work  at  CIA.     Nor-
mally   the   Republicans,  recalling   Mr.   Kennedy's  attacks   on
the  Sherman  Adams  affair,  would  have  taken  the  offensive  on
the   issue.    But  protection  of  oil  interests  is  a  bipartisan  con-
cern.    Senators  Saltonstall and  Dirksen  not  only  came  to  Mr.
McCone's   defense   but   blocked   Majority   Leader  Mansfield's
attempt  to  put  off  the  vote  from  2  p.m.  last  Wednesday  until
Unfair,   Unjust  and  Ungenerous
"I   also   mentioned,   when   the   [Senator]  McCarthy
was  before  the  committee,  that   I  doubted  the  CIA  took
credit   for   the   overthrow  of   Dr.   Arbenz   as   President
of   Guatemala,  because   our  Ambassador   to  Guatemala
at  that  time  told  me  personally  he  felt  he  had  had  the
most   to  do  with  it."
—Symington  (D.  Mo.)  to the  Senate, Jan.  29.
later  -in  the  week  when  three  opponents   of   the  nomination,
Morse,   Clark  and   Douglas   could   be  present   to  vote.     The
nomination  was  voted,  at  press  time,  71  to  12.    The  oil  com-
panies  could  not  have  gotten  away  with  this  if  the  President
were   a   Republican.    This   is  another   example  of   how    the
Kennedy   Administration   has  pulled   the   teeth   of   the   liberal
opposition.
Mr.   McCone's   record- hardly  fits  the  standards  established
by  Mr.  Kennedy.    As  head  of  the  AEC,  by  an  ingenious trust
device,   he   continued   to   draw   profit   from   private  shipping
concerns  doing  business  with  major  AEC  contractors,  a  prac-
tice  he  cleared  at  the  time in  a  "Dear  Sherm"  letter  which  was
brought  to  light  exclusively  in  this  Weekly   (July  14,  1958).
The   press   ignored   the   letter,   though   Mr.   Sherman   Adams,
deep  in  the  Goldfine  scandal, was  a  strange  mentor  for  ethical
problems.     Since  then   Drew   Pearson   brought   to  light  that
a  shipping  concern  with  which  Mr.  McCone  had  joint  inter-
ests  mysteriously moved   from  second-to-the-bottom  of  the  list
to  obtain  the  contract  for  operating  the  first  atomic  vessel  just
as  Mr.   McCone   became  head  of  CIA.     He   also  dug  up   the
story  of  how  Mr.  McCone's   old   friends,  the  Kaiser  interests,
obtained  a  contract  while  he  was  Under  Secretary  for   Air  to
Build   "flying   boxcars"   for   $1,200,000   each   which   Fairchild
had   been   turning  out   for  5260,000.     On   a  meagre   record,
with  no  real  investigation,  there  is  no  proof  of  Mr.   McCone's
personal    involvement.      But   they   illustrate  his   unfortunate
inability  to  maintain  appearances.    His  decision  to  hold  on  to
his   business   interests,  despite  his   new   job,   is  not   in   accord
with  Mr.  Kennedy's  message.     Is  it  as  forgotten  at  the  White
House  as  at  the  CIA  ?
Holy  War  Attitudes  Trouble  Clark  As
"I  am  seriously   concerned   at  the  growth  in  our   country,
during  the  last   year   or  two,  of   a  certain  militaristic  atti-
tude  toward  the  conduct  of  our .foreign  affairs.    I  am   con-
cerned   that   we   tend   to   become   unduly   emotional   in   our
conflict  with communism—and  a  serious  conflict it,is.    I  feel
we  tend  to  deal  with  it  in  terms  of  a  holy  war,  just  as  that
which  took  place  for  700  years  between  the   Mohammedans
and   the   Christians,   or   which   racked   Europe   in   the   17th
century  in  the  war  between  .Catholics  and  Protestants.
"I   fear   that   we   do  not   look   objectively    and   calmly   at
negotiations  looking  toward  peace,  at  the  possibility   of   dis-
armament,   at   the   possibility   of   the   strengthening   of   the
United   Nations  in  the  interest   of   peace,   at  the   possibility
of   the   President's    sound   premise   for   total   and   complete
disarmament   under  enforceable  world  law.   .  .  .
"I  raise  the   question   of   whether   Mr.  McCone—able,   in-
telligent,  honest,   stable—is  a  man  of  judicial   temperament.
I  suspect  that  he  is  not.  .  .  .  Mr.  McCone  is  said  to  believe
we  should   immediately   resume   testing  in  the  atmosphere.
...  He  opposed  the  moratorium.  .  .  .  Will  not  that  strong,
He  Explains  His  Opposition  to  McCone
honestly  held  conviction  not  only   about   this  question   alone
but  also  about  a  score  of  other  matters,  inevitably  affect  the
objectivity  and  the  validity  of  the  evaluation  of   intelligence
lie  will  give  to  the  President?   .  .  .
"Finally,  Mr.  President ...  I  have  a  serious  doubt   .  .  .
that   the  holdings  by  Mr  McCone  of   over   a  million  dollars
worth  of  stock  of  the  Standard  Oil  Company   of  California
is  both  a  legal  violation of  the  conflict-of-interest  laws  arid
also  a  very  unwise  holding. ...  If  a  man  wishes  to   delve
into  the   tortuous   politics   of   the   Middle   East,   .  .   .  if   he
wishes  to  inject  himself  into  the  tortuous  policies  of  Castro-
ism  and  its  efforts  to  take  over  democratically  elected   gov-
ernments   in   Latin   America,   such   as   Venezuela,   then   he
should  not  have  a  substantial  interest   in  any  oil   company,
which  inevitably  is  deeply   involved. ...
"I  am  concerned  about   his  views  toward  peace  and   con-
cerned   by  his  apparent   view  that  there  is  little  immediate
chance   of   achieving   it,  and  that   sole   reliance   on  military
strength   is  a  better  policy. ...
—Clark  (D.  Pa.)  to the  U.S.  Senate, Jan.  30.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  Ftbrnary    !>,
In  Gen.  Trudeau's  Political   Geography,  The  Center   Is  Where   Goldwater  Stands
Under  the  Senate  Spotlight:  The  Army's  Choice  to  Be No.  2 Man  in  CIA
Looking   at  the  Generals   turned   up   in  the  current  Senate
inquiry  into  military  censorship,  an  editorial in  The  Times  of
London   (Jan.  24)   quotes  the  words  of  the  Duke  of  Welling-
ton,  "I  don't  know  what  effect  these  men  will  have  upon   the
enemy  but,  by  God,   they  terrify   me."     There  are  thoughtful
men  among   our  military  leaders,   as  Gen.   White's  testimony
in  the  adjoining  box   indicates,  but   there   is  also  a  generous
assortment  of  windy  old  warriors who  seem  to  have  done  their
basic  training  as  caption   writers  for   the   silent    films.    They
make  the  struggle  against  Communism  sound   like  the   Perils
of   Pauline.
He  Sees  The  Left  Suspect  But  The  Right  Maligned
A  sample  is  this  passage  from  a  speech   by  Lt.  Gen.   A.  G.
Trudeau,   Chief   of   Research   and   Development,   U.S.   Army.
"At  a  time,"  Gen.  Trudeau   said,  taking  a  deep  breath,  "when
the  horrible  maelstrom  of  World  Communism,  now  engulfing
large  segments   of  the  world's  populations,   seeks  to  suck  our
nation,  and   the   rest   of  the  world,   into  the  vortex   of   death
and  destruction,  I  would  be  faithless  to  my  trust  if  I  did  not
speak   out."    Gen.   Trudeau   is  reported   (Washington    Daily
News,  Jan.  25)  to  be  the  Army's  leading  candidate  for  deputy
director   of  CIA.     He   should   be  Moscow's  favorite,  too.     A
passage  in  his  interrogation   about  Fabian  Socialism  which  we
reproduce   in  the  box  below  shows  that   by  his  standards,  as
in  that  rightist  film,  Communism  on  The  Match,  most  of  the
world  is already  Red.    His  political  geography  locates  the  cen-
ter  about  where  Goldwater   stands,  but  while  all  to  the  left  of
it  is  suspect,  all  to  the  right   of   it  seems  to  be   maligned.
His  speeches   make  us  wonder  why  the  Army  picked   Gen.
Trudeau  to  supervise  the  billion   a  year  it  spends  on   research
and   development,   a  job  we  supposed   called   for   a   scientific
type.    The  General's  attainments  lie  in  the  literary   field.   His
are  some  of  the  finest  mixed  metaphors   and  anti-climaxes  to
Should   the   Military   'Educate'  The   Public?
Mr.  Kendall  [Chief  Counsel]:  General,  what  is  your
•opinion  of  the  responsibility of  the  military in  educating
the  public  to  the  menace  of  the  cold  war?
Gen.  White  [former  Chief  of  Staff   U.S.   Air  Force]:
It  seems  to .me  the  role  of  the  military in  the  education
of  the  U.S.   public  is  a  very  sensitive   question  and  one
that  can  be  misused.    I  am  not  sure  that  I  would  like
it  if  I  were  a  member of  the  public.   And  I  am  equally
sure  that  as  a  member  of  the  military  I  would  have  a
question  that  the  education  of  the  U.S.   public  is  part
of   my   main  job.
Sen.   Saltonstall   (R.  Mass.):  Would  your  opinion  be
changed  if  you  changed  'educate'  to  'inform'?
Gen.  White: I  would  like  to  have  everyone  who  knows
about  the  internal  menace  of  Communism  preach  it  to
high  heaven  but  as  a  matter  of  principle  I  am  dubious
about  the  military  having  that  mission.    Now   suppose
by  a  miracle  Communism disappeared  from  the  face  of
the   earth,  and  yet   we   had  set   the   precedent   of   the
military   informing—I   would  say   indoctrinating,   edu-
cating—the  public  against  this  particular  subject.    You
have  opened  the  door.    Where  do  we  go  from  there?
Again,  I  am  talking principle.
Sen.  Stennis  (D.  Miss.):  You  want  to  keep  the  mili-
tary  profession   more  strictly  military?
Gen.  White:  I  think  you  have  said  it  for  me.
—Senate  inquiry  into  "military  muzzling"  Jan.  25.
be  found   in  the   Stennis   committee's    anthology   of  Pentagon
prose.    One  of  our  favorites  is  the  peroration   in  which   Gen.
Trudeau   warned,    "The    outcome   will   determine    not    only
whether   we  live  in  a  free  or  a  slave  state  but  whether   world
trade  will  be  based  on  four  rubles  to  the  dollar  or  four  dollars
to  the  ruble."    We'd    gladly  pay  four   dollars   for  a  ruble   to
stay   free.
Gen.  Trudeau  Is  Suspicious  of  Fabian  Socialists  and  Protective   Toward  Right-Wingers
Sen.  Bartlett  (D.  Ala.):  General,  I  note  that  a mandatory
change  was  made  in  a  speech  you  delivered  before  the  Na-
tional  Strategy   Seminar  on  Jan.  21,  1961.    You  had  under-
taken  to  say:  "We will  be  blocked  not  only  by  selfish inter-
ests  who  are   unable  to   rise   to   the   occasion,   but  by   the
Fabian   Socialists    and   Communists   who",   and   so   forth.
Would  you  equate  the  Fabian  Socialists   and  Communists?
Gen.  Trudeau:  [Chief  of  Research  and  Development,  U.S.
Army]:  I  do  not  know  that  my  definition  of  Fabian  Social-
ism  agrees  with  yours,  Senator,  because  I  don't  know  what
yours  is—
Sen.  Bartlett:  I  must  say   that  I  do  not  have  one.    I  do
not  know  much  about  Fabian  Socialism.
Gen.  Trudeau:  Perhaps   I  should  not   either,   but  it   is   a
term  that  has  come  down,  as  I  understand it,  from  a  society
of   socialists   that  was   organized  in  1884  to  spread  social-
ist  principles gradually.  .  .  .
The  Fabian  Socialists,  as  such,  using  the  tactics  of   [the
famous  Roman General]  Fabius  himself, are  supposed  to  be
those  who  lean  toward  Communism,  perhaps  a  little  more
toward  that  intermediate  step  called  socialism,   and  in  the
belief  that  that  can  be  attained  and  should  be  attained with-
out  revolution  and  by  evolution.  .  .  .
And  this  represents   some  of  those  to  the  left  who  seem
to  appear  at   various  times,  usually  anonymously,  and  not
in   the   records   of   Mr.   Hoover,   as   are   the   card-carrying
Communists,  who  sometimes  raise  questions  as  to  where  we
are  going  or  where  they  would  like  us  to  go.
I  cannot  name  these  individuals.    I  think  there  are  some
of  them  and  where  they  are  I  don't  know.    But  in  this  term
of  "Fellow  travellers",  I  was  associating  it  with  people  who
are  definitely   left   to  the  center,  and  I  base  the  center   in
my  interpretation as  being  an  advocate  of  those  principles
on  which  our  country  is  established,  including  the  spiritual
guidance  and  God  and  the  respect  for  the  dignity  of   man.
And   the   belief   in  private  enterprise   within   reasonable
direction  and  not  in  the  control  of   the  state,   so  that   man
becomes  a  slave.    This  is  where  I  stand  with  respect  to  the
center  position.    The  people  I  am  talking  about,   whatever
terminology  I  happened to  use  at  the  time,  fall  in  the  cate-
gory  that  are  substantially to  the  left  of  this  position.
And  to  these  people  sometimes  the  individual who  stands
as  solidly  to  the  center  of   things  we  have   long  believed
in,  is  attributed to  be  an  extreme  right  wing  radical,  with-
out  evidence  of  this  being  the  fact,  but  making  good  news
as   far   as  they  are  concerned.     I  hope  this  answers   your
question,  Senator  Bartlett.
Sen.  Bartlett: In  my  opinion you  have  made  a  most  help-
ful   statement   and  you  have  been  a  splendid   witness.
—Senate  inquiry  into  "military  muzzling"  Jan.  2£.
2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  5, 1962
More  Than  Urban  Renewal,  This  Country  Needs  Renewal  of  Its  Free   Traditions
Mr. Kennedy Will  Have  to  Do  More Than  Glare  Icily  at  Sarah  McClendon
Some  of  my  liberal  colleagues  may  be  a  trifle  too  ecstatic
over  the  contempt  and  anger  with which the  President  greeted
Sarah  McClendon's  rasping  question  at  press  conference  about
"two   well-known   security   risks"   in   the   State   Department.
What  did  they  expect  Mr.  Kennedy  to  do?    Kiss  her?    We
have  grown  so  accustomed  to  pusallinimity  that  the instinctive
reaction  of  an  executive  and  a  gentleman  when  subordinates
are  slandered  is  treated  as  if  it  were  some  kind  of  libertarian
Thermopylae.    Much  more  needs  to  be  done.    The  incident
should  make  the  President  realize  that,  far  more  than  urban
renewal,  this  country  needs   renewal  of   its  free  institutions.
The  First  Amendment  isn't  what  it  used  to  be  and   dissent
is  no  longer  a  respectable  neighborhood.
Fair  Play  Was  Once  Regarded  as  American
Fair  play  used  to  be  thought  of  as  an  American character-
istic  but  anyone  even  vaguely  accused  of  being  a  security  risk
is  regarded  as  outside  the  protective  pale  of  the  laws  of  slan-
der.   Mrs.  McClendon   in  her  gross  way  was  only  reflecting
this  atmosphere.    Of  the  two  "well  known  security  risks"  she
named,  one  was unknown  to  me  or  any  other  reporter  I  have
been  able  to  find.  The  other,  Wm.  A.  Wieland,  could  better
be  described  as  well-smeared.    The   Senate  Internal  Security
Committee,   with   characteristic  impartiality,  has   released   all
the  adverse  testimony  against   him   in  the   Cuban   affair   but
withheld  that  in  his  favor.
Yet  we  have grown  so  accustomed  to  character assassination
that  there  was  no  public  outcry  during  the  week  when  a  Sen-
ate  committee  approved  $325,000  for  another  year of  its  prac-
tice  by  the  Internal  Security  Committee.     And  on  the   other
side  of  the  Capitol  only  two  Congressmen,  Ryan of  New  York
and  Roosevelt of  California,  recorded  themselves  in  opposition
when  the  House  voted  $350,000  more  for  the  Un-American
Activities  Committee.    The   House,   like  the   Senate,  is  liter-
ally  afraid  to  stand  up  and  be  counted  on  the  issue.
Unfortunately  Mr.  Kennedy,  though  urbane  and  civilized,
has  rarely  been  responsive  to   issues  of  civil  liberties.     The
First  Amendment  and   Jefferson   strike  no  strong  chords  of
sympathy  in  him.    This  was  apparent  when  he  was  asked  at
the  same  press  conference  about  the  new  postal  bill's  censor-
Rep.  Ryan  on The Un-Americans
"We  should  remember  that  the  issue  involved  is  de-
mocracy.    The  Un-American  Activities  Committee,  the
atmosphere  of  anxiety   it   embodies,   and  the  fear  and
suspicion   it  spreads   are  the  antithesis   to  the  spirit  of
democracy.  The  democratic  spirit  demands   controversy,
dissent,  free  discussion,  and free  association.    These  the
committee   clearly   opposes.    The   committee   itself    is
the  high  priest  of  acceptability.    It  alone  defines  what
is  and what  is  not  un-American.   When  students  oppose
the  committee,  it  accuses  them  of  toying  with  treason.
The  committee has  lost  faith  in  the  democratic   process.
It-is  vital  to  that   process  that   dissent  be  heard  and
differences   be   argued   out   to   be  accepted   or   rejected
by  ultimate  common  sense."
—Rep.   John   F.  Ryan   (D.  N.Y.)   opposing   a  new
$350,000   appropriation    for   the  un-Americans   in   the
House  Jan. 24  where  it  was  passed  by  voice  vote,  only
Ryan   and   James   Roosevelt   of   California     recording
opposition.
ship  provisions,  to  give  them  their  right  name.
Mr.  Kennedy  didn't  think  they  gave  the  Attorney  General
"very  clear  guidance"  and  hoped   the  Senate  would  examine
the  language  to  "make  sure  it's effective."   It's true  he  said
something  at  the  end  about  the  American  people  being  "used
to hearing  all  sides"  (a  useful myth,  but  a myth all the  same).
There  was  no  fire  in  the  answer.
These  postal  provisions  are  a  triumph  of  Birchism.    They
are  embodied  in  the  so-called  Cunningham-Rousselot amend-
ment,  the  latter  being  one  of  the  two  members  of  the  House
who  are  members  of  the  John  Birch  Society.    The  provisions
are  broad  enough  to  bar  from  the  mails  matter  of  domestic
as  well  as  foreign  origin  if  the  Attorney  General   deems   it
"financed  or  sponsored  directly  or  indirectly  by  any  Commu-
nist  controlled  government."    How  does  the  Attorney General
make  this  determination without  examining  the  mails?    Even
Mr.  Walter  last  year  said  this  was  unconstitutional.    But  no
clear  word  on  the  subject  comes  from  the  White  House  and
only  two  Congressmen,  both  from  New  York  City,  the  Demo-
crat  Ryan  and  the  Republican  Lindsay,  voted  against  it.
Suggestion:  One  Topeka,  Kansas,  Reader  Holding  A  Letter-Writing  Party  to Speed  Those  Test  Appeals  to JFK
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................................................................................—
Street   ..................................
City   ............................................2
2/5/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ...............................................................................
Street    ..........................................................................................
City   .................,.........................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,   D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday  in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  6618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  JS  in  the  U.  S.;   $6 in
Canada:  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;   $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED