I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962sep24.pdf

============================================================

JFK   on  Space  — Soap  Ad   Style,  P.  2
When  Is  The  White House Going  to  Give  Kefauver  A Hand in  The  Steel  Data  Fight?   See Page 3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  34
SEPTEMBER  24,  1962
'<"       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Time,  The  Monroe  Doctrine  and  War   On  Cuba
Time  Magazine  (Sept.  21)   calls  for  war  against  Cuba  in
a  special   cover  article  about  the  Monroe   Doctrine.    Its sug-
gestion  of  "a  direct  U.S. invasion  of  Cuba,  carried  out  with
sufficient   force  to  get  the  job  done  with  surgical  speed  and
efficiency";  its  dismissal  of  inter-American pacts  against  inter-
vention  as  "multilateral  flypaper";  and  its  distortions  of   the
Monroe  Doctrine  to  lay  a  basis  for  such  action  will  hurt  our
country  deeply  in  this  hemisphere  and  beyond  it.    It  recalls
how  another lord  of  the  press,  Wm.  Randolph  Hearst,  helped
pressure  another  unwilling but  wavering  President,  McKinley,
into  war.   To  see  how  the  Monroe  Doctrine   looks  to  our
neighbors  is  now  a  necessity.   This  is  our  contribution  to  it.
No  Monroe  Doctrine  freed  Latin  America.   "Our brothers
of  the  north,"  Bolivar  said,  "have  been  apathetic bystanders
in  our  struggle."    Latin  America  owed  its  successful  revolt  to
the  weakening  of  Spain  by  the  Napoleonic  invasion.    From
that  point  on,   Britain  and   the  U.S. became  rivals  for   the
hemisphere.    Both  preferred   to  leave  a  weakened  Spain  in
control.    Britain  -wanted  a  Spain  strong   enough   to   counter-
balance  France  but  too  weak  to  stop  its  growing  trade  with
Spanish  America.    Once  we  had  taken  Florida,  we  preferred
Spanish  rule in  Cuba  and  Puerto  Rico  rather  than  their  libera-
tion   by  the   anti-slavery  Spanish  American  revolutionists   or
their  transfer  to  Britain.
Canning's  Double  Purpose
The   Holy  Alliance  of   Russia,  Austria  and   Prussia,  with
France,  when  it  threatened  reconquest  of  the  Spanish  colonies
was  a threat to England's  trade and  power.    The  joint declara-
tion  suggested  to  us  by the  British  Foreign  Minister,  Canning,
in  August,  1823,  was  a  subtle  effort  to  block  American expan-
sion  as  well,  by  getting  us  to  join  England  in  declaring  "We
aim  not  at  the  possession  of  any  portion   of  them  [i.e.  the
former  Spanish  colonies]  ourselves."     In  the  Cabinet  discus-
sion  which  preceded  the  Monroe  Doctrine,  "Mr. John  Quincy
Adams  thought  that  Canning  wanted  some  public  pledge from
the  United  States  not  only  against  the  forcible  intervention
of  the  Holy  Alliance  in  Spanish  America  but  also  especially
against  the  acquisition  by  the  United   States  of  any  part  of
those  countries."    (p.  100 J.  Reuben  Clark's  Memorandum  on
the   Monroe   Doctrine,   State  Dept,  1930.)    The  shape  of
things  to  come  may  be  seen  in  the  same  record's  notation  that
Calhoun   was  prepared   for   such   a   declaration   "even   if   it
should  pledge  the  U.S. not  to  take  Cuba  or  Texas."    Adams
was  against  the  acceptance  of  any  such  self-denying   pledge.
The  Monroe  Doctrine  as  declared  in  December  1823, warned
the  European  powers  other  than  Spain  to  keep  their  hands off
the  colonies  but  did  not  pledge us  to  do  so.
It  was American  rivalry  with  Britain,  not  a  fraternal   desire
America's  Two-Fold  Dogma
"The     Monroe   Doctrine,   by   its   mere  unilateralism,
amounted   to   a   degradation   of   the   Latin  American
countries  to  the  status  of  protectorates. ...  I  only
know   two  things  about  the   Monroe  Doctrine:  one   is
that   no  American  I  have  met  knows  what   it   is;   the
other  is  that  no  American  I  have  met  will  consent   to
its  being  tampered  with.   That being  so, I  conclude  that
the   Monroe  Doctrine  is  not  a  doctrine  but  a  dogma.
But  when  I  look  closer  into  it,  I  find  that  it  is  not  one
dogma  but  two,  to  wit:  the  dogma  of  the  infallibility
of  the  American  President  and  the  dogma  of   the  im-
maculate  conception  of  American  Foreign   Policy."
—Salvador   de  Madariaga:   Latin  America   Between
The  Eagle  and  the  Bear.
to  protect   Spanish  America,  which  bulked   large  behind   the
Monroe  Doctrine.    In  the  three  years  after  it  was  made,  five
newly   independent  Latin  nations,   Chile,   Colombia,   Brazil,
Mexico  and  the  United  Provinces  of  the  Rio  de  la  Plata  (as
Argentina  was  then  known)  appealed  to  us  for  aid  under  the
Doctrine  against  European  interference  but  were  brushed  off.
The  Monroe  Doctrine  was all  but  forgotten  for  a  quarter  cen-
tury  until  Polk  revived  it  against  British  and  French  interfer-
ence  in  the  annexation  of  Texas  and  the  war  with   Mexico.
We  used  it  as  a  battle  cry in  the  Oregon  dispute  with  Britain
and   in  protesting   British   designs   on  California,   before   we
took   it  from   Mexico.    The   Doctrine   showed  itself   in   the
Mexican  war  as  an  instrument  of  our  own  expansion  at  the
expense  of  our  Latin  neighbors.    The  Hemisphere  was  to  be
our  private  preserve.    This   attitude  reached  its  boldest   and
baldest  assertion  in  the  famous  message  which   Secretary  of
State  Olney  sent  the  British in  1895 in  the  Venezuela   dispute.
"The  United  States  is practically  sovereign  on  this  continent,"
Olney  informed  England,  "and its  fiat  is  law  upon  the sub-
jects  to  which  it  confines  its  interposition.    Why?     It  is  not
because  of  the pure  friendship or  good  will  felt  for  it,  ...    It
is  because,  in  addition  to  all  other   grounds,   its  infinite  re-
sources  combined  with  its  isolated  position   render  it  master
of   the   situation   and  practically   invulnerable   against   any  or
all  powers."
One  of  the  simple-minded  notions  about  the  Monroe Doc-
trine is that  it  saved  Spanish  America  by shutting  off the  New
World  from  the  quarrels  of  the  old.   This  is  only  a  partial
truth.    A  sphere  of  interest  policy always places  smaller  neigh-
bors  at  the  mercy of  the  sphere's  dominant  power,  and  unable
to  play  the  big  powers  against  each  other  for  their  own  pro-
tection.    One  reason  our  Revolution  succeeded  is that  we  were
able  to  play  off  France   against   England.     American   domi-
nance  was  as  feared  by  Latin  America  as  Russian  power  was
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
I 3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  24,
Is  Space  to  Be  Kept  "Peaceful"  By  Organizing  A  New  Armed  Force  to  Patrol  It?
Mr.  Kennedy's  Speech  on  Space  Nationalistic  Soap  Ad  Hoopla
Mr.  Kennedy's  speech  on  the  space  challenge  at   Houston
revealed  more  about  Mr.  Kennedy  and  his  advisers  than  it
did  about  the  problems  of  space.    The  most  important  ques-
tion  he  had  to  answer  was  why  we  were  spending  all  those
billions  out  there  in  space  anyway.    To  this  he  gave  two  re-
plies.    One,  which  seems  to   reflect   a  family   characteristic,
might  be called  the  touch-football-after-lunch  explanation;  the
Kennedys  love  activity  and  competition  for  their  own   sake.
As  Mr.  Kennedy  said,  "Why,   some  say,  the  moon?    Why
choose  this  as  our  goal?    They  may  well  ask  why  climb  the
highest  mountain?   Why  35 years ago fly the  Atlantic?    Why
does  Rice play Texas?"   The  race to  the  moon,  from  this van-
tage  point,   is  a  way  to   work   off   excess  energy,  a  cosmic
sporting  event.
Mr.  Kennedy's  second  explanation was a flag-waving appeal
to  nationalistic instincts.    "We  have  vowed,"  he  said,  "that
we  shall  not  see  it  [space]  governed  by  a  hostile  flag  of  con-
quest,  but  by a banner  of  freedom  and  peace."    How  can  Mr.
Kennedy  say,  as  he  did  later  in  the  speech,  that  "there  is  no
strife,  no  prejudice,  no  national conflict  in  outer  space,"  when
he  invites them?
"Peaceful"  a  La  Pentagon
Many  serious questions  are  involved in  the  space  race.    One
is  the  problem  of  preventing  war  in  space  while  there  is  yet
time.   Here  Mr.  Kennedy managed  to  be his  usual ambivalent
self.    At  one  point,  he  said  "We  have  vowed  that  we  shall
not   see  space  filled  with  weapons  of  mass  destruction,  but
with  instruments  of  knowledge  and  understanding."     A  few
minutes  later,  as  though  with  a  reassuring  nod  to  the  Penta-
gon,  he  was adding,  "I  do  not  say that  we  should  or  will  go
unprotected  against the  hostile  misuse of  space  any  more  than
we  go  unprotected  against  the  hostile  misuse  of  land  or   sea."
This  promises that  space  will  be  kept  "peaceful"—by  adding
a  new  space  branch  to  the  armed  forces.
Mr.  Kennedy's  reference  to  "hostile  misuse  of  space"  was
disturbingly  un  self-conscious.   Up  to  now  only  one  nation
has  misused  space in  a  hostile manner, by creating  a  new radi-
ation  belt  hazardous  to  astronauts and  by sending  up  U-2s and
"weather"   satellites  to  spy  on  other   nation's  defenses.     He
implied  a  readiness  to  shoot  down  such  activities  by  others.
What  if  they  shoot  ours  down?    How  can  there  be  peace  in
space  if  our  people's  eyes  are  not  opened  by  responsible  lead-
Outer  Space  Fibbing
"The   new  radiation  belt  .  .  .  will  not  constitute  any
hazard   to   manned  satellite   launchings   that   we   have
planned  in  the  near   future."
—AEC-Defense   Dept.  release  of  Sept.   1.
"The  explosion  at  an  altitude  of  200  miles  of  a  mega-
ton  range  hydrogen  bomb  over  Johnston  Island  on  July
9  has  led to  many  unexpected  results  that  .  .  .  may re-
quire  drastic  changes  in  our  plans   for   manned   flights
in  the  near  future.  .  .  ."
—Wm.  L.  Laurence,  New  York  Times,  Sept.  16.
And  Lillian  Levy  of  Science  Service, who  accompanied
the  President  on  his  space  installation  tour,  reported
(Houston  Press,  Sept.  12)  admissions  from  Von  Braun
and  others  that  if  the  manned  space  shot  by  Lt.   Com.
Schirra  later  this  month  should  overshoot  the  mark  and
approach   the  dangerous  new  radiation  belt  our  outer
space  test  created  he  will  be  brought  down  after  one
orbit  instead  of  the  six  planned.
ership  to  see our  actions  as  they  look  to  others?
Mr.  Kennedy dragged  in the  Pilgrim  Fathers  for  inspiration.
The  Pilgrim  Fathers  didn't  make a  fortune  selling  their  stories
to  a  picture  magazine  even  before  they  started.    No  vast  in-
dustry  sprang  up  to  cash  in  on  their  venture.    Space  deserves
treatment  more  sober  than  this  kind  of  soap  ad  copy.
We  are tackling  the  tasks  of  space,  Mr.  Kennedy  said,  with
his  weakness  for  the  mock  heroic,  "not  because  they  are  easy
but  because they are hard."    They  are hard  only  for  a  handful
of  astronauts and  scientists.    For  industry,  this  is  a  lush  cost
plus   operation.    For  the   leadership,   it  provides   glamorous
politics  to  be  photographed  with  the  heroes.    For  the  rest  of
us  it  is  only  another,  though  fantastically  expensive,  form  of
spectator  sports.
It  could  be arduous  for  both  the  leadership  and  the  led.  But
Mr.  Kennedy's speech  on  the  space  challenge  left  out  the  im-
portant  challenge—that  to  man's  obsolete  tribal  way of  think-
ing.    If  space is not  to bring  final  disaster,  man must  be  forced
to  grow  up,  a painful  business.    To  make  him  see  space  as  a
human  adventure, to  identify  our  efforts  with  nothing  smaller
than  the  race of  man, to  make  our  perspectives  begin  to  match
its  distances,  to  see  how  ludicrous  the  little  divisions  of  na-
tions  look  from  the  moon  or  Venus—if  Mr.  Kennedy  really
wants  a  hard  and  worthy  space  age  task,  there  it  is.
Gen.   LeMay's  Buck  Rogers  Vision  Of
"An  idea  that  impedes  military  space  progress  is  the  idea
that   nuclear  weapons   are   the   ultimate  weapons.    People
say  there  are  already  enough  weapons  to  destroy  the  world.
This  causes  some  people  to  worry  about  and  to  question  the
need  for  the  development  of  military space  capabilities.  Now
I  don't  think  the  nuclear  weapon  is  the  ultimate   weapon.
And  I  don't  think  the  one  that  replaces  the  nuclear  weapon
will  be  the  ultimate  either.    Tomorrow's   weapons  may  em-
ploy  new  and  non-nuclear  principles  of  operation.    For  ex-
ample,  we  are  still  acquiring  greater  understanding   of  the
principles   governing  focused   energy.     We  may  see   these
developments  lead  to   focused   energy   weapons   ["lasers"].
"The  energy  directed by  such  weapons  could  travel  across
space  essentially  with  the  speed  of  light.    This  would  be
New  Space Weapons To  "Prevent"  War
an  invaluable  characteristic   for   the  interception   of   ICBM
warheads.    If  a  new  generation  of  armaments  operating   in
space   could  neutralize  an  aggressor's  ICBM's,  warfare   as
we  have  known  it  would  be  outmoded.
"The   neutralization   of   ICBM's   by   a   system    deployed
aboard  a  maneuvering  space  vehicle  is  no  irresponsible  es-
calation  of   the  arms  race.     People  who  say  we'have  an
unstable   military  environment  say   that  because  they   feel
the  offense  has  overwhelmed  the  defense.     A  weapon  such
as  I  have   described   would  return   that    offensive-defensive
balance.    And  it  would  move  the  world  into  a  new  era  of
warfare.    More  importantly,  it  would  move  the  world  into
a  new  era  of  preventing   war  [emphasis  in  original].    As-
suming,  of  course,  that  it  was  in  the  proper   hands."
—Gen.  LeMay,  U.S.  Air   Force  Chief   of  Staff,    slightly  abridged  from  Air  Force and  Space  Digest  for  Sept.  1962.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  24,  1962
When  Is  The  White  House  Going  to  Give  Kefauvcr  A  Hand  in  The  Steel  Data  Fight?
The  Right  to  Travel,  Report  and Think  Involved  in  Worthy's  Conviction
Three  basic  issues   are   involved   in   the   case   of  Wm.   C.
Worthy,  correspondent  for  the  Baltimore  Afro-American,   -who
has  just  been  sentenced   in  Miami  to   3  months   of   Federal
prison  for  entering  the  U.S.  via  Cuba  without  a  passport.   One
is  the  right  of  an  American to  come  home  without  a  passport.
The  second  is  the  right  of  the  State  Department  to  ring  down
iron  curtains  against  travel  to  countries  it  does  not  like;  this
is  a  relatively  new  practice;  in  the  20's  when  we  did  not  recog-
nize  Russia,  it  was  still  legal   for   Americans  to  travel  there.
The  third  is the  right  of  the  State Department  to  facilitate  the
imposition  of  homogenized  foreign  policy  views  on  the Amer-
ican  public  by  forbidding  or  controlling  travel  by  reporters  to
places  like Castto  Cuba  and  Communist  China,  both  of  -which
Mr.  Worthy—to  his  credit—dared  to  visit  without  the  De-
partment's   approval.
No  Way  to  Honor  Lincoln
We   heartily  sympathize  with   Bishop   Smallwood   E.   Wil-
liams  in  his  protest  against  the  plan  to  celebrate  the  centennial
of  the  Emancipation Proclamation  without  a Negro  speaker  on
the  program.    The   two  main   speakers  were  to  be   Nelson
Rockefeller  and  Adlai  Stevenson.    For  the  former  this  only
represents  a  chance  to  make  political  capital;  the  latter's  atti-
tude  toward  the  Negro's  struggle  has  always been  tinged  with
a  certain  smugness  which  endeared   him  to  the  Southern  con-
servatives.     Someone   like  Martin  Luther   King   should   have
been  asked  to  speak.    It  dishonors  Lincoln's  memory  to  make
the  centennial  a  platform  for  white  politicoes,  especially  when
the  Negro  is  engaged   in  a  struggle   to  complete   the  task  of
emancipation.  We're  glad  Judge  Marshall  has been  added.  . . .
A  key  fact  in  Kefauver's  fight  to  make  the  steel  companies
disclose  their  costs  is  that  their  export  prices  have  been   30
percent  above  those  of  European  steel  companies.     This  has
cut  the  U.S.  share  of  the  world  market  and  indicates  the  bur-
den  which  high  steel  prices   impose  on  U.S.   industry.     The
former  figures  in  the  balance  of  payments  problem;  the  latter
in  our  lagging  growth  rate.    But  so  far  there  is  no  sign  of
White  House  support  for  Kefauver,  though  his  inquiry  began
Vilhjalmur   Stefansson
During  August,  when  the  Weekly  was  not  published,
the  death  at  82  of  Vihjalmur  Stefansson,  evoked  many
fine  tributes  to  his  greatness  as  a  scientist  and  Arctic
explorer.    But  few   mentioned  that  this  Canadian  born
American  of  Icelandic  origin  was  a  man  of  liberal  and
sympathetic  outlook  who  lent  his  name  and  gave  his
aid   to   many   causes   frowned   upon   during   the   witch
hunt.     He   befriended   and   defended   Owen   Lattimore
during   the  years  when  Prof.   Lattimore  was  a  No.  1
target  of  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee.    He
was  a  member  of  the  American  Committee  for  the   Pro-
tection  of  the  Foreign  Born  and  of  the  American   Civil
Liberties  Union.    He  was   prominent   in  Russian  War
Relief.    These  sympathies  and  activities,  and  his   out-
spoken  non-conformist  views,  deserve  gratefully   to  be
recalled.    He  was  as  ready  to  take  an  iconoclastic  posi-
tion  on  public  issues  as  he  was  in  Arctic  studies  where
he  so  often  proved  to  be  ahead  of  his  time.
when  Kennedy  asked  his  help  last  April  against  the  $6  a  ton
price  increase.     Senate  Judiciary  was  never  reluctant  to   vote
contempt  action  when  some  poor  professor  refused  to  give  the
names  of   colleagues   with   whom   he  had   attended   a   radical
meeting  years  earlier.  .  . .
Hitler  once  fooled  some  German  Jews  by  claiming  he  was
only   against   Ostjude,   Jews   from   the   East.     Bonn's   former
Ambassador,  Grewe,  who  taught   international  law  under  the
Nazis  and  bored  Mr.  Kennedy  with  his  humorless   legalisms,
recalls  this  by the  interview  he  gave  UPI for  the  German  press
on  leaving  the  U.S.  He  complained  that  U.S.  policy  was  being
biased   against  Germany  by  "East  Coast   intellectuals."   .  .  .
The   New   York   Post's  gifted   Paris  columnist   Joseph   Barry
reported  that  when  de  Gaulle  made  that  speech  disclosing  that
he  had  a  German  great  grandpappy,   one  French   news  editor
wanted  to  headline  the  story,  "Part  Aryan,  Says  De  Gaulle."
...  If  the  Russians are  serious  about  reviving  the  troika  pro-
posal  at  the  UN,  they've  been  overlooking   a  good  argument:
the  Christian  Heaven  has  been  presided   over  by  a  troika  for
2,000   years.
A  Different   and  Friendly  View   of  Cuba  From  A  Newly  Returned  U.S.  Historian
"While  I  saw   much  evidence  of  suppression,  mismanage-
ment  and  food  shortages,  I  am  still  impressed  by  the  posi-
tive  achievements  of  the  revolutionary  regime.    The  Cuban
economy  has  managed  to  survive  the  total  loss  of  $600  mil-
lion  a  year  in  United  States  imports  fairly  well:  gasoline,
for  example,  has  never  been  rationed  and  still  sells  at  the
old  price  of  32  to  34  cents  a  gallon.
"Despite  the  loss  of  American  technicians,  raw  materials
and   replacement   parts,   the   refineries,   the   electric   power
plants  and  the  telephone  system  are  functioning  normally.
Cuba   has  all  but  wiped  out  illiteracy,  and  is  engaged  in  a
massive  program  of  technical  education;  the  construction  of
new  homes,  hospitals,  schools  and vacation  hotels  continues
on  a  scale  hardly   matched  elsewhere  in  Latin   America.    I
am  convinced  that  Castro  is  still  supported  by  a  majority
of  the  Cuban  people.   These  are  some  of  the  good  features
of   the  revolution  that  might  be  better  reported  if   Castro
relaxed  the  ban  on  American  newspaper  men.     Cuban   con-
trol  of  the  press,  however,  is  understandable.    Many  Amer-
ican   papers   have   printed   grossly   inaccurate   accounts   of
what  has  taken  place  on  the  island.  .  .  .
"Cuban  censorship  is  in  part  a  measure  of   self-defense
against  American  economic,  diplomatic  and  military   meas-
ures. The  United  States regularly  continues  to  violate  Cuban
territorial  waters  and  air  space,  to  encourage  acts  of  sabot-
age,   to  permit  hit-and-run  raids  by  Cuban  exiles  based  in
Miami,  and  to  insist  that  it  will  "never"  recognize  Castro.
"Our   own  ban  on  travel  to  Cuba,  and  the  recent  convic-
tion  of  U.S.   correspondent  William   Worthy  for  traveling  to
Cuba  without  permission,  indicate  that  our  own  devotion  to
freedom  of  the  press  is  somewhat  less  than  perfect.    While
recognizing  the  unpleasant  totalitarian  aspects  of  the  pres-
ent  regime,  it  would  be  unrealistic  not  to  admit  that  some
of  them  are  necessary.
"Castro  and  his  advisers  remember  what  happened  to  the
Arbenz  regime in  Guatemala  in  1954;  they  will  certainly  not
relax  their  grip  as  long  as  the  Kennedy  Administration   con-
tinues  to  cling  to  its  policy  of  implacable  hostility."
—Samuel  Shapiro,  Dept.  of  History,  Michigan  State,  back  from  Cuba, in  a  letter  to  the  New  York  Times  Sept.  17.
1   3   'i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  24,1962
The  Less  We  Talk  About  the  Monroe  Doctrine  The  Better
(Continued   from   Page   One)
by  the  Turks,   the  Iranians  and  the  Poles  under  similar  cir-
cumstances.     Stalin's   insistence   on   Russia's   right   to   have
"friendly  neighbors"   was  the  equivalent  of  our  Monroe  Doc-
trine.    The  policy  of  the  Big  Stick,  and  Dollar  Diplomacy,  as
practiced   under   Teddy   Roosevelt,   Taft,   Woodrow   Wilson
and  Coolidge  led  the  Latins to  reverse  Canning's  famous  dic-
tum  and  seek  in  the  Old  World  some  way to  redress  the  bal-
ance  of  the  New.
First  the  Axis,  Now  the  H-Bomb
The  first  challenge  to  U.S.  supremacy  was  not  the  Russian
thermonuclear  weapon,  which  has  deprived  us  of  what  Olney
described  as  an  "isolated  position  .  .  .  invulnerable   against
any  and  all  powers."    The  first  challenge  was  the  rise  of  the
Axis   under   which   Nazi,   Fascist,   and   Japanese   influence,
abetted   by   Franco's   anti-American  appeals   to    Hispanidad,
spread  widely  in  Latin  America.    Even  so  anti-Fascist  a  coun-
try  as  Mexico  turned  in  desperation  to  an  oil  deal  with  the
Third   Reich  to  end  the  strangling  embargo  which  followed
its  expropriation   of   the  American  oil   companies,   as   Castro
turned  to  Russian aid  under  similar  circumstances.   It  was  this
new  situation  which  the  Good   Neighbor   policy   met;   FDR
at  Montevideo  in  1933  began  the  process  of  converting  the
Monroe  Doctrine  from  an  instrument  of  American domination
to  a hemispheric self-defense pact,  buttressed  for  the  first  time
by  our  pledges  not  to  intervene in  the  affairs  of  our  neighbors.
These   are  the  pledges,   most  clearly  expressed   in  the   1948
Bogota  pact,  which  we  have  been  violating  by  our  economic
blockade  of  Cuba.
For  the  Latin  Americans the  longer  range  issue  in  Cuba  is
their  right  to  carry on  trade  and  diplomatic  relations  with  the
Soviet  Union  as  a  counter-poise  to  the  U.S.  Our  hostile  policy
toward  Cuba  raises the  question  for  them—at  what  point  will
the   U.S.   interfere  with   their   Soviet   relations   if   Cuba   is
crushed?    When  they  buy  cheaper  oil?    For  us  Americans,
the  situation  is  a  challenge  to  our  maturity,  wisdom  and  pati-
ence.    Let  us  stop  talking  about  the  Monroe  Doctrine,   as  if
it  came down  from  Mt.  Sinai; the  Latins hate  it.    Let  us  think
instead  in  terms  of  true  national  interests.    We  are  the  bene-
Keating's  "Scoop"   on  Cuba
"Washington,  Sept.  16—Peruvian  Ambassador  Fern-
ando   Berckemeyer   predicted  today  that   most   Latin
American  nations  would  support  any  U.S.   blockade  of
Communist-dominated  Cuba ...  in a  TV  interview with
Sen.   Kenneth  B.  Keating  (R.,  N.Y.)."
—United  Press  International   Sept.  17.
"Washington—While  debate  rages  here  over  the  use
of  harsh  measures  to  de-communize Cuba,  U.S.   listen-
ing  posts  across  Latin  America are  picking up a  highly
significant  hush.  .  .  .  There  is  little  the  OAS  could  do
now  to  damage  Castro  short  of  actually  mounting  an
invasion  or joining in  a  Cuban  blockade.   And  the  mere
mention   of   either  course,   judging   from   the   careful
soundings,   would   acutely   embarrass   or   even  openly
antagonize  a  lot  of  Latin  American  governments,  and
perhaps  even  threaten some  with  violent  overthrow by
Castro sympathizers."
—Wall  St.  Journal  Sept.  13.
ficiaries of  the  policies  it  cloaked;  our  great  country,  from  sea
to  sea,  is the  fruit  of  conquest and  expansion.    It  is  not  to  our
interest  to have Russian  bases  in  this  hemisphere,  though  it  be
only  a  taste  of  the  same  medicine  we  give  them  by  our  bases
in  Turkey  and  Iran.    But  as  in  the  30's  we  must  see  that  to
preserve   a   friendly   hemisphere   we  must   adopt   policies   of
equality   and   partnership   with   our   Latin   neighbors.     War
against  Cuba  would  stir  up  hateful  memories  and  split  the
hemisphere  apart.    Resumption  of  Cuban  relations,   honoring
those  treaties  in  which  we  gave  up  the  Big  Stick,  would  win
us  friends  and  enable  us  to  dislodge  Russian  influence.    To
resume  unilateral  policies  of  force  would  be  to  invite  disaster
in  the  hemisphere,  even  if  the  Russians  do  nothing  here  or
elsewhere.    For  it  would  revive  fears  of  Yankee  Imperialism,
destroy  the  middle  of  the  road  elements  on  which  the  Alliance
for   Progress   depends   and  turn   a  Cuban  war  into   a  hemi-
spheric  civil  war.    Our  country's  greatness  and  its  security  de-
pend   now more than  ever  on  our  ability to  look  at  this  Cuban
situation  with  eyes  neither  clouded  by  myths  about  the  Mon-
roe  Doctrine  nor  blinded  by  frustration  that  we  can  no  longer
always  and  completely  have  our  own  way.
We'll   Mail  Sample  Copies  of  This  Free  to  Friends  If  You  Send  Long  Stamped  Self-Addressed    Envelopes
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ............................................................................._....._
Street   ......................................................................._~.......—
City  ............_.........................Zone........_..State....................
9/24/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..........................................................,..............^...
Street   ........._..................._...................................................
City  ..........._.........................Zone......._.State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yea Q    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone*a  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  G.   Published   every  Monday  except  during   August  and  the  last  Monday  in   December
and  the  first  in  January  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington.   D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  published   and  edited  by  I.  F.
Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  {5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  in  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.
Air  Mail  rates:  $16  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED