I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jun11.pdf

============================================================

Debunking   Those  New  Reassurances  on  Fallout
Glimpses  of  Our  "Sheltered"  Future  From  The  Latest  Report on  the  Civil  Defense  Program,  Pages  2  and  3
/. F. Stones  Weekly
VOL.  X,  NO.  23JUNE  11,  1962,'
01
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.IB  CENTS
Still Playing A Phony Numbers Game to Cover Up Testing
The  place  where  the  body  is  buried  in  the  report  of  the
Federal  Radiation  Council  on  fallout  from  weapons  tests  lies
at  the  end  of  a  paragraph  which  generated  optimistic head-
lines,  as  it  was  intended  to  do.    This  said  that  the  average
whole  body  burden  dose  from  all  testing through  1961 would
amount,  over  the  next  30  years,  to  less  than  5  percent  of  the
natural  background  radiation  to  which  man  has  always  been
exposed.   The figure which follows this on dosage to the  bone,
whence  come bone cancer and  leukemia, is larger but  still  looks
reassuring  if  not  examined  too  closely.  This  estimates that  the
average  bone  dose  over  70  years* will  be  less  than  10 percent
of   that   from   natural  background.    These  figures  make  the
extra  risk  from  further  testing  seem  slight.    But  then  the  last
sentence  of  this  key paragraph  says, "Any further  testing  will,
of  course,  increase  the  exposure."    This  is  the  place,  as  the
old  railroad  grade  crossing  signs  used  to  say, to  Stop,  Look
and  Listen.
But  What  If  Testing  Continues?
The  eye and  the  mind  pass  quickly  over  this  sentence.    It
did   not  make  headlines.    No   newspaper   that   I  have  seen
stopped  to  ask  how  much  the  hazards  would  be  increased by
further  testing.    The  report  itself  says  nothing  about  this  be-
yond  the  one  cryptic  sentence.    Fallout  dissipates  itself  over
the  years, some  particles quickly,  some  slowly.    If  testing  had
stopped  at  the  end  of  1961,  one  could  rest  content  with  the
30  and  70  year  averages  on  which  the  reassuring  estimates  of
this  report  are  based.    But  if  testing  starts  up  again,  as  it has,
and  if  new  series  of  tests  are  to  continue  indefinitely  as  they
threaten  to  do,  then  these   30  and  70  year  averages  become
deceptive.    With  fresh  fallout  every  year,  we  will  no  longer
have   a   steady  diminution  of.  man-made  radioactivity  from
weapons  testing.   Those  comforting  averages—5%  of  natural
background  for  the  whole  body,  10%  for  the  bone—will  be-
come  obsolete.    A  more  relevant  figure  now  available,  a  more
genuine  measure of  the  danger,  is  the  fallout  during  and  just
after   a  year  of  testing  as  compared  with  natural  background.
There  are  such  one-year  figures  in  Table   1  of  the  report,
though   remarkably  little   attention  has   been   paid   to   them.
These  one  year figures, as  Appendix  A  explains,  are  for 1958-
59,  the  years of  highest  dose  prior  to  the  big  Russian  tests  of
1961  from  which the  highest  doses  will  not  be  registered  until
1962   and  1963.   These  one-year  figures  show  that   for   the
whole  body  and  for  the  reproductive  cells,  the  amount  of dos-
age  in  1958-9   -was  not  5  percent  of  natural  background   but
from  10  to  25  percent.    For  the  bone  marrow  it  was  20  to
40  percent  of  natural  radiation  and  for  the  bone  the  one year
*  30  year  averages  are  used  for  genetic  and  70  for  somatic
effects,  the  former  being  the  average  child-bearing  age  and
the  latter  the  average  life  span.
Our  Solution  for  the  Stock  Market
One  way  to  end  the  stock  marekt  decline  would  be
to  apply  to  stock  speculation  the  same  principles  we
use  in  agriculture:  That  is,  a  system  of  support  prices
for   surplus  crops  which   would  otherwise  have  to  be
sold  at  distress  levels.    The  unhappy  holder  of  A.  T.
&  T.  or  IBM,  if   their   prices  fell  below  the   support
level,  could  take  their  stocks  to  the  Treasury  and turn
them  in.   This  would  end  panic  about  stock  prices,  and
with  it  the  slump  in  the  sale  of  mink  stoles  and  Cadil-
lacs.    Ours  is  unfortunately  a  not  too  rational economy
in  which  the  economies  of   the   rich  soon  become  the
privations  of  the  poor,  as  happened  in  1929.   It  would
be  cheaper  to  pour  a  few   billion  dollars  quickly  into
the  stock  market  now, farm  relief  style,  than  allow  it  to
trigger   a   panicky   slump   in   business   at   home   and
abroad.    We  can  already  visualize  the  construction  of
storage  facilities   for   surplus  shares   of   du  Pont  and
General  Motors  by  some  future  Billy  Sol  Estes.    What
better  way  to  defeat  Communism  and  spread  People's
Capitalism   all   over  the   world   than  by   giving  away
surplus  shares  in  American industry  abroad,  as  we  do
surplus   wheat   and  corn?     Henry  Wallace  wanted  to
assure   the   Hottentot   a   quart   of   milk   a  day. We'd
top  his  offer  with  a  better. Win  the  Zulu  for  free enter-
prise  forever  with  a  share  of  Standard  Oil  (N.J.).
dose  was  from  23  to  60  percent  of  natural  radiation.    These
figures  are  very  different  in  their  implication  from  the  5  and
10  percent   figures.
The   news  stories  and  the  headlines  stressed  the  estimate
in  the  report  that  there  was only  one  chance  in  a  million  that
an  individual  of  the  next  generation  would  be  born  with  a
gross  physical or  mental  defect  as a  result  of  fallout  from  test-
ing  through  1961.   But  these  chances  will  go  up considerably
if  testing  continues.    This  estimate  of  genetic  damage  to  the
next  generation   got   itself   confused  in  the  minds  of  many
newspaper   readers  with   a  simple  one-chance-in-a-million  of
harm  to  anyone.    But  Table  3  of  the  report  shows  that  for
this  generation  on  the  70-year  average  basis  from  past  tests
there  is  one  chance  in  300,000  of  leukemia  and  one  chance  in
100,000  of  bone  cancer.    But  again  if  testing  continues,  »nd  if
fallout  stays somewhere  around  the  1958-59  level,  jf  it  is from
20  to  40  percent  of  natural  radiation  for  the  bone  marrow
instead  of  10  percent,  and  23  to  60  percent  for  the  bone  in-
stead  of  10  percent,  then  the  chances  of  leukemia  and  bone
cancer  will  rise  correspondingly.     Here  we  begin  to  tee  the
importance  of  striving  for  a  new  test  cessation  «grtement,  »nd
it  is  here  that  the  report  leaves  us  in  the  dark.    Otherwise  it
would  have  become  a  plea  for  test  cessation  not  ft  cover-up
for.  test  resumption.
Even  these  figures,  I  now want  to  show,  under**** the  real
(Continued   on  P*fe   Two)
9   1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  11, 1902
danger.    They  do  so  in  several  ways.   The  first  is that  they  do
not  put  weapons  fallout  into  the  context  of  other  sources  of
man-made  radiation  such  as  medical  uses.    In  its  first  report
two years  ago  the  Federal  Radiation  Council  gave  the  average
annual  genetically  significant  dose  from  medical,  occupational
and  other   man-made  sources  of   radioactivity  at  from   80   to
280  millirems  a  year.    If  we  add   to  this  its  new   10  to  25
millirem  figure  for  weapons  fallout  in  one  year  and  the  100
millirem  figure  it  gives  for  natural  radiation,  we  get  a  total
of  from  190  to  405  millirems  a  year.   But  Table  1  shows  170
millirems  a  year  as the  Council's safe  limit  for  peacetime  popu-
lations.    In  other  words  when  you  add  these  figures  you  see
that  under  conditions of  continued  testing,  the  total  radioac-
tivity  to  which  the  population  is  exposed  from  nature,  civilian
uses  of  radiation and  fallout  is  at  or  above  the  level  the  Coun-
cil  considers  safe   for   the   population  as  a  whole.     We   arc
already  at  the  point  where  we  must  begin  to  think  about  pro-
tective  measures.
Shorter   Lived  Particles  Ignored
There  is  a  second  way  in  which  these  figures  understate  the
danger.    They  do  not  seem  fully  to  take  into  account  radio-
active  isotopes  other  than  Strontium  90,  Cesium  137  and  Car-
bon  14.   Otherwise  the  figures  would  look  very  different.  The
shorter  lived  isotopes  tend  to  be  dismissed  as  of  little import-
ance.    But  a  study  published  by  Science,  weekly  organ  of  the
American  Association  for   the   Advancement  of   Science,  last
October  6,  disclosed  that  right  after  years of  testing  the  short-
lived  isotopes  are  of  far  greater  importance  than  hitherto  be-
lieved.    This  study,  by  two  AEC  scientists  and  a  third   from
the  U.S.  Nuclear  Corporation,   showed  that  for  eight  months
in  1959  dose  rates from  fallout  over  New  York  City  "reached
as  high  as  50  percent  of  total  background  rates."     Their  fig-
ures  for five  selected  short-lived  isotopes  (not  including  Iodine
13.1)   showed  that  they  provided  far  more   radioactivity  than
Strontium  90  or  Cesium  137  and  called  for  "a  more   thorough
evaluation   of  the  world-wide  effects  of  the  shorter-lived  nu-
clides."    A  similar  warning was  given  a  year  earlier  when  Dr.
Ralph  Lapp  at  the  I960  radiation  hearings  before  the  Joint
Committee  on  Atomic Energy  criticized  the  Federal Radiation
Council  for  not  paying  enough  attention  to  the  shorter  lived
particles  and  pointed  out  that  a  report  by  Dr.   Gustafson   at
the   Argonne  National   Laboratory  showed   that   fallout   over
Chicago    when   these   other    particles   were    also    measured
amounted  to  70  percent  of  natural  background.     Looked   at
over  30  or  70  years, of  course,  these  less  well  known  particles
soon  die  out.    But  while  testing  goes  on,  they  add  up  to  far
more  than  any  comforting  5  percent  of  natural   background.
One  of  these  shorter-lived  radioactive  substances  is  lodine-
Glimpses  of  Our  "Sheltered"  Future
Who  Needs  Water?
"Water  allotment  for  shelters  is  1  quart  per  person
per   day   for   14  days.     OCDM   technical   bulletins   had
recommended  1  gallon  per  person  per  day   for drinking,
washing  and  other  purposes.    Occupants  of  a  simulated
shelter   who  had  access  to   1  gallon  of   water  per  day
complained  most  about  lack  of  water  for  bathing.  .  .  .
The  OCDM  Interdepartmental  ad  hoc  Advisory   Group
on   Research   and  Development   for   Food   for   Shelters
recommended  2  quarts   per  person   per  day  as  a  mini-
mum  'survival'  allowance  for  a  2  week  stay  in  shelters.
Public  Health   Service   joined  in  this  recommendation.
"In  deciding  upon  a  water  allotment  one-fourth   that
recommended  by  OCDM  and  one-half   of   the  'survival'
allowance  recommended  by  the  advisory  group,  the  Of-
fice  of  Civil  Defense  pointed  to  the  experience   of   sol-
diers  in  desert  training  or  combat:  'Studies  and  experi-
ence  of  American,  British  and  German  troops  have  in-
dicated   that  soldiers   exposed   to   heat   and   sun   under
desert  conditions,  can  live  on  1  quart  of  water  per  day
for   periods   exceeding   2   weeks.      Therefore,    on   the
basis  of  these  studies,   the  Department  of  Defense  has
concluded  that  14  quarts  of  water  per  shelter  occupant
under   sedentary   conditions  combined  with  an  austere
low-protein  diet  will  permit  an  organized  and  informed
group  to  survive  without  deterioration  of  health   for  2
weeks'."
—National   Fallout  Skelter  Program,  report   by  the
Holifield     Military     Operations    Subcommittee    of    the
House  Committee  on  Government   Operations,   May   30.
131,  and  this  brings us  to  yet another way  in which  the  danger
is  understated.    Iodine-131  can  cause  cancer  of   the   thyroid,
and  children  are  especially  susceptible  to  it.    Little  attention
was  paid  this  in  the  newspaper  summaries,  and  the  subject  is
introduced  in  the  Federal  Radiation  Council  report  in  a  way
which  would  lead  the  unwary  reader  to  think  it  of  little  im-
portance.     "The   half-life   of  radioactive iodine,  the  principal
source of  the  thyroid  dose,  is only  eight  days,"  the  report  says,
"and  the  peak  dose  rates  persist  for  a  relatively short  period
of  time.    For  this  reason thyroid  doses  are  not  included  in  the
table."    But  when  the  reader  studies  the  report  more  closely
he  finds  the  admission  that   "the   likelihood   and  extent"  of
thyroid  cancer  "have  been  considered  to  be  about  the  same  as
other  malignancies  for   comparable   exposure,"   i.e.   for   bone
cancer  and  leukemia.   The   close  reader  will  also  notice  that
Iodine-131   was  not  quite  as  evanescent   as  the   reference   to
8-day  half-life  may  have  led  him  to  believe.    The  report  ad-
mits,  "Doses  to  the  thyroid  from  fhe   major   past   tests  were
estimated  to  have  ranged  from   100  to  200  millirems  per  year
(our   italics)  during   and   immediately  following   periods   of
Glimpses of  Our  "Sheltered" Future
Children  Given  Special  Role  in  the  Pied  Piper  Scenario   of  the  Shelter  Program
"Among  the  eligible  institutions   [for   the  new  Civil  De-
fense   program's   incentive  payments]  schools  are  to  be  em-
phasized.     Fallout  shelters  in  schools  would  serve  not  only
to  insure  a  good  distribution  of  shelters  in  relation  to  resi-
dential  populations  but  would  induce  a  particularly   favor-
able   response   associated   with   protection   of   the   Nation's
children.  . . .
"The  obvious  advantages  of  a  school-oriented  shelter  pro-
gram   are  the  frosting  on  a  cake   of   complications  which
baffle  policy makers.  .  .  .  Questions  like  these  abound.  .  .  .
Shall   financing   for   shelter   construction   be   raised   locally
from  school  construction   funds,  general  tax  revenues,  bond
issues  or  special  assessments?  .  .  .  Will  funds  for  shelters
eat  into   plans   for  needed   expansion   of   educational   facili-
ties?  . . .
"The    psychological    effects    on   children    of     windowless
schools  are  largely  unknown.   In  a  school-oriented  program
many  more  such  classrooms  will  be  built,  and  they  will  be
used  by  generations  of  school   children."
—Holifield   Shelter  Report,  May  30.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  11, 1902
testing."    Natural  radiation  is  figured  at  100  millirems  a  year.
In  other  words  Iodine-131  alone  during  and  following   pe-
riods  of  testing  contributed  "from   100  to  200  millirems  per
year"  or  from  100  to  200  percent  of  natural  background.  Here
again  we  find  ourselves  far  away  from  that  reassuring  5  per-
cent  figure.  The  report  says  "These  values  apply  only  to  indi-
viduals  who  were  infants  at  the  time  of  highest   concentration
of  radioactive  iodine."    It  says  "the  average  value  for  all  age
groups  was  about  a  tenth  as  much,"   which   leads  us  to  an-
other  way  in  which  this  report  understates  the  dangers.  This
lies  in  the  tactic  of  averaging,  which  slurs  over  the  enhanced
danger  to  particular  age  groups,  especially  children.     Appen-
dix   A  admits  that   "the   contribution   of   radio-iodine  to   the
dose  to  the  thyroid  gland  is  much  larger  in  the  case  of  infants
than   in  older  persons"   but   it  does  not   indicate  how   much
larger.    Apparently, judging  from  the  figures  in  the  preceding
paragraph,  it  is  about   10  times  greater.     Similarly  Appendix
A  explains  that  for  Strontium  90  "Early  concentrations  in  the
bone  will  be  greatest  for  those  children  who  are  less  than  1
year  of   age  at  the   time  that   peak   concentrations  of   fallout
occur  in  food.    The  average  bone  and  bone  marrow  doses  to
such  children  as  estimated  in  Table   1  are  much  larger   than
the  average  to  the  whole  population."     Again  the  report  fails
to  say how  much  larger.   Table  1 gives no  separate  figures  for
children.    But  its  one  year  figures,  as  we  pointed  out,  already
show  even  for  the  population  as  a  whole  that  the  dose  to  the
bone  marrow  after  a  heavy  testing  year  is  20  to  40  percent  of
natural  radiation  and  for  the  bone,  23  to  60  percent.    How
much  larger   is  the  average   for  young  children.    What   does
"much  larger"  mean?     The   report   is  silent.
How  Averages  Can  Mislead
Global  national  averages  hide  the  special  dangers  to  special
areas  as  well  as  to  special  age  groups.     It  does  not  help  mi-
gratory  farm  workers  to  know  that  their  annual  income  when
averaged  out  with  Nelson  Rockefeller's  is  big  enough,  theo-
retically,  to  provide  a  safe  backlog  for  their  retirement.    Nor
does  it  help  residents  of  the  Mississippi  Valley  or  other  radio-
active  "hot   spots"  to  know   that   the  amount  of  fallout  they
receive,  when  averaged   out  with   more  fortunate  parts  of  the
country,  is well  below  the  danger  limit.
The   real  picture  is  different  from  that  of  the  smooth   dis-
tribution  which  global  averages  over  30  to  70  years,  tend   to
create.     Freak   weather,   sudden   storms,   may  bring   a   heavy
downpour  of  short  lived  radioactive  substances  just  when  they
Glimpses of  Our  "Sheltered"  Future
Safe  for Drinking ...  If   ...
"A  strong  bid  for  use  of  sterile,  canned  drinking  wa-
ter  in  shelters  was  made  by  firms  experienced  in  sup-
plying  Navy  shipboard  requirements. .  .  .  The  costs  of
procuring  750  million  quarts  of  canned  water   [15  qts.
per  person  for  50  million  shelter  spaces—IFS]   at  30
cents  a  quart,  and  of  moving  this  mountain of  water  to
local  warehouses  and  individual  shelter  sites,  dissuaded
the   Office  of  Civil  Defense   from   the  canned  water  ap-
proach.    Fiber  drums,  lined  with  plastic  (polyethelene)
bags,  filled  with  tap  water,  would  run  the  cost  down  to
2 cents  a  quart.
"The  first  procurement  of  liners  for  the  water drums,
to  be  used  in  the  14-city  provisioning  test,  did  not  turn
out  well. ...  Of  22 firms invited  to  bid by  the  Defense
Supply  Agency,  only  2  responded.    A  fixed  price  con-
tract  of  $3,962 was  awarded  to  a  Norfolk, Va.,  firm  for
20,000  plastic  bags.  .  .  .  Leakage  and  seam   strength
tests  were  performed  by  the  contractor  and  a  testing
laboratory.     The   bags   passed   the   various   tests,   but
upon   the   first   filling   of   water   of   Tallahassee,    Fla.,
early  in  1962, half  of  the  bags  leaked.  .  .  .
"The  Public  Health  Service  has  informed  the   Office
of  Civil  Defense  that  the  sealed  polyethelene  container
method  will  provide  safe  water  for  long  periods,  if  the
water  is  not  contaminated at  lime  of  filling.  .  .  .  The
emptied   drums   will   be   converted  into   commodes  by
fitting  toilet  seats  over them."
—National   Fallout  Shelter  Program,  report   by  the
H oli fit Id    Military     Operations    Subcommittee    of     the
House   Committee  on  Government  Operations,  May  30.
are  most  virulent  right  after   fresh  tests.     A  hurricane  along
the  East  Coast  and  a  high  pressure  area  over  the  eastern  half
of  the  country  last  September   17-20  seem    (according  to  testi-
mony  last  Tuesday  before  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  En-
ergy  by  Dr.  Donald   R.  Chadwick   of  the  U.S.  Public  Health
Service)  to  have  dumped  unusually heavy  amounts  of  Iodine-
131   (and   Strontium-89)    in   the   southern   and   southeastern
states  from   the  heavy  Russian  tests  which  had   begun   three
weeks  earlier.    New   Orleans   reported   530   micromicrocuries
of  Iodine-131  per  liter  of  milk  on  Sept.  25;  St.  Louis,  500  on
the  27th.    For  the  three  months  following  the  onset  of  Soviet
testing,  average  fallout  of  Iodine-131  in  several  large  areas  of
the  Mississippi  Valley  was  well  above  the  danger   level.  Simi-
lar  freak  storms  May  8,  10  and  12  of  this  year,  according  to
Dr.  Lester  Machta  of  the  U.S.  Weather  Bureau,  dumped  debris
Glimpses  of  Our  "Sheltered" Future
How  They  Hope  to  Have  2,100,000  Hospital   Beds   Ready  for   60,000,000  Casualties
"The  planning  goal  is  9,500  [emergency]   hospitals  which
would  mean  1,900,000  beds  at  200  per  unit.  .  .  .  The  hospital
units  are  stored  in  crated   form  near   the  buildings   where
they  are  to  be  assembled. ...  In  case  of  emergency,  the
units  will  be  assembled   by  local  persons   trained  in  accord-
ance  with  an  approved  community  disaster  plan.  .  .  .
"Medical  stockpile  goals  are  based  on  planning  assump-
tions  formulated  under  OCDM  guidance  in  1958.    It  is  as-
sumed  that  in  a  population  of  180  million,  there  will  be  60
million  casualties,   12  million  immediate deaths,  which could
increase  to  34  million  within  30  days  and  more  than  40  mil-
lion  at  the  end  of  6  months.    One-third of  the  initial  casual-
ties,   or  about  20  million,  would  survive  beyond   6  months,
but  a  majority  of  these  would  recover  at  some  time  within
that  period.    Medical  care  demands  would  increase   greatly
in  the  first  6  months,  not  only  because   of  mass  casualties
but  because  of  inadequate  sanitary  facilities,  crowding  and
other  health  hazards  to  uninjured  survivors.   .  .  .
"There   are   approximately  1,600,000  fixed  hospital   beds
in  the  United  States.    The  planning  assumptions   estimate
that  600,000  of  these  would be  destroyed,  and  another  600,-
000  would be  denied  use  because  of  fallout  radiation, leaving
400,000  for   immediate  use.    The  civil   defense    emergency
hospitals,  being  placed  in  selected  locations,  are  expected  to
suffer   much  less  loss.    The  estimate  is  that  90  percent   of
the  emergency   beds  would  be  available  for  immediate   use.
[90%   of   1,900,000  is   1,710,000  plus  the   400,000   surviving
normal  hospital   beds  equals   2,110,000  beds   for  these  60,-
000,000  casualties—IFS].
—Holifield   Shelter  Report,  May  30.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  11,1962
The  Peril  Rises  As  the  Weapons  Grow  Bigger  and  Tests  More  Intense
(Continued   from   Page   .Three)
from  the  recent   U.S.  Christmas  Island  tests  on  the  Midwest.
The  highest  concentration  of  Iodine-131 was in  Wichita where
it   reached   660   mmc  per   litre  of   milk;   in  Kansas   City,  it
reached  600  mmc per  litre.   A  level of  100 mmc per  litre takes
one  into  Range  3,  the  danger  zone.
No  Way  to  Check  the  Figures
This  report  and  its  appendices  were  prepared  not  in  a spirit
of  science  but  of  public  relations.    It  contains  no  references
so  that  there  is  no  way  for   scientists  to  check  back  to  the
sources  of  its  estimates.   Appendix  A  says  the  numbers  given
for  dose  ranges  from  tests  through   1961   "represent   estimates
made  using  somewhat  different  but  plausible  assumptions  con-
cerning   such   factors   as   fallout   distribution,   the   effects   of
weathering  and  shielding,  and  the  movement  of  radioisotopes
from  the  environment  to  man."     But  it  does  not  give  these
assumptions   so  they  can  be  independently  evaluated.     The
most  important  gap  in  the  report  is  its  failure  to  make  any
estimates   as  to   the   danger   which   continued   testing   would
create.     The  first  report  by  the   Federal   Radiation   Council,
May  13,  I960,  when  there  was  still  hope  that  testing  might
have  ceased  forever,  did  give  such  an  estimate.    At  page  20
it  says  that  Langham  and  Anderson  in  their  May  1959   testi-
mony   before   the  Joint   Committee  on   Atomic   Energy   esti-
mated  that  should  testing  resume  and  continue  at  the  average
of  the  five  years  1953-58,   the  numbers  given  for  the  radio-
activity   to   which   man   would   be   subjected   genetically   and
somatically  over  30  and  70  years  respectively  would   have  to
be  multiplied  by  8.    This  would  bring  fallout  up  to  40  per-
cent  instead of  5 percent  of  natural background,  and  the  Lang-
ham-Anderson  figures  only  covered  Strontium  90  and  Cesium-
137.    This  provides  some  numerical  clue  to  the  meaning  of
that   cryptic  sentence,   "Any   further   testing   will,   of   course,
increase  the   exposure."
Further  testing  is  likely  to  increase  the  danger   far   more
than  the  8  times  estimate  of  Langham  and  Anderson  since
theirs  was  based  on  the  average  of  the  five  years   1953-58.
Since then  the  size  of  weapons  tested  and  the  tempo  of  testing
have  risen.    All   previous  testing   by  the   end   of   1958   had
created  92  megatons  of  fission;  the  Russians added  25  mega-
Last  Minute  Censorship  at  State   Dept.
As  is   well  known  now,   the  volume  of   State  Dept.
diplomatic  papers  on  relations  with  China  in  1943,  re-
cently  released,   was  ready  in  1957  (as  the  date  on  the
title   page  shows)   but   held   up  by   Secretary   Dulles.
Their  revelations   about  war-time  China  do  not  cast  a
flattering   light   on   Chiang   Kai-shek.     What   has   not
come  to  attention  before   is  that   even  this  year,   after
the  first  copies  had  gone  out,  the  volume  was   recalled
and  at  least  one  page  reprinted  after  remarks  critical
of  Chiang  had been  taken  out.
One   of   these   early   press   copies   contained   a   new
page  398 but  with  the  old  one  still  in  it.    The  old  page
disclosed  that  two  passages  of  a  report  by  John  Davies,
Jr.  (whom  the  China  Lobby  later  crucified  via  McCar-
ran   and  McCarthy  and   whom   Dulles   dismissed)   had
been  omitted.    In  their  place,  asterisks  appear  in  the
final  version.
The  first  omitted  passage  was  the  first  sentence  of
the  report  and  it  said,  "The  Generalissimo   is   probably
the   only   Chinese   who  shares   the   popular    American
misconception    that   Chiang   Kai-shek   is   China.     This
congenial  fiction  is  worth  examining."    The  other   pas-
sage  omitted,  in  the  middle  of   the  report,  said,   "The
Generalissimo  seeks  to  dominate  because  he  has  no  ap-
preciation    of   what   genuine   democracy    means.     His
philosophy   is  the  unintegrated   product   of  his   limited
intelligence,  his  Japanese  military   education,  his   for-
mer  close  contact  with  German  military  advisers."   We
are  happy  to  rescue  these  passages  from   the  censor
and  to  restore  the  original   untouched  portrait.
tons  of  fission  from   125  megatons  of  detonation  in  the  last
three  months  of   1961   alone.     Mr.  Kennedy  in   announcing
resumption   of  testing   last  March   2  said   "the   total   effects"
from  our  new  series  would  "only"  be  equal  to  about  one  per-
cent  of  natural  background.    This   doesn't   sound  like  much
until  one  recalls  that  we  figure  all  testing  through   1961   only
added   5  percent   of  natural  background.     So  our   series  this
year  will  be  roughly  equal  in  fallout  to  20  percent  of  all  pre-
vious  testing.    That  would  indicate a  very  large  series  indeed.
The  weapons grow  larger,  each  series more  intense.    The  fall-
out  peril  will  rise  accordingly.   This  is  the  danger  this  sugar-
coated  report   passes  over  so  lightly.
We'll  Be  Glad  to  Send  This  Important   Issue  to  Friends  If  You  Send  Long  Stamped   Envelopes
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Avfc,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Pleaae   renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .
Street
City   ............._............................Zone.............State....................
6/11/62
Enter  gift  tub  for  $2  (•  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name  .....................................................................«..^-..
Street    .........._,..................._....................................................
City   ............—.........................Zone............State....................
Shall  w«  ««nd  gift  announcement?         Tea  D    No  D
LR Stone's  Weekly
5618  Ntbroiko  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Second  Clan  Portage  'Paid  at  Washington,  D.  G.
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  In  January
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly.
Published   every   Monday   except   the    lasfc  Monday   In   August   and   the   first   In
at  6618  Nebraska  Ava.  N. W..  Washington.  D.C^ An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M. Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;   15  in
Canada;  »10  elsewhere.    Air  Hail  rates:  tlB  to  Europe;   120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED