I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jun18.pdf

============================================================

A  New High  in  Scientific   Naivete,  P.  2
Air  Force  Scientist  Suspects  Vents  From  Underground  Tests  Are  Source  of  Iodine-131  in  Milk,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  24JUNE  18,   1962
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Untold  Story  of  the  Drug  Bill  Sellout
Mr.  Kennedy  opened  up  a  major  theme  in  his  address  last
week  at  Yale,  when  he  spoke  of   the   myths  which  hamper
solution  of  national  problems.    But  though  the  background
of  that  talk  was  his  clash  with  U.S.   Steel,  he  did  not  dare  to
touch  on  the  myth  that  befuddles  understanding  of  the  steel
price  rise he  blocked.   This  is the  myth  that  equates  any attack
on  the  steel  industry's  system  of  administered  prices,  fixed  by
a  handful  of  big  business  commissars  in  their  private  Polit-
bureau,  with  an  attack  on  free  enterprise;  the  only  freedom  in
this  picture  is  freedom  to  ignore  the  public  interest.    But  the
stock  market  decline  has  the  Administration  much  too  fright-
ened  for  any  such  plain  speaking.    Mr.  Kennedy  hurried  back
to  Washington  for  a  private  meeting  with  the  biggest  barons
of   our   feudal   economic  system:   Alexander  of   the   Morgan
Guaranty  Bank,  Greenewalt  of  du  Pont,  Blough  of  U.S.   Steel
and  Watson  of  IBM  accompanied  by  Allan  Sproul,  the  New
York  Federal  Reserve's  elder  statesman.    Though   billed  as
a  discussion  of  the  balance  of  payments  problem,  it  looked
more  like  a  peace  conference  to  offer  surrender  in  the  Admin-
istration's  brief  little  rebellion  against  the  real  masters  of  our
economy.
The  Sacred  Rights  of  the  Drug  Business
Against  this  larger  backdrop  the  scene  in  the  Senate  last
Monday   should   be   less  surprising.     Senator  Kefauver   rose
angrily  on  the  floor  to  charge  that  Senator  Eastland  had  ar-
ranged  a  secret  meeting  with  the  Republicans  on  Kefauver's
anti-trust  subcommittee  of  Senate  Judiciary  and  with  represent-
atives  of  the  Kennedy  Administration  and  there  cut  the  heart
out  of  his  proposed   Drug  Industry  Anti-Trust  Act", the   fruit
of  a  two  and  a  half  year  campaign  to  give  the  people  of  this
country cheaperand  safer  drugs.   Neither  Kefauver,  the  spon-
sor  of  the  bill  and  the  chairman  of  the  subcommittee,  nor  any
other  of  its  Democratic  members  were  invited  to  the  meeting.
Behind  their  back,  Ribicoff's  representatives  from  the  Depart-
ment  of  Health,  Education  and  Welfare   met  with  Eastland
and  the  Republicans  to  frame  a  series  of  emasculating  amend-
ments  which  leaves  only  a  shadow  of  the  original   Kefauver
bill.    Next  day  the  HEW  man  on  the  Hill  had  the  brass  to
tell   reporters   these  new  amendments   embody  "pretty  good
steps  forward"  while  Eastland  as  Chairman  of  Judiciary  told
the  Senate  he  was acting  in  accordance  with  the  Kennedy  Ad-
ministration's  wishes.    "I  do  not  think  the  iron  heel  of  the
U.S.  Government,"   Eastland   declared,  "should  be  placed   on
any  company which  wishes  to  manufacture  drags."
In  public  the  Kennedy  Administration  has  been  the  cham-
pion  of  the  consumer;  in  private,  it  has  joined  the  coalition  of
Southern  Democrats  and  Republicans  against  protective  legis-
lation.    On  March  14 Mr.  Kennedy  sent  Congress  an  eloquent
message   on   consumer   protection,  with   a  section  on   drugs,
7
The  More  U.S.    "Aid"   The  Less  Security
"In   Laos   and   in   South
   v
 Vietnam,   particularly,   the
immense cost  of  sustaining  the  large  military  establish-
ments  built  by  U.S.  military  aid  required,  in  turn,  large
annual  economic  aid subsidies to  these countries. Neither
form  of  aid  has  much  effect   on  the  economic  or  social
well-being  of  the  ordinary   people  of  these  nations.  The
principal  gain  has  flowed  to  a  relatively  small  number
of  persons  in  the  cities  and to  military   personnel.  .  .  .
"Eight  years  of  aid  ...       have   produced  scarcely  a
ripple  in  Laos,  except  in  the  capital  city.    And  what  it
has   produced   there,  to  say   the  least,  does  not  speak
well  for  it.    Laos  is,  clearly,  in  far  more  danger  today
of  a  collapse.  .  .  .  than  when  this  whole  process  began
—when  the  country  was  led  by  one  who  tried  to  think
and act in  terms  of  the  Kingdom's  neutralism.  .  .  .
"After   years   of   enormous   expenditures   of   aid   in
South  Vietnam,  that  country  is  more  rather  than  less
dependent  on  aid  from  the  U.S.    Vietnam's  independent
survival  is  less  rather  than  more  secure  than  it  was  5
or  6  years  ago.     I  think  in  all  honesty  that  we  must
contrast   those   situations   with   those   which   exist   in
Burma  and  Cambodia   [both  neutral  and with  little   U.S.
aid  but  both  independent]."
—Mansfield   (D.  Mont)   at  Mieh.  State  Univ.  June  10
strongly  supporting  the  long  campaign  Kefauver  has  waged
against  the  abuses  of  the  drug  industry.    But  in  this,  as  on
most  matters  on  the  Hill,  the  Administration  talks  a  better
fight   than   it   wages.     Its   Congressional   liaison   men   start
throwing  in  the  sponge  before  the  opening  bells  have  stopped
ringing.   The  swift  climbdown  on  drugs  can  easily  be  charted.
On  April  10  Mr.  Kennedy  could  still  be  prevailed  upon  to
sign  a  strong  letter  to  Eastland,  as Chairman  of  Judiciary, ask-
ing  for  virtually  everything  in  the  Kefauver  bill  except  com-
pulsory  licensing  of  patents.    But  less  than  one  month   later
the  Administration's  lieutenants  had  drafted  and  on  May  3
gotten  Chairman  Oren  Harris  of  Interstate  and  Foreign  Com-
merce  to  introduce  a  substitute  bill  in  the  House.    This  left
out  the  patent  and  anti-trust  features  of  the  Kefauver  bill  and
watered  down  its  health  and  safety  features.    Then  a  month
later,  on  June  8,  came  the  secret  meeting  at  which   Ribicoff's
men  with  Eastland's  and  Dirksen's  framed  the  latest  substitute.
The  result  is,  as Kefauver  told  the  Senate,  a  bill  weaker  even
than  that  which  had  earlier  been  advocated  by  Mr.  Beasley of
Eli  Lilly,  the  spokesman  for  the  drug  industry.     Here   the
New  Frontier  seems  to folio* the  Mississippi  State  line.
The  Administration  had  already  turned   thumbs  down  on
the  legislative  proposals  by which  Kefauver  in  the  Senate  and
Celler   in  the  House   seek  to  protect  consumers   against   the
price-fixing  mores of the  steel industry.    But it had  beea  hoped
(Continued   on  Page   four)
9  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  18, 1962
Under  JFK  As  Under  Ike  Timely  Safeguards   Against  Fallout  Hazards
A  high  point  in  political  naivete  on  the  part  of   scientists
was  reached  during  last  week's  radiation  hearings   before  the
Joint   Congressional   Committee  on  Atomic  Energy.     It   came
during   the   testimony   of  Wright   H.   Langham,   of   the   Los
Alamos   Scientific  Laboratory.     He   admitted   that  figures  on
fallout   can  be  considered   "from   the  more   realistic  point   of
view  or  from  the  pacifistic  point  of  view"  and  added  "I  happen
to  enjoy  the  right  of  appearing  before  a  committee  of  my  gov-
ernment  and  saying  exactly  what  I  think,  and  to  me  this  is
worth   a  few  strontium  units  in  my  milk."
This  implies  that  the  arms  race  somehow  makes  freedom  of
speech  possible,  and  that  if  we  lagged  behind  on  testing  the
Russians  would   soon   be  over   here,   and   only  scientists  who
agreed  with  them  would  have  the  right  to say exactly  what  they
think.    The  fact  is that  Dr.  Langham  is  invited year  after year
to  say exactly  what  he  thinks  to  the  Joint  Congressional   Com-
mittee  because  what  he  thinks  never  departs  very  far,  if  at  all,
from   exactly  what   the  military-nuclear  establishment   thinks.
His  opinion,  freely  expressed,  was  that  the  President   had  no
alternative  to  resuming  tests,  especially  since—as  Dr.  Langham
put  it—the  risk  from  fallout  is  so small.   Saying this  out  loud
in  Washington  today  hardly  put  Dr.  Langham  in  a  class  with
Giordano   Bruno.
Little   Time  for  the   Opposition
The   arms   race   and   the   military-industrial  complex   tend
to   restrict,   not   to   enlarge    freedom.      Dr.    Langham    only
has   to   look   objectively   at   the   Joint   Committee's    hearings
over   the   years   to   see  what   he   is  really  getting   for   those
extra  strontium  units  in  his  milk.    The  Committee,  which  was
supposed   to  provide  a  check  on  the  Atomic  Energy   Commis-
sion,  the  military  and  nuclear   industry  has  grown   more   and
more  the  captive  satellite  and  the  faithful   echo  of  these  inter-
ests.    Critical  scientists,  sometimes  heard  in  earlier  years,  are
rarely  invited  anymore,  or—along  with  labor's   representatives
—are given  a  scant  few  moments  of  time on  hurried  discussion
panels.    These  afford   only   a  "somewhat   truncated   opportu-
nity",   as  George  Taylor  of   the  AFL-CIO  on   one  of   these
panels  termed  it,  to  present  opposing  points  of  view,  even  of
a  mild  variety.
Labor's  point  of  view,  presented   in  a  few  scant   moments,
went  to  the  heart  of  the  problem.  It  wants  repeal  of  the  law
authorizing  the  Federal  Radiation  Council  and  its  replacement
with  a  system  of  mandatory  Federal  controls.   This  is what  the
military-industrial  complex   has  been  fighting  since  early   1959
Nobody   Checks   On  The  Military
Mr.  (Alexander)  GRENDON,  [coordinator  of  Atomic
Energy  Development and  Radiation  Protection,  State  of
California]:  The  implied  obligation  of  Federal  agencies
to  avoid  increasing   the  total  population  exposure   out
of   trivial  considerations  seems  to  have  been  well  met
by  the  AEC   [Atomic  Energy   Commission],  since   the
actual  result  produced  by  the  standards  it  has  set   has
kept   well   below   RPG   [Radiation  Production  Guide]
levels,  as  it  should.   The  FRC  [Federal  Radiation Coun-
cil]  should,  however,  undertake  to be a reviewing  agency
with  respect  to  the  activities of  any  Federal  agency  that
proposes  to  exceed   RPG  levels.    The  recommendations
in  its   Report   No.   1  seem  not   to  indicate  such  an  in-
tention.
Mr.  (James  T.)   RAMEY   [exec.  director  Joint  Com-
mittee  on  Atomic Energy]:  You  say  that  FRC Report
No.  1  seems  to  indicate no  intention  to  review  the  ac-
tivities.    I  think,  in  actual  practice,  however, they  have
required   a  report  by   each   Federal   agency  that   it   is
staying  within  the  appropriate guides  applicable to their
activities.  . . .
Mr.  GRENDON: If  they  are,  they  have  not  made  it
sufficiently   public  to  reach  me.    For  example,  I   don't
think  the  DOD  [Dept  of  Defense]   has  ever  made public
what  radiation  exposure  may   be  involved  in   some   of
its   military  activities.  .  .  .
Mr.  RAMEY: I  think  they  sort  of   exclude  military
activities.
—Radiation  Protection  Hearings,  Joint   Congressional
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  June  7.
when  Senator  Lister  Hill  of  Alabama,  with  labor  support,  put
in  a  bill  to  give  the  Public  Health  Service  authority  to  enforce
radiation  standards  and  establish  safeguards  against  fallout  and
nuclear  industrial hazards.
Nuclear  industry fears  higher  costs  in  better  worker  protec-
tion.     The   military  fear   interference    with   testing   if   strict
standards  are  established.    To  head  off  such  legislation,  Eisen-
hower  on  August   14,  1959,   established   a  Federal  Radiation
Council  which  was  supposed  to  establish  uniform  Federal   reg-
ulations  against  radiation.   But  at  the  same  time  he  also  gave
the   Atomic   Energy   Commission   authority   to   transfer   wide
areas  of  nuclear  safety  control  to  the  States.   This  application
of  States  rights  principles  to  nuclear  safety  was  ludicrous;  the
hazards  involved  in  nuclear  production  and  disposal   problems
are   highly   abstruse   and   nationwide.     To   parcel   them   out
among  the  States  is  to  invite  competition   among  them  in  the
Labor's  Unheeded  Protest  Against  Giving  Mississippi  Control  of  Nuclear Safety
"A  very  serious  issue  is  raised  by  the  proposed  Mississippi
plan   to   assume   regulatory    authority    over   AEC   owned
source,  byproduct and  special  nuclear  materials of  less  than
critical  mass.    The  question  is  whether  such  a  plan  meets
the  Commission's  criteria  of  eligibility  in  the   face   of   the
record  of  this  State  in  the  field  of  worker  safety—a  record
which  is  among  the  very  worst  in  the  nation.  .  .  .
"A  State  which  lacks  even  a  Department  of  Labor,  oper-
ates  a  shadow  factory  inspection  department  and  farms  out
its  general  safety  programs  to  private  business  and  indus-
try,  demonstrates  such  small  concern  for  human values  that
its  application now  before  the  Commission  should  be  suspect
on  its  face.  .  .  .
"If  the  Commission  feels  impelled  to  approve  the  Missis-
sippi  plan,  simply  because  on  paper  it  meets  minimum Com-
mission  criteria,  a   most   dangerous   precedent   will  be   set
which  will immediately  spread  to  other  States lacking  safety
programs.   Already the  Southern  States  have  organized  and
are   pressing   for   Congressional   ratification   of   a   Southern
States  Nuclear  Compact,  with  emphasis  on  industrial  pro-
motion."
—"Comment"   filed   by   the   AFL-CIO   May   4   before    the
AEC   which   has  nevertheless  without   public   hearing   ap-
proved   plans   for    transferring     certain   areas   of   nuclear
safety    aiithority   to  the.  State  of  Mississippi.      The   bill   re-
ferred   to  by  the  AFL-CIO,  HR  10618,  passed  the  House  on
the   consent   calendar   without   debate   June   4  and  was   re-
ferred   next  day  to  Senate  Judiciary   Committee.   It  raises
the   spectre   of   the  South  luring  nuclear  industry   by  low
safety   standards  as  it  does  industry  by  low  labor  standards.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  18, 196%
.  . .  Are  Still  Blocked  by  the  AEG  With  Its  Military  and  Industrial  Allies
game  of  attracting  industry by  offering  cheap  and  inexpensive
nuclear  safety  requirements.    The  whole  process  was  carica-
tured  when  the  AEC  recently authorized  such  a  transfer  of  re-
sponsibility  to  Mississippi  (see  box  bottom  of  p.   2).
The  FRC  A  Weak  Front
Though  Kennedy  in  1961  during his campaign  for  President
criticized  the  system under  which the  AEC  "is  both  the  devel-
oper  of  weapons  and  the  judge  of  risks",  and  called  for  the
separation  of  the  two  functions,  actual  policy  under  Kennedy
has  been  the  same  as  under  Eisenhower.    The  Federal  Radia-
tion  Council  has  been  a  weak  front  behind  which  the  AEC
with  its  military and  industrial  allies  has  continued  to  subor-
dinate  health  considerations  to  military thinking and  business
profit.    Authority  in  the  field  of  radiation  protection  remains
diffused;   the   "protection   guides"   established  by  the   Council
are  only  advisory;  responsibility for  counter  measures  against
the  dangers of  fallout  is still  undefined.
Such  countermeasures  must  now  be  prepared,  according  to
a  long  and  mysteriously delayed  report  by  the  National  Advi-
sory  Committee  on  Radiation  to  the   Public  Health   Service.
This   Committee,  headed   by  Dr.   Russell  H.   Morgan,   chief
radiologist  at   Johns   Hopkins,   recommended   as  far   back   as
March,  1959,  that  primary  responsibility for  the  nation's  pro-
tection  from radiation hazards be established in  a  single  agency
of   the   Federal  government,   "preferably  the   Public   Health
Service."    In  recent  weeks  bits  of  a  new  report  by  this  com-
mittee  have  been  leaking  into  the  press,  and  the  Industrial
Union  Department  of  the  AFL-CIO  has  been  demanding  its
release.    It  was  suddenly  made  public  during  the  Joint  Com-
mittee hearings, after  Congressman  Mel  Price  (D.   111.)  wanted
to  know  why  it had  not  been  made  available.
Where  the  FRC  report  (discussed  in  our  last  week's  issue)
said  testing  through   1961  had  not  noticeably  increased  health
hazards,  the  Morgan  report  pointed  to  sharp  increases  in  Io-
dine-131  from  recent  Soviet  and  U.S.  testing  and  warned  that
counter-measures  might  have  to  be  taken  if  the  Russians  re-
sumed  testing again after  our  current series.   The  best  counter-
measure,  it  said,  would  be  the  use  of  powdered  or  evaporated
milk  for  infants  and  pregnant  or  lactating mothers.    Effective
Fallout  Monitoring  Inadequate
"The   [fallout]   monitoring   systems  have  serious  de-
ficiencies  with  respect   to  speed  and  effectiveness;   the
information   is  not  available  soon  enough  to  take  any
preventive  action  which  may  be  warranted.    The  total
diet  samples  (especially  useful   for   medium   and  long-
lived   radioisotopes,   such   as   Strontium   89,   Strontium
90  and  Cesium  137)   do  not  give  us  data  until  three  or
four  months  after   the  food  has  been  eaten.
"The   milk  network   requires   about   two   months   for
the  reporting  of  such  data.    But  this  network   is  also
capable  of  reporting  the  short-lived  Iodine-131   within
a  few  days,  and  is  especially  valuable  for  this  reason.
The  air  network,  which  should  act  as  an  'early  warning'
system,  to  warn  us  of  approaching  radioactive  contami-
nation,  is  of  very  limited  value,  if  not  misleading.    The
air  network  failed   to  give  warning  of  high  Iodine-131
levels  in  milk  in  most  places  in  the  U.S.   last  Fall."
—From  Prepared  Summary   of  Testimony   by  Irving
Michelson,   Consumers   Union,   before    the   Joint    Com-
mittee  on  Atomic  Energy,  June  5,
counter-measures  for  Strontium  90,  on  the  other  hand,   have
yet  to  be  developed.    The  Morgan   report  urged  that   unless
preparations  in  the  field  of  counter-measures  are  taken   now,
"the  nation  may  well  be  faced  in  a  few  years with  contamina-
tion  problems  which  cannot  be  easily  solved."
Here  a  new  obstacle  is  encountered—the  milk  industry.   It
would  rather  pretend  that  little  danger  exists.    Its  partners  in
pretense  are  many  and  powerful.    The  military  does  not  like
the  Morgan  report's  warning that  if  testing  is  continued,  seri-
ous  health  hazards will  appear.    The  AEC  dislikes  the  Public
Health  Service, and  prefers  to  operate  behind  the  facade  of  the
Federal  Radiation  Council.    It  turns  out  that  this  body,  made
up  of  Department  heads,  has  only  met  seven  times  in  three
years,  hardly  a  reassuring  record.    Opposition  to  the  Morgan
report   may  also  come  from  the   Budget   Bureau;   the   report
calls  for  a  50  percent  increase  next  fiscal  year  in   radiological
health  activities  to  $25,000,000  and  a  steady  rise  thereafter  to
$100,000,000  by  1970.     Economy  is  still   the  watchword  of
government  where  civilians are  concerned.
Leakage  From  Underground  Tests  in  Nevada  Suspected   As  Source   of   Iodine-131
"One  of  the  things  that  has  bothered  me  most  is  to  recon-
cile  some  aspects  of   the   fallout   data   associated   with   the
periods   of  relatively  high  iodine  activity   in  eastern  United
States.    In  the  past  we  have   [had]   a  strong  correlation  of
iodine  activity   associated  with  Nevada  tests.    This   feature
still  seems  to  be  apparent  in  these  data.    So  in  the  timing,
in  the  age  of  the  debris,  the  concentration  of  surface   air,
in  radioactivity  and  in  the  distribution  pattern,  all  of   the
late  September  [1961]  activity   would  suggest  that  perhaps
we  are  overlooking  an  important  contributor.    In  fact,   from
the  point  of  view  of  the  very   short-lived   [radio]  activity,
it  may  even  be  the  predominant   contributor.    By  this  I  mean
leaking  or  mild  venting  from   underground   tests  which   are
not  completely  contained.   .  .  .
"I  think   if   one   examines   the   iodine   activity,   you  find
many   features  in  it  which  could  be  related  to  its   possible
origin  in  Nevada  underground   shots.    There  seems  to  be  in
the  timing,  in  the  age  of  debris,  in  the  concentrations  ob-
servable,  things  that  can  be  rationalized  from   this  source
which  are  very  difficult   to  rationalize  from   a  very  distant
source.    We   are  having   the   same   kind   of   difficulty  with
some  of  the  present  data,  mid-May,  1962,  data,  showing  high
concentrations  in  the  Middle  West  milk' again  and  this   pre-
sumably   due  to  atmospheric  tests  in  the   Pacific.     I   think
it  is  important  to  fully  evaluate   these  possibilities.
"One  kiloton  in  surface  air  drafting   [drifting?]  over  con-
tinental  United  States  can  produce   the  observed  concentra-
tions  in  layers  one  or  two  miles  thick,  concentrations  ob-
served  in  late  September.     This  could   account  for  the  milk
if  it  were  mostly  deposited  in this  limited  region. ...  I  think
in   connection   with   the   iodine   problem   we   should   look   to
our  underground  tests  quite  carefully  as  a  possible  contri-
buting  source  and  conceivably   the  important   source."
—Dr. E.  A.  Martell,  Cambridge  Air  Force  Research   Cen-
ter,  during  panel  discussion  at  the radiation  hearings   before
the  Joint   Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  June   5.     If    Dr.
Martell's  hunch  is  correct  then  heavy  iodine  concentrations
in  the  Mississippi   Valley   last  Fall  and  last  May  were  due
in  part  at  least  to  leakage  from  our  own  underground  tests
rather  than  Russian  and  U.S.  atmospheric  testing.
9     /
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  18, 1962
A  Fighting  Liberal  President  Would  Have  Made  This  A  Great  Issue
(Continued  pom   Page  One)
that  the  Administration  would  still  support  the  battle  to  aid
the  drug  user.   The  high  profits  of  the  industry,  its exorbitant
prices,  its  exaggerated   claims,  the  high  pressure  salesmen  it
looses  on  the  physician,  the  dangerous  side-effects  its  wonder
drugs  often   create—all  have  been  voluminously  documented
in  12  volumes  and  8,668  pages  of  testimony  before  the  Ke-
fauver  committee.    The  high  spots  have  even  appeared  in  a
largely  indifferent  press*  often  more  sensitive to  drug  adver-
tising  than  to  its public obligation.
Kefauver's  Grand  Design
The  remedy  proposed  by  Kefauver  was  a  classic American
populist  response—not  price-fixing  by  government  but  regula-
tory  steps  to  restore  competition  and  prevent  cheating.    Ke-
fauver's  bill  embodied  a  grand  design.    It  would  have  made
certain  well-known  abuses  of  patent  procedure  per  se  viola-
tions  of  the  Sherman  Act, thus  hitting  the  drug  cartel  at  its
foundations.    To  end  high  prices  in  patented  drugs,  it  would
have  provided  for  compulsory  licensing  after  three  years  (at
royalties  up  to  8  percent  of  sales,  a  generous  margin).    To
bring  down  prices  in  non-patented  drugs,  it  would  have made
it  easier  to  buy  drugs  by  their  generic  names.    To  give  the
physician  confidence,  it  would  have subjected  the  drug  manu-
facturers  to  licensing  and  inspection.    It  would  have  forced
the  drug  houses  to  tell  the  truth  about  the  side  effects  in their
advertising.    It  would  also  have given  the  Patent  Office  power
to prevent  "a quick kill with the quick pill" by refusing  patents
on  slight  modifications  which  provide  sales  gimmicks  rather
than  therapy]    These  were  the  outlines  of  a  great  and  over-
due  reform,  a  monument  to  any Administration.
From  the  standpoint  of  practical  politics,   the   drug  issue
has  the  same appeal  as  medical  care  for  the  aged.    The  price
* The  AP,  to  its  credit, made Kefauver's  charge  of  a  secret
meeting  the  lead  of  its  story.    The  UPI  left  this  out.    The
Baltimore  Sun  put  the  AP  story  on  page  one  but  the  Wash-
ington  Post,  the  New  York  Herald-Tribune and the  New  York
Times  all  ran  the  UPI  story  instead,  buried  inside.   The  New
York   Times   dropped  the   story   altogether   from   its   main
Late  City  Edition.    For  most  newspaper  readers  this  is  still
an  untold  story.
Witch   Hunt   Victory
It  is  a  pleasure  to  report  that  the  first  two  Commu-
nists  to  be  jailed  in  connection  with  the  Internal  Secur-
ity  Act,  that  excrescence  on  a  free  society,  will  go  free
as  a  result  of  a  unanimous  opinion  just  handed  down
by  Judge  J.  Skelly  Wright  (with  Judges  Edgerton  and
Burger)  of  the  U.S.  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  District
of  Columbia.   The  decision  was  in  the  case  of  Philip
Bart,  a  Communist  official  for  more  than  30  years,  but
the  reasoning   applies  to  the  appeal  of  James  E.  Jack-
son,  editor  of  The  Worker.    Both  men  were   sentenced
to  6  months  in  jail  for  contempt  when  they  refused  to
name  other  party  officers   after  being   given  immunity
under  the  Compulsory Testimony  Act  upheld some  years
ago  in  the  Ullmann  case.    The  Court  held  that  while
the  Compulsory  Testimony   Act  specifically  covers  In-
ternal  Security  Act  cases,  the  government  must  show
that   the   matter  being   investigated   really  involves  a
threat  to  the  national  security.    More  than  allegation
is   required.    "The  judge,"  the   Court  said,  "is  not  a
mere  automaton,  performing  a  ritualistic  act."    Judge
Wright  declared,  "Only  the  strongest  circumstances  can
justify   compelling  a  confession   of   crime.    Especially
so,  when  that  admission   involves  not  only  the  odium
attached  to  guilt  but  also civil  and  economic  disabilities
which  the  grant  of  immunity probably  cannot  erase."
of  medicine  for  chronic  ailments  imposes  real  hardships  on
a  large  section  of  our  older  population.    This  was  an  ideal
spot  at  which  to  fight  some  of  the  myths  to  which  Mr. Ken-
nedy  referred  at  Yale.    As  Hart  of  Michigan  told  the  Senate
in  support  of  Kefauver, "When certain phrases are  used,  most
members  react rather like  an  automatic sprinkler  system.   One
of  these  phrases  is,  'You  do  not  want  to  curb  American busi-
ness'."    This  identifies  American  business  with  the  right  to
take  the  public  for  all  it  can  get.   The  Republicans,  through
their  Senate leader,  Dirksen  of  Illinois,  have made themselves
the  fervent  spokesmen of  the  drug  industry in  this  fight.  This
could  have  been  a  great  issue  in  the  coming  campaign,  were
it  not  that  Kennedy  sometimes  seems  much  closer  to  Dirksen
than  he  is  to  Kefauver.   Indeed  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that
the   secret  surrender  on   the  drug  bill   followed  right   after
Dirksen  came  to  Kennedy's  rescue  in  the  fight  to  continue
farm  aid  to  Poland  and  Yugoslavia.
Please  Specify    Which  Issue  When  Sending  Stamped  Envelopes  For  Free  Sample  Copy   to  Friends
I.   P.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street    ...................................................................................._
City   ..........._.........................Zone.............State....................
6/18/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........._................................................................._...
City  ............_.........................Zone......._..State....................
Shall  we  tend  gift  announcement T         Tea  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebratko  Ave..  N.  W.
Washington   15,  0.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'.  Weekly.August   and   the    flnt
__.._.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   - -  - _—  __    —
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  In  January  at  6618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W..  Washington.  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  II.  Stone.   Subscription:   SE  in  the  U.  S.:   S6  in
Canada:   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $16  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED