I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962may21.pdf

============================================================

To Bertmnd  Russell  an His  90tb Birthday,  P.  4
Difficulty  of  Honest  Reporting  in  Vietnam  Disclosed  in  Private  Report to  N.  Y. Times  House  Organ,  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  20MAY  21,  1962'<"      WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
Where  Swarming  Gnats  Can  Devour  A  Giant
In  July  of  last  year  the  President  had  a  visitor  who  is  not
without  experience  in  the  Far  East.    He  asked  if  he  might
be  frank  and,  when  told  that  he  could,  "proceeded"   (accord-
ing  to the New  York  Herald-Tribune, July  26,  1961)  "to  give
as  frank  a  talk  as  the  President  has  ever  heard.    Net  of  the
talk:  Keep  U.S.  troops  off the  mainland  of  Asia  at  all  costs."
The  visitor  was  General  MacArthur.    If  there  were  still  an
opposition  in  this  country,  instead  of  a  numbed  monolithic
bipartisan,  i.e.,  one  party  system,  whenever  there  is  a  danger
of  war, this advice would  be in  the  headlines  and  on the  radio
in  the  wake  of  our  decision  to  land  troops  in  Thailand  close
to  the  borders  of  Communist  China.    This  is  a  first  step  into
a  vast  marsh  where  swarming  gnats  can  devour  a  giant.
The  Fleet  In  The  Wrong  Gulf
If  MacArthur had  advised  intervention  and  war,  the  whole
country  would  have  heard  about  it  and  it  would  be  repeated
today.    Because  he  advised  against  intervention   then  in  the
perpetual  Laotian  crisis,  few  knew  of  it,  fewer  remember  it.
This  disappearance  of  debate  on  such  vital  issues  destroys  the
stabilizers  of  the  ship  of  state,  locks  the  country  in  not  only
with  one  man's  decisions,  but  deprives  even  that  one  man,
the  President,  of  the  greater  flexibility  made  possible  by  the
existence  of  alternative  points  of  view  in  a  free  society.    In
this  context,  the  phrase  itself   becomes   rhetoric   rather   than
reality.    Indeed,  viewed  astringently  from  outside,  we  could
not  have picked  a  poorer  time  to  act  in  Southeast  Asia.    The
same  President  who  can  deploy  4,000  men  and  a  vast  naval
armada  across  the  Pacific  to  "defend  freedom"   hardly  raised
his  voice on  Capitol  Hill  in  the  literacy  bill  fight  to  defend  a
liberty  so  fundamental  as  the  right  to  vote.    The  fleet  should
be  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  the  helicopters  over  Mississippi.
We  have grown  inured  to  our  own  hypocrisies.    To  bolster
a  dictatorship  in  Thailand  in  the  same  week  that  we  can  en-
force  neither  majority  rule  in  the  Senate  or  minority rights  in
the  South  hardly  advertises  us  abroad  as  champions  of  free-
dom.     The  repressive  nature  of  Communism  once it  takes hold
is  lost  to  sight  in  our  own  inability  to  be  what  we  claim  we
are.    What  we  advertise  as a  rampart  of  freedom  in  the  East
is manned by four  of  the  queerest  figures  ever  smuggled  under
the  Jeffersonian   mantle—Pak  in  Korea,  Chiang  in   Formosa,
Diem  in  South  Vietnam,  Sarit  in  Thailand.   Never  did  a  rich
concern  acquire  so many sure  tax  losses.
Self-depredation   marks  every  step  of  our  way on  *  course
that  may be disastrous.   As we write  the  morning  paper  head-
lines  proclaim  "Thailand  Welcomes  Arrival  of  1800   Amef«  '
ican   Marines."     Already  brushed   under  the   rug   in   typical
fashion  was the  queasy remark  of Thailand's Interior  Minister,
Gen.  Charusthien.    For  a  moment  in  the  late  afternoon  pa-
6
Cease-Fire?    What  Laos  Needs
Is A  Cease-Retreat!
"Vientiane,  May  11  (French  Press  Agency)—Amer-
icans  and  Laotians  are  not  in  agreement   [on  the  re-
ported  fall  of  Houei-Sai  on  the  Lai-Thai  border to  the
Pathet  Lao].  .  .  .  The  American  spokesmen  say  they
are  not  even  sure  that  the  Pathet  Lao  seek  to  occupy
that  locality.    They  say  journalists  can  go  there  to-
morrow  by  plane  to  see  for  themselves."
—Figaro   (Paris)   May   12-1S  week-end  issue.
"Honei-Sai,   Laos,  May  14  (AP)—Honei  Sai  was  a
ghost  town  today following a  mass  evacuation  into Thai
territory  by  government  troops  and  civilians  late  last
week.. ..  Mayor  Phoney  Chatamga,  back  on an inspec-
tion  tour  of  his  town,  said  he  believed  the  main  body
of  pro-Communist  forces  was about  30 miles  away. . . .
The  town itself  apparently had  never  been  occupied  by
the  Reds. .. . The evacuation into Thailand was started
by  government  troops  last  Wednesday and ran  through
Friday  in  what  an  eye-witness  described  as  'two  days
of  hell'.  .  .  ."
—AP  reporter  Tony  Escoda,  flown  to  Thai  side   by
helicopter,  crossed   Mekong   in   home-made   launch  and
filed this  from  the  scene, Wash. Star, May  14.
"Houei   Sai,   Laos   (AP)—May   15—Dishevelled   Lao
troops  continued to  flee  through  this  border  town  into
Thailand  today  even  though  no  Communist  forces  have
been  sighted  in  the  area  for  five  days.    Authoritative
military  sources  [this  means  U.S.—IFS]  said  patrols
have  pushed  well  back  over  the  line  of  retreat  to  dis-
cover  the  strength  of  Pathet  Lao  forces  without com-
ing  into contact with  the  enemy.   The  Pathet  Lao drive
seems  to  have  paused  after  chasing  the  Royal  Laotian
forces  out  of  Nam  Tha,  90  miles  to  the  north."
—Washington  Post,  May   16.
pers  of  the  day  before  one  could  get  a  glimpse  of  the  truth
in  his  apologetic   statement  that  "persons  with  old-fashioned
ideas  may  not  like  the  matter  of  foreign  troops  in  Thailand,
but  there  are  times  when  a  country  has  to  depend  on  collec-
tive  defense."    Even in Thailand,  where public  opinion  hardly
exists  under  the  repressive  blanket,  the  Interior  Minister  finds
it  necessary  to  excuse  the  admission  of  U.S.  troops.    This  is
not  the  most  auspicious  circumstance  under  which  to  make our
debut  with  combat  forces  on  the  mainland  of  Asia.   But  how
many  will  notice  this  detail  in  the  reassuring  flurry  stirred  up
as  usual  by U.S. "information  agencies"  ?   They  sell  folly  with
the  same  techniques  that sell  soap.
The  truth  is  that  there  can  be  no  peace  in  Southeast   Asia
and  no  stability  unless  this  area  on  the  southern  borders  of
China  is  neutralized.    The  people  of  this  otherwise  blessed
(Continued   on  Pagt   Two)
7   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 21,1962
region,  neither  overpopulated  nor  underfed,  need  and  want
to  be  let  alone.    They  need  to  be  sealed  off  from  the  giant
quarrel  of  China  and  America.    China  can  no  more  help  re-
sisting  our  establishment of  bases  to  her  south  than  we  could
help  resisting  if  Chinese  military  advisers  were  operating   in
Guatemala  and  Chinese  combat  troops  were  being  placed  in
Nicaragua.    We  overthrew Arbenz and  we wage economic war
on  Castro  insisting  that  we  have  a  right  to  make  sure  that  the
regimes  among  our  smaller  neighbors  are  to  our  liking,  and
under  our  influence.    But  we  recognize  no  similar  right  on
the  part  of  China.    Her  neighbors,  too,  must  be  satisfactory
to  us.   This  is  to  make  the  Monroe  Doctrine  world-wide,  as
Mr.  Kennedy's  friend  Henry  Luce  advocates  and  indeed   as
the  Truman  Doctrine  of  containment  in   1947  was  intended
to  imply.    The  whole  world  is  to  be  our  sphere  of  influence.
This  spells  trouble  with  a  capital  P:  world-wide  dispersion  of
military  forces,  a  constant  increase  in  their  size,  a   growing
hatred  for  us wherever  we  are  impelled  to  burn  out  resistance
with  napalm  as  in  South  Vietnam,  an  increasing militariza-
tion  of  our  own  society.
The  Question  of  Sincerity
It  should  be  clear  by  now  that  only  neutralization  can  con-
tain  Communism  in  Southeast  Asia.    The  one  stable  State  in
it  with  no  Communist  menace  is  Cambodia  which  has  peace-
ful  relations with  both  sides  and  ended  insurgency  by peaceful
reform  without  undemocratic  repression.    But  Cambodia,  for
some  reason,  is the  country our  bureaucrats,  military and  civil-
ian,  seem  to  hate  most  in  the  whole  area.    Cambodia's  Prince
Sihanouk  is  a  man  of  elevated  views,  but  our  people  in  Asia
prefer  the  corrupt  downs  we  have  been  supporting   in  Laos.
The   New   York   Times   in  an  unbearably  unctuous   editorial
(May  16)  speaks  as  if  the  restoration of  the  cease-fire and  the
achievement   of  a  coalition   Laos  regime   as  pledged   by   the
Powers  last year at  Geneva  were  a  test  of  Russian and  Chinese
sincerity.    But  it  is  our  government  which  has  seemed  insin-
cere  since the  beginning  in  this whole  area.
There  has  been  a  strange  contradiction  in  our  policy  since
Dien  Bien  Phu.   On  the  one hand,  our  military were  opposed
to  a  cease-fire  between  the  French  and  Ho  Chi-minh's  forces.
On  the  other  hand,  the  Pentagon  always  gets  cold  feet  when
asked  to  intervene on  its  own.    Those  who  go  back  and  study
the  papers carefully  will see this  "let's you and  him"  fight  pos-
ture  which  so  rankled  the  French.    It  was  a  report  by  Gen.
Ridgeway  on   the  logistical  difficulties,   as  the  brass  calls  it,
which  swung  the  scales  against: U.S.  military  intervention  in
1954  and  our  surly  acquiescence  in  the  Geneva  settlement  of
that  year.    In  the  same  way  the  present  policy  of  seeking  a
way  out  by  a  coalition  with  the  Communists  in  Laos  was  de-
Our  Trustful   Laotian  Allies
"Mr.   McNamara    [U.S.    Secretary   of   Defense]   was
told  by  American  officers  from   Laos  that   the  Laotian
generals fled the  battle  scene  this  week  in  Northwestern
Laos  without  notifying  American  military  advisers  who
were  trying   to  rally  the  defenders.  .  .  .
"The   Laotian   government,    it   was   reported   to  Mr.
McNamara  refuses  to  show  military  maps  to  the  Amer-
ican  advisers  or  tell  them  where  troops  are  deployed."
—Washington  Star,  Sunday,   May  IS,  main   story,
"Kennedy   Draws  Line  in  Laos"  by  Richard   Fryklund,
its  Pentagon   reporter.
cided  before   Kennedy's inaugural  when  the  Pentagon,  on  tak-
ing  a  close  look  after  the  collapse  of  "strong  man"   Phoumi
Nosavan's  drive  northward  in  December  I960,  decided  that
it  didn't  want  to  intervene.    On  January  3,  1961,   there  was
one  of  those  off  the  record  briefings  for  Pentagon   reporters
which  signalled   the  change.     In  the  newspapers   of  Jan.  4,
1961,   Pentagon   reporters   Jack  Raymond  in  the  New   York
Times,  Mark  Watson  in  the  Baltimore  Sun  and  Richard Fryk-
lund  in  the  Washington  Star  (with  Hanson  Baldwin  chiming
in  two  days  later  in  the  New   York   Times)   all  carried   the
same  tune:  that  intervention  in  Laos  was  too  difficult   logis-
tically   (not   enough   roads,   mostly   trackless   mountain   and
jungle)   and   also   politically    ("In    Laos,"   Fryklund   wrote,
"there  is no dear  cut  38th  parallel  between  the  good  guys and
the  bad  guys.   Our  man,  Prince  Boun  Oum,  has little  popular
support.  .  ;  .")  and  anyway  Laos  was  not  important   enough
to  either  side  to be worth  a  fight.  It  was at  the  Pentagon  that
the  scales  of  policy  were  turned  to  the  search  for  a  coalition
regime  as  a  way  out.    It  is  not  accidental  that  we  are  inter-
vening  in  Thailand,  not  Laos,  and  talk  of  drawing  a  line  only
around  the  capital  of  Ventiane  where  a  bend  in  the   Mekong
river  makes defense easy  from  the  Thai  side.   They  blow  hard,
our  military men.
The alternative to fighting is to negotiate.  But  here the wind-
bags  fill  up  again  to  bursting  with  the  cry  of  "appeasement."
The  pattern  has  been  to  let  the  other  Powers  take  the  onus of
negotiating  and  then  surreptitiously  try  to  upset  the   results.
Dulles  refused  to  attend  the   1954  Geneva  conference.    We
would  not  sign  the  settlement.    We  helped  block  the unifying
free  elections which were promised  in  Vietnam  and  established
the  Diem  dictatorship  instead.    In  Laos  we  tried  our  best  to
sabotage  the   1954   agreement  to  reunite  the  two   Northern
provinces  held  by  the  Pathet  Lao  with  the  rest  of  the  country
by  elections and  by  absorbing  the  Pathet  Lao  into  the  Royal
Army.     When   elections  were  finally  held   and   a   coalition
formed,  we  overthrew  Souvanna  Phouma,  set  up  a  dictator-
ship,  threw  the  Leftists  out  of  the  Parliament,  put  the  Pathet
Even  Visiting  U.  S.  Defense   Secretary
"Five   hundred   Vietnamese   Communist    guerrillas   have
been  deployed  in  the  area  of  the  resettlement  project   known
as   Operation   Sunrise.    Defense   Secretary   Robert   S.  Mc-
Namara  visited  the  area  Wednesday.  .  .  .  The  Communists
made  their  presence  felt  on  the  same  afternoon  that  Mr.
McNamara   inspected   Ben  Tuong,   the   first   settlement   of
Operation   Sunrise.    They  ambushed  a  convoy  of   the   7th
Regiment,  killing  6  soldiers.    Five  soldiers  were  captured.
The  Communists   seized  two  American   submachine   guns,  six
rifles  and  two  carbines.
McNamara  Not  Told  Truth  in  Vietnam
"The  incident  occurred  at  noon  on  the  main  road  to   Sai-
gon.    Mr. McNamara   passed  over  this  area  about  five  hours
later  in  a  U.S.   Army  helicopter.    HE  WAS  TOLD   NOTH-
ING   OF   THE   INCIDENT   DURING    AN   EXTENSIVE
BRIEFING   at  Ben Tuong,  although  the  settlement  was  only
8   miles   from   the  scene  of   the  ambush.    The  Vietnamese
assured   Mr.  McNamara    that   the   highway   was   now   un-
molested."
—Homer  Bigart  from  Saigon,  New  York  Times,  May  IS.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  21, 19C2
Lao troops into concentration camps and  sent their  leader  Prince
Souphanou  Vong  to  prison  on  trumped  up  charges  of  treason.
The  troops  and  the  Prince  escaped  and  resumed  the   rebellion.
Then  in  August,  I960,  a brave young  parachute captain,  Kong
Le,  disgusted with  the  corruption  our  aid program  had  brought
the   Laotian  military  and   rich,   revolted   and   put   Souvanna
Phouma  back  into  power.
The  Highest  Paid  Army  In  Asia
Again   we   upset   coalition   talks   and   encouraged   Phoumi
Nosavan  to  revolt.    It  is  important  to  remember  that  the  Rus-
sian  supplies which  turned  the  tide only  began  to  come  in  after
Nosavan's   relative,  Marshal   Sarit,  the  dictator   of  Thailand,
bombarded  Ventiane  with  mortar  fire  from  the  Thai  side  and
shut  off  all  supplies  to  the  Laotian  capital,  which  depends  on
oil  and  other  goods  shipped  up  the  Thai  side  of  the  Mekong,
it  was  then  that  Souvanna  Phouma  appealed  to  Moscow   for
help.    Our  military  and  CIA  men, by  their  intrigues  against
Souvanna  Phouma  thus  opened  the  gates  to  the  supplies  that
overwhelmed  that  phoney   "strong  man" of   theirs,   Phoumi
Nosavan  and  that  no  good  army  of  his, which  we  made  the
highest  paid  in  Asia  but  which   turned  out  to  be  the  least
willing  to  fight.
Again,  in  recent  months,  Le  Monde  of  Paris  and  The  Times
of  London  have  reported  that  our  military  and  the  CIA  were
encouraging   Phoumi   Nasavan   to   hold   out   against   a  new
coalition  regime  even  while  the  U.S.  Embassy at  Vientiane was
Operation  Sunrise Unappreciated
"At  the  [Ben Tuong]  settlement,  40  miles  north  of
Saigon,  Mr.  McNamara  saw  the  first  results   of  Oper-
ation  Sunrise,  which  seeks  to  pacify  and  secure  rural
areas.   He  decided  to  support  the  project  to  the  fullest
when  he  first  heard  of  it  in  Hawaii  in  February.
"Operation  Sunrise  involves  rounding  up  and  reset-
tling  hundreds of  families in  areas  previously  controlled
by  the  Communist   guerrillas.     Most  of  these  families
must  be  forcibly  removed  by  Government  troops,  who
burn  the  dwellings  to  prevent  their   use  by  the  Com-
munist  guerrillas,  known  as  the  Viet  Cong.    The U.S.
has  made  funds  available  to  compensate  the   families.
"In  the  thatched  briefing  hut,  Mr.  McNamara  asked:
'What  has  been  the  reaction  of  the  resettled  families?'
'At  first  unhappy,'  Col.  Nguyen  Due  Thang, commander
of  the  5th  Division   admitted."
—Homer  Bigart  from.  Saigon,  N.  Y.  Times,  May  10.
urging  him  to  go  in.    This  may  seem  a  familiar  problem  to
us  but  it  may well  have  looked  like  a  double-faced   policy  to
Moscow  and  Peking.    Even  our  papers  indicate  that  the  truce
was  broken  in  the  North  after  Phoumi  despite  U.S. warnings
built  up  his  troops  in  Nam  Tha  in  violation  of  the   cease-fire.
In  a statement  in Paris  which  Le  Monde  carried  (May  11)  but
which  I  did  not  see  in  our  press,  Souvanna  Phouma   claimed
that  the  Royal  forces,  not  the  Pathet  Lao,  began  the  attack  at
Nam  Tha.  Now  we  can't  get  our  heroes  to  stop  running.
A  Vivid  Picture  of  An  Independent  Minded  U.  S.  Newsman's  Troubles  in  Vietnam
"Saigon,  South  Vietnam—At  4  p.m.  on  March  23,  I  was
summoned  to  appear before  the  director  general  of  the  Dept.
of  Information,  Republic of  South  Vietnam.   Such  summons
are   always   unpleasant.    Departments  of   Information,  of
course,  never  handle  information.    They  exist  for  the cor-
rection  of  mental  aberrations that  afflict  foreign  correspon-
dents.
"Wondering  where  my  copy  had  been  found  repellent,  I
stopped  first  at  the  shop of  Dang  Due  Khoi, who is  a  special
press  adviser  to  the  President.    Khoi  is  a  Buddhist,  but  he
seems  more  attuned  to  reality  than  most  Christians   here.
'Have  I  been naughty?',  I  asked  Khoi.   'Will  they  throw  me
out?'    Khoi  assured  me  that  my  stories  were  jewels  of  ob-
jectivity.    Suspecting  perhaps  that  my  intimations  of   de-
portation  were  based   on  wishful  thinking,   Khoi   exhorted
me  to  banish  such  thoughts.    Besides  the  Director  General
would  never  dare  try  to  oust  me.   Here  he  was  wrong.
''The  heat  was  terrible  that  day  and  I  was  sweaty  and
fretful  when  I  mounted  the  stairs  to  the  Office   of  Truth.
The  Director  General  had  just  returned  from  a  symposium
on  The   Free  Press  in  India'  and  in  consequence  his  man-
nerisms  seemed  more  saccharine  than  usual.    But  he  came
to  the  point  quickly.
" 'I  have  to  inform  you,'  he  purred,  "that  a  decree  for
your  expulsion  has  been  signed  by  the  Minister  of  Interior.
You  must  leave  by  plane  tomorrow.'
" 'Thank  yon  for  giving  me  so  much  advance  notice,'  I
replied.
"He  evidently  thought  I  would  beg  for  time.    Finally  he
asked  whether  I  wanted  a  few  extra  days  to  pack.   He  said
he  might be  able  to  swing  it.    But  there  is  a  limit  to  self-
degradation  and  I  gag   at  asking  favors  from   information
directors.   'It's  up  to  you  to  say  when  I  must  leave',  I  told
him.    I  asked  the  reason  for  my  expulsion.    He  said  he
did  not  have  the  decree  handy  (I  was  never  able  to  see  it)
but  he  would  call  Interior and find out.  He  phoned  someone
and  then  said:  'You  have  spread fake  information which  is
considered  to  be  tendentious  and  against   the   government
and  people  of  Vietnam.'
"'I  have  been  expelled  from  only  one  other   country—
Communist  Hungary,'  I  told  the  Director  General.    *We  are
in  a  state  of  national  emergency,' he replied.  .  . .
"Returning  to  Saigon  late  Saturday,  I  was  informed  by
Khoi  that  it  was  all  a  mistake.    I  could  stay.    There  had
been  an  error  in  the  translation  of  one  of  my  stories.  (Offi-
cially  there  is  no  censorship,  but  cable  copy  is  read  by  in-
formation  people who sometimes  relay  transmission  or  even
refuse  to let  some  stories  go out.) .  .  .
"This  is  one  explanation.   Ambassador  Nolting  has  heard
another—that  my  stories  tended  to  pessimism  and  failed  to
reflect   much  enthusiasm  for  the   government.    The  palace
had  marked  me  as  anti-regime  and  stooges  were  combing
my  copy  to  seize  upon  some  excuse  for  expulsion.
"Sully  [Francois   Sully  of  Newsweek,  another  correspon-
dent  served  with  an  expulsion  order  at  the  same  time]  was
never  told  his  offense.    At  Sully's  request,  none  of  the  cor-
respondents  here  wrote  about  the  deportation   orders.
"Besides,  how  do  you  write  a  story  about  yourself   in  The
New  York  Times?    In  the  third  person?    And  what  cate-
gory  would  it  fall   in?     News?     Analysis?    Talker?    Or
should  it  detonate  a  Blockbuster?    Anyhow  I  regarded  my
reprieve  with  mixed  feelings.    This  has  not  been  a  happy
assignment.
"Saigon  is  a  nice  place  to  spend  a  few  days  in.   The  food
and  wine  are  good,  the  city  is  attractive,  most  hotels  and
restaurants  are  air-conditioned.   But  to  work  here  is  pecu-
liarly  depressing.   Too often  correspondents  are  regarded  by
the  American  mission  as  tools  of  foreign  policy  [exactly   as
Washington  correspondents  are  regarded  by  the  State  De-
partment—IPS].    Those  who  balk  are  apt  to  find  it  a  bit
lonely  [ditto  Washington—IFS],  for  they  are  likely  to  be
distrusted  and  shunned  by  American  and  Vietnamese   offi-
cials.   I  am  sick  of  it.  .  .  ."
—Homer  Bigart  in  the  New  York   Times  house  organ.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May SI,  1962
Two Labor Racket Decisions Cast A Dim  Light on Pending Contempt Appeals
Two  appeals  arising  from  the  McClellan  investigation  of
labor  racketeering  were  decided  by  the  Supreme  Court   last
Monday,  but  its  newest  member,  Mr.  Justice  Byron   White,
took  no  part  in  either  so they threw  no  light  on  what  his  atti-
tude  will  be.    Since  the  Court  has  been  divided  5-4  in  favor
of  broad  Congressional  powers  of  investigation,  the  new  ap-
pointee  might  turn  the  scales.
The  two  cases  were  those  of  the  ex-Teamster  leader,  Dave
Beck,  and  Maurice  Hutcheson  of  the  Carpenters.   Neither  in-
volved  the  issues  coming  up  in  the  pending  contempt  appeals
from  the  Un-American and  Internal  Security committees.  They
are  interesting  only  as  revealing  those  basic visceral  reactions
which  so  often  are  the  hidden  propellants  of  judicial  ration-
alization.    Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter,   who  is  ill,   took  no  part
in  either  decision.
Not  An  Impartial  Grand  Jury
Beck's  case  was  decided  4-3.    Warren,  Black  and   Douglas
felt  that  he  had  a  right  to  a  new  trial  for  grand  larceny  be-
cause  the  trial  judge  had  made  no  explicit  attempt  to  weed
out  of  the  grand  jury  which  indicted  him  those  who  might
have  been  prejudiced  by the  burst  of  unfavorable publicity  he
received from  the  McClellan  committee.   Clark decided  against
Beck,  with  the  support  of  Harlan,  Brennan  and  Stewart.
Mr.  Justice  Blade  took  no  part  in  the  Hutcheson   case.    It
was  decided  against  the  union  leader  4  to  2.   He  was  held  in
contempt  for  refusing to  answer  questions  about  a  jury  fixing
case for  which he  was being  prosecuted  in  Indiana.    If  he  had
pleaded  the  Fifth,  the  fact  could  have  been  used  against  him
in  the  State  proceeding.
Another  witness  in  the  same  proceeding  found  a  way  out
by  refusing  to  answer  on  the  ground  that  questions  about  the
jury  fixing  conspiracy were not  "pertinent"  and  "might aid  the
prosecution  on  which  I  am  under  indictment."     But  when
Hutcheson,  on  advice of  the  same lawyer, made the  same  plea,
he  was held  in  contempt.
Warren  dissenting,  with  Douglas,  was  for  reversal  on  the
ground  that  the  committee  did  not  need  the  details  of  this
crime  to  pass  laws  regulating   union  funds.    Douglas,   in  a
separate  dissent,  argued  for  reversal  of  the  rule  which  holds
invocation  of  the  Fifth  Amendment  in  a  Federal  proceeding
For Bertrand  Russell's 90th Birthday
Only  a  few  philosophers  have  left  behind  them  some
enduring  fragrance  in  the  garden  of   men's  thoughts.
Socrates   and   Marcus   Aurelius,   Giordano   Bruno   and
Spinoza,  inspire  others  across  the  centuries  by  some
special  quality  of  courage  and  devotion.    But  Bertrand
Russell  is   the  only  philosopher  we  can  think   of  who
sought  not  only  to  teach  but  actually  to  lead   mankind.
The  spectacle  of  an  octogenarian  philosopher  speaking,
marching,  engaging  in  ait-downs,  is  as  unique  as  the
peril  against  which  he  is  seeking  to  rouse  the  human
race.   The  chains  against  which  he  urges  struggle  are
subtler  and  stronger  than  man's  impediments  in   the
past.   Not  superstition  or  intolerance  but  habit,  apathy,
and respectability  today  lead  mankind to  move in  locked
step  toward  an  abyss.    He  has  even  been  willing—last
full  measure  of  an  Englishman's  devotion!—to  risk  ap-
pearing  undignified  fat  his  efforts  to  awaken  us  from  a
kind  of  somnambulism.    To  speak  with  him  is  to  feel
his  exhilirating  combination  of  pessimism  and hope,  ob-
jectivity  and  involvement,  despair  and  joy.    His  love
shines  in  his  countenance  and  in  his  preachment.   The
thoughtful  and the  uncorrupted  everywhere  are  grateful
to  him  for  it,  and  hope  he  will  be  spared  to  lead  us  a
goodly  span  longer.
may  be  used  to  convict  a  man  in  a  State  court.
Hutcheson  claimed  his was a case of  exposure  for  exposure's
sake.    Harlan  (with  Clark  and  Stewart)   for  the  Court  re-
jected  this  plea  on  the  ground  that  Congress  has  full  power
under  the  commerce  clause  to  legislate  in  the  field  of  labor-
management  relations.    Harlan   said  this  was  different   from
that  "indefinite  and  fluctuating  delegation   which  permits  a
legislative  committee  'in  essence  to  define  its  own authority' "
as  the  Court  had  said  of  the  Un-American  committee  in  the
Watkins  case.
Brennan  in  his  concurring  opinion  pointed  to  the  reason-
ing  of  Harlan  as  evidence  that  the  Watkins  decision  against
the  un-Americans  had  not  been  overruled  by  the  Barenblat*
Braden  and  Wilkinson  decisions.   He  said  the  majority  ruling
was  evidence  of   "continued   adherence"   to  the  "vital  prin-
ciple"  that  "exposure   for  the  sake  of  exposure  is  not  legis-
lative   inquiry."     Pending   contempt   cases   will   soon
whether  Brennan  was  just  grasping  -wistfully  at  a  straw.
This  Issue  Also  Available  Free  to  Friends   If   You  Send  Stamped  Addressed  Envelopes.    Specify   Which   Issuf
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .............................................................................—....—
Street   ..................................................................................—
City   ............._............................Zone...........;.State....................
B/21/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  moa.)  or  $4  <1 yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name  ..............................................................................
Street    .........—..........................................................................
City  ..........._.........................Zone.............SUte....................
Shall  we  lend  fift  announcement?          Tea  O    No  D
I.E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Wellington  IS,  D.  C.
Second  class  ,
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   W.  8ton.'»  WMUr.
S«»t«»l>«r
«nd   the   flrit   in
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED