I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962may28.pdf

============================================================

Douglas  On  The  Press and  The  Witch  Hunters,  P.  3
Odd  Answers at  State  Department  to  Queries About Troop Landings in Thailand
Q.  Have  we  got  formal  permission  from  Thailand  yet   to
land  Marines  there?
A.  Let  me  just  say  that  we  are  working  very  closely  with
the  Government  of  Thailand.  .  .  .
Q.  Have  they  requested American  reinforcements?
A.  I  can't  answer  specific  questions  like  that.
Q.  Are  they   specifically   in  agreement  with  the   precau-
tionary   measure  of  landing  Marines  in  Thailand?
A.  No  comment.
Q.  Is  the   U.S.  consulting  members  of   the   SEATO  alli-
ance  on  this?
A.  I  can't  answer  that  specifically.
—State  Dept.  daily  press  briefing   May  IS
Q.  Link   [Lincoln  White,  State  Dept.  official  spokesman],
I  am  a  little  confused  about  the  SEATO  relationship.    We
haven't   even   advised   the   SEATO   Council   what   we   are
doing.     We  have   advised   individual   members   of  SEATO
but  we  haven't  told  the  Council  as  such  in Bangkok.
A.  Unless  there was  a meeting out there today, that would
be  my  supposition.
Q.  There  may be  a  public  explanation  which  I  missed  this
morning  for  our  reasons  for  not  going  to  SEATO   first.   Is
there  some?
A.  I  am  just  not  prepared to  discuss  that.
—State  Dept.  daily   briefing    May   IS
Q.  Link,  there  seems  to  be  some  confusion  over  whether
Thailand  will  ask  our  SEATO  allies  to  send  troops.    Do
you  have  any  information   on  that?
A.  I  better  let   the  Thais  speak  for  themselves.    I  just
have  no  precise  information  on  that.  .  .  .
Q.  Do   you   know   whether   any   requests  have   gone  out
from  the  Thai  government?
A.  No,  I  don't.
—State  Dept.  daily  press  briefing   May  18
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  X,  NO.  21
MAY  28,   1962
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Hardly  Setting  An  Example  of  Adherence  to  World  Law
The   Kennedy  Administration   is  not  being  at  all  candid
about  the  dispatch  of  troops  to  Thailand.    It  has  sought  to
create  the  impression  that  the  troops  were  sent  in  response  to
an  appeal  from  Thailand  for  protection  from  a  threat  of  ag-
gression,  and  that  action  was  taken  in  accord  with  the  South
East  Asia  Treaty  Organization  (SEATO)  and  the  Charter  of
the  United  Nations.    Our   official  letter  of  notification  to  the
United  Nations  dated  May  15  said  U.S.  military  forces  were
being  sent  to  Thailand  "in  response  to  a  request  by  the  gov-
ernment  of  Thailand  .  .  .  which  now  faces  a  threat  of  Com-
munist  aggression."    This  communication was  signed  not  by
Adlai  Stevenson but  by his  deputy,  Charles  W.  Yost.    It  may
be  that  after  the  Cuban  affair   Mr.  Stevenson  has  grown  re-
1 ictant  to  put  his  signature to  these  little white  prevarications.
There  has been.no sign  of  any Pathet  Lao advance  toward  the
Thai  border  since  the  Royal  Lao  troops  fled  from  Nam  Tha.
There   is  no  appeal   on  the   record  from   Thailand   for   U.S.
troops.
Not  Very  Welcome  Defenders
When  Mr.  Kennedy at  press  conference May  18  was  asked
to  explain  his  "rather  swift  action  to  move  American  troops
into  Thailand,"  he  replied  that  "in  our  desire to  stabilize  the
situation  we  got  into  touch  with  the  Government  [of   Thai-
land]  which  was already in  touch with  us,  and  worked out  the
proposed  course  of  action."    This  wording  is  curiously  cir-
cuitous.    If  Thailand  had  appealed  for  U.S.  troops,  it  would
have  been  easy  to  say  so.    The   official   troop  announcement
from  the  White  House  two  days earlier also  failed  to  say there
h»d  been  an  appeal  from  Bangkok  for  aid.    It  said  the  action
v-.-is  taken   following  "joint  consideration"  by  the   two   gov-
* amerits.    Again  the  phrasing  was  odd.    There  is  reason  to
suspect  that  our  government,  rather  than  the  Thai,  initiated
this  "consideration,"  that  our  government  rather  than  Thai-
6  *
Rockefeller's   Ready
Denver,  May  12 (UPI)—New  York Gov. Nelson  Rock-
efeller  said  today  crises  such  as  in  Laos  possibly could
be  avoided  if  the  U.S.  would  take—and  keep—the  ini-
tiative  in  the  fight  against  Communism.  .  .  .  Earlier
today  in  a  speech  at  Colorado  Springs,  Col., Rockefeller
said  the  U.S.  must not  be afraid  to  use nuclear weapons
to  preserve  freedom."
—Washington  Post,  May  IS
And, as  everybody knows, nothing frees  people  faster
than  nuclear  explosion.
land's  has  been  pressing  other  members  of  SEATO  to  send
token  forces. This,  I  believe,  explains  the  evasive  replies  given
by  the  State Department  all  last  week  when  asked  to  clear  up
these  matters; a  sample  of  them  is provided  in  the  box  above.
The  key to  Thai  reluctance  may be  found  in  a  dispatch  to  the
London  Daily  Telegraph  May  16  from  its  correspondent   in
Saigon  who  reported   that  the  Thais  had  asked  the  U.S.  to
deploy  its troops  "well  outside  the  capital,  Bangkok"  in  order
"to  avoid  giving  the  impression  that  the  country,  which  has
never  been  under  white  colonial  rule,  has  come  under  alien
occupation."
The  return  of  white  combat  troops  to  the  mainland  of  Asia
is  not  a  popular  move.    The  struggle   against   colonialism   is
too  recent.    This  is  true  not  only  of  neutralist  but  of  inde-
pendent  anti-Communist States.    SEATO  has  itself   been  sus-
pect  from   the  beginning,   as  primarily  an  alliance  of   white
imperial  powers.    Most  of  the  peoples  it  purported  to  protect
declined  to  join.    India,  Burma,  Ceylon  and  Indonesia  turned
down  John  Foster  Dulles's  invitation  to  the  organizing  meet-
ing  in  Manila  in  September,  1954;  Malaya,  which  became  in-
dependent  since,  refused  to  become  a  signatory.    Nehru  saw
(Continued   On   Page  Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  S8,196K
Tito  and  Mr.  K.  Don't  Mind  Criticism   of  Stalin's  Rule  But  Only  of  Theirs
It's   His  Conversation  With  Khrushchev  in  Kiev  That  Did  Djilas  In
It  is,  I  suspect,  not  the  portrait  of  Stalin  but  the  portrait  of
Khrushchev   in   Djilas's   book,   "Conversations   with   Stalin,"
which  got  the  author  into  trouble.    Djilas,  in  his  estimate  of
Stalin  is  more  generous  than  Khrushchev was  at  the  20th  and
22nd  Soviet  Party  Congresses.    The  revelations  in  the  Djilas
book  are  neither  as  new  nor  as  damaging  as  those  which  Ilya
Ehrenbourg  is  now  making  in  his  memoirs,  currently  being
serialized  in  Novy   Mir,  organ  of  the  Soviet  Writers   Union.
It  is in  reporting  his  1945  visit with  Khrushchev  that  Djilas
touched  sensitive territory.   Djilas  stopped  off  in  Kiev,  capital
of  the  Ukraine,  on  his  way  back  from  Moscow  in  the  closing
months  of  the  war.    Khrushchev  was  then   Secretary  of   the
Ukrainian  party  and  Premier  of  the  government.    By normal
standards,   Djilas's   portrait   is  not   unsympathetic.    Khrush-
chev,   as  Djilas  portrays  him,   already  showed   the   popular
touch,  the  love  of  turning  up  on  the  spot  to  see for  himself,
the  quick  grasp  of  practical  affairs,  the  lively,  homely  and  un-
sruffy  way  of  speaking  which  have marked  his  tenure  in   the
Kremlin.
That  Fine  Old  Daily  Worker  Frenzy
"The    book    [Conversations   With   Stalin],    without
doubt,  was  written  with  the  precise  aim  and  intention
of  serving  as  an  instrument   of  the  cold  war;  it  is   sup-
posed  to  be  a  new  stimulant  in  the  cold  war  campaign
which  is  persistently  and carefully  planned  and  worked
out   in  the  circles  which   conduct  psychological   activi-
ties;  it  has,  by  the  way,  even  before  its  publication,  al-
ready  served this  purpose.  A  chorus  of  hoarse  and  grat-
ing   voices  has   been   heard   in  the  Vienna   Presse,   the
Washington   Post,   the   Rome   Messagero,   the   Cologne
radio,   the   Chetnik-Ustashi   immigrant   press,   and  all,
naturally,  in  defense  of  Djilas.    Hysterical   cries  have
been   heard   from  those  who  don't   even   know   how   to
whisper  of  the  killings  in  Angola,  the  genocide  in  Al-
geria,  the  race  riots  in  Alabama,  the  arrests  of  political
workers   or  the  banning   of   movements   and  parties  in
West   Germany,    the   USA   and   elsewhere,   terror   in
Spain,  violence  under  the  government   of  Verwoerd   or
Chiang  Kai-shek."
—Yugoslavia's   leading   paper,  BORBA,  May  18
Untactful  Details
But  Djilas  added  less  flattering  details to  the  portrait  which
no  Soviet  writer  would  permit  himself:  the  "unrestrained  gar-
rulity,"  the  inferior education, the  capacity to  bolt  huge quan-
tities  of  food  and  drink.    These  make  the  portrait  seem  the
more  human,  but  dictators  like  to  be  pictured  as  a  little  more
than  human.
Then  there are the  embarrassing paragraphs in which  Djilas
discusses  the  Russification  of  the  Ukraine  and  the  fact  that
Khrushchev,  though  its  Premier,  was  a  Russian.    "It  was  in-
deed  unusual even  for  us  Communists, who  are  able  to  justify
and  explain away  everything that  might  becloud  the  ideal  pic-
ture  of   ourselves,"   Djilas  writes,  "that  among  the  Ukrain-
ians,  a  nation  as  numerous  as  the  French  and  in  some  ways
more  cultured than  the  Russians, there  was not  a  single  person
capable  of  being  Premier  of   the  Government."     This   is  a
delicate  topic  in  the  USSR.
The  book's  basic  heresy,  of   course,  lies  in  its  challenge   to
the  Soviet  line  that  the  evils  of  the  Stalin  period  were  the
accidental  result  of  something vaguely  called  "cult  of  person-
ality."    Djilas  says the party  bureaucracy needed  somebody  like
Stalin  and  broke  with  his  methods  only  to  the  extent   that
they  became a  danger  to  the  party bureaucrats themselves.    As
Khrushchev  complained   in   Sofia  last  week-end  (New    York
Times,  May  20)   Stalin  turned  the  secret  police  "against   his
own  people."    Djilas  sees  the  root  of  the  evil  in  the  Parry's
insistence  on  an  ideological  monopoly.    These  are  dangerous
thoughts  in  Yugoslavia  as well  as  in  Russia.
Ten  years  ago  in  the  conversation  Dedijer  recorded  in  his
biography  of  Tito,  the  Yugoslav   dictator,   in  criticizing  the
Soviet  Union,  said  "There  is  no  freedom  of  thought  and  cre-
ative work  in literature.  .  .  ."   Now  a  new savage prison  sen-
tence  on  his  old  comrade  in  arms,  Djilas,   underscores   the
Stalinist  habits  which  hang  over  in  Yugoslavia.    Khrushchev
and  Tito  both  hated  the  old  dictator,  and  seek  to  rule  more
mildly,  but  like  him  neither  will  brook  real  opposition.
Van  Allen  Belt  Discoverer  Negative  on  Shelters,  Opposed to Atmospheric Testing
Mr.  [Sidney  R.]  YATES  (D.  Ill):  I  was  going  to  ask  you
the  next  question   as  to  what  your  views  were  on  the   con-
struction   of  fallout   shelters.
Dr.  [James  A.]  VAN  ALLEN  [for   whom  the  Van  Allen
radiation  belt  is  named]: I  happen  to  be negatively  inclined.
(Discussion  off  the  record).  .  .  .
Mr.  YATES:  Yon indicated  before  that  you  thought  above
atmospheric   atomic   explosions  would   be  profitable   and  to
advantage  of  the  cause  of  science.    Do  you  hold  the  same
view   for  atmospheric  explosions?
Dr.  VAN  ALLLEN:  I  would  not  at  all.    I  think  that  the
justification  for  atomic  testing  in  the  atmosphere,  if  there
is  one,  is  entirely  a  matter  of  military  technology.
Mr.  YATES:  And  you  are  against  it?
Dr. VAN ALLEN:  I  am  against  it.    ...
Mr.  YATES:  I  do not  know  that  I  was  fair  to  you  in  an
earlier   question  when  I  asked  you  about  atmospheric  nu-
clear  testing  and you  said  you  were  against  it.   I  think  you
had  spoken  of  the  military   basis  for  it  and  then  you  said
you  were  against  it.    I  do  not  think  just  that  on  the  record
is  adequate  to  reflect  your  position.
Dr. VAN  ALLEN: It  is  not  a field of  experience  with  me.
I  am against  it  on  the  grounds  of  the  impact  it  has  on  other
countries  and  —
Mr.  YATES:  Political  impact   or  social   impact?
Dr.  VAN  ALLEN:  I  think  that  testing  of  bombs  in  the
atmosphere  is  in  the  nature  of  a  terror  activity.    I  think  it
can  be  so  interpreted.   I  do  not  say  it  is,  really.
Mr.  YATES:  What  about  the  effects   of  fallout  itself  and
the  harmful  biological  effect?    Is  this  a  factor?
Dr.  VAN  ALLEN:  It  is  a  factor  in  the  terror.    If  it  were
not  for  fallout,  it  would  be  like  a  big  blast  of  TNT.
Mr.  YATES:  Or  above  atmospheric  test?
Dr.  VAN  ALLEN:  I  am  talking   about   one  which  yields
fallout.    I  think  that  the  general  human  reaction  to  that  is
one  of  terror.    That  is  why  I  feel  it  is  undesirable.   I  think
it  is  unlikely  that  the  military  requirements  make  it  neces-
sary  to  make  more  tests.  .  .  .
—House   Approp.    Com.   Hearings   on  National   Science
Foundation  exec.  session  Feb.   27,  released  May  H.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stont-'s  Weekly,  May  28,196S
Freeing  of  Pete  Seeger  by  Court  of  Appeals  in  New  York  Another   Witch  Hunt   Setback
Supreme  Court  Reverses  Six  First  Amendment  Contempt  Convictions
The  process  of  what  might  be  called  de-mccarthyization  in
our  country,  like  that  of  de-stalinization  in  the  USSR,   pro-
ceeds  slowly.    The  Judges,  as  if  ashamed,  reverse  more  con-
victions  but  on  technicalities,   still  hesitant   to   affirm   funda-
mental  principles.    The  reversal  of  six  First  Amendment  con-
tempt  convictions  by  the  Supreme  Court  last  Monday  and  of
the   Pete  Seeger   contempt   conviction   by  the   Second   Circuit
Court  of  Appeals  in  New  York  a  few  days  earlier  represent
a  setback  for  the  paranoids  in  our  society,  above  all  for  Chair-
man  Walter  of  House  Un-American   and  Chairman   Eastland
of   Senate   Internal   Security.     They   reflect   an    atmospheric
change,   but   they  provide   as  yet  only  precarious   safeguards
against  a  revival  of  the  witch  hunt.
The  Judicial  See-Saw
The   Supreme   Court   has  been   see-sawing  back  and   forth
between  a  5-to-4  lineup  against  the  witch  hunters  in  Watkins
and  Suieezy  to  a  5-to-4  in  their   favor  in  Barenblatt  and  its
successor  cases.   Now  Mr.  Justice  Stewart  has  swung  over,  and
formed  a  new  majority  of  five  against  abuse  of   Congressional
investigating   powers,  but  only  on  the  rather  fine-spun  tech-
nicality   that   the   indictments   failed   to   identify   the   subject
under  inquiry.    The  Pete  Seeger  conviction   was  reversed  on
the  somewhat  similar   ground  that   the   indictment   failed   to
spell  out  the  investigating  subcommittee's   chain  of   authority.
A  majority  cannot  yet  be  mustered  for  the  basic  view  (so  elo-
quently  expounded  by Mr.  Justice  Douglas  in  the  box  below)
that  Congress  under   the  First   amendment  has  no  power   to
investigate  free  expression  of  opinion.
Sad  Outlook—For  Walter  and  Eastland
"I  am  unable  to   rid  myself   of   the   view   that   the
reversal   of   these   convictions   on   such    insubstantial
grounds  will  serve  to  encourage  recalcitrance  to  legiti-
mate  Congressional  inquiry."
—Mr.  Justice   Harlan  dissenting   (with  Mr.   Justice
Clark)  from  the  reversal  of  six  First  Amendment  eon-
tempt  convictions  in  Russell  et  al  v.  U.S.  May  21.
These  are  fragile  bulwarks.    Theoretically   the   government
could  reindict  all  seven  and  bring  them  to  trial  again.     We
don't   believe  this   is  likely.    The   cases   of   Robert   Shelton,
Alden  Whitman,   Herman  Liveright  and  Wm.  A.  Price  were
the  result  of  an  attempt   by  the  Eastland  committee  and  its
counsel,   Jules   Sourwine,  to   launch   an   investigation   of   the
press,   especially  the  New   York   Times,  in  1955.     That   soon
collapsed  and  is unlikely to  be  revived.   The  other  three  cases,
Norman   A.   Russell,  John  T.   Gojack   and   Pete   Seeger  are
equally  notorious   relics  of  forays  by  the  Un-Americans  into
the  fields  of  entertainment  and   labor.     Of   three  other  un-
American  contempt  convictions  awaiting  decision by the  Court,
those  of  Edward  Yellin,  Bernard  Silber  and  Frank   Grumman,
the  last  is certain to  be  reversed  on  the  same  grounds  of  faulty
indictment while the  first  two  may also benefit  by the  improve-
ment  in  atmosphere.    Thus  at  least  one,  and  possibly  three,
new  blows  are  ahead  of  the  Un-American   committee.     Best
of  all:  the  new  Justice,  White,  did  not  take  part  in  last  Mon-
day's  decisions.    He  might  provide  a  majority  of  six  in  some
future  witch  hunt  appeals.
Justice  Douglas  Defends  Freedom  of  the  Press  From  Congressional   Snoopers
"While  I  join  the  opinion  of  the  Court,  I  think  it  is  de-
sirable  to  point  out  that  in  a  majority  of  the  six  cases  that
we  dispose  of  today  no  indictment,  however  drawn,  could  in
my  view  be  sustained  under  the  requirements  of  the  First
Amendment.     The   investigation   [by   the   Senate   Internal
Security  subcommittee]  was  concededly  an  investigation  of
the  press.  .  .  .  The New  York Times  was  a  prime  target  of
the  investigation,  30  of  the  38  witnesses  called  at  the  1955
executive  session  and  15  of  the  18  called  at  the  1956  public
hearings  being  present  or  past  employees  of  that  paper.
"The  power  to  investigate  is  limited  to  a  valid  legislative
function.    Inquiry  is   precluded  where  the  matter  investi-
gated  is  one  on  which  'no  valid  legislation'  can  be  enacted.
Since  the  First  Amendment  provides  that   'Congress  shall
make  no law .  .  .  abridging  the freedom ...  of  the press,'
.   .   .   this   present   investigation   was   clearly   unconstitu-
tional.  .  .  .
"Under  our  system  of  government,  I  do not  see  how  it  is
possible  for  Congress  to  pass  a  law  saying  whom  a  news-
paper  or news agency  or  magazine shall  or  shall  not employ.
If  this  power exists,  it  can  reach  the  rightist  as  well  as  the
leftist  press,  as  U.S.  v.  Rumely  shows.    Whether it  is  used
against  the  one  or  the  other  will  depend on  the  mood of  the
day.   Whenever it  is  used  to  ferret  out the  ideology  of  those
collecting news or writing articles or editorials  for  the  press,
it  is  used  unconstitutionally.
"The  theory  of  our  Free  Society  is  that  government  must
be  neutral when it  comes  to  the  press—whether  it  be  right-
ist  or leftist,  orthodox or  unorthodox.   The  theory  is  that  in
a  community  where men's  minds are  free,  all  shades  of  opin-
ion  must  be  immune  from  governmental  inquiry  lest  we  end
with  regimentation.  .  . .
"Since   the  editorials  written  and  the  news  printed  and
the  policies  advocated  by  the  press  are  none  of  the  govern-
ent's  business,  I  see  no  justification  for  the  government  in-
vestigating  the  capacities,  leanings,  ideology,  qualifications,
prejudices  or  politics  of  those  who  collect  or write  the  news.
It  was  conceded  on oral  argument  that  Congress  would  have
no  power  to  prescribe  loyalty  tests  for  people   who  work
for  the  press.    Since  this  investigation  can  have  no  legis-
lative  basis  as  far  as  the  press  is  concerned,  what  then  is
its  constitutional  foundation?
"It  is  said  that  Congress  has  the  power  to  determine  the
extent  of  Communist  infiltration  so  that  it  can  know  how
much  tighter  the  'security' laws  should  be  made. This  proves
too  much.   It  would give  Congress  a roving  power to inquire
into  fields  in  which  it  could  not  legislate.    If  Congress  can
investigate  the  press  to  find  out  if  Communists  have  infil-
trated  it,  it  could also  investigate  the  churches  for  the  same
reason.    Are  the  pulpits being  used  to  promote  the  Commu-
nist  cause?     How  about  the  governing  board?    How  about
those  who  assist  the  pastor  and  perhaps   help  prepare   his
sermons  or  do  the  research?    Who comes  to  the   confession
and  discloses  that  he  or  she  once  was  a  Communist?  .  .  .
"The  strength  of  the  'press'  and  the  'church'  is  in  their
freedom.    If  they  pervert  or  misuse  their  power,  informed
opinion  will  in  time  render  the  verdict  against   them.    A
paper  or  pulpit  might  conceivably  become  a  mouthpiece  of
Communist  ideology.    That  is  typical  of  the  risks  a  Free
Society   runs.    The  alternative  is   governmental   oversight,
governmental  investigation,  governmental  questioning,  gov-
ernmental   harassment,   governmental   exposure   for   expo-
sure's  sake.    Once  we  crossed  that  line,  we  would  sacrifice
the  values  of  a  free  society  for  one  that  has  a  totalitarian
cast."
—Douglas  concurring  in  Russell  et  al.  v.  U.S.  May   SI
8    .1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May S8, 196*
What  If  China  Put  Troops  Into  Mexico  to  Warn  Us  On  Cuba?
(Contmued   From  Page   One)
the  Dulles  plan  as  "likely  to  change  the  whole  trend  toward
peace  that  the  Geneva  conference  has  created  by  its  decisions
on  Indo-China."   Pakistan,  the  Philippines  and Thailand  were
the  only  Asian  countries  to  join  the  U.S., Britain,   France,
Australia  and  New  Zealand  in  forming  the  pact.    The  same
queasy   feelings   have  made  themselves  apparent   in   Asia  in
the  wake  of  U.S. action.    Japan  objected  to  the  sending  of
troops  from  her  territory  as  a  violation  of  her  defense  agree-
ment  with  the  U.S.    The  Prime  Minister  of  Malaya  May  20
announced  that  his  government  would   not  agree  to  permit
British  Commonwealth   troops   stationed   in   Singapore   to  be
sent  to  Thailand.   Neither  Pakistan  nor  the  Philippines   have
responded   to   our   request   for   token   contingents.     Lyndon
Johnson  was warned  by the  Filipinos  during  last  year's  uproar
over  Laos  not  to  send  U.S.  combat  troops.
Containment—Of  the  Republicans
In  the  cynical  atmosphere  of  Washington,   where  the  troop
movements  are  dismissed  light-heartedly  as  a  means  of  con-
taining  the  Republicans   before  the  next   Congressional   elec-
tions,  little attention  is paid  to  such wider  considerations.   It  is
a  dangerous  myopia  that  overlooks  the  instinctive  reactions  of
Asia's vast millions.   The  action  is not  even  in accordance with
the  pact  we  fathered.    When  Mr.  Kennedy  was  asked  at  his
May  18  press  Conference  what  was  "the legal   basis  for  our
sending   troops, into  Thailand"  he  replied  "the actual   legal
basis  was  to  put  us  in  position  to  fulfil  our  obligations  under
the  SEATO  treaty."   This  was  disingenuous.   The  treaty  re-
quires  unanimous  agreement  for  armed   resistance  to   aggres-
sion,  consultation  in  the  event  of  any  other  threat  to  "the  in-
violability  or  integrity"  of  any  State  covered  by  its  guarantees.
We  acted  first  and  consulted  afterwards.    We  sent  in  troops
and  then  having  created  a  fait  accompli  put  pressure  on  the
other  members to  make  it  look  legal  by adding  token  troops  of
their  own.    The  Pact  was  supposed  to  be  a  joint  venture  to
protect  the  stability  of  Southeast  Asia.    Suppose   some   other
member  thought  the  sending  of  U.S.  combat  troops  to  Thai-
land  threatened  to  upset  that  stability  by  provoking  similar
movements  by  China?    Our  unilateral  action  was  hardly  in
accordance with  the  treaty,  as  it  was  hardly  in  accordance  with
Somebody  Sort  of  Got  Carried Away
"The  free  Vietnamese  found  a  determined  and  re-
sourceful  leader  .  .  .  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  .  .  .  creating  a
symbol  of  liberty and independence  .  .  .  the fierce will
of  the  Vietnamese  people  to  survive  in  freedom  .  .  .
the  high  quality  of  their  fighting  spirit.  .  .  ."
—Under  Secretary   of  State  George  W.  Ball:  Speech
OH  Vietnam   before   the  Detroit  Economic  Club April   30.
"South  Vietnam—At  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year  1961
the  total  amount  of  foreign  aid  given  to  this  country
of  some  14  million  people amounted to  nearly  $2 billion.
Since  President  Diem   assumed  office   in  1955,  he   has
taken  dictatorial  control,  either  directly  or  through  a
small  group  of  intimates,  many  of  whom  are members
cf  his  family.   It  is  estimated  some  30,000  South Viet-
namese  nationalists  are  in  concentration  camps.    The
lack  of  freedom  of  the  press  and  the  presence  of  close
governmental  controls,  have  been  reflected  in  the  lack
of  will  by  some of  the  South Vietnamese  people to  fight
for  their  country."
—House   Foreign   Affairs    Com.:  Special  Study   Mis-
sion  to  the  Far  East:  Supplementary    Conclusions  by
Pilcher   (D.  Ga),  Johnson   (D.  Md),  Adair   (R.  Ind),
May   22.
the  UN  Charter.    If  there  was a  threat  to  the  peace,  the  Char-
ter  should  have  been   invoked.    Our  obligations   to  the   UN
were  not  fulfilled  by sending  it  a little  chit  after  the  event say-
ing  (as  did  our  note  of  May 15),  "Consistent  with  the  policy
of  the United  States to keep  the  United  Nations  fully  informed
as  to  events  affecting  the  maintenance  of  international  peace
and   security  in  Southeast   Asia,  I  am  informing  you  of   the
President's   action."    What  does  the  Secretary  General   reply
to  that?    "Thanks   a  million,  and  please  let  us  know  if  you
drop  any  A-bombs  .  .  .?"    This  wilful  disregard  of  Charter
and   Treaty   hardly  accords  with  all   those  fine  speeches   we
make  about  world  law.
What  if  China  were  to  send  combat  troops  into  Mexico  as
a  warning  to  the  U.S.  to keep  hands  off Cuba,  would  we accept
this  as a  purely  defensive  move  intended  to  maintain  peace  in
accordance  with  the  UN  Charter ?   Or  would  we suspect  China
was  using  Cuba  as  an  excuse  to  establish   a  base  in  North
America?                                                           Noon,  May  23
This  Issue  Also  Available  As  Free  Sample  to  Friends  But  Specify    Issue  and  Send  Long  Envelopes   Stamped
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City  .
Enter
(To)
Street
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for
...........—............................Zone........
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
.......................................Zone........
we  Bend  gift  announcement?
the  enclosed  $5:
...State....................
5/28/62
(1 yr.) additional:
....State....................
Yes  D   No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Glass  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  G.   Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  In  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M. Stone.   Subscription:  $5 in  the  U.  S.;  $6 In
Canada:   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED