I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962apr23.pdf

============================================================

New  Revelations  on  Test  Detection,  P.  3
How  A  Report Disproving Dr.  Teller  Can Be  "Released" and  Kept  Secret  at  the  Same Time
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  16
APRIL  23,  1962
»'°'      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Better   at  Hiding  Information   Than  At  Hiding  Tests
To  move  back  from  Geneva  to  Washington   is  to   plunge
into  an  altogether  different  atmosphere.  Here  the  decision  to
resume  testing  can  be  seen  ever  more  clearly  as  a  political  and
domestic matter.   It  is painful  to  notice that  as the  date for  re-
sumption  of  testing  draws near,  only  one  member  of  Congress
has  suggested  postponement.  A  few  others—not  many—may
feel  the  same  way,  but  they  are  silent.   Frank  Kowalski,  Con-
necticut's  Democratic  Congressman-at-Large,  the  one   profes-
sional  Army  officer  in  the  House,  a  West  Pointer  and  a  Col-
onel,  released  a letter  to  the  President  April  12 suggesting—as
India  did  in  Geneva  that  same  day—that we  postpone  resump-
tion  while negotiations are  going  on.    "It  would  seem incon-
sistent,"  he  wrote  Mr.  Kennedy,  "to  threaten  the life  of  these
negotiations  by  committing  the  very  acts  we  are  trying to  out-
law at Geneva.  . . . Your  decision  not to talk  would  assure the
free  people  of  the world  that  before God  we are doing  all  that
is  humanly  possible  to  promote  peace  and  avoid  spilling  nu-
clear  refuse  upon  all  mankind  and  generations  to  come."
A  More  Daring  Leadership  Required
Kowalski's  lone  voice  merely  emphasized  the  silence.     It
would  take  a  President  more  daring  and  emotionally  commit-
ted  than  John  F.  Kennedy  has  shown  himself  to  be  to  step
into  this  political  void,  and  appeal  to  the  better  conscience of
the  country  against  the  storm  of  protest  and  suspicion  which
a  sudden  order  to  stop  would  bring  from  the  Republicans,  the
Southern  oligarchy  and  the  military-industrial complex.    The
best  one  hears  from  the  unhappy  liberals  in  the  Kennedy  en-
tourage  is  that  after   a  new  test  series,  and  only  then,  can  the
Administration  afford  to  be more flexible about  controls.    The
Russian  refusal  to  permit  any  inspection  even  by  the  neutrals,
does not  make the Administration's task  easier,  and  strengthens
the  suspicion  that  they,  too,   are  not  ready  to  talk  seriously
until  after  another  round  of  their  own.
What  Geneva   is  discussing   seems  all  the  more  irrelevant
when  seen  from  the  perspective of  Washington.  Unfortunately
a  combination  of  diplomatic  tact  and  inadequate  information
keeps  the  neutrals  from  breaking  through   into  the  realities.
The  whole  question  of  underground  testing  has  been  exagger-
ated  out  of  all  proportion.   At  his  press  conference  on  March
29,  Mr.  Kennedy  was  asked  about  emphasis  on  inspection  of
underground  tests  since  he  himself   had  said  at  Palm   Beach
last  winter  that  they  did  not  particularly  advance  the  art  of
weaponry.    Mr.  Kennedy  replied  lamely that  he  thought   "un-
derground  tests  potentially  could  be  more  rewarding  than  they
have  been  in  the  past."    It  now  appears  that  only  a  few  days
earlier  a  key  Defense   Department   official,   when  questioned
by  the  House  Appropriations  Committee,  admitted  that  under-
ground  tests  were  of  limited  value  and  that  one  could  never
5
Social  Notes
Since  our  last  report Mr. Kennedy  managed to  attend
two  State  dinners for  and  by  the  Shah  of  Iran  and  his
Queen  but  found  no  time  to  see  a  delegation  from  the
Women  Strike for  Peace  which  held  a  24-hour  vigil  for
a  week  outside the  White  House trying to  talk  with him
nor to  spare  a  moment  for  Miss  Miyoko Matsubara and
Mr.  Hiromasa  Hanafusa  who  came  from  Hiroshima  on
their  way  to Geneva.
The  resplendent   Shah  brought  the   not  unexpected
news  that  he  needed  dollars  quickly  if  he  were  to  con-
tinue  to  support  himself  in  the  style  to  which  U.S.  aid
and  rich  oil  revenues,  all  somehow  dissipated,  had  ac-
customed   him.    Miss   Matsubara   and   Mr.  Hanafusa
brought  messages  of  a  different  character,  an  appeal
from  460,000  citizens  of  Hiroshima  against  resumption
of  testing.
All  these  visitors,  humble  and  regal,  had  their  scars
to  show.    On  the  face  of  Miss Matsubara,  who  teaches
at  a  school  for  the  blind,  are  visible  the  skin   grafts
which  are  a  relic  of  that  day  the  mushroom cloud  ap-
peared  over  Hiroshima.   The  Queen  of  Iran,  too,  has
suffered.    The  emerald and  diamond  crown she  wore  to
the  White  House  dinner  is  so  heavy  her  head  had to  be
protected  with  a  padding  of   velvet  and  cotton.    Mr.
Hanafusa,  whose parents were victims  of  the Hiroshima
bombing  when  he  was  two,  owes  his  survival  to  his
grandmother,  but  at  the  age  of  four  he  began  to  help
her  by  collecting  old  iron  and  copper  in  the   streets,
earning  sometimes  as   much  as  30  cents  a  day.    The
Shah  also  had  a  sad  story;  he  told  the  National Press
Club  "this  king  business"  had  given  him  "nothing  but
headaches."     No   doubt   the   U.S.   Treasury  will  keep
the  aspirin  coming.
be  sure  of  the  results  without  a  full-scale  test,  "and that  takes
the  atmosphere."  *
Unfortunately  this  expert  testimony,  released  a  week  after
the  President's  remark,  was  generally  overlooked  or  ignored
in  the  U.S. press  and  the  neutrals  at  Geneva  are  unlikely  to
hear  of  it.    We  reprint  important  parts  of  it  (see  boxes  on
page  three)  because  it contained  this  and  two other admissions
important  in  the  current  controversy over  test  detection.    The
witness  was Dr.  J.  P.  Ruina, who  is  in  charge  of  the  Defense
Department's   Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency;  his  juris-
diction  includes  Project  VELA,  through   which  the  U.S.  is
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
* Three  years  ago  we  called  attention  (the  Weekly,  June
8,  1959)  to  similar  testimony  by  Dr.  SheHon  of  the  Armed
Forces  Special  Weapons  Project  who  objected  that  testing
underground  or  in  outer  space  provided  "very  little informa-
tion  on  the  main  purpose  of  the  weapon,  that  is,  how  to  use
it,  and whether  to  use  it,  and what  it  will  do."   Then,  as  new,
little  attention  was  paid this  testimony.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  23, 1962
studying  improved  methods of  detecting  and   identifying  un-
derground  tests.    Dr.  Ruina's  two  other  admissions  were  that
atmospheric  tests  could  be  monitored   "without  actually  put-
ting  stations  within  the  other  country"  and  that  British  studies
showed,  as  he  grudgingly put   it,  "some  possibility  that  one
can  improve  detection  capabilities rather  significantly."  It  is  a
pity  so  few  people here or  abroad  will  know of  this  testimony.
"Information  Men"  At  Work
A  less  candid  picture  was  drawn  for  the  Washington press
corps  last  Thursday,  April  12, when  the  State Department  was
thrown  into  a  near  panic  by  the  proposal  from  Geneva  for  a
temporary  moratorium  on  testing  while  negotiations  were  un-
derway.    This  originated  with  India,  drew  a  Soviet  agreement
and  was  supported  by  many  of  the  neutrals;  Canada  joined
them  in  deploring resumption  while  talks  were going on.    But
in   the  Department,  as  in  most  of   U.S.  press  coverage,  this
was  presented  solely  as  a  Soviet  proposal, and  steps were  taken
by  "information   officers"   to  counter  the  news  from  Geneva.
These  steps  are  so  typical  they  deserve  fuller   description.
First  of  all  the  press  was  allowed  to  report  "the  thinking
of  U.S.  officials"—this  was  the  dictated  phrase.    How, where
and  just  when  this  "thinking" was  obtained,  whether  by  telep-
athy,  osmosis,  divination,  palmistry  or  necromancy  cannot  be
divulged;  this  is  the  old   not-for-attribution   but   please-use-it
device.    Suffice  it  is  to  say that  the  "thinking" was  so  discour-
aging  about  the  possibilities  of  detection  that  it  was  even  sug-
gested  one  could  not  be  sure  of  detecting  atmospheric  tests
without  an  international  network!    Fortunately  the  process of
transmitting   this   thinking   provoked   so   many   embarrassing
questions  and   disclosed   so  many  contradictions  that  little  if
any  trace  of  these  disembodied cogitations  could  be  found  in
the  next  day's newspapers.
The  second  step  taken  was  the  release of  a  report on  "The
Detection  and   Identification  of  Underground  Nuclear  Explo-
sions"  by  the  U.S.  Arms  Control  and  Disarmament  Agency.
While  We  Talk  Disarmament
"In  this   bill,   peacetime   appropriations  for   Defense
have  again  reached  a  new  high  as  a  result   of  new  or
enlarged   programs  to   increase   our   military   strength.
.  .  . The  Dept. of  Defense  reports  that  longer  range  pro-
grams   proposed   in   this   area    [strategic   retaliatory
forces]   will  provide  by  1967  a  force  of  over  700  B-58
and   B-52  bombers   equipped  with  HOUND   DOG   and
SKYBOLT  missiles,  well  over  1,000  land-based  ICBM's,
and  41  submarines with  more  than  650  POLARIS  mis-
siles  abroad.   It  is  also  reported  that  the  alert   portion
of  this  force  alone  will  have  three  times  the  destruc-
tive  capability  of  the  alert  force  we  had  in  June  1961.
.  .  .  The  Air  Force  will  keep  one-half   of  its   strategic
bomber  force  on  15-minute  ground  alert  during   fiscal
1963.  .  .  .  One  area,   chemical   and  biological   warfare
weapons,  has  been  allocated  an  approximate  increase  of
four   times  the   amount   provided  in  the   current   fiscal
year."
—From  the  Appropriations   Committee  report   to  the
House  on  the  1983  Defense   Dept.  budget,  April  13.
This  marked  another  of  the  occasions  on  which  this  Agency,
which  is  supposed  to  be  working  militantly  for  disarmament,
has  been  used  by  the  State  Department  to  make propaganda
discouraging   disarmament   negotiations.     This   on-the-record
report  fell  as  flat  as  the  off-the-record  "thinking"  but  I  hope
that   independent    scientists,   particularly   seismologists,   will
write  the  agency  for  a  copy  so  they  can  analyze  it  for  them-
selves.    It  could  hardly  have  been  more  pessimistic  if  written
by  Dr.  Teller himself.    On  page  4,  for  example, it agrees with
Dr.  Teller  that  even  at  the  best  the  location  of  a  suspicious
seismic event  could  only  be made within  "about  10  kilometers"
or  six  and  a  quarter  miles.   Coast  and  Geodetic found,  to  the
contrary,  in  a  still  undisclosed  study  of   Project  Gnome that
travel  time  curves  could be drawn  to  locate  the  explosion with-
in   several  tenths  of  a  mile.    The   report  says  on  page  eight
that  there  is no  technique "which would  permit  the  identifica-
Senator   Clark  Warns  Senate  Badly  Needs  Preparation  for  Disarmament  Treaty
"Two  of  the  great  powers  have  recognized  that  the  key
to  practical disarmament cannot await  the  solution  of  politi-
cal  problems.   'Efforts  should  continue  without interruption
until  agreement  upon  the  total  (disarmament)  program  has
been  achieved,'  read  the  US-USSR  Joint  Statement  of  Sept.
1961.    But  their  deeds  do  not  match  their  words.  .  .  .
"In  Congress  and  throughout  the  country  we  have  failed
to  readjust our  thinking about  disarmament to  make  it  com-
port  with  the  basic  new  fact  of  international life:  Two  great
powers  have  the  present   capability  of   destroying  civiliza-
tion.    And  either  of  them  might  do  it  through  accident   as
easily  as  by  design.   .  .  .
"The  Senate,  even  today  is  badly  informed  on  the  Presi-
dent's  disarmament  policy.    An  incident  during  last  week's
debate  on  the  UN  bond issue  illustrates  the  point.     A  press
story   indicated  that   our  delegation   in  Geneva  would  sub-
mit  a  plan  that  called  'for  the  elimination of  national  armies
within  nine  years.'   The  statement  differed  little  from  those
of  the  President  I  have  quoted.   Yet  a  Senator  drew  atten-
tion  to  this  article  in  obvious  surprise  and  alarm.    Another
Senator,   a  noted  supporter  of   the  President,   said  that   he
.'had  never  heard  anybody  on  the  floor  of  the  Senate,  or,  for
that  matter,  in  this  country,  make  a  declaration  going  that
far,  which  would  seek  to  abandon  our  own  national  forces.'
Regretfully—as  a  reading  of  the   Congressional   Record  of
April  5 will  show—this  unfamiliarity  is  not the  sole  property
of  these  two  men.
"There  are  a  number  of  reasons  for  this.    First  disarma-
ment  matters  are  extremely  complex  and  are  diffused  among
a  number  of  overburdened  committees.     The  Senate  Com-
mittees  on  Foreign  Relations,  Appropriations,  Aeronautical
and  Space   Sciences,   and  Armed  Services  all  have  jurisdic-
tion  as  does  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy.    Dis-
armament  to  each  of  these  is  a  different, and  sometimes   sec-
ondary,  problem. Committees  occupied with  determining  how
large  our  arsenal   should  be—whose  daily  currency  is  testi-
mony  from  members  of   the  industrial-military complex   of
which  President  Elsenhower  warned—are  not  apt  to  regard
highly  their  function  as  disarmament  policy  advisers.  .  .  .
"May  we  not  be  heading  for  another  Versailles?     Is  the
Congress  being  prepared  to  'advise  and  consent'  to  a  mean-
ingful  disarmament treaty?    I  fear  not,  and,  more  important
perhaps,  does  the  country  understand  what  the  Administra-
tion  is  up  to?     Again  I  fear  the  answer  must  be  negative.
Is   not  the  conclusion   that  if   disarmament   should   become
diplomatically  possible,   it  would  nonetheless   fail  for   want
of  Congressional  approval?    As  of  today,  I  fear  the  answer
is  yes.  .  .  .
"In  the  end,  much  depends  on  the  American  people  them-
selves.   The  incentive  .  .  .  must  come  from  the  grass  roots
of  public  opinion."
—Senator  Clark   (D.Pa.)   to   the  American  Academy  of
Political  Science  in  Philadelphia,  April  13.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  E Stone's  Weekly,  April  23, 1962
tion   of   underground   nuclear   explosions   by   remote   means
alone"   but   fails   to   explain   how   then   the   U.S.   so  quickly
identified  the  underground  Soviet nuclear test  of  Feb.  2. Indeed
there  is  no  mention  of  this  embarrassingly  efficient   affair   in
the  report,  and  attempts  to  probe  "thinking"  on  the   subject
in   the  aforementioned  press  trance  only   evoked  annoyance.
Dr.  Teller's   "Big   Hole  Again
The   report   came  up   again  with  Dr.  Teller's   "big   hole"
nightmare.    It  said  "the  strength  of  the  emitted  wave  does  not
give  a  clear  indication of  the  yield  since  variations  in  the  soil
or  rock  surrounding the  explosion  or  in  the  size  of  the  cavity
in  which  the  bomb  is  placed  can  alter  the  magnitude  of   the
seismic  oscillations  by  factors  of   several  hundred."     This   is
phrased  with  lawyer-like  skill  to  give  the  unwary  reader  the
impression  that  the  Teller-Latter  "big  hole"  theory  of  conceal-
ment  is  a  proven   fact  but  in  so  disingenuously  phrased  a  fa-
shion  that  it  can  be  defended   against  the  more   sophisticated
as  not  literally  incorrect.    It  so  happens  that  the  very  day  this
report  was  released  another  report,  the first on  Project  Gnome,
was  supposed   to  become  available  at  the   Office   of   Technical
Services  in  the  Department  of  Commerce.    This  second  report
dated  Dec.   10  but  released  April  12  for  the  first  time  docu-
mented  just  how  strikingly  incorrect  the  Teller-Latter   theory
turned  out  to  be  in  this,  its  first  nuclear  tryout.
To   high-light   the   significance   of   this   and   the    efficiency
with   which   the   government   hides   information,   I   want   to
quote  what  eight  scientists said  of  this  in  their  answer  to  Dr.
Teller  in  the  Saturday  Evening  Post  for  April  14.  They  wrote:
Dr.  Teller  has  repeatedly  attempted to  'prove*  that  the
Russians   could  easily  conceal  underground  nuclear  tests.
A  couple  of  months  ago  a  remarkable  experiment,  Project
Gnome,  was  conducted  by  a  laboratory  recently  headed  by
Dr.  Teller.    A  small  5-kiloton  shot—one-fourth  the  size  of
the  Hiroshima  bomb—was  fired  deep  in  a  bed  of  salt,  ma-
What the  British  Did on Detection
Mr.  [Dan'1  J.]   FLOOD  (D.  Pa.):  You still  have  not
made  clear  to  me  what  is  the  gimmick  or  the   gadget
that  the  British  have  come  up  with  which  makes  Mac-
millan  so  optimistic   [on  test  detection].
Dr.  J.  P.  KUINA  [Director  of  Defense  Dept's  ARPA
which  is  in  charge   of  test  detection  research]:  I  will
see  if  I  can  explain  that.
Mr.  FLOOD:  Is  it  hardware?
Dr.  RUIN A:  It   is  a  collection  of  hardware.    They
have  an  array  of  seismometers,   24  seismometers.
Mr.  FLOOD:  This  is  not  some  sort  of  Rube  Gold-
berg  thing?
Dr.  RUINA:  No, it  is  not  a  Rube  Goldberg  thing.   It
is  the  use  of  24  elements  of  an  array.    The  array  is
lined  up.    Each  seismometer  detects  the  signal.   Then
you  collect   these  signals  and  handle  the  data  in  such
a  way  that  the  sum  of  the  signals,  using  all  24,  gives
you  a  sensitivity  which  is  24 times  as  large  as  any  in-
dividual  one.    The  usual,  at  least  the  accepted   theory
for   how  one  can  handle  these  data  is  such  that  you
would  get  an  improvement if  you  used  24  seismometers,
by  a  factor  of  the  square  root  of  24, which  is  more  like
5.    The  British   have  a  technique  by  which  they   feel,
on  a  very  early  and  preliminary  basis,  the  improvement
might  be  five  times  better   than   what   we  thought   it
would  be.  Therefore,  their  sensitivity   for  detecting  nu-
clear  explosions  is  greater  than  we thought  it  would be.
—Hse.  Approp.   Com.  Hearings   1963  Defense    Dept.
budget,  Part  5,  pps.  116-117  released  April  7.
terial   supposed   to   muffle   and  conceal  underground   bomb
tests.   Contrary  to predictions, this  salt-bed  shot  was  picked
up  and  identified  as  an  underground  explosion  as  far   away
as   Finland   and  Japan.    Based   on  published   reports  one
would  estimate  the  muffling  factor  to  be  at  least  10  times
smaller  than  the  factor  quoted  by  Teller  in  his  articles.
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
Three  Striking   Admissions  About  Test
Mr.  [Dan'1 J.]  FLOOD  (D.  Pa.):  What  is  your  comment
upon  Khrushchev's  recent  statement   that   most  of  this  de-
tection   is  nonsense   because   they   have,   and   he   takes   for
granted  we  have,   adequate   hardware   to  do  any   detection
above  the  ground  or  below  the  ground  or  in  the  atmosphere
which  is  necessary?     What  is  all  the  shooting  about?    Do
you  believe him?    Do  you  think  he  has?    We  obviously  do
not.    So  where  does  that  leave  us?
Dr.  [J.  P.]  RUINA  [Director,  ARPA  Advanced  Research
Projects  Agency  which  includes  VELA,  the  project  for  im-
provement  in  test  detection  techniques]:  The  issue  in  test
detection  we can  divide  into  two parts  basically.    One  is  the
question  of  atmospheric  tests,  and  the  other  is  the  under-
ground  tests.   In  the  ARPA  program  we  are  not  concerned
with   atmospheric  tests  because   we,  too,   believe   that   the
capability  this  country  has,  as  well  as  the  USSR,  to  detect
atmospheric  tests  is  quite  adequate.   YOU CAN  DO THIS
WITHOUT  ACTUALLY PUTTING  IN  STATIONS   WITH-
IN  THE  OTHER  COUNTRY.
On  the  question  of  underground  tests,  the  sensitivity  of
the   methods  of  underground  test   detection   are   far   lower
than  the  sensitivity  of  amospheric  test  detection.    There  is
no  radioactivity to  check.    There  is  no  sampling  of  the  air
that  you  can  use.
Mr.  FLOOD:  Macmillan  seemed  to  be  satisfied  the  British
have  solved  the  problem.   Why  are  you so unhappy about  it?
Dr.  RUINA:  I  do not  think  it  is  as  simple  as  one  solving
the  problem  and  the  other  not  solving  the  problem.    I  think
there  is  no basic disagreement  on  the  technical level  between
the  U.S.  and  the  USSR  [sic]   as  to  what  the  capability  is.
Detection   No  U.S.  Newspaper   Published
Mr.  FLOOD:  What  about  Macmillan's  observation   about
the  British  breakthrough on  the  ability  to  detect   subsurface
explosions?
Dr.  RUINA: There  have  been  very  recent  British  studies
which  are  subject  to  a  variety  of  implications,  which  indi-
cate  there  is  some  possibility  that  ONE  CAN  IMPROVE
DETECTION  CAPABILITIES  RATHER  SIGNIFICANTLY
WITH   SOME  NEW   TECHNIQUES.
*                     *                    *
Mr.   Wm.   E.   Minshall   (R.   Ohio):   Would   you   tell   me,
please,  as  a  layman, what  are  the  advantages  and  disadvan-
tages  of  underground  testing  as  compared  to  atmospheric
testing?
Dr. RUINA: . . . There are two major  reasons for testing.
One  is  for  testing  new  bomb  devices,  and  the  other   is  for
learning   about   nuclear   effects,   explosion   effects.     If   you
want   to  learn  about  explosion   effects—for   example,   what
effect  a  nuclear  explosion with  a  certain  overpressure  would
have  on  a  TITAN  silo,  let  us  say,  or  if  you  want  to  learn
about  whether  a  particular   material  could  be  used  for  an
antenna  in the  area  of  a  nuclear  explosion,  that  sort  of  thing
cannot   be   done   underground.     FOR   THE    EXPLOSION
EFFECTS  YOU  MUST  TEST  IN  THE   ATMOSPHERE.
For  actual   bomb  devices,   I  am  told   one  can  test   some
things  underground  on  a  small  scale,  BUT  ONE  IS  NEVER
SURE   UNTIL   HE   HAS   A   FULL-SCALE   TEST,   AND
THAT   TAKES   THE    ATMOSPHERE.
—Dept.  of  Defense   1963  Budget,  Hearings  Before   House
Appropriations  Com. Pt.  5, Research, pps.  114-15.  Executive
Session, March  20, released  April  7.  Emphasis   added.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F  Stone's  Weekly,  April  23,1962
Not   Secret,  "Released",  Priced  at  $2  But  Not   For  Sale!
(Continued   from   Page    Three)
The  new  report  on  Project  Gnome  shows  that  the  use  of
salt  did  not   muffle    the  shot  at  all  but   magnified    it!     If   the
scientists  will  get  this  report  (PNE-110P),  "Seismic Waves
From  An  Underground  Explosion  In  A  Salt  Bed"  prepared
for   the  A EC  by  the  Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey  they  will  see
that  while  Dr.  Teller  predicted  that  explosion  in  salt would
muffle  the  shot  by  a  factor  of  three—it  turned  out  that  in  fact
it   magnified   the   effects   by   a   factor   of   four.*     Instead   of
being  reduced  by  two-thirds,  in  other  words,  they  were mul-
tiplied  by  four!    Detection  turned  out  to  be  easier  not  more
difficult.
Techniques   of  Concealment
Unfortunately   the  government's  techniques  for  concealing
information  are  better  than Dr.  Teller's theories about how  to
conceal  underground  tests.   In  tracking  down this  first  of sev-
eral  reports on  Project  Gnome,  I  found  various  techniques for
concealment  at  work.    In  the  first  place,  while  seismology  is
not  supposed  to  be  classified,  the   same   effect   is  achieved  by
getting  the  civilian  Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey  to  work  on
contract  for  the  Air  Force  and  the  AEC;  the   Survey  is for-
bidden  by the  terms  of  the  contract to  make  these reports pub-
lic;   release  depends  on  the  "contractor."    In  the  second  place,
even  when  a  report  is  released, it  is  done  so  secretly  that  few
know   about   it.    No   information   officers   drew  attention  to
this  one;  it  was  only  by  accident  that  I  learned  of  the  report
a  few   days  after   its  supposed  public  release.     In   the   third
place,  when  I  went  to  buy  myself   a  copy  at  the  announced
Mr.  Kennedy  v.  Mr. Blough
We  applaud the  energy  with which  the  President  and
his  advisers  forced  Roger  M.  Blough  of  U.S. Steel  to
rescind  his  $6-a-ton price increase,  but  note  how quickly
this  was  followed  by  inspired  stories  assuring   the  steel
industry   that   the  Administration  had  no  intention  of
following  through by  doing  anything  fundamental about
it.     Mr.  Kennedy  acted   as   an   affronted  conservative
anxious  to  hold  the  price-wage  line,  not  as  a  potential
radical.
The  heart  of   the  issue   may  be  reached  by  starting
with  a  statement  an  unnamed  steel  executive  "grimly"
gave  the  Wall  St.  Journal  (April  16)  saying   Presiden-
tial  power  used  in  this  way  could  create  "a  controlled
economy   —   which   means   nothing   but   administered
prices."    Administered  prices  have  been  the  rule  in  the
steel   industry,   as   Senator   Kefauver's   anti-trust   in-
quiries  have  demonstrated.    The  real  question  is  who
shall   set   these   administered  prices—the  private  com-
missars  of  the  steel  trust,  or  a  public  body.     Senator
Gore   has   made   several   proposals   for   protecting   the
public  interest   in  this   process,   but  there  seems   little
chance  the  Administration  will  support  him.    Without
some   basic   reform,   prices   will  rise   to   suit   the  steel
moguls;  the  President  cannot   intervene   very   often.
This  seems  to  us  a  good  occasion  to  recall  that  Mr.
Blough,  whose  readiness   to  subordinate  private  profit
to  public  interest  has  now  been  demonstrated,  remains
one  of  the  advisers  to  the  new  Arms  Control  and  Dis-
armament   Agency.     We   suspect   his   passion   for dis-
armament  is  not  unbridled.
* This  may  also  be  seen  from  the  magnitude  given  in  the
new  report.    While  it  gives  the  earthquake  magnitude  of  the
comparable  5-kiloton  Logan  shot   in  tuff   as  4.5  (many  seis-
mologists,  including  Romney,  Johnson   and  Press  have   said
only  4.4),  it  declares  "the  estimated magnitude  of  the GNOME
shot  was  from  4.6  to  5.0, depending  on  the  choice  of   data."
The  significance  of  this  can  be  seen  from  the  fact  that  4.75,
which  the  U.S. equates  with  19  kilotons,  was  supposed   to  be
the   threshold  below   which  detection   would  not   be   reliable.
This  5  kiloton shot  gave  a  signal  whose  range  went   consider-
ably   higher  than  what  had   earlier   been   expected   from  20
kilotons.   I  was  told  privately,  in  fact,  that  the  seismologists
were  so  sure  Dr.  Teller   was  right  that  they  adjusted   their
equipment  for  so  small  a  signal  that  the  actual  signal  when
it  came  went  literally  off  the  record—it  was  so  much   larger
than  expected.
We'll  Send  Copies   of   The   Geneva  Reports   Free  If
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................................................................................—
Street   ...................................................................................._
City   ...........................................Zone.............State....................
4/23/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1 yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   ...............................................................................
Street   ........._................;.........................................................
City   .......:.....-................,............Zone.............St8te....................
Shall  we send  gift  announcement?        Yes  D    No  D
price  of  $2  in  the  Department  of  Commerce  Office  of  Tech-
nical  Services  I was told  it could not  be purchased,  even though
unclassified,  because some unnamed  agency  had  sent  through
a .note  saying  "No   information   released  for  public  distribu-
tion."    How  I  obtained  a  copy  nevertheless  is  another  story
but  a  day later,  checking by telephone  at  the  AEC  to  ask when
it  would  release  the  two  other  Coast  and  Geodetic  reports  I
have  been looking  for  and  writing  about,  I  was  offered  a  free
copy  of  this  one.    The  other  two  reports  deal  (1)  with  the
monitoring  by  90  foreign  stations  of  Project Gnome and   (2)
with  Coast  and  Geodetic's  monitoring of  our  own  recent  un-
derground  test  series.   These  are still being withheld,  perhaps
until  after  the  Geneva talks are  over  or  testing safely  begins.
Such  are  a  reporter's pastimes in  this open  society  of  ours.
April   18,  10 a.m.
You  Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   LONG   Envelope.
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   Auguit   and  the   flrit   in
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   m   August   and   the
September  and  the  last  Monday   in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W..  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5 in  the  U.  S.:   16  In
Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED