I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jan22.pdf

============================================================

The  New  Missile  Gap  and  the Molotov  Mystery,  P.  2
Cuba's  "Suppressed"   Peace  Offer,  See  Page  3;  Loophole  in  the  New  Passport  Rules,  Page  4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  3JANUARY  22,  1962
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
How   You,   Too,   Can  Strike   For   Peace
I  wish  every  reader  could  have  seen  the  demonstration  in
front  of  the  White  House  last Monday by the  Women's  Strike
for  Peace.   Nearly  3,000  women,  some  from  as  far  as  Maine
and    California,   picketed   in   a   fierce   and   chilly   rainstorm.'
Among  them  were  several  with  children  in  arms,  one  with  a
stroller;  there  was  even  a  blind  woman,  with  a   beautifully
serene  face,  marching  along  with  her  dog.    The  good  humor,
the  brightly  painted  signs  smeared  by  rain,  the  multi-colored
balloons  they carried, made a  vivid  and  inspiring sight.    This
was  the  biggest  demonstration Washington  has  seen  since  the
huge  prayer  meeting held  by  Negro  organizations a  few  years
a-go  at  the  Lincoln  Memorial.   It  was  an  experience to  go with
the  women to  their rally,  to  hear  the  cables  from  similar meet-
ings  in  London,  Paris,  Brussels,  Rome,  Vienna,  Sydney,  Cal-
cutta,   Stockholm,  Montreal,   both   Berlins,   Sofia,   Budapest,
Tokyo  and  a  woman's  group  in  the  Soviet  Union,  and  then
go  from  there  to  the  President's  press  conference  and  hear  his
friendly  references  to  the  demonstration.    He  said  he  saw  it
from  the  White  House  windows.
The  Prison  of  The  Presidency
To  look  out  the  White  House  windows  at  a  peace  demon-
stration  is  to  look  out  of  a  prison.    A  President  is  hemmed
in  by gigantic blocks  of  granite  interests  and  habits:  the  mili-
tary  bureaucracy, the  arms  industry, the  immemorial suspicions
and  hatreds of  our  human  breed,  and  worst  of  all  the  feeling
of  helplessness  that  freezes  the  best  of  us  into  inaction  when
we   confront   the   immense   problem   of   preventing  thermo-
nuclear  war.    This   spontaneous  and  disarmingly  amateurish
Strike  for  Peace  movement  begun  by  two  local  women,   Mrs.
Dagmar  Wilson   and  Mrs.  Margaret   Russell,  is  one  sign  of
what  can  be  done,  given  some  leadership.    There  is  a  new
stirring   in  the  land.    A  group  of  student  peace   movements
plan  to  converge  on  the  capital  in  another  great   demonstration
Feb.  16  and  17.  The  newly formed  Turn  Toward  Peace  move-
ment,  a  coalition  of  various  groups  ranging  from  the  United
Auto  Workers  and  the  ADA  to  the  Friends  and  the  War  Re-
sisters  League,  with  Norman  Thomas  as  national  chairman,  is
planning  a  nationwide  series  of  demonstrations  Feb.  2  geared
to  putting  10,000  telegrams  in  the  White  House   Feb.   3  in
opposition  to  resumption  of  atmospheric  testing.
The  decision  will  be  made  in  February.    These  next  two
weeks  represent  the  last  chance  to  make  your  voice  heard  be-
fore  that  decision is made, to  demonstrate  to  the  President  that
there  is  a  peace  movement  in  this  country  big  enough  to  count
in  the  scales  of  national  policy.    The  politics  of  our  country
have  grown  dangerously  lopsided.    There  is  a  vocal  extreme
right.    There  is  a  center,  which  Mr.  Kennedy  has  pre-empted.
There  is  no  longer  a  liberal  opposition.    The  Washington
scene  is  dominated  by  two  institutions,  a  Congress   with   the
His  Biggest  Disappointment
Q.  Mr.  President,  after  one  year  in  the  office  of   the
Presidency,  sir,  would  you  care  to  give  us  any  of  your
comments  with  the  first  year  and  perhaps  in  particular
the  most  rewarding  and disappointing events  that  have
come   across  your  desk?
A.  Well,  I  would  say  the  most  disappointing  event
was  our  failure  to  get   an  agreement  on  cessation  of
nuclear  testing."
—The  President  at  press  conference, Jan.  15.
archaic  flavor  and  smug  outlook  of  a  country  courthouse,  and
a  Pentagon  whose  labyrinthine corridors lead  one  into  a  world
of  nightmarish   military  strategy.    Only  an  upsurge  from  the
grass  roots  can  set  policy free  from  these  frightful  institutions.
This  is a moment when  something  can still be accomplished.
If  we  do  not  resume  atmospheric  testing,  if  we  instead  enter
a  new  round  of  negotiations,  a  new  spiral  of  tension,  fear  and
hatred  may  be  avoided,  a  breathing  space  may  be  provided  in
which  to  turn  back  from  the  abyss.    It  is  for  this  reason  that
we  ask  every  reader  of  our  Weekly   to  sit  down  and  write  a
letter  to the  President  during  the  next  few days asking  him  not
to  resume  atmospheric  testing.   Last  Fall,  as a first experiment,
Weekly   readers  put  more  than  600  letters  of  praise  into  Sen-
ator  Mansfield's  office;   rarely has  a  Senator  received  a  mail  of
such  quantity  and  quality.    But  for  this  we  want  a  greater
effort.    By  the  normal  magazine  ratio  of  five  readers  for  every
subscriber  and  buyer,  this  issue  should  be  read   by  close  to
100,000  people.    We  want  at  least  10,000  letters  and  10,000
postcards  telling  us  you  have  written.    Ten  thousand  letters
would  have a  mighty  impact  at  the White  House.    A  hundred
thousand  would  be  a  tidal  wave.    We'll  print  a  boxscore  as
the  results  come  in.   Here's  your  chance  to  do  something.
The  situation  on  testing  as  we  see  it  is this:  The  ease  with
which  we  monitored   the  Soviet  tests   (including   one  under-
ground) ; the  fact  that  an underground  test  of  ours  in  Decem-
ber  as  small  as  5  kilotons  was  detected  as  far  away  as  Japan
and  Finland  though  muffled   in  one  of  those  "big  hole"  salt
caverns;  the  recognition  that  underground   tests  are  of  limited
value  anyway—all  these  facts  point  in  one  direction.    This
is  that  no  Rube  Goldberg  system  of  listening   posts  on   each
other's  soil  is  required  to  police  a  new  moratorium.     We  be-
lieve  the  question  of  underground  tests  was  blown  up  out  of
all  proportion  to  reality  by the  Teller  crowd.    We  also  believe
that  militarily  our  own  country  has  more  to  gain   by  a  new
moratorium  than  do  the  Soviets.    One  more  round  and  they
may  catch  up  completely.     For  mankind  as  a  whole,  Amer-
icans  and  Russians included,  a  new  round  is  madness;  it  is  not
just  the  poison  in  the  skies,  it  is the  poison  piling  up  in men's
mind  that  should  worry  us.    This  may  be  a  last  chance.
1   1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   22,   1!><12
Air   Force   Victory   Here  Over  -Military  Moderates  May  Hold  Clue  to  Molotov  Mystery
A   Staggering   Missile   Program  Casts  Its  Shadow  on  Arms  Negotiations
It  has  been  hoped   that   the  development   of   relatively  in-
vulnerable  missiles would  give  each  side  a  force  that  the  other
could  not  destroy.    This  would   mean  that  neither  could  risk
a  surprise  attack  upon  the  other  because  the  victim  would  al-
ways  have  missiles  left  with  which  he  could  destroy  the  cities
and  the  civilization  of  the  attacker.   This  is the  so-called  stabi-
lized  nuclear   deterrent.
In  the  special  Arms  Control  issue  of  Daedalus   (Fall  I960),
Dr.  Jerome  B.  Wiesner,  now  the  President's  scientific adviser,
argued  that  a  system  of  stabilized  deterrence  could  be  a  tran-
sition  stage  to general  disarmament.    He  revealed  that  "studies
made  independently  by  the  U.S.  Army  and  Navy  have   indi-
cated  that,   even  in  the   absence  of  agreements  limiting  force
size  and  permitting  inspection,   200   relatively  secure  missiles
would  provide  an  adequate   deterrent."
Our  5-Year  Missile   Plan
Dr.  Hans  A.  Bethe  shares  Dr.  Wiesner's  views.  The  former
in  the  speech   we  reported  last  week  expressed  the  hope  that
the   development    of    relatively   invulnerable  striking    forces
should  make  possible   their   reduction.    The   trend,  however,
seems  to  be  in  the  other  direction.    In  the  battle  over  the  new
budget,   judging  by  reports   in  the  wake  of   the  State  of   the
Union   message,   the   Army  and  Navy,   which   lean   toward   a
stabilized  nuclear  deterrent,  seem  to  have  lost  out  to  the  Air
Force  and  the  aviation-missile  industry.   Mr.  Kennedy  said  he
would   ask   for   "nearly   300   more"   Polaris   and   Minutemen
missiles.    But  these,  according  to  Warren  Rogers,   Jr.,  in  the
New   York   Herald-Tribune     (Jan.   12)   would   be  on   top  of
1,295  strategic missiles "already  in  the  works"  and  are  part  of
a  program  to  give  the  U.S.  1,589  nuclear  sea  or  land  missiles
within  five  years.    All  this  would  be  in  addition  to  our   1500
long-  and  medium-range  bombers.
What  will  we  do  with  1500  missiles and  1500  planes  when
there  are  about  50  prime  targets  in  the  Soviet  Union?    This
sounds  like  the  Air  Force's  counter-force strategy,  the  building
up  of  a  force  so  overwhelming  as  to  make  a  first  strike  seem
feasible  even  against hardened  bases.    Certainly these  numbers
are  not  called  for  by our  estimates of  what  there  is on  the  Rus-
sian  side.    The   latest   intelligence  leaked  from  the   Pentagon
(see  the  AP  dispatch  in  The  New   York   Post,  Jan.  5)   is  that
the  Russians  are  behind  us  in  both   ICBM's  and  Polaris  type
Well  Not  Exactly  Maybe But.  . .
Q.  Mr. President,  are  American  troops  now  in  combat
in  Viet  Nam?
A.  No.
—Mr.  Kennedy's  Press  Conference,  Jan.  1C.
"Saigon,  South  Viet  Nam,  Jan.  9 (AP)—The streets of
this  South  Viet  Nam  capital  are  taking  on  an  American
atmosphere  as  more  and  more  U.  S.  servicemen  arrive
—to   train  the   Viet   Namese   to   fight   the   Communist
guerrillas.    Details  are  still  secret  but  best   estimates
are   that   from  2,000  to   3,000   U.   S.  servicemen  of   all
branches   are   in  South   Viet   Nam   and  the   number   is
growing  daily.    The  Americans  were  sent  to  help  cor-
rect  basic  weaknesses   in  the  Viet  Namese  armed  forces
—communications,   intelligence,   mobile   transport   and
organization.    But  their  duties  in  the  interior  often  in-
volve  them   in  shooting   with  the  Viet   Cong   guerrillas
from  North  Viet  Nam.   One  U.  S.  serviceman was killed
recently  in  a  Viet  Cong  ambush.  .  .  ."
— Washington  Evening  Star, Jan.  9.
missiles.    The   missile  gap  is  now  said  to  be  in  our  favor.
We  have  no  way  of  knowing whether this  is true,  or  merely
meant  to  spread  the  idea  that  we  are  "ahead"  and  can  there-
fore  afford   to  be  tougher.    In  any  case  such  figures,  coupled
with  plans  for  the  building  of  so  huge  a  striking  force  may
have  serious  psychological  and   political  effects.     At   home  it
may  make  the  idea  of  a  first  strike against  the  Russians attrac-
tive.     It  may  also  make  us  less  willing  to  negotiate  on  arms
control  or  reduction.
There   are   people   in   the   Administration   who   believe,  as
Acheson  did,  that  such  overwhelming  power   may  force   the
Russians  to  cave  in.    The   situation  of  strength   policy   didn't
work   in  the  Truman-Acheson  era.    It's   a  dangerous   gamble
now.    It  may  have  the  opposite  effect.     It  may  force  the  Rus-
sians  to  step  up  their  own  rate of  arms  production  sharply.    If
this calls  for  a  reduction  in  consumer goods,  it may  also require
a   return   to   severe   Stalin-like   controls   excused   by   fears   of
American  attack.    Instead of  giving us  a  Russia  easier  to  deal
with,  it  may  give  us  one  more  unyielding.   These  missile fig-
ures  may  not  be  unconnected with the  mystery  of  how  Molotov
has  been  able  to  survive Khrushchev's  attacks.    The   Pentagon
may  resurrect  Stalin  yet.
Why  The  New  "Turn  Toward Peace"  Movement  Opposes Renewed  Testing  In  The  Air
"The    recent   series   of   approximately    50   Soviet   nuclear
tests   has   yielded   some   new   military   information    to   the
Soviet  Union.  Nevertheless,  we  oppose  resumption  of  U.  S.
atmospheric    tests   on   moral,    political    and   psychological
grounds   which  we  believe  outweigh  any  possible  advances
in   weapons   technology.    Such   tests   would:
"(1)   Create  another  spiral  in  the  arms  race  and   provide
the   Soviet   Union   with   incentives  to  undertake   still   other
tests  to  'catch   up'.
"(2)   Add  to  international   tension  at  a  moment   when   gen-
eral   disarmament   negotiations   are   about   to  resume,  thus
raising  the  question   of  U.  S.  sincerity.
"(3)   Spread   a  feeling   of  despair  among  people  at  home
and   abroad   because   of   our  seeming   inability    to   halt   the
arms   race.
"(1)  Damage  the  image  of  the  United  States  around  the
world  especially  in  Japan,  India  and  Africa.    In  these  areas
there   was   a  significant,  though   tardy,   reaction   to   Soviet
tests.    There  the  U.  S.  is  looked   upon  as  a  nation   with  a
higher  standard  of  international  conduct  than  that  of   Com-
munist   nations.
"(•
r
>)   Add   to   the   existing   levels   of   radioactive    fallout,
with  its  consequences  for  the  health   of  present  and  future
generations.     Although   there   is   no  way   to   measure   the
exact   amount   of   damage,   it   is   particularly   unfair   to   the
unborn  and  the  uncommitted  to  subject  them  to  these  dan-
gers  through  decisions  in  which  they  have  no  voice."
—Joint  statement  formulated   by  the  National  Committee
for  A  Sane  Nuclear  Policy,  Friends  Committee  on  National
Legislation   and   the    Women's    International   League    for
Peace  and  Freedom,  and  distributed  by  Turn  Toward  Peace,
a  new  national  coalition  of  labor  aitd  peace   groups.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  22,  19U-2
Brazil  Angers  State  Dept.  By  Proposing  Peaceful  Co-Existence  Code  for  The  Hemisphere
U.S.  Public  Not   Informed   of  Guevara's  Olive  Branch  at  Punta  del  Este
Writing  on  the  eve  of  the  new  Punta  del  Fste  conference,
we  want  to  call  attention  to  a  significant  omission  in  the  new
State  Department  White  Paper  on  Cuba.    The  White  Paper
quotes  die  Guevara  as  saying  to  the  Punta  del  Este  confer-
ence  last  August that  the  Cuban  revolution had  set  an example
for  the  rest  of  Latin  America.   This  was  used  to  paint  a  pic-
ture  in  the  White  Paper  of   a  Cuba  intent  on  exporting  its
revolution  by  military  means  to  other  countries  of  the  hemi-
sphere.    What  the  White  .Paper  omits  is  that  Major Guevara
went  on  to  say  (see  adjoining  box),   that  while  Cuba   could
not  give up  the  moral  effect  of  its example, it  was  prepared  to
guarantee  that  it  would  not  give  military  aid  to revolutionary
movements  elsewhere  in  the  hemisphere.    This  olive branch
was  not  reported  in  any  American  newspaper  we  have  seen.
Indeed  we  did  not  become  aware  of  it  until  we  saw  it quoted
some  weeks  ago  in Le  Monde  of  Paris.   We  quote  it now  from
the  Spanish  text  obtained  at  the  OAS  headquarters here.
Brazil's  "Live  and  Let  Live"  Proposal
In   effect   Guevara  was  offering  Cuban   non-intervention   in
Latin  America  in  return   for   U.S.  non-intervention   in  Cuba.
This  is  relevant  to  the  new  Brazilian  proposal  for  "creating
the  conditions  of   live  and   let  live  between   a  socialist  Cuba
and   other  members   of  the   OAS."      (Washington   Star,  Jan.
14).   The  Brazilian  Foreign  Minister, Dantas,  \\\  proposing  it
at  Rio Jan.  12 expressed  the  belief,  according  to  the Neir   York
Times  (Jan.  13)  that  in  return  Castro  "would  accept  the  idea
of  a  limitation   on   Cuba's   attempts   to   interfere  with  other
American   States."
Brazil's  proposal   for   a  hemispheric   code  of   peaceful  co-
existence  is  resented  at  the  State  Department  which  issued  a
special  statement  against  it, calling for  "continued   and  positive
resistance  to  any  totalitarian  ideology."     We  wonder  how  this
will  be  equated   with  Secretary  Rusk's  recent  visit  to   Franco,
when  he  invited  the  Fascist  dictator  to  join  Washington  in  a
"triangular"  relationship  with  Latin  America.    Franco  overtly
as  an  Axis  ally  before  the  war  and   covertly  as  an  American
client  since has  tried  to spread  anti-democratic and  anti-Yankee
Cuba's  "Suppressed" Peace  Offer
"So    then,    gentlemen,   construct   the    Alliance   for
Progress  on  these  terms:  so  that  it  will  in  truth  expand
the  economies  of  all  the  Latin  American countries;  ex-
pand   them   so   they   can   consume   more   of   their   own
products  instead of  merely  serving  as  a  source  of  profit
for  North  American  monopolies;  expand  them,  to   as-
sure  social  peace  not  to  create  new  bases  for  an  event-
ual  war  of  conquest;  expand  them,  for  our  benefit,  not
for  the  outside  world.    And  to  all  of  you  delegates,  the
delegation  of  Cuba  says,  with  all  frankness:   we   wish,
within   our  own   way   of   life,   to   remain   in   the   Latin
American  family;  we  wish  to  see  it  grow,  if  possible,
at  the  same  rhythm  as  ours,  but  we  do  not  oppose   its
growth  on  any  other  basis.    All  we  ask  is  a   guarantee
of  non-aggression   against  our frontiers.
"We  cannot,  as  the  U.  S.  desires,  give  up  the  export
of   our   example   because   that   example   is   something
spiritual  which overleaps  frontiers.   That  which  we  can
give  is  a  guarantee  that  we  will  not  export  revolution.
We  will  give  a  guarantee  not  to  move  a  gun  from  Cuba,
not   to  export  a  single   weapon  for  use  in  struggle   in
any  other  country  of   America."
—Che  Gncvnra, at  Pimta  del Este, Aug.  8, 19til.
conceptions   of   "Hispanidad"   in   this  hemisphere,  ideas   as
alien  as  those  of  Marxism-Leninism and' the  lineal   descendent
of  the  Holy  Alliance  clcrical-authoritarianism  which  the  Mon-
roe  Doctrine  was  designed   to  keep  out  of  the  New  World.
The  Kennedy Administration  to  its credit searches  for  com-
promise  over  Berlin,  and  over  Laos.    It  urged  India  to  nego-
tiate  over  Goa  and  it  urges  Indonesia  to  negotiate  over  West
Irian.    It  not  only  coexists with, but  gives  aid  to  other  regimes
which  are, at  least  as  "Marxist-Leninist" as  Castro's.   We  help
Tito and Gomulka.   We  give aid to Guinea  and  Ghana.    Why
is  Cuba  alone  the  object  of  economic blockade,  hostile  diplo-
matic  action  and  secret  cloak-and-dagger  activities  which  sup-
port  in  Cuba  exactly  the  kind  of  bombings  and  assassinations
we  condemn  when  committed  by  the  other  side  in  South  Viet-
nam?     In   any   adequate  answer   two   names  would   figure:
United  Fruit  and  Standard  Oil.
British  MP  Says  The  Old-Timers  and  the  Youth  Share  Urge  for  Liberty  in  USSR
"Sir—Ilya  Ehrenburg's  latest  speech   [defending  Paster-
nak]  recalled  to  me  a  conversation  which  I  had  in  Moscow
just  over  a  year  ago  with  an  81 year-old  journalist,  the  last
survivor  of   the  last   Social  Democratic  newspaper,   Novaya
Zhizn.    I  asked   him  whether  he  felt   that   the  post-Stalin
thaw   (Ehrenburg's   metaphor)   might   turn   again   into   a
freeze.    He  replied:  'No,  the  young   generation   is   already
spoiled.'
"He  meant  that  those  who  have  had  a  taste  of  liberty  can
never   renounce   the   appetite.   I   observed,   indeed,  that   be-
tween  the  students  of  Moscow  University  and  the  very   old,
who  by  ingenuity  or  discretion   had  outwitted  Stalin,   there
was  an  axis  of  libertarian  feeling   which  turned  them   with
curiosity  towards  the  west.    On  the  other  hand,  the   image
of  a  Soviet  Union  beleagured  by  enemies,   as  the  U-2  inci-
dent  seemed  to  indicate,  was  enough,  in  talk  and  no  doubt
in  fact,  to  suppress   those  sympathetic  promptings  in  favor
of  a  resentful  solidarity  against  the  west.
"Does   this   not  suggest   that   the   emphasis   of   western
propaganda   to  the  Soviet   Union  should  be  re-examined   in
the  light   of  the  changes  which  are  certainly   taking  place
among  the  millions of  young  Soviet  citizens  who  with  access
to   higher   education   are   publicly   asking   questions—about
freedom   of   choice,   for  example—which  have  never  before
been  asked,  unpunished,  in  a  monolithic  Communist  society?
"The  bludgeon  of  abuse  and  threats  won't  change  the  in-
transigeant   mood  of   the  Russian  people   or  its  leaders;  it
will  merely  harden  it.    There  is  room,  I  believe,  for  the  ef-
fective  communication  through   the  BBC  and  our  diplomats
of  positive,  democratic  ideas  to  a  Soviet   youth  which   pos-
sesses  all  the  generous  impulses  of  the  young—a  student
body  which  applauds  the  courageous   author  of   Babi   Yar,
and  which  will  as  greedily  'tape'  the  language  of  liberty  as
it   does   today   the  jazz   music   which   is   blown   across   the
Iron  Curtain.
"But  there  isn't  much  time.    The  neo-Stalinists  are  wait-
ing  their  turn.    And  Khrushchev,  for  all  his   inadequacies,
remains  "the best  Soviet  Premier  we've  got.' "
—Maurice  Edelman, MP, in  The  Times  (London)   Jan.  9.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

./.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   22,  19U2
Chairman  Walter  Seems  to  Think  It  Un-American  to   Let   A  Man  Confront   His  Accusers
Overlooked  Loophole (As Wide As A  Barn Door) in the New  Passport Rules
Could  there  be  anything  more  un-American  than  to  send  a
man  to  jail  without a  chance to  confront  his  accusers?   Chair-
man   Walter   of   House   Un-American  demonstrates   his  own
odd   notions  of   Americanism  in  attacking  the   State  Depart-
ment  for  its  new  regulations  allowing  passport  applicants  to
face  accusers.    We  would  like  to  believe the  change  is  due  to
a  more  liberal  Department  but  the  truth  is  that  the  reform  in
the  regulations  is  made  necessary  by  the  fact  that  the  Depart-
men  will  now  be  administering passport  control  under  a crim-
inal  statute,  the  McCarran  Act  (the  Internal  Security  Act  of
1950).   This  makes  it a crime punishable  by a fine of  $10,000,
five years  in  jail  or  both  even  to  apply   for  a  passport  if  a  pres-
ent  member  of  an  organization  ordered   to  register  with  the
Subversive   Activities  Control   Board.*  .The   U.S.   has   not
reached  the  stage—we  hope  it  never  will—when  a  man  can  be
convicted   of   a  crime  without  a  chance  to  face  his   accusers.
Chairman  Walter,  a  lawyer,  should  know  better.    The   Court
has  yet  to  decide  (1)   whether  Communists  can  be  forced   to
register  and  (2)   whether  they  can  be  deprived  of  their  rights
to  travel.    We   feel  certain, the  Court  on  Fifth   Amendment
grounds   will  decide   against   registration.     That  will   be  the
end  of   this  travel   ban.
An  Iron  Curtain  Clause
A  subtler  travel  ban  has  been  overlooked  in  the  excitement
over  the  barring of  faceless  informers.    An  unnoticed   section
embodies   sweeping   travel  controls   through  which   the  State
Department   can  continue  to  operate   its  own   Iron   Curtains.
"In   order  to   safeguard  the  interests  of  the  United  States,"
Section  51.136  says,  "passport   facilities,  except  for  direct  and
immediate  return  to  the  United  States,  shall  be  refused  to  a
person  when  it  appears  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Secretary  of
State  that  the  person's  activities abroad  would   (a)   violate  the
laws  of  the  United  States;  (b)   be  prejudicial  to  the  orderly
conduct  of  foreign  relations;  or  (c)   otherwise  be  prejudicial
to  the  interests  of  the  United  States."     This  is  so  broad  and
Uh ... Yes ... Freedom
We  have  just  received  from  France  a  copy  of  a  peti-
tion  sent  to  President  Kennedy  by  a  group  of   30   dis-
tinguished  French  intellectuals  asking  him  to  grant  an
amnesty  to  Carl  Braden  and  Frank  Wilkinson  who  are
serving  one  year  terms  for  contempt  of  the   Un-Ameri-
can   Activities   Committee.     Among   the   signers   were
Andre  Schwarzbart,  author  of   "The   Last  of  the  Just";
Claude  Roy,  who  spoke  for  the  conscience  of  France  in
his  book  on  Algeria;  Senator  Francois  Mitterand;  the
famous  advocate,  Henri  Torres;  the  movie  maker,  Rene
Clair;  ex-Ministers  Daniel  Mayer  and  Pierre  Cot;   An-
drew  Jeanson,  of  France's  Catholic  federation  of  labor,
and  Claude  Bourdet,  editor  of  France-Observateur.  "We
love  America  and  what  she  stands  for  in  the  world,"
they  wrote  President  Kennedy,  "and  deplore  these  polit-
ical  convictions,  so  at  variance  with  the  liberal   tradi-
tions  of  your  country."  Mr. Kennedy,  at  the  close  of  his
State  of  the  Union  message,  spoke  of  being  ready  "to
seize  the  burden  and  the  glory  of  freedom."   It  might
seem  that  one  way  to  do so  would  be  to  set  Braden  and
Wilkinson  free  with  a  message  reaffirming   the  right  of
dissent  and  non-conformity.   But,   then,  even  foreigners
know  by  now  that  though  it  may  be  a  little  hard   to
gather  just  what  we  do  mean  when  we  talk  of  freedom,
we  don't  mean  anything  like  that.
* At   present  this  applies  solely   to  members  of   the    Com-
munist   Party,  the  only  organization  ordered  to  register.
vague  that  the  Secretary  of   State  can  do  pretty  much  as  he
pleases  under  it.    The  problem  would  be,  not  facing  one's  ac-
cusers,   but  forcing  the  Secretary  of  State  to  specify  just  why
he  was  denying  the  passport.     This  may  prove  difficult,   con-
sidering  the  reluctance  of  the  courts  to  interfere with  the  for-
eign  policy  powers  of  the  Executive.    This  section  would  sur-
vive  invalidation of  the  McCarran  Act  and  have to  be  litigated
on  its own.    The  Supreme  Court  held  in  the  Kent  and  Briehl
cases  that  a  man  could  not  be  deprived  of  his  right  to  travel
without  due  process  of  law.    But  no  one  can  be  sure  just  what
that  constitutional incantation  would  mean  as  applied  to  this
section.    To  refuse  a  passport  under  it,  the  Department  would
not  have  to  prove  an  applicant  a  Communist.    It  would  only
have  to  rule  that  his  presence  abroad  would  lie  prejudicial  to
the  United  States.
Save  Your  Wwklies   in  A  Hinder—Wr   Supply   An  Annual  Index   Free
I.  F.
Please
Street
City  .
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
........... _ ........................ .Zone............ .State....................
.   1/22/62
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
...........................................Zone.......... .State....................
we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  Q    No  D
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,    N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  lant  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  nml  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   $15  to  Europe:   3-0  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED