I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jun04.pdf

============================================================

Freedom  Riders  Tell  Their  Story,  Pps. 2-3
Glimpses  of  the  Negro  Liberation Movement  in  the  South,  99  Years  After  Emancipation,  See  Pps.  2-3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  22
JUNE  4,  1962
">i      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Time  to  Put   the  Spotlight   on  The  CIA  In  Laos
Twenty-one  U.S.  Senators  are  sponsors  of  Senate Joint  Reso-
lution  77  to  set  up  a  Joint  Committee  on  Intelligence,*  which
would  supervise  the  CIA.    The  resolution  has  been  before  the
Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  for  several  months  with-
out  action.   This  would  be  a  good  time  to  demand  hearings
on  the  bill  and  to  make  those  hearings  a  vehicle  for  an  inquiry
into  CIA  activities  in  Laos.    A  Washington   dispatch  in   The
Times  of  London  May  24  (see  adjoining  box)   declares  that
the   CIA   has  been   sabotaging   U.S.   policy   and   encouraging
Phoumi  Nosavan,  the  rightist  leader,  to  resist  Administration
efforts  to  create  a  new  neutralist  coalition  regime.    The  story
reverberated  in  the  foreign  policy  debate which  took  place  later
that  day  in  the  House   of  Commons,  but   so  scanty  was  the
attention  paid  it  by  the  U.S.  press  that  many  Senators   here
with  a  sharp  interest  in  the  CIA  are  unaware  of  the  charges.
They  are  similar  to  those  in  Le  Monde   (Dec.   17-18)  which
we  reported  in  our  issue  of  last  January  8.    According  to  an
on-the-spot  survey  in  that  paper,  the  efforts  of  the  U.S.  Am-
bassador  to  bring  Phoumi  into  the  coalition  were  undercut  by
CIA  agents  and  the  U.S. military.
Phoumi's  Closest  U.S.  Adviser  A  CIA Man
The  London  Times  story  was  denied  by  Lincoln  White,  the
State  Department's  briefing  officer.    But  Senators  who  inquire
in   those  sections  of   the  Department   in  touch   with   Laotian
affairs  will  find  that  in  this,  as  in  the  case  of  the  U-2,   Mr.
White has  been  erroneously  informed.    The  U.S.  press has not
been  at  all  enterprising  in  going  after  the  story.   The  London
Observer  (May  27)  in  reporting  the  denial  added  a tantalizing
detail.     "It   is  true,"   its  Washington   correspondent   cabled,
"that  the  chief  CIA  operator  [in  Laos]  is  still  the  same  man
as  when  the  agency  supported  General  Phoumi.   .  .  ."    The
paper's  correspondent   in  Singapore   added  that  while  it  was
incorrect  to  accuse the  CIA  of  undercutting  U.S.  policy  in  Laos
the  individual  CIA  representatives  there—
are  privately  opposed  to  a  compromise  with  the  neutralists
and   pro-Communists.     They   urge   that   if   necessary   the
country  be  partitioned ...  or  that  the  Vientiane  govern-
ment  should  at   least  be  helped   to  retain  full  control  of
towns  and  principal  communications,  even  at   the  risk  of
war.    This  view  encourages  right-wing   Laotian  leaders  to
refuse  to  come  to  terms  with  their  enemies—particularly
as  Gen.  Phoumi's   closest  personal  American   adviser  is  a
senior  CIA   officer.
Our  own  inquiries  have  led  us  to  believe   that  the   Times
account  is correct.   Thailand  has  long  been  a  CIA  stronghold,
as  was  indicated  some  years  ago  when  the  Burmese   govern-
ment  complained   that  CIA   operatives   were  using  a  trading
* The  21  are:  McCarthy,  Anderson,  Morse,  Clark,  Metcalf,
Iturdick,  Bartlett, McNamara,  Humphrey, Carroll,  Long (Mo),
Moss,  McGee,  Talmadge,  Hickey,  Case  (S.  Dak).  Pell.  Prouty,
Young  (Ohio),  Hart  and  Williams  (N.J.).
What  the  London  Times  Reported
"It  is  not  easy  to  acquire  all  the  details  in  such  a.
murky  situation,  but  apparently  the  evidence shows that
the  swarm  of  CIA  agents  in  Laos  deliberately  opposed
the   official   American  objectives  of  trying  to  establish
a  neutral  government.   They  are  believed  to  have  en-
couraged  General  Phoumi  Nosavan  in  the  concentration
of  troops  [in  Nam  Tha]  that  brought  about  the  swift
and  disastrous response  of  the  Pathet  Lao.
"It  is  also  officially  believed  that  the  heavy  pressure
brought  upon  Prince  Bonn  Oum and  General Phoumi  to
accept  the  political  solution  of  neutrality,  including  the
suspension  since February of  the  monthly subsidy  of  $3
million,  failed  because  the  agency  provided them  with
some  funds  from  its  own  capacious budget.   The  belief
is  that  the  agency  transferred the  money  from  its  oper-
ations  in  Siani,  where  General  Phoumi  has  family con-
nections.
"It  will  be  recalled  that  the  CIA  played  a  large  role
in   bringing   about   the   downfall   of   Prince   Souvanna
Phouma,  who  was  ousted  by  the  General  in  1960.  .  .  .
The  result  of  their clandestine  efforts  is  the  defeat, and
perhaps   total   demoralization  of    the   Royal   Laotian
forces;   the   commitment  of   American   forces   on   the
Asian   mainland  and  a   deterioration  of   the   political
situation.  .  .  ."
"  —The   Times  (London)  from  Washington,  May   H
company  in  northern  Thailand   as  a  cover  to  funnel   supplies
across  the  border  to  Chinese  Nationalist  troops  in  Burma.  The
Cuban  affair  last  year  should  be  a  reminder  that  the  White
House  is  not  always  either  well-informed  or  really  obeyed  by
the  CIA;  a pro-Batista  CIA  agent,  and  an  ignoramus  on  Latin
American  affairs  to  boot,  went  on  in  charge  of  operations   at
Miami  long  after  authoritative  sources   at  the  White  House
assured  reporters   that  he  had   been   removed.     It  is   difficult
enough  to  get  the  State  Department   only  a  few  blocks  away
to  carry  out  White  House  directives  which  run  counter  to  cold
war  conditioning.     It  would  be  naive  to  believe   that  secret
operatives  in  so  huge  and  well-heeled   an  organization   as  the
CIA  meekly  carry  out  orders  with  which  they  are  not  in  ac-
cord.    The  Laotian  affair  would  not  only  provide  a  test  case
with  which  to  evaluate  the  proposal  for  a  joint  committee  on
intelligence,  it  would  also  throw  a  scare  into  the  gumshoe  op-
erators  and  help  the  White  House  bring  the  Laotian  negotia-
tions  to  a  successful  conclusion.   There  is  no  reason  why  the
chief   CIA  man   in  Laos  cannot  be  brought   before   a  secret
session  of  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee   for   ques-
tioning.
To  read  the  London  Times  parliamentary  report  which  has
just  arrived  here  of  the  foreign  affairs   debate  May  24  is  to
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  4,1962
Too  Few  Listen As Freedom Riders and Sit-In'ers Tell Their  Dramatic Story .
Norman   Thomas,   who   back-stopped    Mrs.    Roosevelt   as
chairman   of   the   Committee   of   Inquiry,   spoke   of   them   as
"secular  saints"—this  handful  of  young  Negroes  in  their  teens
and  early  twenties.    They  and   a  few  white  sympathizers  as
youthful  and  devoted  as  themselves  have  begun  a  social  revo-
lution  in  the  South  with  their  sit-ins and  their  Freedom   Rides.
In  the  sparsely  filled  small  Washington  Post  Community  Room
last  week-end  they  told  their  story  and  their  needs  to  a   "Com-
mittee  of  Inquiry  Into  the  Administration   of  Justice  in  the
Freedom  Struggle."    To  it Mrs.  Roosevelt,  now  bowed  in  body
but  tireless  as  ever  in  spirit,  not  only  lent  her  name  as  chair-
man  but  flew  to  Washington  and  presided  over  the  first  day's
session.
A  Minority  of  A  Minority
In  the  boxes  on  these  two  pages,  in  succinct  summaries  more
moving  than  any eloquence,  we provide glimpses  in  their own
words  of  what  they  have  encountered   since  that  first  sit-in  at
a  Greensboro,   N.C.,  lunch  counter  in  Feb.   I960.    A  report
and  a transcript of  the  two-day hearing  will  be published.  They
will  provide  the  first  comprehensive  view   of  the  movement
which  has  sparked  Negro  resistance to  white  supremacy  in  the
deep  South  for  the  first  time  since  Reconstruction.    Never  has
a  tinier minority done  more  for  the  liberation  of  a  whole  peo-
ple  than  these  few  youngsters  of  CORE  (Congress  for  Racial
Equality)    and   SNCC   (Student   Non-Violent   Coordinating
Committee.)
The   sit-ins  and   the   Freedom   Rides  have   done   something
else,  less  sensational but  more  universally  significant.    As  Mr.
Thomas  said  in  his  summation,  "they  have  fought  entrenched
discrimination  and  wrong  without themselves  indulging  in vio-
lence  and  done  this  in  one  of  the  most  violent  periods  of  hu-
man  history."    Everywhere else  in  recent  years,  terrorism  has
been  accepted   as  a  justifiable  weapon   in  liberation  struggles.
From   Palestine   and   Cyprus   to   Algeria  and   Indonesia,   the
Ferdinand  the  Bull  (Connor)
"The  driver  [at  Anniston, Ala.]  announced  he  would
not  drive  on  until  the  four  Negroes  of  our  party  went
to   the   back  of   the   bus.    They  refused.    The   whites
[mobsters]   then   went  to  work  on  the   four   Negroes.
Walter   Bergman,   also  white,  and  I  went  forward  to
talk  to  the  attackers.    They  slugged  Walter  Bergman
on  the  head and dragged  him  to  the  back  of  the  bus.    I
was  similarly  slugged  and dragged.   The  Negroes  were
dragged  to  the  rear  also.    We  maintained non-violence.
I  saw  no  police  near  the  bus.    The  bus  then  left  for
Birmingham.
"Waiter  Bergman's  injuries  have  since  resulted  in  a
stroke.    He  is  the  most  serious  Freedom  Ride  casualty.
At   the   Birmingham  station  a   mob  awaited  us,  their
pipes  wrapped  in  paper.    No  police  were  in  sight.    In
an  alley  away  from   spectators,   I  was   beaten  uncon-
scious.    Police  Chief   Bull  Connor  of   Birmingham   ex-
plained  later  that  we  had no  protection  because  his men
were  off  for  Mother's   Day."
—Testimony   of   James   Peck   (white)    to   Committee
of  Inquiry;  he  is  editor  of  CORE  Bulletin.
knife,  the  bomb, the  nocturnal  attack, haphazard  violence  often
at  the  expense  of  the  very  people  being  liberated,  have   been
taken  for  granted.
Here  in  the  United  States  the  struggle  against  the  imposed
humiliation  of  the  Negro  has  been  carried  out   in   Gandhi's
spirit,  with  successful  non-violence.    History  will  record  it  to
the  honor  of  the  Negro  and  of  our  country  but  too  few  are
aware  of  it  today.    The   hearings  themselves   attested   in  un-
intended  fashion  the  degree  to  which  this  has  been  the  work
of  a  minority  of  a  minority.   Though  Washington  is  the  seat
of   Howard   University   and   all   through   the   South   students
have  been  aroused  to  act  in  this  struggle,  only  a  few   local
Negro  students  turned  out.    The  NAACP  did  not  even  send
an  observer.    A.  Philip  Randolph  lent  his  name  but  not  his
Life  for  the Non-Servile Negro  in the
Order  In  A  Georgia  Court
"Early  in   March  1962  I  appeared  before  the  Dougherty
County  Superior  Court  in  Albany  with  four  clients,  to  an-
swer  charges  of  conspiracy to  commit  breach  of  the  peace.
Court  was  in  session,  the  judge  on  the  bench.    My  clients
Chas.  Sherrod  and  Charles  Jones,  Negro,  and  Robert  Zell-
ner   and  Thomas  Hayden,   white,   with   Mrs.  Hayden,  took
seats  in  the  second  row  from  the  front.    A  deputy  sheriff
asked  them  to  move  to  the  rear  [where  Negroes  sit].    As
they  got  up  to  do  so,  the  sheriff  pushed  Sherrod  with  force
to  the  floor  and  dragged  him  on  the  floor  to  the  rear.    Two
officers  then  seized  Zellner  [who  had  angered  them  by  also
moving  back  to  the  Negro  section  though  he  is  white],  by
the  trousers and  the  collar  and  dragged  him  from  the court-
room.    While  Zellner  was  on  the  floor  in  the  hall,  he  was
hit.    Mrs.  Hayden was  dragged  over  3  or  4  seats  and  car-
ried  into  a  room  behind  the  court.    All  this  while  the  Judge
sat  on  the  bench  watching and  never  said  a  word."
—C.  E.  King,  Negro  attorney,  Albany,  Go.
See  No  Evil,  Hear  No  Evil
"Police  arrested  me  and  four  other   students  for  illegal
use  of  a  sound-truck.  We  were  held  in  Baton  Rouge  Parish
jail  under  $1500 cash  bond  each.    My  attorneys  bonded  me
out  in  the  evening.   As  the  group left  the  jail's  second  floor
and  got  to  the  first  they  were  detained.    I  was   rearrested
for  conspiracy  to  commit criminal mischief,  and  returned  to
jail.    I  remained in  jail,  awaiting  bond,  for   21  days.    Jail
South  99 Years  After Emancipation
atmosphere  was  hostile;  I  was  denied consultation  with min-
isters,  mail  and  use  of  telephone.    After  making  three  re-
quests  one  day  to  see  a  doctor  I  was  slapped  and  choked.
Jerome  Smith,  a  fellow  CORE  prisoner  was  hit  with  a  judo
chop  and  Dave  Dennis,  who  inquired  about  these  incidents,
was   pulled   from   the   Negro   cell  area,  thrown  with   force
against   iron  bars  and  placed  in  solitary.    An  FBI  inquiry
concluded  that  there  had  been  no  violation  of  civil  rights."
—Konnie  Moore,  21, chairman  of  Baton  Rouge   CORE
Fun  and  Frolic  At  A  Fair
"On  the  16th  Oct.  1961,  fourteen  of  us  were  at  the  Miss.
State  Fair  grounds  at  Jackson  to  see  if  the  [Negro]  boy-
cott  was  a  success.    We  asked  people  going  in  if  they  knew
about  the  boycott,  if  they  felt  they  should  take  second  best,
if  they  knew  they  were  paying  for  leftovers   [only  the  last
3 days of  the  Fair  are for  Negroes].   Police  gathered  around
us  yelling  vulgar  language  and  told  us  to  move  on.    They
arrested  7  of   us  before  we  had  a  chance  to  move.    Then
police  came  toward  the  Fair  entrance  with  3  police  dogs.
They  went  up  the  hill  with  the  dogs,  running  people  away
from  the  Fair.    One dog  got  loose  and  chased  people  on  his
own.   There  were  about  300  or  400  people  there  in  front  of
a  band.    I  heard  a  dog  attacked  and  bit  a  man  who   was
hospitalized.    We  were  put  in  the  paddy  wagon  and  at  the
Jackson  jail  charged  with  breach  of  the  peace.  .  .  ."
—Charles McLaurin,  21, Jackson,   Miss.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  ^, 1962
... Police Dogs,  Savage  Mobs, Sadistic Cops, Fail to Halt Liberation Movement
presence.   There was  only  one  Negro  on  the  'panel  either  day,
Dr.  Kenneth  Clark,  the  New  York  City  College  psychologist
the  first  day;  Rev.  Gardner  Taylor,  a  Brooklyn Baptist  pastor,
the  second.*
The  record,  when  published,  will  show  the  widespread  use
of  dogs  by the  police  to  terrorize Negroes;  the  lawlessness  and
sadism  of   Southern  police   officials;   the   inability  to  get   the
FBI  to  do  anything about  police  brutality; the  appointment  of
White   Citizens  Council  members  to  the  Federal   bench;  the
use  of  heavy  bail  requirements  as  a  means  of  crippling   the
sit-in  movement,  and  undercover  pressure  from  State  agencies
in   Mississippi,   to   frighten   bonding   companies   away   from
Freedom  Ride  cases.
James  Farmer,  CORE's  impressive  leader,  testified  that  the
Southern   Regional   Council   estimates  that   there  have   been
Segregation   by  Revelation
"In  situations  like  this,  I  always  ask  myself,  what
would  Jesus  do,  and  therefore  I  have  contemplated  on
this  for  a  while,  and  I  must  ask  you  to  leave."
—White   Methodist   Minister   in   Alabama   to   Negro
sit-in,  demonstrators   in  his  church,  from   Committee  of
Inquiry   testimony,  May  25.
* Others  who  lent  their  names  but  did  not  appear  included
Walter  Reuther.    Unlike  Reuther,  Wm.  Schnitzler,  secretary-
treasurer  of  the  AFL-CIO,  at  least  sent  a  substitute,   Boris
Shishkin.   The  other  name-lenders  non-appearing  were:  Tal-
lulah  Bankhead, Harry  Golden, Bishop James  A. Pike,  Justine
Wise  Polier,  and  James  Wechsler.    Those  who  sat  in  on  the
hearings  part   of  the  time  were  Telford  Taylor   and  Joseph
L.  Rauh,  Jr.    Those  who sat  through  the  whole  two  days  in
addition  to Norman Thomas  were Roger  Baldwin and  John  B.
Culbertson,  a  devoted  white  attorney   from   Greenville,    S.C.
Rowland  Watts   of   the   ACLU   and   Carl   Rachlin   of   CORE
acted  as  counsel  for  the  hearing  board.
5,181  arrests since  the  sit-ins  began  and  that  between  two  and
three  million  dollars  have  had  to  be  raised  to  bail  them   out.
Louis  Lusky, once  a  law  clerk to  Justice  Cardozo,  now  a  prac-
ticing  lawyer  in  Louisville, Ky.,  defense  counsel  in  the  famous
Carl  Braden  sedition  case,  testified  that  in  the  mass  arrests  of
Freedom   Riders  in  Jackson,   Miss.,  total  bond   requirements
reached  $373,000  and  not  a  single  bonding  company  was will-
ing  to  put  up  bond.
Such  tactics  and  the  new  use  of  criminal  anarchy  charges
(on   which  we  will  report   more   fully   in  a  later  issue)   are
aimed  to  crush  the  movement.    But  it  has  succeeded  in  awak-
ening  Negroes   even  in  Mississippi  to  the  possibility  of  fight-
ing  for  their  rights  and  dignity.    Most  important  of  all,  as
Mr.  Lusky said  in  his  deeply  felt  testimony,  it  has  broken  the
comfortable  white  Southern  stereotype  of  the  Negro  as  a  less-
than-human  creature  ill  disposed  to  fight  for  his  emancipation.
What  Happens to  White  Men Who Try  to  Help the  Negro's  Struggle  in the  South
"On  November  9,  1961,  I  went  with  5  members  of  New
Orleans  CORE into  lower Mississippi  to test  compliance with
the  ICC  ruling  at   bus  stations.     [They   were  arrested  in
Poplarville,  scene  of  the  Mack  Parker  lynching.]    About  50
Poplarville  whites  crowded  the  room  behind  the  fire  station
at  our  trial  November  13.   The  arresting  officer  testified  he
had  wanted  to  kill  me.   In  the  courtroom,  he  tried  several
times  to  attack  me, but  was  restrained  by  his  friends.    We
were found  guilty of disturbing  the  peace,  and  having  posted
$500 bond apiece,  were about  to  leave.   The  district  attorney,
who  meant  to  keep  me  in  town  overnight,  now  charged  me
with  interfering  with  an  officer.    Our  judge,  also  the  Mayor,
observing  the  crowd's  temper,  found  me  innocent  and  told
my  lawyer  to  get  me  out  of  town  quick."
—Testimony  of  Frank  Nelson,  23-year  old  white  engineer
from  New  York   City,  member  of  CORE.
"Early  in  August,  1961,  George  Blevins,  John  Dolan  and
myself,  all white, were  in  New Orleans  after  serving  40 days
in  the  Parchman,  Miss.,  prison  as  Freedom  Riders.   In  New
Orleans  we  stayed  at  the  home  of  a  Negro  minister  where
we  were  awaiting  dinner  when  several  police  entered,   said
they  had  complaints   about   whites  and  Negroes   being   to-
gether,  creating  a  disturbance.  .  .  .  They  had no  warrant;
they  told  us  to  come  with  them.   We  asked  if  they  had  the
right  to  take  us  out  of  a  private  home.   They  sai<i  we  had
no rights; that  when  they  say  come,  we'd  better  come.
"At  a  police  station  . ~.  .  the  police  made  the  three  of  us
stand  facing  a  wall  and  hit  us  with  blackjacks.    About  20
police were watching.   We were taken  upstairs  in the  station
to  be  photographed,  finger-printed  and  questioned.    The   offi-
cer  who  had  hit  George  Blevins  asked  about  the  blood  on
George's   shirt;  George   said   he  had  a  head   wound.   The
officer   grabbed  George  by  the  hair,  said  'where',  felt  with
unclean  hands  into  the  cut  and  tore  it  open;  later  George
had  four  stitches.   This  officer  told  me  he  would  kill  me  if
he  saw  me  again  in  the  city."
—Same  witness
"On  Jan.  22,  1962,  Marshall  Kieth,  27,  white,  a  technical
writer  at  the  Redstone  Arsenal   [Huntsville,  Ala.]  who had
joined  CORE in  sit-ins,  was  at  home  reading.    At  midnight
two  men  entered,  stuck  a  gun  in  his  back,  blindfolded him,
took  him  to  a  remote  part  of  town,  partially  stripped  him,
beat  him  and  sprayed  him  with  oil  of  mustard.    Kieth  got
to  a  nearby  home; police  were  summoned.   Kieth  was  hos-
pitalized  in  much  pain.    He  had  grown  up  in  Huntsville;
his  parents,  he  told  me, had  received threatening  phone calls.
To  protect  them  and  because  he  could  not  bear  the  harass-
ment,  Kieth  left   Huntsville  to  take  up  his  life   elsewhere,
and  left   us  no  forwarding  address."
—Testimony   of  Henry   Thomas,  20,  St.  Augustine,  Fla.,
a  Field  Secretary   for   CORE.    He   had   to  be  hospitalized
after   someone  put  mustard   gas  on  the  seat  of  his  car  while
he  was  directing  sit-ins  in  Huntsville.    Police  took  no  action
except  to  impound  his  car  as  evidence!
"During  January  1962  I  taught  some of  the   sharecroppers
[evicted  in Brownsville, Tenn.,  for trying to register  to vote]
to  make  tote  bags  for  sale.    Police  went  to  the  home of
Negroes  with  whom  1  was  staying   and  questioned   them
about  me.   On  Friday,  March  3,  Jeff  Gordon  and  I  started
to  drive  to  Memphis to  get  materials  for  the  bags.   We  had
gone  about  four  blocks  when  Sheriff's  men  told  us  to  drive
to the courthouse.  . . . They  refused  to say why.  . . .
"We  refused  to  move  and  when  police  grabbed   us  went
limp.    We  were  dragged  out,  heads  bouncing,  stuffed   into
a  police  car  and  taken  to  jail.   After  about  three  hours  in
a  cell,  police  came  to  fingerprint  us.   They  dragged  Jeff  out
by  a  wrist  clamp which  is  very  painful  and  leaves  the  wrist
torn.    Because  of  the  injustice  of  the  proceedings   I  could
not  cooperate  even  to  the  degree  of  holding  my  fingers  still
for   inking.    I  was  beaten   by  Deputy  Anderson   and  four
others,  some  in  blue  uniforms,  some  in  plainclothes.     The
wrist  clamp  was  screwed  down  to  the  screaming  point  and
shaken.    My  fingers  were   bent   back,   my  pants  torn   or
slashed  off, and  a  high  voltage  electric  probe  applied.    Dur-
ing  the  beating  I  passed  out  several  times  but  was  revived
each  time by  slaps  so the  torture  could  continue."
—Testimony  of  Eric  Weinberger,  30,  of  Norwich,   Conn.,
who  is  back  with  the  croppers  in   Tennessee.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, June  4, 1962
How  Use The  CIA  For  Settlement   When  It's  Conditioned  to  Conflict?
(Continued   from   Page   One)
realize  again  how  numb  and  dumb  our  Congress  has  grown
on  issues  of  war  and  peace.    In  England  the  government  was
subjected  to  sharp  questioning  by  the  Labor  opposition;   the
Prime  Minister,  incidentally,  failed   to  deny  that   the   initial
request  for  British troops  to Thailand  came not  from  the  Thais
but  from  the  White  House.    Here  not  only  is there  no  oppo-
sition  but  little  informed  support  for  the  constructive   aspect
of  U.S.  policy—the  President's and  Mr.  Harriman's search  for
a  peaceful  solution  via  a  neutral  coalition  in  Laos.
His  Own  Little  "China  Lobby"
Phoumi  Nosavan  has  his  little  "China  Lobby"  on  the  hill;
Sen.  Dodd  made a  speech  in  the  Senate May 21 supporting  him
and  opposing  a  coalition.    The  same view  was  taken  a  week
earlier  by  Senator  Jackson  on  ABC-TV's  Issues  and  Answers
(May  13).    It  is curious  how  this unfailing voice of  the  avia-
tion  lobby should  pipe up  on  Laos, as  if  his  industrial  advisers
and  military  connections  scent  and  fear  the  relaxation  of  ten-
sion  a  settlement  might  bring. The  liberals in  the  Senate  could
at  least  build  up  countervailing  pressure  in  support   of   the
President's  coalition  policy  by  some  energetic  questioning  on
the  role  of  the  CIA  and  the  military in  Laos.   What  did  hap-
pen  at  Nam  Tha?    How  was  Phoumi  Nosavan   able  to  con-
centrate  forces  in  this  rat  trap   over   the   objections   of   U.S.
military?   Who  started  the  fighting?  How  much  real  fighting
was  there?    Was  the  purpose  of  this  comedy  to   precipitate
U.S.  intervention ?   Is  it  true,  as  reported  from  the  scene,  that
the  Royal  Laotian  officers   refused  to  let  their   U.S.   advisers
know  the  full  facts  about  the  numbers and  deployment  of  their
troops?    This  is  an  old  U.S.  complaint  in  Laos.    The  Porter
Hardy  subcommittee  investigation  of  the  Laotian  aid  program
two  years ago  showed  that  U.S.  auditing  agencies  were  never
able  to  learn  exactly  how  many  men  were  in  the  Lao Army.
There  was  no  way  to  check  on  how  much  pay  was  going  to
troops  and  how  much  into  the  pockets  of  Laotian  leaders.    If
CIA  is good  for  intelligence  and  not  just  for  intrigue,  it  ought
to have the answers on all  these questions.   The  answers would
help  to  explain  why the  Royal Lao Army  we  armed  is not  able
to  stand  off  inferior  forces  equipped  with  cast-offs  not  just  in
guerrilla  operations  but  in  open  battle.
Unhappy  With  Our  'Strong  Man'
Q.  Do  you  have  any  comment  on  the  ticker  reports
that  the  United  States  has  told  Boun  Oum  to  get  rid of
[Gen.  Phoumi] Nosavan?
A.  The statement  attributed to  Gov. Harriman  in this
report  that  Gen. Phoumi  "must quit  the  government" is
untrue.    We  have,   however,  urged  all  along  that   the
Royal    Lao    government    undertake    to    move   ahead
promptly  and realistically  on  negotiations for  a govern-
ment  of  national  union  under  Souvanna  Phouma.
Q.  What  does  it  mean  to  move  ahead  promptly  and
realistically?      Does    it    mean    Phoumi    must    go?
(Laughter).
A.  It  means just  that  the  negotiations  should  be  un-
dertaken  promptly  and  realistically.
Q.  Well,  it  has  been  said  many  times  in  this  town  in
the  last  two  weeks  that  the  reason  they  didn't  move
ahead  promptly  and realistically was  that  Gen. Phoumi
didn't  agree  with  some  of  the  things  the  U.S. wanted
to  do. . . . Have  we  suggested  that  perhaps Gen. Phoumi
who  is  a  military  man might  consider better  serving his
country  as  head  of  the  army  in  the  field  instead  of  as
a  Cabinet   officer?
A.  I  don't  think  I  can  go  further  than  what  I  have
said  already.  .  . .
—State  Dept.  Press  Briefing,   May  24
How  does  a  defeated  Lao  leader  with  no  visible  means  of
support  stand  off  U.S.  pressure  as  long  and  easily  as  Phoumi
has  done?   He  can't  be that  slick.   He's  obviously playing  for
a  final  breakdown  in  the  coalition  talks  and  partition  of  Laos
by  U.S.  troops.    This  would  cut  up  his  country  but  leave  his
pipeline   to  the  U.S.  Treasury   intact.    But  he  could   hardly
play  this game  if  it  did  not  suit  more  powerful  interests.    The
agreement  between  Kennedy  and  Khrushchev  over  Laos  is  the
one  frail  bridge  to  the  beginnings  of  a  general  settlement  be-
tween  the  two  superpowers.   If  it  breaks  down  and  our  troops
move  into  Laos,  the  hope  vanishes.   Those  who  see this  hope
as  a  menace,  the  believers  in  inevitable  conflict,  the  military-
industrial  complex, the  desperadoes  like  Chiang  Kai-shek, pull
the strings to which Phoumi  prances. Now,  before  it is too late,
is  the  time to  recall  that  the  CIA  from  McCone  down  is  con-
ditioned  not  to  settlement  but  to  permanent  conflict.    This  is
the  heart  of  the  matter.                                                    May  29
This  Issue,  Too,  Available  In  Free  Sample  If  You   Send  Long  Envelopes  and   Specify     Which  Issue
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ......................................................................................—
Street    .....................................................................................^
City  ............_................,........Zone.............State....................
6/4/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ........................................................................._
Street    ........._..„..............._....................................................
City  ..........._,.........................Zone.......~...State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tea  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December   and  the  6rst  In  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington.  D. C.  An  inde]
weekly  published  and  edited  by  1.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M. Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;   J6  in
Canada:   SIO  elsewhere.     Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia   and  Africa.
except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   In
-r  —   „.   . .            _   _    .     .   . ,
pen(1(
.
nt
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED