I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962may07.pdf

============================================================

Picasso's Lenin Prize  — Honor  or Insult? P.  4
Documentary: The Resolution  In Which  ADA Broke  With  Kennedy  to  Oppose  War in  South  Vietnam,  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  18
MAY   7,  1962
»'<"      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Nobel  Laureates  and  the  White  House  Dinner
In  the  wake  of  his  order  resuming  nuclear  testing  in  the
atmosphere,   Mr.   Kennedy   had  the  Nobel   laureates  of   the
hemisphere in  to dinner.   As public relations,  this  was superb.
The  picture  of  the  President,  surrounded  by  savants and  writ-
ers,   tended  to  counteract  that  other  picture  in  the  minds  of
angry  demonstrators  at  home  and  abroad,   the  picture  of  an
American  President   hurling  new  radioactive  poisons  into  the
heavens  in  a  narrowly  nationalistic, tit-for-tat  contest  with  the
Russians.    The  unexpected  behavior  of  two  guests,  Dr.  Linus
Pauling   and   Clarence   Pickett,   though   contrary   to   protocol
and  etiquette,  lent  a  wonderful  final  touch.    What  could  have
provided  a  more  civilized  picture  of  our  country  abroad  than
the  spectacle  of  a  noted  scientist and  a  saintly  Quaker  picket-
ing  the  White  House   in  protest   against   resumption  before
going  in  to  have  dinner  with  the  President?    Finally one  can-
not  overlook  the  ingratiating  pantomime,  so  appeasing  to  our
own   scientific  community,  in  the  presence  at  the  dinner  of
J.  Robert  Oppenheimer,  who  was  hounded  out  of  government
after  opposing  development  of  the  H-bomb,  and  the  absence
from  the  dinner  of  Dr.  Edward  Teller,  the  monster's  "father."
Who   could  fail  to  be  grateful  to  Mr.  Kennedy  for  this  fine
gesture  of  reparation  to  Dr.  Oppenheimer ?
But  The  Victory   Was  Teller's
Unfortunately,  though  Dr.  Teller  didn't  get  invited  to  din-
ner,  his  is the  victory.   His  Livermore  Laboratory  crowd  hold
the  key  positions  in  the  bureaucracy  where  the  problems  of
testing  are  decided:  Harold  Brown,   chief   of  research  at  the
Pentagon;   George    Bing,   in   charge   of    VELA-UNIFORM,
which  runs  research  into  new  means  of  detecting  underground
tests;  Gerald   Johnson,  McNamara's  assistant  for   atomic  en-
ergy—all  are out  of  Dr.  Teller's  team  at  Livermore laboratory.
The  decision  to  resume  testing  was their  victory  and  the  logic
of  Mr.  Kennedy's   address   March  2  announcing  the   decision
was  their  logic:  the  need  for  constant  research  and  develop-
ment  to  supply  our  arsenal  with  "the  most  modern,  the  most
reliable  and  most  versatile  nuclear  weapons";  the  ambiguous
but  familiar  Teller-like  assurance  that  biological   effects   from
new  radioactivity   in  the  new  tests  would   be  "roughly  equal
to  only  1  percent  of  those  due  to  ...     natural  background,"
and  the  assumption  that  only  an  elaborate  network  of  listen-
ing   posts   and   inspectors   can  make  a  test   moratorium  safe
though  we  seem  to  monitor  every  Russian  test  with  ease  with-
in  a  few  hours.'   The  point  we  wish  to  make  is  not  just  that
these  considerations  led  to  the  resumption   of   testing.     The
point  is that  the  same  logic  must  lead  us  to  engage  every  few
years—when  improved  devices  are  ready—to  a  new  series  of
tests  after  a  new  round  of  negotiations  which  are  again  only
an  exercise in propagandists gamesmanship.    In  this  direction
Our  Favorite   Kennedy
Our  favorite  Kennedy  is  now  Caroline.    Hers  seems
to  have  been  the  really  historic  remark  at  the  dinner
the   President   gave   the   Nobel   Prize   winners  at   the
White  House  the  other  evening.   In  the  receiving  line,
Mrs.   Kennedy said  reproachfully to  Mrs.  Linus  Pauling,
whose  husband  had  been  picketing  the  White  House
before  coming  in  to  dinner,  "How  could  you  do  such  a
thing?    You know  Caroline asked  me,  'What  has Daddy
done  wrong  this  time?'"   At  least  one  Kennedy  seems
to  watch picket  lines  carefully.
Mr. Kennedy himself  greeted  Dr. Pauling with  a  grin
and  said,  "Well  it  seems  like  you've  been  around  the
White  House  a  couple  of  days  already."   On Saturday
Dr.  Pauling  carried  a  sign  against  resumption  of  test-
ing   with   Women   Strike  for   Peace.     On  Sunday  he
joined  the  Quaker vigil  outside  the  White House,  as  did
another  dinner guest,  Clarence Pickett, secretary emeri-
tus  of  the  American.  Friends  Service  Committee  which
won  a deserved  Nobel  Peace  prize in  the  1940's.   Should
Nobel  Prize  dinners,  and  resumption  of  testing,  alike
become  annual  events,  the  least  the  guests  can  do  is  to
picket  before  going  in  to  dinner.
there  is no  exit from  a fatal  spiral.
Mr.  Kennedy's  dinner  was  a  gracious  gesture,  like  the  hot
coffee  he  sent  out  to  the  picketing  students  last  winter.    But
gracious  gestures,  whether  so  intended  or  not,  are  only  public
relations.    Mr.  Kennedy  shows  no  readiness to  engage  in  that
campaign  of  public  education  necessary if  we  are  to  break  out
of  the  deadly  spiral.    Essentially  he  drifts  gracefully  with  the
tide.     Against   that  background  we  suggest,   quite  seriously,
that  the  Nobel  laureates  should   have  refused,  in  a  body,  to
accept  his  invitation  to  dinner.    We  believe  they  owed  it  to
science  and  to  humanity  to  demonstrate  that  they  could   not
acquiesce,  by  their  presence,  in  a  drift  which  endangers   our
whole  species.    Without  disrespect  to  the  Presidency or  to  Mr.
Kennedy   personally,  they  should   have   recognized   that  they
symbolize  Science,  with  all   it  could  do  for  man   if  properly
utilized,  while  he  symbolizes  the  nation  state  system,  which
degrades  science  into  providing  ever  more  fiendish  means  of
mass  murder.    Behind  the  glamorous  facade  of  that  splendid
evening   lies  fatalistic  acceptance   of   other   future   scenes—of
suffering  beyond  the  imagination of  a  Dante,  inflicted  on  mil-
lions   everywhere  in   some  stupid  big   power   quarrel   over   a
point  of  prestige  or  of  "honor."    The  scientists  should   have
urged   Mr.  Kennedy   instead  to  use  the  powers   of  his  great
office  to  awaken  mankind  to  the  danger  and  to  the  need  for  a
fresh  approach.    This  was their  duty  and  this  is his  duty,  and,
only  in  this  should  he  have  the  strengthening  accompaniment
of  our  best  minds  and  spirits.
7  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  7, 1962
JFK  Evangelical  in  Latin  America   About  Evils  He  Takes  Calmly  In  Our Own South
A  Climax  Approaches  in  the  Struggle  for  Negro  Voting  Rights
The  coming  two  weeks  will  be  climactic  in  the  struggle  for
Negro  voting  rights.    On  Wednesday   next,  Majority  Leader
Mansfield  will  ask  cloture  to  shut  off  the  Southern   filibuster
against  the  bill  to  make  proof   of  a  sixth  grade  education  the
only  literacy  requirement   for  voters,  thus  ending  one  device
for  disfranchising  the  Negro.    If  more  than  a  majority   vote
for  cloture,  Mansfield  will  use  the  device  of  a  motion  to  table
his  own  bill  (which  is  not  debatable).     If  this  is  defeated—
as  he  hopes—debate  will go  on  for  another  week  at  least,  cul-
minating   in  a  second   vote   for   cloture.     At   least   three  Re-
publicans,  and  possibly  the  same^number  of  Democrats,   have
said  they  will  vote  for  cloture  on  the  second  round.    It  is  im-
portant  to  make  that  vote  as  big  as  possible.
A  Strange   Apathy
Unfortunately   this  battle   over   voting   rights   has   brought
little  mail  and   pressure   from   the   country  even   from   those
Northern   areas  where  the  Negro  counts  politically.    Although
the  solid  south  can  now  be  sure  of  only  20  votes   (Yarborough
of   Texas  and  Randolph  of  West  Virginia   are  mavericks  on
the  voting  issue  as  on  so  much  else)   and  33  votes  are  neces-
sary  to   block   cloture  in  a   full   Senate,  the  old   alliance  with
Republicans  from   the  Plain   States  and   Democrats   from   the
Mountain   States   still   holds.     Enough   votes   can   usually  be
mustered  from  these  two  areas  to  maintain  white  supremacy
in  the  South  in  return  for  Southern  votes  for  the  special privi-
leges  in  which  mining  and  farm  Senators  are  interested.
Now   is  the  time  for  Negroes  and  the  friends  of  real  de-
mocracy  to  bring  pressure  on   both   party  leaderships.     Here
an  odd  situation exists.   There  has  been  criticism  of  the  White
House  for   carrying  on   a  political   romance  with  Dirksen   of
Illinois  at  the  expense  of   the  liberal  Democrat,   Yates,   who
opposes  him   for  reelection.    On   this  issue,  Dirksen   is  more
militant  than  the  White  House.     His  anxiety  about   reelection
in  Illinois, where  the  Negro  vote  is potent,  has  led  him  to  put
the  heat  on  his   fellow   Republicans.    But  there   is  as  yet   no
sign  of  similar  pressure  by  the  White   House  on  the   Demo-
crats.    Attorney General  Robert  Kennedy  has  come  out  strong-
ly   for   the   literacy   bill,   but   White   House   sources   are   non-
committal  when   asked  what  it  intends  to  do  about   rounding
The  SEP's  Belated  Expose   of   the   N-Bomb
"At  the  present  stage  of  world  nuclear  progress,   it
is   scientifically   unlikely   that   anybody  can   perfect   an
N-bomb  for  nearly half  a  century.   And  if  they should,
its   military  application  is  so  limited  that  it  would  be
as   expensive   and  absurd  as   killing   flies   with   a   big-
game   rifle.     Nor  is   it  right  to  reach   a  quivering  as-
sumption   that   there   can   be   no   defense   against    an
N-bomb.    On  the  contrary,  it  is  easier  to  guard  against
this    theoretical   weapon   than   against    A-bombs    or
H-bombs."
—The   Neutron  Bomb,  by  Win.  L.  Laurence  in  the
Saturday  Evening  Post  May  5,  is  a  devastating    reply
to  the  'nightmarish   campaign   staged   by   Connecticut's
Senator   Dodd   and  others  last  year  to  panic  the    U.S.
into  atmospheric  testing.    "If   the  Soviets  were  to  get
it   [the  neutron  bomb}  first,"  Dodd  said,  "it  might  very
well  cost  us  our  freedom."      Now  this  veteran   science
writer  replies,  "it  would   be sheer  'nonsense  to rush  into
a   multi-billion   dollar   program   to   develop    a  neutron
bomb"  and  "equally  silly   to  use  the  neutron  bomb  as  a
reason  for  resuming  atomic  tests  in  the   atmosphere."
Query:  How   lano.  has  the  SEP   been   holding   this  ar,-•
swer  to  a  speech   Dodd   made   last  July   and   why   is  it
published  only  now  after   testing  in  the  atmosphere  has
been  resumed?—IFS.
up  votes.
It  is  a  pity  the  White   House  is  not  as  militant  about   de-
mocracy  in  the  South  as  it  is  away  from  home.    It  could  do  a
lot,  if  only  by  calling  attention  to  the  study  made  last  year  by
the   Civil   Rights  Commission   of   17   black   belt  counties   in
which  the  Negro  is  in  the  majority  but  remains  effectively  dis-
franchised.     Its  subdued   and   restrained  pages  paint   a  vivid
picture  of  one   party  dictatorship,  of   naked   racist   oppression
and   of   feudal  rule  by  the  big  white  cotton   planters.     Some
Latin   American  ought   to   use   that   report   for   a  tongue-in-
cheek  plea  for  land  and  fiscal  reform  in  these  areas  ruled  by
our  own  oligarchy.    Even  Negroes  who  are  major  taxpayers
can't  vote.    In  one  county  spotlighted  by  the  report  a  Negro
merchant  pays  $2,000  a  year  in  taxes  but  they  won't   let  him
pay  his  $2  poll  tax.    It  would  be  hard  to  match  that  even  in
Peru.     Let  the  White  House  and  your  Senators  know   you're
concerned.
"This  Is  War  Waged  in  Peacetime"—The  Aldermaston  Petition  to  the  United   Nations
"Just   as   we  condemned  the  resumption  of  tests  by   the
USSR   as  a  crime  against  humanity   we  likewise  denounce
the  series  ordered  by  the  President  of  the  United  States  as
(in   his  own  terms)  the  'substitution  of  terror  for  reason.'
The   massive   series   of   tests   will,   with  certainty,  be   fol-
lowed  by  further  tests  by  the  USSR.
"This   is   war   waged  in   peacetime   against   nations   who
have   no   part   in   this   struggle   for   arms   supremacy   and
against   innocent  peoples   of   all   nations   whose   lives   and
health  are  in  danger.   The  biological effects  cannot  be  mag-
nified  nor  minimized  because   they  are  unpredictable.   The
risks  must  be  measured  not  by  scientific  knowledge  but  by
scientific  ignorance.  This  has  been  recognized  by  the  United
Nations  when  it  constituted  the  continuing  Scientific  Com-
mittee  on  the  Effects  of  Atomic  Radiation  which  enjoined
the  cessation   of  contamination  of   the  environment  by   ex-
plosions  of  nuclear  weapons.
"Arguments  of  political  expediency  or  military  necessity
cannot  override  the  rights  of  the  individual; the  considera-
tions   of   genocide   where  the   genus   is   homo   sapiens;  the
freedom  of  the  seas;  the  necessity   to  conserve   the  living-
space   of  mankind  against  the  pollution  of  the   atmosphere
and  to  prevent  the  radioactive  poisoning   of  the  communal
oceans  with  the  contamination of  the  food  cycle.  .  .  ."
—After    this  year's   Aldermaston   March   which   reached
60,000  by  the  time  it  arrived  in  Hyde  Park,  two  deputations
were  appointed    by  the  British  Campaign  for  Nuclear   Dis-
armament,  erne  to  Geneva  and  the  other  to  New   York  with
this  petition  for  V  Thant,  Acting  Secretary  General  of  the
United   Nations.    It   was  brought  here  by  Lord   Boyd   Orr,
Nobel  Peace  prize-ivinner, and  first  director  of  the  UN  Food
and   Agriculture   Committee;   Prof.    Ritchie   Colder,    Vice
Chairman  of  CND,   and  Mrs.   Patricia  Goldacre,  rank-and-
file  member.   U  Thant  was  too  busy  lunching  the  Duke  and
Duchess  of   Windsor   to  see  them  but   they  presented   their
petition April  27.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  7, 1962
He  Turns  Out  To  Be  A  Somewhat   Stuffy  Man  With  Conventional  Half-Baked  Ideas
Former  CIA  Chief   Dulles  Sits  For  An  Authorized  Protrait  on  CBS
In  his  interview with  Eric  Severeid  on  CBS  Reports,  April
26,  former CIA  Director  Allen  W.  Dulles  denied  that  follow-
ers  of  Batista played  a  large  role  in  the  Cuban  invasion  forces
last  year  despite  a  White  House  order;  denied  that  the  activi-
ties  of   CIA   have  ever   conflicted   with   official   State   Depart-
ment  policy;  denied  that  CIA  operatives  have  tended  to  back
right  wing  elements  in  foreign  countries  "because  of  an  obses-
sion  with  Communism."     The  CIA  seems  to  have  kept  a  lot
of  secrets  from  its own  director.
Admits  Majority  of  Cubans  Were  With  Castro
There  were  also  some  interesting  admissions.   When   Mr.
Dulles  was  asked  about  the  report  in  a  new  book  on  the  CIA
that  its  operatives  "spent  literally  millions  of  dollars,  hiring
people  to  riot  in  the  streets ...  to  get  rid  of  Mossadegh"  in
Iran,  Mr.  Dulles  replied   "the  statement  that  we  spent  many
dollars  doing  that  is  utterly  false."    Apparently Iranian  street
mobs  come  cheap.    When  Mr.  Severeid  asked  why  he  took  so
long  before  acting  against  Castro,  Mr.  Dulles  asked,  "What
were  you  going  to  do  about  it?    Castro  was  in  there,  with  the
great  support   of   the   majority   of   the  people,  and   if  we  had
planned  any  expedition  at  an  earlier  date,  that  might  not  have
been  of  any  more  success  than  the  one  that  we  did  after  rather
mature  preparations."     He   admitted  that  "particularly  in  its
latter  phases"  the  Cuban   invasion  affair   "exceeded  the   scope
of  the  normal  activities of  the  CIA,"   and  that  such  activities
"should  be  of  a  nature  that  could  be  kept  quiet."    He  thinks
the  Soviet  danger  in  the  Congo  was  "overrated"   and  he  im-
plied  that  the  Japanese   surrender   might   have   been    brought
about  without  atomic   bombing.
There  were   glimpses   of   just  how  profoundly  Mr.   Dulles
assesses   men  and   events.    When   in  Switzerland   during   the
war,  he  consulted  with  Dr.  Carl  Jung  on  what  Hitler  would
do.    Dr.  Jung  was  remarkably  fuzzy-minded,  if  not  worse,  on
Nazism   but  Mr.   Dulles  thought   him   "very,   very  good   on
that."     From  him,   Mr.  Dulles  learned   that   Hitler   -was   "an
introvert,  I  believe ... as compared  to ...    Mussolini ... an
What   Khrushchev   Told  Dulles
Eric  SEVEREID: Mr.  Dulles,  when  Khrushchev  was
here,  did  you  get  a  chance  to  talk  with  him  at  all?
Allen  W.  DULLES:  Yes.     I  didn't  have  a  long  talk
with  him, but  I  had  a  very—quite  an  amusing encounter
with  him.    It  took  place  at  the  dinner  that  President
Eisenhower  gave  for  Khrushchev,  and  the  President  in-
troduced  me,  and  said:  'This  is  Mr.  Dulles.    You  may
know   Mr.  Dulles.'    He   turned   to  his   reporters  [sic],
kind  of  a  twinkle in  his  eye,  because  he's  got  a  keen—
you  must  admit,  he's   got  a  good  sense   of  humor,  and
he  said:  'Oh,  yes.    I  know  you.    I  read  your  reports.'
Mr.  SEVEREID: Really?
Mr.   DULLES:  Yes.     And   1  said:   'I   hope   you   get
them   legally'    And,  'Oh,'  he  said,  'you  know   how   we
get  them.    We  all  pay  the  same  agents  and  we  all  get
the  same  reports.'   And,  'Well,'  I  said,  'That's  a  kind  of
sharing  the  wealth, isn't  it?'   And  then we  had  a  laugh
and that  ended it.
—"The  Hot  and  Cold  Wars  of  Allen  Dulles"  on  CBS-
TV  April  S6.    The  real  point  of  this  famous   exchange
is   that   in   many   undeveloped—and    some    developed—
countries  espionage   is  a  kind  of  WPA   providing   work
for   the  local  sharpies,  and  the  same  busy   entrepeneurs
sell  the  same  tripe,  differently     packaged,  to  both  sides.
extra-extravert"    Mr.  Dulles  himself  is  "somewhat   of   a  dis-
ciple  of  Pavlov,  an  an  interpreter  of  what  Khrushchev  does."
Mr.   Dulles   said  that  when   Khrushchev   broke   off  the   Paris
conference,   the   TJ-2  was   only   "an   excuse   in   the   Pavlovian
manner."    But  a  few  moments  later Mr.  Dulles  was  saying,  in
a  quite  sensibly  non-Pavlovian  way,  that  the  Russians  "felt  so
sensitive"  about   the   U-2   because   it  breached   the   secrecy  on
which   they  counted   for   security.    Mr.   Dulles   doesn't   think
Communism  within  the  United  States  is  a  serious  matter   "due
to  the  vigilance  of  the  FBI  and  what  J.  Edgar   Hoover  has
done."     Some  misguided  people  tend  to  give  the  credit  to  a
free  and   affluent   society  with  a  high  degree  of  social  welfare
reforms.    Mr.  Dulles  sees  our  stability as  a  testimonial  to  the
secret  police.  That  was the  interview's  most  revealing  moment.
The Resolution in Which The ADA  Broke With Kennedy on  Our War  in  South  Vietnam
"We view  with  grave  anxiety  and concern  the  military  in-
tervention  of  the  United  States  in  South  Vietnam without
invoking   the   good   offices   of   the   United   Nations,  without
deference  to  the  International  Supervisory   Commission  un-
der  the  1954  Geneva  Treaty,  without  coordination  with  out
SEATO  allies,  and  without  making  clear   to  the   Congress
and  the  American  people  the  reasons—if  they  exist—which
would  justify  such  unilateral  military intervention.
"The  civil  war  in  South  Vietnam  has  been  presented   to
the  American  people  as  having  been  caused   primarily  by
foreign  intervention.    In  truth, that  civil  war  is  in  the  main
the   result   of   the   decay   of   the   totalitarian  Diem   regime.
This   regime   has   lost   popular   support,   and  the  people   of
South  Vietnam are  either  actively  hostile  or indifferent  to  it.
"We  do  not  oppose,  indeed  we  favor,  reasonable  military
aid  to  countries  which  are  seeking  to  maintain  their  inde-
pendence   from   external   aggression,   including   externally
aided   and  directed   subversion,   even   though   we   may   not
wholly  approve  of   their  governments.     But  we  vigorously
oppose   the  unilateral  commitment  of   America's   own  mili-
tary  power  and  prestige  to  sustain  governments  in  Asia  or
elsewhere   against  the  resistance  of  their  own  people.
"No  one  is  in  a  position  to  predict whether Red  China or
the  USSR   will  intervene  against   us,  or  the  gravity  of  the
consequence   of   their  intervention.    But   no   one   can  deny
that  unilateral  military  intervention involves  an  important
moral  problem  and  grave  political and  military  risks,  which
may  imperil  the  whole  future  of  America.    The  American
people  have  not  been  informed of  these  risks  and  they  have
the  right  to  know and knowingly to  share  in  decisions  which
may  irreversibly  affect  their  destiny."
—Of    the  resolutions   adopted    by  Americans   for    Demo-
cratic  Action  at  its  15th  annual  convention  in  Washington
April  27-29  this  resolution  on Vietnam  was  the  most  urgent,
the  most  newsworthy,  and  the  most  clearly   in  opposition   to
the  Kennedy   Administration.    Few  papers   mentioned  it  so
we  supply   the  text  here.  The  ADA   also  adopted   a resolution
on  disarmament  and  security  deploring   "the   resumption  of
testing  by  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  US"  but  struck  out  the
next  sentence  of  the  recommended    draft,   "We   are   opposed
to  further   nuclear   tests   by  any   -nation."     The  resolution
called  for  negotiation  of  a  ban  on  atmospheric  tests  with-
out  inspection  since  such tests  are  detectible.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  7,1962
The  Greatest  Living  Painter  Is  Honored  in  Both  East  and West  But—
Poor  Pablo   Picasso  — Neither  Side  Wants  the  Whole  Man
In  Moscow,  Picasso  has  just  been  awarded  the  Lenin  Peace
Prize,   but   Russia's  extensive   pre-revolutionary   collection   of
his  work  is still  shut  off from  the  public.  In  New  York,  where
few   artists  dare  any  longer  to  be  Communists  like   Picasso,
nine  galleries  are  cooperating  in  an  American  tribute with  the
most  elaborate  exhibition  of  his  works  yet  seen  in  this  coun-
try.     America  forgives  his  politics   for  his  painting.     Russia
forgives   his  painting   for  his  politics.    Poor   Pablo   Picasso:
neither  side  accepts  the  whole  man.
The   greatest  painter  of  our  time  is  nevertheless  better  off
in  the  West  than  he  would  have  been  in  the  East.     France
gave  him  refuge  from  Fascism,  allowed  him  political  freedom,
and  above  all  left  him  free  to  paint  as  he  pleased.    Capitalist
collectors  have  outbid  themselves  for  his'work.
Had  Picasso  Been  A  Russian  Painter
Had   Picasso  been  a  Russian  painter,  he  would  have  been
driven   into  exile  or  liquidated   long   ago  as  were   so  many
artists  of  his  generation  who  failed  to  toe  the  party  line  in
the' arts.    Just  last  week  in  Novy   Mir,  Ehrenburg's  memoirs
told  the  story  of  how  the  Russian painter  Falk,  a  follower  of
Cezanne,  was  driven   by  the   authorities   into   total   poverty.  '
While  the  capitalist  world  shows  a  cultivated  taste  for  revo-
lutionary  art, the  proletarian  State under  Stalin  and  even  now
under   Khrushchev    shares   all   the   predilections   that   artists
used  to  stigmatize  as  philistine  and  bourgeois.     In  the  arts,
the  Russian  Revolution  brought  Babbitt  to  power.
In  Communist  Russia,  as  in  Nazi  Germany,  Picasso  was  re-
garded  as decadent.    No  one  in  the  ruling  Russian  Communist
bureaucracy  ever  asked  himself  how  it  was  that   a   decadent
artist  should   have  taken  so  bold  a  part  in  the  fight  against
Fascism,  risked  so  much  in  the  peace  campaigns,  dared  even
to  become  a  Communist.    Bureaucrats  are  incapable  of   such
questions.
The  vision  that  burns  in  Picasso's  paintings  is  the  vision
that  burns  in  his  life.    If  integrity  is  wholeness,  his  life  and
work  are  a  monument  of  integrity.   To  reject  his  painting  is
to  reject  his  life.   To  award  him  the  Lenin  Prize  while  refus-
ing  to  let  the  Russian public  see his  painting  is  not  an  honor.
It's  an  insult.   It  says  "We  toss  you  a  decoration  for  what  we
Hat's  Off  To  David  Susskind
Our  hat  is  off  to  David  Susskind for  appearing as  an
expert  witness  in  behalf  of   John  Henry   Faulk  in  his
$1,000,000  suit  against  AWARE,  Inc.,  Vincent Hartnett
and  that  wealthy  busy-body  grocer,  Lawrence  Johnson
of  Syracuse,  for  ruining  his  career  as  a  radio-TV  en-
tertainer.   It  was  no small thing  for  a  man with  as  far-
flung  interests  in  the  industry  as  Mr.  Susskind  to  ap-
pear  in  the  witness stand, to  name names and to reveal
the  full  extent  of  the  blacklist in  the  1950's.    He testi-
fied that  no less than 1,500 actors, writers, directors and
technicians   had  been  blacklisted  as   "politically  unde-
sirable."   He  said  that  in  programs he  produced during
that  period he  had  to  submit  the  names of  5,000 persons
in  the  entertainment field for  "clearance"  to  the  adver-
tising  firm  of  Young  &  Rubicam,  that  about one-third
were  rejected,  that  these  rejections  made his programs
"artistically  unworkable" and  led  to  much  hardship  for
performers.     He   testified  that   when  he   begged   the
agency  to  let  the  blacklisted confront their  accusers,  he
was  told  they  could  not  help  him  "they  were  caught  in
a   trap."   This   was   the   kind   of   Kafka-style  drama
played  out  behind  the  "free  world"  facade  in  the  50's.
We  wonder how  much  of  it  continues, and  to  what  ex-
tent  it  has  ebbed  only  because  performers  have  been
taught  the  hard  way  that  they  endanger  their  bread-
and-butter  if  they  dare take a  position  on controversial
issues.
can  use of  you."    It  says  "We  welcome  non-conformity  abroad
for  the  use  we  can  make  of  it  but  we  don't  encourage  it  at
home  even  in  so  non-political  a  field  as  painting."
Picasso  has  lived  by the  belief  that  the  artist must  take  part
in  the  great  struggles  of  his  time  for  peace  and  justice.    He
showed  his  conscience  had  not  been  drugged   by  Communist
Party  membership  when  he  spoke  up  for  the  Hungarian  revo-
lutionists  in  1956.   To   liberate   Soviet   artists  from  bureau-
cratic  interference  and  control  is  one  of  the  political  tasks  of
our  time.    Picasso  could  make  a  mighty  contribution  in  this
field and  help  his unhappy fellow  painters in  the  Soviet  Union
by sending  his  Lenin  Prize back.   With  it  should  go  a  message
saying  he  would  be  happy  to  accept  it  when  they,  too,  are
free  to  paint  as  they  please.
Geneva  Issues  Still  Available  Free  If  You   Send  Stamped   Self-Addressed     Envelope
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................................................................................—
Street
City   ............................................Zone.............State....................
5/7/62
Ejter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ...............................................................................
Street    :...........„................................................„...........................
City   _........................................Zone.............State....................
Shall  we  Mod  fift  announcement T         Tes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Watniniton   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's
eekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   flnt   In
r  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  flw  Int  In  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W..  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  L  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M. Stone.   Subscription:  16  in  the  U.  S.;  16  in
Canada.:   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   116  to  Europe;   *20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED