I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962mar12.pdf

============================================================

Behind  JFK's   Test  Resumption  Message
The  Impression  of  Candor  Without  The  Reality:  Taking  The  Fatal  Line  of  Least  Resistance
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  10MARCH  12,  1962
»'°'      WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Hidden  Truth  About  The  Nuclear  Arms   Race
The  most  revealing  portion  of  the  President's  speech  an-
nouncing  the  resumption  of   atmospheric  testing  lay  in  that
passage  where  he  said  the  leaders  of  the  Soviet  Union  were
watching and  "should  we fail  to  follow  the  dictates of  our  own
security,  they will chalk  it up,  not  to  good will, but  to  a  failure
of   will—not   to  our   confidence   in  Western   superiority,   but
to  our   fear   of   world  opinion,  the   very  world  opinion   for
which  they  showed  such  contempt.    They  could  well  be  en-
couraged  by such  signs of  weakness. . .  ."
This  was  not  the  sober  analysis of  military  or  technological
need.    It  was gamesmanship.    It  declared  that  we were  acting
out  of  fear—fear  of  what  the  Russians might  think.    It  also
implied  that   disregard  for  the  opinion  of  mankind  was,  or
could  be  regarded,   as  a  sign  of  strength.    These  are  psycho-
logical  and  political  considerations yet  they  came immediately
after  a  passage  in  which  Mr.  Kennedy had  assured the country
and  the  world  that  his  decision  to  test  in  the  atmosphere was
not  based  on  "political  or  psychological   reasons."
Fear  of  Not  Looking  Tough   Enough?
This  is  very  different   from  following  "the   dictates  of  our
own  security."     It   is  following  the  persistent  but  primitive
concept  that  the  way  to  deal  with  a  tough  guy  is  to  show  him
you're  as tough  as he  is.   A  decision  of  this  character  required
no  patient  sifting  of  radioactive  particles  gathered  by airborne
intelligence  patrols.     This   is  the   familiar   strategy   of   every
schoolyard  quarrel  and  bar-room  brawl.    Suppose  the  scien-
tific  experts  had  decided  that  "the  dictates  of  our  own  security"
required  no  testing.  In  such  a  case  which  considerations  would
determine  the  decision—the  real  needs  of  our  security  or  the
fear  of  not  looking  tough  enough?
In  this  realm  of  secrecy and  disingenuous  government  state-
ment,  no  one  can  be  sure  of  the  facts.    But  I  believe   that
in  this  case  "the   dictates   of  our  own  security"   called  for  a
decision   not  to  resume  tests  and   to  negotiate   a  new  mora-
torium  with  the  Russians  instead.    I  believe  this  decision  was
rejected   not   because   of   what   the   Russians  might   think   we
thought  they'd  think  (the  two governments  have  a  pretty  clear
idea  of  their  relative  strength;   only  the  peoples   are  in   the
dark)  but  because  of  what  the  American  people  might  think.
Such  a  decision  would   be  too  hard  to  explain  at  home.     It
would  require  a  kind  of  bold  leadership  for  which  Mr.  Ken-
nedy  has  shown  neither  taste  nor  capacity.
Mr.  Kennedy's  speech  was  most  striking  in  what  it  did  not
say.     It  did  not  say  the  Russians  have  forged   ahead  or  even
caught  up  with  us  in  nuclear  weapons  technology.     It  did  not
fall  back  on  the  myth  that  an  anti-missile weapon  may  be  just
around  the  corner  that  could   dramatically  change  the  world
balance  of  power.  These  would  have  been  falsehoods.   Let  us
look  at what  Mr.  Kennedy  did  say:
Nuclear  Scientist  Dissents
New  York,  March  5  (AP)—Dr.  Ralph  Lapp,  promi-
nent  atomic  physicist,  said  today  President   Kennedy's
decision   to  resume  nuclear  tests  was  a  political   one
and  that  further  tests  are  not  necessary  for  the  coun-
try's  national  security.   Appearing  on  the  NBC  Today
show,  Dr.  Lapp  said,  "From  a  technical  viewpoint,  I
do not  think that  these  tests  affect  the  balance  of  power
between  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  United  States."   He
added  that  he  felt  the  decision  was  a  'fairly  easy  politi-
cal  one'  because  'I   think   nuclear   tests  have   become
power  symbols  in  this  age  of  power  politics.'
—Baltimore  Sun,  March  6.
"In  short  last  Fall's  tests,  in  and  by  themselves,  did  not
give  the  Soviet  Union superiority  in  nuclear  power.    They
did,   however,  provide  the  Soviet  laboratories  with  a  mass
of  data  and  experience  on which, over  the  next  two  or  three
years,  they  can  base  significant  analyses,   experiments  and
extrapolations,   preparing   for   the  next   test   series  which
would  confirm  or advance their  findings.  And I  must  report
to  you that  further  Soviet  series,  in  the  absence  of  further
Western  progress, could  well  provide the  Soviet  Union  with
a  nuclear  attack  and  defense  capability  so  powerful  as  to
encourage   offensive  designs."
This  implies  that  the  Soviets do  not  yet have  a  nuclear  arsenal
sufficient   to  encourage  offensive   designs;  apparently  all   they
have  now  is  a  retaliatory  capacity.    It  also  implies  that  if  test-
ing  goes  on  they  will  acquire  such  an  arsenal.
The  fallacious part  of  the  paragraph  we  quoted  lies  in  the
phrase,  "in  the  absence  of  further  Western   progress."    This
embodies  a  delusion  of  semantic  origin  arising  from  the  pic-
ture  created  by  the  term  "arms  race."    In  a  race,  if  one  side
puts  on  a  fresh  spurt,  the  other  side  must  do  so,  too,  to  keep
up  or  stay  ahead.    But  the  facts  of  the  nuclear  arms  race  do
not  fit  this  metaphor.    Nuclear  weapons  technology   is  not  an
infinite   body   of  knowledge.    As.  Dr.   Hans  Bethe  said   in
his  famous  speech  at  Cornell  Jan.  5—
the  value  of  tests  has  been  grossly  exaggerated.    We  al-
ready  know  so  much  about  atomic  weapons  that  there  is
very  little  more to  learn.   We have  weapons  of  all  sizes  for
all   reasonable  military   purposes.     Only  relatively  minor
improvements  can  be  made  in  the  yield  of  weapons  for  *
given  weight.
He  spoke  of  the  "extensive   Russian  tests"  as  an  attempt  to
"catch  up  to  our  technology."    In  this  kind  of  "race,"  it  is
to  the  advantage  of  the  one  ahead  to  call  it  off  before  the  one
behind  catches  up.    The  longer  this kind  of  race  goes  on,  the
more  the  two  sides  draw  abreast.*
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
'.Thanks  to  Congressman  Kaatenmeier  the  Bethe  text  is
now  available  in  the  Congressional  Record  in  two  parts   (Feb.
26-27  at  pages  A1397  and  A1450).
3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  12, 1962
(Continued   from   Page   One)
If,  as  Mr.  Kennedy  said,  "further   Soviet  series,"   after  two
or  three  years  of  digesting  new  data,  "could  well  provide  the
Soviet  Union  with  a  nuclear  attack  and  defense  capability so
powerful  as  to  encourage  offensive  designs,"  then  it  is  to  our
national  interest  to  prevent  new  Soviet  test  series  from  taking
place.    These,  as our  own  experience  and  decision  shows,  must
take  place in  the  atmosphere  where  they are open  to  long  range
detection  without  any  special  system  of  international  surveil-
lance.    Underground   tests  have  proven  of  limited  value;  in-
deed  their  chief  effect  has  been  to  provide  the  Teller-military-
AEC  combination  with  a  way  to  confuse  the  public  and   to
hamper  the  test  ban  negotiations.    An  agreement  with  mod-
erate  inspection  might  have  been  reached  if  inspection require-
ments  had  not  been  pitched  so  high  as  to  make  the  Russians
fear   our   real   purpose   was   military   intelligence.    Thus   the
talks  broke   down   and   now   our   resumption   of   atmospheric
testing  will  give  the  Russians  the  excuse  they  want  for  that
new  series  of  tests  which  may  end  our  nuclear superiority.
How  Teller   Hurt  U.S.   Security
Time  will  reveal  that  those  who  campaigned  for  a  nuclear
test  ban  were  acting  in  the  best  interests of  U.S.  security while
those   who   oposed   it,  and   built  up   so  many  nightmares  to
frighten   the  public  away  from   it,  as  Dr.   Edward  Teller  and
the  AEC-Pentagon   crowd  did,  were  acting  against  our  coun-
try's  best  interest.    A  test  ban  would  have  frozen  the  nuclear
arms  race  at  a  point  of  clear  U.S.  technological  superiority.    It
still  could,  for  we  are  still  ahead.     But  this  would  require
courageous   leadership—in  explaining  the  true  nature  of   the
nuclear  arms  race  to  the  public,  in  freeing  ourselves  from  the
notion  that  only  an  elaborate  system  of   surveillance  within
Russia  could  police  a  new  ban,  and  in  defying  those interests
which  are  opposed   to  any  kind  of  halt  for  very  different   rea-
sons.    The  arms  industry  crowd  wants  new  tests  to  provide
new  models,  or   "generations,"   of   missiles  to  maintain  sales
as  they  maintain  sales  of  automobiles—with  new  gadget   im-
provements  every  year.
II
To  assess  Mr.  Kennedy's  test  resumption  message  one  must
clear  away  the  fog  of  propaganda.    An  obstacle  to  any  new
test  cessation  agreement  is  the  charge  that  the  Russians  broke
the  last  one.     But  is  this  quite  true?    How  many Americans
remember  that  on  December   29,  1959,  President  Eisenhower
announced  that  we  no  longer  considered  ourselves   bound   by
the  test  moratorium  and   declared  ourselves  "free   to   resume
nuclear  testing"  at  any  time  we  chose  to  do  so?    Mr.  Eisen-
hower  said  that  in  the  meantime  the  U.S.  "will  continue  its
active  program  of  weapon   research  development."     The  Rus-
sians  may  justly  be  condemned  for  starting  up  first,  but  it  can
hardly  be  said  that  they  broke  an  agreement.    Mr.  Eisenhower
had  publicly  abrogated  it  a  year  and  a  half   earlier.
A  second   factor  which  needs  evaluation  is  the  part  played
by  the  U-2  incident  six  months  after  Eisenhower's  declaration.
Few  Americans are  aware  of  the  extent  to  which  we  had  been
"inspecting"   Russia  via  the  U-2  or  its  consequences   for  Rus-
sian  security.   Thanks  to  the  recent  indiscretion of  Col.  Barney
Oldfield,  chief  press   officer   of  the  North  American   Defense
Command,  we  now  have  a  very  clear  view  of   how   effective
this  aerial surveillance was.    Col.  Oldfield  was  accused  of  vio-
lating  security  by  telling  a  space  writers  conference   at  Fort
Le  May  Agrees  With  Bethe  on   Anti-Missile
Q.  Would   an   anti-ICBM    [intercontinental     ballistic
missile]  in  Soviet   hands   seriously   diminish   the   'over-
whelming  superiority'  of   the   U.S.   to  which  you  have
referred?
A.  No.  .  .  .
Q.  What  effect  would  an  anti-ICBM  in  the  hands  of
one  nation  and  not  the  others   have   on  the  balance  of
power?
A.  It  might  have  none—or  very   little   effect.  .  .  .
Q.  Can  any  defense  actually  be  saturated,   as  a  rule?
A.  There    is   no   airtight,    perfect    defense    against
manned  bombers  or  missiles.
Q.  Is  there  none  in  sight?
A.  No,  There  never  has  been  one  in  sight.    There  is
no  such  thing  as  a  perfect   airtight  defense.  .  .  .
Q.  If  a  choice  had  to  be  made  between   the  B-70  and
an  anti-missile  missile,  which  should  it  be?
A.  I  don't  think  we  have  to  choose  one  or  the  other.
But  if  we  did have  to,  I  would take  the  offensive  weapon.
—Interview   with   Gen.   Curtis   Le   May,   Air    Force
Chief   of  Staff,    U.S.  Ncivs  &  World  Report,  Nov.  27,  '61.
Worth,  Texas,  that  we  knew  of  Soviet  space  failures  because
our  U-2  showed  Soviet  launching  pads  with  rockets  in  place
and  then  scorched  earth  at  the  same  sites.    Obviously  we  had
been  getting  a  pretty  close  look  behind  that  Iron  Curtain.
A   few  days  later  Col.   Oldfield  gave  an   interview  to   the
Canadian  Press  (New   York   Herald-Tribune,   Feb.   24)   which
left   less  to   inference:    "Col.   Oldfield    said   the   photographs
taken  by  the  U-2  planes  over  a  period  of  four  years  gave  the
U.S.   a  great   deal  of   information   on   Soviet  military   power,
including  the  location of  missile  and  atomic  sites,  aircraft  and
submarine  production  and  rocket  developments."     Then   Col.
Oldfield  added  that  although  the  U-2  flights  were  called  off in
May,  I960,  after  they  had  wrecked  the  summit,  "this  didn't
leave  us  exactly paralyzed  on  getting  Soviet  intelligence."    Col.
Oldfield,  Canadian  Press  said,  did  not  elaborate  on  this  hint.
There  is reason  to  believe that  we  have  reconnaissance  satel-
lites  which have  taken  over  the  photography  tasks  of  the  U-2.
Thus  an  Associated  Press  dispatch  from  Washington  January
5  (New   York   Post,  same  day)  quoted   "U.S.   intelligence   spe-
cialists"  as  saying  that  the  Soviets  were  lagging  in  the  ICBM
race.    "The  most  recent  intelligence evaluations,  sources  said,"
according  to  the   AP,   "credit  the  Russians  with   what   were
termed   'startlingly few'   liquid  fuel   ICBM's   in  place.    They
said  the  Russians have three or  four  fewer  than  the  U.S.  which
has  emplaced  45  liquid-fuel  Atlas  ICBM's."    Obviously,   U-2
or  no  U-2,  we  are  still  getting  close  enough   looks  at  Russia
to  count  missiles  in  place.
It  would  appear  that  while  the  public  has  been  told  about
the  impossibility of  disarmament  without  inspection,  and   the
Soviets  have  been  denounced  for  unwillingness  to  "open   up,"
the  Soviet  Union  has  been  subjected  to  very  thorough   inspec-
tion.    The  truth  about  this  did  not  begin  to  come  out  until
after  the  U-2  incident;  a  month  later,  in  June,  I960,  then  CIA
Director  Allen  Dulles  first  gave  the  Senate  preparedness   sub-
committee  a  secret  briefing  in  which  he  was  able  to   disclose
that  there  was  no  missile  gap.
Both  Dr.  Ralph  Lapp  in  the  Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scien-
tists  and  Dr.  Bethe  in his  Cornell  speech  declared  the  U-2  had
much  to  do  with  the   resumption   of   Soviet  nuclear  testing.
"Soviet  secrecy  as  to  their  strategic  bases,"  Dr.   Lapp   wrote
(p.   288,   BAS,  Sept.  1961),  "was   a  priceless  asset  and   must
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  12,
have  given  the  Kremlin  a  great  sense  of  security.   This  posi-
tion  of  security  was  undermined  by  the  U-2  affair.     Generals
in   the   USSR  must  have  viewed  their   fixed   1CBM   bases  as
highly  vulnerable  to  a  U.S.  first  strike  or  pre-emptive  attack.
To  redress this  loss of  security,  there  must  have  arisen  a strong
military  demand  for  solid-fueled,  mobile,  ballistic  missiles of
intercontinental  range."    Dr.   Bethe   expressed   similar  views.
He  said  that  as  long  as  the  Soviet  missiles  were  above  ground
"we  could  destroy  them  by  a  surprise attack  if  we  knew  their
exact  locations."    The   discovery  of  their  missile  bases  by  the
U-2s  meant  that the  Russians had  to  learn how  to  make  "solid
fuel  missiles  similar to  our  Minutemen  which  could  be  put  in
hardened  sites,"  i.e.  underground.    Dr.  Bethe  said  that  most
of  the  Russian  tests  were  in  the  one  to  five  megaton   range.
This  range,   according  to  Dr.   Bethe,  is  "just  the  range"  for
the  development   of   such  missiles.*
Seeking   A  Stabilized   Deterrent
To  this  extent  at  least  the  Soviet  tests  may  be  regarded   as
defensive  and  an  attempt  to  catch  up  with  our  technology  in
order  to  hide  their  missiles  underground.    By  putting  their
missiles  underground  as  a  secure  second  strike retaliatory  force
they  would  cut  down  the  temptation  of  a  first  strike  against
them,   the  so-called  counter-force  strategy  of   the   Air   Force.
As  Dr.  Bethe  said,  "The  major  part  of  their  test  series,  there-
fore,  may  well  have  reduced  rather  than  increased  the  danger
of   war."     The   whole   idea  of   a  stabilized  nuclear  deterrent
is  that  each  side  shall  possess  roughly  equal  missile  forces  so
well  hidden  that  they  cannot   be  destroyed  in   a  first  strike.
This  means  that  neither  can hit  the  other  without  the  certainty
of  devastating retaliation.
Ill
But  the  whole  idea  of  a  stabilized  nuclear  deterrent  is being
abandoned.    This   is  hidden  from   public  view  in  Mr.   Ken-
nedy's  message  which  gives  the  appearance  of  candor  without
the  reality.    Its  tantalizingly  opaque  phrases  hide  more  than
they  disclose.    Nowhere,   for  example,   does   it  touch  on   the
question   of   overkill.    How   much   is  enough?     The   House
Majority  leader,  Carl  Albert  of  Oklahoma,   a  man  not  given
D  reckless  utterance,  told  a  Jefferson-Jackson   Day  dinner   in
Richmond,  Va.,  recently "We  have five times  the  atomic  capa-
bility  of  the  Soviet  Union."     (Washington   Star,   Feb.    18).
;re  we  trying  to  preserve  or  widen  so  huge  a  margin ?    Dr.
lethe's  speech,   as  we  reported   in  our  issue  of  Jan.   15,  dis-
'osed  that  we  can  deliver  20,000  megatons—20,000  million
nii  of  TNT   equivalent!—in  1500  long  range  bombers  alone
.•ithout  counting  the  150  missiles  (50  ICBM's,  100  Polarises)
we  have  already.    How   do  you  divide   50  or   at   most   100
prime  targets   in  the  Soviet  Union  among   1500  planes   and
150  missiles?    "The   Russians,"  Dr.  Bethe  said,  "have  smaller
numbers   but   still   enough, to  destroy  us  many   times   over."
How  much  more  do  both   sides  require  before  they  sit  down
to  negotiate?
What-purpose  does  new  testing  on  our  part  serve  in  this
picture?    How  much  is determined  by military  and  how  much
What   U.S.   Hates  to  Admit
"Leftwing   Laborite  Barbara  Castle  said  atmospheric
tests  are  self-policing  and the  bulk  of  underground  tests
now  can  be  detected  by  instruments and  asked  whether
this  doesn't   provide a  basis  for  agreement   to  ban  fur-
ther  tests.    Macmillan  replied:  'While  not  accepting  in
full  what  you  say,  it  is  perfectly  true  that  the remark-
able   advances  of   scientific   instruments   may   make  it
easier  to  arrange   some  forms  of  international verifica-
tion  without  some  of  the  difficulties  which have hitherto
made  it  difficult   for  the  Russians  to  accept.'"
—Reuters  from   London  on  the  House   of    Commons
defense   debate,  Washington  Post,  March   6.
* The  AP  dispatch  cited  above  quoted  the  same  intelligence
specialists  as  reporting that  the  Soviets  would "trail  the  U.S.
by  about  half  a  year  in  getting  an  advanced ICBM  ready  for
combat."    Our  solid  fuel  Minuteman  is  supposed  to  become
"operational" this  summer but  the  first  Russian missile  of  the
same  type  not  until  early  1963.
by  muscle-flexing  considerations?    Does  the  clue  here  lie  in
the  new  propaganda   campaign   launched  with   a   speech   last
Oct.   21  by  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  Gilpatric?    This  re-
flected,  as  the  U.S.  News  and  World  Report  said  Nov.   6,  "A
decision  by  the  White  House  to  counter  propaganda—which
suddenly  has  taken  hold  around   the  world—that  the  U.S.  is
weak,   Russia   strong."     The   armament  lobby   in   its   bomber
gap  and  missile  gap  campaigns  had  pictured  the  Russians  as
ten  feet  tall  in  order  to  get  bigger  appropriations out  of   Con-
gress.    Now   our  answer  to  Khrushchev's  100  megaton   mon-
ster  was  to  picture  them  as  3  feet  small.    The   U.S.  News  &
World  Report   in  the  wake  of  Gilpatric's speech  said  that  the
ICBM  missile  gap  was  3  to  1 in  our  favor  (150   ICBM's  and
Polarises  against  less  than   50  ICBM's  on  the  Russian  side).
In  long  range  bombers  our  edge  was  given  as  10  to  1  (some
1500  to  only  150  for   the  Russians).
If  these  figures  were  correct,  or  anywhere  near  correct,  two
contradictory  conclusions  could   be  drawn   from   them.     One
was  that  with  this  overwhelming  lead  we  could  well  afford  to
negotiate  arms control,  reduction  and  disarmament.    The  other
was  that  with  a  lead  this  overwhelming  we  ought  to  be  able
to  dictate  terms.    The  latter  has  become  the  premise  of  policy.
Its  corollary  is  to  speed  up  the  arms  race  in  order  to  maintain
overwhelming  superiority.   The  increase of  almost  IO billions
or  nearly  25  percent  in  the  Kennedy  arms  budget  over  Eisen-
hower's—and  now  the  decision   to  resume  testing—seem  de-
signed,  as  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  Harlan   Cleveland   said
at  Rollins  College,   Florida,   Feb.   10  "to   prevent   our   Soviet
rivals  from  getting  ahead,  or  thinking  they  can  get  ahead,  in
the   hidden  and   costly   game   of   nuclear  deterrence."    This
policy  of  course,  is  made  to  order  for  the military-industrial
complex  which  lives  on  the  arms  race.    Just  how   it  can  be
reconciled  with  Mr.  Kennedy's  "peace  race"  was  demonstrated
in   agile   fashion   by  Arthur  Schlesinger,  Jr.,   the   President's
assistant,  when  he  told   the  Young   Democrats   in  San  Diego
Jan.  6,  "To  persist  in  piling up  the  weapons  of  mass  destruc-
tion   is  a  tragic  choice.     But   we   live   in   a  world   of   tragic
choices;  and  there  is no  point  in kidding  ourselves that  painful
problems  have painless  solutions.    It  is  an  irony  of  our  times
that  the  arms  race  offers  the  only  road  to  arms  control.  .  .  ."
This  neatly  accommodates  the  Kennedy  policy  of  running  an
arms   race  and   a  peace  race  at  the   same  time,  though   even
Prof.  Schlesinger only  speaks  of  this  as  a  way  to  arms  control,
not  disarmament.   The  dream  is  of  an  arms  control  in  which
we  are  so  strong  that  we  can  do  the  controlling.    This  is  a
variant  of  the  old  Acheson-Dulles  belief  that  if  only  we  build
up  overwhelming  power  we  can  dictate  an  unconditional  sur-
( Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  12,  1962
The  New  Military  Strategy  By  Which  We  Hope  to  Dictate  Terms
(Continued   from   Page    Three)
render.    But  behind  these  rationalisations  h'es  a  simple  policy,
the   policy  of   following  the   line   of   least   resistance,  which
is  the  arms  race.
The  line  of  least  resistance is the  only  Grand  Design  visible
in  the  Kennedy  Administration.    A  man  who  will  not   put
up  a  real  fight  even  for  adequate  aid  to  education  is unlikely
to  put  up  a  real  fight  for  disarmament. Mr.  Kennedy,  to  judge
from  the  eloquent  words  he  utters  on  the  subject  from  time  to
time,  is  aware  of  the  deadly  danger,  but  like  Eisenhower  he
is  too  anxious  to  remain  popular  with  everybody  to  do  any-
thing  much  about  it;  to  be  that  popular  one  must  reign  in-
stead  of  rule.    In  the  absence  of  effective  Presidential   leader-
ship  to  the  contrary,   the  White  House  is  pulled  along  in  the
wake   of   the   powerful   industrial  and   bureaucratic   interests
which  would  be doubly  hurt  by disarmament, first in  the  profits
they  draw  from  it,  and  second  in  the  reorientation   of  national
energies  to  fill  the  armament  gap.     Reconstruction   at   home
and  abroad  would  not  require  so many  Generals  and  it  would
not   be  the   same   luxurious  cost   plus   operation   as  building
missiles.
Too  Hard  to  Explain
I  regard  the  stories  about  Mr.  Kennedy's  agonizing  over  the
decision  to  resume  testing  with  jaundiced  eye.    I  do  not  mean
to  imply  that  Mr.  Kennedy  may  not  have  been  agonized  per-
sonally.    But  no  one  who  has  watched   this   Administration
can  believe  that  any  other  decision  was  likely.    //  would  have
been  too  hard  to  explain.    It  would   have  meant  a   fight.   It
would  have  been  too  out  of  character.    I  do  not  mean  to say
that   Mr.  Kennedy,   a  clever   man  with   clever   advisers,   will
not  seek  to  find  ways  to  do  enough,   or  seem  to  do  enough,
about  disarmament  to  keep  the  peace  people  happy,  too,  along
with  the  arms  people.    But that only means  that  Mr.  Kennedy,
in  going  with  the  tide,  will  do  it  cleverly.
The  arms  race  undertow  is  substituting  for  nuclear   deter-
rence  a  much  more  adventurous  policy  in  which  we  hope  to
make  the  Russians feel  that,  if  they  provoke  us  too  far,  we  are
strong  enough  to  make  a  first strike.   This  is why,  despite  the
discovery  that  there  is  no  missile  gap,  we  plan  to  build  up  a
force  of  some  1600  missiles  by  1965.     Even  hardened   under-
Memorable  Non-Sequitur  Itept.
Independence,  Mo.,  Mar.  3  (AP)—Harry   S.  Truman
said   today   President   Kennedy   'is  on  the  right   track'
on  his  decision  to  resume  atmospheric  testing.    'It  was
the  proper  thing  to  do.   We  should  never  have  stopped
it.     Where  would   we  be  today  if  Thomas  Edison  had
been   forced   to  stop  his  experiments  with   the  electric
light   bulb?'
—Washington  Star,  March  4.
ground   solid   fuel   missile  bases  are  not   invulnerable  if  one
side  can  afford  to  aim  half  a  dozen  ICBM's  at  each  ICBM  on
the  other.     It  is  against  this  background   that  one  can  better
understand  that  passage  in  Mr.  Kennedy's  message  where  he
said  we  must  test  in  order  to  "enable  us  to  add  to  our  missiles
certain  penetration  aids  and  decoys,  and  to  make  those  missiles
effective  at  higlvaltitude  detonations,   in  order   to  render   in-
effective  any anti-missile or  interceptor  system  an  enemy  might
some  day  develop."    This  smacks  of  first  strike,  and  it  is  al-
ready   planning   for   the   d«//-anti-missile.     The   direction   in
which  all  this  leads  on  the  military plane was indicated  in  Sec-
retary  McNamara's   speech  at  Chicago   Feb.   17  when  he   pic-
tured   a  situation  in  which  we  would   be  so  strong  that  we
could  knock  out the  enemy's  bases  and  still  have  enough power
left    to   use   it   "as   a   bargaining   weapon—by   threatening
further  attack.  .  .  .  Our  large  reserve  of  protected  firepower
would  give  an  enemy  an  incentive  to  avoid  our  cities  and  to
stop  a  war."    This  is  the  first  public  appearance   of  a  new
"counter-force"   policy  favored  by  the  Air  Force  under  which
we  could  smash  enemy  bases  but  leave  his  cities  as  "hostages"
to   prevent   retaliation   against   ours.    Here  the   limited   war
fallacy  emerges  in  giant  dimensions.    This  is  a  new  kind  c
"pause,"  a  pause  after  a  nuclear  attack.    It  expects  the  Rus
sians,  after  the  horror  of  a nuclear  attack,  to  exercise  a  ratior
ality  and  restraint  hardly  to  be  expected   from  a  colony
Christian  saints.   It  also  assumes  that  they,  too,  will  build
many  missiles  they  also  will  always  have  a  reserve,  perhaps^
some  Siberian  deep-freeze.    How  stop  such  lunacy  when   .^
Kennedy  himself  talks  in  his  resumption  message  as  if  n.
tests  would  somehow  make  it  possible  to  win  and  survive
thermonuclear  war?
We'll  Send  A  Free  Copy  of  This  to  Friends  If  You  Send  A  LONG  Stamped   Addressed   Envelope
IE  Stone's  Weekly
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ......................................................................................—
Street    ...........................................................................................
City   ..........._.........................Zone.............State....................
3/12/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   N«me  ............................................................................
Street    ........._..........................................................................
City  ......_4_.........................Zone.............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C
I.   F.  Stone'9  Weekly.    Second
September  and
weekly  D'
Kond  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618   Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W..  Washington.  D. C.  An  independent
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M. Stone.    Subscription:  $5  m  the  U.  S.;  $6  in
"••>»<!»•   «10   i>1«ewhpre.     Air  Mail  rates:   S16  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED