I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jul09.pdf

============================================================

Was  Dr.  Soblen's  Trial  Fair? P.  4
The  Gomulka  Interview  Life  Magazine  Decided  Not  to  Print,  P.  2;  Counter-Force  and  Co-Existence,   P.  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  X,  NO.  27
JULY  9,  1962»
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Some  Missing  Faces   in  That  Mexican  Welcome
The  President  and  Mrs.  Kennedy  are  genuinely   simpatico,
and  deserved  their  Mexican  triumph.    But  though  the  Latins
love fiestas, this  kind  of  pageantry  should  not  be  mistaken  for
reality.    It  is made  to  order  for  the  big  picture  magazines but
it  is  not  a  substitute  for  the  thinking  required  if  we  are  to
maintain  friendship in  this hemisphere.    A  useful  exercise is to
try  and  see the  visit as many Latin Americans will  see it.    For
them  it  will  be  symbolic that  though  Russian and  other  Soviet
envoys were in  the  diplomatic corps  which exchanged  greetings
with   the  President   on   his   arrival,  the   Cuban  Ambassador,
Carlos  Lechuga,  was  not  invited.   It  is,  indeed,  difficult  to  see
how  they could  have met  gracefully.   But  the  point  is that  for
all  the  rhetoric  about  revolution  in  Mr.  Kennedy's  address,
when  one  really  happens  in  this  hemisphere  we  greet  it  with
enmity  and  try  by  boycott  to  isolate  and  destroy  it.
Cuban  Sugar  and  Mexican  Oil
The   embargo   on   Cuban  sugar  recalls  all   too   freshly   for
Mexicans  the  world-wide  boycott  we  organized  against  their
oil  after  Cardenas expropriated  the  American companies in  the
30's,  forcing the  most  anti-Fascist regime  in  this hemisphere—
more  friendly  than  any  other  to  the  Spanish  Republic—into
strange  deals  with  the  Axis  to  find  some  outlet  for  its  petro-
leum.    Those  were  the  days  of  FDR's  Good  Neighbor  Policy
as  these  are  the  days  of  the  Alianza  para  progreso,  but  Latin
Americans  have  had  bitter  experience  with  progressive   U.S.
administrations.   They  felt  the  Big  Stick  in  Teddy  Roosevelt's.
Wilson  constantly interfered  after  the  Mexicans  overthrew  the
long  cruel  dictatorship  of  Diaz,   and   he  helped   the   power-
hungry  Carranza to  take  over.   Mr.  Kennedy  praised  Mexico's
progress  in  land  reform,  but  when  the  big  step  forward  came
under  Cardenas, it was only  made possible  by a battle with  the
Church  and  the  oil  companies  of  which  the  U.S.  disapproved;
had  it  not  been  for  the  great  struggle   shaping  up  in  Europe,
we  might  again  have  sent  troops  into  Mexico.     Even  today
Cardenas,  who  did  more  fpr  the  poor   and  landless  than  any
other  leader  in  Mexico's  history,  even  than  its  Indian  Lincoln,
Juarez,  is regarded  with  disfavor by the  U.S.    He,  too,  was  not
there  for  a  handshake.    We   like  the  revolutions   best  when
they  become  corrupt  and  moribund  as  has  Mexico's.
This  was  not  the  best   backdrop   for  that   passage   in   Mr.
Kennedy's  speech  where  he  said,  "We  do  not  seek  to  change
or  direct  any  nation's  political  or  economic  system."   Another
passage  which  will  sound  differently  to  them  than  to  us  was
his  reference  to   "a   common   determination   to   preserve   the
blessings   of   freedom."      Several   thousand   Mexicans   were
rounded  up  for  protective  custody  on  the  eve of  the  visit.   The
famous  muralist,  Siqueiros,  and  dozens   of  labor   leaders   are
The  Prayer   We  Favor
The   tidal   wave   of   piety   stirred  up  by   the   school
prayer  decision  has  engulfed  us,  too,  and  we   offer   a
few   religious  items.    We  note   with   admiration  how
well   the   President  at   press   conference  handled   the
ticklish  question  of  his  own  reaction  to  the  Court's  rul-
ing.    We  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  the   President
of    Mexico  did   not    accompany   President   and   Mrs.
Kennedy  to  the  Shrine of  Guadulupe.    "Mexicans  said,"
the  Washington  Post  alone  reported,  "that  it  would  be
in  violation  of  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution  for  Presi-
dent   Lopez   Mateos   to   attend  mass."     Separation  of
Church  and  State  is  sharper  there,  because  every  lib-
erating  upsurge  from   Juarez   to   Cardenas  has   found
the   Catholic   Church   on   the   side   of   reaction.    That
these  tendencies  are  not  absent  in  our  own  hierarchy
was  demonstrated when  Col. Chas. E.  McGee,  an  Army
chaplain,   delivered  the   invocation  at   Dr.   Schwarz's
poorly   attended   "Christian   Anti-Communist   Crusade"
in  Madison  Square Garden  June  28—as  Cardinal  Spell-
man's   representative!   If   this  inspires  prayer,  it   is
prayer  to  keep  Church  and State  firmly  apart  here,  too.
still  in  the  jails  where  Lopez  Mateos  threw  them  months  ago
to  break  a  railroad  strike.    Political  freedom  is  strictly circum-
scribed  in  Mexico  today, and  our  example  is  not  always good.
Only  a  few  months  ago  the  State  Department  refused   to  let
Mexico's  brilliant  young  novelist,  Carlos  Fuentes,   enter   this
country  on  invitation  of  a  major  TV  network  for  a  public  de-
bate  on  Castroism,  a  subject  on  which  we  pull  down  our  own
Iron  Curtains.
Our  Own  Latifundistas
Latin  American  intellectuals  may  feel  more  forgiving,  how-
ever,  if  they  notice  that  Mr.  Kennedy's  problems  lit  home  »re
not  so  different  from  theirs.    We,  too,  have  our    lattfundistas,
who  thwart  democratic  aspiration.    Tax  reform  is  as   difficult
here  as  there;  Senator  Kerr   stands  guard  over  the  loopholes
that  mean  millions  to  the  oil  and  gas  barons.    Even  a  minor'
suggestion   for   withholding   taxes  on  dividends   and   interest
raises  a  storm.    The  effort  to  rationalize  farm  price   supports
fails.     Mr.  Kennedy  is  punished   because  he  dared   to   hold
down  steel  prices  after  holding  down  steel  wages.    The  privi
leged  are  up  in  arms  because  the  less  fortunate  want  medical
care  in  their  old  age.    It  is  only  when  the  rich  and   powerful
approve,  as they  do  on  tariff  reform,  that  the  U.S.  Chamber  of
Commerce  graciously allows  our  charming young  President  his
one triumph  at this  session  of  Congress.    Mr.  Kennedy  is more
to  be pitied  than  scorned.
1  0  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Sttnic's  Weekly,  July  9,  1962
Henry  Luce,  Like  the  Russians,  Only  Likes   to  Print  What  Follows  His  Line
Gomulka's  Views  on  Co-Existence,  and  West  Germany  Not  to  Life's  Taste
(From   Gomulka's   Rejected   Replies  to   Life)
"There  are   people   who   proceed   on   the   assumption  that
peaceful   co-existence  among   states   favors  Communists  only
and—they  argue—what  favors  them,  must  be  contrary  to  the
interests  of  the  capitalist  states.    This  reasoning  is  behind  the
policy  pursued by  many  influential  quarters in  the  West  which
regard   our   policy   of   peaceful  co-existence  as   a  Communist
maneuver.  .  .  . The  only  alternative  to  peaceful  co-existence  is
a  genocidal  destructive war.   Such  is  the  challenge of  our  days.
There  is  no  other  choice.  .  .  .
"In  a sense  politics can  be  likened  to  technology.    If  a  policy
is  to  be  constructive,  it  must  take  into  account  all  the  realities
of   the  current  world  situation.   .   .   .  But  there  are  countries
which  have  frozen  their  foreign   policies  and  conduct  them  or
try  to  conduct  them  in  the  seventh  decade  of  our  century  by
means employed during  the  first  few  decades of  our  century.  . .
The  Reality  of  Soviet   Power
"For  many  years the  United States  was  the  strongest country
in  the  world, thus  holding  a  dominating  position.  Today  there
is another  power,  at  least equal  in strength, the  U.S.S.R.   From
this  fact  the  U.S.  has  failed   to  draw  proper  conclusions,  not
recognizing  the   USSR  as  an   equal  part/ier   with   whom   it  is
necessary  to  seek  an  understanding,  while  taking  into  account
mutual  interests.  .  .  .
"Only  a  few  years  ago  general  and  complete  disarmament
might  have  appeared  as  a  slogan  of  pacifists.  Today  it  finds  its
place  in  the  program  of  the  CPSU  and ...  in unanimous reso-
lutions  of  the  United  Nations.
"Can  anyone  seriously  suppose  that  these  new  and   funda-
mental   principles  of   the  Soviet  Union  and   the  world  Com-
munist   movement   proclaiming   the   possibility   of   avoiding  a
new  world  war,  peaceful   co-existence  of  States  and   also   the
possibility  of  general  disarmament  have  been  adopted  by  the
Communists  in other to  mislead nations? ...
"The   Soviet Union,  together  with  other  socialist  states,  has
in  fact  evolved  its  policy,  adapted  it  to  the  present  historical
situation.  .  .  .  and  the  hard  requirements imposed on  all  states
by  the  destructive  force  of  nuclear  weapons  and  ballistic mis-
siles.    As  soon  as  the  West  does  likewise  .  .  .  mutual  distrust
and  the  dangers of  nuclear  war  will  be  dissipated. .  . .
"The    assurances   given   by   Western    statesmen   that   the
Bundeswehr's  integration  in  the  armed  forces  of  NATO  pro-
tects  the  socialist  states  from  aggression  by  German  militarism
Life's   High  Cultural   Standards
A  painful  impression   has  been  created  in  Poland   by
Life  Magazine.     Inserted  in  the  issue  of  June  22  sent
to  certain  advertising  agencies,   Life   placed   a   special
"memo"   answering  rumors  that  it   had  (as   Life  said)
"riveted  another  bolt  on  the   Iron  Curtain"  by  sending
a  rejection  slip  to  "a  Hed  premier."    According   to  Life,
a   manuscript  arrived  one  day   from   Gomulka   which   it
rejected   because   it   "parroted"   the   Russian   line.     The
Polish   version   is   that   Life   sent   Isaac   Don   Levine   to
Warsaw   last   November   to  ask  an  interview  with  Go-
mulka.     The   latter   finally   offered   to   answer    written
questions.    The  answers   were  then  rejected.    The  ques-
tions   and  answers   were   published   July   1  in   Trybuna
Ludu,  Warsaw's   leading  daily.    We  give  excerpts  here
from   the   text   distributed   by   the   Polish   Embassy   in
Washington.     "Through    the   years,"   Life   said   unctu-
ously   in  its   memo,   it   had   published   "the   first   person
views  of  dozen  of  world  leaders"  (it  cited   Elsenhower,
Churchill,   Nasser,    de   Gaulle,   Truman   and   Gen.   Van
Fleet),   but   they   had   to   "meet   the    uncompromisingly
high  editorial  standards   made  possible  by  the   freedom
of  our  culture."    We  can  imagine  the  snorts  from   Life
if   Izvestia  solicited  but  then   declined  to  print  the   re-
plies   of   an  American   leader   on  the   ground   that   they
did   not  meet   (zvestia's  cultural  standards!     The   inci-
dent    hurt    the    "liberalizers"    in   Warsaw,    who    have
spoken  well  of  the  U.  S.  press.
are  but  political   fairy-tales.     When   the  German  Federal  Re-
public  was  admitted  to  NATO,  it  was  still  a  weak  state.    Its
stronger  partners  in  this  Pact  could  impose  their  will  on  her.
Today  the  situation  is  reversed.     It  is  no  exaggeration  to   say-
that  in  NATO  the  German  Federal  Republic  is  in  fact  only
second   to  the  United  States.     The   Bundeswehr  has  become
NATO's  principal  force  in  Europe.    And  this  is what counts.
Who   is  strong  imposes  decisions.  .  .  .
"At  present  there exists within  NATO an  intention through
this  organization  to  place  nuclear  weapons  at  the  disposal  of
the  German   Federal  Republic  by  transforming  NATO  into
the  'fourth  nuclear  power.' ...  If  such  a  situation  came about
it  would  be  much  more  difficult  to  turn  the  world  back   from
the  road  leading to  nuclear  catastrophe.
"The  Bundeswehr's finger on  the  pushbutton  of  the  Ameri-
can   nuclear   weapons   would   .   .   .   increase   its   influence   on
NATO  policy,  still  further  encourage German  militarists  and
revanchists,  bolster  up  their  aggressive spirit.  .  .  ."
When  Asked  About  Cuba,  Laos  and
"Q.  Would  you  favor  the  cessation,  by  the  USSR  and  its
associates,   of   supplying    arms   to   incendiary   elements   in
Laos,  Vietnam  and  particularly Cuba,  so  as  to  extinguish  in
those  areas  the  smoldering  fires  which  threaten   to  consume
all  mankind  in   a  nuclear  conflagration?
"A.  Not  only   do  I  favor  it  but  .  .  .  the  Soviet  Union   has
repeatedly  suggested  .  .  .  that  the  two  sides  refrain    from
supplying  arms  to  certain  regions  of   the   world,  to   which
the   West   refused   to  agree.     Also,   it   is   noteworthy   that
arms  supplies   from   socialist   countries   came,   as   a   rule,   in
reply  to  American  arms  supplies.
"There  seems  to  be  a  difference  between   the  meaning  of
the   word   'incendiary  elements'  as   interpreted  by   Life  and
by  myself.     Your  question   implies  that  the  USSR  or  other
Vietnam,  Gomulka  Made  Tart  Replies
socialist   countries   are   supplying   arms   to   incendiary    ele-
ments  in  other  countries,  including   Cuba.    In  actual   fact,  it
is  the  United   States  that   supplies  arms   to  Cuban   counter-
revolutionaries.   .  .  .  The  Government   of   Fidel   Castro  re-
ceived  arms   from   some  socialist   countries   when   capitalist
countries,   having   refused   to  sell  arms  to  him,  proceeded  to
organize   counter-revolutionary   detachments.    .   .  .
"The   civil  war  in  Laos  is  the  outcome  of   the  policies  of
the   previous   U.S.   Administration.   .  .  .  The   American   in-
tervention   in   South   Vietnam,   continuously    increasing   in
scope,   arouses   growing   concern   the   world   over.     Finding
no   support   whatever   amongst   the   people   of   South   Viet-
nam,   the   local   regime   maintains   itself   in   power    through
mass  terror.  . . ."              —From,  the  Gomulka  interview
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  9, 1962
By  The  Author  of  "The  Limits  of  Defense":  Strategy,  Politics  and  The  19th   Century
Balanced Deterrent  Implies Co-Existence But  Counter  Force  Nuclear  Victory
By   Arthur  I.  Waskow
Now  unhappily  coexisting  within  the  Kennedy Administra-
tion  are  two  opposed  views  of  the  world,  both  out  of   date.
Their   coexistence   gives   us   the   military   Mix   and   a   foreign
policy  that  vacillates between   seeking   "rollback"  and   settling
for   "stalemate."     Which  element   in  the  military  Mix   domi-
nates  at  any  one  point  may  be  to  angelftloghh*    an  index  of
which   foreign   policy  is  coming   into ascendancy.
The   implication  of  one  of  the  competing  strategies,   "coun-
ter-force,"   is  that   military   power   or   the   threat  thereof   can
roll  back  the  Communist   empire.    The   implication  of  its  op-
posite  number,   "minimum  deterrence,"   is  that  unhappily  the
Communist  empire  is  here  to  stay  and   must  be  accepted   as  a
fact  of  life.
Discriminating    H-Bombs
"Counter-force"    suggests   that  H-bombs   can  be  trained   to
destroy  other   H-bombs   but  let  people  alone.     If  two  nations
try  this  gambit  but  one  can  grow  and  train  a  great  many more
H-bombs  than  the  other,  that  nation  has  a  "credible first-strike
capability."    For  it  can  threaten  to  attack  the  enemy's  forces
and  destroy  them  without  fear  that  the  far  weaker  enemy  can
destroy  its  forces.    And  since  the  enemy  is  of  course  carefully
adhering   to  the  arrangement   not  to  kill   people,   the  nation
with  a  bigger  brood  of  H-bombs  can  "win"  or  "prevail"  with-
out  much  damage  to  itself.
What  this  means  is  that  in  a  great  crisis  the  United  States,
with   a  counter-force  strategy  according  to  Defense   Secretary
McNamara  and  with  overwhelming  thermonuclear  power  ac-
cording   to  Deputy   Secretary  Gilpatric,  can   demand   a   Com-
munist   retreat.     Obviously,   this   possibility   appeals   to   those
who   cry  for   "total   victory."     These   men   are  19th-century
Americans  in  a  late  20th-century  world.    They   remember  de-
feating   Indians,   Britain,  Mexico,   Spain,   and   even  Germany
and   Japan.     They   remember   that   American   free    enterprise
conquered   new  territory, won   new  markets,  and   had  world-
wide  respect.    These  descendants  of  the  manifest-destinarians
do  not  understand  why  the  advent  of  the  H-bomb  might  make
difficult  the  march  to  far  frontiers.
Opposed  to  these   19th-century  Americans  are  what   might
be  called   19th-century  Europeans.     They   model  their  foreign
policy  on  the   19th-century   balance   of  power   and   they   scorn
the   "i-llusion  of  American  omnipotence"  as  a  dream  of  youth
and   innocence.    They   counsel   patience  and  cunning,
  f
he  vir-
tues  of  19th-century diplomats.    They  look  forward  to  a  world
in  which  the  United   States  is  secure  but  its  power  limited, the
Soviets  and  Chinese   feel  secure  but  their  power   is  contained,
and  the  arts  of  diplomacy  and  old-fashioned  limited  war  can
be  used  to  settle  conflicts  of  interest.
The    preferred   strategy   of   such    men   is   "minimum"    or
"stable"  or  "balanced"  deterrence.    They  believe  that  if  each
side builds a  limited  number  of  thermonuclear  missiles, enough
to  destroy  the   other   side's   cities,  and   if   each   side   carefully
makes  this  limited missile  force  "invulnerable"  to  attack,  and
A  Modest   Proposal  on   Guerrillas
The    new    faddists     for    "counter-insurgency"    and
"guerrilla  action"  hark  back  to  America's  frontier  days
for  evidence   that  we  make  good  guerrillas.    They   for-
get  that  the  Green  Moutnain  Boys  were  fighting  in  and
for  their  own  country,   not   in  either  Viet-Nam   or   Po-
land.    If  this  fad  for  guerrillas  continues,   we  suggest
that   the   idea   be   tried   out   in  one   country   that   might
arouse   among   some  Americans   both  the  zeal  for   revo-
lution   and  the  identification  with  the   people   that   the
Green  Mountain Boys  had.    The  testing  ground  we  pro-
pose  is  South  Africa,   and  of  course  the  guerrillas  we
suggest  are American  Negroes.
The  guerrillas-to-be   might   be  trained   in   Mississippi
with  a  few  forays,  both  violent  and  non-violent,  against
county   sheriffs   or   local   radio   stations.     The   training
cadres   could  be  made   up  of   CORE  and   Black   Muslim
veterans  of  action.    A  series  of  controlled    experiments,
comparing   the  success   of   violent   and  non-violent   ac-
tion,  could  thus  be  arranged.     When  training  was   com-
plete,  the  new  War  Corps  could  be  smuggled  into  South
Africa.     Then   we  could  announce   our  intention   to  aid
in  the  overthrow  of   the   Afrikaaner   government   on  or
before  July 4, 1970.
Since  the  Soviet  Union  does  not  have  a  Negro  popu-
lation,  it  could  not  match  our  program;  so  we  would  at
once   win   a   major   propaganda    victory.     By   1970   we
would  have   a  full  file  on  modern   guerrilla   techniques.
It  is  also  probable  that   till  1970  the  attention   of  civil-
rights   enthusiasts    would   be   riveted   on  South   Africa,
so  that  American   politicians   would  be  happily  released
from   pressure   to   pass   civil   rights   legislation.—A.W.
*  Opposite  of  demonologists;  hence,  students  of  power   shifts
in  the  White  House.
if  neither  side  tries  seriously  to  protect   its  populace  from  at-
tack,  then  both  sides  will  be  "deterred."    Neither  can  strike
first without  committing  suicide  as  well  as  murder.
Since  minimum  deterrence  could   only  be  used   in  response
to  an  H-bomb  attack,  this  strategy  would  require  conventional
and  commando   forces  to  deal  with  lesser  clashes.    Thus  the
20th-century  weapons  would   be  nullified,  instead  of  being  in-
corporated   into  the  regular  arsenal  as  "counter-force"   strate-
gists  would  urge.    And  thus  the  United  States  would  accept  a
basic  world-wide  stalemate  of  opposed  imperial  powers—like
the  Kaiser  and  the  Tsar,  before    1914.
The   bomb,   of   course,   makes   the   19th   century  obsolete—
either  in  its  American  or  European  versions.     It  is  possible  to
imagine  a  policy  that  would  temporarily  use  the  minimum de-
terrent  to  preserve  a  temporary  military  safety,  while  redirect-
ing  the   resources   that  now  need   our  counter-force  weapons.
Those  resources  could  go  both  into the non-military  conquest  of
Space  (with  inspection  invited  to  prove  that  the  conquest  was
indeed   non-military)  and   into  the   provision   of   liberty  and
food  for  the  hungry  nations.     Such  a  policy  would  make  dis-
armament  much  more  likely,  since  it  would  press  the  Soviets
into  non-military  forms  of  competition  with  us.    Such  a  policy
would  also  break  through  the  stalemate of  terror  to  reduce  the
military  supports  for  totalitarian  states  and  to  win  victories  for
free   men.
But  unfortunately  such  a  policy  belongs  in  the  20th  century.
It   will   therefore   not   be   accepted   until   the   21st—which   is
probably  too  late.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  9, 1962
Behind  the  Appeal  the  Supreme  Court  Refused  to  Hear
How  the  Soblen  Trial  Fell  Below  the  Highest  Standards  of  Justice
Dr.  Robert  A.  Soblen's  story begins  with one witch  hunt  and
ends  with  another.     The  first  was  the  witch  hunt   ithin  the
Communist  movement  against  Trotzkyists.  The  second  was  the
witch  hunt   in  the  United   States   against   Communists.     The
story  is  an  ugly  one.    He  and  his  brother,  Jack  Soble,  became
Communists   in  their  student  days  in  Germany  in  the   1920s,
were  expelled  for  Trotzkyism  in   1929   and   then   recruited  by
the  GPU   to  spy  on  their  former  Trotzkyist  comrades.     The
story  begins  with  the  betrayal  of  party comrades  and  ends  with
the  betrayal  of  the  wife  and  friends  who  put  up  $100,000  in
bond  for   him.
It  must  be  admitted  however,  that  his  trial  and  sentence  did
not  conform  to  the  highest  standards  of  justice.  The  Court  of
Appeals  in  upholding   his  conviction  said  it  thought   the  sen-
tence  imposed  upon  him  "somewhat  harsh."    His  brother  was
given   7  years,  Dr.   Soblen   life   imprisonment.     Yet   in  any
other  type  of  prosecution,  the  statute  of  limitations would  have
debarred  action  and  the  necessary  evidence  of  intent  to  obtain
American  defense   secrets  was  tenuous.
On  A  Psychotic's  Testimony
Two  briefs  amicus  were  filed   on  his  behalf.    A  group  of
psychiatrists  wanted  the  Supreme  Court  to  decide  whether   a
man  could  be  convicted  on  the  testimony  of  a  psychotic.    The
American   Civil  Liberties   Union   wanted   the   Court   to  spell
out  "the   full  extent  of  the  obligation  of  government   prosecu-
tors  to  disclose  information  of  value  to  the   defense."
Newly   retained   counsel   on   appeal   had   asked   for   a  new
trial  on  the  ground   that  the  defense  had  been  unaware    (1)
of  testimony  by  a  prison  psychiatrist that  Dr.  Soblen's  brother
was  too  sick  mentally  to  tell  truth  from  falsehood  and  (2)   of
facts  which  cast  doubt  on  the  other  key  witness,  a  Mrs.  Beker.
The  plea  for  a  new  trial was  rejected  on  the  ground  that  these
facts  were  "readily  available  to  a  diligent   defender."
One  crucial  point,  however,  could  not  have  been  unearthed
at  the  time  even  by  diligent  counsel.    The  prosecution  with-
held  the  fact  that  Dr.  Hans  Hirschfeld,  a  prominent   Socialist
official  of  West  Berlin,  had  denied  before  a  Grand  Jury  here
under  oath   Mrs.   Beker's  story  that  she  passed  Dr.   Soblen   a
If   It  Weren't  The  FBI
Or.  Soblen  is  the  sixth  convicted  Communist  in  re-
cent  years  to  skip  bail.    The  first  was  Gerhart   Eisler
who  fled  in  1949  after   the  Supreme  Court   refused   to
hear  his  appeal  from  a  conviction  for  contempt of   the
Un-American  Activities  Committee.   Two  years   later,
four  top  Communists  eluded  the  authorities  and  went
into  hiding  after  their  Smith  Act  convictions  were  up-
held.    Dr.  Soblen  made  his  getaway  a  few  days  after
the  Supreme  Court  turned down  his  appeal.    If  he  had
fled  to  Russia  instead  of  Israel,  his  whereabouts  might
still  be  unknown,  the  FBI  still  looking  for  him.
If  any  other  agency  were  involved,  we  may  be  sure
there   would   be  indignant  editorials   asking   why   sur-
veillance  was  so  slack.    The  FBI  boasts  a  network  of
informers.     It  has   so   many   in   the  Communist  Party
that  sometimes  they  inform  on  each  other,  as  came  to
light    in    recent    Un-American   Activities   Committee
hearings  in  Cleveland.   If  it  were  an  agency  less  sacro-
sanct,  with  a  chief  less  the  sacred  cow  than  J.  Edgar
Hoover,  there  would  be  demands  for  an  investigation.
Some  Birchite  might  even  ask,  knowing  how  devious
counter-intelligence   becomes:   When   the   Communists
are  so  infiltrated  by  the  FBI,  can  one  be  sure  the  FBI
is  not  just  a  little  infiltrated  in return?
letter  from  Dr.  Hirschfeld  during  the  war  saying that  the  U.S.
was  working  on  a  new  secret  weapon.    This  gave  the  trial  an
"atom  bomb"  angle.    The  Solicitor  General's  answer  was  that
"the  transcript  of  Hirschfeld's  grand  jury  testimony  would  not
have  been  producible  since  Hirschfeld  was  not  a  government
witness."   But  was  this  a  fact  the  government   could   honorably
withhold?
The   Court   of   Appeals   earlier   set  aside  the   conviction  of
Mark  Zborowski  whom  Dr.  Soblen's  brother,  Jack  Soble,  had
named  as  another  member  of  this  same  spy  ring.    The   Court
ordered  a  new  trial  on  the  ground   that  the  government   had
withheld  from  the  defense  medical  reports  on  Soble's  mental
illness   and    inconsistences   with   his   grand    jury   testimony.
Zborowski   is  to  be  retried  in  September.     Should   Zborowski
be  acquitted,  it  would   also  cast  doubt  on  Dr.  Soblen's  convic-
tion.
Please   Specify     Which  issue  in  Sending  Envelopes  for   Free  Sample  Copies  to  Friends
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,  seis  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name   ......................................................................................—
Street   ...................................................................................—
City   ............_.........................Zone.............State....................
7/0/62
firmer gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........._..................._...............................................,....
City   ............~...........................Zone.............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tea  D    No  D
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'a  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  'C.    Published   every   Monday  except   the  last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   In
September   and  the  last  Monday  In  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  6618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington,  D. C.  An  Independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M. Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.  S.:   *«  in
Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED