I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962mar26.pdf

============================================================

Is  A  New  U-2 Style  Affair    Brewing? See P.  3
Khrushchev  Claims  He  Set  Off Underground Blast  to  Prove  We Could  Detect It;  AEC  Confirms  This,  P.  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  12
MARCH  26,  1962
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The   Lessons  of  the   Algerian   Liberation
Many  are  the  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  the  Algerian liber-
ation  struggle.    The  first  is  the  poisonous  effect  of  white  su-
premacist  doctrine;  even  in  tolerant   and   civilized   France  it
was  strong  enough  to  prevent   the   development  of   a  great
multiracial  commonwealth.   The  North  African  Arab wanted
to  be  treated  with  respect.     The   leaders  of  the  revolt  were
men  educated  in  France,  and  desirous  at  first  of   assimilation
to   France.    Their   disappointments   began   with   the   broken
promises  of  the  Blum  Popular  Front  government  in  the  mid-
30s,  the  first  in  a  series  of  disillusionments  which  finally  led
to  the  outbreak  of  the  revolt  in  1954.    The  second  is  the  im-
potence  of  military power  against  a  small  terrorist  force  when
the  latter  has  the  passive  sympathy  of  the  people.    Where
France  could  put  250,000  men  into  Algeria,  with  all  the  latest
equipment,  the   insurgents  rarely  had   10,000  ill-armed  men
active  at  one  time  within   Algeria   itself.    The   third  is  the
failure  of  the  French  idea  that  they  could  use  against  the  Al-
gerian  guerrillas  the  lessons  they  thought  they  had  learned  in
fighting  Ho  Chi-minh's  in  Vietnam.    They  read  Mao's  hand-
book,  as  we  now  read  Guevara's,  but  mechanically,  forgetting
that  guerrilla  war  is  a  weapon  of  desperate  revolutionaries,  a
last  resort  for  freedom.    Fourthly,  de  Gaulle  had  the  wisdom
to  see that  the  liberation  struggle  could  not  be  defeated;  after
250,000  lives  and  $20  billion  dollars,   it  was  poisoning   the
life  of  France.
Not  To  Be Turned  Off By  A Kremlin Spigot
Had  the  French  rightists  had  their  way,  or  had  some  of  our
simple-minded  anti-Communist  American  strategists   been   in
charge,  the  struggle  would  long  ago  have  been  presented   to
the  U.S.  public.as  an  occult  affair,  master-minded  from  Mos-
cow,  with  which  no  compromise  was  possible.    The  fact  that
Peking  had  recognized  the  FLN  and  that  Moscow  had covertly
helped  them  with  supplies  on many occasions  would  have  been
blown  up  to  such  proportions  as  to  hide  the  real  causes,  and
therefore  the  real  solution.    U.S.  leaders  are  constantly  hark-
ing   back   to  Khrushchev's   I960   declaration   of   support   for
wars  of  liberation,  as  if  it  were  the  confession  of  a  Commu-
nist  plot.    We   talk  as  if  these  wars  could   be  turned  off  at
some  Kremlin  spigot.   The  real  meaning  is  that  these  are  un-
avoidable  and  that  the  only  way to  counter  Moscow's  effort  to
bring  them  under  its wing  is  to  welcome  them  ourselves.  This
is  in  part  what  happened  with  the  Algerian  revolt  where  the
American  labor   movement   for   once  provided   a   moderating
perspective.     Otherwise   the  FLN  might  have  been   made  as
completely  dependent   on  the'Soviet  bloc  as  was  Castro,  the
bloody, struggle  escalated,  instead  of  brought  to  a  close,  at  least
insofar  as  the  FLN   is  concerned.     France  itself  still  faces  a
period   of  struggle  with   its  own  military  conspirators,   men
4
An  Appalling  Confession
If  Nixon is  now telling the truth  in  his  new  book  "Six
Crises,"  then  both  he  and Kennedy deceived the country
on  Cuba  in  the  1960  campaign.    Nixon  says  Kennedy
criticized   Elsenhower   for   not   acting   against   Castro
when  he  knew  from  CIA  briefings  that  an  invasion  was
being   prepared.     Nixon   says   he   himself    misled   the
public  by  pretending to  be  more  "sober"  than Kennedy
in  order to  hide the  invasion  plans.    Nixon  says  he  was
engaging  in  falsification  for  "cover"  purposes—as  the
cloak  and  dagger  men  say—when  he  argued  that  an
attack  on  Cuba  would lose  us  friends  in  Latin America,
invite  Khrushchev  in,  and  draw  us  into  a  civil  war  or
worse.    Nixon  finds  it  ironical,  nothing  more,  that  this
was   "the  one  and  only  time  in  the  campaign"  when
columnists   and   editorial  writers   were   on   his   side.
Events  since  do not  seem  to  have  taught  him  that  when
he  was  insincere  he  was,  for  once,  right.   His  only  feel-
ing  of  indignation  is  against  Kennedy  for  taking  ad-
vantage  of  inside  information.   He  seems  too  obtuse  to
realize  the  significance  of  his  confession,  the  lightning
flash  with   which  it  illuminates  the  low  standards  of
public  honor  to  which  we  have  been  brought  by  CIA
operations   and  our   undignified  quarrel  with   a   tiny
neighbor.    The  White  House  and  ex-CIA  Chief   Dulles
deny  that  Kennedy  knew  about  the  secret  plans  to  in-
vade  Cuba  until  after  the  election,  but  too  much  official
falsehood   has  marked  the  Cuban  affair,  and  been  de-
fended  as  expedient,  to  give  such  denials  the credibility
they  would otherwise command.
driven  into  counter-terror  by  the  same  delusions   about  Com-
munist  plots  and  the  same  marijuana  about   counter-guerrilla
tactics  evident  in  our  own Pentagon  and  in  some White  House
circles.
Heading  for  An  Algeria  of  Our  Own?
France  moved  from  folly  in  Indochina  to  folly  in  Algeria
and  we  are  retracing  its  footsteps   and  its  errors.     In  South
Vietnam  we  are  adopting  the  same  formulas  of  "regroupment
centers"   (concentration  camps  would  be a more  realistic  term)
for  the  peasantry  which  failed  in  Algeria,  and  it  is  not  at  all
impossible  that  we  may plunge  one  of  these  days  into  an  Al-
geria  of  our  own  in  Cuba.    It  is a  pity  a National  Commission
could  not  make  a  study  for  us  of  the  French   experience,  so
we  might  avoid  repeating  it,  particularly  the  lesson  that  repub-
lics  which  use  military  force  to  repress  other  people^  abroad
end  up  by  struggling  for  their  own  liberty  against  these  same
military  forces,  grown  swollen  in  size  and  frustrated  in  spirit,
anxious  to  do  at  home  what  they  cannot  do  abroad.  '  This  is
the  next  act  in  France's  tragedy;  it  could  some  day  turn  out
to  be  our  own.
4   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  26,1962
Only  Hope  of  New  Test  Ban  Agreement  Lies  with  Indians   and  Swedes  at  Geneva
British  Scientists  on  Secret  Visit  Fail  to  Persuade  White  House
Two  British scientific  authorities,  Sir  Solly Zuckerman.  chief
scientific   adviser  to  the  Ministry  of   Defense,   and   Sir   \Vm.
Penney,  research  chief  of  the  British Atomic  Energy Authority,
were  here  in  Washington   on  a  secret  visit  last  week-end,  ar-
riving  on  Friday, March  16 and  leaving  on  Tuesday,  March  20.
Their  purpose  was  to  convince  the  Kennedy Administration
that  it  could  safely  reduce  its  requirements  for  a  test  inspection
agreement   since  even   small  underground   tests   could   be  de-
tected  from  abroad.    They   brought   with  them   evidence  that
the  British  had  detected  all  the  tests  in  our  recent  underground
series  in  Nevada   and   New   Mexico,   but   their  trip  seems   to
have  been   fruitless.
Apology   and  Correction
In  last   week's   issue   we   unfairly   characterized   the
National   Committee    for   A   Sane   Nuclear   Policy   as
stricken  "numb   and  dumb"  by  the  President's  decision
to  resume  atmospheric  testing.  SANE's  energetic  press
office  did  issue  a  statement  in  the  early  morning  hours
after  the  President's  TV  speech  March  2,  which  went  to
all   New   York  papers.    But  there  seems  to  have  been
some  slipup  in  distribution   out   of   town.    We  neither
received  the  release  nor  saw  any  mention  of  it  in  the
New  York  papers  which   (as  so  often  happens)  ignored
it.    We  are  happy  to  learn  that  we  were  in  error.
Britons  Frustrated—Congress  Alarmed
At  the  time  of  writing,  just  before  going  to  press,  none  of
this  had  yet  leaked  out  into  U.S.  newspapers  though  quite  an
array  of  scientific  talent  was  marshalled   by  the  White  House
for  its  own  secret  conferences with  the  visitors.   George Kisti-
akowsky  was  brought  down  from  Harvard  for  these  sessions.
Other   participants were   AEC  Chairman  Glenn   T.   Seaborg;
Harold  Brown,  research  chief  at  the  Defense  Department,   and
Jerome  Wiesner,  the  President's  scientific  adviser.
The   conferences  seem  to  have  left   behind  them  consider-
able  frustration   among  the  British,  and   rising  alarm  in  cer-
tain  Congressional  quarters.    The  frustration  arose  from   the
fact  that  on  the  one  hand  the  U.S.  government   says  under-
ground   tests  are  no  longer   the   issue,  that   atmospheric  tests
are  necessary  for  its  purposes,  particularly  in  the  field  of  mis-
sile  interception.    On  the  other  hand,  when  it  is  pointed   out
that  atmospheric  tests  are  easily  detected,  the  difficulty   of  de-
tecting  underground  tests  is  brought  up  as  an  obstacle   to  an
agreement.    The  alarm  arose  from  fears  on  the  Hill  that  the
Administration   might  be  on   the   verge   of  giving  in   to   the
British.   This  was  reflected  in  statements  from  Senators  Dirk-
sen  of  Illinois  and  Javits  of  New   York,  and  in  a  leading  edi-
torial  in the  Washington   Star  (March  20)   accusing  the British
of   "playing  Russia's  game"  and  declaring  that  if  a  new  test
series  "means  a  break  with  the  British,  that  will  be  too  bad.
But  it  will  be  better  than  selling   ourselves   down   the   river."
Of  such  demagogic  rubbish  is  national  policy   made.
Nevertheless  the  British  seem  to  have  been  frightened  away
from  taking  the  initiative  at  Geneva  and  the  only  hope  now
lies  with  the  Indians  and   Swedes.    There  is  good  reason   to
suspect  that  both   the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  are  anxious  for
another   series  of  tests.    These  will  not   only  pollute  the  at-
mosphere  but  increase world  tension.    The  Indians  seem  to  be
suggesting  that  national  detection  systems  be  supplemented  by
an  international  network  to  be  set up  in  neutral  countries.  One
way  India  and  Sweden  could  put  pressure  on  for  a  new  test
moratorium  would  be  to  make quickly available from  the  pow-
erful   seismic  stations  in  Finland,  Sweden,   Japan,   the  Philip-
pines  and  India,  the  recordings  they  have  made  of  the   U.S.
underground    tests   and   the   one   underground    test   to   which
Khrushchev  referred  in  the  speech   from  which  we  quote  be-
low.    This  would  show  how  successfully  these  tests  have  been
monitored  and  dispel  the  chief  bogey  cited  as  excuse  for  not
entering  a  new  agreement.
Khrushchev  Boasts  He  Set  Off Underground  Blast  To Prove  We  Could Detect  It
"It  is   claimed   that  secret  tests  of  nuclear  weapons  can
be  carried  out  underground.     I  am  going  to  divulge  a  secret
to  you,  comrades.    We  knew  that  science  makes  it  possible
to  detect  underground  nuclear  explosions  by  national  means
of  control.     The  underground   nuclear  tests  carried  out,  for
instance,   in   the   United   States   were   recorded   by   Soviet
scientists  and  by  scientists  in  other  countries.    And  we  de-
cided  to   prove   that   when  representatives  of   the   Western
powers  harp  on  the  impossibility  of  detecting  underground
explosions,  they   lie.
"We  have  used  the  well-known  popular  trick  to  see  how
some  people  simulate  deafness.  This  checkup  consists  of  the
following:  A  man  is  told—'Ivan  give  me  this!'    But  Ivan
pretends  not  to  hear.    Then  you  tell  him—'Ivan,  take  this!"
Then  he  hears  you  perfectly  well,  to  be  sure.    And  so  we
decided  to  use  this  popular  method,  and  it  worked.
"Recently  an  underground  nuclear  explosion  was  carried
out  in  the  Soviet  Union,  although  formerly   we  did not  stage
such  explosions.  And  what  was  the  result?  Almost  on  that
very   day   the   Atomic   Energy   Commission   of   the   United
States  declared  that  the   U.S.   detected  an  underground  nu-
clear  explosion  in  the   Soviet   Union.
"Hence,  it  follows  that  those  who  tried  to  prove  the  im-
possibility  of  registering  underground  explosions,  who  in-
sisted  that  the  banning  of  underground  nuclear  tests  must
be  placed  under  international  control,  were  not   guided  by
the  interests  of  the  earliest  achievement  of  agreement.
"This   proves   once   again   that   the   banning   of   nuclear
weapons  tests  is  blocked  not  by  the  elaboration  of  a  control
system  but  by  the  Western  Powers'  unwillingness  to  reach
agreement  on outlawing  nuclear  tests."
—Khrushchev's  "election"  speech,  Moscow,  March  16.
"The   Atomic  Energy   Commission  announced  this   after-
noon  that  the  Soviet  Union  apparently  conducted  a  nuclear
detonation  underground  today.    The  detonation  took  place
at  the  Soviet  nuclear  weapons  proving  grounds  in  the  Semi-
palatinsk  area  in  Central  Asia.    The  yield  was  well  above
the  threshold  of  underground  detectability,  even  by  a  single
national  system,  and  the  absence  of  acoustic  signals   indi-
cated  that  it  occurred  underground."
—Full  text, AEC  release  No. E30,  Feb.  2, 1962.
"The   evidence,   official   sources   said,   was   picked   up  on
seismographic  equipment  which  would  also  record  an  earth-
quake.    Apparently,  however,  it  had  some  particular  char-
acteristics  of   an  explosion.    Furthermore,   there  are   indi-
cations  that  the  U.S.   corroborates  its  seismic  detections  by
other  means."                               —New  York  Times,  Feb.  3.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  26, 1962
Faked  Elections   Cause  Trouble  in  Guatemala;  Liberal  Protest  Rises  in Colombia
Tricky  Frondizi  Upset  By  Same  Forces  Which  Made  Him  President
The  stormy Latin  American  situation  bears  little  resemblance
to  the  optimistic  platitudes  of  the  Alliance  for  Progress.     In
Argentina,  Frondizi  may  be  forced   out  of   office   by  the  very
same  forces  which  helped   him  in;  this  one  time  honest  anti-
fascist  turned  trickster  won  the  1958  elections  with  the  covert
support  of  Peronistas  and  Communists.     His  personal   ambi-
tions  for  the  Presidency  split  the  Radical  movement;   its  two
main  branches  together   polled  1,000,000  votes  more  this  time
than  the  Peronistas.    Were  it  united,  the  Radical  Party  would
be  Argentina's  largest,  a  cohesive  moderate  reform  group  able
to  provide  stable  rule  for  Argentina.
From  Welfare  State  to  Free   Enterprise
Unfortunately  Frondizi,  after  his  election,   reversed  himself
and  moved  from  welfare  statism  to  reliance  on  private  enter-
prise  and  foreign  private  investment  notably  in  oil.    This  re-
quired  an  "austerity"   (for   the  working  class  but  not  the  in-
vestors)   which  made  the  Peron  era  with  its  lush  inflation  and
social  benefits  look  like  the  "good  old  days",  especially  since
Frondizi's   regime   with   its   reliance   on   states   of    emergency
and  the  military,  was  not  much  better  than  Peron's  when   it
came  to  civil  liberties.    The   break   in  relations   with   Castro
which  Washington  and  the  military   forced  on'Frondizi  was
the  final  pre-election  straw,  and  the  U.S.  may  soon  find  itself
backing  a  veiled  military  dictatorship  as  a  lesser  evil  than  the
return  of  Peron.
In  Guatemala   trouble   began  in  December  when   elections
gave  the  Ydigoras  government   about  three  fourths  of  the  seats
contested   in  the  countryside,  where   control  is  easy.    In   the
capital,  Guatemala  City,  where  an  alert  electorate   makes  bal-
Outcry  Against   Creeping  Stalinism?
"What  is  the  revolution  being  converted  to?    Into  a
group  of  tame  minds'.  .  .  .  Revolution  must  make  men
think,  analyze  and  maintain  deep  convictions,  convic-
tions  so  deep  that  there  will  be  no  need  of  things  like
these!  .  .  .  How can  we,  before  a  new  generation,  a  gen-
eration  thirsty  for  knowledge,  how  can  we  put  blinders
on  them  so  they  cannot  read  the  complete  texts  of  the
historic  documents  of  a  revolutionary  comrade?"
—Fidel  Castro  on  Havana  radio   March   14,  the  5th
anniversa>~y  of  the  storming  of  the  Batista  palace,  pro-
testing   the  omission  from   the  testament   of  Jose   An-
tonio  Echevarria,  who  fell  in  that  uprising,  of  his   dy-
ing  statement,  "We  are  confident  that  the  purity  of  our
intentions  will   bring   us   the   favor    of   God  and   make
justice  prevail  in  our   homeland."
lot-stuffing   difficult,   the   government   came  in   a  poor   fourth.
As  a  result  there  were  demonstrations.    The  government  began
bringing   in  peasants   from  national   farms,  armed   with   clubs
and  machetes,  to  attack  demonstrators.    Opposition  is  so  wide-
spread  on  both  right  and  left  and  among  the  business   classes
as well  as  the  intellectuals  that  Ydigoras  is having  trouble  sell-
ing  even  our  press  the  notion  that  this  is a  Castro-Communist
plot.
In  Colombia   a  breakaway  liberal   faction,  tired  of  the  do-
nothing  bipartisan  share-the-rule  agreement  between  the   Con-
servatives  and   the   Liberals,   and   anxious   for   social   reform,
registered   a  sharp  upturn   in  the  March  18  elections,  taking
about  40  percent  of  the  Liberal  vote as compared  to  23  percent
in   I960.
U.S. Accused of  Space "Brinkmanship'
"Last  week,  after  the  transformation scene  in  the  U-2  af-
fair   had   produced  a   national  hero  from   an  unpromising
situation,  applause  deadened  a  noise  off-stage—the  launch-
ing,  by  the  U.S.  Air  Force,  of  a  fourth secret  satellite.   The
lesson  of  the  U-2,  it  seems  has  not  been  learned  .  .  .
"On   November   22,   1961,   the   USAF   announced  that   a
satellite  had  been  'successfully   launched'  by  Atlas  Agena
rocket   from   Point   Arguello,  California.    On  December   2,
1961,   a   similar  announcement  stated   that   another   such
satellite  had  been  launched.   No  further  details  were  sup-
plied.    Neither satellite  was  given  an  international designa-
tion,  and  both  were  omitted  from  an  allegedly  full  list  of
space  launchings  in  a  report by  President  Kennedy.   At  the
same  time,  in  the  United  Nations,  Mr. Adlai  Stevenson  was
introducing  a  resolution  (adopted  on  Dec.  11)  which, among
other  things,  called  on  States  launching  spacecraft  'to  fur-
nish  information promptly  for  purposes  of  registration  of
launchings.'    Mr. Stevenson  commented: 'The  first principle
is   that  international  law,  including  the   UN   Charter,  ap-
plies  to  outer  space ...  we  should  state  explicitly that  the
rules  of  good  international  conduct  follow  (man)  wherever
he  goes  .  .  .'
"On  Feb.  21 this  year,  a  USAF  Thor  Agena  was  launched
from   Vandenberg  Air   Force   Base  carrying  'secret  equip-
ment.'    This   was  correctly  designated  as   1962  Delta,  but
no  further  information was  given.    Discoverer  38, launched
on  Feb.  27,  was  also  given  its  1962  Epsilon  designation  but
nothing  further  was  disclosed.    The  most  recent  launching
of   a  USAF   'secret  satellite'  was   from   Point  Arguello  on
March  It
"It  appears  that  the  launchings  of  Nov.  22  and  Dec.  23,
in Secret  Launching of  U-2  Satellites
1961,  and  Mar.  7,  1962,  were  of   Samos  reconnaissance   or
Midas  early  warning  satellites,   and  that  those  of   Feb.   21
and  Feb.  27  were  Discoverers  carrying  Samos  and/or  Midas
equipment.    Together   with  Midas  4   (Oct.   21,  1961),   this
makes  six  major  launches  on  which  basic  orbital   informa-
tion  has  been  withheld  from  world  scientists.
"Let   us  list   our  objections.     US   Air   Force   secrecy   on
basic  orbital data  is  not  in  line  with  the  US-sponsored   UN
resolution.    It  prevents  world  scientists  from  studying  the
orbits  and  so  learning  new  facts  about  the  structure  of  the
high  atmosphere.    It  is  of  doubtful  military  value,  for  the
satellites  concerned  can  undoubtedly  be  observed  from  the
Soviet  Union,  as  at  least  one  has  been  observed  from  this
country.    And  this  secrecy   represents   a   double  standard,
which  is  not  tenable.
"For  world  science  and  world politics,  then,  the  American
attitude  is  dangerous.    Scientifically there  is  a  parallel  in
the  ill-advised  West  Ford  project  to  place  a  belt  of   dipoles
["needles"—IPS]   in  orbit—a  second   attempt  at   which   is
now  being   made.    Politically,  the  parallel  with  the  U-2  is
too  close  for  comfort.   In  1956  Flight  readers  observed   U-2
operations.    Now  a  reader  has  reported  the  observation  of
a  secret  USAF satellite.   The  1960  summit  meeting  prepara-
tions  were  blasted  by  the  ill  timing  of  the  U-2  affair.    Now,
a  satellite  carrying  observation  equipment  is   launched  on
the  day  following  Mr. Khrushchev's  suggestion  of  coopera-
tion  in  space.    This  is  not  what  Mr.  Stevenson   calls  'good
international  conduct.'    This  is  brinkmanship  in  space."
—This   "leader"   in  Flight   (March   15)  England's   most
respected   aeronautical   weekly    created   a  sensation  in   the
British  press  but  was  given  little  attention  in  ours.
4   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  26, 1962
Political   and  Humane  Considerations   Alike  Dictate  A  Sharp  Turn  in  U.S. Policy
China's  Hunger  and  Split  With  Russia  Is  Our  Opportunity
China's  hunger,   China's   split  with  Russia,   offer   the U.S.
an  opportunity  of  historic  importance.    To  open  negotiations
now,  to  permit   food  shipments  to  China,  would   be  to  take
advantage  of  the  biggest  fissure  yet opened  in  the  Soviet  mono-
lith,  to  make  the  split  between  Moscow   and  Peking   perma-
nent,  to  arrange  better  terms  for  Formosa  than  we  may  ever
get  again,  and  to  regain  the  friendship  the  Chinese   people
has  felt  for  America  since the  Boxer  rebellion.
Left   in  the  Lurch  By  Russia
A  Hong  Kong   dispatch  to  the  London   Observer   (March
18)  provides  a  vivid  and  detailed  picture  of  the  way Russian
technicians  have  left  China  in  the  lurch,  simply  downing  tools
at  many  places  and  even  taking  construction  blueprints  away
with  them.    China's  grain  purchases  from  Canada  and  Aus-
tralia,  its  negotiations  to  buy  Viscount  airlines  and   petroleum
from  Britain, indicate  that  China  is  being  forced  to  turn  west-
ward  for  aid,  just  as Tito  was.
Had  Washington   turned  a  cold  shoulder  to  Tito  and  main-
tained  economic  blockade,  it  would  have  given  Stalin  a victory.
Instead,   by  supporting   the  Yugoslavs,   we  widened  the  first
major  crack  in  the  Soviet  empire;  we  allowed  Tito  to  demon-
strate  that  a  Soviet  satellite  could   defy  Moscow  and  get  away
with   it.     China—and   Albania—now   offer   a   similar   oppor-
tunity.    It  was  through  the  rapprochement  with  Tito  that  the
U.S.  was  able  to  win   against  the  guerrillas   in  Greece;   the
unexpected   split   between   Belgrade   and   Moscow   led  to   the
closing  of  the  Yugoslav  border  and  hence  of  the   "privileged
sanctuary"  from  which  the  guerrillas  had  been  operating.     A
rapprochement   with   China   might   have   similar   results   in
stabilizing  Southeast  Asia.
The  hunger  in  China  is  deep.    News  reports  from  China
summarized  by  the  London  Sunday  Times  (Mar.  18)  picture
"the  pathetic  organized  search  by  millions  of  people  for  wild
fruits,  herbs,  chestnuts, waterweed  stalks,  arrowroot  and  other
plants  to  supplement   the  shrinking  supply  of  staple   foods."
Our  food  surpluses  are  huge  and  growing.    A  simple  act  of
generosity  would  pay  off.   Calculation  aside,  nothing  could  be
better  for  our  own  American people  than  to  be  asked  to  make
Deception  By  The  Attorney   General
In  indicting  Communist  leaders  Gus  Hall  and  Benja-
min  J.  Davis   for  failing  to  register   the  Party   under
the  McCarran  Act,  Attorney  General  Kennedy  insisted
"such  registration  is  not  unusual  in  this  country. Reg-
istration  is   required   in  a  number  of   fields,   including
agents   representing   foreign   countries,   the  sale  of  se-
curities,   establishment   of   welfare   and  pension   plans,
campaign  contributions  and  lobbying.   Many  Americans,
including   respected   individuals   and   law   firms,   have
registered   and  obeyed  such  registration   laws."
The  registration  statutes  mentioned  by  the  Attorney
General   subject   registrants   neither   to   ignominy   nor
sanctions.    But   registration   under  the   McCarran  Act
reduces  a  man  to  second  class  citizenship.   He  loses  his
right   to  travel   and  to  work  for  the  government  or  in
arms  plants.    If  an  alien,  he  can  be  deported;  if  a  re-
cent  naturalized  citizen,  he  can  lose  his  citizenship.    By
registering,  he  opens  himself   to  prosecution   for  Com-
munist  membership  under  the  Smith  Act.    He  is  subject
to  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  as  a  self-de-
clared  subversive  and his  name  will  appear  on  its  public
black  list.    To  compare  this  with  registration   under  the
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  or  the  Lobbying
Act  is  rank  deception.
The  purpose  of  the  deception  is  to  hide  the  fact  that
the   McCarran   Act   is   an   act   of   political   outlawry.
"Neither  these  indictments,  nor  any  possible  future  ac-
tion,"  the  Attorney  General  said,  "mean  that  the  Com-
munist  Party   is   outlawed."    Of  course   the  McCarran
Act  does  not  in  so  many  words  outlaw  the   Communist
Party.     A   statute   of   outlawry   would  hardly   survive
constitutional  test;  political  parties  in  a  free  society  are
supposed  to  be  subject  to  the  ballot  box  not  the  police-
man's  baton.    The  McCarran Act  seeks  to  achieve out-
lawry  under  the  appearance  of  registration.   The  effect
will  be  not  only  to  destroy   the  Communist  Party  but
later  to  endanger  any  other  group  left  of  center  which
can  be  held  to  agree  with  Communist  policies.    The  At-
torney  General  may  be  bound  to  apply  the  law  but  he
is  not  duty-bound to  hide  its  true  nature.
a  big  gesture,  just  out  of  plain  humanity,  a  humanity  the^  cold
war  has  shrivelled  in  too  many  of  our  hearts.
Why  Not  Give  A  Subscription  to  Your  College   Library?     Your  Minister?    Your  Local  Paper?
I.  F.
Please
Name
City
Enter
(To)
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
...........................................Zone.............
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1
Name   .................................................
...........................................Zone.............
we  send  gift  announcement?
3/26/62
yr.)  additional:
Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
or
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,   D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday   in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the   IT.  S.;   $6  in
Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;   J20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED