I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jan29.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue:  McCone's  Nomination  to  CIA
Mrs.   Smith  of  Maine  Joins  Sen.  McCarthy  (Minn.)  in  Expressing  Distrust  of  CIA, See  Pages  2  and  3
I. F. Stones  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  4JANUARY  29,  1962
•>'«"      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.16  CENTS
(Triply)  Biased  Intelligence  Guaranteed
A  rival  Washington   newsletter,  Strom  Thurmond    Reports
to  the  People,  suggested  recently that  what  the  President  need-
ed  was  a  few  right-wing  extremists  in  his  administration.  Its
editor   and   publisher,   Senator   Thurmond,    must   have   been
gratified   when   a  few   days  later  the   Senate  Armed  Services
Committee  was  called  upon   to  confirm   the  appointment   of
John   A.  McCone   to  be  director  of  the   Central   Intelligence
Agency.    Not  all  newsletters  get  results  that  swiftly.    At  the
hearing  the  one
7
time  Dixiecrat  candidate   for   President,   not
ordinarily  to  be  found  in  the  New  Frontier  cheering   section,
was  as  emotional  in  his  praise  of  the  nominee  as  if  he  were
already  delivering  his  funeral  oration.    Mr.  McCone  may  not
qualify  as  an  extremist  but  in  picking  him  to  be  head  of  the
CIA,  Mr.  Kennedy  has  chosen  a  man  as  satisfactory  to  the
far  right  as  J.  Edgar  Hoover   himself.
To  Make  The  World  Safe  for  Oil
It  would  seem  that  a  prime  qualification for  top  intelligence
posts  in  our  society  is a  strong  set  of  biases.    Mr.  McCone  can
offer  triple  assurances  against  any  dangerous   objectivity.    He
belongs  to  that  sector  of  Roman  Catholic  opinion  which  takes
an  apocalyptic  view  of  our  relations  with  the  Soviet   Union.
He  has  close  ties  with  Big  Oil.    Himself   one  of  the   largest
stockholders  in  Standard  Oil  of  California,  owner  of  shipping
concerns   which   do   a   big   business  with   Standard   of   New
Jersey  and  several  other  of  the  majors,  Mr.   McCone   is  not
apt  to  be  flint-hearted  in  dealing   with  the   problems   those
long-suffering   concerns   encounter   in   cut-rate   Soviet   petrol-
eum,  Arab nationalism,  Indonesian  firebrands and  Latin Amer-
ican   radicals  on   the   precarious   outer   marches  of   the   Free
World  where  the  CIA  lurks  protectively  in  the  bushes.
The   third  and  perhaps   the  most  politically  endearing  of
Mr.   McCone's   qualifications  is  represented   by  his  long  and
faithful   association  with   the  aviation-missile  industry   crowd
inside  and  outside  the  government.    During  and   after   the
war,   Mr.  McCone  made  his  fortune  in  the  business  of  supply-
ing  maritime, aviation  and  nuclear  engineering  services  to  the
government.    His  debut  in  government  itself  was  as  a  mem-
ber  of  the  Truman  Air  Policy  Commission;  its  recommenda-
tion  for  a  4-billion  dollar   stepup   in  Air  Force  spending  in
1948  was the  first  trumpet  blast  of  the  postwar  aviation  lobby.
Later  as  assistant  to  Secretary  Forrestal,  then  as  Under   Secre-
tary  for  Air  under  Symington's  wing,  more  recently  as  chair-
man   of   the   Atomic  Energy  Commission,   Mr.   McCone   has
been  a  consistent  advocate  of  those  views  which  the  Air  Force
and  its  industrial  allies  hold,  particularly  against  any  cessation
in  nuclear  testing.    The  top  foreign  intelligence  post  is  being
given  to  a  representative   of  that  military-industrial  complex
which  would   be  more  endangered  than   any  other  sector  of
2
A  $44,000,000  Profit  on  $100,000
"I  have  not  had  the  opportunity of  knowing  Mr.  Mc-
Cone  well,  only  through  reputation, but  in  looking  over
this  biography,  to   me  it   epitomizes  what   has   made
America   great."
—Senator  Strom  Thurmond   (D.  S.Car.)  at  the  Sen-
ate  Armed  Services  Committee  hearing  on  the  McCone
appointment   to  the  CIA,   Jan.   18.
"I  dare  say  that  at  no  time  in  the  history  of  Amer-
ican  business,  whether in wartime or  in  peacetime,  have
so  few   men  made  so  much  money  with  so  little  risk
and  all  at  the  expense  of  the  taxpayers  not  only  of  this
generation  but  of  generations  to   come."
—Ralph    E.   Casey,   of   the   Comptroller    General's
office,     testifying     at   a  1946  House   inquiry   into   ship-
building  profits   in  World  War  II,  on  the  way  in  which
Mr.   McCone   and   his   associates   in   California    Ship-
building  Company   made  $44,000,000 on  an  investment
of   $100,000;  quoted   by  Senator  Case  (R.   S.Dak.)   at
the  Senate  committee   hearing,   Jan.  18.
Sen.   Symington  (D.  Mo.):  Now'  it  is  still  legal   in
America,  if  not  to  make a  profit,  at  least  to  try  to  make
a  profit,  is  it  not?
Mr.  McCone:  That  is  my  understanding.
—The  Senator  .from   Missouri,  a  few  minutes  later,
helping   the  nominee   explain.
American  industry  by  a  change  for  the  better  in  the  interna-
tional  climate.    Mr.  McCone  offers  built-in  safeguards  against
an  unhealthy  optimism.
This  happy  choice  to  succeed  Allen  Dulles  seems  to  be  the
triumph  of  the  practitioners  of  realpolitik  at  the  White  House.
For  them,  the  smart  strategy  is  to  fill  every  sensitive  post  in
the   government   with   a   conservative   Republican   while   the
liberals   on   the   Kennedy   staff   are   assigned   to   snow   under
journalistic   criticism   with   sympathetic   assurances    that   the
nominee  will  somehow  be  kept  under  control  and  even  har-
nessed  mysteriously to  the  achievement,   in  some  far  distance,
of  enlightened   goals.    They're  smooth,  man.*    Were  this  an
Elsenhower  appointment,  there  would  be  an  outcry  from  the
liberals  on  Capitol  hill,  but  the  liberals  have  been  taken  into
camp.    Since  1956  Senator  Mansfield  has  been  a  fierce  critic
of  CIA's  conspiracies  abroad,  a  crusader  against  its  exemption
from  Congressional   supervision;  now  as  majority  leader,  he  is
silent.    Nuclear  test  cessation  has  been  Humphrey's   major
issue,  but  now  as  party  whip,  he  must  grumble  if  at  all  pri-
vately;  Symington  said  at  the  McCone  hearing  that  <*ne  of  his
{Continued  on  Page   Two)
* Judging  by  its  complaisant  news  and  editorial  treatment
of  the appointment the  liberal  Washington  Post  seems  to  have
emerged  glassy-eyed   from  just  such  a  smooshing.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   29,  HH12
{Continued  from   Page  One)
colleagues  asked  him  querulously,  "Why   can't   the   President
get  a  Democrat?"    He  courteously  withheld  the  name  of  this
subversive  fellow.    On  the  score  of  viewpoint,  lack  of  experi-
ence,  conflicts  of   interest,   Mr.   McCone   would   have  been  a
juicy  target  for  the  liberals  in  the  good  old   days  of   Eisen-
hower.    Now   it  was  left  to  a  junior  Democrat,   McCarthy  of
Minnesota,  and  to  two  conservative  Republicans,  Mrs.  Smith
of  Maine  and  Case  of  South  Dakota  to  carry  the  fight  in  com-
mittee,  whatever  of  it  there  was,  against  the  McCone  nomina-
tion.     Even  Morse,  though  he  made  a  Senate  speech   on  the
subject  before  leaving   (see  box  on  p.  2)   was  providentially
sent  off  as  part  of  Kennedy's  mission  to  get  Castro's  scalp  at
Punta  del  Este  and  so  may  not  be  present  in  the  Senate  to  op-
pose  the  President   when   the  nomination  comes  up.     Never
have  wheels  been  so  skilfully   fitted  into  wheels.
Morality  Begins  to  Seem  Quaint
Senator  McCarthy   took  the  unusual  step  of  appearing  as  a
witness   against  the   nomination  before   the   committee.     He
quoted   Senator  Mansfield,  former  Secretary  of  Defense   Wil-
son,  Hanson  Baldwin,  and  Walter  Lippmann  in  setting  forth
the  dangerous   powers   exercised  by  Cl A.    He  dared  to  ques-
tion  its  foreign  undercover  operations   (see  box  bottom   of  p.
3)   in  Guatemala,  Iran  and  Laos  as  well  as  Cuba.    So  far  have
we  drifted  from  our  constitutional  and  moral  moorings  that  it
sounded  old-fashioned,  almost  quaint,  to  hear  a  U.S.   Senator
imply  that  the  Cuban  operation  would  have  been  wrong  even
if   it  succeeded   and  that  the  overthrow   of  Arbenz  in  Guate-
mala  was  contrary  to  law  and  Monroe   Doctrine   though,   he
added  weakly,   "objectively   considered  .  .  .  desirable."    We
have  grown  accustomed  to  assuming that  anti-Communist  ends
justify   any  means.     His   charges   were  easily  disposed   of   as
Symington   counter-attacked   in   defense   of   his   old   protege,
McCone.     Symington  asserted  blandly  that   as  head   of   CIA
McCone  would  be  one  of  the  most  supervised men  in  the  gov-
ernment!    He  declared  that  if  the  CIA  hadn't  gotten   rid  of
Mossadegh,   Iran   would   be   Communist   today.     McCarthy
wanted  the  committee to  investigate whether  McCone  was  the
source  of  the  leaks  from  -the  AEC  harmful   to  the  test  talks
at  Geneva,  particularly  the  stories of  clandestine Soviet  testing.
Symington  interrogated  McCone   iike  a  defense  counsel.     He
Morse   Expresses   Concern
"I  am   concerned  with   being   confronted  with   after-
trie-fact   situations—after   the   CIA   has   created   prob-
lems,  as  it   has   in  the  past—in  certain  foreign  lands,
which,   in  my  opinion,  have  created  embarrassment   to
the   United  States.     I   speak   as   the   chairman  of   the
subcommittee   on   Latin   American  affairs.     It   is   well
known  by  members  of  my  subcommittee that  I  am  not
too  happy  about  some  of  the  manipulations  by  the  CIA
in   Latin  America  in  times  gone   by.  .  .  .
"Would  we  have  told  Webster  or  Calhoun, or  any  of
the  other  great  forefathers  who  trod  the  carpet  of  this
great   parliamentary   Chamber,   that   it   was   necessary
to  have  legislation  to  enable  the  legislative branch  of
the  Government  to  find  out  what  the  executive  branch
was   doing  in  some  cloak-and-dagger  operation  some-
where  in  the  world  which  might  very  well  involve  the
suffering  and  the  lives  of  tens  upon  tens  of  thousands
of   American  boys?     What   would   Jefferson   have  said
about   such  an  unchecked  power?"
—Morse   (D.  Ore.)  in  the  Senate,  Jan.  18.
got  McCone  to  reply  that  he  knew  of  no  instance where  he
was  "charged    with  leaking  such  information.  McCone   also
said  he  knew of  no  leaks  "attributed"  to  him; obviously he  did
not  read  the  papers  closely.    This  was  not  quite  the  same  as
denying  the  charge  but  no  one  on  the  committee  pressed  him
on  it.    Symington  also  easily  drew  a  denial  that  as  a  Caltech
trustee  he  had  ever   "officially"   tried  to  bring  about  the  dis-
charge  of   the   ten  Caltech  professors  who   in   1956   had   the
temerity  to  issue  a  joint  statement  supporting  Adlai  Stevenson
on   nuclear  testing.    Mr.   Stevenson   must   feel   real  chummy
when  he  meets  Mr.  McCone  now  in  the  inner  councils:  the
darnedest  people  do  turn  up  on  the  New  Frontier.
One  of  the  most  important aspects  of  the  McCone  appoint-
ment  did  not  figure  in  Senator  McCarthy's  testimony,  though
Symington   touched   on   it  tangentially.    The   jungle  of   our
multifarious   intelligence  agencies   is  the   scene   of   an  annual
struggle  in  which  each of  the  armed  services with  its  industrial
allies  tends  to   exaggerate   Russian   progress   in   its  own  field
to  get  greater  appropriations  for  itself.    The  Air  Force's  well
publicized   campaigns  first  about   a   "bomber   gap"   and   then
about   a   "missile   gap"    are   the   most   sensational  examples.
They   illustrate  the  Administration's  lack  of  wisdom  in  pick-
McCone  Admits  No  Training  for  Job
SKX.  MARGARET  CHASE  SMITH   (R.   Me.):  Mr.  Mc-
Cone,  my  impression  of  the  CIA, based  upon  my  knowledge
and  experience  with  it,  as  a  member  of  the  Senate  Armed
Services   Committee,  Senate   Appropriations subcommittee
on  defense,  the  Senate  Appropriations  subcommittee  on for-
eign  relations, the  Senate  Preparedness  Investigating Com-
mittee,   and   the   Senate   Aeronautical   and   Space    Sciences
Committee,  has  not  been  a  very  favorable one.
The  Cuban  debacle   and  fiasco  climaxed  my  very   serious
reservations  about  the  CIA  and  the  way  it  was  being  run.
Coupled  with  this  record  is  the  fact  that  the  CIA  enjoys  a
virtual  immunity  from  reporting to  Congress  on  its  activi-
ties  and  on  its  expenditures.   It  has  very  little,  if  any,  real
check  placed  upon  it.
Like  no  other  agency   in  our  Federal   government,  it   has
been  given  a  Congressional  blank   check   for  its   operations
and   its   administration  and  unfortunately  under  such  cir-
cumstances,   Congress   literally   operates   in  the  dark  as   to
the  CIA  without  any  chance   to  measure  its   effectiveness,
As  Mrs.  Smith  Voices  Distrust  of  CIA
its   justifications,   and  whether  it  should  be  revised   or  im-
proved,  that  is,  we  operate  in  the  dark  until  it  is  too  late,
and  we  do  not  learn  of  the  faultiness  and  the  damage  until
after  the  damage has  been  done.   Such  was  the  case  of  Cuba.
Because  of  this  and  because  of   the  great  unlimited  and
unchecked  powers  so  far  as  Congress  is  concerned  that  are
held  by  such  a  vital  agency,  that  is  such  a  vital  part  of  the
life  and  death  of  our  country,  I  believe  that  we  should take
the  greatest  care  in  the  selection  and  confirmation  of   the
Director  of  the  CIA,  and  it  is  with  these  thoughts  in  mind
that  I  wish  to  ask  you  several  questions.
It  is  my  recollection, Mr.  McCone, that  all  of  your prede-
cessors  had  some  prior  training  or  experience  in  the  field  of
intelligence  prior  to  their  appointments  as  director  of   the
CIA.    Will  you  tell  the  committee  what  training or experi-
ence  you  had  in  the  field  of  intelligence  prior  to  your  ap-
pointment   to  that  position?
MR.  McCONE:    None.
—Senate  Armed  Services  Committee,  hearing  Jan  18.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  29, 1962
ing  a  top  intelligence  chief  so  closely  associated  with  one  mili-
tary   point   of   view.    Not   many  months   ago  the   Air   Force
crowd   through   Senators   like  Symington   and   journalists   like
Alsop  was  issuing  hysteria-breeding  estimates   of   Soviet   mis-
sile  strength.     Now,  when   the  Russians  were   advertised   to
have  500  ICBM's,  it  turns  out  that  they  only  have  about   50.
A  close  reading  of  the  "missile  gap"   propaganda  of  two  years
ago  discloses   animosity  against  CIA  Chief   Allen   Dulles  for
rejecting  and  slowly  reducing   bloated   Air  Force  intelligence
estimates   of   Russian   missile  strength.      Symington   told   the
McCone   hearing  he  has  been   "especially   interested   in  some-
body  [sic]  going  into  the  Central   Intelligence   Agency  because
of   its  importance   to  our   national   defense,   and   inasmuch  as
the  previous  administration of  CIA  told  us  early  last  Fall  that
their  estimate  of  Russian  long-range   missile  capacity  in  mid-
1961  was  3.5  percent  of  what  they  estimated  it  would  be  only
19  months  previously."    This  3.5  percent  I  believe  is  a  newly
disclosed   figure.   So  Russian  missile  capacity  was   represented
as  30  times   bigger   than   we  now   believe  it  is,  and   Russia's
missile  forces  were  estimated   as   10  times  greater   than   they
turned  out  to  be.    Such  downward  revision  is  a  threat  to  the
hopes,  the  backlogs  and  the  profits of  our  own  missile  makers.
Billions  Wasted  on  The  Bomber  Gap
Faulty  intelligence  based  upon  faulty  assumptions  led  to  the
expenditure  of  billions of  dollars  on  bombers  and  anti-bomber
defenses  while  the  Russians  instead  of  mass  producing   bomb-
ers  beat  us  to  the  ICBM  against  which  those  defenses  are  use-
less.*    A  CIA   chief   drawn   from   the   aviation-missile  crowd
is   likely  to  be   less  on   guard   than   Mr.   Dulles  was  to  this
danger.     Indeed  the  government   seems  to  have  learned  little
from  the  experience.    The  huge  missile  program  outlined  in
the  new  military budget,  a  buildup  to  some  1500  missiles,  far
beyond   the   number   needed   for   deterrence,   is  based   on   the
same  kind  of  bloated  assumptions  as  before.    "If   we  assume
as   in   fact   we   have,"   Secretary  McNamara   told   the   Senate
Armed  Services  Committee  the  day  after  the  McCone  hearing,
"that  the  Soviet  Union   will  eventually  build   a  large   ICBM
The  FBI  Infiltrates  'Em
And  the  CIA  Subsidizes  'Em
Sen.   Smith  (R.  Me.):  It  has   been   alleged,   Mr.  Mc-
Cone,  to  me  that  the  CIA  has  been  or  is  supporting  the
political  activities  of  certain  ethnic  groups  in  this  coun-
try,  such  as  the  Polish  and  Hungarian   group;   is  this
true,  and  if  so,  what  comment  do  you  have  to  make?
Mr.  McCone:  I  can  make  no  comment  on  it.
Sen.  Smith:  Is  it  true?
Mr.   McCone:  I   wouldn't  comment   on   it.
*          *         *         *
Sen.   Russell:   As   a   matter   of   national   policy,   and
speaking   as  a  citizen  and  not  as  a  nominee   for  this
position,  Mr.  McCone,  do  you  see  anything   immoral  or
wrong  about  any  agency  of  this  government   undertak-
ing   to   encourage   ethnic  groups   in  this  country   that
have  brethren  behind  the  Iron  Curtain  to  look  at  mat-
ters  from  the  standpoint  of  this  country   rather   than
of   the  Soviet   Union?
Mr.  McCone:  No,  sir,  I  do  not.
—Senate  Armed  Services  Committee,  Jan.  18.
force,  then  we  must   concentrate   our   efforts   on   the  kind   of
strategic  offensive  forces  which  will  be  able  to  ride  out  an  all-
out  attack  by  nuclear  armed   ICBMs  in  sufficient   strength  to
strike  back  decisively."     But  what  if  the  Russians  do  not  build
a  large  ICBM  force?    What  if  they  feel  they  have  enough  to
deter  an  attack  upon  them  and  are  not  crazy  enough  to  try  and
build  up  a  force  big  enough  for  a  suicidal  first  strike  against
'"We  have  today,"  Mr.  McNamara  told  Armed   Services,
"in  the   North  American  continent   and  across  the   seaward
approaches   a   very  extensive   and  sophisticated   air   defense
system,  costing  in  the  neighborhood  of  $2 billion  a  year.   But
this  system   was  designed  primarily  to  defend  against  mass
attack  by  manned bombers.    In  that  role  it  is  quite  effective,"
he  continued,  with  perhaps  unconscious   irony,  "particularly
since  the  Soviet  Union  did  not  build the  large  manned bomber
force   anticipated   many   years   ago   by   the   planners   of   the
system.     But   the  threat   is  now  shifting   to  the   ICBM  and
submarine-launched  missiles.     Against  this  threat,  the  exist-
ing  system  is  completely  ineffective,  except  for  certain  parts
of  the  warning  network."
Trying  To  Test  McCone's  Sensitivity
"The  CIA is  credited with  having helped to  oust  Mossadegh
from  the  Premiership  of  Iran  in  1953.    History  has  not  yet
clearly   demonstrated  that   this  was   the  wisest   policy.    It
probably  never   will,   but  the   question  of   legality  and  au-
thority  of  the  CIA  in  this  action  is  open  to  question.    CIA
takes  credit  for  the  overthrow  of  Dr.  Arbenz  as   President
of  Guatemala  in  1954.    Objectively  considered   this  was  de-
sirable,  but  again  it  is  difficult  to  establish  any  justification
in  law  or  treaty  or  even  tradition  for  this  action.     It   was
not  sanctioned  by  the  OAS  or  by  NATO  membership,  and
scarcely   comes  under  the  Monroe  Doctrine.
"The  policy decision  involved last  year  in  supporting Gen.
Phoumi  Nosavan's  move  from  Vientiane,  helping  him  equip
an  army  in  the  south  to  remove   Souvanna  Phouma  from
power  rather  than  join  the  cabinet   as  Vice  Premier   was,
insofar  as  I  know,  without  any  sanction  excepting  that  he
had  declared  himself  to  be  positively  on  our  side  and  Sou-
vanna  Phouma  was  declared  neutral.
"The  U-2  flight  raises  some   questions   of   prudence,   but
does  not  raise,  in  my  judgment,  questions  of  legal   or  con-
stitutional   justification   as   the   others   do.    In  the   case  of
the  invasion  of  Cuba  this  year,  the  basic  question  of  justi-
fication  would   remain  even  though  the   invasion  had   been
a  success.  .  .  .
Toward  Another   Guatemala  or  Cuba
"The  director  of  the  CIA  should  be  sensitive   to  the  dan-
ger  of  such  proceedings.    I  hope  that   this  committee  will
make   inquiry   as   to  the   awareness   and  sensitivity   of   the
current   nominee  with   reference   to   these   basic   considera-
tions."
—Sen.  Eugene  J.  McCarthy   (D.  Minn.)   before   the   Sen-
ate  Armed  Services  Committee  January   18.
Sen.   Cannon   (D.   Nev.):   Senator   McCarthy  raised   the
point  on  page   4  of  his  statement   concerning   the  legal  or
constitutional  justification  for  certain  actions,   and  in  that
connection  I  would  like  to  ask  you  whether  or  not  you  feel
that  if  the  CIA  were  to  interfere  or  to  assist  in  the   over-
throw  of  the  government  of  any  foreign  country,  that  would
be  a  violation  of  your  constitutional  authority?
Mr.   McCone:    Well,  that   is   an  answer   [sic],   a   rather
difficult   hypothetical  question   to   answer,   Senator,   I  think
that   there  again  it  would  really  depend   upon  the  actions
that  might  be  indicated  in  support  of   the  President's  for-
eign  policies  .  .  .  and  our  determined  efforts  to  fight  back
the  intrusion of  communism. ...  It  would  have  to  be  quite
an  extreme  case,  I  should  think,  before   I  would  feel  that
it  was  a  violation  of  constitutional  rights  of  the   executive
branch  [sic]   of  the   government."
—Senate  Armed  Services  Committee  hearing  Jan.  18.
1   '!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   29,  1962
How   Missile  and  Bomber  Gap  Scares  Can  Endanger  U.S. Security
us ?   What  if,  instead  of  producing  more  missiles,  they  again
concentrate  their  less  luxurious  resources  on  the  next  step  and
develop  some  new  weapon  which  will  do  to  the  missile  what
the  missile  did  to  the  bomber ?   It  is  by  just  such  tactics  that
a  country with  lesser  resources  can  get  ahead  of  a  country with
greater.
Industrial  Convenience  and  Military  Policy
It  is  here  that  faulty  intelligence  endangers  national  secu-
rity.    And  it  is here  that  Mr  McCone  is most  unfit  for  his  new
post.    The  welfare  of  the  aviation-missile lobby  depends  on  a
mirror-image  of  Russian  intentions.    Like  our   business  men
generally,  the  aviation-missile  crowd  is  conditioned  to  mass
production.     If  one  ICBM  is  a  good  weapon,  .then  why  not
1,000?    The  more  the  better,  especially  since  profit  becomes
substantial  only  with  quantity  production.    Our  business  men
assumed  mass  production  of  bombers  and  now  assume  mass
production  of  missiles  by  the  Russians  because  those  assump-
tions  reflect  their  own  industrial  experience,   serve  their  own
interests   and   reflect,   incidentally,   their   military   ignorance.
The  basic  military principle  of  "economy  of  force"   is  repug-
nant  to  them  because  it  discourages  the  mass  production  as-
sembly  line.    In   our  society—and  this  may  prove   a  crucial
weak  point—industrial  convenience  tends  to  determine  mili-
tary  doctrine,  instead  of  the  other  way  round.    Mass  produc-
tion  is  best   served   by  the   illusion  that   if  only  forces   huge
enough  are  built  up,  armies  can  again  be  used  as  instruments
of  national  policy,  in  blackmail, and  that  we  can win  a  nuclear
war  if  our  bluff  should  be  called.
Mass  production  requires  a  belief  in  massive  retaliation.    It
is  to  the  missile  business what  the  two  car garage  is to  Detroit.
It  was  revealing  that  in  the  Senate  hearing,  Mr.  McCone  in-
sisted  on  declaring  himself  "a  strong  supporter  of  the  concept
of  massive retaliation"  even  though  Symington  by  a  series  of
leading  questions  tried  to  create  the  opposite  impression  in  or-
der  to  rebut  another  of  McCarthy's  charges.     Mr.   McCone
even  declined  to  comment  when  Symington  gave  him  a  broad
hint  and  an  easy  way  out  by  asking,  "Do  you  agree  with  the
President  when  he  says  we  should  have  some  difference  be-
tween  humiliation  and  nuclear  response?"     When  Mr.  Mc-
Cone  finally  caught  on  to  what  Symington  was  trying  to  do
All's  Well  in  The  Middle  East
Sen.   Bartlett   (D.  Ala.):  Mr.  McCone   do  you   know
if    Standard   Oil   of    California    is   a   member    of    the
Arabian   American  Oil   Company?
Mr.   McCone:   Yes,  it   is.
Sen.   Bartlett:  And  of   course   all   of   us  have   heard
that   this  company,   operating  in  the  Middle   East,  has
at   various  times   intervened   or   participated    or  inter-
fered,  whatever   word  should  properly   be  applied,  in  the
operation   of  the  governments  in  that  area.  .  .  .  Have
you  any  comment  to  make  on  that  situation?
Mr.   McCone:   I   would   have   no  comment   because  I
have  not  personally  read  or  heard  such  allegations.    In
my  trips  to  the  Middle  East  I  have  observed  that  the
Armaco   people  handled  their  relationship  with  the gov-
ernments  of  Arabia  and  Bahrein  Island  in  a  very  satis-
factory  way.   I  don't  know   of  any  interference."
—Senate  Armed  Services  Committee,  Jan. 18.
for  him  and  agreed  that  "We  must  have  a  capacity to  conduct
war   at  various  levels,"   he  still  added   stubbornly  "We   also
must  have  the  capacity  to  handle  ourselves  in  the  ultimate
war."    The  reply  will  evoke  cheers  in  the  Air  Force  and  the
Air  Force  Association.
No  committee  of  Congress  is  in  a  better  position  critically
to  explore  the  full  implications  of  the  basic point  here  raised,
and  none  is  less  disposed  to  do  so than  Senate  Armed  Services
which  is heavily weighted  for  the  aviation  point  of  view.  The
ranking   Republican,   Saltonstall,   was   so   solicitous   for   the
nominee  as  to  embarrass  even  the  chairman.    Senator  Russell
seemed  to  be  concerned  only  with  making  sure  that  there  had
been  no  diminution  of  CIA's  power,   that   McCone's   deputy
would  be  a  military  man  and  that  in  selecting  this  deputy  he
wouldn't   be  influenced  by  any  other   branch  of  the   govern-
ment,  above  all  by the  State  Department,  of  which  the  august
Georgian   does  not  seem  to  approve.     As  for  the  unfriendly
questions  by Mrs. Smith  and  Case,  these  concentrated   largely
on  the  conflict  of  interest  area  where  Mr.  McCone  has  a  fasci-
nating   record   of   ingeniously  managing   to   squeeze   through
some  of  the  oddest  crevices  of  the  law.  But  this,  which  may
figure  in   the   coming   Senate   debate,  must   be  left   for   next
week's  issue.                                                             Jan.  24,  Noon
Every  Reader:  Don't  Forget  to  Write  the  President Asking  Him  Not  to  Test  and Send  Us  A Postcard
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave., N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name   .
Street
City   ............................................Zone.............State....................
1/29/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)    Name   ................................................................————•
Street    .........._..........................................................................
City   ............_,.........................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
ited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manayer.  Erther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $6  in i  the  U.  S.,   »6  in
^
weekly  published  and  edited    y   .    .     one;                                    .                  .           .
Canada:   810  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:   $16  to  Europe;   *20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED