I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962dec10.pdf

============================================================

Chiang  Kai-shek  and  the McMabon  Line, P.  3
Who Started the  Oct. 20 Offensive  on Sino-Indian  Border? Some Fresh  Light on An Overblown Affair,  pps. 2-3
L R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  X,  NO.  45
DECEMBER  10,  1962
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
A  Hopeful  Crisis  Story  The  Government   Withholds
During  the  Cuban  crisis,  the  big  fear  in  this  country was
that  the  Russians might  retaliate  by taking  action  against  Ber-
lin.    It  should  therefore  be  news  of  the  first  order  that  during
the  crisis  these  fears  were  diminished  by  the  mutual  surveil-
lance  of  each  other's  troop  movements  in  the  Berlin  area  by
the  U.S.  and   Soviet  military  commands  in  Germany.    Each
side  had   a  military  mission  on  the  other's  territory,  and   in
the  Berlin  area  was  even   able  to  use  helicopters   with   the
other's  consent  to  make  sure  that  no  threatening  buildup was
occurring.    Fear  and  misinformation might  easily  have  led  to
a  miniature  1914  interplay of  mobilization  and  counter-mob-
ilization,  escalating, beyond  cither's  control  into  war.    Yet  for
some  reason  the  press  officers   of  the  government  have  done
their  best to  keep  this  story under  wraps,  and  no  reference to
it  appears  in  any  of  the  "now  it  can  be  told"  stories appear-
ing  in  various magazines.
Just  What  We  Proposed  at  Geneva
The  silence  is  the  more  curious  because  this  aspect  of  the
Cuban  crisis was  a  kind  of  successful  pilot  model  exercise  in
"arms  control,"  ordinarily a  favorite  topic  with  the  Pentagon
when  disarmament  comes  up  for  discussion.    It  illustrated   the
value  in  a  crisis  of  certain  provisions  in  the  U.S.  draft  plan
for  a  treaty  on  general  and  complete  disarmament  we  tabled
at  Geneva  last  April  18.    In  Stage  1,  Section  F  on  "Reduction
of  the  Risk  of  War,"   the  U.S.  called  for  exchange  of  mili-
tary  missions and  advance notice  of  major  military movements
in  order  to  reduce  the   danger   of  war  by  miscalculation   or
accident.    When  Mr.  Zorin  on  July  19  at  Geneva  indicated
Soviet  agreement  (similar  provisions  were  included  in  Section
17a  of  the  Soviet  draft  treaty  submitted  by  the  Soviet  Union
on  September  22),  Mr.  Dean  welcomed  this  three  days  later
and  asked  whether  the  Russians were  "prepared  to  consider  an
arrangement  of  this  kind  as  an  initial  measure  that  can  be
negotiated  and  implemented"   without  waiting  for   completion
of  negotiations  on  general   disarmament.
So far  as I  can learn  there  was no  answer  from  the  Russians.
But  the  experience  in  the  Berlin  area  during  the  Cuban  crisis
would  have  seemed  an  excellent  opportunity  to  press  the  point
and  educate  the  U.S.  public  on  its  significance.    Yet  no  story
on  this  mutual  surveillance  came  out  of  Berlin  or  the  Penta-
gon.     It  came  to  light  here  only  by  chance  when  Wm.  C.
Foster,   chief   of   the   U.S.   Arms   Control   and   Disarmament
Agency,  was  interviewed  by  a  panel  of  three  newsmen   (one
British,  one  Japanese,  one  American)  on  a  Voice  of  America
program  Nov.  27.    The  American  participant,   Earl  H.  Voss,
wrote  a  story  which  appeared' that  day  on  page  one  of  his
paper,-the  Washington  Star,  "Russia,   U.S.  Monitored   Troop
Shifts  in  Crisis,"  but  no  transcript  and  no  tape  could  be  ob-
tained  from  the  State  Department  press  office,   which  did  its
best  to  discourage  any  follow  up.    It  took  me  a  week  to  get
Is  Peace  Un-American?
"With  the fate  of  humanity resting on a  push-button,
the  quest  for   peace  has  become  the  highest   form  of
patriotism.  Women's Strike  for  Peace  is  a  grass-roots
movement  to  that  end.   We  are  not  an organization  and
we  do  not  ask  of  any  woman  her  race,  religion  or  poli-
tics.    We  do  not  ask  an  oath  of  loyalty  to  any  set  of
beliefs.  Instead  we  ask  loyalty  to  the  race  of  man. Any
woman  who sees the  threat  to  all  mankind  and who will
work  to  achieve  general  and  complete  disarmament  un-
der  effective  international  control  is  welcome  to  work
with  us.  We  submit  it  is  not  we  women  who  should  be
'investigated' but  those  who,  with the  cool  logic of  mad-
ness,  attempt  to  reconcile  us  to  complete  destruction.
Our  'crime*  is  to  cry  aloud  that  nuclear  war  must  not
be  permitted,  and  we  shall  continue  to  cry  aloud  with
all  our  strength.   We  do  not  fear  the  contamination  of
ideas;  we  fear  the  conspiracy  of  silence.    The  time  is
long  past  when a small group of  censors  can  silence  the
voice  of  peace.    To  muzzle  honest  debate  in  the  name
of  national interest  is  to  do our  country,  and the  world,
a fatal  disservice."
—From  the  reply  issued  by  Women  Strike  for  Peace
Dec. 3  to  the  subpoenas  served  by  the  House  Un-Ameri-
can Activities  Committee  on its  leader, Dagmar  Wilson,
and  IS  other  women  to  appear   at  hearings  Dec. 11,  IS
and  13  to  investigate   the  peace  movement.
a  transcript  from  the  Voice  of   America.
Military  missions  came  up  in  the  interview  when  Mr.  Voss
said  both  the  President  and  Chairman  Khrushchev  had  men-
tioned  the  possibility  of  a  detente  once  they  got  by  the  Cuban
crisis  and  asked,  "Can  you tell  us  how  you  see  such  a  detente
developing?"     "If  we  were  to  increase  the  exchange  of  mili-
tary  missions  between  the  two  sides,"  Mr.  Foster  replied,  "so
that  one  side  could  observe  what  the  other  side  was  doing,
this   tends   to  stabilize  the  relationships."     Later   Mr.   Voss
asked,  "Could   you  go  into  detail  on  how  that  would  work?
Would  the  Russians  be  stationed  say  at  Cape  Canaveral  and
a  few  other  of  our  bases  in  exchange  for  our  getting American
military  men  at  their  bases?"    Mr.  Foster   instead  of  answer-
ing  the  question  directly said  we already  had  such  an  exchange
of  missions  in  East  and  West  Germany  where  they  "have  been
useful  in  giving  information  on  the  movements  of  troops,  on
the  fact  that  these  are  maneuvers  and  not  an  actual  concentra-
tion  in  anticipation  of  an  attack."    Mr.  Voss  wanted  to  know
whether  these  missions  operated  during  the  Cuban  crisis  "and
were  we  getting  information  on  troop  movements,   if  any?"
Mr.  Foster  answered,  "Yes,"  and  said  the  arrangement   went
back  to  the  Postdam  agreement.  . Actually  the  exchange  ante-
dated  the  Potsdam  agreements   and  was  not  connected   with
them.    The  U.S.,   Soviet  and  British  commands   in  Germany
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
1   1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  10, 1962
A  Fresh  Look  at  the  Fighting  on  the  Sino-Indian  Border  .  . .
The  recent major burst  of  warfare  on  the  Sino-Indian  border
began  on  Oct.  20.  Which  side  began  it ? The  U.S.  press  refers
constantly  to  a  Chinese  offensive  which  opened  on  that  date.
If  this  was  a  Chinese   offensive,  then  the  sudden  unilateral
cease-fire   and   withdrawal  by  Peking   is  puzzling.      But   if   it
was  the  Indian  side  which  provoked   the  fighting,  then   the
Chinese  may  have  pushed   forward   in  order   to   demonstrate
their  military  strength  so  that  their  renewed  offer  to  negotiate
would  not  be  taken  as  a  sign  of  weakness.
Victorious  Attack  Expected
In  his  first  report  on  the  outbreak  of  the  fighting,  the  able
Delhi   correspondent   of  The   Times  of   London   noted    (Oct.
22),  "For  the  past  few  weeks  the  public  has  been  led  by  the
newspapers  to  expect  a  victorious  Indian  attack  on  the  Chinese
who  had  crossed  the  Tongla  ridge,"  at  the  extreme  western
end  of  the  McMahon  line.    Chinese  troops  had  occupied  the
south  face  of  the  ridge  Sept.  8.    The  Indians  regard  the  south
face  as  in  their  territory  while  the  Chinese   claim   the   whole
ridge  is  in  theirs.*    The  Indians  began  extensive   preparations
to  retake  it.    On  Oct.   11  Peking  reported  33  Chinese   and  6
Indians  killed  in  Indian   attacks  at  this  point  on  the   border.
Delhi  the  same  day  declared   it  was  the  Chinese  who   attacked
but  the  London  Times  Delhi  correspondent   said  of  the  brief
communique  issued  by the  Indians,  "This  skimpy  account  does
not  answer  the  question   whether   the  Indian  army  is  now  be-
ginning   its  attack  to  push   the  Chinese   intruders  back   across
Tongla  Ridge.   .  .  .  The  Indian  Army  has  now  had  time  to
complete  its  deployment  of  forces  south  of  the  Tongla  Ridge.
The  Government,  having  given  orders  that  the  Chinese  must
be  thrown   back  over  the  border,   has  been   showing  signs  of
impatience,   but   the  new  corps  commander   in  the   area,   Lt.
Gen.  Kaul,  must  by  now  have  worked  himself   and  the  many
specialist   officers  he  took  from  Delhi  into  the  command   and
it  could  well  be that  tonight's  report—issued  only  after  Peking
had   announced   an   attack   by  Indians   and   heavy   fighting—
*  In  an  editorial  Oct.  12  the   London  Times   said   of   this
move,  "The  Chinese  action  is  evidently  in  retaliation  against
Indian  moves  made in  the  Ladakh area  earlier  in  the  summer.
Indian  posts  were  pushed  forward  there  in  territory  where
the  Chinese  were  in  occupation—if  military  posts   alone  can
amount  to  occupation  in  such  wild  and  uninhabited  country.
The  Chinese  have  now  moved  south  of  the  McMahon line  to
demonstrate  their claim,  though  they  have  done  it  at  a  point
where  there  is  a  discrepancy  between  the  line  as  shown  on
the  maps  and  indicated by  the  watershed.    They  claim  it  is
the  Indian  troops  and  not  theirs  that  are  on  the  wrong  side
of  the  line."
The  U.S.   and the  McMahon  Line
"State   Secy.   Herter  refused   Nov.   12  to   take   'any
sides'  in  the  border  dispute  between  India  and  Commu-
nist  China.    Herter,  while  reaffirming  the  U.  S.  sympa-
thy  for  India, told  newsmen  the Indian-Chinese-Tibetan
border  was   'ill-defined'  and  that   the   US   lacked   'first
hand  knowledge,  particularly .  .  .  (about)   the  north-
western  area  [Ladakh—IPS],  with  respect  to  the  defini-
tive   border   that   could   rightly   be  claimed   by   either
side'."
—Facts  on File  371B2, Nov.  12-18,  1959.
"In  Washington,  the  Secretary  of  State  (Mr. Herter)
said  at  a  news  conference  on  Nov.  12  that  ., .  .  so  far  as
he  knew, the  USA  had  never  officially  endorsed  the  Mc-
Mahon  Line. . .  .  Any  decision  on  the  merits  of  the  case
could  only  be  taken  after  one  side   or  the   other  had
appealed   to  the  UN  on  the  ground  that  the  situation
constituted  a  threat  to  international  peace."
—Keesmg's  Archives  (London),  Nov.  21-28, 1959.
could   signal  the  beginning   of  an  operation  to  clear   Chinese
troops  from  the  south  face  of  Tongla  Ridge."    The  next  day
the  London  Times  Delhi  correspondent  cabled,  "Mr.   Nehru,
the  Prime   Minister,  confirmed   today   that   the   Indian   Army
had  been  ordered  to  clear  the  Chinese   from   Indian  territory
which  they  are  occupying  south  of  the  McMahon  line."
That  the  Indians  were  preparing  a  large  scale  attack  was
also  evident  from  the  report  by  the  Indian   correspondent    of
the  London   Economist   (Oct.   20)  who  wrote:
"For  the  first  time  since  the  Sino-Indian  border  dispute
began,   the   Indian   people   know   where   it   stands.     After
months  in  which  New  Delhi  has  blown  hot  and  cold  in  suc-
cessive  breaths,  one  could  almost  feel  the  relief  that  greet-
ed  Mr.  Nehru's  flat  statement  on  Oct.  12  that  the  army  had
been  ordered  to  push  the  Chinese  out  of  their  latest  foot-
hold  in  the  North  East  Frontier   Agency.    He  followed   it
next  day with  an  appeal  to  the  people  to  back  the  troops  in
the  front  line  'with  discipline  and  increased  production.'   It
is  as  if  Chamberlain  had  given  way  to  Churchill. .  .  . The
Indians   mean  what   they   say   about   pushing   the   Chinese
out.  .  .  .  They  have  at  least   50,000  men  deployed  under  a
new  and  energetic,  but  not  battle-tried,   corps  commander,
Gen.  B.  M. Kaul,  who  was  moved  two  weeks  ago  from  lead-
ership  of  the  army  staff  to  take  charge  in  the  North  East
Frontier  Agency.  .  .  ."
This  did  not  go  unnoticed  on  the  Chinese  side.  The  Peking
Review  for  Oct.   19  [which  recently  arrived  here  with  a  big
batch   of   Chinese   publications   delayed   by  our  postal   censor-
ship]  carries  the  text  of  an  editorial,  "Mr.  Nehru,  It  Is  High
Time  for  You  To  Pull  Back  from  the  Edge  of  the  Precipice"
from  the  Peking  People's   Daily  of  Oct.   14.    This  said,   "A
Thumb-Nail  Sketch of  the  Distant Land—Ladakh—Whose Northeast Corner Is In Dispute
"Ladakh  was  annexed  in  1841  by  Gulab  Singh,  Rajah  of
Jamimi,  leading  to  armed  border  conflict  with  the  Tibetan
authorities.    In  1842  two  separate  treaties  were  concluded
whereby   it   was   agreed  that  the  boundary  of   Ladakh  'as
fixed  from   ancient  times'  should  be  respected   and  not  be
subject  to  further violations; one  of  the  treaties  was  signed
between  Gulab Singh  and  representatives  of  the  Dalai Lama
of  Tibet,  and  the  other  between  the  respective   suzerains—
the  Sikh  kingdom  in  the  Punjab,  and  the  Chinese   Emperor.
The  frontier  line  was  not  fixed  by  maps  but  was   regarded
by   the   British,   Tibetan   and  Chinese   authorities  alike   as
established by  custom  and tradition.
"Situated  17,000  feet  above  sea  level,  Ladakh has  a.n area
of  about  37,000  square  miles  and  a  population of  less  than
100,000.    Barren,  inhospitable   and 'undeveloped,  it   has  no
industries,  only  primitive  agriculture,  and  no  road  commu-
nications   apart   from   a   long   and   difficult    road   passing
through  remote  country  which,  together  with  two  airstrips,
constitutes  the  only  supply  link  with  Kashmir.    Lamaistic
Buddhism   is   the   prevailing  religion,   more   than   half   of
Ladakh's  arable  land  being  owned  by  28  monasteries  (gom-
pas).    Great  influence is  wielded  by  eleven  incarnate  lamas
(shenshaks),  of  whom  the  senior—the  Shenshak  Bekub—is
Chief  Lama  of  Ladakh  and  now  holds  the  post  of  Minister  •
of  State  for  Ladakh Affairs  in  the  Kashmir  Government."
—Keesing's  Archives  (London),  p. 17,120 Nov.  21-28,1959.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,   December  10, 1962
.  .  .  And  An  Antidote  to  the  Exaggerations  in  the  American  Press
massive  invasion  of  Chinese  territory  by  Indian  troops  on  the
eastern   sector  of   the  Sino-Indian  boundary  seems  imminent.
Indian   Prime  Minister  Nehru   declared   on   Oct.   12  that   he
had   issued   instructions  to  the   Indian   armed   forces   'to   free
Chinese   territory   in   the   Northeastern    frontier    Agency   of
Chinese   intruders',"   and   spoke   of   "the   massive  attack   for
which   the   Indian   armed   forces   have   now   completed   their
preparations   and   which   they   are  only  waiting  to   unleash."
The  editorial  asserted  that  Chinese  troops  had  never   crossed
the  McMahon  line  but  that  the  Indians  had.    It  named  a  list
of  points  held   by  the   Indians  which   it  claimed  were   north
of  the  McMahon   line,  i.e.,  on  the  Chinese  side,  and  declared,
"Therefore,   the  ones  who   should   be  cleared   off  are  the   in-
truding  Indian  troops;  certainly  not  the  Chinese  troops  who
are  defending  their  own  frontier."  *    The  next  issue  of  the
Peking  Review  (Oct.   26)   carried  the  text  of  a  Chinese   gov-
ernment  statement   dated   Oct.   24  saying  "on  Oct.   20,  Indian
forces  started  a  massive  general   offensive   in  both  the  eastern
and   western   sectors   of   the   Sino-Indian   border.     In   these
serious   circumstances,   the   Chinese   frontier   guards   had   no
choice  but  to  strike  back  in  self-defense."
Did  the  Chinese  Anticipate?
It   would   seem   from   all  this   that   India  was  preparing   a
major  offensive.    The  Chinese  claim  they  struck  back  in  reply
to  it.    Other  observers  believe  the  Chinese  struck  first  in  an-
ticipation  of  the   offensive   building  up  against   them.    Thus
a  military  expert   writing  in  the  London   Sunday   Times   Oct.
21,  after  fighting  broke   out,  said  that   in  view  of  the   order
issued  by Nehru  on  Oct.   12,  "It  now  looks  as  if  the   Chinese
troops  .  .  .  decided  to  get  their  blow  in  first."
In  either  case,  the  Chinese  advance  takes  on  the  aspect  not
of   an   attempt   to  invade  India  but   to  demonstrate   that   the
Chinese  could  not  be  pushed  back  by  force.    Having  demon-
strated  strength,  they  could  afford  to  fall  back  to  the  McMahon
line  and  offer   a  peaceful   settlement  without  loss  of  face.
*  The  Times  of   London  in   an   editorial   Oct.  23  said   the
Chinese  "have  been  denying  that  they  had  crossed   the  line
and  have  maintained  that  their  actions  were  no  more  than  a
reply  to  the  assault  the  Indians  were  mounting.    And  there
is  on  the  ground  and  on  the  maps,  some  excuse  for  the  dis-
pute  at  this  point,  even  if  the  Chinese  arguments  are  flimsy."
The   London  Economist   (Oct.  20)   also   said,   "The   most   in-
triguing  uncertainty  is  whether  the  area  really  is   south  of
the  McMahon  line  at  all."
Chiang  Kai-shek  and  the  McMahon Line
"The  drawing together of  India and  the  United  States
in   these   changed   circumstances   was   illustrated   and
helped  by  the  statement  of  Mr. Galbraith,  the  American
Ambassador  here,  who  said  that  Washington   regarded
the  McMahon Line  as  the  legal  international  boundary.
The  previous   position   taken  by  Washington   had  been
warily  stated  by  Mr. Christian Herter,  the  previous  Sec-
retary  of  State,  probably  with  an  eye   to  reactions  in
Formosa.  . .  ."
—The  Times  (London),  from  Delhi, Oct.  29.
"The    Chinese    Nationalist    Foreign    Ministry   has
lodged  a  formal  protest  with  the  United  States  on  the
Sino-Indian  border  dispute,  as  a  result  of  statements  by
Prof.  J.  K. Galbraith, the  U.S.  Ambassador,  and a  State
Department   spokesman   supporting   the   'controversial
McMahon  line.'    The  protest   said   the   American  view
was  contrary  to  historical   facts."
—The  Times  (London),  from  Hongkong,  Nov.  10.
"In  his   book   China's  Destiny   written   in   1943   the
Generalissimo  left  no  doubt  that  he  not  only   intended
to  recover  all  China's  lost  territories,  including  Taiwan,
but   also   to   reconquer   Tibet.     The   1960   China   Year
Book,  published  in  Taipeh,  showed  a  border  even  fur-
ther  south  in  India  than  Peking   claims."
—Edgar  Snow's  -new  book,  "The   Other  Side  of   The
River: Red  China  Today",  p. 121.
"In  Nationalist   Taiwan  a  collection  of  Atlases  and
geography   books   of   8   different   countries    (including
Britain)  has  been  put  on  display  to  prove  that  the  Mc-
Mahon  line  has  been  widely  repudiated  in  the  past."
—London    Observer    News   Service   dispatch     from
Singapore  in  the  Washington  Post,  Dec.  3.
The  real  problem  for  Mr.  Nehru  is not  military  but  ethical.
The  Delhi  correspondent   of  The  London  Times   emphasized
it   beautifully  when   he  wrote   (Nov.    9)   of  Nehru's   "total
war"   speech  in  the  Indian  Parliament:
"As  he  has  often  done  in  the  past,   Mr.  Nehru  said   that
war  between   Indian  and  China  could   affect   the  world.    But
previously  he  had   advanced   this  as  a  weighty   argument   for
avoiding  war.    Today  it  seemed  no  more  than  a  footnote.  .  . .
In  the  past  Mr.  Nehru  has  always  been  ready  to  take  on  the
role  of  reason  in  the  nations'  follies,  and  to  urge  on   powers
whose  disputes  threatened  to  light  a  greater  conflagration   that
considerations  of  national  pride  be  put  aside  in  the   interests
of   world   peace:   today   such   considerations   are  forgotten    or
unvoiced."
Nehru's  Account  of  How  India  Discovered China  Had  Built A  Road  Across Ladakh
"Our  attention was  called  to  a  small-scale  map  published
in  a  Chinese  newspaper  indicating  the  rough  alignment  of
the  road.    It  was  not  possible  to  find  out  from  this  small
map  whether  this  road  crossed  Indian  territory,  though  it
looked   as  if   it  did.    It  was   therefore  decided  to  send   re-
connaissance  parties  to  find  out  the  alignment  of  the  road.
"Two  reconnaissance  parties  were  accordingly  sent   last
year.    One  was  taken  into  custody  by  a  superior   Chinese
detachment;  the  other  returned and  gave  us  some  rough  in-
dication  of  this  newly  constructed  road  in  the  Aksai  Chin
area.    According to  their  report,  the  road  enters  Indian  ter-
ritory  in  the  south  near Lake Jilganang and  runs northwest,
leaving  Indian  territory  in  the  northwest corner  of  Ladakh.
"Kcpresentations  were  made  to  the  Chinese   government
on  Oct. 18,  1958, drawing their  attention  to  the   construction
of   a  road  through  Indian  territory  and   the   arrest   of   15
members  of  an  Indian  reconnaissance   party  within  the  In-
dian  border.    The  Chinese  government,   in   their   reply   on
Nov.  1,  1958,  notified  the  release  of  the  party  and  claimed
that  the  road  ran through  Chinese  territory.  .  .  .
"The  entire  Ladakh  area,  including  Aksai  Chin,   became
part  of  Jammu  and  Kashmir  state  as  a  result  of  a  treaty
signed  in  1842.  .  .  .  Although  no  actual  demarcation   was
made  on  the  ground,  maps  were  prepared  on  the  basis  of
old  usage  and  convention.    These   maps  have  been  used  in
India  for  the  last  100  years  or  so.    They  include  the   Aksai
Chin  region as  part  of  Ladakh.  .  .  .  Old  Chinese  maps  have
shown a different  alignment."
—Nehru  to  the  Upper  House  of  the  Indian  Parliament,  Aug.  31, 1959  (text  in  Keesing's,  p.  17116  Nov.   1959).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 10,  1962
Little  Use  Made  of  Arms  Control  Agency  In  An  Arms  Race Crisis
(Continued   from   Page One)
agreed   in  October   1944  to  allow  military  missions  in  each
other's  respective  zones  of  occupation.    The  present  missions
were  formalized  in  a  U.S.-Soviet  military  agreement  signed
April  5, 1947.
Thus  an  agreement  reached  years ago  in  wartime when  the
U.S.  and  the  Soviets  were  allies  and   formalized   before  the
cold  war  had  time  to  freeze  a  permanent  posture  of  hostility,
turned  out  in  a  crisis years  later  to  have  great  utility  in pre-
venting   war   by   miscalculation.     An   Administration   really
concerned   about   disarmament   and   arms  control   would   see
that  this  story  got  out.   The  U.S. plan  of  last  April,  for  ex-
ample,  called  for  the  establishment  of  an  International  Com-
mission  on  Reduction  of  the  Risk  of  War  to  study  just  such
measure»    Now  would  seem  to  be  a  good   time  to  press  for
its  establishment.    But  Mr.   Foster   himself  did  not  use  the
interview  to  develop  the  significance  of  all  this;  the  subject
was  quickly  dropped  and  the  press  office  did  its  best  to  bury
the  story.    No  newspaper  pursued  it.    This  reflects  a  general
indifference  to  the  whole  topic.
Bad  For  the  ACDA's  Morale
The   fact  is  that  the  Cuban  crisis  can  be  seen  as  an  arms
race  crisis.   The  President  said  the  Russians  tried  to  put  mis-
siles  in  Cuba  to  compensate  for  their  inferiority in  long  range
missiles.    The  tense  days  both  sides  experienced  on  the  brink
dramatically  demonstrated  the  need  for  measures  to  prevent
accidental  or  unintended  war.   The  U.S. Arms  Control  and
Disarmament  Agency  was  set  up  to  study  just  such  matters,
and  has  indeed  been  doing  so.    It  has  also  been  studying just
how  best  to  negotiate  questions  of  arms  reduction,  troop  de-
ployment,  and  bases  with  the  least  possible  danger  to  prestige
and  alliances.    But  it  was  allowed  to  play  only  a  minimal,
belated  and  peripheral  role  in  the  crisis.    Mr.  Foster  did  go
to  two  meetings  of  the  executive  committee  of  the  National
Security  Council  (so  I  was  told)  but  it  was  the  Secretary of
State  who  took  him  along  the  first  time  (Oct.  26),  almost
as  a  kindly  afterthought,  that  perhaps  his  agency  might  have
something  to  contribute!    There  is  no  sign   that  the  White
House  during  the  crisis  or  since  has  been  really  interested  in
utilizing  the  agency  in  any  major  way.   The  Agency's  morale
has  never  been  lower;  even  those  who  are  not  zealots  for dis-
U  Thant's  Gentle  Lecture  to the  USA
"The  West  does  not  seem  to  appreciate  the  full sig-
nificance  of  this  obvious  change  of  political  climate  in
the    Soviet    Union     [from    Stalin    to    Khrushchev].
Throughout  the   fifties   most   Western   leaders   saw   the
world  as  a  battlefield  between   two  antagonistic  sys-
tems,  militantly  expressing   the  principles  of  good  and
evil.    Hence  compromise  was  betrayal.  .  .  .  This  view
of  the  world purely  in  terms  of  black  and  white  was,  in
essence,  the  Western  response  to  Stalinism.    However,
This  attitude  persisted  even  when  the  character  of  So-
viet  challenge  was  already  changing.  .  . .
"The  United  States  is  the  one  society  in  which  the
philosophy  of  material  progress  is  a  spectacular  suc-
cess.    Democracy  is  not  inhibited,  as  it  is  in  Europe,  by
either  the  threat  of  social  upheaval  from  below  or  the
memory  of  a  conservative  past.    But .  .  .  political  and
social  changes   elsewhere  worry  most  Americans.    The
revolt  of  the  colonial  people,  who  are  in  fact  the  ulti-
mate  heirs  of  1776 .  .  .  seems  to  be frightening  and in-
comprehensible  to  the  descendants  of  those  who started
it  all  at  Lexington  and Concord....
"The  attempt  to  pin the  blame  on scapegoats and sub-
versives  may  have  been  emotionally   comforting,  but  it
has  probably  weakened  the  confidence  of  the  American
people.    Nor  is  more  and  bigger  defense  spending   the
answer,  .  .  .  The  real  challenge   to  the  United   States
is  how  to  promote  this  trend  towards   a  'better  future
for  all  humanity ...  to  ease  the  contrast  between  its
own  abundance  and  the  poverty  of  mankind   elsewhere.
"Let  me  cite  one  glaring  instance.    In  Asia,   Africa
and  Latin  America,  the  living  standards  have   largely
remained  stationary,  or  have  even  declined.    Through-
out  the  last  decade,   the  fall  in  the  price  of  raw  mate-
rials,  while  priming  the  affluent  societies  of  the  West,
has  not  only  cancelled out  the  sum  total  of  Western  aid,
but  in  many  cases  has  led  to  an  absolute   drop  in  na-
tional  income.    One  great  lesson  of  this  phenomena  is
that  the  world will  not  live  in  harmony  so  long  as two-
thirds  of  its  inhabitants  find  difficulty in  living  at all."
—UN  Gen. Sect'y  U  Thant  at  Johns-Hopkins,  Dec.  2.
armament,  and  that_applies  to  most  of  its  top   officials,   feel
hurt  in  their  bureaucratic pride.    In  this  as  in  other  respects
on  which  I  hope  to  comment  later,  there  is  little  indication
that  any  lessons  have  been  drawn  from  the  crisis,  other  than
the  need  for  more  and  better  arms.
If   You  Send  Stamped  Long  Envelopes   We'll  Send  Free  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Friends
IE  Stone's  Weekly
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................................................................................_
Street  ..................................
City  ............_........................
12/10/62
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ...............................................................................
Street    .........._..........................................................................
City   ............_...........................Zone........-...St»te....................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
5618   Nebraska  Avi.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday  in   December
and  the  first  in  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.   F.
Stone;  Circulation  Manaffer,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.:   $6  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.
Air  Mail  rates:  }15  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED