I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962apr30.pdf

============================================================

TW Important   Texts from   Geneva
The  Preamble  On Which  Both  Sides  Agreed  and the  Test  Compromise   Proposed  by  the  Neutrals,  Pages  2-3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  17
APRIL  30,  1962
'°'      WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS
The  Hard  Lesson  in  the  New  Mushroom  Clouds
The  resumption of  atmospheric  testing  by the  United  States
in  reply to  the  Soviet  resumption  last  September  should  not  be
the  occasion  for  a  burst  of  hysteria  on  the  part  of  the  peace
movement.   This  is  not  the  end  of  the  world.    But  it  should
be  the  occasion  for  sober  thought  and  greater  dedication.    It
would  be  easy,  and  instinctive,  and  emotionally  satisfying,  to
put  the  blame  on  two  men,  on  the  two  K's,  on  the  simple-
minded  assumption that  if  only they had  been  stronger,  better,
more  moral,  resumption  might  have  been  avoided.    To  say
this  is not  to  absolve  either;  both  were  afraid  to  take  the  risks
of  leadership  in  an  unconventional  direction.    The  military
bureaucracies  made  the  decisions  on  both  sides,  using the  same
mirror-image  excuses,  on  one  side  the  menace  of  communism,
on  the  other  that  of  capitalism.   The  peace  movement  needs
to  keep  free  of  partisans  who  fall   for   these  hate-breeding
cliches  and  see the  struggle  for  peace  only  as  another  form  of
struggle  between  these  two  "isms."    To  look  at  what  is  hap-
pening  objectively  is  a  first  necessity  if  we  are  to  dig  down
deep  to  the  real  causes  and  try  to  do  something  about  them,
and  to  rouse  people  to  the  necessity of  a  major   effort.
Both  Testing  Only—For  Peace!
It  is  obvious  that  behind  their  opposing  slogans  both  sides
are  moved  by  the  same considerations.   Both  insist  self-right-
eously  that  they are  only  testing  to  preserve  peace.    Mr.  Ken-
nedy  in  his  address  of  March  2  expressed   the  hope  that  by
renewing tests in  the  atmosphere,  "the  prospects  for  peace may
actually  be  strengthened"  while  Mr.  Gromyko  a  few  hours
before  the go-ahead  signal was given  by Mr.  Kennedy  told  the
Supreme  Soviet  in  Moscow  that  if  the  U.S.  resumed  so  would
the   USSR  "for   security—and   to  preserve  peace."     Perhaps
peace would  be more secure if  the  two  great  powers  could  only
restrain  this  zeal  for  its  preservation.    Each  side  is  sure  that
it  is  acting  only  out  of  concern  for  its  defense;  each  assumes
the  other  cannot  be  trusted;  each  is  sure  that  its  own  security
is  also  mankind's;  and   each  assumes  the  right  to  do  as  it
pleases  whatever  the  cost  to  other  people.   The  Soviet  Union
exploded  its  50-megaton  monster  last  Fall  despite  a  UN  reso-
lution  asking  it  not  to  do  so.   We  resume  atmospheric  testing
in  defiance  of  another  UN   resolution   in  which  the  nations
of  the  earth  voted  71  to  20  to  ask  for  a  new  moratorium.
These  wilful  acts  reflect  the  realities  of  an  anarchistic  and  law-
less  world  in  which  "sovereign"  States  arrogate  to  themselves
power  of  life  and  death  over  their  own  peoples  and  the  world.
This  nation-state system,  not  capitalism  or  communism,  is  the
root  cause  and  the  enemy.    Given  the  nature  of  the  system,
resumption  was  bound  to  occur  in  response  to  the  same  mili-
tary  considerations  and  to  the  same  deep-seated  human  feel-
ings  that  "one's  own"  come  first,  and  that  the  only  safety  lies
in  pilihg  up  more  weapons  than  the  other  tribe   possesses.
We  who fight for  peace  must have the  courage  to fight with-
5  *
Some  Sunrise
We  wonder   how  many  Americans  are  watching  our
latest  project   in  South  Vietnam.    It  has  a  glamorous
name,   "Operation   Sunrise,"  a   name   which   seems   to
have  been  thought  up  by  the  same  genius  who  decided
some  years  ago  at  the  AEC that  Strontium  90  units
would  be  more  healthful   if  called  Sunshine  Units.
To  deprive  guerrillas  of  support  we  are  beginning  to
burn  down  the  villages  in  rural  areas  and  resettle  the
peasants  in  new  centers  "surrounded"  as  one  AP   dis-
patch  (Wash.  Post  April  16)  described  them  "by  adobe
earthworks,   barbed  wire  watchtowers  and  a  moat  lined
with  bamboo  spikes."   The  peasants  in  their  ignorance
seem  to  regard  these  as  concentration  camps;  many  of
the  younger  men  head  for  the  forest  and  the  guerrillas
instead.
A  controversy  seems  to  have  broken  out  between  the
U.S.   officials  helping  in  this  benevolent  maneuver,  and
the  Vietnamese    government.     The  former  think   fewer
peasants  would  run  away  if  attractive  leaflets   explain-
ing  the  change  were  dropped  on  the  villages  in  advance.
The  Vietnamese  think  this  would  only  tip  them  off  to
start  running.    Anyway  how do you  explain  to  illiterate
peasants  that   burning   down   their   villages  is  a  small
price   to   pay   to   save   South   Vietnam    for   something
called  free  enterprise?
To  understand   the  reaction  of  the  Vietnamese  peas-
ants  to  "Operation  Sunrise,"  imagine  the  U.S.    invaded
by  Martians  who  burned  our cities  and  put  us  in  deten-
tion  camps  on  the  excuse  that  they  wanted  to  save  us
from   other  invaders  from   outer  space  whose  ideas—
they  assured  us—we  would  find  obnoxious  if  only  we
could   understand   them.     We  can  just   see   an   eager
beaver  USIA  man  telling  a  weeping  Vietnamese  peas-
ant  woman  as  she  leaves  her burning home,  "But  let  me
tell  you  about  the  fallacies  of  dialectical  materialism."
out  delusion,  for   these  delusions  only  block  us  off  into  an
imaginary  dream world  of  our  own which  blissfully  bears  little
resemblance  to  the  real  world  in  which  decisions  are  made.
Our  marches and  demonstrations  must not  blind  us  to our  own
weakness.    The  majority  still  responds  to  the  old  condition-
ings.    On  April  18,  for  example,  the  day  the  U.S.   produced
its  own  expanded   draft  outline  for  a  treaty  on  complete  and
general  disarmament,  the  House  of  Representatives  passed  the
largest  peacetime  arms  budget  in  our  history  without   a  dis-
senting  voice  or  vote.    Nobody  questioned,  nobody   even   dis-
cussed,   the   implications  of   a  25  percent   rise   in   the   arms
budget,  and  of  our  five  year program  to  build  a  force  of  stra-
tegic  missiles and  aircraft  stupendous  enough  to  wipe  out  not
only  Russia  many  times  over  but  the  planet.    No  one  asked
how  we  could   negotiate  disarmament  while  we  sought   ener-
getically  to  create a  hugely  disproportionate  force  on  our  own
side,  or  how  we  could  make  an  enemy  believe  our   peaceful
intentions  when  we  built  up  forces  strong  enough  for  a  first
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
6   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  30,  1962
strike.   No  one  seemed  aware  of  these  questions.    We  have
two  faces.  For  a world  audience,  we present a plan  of  complete
disarmament   while  at  home,  for  an  electorate  conditioned  to
the  old  thinking   ("preparations  for  war   will   bring  us  the
preservation  of  peace"  as  Mr.  Kennedy  said  in  his  March  2
speech)  we  vote  the  biggest  arms  budget  yet.    It  is  significant
that  the  day  after   the  new 'plan  was  put  forward   at  Geneva
and  Goldwater  attacked  it,  only  Humphrey  and  Morse  came
to  its  defense   in  the  Senate.    Mr.  Kennedy's  own   majority
leader,  Mansfield,  was  silent.    It  was  as  if  no  one  in  the  Sen-
ate,  except  for  a  few  idealists  on  one  side  and  a  few  suspicious
extremists     on     the     other,     took     disarmament       seriously
enough  to  quarrel  about  it.    And  we  have  heard  no  roar  of
disapproval  from   the  country   against  either   the  vote  in  the
House  or  the  silence  in  the  Senate.    People  move  about  their
tasks  and  pastimes  as  helplessly  unable  as  any  colony  of  social
insects   to   break   out   of   that  web   of   accepted   ways   which
threatens    disaster.
Not  Altogether  Hopeless
Yet  the  outlook  is  not  entirely   hopeless.    It  is   indicative
that  both   sides,   despite   resumption   of   testing,   are  moving
closer  to  a  settlement  at  Berlin,   the  nerve  center   of  world
tension.    Two   cautious  leaders,  heading  societies  fearful   of
each   other,  resume  testing  out  of  similar  military   considera-
tions  but  yet  try  patiently  to  keep  away  from  the  abyss   threat-
ened  by  a  direct   confrontation   at  Berlin   or  elsewhere.     Cau-
tion  and  conventionality,  not  the  insane  and  bellicose  ambition
of  a  Hitler,  mark  this  picture,  warning  us  to  get  some  prog-
ress  toward   agreement   before   it   changes,   as   it   changed   in
1933,   after  the  abortive  disarmament   conference   of    1932.
The  two  general  disarmament   plans,  however  cleverly   de-
signed  to  put  the  other  at  a  disadvantage,  still  contain   many
points  of   agreement.     If   seen   as  the   beginning   of   a  long
drawn   out   bargaining   process,   they   are   not   without   hope,
given   time.     But  there  may  not  be  too  much   time  ahead,  if
tests  go  on  much  longer.    Both  sides  indicate  a  readiness  for
How  to  Shape   The  News
Over   the  Easter   week-end,   a   good   time   to   release
news  you  want  few  people  to  see,   the  AEC  put  out  an
announcement   that  should  be  big  news  at  Geneva,  but
of   which   the   disarmament   conferees   will   remain   un-
aware.    The   announcement   said   that   on   opening   the
tunnel  in  which  Project  Gnome  was  exploded   in   New
Mexico  last   Dec.   10,  the   AEC   found   that   instead   of
being  5  kilotons,  as  announced, it  turned  out  to  be  only
3   "plus  or  minus  one."     The  only   place   we   saw   the
story   was   the   Washington   Star   Saturday   afternoon
April  21.    Neither   the  press  release  nor  the  story,  of
course,  explained   its   significance.    It  meant   (1)   that
the   shot   detected   as  far   away   as  Japan  and  Sweden
was  even  smaller  than  was  thought  and  (2)   that  Dr.
Teller's  theory  about  hiding  nuclear  explosions   in  big
salt  caverns  was   even   more   wrong   than   we   reported
last  week.  This  shot—somewhere  between  two  and  four
kilotons—looked  like  a  shot  of  from  15  to  30.
The   headlines    were   made   Monday   morning   after
Easter,  an  ideal  time  for  a  release,  by  a  quite  different
story,  a  pessimistic  report on  test  detection  by  the  Joint
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  based  on  hearings  it  held
last  July.    This  made  the  top  of  page  one  in  the  New
York  Times  April  23  in  an  account  by  John  W.  Finney,
who  faithfully   reflects   the   AEC   line;   he   buried  the
Project  Gnome  revelation  in  his  story  without  explana-
tion.    We  dare   not,  so   soon   after   last   week's   overly
technical  issue,  enter  into  the  details.    But  this  belated
report  was  based  on  hearings  at  which   AEC,  Defense
and  Rand Corp. held  the  stage  unchallenged.   Chairman
Holifield,   under   whom   the   Committee   has   become   a
mouthpiece  of  the  AEC,  made  no  real  effort  to  canvass
independent  opinion.    What  he  held  was  not  an  investi-
gation   but   an   official   briefing—by   officials   who   favor
resumption  of   testing.
new  talks  on  testing,  after  they  have  had  just  one  more  round,
and  the  peace  movement  ought  to  wage  an  intensified   cam-
paign  world-wide  to make future  moratoriums  something  more
than  a  pause  while  the  laboratories  blueprint   new  monsters.
A  dangerous  new  tendency  is  the  increased  number  of   proof-
The Compromise  Test Inspection  Plan  Proposed  at  Geneva  by  the  Eight  Neutrals
"The  delegations   of  Brazil,  Burma,  Ethiopia,  India,  Mex-
ico,  Nigeria,   Sweden  and  the  United  Arab  Republic  at  the
18-nation  disarmament conference,  deeply  distressed  that  no
agreement  has  yet   been   reached  concerning  a  ban  on  nu-
clear  weapons  tests,  address   an  earnest  appeal  to  the  nu-
clear  powers  to  persist  in  their  efforts  to  come  to  an  agree-
ment  prohibiting  nuclear  weapon  testing  for  all  time.  .  .  .
"They   believe  that  possibilities  exist   in  establishing  by
agreement  a  system  for  continuous observation  and effective
control  on  a  purely  scientific  and  non-political  basis.    Such
a  system   might  be  based   and  built  upon  already   existing
national  networks  of  observation  posts   and  institutions,  or
if  more  appropriate, on  certain  of  the  existing  posts  desig-
nated  by  agreement  for  the  purpose  together,  if  necessary,
with  new  posts  established  by   agreement.
"The  existing  networks  already  include in  their  scientific
endeavours   the   detection   and   identification  of   man-made
explosions.     Improvements   could  no  doubt  be  achieved  by
furnishing  posts  with  more  advanced instrumentation.
"Furthermore,   the   feasibility   of   constituting  by   agree-
ment  an  international  commission,  consisting   of   a  limited
number   of   highly   qualified   scientists,   possibly   from   non-
aligned  countries,  together  with  the  appropriate  staff   might
be   considered.
"This  commission  should  be  entrusted  with  the  tasks  of
processing  all  data  received  from  the  agreed  system  of  ob-
servation  posts  and  of  reporting  on  any  nuclear explosion  or
suspicious   event   on   the   basis   of   thorough   and   objective
examination  of  all  the  available  data.
"All  parties  to  the  treaty  should  accept  the  obligation  to
furnish  the  commission  with  the  facts  necessary   to  establish
the  nature  of  any  suspicious  and  significant  event.
"Pursuant   to   this   obligation   the   parties   to   the   treaty
could  invite  the  commission  to  visit  their  territories  and/or
the  site  of  the  event  the  nature  of  which  was  in  doubt.
"Should  the  Commission  find  that  it  was  unable  to   reach
a  conclusion   on  the  nature  of  a  significant   event  it  would
so  inform  the  party  on  whose  territory  that  event  had  oc-
curred,  and  simultaneously  inform  it  of  the  points  on  which
urgent  clarification seemed  necessary.
"The  party  and  the  commission  should  consult  as  to  what
further   measures   of   clarification,  including   verification   in
loco,  would facilitate  the  assessment.    The  party   concerned
would,  in  accordance  with  its  obligation  referred  to  in  para-
graph  4  above,  give  speedy   and  full  co-operation  to  facili-
tate  the  assessment.
"After  full  examination  of  the  facts,  taking  into  account
any  additional  data  furnished  to  it  as  suggested  above,  the
international  commission   would  inform  the  parties   to   the
treaty  of  all  the  circumstances   of  the  case  and  of  its   as-
sessment  of  the  concerned  event.
"The   parties   to  the  treaty   would  be  free   to  determine
their  action  with  regard   to  the  treaty  on  the  basis  of  re-
ports  furnished  by  the  international   commission."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  30, 1962
firings.    As  weapons  accumulate,  this  so-called   proof-testing
can  spiral  into  a  miniature Russo-American  war  on  mankind,
polluting   the   common   skies   with   radioactive   poisons.     If
enough  people  can  be  aroused,  something  may  yet  be  accom-
plished.    But  the  struggle  will  be  more  effective  if  we  under-
stand  compassionately  that  the  enemy  is  within,  that   man's
fight  is  against  the  chains  of  his  own  habits  and  institutions.
Man  must  surpass  himself  or  die.
What  the  Neutrals  Could  Do
From  London  over  the  week-end  Bertrand  Russell,  who  has
done  so  much  to  rouse  mankind,  urged  the  neutrals  to  send
their  ships  in  protest   to  the  international  waters  where  our
"barbarous"   tests  are  beginning.     It  is  unlikely  that  neutrals,
beholden   to  both   sides   and   anxious   for  financial  aid   from
both,  would  take  the  risk.    A  more  fundamental  contribution
could  be  made  by  them  if  they  set  the  great  Powers  an  ex-
ample,  if  Nehru  expressed   a  readiness  peacefully  to  compro-
mise   the   Kashmir   dispute;   Nasser,   the   Arab  quarrel   with
Israel;  Tito,  his  old  feud  with  Albania.    These  three  neutrals
by  offering  to  accept  world  mediation,  and  arbitration in  their
own  fiercely  felt   quarrels,   could   say  by  their   action,   "The
world  can  no  longer  afford  war,  national  wills  must  be  curbed
for  the  planetary  good,  we  will  sacrifice our  own  deeply  held
interests  in  the  cause  of  world  settlement  and  world  law.    We
will  inaugurate  a  new  movement,  to  join  the  human  race  into
one  people  with  one  government."     But  just  as  Kennedy—
or  most  Americans—will  not  give  up  a  new  round  of  tests
after   Khrushchev's    nor   Khrushchev—or   most   Russians—a
What  U.  S.  Newspaper  Would  Dare
Speak  So  Objectively  of  China?
"For  all  the  errors,  China's  present  plight  should not
be  exaggerated.    There is  always  this  danger  in  assess-
ing  a  country  which  is  as  unwilling  to  allow  outside
verification  of  its   economic  progress   as  the  Russians
are  to  allow  verification  of  nuclear  tests.   Sympathizers
see  tremendous dedication  and  presume  immense  prog-
ress;  opponents  hear  of  shortages  and  difficulties  and
presume  suffering  and  collapse.    The  truth  is  that  the
sufferings  of   the  ordinary  Chinese  peasant   from  war,
disorder,  and  famine  have  been  immeasurably  less  in
the  last  decade  than  in  any  other  decade  in  the  century.
And  when  the  People's  Daily  claimed  yesterday   that
the  first  foundations had  been  laid  for  building  a  mod-
ern  economy  in  China  it  was  quite right.    But  the  mod-
ern  economy  will  be  a  long  time  coming."
—Editorial  in  The  Times  (London)  April  18.
new  round   after   Kennedy's,  so  the   smaller   powers   too  are
unwilling  to  sacrifice  for  peace.    We  Americans  and  the  Rus-
sians  are  bad  enough  but  not  without  restraint.    Everywhere,
in  Indonesia's  quarrel  with  Holland,   in  the  shooting  on  the
Israeli-Syrian  border,  in  the  Algerian  agony,  men  reach  quickly
for  the  gun.    How  really  rouse  people  to  the  statistics of  fall-
out  damage  to  future  generations  when  they  are  so  ready  to
kill  in  this  one?    So  long  as  murder  regulates  human   affairs,
in  petty  quarrels  as  in  great,  the  planet  is  not  safe,  nor  the
future  of  our  species  secure.    This  is  the  hard  lesson  in  the
new  mushroom  clouds.
Exclusive: Text of  the  Preamble  to  A  General  Disarmament Pact Adopted  at  Geneva
"The  States  of  the  World:  1.  Acting  in  accordance  with
the  aspirations and  will  of  all  the  peoples:
"2.  Reaffirming   their   dedication  to   the   aims   and  prin-
ciples  of  the  United  Nations  Charter:
"3.  Desiring  to  create  conditions  in  which  all  peoples  can
strive  freely  and  peacefully  to  achieve   their  just  aspira-
tions:
"4.  Conscious  of   the   threat   to   mankind   posed   by   the
arms  race,  especially in  view of  the  development of  nuclear,
rocket  and  other  modern  weapons  of  mass  destruction:
"5.  Convinced  that  war  can  no  longer  serve  as  a  method
of  settling international disputes  and  must  forever  be  ban-
ished  from  the  life  of  human  society:
"6.  Determined   that   this    and   succeeding     generations
should  be  free  from  the  scourge  of  war  and  the  dangers  of
the  arms  race:
"7.  Convinced   that   disarmament  must   be   general   and
complete  under  strict  and  effective international  control and
that  such  disarmament  must  be  accompanied by  the  estab-
lishment  of  reliable  procedures  for  the  peaceful  settlemen£
of  disputes and  effective  arrangements for  the maintenance
of   peace   in   accordance   with   the   principles   of   the    UN
Charter:
"8.  Convinced   that   general   and   complete  disarmament
under  strict  international  control  is   a  sure   and  practical
way   to   fulfill   mankind's  age-old   dream   of   ensuring  per-
petual  and  inviolable peace  on  earth:
"9.  Desiring  to  end  forever  the  heavy  burden  placed  on
mankind  by  the  diversion  of  human  and  material  resources
to  creation  of  the  means  of  annihilating human  beings and
of  destroying  material  and  cultural  values:
"10.  Seeking  to  direct all  resources  towards  ensuring fur-
ther   economic  and  social   progress   in  all  countries  in  the
world  and  ensuring  that  the  resources   of  nations  shall  be
devoted  to  man's  material,  cultural  and  spiritual advance-
ment:
"11.  Convinced that  the  resources  released  by  general  and
complete  disarmament  will  enhance  the  capacity  of  states
so  disarmed  to  contribute  to  the  economic  and  cultural  de-
velopment   of   all  countries  and  peoples   of   the   world  and
contribute  to  greater  cooperation among them:
"12.  Conscious  of  the  need  to build relations  among  states
on  the  basis  of  the  principles  of  peace,  good  neighborliness,
equality,  non-interference and  respect  for  the  independence
and  sovereignty  of  all  states:
"13.  Desiring  to  establish  conditions  under  which  justice
and  respect  for   the  obligations  arising  from   treaties  and
international  law  can  be maintained:
"14.  Affirming   that  to  facilitate  the  attainment   of   gen-
eral  and  complete  disarmament  [in  a  peaceful  world]  it  is
important   that   all  states   abide  by  existing  international
agreements,  refrain  from  any  actions  which  might  aggra-
vate  international  tensions,  and  seek  settlement  of  all  dis-
putes  by  peaceful  means:
"15.  [Declaring  their  goal  to  be  a  free, secure  and, peace-
ful  world  of  independent states  adhering  to  common stand-
ards  of  international  conduct,  a  world  where  change  takes
place  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  the  United  Na-
tions  Charter]:
"16.  Have  resolved  to  conclude  the  following  treaty  on
general  and complete disarmament  under strict and  effective
international  control  [in  a  peaceful  world]."
—Text  of  the  draft   preamble   to  a  general  disarmament
treaty  as  proposed  by  the  USSR   and  the  USA  and  adopted
by  the  17-nation  disarmament   conference   in  Geneva  April
17.   This  was  not  carried  by  AP  or  UPI   but  was  picked  up
by  us  off   the  Reuters  ticker, marked  for  the  attention  of  the
Canadian  press  which  apparently   was  more  interested  than
the  U.S.  press.   So  far   as  we  know  no  U.S.  paper  carried
this  text,  a  noble  affirmation     of  humanity's    wistful    hopes,
which  we  thought  our  readers  would  like  to  see.   The  words
in  brackets  were  not  accepted  by  the  USSR,
6   J
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Sione's  Weekly,  April  30,1962
Not  All  Those  Distortions  Abroad  Were  Created  by  Radio  Moscow
A  Challenge: How  Attorney  General  Kennedy  Could  Improve  Our  "Image"
Attorney  General  Kennedy,  in  an  address  to  the  Associated
Press,   that   fine   old   non-conformist   organization,   expressed
alarm  over  our  image—as  we  idolaters  phrase  it—abroad.   He
wants  more  Americans  to  go  on  tour  and  stand  up  and  an-
swer  questions.     He  assumes  the  questions  can  be  answered
easily.
The  answers  are  easy  when  the  questions  are  based  on  ig-
norance.    The  answers  are  difficult  when  they  contain  a  sub-
stantial  half  truth.     An  example  is  the  area  of  political  ex-
pression.    The  Communists  do  not  allow  anti-Communists  to
speak.    But  are  we  exactly  hospitable  to  suspected   pro-Com-
munists ?   How  does  a  speaker  abroad  explain  the  Smith  Act ?
The  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee?    The  unof-
ficial  blacklist   in   the   entertainment   industries—now   being
challenged  in  John  Henry  Faulk's  suit  a^iinst  AWARE?   The
refusal  of  visas  to  foreign  visitors  like  Konni  Zilliacus  whose
views  we  dislike  or  Tshombe   whose  speeches  we  fear?    The
McCarran  Act  with  its  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board?
Under  The  Free   World  Makeup
The   sharp-eyed  intellectuals   of  the   Soviet   bloc,  eager   for
freedom,  and  those  of  the  colonial  world,  quick  to  spot  the
hypocrisy  of  either  side,  see  in  these  the  familiar  visage  of
police   state  practice  under   the  thin  makeup  of   free   world
rhetoric.
It  takes  the  drama  of  courage  to  build  a  tradition.    It  takes
more  than  Madison  Avenue  hot  air  to  keep  it  alive.    If  the
Attorney  General  had  the  nerve,  he  could  make  a  dramatic
change  in  our  image  abroad  by  recommending,  for  instance,
the  repeal  of  the  McCarran  Act.    He  could  quote   Truman's
veto  message  and  the  warnings of  the  many  distinguished  con-
servative  lawyers  who  opposed'its  passage.    He  could  say  its
central  idea—that  the  State  had  a  right  to  protect  the  people
against  "dangerous  thoughts"—was  incompatible  with  Ameri-
can  philosophy.    He  could  say  that  unlike  our  great  antag-
onists  we  would  were  not  afraid   to  let  the  opposition—not
the   Republicans  but   the   real   opposition,   the  revolutionary
Marxists  of  any  variety—speak  undisturbed.
Subversion    Everywhere
It  was  a  shock  from  which  recovery  will  not  be  easy
to  pick  up  the  paper  and  see  that  the  Republican  lead-
ership  of  the  House  and  Senate  had  issued  a  formal
statement  about  the  FBI  in  the  steel  price  affair  which
sounded  like  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union  in  its
more  militant   moments.    It  spoke  of  "the  feared  knock
on  the  door"  and  "the  shadow  of  police  state  methods"
and  it  expressed  the  "hope  that  we  never  again  step
into  those   dark   regions  whatever   the  controversy  of
the   moment,   be  it  economic  or  political."    The  refer-
ences,  of  course,  were  to  the  FBI's  action  in  routing
several  newspapermen  out  of  bed  at  3  a.m.  to  check  on
statements  attributed   to  a  steel  company   official.    We
welcome   the  libertarian  sentiments  and  also  object  to
the  knock-on-the-door  in  the  small  hours,  especially  to
newspapermen,  even  when  done  by  telephone.  But  what
really  disturbs  us  is  an  even  darker  picture,  on  which
the  Republican  leaders  hardly  dared to  touch.   This  was
the  zeal  displayed  by  the  G-men  when  let  loose  on  the
steel  trust.   To  see  the  FBI  rushing  off  on  the  trail  of
the  steel  magnates,  like   the  NKVD   on  the   hunt   for
kulaks,  is  enough  to  make  stronger  men  than  Dirksen
and  Halleck  quail.    Thanks  to  the  John   Birch  Society,
we  had  grown  accustomed  to  living  with  the  idea  that
maybe  Dwight   Eisenhower  has  been  a  secret  Marxist-
Leninist   all   along,   like   Fidel   Castro.    But   J.   Edgar
Hoover!    We  had  supposed  that  he  would   turn  in  his
badge  rather  than  let  his  men  be  used   in  a  crypto-
collectivist  assault  on  U.S.   Steel.     Now,   for  the  first
time,  we  know  how  the  DAR  feels.
We  can assure the  Attorney General  such  a campaign  would
win  cheers  for  America  from  the  best  youth  everywhere.    It
would  also  show  him,  in  the  cold  reaction  from  certain  quart-
ers  here,  that  if  we  are  to  explain  Americanism, there  is  even
more  need  at.home than  abroad  to  stand  up—as  he  said—and
answer  questions.   Not  everybody who  vociferously  calls  him-
self  American would  be  recognized  by  Jefferson  as kissin'  kin.
And  may we  add—since  he  spoke  so much  of  Hungary  and
Tibet—that  it's  not  exactly  easy  to  explain  Cuba,  either?
The  Two  Geneva  Issues  Still  Available  Free   If    You  Send  Long  Stamped   Addressed   Envelopes
I.  F.  Stone'
Please  renew
Street   ............
City   ..................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name
Street   ............
City  ..................
Shall  we  send
S  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)
...................
for  $2  (6
...................
my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
......Zone.............
mos.)  or  $4  (1
.......Zone............
gift   announcement?
4/30/62
yr.)  additional:
State....................
Yes  D   No D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye,,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   In
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December   and  the  first  in  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington.  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  15  in  the  U.  S.:  16  in
Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:   $16  to  Europe;  {20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED