I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jan15.pdf

============================================================

Nucleonics  Dissents  on  Shelters for  Industry,  P.  3
Prelude  to  Puenta  del  Este:  What  Do  We  Mean  When We  Ask  Castro  to  Cut  Soviet  Ties?    Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  2
JANUARY   15, 1962
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Dr.  Hans  Bethe,   Time  and  Those  Russian  Tests
The   lecture  delivered  by  Dr.   Hans   A.   Bethe  at   Cornell
Jan.   5 was the  first  reliable information  on  the  conclusions  Dr.
Bethe  has  reached  as  head  of  the  special  committee  of  scien-
tists  which  made  a  preliminary  report  to  President  Kennedy
last  month  on  the  significance  of  the  Russian  test  series.   This
report   will  help  to  determine  whether  the  President  finally
orders  resumption  of  atmospheric  testing.    The  preliminary
evaluation  was  made  on  Dec. 7  and  there  were  alarming  re-
ports,  notably  in  Time   for  Dec.  15,  as  to  what  it  contained.
Time  called  its  report,  "The Grimmest  Meeting."    It  pictured
the   President   and   the  National   Security   Council   with   "an
assortment  of  top  scientists"  gathered  around  what  Time  de-
scribed  for  the  occasion  as a  "coffin-shaped" Cabinet  table.  On
it  was  a  top  secret  report  about  the  Russian  tests.    "The  evi-
dence  was  overwhelming,"   Time   said.     The   Russians  had
made  "giant  strides"  and  "unless  the  U.S. starts  moving  fast,
it  may  be  mastered  by  the  physical  force  that  it  first  unleashed
as  an  instrument  of  devastation."
These  reports,  like  similar ones  in  the  Washington   Star  and
the  New   York   Times  were  largely  due  to  the  efforts  of  Dr.
Edward  Teller,  in  town  early  in  December  to  urge  resumption
of  atmospheric  testing.  Dr.  Bethe,  on  the  other  hand,  reported
at  Cornell  that  "nothing  has  been  changed  fundamentally by
the  Russian  tests"  and  that  "nothing  fundamental  is  likely  to
change  by any  amount  of  future  testing."    Dr.  Bethe  declared
"the  value  of  tests  has  been  greatly  exaggerated.   We  already
know  so  much  about   nuclear  weapons,"  he  went  on,   "that
there  is  very  little  more  to  learn.    We  have  weapons  of  all
sizes  for  all  reasonable  military  purposes."
Why  Was  the  Big  Bomb  So  Clean?
Dr.  Bethe  also  dispelled  the  mystery  about  the  unexpected
cleanliness  of  the  big  bomb  the  Russians exploded  on  Oct. 30.
Time  reported   "strong  evidence"  that  the  Russians  have  de-
veloped  "an  improved  triggering  device."    John  W.  Finney
in  the New  York  Times  (Dec. 8)  went  further.    "In  the opin-
ion  of  some  atomic  weapons  experts,"   he  wrote,   ".   .  .  the
Soviet  development  of  a  small  fission  trigger  raises  the  long-
range  threat  that  the  Soviet  Union  is  making  progress  toward
development  of  the  neutron  bomb,"   the  favorite  hobgoblin
of  the  pro-testing  forces.    Dr.  Bethe  revealed*  that  the  rela-
tive  cleanliness  of  that  explosion  was  not  due  to  any  break-
through  on  a  triggering  device  but  because  the  Russians  put
a  lead  jacket  around  this  60-megaton  monster,  reducing  fis-
sion  to  only  a  few  megatons.    "Thus,"  Dr.  Bethe  explained,
"the  Russians  reduced  the  fallout,  especially  that  which  might
have  fallen  on  their  own  country.    If  lead  were  replaced   by
Neither   Civil   Defense   Nor  Anti-Missile
"I  think  it  is  clear  that  any  really  effective  civil  de-
fense  is  impossible,  and  1 believe  the  same  is  true  for
AICBM   [anti  intercontinental  ballistic  missile].    It  is
not  very   difficult   to  design  a  defensive  missile  which
will  come  close  enough  to  an  ICBM   to  destroy  it  by
means  of  an  atomic  explosion.    There  is  also  no  prob-
lem  about  providing  atomic warheads for  anti-missiles.
But  the  offense  can  send  decoys  along  with  their  mis-
siles  which  are  almost  impossible  to  distinguish   from
the  missiles,  and  they  can  send  many  missiles simultan-
eously  which  saturate  the  radars  of  the  defense.  Thus  I
think   AICBM  is  virtually  hopeless,  and  the  deterrent
can  remain stable  for  a  long  time."
—Dr.  Hans  A.  Bethe,  at  Cornell,  Jan. 5.
''Thus  confirming   the   accuracy   of   the   report   carried  by
Newsweek  (Dee. 18)  which  was  the  opposite   of  Time's.
uranium,   the   Russian  device  would  give   100   megatons   or
slightly  more."
Dr.   Bethe  said  there   is  little  military   difference    between
100  megatons  and  10.    Ten  is  enough  to  destroy  nearly  any
big  city.   We  have  had  10-MT weapons  since  1954, they  since
1958.     "We  have  500  B-52s  to  deliver  these,  1000  B-47s,"
Dr.  Bethe  said,  "the Russians  have  smaller  numbers  but  still
enough  to  destroy  us  many  times  over."    Our  over-kill capac-
ity   is  stupefying.     Dr.   Bethe  said  that  assuming   each   B-47
carries  10  megatons  and  each  B-52  carries  20  megatons,   we
have  a  striking  power   of   20,000  megatons   in  planes  alone
without  counting  the   100  missiles  of   Polaris  submarines  al-
ready  in  operation.     In  addition  he  estimated  that  in  a  few
years  we  are  likely  to  have  about  1,000 long-range   missiles.
He  did  not  say  so  but  it  must  be  hard  indeed  to  divide  the
estimated  50  prime  targets   in  the  Soviet  Union  among 1500
attacking  planes  and   150  or  so—soon   1,000—missiles.
How  much  is  enough?  The   excuse  for  so  huge  a  thermo-
nuclear  armada  is  the  fear  of  surprise  attack.  But  Dr.   Bethe
believes  this  danger   has   been   reduced   because   Polaris sub-
marines  and  Minutemen  missiles  in  hardened   bases  make  it
impossible  for  an  attacker to  escape  the  certainty of retaliation.
He  sees  a  similar  development  on  the  Russian  side.    He  says
their  test  series  included  many  tests  in  the  range  from   1  to  5
megatons,  the  range   for   development  of   solid   fuel   missiles
similar  to  our  Minutemen  which  could  be  placed  in  hardened
bases.    Dr.  Bethe  thinks  "this  major  part  of  their  test  series
therefore   may  well  have  reduced   rather  than   increased  the
danger  of  war."   For  they  will  make  the  Russian  retaliatory
force  as  immune  to  surprise  attack  as  ours.
This  is the  so-called  stabilized  nuclear  deterrent.    Dr.  Bethe
sees  it  as  a  new  point  from  which  fruitful   arms  ne|ocuti»ns
can  begin.    He  sees  invulnerable  bases  nuking   se&ecjr  lew
(Continued   on  Page  Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   January    15,  10H2
Castro  and  Nagy:  One  Dared  Abandon,  the  Other  Dared  Adopt, Marxism-Leninism
Just What  Do  We  Mean When  We Ask Cuba to Cut Its Ties With  Moscow?
At  the  new  Puenta  del  Este  conference  which  opens  next
Monday   Cuba  will   be  asked   to  cut   its  ties  with  the  Soviet
bloc  under  threat  of  hemispheric  sanctions.    What   does   the
cutting  of   ties  mean ?    Presumably   it  does   not   mean  ending
diplomatic  relations.    We  have  diplomatic  ties  with  Moscow.
So  do  many Latin American countries.    Presumably it  does  not
mean   ending   ordinary   commercial   ties  with   Moscow.      We
have  them,  as  do  other  Latin  countries.    Presumably  what  we
want  to  end  are  those  ties which  make  Cuba  wholly  dependent
on  the  Soviet  bloc.    These  principally  are  the  oil  and  sugar
agreements.     Without  them  Cuba's  economic  life  would  come
to  a  standstill.
Will  We Buy  the  Sugar  If  Moscow  Doesn't?
Reasonably   considered    the   ending   of   these   ties  requires
more  than  action  by  Cuba.    It  also  depends  on  action  by  us.
If  Cuba  stops  selling  sugar  to  the  Soviet  bloc,  will  we  buy  it?
The   Mikoyan-Guevara  trade  agreement   of   a  year  ago  is  no
obstacle  to  such  a  shift;  it  says  the  Soviets  will  buy  the  sugar
only  if  the  U.S. doesn't.    On  what  terms  would  we  buy  again ?
Compensation   for  U.S.  properties?    Cuba  has  several  times
offered  to  pay  compensation  as part  of  an  agreement  to  resume
sugar   purchases.     Or   would   we   insist  on  turning  back   the
clock  and  reinstating United  Fruit  as  we  did  in Guatemala?
On  oil:  If   Cuba   agrees  to  stop  buying  Soviet  oil,  would
we  lift  the  oil  embargo?    Or  would  we  insist  on  the  return
of  the   refineries  and   a  promise  never  to  buy  cheaper   Soviet
oil  as  the  price  of  reconciliation?
It   is   quite   obvious—and   we   hope   some   sensible   Latin
American  will  have  the  nerve to  stand  up  and  say so  at  Puenta
del  Este—that  it  takes  two  to  cut  these  ties  and  to  make  peace
West  Germany  Offers  to  Buy  British  Arms  Secrets
Cuba  and  Co-Existence
The  new  White  Paper  on  Cuba  by  the  State   Depart-
ment   has   a   more   rightist  flavor  than  the   one   issued
last  April  on  the  eve  of  the  Cuban  invasion.    One pas-
sage  struck  us  particularly.    It  complains   that  a  year
ago,  in  a  joint  communique with  Mikoyan  "Major  Gue-
vara  accepted,  on  behalf  of  the  Castro  regime,  the  ob-
ligation  to  support  'resolutely  peaceful  co-existence  be-
tween  states  with  different  social   systems',  the   Soviet
euphemism   for   a  policy  of   infiltration   and   subversion
of    non-Communist   States."     (Our  emphasis).      We
know,  of  course,  that  the  paranoids  in  Congress  regard
co-existence  as  a  Communist  plot,  but  we  were  unaware
that  it  was  national policy.    If  it  is  then  much  which  the
Administration  is  doing—cultural  exchange,  joint  diplo-
matic  pressure  for  a  coalition  regime   in  Laos,  and  ef-
fort   to   reach   a   modus   vivendi   in   Berlin   and  Central
Europe—are.  equally   suspect.     Or   is   it   just   that   as
usual   in   Latin   American   relations,   the   direction   of
policy   always   seem   to  slip   back   into   the  same  stale
hands?
between   Havana  and   Washington,   that  negotiation  and   not
dictation  is  called  for, that  a  resolution  simply  asking  Cuba  to
cut   off  Soviet  ties,   is  really  asking  Castro   for  unconditional
surrender.
Essentially  the  Latin  Americans are  being  summoned  to help
us  do  to  Cuba  what  the  Russians did  to  Hungary.    Nagy  was
destroyed  because he  left  the  Soviet  bloc  and  abandoned  Marx-
ism-Leninism.    Castro   is  to  be  destroyed   because  he   left   the
U.S.  blcc   an<^  adopted   Marxism-Leninism.     No   matter  how
you  look   at   it,  this  is  Big  Brotherism  in  action.
A  Sensible  Plan  on  Berlin  Access  — Both  East  and  West  Germans  Say  No
Little  attention  was  paid  it  by  the  U.S. press  but  the  Brit-
ish  Labor  Party  Leader  Gaitskell  in  West  Berlin  Jan.  5 sug-
gested  that  an  international agency  with both  the  West  and  the
East  Germans  on  it  be  established  to  supervise  road,  rail  and
water  access  to  West  Berlin.    The  West  Germans  at  once  ob-
jected  that  this  would  give, the  East  Germans  de  facto  recog-
nition.    The   official   East  German  paper,  Neues   DeutschLmd,
also objected.   It  said this would  restrict  the  "sovereign  rights"
Hast  Germany already  exercises  over  road,  rail  and  water  ac-
cess.  The  West  Germans  and  the  East  Germans   are  alike  in
that  neither wants to  concede  anything. So  long  as  this  is their
idea  of  negotiation,   the  world  will  be  kept  on  the  brink.
Both  the  U.S.  and  Britain  have  balance-of-payments   difficul-
ties  partly  because  of  the  expense  of  keeping  troops   in Ger-
many.     Both  have  asked  German  contributions  to  this   cost.
The  Germans  refuse   to  pay  "occupation  costs"  but   offer   to
alleviate  balance-of-payments  difficulties  by  buying  more  arms
from   the  two  countries.    This   puts  both   in  the   position   of
begging   the  Germans  to  buy  more  armament.    Bonn  recently
announced   plans  to  buy  $600,000,000  worth   of   arms  from
the  U.S.  in  the  next  two  years.    Britain  wants  seme  similar
deal  to  help  pay  the  $200,000,000  a  year  it  costs  to  keep  a
British  Army  on  the  Rhine.   The  Germans  are  offering  to  pay
Judgment  at   Nuremberg
We  don't  usually  review  movies  but  Stanley  Kramer's
"Judgment  at  Nuremberg"  is  a  political  event,  a -film  of
courage  and  artistry.    This  pictures  a  war  crimes  trial
of  German judges  in  1947-48  when  the  onset  of  the  cold
war  was  leading  U.S. policy  to  soft-pedal   anti-Nazism
in  the  name  of  anti-Communism.    It  is  a  miracle  that
a   Hollywood   team   would   dare   so   sensitive   an  issue.
The  conflict  which  faces  the  American  judge  and  prose-
cutor  is   no?,  so  unlike  the   conflict  of  means  and  ends
which   faced  the  German  judges  on  trial  before   them.
The  result   is  drama  of   the  deepest  intensity,   terribly
relevant  not  only  at  a time  when  we  are being  pressure.!
to  give  nuclear  arms  to  the  Germans  but  when  the  new
magnitude  of   weaponry  raises  questions  of  conscience
for   every   human   being.     Spencer   Tracy   as   the  U.S.
Judge,  Maximilian  Schell  as  the  German  defense   coun-
sel,   Marlene   Dietrich   as   the  widow  of   a  General   the
U.S.   hanged  and  Bert   Lancaster   as  the  German  Judge
who  declares   himself   guilty   are  memorable.     Highest
praise  of  all  goes  to  Abby  Mann  who  wrote  the  play.
for   joint  research  projects  in  weapons,   aircraft  and   rocketry
"for   which  the   British,"   the   Baltimore   Sun   reported   from
Bonn  Jan. 8,  "would  contribute  more  advanced  knowledge."
We  wonder  if  some  of  this  would  be  thermonuclear?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   15,   19fi2
While  the  Editors  of  McGraw-Hill  Encourage  Post-Attack   Business-As-Usual   Delusions
Nucleonics  Magazine Warns  No  Nation  Can Survive  Ail-Out  Nuclear  War
McGraw-Hill's  various  trade  journals  this  month  contain  a
special   16-page  insert,  to  be  made  available  separately  as  a
booklet,  called  "Nuclear  Attack  and  Industrial  Survival."    It
includes  a  letter  from  Secretary of  Defense  McNamara  calling
on  U.S.  industrial  executives  to  prepare  "for  the  possibility—
however  unlikely—of   nuclear  war."     It  is  on  a  higher  level
of  competence  than  the  Defense  Department's  fallout  shelter
pamphlet,   and   it  carries  a  preface  saying,  "Nothing  in   this
report  .  .  .  encourages  aggression  or  bravado.    Oh  the  con-
trary,  the  awe-full  dimensions  of  destruction  .  .  .  despite  all
the  preparations  for  protection   .  .  .  compel  the  utmost   effort
for  prevention  of  nuclear  war."
Yet,  for  all  its  sobriety,  the  McGraw-Hill  booklet  leaves  the
impression  that  if  only  steps  are  taken  in  time to  protect  plant
and  labor  force,  then  somehow  the  intricate network  of  trans-
•port  and  communications,  advertising  and   selling,  on  which
industry  depends  for   power,   supplies   and   customers  can  be
restored   and  profitable  production   of   TV   sets  and  washing
machines  resumed.
The  Best  Informed  Dissent
We  hope  thoughtful  business  men  will  notice  that  the  edi-
tors  of  the  one  McGraw-Hill  publication  which  is  closest  to
the  subject  do  not  agree.    Nucleonics,   the  McGraw-Hill  trade
journal  devoted  exclusively to  nuclear  problems,  prefaced  the
16-page   insert  with  an  editorial  of   its   own   which  cuts   the
ground  from  under  these  tacit assumptions.
The  editors  of  Nucleonics  draw  a  distinction  between  indi-
vidual  and  national  survival.    They  recognize  that  individuals
may  survive.    They  believe  society  "out  of  humane consider-
ations"  should  "set   aside  a  reasonable  amount  of  capital"   to
help  those  who  do  survive  "just  as  an  ocean-going  ship   pro-
vides  lifeboats"  for  use  in  the  event  of  a  catastrophe.     But  as
to  the  elaborate  social  structure  on  which  business  depends,
the  editors  of  Nucleonics  are  pessimistic.    They   "feel   it  is
unrealistic   to  believe  the  United  States—or  any  modern  na-
tion—can  survive  an  all-out nuclear  attack."
They  believe  "the   survival  of  a  complex  society  organized
on  a  national  scale"  is  "practically  synonymous with  the  ex-
One Way  to  Alleviate  Shortages
"There  might  be  a  surplus of  food  and  plenty of  liva-
ble  housing left after a  massive  nuclear  attack—because
so  many who had lived would  be  dead.   This  is  one  sug-
gestion  made  in  the  latest  of  a  number  of  studies  by
the  military  on  possible  or  probable  impact  of  attack
on  the  United  States  and  the  behavior  of  citizens.   The
study  was  conducted for  the  Behavioral  Sciences  Divi-
sion   of   the   Air   Force's   Office   of   Scientific   Research,
Inc. ...  It  carries  the  title,  'Social  Phenomena  in  A
Post-Attack  Nuclear  Situation.'  .  .  .  An  attack  would
reduce  the  population  without  destroying  the  same  pro-
portion   of   consumer  goods.     In   food   'a   surplus  may
be   created,  due   primarily   to   the   sharp  reduction  in
population.'"
—AP  story  in  Washington  Post,  Jan.  7.
istence  of   our   huge   nationwide  systems  of   distribution   and
communication—our   railroads   and   highways,  our   telephone
and   radio-television   networks   and   our   power   distribution
grids."   They  say it  "would  be  prohibitively  expensive,  if  not
physically  impossible,   to  provide  effective   'shelters'  for  these
vast,   complicated    networks."      They   believe   the   survivors
would  be  too  busy  "foraging   .  .  .  for  the  essentials  of  life"
to  reconstruct   them.
"A   postwar   society,"    they   conclude   with   quiet   horror,
"would   most  likely  consist  of  scattered  self-sufficient   commu-
nities  of  people  who   once   called   themselves  Americans  but
who  would  be much  too  occupied  with  the struggle for  physical
existence  to  know   or   care  what   is  happening   beyond   their
own  immediate  localities.  .  .  . We  might  compare  them  rather
to  the  survivors  of  a  shipwreck  cast  up  on  a  s:>ange  shore."
Is  it  not  delusion  to, believe  that  once  the  fallout  is  washed
off   the  factory   roof   and   the  rubble  cleared   out  of  the  yard,
one  could  sell  Buicks  and  TV   sets  to  this  handful  of  radio-
active   Robinson   Crusoes?     And   how   will   industry   find   a
market  for  its  other  mainstay,  weapons  of  war,  if  the  Russian
menace  is ended?    If  we're  planning  to  restore  the  profit  sys-
tem,  we'd  better  put  our  Communist  enemies  in  deep  shelters,
too.    How  revive  U.S.  business  without them?
The  Medieval  Family  Regime  for  Which We  Risk  A  New  Korea  in Vietnam
Washington,  Jan.  8—"I  wonder  whether  it  is  a  crime  to
be  a dictator?"   This  question was  asked  at  a  press  confer-
ence   today   by   Archbishop   Ngo   Nenh   Thuc,  of   Vietnam.
The  Archbishop made  it  clear  that  he  thinks  the  answer  is
'No.'    He  is  a  member of  a  family  which  controls  virtually
every  phase  of  life  in  embattled South  Vietnam.
As  Archbishop o'f aH Vietnam  (North  and  South)  and  the
oldest  member of  the  clan,  64,  he  is  the  head  of  the  family.
A  brother  is  the  Bishop  in  charge  of  the  Catholic  Church in
South  Vietnam.   Another  brother,  Ngo  Dinh  Diem,  is  the
President  of  South  Vietnam.   A  third  brother, M.' Nhu, con-
trols  all  the  labor  groups  in  free   South  Vietnam. ...  A
sister-in-law—Mme.  Nhu,  wife  of  the  labor  leader—has  to
quote  the   Archbishop,   "her   fingers   in  all   the  commercial
and industrial  organizations of the country." ...             _
—Howard  Norton,  Baltimore  Sun,  Jan.  9.
"South   Vietnam  must  buy  time  in   which  to  recast   its
military  force  with  new  booster  shots  of   U.S.  aid  and  to
recast  its  generally  unpopular  authoritarian government  as
well.
Many  of  the  1600  U.S.  military  men  here  fear  that  this
shot  in the arm has  come  too  late. ...  In such  a  case,  Viet-
nam's  only  salvation  will  be  the  quick  dispatch  of  American
combat   troops,  bolstered  perhaps  by  at  least   token  units
from   other   Southeast   Asia   Treaty   Organization  powers.
From  these  one  can  picture  another  Korea,  or  the  start  of
World  War III. .  .  .
"Diem  failed  abysmally  to  generate  popular   enthusiasm
for  what  looked like a  rosy  future  in  Vietnam.    For  this  he
has himself  to blame. ...
"In  the  countryside  many  of  Diem's  officials  came  to  view
their  government  jobs  as  open  licenses   for  larceny.    They
often  extorted  money  from  the  peasants.  . .  .  Thus  the  Viet
Cong  guerrillas  could  gain  popular approval by  occasionally
murdering  a  corrupt  official.     Soon   they  had  thousands  of
peasants  eager  to  supply  them  with  rice  and information.
...  A  single  dramatic  gesture,  such  as  the  recognition  of
a  foyal  opposition  with  the  rights  of  free  speech  and  a  free
press,  would  enhance  his  damaged  popularity. .  .  .  When  I
talked  with  Diem  he refused  even  to  consider  the  . .  .  step."
—Saturday  Evening  Post,  Jan.  6.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  15, 1962
The  Testing  Decision  Before  the  President  Is  Political,  Not   Scientific
(Continued  from  Page  One)
important  to  the  Russians.    He  advocates a  step-up in conven-
tional  arms  as  a  stage  in  reduced  reliance  on  massive  retalia-
tion,  and   "an   essential  part  of  disarmament  in  the  nuclear
area."    He  believes  the  gap  between  the  East  and  West  on
inspection   can  be  bridged  by  some  such  proposal  as  that  of
Prof.  Louis  B.  Sohn's  (see  box  on  page  4).     Dr.  Bethe  sees
complete  and  general  disarmament under  a  system  of  world
law  as the  ultimate  goal.
How  Sell  New  Missiles  Without  New  Models?
Dr.   Bethe   believes   a  few  hundred  missiles  on   each  side
would  be  enough  for  a  stabilized  deterrent  while  long  range
negotiations  proceed.    "There  is at  least  a  chance  now  to  slow
down  the  arms  race,"  Dr.  Bethe  said,  "but  of  course  if  one
side  resumes  the  other  side  will  follow."    This  is  what  makes
the  decision  on  whether  to  resume  atmospheric  testing  so  im-
portant.    The  pressures   are  enormous.     Mutual  distrust  has
grown.     Dr.   Bethe  says  the  size  and  extent   of  the  Russian
tests  shows  bad  faith,  that  while  negotiating  their   laboratories
were  working-for  months  "on  the  assumption  that  tests  would
at  some  time  be resumed."   On  the  other  hand  Dr.  Bethe  said
one  of  his  two  main  intentions  in  advocating  the  test  ban was
"to  stabilize  the  technical  advantage  which  the  U.S.  still  pos-
sessed  in  1958  in  nuclear  weapons,"  the  other  to  establish  a
precedent  in  inspection.    "Neither  of  these  aims,"  he  said,
"can  any  longer  be realized."    In  the  meantime a  huge  indus-
trial-military  complex   has  grown  up  in  the  missile  industry
-which  would  be  menaced  by a  cutback  in  production,  a  stabi-
lized   deterrent,  the  ending  of  tests.    New  sales  depend   on
new  models  and  new  .nodels  depend  on- new  tests.
The  pressures   seem  to  be  reflected   by  Dr.   Bethe  himself.
While  saying  that  nothing  fundamentally  has  been   changed
by  the  Russian tests  nor  will be  changed  by further  testing,  he
thinks  it  "reasonable"   after  the  Russian  tests  that  "we  should
also  test  those  designs  which  we have developed  in  the  labora-
tory"  for  Polaris  and   Minuteman.    "There  are  a  few  other
tests,"  he  said,  "which  make sense for  us, but  I  do  not believe
that  nuclear  testing  is  the  endless  frontier   that  some   people
seem  to  think  it  is."    He  did  not  specify  whether  these  tests
could  be  underground.    But  at  another  point,  after  declaring
that  he  did  not  think  a  really  effective   anti-ICBM   possible
The  Sohn  Sampling  Scheme  for   Inspection
"The  best  way  out  of  this  impasse  [over  inspection]
has  been  suggested  by  Prof.  Sohn  of  the  Harvard  Law
School.    According  to  this  plan,  each  of  the  two  major
countries,  Russia  and  the  U.S., divides  its  territory  into
a  number  of   zones—let  us  say,  20—of   approximately
equal  importance,  and  gives  a  map  of  the  zones  to  the
other  country.    Then  each  country  declares  the  number
of  strategic  weapons  in  each  zone  but  not  their exact
location.     Then   the   other  country   picks  one   of   the
zones,  and  has  the  right  to  inspect  this  one  zone  in  all
detail.    In  this  way  the  initial  declaration  can  be  veri-
fied,  and  at  the  same  time  95%  of  each  country  is  still
secret.    After  some  time,  let  us  say  half  a  year,  a  new
declaration   must   be   made,   and  another  zone  will   be
opened.    The   total   number   of   weapons   in   all   zones
would   be   reduced   according   to   an   agreed  schedule.
After  a  while,  other countries  would  participate  in  this
scheme,  and  other  armaments  than  strategic  delivery
vehicles  would  be  included.    An  important  question  is
whether  a  plan  of  this  kind  would  be  acceptable to  the
USSR.    Private  conversations with  a  few  Russian  sci-
entists  and social  scientists  seem  encouraging, although
such  conversations  may   not   mean   very   much   in   the
light  of  power  politics.    Drastic  reduction  of  strategic
forces  by  treaty,  and  with  inspection of  the  Sohn  type,
seem  to  me  our  best  hope  of  stopping  the  arms  race."
—Dr.  Hans  A.  Bethe  at  Cornell,  Jan.  5.
[see  box on  page  1],  he did  say the  need  to  keep  up  with  de
:
velopments  in  this  field  "may  require  tests  in  the  atmosphere."
The  question   Dr.  Bethe  did  not  answer,  at  least  in  the  pre-
pared  text  from  which  this  is  written  lit  will  be   published
later   in   Scientific   American]   is  whether  improvements    Dr.
Bethe  admits  will  not  change  the  picture  fundamentally  are
worth  the  risk  of  triggering  off an  intensified  arms  race.  This,
the  real  question,  is a political  one.    The  value  of  Dr.  Bethe's
report  is  that  it  shows  the  real  nature  of  the  decision  facing
the  President.    It  is  not  a  question  of  a  major   technological
break-through.    It  is a question  of  finding  some way politically
to  break  out  of  a  deadly  race  straight down  a  dead-end  street.
Wouldn't   the  President  be  strengthened   in  his  lonely  task  if
he.took  the  issue  to  the  country?   If  free  society  has meaning
then  this  decision  ought  not  to  be  made  without  fuller  aware-
ness  of  what  is at  stake,  and  a  chance  to  let  the  people  speak.
Many   Thanks  for   the  Friendly   Messages  Coming  In  With   Renewals
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ....................................................................................._
Street   .................................
City  ..........._.....................
1/15/62
Enter  gift  »ub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name  .......................... ................................................_..
Street   ........._..„..............._....................................................
City  ..........._..........................Zone........_..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F   Stone's  Weekly     Second  Clan  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday    in   August   and   the   first   in
September "and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  Urst  In  January  at  6«18  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M. Stone.   Subscription:  S5  in  the  U.  S.;   S6  in
Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe:   120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED