I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962nov19.pdf

============================================================

The  Little  Black  Boxes and  A   Test  Ban, P.  4
Nationwide  Survey:  How  the   Peace   Candidates  Fared  Around  The  Country,  See  Page  3
/. P. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  42
NOVEMBER  19,  1962
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Notes  on  The  Really  Tough  Questions  About  Cuba
Is   Agrarian  Reform   Negotiable?     Russian   ships   steaming
away  with  missiles,  meekly  uncovering  their  decks  for   U.S.
inspection,  are  a  symbol  of  American  military  primacy, in  the
Western  Hemisphere  at  least.    They  are  also  a  reminder  that
all  the  problems  of  the  world  are  not  encompassed  in  our  ob-
sessed  quarrel  with  the  Russians.   For  they  do  not  solve  the
problem  of  Castro.  What  are  we  going  to  do  about  him?  We
have  the  requisite force  to  crush  him.    But  we  don't  have  a
political  solution.    The  exiles  are  terribly  fragmented.    Those
with  the  best  chance  of  winning  popular  support  in  Cuba—
those  whose  slogan  is Fidelismo  without  Fidel—the  non-Com-
,munist  left—are   the  ones  our  military  and   intelligence   bu-
jreaucracies  like  least.    Those  they  like  best  are  the  ones  least
jlikely  to  win  popular   support   in  Cuba:   the  petty   oligarchy
, which  was  content   in  a  junior  partnership  with  U.S.   sugar,
cattle  and  oil  interests.    In  Guatemala  we  turned   back   the
"clock;  the  United  Fruit  company  lands   were  restored.    But
tuba  is  not  Guatemala.    The  effort  at  such  a  solution  would
'require  another  occupation,   but  the  middle  of  the  twentieth
century  is a poor  time  for  old  style  colonial  occupations.     The
price  in  lives and  respect  would  be  great,  the  chances  of  suc-
cess  minimal.   What  are  our  war  aims in  Cuba?  Do  we  accept
the  expropriation  of  the  sugar  and  cattle  lands?    The  expro-
priation  of  the  oil  refineries?     How  much  socialism  will  we
allow  in  Cuba?   When  these  practical  questions  are  asked  the
dimensions  of  the  political   problem   appear.     We   have  said
Communism  in  Cuba  is  not  negotiable.     Is  agrarian  reform
negotiable?    That  is  the  question   on  which  Latin  America
waits  for  an answer.
What  Booth  Did  For  Lincoln
Drift   to  War  or  Move  Toward  Peace?   If  we  kill   Castro,
we  do  for  him  what  John  Wilkes  Booth  did  for  Lincoln;  we
make  him  a  legend,  we  save  him  from  the  practical   agonies
of  Reconstruction.    We  send  him  down  in  history  with  Boli-
var   and  Juarez.     If  we  go  in  and  fight  Cuba,  we  split   the
hemisphere  against  us.    If  we  win,  we  will  have  a  bloody
mess  on  our  hands.    The  wise  and  magnanimous  solution  is
to  make peace  with  Castro.    Now  after  the  Russian backdown,
and   the  elections,  Kennedy  is  strong  enough  to  do  it.     It
would   take  courage,   far   greater   courage   than   to   press   the
buttons  which  might   set  off  a  world  conflagration;  it   would
require  the  courage  to  stand  up  against   popular    misconcep-
tions,  to  lead.    The  Fidelistas  are  disillusioned   with  the  Rus-
sians.    Now  is  the  time  to  win  them  back.    The  Brazilian
resolution  for  a  nuclear  free  Latin  America,  complete  with  a
provision  on  verification,  offers  a  face-saver  for  both  Kennedy
and  Castro.   The  Cuban  government  has  indicated  on  several
occasions  recently  that  it  is  willing  to  negotiate  compensation
for  properties  taken  if  we  resume trade  and  friendly  relations,
ft  has  offered   to  disarm  altogether  if  we  give  it  firm  guar-
Farewell   to  Mrs.  Roosevelt
This  issue  is  dedicated  with  love  and  reverence   to
Eleanor  Roosevelt.    No  woman  in  history   ever  left   so
universal   a   sense   of   loss   among  people  everywhere.
Her  devotion and her  faith remain  comfort  and  inspira-
tion,  in  murky  hours  such  as  this  one,  for  all  who,  in
the  Quaker sense,  are  concerned.   We  feel  that  we  have
lost  a  mother, and  seen  the  passage  of  a  saint.
antees.    To  win  Cuba  back  honorably,  to  accept  its  revolution,
would  also win  a  battle  for  us in  the minds of  the  Latin  Amer-
ican  masses.    It  would  alarm  the  oligarchs,  but  the  oligarchs
in  their  blindness  are  a  menace  to  the  stability  of  the  hemi-
sphere.    Have  we  the  resolution  to  seize the  opportunity  ?   Or
will  we  be  drawn  by  the  undertow   sooner  or  later   into  war
with   Cuba?
Why  The  Big  Naval  Buildup?    The  U.S.  press  is  now  self-
censored  on  military  deployments.    But  it  appears  from  The
Times  of  London  that  a  buildup  of  naval  power  in  the  Carib-
bean   is  underway  of   formidable   dimensions.      Its   Panama
correspondent  reported   (Nov.   6)   that  all  commercial   traffic
through  the  Panama  Canal  was  shut  off  "so  that  between  17
and  25  U.S.  naval  vessels  could  move  from  the  Pacific  to  the
Caribbean."    Next  day  he  reported   U.S.   naval  vessels   were
still  moving through  eastward.    Its Washington   correspondent
Nov.  9  said  the  U.S.  fleet  off  Cuba  was  being  heavily  rein-
forced  and  the  Administration was  "again  preparing,  or  going
through  the  motions  of  preparing,  for  any  eventualities.   One
senior   official    said   today   that  invasion  was  the   only  certain
way  of  ensuring  full   inspection."     (Our   italics.)
Where   Does  Inspection  End?     The   senior   official   quoted
by  the  London  Times  as saying  "invasion  was  the  only  certain
way  of  ensuring  full  inspection"  was,  of  course,  quite  right.
The  newspapers,  in  talking  of  on-site'inspection  to  check  the
removal  of  missiles  and   11-28  planes,  are  confused  and  con-
fusing.     On-site   inspection   arises   in   connection   with   sus-
pected  secret  underground  tests;  on  the  site  one  can  determine
whether  an  explosion  took  place.    But  once  aerial  reconnais-
sance  has  shown  the  removal  of  missiles,  what  is  the  point  of
on-site  inspection ?  If  they,  or  the planes,  are  to  be  dismantled
and   hidden,   they   would   hardly  be  left   on   the   site   where
they  were  originally  spotted.   They  would  be  moved  into hid-
ing  elsewhere.    To  comb  an  island  which  reaches  the  distance
from  Washington  to  Chicago  for  hidden  arms  is  quite  a  job.
It  is  the  kind  of  job  suitable  only  for  the  occupying  army  of
a   victorious   power,   and   the  Cubans   naturally   object   to   it.
Castro  in  his  Nov.  8  speech  said  he  would  not  allow  inspec-
tion  inside  Cuba  because  that  would   be  accepting  the  prin-
ciple  that  the  U.S.   decided  what  weapons   Cuba  could   have.
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
1   6
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  19,1962
No   Clear  Non-Invasion  Pledge  Even  If  All  Our  Conditions  Met
"Inspection"  would  enable  the  U.S.  to  leatn  exactly  what  kind
of  arms  an  invading  force  would   encounter,   what  caves  had
been  converted   into  underground    shelters,  and   how   Cuba's
forces  were  deployed.   "Inspection"  would   facilitate  invasion.
Weasel  Words
Why  No  Firm  Non-Invasion   Pledge?    This  right  to  inspect
may  seem  all  the  more  threatening   to  the  Cubans  in  view  of
our  failure  to  offer  a  clear  pledge  against  invasion.    On  ABC-
TV's   Issues  and  Answers  Nov.   11,  Deputy   Secretary  of  De-
fense  Gilpatric  was  asked  what:  he  would  say  to  those   Repub-
lican  critics  who  claim  that  Kennedy's  promise  to  Khrushchev
"guarantees  a  sanctuary for  Communism  in  the  Western  hemi-
sphere."    Mr.  Gilpatric   replied  first  that  no  such   obligation
exists  since  the   "Soviet   performance   has  only  been   partial."
Then  he  went  on  to  say that  "assuming   for  the  moment  that
the  Soviet  performance   is  complete"  bringing   into  play  our
non-invasion   pledge   "it   may  not   fundamentally   change   the
status  quo  because   under  the  Rio  Pact  and  under   our  own
national  policy  we  have  never  had  an  objective   of   invading
Cuba.    We   have  an  objective  of   maintaining  peace   in   the
Caribbean,  of  protecting   the  United  States  and  honoring  our
treaty  obligations   under  both  the  UN   Charter   and  the  Rio
Pact."    But  what  if  we  think  this  objective  requires  us  to  in-
vade?    Mr.  Gilpatric  was  asked  whether  such  a  course  of  ac-
tion  "will  not  be  closed  to  us  if  the  Soviets  do  carry  out  their
pledge  to  remove  all  offensive  weapons?"    To  this  Mr.  Gil-
patric  replied  cryptically,  "The   Castro  problem  we  had   before
the  Soviets  decided  to  establish  a  major  military  base  in  Cuba
and  we  will  have  the  problem   after  the  Soviets'   base  is  re-
moved."    The  Cubans  have  a  right  to  a  clearer  answer.    So
do  all  those  everywhere  who  want  peace.
'A   New    Doctrine   of   Inspection?     In   that   same   program
Mr.  Gilpatric  seemed   to  be  putting  forward  a  new  and  dis-
turbing  theory  of  the  right  to  "inspect"  other  countries.     He
said  "we  regard  aerial  reconnaissance  as a part  of  our  inherent
self-defense."     This  prompted  the  question,   "Do  you  mean
we  might  continue   aerial   inspection   even   though   we   were
totally  assured  that  the  missiles will  be  removed?"    To  which
Mr.  Gilpatric  replied,
The   11-28  and  the  B-47
Mr.   [Bob]   CLARK   (ABC):   How  about   the   Soviet
jet  bombers  in  Cuba,  are  we  going  to  insist   that  they
go,  too?
Mr.  [Roswell  L.]  GILPATRIC  (Deputy  Secretary  of
Defense):  We  regard  them  as  offensive  weapons.   They
have  strategic  capabilities  similar  to  our  own  B-47s.
—ABC-TV's  Issues  and Answers, Nov.  11.
This  seems  to  be  stretching   it  a  bit.    Here  is  how
(according  to  Jane's)   the  two  planes  compare:
11-28                     B-47
Speed                       522  mph                   630  mph
Ceiling                20,000  ft.                 40,000  ft.
Range                    1500  miles             3,000  miles
Bomb  Load          6600  Ibs.               20,000  Ibs.
The  B-47  is  a  strategic  bomber.    According  to  "The
Soviet  Air  Force"  (1962)   by  the  British  expert  Asher
Lee,  the  11-28  is  a  tactical  bomber,  used  for  air-ground
support.    In  recent  years  it  has  been  supplied  by  the
Russians  to  the   Egyptians   and  the  Afghans   as  well
as  to  their  own  satellites.    In  the  period   1956-7  the
older  11-28  began  to  be  replaced  in  the  Soviet  Air  Force
by  a  supersonic  improvement.   The  11-28  is  obsolete  by
Big   Power  standards.    The   11-28  could  help  stand  off
an  invading  force  with  second  rate  aircraft  but  would
be  no  match  (as  we  pointed  out  last  week)  for  our own
supersonic  interceptors  and anti-aircraft.
As  I  say,  the  conduct  of  aerial  reconnaissance   is  part  of
our  overall  intelligence  collection  system  and  we  are  never
going   to   bargain  away   any   part   of   our   right   of   self-
defense,  which  includes  the  right  of  aerial  reconnaissance.
I  do  not  know  as  of  today  what  the  reed  would  be  in  the
future  for  a  particular  type  or  a  pa-ticular  frequency  of
aerial  surveillance  over  Cuba  or  any  other  foreign  country.
Other  countries regard  the  right  to  shoot  down  intruders over
their  air  space  as  a  part  of  their  "inherent  self-defense."    So
will  we  if  we  ever  catch  Russian  or  Cuban  planes  over  our
territory.    We  promised  the  Russians no  longer  to  send  U-2s
over  their  territory.    Does  this  mean  we  go   on  using  them,
however,  over  weaker .countries  like  Cuba?    What   if  Cuba,
like   Russia   and   China,   again  shoots   down   a  U-2   or   some
other  reconnaissance'plane  to  shield  its  defenses  from  hostile
eyes ?   What  do  we  do ?
Deputy  Defense  Sec'y  Denies  Missiles  in  Cuba  Threatened  Nuclear  Balance  of  Power
Mr.   [John]   SCALI  (ABC):  Do  you  think  that  perhaps
Mr.   Khrushchev  might  have  decided  on  this  very   chancy
maneuver   [placing   missiles   in  Cuba]  because  he  realized
that  compared  to  the  U.S.  the  Soviet  Union  is  weak  in  its
ability  to  deliver  nuclear  warheads  on  target?
Mr.   [Roswell]   GILPATRIC   (Deputy   Secretary   of   De-
fense) :  I  do  not  'regard ' the   Soviets   as  considering   them-
selves  weak.   We do feel  we  have,  as  we  have  stated  several
times  during  the  past  12  to  18  months,  a  measurable  mar-
gin  of  superiority  in  strategic   weapons.    Khrushchev,  we
think,   knows  that   while  our   intelligence   is   not    precise
enough  to  put  a  pair  of  calipers  on  the  margin  of  the  su-
periority  we  enjoy,  it  may  be  such  as  to  lead  him  to  think
that  he  had  to  improve his  strategic  posture  but  in  my  own
mind   the   military   equation  was  not   altered,   the  military
equation   between   the   Soviets   and  the   U.S.,   by   bringing
closer  to  our  shores   of  these  missiles   that  previously  had
been  ranged  against   us,  or  longer   range   missiles   of   the
same  weapon-carrying  capacity  at  longer  range.    After  all,
the   Soviets   have  missile-bearing   submarines.     Those   sub-
marines  can  reach  our  shores  and  warheads  comparable  to
those  that  would  have  been  borne  by  those   missiles  could
be  struck  from  submarines  off  our  shore.     So  that  I  don't
believe  there  was  any  major  change  in  the  over-all  military
equation  as  a  result  of  this  particular  deployment.
Mr.   [Bob]   CLARK  (ABC):  Do  you  think  then  that  we
have overemphasized the danger of  these  bases?
Mr.  GILPATRIC:  Not  at  all.    I  think  the  presence  of  the
missiles   there,  in  this  context  of  this  being  the  first  time
the  Soviets had ever  put any  such weapons outside their  own
immediate  territory  and in  a  situation  where  they  might  not
always  be  able  to  control  them,  where   you  had  a  much
shorter  warning  period  and  where' the  effect  on  the  Latin
American  countries  as  well  as  on  ourselves  in  the  Western
Hemisphere  was  very  destabilizing—it  changed  the  juxta-
position  of  these  arrays  of  power, so  I  think it  was  of  major
importance,  of  great  danger  to  us  but  I  don't  believe  that
we  were  under  any  greater  threat  from  the  Soviet  Union's
power  taken  in  its  totality  after  this  than  we  were  before.
It  was  simply  an  element  of  flexibility  introduced  into  the
power   equation  that  the  Soviets  had  not  heretofore   pos-
sessed.             —ABC-TV's  Issues  and Answers,  Nov.  11.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  19, 196&
California   Sending   Three  New   Anti-War   Congressmen  to  Washington
First  Complete   Survey  of  the  Peace   Candidates  Around  the   Country
By  Sanford   Gottlieb
Political  Action Director,  Nat'1 SANE
The  small  band  of  peace-oriented  Congressmen  will  be  bol-
stered  by  fresh   faces  from  California  when  the  next  session
begins  in  January.    George  Brown,  Jr.,  and  Edward  Roybal,
liberal  Democrats  from  Los  Angeles  who  received  the  active
support  of  SANE  in  the  primaries,  have  won  election  to  the
House.    They  will  be  joined by a  like-minded newcomer  from
San  Diego,  Lionel  Van  Deerlin.    The  only  California   peace
candidate  who  did  not  survive is John  O'Connell  of  San Fran-
cisco,  surprisingly  overwhelmed   in   a  Democratic  district  by
Republican  Representative Mailliard.    Other  House  freshmen
such  as Don  Fraser  (D.,  Minn.)  and  Claude  Pepper  may add
weight  to  the  group  in  the  House.
Reps.  Edith  Green,  Robert  Kastenmeier  and  William  Fitts
Ryan  will  be  back,  although  Frank  Kowalski  will  not.    Ryan
garnered  almost  73  percent  of   the  vote  in   a  partially  new
district.
Women  Candidates  Fared   Worse  Than  Men
Among  the  peace  candidates who  ran  as  district  underdogs
in   the  major  parties,  all  met   defeat  as  expected.     Some  of
them—Jerome Ziegler  and  Bob Wilson  in  Illinois, Tom  Payne
of   Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  Blaine  Whipple  in  Oregon—reduced
the  margin  by which  their  incumbent  opponents  had  won  elec-
tion  in  1960.    On  the  other  hand,  an  equal  number—Caroline
Ramsay  in  Baltimore,  William  Hefner  in  Western  Massachu-
setts,  Alice  Franklin  Bryant  in  Seattle,  and  Martin  Dworkis
in  Manhattan—lost   by  larger   margins.    Nothing   very  con-
clusive  can  be  learned  from  these  results,  except  that  progress
seems  to  come  more  easily  in  less  populated,  safely  Republican
districts  where  the  Democratic  Party  has  been  only  a  skeleton
in  the  past.    We  have  a  feeling,  no  more  than  a  hunch,  that
the  women  fared  somewhat  worse  than  their  male  colleagues
because  the  American  public  feels  more  secure  entrusting  de-
cisions  to  men  in  times  of  crisis.
Jerome  Ziegler,  who  ran  one  of  the  most   effective   peace
campaigns  in  the  country  (as  measured  by ability to  communi-
cate with  his  constituents),  was  victimized  shortly  before  elec-
tion  day by a smear  tactic linking  him  to  the  Communist  Party.
A  leaflet  was widely  distributed  reproducing  an  appeal  by  The
Worker  to  vote  for  peace  candidates.    The  leaflet  also  showed
Ziegler  listed  as  a  sponsor   of  Voters   for   Peace  in   Chicago.
Smear  That   Failed
The  Christian  Freedom  Fighters  have  made  a  con-
tribution   to   the   American  political   dialogue.    Citing
Rep.  Robert  Kastenmeier's  role  in  producing  "the  Lib-
eral   Papers,"  the  group  distributed  a  handbill  in   his
district  asking:  "Mr.  K  (the  balance  of  the   Congress-
man's  name  was  printed  in  small  type),  Why  Are  You
Trying  to  'Bury  Us'?"   He  was  accused  of  "advocating
our  surrender  on  the  installment plan"  through  disen-
gagement  and  reciprocal initiatives.  The  handbill  ended
on   an   inspirational  note:   "Jesus   Christ,   Not    Karl
Marx."    This  message  changed  neither  Kastenmeier's
majority  nor  the  fact  that  "The  Liberal  Papers"  is  an
innocuous  collection  of  essays,  unread  by  most  of   the
"Freedom   Fighters."
The  link  was  made  explicit  for  those  who, might  have  failed
to  grasp  the  point.     Ziegler   received  40  percent  of  the  vote,
but  expected   to  do  better.    The  most  vigorous  Democrat  to
oppose  Rep.  Elmer  Holland,  Ziegler  had  strong  labor  support
in  the  Joliet  area,  a  base  among  the  more  liberal  farmers,  and
the  help  of  scientists  and  technicians  from  Argonne   National
Laboratory.    If  he  chooses   to  run  again,   1964   could  be  his
year.
The  peace  candidates  who  ran  on  third-party  tickets  were
virtually  ignored   by  the  voters,  although   in  most   cases  they
succeeded  in  airing  the  issues.    The  votes  of  William   Hart,
independent  candidate  for  the  Senate  in  Wisconsin,   still  had
not   been   counted   one   week   after   the   election   and   in   one
county  his name  did  not  even  appear  on  the  ballot.    The  three
Voters  for  Peace  write-in  candidates  in  the  Chicago  area  av-
eraged   1,000   votes   apiece.    Harrop  Freeman,   Liberal   Party
candidate  in  the  Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  district,  received  three  percent
of   the   tally,  while  Harry  Purvis,  independent   candidate  in
Nassau  County,  Long  Island,  polled   one  percent.    These  re-
sults  correspond   closely  to  Stuart  Hughes'  share  of  the  Massa-
chusetts  vote.
For  the  peace  movement  as  a  whole,   1962   was  the  year
when  it  began  to  get  its  feet  wet  politically.    Between   now
and  1964,  it  must  make  the  big  jump  toward  a  "winner"  psy-
chology—and  more  winners.    Two  years  hence   will  be  too
late  for  purely  educational  campaigns.    This  is  the  time  for
building  a   base,   both   within  the  major  parties   and   in   the
community  at  large,  for  the  peace  candidates  of    1964.
Cuban  Crisis  Cut  Suddenly  and  Drastically  Into  The  Expected Hughes Vote  in  Mass.
The  impulse  to  close  ranks  behind  the  President  during
the  Cuban  crisis  cut  drastically   into  the  vote  for   Stuart
Hughes   in   Massachusetts.     His   49,127   ballots  amount  to
approximately  two  percent  of  those  cast  in  the  contest  for
the  Senate  seat   won  by  the  President's  youngest   brother.
The  week  before  the  election  poll  in  The  Boston  Globe  pre-
dicted   that   Hughes   would   indeed   receive   two   percent,   a
drop  from  the  seven   percent  forecast   earlier.    Other  pre-
Cuba  polls  had  shown  the  independent  candidate   attaining
10  percent.
This   sudden  shift   shows   once   again  the  serious   short-
comings  of  running  a  campaign  outside  of  the  major-party
framework.     Support  melts   when   the   going   gets   rough.
International  tension  or even  the  prospect  of  tipping  a  close
election   to  a  conservative   candidate   make  liberal  voters
uneasy  about  a  third  party.
While  the  Hughes  campaign  was  geared  primarily  to  dis-
cussing   peace  issues  rather  than  amassing   votes,   all   con-
cerned  knew  that  in  the  view  of  politicians,  the  ballot  is  the
payoff.    In  this  light  the  small  number of  votes  is  a  defeat
for  the  peace  movement.    Yet  the  less  tangible  impact  of
the  public  debate  and  news  media  coverage   represents  a
net  gain.
The  Hughes  organization  has  decided  not  to  dissolve.  The
local  campaign coordinators  will  be  linked  through  a  state-
wide  body with  an  office  in  Cambridge.   Although  the  future
orientation  of  the  group  is  not  yet  clear,  the  value  of  grass-
roots  organization  is.    In  areas   where  the  Hughes  forces
were  best  organized,  their  candidate  polled  7  to  12  percent
of  the  vote.
t    6
      r
j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  19,1962
Bright  Spots:  Nixon's  Downfall,  Birchite  Defeats,  Failure  of  Red  Smear  Campaigns
Election  Returns  Reflect  A  Contended  Conformist  "Immobile"  America
The  election  results  show  how  badly  we  need  to  bring  the
French  word  "immobilisme"  into  English.    The  French  use
it  for  static  political  situations:   motionlessness,  immobility.
It  applies  with  exactitude  to  the  American  electorate  at  this
time.    Kennedy  in  his   election  campaign  used  the   slogan,
"let's  get  American  moving again."   But  the  election  results
show  the  country  is  in  no move to  budge, either  rightward  or
leftward,  and  two  years  of  Kennedy  have  shown  that  he  is
not  the  man  to  give  the  voters  anything  they  don't   want.
Arthur   Schlesinger,  Jr., popularized  the  idea  of  "the vital
center" but  what  our country  seems  to be on is  a  dead  center.
About  the  only  visible  flurry  on  the  stagnant  surface  is  the
desire  for  a  little  more  social  welfare,  as  on  medical  care.
Liberals   Reelected
The bright  spots  in  the  returns  were  the  defeat  of  the  two
Birchite   members   of   Congress,   Rousselot   and   Hiestand  of
California  while  three  peace  candidates  were  elected  from  the
same  State;  the  downfall  of  Nixon;  the  failure  of  Red  smear
tactics in  California,  in  Pennsylvania  (against  Senator  Clark)
and  in  Wisconsin  against  Kastenmeier;  the  reelection  of  all
the  Congressmen  associated  with  "The  Liberal  Papers."   The
Democratic  Study  Group believes  it  will have five or  six more
votes  for  rules  reform,  but  don't  bank too  heavily  on it.   The
same  old Southern  troglodytes  will site  in the  same  key  chair-
manships    when   Congress    reconvenes,   assuring    minority
checks  on majority  rule.  .  . .
Liberal  victory  footnote:  A  Treasury   briefing  on  the  new
budget  estimates   produced  this  summary  in  the  Washington
Star  (Nov.  12),  "Expenditures  for  defense  and  space.will  rise
substantially   over  fiscal   1963.    But  the  President  reportedly
is  slashing  agency  requests   severely  in  civilian  areas.  .  .  ."
Test    for    Kennedy:   Goldwater's   attack    on    Stevenson,
Bowles,  Schlesinger   and   Goodwin  is  not  to  be  lightly  dis-
missed.    The  strategy  is  to  make  them  "controversial"  and
impair  their  usefulness.    Truman  refused  to  give  when  Ache-
son came under  similar  but  far  more  severe  attack,  and  kept
him  as  Secretary  of  State  to  the  end.   It  will  be  interesting
to  see whether  Kennedy proves  as tough. . . .
Der  Spiegel  is  what  Time  magazine  would  be  if  it  were
run  by  Drew  Pearson   instead  of  Henry  Luce,  i.e:  lively,  ir-
reverent,  and  muck-raking.    It  has  exposed  the  Nazis  in  the
German  government;  it  carried  the  first  friendly  account  in
the  German  .press  of  the  progress  being  made  by  the  Poles
in  the  Oder-Neisse  territory.    The  text  of  the  law  being  ap-
plied  against  Der  Spiegel   (it  was  printed  in  Le  Monde,  Nov.
7)  is  appallingly  loose  in  its  definitions of  official  secrets  and
of  treason.    The  former  covers  any  matters  "on  which  it  is
necessary  to preserve  secrecy  . . . for the good  of the Federal
The  Little  Black  Boxes  and  A  Test  Ban
We  appeal  to  scientists  associated  with  the  Pugwash
conference   to   answer   the   Teller-style   campaign  un-
leashed   in   off-the-record    briefings   by  U.S.   agencies
against  the  idea  of  using  "little  black  boxes"  in  a com-
promise  test  ban  agreement.   The  public is  being  given
the  idea  that  these  sealed  automatic seismographs  could
be  doctored  by  reading  a  fake  recording  into  them  to
hide  a  clandestine  underground nuclear  test.   But  since
the  network  and  the  supervising commission would  de-
pend  on  scores  of  seismographs  in  various countries  and
of  various kinds, and  on the  tell-tale  pattern  established
by  collating   various  readings,  any  such  seismographic
forgery   would   require   impossibly   skillful   tampering
with  large  numbers of  boxes  to  make  them  match  the
fake  recording.    It  would  not  be  enough  to  doctor  the
records  in  one's  own  country.   It  would  also  be  neces-
sary  to  doctor  the  records  and  deceive  the  larger  ob-
servatories  abroad.    The  real  difficulty   is  that  inspec-
tion  has  been  built  up  into  a  dogma in  this  country  and
any  treaty  without  some  inspection  feature  would  have
hard  going  in  the  Senate.   U.S.  fears  of  secret   testing
and  Soviet  fears  of  espionage  are  both  highly  exagger-
ated.    Neither  side  wants  an  agreement  badly  enough
to  concede.
Republic"  and  transmitting  such  secrets  to  unauthorized  per-
sons  is  defined  as  treason.    No Western  country  defines  either
official   secrets   or  treason  that  loosely.    Anthony  Terry   re-
ported  from   Bonn  in  the  London  Sunday  Times  (Nov.  11)
"Apart  from  the  'liberal  third'  of  the  population, which  genu-
inely  fears  a  return  to  police  state  methods  and  the  suppres-
sion  of  free  speech,  a  surprisingly  large  number  of  ordinary
West  Germans have  no idea  of the wider issues  involved.  They
are  highly  critical   of  the  Spiegel  for  "attacking  prominent
public  figures"  and  they  back  Dr.  Adenauer  whole-heartedly."
Plus fa  change.
ABC  deserves  praise  for  using  Alger  Hiss  on  that  Nixon
program.    How  could  so  central  a  figure  be  left  out  of  a  TV
biography  of  Nixon?   Protests  from  assorted  bigots  were  to
be  expected  but   not  former  Congressman  Jerry   Voorhis's
effort  to  back  out  of  the  show  when  he  heard  Hiss  would  be
on  it.  ...     Our favorite  comment  on  Nixon's  defeat  was by
Dick  Gregory,  the  comic now  at  Washington's   Casino  Royal.
"Khrushchev  lost  Cuba  and  Nixon  lost  an  election,"  Gregory
said.    "I   never   dreamed   Khrushchev  would  be  the  better
loser."
Free  Copies   This  Or  Any  Other   Issue  Sent  Free  If  You  Send  Stamped   Self-Addressed    LONG   Envelopes
I.   P.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ............................................................................,~..... _
Street
City  ............—.........................Zone........™JStat«....................
11/19/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........._..........................................................................
City  ...........—.........................Zone......._..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tes  D    No  D
LF. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday  in  December
and  the  first  in  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.
.    Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the   IT.  S,;  $6  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.
Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED