I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962apr09.pdf

============================================================

Special  Report  From  Geneva
Krishna  Menon  Proposes  "Peace  Stations",  P.  3;  Canada  Sees  US  and  USSR   Closer  on  Disarmament,  P.  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  14
APRIL  9,  1962
•>'<"      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
One  Wistful   Hope  On  A  Bleak  Horizon
Geneva  April  2
It  is time  the  anthropologists  took  over,  and  recognized  the
disarmament  conference  as  a  form  of  religious  ritual  engaged
in  by humanity between  its  world  wars.   Not  long  before  the
last  one,  a  disarmament conference  here  was  within  sight  of
unanimous  agreement  on  a  treaty  to  ban  the  bombing  plane;
now  another  is  as  seriously—but  no  more  or  less—discussing
the  abolition  of  the  ballistic  missile.    This   city  which  gave
mankind  palliatives  as diverse  as  Esperanto and  the  Red  Cross,
is  the   Mecca  of   the   disarmers.    Of   the   25   Swiss  cantons,
Geneva,  true to  its  tradition  of  inextinguishable  hope,  was  one
of  the  four  which  voted  yesterday forever  to  bar  atomic arms
from  Swiss.territory.   The  Catholic,  conservative and  German-
speaking  cantons,  however,   swamped  the   socialistic  French-
speaking  Protestant  areas and  the  initiative was rejected almost
two  to  one.    The  delegates,  reconvening  this  morning  for  the
third  week  of  the  current  disarmament  confernce,  read  in  their
morning Swiss papers  not  one  but  two  disheartening  messages.
The  more  obvious  was  the  dwindling   chance  of   preventing
the  spread  of  nuclear  weapons;  the  Swiss  too  want  to  reserve
the   possibility  of   an   independent   nuclear   deterrent,   as   the
British  call  it.    Just  around  the  corner  is  the  prospect  of  an
international  trade  in  second  hand   last-year's  model   nuclear
arms  for   the   smaller   and  poorer   Powers.     The   other,   less
obvious  message,  is  that  here,  too,  apathy  reigns;  barely  half
the  Swiss  bothered  to  vote  at  all.    In  Geneva  canton,   little
more  than  a  third  went  to  the  polls;  the  idealists  marshalled,
the  hotelkeepers  strolled  in  the  sun.    Mt.  Blanc,  after  several
days  of  rain,  was  majestically  visible  beyond  the  blue  Lake;
few  cared  to  notice,  a  little  further  off,  the  mushroom  cloud
shaping  up.
A  Rest  Home  for  Idealists
The  setting  for  the  conference  at  the  Palais  des  Nations  is
as  familiar  as  the  libretto;  weapons  change  but  not  disarma-
ment  tactics.    These   have  become  almost  as  stylized  as  the
classical  ballet.    The  Palais is  deceptively  severe  in  its  archi-
tecture.    The  atmosphere  in  its  offices  is  relaxed;  the  problems
may  be  urgent  but  they  are  also  prepetual   and  the  staffs  are
in  no  hurry.   This  is  a  place  of  frequent  and  extended   coffee
breaks where idealists—like the  fat  peacocks  on  the  wide well-
kept  lawns—may  safely  be  let  out  to  graze.    Amid  the  neatly
labelled  cubby-hole  offices  one  may  find  men  engaged   in  the
lifelong  production of  shocking  but  harmless  documents  on  all
kinds  of  nefarious  human  trades  and  habits,  from  those  of
narcotics  to  those  of  armament  and  war.    One  feels  oneself
among  lotus  eaters  in  a  land  of  perpetual  though  gentle  mo-
tion;  here,  as  it  were,  God  proposes  and  Satan  disposes.    As
in  a  richly  endowed  temple,  the  bells  ring  and  the  rites  are
The  Soviet  Proposal  on   Rockets
"There  shall  be  eliminated  from   the  armed  forces,
and  destroyed, all  rockets capable of  delivering  nuclear
weapons,  of  any  calibre  and  range,  whether  strategic,
operational  or  tactical  (except  for  strictly  limited num-
bers  of  rockets  to  be  converted  to  peaceful  uses),  as
well  as  pilotless  aircraft  of  all  types.    There  shall  be
completely   demolished  all   launching  pads,   silos  and
platforms   for   the   launching  of   rockets   and  pilotless
aircraft,  other than  those  pads that  will be  retained  for
peaceful  launchings  under  the  provisions  of  Article  15
of  the  present  Treaty.    All  instruments for  the  equip-
ment,  launching  and  guidance  of  the  above mentioned
rockets  shall  be destroyed.   All  underground depots  for
such  rockets,  pilotless  aircraft  and  subsidiary  facilities
shall   be  demolished.   Inspectors  of   the  International
Disarmament  Organization  shall  control  the  execution
of  the  measures  referred  to.  ...     For  the  peaceful  ex-
ploration  of  space  there  shall  be  allowed  the  manufac-
ture  and  testing  of   appropriate  rockets   provided  the
plants  manufacturing  such  rockets,  as  well  as  the rock-
ets,  themselves,  will  be  subject  to  supervision  by  the
inspectors  of  the  International  Disarmament Agency."
.  .  .  [The  Agency]   shall  exercise  control  over  launch-
ings  . ..  through the establishment of  inspection  teams
at  the  sites  for  peaceful  rocket  launchings  which  shall
be  present  at  the  launchings  and  shall  thoroughly  ex-
amine  every  rocket  or  satellite  before  their  launching."
—First  Stage  Provisions, Soviet  Draft  Arms   Treaty
celebrated;  mystic anguish  subsides with  the  years into leisurely
priesthood;  evil  goes on  in  the  outside world  but  one's  pension
rights  accumulate.   The  case  against  sin  is voluminously  docu-
mented  but  with  discreet  deference  for  the  Powers  whence,
after  all,  the  annual  budgets  are  met.    This  deplorable  world
is  made  as  pleasant   for   oneself   as  possible   while   waiting
piously   for  the  next.     As  I  write,  a  planeload  of   go-getter
women's   strike-for-peace  delegates   have   just   arrived   from
America  to  grasp  these  officials  working on  disarmament  firmly
by  the  lapel,  and  to  set the  statesmen  straight.    I  wish  I  could
tap  the  conversations  between  these  passionate  women  mili-
tants  and  these  gracefully  reconciled  idealists who  will  be  ap-
palled  to  heat  again  all  they  know  so  well,  and  indeed  earn
their  livelihood  by  repeating,  though  with  no  real  hope  that
it will  make  any difference.   How  many  moribund   consciences
these  women  will  twinge!
The  Foreign  Ministers  have  left  and  the  real  work  of  the
conference,  as  they  say,  has  begun.    This  is  true  in  the  sense
but  only  in  the  sense  that  the  "real  work"  of  the  conference
is  to  disentangle  from  one's  pledges  and  try  to  put  the  blame
for  failure  on  the  other  side.    From  another,  and  also  realistic
(Continued   on  Page  Two)
5  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  9, 1962
sense,  the  conference may  already be  over.    The  disarmament
conference,  from  this  point  of  view,  was  an  elaborate  facade
for  the  settlement  of  more  important  business.    There  seems
to  be  a  general  though  perhaps  too  optimistic feeling  that  the
way  was  cleared  between  Rusk  and  Gromyko  for  a  Berlin  set-
tlement  which  will  be  unveiled  at  a  summit  meeting  in  the
latter  part  of  May.    On  nuclear  testing,  there  seems  to  be  a
tacit  agreement  between  Washington   and  Moscow  to  take  up
the  subject  again  only  after  another  round  of  testing;  the  neu-
trals,  desperate  and  frustrated,  were  to  make  one  more  grand
effort  behind  closed  doors  this  morning to  stop  them  but  the
outlook  was  not  promising.    In  Washington,  one  felt  that  all
those   well-publicized   weeks   of   agonizing  indecision  was   a
fraud,  that  the  decision  to  resume  had  already  been  made by
the  kind  of  political  necessities  to  which  Mr.   Kennedy  was
most  responsive.    Here,   in  Geneva,  one  gets  the  impression
that  on  the  Soviet  side,  too,  there  is  an  almost  smug readiness
for  another  round,  a complacent assurance that  negotiation will
be  possible  after  it's  over.    The  Russians could  easily have  put
us  on   the  spot  by  accepting   neutral   inspection  if   a  neutral
seismographic  network  turned  up  with  objective  indicators of
a  hidden  nuclear  test.    But  they,  like  us,  seem  afraid   to  risk
even  propaganda  gestures lest  they interfere with  another  series
of   tests.
The   press   lias   been   encouraged   by  the   U.S.   information
officers,  as  they  are  euphemistically called,  to  dwell  on  the  un-
usually  polite  and  non-acrimonious tone  of  the  proceedings  so
far,  as if  it  were  a positive  achievement for  Mr.  Zorin  and  Mr.
Dean  to  meet  without  any  attempt  at  mayhem.    It  would  be
Brazil  to  the  Non-Nuclear  Powers
"The  experience  of  the  last  few  years  has  taught  us
that  this  problem  can  be  dealt  with  in  two  ways.    The
first  consists  in  proposing  to  the  other  party  what  we
know  fully   well  in  advance  he  cannot   accept   without
weakening  his  position.   It  was  this  mode  of  procedure
which  made  disarmament  a  favorite  area  for  cold  war
maneuvering.     Non-viable   propositions   were    hurled
from   one  side  to  the  other,  not   in  the   expectation  of
any  real  progress  in disarmament, but  to  make political
capital  with  world  public  opinion. .  . .
"Disarmament   proposals   which  bear   the  imprint  of
the  cold  war  are  not  submitted  by  one  Nuclear   Power
in  any  hope  of  misleading another  Nuclear  Power,   but
to  obtain  credit   with   world  opinion   and   particularly
with  the  opinion  of  other  nations  eager  for   conditions
which  can  assure  their  prosperity  and  give  them  con-
fidence  in  the future.  .  .  . The day when  the  unarmed
Powers—thirsting  for   a   lasting   and   genuine  peace—
decide  to  denounce  and  reject   such  cold  war  proposals
.  .  .  from   either  military  bloc,  the  political   effect  of
such  projects  can  be  offset  and  eliminated.   The  condi-
tions  for  the  emergence  of  disarmament  policies   with
real  results  would  then  be  created."
—Brazil's  Foreign  Minister,  Dantas,  Geneva,  Mar.  16
tempting  but  untrue  to  attribute this  improvement  in  tone  to
the  tacit  agreement  of  the  great  Powers  to give  themselves just
one  more  round  of  testing  before,  as  it  were,  joining  atomics
anonymous.    The  real  reason  for  the  restrained language  seems
to  be  the  presence  of  the  neutrals,  for  in  the  subcommittee  on
nuclear  testing,  where  the  nuclear  Powers  confront  each  other
Canada  Lists  Seven Disarmament Areas in Which US and USSR Move Closer
"1.  The  U.S.  and  Soviet  proposals  both  provide  for  means     ent  stages—to  cease  production of  fissile material  for  weap-
of  assuring   that   rockets   and  satellites  placed  in  orbit   or
launched  into  outer  space  will be  used  for  peaceful  purposes
only.     Provision   is   made   for   advance   notification  to   an
International    Disarmament   Organization   about   all   such
launchings.   Both  sides  have an  overriding interest  in  reach-
ing  an  understanding  which  will  ensure  that   scientific  ad-
vances  in  this  field  serve  only  the  cause  of  peace.    There  is,
therefore,  every  reason  why  agreement   should  be  reached
in  short  order.
"2.  The  U.S.  proposals  contain  suggestions  for  observation
posts  and  other   procedures  designed  to  reduce  the  risk  of
surprise  attack  or  accidental war.    Specific proposals  to  this
effect   do  not  appear   in  the   new   Soviet  draft  treaty,  but
similar  ideas  were  advanced  in  the  Soviet  plan  of  Sept.  23,
1960,  and  again  in  the  memorandum submitted  by  the  USSR
to  the  United  Nations  on  Sept.  26,  1961.   The  fear  that  war
could  break  out  through  accident  or  miscalculation  is  a  con-
tinuing  source  of  international   tension  which  increases  as
more and  more dangerous  weapons  are  developed.  Both  sides
have  a  vital  interest  in  removing  these  fears   as  soon   as
possible.    Both  sides  have  proposed  measures  which  would
provide   means  of   doing   so.    Further   negotiation,  and  a
willingness  to  compromise,  could  produce  agreement  in  this
field.
"3.  The  U.S.  plan  calls  for  technical  studies  of  means  to
deal  with chemical and  bacteriological  weapons.    The  Soviet
Union  has  also  put  forward  a  suggestion  for  joint  studies  in
this  area  in  its  plan  of  Sept.  23,  1960.    In  the  opinion  of
my  Delegation,  such  technical  studies  should  begin  immedi-
ately.   On  the  basis  of  existing  proposals,  it  would  appear
that   full  agreement   already  exists  on  this  point,  and  that
there  is  no  reason  for  further  debate  before  taking   concrete
action.
"4.  Provision   is  made  in  both  plans—although  at   differ-
ons  purposes   and   to  transfer   existing  stocks  to  peaceful
uses.    The  increased   amount  of  the  initial  reductions  pro-
posed  by  the   U.S.  representative   on  March  15  means  that
by  the  time  the  second  stage  is  completed  stockpiles  would
have  been  very  greatly  reduced.   This  fact  brings  the   U.S.
position  much  closer  to  the  Soviet  view  that  all  such  stock-
piles  should  be  eliminated in  Stage  II.    In  our  opinion  fur-
ther  negotiation  could  bring   full   agreement.
"5.  Both  plans  contain  proposals  designed  to  prohibit  the
wider  spread  of  nuclear  weapons.    A  Resolution   submitted
by  Ireland  calling  for  international  agreement   in  this field
was  endorsed  by  all  members  of  the  United  Nations  at   the
16th  session  of  the  General   Assembly.     What   is   required
now  is early  action  to  bring  this  recommendation  into  force.
"6.  The  U.S.   program   and  the   Soviet   draft   treaty   both
call  for  reductions  of  conventional  arms  in  the  first  stage.
The   Soviet   plan   provides  for   reductions   proportionate   to
manpower  cuts.    At  oiir  second  meeting,  the   Representative
of  the  U.S.  put  forward  new  proposals  calling  for  a  reduc-
tion  by   30%.    My  Delegation   believes  that   this  develop-
ment  brings  the  views  of  the   two  major  military   powers
closer  together.    Detailed  negotiations  should  begin  at  once
to  remove  remaining   differences.
"7.  In  the  crucial  field  of  nuclear   disarmament   the  posi-
tions  of  the  two  sides  have  likewise   been  brought  substan-
tially   closer   by  the   significant  new   U.S.   proposals  for   a
30%  reduction  of  nuclear  weapons  delivery  vehicles  in  the
first  stage.   The  Soviet  draft  treaty  calls  for  the   complete
elimination  of  all  such  vehicles  in  the  opening  stage.  Never-
theless,  having  in  mind  the  magnitude  of  the  initial   cuts
proposed  by  the  U.S.  as  well  as  the  agreed  principle  of  bal-
ance,  my Delegation  believes  that  detailed  negotiation  should
bring   the   two   major   military   Powers   to   agreement    on
phased  reduction  in  this  field."
—Mr.  Green,  Canada's  Secretary  for  External  Affairs,    at  the  Geneva  disarmament  conference,   Mar.  19
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  9,  1962
without   neutral   witnesses,   the   transcripts   reveal   an   acridly
polemical  tone  which   recalls  the  best   days  of  Vishinsky  and
Dulles.  In  the  lower  ranks of  the  more  or  less  permanent  dele-
gations   on   disarmament,   these   conferences   are   a   form   of
gamesmanship;  only  a  rare  few  dedicated  souls  take  the  work
seriously.    But  among  the  leaders  of  the  delegations,  the  mo-
mentum  of  combat  in  one  Geneva  conference after  another  has
worked  emotions  to  such  a  pitch  that  it  would   only  take  the
slightest  blip  on  the  radar  screens  to  get  Mr.  Dean  to  let fly
with  an  H-bomb  at  Mr.  Tsarapkin;  after  prolonged  and  repe-
titive  bargaining  sessions  each  side  seems  to  regard  the  other
as  a  pack  of  swindlers.    Intimacy has  not  flowered  into  love.
The   exasperation   is  as  great  on  general   and  complete  dis-
armament  as  on  nuclear testing,  but  the  situation is the  reverse.
On  nuclear  testing  the  two  big  Powers  disagree  violently  in
public  on  basic  principles  but   agree  privately  in  practice  on
resumption  of  testing.    On  general  and  complete disarmament,
they  agree  publicly  on  basic  principles  but  disagree  violently
in  private  as  soon  as  the  question  arises  of  putting  them  into
practice.    The   U.S.  delegation   is  deeply  annoyed—indeed  re-
gards  it  was  a  blow  below  the  belt—that  the  Russians turned
up  with  a  detailed   draft  treaty  on  general   and   complete  dis-
armament  and   tabled  this  as  a  basis  for   discussion.    For   a
moment,    last   Thursday,   the   neutrals   thought   the   sun   was
breaking  through   the  angry  clouds  when   the  innocuous  pre-
amble  of  the  Soviet  draft  with  two  U.S.   amendments  was  al-
most  adopted.     It  looked  that  night  as if  mankind were  on  the
Ethiopia   Warns  the   World   Again
"Over  a  quarter  of   a  century  ago   His   Majesty   the
Emperor  addressed  the  League  of  Nations  in  this  very
city.    He  spoke  then  not  only  for  Ethiopia  but  also  for
the  weak  and defenceless  everywhere.  He  spoke  against
aggression,   against    injustice,   against    all   abuses    of
power.    Today  the  small  nations  of  the  world—weak,
defenceless  and  at  the  mercy  of  those  whose  fingers  are
on  the  nuclear  trigger,  speak  in  the  same  vein—in  the
name  of  humanity.    The  words  of  Emperor  Haile   Se-
lassie  went  unheeded  in  1936,  and  we  are  all  acquainted
with  the  consequences.     If  today  those  who  speak  not
from  military  power  but  from  conviction  go  unheeded,
this   lime  the   consequences   will   not  be   limited   to   a
simple  world  war.    It  will  surely  mean  extinction."
—The  Ethiopian  Foreign  Minister  at  the  5th  Plenary
meeting,  Geneva  disarmament  conference,   March  21.
verge  at  least  of  a  general   and  complete   preamble   to  a  dis-
armament  treaty.    But  somehow—the  details  are  not  clear—
the  happy  event  was  delayed  and  on  Friday  when  Article  1
came  up,  heavy  fighting  broke  out.    While  the  preamble  is
merely  against sin,  Article  1  talks  sweepingly   of  closing  down
all  dens  of  military  iniquity within  four  years.    Though  Mr.
Kennedy's  program   of  general  and  complete  disarmament,  as
presented  to  the  United  Nations  last  September,   is  in  principle
as  sweeping  as  the  Russian  and  Mr.  Zorin  was  able  to  defend
the  general  declarations  of  Article  1  by  quoting  chapter  and
Krishna  Menon's  Proposal  for  "Peace  Stations"  to  Monitor Nuclear  Testing
"We  are  not  prepared  to  say  at  the  present  time whether
every  explosion  is  detectable or  not  detectable.   At  the  same
time  we  submit  that  ours  here  is  not  an  academic  exercise.
We  are  not  trying  to  find  out  whether  anything  can  be  ex-
ploded  in  a  laboratory  or  whether  there  could  be  an  earth-
quake  which  could  be  mistaken  for   an  explosion.    By  and
large,  is  it  possible  to  find  out  whether anybody  is violating
a  treaty?
"Secondly,  this  Conference  meets  on  the  basis  that  agree-
ments  will be  made  and kept;  otherwise  why  should  we  meet,
why  should  we  try  to  make  agreements  if  we  are  sure  be-
forehand  that  they  will  be  broken?    We  can  naturally  make
provision  against  the  temptation on  the  part of  people  to  get
around  them.    Therefore   we  would  say   that   any   kind  of
agreement  which by  and large  is  feasible  should  be  sufficient
for  the  purpose—Mr.  Unden  [of  Sweden]  called  it  a  provi-
sional  agreement.     Whatever  we  do,  if  there  are  more   ex-
plosions,  what  will  happen  to  the  work  of  this  Conference
and  the  atmosphere  of   peace  and  confidence  that  must  be
created  in  the  world?    There   is  nothing  so  dangerous   as
turning  people  into  cynics  in  this  matter.  .  .  .
"We would  also  suggest  that  if  the  idea  is  that  one  can-
not  take  for  granted  the  results  of  the  detection  efforts  by
any  of  the  three  countries  involved  in  this  matter—that   is
to  say  if  the  United  States   is  not  prepared  to  accept  the
judgment  on  this  score  of  the  United  Kingdom or  the  Soviet
Union,  or  the  other  way  around—it  may  be  worth  consider-
ing  whether scientific  detection  stations  could  be  established
by  national  efforts in  other  countries  or could  be internation-
ally  established.
"If  it  is  possible  to  spread  bases  all  around  the  world  or
to  manufacture  these  weapons  in  large  quantities,  it   should
also  be  possible  to  establish  these  peace  stations  in  various
parts  of  the  world,  in  countries  that   are  only  partly  com-
mitted  or  are  uncommitted to  the  two  blocs.    Then,  in  the
event  of  an  explosion, the  results  would come  in  from  every-
where.    Today   we  measure  radiation,  and  the  results   are
internationally  communicated.  We  may  adopt  a  similar  pro-
cedure.    Therefore,  as   a  compromise  measure,   it   could  be
agreed  for  the  time  being  that  we  should  have  other  moni-
toring  stations from  which results  would be  received.    If  all
the  data  collected  pointed  to  one  result,   there  would  be  no
difficulty;  if  there were differences of  opinion  [as  to  whether
(he  explosion  was  nuclear  or  not—IFS],  then  it  would  be
for  us  to  consider  what  would  be  done  about  them.
"The   main  explosions   we  are  worried  about  at  the  mo-
ment  are  explosions  in  the  atmosphere   and  the  biosphere.
These,   it  is  admitted  on  all  sides,  can  be  detected,  and  the
committing  of  such  explosions—there  is  no  other  word  for
it—would  be  a  violation  of  an  international  agreement.    If
there  was  a  straightforward agreement  between  the  nuclear
Powers  that  there  would be  no  more  explosions   and,  if  any
were  detected  afterwards, that  would  be  proof  of  the  viola-
tion  of  the  international  treaty.    That  is  all,  in  any  case,
that  we  could  do.   There  is  no  way,  except  in  a  world  State,
of   sending  people  from   one  place  to   another   in   order   to
enforce  a  treaty.  .  .  .
"We  have  no  desire  to  exaggerate  this  problem  of  explo-
sions,  but  it  has  got  so  much  into  the  mental  makeup  and
fears  and  apprehensions  of  people  and  nations  that  it   has
almost  come  to  be  regarded  as  the   acid  test  of   what   the
great  countries  are  prepared to  do.    People  ask   themselves:
'If  they are  not  going  even  to  stop  tests,  how  will  they  abol-
ish  weapons?' How are we  to explain this  to our people?  .  . .
"While  we  are  sitting  here,  tests  are  being   contemplated
by  one country.    It  is  unfortunate  that  in  the  period  of   sus-
pension  the  Soviet  Union broke the  suspension  that  obtained
and  there was  an  explosion,  about  which  we  all  protested  at
(hat  time.   But  in  that  period  of  15  or  18  months  it  was  not
a  question  of  a  lack  of  detection,  it  was  not  as  though   ex-
plosions  had  taken  place  clandestinely  .  .  .  the  whole   prob-
lem  of  detection  is  being  projected  disproportionately   and
given  too  much  precedence.    It  really  is  not  a  problem  but
a  conundrum."
-India's  Defense   Minister,  Krishna  Mennon,  at  the  5th   Plenary  meeting, disarmament  conference,   Geneva,  Mar.  20
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  April  9, 1962
The  Time  Limit  Is  The  Key  to  A  Disarmament  Agreement
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
verse  from  the  U.S.  plan,  the  Western   side  shied  away vio-
lently.     Mr.   Godber   of   the   United   Kingdom   didn't   know
why  the  two  sides  couldn't  get  together  instead  on  such proj-
ects  as  a  joint  study  of  how  best  to  verify  the  elimination of
nuclear  weapons  stockpiles.    Mr.  Dean  protested  that  the Rus-
sians  were  trying  to  build  a  house  without  a  blueprint;  they
replied  that  their  treaty  was  a  blueprint,  and  that  the  other
side  was free  point  by point  to amend or  change that  blueprint.
To  the  outside  observer  it  seemed  that  what  was  missing was
not  a blueprint but  the  reluctance on  the  U.S.  side to  be drawn
into  discussion  of  how  to  build  the  house  of  disarmament  at
all.    On  Friday,  the  very  first  day  on  which  the  plenary  com-
mittee  tackled   the   specifics   of   disarmament,  the   divergence
grew  so  wide  that  Senator  de  Mello-Franco  of  Brazil  spoke
despairingly  of  "an  impasse"  though  he  rose  later  to  explain
tactfully  that  all  he  meant  was  that  the  conferees  had  arrived
at  a  cross-roads.
No  Absolute  Guaranties
It  is  the  old  and  familiar  cross-roads.    On  the  U.S.  side  we
want  absolute  guaranties  against  violation  of  any  treaty  while
the  Russians  want  absolute  guaranties  that  a  treaty  cannot  be
used  to  map  their  bases  for  attack  before  complete and  general
disarmament  has  been  achieved.    Neither  side  is  prepared   to
recognize  that  while  they  talk  of  absolute   security  in  either
sense,  technological   changes   are  destroying  it.    The   risk  of
sudden  attack  by  a  few  planes  or  rockets  hidden  from  inspec-
tors  is  less  than  the  risk  of  unleashing  monsters  of  destruction
through  the  probability  of  accident  as  these  weapons  pile  up
and  grow  more  complex.    On  the  other  side,  the  Russian  fear
that  inspectors  may  spot  their  bases  for  attack  begins  to  seem
ludicrous  as  we  learn  more  and  more  about  the   surveillance
to  which  they  were  subjected  by  U-2  and  are  being  subjected
by  its  successor   satellite  spy  systems.    These  neuroses  again
block  agreement.   The  key  to  resolution of  the  difficulty  seems
to  lie  in  the  time  limit.    If  the  process  is long  drawn  out,  then
the  Russians can reasonably fear  that  after  much  inspection  and
Why  Total  Disarmament?
"The   existence   of    missile    and   nuclear   weapons
changes  entirely  the  function  of  control.   In  the  past,
before  World  War  II,  for  instance,  one  could   discuss
advantages   and  disadvantages  of   control  over  arma-
ments.    At  present, reciprocal control  over  missile  and
nuclear  armaments,  providing  both  sides  with detailed
information  on  the  location  of  military  bases  and rocket
launching  pads—can  only  encourage an  aggressor,  who
is  aware  of  the  specific  targets,  to  a  sudden attack. And
it  is  not  able to  prevent it.    In  this  respect  military  ex-
perts  in  the  East  and  West  seem  to  be  in  agreement.
Therefore,   insofar  as   modern   means  of   warfare  are
concerned,  the  dilemma—control  over  disarmament or
control  over  armaments—boils  down  to  the  one  of  con-
trolled  disarmament or  of  an  accelerated arms race and
increasing  threat  of  a  sudden  attack."
—Polish  Foreign  Minister  Rapacki,  Geneva, Mar. 21
little  disarmament,  we  may  break  off  the  process  and  be  in  a
better  position  to  attack.    On  the  other  hand,  given  the  will
to  agree,  if  the  time limit  is short,  verification  should  be  nego-
tiable,  especially  if  sampling  and  zonal  systems  are   applied.
But  the  Russians  cannot  expect  to  get  a  treaty under  which  we
would   have  no  way  to  verify  the  forces  which  remained  on
their  side  after  cuts  were  made.
The  reader will  note that  after the  pessimism I  brought  with
me  from  the  Washington  scene  I  am  beginning  to  take  the
details  of  negotiation  seriously,  as  if  all  this  were  real. The.
neutral  hope  is  that  by  a  similar  process  maybe  the  West  can
be  drawn  so  inextricably  into  discussion  that  it  will  be  unable
to  back  out.    The  U.S.  must  soon,  if  only  to  compete  with  the
Russians,  present  something  like  a  draft  treaty  of  its  own.    In
principle  it  cannot  be  too  different.   What  happens  when  the
two  are  put  together?    If  a  man  doesn't  want  to  marry  a  girl,
he  had  best  not  enter  into  a  theoretical   discussion  with  her
father,  mother  and  brothers  on  when,  where  and  how  they
would  be  wed  if  he  finally  made  up  his  mind  to  wed her.
Such  theoretical  discussions  are  perilous  for  bachelorhood.    Sb
the  neutrals hold  their  breath  and  hope.
IPS  Continues  His  Report  From  Geneva  Next  Week—Use  Blank Below  to Start or  Send  A Sub  With  This  Issue
I.  F.
Please
Street
City
Enter
(To)
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
...................................... .....Zone.............State....................
4/9/1962
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
Name  ...............................................................................
........... — .........................Zone.............State.......... ..........
we  send  gilt  announcement?          Ye»  D    No Q
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington  IS,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the  last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  in
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;   S20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED