I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962sep17.pdf

============================================================

Naming  Names: Big Drug Firm  Violators,  P.  2
Cl A  Arrogance; U-2s  Secretly  Given  Chiang  Within  A Few Weeks of  the  1960 Summit  They Wrecked, P.  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO. 33SEPTEMBER  17, 1962
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Afraid   of  Everything  But   War
Calmly  considered,  the  Soviet  note  on  Cuba  is  nowhere  as
near  belligerent  as  our  headlines  make  it  out  to  be.    It  an-
nounces  another  postponement   in  that  Berlin  deadline.     It
says  the  Soviet  Union  has  no  intention  of  establishing  a  base
in  Cuba,  and  that  the  arms  being  sent  there  are  defensive.    It
declares  that  the  number  of  technicians  accompanying  these
arms  are  small  compared  to  those  sent  into  Cuba  to  aid  its
industrial   and   agricultural   development.     It   pointedly  con-
trasts  the  President's  request  for  150,000  more  reservists  with
the  recent  release  of  trained  soldiers  from  the  Soviet  Army
and  the  normal  call-up  of  a  new  age  class.    As  an  earnest  of
peaceful   intent,   it   emphasizes   this   routine   replacement   of
trained  men  with  raw  recruits  at  a  time  when  the  equipment
they  must  handle  is  so  complex.    Given  the  nature  of  men
and  their  nation-states,  all  this  had  to  be  layered  over  with
strong  words  or  it  would  look  like  "knuckling  under."
We  Cultivate  Obtuseness
There  is  also  a  defensive  ring  in  the  note's  angry  protest
(see   box)   against  the  uproar   here  over  this  limited   aid  to
Cuba  when  we  so  take  for  granted  not  only  our  ring of  bases
around  the  Soviet  bloc  but  the  presence  of  out  war  fleets  in
the  seas  adjacent  to  it.   What  if  there  were  a  Soviet  6th  Fleet
in  the  Caribbean as  ours  is  in  the  Mediterranean,  and  a  Soviet
7th  fleet  between  Hawaii  and  California?    It  is  a  pity  that
the  State  Department's   spokesmen   encourage  obtuseness  by
shrugging  this  off  as  propaganda.    The  safety  and  welfare  of
our  country  depends  more  than  ever  on  a  thoughtful  elector-
ate,   prepared  to  try  and  see the  world  through  the  other  fel-
low's  eyes.    There  is  much,  however  unpalatable,  that  could
be  learned  from  the  Soviet  note.    It  touches  the  crucial  spot
when  it  says  it .is  not  the  military  equipment  in  Cuba  "it  is
the  revolutionary spirit  you fear."    The  Alliance for  Progress
is  poisoned   by  hemispheric  awareness  of  the   swift   oil   and
sugar  interest crackdown on  Cuba when  it sought to  accomplish
the  social reforms we claim to favor.   Whatever  Castro's  head-
strong  follies,  this  compromises  us  in  Latin  eyes  and  will  set
its   common  people  and   intellectuals   against   us   should   we
stage  a  new  attack  on  Cuba.
The  Soviet  note  suggests  that  instead  of  mobilizing  reserv-
ists  "it   would   be  more  sensible  if   the  Government   of   the
United  States,  displaying wisdom,  would  offer  a  kind  gesture
—would  establish  diplomatic  and  trade  relations  with  Cuba."
They  can  safely  give  this  good  advice,  knowing  we won't  take
it.    If  there  were  any  humor  left  we'd   resolve  the  crisis  in
universal  laughter  by  taking  up  the  idea  on  condition   that
Khrushchev   show   a   similar  magnanimity  -toward   Albania.
Hoxha, is  the  only  other  fly-weight  dictator  with  the  nerve  to
thumb  his  nose  at  neighboring  Big  Brother.    Come  to  think
of  it  we might  blow  off  some  of  our  aggressive  steam  by send-
9*                                                                                                   13
What  They  Fear and Resent
"The  United States of  America  has  ringed the  Soviet
Union  and  other  Socialist  countries  with  bases.   What
have  they  stationed  there—tractors?     Are  they  per-
haps  growing rice, wheat, potatoes or  some other  farm
crops  there.    No,  they  have  brought  armaments  there
in  their ships,  and these  armaments  stationed  along  the
frontiers  of  the  Soviet  Union—in  Turkey,  Iran,  Greece,
Italy,   Britain,  Holland,  Pakistan ...  are  said  to be
there  lawfully  by right..  . .  But to  others the  U.S.  does
not  permit  this  even  for  defense.  .  .  .
"The  United  States,  for  instance,  is  now  mobilizing
allegedly  because our  merchant  ships  are  proceeding to
Cuba.   At  the  same time  U.S.  ships,  not  merchant ships
...  but warships,  the  entire  6th  Fleet  cf  the  U.S.,  are
in  the  Mediterranean.  .  .  .  The 7th  U.S.  Fleet  is  in  the
Taiwan  Strait  .  .  .  while  American admirals and  gen-
erals,  as if  competing with  each other, prattle ...  about
the  6th  and  7th  fleets  being  designed  for  attack,  for
destroying  the  Socialist  countries."
—Soviet note  on Cuba Sept. 11.
ing  military  technicians  and  supplies  to  this  Soviet  rebel  as
we  once  sent  them  to  Tito,  the  first  Castro  to  appear  on  their
side of  the  fence.
No  such  healing perspectives  were  opened  up  by our  official
reactions.    The  Secretary  of  State  emerged  from  a  Congres-
sional  briefing  to  tell  reporters  stalwartly,  "we  are not  nervous
or  afraid."    The  truth  is that  everybody  seems  to  be  afraid  of
everything  but war.   People are  afraid  to  look at  the  situation
from  Khrushchev's  point  of  view,  or  Castro's,  lest  they  be
accused  of  giving  aid  and  comfort  to  an  enemy.    Mr.  Rusk  is
afraid  to  talk  sense  publicly  among  the  idiots  on  Capitol  Hill
for  fear  of  being  labelled  an  appeaser.    Everybody  is  haunted
by  fear  of  losing  aft  office  or  an  election.   The  President  asks
Congress  for   call-up  authorizations  he   already  has  and   for
150,000  more  men  he  doesn't  need  because he  fears  what  the
Republicans will  say in November.   What we ought to mobil-
ize  is  a  quiet  conference  here  and  abroad  to  explore ways  to
resolve  the  Berlin  and  Cuban  disputes  peacefully.    But  this
implies  some  compromise,  and  everybody  is  afraid  a  readiness
to  compromise  will  be  taken  as a  sign  of  weakness.   Khrush-
chev,  too,  fears  to  talk  sense  without  rattling  rockets though
this  ruins  any  good   effect   by  burying  conciliatory  moves  in
hostile  threats.    The  H-bomb?    The  danger  to  world  civili-
zation?    The   facts  of  the  thermonuclear   age  do  not  seem
really  to  have  registered  on  Mr.  Khrushchev  or  anyone-  else,
On  Capitol Hill they're as ready to  court  a mindless popularity
with  inflammatory  rejoinders  as  if  the  war  were  to   DC  fought
with  flintlocks.  Nobody  seems  to  be willing to  risk  anything
for   peace—anything,  that  is,  but  the  human  race.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  17,1962
Rep.  Lindsay  Shows  Jerome Wiesner  Evasive  on  Radioactive  Iodine  Danger
The  Weaknesses  of  the  New  UN   Radiation  Committee  Report
The  Second  Report  of  the  UN   Scientific Committee  on  the
Effects  of  Atomic  Radiation  is  disappointingly  vague  and  dis-
turbingly  unanimous.   In  the  presentation   of  the  first  report
in  1958,  there  were  minority  efforts  made  by  the  Soviet  bloc
to  call  for  immediate  cessation  of  testing  and  by  the  Indians
to  put  the  Committee  on  record  against  "any  activity"  which
could  increase  radiation  hazards.    This  time  there  seems  to
have  been  no  fight  to  go  beyond  an  antiseptic  sentence  piously
concluding  that  "the  achievement  of  a  final  cessation  of  nu-
clear   tests  would   benefit  present   and  future  generations  of
mankind."
Dr.  Shields  Warren,  the  U.S.  representative   on  the  15-na-
tion  committee,   has  always  been  associated  with  a  ready  ac-
quiescence  in  official  reassurances.    This  time,  with  both  blocs
testing  and  neither  anxious  to  emphasize  the  dangers  of  fall-
out,  the  new  report  seems  to  be  a  triumph   for  this  type  of
scientist.    No   annex  provides   data  on  the  new  Soviet   and
U.S.  tests  though  these  are  the  most  concentrated  the  world
has  seen.
Those  Deceptive  World  Averages
A  change  in  the  mode  of  presentation   cuts  down  the  re-
port's  usefulness.    As  Donald  Keys  of  SANE  pointed   out,
The  1958 report  gave  estimates  of  risk  to  persons  living
in  different  parts of  the  world and  subject  to  differing  con-
ditions.    It  also  gave  ranges   within  which  the  limits  of
effects  to  individuals would  be  expected  to  fall,  and  of  the
numbers  of  people  to  be  affected.    The  new  report  deals
only  with  weighted  world  averages,  impossible  to  trans-
late  to  regional  or  local  conditions,  and  omits  any  refer-
ence  to  the  numbers of  individuals who  will  suffer  certain
types  of  defects.    The  risks,  posed  as  world  averages,  are
compared  with  the  risks  of  medical  and  natural radiation
on  a  world  scale.    By  defining  the  wealth  of  new  material
available  to  it  in such  narrow  terms,  the  report is  seriously
limited  in  usefulness  as  a  basis  for  sound decision-making
and  provides reassurance  for  those  who  wish  to  minimize
the  hazards  of  nuclear  testing.
A  serious  gap  in  the  new  report  is  the  rather  cursory  atten-
tion  given  to  shorter  lived  radioactive substances  like  Iodine-
131.   It  admits  in passing  that  the  discovery that  fallout  comes
Tenth  Pugwash  Produces  Little
The  final  statement  adopted  by  the  Tenth  Pugwash
Conference   on   Science   and   Moral   Affairs   says   "We
are  now  at  a stage  in  which  general  statements  of prin-
ciples  are  not  enough:  action  is  needed." Unfortunately
the  delegates  had  difficulty  in  getting  beyond  the  usual
generalities   about  the  dangers  of   nuclear  war.    The
only  concrete  idea  in  it  was  the  suggestion   that  test
inspection  differences  be  bypassed  by  the  use  of  "auto-
matic  sealed  seismic  stations"  which  "would  be  put  in
places  in agreed numbers by  the  host  nation after  being
sealed   by   an   international  authority."    The  London
Times  reported  Sept.  8  that  Soviet  Academician  I.  E.
Tamm  told a  press  conference this  would greatly  reduce
the  number  of  unidentified  events  and  that  the  seals
would  make  it  possible  to  detect  any  tampering  with
the  stations.   A  similar proposal  for  unmanned stations
was  made  many  months  ago,  but  only  as  a  supplement
to   manned  listening   posts.    The  only  other  point   at
which  the  statement  became  at  all  specific  was  in  a
paragraph  suggesting  that  the  early  elimination  of  the
means   of  delivering  weapons  of   mass  destruction  be
"linked   with   substantial   reductions   of   conventional
military   forces."    This   formula   might  bridge  Soviet-
American  differences  on  the  first  stage  of  disarmament
if  either  capital  wanted  to  bridge  them  at  this  time,
which  we  doubt.
down  faster  than  earlier  expected   "will  somewhat   increase"
fallout  hazards  because  of  these  lesser  known  nuclides.    But
studies  have shown  that  these  are far  more  serious  than  hither-
to  believed  and  add  greatly  to  the  hazards,  especially  to  in-
fants  whose  thyroids  may  be  damaged  by  radioactive  iodine.
In  a  speech  to  the  House   Sept.  4,  Rep.  John  Lindsay,  a
young  New  York  Republican  who  has  distinguished   himself
by  his  alertness,  made  public  an  exchange  of  letters  with  the
White  House  on  this  subject.   The  letter  by Dr.  Jerome  Wies-
ner  as  the  President's  scientific  adviser  was  evasive  and  mis-
leading  and  supports  the  theory  that,  as  Mr.  Lindsay  put  it,
the  Administration  is  afraid  to  act  on  the  radioactive  iodine
danger    lest   this   "provide   additional    ammunition   to   the
opponents  of  nuclear  testing."
Some  of  America's Biggest  Drug  Firms  Found  in  Violation  of  Health Standards
Some  of  America's  largest  drug  firms  figure  on  the  lists
supplied  by  the  Food  and Drug Administration to  the  House
Interstate  and  Foreign  Commerce Committee  of  (1)   those
concerns  found  in  violation  of  anti-biotic  standards  and  (2)
those   which  have  refused   on  various  occasions  to  permit
inspection.    The  lists  and  the  FDA's  comments  have  been
given  little attention  in  the  press,  for  they  step  on  the  toes
of   powerful  advertisers.
The  disclosures  indicate  the  urgent  need  for  House  action
on  SI 552  as  unanimously  passed  by  the  Senate.   This  would
extend  controls  to  all  anti-biotics  and  tighten  up  powers  of
inspection.    Under the  present  law  only  the  five  anti-biotics
in  existence  in  1949 are  covered.   The  lists  show  that  under
this  law,  firms  as  large  and  reputable  as  the  Upjohn  Co.;
Squibb's;  Parke,  Davis;  Lederle  Labs;  Chas.  Pfizer;  Merck
Sharpe  & Dohme;  Commercial  Solvents  and  Eli  Lilly  have
on  many  occasions  in  the  last  two  fiscal  years  been  caught
marketing  sizeable  quantities  of  sub-standard  drmgs.    The
drugs,  the  size  of  the  shipments,  the  dates  and  the  nature
of  the  violation  were  given  by  the  PDA.    Some  of  the  same
firms  appear  on  the  list  of  those  which  have  refused   to
permit  Food  and  Drug  inspections.
The significance of  the  disclosures  lies in  the  light  it  casts
on   the   familiar   claim  of   these   big   companies  that  their
brand  names  and  reputations  provide  sufficient  protection,
and  make  the  sale  of  drugs  under  generic  names  unwise.
The  FDA  report  also  shows  shocking  instances  of  health
and  safety  standard  violations  in  the  food  and  cosmetic  in-
dustries,  which  are  not  covered  by  the  Senate  bill.   Unfor-
tunately  to  widen  the  bill  now  would  be  to  ensure  that  no
bill  was  passed  at  this  session.
"The  deformed baby" scandal  made  it  impossible  for  the
drug  lobby  to  frustrate  Kefauver's  years  of  effort   for  re-
form.    The  bill  as  passed  by  the  Senate  marks  a  big  step
forward.    The  drug  interests  would  like  to  kill  it  in  the
House  either  by  frontal  attack  or  by  so  widening  the  bill  as
to   make  final  action  impossible  this  session.    They  may
succeed  unless  pressure  is  mobilized  for  House  passage  of
S1552.    One  way  to  ensure  yourself  of  safer  and  cheaper
drugs  is  to  write  your  Congressman  now.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  17,1962
Berlin  and  Cuban Events  at  The  Mercy of  Men Authorized  to  Play  Dirty  Tricks
Now,   Before,  and  Not   "After",  Is  The  Time  to  Reopen  Debate  on  the  CIA
The  Berlin  and  Cuban  crises  should  remind  us  to  ask our-»
selves:  What  is  the  CIA  doing?    The  democratic  process  is
crippled   by  the   existence  of   a  huge  intelligence    apparatus
which  has  two  secret  ways  of   affecting   policy.    One   is  the
character  of  the  advice  it  supplies  as  intelligence.     The  other
is  its  power  to  create  the  trouble  it  is  supposed  to  detect  by
carrying  on  all  kinds  of  covert  activity,  affecting  friends  and
enemies  alike.    That  West  Berlin  rioter  hurling  stones  at  an
American  soldier  may  himself  be  a  CIA  man.
In  an  address  here  to  the  American Political  Science  Asso-
ciation,  Prof.  Harry  Howe   Ransom  declared   that  the  CIA
has  become  "a  multi-purpose  organization,  engaged  in  a num-
ber  of  disparate  'strategic  services'."     He  warned   again,  as
so  many warned  after  the  last  Cuban  invasion,  that  its  clan-
destine  activities  should   be  separated   from  its   informational
services  lest  these  be  distorted   to  justify   its  planned   adven-
tures.     "Here   the   self-fulfilling   prophecy,"   Prof.   Ransom
said,  "is  perhaps  the  most  common  danger."   He  recalled  that
in  Korea,  Laos  and  Cuba,  experience  had  shown  that  "selec-
tion  of  only those  bits  of  'intelligence'  justifying a given  plan's
practicability  courts  disaster."    Unfortunately   he  also   noted
in  a  footnote  to  his  talk,  "While  there  was  much  speculation,
after   Cuba,   about   reconstituting   CIA   as  an   exclusively   in-
formation-gathering  agency,  assigning  clandestine  political  and
para-military  missions  elsewhere,   such  radical  surgery  appar-
ently  had  not  been  performed  as  of  August  1962."
Is  A  New  Cuban  Invasion In  The Works?
The   day  Prof.   Ransom  spoke   there   were  charges   that  a
new  Cuban  invasion  was  in  the  making.    The  UPI  ticker  re-
ported  from  Mexico  City  Cuban  Ambassador  Lechuga  told  a
press   conference  that  men  were  being   trained   in  camps  in
Guatemala,  Nicaragua,  Panama,  Haiti  and  the  Dominican  Re-
public for  an  attack on  Cuba.    He  said  a  foreign  vessel  loaded
with  arms  and  painted  with  Cuban  markings  would  be  "cap-
tured"   en   route   to   Venezuela   as  a  pretext   to   launch   the
invasion."
We  have  no  way of  verifying  these  charges.    All  we  know
is that  last  time the  Cubans proved  to  be better  informed  about
How  U-2s  Can Be Not  "Stationed"
Where They  Are  Stationed
"After  the  Russian  [U-2  over  Sakhalin]  charge,  the
5th  Air  Force  unit,  which  includes  units  in  Japan,  Ko-
rea  and  Okinawa, promptly refused  to  discuss  the  U-2
airplane  and  said  it  had  been  directed  to  refer  all  in-
quiries  on  that  type  of   aircraft   to  Washington.    In
Washington  military  leaders  said  no  U-2s  are  stationed
in  Japan.
"Then  they  also  announced that no U-2s are  stationed
on  Okinawa, one  jet  hour  away.   This  becomes  an  in-
teresting  exercise  in  military  semantics.   The key  word
is  'stationed.'    U-2s  do  fly  from  Okinawa,  and  at  any
given   time   an  incoming  passenger   on  a   commercial
flight  to  Naha  may  glance  out  the  window of  his  plane
at  the  runways  of  Kadena  Air  Force  Base  and  see  sev-
eral  of  the  craft   lined  up  on  a  concrete  apron.    Bat
under  the   military  definition  of   the   word,   units   are
'stationed'  at  their  home bases.  Thus  a  bomber unit  can
be  'stationed*  in  Arizona  but  flying  out  of   Clark  Air
Force  Base  hi   the  Philippines.    U-2s  operate   out  of
Clark,  too,  incidentally."*
—Ted  Sell  from   Tokyo,  Los  Angeles  Times  Foreign
Service, in  Washington  Post,  Sept.  9.
invasion   plans  than  we  Americans  were.    In  the  war  with
Spain  we  never  did  find  put  who  blew  up  the  Maine,  but  at
least  then  we  didn't  have  a  secret  branch  of  government  set
up  to  engage  in just  such  operations.
Prof.  Ransom  quoted  Allen  W.  Duties  as  saying  in   1954
that  in  intelligence  work  you  had  to  "take  certain  things  on
faith"  and  judge  by  results.   But  free  government,  Prof.  Ran-
som  pointed  out,  is  not" supposed   to  operate  on  "faith."    As
for  results,  "by  what  criteria,"  he  asked,  "can  one  judge  such
inevitable  'results'  as  the  role  of  the  CIA  in  ousting  Premier
Mossadegh   in  Iran   in   1953,   its  role  in  the  coup  d'etat  in
Guatemala  in  1954,   in  the  Hungarian   uprisings   in  1956,   in
Laos,  in  Berlin,  and  in  numerous  other  clandestine   activities,
some  of  which  apparently  were  failures?"    These  are   again
urgent  questions  now  when  secret  operatives,   by  accident  or
design,  may  fake  us  over  the   brink.
U-2s  For  Chiang—A  Warning  of  How
The  most  important  part  of. the  U-2  flight  over  China  is
the  date  on  which  we  "sold"  two  of  the  planes  to  Chiang
Kai-shek.    This  was  July,  1960,  just  two  months  after  the
U-2  flight  over  Russia  wrecked  the   summit  meeting,  and
Eisenhower  promised  there  would  be  no  more  flights  over
the   Soviet  Union.    Imagine  the  uproar  if   it   had  become
known  at  the  time  that  in  the  wake  of  this  disaster  the CIA
was  negotiating  secretly  to  give  the  planes  to  Chiang.
The  deal  reflects  dangerous  qualities  on  the  part  of  this
secret   bureaucracy—bravado,   arrogance,   recklessness.     It
is  difficult  to  believe  that  CIA would have dared go  into  this
deal  if  there  were  a  Joint  Congressional  Committee on  In-
telligence  to  oversee  its  operations  as  recommended to  the
Hoover  Commission in  1955  by  Gen.  Mark   W.  Clark   and
proposed  in  the  bill  Senator  Mansfield  and  34  co-sponsors
tried  unsuccessfully  to  get. through  Congress  the following
year.
The  same  questions which  were  raised  at  the  time  of  the
May,  1960,  flight  ought  to  be  raised  now.    Who authorized
it?    Prof.  Ransom in  his  address  to  the  American  Political
Reckless  and  Arrogant  the  CIA  Can  Be
Science  Association  recalled  that  neither  the  President  nor
the  Secretaries  of  Defense  and State  knew the  U-2  was  over
the  Soviet  Union on  May  1,  1960.   Who, within  the  next  few
weeks,  allowed  the  Chinese  deal,  using  as  •   "cover"  the
same  Lockheed Aircraft  Corporation which was  used  hi  the
earlier  affair?    Have these  planes  been  transferred  to  any
other  ally  or  to  any  private  group  acting  as  a  front  for
the  CIA?
These  are  not  run-of-the-mill secrets.  They  involve  major
questions  of  policy,  in  the  area  of  the  war-making power,
where  Congress  ought  to  have some  means  of  knowing what
is  going  on.   The  absence  of  Congressional  supervision  very
probably  leads  also  to  a  slackness  in  executive  supervision
because  no  one  expects  to  be  found  out.   A  country  in  an
uproar  because  the  Russians  have  given  25-mile range  anti-
aircraft  guns  to  Cuba  shows  a  perilous  blindness  when  it
so takes for  granted the  transfer  to  Chiang of  a  plane which
can  overfly  the  whole Eurasion continent.   How do  we make
sure  it  will  carry  only  cameras?    What  if   those   "winds"
blow  it  over  into  Siberia?
1   3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. ^tone's  Weekly,  September  17,1962
Election  Bulletin
Unofficial   returns   from   Vermont   show   former    Con-
gressman  Wm.  H.  Meyer  polled  4,075  votes  to  the  5,863
cast   for   the   organization   candidate,   Johnson,   in   the
fight  for  the  Democratic  Senate  nomination.    That  he
could  do  so  well  in  this  lonely  fight  is  a  reminder.of
what  a  little  outside  aid  could  have  done  for  him  and
could  do,  if  given  in  time,  for  other  peace  candidates,
especially  Hughes  in  Massachusetts.   It  is  a  pleasure  to
record  that  another  Congressional  voice  for  peace,  Wm.
Fitts Byan  of  New  York,  defeated  a  right  wing  machine
candidate   for  renomination  by   26,000  votes  to   18,000.
Ryan  fought   the  House  Un-Americans  and  defied   the
China  lobby.    His  success  should  inspire  others.
Contrast  Between  the  Soblen  and Artukovic  Cases;  Three  Items  of  Cuban  War  Hysteria
How  Diem  Tries  to  Stifle  Honest  Reporting  Out  of  South  Vietnam
The  Right  to  Know:  The  Moss  subcommittee  on  freedom
•of  information,  which  frightened   HEW   last  week-end  into
releasing  a  suppressed  report  on  birth  control,  would  perform
another  public  service  by  looking  into  the  expulsion  of  News-
week's   correspondent   Francois   Sully   from   South   Vietnam.
Intervention  in  South  Vietnam  is  costing  the  U.S.  many  mil-
lions  and   some  lives;  nowhere  is  there  greater  need   for   a
free  flow  of  information.    Sully's   expulsion   order   followed
on  the  heels  of  Newsweek's  August  20  issue,  "Vietnam:   The
Unpleasant  Truth."    Press  difficulties  also  seem  to  reflect  the
U.S.  Embassy's attitude; correspondents  who  do  not  follow  its
pro-Diem  "party  line"  are  regarded  with  disfavor. Last  spring
Diem  tried to  expel  Sully  and  Homer  Bigart  of  the  New   York
Times.    U.S.  Ambassador  Nolting  persuaded  Diem  to  defer
action.    Since  then  the  independent  minded  Bigart  has  been
recalled  and  Sully  has  been  ousted.    Both  should  be  asked
to  tell  their  story.
Soblen  and  Artukovic:  The  death  of  Dr.  Robert  Soblen  in
London  will  leave  a  bitter  taste  in  the  mouths  of  Britons  and
Israelis  who  realize  that  under  their  laws  espionage  is  a politi-
cal  and  therefore not  an  extraditable  offense.  They  may  con-
trast  this unrelenting hunt  for  a  dying man  with  the snail-like
pace  of  the  U.S.  government's  proceeding  to  deport  Andrija
Artukovic  whom  the  Yugoslavs  have  long  wanted  to  try  as  a
participant  in  Nazi  war  crimes  during  the  German  occupation.
A  final  order  for  "his  deportation   to  Yugoslavia   was  issued
almost  ten  years  ago,  buf  six  years  later  a  U.S.  Commissioner
in  California  ruled  that  his  crimes  were  political  and  he  was
therefore  not  extraditable.   A  Detroiter  who  wrote  the  Attor-
ney  General  recently  to  ask  about  the»case  was  informed  that
the  U.S.  Immigration  and  Naturalization   Service  was  trying
"to  obtain  a  travel  document  for  deportation  to  some  other
country  but  to  date has been unsuccessful."
One  Way  to  Save Money:  Last  Monday  William  Albertson
went  before  the  Subversive  Activities  Control   Board  in   the
first  test  of  the  Internal  Security  Act  requirement  that  Com-
munist  Party  members  register.   This  is  one  of  four  separate
sets  of  test  cases  now  underway.    Gus  Hall  and   Benjamin
Davis  are  to  be  tried  for  failing  to  register  the  Party.    Three
organizations  go  before  the  Court  of  Appeals  here   October
3  to  test  the  first  orders  requiring  registration  as  Communist
fronts:   the   American  Committee  for   the   Protection   of   the
Foreign   Born,   the   National   Council   of   Soviet   American
Friendship  and  the  Veterans  of  the  Abraham Lincoln  Brigade.
An  appeal  is pending  by the  Mine,  Mill  and  Smelter  Workers
against  registration  as  a  "Communist  infiltrated"  trade  union.
This  litigation  will  be  long  and  costly.    No  other  country  in
the  "free  world"  has  so  few  Communists  and  will  spend  so
much   money  trying  to   get   them   registered.     It   would   be
cheaper  quietly  to  pension  them off.
No  Way  to  Lean: The  NLRB  Sept.  6  upheld  the  discharge
of  five  employes  by  a  Miami  shoe  concern  because  a  Dade
County,  Fla.,  Criminal  Intelligence  Unit  man  checked   them
out   "as  being  pro-Castro   or  leaning   towards   Castro"  .  .  .
Tell-Tale   Nose   Rings:  The   AP   from   Miami    (Washington
Star   Sept.   9)   quoted   newly  arrived  refugees  as  saying   the
Russians  were  bringing   Congolese   to   Cuba,  too;   they  were
spotted  because some  "had  rings  in  their  noses."   This  should
give  Senator  Dodd   a  chance  to  combine  two  favorite  cam-
paigns   and   call   for   action  against  Leopoldville  as  well   as
Havana.  .  .  .  Reportedly   Reporting:  We  nominate  for   some
kind  of  journalism  award  the  Copley  News   Service  dispatch
in  the  war-like  Washington   Daily  News  Sept.   3  which  was
headlined,   "Report   Reds  Will  Launch  Rocket  From   Cuba"
and   began,   "The   State  Dept.  reportedly   is  studying   reports
that  Russia  plans  to  launch  a  3-stage   scientific   rocket  from
Cuba  in  the  near  future.  .  .  ."
Copies  Of  This  or  The  Last  Two  Issues  Sent  Free  to  Friends  If  You  Send  Long  Stamped  Addressed   Envelopes
I.  F.  Stone'
Please  renew
Name  ..............
Street   ............
City  .................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street   .............
City  ................
Shall  we  send
S  Weekly,  S618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
..........................Zone.............State....................
9/17/62
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
........................ .Zone.............State...... ..............
gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday  in  December
and  the  first  in  January  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.
Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $6  in  the  U.  S.;  $6 in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.
Air  Mall  rates:  (16  to  Europe;  *20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED