I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jul23.pdf

============================================================

Time  to  Call for  Peace  in  Viet  Nam,  P.  3
Ralph  Lapp  Asks  Shutdown  Nevada  Testing  Grounds,  Says  Iodine-131  Dangerously  High,.See  Page  2
I. F, Stone's  Weekly
+r
VOL.   X,  NO.  29
JULY  23,  1962WASHINGTON,  I).  C.
15 CENTS
Superstrong—But  Too  Weak  to  Stop   Testing
As  the  Geneva  disarmament  conference   reopened  and   the
Moscow   Peace   Congress   closed,   this   is   how   the   situation
seemed   to   stack  up.     When   the   U.S.   talks  of   its   military
power,  it  claims intelligence so precise that  it can  pinpoint  and
blast  out  Russia's hidden  missile bases.    But  when  it  comes  to
the   question   of   a  treaty  banning  further  nuclear   tests,   the
U.S.  claims  its  intelligence  apparatus  is  so  poor,  it   couldn't
be  sure  the  Russians  weren't  cheating  unless  it  had   listening
posts  on  Soviet  territory  and  the  right  of  on-site   inspection.
On   the  other  hand,   the  Russians,  -when  talking  of   their
military  power,  claim  to  have the  world's  most  advanced  weap-
ons.    As Mr.  Khrushchev  told  the  Peace  Congress,  engagingly,
"let's  be  frank  about  it—we  have  the  most  perfect  of  weapons
that   no  other  power   possesses."    But  when   it   comes   to  a
cessation  of  nuclear  testing,  Mr.  Khrushchev  claims—as he told
the  editors—that  the  Soviets  can  "come  abreast  of  the  United
States  .  .  .  only  if  it  carries  out  its own  tests,  after  the  current
series  of  American  tests."
A  Dandy  Little  Armament   Salesman
If  Mr.  Khrushchev  is right,  it  is the  U.S.  which  needs  more
testing  to  catch  up.    He  told  the  editors,  "I  am  not  boasting
but  we actually have  a global  rocket  which  cannot  be  destroyed
by  any rocket weapon."   He  claims  to  have an  anti-missile  and
he  told  the  Peace  Congress,  "The  ruling  groups  of  the  United
States,  who  do  not  have  the  same  powerful  military  weapons,
have  no  reason  at  all  to  say that  the  balance  of  strength  has
changed  in  their  favor."     These  modest   declarations,  neatly
printed  and  sent  around  in  this  country,  would  make  a  most
effective  sales  brochure  for  higher  U.S.   armament  appropria-
tions.
On  the  other  hand,  if  Mr.  McNamara   is  right  in  his  cam-
paign  for  a  counter-force   strategy,  then  world  stability  is  en-
dangered  not  by Russian secrecy  but  by  lack  of  it.    If  we  know
as  much  as  we  claim  to  know  of  what's  going  on  behind  the
suddenly  sievelike  Iron   Curtain,   then   it  would  be  to  every-
body's  advantage  if  Russia  were  subjected   to  less   inspection
not  to more.   The  temptation  of  an  American first strike  would
be  removed   if   we  knew   less   about   where   Russia's  missile
bases  were.
These  contradictory  pronouncements  by the  two  big  powers
do  not  provide  the  most  entrancing  overture  for  the  reopening
of  the  Geneva  talks.   Neither  do  the  two  main  lines  of  argu-
ment  being  put  forward  in  this  country  for  an  intensified  arms
race.    One  is  that  by  stepping  up  the  race,  we  will  force  the
Russians  to  say  "uncle"  and  "agree  to  our  terms.    The  other
is  that  by  stepping  up  the  arms  race,  we  can  continue   in  a
position  to  smash  the  Russian  missile  bases  but  prevent  them
from  retaliating  against  our  cities. We  reported,  quite wrongly
8*
Triumph  of  Socialism  in  Military  Science
Thermonuclear  war  seems  to  be  getting safer  all  the
time.    We  had  barely  finished  digesting  the reassuring
implications  of  counter-force  strategy,  when  this  came
over  the  UPI  ticker:
Moscow,   July   17—Premier   Nikita   Khrushchev
is  now  claiming  that  Russia  has  an  anti-missile  so
accurate  that  it   'hits  a  fly   in  outer   space.'
Only   yesterday  McNamara   announced  proudly  that
we   wouldn't   hit  cities.    Now  it  seems  the   Russians
can  already  go  us  one  better  and  announce that  they'll
only  hit  flies.
it  seems  last week, that  Mr.  Kennedy  and  Mr.  McNamara  were
backing   away  from  this  counter-force   strategy.     On  the  con-
trary the  latter  has been  calling  in  reporters  for  briefings aimed
to  sell  the  idea  and  answer  criticism.
The  answers  are not  reassuring.    Mr.  McNamara  told  Mar-
quis  Childs   (Washington   Post,  July  13)   that   he  was  "sur-
prised"  that  anyone  could  read  a  first  strike  implication  in  his
Ann  Arbor  speech.    He  regards  counter-force   as  a  defensive
strategy  and  believes  nobody  could  win  a  nuclear  war.    But
"he  knows"  also,  as Mr.  Childs  reported,  "that  there  are  those
in  the  Pentagon—some  in  high  position—who  disagree  and
feel  that  a  nuclear  war  could  be  won."     This  is  not  calculated
to  convince  the  Russians  this  is  a  good  time  to  reduce  their
armament.
The  Pipe-Dream  of  A  Pax   Americana
It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  Mr.  McNamara   can  be  as  in-
telligent  as  he  has  shown  himself  to  be  and  still  as  naive  as
he  would  like  us  to  think  he  is.    Another   of  the  reporters
briefed  by Mr.  McNamara  provided  a  clue  to  the  real strategy.
He  is Richard  Fryklund  of  the  Washington  Star who  was used
by  the  Air  Force  to  launch  this  spare-the-cities  nonsense  a year
ago.     In  Mr.   Fryklund's  article,  as  published   by  his  paper
July  16,  he  showed  the  Russians  how  easily  they  could  avoid
the  fear  we  might  use  our  overwhelming  counter-force  for  a
first strike.    "The  Kremlin,"  Mr.  Fryklund  wrote,  "could  in-
sure  the  safety  of  the  Soviet  block  simply  by  refraining  from
provoking  the  United  States."    This  is,  indeed,  how  the  Air
Force   and   its   military  intellectuals   see  counter-force,   as  a
means  of  frightening  an  adversary.    All  Mr.  Krushchev  has
to  do  to  be  safe  is  to  accept  a  Pax  Americana,  Henry  Luce's
American  Century.    Until  we  awaken  from  this  pipe-dream,
disarmament  conferences  will  remain gamesmanship.
There are  several  things wrong •with  this  policy  of  perpetual
arms  race  in  the  hope  of  some  day  achieving  surrender  to  U.S.
.  (Continued   on   Page   Four)
1  1  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  23, 1962
Famous  Physicist  in  Address  Press  Ignored  Says  Iodine-131  Getting  Dangerously  High
Dr.  Ralph  Lapp  Recommends  Closing  of  Nevada  Nuclear  Testing  Grounds
By  Dr. Ralph  E.  Lapp *
With  the  resumption  of  atmospheric  testing  at  the  AEC's
Nevada  Proving  Grounds,   it  is  timely  to  consider  the  fallout
hazards   from   continental  nuclear   bursts.     The   problem   of
fallout   from   Nevada    tests   focuses   upon    local   and    tropo-
spheric  deposition  of   radioactive  debris  in  which  short-lived
radioactivities  are  of  principal  concern.    Of   these  iodine-131
has  received  relatively  little   attention  especially   as  it   relates
to  contamination  of  the  milk  supply.
So  much  attention  has  focused  on  strontium-90  and  cesium-
137,  the  longer-lived   components  of  fallout,  that  research  on
iodine-131  has  been  slighted.    We  know  how  much  iodine-131
is  formed  in  the  bomb  (a  nuclear  explosion  of  1 kiloton  yield
produces   100,000  curies  of  iodine-131),  but  little  is  known
about   the   fractionation  of   this  nuclide   in   local   and   tropo-
spheric  fallout.
Maximum Risk to Infants
In  assessing  the  iodine-131  hazard,  it  is clear  that  the  maxi-
mum  risk  involves  the  infant  thyroid.    The  radiation  dosage
of  the  developing  thyroid  in  the  late  foetal  period  would  seem
to   be  significant   especially   because  of   the   criticality   of  this
gland,  its  high  radioactivity  and  its  high  specific   content.
The   British   have   set  up   130  uuc/liter   as  the   acceptable
limit   for   continuous   contamination  of   milk   by   iodine-131.
This  corresponds   to  about  1  rad  dose  to  the  thyroid  over  a
period  of  one  year.    Milk  containing   1,000   uuc/liter  would
produce  an  irradiation  of   about   7  rad  to  the  thyroid  if   the
rate  of  consumption  is  one  liter  per  day.**
Farmers  and   milk   processors   must  be  worried   about   the
prospect  that  their  product  may  be  subject  to  interdiction  in
the  event  of  severe  iodine-131  contamination.   This  has  not
occurred  as  yet  in  the  U.S.  partly  because  the  radioiodine  fall-
out  measured  in  the  past  year  has  originated  in  remote  tests,
namely  in  the  Pacific  or  in  the  Soviet  Union.    However,  with
the  resumption  of   tests  in  Nevada,   it  is  necessary  to  take  a
closer  look  at  radioiodine.
There  have   been   a  number  of   tropospheric   fallouts  from
Nevada  tests  in  the  past  which  may  serve  to  give  an  index  of
the  radio-iodine hazard.    An  an  example,   I  cite  the   fallout
from   Shot   7,  Test  SIMON  of   the  UPSHOT-KNOTHOLE
series,  which  took   place  on  April  25,   1953.     On   April  26,
18  hours   after   the   shot,   an   unusually  severe  thunderstorm
took  place  over  the  Troy-Albany-Schenectady  area  some  2,300
miles   east  of   the   Nevada   test  site,  one   of   the   worst   flash
storms  in  years.    Dr.   Herbert  M.  Clark  of  Rensselaer  Poly-
technic   Institute   at   Troy   discovered   a   marked   increase   in
radioactivity  on  the  campus  grounds  and  proceeded   to  make
measurements.
I  estimate  that  from  2  to  4  curies  of  iodine-131  per  square
mile  were  deposited  in  the  Troy  area.    This  means  that  milk
collected   from  cows  feeding  exclusively  on  fresh  pasture  con-
taminated   to   this   level   would   produce   milk   exhibiting   an
Four  U.S.  "Hot  Spots" In June
The  latest  monthly  report  of  the  Public  Health  Serv-
ice  for  June  (released   July  13)   showed  average  con-
centrations  of  iodine-131 in  milk  were  disturbingly high
in   four   urban  areas.     The  average  number  of   micro-
microcuries   per   liter   for   June  was   350   in   Spokane,
Wash.;  240  in  Kansas  City,  Mo.;  160  in  Oklahoma City
and  130  in  Wichita,  Kansas.    The  British  set   130  per
liter  as   the  acceptable   limit.
early  contamination  of   the   order   of   100,000  uuc/liter.     A
single  pint  of  this  milk  would  equal  twice  the  British  annual
allowance  for  iodine-131  intake.
No  measurements  were  made  of  the  Troy  fallout  in  milk,
at  least  none  have  ever  been  published. ...  To  the  best  of
my  knowledge  the  AEC  report  dealing  with  the  Troy  fallout
is  still  classified   SECRET.     Unless  the  fallout  was  extremely
localized,  which  seems  unlikely,  since  one  square  mile  of  con-
tamination  involved  only  one-millionth  of  the  total  iodine-131
produced   by  the  SIMON  shot,   about   10,000  infants  in  the
Troy-Albany-Schenectady  area  would   have  been   involved.
The   Troy  fallout   is  worth   reconstructing   in   view   of   the
underground  or  so-called  "contained"  shots  in  Nevada.    It  is
possible  to  have  underground   shots  which  appear  to  be  con-
tained   but  still  vent   radio-iodine.***    With   respect  to  the
100-kiloton   Plowshare   explosion   of   July   6,    1962,    it   was
claimed   that  the  shot  released  only   5  percent  of   its  radio-
activity.    However,   a  much  higher  release  of  iodine-131  may
have   taken  place   and   if   this,   along  with   iodine-131    from
more  recent  atmospheric  tests  in  Navada,  falls  out  tropospher-
ically  in  the  United  States  high  milk  levels  may  result.
The  levels  are  already  sufficiently  high  so that  recently  when
our  seven-month  old  baby  was  given  a  check-up  and  we  were
told  we  could  switch  to  fresh  milk  I  insisted  on  using  aged,
canned   milk.
1.  I  believe  that  the  radioiodine  hazard   is  serious  enough
to  justify  closing  the  Nevada   Proving  Grounds   to  all  atmos-
pheric   tests   and   curtailing   the   underground    test   program
so  as  to  eliminate  iodine-venting.
2.  I  would   recommend   that  the  Public  Health  Service  in-
tensify   its  iodine-131   monitoring   of   the   milk   supply.
3.  I   would   urge   that   the   Federal   government    accelerate
research  in  the  investigation   of  tropospheric  fallout  and  bio-
logical  uptake  of  iodine-131.     In  addition,  the  Federal  Radi-
ation  Council   should   make  a  determination   of  the  action   to
be taken  when  excessive  levels  of  iodine-131  are  found  in milk.
4.  I  would  also  recommend   that  special  biomedical  surveys
be  made  of  "hot  spots"  like  Troy,  N.Y.,   Salt  Lake  City  and
other   areas  where  heavy  fallouts   have   occurred   in  the  past.
In  such  areas  it  is  highly  probable  that  individuals  have  sus-
tained  the  highest  radiation  dosage  so  far  accruing  in  fallout
as  concentrated  in  any  active  body   organ.
'Abridged   from   an   address   at   Utah   State   University,
Logan,  Utah,  July  10.  which  was  almost  entirely  ignored  by
the  press.    Dr.  Lapp is  the  author  of  many well-known books
on  fallout   and  nuclear  weapons;  his  latest   "Kill  and  Over-
kill"  (Basic  Books)   will  appear  in  October.
** The  U.S.  Federal  Radiation  Council protective guides  set
the  Range  III  danger  zone  as  100  to  1,000  uuc  per  day.
*** Dr.  Lapp  explained  to  the  Weekly  that  this  is  because
iodine-131  can  escape  in  gaseous  form  through  small  fissures.
Readers  will  recall  that  in  our  issue  of  June  18  we  published
testimony  by  Dr.  E.  A.  Martell  of  the  Cambridge  Air   Force
Research  Center  before  the  Joint  Atomic  Energy  Committee
in  which  he  suspected  that  leakage  from  our  long  series  of
underground  tests  in  Nevada  since  last  Fall  was   responsible
for  the  sharp  increase  in  iodine-131  levels.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  23, 1962
A  Tribute  in  Farewell  to  Royal  W.  France:  He  Fought  for  Those  Few  Dared  Defend
Time  For  The  Peace  Movement  to  Call  For  An  End  of  War  in  Viet  Nam
PROPOSAL  FOR THE  PEACE  MOVEMENT:  Why   not  appoint
an  independent commission to  investigate the  war  in Viet  Nam
and  pave  the  way  for  negotiation  as  in  Laos  and   for  with-
drawal  of  U.S.  troops?     It  is  time  the  full  truth  about  the
war  and  the  nature of  the  revolt  against  the  Fascist  regime  in
Diem  were  told.     There   are  plenty  of   returned   Americans,
military  and  civilian,  to  testify  before  such  a  commission.    It
is  ludicrous  to  have  a  growing  peace  movement  which  does
not  fight  for  peace  in  the  one  area  where  warfare is  going  on.
How  much  of  South  Viet Nam  does  the  Diem  regime really
govern?   Note  that  the  recent  ambush  of  a  19-vehicle  convoy
in  which  Capt.  Don  J.  York  was killed  occurred  only  40 miles
outside  of  Saigon,  and  that  this  was  the  third  convoy  knocked
off  by  the  guerrillas  in  the  same  area  in  the  last  few  months
though  two  of  the  convoys  included  armored  vehicles.
They  Pay  Taxes  to  the  Viet  Cong
The  AP  dispatch  from  Saigon  about  this  carried  two  fasci-
nating final paragraphs  which  I  saw only  in  the  Baltimore  Sun
(July   16).     The   attack,  the  AP  said,  occurred   on   "bloody
Route   13,"   parallel   to   a   railroad   spur   over   which  service
ended  last  year  for  lack  of  security.   "However,"  the  AP  dis-
patch   revealed,   "rubber   plantations   in   the   region,   mostly
owned  by  French  interests, continue to  operate  and  ship  their
produce  to  Saigon.    The  planters  generally  have  made  agree-
ments with the  Viet  Cong  under  which  they  pay  taxes  to  Com-
munists  and  refrain   from   open  cooperation  with  the  govern-
ment."
Patriotic  Note:  California  growers   are  threatening  to  sue
Secretary  of  Labor  Goldberg  because  he  set  $1  an  hour  mini-
mum   wages   for   "braceros"   which   "mean   a   minimum   for
domestic,"  i.e.  American  workers,   too.   .  .  .  Hopeful   Note:
Snator  Kefauver  has  been  winning  some  battles  in  committee
on  the  drug  bill  and  hopes   by  a  floor  fight  to  gain  further
improvements.  .  .  .  "Space"  Blackout:  Few  papers  published
anything  on   Kefauver's   press   conference  pointing   out   that
A.T.&T.  was  "not   risking  one  dime"   on  Telestar:   52%  of
the  cost  is  deductible  as  research  and  the  remainder,  so  FCC
told  the  Senator  will  go  into  A.T.&T.'s   rate  base.  .  .  .
Our Ersatz  Guerrilla  Warriors
"Associated   Press  correspondents   have  gone  on  mis-
sions  with  Viet  Namese  forces,  having   probed  into  the
conflicts   and  frustrations   of   the   Viet   Namese    war.
Their  dispatches   reflect  a  picture  like  this:  U.S.  officers
are  finding  they  know  less  about  jungle  fighting,  often,
than  the  men  they  are  supposed  to  teach  guerrilla   tac-
tics.    Few  Americans  can  go  into  the  jungle  and  live
off   the  land   for  long   periods.  .  .  .  Guerrillas  fire  on
helicopters   with  captured   U.S.   weapons.  .  .  .
"Malcolm  W.  Browne  is  the  chief   AP  correspondent
in   Viet   Nam.     He   cabled   these   views   Friday    after
watching  the  situation   develop   for  several  months:  'I
get  the  feeling  some  special  forces  types  could  do  with
some  basic  training  themselves.    They  often  are  saved
from  disaster   by  Viet  Namese  troops  with  them'."
—From  a  round  up  story  sent  out  by  the  AP  (Wash.
Star,  July  U),  a  folo  up  on its  interview  the  previous
week-end  with  disgusted   officers    at  Leavenworth, Kans.,
just  back  from  Viet  Nam,  to  which  we  called  attention
in  our last  week's  issue.
Freer  Trade?   Of  the  stories  which  emerged  from  a briefing
by  Secretary  McNamara  on  a  stiffer   Buy  American  policy  to
help  stem  the  gold  outflow, only  the  Washington   Post's  astute
Bernard  D.  Nossiter  pointed  out  that  this  conflicted  with  the
Administration's   crusade   for   freer   trade.     Under   the   new
rules  domestic  bidders  on  military  contracts   may  be   allowed
a   50%   margin   over  foreign   bidders   instead  of  the   present
25%.    That's  an  expensive  way to  "save  dollars".  .  .  . That
Cartoon  in  last  week's  issue  was  by  the  brilliant   Indian  car-
toonist  Abu,  from  the London  Sunday Observer  of  July  8.    ...
Royal  Wilbur  France:  With  respect  and  affection,  for
his  gentle  character  and  quiet  devotion,  we  record  with  sorrow
the   death   of  Wilbur   Royal  France   at   79.     A    corporation
lawyer  who  turned  civil  liberties  crusader,   he  defended   the
Socialists  when  they  were  expelled  from  the  New  York  legis-
lature  in  the  Red  Hunt  of  the  early  20's  and  the  Communists
in  the  similar  cold  war  prosecutions  of  recent  years.  He  leaves
as  inheritance  to  younger  men  the  inspiration   of  a  fight  for
justice  richly  enjoyed  and  a  life  nobly   lived.
How  the  Armed Service  Mold  the  Public  Mind  Through  Movies  and  TV
We  are  indebted  to  Richard  F.  Roper,  the  Hollywood  cor-
respondent  of  the  Wall  St.  Journal,  for  a  full  report  in  the
July  12  issue  of  that  paper  on  how  much  influence the  mili-
tary  wield  in  the  making  of  movies  and  TV.    Special   staffs
are  maintained  by  the  three  armed  services   in  the   movie
capital  to  work  with  producers  of  both.    Last   year   Holly-
wood   turned   out   19   feature   military   pictures   and   there
will  be  four  new  service  series  on  TV  next  fall.
"By  offering  producers   free   technical   advice,   manpower
and  equipment  at  little  or  no  cost,"  Mr.  Roper  wrote,   "the
services  find  they  can  get  favors   in  return.    These   favors
include  presentation  of  military  men  in  a  good  light,  back-
ing   of   a  particular  branch   in   inter-service   rivalries,   and
sometimes  the  ability  to  edit  out  offensive   material."
Air    Force   influence   led   Disney    Productions   to   revise
the  script  of  its  forthcoming  "Moon  Pilot,"  deleting  Army,
Navy   and   NASA   which   has   primary   charge   of   manned
space   exploration.    In  the   picture   all  the   space   men  will
be  shown  in  Air  Force  uniform.    The  Navy   put  a  cruiser
at   the  disposal   of   MGM  for   "Honeymoon   Machine"  after
the  script  was  revised  to  make  the  admiral  in  it  less  pom-
pous.    The  Army  staged  a  full  review  of  18,000  troops   for
another   picture   it   favored.     Said   an   Army   information
officer,  "We  don't  cooperate  unless  we  can  see  that  a  movie
or  TV  show  will  do  us  some   good."    One  script   is   being
rewritten   because   the   Pentagon   objected   that   it   showed
Air   Force   men  as   "undisciplined  and  glory-seeking."
The  Pentagon  also  exercises  its  blue-pencil  on  movies  that
portray  too  harshly  former  U.S.  enemies  who  are now  allies.
"Defense  Department  script  reviewers,"  Mr. Roper  reported,
prevailed  on  Universal  Pictures  to  tone  down  the  portrayal
of  a  World  War  II  Japanese   colonel.     "Originally   he   was
shown   whipping   a   priest   but  this   was   revised   'to  avoid
making  the  Japanese   officer   look  like  a  bloodthirsty   guy,'
says  an  officer   who  worked  with  Universal   on  the   movie."
Add   to   this    the   influence   that   the   Pentagon    exerts
through  its  information  officers  in  the  press,  magazine  and
book  worlds,  including—not  even  but  especially—the  comic
strips,  and  you  get  some  idea  of  the  brainwashing  potential
at  the  Pentagon's  command.
1   1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  23, 1962
The  Common  Interest  and  the  Common  Danger  of  America  and  Russia
:
'                       {Continued   from   Page One)
domination.     It  breeds  an   unconscious  arrogance  much  like
that  of  the  Kaiser's Germany which may  lead  us into disastrous
adventures.     It  may  slowly  push  the  Soviets  back  to  a  more
dracpnian   regime   to   meet   the  mounting  costs.    The   recent
increases  in  meat  and  butter  prices  were  an  indication  of  the
strain  on  the  economic  side,  there  may  be  similar  tightening
upon  the  political  side.    Russia  could  harden  instead  of  "mel-
lowing"  and  make  the  problems  of  diplomacy  more   difficult
of  solution.    Though   this  would  seem  to  go  contrary  to  the
State  Department's  expressed   hopes   and   pious  wishes,  there
are  many  in  the  military  bureaucracy who  would  welcome  this
development  and  would  be glad  to supplement  it with  a harder
regime  here  at  home.
The  Dollar  Crisis  Is  A  Warning
Another  dangerous  aspect  of  this  policy  is that  if  the  tempo
of  the  arms  race  continues  to  rise,  it  will  soon   be  a  positive
burden  instead  of  an  economic  stimulus  to  our  economy, too.
The  present  difficulties  with  the  balance  of  payments  problem
may  be  only  the  first  warning  rumbles.    The  fact  is  that  the
dollar  is  weakening  as  against  the  German   mark,  the  French
franc  and  the  British  pound.    The  dollar  has  been  the  proud
king  of   world   currencies—"good   as  gold"—for   most   of   a
half   century,  since  World  War   I  wrecked   Europe.    Now   it
totters  on  its  throne  under  the  impact  of  the  costs  imposed  by
the  arms  race  and  our  huge  and  wasteful  military  establish-
ments  abroad,  the  luxurious  legions  with  which  we,  like  the
ancient  Romans,  seek  to  guard  the  marches  of  our  empire  and
contain  the  outer   barbarians.
Already  we  beg  the  Germans  for  arms  orders,  the  French
for   pre-payment  of  debt,  to  ease  the  pressure  on  the   dollar.
A  few  years  ago  they  were  the  recipients  of  our  charity,  now
they  confer  favors.    This  economic  change  must  be  reflected
in  political  changes  and   it  is  against  this  backdrop   that  we
—and  the  Russians—should  view  the  most  serious  aspect  of  a
continued  arms  race  for  both  peoples.    Mr.  Kennedy  is rightly
concerned   about   the   proliferation   of   nuclear   arms   and   the
development   of  independent   nuclear  deterrents.    But  nothing
can  stop  this  development   except   an  agreement   between  the
two  present  superpowers  for  a disarmed  world  in  a new  system
Grains  of  Comfort
Comfort  in  the  news  is  hard  to  find  these  days.   We
dnw  it  from  odd  items.    We  were  immensely   cheered
by  the  news  that  three  convicts had  dug  their  way  out
oi   Alcatraz   with   a  spoon;  we  regard  their  feat  as   a
salutary  lesson  for  the  young,  a  true  success  story.
Another   item   which  gave   us   hope—we  seem   to  be
b< coming   a  reactionary   as   well   as   an   anarchist—was
tl'i'  news  that  two  monkeys  and  four  hamsters  exposed
t<   cosmic rays  in  a  space  capsule  had  been  found  dead.
We  cannot  imagine better  news  for  the  human  race  at
this  moment  than  the  discovery  that  cosmic  rays make
space  travel  impossible  for  man.
The  human  animal   is  clearly  unfit   for   outer   space.
He  would  bring  it   within   the   deadly   orbit   of   his   in-
cessant  wars and  hates;  ravage  it  with  his  Buck  Rogers
mentality;  pollute  it  with  his  bombs.    This  fiscal  year
we   will  spend  $5  billions  on  space.     The  race  to   the
moon   will   cost   us   at   least   $15  to   $20  billions.     The
Russians  are  spending  comparable  sums.     Spent  on  a
race   to   dominate  space,   they   may   some   day  engulf
heaven  in  a  nuclear  hell.    Pooled  in  peace,  they  could
make  a  paradise  on  earth.
of   law.    Time  is running  out  for  both  the  American  and  Rus-
sian  peoples.    While  they  warily watch  each  other  in  fear  of
attack,   the   catastrophe  may  come   from   unexpected   sources.
In  Japan  the  other  day  another  warning  bell  tolled   when
the   82-year-old  pre-war  Premier   Yoshida,   its   leading   elder
statesman,  told   the  Japan-America  Society  in  Tokyo   (Wash-
ington  Star,  July  12)  that  Japan  may  have  to  develop  its  own
nuclear   arms   "to   defend   the  Orient   from   the    unfortunate
threat  of  communism."    It  was  under  cover  of  pre-war pro-
testations  about  the  fear  of  Communism  that  Japan  began  its
attacks  on   China,  on   the   British  and   French   empires,   and
finally  on   Pearl   Harbor.    Then  too, a  second   rank   power
toppled  the pillars of  world  stability, and  unleashed  the  storms
that  bore  their  most  bitter fruit  at  Hiroshima.    The  clocks  tick
on.     Both  America  and   Russia  were  the  victims  of   surprise
attack  before.    It  can happen  again—this  time with  the  nuclear
arms  whose  proliferation  they  failed  to  stop  when  they  still
had  time.    This  is  the  price  fate  may  exact  for  their  mutual
obduracy  at  Geneva.
No   Weekly   In  August   This   Year.     The   Next   Issue   Will   Be  The  Last  Until   Labor  Day
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City   ............_............................Zone......._..State....................
7/23/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)    Name   ...............................................................................
Street    ........._.........................................................................
City   ..........._..........................Zone........_..SUte....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  Q   No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F:  Stone'*  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday  in   August   and   the   flnt   in
September  and  the  hut   Monday  in  December   and  the   flnt   In  January  at  5618 Nebruka  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Either  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   16  in  the  U.  S.:   16  in
Canada:    SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $16  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED