I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962oct22.pdf

============================================================

Polls  Show  US.  Opinion Against  War  on  Cuba, P.  2
Swedish  Figures  Disclose  Soviets  Now  the  Biggest   Test  Offenders  in  Terms  of  Megatonnage,  See  Page  4.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  38
OCTOBER  22,  1962
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
IB  CENTS
No  Way  to  Run  A  Fire  Dept.  Or  A  Foreign   Policy
In  the  first  World  War,  a  favorite  election  slogan  was  the
promise  to  get  the  boys  out  of  the  trenches  by  Christmas.   A
cynic  might  easily  conclude  that  the  Kennedy  Administration
was  doing  its best  to get  them  into the  trenches—around  West
Berlin—by  the  same  magic  date.    At  a  two-day  newspaper-
men's   briefing   session—which  others  might  call  indoctrina-
tion  or  even  brain  washing—held   by  the   State  Department
here  last  Monday  and  Tuesday,  the  press  was  encouraged  to
report  that  "top  officials"  predict  "a  first  class crisis by Christ-
mas"  on  Berlin.   The  use  of  the  term  "first  class"  is indica-
tive.    It  is a  term  one  does  not  apply  to  events  one  does  not
relish.    No  one  talks  of  his  wife's  having  to  undergo  a  first
class  operation,  or  tells   friends   that   doctors   suspect   a  first
class  cancer  in  one's  abdomen.    First  class  is  usually  associ-
ated  with  pleasant  events;  one  speaks  of  a  first  class  train  or
ship  ticket  to  take  one  away  from   work-a-day  anxieties.    In
this  case  a  first  class  Berlin  crisis  would  take  the  Administra-
tion  far,  far  away  from  Cuba.   There  is  a  growing  suspicion
that   the   Berlin   crisis   is  being  manufactured   in  a  kind  of
homeopathic   diplomacy.     Homeopathic   medicine  fights  one
fever  with  another.    It  looks  as  if  this  is  an  attempt  to  fight
hysteria  over  Cuba  with  hysteria over  Berlin.
Moscow  Perversely   Calm
Though   the  British  Foreign   Office   declares  itself   "mysti-
fied"  (see  box this page)  by American insistence  on  the  immi-
nence   of   a   Berlin   crisis,  and   neither   Bonn   nor   Paris   are
aroused,  the  U.S.  press  has  been  so  sold  on  it  that  Khrush-
chev's   friendly   three-hour   talk   with   our   new   Ambassador,
Kohler,   in   Moscow   last   Tuesday   was   regarded   as  another
example  of  Soviet  deviousness.    Thus  the   Washington   Post
headlined  its  story  (Oct.   17)  on  the  Moscow  talks,   "Sudden
Red  Calm  Jolts   Strategists"  and  Murray  Harder   began   his
story  this way:  "The   Soviet  Union  put  on  a  deliberate  display
of  calmness  in  the  Berlin  crisis  yesterday  as  a  contrast  to  its
charge  that  the  United  States  is  fomenting  a  'war  psychosis'."
It  was  almost  as  if  Moscow's  refusal  to  cooperate  in  whipping
up   the   crisis   was   an   unfriendly   act,   another   instance   of
Khrushchev's   perversity.     Other   papers  paid   little  attention
to  the  contrast  between  the  talks  in  Moscow  and  the  excite-
ment  in  Washington.   The  New   York  Herald-Tribune,  which
has  been  jumping  up  and   down   for   war  somewhere—any-
where,  carried a  big  black  headline  across  page  one,  "Russia's
Crunch  on  Berlin,"  as  if  the  Russian  bear  already  had  bitten
into  Berlin's  left  leg,  with  a  crunch  audible  around  the  world.
This  onomatopoetic  language  fits  both  the  headlines  and  the
war  whoop  psychology.    "When  they  speak  of  the   gathering
storm  over  Berlin  today,"  the  Herald-Tribune  said  in  an  ex-
cited   italic   lede-all,   "diplomats   use  undiplomatic   language.
They  talk  of  H-hour  and  D-day"  but  added  as  if  in   regretful
London  Mystified  by   Crisis
"Officials  in  London are  mystified  by  the  steady  flow
of  reporting from  Washington, apparently  officially  in-
spired,   about   the   imminence   of   a   new   Berlin  crisis.
Whitehall,   it   seems,   rejects   the   State  Department's
belief  that  Mr. Khrushchev  plans  to  visit  the  UN  Gen-
eral  Assembly  as  soon  as  the  mid-term  Congressional
elections  are  over  in  order  to  call  the  world's attention
to  the  Berlin issue.   The next  step  in  London's  view,  is
more  likely  to  be  a  resumption  of  the Soviet-American
diplomatic  soundings that  have  gone  on intermittently
since  last  January."
—Sunday  Times  (London)  Oct. H.
"British  officials  in  London  say  they  are  mystified  by
American  talk  of  an  imminent  Berlin  crisis.    They  see
no  serious   evidence   for   Washington  speculation  that
the  West  must  be  prepared  for  the  'crunch'  in  Berlin  in
mid-November   immediately   after   the   American  Con-
gressional  elections."
—The  Observer  (London)  Oct.  14.
after-thought,  "So  far,  the  terms  apply  to  negotiation."     Ap-
parently  D-day  is  only  our  election  and  the  H-hour   the  re-
sumption   of   Berlin  talks.     This   is  booby-hatch  journalism
and  booby-hatch diplomacy.    If  we  ran  our  fire  departments
the  way  we  run   our  foreign  policy,  we'd   have  the  firemen
worn  to  a  frazzle  running  around  all  night  on  false  alarms.
The  onanistic  excitement  here  over  West  Berlin   contrasts
with  the  conduct  of  the  West   Germans  themselves.    While
we  get  ourselves  involved  on  their  account  in  an  endless  has-
sle  with  the  Russians, the  West  Germans  do  a  bigger  business
than  any  other  nation  with  the  Soviet  bloc  and  their  military
expenditures  in  relation  to  budget  and  national  income  are  far
less  than  ours  and  than  those  of  the  other  Western   nations
pledged  to  defend  them.    An  Associated  Press  dispatch  from
Bonn  said  West  German  trade  with  the  Soviet  bloc  is  more
than  five  times  greater   than  that  of  the  United   States   and
nearly  twice  as  big  as  Britain's.    The  big  firms,  Krupps,  Sie-
mens  and  AEG  have  all  been  building  plants  in  Communist
countries.    "When  the    Communists  built  their  wall  in  Ber-
lin,"   the  AP  reported   (Oct.   14  Herald-Tribune)   "Chancel-
lor   Adenauer  said  his  government   would   retaliate   by  can-
celling  the  trade  contract  with  East  Germany.    But  this  plan
was  quietly  dropped,   according   to  an  informed   source,   be-
cause  industry  would  not  go  along."    While  German   policy
helps  maintain  bad  blood  between  Washington  and  Moscow,
German  big  business  deals with  the  East and  the  German  mili-
tary  proceeds   in  its  own  sedate  way  to  build  German   power
for  its  own  purposes.    The  Administration  would  like  more
flexible  policies  on  Berlin  but  only  locks  itself  in  by  foment-
ing  hysteria  on  the  subject.                                              Oct.  17
\  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  22, 1962
London  Observer,  Answering  Reston,  Criticizes  Simple-Minded  U.S.  View  of Communism
Three  New  Polls  Show  American  People  Against  War  With   Cuba
Judging  by  three   polls   published   in   the   past   week,   the
American  people  are  against   war  with   Cuba.
The  first  Gallup  poll  results   (Oct.   14)  and  the  San  Fran-
cisco  Chronicle  poll  of  Northern   California   (Oct.    12)   are
given  in  detail  in  the  box  below.     The  former   showed   that
two-thirds  of  those  polled  are  opposed  to  an  invasion  of  Cuba.
The   more   detailed   San  Francisco   Chronicle   poll   showed   a
minority  for  short-of-war  measures  and  a  majority for  resump-
tion  of  relations  with   Cuba.
The  Gallup  poll  is  slanted   toward   the  negative.     A  new
Gallup  poll  published   Oct.   17  showed  that  51%  believe  all-
out  war  likely  to  result  from  an  attack  on  Cuba  while   37%
do  not  think  so.    But  even  this  one-third,   which  thinks  Cuba
can  be  attacked  without  triggering   an  all-out-war,  was   57%
against  invasion  and  only  36%  for.    Among  those  who  think
an   attack  on   Cuba   would   trigger   a  world   war,   69%   were
against  invasion,  19%  for  it.
What  Algeria  Said  on  Cuba
"The  strict  acceptance  of  the  principle of  peaceful  co-
existence  would bring  about  as  its  corollary  the  prohi-
bition  to  any  State  to  interfere  in  the  domestic  affairs
of  another  State.    This   would  imply  that  each   State,
great  or  small,  rich  or  poor,  must  recognize  this  right
to  its  own  political  system  and  have  that;  right   recog-
nized  by  others.
"It  is  because  of  this  necessity   that  we  feel  danger-
ous  for  international  peace  the  efforts  made  to  try  to
attack  and  undermine the  political regime  chosen  by  the
friendly  people  of  Cuba.   The  people  of  Cuba  have  no
aggressive   intentions,  and  they  have   a  right  to  wish
their  economic  and  social  liberation.    We  ardently  hope
that  there  will  be  a  relaxation  of  tension  between   the
United   States   and  Cuba,  and  that   a  specific  solution
will  be  found  to  that  problem  on  the  basis  of  the  prin-
ciples  to  which  I  have  just   referred."
—Mr. Khemisti, Algeria,  UN  Gen'l Assembly,  Oct. 12.
Fear  Looking  "Soft  on  Castro"
If   these  polls  are  correct,   or  anywhere  near   correct,  then
the  sentiment  for  war  with   Cuba   in  this  country   commands
only  a  minority.    How,  then,  account  for  the  belligerent  and
poisonous  propaganda   emanating   from   the  press  and   from
Congress?     A  number  of   reasons   may  be  descried.     Firstly,
the  press  makes  circulation  by  whooping  up  war  hysteria;  the
politicians   hope  to  garner   votes   by  it.     Secondly,   the   influ-
ence  of  powerful.oil  and  sugar  interests  which  favor  a  show-
down   in  Cuba   are  much   stronger  in  the  press  and  politics
than   they  are  among   ordinary  people.    Thirdly,  among   the
so-called  opinion  makers,  there  is a kind  of  mob  feeling:  one's
attitude  toward  Castro  has  long  been  a  hallmark   of  respecta-
bility.    To  indicate  that  one  is  "soft"  on  Castro  has  in  recent
months   become   more  dangerous   even   than  to  be   considered
"soft"  on  communism.    So the  writers  run  with  the  pack,  and
repeat  the  cliches  that  are  a  sign  of  "belonging."
Finally  there   is  an  almost   complete   absence   of   objectivity
on  communism;  even  the  word  socialism  makes  the  respectable
queasy.    The  London   Observer   replied   (Oct.    14)   to  James
Reston's  overwrought   comparison   between  Cuba  and  the  Nazi
invasion  of  Belgium   and  Holland.    It  first  dismissed  this  as
militarily  nonsensical  and  then  said:
Politically,  the  comparison  makes  the  old American  mis-
take  of  equating   Communism  with  Nazism.    Surely   it  is
time  that  even  the  U.S.  recognized   that  Communism  is  a
complex   and   rapidly    developing   system,   that   it   is   not
wholly  evil  and  that  it  is  precisely   because  it  has  some  posi-
tive  advantages  to   offer    the  less  privileged   peoples  of  the
world   that  it   is  politically   dangerous   in  parts   of  Latin
America.   Other  peoples  simply   do  not  see  Communism  as
all  bad  and  Western  civilization  as  all  good—a   proposition
which, for  many  powerful   historical  reasons,  has  more  ap-
peal  to  Americans  than  to  other  Europeans.    We  know  we
have  a  dubious  political  past:  they   believe  themselves  im-
maculately    conceived—   a  legend   which  make   them   more
prone  to ideological  attitudes  than we  are.
Results  of  the  Gallup  and  San  Francisco  Chronicle  Polls  on  Cuban  Policy
Both  the  Gallup  nationwide  (Oct.  14)   poll  and  the  San
Francisco   Chronicle  (Oct.  12)   poll  of  Northern   California
showed  that  only  a  minority  favor  aggressive  action  against
Cuba.     In   the   Gallup   poll,   only   10%  were   in   favor   of
"bomb,  invade,  belligerant   act,"  only   13%  for   "trade  em-
bargo,  starve  them  out"  and  26%  for  "do  something   short
of   actual  war."    In  the   San   Francisco   Chronicle  poll   the
votes   for   aggressive   action  were:  Immediate  invasion   of
Cuba:  13%  for,   86%  against;   armed  blockade:   22%  for,
76%  against;  economic boycott: 36% for,  61% against.
On  Gallup's  question,  "Should  the   U.S.   invade  Cuba?",
last  put  by  this  poll just  after  the  April,  1961  invasion,  the
percentage  for  invasion  then  and  now  was  the  same:  24%.
The  opposed  were  65%  in  April  1961  and  63%  today.    The
"no  opinion"  had  risen  from  11  to  13%.    The  current  vote
showed   that   "Republicans,   Democrats   and   Independents"
provided   "almost   identical  majorities  opposed   to   such   an
invasion  at  this  time."
The  Gallup  poll  was  not  as  specific  in  its   questions   as
the'San  Francisco  Chronicle poll.    Gallup  merely  asked  two
questions,  whether  we  should  invade  Cuba  and  what  do  you
think  the  U.S.  should  do.   Aside  from  the  belligerent  steps
on  which  we  gave  the  votes  above,  this  yielded  a  22%  vote
for  "keep  out,  hands  off",  4%  for  "other   action"  and  25%
"don't  know."    The  Chronicle  poll,  on  the  other  hand,  put
five  questions  on  alternative  policies.    These   showed  a  ma-
jority  (56%  for,  40%  against)   favored  resumption  of   U.S.
trade  and  diplomatic  relations   with  Cuba  and  a  majority
(68%  for,  25%  against)   also  favored  '^increased   economic
aid  to  Latin  American  nations  to  forestall  communization."
A  majority  (62%  to  35%)  opposed   "U.S.  allies  should  be
induced  to  quit  trade  with  Cuba."   The  proposition  that  we
"let  the  Organization  of  American  States  assist  Cuban  ref-
ugees  toward  re-establishment   of  democracy  in  Cuba"  was
also  voted  down but  by  a  small  margin:  48%  to  44%.   An-
other  proposal,  that  the  U.S.   abandon  bases  in  Turkey  in
return  for   Soviet   withdrawal  from  Cuba,   was  also   voted
down  (49%  to  42%).
The  poll  in  California also  showed  strong  support  for  the
positions    argued   by   the   Kennedy   Administration:   81%
agreed   that   U.S.   intervention   would   give   the   Soviets  a
propaganda  victory; 77% agreed  that  it  would arouse  strong
Latin  American  resentment;   73%  agreed   that   the  Cuban
arms  buildup  was  purely defensive;  and  53%  approved  (but
38%  disapproved)  U.S.  action  "if  the  arms  buildup  threat-
ens  aggression  against  it  or  any  other  nation  in  the  hemi-
sphere."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  22, 1962
Silent  As  Usual  on  Racism,  FBI  Chief  Attacks  Crime,  Communism  and  The  Courts
How the U.S. Press Reacted to A Speech Which Dared Criticize J. Edgar Hoover
In  the  middle  of  the  Mississippi   crisis, FBI   Chief   J.   Edgar
Hoover  made  a  speech  to  the  American  Legion  in  Las   Vegas
in  which  he was  as  usual  silent  on racism  but  attacked   crime,
communism  and   the   courts.    We   provide   excerpts   in   the
boxes  on  this  page  from   the  speech  and  from   a  critical   ad-
dress   to  which  Mr.  Hoover   replied,   a  speech  in  August   by
W.  H.  Ferry,  a  vice-president   of  the  Fund  for   the   Republic
before   the  Western  States  Democratic  Conference  in  Seattle,
the  first  time  in  many  years  that  Mr.  Hoover  has  been  criti-
cized   before   an  important   political   body.    Since   the   cult  of
personality    which  surrounds    our  secret   police   chief    is   un-
matchable   anywhere   west   of   the  Soviet   bloc,  this  was   an
event.  We  thought  readers  would  like  to  see Mr.  Ferry's   own
analysis   of  press  reaction  to  his  speech  as  printed   Sept.  15
in  Editor  and  Publisher.    Mr.  Ferry  wrote:
"Of  the  43  [editorials]  before  me,  39  are  hostile.    The  re-
maining  four—in   the   New    York   Post,   Decatur   (111.)   Re-
view,  Pittsburgh  Post-Gazette  and  Toledo  Blade—range  from
support  of  the  right   to  criticize  Mr.   Hoover   to  support   of
some  of  the  criticism  itself.  .  .  .  The  contra  editorials,  at  the
more  lurid  end  of  the  spectrum,  presented  my  remarks—non-
libellously—as  those  of  a  stupid  or  willing  tool  of   Moscow.
The  general  sense  was  that  no  one,  least  of  all  a  'fuzzy-headed
ultra-liberal'   should   on   any   account   'belittle'   or   chide   Mr.
Hoover.     At  the  other   end  of  the  spectrum  there  was  some
chortling  that  a  'politically  witless'  speaker  had  uttered  criti-
cism  of  Mr.  Hoover  before  a  Democratic  group,  thereby  help-
ing  the  Republicans.     GOP   Chairman  Miller's  characteriza-
tion  of  my  remarks  as  'virtually  traitorous'  was  much  drawn
on  by  this  group  of  editorial  writers.  .  .  .  Among  syndicated
columnists   the  record   is  100  percent   contra.  .  .  .
Where  They  Fell  Silent
"Perhaps  the   most  noteworthy  aspect   of   the   contra  com-
ment  is  that  my  substantive  questions,  as  for   example,   why
there  is  so  curious  a  disparity  between  the  large  number   of
Speaking  of  Plots  &  Plotters
To  Undermine  The  Courts
"The  Communist  Party,  USA ...  is  engaged  in an
intensive  campaign  to  ...       destroy   public  confidence
in  our  entire  system  of  justice."
—J. Edgar  Hoover  to the  American Legion, Oct.  9.
"Too  often,  the  interests  of  justice  and consideration
for   the  welfare  of   society   are  buried  under  an  ava-
lanche  of   court   decisions  which  give   violators  of   the
law  rights  and  privileges  that  destroy  respect   for  the
law   and   the   public   safety.     Too   often,   technicalities
have  been  permitted to  exist  in  our  penal  codes  which
have  been  employed solely  and exclusively  for  the  bene-
fit  of  that  small  minority of  lawyers-criminal who  use
any  tactic,  no  matter  how  unethical,  to  defeat  the  in-
terests   of   justice.     More   and   more  the   judicial-legal
system  of  this  country  is  being  revised  to  benefit   the
criminal."     —J.  Edgar  Hoover,  same speech, same  day.
spies  Mr.  Hoover   claims  are  in  the  U.S.  and  the  small   num-
ber   he   catches  each  year,  were   touched   on   only   by   David
Lawrence  and  one  or  two  others.    None  pointed   out  that   I
tried  to  defend  Americans against  Mr.  Hoover's  slurs  on  their
intelligence  and  spiritual  sturdiness.    None  indicated  that   I
had   also   said   that   I  had   greater   confidence   in   traditional
American  institutions  than  Mr.   Hoover   appears   to  have.
"This  is  a  partial  report,  based  only  on  the  editorials   and
columns   collected   by  a  single  clipping   agency.     Perhaps   a
complete   accounting  would   show  a  result  different   from   the
one  here  disclosed,  which  appears  to  be  that  criticism  of  Mr.
Hoover,  unlike  criticism  of  any  other  public  figure  including
the   President,   verges  on  treason.   .  .  .  Whether   such   near-
unanimous  idealization  of  a  police  chief  is  a  good  thing  for
the  nation  is  perhaps   another   topic  with  which  the   editorial
writers  and  columnists  will  one  day wish  to  deal."
Hoover's  Reply  and  What  the  Fund  for
'The  Communist Party today may be smaller  in the  United
States,  but  it  is  a  hard-core  of  fanatics  operating  a  mas-
sive  and  impressive  propaganda  machine.   The  dangers  and
wiles  of  communism  cannot  be  measured  solely  by  shrunken
rolls  of  actual  Party  membership  in  this  country.  .  .  .
"Much  has  been  done  by  the  Government's  internal   se-
curity   programs,   by  investigation,   arrest   and  prosecution
of   Party  functionaries;   and  widespread  intelligent   public
opposition  to  the  Marxist  philosophy  to  thwart  the  commu-
nist   Party's  efforts  in  this  country.
"However,   communism   remains   an   intense    subversive
threat.    Our  Nation's   efforts  to  deal  effectively  with   this
menace  are  not  enhanced  by  those  of  the  extreme  right  who
tend  to  affix  the  communist  label  without  intelligent  analy-
sis  or  by  those  of  the  extreme  left  who  endeavor  to  mini-
mize  the  real  danger  of communism.
"This   latter   group   includes   grossly    irresponsible    ele-
ments—a   shocking   number   of   whom  have   depended,   for
their   very   existence,   upon   tax-exempt   funds.     We   have
heard  them  shout  'sententious  poppycock'  at  well-founded
and  documented  warnings  against  the  capacity  of  the  com-
munists  to  pervert  our  thinking  and  destroy   the   spiritual
supports  which form  the  foundation  of  our  freedom.    Inane
statements   such   as   these   add  nothing   to   the   American
people's  understanding  of  the  true  menace  of  communism."
—Hoover  to  the  American  Legion  in  Las  Vegas,  Oct. 9.
the  Republic's  W.  H.  Ferry  Actually  Said
"Mr.  Hoover  starts   off  by  quoting  old  U.S.  Communist
hacks  Wm.  Z.  Foster  and  Benjamin Davis  and  the  USSR's
Nikita  Khrushchev about  the  numerical  smallness  but  great
potential  strength  of  the  Communist  Party.    But  on  other
occasions   Mr.  Hoover  has  told  us  never  to  believe  a  word
these  men  say.    Why  should  we  start  to  believe  them  now,
especially  when  they  are  selling  their  own  line  of  goods...
"Then  Mr. Hoover  warns  against  Soviet  espionage  in  the
United  States.    This  is  an  old  line  of  the  FBI  chief,  and  its
success  year  after  year  is  a  tribute  to  the  trance  into  which
his  sermons   throw   Americans.   .  .  .  Mr.  Hoover   is,   after
all,   our   official   spy-swatter.     In   these   persistent    reports
about   espionage   and  sabotage,   is   he  delicately   telling   us
that  he  isn't  up  to  the  job,  that  Red spies  are  running  loose
despite  his  best   efforts?  .  .  .
"There  is,   Mr.  Hoover  says,  an  advance  detachment   of
Communists  within  our  borders  with  the  'capacity  to  per-
vert'   our  thinking   and  destroy   the   spiritual    foundations
which  form  the  foundation  of  our  freedom.'  This  is   senten-
tious   poppycock.    Our  institutions   are   nowhere   near   as
fragile  as  Mr. Hoover  thinks  they  are. ...  It  is  an insult  to
the  American  people  to  say  that  they  are  so  weak-minded
and  spiritually  insecure  as  to  be  ready  to  throw  down  insti-
tutions  and  traditions  built  up  over  centuries   at  the  blan-
dishment  of  a  small  devious  band."
—W. H. Ferry  to Western  Democrats  in Seattle, Aug.  6.
1  5  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  22,  1962
Slipping  Further  Into  War  In  Vietnam;  Again  Ready  to  Use  A-Bombs  on  Asians
Russians  Now  the  Worst  Offenders  in  Terms  of Nuclear  Test  Megatonnage
We  hope   some  alert  delegate  participating  in  the  nuclear
test  debate  now  underway  before  the  UN's   First   Committee
will  call  attention  to  a  dispatch  from  Sweden  carried  by  the
Associated  Press  wire  at  10  a.m.  Oct.  12  which  seems  to have
been  picked  up  by very  few  papers.    The  dispatch  quoted  Dr.
Markus  Baath,  the  respected  head  of  the  seismology  institute
at   Uppsala   in   Sweden,   as  disclosing   that   in   their   current
series  the  Russians  exploded   a  total  of  230  megatons  in  15
tests.    This   compared   with  their   180  megatons   in   18  tests
in  the  Fall  of  1961,  and  35  megatons  in  9  tests  in  the  Fall  of
1958,  just  before  the  moratorium.
More  in  13  Months  Than  in  13  Years
The  rising  tempo  of  testing  was  indicated  by  Dr.   Baath's
estimate  that  total  megatons  in  all  tests,  East  and  West,  dur-
ing  the  last  13 months  was  more  than  2l/
2
  times  greater  than
the  total  of  all  tests  in  the  13 years  from   1945  to  1958.  Total
megatonnage  since  1945,  according  to  Dr.  Baath,  has  reached
600  MT,  or  600,000,000  tons  of TNT equivalent.    More  than
two-thirds   of   this   was  Russian.    The   U.S.   has   had  many
more  tests  than  the  Soviet's  but  many  were  small  and  under-
ground.     The   Russians  have  had   fewer   tests   but   exploded
bigger   bombs,   creating   greater  fallout.     If  the  U.S.  govern-
ment  wanted  to  stop,  it  would  publicize  these  figures  to  put
the  Russians  on  the  spot.     But  neither  big  power  wants  to
stir  up  alarm  about  fallout   lest  it  interfere  with  testing.  .  .  .
Two  danger   signals  on   Southeast   Asia  passed   with   little
attention.     One  was  the  decision  to  authorize  our  new  rocket
firing  U.S.  Army  helicopters   to  attack  the  Viet  Cong  directly
whereas  up  until  now  U.S.  military personnel  in  Vietnam  have
been  under  orders  not  to  fire  on  the  Viet  Cong  except  in  self-
defense.     Step-by-step   we're   being   led  into  the  Indochinese
morass  where  the  French  foundered  before  us.    The  same day
this  order   became  public,   there  was  a  Pentagon   briefing  at
which   "high  government    officials"   explained   that  while  we
would  not  use  nuclear  weapons  in  Europe  "if  the  Soviets  at-
tacked  with  conventional   weapons,"   we  may  pursue  a   differ-
ent  policy   in  Asia  since   (as  the   Washington   Post's  military
reporter,  John  G.  Norris  relayed  it  Oct.   16)   "employment  of
The  ADA  and  Stuart  Hughes
H.  Stuart  Hughes  for  Senate  headquarters  (50  Boyl-
ston   St.,   Cambridge  38,  Mass.)   reports   a  heavy  mail
from  ADA  members  all  over  the  country in  response   to
our  appeal  Oct.  1  for  ADA  rank-and-file  pressure  on
the  leadership  to  support  Hughes,  the  nation's   No.  1
peace  candidate.     Since   then   the   Campus  ADA   Na-
tional  Board  adopted  a  resolution  "approving   the  plat-
form  and  campaign"  of  Hughes  and  recommending that
Mass,  adult  chapters   do  likewise  at   the   Mass.   State
Board  meeting.   That  was  held  Oct.  15, but  the  Mass.
Board  decided  ignominiously—to  take  no  position.     It
opposed  Ted  Kennedy  in  the  primary  and  can  hardly
support   Lodge.
The  rebellious  action  of   Campus   ADA   will   confirm
the   disapproving   view   of   today's   radical   youth   ex-
pressed  by  John  P.  Roche,  the  Brandeis  Univ.  profes-
sor  who  is  national  chairman  of  ADA,  in  the  New  York
Times   Magazine    Oct.   14.    The   article   is   protectively
vague  but  attacks  today's  youth  as  too  peace-minded.
Prof.  Roche's feelings  were  less circumspectly  expressed
in  a  letter  to  the  New  York  Times  (May   9,  1961),  after
the  Cuban  invasion,  criticizing  "liberal  isolationists"  on
Cuba  and  his  more  recent  letter  there  (Sept.  21)  called
"Too   Liberal   to  Fight"  which  had  the  febrile  and  in-
flated  war  rhetoric  one  expects  from   David  Lawrence
or  George  Sokolsky.    Prof.  Roche  is  clearly  in  no  mood
to   support   peace  candidates.
While  the  adult  ADA  sits  the  fence,  the  Hughes   cam-
paign  was  encouraged  by  word  that  a  Lou  Harris  poll
for  Ted  Kennedy  predicted  Hughes  would  get  10%  (or
240,000)  of  a  2,400,000  total  vote  cast.
the  growing  U.S.  stockpile  of  small  A-weapons  seems  the  only
practical  way  of   off-setting   China's   vastly  superior   military
manpower."    This  kind  of  talk  will  hardly  convince  China
to  give  up  nuclear  testing  and  will  grate  on  Asians  sensitive
because  the  A-bomb  was first dropped  on  them.  .  . .
Now  that  deGaulle   (in  Germany)   disclosed   that  he  had
a   German   great   grandfather,   and   Kennedy   (on    Columbus
Day)   revealed  that   his  Fitzgerald   clan  really  originated   in
Italy,  we  can't   wait  until  Negro  registration   in   Mississippi
reaches  the  point   where   Ross  Barnett  begins   to  tell   certain
voters  he,  too,  is  just  a  little  bit   colored.
Take  Advantage  of  Our   Offer    to  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  If  You  Send  Stamped  LONG  Envelopes
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ....................................................................................._
Street
City  ............_.........................Zone.........-.State....................
10/22/62
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   .........................................................................—
Street   ........._..........................................................................
City  ...........—.........................Zone.......,_..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington  IS.  O.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday  in  December
and  the  first  in  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.
Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.
Air  Mail  rates:  115  to  Europe;  (20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED