I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jun25.pdf

============================================================

The  Delusions of  Counter-Force
By  Sanford  Gottlicb:  A  Nation-Wide Survey  of  the  Many Peace  Candidates  Now  In  The  Field,  Page  3
L F. Stonefs   Weekly
VOL.  X,  NO.  25JUNE  25,  1962
•>"»       WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
A  Triumph  of  Herman  Kahnism
The  best,  perhaps  the  only  way  to  make  the  nuclear  deter-
rent  really  credible  is  to  convince  your  opponent  that  you're
a  little  touched  in  the  head.    When  I  was  a  boy  there  was  a
comic strip about the  Terrible  Tempered  Mr.  Bangs;  he  had  to
be  handled  with  kid  gloves  because  he  would  blow  up  on  the
slightest  provocation.    Those  who  want  seriously  to  play  the
game  of  nuclear  diplomacy,  a  politer   word   than   blackmail,
should  model  themselves  on  this  instructive character.   A high
component  of  irrascible  irrationality  is  required  to  make  your
opponent  believe  you'd  blow  your  brains  out,  and  the  world
with  it,  rather than  let  the  Ministry  of  Fine  Arts go  to  a  neu-
tralist  in  Lower  Slobbovia.    From  this  standpoint  an  oddly
stabilizing  role  has  been  played  by all  those  3 and  4  star wind-
bags  who  have  made  the  Pentagon  seem  America's largest  rest
home  for  the  emotionally   disturbed;  they've  probably   done
more  than  the  Strategic  Air  Command  to  make  Moscow  and
Peking   nervous.     The   fear   that   our  military  establishment
really  is  wacky enough  some  day  to  press  that  button  is  a  de-
terrent.    It  is  to  this  salutary  skepticism about  the  Pentagon's
sanity  that  Secretary  McNamara  made  a  formidable  contribu-
tion  by his  speech  at  Ann  Arbor  June  16.
Overlooked  in  The  New  McNamara  Speech
Except  for  one  newspaper,  the  Washington  Star,  the  press
has  failed  at  home  and  abroad  to  grasp  the  big  news  in  that
McNamara  speech.     It  was  the  first  announcement  that  the
Kennedy   Administration  had  adopted  the   so-called   Counter
Force  strategy  long  advocated  by  the  Air  Force.    Mr.  McNa-
mara  is  not  a  windy  Admiral.    He   is  a  highly   intellectual
fellow.    He has a mind  like an  IBM computer.   Perhaps  that's
what  made  him  fall  for   this   nostrum  with   which   the  Air
Force  has  been  working  its  way through  the  War  College  for
many  months.   On  the computers,  Counter  Force  plays a lovely
tune.    We  build  up  a  force  so overwhelming  we  can  pinpoint
the  enemy's  missile  and  air  bases,  wiping  them  out  in  one
counter-force  swoop  while  the  enemy dare  not  retaliate  against
our  cities  because  then  with  our  reserve  forces  we'd  wipe  out
his.   The  Pentagon  strategists and  the  Rand  Corporation  mili-
tary  intellectuals have  been  waging  war  like  mad  on  the  com-
puters  for  months;  Khrushchev   must  shudder  to  think  how
often   these  IBM  Napoleons  have  devastated   Minsk.     This
Counter  Force,  so  the  Air  Force  computers  say, makes thermo-
nuclear  war  rational,  and  winnable  and  leave  us  at  the  end
with  our  cities  intact.   This  is  how  the  Pentagon  has  come  to
the  conclusion  voiced  by Mr
v
 McNamara  at  Ann  Arbor  that
"basic   military   strategy   in   a   possible   general   nuclear   war
should  be  approached  in  much  the  same  way  that  more  con-
ventional  military  operations  have  been  regarded  in  the  past.
That  is  to  say, principal  military  objectives,  in  the  event  of  a
7  *
All  We  Got  to  Do  Is  Make  Sure
The  Russians  Use  the   Same
Computers  We  Do
General  BURCHINALL   [Director  of   Plans   HQ   US
Air   Force]:  In  summary   .   -.  .  we  have  enunciated  a
military   strategy,   optimized   for   its   deterrent   value,
with   provision  for   prevailing,  should  deterrence   fail,
and  with  a  most  important  objective  of  preventing  by
all  means  militarily  possible  damage  to  our  strengths
and  casualties   among  our  people.    The  strategy   has
been  tested   [that   is,  on  the  computers—IPS]   and  is
feasible.  .  .  .  The  point  I  am  making  here,  sir,  is  that
we  deter  a  Soviet  attack if  we,  in  fact,  can  create  this
kind  of  an  imbalance  in  our  favor  after  he  has  started
a  war.   That  if  he  can  calculate  this—and Malinovsky
says  they  are  using  computers [deleted  by  censor]—he
will  never  start  a  war. ...
Chairman  RUSSELL: General,  do  you  think  you  can
fight  a  nuclear  war,  using  large-yield  warheads,  and
confine  the  attack  just  to  military  targets?
[Deleted  by  censor].
Chairman  RUSSELL: I  never  have  been  impressed
by  these  people who  write  these  great  books  giving  all
these  alternatives  of  fighting.
—Military   Procurement   1963:  Senate   Armed   Serv-
ices  Committee  hearings,  Jan.-Feb.  1962, pps.  550-3.
nuclear  war  stemming from   a  major  attack  on  the  Alliance,
should  be  the  destruction  of  the  enemy's  military  forces,  not
of  his  civilian  population."
This  is  the  victory  of  Kahn   and  Kissinger   and  the  other
Pied  Pipers  of  limited  themonudear  war.    This  is  what  Mr.
McNamara   means  by   "a   strategy   of   controlled   response."
This  is what  came out  of  that  Rockefeller Brothers  Fund  study
some  years ago  which launched  the  idea  of  limited  war  in  the
thermonuclear  age,  a  delusion  tailor-made  for   the   needs  of
far-flung  business  enterprise:  How  to  Push  the  Russians out
of  the  Middle  East  Without   Setting  Fire  to  Standard  Oil's
Wells.    This  is  the  Air  Force  nostrum  put  on  public  sale  in
that  Washington  Star  series  by  its  Pentagon  reporter,  Richard
Fryklund,  two winters ago and  since  developed  in  all  its vapid
silliness  in  his  book,  "100  Million  Lives:  Maximum Survival
in  A  Nuclear  War."    This  is  the  "Spare  the  Cities"  strategy
to  which  Mr.  McNamara  referred  when  he  said  "we  are  giv-
ing  a  possible  opponent  the  strongest  imaginable  incentive  to
refrain  from  striking our  own cities."   The  war  would  be won
on points,  like a tennis match and  end  as Mr.  Fryklund pictures
it  in  his  book:  "Both  sides  could  just  quit,  snarl  at  each  other
and  start  rebuilding,"  presumably,  that  is,  for  a  return  match.
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
9   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  25, 1962
Counter  Force  Means  An  Endless  Arms  Race  and  A  Garrison   State
(Continued   from   Page    One)
Thus  the  Air  Force  could  stay  in  business  forever,  and  war
continue  as  the  main  sport  of  mankind.
Patent  Medicine   for  A  NATO  Headache
Why  did  Mr.  McNamara  unveil  this  nonsense  in  a   speech
which  was  designed  to  appeal  over  de  Gaulle's  head  to  France
and  Western   Europe  against  the  idea  of  an  independent   nu-
clear  deterrent?    Because  just  as  Russia  fears  we  may  be  crazy
enough   to  press  that  button,  Western  Europe  is  haunted   by
fear  that  we  really  aren't;  it  saw  Mr.  Dulles,  the  advocate  of
liberation,  not  only  hold  back  when  the  East  Germans  rose  in
1953  and  the  Hungarians  in  1956  but  hasten  to  assure  Moscow
we  would  not  intervene.    It  fears  we  might  similarly  hesitate
to  commit  suicide  for  the  sake  of  West  Berlin.   That  is  why
the  French  and  behind  them  the  Germans  are  pressing  for  a
deterrent  of  their  own.    To  make  this  seem  unnecessary,  Mr.
McNamara   is  trying   to  tell   them  that  we  have  a  wonderful
new  plan  by  which  we  could  smash  Russia's  war  power   and
still  survive  if   Moscow   threatened  a  vital  Western   interest.
We   wouldn't   have   to   commit   suicide,   nor   would    Europe.
Our  bombers  and  ICBM's  would  destroy  Russia's  in  a  twin-
kling;  all  the  city  dwellers  of   Western   Europe  and  America
would  have  to  fear  is  fallout  and  for  that  two  weeks  under-
ground  on  the  Pentagon's   new  protein  wafers  would    suffice.
Counter-Force   is  the  patent  medicine  to  end  NATO's   biggest
headache.
We  hope  public  opinion  at  home  and  abroad  will  wake  up
to  the  side  effects.     Counter-Force   means  an  unlimited  arms
race,  in  which  each  side  must  strive  to  stay  so  far  ahead   that
it  can  wipe  out  the  other's  forces  in  one  first  strike.    It  puts
a  higher premium  than  before  on  secrecy,  to  keep  those  bases
from  being  spotted  by  the  enemy.    It  invites extension  of  the
race   into  outer   space,   in   which   new   commanding   vantage
points  may  be  established.    The   best  discussion  of   its  conse-
quences   I   have   seen   is   the   brilliant  little   book   of   Arthur
Waskow's   "The    Limits  of   Defense"    (Doubleday)    which   I
recommend  highly  for  those  who  want  to  understand  the  mys-
teries  of  "stabilized  deterrent"   and  "counter   force."    The  lat-
ter  would  increase  the  temptation  to  strike   first.   "Every  ma-
jor  international  crisis,"  as  Mr.  Waskow  writes,  "would  press
both  sides  quickly  to  the  brink  of  war,  and   if   counter-force
strategy  had  been  highly  developed,  beyond  the  brink."    This
is   a   recipe   for   hair-trigger  tension.     The    domestic   conse-
quences  were  soberly  spelled  out  by  George  A.  Lowe  in  the
leading  article  of  the  April  issue  of  the  U.S.  Naval   Institute
Proceedings.    They  are  "unlimited  numbers of  hardened  fixed-
base   missiles,  greatly   accelerated   arms   race   in   space,   enor-
.mous  civil  defense   .  .  .  tremendous  governmental  regimenta-
tion."    This  shapes   military  doctrine  and  national  destiny  to
How   We  Estimate  Soviet  Missiles
Chairman  RUSSELL  (D.  Ga.):  I  notice  your  estimate
of   the   intercontinental   missiles   the   Soviets   have   on
launching  sites  is  [deleted  by  censor].  .  .  .  How  do  you
get  at  the  composite;  do  you  add  up  what  you  [the   Air
Force]  put  and what  the  Army  puts  and  what  the  Navy
estimates  and  the  CIA,  and  divide  it  by  4?     Just  how
do  you  get  at   it?
General   SMITH   [Vice-Chief  of  Staff,  Air  Force]:  No,
sir.     That   is   not   so.     May  I   ask   General   Breitweiser
[Assistant   Chief   of   Staff,   Intelligence,   Air  Force]   to
give  you  the  way  the  estimate  is  arrived   at.
General    BKEITWEISER:   All   of   the   agencies,   of
course.  Mr.  Chairman,  work  from  the  same  body  of  evi-
dence  [deleted  by  censor].  .  .  .
RUSSELL:   Who   makes   the   final   determination   of
what   the  Secretary  of  Defense  brings  us  or  what   the
President  is  furnished   about  the  number  of  missiles  on
launchers?
BREITWEISER:   The  national   intelligence  estimates
with   which   you   are   familiar,   Mr.   Chairman,    contain
[deleted].
RUSSELL:     I   see.      Thank    you,   sir.     I    understand
it   a  little  better.     I  have  been   concerned   about   that.
In  the  last  analysis  then  the  President  just  takes  his
choice  of  which  one  he  thinks  is  most  credible.
—Military   Procurement   11)6,1:  Senate  Armed   Serv-
ices  Committee  hearings,  Jan.-Feb.  1962,  pps.   519-20.
the  hungry  needs  of  the  aviation and  uranium industries.
Except  for  a  few  vague  and  heavily  censored  references  in
recent  hearings  of  which  we  give  samples  on  these  two  pages,
this  move  toward   counter-force  with  all   its  fateful   implica-
tions  has  been  brought  about  without  discussion  in  public  or
Congress.    Only  a  small  stratum  of  intellectuals, some  work-
ing  for,  others  against,  the  military  machine,  are  aware  of  the
controversy,  even  understand  its  terminology.     Here  we  see
dramatically  displayed  the  erosion  of  free  and   representative
government,   its  abdication  to   an   elite  and   their   computers.
What   if  the  Russians  refuse   to  play  the  game?    What  if
they  stick  to  a  second  strike retaliatory threat  against  our  peo-
ple  and   cities?    What   if   they   move  on   from   100-megaton
weapons  to  1,000-MT  monsters?    Twenty  of  the  latter  deto-
nated  high  up  and  dirty  would  do  us  in.    This  would  be  the
natural  strategy  for   a  power   which   is  ahead  of   us   in  heavy
weight  rocketry  but  behind  in  resources.    It  is time  the  Amer-
ican  public  realized  where   it  is  being  led   and   took   a  good
look   at  this  weird  delusion  that  in^he  age  of   themonuclear
weapons  you  can  pinpoint   hidden   bases  while   leaving  cities
and  people  unscathed.    It  has  been  said  that  the  world   would
be  in  danger   if  the  H-bomb   ever   fell   into  irrational  hands.
Will  we  wake  up  one  of  these  days  to  find  that  it  has—and
that  the  hands  are  ours ?
Russell  of  Georgia  Attacks  the  Delusion  Nuclear  Wars  Can Be  Fought  Like   Tournaments
"There   have   been   some   estimates   and   some   so-called
mathematical  computations  of  the  casualties  that  would  re-
sult  from  a  nuclear  war  under  various  assumptions,  includ-
ing  a  positive  attempt  by  the  adversaries  to  limit  targeting
to  military  installations  and facilities. ...  To  me  these  ex-
trapolations  .  .  .  are  exceedingly   unrealistic.    They    pre-
suppose  a  war  being  waged  with  rational  restraint  by  both
sides.    I  doubt  that  there  could  be  anything  rational  in  the
awful   eventuality  of  a  nuclear  attack.  .  .  .
"The   day  of  the  tournament  has  long  since  passed  into
history.    I  am  convinced  that  we  would  be  deluding    our-
selves  if  we  were  to  base  any  national  policy   on  the   as-
sumption  that  any  potential  adversary  would  be  restrained
and  rational  and  abide  by  any  such  rules.    In  my  opinion,
if  nuclear  war  begins,  it  will  be  a  war  of  extermination."
—Russell  (D.  Ga.)   to  the  Senate  April  11.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  25, 1962
A  Country-Wide  Survey  of  the  Many  Peace  Candidates  Now  in  The  Field
By  Sanford  Gottlieb
Peace,  which  has  been  elusive  both  as  a  condition  of  human
existence  and   as  an   issue  in  American  politics,  is  making  a
modest    comeback    in    pre-November    electioneering.      New
England   abounds   in   "peace  candidates,"   running   primarily
for   the  educational  value  of  airing  the  issue  in  the  political
arena.    Others  are  running  in  Baltimore,  Detroit,   Ithaca  and
central   Illinois.    They  have  entered  races  as  Democrats,   Re-
publicans  and  independents.   Moreover,  their  effort  is comple-
mented  by  the  campaigns  of  a  vigorous  group  of   Democrats,
concentrated   largely  in  California,   who   are  running   not   to
educate  but  to  win.
In  the  latter  category  the  situation  in  the  redistricted  29th
Congressional  District  of  Los  Angeles  promises  the   earliest
rewards.    There,  State  Assemblyman George  Brown  has  won
the   Democratic  primary  in   the   face  of   opposition   by   Rep.
Chet  Holifield  and  the  party  regulars.    The  Liberal   Democrat,
an   independent  journal  close   to  the  Democratic   club   move-
ment  in  California, claims that  Holifield  put  another candidate
named  Brown  in  the  primary  race  in  order  to  reduce  the  As-
semblyman's   chances.     Some   of   the   labor   unions  backing
Brown  were  subjected  to  intense  pressure  by  the  Democratic
organization  in  an  effort  to  make  them  shift  their  endorsement.
Nevertheless,  with  an  excellent  liberal  voting  record,   Brown
held  his  labor  support.     He   also  attracted  the  peace   groups
into  a  new  and  effective  coalition  with  the  unions and  the  club
movement.
SANE  Takes   A  Hand
Brown,  City Councilman  Edward  Roybal  and  attorney Jerry
Pacht,  running  respectively in  the  Democratic  primaries of  the
29th,  30th  and  31st  C. D.'s,  campaigned  vigorously  in favor of
disarmament,  an  end  to  nuclear  tests,   and   realistic  planning
for  conversion  to  a  peacetime  economy.    SANE   and  Women
Strike  for  Peace  succeeded  in  directing  350  of  their  local  mem-
bers  into  the  three  campaigns  as volunteer  workers,  displaying
an  ability  to  "deliver"  which  is  without  precedent  for   peace
groups.     Both  Brown  and  Roybal  survived  the  primaries.
Brown  will  face  one  of  the  three  avowed  members  of  the
John  Birch  Society  running  on  the  Republican  ticket  in  Cali-
fornia.    The   issues  could   not  be  more  clearly  drawn.     The
district  has  a  Democratic  majority,  and,  barring  an  unforeseen
upheaval,   Brown   should   be   elected   in  November.      Roybal
faces   a   tougher   fight   against   incumbent   Rep.   Gordon   Mc-
Donough.    In  the  Bay  Area,  two  more  Democrats   espousing
a  strong  peace  platform  have  won  the  primary  and  face  Re-
publican  incumbents.    They  are  John  O'Connell  of  San  Fran-
cisco  and  Charles  Weidner  of  Contra  Costa  County.
Among  the  peace  candidates  who  are  campaigning  mainly
to  educate the  voters,  the  best  known  is H.  Stuart  Hughes,  pro-
fessor  of  history  at  Harvard   and  author  of  six  books.    Emi-
nently  qualified  to  compete   in  the  "Battle  of  the  Dynasties"
in   Massachusetts  by  virtue  of  his  kinship   to  the   late  Chief
Justice  Hughes,   Stuart  Hughes  is  seeking   72,514   signatures
on  a  statewide petition  by  July  24  in  order  to  qualify  as  an
independent  candidate  for  the  Senate.    His  campaign  began  in
May  with  hundreds  of  volunteers,  many  of  them  young  house-
wives,  collecting  the  signatures  in a door-to-door  canvass.    Dis-
interested  observers  and  even   some  of  Ted   Kennedy's   aides
admit  that  Hughes  is  off  to  a  good  start.    If  the  President's
younger  brother  wins  the  Democratic  primary,  a  result  by  no
Key  Congressional   Fights
Foreign   policy  issues   loom  large   in   the   efforts  of
Frank  Kowalski  and William  Meyer  to  win  Senate  seats
in  Connecticut  and  Vermont,  and  in  the  campaigns  of
Congressman  Robert  Kastenmeier  (Wis.)   and William
Fitts   Ryan   (N.   Y.).     Kowalski   is   challenging   John
Bailey's   machine  and   its   candidate,   HEW   Secretary
Abraham  Ribicoff.    Kowalski needs  200 delegates  at  the
Democratic  convention  in  July  in  order  to  force  a  pri-
mary  election.   He claims 230.   Meyer was  the  Capitol's
firmest voice  for  peace during his  single  term  (1958-60).
Opposing  popular  Senator  George  Aiken  in  a  heavily
Republican  state,  Meyer  describes  himself  as  a  Demo-
crat   who  takes  an  independent  view  of   domestic   and
world  issues.    Kastenmeier  has  been  made  a  target  of
the  GOP  because  of  his  role  in  producing  The  Liberal
Papers.    Because  of  redistricting,  Ryan  faces  a  rugged
primary  fight.
means  assured  because  of  growing  resentment  against  dynastic
pressures,  Hughes  may well  find  himself  in  a position  to  swing
a  close  election  to  the  Republican  candidate.
Like  his  fellow  New  England  peace  candidates,  Hughes  is
backed  by Political  Action for  Peace  (PAX),  which  was  estab-
lished  this year in  order  to  encourage  election  campaigns  based
on  the  need  for  disarmament  and  stronger  international   insti-
tutions.    The  PAX  candidates  are  united  in  their  support  for
a  policy  of  unilateral  initiatives,  a  sustained   series  of  acts  by
the  United  States  designed  to  produce  favorable   reciprocation
by  the  Russians.
In   1960,   only  William  Hefner   of  Greenfield,  Mass.,  cam-
paigned   for   Congress   as  a   peace   candidate.     Although   he
placed  third  in  a  field  of  three  in  the  Democratic  primary,  he
proved  his point:  that  an  election  campaign  can generate  more
discussion  of  and  publicity  about  disarmament  than  the  activi-
ties  of  a  local  peace  organization.    This  year  Hefner  will  run
again.    He  will be  joined  in  the  neighboring  Third  District of
Massachusetts  by  Elizabeth  Boardman,   a  mother  of   six   and
co-founder   of   Voice   of  Women—New   England.     In   New
Hampshire,  still  another  PAX  candidate  will  campaign  jointly
with   her   husband,   who   operates   a   Quaker   school.     Helen
Bliss,  a  Democrat,   will  oppose  incumbent  Rep.  Perkins   Bass.
Other  individuals have  set  out  on  their  own  as  peace  can-
didates.    Harrop  Freeman,  professor   of  law  at  Cornell,   will
run  as  an  independent  in  the  Ithaca  area.    In  Baltimore,   Mrs.
Caroline  Ramsey  has  already  won  the  Republican  primary  in
the  district  represented   by  Congressman  Samuel  Friedel.    In
Detroit,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Weideman  will  challenge  Rep.   John
Lesinski  in  the  Democratic  primary.    In  central  Illinois,  Bob
Wilson,  a  Quaker  farmer  who  owns  five  country  weeklies,  is
the   Democratic   candidate  in   the   22nd   District.    Wilson  is
linked  to  Jerome  Ziegler,  a  young  Democrat   running   in  the
Chicago    suburbs   with   the   backing   of   the   party    regulars,
through  the  organization  Voters  for  Peace.    Another   Quaker
farmer  with  the  unlikely   name   of  Herbert  Hoover  ran  un-
successfully  against  Senator  Hickenlooper  in  Iowa.
The  greatest  value  to  flow  from  this  burgeoning   interest
in  peace  candidates  may  be  the  experience  in  practical   politics
which   it   provides   for   several   thousand    members   of   peace
groups.    Increasingly   determined   to  change  the  political   cli-
mate  through  the  ballot  box,  the  peace  movement  is  develop-
ing  its cadres  in  1962  for  what  could  be a major  effort  in   1964.
1   0
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  25,  1962
In  and  Around  the  Capitol:  The  Country's  Growth  Rate  May  Be  Slow,  But  Not  the  CIA's
One Kind of Filibuster Against Which the Democratic Leadership Fights Hard
MORE   MILITANT   ABOUT    A.T.&T.   THAN    CIVIL
RIGHTS:   When   the  Southerners  earlier  this  session  filibus-
tered  against  new  civil rights  legislation,  the  Democratic lead-
ership  held  the  Senate  to  a  sedate 8-hour  day and  5-day week.
But  now  that  a  group  led  by Kefauver  and  Long  of Louisiana
are  out  to  talk  the  Satellite  Communications  Bill  to   death,
Majority   Leader  Mansfield  orders   10-hour   day  and   six-day
weeks.  .  .  .  SEVENTH  CONTEMPT  REVERSAL: In  a  per
curiam  opinion  with  Harlan  and  Clark  dissenting the  Supreme
Court  last  Monday  reversed   the  conviction  of  Frank  Grum-
man,   an   American  Communications  Association  official,   for
contempt   of   the   Un-American  Activities  Committee  on   the
ground   that  the   indictment  was  faulty.    This   was  the   7th
witch  hunt  contempt  reversal  this  term.  .  .  .
Still  Hope  on  the  Drug  Bill
IF  ONLY  elderly people were  as well  organized  to  fight  for
cheaper  and  safer  drugs  as  they  are  to  fight  for  medical  care,
the  drug  lobby  could  still  be  defeated  at  this  session.   While
the  Kefauver bill  is  being  emasculated  in  the  Senate Judiciary
Committee,  hearings  have  begun   on  companion  bills  in  the
House.    It  would  be  better  to  block  meaningless  compromises
this  session  and  fight  for   a  meaningful  bill   next  year  than
to  let  the  Administration and  the  drug  lobby  get  away  with
a  phony  measure  which  could  be  labelled  as  reform  and  lull
the  public  back  to  sleep  for  another  few  years.    The   New
York  Times  which  we  criticized  last  week  for  failing  to  report
the  Kefauver  speech  accusing  the  Administration  of  conniving
with  Eastland  for  a  feeble  compromise,  made  amends  with  a
strong  editorial  (June  15)   supporting  the  original  Kefauver
bill  and  asking  the  President  to  make  clear  whether  he  still
favors  that  or  the  current  weak  substitute.  .  .  .
FOR  FREEDOM  RIDERS:  Congressman  Wm.  Fitts  Ryan
(D.  N.V.)   introduced  a  bill  last  Tuesday  providing  that  no
person  may be  denied  "any  license, right,  benefit  or   privilege"
or  be  barred  from  government  employment  because  he  had
taken  part  in  any  peaceful  demonstration  for  equal  rights  or
against  discrimination.  .  .  .  DISARMAMENT   THE   ONLY
CIVIL  DEFENSE:  This  was  the  theme  of  a  speech  made  in
the  Senate  last  Monday  by  Young  (D.  Ohio)  welcoming  the
news  that  the  House  appropriations subcommittee  under  Rep.
Watson-Watt  on  the  Van  Allen  Belt
"It  is,  as  I  see  it,  of  the  essence  of  this   [scientific]
integrity   that   each  step  forward  should  be  restrained
by  a  determination  not  to  release  forces   or  processes
beyond  the  control  of  the  investigator.    The  physics  of
the  ionosphere   was  studied  by  methods  which  did  not
transgress  this  salutary  restraint.   It  would be a  breach
of  our  implicit  Hippocratic  oath  in  physical   science  to
launch  a  heavy-handed  attack  on  the  Van  Allen  belt  by
methods   whose    consequences    are   beyond  treasonable
forecast  and which  might  prove  irreversible.  .  .  .  Even
in   physics   it   is   undesirable    that   technological    fools
should  rush  in  where  scientific  angels  fear  to   fly.   Even
the  relatively  minor  trespass  of  metallic  needles  in  the
ionosphere  is  a  breach  of  this  tactical  ethical   responsi-
bility  of  science."
—Sir  Robert  Watson-Watt,   FRS,  discoverer  of  radar,
at   the  First  National   Conference    of   the   Congress  of
Scientists  on  Survival,  New   York   City,  June  16.
Albert  Thomas   of   Texas   had   eliminated  the   $460  million
asked  by the  Defense  Dept.  to  start  a  fallout  shelter  program.
.  .  .  RECIPE  FOR  TROUBLE:   A  Los  Angeles  Times  dis-
patch  from  Stuttgart  (Wash.  Post,  June  11)  says the  Army is
intensifying  the  training  of  guerrillas  for  service  behind  the
Iron  Curtain  in  the  event  of  war  in  Europe.   .  .  .
NO  GROWTH  RATE  PROBLEM  WITH  Cl A:  Although
the  paint  is  hardly  dry  on  its  new  $46,000,000   headquarters
in  McLean,  Va.,   the  CIA  is  already  negotiating   to  rent  an
additional  huge  office  building  at  the  Naval   Weapons   Plant
in  Washington.     A  6-story  warehouse  there  is  being  remod-
elled  into  an  office  building  for  CIA  occupancy.  .  .  .  ANTI-
CASTRO   CUBANS   AND   THE   U.S.   ARMY:   A  year  ago
the  Army  opened  its ranks to  Cuban  nationals,  expecting  about
1,000  veterans of  the  April,  1961,  invasion to  join  up.    Now
a  UPI  dispatch  from  Fort   Jackson,   S.C.,  June   16  discloses
that  only  17  signed  up  and  eight  of  these  want  out.  .  .  .  RIP
VAN  WINKLE  DEPT.:  When  Smathers  of  Florida finished
his  speech   last  Monday  calling  for  establishment  of  a  Cuban
government-in-exile,  Scott  (R.  Pa.)   rose  to  support  him  and
added  the  suggestion  that  we withdraw diplomatic  recognition
from   Castro!
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name ....................................
Street    ..................................
City   ........................................
6/25/02
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)    Name   ...............................................................................
Street    .........._.,.........................................................................
City  ..........._.........................Zone........._..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tea  D   No  D
Glad  to  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  to  Friends,  If  You  Supply   the  Stamped   Envelopes  and  Specify    Which   Issue
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Waihington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'B  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except   the  last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M. Stone.   Subscription:  $6  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  in
Canada;  *10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  SIS  to  Europe;   $2*  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED