I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962feb12.pdf

============================================================

What  Cuba  Said  At  Punta  del  Este,  Pps. 2-3
Pro-Testing  Crowd  Gunning  for  Dr.  Bethe:  Scientists  Protested  McCone  Nomination,  Page  4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  6
FEBRUARY  12,  1962
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
An  Arms   Budget   Designed  to   Terrify
In  terms  of  size,  shape  and  military doctrine,  the  new  Ken-
nedy  arms  budget   is  a  terrifying  document,  and  intended  to
terrify.    In  terms  of  size,  it  is  roughly  $10  billion  higher  than
Elsenhower's.    During   his  Administration  the  arms   budget
was  somewhat  higher  than  $40  billions.   Under  Kennedy  it
emerges  somewhat  higher  than  $50  billions.    A  decade  ago,
just  before  the  Korean  war,  it  was  barely  past  $10  billions.
In  terms  of  shape,  the  arms  budget  resembles  that   advocated
some  years  ago  in  the  Rockefeller Brothers  report  on  military
policy,  i.e.   the  armed  services  are  being  recast  and   merged
functionally,  with  separate  commands  and  striking  forces  for
thermonuclear  war,  for  continental  defense,  and   for   limited
"police"  actions  on  the  periphery  of  the  Soviet  bloc  to  stop
up  any  fissures  in  the  wall  of  containment,  -in  terms  of  mili-
tary  doctrine,  the  budget  embodies  a  more  adventurous  policy
than   Eisenhower's.    Where  Eisenhower  said   war   was  now
"preposterous,"   Kennedy  is prepared  to  play  the  terrible  game
in  three  forms.
More  for  Chemical and  Germ  War
The  one  that  seems  to  fascinate  him  most  is  that  of  para-
military  operations:  the   use  of   secret  small  detachments   for
undeclared  war.    Three  new  centers  for  such  "special   forces"
are  to  be  added  to  the  two  already  in  existence  at  Fort  Bragg,
N.C.   and  Fort  Gulick  in  the  Panama  Canal  Zone.    Of   the
three,  one  is  to  be  for   trans   Pacific  operations,  another   for
Europe  and  the  third  for  the  Middle  East.    The  second  form
in  which  Kennedy  is  ready  to  play  the  war  game  is  that  of
limited  conflict,  conventional  or  with  so-called  tactical  nuclear
arms.    In  both  para-military and  limited  war,  a  larger  role  for
chemical  and  biological  weapons  is  foreshadowed  by  the  new
budget;  the  Army's  spending  plans  for  these   is  up  67%   to
$85  millions.    For  so-called   limited  war  purposes,   the  new
budget  adds  two  divisions  to  the  Regular  Army  and  provides
the  Army  with  improved   conventional  weapons;   the   Navy,
with  more  ships;  the   Air   Force,  with   four   more  wings  of
tactical   aircraft.
The  third   Form  in  which  Kennedy  is  prepared  to  play  the
game  of  war  is that  of  all-out  thermonuclear  conflict.  The  new
budget  represents  the  defeat  of  those  who  advocate  the  estab-
lishment  of  a  stabilized  nuclear  deterrent  of  some  200  "invul-
nerable"   Polaris  and   solid   fuel   Minuteman   missiles  under
whose  protective  umbrella  disarmament  might  be  negotiated.
The  budget  programs  an  enormous  force  of  some  1600  mis-
siles  although  it  is  now  recognized  that  there  is  no  "missile
gap",   that  even  in  ICBM's  we  are  ahead  of  the  Russians.  The
missile  program   mounts   staggeringly,   as  if   earlier  fantasies
about   the   Russians  having   500   ICBM's   (when   apparently
they  have  only  about   50)   were  realities.    Plans  for  so  huge
a  force  must make  the  Russians feel  that  we  are  moving  from
Economic  Impact of  Disarmament
When  John  J.  McCloy  was  adviser  to  the   President
on  disarmament,  he  named a  panel  under  Emile  Benoit
of  Columbia to  study  its  economic  impact.    What  began
in  a  burst  of  zeal  seems  to  have  ended  in  a  damp little
squib.   The  panel  submitted its  report last  October  but
has  just  been  released  now  by  Wm.  C.  Foster,  director
of  the  new  U.S.  Arms  and  Disarmament  Agency,  prob-
ably  the  capital's  most  timorous executive.    It  reads  as
if  prepared or  revised  under  instructions  not  to  alarm
the  Pentagon.    It  begins,  incredibly, with  this  sentence,
"Threats  to  national  security  now  require  an improve-
ment  in  U.S.  military  capabilities,"  not  the  most   evan-
gelical  start  for  a  study  of  disarmament and  difficult  to
reconcile  with  Secretary   McNamara's  boast   the   same
day  that  the  U.S.  armed forces  were  strong  enough  to
ride   out   any   currently   possible   nuclear   attack   and
"completely  destroy" the  attacker.   The  report's  "Model
of   General  and  Complete  Disarmament"  envisages   a
gradual  reduction  over  the  next  15  years  to  10  billions
in  arms spending  and  500,000  men  in  the  armed  forces!
Just  how  this  constitutes  "complete  and  general"  dis-
arming   is  not  explained.   The  report,  which  we  may
discuss  in  more  detail  later,  finds  as  expected  that  the
economic   problem   this  would  create   is   not  insoluble,
but  its  meager and cautious analysis  is  neither  inspired
nor  inspiring.    The  manner  and  timing  of  its  release
reflects  an official  atmosphere less than passionate  about
the  whole  subject.
the  idea  of  a  deterrent  to  the  preparation  of  a  possible  attack.
The  pyromaniacs are  jubilant;  Joseph  Alsop  in  recent  columns
has   been   hinting  joyfully   that   we   have  at   last   abandoned
Eisenhower's  "never   strike  first"  doctrine.
This  may overstate  the  intention  but  not  the  drift  of  policy.
The  truth  is that  the  path  of  least  resistance  is mass  production
of  missiles,  and  the  only  doctrine  that  can  justify  this  is  one
which  holds  that  "under  great  provocation"  we must  be  ready
to  strike first and  have  a  missile  force  so  huge  it  can  wipe  out
even  hardened   bases  on  the  other  side,  win  the  war  and  sur-
vive.    The  corollary  of  this  is  a  shelter  program,   private  or
communal,  to  make  this  "credible"  not  only  to  the  Russians
but  to  ourselves.    The  shelter  program   has  become  another
facet  of  the  familiar  Democratic  armament  policy  begun  under
Truman;  another  way  to  prime  the  pump  of  business  and  at
the  same  time  support   a  "tougher"   foreign   policy.*    With
this  is  revived  the  Acheson  notion  that  if  we  build  up   over-
whelming  power  we  can  dictate  terms,  particularly  if  we  make
it  clear  that  we  are  ready—if  need  be—to  risk  war  to  enforce
them.    This,  my  friends,  is  not  a  peace  race.
*  See  the  National  Planning  Association's   January  bulletin
which  says  the  shelter  program   would  take  up  the  slack  in
steel   and   cement    while   making   a   first   strike   strategy
"credible."
2   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly  February  12,   1!HJ2
What Cuba Had to Say in Its Own  Defense at the Punta del Este Conference...
We  are  sorry  to  see  Cuba  go  the  way  of  Marxism  Leninism
just  when  revelations  about  Stalin  show   how  inevitably   a
one-party   state  without   a  free   press   breeds   injustice   and
degenerates   into  bureaucratic   authoritarianism  and   thought
control.    But   U.S.  behavior   toward  Cuba  hardly   constitutes
an  advertisement   for   the   ideals   of   Jefferson.       It   was   very
hard  to  tell  from   the  news  dispatches   in  our  own  free   press
what  Cuba  had  said  at  Punta  del  Este.    In  the  interest  of
fairness,  we  present  on  these  two  inside  pages  excerpts   from
the  speech  made  by  President   Dorticos  of  Cuba  at  Punta  del
Este  on Jan.  25.
We  believe  Punta  del  Este  marks  another  step  down  a  dis-
astrous  road.  It  splits  the  hemisphere;  on one side  are  mostly
the  petty  dictatorships   of  the  Caribbean  area.    On  the  other
side  are  the  major  republics  with  a  majority   of  Latin  Amer-
ica's  land  and  peoples,  more  fearful    of   U.S.  interventionism
than  of  Castroism.   Within  these  countries,  the  military  and
the  rightists,  as  in  Argentina,  are  using  the  Cuban  issue  to
regain  power  at  the  expense   of  precarious  democratic  insti-
tutions.    The   effect    will   be  to  polarize   the  struggle,  and   to
weaken  those  moderate   elements  which  are  the  only   support
of    the  Alliance  for   Progress.    Finally   we   believe   the  con-
ference    will   strengthen  rightist   elements   at   home.     Their
appetite    for    stronger   measures   against    Cuba   has   been
whetted.   Kennedy's  fixation  about  Cuba  led  to  his  first  great
setback   last  April.    We  believe  worse  are  ahead.    How  can
rve  campaign   for   world  law  when  we  violate   the  laiv  of   the
hemisphere    by   economic   and   military    aggression    against
Cuba?—IFS
From the  Dorticos Speech
"This  meeting  [Pres.  Dorticos  said]  was  promoted  to  pre-
pare  a  favorable  climate  in  the  Hemisphere  for  a  new  phys-
ical  and  military  aggression  against  my  country  and  as  such
I  denounce it. . . .
"But  as  we  shall  see  later,  this  meeting  also  has   another
aim.   This  is  not  only  a  meeting  against  Cuba,  it  is  not  only
a  meeting  against  the  Cuban  people.   At  this  meeting  there
are   some  who  also  conspire  against   the   inevitable   future
freedom  of  many  Latin  American  peoples.   They wish to  take
the  practical  measures  and  precautions  deemed necessary  not,
as  they  so  often  repeat,  to  prevent  the  propagation   of  inter-
national  communism  in  this  hemisphere,  but  simply  to  put
a   stop  to  national  liberation  or  anti-imperialist   movements
among  many  peoples  of  Latin  America.  .  .  .
"In  the  future,  strikes  will  be  suppressed   more  violently;
bloodshed  and  bullets  will  be  used  to  try   to  destroy   farm
workers'   movements;  and,   perhaps,   the   power   of   circum-
stances  themselves  may,  some  dramatic  day,  make  this  con-
tinent  the  scene  of  another  colonial  war.    On  the  one  hand
will   stand   the   peoples,   longing   for   freedom,  determinedly
rising  in  rebellion; on  the  other  will  stand  fierce  imperialism,
If  the   Pope  Can  Co-Exist  With  Castro
It  is  easy  to  imagine  the  outcry  from  the  Senate  In-
ternal  Security  Committee  and  the  House Un-American
Activities  Committee   if   leading   Protestant  clergymen
were  now  to  give  a  friendly   reception-  to  an  emissary
from  Castro,  as  the  Pope  did  on  February  3  when  he
accepted  the  credentials  of  a  new  Cuban  Ambassador  to
the  Vatican  and  accorded  him  a  private  audience.    The
new  envoy,  to  top  it  all, is  (according  to  the  UPI  from
Vatican  City)   "a  leftwing   intellectual   who   fought   on
the  Loyalist  side  in  Spain."   If  a  Senate committee  can
investigate   the   United   Nations,  as   Internal  Security
did  a  few  years ago  under  that  devout  son  of  the  Church
and  friend  of  Franco,  McCarran—why  not  the  Papacy?
If  it  can  pillory  the  Protestant clergy  for  not  being  soft
on   Communism,   why   not   the   Pope  for  being  soft  on
Castroism?      Alternatively,   if   the   Pope   can  co-exist
with  Castro,  why  can't  we?
seeking   with   marines,   transported    armies,    and   specially
trained  groups,  to  put  down  the  efforts  of the  peoples.  .  .  .
"Thus  are  we attacked  and  injured  by  those  who invoke the
sanctity   of  human   rights.     Why   were   these   champions  of
human  rights   in  our  hemisphere  not  stirred   or  even  moved
by  the  report  that  a field worker  in  our  literacy  campaign,  a
16-year   old  worker,  was  murdered  by   a  gang  of   counter-
revolutionaries  equipped  by the  U.S.  intelligence service ?  .  . .
But  the  OAS  took  no  note;  the  Ministers  of  Foreign  Affairs,
some  of  them  listening  to  me  now,  took  no  note.  .  .  .
"We  are  also  charged  with  violating  the  exercise  of  democ-
racy.  .  .  .  Speak  of  representative   democracy  to  the  Amer-
ican  Indian, to  the  U.S.  Negro,  to  the  illiterates  of  this  hemi-
sphere,  to  the  poor  and  the  hungry.    Gentlemen,  once  illiter-
acy  has  disappeared   from   your  countries,  once  there  is  no
poverty,  no  discrimination—then  is  the  time  to  speak   of  de-
mocracy.  . . . Democracy. Does it  by any  chance  exist  in Para-
guay ?    Are  you  about  to  demand  that  I  prove  that  there  is
no  democracy in  Paraguay?    Democracy  in  Nicaragua.    Are
you  going  to  ask  me  to  prove  the  lack  of  it  in  the  face  of
notorious  fact?  .  . .
"And  furthermore,  gentlemen,  with  all  these  old  evils,  are
periodic  elections  the  only  way  that  the  people  have  to  ex-
press  their  will ?    Would  you  try   to  ignore   history ?     Are
you  trying  to  disregard  the  scientific  truth  of  history?    Do
you   seek  to  ignore'the  fact  that  history   has  been   spurred
on  by  revolutions, that  revolutions  are  the  exceptional,  glori-
ous  and  culminating experiences  of  the  people,  the  real  ex-
pression   of  their   will ?
"Obviously,   all   revolutions  and   among   them   the   Cuban
revolution,  work  toward   creating   institutions,   including  an
electoral  system.    Cuba  is  not  an  exception  to  the  rule.    Our
U.  S. Charged  With  Enmity  to  Cuban  Revolution  Even  Before  It  Turned Socialist
"I  wish  to  reply  here  to  the  statements  made  by  the  Sec-
retary   of   State  of   the   United  States.     He   said   that   the
North   American   government   had   no   quarrel,   originally,
with  the  Cuban  revolution;  the  fact  that  our  Revolution  be-
came  a  Socialist  revolution,  that  we  declared  its  basis  to  be
the  Marxist-Leninist  ideology, which  we  make no attempt to
hide,  is  what  has  provoked  that  country's  enmity.     What
a  short  memory!
"Have  they  forgotten  that  they  began   to   send  insolent
diplomatic  notes  in  early  1959  because  we  had  merely pro-
posed  an  agrarian  reform?     Have  they  forgotten  that  be-
fore   we  nationalized   one  North   American   monopoly  they
began  to  cut  our  sugar  quota?    Have  they  forgotten  that
before   we   adopted  any   socialistic  measures   or  even  any
nationalizing  measures in  our  country,  in  1959,  many  planes
coming  from  North  American  territory  set  fire  to  our  sugar
fields  and harvests and burned  many  of  our farmers' homes?
"This  enmity  on  the  part  of  the  Government  of  the  United
States   is  not  only  against  the  socialistic  revolution.   We
are  not  claiming  or  aspiring  or  trying  to  export  our  social-
ism  to  any  American  country.    But  that  won't  matter;  if.
any  other  country  of  America  makes  a  nationalistic liber-
ation  attempt  that  includes true  agrarian  reform,  national-
ization  of   North  American  companies  and  intervention  of
North  American  utility  companies, it  will  be enough  to  cause
in  those  countries  a  repetition  of  the  events  of   which  we
were  victims  since  early   1959,  even  before  our  revolution
became  socialistic."
—President   Dorticos   of  Cuba  addressing   the  Punta,  del   Este  Conference  Jan.   25.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  —
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly  February   12, 19U2
From  the  Speech  By  President  Dorticos  Blacked  Out  in  the  U. S.  Press
revolution   is   directed   toward   the   creation    of  institutions,
which  will  give  definitive  form  to  our  great socio-economic
changes.     Cuba   will   adopt   institutions,   among   them,   the
electoral  institution.    But  Cuba  will  do  this  in  the  way  and
at  the  time  our  people  so  determine,  and  not  in  response  to
any  international  coercion or  intimidation by force.   Cuba  has
lived  for  three  years  as  an  expression  of  popular  will.  .  .  .
"Furthermore,  if  these  are  governments  of  the  people,  by
the  people  and  for  the  people,  I  would  invite  them  to  arm
their  people  as  Cuba  has  .  .  .  then  we  would  see  how  short
a  time  they  would  stay  in  power.  .  .  .
"The   government  of  the  United  States  asks  for  freedom
and  democracy.    Let  us  remember,  at  least,  what  the  great
Simon  Bolivar  said:  'The  United  States  seems  destined   by
providence   to   plague   America  with   woes   in   the   name  of
freedom'  . . .
What  Cuba Has  Achieved
"What  have  we  done, what  has  the  Cuban  Revolution done
that  it  is  now  to  be  condemned?    What  has  it  done  in  spite
of   these  aggressions,  sabotage  and   espionage   infiltrations?
In  agriculture,  over  140,000  field  workers  have  become  land-
owners.    There  are   125,000  sugar  workers   working   in   the
cane  cooperatives  .  .  . we have  done  away  with  chronic  sea-
sonal  unemployment in  our  agriculture.  In  the  people's  farms,
120,000  agricultural  workers  have  employment  assured.   Un-
employment  has  virtually  vanished   from   our  lands   and,   at
times, we face  manpower  shortages. . . . The industrial  growth
of  Cuba,  for  the  first  3 years  of  the  Revolution,  is  more  than
50  percent. . . .
"In  the  national  budget  of  Cuba  for  1962,  the  expenses  for
education,  science  and  culture  amount   to  270  million  pesos,
almost  four  times  as  much  as  the  highest  amount  ever  paid
in  our country.  .  . . The budget  of the  Public  Health  Depart-
ment  in  1958  amounted  to  21  million  pesos;  in  1962  it  is  89
millions.   Our  rate  of  economic growth  will  not  be  lower  than
a  cumulative  12 percent.  .  .  .  This  in  itself   is  unheard  of  in
the  economie development  of  Latin  America.
"As  to  literacy  .  .  .  only  3 percent  of the  Cuban  population
is  still  illiterate,  and  this  includes senile  persons  whom  it  is
impossible  to  teach   and   persons   with   physical   and   mental
defects.  .  .  .  Could  it  be  for  this  that  they   want   to  con-
demn  us?
"Cuba  is  simply  an  idea  and  an  example.    If  this  idea  and
this  example constitute  a  danger  to  imperialism, a  danger  to
oligarchy,  a  danger   to  the  exploiters,   it  is  not  the  fault  of
this  idea  and  of  this  example,  but  that  of  imperialism,  oli-
garchy  and exploiters. ...
"Cuba  is  the  first  country  of  America  to  begin  the  road  to
Why  Cuba Turned  to Soviet Trade
"We  are  also  accused  of  maintaining  relations  with
the  socialist  countries  and,  especially,  of  the  fact  that
our  economic  and  commercial  relations  are  now  virtu-
ally   monopolized  by  imports  from   and  exports  to   the
socialist  countries, and  this  is  affirmed  to  be  a  sin  or  a
crime.    However,  the  reason  why  this  has  happened  is
forgotten.
"Before  our  successful  revolution, our  country,  essen-
tially  an  exporter  of  a  single  commodity, used  to  deal
almost  exclusively  with  the  U.S.    When  the  Revolution
triumphed,  the  Revolutionary  Government  of  Cuba  set
for  itself,  among  other  goals  for  economic  transforma-
tion,  the  task  of  overcoming  our  status  as  exporters
of   a  single  commodity   and  the   diversification   of  our
foreign  trade.
"Did  we  want,  then,  or  do  we  want  now,  to  limit  our
trade  to  a  single  group  of countries?    On  the  contrary,
we  would  have  wanted—and  did  want,  to  increase  in  a
rational  way  our  economic relations  with  the  U.S.  But
it  was  the  U.S.  which,  by  a  unilateral   decision  and  as
a  measure  of  economic aggression,  limited and  curtailed
our  economic  relations,  cancelled  its  purchases   of  our
products  to  ruin  our  people  and  defeat  the  Revolution.
What  did  it  want,  then?     To  have  hunger   prevail  in
our  land?"
—Cuba's    President     Dorticos    at   Punta   del   Este
Jan.  25.
socialism:  but,  as  history  shows,  it  need  not  be  the  last.   If
an  international   juridical  community  is  to  endure,  whether
it  be  a  world-wide  one  or  a  regional  one,  it  must  be  based
on  the  compulsory acceptance  of this  diversity  of  political  and
social  systems.   If  mutual  respect  exists,  if  the  right  of  each
state  to  determine  its   own  destiny   is  recognized;   if  states
refrain  from   all  forms  of  intervention   in  the  affairs  of   the
rest,  then  differences  in  systems  can  be  no  obstacle  to  coex-
istence  in  regional  organisms.
"Cuba  will  not  permit  the  socialist  nature  of  its   revolution
to  be used  as  a  pretext  to limit  its  rights  as  a  sovereign  state
in  a  regional   organization.    Either  the  OAS,  as  such  a  re-
gional  organization  functioning  within  our  geographic  limits,
has  room for  all  the  American  nations, whatever  may be their
social  or  political   systems,  or  the  OAS  becomes  the  shame-
less,   unabashed   private   preserve   of   Washington,   ruled   in
the  manner  of  a  Ministry  of   Colonies."
CIA  Accused  of  Sending  Batista  Captain  to  Assassinate  Fidel and  Raul  Castro
"It  is  not we who are disturbing  the  peace  of  America. . . .
Have  we  by  any  chance  signed  a  military  pact  with  anyone,
as  the  U.S.  has  signed  military  pacts  of  aggression,   thereby
bringing  the  cold  war  to  our  hemisphere  and  jeopardizing
the  peace of  its  peoples?  Is  not  the  peace  of  our Hemisphere
disturbed  when  the  U.S.  fleet  is  mobilized  to  force  events
in  the  Republic of  Santo  Domingo?    Is  not  the  peace  of  the
Hemisphere  disturbed when  our country  is  invaded?    Is  not
the  peace  of  the  Hemisphere  disturbed  when  atomic  bases
are  established  in  Purto  Rico?    Is  it  not  a  breach  of  the
peace'to  maintain,  by  force,  a  U.S.  naval  base  in  Cuba?    Is
it  not  a  breach  of  the  peace  in  the  Hemisphere  when  the
government  of  the  U.S.  organizes,  as  it  is  doing, training
bases   now  in  operation  for   aggression   against   Cuba,  not
only  in the  U.S.  but in other countries  of  Latin America? . . .
Is  not  the  peace  of  America  disturbed  when  agents  of   the
U.S.  Intelligence  Service  infiltrate  our  country?  .  .  .
"Is  not   the   peace   of   the   continent  disturbed  when,  on
November  19,  1961,  a  group  of  seven  persons  led  by  a  for-
mer  captain  of  Batista's  army, landed  at  Punta  de  Coco  and
it  was  found,  after  seizure  of  the  arms  and  documents  and
from  their  statements,  that  they  had  been  trained  in  espi-
onage  techniques  by  the   government   of  the   U.S.   for   the
purpose,  among  others,  of  carrying  out  a  so-called  'Opera-
tion   Patty',  consisting  of  nothing  less  than  the  death  or
assassination   of  Commanders  Fidel  and  Raul  Castro?  From
them  were  taken  two  cannon,  four  bazookas,  23  rifles,   etc.,
all  of  them  arms  of  the  U.S.  Army.  .  .  .
"I  wish   to  remind  you  that   it   was   President   Kennedy
himself  who  declared  a  few  days  before  the  invasion,  that
the  government  of  the   U.S.   would  never  take  part  in   it,
only  to  declare  some  days  later  that  he  assumed  the  respon-
sibility  for  the  invasion. .  .  .  Why  did not  the  OAS  go  into
action  then?  .  .  .  Does  the  U.S.,  within the  strict  and rigor-
ous  regulations of  the  OAS,  have  exceptional  permission  to
invade  a  country  without  anything  happening?"
—Cuba's  President  Dorticos  at  Punta  del Este  Jan.  25.
To  Friends  If  You  Send  Long  Stamped  Self-Addressed   Envelopes
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly  February  12, 1962
Pro-Testing   Crowd  Gunning  for  Dr.  Bethe;  Scientists  Protested  to  White House  Against  McCone
AEC  Quickly  Identifies   New   Russian  Underground  Test
New  developments  in  the  controversy  over  nuclear  testing
during  the  past  week:
1.  On  Feb.  2  the  Russians  set  off  an  underground explosion
in  central  Asia  in  the  region  of  Semipalatinsk.    The  AEC  in
Washington   that  afternoon  announced  the  explosion,  saying
it  "was  well  above  the  threshold  of  underground detectability
by  a  single  national  system."   "For background  only,  not  for
attribution"  the  size of  the  Soviet explosion  was placed  at  from
20  to  100  kilotons.    But  the  next  day  the  Seismological   In-
stitute  in  Uppsala,  Sweden,  one  of  the  world's  best,  said  the
explosion  was  only  10  kilotons.    The  AEC  declined  to  com-
ment  on  or  explain  the  difference  and  few  newspapers  pub-
lished  the  AP  dispatch  from  Uppsala.    We  saw  it  only  in  the
Washington  Evening  Star,  Feb. 3.    This  was  one  more  indi-
cation  that  long  distance  identification  of  underground   shots
is  easier  than,  we  have  been  told.
That  Lead  Jacket
2.  The  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  is  gunning  for
Dr.  Hans  Bethe  and  executive  hearings  were  to  be  held  Feb-
ruary  7  and  8  to  investigate   whether  he  violated   security  by
his  talk  at  Cornell  Jan. 5  (which  we  reported  in  our  issue  of
Jan.  15).   Dr.  Bethe  irked  the pro-testing  crowd  by  revealing
that  the  relative  cleanliness  of  the  big  Russian  bomb  explosion
of  Oct. 30  was  due  to  its  being  encased  in  a  lead  jacket  and
not  (as  fed  out by  Dr.  Teller  to  Time  Magazine  and  the  New
York  Times)   to  any  new  triggering  device  which  supposedly
brought  the  Soviets  nearer  to  that  "clean"  neutron   bomb.
3.  In  a  long  piece  on  the  McCone  and  testing  controversy
in  the New  York  Times  Feb.  4  its military expert,  Hanson  W.
Baldwin,  disclosed  that  Dr.  George  T.  Kistiakowsky  of Har-
vard,  former  science  adviser  to  President  Eisenhower  "headed
a  group  to  the  White  House  that  opposed  Mr.  McCone's ap-
pointment  as  CIA  director.    According  to  Mr.  Baldwin,  this
reflected  the  feeling  of  "many  in  the  academic  and   scientific
community"  who  "regard  Mr.  McCone  as  biased  and   'inju-
dicious' "  in  his  advocacy  of  resumed  nuclear   testing.    Mr.
Baldwin  also  disclosed   that  after  the  committee  of  scientists
headed  by  Dr.  Bethe  made  the  report  the  White  House  had
AEC  Now  Dubious  of  Underground  Testing
"Underground  testing   is  limited  to  the  lower  yield
devices   (up  to  some  tens  of  kilotons  at  present)   and
certain  types  of  tests,  particularly   some  effects  tests
[presumably   the   effects  of   the   weapons   on  military
targets—IFS],   cannot   be   made   in   this   way   at all.
Hence,   steps   were  taken  to   prepare  for   a   series   of
tests   in   the   atmosphere   in   the   event   the   President
should  decide  to  expand  the  test  effort  in  this  way.
"While  important  development  information  with  re-
spect  to  nuclear  weapons  designs  was  discovered  in  the
course   of  the  underground  tests,   these  tests  also  re-
vealed  that  testing  underground  is  a  slower  and  more
expensive  process   than  had  previously   been   assumed.
It  has  proved  to  be  more  difficult  to  diagnose  some  of
the  results  of  development  tests;  operational   difficulties'
such  as  post-shot   re-entry   and  re-oise  of  partially con-
taminated  tunnels  were  continuing   factors   in   delaying
the  test   program."
AEC  Annual  Report  for  1961,  released  Jan.  SO.
requested  of  them  on the  results  of  Soviet  testing,  Mr.  McCone
presented   another  evaluation  which   "apparently   viewed   the
Soviet  progress   in  considerably  stronger   terms  than  did  the
earlier  scientific  analysis."    Who  said  Mr.  McCone would  take
no  hand  in  policy  formation?*    And  what  has  happened   to
the  atmosphere  of  free  debate  when  scientists  are  afraid  to
oppose  a  CIA  appointment  publicly?
Total  letters  to  the  President  in  our  anti-testing  campaign
as  of  Feb.  7  was  1937,  keep  them  coming.
* With  respectful   salute  we   record   the  12  Senators  who
voted   against,   and  the  three  who  were  paired  against,   the
McCone  confirmation: Burdick  (D.  N.Dak.),  Byrd  (D.  W.Va.),
Case  (R.  S.  Dak.),  Fulbright   (D.  Ark.),  Gruening  (D.  Alas-
ka),  Lausche  (D.  Ohio),  McCarthy  (D.  Minn.),  Metcalf.  (D.
Mont.),  Neuberger  (D.  Ore.),  Proxmire  (D.  Wis.),  Smith  (R.
Me.)  and  Young  (D.  Ohio).    Morse   (D.  Ore.),  Douglas   (D.
111.)  and  Clark  (D.  Pa.) were  paired  against  the  nomination.
We  would  also  pay  tribute  to  Drew.  Pearson  whose  columns
did  so  much to  awaken  the  Senate  and the  public  to  the  issue.
1961    Index   Ready—Free   But   You   Must  Send   Stamped    Self-Addressed     Long   Envelope   For   It
I.   P.   Stone's   Weekly,  seis  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please .renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................................................................................._
Street   ....:...............................................................................—
City   ............_,........................Zone........~.State....................
2/12/62
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  («  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ...............................................................................
Street   .........__..........................................................................
City   ............_.........................Zone.............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?           Yes  D    No  D
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington    15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday    in   Aufrust   and   the   first   in
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday    m   August   and   th
September  and  the  last  Monday   in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington,  D.C.  An   independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M. Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;   $6  in
Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates?  $15  to   Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED