I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962sep10.pdf

============================================================

The  Test  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter   Failed,  P.  4
How  Our Military Tripped  Themselves  in  Outer  Space,  P.  2;  Celebrezze Fogs Up The  Fallout  Picture,  P.  3
L F. Stones  Weekly
VOL.  X,  NO.  32SEPTEMBER  10,  1962
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Cuba  Is  The  Spark  That  Could  Set Off  The  Conflagration
Good  sense,  international  law  and  the  moral  considerations
we  always  claim  as  especially  our   own   dictate  a  hands  off
policy  toward Cuba.   But  in  the  name  of  patriotism  a swarm
of   little  men  are  stirring  a  war  spirit  to  grind   their  petty
axes,  the  Republicans  led  by  Keating  of  New  York  to  give
them  an  issue  in  the  coming  elections,  the  newspapers  to  pep
up  circulation  with  incendiary headlines  and  stories.    As  we
write  the  President  has  just  summoned  Congressional  leaders
to  the  White  House  and  issued  a  statement  drafted  carefully
to  allay  alarm, but  next  morning  even  newspapers  as  respon-
'sible  as  the  Washington  Post  and  the  New   York  Times  dis-
torted  the  meaning  of  Mr.  Kennedy's  words,  the  former  with
an  8-column  screaming  headline,  "Kennedy  Warns   Cuba  on
Aggression,"  the  latter  with  a  news  story which  lent  a  bellig-
erant  cast  to  words  intended  to  stop  thoughtless  panic.    We
give  the  heart  of  them  here  because  we  were  sure  they  would
be  buried  or  forgotten  in  more  sensational,  smaller  and   less
scrupulous  papers  around  the  country.
The  Words  The  Presses  Blurred
The  President said,  "There  is  no  evidence of  any  organized
combat  force  in  Cuba  from  any  Soviet  bloc  country;  of  mili-
tary   bases  provided   to  Russia;  of   a  violation  of   the   1934
treaty   relating  to   Guantanamo;  of   the   presence  of      offensive
ground-to-ground   missiles;  or   of   other  significant       offensive
capability  either in  Cuban  hands or under Soviet direction and
guidance."    But  these  clear  words  were  blurred  in  the  report-
ing.   They were,  by the  standards of  city  editors, neither   "hot"
nor  "new."    Though  the  President  said  pointedly  that  Cuba's
new  ground-to-ground  missiles  had  a  slant  range  of  25  miles
(as  compared   with  the  90  miles  to  Florida),  the  headlines
played  up  his  later  words  about  not  allowing  Cuba  "to  export
its  aggressive purposes,"  and  the  New  York  Times  headlined,
"Kennedy  Pledges  Any  Steps  to  Bar  Cuban  Aggression."   The
illea  that  this  little  besieged   island  of  6,000,000  people,  its
Shores  constantly  patrolled   by  U.S.  planes  and  ships,  with  a
powerful  US  base  directly  on  its  soil,  may  be  threatening  at-
tJTck would  be a joke if  our  country were  not  already half  gone
Jato  a  mood  of  overheated   frustration.    The  President   will
have  to  speak  more  strongly,  with  no  counter-balancing  rhet-
oric,  if  he  is  to  stem  the  tide  toward  war.    He  will  have  to
take  the  offensive  and  label  the  Republicans  the  war  party  or
he  may  find  himself  dragged   along  defensively  by  the   tide.
Now  is  the  time for  every  element  of  sanity in  our  country
to  speak  up  and  help  Mr.  Kennedy  stem  the  drift.   The  truth
IS  that  we  are  guilty  of  aggression  against  Cuba,  of   economic
aggression  in  clear  violation  of  Inter-American  treaties,  and  of
allowing  hostile  action  in  violation  of  our  own  neutrality  laws
by  Cuban  exiles,  the  CIA  and  our  military.    That  uproar  a
9
Voices  of   Reason
"The  Kennedy  Administration has   to  be  guided  by
.  .  .  realities,  not  by  passion,  and  least  of  all  by  fear
and  hysteria.   The  Soviet  bloc  is  7,000  and  more  miles
away;  Cuba  is  90  miles off  the  Florida  coast.   If  there
is  going  to  be  a  nuclear   war  it  will  not  come  from
Cuba ...  to  invade  Cuba  under  the  present  circum-
stances  would ...  be the course of  irrevocable   folly."
—New  York  Times, Sept.  1.
"What  kind  of  quivering  mentality  is  it  that  fears
Castro  as a threat  to the United  States?  . . . The U.  S.
has  several  thousand  technicians  in  Turkey,  on the bor-
der  of  the  Soviet  Union,  and  Senators  find  nothing  in
that  to  warrant  any  alarm  by  the  Russians. ...  To
suggest  that  the  presence  in  Cuba of  Soviet  technicians
—not  combat  troops,  but  only  technicians,  according  to
the  President's  assurance—is  somehow  different  from
the  basing  of  U.S.  military advisers  and  Air  Force and
CIA  units  in  Turkey is  hypocritical."
—Son Francisco Chronicle, Aug.  31.
".  .  .  we  should  remember that  we  maintain  and! in-
sist  upon  the right to  maintain military  bases  or  forces
in  countries  bordering  the  Soviet  Union.    If  we  assert
the  right  to  do this  in  1962,  and we  certainly  have  the
right,  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  see  how  the  Monroe Doc-
trine  of  1823 can  rationally  be  invoked  now  to  deny  a
similar  right  to  Russia in  the  case  of  Cuba."
—Washington  Evening  Star, Sept.  4.
few  days  earlier  about  shots  fired  on  American planes  had  the
distinct  smell  of  a  highly  exaggerated  war  provocation.     In
any  case  how  would  we  feel  if  Cuban  reservists  were  allowed
to  practice  air  patrols  15  miles  off the  Florida  coast  with  radar
and  electronic  gear  for  intelligence  purposes?    It  would  suit
Moscow  perfectly  if  we  were  to  do  a  Hungary  in  Cuba.    It
would  hurt  Russian  interest  most and help ours  in Latin  Amer-
ica  if  we  were  to  reverse  our  Cuban  policy,   send  the   Peace
Corps  there  to  help  its  people,  negotiate  resumption  of  sugar
purchases  and  oil  sales.    We  would  thereby  make  Cuba  less
dependent  on  Moscow  and  demonstrate   for  all  the  world  to
see  that  our  policy  was  not  made  by  sugar  and  oil  companies,
and  that  U.S.  imperialism was  a  thing  of  the  past.
If  so wise and  noble  a magnanimity  is  politically  impossible
then   the   Administration   would   do   best   quietly   to   cancel
that  "shoot  back"  order  to  our  planes  and  ships  around  Cuba.
Too  many  trigger-happy  elements  are  present  on  both   sides.
We  should  instead  withdraw our  ship  and  plane  patrols.    We
would  never  stand  for  so  continuous  and  hostile  a  challenge
off   our  own  shores   even  if  theoretically   beyond  an  obsolete
3-mile  limit.   To  keep  this up  is  to  invite  the  sptrk  that  could
set  off  a  conflagration.                                          Noon,  Sept. 3
1   2   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  10, 1962
Neither  US  Nor  USSR  Prepared  to  Take  Slight  Risks  for  A  Test  Ban
We  hope  the  tenth  Pugwash  conference in  London  will  take
up  seriously  President   Kennedy'.s  invitation  to  "explore  fully
and  objectively  the  basic  reasons  for  our  failure  thus  far  to
reach  agreement"   on  the  nuclear   test  ban.    A  committee  of
scientists  from  the  non-nuclear  powers  could   focus   attention
on  the  real  reasons  for  the  stalemate.    My  latest  visit  to  Ge-
neva,  discussed  in  last  week's  issue,  and  what  I  have  learned
since  on  returning  to  Washington   convinces  me  that  neither
the  U.S.  nor  the  U.S.S.R.  is  disposed  to  take  the  very  slight
risks  involved  for  a  new  agreement.    These  risks  are   chiefly
risks  to  the  internal  political  prestige  of  the  two  rival  leaders,
Kennedy   and   Khrushchev.      It's   not   in   seismology   but   in
anthropology   that   the    difficulty   originates,   in   the    age-old
arena  of   the   psychological   problems   which   arise  when   the
leaders  of   two  rival  hordes   face  each  other,   fearful   of   the
enemy  in  front  of  them  and  of  any  slip  which  might  give  an
opportunity  to  potential   rivals  for  leadership  behind   them.
Both  K's  Fear  to  Show  Weakness
Both  Kennedy  and  Khrushchev   realize  the  danger.     Both
would  like  an  agreement  to  end  tests.    But  both  would   like
the  agreement  to  be  a  triumph  for  themselves  and  their  own
terms,  and  neither  is  disposed   to  risk  his  leadership   on  con-
cessions  which  offend   the  deep-rooted   biases  on  either   side,
one  which  sees  inspection  as  espionage' and  the  other  which
sees  any  agreement  as  a  contest  in  cheating  that  requires  con-
stant  policing  if  it  is  to  be  observed.    Particularly  neither   is
disposed  to  make  concessions  which  may  be  taken  as  signs  of
weakness  when  they  are  feeling  each  other  out  in  Berlin  and
Cuba.
Last  week  we  discussed  the  pitfalls  in  the  U.S.  offer  to  ac-
cept  "internationally controlled   national  networks"   to   police
a  new  agreement.   This  week  we want  to  take  up  some  recent
Soviet  statements and  show  how  easily  the  Soviet Union  could
bring  about  an  agreement,  simply  by  accepting—not  the  U.S.
terms—but  the  principle  of  obligatory  inspection  when   and
if   a  non-political  international   commission  monitoring   tests
from   outside  the  territory  of   two   big   powers   decided   that
such   inspection  was  necessary  to  determine  the  nature  of  a
suspicious  event.
Not  So  Business-Lake   Communists
Nor  So  Workman-Like  Capitalists
"It  has  been  amusing  during  the  debate  to  hear  how
often  the  socialist  countries   talk  about  the  need  to  pro-
ceed  with   our  work   in  'a  business-like  manner'   while
the  other  side  seems  to  prefer  the  phrase  'a   workman-
like  attitude.'    Whatever  might   be  the  explanation  of
this  difference   in  vocabulary,  we  rather  regret  that   so
little   of   either   a  business-like  or  a   w   'manlike  ap-
proach  has   been   prevalent   in   the   deli   .-rations  on  a
test    ban."
—Mrs.  Myrdal   (Sweden)  at  Geneva  arms parley  Aug.  1
We   want   to  call  attention  to.  two   interesting  arguments
made  by  the  Soviet  representative,  Kuznetsov,  at  Geneva  on
August  17  which  deserve  more  attention  than  they   received.
The  first  was .his  argument  that  national  detection  systems  had
proven  their   efficacy   in  the  period   1959-61  when   there  was
no  testing.    "In   the  course  of  this  period,"  Kuznetsov  said,
"not   one  misunderstanding  or  dispute  arose.    No   one  took
one  of  the  earthquakes  which  occurred  during  the  period   for
a  clandestine  nuclear  explosion."     This   is  true,  and  it  indi-
cates  that  each  side  has  enough  non-seismic means  of  intelli-
gence  to  supplement   seismographic  detection  and  distinguish
an  earthquake from  a nuclear  explosion.    The  argument  shows
how  little need  there  is  either  for  international listening  posts
on  each  other's  soil  or  for  on-site  inspection.
But  the   argument   cuts  both   ways.    If   national  networks
worked  that  well  during  the  last  moratorium,  would  there  not
be  even  less  likelihood  of  confusion  arising  in  a  new  mora-
torium  policed  by  an  international commission  as  suggested  by
the  neutrals and  with  the  improved  equipment  now  available?
The  chances  of  a  demand  for  an  on-site  inspection  would  be
very  slight,  and  an  offer   by  the  Soviet  Union  to  accept   such
an  inspection if  necessary would  involve  very  little  risk  of  the
espionage  it  fears,  a  risk  far  outweighed  by  the  dangers  of  an
uncurbed  nuclear  arms  race.    Is  this  too  much  to  ask  in  the
cause  of   peace  which   Moscow   proclaims  as  its  own?
Now  I  want  to  go  on  to  a  second  important  point  made by
Kuznetsov  in  his  speech.    For  the  first  time  he  developed  the
Our  Military  Bureaucrats  Turn  Out to  Be
In  his  testimony  before  House  Appropriations   on  educa-
tion,  Admiral   Rickover  disclosed  that  he  had  been  asked  by
one   of   his   superiors   to   reduce   the   amount   of   radiation
shielding   in  nuclear  ships.    He  refused  on  the  ground  that
he  was  dealing  "with  the  genetic  future  of  mankind."   The
official   replied,  according  to   Rickover,   "that  no  one  knew
much   about   evolution  anyway,  and  if   we  raised  radiation
exposures  we  might  find  that   the  resultant  mutants  were
helpful."     Rickover   rejected  this  as  "utter  nonsense."   One
wonders  whether  similar  pressure  from   military   superiors
explains  why  U.  S.  scientists  were  so  quick  earlier  this  year
to  dismiss  warnings  from   scientists  aboard  that  high  alti-
tude  testing  might  have  unforeseen  and  dangerous  conse-
quences.
It  now  appears  that  their  reassurances  were  unfounded.
"Nuclear  Test  Fouls  U.  S.  Space  Program"  said  a  headline
in   Missiles   and  Rockets   Aug.    27.    The   July   9  explosion
created  a  new  artificial  belt  of  radioactivity  which  has  dam-
eged  three satellites.   At  first  it  was  said  that  the  new belt
would  soon  disappear.    Now  the  AEC  and  the  Defense  De-
partment  admit,  in  a  repellant  little  press  release  of  Sept.  1
Victims  of  Their  Own Arrogance  in  Space
phrased  to  provide  a  minimum  of  information  and  a  maxi-
mum   of   face-saving,   that   the   new  belt   "may   persist   for
many  years."
It  is  pleasant  to  learn  that  our  military  bureaucracy  is  a
victim  of  its  own  arrogance.    The  day  before  the  new  ad-
missions,  the  Washington  Star's  able  science  writer,   Wil-
liam  Hines,  disclosed  that  the  Pentagon  is  worried  about  24
secret  military  satellites.   These  carry  cameras  designed  to
work  at  about  300  miles  above  the  earth  "and  300  miles  is
well  within  the  new  belt's  'hot'  region."
The  whole  truth  is  still  being  withheld.    Example:  the
New  York  Times,  like  other  papers,  in  reporting  the  Sept.
1  release  high-lighted  its  assurance  that  the  new  belt   "will
not  constitute  any  hazard  to  manned  satellite  launchings."
But  it  overlooked   the  rest  of  this  sentence  in  the  original
which   said,   "that   we   have   planned   in  the   near   future."
Those  alive  to  the  arts  of  fakery  as  practiced  by  the  Penta-
gon's  public  relations  men  will  read  this  closely.    The  new
belt  may  be  no  danger  to  the  low  level  flights  planned  "in
the  near  future."    But  what   of  later   flights   which   would
put  astronauts  high  enough  to  be   affected?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  10, 1902
.  .  . Politics  and  Prestige,  Not   Seismology,  Called  the  Real  Stumbling  Blocks
Soviet  idea  of  how  inspection   by  invitation  under  the  inter-
national   commission   proposed   by  the   neutrals   would   work.
He  said  the  commission  would  first  carefully  assess  the  facts,
and  then  consult  with  the  power  on  whose  territory  the  sus-
picious  event  had  occurred  to  determine  "what  further  meas-
ures  of  clarification,  including  verification  in  loco  [i.e.  on-site
inspection]  would   facilitate  the  assessment."     The   State  in-
volved,  pledge  as  it  would  be,  he  said,  "to  give  speedy  and
full   cooperation,"   might  wish  to  clear  itself  of   all   possible
doubt   and   might  want   to   invite  the   commission"   to   make
an  on-site inspection.
Embarrassing  Not  to  Invite
Kuznetsov  went  on  to  picture  the  pressure  which  the  in-
ternational  commission  could  exert  to  force  an  invitation.   "If
it  [the  State  suspected]   did  not  invite  the  commission,"  Kuz-
netsov  said,  "then   the  commission—as  stated   in  the  memo-
randum  of  the  eight   neutrals—would   inform  the  parties  to
the  treaty  of  all  the  circumstances of  the  case  .  .  .  and  world
public  opinion  that  the   nuclear  power   concerned   on  whose
territory  the  event  had  occurred  refused  to  invite the  commis-
sion  to  assess  the  nature  of  the  event.  .  .  . The  State  concerned
would  have  to  weigh  up  what  the  other  States  would  think
and  the  reactions  of  public  opinion. ...  It  is  evident,"  he
continued,  "that  these  are  very  serious matters  for  any  nuclear
power   to  take  into  consideration.    In  the  light  of  all  these
considerations,  "Kuznetsov  asked,  "can   one  conclude  that  the
nuclear  powers  will  always  adopt   a  negative  attitude  on  in-
viting  a  commission  to  visit their territory?"
Obviously  under  such  circumstances  if  an  on-site inspection
were  refused,  public  opinion  would  support  the  other  side  in
assuming  that  the  treaty  had  been  violated.    As  Mr.  Lall  of
India  was  quick  to  point  out  this  narrows  the  real   difference
between  the  two  sides.   On  the  one hand,  if  a power  did  break
the  treaty  and  were  caught  cheating,  it  would   not  allow  an
on-site  inspection  even  if  that  were  provided  for  in  the  treaty.
The  cheating  power  would  have  lost   its  gamble  and  testing
would  resume.
On   the  other   hand,   under   this   system  of   invitation,  the
refusal   to   invite  an   international  scientific   body   to   inspect
Why  Mavericks  (Like  Us)   Are  Needed
"Free  societies  depend  on  lay  criticism.  .  .  .  Before
the  people  can  demand  remedial  action,  they  must  first
discover  existence  of  defects  in  the  status  quo.    When
the  defects  exist  in  powerful   public  agencies  the  im-
petus  for  reform  necessarily  must  come  from  outside.
Such  agencies  rarely  generate  self-reform;  their  hier-
archic   organization   effectively    prevents   this.     Hence
democracies  depend  on  individual   criticism.   This  is  the
reason  why  freedom  of  speech  and  a  free  press  are  im-
portant.    It  is  through  them  that   the  public  is  made
aware  of  problems  that  must  be  remedied.    Otherwise,
public  agencies  would  be  able  forever  to  hide  the  truth
from  the  American  people  by  setting  up  a  screen  fash-
ioned  of  slogans,  cliches  and  illusions  designed  to  proj-
ect  a  favorable  image  of  the  agency  and  to  bury  its
shortcomings.    This  sort   of   thing  has  become  a  fine
art  with  public  relations  staffs."
—Admiral   Rickover's  testimony  on  education    before
House  Appropriations   Committee,  released  Sept.  3.
would  create  such  justifiable  suspicion  as  also  to  end  the  test-
ing  ban.    The  difference  in  reality is not  great,  and  either  side
if   it  wanted  a  treaty  could  adopt  the  other's   formula.     We
could  accept  the  invitation  principle.    By  the  same  logic,  the
Russians  could  accept  the  obligatory   on-site  inspection   rule.
It  would  involve  little  more  concession  on  their  part  than  the
invitation  idea.    But  neither  their  government  nor  ours  wants
an  agreement  badly  enough   to  bridge  this  minor   difference.
In  each  case  the  domestic  opposition   would  attack  this  minor
practical  difference   as  a  matter  of  principle  and   use  this  in
the  internal  struggle   for   power.     Each  side   also  fears   that
whoever   gave  the   last   inch   would   appear   to   be  weak   and
knuckling  under,  the  Soviet  Union  to  the  principle  of  obliga-
tory   international  inspection,  the   United   States  to   the   idea
of   inspection  by  invitation  only.    What  really  is  at  stake  is
leadership  prestige  at  home  and  national  prestige   abroad.
The  Pugwash  parley could  also  perform  a  service  in  focuss-
ing  attention  on  the  unwillingness  of  either  the  Russians  or
the  Americans  to  lift  secrecy  from  seismology  as  their  contri-
bution  to  a  nuclear  test   agreement.     But  this' must   be   left
for   explanation  next   week.
Fallout  Hazards  Beautifully  Fogged  Up  By  Federal  Radiation  Council  Chairman
The  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  has  released  an
exchange  of  letters  between  HEW  Secretary  Celebrezze,  in
his  capacity  as  chairman  of  the  Federal  Radiation  Council,
and  Chairman   Holifield  of  the  Joint  Committee  and   Chair-
man  Price  of  its  Subcommittee  on  Radiation.    The  purpose
of  the  letters  sent  by  Holificld  and  Price  was  to  determine
whether  the  Federal   Radiation   Council's  so-called   "Radia-
tion  Protection  Guides"  applied  to  fallout,  especially  Iodine-
131.    The  replies  signed  by  Celebrezze  are  models  of  foggy
bureaucratic  prose  which  leave  the  whole  situation  beauti-
fully   confused.
It  appears  that  the  FRC  safety  standards  were  not  in-
tended  to  cover  fallout  but  "can   be  used  as  an  indication  of
when  there  is  a  need  for  detailed  evaluation  of  possible  ex-
posure   hazards."    This   evaluation   however   will   not   be
made  by  the   FRC   which   "believes   that   individual    fallout
situations   require   individual   evaluation."    But   the   indi-
vidual  in  evaluating  his  fallout  must  take  "national  security
considerations"  into  account.  Presumably,  Geiger  counter  in
hand,   he   will   first   come   to   Washington   and  consult   the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.
While  the  FRC's  Radiation  Protection  Guides"  have  some
relevance,"  they  were  never  intended  to  be  "a  dividing  line
between  safety  and  danger."    Indeed  one  wonders  why  the
FRC   alarmed   the   country   at   all   by   establishing   these
"guides"  since  Mr.  Celebrezze  concludes  hopefully  by   say-
ing  "we  do  not  believe  there  is  any  risk  of  a  major  health
hazard   until   exposure   levels   are   many   times   above   the
guide  levels."
Holifield   and   Price   asked   about   the   situation   in   Utah
where  Iodine-131   levels  went  so  high  in   July   that   dairy
herds  were  switched  from   fresh  pasturage  to  stored  feed
and  fresh  milk  diverted  to  butter,  cheese  and other  products
to  allow  time  for  the  decay  of  the  radioactive  iodine.    Mr.
Celebrezze  replied  in  a  letter  of   Aug.   29  that  "premature
action  has  been  taken  in  some  areas  to  reduce  the  intake  of
Iodine-131,  which  action  the  Council  would  not  have  recom-
mended   under  its   interpretation  of   the   Guides."    This   is
not   consistent   with   an   HEW   release   of   Aug.    17   which
praised  the  milk  industry  for  its  action  in  Utah  and  said  it
was  "based  upon  the  radiation  exposure  guidelines  recom-
mended  by  the  Federal  Radiation   Council."    We  hope  Mr.
Celebrezze   will   not   be   allowed   to   get   away   with   these
evasions  and inconsistencies.
1   2  i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  10,1962
The  Disciple  of  Holmes  and  Brandeis  Weakened  the  Bill  of  Rights They  Defended
The  Test  That  Mr.  Justice  Felix  Frankfurter   Failed
Holmes  and  Brandeis  go  down  in  history  as  champions  of
fundamental  liberties  but  their  young  friend  and  disciple,   Mr.
Justice  Frankfurter,  found  some  rationalization on  most  occa-
sions  to  excuse  restrictions  of  basic  rights.     Their   eloquence
made  the  Bill  of  Rights  stronger.    His  sophistry  weakened  it.
This,  and  not  the  tender  encomiums  that  attend  his  retirement,
will  be history's verdict.
To  leaf  back  through  the  opinions  Mr.  Justice Frankfurter
wrote  in  his  23  years  on  the  Supreme  Court  is  to  feel  respect
for  their  quality  and  to  take  pleasure  in  their  dialectic.    He
served  the  law  with  love  and  brought  a  teacher's  zest  to  the
tasks  of  adjudication.    But  the  net  effect  is  that  of  a  Pontius
Pilate,  who  is  constantly  letting  execution  proceed   while  ex-
culpating  himself  with  the  doctrine  of  judicial  restraint.
Basic  Attitude  Quickly  Evident
The  extraordinarily consistent  pattern   of  his  work  on  the
Court  made  itself  evident  soon  after  his  appointment.    In  the
Gobitis  case  in   1940   he  upheld   the  expulsion   of   Jehovah's
Witnesses'   children   from   school   for   refusing   on   religious
grounds  to  salute  the   flag.   His  basic  posture  as  a  judge  may
be  seen  in  that  opinion  and  in  his  dissent  two  years later  when
the  Court,  speaking  memorably  through  Mr.  Justice  Jackson,
reversed  Gobitis.
Mr.  Justice  Jackson's  decision  (West   Va.  v.  Barnette)  has
taken   a  place   among   the   noblest   affirmations   of   America's
truest  faith  while  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter's dissent  is  a  queasy
effort   to   equate   acquiescence   in   infringement  of   the   First
Amendment  with  judicial  tolerance  of  social  experimentation
in  the  various  States.
Holmes  and  Brandeis long  protested  use  of  the  due  process
clause  by  judges  to  read  their  own  preconceptions  into   the
Constitution  in  order  to  block  social  reforms.    But  the  basic
freedoms  of  the  mind  and  person  are  not  on  the  same  plane
constitutionally  with  the  rights  of  property.    The  latter  may
be  diminished  if  the  procedure  is  fair   and   taken  over  alto-
gether  if  the  compensation  is just.    But  the  First  Amendment
forbids  any  restriction  on  the  freedoms  of  speech,  press  and
assembly,  or  any  establishment  of  religion.    The  Constitution
was  never  intended   to  allow  experiment  in  the  abridgement
of   intellectual  and   spiritual   liberty.    Here  judicial  restraint
passes  over  into  abdication.    Where  it  is  a  Judge's  duty  to
act,  restraint  becomes  dereliction.
Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  tended   to  read  the  First  Amend-
ment  as  if  it  were  as  vague  as  the  due  proces^ clause,  and  to
infer  from  the  existence  of  such  marginal  restrictions  as  libel
and  obscenity  that  almost  any  restriction  on  speech  might  be
constitutional  if  "reasonable"  and  if  "balanced"  by  other  con-
siderations  of  public  policy.    The  unambiguous  language  of
the   First  Amendment   dissolved   under   this   skilful   exegesis,
and  opened  the  way  for  easy  acceptance  of  the  infringements
which  marked  the  cold  war.
Among  the  Monstrosities   He  Upheld
In  1950  he  joined  with  the  majority in  upholding  the  Taft-
Hartley  oath  provisions,  though  with  an  uneasy dissent  where
they  covered  belief   as  well  as  Communist  membership.     In
1951  he was with  the  majority which  validated  the  Smith  Act
our  first  peace-time  sedition  statute  since  the  Alien  and  Sedi-
tion  Laws  of  John   Adams.    In   1956   he  wrote  the  decision
affirming   the  constitutionality  of  the   Compulsory   Testimony
Act,  and  last  year  the  5-to-4  decision  declaring  constitutional
the  registration  provisions  of  the  Internal  Security  Act.    He
joined  in  the   5-to-4  decision   upholding   the  powers   of   the
House   Un-American  Activities  Committee  in  the   Barenblatt
case.    These  mark  the  major  lapses  of  our  time.
The  unspoken  premise  of  these  rulings  was  that  the  char-
acter  of  the  Communist  menace  justified  unusual  abridgement
of  basic  liberties.    But  the  menace  of  the  day—whether  it  be
the  divided  loyalties  of  the   Francophiles  in  the   1790s,   the
inflammatory   speeches  of   the  abolitionists  in  the   1850's   or
the  bomb  outrages  of  the  anarchists  a  half  century  later—al-
ways  seems  special  to  contemporaries  who  falter  in  their  reli-
ance  on  the  therapy of  free  debate.    Holmes  and  Brandeis saw
this  clearly in  the  20's  as  Black  and  Douglas  have  in  our  time.
This  is  the  test  Frankfurter  failed.
Why  Not  Send  That  Youngster  Off   to  School  With  A  Sub  to  the  Weekly   and  Ensure  His  Education?
IE  Stone's  Weekly
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ....................................................................................._
Street   ........................................................................_........._
City   .............~.................'........2one.........-..SUte....................
y                                                            9/10/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........._..................._............................;.......................
City   ..........._.........................Zone........._..State....................
ShaU  we  lend  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  StoM'*  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  during  August  and  the    I ait  Monday  in   December
and  the   flnt  in  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.
Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  in  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.
Air  Mail  rates:  $16 to  Europe;   $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED