I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962feb26.pdf

============================================================

In  Guatemala  We  (Not  Castro)  Trained  the Rebels,  P. 3
Reported  Adoption  of  'First  Strike'  Strategy  Questioned  by  Senator  Clark at  Swarthmore   Arms  Parley,  P.  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  8
FEBRUARY  26,  1962
'»'      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
IB  CENTS
A  Triumph  of  Youth,   Not   of  Electronic  Hardware
When  Col.  Glenn  finally  went  into  orbit,  it  was  a  feat  of
mechanical  technology,  a stunt  in a competition  for  world  pres-
tige;  no  new  dimensions  were  added  to  the  human  spirit,  the
only  new  dimension  promised  was  for  the  game—and  curse—
of  war,  which  moves  toward  outer  space;  Gagarin,  Titov  and
Glenn  are triumphs  neither  of  socialism  nor  democracy,  but  of
the  same  machine  type  civilization;  both  sides  manage  to  or-
ganize   their   energies   best   when   the   challenge   is   linked
to  wreaking  murder,  out  of  self  defense  and  for  the  highest
motives  of  course,  upon  the  other.   The  man  in  the  sky is still
the  man  in  the  cave.*
In  the  four  thousand   students  who  came  to  Washington
last week-end we salute a different youth,  achieving a  different
and  more  difficult  orbit.    After  the  dreary  McCarthy  years,  in
which  fear  of  non-conformity  lay  like  a  pall  on  the  campus,
this  marked  the  launching within  Turn  Toward  Peace  of  a new
student  movement.    No  lucrative  industry,  like  that  of  aero-
space,  stood  by  to  focus  all  its  public  relations  apparatus  on
this  feat;  no  powerful  bureaucracy,  like  that  of  the  Pentagon,
provided  them  with  million  dollar  vehicles  in  which  to  set
out;  as they  boarded  buses  for  Washington,  no  corps  of  scien-
tists  stood  by  to  measure  the  slightest  reactions  of  heart  and
spleen  to  the  gravitational  pulls  of  indifference, hostility,  sus-
picion  and  apathy.    They  made  it  on  their  own.
A  Plea  in  Pantomime
Friday,  when  the  first  students  began  to  arrive,  was a  miser-
able  day  of  sleet  and  fog.   By noon  of  Saturday, when  the  sun
came  out  like  a  benediction  and  all  the  neighboring   church
bells  rang, the  students  had  ringed  Lafayette  Square  and  pack-
ed  the  sidewalks   in  front  of  the  White  House  and  the  old
rococo  State  Department  building  next  door.   It  was  the  big-
gest  peace  demonstration  Washington  has  ever  seen,  and  the
biggest  demonstration of  any kind  here  since  Negro  organiza-
tions  held  their  famous  Prayer  Meeting  some  years ago  before
the  Lincoln  Memorial.   Just  as  the  Negroes   had  picked  the
symbolism  of  the  Memorial  in  their  prayer  for  a  new  libera-
tion,  so the  students  marched  off  at  12:30   to  the  tomb  of  the
Unknown  Soldier  across  the  river;  there  high  up  above  the
city  and  the  Potomac,  without  speeches  or  banners,  they  laid  a
wreath.   In  this  silent  pantomime  was a plea  no  hateful  propa-
ganda  could  distort.
For  the  sophisticated   observer,  there  had  also  been  an  un-
mistakable  message  in  the  bright  young  faces  and  the  banners
*At  press  time  there  came  word  of  an  exchange   of  mes-
sages  on  peaceful  cooperation  in  space  between  Khrushchev,
who  has  already  pointed  ouf reassuringly  that  the  vehicles
which  carried Gagarin and  Titov  could deposit  nuclear  bombs
upon  »ny  point  on earth,  and  Kennedy,  who  is  racing  so  hard
for  peace  that  he  had  to  increase  the  Eisenhower  military
budget  by almost  25%.
3
Idiot  Arithmetic
"While  the  majority  of  our  people  can  be  saved  from
all-out  nuclear  attack, we  cannot  hope  to  save  most  of
our  industry  and  possessions.     Fortunately  much   of
our  industrial  strength   is   in  our   know-how  and  our
organization.    Our gross  national  product,  the  value  of
all  we  produce,  is  more  than  $500  billion  a  year.    But
the  total value of  all  our belongings is  more  than $1,500
billions.    This  means  that  our  present  industrial  com-
plex,  if  replaced,  could  reproduce  all  we  have  in  about
three   years."
—Dr. Edward  Teller, Saturday  Evening  Pott, Feb. 17.
We  hope  Dr.  Teller  is  a  better  physicist  than  he  is
an  economist.   The gross  national  product  includes  the
total  value  of  all  services   and  consumption.    Of  this
$500  billion,  even  in  normal  times,  we  manage  to  put
barely   $30  billion  into  net  capital  formation,   i.e.   the
construction  of  new factories,  tools, buildings,  etc.  Thus
even  "if  replaced",  as  Dr. Teller  says,  without   specify-
ing  just  how  such  a  miracle  could  occur,  our  present
industrial    capacity   (assuming   also   no  loss   in   labor
force   and  skills)   would  take  50  years,  not  three,  in
which   to   reproduce  itself.    "Survivors  of  a   nuclear
attack," Dr.  Teller  says  blithely,  "working  with  dedica-
tion,   could   replace   this   industrial    complex   in   five
years."    Dr.  Teller's   arithmetic   makes   nuclear   war
sound  so  exhilirating  we  can  hardly  wait.
of  the  immense  picket  line.    These  were  no  longer  the  beat-
niks  of  the  50's  nor  the  party-liners of  the  40's.    Both  a  new
courage  and  a  new  maturity  were  visible.    There  was  a  fresh
spontaneity  in  the  hand-painted signs  they  carried.   This  was-
a  Third  Camp  demonstration, aware of  the  dreadful similarity
in  the  military logic  and  nation state  lawlessness  on  both sides.
One  banner  quoted  Camus,  "Neither  Victims Nor  Execution-
ers"  and  another  Thoreau,  "Unjust  Law  Exists."    The  Leftist
heretic  and  the  New  England  anarchist were  alike congenial
to  this  new youth,  searching  for  perspectives  more  human  than
any  divisive ideology  and  expressing  a  secular  conscience  far
different  from  the  ersatz  Godliness  of  the  Pentagon.   "Make
the  World  Safe  for  Humanity"  said  one  banner,  and  another
"The  Deeper  the  Shelter  the  Bigger  the  Bomb."    A third  pro-
tested   "Man   Isn't  A  Mole"  and  another,  "I'd   Rather  BE."
One   said,   "Soviet  Students  We   Criticize  Our  Government.
You  Must  Criticize  Yours.    Both  Sides  Are  to  Blame."    An-
other  suggested   "Men  Who  Want  to  Be  Soldiers—Why  Not
Astronauts?"     Here  their  orbit  crossed   Col.  Glenn's.
The  young  President,  when  he  looked   from   the windows,
must   have   been   touched   by  the   number   of   these   youthful
pickets  who  quoted  his  own words.    One  said,  "Neitric  Dead
Nor  Slave  But  Alive  and  Free—JFK";  another,  "Lefs  Call  A
Truce to Terror"; a third  "Let  Us  Never  Fear  to tye'gotiite—
JFK"   but  a  fourth,  the  most  numerous,  vu  impatient.   It
(Continudi  on  Pagi  Four)
3  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  26, 1962
Senator  Clark  Urges  Student  Conference   to  Help  Change  Climate  of  Opinion
Disarmament  Impeded  By  An  Inert  Public  and  A  Cynical  Congress
Some  360  students  from  85  colleges,  including   schools  as
distant  as  McGill  in  Montreal,  Carlton  in  Minnesota   and
Tougaloo  in   Mississippi,    attended   a  First   Intercollegiate
Conference   on Disarmament  and  Arms  Control  at  Swarth-
more  the  Feb.  16 week-end.  The  keynote   speech,  by  Senator
Joseph   S.  Clark   (D.  Pa.)   was  on  the  high  level  to  be  ex-
pected  from  this  able  Senator.   From  this  speech  we  cull
here  3  passages  of  special  interest:  in  the  box  below,  the
disquiet  stirred  by  reports  that  the  U.S.  is  abandoning   its
never-strike-first    position;   in   the   box  in   the    adjoining
column,  a  glimpse   of   the  growing  impatience   among   lib-
erals  with  the  new  Disarmament  Agency,  and  in  the  pas-
sages  which  follow  a picture  of  the  Congressional   and  pub-
lic  attitudes  which  are  obstacles  to  disarmament.  The  text
can  be  obtained   by  writing  Senator  Clark,  Washington  25,
D.C.
The  Soviets  and  Control
"Those  who  state  repeatedly   in  the  press  and  on  the  stump
[Sen.  Clark  said]  that  the  Soviets  have  never  indicated   agree-
ment  to  submit  to  controls  are  either  careless  or  ignorant  of
what   the   Soviets  agreed  to  in  the  McCloy-Zorin   Statement.
Let  me  read  part  of  the  sixth  point  in  that   satement:
" 'All   disarmament    measures    should    be    implemented
from  beginning  to  end  under  such  strict  and  effective  con-
trol  as  would  provide  firm  assurance  that  all  parties  are
honoring  their  obligations ...  To  implement  control  over,
and  inspection  of,  disarmament, an  International Disarma-
ment  Organization .  .  .  shall  be  created  within  the frame-
work  of  the  United  Nations  .  .  .  This  Organization   and  its
inspectors  shall  be assured  unrestricted   access  without  veto
to  all  places  as  necessary  for  the  purpose of  effective  verifi-
cation.' "    [Emphasis  in  original.]
"This  agreement  on  principles,  of  course,  is  limited   by  the
Russians  to  controls  over  the  disarmament  process,  as  opposed
to  control  over  remaining  arms;  an  untenable  limitation.  .  .  .
But  people  should  not  be  permitted  to  state  without  challenge
that  the  Soviets  have  never  agreed   in  principle to  accept  any
controls.
"Perhaps  the  most   important  aspect  of  the   McCloy-Zorin
Agreement  is  the   official   recognition   by  the  Russians  for   the
first  time  of  the  necessity  for  creation  of  strong  international
peace-keeping  machinery.  .  .  .
"The   President   is  hampered   in  implementing  his  disarma-
ment  policy  by an  alarming  political  lag  in  the  country  as  well
as  in  Congress.    Not   more  than  a  handful  of  my  colleagues
are  fully  familiar  with  the  McCloy-Zorin   Agreement   and  the
President's  Disarmament  Plan.    Hardly  any  of  them  take  dis-
armament  seriously.  .  .  .
New  Arms Agency  Needs  Pushing
Senator   Clark's   Swarthmore   speech    revealed   that
Senator  Humphrey  (D.   Minn.),  the  Senate's  foremost
proponent  of  disarmament, "told  a  high  officer   in  the
new   Disarmament  Agency   recently—'The  honeymoon
is  over.    You  can  expect  the  real  friends  of  disarma-
ment  to  start  pushing  you  hard  .  .  .'    Such  "pushing"
was   advocated  by   Clark.     "Examine,"   he   said,   "the
annual  report  of   the  Disarmament  Agency,  just  pub-
lished  and  see  if  you  think  its  announced list  of  study
projects  is  balanced  or  weighted  unduly  toward  scien-
tific,   not  political  problems.    Let   the  Agency  know   it
has  a  constituency  in  the  country  at  large;  a  consti-
tuency  that  backs  it  when  it  deserves  help  and  pushes
it  when  it  fails  to  make   progress."
"A  Senate  unwilling  to  give  its advice and  consent  to  repeal
of   the   self-judging   Connally   Amendment;   a   Senate   which
finds  controversial  the  obviously necessary step  of  helping   the
UN   in  its  current  fiscal  crisis—such  a  Senate  can  hardly  be
expected   to  ratify   a  far-reaching disarmament  treaty  without
an  enormous  amount  of  educational groundwork.
"In  this  regard,  unhappily,  the  Congress   appears  to   reflect
sentiment  throughout   the  country.    Disarmament  negotiation
preparations  and  proposals  have  evoked   scant  and  frequently
inaccurate  press  attention.    With  rare  exceptions,  columnists,
editorial  writers,  TV  and  radio  news  commentators  are  unin-
terested,  or  uninformed  or  both.    Congressional   mail  on  dis-
armament   problems   until  the   Berlin   crisis  last   summer  was
almost  nil.    Since  then  it  has  picked  up  but,  too  frequently,
reflects   only  an   impatient  desire   for   peace,   not  constructive
suggestions  for  obtaining  it.  .  .  ."
(After  suggesting   formation  of  a  permanent   intercollegiate
group  on  disarmament  as  a  means  of  changing  the  climate  of
opinion   Senator   Clark   warned)   "Inside  the  Government   of
the  United  States,  and  I  suspect,  the  Government  of  the  Soviet
Union  as well,  a  contest  is being  waged  for  the  minds  of  men
in  power.    On  one  side  of  this  contest,  are  the  men  who  see
no  end  to  the  arms  race.    They  point  to  the  history  of  power
balance  struggles  and  wars  since  nation  states  evolved  and  pre-
dict  the  future  in  like  terms,  .  .  .  They  think  of  disarmament
purely  as  propaganda   and  cite  the  failure  of  past  disarmament
talks.    They  see  no  future  for  the  United  Nations.    All  too
often   they  have  a  vested   interest  in  a  continuing   arms   race
as   members   of   the   entrenched    military-industrial    complex.
They   have  many  strong   allies  in  Congress."
Reported  Adoption  of  'First  Strike'  Strategy  Questioned by  Clark
"You  probably  know  that  the  Administration has   asked
for   more  than  $50  billion  in  defense  appropriations  in  the
coming  fiscal  year.    Reports  have  been  emanating  from  the
Pentagon   that  defense   expenditures  will  be  in  excess  of
$50  billion  for  each  of  the  next  five  fiscal  years.
"Defense-oriented  columnists have  reported  a  recent  pol-
icy   decision   that   we   must   further  build   up   our  nuclear
deterrent  so  that  it  is  more  powerful  than  the  Soviet  nu-
clear   striking   force   'by   a  wide  margin.'    The  decision   is
said  to  be  based  on  the  theory  that  a  'deterrent  only  capa-
ble   of   striking   second   is   highly   unlikely  to   deter   ade-
quately';  that  we  need  to  build  a  first  strike  force  for  pos-
sible  use  in  'desperate  circumstances';   that  its  mere   exist-
ence  is  the  'best  insurance  against  accidents  and  miscalcu-
lations.'
"If  this  report  is  true  and  I  have   no  inside  information
as  to  its  accuracy,  the  consequences   could  be  far-reaching
indeed.    Some  of  the  questions  which  arise  are:  Is  a  con-
scious  effort  to  achieve  and  maintain a  'first  strike'  nuclear
force compatible with serious  disarmament discussions?  Can
such  a  decision  be  put  into  effect  without  producing  certain
efforts  to  offset  it  by  the  Communist  bloc  and  thus   accen-
tuating   the   arms   race?     Is   it   politically  possible   in   the
U.S.   at   present   to  make  parity,  not   superiority,  our  de-
fense  objective?'
—Sen.  Clark   (D.Pa.)  at  Swarthmore  conference,   Feb.  16.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February   26,  19U2
Adlai's  Words  on  Goa—The  Evil  of  Resorting  to  Force—Quoted  Back  at  Him
Our  Cuban  Policy  Cuts  A  Poor  Figure  in  Both  the  UN  and  NATO
The  latest  developments  on  Cuba  might  be  summed  up  in
this  way:  After  many  months  of  complaining  about  neutral-
ism,  we  won  a  victory  in  the  United  Nations  by  begging   the
Asian-African  neutrals  to  stay  neutral  and  abstain  from  voting
on  either  side  in  the  Cuban-American quarrel.    After  many
months  of  lecturing  our  European  allies  on  the  evils  of  im-
perialism,  we  sent  Prof.  Rostow  to  the  NATO  Council  to  ask
for   their  support  in  our  own  quarrel  with  Cuba.
Too   few  Americans realize  that  our  quarrel  with  Cuba  is
as  much   an   imperial  quarrel  as  was  England's  with  Egypt.
England  tried  to  invade  Egypt  in  anger  over  Nasser's  seizure
of  the  privately  owned  Suez  canal,  as we  tried  to  invade Cuba
in   anger  over  Castro's  seizure  of   Standard  Oil   and   United
Fruit  properties.
NATO  and Colonialism
When  the  North  Atlantic Treaty  was  first  before  Congress,
Mr.  Acheson  assured  the  country  that  we  would  not  be  bound
by  the  treaty  to  fight  the  imperial  quarrels  of  these  allies  in
their  Asian  and  African  colonies.    Now  we  are  in  the  posi-
tion  of  asking  them  to  help  us  in  our  colonial  quarrel  with
Cuba  by imposing  economic  sanctions on  Castro.  Among  these
allies  are  Portugal,  Belgium,  France and  England—all  of  them
smarting  from  U.S.  interference  on  the  side  of  their  own  rebel
colonials.
Nor   is  this  the  sum  total  of  the  wounds  our  Cuban  policy
has  opened.    Mr.  Collet  of  Guinea  during  the  debate  on  Cuba
in  the  UN   (Feb.   13)—pleading  for  peaceful  negotiation  be-
tween  Washington   and  Havana—quoted  back  at  Mr.  Steven-
son  the  words  he  had  used  in  reprimanding  India  over   Goa.
"Whenever   force  is  used  to  effect  change,"  Mr.  Collet  quoted
from   Mr.   Stevenson,   "the   very   foundations   of   this   peace-
keeping  organization,  on  which  the  security  of  all  of  us  in
whole  or  in  part  depends,  are  dangerously  shaken."
The   delegate  of  Guinea   voiced  another   deeply  felt  griev-
ance  aroused  by  U.S.  pressure  on  the  Asian-African  bloc  in
the  Cuban  affair  when  he  spoke  of  "the  contradictory  attitude
of  those  who  openly  ask  for  sanctions  against  Cuba,  whereas,
during  all  the  discussions  on  colonial  and  racist problems,  they
categorically  opposed  sanctions—and  these  were  justified  sanc-
tions—against  the  governments  of  South  Africa,  Belgium  and
Portugal,  when  these  were  cases  of  flagrant  and  repeated  vio-
lations  of  the  essential  principles  of  the  Charter  on  the  part
of   these  Governments."
It  was  by pressure  on  unhappy  neutrals  and  smirking  I-told-
you-so  allies  that  we  managed   to  defeat  the   Czech-Romanian
resolution   on  Cuba.     The   vote   itself  was  instructive.    Each
The  Holy Wars Of  Our Time
"The  Conference  of  Punta  del  Este  was  greatly  agi-
tated  by  the  difference  between  Cuba's  ideological   sys-
tem   and  the  one  worshipped  by  the  other  States.     I
used  the  word  'worship'  because,  while in  Man's  march
through   history  and  his   quest   for   basic   creeds,   our
ancestors   worshipped   different   Gods  and   were   ready
to  kill  each  other  for  these  differences,  in  our  age  of
enlightenment  we  have  made  what  is  called  scientific
progress  and  now  we  worship  different   economic  and
political  systems  and  are  ready  to  kill  each  other  for
the  differences  between  these   systems.
"If  the  end  aimed  at  is  merely  the  exclusion  of  Cuba
or  any  other  member  from  a  club  of  nations,  we  have
no   quarrel   with   that.    As   a   non-aligned   nation   we
should  be  the  last  to  mourn  the  departure of  a Member
State  from   any  military  alliance  .  .  .  But  if  the  end
aimed  at  is  sanctions—as  some  States  have  interpreted
the  issue—then  .  .  .  the  decisions   arrived  at  Punta  del
Este  are ...   incompatible with  the spirit of  the Charter."
—Mr.  Malalasakera,   Ceylon,  in  the  UN  Feb.  H.
paragraph  was voted  on  separately.   The  first,  expressing  con-
cern  over  the  situation  in  the  Caribbean,  was  defeated   50  to
11  with   39  abstentions;   even   Yugoslavia   abstained.     Even
here  only  half  those  voting  voted  on  our  side.    The  second
paragraph  recalling  that  the  UN  was  based  on  "friendly   rela-
tions  .  .  .  self-determination  .  .  .  and  non-interference"   was
actually  adopted  over  our  objections  by  41  votes  to  none  with
59  abstentions,  the  U.S.  included.
The  first  operative  paragraph  asking  the  U.S.  to  cease  inter-
fering  in  Cuba  was  defeated   by  50  votes  to  11  with  39  ab-
stentions,  i.e.  by half  the  countries  participating.    Under  U.S.
pressure  even  Yugoslavia  did  not  join  the  Soviet  bloc  on  this
vote.
But  on  the   second   operative  paragraph,   the  heart   of   the
resolution,  calling  on  the  U.S.  and  Cuba  "to  settle  their  differ-
ences  by  peaceful  means,"  we  did  not  do  as  well.    On   this
28  neutrals  joined  the  Soviet  bloc.    Among  them  were  Yugo-
slavia,  India,  Indonesia,  Burma,  Ceylon,  Cambodia,   Ethiopia,
Nigeria,  Morocco  and  both  Congos.    It  was  defeated  46  to  39
with  15  abstentions,  i.e.  by  a  minority  of  those  participating.
The   only   Asian  powers   voting   with  the  U.S.   on  this   were
Malaya,  Iran,  Thailand  and  Nationalist   China;  the  only  Afri-
can  power  was  South  Africa.
The  lineup,  the  way  it  was  achieved,  and  our   unwillingness
to  accept  even  that  part  of  the  resolution  which  merely  called
for   settlement  by  peaceful  means,  should  make  every   honest
and  thoughtful   American  blush.
We   Seem   to  Be   Collaborating  With  Castro  In  Training  Guerrilla  Rebels
"The  military  training  of   Latin  Americans  in   Cuba  by
the   Castro   regime   and   the   wide  distribution throughout
the  hemisphere of  the  treatise  on  guerrilla warfare by  'Che'
Guevara,  Castro's   chief   lieutenant,  are  clear  evidence  that
the  Castro  regime  is  bent  on  guerrilla operations  as  another
important  device  for  gaining  its   objectives."
—Adlai  Stevenson  in  the  UN  debate  on  Cuba,  Feb.  H.
"The  rebels  [in  Guatemala]  .  .  .  are  led  by  former  army
officers  who  escaped  to  Honduras  after  an  abortive uprising
in  November,   1960.    They   have  thus  named  their   present
action  the  Nov.  13 Movement.
"The  rebel   officers   and  loyalist   officers   were  all  trained
in  the  U.S.  Guerrilla  War  Training  School  at  Fort   Gulick
in  the   Panama   Canal  Zone.
" 'One  of  our  great  difficulties,'  President  Ydigoras  said,
'is  that  both  sides  have  been  trained  in  the  same  tactics  by
the  same  experts.     Our  commanders  are  very  smart,  but
the  rebels  are  very  smart,  too.'"
—"Guatemala's  President  Reports  Crushing  of  Bananera
Rebels",  New   York   Times,  Feb.  16.
3   :i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  26, 1962
(Continued  from  Page One)
said  "Mr.  President,  We  Support  The  Peace  Race.   Let's  Be-
gin."   The  sober,  admirably drafted  policy  statement circulated
by  the  students  was critical.   It  protested  the  "first  strike"  note
creeping  into  the  Administration's military  planning   It  ques-
tioned   the  morality  and  the  logic  of  renewed  testing.   It  at-
tacked  the  civil  defense program,  saying "By  creating  the  illu-
sion  of  public  safety,  civil  defense  encourages  public  support
for  the  kind  of  'hard'  foreign  policy  being  urged  by  extrem-
ists."     It  might   have  added,   had  it  known,  that  the  same
hard  policy  was  being  urged  that  day  in  Chicago  by Secretary
McNamara.
Competent   But   Conventional
On  Friday and  Saturday,  smaller  contingents  fanned  out  to
lobby  in  the  White  House,  on  Capitol  Hill,  in  the  State  De-
partment  and  at  the  Soviet  Embassy.   These  visits,  like  some
unexpected   difficulties,  were  an  education.   The  White  House
was  the  one  place  where  they  found  both  sympathy  and  an
ability  to  establish  communication;  the  hot  coffee  the  President
sent  out  to  the  pickets was  a  gesture  of  friendliness,  and  there
was  respect  in  the  high  level  of  the  advisers  assigned  to  meet
the  student  delegates:  McGeorge  Bundy, Jerome  Wiesner,  Ted
Sorenson  and  Mark  Raskin.  The  students  felt  understood;  one
Presidential  adviser  even  suggested  they  should  have  picketed
the  Pentagon  instead  of  the  White  House.   What  the  students
found  less  encouraging  there  was  the  concern  with  the  easily
possible,  with  making  no  move  which  was  not  sure  of  success
in  Congress;   the  caution,  the  conservatism.  This  combination
of  competence  and  conventionality  is  indeed  the  hallmark  of
the  Kennedy  Administration.
Elsewhere  the  students  did  not  fare  as  well.    At  the  Soviet
Embassy  they  met  affability  but  were  unable  to  break  through
Soviet  cliches.   The  State  Department  was  worse;  there  they
encountered  "party  line"  without  the  affability.    Some mem-
bers  of  the  delegation  left  in  anger  when  they were  treated  to
what  they  described  as  a  series  of  pompous  lectures  on  U.S.
policy,  and  told  they  were  hurting  their  country  by  not pre-
senting  a  united  front  to  the  world!   On  Capitol  Hill,  except
in  the  offices  of  such friendly  members as Mrs. Edith Green  of
Oregon  and  Wm.  Fitts  Ryan  of  New  York,  the  reception  ac-
corded  the  students  was  described  as  often  rude.    The  worst
Journalistic  Footnote: British  Guiana
Nicholas  Kaldor,  the   famous   Cambridge   economist,
who  framed  the  budget  which  set  off  the  riots  in  Brit-
ish   Guiana,   was   interviewed  by   the   London   Sunday
Times  and  the  New   York  Times.    The  headline  over
the  latter's  story  (Feb.  20)  was,  "Riots  Are  A  Familiar
Story  to  Tax  Economist."   The  headline  over  the  Lon-
don  paper's   story   (Feb.   18)   was  "Business  Wrecking
Jagan,  Says  the  Budget  Don."    The  New  York  Times
reported   that  business   men  do  not  like   Mr.  Kaldor's
tax   plans  for   underdeveloped  countries.     The  London
Sunday  Times  explained  that   the   device  Mr.  Kaldor
recommends  to  these  countries  is  calculated  to  prevent
subsidiaries  from  operating   at  a  paper  loss  while  si-
phoning  off  profits  to  parent  companies  in  tax   haven
countries.   The new tax  device  imputes  to  the  operating
concern  a  share  in  the  world-wide  profits  equal  to  the
ratio  between   its   turnover  and  the   turnover  of   the
world   concern.     The   New   York   Times   said   Kaldor
"charges industrialists  inspired  their  workers  to strike."
The  London  Sunday  Times  reported,  "The  men  behind
the  British  Guiana crisis,  he  claims,  are  British,  Amer-
ican  and  local  business  men  who  for  years  have  been
avoiding   the  45  percent  company  profits  tax."    What
was   sharply   presented    in   London   was   softened   in
New  York.
was  Chet  Holifield  of  California,  who  sneered  that   someone
had   "filled   the  students  full   of   baloney",   an  odd  comment
from  a  once  liberal  Congressman  grown  so  inflated  on  Penta-
gon  and  AEC ozone as to  be unrecognizable to  his  old  friends.
The  most  disquieting  revelation  was  how  frightened  non-
official  Washington   still  remains.   All  Souls  Unitarian   turned
students  away when  they  asked  a place  to  sleep.   Metropolitan
A.M.E.  wouldn't  let  them  use  its  premises  because  they  were
to  be  addressed  by Norman  Thomas  and  many  of  its  members
were  government  employes  afraid  of  so  subversive  an  associa-
tion.   Even  Union  M.E. which  allowed  its  use  as  headquarters
forced  the  last  contingent  out  onto  the  sidewalk  in  the  cold
night  to  wait  for  their  buses.   The  National  Press  Club  and
both  Howard   University  and  George  Washington  refused  to
let  them  hold  their  final  rally  in  their  auditoriums—"too con-
troversial."    Norman   Thomas—that   evergreen   of   the   peace
movement—and  Emil  Mazey  of  the  Auto  Workers  had  to  de-
liyer  the  moving  addresses  with  which  the  demonstration end-
ed  in  the  open  and  the  cold  near  the  Washington  Monument.
Total  Anti-Test  Letters  to  President  As  Of  Feb.  21  was  2,609  —  Keep  'Em  Coming
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   S618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  .................................................................................—••—
Street   ....................................................................................—
City   ............._.........................Zone.............State....................
2/28/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    .........—..........................................................................
City  ............_,.........................Zone.............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Will  Send  Copies  of  This  to  Friends,  If  You  Send  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelopes
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED