I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962mar19.pdf

============================================================

Look  Who's  Going to Advise  on Disarmament, P.  2
Extra:  Government  Working  Hard  to  Prove  The  Worker  A  Communist-Influenced  Paper!    Page  4.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  11
MARCH  19,  1962
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.15  CENTS
Hiding  The  Truth  on  Nuclear  Test  Detection
Writing  on  the  eve  of  the  Geneva  conference,  a  conscien-
tious  newspaperman  feels  a  sense  of  anguish.    It  is  as  if,  al-
most  imperceptibly, the  arms  race  were  transforming  our  so-
ciety;  garrison  state  practices  descend   upon   us  softly   like  a
warm   but   suffocating   featherbed.    The   decision   to   resume
atmospheric  testing,  which  may  have  fateful   consequences,   is
taken  by  Presidential  proclamation;   it  is  announced,  not   de-
bated;  its  real  motives  are  known  only  to  a  handful  in  a  kind
of  American  Politbureau.    The   country  accepts  it  with  only
scattered  protest;  even  organizations like  the National Commit-
tee  for  A  Sane Nuclear  Policy  are  numb  and  dumb;  it  is  dis-
turbing  that  the  Committee  issued  no  statement  on  the  Presi-
dent's  decision.   Like Tennyson's  Light  Brigade,  it  is  not  ours
to  reason  why.
An  Anglo-American   Disagreement
In  the  final  hours  before  the  conference  opened,  a  serious
dispute  was  taking  place  between  the  British  and   American
governments  but  the  American  public  was  little  aware  of  it.
The  dispute  was  technical  as  well  as  political.    It  involved  a
difference  of  scientific  opinion.    The  British  view  was  based
on  the  "very  good  results"  (I  cannot  give  the  source  but  I can
•  Assure  the  reliability of  that  quotation)   they  achieved  in  mon-
itoring  our  recent  underground  test  series.    This  led  them  to
Believe  that  the  inspection  requirements   for  a  new  test   ban
ctesation   agreement   could   be   revised   downward   radically.
There  are  indications  that  some  Americans  in  key  places   agree
with   them;   I   cannot  without   breaking   confidences   identify
the  n.    The  Washington  correspondent  of  The  Times   (Lon-
do  )   reflected  the  views  of  one  informed   American   source
when  he  reported   (March  7),   prematurely   and  too  optimis-
tically,  "The   American  view  is  that  improvements  in  the  sci-
en,  a  of  detection  can  permit  less  physical  intrusion  on   Soviet
ter  itory than  was earlier  held  to  be  necessary.    Detection  is by
no  means  perfect,  but  because  underground  testing,  for  which
m« st  of  the  machinery  was  devised,  is  no  longer  regarded  as
sif .lifkant,  it  is  prepared  to  modify  further  its  demands  for
OR  site  inspection  and  international  control  stations  within  the
Soviet  Union."    The  State  Department   correspondent   of  the
Washington  Star,  Earl  Voss,  reflected   the   views   of  another
American  source  when  he  reported  (March  11),   "One  key sci-
entist  advising the  American government reports that  every  one
of  the  Nevada-New  Mexico  shots,  even  those  below  one  kilo-
ton,  have  produced   warning   signals  which   almost   certainly
would  have  been  picked  up  by  a  test-ban  inspection  system."
Why  in  a  free  society,  if  I  may  be  forgiven   this   antiquarian
phrase,   should  such  information   be  leaked   out  only   in   eye-
dropper   proportions,  noted  only  by  a  few  careful   readers  of
many  papers,  and  open  to  evaluation  only  to  those  within  the
government   or  the  press  corps  itself?
(Continued   on  Page  Two)
Testing  and  the  Balance   of  Power
"Geneva,   March   11—The   crucial   fact   to   be  recog-
nized   at   the   forthcoming  disarmament  conference   is
that  Russia  achieved  a  break-through  during  its   last
nuclear  tests.    Therefore  .  .  .  the  U.S.  must  resume
testing  itself   .  .  .  The neutrals  have  to  be  reminded  it
is  only  because   there   is  a  balance  of   implied   terror
that  they  continue  as  independent  states."
—C.  L.  Sulzberger,  New  York   Times,  March  12.
Mr.  [Wm.  H.]  Bates  (R.  Mass.):  I  would  like  to  go
back  to  this  question  of  nuclear  testing.    And  I  would
like  to  get  an  assessment  of  the  importance  that  you
attach  to  it  from  a  military  point  of   view.
Secretary   [of  Defense]   McNamara:  [Deleted],  .  .  .
Mr.  Bates:  You  don't  think  it  is  a  grave  matter of
concern?
Secretary   McNamara:  Well   it   is   difficult    to   say
whether  it  is  grave  or  not.    [Statement  off  the  record].
But  I  am  just  giving  you  my  personal  opinion.     [Fur-
ther  statement  off  the  record].   I  don't  know  whether  I
have  answered  your  question  fully,  but  I  hope  so.
Mr.  Bates:  Well,  a  little  bit  differently   than  I  ex-
pected.    I  know  about  the  reasons  for  the  tests.    But  I
don't   know   of   anyone   on   the   Joint   Committee   on
Atomic  Energy   [of   which  Bates   is  also  a  member—
IFS]  who  doesn't   think  that  this  is  of  supreme  im-
portance   to   the   survival   of   the   Nation.     You  don't
agree  with  that?
-  Secretary  McNamara: 1  don't  believe  that  they  have
considered  the  power  we  have  if  they  consider   this  is
of  supreme  importance.    Maybe  we  are  arguing   over
semantics  here.
Mr.  Bates:  Well,  it  is  now—since  October  1958  that
the  moratorium  went  into  effect,  we  have  stayed  still
for  all  intents  and  purposes.     We  haven't  tested.
Secretary  McNamara:  We  haven't  stayed  still,  how-
ever.
Mr.  Bates:  As  far  as  testing  is  concerned.
Secretary   McNamara:  We  have  stayed  still  as   far
as  testing,  but  we  haven't  stayed  still  on  weapons  tech-
nology  and development.
Mr.  Bates:  But  we  don't  know  where  you  can  go  on
the  weight   per  unit  of  yield.  That  can  be   determined
only  by  testing.   You can  extrapolate  all  you  want, but
until  you  have  had  testing   you  don't  know  what  you
are  doing.    I. don't  know  any  witnesses  that  have  ap-
peared  before  our committee that have any  reservations
whatever  of  the  vital  importance  of  conducting  these
tests.
Secretary   McNamara:  [Deleted].    I  want  to  go  on
record  that  whether  we  test  or  don't  test,   w«  have  a
tremendous  amount of  nuclear  power  and  we  propose  to
continue  to  increase   it  and  that  is  the  purpose  of  this
budget.
Mr.  Bates:  Well,  let  me  put  it  this  way.    W«  had
experts  come  before  the  committee  who  went  this   far.
They   said  unless  we  conducted   these  tests,   that   the
balance   of   power   might   well   shift   to   the   Russians.
You  don't  agree  with  that  statement?
Secretary  McNamara:  I  do  not.
—Before   the  House  Armed  Services  Committee   Jan.
£5  in  executive  tetsion,  from  pp*.  SS01-S  Hearings  On
Military  Posture,  just  released  after   eetuortMp.
4   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  19, 1962
(Continued   from   Page   One)
Another   Method  of   Censorship
Many   months   ago  the   Senate   disarmament  subcommittee
was  assured  that  seismological  information would  not  be classi-
fied.    But  the  same  result  has  been   achieved  by  a   different
route.    A  report  on  the  recent  underground  tests  and  on  how
far  away  they  were  detected   has  been  prepared   by  the  Coast
and  Geodetic  Survey  in  the  Department  of  Commerce  but  it
was  done  on  contract   for   the   AEC's  Livermore  Laboratory.
Coast  and  Geodetic  says  that  since  the  work  was  done  for  an-
other  agency,   it  is  not  allowed  to  give  out  the  results.     The
AEC,  which  has  a  bad  record  of  hiding the  facts  on  test  detec-
tion  as  on  radiation, will  determine when  and  how  the  results
will  be  made  known.    This  is  the  blank  wall  we   encountered
when  we  tried  to  find  out  what  the  new  shots  had  shown.  But
in  respect   to  one  of  those  shots,  the  Project  Gnome  shot  in
the  salt  deposits  of  New  Mexico,  the  curtain had  already  been
breached  and  we  were  able  to  learn  a  little  more  than   pre-
viously  reported  in  trying  to  track  down  the  basis  for  the  sen-
sational  story  which  appeared  in  the  New   York   Times  March
5,  "New   U.S.  Detection  Studies  Add  Barrier  to  Atom  Pact"
by John  W.  Finney,  a report  on  which  was  crowded  out  of  our
last  week's  issue.    As  James  A.  Wechsler  angrily  noted  in  his
column  in  the  New  York   Post  (March  6),  this  story  appeared
right  after  the  first  reports  from  London  that  the  British  gov-
ernment,  on  the  basis  of  new  scientific  information,  was  pre-
pared  to  propose  "looser  controls"  at  Geneva.    It  was  destruc-
tive  of  such  hopes   to  have  America's  leading  paper  at  once
appear  with  a  story  which  began,  "Extensive  research  in  nu-
clear  testing  in  Nevada  in  the  last  five  months  has  confirmed
the  conclusions  of  U.S.  scientists on  the  difficulties  of  detecting
clandestine   underground    explosions    of   nuclear    weapons."
Who  Really  Got  Tricked?
Senator  Humphrey:  Mr.  [Wm.  C]  Poster   [head  of
the  U.S.  Arms  Control  and  Disarmament  Agency],   I
have   been   very   intrigued   by   the   comment   of  many
Americans  to  the  effect  that  we  have  been  tricked  for
three  and  a  half  years  by  the  Soviets  in  these  nuclear
test  discussions   .  .  .  Now  my  question  is  this:  do  you
think  that  we  were  ahead  of  the  Soviet  Union  in  nu-
clear   technology,  sophistication   of   weapons,  variety,
design  and  numbers,  yield,   et  cetera,   in   1958,  let   us
say?
Mr.  Foster:  Yes,  sir,  I  do.
Sen.  Humphrey: Do  our  scientists  and  our  weapons
evaluation  experts  feel  we  have  been  ahead,  let  us  say,
until  the  recent  Soviet   tests?
Mr.  Foster:   Yes,  sir,   and  I  think  they  still  feel   in
many  areas  we  are  ahead.
Sen.  Humphrey:  Well,  wouldn't  it  be  more  reasonable
then  to  assume  that  the  Soviets  have  been  tricked into
these  discussions,  if  you  are  going  to  use  that  nasty
word  "tricked"?
—Senate  disarmament  subcommittee  March  8.
What  was  a  reader  to  believe?
Part  of  the  reason  for  our  smothered  feeling  is  the  lack  of
enterprise  and  independence  shown   by  our  press  in   dealing
with  such  contradictory  reports.     Any  reporter   is  free  to  do
what  we  have  done.    This  was  first  of  all  to  obtain  from  the
Defense  Department   the  actual  text  of  the  questions   and  an-
swers  on  which Mr.  Finney  based  his  story,  and  the  other  was
to  check  them  with  the  seismologists   at  Coast   and   Geodetic
Survey.    Such  inquiry  showed  (1)  that  though   these  answers
were  couched  in  double-talk  designed  to  give  as  pessimistic  an
impression  as  possible  they  were  not  as  pessimistic  as  Mr.  Fin-
ney's  story  and  (2)   that  the  Defense  Department  answers,  as
cleared  by  AEC  and  State,  were  more  pessimistic and  less  can-
JFK's  15 Arms Advisers: More Old Stuffed  Shirts  on the  New  Frontier
The   basic   conventionality   of   the   Kennedy  Administra-
tion's  attitude  toward disarmament is  evident  in  its   choice
of  the  15-member  General  Advisory  Committee  to  the  new
U.S.  Arms  Control and  Disarmament Agency.    It  is  on  the
whole  the  usual  collection  of  stuffed  shirts  to  be  found  on
umteen  public  committees,  and  it  is  weighted  against  dis-
armament.
From  the  labor  movement, for  example,  the  Administra-
tion  picked  George  Meany,   who  belongs   to  the  Adenauer
school  of  cold  warriors,  rather than  Walter Reuther, who  is
friendly  to  disarmament.    Among  the  fellow  members with
whom  Mr. Meany  will  find himself  allied  is  Dean  A.  McGee,
of  Oklahoma  City,  president  of  Kerr-McGee  Oil  Industries.
McGee  and  his  partner,  the  multimillionaire  Senator  Kerr,
have  a  big  stake  in  the  nuclear  arms  race.    Their  oil  com-
pany,  as  the  Weekly  disclosed  a  year  ago  (Feb.   13,  1961),
has  three  subsidiaries  in  uranium,  one  of  them  the   largest
of   the  AEC's  27  suppliers.   This  subsidiary,  Kermac  Nu-
clear  Fuels,  has  contracts  to  sell  the  AEC  almost  a  third
of  a  billion  dollars worth of  uranium  by  1965.
Three  other  members  are  clearly  in  the  same  pro  arms
race  category.    One  is  Roger  M.  Blough,  chairman  of   the
board  of   U.S.  Steel,  elevated  to  that  post  by  the  Morgan
firm because  it  felt  his  predecessor,  Fairless,  had  grown  too
liberal  and  chummy  with  labor.    Mr.  Blough  was  described
to  us  by  a  reporter who  knows  him  well  as  a  man  with  a
"profound  contempt  ?or  the  public  interest"  and  "incredibly
reactionary."    U.S.  Steel,  too,  has  a  stake  in  the  arms  race,
not  as  great  as  in  the  pre-electronic  past  but  still  large.
The  two  others  in  this  category   are  Thomas   D.  White,
retired  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff,  and  Herbert  F.  York,  now
Chancellor  of   the  University  of  California,  formerly  head
of  research  at  the  Defense  Dept.
While  these  five  have clear  attachments  to  the  arms  race,
only  one  of  the  15  is  strongly  associated   with  the  cause  of
. disarmament  and  that  is  John J.  McCloy.   Of  the  two  scien-
tists  named  to  the  advisory  group,  one,  George Kistiakow-
sky  of  Harvard, was  Elsenhower's  science  adviser;  he  is  an
ultra-cautious  man,  who  is  said  to  be  swinging  emotionally
over  to  "strong"  policies.    The  other  scientist,  I.  R.  Rabi of
Columbia,  has  spoken  out  against  the  arms  race  but  not  too
often.
The  two  newspapermen on  the  panel  are  ultra-respectable
though  somewhat  liberal.    One  is  Ralph  McGill  of  the  At-
lanta  Constitution  and  the  other  John  Cowles  of  the  Min-
neapolis  Star   and  Tribune.    The  member  who  looks  most
hopeful  oddly  enough  was  legal  adviser  under  Dulles  in  the
State  Department; he is  Herman Phleger,  the  San  Francisco
lawyer,  and  he  is   given  credit  for  pushing  the   Antarctic
Treaty  through  the  government  against   heavy   opposition.
With  him  might  stand  Trevor  Gardner, a  former  director  of
research   for  the  Air  Force,  well  informed  and  well-inten-
tioned;  he  was  described  to  me  as  "half  for  peace,"  a  good
batting  average  for  a  former  Air  Force  man.
The  others  are  the  New  York  banker,  Robert  A.  Lovett,
a  former  Secretary   of  Defense:  James.A.  Perkins  of  Car-
negie  Corporation;  and  the  Rev.  Edward  A.  Conway,  Prof,
of  political  science  at  Creighton  University,   Omaha.   In  a
curious  slip,   Wm.  C.  Foster,  chairman  of   the   U.S.   Arms
Agency,  referred  to  Father  Creighton  at  a  Senate  disarma-
ment  subcommittee  hearing  March 8  as  "head  of  the  arma-
ment  department"  at  Creighton.    That  should  qualify  him.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F, Stone's  Weekly,  March  19,1962
did   than  the  conclusions  reached   by  Coast  and   Geodetic  at
least  wish  respect  to  Project  Gnome,  which  has   n<>t  been  en-
tirely  blacked  out   by  censorship.
Why   Coast  and  Geodetic  Was   Encouraged
Leonard  W,  Murphy,  chief  seismologist  of  Coast  and  Geo-
detic  Survey,  told  me  his  bureau  regarded  the  results of  Proj-
ect Gnome as encouraging  for  two  reasons.    The  first  was that
with  few  exceptions the  90-or-so  stations  which  detected  Proj-
ect  Gnome  all  reported   a  first  compressional  P-wave,  which
can  be  used  to  identify  a  nuclear  explosion.    The  second  w.is
that,  with  the  results,  Coast   and  Geodetic   had  been  able  to
work  out  a travel time curve with which to  locate the  explosion
within  a  few  tenths  of  a  mile.    This  confirms  earlier  expert
testimony  that  an  inspection  system  could  be  "calibrated"  to
locate  the  scene  of  a  buried  explosion  within   limits  narrow
enough  for  successful  inspection.    Thus   progress  was  regis-
tered  on  the  two  key  problems  of  identification  and  location.
Perhaps  most  important  of  all,  hidden  away  in  the  answer
to  Mr.   Finney,  but  not  discussed  by  him,  was  the  revelation
that  the  computations  on Which  Dr.  Edward  Teller  based  his
alarmist  view  that  underground  explosions  could  be  "muffled"
in  big  salt caverns turned  out  to  be  untrue in  at  least  one  sig-
nificant  respect.    "The  seismic wave  from  GNOME,"  the  De-
fense  Department  answer  to  Mr.  Finney  said  in  a  cryptic  pas-
sage,  "appear  to  have  been  somewhat  larger  than  from  Logan
(5  kt  in  tuff)   and  somewhat  smaller  than  Blanca  (20   kt  in
tuff)."    The  Teller  computation was that by exploding  in  salt,
the  impact of  the  blast  would  be  muffled   or  diminished  by  a
factor  of  three  as  compared  with  a  blast  in  Nevada  tuff.     But
it  turned  out  that  Project  Gnome,  the  5 kilotcn  salt  shot,  was
actually  magnified   in  many  areas  where  it  was  received;  its
signal,  as  the  answer  to  Mr.  Finney admitted, was  larger  than
a  shot  of  the  same  size  in  tuff.     Seismic stations  as  far   away
as  Finland   clearly   registered  the  tell-tale  first  compressional
P  wave  from   it.    As  the  answer  to  Mr.   Finney  said,  with
grudging  understatement, "Seismic waves  from  GNOME  were
somewhat  surprising  to  most  seismologists"  and  the unexpect-
edly  large  recordings  at  many  foreign  stations  "could  be  used
for   locating   the  epicenter   in  the   same  way  that  recordings
within  the  U.S.  could  be  used.    They  would  perhaps  also  be
useful  for  assisting  in  identifying  the  probable  nature  of   the
source."    These  were  obscure  admissions   of  the  fact  that  a
Hopeful  Clue  Eludes  Censorship
Mr.  [Frank  C.]  Osroers,  [Jr.  R.  N. J.]: What  in  your
opinion  is  our  relative  standing   at   this   time  in  that
great   race  for  the  next   big  one,   that  is  the  develop-
ment  of  a  reasonably  successful   anti-missile  missile?
Secretary   [of  Defense]  McNamara:  [Deleted  by  cen-
sor].
Mr.  Osmers:  I  notice—
Secretary  McNamara: I  believe  they  are  even  farther
from  it.
—P.3 217  recently  released  hearings  on  U.S.   Military
Posture  brfort   Hunsv  Armed  Services   Committee.
shot  as  small  as  5  kiiotons  could  register  location  and  iden-
tification  clues  as fai  as 7200  miles away.   None  of  this was  in
Mr.  Finney's  story.
Special   Task   Force  Proposed
Whatever  happens  at  Geneva—and  little is  likely  to  be  ac-
complished—the  forces  of  peace  must  begin  to  organize   for
the  next  conference.   When  atmospheric tests  by  the  U.S.  and
the  U.S.S.R.  resume,   the   resultant  fallout  and   tension  will
bring  a  new  outcry  for  a  new  test  cessation.    We  have  to  be
ready  to  support  that  demand  with  more  knowledge  of   the
technicalities  in  which  human  hope  can  so  easily  be  buried.
There  is  at  Coast  and  Geodetic  a  mine  of  information  which
independent  seismologists  could   tap.    There  are  first  of   all
the  seismographs of  the  recent  test  series  from  Coast  and  Geo-
detic's  network  of  23  stations which  extend  from  Fairbanks,
Alaska,  south  to  the  Antarctic,  and  as  far  outward  as Hawaii
and  Guam.    These  seismographs—so  I  was  assured—are  not
classified  and  may  be  examined  by  seismologists.    The   other
set of  records are  the  seismic reports which Coast  and  Geodetic
gets  from  some  500 stations around the world, including  Soviet
stations   from   Prague   through   Moscow   to   Vladivostok.     It
seems  too  much  to  hope  for  that  these  records  might  provide
a  clue  to  Soviet  detection  of  our  underground  shots  but  some-
one   technically  qualified   ought  to   look  at  them,  and  at   the
British,  Swedish,  Finnish  and  Japanese  reports.    Can't   peace
organizations  get  up  a  task  force  of  independent seismologists
to  make  this  study  so  as  to  provide  clearer public understand-
ing  for  fresh  negotiations  by  the  time  both  sides  realize  that
testing  cannot  go  on  forever?
A  Technical  Journal  Lifts  the  Curtain  on  the  Truth  About  the  Anti-Missile
"When  the  ICBM  [intercontinental  ballistic  missile]  first
appeared  on  the  scene,  the  problem  of  defending  ourselves
against  it  seemed  relatively   simple   to  define,  at  least,   al-
though  exceedingly  difficult  to  solve.    By  now,  not  even  the
problem  is  simple  any  more.  .  .  .
"The  threat  is  no  longer  the  'simple
1
  ICBM.    By  now,  we
must  assume,  the  enemy  can  launch  many  ballistic missiles
—IRBMs  [intermediate  range  missiles]  as  well  as  ICBMs.
—at   us   at  one   time,  along  with  screens   of    sophisticated
decoys.    And  these  missiles   may  be  launched  from  any  of
many  land  bases,  from  the  air,  from  ships,   from  subma-
rines  under  the  sea.     Even  space-launched  missiles  may  be
soon   added   to   the   threat.     The   missiles    themselves   are
sophisticated,   too—the  techniques   are  already  available  for
changing  the  speed  and  course  of  their  warheads  in  flight.
"Nor  is  this  all.    If  the  anti-ICBM  weapons  we  are  now
working  on  will  stop  only  the  ICBMs  the  enemy  has  today,
they  are  useless—they  must  stop  the  more  advanced  ICBMs
the  enemy  will  have  tomorrow,  when  our  counter   weapons
are  operational.  .  . .
"Though   [the   Army's  Nike]  Zeus  is  the  only  anti-ICBM
weapon  we  have  that  is  anywhere  near  operational   status,
there  is  considerable   doubt  that  it   wilt   ever   be   produced.
Not  even  if  it  proves  it  can  do  the  job  for  which  it  was  de-
signed  will  its  future be  assured.    It  may  already  be  obso-
lete  in  view  of  the  technical   advances  made  by  the  ICBM
offense  since  it  was  started  a  little less  than  4  years  ago.
"Many  of  the  decision  makers  in  the  Defense  Department
argue   that  Zeus  is   not  flexible  enough   to  be  modified   to
meet   even   the  enemy's  estimated   current   offensive    capa-
bility.    They   claim  that  it  cannot  be  brought   to  the  point
where  it  will  not  be  fooled  by  decoys,  saturated  by   large-
scale  attacks  or  overwhelmed  by  satellite-launched   ICBMs.
"Right  now,  Zeus  is  costing  us  a  million  dollars  a  day  to
develop.    To  produce  it  would cost  a  billion  a  year.   To  pro-
duce  enough  Zeus  systems  to  defend  about  one-third  of  the
U.S.  population  would  cost  some  $14  billion."
—Space  Aeronautics, November   1361.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 19,1962
Editor  of  Worker  Ordered  to  Jail;  Government  Suspects  Communist   Influence
"Leader  of  The  Free  World"  Begins  A  New  (and  Sillier)  Red  Hunt
In  his  memorable  series  on  the  Soviet  Union  in  the   New
York  Times  (Feb.  5  through  8),  Harrison  Salisbury wrote of
the  revival of  liberal  ideas among  the  best Russian youth.   He
said  three  events  had  shocked  these  idealists.    One  was  Mos-
cow's  resumption  of  testing;  the  second  was  Nehru's  invasion
of   Goa  and  the  third  was  the  renewed  prosecution   of   the
Communists  in  the  United   States  under  the  McCarran   Act.
If  the  President  and  the  Attorney General  wonder  why  so
many  students  get  false  ideas  of  the  United  States,  one  reason
is  that  these  ideas  are  not  entirely  false.    A  country  which
claims  to  be  the  leader  of  the  free  world  but  imposes  a  form
of  outlawry on  a  radical party which  operates  freely  elsewhere
in  the  Western  world  (except  West  Germany)  hardly fits the
Jeffersonian   image.
Names  They  Already  Know
Here  in  the  District  of  Columbia  the  wheels  are  beginning
to  grind.   Philip  Bart,  alleged  to  be  the  organizational  secre-
tary  of  the  Communist  Party,  is  the  first  to  go  to  jail  under
the  McCarran   Act;  sentenced   for   contempt   in  refusing,  on
proffer  of  personal  immunity,  to  tell  a  grand  jury  the  names
of  other   officers.
What  makes  the  Bart  affair  look  silly  is  that  the  govern-
ment  itself,  in  opposing  the  Party's  motion  to  dismiss  the  in-
dictment  against  it  for  failure  to  register  under  the  McCarran
Art,  said   "as  both   the  Court   of  Appeals   and  the   Supreme
Court  observed   in  the  Party  case,  the  officers  have  never  at-
tempted   to  conceal  their  membership."     If  so,  why  jail  one
top  Party  official  for  refusing  to  name  the  others,  when  they're
already  known?
A  similar  offer  of  immunity  in  return  for  testimony  was  re-
jected  by James  E.  Jackson,  editor  of  The  Worker,  and  he  too
was  sentenced  to  jail  in  civil contempt  by Federal  Judge  Alex-
ander  Holtzoff.    The  sentence  has  just  been  stayed  pending
appeal  by the  Court  of  Appeals,  where  Judges  Edgerton,  Fahy
and  Burger  heard  the  case.
The  same  Court,  with  Judges  Bazelon  and  Burger  sitting,
had  earlier  refused  a  stay  in  the  Bart  case.    Perhaps  the  free-
dom  of  the  press  issue in  the  Jackson  case made the  difference.
Walter  In  Orbit  Over  Scales
"Mr.  Speaker,  a  bleeding-heart  campaign  has   been
launched  to  bring  about  Presidential  clemency  for  Jun-
ius   Scales,  former  leader   of  the   Communist  Party's
Carolinas  district.    To date,  Scales  has  served  only five
months  of  a  6-year  prison  sentence  for  violating  the
membership  clause  of  the  Smith  Act.  .  .  .  Clemency-
for-Scales  articles   are  appearing  in  left wing 'publica-
tions.  .  .  .  Editorials  in  the  New York  Times  and the
Washington. Post,  two  Goliaths  of  the  weeping willow
world,  have  jumped  on the Scales  bandwagon  . . .
"What  are the reasons  given?  .  .  .  The first one I
mentioned  was  that  Scales  is  the  only  person  the Gov-
ernment  has   been   able  to  prosecute   successfully   for
violation  of  the  Smith  Act's  membership  clause.    This,
to  me,  is  a  meaningless  argument.   Just  because  Col.
John  Glenn  is  the  only  American  to  have  orbited   the
earth,   does  that  mean  his  accomplishment  should  be
discounted?"
—Chairman  Walter  of  House  Un-American,  in  Cong.
Record  March  7.   The  campaign  for  Scales  is  based  on
the  fact  that,  though  serving  time  as  a  "member",  he
broke  with  the  Party   after    Hungary.
Among  the  questions  which  Jackson  had  refused  to  answer
were  whether  the  editorial  policies  of  The   Worker   reflected
the  viewpoint  of  the  Communist  Party  and  whether  Commu-
nist  leaders  had  ever  suggested  "the  subject  matter   of   The
Worker's  editorials."    Even without  the  FBI  and  the  Cl A,  the
government  might  have  suspected  those  editorials  weren't  be-
ing  slipped  in  by  the  U.  S.  Chamber  of  Commerce.
Jackson's  lawyer,  Joseph  Forer,  told  the  Court  this  was  the
first  time  in  American history an  editor  had  been  ordered  to
jail  for  refusing  to  discuss  the  editorial policies of  his  paper.
Judge  Edgerton  asked  U.S.  Attorney David  C.  Acheson  if  this
were  true.    Acheson  said  editors  had  been  sent  to  jail  under
the  Sedition  Act  in  the  Eighteenth  Century  but  he  did   not
know  that  any  of  them  had  been  sentenced  for  civil contempt
in  refusing  to answer grand jury  questions about their editorial
policies.    Judge  Edgerton  commented  dryly  that  anyway  that
was  a  long  time  ago.
One   Way  to   Fight   for   Peace  and  Sanity   Is  to  Give  The   Weekly   As  A    Gift
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .....
Street    ...
City  ............_.........................Zone.............State....................
S/19/62
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(T»)  Name  ..................;_.....................................................-...
Street   ........._.._.............................................................
City  ..........._........M.............J5one.......™.State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tea  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stones  Weekly.    Second  Clan  Portage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the  lait   Monday   in   August   and   the   fint   in
September  and  the  last  Monday   in-  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington,  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.:   16  in
Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $16  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,   Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED