I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962apr16.pdf

============================================================

Another  Report  Direct  from   Geneva
Burma's  Eloquent  Plea  Against  Resumed  Testing  and  for  A  Compromise  on  Inspection,  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  15APRIL   16,  1962
»'»'      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
How  the  Press  Is  Brain-Washed  and  the  Neutrals  Gulled
Geneva,  April  6
This  17-nation  disarmament  conference  is  neither  secret  nor
open,  but  combines  the  worst  aspects  of  both  kinds  of  diplo-
macy.   The  meetings  are  closed  to  the  press,  but  each  partici-
pant  is  free,  if  it  thinks  it  has  made  a  particularly  effective
point,  to  release the  text  of  its own  statement afterwards.    The
press  is  dependent  on  these,  on  stray  leaks,  and  on  the  daily
briefings.    These  are  held  by  the  information  officers   of   the
larger  powers,  at  about  the  same  time,  right   after  the   daily
session  breaks  up.    This  time  element  plus  the  language  bar-
rier  prevents  one  from  attending  all,  and  comparing  the vari-
ous   versions  of   what   occurred,   an   exercise   in   comparative
propaganda  which  would  be  most  enlightening  but  would  re-
quire  an  international monitoring  team  of  independent  jour-
nalists.
By  That  Time The  Story  Is  Dead
Every  day  a  verbatim  record  is  made  of  each   session,   and
this  is  available in  the  main  languages  of  the  conference  next
morning,  as with  the  meetings  of  the  United  Nations  Security
Council  and  General  Assembly in New  York.    But  in  this  case
the  verbatim  record  is  kept  from  the  press  and  public.    This
procedure,  which also marked  the  predecessor  conferences  here
on  nuclear  testing,  suits  the  routine  coverage  of  the  wire  serv-
ices  and  the  cold  war  zealots  but  is frustrating to  the  conscien-
tious  reporter,  for  only  in  the  verbatims  can  one  see  the  in-
formal  discussion,  catch  the  finer  crucial points  and  learn  more
fully  what  the  neutrals  really  had  to  say.    The  verbatims   are
not,  strictly  speaking,  secret  but  they  are  not  made  available
until  weeks  after  the  conference  is  over,  and  then  only  in  a
scant  few  copies.    This  was  brought   home  to  several  delega-
tions  in  New  York  last  winter  during  the  General  Assembly
debates  on  nuclear  testing  when  they  wanted  to  study  the  rec-
ords  of  the  nuclear  conferences  at  Geneva  and  found  only  one
copy  in  the  United  Nations  library.   By the  time  the  verbatims
are  available,  the  story  is  dead,  the  reporters  are  too  busy,  the
public's  attention  is  elsewhere.
In  the  meantime  opinion  has  been  formed  by  the  briefings.
To  understand  these  one  must  break  out  of  the  semantic  fogs
of  our  Orwellian  times.    The  government  information   officer,
to  speak  plainly,  is  a  wwinformation  officer;  his  job  is  not  to
inform  the  press,  but  to  put  across  the  particular   version  or
distortion,  previously   decided  upon  by  the  government   for
which  he  works.    The  briefing  is  a  mild  but  effective  variety
of  brain-washing.    It  is  a  pity  some  foundation    independent
of  the  earthly  powers  could  not  finance  a  kinescopic  record  of
these  briefings:  the  slanted   remarks,   the   snicker,   the   ironic
smile,  require  camera  as well  as tape  recorder.   Arguments of
which  the  government  disapproves  are  made  to  seem  silly;  key
If  No  Security  This  Way,  Why  Test?
"We  sincerely  hope  that  another  effort  can  be  made
by  the  powers  directly  concerned ...  to  reach  agree-
ment  and  to  avert  this  new  threat  of  another spiral  of
tests.  .  .  .  There  are not just  two  sides  to  this  question,
namely,  the  Western  side  and  the  other  side:  there  is
the  third  side,  represented  by  the  unaligned  countries.
And  there  is  a  wider  side  than  the  unaligned  countries:
there  is  the  world  itself.   There  is  the  opinion  of  the
world  itself,  Mr.  Chairman,  and  I  think  you  will  bear
with  me,  and  I  trust  the  representative  of  the  Soviet
Union  will  bear with  me,  when I  say  that whoever tests,
whoever  embarks upon  this  series  and  whoever contin-
ues  it,  will  earn  the  bitter  resentment  of   the  world,
will cause  a feeling of  deep disappointment in  the  world
that  this  spiral   of   tests   should  be  recommended  and
continued.
"I  address  this,  naturally,  to  both  sides  because  we
understand  both  are  preparing  tests.    It  will  be  of  no
help  to  the  future  to  say  that  the  purpose  of  further
testing  was  a  search  for  security.   No  security  can  be
found  in  this  way—and  the  leaders  of  both  sides  have
said  so.    The  leaders  of  both  sides  have  said  that  there
can  be  no  security  through  the  perfection  of  weapons
of  mass  destruction.   This  is  such  a  basic contradiction
that  it  tremendously  increases  the  apprehension  of  the
world.    Obviously  we  are  standing near  a  very  danger-
ous  precipice if  the  very  countries  which  announce that
they  cannot  find  security  in  the  development of  weap-
ons  still   go  ahead  and  develop  weapons  of   mass  de-
struction  further  and further."
—Ambassador  Lall  of  India, at  Geneva, April  4.
technical  points  are  given  rapid  fire  treatment  so  hurried  and
obscure   as  to  hide  their   significance;  one's  own  position  is
high-lighted,  the   adversary's   is  twisted   and   the   neutral's   is
given  only  a  quick  once-over.
The   mimeograph   machines  grind   quickly  and   they   grind
exceedingly   well   when   the  government   concerned   wants   to
put  something  across.    But  on  other  occasions,  when  it  is  de-
cided  by our  opinion  manipulators  that  the  details  were  better
left  in  twilight,  little  is  forthcoming.     On  Wednesday  of  this
week  Arthur  Dean  made  two important  statements,  one  on  the
technical  problems   of  a  test  ban,  the  other  on  the  principles
the  U.S.  would  like  to  see in the  preamble, but  the  former  was
so  swiftly  summarized   by  the  briefing  officer  that  the  crucial
details  were blurred  and  the  latter was available only  in a badly
typed  copy  one  could  see  only  at  the  U.S.   Information    offices
downtown.
These  practices  are  not,  of  course,  a  monopoly   of  our  side.
The  Russians are past  masters at this  business.    Mr.  Zorin  pro-
vided  an  interesting  specimen  in  the  speech  he  made  Wednes-
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
5   a
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'*  Weekly,  April  16,1962
day  of  this  week  on  the  problem  of  nuclear  testing,  which  was
released  to  the  press  after  the  session.   The  Soviet  reader  who
has  no  access  to  the  Western  press  would  get  a  false  picture
from  this  of  the  neutral  position.    From  Mr.  Zorin's  account
the  unwary  reader  would  never  guess  that  while  the  neutrals
generally   believe   existing   national   systems   can   adequately
monitor  a  testing  agreement  they  also  believe  (as  may be  seen
from  the  Burmese  speech  in  the  box  on  page  3)   that  some
form  of  neutral  or  independent   inspection  is  necessary  to  re-
solve  disputes.    Mr.  Zorin  made  no  reference  to  this.*    The
neutrals—and  with  them  privately many Canadian  and  British
representatives—have  come  to  feel  that  the  U.S.  is greatly  ex-
aggerating  the  difficulty  of  detecting  underground  tests  while
the  Russians  are  exaggerating  the  ease  with  which  they  may
be  monitored.
How  the  Neutrals  Can  "Test"
In  an  article  for  the  forthcoming  (April   13)   issue  of  the
London   New   Statesman  and  Nation,   I   am  suggesting   that
there  is  an   easy  way  for  the  neutrals  to  test  the  conflicting
claims  of  the  two  great  nuclear powers.    The  Russians claimed
in  their  press  this  week  that  they  had  detected  all  23  under-
ground  tests  exploded  up  until  then  in  the  current  U.S.  series.
Since  the  23  covers  only  the  announced  tests  and  the  AEC  has
made  it  clear  from  the  beginning  that  there  would   be  some
secret  unannounced tests  in  the  series, the  Russians could  clinch
their  argument  if  they  now  came  forward  and  gave  the  dates
and  numbers  of  the  secret  tests  in  the  U.S.  series.    The  neu-
trals  ought  to  challenge  the  Russians  to  do  so.   A  second  chal-
lenge  would  be  for  the  neutrals  to  ask  Russia  to  disclose  the
size  of  the  nuclear  test  it  held  underground  last  February  2.
The  purpose,   as  Khrushchev  boasted,  was  to  prove  that  any
underground  blast  in  the  Soviet  Union  would  at  once  be  de-
tected  in  the  U.S.,  and  the  AEC did  indeed  announce the  event
and   its  location   (at   the   Semipalatinsk  proving   grounds   in
Central  Asia)  within  a  few  hours.
Mr.  Dean  in  a  speech  to  the  plenary  session on  April  2 tried
to  explain  this  away  by  saying  that  the  Soviet  shot  was  "quite
a  large  one."     One  head  of  a  neutral  delegation  informed  me
* Our  press  has  paid  little  attention   to  neutral  opinion  at
the  conference.    In  the  boxes  in  this  week's  and  last  week's
issue  I  have  tried  to  give  a  sampling  of  the  views  expressed
by  the  neutrals  and  the  Canadians.
Sweden's  Control   Proposal
"Would  it  not  be  worth  while  to  examine  whether  a
solution  to  the  problem  of  continuous  control  could  be
found  on  a  non-political,  non-military,  purely  scientific
basis?     It   should   be   considered   to   what   extent   one
might  rely  on  the  already  existing  network  of  observa-
tion  posts  in  the  field  of  meteorology,   seismology,   etc.
or  a  network  which  could  be  enlarged  and  improved,
and have  the  observations  and data  registered  there  col-
lected   in  an  international  center  where  a   commission
composed   of  prominent  scientists  through   analyses   of
data  on  radioactive  fallout,  seismographic    phenomena
and  other  facts   would  be  able  to  establish  the  proba-
bility   of   a   nuclear   weapon   test   in   violation  of   the
treaty.    Such  an  organ,  which  should  be  completely  in-
dependent,  ought  also  to  have  the  possibility  in  accord-
ance  with certain  established  procedures   to  arrange  in-
spections   to   establish   the   facts   in   possibly    doubtful
cases."
—Ambassador  Edberg,  Sweden,  at  Geneva April 2
Dr.  Jerome Wiesner when  he was here  told  him  that the  Soviet
shot  was  100 kilotons.    U.S.  sources with which  I  checked  this
denied  it  and  insisted that  Dr.  Wiesner  had  said  50  kilotons.
But  in  Swedish  circles  I  was  told  that  Upsala   observatory  in
Sweden,  which  also  identified  the  Soviet  shot,  and  originally
calculated  it  at  5  kilotons,  now  officially   computed  it  at  ten.
The  Western  position  has  been  that  shots  under  20  kilotons
could  not  even  be  detected  with  certainty by  international lis-
tening  posts  on  Soviet  soil;  20  kilotons  was  the  threshold  of
the  abortive East-West agreement.   Below  this threshold,  there
was  to  be  a  moratorium  pending  new  and  better  methods  of
detection.    If  the  Swedes are  right and  the  Soviet test  was only
10 kilotons, then  detection  of  underground  tests  is much  easier
than  the  U.S.  claims.
I  suggested  in  the  New   Statesman  that  the  neutrals  ought
also  to  challenge  the  U.S.  government  to  produce   two   still
unpublished  reports,  one  showing  the  results  obtained  by  our
Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey in  monitoring  our  own  recent  tests ,
underground  and  the  other  analyzing  the  reports  turned  in  to
Coast  and  Geodetic  by  foreign  stations which  monitored  Proj-
ect  Gnome,  where  we  set  off  our  first  underground  test  in  a
salt  formation.    The  Coast and  Geodetic network extends  from
Alaska   through   Panama  to  the   Antarctic  and   westward   to
Guam  and  Okinawa.    The  report  was  made  weeks  ago  to  the
Canada's  "No  Bombs  in  Space"  Proposal  Which  Riled  the  U.S.  Delegation
"In  the  opinion  of  my  delegation   it  would  be  useful   to
begin  with  the  question  of  outer  space.  .  .  .
"In  Article   14  of  the  Soviet   draft   treaty  it  is   provided
that  the  orbiting  or  stationing  in  outer  space  of  special  de-
vices   capable   of   delivering  weapons   of   mass    destruction
should  be  prohibited.    The  U.S.   plan  contains  similar  pro-
posals  in  Section  E  of  Stage  1.   In  the  same  section  of  the
U.S.  plan,  provision  is  also  made  for  advance  notification  of
launchings  of  space  vehicles  and missiles.   The  USSR  draft
treaty  contains  an  almost   identical  proposal   in  Article  14.
My  delegation   considers   that  it  would  be  of  great  signifi-
cance  to  give  formal  recognition   to  the  large  measure   of
agreement   which  already  exists  on  these  two  points  in  the
U.S.   and  Soviet  disarmament  plans ...  in  the  form  of  a
declaration  by all  members  of  this  Conference ...  to  ensure
that  outer  space  will  be  used  for  peaceful  purposes  only....
"I  am  aware   that   the   Committee   on  Peaceful   Uses  of
Outer  Space  is  now meeting  in  New  York.   It  is  a  source  of
encouragement   to  us  ...    but as  the  title  of  the  Committee
itself  indicates  its  activities  are  specifically  restricted  to co-
operation  in  the  peaceful  uses  of  outer  space.
"It  is  not  our  purpose  here  to  set  down  in  full  the  re-
quirements  for  cooperation  in  outer  space.    It  is  rather   to
achieve  two  specific  ends:  first,  that  outer  space  will  not  be
used   for   the   stationing   or   orbiting   of   mass    destruction
weapons;   and  second  that  the  fear  of  the  illegitimate   use
of   space   vehicles    and  missiles   will   be   greatly     reduced
through  the advance notification to  an  international   authority
of  any  proposed  launchings.  .  .  .  The  acceptance  of  the  pro-
posed  draft  declaration   would  be  a  major  advance   towards
a  rule  of  peace  and law  in  outer  space."
—Howard  Green,  Canada's  Secretary   of  State  for  Exter-
nal  Affairs,    at  Geneva,  March  S6.  Mr.  Green  was  criticized
by   the   U.S.  delegation   for   making   this  proposal  without
first  clearing  it  with  them.   The  U.S.  is  opposed   to  such  a
declaration.   This  may  explain  Mr.  Green's  angry  statement
on  returning   to   Canada,   "We   did   not   go   to  Geneva   to
please  the  U.S."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  16,1962
Atomic  Energy  Commission  which  is  withholding  it.    Does  it
show   detection  and   identification  are  as  difficult   as  the   U.S.
government  claims?    The  U.S.   believes  strongly  in  the  prin-
ciple  of  international  inspection.    The  neutrals  ought  to  insist
on  inspecting  this  report  and  the  one  on  Project   Gnome.
In  the  March  19  issue  of  the  Weekly  I  disclosed  facts  about
the  Project  Gnome  report  of  which  few  people  here,  even  on
our  own  delegation,  seem  to  be  aware.    The  results  were  en-
couraging  in  that  (1)  of  90  foreign  stations  reporting,   almost
all   registered   a  first  compressional   P   wave,   the  identifying
mark  of  a  nuclear  explosion   as  distinct  from  an   earthquake,
(2)   with  the  data, Coast  and  Geodetic  was able  to plot  a  travel
time  curve  with  which  the  location   of  the  blast  was  located
within  several  tenths  of  a  mile,  rebutting  Dr.  Teller's  claim
that  an  underground  blast  could  not  be located  that  closely  and
(3)   it  showed  that  Dr.  Teller's  "big  hole"  theory  of  conceal-
ment  was  wrong  in  at  least  one  important   respect;  detonation
in  salt,  according  to  him,  was  supposed   to  reduce  the   seismic
signal  by  a  factor  of   3.     Instead   the   signal   was  magnified
somewhere   between  two  and  three  times  when   detected   and
identified  as  far  away  as  Sweden  and  Japan.
Misrepresenting   the  Facts
Not  only  have  these  facts  been  withheld  from  the   Geneva
conference,  but  they  have  been  misrepresented   by  Mr.  Dean.
He  told  the  13th  plenary  meeting  on  April  2  "detection  of  the
'Gnome'  shot  was  made  relatively  easy  by  the  fact  that  it  was
fired  in  a  solid  salt  formation  so  that  the  coupling   of  the  ex-
plosive  energy  into  the  ground  was  very  strong  and  the  result-
ing  seismic signals  were  of  a  high  intensity.    The  U.S.  under-
ground  shots  fired  in  other  media  have  been  much  less  easily
detected.   .  .  ."    This  was  sharp   legal   pleading   but  hardly
scientific  candor.    The  only  "other  media"  in  which  we  have
set  off  underground   shots  was  in  soft  volcanic  Nevada  "tuff".
The  Teller  theory  was that  setting  them  off in  salt  or  hard  rock
would  muffle  the  blast,  reducing  the  seismic  signal  by  a  factor
of  three  as compared  with Nevada  tuff.    The  neutrals  ought  to
demand   that   the   U.S.   tell   the   full   and   whole   truth   about
Zorin's  "No"  To  Any  Form  of  Test  Inspection
"Mr.   Godber   [of   the   United  Kingdom  delegation]
formulated  some  questions  and,  in  fact,  he  asked   for
three  simple   replies   from  me  to  his  three  questions.
His  first  question  was:  'Firstly,  does  the  Soviet  Union
offer   us  no  hope  of  any   form  of  international inspec-
tion  of  any  unidentified  events  in  the  Soviet  Union,  in
any  circumstances,  short   of   the  achievement  of  com-
plete  and  general  disarmament?'    My  answer  is:  No,
there  is  no  hope.
"Mr.  Godber's  second   question  was:  'Secondly,   does
the  Soviet  Union  reject,  on  grounds  of  espionage,   the
presence  of  unaligned  nations  on  a  visiting  inspection
team?    If  so,  why  do  they  reject  it?'   This  question  is
not  one  which  we  face,  because  we  reject  a  system  of
international   inspection  for   this   purpose.    Therefore
the  composition of  the  inspection  team  is  not  relevant."
—Mr.  Zorin  at  the  15th  plenary,  Geneva,  April   It.
Project  Gnome.*
Into this  den  of  plain  and  fancy prevaricators,  playing  games
Geneva  has  come  to  know  so  well  over  the  years,  there  de-
scended  last  Monday  a  delegation  of  50  American  women   on
a  Quixotic  mission,  somehow  to  reach  the  hearts  and  minds  of
the  diplomats  here  for  the  great  Powers.     The  women   came
from  18  States;  they  included  a  Negro  woman  freedom   rider
from  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  Mrs.  Martin  Luther  King;  one  was
* Mr.  Dean  also  said  it  was  not  surprising  that   Japanese,
Finnish  and  Swedish seismologists  picked  up  the  Gnome shot
since  "the  exact  date,  hour  and  minute"  was   known  in  ad-
vance  so  all  they  had  to  do  was  "to  study  their   recordings
carefully  for  that  particular point  in  time,  and  if  they  found
anything  in  that  location  they  could  ascribe  it  to  'Gnome'."
This  does  not  accord  with what  I  learned  at  Coast  and  Geo-
detic  where  I  was  told  the  Finns  turned  in  a  clear   direction
of  first  motion  seismograph  even  though  they  did  not  know
that  at  the  last  moment the  Gnome shot  had  been  postponed
four  hours.   It  also  does  not  agree  with  Coast  and  Geodetic's
finding  that  virtually  all  of   the  reporting  foreign   stations
showed  a  first  compressional  P  wave  and  not  just  "anything
in  that  location"  as  Mr.  Dean  phrased  it.
Burma's  Eloquent Plea  Against  New  Tests  and  For  A  Compromise  on  Inspection
"In  the   course  of   private  exchanges   we   have   heard   it
stated  that  resumption  of  tests  is  inevitable,  and  this  Con-
ference  must,  and can,  learn  to  live  with  them.  .  .  .
"I  am  not  one  of  those  who  share  the  view  that  this  Con-
ference  is  doomed to  failure.    Indeed,  I have  been  moderate-
ly  encouraged.  .  .  .  But  who  will  deny  that  the  going  has
not  been  easy,  and this  at  a  time when  we  have been  dealing
with  generalities  and  matters  of  procedure.    Would anyone
deny  that  the  main  obstacles   lie  ahead,  and  that  we  will
need  a  helpful  climate  and  atmosphere  if   we  are  to  have
any  chance   of  success   in  overcoming  them?    Would  such
an  atmosphere  be  engendered  by  a  series  of  nuclear  explo-
sions   spread   over   a   period   of   weeks,   and   possibly   of
months?    And  even  if  we  who  assembled  in  Geneva  could
take  a  pragmatic  view  of  this  paradoxical  situation,  would
the  outside   world  understand?     Indeed,   would  they   even
hear   us  against   the  reverberating   echoes   of   the  nuclear
tests?  .  . .
"It  seems  to  us  that  the  claim  of  the  Soviet   Union  that
all   nuclear   explosions   can   be   detected   and  identified  by
means  of  national  detection  systems,   and  that  no  interna-
tional  control  is  therefore  necessary,  leaves  one  vital  ques-
tion  unanswered.    It  is,  what  happens  in  the  event  of  a  dis-
pute  as  to  the  facts  of  a  particular  event?  .  .  .  How  would
a  difference  of  this  kind  be  resolved   unless   there  were  in
existence  some   impartial  international   scientific  body,  ac-
ceptable  to  all  the  nuclear  powers?  .  .  .
"On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Chairman,  my  delegation  won-
ders  whether  such  an  international scientific  body  need  be
as  elaborate as  that  envisaged  by  the  two  Western  nuclear
powers.   The  principle  cause  of  concern  would appear  to  be
the   difficulty   of   distinguishing   between  certain   types   of
earthquakes  and  underground nuclear  explosions.   .  .  .  But
if   this  is  correct,  the  next   question   which  arises  is,  how
significant  from  the  military point of  view  are underground
nuclear  tests,  particularly those  with  a  low  yield  which  are
difficult  to distinguish  from  earthquakes? ...  Is  it  essential
that  any  system  of   international   control  over  a  test  ban
treaty  should  be  such  as  to  be  able  theoretically  to identify
every   suspicious   event,  regardless   of   its   military  signifi-
cance?  . .  .  Might  not a  less  elaborate  international  system,
perhap  omitting  control  posts  from  the  territories   of   those
who  object  to  them,  but  with  the  right  to  conduct  an  agreed
number  of  properly  safeguarded  on-site  inspections   by  the
international  control,  serve  all  our  purposes  just  as  well?
"It would be  more than tragic  if  antipathy  to  even  a mini-
mum  of  international control  on  one  side,  and  insistence  on
near  theoretical   perfection  on  the  other,  were  to  doom  the
entire  world  to  a  new  cycle  of  nuclear  weapons  tests  with
all  the  evils  that  inevitably  follow  in  its  wake."
—Ambassador  Barrington of  Burma  at  Geneva  April  2.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  16,1962
Mr.  Dean  Was  Cold  and  Mr.  Zorin  Warm   But  Otherwise  Alike
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
a  Bronx  housewife  who  saw  the  Warsaw  ghetto  uprising  and
lived  through  Nazi  concentration camps; another,  an American
woman  who  was  in  Japan  when  we  bombed  Hiroshima  and
Nagasaki;  the  most  prominent  was  Mrs.  Cyrus  Eaton,  wife  of
the  Cleveland  industrialist who  launched  the  Pugwash  move-
ment;  the  leader  was  Dagmar  Wilson  of  Washington,  D.  C.
who  started Women  Strike for  Peace  last  Fall.    The  U.S.  gov-
ernment  should  have paid  their  fare,  for  they  gave  the  outside
 J
world  a  glimpse  of  a  different  America  not  often  discernible
in  our  official  representatives,  and  more  to  our  country's  credit.
The  Familiar  State  Dept. Lecture
On  Monday  they  saw Mr.  Dean.    On  Tuesday  they saw  Mr.
Zorin.    On  Wednesday,  joined  by  50  women  from  nine  other
countries,  they  marched  in  procession  to  the  Palais  des  Nations
where   the   17-nation   disarmament  conference   is  in   session.
They brought  with  them  50,000  signatures to  a petition  asking
for  a  test  ban  now  and  continuous  sessions  until  real   progress
in  disarmament  had  been  made.    The  Americans  had  greeted
them  coldly  and  lectured   them  in  the  patronizing  fashion  of
State  Department   briefings.    The  Russians  had   overwhelmed
them  with  hospitality.    In  other  delegations,  they  met  a  mixed
reception;  perhaps  the  most  truly  sympathetic  were  the  Cana-
dians,  our  most  independent,  thoughtful  and  restless  ally.    At
the  Palais  des  Nations  on  Wednesday,  they  were   shepherded
into  Salle  III  with  its  high  curtained  windows  and  small  bal-
cony.    There  they  sat  in  silence  until  the  session  ended  when
the  bulldoggish  looking  Mr.  Dean  and  Mr.  Zorin,  with  the
look  of  an  elderly  scholar,  listened  to their  statements  (see  box
on  this page)  and  received  their  petition.    Mr.  Zorin  to  every-
one's  surprise  made  a  short  address  in  reply  and  so Mr.  Dean
followed  suit.    "Neither,"  as  the  women  commented  dryly  in
a  press  release  afterwards,  "could  resist  maintaining  that  their
government  was right  and  just and  in  essence  merely  repeating
what  they  had  each  stated  to  us  separately.    The  general  con-
sensus  was  only  that  we  had  witnessed'a  more  modified  and
polished  performance  by two  practiced   professionals."
The  earlier  private  sessions  with  Mr.  Dean  and  Mr.  Zorin
separately  had  reduced  some of  the  women  to  despair.  Though
Mr.  Dean   was  hostile  and  Mr.  Zorin   friendly,  the   women
found  them  remarkably  similar  in  nationalistic  attitude.    Mr.
The  Voice  of  Women  at  Geneva
"We  greet  Mr.  Dean  and  Mr.  Zorin  as  the  co-chair-
men   of   the   17-nation   Disarmament   Conference.     We
women  from  ten  nations have  come  to  Geneva  because
of  our anxiety  over  the  lack  of  progress  which  is being
made.  We  have  never  met  each  other  before.  We  speak
many  languages.    In  spite  of  the  difficulty  in communi-
cation,  we  have an  understanding  that  made  it  possible
for   us  to  reach  agreement  as  to  what  must  be  done.
This  unifying  element  was  our  concern  for  the  future
of  mankind.
"We thank  the  delegates  for  giving us  their  time,  and
answering  our  questions  which  they  did  by  expressing
the  point  of  view  of  their  governments.   We  were  not
reassured   by   the   answers  we   received.    We  saw   no
change  in  attitude.    You  are  constantly concerned with
national  security,  national  sovereignty,  national  pres-
tige.    All   these  outmoded  ideas  must  be  abandoned.
We  feel  that  this  kind  of  thinking  is  no  longer relevant
in  a nuclear age  when  the security of  one  is  the  security
of  all.
"We are  not  interested in  techniques of  inspection of
nuclear  tests  and  the  arms  race.    We  are  here  to  re-
mind  you  of  the  real  purpose  of  this  conference which
is  to  reach  an  agreement.   We  are  entrusting  you with
the  gravest  responsibility that  men  have  ever  had  be-
fore  in  human  history.   In  your  hands  lies  the  fate  of
the  human  race.  We  have  one  great  concern—our  chil-
dren."
—Mrs.  Dagmar  Wilson,  leader  of  Women  Strike  for
Peace,  addressing   the   U.S.  and  Soviet   co-chairmen  of
the  disarmament   conference  at  the  Palais  de  Nations,
Geneva,   April    4,   on   the   presentation    of   a   petition
signed  by  50,000  American  women  against  nuclear  test-
ing  and for   disarmament.
Dean  said  we  couldn't  trust  the  Russians  and  if  there  was  a
question  of  the  survival of  our  way of  life, we  had  to  test.  Mr.
Zorin  said  the  same  thing  in  slightly  different  form.    He  said
the  Soviets  could  not,  as  the  women  urged,  act  morally  and
display  good  will  because  the  West  was threatening  the  social-
ist  East  "and   our  people  demand  maximum  security."     One
woman  in  tears after  Mr.  Dean  said  in the hall outside,  "There
is  no  hope."    Another,  in  tears  just  after  seeing  Mr.   Zorin,
cried,  "so  many  words  and  they're  all  alike."    Geneva   could
not  find  a  more  accurate  epitaph.
Next  Week:  The  U.S. and  Soviet  Plans  on  General  Disarmament  Compared
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  ATC,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street    ...................................................................................._
City   ...........—.........................Zone.............St8te....................
4/16/62
Erjter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ...........................................................................
Street   ........._...„.............._..........................................,........
City   ............__.........................Zone.......™.St»te....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tea  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'.  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,   D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday  in   August   and   the   first   In
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington,   D. C.  An   independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;  J6  in
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED