I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962feb19.pdf

============================================================

What  Brazil  Said at  Punta  del Este,  P.  3
How   Our  New   Anti-Castro   "Incompatibility"  Doctrine  Clashes  With  Our  Obligations  in  the  UN,  Page  2
I. R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  X,  NO.  7FEBRUARY  19,  1962
»">'      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The   Mythology  of  the  Anti-Missile   Missile
The  anti-missile missile,  which  has  become  the  excuse  for
resumption  of  nuclear  testing,  may  usefully  be  examined  from
the  standpoint  of  mythology,  as  a  relic  of  belief  in  the  super-
natural.    The  anti-missile  missile  is  only  the  latest  of   those
ultimate  weapons  on  which  our  hopes  have  rested  for  a  mili-
tary  miracle,  in  this  case  for  something  like  the  invisible  and
impenetrable  cloak  which  enables  the  hero   in  the   fairy   tale
to  emerge  victoriously  unscathed   from   amid   enemy  swords
and  lances.    This  belief  in  an  ultimate  magical  weapon,   like
other  superstitions,  survives  all  demonstration  to  the  contrary.
We  had  the  atom  bomb  years  before  the  Russians  and  they
had  both  the  H-bomb  and  the  ICBM  before  we  did,  but  none
of   these  earlier  ultimate  weapons   enabled   one  side  to  force
the  surrender  of  the  other.    To  the  delusions  of  the  irresistible
offensive  is now  added  the  delusion  of  the  insuperable  defense.
We  think  of  the  anti-missile missile  in  terms  of  Buck  Rogers.
We  see  the  tense  comic  strip  panel   in  which  our  side   (or
theirs)  says,  "Their  (or  our)   missiles  are  landing  but  our  (or
their)   missiles  have  been  halted   in  mid-flight  by  some  mys-
terious  new  anti-missile  device.    There  is  nothing   left  to  do
but  phone  Khrushchev  (or  Kennedy)   to  surrender.    Capital-
ism  (or  communism)  has  conquered   the  world."
Our  Modern  Witch  Doctors
This  delusion  reflects  a  faith  in  science  which  has   nothing
to  do  with  a  faith  in  the  methods  of  experiment  and  reason.
It  is  a  faith  in  the  magical  potency  of  science,  and  thus  little
different   from   any  primitive  tribesman's   belief   in  his   witch
doctor.    We  believe  our  wonder  workers,  if  only  given  ample
funds,  will  come  up  with  some  new  weapon   that  will   once
and  for  all  smash  our  enemies.    From  a  sober  military  point
of  view,  this  faith  in  any  one  weapon  is  ludicrous.     As  Gen.
Bradley  said  in  that  speech  at  St.  Alban's  here  in   Washington
Nov.   5,  1957,   which  was  so  hastily  buried   by  our   opinion
makers,   "Missiles   will   bring   anti-missiles,  and  anti-missiles
will  bring  anti-anti-missiles.    But  inevitably  this  whole   elec-
tronic  house  of  cards  will  reach  a  point  where  it  can  be  con-
structed   no  higher."    The   hope  of  an  anti-missile  rests  on
the  fact  that  the  ballistic  missile  follows   a  fixed  trajectory.
The   hope   of   an  anti-anti-missile  rests  on  the   possibility  of
changing  that  trajectory in  mid-flight.    The  hope  of  both  rests
on  the  experience  that  for  any  weapon  of  war  there  is always
a  counter  weapon  to  be  found,  and  so on  ad  infmitum,  that  is,
if  the  human  race  lasts.
All  this  is  worth  a  closer  explanation   because  the  business
of  arranging  a  meeting  in  mid-air  between  a  missile  and  an
anti-missile  is  more  complex   even  than  arranging   a   meeting
of  minds  between  the  White  House  and  the  Kremlin.   This
is  how  you  start  to  construct  an  anti-missile.    You  know  the
missile   follows   a  fixed  curve.    Therefore   once   it   rises   far
Sliding  Into  War  and  Censorship
"Mr.   Harriman said  there  is  no  PRESENT  [empha-
sis  added]  policy  to  use  American  combat  troops,  but
some  American  personnel  are  operating  air  and  other
transportation  for  South Vietnam."
—Washington  Star,  Feb.  13:  Senate  Foreign   Rela-
tions  hearing   on  nomination   of   W.  Averell  Harriman
to  be Ass't  Secretary   of  State  for  Far  Eastern    Affairs.
"U.S.  Marine  officers  who  have  just  completed  a  re-
connaissance  of  mountain  trails  against  A  POSSIBLE
FUTURE    COMMITMENT   OF    MARINE   COMBAT
TROOPS   [emphasis   added]   against   the  Communists,
inspected  the  traps.    Their  findings  will  be  applied  in
jungle  warfare  exercises  on  the  northern  tip  of  Okin-
awa."
—"Vietnam  Hunters  Harass   U.S.  Aides,   Aboriginal
Katu   Tribesmen   Set   Poisoned   Traps,"   Homer   Bigart
in  the  New  York  Times  Feb.  12  from   Vietnam.
Q.  Mr. President,  there  seems  to  be  some  doubt  .  .  .
as  to  the  right  of  the  American people  and  the  rest  of
the  world  to  know  the  extent  of  the  battle  in  South
Vietnam.  .  .  .  How  deeply  are  we  involved  .  .  .  and
what  are  the  rights  of  the  people  to  know  .  .  .?
A.  ...     We'don't  want  to  have  information which  is
of  assistance  to  the  enemy—and  it's  a  matter  which  I
think  will  have  to  be  worked out  with  the  government
of  Vietnam.  .  .  ."
—Mr.  Kennedy's   Press  Conference,   Feb.  7.
enough  above  the  radar  horizon  to  enable  you  to  map  the  be-
ginning  of  the  curve,  you  can  determine  the  rest  of  the  curve.
The  problem  is  to  build  an  electronic  device  capable  of  com-
puting  this  in  the  few  minutes  available,  and  automatically
aiming  your  anti-missile  to  some  intermediate  point   on  that
curve  where  it  can  hit  the  oncoming  enemy  missile  before  it
reaches  your  territory.    It   is,  as  has  been   said  crudely,  like
hitting  a  bullet  with  a  bullet.    This  problem  is  hard  enough.
The  real  problem  of  the  anti-missile however  is  much  harder.
It  is  the  problem  of  designing  an  electronic  network  of  anti-
missile  batteries which  can  cope  not  with  one  missile but  with
a  flood  of  missiles  accompanied  by  several  times  as  many  de-
coys,  distinguishing  the  real  from  the  false,  and  determining
in  split   seconds   which  of  your  anti-missiles   is  going  to   be
aimed  at  which   missile.
Nobody  knows  whether  this  belongs  in  the  realm  of  elec-
tronics  or  in  Grimm's  Fairy  Tales  as  revised  by  General  Dy-
namics.   Dr.  Hans  Bethe,  in  that  speech  at  Cornell  on  January
5  which  set the  arms  race  crowd  gunning  for  him,  said  he  did
not  think  "any  really  effective"  anti-missile  was  possible7
   T
'It
is  not  very  difficult,"  he  said,  "to  design  a  defensive   missile
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
2   '!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  19,   19fi2
The  Doctrine  of  "Incompatibility"  Is  Made  to  Order  for  Big  Brother   Nations
How  Punta  del  Este  Provided  A  New  Cloak  for  Intervention
There   is  some   disposition   to   regard   the   Punta   del   Este
conference  as  a  defeat  for   American  policy,  since  we   failed
to  obtain  approval  for  economic  and  military  sanctions against
Cuba.    But  this  is  a  short-sighted  view,  which  assumes  that
the  U.S.  will  be  deterred  by  legalities  in  its  determination  to
crush  Castro.    The  key  to  the  real  meaning  of  the  Punta  del
Este  conference  and  the  clue  to  coming  events  lies  in  the  reso-
lution,  for  which  we  obtained  all  but   Cuba's   approval,   de-
claring  any  Communist  regime  "incompatible"  with  the  Inter-
American  System.    This  seems  on  its  face  only  a  sort  of  dec-
laration  against  sin.    But   it  is  well  to  remember  that  eight
years  ago,  at  the  Caracas  conference,   John  Foster  Dulles  (by
a  similar  process  of  arm-twisting)  won  a  similarly  generalized
statement  against  Communism   in   the   Americas  and   used   it
three  months   later   to   cover   the   overthrow   of   the   Arbenz
government  in  Guatemala.
Like  Stalin   and  Tito
The  doctrine  of  "incompatibility" formulated  at  Punta  del
Este   embodies   in   our   hemispheric  law   the   same   principle
Stalin  applied  to  Tito,  and  Khrushchev  applied  first  to  Hun-
gary   and   now   to   Albania.    Regimes  Big  Brother   does   not
like  are   declared   "incompatible"   with   the   area   over   which
he  rules.    For  the  U.S.,  the  doctrine  of  incompatibility  offers
a  way  around  those  basic  provisions  of   the  Organization  of
American   States  which  forbid   intervention  "for   any   reason
whatever,   in   the   internal  or   external   affairs   of   any   other
States"   (Art.   15)  whether  by  military  means  or  by   "coercive
measures  of  an  economic  or  political character"  (Art.    16).
With   this  doctrine  of   "incompatibility"  we  hope   to  erase
these  obligations  of  non-intervention  by  imposing  a  status  of
outlawry  on  Cuba.    This  doctrine  of   incompatibility  is  itself
incompatible  with   the   Charters  of   both   the   OAS   and   the
United  Nations.    The  former,  adopted   in   1948,   has  no  pro-
vision  for  outlawry  or  exclusion and  was  framed  as  a  regional
pact  subordinate  to  the  United  Nations.    The  latter  calls  for
the  peaceful  i    existence  of  member  States.    Chapter  4  of   the
OAS  Charter  calls  for  submission of   all  inter-American dis-
putes  to  negotiation  or  mediation  "before  being  submitted  to
the  Security  Council  of  the  United  Nations."    We   have  re-
fused   to  negotiate  our  dispute  with  Cuba,  rejected  offers  of
mediation  and   certainly  have  no  intention  of  submitting   the
dispute  to  the  Security  Counci!     This   insistence  on  having
our   own   way,  irrespective  of      •:  ternational   obligation,   again
The  Resolution   Before  the  UN
"The   General  Assembly,   Deeply  concerned   over   the
tense  situation  in  the  Caribbean  Sea  area,  the  continu-
ation  of  which  is  likely  to  increase   the  threat  to  uni-
versal  peace  and  security,  Recalling  that  it  is  a  perma-
nent   aim   of   the   United   Nations   to   develop   friendly
relations   based   on  respect   for   the   principle  of   equal
rights  and  self-determination  of  peoples  and  non-inter-
ference   in  the   internal  affairs   of  any   State,
"1.  Makes  an  urgent  appeal  to  the  Government  of
the   United  States   of   America   to   put   an   end  to   the
interference  in  the  internal   affairs   of  the   Republic  of
Cuba  and  to  all  the  actions  directed  against  the  terri-
torial  integrity  and  political  independence  of  Cuba;
"2.  Calls   upon   the   Governments   of   Cuba   and   the
United  States  of  America  to  settle  their  differences  by
peaceful  means,  through  negotiations,   without  recourse
to  use  of   force."
—Draft   resolution  by  Czechoslovakia    and  Romania.
strikingly  parallels  Russia's  refusal  to  countenance  UN   inter-
vention   in   its  overthrow  of   the  Nagy  government   in   Hun-
gary.     The   UN   is  a  pillar  of   U.S.   policy  when  convenient
for  our  purposes,   as  in  the  Congo,  but  its  over-all  authority
is  ignored  where,  as  in  Latin  America,  we  propose  to  brook
no  outside  interference.
Unfortunately  it  has  been  left  to  the  Soviet  States  in  a  pot-
and-kettle  argument  to  raise  this  point  in  the  current   debate
at  the  UN  over  the  Cuban  complaint  against  the  U.S.     The
first  week  of  the  debate  went  slowly,  since  even  countries  like
Yugoslavia  and  Poland  were  unwilling  to  risk  aid  from   the
United  States  by  championing  Cuba's   cause  while  few  coun-
tries  seemed  willing  to  take  on  the  stultifying  task  of  defend-
ing  U.S.  policy  in  the  hemisphere.    Our  whole-hearted  cham-
pion  was  Guatemala.    It  was  Guatemala  which  threatened  a
walkout   of   Central   American   States   at   Punta   del   Este   to
stiffen   U.S.  resistance  to  compromise,   and   it  is  from   Guate-
mala  that  we  may  expect  new  moves  against  Cuba.    In  Guate-
mala   the  United   Fruit   Company   overthrew   a   revolutionary
government   and   took   back   its  lands.     Guatemala   is  now   its
base  for  a similar offensive  against  Cuba  where  it also  has  lands
to  recover.    Just  as  the  U.S.  has  imposed   new  economic  sanc-
tions  on  Cuba  even  though   economic  sanctions  were  not  au-
thorized  at  Punta  del  Este,  so  we  may  expect  to  see military
moves  next,  also  without  authorization  but  excused   and   cov-
ered  by  this  new  doctrine  of   "incompatibility."
Cuba  Charges  OAS Action  Against  Her  Violates  Charter  of  the  UN
"We  have been  told  that  the  social  system  adopted  by  our
people  is  incompatible  within   the   American   system.    We
believe  it  is  important  to  put  this  before   the  UN  because
it  concerns  the  United  Nations.  . .  '. Article  1 of the  Charter
of  the OAS reads  as  follows . .  ., 'Within  the  UN, the OAS
is  a  regional  agency.'
"AH   members   of   the   OAS   were   among   the   founding
Members   of   the   UN,  together   with  other   States   having
other  social  and  political  systems.   The  Charter  of  the  UN,
in  its  Preamble,  sets  out  as  one  of  the  obligations  of  Mem-
ber  States  'to  practice  tolerance  and  live  together  in  peace
with  one  another  as  good  neighbors.'    Article  1(2)   of  the
Charter   of   the   UN  sets  out  as  one  of   the  purposes  and
principles  of  the  UN  'to  develop  friendly   relations  among
nations  based  on  respect  for   the   principle  of   equal  rights
and  self-determination  of  peoples.  .  .  .'
"Can   there  be  tolerance,  can  there  be  peaceful   coexist-
ence  as  good  neighbors  in  international  organisms  when  it
does  not  exist  in  regional  organisms?  .  .  .  Can it  be  con-
sidered  consistent  with  the  purposes  and  principles   of  the
UN  for  a  regional   organization   to  discriminate  against  a
member   State   because  of  its   social  system?     What   are
these  gentlemen  of  imperialism  thinking  of?    What  is  their
concept  of  international   law?"
—Cuba's  UN  delegate,  Mr.  Garcia-Inchaustegui,  opening  debate   on  its  complaint   against  the  U.S.  Feb.  5.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  19,  19H2
Dantas  Says  Egypt  and  Iraq  Would  Now  Be  In  Soviet  Bloc  If  Treated  Like  Castro
Brazil's  Argument  at  Punta  del
By  Foreign  Minister  Dantas   of  Brazil
"When  the  Western  powers  have  had  the  foresight to  leave
a  door  open   for  maintenance  of  political,  economic  and  cul-
tural  contact  with  the  West,  there  has  not  been  a  single  case
[of  Soviet  penetration]  which  did  not  see  the  Western  cause
prevail,  either  in  the  form  of  the  political  institutions  them-
selves  or  at  least  in  the  definition  of  the  line  of international
conduct  of  the  country  in  question.    Very  close  to  us  is  the
example  of  Egypt.    If,  at  the  time of  the  Suez  occupation,  the
U.S.  had  not  had  the  foresight  to  leave  the  Egyptian  govern-
ment  an  alternative  in  the  direction  of   the  West,  it  is  very
probable  that  the  U.A.R.  would  not  have  been  able  to  escape
the  attraction of  the  Soviet  bloc towards which  isolation  would
have  pushed  it.    In  the  same  way,  if,  in  the  case  of  Iraq,  Eng-
land  had   not  kept   open   a  way  for  understanding  with   the
West,  that  Arab  country  would  not  today  be  a  Western   bul-
wark  in  the  Middle  East.  .  .  .
Protecting  the  Principle  of  Non-intervention
"We  wish  to  preserve  and  strengthen  the  unity  of  the  Inter-
American  system  and  for  this  we  think  indispensable,  not  a
unanimous  and  unworkable  decision,  but  a  constructive  solu-
tion.    We  wish  to  defend  the  principles  on  which  the  region-
al  system  is  based  and,  for  the  same  reason,  we  do  not  wish
to  adopt  dangerous  solutions  which  make  imprecise  the  limits
of  the  principle  of  non-intervention. .  .  .
"The   solutions  presented   here  so  far  or  announced  by  par-
ticipating  governments   do  not   appear   to   correspond    to  the
preoccupations   of  the  Brazilian delegation.    It  is  true  that  we
saw with  pleasure  the  gradual,  and  we  hope  unanimous,  aban-
doning   of  the  demand  for  military  sanctions  as  an   effective
remedy  for  the  case  of  Cuba.    We  would  destroy  the  inter-
American  system  the  day  that  we  would   consider   armed  in-
tervention  as  a  means  capable,  not  of  repulsing  an  aggression
which  has  materialized  in  particular   acts,  but  of   eliminating
a  political   regime  which  is  contrary  to  the  democratic  prin-
ciples  on  which  the  Bogota  charter  is  based.  .  .  .
"We  would  not  be living  up  to  our  responsibilities  if     ...
we  tried  to  convert  the  regional  organism   into  an  instrument
of   investigation   of   the   nature   of   regimes   established    from
time  to  time  in  the  American  states  and  to  give  it  the   right
to  intervene  to  eradicate  those  that  appear  to  have  origins  in
Este  Against   the  Isolation  of   Cuba
Another  Blacked  Out  Speech
Last  week  we  reprinted portions of  the  speech  made
by   President  Dorticos  at   Punta  del  Este.    This  week
we  print  on  this  page  the  heart  of  the  plea  made  at
that  conference  Jan.  2-1 by   Brazil's  Foreign  Minister
against  Cuba's  forcible  isolation  from   the  rest   of   the
hemisphere.    Neither   speech  was  given  adequate  cov-
erage  in  our  press.
the  international  communist movement.
"If  we  do  not  approve  the  application  of  military  sanctions,
in  which happily we  coincide with  the  general  opinion,  neither
are  we supporters  of  the  imposition of  economic and  diplomatic
sanctions.     Both   actions,  in   their   character   of   multilateral
measures  comprised  in  Article  8  of  the  Rio  Treaty,  appear  to
lack  solid  juridical  bases,  as  do  the  measures  of  military ac-
tion.    Analyzed  in  terms  of  their  political  effects,  they  appear
to  us,  at  best  fruitless,  and  at  worst,  harmful,  since  economic
sanctions   would   deprive   Cuba   of   a   business   of    diminutive
proportions    which   contributes   nothing   to   the   maintenance
of   the   Cuban   economy,  which  is  much  more  dependent   on
the  markets  of  the  NATO  countries  and,  at  present,   of   the
countries  which  make  up  the  Socialist  bloc.    As  for  the  break-
ing  of  diplomatic  relations,  this  would  be  a  purely  symbolic
means  of  dealing  with  a  problem  for  which  we  ought  to  find
an  effective  solution  within  the  framework  of  competition  be-
tween   East  and  West.     If   Cuba's  relations  with   the   Hemi-
sphere  countries  are  broken,  the  reasons  that  can  bring  her  to
total  integration  with  the  Soviet  bloc  will  be  accentuated,   not
lessened.   .  .  .
"Above  all  we  think  imprudent  the  formula  of   informing
Cuba  that,  in  a  specified  time,  she  break  the  bonds  that  she
maintains  with  the  Sino-Soviet  bloc,  and  placing  her  for  that
period  under  the  supervision  of  a  Committee  which  at  the  end
of  its work  would  report  to  an  organ  of  the  OAS.    This  form-
ula  of  deferred  sanctions  has  the  grave  political  drawback  of
being  a  dangerous  element  of  radicalization  and  excitation  in
the  internal  politics  of  various  American  states.    We  would
thus  provoke,  as  an  unavoidable  consequence,   a  battle  in  vari-
ous  states  between   forces  desirous   of   influencing  the  second
decision,  which  would   give  the  Fidelista  movement   a  conti-
nental   resonance  out  of  all  proportion  to  its  true   significance
at  present."
Brazilian  Position  on  Cuba  at  the  UN  Misrepresented in New  York  Times
"Cuba  Denounced  by  Brazil  in  UN"   said  the  headline  in
the  New  York  Times   Feb.  9  over  its  account  of  the  speech
by  the  Brazilian  delegate   to  the  UN  in  the  debate  on  the
Soviet  bloc  resolution  about  Cuba.   The  account  quoted  an
unnamed   U.S.  delegate   as  saying   that   the  speech   showed
the  only  disagreement  over  Cuba  "was  over  procedure."
The  Brazilian did  not  denounce  Cuba.    He  did  say   that
by  adopting  Marxism-Leninism  it  had  voluntarily  cut  itself
off   from   the   community  of   American  states.     But   those
parts  of  the  speech  not  reported  by  the  Times  showed  that
Brazil's  approach  to  the  Cuban  problem  involved  more  than
a  difference  of  procedure  with  the   U.S.
"In  the  opinion  of  the  Brazilian  delegation,"  Sr.  de  Melo
Franco  said,  "the  United  Nations  is  now,  as  on  other  occa-
sions,  endeavoring  to  find  a  peaceful  solution  to  a  dispute
which   falls   within   the   ambit  of   the   so-called   'cold   war',
a  solution  imposed  by  the  need  for  coexistence  among  Mem-
ber  States with diverse  and  at  time  conflicting  political   con-
cepts   and  governmental  practices.    The   UN   was   created
partly  to  find  peaceful  solutions  to  differences;  and,  if  this
was  its   task  at  its   inception,  so  much  the  greater   is   its
responsibility  in  the  field  at  present,  when  the  nuclear  era
has  made  coexistence  a  compulsory   solution,  and  we  might
add  a   solution  leaving   no   alternative."
The   Brazilian  declared  that  in  the   United   Nations   "an
American  State  may  adopt  the  form  of  government  it  con-
siders   will  best  meet  its  internal  needs,   and  any  pressure
exercised   against   such  a  State  for  this  reason  is  a  viola-
tion  of  the  principle of  non-intervention  contained  in  Article
2  of  the  San  Francisco   Charter."
2   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  19, 1962
It's   Not   An  Anti-Missile,  It's Relaxation  of  Tension  They  Fear
.   .            (Continued   from   Page One)
which  will  come  close  enough  to  an  ICBM  to  destroy  it  by
means  of  an  atomic explosion.   There is also  no  problem  about
providing  atomic  warheads  for  anti-missiles.   But  the   offense
can  send  decoys  along  with  their  missiles  which  are  almost
impossible   to   distinguish   from   the   missiles,   and   they   can
send  many  missiles  simultaneously  which  saturate  the  radars
of  the  defense.    Thus  I  think  the  AICBM   [anti   interconti-
nental  ballistic  missile]  virtually  hopeless."    It' is  for  this
heresy,  which  threatens  the  biggest  military  boondoggle   ever
dangled  before  the  electronic  industry,  that  Dr.  Bethe  is  un-
der  attack.    The  development   of  the  Nike-Zeus  anti-missile
system  would   provide   from   15  to   20  billion   dollars  worth
of  business.    Who   cares  that  it  might  be  rendered   obsolete
before  its  completion   by  the  next  development,   a  means  to
change  the  trajectory of  the  missile in  mid-flight, which  would
frustrate   all  the  intricate  computing   and   targeting   mechan-
isms  of  Nike-Zeus?
Too  Many  Excuses  Worse  Than   None
It  is  in  the  perfection   of   these  targeting   and   computing
mechanisms,  not  in  the  warhead,  that  the  secret  of  an  anti-
missile  system  lies.    The  warhead   is  essentially  no   different
from  the  warhead  of  the  missile.    This  is what  makes  doubly
nonsensical   the  reports  being  leaked  out  of  evidence  that  the
Russians  were  testing  an  anti-missile.    First,  there  is  no  way
to  determine   from  the   debris  or  waves  set  off  by  a  bomb
whether   it  was  being  tested   for  missile  or  anti-missile pur-
poses.    Secondly,   the  testing   of  a  warhead   does  not   mean
that   either   we  or  the  Russians  have  solved  the   enormously
intricate   problem   of   targeting   and   computing   for   an  anti-
missile  system.    The  explanations  leaked  out  to  the  U.S. and
British  press  are  so  varied  as  to  create  doubt.    As  in  a  crim-
inal  trial,  too  many  alibis  are  worse  than  none.    An  accused
who  claims  to  have  been  (1)  home  in  bed, (2)   at  a  night
club,  and  (3)  only  accidentally passing  the  scene  of  the  crime
when  it  happened  is  obviously  a  liar.    One  paper  (the  Lon-
don  Sunday  Times,  Feb. 11)   says  "suspicions  [i.e.  of  an  anti-
missile]   have  increased  since  the  discovery  that  two  of   the
Russian  tests  on  Novaya  Zemlya  appear  to  have  involved  rela-
tively  small   nuclear  weapons   above  the  atmosphere"  while
another  paper  (the London  Sunday  Observer, Feb.   11)   says
the  evidence of  a  Soviet anti-missile  is  "circumstantial".  Since
the  U.S. last  December  successfully got  a  Nike-Zeus  anti-mis-
sile  to  hit  a  Nike-Hercules  missile  "high  above  the   White
Sands  proving  ground  in  New   Mexico"   it  is  assumed (the
Observer  reports)  that  the  Russians  can  do  likewise!
A  Publicity  Gimmick
The  truth  is  that  this  anti-missile  excuse  for  resuming  test-
ing  is,  as  one  scientist phrased  it  privately  to  us,  "a publicity
gimmick."    The   real  rationale  for   test  resumption  was  ex-
pressed  by  Assistant Secretary of  State  Harlan  Cleveland Feb.
10  at  Rollins  College,   Florida.     "Given   the   technology  of
nuclear  weapons,"  Mr.  Cleveland  said,  "the first requisite  of
orderly  change  is  to  prevent  our  Soviet  rivals  from   getting
ahead, or  thinking they can get  ahead,  in  the  hidden and  costly
game  of  nuclear  deterrence."     The  logic  is  the  mutually  dis-
astrous  logic  of  any  arms  race.    If  each  side  aims  to  show  the
other  it  can  never  get  ahead,  this  must  push  both  into  ever
bigger  arms expenditure and  further  along  the  way to  garrison
states;   Russia,  back  toward  Stalinism;  we  toward   a   parallel
revival  of  paranoid  suspicion  and  repression.    But  this  Ad-
ministration,  like  the  Democratic  party  as  a  whole,   remains
committed  to  the  arms  race  as  the  line  of  least  resistance,  as
a  grandiose  WPA   for  perpetual   prosperity  until  the   bombs
go  off.   This  is  what  lies  behind  the  President's    impossible
new  condition  that  we  will  enter  no  new  moratorium  without
a  means  to  detect  Russian preparations for  new  tests.  (Would
we be prepared  to open  our laboratories for  surveillance?)  We
fear  any  proposal  which  might  interfere  with  another   round
of  testing  now  that  the  Russians  have  had  theirs.    This  has
to  stop  somewhere  but  we  don't  really want  the  arms  race  to
stop.    This  explains  the  press  briefings  immediately held  here
to  make  sure  that  the  release  of  Powers  was  not  interpreted
as  an  improvement  in  Soviet  relations,  and  the,  near  panic
visible  in  the  wake  of  Khrushchev's  suggestion   that  the  top
leaders  meet  on  disarmament.    All  that  talk  about  our  wag-
ing  a  peace  race  is  blarney,  a  gift  with  which  Mr.  Kennedy  is
richly  endowed.    It  is not  a Russian anti-missile that  the  domi-
nant  alliance  of  the  military  and  arms  industry  fears.    It  is
their  old  enemy,  relaxation  of  tension.
Total  Anti-Testing  Letters  to  President:  2,413 (Feb. 14)   But  Please  Keep   Them  Coming
1.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................................................................................—
Street   ..................................................................................._
City   ............................................Zone.............State....................
2/19/62
Etyter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........._.._................_....................................................
City   .............._™.........................Zone.........-.State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'i  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington.  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;   J6  in
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED