I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962sep03.pdf

============================================================

Report from  Geneva
God  and  Free  Enterprise:  The  Record of  A  Tired  and  Tumultuous  Congress,  See  Pages  2-3
L R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  X,  NO.  31
SEPTEMBER   3,  1962
«"       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
16  CENTS
A  Sedative  While  New  Monsters  Are  Born
Geneva  (By  Airmail)  Aug.  23
The  nuclear  test  ban  negotiations,  after  four  years,  remind
one  of  those  optical  illusions  which  one  moment  appear   to
be  a  jumble  of  blocks  and  the  next  moment  a  staircase.    At
times,  in  sudden  flashes  of  illusory  perspective,  the  talks  ap-
pear  to  have made  steady progress.    At  other  times,  in  colder
light,  the  two  thermonuclear  powers  seem as far  apart  as ever.
Back  in  the  halls of  the  Palais des Nations,  among the  familiar
signs  directing one  to  the  Comite  Central  de  I'Opium  and  the
Maat   Commissariat  pour  les  Refugies,,  it  is  easy  to  feel  that
nuclear  testing  is  taking  its  place  with  narcotics and  refugees
on  the  agenda  of  the  ever  debated  and  the  never  resolved.
Still  Filtering  The  News
A  reporter,  returning  to  these  talks  for  the  third  time  in  12
months,  sees  them  as  no  more  than  a  sedative to  numb  public
awareness  while   new  monsters  are  perfected.     Outside   the
main  Council chamber of  the  old  League of  Nations  the  news-
papermen  still  wait  on  uncomfortable  stone  benches  for   the
press  officers  to  come  out  and  brief  them  on  what  was  said
inside.    Each  country's  reporters  gravitate  to  their  own  coun-
try's  briefing   officer   who  niters  the  news,  feeding  it  out  at
second  hand,  antiseptically,  to  ensure  that  the  press  gets  the
official  slant  on  what  transpired.    The  procedure,  the  issues,
the  arguments,  the  personalities,  change  so  little  as  to  lend
an  almost  reassuring  air  of  permanence  to  the  talks.
The  debate  continues  to  be  technical  but  the  determining
factors  remain  political.    The  United  States,  which  has  had
most  to  gain  by a  cessation  of  testing,  since it  started  first  and
was  once  far  ahead,  has  been   least   disposed  to   stop.     Our
allies  and  the  neutral  powers,  whose  security  we  claim  to  be
safeguarding  by  our  tests,  are  all  anxious  for  their   cessation
even—as  Adlai  Stevenson  reported  at  the  end  of  his  recent
European  tour—without  inspection.    In  Canada,  in  Britain,
and  in  Sweden  the  governments  are  under  strong  pressure  to
reach  agreement.    This  sharp  difference  between  the  U.S.  and
the  rest of  the  West  has given  the  Soviet  Union  leverage.  The
muscle-flexing  speeches  with  which  our  officials  have  tried  to
convince  the  Russians of  our  overwhelming  destructive  power
have  served  to  give  the  Soviets  an  excuse  for  breaking  the
last  test  moratorium.   Their  bargaining  position  has  hardened,
not  softened,   while  their  latest  exploits   in   space  have  had
more  impact  than  the  speeches  about  our  nuclear   strength.
Two  years  ago-the  Russians  were  willing   to  accept  interna-
tional  listening  posts  on  their  soil,  and  a  fixed  quota  of  on-
site  inspections.    Now   their  terms  are  national   monitoring
systems,  on-site  inspection  by  invitation  only,  and  the  right
to  test  last.
This  question  of  who  shall  test  last  is as big a trouble  maker
Blind  Alley  Logic
"We  will not test  again  unless ...  as a  result  of new
Soviet  tests  -we  find  ourselves  unable  to  meet  our  com-
mitments  to  our  own  people  and  those  who  are  allied
with  us."
—President  Kennedy  at  press  conference  July  S3.
". .  .  there  is  the consideration  that  results  if  certain
States  insist  that  their  security  demands  that  they  test
nuclear  weapons ...  if  they  feel  they  will  be unfair  to
their  peoples  and to  their  friends  if  they  do not  develop
and  perfect—what  a  sad  use  of  a  good  word!—weapons
capable   of   annihilating   scores   of   millions   of   human
beings.    In  short,   if   certain   governments   assert   the
validity  of  that  argument  can  they  not  see  that   they
are  encouraging   other  countries  to  follow  the  [same]
path.  .  .  . ?
"The   Foreign   Minister    of    an   important    country
[China]  said  recently  in  Switzerland that  his  country's
scientists  were  developing  nuclear  energy  so  that  they
would  soon  have  nuclear   weapons,  and  he  said  that  if
his  country  did  not  do  this  they  would  be  regarded   as
contemptible  by  other   countries."
—Mr. Lall  (India)  at  Geneva arms parley  Aug. SO.
1   2   3
at  Geneva  as was  the  seignorial  right  under  feudalism  to  test
first.    The  Russians  claim  the  right  of  the  last  test  on  the
ground  that  they  have  had  fewer  than  the  West.    But  Mr.
Kennedy  made  it  clear  at  his  July  23  press  conference   (see
box  on  page  1)  that  we  would  insist  on  another  round  if  we
thought  the  new  Soviet  series  had  made  significant  progress.
To  give  us  time  to  assess  the  results  of  the  Soviet  tests  and
hold  new  tests  of  our  own,  the  new  U.S.  proposals  contain
pitfalls  in  which  the  negotiations  could  bog  down  for  months
even   if   the   Russians   accepted   obligatory  on-site   inspection.
These  hidden  gimmicks explain  the  cheerful  acceptance  of  the
new  U.S. bargaining  position  by such groups  as the  Joint  Com-
mittee  on  Atomic  Energy  which  have  always  opposed   a  test
agreement.
Mrs.  Myrdal of  Sweden revealed  at  Geneva  Aug.  1 that  the
French  underground  test  in  May,  like  the  Soviet  underground
test  in  February,  had  been  detected   and  identified   by  many
stations  around  the  world.  She  said  that  among  the  65  sta-
tions  reporting  on  the  French  test  to  the  U.S.  Coast  and  Geo-
detic  Survey were  seismic  posts  in  countries  as  distant  and  as
technologically  backward  as  Bolivia  and  the  Congo,  Iran  and
Peru.    Though  Mrs.  Myrdal's  disclosures   seem  to  have  been
filtered  out  of   U.S.  press  dispatches,   they  strengthened   the
impression  here  that  seismic  monitoring  was a  good  deal  less
esoteric  than  it  had  been  cracked  up  to  be  and  that  an  inter-
national  commission,  relying  upon  equipment  on  the  fcrnlbry
of   the   non-nuclear   powers,   could   adequately   police  a  test
(Contmtud   on  P*gt   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  3, 1962
Some  Realities  Press  and  Public  Overlooked  in  A  Senate Filibuster
A  Congress  Strong  on  Free  Enterprise  But  Weak  on  Civil  Rights
By  Marvin  Caplan
In  the  late  afternoon  of  Aug.  17th,  Sen.  John  O.  Pastore
(D.,  R.I.),  floor  manager  of  the  pending  bill,  informed  the
Senate  he  could  vote  to  turn  the  communications   satellite
system  over  to  private  industry  and  still  face  his  Maker.
"None  of  us  is  perfect,"   he  conceded,  while  around  him
Senators  chanted,  Vote!  Vote!,  "But  as  my  God looks  at  me
tonight,  with  all  that  I  have  done  in  this  bill  and  all  that  I
have  fought  to  do with  this  bill,  and  all  that  I  know  that  is
in  this  bill,  I  can  look  Him straight  in the  face."
God  and  free  enterprise.    In  the  past  month,  as  in  any
month,  these  were  among  the  widely  announced  motives  for
many  actions  of  Congress.
Many  Congressmen  voted  to  turn  the  satellite  system  over
to   a   private   corporation   in   the   belief   they   were   voting
against  socialism.    Many  newspaper   stories  mistakenly   por-
trayed   the   Senate  filibuster  on  the  bill  as  a  fight  between
proponents  of  free  enterprise   and  advocates  of   government
ownership.    But,  in  truth,  everyone  was  for  free  enterprise.
As  Sen.  Morse  (D.,  Ore.)  explained  it,  the  opponents  wanted
government   control  of  the   system   so  that  all  segments   of
the  private   economy  could  share   in  the  satellite  pie.    The
alternative, he  said,  was  establishing  a giant  monopoly domi-
nated  by AT&T.
The  Dark  Side  Of  The  Satellite  Bill
The  concentration  in  the  news  on  the  dramatics  of  the  fili-
buster   and   the   first   successful   cloture   vote   in   35  years
largely  obscured  what  a  good  case  the  opponents  of  the  bill
made   against   it.    Sometimes  their   own  behavior   obscured
their  points.    Sen.  Morse,  for  all  his  virtues,  irritates  people
and  is  paid  too  little  attention  by  the  Senate  and  the  press.
Sen.  Long  (D.,  La.)  did  not  help  the  cause  of  opposition  by
sweepingly  dismissing  Telstar  as  "junk"  because  it  cannot
be  used  continuously all  day  and  by  first  suggesting  AT&T
was  trying  to  win his  vote  by  offering  to  erect  a  building  in
his  state  and  then  telling  reporters  later  he  did  not  mean
to impute a bribery attempt to the company.
But  the  opponents, by  dint  of  repetition,  made  some  things
clear.     Unless   AT&T   exercises  a  restraint   it   has  never
demonstrated   in  the  past  there  is  little  in  the  bill  to  keep
it  from  controlling most  of  the  private  and  public  stock  in  the
corporation;   from   realizing  a  double  return   on  its  invest-
ment;  from   freezing  the  system  into  using  low-orbit  satel-
lites  like  Telstar   instead   of  the   more   efficient   high  orbit
system  still  in  the  experimental  stage;  from  keeping   phone
rates  up;  and  from  compelling  USIA  and  other  government
agencies  to  pay  the  going  commercial  rates  for  its  services.
The  troublesome  questions   Morse   and   the   others   raised
about  letting  a  private  corporation  conduct  foreign  negotia-
tions  somehow  never   got   fully   answered.     In  the   rush  to
push  the  bill  through,  the  Senate  even  brushed  aside  changes
suggested  by  Secretary  of  State  Rusk  and  Sen.   Sparkman
(D.,  Ala.).
A  Moribund  FCC
Everyone  agreed  that   effective   government  regulation  of
the  private  system  depends  upon  FCC.    But  FCC has  done  a
poor  job  of  regulation  in  the  past.    The  opponents  showed
it  has  never  held  a  formal  hearing  on phone rates;  and there
has  been  no  investigation   of  AT&T for  25 years.   To  expect
an  understaffed   agency  to  regenerate   itself   or  a   Congress
that  rarely  gives  regulatory  agencies  enough  money  to  do  a
decent  job  to  change  its  habits  is,  as  Sen.   Long  suggests,
to  base  one's  hopes  on "phantasy and  illusion."
Not  much  attention  was  paid  to  the   evidences  of  AT&T
monopoly   power  that   came  out   during   the   debate.      Sen.
Kefauver  pinpointed AT&T  alumni  who  have  recently  found
their   way  into  strategic  government   posts.    Sen.   Bartlett
Even  FCC  Doubts  It   Can  Get  The   Staff   To
Regulate  The  Communications  Satellite  System
Sen.  Hubert  Humphrey  (D.,  Minn.):  How  much  ad-
ditional  staff  do  you  think  will  be  required  to  regulate
this  agency  (FCC) properly?
Mr.   Minow   (FCC  Chairman):  For   space  alone   we
need  21.    The  real  problem  is  not  the  number of  peo-
ple;  it  is  the  caliber.    We  need  good,  talented  cost  ac-
countants  and experts.
Sen.  Humphrey:  How  is  your  salary  structure  today
for obtaining these people?
Minow: Hopeless.  Hopeless....
Sen.   Humphrey:   So   the   carrier  can   pay   twice  or
three  times  as  much  for  the  person  that  you  need  to
regulate   the  carrier.    The  government   of  the   United
States  is  supposed  to  be  able  to  recruit  people  on  sort
of   a  charity  basis   for  the  common  good   to  regulate
these  giant  monopolies.
—Senate  Foreign   Relations   Committee   hearings   on
the  space  bill, Aug.  3, 1962.
(D.,   Alaska)    told   how   the   corporation   apparently    "neu-
tralized" a  government  unit  that  had  been  successfully  nego-
tiating  lower  phone rates  for  use  in  the  government  air-raid
warning  system.    Sen.  Gmening  (D.,  Alaska)  described  how
AT&T  misused  its  size  to  gain  a  dominant  position   in  the
municipal fire alarm  market.
All  this  was  largely  ignored.    In  the  impatience  with  the
"obstructionists,"  in  the  haste  to  get  the  bill  out,   nothing
was   examined  very   closely.    More  than   200   amendments
were   offered   and  none,  including  one  that  would  have  in-
serted  an  FEPC  clause  in  the  private  corporation's   bylaws,
was  accepted.   The  bill  passed  the  Senate  by  a  lopsided  vote
of  66  to  11.
Even  though  he  voted  for  the  bill,  Sen.  Javits  (R.,  N.Y.)
objected  to  the  way  the  amendments  were  "guillotined"  and
saw  a  need  for  further  revision  early  in  the  next  session.
If  the  public interest  was  defeated  by  Congressional  action
on  the  satellite  bill  it  was  served  by  prompt  action  on  drug
legislation.   At  the  end  of  July  the  drug  bill,  watered  down
in  committee,  was  expected  to  die  with  the  term.    But  in
one  month  the  public  scare   over  thalidomide  changed  that.
The  bill  was  recalled,  strengthened,   and  as  passed   by  the
Senate   with   only  one  day   of  debate,  should   improve   the
safety  and  effectiveness  of  drugs.    It  may  even  do  a  bit  to
bring   drug  prices  down.    The  House  has   still   to  act  but
no one sees much trouble  there.
The  miracle  wrought  by  thalidomide  has  a  rational  expla-
nation.    Public  opinion, at  last,  was  stronger  than  the  pres-
sure   of  the  drug   lobbies.    It   also   seems   evident  that   the
scare  had   so  shaken   public   confidence   in  drug   manufac-
turers it  was bad for business.
Defense  Funds  And  Poll  Taxes
In  a  month  in  which  the  Senate  was  hamstrung   by  the
satellite  debate  and  the  House  indulged  in  a  10-day  recess
little  legislation   of  substance  was  passed.    The  Defense  ap-
propriation,  as  usual,  breezed  through.    Congress  gave  the
President   $48.1  billion  for   fiscal   1963,  nearly   $230  million
more  than  he  asked  for.    The  House  introduced  one  note  of
caution   in  defense  money  matters  when  it  refused  to  give
the  President  the  $460  million  he  asked  for  fallout  shelters.
But  it  hedged  here  by  voting  $10 million  for  further  study
and  research  into  the  need  for  a  shelter  program.
Yet  it  is  hard  not  to  sense  an  element  of  capriciousness
in  the  attitude  of  Congress   toward   defense.     Most   of   the
extra  money was  meant  for  the  RS-70  reconnaissance  strike
manned  bomber  and  the  favorable  vote  was  hailed  by  Rep.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  3,1962
Liberals  Fight  Walter  on  Security,  Gruening  Speaks  Out On Arms  for  Latins
Gives  A  Satellite  System  Away,  But  Gets  Good  Drug  Bill
Vinson   (D.,  Ga.)  as  a  vindication  of  his  position  in  a  per-
sonal   struggle   with   Defense   Secretary   McNamara.    This
suspicion  of  caprice  is  deepened  by  the  offhand  way  in  which
the   Senate   approved   a  bill  to   allow  the   military   and  air
force  academies  to  bring  their  cadet  corps  to  full   strength,
after   Sen.  Long   (La.)   warned  that  the  bill  would  be  used
to  recruit   football  players.    He  argued   reasonably,  if  with-
out  effect,  that  the  future  military  leaders  of  America should
be  chosen  on  some  other  basis  besides  athletic  prowess.
The  vote  by  the  House  to  abolish  the  poll  tax  in  Federal
elections  by   Constitutional   amendment  had   more  symbolic
than   actual   value.    Only  five  states  still  have  the  tax  and
Congress  acted  when  it  was  no  longer  a  burning  issue.    Nor
is  it  surprising,  in  a  Congress  where  few  know  the  pain  of
segregation,  that   funds   for   segregated   hospitals   were   in-
cluded   in    • the    appropriation     bill    for    the    Department   of
Health,  Education   and  Welfare   and  an  amendment   to   the
farm  bill  was  defeated  that  would  have  prohibited  segrega-
tion  in  recreational  areas  developed  with  Federal   assistance.
The  same  mean  spirit  was  at  work  in  the   shameful  11-
month  delay  on  Thurgood  Marshall's   judgeship  nomination
and  it   seems  present  in  the   conference  wrangle   over   the
aid-to-higher   education  bill,  slated  to  die before adjournment
if  no compromise is  reached.
An  Excess  of  Chivalry
The  one major  piece  of  social  legislation  the  House  passed,
the   bill   to   give   working   women  pay   equal   to   men,  was
weakened  in  the  floor  debate.    In  what  almosi,  seemed  like
an  excess   of  chivalry  and  no  more,  the   House  adopted   an
amendment  by  Rep.  Katharine   St.  George   (R.,  N.Y.)  that
substituted   for  the  original  provision  of  equal  pay  for  com-
parable   work   a   much  more   difficult   standard   of   proof   of
equal  pay  for   equal  work.    The  Senate,  which  still  has   to
consider   the   bill,  will  face   another   amendment  that  could
permit   an  employer  to  reduce  the   pay   of  male  employees
rather than  raise women's  wages.
One  of  the  most  ominous  developments  in  the  past  month
was  the  attack  on  the  present  space  program.    In  the  wake
of   the   successful   flight   of   the   Russian  cosmonauts,   Sen.
Howard   Cannon   (D.,  Nev.)  and  Sen.  Barry  Goldwater   (R.,
Ariz.)   undertook  what   appears  to  be  a  campaign  to   wrest
the  space  program  from  civilian  control  and  turn  it  over  to
the   military.     In   speeches   that   one  cynical  reporter   said
sounded  as  if  they  came  off Pentagon  mimeograph  machines,
the  Senate's  two  reserve  Air  Force  Generals  condemned  as
absurd   the   idea  that  the   Russian   flights   had  no  military
significance  and  that  space  could  be  kept  for  peaceful   pur-
poses.
Senators  Mundt   (R.,  S.D.)   and  Dodd  (D.,  Conn.)  made  a
bipartisan   bid  in   speeches   in  Orlando,  Fla.,  to  stir  grass
roots  support  for  the  bill  to  establish  a  Freedom  Academy  to
teach   government    officials   and   private   citizens   an    official
Millions  For  Defense!—1962  Style
"Even   though   months   ago   the    American   people
ceased  to  take  them  seriously,  the  civil  defense   spend-
ers  continue  to  think  of  new  ways  to  spend  the  tax-
payers'  money.    Among  their  more  recent   half-baked
brainstorms  has  been  the  acquisition of  70  million  sur-
vival  biscuits.    The  Kroger  Baking  Co.  alone  has  re-
ceived  over  $8  million   in   contracts   to  bake   survival
biscuits. ...
"So  now  we  have  70  million biscuits  for  nonexistent
fallout  shelters  which  are  supposed  to  be  built  in prime
target  areas  where  they  will  be  absolutely  useless  in  a
nuclear holocaust."
—Sen.  Stephen   Young   (D.,  O.)  Cong.  Hec.  July   £/".
Drug  Makers  Can't  Keep  Track  of
ALL  the  Figures
Rep.  Schenck  (R.,  O.):  Mr. Beesley  .  .  .  does  EH Lilly
&   Co.  spend  a   substantial   amount   of   money  in   re-
search  on new  drugs  each year?
Mr.  Beesley   (Lilly's  President):  Indeed  we  do.  .  .  .
This  year  our  research  budget  will  be  between  $20 mil-
lion  and  $21  million  .  .  .  10%  of  our  total  sales.    In
other  words  we  spend  approximately  10  cents   out  of
each  sales  dollar  in  financing   research.
Rep.  Dingell  (D.,  Mich.):  How  much  do  you   spend
on advertising out  of  each sales dollar?
Mr.  Beesley:  I  do  not  have  the  figures  in  mind.  .  .  .
Rep.  Dingell:  Would   you  say   it   was   equal   to   the
10  cents  you  spend  on  research?     As  a  matter  of  fact
it  exceeds  the   10  cents  you  spend  on  research  does   it
not?
Mr.  Beesley:  My  opinion  is  that  it  does  not,  but  I  do
not  have  the  figures  in mind.  .  . .
—Drug   Rill   hearings,   House   Interstate   Commerce
Committee, Aug.  20, 1962.
(The   Kcfauver   Antitrust  Subcommittee  found   Lilly
spent  18.1  cents  out  of  each  sales  dollar  for  selling   ex-
penses  in  1958  and  8.8  cents  for  research.)
anti-Communist  ideology.    The  bill  seems   safely   bottled   up
in  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations Committee.
Several   members  of  a  Senate  that  is  rarely   present   for
the  chaplain's  opening  benediction  continued  to  press  for  a
constitutional   amendment  that   would  permit  public  school
classes  to  begin  their  day  with  prayer.
One  of  the  most  courageous  moments  in  the  past   month
was   provided   by   four   House   members,   Reps.   Ryan    (D.,
N.Y.),  Reuss   (D.,  Wis.),  Roosevelt   (D.,  Cal.)   and  Lindsay
(R.,  N.Y.),  whose   objections  prevented   undebated   passage
of  a  bill  that  would  upset  the   1959  Supreme  Court  decision
in  the   Greene  case.    Sponsored   by  Rep.  Walter   (D.,   Pa.)
and  endorsed  by  the  Justice  Department,   it   would   permit
denial   of   private   employment   to   "security   risks"   without
cross-examination  or  court  review.   And  it  might  still  pass.
August  was  also  the  occasion  for  several  excellent   speech-
es.    Sen.  Gruening  gave  one,  full  of  good  sense,  on  the  need
to  stop  the  military  aid  program   to  Latin  America   because
it  was  creating  an  impoverishing   arms  race.    Rep.  Patman
(D.,   Tex.)    continued   his   searching    examination   of    tax-
exempt  foundations and  turned  up  a  group  he  said  use  their
tax-free   assets  to   compete  with  private   industry.
Dairy  Farmers  and Iodine-131
Sen.  Humphrey   (D.,  Minn.)  spoke  up  several  times  for  an
all-out  ban  on  nuclear  tests.    Such  a  ban,  he  said,  was  the
only  guarantee  that   iodine-131  and  other   radioactive   sub-
stances  found  in  U.  S.  food  can  be  kept  in  safe  limits.    He
noted,  by  the  way,  that  Minnesota  dairy  farmers   have  had
to  shift  their  herds  from  open  grass  to  stored   feed  grains
as  a  precautionary  measure.    This  and  the  Midwestern  drive
for   a  farm  bill  amendment  that  would  compensate   farmers
for   losses  due  to  fallout,  suggests  enlightened   self-interest
~nay  be  winning  new  support  for  a  test  ban  among  the  na-
tion's  farm  groups.
But  taking  the  month  in  all,  it  had,  for  liberals,  more  dark
spots  than  bright  ones.   There  is  little  in the  record  to  make
one proud.
Only   a   country   that   thinks   a  three  ring   circus   is  the
Greatest   Show  On Earth  ccuW  consider  the  Congress   of  the
United   States  the  greatest  deliberative   body  in  the  world.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly*,  September  S, 1962
Opening  the  Door  to  the  Same
(Continued   from   Page One)
agreement   and  thus  eliminate  endless  haggling   between   the
U.S.  and  the  Soviet  Union  over  the  number,  manning,  equip-
ment  and  positioning  of  listening  posts  on  each  other's  soil.
The  general  impression  that  the  U.S. has  now  accepted  this
idea   does   not   survive   closer   examination.    In   Mr.   Dean's
speech  here  Aug. 9 explaining  the new U.S.  position  he  placed
his  emphasis  not  on  improving  the  neutral  network  but  on
establishing   stringent  international  controls  over  the  national
networks  of  the  nuclear  powers.    As  Mr.  Dean  explained  it,
once  the  Soviets  accept  the  principle  of  obligatory  on-site  in-
spection,  then  we  would  negotiate  the  number  of  such  inspec-
tions  and  the  number  of  listening  posts  on  Soviet  soil,   offer-
ing  to  take a smaller  number  of  each  than  hitherto.    But  these
posts,  while  nationally  manned,  would  be  internationally  su-
pervised   and   the   supervision   envisaged   is  so  extensive   and
complex   as  to   be   the   occasion   for   just   such   interminable
Soviet-American  haggling  as the  neutrals  had  hoped  to  avoid.
A  Semantic  Juggle
To  study  Mr.  Dean's  speech  of  August  9  is  to  realize  the
full  significance  of  Mr.  Kennedy's  answer  at  press  conference
Aug.  1 when  asked  whether  the  new U.S. bargaining  position
meant  "we  could  now  forego  the  international  control  posts."
"No,"  Mr.  Kennedy  replied,  ".  . . Mr.  Dean  can develop our
thoughts  in  more  detail  but  the  phrase  I  used  is  the  one  that
describes  our  position   on  the  matter—internationally  moni-
tored  supervised  national  control  posts."    Eight  days  later  at
Geneva  this  is how  Mr.  Dean  spelled  it  out—
First,  it   [the  International  Control  Commission]   must
have  rapid  and  reliable  means  of  communication with  the
control  posts.    Secondly,  it  must  be  assured  that  all   posts
are  operated  strictly  and  continuously  in  accordance  with
rigid  scientific  standards  which  the  Commission  will  pre-
scribe.  .  . .   The Commission must  be  assured  that  the  sta-
tion  is  operating  at  all  times  at  peak  efficiency,   and  that
the  data  is  reported  continuously  and  accurately  without
jamming   or  interference.    Thirdly,  the   personnel   of   the
station  should  be  trained  according  to  agreed   standards.
Fourthly,  the  Commission  must  be  assured  that  the  instru-
mentation   operated   by   the   stations   is   constructed  and
equipped   according   to   standards  which   the   Commission
must  set  up  on  a  completely  scientific  basis.    Fifthly,  the
Stale  Russo-American  Controversies
What  We're  All  "Catching Up"  With
"It  was   reported  yesterday  that  the   Russians  had
fired a  20 or  40  megaton atomic  device.   It  may  be  that
their  excuse  for  the  resumption  of  nuclear  tests  is  to
catch  up with  the  U.S.  I  remain  convinced  that  neither
side  can  catch  up  in  this  perilous  game  in  which  they
are  engaged.   There can  only  be  one  meeting place and
that  is  universal  death."
—Mr.  Afou  (Nigeria)   at  Geneva Aug. 6.
Commission  must  be  made  promptly  aware  of  all  data  col-
lected  by  a  control  post.  .  .  .  Sixthly,  it  must  be  assured
that  the  control post  is  located,  after  consultation with  the
party  concerned,  at  a  quiet  site  in  a  region scientifically
satisfactory  to  the  Commission.
These    requirements   would   transform   the    International
Commission  from   a  means  of  correlating   data  from  various
national  networks around  the  world  to  a  mechanism for  polic-
ing  Soviet  stations  and  examining  Soviet  detection  methods
which  are  still—like  the  best  of  ours—secret.    These  require-
ments  are  calculated  to  reopen  in  full  rancor  the  stale  Russo-
American  dispute  about  inspection  and  espionage.    Mr.  Dean
said  it  did  not  appear  "useful  at  this  time  to  go  into  details'
as  to  how  "effective  and  adequate  international   supervision"
could   be  assured   "at  all  times"   but  the  morning  after   the
President's  August  1  press  conference  the  New  York   Times
reported  that  "an  official  close to  the  President  said  the  intent
was  that  one  or  more  representatives  of  the  international  com-
mission  would  be  present  at  each  control  post  to  make  certain
there  was  no  tampering  or  concealment   of   detection   infor-
mation."
The   neutrals  had   hoped   to   bypass  stale   Russo-American
controversies   by  monitoring   a  test   agreement   from   outside.
These  proposals  open  the  back  door  to  all  the  old  disputes
Many  neutrals   regard   the   spirit   as  worse  than   the   details
They  see  the  familiar  self-righteous  U.S. assumption  that  the
Russians  are  crooks  who  would   enter  an  agreement  only  to
cheat  on  it.  Treaty  arrangements  are  no  more  likely  to  survive
in  such  an  atmosphere  than  would  a  proposal   of   marriage
based  on  the  condition  that  the  bride,  when  away from  home
wear  a  chastity  belt  and  leave  the  key  at  the  nearest  polic
station.                                            (To  be concluded next week
Why  Not  Thank  Your  Summer  Hostess  With  A  Subscription  to  the   Weekly
I.   F.   Stone'8  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  AT*,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  iub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .
Street
City  ..........._.........................Zone........_..St*t*....................
8/3/82
Epter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................._....._-
City  ..........._........................Zone......._.State....................
Stall  wo send  gift  announcement?         Tea  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Av«.,  N.  W.
Waihinflton   15,  D.  C.
Second  class  .:
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every  Monday  except  during  August  and   ttetart    Monday  In  Deeembei
and  the  first  in  January  at   6618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  Independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.
Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  In  the  U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;   *10  elsewhere.
Air  Mail  rates:  115  to  Europe;   *20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED