I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jul30.pdf

============================================================

A  Pacifist  Reports From  Moscow,  P.  2
Rev.   Martin  Luther  King  on  Non-Violence  and  the  New  Negro,  P. 3;  Medicare and Southern  Oligarchy,  P.  4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  30
July  30,  1962
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Victory  No  One  Mentioned  on  Telestar
Every  communication carries two  messages,  what  it  says  and
what  it  fails  to  say.   Often  the  latter  is  the  more  important.
This was the  case with the first Presidential  press  conference to
be  seen  in  Western  Europe  on  Telestar.    A  few  hours  before,
a  big  event  had  taken  place.    That  morning,  in  Geneva,  14
countries had  put  their  signatures to  a final agreement  on  Laos.
In  a world  grown sick of  stale  controversy  and  deadlock,  bored
with  Berlin and  fatalistic  about  nuclear  testing,  this  was  some-
thing  of  a  miracle.   East  and  West,  capitalist,  Communist and
neutralist,  had  managed  for  once  to  agree.    Countries  hardly
on  speaking  terms,  some  in  a  state  of  undeclared  war  with
each  other,  met  and  signed.    Not  only  the  U.S.  and  Russia,
but  the  U.S.  and  Communist  China,  not  only  Cambodia  and
its  ancient  enemy  Thailand,  but  North   and   South  Vietnam.
It  was the  first  victory  for  peace  in  many months.    It  was  the
fruition  of  an  agreement  Kennedy and  Khrushchev  had  readi-
ed a year earlier  in Vienna,  the  first hopeful  result  of  an  other-
wise  traumatic  meeting.  It  was  the  first  time  Washington  and
Peking,  though  they  do  not  recognize  each  other,  had  jointly
signed  a  treaty.   Yet  the  President  did  not  mention  it,  and  no
reporter  asked  about  it.
All  With  The  Same  Freudian  Slip
This  was what  Telestar  inadvertently  beamed  to  the  outside
world.    It  told  a  lot,  unfortunately,  about  our  country.    Presi-
dent  Kennedy  deserves  credit  for  the  Laotion  pact,  how  much
may  never  be known;  it  required  reining  in  Cl A  agents  hostile
to  a  settlement,  curbing  a  military  bureaucracy  which   regards
relaxation   of  tension   as  a  threat,  reversing  State   Department
machinery  geared  only  to  cold  war.    All  these  elements  saw
the  negotiation  of  peace  in  Laos  as a defeat.  But  Mr.  Kennedy,
with  a  politician's  sensitivity,  may have  felt  it  was  best  not  to
take  credit  for  this  one.    It  was  not  the  kind  of  victory  his
friend,  Mr.  Luce,  likes  to  celebrate  on  the  cover  of  Life.     The
press  corps,  in  not  even  asking  about  it,  accurately  reflected
the  temper  of  the  country,  largely  indifferent or  ignorant,  con-
ditioned  to think  of  peace as a  suspect  word  and  coalition  with
Communists  as heretical.    We  have  grown  used  to  having  our
own  way, and  in  Laos we  had,  painfully,  to  back  down.    The
rest  of  the world  may find it  cheering.    For  us  it was a painful
experience,  and  best  forgotten.    The  press  and  the  President
forgot  it.
For  the  perceptive  abroad,  Telestar's  message  was that  ours
is  not   a  nation   which   can  be  expected  to   lead   the   world
toward  peace;  we  need  to  be  pushed,  not  followed.    We  can
only  hope  that  other  nations will push  us  now toward  a  settle-
ment  in  South  Vietnam.    Though  Americans  have  begun  to
die  in  its  jungles,  no  one  stood  up  to  ask  the  President  the
Europe's  New  Defender
Every  one  of  our  generals  has  a  press  claque,  and
every  appointee  is  at  once  hailed as  a  brilliant  soldier.
It  is  difficult  to  judge  them.    But  in  the  case  of  Lyman
L.  Lemnitzer,  nominated by  thr  President  to  be  the  new
Supreme   Allied  Commander   in   Europe,   we   do  have
some  experience  to  go  by.    Gen. Lemnitzer was  chair-
man  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  during  the  Cuban  in-
vasion.    That  was  a  resounding  failure.    In  any  pri-
vate  business,   an  executive   who  failed  that  dismally
would  have been fired. Here is  a  huge  military bureauc-
racy   with  almost  50  billion  dollars  a  year   to  spend.
It   has  so   many   intelligence   agencies   it   has   trouble
keeping  them  out  of  each  other's  hair.    The  task  was
to  establish  a  big  enough  beachhead  in  Cuba  to  put  a
rival  government  on  it,  and  give  ourselves  an  excuse
for   more  open   intervention.     Cuba.  U  only   90  miles
away.    The  place  is  full  of  U.S.  agents.    Conventional
arms   and  familiar  problems   were  involved,   the   kind
freshmen  study  at  West  Point.    Yet  the  military,  for
whom   Gen.  Lemnitzer  wa;   the   top   executive,   mis-
judged,  miscalculated   and  misfired.    We're   glad   they
did;   we're  glad  our  country  was  saved  from  a  greater
crime  against  Cuba.    But  if  we  were  a  We«t  European
we  wouldn't  feel   at   all  comfortable  about  having  in
command  against  Khrushchev   a  general  who  couldn't
handle  Castro.
obvious  question.    Since  the  same  nations,  the  same  elements,
are involved  in  the  Vietnamese  as  in  the  Laotion  civil  war,  why
can't  we  try  to  negotiate  peace  there,  too?
Some  viewers  abroad  may  have  linked  that  telecast   with
another  picture.    Mr.  Luce's  Time  magazine  goes  all  over  the
world.    Its  July  20  issue  showed  two young Vietnamese being
led  off  to  be  tortured  under  the  gaze  of  an  American  adviser.
It  related  how  the  jaw  of  one  boy  "was  forced  open  and  five
gallons   of  water  from   a  rusty  can  gradually  poured  into  his
mouth", and  how  "the  youth  gagged  and  screamed  bui refused
to  talk."   Thus what  the  French  called  "the  gangrene"  of  tor-
ture,  which  tainted  their  cause  in  Algeria, also  poisons ours  in
Vietnam.     One   Congressman,    Robert   W.    Kastenmeier,   a
young  Wisconsin   Democrat,  sent  the  President  a  letter asking
that  "before  we  begin  the  slow  descent  to  a moral  level  where
men  pass  off  reports  of  torture  with  indifference  and  impati-
ence,  actions  be  taken  to  halt  our  complicity in  these inhuman
practices."    The  protest  was  released  the  day before  the  press
conference.     All  but  a  few  papers   ignored  it.    No   reporter
asked  the  President  about  that  picture in  Time  magazine.   As
a  nation  we  go  into  a  pious  tizzy  about  school  prayers  but  a
little  torture  in  our  private  war  raises  hardly  a  ripple.   This,
too,  showed  through  on  Telestar.
1   1  9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  30, 1962
What  Seemed  to  Thrill  the  Russians  Most  Was  Mention  of  Their  100-Megaton  Bomb
Bertrand  Russell's  Personal  Representative  Reports  on  Moscow   Meeting
We   thought   our  readers   would   like   to   see   the   report
brought   back  from   Moscow  by  Chris  Parley,  secretary   of
the  British  Committee   of  100,  who  attended   the  peace  con-
gress  there  as  Bertrand  Russell's   personal   representative.
What  follows  is  from  his  interview  by  members  of  the  Lon-
don  Peace  News   staff    in  its  July   20 issue:
Q.  You  went  to  Moscow  with  certain  ideas  of  what  you  ex-
pected  to  find.   Could  you  tell  us  how  much  the  Congress dif-
fered  from  what  you  expected?
A.  I  think  most  of  us  from  the  'non-aligned'  peace  move-
ments  went  to the  peace  congress  feeling  that  this  was  going
to   be   very   largely   a   meeting  of   communists  and   fellow
travellers,  a  meeting  too that  was  so formal in  structure  that
very  little  of  value  could  possibly come out  of  it.    We  expect-
ed  some  sort  of  statement   at  the  end  which  would  say  that
sin  is  sinful,  to  which  anybody  could  put  their  name.
And  we  got  that,  though   the   statement   that  did  finally
come  out  of  the  congress  was  rather   more  liberal  than  we
expected.    It  condemned  all  tests  though  it  named  no  gov-
ernments  specifically,  and  presumably was  not  sufficiently  an
embarrassment   to  communist  governments  for  them  not  to
be  able  to  ignore  or  absorb  such  condemnation.    Neverthe-
less,  the  final  statement   was,  I  think,  a  small  contribution
toward  liberalism  in  the  communist countries  and  may  have
been  a  small  check  on  the  military  and  the  Stalinists.    Cer-
tainly  it  is  significant that  the  Chinese  accepted  a  statement
which  contained  no  mention  of  colonialism,  and  didn't  name
the   U.S.  specifically  as  the  chief  perpetrator   of  wickness  in
the world.
Q.  What  was  the  tone of  the  congress  itself?
A.  Many  of  the  speeches  were  much  as  anticipated.    They
"knew"  that  Washington  was  the  source  of  all  wrong-doing
in  the  work!  and  that  Moscow  was  the  champion  of  the  op-
pressed.    So  little  time  was  given  to  most  people  to  speak
that  it  was  difficult  to  develop this  line very  seriously  or  very
individually.    I  think  we  were  surprised   by  the  number  of
people  who  managed  to  get  in  a  dissenting   voice,  a   genu-
inely  neutralist   voice,  and  I  think  these  people  clearly  made
an impression.
Certain   set   speeches  were  sure  fire  winners;   it's   worth
mentioning  these.    Any  mention  of  China  having  a  seat  in
the  UN,  the  Nazis  in  office   in  West  Germany,  references   to
any  of  the  recent   conflict  areas  Cuba,  Angola  and   particu-
larly  Algeria.    There  was  no  end  to  the  applause   machine
which  greeted  these  things  however  often  they  came  out.
There  was  one  very  interesting   experience.    We  had  had
all  Monday and  Tuesday  in  plenary  session,  and  on  Tuesday
evening  we  broke  up  for  the  first  time  into  commissions  and
each  of  these  commissions contained 400-600  people,  whi«h  is
still  a  very  large  unit  for  serious   discussion.
I  went  to  the  fourth  commission  which  dealt  with  a  vast
range  of  subjects—moral,  legal,  cultural  aspects  of   warfare
and   so  on.    The  chairman,  who  was  an  American,  a  good
man,   a  Quaker,  made  a  personal  speech  which  was  not  very
controversial.   He  then  said, now  it's  time  for  speeches  from
the floor, let's  have  the  first  one.   Whereupon  his  right  hand
man  said,  wait  a  minute,  and  took  a  piece  of  paper  from  his
pocket,  and  the  chairman  said,  no,  I  see  we've  got  a  list  of
speakers  and  called  the  first  speaker,  a  Soviet  professor,  who
spoke for  25 minutes.
By  this  time  a  lot  of  people  in  the  audience,  particularly
people  from  the   US,  people  who  haven't  got  this  congress
platform  tradition,  were  really  angry  and  the  meeting  broke
up  in  disorder,  people  challenging  the  platform  and  wanting
to   make   points   of   order.     The   chairman   couldn't   control
things.
I  was  personally  happy  that  there  was  this  disorder,  not
because  I  wanted  people  to  come  6,000  miles  to  waste  their
time,  but  because  I  felt  it  was  a  healthy  reaction  to  the  vast
authoritarianism   of   the   plenary   session   and   even   of  this
British  Medical  Rebuke  to  AMA
"The    British  Medical  Journal  today  carries  a  strong-
ly   worded  attack   on  the  'cheapness  and  vulgarity'  of
the  American Medical Association's  progaganda  against
the  British  National  Health  Service.    It comments:
" 'We  have  watched  with  some dismay  the mushroom
growth  of  the  AMA's  public  relations activities and  the
colossal  sums  spent  by  it  to  defeat  what  our American
colleagues  call  "socialized medicine."   The  dismay  is  at
the   probably  inherent  weakness  of   American  medical
services  if   such  a  vast  effort   has  to  be  expanded  on
misrepresentation  of  what  is  happening in  Britain.
" 'We  do  not  recall  that  those  who  favored  the  intro-
duction  of  the  NHS   [British  National  Health  Service]
buttressed  their  case  by  distorted  propaganda  against
such  abuses  as  American doctors  themselves  have  ad-
mitted—fee  splitting,  overcharging, unnecessary  opera-
tions  sending patients to  "physician-owned  drug stores"
and  so  forth'."
—The  Guardian  (London  and  Manchester)   July  13.
subcommission.
In   some  of   the   subcommissions  there  were   some  useful
speeches.    Time  was  again  short  but  in  the  first  commission
a  genuinely neutralist  position  on testing was  put  quite  clear-
ly  on  several  occasions.   It  was  possible  for  a  Ceylonese  to
talk   about  a  direct  action  project—sailing   a  boat   into  the
Pacific.
Q.  Could  you  tell  us  something  about  the  reaction  to  the
non-aligned  speeches?
A.  There  was  substantial  applause  for  many  speeches,  but
I  got  the  impression  that  people  who  were  genuinely   non-
aligned  were  so  relieved  to  hear  this  point  of  view  that  they
clapped  out  of  all  proportion  to  their  numerical  strength.    In
actual  fact  I  feel  that,  in  contrast  to  the  vast,  and  obviously
spontaneous   and   heated,   applause   which   greeted   Khrush-
chev's  statement  that  Russia's  got  100-megaton  bombs  plus,
sober,  carefully  thought  out  neutralist  speeches,  which  obvi-
ously  don't  inspire  great  excitement,  received  little  response.
There's  an  interesting  way  of  judging  this.    There  were
many  references  during  first  morning  to  Russell,  to  his  fight
with  the  Labour  Party  leadership,  putting  the  war   question
before  his  membership  of  the  party,  having  been  a  leader  of
the  peace  movement who was  prepared  to  take  personal  risks
—he  was  a  great  hero.    When  Russell's  tape  was  played  on
Monday  afternoon  and  everybody  realized  he  was  a  neutral-
ist,  nobody  was  really   interested  and  there  was  polite,   re-
strained  applause  for  a  few  seconds  at  the  end.
Q.  Did  anyttung  significant  come  out  in  the  speeches   from
the recently  ex-colonial countries?
A.  I  didn't  get  the  impression  that  most  delegates from  the
supposedly  non-aligned  countries  wanted   to  be  non-aligned
or  felt  that  they  would  be  more  useful   in  the   cold  war  if
they  were  non-aligned.
Q.  Was  there  any  difference  between  the  public  face  of  the
congress  and  the  private face?    Did  you  find  any  chance  of
getting  further  in  informal  discussion?
A.  In  private  discussion  it  was  possible  to  locate  the   dis-
senting  voices  in  some  of  the  delegations—the  few  Gandhians
among  the  Indian  Peace  Committee  people,  the  non-aligned
Americans,  the   single   East   German  who  deviated   slightly
from   the   line,  most   of  these  were   contained   by   or   swal-
lowed  up  in  the  full  congress,  and  of  course  the  very  crowded
time-table   discouraged  much  private  searching.    In  private
it  was  admitted  that  there  had  been  serious  disagreements
inside   the   Soviet   Peace   Committee  when   Russia    resumed
testing  last   autumn;  but  no  one  would  have   guessed  this
from   the   Russian's   applause   at   Khrushchev's   pride  in  his
bombs  of  100 megatons  and  more.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  30,1962
National  Press  Club  Address  Provides  Backdrop  to  the  Historic  Struggle  in  Albany,  Ga.
Dr.  King  Eloquently  Explains  the  New  Negro  and  the  Non-Violent  Creed
By  Rev.  Martin  Luther  King*
Probably  the  most  powerful   force  that  is  breaking  down
the  barriers  of  segregation   is  the  new  determination  of  the
Negro  himself.   For  many  years  the  Negro  tacitly  accepted
segregation.     He  was  often  the  victim  of  stagnant   passivity
and  deadening  complacency.    But  through  the  forces  of  his-
tory   something   happened   to   the   Negro.    The   social   up-
heavals  of  two  world  wars,  the   great   depression,  and   the
spread   of  the   automobile  have  made  it   both  possible   and
necessary  for  the  Negro  to  move  away  from  his  former  iso-
lation  on the  rural  plantation.   The  decline  of  agriculture  and
parallel   growth   of  industry  have  drawn  large   numbers  of
Negroes  to  urban  centers  and  brought  about  a  gradual  im-
provement   in  their   economic  status.    Once  plagued   with   a
tragic   sense  of  inferiority  resulting  from   the  crippling  ef-
fects  of  slavery  and  segregation,  the   Negro   has  now  been
driven  to  re-evaluate  himself.   He  has  come  to  feel  that  he
is  somebody.   With  this  new  sense  of  somebodiness  and  self-
respect,  a  new  Negro  has  emerged  with  a  new determination
to   achieve  freedom   and   human   dignity  whatever   the   cost
may be.
This  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  struggle   that  is  taking
place  in  the  South  today.    One  cannot  understand  the  Mont-
gomery   bus  boycott,  the   sit-ins,   and  the   Albany,  Georgia
movement  without  understanding  that  there  is  a  new  Negro
on  the  scene  with  a  new  sense  of  dignity  and  destiny.   Thou-
sands  of  Negroes  have  come to  see that  it  is  ultimately  more
honorable   to   suffer    indignity   than   accept   segregation   in
humiliation.
Every  Class  Involved
A  special  feature  of  our  struggle  is  its  universal  quality.
Every   social   strata   is   involved—lower,   middle   and   upper
class.    Every  age—children, teenagers,  adults  and  senior  citi-
zens.   The whole nation  was  startled  by the  Montgomery  bus
protest  in  1956—chiefly  because  every  Negro  allied   himself
in  the   cause  with  firm  discipline.    The  same  universal   in-
volvement  is  now  appearing   in  Albany,  Georgia.    Last  De-
cember  more  than  seven  hundred  Negroes  from  this  commu-
nity  willingly  went  to  jail  to  create  an  effective  protest.    I
shall  never  forget  this  experience  in  which  elderly  women
over  70, young  teenagers  and  middle-aged  adults  crowded  the
jail  cells—some  with  professional   degrees   in  medicine,  law
and  education—some  simple  housekeepers  and  laborers;  oth-
ers  from  business—all  differences   of  age  and  social  status,
but  all united  around  one objective.
Fortunately,  the  Negro  has  been  willing to  grapple  with  a
creative  and  powerful  force  in  his  straggle  for  racial   justice,
namely,  nonviolent  resistance.    This  does  not  mean  that  a
new  method  has  come  into  being  to  serve  as  a  substitute  for
litigation    and   legislation.     But   those   who  adhere   to   the
method  of  nonviolent  direct  action  recognize  that  legislation
and  court  orders  tend  only  to  declare  rights;  they  can  never
thoroughly   deliver  them.    Only  when  the  people  themselves
begin  to  act  are  rights  on  paper  given  life  blood.   A  catalyst
is  needed  to  breathe  life  experience  into  a  judicial   decision
by  the  persistent   exercise  of  the  rights  until  they  become
usual  and  ordinary  in human conduct.
The  method  of  nonviolent  resistance  is  effective  in  that  it
has  a  way  of  disarming  the  opponent,  it  exposes  his  moral
defenses,   it  weakens  his  morale   and  at   the   same   time  it
works  on 'his conscience.
It  also  makes  it  possible  for  the  individual  to  struggle  to
secure  moral  ends  through  moral  means.    One  of  the   most
persistent   philosophical   debates  of  the   centuries   has   been
over  the  question  of  ends  and  means.    There  have  been  those
Black  Muslim  "Massacre"   in  Los  Angeles
Waiting   in   the   wings  should   non-violence  fail   are
groups  like  the   Black   Muslims  who  reject integration
altogether.    Strong   sympathy   has   been   aroused   for
them   in  the  Negro  community  by   an  incident  in  Los
Angeles  to  which  attention  is  being  called in  a  protest
letter  sent  out  by  a  group  of  whites,  including the  an-
thropologists,  Kathleen and  David  Aberlee,  Leo  Huber-
man   and   Paul   Sweezy   of   the   Monthly   Review,   the
writer  Truman  Nelson  and  Grace  Lee,  a  Detroit  editor.
On  April   27,  Ronald  T.  X.  Stokes,  secretary  of   the
Muslim  League in  Los  Angeles  and  six  other Negroes,
all   unarmed,   were   shot   by   the   people  outside  their
Temple.     The  policeman   who  shot  and  killed  Stokes,
and  testified to  a  Coroner's  Jury  that  he  "shot  three  or
four  others,"  was   absolved   for   "justifiable  homicide."
Instead  an  all-white  Grand  Jury  has  indicted  nine Mus-
lims  for  "criminal  assault  against  the  police."   A  pic-
ture  in  the  Los  Angeles Times the  day  after  the  shoot-
ings   showed  the  Negro  victims  lying  on  the  ground
wounded  and  handcuffed  and  the  caption  said  the  scene
looked  like  Algiers.   Negro  organizations  all  over  the
country   are  protesting  the  shootings  and  their   after-
math,  but  so  far  there  has  been  little  protest  from  the
white  community,  or  notice  in  the  white  press.
* Abridged from  the  speech  made  by  Dr.  King  before  the
National  Press  Club  in  Washington  July  19  before returning
to  lead the  historic  struggle  in  Albany, Ga.
from   Macchiavelli  on  down  who  have  argued  that  the  end
justifies  the  means.    This,  I  feel,  is  one  of  the  great  trage-
dies  of  Communism.   This  is  where  nonviolence breaks  with
Communism  and  any  other  method  which  contends  that  the
end  justifies  the  means.    In  a  real   sense,  the  means  repre-
sent  the  ideal  in  the  making  and  the  end  in  process.    So  in
the  long  run  destructive  means  cannot  bring  about  construc-
tive  ends,  because  the  end  is  pre-existent  in  the  means.
Nonviolent    resistance     also    provides    a    creative    force
through  which  men  can  channelize their  discontent.    It  does
not  require  that  they   abandon  their   discontent.     This   dis-
content  is  sound  and  healthy.    Nonviolence saves  it  from  de-
generating  into  morbid  bitterness  and  hatred.    Hate  is  al-
ways  tragic.    It  is  as  injurious  to  the  hater  as  it  is  to  the
hated.    It  distorts  the  personality  and  scars  the  soul.    Psy-
chiatrists  are   telling  us  now  that  many  of  the   inner  con-
flicts and  strange  things  that  happen  in  the  subconscious are
rooted  in  hate.    So  they  are  now  saying,   "love  or  perish."
This  is  the  beauty  of  nonviolence.   It  says  you  can  struggle
without  hating;  you  can  fight  war  without  violence.
This  approach   to  the   problem   is  not  without   successful
precedent.    We  have  the  magnificent  example  of  Gandhi who
challenged  the   might   of  the   British   empire  and  won  inde-
pendence  for  his  people  by  using  only  the  weapons  of  truth,
noninjury,  courage  and  soul  force.   Today  we  have  the  noble
example  of  thousands  of  Negro  students  who  have  nonvio-
lently   challenged   segregation.     Their   courageous   and   dis-
ciplined  activities have  come  as  a  refreshing  oasis  in  a  desert
sweltering  with  the  heat  of  injustice.   One  day  all  of  Amer-
ica will be proud  of their achievements.
Our  goal  is  freedom.    I  believe  we  will  win  it  because  the
goal   of  the   nation   is  freedom.    Yet  we  are   not   passively
waiting for  a  deliverance to  come from  others  moved by  their
pity  for  us.    Our  destiny  is  bound  up  with  the  destiny  of
America—we  built  it  for  two  centuries  without   wages,  we
made  cotton  king,  we  built  our  homes  and  homes  for   our
masters  and  suffered  injustice  and  humiliation—but  out  of  a
bottomless  vitality  continued  to  live  and  grow.    If  the   in-
expressible  cruelties  of  slavery  could  not  extinguish  our  ex-
istence,  the  opposition we  now  face  will  surely  fail.    We  feel
that  we  are  the  conscience  of  America—we  are  its  troubled
soul.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  .10, 1962
A  Rigged  Poll  on  Shelters;  Hope on  Test  Detection; Clemency  for  Morion  Sobell
Medicare's  Defeat  Shows  We   Suffer,   Like  Latin   America,  From   Oligarchy
WE  NEED  AN  ALLIANCE  FOR PROGRESS  AT HOME:  The  defeat
of  the  mild  and  inadequate  medicare  bill  shows  we  suffer   at
home  from  evils  much  like those  we  are  trying  to  correct  in
Latin  America.   Here,  too,  an  oligarchy  in  a  one-party  area,
the   South,  dominated   by  large  landowners,  was   powerful
enough  to  block  aid  for  the  underprivileged, in  this  case  the
needy   aged.     Multimillionaire   Senator   Kerr   led  the   fight
against  medicare, just  as  wealthy  latifundistas   oppose  social
reform   in   Brazil   and   Peru.     Republicans  from   industrial
states  where  the  poorer  classes  can  and  do  vote  joined  with
Northern   Democrats  for   it.    The  remedy  lies  in   measures
more  fundamental than  the  Republican defeats  asked  by  Mr.
Kennedy.   The  remedy  lies  in  enforcing  the  Negro's  right  to
vote,  in  breaking  the  apathy  of the  poor  white, in  ending  the
one  party  system  in  the  South,  and  easing  out  the  arrogant
old  fossils   whose  key  committee  posts  give  them  oligarchic
veto   powers.
DOES  THE PUBLIC  FAVOR  SHELTERS?   That  Elmo Roper  poll
for  the   Office  of  Civil  Defense  which  purports  to  show  over-
whelming  support  for  the  community fallout  shelter  program
seems  to  have  been  tailored  as  so many  polls  are  to  meet  the
needs  of  the  client  paying  the  bill.    It  found  77  percent  in
favor  but  as  Science  (July  20)  points  out  in  a  skeptical  edi-
torial  these  "findings conflict  sharply  with  virtually  every  poll
that  Congressmen  have  conducted  among  their  constituents."
Aa  a  result  Congress  seems  to  have  shelved  the  program,  for
this  session  anyway.
NEW   BREAK-THROUGH   IN   TEST  DETECTION:  That  Defense
Dept.  release  two weeks ago  on  improvement  in test  detection
methods  was  obscure,  grudging  and  vague.    It  seems  to  have
been  issued  under  pressure  from  sources  impatient   with  the
Pentagon's   determined   pessimism.     The  Sunday    Times  of
London  July  22  provided  the  first  public  account  of   British
progress  in  this  field.  "A  new  British  method  for   detecting
clandestine   underground  nuclear   bomb  tests,"  the   Sunday
Times  reported,  "is  proving so effective  that  the  Atomic  En-
ergy  Authority  has  decided to  build four  stations  in  different
parts  of  the  world.    It   is  estimated   that  12  such   stations
would  be  sufficient  to  detect  any  secret  Russian  tests,  and  20
stations  would  provide  a  world  network."    Stations  of  this
type, according  to  the  account  from  London, could  distinguish
from  earthquakes  any  bombs over  20 kilotons "whatever  steps
were  taken  to  disguise  them"  and  detect  all  underground  ex-
plosions  over  6  kilotons  "whatever  steps  were  taken  to  mask
the  explosion."    This  is  very  different   from  the  180-station
network  earlier  projected.   It  would make  policing  possible  by
a  neutral  network, though it  would not eliminate  the  need  for
The  'Inspection'  No  One  Mentions
In  Test  Ban  Treaty   Discussion
"Secretary  of  Defense  McNamara  ordered  the  can-
cellation  today of  the  Navy's  work  on  what  would  have
been  the  world's  largest  movable  radio  telescope.  .  .  .
The action also brought to  an  end a  highly secret,  high-
ly  unusual episode  in  the  new  art  of  electronic espion-
age.    The  primary  purpose  of  the  radio  telescope  was
to  have  been  to  eavesdrop  on  radio  messages   within
the  Soviet  Union,  with  the  moon  as  a  relay  point. .  .  .
"In  effect,  the  project  was  bypassed  by  advances  in
electronic  and  satellite  technology   Officials  said  it  had
been  concluded  that  many  of   the  secret  military  mis-
sions  originally  to  be  performed by  the  radio  telescope
could  not  be  carried out  by  new  electronic  instruments
.and satellites...."
—John  W.  Finney  from  Washington, N.Y.  Times  Jul.  19
some  inspection  in  case  of  dispute.
NEW  FBI   CHIEF?    J.  Edgar  Hoover  at  67  is  only  three
years from  compulsory  retirement  and right  wingers  seem  to
be  fearful   lest  a  liberal  replace  him.    Republican  Majority
Leader  Dirksen  has  put  in  a  bill providing that  the  director-
ship  of the  FBI  shall  be a  Presidential  appointment  for  a 15-
year  term,  and  subject  to  Senate  approval  as  is  the  head  of
the  CIA.   At  present  the  FBI  chief  is  a  civil  servant  remov-
able  at  the  will  of  the  Attorney  General.   In  practice, no  At-
torney  General  would dare  remove  Mr.  Hoover  from  the  post
he  has  held for  38 years.   This  is much too long  for  any  head
of  a  secret  agency  with  the  wide powers  of the  FBI.    The ad-
vantage of the  Dirksen  bill is that it  would set  some time  limit
and  provide  some  check  through  Senate  hearings  and  debate
on  the  character  of  the  nominee.   We  believe  a  shorter  term
would  be  wiser,  and  hope  Senate  liberals  will  force  hearings
and  full  consideration  of  the  bill  itself.    Such  hearings  could
focus  attention  on the  fact  that  secret  police  agencies  like  the
FBI  and  the  CIA exert  a  power  that  is  a  potential  threat  io
free  government;  limited  terms  and  Senate  confirmation  are
minimal  checks  upon this  danger.
TIME  TO FREE  MORTON  SOBELL:  The  Federal  Parole  Board
having  turned  down  Morton  Sobell's  application,  we  hope  the
President  and the  Attorney  General  will  grant  clemency.    In-
nocent  or guilty,  the ten years he has  served  are  a  most  heavy
penalty   for   the   tenuous   conspiracy   to   commit    espionage
charges  on which  he  went  to  prison.    Mercy  is  long  overdue.
Off    on  Vacation—No   Weekly   in  August—Next   Issue  Labor  Day
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  .............................................................................._....._
Street   .........................................................................-........—
City  ..........._.........................Zone......._.State....................
7/30/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    .........—..................._...................................................
City  ..........._.........................Zone......._..St«te....................
Shall  we  send  fift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Cl
and  the  -       •    -
Second  Clan  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday   except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday   in  December
first  in  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.   F.
Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  S5  in  the  U.  S.;   16  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.
Air  Mall  rates:  S15  to  Europe:  S20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED