I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962dec17.pdf

============================================================

Bertmtid  Russell  on  Freedom's  Meaning, P.  4
Samuel   Shapiro  Fired   By   Michigan  State,  Under   Attack  for  Friendly  Reports  on  Cuba,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  46
DECEMBER  17,  1962°'°'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Is  It  Un-American  To  Be  Un-Chinese?
It  was  the  biggest  such  affair   I  can  recall  since  the  days  of
McCarthy.    It  was  also  the  dirtiest.   The  caucus  room  of  the
Old   House   Office   Building  was  packed  with  women,  many
with   babes   in   arms   whose   sudden   high-pitched  babbling
offered   comic  relief  in  the  more  tense  moments.    A  bizarre
touch  was also supplied  by ex-FBI man  Jack Levine who  strode
forward  suddenly  to  shout,  "As  a  former  FBI  agent,   I  peti-
tion   you   to   discontinue  these   hearings."     He   was   quickly
hustled  out  to  face  the  TV  cameras.    It  was  a  responsive audi-
ence.    It  even  applauded  the  subcommittee  chairman,  Clyde
Doyle  of  California,  when  in  his  opening  statement  he  said,
"The   fact  that  Communists are  active  in  peace  agitation  does
not  mean  that  everyone  who  agitates  for  peace  is  a  Commu-
nist  or  fellow  traveller,"  creating  for  one  moment  the  chilling
suspicion  that  the   Committee  itself   had   been   infiltrated   by
what  J.  Edgar  Hoover  always calls  "pseudo-liberals."
Not  At  AH Party   Line   Dupes
I  saw  a  lot  of  the  Women's  Strike  for  Peace  delegation  in
Geneva   last  spring,   and   came   away  with  great   respect   for
them.    They  were  a  sober,  well-informed   group,  with  a  real-
istic  appreciation  of  how  alike  both  sides  were  in  their  ex-
cuses  for  failing  to  reach  agreement.    This  was  no  gathering
of   party  line  dupes,   and   a   Congressional   committee   could
learn  a  lot  by talking with  them  in  a  serious  atmosphere.    But
you  could  never  guess  it  from  the  inquisitorial  circus  staged
by  the  House  Un-Americans  as  their  three  days  of   hearings
opened.    First  they  put  on  Richard  A.  Flink,  a  young  New
York   attorney  recently   renowned   for   cooperating   with   the
FBI  for  three  years  while  Soviet  agents  solicited  information
from  him.    He  said  he  had   been  contacted  on  several  occa-
sions  by  Women's  Strike  for  Peace.    The  two  sets  of  events
were  not  connected   by  any  testimony;  he  did  not  claim  that
Soviet  agents  had  urged  him  to  turn  transvestite  and  infiltrate
the  women;  he  did  not  say,  and  he  was not  asked,  whether  he
knew  of  Communist  infiltration  in/the  peace  movement.    His
opening   testimony  was  just  left  hanging   over  the  organiza-
tion,  like  a  garland  of  skunk  cabbage,  in  the  best  tradition of
the  old  Wisconsin    maestro.
The   Committee   then  put  on  three  witnesses.     Again   the
tactic  was  familiar. When  the  Committee  investigates,  it never
attempts  to  make  a  sober  size-up  of  an  organization,  to  study
its  line,  to  read  its  literature.    Its  investigators,  most  of  them
from  the  screwball  fringe  or  ex-hotel  didcs,  are  incapable  of
any   such   exercise.     Their   effort,   by  combing  Washington's
voluminous  old  "lists,"  is to  turn  up  with  some  members  who,
because  of  past  associations,  are  likely  to  take  the  Fifth   and
thus  put  a  cloud  on  the  organization  in  the  headlines.    Their
efforts  misfired  twice  on  opening  day.   The  first  witness,  Mrs.
Blanche   Posner,   of   Scarsdale    took   the   Fifth   when   asked
Voices  of   Protest
"The    Committee's  stated  purpose   is   to  investigate
'Communist   infiltration   into   the   peace  movement'  but
such  an  inquiry will  inevitably  stifle  the  voices  of  those
who  dissent   from  the  government  policies  in  the  Cold
War."                          —American  Civil Liberties  Union
"For    the  first  time  in  history,  mere  preparation for
war   is   killing  people  and  damaging   their   health  and
heredity.  .  .  .  Women  would  not  be  normal  if  they  did
not  react  strongly  to  these  dangers  to  their  most basic
functions—the  producing  and  sustaining  of  Life.  .  .  .
"It  will  look  strange  indeed  to  thoughtful Americans
and  to  the  rest  of  the  world  at  this  moment,  when  the
U.S.   is   in  the   midst   of   negotiations  for   a   test  ban
agreement   and  for   world   disarmament,   if   your  Com-
mittee  impugns  the  motives  and  attempts  to  discredit
and  silence  this  healthy  upsurge  of  public  opinion."
—Women's  Int'l  League  for  Peace &  Freedom
"In   such   a   movement  of   thousands   of  individuals
motivated  by  a  common  concern, it  would be surprising
if   there  were  not  some  who  would   be  vulnerable  by
reason  of  other  associations,  past  or  present.    Persons
who,    in  their  anxiety  to  find  a  means  of  building  a
peaceful,  decent  world, have  been  tempted  at  one  point
or   another   by   the   blandishments   of   the   Communist
position,  are  no  less   human  beings,  no  less  concerned
for  the  lives  of  their  loved  ones,  than  any  of  the  rest
of   us.    The  discovery  of   such  persons,   if   they  exist,
would  in  no  sense  compromise the  deep  loyalty  of  the
overwhelming  majority  of  women  active  in  this  move-
ment."                      —The  Fellowship  of  Reconciliation
"The  House  Committee  is   in  fact   playing  into  the
hands   of   the   Communists   by  eliminating  one   of   the
major  differences  between  them  and  us:  the  fact   that
we  stand  for  free  expression.  .  .  ."
—Ephraim  London  for  the  American  Jewish  Congress
'Disarmament   under  effective  international  control
and  a  strong  United  Nations,  imperatives  of  our time,
are  stated  goals  of  Women's Strike  for  Peace.  A  group
of  citizens  working  for  these  goals  within  our  consti-
tutional   framework   should  be   commended,   not   con-
demned."                      —Rep.  Wm.  F. Ryan  (D.,  N.Y.)
whether   she  belonged   to  a  Communist  party  cell  while  she
was  a  New  York  City  school  teacher  from  1922  to  1952,  and
took  the  Fifth  on  every  other  question,  while  manfully—ex-
cuse  the  expression—trying  to  lecture  the  Committee  on  dis-
armament.     The   second   witness,  Mrs.  Ruth   E.   Meyers,  of
Roslyn,  N.Y.,   turned  out  to  be  one  of  those  mistakes  which
enlivened   the  McCarthy   era.     Mrs.   Meyers   took   the   Fifth,
too,  except  when  Committee  counsel  triumphantly  asked  her
whether   she  was  not   the  Ruth  Meyers  who   signed   a   New
York  City Councilmanic nominating petition  on  July  27,   1948,
(Continued    on  Page    Two)
1   8    '<
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  17, 1962
(Continued   from   Page   One)
for  Simon  P.  Gerson.    Committee counsel described  Mr,  Ger-
son  as  an  "identified  Communist"  but  neglected   to  add  that
he  had  so  identified  himself  by  running  on  the  Communist
ticket!    At  this  point,  however,  Mrs.  Meyers  abandoned  the
Fifth  and  denied  this  was  her  signature.    Then  she  added,  to
applause,  "It  looks  as  if,  like  the  taxi  driver,  I  just got  caught
in  a  traffic  jam."    Later  she  told  reporters  she  had  never  been
a  member  of   the  Communist  Party.     Obviously   Committee
investigators  hadn't  overworked  themselves  in  checking   that
one.
Only  By   Informing
In  the  third  Witness,  Mrs.  Lyla  Hoffman,   of  Great  Neck,
L.I.,  the  Committee  also  got  more  than  it  expected,  but  rallied
quickly  to  demonstrate  how  hazardous  it  is  to  be  candid  with
witch  hunters.    Mrs.  Hoffman  refused  to  say whether  she  had
been  a  Communist   in  1944—22  years  ago—but   volunteered
the  information  (1)  that  she  had  been  working  in  the  peace
movement  under  no  dictation  other  than  that  of  her  own  con-
science  and  (2)  that  she was not  a  party member  and  had  not
been  one  for  more  than  five  years.     All  this  brought   Mrs.
Hoffman   was  a  string  of  questions  designed   to  elicit  names.
These  she  refused  to  answer.    For  the  committee,  as  for  witch
hunters  always,  from  the  Inquisition's  dungeons  to  the  Lubi-
anka's  cellars,  sincerity  can  be  proven  only  by  informing.
Every  time  a  witness  tried  to  explain  why  she  was  working
in  the  peace  movement,   she  was  interrupted   or  cut  off  with
the   statement   that   the   Committee   wasn't   interested   in   her
motives.    The  question   of  motives  had  already  been   decided
by  the  Committee  in  its  opening  statement.  This  embodied  the
theory  that  the  peace  movement   is  a  plot  designed  to  have
"a  disarming,  mollifying,  confusing  and  weakening   effect  on
those  nations which  are  the  intended  victims of   Communism."
This  is  the  view  fostered  by J.  Edgar  Hoover,  by  our  wackier
refugee  geopoliticians,  and  by  the  'Pentagon's  experts   in  rid-
ing  herd  on  public  opinion.    The  military  itself   might  have
written  those  opening  phrases  about  the  dangers  of  "an  exag-
gerated  desire for  peace."    Indeed  they  might  also  have  been
taken  from   the  Chinese   attacks  on  Khrushchev   for   backing
down  over  Cuba  and  asserting  the  possibility  of  peaceful  co-
existence.    The  foreign   policy  theory  embodied  in  the   Com-
mittee's  opening   statement  is  identical  with  Peking's.     The
Antidotes
To  the  coming Pentagon  drive  to  sell  Congress  high-
er   appropriations   for   more   armament  (particularly
missiles)   and  an  enlarged  shelter  program:  Ralph   E.
Lapp's  fact-packed  new  book,  "Kill  and  Overkill:  The
Strategy  of  Annihilation."  Dr.  Lapp  has  long  been  a
one-man   crusade   against   military   folly    and    official
misrepresentation   on  nuclear  matters.    Dr.   Lapp   de-
bunks  a  lot  of  the  pretentious   first-strike-second-strike
calculations  of  the  military  intellectuals.    Though  long
an  advocate of  civil  defense,  he  now  concludes  shelters
may  "inspire a  false  sense  of  security"  and  themselves
become  a  strategic  weapon:  "the  only  shelter,  the  only
defense,  in  which  mankind can  find  any  real,  enduring
hope   is  disarmament."
To   the   everlasting   propaganda  campaign   against
Communist  China:  Edgar   Snow's  exciting   "The  Other
Side  of  The  River:  Red  China  Today"  the  first  book
length  report  by  an  American  in  ten  years  from  the
other  side  of  the  Iron  Curtain  we  have  ourselves   im-
posed   on  China.    With  all   his   old  skill   and   courage,
Snow  makes  China  come  alive,  shows  its   great  prog-
ress,   disposes   of   Alsop-style  reports  from   Hongkong
about   hungry   Chinese   eating   after-births!    We   are
skeptical  only  of  the  discussion   of   China's  correction-
by-labor  camps  and  public  "study  groups"  to  show  dis-
senters   the  error  of  their  ways.    Those  who  accepted
similar   euphemisms  about   the   Soviet   Union's   labor
camps  have  lived  to  learn  better.    We  do  not   regard
the  absence  of  civil  liberties  as  in  a  category  with  the
absence   of   plumbing.    Years  ago,   when  the   Russian
Revolution  had  first  begun,  Kautsky  asked  Lenin  how
he  would know what  people  were  thinking  unless  there
was  freedom  of  discussion.    Lenin  retorted  by  bringing
up  lynchings  in  the  U.S.  South!    Some  day  China,  like
Russia,  will  begin  to  recognize  that  iron  conformity  to
party  line  exacts  a  heavy  cost.    We  do  not  believe  the
thought  control  we  fight  as  an  evil  on one  side  is  a vir-
tue  on  the  other.    Carefully  read,  Snow's   own  account
of  China's  short  experiment  in  free  speech  ("let  a  hun-
dred  flowers  bloom")  shows   otherwise.
theory—an  ancient  one—is  that  peace  is  impossible  until  the
other  side,  the  enemy,  has  been  eliminated.    Until  that   happy
day,  softening   influences  must   be  rooted   out   by  public  ex-
posure  and  brain-washing.    This  is  the   Chinese   theory   and
this  is  the  Chinese  practice,  as  it  is  HUAC's.    The  parallel  is
so  close  that  one  may well  ask  whether  it  is now  un-American
to  take  an  un-Chinese  view  of  the  world   crisis.
Negro  Real  Estate Brokers Attack  Kennedy  Housing  Order  as Inadequate
There  was  little  but  angry  criticism  of   President   Ken-
nedy's  anti-discrimination in  housing  order  during  the  first
day   of  the  two-day  legislative   and  policy   conference   held
here  in  Washington  last  week-end by  the  National  Associa-
tion  of  Real  Estate   Brokers,  a  Negro  group.    The  second
day  the  press  was  excluded  and  the  association  met  behind
closed   doors   to   hear   Housing   Administrator   Robert   C.
Weaver.   What  emerged  was  a  policy  statement  supporting
the  President's  order  but  suggesting   it  was  inadequate  in
failing   to   cover  existing   housing   and  conventional   mort-
gages,  and  in  failing  to  include  savings  and  loans,  mutual
savings  banks  and  commercial  banks  benefiting  from  Fed-
eral  insurance  of  deposits.
Less   tactful  were  the  criticisms  voiced  the  day   before.
"We  would  be  better  off,"  Q.  V.  Williamson,  vice  president
of   the  organization  said,  "if  he  had  not  signed   the  order.
I  think  the  order is  a camouflage because  it  makes  it  appear
that   it   means  something  when  it   doesn't   mean  a  thing."
Williamson,  who  comes  from  Atlanta,  is  one  of  the  biggest
Negro   mortgage  bankers  in  the   South.    "Existing   public
housing,"   he  protested,   "was  the   area   the  President   was
asked   to  cover.    Public  housing   constitutes   the  walls  of
segregation  the  government built.   Why  didn't he  tear  down
those  walls  built  with  100  percent  government   funds?"
A  Philadelphia broker, Lenerte Roberts,  pointed  out,  "Un-
til  conventional lending  agencies  are  covered,  we  don't  make
a  dent.   All  the  order  did  was  to  give  the  real  culprits—
the  mortgage  bankers—an  opportunity  to  escape."   A  Chi-
cago  broker,  Wm.  B.  Collier,  Jr.,   declared   he   thought   it
would  have  been better  if  the  President  had  held  the  threat
of  an  order over  the  housing  industry  instead  of  issuing  one
so weak.   "The  housing  market is  soft  and the  industry  was
thinking  about  minority  housing,"  Mr.  Collier   said.     "Now
the  order  gives  them  an  out  because  it  does  not  cover  the
entire  industry."   That   must  have  been  a  stormy  session
with  Dr.  Weaver  next  day.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  17, 1962
Proxmire  Plays  to  the  McCarthyitc  Gallery  By  Campaigning  For  A  Blockade
Soviet  Soldiers  in  Cuba  and  Castro's  Offer   of  Demilitarization
If  the  presence  of  U.S.  troops  in  South  Vietnam  serves  to
deter  a  mass  invasion  from  North   Vietnam  and  China,  the
presence  of  a  few  thousand  Soviet  troops   in  Cuba  may  also
serve  to  deter  our  hotheads  from  an  attack  on  Cuba.    In  any
case  the  fuss  stirred  up  from  the  Pentagon  about  a  few  thou-
sand-man  military  mission—like  the  kind  we  have  in  so many
countries  abroad—begins  to  verge  on  the  ludicrous.   We were
glad  to  see that  Secretary of  State Rusk  at  his  press conference
last  Monday began gently  to  downgrade  this latest menace and
to  remove  it  as  an  obstacle  to  negotiation  -with  the  Soviets  on
larger  issues.   In  the  meantime the  Cuban  offer,  several times
repeated,  to  accept  demilitarization if   there  were  real  guar-
antees   against  aggression   from   the   U.S.   or  U.S.   supported
groups  remains  unexplored.    We  believe  peace  groups  could
outflank  the  Pentagon  by  taking  this  up  as  a  theme:  if  there
are  real  reasons  to  fear  Soviet  military influence  in  Cuba,  why
not  eliminate it  by  negotiating  a  demilitarized  and  neutralized
Cuba  under  international  guarantees?    That  would  take  care
of  fears  on  both  sides.
A  Liberal  Moving  Rightward
While  the  Rusk press  conference  indicated  first faint  efforts
at  disengagement  on  Cuba,  the  Administration is  under  pres-
sure  not  only  from  the  Republicans  but  from  strange  sources
in  its own  Democratic  party ranks for  more  aggressive  policies.
One  of  the  strangest  is  Senator  William  Proxmire,  the  Wis-
consin  once  liberal  Democrat,  who  seems  to  be  extending  his
efforts  to  ingratiate  himself  with  rightist  elements  from fiscal
to  foreign  policy.    There  is  a  big  market  in  Wisconsin,  as
McCarthy's  career  showed,  for  synthetic hair-on-the-chest  for-
eign  policy  and  Proxmire  seems  to  be  moving  to  supply  it.
Proxmire   is  waging   a  one-man  campaign  to  find  out  what
happened   to  the  economic  blockade  the  Administration  was
trying  to  put  into  effect   against  shipping  to  Cuba  when  the
missile  scare  and  the   "quarantine"    came  along.     The   most
important  part  of  this  earlier  plan  called  for  barring  U.S.  fi-
nanced  cargo  and  U.S.  ports  to  ships  engaged   in  trade  with
Cuba.     This   aroused    strong   opposition,   particularly   from
No  Such   Thought   in  JFK's  Mind?
".  .  .  the  Havana regime  began  to  warn  Moscow  that
a   U.S.   invasion   was   imminent,  although    there   was
nothing  to  indicate  that  such  a  thought   was  in  Presi-
dent   Kennedy's   mind  at   that   time   [when   Castro   ar-
ranged  for  Soviet  missiles  to  be  placed   in  Cuba]."
—Tad  Szulc,  in. New  York  Times  Magazine,  Dec. 9
"The  crisis  was  really  born  at  the  Bay  of  Pigs.  .  .  .
Six  months  later,  in  October,  1961,  President   Kennedy,
still   bearing  his  scars  from  the  disaster,  secretly  or-
dered  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  to  prepare  an  invasion
plan  for  Cuba—to  be  used  when  and  if   needed.    This
top  secret  war  plan  took  months  to  prepare,  but  when
the  strategists  and  computers  had  finished,  with  every
plane,  warship  and  assault  unit  tagged,  it  was  calculat-
ed  that  the   first   troops  could  hit   the   Cuban   beaches
eight  days  after  a  'go'  signal.  .  .  ."
—Washington  in  Crisis  by  Fletcher  Knebel  in  Look
Magazine,  Dec.  18.
Britain,  as  an  interference with  freedom  of  the  seas  and  in
effect  a  blockade,  or  act  of  war.
On  November  23  Proxmire  released  the  text  of  a  letter  to
Secretary  Rusk  saying he  was  baffled  and  disappointed  by  the
failure  to  go  forward with  these  plans  to  restrict  shipping  to
Cuba.    On  Dec.  7  Proxmire  released  a  reply  from  Assistant
Secretary  of  State  Frederick  G.  Dutton  saying that  these  meas-
ures  were  "still   under  consideration"  but   decision  on   them
had  been   deferred   "until  the  larger  security   issues   are   set-
tled."    The   letter  added,   "Recent   events,   as  you  are   well
aware,  have  resulted  in   a  marked   decrease  in   Free  World
shipping  to  Cuba.    Discussions  with  our  allies  accounted  in
part  for  this  decrease.    These   talks  will   continue,  and   our
evaluation  of  their  effect  must  be  taken  into  account  in  con-
sidering  further  action."    In  other  words,  we  hope  to  achieve
the  same  results  by  behind  scenes  pressure.    No   matter  how
you  phrase  it,  this  is  an  effort  to  starve  out  Cuba  in  violation
of  elementary international law.    A  strange  crusade  for  a  man
like  Proxmire.
Dr.  Samuel  Shapiro,  Friendly  to Cuba,
We  urge  a  maximum  effort   to  protest   the  action  taken
by  Michigan  State  University-Oakland   in  dropping   Samuel
Shapiro  as  assistant  professor  and  its  senior  American  his-
torian.  Dr.  Shapiro  made  himself  "controversial" by  articles
he  wrote  for  The  New  Republic  and  The  Nation  in  the  wake
of  three  visits  to  Castro's  Cuba,  the  first  in  August,   1960;
the  second  in  January,  1961  and  the  most  recent  in  August
1962.    Though  critical  of  certain   aspects,   particularly  the
loss  of  civil  liberties,  Dr.  Shapiro  praised   the  constructive
achievements  of  the  revolution  and  opposed  the  U.S.   policy
of   strangulation.     The  article   let   loose   a  flood  of   hostile
publicity,   and  Dr.  Shapiro   has  pending   a  suit  for  slander
against  a  Lansing,  Mich.,  TV  commentator  who  called  him
a  Communist.
A  New   Yorker  who  went  to  City   College   and  took   his
Ph.D.  at  Columbia,  Dr.  Shapiro  has  taught  at  Brandeis  and
Oberlin  and  was  a  Fulbright  professor  in  Argentina.    He
will  finish  his  third  year  at  Michigan  State  in  April.  He  has
now  been  informed  that  the  board  of  trustees   voted  not  to
renew  his  contract.    As  usual  in  such  cases,  the  university
authorities,   in   interviews   with   Detroit   newspapers,   have
sought  to  create  the  impression  that  they  were  acting  only
Dropped  by  Michigan  State   University
because  Dr.  Shapiro  was  not  meeting   academic    standards,
that  he  was  getting   too  interested  in  journalism,  was  not
producing  scholarly  work,  etc.    They  also  complained  that
he  was  spending  too  much  time  on  Latin  American  affairs
and  Cuba,  as  if  these  were  somehow  too  distant  from   U.S.
history—though  the  problem  of  Cuba  only  a  few  weeks  ago
threatened   to  write  our  final  chapter.
On  the  score  of  scholarship,  Dr.  Shapiro  seems  to  be  out-
standing  on  his  campus.    Since  Michigan  State's  establish-
ment   at   Oakland  in   1959,  the   whole   faculty   of   some  60
teachers  has  produced  only  five  books.    The  Michigan  State
press  published  Dr.  Shapiro's  doctoral,  a  biography   of  Rich-
ard  Henry  Dana,  Jr.   A  second  book  of  his,  "Invisible  Latin
America,"  will  be  published  next  year  by  Beacon  Press.  Only
a  few  months  ago  Michigan  State  granted  him  $700  to  buy
microfilms  for  a  third  book,  on  Daniel  Webster.
Dr.  Shapiro  has  been  one  of  the  few  American  scholars
courageous   enough   to  deviate   from   U.S.   "party   line"  and
to  write  sympathetically  of  Cuba.    His  dismissal  will  bring
derisive   echoes   from   Latin   America.     At   home   it   will
frighten   others   into   silence   or   conformity.     We  urge   a
strong   kick-back.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 17, 1962
Freedom  More  Than  "Toleration   of  Occasional  Differences  About  Matters  of  Small  Importance"
Bertrand Russell's  Memorable Message on Getting the ECLC Tom Paine Award
By  Bertrand  Russell
This  is  the  memorable  message  sent  by  Lord  Russell,  the
world's  greatest  living  philosopher,  to  the  Emergency  Civil
Liberties  Committee  in  New   York  Dec.  15  on  the  presen-
tation   to  him  of  its  annual   Tom  Paine   award:
You  honor  me  in  a  way  I  deeply  appreciate.    Tom  Paine
symbolizes   for   Americans   the   articulation   of   a  radical  con-
sciousness  that  human  welfare  and   intellectual  integrity  de-
pend  upon  courageous  insistence upon  freedom  for  men  and
women.    Freedom  can  not  effectively  exist  where  it  is  under-
stood  to  mean  no  more  than  the  toleration  of  occasional  differ-
ences  about  matters  which  are  of  small  importance.
Disputes,   for   example,   about   the   comparative   merit   of
consumer  produce  or  the  total  of  farm  expenditures  may  be
cited  as  examples  of  freedom, but  only  by  those  who  are  dead
to  its  life  and  deaf  to  its  death.    The  vision  of  Tom   Paine
was  that  of  a  serious  public  involvement  in  the  direction  of
those  affairs  which  affected  peoples'  lives.    He  struggled  for
the  right  to  partake  in  radical change  and  in  the  constant  de-
bate  as  to  how  the  good  life  might  be  provided  for  the Amer-
ican  people.
Our  Fossilized  Civil  Liberties
Values  and  great  beliefs  live  on  after  their  institutional ex-
pressions  have  ceased  to  live.    So  it  is  with  the  nominal  civil
liberties  enjoyed  today  either  by  Americans or  by  citizens  of
other  countries.
Thousands  of  years  of  human  effort,  of  great  suffering,  of
unique  achievement  are  in  daily  jeopardy  because  the  absence
of   the   freedom   striven  after   by  Tom   Paine  prevents   men
from  forestalling  consummate  folly.
Today,  the  exercise  of  power  is  so  remote  from  the  daily
lives  of  men  and  women,  and  the  control  of  the  very  springs
of  thought  so  concentrated  in  the  hands  of  those   sycophantic
to   power,   that   freedom   is  increasingly  an   abstraction   with
which  we  are  deluded.
Delusion  takes  the  form  of  public  incantation  over  values
and  beliefs  which  are  dishonored   even  as  they  are  invoked.
President  Kennedy  speaks  of  human  freedom   as  he  takes  ac-
tions  which   may  condemn   hundreds   of  millions   of   human
A  10th  Anniversary  Thank  You
This  is  the final issue  of  the  tenth  year  of  the  Weekly.
I  never  dreamed,  when  I  launched  it  in  Jan. 1953, at
the  height  of  McCarthyism,  that  it  would  last  this  long.
It  began  with  little  more  than  5,000  subscribers;  news-
stand  and  subscription  sales  today  are  close  to   20,000.
I  am  grateful  to  the  readers  for  having  made  this  ad-
venture  in  independent  journalism  possible   -in  so   diffi-
cult  a  period.    I  must  apologize  for   the   many  unan-
swered  letters,  but  the  reporting,  writing,  research  and
editing  have  been  a  one-man  job  and  there  has   been
no  time  to  answer  the  mail.   I  want  to  say  "thank you"
now   for   the   many   kind  messages,   and  their   warmly
sustaining,   deeply   appreciated   affection.—IFS.
beings  to  agonizing  death.    Future  generations  are  forfeited
to  the  paranoia  of  those  who  compulsively   act  for   garrison
states.
So  it  is  that  power  possessed   by  the  few  condemns  us  all
to  futile  death  and  empties  our  formal  rights  of  meaning  or
of  viable  life.    Only  to  the  extent  that  we  are  able  to  remove
those  who  would  perpetrate  this  crime  against  humanity can
"Freedom"  be  seriously  our  possession  or  our  right.
I  feel  honored  in  a  way  I  do  not  find  easy  to  acknowledge.
I  am an  Englishman  and  so was Tom  Paine  by birth.  I  believe
that  human  freedom  and   the   civilized   ends   to  which   that
fredom  was  to  have  been  directed,  are  not  spoken  for  by  the
Governments  of  either  of  our  two  countries.     I  find  it   diffi-
cult  to  express  the  feelings  I  have  upon  receiving  this  award
because  I  know  how  Tom  Paine  would  feel  about  the  country
he  left  and  the  nation  he  helped  to  found.
The  pity  of  it.    The  disgrace  to  all  that  is  best  in  man's
long  odyssey.   The  intolerable  affront  to  the  dignity  of  us all,
contained  in  the  readiness  to  annihilate  whole   continents   in
pursuit  of  the  insane  dictates  of  power.
If  there  is one  message,  one  sentiment  I  should  wish  to  give
to  you,  it  is  that  I  can  not  bring  myself  to  believe  that  man-
kind  is  so  base  that  none  of  its  representatives   will  struggle
for   a  more  excellent' way  of  life,  no  matter  the   chances  of
success.     Thank   you  for  your  honor  to  me.    We   share   the
conviction  that  the  struggle  must  go  on.
IFS  Off   to  Cuba.    Watch  for   His  Report  in  The  Next  Issue  Dated  Jan. 7
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ....................................................••.•.......—.•——•—-•—• —
Street   ...................-....................................................—......—
City   ............ ,—. .........................Zone.......~...State....................
12/17/82
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)    Name  ........................................................................•:-•
Street    ......... — .......................................................................
City   ............ _ .........................Zone........_..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?          Yea  Q    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED