I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962oct15.pdf

============================================================

No  Smith  Act for  Miss.  Mobsters,  P.  3
Suppressed   Senate  Report  Shows  Economics  of  Disarmament   Feasible,  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  37OCTOBER  15,  1962
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Cuba  Offers  Peace,  But   We're  Intent  on  War
United  Nations,   N.Y.
The   speech   by   President   Dorticos   of   Cuba   before   the
United  Nations  General  Assembly painfully  recalled  that  by
Ethiopia's  Haile  Selassie before  the  League  of  Nations.  True,
we  have  not   yet  attacked  Cuba  as  Mussolini   did   Ethiopia.
But  here  once  again  one  of  the  smallest  nations  on  earth  was
appealing  in  a  parliament  of  man  for  aid  against  the  aggres-
sive  actions  of  a  great  neighboring  Power,  as  indeed  Nagy  of
Hungary  would  have  done  if  the  Russians had  not  kidnapped
and  murdered him.   It  was not  pleasant to  see one's  own  coun-
try  in  this  bully  company.    In  the  atmosphere  of  frustrated
lunacy  engulfing  these  United  States  on  the  subject  of  Cuba,
I  dare to  say that  it  was  an  able,  an  eloquent  and  a  moderate
speech.   Dr.  Dorticos  scored  a  strong  point  at  the  very  outset,
when  he  pointed  out  that  North  American  hostility  made  it-
self   felt  with  "the  promulgation  of  the  agrarian  reform  law
long  before  we proclaimed  the  socialist  character  of  our  revo-
lution."    The  U.S.  has  yet  to  declare  that  if  Cuba  gives  up
Marxism-Leninism,  it  can keep  the  agrarian  reform;  the  CIA's
hostility  to  the  left  wingers  in  the  anti-Castro  forces  reflects
a  desire  to  restore  the  sugar  and  oil  properties.   As'much  as
Marxism-Leninism,  we  also  fear  Fidelismo  without  Fidel.
The  War  of  1812  in  Reverse
There  was,  secondly,  and  this  I  am  sure  struck  home  with
the  Latin  American  delegations,  his  reference  to  our  invoca-
tion  of  the  inter-American  system  against  Cuba.    This  sys-
tem,   as  revised  at  Montevideo  and  Bogota,   was  to  substitute
hemispheric  guarantees  for  unilateral  U.S.   action  under   the
Monroe  Doctrine.    It  was to  give  the  Latins  protection  against
aggression   from   any  source,  not  just  from  Europe  but   also
from  North  America.    "Why  was  the  system,"  Dr.   Dorticos
asked,   "not   invoked  at  the  time  of  the  aggression?    Why
was  the  system  sidestepped  at  the  invasion  of  Playa  de  Giron ?
Doubtless,"   he  added  bitterly,   "the  same  system  will  also  be
overlooked  in  the  case  of  a  new  armed  aggression  against  my
country."  From  the  violated  law  of  the  hemisphere,  he  turned
to  freedom  of  the  seas.  His  words  must  have  found  an  echo
among  many  Western   and  neutral   delegations   when  he  in-
dicted  our  new  program   of   "coercion   and   reprisals   against
any  shipping  firm  whose  ships  carry  any  cargo  to  supply  and
feed  the  Cuban  people."    He  said  this  was  an  attack   upon
"the   guiding  principles  of  the  freedom  of  trade"  and  that
these, principles  represented   "an  ancient  victory  of   mankind."
If  the  mob  clamor  in  the  U.S.  for  action  against  Cuba  were
not  so  intimidating,  many  would   recall  that  these  were  the
principles  for  which  we went  to  war with  the  British  in   1812.
Now  Washington   is  angry  with  London  for  refusing  to  vio-
late  them  in  the  case  of  Cuba!
1  0  *
New  Light  on  Cuba's  Fishing  Port?
I   do  not   print   stories  I  cannot  substantiate  but  I
make  an  exception  this week for  one  I  picked up  along
the  capital's  diplomatic  row  from  a  source  friendly  to
Castro  which  I  trust.    The  story  is  that  the   Cubans
originally  negotiated  with  the  Japanese  for  construc-
tion  of  that  new   fishing   port,  and  shopped  around  in
Europe  East  and  West  before  asking  the  Russians  to
build  it  for  them.   Earlier,  the  Japanese  took  consider-
able  interest  in  Cuba,  sent  in  rice  growing  experts  and
bought   Cuban   sugar.    Then,  perhaps  in  response   to
Washington's   efforts   to   discourage  all   "free  world"
trade  with  Castro,  trade fell  off.   Recently the  Cubans
wanted  to  send  a  trade  mission  to  Tokyo but  were told
by  the  Japanese  government that  it  did  not  consider
this  an  opportune time  for  such  a  visit.    The  story,  if
true,   would   be  another  illustration  of   the   way   U.S.
policy  has  driven  Cuba  into ever  greater  dependence on
Moscow,  though it  would  have  been  far  more  in  accord
with  national  interest  if  that  fishing  port  were  now  to
be  built  by  an  allied  power  like  the  Japanese.
This  brought  Dr.  Dorticos  to  another  effective  point.    We
say  we're  going  to  show  the  whole  hemisphere  that  socialism
won't  work  in  Cuba.    The  world's  greatest  capitalistic  power
is  embarked  on  a  demonstration  in  competitive  co-existence
with   the  world's  most  precarious   socialist   state.     But   it  is
hardly  a fair  contest.    Dr.  Dorticos  was able  to  say "Now  they
have  to  destroy  the  Cuban  revolution  by  the  artificial  estab-
lishment  of  economic  difficulties,  fully  aware  as  they  must  be
that  the  economic  development  of  my  country  depends,   and
will  depend  for  a  long  time,  on  the  strengthening  and  estab-
lishment  of  our  trade  relations  with  other   countries."     To
bring  down  the  government  of  an  island  country,   dependent
always  on  imports,   by  a  blockade  is  not  to  prove   socialism
unworkable.    It  is only  to  provide  its  collapse—if  it  does  col-
laps,  which  few expect——with  a powerful  alibi:  it  never  had
a  fair   chance.    The  shipping   measures  viokte  the  spirit  of
international  law;  they  viokte  specific  provisions  of  the  inter-
American   system   against   economic  coercion.     Never   did   a
Goliath  stoop  to  more  unfair  tactics  in  dealing  with  a  pigmy
opponent.     Finally  Dr.  Dorticos  was  able  to  indict  our  Con-
gressional  resolution  on  Cuba  as  an  affront  to  the  Charter  of
the  United  Nations,  which  calls  on  all  countries  to  solve  their
disputes  by peaceful  means.    Dr.  Dorticos  declared  that  Con-
gress  "takes  upon  itself  the  so-called  right  unilaterally  to  de-
cide  when,  in  its  opinion,   these  conditions   set  forth   in  trie
joint  resolution  have  been  fulfilled,  at  which  time  the  United
States  will  be  able  to  carry  out  what  previously  was  made
legitimate,   namely  aggression   against  my  country."     He  has
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 15,1962
Humphrey  Circumvents  Gag  to  Get  Out  the  Facts  But  Too  Late  for  Action  This  Session
Suppressed  Senate  Report  Shows  Economics  of Disarming Not  Too  Difficult
Shortly  before 7  p.m.  Friday, Oct.  5 with  the  press  galleries
almost   empty,   Senator   Humphrey  delivered  a   speech   to   a
handful   of   Senators  impatiently waiting  adjournment,  on  a
long  suppressed  and  still  suppressed  report  on  the  economic
impact  of  disarmament. Though  the  Secretary  of  Defense  had
three  times informed  Humphrey,  twice  in  writing,  that  publi-
cation  of  this  report  would in  no  way be  dangerous  to  national
security,  Humphrey  was  unable  to  get  a  majority  of  the  Sena-
tors  (Symington,  Church,  Hickenlooper,  Gore  and  Aiken)  on
his  moribund  disarmament  subcommittee  to  release  its  find-
ings.    In  a  new  and  unprecedented  kind  of  censorship,  the
report  was  labelled  "confidential"  and  its  circulation restricted
to  certain  officials  in  the  Executive branch  and  some members
of  Congress.    The  reason  (I  believe)  is  to  keep  the  spotlight
from  being  focussed  on  the  two  dozen giant  concerns  (see  box
below)   which  form  the  core  of  the  military-industrial  com-
plex and  get  the  bulk of  the  arms business.
Blacked  Out  in  The  Press
Senator  Humphrey  deserves  credit  for   circumventing  this
censorship  to  some  degree  by putting  the  main  findings  into  a
Senate  speech.    Unfortunately  the  long  wrangle  over  this  re-
port  held  him  up  until  the  session  was  almost  over,  when  the
press  galleries  were  so  swamped  with  last  minute  Congres-
sional  action  that  attention  was  least  likely  to  be  given   the
speech,  and  too  late  to  give  any  support  this  session  to  a  fol-
low  up  resolution by Hart  (D.  Mich.)  and  14 other  Senators,
(see  box  col.  2).    I  saw  no  coverage  on  the  speech  in  the
next  day's papers  but  peace  groups can spread  it  by getting  re-
prints  from  the  Congressional Record.
The  eagerness  to  suppress  it  was understandable,  for  it  car-
ried  good   news  about  disarmament.   The   report  was  based
upon  a  questionnaire  sent  out  by  the  disarmament  subcom-
mittee  two  years  ago  before  it  had  been  submerged  into  the
Senate  Foreign  Relations Committee  and  lost  its semi-autono-
mous  status.   The  questionnaire went  to  439  firms  engaged  in
arms  business  and,  though  quite  complicated,  it  drew  replies
from  80  percent,  an  extraordinary response,  many  friendly  to
disarmament,  none hostile.  It  showed  that  arms orders,  though
huge,  are  still  only  a  small  part  of  American  business,   less
than  ten  percent  of  all  goods  and  services,  and  employing  lit-
tle  more  than  5  percent  of  those  engaged   in  manufacturing.
The  aircraft  industry  is  the  only  one  whose  military business
Sample   Arms   Business  Opinion
"One  leading  defense  company  said  it  'whole-heart-
edly  supports  efforts  to  find  some  satisfactory  formula
for  controlled:  disarmament. ...  If  the  billions  now
being  spent  on  weapons   and  warning  systems  can  in-
stead  be  devoted   to  lifting  still  further   the  levels  of
living  of  people;  if  the  tax  burden  can  be  reduced  and
the  threat   of  inflation  met;  if   the  hundreds   of   thou-
sands  of  scientific-engineering   teams  .  .  .  could  once
more  turn  their   innovative   talents  to  King   Customer
.  .  .  the  results  would  be  invigorating.   .  ,  .'   And an-
other  company  stated:  'There  is  no  doubt  that  a  sudden
withdrawal   of   defense  business   would   create   severe
problems. ...  At  the same  time  the  ingenuity  of  indus-
try  and  government   should  be  equal  to  the  challenge.'
"A  third  defense  company  wrote:  'The  Soviet   Union
is   now   convinced    that   any   extensive   disarmament
would  cause  so  great  an  economic   depression  in  the
U.  S.  that  the  result  would  be  the  destruction   of  the
capitalistic   system.     Therefore,   the  Soviet   leaders  do
not  believe  that  the  U.  S.  is  sincere  in  its   disarmament
proposals.  Extensive  government   planning  to  deal  with
the  economic   problems   arising  from  drastic  disarma-
ment  would  go  a  long  distance  toward  convincing  the
Soviet  Union  of   U.  S.  sincerity  in  the  field  of   arms
control."
—Humphrey   to  the  Senate  Oct.  5.   He  appealed   for
passage  of  S.  Res.  S77 by  Hart  (D.  Mich.)  and  14 other
Senators  to prepare for  such planning  by  a  study  of  the
ecnomic  implications   of   our   $50  billion  arms   budget.
But  his  speech  came too  late  for  action.
is  greater  than  its  commercial.    It  is  in  this  industry  that  the
biggest  reconversion problems would  arise.
Next  to  aircraft,  the  two  industries  most  tied  up  in  war
work  are  shipbuilding  and  electrical  machinery.    The  latter,
our  second  biggest  arms industry, got  one-third  of  its business
from  defense  work.    By  contrast,  only  4  percent  of  the  auto
industry's  sales  in  1959  came  from  military  orders.    The  in-
volvement  of   industry  is  uneven  as  to   states   (almost   one-
fourth  of  the  arms business is done  in  California), as  to  prod-
ucts  (missiles  and  aircraft)  and  companies  (24).    Humphrey
concluded  that   diversion  of   resources,  funds   and  personnel
from  these  companies,  states  and  industry groups  "can  be  ac-
complished   without  undue  loss  of  economic  growth  or  em-
ployment.    But  we  need  to  start  planning  now.  .  .  ."    The
military  industrial  complex  would  rather  change  the  subject.
24  Giant  Arms  Concerns  at  the  Core  of  That  Industrial-Military  Complex  Ike  Feared
"The  defense  effort  of  the  U.S.  is  highly  concentrated  in
a  few  industries  and  a  few  companies.    The  military-indus-
trial  complex  that  former  President  Eisenhower  warned  the
country  against  is  one  which  appears  to  be  centered  in  a
few  hands  and in a  few key places. ...
"24  companies  accounted  for  70  percent  of  the  entire  de-
fense   expenditures   represented   by   the   study.     In   other
words,  of  almost   $22  billion  in  defense  spending  about  $16
billion  went  to  24  companies.    There  were  four  companies
each  receiving  over  $1 billion  in defense  sales.  Another  four
companies  received  from   $500  million  to  $750  million  and
12  received  from  $250  million  to  $500  million.  .  .  .
"By  awarding  such  •  large  portion  of  defense  work  to  so
few   companies,  the  government   is  promoting   the  concen-
tration   of   economic   power.     From   an   over-all   economic
standpoint  it  would be  preferable  to  have  the  impact  of  any
reduction  in  defense  spending  spread  more  evenly   through-
out  the  economy.    And  today,  when  weapons  systems  have
become  so  complex,  we  have  transferred   to  some  of  these
industrial  and  technological    giants   great  power   and  influ-
ence  over  the  development  of  these  weapons  systems.   The
continued  concentration  of  economic  power  and  the  loss  of
the   government's  decision-making   power   over   aspects  of
defense  policy  are  trends  in  the  defense  effort  which  should
worry  us.  The  fact,  however,  that  so  much  defense  work  is
done  by  so  few  companies  gives  us,  at  least,  a  handle  in
terms  of  preparing   for  any  adjustments  due  to  arms   con-
trol  and  disarmament.     We  know  where  to  start."
—Humphrey   (D.  Minn.)  in  Senate  speech  Oct.  S  disclos-
ing  findings  of  a  long  suppressed  disarmament   study.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  15, 1962
Rightist  and  Racist  Conspirators  Go  Scottfree   Whille  "Reds"  and  "Pinks"  Still   Hounded
Unbalanced  Is  The  Word  for  The  Double  Standard  the  U.S.   Applies
If  ever  a  country was  literally  unbalanced,  the  term  applies
to  ours  in  its  attitude  toward  two  internal  dangers,   one  so
minuscule  as to  be all  but  mythical,  the  other  all  too  real.  The
former,  of  course,  is  the  Red  menace;  the  latter,  the   danger,
all  too  visible  in  Mississippi,  from  the  twin  menace  of  racism
and rightism.
The   lack  of  balance  was  sharply  visible  here  in  Washing-
ton  the  week  after  the  riots  in  Mississippi,    In  Mississippi,  no
student  has  yet  been  punished  and  most  of  the  rioters  have
been  released.    The   Governor,   though   in  clear  contempt  of
Court  orders,  had  been  given  another  period  of  grace  before
being  brought  to  account.   No  paper  we  have  seen   suggested
that  if  ever  the  Smith  Act  was  violated  by  advocacy  of  force
and  violence within  the  context  of  a  clear  and  present  danger,
it   was   in   Mississippi.     No   indictments  have   been   sought
against  the  White  Citizens'  Councils  and  the  mob  leaders  for
conspiracy  to  stage an insurrection.
Unlawful,   Though  All  Their  Activities  Legal?
But  during  the  very  week  in  which  the  government  was  re-
acting  with  such flabby tolerance  toward  the  right,  there  were
three  examples  of  the  unrelenting  zeal  with  which  the  govern-
ment  pursues  the  victims  of  the  cold  war  witch  hunt  against
the  Left.  Three  alleged  Communist  "front"  organizations,  the
only  survivors of  13  ordered  to  register  by  the  Subversive  Ac-
tivities  Control  Board,  held  a  press  conference  to  protest  their
persecution   the   day  before  their   cases  were   argued   in   the
Court  of  Appeals,   the  first  test  of  the  "front"   provisions  of
the  Internal Security  Act.
With  all  due  respect,  never  were  more  superannuated  sub-
versives  on  view.    The  head  and  spokesman  for  one,  the  Na-
tional  Council  of  Soviet   American  Friendship,  was  Rockwell
Kent,  a  great  American  and  a  great  artist  but  80,  a  little  old
to  be  a  revolutionary  menace.    The  head  and  spokesman  of
the  second,  the  American  Committee  for  the  Protection  of  the
Foreign  Born,  was  Prof.  Louise  Pettibone  Smith,  just  turning
75,  and  also  unlikely to  bomb  the  Capitol.    The  third   "front"
the  Veterans   of   the   Abraham   Lincoln  Brigade,  was   repre-
sented  by  a  handful  of   aging   men,  one  blind,   one  with  a
wooden   leg,   from  wounds   received   in  the   struggle   against
Franco  a quarter  century  ago.
The  press  conference was pathetic.    Except  for  David  Wes-
ley  of  the  York,  Pa.,  Gazette  and  Daily  and  myself,  the  only
other   representative   of   the   U.S.   press  was  from   the   Provi-
dence,  R.I.,  Journal.    The  only  wire  service  which  showed  up
was  Tass.    Prosecution   of  the  left  is  taken  for  granted,   and
few  even  covered  the  argument  before  the  Court  of  Appeals
(Prettyman,  Bazelon  and  Danaher)  next  day,  though   funda-
mental  principles  were  at  stake,  principles  important   enough
to  have  evoked   an  eloquent   veto  message   by  Truman   when
this  Act  was  passed  in  1950  and  enacted  over  his  veto.
For  example:  defense  counsel  for  all  three  alleged   "fronts"
pointed  out  that  there  was  no  evidence  any  of  them  had  en-
gaged  in  activities which  were  unlawful  or  designed  to  further
illegal   or   revolutionary  activities   by  the   Communist    Party.
Government  counsel,  in  answer  to  sharp  questions  by  Judges
Prettyman  and  Bazelon,  insisted  that  the  severe  sanctions  of-
the  Act  could  be  applied  to  them  even  though  they  bad  done
nothing  illegal.    One  worked  for  better  Soviet  relations,  one
helped   foreign   born  persons  in  trouble,  the  last  served   the
needs  of  the  dwindling handful  who  fought  nobly  in  Spain.
This  danger  here  is  real.    The  Internal  Security  Act  permits
the  SACB  to  impose  drastic  sanctions  on  organizations  whose
positions  on  public  questions  parallel  those  of   the   Commu-
nist  Party.     In  the  atmosphere  of  a  victorious  McCarthyism,
this  could  be  turned  against  many  liberal  organizations.
We   take   for   granted   a   most   unwholesome    atmosphere.
Eight  victims  of  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee  and
the  House  Un-American Activities Committee  were  reindicted
during  the  same  week.   None  of  them,  of  course,  were  mem-
bers  of  the  White   Citizens  Council  or  preachers   of   racism.
Racism  is  not  regarded  as  "un-American"   by  Walter's  com-
mittee;  the  White  Citizens Councils  have  a  fellow  traveller  in
Eastland,  chairman  of  the  Internal  Security  Committee.     He
sets in  motion  an  investigation of  the  Oxford  riots  designed  to
smear  the  Federal  marshals  and  excuse  the  mob.    Does  any-
one  rise  in  the  Senate  to  protest  against  an  investigation   of
Mississippi  by  a  Mississippian  who  is  himself   a  racist?
But  behind  the  scenes,  the  pressure  from   this  same  East-
land   and  his  subcommittee  vice-chairman,  Dodd,   and   from
Walter,  was  strong  enough   to  force  a  reluctant   Justice  De-
partment   to   obtain   fresh   indictments   in   these   eight   witch
hunt   contempt   cases,   all  of   them   reversed   by  the   Supreme
Court  last  term.
Still  Hounding   Those  Newspapermen
New  indictments  were  obtained,  though  a  new  court  test  is
likely  to  end  in  another  reversal,  particularly  in  the  case  of  the
three  newspapermen,  Shelton,  Whitman  and  Price,  victims of
an  Eastland  committee  foray  into  the  press   almost  ten  years
ago whose main  target was the New  York  Times.   The  indict-
ments  were  dismissed  for  failure  to  state  the  subject   matter
under   inquiry.     The   new   indictment   states   the   subject   as
"Communist  activities  in  news  media"  but  so  many  conflicting
explanations  of  just  what  the  subject  was  have  already   been
given  by  the  government  and  the  Eastland  committee  in  this
affair,  that  this  new  indicment,  too,. is  apt  to  be  thrown  out
by the  courts.
A  third  example  of  continued  Leftward  prosecution  was  the
government's  decision  to  proceed  with  a  new  trial  of  seven  of-
ficers  of  the  International   Union   of  Mine,  Mill  and   Smelter
Workers  for  conspiracy to  violate  the  Taft-Hartley  Act  by fil-
ing  fake  non-Communist  affidavits.    The  original   convictions
were  reversed.
Several   things  make  this  renewed   prosecution    particularly
reprehensible,   as  John  Pemberton,   executive   director   of   the
American  Civil  Liberties  Union,  pointed   out  in  a  protesting
letter   to  Attorney  General  Kennedy.    One  is  that  the   Taft-
Hartley   oath  was  repealed  in   1959.     The  second  is  that   the
officers  under  attack  all  swore  that  they  were  not   Communists
at  the  time  they  took  the  oath.   But  instead  of  prosecuting   for
perjury,  the  government  is  again  prosecuting  for   "conspiracy."
Every  lawyer  knows  how  much  easier  this  makes  the   gov-
ernment's  task  and  how  much  less  likely  a  fair  trial.    As  Mr.
Pemberton  wrote  General  Kennedy,   "The   use  of  the  less  spe-
cific  although  more  emotionally  tinged  charge  raises  the  ques-
tions  whether  the  government  felt  there  was  inadequate  proof
to sustain the  substantive  offense."
t    4
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 15,1962
Cuba  Even  Willing  to   Disarm
(Continued   from   Page   One)
a  right  to  fear  in  its  terms  "prefabricated"  "pretexts  for  ag-
gression."    All this hardly adds up to a devotion  to world  law.
No  Desire   to  Be  In  The  Cold  War
Dr.  Dorticos  supplemented  his  indictment with  a  plea  for
peace.    "It  has  been very often  stated  here,"  he  declared,  "that
Cuba  is  not  a  bone  of  contention  between  the  East  and   the
West.    Cuba  is  a  problem  of  sovereignty and  independence.
The  problem  of  Cuba  is  the  question  of  the  sovereignty  of  a
people  and  the  right  of  that people  to self-determination.  Cuba
does  not  wish,"  he  told  the  Assembly,  "to  add  its  name  to
the  roster  of  those  involved  in  the  cold  war.  Cuba  only wishes
to  develop  its  economy  and  advance  its  culture  and  to  plan
and  carry out  a  good  future  in  peace."    He  said  again  that  no
attempt  would  be  made  to  recover  Guantanamo,  except  by
peaceful  legal  means:  "We  shall not make a gift  to the  United
States  of  a pretext  for  aggression."  He  reiterated  Cuba's  often
repeated  readiness  "to   indemnify   American  citizens  and  in-
terests  that  might  have  been  affected  by the  laws  of  the  revo-
lution."    He  said  Cuba  was  "ready  and  is  ready  to  do  every-
thing  we  deem  useful  to  lighten  the  tension  that  surrounds
Cuban-American  relations  and   that   threatens  world  peace."
He  even  said  Cuba  was  prepared  to  disarm  if  given  adequate
guarantees  against  aggression.    He  quoted   from  a  document
the  Cuban  Council  of  Ministers sent the  United  Nations secre-
tariat  after   the  adoption  of  the  Congressional  resolution   (a
document  still  not  made  public  by  the  UN)   in  which  Cuba
declared:
"Were   the   United   States   able   to   give   Cuba   effective
guarantees  and  satisfactory  proof  concerning  the  integrity
of  Cuban territory,  and  were  it  to  cease  its  subversive  and
counter-revolutionary   activities   against   our   people,    then
Cuba   would  not   have   to   strengthen   its   defenses.    Cuba
• would  not  even  need  an  army,  and  all  the  resources  that
are  used  for  this  could  be  gratefully  and  happily  invested
in  the  economic  and  cultural  development  of  the  country."
If  our  real fear  is Russian arms in  Cuba, if  we  really  believe
Castro  needs these arms to  hold  down  the  Cuban people,  then
we  should  be  willing  to  take  up  this  challenge,  to  give  guar-
antees  for  an  effectively  neutralized and  disarmed  Cuba,  from
which  Russian  arms  would  be  withdrawn  and  see  what  hap-
pens  under  conditions  of  real  peace  within  and  without  the
If  Given  Effective   Guarantees
Moscow  Has  Trouble  With  Fidel,  Too
"The  main  pattern  of  the  distribution   of   power   [in
Cuba]   has   emerged   relatively   clearly.     The   present
supremacy  of  Castro  is  unquestioned.  .  .  .  The  exile  of
Anibal  Escalante  this  year  marked Communist  acquies-
cence  in  the  defeat  of  their  policy  of  regarding  Castro
more  or  less  as  a  Kerensky.  .  .  .  The  Communists  are
not  allowed  to  hold  any  of  the  levers  of  power,  nor  to
act  as  a  fraction—indeed  there  is  reason  to  believe  that
former  leading  Communists fear  even  to  meet   together
for   fear   they   will   be   accused   of   intriguing   against
Castro.    In  return,  they  are  allowed  to  fill  the  lion's
share  of jobs  in the  State  and Party  apparatus. . .. The
symbiosis  works  without  too  much  friction  at   present,
but  its  real  testing  time will  not  come  until,  divergences
between  Castro  and  the  Russians  grow  too  large  to  be
smoothed  over.    A  hint  of  the  strains  and  stresses  in
Cuban-Soviet  relationships   was  given  by  Castro's  two
demonstrative  cables  last  month  to  the  Albanian  Prime
Minister. ...  It  was a  sign  both  that  Castro  wishes  to
participate,  at  least   verbally,  in  the  struggle   between
the  heavyweights  of  World  Communism,  and  that   he
is  prepared  to  flaunt  his  independence  of  his  Russian
benefactors."
Cuba:  Castro  and  Communism,  by  George  Sherman
in  The  (London)  Spectator  Sept.  7.
island.
But  to  Dr.  Dorticos's  complaints  and  offers  of  negotiation,
Adlai  Stevenson  replied  in  the  supercilious  manner  of  a  sub-
urban  dowager  reprimanding an  insubordinate  colored  house-
maid.    To  a  hastily  summoned  press  conference,  he  read  a
lengthy  statement  denying  the  obvious  ("There  was  incessant
talk  this  morning  about  economic  strangulation  and  economic
blockade.    Neither  of  these  terms  has  any  application  to  the
case"),  restating  the  patently  untrue   (that  we  were  merely
putting  into   effect   the  unanimous  will  of   the   hemisphere)
and  offering  only  to  let  a  repentant  Cuba  crawl,  if  it  chose,
to  the  back  door.     "If   the  Cuban  regime,"  Mr.  Stevenson
said,  in  that  prissy  manner  of  his,  "is  sincere  in  its   request
for  negotiations,  and  wishes  to  lay  its  grievances  before  the
appropriate   forum,"   it  could  apply   to  the  Organization  of
American  States from  which we had  it  expelled.  Then,  though
this  was  supposed  to  be  a  press  conference,  he  walked  out
before  a  single  question  could  be  put  to  him.
Don't  Forget  Our  Offer:    A  Free  Copy   to  A  Friend  If   You  Send  A  Stamped   LONG  Addressed   Envelope
IE  Stone's  Weekly
I.   P.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ...............................,.............................................^~......_-
Street   ..........,.....................,......................................_........_
City   ............_.........................Zone........_..State....................
10/15/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  .........................................................................—
City  ............_.........................Zone.........,..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?        Yes  Q   No  D
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Footage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  daring  August  and  the  last  Monday  in  December
and  the  first  in  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington.  D.  C.   An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.
Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  SB  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  in  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.
Air  Mail  rates:  116 to  Europe;  S20  io  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED