I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jan08.pdf

============================================================

Behind  the Scenes  in  Laos, P.  3
Documentary:  AAAS  Report  Condemning  Shelter  Delusion  and  Calling  for  'Science  of  Survival  Pps.  2-3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
»VOL.  X,  NO.  1
JANUARY  8,  1962       "CU>='
01
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Is  This  How   Kennedy   Wages  A  Peace  Race?
The  new  Defense  Department  pamphlet  on  fallout  protec-
tion  begins with  what  might  be  termed  a  commercial.    "The
purpose  of  this  booklet,"  it  says,  "is  to  help  save  lives  if  a
nuclear   attack   should   ever  come  to  America.    The   foreign
and  defense  policies of  your  Government  make  such  an attack
unlikely,  and  to  keep  it  unlikely  is  their  most  important aim.
It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  have  devoted  so  large  an   effort
to  creating  and  maintaining  our  deterrent   forces."     This   is
smooth  press  agentry  for  the  military,  but  it  hardly  fits  the
testimony  in  the  daily  headlines.    Our  foreign  policies  keep
us  on  the  brink  of  war  in  a  half  dozen  far  places  from  Viet-
nam  to  Berlin.    Our  military  policies  are  based  upon  a  nu-
clear  arms  race which even  many  military men  agree  must  lead
to  a  nuclear  war.    The  effect  of  the  pamphlet  is  to  condition
the  public mind  for  the  disaster  these  policies  make  inevitable.
In  the  name  of  civil  defense,  our  brains  are  being  washed.
A  Henry  Luce Operation
Even  a paper  as  firmly  enlisted  in  the  cold  war  as  the  Bal-
timore  Sun  (Jan.  2)  finds  that  "the  tone  of  the  whole  book-
let,  whatever  it  may  say  specifically,  is  to  suggest  that   safety
in  a  nuclear  attack  is  really  rather  easy and  quite  neat."    The
'  mes  call  for  fhe  widest  public  discussion   of  the  need  to  end
«  arms  race  and  create  a  new  world'  order.     Only  a  few
onths  ago  the  President  was  talking  of  a  "peace  race."    In-
stead  all  the  facilities of  the  Defense  Department  for  molding
public  opinion—it  has  energetic  branches  which  suggest  and
arrange  stories  for  TV,   the  radio,  the  films,  magazines  and
newspapers—have  been  put  to  work  since  last  spring  selling
ihe  shelter  delusion.    It  is  appalling  to  learn  from  the  New
York   Times   (Dec.   31)   that  the  preparation  of  this  fallout
pamphlet  was  originally  entrusted  to  a  team  from  Time,  Inc.,
headed  by  Edward  Thompson,   managing  editor  of  Life   Mag-
azine,  which  last  Sept.  15  published   (with  an  approving  letter
from  Mr.  Kennedy)  that  Pied  Piperish  sensation  "How  You
Can  Survive Fallout.    97  Out  of  100  People  Can  Be  Saved."
The  Time-Life  crowd  is  notoriously  unreliable  as  to  facts:  the
home  office's  capacity  for  distorting  the  news  it  gets  from  the
field  is  an  open  journalistic scandal;  Henry  Luce's  crusade  for
brinksmanship,  notably  in  the  Far  East,  is  an  old  story.    It  is
pad  enough  that  this  one  man  should  control  so  large  a  sec-
tor  of  American  mass  communications;  it  is  worse  that  he  is
invited  in  to  run  a  major  propaganda   campaign  for  the  gov-
ernment.
It  is true that  the  pamphlet  prepared  by the  Time-Life  team
proved   to   be  more   than   Secretary   of   Defense    McNamara
could  stomach.     It  must  have  been   pretty  bad   if  this  pam-
phlet  'is  adjudged   a  more  moderate   version.     It   would   be
fascinating  to know how the  skilled  Time-Life  men made  more
1  *
Poll  Shows  Public  Sour  on  Shelters
A  poll  by  the   San  Francisco  Chronicle  in  Northern
California  disclosed:  98% have not  built  a  shelter, 93%
don't  intend  to;  92%  are  against  the  government  urg-
ing  all  householders to  build  shelters;  70  percent  are
against  community  shelters.    Asked:  "Do  you  take  the
view  that  life  after  a  devastating  nuclear  attack  would
probably   not   be   worth   living?"   69%   replied   "Yes",
23%  "No"  and  8%  were undecided.
In  reply  to  four  questions   about  the  potential  effec-
tiveness  of  shelters,  9%  thought  them  essential  to  na-
tional  preparedness;  54%  thought  them  "largely  use-
less"; 69% thought them  dangerous because  "they  make
nuclear  war  acceptable  by  suggesting   that  they  make
survival  possible"  and  72%  thought  money  for  family
shelters  would  be  better  spent  "supporting the  UN  or
other  peace  agencies."
In   an  editorial   Dec.   26,  the   Chronicle   commented,
"President  John  F.  Kennedy  and  others  who  have evi-
dently  concluded  that  there  is  political  dynamism  in  the
shelter  program  may  well  be  warned  by  the   prepon-
derant  indication  that  the  public  is  not  ready  to  invest
either  faith  or  money  in  it."
palatable  the  suggestions   in-  this  pamphlet  that  "the  water  in
toilet  flush  tanks ...  is  drinkable"  and  that  "in  an  emer-
gency  most  canned  and  packaged  animal  foods  can  be  eaten
by  humans  without  harm."    Or  to  see  the  euphemisms with
which  they  originally  veiled  the  report's  lame  admission  that
while  "many"  of  the  supposed  50,000,000  shelter  spaces  to  be
marked  by  the  National  Shelter  Survey  in  existing  buildings
are  in  central  areas  "exposed  to  destruction  by  blast  and  fire
in  the  event  of  a  nuclear  attack",  this  "space  is  immediately
available  and  the  cost  of  identification,  marking  and   stocking
is  less  than  $4  per  space."     In  other  words,  not  worth  much
but  cheap.
From  every  postorfice  the  government  will  now  be  giving
out  this  pamphlet  by  the  millions.   What  needs  to  be  driven
deep  into  public  consciousness  is  that  there  is  now  no  alter-
native  to  peace,  and  that  peace  requires  an  end  of  internation-
al  anarchy,  limitations  on  national  sovereignty  and  establish-
ment  of  world  law.    This  pamphlet  strives  on  the  contrary
to   hide   from   public   awareness  that   war   is  now  obsolete.
It  admits  in  passing  that  "the  details  of  a  Civil  Defense   Pro-
gram  may  change  with  changes  in  the  kinds  of  missiles  that
might  be  used  against  us,"  but  it  never  honestly  faces  up  to
the  implications.    The  steady  growth  in  the  size  and  number
of  nuclear  missiles  may soon  make  even  the  best  shelter  in  the
most  distant  area  useless  for  survival.    The  booklet  assumes
a  5 megaton  weapon  when  the  Russians have  already  detonated
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   8, 1962
Shelter Delusion Attacked and New  "Science of Human Survival" Called For
"War   is  today  a  social  problem   of  catastrophic  force  and
overshadowing   urgency.     The   basis   of   war   is   power,   and
power   is  a   product   of   science.     Science  is  therefore  deeply
involved  in  this  problem,  and  scientists  have  a  particular  duty
toward  its  solution.
"The   destructive   power   of   modern   weapons   is  increasing
geometrically.     The   first   nuclear   bombs   exploded   in    1945
released   energy  equivalent  to  about  20  tons  of  TNT.     This
year   30,000  and   50,000-kiloton   bombs   were   exploded.     In
the   16  years  since,  the  size  of  available  weapons  has  about
doubled  every  year.
"One  nation  arms  to  deter  a  possible  attack  from  the  other,
fearing   that   these  arms  may  be  for   aggression   rather   than
defense,   the  second   nation  responds   by  an  even  greater  arm-
ament  and  the  process  continues.    Defensive  measures  such  as
shelters   follow   the  same  pattern,  for   they  too  will  tend   to
elicit  a  more  powerful   offense.
Major  Cities  Doomed
"The   immediate  destruction   expected  from  a  full-scale  nu-
clear  war  has  been  the  subject  of  fairly  detailed  study.    It  is
generally  concluded   that  a  massive  nuclear  attack  on  the   U.S.
could  destroy  most  of  the  nation's  major  cities.    All  social  and
economic   processes  which   depend   on   large   cities  would   be
massively   disrupted:    communications,    transport,   finance,   a
considerable  part  of   light   and   heavy   manufacturing,   major
medical   facilities,  centers  of   government.
"In  general,  the  development   of  a  shelter   program  cannot
greatly  influence  the  conclusion  that  a  massive  nuclear  attack
would  have  the  immediate  effect  of  destroying  the  social  struc-
ture.    A  particular  shelter  system  is  designed   to  resist  a  cer-
tain  assumed  intensity  of  attack,  and  its  success  depend  on  the
validity  of  this  assumption.    But  an  opponent  can  be  expected
to  respond  to  such  a  defensive  moye  by  stepping  up  the  in-
tensity  of  attack.    Any  shelter  system  short  of  one  that   places
the  nation's  entire  population  and  industry  permanently  un-
derground  can  be  negated   by  a  corresponding  increase  in  the
attacker's  power.
"The   long-range  problem  is  vastly  more  complex  than  the
immediate  one.     It  presents   the  following  general   questions:
(i)   What  lasting  effects  would  the  great  fires  and  radioactiv-
ity  have  on  the  biological  system  (soil,  water,  air,  plants,  and
animals)   on  which  man  depends?   (ii)   How  would   the  in-
creased   death  rate,  widespread   disease,  and  genetic  effects  of
the  war  affect:  the  validity and  viability  of  the  survivors?  (iii)
A  Scientific  Reply  to  the  Defense  Dept.
A  few  days  before  the  Defense  Department   released
its  report  on  fallout   shelters,   a  quite  different   report
on  the  problem  of  survival in  the  nuclear age  was  being
made   to   the   American   Association  for   the  Advance-
ment  of  Science  at  its  annual  meeting  in  Denver.  This
more  somber   and  honest   but   inspiring  report  was   by
the  AAAS  Committee on  Science  in  the  Promotion  of
Human   Welfare.    It   is   a  pity  that  this,  too,   is   not
available  at  every  postoffice   in  mass  reprint.   We  pre-
sent  an  abridged version  here; the  full  text  can  be  read
in  Science  (Dec.  29).  The  report was  prepared by  Barry
Commoner,  Washington  University; T.  C. Byerly, Agri-
cultural   Research  Service,  U.S.  Dept.  of   Agriculture;
Lawrence   K.   Frank,   Belmont,   Mass.;   H.   J.   Geiger,
School   of    Public   Health,   Harvard   University;  Mar-
geret  Mead,  American Museum  of  Natural  History; and
Frank   W.  Notestein,  Population  Council,   Inc.    Those
who  would  like  more  people  to  see  this  report  by  dis-
tributing  reprints  of  this  issue   can  obtain  them  at   3
cents  each  in  lots  of  100.
Would   the   immediate  destructive   effects   of   a   nuclear   war
cause  major   irreversible  changes  in  the  economic,  social  and
political  organization  of  our   society?   (iv)   How  would   the
foregoing   affects   influence   the   behavior   of   human   beings?
The   scientific  evidence  that  can  be  marshaled  to  answer  this
formidable  array  of  questions  is  very  limited  and  uncertain.
"The   more  complex   problems   associated   with   recovery  of
the  economic  and  social  structures  following  their   disruption
in  a  nuclear  attack  were  considered  at  the  Congressional  hear-
ings  of   1961.      Discussion   by  Sidney  G.  Winter,  Jr.,  of   the
Rand   Corporation,   of   the   economic   recovery  problem    con-
cluded  that  sufficient  industrial capacity would  probably  remain
after  a  nuclear  attack  to  support  eventual  economic   recovery;
but  on  questioning   it  developed   that  this  estimate  was  basec
on  the  assumption  that  transportation  would  be  unharmed   ii
the  attack.
"The   conclusion  that  economic  recovery  is  feasible  was fur-
ther  qualified  by  the  statement  that  it  does  not  apply  'to  pos-
sible  future  situations when  extensive  blast  shelters  might  be
available.'    According to  this  testimony,  in  a  nuclear  war  that
would   destroy  a  given  proportion   of   the  nation's  industrial
capacity,  economic  recovery  would  be  possible  so  long  as  the
loss   of   life   in   the   initial  attack   would   be   correspondingly
large.    If  the  ratio of  survivors to  remaining  industrial  capac-
ity  were  to  become  too  great,   the   resulting   demand   on   the
limited  goods  available would  be  overwhelming   and   cause  a
East  and West  Pretend They  Do Mankind  A  Favor  by  Resuming  Nuclear  Tests
"The  attempt on  the  part  of  the  United  States  and  some
other  Western  powers  to  use,  for   the   purposes  of  under-
mining  confidence  in  the  Soviet  Union,  the  nuclear  weapons
tests  which  our  country  had  to  carry  out  in  response  to  the
military  threats  of  the  NATO  block,  were  of  no  avail.
"All  the  nations  to  whom  the  cause  of  peace  and  security
of  peoples  is  dear—and  they  account  for  the -overwhelming
majority   in  the   United  States—could   not   but  understand
and  recognize  that  the  growth  of  the  Soviet  Union's  might
consolidated   the  international  positions  of   the   USSR  and
the  whole  of  the  socialist  camp,  and  consequently the  cause
of  peace  and  security  of  all  the   peoples."
—V.  A.  Zorin,  Soviet  delegate   to  the  UN,  statement  on
the  General  Assembly  session,  Dec.  22.
"Washington,  Dec.  23—U.S.  officials  appeared  today  to  be
shifting   to  the  view  that  world  public  opinion  should  not
be  a  bar  to  resumption of  nuclear  tests  in  the  atmosphere
if  they  are  considered  a  military  necessity.
"The  Administration  is  turning   to^  the  belief   that   a  re-
sumption  of  nuclear tests  might  be  welcomed by  many  for-
eign  nations,  including  neutralist  countries.
"Official   sources   here,   reviewing  the   policy  on  nuclear
testing  in  the  light  of  the  conference  in  Bermuda this  week
between  President  Kennedy  and  Prime  Minister Macmillan,
said  that  although many  people  might  oppose  a resumption
of  tests  by  the  U.S.,  others  would  regret  it  if  the  tests  were
not  renewed."
—New  York  Times  dispatch,   Dec.  24.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   8, 1962
... In Historic Report to the American Association for the Advancement of Science
general  failure  of  social  organization.
"In   a  piecemeal   treatment  of   recovery   from   nuclear   war,
separate  problems  appear   to  be  soluble   just  because  they  are
artificially  isolated  from  the  web  of  interconnections  that  dis-
tinguishes   the  complexity—and   the  actuality—of   society,  an
illusion  that  is  dispelled  when  the  fragment   is  restored  to  its
proper  place  in  the  whole.     If  we  consider  in  its  entirety  the
problem  of  recovery  from,  nuclear  war,  there  is,  we  believe,
no  scientific  basis  at  present  for  a  useful  prediction   of   what
kind  of  society—if   any—would  emerge  from   the  ruins.     If
society embarks on  the  path  of  nuclear  war,  science cannot  now
offer  enlightenment  on  the  end  result.
"We  must  conclude  that  society  can  no  longer  be  defended
by  an  unlimited  war.    If  we  permit  such  a  war  to  occur  in
the  future  course  of  human  history, we  run  the  risk  of  ending
human  history  altogether.     Peace,  which  was  until  now  a  hu-
man  u'ant,  has  become  a  human   need.
The  Responsibility   of  Science
"We   believe  that  science  has  a  commanding  responsibility
to  help  mankind  survive.    Whether   society  shall  continue  to
rely  on  war—which  is  now  so  dangerously  unfit  for   its  pro-
tective  function—is   a  social  decision.     If   this  crisis  is  to   be
resolved   by   rational   social   action,   the   public   -must   become
aware of  it.    To  acomplish  this  educational  task,  scientists will
need  to  overcome  certain  difficulties.     One  problem   is  to  re-
move  the  obstacles  which  now  tend  to  obstruct  the  flow  of
technical  information  to  the   scientific  community.    Much  of
the  information  about  war  is  not  easily  accessible.    It   often
appears  in  special  reports  which  rarely  find  their  way  into  the
scientists'  libraries.
"Another   difficulty   is  caused   by  the   political  tension   that
is  naturally  associated  with  the  problems  of   war   and   peace.
Any  scientific  finding  about  these  issues  is  almost  certain  to  be
construed  as  supporting  some  political  beliefs  and  contradict-
ing  others,   and   there  may  be  a  tendency   to   social   pressure
against  the  scientist who  attempts  to  disseminate  it.    Such  con-
straint  is  a  hazard  to  the  rational  development   of   social  de-
cisions.    If  scientists  have  the  obligation  to  inform  their  fel-
low  citizens about  grave  issues,  citizens have  a  reciprocal  duty
to  defend  the  scientists'  right  to  be  heard  without  prejudice.
"We   believe  that  if  the  complexity  of  the  problem   is  not
—Abu,  in  The  Observer  (London)    Dec.   2-4.
only  recognized  but  accepted  in  advance  as  inescapable,  it  can
be  solved.     In   the   past,   the   physical,  biological   and   social
sciences  have  been  separated  by  their  reliance  on  different  ap-
proaches.    Today,  to  meet  the  new  needs  of  the  entire  human
species  the  concepts  and  methods  of  all  the  sciences  must  be
combined.   We  can then  hope  to  devise  new  social  inventions
to  protect  all  mankind  from  self-destruction.
"Are  these  hopes  unreal ?   Despite  its  formidable  complex-
ity   and   close   association  with  deeply   held   social   ideas,   the
problem   of  modern  war  is  of  a  type  that  is  not  wholly  new
to  science.    In  a  certain  sense  the  present  problem  resembles
the  historical  crisis  due  to  the  impact  of  Darwinism  on   Vic-
torian  society—or  of   the   Copernican   revolution  on  the  me-
dieval  views of  man  and  the  universe.    In  these  historical  trials
the  views  fostered   by  science  finally  prevailed.
"We   call  for  the  establishment  of  a  new  collaborative   sci-
ence,  the  science of  human  survival, which  will  apply  the  full
strength  and  wisdom  of  all  the  sciences  to  the  solution  of  the
crisis  created   by  the  obsolescence  of  war.
"The   great   changes   that  science  has  made   in  the  human
condition  form  a  procession   of  present   accomplishments  that
yesterday  were  only  fantasies  and  dreams.    This  history gives
us  hope  that  science  can  help  mankind  realize tomorrow  what
is  today  the  dream  of  peace."
French  Correspondent  Lifts  the  Curtain  on  Why  Peace  Talks  in  Laos  Broke  Down
"Vietiane,  Laos,  Dec.  30  (AP)—The  fiasco  of  Laos's  three
Princes'  summit  left  a  harvest  of  criticism in  Vientiane  to-
day  that  the  U.S.  had  not  applied  itself   forcefully  enough
to  making  the  meeting  a  success.  .  .  .  Diplomats from  some
other  countries,  such  as  Britain,  France,  and  India,  believe
that  the  Boun  Otim  [rightist]  government   is  unwilling  to
yield  any  of  its  power.   As  to  whether the  Americans might
have  pressed  Boun  Oum  harder  to  go  into a  bargaining  ses-
sion,   U.S.   Embassy   sources   said   Ambassador   Winthrop
Brown  had  made  it  perfectly  clear  to  the  government that
the  U.S.  supports a  policy  of  Laotian  neutrality  through an
acceptable  coalition  government."
—Baltimore  Sun,   Dec.  31,  IPiil.
'  There  persists  in  Laos  the   most  amazing  situation  in
contemporary   diplomacy.     While  at  Geneva  the   delegates
of  fourteen  Powers including  Communist  China  try  patiently
to  make  possible  the  reunification  and  neutralization  of  this
little  Kingdom,  and  while  at  Vietiane American  and  Soviet
representatives  work  together  to  obtain  the  cooperation of
the  three  Princes  representing  pro-West,  neutral  and  pro-
Communist  tendencies,  a  little  group  of  Laotian  officers  led
by  General  Phoumi  Nosavan  [Boun  Oum's]  Minister  of  De-
fense   and  supported   by   some   U.S.   and  Thai  agents  and
military  men,  'gum  up  the  works."
"Almost  every  morning,  the  U.S.  Ambassador,  M.  Brown,
visits  General  Phoumi  to  persuade him  to  accept the  formula
of  a  coalition with  the  Communists,  which  is  alone capable
of  permitting  reunification   of   the  country   and reestablish-
ment  of  peace.     Every  evening,  an  expert  of   MAAG   [the
U.S.  military  advisory group  in  Laos]  or  of  the  Central  In-
telligence  Agency  comes  to  cheer  up  the  General  and  incite
him  to  oppose  any  entry  of   Reds  into  the  government."
—Le  Monde  (Paris)    Dec.  17-18,  19V1,  in  a  series  of   on-
the-spot   reports   from    Indochina.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   8,  1902
Are  We  Ready  To  Practice  What  We  Preach  to  Nehru?
(Continued   from   Page  One)
a  monster  more  than   10  times  that   size,  and  claim  to  have
100-MT  bombs.    The   booklet   assumes  a  fall-out   producing
ground  burst  when  it  is  quite  possible  to  maximize  blast  and
fire  effects  and  eliminate  local  fallout  by  exploding  bombs  at
high  altitudes.    A  100  MT  bomb  (as  Consumer  Reports   for
January  points  out) would  then  set  afire  an  area  as  large  as
Vermont,  and  a  1000-MT  bomb  would   "easily  do  the  same
for  an  area  equivalent to  the  states of  New  York,  New  Jersey
and  Pennsylvania  all  put.together."
The  Upper  Limit  of  Civil  Defense
Even  elaborate  shelters  with  their  own  air  and  water sup-
plies,  sealed  off from  fire,  deep  enough  to  survive  blast,  some-
how  able  to  guarantee  exit  from  under  tons  of  rubble,  would
still   be   unable  to   guarantee   survival   in   the   permanently
scarred   and   poisoned   landscape   thermonuclear   weapons   are
able  to  create.    Harrison  Brown  at  Denver  last  week  estimated
that  U.S. and  Russian  stockpiles   now  contain   60,000   mega-
tons  of  TNT   equivalent.    Ralph  Lapp  estimated  last  year  that
an   attack   which   dropped    little   more   than   one-tenth   this
amount  on  the  U.S. could  hopelessly   poison   our   croplands.
The  Soviet  farmlands  are  equally  vulnerable.    Dr.  Lapp cal-
culated  an  attack  of  7500  megatons  (40%  of  it  fission  prod-
ucts)   would  render  the  U.S. unliveable.    There  is  an   upper
limit  of  attack  beyond  which  no  civil  defense  is  possible  be-
cause  the  earth  itself  would  be  too  poisoned   radioactively  to
feed  those  left:  to  live  upon  it.    This  level  of  attack  is  below
the  amounts  in  stockpile   and  within  the  delivery  power  on
both  sides.
During  the  holidays there  was  a  burst  of  self-righteous  in-
dignation  over  India's  forcible  reconquest  of  Goa.   But  the
real  lesson  has  not  sunk  in.    Each  nation,  in  a  world  without
law,  is  a  law  unto  itself.    For  each  the  end  justifies  the  means.
Wherever  an  evil  seems  insufferably  bad, the  right  to  resort
to  war  against  it  is taken  for  granted.    We  criticize India  and
the  Afro-Asians  generally  for  feeling  that  way  about  colonial-
ism.    But  we  feel   and  act  the  same  way  about  communism,
and  the  Soviet  states  behave  likewise when  confronted  by what
Like  Betting  on  the   Horses
"To  be  blunt   about   it,   fallout  shelters  of   the   type
widely  proposed  to  date  are  so  costly  and  complex  in
their   requirements,   so   limited   and   unreliable   in use-
fulness,   and  so  generally   dependent  on  variables   and
unknowns,  that  there  is  very  little  which  an organiza-
tion  like  Consumers  Union  can  do  by  way   of  evaluat-
ing  them. ...
"The  family  shelter ...  is  purely  and simply  a  bet.
exactly  like  a  bet  on  a  horse  race.    The  shelter  owner
gambles  (like  the  track  bettor)  that  a  complex  set  of
variables  will  so  arrange  themselves  that  his  shelter
(or  his  horse)   will  come  through.   There  is  assuredly
no  sharing  of  the  risk,  and  there isn't  the  shadow of  an
actuarial   basis.    The   one   with   the   most   money  can
build  the  best  shelter, and  survival  with  a  shelter  comes
high:  the  odds  on  a  $5,000  bet  are  unquestionably  bet-
ter  than  the  odds  on  a  $500  bet, which  is  about  all  the
advice  CU  can  give  in  this  gambling  area."
—The    Fallout    Shelter:    Consumer    Reports   (Jan.
1962)   prepared   by  Dexter  Masters   CU's  Director.
they  call  capitalist  imperialism.   What  Nehru  did  in  Goa  was
less   reprehensible   than   the   secret   conniving  at   war  against
Cuba  by  our  government  which  has  just  been  disclosed  by  the
President  of  Guatemala.    If  Nehru  doesn't  practice  what  he
preaches  neither  do  we  and  neither   does  the  Kremlin.    The
truth  is that,  as  in  civil  life,  the  welfare  of  the  world commu-
nity  demands  the  elimination  of  the  habit  of  taking  the  law
into  one's  own  hands.    No  evil  is  so  great  as  to  justify  resort
to war, for  war  may  mean  the  end  of  all  civilization.   No dis-
pute  is  so  sacred  that  it  should  not  be  subjected  to  arbitration
by  independent  organs  of  the  world  community.    As  Bertrand
Russell  said  in  his  latest  book,  "Has Man  A  Future?", "War
has  so  long  been  a  part  of  human  life  that  it  is  difficult   for
our  feelings  and  our  imaginations  to  grasp  that  the   present
anarchic  national   freedoms   are  likely   to   result   in   freedom
only  for  corpses."    It  is  this  exercise  in  objectivity,  it  is  this
conditioning  for  universal  perspectives,   that  our  people   need
if  our  country  and  the  world  is  to  be  saved,  not  a  pamphlet
propagating  the  delusion  that  we  can  play  with thermonuclear
fire  and  survive  as  a  nation.
Holiday   Gift   Rates  Remain  in   Effect     But   Only   Till   End   of   January
I.  F.
Please
Street
City   .
Enter
(To)
Street
City  .
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
.......... .................................Zone.............State....................
1/8/62
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1 yr.)  additional:
...........................................Zone.............State....................
we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Aye.,   N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  [>.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid   at  Washington,   D.  C.    Published    every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   in
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington.   D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.:   J6  in
Canada:  $10  elsewhere.     Air  Mail  rates:   $16  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED