I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962apr02.pdf

============================================================

Hans  Bethe  on  The  Arms Race, P.  3
A  Supreme  Court  Reversal  Which  Opens  The  Way  to  More  Democratic  Government, See  Page  2
L F. Stones  Weekly
VOL.  X,  NO.  13APRIL   2,  1962
°"»      WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
Stewart  Alsop's  Interview  With  Kennedy
Much   can   be  learned,   not   all   of   it  intended,   from   Mr.
Stewart  Alsop's  interview  with  the  President   in  the  Saturday
Evening   Post  for   March   31.     It  may  be  read  as  a  reply  to
those  who  have  called  Mr.  Kennedy  a  mere  tactician.    The
article  says  Mr.  Kennedy  was  irritated  when  Mr.  James  Reston
of   the  New   York   Times   characterized  him   as  "a  tactician,
more  interested  in  political  manipulation  than  in  public  edu-
cation  .  .  . this  leaves  him without  a  goal  to  which  his day-to-
day  decisions  can  be  related."    Mr.  Alsop's  article  is  called,
as  if  in  rebuttal,  "Kennedy's  Grand  Strategy."     It  says,  at  the
very  start,  Mr.  Kennedy  "does  have  a  goal  .  .  .  and  a  coher-
ent  strategy."    The   article,  however,  only   succeeds  in   con-
firming  the  criticism.    It  ends  lamely  with  admissions.      "The
new  design  is, by its  very nature,  defensive,"  Mr.  Alsop writes,
"it  is a holding  operation."   But  what  is it holding  for ?    "The
President  and  the  men  around  him,"   Mr.  Alsop  writes,  "seek
no  final  solutions  because  there  are  none."   This  is hardly  the
discovery  of  a  Grand  Design.
No  Mention  Disarmament   Under  Law
There  is  a  second  unintended  revelation  in  the  article.    A
researcher,  working  with  official  pronouncements,   might  easily
have  emerged  with  materials  from  which  he  could  assert  that
the  Kennedy  Administration  did  have  a  global  over-all  goal.
He  could  produce  statements  of  policy  to  prove  that  the  Ad-
ministration  conceived  of  its  "holding  operation"  as  a  means
of  obtaining  time  in  which  to  achieve  an  end  to  the  arms  race
under  a  system  of  world  law.    Mr.  Kennedy  has  said  as  much
in  major  speeches.    But  no  word   of  disarmament  or   world
law  appears  in  this  interview.    It  would  seem  that  in  a  private
talk  with  an  old  friend  and  sympathetic writer,  Mr.  Kennedy
did  not  mention  them.   //  is  as  if   these  were  ideas  expressed
in  formal  speeches  framed  to  fit  the  needs  of  certain occasions,
as  in  his  appearance before   the  United  Nations,  but  not   deeply
felt  convictions  or concerns.   Perhaps  this explains  why writers
who  know  the  President  as well as Mr.  Reston  does  fail  to take
these  set  speeches  seriously.    Mr.  Kennedy  could  have pointed
to  disarmament  under  world  law  as  his  Grand  Design.     In-
stead  the  interview showed  him  taken  up  not  only  with  mere
tactics,  but  almost  exclusively  with  mere  military  tactics.    Be-
tween  the  lines one  can  see that the  old  policies of  containment
and  perpetual  arms  race are still his guide-lines.   The  only pas-
sionate  interest which  is reflected  in  this  interview—Mr.  Alsop
calls  it  an  obsession—is  with  guerrilla  warfare.    This  is  not
adequate  leadership  for  a world  living  on  the brink.
At  the  beginning  of  the  interview  Mr.  Kennedy  says many
people  do  not  really  understand   the  change  brought  about  in
the  w6rld  situation  now  that  both  sides  "have  these  annihilat-
ing  weapons,"  i.e.  intercontinental  missiles  armed  with  thermo-
4  *
Can't  Be  Too  Careful  Where
You  Drop  in  Vietnam
Mr.  [Wm.  E.]  MINSHALL  (R.  Ohio):  As  you know,
Mr.  Flood,  there  is  a  war  going  on  over  there  now  [in
Vietnam].    I  was  there  and  I  was  under  armed  guard
the  whole time  I  was  there.   It  was  not  just  for  effect.
I  went  out  to  the  same training  camp you went  to  about
15  miles  outside   of  Saigon  and  the   situation   there   is
very  tenuous   and  it  is  very  strained.    The  roads  are
being  cut  every  night.    There   are  roadblocks   set   up
every  night  and  you  can  hear  mortar  fire  every  night.
Mr,  [Dan'1 J.]  FLOOD (D,  Pa.):  After  4  o'clock  we
had  to  be  within  20  miles  of  the  city  limits  of  Saigon.
Mr.  MINSHALL: And  they  wouldn't  take  me  out  of
the  city  limits  in  Vientiane  [Laos].    That  is  how  they
felt  about  the  situation  up  there.    Furthermore  I  think
the  committee  would be  interested  in  knowing  in  their
drop  zone  where  they  practice  their  parachute  drops—
it  is  not  far  from  the  training camp about  15 miles  out-
side  of  town—it  is  an  area  about  a  half  mile  square,  if
the  parachutists  do not  hit  this  drop  zone  and they  fall
outside,  the  Viet  Congs   pick  them  up  and  that  is  the
end  of  them,  so  it  does  make  them  want  to  be  rather
accurate  in  their  training  jumps."
—House   Approp.   Com.  Hearings   on  Defense    Dept.
Budget  for  1963, pps.  248-9, Pt.  2, released  March  28.
nuclear   warheads.     "Of   course  in  some  circumstances,"   Mr.
Kennedy  is  quoted  as  saying,"  we  must  be  prepared  to  use  the
nuclear  weapon  at  the  start,  come  what  may—a  clear  attack  on
Western  Europe,  for  example.     But  what  is  important  is  that
if  you  use  these  weapons  you  have  to  control  their  use.   What
you  need  is  control,  flexibility,  a  choice.  .  .  ."   This  is  doubly
confusing,  and  seems  to  reflect  confusions  on  Mr.  Kennedy's
part.    The  whole  drive for  a buildup in  conventional arms  for
NATO  has  been  based  on  the  premise  that  this  would  give
the  Administration if  not  an  alternative to  thermonuclear anni-
hilation  in  Europe  then  at  least  a  way of  enforcing  a  pause  for
final  reflection   before  resort  to  weapons  which  can  only  de-
stroy  what  they  are  supposed   to  defend.    Here  we  find  the
President  switching back  to  using  nuclear  weapons  at  the  start.
Has  policy  changed  again  under  pressure  from  those  Germans
who  fear  that  deterrence  will  be  weakened  unless  the  Russians
are  put  on  notice  that  any  attack  on  Western  Germany  would
immediately  bring  thermonuclear  arms  into  use?
The  other  confusion  is more  fundamental  yet,  and  it  empha-
sizes  the  danger  in  Mr.  Kennedy's  overriding    preoccupation
with  the  various  forms  of  military  response  to  Soviet  pressure.
To  say that  "if  you use these  weapons  you have  to  control  their
use"  seems  a  dangerous  illusion.   If  nuclear  weapons  are  used
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
5  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  2,  19U2
Supreme  Court  Reverses   Itself  in  Tennessee  Reapportionment  Appeal
A  Victory  for  More  Democratic  and  Progressive  Government
The  Supreme  Court  is  accustomed  to  the  appeals  of minori-
ties  seeking  justice  against  discrimination   or  oppression  by
a  majority.    In  the  Tennessee  reapportionment  case  decided
last  Monday  the  roles  in  the  usual  judicial  tableau  were  re-
versed.    The  oppressed  in  this  case  is  America's  largest  ma-
jority   grouping,   its   urban   residents.     The  oppressors   were
America's  most  powerful  minority,  its  rural  voters.    In  State
legislatures  and  Congress,   rural   voters   exercise   a  political
power  completely  disproportionate   to  their  numbers.    Theo-
retically  legislatures  and  Congress  are  supposed  to  be  closest
to  "the  people."  Actually  one  of  the  most  familiar phenomena
of   American   politics   is  the  struggle  between  Presidents  or
Governors  elected  by  large  majorities  only  to  be  blocked  by
hostile  forces  in  the   legislative   branches   where,  thanks   to
often  obsolete  and  unfair  districting  a  minority  of  the  people
may  control  a  majority   of  the   votes.     In  addition  relative
handfuls  of  voters  in  compact  rural  machines  are  the  source
of  the  seniority  which  enables horse-and-buggy  area types like
Howard  Smith  of  Virginia  to  hold  down  such  key  spots  as  the
chairmanship  of  the   House  Rules  Committee.    If   City  ever
wins  its  struggle  against  Country for  fair  representation,  the
road  blocks  to  all  kinds  of  liberal  legislation  will  go down.
Department  of  Justice   Joins  In
This   is  why  the   Supreme   Court's   G-to-2   decision  in   the
Tennessee   reapportionment   case  represents  a  major   break-
through  to  more  democratic  government  in America.   It  was  a
defeat  for  rural  oligarchies  and  for  the  big  business  concerns
which  are  often  allied  with  them.    The  decision  was  handed
down  in  a  suit  joined  by  the  cities  of  Knoxville,  Nashville,
Memphis  and  Chattanooga  to  bring  about  the  enforcement of
the  Tennessee  Constitution.   This  calls  for  reapportionment of
legislative  districts  every  ten  years  but  has  been  ignored  by
a  minority-dominated  legislature   for   60  years.    Since  much
the  same  situation  exists  in  most  States,  briefs  amicus  were
filed   on  behalf   of  most;  of  the   big  cities  and  many   smaller
municipalities.   The  Department   of  Justice  also,  for  the  first
time  in  the   history  of  these   cases,   appeared   as   an  amicus
curiae.
The   decision   reversed   one  handed  down  by   Mr.   Justice
Frankfurter  in  1946 for  a  strangely  divided  rump court.  Jack-
son  took not  part;  Reed  and  Burton  agreed  with   Frankfurter.
Rutledge  concurred  in  the  result  but  declared  his  belief  that
the  Court  did  have  power  to  grant  relief  in  districting  cases.
Douglas  and   Murphy  joined  a  dissent   in  which  Black   said
"no  one  would  deny  that   the  equal  protection  clause  of  the
14th    amendment  would  .  .  .  prohibit  a  law  that  would  ex-
The  Basic   Issue
"Regardless  of  the  fact  that  in  the  last  two  decades
the   United  States  has  become  a  predominantly  urban
country  where  well  over  two-thirds  of  the   population
now  lives  in  cities  or  suburbs,  political representation
in  the  majority  of  state  legislatures  is  50 or  more  years
behind  the  times.  . . . The municipality  of  1960 is  forced
to   function   in  a  horse  and  buggy   environment   where
there  is  little  political  recognition  of  the  heavy demands
of  an  urban  population. .  .  .  The  explosion in  city  and
suburban  population  has  created intense local problems
in   education,   transportation  and   housing.   Adequate
handling  of  these  problems  has  not  been  possible  to  a
large   extent,  due   chiefly   to  the   political   weakness  of
municipalities. ...  In  New York  City,  8  million  people
elect   only   90  members  of   the  state  assembly  while  7
million  'upstaters'.  have  118  representatives.    Los  An-
geles  County  with  a  population  of  4,151,687 has  but  one
senator  while  the  counties  of   Inye,   Mono  and   Alpine,
California,   with   a   total  of   14,014  residents  have   the
same  representation.  . . .  Nor is the lack  of urban  rep-
resentation  confined  only  to  larger  municipalities in  the
United  States.  Although  Burlington,  Vermont, contains
33,000  persons,  it  has  one  representative  in  the  state
senate,  while  the  little  town  of  Victory  with  a  popula-
tion  of  48 also  has  one  state  senator."
—Urief   amid  on  behalf    of  the  National  Institute  of
Municipal   Law   Officers     in  Baker  v.  Can-.
pressly  give  certain   citizens   a  half   vote  and   others   a   full
vote."    The  minority  of  three  said  unfair  districting  had  the
same  effect.    Last  Monday's decision  was  a  victory for  Black's
viewpoint;  only  Harlan  joined  Frankfurter   in  dissent.     The
case  now  goes  back  to  Tennessee  for  trial  on  the  merits.
A  victory  in  principle is  assured;  the  tough  problem  is  how
to  force  the  Tennessee  legislature  to  vote  a  more  fair  reap-
portionment.    The  U.S.  courts  have  never  faced  a  more   diffi-
cult  task.    This  is  only  the  first  in  a  series  of  such  suits.  Wise
leadership  calls  for  lightening  the  burden  on  the  courts  by  a
drive  in  Congress  which  has  power  under  Article  1,  Section
4,  to  regulate  Congressional   districts  and  under   the   Four-
teenth  Amendment to  bring  about  fairer  reapportionment  in
the  legislatures.   Kennedy in  the  Netv  York   Times    Magazine
four  years  ago  wrote  about  this  problem.    Good  government
requires  that  he take  the  leadership  on it  now,  tough  as  it  is.
Justice  Frankfurter's   Usual  Appeal  to
"This  [decision]  . . . implies a  sorry  confession  of judicial
impotence  in  place  of  a  frank   acknowledgement  that   there
is  not  under  our  Constitution   a  judicial  remedy  for  every
political  mischief, for  every  undesirable exercise  of  legisla-
tive  power.  The  Framers  carefully  and  with  deliberate  fore-
thought  refused  so  to enthrone the  judiciary.   In  this  situa-
tion,  as  in  others  of  like  nature,  appeal  for  relief  does  not
belong  here.   Appeal  must  be  to  an  informed,  civically  mili-
tant   electorate.     In  a  democratic  society  like  ours,   relief
must  come  through  an  aroused  public  conscience  that  sears
the  conscience  of  the  people's   representatives."
—Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter    dissenting  in  Baker   v.  Carr.
"Tennessee  has  an  'informed,  civically  militant  electorate'
and  'an  aroused  popular conscience'  but  it  does  not  sear  'the
conscience  of  the  people's  representatives.'   This  is  because
the  legislative   policy  has  riveted  the  present   seats  in  the
Assembly   to   their   respective   constituencies,   and   by   the
votes  of  their  incumbents  a  reapportionment  of  any  kind  is
prevented. ...  It  is  well  for  this  Court  to  practice  self-re-
Electoral  Action Brings  A Stormy  Reply
strain!   and   discipline  in   constitutional  adjudication,  but
never  in  its  history  have  those  principles  received  sanction
where  the  national interests  of  so many have  been  so  clear-
ly  infringed   for  so  long  a  time.    National  respect   for   the
courts  is  more  enhanced  through  the  forthright  enforcement
of   these   rights  rather   than  by  rendering  them  nugatory
through  the  interposition of   subterfuges."
—Mr.  Justice  Clark  concurring, same  case.
"Time  and  again,  when  this  Court  has  been  urged  to  in-
tervene  and  to  overturn  legislation  of  state  or  nation,  we
have  been  informed  by  some  members  of  the  Court  that  re-
course  should  in  most  instances  be  had  to  the  political  in-
fluence of  the  citizenry  on  its  legislative bodies  and  not  to  a
judiciary   insulated  from   the  people. ...  It   would  be  a
mockery   indeed  to  inform   us  that   the   vindication  of   our
most  vital  interests   lies  with  the  legislature  and  then  to
permit  such  an  apportionment of  legislative  districts  as  to
make  such  vindication  impossible."
—Brief   amicus  by Nassau  County,  N.Y.,  residents.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  2,  19U2
Physicists  Who  Warn  Against  the  Arms  Race  Not  Popular   in  Washington
Bethe  Lifts  the  Curtain  on  the  Science  and  Weaponry  Debate
By  Dr.  Hans   Bethe*
"Anybody  who  thinks  that  science  can  do  anything,  or fill
any  order  you  give  it,  obviously doesn't   understand   science.
.  . .  Many Air  Force  officers,  for  instance,  believe that  science
can  do  absolutely  anything,  that  it  can  provide  an   offensive
power  that  can  break  all  resistance  and  a  defensive  power
that  can  defend  against  all  attack.  .  .  .
"Some  of  them  [the  nuclear physicists]  say  they  don't  want
to  have  anything  to  do  with  atomic  weapons.    They  want  to
work  on  pure  science  and  they  wish  everybody  would  do  the
same. ...  At  the  other  end  there  are  people  who do  exactly
what  the  government  or  the  Air  Force  or  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission  tells  them to do.   They try  to  invent  the  deadliest
weapons    possible   without    ever    thinking   of    the    conse-
quences.  .  .  .
Some   For  A  Total  Effort   On  Arms
We  have  some  [scientists]   who  fan  the  flames  and  say  we
must  do  far  more  than  we  have  done,  that  we  haven't  done
enough  to  improve  atomic  weapons,  that  we  must  have  more
people  working on  this  subject  and  must  spend  more  money
on  it,  and that  the  country must  be  geared  totally  to  that one
thing.    Some  of  these  men have  great  influence.  .  .  .
"Scientists   can   exert   some   influence   on   the   public   by
speeches,  articles,  letters  to  journals.     Interacting   with  the
scientists  is  the  military  community—the  Air  Force,  Army,
Navy,  and  Atomic Energy  Commission—and  the  rest  of  gov-
ernment,  including the  Congressional  committees. ...  It  is  a
complicated  process,  amorphous and  very  hard  to  control.   In
fact,  it  is sometimes doubtful  whether  it  is really  a  democratic
process  that  is  going  on, especially  because  the  agencies  that
have  the  money  for  scientific  research—and  now  I  mean mili-
tary  technological  research—are  precisely  the  agencies  that
want   the   maximum  of  military  technological  development.
This  includes both  the  armed  forces  and  Congressional  com-
mittees.    So, scientists  who  advocate  development  of  weapons
without  restraint  find  a  very  ready  public,  while  those  who
warn  against  the  dangers  of  an  unlimited  arms  race  find  a
very  hostile  reception  from  many  members  of  the   Washing-
ton  community. .  . .
"This  does  not  go  for  the  leaders  of  government.    It  was
not  true  of  the  leaders  of  the  Eisenhower  Administration  and
it  is  not  true  of  the  present  Administration.    Things  are  all
right  generally  at  the  high  level,  but  they  are  very  far  from
all  right  at  the  lower  levels,  and  it  is  the  lower  levels  gen-
erally  that  influence  the  public  through  the  press. You hear  in
the  newspapers  mostly from  those  scientists who are  strongly
in  favor  of  further  military  technological  developments   and
who,  in their  endeavor  to  please,  sometimes  talk  about  things
that  really  do not  exist  and  are  years  in  the  future,  perhaps
even  impossible,  as  though   they  were  realities. ...  In  my
opinion,  weapons  development  should  not  be  unlimited, but  in
each  particular  case  the  government  should  examine  whether
the   proposed   weapon  fits  into   our  general   military    plans,
whether  it  will  tend  to  stabilize  the  world  situation,   etc.  .  . .
"How  can  a  government  decide?  This  is  one  of  the  greatest
problems  of  our  age.    The  difficulty  is  not  that  the   techno-
On  The  Hell  of  the   H-Bomb
"The  scientist  looked  into  the  hell  of  the  bomb  long
before  anybody else  did.   One of  the  things  that trouble
me  is  that  nobody believes  us  when  we  predict  the  hell,
and  that  even  the  responses   we  scientists  make  to  the
hell,  both  inside  and  outside  government,  are  not  ap-
propriate  to  the  magnitude  of  that  hell.    The  response
the  government made  in  1949 and  1950 to  go  ahead  and
develop  the  [hydrogen]  bomb was  natural  and  perhaps
even  correct.    It  was  said  then  that  we  were  in  a  cold
war  and  we  had  to  develop  the  hydrogen  bomb  because
the  Russians  would  develop  it.    Well,  they  sure  did,  but
it   was  obvious  that  .  .  .  there  would  be  no  security.
And  I  think  it  is  obvious  now  that  weapons  are  com-
pletely  out  of  proportion, that  they  no  longer  have  any
function  as  a  continuation  of  foreign  policy."
—Dr. Hans  Bethe, Interview  on Science.
logical  answers  are  hard  to understand;  they are  terribly  easy
to  understand.    But  they  cannot  be  published  by  reasons  of
security.  We have  an  elaborate  system  of security, and rightly
so.   There  are  certain  facts  about  our  missile  forces  and  our
atomic  weapons  that  we  simply  cannot  state.    I  can  under-
stand  completely  the  confusion  of  the  public  when  they  hear
Mr.  Teller  say  we have only begun  to  develop  nuclear  weapons
and  they  hear  me  say  we  are  essentially  at  the  end  of  that
development  and anything  that  comes from  now on is  not  very
important.  . . .
"In  the  last  four  years  scientists   have  been  listened   to  on
all  problems  that  have  a  large  technological  component.   And
in  the  subcommittees  of  the   [President's]   Science   Advisory
Committee  an  effort  is  always  made  to  bring  in  scientists  of
different    opinions.     In   these   subcommittees    agreement   is
usually   reached   on  the   scientific  problems   of   develoj ment,
though  the  members  may  disagree  on  political   questions.    I
think  this  is  a  good  way  to  proceed,  but  it  is  far  from  satis-
factory  for the public because  it is all behind  closed  doors.  . . .
"Of  course  this  could  be  terribly  abused  if  we  had  a  bad
President   some  day  who  would  stack  these  committees   with
one-sided  scientists,  perhaps   even  incompetent   ones.  .  .  .
Q.  Do  you  think  that  scientists  should   be  allowed   to  ex-
press  moral  or  social  or  political  viewpoints  in  these   advisory
sessions  with  government   leaders?
Bethe:  "It  is  unavoidable.  .  .  .  Only  a  few  scientists  are
involved  in  actually  advising  the  President  or  the  Secretary
of  Defense.   Usually  these  are  scientists  in whom the  political
official  has  confidence.    They  are  usually  the  ones  who  have
some  general  thoughts   about  the  world.    However,  in  these
advisory  sessions,  the  scientist  is  mainly  called  upon  to  ex-
press  his  opinions on technical  matters,  as  distinguished  from
the  session  we have  among  ourselves.  .  .  ."
*From  an  interview  on  science  just  released  by  the  Center
for   the   Study  of   Democratic  Institutions,  Box   4068   Santa
Barbara,  Cal.,  from  which  the  text  is  obtainable  free.
What  Computers Do  to  Scientists:  "They No  Longer  Think About The Problem'
"Nowadays   people  have  enormous  computing  machines
costing  millions  of  dollars,  and  the  customary  thing  is   to
take  a  theoretical physics  problem and  code  it  for  the  com-
puter.    You  put  it  on  the  computer  and  let   the  computer
give  you  your  answer.    As  a  result  many  scientists  think
only  of  how  to  put  the  problem  on  the  computer.    They  no
longer  think  about  the  problem.    By  using  mechanical  de-
vices,  people  are  concentrating  much  less  on  a  real  under-
standing;  of  the  problem  and  they  lose  the  inspiration and
suggestion  for  further  research  and  sidelines  research  that
come  from  intimate contact with  every  phase  of  the calcula-
tions.    Only  if  you  have  a  real  understanding can  you  trans-
mit  to  your  students  all  the  thoughts  and  the  steps  that  go
into  the  solution.    You  obviously  can't  do  that  if  the  com-
puter  gives  the  solution.   In many cases,  if  a  machine costs,
say,  several  million  dollars,  people  become  more  concerned
with  how  they  are  going  to  keep  this  machine  in  operation
24  hours  a  day."    —Dr. Hans  Bethe: Interview  on Science.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  2, 1962
Replacing  Balance  of  Terror  With  Terror  of  Imbalance
(Continued   from   Page   One)
from  the  first,  there  is no  way to  control  them.  If conventional
armies  are  used  in  an  area  of  crucial importance,  as  in  Western
Europe,  there  is  no  way  to  be  sure  that  the  conflict  will  not
escalate  almost  at  once;  it  would   be  foolish   to  believe  that
reasonable  negotiation  will  become  easier  once  the   shooting
starts.    Some measure of  control  is  only possible  in  peripheral
areas  like  Korea  or  Vietnam  where  direct  confrontation  of  the
great  Powers  may  be  avoided.    Even  there  it  is  dangerous  to
play  the  game  of  war;  explosive  emotions  might  easily  have
swept  us  into  a  broader  war  under  MacArthur's  leadership  if
Mr.  Truman  had  not  held  firm  in  Korea.    The  fact  that  both
sides  now  possess  annihilating weapons  really  means  that  war
has  become  too  dangerous  a  game  to  play.    But  Mr.  Kennedy,
like  his  military  adviser  General  Taylor,  wants  to  find  a  way
to use war  again  as an  instrument of  national policy  by moving
back  to  pre-atomic kinds  of  war,  which  were  relatively limited
forms  of  war.    Mr.  Kennedy  really conceives  of  thermonuclear
deterrence  not  as  an  umbrella  under  which  to  seek  a  world  of
law,  in  which  peaceful  conflict  and  colonial  aspiration  ("wars
of  liberation")  can be  mediated peacefully, but  as an  umbrella
under  which  we  can  continue  to  play  the  game  of  war.
Strike  First  Statement  Disavowed
This  more  belligerent  stance,  as  we  have  said  before,  is  the
crucial  difference  between  the  Eisenhower  and  Kennedy  Ad-
ministrations,  and  brings  us  to  the  controversial  point  in  the
Alsop  interview. He  said,  "under  the  Kennedy  grand  strategy"
two  basic Eisenhower  doctrines  had  been  "quietly   discarded,"
one  that  any  war  bigger  than  a  brush-fire war  would  be  nu-
clear   from   the  outset,  the  other  that  the  U.S.   would   never
strike  first  with  the  nuclear  weapon.  Mr.  Alsop  reported  that
Mr.  Kennedy had  two  main  objectives.   One  is to  maintain "a
sufficient  margin  of  superiority  in  nuclear  striking  power"   so
that  Mr.  Khrushchev  will  be  certain  that  he  dare  not  strike
first without  receiving  an annihilating counter-blow. The  other
is  to  see that  Mr.  Khrushchev  "must  not  be certain that,  where
C.  Wright  Mills
C.  Wright  Mills  was   that   rarity,   a  sociologist   who
used  his  specialty  as  a  weapon   against   war  and  injus-
tice,  not  as  a  system  of  stale  apologetics  for  the  status
quo.    His  sudden  death  at  so  young  an  age  is  a  tragic
loss  for  our  country   and  the  world.    We  are   grateful
to  him  above  all  for  championing  the  cause  of  Castro's
Cuba.    In  our  war  against  Mexico  as  later  in  our  war
against   Spain,    there   were   Americans    of   prominence
(the   young  Lincoln  in  the  former)   to  speak  up  against
American   imperialism.      In   our   day,   in   our   effort   to
dominate  a  small  island  neighbor,  the  voices  of  protest
have   been  all   too   few.     C.  Wright   Mills   was   one  of
those  few,  and  for  millions  in  Latin  America  he  will  be
remembered   as  the  embodiment  of  our better  conscience
and  the  upholder  of  our better  traditions.   We  mourn  his
passing.
its  vital  interests  are  threatened,  the  United  States  will  never
strike   first."   Mr.  Alsop  quoted  Mr.  Kennedy  as  saying  "In
some  circumstances we might  have  to  take  the  initiative."
This  part  of  the  article  has  evoked  a  rather  lame  White
House  disavowal.   To  strike first would  not  only  be  to  ignore
the  Constitution  which  in  its  old-fashioned  way  still  requires
a  declaration  of  war  by  Congress.    It  would  be  to  play  God,
deciding  that  Judgment  Day  had  come  and  condemning  mil-
Ions  on  our  planet   to  extinction.    The   mere  suggestion   of
"strike  first"  must  make  negotiation   difficult.     Imagine  how
we  would  feel  if  Khrushchev  were  to  say  that  under  certain
conditions  the  Russians  might  strike   first.   First  strike  talk
is  deeply  irresponsible  and  calls  for  a  more  explicit  repudia-
tion  from  the  President.    The  Alsop  interview, even  with  this
disavowal,  is  most  disquieting.    Indeed   the  Administration's
whole  conception  of  building  up  overwhelming  superiority  in-
stead  of  a  stabilized  nuclear  deterrent  must  create  fear  of  a
first  strike  in  the  other  side,  substituting terror  of  imbalance
for  balance  -of  terror.                                   '              March  28
You  Can  Get  The  1961   Index  Free  If  You  Send   Us   A  Stamped   Self-Addressed     Envelope
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City  .
Enter
(To)
Street
City  .
Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
..........................................Zone.............State
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)
.........,...............................Zone.............State
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes
4/2/62
additional :
....................
D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Wa.hington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I. F. S.  Off  For Geneva  -    Next   Report   From  There
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED