I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962oct08.pdf

============================================================

The  Senate  Votes for  Postal  Censorship,  P.  3
Veteran  GOP  Congressman  Blames  Our  Latin  Troubles  on  FDR's  Good  Neighbor  Policy,  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  X,  NO.  36
OCTOBER  8,  1962
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
When's  The  President  Going  to  Mention   Racism?
Three  questions  stand  out  in  the  Mississippi  crisis.    The
first  is:  was  it  befitting  the  dignity  of  the  law  and  the  Presi-
dency  for  Mr.  Kennedy to  spend  so  many  hours  on  the  tele-
phone  dickering  with  a  Southern  governor  who  was  acting
in  contempt  of  a  final  court  order?    The  second  is:  how  close
to  death  did  these  dickerings  and  the  Governor's  false  assur-
ances  bring  James  Meredith,  the  Federal  marshals  protecting
him  and  assorted  reporters  and  university  officials   in  the  be-
sieged  Lyceum building?
On  two  occasions the  mob  came  within  a  hair's  breadth  of
smashing  the  thin  line  of  marshals,  once  when  the  mob  tried
to  ram the marshals with  a fire truck and  the  second  time when
mobsters tried to  smash the  line  with  a  bulldozer  which,  fortu-
nately,  rammed into  a  tree.    The  marshals  were  almost  out  of
tear  gas when  the  first  Federal  troops  arrived.    Had  they been
delayed  only a little  longer,  had  the  mob  reformed  and  rushed
the  marshals  again  in  the  interim,  as  it  had  several  times  be-
fore,  then  it  might  have  overpowered  the  marshals  and  taken
over   the   school  grounds.    The   result   would   have   been  a
massacre.    This  is  what  Mr.  Kennedy  risked  and  so narrowly
avoided.
Why  It  Was  Easy  to  Trick  Them
The  reason  for  taking  the  risk  was,  as  Miriam  Ottenberg,
a  reporter  particularly  friendly  to  the  Department  of  Justice
wrote  in  the  Washington  Star  (Oct.   1)  that  "Both  the  Presi-
dent  and the  Attorney  General  .  .  .  wanted  to  avoid  sending
in  troops  if  at  all  possible"  and  were  therefore  "particularly
keen"  to  accept  the  assurances  given  them  by  Mississippi   offi-
cials  that  State  police  could  handle   the  situation.     In  their
eagerness  to  avoid  using  Federal  troops,  the  President  and  the
Attorney  General  let  Governor  Barnett  trick  them.    As  Stan
Opotowsky,  who  wrote  the  best  and  most  vivid  account  of
the  campus  battle,  reports  in  the  New   York   Post   (Oct.    1),
"Barnett  had  his way.   He  insisted  that  Meredith  be placed  on
the  campus  before  the  President   went  on  radio  and  TV  to
address  the  nation."    The  result  was that  "the   Federal  men
had  to  run  the  gauntlet  of  idle  students,  who  on  a  day  other
than  Sunday, might  have  been  tied  down  by  classes.     Instead
they  eventually grew  into  a  crazed  and  rioting  mob."    This
occurred,  as  Opotowsky   reported,   because   "the   Justice   De-
partment  wanted  Meredith  in  the  University  before  Tuesday
so  it  could  get  Barnett  and  Lt.  Gov.  Johnson  off  the  hook  at
the  deadline  for   their   contempt   of  a  federal   court   order."
This   desire   to  fix  things  up   privately   cost   two   lives,   and
risked  more.
The  third  and  most  important   question  is:  When  is  Mr.
Kennedy going  to mention  racism ?   All  through  his  campaign
for  the'Presidency,  as may be  seen  from  the  sample quotations
in  the  box  on  this  page,  Mr.  Kennedy  criticized  Mr.  Eisen-
Still  Waiting
"As  a  moral  leader,  the  next  President  must  play  his
role ...  in our crusade for human  rights.  . .  .  For only
the  President,  not  the  Senate  and  not  the  House,  and
not  the  Supreme  Court  .  .  .  only  the  President  can
create  the  understanding and tolerance  necessary.  .  .  ."
—JFK  at Los Angeles, Sept.  9, I960.
"Moral   and  persuasive  leadership  by  the  President
to  create  the  conditions  in  which  compliance with  the
constitutional    requirements   of    school    desegregation
takes  place;  this  is  the  kind  of  leadership  I  intend  to
give.  .  .  .  There  is  more  power  in  the  Presidency  than
to  let  things  drift,   and  then  suddenly  to  call  out  the
troops.  .  .  ."
—-JFK  in  New  York,  Oct. 12,1960.
"If  the  President does  not  himself  wage  the  struggle
for   equal  rights—if   he  stands  above  the  battle—then
the  battle  will  inevitably  be  lost."
—JFK  in Los Angeles, Sept.  9,1960.
1  0
hower  for  failing  to  use  his  high   office  for  moral  leadership
in  the  integration  struggle  and  promised  to  act  quite   differ-
ently  himself.    But  in  his  radio-TV  appeal  to  the  Mississippi
students  and  the  nation  last  Sunday  night,  Mr.  Kennedy  was
as  antiseptically  neutral  and  uncommitted  about  civil  rights
as  was  Mr.  Eisenhower  in  the  Little  Rock  crisis.    Like   his
predecessor,   Mr.  Kennedy  spoke  as  if  the  President  were  a
mere  top  Federal  marshal,  sworn  to  uphold  the  law,  but  not
called  upon  to  like  it  or  discuss  it.    Once  again  at  a  critical
moment,  the  weight   of  the  Presidency  was  not  brought   to
bear  in  support  of  the  Court's  integration  rulings.    Mr.  Ken-
nedy  and  his  brother,  the  Attorney  General,  in  the  latter's
TV  reply  to  Governor  Barnett,  both  spoke  of  Meredith's  bat-
tle  as a  "private  suit"  with  which  the  Federal  government  had
no  concern  until  called  in  a  few  weeks  ago  to  enforce  a  court
order.    This  is a position  calculated  to  achieve  the  lowest  com-
mon  political  denominator  consistent  with  enforcement;  it  puts
the  President  and  the  Attorney  General  shoulder-to-shoulder
with  the  Southern  moderates.    That  is  not  good  enough.
It  is  not  good  enough  because  resistance  to  unjust  law  lies
too  deep  in  American  tradition,  as in that of  every  free  society.
We  have too long  been  taught that resistance  to tyranny is  obe-
dience  to  God,  as  indeed  it  is.   Peaceful  change  in  the  South
can  only  be  brought  about  if  by moral  leadership  and  ethical
education,  we strengthen  those  silenced  and  besieged  elements
in  the  white   South   itself   which  realize  that  it  is  wrong   to
treat  the  Negro  as  a  second   class  citizen,  cruel  to  mark  his
children  from  their  first  days  in  school  with   the  brand  of
apartness  and  inferiority,  a  sin  to  make  another  human  being
a  "nigger."   The fight cannot  be won until the  South  is  made
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 8,1962
The  GOP's  Veteran  Brown  of  Ohio Blames  It  All  on  TDK's  Good  Neighbor   Policy
The  House,  Too,  Had  Its  Mob  Scene  in  Passing  the  Cuba   Resolution
Mobs   are   not   confined    to  Mississippi.     A   warlike   mob
spirit   governed   the   House   of   Representatives    when   on
Sept.  25 it  debated  the  Cuba  resolution.    Though  a  motion
to  recommit  for  a  stronger  resolution  was  defeated   by 251
to  140,  and  the  Administration's    resolution  passed  484  to
7,  very  few  voiced  support  for   the  President's   caution  and
none  dared  go  beyond  his  position  to  advocate   resumption
of   relations  with  Cuba.   On  this  page  we  provide  excerpts
to  give  readers  the  flavor  of  this  unthinking  clamor,  and
nostalgic  longing  for   the  days  of  tougher  policies:
MB.   BROWN   (R.   Ohio):   Mr.   Speaker,   our   troubles   first
started  back  in  the  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt  administration   in-
sofar   as  Latin  America  is  concerned,  when  he  entered   into
what  was  called  the  Good  Neighbor  policy.  .  .  .  That  p61icy
continued  until,  under  Mr.  Truman,  we  entered  into  the  Or-
ganization  of American  States, and agreed  . . . that  we would
not  decide for  ourselves  what  we  should  do  to  protect  Amer-
ican  properties   and  American  lives  in  any  Latin   American
country. . . .
For  a  good  many  years  down in  Latin  America,  on  40  dif-
ferent   occasions,  American   armed   forces  .  .  .  moved  into
countries  south  of the border.  . . . But lately  we have  adopted
this   namby-pamby   policy   of  attempting   to  turn   to   Latin
American  countries,  to  ask their  permission.  .  .  .
MB.  CBAMEB  (D. Fla.):  There  are  in  Cuba trained  African
Communist  troops  who are  to  be  clandestinely  sent  into  Haiti
and   the   Dominican  Republic  to   provide   the   muscle  for   a
Communist  uprising  and takeover.  .  .  .
Danger  to  Florida  Real   Estate
MB.    RIVEBS   (D.   S.C.)  :   According   to   my   distinguished
friend   from   Florida,  who  is  so  eloquent  and  who   recently
came  from  my  part  of  the  world,  if  you  do  not  stop  Castro
now,   soon,  real  estate  in  Florida  will  not  be  worth  50  cents
an  acre. . . .
It  is  as  simple  as  the  ABC's  if  you  give  the  military  the
word   to   go  ahead,   and   we  can  blockade  Cuba.    You   say,
"You    cannot  do  it,  you  may  bring   on  a  rain  of  missiles."
If  you  are  afraid  to  die  now,  you  will  be  afraid  to  die  two
years  from  now.
Let  me  say  that  the  greatest  philosopher   the  world   has
ever  had  was  old  Plato.    He  said,  "Only  the  dead  have  seen
the  end  of  war."    If  blockading Cuba, brings  on war,  let  our
boys  die  for  America.   They  are  not  interested  in  Laos,  they
are  not  interested   in  Indonesia,  they  are   not  interested  in
Berlin. . . .
MB.  JOHANSEN   (R.  Mich.) :  Mr.  Chairman,  let  us  bluntly
proclaim  to  the  world  that  we  need  the  consent  of  no  nation
or  organization  of  nations  to  act  for  our  own  self-preserva-
tion. . . .
MR.   McMiLLAN   (D.  S.C.)  :  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  the
United  States  should  have  stopped   Castro  when  he  pushed
Batista   out  of  office.    We,  of  course,  would  like  to  see  every
country  have  a   democratic   form   of  government;   however,
Batista, even  though  he was a dictator,  cooperated  and worked
with  our country  at  all times.  . . .
MR.   FASCELL   (D.  Fla.):   Some  question  has   been  raised
about  the  existence   and  the  death  of  the  Monroe   Doctrine.
In  looking for  a  date  of  death,  if  any,  I  cannot  overlook  the
time  when  Mr.  Khrushchev  took  off  his  shoe  in  the   United
Nations  and  proclaimed that  the  Monroe  Doctrine  was  dead.
Those  who  have  a  feeling  for  the  enunciation  of  this  prin-
ciple  had  the  opportunity   to  speak  loudly  and  clearly   then
as  they  now  have  to  right  to  speak  loudly  and  clearly;  and
so  let him cast  the  first  stone  if  he has  the  guts  to  do it.    ...
MR.   PILLION   (R.  N.Y.):   I   submit   the   following  report
upon  the  Soviet  military  concentrations  in  Cuba.   This  report
is  based  upon  the  most  reliable  and  informed   sources.
MB.  HAYS  (D.  Ohio):  What  are  they?
MB.  PILLION  :  I  will  tell  the  members  of  the  House  in  just
a  minute  [he  never  did—IFS].    The  Soviet  has  under  com-
mand  in  Cuba  as  of  now  two  surface-to-surface  nuclear  mis-
sile   launching  sites   under   construction;   two   ground-to-air
nuclear  missile  sites;  5 naval  bases;  15 air  bases.    Hundreds
of  Soviet  fighter  planes,  thousands  of  Soviet-Czech  artillery
pieces, thousands  of  Soviet  tanks  and  motorized  weapons  and
troop  carriers  and  350,000 Soviet  trained  and  equipped  troops.
.  .  .  Mr.  Chairman,  let  us  not  repeat  the  history   of   Car-
thage.  . . .
MB.  JOHNSON   (D.  Md.)  :  There  are  those  who  equate  the
Soviet  action  in  Cuba  with  the   establishment   of  American
bases  in  Turkey,  Iran,  Pakistan  and  other  nations   through-
out  the   world.    I,  for   one,  cannot   accept   this  for   several
reasons:  First,  we  have  built  American  bases  by  invitation
and  for  the  sole  purpose  of  opposing  the  threat  of  commu-
nism.  . . .
MB.  BROOMPIELD  (R.  Mich.)  :  It  is clear  that  the  advantage
we  once  had  in  our  ring  of  bases  on  the  periphery  of  Russia
—in  Turkey,  Iran  and  the  NATO  nations—and  our  ability
to  zero  in  bombers  and  missiles  on the  Soviet  Union  has  been
lost  by the  Communist  military  buildup  in  Cuba.  .  .  .
MB.  FOUNTAIN   (D.  S.C.)  :  The  absurd   idea  that  we  can
act  only with  somebody else's  approval,  if  we  do  not   change,
will  ultimately  mean  the  end of  our  way of  life.  .  .  .
MB.  GBOSS  (R. Iowa):  Cuba is  complete  proof  that  foreign
aid  will buy us  nothing.   During  the  14 years  preceding   1961,
the  U.S.  shovelled  at  least  $2,250  million  into  Cuba  through
premium  prices  on  Cuban  sugar,  and  through  economic and
military  assistance.    During   1960  and   1961,  the   Sino-Soviet
bloc  made  $100  million  available  to  Cuba.   Thus  the  Commu-
nists  are  now reaping  the  whirlwind  of our folly.  .  .  .
MB.  PUCINSKI   (D.  111.):  Just  so  there  can  be  no  disagree-
ment  as  to  the  extent  of  the  Soviet  military  buildup, I  would
urge  upon  President  Kennedy  to  order  a  resumption  of  U-2
flights  over  Cuba.  .  . .
MR.   ADDABO  (D.  N.Y.) :  I  thought  that  Neville  Chamber-
lain  proved  a  long  time  ago  that  you  could  not  put  an  um-
brella  over  a  country  that  a  dictator  coveted  and  expect  that
would  keep  him out.   The Monroe  Doctrine  says.  .  .  .
Among The Very Few  Saner and Calmer Voices  Who  Spoke  Up  Amid  The  Mob Clamor
MR.   CELLER   (D.  N.Y.):  Mr.  Speaker,  the  situation  in
Cuba  has  certainly affected  emotionally a  number  of  elected
officials  and  editors,  and  has  clouded  their  judgment. With-
out  enlarging upon  the  proposals they have put  forward  and
examining  all   possible   consequences,   they  have  demanded
a  naval blockade  of  Cuba,  or  outright  invasion  of  Cuba.   A
naval  blockade  is,  of  course,  an  act  of  war. ...  A  direct in-
vasion  at  the  present   time  could  be  easily   interpreted  as
first,   an   act   of   aggression   which   would  give   the   Soviet
Union  an  unprecedented  propaganda  issue;  second,  a   U.S.
acceptance  of  the  principle  of  preventive  war;  third,  an  in-
vitation  to  the  Soviet  Union to  bomb with rockets  our  bases
on  the  periphery  of   Russia   and  her  satellites.    I   believe
most  firmly  that  such  loose  talk  must  cease.  .  . .
MR.  BOLAND  (D.  Mass.):  This  is  no  time  to  listen  to
political  sorcerers,  hucksters  and adventurers. .  .  .  Only  the
foolhardy  and  unthinking  would  plunge  this  nation  into  an
unneeded  and unwanted war. .  .  .
MR.  COHELAN  (D.  Cal.):  A  great  nation  must  have  a
sense  of  historical  perspective.   I  am  afraid  there  are  some
here  who  sound  more  like  they  are  in  panic.  .  .  .  An  inva-
sion  of  the  island  at  this  time  would  utterly  destroy   the
moral   influence   and   authority—and   much   of   the   actual
power—we  now  enjoy  in  the  councils  of  nations.    We  would
be  relegated ...  to  the  footsteps   left  by  the  Soviets  in
smashing  into  Hungary. ...
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 8, 1962
Even  Literate  Liberals  Like  Douglas  and  Proxmire  Vote  for  Iron  Curtain  Practices
Clark  Makes  Three  Attempts  to  Block  Postal  Censorship  in  Senate
The  Senate  again  demonstrated   last  week  that  no  country
in  the  world  has  leaders  who  talk  more  about  freedom   than
ours,  and  care  less.    Senator  Clark  (D.  Pa)   tried  three   times
without  success  to  knock  censorship  out  of  the  postal  rate  bill.
A  majority  of  the  Senate  voted  down  each  of  these   attempts,
though  in  one  of  these  three  votes,  it  took  a  position  to  the
right  of  the  House   Un-American  Activities  Committee,   and
of   its  chairman,  Walter.    Those  who  voted   for   postal  cen-
sorship  included  such  literate  men  and   supposed   liberals  as
Douglas   of   Illinois   and   Proxmire   of    Wisconsin.
The   Postoffice   began   barring  foreign   "Communist   propa-
ganda"   from  the  mails  during  the  Korean  war  under   Tru-
man,  and  made  a  silly  record  doing  it  (see  box  below).    The
National   Security  Council   under   Eisenhower   recommended
that  this  postal  censorship  be  stopped,  and  an  order  to  this
effect  was  issued  by  President  Kennedy  March  17  of  last  year.
Now   it  is  to  be  reinstated.
To  the  Right  of  the  Un-Americans
The  source  of  this  aberration  is  a  Republican   Congressman
from  Nebraska,  Glenn  Cunningham,  who  is  regarded  as  ex-
tremist  even  by  the   Un-American  Activities  Committee   and
his  postal  censorship  bill  as  unconstitutional  by  its  chairman,
Walter.    Nevertheless   it  passed  the  House  last  January  with
only  Congressmen   Lindsay  and   Ryan  of  New   York   voting
'nay'   and  later,  this  same  Mr.   Cunningham   stampeded   the
Senate   Post   Office   Committee   into   reporting   out   a  revised
form  of  postal  censorship,  with  only  three  members  dissent-
ing.    One  was  Clark,  the  other  two  Randolph  of  West  Vir-
ginia  and  Yarborough  of  Texas.    With  their  support   Clark
moved  first  to  knock  postal   censorship   out  of  the  bill  alto-
gether,  and  then  to  substitute  a  non-censorship  measure  pro-
posed  by Walter  last  year.    This,  too,  was  defeated  51  to  23.
Clark  then  tried  to  make  postal  censorship  discretionary  with
the  President  but  lost  on  this  also  48  to  33.
One  reason  for  the  defeat  was  the  weak  attitude  taken  by
the  so-called  "Irish  Mafia"  which  constitutes  the  White  House
The  Mails  and  the  First  Amendment
"The  United States  may  give  up  the  Post  Office  when
it  sees  fit,  but  while  it  carries  on,  the  use  of  the  mails
is  almost  as  much  a  part  of  free  speech  as  the  right  to
use  our  tongues."
—Mr.  Justice  Holmes,  quoted  by  Clark  (D.  Pa).
liaison  with  Congress.  Their  idea  is  always  to  compromise.  If
ever  a  bill  goes  in  to  illegalize  motherhood,'the  "Mafia"  will
seek  to  meet  the  proponents   halfway   by  forbidding  mother-
hood  but  only  in  even  numbered  years.    Though  the  President
opposed  reinstatement  of  censorship,  and  both  State  Depart-
ment  and  USIA  testified  against  it,  the  White  House  liaison
accepted  the  Cunningham idea  in  weaker  form.    Now  it  goes
to  conference  where  its provisions  are  likely to  be made  worse.
A  close  reading  of  the  debate  and  of  memoranda  by  the
Postal  Department   to  correct  wildly  erratic  statements  made
by  Mr.  Cunningham  will  show  that  while  we  are   proposing
to  reinstitute  it,  censorship  on  the  Soviet  side  has  been  easing
up.    Actually  the  volume  of  propagandistic  mail  going   from
our  side  to  theirs  is  now  much  larger  than  the  volume  going
from  their  side  to  ours.    Even  under  the  milder  Senate  ver-
sion,  writers  and  scholars  and  others  who  want  to  read  what
the  other  side  says  "will  not  be  able  to  receive  such  so  called
Communist  political  propaganda,"   as  Clark  told   the  Senate,
"unless  they  write  in  and  ask  for  it  and  thereby  perhaps  get
their  request  placed  in  an  FBI  file  and  subject  themselves  to
slander  by  any  professional  flag  waver  who  chooses   to  con-
tend  that  those  who  make  such  requests  are  soft  on  Commu-
nism   because  they  choose   to  inform  themselves   about   what
goes  on  behind  the  Iron  Curtain."
We  salute  Senator   Clark  for  having  the  courage  to  fight
this  issue  in  a  year  when  he  is  himself  up  for  reelection  and
subject  to  charges  of   "soft  on  .  .  .",  though   his  position  is
supported  not  only  by  liberal  papers  like  the  Washington  Post
and  the  New   York   Times   but  also  by  the  Chicago   Tribune
(Sept. .18).   Too  few  share  his  devotion  to  principle.
Even  A Chess  Manual  and Czarist  Books  Banned  As  "Communist   Propaganda"
"Since  1951,  our  Government  has  engaged   in  wholesale
confiscation  of   publications  mailed  into  this  country   from
behind  the  Iron  Curtain.    U.S.  officials  have ruled that  these
publications,   when   they   contain   foreign   political   propa-
ganda,  are  nonmailable.  .  .  .  Their  sieve  of  restraint  has
caught  not  only  overt  Communist  propaganda,  but  also  a
pamphlet  by  a  member of  the  British Parliament criticizing
the  position  of   the  United  States  during  the  Guatemalan
revolution  of  1954,  various  pacifist  materials  from  England,
scientific   works,   geographies,   novels   and,   mirabile   dictu,
quantities  of  an  edition  of  the  London  Economist.  .  .  .
"The   procedures  were  hasty   and  improvised,   nor  were
there  enough  men  anywhere to  do  the  job  properly—as  at
St.  Paul,  where  a  warehouse  full  of  material  accumulated
while  a  non-Russian speaking  customs  employee, furnished
solely  with  a  Russian-English dictionary, attempted  to  se-
lect  and  detain  all  publications deemed  to  contain  Commu-
nist  propaganda. ...
"The  criteria for  propaganda were  so  broad  that  enforce-
ment  officials  in  the  field  were  able  to  find  suspect  matter
in  Soviet  published works on  art,  religion,  philosophy, 19th
century  literature,  and  even  so  political a  subject  as  'Chess
for   Beginners.'    Volumes  of  this  kind  were  detained  even
though  they  had  been published  prior  to  the  Czar  Nicholas's
demise.   .  .  .  Indeed  books  which  admittedly  were   neither
pro-Communist  nor anti  U.S.  in theme .  . . were  occasionally
stopped  .  .  .  [like]  Avro  Manhattan's  'Catholic Imperialism
and  World  Power'.  .  .  .
"Ironically,  a  consignment  to  one  importer  who  was pur-
chasing  Soviet  publications  for  U.S.  military  agencies  was
confiscated   and   lost.     Mathematical   Review,   one   of   the
world's  three  publications  which  list  all  known  works  in  the
mathematical  field,  was   deprived   of   Russian  titles   for   a
year. ...  A  retired  Coast  Guard  officer  in  New  England had
developed  a  unique  avocation: studying  various navigation
problems  confronting the  Russian  Navy,  using  all  sorts  of
current  Russian  magazines. ...  He  was  told  by  his  local
postmaster  that  he  was  deemed  unqualified  to  receive  the
propaganda  he wanted."
—From  a  study  by Murray  L.  Schwartz  and  James  C.  N.
Paul  in  the  Univ.  of  Penna.  Law  Review  put  in  the  Cong.
Record  Sept.  25  by  Senator   Clark  (D.  Pa.).
1    4   S
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 8,  1962
The  South's  Mental  Sickness  Is  A  Source  of  National  Danger
(Continued   from   Page   One)
to  feel  that  integration  is  not  just  some  ruling  by  a  Supreme
Court  accidentally  filled  with  Negro-lovers  but  a  movement
which  springs  from  the  deepest  ideals  of  this  nation  and  the
most   irrepressible  aspirations  of   human  beings  everywhere.
Instead   of   a  synthetic  pep-talk,  full   of   oratorical   nonsense
about  Mississippi's  great  traditions,  Lucius  Lamar  and   Jake
Lindsey,  all  lily-white,  Mr.  Kennedy  should  have  said  a  word
about  Meredith,  about  a  Negro  air  force  veteran  who  fought
with  honor  in  Korea  and  had  a  right  to  be  treated  as  a  first
class  citizen  on  his  return  home.    In  all  Mississippi's  history,
not  one  Mississippian  has  ever  shown  as much  courage  as  this
young  Negro.    Could  the   President   not  have   appealed   to
young  students  to  wipe  away  the  ugly  racial  blinders  of  their
elders,  to  see  this  as  a  challenge   to  their  intelligence,  their
gallantry,  at  least  their  sportsmanship?
Not   Even  One
It  is more disturbing than  the  mob  scene that  not  one  single
student  at  Ole  Miss  has  had  the  desire  or  the  courage  to  go
over  and  shake  Meredith's  hand  or  to  sit  beside  him  in  class.
Those  empty  seats  around   him,   those  continued   jeers,   con-
demn  Mississippi's  younger  white  generation,   even  these  its
most  privileged.    But  how  expect  them  to  behave  differently
when  they see their  elders  egg  on  the  mob  or  fall  silent,  when
they see even the  President  and  the Attorney General unwilling
to  go  beyond  the  politically  expedient,  willing  belatedly  if
necessary  to  call  out  the  troops,  but  not  to  speak  up  for  the
justice  and  the  morality  of  the  principles  they  are enforcing?
Mr.  Kennedy's  final  appeal  was  to  preserve  the  law  and
the  peace  so "we can turn  to the  greater  crises  that are  without
and  stand  united  as  one  people  in  our  pledge  to  man's  free-
dom."    This  stale cold  war  rhetoric was offensive  on  so  serious
an  occasion. Devotion  to  freedom  should  begin  at  home.  If  we
can't  have  it  in  Mississippi,  we  won't  win  it  defending  dic-
tators  in  Vietnam. The  crises without are  nowhere  near  as  real
as  the  crisis  within.    A  large  section  of  the  white  south  is
mentally  sick  on  the  subject  of  race;  it  draws  support   from
paranoid  minorities in  the  North  who  join  it  in  seeing  the
Supreme  Court  as  the  seat  of  communistic  plotters,  and  inte-
gration  as  an  artificial  business  stirred  up  by  Jews  from  New
New  Soviet  Proposal  on  Disarmament
"Taking  account  of  the  stand  of  the  Western  Powers
the  Soviet  government  agrees  that  in  the  process  of  de-
stroying  vehicles  for  the  delivery  of  nuclear  weapons
at  the  first  stage  exception  to  be  made  for  a  strictly
limited  and  agreed  number   of   global   intercontinental
missiles,  anti-missile  missiles  and  anti-aircraft  missiles
of   the  ground-to-air  type  which  would  remain  at  the
disposal  of  the  USSR  and  the  US  alone.    Thus  for  a
definite   period  the  means  of  defense  would  remain  in
case  someone,  as  certain  Western  representatives  fear,
ventures  to  violate  the  treaty  and  conceal  missiles  or
combat  aircraft."
—Mr.  Gromyko  (USSR)  at  the  UN Sept. 21.
"Mr.   Gromyko  made  a  new  proposal  the  other  day
when  he  spoke  to  the  Assembly.    He  suggested  that,
instead  of  destroying  all  nuclear  weapons  in  the  first
stage,  that  you  might  have  a  limited  number  and  an
agreed  number  of  ICBM's  which  would  be  retained  by
the  Soviet  Union  and the  United  States. ...  At first
sight,  and I  hope  I  am  wrong,  it  seems  to  me  it  is  de-
signed  to  eliminate  the  West's  present  superiority  in
nuclear  delivery  vehicles.  .  .  .  One  other   question,  in
connection  with  what  he  proposed  occurs  to  me.   It  is
this: If  the  U.S.   and Russia  are to retain a certain   num-
ber  of  nuclear  weapons  .  .  .  how  are  the  numbers  to
be  verified?"
—Lord  Home  (UK)    at  the  UN, Sept. 27.
The  original  Soviet   plan  for   complete  and  general
disarmament  called  for  destruction  of  all  means  of  de-
livering  nuclear  weapons  in  the  first  stage.   The  West-
ern  powers  objected  and  this  seems  to  be  an  effort   to
meet  this  objection  halfway.
York.    Men  like  Eastland  represent  this  psychopathic  under-
current  which  makes  the  mob  feel  righteous.    This  sickness
could  under  certain  conditions  coalesce  into  a  serious  rightist
threat  to  free  institutions.   The  time  to  stop  it  is  now,  when
it  is  still  weak.   This  hard  fight  is  Mr.  Kennedy's  duty;  easy
flag-waving diversions  about  dangers  abroad  are  no  substitute
for  it.    This  sickness  in  a  great  nation  like  ours  is  a  matter
of  world-wide  concern.    Only  a  quarter  century  ago  another
great  and  cultured  nation,  Germany,  destroyed  itself  and  half
a  continent  from  the  virus  of  racism.    When  is  the  President
going  to  mention  it?
Don't  Forget  Our   Offer:    A  free   Copy   to  A  friend    If   You  Send  A  Stamped   LONG   Addressed   Envelope
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ....................................................................•—.•——•••••—
Street    ........................................................................—.....——
City  ..........._.........................Zone.............Stat«....................
10/8/62
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mol.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ........................................................................._..
Street    ........._.................._...................................................
City  ..........._........................Zone......._..State....................
Shall  we lend  gift  announcement?        Yea D   No d
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebroiko  Ave.,  N.  W.
Wathinfton   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.
Stone's  Weekly.    Second  CU»  Portage  Paid  «t  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday  in  December
and  the  first  in  January  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.
Stone-  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $6  in  the  U.  S.;  (6  in  Canada;  (10  elsewhere.
Air  Hail  rates:  fit  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED