I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962may14.pdf

============================================================

The  First  Big  Steal In   Outer  Space,  Pps. 1-3
How  AEC's  New  Handbook  Hides  the  Collapse  of  Teller's "Big  Hole" Fantasy  About Test  Concealment,  P.  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  19MAY   14,  1962
°'°'      WASHINGTON, D.  C.16  CENTS
The  Myths  That  Menace  America's  Future
Most  Americans  would  be  surprised  to  hear  that  they  had
an  ideology.    It  sounds  so  foreign.    But  you  can  have  an
ideology  without knowing  it,  and  even  your  best  friends  may
be afraid  to  tell you.   An  ideology is a kind  of  secular  religion.
It  is  a  triumph  of  cherished  faith  over  observed  fact.    It  is  a
collection  of  venerable myths  it  is  not  respectable  to  question
though  we all  really know that they  are untrue.   The American
ideology  is a  belief  that  our  economy  is somehow  a triumph  of
free  enterprise—individualistic,  private and  competitive.    Just
as  the  most  devout  among  us know that  Col.  Glenn  was  in  no
danger  of  running  into  God  or  colliding  with  stray  angels  Up
There,  so  the  most  staunchly conservative among  us  know  the
pious  picture  of  free  enterprise bears  little  resemblance  to  the
realities  of  money-making.  But  few  say so  out  loud.
We  Don't  Take  Religions  As  Seriously
There is one  vital difference,  however,  between  our  religious
and  our  secular faiths.  We  take the  latter much  more  seriously.
No  political figure would  dare  suggest  that  the  Air  Force  stop
testing  nuclear  missiles in  the  stratosphere  lest  it  somehow  dis-
turb  the  Heavenly  Choir.  But  in  the  realm  of  economic  and
social  policy,  ideology  dominates  common  sense.    It  takes  a
bold  politician  to  question  the  hallowed  superstitions  of  free
enterprise.    This  was  vividly  demonstrated   again  on  May  3
when  the  House  of  Representatives after  less  than  four  hours
of  debate  passed  the  Communications  Satellite  bill  by  a  lop-
sided  vote  of  354  to  9.    This  bill,  if  it  now  passes  the  Senate,
will  be  the  first  Big  Steal  in  Outer  Space.    It  will  hand  over
communications  satellites,  with  all  their  enormous  potential  in
communication,  entertainment,  education  and  propaganda,  to
dominance  by  one  giant  corporation,  American  Telephone  &
Telegraph,  with  a  big  financial  stake  in  slowing  up  this  new
break-through  in  technology in order  to  protect  its  investments
in  older,  obsolete  facilities.
In  examining the  myths  that  determined  the  action  of  the
House,  one  can  see  in  just  what  an  unreal  world  most  Amer-
icans  live  and  most  governmental  decisions  are  made.    There
is first of  all  the myth that equates  A.T.  & T. with  private  own-
ership.    It  is,  on  the  contrary,  collective  property,  but  under
private  control.    Its  223,000,000  shares  outstanding  are  owned
by  more  than  2,000,000  shareholders.    But  they  have  little if
any  voice  in  what  is  done  with  their  property.    The   officers
and   directors  who  actually  control   it   own,   as  of   record   in
February  of  this  year,  only  18,149  shares,  or  less  than   one-
hundredth  of  dne percent.    The  men who own  it don't  control
it.   The  men  who  control  it  don't  own  it.   This  disposes  also
of  the  related  myth  that  wide  public  distribution   of   shares
somehow  protects  the  public   interest,   and   creates  what  our
propagandists  call  a  "people's  capitalism."     The  owners  of
these  huge  collective enterprises  are  only  a  helpless  and anony-
The  Nine  and  the  Seven
Only   nine   Representatives,    all    Democrats,   voted
against  the  Space  Communications give-away  bill  when
it  was  adopted by  an  overwhelming  bipartisan  vote  in
the   House  May  3.    The   nine   were:  Gonzales   (Tex),
Mrs.  Green  (Oreg), Johnson (Wis),  Kastenmeier  (Wis),
Kowalski  (Conn),  Poage  (Tex),  Rosenthal  (NY),  Ryan
NY),  and Ullman  (Oreg). Wm. Fitts Ryan of  New  York
led  the  fight  on  the  floor,  making  four  brilliant  speeches
in  two  days.   Only  four  members supported  him  in  the
debate:  Kowalski,  Mrs.  Green,  Ullman  and  Rosenthal.
Other  so-called  liberal bloc members, like  Roosevelt  and
Reuss,  were  conspicuous by their  absence from  the  fight.
Cellar  exposed  the  weaknesses  of  the  bill  and  failed
in  all  but  one  of  bis  amendments  but  nevertheless  vetted
for  it.    So  did  Holifield  (Cal),  Clem  Miller  (Cal),  Moss
(Cal),  Dingell  (Mich)  and  Joelson  (N.J.)  though  they
all  recognized  in varying degrees  that  this was  handing
over  space  communications  to  A.T.  &  T.
In   the   Senate  seven   Senators—all   Democrats—are
sponsoring  a  substitute  bill  for  a  publicly  owned Com-
munications Satellite  Authority,  much  like the  bill  Ryan
sponsored  in  the  House  which  was  defeated  in  a  voice
vote.   The  seven  Senators  are  Kefauver  (Tenn),  Morse
,(Ore),    Yarborough    (Tex),    Gore   (Tenn),    Gruening
(Alaska),   Burdick    (N.   Dak),   and   Mrs.   Neubergar
(Oreg).     This   is  the  first  open  split   between   liberal
Democrats  and  the  Kennedy  Administration on  a  basic
economic  issue.
mous  herd.    The  wider  the  shareholdings  the  easier  for  the
inside  clique  of  bankers,  managers and  big investors.
Then  there  is the  myth  that  A.T.  & T.  embodies the virtues
of  free  enterprise.    Its  record,  on  the  contrary,  is  technologic-
ally  backward,  as Congressman  Wm.  Fitts  Ryan of  New   York
pointed   out,  in  leading  a  lonely  fight  against  the  bill  in  the
House.    Expert  testimony  before  Senator  Russell  Long's  in-
vestigating   subcommittee   in   the   Senate  provided   many  ex-
amples,   including   "one-piece   telephones,   modern   switching
equipment,  and  the  dial phone,  which were not  placed  on  the
market  for  years  after  they  had  been  developed"   in  order  to
protect  investment  in  obsolete  equipment.    For  those  aware
that  A.T.  &  T.  is  a  monopoly,  there  is  the  myth  that  it  is
safely  subject  to  public  regulation.    One  has  only  to  read  the
devastating   speech   by   Congressman    Emanuel   Celler,   from
which  we  reprint  salient  portions  on  page  three,  to  see  how
untrue  this  is.   Summarizing his  painstaking years of anti-trust
investigation,   Mr.  Celler  showed  how  ignominiously  the  Fed-
eral  Communications   Commission  has  failed  in  its  regulatory
task,  how  easily  A.T.  & T.  has  been  able  to  overcharge  long
distance  users  alone  a  billion  dollars  in  the  past  seven  years.
There  is  the  myth,  taught  in  our  country  almost  from  the
first  grade  in  school,  that  anything  public  ownership  does  is
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May H,  1362
bad,  everything  private  ownership   does   is  good.    This  sur-
vives  the  observed   fact  that   in  the  fresh  and   recent  past   a
whole  series  of  technological  break-throughs  of  the  most  mo-
mentous   kind—from   the  unlocking   of  atomic  energy  to  the
placing  of  satellites  in  orbit—were  only  made  possible  by  gov-
ernmental  action under  public ownership.   Whether  in capital-
ist  America  or  Communist  Russia,  in  Britain  or  France,  only
government  has  had  the  resources  for  such  giant  accomplish-
ments,  only  government  could  take  the  vast  financial  risks  in-
volved.    Under  cover  of  this  myth, private  interest  only  grabs
what  public  money  has  developed.     Mr.   Kowalski   of   Con-
necticut,  one  of  the  brave  handful  who  supported   Mr.  Ryan's
crusade  in  the  House  for  a  publicly  owned  space  communica-
tions   authority,  pointed   out   that   some   $25   billions  of   tax
moneys  had  been  spent  in  opening  up  the  possibilities of  space
and   that  half   a  billion  has   been   spent   on   communications
satellite  research  alone.    Yet  a  special  committee  of  interested
companies   organized   by   A.T.   &  T.   has   been   able   to   put
through  the  House  a  bill  which  will  give  them  control  of  the
fruits   in  communications.     For   them,   Mr.   Smith's   dreaded
Rules   Committee   acted   swiftly   and   favorably,  reporting   the
bill  without  question.    For  them,  both  party  leaderships joined
forces  in  a  burst  of  mutual  self-congratulation   on  the  House
floor  that  was  the  most  nauseating  part  of  the  spectacle.     To
watch  this  bipartisan  response  was  to  see  that  when  the  big
moneyed   men  want  action,  the  two  party  system  becomes   a
myth,   too.
Real  Enterprise  Sacrificed
Three  basic considerations were  trampled  down  in  this  rush
to  do  A.T.  & T.'s  bidding.    The  first  two  concern  the  genuine
private  enterprise  which  still  exists  in  the  interstices  and  on
the  margins  of  our  economy.    Only  through  a  publicly  owned
space  authority  could  all  communications  concerns  be  assured
Unexpected   Tribute   to  JFK
Mr.   [Clarence  J.]   BROWN  (R.  Ohio):  Let   me  say
to   the   gentleman   from   Iowa   I   am  convinced,   as   the
result  of  recent  happenings,  that  the  President   will  not
go  out  of  his  way  at  this  time,  if  this  bill  becomes law,
to  offend  any  more elements  in  the  business  and  indus-
trial  world,  as  far  as  that  is  concerned?    I  rather  feel
he  may  be  very  cooperative,  and  may  be  very  desirous
of  discussing  these  matters  on  a  proper  basis.     I  am
sure  that   under  no  conditions  will  he  lose  his   temper
in  connection with  the  establishment   of  this  new  board
of  incorporators  or  board  of   directors."
—Ohio's   veteran  standpat   Republican,   whose   name
has   been  synonymous   with  Hooverism  for   a  quarter
century,  reassuring  other  Republicans  and  a  Southern
Democrat  ivho  wondered   during  debate   on  the  Satellite
Comimrnications  bill  May  2 whether  President   Kennedy,
who  will  appoint   three  of  the  15  directors  of   the  new
satellite  communications  corporation,   can  be  trusted  to
pick  men  "representative  of  the  industry."
of  a  chance   to  use  these  revolutionary  new  facilities.     Only
through  such  an  authority  could  the  smaller  independent man-
ufacturers   hope   to   prevent   this   huge   potential   market   for
equipment  from  being  pre-empted  by  A.T.  & T.'s  own  wholly
owned  equipment  subsidiary,  Western  Electric,  and   its  allies.
Here  the  myth  of   free  enterprise  is  being  used  to  destroy  its
reality.    The  new  communications  satellite  corporation  created
by  the  House  will  be  a  legalized  cartel.
A  third  basic  consideration   is  in  the  sphere  of  foreign  rela-
tions.    These  satellite systems  require  international  agreements.
Their  negotiation interlocks with  many  other  aspects  of  public
policy.    The  responsibility for  these  should  be  in  the  hands  of
the  government.   The  original  bill  proposed  by  the  Adminis-
tration  kept  the  conduct  of  these  negotiations   in  the  State  De-
partment.    The  bill,  as  rewritten   in  response   to  A.T.   &  T.
The .Five Who Had The Courage To Speak  Up  For  Public  Ownership  In  Space
"We  should  not  discuss  the  issue  of  public  or private own-
ership  in  any  doctrinaire  spirit.   Under  some  circumstances
private  ownership  of  a  natural  resource  or  a  technological
innovation   is   best  for   the  common  welfare.    Under  other
circumstances   public  ownership  and  operation  will  achieve
greater  public  benefit.  .  .  .  Public  rather  than  private owner-
ship  should be  considered when: First,  the  resource  or  tech-
nology   has  been  partly  or  entirely   developed  with  public
funds;  second,  free competition is  not  possible  and monopoly
inevitable;  third,  public  participation  is  extremely limited;
and  fourth,  national  objectives  and  normal  business  efforts
to   make  normal  commercial  profits   are  likely  to  conflict."
—Wm.  Fitts  Ryan  (D.  N.Y.)   May  3.
"Paradoxical   as   it   may   sound,  public  ownership  of   the
communications  satellite system  offers far  greater   prospects
for   a  competitive  situation  in  this  field  of  communications
via  space   satellite  than   would  the  committee   bill. ...  A
publicly  owned  system,  including  the  necessary  ground  sta-
tions,  would  provide  a  real  common  carrier  situation  where-
by  the  facilities would be  available  on  an  equal  basis  to  all
communications firms."
—Al  Vllman  (D.  Oreg)  May  2.
"We  are  confronted  once  again  .  .  .  with  a  giveaway  in
the  guise  of  legislation.    [This  bill]  would  .  .  .  turn  over  to
a  few  large  private corporations,  mainly the  American  Tele-
phone  and  Telegraph  Co. the  fledgling  space  communication
satellite  system.    This  communication  to  date  is  a  federally
developed  enterprise.    It  was  conceived,   researched   and  de-
veloped  with  the  tax  moneys  of  the  American  people.    To
turn  it  over  to  these  corporations is  inequitable  and  unjust.
It   may   be  scientifically   unsound."
—Mrs.  Edith  Green (D.  Oreg)  May  2.
'The  President  does  not  deny  or  ignore  the  vast taxpayer
investment   in  space   communication,  and  he  acknowledges
that  it  would  be  inequitable to  give  this  asset  to  a  favored
few,  leaving the  taxpayers  without  a  shred  of  their  invest-
ment.    In  an  attempt  to  reconcile  this  equitable  considera-
tion  with  other  motives,  the  President   suggested   that  one-
half  the  stock  of  the  corporation  be  made  available  for  pur-
chase  by  the  American  public.  .  .  .  But  surely  it  must  be
known  to  all  gentlemen of  the  House  that  the  class  of  stock-
holders  is  not  coexistent  with  the  class   of  taxpayers—few
are  wealthy  enough  to  be  stockholders. ...  A  recent  study
found  that  1.6%  of  adults  in  our  country  own  82%  of   the
stock   held  in  the   personal   sector.     The   proposed   remedy
does  not  satisfy  the  purpose  for  which  it  was   fashioned."
—Frank  Kowalski  (D.  Conn)  May  2.
"Under  the  proposed  legislation,   A.T.  &  T.  will  dominate
it  completely. .  .  .  The  arguments  for  private  ownership  are
all  fallacious  and  are  designed   to  hide  the  fact  that  these
private  monopolies  and  huge  corporations   want  to  get  con-
trol  of  the  operations  and  revenues  of  this  last  and  revolu-
tionary  competitor.   The answer  to  this,  we  are told, is  broad
ownership  in  some  way.   This  is  the  most  cynical  of  all  the
arguments.     Anyone  with  the  slightest   awareness   of   the
facts   of  corporate  life  knows  that   the  broader   the  owner-
ship,   the  easier   it  is   for  the   insiders   to  control,   because
few  small  investors  bother  to  vote  their   stock."
—Ben]. S.  Rosenthal  (D.  Queens, N.Y.)   May  3.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May U,  1962
pressure  and  weakly  accepted  by  the  Kennedy  Administration,
merely  provides  that  the  State  Department  be  "advised."  Con-
gressman  Celler  offered   an  amendment  from  the  floor  giving
the  President  the  same  veto  power  over  this  new  communica-
tions  corporation  that  he  has  over  the  Civil  Aeronautics Board
insofar  as  international transportation  is  concerned.   This  was
brushed  aside.   To  all  such  sobering  considerations there  was
a  continuous  mythical refrain.  "This,"  as  Congressman  Roude-
bush  (R.  Ind)  said  in  a  paean  of  support  for  this give-away
bill,  "is  the  free  enterprise  way;  this  is  the  capitalistic  way;
this  is  the  profit  system  way;  and  this  is  the  American   way."
This  equates  Big  Steals  by  Big  Corporations  with  "the  Amer-
ican  way."    No  satirist  could  top  that  one.
The  Reason  for  the  Rush
The  reason  for  rushing  the  bill  now  is  to  give  the  monopo-
lists  the  inside track  in  this first  great  peacetime  space venture.
This  is  really  a  New  Frontier,  but  in  confronting  it  the  Ken-
nedy  Administration  shows   its   incapacity  to  think   in   terms
which  fit  the  phrase,  the  very  banner  it  has  chosen.    Mr.  Ken-
nedy  gave  up  the  battle  in  his  letter  last  Feb.  7  to  those  other
two  pioneering  pillars  of  this  Administration,  Vice  President
Johnson  and   Speaker  McCormack,   when  he  said  space   com-
munications  was  a  subject  "which,  by nature,  is essentially pri-
vate  enterprise  in  character."    From  this  patent  fallacy  flowed
the  surrender  to  A.T.   & T.    Communications  have  long  been
notoriously  monopolistic  on  earth,  and  the  whole  idea  of  hand-
ing  over  communications  in  space  to  the  same  private  monop-
olists  will  strike  other  nations  as  absurdly anachronistic.
But  He  Voted  For  It
"We  are  in  a  desperate  cold  war  struggle  with  the
Soviets,  not  only  for  the  minds,  but  for  the  markets  of
free  and neutral nations.    If  we  are  to  be  crippled with
the  dead  weight  of  monopoly,  managed  prices,  limited
production,    and    unjustified    profits,    we   cannot   win.
We  are  doomed  to  failure."
—Chet  Holifield    (D.  Cal)   opposing   the   Communica-
tions  Satellite  give-away  bill  on  the  floor  of  the   House
May   2—the  day  before   he  voted  for   it.
The   only  chance  to  block  this  steal  now  is  in  the  Senate
where  seven  Senators   led  by  Kefauver   are  proposing  that  a
publicly  owned  Communications  Satellite  Authority  be  estab-
lished  to  guarantee  technological   progress  and  the  public  in-
terest  in  the  skies.    An   even  more  fundamental   issue   is  in-
\ol\cd.    It  is whether  our  country can, on  great  occasions  other
than   the   making   and   preparing   for   war,   mobilize   its   full
strength  free  from  doctrinaire  considerations,  whether   it  can
operate  in  the  pragmatic way  which  is  supposed  to  be  our  best
tradition.    In  the  years  to  come,  in competition  with  the  forced
draft  industrial expansion  of  the  socialist  countries,  our  coun-
try's  future  growth   and  greatness  will  depend   on  its  ability
to  plan  in  a  big  way,  and
 ;
to  carry  through   vast   enterprises
under  public  direction,  for  peaceful  purposes.    The   issue  is
not  public  vs.  private  enterprise.    The  problem  is  to  free  real
enterprise,    public   and    private,   from   short-sighted    private
monopolies.    This  is  the  full  magnitude  of  the  issue  soon  to
come   before   the   Senate.
Chairman  Celler  On  the  Greed  of  A.T. &  T.  and  the  Weakness  of  FCC  Regulation
"Under  the  pending  bill, the  ground  stations  can  be  owned
jointly   or  separately   by   the   communications  carriers.     In
addition,  HR  11040  [the  space  communications  bill  as  passed
next  day  with  Celler  voting  for  it,  despite  rejection  of  his
amendment   on  this  crucial  point—1FS]   provides  that   the
FCC  [Federal   Communication  Commission]  shall  lean  over
backwards  to  license  these  stations  to  the  carriers.  .  .  .
"Much  of  the  revenue  from  the  satellite  system  will  come
from  handling  the  messages  on  earth.    Under  my  amend-
ment  the  ground  stations  of  the  American  part  of  the  space
satellite  system  shall  be  owned  and  managed  by  the   cor-
poration.    This  safeguard  is  necessary   to  enable  the  new
corporation  to  make  money,  rather  than  handling  its  main
source  of  income  on  a  silver  platter  to  the communications
carriers.  .  .  .
"A.T.  & T.  has  been  boldly  picketing the  halls  of  Congress
advocating   that   the   communications   companies   should   be
the  sole  beneficiaries of  the  communications satellite  system.
To  grant  the  carriers the  ground  stations  would  make  a  gift
to   a   few   companies  of   a  potential  multi-million   dollar   a
year  monopoly.  .  .  .
"A.T.  & T.  does  not  come  before  the  bar  of  the  Congress
with  clean  hands.    It  is  an  old  offender.    In  1953,  the  FCC
negotiated  with  A.T.  & T.  a  rate  increase  of  approximately
$65  million a  year  in  long  distance  telephone  rates.  .  .  .  The
FCC  granted   this   increase   because   it   believed   A.T.   &  T.
was  entitled  to  a  6.5%  rate  of  return  on  net  book  cost.
"Since  1955,   however,  A.T.   &  T.  has  enjoyed  a  rate   of
return  far  in  excess  of  6.5%.  ...     In  the  years  from  1955
through  1961,  if  A.T.  &  T.'s  rate  of  return  had  been  limited
to  6.5%,  long  distance  telephone  users   would  have   saved
approximately  $985  million.    Thus,  over  the  past  7  years,
A.T.  &  T.  has  overcharged  the  American  public  by  nearly
a  billion  dollars.  .  .  .
"Late  last   month  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget  released  a
report  on  the  FCC  by  a  team  of  management  consultants.
This  report,  like  the  [Celler]  Anti-Trust  Subcommittee  con-
cluded  that  the  FCC 'has  established  no firm criteria  govern-
ing  such  rates  of  return.  .  .  .'    Moreover  the  report  noted
that  in  1960  Bell  System's  purchases  from  its  wholly  owned
subsidiary,  Western  Electric, amounted  to  $1.8 billion  'which
amount  becomes   part  of   the  rate  base   on  which   the  Bell
companies  expect  a  rate  of  return.    Apart  from   occasional
review  of  periodic  reports,  no  examination of  the  books  of
Western  Electric  or  other leading telephone  equipment  man-
ufacturers  has  been  undertaken to  determine  the  reasonable-
ness  of  charges  to  the  Bell  System.'    This  is  a  barbarous
situation.    Is  the  American public  paying  for  this  unexam-
ined,  high  profit?    Remember Western  Electric  is   ;i  wholly
owned  subsidiary  of  A.T.  &  T.  .  .  .
"A.T.  &  T.  has  successfully   avoided  regulation  0:1 earth.
Divine  guidance   will  be  necessary   to  regulate  A  f,   &  T.
if  it  is  permitted  to  expand  its  domain  into  space.  .  .  .
"A.T.  & T.  has  proposed  a  low-random  orbit system  which
would  require   scores  of  satellites  and  ground   stations   in
order  to  obtain  world-wide  coverage.    This  proposal  is  made
at  a  time  when  there  is  general  agreement  on  the  ultimate
desirability  of  a  system  of  three  or  four  high  orbiting  syn-
chronous  satellites,  which  would  give  global  coverage  and
would  be  cheaper  both  to  set  up  and  to  maintain.   If   the
existing   communications  companies  are  permitted  to  own
and operate a  system  of  their choice,  they  will have  a  strong
motive  to  retard  its  development  and  use  in  order  to  pro-
tect  their  vast  investment  in  existing   equipment  and  facili-
ties,  such  as  the  undersea  cables  which  A.T.  &  T.  is  still
laying  to  this  day.
"Space  satellites  will  revolutionize communications  as  the
airplane  revolutionized   travel.     Air  travel  as  we  know   it
today  would still  be  a  mere vision  if  Congress  had  delivered
the  budding airlines  business  into  the  hands  of  the  existing
and  established   railroads."
—Emanuel  Celler  (D.  N.Y.)   May  2.
7         •
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  14,  1962
Dr.  Hans Bethe  Tells  the  Weekly  the  Teller-Latter  Calculations No  Longer  Reliable
How  the  AECs  New  Handbook  Hides  the Truth  About  Teller's  "Big  Hole"
The  Atomic  Energy  Commission  is  still  hiding  the  truth
about  the  collapse of  Dr.  Edward Teller's  "big  hole"  theory of
concealing  nuclear  tests with  which  he  has  bedevilled  test  ban
negotiations  for  two years.   The  newly  released  edition  of  the
AEC's  "The   Effects  of  Nuclear  Weapons,"  which  is  supposed
to  be  the  authoritative manual  for  all  such  questions,  has  an
appendix  on  detection  of   nuclear  testing.     In   the   advance
copies  sent  the  press,  a  new  corrected  page  (689)    had  been
hastily  inserted.    The  correction  admitted  that  Project  Gnome
showed  that  explosions  set  off  in  a  hard  rock  like  salt  would
be  magnified  by 2  and  a half  times  instead of  being  muffled  or
diminshed  by  2  and  a  half  as  predicted  by  Teller  and   his
collaborator,  Dr.  Albert  Latter.
In  Ludicrous  Haste
This  admission  means  that  even  if  the  rest  of  the  theory
is  correct  the  maximum decoupling  effect  to  be  expected  from
a  big  hole  in  salt  would  be,  not  the  factor  of  300  they  pre-
dicted,  but  only  a  factor  of  48.    Yet  on  the  same  page,  un-
corrected,  the  AEC's  manual  still  gives  the  same  table   Dr.
Latter   offered   the  Joint  Committee   on   Atomic  Energy  two
years  ago  showing  the  size  of  the  holes  in  salt  required   to
decouple  various  size shots.    In'deed  in  their  haste  the  writers
of  the manual made a ludicrous  change.    Originally  Paragraph
C.24   explained  that  setting  off  the  explosion   in  salt   would
muffle  it  by  a  factor  of  two  and  a  half.    The  next  paragraph
then  said  a  "further"   decrease  could  be  obtained   by  placing
the  explosion  in  a  very  large  hole.    The  word  "further"   was
taken  out  in  the  correction.
Actually  even  the  correction  as made  understates  the  results
of  Project  Gnome.    According  to  the  study  of  Project  Gnome
by  Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey  that  first  nuclear  explosion   in
salt  gave  off  a  signal  that  could  be  read  as  from  4.6  to  5.0
on  the  earthquake magnitude scale depending  on  how  the  data
was  used.    Since  4.6  is  the  equivalent  of  about   12  kilotons
and  5.0  of  40  kilotons,  the. Project  Gnome  shot  as  originally
estimated  (5  kilotons)   looked  from   12  to  40  kilotons.     The
magnification  ran  from  two  and  a  half  to  8  times.
Since  then  the  AEC  has  admitted  that  Project  Gnome  was
only  3  kilotons  "plus  or  minus  one."     It  is  thus  possible,  if
We  Feel  Safer  Already
"We want  weapons which  are  more rugged physically.
.  .  .  The  military  will  be carrying nuclear  warheads  to
various  parts  of  the  country  to  place  in  an  Atlas  or
Titan  or  Minuteman  missile,  and  we  want  them  to  be
safe.    We  would  not  want  an  accidental  drop  to  wipe
out  a  portion  of  our  citizens.    Further,  they  might  be
stored  in  a  silo  ready  for  use,  and  we  would  hate  to
have  a  surprise  attack  from  some  other  power  land  in
the  neighborhood with  such  a  force  that  our  own weap-
ons  are  detonated.   Hence,  we  make  them  stronger  and
try   to   guarantee  that  they  will  not  be  prematurely
detonated."
"Why  We  Test  and  Talk,"  address  by Senator  Ander-
son  (D.  N.  Mex)   to  the  Rotary  Club, Washington, D.C.,
May   a.
the  shot  was only  two  kilotons,  that  the  magnification  was  as
much  as  20  times  since  the  signal  could  be  read  as  40  kilo-
tons.    On  that  basis  the  decoupling   effect  would  be  reduced
to 6 instead of  being  a factor of  300.   That isn't  much  muffling
to  be  obtained  from  the  huge  holes   required.
Indeed  in  the  opinion  of  mining  experts  who  have  exam-
ined  the  "big  hole" theory the  size of  the'excavations  necessary
take  us  into  the  realm  of  sheer  fantasy.    A  hole  1,100   feet
in  diameter  would   be  required  for  a  300  kiloton   shot;  one
of  770  feet  for  100  kilotons.    The  latter—the  smaller  one—
would  require  the  removal  of  20  million  tons  olF salt,  or  about
four   times   annual   U.S.   production.     The   idea   that   earth
movements  on   such  a  scale  could   be  hidden   or   would   be
worthwhile   is  probably  one  of  the  biggest  hoaxes   ever  per-
petrated  by any  government  on  its  people.
When  the  Weekly   called  the  AEC  "correction"  and  these
facts  to  the  attention  of  Dr.  Hans  Bethe,  who  had  reluctantly
accepted  the  Teller-Latter   theory  two  years  ago  though  doubt-
ing  its  practicality,  he  authorized  a  statement  saying,    "The
large  signal  obtained  from  Gnome  casts  some  doubt  on  the
accuracy  of  the  previous  estimates  of  the  decoupling   theory
from  the  big  hole.   It  is very  difficult  to  state  any  precise  fac-
tors  at the present  time."    Why  does  the  AEC perpetuate  such
unreliable  calculations  in  what  is  supposed   to  be  an  authori-
tative  handbook?
Free  Copies  Of  This  Issue  Available  to  Friends  If   You  Send  Stamped   LONG   Addressed   Envelopes
I.  F.  Stone's
Please  renew  I
Street   .............
City  ..................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ...
Street   .........
City  ............_
Shall  we  send
S  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
5/14/62
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
........................Zone...........^.....................
gift  announcement?         Yes  D   No D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  CU»  Postage  Paid  at-Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except  the  last   Monday   In   August   and  tie   flrrt   In
September  and  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  in  January  at  6818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W..  Washington.  D. C.  An  Independent
weekly  published   and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.;   $6 In-
Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mali  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED