I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962oct01.pdf

============================================================

The  ADA   and  Stuart Hughes,  P.  4
Walter  and  the  House  Un-Americans  Suffer  Their  First  Legislative  Defeat  in  Years, See Page  3
/. R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  35
OCTOBER  1,  1962
10
'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
IB  CENTS
How  Do  You  Crush   An   Inspiration?
At  the  close  of  a TV  program  last  Sunday,  Sept.  23,  Senator
Keating  of  New  York,  one  of  the  worst  of  the  Republican
war  hawks,  asked  Gen.  Lucius  D.  Clay  a  cute  question.    "As
a  military man,"  Senator  Keating  said,  "do  you  recognize that
the  weapons  that  they have  in  Cuba  could  be  used  either  offen-
sively  or  defensively?"   The  question  was  designed  to  under-
cut  the  President's  assurances  that  the  arms  in  Cuba  were  de-
fensive.     Gen.   Clay  might   have  replied   tartly  that   only  a
civilian  could  ask  such  a  question.    Obviously  a  shotgun  can
be  used  "offensively"  even  against  an  H-bomb  installation  if
anybody  with  a  shotgun   could   get   close  enough,   but   that
doesn't  make  the  H-bomb  a  defensive   nor  the   shotgun   an
offensive  weapon  when  one  confronts  the  other.    Instead  Gen.
Clay  gave  an  answer  which  goes  to  the  heart  of  the  Cuban
problem.    "I'm  not  too  concerned,"  he  diasppointed  Keating
by  replying,  "about  the  Cuban  situation  as  an  offensive  threat
against  the  United  States.    But  the  possibility  that  it  could
become  the  base  for  the  inspiration  of  revolutions  in   other
parts  of  Central and  South  America  is  very  real  and  one  that
cannot  be  discounted."
Do  You  Use  the  Marines  or  SAC?
So the  question  is:  how  do  you  crush  an  inspiration?    The
Joint  Resolution  passed  by  the  Senate  does  indeed  empower
the  President  "to  prevent  by  whatever  means  necessary,  in-
cluding  the  use  of  arms,  the  Marxist-Leninist regime  in  Cuba
from  extending,  by  force  or  the  threat  of   force,  its  aggres-
sive  or  subversive  activities  to  any  part  of  this   hemisphere."
But  what  if  Cuba  is  not  so  foolish  as  to  challenge  a  giant
neighbor's  overwhelming  power  by  using  force  or  threat  of
force?    What  if  it  operates,  as  Gen.  Clay  fears,  by  "inspira-
tion"?    How  do  you  crush  an  inspiration?    Do  you  use  the
Marines?  Or  the  Strategic  Air  Command?  We  could  destroy
Cuba—utterly—within  an  hour.    But  how  destroy  its memory
in  the  hearts of  Latin America's kindred  millions ?   Cuba,  left
alone,  really  left   alone honorably  to  work  out  its  destiny,  may
prove  disappointing  to  their  hopes;  it  may .disillusion  the  rest
of  the  hemisphere;  it  may shift back,  if  we allow  it,  to friendly
relations  and  a  mixed  rather  than  a  Communist   society.    But
crushed  by  American power,  its  inspiration   would  live  on  in
the   most  idealized   form  among  the  Latin   hungry  and  op-
pressed,  the  legend  of  Castro,  the  Latin  American  David  who
defied  the  Yankee  Goliath,  who  took  the  sugar  lands  to  give
his  people  bread  and  dared  seize  the  oil  refineries  when  their
foreign  masters  refused  to  obey  Cuba's  laws.
We  are,  let  us  remember,  the  rich  man  in  a  huge  hemi-
spheric   slum.     There   never  was  a  greater   challenge   to  our
capacity  to  think  quietly  and  step  warily  than  in  this  Cuban
affair.    Against  this  background,   what  happened  in  the   Sen-
Mississippi's  Moise  Tshombe
As  this  issue  was  being  sent   to  the  printer,   tribal
•warfare   seemed   to   have  spread  from   the   Congo   to
Mississippi.    It  is, too  late  to  fight  a  new  war  between
the  States and it  looks as  if  Governor  Rosa  Barnett  will
get  his  chance to  be  photographed  behind the  bars  of  a
Federal  prison.    Now  Mr.  Kennedy  will  really  have  a
useful  task  for  those  150,000  reservists,  and we  believe
that  if  action  is  swift  and  firm,  and  the  armed  forces
sent   into  Mississippi  overwhelming,  this  will  be  the
last  stand  of  the  segregationists   in  the  South.
This  would be  the  time  for  a  joint  resolution  uphold-
ing  law  and order.   It's  easy  getting a  resolution  shak-
ing  fists  at  Castro.   The  Congress  rises  as  one.    Na-
tional   unity   is  the  watchword.    Nobody  is   afraid  of
war,   especially  ancient  warhorses  too  old  to   fight.   But
ask  these  muscle-flexers  for  a  vote  against  the  mob in
Mississippi  and  see  how  few  volunteer for  active  serv-
ice.    Nor  do we  expect  to  hear  any  intrepid  Senator  ask
Eastland  how  come  in  all  his   years  of  hunting  sub-
versive   threats   to   internal   security   he   never    once
seemed  to  notice  the  racists  who  now  venture  on  insur-
rection  in  the  South,  nor  the  White  Citizens  Councils
whose  chief   is   at  Governor  Barnett's  elbow  and  who
advocate  force  and violence  against  orders  of  the  Fed-
eral  government.   Indeed  in  Mississippi  the  forces  of
order   seem   to   interlock  with   the  forces   of   disorder.
We  notice  from  the  news  dispatches  that  Sheriff  Ford
in   Lafayette   County   is   also   chairman   of   the  county
White  Citizens  Councils.   His  jurisdiction  extends  over
Oxford  and  the  University.    The  jeering  faces  of  Ole
Miss's  student  body  attest  its  high  scholarly character,
and  we  marvel  at  the  handful  of  Negroes   who  dared
turn  out  among them  to  cheer  Meredith  when  he  tried
to  register.   This  Air  Force  Veteran,  prepared to  walk
alone  as  a  student  into  that  howling  mob of  racist  im-
beciles,  deserves  a  Congressional   Medal   of   Honor,   as
one  of  the  heroes  of  our  time.
ate  looks  like  the  attempt  of  a  cautious  President  to  throw
sops  to  an  unthinking  mob  in  the  hope  of  controlling  it.    The
Cuban  resolution  and  the   150,000  reservists  may  be  seen  as
gestures  to  appease  a  mindless  clamor  for  action,  to  buy  time
for  wiser  policies.    But  when  will  braver  men  in  the  Senate
speak  out  for  them?
The  only  way  to  combat  an  inspiration  is  with  another  in-
spiration.    But  to  the  inspiration  of  Castro's  daring  we  coun-
terpose  only  the  spectacle  of a  deep  weakness  and t  dangerous
drift.    Only  an  America  prepared  to  subordinate  ks  private
big  business  interests  to  the  welfare  of  the  hemisphere,  deter-
mined  to  abide  by its  treaty  commitment! of  non-intervention,
under,  leadership  strong  enough   to  make   peace  with  Cuba,
could  provide  an  inspiration  vital  enough  to  counter  the  one
Gen.   Clay   fears.
1   3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,   October  1,19SS
Report  from  the  UN:  As  Cold  War  Flares  Up,  Prestige  of  the  Big  Two  Goes  Down
Our  Tantrums  Over   Cuba  Making  Us  Ludicrous  at  the  United  Nations
I  brought   back  several   impressions  from  the  opening   ses-
sions  of  the  UN   General   Assembly  in  New  York.    One  is
that  the  United  States  is making  itself  ludicrous  by  its  attitude
toward  Cuba.    We   look   like  a  college   fullback  in  a  tantrum
because  a  3-year  old  stuck  its  tongue  out  at  him.    We   claim
to  be  the  strongest  power  in  the  world.    We  shoot  at  Venus
and  have  pushbuttons  that  can  destroy—at  least  so  we  claim
—everything  in  the  Soviet  Union,  down  to  the  last  cowshed.
And  here  we  are  in  a  state  of  hysteria  because  a  tiny  island
neighbor   we  have  long  been  threatening  has  received   defen-
sive  weapons   which,  fired  slantwise,   can  reach  targets  all  of
25  miles  away.    Our  Secretary  of  State  dashes  to  New  York
to  pressure  our  allies  not  to  let  ships  take  supplies  to  Cuba,
though  such  action  would  be  in  violation  of  the  international
law we're  always claiming  to  champion  and  of  the  UN  Charter
which,  like  the  Bogota  Pact,  pledges  non-intervention  in  other
countries'    internal   affairs.     Our   delegate,   Adlai    Stevenson,
once  a  national  asset,  a  memento  of  Wilsonian  standards,  now
becomes  more  and  more  a  mouthpiece  for  stale  State  Depart-
ment  quack-quack,  gets  himself   involved   in  an  exchange   of
insults   opening   day  with   Cuba,   an   exchange   he   initiated.
When  are  we  going-to  act  our  age  and  size?
Pot-and-Kettle  Controversy
The   second   impression  is  that  most  of  the  other   delegates,
from   large  countries   and   small,   are   sick   of   the   cold   war,
which  flared  up  with  fresh  virulence  at  the  opening  sessions.
Almost   everything   of   which   the   Americans   and    Russians
accuse  each  other   is  true,  for   they  each  do  or  try  to  do   the
same  things  where  they  can  get  away  with  it,  one  in  Eastern
Europe,  the  other  in  Latin  America.    I  never  heard  an  argu-
ment  more  completely  pot-and-kettle  than  the  day   Stevenson
rose  to  answer  Grom'yko.    When  Gromyko  brought  up  Cuba,
we  brought  up  Hungary.    The  inference  drawn  by bystanders
is  that  both  big  powers  are  self-righteous  bullies  whose  angry
recriminations  are  destroying  the  UN   as  a  forum  for  sensible
discussion,  heating  up  the  arms race,  and  diverting  more  funds
from  the  pitifully  small  amounts  available for  the  war  on  that
hunger   from   which  most  of   the  world's  peoples   still   suffer.
The  longer  this  goes  on,  the  lower  the  prestige  of  both  big
More  Basic  Than  East-West  Conflict
"The  East-West   conflict   is  likely  to  continue   for  a
considerable   period   of   time.    Nevertheless,   it   is   my
hope  that  we  shall  live  to  see  this  conflict  recede  and
eventually  prove  to  be  a  passing   phase   in  human  his-
tory. ...  At  the  same  time,  the  developed  part  of  the
world,  both  East  and  West,  must  concentrate   sufficient
attention  on  a  problem  which  may  ultimately  prove  to
be  of   even  greater   danger   to   mankind—the   gap   be-
tween  the  rich  and  the   poor."
—Mr.  Lange, Norway,  UN  Gen.  Assembly,  Sept.  21.
Powers  will  fall.    I  am  convinced  that  either  Washington  or
Moscow   could   register   a  propaganda   victory  if   it   suddenly
lowered   its  voice,  understated   its  case,   disarmingly   admitted
its  own  shortcomings   and  then  made  a  few  constructive  pro-
posals  for  practical  first  steps  toward  a  more  peaceful  world.
Mr.  Kennedy,   to  his  credit,  tried  for   a  new  tone  in   Russo-
American  relations  at  the  start  of  his  Administration  and  there
was  some  reply  in  kind  from  Moscow,  but  since  Vienna  there
has  been  steady  deterioration.   Now  at  the  UN  one  can  feel
the  storm  rising.
The  third  impression  is  that  the  Russians  came  to  the   UN
better   prepared.     There  was  much   in   the   Gromyko    speech
which  left  a  sour  impression—his  insistence  on  the  right  to
test  last,  his  paranoid   rejection   of  zonal  inspection  as  merely
espionage,  the  sheer  nonsense  of  declaring   that  in  West  Ger-
many  today  "you  will  hardly  note  any  significant  difference"
from   the  Third  Reich  and  his  demagogy   on  the  Congo.  But
he  also came armed  with  proposals  of  wide  appeal.    The  draft
declaration  on  what  could  be  done  with  resources  released  by
disarmament   will   appeal   to   the  poor   ex-colonial   countries.
So will  the  proposal  for  an "International  Conference  on  Trade
Problems  as  a  counter  to  the  Common  Market  which  most  of
Asia,  Africa  and  Latin  America  fear  as  a  rich  man's  preserve,
restricting  their  own   precarious  exports.     The   Soviet   draft
declaration  on  preventive  war  puts  us  on  the  spot  by  calling
for  a  mutual  pledge  not  to  use  nuclear  arms  first  and  by  con-
demning  the  use  of  force  "against  peoples  that  have  taken  the
road  of  national liberation  and  development."
Brazil  Sees  The  Poor  Growing Poorer  and The  Cold War'An  Obstacle to  Their Hopes
"The   truth   is   that   the   condition   of   the  underdeveloped
nations  tends  to  deteriorate  rather  than  to  improve, for  in
the  majority  of  cases  the  rate  of  development does  not  keep
pace  with  population  growth.   Moreover, thanks to  ...    the
successful  efforts  of  regional  exchange  organizations  estab-
lished  among  the   developed   countries,   the  underdeveloped
countries   which   do   not   participate   in   such   arrangements
are  witnessing the  progressive deterioration of  the  value  on
the   international  market  of   their  raw  materials  and  basic
commodities  which  forces  them  to  work  harder  and  harder
for   less  and  less.
"In  the  last  ten  years  the  foreign  aid  granted  our  con-
tinent  was  much  less  than  the  losses  incurred  through  the
decline  in  the  value  of  its  products.  .  .  .
"The  ideal  of  international order  is  to  achieve  peace  and
prosperity  for  all  people.    Peace   is  based  on disarmament
and  prosperity  depends  upon  technical  and  financial  assist-
ance  to  the  underdeveloped  countries.   Neither disarmament
nor  development  can  be  really  attained  on  the  basis  of  cold
war   and   competition   between  blocs  of   hostile   ideologies.
Brazil,  a  Western  and  Christian country, with  a  long  stand-
ing   democratic  tradition,  does  not  intend  to  part  with  its
formative  values.    However, it  is  precisely   to  remain  loyal
to  these  values that  Brazil  seeks  to  contribute  to  the elimi-
nation  of  the  divergencies between  the  world  blocs.  .  .  .  Dis-
armament    and   development  depend   on   this   elimination.
Without  prejudice  to  the  execution  of  regional   plans   such
as  the  Alliance for  Progress,  we  wish  to  stimulate unbiased
international  aid  to  the  underdeveloped countries.  .  .  .
"The   freedom   of   peoples   is   another   prerequisite  of   in-
ternational   co-existence.   .   .   .   Non-intervention   and  self-
determination  are  not  mutually  exclusive,  they  are mutually
complementary.    In  the  light  of  these  concepts,  if  properly
applied,  the  most  serious  political  problems  of  today,   such
as   those   of   Germany,  Cuba   and   Southeast   Asia   can   be
solved."—Mr.  de  Melo  Franco,  Brazil,  at  the   UN  Sept.  20.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  1, 1962
The  Dual  Function  of  Due  Process
"My   concern   is   not   only   that   innocent   people   are
unjustly  accused  and dismissed, but  also  that  the  agency
itself  will  not  be  able  to  make an  intelligent  or rational
decision   without  some   form  of   hearing.     Due  process
does  not  have  meaning and  value  alone  to  the  unjustly
accused.    It   also  is   essential   for  an  institution   or  in-
dividual   that  makes  the determination."
—Rep.   Jeff    Cohelan  (D.  Cal)   in  the  House  Sept.  17.
HUAC  Loses  on  Bill  to  Permit  "Faceless  Informer"  Discharges  in  Arms  Plants
Walter  and  the  House  Un-Americans   Suffer  Their  First  Defeat  in  Years
For  the  first  time  anyone  on  the  Hill  can  remember,   Chair-
man  Walter  of  the  House  Un-American   Activities  Committee
has  met  defeat  in  trying  to  get  a  Committee  bill  through  the
House.    Usually  HUAC  measures   are  treated   as  non-contro-
versial  in  that  few  members  dare  to  "controverse"  them.    Mr.
Walter  in  his  imperial  fashion  is  accustomed  to  win  their  pas-
sage  on  the  consent  calendar,  or—if   some  intrepid   soul  rises
to   block   unanimous  consent—then   under   suspension   of   the
rules,  when  more  than  one-third  of  the  members  must  record
themselves  against  the  feared  Inquisition  to  prevent   passage.
Until   Wednesday,    Sept.   19,  the   highest   vote   against   an
HUAC   measure   since  the   cold   war   began   was  six,   but   on
that   day   132   members   voted   "nay"    on   HR   11363,   which
would  have  made  it  possible  to  revoke  the  security  clearance—
and  therefore  take  away  the  jobs—of  some  5,000,000  workers
in   defense   industry  and   scholars   in   arms   research  institutes
without  giving  thenva  chance  to  face  their  accusers.   This was
six  votes  more  than  the  one-third  required  to  block  the  meas-
ure.    A  few  minutes  earlier  another  Walter  HUAC  measure,
allowing  summary  discharge  without  hearing  of  any  kind  for
employes   of   the   super-secret   National   Security   Agency,  was
passed   under  suspension   of  the   rules   but   even  then  no  less
than  24  members  voted  against  it.
How  the  Battle  Was Won
There  were  three  factors  in  Mr.  Walter's  defeat.    The first
was  the  opposition   of  the  AFL-CIO  which  for  once  went  to
bat  on  a  civil  liberties  issue.    The   second   lay  in  a  series  of
editorial  protests  by  the  New   York   Times  and  the   Washing-
ton  Post  against  the  bill  as  a  "faceless  informer"  measure  con-
trary  to   American  tradition.    The   third  was  a  round   robin
letter  sent  all  members  of   the  House  by  six  courageous  col-
leagues,  three  Republicans  and  three  Democrats;  the  former,
Lindsay  of  New  York,  Curtis  of  St.  Louis  and  MacGregor   of
Minneapolis;  the  latter,  Cohelan   and  Roosevelt  of  California
and  Reuss  of  Wisconsin.
The  fight  against   both   Walter   bills  was  led  by  John   V.
Lindsay,   a   young   maverick   Republican   of   unusual   ability.
Mr.  Lindsay  before his  election  to  Congress  four  years ago  was
in   the  Department   of   Justice.    Mr.   Lindsay  rallied  support
against  the  industrial security  bill  on  the  ground  that  so  im-
portant   a  measure,   involving  so  large   a   sector  of   industry,
should  not  be  put  to  the  House  under  suspension  of  the  rules,
when  no  amendments  are  permitted  and  only  40  minutes  of
debate   allowed.     Walter   and   the   HUAC's   ranking   Repub-
lican,  Scheret  of  Ohio,  were  startled  to  find  conservatives  like
Judd,  Derwinski,  Gross  and  Alger  voting  against   them.
At  the  time  Mr.  Lindsay first blocked  passage  of  the  Walter
Industrial  Security  bill  by  unanimous  consent   last  May,   Mr.
Walter   promised   full   debate.     But   no   witnesses  were   per-
mitted   to   oppose   the   bill   before   the   House   Un-American
Committee,  which  had  heard  only  Defense,  Justice  and  Labor
for   it  and  Mr.  Walter  twice  tried  to  slip  it  through  on   the
consent  calendar  last  August, but  was  blocked  by  Mr.  Lindsay.
Ryan   and  Rosenthal  of  New   York  joined  in  the  floor  fight
against  the  measure,  and  Chairman  Celler  of  House  Judiciary
voted  with  the  young  liberals  against  both  bills.
The  Supreme Court  (in  dreeiie  r.  McElroy)   in  1959  ruled
against  "faceless informer"  loyalty-security  procedures  but   left
open  the  question  of  whether  they  would  be  constitutional if
specifically   authorized   by  the  President  or   Congress.     Eisen-
however  issued  an  executive order reintroducing  them  in  I960,
and  Congressional  approval  would  strengthen  their  status  on
appeal.    Kennedy  ran  on  a  platform  pledging  no  more  use  of
"faceless    inlormers"   but   the   Administration  joined   hands
with  Mr.  Walter  in  trying to  enact  the  bill.    Mr.  Walter  may
yet  try  to  get  a  rule  from  his  ally,  Chairman  Smith  of   House
Rules  and  try  to  slip  it  through  during the  hectic closing  days
of  this  session  but  it  is  too   l.vte  for  Senate  action,  and  cannot
be  enacted  this year.
Administration  Accused  of  Violating  1960 Platform  Pledge  Against  Faceless  Informers
"I  think  those   on  the  majority   [Democratic]  side  ought
to  be  ashamed  of  this  bill.  .  .  .  This  legislation  is  actively
pushed  by  the  administration,  by  the  Secretary  ot   Defense
and  the  Attorney  General,  in  contravention of   the  Demo-
cratic  platform  of  1960  which  said:
" 'We  shall  provide  full  and  fair  hearing  including con-
frontation  of  the  accuser   to  any  person   whose  public  or
private   employment   or   reputation   is   jeopardized  by   a
loyalty  or  security  proceeding.'
"I  think  we  ought  to  remember  that  if  we  enact  this  bill,
particularly  under  this  procedure, which  does  not  allow  full
debate  and  which  does  not  allow  amendments  to  be  offered,
that   we   are  establishing  a   precedent  which   has   never  in
history   been   established   by   the   Congress   of   the   United
States  when  it  comes  to  the  right   of  employment  of  indi-
viduals  in  the  private  arena.  .  .  .
"HR  11363  gives  the  Government  the  right  to  determine
who  shall  be  hired  and fired. ...  If  such  power  is  neces-
sary,   it   should   be   surrounded   by   adequate  safeguards  so
that   the  Government   cannot   act   in  an  arbitrary   .   .  . man-
ner.     The  gentleman from   Ohio  [Mr.  Scherer,  ranking  Re-
publican  on  House  Un-American]  said  in  the  hearings:
" 'I  think  the  President,  as  Commander  in  Chief,  has
the  right  to  do  what  he  wants  with  classified  information
of  this  Government,  and  he  should  be  able  to  prevent   a
person   from   having   classified   information   if   he   doesn't
like  the  way  he  parts  his  hair.  .  .  .'
"If  this  point  of  view  should  ever  come  to  pass,  then  we
will  be  one  step  nearer  to  the  horrible  world  vision  so  pow-
erfully   expressed   in   Kafka's   terrifying   novel,   'The   Trial'
...  a  world  where an  apparently  innocent  man  is  arrested
for  a  crime  whose  nature he  is  never  able  to  ascertain, and
then  put  to  death  by  a  capricious, anonymous bureaucracy
without  every  determining  the  reasons  for  this  punishment
or  ever  being  able  to  confront  his  accusers.   .  .  ."
—Rep.  John  V.  Lindsay   (R.  N.Y.)    in  the  House  Sept.  17.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October i, 1962
Mass.  Leadership  Undecided on  Support  of  Stuart  Hughes  for  U.S.  Senate
\\fill  the  ADA  Sit  Out  the  Country's  Most  Important  Peace  Campaign?
Urgent  Memo  to  Readers  in  the  ADA:   In  one  overriding
respect,  the  most  important  Senate  campaign next  month  will
be  in  Massachusetts.   Only  in  Massachusetts will  there  be  an
independent  peace  candidate  for  the  Senate.   The  size  of  the
vo(» for  Stuart  Hughes  will  have  nationwide impact.    A  low
vote  will  be' a  disaster;  it  will  hurt  the  morale  of  the  peace
forces;  it  will  be  taken  as  a  sign  by  cautious  politicians  that
to  speak  out  uncompromisingly  for  peace  is  politically  hope-
less.    On  the  other  hand,  a  big  vote  for  Hughes  will  encour-
age  fresh   voices  elsewhere.    The   fact  that   1500  volunteers
could  gather  150,000  votes and  put  him  on  the  election  ballot
was  itself  news  that  invigorated  the  peace  forces everywhere.
If  he  could  now  poll  300,000  votes  or,  better  still,  in  a  hot
contest  make off  with  the  election,  that  would  be  taken  as  a
sign  that  there  is  a  strong  peace  undercurrent,  despite   the
tension  and  hysteria  built  up  by  the  press  and  irresponsible
politicoes,   especially  on  Cuba.
ADA  Opposed  Ted  Kennedy
In  this  juncture,  what  will  the  ADA  in  Massachusetts  do?
It  opposed  Ted  Kennedy.    It  cannot  support  Lodge,  a  right
wing  Republican  in  foreign  policy.    Will  it  back  the  inde-
pendent  candidate  or  stultify  itself  by  swallowing  its  own  bit-
ter  criticism  of  Ted  Kennedy's  ineptitude?    Or,  worse  yet,
will  it  stand  aside,  endorsing  no  one,  counting  itself  out  of
this  crucial  contest?   Unless  there  is  strong  pressure  from  the
Pulling  No  Punches
"What  then  is  the  challenge  Cuba  poses?    A  Social-
ist  economy:  For  the  underdeveloped  nations,  some kind
of  collectivized  economy  may  be  the  most  effective  way
of   achieving  rapid  growth.    It  is  the  sovereign  right
of  every  nation  to  decide  its   own  economic  and  social
system.    Soviet  influence  in  the  Western. Hemisphere:
Cuba  has  trade  and diplomatic relations with  the USSR.
Since  we  have  cut  off  trade  and  diplomatic  relations
with  Cuba,  only  Russian influence  remains.   I therefore
propose  that  we declare our willingness to co-exist with
Castro's  Cuba;  that  we  resume  normal  trade  and dip-
lomatic  relations  with   Cuba;  that   we   permit   Ameri-
cans  to  travel  freely  to  Cuba;  and that  we  include  Cuba
in  the  Peace  Corps  Program  and  the  Alliance  for  Prog-
ress,  and that  we  seek  a  treaty  to  declare Cuba  a neu-
tral   zone:  that   is,   no   bases,   Russian   or   American,
would  be  permitted  on  Cuban  soil."
—From   a   leaflet    by  Stuart   Hughes,   independent
candidate  for  U.S.  Senate  in   Massachusetts.
rank  and  file,  the  Massachusetts  leadership  is  apt  to  decide
to  sit  this  election  out.   This  is an  appeal  to  our  ADA  readers
everywhere  in  the  country  to  write  and  urge  their  organiza-
tion  to  endorse  Hughes  for  the  U.S.  Senate.
As  a  gesture  of  encouragement,  especially  if  you  live  in
Massachusetts,  send  a  note  to  the  Hughes   headquarters  at
56  Boylston St.,  Cambridge 38,  telling  them  you  have  written
and  will  support  Hughes  whatever the  ADA  leaders  decide.
BTATBMBNT  REQUIRED  BT  THE  ACT  OF  AUGUST  24,  1012,  AS
AMENDED  BT   THE  ACTS  OF  MARCH  8,  IMS,  AND   JULY   Z,   1MO
(Title  W,  United  State*  Code,  Section  2S3)  SHOWING  THE  OWNER-
SHIP.  MANAGEMENT,  AND  CIRCULATION OF I.  F.  Stone'i  Week-
ly   published   48  times   a   year   at   Washington.   D.   C.   for   I960.     1.  The
••me*  and  addresses  of  the  publisher,  editor,   managing  editor,  and
bnilneii  managers  are:  Publisher,  Editor,   and  Managing  Editor,   I.
V.  Stone,  M18  Nebraska  Avenne,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.;  Business
Manager  Esther  M.  Stone,  6618  Nebraska  Avenne,  N.  W.  Washington,
D.  C.    2.  The  owner   la:   (If   owned  by  a  corporation,  its  name  and
address  must  be  stated   and  also  Immediately  thereunder   the  names
and  addresses  of  stockholders  owning  or  holding  1  percent   or  more
of  total  amount  of  stock.    If  not  owned  by  a  corporation,  the  names
and  addresses  of  the  Individual  owners  must  be  given.    If  owned  by
m  partnership  or  other  unincorporated  firm,  Its  name  and  address,  as
well  as  that  of  each  Individual  member,  must  be  given.)    I.  F.  Stone,
BUS  Nebraska   Avenne,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   Esther  M.  Stone,
M18  Nebraska   Avenue,  N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.    Celia  M.  Gilbert,
Cambridge,  Mass.   Jeremy  J.  Stone,  White  Plains,  N.Y.   Christopher
D.   Stone,   Chicago,    111.     3.   The   known   bondholders,   mortgagees,
and  other  security  holders   owning  or  holding  1  percent  or  more  of
total   amount  of   bonds,   mortgages,   or   other   securities   are:   none.
4.  Paragraphs  2  and  3  Include,  In  cases  where  the  stockholder  or  se-
curity  holder  appears  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trustee  or
In  any  other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person  or  corporation
for   whom  such   trustee   Is  acting;   also  the   statements   in   the   two
paragraphs  show  the  affiant's  full  knowledge  and  belief  as  to  the  cir-
cumstances   and  conditions   under  which   stockholders   and   security
holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trus-
tees,  hold  stock   and  securities   in  a  capacity   other  than  that  of  a
bona  fide  owner.   5.  The  average  number  of  copies  of  each  issue  of
this  publication  sold  or  distributed,  through  the  malls  or  otherwise,
to  paid  subscribers  during  the  12  months  preceding  the  date  shown
above  was:  (This  information  is  required  from  dally,  weekly,   semi-
weekly  and  triweekly  newspapers only.)    18,521.    Signed,  I.  F.  Stone.
Sworn  to  and  subscribed  before  me  this  24th  day  of  September  1962.
Alvin  Bernstein.  Notary  Public,  Washington,  D.  C.    (My  commission
expires 7-31-1967.)
Don't  Forget   Our   Offer:    A  Free  Copy   to  A  Friend   If   You  Send  A  Stamped   LONG  Addressed   Envelope
I.   P.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  IS,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ....................................................................................._
Street   ....................................................................._........—
City   ............—.........................Zone........_..State....................
10/1/62
Enter  rift  tub  for  12  (6  mo*.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..........................................................................—
Street   .........._..._..............._............................„....„...............
City  ^......^..—..........................Zone.......—.State....................
Shall  we  lend  gift  announcement T         Yea  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  CImm  Portage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  during  August  and  the  lut  Monday  in  December
and  the  flrrt  In  January  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington.  D.  C.   An  Independent  weekly  published and  edited  by  I.   F.
Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Bather  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  SB In  the  U.  S.:   $6  In  Canada;  flO  elsewhere.
Air  Mall  tmtea:  SIS  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED