I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962jul16.pdf

============================================================

Is JFK   Cooling  Off   on  Counter-Force? P.  3
DienTs  Follies  Include  Pressure  on  Vietnam  Army  Officers  to  Become  Roman  Catholics,  Page  2
L F. Stone?s  Weekly
VOL.  X,  NO.  28JULY  16,  1962
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Congress  Enacts  A  Planned   Economy  (For  Sugar)
In  the  uproar  over  sugar  lobbying, public  attention  has  been
focussed,  characteristically, on  the  smallest  of  the  feasting fleas,
those  Washington   "representatives"   who  pick  up  a  few  thou-
sand  dollars  on  the  edges  of  this rich  and  sticky mess,  and  per-
haps  share  a  few  contingent-fee globules  with  their  friends  in
Congress.    Even  among  the  lobbyists,  the  spotlight  has  picked
out  the  least  important,  those  who  try  to  get  some share of  the
huge  subsidized  American  sugar  market  for  Latin  American
and  other  foreign  countries.    The  bigger  men  and  the  bigger
issues remain in  the  obscure background.    The  public has  little
comprehension   of   the   process   by  which   a   combination   of
sugar  interests  has  arranged  and  divided  up  a  guaranteed'take
of  some  two  and  a  half  billion  dollars  above the  world  market
during  the  next five years at  the  expense  of  the  consumer.
No  European  Cartel  So Complete
The  Sugar  Bill  is  a  triumph  of  planned  economy,  brought
about  by  the  firmest  public  champions  of  free  enterprise.    In
the  final hours  of  House  action, Mr.  Wickersham  of  Oklahoma
asked  plaintively whether  under  its  provisions  there  was  any
chance  for  a  new  beet  sugar  mill  in  his  part  of  the  country.
"I  cannot  tell  you  where  any  new  refinery  may be  built,"  Mr.
Cooley  of  North  Carolina, chairman  of  the  Agriculture  Com-
mittee  and  major  domo  of  the  sugar  combine  replied.     "We
did  not fix the  location  of  the  mills."    They  did  fix just  about
everything  else:  prices,  production,  imports  and  foreign  sources
of  supply;  a  half  billion  dollar  a  year  tax  on  consumers;  the
rate  of  expansion  for  this  industrial-agricultural  complex.    No
European  cartel  was  ever  more  complete  than  this  one.    The
bill  was  the  culmination  of   a  year's  behind   scenes  bargain-
ing  among  the- sugar  interests  themselves,   and  then   between
them  and  the  Administration,  ending  with  the  latter's  defeat.
The  bill  is the  most  open  and  advanced  example  of  the  ex-
tent  to  which  ours  has  become  a  political  economy,  and  en-
ables  us  to  see how  much  of  the  nation's  wealth  is  distributed
and  amassed  by the  shrewd  manipulation  of  the  governmental
process.    A  Horatio  Alger  hero  would  most  quickly  rise  from
rags  to  riches  today  by  learning  his  way  through  this  legisla-
tive  labyrinth  where  it  is  impossible   to  disentangle   govern-
ment  in  business  from  business  in  government,   a  network  of
subsidies,  controls,  contracts  and  tax  gimmicks  where  the  big
money  is  now  to  be  made.    It  was  satisfyingly  symbolic  that
the  floor  manager  of  the  Sugar  Bill  in  the  Senate  should  have
been  the  multimillionaire  oil  and  uranium  Senator,   Kerr  of
Oklahoma.    His  own  wealth  js  the  best  illustration,  resting  as
it   does   on  the   twin   governmental   pillars   of   tax   depletion
allowances   for   oil  and   the   booming  market   the   arms  and
space  races  have  created  for  uranium.    He  protects  the  former
from  his  dominant  position  on  the  Senate  Finance  Committee,
Thought  for  A Higher Altitude
Suppose   the  Russians  announced  that  they  had  an
overwhelming  edge  on  us  in  nuclear  firepower,  and  in-
tended  to  keep it  that way.   Suppose  they  followed  this
up  with   a  speech  saying  they  had  enough  power  if
necessary   to  destroy  our  armed  forces  and  still  keep
enough  in reserve to  wipe  out  our cities, too,  if  we dared
hit  back  at  theirs.    Suppose,  over  protests  from  scien-
tists  on  their  side  as  well  as  ours,  they  then went  ahead
with  high  altitude  tests  affecting   the  Van  Allen  Belt.
Suppose  those  high  altitude  tests  were  designed  to find
a  way  to  disrupt  the  radar  and  radio  communications
which  might  otherwise give  the  victim  of  a  surprise at-
tack  a few  minutes  advance warning.   Suppose the  tests
also  seemed  to  be  looking  for  a  way  to  black  out  the
other  side's  defenses  before  a  nuclear  strike.  .  .  .  We
wonder  whether,  if  the  roles  were  reversed, Americans
would  take  all  this calmly  as  scientific  experimentation,
nothing  more.
which  shapes  the  tax  structure,  and  the  latter  from  his  chair-
manship  of  the  Senate  Space  Committee,  which  has  an  inside
track  on  the  race  to  the  moon.    There  is  sugar  everywhere.
The  way the  Sugar  Bill  was written  resembles the  corporate
state  practices  Italy  knew  under  Mussolini.    All   the  main
economic  interests  with  one  exception   got  together   and  be-
tween   themselves   decided   how   best   to   rig   and   divide  the
sugar  market:  refiners,  industrial  consumers  (Coca  Cola  and
Hershey  are examples),  beet  sugar  mill  concerns,  and  the  cane
and   beet  growers,  in  that   descending  order   of   importance.
Their  decision  was  given  a  bipartisan  stamp  of  approval   in
both  Houses.    The  only  interest  not  consulted   was  the  one
whose  protection   provided   the  New  Deal's  main  excuse  for
establishing  this  government  approved  cartel  for  sugar  a  gen-
eration   ago.    The   still  forgotten   men  of  these  lucrative  ar-
rangements  are  the  220,000  mostly  seasonal  and  migratory la-
borers  who  work  the  nation's   45,000   cane  and  beet   farms,
the  nearest  thing  to peons  in  our  affluent  society.   When  FDR
launched  this  experiment  in  the  30's,  the  main  excuse  for  the
subsidies  to  be  paid  the  sugar  farmers  was  the   requirement
that  they  pay  not  just  minimum  but   "fair   and   reasonable"
wages.    But  except   in  Hawaii,   where  Harry  Bridges'   long-
shoremen   organized   the   sugar   plantations  and   forced   into
being  the  best  paying  and  most   efficient   sugar  farms  in  the
world,  sugar  farm  workers  are  paid  much  less  than  the  mini-
mum  wage.
An  effort  to  amend  the  bill  to  make  the  Fair  Labor   Stand-
ards  Act  applicable  was  blocked  in  the  House  and  defeated  in
the  Senate  almost  two to  one,  the  fight  against  a $1.15  an  hour
for   sugar   field   workers   being  led   appropriately   enough  by
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
1  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  16,
One  Way  to  Resolve  the  U.S.-Mexican  Dispute  Over  That  Joint  Communique  on  Cuba
The  New  Frontier  Now  Wants to Be Thought Of As Only Moderately  New
Perhaps  "Standpat"  Next?    To  give  President  Kennedy  his
due,"   says  the  New   York   Daily  News  (July  4)   which  rarely
does,  "last  January,  by  intuition,  he  felt  a  conservative  swing
was  under  way.    So  at  that  time  he  let  it  be  known  that  he
preferred  to  have his  Administration  labelled  'progressive'  and
not  'liberal'.    In  the  last  two  weeks  the  word  has  been  passed
from  those  who  should  know  that  the  Kennedy  regime  now
goes  for  the tag  'moderate'  instead  of  'progressive.' "  .  .  . //
Depends   on   Who's   Doing   the  Intervening:    A   dispute   has
arisen  over  the  Kennedy-Lopez  communique.    The  Mexicans
see  it  as a  victory  for  their  hands-off  policy  toward  Cuba,  since
it  opposes   intervention  "whether   .  .  .  from  a  continental  or
extra-continental  state."    The  U.S.  press  read  it  as  a  warning
to  Moscow.    The   dispute  is  easily  resolved   if  one  keeps  in
mind  that  "non-intervention"  has  a  common  Orwellian  mean-
ing  in  Washington   and  Moscow.     Each  is  resolutely  opposed
to  intervention  by  the  other  in  its  own  sphere  of  influence.
International   (Private)  Collectivism
Cartel  In  Action:  Note  the  uniform  5%  cuts  in  copper  out-
put  being  imposed  by  the  great  corporations  which  mine  this
metal  and  between  themselves  control  prices  and  production.
The  Wall  St.  Journal  (July  5)  reported  that Union  Miniere du
Haut  Katanga,  the  big  Congo  producer  had  just  announced
a  5%  cut  in  output  on  the  heels  of  similar  announcements  by
the  two  big  copper  companies  across  the  border  in   Northern
Rhodesia,   by  Phelps   Dodge   in   the   U.S.   and   by   Noranda
Mines,  Ltd.,   in  Canada.    Aluminum,  Too:   The  sharp-eyed
will  have  noticed,  too,  that  after  Canada  devalued  its  dollar
to  stimulate  its  exports,  Aluminium, Ltd.,  Canadian  twin  of
our  Alcoa,  revised  its  price  upward  to  wipe  out  the  difference
and  keep  it  in  line  with  world  aluminum  cartel  prices.    This
private  action  erased  the  advantage  to  Canada  in  an  important
item  of  export.  .  .  .  Belgium   and  the  Congo:  The   London
Observer  (July I)  in  an  article  on  "Money  Behind  Tshombe"
says  Belgium's largest holding  company,  the  legendary  Societe
Generale,  one  of  the  main  stockholders  in  the  Katanga  copper
company  also  controls  about  26%  of  the  industrial output  of
Belgium,  a  fourth  of  its  coal,  a  third  of  its  steel  and  three-
fourths  of  its non-ferrous  metals.   A  third  of  the  holding  com-
Who  Cares  If  Some  People  Get  Fleeced
"The  agency   [SEC]    proceeds  warily  in  its   prolonged
study  of  the  securities  field,  to  avoid  accusations  that
public  disclosure  of  questionable   practices   frightens  in-
vestors.  .  .  .  New  York's  influential  Sen.  Javits  serves
notice   he'd  seek  Senate  investigation   of  the  SEC's  in-
vestigation    if   the   latter   precipitated   a.  drop   in   the
market."                           — Wall  Street  Journal,  July  6.
pany's   profits   still   come   from   Katanga's   copper.     Legally
speaking  the  largest  single  stockholder   in  Union  Miniere  is
the  government  of  the  Congo  but  Tshombe  gets  the dividends.
One  Way  to  End  the  Red  Menace
Marxism-Leninism's   Last  U.S.  Bulwark:  Last  March  6,  At-
torney  General  Robert  F.  Kennedy  told  the  Advertising  Coun-
cil,  the   Communists   "have   absolutely  no   following   in   this
country."    But  J.  Edgar  Hoover  informed  the  House  Appro-
priations  Committee  this  year  as  usual  that  while  the  number
of  Communists  has  been  declining  since  1945,   "We   should
not  be  lulled  into  a  sense  of  security"  because  of  their  small
numbers.    Mr.  Hoover   said  he  had   185  suspected   Commu-
nist  front  groups—no  less—under  surveillance; any politically
sophisticated  observer  today  would  be  hard  put  to  name  more
than  half  a  dozen  which  could  properly  be  termed  Communist
fronts.    In  a way it  is comforting  to  read  Mr.  Hoover's annual
testimony;  he  is the  Left's  Last Optimist;  nobody  else  seems  to
think  the  Left  in  America is still  thriving.    Even by his figures,
however,  the  number  of  FBI-men  is  overtaking  the   number
of    Communists.     He   still   figures   10,000   party    members
(though  the  best  informed  guesses  on  the  Left  put  the  number
at  less than 5,000).   As against this there are  6,000  FBI  agents
and  Mr.   Hoover   is  asking   145  more.     Since  many  of   these
are  assigned  to  duty  as  members  of  the  Communist  party  and
this  number  does  not  include  the  many  informers,  it  is  quite
possible  that  J.  Edgar  Hoover   now  commands  a  majority   in
the  C. P.    One  reader  suggests  that Mr.  Hoover  use his  voting
strength  at  the  party's  next  convention  to  vote  that  it  dissolve.
That  might  end  the  Red  Menace  but  think  of  what  it  would
do  to  the   FBI.
Diem's  Follies  Include  Pressure  on  His  Officers  to  Become  Roman  Catholic
Congress  is  supposed  to  share  the  war-making  power  of
the  President;  the  Senate,  the  making  of  foreign  policy.    If
both  were  not  numbed there  would  be  public  hearings  in  the
wake  of  the  story   Bern  Price  of  the  Associated   Press  filed
from   Fort  Leavenworth,  Kansas,  last  week-end.  His   inter-
views  with  officers  just  returned  from  South  Vietnam,  and
the  weak  efforts  of  Secretary  of  State  Rusk  and  U.S.  Army
Chief  of  Staff  Decker  to  brush  them  off  next  day,  ought   to
be  given  a  full  airing  before  the  Senate   Foreign   Relations
Committee.     Secretary   Rusk's   assurances   on   ABC's   TV
"Issues  and  Answers"  that  the  war  was  going  well  recalls
those  on  which  the  French  were  fed  for  years  before   they
finally  had to  get  out  of  Indochina.    Gen. Decker's  statement
that  the  AP  interviews do not  "represent  official  Army  think-
ing"  will only  confirm  derisive  prejudices about  official  Army
thinking.
The  Washington   Star  July  8  ran  the  fullest  version  of  the
Price  story.    One of  the  passages  omitted  by  the  New  York
Times  dealt  with  the  pressure  imposed  by  Diem  on  his  of-
ficers  to  join  the  Catholic  Church  although  the   Vietnamese
"identify  Catholicism  with  the  French  occupation"  and  most
of  the  people  are  Taoist.    An  intelligence   officer  was  quoted
as  saying  that  the  negroid  hill  tribes  are  treated  as  outcasts
by  Diem's  regime  while  the  Viet  Cong  help  them.    As  a  re-
sult  their  jungle   area   is  a  guerrilla   haven.     Despite    U.S.
urging  the  Diem  regime  has  only  made  half-hearted  efforts
to   win   them   over.     Officers   also   complained   that   Diem's
forces  were  split  into  three  separate  commands  which  often
do  not  cooperate  and  attributed  this  to  his  fear  that  "a pro-
vincial  leader  might  emerge  who  could  challenge  his  power."
Bern  Price  wrote  that  despite   reports  of  increasing   anti
guerrilla  activities  "the  officers  did not  feel  the   effectiveness
of   the  Viet  Cong   guerrilla   forces   had  been  impaired   too
much."   All  the  returned  officers  appeared  to  be   "convinced
that  South Viet  Nam will  be a  ten-year  war  of  attrition,  and
the  public  might  as  well  become  accustomed   to  the  idea  be-
cause   there  will  be  Americans   killed   from  time  to   time."
Wouldn't  it  be  better  to  look  for  a  peaceful   way  out?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  16,1962
Significant   Press  Conference  Responses  To  Which  Too  Little  Attention  Was  Paid
Are  JFK  and  Me  Namara  Cooling  Off  on  That  Save-the-Cities  Strategy?
The  Administration seems  to  be  cooling  off  on  that  glamor-
our  Air  Force  "save  the  cities"  counter-force   strategy,  or  How
to  Fight  A  Thermonuclear  War  Without  Getting   Hurt.    At
his  press conference July  5, Mr.  Kennedy  dodged  the  question
of   counter-force strategy.    A  reporter  pointed   out  that   Mr.
Kennedy  had  made  lessening  tension  with  the  USSR  one  of
his  prime  interests.    Mr.  Khrushchev  had  declared  Mr.  Mc-
Namara's   counter-force   speech   at   Ann   Arbor  embodied   an
aggressive  policy.   Did  Mr.  Kennedy  "see  any conflict  between
the  two?"    To  this  Mr.  Kennedy  replied   that  the   purpose
of  Mr.  McNamara's  speech  was  "to  discourage  the  expansion
of  national  deterrents ...  as  inimical to  the  cause  of  peace.
So that,"  Mr.  Kennedy  continued,  "I  regarded  it  in  that  sense
as  constructive and,  if   read  from  that  point  of  view,  I  would
hope  that  others  would  so  regard  it." (Our  italics).
Mr.  McNamara  Back-Tracks,  Too
Next   day  at  the   press  conference  held   by  Secretary  Mc-
Namara,  the  following  colloquy  took   place:
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,   I  think  on  the  17th   of   November   last
year,  about  the  time  the  Department  took  over  Civil  Defense,
you  said  something  to  the  effect  that  you  were  not  one  who
believed  that  cities  would  be  spared  in  a  nuclear  war  and  in
Ann Arbor last  month yon  put  forth  a spare-the-cities  formula
for  nuclear  war.    Could  you  tell  us  what  brought  about  this
change  of heart?
McNamara:   I   don't   believe   there   has   been   a  change   of
heart.    What  I  said  a  year  ago  and  what  I  believe  today  is
that  we  can't  be  certain  how  a  nuclear  war  would  be  fought.
We  must  have  a  flexible  strategy.   What  I  said  in  Ann  Arbor
was  that  our  capabilities  are  such  as  to  permit  the  applica-
tion  of  a  flexible  second  strike  strategy.
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,  you   said   in  your  speech   also   that   you
would  give  the  enemy  an  incentive  not  to  hit  our cities  by  not
hitting  his,  but  being  capable  of  hitting  his  if  we  wanted  to.
Now  you  say  we  would  not  necessarily   do  this.    Under  what
circumstances would we  not  want  to  give  the  enemy  an incen-
tive  to  spare  our cities?
McNamara:  We  are  verging  now on discussion  of  war  plans
and  I  don't  believe  it  is  appropriate  to  discuss  those  in  any
more  detail  than  I  have  already.    I  simply  want  to  emphasize
we  have  the  capabilities  to  support  a  flexible  strategy.
This  hardly  answers  the  question  about  "change   of  heart".
At  his  press  conference last  Nov.   17  Mr.  McNamara  said,  "I
think  it  is  at  least  as  likely  that  our  cities  would  be  attacked
as  that  our  military  targets  would  be  attacked.    I  don't  share
the  views  of  some that  only  the  military  installations  would  be
' Wu you* iiul.p«ni).irt or IntegmM ''
targeted."     But  in  his  Ann  Arbor  speech  June   16  Mr.  Mc-
Namara  seemed  to  have  come  around  to  this  point  of  view.
He  spoke  of  "a  strategy  of  controlled  response"  which  instead
of  hitting cities  would  strike  at  military  forces.  This was hailed
in  the  headlines  as  applying  Marquis  of  Queensbury  rules  to
thermonuclear  war.    But  second  thoughts  seem  to  be  creeping
up  on  this  bright  idiocy.
THE  OTHER  GUILTY  IN  THE  FAULK  CASE:  The   $3,500,000
verdict  in  the  John  Henry  Faulk  suit  has  been  upheld. Mur-
ray  Kempton  in  his  matchless  New   York   Post  column   (July
6)   recalled  that  at  the  trial  "CBS  alone  testified  that  there  had
never  been  a  blacklist."    He  revealed  that  when  Faulk  filed
his  suit in  1956,  an  unnamed CBS TV  personality "told  Faulk
he  was  sure  CBS  would  find  it  to  its  interest  to  finance  the
suit.    He  called   [CBS  President]  Frank  Stanton,  and  to  his
shock  was  told  that  CBS certainly would  not."    Shortly  after-
ward  CBS  fired  Faulk.    "If  the  jury  had  believed  CBS's  wit-
nesses,"   Kempton   commented,   "Faulk   would   have  had   no
real  basis  to  sue for  damages  to  anything but  his  good  name."
.  .  .  The  Washington   Post  in  an  editorial   (July   5)   on  the
Faulk  verdict  commented,  "The  Un-American Activities  Com-
mittee ...  is  itself   the  grand  fountainhead  of  blacklisting,
feeding  such  publications as  'Aware'  from  its  voluminous  un-
checked  files."  .  .  .  And  at  this  point  we  record  with  pleasure
the  reversal  by the  Court  of  Appeals  here  last  week  of  Martin
Popper's  conviction  for  contempt  of  the   Committee.
Doctors  Strike  Seen  Paving  the  Way  for  Socialized  Medicine  In  Canada—and  Here
"One  week  ago  today  in  Saskatchewan,  Canada,   the  pri-
vate  practice  of  medicine  as  we  have  known  it  for   hundreds
of  years  on  this  continent  was  dealt  a  blow  from  which  it
will  never  recover.   .  .  .  The  doctors   strike  is   doomed  to
failure.    The  government,   foreseeing  the  exodus,  long   ago
began  a  recruitment  drive  in  Great  Britain.  .  .  .
"The   average   income  of  a  Saskatchewan  doctor  in  1959
was  slightly   over  $18,000  a  year.    The  Saskatchewan gov-
ernment   is  promising  immigrant  physicians  an  income  of
$10,000.    Even  this  is  more  than  the  average  doctor  makes
in  England.    In  Saskatchewan  a  doctor  who  cooperates  with
the  government  plan  will  never  again  go  unpaid.    He  will,
in  fact,  never  again  have  to  send  a" bill.   He  will  receive  pay-
ment  for  every  service  he  performs.  .  .  .  He  will  make  more
money  than  he  has  in  the  past.  .  .  .
"This  [CCF]   party,  an  ultra-liberal   coalition   of  farmers
and  labor  unions,  is  gambling  its  future  on  the  success  of
socialized  medicine  in  Saskatchewan. ...  In  the  Canadian
political  campaign  a  few  months  ago,  every  major  party  had
a  platform  offering  some  type  of  socialized   medicine.
"Before   leaving   Regina   capital   of   Saskatchewan    three
days  ago,  I  had  dinner  with  three  top  government  officials.
'How  long  will  it  be  before  your  medical  care  insurance  act
is  picked  up  by  every   province  in  Canada,'  I  asked.    'Five
years,'  they  said.   'How  long  will  it  be before  it  seeps  down
into  the  United  States?'
" Ten  years,'  they  said,  'and  it  will  make  its  first  appear-
ance  in  California.""
—Harry  Nelson,  medical  editor  of  the  Los  Angeles  Times,
in  the  Washington  Post  July   8.
1    1         <
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  16, 1962
How  Tad  Szulc  and  the  New  York  Times  Frightened  Dodd  and  Eastland
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Senator  Kerr,    Though  it  was  estimated   that  the   McCarthy
amendment  for   this  purpose   would  cost   in  increased  wages
only  about  $30,000,000  a  year,  as  compared  with  the  indus-
try's  half  billion  dollar  annual  subsidy,  even  liberal  Democrats
like   Fulbright,   Jackson,   Proxmire   and   Yarborough    voted
against  it.    As  a  result  field  workers  in  this  most  highly  sub-
sidized   of   all   American  industries  will  continue  to   get   60
cents  an  hour  in  Louisiana while  braceros  from  Mexico  in  the
lettuce  fields  of  California  must  be  paid  $1  an  hour.     The
sugar   farmers  are  under  no  legal   compulsion   either   to  pay
the  minimum wage  or  to  bargain  collectively  with  their  em-
ployes.    The  reforms  we  ask  from  Latin  America  under  the
Alianza   para  progreso  for  agricultural  workers  will   still  be
denied  at  home  in  our  own  sugar  fields.
The  Same  Congress Voted Freer Trade
The  Administration,  won  over  by  Fulbright  and   Douglas,
wanted  to  buy  on  the  world   market  on   a  first  come,  first
served  basis,  the  sugar  we  used  to  buy  from  Cuba.    The  dif-
ference  between  the  world  price  and  the  domestic  was  to  ac-
crue  to  the  Treasury  for  use  in  the  Latin  American  aid  pro-
gram.    The  sugar  cartel  preferred  to  fix  quotas  for   foreign
countries  and  pay  the  premium  to  foreign  companies.    For
this,  it  had  several  motives.    To  allow  part  of  the  supply  to
be  bought   at  world   prices  would  have  made  the   protected
domestic price  "stick  out,"  as  Cooley  said,  "like a  sore thumb."
If  we bought  raw sugar on  the world market,  it would be harder
to  defend  that  provision  of  the  new  bill  which  bars  refined
sugar  from   abroad  altogether,   a  lush  tidbit  for  our   refiners.
Fixed  quotas  and  premiums  for  foreign  suppliers  also  provide
a  guaranteed  market for  American investors in  Latin American
sugar  companies,  and   encourage  sugar   colonialism  like   that
which  we  once  enjoyed  in  Cuba.
The  combine  had  its  way  in  Congress,   though  this  system
of  encouraging a  high  cost  unnatural product  at  home  and  the
colonial   system   in  Latin  America  is  in  sharp  contrast  with
the  supposed  free  trade  principles  embodied  only  a  few  days
earlier  in  the  new  trade  bill.    But  that  won  approval  not  be-
cause  of  free  trade  theory  but  to  push  open  the  doors  for  our-
selves  to  the  protected   rich  man's  club  being  created  in  the
Words No  One Heeded
"Either  we  believe  in  capitalism and  freedom  of  indi-
vidual  enterprise or  we  do not,  and  we  do  not  if  we hold
with  massive  Government   intervention  to  distort  and
freeze  the  market.   If  we  look to  Government  to  rig  the
game,  we  may  as  well  look  to  it  to  play  the  hand."
—From  o  speech  by  Sec'y   of  State  Rusk  quoted  by
Rep.  Findley  (D.  III.)   against  the  sugar  bill, June  18.
European  common  market.    A  similar  paradox  was  Congres-
sional   rejection   a   few   days  earlier   of   the   Administration's
farm  bill,  with  much  milder  controls  than  the  sugar  bill's,  as
"regimentation."     The  explanation  is  that  the  former  would
have  cut  back  on  subsidized  farm  surpluses  while  the  latter
opens  the  way  to  expansion  of  subsidized  beet  sugar  produc-
tion.    Who  says  we're  not  a  pragmatic   people?
The  final  cute  trick  was  to  be  an  investigation  of  the  sugar
lobby  by  its  friends.   Eastland  and  Dodd  rushed  out  to  short-
circuit  with  an  inquiry of  their  own  the  investigation  launched
by  Fulbright   and   Senate  Foreign   Relations.    It  was  at  this
point  that  Tad  Szulc and  the  New  York  Times,  to their  credit,
came  to  the  rescue.   The  fact  that  Dodd  had  been  a  registered
foreign  agent  for  Guatemala,  hitherto  publicized  unheeded  by
Drew  Pearson  and  the  Weekly,   suddenly  appeared  on  page
one  of  the  New   York   Times,  along  with  information  on  the
sugar  lobbying   role  of  Dodd's  former  partner,  Sheldon   Z.
Kaplan,  for  a  hitherto  non-existent  Guatemalan  sugar  indus-
try.    Dodd  decided   he  was  too  busy  after   all  to   investigate
sugar  lobbying.   The  indefatigable  Szulc, our  best  Latin Amer-
ican  reporter,  also  came up  with  fresh  pay  dirt: from  the  secret
archives  of  the  Dominican  Republic  under  Trujillo.    Though
his  paper   published   Szulc's  story  belatedly   (and   apparently
dismembered  and  disjointed  by  nervous  lawyers),  the   possi-
bility  of  more  to  come  seems  also  to  have  worried  Eastland.
Trujillo  was  his  pin-up   boy.    So  Eastland   bowed   out,   too,
leaving  the  field  free  to  Fulbright.    A  great  potential  for  pub-
lic  enlightenment  is now  in  his  discerning  hands.  But  the  most
important  part  of  the  picture  is  this  extension  of  high  pro-
tectionism  and  mercantilism,  even  in  a  tropical  product   like
sugar,  which  takes  bread  from  the  mouths  of  the  very  people
the  Alliance  for  Progress  is  supposed  to  help.
This  Issue,  Too,   Available  in  Free  Samples  for  Friends   If   You  Send  Envelopes  and  Specify    Which  Issue
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ......................................................................................—
Street ....................................................................................._
City   ............._..........................Zone.........-..State....................
7/16/62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ........................................................................._
Street    .........._..................._....................................................
City   ............_..........................Zone.......™.State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tea  D    No  O
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  CU»  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday   except   the   last   Monday   in   August   and   the   first   In
September  and  the  last  Monday  In  December  and  the  first  In  January  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washing-ton.  D. C.  An  independent
weekly  published  and  edited  by  L  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Either  M. Stone.   Subscription:  $6  in  the  U.  S.;  (6  In
Canada;  tit  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  fit  to  Europe:   120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED