I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962nov05.pdf

============================================================

8  Nobel Laureates  Advocate  Neutralized  Cuba,  P.  4
Peace  Proposals:  50 Religious  Leaders  and  the  Women's  Inter'1 League  on the  Crisis,  See Pages  2 and  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   X,  NO.  40
NOVEMBER  5,  1962
•>">'       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
The  Reprieve  and  What  Needs  to  Be  Done  With  It
Last  week was the  world's  first  thermonuclear  crisis.   It  will
not  be  the  last.    This  issue  of  the  Weekly   might  never  have
been  written.    You  who  read  it  might  have  been  one  of  the
lucky  few,  huddled  half-mad  with  anxiety about  missing  loved
ones,  in  the  ruins  of  New  York  or  Washington.    Mr.  Ken-
nedy's  gamble  paid  off.    But  what  if  it  had  failed?    Unless
we   can   achieve  a   fundamental  change   of   behavior   among
nations,  the  Cuban  confrontation  is  only  a  pre-view.    Is  the
fate  of  the  world  again  to  be  decided  in  a  test  of  will  and
nerve  between  two  men?    Or   among  three?    As  the  news
slowly  begins  to  trickle  out  from  behind  the  secrecy  imposed,
we  get  a  glimpse  of  close  contact  between  Russian submarines
and   U.S.   warships  hunting   them.     A  U-2  was  shot   down.
Other   U.S.   planes  were  fired  upon.     Incident  and  accident
thrive  on  such  tension.    What   if  one  of  them  had  led  to  an
outbreak  of   fighting?   What  if  on  some  lonely  aerial  or  naval
patrol   next  time,  someone's  nerve  or  judgment   fails?
What  If  Castro  Seized  Those  Missiles?
In  an  article  written  before  the  Cuban  crisis  but  published
just  after  it  in  the  London  New  Statesman  (Oct.   26'),  under
the  title  "Can  Nuclear  War  Be Prevented?",  Bertrand  Russell
wrote  it  was essential  "to  prevent  the  spread  of  nuclear  weap-
ons  to  powers  which  do  not  at  present  possess  them"  because
"increase  in  the  number  of  nuclear  powers  augments  the  dan-
ger  of  nuclear  war  at  a  rate  greater  than  the  increase  in  the
number  of  nuclear  weapons."   Cuba  demonstrated  this vividly.
In  this,  the  first  thermonuclear  crisis,  we  saw  the  debut  of  the
first Nth  power.    Though  Khrushchev  assured  us,  as we  have
so  often  assured  him,  that  the  ballistic  missiles  passed  out  to
an  ally  were  kept  in  close control  of  officers  from  Big  Brother,
what  if  Castro  refuses  to  give  them  up ?    We   are' reminded
by  an  Assistant   Secretary   of   State  (Martin,   in  a  Voice  of
America  broadcast)   that  Castro  still  has  preponderant   power
in  the  island  itself.    He  could  seize  the  missiles  and  the  Rus-
sians  in  charge  of  them.    He  could,  with  fewer  than  the  30
nuclear  missiles  he  is  supposed   to  have,  blackmail   the   U.S.
and  the  world.    This  is  what  Khrushchev   risked.     I  would
feel  more  grateful  for  his  backdown   if  he  hadn't  made  this
terrible  gamble  to  start  with.
What  happens  when  a  bigger  Nth   power  than  Cuba  is  in
a  position  to  threaten  the  world's  end  to  get  its  way?    Time
(Nov.    2)   reported   Bonn's   Defense   Minister   Franz   Josef
Strauss  "worriedly  saw a  cynical  deal trading off  bases  between
the  U.  S. and  Russia,  which  would  weaken  his  own  long-range
goal  to  obtain  nuclear  missiles  for   West   Germany."     (Our
italics).    What  happens   when  last  year's  models  of   atomic
weapons   are   available   on  the'world's   armaments   market?
What  if  Israel  and  Egypt  had  atomic  weapons  in  the   Suez
crisis?   If  India  and  China  had  them  now?    If  Chiang  could
1  1
No  Hurry
Since  a  nuclear  test  ban  is  one  of  the  subjects  on
which  fresh  talks  are  now  hoped  for,  we  call  attention
to  an  unnoticed  AEC-Defense Dept.  release  on  Oct.  20.
This  said  these  two  agencies   had  finally  agreed  on  the
site  for  an  underground  nuclear  shot  to  be  called  Proj-
ect  Shoal.    Inadvertently  the  release  also  reveals  how
effective  these  two  agencies have  been  in dragging their
heels  on  work  to  improve  underground test  detection.
Project   Vela,   to   develop   better   detection    methods,
was  launched  May  7,  1960.    One  of  the  arguments  for
resumption  of  testing  was  the  need  for  nuclear  shots  in
this  research   program.    When  resumption  of   testing
was  announced   by  Mr.  Kennedy  Sept.  5,  1961,  one  of
the  purposes  was  to  be  the  search  for  improved detec-
tion  methods  "for  possible  use  in  an  international  con-
trol  system."    Since  then  55  announced  and  an  undis-
closed  number  of  secret  underground  tests  have  been
held but  (as  the  release  now reveals)  "No nuclear deto-
nation  has  yet  been  authorized specifically for  the  seis-
mic  research  program."
The  release  says  "much  information   bearing  on  im-
provement  of  capabilities" was  gathered  as  a byproduct
of  these  other  tests.   But  Project  Shoal  will be  the  first
test  specifically  for  seismic  research.    It  was  first  an-
nounced  in  November,   1961.    Now,  a  year  later,  "site
acceptance  means  that  drilling  and  other  work  can  go
forward  toward a  possible  detonation in  the  late  spring
or  summer  of  1963."   This  is  certainly  a  sedate  pace.
The  release  says  "The  site  was  chosen  because  it  is
in  an  area  with  a  history  of  frequent  natural  earth-
quakes. (Sand  Springs  Range  area  of  Nevada),  so  the
seismic   record  of   an  underground  nuclear   detonation
can  be  compared  with  that  from  a  natural  earth  shock
of  approximately  the  same  magnitude."   We  asked  the
AEC  press  office  whether  the  purpose  was  to  set  off
the  test   at  a  time  when  there  was  an  earth  tremor.
This  would  try  out  another  of  Teller's  bugaboos—the
possibility  of  evading  detection  by  holding  tests  during
an  earthquake.    The  AEC  press  office,  after   checking,
assured  the  Weekly  this  was  not  the  case.
lob  one  at  Peking?   This  is what  The  Reprieve  gives  us  time,
precious  time,  to  prevent.
National  sovereignty  has  now  become  the  right  of  any  na-
tion  to  decree  everybody  else's  extermination.  Either  we  end  it
or   it   will   end   us.     Major   Raul   Castro,   Fidel's   brother,
said  in  a  speech  at  Santiago  (Reuters  in  New   York   Times,
Oct.   30)  that  "a  worldwide holocaust was risked  because  Pres-
ident  Kennedy  has  'set  himself  up  as  supreme  judge  of  the
planet'."    There  was  justice  in  the  gibe.    He  had  arrogated
to  himself  the  right to  decide  when  to  press the  button.   The
Pope  appealed  for  negotiation.    U  Thant  asked  for  a  stand-
still.    Lord  Russell  appealed  to  both   sides.    Mr.   Kennedy
insisted  on  a  backdown  by  Khrushchev   first.   Fortunately,  he
(Continued   on  Page  Two)
1   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  5, 1962
(Continued   from   Page  One)
got  his  way.   But  the  happy  relief  should  not  blind  us  to  the
monstrous  situation  in  which  all  humanity  found   itself.    Any
ruler,  with  nuclear  weapons,  as  the  head  and  symbol  of  a sov-
ereign  state, now has  a Divine  Right  beyond  that any King  ever
dreamed   of,  to  condemn  mankind  to  hell.     Before  the  back-
downs  began,  Kennedy,  Castro  and  Khrushchev  were  all mak-
ing  like  Joves,   with   their  thunderbolts.     As  for   the   rest  of
us,  ours  was  but  to  do  and  die, like  the  Light  Brigade  but  not
so  glamorously,   huddled   in  the  cellar  with  canned  goods  and
candles.    The  nation-state  system  that  enables  one  or  two  men
to  decide  life  or  death  for  the  planet  is  the  common   enemy,
not  Russians  or  Americans,  Communists   or  capitalists.     The
rest  is delusion.    "It  is in  the  nature  of  political  bodies,"  Jung
wrote  in  The   Undiscovered    Self,    "always   to  see  the   evil   in
the  opposite  group."    Only  this  bigger  and  truly  human per-
spective  can  light  the  way  to   peace.
JFK  Warns  About  Toughness
We  Americans  emerge  from  the  crisis  the  strongest   power
on  earth.    Man's  fate  depends  on  whether  our  collective   in-
telligence  can  be  made  to  match  our  strength.    Mr.   Kennedy,
vastly  strengthened   politically  by  his  victory,  stands  at  a  fork
in  the  road.    One  way, the  easy  way, the  line  of  least  resist-
ance,  leads  in  the  direction  of  a  bigger  arms  and  civil  defense
buildup  so  that  next  time  we  can  be  in  an  even  stronger   posi-
tion  to  dictate  terms.    The  military  bureaucracy  is  already  de-
manding  heavier  arms  appropriations;   the  scare  will  lead  to  a
strong  demand  for  more  and  better  stocked   cellars  in  which
to  huddle.  The  President,  however,  according  to  a  remarkable
interview  with  James  Reston  (N.  Y.  Times,  Oct. 29),  "is re-
jecting  the  conclusion   of  the  traditional  'hard-liners'  that  the
way  to  deal  with  Moscow  everywhere   in  the  world   is  to  be
'tough'  as  in  Cuba."     It  is  good  to  know  that  the   President
sees  that   the  world   cannot   be  governed   by  crisis  and   ulti-
matum.
Will  Mr.  Kennedy,  then,  take  the  other  fork  in  the  road?
This  requires  courage   and  leadership  of  a  far  more   difficult
kind.    The  crisis  showed   the  curious  limitations  of   Presiden-
tial  leadership  in  our  society.    The  President   can  easily  take
With  The  Ink  Hardly   Dry
"We on our  part  would agree ...  to  give  assurances
against   an  invasion  of   Cuba."
—Pres. Kennedy   to Chairman Khrushchev, Oct. 27.
"Authoritative   sources   warned   today   against   any
feeling  that  the  agreement  with  the  Soviet  Union  will
lead  to  'peaceful  co-existence' with Fidel  Castro's Cuba.
.  . .  Once  the  first  phase  of  actually  dismantling  and re-
moving  the  Soviet  weapons is  completed, they  said  that
the  hemisphere  and  Cubans  can  get  on  with  the  more
'limited'  phase   of   actually  getting   rid  of   the   Castro
regime. ...  At  a  45-minute  briefing in  the  State  Dept.
yesterday,   Secretary   of  State  Rusk  told  the  19  Latin
American  Ambassadors  .  .  .  not  to  exaggerate  the  ex-
tent  of  the  U.S.  guarantee  against  invading  Cuba."
—Washington  Star, Oct. 29.
"President   Kennedy's   assurance   that  the  U.S. won't
invade  Cuba  if  Premier  Khrushchev removes  the Soviet
missiles  there  does  not  mean  this  country  has  pledged
away  the  possibility  of  invasion  in  other circumstances
or  at  another time.   This  was  the  word  today  from  high
Administration  officials  in  the  face  of  some  confusion
over  whether  the  U.S. guaranteed  the  Soviet  Union  it
would  never  invade  Cuba.   These  officials  said  .  .  .  the
U.S.  is  not  committed to  trying  to  deal  with  Castro  in
the  future  without the  threat  of  invasion  as  part  of  its
arsenal."
—Washington  Daily  News, Oct. 30.
the  nation  into  war.   He  can  only  with  difficulty   lead  it  to-
ward  peace.    When  he  seems  ready  to  push  the  button,  albeit
for   universal  destruction,   few  voices  are  raised  against him.
But  let  him  decide  for  peace  and  negotiation—and bipartisan-
ship  ends.    The  Republicans  and  the  right  wing   Democrats
and  a  sizeable  section  of  the  bureaucracy  are  already  complain-
ing  that  we  tied  our  hands  on  Castro.    Their  motto  is  better
the  whole  world  dead  than  Cuba  red.   The  President  is going
to  need  the  support   of  the  peace  forces,  and  he  is  going  to
have  to  help  create  a  stronger  peace  movement,  if  we  are hon-
orably  to  live  up  to  our  assurances  on  Cuba  in  return  for  the
removal  of  missile  bases  in  the  trying  days  ahead.    A  way  out
of  the  crisis  can  only  be  found  if  Mr.  Kennedy  now  sets  out
to  do  what  he  has  never  done  before—actively  to  educate  and
U.S.   Religious  Leaders  Beg  Government   and  People  to  Use  Reprieve   Wisely
An  emergency  meeting  of  nearly  50  national  church  and      the future.
synagogue  leaders,  both  clergy  and lay, was  held  in  Wash-
ington  Sunday,  October  28,  under  the  chairmanship  of   Dr.
John   Bennett,  Dean   of   Union  Theological   Seminary,   who
issued  the following statement:
"The  world has  been  granted  a  reprieve  from war.  There
is  a  grave  decision   before  us.    How  shall  we  use  this  re-
prieve?     Shall  we  exploit  our  strength,   riding   rough-shod
over  all  the  forces  in  the  world  which  we  dislike,  or  shall
we  use  this  occasion  as  a  supreme  opportunity  for  seeking
and  finding  a  new  human  basis  for  international   security
and  peace?     If  we  follow  an  immediate  success  by  brand-
ishing  our might,  we  shall  be  deceived  by  our  own  strength.
War  in  the  nuclear  age  can  bring  no  victory  to  any  nation.
Courage  in  a  time  of  crisis  should  be  matched  by  courage
in  a time of  opportunity.
"We  must  admit  our  own  share  in  the  Cuban crisis.  There
are   many   possible   factors   in   the   decision   of   the   Soviet
Union  to  accept  a  course  of  accommodation  in  Cuba  besides
United  States  military  strength.    There  is  no assurance  that
a  similar course  will be  followed  by  Soviet  leaders  in  future
crises.    On  the  other  hand,  the  American  people  must  take
account   of  changes  in  Soviet   society   which  offer   hope   for
"The  President  of  the  United  States  is  to  be  commended
for  the  use  which  he  has  made  of  international instruments
for  the  maintenance  of  peace—the  United  Nations  and  the
Organization  of  American  States.    He  has  combined  diplo-
matic  initiative with  commendable restraint  and  reasonable-
ness  under  great  provocation  and  popular pressure.    He  de-
serves  full  support  for  his  readiness  to  explore  fresh  paths
to  peace.
"We  address  our  fellow  citizens  out  of  our  deep gratitude
for  the  reprieve  which  has  been  granted  us.    The  Hebrew-
Christian  tradition  warns  a  people  against  pride  in  its  own
strength  and sustains  a  people  who possess the  will to  peace
and reconciliation.
"The  President   and  his  advisors  will  not  fail  the   people
of  this  nation  if  the  people  make  plain  their  will  to  recon-
ciliation.  As  a  free  and powerful nation  why  should  we  fear
a  re-examination  of   every  crucial  international question?
The  UN  is  a  providential  instrument  for  the  consideration
of  every  threatening  problem—Cuba,  Berlin,  bases,  disarma-
ment,  nuclear  testing.    Such  a  re-examination  will  change
our  present  opportunity  into  a  creative  avenue  for  the  ex-
tension  of  justice,  peace  and  freedom  across  the   world."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  5, 1962
to  lead  the  American people  to  a  saner  view  of  the  world,  to
a  more  sophisticated  view,  to  a  less  self-righteous  view.    This
may  be  his  and  our  last  chance.
The  Really  Hard  Line
All  this  would  require  taking  the  really hard  line—the  line
which  runs  athwart  unthinking  prejudice  and  hateful  precon-
ception.    What  are  the  lessons  which  need  to  be  drawn  from
the  crisis  and  driven  home?     One   is  the  indispensability  of
the  United  Nations—it  offered  a  face  saving  way  for  Khrush-
chev  and   Kennedy   to   back  off  from  a  direct  blockade   con-
frontation,  a  way  to  deal  with  Castro  without  offending   his
dignity  and  Cuba's.    U  Thant's   efforts  would  have  been  im-
possible  unless  the   United   Nations   had   preserved    sufficient
universality  and  independence   to  remain  a  moral  force.     To
maintain  this  universality  and  independence  should  be the  aim
of  a  wise  American  foreign  policy;  this  dictates  the  admission
of  China and  an  end  of  the  attitude  which  has  treated  the  UN
as  if  it  were  a  U.S.  errand  boy.    A  second  lesson  of  the  crisis
is  that  it  followed  inexorably  from  our  unwillingness  to  co-
exist  with  Cuba  in  the  hemisphere.    The  stationing  of  Russian
nuclear  missiles  in  the  island,  the  crisis  which  brought  all  of
us  so  close  to  destruction,  was  the  climax  of  the  hateful  atti-
tudes  and  policies  with  which  we  have  long  sought   to  domi-
nate,  to  destroy  and  to  starve  out  an  island  neighbor  in  viola-
tion  of  the  UN  Charter  and  the  Inter-American  treaties.  Until
we  face  up  to  the  truth  about  our  own  guilt  toward  Cuba,  we
cannot  find  our  way  safely  and  finally  back  from  the  brink.
The  third  and  main  lesson  is that  human  beings  everywhere
must  band  together  to  get  rid  of  this  monster,  The  Bomb.  We
need  to  act  now  to  prevent  its  spread;  a  denuclearized   Latin
America,  Africa  and  Middle  East  is  still  easy to  achieve;  a  de-
nuclearized   Pacific   has  been   asked   by  Communist   China   on
several   occasions.     A   disengaged    and   denuclearized    Europe
between  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.   is  the  one  way  to  prevent   future
Dog  in  the   (Guantanamo)   Manger
"And,  of  course,  Cuban  pressure  for  U.S.  withdrawal
from  Guantanamo Bay  has  been  mounting  for  months.
Ironically,  the  Navy  would  probably  have  been  willing
to  give  up  Guantanamo  at  the  start  of  the  Castro  era;
it's   basically  a  convenient,  warm-water  training  base
for   newly   outfitted   ships   and  is   no  longer   vital   for
guarding  the  Panama  Canal.  Now  such  a  pullout  might
be  interpreted as  a  surrender  and  so  is  considered  un-
desirable."
—"U.S.  Bases  Abroad,   New  Red  Push  Foreseen   To
Get   Them   Scrapped;   Some   No  Longer  Vital."     Wall
Street  Journal,  Oct. 29.
crises   that   would   dwarf   Cuba   and   from   which   extrication
would  be  much  more  difficult.    A  noteworthy  survey  by  Jona-
than  Spivak  in  the  Wall  Street  Journal  (Oct.  29)   revealed  the
dwindling   importance   of  our  nuclear   bases   abroad   not  only
in   places  like  Turkey   but   even  in  England.     "Indeed,   U.S.
military  strategists,"  he  reported,   "would  not   [by  a   curious
misprint  we  verified  the  "not"   had  disappeared   in  the  edition
we  saw]   be  seriously  perturbed   if  no  new   nuclear   striking
force  were  stationed   on  the  British  isles.    The   independent
British  deterrent  is  considered  far  more  important  as  a  morale
booster   for  Britain  than  as  strategic  protection  for  the   U.S."
Such  facts  need   to  be  brought   home  to  the  widest   possible
audience  if  we  are  to  find  the  road  to  peace.  Both   Khrushchev
and  Kennedy   in  their  final  exchanges  showed   themselves  so-
bered  by their  look  into  the  abyss,  ready  for  a  fresh  .start.  The
urgent   place  for  them  to  begin  is  with  this  wholly   irrational
war  between   India  and  China.     If  it  is  allowed  to   continue,
the  two  big  nuclear  powers  may  slowly  find  themselves   drawn
in.    A  senseless  quarrel  which  began  over  a  few  square  miles
of  desolate  Himalayan  wasteland   could  end  by  engulfing  the
planet.
WILPF  On  "Reprieve Sunday" Calls
"The   one  thing   which  emerges   most   clearly   from   the
crisis  of  the  last  week, during which the  world has  teetered
on  the  edge  of  thermo-nuclear destruction,  is  the  absolute
necessity   for  negotiation  rather  than   violence.    That   the
world  has  not  been  destroyed  by  the  sharp  confrontation
between  the  U.S.  and  USSR  once  again  demonstrates  the
essential  role  which  the  UN  and  its  dedicated  Secretariat
plays  in the  s'truggle  for  survival.
"WILPF  notes  with deep  regret  that  by  responding  to  the
Soviet  challenge   of  the  establishment  of   offensive  missile
bases in  Cuba  with  the  imposition  of  a  quarantine,  our Gov-
ernment  violated'its  treaty  commitments  under  the  Chart-
ers  of  the  OAS  and  of  the  United  Nations.    We  strongly
believe  that  scrupulous  compliance  with  international  law
and  treaty  obligations  is  an  indispensable  prerequisite   to
the  maintenance  of  world  peace.    A  situation  having  been
created  in  Cuba  which  our  Government  felt  threatened  its
vital  security interests,  it  should  have  exhausted  every  pos-
sibility  of  peaceful  settlement  through  negotiation  and  by
bringing  the  matter before  the  UN  rather  than  resorting  to
unilateral  action  calculated to  bring  the  world  to  the  brink
of  destruction.
"The  immediate  goal   sought  by  our  Government  in  this
instance  may  possibly  be  achieved  by  the  policy  adopted.
But  the  long  term  goal  of-the  world's  peoples  to  live  in  a
world  free  from  nuclear  war  is  jeopardized  by  a  policy  de-
pendent  upon  one  side  yielding  to  the  threats  of  the  other.
With  each  side  believing that  the  other  if  rational  must  give
way  rather  than  resort  to  thermonuclear  war,  the  path  is
for  Talks  on  Disengagement Elsewhere
open  for  the  fatal  collision  when  neither  yields.
"The   WILPF  takes   encouragement   from   the   fact   that
both  the  US  and  the  USSR  have  shown  some  measure  of
restraint  in  the  current  crisis.    That  the  U.S.  has,  to  this
date,   stopped   short   of   invasion   and/or   bombing   of   the
Cuban  bases  represents  a  victory  for  the  forces  of  modera-
tion  within the  Government over  those  who  would  return  to
that  shameful   period  of  U.S.  history  when  sending  in  the
Marines  was  the  typical  response  to  any  hemispheric  crisis.
That  Chairman  Khrushchev  first  ordered  his  ships  not  to
run  the  blockade,   then  directed   their  return  to  Russia  and
finally  offered  to  dismantle  the  missile  bases  has  demon-
strated  both restraint  and a  willingness  to  make  substantial
concessions  in  the   interest  of   peaceful  settlement   of   the
present  dispute.
"We  welcome  the  announced  willingness  of  both  the  U.S.
and  USSR  to  negotiate  their  differences  under  UN  auspices,
and  their  apparent  recognition  that  the  Cuban  crisis,  if  re-
solved,  can  result  in  general  negotiations   leading  to  a  de-
tente  between  the  NATO  and  Warsaw  Pact  countries.    We
believe  that  the  opportunity  here  presented  to  negotiate  a
mutually   advantageous  military  disengagement   and  terri-
torial  disarmament not  only  in  Cuba but  also  in  Turkey and
elsewhere,  could  be  of  tremendous  significance  in  reversing
the  present  arms  spiral  and  in  bringing  about  the  general
and  complete   disarmament  to   which  both   countries   have
committed  themselves  in  principle  though  not  yet  in  prac-
tice."
—Women's  Int'l  League  for  Peace  and  Freedom,   Oct.  28.
1   6
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  5, 1962
Arms  Control  Asked  to  "De-Missilize"  All  Latin  America,  Africa  and  Middle East
Nobel  Prize-Winners  Propose Neutral  Cuba and Non-Military Guantanamo
"Two   general  approaches  for  resolution  of  the  Cuban  im-
passe  suggest   themselves,  varying  in   breadth   of   application
and   in  the  central  concern  to  be  dealt  with.
"Dealing  with  the  Soviets  on  a world-wide basis, the  United
States  might  refocus  attention  on  measures  that  have  already
been  topics  for  disarmament talks:  preventing  surprise  attack
and  the  proliferation  of  nuclear  weapons.    Dealing  with  these
missiles  as problems  of  surprise  attack  and  proliferation  would
avoid   some  of   the  political  liabilities  of   dealing  with  them
in  terms  of  the  unacceptable  Soviet  demand  for  'the elimina-
tion  of  all  foreign  bases.'    Under  these  rubrics could  be  pro-
posed   the   joint  Soviet   and   American  removal  of   all  land-
based  medium  and  intermediate  range  ballistic missiles which
are  a  threat  to  the  two  great  nuclear  powers.
Give  Turkey  More  Aid  As  Part  of  Base  Removal
"Such   a  joint  removal  would   eliminate  all   missiles  that
would  be  clearly  useful  only  for   a  first  strike,  thus  making
surprise  attack  much  less  likely.    Removal  would  also  reduce
the  possibility that  such  missiles  could  fall  into  irresponsible
hands,  the  danger  that  makes  necessary preventing  prolifera-
tion.     It  would  require  the  elimination  of  the  present  Soviet
missiles  in  Cuba,  and  of  American missiles  in  Italy  and  Tur-
key  that  are  generally  agreed  to  be  obsolete.    Although   the
Turkish  government  might  interpret  the  withdrawal of  Amer-
ican  IRBM's  as  a  lessening  of  political  support,   adverse  re-
actions  ought   to  be  meliorable  by  increasing  American  con-
ventional   forces   in,  or  economic  aid  to  Turkey.
"The  second,  more  narrow  approach  might  treat  Cuba  as  a
special   situation,   but  with   implications  for   the   larger  con-
text  of  world  arms  control.    For  example,  the  entire  island
of  Cuba  might  be  set  aside  as  a  special  experiment in  the  en-
forcement  of  general  and  complete  disarmament.   This  would
require  the  Republic  of   Cuba  to   eliminate  all   its  weapons,
'offensive'   and   'defensive',  except  those  agreed  upon  for   the
maintenance   of   internal   order.     It   would   also   require  the
United   States  to   transform   the  naval  base  at  Guantanamo,
which  in  recent  years  has  been   mainly   a  recreation  and   re-
fueling   station  without  direct  and   critical  military   function,
into  a  non-military  center  that  would  bring  obvious  political
The  Men Who Made These  Proposals
The  proposals   published   on  this  page   were  released
Sunday,   Oct.  28  by  eight   Nobel   prize-winners   and  9
experts   on  foreign  and  defense  policy   but  ignored  by
the  press.    It  was  developed  on  the  basis  of   emergency
discussions  in  which  the  Peace   Research   Institute-  in
Washington  brought  together  some  government   officials
and  these  experts,  but was  issued  as  the  views  of  the 17
men  whose  names  are  appended  to  it.    It  was  completed
before   the   news   late   Saturday   evening   Oct.  27   sud-
denly  indicated  that  the  worst  was  over  but  their   sug-
gestions  for  a  way  out  of  the  crisis  are  as  applicable  as
they  were  before.    We  thought  our  readers  would  like
to see  their  conclusions.
The  eight   Nobel   prize-winners   signing   were   Owen
Chamberlain   (Physics),  Peter   J.  W.  Debye   (Chemis-
try),    Donald   A.   Glaser   (Physics),   Arthur   Kornberg
(Medicine  and  Physiology),   Fritz  A.  Lipman  (Medicine
and   Physiology),   Hermann   J.   Muller   (Medicine   and
Physiology),    Edward    Mills    Purcell    (Physics)    and
Harold  C.  Urey   (Chemistry).     The  nine  experts  were:
James   J.   Wadsworth,   David   Riesman,   Walter   Millis,
Kenneth  Boulding,  Charles  Osgood,  Gerard Piel  (Scien-
tific  American),  Donald  N.  Michael  and  Arthur I.  Was-
kow.     The  last   two   are  members   of   Peace   Research
Institute.
benefits   to  the   United   States.    American  vessels  and   forces
now  in  Guantanamo  could   be  based   in  other   places  in   the
Caribbean.    A  UN  inspection  and  enforcement  body  would  be
necessary  to  guarantee  the  continued  disarmament of  the  island
and  to  inspect  surrounding  bases  and  waters  in  order  to  calm
Cuban   fears  of   armed   attack  from  outside.
"The   broad  approach  centered  on  missiles  peripheral  to  the
United  States  and  the  Soviet  Union,  and  the  narrow  approach
centered  on  Cuba,  could   conceivably  be  synthesized  in  some
such  approach   as  arms  control  extending  over  all   of   Latin
America,  Africa,  and  all  the  Middle  East.    Denuclearization
of  such  a  broad  area  would  be  extremely  difficult   to  enforce
without  a  large  inspection  force,  but  de-missile-izing  the  same
area  could  be  enforced  without  great  difficulty,   because mis-
siles  capable  of  delivering  nuclear  warheads  are  rather  easy
to  detect  with  inspection  on  a  moderate  scale."
Free  Copies  This  Or  Any  Other  Issue  Sent  Free  I/  You  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed    LONG  Envelopes
/ E Stone's  Weekly
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................................................................................—
Street    ...„...........:......................................................................:_
City   ..............~...........
;
............».Zone.............State«..................
1I/.V62
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yt.)   additional:
(To)    Name  ...............................................................................
Street    .........__.;......................................................................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yea  D    No  D
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Omu  Portage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday  in  December
and  the  first  in  January  at  6618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published"  and  edited  by  I.   F.
Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  S6  in  the  U.  S.;  *6  In  Canada;  J10  elsewhere.
Atr  Mail  rates:  SIS  to  Europe;  $20 'to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED