I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962oct29.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on  the  War   Crisis
If  Cuba  Is  To  Disarm,  It  Should  Be  Guaranteed  Against  U.S.  Aggression  and  Interference
/. F. Stone's   Weekly
VOL.    X,  NO.  39
OCTOBER  29,  1962
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Time  for  Plain  Words
After   hearing  the  President  and   then  listening  in  on   the
Security  Council  meeting  in  New  York,  I  set  down  in despair
—for  how  find'words  to  match  the  magnitude  of  the  crisis?—
some  basic  observations  on  the  events  of  the  past  few  days:
1.  Our  blockade  of  Cuba,  though   called  a  quarantine  and
as  yet  limited,  is  an  act  of  war.    To  throw  a  naval  cordon
around  an  island  country,  to  arrogate  to  oneself  the  right  to
determine  what  supplies   may  reach   it,   to  threaten  stronger
measures  unless  one's  terms  are  met,  is  aggression.
2.  We  are  asking  a  small  neighboring  country  to  dismantle
what  we  claim  are  missile  bases.    But  we  make  no  offer   in
return  to  guarantee  it  against  attack,  to  put  a  stop  to  hostile
activity  against  it.    Instead   we  have  made  it  plain  that  we
will  not  negotiate  with  Cuba's  government  but  seek  its over-
throw.    This  is  asking  the  unilateral  disarmament  of  an  in-
tended  victim.
No  Defense  Against  Us
3.  The  type  of  arms  we  regard  as  defensive,  the  kind  de-
scribed  by  Mr.  Kennedy  in  earlier  press  conferences,  are  the
kind  which  could  cope  only  with  a  small  scale  invasion  by
Cuban  exiles,  like  that  staged  in  April,   1961.     The  weapons
we  object  to  now—missiles,  MIGs,  Ilyushin  bombers—are  the
kind  of  weapons  with  which  the  Cubans  could  hope,   though
only  for  a  short  while,  to  fight  off an  American attack.   In  this
sense,  they  are  defensive,  and  in  this  sense  we  are  asking  the
Cubans  to  give  up  the  only  type  of  weapons  big  enough  to
cope  with  an  American  attack.
4.  Exactly what  weapons  the  Cubans  have  is far  from  clear.
What  is  clear is  that  no  possible  scale  of  armament  for  a  peo-
ple  of  6,500,000  could  make  it  feasible  for  that  nation  to  take
offensive  action  against  a  nation  of  180,000,000  people,  espe-
cially  one  with  the  greatest  arsenal  of  destructive  power  in  all
human  history.    In  that  sense,  whatever  weapons  the  Cubans
have, are  defensive.
5.  All  the  Cubans  could   hope  to  do  with  a  few  nuclear
weapons—if  they  had  them—would  be  to  deter  an  American
attack  by  the  threat  of  retaliation.    The  threat  wouldn't  mean
much  because  we  could  knock  out  the  whole  island—and  its
bases—with  one  nuclear   blow.    But  in'all  objectivity,  isn't
this  the  doctrine  of  deterrence  which  we   popularized?
6.  Do  the  Cubans  have  such  means  of  deterrence?   This  is
not  clear.    Apparently  we  have  spotted  24  surface-to-air  mis-
sile  sites,  22  of  them  operational,  in  Cuba.    Surface-to-air  mis-
siles  are short  range  and  we regard  them  as defensive.  In  addi-
tion  we  claim  to  have  spotted  sites  for  1,000  mile  mobile  mis-
siles  and  seen  such  missiles  on  trailers.    "Additional  sites  not
yet  completed,"  the  President  said,  "appear  to  be  designed  for
intermediate  range  ballistic  missiles  capable  of  travelling  more
than  twice  that  far. ..."   We  do  not  claim  that  such  missiles
Another  Warning   by  Ike  Few  Will  Heed
"...  a  united  America  need  not  and  should  not  de-
generate  into a  conformist, a  silenced  America.   In  our
internal  affairs,  unity  should  not  become  an  excuse  for
compliant  submission  .  .  .  our  civic  duties  impel  us  to
express  our honest  convictions. .  .  .  The  Republic  of  the
United   States—the   oldest   Constitutional   government
among  the   major  nations  of   the  world—has  survived
war  and  the  peril  of  war  because  the  American  people
through   their  elected  representatives  in  the   Congress
have  always  been  free  to  advise  and  counsel—even  to
rebuke  and  warn—the  Executive.  Therein  lies  the  fun-
damental  strength  of  our  system.  Never  has  catastro-
phe  nor  emergency justified  reduction  of  the  people  to  a
regimented  herd or  of  their  representatives  to  blind ac-
ceptance  of  decree  and  pronouncement by  government."
—Former  President  Elsenhower,  Oct. 24.
have  been  put  in  place  nor  do  we  claim  to  have  evidence  that
there  are nuclear warheads in  Cuba.   On  the  other  hand  while
Mr.  Zorin  at  the  United  Nations  Tuesday  night  did   attack
"the  completely  false  and  slanderous  thesis  of  the  presence  of
offensive    Soviet  rockets  in  Cuba"  (our  italics)  he  did  not  deny
that  missiles  had  been  sent  Cuba.    Nor  did  Mr.  Garcia-Inch-
astegui,  the  Cuban  Ambassador  to  the  UN.    Indeed  his  reply
implied  that  Cuba  had  such  rockets.
"Good"  Missiles  and  "Bad"   Missiles
7.   The  Cuban  Ambassador's defense  of  this would  be  hard
to  answer  in  any  impartial  court.  He  told  the  Security  Council:
The  North  American  President  said  .  .  .  that  our  defen-
sive  arms  affect  the  security  of  their  territory.   I  appeal to
the  conscience  of  this  Council:  Are  not  the  military  poten-
tial  and  the  aggressions   of  the  North  Americans  a  threat
to  our people?  . .  . Their idea  is  that  the  U.S.,  as  a  military
power,  as  a  developed country,  can  promote,  stimulate,  and
carry  out  all  types  of  aggressions,  boycotts,  sabotage,  and
all  acts  contrary   to  international   law—and  Cuba,  a  small
but  nevertheless  courageous  country, cannot  arm  in  its  own
defense. ...  If  we  proceed  along  that  line,  there  will  be no
sovereignty  left  unscathed,  and  only  the  law  of  the  strong-
est  will  prevail  in  relations  between  States.  .  .  .  According
to  the  statements  made by  the  representative  of  the  United
States,  there  are  two  types  of  military  bases  and two  types
of  rockets:  the  good  military  bases  and  the  bad  ones,  the
good  rockets  and  the  bad  ones.   And  obviously  the  govern-
ment  of  the  United  States  reserves   the  right  to  determine
when  a  rocket  is  good  and when  a  rocket  is  naughty,  when
a  base  is  good  and when  a  base  is  naughty.
8.  While  the  Cuban  desire  for  effective  defense  and  deter-
rence  is  understandable,   it  is  also  natural  that  every   American
should  be  alarmed  at  the  thought  of  waking  up  one  morning
to  find  a  nuclear  missile  on  our  doorstep.    The  President  was
right  when  he  said,  "Nuclear  weapons  are  so  destructive  and
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
\  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  29, 1962
Moscow  Wouldn't  Be Calm  If  We  Secretly  Put  Missile  Bases  in  Finland ...
ballistic  missiles  are  so  swift  that  any  substantially  increased
possibility  of  their  use  or  any  sudden  deployment  may  well  be
regarded  as  a  definite  threat  to  the  peace."    But  this  sudden
possibility  of  nuclear  missiles  in  the  Caribbean  should   enable
us  to  see  how  it  looked  from  the  other  side  when  we   began
deploying   intermediate   range   missiles   in  Turkey,   Italy,   and
Britain  aimed  at  Russia  and  on  Okinawa aimed  at  China.  Here
again  we  come  up  suddenly  against  the  double  standards  we
have  employed.
The  Puzzling  Absence  of   Camouflage
9.  Mr.  Kennedy  said,  "For  many  years  both  the  Soviet  Un-
ion  and  the  United  States,  recognizing this  fact,  have  deployed
strategic  nuclear  weapons  with  great  care,  never  upsetting  the
precarious  status  quo  which  insured  that  these  interests  would
not  be  used  in  the  absence  of  some  vital  challenge."     The  fact
is  that  the  Soviets,  unlike  ourselves,  have  hitherto  never  de-
ployed  strategic  missiles  outside  their  borders.     It  is  we  who
have  done  so,  though  keeping  control   with  our  own  military
technicians  (as  perhaps  the  Russians  may  be  doing  in  Cuba).
Indeed   I  must  confess  to  some   skepticism  about   IRBM's  in
Cuba  in  view  of  Russian  reluctance  to  place  them  in  any  satel-
lites   and   the   fact   that   Soviet   diplomats   have   not   regarded
Castro  as  too  dependable.      Could   we  be  up   against   a  feint
and   a   ploy?   Why  the  absence  of  camouflage?
10.  If   the   Russians  are   in   process   of   placing  IRBM's   in
Cuba,  then  Mr.  Kennedy  is  justified  in  accusing  them  of  bad
faith.     The   semantics  of   what   constitutes   a   defensive   and
what  an  offensive  weapon   may  be  put  to  one  side.    But  it  is
true   that   when   the   Soviet   statement   of   Sept.   11   said   that
Russia's  rockets  were  so  powerful  she  had  "no  need  to  search
for  sites  for  them  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  Soviet  Union,"
this  implied  in  the  context  of  the  Russo-American  dialogue  on
Cuba  that  they  were  not  going  to  place  nuclear  missiles  on  the
island.    The  neutrals  trying  to  mediate  this  conflict  need  only
Women's  Strike  Statement
"We  women   who  have   dedicated  ourselves  to  pre-
serving  and  cherishing  human  life  are  concerned  that
the  present  Cuban crisis  may  erupt  into  nuclear war.
We,   together   with   President   Kennedy,  have   com-
mitted  ourselves  to  accomplishing  world  peace  by  gen-
eral  disarmament  under  effective  United  Nations  con-
trol.    We  feel  that  the  settlement  of  the  Cuban  crisis
under  United  Nations  auspices   is  an  essential  step  to-
wards   ultimate  disarmament   and   world  order.     The
quarantine  of  vessels  announced by  the  President  is,  we
believe,  a  serious  threat of  the  use  of  force  in  violation
of  the  charters  of  the  United  Nations  and  the Organiza-
tion   of   American  States.     Moreover,   it,  establishes   a
precedent  of  unilateral action  that  may  be  used  to  the
detriment  of  world  peace  in  other situations.
Therefore,  we  respectfully  urge  our  President  to  re-
consider  the  announced  action  to  quarantine  the  seas
pending  an  orderly  determination of  the  differences be-
tween  the  United States,  the  Soviet  Union and  Cuba by
the  United  Nations.    We  call   upon  both  sides  to  use
restraint  in  this  critical situation  and  to  use  extraordi-
nary  caution  to  assure  that  a  nuclear  disaster  does  not
result  either by  accident  or  reckless  action."
—Women  Strike  For  Peace, Oct.  22.
stop  and  consider  what  Khrushchev  would  have  said  if  Ken-
nedy  secretly  had  begun  building  IRBMs  in  Yugoslavia   and
Finland  after  declaring  publicly  that  the  U.S.  was  only  send-
ing  them  defensive  weapons!
11.   Here  we  come  to  the  inner  heart  of  this  conflict   which
threatens   the   world.     Mr.   Kennedy   saw  this  as  a  personal
affront,   a  challenge  to  his  leadership   and  a  blow  at  American
prestige.    "This  sudden,   clandestine   decision   to  station   stra-
tegic  weapons  for  the  first  time  outside   of   Soviet  soil,"   Mr.
Kennedy   said,  "is   a  deliberately   provocative   and  unjustified
change  in  the   status  quo   which  cannot   be  accepted   by  this
An  Appeal  to  The  President  to  Lift  The  Blockade  and  Neutralize  Cuba
"In  response   to  President  Kennedy's  address  on  the  dan-
gerous   turn  Cuban-American relations  have   taken  in   the
past  few  days,  we  feel  obligated,  as  private citizens,  to  urge
a  sense  of  restraint  and  reflection upon  pur  government  and
our  fellow-citizens.
"We  believe,  first,  that  the  President's  order  of  a  partial
naval  blockade  on  Cuba  is  an  unwise  move  and  one  which
clearly   threatens  the  peace  of  both  the  Caribbean  and  the
world.    We  believe  too  at  this  grave  hour  threats  of  force
and  coercion  serve  only  to  exacerbate  rather   than  to  calm
this  serious  crisis.    Such  threats,  in  violation  of  our  com-
mitment  to  the  UN  Charter and  the  OAS  Statute,  fail  to  in-
crease   our  own  security  while  frustrating   the  very   policy
aims  they  pretend  to  serve.    They   are,  in  every  sense,  in-
defensible.
"As  we  now wait  through  this  grave  crisis  we  wish  to  re-
mind  the  leaders  of   both  our  own  nation  and  that  of   the
Soviet  Union  of  the  dangers  inherent  in  using  the  destinies
of  small  states  to  serve  their  own  ends.    The  Soviet  Union
and  the  United  States   must  realize  that  the  existence  of
nuclear  weapons  on  each  other's  borders  threatens  their own
security  as  well  as  the  well-being of  all  the  world's   peoples.
In  our  world  threats   of  force  are  acts  of  suicide.     In  the
midst  of  such  intense  crises  the  possibilities  of  war  by  acci-
dent   and  miscalculation,   always  serious,   are  multiplied  a
thousand-fold,   while   minor  irritants  take   on   the   air   of
grave  and novel provocations.
"Let   the   great   powers   resolve   now   to   withdraw  their
nuclear  weapons  to  their  own  borders  as  a  first  step  toward
meaningful  general disarmament.
"We  call  upon  the  Soviet  Union  to  cease  now  all  further
arms  shipments  of  any  kind  to Cuba.
"We  call   upon  the   United   States ^,to   end  both   its   new
blockade  and  the  old  embargo  directed at  Cuba  and  to  move
as  well  to  normalize relations  with  the  present  Cuban  gov-
ernment.    We  call  upon  the  Cuban  Government  to   declare
itself  a  neutral state  and  to  place  itself  under  the  protection
of  the  General  Assembly.
"We  call  upon  the  political  leaders  in  our  own  country  to
respect   the  wishes  of  our  people,  as  indicated  in  so  many
recent  reports,  and  to  reflect  in  word  and  deed  their  desire
for  reduction  of  Cuban-American  tensions.
"Finally,  we  call  upon  the  Soviet  Union   and  the  United
States  to  use  the  immense  resources  now  consumed  by  the
weapons   of  war  to  contribute  to  the  well-being  of  the  im-
poverished  masses  of  the  under-developed world.
"In  short,   let  the   leaders  and  the   peoples   of   the  great
powers—TURN  TOWARD PEACE."
Alfred   Hassler;  Charles  Lawrence;  Homer  Jack;  Robert
Gilmore;  Seymour  Melman;   Norman   Thomas;   Carey    Mc-
Williams;  A.  J.  Muste;   Donald   Keys;   John   McDermott;
and  I. F. Stone.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  29, 1962
... India and China Proving  Even  More  Irresponsible Than  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.
country  if  our  courage  and  our  commitments  are  ever  to  be
trusted  again,  by either  friend  or  foe."     Mr.  Kennedy  saw this
as  a  dare  from  Mr.  Khrushchev,   a  test  of  nerve.
The  Puerility  That  May  Doom  Our  Species
12.  This  "double-dare-you"   aspect   of   the   crisis  may  seem
puerile,  but  it  is  this  puerility which  may  spell  doom  for  our
species.    While  the  world's   two  most   powerful   nations  are
on  the  brink  of  war,  its  two  most  populous  countries  are  al-
ready   at   war—from   just   such   motivations.     If   we   set   the
Russo-American  conflict  beside  the  Sino-Indian  war,  as  if  they
were  a  set  of  simultaneous  equations,  we  will  begin  to  see  the
real  nature  of  the  situation  in  which  man   is  trapped.     India
and  China  are  at  war  over  uninhabitable  high  mountain  lands
on  their  far  western  frontier  and  over  malarial  equally  unin-
habitable   jungle  lands   on   their   easternmost   frontier.      The
prestige  of   the   leadership  on   both   sides  is  at   stake   in  this
wholly  idiotic  conflict;  Nehru   and  Menon  would  be  attacked
as  appeasers   if  they  gave   in;  presumably   similar   fears   haunt
the   Chinese   leaders.     Then,  on   both   sides,  the   symbol,   the
sacred   symbol  of   the  nation,  commands   a  devotion  so  deep
that  millions  who  have  only  the   faintest   idea  of   where   the
disputed   lands  lie,  are  ready  to  die  for  "the   sacred  soil."    In
the   East   as  in  the  West,   the  Nation   commands   the   fanatic
allegiance   men   once   gave   to   their   gods.     Finally,   just   as
Nehru   and  Mao  are  unconcerned   with  the   effect   on  the  rest
of  the  world,  so  are  we.   Though  our  Cuban  policy  risks ther-
monuclear   war—and   Khrushchev's    Cuban    policy   has   also
risked  thermonuclear  war—and  though  this war  would  involve
all  mankind  directly or  indirectly, we  move  toward  it  without
consulting   even  our   closest   allies.    These  are,  as  the  phrase
goes,  informed  but  not  consulted.
13.  The   Sino-Indian  dispute   does  not  bother  the  world  so
much   because  neither  has  nuclear  weapons.     But  if  they  did
French  Cynical
"PARIS,   Oct.  23   (Tuesday)   —   The   arms  embargo
threatened   against   Cuba   by   the   United   States   an-
nounced   by   President   Kennedy  tonight   was   met   in
Paris  with   official   silence.   .  .  .  Some  opinion  was   ex-
pressed  here  before  President  Kennedy's speech,  and  it
was  hardly  flattering  for  American  policy.
"Waverly    Root,   of   The   Washington   Post   Foreign
Service   reported  every  broadcast,   without   exception,
which  was  heard  last  night,  plus  published and  word  of
mouth  comment, attributed  whatever  action  the  United
States  government  intends  to  take  to  electoral  consid-
erations.     It   has   been   explained   endlessly   to   French
listeners  that   the   administration,   finding   itself  under
criticism   from   its   Republican   opposition   for   lack   of
success  in  meeting  the  Cuban  issue,  is  now  out  to  prove
itself  tougher than  its critics."
—The  Washington  Post,  Oct.  23.
have  them,  they  have  given  us  no  reason  to  believe  that   con-
cern  for  the  fallout on  other  peoples  would  prevent  them  from
bombing   each  other.     We   are  not   the  only  country  with   a
"Cuba."    The   only  difference   is  that  we  are  big  enough   to
be  a  law  unto  ourselves.  The   British  and  French,   in  attacking
at   Suez,  felt  that  their   vital   interests  were  at   stake,  that   to
allow  Nasser   to  get   away  with  seizure  of  the   canal  was   to
weaken  their  prestige  irreparably.    In  other  words,   they   felt
about  F.gypt exactly  as  our  sugar  and  oil  companies  feel  about
Cuba.     If  they  had  been  strong  enough  to  act   independently
of  the  U.S.,  if  they  had  not  been  threatened  by  the  Soviet  Un-
ion,  they  would   have  gone  ahead   at  no  matter   what   cost  to
the  rest  of  the  world.    So  it  was with  the  Dutch  in  their  quar-
rel  with  Indonesia  and  the  Portuguese  when  the  Indians  took
(Continued   on   Page   Four)
First  British  Press  Reactions  Mostly  Critical  of  Kennedy's Cuba "Quarantine"
"The  Daily  Herald  argues  that,  even  if  such  Soviet  bases
as  those  described  by  President  Kennedy  do  exist  on  Cuba,
a  report  should  have  been  made  to  the  Security  Council be-
fore   the   United   States   risked   "such   incalculable   conse-
quences."    The  Daily  Telegraph,   while   expressing   sympa-
thy  with  the  United  States,   is  fearful  of  the complications
which  might  result  from  the  measures  being  taken  by  the
US,  and  also  suggests  it  might  have  been  better  for  the  US
to  state  its  case  at  the  United  Nations   before  taking  such
action.   The Daily  Express  fully  supports  the  United  States'
action,  while  the  Daily  Worker  calls  it  'a  flagrant  action  of
aggression'."                              —Coup  d'Oeil,  UN,  Oct.  23.
THE  GUARDIAN (Liberal)  refers  to  the  possibility  of  a
blockade  and  asks  how  a  blockade  of   Cuba  is  likely  to  be
taken   in   Moscow   and  how   will   it   effect   the   rest   of   the
world?     The  paper  says  the  Soviet  Union  might   consider
that  if  the  United  States  thinks  itself   entitled   to  blockade
a  Communist  base  close  to  its  home  territory,  then   Soviet
ships  or  planes   are  equally  entitled  to  cordon  off  in  some
way  western  bases  in  Turkey  or  the  Soviet  Union  might  put
heavy   pressure   on  Western   communications   with    Berlin.
THE  GUARDIAN  continues:
"Either  way  we  could  expect  a  dangerous   crisis.    In  the
United  Nations  the  United  States  will  have  to  justify  any
such  action  as  a  blockade.    But  how?    How  can  the  Admin-
istration  justify   even  such  limited  military  action?    There
is,  at  the  moment, no  shred  of  an  excuse  which  the  rest  of
the  world  could   accept,   and  no  sign  of   one.   ..Cuba  is   not
invading  anyone.    Even  it  it  has  offensive  weapons,  their
presence   in  bases  elsewhere   has   justified   no   such   drastic
action.    It  is  hard  to  see  how  America  can  act,  except  on
grounds  of  mistaken  self-interest.    A  blockade  so instituted
would  do  America's  cause,  her  friends,  and  her  true   inter-
ests  serious   harm,  for  no  worthwhile,  purpose."
The  DAILY  MAIL  (Conservative)  says  "two  flash  points
on  opposite  sides  of  the  world  threaten  peace,  and,  for  once,
the  quarrelsome  Europeans—in  whom  we  include  the  Brit-
ish—are  not   mixed  up  with  either.    Instead,   Indians   are
fighting  Chinese  in  the  East,  and  a  menacing  situation  has
arisen  between  Americans  and  Cubans  in  the  West.     The
paper  says  that  if,  as  the  Americans  say,  there  are  missile
bases  in  Cuba, this  is  a  dire  threat  to  the  United  States,  but
they   must   have  known  about   them   for  a  long  time.    Are
they  now  to  be  used  as  an  excuse  for  action  against  Cuba?
Has   President   Kennedy   partly   surrendered   to  anti-Cuban
hysteria?"    The  DAILY  MAIL  says:
"We  cannot  help  thinking  that  any  hostile  move  against
Cuba  is  a  profound  mistake.    It  is  certain  to  arouse  antago-
nisms,  especially  throughout  Latin  America.    It  would  have
been  wiser  to  have  met  Russian  penetration  with  aid  .  .  .
and  with  friendship   rather  than  antagonism."
—British  Information  Services, Oct.  23.
f     5    V
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 29, 1962
Adlai  Talks  of  Pluralism   But  Won't  Recognize  Cuba;  Zorin's  Pot-and-Kettle   Arguments
Sane  Solution: A  Neutralized  Cuba and Resumption of U.S.  Relations With  It
Goa.    A  world organized  in  this  irrational  and  lawless  fashion
is  a  world  bound  sooner  or  later  to  destroy itself.
14.  Against  this  background,  the  speeches  of  both  Steven-
son  and  Zorin  to  the   Security  Council  Tuesday  night  were
equally  nauseating.    Stevenson's  was  a  stale  Phillipic  in  the
Truman-Acheson  tradition.    It: beat  the  drums  for  a  new  holy
war.    The  cold  war,  Stevenson  said,  "isn't  a  private  struggle;
it  is a  world  civil war—a  contest  between  the  pluralistic world
and  the  monolithic  world.  .  .  ."  This  is  one  of  those  propa-
gandistic  half  truths  which  breed  war  and  block conciliation.
How  "pluralistic"   is  a  government  which  will  not  negotiate
with  a  small  neighbor  because  it  does  not  like that  neighbor's
form  of  government?    On  the  other  hand  the  argument  took
on  familiar  pot-and-kettle  lineaments  when  Zorin  accused  the
U.S.  of  "saber  rattling"—presumably  he  spoke  of  sabers  be-
cause  it  is the  USSR  which  in  recent  years  has  done  the rocket
rattling—and  when  he  spoke  of   the  principle  of  non-inter-
ference  in  the  internal  affairs  of  other  states.  No  nation honors
the  principle  less  than  Moscow.    There  would  be  no  conflict
One  Latin   Protest
"U.  S.   Treasury   Secretary   Douglas   Billon  said  he
would   remain  here  until  Tuesday  afternoon  to  deliver
the  main  U.  S.  speech  at  the  week-long  conference.  But
he  said  he  would  fly  to  Washington  immediately   after
his talk.
"This  decision  drew  the  fire  of  Henrique  Vale,  deputy
chief   of   the   Brazilian   delegation,   who   said:   'Cuba
clearly  is  of  immense  strategic  concern  to  the  United
States.   But the  alliance  which  is  to  build  the  future  of
all   our  countries   should   get   every   priority   and  not
get   mixed   up  with  other,  more  temporary  issues'."
—Washington  Post  from  Mexico  City,  Oct.  23.
Canada   Cool  to  Blockade
"It   was   worth   noting,   however,   that   neither   the
Prime  Minister  nor  Opposition  leaders  said  anything
suggesting  that  Canada  cut  off  her  trade  with  Cuba  or
join  any  possible  blockade  or military  action  that  might
follow."
—New  York  Times,  Oct.  23 (Ottawa  Dispatch)
between  the   U.S.  and   Cuba,  for   example,   if   Cuba  were  as
willing  to  accept  U.S.  limits  on  her  freedom  of  action  as  Fin-
land  is  to  accept  Russia's.
15.  Theoretically,  a  solution  to  the  Cuban  crisis  should  not
be  unattainable.    The  Cuban  Ambassador  opened   his  speech
to  the  Security  Council  by  quoting  again  from  the  declaration
the  Cuban  Council  of  Ministers  adopted   in  response  to  our
Congressional   Joint  Resolution  on  Cuba.    "Were  the  United
States   able,"   Mr.   Garcia-Inchaustegui   read   to   the  Security
Council  from  that  Cuban  document,   "to  give  Cuba   effective
guarantees  and  satisfactory  proof   concerning  the  integrity  of
Cuban  territory,  and  were  it  to  cease  its  subversive and  coun-
ter-revolutionary    activities   against    our   people,   then    Cuba
would  not  have  to  strengthen  its  defenses.    Cuba  would  not
even  need  an  army,  and  all  the  resources  that  are  used   for
this  could  be  gratefully  and  happily  invested  in  the  economic
and  cultural  development  of  the  country."    A  sane   solution
would  be  to  neutralize  the  island,  to  withdraw  missiles  and
Guantanamo  together.     Mr.  Kennedy  said  in  his  speech  that
we  were  prepared  to  "discuss  new  proposals  for  the  removal
of  tensions on  both  sides, including  the  possibilities  of  a  genu-
inely  independent  Cuba  free  to  determine  its  own   destinies."
(But  Cuba  can  only  be  independent  if  the  U.S.  resumes  trade
relations  with  it.)     The  Soviet  resolution   before  the   Security
Council  "calls  on  the  United  States  of  America,  upon  the  Re-
public  of  Cuba  and  upon  the  Union  of   Soviet  Socialist  Re-
publics  to  enter  into  negotiations  for  the  purpose  of  normal-
izing the  situation  and  thereby of  removing  the  threat  of  war."
Surely  within  the  context  of  these  three  positions,  a  solution
is  possible,  honorable  and  satisfactory to  all?
16.  Practically,   however,   I   fear   that   the   momentum   of
events  is passing  beyond control,  that  an  invasion  of  Cuba  may
already  be  in  the  wo/ks,  that  though  the  Soviet  Union  holds
back  from  action,  we  shall  plunge  ahead,  and  if  the   shooting
once  starts,  the  conflict  and  its  consequences  will  not   easily
be  contained.                                                                     Oft.   24
Note's  the  Time  to  Redouble  Efforts    for  the  Peace  Candidates,   Especially    Hughes
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................................................................................_
Street   ...................................................................................._
City  ..........._.........................Zone............State....................
10/29/62
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name   .....................................................................——..
Street   ........._........................................................................
City  ..........._.........................Zone........_..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
F.  Stone'1  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday  In  December
and  the  first  In  January  at   5618   Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  J.  F.
Stone-  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M. Stone.    Subscription:  »5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6 in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.
Air  Mail  rates:  115  to  Europe;  J20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED