I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1962
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1962nov12.pdf

============================================================

What   Castro  Told  Cuba  About  Those  Missiles,  Pps. 2-3
Calmer  Light  on  Those  (Outmoded and  Subsonic)  Ilyushin-28's  in  The  Dismantling  Wrangle,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  X,  NO.  41
NOVEMBER   12, 1962
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
How  Our  Free Press  Uses  Its  Freedom in The  Cuba Crisis
Devoted  as  I  am  to  free  enterprise in  journalism,  I  still find
it  hard  to  bleed  in  unison  with  my  colleagues  over  the  new
restrictions  on  press  contacts with  officials  at  the  Defense  and
State  Departments.    Nor   am  I  surprised  by  Mr.  Sylvester's
avowal  of  the  government's use  of  the  press  as weaponry. This
has  been  going  on  in  Washington  for  years,  and  it  has  been
facilitated  by the  readiness of  the  press  corps  to  be  the  willing
conduit  of   all  kinds  of   official   misinformation   and  mischief
as  dished  out  in  the  capital's  57  varieties  of  off-the-record-but-
please-use-it   press   conferences.    The   so-called   information
officers  of  the  government  have  long  been  engaged  in  brain-
washing  and  most  of  the  reporters  here  have  been  as  eager
inculcators  of  the  U.S. cold  war  party  line  as  their  opposite
numbers  are  to  dish  out  the  official  view  in  Pravda  or  Izvestia.
The   handling  of   the  Cuban   affair   from   the  beginning  has
hardly  been  a  model  of  passionate  eagerness  to  search  out  the
impartial  truth.    The  main  and  immediate  reason  for  the  up-
roar   here   is  that   an   effort   is  being  made  by  the   Kennedy
Administration  to  shut  off  those  disgruntled  elements, particu-
larly  in  the  Pentagon,  who  were  trying  to  undercut   t^ie  Presi-
dent's  efforts  at  restraint  by  leaking  to  the  press  (as  they  do
to  the  Hill  when  Congress  is  in  session)   the  kind  of  alarums
with  which  the  Luce,  Hearst  and  Howard  publications  have
been  whipping  up  opinion  for  stronger  action  against  Cuba.*
ICBMs  in  Cuban  Caves
A  test  of  how  freely  our  press  chooses  to  operate  in  a  war
crisis  is  afforded  by  three  recent  examples.    The  latest,  which
had  just  begun  to  develop  as this  was written,  might  be  called
the  Case  of  the  Caves.    In  the  New  York  Herald-Tribune  of
Nov.  6, Marguerite  Higgins  reported  that  we were  insisting on
on-site  inspection  in  CuLa.    "According  to  Mr.  McCloy,"  she
wrote,  "this  meant  that  international  inspectors  must  be  able
to  look  behind  trees  and  crawl  through  caves. ..."    This
looked  like  a  scenario  for  a  Mack  Sennett  film,  with  Russians
frantically  pushing  baby  missiles  in  little  hand  carts   around
trees  and  through  tunnels  with U.S. inspectors  in  wild pursuit..
But  the  same  morning  the  Baltimore  Sun  carried  a  Washing-
ton  dispatch  quoting  an  unnamed   "refugee   Cuban  geologist"
as  saying that  "all  of  the  Soviet  missile  bases  in  Cuba  are  lo-
cated   close  to  large   underground   caverns,   ideal   for   storing
such  weapons."    Within  a  few  hours,   surmise  had   become
reality.    That  afternoon  a  page  one  story  in  the   Washington
Star  already had  the  Soviet  missiles "in  seven  caves"  (no  more,
no  less),  in  "sufficient  number  to  destroy  half  the  American
continent,"  and  placed  there  "since  the  Kennedy-Khrushchev
agreement  to  dismantle  the  open  missile  sites."    This  time  a
NATO  Split  on  Inspection  by  Invitation
Few,  if  any, newspapers seemed  to  give  their  readers
the  vote  by  nations  in  the  UN's First  Committee Nov.
5  when  it  passed  a  resolution  (81  for  to  none  against
with  25  abstentions)  calling  on  the  nuclear  powers  to
end  all  nuclear weapons testing  by  Jan. 1.   This  hid  a
split  in NATO.
The  key  vote  was  on  that  provision  of  the  37-nation
resolution  as  passed  which  declared  the  8-nation memo-
randum  at  Geneva  represented  "a  sound,  adequate  and
fair  basis  for  the  conduct  of  negotiations  towards   re-
moving  the  outstanding  differences  on  the  question  of
effective  control  of  underground tests."   This  called  for
on-site  inspection by  invitation.   Canada,  Denmark  and
Norway  split   from   NATO  to  vote  for   this   provision
while  the  U.S. and  other  NATO  allies  abstained.     All
Latin  America  except  El  Salvador,  all  Africa  but  South
Africa  and  all  Asia  except  Turkey,  Thailand  and  Na-
tionalist  China  also  voted  "yes" as  did  the  Soviet  bloc
and  Yugoslavia.
On   the   final   resolution   as   a   whole,  however,   the
Soviet  bloc joined  the  NATO bloc  in  abstaining.  Again,
however,  Canada,   Denmark  and  Norway  voted  "yes"
as  did  Yugoslavia.   Cuba  was  the  only  Latin  American
country  which  joined the  two  blocs  in  abstaining;  South
Africa,   the   only   African  country;   Nationalist   China,
the  only non-Communist or  non-NATO Asian   abstainer.
Since  both  blocs  ignored  past   resolutions   in  resuming
and  continuing nuclear  tests,  no  one  expected  this new
resolution  (o  interfere  with  their   plans,  either,  though
obviously  the  bulk  of  mankind was  against  them.
*  See  box  at  the  bottom of  page  3  for  an  amusing sample
of  one  of  these  Jeffersons  in  action.
1  1 *                                                  '                                                            163
Cuban  refugee  leader  was  quoted  by  name,  but  turned  out  to
be  a  lawyer,  not  a  geologist,  a  Mr.  Fernando  Garcia   Chacon.
It  would  make  an  instructive  class  in  evidence  to  put   Mr.
Garcia  in  the  witness  chair.    Garcia  said  he  was  "unable  to
name  the  precise  location"  of  these  seven  caves  except  for  two
seen  by  another  refugee,  Mr.  Luis  Ferdinand   Rocha,  who  re-
turned  from  Cuba  to  Miami  in  September.     Mr.   Fernandez
said  he got  within  200 yards of  two  caves  and  "waited  for  two
days  until  the  metal  doors  were  opened  but  was  unable  to  see
what  was inside."   No  Cubans,  according  to  Mr.  Garcia,  have
been  allowed  to  approach  these  caves  since  the  sites  were  com-
pleted.    Nevertheless  he  knows  that  while  our  planes   spotted
only  30  missiles,  "The Soviet  Union  can.take  out  of  Cuba  and
permit  the  inspection  of  more  than  50  missiles,  but  there  are
on  Cuba  territory  sufficient  missiles  to  destroy  half  the  conti-
nent."    Mr.  Garcia  added   another   chilling   detail   when   he
said,  "some  of  the  underground   installations  are  big  enough
for  Intercontinental  Ballistic  Missiles  of  a  type  not  previously
mentioned   by  the  Defense   Department  as  being  in  Cuba."
What would  Castro  want  intercontinental  ballistic missiles  for?
To  threaten  Khrushchev?
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  12,  1962
What  Castro^Told  Cuba  Nov,, 1 on TV  About His Parky With U Thant.
* '          '•    -j      V
              L
               -,
The  best  source  of  information  on  Cuba  lies  in  Castro's
own  speeches  but
:
  the   U.S.    jpress  ignores   them,   perhaps
because  they  would,  conflict   with  the  popular  picture  here
of  Castro  as  a  fool  or  maniac.  Here  is  the  gist  of  his  speech
Nov.   1  in  which  he  read  from  a  transcript  of  his  talks  with
U  'Thant.    We  have  made  no  cuts  which  alter  its  message
or   tone,   but   have   italicized   important   disclosures.—IFS
U  Thant   stressed  the  fact  that  his  mission originated  with  meetings
at  the  UN   of  45  neutral   countries  "principally  those  which   had   at-
tended  'the  Bandung 'and  Belgrade  conferences."   ' tie  said  they  asked
him,  "since  I  also  belong  to  a  neutral  country  and  participated  in  the
two  meetings,"  to  take  the  initiative in  the  Cuban  crisis.    U  Thant  did
not  mention  any  other, weapons  other  than  the  missiles.    "The   U.S.
told  me,"  he  said,  ".  .  .  Its  principal  concern  is  the  missile launching
fads."                       '       •                                          •                      •
U  Thant   Said  the  U.S.  made  two  'proposals  to  verify   the  disman-
tling:  one  of  UN  "persons  whose  nationalities  are  acceptable  to  the
Cuban  government"   for  ground  inspection,  the  other  a  plane'for  re-
'connaissance  to  be  manned  by  "persons  acceptable  to  the  Cuban,  Rus-
'sian  and  American  governments"  for  the  two  or  three  weeks  required
to  dismantle  the  bases.    U  Thant  said  the  U.S.  offered,  if  these  condi-
tions  were   met,  to  make  a  public  statement  in  the  Security  Council
'"that  it  would  harbor  ho  aggressive  intention  toward  the  Cuban  gov-
ernment  and  would  guarantee  the  territorial  integrity  of  the   nation"
and  that  it  would  also  lift  the  blocka'de.
Only   With  Cuba's  Consent
U  Thant   declaredj   "As  Your   Excellency  knows,  I  said  in  the  Se-
curity  Council  that  this  blockade  was  highly  unusual,  not  very  com-
mon  except  in  time  of  war."   U  Thant  said  that  in  past  cases,  such  as
Laos,  Egypt.  Lebanon  and  the  Congo,  the  UN  had  gone  in  only  with
'the  consent  of  the  governments  of  those  countries,  and  that  it  would
go  into  Cuba  only  with  Cuba's  permission.           ,                           .
.    Castro  commented that  in  the  Con.go  "the  government  that  requested
it   [UN   intervention]  .is  buried  now."  ,  Fie  hastened,  however,  to  ex-
press  his  high  regard  for  and  confidence  in  "the  present  UN  Secretary
General."     "All   of  us  hold  his  mission  and  h\s  person   in  great  es-
teem"  but  he  did  not  think  peace  could  be  safeguarded  by  "sacrificing
the  rights  of  peoples."    He  objected  to  "paying  daily  the  price  of  an
ephemeral   peatfe"   and   added   that   Cuba   "is
1
  not   Austria,   nor   the
Czechoslovak  Sudetenland  nor  the  Congo."
U  Thant  said  he  thought  the  UN  presence  in  Cuba  for  two  or  three
weeks  would   "lessen   ,or  .limit   the  danger   of   aggression."     President
'Dorticos  broke  in  to  ask,  "Where  is  the  danger  of  war?    In  the  arms
of  one  kind  or  another  that  Cuba  has,  or  in  the  aggressive U.S.  designs
against  Cuba?"    He  said  the  arms  in  Cuba,  "regardless  of  what  they
may  be,  will  never  begin  an  aggression.    Therefore,  we  ask  ourselves:
why   is  inspection,  and   an   acceptance  of   inspection,  'a  condition   for
guaranteeing  peace?    To  guarantee  peace  it  would  suffice  for  the  U.S.
to  pledge,  with  all  necessary guarantees through  the  UN,  not  to  attack
Cuba."    Castro said,  "I  wonder,  if  the  Soviet  Union  authorizes  inspec-
tion  of  its  ships  on  the  high  seas,  why  would  it  then  be  necessary  to
inspect  them  again  in  Cuban  ports?"  He  said  the  inspection  require-
ment  was only  made  to  humiliate  Cuba.
Castro  closed  this  first  meeting  with  U  Thant  by  an  observation  on
the  stress  the  acting  UN   Secretary  General   laid  on  the   U.S.   pledge
Sweden  Defies   U.S.   Blockade
"Stockholm,  Oct.  27  (AP)—The  Swedish  government
looked  cooly  today  upon  the  U.S.   blockade  of  Cuba  and
voiced   support   for   UN   Acting   Secretary   General   U
Thant's  efforts   toward  a  peaceful  settlement.    After   a
meeting  of  its   Foreign  Policy   Board,  the   government
issued  a  communique  citing  the  principles  of   freedom
of  the  seas.    'Under  this  principle,'  it  said,  'naval   ves-
sels  from   one  nation   may  not   in  peacetime   interfere
with   ships  of   other  nations  in   international  waters'."
—Washington  Evening  Star,  Oct.  27.
"There    were    many    encounters,    however.     Planes
tracked  many  ships,  and  destroyers  came  to  ask  them
by  blinker   code  who  they  were,  what  they  carried  and
where  they   were   bound.    One  Swedish   freighter   was
intercepted   and  queried   but   it   blandly   ignored   all   of
the  signals  and  steamed  on  past  the  destroyers."
—From  a  now-it-can-be-told  story  on  the  blockade  by
Richard  Fryklund   in  the  Washington  Star,  Oct.   30.
not  to  invade  Cuba.    "On  this  point,"   Castro  commented,  "I  wish  to
say  first  that  the  U.S.  has  no  right  to  invade  Cuba  and  that  it  is  im-
possible  to  negotiate  with  a  mere  promise  not  to  commit  a  crime."   He
went  on  to  say  that  if  the  UN   attaches  such  great   value  to  a   U.S.
promise  not  to  invade,  "why   not  concede   equal  value  to  the  public
commitment  made  to  the  UN   by  the  USSR  to  withdraw  the  strategic
weapons   it  sent  for  the  defense  of  the  Republic  of  Cuba?"   He  said
these   would   be  "two   equally  public   commitments.     If   one   of   them
needs  no  additional  guaranties—that  is,  the  U.S.   commitment  not  to
invade  Cuba—why  does  the  Soviet  Union's  commitment to  withdraw
its  strategic  weapons   need  the  additional  guarantee  of  inspecting   us."
Castro,  in  his  TV  talk,  said  the  second  meeting  with  U  Thant  was
confidential.    He  said  he  regretted  the  death  of  the  U.S.  flier  who  had
been  shot  down  over  Cuba.    He  praised  the  UN   but  said  he  had  been
"inltansigeant"   in   opposing    inspection    because  this   would    validate
"the  pretensions  of  the  U.S.  to  decide  what  kind   of  weapons  we  have
or  do  not  have  the  right  to  possess,"     Castro  said  that  in  his  second
meeting   with   U   Thant   he  repeated   that   tensions   in   the   Caribbean
could  only  be  allayed  if  the  U.S.   also   ended  the  economic  blockade.
He  complained  "We   are  constantly  receiving  reports   of  vessels  which
were   coming   to  Cuba  and  whose  goods   were   left   in  Mediterranean,
European  or  Latin  American  ports,"  because  of  U.S.   pressure.
Of   Guantanamo,  Castro  said:  "It   is  absurd  that  the  withdrawal   of
friendly   weapons   b.e requested  and  that  an  enemy   base  be  left   in   our
country   .  .  .  a  base  where,   in  these   days  of   crisis,  troops   were  ac-
cumulating   to  attack  our  country.    Are  we  going  to  be  asked  to  with-
draw  friendly   weapons,  while  enemy  weapons  remain  within  the  heart
of   our  country?"     He  said  the  base  was  granted  the  U.S.  as  the  result
of  unilateral  pressure  but  added,  "If  we  call  that  agreement  legitimate,
even  more  legitimate  are  the  agreements   between   the  Soviet   govern-
ment  and  the  most  free  government  of  Cuba,  by  virtue  of  which  these
strategic   missiles  were  situated   in  our   country  and   for   our   defense.
Some  Calmer  Light  From  Experts  on  Those  Ilyushin*28's  We  Call  Offensive
".  .  .  the  11-28  tactical  bomber  is  a  type  normally  supplied
by  the  Soviet  Union  to  its  allies  and  satellites.    It  is  an  old
aircraft,   virtually  superseded  in  the  Soviet  Air  Forces,  and
it  is  the  view  of  aviation  experts  in  London  that  although
it  may  be  physically  capable  of  carrying  a  nuclear  weapon,
its  presence  in  Cuba  is  not  enough  on  its  own  to  constitute
a  serious  nuclear  threat."
—London   Times'   Defense   Correspondent,   Oct.   26.
"Washington,  Nov.  2—Now  that  missile  bases  in  Cuba  are
being  dismantled,  the   U.S.   will  watch  for  the  departure  of
more   than   20  Soviet   bombers   from   the   island.  .  .   .  The
bombers,  designated  Il-28's  are  believed  capable  of  carrying
nuclear  weapons  to  a  maximum  range  of  1,300   miles.    The
planes'  top  speed  is  estimated  at  550  miles  an  hour.
"In  an  all-out   war,   involving   the   exchange   of   nuclear-
tipped  missiles  at  speeds  of  15,000  miles  an  hour,  the  Il-28's
would  probably  only  be  of  nuisance  value  to  an  aggressor,
unless the  aircraft  were sacrificed  against  vital  targets,  such
as  air-defense  communications  posts.
"And   in  an  attack  on  the  U.S.   the, Il-28's .would  have  to
avoid  Air   Force  interceptors  with  'twice,  the  speed  of   the
bombers,  and  also  dodge  the  Nike  Ajax,  and  Hercules  air
defense  missiles.    Both  Nike  types  can  climb  higher  than
the  ceiling  of  the  Il-28's  which  is  about  50,000  feet.
"Perhaps  the  principal  value  of  the  Ilyushin  bombers  to
both  the   Soviet   Union  and  Cuba   is   their  possible  use   as
training  planes.  .  .  .  With  300  or  400  hours  of  flight  experi-
ence  in. an  11-28,  a  Cuban  pilot  might  be  ready  for  a  more
modern  bomber  of  supersonic  speed."
—Washington   Bureau,  Baltimore   Sun,     Nov.    S.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  12,1962
... Tried  to  Alky  "Discontent" With  Moscow  and Explain  Missile  Removal
And   if  the  U.S.,"  he  added,  "has   placed  the  world  on  the  brink  of
war  to  demand  the  withdrawal  of  those  missiles,  then  what  right  and
justification  has  it  to  refuse  to  abandon  the  territory  it  occupies  in  our
country?"
Castro  complained,  "A  few  days  before  the  crisis,  barely  two  days
earlier,  we  inaugurated  the  institute  for  basic  sciences.     Some   1,000
young  people  were  to  enter   it  to  begin   studying  medicine.    Within
three  days  the  institute  for  basic  sciences  was  converted  into  an  anti-
aircraft   artillery  school,   and   thus   went   everything  else."     He   said
within  three  days  they  had  to  be  "taught  to  kill,  to  be taught  to handle
not   surgical  instruments  but   cannon."     He   said   these   were   "bitter
tasks  which  have  been   imposed  on  us  by  the  aggressors."      He  said
Cuba  wanted  peace  but   peace  with  dignity  and  that  the   U.S.,   too,
would  profit  by  peace  with Cuba.
Missiles  Never  Cuban  Property
Castro  said  "in  the  course  of  this  crisis  .  .  . there  arose  some     differ-
ences  between  the  Soviet  government  and  the  Cuban  government"  but
added,  "It  is  not  here  that  we  should  discuss  these   problems  .  .  .
where  our   enemies  might  find  it   useful   or  try  to   profit   from   those
discussions."    He  said,  "above  all,  we  are  Marxists-Leninists.    (Pro-
longed  pause.)     Between  the   Soviet  Union   and  Cuba  there  shall   be
no  breaches!"     He   said   he  had   confidence  in   the   leadership  of   the
Soviet  Union  and  he  asked  his  listeners  also  to  "have  confidence,  be
firm  and  have  faith."    He  asked  them  "in  these  moments  when  a  cer-
tain   disagreement   may   have   been   created"   to   remember   "how   the
friendly  hand  of  the  Soviet  Union  has  been  there  with  us  after  each
Yankee   blow—economic   aggression,   the   suppression   of   the   sugar
quota,  the  suppression  of  the  shipments  of  petroleum to  our  country."
He  asked  them  also  to  keep  in  mind  "the  technicians  who  have  come
to  work  with  us  in  our  rural  areas,  the  teachers,  professors,  engineers,
planters,  technicians of  all  kinds,  the  interest,  the  devotion,  the  fond-
ness  with  which  they  have  helped  us."     He  added,  "Moreover  there
are  the  military  technicians,   men  who   have  been   ready  to  die   here
with  us  ...     teaching  our  men to fight and  organizing  the formidable
army  we  have  at  this  moment."    Castro  said  that  several  months  ago
the  Soviet  Union  "decided   to  cancel  all  the  debts  of  our  country  for
armaments."
Castro  said  there  were  military matters  he  could  not  discuss.  "Never-
theless,"  he  said,  "I  will  explain  something;  for- example,  the   strategic
weapons  for  our  defense.    These  weapons,  the  strategic  weapons,  were
not  the  property  of  Cuba.    That  is  not  the  case  with  the  tanks  and  an
entire  series  of  weapons,  which  are  our  property.    The  strategic  weap-
ons  were  not  our  property.    In  the  agreements,"  he  went  on,  "by  vir-
tue  of  which  they  were  sent  to  our  country  to  strengthen   our  defenses
against  the  threat  of  attack,  it  was  decided  that  those  strategic  weap-
ons,  which  are  very  complex  and  require  specialized  personnel,  would
continue  under  the  direction  of  Soviet  personnel   and  continue  being
the  property  of  the  Soviet  State.    That  is  why,  when  the  Soviet  gov-
ernment   decided   to   withdraw   these   weapons,   which  belonged   to   it,
we  respected  that  decision."
"I  explain  this,"  Castro   continued,   "so  that  the  reasons  why  the
Warlike  Intellectuals  Dept.     ,
"As  near  as  I  have  been  able  to  determine  after  more
than  10  baffling   years  [of  reading  The  Reporter],  Max
Ascoli's  method  is  to  offer   a  straightforward  thought
and  to  surround,  conceal  and  even  occasionally  contra-
dict  it  with  a  flurry  of  tangents.   The  effect,  stylistical-
ly,  is  of  a  Walter  Lippmann  column  whose  paragraphs
have   been   scrambled;  but  Ascoli's   message,   when   it
gets  through,  is  one  of  'peace-through-force'  resistance
to  Communism.
"In  the  current  issue,  Ascoli  writes  approvingly  of
the  President's  use  of  a  show  of  force  to  drive  Soviet
missiles  out  of  Cuba.    Then  he  suggests  that  the    mis-
siles  may  not  have  been  missiles  at  all,   but  cardboard,
dummies  designed  to  be  photographed  by  our  recon-
naissance  planes  and intended  by  the  Kremlin  to  humili-
ate   us   without   the   risk   of   placing   Castro's   unruly
finger  on  a  nuclear  trigger.
"Having   advanced  this  odd  idea,  which  denies  the
whole   U.S.   case  for  a  showdown  with  Moscow,  Ascoli
then   argues   that   it   does   not   matter:   'Those   missile
sites,  real  or  phony,  must  be  destroyed'.    And  if  they
are,  he  continues,  the  Berlin  wall  will  begin  to  tumble.'
Not  because  it,   too,   might  be  made  of  cardboard    (As-
coli  at  least  does  not  suggest  that!)  but  because   his
point  is  that  every  Soviet  initiative  should  be  met  with
firmness."
—Al  Home's   The  Magazine   Rack/   New   York   Post,
November   4.                                                      .            •                        ,
withdrawal  was  decided  on  by  the  Soviet  Government  can  be  under-
stood.    That  is  why  I  was  saying  that,  even  though  we  may  have  some
well-founded    reason  for  discontent  over  some  fact,  some  detail,   more
than  ever  we
;
 must  remember  how  good,  generous,   noble  and  friendly
the  Soviets  have  been  toward  us."     He  added,  "Let  it  not  be  thought
that  the  withdrawal  of  the  strategic  weapons   disarms  us.    This  does
not   mean  that   we  are  disarmed.    I   can  assure   you   that   we   have
formidable  means  of  defense.
Castro  ended'  by  saying  that  "during  these  days  of  extreme  crisis  it
was  not  necessary  to  arrest  anybody.   Even  men  and  women  who  criti-
cized  the  revolution—in  this  decisive  hour  the  patriotic  revolutionary
core  became apparent  and  they  went  to  enlist."    Castro  said,  "we  have
long  range  moral  missiles  that  cannot  be  dismantled"   and  that   these
were  "our   most  powerful  strategic   weapon."     He   praised   the  spirit
of.  the  Cuban  people   and  ended  by  saying
(
  "today  more  than  ever  I
feel  proud  of  being   a  son  of  this  people.     Fatherland   or  death,  .we
will   win!"
Standing  Four  Square  With Jefferson  Against  Censorship  (Half  The  Time Anyway)
"Washington—A  change  is  coming  over  the  relationship
between  the  American  people  and  their  government,  and  it
remains  to  be  seen  whether  this  is  permanent  or  temporary.
Since  the  beginning  of  the  republic,  despite  many  attempted
incursions  against  the  free  flow  of  information,  the  Amer-
ican  people  have  clung  to   two  basic  tenets:     >
"1.  The  First  Amendment  to  the  Constitution,  which  says
in   part,   'Congress  shall   make  no  law  .  .  .  abridging  the
freedom   of  speech  or  of  the  press.  .  .  .'<  2.  The  philosophy
of  Thomas  Jefferson  that,  if  the  people  are  informed,  they
will  do  the  right  thing."
—Warren  Rogers,  Jr.,   in  the  New  York   Herald-Tribune
Nov.   4  on  the  Kennedy   Administration's  news  restrictions.
"The   Kennedy  Administration  is  bracing  for  a  very  hard
propaganda  onslaught  from   the  Kremlin  this  fall,  as  a  re-
sult  of  two  new  books:  'Fail  Safe'  by  Eugene  Burdick  and
Harvey    Wheeler,   and   'Seven   Days   in   May'   by   Fletcher
Knebel   and  Chas.  H.  Bailey  II  ...     the  themes  they  chose
and  the  conclusions  they  reach  are  in  the  mainstream  of  the
Soviet  propaganda  line.    'Fail  Safe'  is  the  story  of  an  acci-
dental  nuclear  attack  by  the  U.S.   on  the  Soviet  Union.   The
Russians  have  hammered  away  at  this  .  .  .  'Seven  Days  in
May'  deals  with  a  narrowly  aborted  military  coup  to  set
up  a  military  dictatorship  in  the  U.S.     This,  too,  is  a  recur-
ring  Russian  barb,   usually   expressed  in  terms  of   'ruling
circles  in  the  Pentagon' ...                 "
                                                   :
"As  the  State  Dept.,  the  Pentagon  and  the  U.S.   Informa-
tion   Agency   marshal   their   resources  for   the   propaganda
offensive,  this  thought  occurs  to  me:  Are  such  books  in  the
national  interest?  .  .  .
"Censorship  is  vile.  It  is  a  tyranny  to  be  opposed  at  all
costs.  But  restraint  and  self-discipline  are  also  part  of  the
American  ideal  to  be desired  on  some  occasions  at  least  over
the  current  fad  for  'mea  culpa'  masochism.    We  are  agreed,
I  believe,  that  we  do  not  want  to  grow  as  ruthless  as. the
Communists  in  fighting  them.    But  it  is  hard  to  escape  the
feeling  that  our  one-sided  adherence  to  Marquis  of  Queens-
bury  rules  will  be  the  death  of  us   yet."
-r-Same  Warren  Rogers  in  the  Book  Review  section  of  the
same  Herald-Tribune   two  Sundays   earlier,  Oct.   21.
1   6   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  12, 1962
Those  Planned  Scare  Stories  on  "U.S.  Deterrent  in  Peril"
(Continued    -from   .Page   One)
We  wonder  how  many newspapers  will  treat  this  story with
skepticism.  About  as many, we  suspect,  as  those  which  printed
the  facts  on  the  dynamite attacks against  the  Creole  Petroleum
(Standard  of  New  Jersey)  oil  installations  on  Lake Maracaibo
in  Venezuela  Oct.  27.    This  was  at  once  linked  with  Castro.
It  was  widely  reported  in  the  U.S.  press  that  a  coded  signal
had  been  detected  from  Havana  just  before  the  raiders  struck.
The  Venezuelan  Minister of  the  Interior disclosed  a  week  later
that  this  supposed   coded  signal  was  (1)    an  uncoded   cable-
gram  from  Havana  to  Communist  students  in  Venezuela   (2)
that  it  had  been  intercepted  only  a  few  hours  before  the  ex-
plosions  while  (3)   the  oil  plant  sabotage  had  been   planned
well  in  advance.    A  UPI  dispatch  on  the  ticker  Nov.   5  car-
ried  this  and  also  reported  that  it  conflicted  with  "reports  ap-
parently  originating  in   official   sources   in   Washington,    and
attributed  to  the  U.S.  Embassy  in  Caracas"  which  had  earlier
claimed   "Venezuelan   officials   had   solid  information  linking
Premier  Fidel  Castro's  Cuban  regime  with  the  bombing  oper-
ation."    This  if  true,  the  UPI  dispatch  went  on,  "could  have
been  a  possible  base  for  collective  action  against  Cuba  by  the
OAS."     The  only  place  I  saw  this  printed   was  in  the  City
Edition  of  the  New  York  Times  (Nov.   6).
Sample  Trained  Seal  Briefing
A  third  example.    On  Oct.  26,  when  we were  still  on  a  col-
lision  course,  an  unnamed  official   (at  the  White  House,  I  be-
lieve)   called  in  a  few  favorite  reporters  and  drew  for   them
a  highly  exaggerated   picture  of  the  military significance  of  the
missile  bases  in  Cuba.    That  afternoon   in  the   Washington
Star,  Earl  H.  Voss  had  a  front  page  story,  "Bases  Peril   U.S.
Deterrent."    John  H.  Finney  on  page  one  of  the  New   York
Times  next  day  had  a  similar  story,  "U.S.   Atomic  Edge  Be-
lieved  in  Peril."    The  ever  frenetic  Joseph  Alsop  in  the  New
York   Herald-Tribune   the  same  day,  on  the  basis  of  the  same
trained-seal  briefing,  reported   "a  vicious  military  trap"   had
been   laid,   "a  darkly  Macchiavellian  scheme,"  to  upset    "the
delicate  balance  of  terror."    Time  (Nov.   2)   said  that  if  the
plan  had  worked   "Nikita  Khrushchev  would   in  one  mighty
stroke   have   changed   the   power   balance   of   the   cold   war."
Consult?  When  There's  Only  Time  To
See  Bright  Colors  Whizz  By?
"Today's  decisions  at   the   highest   level  of   military
command  require  a  range,  precision  and  speed  of  com-
munication  and  information  processing  beyond  virtual-
ly   anything  conceivable  in  the  past.    Further,  optim-
ization  of  the  electronic  portion  of  a  command  control
system  cannot  be  considered  independently  of  the  capa-
bilities  of   the  ultimate,  human  decision  maker  in   the
chair  of  command.
"A   good  case   in   point   is   the   SAC   [Strategic   Air
Command]  global  command  and  control  system  465-L
for   which  ITT  International Electric  Corporation car-
ries  systems  development, design  and  management  re-
sponsibilities.    In  order  to  further   multiply   the   effec-
tiveness   of   the   military   commander,  faced   with   the
crucial  task  of  assimilating vast  quantities of  informa-
tion  projected  on  the  screens  before  him, ITT  engineers
and  scientists  recently  added  a  remarkable  new  capa-
bility  to  465-L:  data  presentation  in  color.
"Operating   at   speeds   that  appeared  incredible only
a  short  time  ago,  the  system  enables  computer  outputs
to   be   converted  to   alpha-numeric   form   .   .   .  photo-
graphed  .  .  .  developed  and  projected  on  control  center
screens  in  as  many  as  7  colors  in  a  matter of  seconds."
—From  "How   to  Inform   the  Military    Commander,"
one   of   those  glamorous   ads  for   technical   help   in   the
New   York   Times   financial   section  Sunday,   Nov.   4-
Though  the  same  papers  for  months  had  been  reporting  ou;
overwhelming  edge  in  bombs  and  delivery  power,  they  did  not
stop  to  ask  how  a  few  missiles  in  Cuba   could   change   that
overnight.
Now,  with  the  crisis  eased,  we  get  a  revised  view.    Relman
Morin  for  the  Associated  Press  has  been  writing  a  series  on
the  Cuban  crisis,  "Days  That  Shook  the  World."    In  his final
installment   (Washington   Star,  Nov.   6),   he  reported,    "The
Cuban  bases,  in  themselves,  did  not  change  the  balance  of  nu-
clear  striking  power  between  the  U.S.  and  Russia.    But  as  a
top  official  put  it,  'they  were  setting  up  eight  or  ten  sites  for
30  or  40  missiles.    If  they  were  allowed  to  proceed,  why  not
ten  more  sites?   That  could  very  much  have  made  a   differ-
ence'."                                                                        Nov.   6,   1962
An  Early   Press  Time  Forced   Us  To  Postpone   Election  Result  Comment  Until  Next   Week
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ......................................................................................_
Street    ......................................................................................_
City   .............._............................Zone.............State....................
11/12/02
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  raos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name   ...„....._.................:..........................„...................„
Street    .........._.........................................................................
City   ............—.................
m
.......Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
/ E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Chug  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C:   Published  every   Monday  except  during  August  and  the  last  Monday  in  December
and  the  first  in  January  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published   and  edited  by  I.   F.
Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.  S.:  $6  in  Canada:   $10 elsewhere.
Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED