I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953jun13.pdf

============================================================

Trial  by  Press and Pillory. The  Austrian  Money Plot, See Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I   NUMBER   21
JUNE  13,   1953
5       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Challenging  the Left:   "Back  Ike  for  Peace"
At  the  risk  of  complete  and  total  Leftist  excommunica-
tion—from   the  ADA  straight  across  the  board  through  the
Communists  to  the  Trotzkyists—1  want  to  put   forward   a
daring  slogan   in  the   difficult   and  precarious  weeks  ahead:
"Back  Ike  for  Peace."
Those  who  live  in  a  dream  world  may  well  believe  that
Eisenhower  as  President  of  the  United  States  need  only  press
a  button  to  oust  Syngman  Rhee,  recognize  Red  China, restore
Formosa  to  the mainland, put  Chiang  Kai-shek in  the laundry
business  and   ensure  peace  forever  by  a  quick   talk   with
Churchill,  Malenkov  and  Mao Tse-tung. In  that  dream  world,
Eisenhower   is  to  be  treated  with  suspicion  until  a  global
peace  has  been  signed,  sealed  and  delivered.
Others  on  the  Left  are  as  giddy  as  a  punch  drunk  fighter
who  has  had  too  many  blows on  the  head.  They  are suddenly
certain  that  the  U.S.  is  so  weak  and  unpopular  with  its  own
Western  allies that  it  must  make  peace  in  Korea  and  call off
the  cold  war.
But   those  with  some  conception   of  political  realities
must  see  the  enormous  odds  against  which  Eisenhower  has
slowly  been  pushing   toward  peace   in   Korea.  A  powerful
wing  of  the  Republican  party  is  against  a  settlement.  The
American  military  bureaucracy  has  been  and  continues  to  be
opposed   to  a  settlement.  The   military  if  given  its  head  is
quite  capable  of  stretching  out   the  talks  for  another  year.
There   was  an  ominous  ring   in   the   happy  announcement
from  Panmunjom  as  we  went  to  press:  "Remember   this  is
not  the  armistice  agreement.  It  deals  with  the  prisoner  of
war   issue  only."  The  military  are  prepared   if  permitted   to
split  hairs  for  many  months  more  on  the  exact  location  of
the  cease-fire  line  and  on  the  question  of  air-field   construc-
tion  during  a  truce.
As  peace  comes  closer,  Syngman  Rhee  and  Chiang  Kai-
shek, the  principal  beneficiaries of  the Korean  war, grow  more
desperate.  Eisenhower  last  week barely  managed  to  get  Senate
leaders   to  withdraw  an   appropriations   rider   which   would
have  had  the   effect   of  taking   the   U.S.  out   of  the   United
Nations  if  Communist  China  were  admitted.  Syngman  Rhee
counts  on  the   support   of. the   same  forces  in  his  intran-
sigeance.  The  significant  point  in  Rhee's  attitude  is  that  he
nowhere  calls  for  peaceful  unification  of  Korea  by  elections
under  UN  auspices;  now,  as  in  August   1950  when  a  truce
seemed   imminent   and  such  elections   were  being   seriously
discussed,  he  fears  an  unfavorable  verdict  at  the  polls.
It  is  a  mistake  to  believe  that  Eisenhower  has to  con-
tend  only  with  a  few  wild  men  and  reactionaries.  A  peace-
fully  unified.  Korea  would  be  the  natural  cornerstone  of  an
over-all  settlerijent   in  the  Far  East,  but   such  a   settlement
would  require,  the  recognition  of  Communist  China  and  its
admission   to  the  UN.  But  even  in  the  labor  movement  this
would  command  little  support.  John  L.  Lewis  last  week  de-
clared   that  admission  of   Communist   China  would  be   the
death  of  the  UN.  George  Meany of  the  AFL  warned  against
Soviet  peace  moves  as  leading  toward  "a  new  Munich."  A
joint  statement  by  the  CIO,  AFL  and  UMW  to  the  forth-
coming  Stockholm  conference  echoes  all  the  rightist   shibbo-
leths  about  "appeasement"   and  "liberation".   The   leadership
of   American  labor   is  close  in   spirit   to   that  wing  of   the
Republican  party  for  which Knowland  spoke  last  week  when
he  called  for  the  "calculated  risk"  of  war  with  Russia  if  the
Korean  truce  talks   fail.
Where  then  can  forces  be  mobilized  to  support  the  drive
for  peace  in  Korea  and  to  block  a  new  intervention if  Rhee
sets  the  war  going  again?  Eisenhower  himself  is  the   focal
point   of   a  big   business  group   which  wants  peace.   Their
voice  was  heard  in  the  Senate  on  June  3  when  Senator  Ed-
ward  Martin,  Republican,  of  Pennsylvania,  said  he  had  al-
ways  been  a  strong  supporter   of  military  preparedness  but
that  he  had  become  convinced  that  under  present   conditions
"it  is  almost  impossible  to  provide  sufficient  money  to  assure
an   adequate   defense",   and  that   "if   the   present   armament
race  continues  all  the  nations  of  the  world  will  go  bankrupt."
Senator   Martin  spoke' in   support   of  a   disarmament
resolution  introduced  that  day  by  another  Republican  busi-
ness   man,   Senator   Flanders,   of   Vermont.  This   resolution,
co-sponsored   by  an   impressive   list   of   Senators   from   both
sides  of  the  aisle,  would  instruct  the  President  to  "develop  a
plan  for  the  transfer  of  resources  and  manpower  now  being
used  for  arms  to  constructive  ends  at  home  and  abroad."  This
echoes   the   suggestion   put   forward  by   Eisenhower  in   his,
speech   to  the  American   Society  of  Newspaper   Editors.  A
recent  Gallup  poll  shows  65  percent  in   favor   of  diverting
defense   funds   to  world  reconstruction.  This  was  essentially
FDR's  idea  and Wallace's,  as it  was later  McMahon's. Despite
the  ugly  clamor  of  hate  in  the  press,  it  always  seems  to strike
a   favorable   response.   This   popular   response   is   most   en-
couraging   for  what  it   tells  us  about  the  innate  kindliness
and  good   sense  of  most  of  our  fellow  Americans.
I  suggest   that  this  resolution  and  the   President's   efforts
for  peace  in  Korea  provide  points  around  which  the  peace
forces   in   this   country   may   again   rally   popular    support.
Truman-Acheson  "total  diplomacy"  sought  to  make   "peace"
a  subversive  word  and  succeeded  in  reducing  peace  agitation
to  negligible  proportions.  Here  is  a  chance  to  break  out  of
the  repressive  strangle,  to  raise  the  peace  issue  in  a  context
in  which  people  will  not  be  afraid  to  discuss   it.  I   suggest
that  "Back  Ike  for  Peace"  is  a  slogan   hard  to  beat.  I  also
suggest  that  unless  in  every  town  and  city  of  this  country
people  begin  to  talk  of  peace  and  call  for  peace,  the  bright
hope  dawning over  Panmunjom  may yet  be  suddenly  eclipsed
in  a  new  and  more  terrible  and  wider  war.
8  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   June  13,  19)3
Trial  by  Press  and  Pillory
Frank  Coe  and The  Austrian  Money  Plot
There  is  much  the  newspapers  failed
to  report  about  the  interrogation  by  the
McCarthy  committee last  week  of  Frank
Coe,  former secretary  of the  International
Monetary  Fund.
The   most  Striking  omission  was  Mc-
Carthy's   Freudian   "lapse   of   memory".
The  Senator  asked  Coe,  "In   1950  when
I  named  you before  the  Tydings  commit-
tee  and  that  committee  found  you simon
pure,  were  you  at  that  time  engaged  in
espionage?"  Coe declined  to  answer.
The  proceedings   were  being  televised
and the effect  on the unwary listener  must
have  been'  how-right-McCarthy-was-all-
the-time.  But  the  record  shows  that  Mc-
Carthy  never  named  Coe  in  his   famous
State   Department   charges    before   the
Tydings  committee  and  Coe  is  nowhere
mentioned  in  its  report.
Coe  and  Bentley
Coe's  ruin  was  a  mention by  Elizabeth
Bentley.  On  July  31,  1948,  she  told  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Commit-
tee  that  as  a  Soviet   agent  she  had  ob-
tained  information  from  a  group  in  the
Treasury. When  she was  concluding,  the
committee's    Counsel,   Robert    Stripling,
asked  her  "whether  or  not  there  is  any-
one  else  in  this  group  that  you  have  not
named":
Miss  BENTLEY.  Frank  Coe. ...
Mr.   STRIPLING.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Communist  party,  according  to  your
information ?
' Miss  BENTLEY. According to  my under-
standing,  yes.
Coe's  Denial
Two   weeks  later   Coe  took  the  stand
before  the  committee  and  swore  that  he
was  not a  member of  any  espionage  ring,
that  he  never  had  been a  member of  any
such  group,  that  he  had  never  been  a
member  of  the  Communist party  or  fol-
lowed   its   line,  and  that  he   had  never
given  official   information  "to  any  unau-
thorized  person."
Three  years later Miss Bentley was be-
fore  the  McCarran committee  in  the  In-
stitute   of   Pacific   Relations  inquiry  and
Robert   Morris,   the   committee  counsel,
asked  her  "do you  know  Frank  Coe ?"
"Not   personally,"  was  Miss   Bentley's
answer.  "He,   again,  was  a  member  of
the   Silvermaster  group,  worked   in  the
Treasury   Department.   I   collected   his
Communist  party  dues  from   the  Silver-
master  group,  and  it  was  my  understand-
ing  from  the  Silvermasters,  again,   that
he  had  been  a  member  of  the  party  for
quite  some  time."
These   "understandings"   were   vague.
But  Coe  may  have  feared  that  with  the
changing    atmosphere    they    might    be
enough  for  a  perjury  conviction.  When
the   McCarran  committee  put   the   same
1948  questions to  him  in  December,  1952,
Coe  changed  his  tactics  and  pleaded  the
Fifth  amendment,  as  he  did  last   Friday.
He  thereby  lost  his  job  as  secretary  of
the  Fund.
McCarthy's  Secret  Mission
Mundt was on the  House Un-American
Activities  Committee  when  it  heard  the
Bentley   testimony   in    1948   and   Coe's
denials.  He  was  acting  chairman  of  the
McCarthy  committee at  the  May 29  hear-
ing  in  McCarthy's   absence.
After   the   May  29  session  was  over,
committee  aides  leaked   to  the  press  a
sensational  story,   "Coe   Hunted,   Linked
to Red Finance  Plot". The  subcommittee's
chairman,  McCarthy,  was  in  Mexico  on
what  he said was a  secret mission. So was
Coe.  Was  McCarthy's  "mission!.'  to-have
been  the dramatic arrest of Coe as a  fugi-
tive  from  justice?
If  the  Senator  was  planning  a  grand-
stand  play  in  Mexico,  Coe  robbed  him
of a headline triumph. According  to  Coe's
own  statement, he  read  a  brief  account of
the   charges  against  him  in  a  Mexican
newspaper  next   morning,  May  30,  and
immediately  bought  a  ticket  to  return  to
the  United  States.  En  route  to  Washing-
ton,  he  telephoned  his   attorney   to   ar-
range  for a hearing before the  committee,
which  the latter  did on. June t.
The  hearing,  on  Friday  June  5,  Just
one  week  after  that  closed  session,  illus-
trated  how  delusive  is  the  idea  that  an
accused" person  has  any  hope  of  a  fair
chance  to  state  his  own  side  of  the  case
before   these   inquisitorial   committees. -
Calumny  by  "Leak"
Damaging  charges  were  given  out  to-
all  the newspapers and wire services  after
the   closed   session   of   May   29  without
' waiting  to   get   Coe's  side  of   the  story.
The  story  pictured Coe  as  a  fugitive and
accused  him  of  using  his  power  as  sec-
retary  of  the  Fund  to  try  and  block  an
Austrian  currency  devaluation  favorable
to  the  U.   S.  and  opposed  by  the  Soviet
Union.
Coe  came  rushing  back  from   Mexico
and  was heard  by the committee  in execu-
'  tive  session  on  Wednesday,  June  3.  But
Coe  was  not  allowed  to  see  a  transcript
of  the  May  29  hearing  until  after   he  had
testified  on  June  3.  This  means  that  he
had  to  testify  without  knowing  fully  the
allegations  against  him  or  their   source.
These  committee  hearings   are  exercises
in  entrapment,  and  this  is  typical  of  their
procedure.
Stock  Questions
Coe  came  to  the  hearing  with  a  pre-
pared  statement.  The  devaluation  charges
warranted   investigation.   They  involved
hot   only  Coe's   official   conduct   but   the
honor  and  reputation  of  an  international
agency.   But   the   questions  which   con-
sumed   most   of   the   session   dealt   with
the  old  Bentley  charges,  the  inference  to
be drawn  from  pleading the  Fifth amend-
ment,  and  whether  Coe  could  call himself
a  good American (this  is Senator  Syming-
ton's,  stock  question)   and  still  decline  to
say  if  he  had  ever  been  a  Communist.
Not  until  the  session  was  almost  over
did  the  committee  get  around  to  asking
him   anything   about   the   Austrian   cur-
rency  story.  Coe  then  said  it  might  save
time  and  answer  many  questions  in  ad-
vance   if   he  were   allowed   to   read   his
statement.
"You   yourself  said,"  Coe  pointed  out
to  Senator   Mundt,  the  acting  chairman,
"that  at   some  proper   point  you  would
allow  me  to  read  a  statement  in  my own
defense."
Mundt  said  that  under  Senate  rules  a
statement  had  to be submitted to the com-
mittee 24  hours  in  advance.  Mundt  said
it  would  be  printed   in- the  record.  This
is  one  of  the  familiar  committee  devices
for  effectively  preventing  a  witness  from
telling  his  side of a story. The  record may
not  be  available  for  weeks  and  by  then
the, story  has  been  buried  in  new  sensa-
tions.
Defense  Ignored
The witness may give out the statement
to  the  press,  as  Coe did, but usually little
attention   is   paid   the   statement,   other
than  to  note  briefly  that  in  it  the  accused
denied  the  charges  against  him.
The   reason   for   keeping   the   witness
from  reading  his  statement  was  obvious
to  those  who  had  a  chance  to  read  it.
There  were  points  in  it  which-  explode
the   whoFe   Austrian  currency  sensation.
Coe said  that  though  the  press  was  in-
formed   that  the   subcommittee  had  evi-
dence  of  a  message  in  which  he  tried  to
block   Austrian   devaluation,   "I   cannot
find in the transcript that either Mr. King
or  Mr.  Kerekes,  the  two  witnesses   in-
volved,  said  that  I  sent  such  as  message.
The  only  places  in  the  transcript  where
such  a   statement  appears  are   in  ques-
tions  and  comments of  Mr.  Cohn, counsel
of   the  subcommittee."
Most  newspaper   readers  knew  from  a
statement   issued  by  H.   Merle  Cochran,
acting  managing  director  of  the  Interna-
tional  Monetary  Fund,  that  Coe  was  on
an  official  mission  in  the  Middle  East  at
the  time  of  the  Austrian    negotiations.
(Continued  on  Page  Three)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June   13,   1953
/.  F. Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor and Publisher, L F. STONE
Published  weekly  except the  last two weeks
of  August  at  Room  205,  301  E.  Capitol
St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C   Subscrip-
tion  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and Continental
Europe, $10  by  1st class mail,  $15  by  air;
for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by fust class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail. Single
copy,  IS cents. Tel.: LI 4-7087. Entered as
Second   Class   mail   matter,  Post   Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
June  13,   1953
5      VoL  I,  No.   21
COMMENT
Journalistic  Distinction
Now that the Supreme Court has unani-
mously  overruled the  U. S.  Circuit Court
of  Appeals  for  the  District  of  Columbia
(see  "Jim  Crow  in  the  Capital"  in  our
issue of January 31) and held that  Negroes
must   be   served   in  Washington    eating
places,  a  new  distinction  has  been  con-
ferred  upon  the  National  Press  Club.  It
will  be  one  of  the  last  Jim  Crow  eating
places  left  in  the  capital.  Walter   White
was  served  there  once  by  accident.  Wil-
liam  H.  Hastie,  first  Negro  to  sit  on  the
U. S.  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals,  was  re-
fused  service when taken there  as a  guest.
As a private  club,  the  National  Press can
go  on  insisting that  it  has  a  right  to  be
lily-white.
Truman  Era  Law
A  Truman  majority  on  the  U. S.  Su-
preme  Court has just  approved a  particu-
larly  noxious  Truman  era  innovation  in
American  law. To convict a  man without
disclosing  the  identity  of  his  accuser  or
even  the  exact  details  of  the  accusation
is  an  ancient  evil.  It  gained  a  foothold
here  whh  the  Truman  loyalty  order  of
1947.  This  permitted the  FBI  to withhold
from-   an   accused   government  employe
(and  even  from  his  judges)  the  source
and  precise nature  of  an  accusation when
such   disclosure   in   the   FBI's   opinion
might  "endanger  its  sources  of  informa-
tion."  Thus  the  convenience of  the  secret
police  was held superior to a  man's  right
fully  to  defend  his  reputation.
Austrian  Money  Plot
(Continued  from  Page  Two)
But  in  his  own  statement,  Coe  added
that  he wrote Cochran  and  asked whether
the   records   of   the   Fund   showed  that
any  communication had  been  sent  signed
"Coe"   or  "Secretary"  asking  for   post-
ponement  of  the  Austrian  devaluation.
"From  Mr.  Cochran's  oral  reply,"  Coe
said  in  his  prepared   statement,   "it  ap-
pears  that  not  only  was  no  such  message
ever  sent  by  myself  but  also  that  no  one
The  spread  of  loyalty  procedures  into
other fields has  spread  this  fungoid  juris-
prudence  with  it.   Chief   Justice   Vinson
and  the  Truman majority  have now  per-
mitted  its  extension  into  the  trial  of  con-
scientious  objectors  under  the  draft  law.
Those  febrile  concepts  of  emergency  and
security  which  served  to  excuse  the  ero-
sion  of  ancient  liberties  and  safeguards
under  Truman  echo  in  the  reasoning  of
his judges.
Chief  Justice  Vinson  ruled,  "It   is  al-
ways     difficult     to     devise     procedures
which   will   be   adequate  to   do  justice
in  cases  where  the  sincerity  of  another's
religious  convictions  is  the  ultimate fac-
tual  issue.  It  is  especially  difficult  when
these  procedures must  be  geared  to  meet
the  imperative needs  of  mobilization  and
national  vigilance.  .  .  .  Under  the cir-
cumstances",  the court  could not hold  that
fundamental   rights   had   been   (unduly)
violated  by the  use  of  secret  informer  tes-
timony.    The    excuse    of    vigilance   is
as   ancient   as   the   evil.   "The   enemy
is  not  yet  so near  the  gates,"  Mr.  Justice
Frankfurter  commented dryly  in  dissent-
ing  for  himself  and  Mr.  Justices  Black
and  Douglas,  "that  we  should  allow  re-
spect  for  the  traditions  of fairness, which
has  hitherto  prevailed  in  this  country,  to
be overborne by military exigencies."
Mr.  Justice  Douglas  added  a   separate
paragraph   dissent   for   himself  and   Mr.
Justice  Black  which  we  quote  in  full.
"The   use  of  statements  by  informers,
who  need  not  confront  the  person  under
investigation  or  accusation,"  Mr.  Justice
Douglas  said,  "has  such an  infamous  his-
tory  that  it  should  be  rooted  out   from
our  procedure.  A  hearing at  which  these
faceless    people  are   allowed  to   present
their whispered rumors and yet escape the
test  and  torture  of  cross-examination  is
not  a  hearing   in  the   Anglo-American
sense.  We  should  be done with  the  prac-
tice—whether the life  of a man is at  stake,
or  his  reputation,  or  any  matter  touching
upon  his  status  or  his  rights.
"If  FBI  reports are  disclosed  in admin-
istrative   or   judicial   proceedings,"   Mr.
Justice Douglas continued, "it  may be that
valuable underground sources will dry  up.
But that  is  not  the  choice.  If  the  aim  is
to  protect  the  underground  of  informers,
in   my   office   in  the   Fund   sent   such  a
message,  and  further,  that  nobody  at  all
in  the  Fund  ever  sent  such  a  message."
Coe  denied  that  he  was  in  any  sense
a  fugitive.  He  said  he  went  to  Mexico
in  search  of  employment  and  that  at  the
time  he  left  Washington  "I  was  not  un-
der  subpoena by  any  other  committee of
the  Congress,  by any existing  grand jury,
or  by  any  other  tribunal."
But  little  if  any  of  this  got  through  to
the  newspaper  reader. The  statement  will
not  be  available  until  the  full  record  is
printed,  and  then  it  may  be  buried  in  an
the  FBI  report  need  not  be  used.  If  it  is
used,   then   fairness   requires   that   the
names  of the  accusers  be disclosed.  With-
out  the  identity  of  the  informer  the  per-
son  investigated  or  accused  stands  help-
less.  The  prejudices,  the  credibility,  the
passions,  the  perjury  of  the  informer  are
never  known.  If  they  were  exposed,  the
whole  charge   might  wither   under   the
cross-examination."
Unfortunately   this  is  the  dissent,  not
the  holding.  Whatever   the  tradition   of
Anglo-American  law,  American  law  as
now  handed  down  by  the  Truman  judges
permits  the  use  of  anonymous informants
in  the  interests   of  "national   vigilance".
This  was  the  same  reasoning  used  in  the
degenerate  days  Tacitus  describes  when
Imperial  Rome honored  its  informers  and
strangled  those  suspected of  "subversion",
then  as  now  often  a  synonym  for  inde-
pendence  of  mind.
Dangerous  Fellow
While  we  are   on  the  subject,   and  if
J.  Edgar  Hoover  will  keep our  identity a
secret,  we  are  prepared  to  inform  him
that  the FBI  nurtures  a  subversive  in  its
bosom.
The  Washington  Post's  columnist  on
government employment, Jerry Kluttz,  re-
ported  recently that  FBI  agents  last  year
voluntarily   worked   2,849,016   hours  of
(unpaid,  of  course)   overtime.
An  anonymous  letter  signed  "Govern-
ment  Worker"   in  last  Tuesday's   Wash-
ington Post  declared  this overtime  "about
as voluntary as are  the votes of the  masses
in  totalitarian  countries."
"If  the  FBI  agent's  work  day  must  be
9,  10  or  IF hours,"  the  letter  continued
indignantly,  "the  democratic  way and  the
dignified  way,  would  be  to  establish  the
length  of  the  longer  work-day  and  raise
salaries   accordingly."
The  letter  writer  says  that  this  over-
time  practice  is  "far   too  criminal   and
Communist-like"  to  be  "allowed  to  con-
tinue  in this  democracy,"  but  Mr.  Hoover
will   not   be   fooled   by   such   patriotic
phrases.
That  man's  a  menace.  First  thing  you
know radicals under  interrogation  by  FBI
men  will  be  asking  them,  "Brother,  are
you  getting  overtime for  this?" and  pass-
ing  out  union  membership  applications.
appendix  since  it  was  not  actually  read
at the hearing. The committee, having had
the  benefit  of  two  executive  sessions,  was
forewarned   that   it  would  be  better   to
change  the  subject.
There  will  probably  be  new  sensations
before  this issue of  the  Weekly  comes off
the  press,  and  the  Austrian  charges  will
be  left  to  dissipate  themselves  in  thin  air
like  another   McCarthy   stinkbomb.   The
Coe affair  again  shows  how  helpless  are
the. reputations   of  men  and  institutions
when left  to this  process of trial  by public
pillory,  Senatorial  malice  and  the  press.
8  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   June  13,  1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
We  Set  the  Stage  for  Doomsday—and  Lower  Taxes
I  honestly  forget  whether  it  is the  eleventh  bomb  or the
seventeenth   we've   now  set  off  this  spring   in   Nevada.   Or
perhaps, counting the  ones  previously  set off out  in the  islands,
it  is  the  seventeenth  in  all.  The  remarkable  thing  is  that  it
doesn't  seem  much  to  matter  lately;  the  bigger  they  come  the
less  noise  they  make  in  the  world.
The   publicity  .comes  harder   all  of  the  time:  If   the   last
bomb  had  not  had  to  be postponed  on  account  of  the  weather,
it probably  would  not have been  noticed  east  of the  Mississippi,
what  with   everybody   sighing   in  his  democratic   beer   over
Elizabeth  our  undoubted  Queen.
The  event  well  may  have  implications  reasonable  men  can
accept  without  indigestible   distress.  It  could  be,  that  is,  that
the  apparently  general  falling  off  of  interest  in  the  fireworks
at  Frenchman   Flats   is  a  sign   not  just  of  boredom,  nor  of
resignation,  but  of  adjustment.
Boredom  cannot  be  ruled  out  altogether,  since  after  awhile
one  cloud  that  looks, like  a  mushroom  does  come  to  look  very
like  another  cloud   that   looks   like  a  mushroom.   Nor   need
we  scout  the  possibility  that  many or  most  of  us  simply  have
made  up  our  minds,  as  have  the  committee   of  experts   set
up  under  Mr.  Kelly  by  former  Defense  Secretary  Lovett,  that
there  is  nothing  to  be  done  about  the  A-bomb  save the  arms
race  eternal,  that  the  vulnerability  of  all  nations  leaves  no
option   to   any  save  to  strive   forever  to  make  itself   more
feared  than  it  is  afraid.
It  is  the  third  way  of  looking  at  it,  however,  which  dis-
covers  to  us  a  more  bearable  prospect.  For  if  our  tendency
from   day  to  day  to  take  atomic  explosions   as  a  matter  of
course  really  means''that  we  are  becoming  used  to  the  idea
of  living henceforth under  the  possibility  of  an  all-destroying
atomic  doo'rniday,  our  situation  is  not  hopeless.  Though   we
may  not  escape  fear,  and  though  we must  continue yet  awhile
to  find  billions  of  dollars   (and  rubles)   for  the  arms  race,
an  end  to  our  effort  can  be  envisioned.  When  we  shall  have
set  the  stage  for  the  doomsday,  we  shall  be  able  to  return our
attention   to  the  primary  problems  of  existence.
Obviously  it  would  be  ridiculous  for  mankind  to   furnish
itself  with  more  than  a  single  means  of  oblitering mankind.
One  sure  bomb  based  either  on  fission  or  fusion  will  be suf-
ficient.  How  long  it  will  be  before  we  possess  the  magisterial
weapon  cannot  be  predicted  to  the  day  or  the  year,  but  our
invention   and  production   is   advancing  with  great   strides.
The   last   ruddy  mushroom   we   have  thumped   up   on   the
Nevada  flats  was  ten   times  the   size  of  the  first  one;   the
flash  of  it,  it  is  said, was  visible  in  Los Angeles,  five hundred
miles  away.
Meanwhile,  the  people  on  the  other  side  of  the  world
are  busy,  too.  Our  new  intelligence  reports   (adjusted  to  the
Republican  administration's  goal  of  "maximum  strength  with
minimum  strain"  intimate  that  the  other   people  will  have
enough  bombs  to  wage  war  in  1956.  It  could  be  that  by then
both  sides  will  have  enough  bombs  to  assure  beyond  a  doubt
that  if either  side  moves  to  wipe  out  the  other,  the  retaliation
will  be  automatic,  inevitable  and  equal.  In  that  case  we  shall
have   a  precise   balance  of  power,   the   power   of   complete
destruction,  and  with  it  about  as  much  security  all  around
as  anybody  will  need.
War  will have  been  eliminated  not  by renunciation nor  by
disarmament;   these  preventives   having   required   an  act  of
intelligence  the  race  is  not  yet  up  to;  but  by  human   effort
nevertheless  in  building  up  a  situation  of  mutualand  con-
sumate   fear.  We   shall  have  with   us  the   bomb   that   is  as
surely  suicidal  as  it   is  surely  murderous,   and  we  shall  be,
no   doubt,   quite   as  capable   of   adapting   ourselves   to   this
new  feature  of  our  environment  as  we  have been  of  adapting
ourselves   to   other   terrors   bearing   upon   the   fact   of   our
mortality.
We  shall  not  then  be  able  to  boast  greatly of  our  accom-
plishment,  but  we  shall  have  proved  that  humanity  has  the
hardihood  to  survive  the  A-bomb—just  as  the  housefly  and
the  potato bug  have  had  the  hardihood  to  survive  DDT.   And
with  the  ultimate  bomb  set  up  and  .triggered,  we  can  cease
our  labors  in  that  direction,  save  for  maintenance.  The  arms
race  will  be  over.   By  billions  of  dollars  and  rubles  our   tax
rate  at  last  can  be  cut.
7. F. Stone's  Weekly
                                                             6
-
13
-
63
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St.,  S.E.,   Washington i,  D.  C.
Please .enter the  following  subscription. $5  for  1 year  is
enclosed.  (See  page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street
City   ..
State  .
..Zon
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St.,    S.E.,
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED