I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953aug08.pdf

============================================================

Rev.  Jack  Me  Michael and  The  Witch Hunters, See Page 2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I  NUMBER  29AUGUST  8,   1953s       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  U.S.  Prepares  to  Go  It  Alone With  Rhee
On  the  eve  of  the  special  session  of  the  UN   General
Assembly,  the  Elsenhower  Administration  is  preparing  to  go
it  alone.  During  the  hearings  before  the  Senate  Foreign  Re-
latons  Committee  on  the  Mutual  Security  Act,  there  was  a
little  noticed  exchange  between  Senator  Knowland  and  Secre-
tary  Dulles.  "If  our  so-called  allies  don't  realize  the  facts  of
life,"  the  Senate's acting majority  leader  said,  "why it  becomes
a  question  in  my  mind  as  to  how  long  we  tie  the  hands  of
this  government   and   our  foreign  policy."   Secretary  Dulles
said,   "Those   observations   are   very   pertinent."   They   were
followed   by  a  proposal   which  foreshadows   the  policy  now
being   followed.
The  Mutual  Security  Act  provided  that  funds  were  to  be
made  available  to   the  United  Nations   Korean   Reconstruc-
tion  Agency.  Knowland  proposed  to  add  "or  for  such  other
Korean  rehabilitation  aid  as  the  President   may  determine."
"I  could  foresee  a  situation,"  he  said,  "where  the  United  Na-
tions  in  its  General  Assembly  or  Security  Council  might  vote
to  divide  Korea  at  the  38th  parallel.  I  don't  believe  any  such
decision  would  be  acceptable  to  the  Republic  of  Korea.  They
might,   quite   properly,   both   resent   and   not   welcome   the
United  Nations  agency  there  under  those  circumstances."
Were  relief  and  reconstruction  funds  in  the  hands  of  a
United  Nations   agency,  the  organization  would  have  lever-
age  with  which  to  make  Rhee  submit  to  its  decisions.  This
is  what  Knowland  wanted  to  avoid.  "I  would  not  want  the
President   to   be   foreclosed,   if   that   situation  did   develop,"
Knowland   continued,  "for  these   rehabilitation   funds   to  be
made  available to  the  Republic  of  Korea  by  either  the  United
States  doing  it   itself,  or  doing   it  in  conjunction  with   the
Korean  government."
The   special  . $200,000,000   Korean    relief    appropriation
passed  by  the   Senate  last  week  was  framed   to  accord  with
Knowland's   views.  The   fund   was  not   made   avaikble   to
UNKRA  but  to  "such   officers  or  agencies"   as  the   President
may   designate.   Knowland   said   that   "certainly  during   the
period  of  cease-fire, before  we  learn  whether  ultimately  there
will  be  a  peace,  it  will  be  handled  by  the  United  States  au-
thorities  as  distinguished   from   UNKRA."  He  also  assumed
it  would  be  handled  "in  cooperation   with  the  President  of
South   Korea."   Ferguson    (R.   Mich.)    said   he   hoped   the
Army would handle the  reconstruction  job. "I believe",  he went
on,  "we  should  be  greatly  disappointed   if  this  fund  were  to
be  administered  by others, such  as the  United  Nations."
This  discussion  took  place  on  the  floor  of  the  Senate
the  afternoon  of  the  same  day  that  the  New   York   Times
published   James   Reston's    revealing   interview   with   Rhee
in  Seoul.  In  this  Rhee  made  it  clear  that  the  only  solution
he  would  accept  was  "that  all  Korea  should  be  governed  by
his  regime"  and  insisted  that  the  U.  S.  had  promised   "im-
mediate  and   automatic  action"   against   the   Communists   if
they  failed  within  the  specified  90  days  to  accept  these  terms.
Though   the   New   York   Times   next   morning    headlined,
"Senators  Shocked  by  Rhee  War   Stand",  not  a  single  com-
ment  was  obtained   from  a  Senator   willing  to  let  his  name
be  used,  not  a  single  protest  was made  on  the  floor.  No  one
rose  to  oppose   the  point  of  view  taken  by  Knowland  and
Ferguson,   and   the   aid  bill  drafted   to  give   Rhee   freedom
from  UN  interference  passed  unanimously.
Rhee's  arrogant  assumption  that  he  could  run  the  foreign
policy  of  the  United  States  was  not  publicly  challenged.   His
supporters   are   a  minority   but   vocal;   the   majority   which
dislikes  him  is  scared  stiff   lest  criticism  of  Rhee  be  used  to
make  them  appear  pro-Communist.  In  this  atmosphere  Dulles
is  proceeding   with  his  preparations,  and  these  are  prepara-
tions  to  ensure  the  failure,  not  the  success,  of  the  forthcom-
ing  political  conference  on  Korea.  There  is  no  point  in  hold-
ing  a  conference  if  a  major   participant   makes  it   clear   in
advance  that  it  will  not  negotiate  any  item  on  the  agenda.
There   are   three   items  and  Dulles  is  rapidly  shutting   the
door  on  discussion  of  all  three.
One  item on  the  agenda calls for withdrawal of all foreign
troops  from  the  peninsula,  and  he has come  up  with a  plan—
cute  is  the  only  word  for  it—for   keeping  American  troops
in  Korea  "to  assist  in  rebuilding  the  devastated  land."  Another
item  calls  for  free  elections   and  the  third  is  m  "etc."  The
latter   was  a  euphemism  to  spare   American  feelings   while
covering   the   crucial   question   of  Red   Chinese    recognition,
without   which  there   can  be  no  stability  in   the   Far   East.
Dulles  shut  the  door  firmly  on  that  at  press  conference, with-
out waiting to consult  America's Western  allies.
The  remaining  item   is  unification  by  free  elections.  But
here  Rhee  still  insists  that  the  only  elections  he  will   accept
are  elections  in  North   Korea  to  fill  the  23  seats  left  vacant
for   it  when  the  South  Korean  Republic  was  originally  set
up.  On  this  the  Administration has  as yet  made  no  firm  com-
mitment—at  least  not  publicly—but  the  American   military
in  Tokyo  are  already  acting  as  if  it  would  be  unthinkable  to
oppose   Rhee  on  this.  Nor   is  this  Rhee's   position   only.  In
the  summer  of  1950  when  peace  seemed  near  and  the  hold-
ing  of  free  elections  began  to  be  discussed  at  Lake  Success,
Warren  Austin  on  August  17,  1950  revealed  that  the  U.  S.
wanted  the   elections   held  on  the  basis   that   the   Republic
of  Korea's  jurisdiction  would  be  extended  over  North  Korea
automatically.  (See the  chapter,  Free  Elections?  in  my  Hidden
History   of  the  Korean  War).  It  will  be  a  miracle  if  Rhee
does  not  get  his  chance  to  start  up  the  war  again.  But,  then,
the  truce  was something  of  a  miracle,  too.
1   1  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  August  8, 1953
Extending The Witch  Hunt  to The Church
Like die  Queen  in  Alice,  the  House  Committee  on Un-
American  Activities   often  beheads  the  victim  first  and  tries
him  afterward.  In  1951,  in  a  pamphlet  on  Communism  and
religion  the  Committee  called  the  Methodist   Federation  for
Social Action "a tool  of the Communist party." A year later,  the
Committee  devoted  a  full  report  to  the  Methodist  Federation,
but  avoided   conclusions.   The  Committee  said  only  that  the
record  "as presented  herein  may be of  some  aid  to  those  who
are interested in  determining  whether  the  Federation  has been
favorable   to,  or   supported,   Communistic   objectives."   This
year  for  the  first  time  the  Committee  has  gotten   around  to
questioning a Federation official,  the  Rev. Jack  R. Me Michael,
until recently  its executive secretary.  Thus the Committee pub-
lished  its  verdict  of  guilty  in  1951,  released  an  interim  report
in  1952  and  began  to  hold  hearings  in   1953.  Lewis  Carroll
would  have been  delighted  with  the  sequence.
The   Committee's  helter-skelter   methods   of   investigation
were displayed  in  last  year's report, which put  together  a mis-
cellaneous  batch  of  past  newspaper  and  magazine  articles  on
the  Federation  (all  but  two of  them  hostile), with  no  attempt
at  evaluation,  logical  order  or  summary. The  result  is weirdly
anachronistic.  The   Federation   is  linked   guilt-by-association
style  to  the  anarchist,  Roger  Baldwin;  to  Professors  Charles  A.
Beard  and  George  S. Counts  who  are  accused  of  "bootlegging
Marxism'' into the public  schools, and to Henry  Ford, "who has
made  millions but  of  his Communist  commercial  connections."
One  of  the  more  recent  clippings,  from  the  Chicago  Tribune
of  1931,  reports  a  Federation  meeting  at  Evanston,  Illinois,
where  the  speakers   denounced   everything—including  Com-
munism—but  notes  wistfully,  "No  one  spoke  a  good  word
for  capitalism." Unfortunately  this is in the Christian  tradition.
There  is litde  in  the  Gospel  which  can  tactfully  be  inscribed
over back entrances.
From  the  Committee's  point  of  view, Me  Michael  last
week  made an  unsatisfactory witness.  The  Committee  likes  the
victim to lie quiet, to  answer  "yes"  or "no" to  loaded  questions
and  to  identify   without   further  remark  its  favorite   "docu-
ments'*—photostats  from  the  Daily   Worker,  which   its  re-
searchers  study as theologians  once did  Holy Writ, poring  over
every  jot  and  tittle.  The  Committee  was  prepared  to  prove
that the Rev. Me Michael during the past two decades had been
an  indefatigable   joiner  and  sponsor  of  endless  causes  left  of
center, and  that  these  sundry  causes  had  been  "cited"  as sub-
versive. Me Michael  insisted  on  reminding the Committee  that
dozens  of  respectable  Americans  supported   such  causes,  that
many of  them  were not  "cited" until years later,  and that  "cita-
tion"  is  not  as  impressive  as  it  sounds  when  one  remembers
that  the  Attorney   General  acts  without  notice,  hearing,  or
argument.
Me Miriyipl—Georgia born—affects  the  bucolic manner of a
back country  preacher,  and  has  a  disconcerting habit of saying
"amen,  brother"  to   Committee    members.   Tall,   handsome,
gangling,  with  balding  sandy  hair,  he  looks  a  good  deal  like
Lindbergh  and  exhibits  filibustering  gifts  which  would  have
made  him  a  worthy  colleague  of  Tom  Connally. There  were
times  when  he,  rather  than  the  benevolent  looking  Velde,
seemed  to  be  running  the  show.  The  heavy  jowled  counsel,
Robert  Kunzig, strove vainly  against McMichael's irrepressible
flow of  argument. The  Rev.  McMichael  insisted  on  discussing
"documents"  and  "citations"  his  own  way. "I'm  no  lawyer,"  he
said  at  one point,  "but  I  didn't  get  my eye-teeth  yesterday."
Amid  the  Daily  Worker  photostats  were  some  glimpses of
how  spy-ridden  America  has  become.  A  confidential  New
York  City  police  report  was  read  into  the  record  showing
that  Me Michael had spoken  at  an  official  gathering in  1941 on
the  eighth  anniversary of  the  resumption  of  diplomatic  rela-
tions   between   the   U.S.   and   the   U.S.S.R.  Me  Michael  was
alleged  to have praised  the  Soviet  Union  for  realizing  in  prac-
tice  Christian ideals  of  racial equality.
The  Committee  has  a  long  standing  reluctance  to let
anything  into  the  record  which  might  reflect  favorably  on  a
witness.  It  even  fought hard to  keep  Me  Michael from  getting
into  the  record  one  of  its  own  past  reports,  that  of  January
3,  1940,  which  listed   11  organizations  as  Communist  fronts
but  did  not  include  among  them  the  American  Youth  Con-
gress  of  which  Me  Michael  was  then  national  chairman. Me
Michael  also  tried  hard  to  show  what  the  files  of  both  the
New  York  Times  and  the Daily  Worker confirm, that after  the
Nazi  attack  on  Russia  he  won  a  majority  of  the  American
Youth  Congress  to  support  a  resolution  opposing  American
military  intervention  in  the  European  war. The  Young  Com-
munist  League  was for  all-out  aid  including  a  new  A.E.F.  but
abstained  from  voting. This was Me Michael's  prize  exhibit  in
support  of  his  denial  that  he  had  ever  been  a Communist  or  a
member  of  the  Young  Communist  League.
The  stage  is  set  for  a  test  by  perjury  prosecution.  Two  ex-
Communists  employed  by  the  government  as  informers  and
witnesses  identified  Me  Michael  in  secret  session  as  a Com-
munist.  Manning  Johnson,  who  left  the  party  in   1939,   said
he  knew Me  Michael  as  a  member  of  the  National  Commit-
tee  of  the  Young  Communist  League.  Leonard  Patterson  said
he  was  with  Me  Michael  in  the  New  York  district  of  the
YCL  in  1934  until  Patterson  left  in  1935.
The  dates  may  prove crucial.  Me  Michael  entered Emory
University  outside  Atlanta  in   1934  and  graduated  in   1937.
He  was in  China  in  1938  on  a  YMCA  student  exchange  fel-
lowship  and  did  not  come  to  New  York  until   1939  when
he  entered  Union   Theological  Seminary.  When  confronted
with   Johnson,   a  burly  man   with   wary  eyes,   Me  Michael
denied   ever  having  known  him.  Patterson   did   not  appear
but  the  Committee  produced  two  other  witnesses,  Mr.  and
Mrs.  John  J.  Edmiston,  who  said  they  were  undercover  FBI
operatives   in   1940-41,  posing  as  Communists,   and  saw  Me
(Continued  on  Page  Three)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  8,1953
I.  F. Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor and Publisher, I. F. STONE
Published  weekly  except the  last two weeks
of  August  at  Room  205,  301  E.  Capitol
St.,  S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C.  Subscrip-
tion  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and Continental
Europe,  $10  by  1st  class  mail,  $15  by air;
for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by first class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.  Single
copy,  15 cents. Tel.: LI 4-7087. Entered as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
August  8,  1953Vol. I,  No. 29
COMMENT
The  Difference
The  respected  and  independent Phila-
delphia   Bulletin  tried  its  best  last  week
to  make  the  new  Smith  Act  arrests  in
that  city  the  occasion  for  a  liberal  edi-
torial  of a kind.
It  said  "the  FBI arrested several Phila-
delphians  on  charges   of   conspiring   to
overthrow  our  government  by  force  and
violence . . . while these  persons have not
been  tried  and  found  guilty, the  evidence
against them is of a different quality from
that  adduced  against   others  by  a  Con-
gressional  investigating  committee. None
of  them  has  been  arrested  because  back
in the forties  his name was on the letter-
head  of  some  organization  with  a  high-
sounding  name that  subsequently  proved
to be a Communist front.  None is  accused
.  .  .  because  he  expressed  doubt  of the
guilt  of Alger  Hiss  . . ."
The   Bulletin's   criticism   of   Congres-
sional  committees  is correct but its  inter-
pretation  of the  Smith Act arrests is not.
Its  opening statement is inaccurate. Those
Philadelphians   were   not   arrested   for
"conspiring to overthrow our government
by force  and violence." If  the  editors  will
look  at  the  indictment  they  will  see that
these men were charged with  "conspiracy
to  advocate" revolutionary doctrine.
The  difference  is considerable.  The  first
charge  requires  proof   of  conspiratorial
preparation   to   use   force   and  violence
against  the  government. The  second  only
requires  proof  of  preparations   at   some
future  time  to  advocate  overthrow.  The
former  deals with concrete acts, the latter
with  books  and  ideas.  These  and   their
proper  interpretation  will  be  on  trial  in
Philadelphia,  as  they   were  on  trial  at
Foley  Square.
Unlike many witnesses before Congres-
sional  witch  hunt  committees,  the  men
arrested are  Communists. But the charge
against  them when  examined in the  light
of  the  criminal law is  tenuous.  The  Smith.
Act  for  the  first  time  since the  Alien and
Sedition  laws  made  advocacy  of  revolu-
tionary   doctrine  a  crime  in  peacetime.
But  in  Philadelphia,  as   elsewhere,   the
government  has  yet  to  indict   a   single
Communist  for  advocacy. All  have  been
indicted for  conspiracy  to advocate. This,
like  the  related   seditious  conspiracy  of
the  old  English  common  law,  is  a  long
way  from  the  tradition  which holds that
a  free  government  does  not  punish  for
ideas, but for  overt  acts.
"Conspiracy"   at  its  best  is  a  vague
category  of  crime,  open  to  abuse.  Con-
spiracy  to  advocate  is  conspiracy  at  its
worst.  So far  the  government   has   pro-
ceeded  only  against  national  and  local
leaders, but the dragnet  is flexible enough
for  small  fry.  Anything  done in  further-
ance  of  a  conspiracy  makes  one a  party
to  it.
Just as a man may be ruined by a Con-
gressional   committee   because   he   once
joined  some  Popular  Front  organization,
so a man who joined the  Communist party
because  he  felt  deeply about  some  social
evil   it   was  fighting  in  perfectly   legal
ways may end up by going to jail as part
of  a conspiracy to advocate  revolutionary
doctrine.  Both  procedures  have  the  effect
of  frightening  liberals  and  radicals  into
inactivity. This  is the  way conformity  is
imposed.   This    is    the    mechanism   of
thought  control.
For  Senator  Taft
The  Chicago  Tribune  praises   Senator
Taft  for  having  defended  the  seditionists
during  World War II.  We remember with
gratitude  his  more recent  defense of  aca-
demic  freedom.  We  sent  the   Senator  a
note  of  appreciation  and  best  wishes  for
his  recovery  some time  ago  when  he  was
still well enough to acknowledge it, as he
graciously  did.  We  join  with  men  of  di-
verse views in expressing  our respect  and
regret  at  his  passing.
Little  Europe  Crumbles
The  fall  of  de  Gasperi  last  week  and
the  broadside  fired  at  Adenauer  by  the
German trade unions foreshadows the end
of  that truncated  Catholic "little  Europe"
which American policy helped create  after
the  war.  Unfortunately  in  Italy  and  in
Germany,  the   successor   regimes  under
present  circumstances  are  apt  to  prove
worse.  History  may  see  the  de  Gasperi
and  Adenauer  governments  as little more
than   interim  caretaker  regimes  which
held  precarious  power  while  Italian  and
German Fascist forces revived. As moder-
ate  Catholicism  fails,  U.S.  policy  is  al-
ready   turning   toward   the  neo-Fascists
rather  than  the  Socialists  for  an alterna-
tive  alliance.
Thought  Control Be Extended  to  The Pulpit?
(Continued  from   Page  Two)
Michael  with  known  Communists at  a  Youth  Congress  meet-
ing  in  Columbus,  Ohio,  in  June,   1940.
Me  Michael  could  not  recall ever  having met  them  or  been
at  that  meeting  in  Columbus,  Ohio.  Mrs.  Edmiston  testified,
"Our  appearance  was  different   when  we  were  working  with
the  Communist  party.  We  were  trying  to  play  a  part."  She
testified  Me Michael was  not  "identified to  us  as a Communist
party  member"  but  added,  "The  question  is, who is doing  the
most  damage,  the  Communist  party  member  who  rolls  the
poison  pill  or  the  person  who, in  the  guise  of  religion,  shoves
it  down  our  throats?"  Congressman  Clyde  Doyle  (D.  Calif.)
asked  Mrs. Edmiston, "Did  you try  to  identify  Me Michael as a
Communist?  You  made an  effort  but  failed?"  Her  answer was,
"Right."  These  inconsistencies  may explain  why  Senator  Byrd
was  able  to  state  in  an  interview  that  J.  Edgar  Hoover   told
him  the FBI had no information on which any clergyman could
be prosecuted  as a  Communist  agent.
The  inquiry into the  churches is underway. The Commit-
tee released testimony  taken  in  executive  session  two  years ago
when  Congressman  Donald  L.  Jackson  (D.  Calif.)  sitting  as
a  one-man  committee  questioned  another  progressive   clergy-
man,  the  gifted  Rev.  Stephen  H.  Fritchman  of  the  First  Uni-
tarian  Church  in  Los  Angeles.  Rev.  Fritchman  pleaded   his
privilege  under  the  Fifth  to  a  series  of  questions  linking  him
with  various  liberals  and  radical  causes. The  three  top  officials
of  the  Methodist  Federation  in  a  statement  expressing   their
faith  in  the  integrity  of  Me  Michael  put  the  basic  issue  when
they  said  the  purpose  of  such  inquiries  is  "to  intimidate  all
clergymen ... so they  will  leave  social  issues  alone." The  ques-
tion  in  the  Me  Michael  case  is  not  how,  whether  or  to  what
degree  he  followed  party  line  but  whether  churchmen  will  let
themselves  be  frightened  out  of  the  right  to  speak  the  truth
as they see it, and  have the  courage  to  close  ranks in  defense of
those who exercised  that  right  in  the  past.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  8, 1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
But  For  Buffer  Zone  Foes  Might  Make  Friends
In   Korea,  as  after   every  cease-fire   in  every  war,  the
first  problem  of  the  opposing  brass  has  been  the  inclination
of  their  troops  to  cross  over  and  shake  hands  with  the  other
side.  And  this  is  a  sign  to  be  cherished,  I  am  sure,  by  all
who  look  for  natural  man  in  the  end  to  survive  and  surmount
the  recurrent   torrents  of  synthetic  hate  with  which  history
is besmirched.
Apparently   it   is   impossible   completely   to    indoctrinate
the  young  men  sent  to  shoot  each  other.  Left  to  themselves
they would swarm together  immediately the guns are put  down
to  swap  gadgets   and  grins.  In  the  buffer   zone  in  Korea  it
was  the  old  story.  The   officers   had  to  be  very  stern   about
it.  A  good   case  can  be  made  for  the   possibility   that   the
buffer  zone  is  needed  not  to  prevent  clashes  among  the  men
but  to prevent  fraternization.
We  see  how  that  is  far  from   the  battle  lines   where  it
is  much  easier   to  preserve   the  calculated   illusion   that  the
Enemy  is  all-foul,  sub-human,  feral  and  treacherous.  It  will
be  easier  in  Korea,  too,   to  keep   the  young  men  adjusted
for  mortal  combat  if  they  are not  permitted  to  trade  cigarettes
face' to   face.  They   actually  get   to   serenading   each   other.
Our  command  had  to  order  that  cut  out.  Two  days  after
the  pulJback  began  and  just  before  the  neutral   commission
took   over   the   zone,   the   press   wires   out   of   Munsan   did
however  carry  this  quaint  paragraph:
"The   U.   S.  8th   army  eased   its  'no  fraternization'   order
to  allow  Marines  and  Chinese  to  work  together  in  identifying
the  dead."
With  the  dead,  of  course,  the  grounds  of  common  hu-
manity  safely  can  be  recognized.  Dust  to  dust  was not  spoken
only  of  the  West  or  of  the  East.  There  is  no  danger  that  the
dead  will  realize  that  after  all  the  man  who  sped  the  bullet
he  stopped  was  a  pretty  good  Joe,  much  like  himself  except
around  the  eyes. The  Marines  who will work with the  Chinese
sorting  out  the  bodies  undoubtedly  will  find  it  much  more
difficult   than  Mr.  Dulles  does  piously  to  assume  that   these
people  do  not  deserve  to  be  admitted   to  the  family  of  the
nations. Working  with the dead  leaves little room  for  snobbery.
The  pity   is  that   for  the  living   we  must   actively   resist
7. F. Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol  St.,  S.E.,   Washington  3, D.  C.
Please  enter the  following  subscription. f5  for  1 year  is
enclosed.  (See   page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name   ....................................................................................
Street
City
State
..Zone..
the   drift   toward  conciliation   and  understanding  which  in-
stinctively  begins  whenever  the  battle  is  quieted.  The  troops
in   Korea  cannot  be  allowed   to  mingle   and   strike   hands;
they  must be  kept,  as Gen.  Mark  Clark  warned on  leaving  for
home,  in  "battle  fitness  and  alertness."  Hard  training—"run-
ning   up   and  down  the   hills"—is  scheduled   for   them,  as
well   as  more  amusements   and   interests.   It   could   be   that
operation  Big  Switch will  provide  new  accounts  of  atrocities
to  sustain  "morale,"  a  prospect   already  anticipated  by  some
of  the  stateside  press.
Here  we  have  to  appreciate  the  size  of  the  task  of  the
brass,  our   brass   and   the   Red   brass   also.   For   though   we
have  done  everything  we  can  think  of   to  hold  down   the
world's  elation  at  the  event  in  Korea,  to  take  the  joy  out  of
the   cease-fire   and   hedge  against  the   hope   of   peace,   there
is  a  rather  general  conviction  that  the  war  cannot  be  started
up  again  and  a  rather  general  suspicion  that  the   painfully
negotiated   armistice   is  a  more  important   triumph—of   in-
telligence—than  any  victory simple  force  ever  could  achieve.
The   soldiers   of   the   opposing   armies   in   Korea   have   at
this  juncture,  it  must  be  remembered,  an  attitude  vis-a-vis
each  other  uncommon  in  the  ranks  after  other  wars.  There
are no  victors  and no vanquished.  There can be no  condescen-
sion,  no  resentment.  In  addition  to  the  mutual  respect   the
fighters  on  both  sides  have  gained  in  the  course  of  the  in-
conclusive  war  there   is  inevitably  a  feeling  of  equality  in
the  present  situation.   Fraternization  would  be  natural,  and
it  is  doubtful  that  a  physical  separation  of  two  miles  is  far
enough  to  discourage  a  sense  of  companionship  among  GIs
where  UN  or  Red  resting  without  danger  so  close   together.
All  along,  the  Korean  war  has  had  notable  elements of
unconventionality, thus encouraging  the  hope that  history need
not  again  drearily  repeat  itself.  In  many  ways  it  is  regret-
table  that  the  rules  of  conventional  posture  now  should  pro-
hibit peaceful intercourse among the young men in the services.
Associated  culturally  instead  of  at  gun-point,  they  well  might
discover broader  bases  of  friendship  and  tolerance  than  can de-
velop  in  such  limited  acquaintance  as  that  furnished  by  the
sole   permissible   fellow-traveling—in   picking   up   the   dead.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  20?
301  E. Capitol  St.,     S.E.,
Washington  3, D.  C
Entered  as
Second   Class   Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED