I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953mar28.pdf

============================================================

Detention  for  Life—On  Undisdosed  Charges,     See  Page  4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I  NUMBER  11MARCH  28,   19537      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
An  Evil  Wind  of  their  Own   Sowing
Geography  imposes  a  basic  continuity   on  any  country's
foreign  policy.   An  island kingdom like the  British lives under
urgent   necessities  which  determine  policy  whether  Tory  or
Laborite  is  in  power.   Russia  is  impelled to  seek  the  open  sea
whether  ruled  by  Czars  or  Commissars.   This  continuity  frus-
trates  idealists  and  politicians alike.    It  is  frustration  of  this
kind  which plays a  part  in  the  Republican and  rightist  revolt
against  the  nomination  of  Charles  E.  Bohlen  to  be  Ambassa-
dor  to  Moscow.
Combined  with  it  is  the  related  frustration  which  springs
from  the  need  for  a  permanent  bureaucracy to  carry  on  any
skilled  function  like  foreign  policy.    Republican suspicion  of
the  State Department  and  the  Foreign  Service is in  this  respect
much  like that which the  New  Dealers  felt  20  years  ago when
they came to power.   FDR himself  never  outgrew  that  distrust,
and  in many crucial instances bypassed normal channels to  keep
the  reins of  foreign  policy in  his  own  hands.   Much  the  same
group  of  officials  then  regarded   as  reactionary  are  now  sus-
pected  of  being  "communistic."     Bohlen  is  one  of  them.
To  read  the  testimony  given  by  Bohlen  before  two exec-
utive  sessions  of  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  is
to  see that  he  aggravated  this  sense  of  frustration.   A  disdain
for  the  extraordinary  ignorance  shown  by  some  members  of
the committee is visible  between  the  lines of  the  printed  record
as  now  released.    A  creditable  unwillingness  to  barter   self-
respect  for  approval  is  evident.    He  offended   such  Senators
as   Ferguson,   Hickenlooper,   Knowland   and   the   incredible
Wiley  by  declining  to  acquiesce  in  the  mythology  of  the  vic-
torious  Republicans.    He  defended  Roosevelt.    He  failed  to
say the  right things when  Hiss  and  Lattimore were  mentioned.
He  had  the  temerity to  say of  the  Yalta  conference,  "I  found
nothing  in  my  experience  there  or  my  association  with   the
men  responsible  for  it,  to  indicate  that  there  were  any  dis-
creditable motivations  of  any kind."
Bohlen  failed  even  to  give  satisfaction  on  the  question  of
"containment"  vs.  "liberation."   Senator  Ferguson  asked  him
almost  desperately,   "You  don't  dispute  the  Eisenhower-Dulles
idea?"    The  answer was  "No,  sir,  certainly  not."    Then  Fer-
guson  asked,  "There  is  no  change  from  what  had  been  the
situation  under  Acheson  to  what  it  now  is  under  Dulles?"
The  reply  must  have  been  almost  maddening,  "That  is  not
for  me  to  say,  Senator."   Mr.  Bohlen  went  on  to  suggest  that
he  thought  much  of  the  debate  "semantic,"  since  "liberation"
does  not  mean  as  in  World  War  II  "foreign  armies  coming
in  to  liberate  you. ...  I  don't  understand  from  Mr.  Dulles
and  the  President's  own  statement  that  we  are  contemplating
a  war  of  liberation."     In  alarm,  almost  as  if  referring  to  a
bible,  Ferguson asked, "Then you don't  agree with Burnham?"
Mr.  Bohlen  replied,  "I  haven't  read  his  book."
There  is a  coalition  of  the  simple-minded   and  the  sinister
in  the  fight  on  the  Bohlen  appointment.    "There  are  a  lot  of
people  in  this  country,"  Chairman  Wiley  said  at  the  start  of
the  hearings,  "who  feel it  is a mistake to have  any  Ambassador
to  Russia."    Senators  like  McCarran,  McCarthy  and  Bridges
speak  for  those  forces  which  not  only  believe  war   inevitable
but  want to be sure and make it  so.   They  regard it  as hazard-
ous  to  have an  Ambassador  in  Moscow  while  the  new  Malen-
kov  regime  is putting  out  feelers  for  a  peace  settlement.   Mc-
Carran,  McCarthy  and  Bridges  are  prepared   to  do   business
with  any  pumpkin  for  ammunition  against   Bohlen.
The   Administration   invited   trouble   when   it   appointed
Bridges'  assistant  McLeod  to  be  security  officer  of  the  State
Department.     McLeod  spent  most  of  his  seven   years  as  an
FBI  agent  in  Concord,  New  Hampshire,  hardly  the  best  post
in which to train  for  surveillance  of  the  Foreign  Service.    The
Secretary  of  State  at  press  conference  admitted  he  had   not
asked  McLeod  whether  in  the  Bohlen   affair  he  had  commu-
nicated  over  his  head  with  Bridges,  McCarthy  or   McCarran.
Dulles  when  asked  whether  he  would  question  McLeod   said
he  didn't  go  on  the  basis  that  he  had  to  be  a  security   officer
to  run  the  security  office.    It  sounded  as  if  Dulles  were  too
unsure  of  his  subordinate's  loyalty  to  inquire.
The  Secretary  of  State  may not  be  quoted  directly, but
here  in  indirect  discourse  are  the  words  he  used  to   defend
Bohlen.    Dulles  said  it  was  the  business  of  the  FBI  to  try
to  locate  any  possible  gossip  or  suspicion  which  should  alert
one to danger.    They  go about, they  talk  to  dismissed  servants,
to  business  competitors,  they  seek  the  good  but  they  also  are
particularly  anxious  to  locate  any  basis  of  possible  suspicion.
There  is,  the  Secretary  thought,  no  person  of  any  importance
or  prominence  in  the  United  States  who  could  be  covered  by
a  full  FBI  field  check  and  not  have  in  it  some  derogatory  ma-
terial.    If  whenever  a  person   comes  up  to  appointment  in
high   office  that  stuff   should  be  dragged  out  on  the  floor  of
the  Senate,  then  he  thought  it  would  put  an  end  to  persons
of  repute  and  standing  in  the  community  ever  accepting  an
office  and  going  through   that  ordeal,  which  would   be  very
damaging  to  their   reputations.
But  it  is  on  the  basis  of  just  such  a  mish-mash  of  "deroga-
tory"   information   from   FBI  files  that   teachers   have   been
ruined,  civil  servants  discharged,  artists  blacklisted   and  for-
eign-born  citizens  subjected  to  deportation   and  denaturaliza-
tion.  The  respectables  have  for  two  decades  encouraged  the
calumniators  in the  fight against social reform.  If  the  hot  blast
of  calumny  now  singes  the  new  Secretary  of  State  and  beats
upon  the  White  House  door,  this is the  wind  they  themselves
sowed.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  28,  1953
Behind  The  Glasser  Case
The  FBI Sets  Out  To  "Get" Its  Man
,  Washington, D.  C.
I  put  the  question  to  Congressman   Velde
when   the   hearing   was  over.    I   asked   him
whether,  during  the  days  when  he  was  an  FBI
agent,  he  had  participated   in  the   investigation
of  the  Abraham  Glasser  case.    Glasser,  an  as-
sociate  professor  of  law  at  Rutgers,  had   just
finished  a  day  on  the  stand  before  the  House
Un-American  Activities  Committee  over  which
Velde   presides.    The  chairman  hesitated   and
then  said,  "I'm   afraid  it  will  have  to  be  'no
comment.'"    This  is  why  the  question  was
relevant:
.    A  decade  ago  Glasser  was  suspended   from
his  job  as  attorney, in  the  anti-trust  division  of
the   Department    of  Justice.    The   suspension
was  ordered   as  a  result   of  reports   from   the
FBI.     But  after   an.  extended   investigation   a
special    departmental    hearing    board    cleared
Glasser.    There  is  reason  to  believe   that   the
FBI  has   never   forgiven   that   defeat.     Either
that  or  the  FBI  has  been  guilty  of  an  extraor-
dinary  series  of  oversights.
The  first  occurred  soon  after  Glasser  had
been  cleared.    The  suspension  was  on  June  17,
1941.     The  decision  clearing  him  was  handed
down  on  October   24,   1941.     Glasser  was  al-
lowed  to  resign  without  prejudice  and  transfer
to  the  OPA.    Yet  a  month  later,  under  date of
December  31,  1941,  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  director
.of  the  FBI,  wrote  to  the  Office  of  Emergency
Management,   which   had   general   supervision
of   the   OPA.     Hoover   repeated   the   original
charges   against  Glasser  but  failed  to  mention
that  there  had  been  a departmental  hearing  and
that  Glasser  had  been  cleared.
"Thereafter,"  'according   to   the   brief   filed
with  Rutgers  on  the  accused  professor's  behalf,
Glasser  was  "informed  by  his  superior   officers
'  in  the  OPA  that  on  a  number  of   additional
occasions  between  1942  and  1944  or  1945  the
FBI   had   repeatedly   been   sending   to   OEM
or  to  OPA  the  same  old  1941  Department  of
Justice  charges,  and  that  the  FBI  in  doing  this
seemingly  had  failed  consistently  to  state  that
there  had  been  a  hearing  and  a  dismissal  of
the   charges   in   the   Department   of    Justice."
Again,  late  in  1945,  Glasser  was  told  by A.  D.
Vanech,  then   assistant   to  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral,  "that  the  departmental   personnel  file  in
the   Professor's    case   contained   no   indication
whatever  that  he  had  had  a  hearing   and  had
been  cleared  in  1941!"
That  was no  routine  clearance  by  obscure
officials.     The   Attorney   General   named   two
special  assistants  and  an  assistant  solicitor  gen-
eral  to  sift  the  FBI  charge.    The  three  were
Charles  Fahy,  now  on  the  U.S.  Circuit   Court
of   Appeals;   Ugo  Carusi,  now   Commissioner
of  Immigration  and  Naturalization;  and  Edwin
M.  Dickinson,  Dean  of  the  University  of  Cali-
fornia  Law  School.
The  care  they  exercised  is  indicated  by  two
letters  written  five  years  later  by  two'of   these
men  when  a  new  investigation   was  ordered  by
the   Civil   Service   Commission.     Ugo   Carusi
wrote  the Commission  that  the  board  had  made
a  "painstaking"  study of  the  charges and added,
"I  personally do  not  consider  Mr.  Glasser  unfit
for   employment  by  the  Federal   government."
Dean  Dickinson  wrote  Glasser  expressing  regret
over  the  revival  of  the  old  charges.    "No  case
within  the  purview  of  my experience,"  Dickin-
son   said,   "was   more  thoroughly   investigated
by  the  FBI.  .  .  .  No  case  was given  more at-
tentive  and  thorough  consideration   by  the  de-
partmental   hearing   board. ...  In  the  result
you  were  completely  exonerated  on  all  charges
except  the  charge  of  negligent  or  careless  dis-
closure   in   personal    discussions.  .  .  .  There
was  no  evidence  that  you  were  a  Communist
or  associated  with  so-called  Communist  fronts."
The    unauthorized    disclosures   dealt    with
Spanish  Loyalist  matters.    Glasser's  assignment
required   him  to  study  the  files  on  the  arms
embargo  during  the  Spanish  Civil   War.     He
had  a  room-mate  who  was  later  lulled  fighting
on  the  Loyalist side  in  Spain.    Glasser  avowed
his  pro  Loyalist sympathies at  the  departmental
hearing  and  admitted  he  might  have  been  in-
discreet  in  his  discussions  outside  the  Depart-
ment.
Until   Velde  became  its  chairman,   these
facts   had   twice   come  informally   before   the
House  Un-American Activities  Committee.    In
August,   1941,   Thurman  Arnold  discussed  the
matter  with  Martin  Dies,  then  chairman of  the
House  Committee.   Judge  Arnold  was  head of
the  anti-trust   division  in   which   Glasser   was
employed.    Arnold  laid  the  facts  before  Dies
and   obtained   his   approval   of   Glasser's   con-
templated  transfer  to  the  OPA.     In   October,
1949,   Glasser   was  subpoenaed   by  the   House
Committee  but  the  subpoena  was  dropped  by
the  Committee  after  Glasser's  counsel  had  laid
before  Committee  counsel  the  facts  as  to  the
past  investigation  and  adjudication.
This  year,  with  Velde  as  chairman  of   the
House  committee,  a  renewed  attack began.  On
February   10,  Glasser   was  subpoenaed.    Two
days  later  he  was  again  questioned  about  the
old  charges  by  two   FBI  men.    On  February
23,  agents  of  the: committee visited  the Admin-
istrative  offices  of  the  Rutgers  law  school,  in-
spected  lists  of  students  he  had  taught,  wrote
down  the  names  and   addresses  of   seven  and
subpoenaed   at   least   one.     Shortly   afterward
Glasser  was  advised  that  a  member of  the  legal
staff  of  the  House  committee informed a  repre-
sentative  of  the  University  that  the Committee
had  a memorandum from  "two  Federal  judges"
which   it  would  put   in   evidence  against  the
Professor.
The  Fifth Amendment  says  no  person shall
"be  subject  for  the  same  offense  to  be  twice
put  in  jeopardy  of  life   or  limb."    This,   the
famous   "double  jeopardy"  clause,  forbids  the
government  to  try  a  man  twice  for  the  same
offense.    But  nominally  the  House  committee
is   not    engaged    in   a   criminal   proceeding.
Though  the  effect  be  to  destroy  Glasser's  repu-
tation   and  end  his   career   as  a   teacher,   the
House   committee  ostensibly  is   engaged   in   a
mere  legislative  inquiry.
The  House  committee  can  reopen  a  case  as
often  as  it  pleases  until  the  victim  is  ruined,
no  matter how  many  times he  has  been  cleared
in  judicial or  administrative hearings.   Charges
which   do   not   stand   up   under   judicial   or
quasi-judicial   scrutiny  may   be   good   enough
for  headlines.   The  chairmanship of  the  House
committee  gave  the  ex-FBI man, Velde,  power-
ful   leverage.    Three   officials   linked  with   the
FBI  in  the  old  investigation  have  since  been
appointed   Federal   Judges   in   the   District   of
Columbia.    With  or  without  their  permission
their  names  might  be  invoked  with  enhanced
prestige  in  a  new  proceeding.    Judge  Matthew
M.  McGuire,  then  an  assistant attorney  general,
was  liaison  between  the  legal  staff  of  the  Jus-
tice  Department  and  the  FBI  at  the  time  of
the   Glasser   inquiry.     Judge   Alexander   H.
Holtzoff   was  McGuire's  aide.    Judge  Edward
Tamm  was  a  high   official   of  the  FBI  at  the
time.
The   sensation   of   the   Glasser   hearing  last
week   was   the   submission  in   evidence   of   a
memorandum  from  Holtzoff  to  McGijire  dated
July  23,   1941,   which  embodied  the   original
charges.    It  was  read  into  the  record  and  at
11:50    a.m.   when   the   reading   was  finished
Velde  called  a  ten  minute  recess.    The  timing
and   the  recess  made  this  a  perfect  story  for
the  afternoon  editions.    It  was  not  until  after
the   recess  that   the   Committee  put   into   the
record  the  memorandum dated  October  24  of
that  year  in  which  Carusi,  Fahy  and  Dickinson
cleared   Glasser   of   the   charges  made  in   the
Holtzoff   memorandum  to   McGuire.     It   was
unfair   not   to  release  the   two   documents  to-
gether.    The  timing  of  the  recess  was  a  dirty
piece  of  business.                   .
The   Holtzoff   memorandum   did   not  say
that  Glasser  was  a  Communist  but  that  there
were  "at  least  some  Communists"  among  his
friends   and  acquaintances.    More  serious  was
the  memo's  charge  that  a  Soviet  agent    "X"
confessed  in  Canada  that  he  had  received  in-
• formation,  most  of   it  about  the   Spanish  war,
from  Glasser.   The  three man hearing board, in
passing  on  these   charges,   said   that   Glasser's
alleged  contacts  with  this  agent,   "if   they  ex-
isted,"  were  "not   inspired   by  motives  of  dis-
loyalty,  nor  by  the  desire  knowingly  to  misuse
his   official   position."     The   charges,   if   true,
were   charges   for   a  grand   jury.    To   rehash
them  after  all  these  years,  when  they  had  been
thoroughly  investigated  and  discredited  within
the  Department  itself,  is  vindictive.    Glasser,
manfully  standing  his  ground  before  the  com-
mittee,  tried  to  ask  Velde  whether  he  had  par*
ticipated  in  the  earlier   investigation.    In  that
event,  Glasser  wished  to  move  that  Velde  dis-
qualify    himself   from   the   proceeding.     But
Glasser  was  hammered  down  by the chairman's
gavel  when  he  tried  to  raise  the  question.    In
Velde's  opinion  it  was  relevant  to  ask  Glasser,
a  native  of  New  Brunswick,  where  his  parents
were born.   But  it  was not  relevant for  Glasser
to  explore  the   possibility  that  his  name  and
career  were  to  be  destroyed  to  satisfy  an  old
grudge,  and  erase  an  old  defeat.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   March  28,  1953
I.  F.  Stone's    Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONI
Published  weekly except the last  two weeks
of  August  at  Room 225,  1416 F St.,  N.W.,
Washington  4,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:
Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and
elsewhere in  the Western  Hemisphere,  $6;
England  and  Continental   Europe,   $10  by
1st class  mail,  $15  by air; for  Israel,  Asia,
Australia   and   Africa,   $10   by   first   class
mail,  $20  by  air  mail.    Single   copy,  15
cents.     Contents    covered    by   copyright.
Telephone,   STerling   3-0938.   Entered  as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
Vol.   1,  No.  11March  28, 1953
Dastardly  Incident
(From  Our  Special Correspondent)
Moscow,  March  28—-A  Soviet  bomber  was
shot  at  by  fighter  planes  of  the  American  im-
perialist   Air    Force   today   off   Long   Island,
though   the   Soviet  plane  was   more  than  25
miles  from  American territory  at  the  time.
The   Soviet  Air   Force   explained  that   the
plane  was  on  a  routine  weather  reconnaisance
flight  from   a  Murmask  air  base,  that  it  was
unarmed  and  that  the  unprovoked assault upon
it   showed   the   necessity  for   building  a   120-
group  Soviet  Air  Force  as  soon  as  possible  to
defend   the   Soviet  Union   from   capitalist  ag-
gression.
The   incident   occurred   just   when  certain
members  of  the  Supreme  Soviet  were  discuss-
ing  the  possibility  of  reducing  taxes  and  mili-
tary  expenditures.    These, members  will   now
be  sent  to  corrective  labor  camps.
Portrait  in  Action
Of  The  Senate Foreign
Relations  .Chairman
From  the  hearings  before  the  Senate For-
eign  Relations  Committee  on  the  nomination
of   Charles  E.   Bohlen   to   be   Ambassador   to
Moscow:
The     CHAIRMAN    (Wiley    of    Wisconsin).
What  date  was  the  Cairo  conference?
Mr.   BOHLEN.   '  Cairo   was   in   the   fall   of
1943,  Mr.  Chairman.
The   CHAIRMAN.     Is  it   not   a  fact   that   at
Cairo,  Roosevelt and Churchill  promised  Chiang
Kai-shek  that  all   of  the  territories  in   China
would  be  returned   to  her,  particularly Man-
churia,  yet  14 months  later,  they  turned  around
and  proceeded  to  give  the  Soviet  Union,  Mon-
golia  and  South  Sakhalin?
Mr.  BOHLEN.    Senator,  I  was not  present  at
the  Cairo  conference,  so  I  have  no  first  hand
knowledge.
Senator  MANSFIELD.    Mr.  Chairman,  may  I
say  that  Sakhalin  was  taken  from   Japan   and
that  so  far  as  Mongolia  was  concerned,  there
were  agreements  going  back to  the  early  1920's
by  which  it  had  a  semi-autonomous  nature.
Senator   SPARKMAN.    I   am   looking   a,t  the
Cairo agreement; it  does not mention  Mongolia.
It  mentions  Manchuria,  Formosa  and  the Pes-
cadores.
The   CHAIRMAN.    It  relates  to  Port.  Arthur
and    two    key   Manchurian    railroads,    which
opened   the  door   to  all  Manchuria,  plus   the
Kuriles.    But  I  wanted  to  get  this  gentleman's
understanding  based  upon  what  we understand
is  about  the  only  knowledge   there   is—he  is
about  the  only  one  who  has  any  first  hand  in-
formation  of  what  went  on.    If  we  have  any
misinformation,  why  he  ought   to  be  able   to
correct  that.
Given    sufficient    time,    and    a    geography
primer.
Notable  Discovery  In  History
While  the  Chairman  of  the  Senate  Foreign
Relations  Committee  was  discovering  that  the
Manchurian  railways  opened   the  door  to   the
Kuriles,  an  equally  notable  advance  in  the  re-
lated  field  of  history was  being  made last  week
on  the  other  side  of  Capitol  Hill.
"In   1848,  in   a  Paris   attic,"   Congressman
Jackson   of   California   told   the   House,  "two
Russian   emigres,   Karl   Marx   and   Friederich
Engels,  sat  down  together  to  draft  a  blueprint
for   world  domination.    Their   blueprint  was
the  Communist Manifesto. ..."
Old-fashioned  readers brought  up  in  the  be-
lief  that  Marx  and  Engels  were  Germans  and
that   they   wrote   the   Manifesto   in   London
(neither  in  an  attic—both  being  too  fond  of
bourgeois  comfort)  are  warned  against  rushing
into  correspondence with  Congressman  Jackson.
Communists  also  hold  to  the  oldei  view.
Whether   one   believes   with   Jackson    that
Marx  and  Engels  were  Russians  or  with   the
Communists  that  they  were  Germans  may  be-
come  a  convenient  way for  the  House  Commit-
tee   to   determine   whether   a   man   advocates
overthrow   of   the   government   by   force   and
violence.    A  witness  can hardly  plead  the  Fifth
amendment  when  asked  whether  he  thinks  the
Manifesto  was written  over  vodka  in  a  Parisian
attic  or  over  beer  in  a  London  drawing   room.
The  only  safe  course  is  to  assume  that Con-
gressman  Jackson  is America's  foremost  Marxist
scholar.
Shrewd  Maneuver
To  Win  Over India
Among  other  momentous  legislation   pro-
posed  to  Congress  last  week  was  Senate  Joint
Resolution  No.  58  introduced  by  Ives  of  New
York.    As  a  public  service  we  here  reprint  it
in  full  text:
"Resolved  by  the  Senate and  House  of  Rep-
resentative?  of  the  United  States  of   America  in
Congress   assembled,  That   the   18th  day   of
August  of   each  year  is  hereby  designated   as
National   Holstein-Friesian  Day  in  commemo-
ration  of  the  anniversary  of  the  first  registered
Holstein  female  entered  in  the  first  published
herd  book  of  this  breed  in  America,  and   the
President   of   the  United   States   is   authorized
and  requested  to  issue  annually a proclamation
inviting   the   people   of   the   United   States   to
observe  such  day, in  schools  and  other  suitable
places,  with  appropriate   ceremonies."
The  resolution  had  us  puzzled  until  we  re-
called  the fierce propaganda  battle  being  waged
,  for   the   affections   of  stubbornly   neutralist   In-
dia.    India  reveres  the  cow  as  sacred.    Under
the  guise  of  a  special   concern   for   the  Hol-
stein,  Ives  may  be  moving  to  make  an  Ameri-
can  holiday  of  a  National   Cow  Day.   Chris-
tians  and  Moslems  may be  disarmed  by the  ap-
parent  emphasis  on  the  one  special   breed  of
cow,   but  Hindus  will  see  the  strategic   signifi-
cance  of  his  bill  as  an  entering  wedge  for  the
cult  in  America.    For  the  benefit of  our  Indian
readers  we  add  that  the  Mahatma  Ives  is  senior
Swami  from  New   York  and  may  be  reached
any  week-day at  his  ashram in  the  Senate  Office
Building,  Washington,  D.  C.
Vital  Statistics
The  Weekly  passed  its  tenth  "birthday"  with the  last issue and we thought  readers  might  like
to  know  (we were curious  ourself)  how extensive  is  its  circulation.    Our  shiny  new  card  catalogue
of  subscribers  turned  up  the  welcome  news  that  we now  reach  every  State  of  the  Union,  the  ter-
ritories  of  Alaska,  Hawaii  and  Puerto  Rico  and  six  Provinces  of  Canada.    There  are  subscribers
in  Mexico,  Panama, Colombia, Brazil and  Jamaica; in  Norway, Sweden,  Belgium, England,  France,
Austria,  the  British zone  of  Berlin,  and  Israel.    There  seems  to  be only  one  subscriber  behind  the
Iron  Curtain,  in  Poland,  but  last  week  a  tattered  sub came  in  from  Hungary  badly  mutilated  with
the  money  order  missing.    We  have  a  new  subscriber—our  first—in  Japan.    The   best  5tat*  of
course   ia  New  York.    The  poorest?    We  have  only  one each in Arkansas and Nevada  (cherkhed
subscribers both,  to  whom we send  greetings).   We  are sorry to  report that in  Canada  we have  not a
single  subscriber in Newfoundland  or the  Yukon.   As soon as we can get  the  dog  team hitched, our
circulation  department  mushes  northward.                                                                  I.  F.  Stone
4  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   March  28,  1953
Detention  for  Life—On  Undisclosed  Charges
The  anonymous  informant  has  become  an  American  in-
stitution.    He  figures  in  all  kinds  of  loyalty  and  security  pro-
cedures.   Last week the U.  S. Supreme Court widened  the  orbit
of  his  power.    It  ruled  5-4  that  a  man  might  be  imprisoned
for  the  rest  of  his  life  on  the  basis  of  undisclosed  accusations
from  undisclosed  sources.
Nominally  the  case  of  Shaughnessy  v.  Mazei  concerned  an
alien  denied  admission,  and  interned  two  years  on  Ellis Island.
Actually  Ignatz  Mazei  was a  legal  resident  of  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,
and  had been  in this  country  25 years.    "If  the procedures  used
to judge  this  alien  are fair  and  just,"  Mr.  Justice  Jackson  pro-
tested  in a dissent  joined  by Mr.  Justice Frankfurter,  "no  good
reason  can  be  given  why they  should  not  be  extended  to  sim-
plify  the  condemnation  of  citizens."
Mazei, a British subject,  came to this  country in  1923,  mar-
ried  an  American  citizen,  raised  a  family  of  four  children  on
his  earnings  as a carpenter.   He  was past  50 when his  troubles
began.    In  1948  he  went  abroad  to  visit  his  dying mother  in
Rumania,  but  ran  into  difficulties.    He  got  as  far  as  Hungary,
was  denied  entrance  to  Rumania,  waited  months  for  an  exit
permit  to  leave  Hungary.   When  he  returned  home on  a regu-
lar  visa,  the  Attorney  General  ordered  him  excluded  without
a  hearing  on  the  basis  of  "information  of  a  confidential  na-
ture,  the  disclosure of  which  would  be prejudicial  to the  public
interest."
Mazei  was  twice  shipped  abroad,  but  came  back  each  time
when  no  other country  would  accept him.   After  two years on
Ellis  Island  and  four  unsuccessful  efforts  to  win  freedom  on
habeas  corpus,  Mazei  applied  again,  this  time  to  Federal  Judge
Irving  Kaufman.    The  Judge  asked  the  government   at  least
to  divulge  the  evidence  against  Mazei  in  camera.   When  the
government   refused,  Judge   Kaufman  set  Mazei   free.     The
U.  S. Circuit Court  of  Appeals  upheld  him  2-1.   The  lone dis-
senter,  Learned  Hand,  was more  acid than  the  majority  in  his
comment.    "Think what  we may,"  he  said,  "of  a statute  based
upon  such  fears,  when  passed  by  a  society  which  professes  to
put  its  faith  in  the  free  interchange  of  ideas,  a  court  has  no
warrant  for  refusing  to  enforce  it.    If  that  society  chooses  to
flinch when  its  principles  are put  to  the  test, courts  are not  set
up to give it derring   do."
L  F.  Stone's   Weekly
Room  225  Kellogg  Bldg.
1416  F  Street,  N.W.,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Pleate enter  the  following  subscription.   »5  for  1 year  it
enclosed.   (See  page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street
City
State
Zone
When  the  government   appealed  to  the  Supreme  Court,
Mazti's counsel  asserted  that  the  only  reason  for  "flinching"
in  the  case of  this  obscure carpenter is that he  once  joined  the
International  Workers  Order,  a  fraternal  organization,  for  its
insurance  privileges.   The  government  in  its  response  did  not
deny  that.    On  the  Supreme  Court  it  encountered  congenial
theories  of  jurisprudence.   The  majority  decision  upholding
Mazei's  indefinite  detention without  hearing  or  disclosure  of
charges was written by Mr.  Justice  Tom  Clark.    It  was Clark
who  as Attorney General put  the  International Workers  Order
on  the  subversive  list  the  same way without notice,  hearing  or
charges.    It was also he who  as Attorney General handed  down
the  ruling  in  the   famous  Ellen  Knauff   case  excluding  that
German  bride  of  an  American  official   from  the  country  as  a
security  risk  while  declining  to  reveal  the  source  and content
of  the  accusations  against  her.
When  public  interest  forced  Clark's  successor,  McGrath,  to
allow  a  hearing  in  the  Knauff   case,  the  evidence against  her
was found to  be spurious—"hearsay  on hearsay."   The  plea of
information  too  confidential  to  be  disclosed  proved  merely  to
be  a cover  for  information  too  flimsy  to  survive a  real hearing.
In  the  Mazei  case,  Mr.  Justice  Jackson  harked  back  to  his  ex-
periences  as  prosecutor  at  Nuremberg,  quoted  Goering's   ex-
planation  for  the  use  of  concentration camps  and commented,
"Quite  unconsciously,  I  am  sure,  the  Government's  theory  of
custody  for  'safekeeping'  without  disclosure  to  the  victim  of
charges,  evidence,  informers or  reasons  .  .  .  has unmistakable
overtones  of  the  'protective custody'  of  the  Nazis."
"Individual liberty," said Mr.  Justice  Black  in  a separate
dissent  for  himself  and  Mr.  Justice  Douglas,   "is  too  highly
prized  in  this  country to  allow  executive  officials  to  imprison
and  hold  people  on  the  basis of  information kept  secret  from
the  courts."   This  is  an expression of  hope,  not  a statement of
fact.    It  remains to  be  seen  whether  individual  liberty is  that
highly  prized  in  the  cowed  and  confused  U.S.A.  of  1953.    In
the  Knauff  case,  public opinion  compelled  the  Department  of
Justice  to  hold  a  hearing,  to  make  its  evidence public  and  to
revoke  the  exclusion  order.    Will  the  people  of  Buffalo  and
of   New  York  State  generally  show  a  similar  spirit  in   the
Mazei case?   Justice Tom  Clark's  ruling, if  allowed to  become
precedent,  will  cast  a  long  and  sinister shadow.
I. F.  Stone's Weekly
225  Kellogg  Bldg.
1416  F St.,  N.W.,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class   Mail
Matter
Post   Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED