I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953sep05.pdf

============================================================

Behind The  Attack  on  The  Lawyers Guild, See Page 2
•• '"' :  ,*"  "•"••SW.iV-.'t  -'•'' •  '   '••^•v-   ('   ':.'":'••'.   '.'   •"'  .1
\. F. Stone's  We
VOL.  I,  NUMBER  31
SEPTEMBER   5, 1953
'D.  C.is
The  J. Edgar  Hoover -Me
•  Me  Carthy   is  America's  most  controversial    figure..}.
Edgar   Hoover   is   its
   r
most   feared-,.When   Hoover..praises
,M<;  Carthy.,  that, would, ?eem,to..be  $>age.,one
;
  neWjSv.Jlenjark-
ably.little  attention-was  paid.by  the  press  last  week; to  the
interview  the  chief of the  G-men  gave the  San Diego Evening
"tribune  of  August  22. The  New  York  Times  buried  the  story
in  a  three-paragraph  "shirt-tail"  to  another  Me  Carthy  con-
troversy  on  page  11  of  its  August  24  issue.  For  some  reason
the  story  did  not  appear  in  the  Washington' Post  and  the
Washington  Times-Herald  until  two  days later  on  August  25.
The  Times-Herald,  ultra  rightist  and  virtually a  house  organ
lor  both  Hoover  and  Me  Carthy, buried  the  story  inside,  per-
haps  because someone  felt  the  G-man  had  been  indiscreet.
One  aspect  of  the  indiscretion  was  touched.on  by  an  in-
trepid  reporter  at  Attorney  General  Herbert  Brownell's  press
cojh'ference  here  three  days'later.  The  Department  of  Justice
is
f
supposed  to  be—and  Brownell  insisted  that  it  still  is—in-
vestigating  that  Senate report  of  last  January on  Me  Carthy's
financial manipulations.  The  investigating of  the  Department
of  Justice  is. done.•through—the, Federal  Bureau, of  investiga-
,tion...The,hj?ad  .of  the.  FBIju^.tjje  §an. Diego  interview  called
, Me Carthy "ear,nest and  hpnest.".^., repjwiter  aske$,trje.;AttDrn!|y
General  whether  he  thought  it  appropriate  "for,,a  member of
the  Justice  Department  to  make  a  statement  evaluating  the
character  of  a  person  whose  affairs   are  under
;j
study-in  ,tjhe
Department."   ;., ,.
r
                                         •      ,',.»..
 r
  s,  .*
The Attorney  General declined  to  comment.  He  said  he had
not  yet  seen, the  full.text  of  Hoover's  statement,  'l.have^ifull
confidence  and  admiration  for  Mr.  Hoover,"  Brownell, a<lded.
"I  like  to  stress  .that  whenever  possible."  Hoover   sSeems  to
have  a  similar  confidence  and  admiration  for  the  Senator  he
is presumably .investigating. Both  Hoover  and  Me  partrjy  were
registered   at  the  same  seaside  hotel  in   La  Jolia-rr-by,
r
cqin-
cidence  the  G-man  said—when  Hoover  was  'interviewed.  It
will  take a  very  brave FBI  man  to  turn  in  anything'unfavor-
able  on  Me  Carthy  after  the  Hoover  statement.
What  The  G-Man  Chief  Said  of Low  Blo\y  Joe
"Me  Carthy  is  a  former  Marine,"  Hoover  said.  "He was
an  amateur boxer.  He's  Irish. Combine those,  and you're going
"to  have a'vigorous  individual,  who  is  not  going  to  be  pushed
around.       .
"I  am  hbt  passing,"  Hoover  continued  more cautiously  after
this  bit   of  positive  hero-worship,  "on  the  technique  of  Me
Carthy's  committee,  or  other  Senate  committees.  That's  the
'Senator's'responsibility.  But  the  investigating'committees  do
a  valuable/job.  They  have subpena  rights  without  which'  some
vital  investigations  could  hot  be  accomplished:,   '       ,    "
."I  never knew Senator  Me  Carthy,"  Hoover  Went  oh/"until
he  came to  the'Senate.'TVe  come to  know  him  well,     officially
and  personally. -I view'him  as a friend  and  believe  he  so'views
me.
"Certainly,  he  is a  controversial  man.  He'is  earnest  -ahdi  he
is  honest.  He  has  enemies.  Whenever
1
 you  attaek-tsubv^rsiVes
of  any  kind, 'Communists,
;
  Fascists,  even  the  Ku'IQui''Klan,
you  are  going  to  be  the  victim  of  the  most
 r
'extfemely 'vicious
criticism  that  can  be  inade;                            :
;
i    r:
;
;
   This  admission  of  close  relations  and  declaratfpn  of
friendship  may  give  Me  Carthy  an  advantage  Hitler \lacked
.
t
—the  advantage  of  dose  liaison  and  support  from.'the
1
  'secret
police of the government ne;,wants to tak^'ov^r.  !"
  2;  r!;
"
!
;
Hoover's  closet  is  well  stocke^^with;ske|et6iK. iiany  iii  the
'capital  fear  the  stray  bones  he  'may  rattie^  Few  who  criticize
Me Carthy dare criticize Hoover.  Some who criticize Me Carthy
will  go  easy  if  they, know  he  has  the  G-man's  backing.  The
[  silence.of  the"nation's  editorial  writers  on  this  San  Diegci  in-
terview  is more  eloquent  than  any comment  they.could  make.
There" was similar  silence  in  July  when  at  Me  Carthy's  worst
moment  (the  forced  firing  of  J.  B. Matthews)  he  held  a  con-
ference  with; Hoover  and  hired! the:head  of  the,
-      "T know," Hoover  said.  "But  sometimes  a  knock  is  8
  :
When  certain   elements   cease  their  attacks  on- me,   F  know
•1'nv slipping."
      v
"-•"•'
     :
-
;
      -'      -'-  "    •    '•'>"••"-   +iv>"    .-)•>..sno,.
Hitler  Lacked        ;             '   . ::'
;
HE^
25  but  saw  it  mentioned  nowhere  else.  The  Hoover  confer-
ence  and the'Carr  appointment  helped  to  bolster Me Carthy at
a   bad   time.               •  >
  ;
    ^      •'        •                         '•-.;•"   •'.^iif.-.'r'.
AVny Editors Look The Other  Way
A  Hoover-Mc  Carthy  axis  must   also  spike  the  feeble
popguns  of  those  faint-hearted liberals  whose  and-Mc  Carthy
line has  been, "let the  FBI do it." This  M  how the  FBI does  it.
gators 'feed  sri'lush'ly  is; exactly  the  siune mish-rnaih the  Coplon
case turned  up  in  trie FBI   files.   •'   -  '-
  1
'"--
  J
'
;n
   ~>'?'-i''••«••"•' ••
^T^^'^^^v^^'-^-isi^^-m'^^
been^slipbing  inrormati8n
 ?
6f'tnis'femtf  to  C'oifigreMonat'wic
_   mohai; witch
hunters  for  a  long  time,  long  beforV'Mc  Carthy.  The
5
'New
1  2  S
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  5,1953
Nixon's  Part  in  The  Fight  Against  the  Lawyers  Guild
Dealers  often  used  Congressional   inquiries  when  frustrated;
the  most  famous  case, was  when  Standard  Oil  negotiated  a
consent  decree  with  Attorney  General  Francis  Biddle   after
Pearl  Harbor  in  the  hope  thereby  of  hiding  its  past  relations
with  I.  G.  Farben.  Thurman  Arnold,  then  Assistant  Attorney
General,  foiled  this  by  having  himself   subpoenaed   by   the
Truman  investigating  committee,  through  which  he  told  the
whole  story.  The  FBI  files  would  be  a  similar  gold  mine  for
Me Carthy, and Me Carthy can  also be useful  to  the FBI.
The  FBI  is  very  smart  publicity-wise. There  was  a  spate of
stories  last  week-end  on  Communist  plots  to  smear  the  FBI.
A  "highly  secret  Communist  party  document"  to  this   effect
was  given  to  the  North  American  Newspaper   Alliance   (see
Washington   Sunday   Star,  August  30,  "Communist  Party  Di-
rects Comrades  to  Smear  FBI"). The  Washington  Times-Her-
ald  next  day  carried  a  front page banner  headline,  "U.  S. Reds
Plot  Campaign  to  Smear  FBI."  Victor  Riesel  in  last  Sunday's
New  York  Mirror  reported  mysteriously that  such  orders  had
been  sent  out  in  retaliation  for  the  arrest  of  two Communist
Smith  Act  fugitives,  Thompson   and  Steinberg.  So  any  editor
who  comments  on   the  Hoover-Mc  Carthy  alliance  and   its
political  implications  risks  suspicion  of  links  with  the  Com-
munist  underground.
The  Strange Case of  the  National Lawyers Guild
An  example  of  the  chores  a  Congressional  investigating
committee  can  do  for  the  FBI  is  provided  by  the  case  of  the
National  Lawyers Guild.  One day in  January,  1950,  Clifford  J.
Durr, then  president  of  the  Guild,  sent  the  press  a  notice  that
two  days later  he  would  hold  a  press  conference  in  Washing-
ton  and  release  a 40-page  report  made  by a  special  committee
of  the  Guild  "concerning  wiretapping,   and  other  illegal  and
offensive  practices  carried  on by the FBI . . .  based  upon  the
careful  analysis of  some  800  pages  of  FBI  reports  introduced
in  the  Coplon  case."
The night before the press conference, Congressman Richard
Nixon   (now  Vice-President),  then  a  leading  member  of  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  telephoned  the As-
sociated  Press,  United  Press  and  International  News  Service.
Nixon  said he  had  just  written  a letter  to  Chairman Wood of
the  House  Committee  and wanted  to  release  it  for  immediate
publication.  Nixon  said  he  hadn't  had  time  to  make  copies.
The letter  was dictated  to  the  wire  services  over  the  telephone.
The  letter  provided  the  morning  papers  with  sensational
headlines  as  a  backdrop  for  the  press  conference  and  the  re-
lease  of  the  report  criticizing  the  FBI.  Nixon's  letter  asked
the  House  Un-American Activities  Committee  to  investigate
the  Lawyers' Guild  as  a  Communist  front.  In  its  report  later
that  year  the  House  Committee  said  it  had  "no  doubt"  that
the  Guild's  attack  on  the  FBI  was  "part  of  an  overall  Com-
munist  strategy  aimed  at  weakening  our  defenses against  the
international   Communist    conspiracy."   The   report   recom-
mend/ed  that  the  Guild  be  placed  by  the  Attorney General  on
the  subversive  list  and  asked  the  American  Bar  Association  to
consider  "whether  or not membership in the National Lawyers'
Guild, a subversive  organization, is compatible with  admissibil-
ity  to  the  American  bar."
It  has  taken  three  years  to  achieve  the  goal.  Brownell
capitulated  where  even  Me  Grath  and  Me  Granery  held  out.
Last  week  at  the  annual meeting  of  the  American  Bar  Asso-
ciation,  he  announced  that  he  would  blacklist  the  Guild.  The
ABA's  House  of  Delegates  only  four  years  ago  voted  down  a
recommendation   from   its   Board   of   Governors  that  Guild
members  be  barred  from  membership  in  the  ABA. This  year
the   delegates   applauded   Brownell's  announcement, and  ap-
proved  without  debate  a  resolution  urging  the  disbarment of
all  Communist  lawyers.  In  an  editorial  pointed   toward  this
year's  meeting,  the  August  issue of  the  American Bar Associa-
tion Journal  had  boasted  that  men  trained  in  the  law  "have  a
special  sensitivity, like  a  musician's  sensitivity to disharmony,
for  anything  that  threatens  liberty." Like  so many convention-
goers,  these  members  of  the  bar  seem  to  have  left  their  spe-
cial  sensitivities  at  home.
"Liberty Under  Law"
Neither  the  Attorney  General's  address  nor  the  disbarment
resolution  could  easily  be  reconciled  with  the  theme  of  this
year's  Diamond  Jubilee  meeting  of  the  bar  association, which
was  "Liberty  Under  Law." Since  "it  is  not  unlawful  to  belong
to  the  Communist  party,"   as  the  conservative  Washington
Star  noted  with  misgiving  in  its  comment  on  the  resolution
last  Sunday, "the  question  really  is whether  a  lawyer  should  be
subjected  to  the  severe  penalty  of  disbarment  for  doing  some-
thing  that  is  sanctioned  by our  law."
The  Attorney  General  disclosed  that  while he  was summon-
ing  the  Lawyer  Guild  for a hearing, he  had  made up  his  mind
in  advance.
This  matter  of  allowing  a  hearing  before  blacklisting  has
a  long  history. Two  years  ago  the  U.  S. Supreme  Court  ruled
that  the  Attorney  General   could   not  blacklist   organizations
without  some  form  of  notice  and  hearing.  The  Department
•of  Justice  has  been  fighting  a  rear-guard  action  against  that
decision  (341  U.  S.  123)  ever  since.  Last  week  the  govern-
ment  lost  another  round  in  the  U.  S.  Circuit  Court  of  Ap-
peals  here  in  the  lengthy  technical  litigation  waged  to  make
the  Attorney General  obey the  Supreme  Court. In  strategic  re-
treat,  Brownell  has  adopted  what  purports  to  be  a  form  of
notice  and  hearing.  On  this  the  courts  have yet  to  pass.  Light
was  shed  on  Brownell's  new  procedure  by  his  speech  to  the
Bar  Association.  This  revealed  that  he  had  not  served  notice
of  hearing  on  the  accused  organization  until  the  very  day  he
announced  his  unfavorable  verdict  against  it  in  an  address  to
its  old  rival,  the  American  Bar  Association.
Here  is  the  passage  so  the  reader  can  judge  for  himself.
"I  have  conducted  the  study,"  Brownell  said  of  his  inquiry
into  the  Lawyers Guild,  "with  great  care.  I  am  now  prepared
to  make  this  determination  public.  It  has  been  clear  that  at
least  since  1946  the  leadership  of  the  Guild  has  been  in  the
hands  of card-carrying Communists  and fellow  travelers  . . .
I  have  today  served  notice  to  it  to  show  cause  why  it  should
not  be  designated  on  the  Attorney  General's  list  of subversive
organizations."
The  Attorney  General's Occult  Powers
The   speech  showed  a  mind  firmly  closed  in  advance
to  any  evidence  which  might  be  produced   in   favor  of   the
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  5,1953
To  Disbar  Radical  Lawyers Is Totalitarian  Logic
accused.  The  National   Lawyers  Guild,  a  product   of  a  New
Deal  era  revolt  against  the  stuffiness  and  reactionary  outlook
of   the  ABA,  has  been  a  Popular   Front   but   not  a   straight
party  line  organization.  It  has  many  non  Communists  among
its  members.  Their  influence  has  been  felt,  from  the  Guild's
condemnation  of  the  attack  on  Finland  in   1939  through  its
defense  of  Yugoslav  lawyers  after  the  Tito  break  down  to  its
1950  resolution  supporting  "the  action  of  the  United  Nations
in   opposing   the   aggression   of  North   Korea   against   South
Korea."
The  Attorney  General  already  has  at  hand  a  rationalization
with  which  to  dismiss  such  evidence.  "On  every  major  issue,"
he  told  the  bar  association, the  Guild  "has  steadfastly  followed
the Party line . . . excepting  only  those  issues so notorious that
their  espousal  would  too  clearly  demonstrate  the  Communist
control."  Such  occult  standards  are  a  danger  to  any individual
or  organization  on  the  Left,  since  differences  with  the  Com-
munists  may  thus  be  dismissed  as  mere camouflage.
Mr.  Brownell's  new  regulations   match  this  mentality.  The
hearing  board  or  officer   is  authorized  "to  receive  as evidence
on  behalf  of  the  Attorney General information  or  documentary
material,  in  summary  form  or  otherwise,  without  requiring
disclosure  of   classified   security   information  or   the  identity
of   confidential   informants."   Witnesses  "shall   be   subject   to
cross-examination,   provided  that  no  witness  on  behalf  of  the
government   shall  be  required   to   disclose   classified  security
information   or   the  identity  of  confidential  informants."  As
in  the loyalty procedures  of  the past,  the  nature  of the  evidence
and  the  source  of  the  accusations  may  be  kept  secret.  This  is
not  a  hearing  in  any  real  sense  of  the  word.
Nobody  Discusses The  Real  Issues
The   free   atmosphere  America  knew   in  the  past  has
become  so  corrupted  that  the  real  issues  are  hardly  discussed
anymore.  One  is  whether  the  Attorney  General  has  any  right
to  proscribe   whole  organizations   as  "subversive,"   a  standard
still  undefined  and  incapable  of  definition.  Another  is  whether
freedom  can be preserved  in  America  if  Communists  are made
a  special  class  outside  the  law—in  the  resultant  hunt  to  de-
termine  who  is  a  Communist   everybody  is  pushed   toward
conformity  for  safety's  sake.  A  third  is  whether  the  right  to
counsel  can  be  preserved   for  radicals  in  political   prosecutions
if  lawyers suspected   of  Communism  are  in  danger  of  disbar-
ment.  Already  in  an  atmosphere  where  clients  are  judged  by
their  lawyers  and  lawyers  by  their  clients  it  is  becoming  very
difficult  for  accused  radicals  to  find  counsel.
America  is  rapidly  moving  back  toward  a  situation  Anglo-
American  law  has  not  known  for  three  centuries.  Until   the
English  Revolution  of  1688,  defense  counsel  was  not   allowed
persons  accused  of  "treason"—then  as  loose  a  term  as  "sub-
version"  and  "disloyalty"  are  today.  Ever  since  Attorney  Gen-
eral,  now  Supreme  Court  Justice,  Tom  Clark  in   1949   urged
disbarment  of lawyers defending Communists, the  Department
of  Justice  has sought  to  destroy  the  right  to  counsel  in  radical
cases.  Even  as  it  is,  a  lawyer  who  takes  a  radical  case,  even  at
the  direction  of  a  court,  is  in  danger  of  losing  much  of  his
private  practice.  This  is  the  application  of  lynch  attitudes.
9
1   2   7
The  drive  to  disbar  radical  lawyers  illustrates  the  tendency
of  the  "loyalty" orbit to be widened  by one special  excuse  after
another.  It  began   on  the  plea   of  a  need  to  protect    official
secrets,  widened  out  to  cover  every  Federal  employe  however
unimportant,  and  then  was extended  to  defense  plants,  docks
and   the   maritime   industry.   Teachers,   radio-  commentators,
librarians,  book  publishers   and  newspapermen   have  all  been
affected   since  on  the  ground  that  they  dealt  with  ideas  and
therefore  must  be  policed  against  "dangerous  thoughts"  Japan-
ese  style.  The  rationalization   in  the  case  of  lawyers  is  that
they  are  "officers  of  the  court."
As  applied  to  the  disbarment  of  radical  lawyers,  this  recalls
totalitarian   practice.  The  United  Nations  report  on   forced
labor  in  discussing  the  Soviet  Union  quotes  Vishinsky  as say-
ing  that  "The  first  requirement   of  a  defending  counsel  is  a
high  sense  of  political  responsibility ... an  ability  to  defend
his  point  of  view  and  give  battle  for  his  beliefs,  not  in  the
interests  of  his  client  but  in  the  interests  of  socialist  construc-
tion  and the  interests  of  our  state." The  UN  report   comments
that  such  a  conception  of  defense  counsel  and  the  restrictions
it  places  on  the  defense  "considerably  increase  the  risk  that
the  penal  system  and  the  system  of  corrective  labor  will  be
used   for  the   oppression   of  those  who  are  opposed   to   the
regime." The  same  comment  may well  apply here soon.
The  Witch Hunt  and Peace
The  stepped  up  activity  of  the  witch  hunters,  the At-
torney  General's  capitulation,  the  emerging  Hoover-Mc Carthy
axis,  the  Jenner  spy  scare  report  (which  we  hope  to  discuss
in  detail  later),  are  of  international  as  well  as  domestic  con-
cern.  Western  Europe  must  realize  that  the  strategy  is  to  in-
tensify  an  atmosphere  in  which  it  becomes  more  difficult  than
ever  for  the  Eisenhower  Administration  to  make  a  firm  peace
in  the  Far  East.
The  White  House,  like  the  rank  and  file  of  both  parties,
does  not  want  a  resumption   of  the  fighting.  But  it  is  as  if
Eisenhower  had  exhausted  his  meager   powers   of  leadership
in  achieving  a  precarious   truce.  The  enemies  of  peace—the
China  Lobby  Senators,  the  military  bureaucracy,  the  aviation
lobby,   the   anti-Communist   fanatics—are   working   hard   to
make  it  difficult  to  avoid  a renewal  of  the  war  if  Rhee—as  he
plans—starts  it  up  again.  Increased  repression  at  home  is part
of  their  strategy.
/  F. Stone's    Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F. STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room   205,
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington   3,  D.  C.  Subscription  rates:  Do-
mestic,  $5  a year;  Canada, Mexico  and elsewhere  in  the  Western  Hemi-
sphere,  $6;  England  and Continental  Europe, $10  by  1st class  mail,  $15
by air; for  Israel,  Asia, Australia and Africa,  $10  by first class mail,  $20
by  air  mail.  Single  copy,  15  cents.  Tel.:  LI 4-7087.  Entered  as  Second
Class  mail  matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
September  5,   1953
Vol.   I,  No.  31
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

l.F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  5,1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
If  We  Get  Rid  of the  Veto  We  Can Let  China  In
I  find  myself   always  trying  hard  to  believe  that  men in
high  places  who potter  around  with  the  fate  of  our  world  do
have  an  inkling  of  what makes  sense,  since it's the  only  world
we've  got. I  mean  John  Foster   Dulles,  as  much  as  anyone.
The  more  I  turn  over  what  he  had  to  say  to  the  lawyers  at
Boston  about  routing the  veto out  of  the  UN  security  council
the more  I  like  the possibility  that  what he really was planting
was  a  gimmick  to  get  us  off  the  hook  with  regard  to  China.
Most  of  the  press  here  and  abroad  have gone  along  with  the
likely  view  that  our  lanky  Secretary  of  State,  with  his  camel's
habit  of letting  down  one  corner  of  his mouth, intended  some-
thing  beyond  the   ritualistic   cold   war  shot  at  Moscow,  and
that  his  allusion  to  the  "obsolescence"  of  the  UN  charter  was
prompted  mainly  by  the  dog  days'  news  that  now everybody
but  Liechtenstein  has  the  H-bomb.  I  venture  the  other  inch
at the  invitation  of the  circumstances.  Making faces  at Moscow
is, after  all, a postprandial  commonplace;  and  as for  the  prob-
lem  of  the  H-bomb  what  more  is to  be  said  intelligently  than
that  already  the  H-bomb  is  about  as  effectively  tied  down  as
is  ever  can  be—by  the  H-bomb.
Mr.  Dulles  could  not  have  been  assailing  the  veto  seriously
as  a  major  stumbling  block  in  the  UN's path.  We  have  laid
all  manner  of  evil  to  it;  still  it  is  true  that  only  those  fine
plans  we have  for  ordering  the  whole  world  can  come  to  pass
on  which  the  great  powers,  including  our  own,  are  in  accord.
On  the  other   hand,  the  existence  of  the  magisterial  yea  or
nay  in  the  security  council  does  seriously,  in  a  way we hardly
can  afford  to  admit,  encumber  our  own  road  of  escape   from
the  precious  quandry  of  "non-recognition"  in  which  our  stub-
born  and  transparent  pretenses  have  cornered  us.  This  prob-
lem  can  use  all  the  ingenuity  of  which  our  Mr.  Dulles  is  ca-
pable.
In  the  past,  when  the  adventurous  West   discovered  the
ancient  East,  western  wits  jested  of  the  people  on  the  other
side  of  the  world  who  walked  "with  their  heads  down."  Ever
since  the  revolution  in  China,  it  has  been  the  people  of  the
West,  particularly  of  the  United  States,  who  have  walked  up-
side  down  to  keep  from  seeing  the  portentous  change.  Our
own  deliberate  defiance  of  the  natural  laws  has  fooled  nobody
and  has  placed  us  in  an  impossible  posture  of  ridiculousness.
Help Keep Dissent  Alive In  America
By Subscribing
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
301  E. Capitol St., S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C
Please  enter the  following  subscription. #5  for  1 year  is
enclosed.  (See  page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street
City  ....................................I
The  jests  now  are  toward  us. The  make  believe  has, neverthe-
less,  so  involved  our  western   "face"  that,  though  obviously
we  must  straighten  up  sometime   (or  make  ourselves  content
with  the  role  of  chief  bubblehead  among  the  nations),  the
return  to  national  behavior  presents  aggravating   difficulties.
Perhaps   only  a  good   trick  can  serve  our   need  and   just
perhaps  Mr.  Dulles  has  one  knocking  around  upstairs.  If  the
UN  charter  should  be  revised  to  catch  up  with  the  click  of
the  Geiger  counters,  leaving  out  the  infamous  veto,  the  U. S.
could  see  its  way  dear  to  letting  a  delegate  of  the  Chinese
nation  into  the  seats  at  the  UN   reserved  for  China,  at  our
insistence,  in  the  beginning;  in  the  assembly  and  in  the secu-
rity  council—why  not?
In  the  assembly  China  would  have one  vote, like Cuba, like
all  the  rest;  she  could  be  handled  there.  In  a  security council
without  the  veto  she  could  recommend,  like  each  of  the  other
four  Great  Powers,  and  no  harm  done.  General  Chiang would
be  pensioned   off quietly, given  Formosa  for  his  China  if  that
could  be  worked  out; all  the  powers  would  be  in  the  UN
where they could  speak  to each  other  directly  and  without em-
barrassment,  if  only to  hiss, and  reality would be  restored.
The  rules  would  have  to  be  changed,  of  course,  as Mr.
Dulles  proposes;  and  some  undoubtedly  would  recall  that  the
rules  had  been  drawn  in  the  first  place  to  please  the  United
States,  that  we  had  wanted  China  in  a  permanent  seat  on  the
council  in  order  that  we  would  have  at  least  three  votes  that
we  could  rely  on  vis-a-vis  the  Russian  corner.  But  would  it
not  all  be  for  the  best?  To  kick  China  off of  the  council  just
because  of  American  chagrin  at  the  change  of  government  in
China would  be too crude;  but  all of the other  members should
be  able  charitably  to  perceive  that  removal  of  the  "obsolete"
veto  would  also  remove  the  main  fear  which  all  along  has
accounted   for  our   absurd   persistence   in  refusing  to   agree
that  China,  under  a  new  regime,  still  has  corporeal  being and
actual  visibility.
Even  to  help  us  get  our  head  out  of  the  sand  the  revision
of  the  UN   charter  cannot   be  undertaken  before  1955; but
we  ought  to  be  able  to  imagine Mr.  Dulles  looking  ahead  at
least  that  far. And  a  sympathetic  world,  truly  aware  of  our
plight,  should  be  willing  to  abet  our  trick  without  letting  on.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol St.,  S.E.,
Washington  3, D.  C
Entered  as
Second   Class   Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED