I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953jul04.pdf

============================================================

A  KKK  Pbstcript  to  The  Rosenberg  Case,  See  Page  4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I  NUMBER   24
JULY  4,  19535       WASHINGTON,  D.  C15  CENTS
How  Long  Is  The  U. S. to  Be Rhee's  Satellite?
The  Communist  rejection  of  that  incredible  letter   from
General  Mark  Clark  makes  sense.  It  makes  sense  from  every
point  of  view,  whether  that  of  world  peace,  Chinese  "face"
or  American  dignity.  To  try  a  truce  with  Syngman  Rhee  un-
committed  (he  ought  to  be  put  away)  is  to  invite  provoca-
tions  that  might  easily  ignite  World  War  III.  The  fighting
now   is  at  least  limited   to  Korea   but   were  a  truce  to  be
broken  by Rhee  it  would  be  easy  in  the  confusion to  represent
it  as enemy treachery  and  thus  give  their  head  at  last  to  those
MacArthurite  forces  who   have  been   longing   for   full-scale
war  with  China.
The  United   States  has  been   put   in  a  most  humiliating
position  by  Rhee.  The  great  Power  which  aspires  to  lead  a
"liberation"   crusade  against  the   Soviet   third   of   the  world
has  shown  itself  impotent  to  control  and  remodel  tiny  South
Korea.  Graver  humiliations  would  be  risked  were  a  truce  to
be  made  with  Rhee   still  in   control   of   the   South  Korean
police  and  army.  What  if  he  carried  out  his  threat  and  re-
fused  to  let  neutral  commissioners  from  India  into  the  coun-
try?  The  question  seems  much  less  fantastic  after  the  events
of  the  past  few  weeks.
What  is  the  answer?  The  answer  ostensibly  has  been  in
General  dark's  hands  for  several  weeks.  He  has  been  given
power  to  declare  martial  law  in  South  Korea.  If  Washington
had   half   the   backbone  shown  by  the  crusty  old  tyrant  in
Seoul  it  would  order   Clark  to  put   martial  law  into   effect
at  once.  The  most  important  single  political   and  moral  act
which  could  be  performed  by  the  "unified  command"  would
be  to  use  force  to  free  Chough  Pyung  Ok  from   "protective
custody".  It  is  shocking  that  under  the  noses  of  our   troops
a  member   of   the   Korean   National   Assembly,  leader  of  a
major   opposition  party,   should   be   beaten   and   imprisoned
for  saying in  South  Korea  exactly  what  Eisenhower  has  been
trying  to  say  from   Washington!   Chough's   crime  was  that
he  criticized  Rhee  for  releasing  POW's  without  consulting
General  Ckrk   and   declared   Rhee's   threat   to  go   it   alone
would  be  national  suicide.
This  is  supposed  to  be  a  war  to  make  South  Korea   safe
for   democracy.  The   situation   is  made  downright   ludicrous
when   a  political   leader   there  dare  not   even  voice  a  pro-
American  line!   We   have  become   Rhee's   satellite   when   it
is  he  who  can  call  the  tune  of  policy  at  home  and  abroad.
The  time  has  come  when  we  must  either  do  Rhee's  bidding,
which   means  to   move  closer   to  World   War   III,  or   oust
him  as  head  of  South  Korea.  The  task  is  not  as  formidable
as  it  looks  if  one  remembers  that  Rhee  overwhelmingly  lost
the  election   held  on  the  eve  of  the  Korean  war,  and  that
he  had  to  use martial  law  himself  last  year to  force  the  South
Korean  Assembly  to  change  the  Constitution  and  make  his
reelection  as  President   possible.  His  real  strength   is  not  to
be  measured   by   noisy  demonstrations   or   by   the   Fascistic
"youth  groups"   on  which  he  has  depended   to  terrorize  the
opposition.
A  combination  of  military  and  political  measures  is
necessary  if  more  Americans   are  not  to  die  in  Korea  and
perhaps  many  many  more  in  China.  Military  measures  are
required  to  show  that  we  mean  business  and  that  advocates
of  peace  may  speak  up  in  South  Korea  without  fear.  To  end
Rhee's   scarcely  veiled   dictatorship   would  make  it   possible
to  win  the  support  of  the  National  Assembly.  The  great  mass
of  the  Korean  people  on  both  sides  must  be  sick  to  death  of
a  war  that  has  made  their   tiny  country  a  bloody  training
ground   for  the  armies  and  air  forces  of  the  great   Powers.
If  we  believe  in  democracy,  let  us  make  it  possible   for  the
Korean  people to  speak.  Under  such conditions a program  call-
ing  for  unification  of  Korea  and   free   elections   under   UN
auspices  to  pick  a  new  unified  government  would  make  sense
as  the  political  basis  for  a  permanent  peace.  Any  other  kind
of  patched  up  truce  would  merely  be  a  short  breathing  spell
until  we  were  summoned  again  to  put  out  fires  ignited  by
Rhee.
It  is  important  at  this  juncture  to  remember  that  Rhee—
for   all  his   talk   of   unifying   his   country—was   one   of   the
few   leaders   who   pressed   originally   for   establishment   of   a
separate  State  in  South  Korea  despite  Australian and Canadian
misgivings   and   the   opposition   of   most   Korean   political
leaders  right   or   left.   They   foresaw  that   separate   elections
would  lead  to  civil  war.  It  is  also  important   to   remember
that  Rhee  has  always  opposed   unification  and  free   elections.
His  program   has  been   for  us  to  conquer   North   Korea  by
force  and  then  hand  over  control  of  it  to  Rhee.  Like  Ade-
nauer  in  that  other  Korea  on  the  other  side  of  Eurasia,  Rhee
has  always  feared   that   free  elections   in   a   unified   country
would  be  the  end  of  his  regime.
We  have  been  paying  with  the  blood  of  our  sons  for
our  political   errors  in   Kqrea.  We   treated   the  Koreans  all
through  World  War  II  as  an  inferior  breed,  refusing   tl.em
arms  and  the  basis  for  a  postwar  government.  After  the  war,
MacArthur   was  consistently   pro-Japanese   in   dealing   with
Korean  problems.  In  the  Korean  occupation,  we  fumed   but
acquiesced   in   Rhee's   high-handedness   and   in   the   terror
and   assassinations   with   which   he   liquidated    opposition.
After   the   war   began,   our   troops   treated   as   "gooks"   the
people  we  had  come  supposedly  to  liberate.  Now  we  permit
Rhee  to  beat   and  imprison   those  who  dare  speak   up   for
peace.  The  contempt  they must  feel  for  us  is  easy  to imagine,
yet  these  are  the  people  we  must  mobilize  for  peace  if  we
are ever  to  disengage  ourselves from  an  endless and  futile  war.
9   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  4,  1953
Paradoxical Picture  in  The  Search  for  Peace
The  nightmare had  come to  pass. There was a General  in
the White House  and a General Motors  executive in  the Penta-
gon.  By  all  the  stereotypes   cherished  left  of  center,  the  Gen-
eral  in  the  White  House  should  have  meant  more  power  for
the  military  and the GM  executive  in  the  Pentagon  more arms
orders  for  big  business.  Eisenhower  and  Wilson  between  them
should  have been  producing  the  biggest  arms budget  in  peace-
time  history. The  paradox  is that  last  week they were  engaged
in  a major  struggle  against  the  military bureaucracy to  put  the
brakes  on  armament  spending.  The  Republican  "party  of  big
business"  had  supported   them  in  two  showdown  votes,  while
ex-President  Truman  had  emerged  from  a  brief  retirement  to
lead  the  Democratic  "party  of  the  little  man"  into  battle  on
behalf  of  the  military  and  aviation  lobbies.  This  was the weird
story  unfolding  in  Washington.
The House  had voted 234-108 to uphold  Eisenhowet's storm-
provoking  Reorganization  Plan  No.  6.  Only  11  Republicans
voted  against  the  President  and  only  a minority  of  Democrats
had  voted  for  him.  The  issue  was obscure,  and  had  been  made
more so by the  sudden outcry that Eisenhower was trying to cre-
ate  a  "Prussian-style"  General  Staff.  Former  President  Hoover
lined   up   against   Eisenhower.    David   Lawrence   denounced
the  plan  daily.  Clare  Hoffman  of  Michigan,  chairman  of  the
House  Committee  on  Government   Operations,   tried  his  best
to  kill  the  plan. On  the  surface  all  it  seemed  to  do  was carry
unification  of  the  armed  forces  a  few  small  steps  further.  It
was  calculated  to  increase  the  power  of  the  Secretary  of  De-
fense  and  under  him  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff   to  weld  three   jealous  and  competing   armed  services  a
little  more  closely  into  a  team.
The  real issue was evident  in the fear  expressed  by former
Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  Thomas  K.  Finletter.  "This  move
toward  a  centralized  authority  in  a  single  department,"  Fin-
letter  told   Clare  Hoffman's   committee,   "is  going  to  hit  air
power—hurt  air  power  . . .  Reorganization  Plan  No. 6    ...
will  interfere  with  the  proper  presentation  of  the  case  of  air-
power."
Finletter  said  "We  are  indeed  at  this  moment  seeing  an
example  in  the  debate  over  the  budget  for  the fiscal year  1954
of  the  failure to  p'rovide the proper  mechanism  for  the  presen-
tation  of  the  air-atomic point  of  view."  The  day the  Reorgani-
zation  Plan  was  approved  in  the  House,  the  aviation  lobby
suffered  another  defeat  at  the  hands of  the  Administration and
the  Republican  party.  The  powerful  Appropriations   Commit-
tee  of  the  House  not  only  rejected  Air  Force  protest  against  a
5  billion  dollar  cut  by  Eisenhower  and  Wilson   in  the   1954
aviation  budget  but  added  another  quarter  billion  dollar  re-
duction  on  its  own.
The  Republicans  are thinking  in  terms  of  "economy"
—and  driving hard  for  a tax cut  in  time  for the  next  Congres-
sional  elections.   The   Democrats   are  still  thinking  of  arma-
ment  and  war  as a  kind  of  gigantic  "boondoggle".—they  hope
to  pick  up  votes  as  a  shrinking  arms  budget  reduces  jobs.  In
this  picture  the  military  are  lined  up  with  the  Democrats—
and  so  is  labor.  Armament  has  become  a  kind  of  pork  barrel,
as rivers  and harbor  legislation  used  to  be, and  every cut  in  an
arms  contract  mobilizes  local  members  of  Congress  and  Sena-
tors  with  the  labor  unions  and  the  aggrieved  contractor  for
reinstatement. At  Willow  Run  outside Detroit  last  week work-
ers  continued  at  work  on  cancelled  Air   Force  contracts  for
overpriced  C-119's and  S-123's. A petition  was circulated  offer-
ing  to work 30 days without pay to help  Henry Kaiser get new
business  while  Michigan's  Senators, Ferguson  and  Potter,  and
Congressman  George  Meader  put  pressure  on  Secretary  of  Air
Talbott   to  provide  a  new  "fixed   price"  aircraft  contract  for
Willow   Run.
There  was  a  revealing  bit  of  dialogue  on  the  Senate floor
last  week  when  Symington  of  Missouri,  a  Democrat,   chief
spokesman  of  the  air  lobby,  used  his  maiden  speech  for  a bit-
ter  attack  on  the  cuts in  the  air  force  program.  Senator  Kerr,
Democrat,  of  Oklahoma,  put   a  question  which  disclosed  an
attitude  of  mind  typical on  the  Democratic  side:
MR.  KERR.  Is  there  not  abundant  evidence  of  the  fact
that  the  hard-dollar  policy of the  administration was more
influential  in  the  decision  made  by  the  Secretary  of  De-
fense than  an appropriate  understanding of the  necessities
for  the  Nation's  defense?
MR.  SYMINGTON.  I  believe  the  distinguished  Senator
from  Oklahoma  is entirely  correct.
Hatred  of  the  "hard  dollar"  has  been  a  characteristic of
the  popular  party  in  this  country  as  far  back  as  Shay's  Rebel-
lion;  Beard's "Economic  Interpretation"  showed  the  part agrar-
ian  and  debtor  desire  for  cheap  money  played  in  the  original
battle  over  the  Constitution.  But  cheap  money  policies  which
financed reform  and  improvements  under  Franklin  D.  Roose-
velt  had  become  the  vehicle  for  perpetual   alarm  and  arms
spending  under  Truman.  To  read  the  ex-President's  speech  to
the  Reserve  Officers'  Association,  always  a  sounding  board  for
the  military bureaucracy, was  to  see that  he  slipped  naturally
from  arguing  the  need  for  greater  armament  into  a  quite dif-
ferent  kind  of  attack  on  "economizers".   "What  did  we  hear  in
1939  and  1940?  Why,  we heard that a few billion  dollars more
of  Federal  spending  would  wreck  the  economy"  and  then  after
Pearl  Harbor   "We  forgot  all  about  those  alleged  dangers  of
wrecking   the   economy.  We   spent   nearly   $350   billion  on
armaments  and  war.  We  increased  the  national  debt  400  per-
cent.  And  our  economy,  after  all that, didn't  show  the  slightest
sign  of being  wrecked  . . . our  economy  came  out of  the Sec-
ond  World  War   in  good  health  and,  basically >  it  got  steadily
healthier  throughout   the  postwar  period."
What did Truman mean  by economic health?  "Whether
people  who  want  to  work  can  find  jobs  at  decent   wages—
whether  national  production  is  going  up—whether  businesses
are  growing  . .  ." But was it  economically  healthy, was it  safe,
was it  decent  to  keep  an  economy pumped  up  by war  and  fear
of  war?  This  was  the  easy  and  popular  way  out.  "Too  few  of
us,"  said  another  voice  in  this  debate,  "have  a  real  conception
of   the  substantial   portion   of  our   economic   vitality  that  is
siphoned   away  as  a  result  of  our  past  approach   to  military
programs." The  speaker  was the  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense,
Roger  M.  Kyes, before  the  U.  S. Chamber  of  Commerce.  The
difference  in  approach  is  the  difference  in  attitude  of  the  two
parties  toward  military spending.  That  difference  is  important
for  peace.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  4,  1953
/ F. Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher,  I. F. STONE
Published  weekly except  the  last two weeks
of  August  at  Room  205,  301  E.  Capitol
St.,  S.E.,  Washington   3,  D.  C.  Subscrip-
tion  rates:   Domestic,   $5  a  year;   Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and  Continental
Europe,  $10  by  1st  class  mail,  $15  by  air;
for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by first class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.  Single
copy,  15  cents. Tel.: LI  4-7087. Entered  as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,   D.  C.
July  4,  195?
s      Vol.   I,  No.  24
COMMENT
Footnote on Book-Burning
What   is   currently   being   called   Mc-
Carthyism  is,  of  course,  much  older  and
has more respectable beginnings and  back-
ing.  In  the  current  uproar  about  "book-
burning",  it  is useful  to  recall  that  stricter
surveillance of librarians and libraries was
among   the   measures   advocated   by   the
U.  S. Chamber of  Commerce in  the  series
of  annual  pamphlets it has  issued since  the
war   on  community action  against   Com-
munism.   These   pamphlets—to   which   I
first   called   attention   in  the   New   York
Daily  Compass—blueprinted  the  drive  to-
ward  thought control  in America.
The   1948   pamphlet,  "A   Program   for
Community     Anti-Communist     Action",
called  for  the  extension  of  loyalty  purge
standards  to  all  professions  dealing  with
opinion.  It  mentioned  teachers  and  it said
"Librarians  likewise are  not  beyond pub-
lic  scrutiny." The  U.  S. Chamber of  Com-
merce  said,  "In  spite  of  some highly  pub-
licized   protests    against   'censorship',   it
must  be  remembered that  a  public library
is  a  public  trust.  It  should  not  be  used  as
a  vehicle for  publicizing Communist prop-
aganda."
If  libraries  are  not  to  be  a  "vehicle  for
Communist  propaganda",  somebody  must
decide  what  boqks  are  Communist  propa-
ganda and whether they  should be  allowed
in  the  library.  This  is  censorship.   The
Chamber   of   Commerce   said   cautiously
that  it  did  not  mean  "we  should  protest
because   a  library  carries   the  works  of
Marx,  Lenin,  Stalin.   But  we  should  be
concerned when  (1)  The  amount of Com-
munist  or pro-Communist literature  is out
of   proportion  to  factual  anti-Communist
literature  and  (2)  pro-Communist studies
are  promoted  in  library  literature  as  ob-
jective   or   recommended  studies."   This
means  encouraging  busy-bodies  to  snoop
around  libraries  for  what  they  may  con-
sider  pro-Communist  books.
That  program  five  years  ago  already
outlined  a  drive  to  "purge"  the  book  re-
views as  well as the libraries,  foreshadow-
ing  that  lengthy  analysis  of  literary   re-
views  by  the  McCarran  committee  in  its
search  last  year  for  books  and  reviewers
7*
critical  of  American  Far   Eastern  policy
and of Chiang  Kai-shek.  "The  real  danger
in  this  field,"  the  U.  S.  Chamber  of  Com-
merce  said  in  1948,  "is  not  usually  the  at-
titude  of  the  librarians  themselves.  It  is
the  fact  that  many of their  important  book
review   sources   are   infiltrated   by   Com-
munists  or  sympathizers."
Thought  Control and Labor
In  the  same  pattern  is the  drive to  sub-
ject  the labor  movement to the  Subversive
Activities  Control   Board.  This  has  long
been  the  goal   of  the   Chamber   of  Com-
merce   and   the   National   Association  of
Manufacturers,  both   of  which  supported
the   McCarran    Act   under   which   that
Board  was  established.   The   Goldwater-
Rhodes  bill,  which  would  have  given  the
Board  sweeping powers over  labor unions,
bogged  down in unfavorable publicity. But
the  Jenner  committee  was  off  on  a  new
tack  last  week-end with the announcement
that  hearings   would  soon  be  held  by  a
special  "task  force  of  the  Senate  Internal
Security    Subcommittee"    on   a    similar
measure  by  Senator  Butler,  R.,  of  Mary-
land,  McCarthy's  protege  in  his   success-
ful  fight  against  Tydings.
The  "task  force"  has  been nicely chosen
for  this task.  Butler,  Welker  and  McCar-
ran  will  make  up  the  subcommittee  and
several  weeks of hearings  will  be held  this
month.  Butler's  bill would enable the  Sub-
versive Activities Control  Board to put out
of  business  any  union  it  regarded  as  sub-
versive.  McCarran  has  a  bill  to  bar   "sub-
versives"  from  labor  unions and  allow em-
ployers  to  fire  them  at  will.  It  remains  to
be  seen  whether  the  labor  movement can
rise  above  its  own  intra-mural  feuds  and
obsessions  to  see the  danger  in  such  legis-
lation  to  all  militant trade unionism.
Giddy Air  Force
A  chart  on  page  281 of  the  House  Ap-
propriations   Committee  hearings   on  the
Air   Force   shows   the   giddy  way   arms
budgets  are  made up  and  billions  juggled.
Originally  the Air  Force  asked  22 billions
for   fiscal   1954.  The   Department   of   De-
fense   staff   experts  cut  this  to  15  and  a
half   billions.  The   Air   Force  came  back
with  a  revised  estimate  of  19  and  a  half
billions.  The   Department  of   Defense  in
submitting  final  estimates  to  the  Budget
Bureau  split  the  difference  and  asked  for
17  billions.  The  Budget  Bureau  cut  this
down by one billion and Truman  put  it  up
a  half  billion  in the estimates he  sent  Con-
gress  last  January.  This  16 billion  dollar
figure  was  cut   three  and  three   quarter
billions  by  Eisenhower  and  Wilson.   The
House  Appropriations  Committee  cut  an-
other   quarter   billion   off  the   total   last
week,  recommending  11  billions  or   just
one half  the original  Air  Force  request.
143 Wings and Garrison  State
The  figures  show  a  growing   gap  be-
tween  the  amounts  appropriated  for  the
9  3
Air   Force  and  the  amounts   spent.   The
carry-over  at  the  end of this  year,  accord-
ing  to  Senator  Ferguson  will  be  28  bil-
lions. The  House Appropriations  Commit-
tee  pointed  out  that  even  with  the  cuts  it
recommended   the  Air   Force—thanks  to
the   carry-over—would   have   more   than
36  billions to  spend  in  the  fiscal  year  be-
ginning  this  week.  Flanders  of  Vermont
went  to  the  point  when  he" told  the  Senate
after   Symington's  attack  on  Air   Force
budget  reductions,  "It  has  been  very  evi-
dent  that  we  have   appropriated   beyond
our  ability  to  build  without   going  on  a
wartime  basis."
Dulles on East-West  Trade
Official    responsibility    and     economic
reality  have  had  their  sobering  influence
on  John  Foster  Dulles,  at  least  in  respect
to  East-West  trade   in  Europe.  The  re-
cently  released   Senate  Foreign  Relations
Committee hearings  on the  Mutual  Secur-
ity   Act   of   1953  disclose   an   unexpected
moderation  on  the  part  of  the   Secretary
of  State  when  he  was  asked  about  East-
West  trade  by Senator  Smith,  R., of  N.  J.
Secretary  Dulles  said  East-West  trade
in  Europe  now  amounted  to  about  $800,-
000,000  "a  year  both  ways,  and  it  is  our
present   thinking  at   least  that   it  would
not  be  desirable  to  try  to  cut  that  trade
off.  It  would  impose  upon us a very heavy
additional   responsibility  .  .  .  It  would
either  mean  a  very  sharp  decline  in  the
economic  conditions  in  those  countries  or
we would have  to compensate  by increased
aid  from  ourselves."
"And    furthermore,"    Dulles   went   on,
sounding  quite  unlike himself,  "I  believe
that  kind  of  trade  can  be  definitely  to  our
advantage  in  particularly   awakening  the
satellite  countries   to  the  possibilities  of
closer  relations  with  the  Western   coun-
tries  as  what  they  can  get  through  their
present  relations  with  the  Soviet  Union."
The  Secretary  of  State  as  an  example
told  the  Senators  he  had  spoken  with  the
U.  S.  Ambassador   to  Hungary   "and  he
said  that  there  was  a  very  great  desire
on  the  part   of  Hungary   to  have   closer
relations  with  the  West  of  an  economic
character   and  to  lose  even  its  economic
dependence  upon  the  Soviet  Union."  Un-
der  the  circumstances  Dulles  thought   it
would  be  unwise  "to  cut  off  that  trade",
except  for  the  Battle  Act  restrictions  on
strategic   materials.
Senator   SMITH.  Some   of  us,  of
courseware  bothered  by  the  thought
that  almost  any  article  today  is  of
some  strategic  value.
Secretary    DULLES.  Yes,  that   is
quite  true,  but  by  the   same   token
you  might  say  what  we  get  from
them  is  of  strategic  value  to  us.
The   idea   expressed    is  that   trade   is
mutually   beneficial.   The    idea   was   no
longer  novel  in  the  days  of  Homer.  But
its  rediscovery   in  cold  war  Washington
is  news.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  4,  1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
Bright  Postcript  by  the  Ku Klux  Klan
The  day  after   my  friend   and  neighbor  Fyke  Farmer  re-
turned  from  Washington,   two  days  after  the  sentence  of  the
court  in  The  People  vs.  Julius  and  Ethel Rosenberg  had  been
executed, I  was his guest  for dinner at  his home. Afterward, as
the  evening darkened  and  cooled,  we sat  in  his  sun  porch  and
he  spoke  of  the  piece  he  was  thinking  of  writing,  "Why  I
Believe the  Rosenbergs Were Innocent."-"Who would publish
it?"  he  said.  I  mentioned  Life  . . .  "After  all, the  Pope was
interested."  He  was  called  to  the  phone  and  I  sat  with  Mrs.
Farmer.  She  is  a  quiet  woman with  graying  hair;  her  strong
face  makes yon think of'the  Pioneers.  She had  a kitten  on  her
lap.  There  was a  little  brown  dog  in  the  porch.  We  talked  of
their   pets,   of  their   children  who  were  at  summer  'camps.
Fyke  came back grinning.  "John  Beverly; we  were  at Vander-
bilt  together."  Beverly had called to tell  him that  friends  at  his
house  were  saying Farmer  must  be  a  Communist.  "He  called
to tell me he  had  'stood  up  for  me,
1
" Fyke said. "They'd  had a
drink  or  two  around."  The  little  brown  dog  was  behaving
nervously. Mrs. Farmer went to the door  and let him out.
What  had  led  him  to  believe  they  were  innocent  was  the
record;  they  had  told  a  "straight  story"  all  the  way  through.
Greenglass"  testimony  was  given  "under  duress,  his  life  was
at  stake."  Under  the  same duress the  others  would  not  change
their   story  to   save  their   lives.  "They   could  have  invented
something  . .  ."  Outside,  the dog was barking  so excitedly  I
could  not  hear  the  rest  of  his  sentence.  A  plane  was  going
over,   the   10  o'clock   transcontinental,   westbound.  With   a
murmur  of exasperation  Mrs.  Farmer  let  the  dog  in.
She  took  him  away  to  another  part  of  the  house,  and  we
heard  her  cry  "There's  a  fire."  I  glanced  over  my  shoulder.
There was indeed  a  small,  lively  blaze down  at  the  foot  of  the
lawn,  under  the trees.  Someone  burning  leaves . . . But then,
at  the  front  door,  she  cried  more  sharply,  and  Fyke  and  I
went  out to the  veranda.
In  the  still  black  night,  the  cross  was  flaming  silently.  It
was  about  eight  feet  tall,  at  the  side  of  the  street.  Fyke went
down  the  steps  and  halfway  across  the  lawn  and  came  back
to  the  house.  "Perhaps  I  should  call  the  police,  or  the  sheriff.
1. F. Stone's  Weekly
                                                                7
-
4
-
53
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St.,  S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C
Please enter the following  mbscription. £5  for  1 year  is
enclosed.  (See page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name   ....................................................................................
Street
City
State
..Zone..
Would  you  call  the  police  or  the   sheriff?   Or   the  paper?"
'If  anybody,"  I  said,  "I'd  call  the  fire  department."  We  re-
turned  to  our  chairs  in  the  sun  porch.  The  light  from   the
blazing  cross  flickered  on  the  windows. A  boy's  voice  called
at  the  door:  "It  was  three  young  fellows  in  a  big  car, Mr.
Farmer.  A  black  car." Fyke  thanked  him. He   handed  me
some manuscript sheets.  "I've  just  started  writing it," he said.
"I  want  to  see  Justice  Frankfurter's  dissent  first."  His   wife
stroked  the  white  kitten  in  her  lap. She  said  nothing  but  I
noticed  that  she  could  not  help  glancing  up  at  any  noise  in
the  street,
A  car  grated  in  the  drive;  a  reporter  and  a  photographer
knocked  at  the  door  at  the  end  of  the  porch.  "We  got  a  call
about  a  cross burning out  here,  Mr.  Farmer." Mrs.  Farmer said
softly,  "I  think I  know who  called."  The  blaze  was  about out.
"In   Tampa,  when  Al  Smith  was  running,"  I   told  Mrs.
Farmer, "the  Kluxers came into town  and burnt  crosses  in  the
cigar-making  section.  It  was midnight. When  they  drove  out
Seventh  Avenue in  Ybor  City, the  Cubans  stood  on  boxes and
yelled  at  them  'Viva  Al  Smeet!'" She smiled,  but  very  faintly.
I  do  not  think  she  was  alarmed,  but  this  was  her  home.  She
said,  "I  don't  want  any  more  publicity."  Fyke  heard  her, and
told  the  reporter  and  the  photographer,  "No  pictures.  That's
the  story. Thanks."  They went away.
"Do you know what  he  asked me?" Fyke said.  "Whether  I'd
been  in  Washington.  Where  were  we?" Mrs.  Farmer  brought
us mint tea  and  sat  down  again  and  stroked  the  kitten.  Their
house  is  on  a  shaded  street  where  the  houses  are  far  apart.
Occasionally  there  was  voices  in  the  street  and  Mrs. Farmer
lifted  her  head  at  these  sounds.  Their  high  school  son  came
in and put  up the car and passed,  whistling,  through  the  house
toward  the  kitchen. They  said  nothing  to  him  of  the incident.
"Do  you  sometimes  wonder,"  Fyke  said  suddenly, "whether
in  the  end  we'll  be  able  to  keep  our  democracy?"  I  tried  to
reassure  him.  "I'm pretty  sure  it's been  a  fight  since  the  be-
ginning.  A  good  fight."  I  thought  they  would  feel  better  in
the morning.  When  I drove out of their  gate, not a spark  of the
hate-stick remained.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  B.  Capitol  St.,  SJB.,
Washington  3,  D.  C
Entered  as
Second   Class   Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED