I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953sep12.pdf

============================================================

Jennings  Perry  on  The  Bible  Blitz,  See Page  4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I,  NUMBER  32           SEPTEMBER   12,  19535       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Jenner  Report  and  The  Panicky  Liberals
The  effect  of  the  Jenner  committee  report  on  Interlock-
ing  Subversion  in  Government Departments is  to  represent
the  New  Deal  and  the  Fair  Deal  as  a  vast  Communist con-
spiracy.
"They"  were  everywhere.  "When  the  principal  concern  of
Government  was  economic  recovery,"  the  report   says,  "they
were   in   the   Agricultural  Adjustment  Administration,   the
Works  Progress  Administration,  the  National  Recovery  Ad-
ministration  .  .  .  During  the  war,  they  joined  such  wartime
agencies  as the Board of Economic Warfare  . . .  Toward the
end  of  the  war  they  were  operating  in   the  foreign  policy
field .  .  .  They  colonized  key  committees  of  Congress.  They
helped  write  laws,  conduct  Congressional  hearings,  and  write
Congressional  reports.  They  advised  Cabinet  members  .  .  .
They   staffed   interdepartmental   committees   which  prepared
basic  American  and  world  policy.  They  travelled  to   every
continent  as  emissaries  and  representatives  of  the  American
people.  They  attended  virtually  every  international  confer-
ence  where statesmen  met  to  shape  the  future."
The  Eisenhower  Administration  is  also  suspect.  "They"  are
still  around.  The  'report  says,  "The  Soviet  international  or-
ganization  has  carried  on  a  successful  and  important  penetra-
tion  of  the  United  States  government  and  this   penetration
has  not  been  fully  exposed."  Though  the  Republicans  are  in
power,   "policies  and  programs   laid   down  by  members  of
this  Soviet  conspiracy  are  still  in   effect  within  our  govern-
ment  and constitute a continuing hazard to  our  national secur-
ity."
The  reverberations  may  already  be  heard  in  the   rightist
press.   "There   are   at   least   10,000   Communists   or   fellow
travellers,  many  in  sensitive  spots,  on  the  Federal  payroll  at
this  moment,"  Lee  Mortimer   breathlessly   announced  in  his
Hearst  newspaper  column, New  York  Confidential,   last  week.
"Ike, what are you going  to do about  it?"
Wall Street  Suspect, Too
One  of  Elsenhower's  closest  advisers,  John  J.  Me  Cloy,
is  deftly  sideswiped  by  the  report.  It  digs  up  a  War  Depart-
ment  directive  of   1944   and   some  Me  Cloy  testimony  of
1945   to  show  "Army  tolerance   of  Communists."  Me  Cloy
was  then  Assistant  Secretary  of  War,  and  the  testimony  may
be  intended  to  embarrass  him,  for  it  shows  a  calmly  judicial
view  of  the  Red  Menace.  The   effect  is  to  create  distrust  of
Republicans  as  well  as  Democrats,  for  the  War   Department
then  was  under  Stimson  and  Patterson,  both  Republicans.
The  tide  of  slander  here  begins   to  lap  at  one  of  Wall
Street's  most  respectable  doorsteps.  Me  Cloy,  a   corporation
lawyer  by  profession,  conservative   and  Republican,   is  now
chairman   of   the   board   of   Chase   National   Bank.  He   has
been  mentioned  as  possible  successor  to  John  Foster  Dulles
as  Secretary  of  State.  Obviously  the  witch  hunters  are  also
gunning  for  the  civilized  wing  of  the  Republican  party.  This
is  a  good  point  at  which  to  recall  that  the  chairman  of  the
committee  which  released   this  report   is  the   same  Senator
Jenner  who  smeared  General  Marshall.
Where Was The  FBI?
The   most  serious  charge  made  in  this   report   is  that
"Thousands  of  diplomatic,  military,  scientific  and  economic
secrets  of  the  United States  have been  stolen  by  Soviet agents
in  our  government  and  other  persons  closely  connected  with
the   Communists."   If  this   is  true,  then   the   various  secret
police  agencies  of  this  government,  notably  the   FBI,  were
criminally   inefficient.
A  footnote  on  page  25,  says,  "The  sub-committee  learned
during  this  series   of  hearings   that  the   Federal  Bureau  of
Investigation  had  received derogatory  security information and
had  conducted  investigations  during   1941  and   1942  on  Al-
ger  Hiss,  Harry  Dexter  White,  Harry  Magdoff,  Maurice  Hal-
perin,  and  Harold  Glasser." War-time  statutes  and regulations
were  in  effect.  The  FBI  was  tapping  wires  by  special  per-
mission  of   the   Attorney  General   in   such   cases.  Mail  was
covered.
The  "derogatory  security  information"  if  true,  represented
valuable  "tips"  to  a  secret  police.  Many means  of  surveillance
were at  its disposal  The report  says, "There is ample  evidence"
that  the  FBI  learned  "the  underlying  facts  of  the  Communist
conspiracy"  and  informed  administrative  agencies.  "It  is  the
function  of  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation,"  the  report
goes  on,  "to  uncover  and  compile  security  information  and
make  it   available,  without  evaluation   and  without  recom-
mendation,  to  the  proper  executive  agencies.  The  FBI cannot
expose  and  cannot  force  action  once  it  has  reported  the  re-
sults  of  its  investigation."
Were The Attorneys General at Fault?
This  implies that  the  FBI  uncovered  evidence  of wrong-
doing  but  that  the  Department   of  Justice  declined   to  take
action.  The  main  responsibility  would  rest  on  the  Attorneys
General  of  this  period,  first  Jackson  and  then  Biddle.  If  all
this  miasma  of  suspicion   were  really  to  be  conscientiously
investigated  by  a  body  with  powers  of  subpoena,  one  of  its
earliest   moves  would  be  to  determine   (1)   just  what  the
FBI  found  and  (2)   if  it  found  evidence  of  crime,  why  no
action  was taken  by the  Department  of  Justice.
I  do  not  believe  that  men  of  the  calibre  of  Jackson  and
Biddle  would  have  ignored,  or  that  any  Attorney   General
would  dare  ignore,  evidence  that  secret   government   docu-
ments  were  being   stolen  by   officials   and  transmitted   to  a
foreign   power.
1  2  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  12, 1953
The  "derogatory  information"  to  be  encountered  in  loyalty
cases  has  usually  been  of  quite  a  different  character.  Radical
views,  associations  and   affiliations   are'  not   proof   of  crime.
The  report  says,  for  example,  "In  the  case  of  this  subcommit-
tee's  inquiry  into  American  citizens  at  the  United  Nations,
the  Federal   Bureau  of  Investigation,  in  virtually  all  the  26
cases,  had  transmitted  derogatory  information  to  the  proper
authorities  in  the  State  Department  years  earlier.  These  peo-
ple  had  also  appeared   before  a  Federal  grand  jury  in  New
York  which  had  this  derogatory  evidence.  Yet, it  was  not
until  the  Internal  Security  subcommittee   brought  this  infor-
mation  forth  in  its  public  hearings  in  the  fall  of  1952,  that
any  action  was  taken  to  remove  these  obvious  security  risks
from   their  positions   of  trust   and  influence."
Why  Didn't  The Grand Jury Indict?
This  is  worth  careful   examination.  The  subcommittee
itself   merely  speaks  of   these  people  as  "security   risks."   It
does   not   claim  the   "derogatory   information"  went   beyond
casting  doubt  on  their  political   reliability.  The  reference  to
the  grand   jury  is  revealing.   The   statute  of   limitations   on
espionage  is  10  years,  not  three   as  in  the  case  of  ordinary
crimes.  The  atmosphere   was  far  different   from   that  which
existed  earlier.  The  grand   jury  had  this  "derogatory   infor-
mation"  but  did  not  indict.
Chambers  first  talked  in  1939, Elizabeth  Bentley  in 1945.
The  persons   they  mentioned   were  subject   to   months   and
years  of  surveillance.  The  surprising  thing   is  that   after   all
these  years  the  subcommittee   has  no  new  evidence  to   offer
and  rests  its  case  against  these  and  other  persons  primarily
upon  their  invocation  of  the  Fifth  amendment.  Some  may  be
guilty  of  espionage.  Some  may  only  be  guilty  of  Communist
associations.  Some  may  only  be  guilty  of  concluding  that  in
this   atmosphere   silent   discretion   was  the   better   part   of
valor.  It  is  a  pity  we  cannot  hire  ourselves  a  Royal  Commis-
sion   and   let   it   dispassionately   separate   fact   from   crypto-
Fascist   fancy.
Retroactive  Political  Memory
The  situation  is  confused   by  indications  that  testimony
has  been   influenced  by  retroactive   political   considerations.
"In   its   report   on   the   Institute   of   Pacific   Relations,"   the
Jenner  subcommittee  says  it  "showed  how  a  group  of  these
individuals  influenced  the  State  Department  with  disastrous
results  to  American  far  eastern   policy.  In   the   present   in-
quiry  we  found   other  nests  in   the   Federal  Economic  Ad-
ministration,   the   Board   of   Economic   Warfare,   and   those
sections   of   the  .Treasury  which   formed   American  postwar
foreign  economic policy, particularly with regard  to  Germany;"
The  chief  targets  here,  of  course,  are  the  so-called  Morgen-
thau  plan  for  Germany  and  the  late  Harry  Dexter   White,
who   was   Morgenthau's  Under   Secretary.  The   report    says
Miss  Bentley  "gave  the  subcommittee  an  extraordinaryily  re-
vealing  glimpse  of  how  White's  hands  played  with  the  inner
levers  of  American  policy."  Here  is  the  testimony,  as  given
in   the  report:                         •
Miss  BENTLEY.  No;  the  only Morgenthau  plan  I knew
anything  about  was  the  German  one.  .
Senator  EASTLAND. Did  you know who  drew that  plan?
Miss  BENTLEY.  Due  to  Mr.  White's  influence,  to push
the  devastation  of  Germany  because  that  was  what  the
Russians  wanted.
Senator   FERGUSON.  That   was  what  the  Communists
wanted?
Miss  BENTLEY.  Definitely Moscow  wanted  them  com-
pletely  razed  because  then  they  would  be  of  no  help  to
the  allies ...
Senator  EASTLAND. What  you say is that  it  was a Com-
munist  plot   to   destroy   Germany  and   weaken  her   to
where  she  could  not  help  us?
Miss  BENTLEY.  That  is  correct.  She  could  no  longer
be  a  barrier  that  would  protect  the  Western   World.
This  is  certainly  reading  back  into  events  a  picture   that
was  not  there  at  the  time.  Except  for  Goebbels,  who  during
the  war  pictured  the  Germans  as  "a  barrier  that  would  pro-
tect  the  Western  World?"  The  "Morgenthau  Plan"  began  to
be  developed  on  the  Western:—not  the  Russian—side'as early
as  the  Quebec  Conference  as a  means  of  preventing  the Ger-
mans  from  making  war  again.  The  subcommittee   report  im-
plies  that  sound  policy  would  have  been  a  negotiated   peace
with  the  Germans  and  an   alliance   against   Russia.  This   is
just  what  Hitler  wanted  after   Stalingrad.
Half-Truth  and Whole Lie
It  will  be  a  long  time  before  we  can  disentangle   half-
truth  and  whole  lie  in  the  witch  hunt.  It  will  also  be  a  long
time  before  we  know  the  full   extent  of  the  sinister  forces
pumping  up  the  Communist   bogey  beyond  all   proportions
to  serve  their  own  purposes.  The  New  Deal  was  a  kind  of
Popular  Front, in  which  Communists  played  their  part.  There
were  Communists   and  Communist  party-liners   in  Washing-
ton,  some  in  important   jobs.  Their  position,   their   numbers
and  their  influence are  being  exaggerated   beyond  all  reason.
But  the   liberal  press  or  what  remains  of   it   is  too  panic-
stricken  to  discuss  the  report.  To  disparage  Communist  in-
fluence  and  power   is  dangerous,  as  it  was  dangerous  in  an
earlier  Inquisition  to  doubt  the  power  and  cleverness  of  the
Devil.
This  Popular  Front,  far  from  overturning  the   government
by  force  and  violence,  brought   America  out  of 'the  tailspin
of   a  great   depression,   made  democracy  work,  proved   that
social  reform  was  possible   by  peaceful  means—and  did  so
at  a  time  when  other  countries  were  turning  to  dictatorship
of  right  or  left.  It  gave  the  workers  and  farmers  of  America
new  faith  in  their  country  and  their  society.  It  taught radicals
who  came to  Washington  a  new  respect  for  democratic proc-
esses  as  it  taught  not  a  few  big  business  men  a  new  respect'
for  the  meaning  of  free  government.  The   "security  risk"  of
having  a  few  Communists  or  Communist  sympathizers  in  the
government  was  far  less  than  the  security  risk  we  would  have
taken  if  the  American  people  in  1932 had  taken  the  other
road—the  road  of   repression   and   reaction   onto   which  we
are  being  pushed  today.
The  purpose  of  the  Jenner  report  is  to  defame  the  mem-
ory  of  a  great  period   in  American  history;  to  make  Eisen-
hower  a  prisoner  of  the  China  Lobby;  and -to  intensify  that
mood   of  paranoid   suspicion,   mutual  distrust   and   growing
panic  so  necessary  as  prelude  to  Fascism.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September   12, 1953
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  and Publifher,   I.  F. STONE
Published   weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room   205,
301  E. Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.  Subscription  rates:  Do-
mestic, $5 a year; Canada, Mexico and  elsewhere  in  the  Western  Hemi-
sphere, $6; England  and Continental Europe,  $10  by  1st class mail,  $13
by air;  for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by first  class  mail,  $20
by  air  mail.  Single  copy,  15  cents. Tel.:  LI  4-7087.  Entered  as  Second
Class  mail  matter, Post  Office,  Washington, D.  C
September  12,   1953Vol.   I,  No.  32
COMMENT
Labor  Day   ,
This  issue  had  to  go  to  be  prepared  almost  a  week  earlier
than  usual  because  of   Labor  Day   and   we  must  leave  for
later  comment  the  Dulles  speech  to  the  American  Legion,
which  makes  a  successful  Korean   political   conference  even
less  likely than  before,  and  UN  Secretary  General  Dag  Ham-
merskjold's   time-serving   action   in   finding   it    "inadvisable"
to  obey  the  Administrative  Tribunal  order  for  the  reinstate-
ment  of  four  UN  employes  who  invoked  the  Fifth  Amend-
ment. This  breaks  the  new Secretary  General's  moral  backbone
at  the  very  outset  of  his  career.
New  Kind  of  Army  Maneuvers
It  should  be  comforting  to  the  Russians  to  know  that  we
not  only  have  enough  bombs  to  blow  them  to  smithereens,
but   are   already   training   military   government    occupation
teams  to  pick  up  the  pieces.  The  Washington  Post  the  other
day  ran  a  story  from  Fort  Meade,  Md.,  which  deserves  wider
attention.   It   was   headed   modestly,   "Reservists   Train   for
Political  Control  of  Lands Under  Reds."
Some  700  civilian   reservists  underwent   15  days  of  mili-
tary  government  training  at  Fort  Meade,  "wrestling  with  the
problem  of  establishing  a  democratic  government  in  'Coun-
try  X',  hypothetically  liberated   after  years  of  Soviet  domina-
tion."  This  should  be  quite  a  wrestle,  though  "the  great  bulk
of   the   population   is   assumed   to   be   friendly   toward   the
United   States",   no   doubt   because   of   the   friendly   feelings
created  by  fission  and  fusion  bombing.
The  exercise  was  set  up  and  directed  by  a  Colonel  Charles
H.  Kraus,  "who  in  civilian  life   is  a  professor  of   political
science  in   the  Foreign   Service  School  at  Georgetown   Uni-
versity."  Another   Old  Russia   Hand   helping   to   direct   the
liberation   maneuvers  is  Col.  Lloyd  E.  Kelly,  who   recently
retired  as deputy  chief  of  the  Metropolitan  Police  Department
in  Washington.
The  military  game  assumes  that  these  liberation   teams  are
accompanied   by  members  of  a  government-in-exile,  who  set
up  a  provisional   government   until   polling   booths   can  be
set  up.  The  reservists  rise  at  5:55  a.m.  and  "All  day  long,"
said  the  Washington  Post  account,  "they  issue  directives   to
the  residents  of  'Country  X'  or  confer  with  fellow  reservists
who  are  acting  as  members  of  the   civilian  government  of
the  country."
Sounds  like  a cinch. We  wonder  how  Napoleon  and  Hitler
could  have slipped  up  on  so simple a military  problem.
Understatement-of-the-Week
Faithful   readers   of   the   Weekly   may  recall   "The   Good
Old  Days  Are  Back—in  FTC  at  Least"  in  our  No.  12, which
dealt  with  the   replacement   of   crusading  ex-newspaperman
John  Carson  by  anti  anti-trust  lawyer  Everett  F.  Howrey  at
the  Federal  Trade  Commission.  Howrey  as  chairman  of  the
FTC  has  now  ousted  three  of  the  four  economists  who  wrote
that  report  suggesting  that  an  international  oil  cartel  existed.
The   comment   of   retiring   FTC   Commissioner   Stephen   J.
Spingarn,  "This  seems  like  an  awful  coincidence  to  me."
Shades  of  Pretty  Adolph!
The  German  Party, ultra  right  and anti  denazification, drew
an  audience  of  only  four  people   to  its  election   rally  in  a
working  class  suburb  of  Frankfurt  last  week.  The  organizers
said  they  had  been  secretly  told  "the   Reds"   (meaning  the
Social   Democrats   principally)   had   warned  the   population
against  coming.  "Imagine,"  said  Dr.  Heinz  Nagel,  "that  there
should  be  so  little  tolerance  in  Germany  for  other  people's
views!"
Hat's  Off
To  that  other  radical  paper,  The   Wall  Street  Journal,  for
its  leading  editorial   of  August  27  opposing   the  McCarran
bill  to  compel  the  testimony  of  witnesses  invoking  the  Fifth
Amendment.  The  bill  need  only  pass  the  House  at  the  next
session  of  Congress  and  we  suggest  that  readers  looking  for
ammunition  get  a  back  copy of  the  WSJ.  "A  rip  in  the  fabric
of  freedom," The  Wall  Street  Journal  concluded,  "strengthens
all  those  who  would  destroy  freedom. We  must  contend  with
Communism  now;  at  some  future  time  our  concern  could  be
a  despotic-tending  State  that  would  use  compulsory  testimony
to  its  good   advantage.  And  a  protection   to  the  individual
once removed  is never  easily  reinstated."
Journalistic  Footnote
Left-of-centre  we  seemed  to  have  the  field  to  ourselves  last
week   in  telling   the   story  of  J.  Edgar  Hoover's  praise   for
Me Carthy   and  its  political   implications.  The   Nation   and
The  New  Republic  were  mum,  as  was  Newsweek,  but  Time
also  told   the  story.  To   fellow   publisher,  Henry   Luce—the
Order  of  the  Pebble,  First  Class.
SAMPLE   COPIES
We will be glad to  send  sample copies
of  any recent issue free  of  charge to any
of  your  friends who  are not subscribers.
You  send us the names. We'll mail them.
I.  F.  STONE'S   WEEKLY
9  *
1  3  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  12, 7953
JENN1NGS    PERRY'S    PAGE
Airlifted  Bibles  Could  Aid  and  Comfort  Enemy
Let  him  who  is  without  worries  of  his  own  be  first  to
cast  the  stone  of  reproach  at  the  State  Department  for  trying
to  avert  its  countenance  from   and  wash  its  hands  of   the
Bible  Blitz  project,  intended  to  get  Holy  Writ  across  to  the
Godless  Reds  by  balloon.  This  page  for  its  part  cannot  in
good   conscience   so   stoop  but,   rather,   charitably   suggests
that  in  passing  the  potato  to  the  Germans  the   Department
has  shown   a   concern   for   consequences   heretofore   seldom
exercised  in  the  prosecution  of  the  Cold  War.
I   no  more  than  the  State  Department,   of  course,  mean
to  impugn  the  motives  of  the  sponsor   of  the  project,   the
International  Council  of  Christian  Churches.  Its  aim  is  to  be
helpful,  to  supplement  our  benefactions  in  Berlin.  Man  can-
not   live  by  bread   alone,   for  a   fact,   not   even  free   bread;
and  no  matter  what  the  Eisenhower  Bundles  may  do  for  the
material  welfare of  the  hungry  Easterners  their  diet  properly
can  be  rounded  only  by  access  to  food  of  the  spirit.
Nor   does  one  question   the  purity  of  the  Council's mis-
sionary  zeal.  On  that  score  its  assurance  to  Pres.  Eisenhower,
on   appealing   for  his  "immediate   assistance,"   that   the bal-
loons  were  not  to  carry  any  political  propaganda  should  be
conclusive.  The  Bibles  and  selected  quotations  to  be  airlifted
have  been  faithfully   printed   in  Polish,  Russian,  Czech  and
Slovak   without   expurgation   or   slanted   editorial   interpola-
tions.  The  balloons  bear  only  the  trademark  of  their  German
manufacturers  and,  though  lifted  by  hydrogen,  would  not  be
expected  unpleasantly  to  remind  the  benighted  people  among
whom  they  would  drift  down  of  recent  apocalyptic  explosions
on both  sides of  the  Iron  Curtain.
Just  why,  indeed,  the  Council's  spokesmen  should  feel
that  the  promise  not  to  include  political   propaganda   with
the  Bibles  might  recommend  the  project  in  Washington   is
hard   to  say. But  in   any  sympathetic  defense  of  the   State
Department's  reluctance  to  intervene  with  German  authori-
ties  for  permission  to  get  the  balloons  off  of  the  ground  it
must  be  pointed  out  that  the  Book  itself  expounds  a  social
theory  which  has  proved  highly  incendiary  in  the  past,  and
that  the  whole  well-meant distribution  could  seriously  back-
fire. The  Devil  himself,  as  is  well  known, is  adept  at  rooting
out  arguments  to  his  purposes  in  the   Scriptures;   and   the
Help Keep Dissent  Alive In  America
By  Subscribing
7. F. Stone's   Weekly
301  E. Capitol St.,  S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C
Please  enter  the  following  subscription.  $5  for  1 year  it
enclosed.  (See page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name  ....................................................................................
Street
City
..Zone.
..State.
9-12-53
State   Department,   already  under  attack   for  unimaginative
laxity  in  security  matters,  would  be  sorely  taxed  to   justify
before  Sen.  McCarthy  even  a  friendly  association   with  this
plan  to  place  such  powerful  ammunition  within  reach  of  the
unscrupulous   heathen   who   "hope   to   wreck   our   life   and
freedom."
Beyond  doubt   these  people  have  a   facility   of   imitation
and  are  quite  capable  of  taking  and  using  our  good  works,
from  B-29s  to nuclear bombs, and even of  improving  on  them,
for  evil.  Letting  them  have  the  Bible  would  be  a  great  risk
since  we  cannot  trust  them  with  anything.  Our  bread  could
come back disastrously.
For  though  providentially  the  winds  do  blow  from  west  to
east  in  Europe,  the  winds also  blow  from  Kamchatka to  Kan-
sas,  from  the  unjust  to  the  just, as  the  Japanese  lately  demon-
strated.  The   hydrogen  balloons   blow   with   them—and   ap-
parently  in  Siberia  these  people  also  have  hydrogen.  Suppose
we  should  find  our  holy  books  floating  back  to  us,  not  clean
and  unslanted as  we  sent  them  out  but  underscored  and  red-
lettered   for  propaganda—"He  hath  made  of  one  blood   all
nations  of  men"  and  "Go  and  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to
the  poor?"
Or  worse:  for  these  people,  we  have  told  ourselves  over
and  over  again, have their  own profane  "Bible."  Suppose  that,
slyly  trading  on  the  injunction  to  "do  unto  others,"  they  fill
our  air  with  gift  balloons  wafting  down  Karl  Marx  on  our
countrysides,  our  city  streets,  where  anybody,  even  the  chil-
dren,  can  read  the  false  doctrines   and  see  what  the   fuss   is
about?  The  police  could  not  hope  to  suppress  all  of  this mat-
ter;  the  senatorial  committees  could  not  possibly  purge   the
libraries  fast  enough:  and  the  question  of  true  loyalty  would
have  to be  extended  darkly over  the  whole of  our  fair,  literate
land.
As  it  is  now,  the  State  Department   has  Mr.  Dulles  who
can  recite  all  the  Scripture  the  Voice  of  America  needs  to
send  across  the  borders.  Mr.  Dulles  is  discreet.   He  can  be
trusted  never  to  reveal  double-bitted  quotations  to  those  who
cannot  be  trusted  not  to  use  the  other  edge.  His  department
simply  feels  safer,  one  can  understand,  not  encouraging  this
flight  of  uncensored  Bibles  to  the  impious.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St., S.E.,
Washington  3, D.  C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED