I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953jun06.pdf

============================================================

The  "Ammunition  Shortage"  and  the  New  Stab-in-the-Back  Myth,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   1,  NUMBER  20
JUNE  6,  19532o»       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
That Wild  Uproar May Herald  Peace
Washington  this  past  week  has  been   the  center   of  a
tempest.  But  the  howling  gales,  the  deafening tumult  and  the
tension  have  been  good  signs,  not  bad.  It  is  the  approach  of
peace  which  has  aroused   to   furious   protest   every  pro-war
element  in  the  Western   coalition   from  Seoul  to  Bonn, and
within  both  parties  at  home.  The  balance  of  forces  making
for   peace   is  precarious.  Some   new   provocation  may   easily
upset  it,  and  plunge  us  suddenly  into  wider  conflict   abroad
and  intensified  repression  at  home.  The  screaming  will  grow
louder,  the   danger  greater,  as  peace  draws  nearer,  but   the
direction  of  events  is hopeful  and  President  Eisenhower him-
self  is  a  positive  factor  in  this  situation,  a  factor  on  the  side
of  peace  and  world  sanity.
This  becomes  clearer  if  one  looks  carefully  and  as objectively
as possible at  the  Taft  speech  in  Cincinnati  and  the  President's
reactions  to  it.  Taft  is  not  a  demagogue.  He  is  an  able  and
well-informed  conservative.  The  speech  was  painfully  honest
in  its  survey  of  American  foreign  policy  and  its  search  for  a
way  out.  After  six  years  of  cold  war  cant,  it  is  refreshing  to
hear  Taft  say  again  as  he  did  in  the  original  Senate  debate
on  the  Atlantic  Pact,  that  the  Truman  doctrine  and   NATO
could   not   easily   be   reconciled   with   the   United   Nations
Charter,  that   we  had  abandoned  the  UN   for   a  system  of
military  alliances.  Though  Taft's  is  the  voice  of  Midwestern
isolationism,  there  were  passages  in  the  speech  which  will  be
read  gratefully  in  Western   Europe.  "It  is  pretty  hard,"  Taft
said  of  our  restrictions  on  East-West  trade,  "for  the  United
States  to  claim  the  right  to  cut  off trade  channels  which  have
existed   for  centuries."  He  urged  that  we  try  to  understand
the  problems  of  other  countries  "and  not  force  upon  them   a.
policy  they  do  not  approve,  either  by  the  pressure  of  grants
of  money  or  grants  of  soldiers."  No  one  of  any  importance  in
Washington  has  spoken  that  way in  a  long  time.
But  the  context  of  the  speech  is bad,  and its confusions
are  endless.  The  same  man  who  objects  to  any undertaking  to
defend  Norway  and  Denmark   against  Russia  would  have  us
persevere  in  holding  out  the  hope  of  American   "liberation"
for  Poland,  Czechoslovakia,  Hungary  and  Rumania.  This  cer-
tainly  is  not  cutting  the  cloth  of  national  policy  to  the  fit  of
military  realities.  Taft  says  that  he  has  felt  from  the  begin-
ning  that  "we  should  have  insisted  on  a  general  peace  nego-
tiation  with  China,  including   a  unification  of  Korea   under
free   Koreans,   and   a   pledge   against    further   expansion   in
Southeast  Asia."  But  such  an  over-all   settlement   would   re-
quire  the  recognition  of Communist  China and  the  liquidation
of  the  Chiang  Kai-shek  regime..  There  is  no  indication  what-
soever  that  Taft  is  prepared  to  support  such  a  settlement.  In-
deed  the  context  of  his  demand  that  we  "go  it  alone"  if  truce
talks  break  down  in  Korea  is  resentment   against  the  much
smaller  concessions  forced  from  American   policy  by  British,
French  and  Indian  pressure.
Taft's  honesty  leads  him  to  hopelessness  but  this  hopeless-
ness  may  swiftly  turn  to  desperation.   This  is  why  the  Taft
speech  has  been  welcomed  in  those  circles  which  are  fighting
peace.  This  is  why  it  is  hailed  by  Father  Curran  and   David
Lawrence. Taft  sees the  disintegration of  the  Western  alliance.
He  is doubtful  that we can go  on buying firm allies.  He  thinks
we  may  have  to  "go  it  alone"  but  he  doesn't  say where.  He
says  he  has  "always  felt  that  we  should  not  attempt  to  fight
Russia  on  the  ground  on  the  Continent  of  Europe  any  more
than  we  should  attempt  to  fight  China  on  the  Continent  of
Asia."  But  to  raise  the  cry  "go  it  alone"  at  this  moment  is  to
suggest  throwing  off  the  restraints  imposed  by  our  allies  and
embarking  on  a  course  which  must  lead  to  war  with  China
and  may  lead  to  war  with  Russia.  And  every  sober  military
man  agrees  that  such  wars must  ultimately be  fought  out  on
the  ground, which  in  this  case means thousands  of  miles  from
home  and  against  an  enormous  superiority  of  manpower.  It
is  this  huge  and  terrifying  blind  spot  which  makes  the  isola-
tionism  of  Taft  the  avenue  to  a  wider  adventurism.  It  is  this
which   makes  the   sober   and   decent  Cincinnati   corporation
lawyer  the  leader  of  those  forces  in  the  Republican  party  on
which  the  China  Lobby  sets  its  hopes.  It  is  this  which  makes
him  the  bedfellow  of  Bridges  and  McCarthy.
It   is  a  mistake  to  believe  that  the  breakup  of  the
Western  coalition  is  necessarily a  factor  for  peace.  If  it breaks
up  just when  Churchill and  our  Western  allies  are beginning
to  restrain  American  policy  and  to  move  toward  negotiation,
then  the  result  may  be  calamitous.  In  this  perspective,  Eisen-
hower's  comment  on  the  Taft  speech  reflects  not  only  an  un-
derstanding of  the  need  for  compromise  in  any coalition policy
but   a  willingness  to  compromise.  And  compromise  in  this
situation  means  compromise  for  peace.  This  is  why Adenauer
and  Rhee both  are appealing  frantically  to Washington against
further   talks.  This  is  why  the  China  Lobby  is  pushing hard
for  Congressional  action  to  take  the  U.S.  out  of  the  UN  and
to  shut  off  American  appropriations   for  the  UN  if  there  is  a
vote  to  seat  Communist  China.  This  is  why  the  split  grows
inside  the  Republican  parry  and  the  Eisenhower  Administra-
tion  itself.  This  is  why  McCarthy  is  driving  hard  for  bad
relations  with  Britain.
The  coalition  which was  acceptable  when  it  meant air  bases
for  attack  on  Russia  begins  to  seem  an  urgent  menace when
it  becomes  a  force to  draw an unwilling  America toward  peace
talks.  Eisenhower's  leadership  may  be  weak,  but  its  direction
is  good.  He  is  the  center  around  which  rally  those elements
in   the   business  community  which   want   a  more  moderate
policy  and  negotiations.  Moscow  and  Peking  may  make  fate-
ful   errors   if  they  fail  to  see  the  real  balance  of  forces  here,
and  if  the   Chinese   Communists   let  stubborn   considerations
of  pride and  prestige stand  in  the  way of  making  a  settlement
in  Korea  now.
8  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   June  6,  1953
That  "Ammunition  Shortage"  and  a  New  Stab-in-the-Back  Myth
The German military  alter World War
I  came  up  with  the  myth  of  a  "stab  in
the  back"  on  the  home front  to explain
away  their  defeat  in  the  field.  A  com-
parable   myth   is   being   fabricated   by
some  of  our  military   and  exploited  by
Republicans  and  right  wing Democrats
to  alibi  the  failure to  win  a  decisive vic-
tory  in  Korea  over  much  more  poorly
equipped  enemy  forces.
Hitler  utilized  the  "stab  in  the  back"
myth  to gain popular support. The myth
'implied  that  the  Social  Democrats were
traitors  to the  Fatherland. It  also spread
the  notion  that  German  military  power,
if   free   from  treachery  at   home,  could
dominate the world. A similar  myth may
play  a  similar  role  in  this  country.
The  newly   developing  "stab   in   the
back"  theory   of  the  Korean  war  falls
into  two  related  parts:  (1)  victory  was
in  our  grasp  when  the  Truman  Admin-
istration  agreed  to  a truce;  (2)  the  truce
and  the  failure  to  win  the  Korean  war
were  the  result  of  an  ammunition  short-
age.  In  both  cases  the  charge  of  Demo-
cratic  error  on  the  home  front  passes
over  easily  into  the  imputation  of  Demo-
cratic  treason.  Such ideas'may help pave
the  way  to  Fascism  at  home  and.war
abroad.
The  New   Senate   Report
These  ideas  have  been  advanced  by
General Van Fleet  since his  return  from
Korea  and  given  a  sounding  board  in
Life   Magazine and  a  series  of  Congres-
sional  hearings.  This  is  the  context  in
which  one must  read  the  new "ammuni-
tion  shortage"  report   turned   in  by  a
Senate   Armed   Services   subcommittee
early  last  week.  The  report  made  sen-
sational  headlines  at  the  expense  of anx-
iety  in  thousands  of  American  homes.
The charge that an ammunition  shortage
had  caused  "a  needless  loss  of American
lives"  conjured  up  a  picture  of  Amer-
ican  boys  killed   because  they  had  run
out  of  ammunition.
But.neither  in  the  extended  hearings
nor  in  the  report" itself   was  there  any
evidence that a  single  American boy was
killed   because  he   lacked   ammunition.
The  one  dissenting   Senator  on  the  sub-
committee,  Kefauver,  Democrat,  of  Ten-
nessee,  protested  that  "the  statement  is
based,  as  the  committee  acknowledges,
on  conflicting   testimony  between  vari-
ous  army  generals."
The  fact   is  that  on  the  one  crucial
point  there  was  no  conflict.  The  Gen-
erals  agreed  that  there  was no  shortage
at  the  front  itself.  The  report  says  U.S.
Army  Chief  of  Staff  General  J.  Lawton
Collins "stated  that  the. man  at  the  front
was  never  out  of  ammunition."  The  re-
port   admits,  "In  a  sense  General  Van
Fleet  agreed  with  General  Collins' state-
ment. He stated that  the man at  the gun
always  had  in  his  possession  what  is
known   as   a   basic   load.   This   is   the
amount  of   ammunition  which   can   be
carried  with  the  weapon to  its' position."
No  one  would  guess  from  the  report
that  testimony  showed  our  forces  were
firing  ten  times  as much ammunition as
the  enemy  and  that  authorized  rates  of
fire were far  higher than  in the  last  war.
A  Matter  of   Definition
At  these  levels  of  consumption, short-
ages   did   develop  in   certain  items   at
supply  points behind the lines.  Here part
of  the  dispute  between  Van  Fleet  and
Collins  was- a  matter  of  definition.  Ac-
cording  to  the  report  itself,  Army   offi-
cials regarded  a  60-day  ammunition sup-
ply   as  the   safety   level.   On  the   other
hand,   the   report   says,   "General   Van
Fleet  describes  a  critical  short  supply
as   existing  when  the   ammunition  on
hand  and in reserve  is less  than  a  65-day
supply."
These   are   technical   matters   which
must  be  left  to  military  men.  The  only
point  made here  is that  it  was wrong to
make  a  report  implying  that  American
lives  were  lost   because  American  sol-
diers   ran   out  of  ammunition  when  in
fact  the  subcommittee had  no  such  evi-
dence.
A  careful  examination  of  the   report
and  the  testimony shows that  Van  Fleet
in  alleging  shortages  was  talking  (1)  of
certain  specific  items:  mortar  and  how-
itzer   shells   of   specified  calibres   and
hand  grenades  and  (2)  of  shortages  be-
hind  the  lines.  Even  so his  testimony  is
full   of  discrepancies.  At   one  point   he
said  that  ammunition  was  in  short  sup-
ply  "during  the  entire  22  months"   he
was in Korea. But a little later  he denied
that  a shortage of ammunition  explained
the  refusal  to  allow him to continue that
supposed  victory offensive  in June  1951:
Senator  BYRD.  Was  the  ammunition
an  adverse  factor  at  the  time?
General  VAN FLEET.  No, sir;  we  had
enough  ammunition then.
On the  other  hand the  Armed  Services
subcommittee report  says,  "There  is evi-
dence  to  indicate  that  a  part  of  the  de-
cision  in  the  summer  of  1951, to conduct
a  sitdown  war  in  Korea,  was influenced
by  the  fact  that  our  military  planners
knew  our  ammunition  supplies  were  in
such  bad  shape  and  instituted  this  new
policy  to  conserve  ammunition."  If there
is  such  evidence,  it  was  not  produced
either  in the  report  or  the  lengthy  hear-
ings  which  preceded  it.  The  testimony
of   General   Collins,   as   we   shall   see,
showed  on  the  contrary  that   offensive
plans  were  vetoed  not  to  save  ammuni-
tion  but  to  conserve  lives.
Van  Fleet's  Contradictions
Van  Fleet's  testimony  that  the  truce
talks,  deprived  him  of  victories  is  worth
careful  examination.  He  never  told  the
same story twice. On March 4 before  the
•  House  Armed  Services   Committee,   he
was  asked  about  an  interview  he  had
given in Korea saying that the war might
have  been  ended  with  victory  in  1951
had  it  not  been for  the  truce  talks.
"In  other  words," Congressman  Arends
asked  him,  "had  we  followed  up  at  that
particular  moment in  place of going into
these  interminable  talks,  why, we might
have  brought  about  the  successful con-
clusion  of that  war,  in  your opinion?"
"I  would  like  to  think  so,"  was  Van
Fleet's  answer,  "as  being  the  man  on
the  spot  at  the  time."
"A  Little   Overstated"
But  the  very  next  day  in  executive
session  before  the  Senate  Armed  Serv-
ices  Committee,  Van  Fleet  answered  the
same  question  differently.   Here  is   the
colloquy  as   it   appears  on  page  31  of
the  printed  record:
Senator   BYRD.  You  were  quoted,  I
think,  General,  in  the  newspapers,  as  I
recall   it,   as   saying  on  two   occasions
that  you  could  have  gotten  the  military
victory  in  Korea,  is  that  correct?
General VAN FLEET: I think that was
a   little   overstated    in   the   paper,   or
we  might  define  what  you  mean  by  a
military  victory.
I  would  not  say  a  complete  victory,
but  in  June  of  1951 we  had  the  Commu-
nist  armies  on the  run;  they  were  hurt-
ing  badly,  out   of  supplies,  completely
out  of  hand  or  control;  they  were  hi  a
panic. ...
Still   another   version   was   given   by
Van   Fleet   when   he   was   questioned
again by the  Senate  committee, this time
on  April  1.  Senator  Byrd  recalled   that
in  his  previous  testimony  he  had  said
that  "you  had  the  Communist  armies  on
the  run  and felt  convinced then that you
could  win  a   military   victory  but  that
you  were  stopped  by  orders  not  to  pur-
sue  and  finish  the  enemy."  It  then  ap-
peared  for  the  first  time  that  it  was not
a  case of  simple pursuit.
"Early  in  June," Van Fleet  replied,  "I
recommended  to  General  Ridgway, who
was  then  the  Far  Eastern   commander,
that  we follow  that up  with  an amphibi-
ous  landing  on the  east  coast  .  .  . and
that  operation  was  stopped."
On  this  day  of  testimony  Van  Fleet
did  not  claim  that  this  operation  would
have  led to  a final  military  victory.  The
best  claim  which  now  appeared  in  the
Van   Fleet-Byrd   colloquy   is   that   we
"could  have  captured   a  great  many  of
the  enemy and  destroyed  their  supplies."
Collins  Saw  No  Panic
Quite   a   different   picture   was   pre-
sented  by  General  Collins  when  he  was
before  the  same  subcommittee  on  April
20.  He  flatly  denied   Van  Fleet's   testi-
mony  that   the   enemy  was  fleeing  in
panic.
"I  assure  you,  Senator,"  General  Col-
lins  said  to Byrd,  "that  I  was over there
shortly  after  that   tune,  and  neither   I
nor  anybody  else  that  I  know  saw  any
signs  of  panic.  We  were  getting  pretty
severe  casualties  at  that  time."
As  for  the  "victory  offensive" which
was  countermanded  in  June,  1951, Gen-
eral  Collins  put  two, official  documents
(Continued  on page  3)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   June  6,   195)
L  F.  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  an4  Publisher,  I.  f.   STONE
Published  weekly except the last two
weeks of August at  Room  205, 301 E.
Capitol  St.,  S.K., Washington 3, D. C.
Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a
year; Canada, Mexico and  elsewhere
in  the Western Hemisphere, $6;  Eng-
land  and  Continental Europe, $10 by
1st class  mail, $15 by air;  for  Israel,
Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by
1st class mail, $20 by air  mail.  Single
copy,  15  cents.  Tel.:  LI  4-7087.  En-
tered  as  Second  Class  mail  matter,
Post  Offl.ce,  Washington, D.  C.
June  6,  1953
Vol.  I,  No.
COMMENT
The  Rosenberg  Case
The  Supreme  Court last  week  for  the
third  time  refused  to  grant  a  hearing  in
the  Rosenberg  case  but  on  this  occasion
Mr.  Justice  Douglas  joined  Mr.  Justice
Black  in  favor  of  a  review.  A  new  exe-
cution date has now been  set for June 15.
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  death  sen-
tence   is   shockingly   out   of  line   with
the   offense.   The  case  for  t:lemency  is
strengthened  by  the  appearance  of  new
evidence and new expert  affidavits  which
call  for  examination  in  a  court  of  law.
A decent  respect  for  the  opinion of man-
kind  calls  for  clemency  and  a new trial.
The  case  for  a  new  trial  is,  if  any-
thing,  strengthened  by  the  peculiar  cir-
cumstances  under   which  the   physicist
William Perl  was finally  brought to trial
and  convicted of perjury  in denying  that
he  knew  Julius  Rosenberg  and  Morton
Sobell.
The  indictment  of  Perl  came  in  the
midst  of  the  Rosenberg  trial,   creating
another  sensation  unfavorable  to  the  de-
fendants.  The  chief  prosecuting  attorney
said  Perl  was to  be a  corroborating  wit-
ness  for  the  State  but  he  was  neither
produced  nor  brought  to  trial. The gov-
ernment  now says that it  is in a  position
to  link  Perl "directly" to  the  Rosenberg
"espionage  ring."  If it  has, it  should  join
the defense in application  for a new trial
and  accept the  challenge  of erasing doubt
about  the  Rosenberg  verdict.
On Arming  the  Germans
Some    indication     of    the    growing
strength   of   the   Germans—and  of   the
thinking  of  General  Alfred   M.  Gruen-
ther,  newly  appointed  to  succeed  Ridg-
way  as the  head of  NATO—may  be  seen
in  this  unnoticed   passage  of  his  testi-
mony  recently  before the  Senate Foreign
Relations  Committee.
General  Gruenther  was discussing  the
treaty   for   a   European   Defense  Com-
munity. "We no longer  have the  alterna-
tive of not  arming the Germans,"  Gruen-
ther  told  the  committee,  "the  question
is: What is the best  way for the Germans
to participate?  Too much water has gone
over  the  dam  now  to  be  able  to  assume
that  it  is  realistic  to  keep  the  Germans
under  an  occupation status  much  longer.
The  future  of  Europe  depends  in  large
measure  on  the  solution  of  the  German
problem.
"As  I  see  the  problem,"   Gruenther
went  on,  "it  is  not  the  alternatives  of
arm  or  not  arm. It  is  a  question  of mak-
ing  the  best  of  a  risky  situation,  evaluat-
ing  whether there is  more to  fear   from
the  Russian or from  the  German."  (Ital-
ics  added.)
I  have  had  to  postpone  my  promised
piece  on  why  Churchill  shifted  his  po-
sition.  But  when  a  top  American  Gen-
eral  can  say  that  there  may  now  be
doubt  as  to  "whether  there  is  more  to
fear  from  the  Russian  or  from  the  Ger-
man,"  it  should  not  seem  strange  that
British  and  French  opinion  as  a  whole
no  longer  share  our  exclusive  American
preoccupation  with  the  old Red menace.
The Right  Answer
We  cannot  resist  passing  on this  anec-
dote  from  Walter  Trohan's  "Washington
Scrapbook" in  the  Chicago  Tribune.  Mr.
Trohan  attributes it  to  Louis J.  Russell,
chief   investigator   for   the   House  Com-
mittee   on   Un-American  Activities.    It
seems  that  a  young  woman  applied  for
a  clerical  job  with  the  committee  some
years  ago and  after  satisfying  her  inter-
rogator  about her fitness for the  job, she
was  asked:
"Do  you  believe  in  communism?"
"Of  course  not,"  was  the  reply.
"Do you  believe  to  fascism?"
"Oh,  yes,"  said  the  applicant   eagerly.
"Do   you   know   what   fascism is?"
asked  the  astounded  questioner.
"I haven't  the  slightest  idea,"  was the
answer,  "but  I  read  in  some  newspaper
that  this  was  a  fascist  committee  and
I'd  certainly  like  to  get  the  job."
Democrats  as  War  Party
Elsenhower   is   dependent   on   Demo-
cratic votes for  much of his program,  but
it  is-evident  that  on  the  central  issue of
reduction  in  armament  expenditure,   es-
pecially  on  aviation, he  faces  solid Dem-
ocratic   opposition.   Symington   is   the
spokesman  for  the  air  lobby. W. Averill
Harriman  made  a  speech  attacking  the
"relaxationists."  Francis   Biddle  at  the
ADA  convention  sounded  off  in  a  simi-
lar  vein  about  the  menace  to  national
security.  Even  Congressman  Chet  Holi-
fteld  had  to  balance  off  his  speech  last
Monday attacking the atomic power grab
with  a  salvo  aimed  at  Elsenhower's  re-
ductions  in  arms  expenditure.  "To  pull
up  short  now,"  Holifield  said,  "and  look
for  economies when the  issue  is  nothing
less  than  the  survival  of the  free  world
is  to  trifle  with  destiny   and  to  court
disaster."
These    stale    Truman-Acheson     era
cliches  are  unworthy of people like Holi-
field and  Biddle. Experience shows arma-
ment  races  lead  to war.  Tension rises as
arms budgets go up, and tension  must be
maintained  to  maintain  a  high  level of
expenditures.  Unless, to paraphrase  Hbli-
fleld, we  pull  up  short  soon,  it  will  be
too  late  to  stop  the  slide toward war.
These  cries  of  alarm  are  all  out  of  pro-
portion to the actual cuts made by Elsen-
hower  and  Wilson in  air  force  spending
anyway.
Just  as  the  desire  for  economy  leads
one wing of the  Republican party  toward
peace,  the  easy  spending  proclivities of
the  Democrats  make  them  the  natural
allies  of  the  greedy  aviation  lobby  and
the trigger-happy  Air Force  bureaucracy.
Best  News of  the  Week
Omitted  by  the  Republican  majority
leadership   in  Congress  from  their  list
of   "must"  legislation  for  this  session:
the  McCarran  bill  to  deprive  witnesses
before  Congressional  committees  of their
privilege  under  the  Fifth  amendment  to
return for a  spurious  immunity.
That  "Ammunition  Shortage"  and a New  Stab-in-the-Back Myth
(Continued  from  page  2)
into   the   record   during   the   executive
hearing  on  April  20.  One  showed  that
Ridgway had vetoed, without  submission
to  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  a  Van Fleet
plan  for  an  amphibious  landing  behind
the  enemy  lines  on  the  "East  Coast  on
June  6, combined  with  a  general   offen-
sive  northeast Irom  the  Chorwon-Kum-
wa  area.  Among  the  reasons  given  by
Ridgway  were  "the  continuing  capabil-
ity  of  the  enemy  for  offensive  action"
and  "the  small  reward  to  be  gained  if
the  operation  is  successful."
6*
The other  document was a  message  to
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  from  Ridgway
on June  26 reporting,  "Visited  the  United •
States  I   Corps  front  today  with  Van
Fleet  and  Milburn.  Nothing  significant
to  report  concerning  enemy  action  and
capabilities.  . . . Van  Fleet  believes, and
I  concur, that  advance to  a  general  line
north  of a  certain  line  while  tactically
and  logistically feasible  at  present would
entail  unacceptable  casualties."
Thus the  documents presented by Gen-
eral  Collins  and  his  own first  hand  esti-
mate  of  the   situation  in  Korea  shows
8  3
that  Van Fleet's  claim  of a  decisive  vic-
tory  thwarted   by  the  truce  talks  was
(as  Van  Fleet  admitted)  "a  little  over-
stated  in  the  paper."
Unfortunately  this  admission, like  the
Collins testimony here  quoted, was given
in  executive  session.  The  headlines  had
already  created  the  false  impression,  so
that  we  even  have  the  Hew  Republic
last  week  saying  "It   may  be,  as  Van
Fleet   maintains,   that   we  could   have
pressed   our   offensive   to   a   successful
conclusion   in   1951."   The   myth
inarching  on.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,    June   6,  1553
JENNINGS     PERRY'S    PA  GE
Bill  Oatis  Free  Finds  the  Way  of  Fact  Is  Hard
This  week,  Americans  whose  foible   is  reading   their
newspaper   from  back  to  front  probably  were  first  to  see  the
little  piece  about  Bill  Oatis  going  to a sanitarium  for  treatment
of  a  lung  condition.  The  radio  also  had  a  spot  on  it.  Ap-
parently  this  is  the  ailment  mentioned  by  Oatis  when  upon
his  return  he  was strenuously  pressed  to  tell  just  how he was
"drugged"  by  his  Czech  jailors.  Oatis'  reply,  in  which  he  was
firm,  that  he  was  given  injections  for  his  lung  condition  but
that  these  had  no  effect  whatever  on  his  mind,  was  not  too
well   received.   It   was  received   no  better,   indeed,  than   his
refusal  to retract  his  confession  or his  persistence  in  reminding
his  interviewers  that  he  was  charged,  tried  and  convicted  not
under  the  laws  of  his  own  country  but  under  the  laws  of  the
country  in  which  he  was  working  as  a  correspondent  of  the
Associated  Press.
The  relegation  of  the  Oatis  story  to  the  inside  pages  need
surprise  none.  There  is  no  use  blinking  the  fact  that  Oatis
free  has  been  a  great  disappointment  to  many  members  of
our  press  who  tied  the  whistles  of  their  columns  down  on
the  subject  of  Oatis  held  in  vile  duress  over  there.  His  ordeal
had  been  told  and  retold  in  detail;  the  build  up  of his martyr-
dom  was  tremendous.  He  had  only  to  bring  in  a   personal
account  backing  up   even  roughly  the  harrowing  tale  of  his
vicissitudes  already  told  for  him  for  true—nay, to  do  no  more
than  to  profess  not  to  remember—and  the  tale  would  have
stood  up  as  already  spread   and  accepted.  Instead  he   turned
out,  as  surely  it  must  seem  to  those  who  most  angrily  wept
ink  at  his  plight,  a  most  "uncooperative    witness."
He  gave  his  own  report  of  what  happened   to  him  in  the
Czech  courts  and  in  the  Czech  jails, and  stuck  to  it. He  denied
that  he  was ever  drugged,  tortured  or  brainwashed.  He  would
not  say  that  he  had  not. violated  the  laws  of  Czechoslovakia
or  that  he  had  been  ignorant  of  the  law.  Asked  whether   he
felt  he  had  violated  the  ethics  of  his  profession,  he  repeatedly
attempted  to  make  the  point  that  what  is  considered   fair  in
newsgathering  at  home   is  not   necessarily  permitted   in   the
work  of  newsgathering  in  other   lands.  His  personal   report
had  the  earmarks of  candor.  The  question  remains  of  whether,
in  maintaining  his  own  version  of  what  happened   to  him,
Bill  Oatis  in  any  way  "let   down"  either  his  country  or  his
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                                                          6-6-53
Room  205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.
Please  enter  the  following  subscription.  $5  for   1  year
is  enclosed.   (See   page  3  for  foreign  rates.)
Name
Street.
City   .
.Zone.
State.
profession—whether,  no  matter  what  he  experienced,  saw  or
thought,  he  did  not  owe  it  to  his  country  and  profession   to
go  along  with  the  story  of  the  enemy's  atrocious  treatment  of
Oatis  written  when  Oatis  himself  could  not  get  in  a  word?
F>r  my  part,  I  cannot  see  that  this  question  has any
beating   upon,  or  is  borne  upon   by,  the  other  matter   left
hanging  by  all  the  speculation   to  date—whether  Oatis  was
or  was not  an  American  spy.  I  remember  writing  at  the  time
of   the  arrest  and  trial  that  since  our  country  also  must  be
presumed  to  have  spies,  and  since  the  work  is  entirely  praise-
worthy  when  done  by  our  side,  it  would  be  contemptible   to
suppose  that  the  patriotism  of  newspapermen  would  not  be
equ.il"to  it.  I  suggested  then  that  the  Czechs  send  Bill  Oatis
on  home  to  his  wife,  as  an  evidence  of  their  understanding
of  ihe  under-the-rose   facts  of  international  life.
Oatis  may  or  may  not  have  been  in  communication  with
our   intelligence   officials  in  Prague  outside  the  strict  line  of
his  professional  duties;  he  has  declined  to  make  a  statement
on  that.  It   stands  to   reason   however,  that  if  he  were,  his
motives  were  those  of  a  loyal  citizen.  He  would  have  been
"doing  his  duty  as  he  saw  it."
It  does  not  follow  that  either  loyalty  or  duty  required  of
him, after  his  release, that  he  should  shape  his  tale  to conform
to  any  and  all  representations  made  by  our  foreign   office   in
connection  with  his  case.  Nor  that  the  ethics  of  his  profession
require  him  to  affirm,  despite  whatever, he  personally  might
know  to  the  contrary,  that  the  lurid  and  inflammatory  "Oatis
story"  woven   generally   by  the   American   press  during  his
captivity  was  "the  way  it  was."
The  first  article  in  the  code  of  a  good   newspaperman   is
objectivity—and  let  the  chips  fall  where  they  may.  I  cannot
help feeling  that  throughout  Bill  Oatis  has been  a  good  news-
paperman  by  that  light,  that  he  has  tried   before   all  to  be
loyal  to  Fact, and  that  the  most  onerous  part  of  his  experience
has  been  the  attempt  of  opinionated   colleagues  at  home   to
"break  down  his  story,"  to  compel  him  to  agree  that  the  true
history  of  his  case  is  not  as  he  recalls  and  reports  it  but  as  it
has  been  set down  and  stylized  in  full  cold  war  prose by  those
who  were  not  there.
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Room  20$
301   E.  Capitol   St.,   S.E.,
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
NEWSPAPER
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED