I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953sep19.pdf

============================================================

What  Adenauer's  Victory  Means,  See Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL. I, NUMBER  33             SEPTEMBER  19,1953
5       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
Stevenson  Again  Offers  Leadership  for  Peace
More  striking  even  than  Adlai  Stevenson's  speech  at
Chicago  was the  little  noticed  hint  in  his final article  for Look.
There  the  Democratic  leader  had  the  courage  to  suggest  ne-
gotiating   recognition   of  Communist  China.  His   words  are
worth  close  examination.   "In  China,"  Stevenson  wrote,  ".  . .
industrialization  and  increased   food  production  will  require
goods  and machinery from  the  West. That's why many  experts
I  talked with conclude that  China  wants peace and trade above
all ...   Our allies  are hungry  for trade  with  China,  too.  .  . .
Some kind  of  Western  policy  for  China must  be  worked out,
now  that  the  Korean  fighting  has  ceased.  Views  among  the
allies  are  far  apart  now;  but  if  China  wants unrestricted trade,
admission  to  the  UN,  diplomatic  recognition  and  Formosa,
and  if  we  want  a  unified  Korea,  peace  in  Indochina  and  a
separate  status  for  Formosa,  there  is  at  least  a  broad  base  for
negotiation."
The   assumption   is  that  we  must  co-exist  with  the  new
China,  a  daring  proposition  in  the  bedlam  of  American poli-
tics.  As  in  the  last  campaign,  Stevenson  makes  containment
a  stepping  stone  to  co-existence  rather  than  to  "liberation."
When   interviewed   by  Newsweek  on  his  return,  Stevenson
said  he was convinced  that  we should  "continue  to  resist Com-
munist  expansion"  but  "must  decide  whether  we are  trying  to
destroy  Communism  or  trying  to  achieve  a  peaceful co-exist-
ence  with  it."  He  said,  "the  rest  of  the  free  world  is alarmed
by our  seeming inflexibility. There's a suspicion that  our objec-
tive  is to  exterminate  Communism  . . . Merely  being against
Communism  is  old  stuff  in  Europe  and  will  win  few  hearts
in  Asia. They  need  convincing  that we  are  more  interested  in
settlements  by  negotiation,   in  reducing  tensions  and  in  sta-
bility,  than  in  force  and  military  action."  The  tone  differs  not
only  from  Dulles but  from  Truman  and  Acheson.
To find a common denominator of  leadership for  peace
in  the  Democratic  party  and  in  the  country  at  this  time  re-
quires finesse. For  many months  the  only  theme  of the  Demo-
cratic  opposition   in  foreign  policy  has  been  that  Eisenhower
was  "dismantling"  our  defenses.  No  Democrat  has  challenged
Dulles   for  implying  before  the  American  Legion  that  our
bombers  will  attack  China  if  there  is  renewed  war  in  Korea
or  Chinese  intervention  in  Indo-China.  Something  perilously
close  to a commitment  to  World  War  III  has been  made with-
out  protest   from  the  opposition   party  or  a  numbed  public
opinion.   The  Indo-Chinese  commitment   indeed  merely  im-
plements  the  original  Truman  Doctrine,  which  was  intended
to  be  global.
One  wing  of  the  Democratic  party,  with  Byrnes, is  "libera-
tionist."  Another,  with  Symington,  is  the  support  of  the  Air
Lobby.  Truman  sees  eye  to  eye with  Symington on  Air  Force
cuts  and  is  reported  by  Drew  Pearson  to  have  spoken  con-
temptuously  of  the  Korean  truce  as  something  he  could have
had  months  ago if he had been  willing  to take the  terms  Eisen-
hower  accepted.  Senator  Douglas, the main  speaker  at Monday
night's  dinner  in  Chicago,  still  pursues  the  Mac Arthurite  line
and  implied   that  Eisenhower  had  settled  for  a  "cheap   peace
in  Korea  which  might  give  away  our  security."  To  conciliate
such  diverse and  belligerent  voices,  to  find  formulas  for  peace
which  they  might  be  led  to  accept,  is  a  task  which  requires
political   genius.
Stevenson  again  displayed  the  art  of  seeming  to  agree
with  these  other  party  voices,  yet  leading  them  off  in  a  quite
different  direction.  He,  too,  is against  "unilateral  disarmament"
and he, too,  is for a firm policy  in  Indo-China. At a time  when
American  diplomacy  seems  to  be  a  constant  exercise  in  de-
mbnology,  Stevenson  uses  the  ritualistic  verbalisms  necessary
for  political respectability.  Yet he ends up with such heresies  as
the  right  of  a  large  part  of  the  world  to  be  neutral,  the  need
for  relaxation  of  tension  and  (most  breath-taking  of  all)  the
proposition  that  not  all  the  ills  of  the  world  are  due  to  Com-
munism.  To  ask before  that  audience  and  in  that  atmosphere
whether  China  would  "yield  at  the  conference  table  what  it
fought  to  prevent  on  the  battlefield"  and  to  answer  that  this
was  unlikely took  nerve. To  go on  and  say that  he  hoped  that
in  negotiating  we would not  be "prisoners  of domestic  political
propaganda"  was  to  make  himself  the  No.  1  enemy  of  our
No.  1 political  power,  the China Lobby.
It  has  too  quickly  been  forgotten  that  Stevenson  was  the
only  American  political  leader  last  spring  to  endorse  Church-
ill's  call   for  a  new   try  at  negotiation.  He   stopped   off  at
Chequers  to  see Sir Winston  on  his  way  home.  The  design  he
offers   for  world  compromise  is  much  like  Churchill's.  This
is  strikingly  so  in  the  case  of  Germany  which  Stevenson,  too,
would  "win  for  the  West"  but  with  "durable  assurances  of
non-aggression—for  Russia  as  well  as  for  France."  (Obvious
as  the  notion  may  be  in  the  rest  of  the  world,  here  it  was
hazardous  for  Stevenson  to  suggest   that   the  Russians  have
legitimate  security  needs,  too.)  This  formula  lacks long  range
realism—the  Germans  will  never  be  safely  and permanently
"Western"—but  it  offers  a  basis  at  least  for  negotiation.
Stevenson's suggestion that we swap Chinese  recognition
and  trade  for  a  separate  status on  Formosa  has  similar defects
and  similar  virtues.  The  Chinese  will  never  accept  a  rump
regime  on  Formosa.  Even  a  "UN  trusteeship"  for  the  island
may  be  as  unpalatable  to  them  as  a  UN   trusteeship   over
Hawaii  would  be  for  us.  But  at  least  this  breaks  the  ice  and
sells  the   feasibility  and  desirability   of  negotiation   and  co-
existence.  For  this  and  for  Stevenson's  protest   against  "the
current  wave  of  conformity  and  fear  here  at  home"  we  are
grateful.
1  3  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September   19, 1953
Adenauer's Victory  and the  New  Berlin-Washington  Axis
The  logic  of  the  Adenauer  victory  in  Germany  is quite
simple.  It  does  not  pay  the  Germans  to  negotiate   unification
with  Moscow  as  long  as there  are  still  benefits to  be  collected
from  the  West.  At  the  moment  "unification"  with  Washing-
ton  is worth  much  more  than  unification with  East Germany.
The  American  alliance  offers  a  means  of  rearming Germany
at  American expense.  One  reason  for West  Germany's remark-
able  economic  recovery  is  that  it  has  been  the  only country
in  the  West  with  no  armed  forces  to  support.  Either  through
the  European  Defense  Community   (if   ratified)   or  directly,
the  Germans  will  get  U.  S. aid  in  rearming.  And  a  rearmed
West  Germany can make a  better  deal  with the  Russians than
could  an  unarmed  Germany  today.
The  Russians  are  left  holding  the  bag  in  Eastern Germany.
Basic  German-Slav  antagonisms   centuries  old  make  it   diffi-
cult  for  the  Russians  to  develop  a  real  base  in  an  occupied
East  Germany.  The  German  Communists  are  compromised  by
their  relations  with  the  occupying power.  The  level of  operat-
ing  efficiency  in  Germany  is much higher  than  in  Russia.  The
Russians  seem  to  have  more  difficulty  with  the  workers  than
with  any other  class  in  the  zone. Moscow  cannot  compete  with
Washington in the  handing out  of favors. The  longer  a  unifica-
tion  deal  is  delayed,  the  higher   the  German  price  will  be.
Adenauer  is  already  saying  that  a  "solution"  of  the  Eastern
frontier  can only be  negotiated  with  a  "free"  Poland  and talk-
ing  of  a  condominium   or  UN   trusteeship   over   the  Oder-
Neisse  territories.  The  iron  and  steel  masters  of  the  Ruhr  are
anxious   to   "liberate"  the   Silesian  iron   and   steel   resources
which  lie  in  the  Oder-Neisse   territories   annexed   to  Poland.
The  German  goal  is  a  new  partition  of  Poland,  recovery  of
East  Prussia.
The  Adenauer  election  has  strengthened  John   Foster
Duties and enabled  him  to  resume  the liberationist  aims which
the   Eisenhower   Administration   had   shelved.   Always   pro-
German,  Dulles  will  be  freer  than  before  to  give  a  German
orientation  to  the  State  Department,  which  has  tended  for  a
generation  to  be pro-British  and  to  a  lesser  extent  pro-French.
German  leverage  is  now  stronger   than  that  of  any  country
on  the  Continent.  Its  traditional  power  to  blackmail East  and
West  has revived.  It  can always threaten  to  repeat  the  maneu-
vers  of  Rapallo  and  the  Nazi-Soviet  pact  if  Washington   does
not  dance  to  its  tune;  in  this  respect  Adenauer  becomes  a Eu-
ropean  Syngman  Rhee  but  on  an  incomparably  bigger   scale.
"If  this  is  a  triumph  for  American  democracy,"  one  news-
paper  said  of  the  Adenauer  victory,  "it  is  a  strange  one  in-
deed,  for  if  Germany  has  elected  to  tie  its  future  to  America,
America   is  by  the  same  circumstance,  tied  more   closely  to
Germany's  future. The Germans have voted themselves a  strong
claim  upon  American  military  and  economic  support ... a
more  intimate  and  direct  involvement  in  the  most  explosive
of  Europe's  many  explosive   problems,  the  problem   of   Ger-
man  unification and  rearmament."  The  paper  went  on  to warn
that  "the  exigencies  of  politics  may  lead  the  Russians,  if  not
him,  to  force  the  issue  . .  .  the  American  people  had  better
consider  carefully  before  the  event,  for  if  they  wait  until  the
ultimatums  have  been  delivered,  it  will  be  too  late."  These
dour  reflections  on  the  Adenauer  victory  were  the  Chicago
Tribune's;  it  wasted  no  space  on  the  poppycock  in  most  of
the  American   press  about  Germany  having  been  saved  for
the  "free  world."
Adenauer  is  an  authoritarian  old  man,  exactly  the  kind
of  father  image  to  whom  the  Germans  respond.  He  has  kept
the  reins  of  power   in  his  own  hands  to  a  ludicrous extent;
unlike  Hitler,  he  has  neither  a  Goering  nor  a  Goebbels  nor
a  Ribbentrop.   The  "freedom"  he  represents  is  the   freedom
of  German  big  business  to  rule  Germany  its  own  way;  the
post-election  ultimatum to  the  trade .unions,  and  the  big-busi-
ness  demand  that  he  sell  government  owned  industrial  prop-
erties  are  indicative. A  tight  oligarchy representing  the Ruhr-
Rhineland  industrialists  and  the  Catholic  Church  rule  West
Germany  through  Adenauer. The  Churches outdid themselves
in  a  Me  Carthy style pre-election  campaign  against  the  Social
Democrats,  and  the  outcome  is  a  signal  for  more  "free  enter-
prise"  Germany style.  This  is  the  old  cartel  system  in  a  new
package.  The  anti  Communist  vote  reflected  hatred  for  the
Russians, but  the  decline  in  the  neo-Nazi  vote  does  not mean
"democracy"  is  safe  in  Germany.  The  Germans  will  not  turn
further  right  until  that  serves  their  purpose.  This  is  the time
for  another  Bruening;  a  new  Hitler  would  be  premature.
Will  the  Russians  step  in  to  prevent  the  rearmament of
Germany?  All  we  know  of  Russian  history  and  the  mood  of
its  people  leads  one  to  doubt  it.  "Preventative"  war  is  as  far
from   the   Russian  pattern   as  from   the   American.  Moscow
gave  way before Hitler until  attacked  and  will  give  way again
to   German   pressure.   The   post   Stalin   changes   reflect   vast
popular  discontent  within  the  Soviet  Union,  and  a determina-
tion  to  appease  this  by  slowing  down  the  pace  of  forced  in-
dustrialization   and  military  preparation.   The   Russians  will
not  go  to  war  to  prevent  the  Germans  from  rearming,  but
neither  will  they  be  mollified  by  any  maneuver 'as  phony  as
Adenauer's  pre-election   talk  of  a  new   "security"  pact  with
which  to  sugarcoat  German  rearmament  as part  of  the  West-
ern  bloc.  German  non-aggression  pacts are traditionally worth-
less,  and  the  Russians  answer  is  more  likely  to   be  an  at-
tempted  return  to  the  alternative  tactic of  the  Franco-Russian
alliance.
This,  however, no  longer  seems  possible.  France  is  tied
to   the  dollar,   and  the   Indo-Chinese   war  has  made   her  a
captive  of  current  American  policy.  As  seen  from  this  point
of  view,  a  settlement   of   the   Indo-Chinese   war   would   run
counter  to  Dulles's  purposes   in  Europe'  as  much  as  in  Asia.
Once  the  Indo-Chinese  war  is  ended,  France  would  resume
greater  freedom  of  action  on  the  Continent.  This  would  run
counter  to  German  interests,  and  to  the  aims  of  the  "libera-
tionists".  A  new  Franco-Russian  pact,  supplemented    again
by  a  new  Franco-Polish   pact,  would  be  a  fundamental   ob-
stacle to  Dulles's  dream of a new counter  revolutionary-crusade.
At  the  moment  any  such reorientation  of  European  politics
is  out  of  the  question.   Washington   holds  by  far  the  better
cards  than  Moscow  in  Europe.  In  Europe,  unlike  Asia,  there
are  no  neutral  powers.  In  the  Soviet  zone  of  Eastern  Europe
the  revolution  is a  more  or  less  imposed  and  artificial  product
rather  than  a  grass  roots  affair  as in  China.  And  the  Germans
are  in  no  hurry  to  deal  with  Moscow  so  long  as  through   the
camouflage   of   a  "united  Europe"  they  can  dominate   their
Western  neighbors.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September   19,  1953
/.   jF.  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F. STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room 205,
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington   3,  D.  C.  Subscription  rates:  Do-
mestic, $5 a year; Canada,  Mexico and  elsewhere  in  the  Western  Hemi-
sphere,  $6; England  and Continental Europe,  $10  by 1st class  mail,  $15
by air;  fot  Israel,  Asia, Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by first class mail,  $20
by  air  mail.  Single  copy,  15  cents.  Tel.:  LI  4-7087.  Entered  as  Second
Class mail matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
September  19,  1953
Vol.   I,  No.  33
COMMENT
White-Washing  Me Carthy
In  an  interview  at  San  Diego  on  August  21  (see the
Weekly  of September 5 ), J.  Edgar Hoover  declared  his  friend-
ship  and  admiration  for  Me  Carthy,  and  called  the  Senator
an  "honest"  man. Two  weeks later  the  Department  of  Justice,
perhaps  testing  the  temper  of  public opinion,  let  it  be known
that  a  "lower  echelon"  of  lawyers  had  found  no  basis  for  in-
dicting  Me  Carthy  after  a  seven  month  study  of  the  Senate
privileges  and  elections  subcommittee  report  on  his  financial
operations.  The  Senate  report  showed  that  Me  Carthy and  his
administrative  assistant  banked  $268,000  from  1948 to 1952
and  that  almost  $105,000  of  these  deposits  had  "not been
identified  as  to  source."
The  first  task of  any  inquiry would  be  to  try  and determine
whence,  how  and  why  such  huge  sums  flowed  into  the  ac-
counts  of  the  Senator  and  his  assistant  and  alter  ego. If  the
FBI  had  investigated  and  found  no  impropriety,  one  would
expect  the  fact  to  be  announced.  But  there  is  no  indication
in  any  of  the  news  stories  that  there  has  been  any  investiga-
tion  at all. On  the  contrary  they  give  the  distinct  impression
that  all  that  happened  is  that  Department  of  Justice  lawyers
took  the  facts  as  presented  by  the  Senate  report  and  on  that
minimum  basis  determined  whether  there  was  any  ground
for   prosecution.   Part   of  their  conclusion   is  merely  that  no
charges  can  be  brought  unless  persons  who  paid  sums  to  the
Senator   were   to   complain   that   they  had   been  defrauded.
This  sort  of  technical  legal  analysis  is  a  very  far  cry  from  a
real  investigation.
But  how  have  a  real  investigation  when  the  head  of  the
Federal  Bureau of  Investigation  calls  Me  Carthy  a  friend  and
terms  him.  "honest?"   On  this  the   silence  even  of  the   and
Me  Carthy  press  is  thunderously  eloquent.  The  combination
of  Me Carthy and  Hoover  really has  them  scared.
Narrow  Escape: Durkin  Resigns
Martin  Durkin's  resignation  represents  a  narrow  escape.
For  the  sake  of  a  few  concessions  on  the  Taft-Hartley Act,
the   Eisenhower  Administration  might  have  split   the  labor
movement  politically, attaching  the  craft  unions  to  the  G.O.P.
Many  of  these  union have  traditionally been  Republican any-
way.  The  Durkin  resignation  and  the  decision  to  stand  pat
on  Taft-Hartley at  last  puts  labor  into  opposition.
When  one  sees  how  dependent  the  organized  labor  move-
ment  in  this  country  has  been  on  political  favoritism,  how
closely  linked  especially  on  rhe  municipal level  with corrupt
political  machines,  how  ready  to  jump  on  the  bandwagon of
war  and  war  preparations,  how  uninterested  generally  in any-
thing  but  its  own  immediate  bread  and  butter  problems,  one
shudders  to  think  of  what  a  shrewd  and  demagogic  rightist
regime  could  do  to  create a  contented  and  subservient Ameri-
can  Labor  Front.
The  problem  of  the  American  intellectual  is  the  preserva-
tion  of  peace  and  freedom. The  labor  movement  is  not  overly
concerned  with  either.  On  the  contrary,  it   remembers  two
World  Wars  as  periods  of  great  progress.  Under  Wilson   as
under  Roosevelt,  labor  made  big  gains  as  a  reward  for  co-
operation.  Under  Truman,  it  found  no  fault  with  the  cold
war  or  the  Korean  war  as long  as these  provided  the  economic
basis  for  full  employment.  Such  a  movement  could  easily  be
enlisted   in  an  American  Fascism,  so  long   as  labor  was  as-
sured  its  share  of  the  spoils.
This  Administration, however,  is  neither  Fascist  nor  a  mili-
tarist  regime,  but  a government  of  conservative  business  men.
It  is  busy  placating  and  appeasing  a  powerful  cryto-Fascist
•wing, but  its  own  objectives  are  those  of  the  cautious  banker,
not  the  adventurer.  One  objective  in  the  current  deflationary
policy  is  to  weaken  the  labor  movement  and  end  the  spiral
of  wage  increases.  In  that  framework,  a  Durkin  is  an  impedi-
ment  and  the  Taft-Hartley  Act  a  valuable  instrument.
ACLU  and  The  O'Connor  Case
There  are  times  when  news  still  seems  to  travel  slowly.
On  June  11 Einstein  urged  American  intellectuals  to  defy  the
witch  hunt  and  refuse   to  answer  Congressional    inquisitors.
On  July  14  Harvey  O'Connor   refused  to   answer   questions
when  subpoenaed  by  Me  Carthy  in  his  "book  burning"  in-
vestigation.  On  July  23  the  Senate  voted  to  cite   O'Connor
for  contempt.  O'Connor  was the  first  intellectual  to  take "the
Einstein  pledge."  For  the  first  time  since  the  Hollywood  Ten,
a  witness  did  not  invoke  the  Fifth  amendment  but  took  his
stand  on  the  First.  The  Supreme  Court  declined  to  hear  the
Hollywood  Ten  and  has  never  passed  on  the   constitutional
point.  It  might  do  so in  O'Connor's  case.
Against  that  background   it  was  a  little  weird  to  find  in
our  mail  under  date   of  September   8  a  letter   from   Louis
Joughlin,  research   director   of  the  American  Civil   Liberties
Union,  saying  "This  office  would  like  to  study  that  issue  of
the  Weekly  which  contains  the  full  text  of  a  statement   by
Harvey  O'Connor  concerning  academic  freedom.  I  should  be
grateful  if  you  would  send  me  a  copy."  We  sent  him  a  copy
of  our  issue  No.  27,  dated  July  25,  which  carried   the   full
text  of  the  O'Connor  testimony  before  the  Me  Carthy  com-
mittee.  We  are  at  a  loss  to  explain  just  what  led  the  ACLU's
research  office  to  think  that  O'Connor's  statement  had  some-
thing  to  do  with  academic  freedom  or  just  why  two  months
later  it  still  was  unaware  of  the  news  that  a  man  at  last  had
bitten  a dog.  Now  that  the  ACLU  knows,  we  are  waiting  to
see  what  it  will  do.
News Note
Professor  Thomas I.  Emerson  of  Yale Law School  will be
given  a  testimonial  luncheon  by the  Emergency Civil  Liberties
Committee   at  the   Fifth   Avenue  Hotel   in  New   York   on
Monday,  September   21.   He   is  leaving  for   six   months  of
study  abroad.
1   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J.  F. Stone's Weekly,  September  19,  1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
Can  Demos  Rise to  Nothing  to  Fear  but  Fear  Again?
Just  how  much  new  harmony  in  Democratic  ranks was
found  or  generated  at  Mr.  Mitchell's  well-publicized  Chicago
picnic  for  paying  guests  time  will  tell:  the  party's  way-down
South  wing  apparently  intends  to continue  its  long  pout  about
the  so-called  loyalty pledge  and  a  few  dedicated  members of
the  party's  dwindling  band  of  liberals  obstinately  cling  to  the
view that  bolters  should  not  be given  the right hand of  fellow-
ship  without  some  sort  of  slap  on  the  wrist.  As  of  now, how-
ever,  the  one  September   song  sung  in  sweet  unison  by  all
who  lay  claim  to  the   Democratic   name—those  who  were
"detained  by  previous  engagements"  as  well  as  those  actually
in  attendance  at  the  rally—projects  the  theme  of a  Democratic
come-back  in  the  congressional  elections  of  1954
The  note  of  confidence  in  this  prophetic  chorus  probably
is  justified. It  has  not  taken  many months  of  Republican  ad-
ministration  to  arouse  a  lively  nostalgia  in  several  population
groups  of  great  voting  strength.  The  farmers particularly  are
unhappy. Labor is apprehensive.  And  the always harried white-
collar  level,  distressed  on  the  one  hand  by  an  undiminished
cost  of  living  and  on  the  other  by  the  failure  of  the  Repub-
licans,  in  their  turn,  to  end  deficit  financing,  sadly  suspects
that—so  soon  again—it  is  time  for  a  change.
But  if  the  trend  is  toward  a  Democratic   restoration   in
Congress,  if  the  American people  shall  be  ready  for  that  next
year, can it  be assumed, from  anything the  opposition  party  up
to now has had to  offer,  that  the  Democrats  will be ready with
vigorous  and  inspiring  leadership?  At  Chicago,  speaker  after
speaker  skinned  the  "reactionaries"  for  plotting  and  trying  to
"turn  the  clock  back"  in  internal  affairs  for  "chipping  away"
at  the  Democratic   agricultural  program,  for  "getting   ready"
to  hand  over  the  natural  resources  of  the  commonwealth  to
the  boodlers,  for  a  "hard  money"  policy  that  clips  the  coins
in  every  citizen's  pocket.  As  certainly  was  to  have  been  ex-
pected   at   such  a  convocation   the   Republicans   caught  the
devil.  The  question  remains  of  whether  the  opposition  party
hopes  to  win  an  election  or  merely  to  pick  one  up,  whether
it  has  any  ideas  at  all  that  the  popular  nostalgia  on  which  it
is trading  is  not  so much  for  Democratic  programs  "tried  and
true"  as  for  imaginative and  heart-quickening  courses  of gov-
ernment  the  people  have  not  had  proposed   to  them  of  late
Help Keep Dissent Alive In  America
By  Subscribing
7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
301  E. Capitol  St., S.E., Washington  3, D.  C
Please  enter  the  following  subscription.  £5  for  1 year  is
enclosed.  (See page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street    .....
City   ..................
..................Zone..........State........................
9-19-53
by  the  leaders  of  either  party.
There is much to suggest that the Democrats have no more
in  mind  than  to  take  over  where  they  left  off:  to  return  the
legislative   processes,  indeed,  to  "experienced   hands"  but  to
permit  the  all-important  attitudes  of  this  nation's  government
toward  the  rest  of  the  world  to  rock  along  in  the  same, deep-
ening  rut. In  any  case,  Mr.  Eisenhower  would  continue  to
reside  in  the  White  House;  as  if  preparing  for  their  prospec-
tive  resurgence  in  Congress  to  disturb  as  little  as possible  the
ritual   of   the   Cold  War, the   Democratic   spokesmen   have
missed  no  opportunity  of  pointing  out  that  the  President  has
had  to  rely  at  every crucial  point  "on  Democratic  votes."  And
though  the  familiar  complaint  that  bipartnership  in   foreign
policy  is  "dead"  now  is  heard  in  Democratic  accents,  the  fact
remains  that  Mr.  Eisenhower  himself,  by  his  very  reluctance
"to  lead,"  has  placed  himself  in  the  position  of  'titular  "head
of  government"  in  the  pattern  rather  of  European republics
than  of  our  own, ready to  "form  a  government"  congenial  to
any  party  in  representative  elections  come  to  power.
It   is  difficult  to  suppose  that  Mr.  Stevenson,  his  man
Mr.  Mitchell  or  any  other  Democratic  spokesman  does  not
realize  that  the  one  solid  basis  of  Mr.  Elsenhower's enduring
"popularity"  is  the  ability of  his  supporters  to  claim  that  "he
has  made  good  his  promise  to  end  the  war  in  Korea."  The
fact  should  mean  something  to  the  party  now  out  of  power
but  bubbling  with  expectation  of  "taking  over  Congress"  in
the  off-year.  It  should  mean  that  the  Democrats,  when  they
go  to  the  people,  will  stand  on  something  better,  more  in
consonance  with  the  universal  disgust  with  splenetic  accusa-
tions  and  ominous "or'elses,"  than  a  mere  resumption  of  the
blind,  brittle  "toughness"  of  the  Truman-Acheson  days.
Twenty  years ago,  the  people's  dread  of  a  staggering  econ-
omy  gave  the  Democrats   the   chance  to  institute   remedial
measures  the  Republican  administration  has  not  been  able  to
attack  with  impunity.  Fear  now  has  another,  a  deadlier  com-
plexion.  If  the  Democrats  have  no  answer  for  the  malaise of
these  times, but  count  on  coming  back  solely on  the  strength
of  favor  won  by  accomplishments long  past,  they shall  hardly
deserve the  nod of a nation looking  above all for  a bold leader-
ship  for  peace.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,          '•
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class   Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED