I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953may09.pdf

============================================================

Is  Freedom  of  The  Press  Under  Attack?  See  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I   NUMBER   17
MAY  9,  1953
s       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
An  End  of Government  by  Alarum
Momentous  conclusions  hopeful  for  world  peace flow
from  the  budget  statement  made by  the  President  at  his  press
conference  last  week.  He  announced  a  new  approach  to  the
problem  of  defense.  He  said,  "We   reject  the  idea  that   we
must  build  up  to  a  maximum  attainable  strength  for  some
specific  date  theoretically  fixed  for  a  specified  time  in   the
future".  The  tempo  of  rearmament was  no  longer  to  be  "tied
to  any  magic  critical  year."  This  means  an  end  of   govern-
ment   by   annual  alarum,   and   an   end   of   government   by
alarum  in  America  must  contribute  materially  to  an  easing
of   world  tension.  Under  Mr.  Truman,  the  Pentagon   threw
Congress   and  the  country  into  a  dither  annually.  Military
appropriations  were  enacted  by  stampede.
A  correspondent  reminded  Eisenhower  that  the  maximum
target  date  of   1954  was  supposed   to  mark  the  time  when
(in  the  opinion  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff)   the   U.S.S.R.
would  be  ready  to  launch  an  atomic  attack  on  the  United
States.  Eisenhower's  answer  was  refreshingly  calm.  He  said
he  was  not  going  to  quarrel  with  the  estimate  of  when  the
Russians  would  have  the  atom  bomb  because  he  does   not
admit  that  anyone can  predict  when, if  ever,  another  govern-
ment  would  want  to  launch  into  global  war.  He  added  that
he   just  did   not   believe  there  was  a  necessary  relationship
between  the  two.  The  quiet  reply  deviated  strikingly   from
the  demonology  of  the  cold  war.
The  concept  of  a  target date  for an  arms  buildup  made
sense  only if  over-all  policy  was  pointed  toward  a showdown.
This  was  in  fact  the  basic  premise  of  Truman-Acheson "total
diplomacy."  All  negotiations  were  to  be  avoided until  we  had
built  up  such  overwhelming  power  that  the  Russians  would
have  to  choose  between  surrender  or  destruction.  To  abandon
the  target  date  is  not  only  to  relax  the  public  mind   from
artificial  frenzies  but   to  establish  conditions   from   which  a
different  foreign  policy  must flow.
The  dominant drift  of  Eisenhower  policy  is  making  Dulles.
an  anachronism.  "Liberation"  is  no  longer  a  conceivable  goal
if  we  are  not  to  create  a  destructive power  so  overwhelming
as  to  force  Russian  withdrawal.  The  stretch-out  of  rearma-
ment  is  defensive;  it  will  not  support  an  aggressive  diplo-
macy.  The   new  policy  presupposes  co-existence  for  a  long
time  to   come.  The   co-existence   need   not  be   friendly   but
co-existence  of  any  kind  demands  some  mutual adjustment.
If   "a  healthy  American  economy"  and  "a  functioning  econ-
omy"  in  other  countries  are,  as  the  President  said,  "insep-
arable  from  true  defense",  then  there  are  circumstances under
which  successful  negotiation   for  relaxed  tension  and  reduced
armament  may   increase  real - security.  The   implications   are
not  those  to  which  we  have  become  accustomed  in  the  last
few  years  when  the  bugaboo  was  any  relaxation  of  tension!
It  is not  that  the  Republicans  hate  the Communists  less.
It   is  merely  that   they  love  a  balanced  budget  more.  Taft
said   it   in  Chicago   on  February  21  when  he  warned  that
"we  could   destroy   our   liberty   by  a   military  and   foreign
expenditure  in  time  of  peace  so  great  that  a  free   economic
system  cannot  survive".  There  is  no  such  thing  as  building
up  to  a final situation  of  strength  between  two  great  Powers.
An  increase  on  one  side  is  matched  by  an  increase  on  the
other;   new   weapons   of   offense   call  forth   new   means  of
defense.  Tension  and  hostility  must  be  stimulated   to  main-
tain   the   competitive   pace   and   no  country   is  too   rich   to
avoid  impoverishment  if  the  process   is  unchecked.
General  Eisenhower  is  proving  much   less  bellicose   than
Captain   Truman.   "Disengagement"   rather,  than  "liberation"
seems  to  be  his  principal  objective,  and  one  of  the   things
he  wishes  to  disengage  is  the  public  purse  from  the  grip  of
the  military. His  new  reorganization  plan  strengthens  civilian
control.  David  Lawrence  in  alarm  called  it  downright  uncon-
stitutional.  Senator  Symington, through  whom  the  Air  Force
and  the  air  lobby  speak,  insisted   that  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff   should   have  the  right  to   state  their  views  "without
pressure    from    anyone  to   alter   those   views  on   economic
grounds."  The  President  was  alarmingly  non-committal  when
asked  about  the  143-group  air  force goal  and  Symington was
almost  shrill  when  he  protested  in  his  speech  at  Charlottes-
ville  last  week,  "no  one  at  any  level  has  the  right  to  place
solvency  above  security."   The   Democrats   now  seem  to  be
the  war party.  The  Republicans are  not  sure the  8  and  a  half
billion   reduction   promised   by  Eisenhower  will  be  enough;
they  still  want  a  tax  reduction.  The  Democrats  grumble  that
he  may  be  endangering  security  by  too  sharp  cuts.
How  understand  what  is  happening?  The  Democrats,
the  popular  party,  have  always  been  a  cheap  money  party.
The  Republicans  came back  to  power  where  they went  out—
in  anxiety  over  the  budget.  The  dollar  cannot  be  "strength-
ened"   without   sharp   cuts  in   expenditure;    the  only   place
where  sizeable cuts  can  be  made  is  in  military spending.  The
Democrats,  under  Red  smear  attack  since  1936,  did  not  dare
suggest  we  could  cut   down  arms  in   face  of  The  Menace.
The  Republicans  are  under  no  such  compulsion.  They  speak
for   and   through   big   business  men   who  want  an   end   to
spending.
The  key  word  of  the  Administration  seems  to  be  deflation.
No   Democrat   would   dare  handle  the  military   as  Charles
Wilson  of  GM  is  doing,  or  to  talk  of  the  military  the  way
his  deputy,  Kyes,  also  from  General  Motors,  did  last  week:
before  the  annual meeting  of  the  U.  S. Chamber  of  Commerce,
lashing  out  at  the   incompetence  and   extravagance  in   the
Pentagon.  How  the  military  must  miss  those  docile  Demo-
crats!  I,  though  never  a  card-carrying  Republican,  am  begin-
ning  to  like  Eisenhower.  If  Moscow  and  Peiping   are   wise
they  will  come  to  terms  with  him  before  the  desperate  stage
some  new  provocation  to  keep  peace  from  breaking  out.
6  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  P. Stone's  Weekly,  May  9,  1953
Is Freedom  of The  Press Under  Attack?
This  appeared  last week-end on the bul-
letin   board  of  the  press  gallery   in   the
House    of   Representatives,   "Chairman
Harold  H.  Velde  (R.   111.)  of  the  House
Committee   on   Un-American   Activities,
today  announced  in  connection  with  the
forthcoming  hearings  in  New  York  City
May  4, that  Cedric Belfrage, editor  of  the
publication  called  the  'Guardian'  is  ap-
parently  operating  under the delusion that
his association with that publication places
him  in  the  category   of  being  a  member
of  the  press  and  is  making  charges  that
his  scheduled  appearance  before the  com-
mittee   is  an   attack   on   freedom   of   the
press."
The announcement continued, " 'I doubt
very   much   if   the   members  of   the   na-
tion's  press  consider  him worthy of  being
classed   as  a  colleague  of  that  great   in-
stitution  of the  Fourth  Estate',  the  Chair-
man  said."  The  press  release  went  on  to
explain  that   testimony  before  the  Com-
mittee  showed  that. Belfrage  "has   been,
and  may  now  be,  a  member  of  the  Com-
munist   Party."   If   this   is   the   kind  of
stupendous   discovery   Velde  made  when
he  was an  FBI  man,  his  election  to  Con-
gress  was  no  loss  to  J.  Edgar  Hoover.
The  revelation,  if  true,  is  about  on a  par
with  the  disclosure  that  the  editor  of  the
Chicago  Tribune,  the  redoubtable  Colonel
McC.,   "has   been,   and   may  be  now,  a
member  of  the  Republican  party."
Hardly A  Scoop
Velde  must  be  running  short  of  sensa-
tions,  may   soon   be  exposing  the   Daily
Worker  as a  Communist organ.  His  snide
little driblet  of a  press  release was  chiefly
interesting   for  the  simple-minded   FBI-
man's  notions  it  reflects  of  what  consti-
tutes   freedom   of  the  press.  This  would
seem  to  be  the  prerogative   only  of  po-
litically  pasteurized  organs.  But  the  he-
roes  of  the'  fight  for  a  free  press,  and  its
martyrs,   were   no   more   respectable   in
their  time than  Belfrage.  Zenger, Wilkes,
Paine,   Lovejoy   and   Garrison   were   as
much   looked  down  upon  in  their  time
by  "right  thinking"  people.
Freedom  of  the  press  was  under  attack
last  week  from  three  separate  groups  of
Congressional  snoopers.  Velde's  subpoena
for  Belfrage  followed  on  the  heels  of  the
session  to  which  the  McCarthy  commit-
tee  subjected  James  Wechsler,  editor  of
the  New  York  Post.
The  Senate  Internal  Security   subcom-
mittee  announced that  a  witness who had
pleaded  the  Fifth  amendment on  spy  ring
questions  had  reviewed  53  books  for   the
Saturday    Review    of    Literature     and
"about   38  books"   for   the   New    York
Herald-Tribune.
This  was  no  mere  search   for  febrile
sensations.  The  pattern,  like  so  much  in
the  current   Red  hunt,  was   outlined   in
the  annual  U.  S.  Chamber  of  Commerce
reports   since   1945   on   "community  ac-
tion"  to  deal  with  the  menace  of  Com-
munism.  The  "infiltration"  of  the  press
by  radicals  was  stressed,  the  liberal  press
was  a  special target,  and  much was made
of   the   fact   that   rightist  literature  was
being   given   unfavorable   book  reviews.
The  press  was  not  to  be  immune   from
the  drive  to  purge  non-conformists from
all   professions  which   had   to   do  with
ideas.  Newspapermen were  not  to  be  ex-
empt  from   the  purge  of  teachers,  libra-
rians,   radio   broadcasters,   writers    and
artists  of  all  kinds. The  turn  of  the  press
had  come  at  last.
Whether  the  press  knew  it  or  not  was
a    different    matter.   The    Wall    Street
Journal  last  week  had  a  piece  strongly
defending   —   Zenger.    The   New   York
Times    and    the    New    York    Herald-
Tribune  both  had  strong  editorials   pro-
testing  infractions of  freedom  of the  press
—in  Ecuador.  The  New  York  Post  was
manfully  defending the  New York  Post—
but  as  we  went  to  press  had  yet  to  say
a  word in  defense  of  the  Guardian. Times
had  changed  a  great  deal  since  the  days
when the conservative Republican  Herald-
Tribune   in    1934   defended   the   Daily
Worker   against   criminal   libel    charges
brought  by  District  Attorney   Dodge.
Panic  Among  The  Liberals
The  climate of  opinion has  changed  for
the  worse.   Principles   have  been   aban-
doned  in  panic. The  notion that  the  right
of   Congress  to  investigate   is   unlimited
has   been   accepted.  The   pro   cold   war
liberals,  anxious  to  shield  their  own  re-
spectability,   have   begun   to   accept   the
idea  that  Congress  has  a  right  to  stage
ideological   inquisitions.  Thus   the   New
Republic   in  its  April  20  issue  cut   the
ground  out  from  under  itself  by  saying
"Congress  has  the  right   to   investigate
subversion  in  the  churches  in  its  general
inquiry  into  the   activities   of  the   Com-
munist  party."  If  it  has  a  right  to  inves-
tigate   "subversion"    (nobody   asks    any
longer  just  what  that  means—this  bogey-
man   word   for   nonconformity  has   also
been  accepted  by  the  housebroken  liber-
als)   in  the  churches,  then  it  has  a  right
to  investigate  "subversion"   in  the  press.
The   logical   consequences  were   those
drawn   by  the  conservative   Washington
Star  which  said  of  the  McCarthy-Wech-
sler  affair,  "The  first  amendment forbids
Congress  to  make  any  law  abridging  the
freedom  of  the  press.  It  hardly  follows,
however,  that   this   guarantee   of  a   free
press  confers  immunity  from   investiga-
tion   on  an   editor.   If   a   Congressional
committee  has  a  right  to  expose  the  fact
that  a  union  official  or  a  teacher,  for  in-
stance,  is a  Communist or  a  former  Com-
munist,  it  certainly  has  the   same   right
with   respect   to   an   editor."    Once   the
premise   is   accepted,   the   gate   is  wide-
open  to  the  witch  hunt.
What  About The  First  Amendment?
But  is  the  premise  correct?  Does  the
First  Amendment provide no  bar  against
indirect  attacks   from   government ?   The
Supreme  Court  not  so  many  years  ago
invalidated  a  Huey  Long  tax  on  news-
paper   advertising   on   the   ground  that
such  taxes   could  be  turned  into  an   in-
direct   restriction   upon   freedom   of   the
press.  How  much  more  repressive  is  the
fear   of   Congressional   smearing!    The
First   Amendment   says   Congress    shall
make  no  law  setting  up  an  Established
Church.  Could  Congress  under  the  guise
of  investigating  Communism harass  min-
isters  who  believe  in  certain  theological
doctrines   which   other   ministers   think
conducive  to  Communism?  Could  an  in-
vestigating   committee  apply   the   stand-
ards of  Catholicism, or  fundamental  Prot-
estantism,   as   a   means   of   rooting   out
"crypto-Communism" ?
The  power  of  investigation  is  an  aux-
iliary  to  the  power  of  legislation.   Con-
gress  has  a  right  to  inform  itself  about
matters  on  which  it  may  legislate.   But
can  it  under  the  First  Amendment legis-
late  control  over  ideas,  whether  political
or  theological?  This   is  the  basic  ques-
tion.   It   is   only  by   asserting   that   the
sphere  of  ideas  is  beyond  the   power  of
the  State,  it  is  only  by  reaffirming   this
traditional     conception    of    the    First
Amendment,  that  the  witch  hunt  may be
fought.  But  this  requires  the  courage  to
say  that  Communists  have  the  same  po-
litical  rights  as  anyone  else.  Not  to  say
it  is  to  endanger  everyone's   rights.
The  Fatal  Consequences
For    if   Congress    may   treat   certain
ideas  as   criminal,   if   it   may   set   up  a
Committee  to  act  as  a  grand  jury  oper-
ating   in   public  without  the   safeguards
of   secrecy,   then   it   may   not   only   ask
questions   about   political   affiliation    but
about   a   man's   writing   and   preaching.
What  if  he  never  was  a  Communist,  or
is  now  an  anti-Communist?  If  Congress
and  the  government  have  a  right  to  put
ideas   under   surveillance,    they   have   a
right   to   examine  writings   or   sermons
which  propagate   ideas  that  may  conduce
to   Communism  or   shield  Communism.
Wechsler   says  he  is  not  longer  a  Com-
munist.  He   claims  to  be  an   anti-Com-
munist.  But  he  has  criticized  the  FBI  as
a  thought  police.  He  has  defended  Com-
munists  against   Smith  Act   prosecution.
So  he  is  attacked  as  crypto-Communist.
This   is  where   acceptance   of  that   fatal
first  premise  leads.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stoae't  Weekly,   May   9,  1953
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and Publuhef,  I. F. STONE
Published weekly except the  last two weeks
of  August  at  Room  205,  301  £.  Capitol
St.,  S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C.  Subscrip-
tion  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and Continental
Europe,  $10  by  1st  class  mail,  $15  by air;
for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by first class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.  Single
copy,  15  cents. Tel.:  LI 4-7087. Entered as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
May  9,  1953
5       VoL  I,  No.   17
CIVIL  LIBERTIES  FRONT:
A  CROWDED  WEEK
Hat's  Off
To  Judge  Luther  W.  Youngdahl  for  an
eloquent   decision   in   the   old-fashioned
libertarian   tradition   knocking  out   four
of  the  seven  counts  in  the  indictment of
Owen  Lattimore  for  perjury  and  casting
doubt  on the  remaining  three.
The  Lattimore  case  can  be  won  when
it  comes  to  trial  next  Fall  and  a  victory
in it would be a terrific blow at  McCarran,
who  forced  this  spurious  indictment, and
McCarthy,    who    first    made   the    fake
charges.  Lattimore  needs  help  and  can  be
reached  care  of  Johns  Hopkins  in  Balti-
more.  Those   readers  who  would  like  to
rally   support  among  their   friends   may
have  free   copies  for  distribution  of   our
issue  No.  5,  with  its  "The  Truth  About
The  Lattimore  Case", the  full  behind-the-
scenes  story.
We    refer    to    McCarthy's    as    "fake
charges"    on    the    authority   of    Judge
Youngdahl  himself.  For   after  surveying
the  vague  allegations  of  the  indictment,
the  Judge commented drily in his decision,
"Apparently  the  Committee  [i.e.  the  Mc-
Carran  Committee]  could discover  no evi-
dence  from  its  investigation  or  the  testi-
mony  of  various  witnesses  that defendant
lie-in denying that  he was a Communist,
a  member of  the  Communist party,  a  So-
viet  spy or  a  fellow traveller."  McCarthy
called   Lattimore   the  No.   1  Soviet   spy
in this country.  Budenz called  him a  Com-
munist.  Lattimore   was  not   indicted  for
denying  either   charge.   Apparently  even
the   McCarran   committee   didn't   believe
them.
Last  Chance
In   the  high   vaulted  marble   chamber
where the  U.S.  Supreme Court  last  Mon-
day   heard   the    final   argument    in   the
Bridges  case,  there  was  little  echo  of  the
tumultuous  20  years   in  which  the   San
Francisco   waterfront  interests,  the  gov-
ernment  and  latterly  his  own  enemies  in
the  CIO have tried  to  "get"   Bridges.
The  argument  went  round  and  round
the   legal  metaphysics  of  what  precisely
constitutes   fraud,  and   whether   the   re-
peated    hearings    and   trials    to   which
Bridges  has  been  subjected  brought  the
matter, under  res  adjudicata   or  collateral
estoppel.
A  diminutive counsel  for  the   govern-
ment,   dapper   in  a   frock   coat,  put   the
matter  more  succinctly  than  he  himself
perhaps  intended.  "It   seems  to  me,"  he
said  at  the  end of  his  argument,  "you  get
nowhere  if  you  take  a  broad  view  of  this
case."
From  the  standpoint of the government,
this  is  all  too  true.  For  on  a  broad view,
it  would be  asked  how  often  a  man  could
be  put  through  the  wringer   of  trial  on
the  same  political  charges   in  a  country
that   constantly  advertises   itself   as   free
and   has   a   constitution   which   forbids
double  jeopardy.
On  a  broad  view, one  would  see  in  all
its  embarrassing  clarity  the  contrast  be-
tween  the  treatment  accorded  Joe  Ryan
on  the  corrupt  East  coast  and  the  treat-
ment   accorded   Harry    Bridges   on   the
West  coast.  On  a  broad  view,  it  would
be  seen  how  the  government  has  favored
the  gangster  type  of  labor  leadership and
pursued  with  implacable  hostility  a  man
who   neither  betrayed   his   workers   nor
dealt  dishonorably  with  their  employers.
From   the   government's   point   of   view
you  do  indeed  "get  nowhere"  by  taking  a
broad view.
All  the  blood  and  agony  of  those  20
years  had  been  sifted  out  of  the  argument
by  certiorari.  The  urbane  Chief  Justice
enlivened  the  proceedings  with  an   occa-
sional  joke.  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  was
as  sharp  and  witty  in  his  questions  as  if
examining  students at Harvard  Law.  The
tenor  of  his  questions,  like  those  of   Mr.
Justice  Black,  seemed  to  favor   Bridges.
Douglas  was  silent.  Jackson   and  Clark
absented  themselves  as  former  Attorneys
General  who had  engaged  in  the  Bridges
hunt.   The   others,   including   the   Chief
Justice,  seemed to have their  minds firmly
made   up.   It   looked  as   if   Bridges   this
time  faces  jail,  4-3  or  even  perhaps  5-2.
This  conviction  of  fraud  was   brought
about  by  circumventing  the  double  jeo-
pardy   clause   and   getting   around   the
statute  of  limitations,  but  law  counts  for
less  and  less  these  days.  Bridges  can only
be  saved  from  jail  and  the  U.S.  from  the
disgrace  of  this  whole  affair   if  the  lead-
ers   of   the  labor  movement  can  be  pre-
vailed on to join  in a campaign for pardon.
This  time  Bridges  was  the  victim  not
of   the  waterfront   interests,   which  have
grown  to  tolerate  and  like  him,  but  of
the  cold  war  split  in  the  labor  movement.
He  was  warned  to  line  up  for  the  cold
war—or  else.  Now that  the  cold  war  may
be  abating,  perhaps  his  old  colleagues  of
the  CIO  will make amends. Perhaps.
Antiquated  Notions
The  Congressional  witch hunt is now to
be  a  four  instead  of  a  three  ring  circus.
To  the  Velde, Jenner  and McCarthy com-
mittees  is  now  added  a  special  Subcom-
mittee  on  Security  Affairs  established  by
the  Senate  Foreign  Relations Committee,
with  Wiley  of  Wisconsin   as  chairman;
the  other  two  members  are  Ferguson  of
Michigan  and  Gillette  of  Iowa.
The  subcommittee  made  its  debut  last
week-end  with  the  release  of  a  report  on
"Adequacy   of  U.S.   Laws  With  Respect
to  Offenses   Against  National  Security."
Of  course  it  found  these  laws  inadequate.
The  report  complains  that  the  consti-
tutional  provisions  on  treason  make  con-
viction  difficult   and  that   "Constitutional
guaranties  of  a  public  trial  and  due  proc-
ess  of  law  make  it  difficult  to  prove  cer-
tain offenses,  particularly  espionage,  with-
out  endangering  national  security."  It  is
a  good  thing  the  Founding  Fathers  are
dead  or   they'd   be  subpoenaed   for   some
pretty  stiff  questioning.
The  subcommittee complains about  our
allies   as  well  as  our   Constitution.   "In
many    allied   countries,"    says    Senator
Wiley's   preface  to  the  report,   "the   se-
curity  problem  has   been  aggravated  by
the  fact  that  their  governments  and  their
peoples   have   traditionally   taken   a   far
more  tolerant  view  of  Communism  and
Communists  than  we  as  a  people  feel  the
present   situation   and   the   past   record
justifies.   Some   of  these   countries   have
systems  of law  which are  even  more anti-
quated  in this  respect  than  our own . .  ."
The   British,   for   example,    notoriously
backward, are  said  still  to have  something
called  habeas  corpus.
Senator   Wiley   generously    recognizes
that  "each  nation  must  of  course  remain
sovereign  in  its  own  internal  affairs"  but
"the  internal  security  of  many  countries
has  become  inextricably  intertwined  with
the  very,,lives  of  our  own  American  sons
who are stationed  in those  lands .. ." The
Senator   feels   therefore   that    it   is   not
"presumptous"  of  the   subcommittee   "to
call  the  attention  of  our  friends   overseas
to  facts  of this  nature."  Those  allies who
show  no  disposition  to  adopt  more  up-to-
date  legal  systems  will  have  only  them-
selves   to   blame   if   some  day   they   find
their  mutual security  allowances  cut.  The
free   world   cannot    afford    to    subsidize
legal  backwardness.
The   subcommittee  endorses   thie  move
underway   this   week   to   legalize   wire-
tapping  but judging  by its first report will
not rest  content until we have gone further
and  at  least   restored  secret  trial  in  star
chamber.  To  read  its  report  is  to  realize
how  immeasurably  the  security  problem
would  be  eased  simply  by  repealing   the
Constitution.  Senator  Wiley  hesitates  to
say  so  publicly  but  obviously  it's   anti-
quated,  too.
Good  News
Attorney  General  Brownell  has  agreed
to  reopen  the  case  of  Ignatz  Mazei,  see
the  Weekly,  No.  11, "Detention  for  Life—
On  Undisclosed  Charges," where  we  told
the  story  of  this  long  time  alien  resident
of   Buffalo   who   faced   life  imprisonment
ion  Ellis  Island  on secret  charges. We  are
happy  to  report  that  copies  of  that  issue,
circulated  last  March  by  Mazei's  counsel
among   friendly   members   of    Congress,
helped.
7     •;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

L  F.  Stone's  Weekly,    May   9,  1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
Freedom  and  Fortune  Bid  for  Treason  and  Theft
At  this writing, our reception  committee  at Kimpo  airport
still  is  scanning  the  skies  for  the  first  enemy  pilot  to  accept
Gen.  Mark  Clark's  generous  invitation  to  bring  in  his  jet  and
receive   100,000  pieces  of  silver,  and  the   keys  to  the   Free
World.  The  delay,  one  can  imagine,  has  been  as gratifying  to
one  side  as  to  the  other.  For  though  there  hardly  can  be  any
question  of  the  firmness  of  the  offer,  with  the  Supreme  Com-
mander's  name  behind  it,  nor  of  the  Free  World's  ability  to
pay, certain  aspects  of  the  project  appear  to  need  further  study
and  clarification.
For  instance,  the  air  and  odor  of  the  reception  itself,  when
the  respondent  pilot, having  carefully  followed  the  instructions
given  to  assure  him  safe  conduct  through  our  defenses,  sets
down  his  MiG-15  or  "other  Russian-built  jet  combat  type"  at
Kimpo.  Should  the  occasion  be  festive  or  solemn,  open  to  the
press  or  discreetly  screened?
The  role  of  the  enemy pilot  has been, to  be  sure,  elaborately
cued  for  him.  He  has  been  addressed  in  the  leaflet  as  "coura-
geous."  His  desire  to  liberate  himself  from  the  "vicious  whip"
of  his  Red  masters  has  been  sympathetically  suggested  to  him.
He  has  only  to  step  out  of  his  plane  hailing  Freedom—and
pick  up his  check.
He  will  have  hit  the  jackpot;  with  his  fortune  (which  it-
self  would  not  connote  freedom  to  many  a  man  not  now,  or
ever, behind the  Iron Curtain)  he can proceed,  the  Free  World
promises   him,  to  any  corner  of  the  Free  World   his  heart
fancies:  to  New  Jersey  or  Long  Island,  perhaps,  with  winters
at  Miami  Beach.  (Nice  little  places  at  Miami  Beach  for  much
less  than  $100,000.)   For  the  rest  of  his  years,  he  can  have
comfort  and respectability ...
It  is  when  one  considers  this  item  of  prospective   comfort
and  respectability  that  reasonable  doubts  must  arise  both  as
to the  ability  of the  Free  World to  guarantee  it  and the  ability
of  the  freedom-seeking  pilot  to  experience,  within  himself,
the  said  blessings.  Indeed,  it  must  be  perceived  that  even  the
reception   at  Kimpo  can  be-brought  off  handsomely  only  if
none says aloud what all will  be aware of—that  a single breath
of  candor  at  the  moment  of  liberation  would  name  the  coura-
geous  pilot  traitor,  and  thief  as  well  as  traitor,  and  his  Free
World  receivers  as suborners  of  his  treason  and  his  larceny.
It  is  the  extra  added  attraction,  the  $100,000,  of  course,
which  makes  the  situation   delicate.   Elsewhere,   as  at  Born-
holm,  a  pilot  from  behind  the  Curtain  can  land  his  plane  in
the  Free  World  and  claim  asylum—and  respect—on  no  other
showing  than  his  love  of  liberty.  Theoretically   he  has  only
borrowed  the plane;  it  will  be returned  to  its  owners. But  the
operation  General  Clark's  proposals  have  set  us  up  for  in  the
Far  East  is a horse  of  a different  shade and  breed.
We  are dangling  a straight  cash  bribe  before enemy  soldiers
under  oath—the  universal soldier's  oath—to  serve  their  home-
lands.  We  are  tempting  them  to  desert  on  the  battlefield  for
pay—for  very  high  pay.  From  the  beginning,  we  have  offered
them freedom:  now, we are telling them to steal and bring over
to  us their side's  military  secrets  and  we will make them  rich.  I
submit  that  it  will  be  next  to  impossible  for  us  ever  to  feel
real neighborly  esteem  for  any enemy pilots  in  Korea who may
liberate   themselves   to   us  on   those   terms   no  matter  what
pleasantries  we organize  for  their  reception  at  Kimpo  airfield
near  Seoul.
We  may  be  able  to  bring  ourselves  to  welcome  them  as
freedom-loving  brothers,  while  slipping   them  their   $50,000
and  $100,000  checks under  the  table,  but  we will  have to  hold
our  noses  on  the  side.
I  should  not  be  surprised  if  one  day  before  long,  perhaps
before  this  is  in  print,  some  Red  pilot  sneaks  off  to  Kimpo
with  a  copy  of  the  General's  glittering   IOU  in  his  padded
sleeve.  In  all lands some  men  have a price, and  we are  bidding
high.  Then  we  should  have  our  MiG-15  to  tear  apart  to  our
complete   satisfaction,   since   we  got   only   photographs   and
measurements  of  the   one   at  Bornholm.  And   the   Russians
would  have  to  develop  another  secret  to  hide  from  us  as long
as they  could.
In  that  case,  General  Clark's  psychological  warfare  experts
will  have  proved  a  point:   that  when  all  else  fails  the   Free
World  can go  out  and  buy what  it  wants ...  in  the  black
market.
/.  F.  Stone's
Room  203
301  E. Capitol
Please enter
enclosed.  (See
Street   ............
>»
City   ...............
State  ..............
Weekly
                                                                      B
-
9
-
BS
St.,  S.E., Washington  3, D.  C
the  following  subscription. #5 for  1 year is
page  3  for  foreign  rates)
.....................................................Zone..........
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,
Washington 3, D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  O.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED