I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953jun27.pdf

============================================================

Rosenberg Aftermath: Wild Words Will  Not  Help, See Page  Two
I. R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I  NUMBER  23
JUNE  27, 1953
5       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Only  Rhee's  Removal  Can  Save  Peace
Next  month  may prove  to  be  the  most  critical  July  since
1914.  A  headstrong  satellite,  secretly  abetted  by  officials pur-
suing  incendiary  policies  of  their  own,  may  again  be  able  to
plunge  the  reluctant great  Powers  into  a  war  for  which  they
have  long  been  preparing.  One  difference   is  that  today  we
have  two  Serbias—-Germany  as  well  as  Korea.  It  is  too  early
to  tell  whether  the  East  German  disorders  represent  a  spon-
taneous worker uprising—it  is difficult  to  associate  spontaneity
with  the  German  character—or  coordinated  action  exploiting
labor  grievances  but  carefully  prepared   by  a  military  under-
ground  for  some  crucial  moment.  The  moment  for  the  Reich
is crucial; beyond  Bermuda looms  the  possibility of  a Big  Four
or  Big  Five  gathering—and  Adenauer's  anguished  comments
reveal  how clearly the  Germans  understand that  their  bargain-
ing  powet  and  recovery  depend  on  the  maintenance  of  East-
West  hostility. The  East  German  "revolt"  may  help  to  upset
Churchill's  plans  for  a  relaxation of  tension.
The  importance  of  the  German  rising  lies  in  its  effect   on
Moscow   and   Washington.   Here   it   is  strengthening   those
liberationist  delusions  so  prominent   in  last  year's  campaign.
Eisenhower,  said  the  June  26  issue  of  U.  S. News  and  World
Report,  "is beginning  to be a little  less eager  to  follow  the  lead
of   Sir  Winston  Churchill"  since  "German   workers  showed
some  disdain  for  the  might  of  Russia."  It  reports  triumphantly
(
that John  Foster  Dulles would like to say "I  told you so" to  the
British  "who  have  ridiculed  his  idea  that  there  is  real  senti-
ment  in  Eastern  Europe  for  liberation  from  Communist  rule."
American  military  officers—according   to  the  same  source—
have  started  figuring  "how  many  Russian  divisions  would  be
required  to  police  all  of  the  cities  of  Eastern  Europe  in  event
of  real  trouble  with  the  people  of  satellite  countries."  It  is  on
such  hashish  that  the  Germans  feed  their  dream  of  a  new
American-financed  drang  nach  Osten.
The   effect  on  Moscow  may  be  as  bad.  Churchill  in  his
historic  speech  calling  for  an  end  of  the  cold  war  laid  great
stress  on  the  changes  which  had  occurred  within  Russia  since
Stalin's death. He  warned against doing  anything which  might
"impede  any  spontaneous  and  healthy  evolution  which  may
be  taking  place  in  Russia."  The  German  disorders  followed
on  the  heels  of  sweeping  changes  in  the  East  German  regime,
which  included  plans  for  de-communizing  and  de-militarizing
that  Soviet  satellite  in  preparation  for  peaceful  unification  of
the  Reich.  The  violent  reaction  in  East  Germany  might  have
been  calculated  to  discredit  those  forces  in  the  new  Russian
regime  which have  advocated  more  moderate  policies  at  home
and  abroad.  A return  to  the  rudeness  and rigidity  which  were
such  prominent   features  of  Russian  diplomacy  under  Stalin
would  serve  German  purposes  by  making  relaxation  of  world
tension  less  likely.
A  fear  that  moderation  may  be  taken  as a  sign  of  weakness
has  haunted  nations  into  war  before,  and  may play  its  part  in
the  equally  fateful   and  even  more  critical  events   unfolding
on  the  other  side  of  Eurasia. The  release  by  Syngman  Rhee of
war  prisoners  was an  affront  to  the  new  China,  done  without
any  face-saving disclaimers  or  subterfuges.  Rhee  boldly   took
responsibility  for  his  action.  It  was  important   to  his  plans
that  there  be  no  appearance  of  accident.  The  purpose  was  to
inflict  a maximum  loss of  face  on  the  enemy,  and  to bring into
sharp  relief  the  inability  or  the  unwillingness of  the  American
government   to  control   Rhee.  According  to  a  United   Press
dispatch  from  Tokyo  published  by  the  New  York  Times  on
June  19, General  Mark  W.  Clark  knew  that  Rhee  would  not
hand  over  the  prisoners, "Dr. Rhee  told  him  so" and  "General
Clark  had  notified  Washington   that  he  thought   Dr.  Rhee's
first  move  against  the  truce  agreement  might  be  the   release
of  the  34,000  anti-Communist  North  Korean  captives."
General  Clark's  explanation  last  Sunday was  as  weak  as
it  was wordy.  The  Chinese  can  hardly  be  blamed  if  they  see
bad  faith.  There  was  at  least  criminal  weakness,  a  weakness
for  which a  heavy  cost  in  lives  may  yet  be  paid.  And  there  is
no  sign  as  yet  that  either  Washington  or  Tokyo  HQ  is  pre-
pared  to  learn  anything  from   this  experience.   Rhee   showed
that  he  was  not  bluffing.  He  wanted  this  war; he  may  have
started  it;  he has tried  to  block  a truce  every time  one  seemed
possible;  and  he  has  said  that  he  would  not  abide  by  a  truce
if  it  were  reached.  Our  irresolution   is  his  strength.  It  is  folly
to  believe  that  a  truce  can be  reached  without  him  so long as
he  remains  in  power  in  South  Korea.  He  can  prevent   the
neutral  commissioners  from  landing.  He  can  start  the  war  up
again  and  force  the  U.  S. to  support  him  for  inescapable  rea-
sons  of  prestige,  strategy  and  domestic  politics.  There  will  be
peace  only  if  the  U.  S.  has  the  resolution  to  impose   martial
law,  remove  Rhee  from  power  and  deal  directly  with  those
elements  in  South  Korea  which want peace,  relentlessly  smash-
ing  the  mercenary  and  terroristic  "youth  groups"  on  which
Rhee's  power  largely  depends.
At  the  moment  there  seems  no  possibility   whatsoever  of
such   drastic   action,   though   Congress   is   sick   of   the war;
McCarthy  and  McCarran  significantly  were  the  only  voices
raised   in   support   of   Rhee.   Those  who  think   Rhee   really
speaks  for  South  Korea  should  read  the  article  by  a  former
British   official  of  the  United  Nations  Korean   Reconstruction
Agency  in  the  June  20  issue  of  the  London  New  Statesman.
It reveals the stage-managing  and the paid  demonstrators  which
have  gone  into  the  anti-truce  rallies  of  the  past,  and  it  points
out  that  "it  was  only  the  support  of  the  U.  S.  Army  which
kept  Rhee  from  being  deposed" in  his clash  with  the  National
Assembly  last  June:  "Even  the  heads  of  the  Korean  Army and
Navy  opposed   him."  If  Rhee  is  not  removed,  the  war  will
go  on.  If  he  has  his  way, Seoul  will yet  be  our  Sarajevo.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  27,  19)3
Rosenberg Aftermath:  Wild  Words Will  Not  Help  Peace
The  ghost  of  the  Rosenberg  case  will  haunt  the  United
States  for  a  long  time  to  come.  The  sentence  was  barbaric.
The  speed  with  which it  was imposed  last  week  was  indecent.
It  is almost  as if  the government  were afraid  that  if  the  Rosen-
bergs  were  not  killed  as  quickly  as  possible  the  case  might
blow  up  in  its  face. The  Attorney  General,  in  the  application
which  led  the  Supreme  Court  swiftly  to  reconvene,  said  it  was
important  "in  the  national  interests  that  this  case  be  brought
to  a  final  determination   as  expeditiously  as  possible."   Mr.
Brownell  never  put  forward  a  more  dubious   proposition.
On  the  contrary,  just  because  there  had  been  fantastic  dis-
tortions  in  the  world-wide  campaign  for  the  Rosenbergs,  it
was  important   in  the   national   interest   that   the  convicted
couple  be  given   every  right  due  them  under  the  law, that
doubt  of  their  guilt  be  allayed,  and  that  we  show  the  same
"decent  respect  for  the  opinion  of  mankind"  we  ourselves  in-
voked  at  an  earlier  stage  of  our  history.  When  a  campaign
for  clemency  enlists  the  Pope, when  so  famous  an  atomic sci-
entist  as  Dr.  Harold  C  Urey  questions   the  verdict,  the  na-
tional   interest   called   for  cautious   deliberation   rather  than
speed.  As  it  is,  the  execution  will  seem  a  slap  in  the  face  to
millions  the  world   over.  The  final  touch  was  moving  the
execution   back  a  few  hours  so  as  not  to  conflict  with  the
Jewish  Sabbath!   That   the   defense  was  equally  hypocritical
in  exploiting  religious  sentiments   which  meant  little  to  the
Rosenbergs  or  most  of  their  supporters  does  not  make  the
government's  action  less  sickening.
Some  forgotten  history  may  throw  new  light  on  the
terrible   events  of  the  past  week  and  on  Justice   Douglas's
courageous  last-minute  attempt  to  stay  the  execution.  When
the Atomic Energy Act was originally drafted by the  McMahon
committee,  it  not  only contained  no  death  penalty  for  atomic
espionage  but  provided  that no presecution  might  be initiated
without consultation  by the Attorney General  with the Atomic
Energy  Commission.  The  purpose,   as  the  National  Commit-
tee  for Gvilian  Control  of Atomic Energy protested  when this
provision  was taken  out  of  the  bill  in  the  House,  was to pro-
tea  scientists  against  reckless  accusations. "Since  atomic energy
is  a  field  of  sensational  publicity  value,  and  subject  to pos-
sible  hysteria,"  the  Committee  wrote,  "this  consultation  pro-
vision  was  designed  to  assure  that  prosecutions   would  not  be
initiated  without  review  by  persons  having  the  technical  and
scientific  background  necessary  to  determine  the   significance
of  the  acts  complained of."
In   the   light   of   the   Rosenberg   case,   the   protest   seems
prophetic  Had  the  provision  remained  in  the  bill  as  passed,
there  could  hardly  have  been  all  the  exaggeration   in  which
the prosecution, the  judge and the  press  have indulged.  What-
ever  Greenglass  and  the  Rosenbergs  may have  given  the  Rus-
sians,  it  was  hardly  the  "secret"  of  the  atom  bomb.  A  case
in  which  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  participated   would
have .deflated  the  charges.  Unfortunately  protest  did  not suc-
ceed  in  restoring  this  provision.
It  was also  in  the  House  that  an  amendment  by Hatton  W.
Sumners  of  Texas  added  the  death  penalty  to  the  bill.  This
passed  without  debate  or  roll-call  The  Senate  conferees  ob-
jected  strongly  to  the  death  penalty  but  the  best  they  could
wring  from  the  House  was  a  further  amendment  specifying
that  neither  the  death  penalty  nor  life  imprisonment  could
be  imposed  except  on  recommendation  of  the  jury  and  "only
in  cases  where  the  offense  was committed  with  intent  to  in-
jure  the  United   States."
This  is where Justice Douglas  came  in.  The application
of  this  law  to  the  Rosenberg  case  would  have  upset  the  ver-
dict.  The  death  penalty  had  not  been  recommended   by  the
jury. There  had  been  no  attempt  to  prove  intent  to  harm  the
United  States,  since  the  U. S. and  the  U.S.S.R.  were war-time
allies  at  the  time  the  theft  of  atomic  information  is  supposed
to  have  occurred.  The  maximum  penalty  under  the  Atomic
Energy  Act  would  therefore  have  been  20  years  in  jail.
As applied  to  the  Rosenberg  case, the  question  is a  difficult
one. They  were tried  and sentenced  to death under  the  Espion-
age  Act  of  1917. The  overt  acts  occurred  in  1944 and 1945;
the  Atomic  Energy  Act  was  not  passed  until  1946. But  this
was  a  conspiracy  indictment  and  the  conspiracy  was  alleged
to  have continued  until  1950.  There  is  also  a  doctrine  which
holds  that  where  a  man  is  tried  for  a  crime,  and  the  penalty
is reduced  by law before he is tried, he has a right  to  the  lesser
penalty,  even  though   the  crime  was  committed  before   the
penalty  was  reduced.
The  government  countered  with  another   argument.  The
Espionage  Act, as  the  Washington  Post  said  in  an  editorial
last  Saturday,  "was  in   no  way  limited   or  changed   by   the
Atomic  Energy Act. Consequently,  there  was  no  warrant  for
the stay granted by Justice  Douglas."  The  premise is too sweep-
ing;  the  conclusion, fallacious. It  is true  that  the  section  of  the
Atomic  Energy  Act  which  deals  with  unlawful  handling  of
information  says  "This  section  shall  not  exclude the  applicable
provisions  of  any other  laws  .  .  ."  But  it  also  adds,  "except
that  no  government  agency  shall  take  any  action  under  such
other  laws  inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of  this  section."
What  does  one  do  in  a  case  where  the  Espionage  Act  calls
for   the  death  penalty  and  the   Atomic  Energy  Act   for  20
years  in  jail?  Obviously  the  question   cannot  be  resolved  as
easily  as  the  Washington  Post's  formulation  would  imply.
The  authoritative  work  on  the  subject,  "The Control
of  Atomic Energy," by James  R. Newman  and  Byron  S. Miller,
gives  a  different   answer.  Newman  was  counsel   and  Miller
assistant  counsel  to  the  McMahon  committee  in  the  framing
of  the  Atomic Energy Act.  "We  do  not  see,"  they wrote, "how
it  is  possible  to  hold  other  than  that  when  Congress  adopted
Section  10 of  the  Atomic  Energy Act  it  intended  to  prescribe
the exact punishment  to be applied  for all violations  involving
the  unlawful  dissemination  of  restricted  atomic  energy  data."
Their  opinion  in  that  book  published  five  years  ago  was  that,
in  saying  the  applicable  provisions  of  other  laws  were  not
to  be  excluded,  Congress  "meant   to  guard  against   possible
omissions rather  than  to  give  a  prosecutor  the  option  of  pro-
ceeding  under  other  laws  against  offerees   fully   covered  by
the  Atomic  Energy  Act  for  the  sole  reason  that  under  such
other  laws these  offenses  bore  heavier  penalties."
The  passage  quoted  foreshadowed  the  problem   raised  be-
fore  Justice  Douglas.  "The difference,"  Newman  and  Miller
(Continued  on  Page  Three)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1.  P.  Stone's  Weekly,   June  27, 1953
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
•  Editor  and  Publisher, I. F. STONE
Published  weekly  except the  last two weeks
of  August  at  Room  205,  301  E.  Capitol
St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.  Subscrip-
tion  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the  Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and Continental
Europe, $10  by  1st class  mail,  $15  by  ait;
for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by first class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail. Single
copy,  15 cents.  Tel.:  LI 4-7087. Entered as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post   Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
June  27, 1953
5      Vol.  I,  No.   23
Comment
Best   news   of   the  week   and   the  most
unexpected  was  the  4-3  Supreme  Court
decision reversing the conviction of  Harry
Bridges,   and   his   two  associates   in   the
longshoremen's union, Henry  Schmidt and
J.  R.  Robertson.  It  is  now 20 years  since
the  government  began  its  long  campaign
to  deport  or  jail  Bridges.  Will  the  gov-
ernment   make  jtself   look   ridiculous  by
trying  again?
Next  best  was  the  Court's  6-1 decision
in  Barrows  v.  Jackson  giving  what  ap-
pears  to  be  the  final  death  blow  to  racial
restrictive  covenants  in  real  estate.  Chief
Justice  Vinson,  who  seems  to  be  becom-
ing  the  extreme  right  wing  of  this  court,
was  the  lone  dissenter.
Warning   to  students:   A   government
employe  from   out-of-town,  visiting  with
friends  in  the  civil  service,  passes  on  and
vouches  for  this  story.  An  FBI-man,  dur-
ing  the  course  of  asking  a  local  govern-
ment  employe about  a  man  he  was  inves-
tigating,  said:  "When  I  come  across  ap-
plicants from  certain  big  city  colleges  and
I  see that  they  say they  did  not  belong  to
the   American    Student    Union    or    the
Young  Communist  League  or  any  other
radical  organization  while  they  were  in
college,  then  I  really  get  suspicious.  I ask
them,  'Why, didn't  you belong ?"
Compliment,  well,  sort   of:   Two   read-
ers  have  sent  in  clippings  of  an  editorial
from   the   Minneapolis   Star   of   June   6.
"Now  and  then,"  said  the  Star, "even  the
wrong-headedest  dissenter says  something
worth  listening  to.  The  ultra-Left   I.  F.
Stone  does  so  in writing  about  the  depor-
tation  of  Cedric  Befrage,  English  editor
of   the   pro-Communist  National   Guard-
ian."  The  editorial  goes  on to  quote liber-
ally  from  our  issue  of  June  30  and  con-
cludes  by  saying,  "With  Belfrage's   re-
fusal  to  testify  we  have  no  patience,  and
for  his  departure  we  have  no  fears.  But
what  Stone  says  about  the  real  threat  of
McCarthy ism  to  the  American concept of
freedom   and  justice  is  profoundly  true.
Dont  shrug  it  off  just  because  a  pinko
said  it.'
Hat's  Off:    To  Senator  Lehman  of  New
York,  the  Senate's  most  consistent  oppo-
nent  of  "creeping  Fascism",  for  his  great
Jackson  Day  dinner  speech  at  Milwaukee
last  Saturday, taking  the offensive  against
McCarthyism   and   attacking   those   who
turn  "the  legislative  branch  into  a  series
of  star chambers, with  unchecked power of
destruction  over  the  lives  and  reputations
of  countless  individuals."
And    while    we're    on    the    subject:
McCarthy's  resurrection  of  J.   B.   Mat-
thews  to  be  his   principal   assistant    in
witch-hunting,  should  serve  to  alert  the
clergy  to  the  need  for  some  kind  of  or-
ganization   of   mutual   aid   and   counter-
attack.  A  taste  of  what   may  be  coming
is  provided   in  Matthews'   article   in  the
July   American  Mercury,   which   begins,
"The  largest  single  group  supporting  the
Communist apparatus  in the United  States
today  is  composed  of  Protestant  clergy-
men."  Note  the  adjective,  "Protestant."
Recommended:  Helen  Bryan's  "Inside"
(Houghton   Mifflin,   $3),   an  account  of
her   stay   in  prison   for   contempt  of   the
House  Un-American  Activities  Commit-
tee, by the  executive  secretary  of the  Joint
Anti-Fascist    Refugee   Committee.  Writ-
ten with  simplicity, humanity and  insight,
as gripping  as  a  first-rate  novel, generally
cold-shouldered by the literary  reviews  for
political  reasons.  You  won't  put  it  down
once  you  start  reading.
Wild  Words  Will  Not  Help Peace
(Continued  from  Page  Two)
said  of  the  conflict  between  the  two  acts,
"can   only  be  resolved   by  judicial  deci-
sion."  This  is  how  Justice  Douglas  was
trying  to  resolve  them when the  full  court
was  hastily convened.  Counsel  had  to  ar-
gue  the  merits  before  the  full  court  on  a
day's  notice,  against  the  background of  a
demand  in  Congress  for  the impeachment
of  Justice  Douglas  and  pressure  for  haste
from   the   Attorney   General.    This  . was
hardly  full  and  fair  consideration  of  such
subtle questions, especially in a case where
the  lives  of  the  appellants  were  at  stake.
Had   the   stay   remained   in    effect,     it
would have given the defense time to press
on  with  its  petition for  a  new  trial  on  the
basis  of  new  evidence. The  motion  for  a
new  trial  rejected   last  month  by  Judge
Kaufman   contains  material   which  casts
doubt  on  the  verdict,  notably  the  produc-
tion  of  the  console  table  which  figured  so
strikingly  in  absentia  at  the  trial.   This
deserved  a  fuller  review than  the  cursory
hearing  given  counsel  for  the  Rosenbergs
in  the  Circuit  Court.  It   was  not  in  the
interests  of  justice  or  the  good  name of
the  United  States  to  execute  sentence  be-
fore  this  evidence  could  be evaluated.  The
many  "reviews" supposedly granted  in the
case  were  mainly  refusals  to  review  and
as  Justice  Black  said,  "It  is  not  amiss  to
7
point  out  that  this  Court  has  never   re-
viewed  this  record  and  has  never  affirmed
the  fairness  of the  trial  below."
There  were   dangerous   myths   germi-
nated   in  this  case,  and  it  is  tragic  that
there   may  now   be  no  way   finally   and
definitely   to  expunge  them.   One   is   the
myth,  which  began  with  Judge   Kaufman
and  runs  througjj  President   Elsenhower's
denial  of  clemency,  that  the   Rosenbergs
somehow  gave  the  Russians  the  "secret"
of  the  atom  bomb;  one  has  only  to  read
the  testimony  of  General  Groves  in  the
framing   of  the  Atomic   Energy   Act   to
see  what  nonsense  this  is.
The  other  myth arose from  the  constant
effort  of  the  defense  to  equate  the  United
States  with  Nazi  Germany; to picture the
Rosenbergs  as the  victims of a  racist mur-
der  and  anti-Semitic  plot.  This  fit  neatly
with   Soviet   propaganda   but  it  hurt   the
Rosenbergs  more  than  it  helped  them;  it
antagonized  the American  Jewish commu-
nity;  it  was   poisonous   folly.   The  final
straw   was   the   readiness   of   those   who
propagated   the  "Nazi  America"  line  to
believe the worst  about the accused Jewish
doctors  in  Moscow  and  the  Joint  Distri-
bution  Committee  before  the  new  Malen-
kov  regime  suddenly  reversed  the  verdict.
The  haste  with  which  the  Rosenbergs
were  executed  after  three  years  is  hardly
the  same  kind  of  haste  with  which   the
Czechs  shot   Slansky   overnight,  without
appeal.  In  the   Soviet  bloc,  where   there
has been little justice and less mercy, there
is  no  cause  to  condemn  the  treatment  of
the   Rosenbergs.   When   persons   accused
of   espionage   and   counter   revolutionary
activity  in  the  Soviet  zone  are  allowed  to
agitate   and  defend  themselves,  when  in-
dependent   counsel  are   permitted  'to  de-
fend   them   and   attack   the   government,
then  the  Communist  movement  will  have
grounds  for  criticism.  But  by  the  stand-
ards  of  law  and  justice  in  which  we  pur-
port  to  believe  the  Rosenberg  case  will
appear   more  plainly   with   the  years   to
have  been  a  shameful  episode in  cokl  war
hysteria.  The  contrast with  the treatment
of  the  Fuchs  and  Allen Nunn  May  cases
in  England  is  not  flattering  to  oursctve<.
It  is  still  not  clear  just  what  the  Ro>eu
bergs  did  nor  clear  beyond  a  reasonable
doubt  that  they  did  it.
Their  composure  was  impressive, their
conduct  in  the  face  of  death  heroic. They
deserve  a better  tribute than  the  wild  aiul
irresponsible  outpourings  which  marked
their  funeral.  It  will  be  more  than  a  pity
if  a  campaign  to  clear  their  name  is  car-
lied   mi  in  the  same  mood.  It  will  be  a
downright  menace  to  the  fight  for  peace
and  a  saner  world.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  27,  1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
A  Remarkable  Faith  Furnished  Farmer's  Wings
Less  than  24  hours  before  Judge  Kaufman  summarily
turned  down  his  plea  for  a  writ  of  habeas  corpus   for   the
Rosenbergs,  styling  him  "intruder  and  interloper,"  my  friend
and  neighbor  Fyke  Farmer  sat  in  my  study  1100  miles  from
New   York  .explaining  his  necessity   and  cherishing  his  re-
markable  faith.
He  had  just  sent  off  two  wires.  One  to  Dan  Marshall  in
Los  Angeles  asking  him  to  join  him  in  the  plea.  Another  to
the  Rosenbergs'  attorneys  in  New  York  advising  them  that
he  would  be  in  his  hotel  there  after  midnight.  He  had  his
packed  briefcase  and  his  plane  reservation.  What  he  did  not
have,  three  hours before  plane time,  was his  fare  or  the means
of  meeting  his  hotel  bill.
Farmer  believes  the  Rosenbergs   to  be  innocent.  At  that
time,  he  believed  also  that  Judge  Kaufman  would  listen  "fair-
mindedly"  to  his  grounds   for  staying  the  execution   of   the
Rosenbergs.  Only  a  few  days previously  he  had  been  present
as  an  observer  when  the  Judge  had  denied  the  last  defense
plea  for  a rehearing  and  had  been  impressed  by what  he  took
to  be  the  efforts  of  the  bench  to  evoke  a  better  presentation
of  the  defense.
Farmer  was  unnoticed  at  that  hearing.  A  Times  reporter
had  spoken  to him  in the  corridor;  a  Herald-Tribune  man had
asked  him  for  some  "background."   His  interest   in  the  case
was  not  considered  important.  For  weeks, he  had  been  trying
to  persuade  the  defense  attorneys  to  take  up  his  contention
that   the  Rosenbergs   had  been   illegally  sentenced  to  death,
but  his  points  of  law  had  not  been  pressed  in  court.
He  had  been  compelled  to  interrupt  the  preparation  of  his
own  brief,  which  he  was  determined  to  file  independently  as
a  last  resort,  and  return  home  for  the  wedding  of  his  daugh-
ter.  The  trip  had  exhausted  his  funds.  His  unfinished  brief
remained  in  New  York;  he  had  unsuccessfully  offered  it  to
the  Rosenbergs'  lawyers. He  could  not  pay  the  stenographer's
fee   ...
The   mockingbirds  in  the  trees  at  my  house  sang  ex-
citedly  as  the  day  wore  on  and  the  air  was  refreshed  by  the
coming  evening.  It  was  one  hour  till  plane  time.  My  friend's
dark  eyes  kindled  with  anxiety.  It  was  too  late  now  to  call
the  few  people  we  knew  in  distant  cities  who  "might  help."
"These  people  ought  not  to  die,"  Farmer  protested,  rising
and  pacing  the  narrow  room.  "They  are  innocent.  But  right
now it  is just a question  of  that—of  keeping  them  from  dying.
Nobody  really  wants  them  to  die."
I  agreed  with  him  that  in  all  probability  the  members of
the  Supreme  Court  would  welcome  a presentation  of  the mat-
ter  on  a  valid  point  of  law  that  would  be  new  in  the  case,
whereby  without  abandoning  any  position   already  taken  by
the  Court  they  might  spare  the  Rosenbergs  and  square  their
own—and  the  national—conscience.  I  tried  to  share  his  con-
viction  that  there   "must  be  a  way"  of  reaching  the  court
with his plea. But it was  very  late . . .
I  have known Farmer  for  years, the  humanity of  his views,
the  headlong  sincerity  of  his  drives  and  the  "reckless"   opti-
mism  of  his  faith   in  the  essential  goodness  and  rationality
of  the  race.  His  training  is  in  law.  He  has  no  doubt  but  that
in  our  moments  of  great  resolve  we  have  subscribed  to  com-
pacts  sufficient  to  bring  peace  and  to  insure  individual  liber-
ties—if  only, and  simply, we will "just  live  up  to  our  laws."
Three  months  ago  he  was  aroused  to  the  possibility of
a  miscarriage  of  justice  in  the  Rosenberg   case  by  a  letter
written  by  the  wife  of  a  member  of  the  faculty  at  Fisk  Uni-
versity.  He  procured  a  transcript   of  the  case  and  studied   it
day  and  night. It  appeared  to  him  not  only that  these  people
were  innocent  of  the  crime  charged  but  that  their  civil  rights
had  been  abrogated  through  the  failure  of  defense  counsel  to
point  out  fatal  errors  in  their  prosecution  by the  Government.
He  had  no  hesitancy  now  about  "intruding"  in  the  case;
he  did  not  weigh  decorum  against  his  purpose.  There  was an
effort   on  the  side  of  justice  to  be  made,  and  what  did   it
matter  that  he  was  an  outsider  and  unknown?  What  imme-
diately  mattered  was  that  the  court  of  first  contest  was hun-
dreds  of  miles  away,  that  he  had  a  plane  seat  and  no  fare.
Unfortunately  I  could only wish  him  well.  He  left  my house
cheerfully,  knowing  where  he  was  going  but  not  how.  "You
may  hear  of  me,"  he  said.  "I'll  do  my best." I  do  not  yet know
We  canvassed  the  corners  where  he  might  hope  to  obtain
even  $100.  There  seemed  no real  hope  in any corner  . . .
7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                                            «-
27
-
53
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.
Please  enter  the  following  subscription. $5  for  1 year  is
enclosed.  (See  page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street
City    ..
State  .
..Zone..
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.B.,
Washington   3,  D.  C
Entered  as
Second   Class   Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED