I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953mar21.pdf

============================================================

The  Case of  the  Cooperative Teacher,  See Page  4.
/. F. Stone's   Weekly
VOL.  I  NUMBER 10MARCH  21,  1953
7        WASHINGTON,  D.  C15  CENTS
The  Meaning  of  Malenkov
The  West  does  not  know  when  it  is  well  off.   Had  the
Russian  Revolution  like  the  French  degenerated  into  a  Napo-
leonic  phase,  the  world  would  indeed  have  cause  to  tremble.
The  masses  of  Russia allied  with  those  of  China  under  a mili-
tary despotism energized, as was France,  by revolutionary  social
change—such  a  combination   would   be  almost   insuperable!
It  is  fortunate  for  us  that  in  the  transition  from   Stalin  to
Malenkov,  as  in  that  from  Lenin  to  Stalin,  the  civilian power
emerged  at  the  helm  of  the  State.    Once  again  it  is  the  Party
rather  than  the  Army  which  remains  at  the  controls,  with  the
vast  apparatus  of  the  secret  police  as  some  check  upon   the
military  itself.    Repugnant  as most  of  us  find  this  monolithic
dictatorship,  it  is  preferable  to  the  emergence  of  a  military
adventurer,  especially  one  of  genius,  like  the  great  Corsican.
It  is  also  fortunate  for  us  that  the  Russian  people,  unlike
the  Germans,  is  basically  peaceful  and  not  susceptible  to  the
Pied  Piper  of  world  conquest.    The  accents  of  a  Bismarck,
a  Kaiser  or  a  Hitler  were noticeably  absent  from  the  speeches
at  Stalin's  funeral  and  before the  Supreme Soviet.    There  was
no gospel of  blood  and  iron,  and  none  of  the turgid  demagogy
with  which  Der  Fuehrer  bewitched  the  Reich.    The  tone  was
sober,  the  content  was  peaceful.    The  voices  were  those  of
responsible men taking over a huge State in what was obviously
a  well  planned  succession.   One  may like  or  dislike the  men
and  the  doctrine  they  live  by  but  so  much  must  be  admitted
by  objective  observation.    How  quickly we have  forgotten  the
ranting  and  the  hysterics,, the  saber-rattling  and  the  tantrums,
heard  from  Berlin  before  World  Wars  I  and II!    By contrast
the  Malenkov  speech  at  Stalin's  funeral'  was calm to  the  point
of  being  pedestrian.     Its  stress  was  on  the  development  of
industry  and  agriculture  at  home.    Its  theme  in  foreign  policy
was  "the   Lenin-Stalin  axiom  that  peaceful  co-existence  and
peaceful  competition  between  two  different  systems—the  cap-
italist  and   the   Socialist   systems—is   possible."     This   is  no
neurotic  Hitler,  no  posturing Mussolini.
The  most striking thing  of  all  about these two speeches by
Malenkov  is  their  attitude  toward  the  United  States.    There
was  not  one  word  of  ill-will  toward  our  own  country.    There
was  none  of  the  demagogy  in  which  Soviet  leaders  have often
indulged  on  the  subject of  "American warmongers,"  no Social-
ist  soap-box  phrases  about  our  ruling  class.    In  the   speech
before  the  Supreme  Soviet,  Malenkov  specifically  mentioned
the  United  States  in  saying  that  there  were  no  controversial
issues  with  other  nations which  Moscow  was  not  prepared  to
settle  peacefully.     A  hand  was  extended,  not  a  mailed  fist.
What   will   be   Eisenhower's   answer  to   these   overtures?
"We  have  always  been   ready  to  negotiate,"  Anthony  Eden
said  in  his  farewell  speech  before  the  Foreign   Policy  Asso-
ciation  last  week.    "We  still  are."    This  may  be  a  British
hope.    It  has  not  been  American  policy.    The  avoidance  of
all  negotiations,  the  rejection  of  all  overtures,  has  been  Wash-
ington's  policy.    The  whole  point  of  the  Truman-Acheson
"total  diplomacy"  was  to  substitute  the  buildup  of  arms  and
tension  as a substitute  for  patient  exploration.    The  hope  was
to  marshal  such  overwhelming  power  as  to  be  able  to  dictate
virtual  surrender  terms  to  Moscow,  or  crush  the  Soviet  State
with  one big  boom.    It  should  be dear  by now that  this  kind
of  policy  belongs  in  the  comic  strips  with  Buck  Rogers,  and
Eisenhower  has  in  fact  indicated  that  he  might  be  willing  to
talk.
It  is a  pity  that  at  this  moment  we should  have  no Am-
bassador  in  Moscow  to  make  deeper  soundings  as  to Russian
policy  and the  possibility  of  successful negotiations.     It  may be
no  coincidence  that  such  Senators  as  Bridges,  McCarthy  and
McCarran  have  chosen  this  moment  to  fight  the   nomination
of  Charles  E.  Bohlen  for  the  post.    These  Senators  are  the
spokesmen  for  those  who  want  war.    It  is  fantastic  that  a
career  diplomat  so  far  to  the  right  as  Bohlen  should  have  to
have his  "loyalty" defended.  This is a sideshow  for  us boobs of
the  public.  These  Senators, simply  do  not  want  an  American
Ambassador in  Moscow at this  time.  They  are fearful  lest  peace
break  out.   This would  be the  death  of  Chiang's hopes  and of
the  American  hysteria  on  which  their  own  careers   depend.
This  is the  moment  which  may determine  the  future.    The
dream of  building  up  overwhelming  strength  is  as absurd  now
as  in  the  past.    We  are  engaged  in  an  arms race and  an  arms
race  can  lead  only  to  war.    Both  sides  can  only  impoverish
each  other,  especially  when  the  tools  of  war  are  as  complex
and  expensive  as the  jet  plane,  the  big  bomber  and  the  atom
bomb.    In  such a  race,  the  Soviet  States,  accustomed  to  much
lower  living  standards,  used  to  a  fierce  and  rigid   discipline,
have  the  advantage  over  us.    Above  all  it  is  difficult  to  keep
a  free  society  with  free  traditions  in  a  perpetual  state  of  ten-
sion  and  mobilization.    It  is  not  an  accident  that  the   mo-
mentum  of  the  cold  war  is  driving  us  toward  a  Fascism  of
our  own.    Only  a  regimented  America,  in  which  all  dissent
has been cowed, can be expected  to bear the stepped  up burdens
of  an  atomic  arms  race,  and  to  submit  to  the  annual  spring
scares  staged  by  the  military and  the  aviation  lobby,  like  the
new   bogeyman  story  sent   out   last  Monday  by  the   Alsop
brothers.    The  price  of  rejecting  these  new  peace  overtures
must  be the  further  erosion of  basic American freedoms.    The
choice  is between negotiation  and  a road which leads to mutual
destruction.
4  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  21,  1953
When  Is  Contempt  Not  Contempt?
When  A  Big  Business  Lobbyist  Defies  A  Committee
A  unanimous  Supreme   Court   last   week
held  that  Edward A.  Rumely had  been  unjustly
convicted  of  contempt.  It  ruled  that  a  Congres-
sional  investigating  committee had  exceeded  its
powers   in   asking   Rumely  certain    questions.
This was the first time since  1881  that the  Court
had  reversed  a  conviction  for  contempt  on  the
ground  that  the  questions   asked  a  witness  by
Congressional   investigators   were  beyond   their
powers.
The  ruling  in  V.  S.  v  Rumely  was  the  first
sign  that  the  U.  S..Supreme  Court  might  in-
tervene   to  help   victims  of   such   inquisitorial
bodies  as  the   House   Un-American  Activities
Committee.   Indeed  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter,  in
writing  the decision,  said  the  Court  would  have
to  be  "blind"  not  to  see  that  "there  is  wide
concern,   both   in   and   out   of   Congress,   over
some  aspects  of  the   exercise  of   the   Congres-
sional  power  of  investigation."
Ever  since  the  case  of  the  Hollywood, Ten,
the  Court   had  managed  to  stay  blind.   It  re-
fused   to  hear  the  appeals  in  the  Hollywood,
Joint
:
Anti-Fascist  Refugee Committee and  other
contempt  cases  which  raised  squarely  the  prob-
lem  of  whether  the  House  Un-American Activi-
ties  Committee was  violating  the  First Amend-
ment.
The  Rumely  case  is  the. first in  which  the
present Court  has  passed on  this  question.   The
decision   may   prove   useful.    But   certain   as-
tringent  and fundamental  observations  are neces-
sary  to temper jubilation and  restrain  prediction.
Now  as  so  often  in  the  past  it  was  the  danger,
to  moneyed  privilege   and  not   to  intellectual
liberty  which  galvanized  the  Court  into  action.
The  story  behind  the  decision  again  illustrates
the  Supreme Court's  traditional  ambivalence  in
dealing  with  the   rights   of   property   and   the
rights  of man.
The  law is that   Congressional  investigations
are limited  (1)   by the Constitution  and  (2)  by
the  resolutions under which they operate.  These
salutary  principles  were  first  laid  down  by  the
Supreme Court  in  1881.   The  effect  was to  keep
Congress  from  investigating  the  Jay  Cooke  re-
ceivership,  No.  1 scandal  in  the financial crisis
of  the  70's,  and  to  save  from  jail  the company
official   who   refused   to   produce  its  accounts.
The  new  decision  is  in  a  similar pattern.  Its
effect   is  to  keep  Congress  from  investigating
the   accounts  of   the   Committee  for   Constitu-
tional Government,  one of  big business's  biggest
lobbies,   and   to  save  its  secretary,  Edward  A.
Rumely,  from  going  to  jail  for  refusing  to  dis-
close   the  sources  of  $2,000,000  spent   by   the
Comnjittee.    It   was   for   this   that   the   First
Amendment was finally taken out  of deep  freeze.
The  Ruauly  decision   and  its  background
show  how  differently  the  courts  treat  "subver-
sion"  when  it  comes  from  the  Right.   The  case
derived  from  the  efforts  of  Congress  to  control
lobbying.   Lobbying  in  this  context  represents
the  effort  of  big  moneyed men  and  corporations
so to manipulate public opinion  as to undermine
democratic   processes.    At  least  as  far  back  as
1913  President   Wilson   called  attention  to  "an
insidious  body  of  tariff   lobbyists"  in  the  fight
over  the  Underwood  tariff.
There   have   Been   many   investigations   of
lobbying.   One  of  the  most  famous was  the  in-
quiry  under  the  chairmanship of  Senator  (now
Supreme  Court  Justice)   Hugo  Black  into  the.
lobby  which tried  to  defeat  the  Utility  Holding
Company  Act.   Prize  discovery:  of  13,580  tele-
grams  sent  Congress  from  20  different  towns to
protect  the  pending  legislation  on  utility hold-
ing  companies  all  but  13  were  filed  and  paid
for   by  utility  company  agents,   often   without
consent  of  the  person  whose  name  was  used.
The  first  Lobby  Registration  Act  to  contend
with   such  evils  was  passed  by  Wisconsin   in
1905   under   the   inspiration   of   the   elder   La
Follette.   His  son  and  Congressman Mike Mon-
roney put  similar provisions  into  the  Legislative
Reorganization  Act  of  1946.   These  require  the
registration   of  lobbyists  and   the  reporting  of
their financial  sources.  A  House  committee was
set  up  in  1949  to  investigate  operations  under
this  legislation.   A  passage  from  its  interim re-
port  in  October   1950  may  serve  to  show  the
philosophy  behind  the  inquiry.   It  complained
that  big  business  "organizations  seeking  to  pro-
tect a  privileged  status for  their  members at  the
expense  of  the  general  welfare of  all Americans
use  terms  like  'socialism,'  'statism'  and  'welfare
state'  to  forestall  rational analysis of  legislative
proposals  which  they oppose."  The  report  said
"Political  freedom cannot  live  in  an  atmosphere
of  such  hysterical  oversimplification."
One   of   the   biggest  wholesalers   of   these
"hysterical  oversimplifications" is the Committee
for  Constitutional  Government.   From  1937  to
1944   it   sent   out   some  82,000,000   pieces  of
literature.   From   1946  to   1950  it  spent   some
$2,000,000   fighting   reforms  of   almost  every
variety  from  "socialized  medicine"  to  rent  con-
trol.  It  set  up  a  system  to  avoid  reporting  its
contributors.   Rumely was  cited  for  contempt  in
refusing  to disclose.
Defense  counsel  argued  that  disclosure would
interfere  with  exercise  of  rights  guaranteed  by
the   First   Amendment.   An   anonymous  "lady
from  Toledo"  paid  to  send  out  4,000  copies of
John  T.  Flynn's  The  Road  Ahead.    "Surely,"
the  defense   argued   in  its  brief,   "she   had  a
constiutional  right  to  do  this.   But,  if  she  had
known  that  her  name  and  address  must  be  re-
ported  to  Congress  and  would  be sensationally
publicized   by   a   committee   of   Congress    she
might   well  have  been   deterred   from   making
such  a  purchase."    The  brief   argued   that  big
employers  had  a  similar  right  to  anonymity in
financing  Taft-Hartley   law   pamphlets.     "En-
forced   publicity  .  .  .  would  inevitably  deter
many  such  employers  from   thus  arousing  an-
tagonisms   that   would   surely  embarrass  their
efforts  to  maintain  cordial  relations  with  their
employees and union  organizations."
The  same  argument  was made on behalf  of
the Hollywood  Ten and of  the Joint Anti-Fascist
Refugee  Committee.  It  was said that  the  House
Un-American  Activities  Committee  by  pillory-
ing  persons  of  liberal  or  radical views was  effec-
tively  interfering  with  the  First  Amendment by
making people  afraid  to  speak  freely.
The  same Circuit  Court heard  the  same  argu-
ment  in  both  the Rumely  and  Joint  Anti-Fascist
Refugee  cases.  The  two  decisions  were  written
by the same judge, Prettyman.  He admitted  "the
realistic   effect   of   public  embarrassment   is   a
powerful  interference  with  the  free   expression
of  views."    But  Judge  Prettyman  held  that  in
the  JAFRC  case  "the  apparent  nature  of  the
Communist  party  created  a  public  necessity  for
congressional   inquiry,"   while  in   the   Rumely
case  "no  such  dangerous  factors  are  represented
to  us."
The   difference   in   attitude  could   not   have
been  confessed  more  baldly.  The  effect  was  to
protect   rightists   fighting   social   reform   while
leaving unprotected those fighting to  change  the
status quo.
While  new  forms  of  registration   and  ex-
posure  are  being  imposed  on  Leftists,  the  regis-
tration  provisions  of  the  Lobby  Act  are  faring
badly  in  the  courts.   Twice  in  the  past  year,
once  on  appeal  by  the  National  Association of
Manufacturers  and  again  on  appeal  by  a  New
York  cotton  broker,  Federal  Judge  Alexander
Holtzoff  has  declared  the  Lobbying  Act uncon-
stitutional.   So deep is  the  animus against  regis-
tering  lobbyists that  a  court even  threw  out  the
one   indictment  of   a   Left   lobbyist,   William
Patterson,  of  the  Civil  Rights  Congress.
The  Supreme  Court  must  soon  pass  on  the
decisions  holding  the  Lobbying Act unconstitu-
tional.   In  the  Rumely   decision  the   majority,
speaking    through    Mr.    Justice    Frankfurter,
moved  warily.  It  freed  Rumely  on  a finely  split
hair,  holding  that  the  activities  he  declined  to
disclose   were   only   "indirect"    lobbying   and
therefore  beyond the  authority of  the  investigat-
ing  committee.
Mr.   Justice   Douglas   agreed   that   Rumely
should  go  free  but  protested  for  himself   and
Mr.  Justice   Black  that  the  conviction   should
have  been  upset  on  First  Amendment  grounds.
They  argued  that  if  the  government  could  de-
mand  that  a  publisher  disclose  the   purchasers
of   his   books,   "the   spectre   of  a   government
agent  will  look  over  the  shoulder  of  everyone
who  reads."
But  to  accept  the  reasoning  of  the  minority
would  be  to  protect  the  poor  man's  advocate  as
well as the rich  man's hired  lobbyist.  It  remains
to  be  seen  whether  a  majority  of  the  Court  is
prepared  to go  that far.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  21,  1953
I.  F.  Stone's    Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONB
Published  weekly  except  the last  two  weeks
of  August  at  Room  225,  1416  F  St.,  N.W.,
Washington  4,  D.  C.    Subscription  rates:
Domestic,  $5 a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and
elsewhere  in  the Western  Hemisphere, $6;
England  and  Continental   Europe,  $10  by
1st  class  mail,  $15  by air;  for  Israel,  Asia,
Australia   and   Africa,   $10  by   first   class
mail,  $20  by  air  mail.     Single  copy,   1)
cents.     Contents   covered    by    copyright.
Telephone,   STerling   3
T
0938.  Entered   as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
Vol.   1,  No.  10
March  21, 1953
What  Churchmen  Could  Do
Washington,  D.  C.
Though  the  House  Un-American  Activities
Committee  has  shelved  any  plans  its  chairman,
Velde, may have had to  investigate the  churches,
we  see  no  reason  why  the  churches  should  not
go  ahead  and  investigate  Velde  and  the  House
Committee.     Instead  of  limiting  themselves  to
resolutions   of   protest,   churchmen  in   various
communities  could  perform  a  work  of  charity
by  setting  up  local  boards  to  hear  victims of
the  current  witch-hunts,  whether  Velde's,  Jen-
ner's  or  McCarthy's.
These   committees  operate  on  a  hit-and-run
basis.     They  execute  first  and   investigate,   if
at  all,  later.    Any slander which serves to make
a  headline  is good  enough  for  them.   There  is
need  for  unofficial   local  hearing  bodies  which
might  at  least  give  the  victims a  chance to  tell
their  side  of  the  story,  and  to  put  their  life  and
work   in   fuller   context   and   perspective.     A
board  made  up  of  respected  churchmen  might
serve  a  function  of  this  kind admirably.  There
are  many  situations  in  which  school  superin-
tendents  and  others  might  be  able  to  defy  the
witch-hunters   if   they   could   mobilize   some
counterbalancing  forces  of  this  kind.
On  a  national  basis,  the  time  is  overripe  for
the  establishment  of  a  commission  of  leading
churchmen  to  report  on the  excesses  and  abuses
which  have  marked  the  witch  hunt  since  the
House   Committee   began   its   activities   almost
two   decades  ago.  The   distortions,   perjuries
and   flim-flam   deserve   to   be   recorded   and
analyzed.    Unless    the    churches     investigate
Velde,  Jenner  and  McCarthy,  they  will  sooner
or  later  begin  investigating  the  churches.    The
gleichshaltung   now   under   way  in   American
life  will  not  be  complete  until  the  pulpit,  too,
has  been  frightened  into  silence.
As  the  Rev.  Dr.  Russell  Cartwright  Stroup
said   last  Sunday  at   the   Georgetown   Presby-
terian   Church   in   Washington   in   a   sermon
aimed  at  his  fellow  clergymen,  "It   is  foolish
if  we  imagine that  liberty  is  divisible;  that  our
freedom   as   ministers   will   somehow  be pre-
served  when  the  freedom  of  laymen  is  threat-
ened.    It  is  suicidal  for  us  to  keep  silent  until
our ox is gored. ...  If it is permissible  for the
state  to  persecute  opinion  in  the  college  it  is
permissible  to persecute  opinion  in  the  church."
Visa  Denied
If  V.,  J.  and  Me  C.  were  really  looking  for
saboteurs  of  American  policy  in  the  State  De-
partment,  they  ought  to  dig  out  the  men  re-
sponsible  for   the  decision   to  deny  a  visa   to
Sidney  Silverman.    This  doughty  little   Labor
Party  battler   was  to  have  addressed  a  Rosen-
berg  clemency dinner  at  the  Hotel  Capitol  in
New  York  last  Wednesday,  but  at  press  time
there  was  still  no  last-minute  miracle  in  sight
which  might  get  him  there.    The  exact  legal
grounds  are  not  clear,  even  under  the  McCar-
ran-Walter  Act.    Silverman  is  a  Laborite,  not
a  Communist.    The  denial  of  a  visa  will   do
the  Rosenberg  cause  more  good  than  a  speech
by   Silverman,   eloquent   though   he   may   be.
The   case  is  still   page  one  news  in   Western
Europe  and  the  refusal  of  a  visa  to  a  respected
British  M.P.  will  make new  headlines.    These
may   yet  help   to   save  the   Rosenbergs.     The
longer   clemency  is  denied,  the  less  credit  we
will  get  for  it,  the  more  it  will  seem  to  be  a
grudging  move,  extorted  by  foreign  pressure.
Not  A  Secret  Police?
Dr.   Douglas  Southall  Freeman,  the  dis-
tinguished  historian  and  editor,  came  up  from
Richmond  last  week  to speak at  the  Advertising
Club  in  Washington   and  delivered  himself  of
some   shrewd   observations   on   events   foreign
and   domestic,    including   a   warning    against
"what   Elihu  Root  called   'government  by  sus-
picion."    One  remark  he  made,  however,  de-
serves  an  exception.    He  said  "it  is  remarkable
that  the  FBI,  despite  all  the  temptations,   never
became  a  secret   police."
Just  what  Dr.  Freeman  meant  by  this  is  not
clear.    The   FBI's   powers  fortunately  are  no-
where  near  as  extensive  as  the  secret  police  of
Russia   or   of   pre-war   Fascist   Germany,  Italy
and. Japan.    But  it  operates  in  secret.    It  en-
gages   in   surveillance  of   political   affairs.     It
gathers   dossiers  on  all   kinds  of   citizens,   in-
cluding  many  of  very  moderate  liberal   views.
It  has the  power  to  destroy  reputation  and  live-
lihood    in    all    those   growing    areas    where
"loyalty"   and   "security"   clearance   are   now
needed,  from  private  business  scientific  labora-
tories  to  jobs  on  the  waterfront.    It  has  the
privilege  of  keeping  its  informants  anonymous
and  of  not  disclosing  the  content  of  secret  in-
formation  to  accused  persons  or  even  to  their
judges.    This  is  certainly   acting   as  a  secret
police,  or  what  the  Japanese  called  a  "thought
police."
Good Deed
At   the   risk   of  losing   some  of   those  new
votes  in  Texas,  the  Eisenhower  Administration
through  Attorney  General  Brownell  has  asked
the  Supreme  Court  to  reverse  a  recent  pro  Jim
Crow  decision  by  the  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals
for  the  District  of  Columbia  (see  "Jim   Crow
in The Capital" in the  Weekly  for January 31).
At  the  risk  of  ruining  the  Attorney   General
with   the  Rightists   and  die-hards   of  his  own
party,  the  Weekly  commends  him  for  it.
Best  News  of  The  Week
Best  news  of  the  week  on  the  civil  liberties
front  was  the  Supreme  Court's  announcement
that  it  will  review  the  Bridges  case.   The  labor
leader  the  government  has  been  trying  to  de-
port  for   18  years  still  has  a  fighting  chance.
The  Weekly  will  publish  an  article  on  the  case
in  an  early  issue.
(Please  mention  the  Weekly  in  dealing  with  advertisers)
•  TO I  F.  Stone's Weekly   READERS  •
When  thinking  of  replenishing  your  wardrobe  with  a  distinctive  suit  or
topcoat,  remember,  no one in  all  New  York  offers  Registered  No.  6  Grade
clothing—the   finest   tailoring   possible   in   ready-to-wear—at   this   price.
(Imported   Harris   Tweeds,   Flannels,  Gabardines,  Worsteds, etc.)
REG.  $85  to  $115  NOW
TED  BROOKS  CLOTHING  CO.
91 Fifth Ave.  bet.  16 &  17 Sts.,  N.Y.C.
WA  4-9613    AL 5-6570
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  21,  1953
The  Case of The  Cooperative Teacher
The Voice of America last year asked Or. Julius  H. Hlavaty
to make a broadcast  in  his  native  tongue,  Slovak,    H.C  thought
this  might  endanger  relatives  in  the  old  country  but  agreed.
He  gave  his  services  free.    The  script  was prepared  for  him.
It  dealt  with  the  Bronx  High  School  of  Science  where  Dr.
Hlavaty  is  head  of  the  mathematics   department.
Someone  in  the  Czechoslovak  colony  in  New  York  disliked
the  idea  of  a  broadcast  by  Dr.  Hlavaty.    A  letter  was  sent
Senator  McCarthy.    Last  week  Dr.  Hlavaty  came  home  one
evening  to  hear  that  Roy M.  Cohn,  counsel  to  the  McCarthy
committee,  had  just  phoned.   Dr.  Hlavaty  was ordered  to  ap-
pear  next  morning  at  a  hearing  in  Washington.
Now  Dr.  Hlavaty,  gray-haired,  thin-faced,    distinguished
looking,  was  before  the  committee.    The  exposure  of  New
York  City  school  teachers  is  no  longer  a  sensation,  and  there
were  only  a  few  spectators  in  the  big  Senate  caucus  room.
Though  the turnout  was poor,  the  Senators  did  their  best,  like
good  troupers,  to put on a performance.   Dirksen, who  relishes
himself  as a golden-voiced  orator,  was  as  deceptively  dulcet  as
an  Inquisitor  about to consign  a suspected  heretic, to the  secular
arm  for  slow  broiling.    McCarthy,  in  that  cavernous  marble-
walled  room,  seemed to enjoy  sounding like the  Voice of  Doom
in  a  soap  opera.
McCarthy wanted to know whether Dr.  Hlavaty was "aware"
that  the  Liberal  Party in  New  York had  broken  away  from  the
American  Labor  Party.    Dr.  Hlavaty  was  aware  of  it.    Mc-
Carthy  wanted  to  know  whether  he  was  aware that  the  ALP
had  been  cited  as subversive.    Dr.  Hlavaty was not  aware of  it.
The  ALP  is  not  on  the  Attorney  General's  list.   It  soon  ap-
peared  that  McCarthy  was  referring  to  an  obscure  "citation"
by  the  Tenney  committee  in  California.    Was  Dr,   Hlavaty
aware  that  the  ALP  was Communist dominated?   Dr.  Havaty
seemed   to   assent.     Triumphantly  McCarthy   asked  him   to
identify  two  documents.    These  showed  that  Dr.  Hlavaty and
his  wife  had  registered  ALP  in  last  year's  election.
As  an  exploit  in  entrapment,  this  was  good  Senatorial
sport.   It  was not  clear  just what  it  had  to  do with  the  Voice
of  America.   A  Senator  wanted  to  know if  the  example  set by
Dr.  Hlavaty's  registration  might  not subvert  his  students.   Dr.
Hlavaty  tried  to  explain  that  he  thought  election  registrations
were  a  private  matter.    Perhaps  the  ALP  was  lugged   in  be-
cause  at  the  morning  session  Dr.  Hlavaty  had  denied  present
or  recent  membership  in the  Communist  party but  pleaded  the
Fifth  amendment  for   1948.
Symington  of   Missouri   seemed   to  think  the  committee's
jurisdiction  extended  to  theology.    "As  a good  American,"  he
asked  Dr.  Hlavaty,  "do  you  believe  in  God?"    The  mathe-
matics  teacher  said he  did.   At  one  point  Dirksen  went  off on
a  weird  tangent.    He  wanted  to  know  whether  Dr.  Hlavaty
had  been  identified  on  the  broadcast.    He  had  been.    Then
Dirksen  wanted  to  know what  if  the  Voice  had  broadcast Earl
Browder?    Would   this  not  encourage  Communists  abroad?
"Were  you,"  Dirksen   asked  pointedly,   "known   in  Czecho-
slovakia?"   Dr.  Hlavaty  said  if  he  were  known  at  all  it  was
only  as a poor  boy who  left  in  1921  and  became  head  of  the
mathematics  department  in  a  famous  American  high  school.
Dr.  Hlavaty  said  he  thought  this  was  good  propaganda  for
America.   Dirksen  desisted.
It  was only toward  the  end  of  the  hearing,  on  intervention
by  Senator  McClellan, that  Dr.  Hlavaty  was finally allowed  to
explain  just  how  he  came  to  make  the  broadcast.    But  Mc-
Carthy  would  not  let  him  read  the  transcript  into  the  record.
McCarthy  said  the  committee  knew  there  was  no Communist
propaganda  in  the  broadcast.    If  so,  why  had  Dr.  Hlavaty
been  called?    Cohn  jumped  in  to  remedy  the   effect  of  Mc-
Carthy's  admission.   He  asked  Dr.  Hlavaty whether  there was
anything  anti-Communist in  the  broadcast.    Hlavaty admitted
there  wasn't.
It was painful to watch.   There was no allegation of wrong-
doing.    A  teacher  was  being  ruined  because  he  had  done  a
favor  for  a  government  agency.   A  committee  sated  with vic-
tims  took  him  apart  indifferently,  like  a  small  boy  taking  the
wings  off  a  beetle.    Dr.  Hlavaty  has  been  in  this  country  32
years.   He  has been  a teacher  for  24.   He  has a national  repu-
tation as a teacher of  mathematics.   He  is one of  the  best  loved
teachers  on  the  faculty  of  the  Bronx  High  School  of  Science.
His  chances  to  avoid  dismissal  are  slight  unless  students  and
parents  organize  to  support  him.
I.  F. Stone'*  Weekly
                                   M| M
Room  221  Kellogg  BIdg.
1416  V  Street,  N.W.,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Please  enter  the following  subscription.   $5  for  1  year  is
enclosed.    (See   pmge  )  for  foreign   rates)
Name    ..........................................
Street   ..........................................
City  ................................   Zone  ......
State  ...........................................
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
221  Kellogg  Bldg.
1416  F St.,  N.W.,  Washington  4, D.  C
Entered  a*
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Post   Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED