I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953dec07.pdf

============================================================

Exposing:  The  Fallacies  in  the  Wire-Tap  Drive,  See Page Two
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I,  NUMBER  44
DECEMBER  7,   1953
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
That  Fake  Pre-Bermuda   Tussle  With  McCarthy
The  immediate  precipitant  of  the  Dulles  statement  against
"McCarthyism"  was  Canadian  resentment   over   the   Jenner
committee  in  the  Gouzenko  affair,  which  has  upset  negotia-
tions  for  joint  defense  facilities with  Canada. The  tip-off  was
the  passage  in  which  Dulles  said  "we  gain  security  because  of
an  early  warning  system  which  permits  of  interception   and
civil  defense.  But  this  requires  facilities  in  the  friendly  coun-
tries  which  are  nearer  the  Soviet  Union.   Without  that  such
industrial  centers  as Detroit,  Cleveland,  Chicago  and  Milwau-
kee  would  be  'sitting  ducks'  for  atomic  bombs."   It   is  the
Canadian  border  to  which  he  referred.
Gouzenko  Wants  to  Get  Into  the  Act
Gouzenko's  name  and  whereabouts  are  no  secret  in  Canada
and  any  newspaperman  who  wants  to  interview  him  can  do
so—for  a  fee.  Gouzenko  feels  cheated.  Whitaker  Chambers,
Louis  Budenz and  Elizabeth  Bentley  cleaned up  on  their  reve-
lations  while  Gouzenko  has  had  to  be  satisfied  with  a  small
annuity  conferred  upon  him  by  a  Canadian  business  man.
Gouzenko  may  yet  yield  to  temptation  and  cross  the  border.
Book,  magazine and  movie  rights  dangle  before  him.
Ike  Will  Not  Fight  McCarthy
McCarthy  would  like  a  battle  with  Ike,  but  Ike  will  not
fight  McCarthy.   The  President's  endorsement  of  the  Dulles
statement  at  the  White  House  press  conference  last  week was
cautious,  discreet  and  limited.   It  was intended  to  appease  the
restive  British  and  French  at  Bermuda.   British  business  men
smart  under  McCarthy's  reference  to  their  trade  with  China.
No  such  spotlight   is  thrown  on  West  German  and  Japanese
trade  with  the  Communist   mainland,  and  the  U.   S.   itself
directly  and  through  Japanese intermediaries  has  been  increas-
ing  its  trade  with  China.   American  cars  are  conspicuous  in
Peking.
A  Crisis  in  Western  Relations
, *
The  British  and  French  attitude  toward  negotiation   with
the  Russians  is  diverging  sharply  from  that  of  the  State  De-
partment.   M.  Laniel's  difficulties  over  German  rearmament  in
any  form  reached  their  climax  before  the  latest  Soviet  move
was  heard  of.   The  British  are  insisting  on  a  meeting  with
the  Russians while the  mood  in Bonn is described  as  "pessimism
verging  on  despair ... as a result  of  the  combined  impact  of
the   Soviet   note   and   the   French   debate"   (Sunday    Times,
London,  November  29).   Dulles  and  Adenauer  see eye  to  eye
—their  objective  is  to  stave  off  negotiations  until  the  U.  S.
has  financed  German  rearmament,  and  then  to  "push"  east-
ward  at  the  risk  of  war.
Dulles  is  still  "liberationist"  and  Eisenhower,  a  weak  and
uncertain   cipher  in  the  equation  of  American  government,
now  seems  to  agree  with  him.   At  press  conference  last  week
the  President  said  "a  breath  of  freedom"  must  mean  giving
the  satellite  countries  the  right  to  determine  their  own  form
of  government.   This  and  his  remark  shutting  the  door  even
on  negotiating   about   recognition   of   China   shows  that   the
American  government  is  still  dead  set  against  a  conference
with  Moscow,  and  will  seek  some  formula  «t  Bermuda  with
which  to  block  talks  or  ensure their  failure.
Elsenhower's  Strategy
Abroad  is to  continue  the  Truman-Acheson  policy  of  "con-
tainment"  plus,  holding  the  French  back  from  a  settlement
in  Indo-China,  restraining  the  British  in  their  relations  with
China  and  leaving  Korea  as  an  insoluble   sore.   At  home  his
Administration  will  pursue  the  policjr  of  trying  to  cut   the
ground  out   from  under  McCarthy  by  outdoing  him  in  the
loyalty  purge and  in  sensations  like BrownelPs smear of  Harry
White.
McCarthy  and  Dulles  Both  Pro-German
Despite Eisenhower's  personal  predilections,  which  count  for
very  little,   this  is  a  pro-German  orientated   Administration.
McCarthy,  the  defender  of  the  Malmedy slayers, will  ride  herd
on  the  Administration  to  force  it  into  anti-British  and  anti-
French  positions.   Dulles  has  been  pro-German  at  least  since
the  early   *30's  and  despite  his  "rebuke"  of   McCarthy  'has
pursued  a  policy  of  imposing  American  will  on  the  Atlantic
powers  for  the  benefit  of  Germany  and  Japan.   The  way  he
rammed  the  Japanese peace  treaty  down  the  throats  of  London
and  Paris  was  an  example.   In  a  speech  earlier  this year  Dulles
said  the  U.  S. need  not  take  a "popularity  poll"  before  decid-
ing  what  course  to  pursue  in  foreign  policy.
Rhee  May  Upset  the  Applecart  Again
In  this  situation,  Rhee  may  upset  the  applecart  again.   It
was  the  Korean  war  which  enabled  Acheson  unilaterally  to
launch  Germany  on  the  path  of  rearmament.   A  renewal  of
the  Korean  war  would  again  "solve"  the  German   problem.
The  American  military  in  Korea  are pro-war  and many of  the
American  military  in  Washington  are  resentful  of  the  truce
and  the  curb  put  on  them  by  Eisenhower's  big  business  ad-
visers.   Rhee  is  being  encouraged  to  start  the  war  up  again.
The  logic  of  the  situation  indicates that  now  as in June,  1950,
he  can  force  the  Administration   to  support  him  once  the
fighting   resumes.   The  Rhee-Chiang  visit  is  a  danger  signal
which  should  not  be  ignored.
1  7  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  7,  1958
Fallacies  of  the  Drive  for  Wiretap Legislation
It  Won't  Catch  Spies,  But  It  Will  Police  Thoughts
The  Federal  Communications  Act  of  1934  makes  wire-tap-
ping  a  crime.  In  1937  the  Supreme  Court  (Nardone v.  U.S.,
802  U.S.  379)  rejected  the  Justice  Department's  contention
that  this  did  not  apply  to  Federal  agents.   Ever  since  the
Department  has  been  (1)  violating  the law and  (2)  trying to
get  legislation  which  will  authorize  the  FBI  to  tap  wires.
Attorney  General  Herbert  Brownell,  Jr.,  failed  to  get  such
legislation  last  spring.   He  is  using  the  White  affair  as  a
springboard  for  another  attempt.
The  impression  has  been  created  that  if  wire-tapping  were
legal,  convictions  might  have  been  obtained  against   those
named   by   Elizabeth   Bentley.    Thus   the    New  Republic
(November 30)  says, "The  Grand Jury heard the  evidence for
eighteen  months, and  decided that no case  had been  presented
against  any member of the  group that called for  court  action.
Its  conclusion  was  based  largely  on the  inadmissible  nature
of  evidence gained  by  wire-tapping."
If  Elizabeth  Bentley  told  the  grand  Jury  what  she told  the
Court  under  cross-examination   in  the  Remington  case   (see
last week's Eye-Opener),  there could  hardly be an  indictment
returned  against  most  of  the  people  she named.  For  she  tes-
tified  that  except  for  the  Silvermasters  and  Ullman,  none of
the  persons  from  whom she claims  to  have  collected informa-
tion  were  told  that  she was  a  spy working for  the  Russians.
The  persons  named  could  not  be  indicted  for  espionage  if
according to Miss Bentley  herself  they  did not know that they
were  helping  a  spy.  It  is  hard  to  see  what  could  have  been
added  by  wire-tapping.  If  Miss  Bentley  herself  did  not  tell
these  people what  she was really  doing, they would hardly  be
discussing it  among themselves over the  telephone.   Wire-taps
could  show association.  But  the  fact  that  these  people  asso-
ciated  with  each  other  would not  prove  espionage.
The  Attorney  General's  summary of  the  evidence  obtained
by  FBI  surveillance  shows that  only  association  was  uncov-
ered.   Though  evidence  obtained  by  wire-tapping  is  inadmis-
sible  in a court  of law, there was nothing to stop the  Attorney
General  from   using  facts  obtained  by  wire-tapping  in  his
summary.  It  would  have  been  the  strongest   possible  argu-
ment  for  the  legislation  Brownell  and  Hover  want,  if  they
had  said,  "We heard  two  officials  planning  to  obtain  a  secret
document  but  we  could  not  use  this  information  before  the
grand  jury  because  it  had  been obtained  by  wire-tapping."
Documents  cannot  be  passed  by  telephone.  There  must  be
physical  contact.  This  can  be  observed.  Documents must  be
filched  and  photographed.   This  can  also  be  observed.   The
strangest  thing  in  this  whole story is that  though the  Silver-
masters  and  Ullman  were  involved in  loyalty  proceedings  in
1942, three years before  Miss Bentley told her  story, and  were
supposed  to  be  using  basement  photographic  equipment  for
improper  purposes,  surveillance  neither  before nor  after  the
Bentley  story  turned  up  any  evidence.  The  only  fair  infer-
ence  under  the   circumstances   is  that  there   was  none  to
turn  up.
The  Coplon  case  is  supposed  to  show  the  need  for  permit-
ting  wire-taps.  It  is  said  that  in this  case  a  spy went  free
because  wire-tap  evidence was  not  admissible.   But  this does
not  happen to be true.  Miss Coplon  was  tried  in  Washington
and  in  New  York.   The  conviction  in  Washington  was  re-
versed  not  because  the  government  had  used wire-tapping  to
investigate  espionage  but  because  the  FBI  had  listened  in
on  conversations  between  Miss  Coplon  and  her  lawyer.   The
Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  in  the  District  of  Columbia  said
this  was  an  invasion  of  her  constitutional  rights  under  the
Fifth  and  Sixth  amendments "which  unqualifiedly  guard  the
right to assistance of counsel"  (191  F.  2d 749).  Even if  wire-
tapping  were  made  legal,  it  would still  be illegal  to  listen  in
on a  lawyer  and  client  preparing  for  trial.
As  for  the  New  York  case,  the  finding  of  the  trial  judge,
Sylvester  Ryan, throws  considerable light  on wire-tapping  in
espionage  cases.  "Careful  study  of  the  information  obtained
on  all  these  interceptions,"  Judge  Ryan  ruled,  "reveals  that
at  no time was  a  conversation  between Coplon  and  Gubitchev
intercepted; that  at  no time was either  defendant  heard men-
tion  the  name of  the  other;  that  the  existence  of  the  alleged
conspiracy  was  never  discussed in  the  slightest  manner."
The  New York  conviction was  reversed  because no  warrant
had  been  obtained  for   the  arrest  of  Miss  Coplon  and   the
seizure  of  the  confidential  material  found  in  her  purse.   The
conviction  was  also  reversed  because  the  Circuit  Court  felt
that  Miss  Coplon and her  counsel had a right to  examine  the
wire-tap  records  for  themselves  extensively  enough  to  deter-
mine  whether  the  original  tip  or  later  evidence  had  been
obtained  by  wire-tapping.   Only  Judge  Ryan  had  seen  this
evidence   (185  F.  2d  629).
According to Judge  Ryan's findings, an  examination of  the
records  would  show that  wire-tapping  had  disclosed only  two
matters,  one  irrelevant,  the  other  unnecessary.   The  irrele-
vant  was  "information  on  her  contacts  and  relationships  to
one  H.S.,  a  male  acquaintance"   (88 F.  Supp. 926).  This  had
no bearing on the charge of espionage.  The other  information
was that  she was  going  to  New York  on three  specific  dates,
"but  this  information,"  as  the  Circuit  Court  pointed  out  in
Washingon, "was  also  given  to  Foley  [Miss  Coplon's  superior
in  the  Justice  Department]  by  the  appellant  herself."
In  the  Coplon case,  wire-tapping  was  unnecessary.   Coplon
and  Gubitchev did  not  communicate by  telephone.   The  rea-
soning  of  the  two  Circuit  Courts  would  have  called  for   re-
versal  even  if  wire-tapping  were  legal.   The  Department  of
Justice  and the  FBI  were the  victims  of their  own unfair  and
clumsy  tactics.
The  existence  of  legislation   permitting  wire-taps   in  such
cases  would  have  made  a  difference  in  other  respects,  how-
ever.  If  wire-tapping  were legal, Miss Coplon's lawyer  would
never have been able to learn that  the  FBI  had  been  listening
in  on  his  telephone talks  with  his  client  in  preparation   for
trial.
The  FBI  would  also  be  saved  the  embarrassment  of  sub-
poenas  which  reveal   how  extensively   it   has  been  tapping
wires  and  what  trivial,  scandalous  and  personal  material   it
gathers.  The  FBI  reports  seized  in  Miss  Coplon's possession
were published at  the  time and they  showed widespread wire-
tapping as a means of political surveillance often  unconnected
with  any  allegations  of  crime  or  threat  to  internal  security.
The reports  which came to light  in  the  Coplon  case showed
that  the  FBI's  criteria  of  'loyalty"  are   (as  the  National
Lawyers  Guild  declared  in  a  conmprehensive analysis  of  the
documents at  the  time)  "subjective  and  reactionary."   Affilia-
tion  with  the  Progressive  Party,  "writing  a  master's  thesis
on  the  New  Deal  in  New  Zealand,"  "opposing  the  House
Committee  on  Un-American  Activities,"  "making  a  strong
progressive  speech  which attacked  an  anti-Semitic  teacher,"
"taking courses  under  Veblen" and  even having  Eravchenko's
anti-Soviet  "I  Chose Freedom"  in  one's  library  were  enough
to  qualify  one  for  inclusion  in  an  FBI  dossier.
Public  and  private  wire-tapping  is  now so extensive  in this
country  that  everyone  assumes  that  it  is  no  longer  safe  to
discuss  private  affairs  of  any  kind  on  the  telephone.   Wire-
tapping  will  catch  no  spies.   But  to  take  off  all  inhibitions
and  make wire-tapping by the  FBI  legal  would be to encour-
age  the  G-men  to  expand  their  work  as  a  political   thought
police.
(Note: A succeeding issue  will  provide a study of  the
wiretap  legislation  now before Congress.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  7, 195S
I. E  Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher,  L  F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  20),  301
E.  Capitol  St., S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic, $J
a   year;   Canada,   Mexico   and  elsewhere   in   the   Western  Hemisphere,   $<;
England   and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by   1st  class  mail,  $15  by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   1!   cents.    Tel.:   LI  4-7087.    Entered   as  Second   Class  mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
December  1, 1953VoL  1,  No.  44
They  Keep  Re-Heating  The  Cold  War
The   Elsenhower  Administration   is  serving  warmed  over
spy  at  home  and warmed over atrocity  at  the  UN.  The latest
on  atrocities   (UN  Document  A/2563)  is  referred   to  as  a
"report" but  consists  of a  "compilation  of typical  documents"
which  turns  out  to  be  a  hodge-podge  of  affidavits,   stapled
together  in  no particular  order.  The pages  are  not numbered
and  the  material  is  not  analyzed.  There  is nothing in  it  par-
ticularly   new   (See  the   Weekly,  No.  40,  Special  Issue:  A
Report  on An  Atrocity  Report)  but  what there  is  makes one
wish  a  legal   commission  had  been  set  up  to  examine  the
witnesses  and  documents for  itself,  instead  of  depending on
these  ex  parte  statements.   A  few  samples  will  allow  the
reader  to  get  the  flavor  for  himself.
Some  of  the  incidents hardly  seem  atrocities  but  the  sort
of  things  which happen in  the  heat  and  panic  of  war.   Thus
no  less  than  six  affidavits  are  provided  on  Case  No.  639  in
which  3  British  and  5  Belgian  soldiers  were  killed.   These
were  prisoners captured  on  the  Imjin  April  23,  1951.  "They
were  given  some  food  and  had  not  been  mistreated  at   all,"
one  of the  documents says, "until a  flight  of  American  fighter
planes  began  dropping napalm  bombs.   The  Chinese  became
frightened   and  one  or  more  of  them  started  firing  at   the
British  and  Belgian  soldiers."
Page  8 of Part  III  is  the  affidavit  of a  returned  American
POW  who tells  how three  captured  soldiers  went  looking  for
food.   They  were discovered by  a  Chinese soldier,  killed  him
and  started  burying  his  body. Three  other   Chinese  soldiers
came  upon  them.   Two  of  the  POWs  made  a  get-away   but
the  third  was  captured,  court  martialed  and  shot.
Case  No.  16  makes  one  wonder  just  what  methods  were
used  to  obtain  confessions in  our  own  POW  camps.  This  is
the  affidavit  of  a  North  Korean  POW  on  Koje  Island,  dated
August  17, 1951.  It  says  "Prior  to my making this  statement
I  have been  interrogated  by  different  persons  on  several  dif-
ferent  occasions  at  Waegwan, at  Taegu,  at  Pusan  and  also
here on Koje  island.  I was also given a lie detector  test  some-
time  in  October   1950  at  Pusan.   To  my  knowledge  I  have
never   written   or   signed   any   statement.   On  all   of  these
occasions  when  I  was  interrogated  I  did not  exactly  lie, how-
ever,  I  also  did  not  relate  the  complete true  facts  of  the  de-
tails  which occurred  in  the  vicinity  of  Waegwan  between  15
and  17 August  1950.  I  will  now  of  my  own free  will,  write
the  true  facts."   This  is  followed  by  an  affidavit  by  a  South
Korean  War  Crimes  investigator  saying,  "no  force,  threats
or  promises"  were  made  to  extort  the  confession.
Tricky  Tactics
The  2-to-l   decision  by  the   Circuit   Court   of  Appeals  in
the  Remington  case  serves  as  a  reminder  of just  how low the
government  stooped  to  obtain   its   one  and   only  conviction
growing  out  of  Elizabeth  Bentley's  spy  ring  story  (see  the
Eye-Opener   in  last  week's  issue).
When  the  Circuit  Court  two  years  ago  reversed  Reming-
ton's  conviction  for  perjury  in  denying to a  grand  jury that
he  had  ever  been a  Communist, it  did  not  dismiss  the  indict-
ment  but  recommended a  new trial.  It  also  gave  the  defense
limited  access  to  the  grand  jury  minutes  so that  on  a  new
trial  the  defense  could  fully  explore  evidence  that  the  in-
dictment  had  been unfairly  obtained because  (1)  the  foreman
of  the  grand  jury  was  Miss  Bentley's  literary  and  financial
collaborator  and  (2)  the U.S.  Attorney  (Irving Saypol),  after
consulting  then   Attorney   General   McGrath,  had   withheld
this  information  from  the  defense.
The government, to  avoid full  exploration  of these  charges,
applied  to  the  Supreme Court  for  permission  to  have  the  in-
dictment  dismissed.   When  this  was  denied,  the   government
nonetheless  shelved  the  old  indictment  and  went  to  trial  on
a  second indictment  hastily  obtained  from  a  new grand  jury.
The  new indictment was  based  on his  testimony  in  the  trial.
This   novel   procedure  raised   the   question  of  whether   the
government  might,  by  a  succession  of  indictments  for   per-
jury, keep  trying a man until it got a  conviction  which would
stick.  The  Circuit  Court  has  now upheld this  conviction,  but
this  time  with  a  dissent  by  Judge  Learned  Hand  that  may
help  Remington to  get  a  hearing  in  the  Supreme  Court
The  majority   (Augustus  Hand  and  Swan)  declared  that
even  if  the  first  indictment  had  been  illegally  procured  that
would  "not  permit  the  defendant to  commit  a  new  and  inde-
pendent  crime."  Learned  Hand  felt  that  testimony  given  by
Remington  in  the  trial  of  the  tainted  indictment  hardly  con-
stituted  a  "new"  and  "independent"  crime.  He  also  objected
that  improper  pressure  had  been  brought  to  bear  by the  first
grand  jury  on  Remington's  former  wife  Ann,  to  get  her  to
change  her  testimony  and  give  evidence  against  Remington.
Learned   Hand's  dissent  says  that  after   prolonged  ques-
tioning  by  the  first  grand  jury,  Ann  Remington  protested
that  she was  getting  "fuzzy"  from  fatigue  and  hunger.   She
was  refused  permission  to  see  her  lawyer.   The  questioning
continued  and  the  witness  finally  broke  down,  giving   the
testimony   the   grand   jury   wanted,   though   this   consisted
largely  of  communications  privileged   as  between  man   and
wife.
Judge  Hand  said  that  Brunini,  the  foreman  of  the  grand
jury,  Bentley's  collaborator,  advised  Ann  Remington  falsely
when  he told her  during  this  prolonged  examination  that she
had  no privilege  to  refuse  to  answer  the  question  put  to  her.
Judge  Hand  thought  this  ground  enough  for  quashing  the
first  indictment.   "It   seems  to  me,"  he  said,  "that  the  case
at  bar  is within  the  implied ambit  of the  doctrine  of 'entrap-
ment' as well as it  is within  that of the  doctrine  against using
evidence  unlawfully obtained."
THE  LONDON  TIMES  WAS  SURPRISED ...
The  Times  of  London  Literary  Supplement  (September  9)  reviewing "The  Truman  Era",  a  collection  of  my Washing-
ton  dispatches  and  columns  published  by  Turnstile  Press  in  England, said the book "may indeed come as a surprise to those
who  doubted  that  the  McCarthys  and  the  McCarrans  could have  so outspoken  a  critic  in  the  city  where  'the  Red hearing
has  become  the American  equivalent of the bullfight'  . . .  That  this  crusade  should  be conducted  with  such  outspokeness
and  vigour,  even from the very  committee  rooms  and  corridors of  the Capitol,  is, perhaps, testimony  In itself  to  the strength
of  the  American  way  of  life  he  [Stone]  is defending."
Help  that  fight  along  .by  renewing  TODAY  and,  if  you  can,  add  a  gift  subscription  for  only  $4  more.
1  2 *
1   7  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  7,  19St
Jennings  Perry:  Daring   Dulles  Peeps  in  from  the  Outside
/  am  so  pleased  that  we  did  not  have  to  go  to  war  with
Canada  over  Igor  Gouzenko  that  I  could  pass  napkins  at  a
cocktail  for  John  Foster Dulles.   This would  give me a  chance
to  ask  him  whether  his  remarkable  Answer  to  Jenner  was  a
quippish  thought,  happily  tailored  for  the  moment  only,  or  a
new  doctrine  intended  to  guide  our  external  relations  hence-
forth.
If   the  latter,  we  all  could  indulge  in  fresh  hope  for   the
eventual  triumph  of  sanity.
For  what  Mr.  Dulles  has  done  here  is  that  amiable but  for
some  reason  most   difficult   thing   to  do—put  himself  in  the
place  of  the  other  party  to  a  dispute.    Instead  of   cracking
down  on  our  Canadian  friends  for  refusing  to  deliver  their
ex-spy  unconditionally  into  the  hands of  the  headline-happy
Indiana  senator,  he  told  the  senator  he  would  have  taken  the
same  position  on  behalf  of  the  United  States.
You  have  to  admise  a  stand  of  that  sort  on  the  part  of  a
fellow  countryman  placed  to  speak  for  the  nation.    It   is  a
stand   of   understanding,   of   principle,  related   to   the   great
philosophy  of   live  and  let   live,  to  the   Golden  Rule   itself.
And  you  have  to  imagine what  the  effect  would  be  upon  the
whole  community  of  humanity,  on  the  temper  of  the  times, if
more  of  the  same  fellow  feeling  were  allowed  to  enter   our
bearing  toward  all  other  peoples.
Canada  is  of  course  on  our  side,  our  uranium  mine,  as  it
were,  and  important  for  bases all  along  the  rim  of  the  arctic.
We  owe  those  people  some  special  consideration.    But  others
who  also  are  our  friends  and  valuable  to  us  certainly  deserve
equal   treatment   with   the  "most   favored"   under   the  new
policy;  and  still  others,  at  present  outside  this   description,
have  a  right  to  expect  that  even  they  will  be  touched  agree-
ably by sympathetic orientation  of  the American point  of  view.
Great  meetings  appear  to  be  coming up—at  Bermuda,  per-
haps  at  Berlin  and  in  the  Far  East.   These  will be  the  confer-
ence  tables  we  look  to  as  places  'for  "making  our  principles
prevail."    Here  the  new  Dulles  Doctrine  must  be  tested.
Britain   will  press  for   high   level   talks  with   Russia  and
defend  the  expansion  of  her  trade with Red China:  France will
try  to  explain her  fear  of  German rearmament and her  need  to
close  out  the  dreary  war  in  Indo-China.    Will  we  have  the
candor  to  reply,  "Yes, in  your  place  we  would  feel  the  same
way?"
At  the  Berlin  conference  of  foreign  ministers  the  Russians
also  will  protest   German  rearmament  and  undoubtedly   will
complain  of  encirclement  by  the  military  forces  of   "capitalist
imperialism."    Mr.  Dulles  will  be  there:  can  we  depend  on
him  to  brush  off  these representations  with  the  usual comment
about  "the  same  old  line?"
Or  will  the  other  Dulles,  the  let-principles-prevail   Dulles,
the  Dulles  of  the  Answer  to  Jenner   respond:
"I  know  exactly  how you feel.   The Germans have marched
on  your  land,  wrecked  your  cities,  slaughtered  your   people;
your  nervousness is  entirely  natural.    If  you  had  air  bases  on
our  borders  from  the  Pole  to  the  tropics  and  back  to  the  Pole
again,  if  you   were  subsidizing  our  close  neighbors,  if   your
great  publications   constantly  were  pointing  out  the  vulner-
ability  of  our   atomic   plants  and  hailing  the   establishment
in  our  back  yard  of   some  new  field  providing  'a  point  of
return  for  strategic  bombers  striking  across  the  Polar  zone'-;—
under  similar  circumstances  I  would  be  stating  exactly  the
concern  you  state  on  behalf  of  the  United  States."
What  are  the  chances  that  our  spokesman  will  so  respond?
For  the  question  is not  exclusively  whether  our  principles  will
prevail among others,  the  benighted:  they  must  also be honored
at   home—and  their  enunciation   in  Mr.  Dulles'  Answer   to
Jenner   leaves   plenty   of   room   for   their   exercise   in   other
directions.
Our  forbearance with  Canada is indeed exemplary, and  most
gratifying  if  we  have  set  an  example  for   ourselves.    Other
nations  also  have  their  reasons  for  pride  and  dignity  and  for
fears  for  their  security.     If  we  recognize  and  respect   them
as  Mr.  Dulles  has  done  in   the  instance  in  question,   as  we
recognize  and  respect  our  own, the  conference  tables  here-
after  will  be  more  profitable for  all  concerned.    It  just  could
be  as  one  result  that,  understanding  others,   we  should  find
ourselves  better   understood.
Doift   Rue  It,  Do   It.
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed $5:
Name     _—————————————-———-—————————
Street  __
City_____
Zone...___  State--
Enter  this  gift  sub   for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name _______——__   _—————  ——
Street   ____—____________________
City__
Zone-
State..
12-7-53
I.  F. StoneV Weekly
Room  20$
301 E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED