I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953jun20.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue:  Who  Will  Take  the  "Einstein  Pledge"?
I. F. Stone's
VOL.  I  NUMBER  22JUNE   20,   1953WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Einstein,  Qxnam  and  The  Witch-Hunters
The  background  against  which  Einstein  has 'issued  his
call  for  civil  disobedience  of  the  witch  hunters  is  encour-
aging.  There  are  signs  of  a  growing  revulsion  against  Con-
gressional   Inquisition.  McCarthy  has   had   the   guidance  of
Father   Edmund   A.  Walsh   at   Washington's   ancient  Jesuit
university,  Georgetown.  But  at  its  sister  institution  in  the
capital,  Catholic  University, the  principal  address at  the  com-
mencement  exercises  last  week  was  devoted  to  warning  the
graduates  against  the  hysteria  fomented  by  Congressional  in-
vestigating  committees.  The  Archbishop  of  Washington,  the
Most  Rev. Patrick A. O'Boyle, presided  and  "some  politicians"
were  criticized  for  their  readiness  to  "seize  upon  any  issue,
real  or  spurious,  to  boost  their  fame  and  publicity."
There  were  similar warnings from  as  unexpected  a  source
at  Radcliffe.  There  the  commencement  speaker  was Senator
Stuart  Symington, a  business man  and  a right  wing  Democrat
from  Missouri,  himself  a  member  of  the  Senate Government
Operations  committee  over  which  McCarthy  presides.  Sym-
ington   has  distinguished  himself  on  the  committee  in   the
past   by  asking  witnesses  some  remarkably  inane  questions
about  whether  they  believe  in  God.  Just  what  their  private
theological   opinions  had  to  do  with  government  operations,
the  committee's  field  of  authority,  has  never  been   explained.
But  at  Radcliffe  Symington  executed  a  quick  metamorphosis
and  turned  up  as  a  liberal  to  warn  that  the  recklessness  of
the  Red hunters could  easily turn into  "a  new reign of  terror."
Symington's  sudden  conversion   on  the  road  to   Cambridge,
Mass.,  was  gratifying, though  important  chiefly  as  a  weather
indicator.  Symington  wants  to  be  President,  and  is  prepared
to  move  left  or  right  with  the  prevailing  winds.  Eisenhower's
own  gratifying  remarks  at  Dartmouth   will  help  turn  those
winds  against  the  witch  hunt.
Another   hopeful   development  last  week  was  the  ap-
pointment  of  a  three  man  subcommittee  by  the  House  Rules
committee   to  study  proposals   for  regulating   Congressional
investigations  to  assure  "maximum  fairness,  dignity  and  ef-
ficiency."  The  subcommittee  was  suggested   by  two   liberal-
minded  Republicans,  Rearing  and  Javits  of  New  York,  and
had  the  approval  of  Speaker  Martin.  The  chairman  of   the
subcommittee   is   an   Eisenhower  Republican,   Congressman
Hugh  Scott  of  Pennsylvania. Another  Republican,  Chenoweth
of  Colorado  and  one  Democrat,  Howard  W.  Smith  of  Vir-
ginia,  will  serve  with  him.  Though  the  last  is  the  "Smith"
of   the  Smith  Alien  and  Sedition   Law,  he  is  said   to  find
McCarthyism  a  little  too  much  for  him.  "The  real  offender,"
he  declared  at  a  hearing  on  proposed  regulatory  legislation,
"is on  the  other  side.  We  can  only  change  House  rules."  The
reference  to  "the  other  side"  was  to  the  other  side  of  the
Capitol  where the  Senate  sits  and  McCarthy  operates.
There  are  four  bills  before  the  House  and  two  before  the
Senate  for  the  reform  and  regulation   of  investigating  com-
mittee  procedures.  One  of  them  is  by  Celler  of  New  York,
who  has  the  distinction  of  having  cast  one  of  the  two  solitary
votes  this  year  (Wier  of  Minnesota,  the  other)  against  the
annual  appropriation   for  the  House  Un-American  Activities
Committee.  Celler's  bill   (H.  Res.  86)   would  authorize  the
Judiciary  Committee  to  investigate  the  investigators—to  hold
hearings  on  the  conduct  of  Congressional  investigating  com-
mittees  and  draw  up  a  code   of   fair   procedure   for   them.
This  would  give  victims  of  the  witch  hunt  a  forum  in  which
to  state  their  case  against  the  witch  hunters,  but  it  has little
chance  of  being  reported  out  for  a  vote.  No  sizeable   section
of  Congress  is  in  the  mood  for  so  thorough-going  an  inquiry.
But   enough   Congressmen   have  been   hearing   from   home,
chiefly  because  of  the  threat  to  investigate  the  churches,  to
make  some  semblance  of  activity  on  the  subject   desirable.
II
The   regulatory  bills  themselves  are  less  than   drastic.
H.  Res. 29 by Keating  of New  York  provides  that  the subject
of  the  inquiry  shall  be  clearly  stated;  that  the  witness,  unless
the majority decides otherwise,  shall have the right  of  counsel;
that  every  witness  at  the  close  of  his  testimony  shall  have
the  right  to  make  "a  brief  oral  or  written  statement";   that
an  accurate  stenographic  record  shall  be  kept  of  all  proceed-
ings  and  made  available  to  witnesses;  and  that  any  person
defamed  by  testimony  shall  have  the  right   to  file  a  sworn
statement,  appear  on  his  own  behalf  and,  if  a  majority  of  the
•committee  permits,  cross-examine  adverse  witnesses  and  sub-
poena  witnesses  on  his  own  behalf.  This  is  hardly  enough  to
end  Inquisition  into  men's  beliefs.
H.R.  4123  by  Javits  of  New   York   is  lengthier   but   no
more  fundamental.  It  provides  that  no  major  investigation
shall  be  initiated  without  approval  of  a  majority  of  the'-'com-
mittee;  that  a majority vote  shall be  required  for  the  holding
of  executive  hearings,  the  releasV of  secret  testimony,* and  the
publication  of  reports;  "that  no  committee  shall  circulate  on
its  letterhead   or  over  the   signature   of  its  members  or  its
employes  charges  against  individuals  or- organizations  except
as  the   committee^  by  a  majority  vote  shall   determine".   In
other  respects  the  Javits  bill  is  the  same as  Keating's,  except
that  persons  injured  by  testimony'would  be  allowed  (with
majority  consent)  to  submit  questions  to  adverse   witnesses
through  the  committee  instead  of  cross-examining  directly.
H. R   178 by Klein  of  New  York  is  identical  with  S. Res.
83  introduced  in  the  Senate  by  Morse  and  Lehman.  This  is
much  like  the  two  bills  already  summarized  except  that  it
allows  somewhat  broader  powers  to  defense  counsel  at  hear-
ings:  counsel  may  not  only  advise  the  witness  but  make  ob-
8   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  20,
Einstein, Oxnam  and the Witch-Hunters
jections  and  support  those  objections  with  "brief   statements"
and  legal  memoranda. No  report  based  on  adverse  testimony
or  the adverse  testimony  itself  may be issued  "unless ... the
complete   evidence  or  testimony  offered   in  rebuttal  thereto,
if  any,  is  published  prior  to  or  simultaneously  with  the  issu-
ance  of  the  report."
All  these  bills  assume  that  the  situation  would  be  mate-
rially  improved  if  committee  actions  were  dependent  on  ma-
jority  vote  instead  of  being  left  as  so  often  happens  to  the
chairman  or  the  staff.  But  there  is  no  reason to  believe  that
McCarthy,  Jenner  and  Velde  cannot   on  most  matters  com-
mand  a  majority  of  their  respective  committees,  or  that  the
majority  on  these  committees   is  better   than  the  chairman.
The  reducrio  ad  absurdum  of  this  approach,  and  the  most
vivid  illustration  of  the  failure  to  deal  with  the  bask  evils,
may  be  found  in  two  provisions  of  Senate  Concurrent  Reso-
lution   10,  introduced  by  Kefauver  and  supported  by  an  im-
pressive  list  of  Senators  from  both  parties,  including  Hunt,
Magnuson,  Pastore,  Mrs.  Smith,  Hennings,  Neely,  Murray,
Ives and  Morse.  Section  5 of this measure  says, "No  subpoena
to  inquire  into  the  private  affairs  of  any  individual  shall  be
issued Jo  any  committee   except  pursuant   to  majority   vote
of  the  committee."  And  Section  7  says,  "No  witness  before
a  committee  shall  be  compelled  to  testify  as  to  his  religious
or  political  belief   unless  the   committee   rules  by  majority
vote  that  such  testimony  is  relevant  to  the  inquiry."
This  is  to  say that a  committee  of  Congress  has  the  right
to  compel  a  witness  to  testify  on  his  private  affairs  and  his
religious  or  political  beliefs  if  a  majority of  the  committee
approves.  The  vice  of  all  these  bills  is  that  they  imply  an
unlimited  right  of  inquiry on die part of  Congress and assume
that  only  procedural  reforms arc  necessary  to  correct  abuse.
ffl
The  First  Amen<lim»nf  says  Congress  "shall  make  no  law
respecting  an  establishment  of  religion.''  This   ""*»"*  that  it
can  establish  no  standard  of  orthodoxy.  Can k  inquire  into
beliefs  it  may  not  regulate?  There  are  many  Catholics  and
not  a  few  Protestants  who  believe  that  heterodox   opinions
on  certain  fundamental  religious  dogmas  create  a  political
danger  for  the State by leading  directly to  "subversive''  politi-
cal  views.  But  the  connection  of  political  danger  with  theo-
logical  error  is  hardly  new. The  Pilgrim Fathers fled from  just
such  inquisition  in  the  England of  their  time  and the  provi-
sion  against  an  Established Church  was  intended  to  prevent
the  development  of  similar  practices here.
A  characteristic   of  the  American  system  is  the  denial
of  absolute  powers  to  the  government  or  any of  its  coordi-
nate  branches.  No  one  would  argue  that  Congress  may pass
a  law  taking  a  man's  property  without  compensation  or  his
life  without  trial   But  the   notion  has  grown  up   that  the
Congressional  power  of   investigation,  unlike  all  other  gov-
ernmental  powers,  is  virtually unlimited.  The  recent  Rumely
decision  was  only  the  latest  in  a  series  of  Supreme  Court
opinions  which  have  held  to  the  contrary, though  the  court
has  yet  to apply  the  same protection  to  the privacy  of  men's
minds that  it  has  in  the  past  to  the  privacy  of  their moneyed
accounts.
The  witch  hunt  abuses  of  our  time  find  their  support  in
two  fallacies  which  have  nothing  to  do  with  the legitimate
exercise  of  the  Congressional  power  of  investigation.  One  is
that  while  Congress  has  no  power  to  regulate  opinion  it  has
a  right  to  expose,  disgrace  and  pillory  holders  of  opinions
it  regards  as  dangerous,  subversive,  heretical  or  un-American.
The  other  is  that  which  permits  a committee  of  Congress  to
act  as a  roving  grand  jury  for  the  discovery and punishment
of  individual  crimes.
A  section  of  the  Fifth  Amendment  to  which  amazingly
little  attention  has  been  paid  in  the  current  controversy over
Congressional  investigation  says,  "No  person  shall  be  held  to
answer  for  a  capital  or  otherwise  infamous crime,  unless  on
a  presentment  or  indictment  of  a  grand  jury."  The  purpose
was  to  protect   accused  persons   from   having  to  stand   the
shame  of  public  accusation  and  the  expense  of  trial  until  a
grand  jury  in  secret  session  had  determined  that  there  was
enough  substance  in  any'charge  to  warrant publicity and  trial.
Ever  since  Martin  Dies  and  John  Rankin  these  Con-
gressional  committees  have  announced  their  determination  to
act  as  a  peculiar   new  type  of   "grand   jury",  operating   in
public  and  more  than  content  to  leave  the  stigma  of  serious
crime  by  hit-or-miss  questioning  of  the  sort  that  has  been
well   termed'  a   "fishing   expedition."  Congressman   Keating
referred   to  this  type  of   abuse  in  a  thoughtful  speech   last
month  to  the  -San  Francisco  Bar  Association.  Keating   said
that  an  area  which  "should  be  scrupulously  avoided"  by  Con-
gressional   committees   "is  the  domain  of  law  enforcement
officers  and  the  criminal  courts."  Rearing  pointed   out  that
"Only   in  the  case  of  impeachment   does  Congress  have  the
right  to  determine  whether  a  particular  individual  has  com-
mitted  a  specific  crime  against  society.''  None  of  the  reform
proposals  now  in  Congress  would  prevent  investigating  com-
mittees  from  acting  as  quasi  grand  juries  nor  as  pillories  for
holders  of  unpopular  opinions.
IV
In  this  ripening  situation,  with  public  opinion  slowly  be-
ing  aroused,  Einstein's  proposal  for  civil  disobedience  of  the
Congressional   Inquisitors   has  the  merit  of  getting  down  to
rock-bottom. What  McCarthy,  Jenner  and  Velde  are  doing  is
wrong.  It  is  therefore  wrong  to  submit  to  them.  They  are
poisoning  the   air  of   America   and  making   people   in   all
walks  of  life  fearful   of  expressing  opinions  which  may  be
a  little  "controversial"  It  is  in  this  way that  they  are  begin-
ning  to  impose  thought  control
The  New   York   Times,  objecting  to  civil  disobedience
of  the  witch  hunters,  says, 'Two  wrongs  never  did  add  up  to
one  right."  The  old  chestnut,  in  this  sense,, is  quite  untrue.
Gandhi  made two  "wrongs"  add  up  to  one right  by  refusing
to  pay  the  British  salt  tax.  Long  before  Gandhi,  an  earlier
generation  of  Americans  made  two  wrongs  add  up  to  one
right  by  dumping  that  tea  in  Boston  harbor  rather  than  pay
the  British  tax  upon  it.  The  white  folk  of  the  North  who
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  20,  1953
Who  Will Take The  "Einstein  Pledge"?
refused   to   obey   the   Fugitive   Slave  Law  were  adding   the
"wrong"  of  civil  disobedience  to  the  wrong  of  slavery,  and
these  ultimately  added  up  to  the  right  of  emancipation. Even
more  in  point   is  the   fact   that  our   privilege   against  self-
incrimination  derives  in  large  part  from  the  civil   disobedience
of  John  Lilburne,  who  refused   to  testify  before  Star  Cham-
ber  in  1.637 when  accused  of  importing  heretical  works  from
Holland   and   asked  to   identify   his   collaborators.   The   evil
of   compulsory  testimony  from   which  the   Pilgrims  fled  to
this  country  was  eradicated  by  his  bravery  in   refusing   to
testify  at  the  expense  of  going  to  jail  for  contempt.
The   need  for   such  fundamental   defiance   is  illustrated
by  the  objections advanced against  it.  "One  cannot start,"  the
New  York  Times  said,  "from  the  premise  that  Congressional
committees  have  no  right  to  question  teachers  and  scientists
or  to  seek  out  subversives wherever they  can  find  them; what
is  profoundly  wrong   is  the   way  some  of  them  have  been
exercising  it."  The   fact   is  that  one  cannot  start  from  any
other  premise  without  making  defeat  inevitable.  To  accept
ideological  interrogation  is  to  make  non-conformist  views of
any  kind  hazardous.  To  permit  Congress  to  seek  out  some-
thing   as  vague,  undefined  and   undefinable   as  "subversion"
or  "un-Americanism"  is  to  acquiesce  in  a  heresy  hunt  that
must   inhibit  free   discussion  in   America.  One  man's  "sub-
version"  is  another  man's  progress;   all  change  subverts  the
old  in  preparing   the   way  for   the   new.  "Un-American"  is
an  epithet,  not  a  legal  standard.
The  New   York  Times  says  "An  investigation   which  had
no  taint  of  witch-hunting,  no  bias  of  anti-intellectualism,  no
prejudice,  no  distorted  ideas  of  what  is  guilt  and  subversion
would  be  irreproachable."  A  censorship   of  such  immaculate
virtues  would  also  be  irreproachable,  but  the  Framers  of  the
Bill  of   Rights  thought   it  safer  to  rely  on   free  discussion
than  on  the  miraculous  possibility  that  the  Archangel  Gabriel
might  decide  to  take  the  civil  service  exam  for  the  office  of
censor.
The  New   York  Times  says  "it  is one thing  to fight the
investigations  because  of  the  manner  of  their  procedure • and
another  to  oppose   the  right  of  investigation,  which  has  al-
ways   been   one   of   the   fundamentals  of   our   governmental
system."  Investigations  have  been  fundamental  but  the  kind
of   investigations  utilized  in  this  witch  hunt  are  something
new  in  American  life.  The  first  Congressional  committee  of
this  kind  was  the  Hamilton  Fish  investigation  in   1930,   the
Red-hunt  precursor  of  the  un-American  Activities  Committee.
The   idea  that  a  committee   of   Congress   could   interrogate
Americans  on  their  political  beliefs  is  a  revolutionary  excres-
cence  not   a  fundamental  of  American  government   in   the
past.
V
One  need  only  compare  Einstein's  approach  with  Bishop
Oxnam's  to  see  how  right  the  great  physicist  is.  One  cannot
at   one  and   the   same  time   object   to   investigation   of   the
churches  by  the   House  Un-American  Activities  Committee
and  the  Senate Internal  Security subcommittee and at the same
time  insist  on  a  hearing  before  them  as the  good  Bishop  has
done.  To  ask for  a  hearing  is  to  acquiesce  in  the  committee's
power,   to  establish  a  precedent   by  which  other   clergymen
may  be  hauled   into  the  pillory.-To  defend  oneself,  as  the
Bishop  did  in  that  famous point-by-point rejoinder  the  Wash-
ington  Post  published   last  April  5,  is  to  cut  the  ground  out
from  under  any  principled   objection   to  the  Inquisition.   To
plead  that  one  is  not  "subversive"  by  the  standards   of  the
Committee  or  of  that  ex  pane  blacklist  drawn  up  by  the
Attorney  General  is  to  accept  their  right  to  establish  a stand-
ard  of  orthodoxy  and  heresy  in  American  political  and  re-
ligious   thinking.
No   one  can  "clear"  himself   or  defend   himself   fairly
before  one  of  these  committees.  James  Wechsler's  experience
before  McCarthy  should  be demonstration  enough  of  that.  We
are  not  dealing  with  men  anxious  to  learn  the  truth  or  pre-
pared   to  act  honorably.  We  are  dealing  with  unscrupulous
political  adventurers  using  the  Red  menace  as  their  leverage
to  power.   To  try  and  explain   to  them  that  one  is  not  a
Communist  is  as  humiliating   as  it  is  useless,   unless  one  is
prepared  to  go  over  completely  to  their  service.
At  the  same  time  these  committees  regard  the  invocation
of   the   Fifth  amendment   with  equanimity.   To   invoke   the
Fifth  is  to  brand  oneself  in  the  eyes  of  the  public  as  guilty
of  any  offense  implied  by  the  dirty  questions  these  commit-
tees  put.  Those  who  plead  the  Fifth  in  most  cases  lose  their
jobs  and  reputations.  This  satisfies  the  committees,   for  their
purpose  is  nothing  less  than  an  ideological   purge  of  radicals
and  liberals  from  all  positions  of  influence  in  American  life
and   the   demonstration    to   others   that   non-conformity   is
dangerous.
VI
Great  faiths  can  only  be  preserved  by  men  willing  to
live  by  them.  Faith  in  free  society  requires  similar   testament
if   it   is  to   survive.   Einstein   knows   Fascism   at  first  hand.
History   confirms  his  statement   that   "if   enough  people  are
ready  to  take  this  grave  step"  of  defiance  "they  will  be  suc-
cessful"   but   that   if   not   "the   intellectuals   of   this   country
deserve  nothing   better  than  the  slavery  which  is  intended
for   them."
The  path  pointed  out  by  Einstein  is  that  taken   by  the
Hollywood   Ten  and  the  directors  of  the  Joint   Anti-Fascist
Refugee  Committee,  all  of  whom  went  to  jail  for   contempt.
But   tactics   that  did  not  succeed   at  a  time  when  the   cold
war  was  begun  may  fare  differently  now  when  it  is  ebbing
away.  The  Supreme   Court   did  not  hear  those  earlier   cases
and  there  has  never  been  final  adjudication   on  two  major
points  of  attack  against  the  committees.  One  is  whether  they
violate  the  First  Amendment  by  inquiring  into  beliefs  and
the  other  whether  they  violate  the  Fifth  Amendment  by  ar-
rogating  to  themselves  the  functions  of  a  grand  jury.  Neither
point  can  be  tested   until  someone   dares  invite   prosecution
for  contempt.
This  is  the  moment  to  try.   Einstein  has  lent  the  world
prestige   of  his  name  to   such  an   effort.   These   committees
deserve  contempt,  and I  predict  that  another  of  the  chairmen
will  follow J.  Parnell  Thomas  to  jail. I  propose  an  association
of  American  intellectuals  to  take  the  "Einstein  pledge"  and
throw  down  a  fundamental  challenge  to, the  establishment  of
an  Inquisition   in  America.
9  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  20, 1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
In  Italy  Vox  Populi  Tells Off Lord  and  Lady
It  is  too  early,  perhaps,  to  suggest  recalling  our  ambas-
sador  from  Rome  for  failure  of  mission. Our  man  for  premier,
Alcide  de  Gasperi,  is  in  again  by  a  mere  squeak,  it  is  true.
As  a result  all  sorts  of  troubles  may be  ahead  of  him. He  may
have  to  bring  the  Monarchists  into  his  government.  He may
even  find  it  necessary  to  water  down  his  support  of  NATO
in  order  to pull enough left  Socialists to the side of his Christo-
democrats  to  be  able  to  govern  at  all.
But  our  Ambassador  has  done  what  she  could,  according
to  her  lights,  for  the  advancement  of  our  foreign  policy.  Her
intervention  in  the internal  affairs  of the Italian  people, wheth-
er  on  her  own  or  at  the  direction  of  her  State   Department
superiors,  employed  the  same  wiles  which,  in  her   experience,
had  worked  with  other  electorates.  She  cajoled,  she  warned,
she  threatened. How  could  she have known  the  Italians  would
take  amiss what  so recently her  own countrymen had  relished?
One   of  the   telling—if   low—blows   struck   in   last   year's
American  election  was  a  fee-fi-fo-fum   production  put  on  the
air  with  great  artistry  by  Mrs.  Luce  at  the  very  close  of  the
campaigning.  The  piece  was  mainly  a  play  back  of  excerpts
of  testimony  recorded  at  various  congressional  loyalty  inqui-
sitions  and  its  purpose  was to  scare  up  Republican  votes with
the  thought,  archly  supplied  by  the  fair  platter  spinner,  that
the  choice  was  between  Eisenhower  and—Stalin.  That  show
went  over  big,  and  it  was  partly  because  of  the  lady's  succes
fou   in  the  political  theater  that  in  due  course  she  was  sent
with  ambassadorial rank  to  charm  Rome  and  keep  the Italian
wards  in  line.
In  Italy,  Mrs.  Luce  campaigned  to  the  same  effect  though
less  dramatically.  A  few  days  before  the  election,  she  called
for   an   overwhelming  vote   for   "stable,  democratic  govern-
ment,"  for  our  friend  Signor  De  Gasperi;  or,  as  the  British
New  Statesman pungently noted,  for  "domination by  the  con-
servative,  clerical  Centre."   She  did   not,   indeed,  warn  that
the  alternative  was  to  turn  the  country  over  to  the  Com-
munists,  but   adroitly  as  the  American  spokesman  let  fall  a
caution  that,  if  the  country  should  go  Left,  it  need  look  no
more  to  the  American  treasury  for  comfort  and  aid.
I  find  it  hard  to  agree  with  some  critics  that  popular
resentment  of  our  Ambassador's  "impertinence"  was  entirely
responsible  for  the  disappointing  outcome  of  the  election,  or,
for  all  of  that,  that  our  side  still  may  not  find  something  in
the   outcome   that   is  gratifying.  The   Communists   and   the
Socialist   followers  of  Signor  Nenni  did  gain,  of  course,  as
did  the  smaller  Monarchist  and  Fascist  parties  of  the  Right
extreme.  But  De  Gasperi's  coalition  of  moderate  parties  came
out  nevertheless  with  slender  majorities in  the  senate  and  the
chamber  of  deputies.
De  Gasperi   himself   does  not   despair.  By  no  means  the
"stable"  government  our  Ambassador called  for,  the  Premier's
new  administration  counts  about  the  same  preponderance  of
its  partisans  in  the  legislative  body  as  does  the  Eisenhower
administration  in  the United  States in  the  American Congress.
Its  necessity  of  relying  on  the  Monarchists  for  support  in  a
pinch  ought  not  to  be  too grave a  handicap:  the  Republicans
over  here  have  found  it  possible  to  summon  votes  from  the
opposition  benches  for  their  pet  measures time  and  again.
As  for  "democratic"   government,  if  that  is  our  real  con-
cern,  the  Italian  people   seem   inclined   to  practice   it  with
full  faith  and  fervor,  casting  in  last  week's  election  very near
100  per  cent  of  the  vote  to  which  their  law  entitles  them.
The  fact  itself  that  the  balloting  did  not  go  overwhelmingly
as  Mrs.  Luce  advised  it  to  go  is  evidence  that  these   people
take  their  freedom  seriously,  equating  the  right  to  vote  with
the  right  to  choose.  For  reasons  sufficient  to  them  many  Ital-
ians  voted   left   who  have  not   voted   left   before  and  were
stopped  neither   by  the  threat  that  American  aid  would  be
withdrawn  nor  by  the  more  terrible  threat,  issuing  from  the
Vatican,  that  their  souls  would  be  denied  paradise.
This  would  be  the  doughtiest   democracy,  I   suppose,
where  the  electorate   refuses  to  be  either  bought  or  intimi-
dated,  where  any  dictate  is  scorned  and  where  the   people
headily  regard   themselves  competent  to  pass  on  the  public
affairs.  Ambassador Luce has  been  unable  to  fascinate or  over-
awe the  self-conscious Italian democrats. They probably admire
her  looks  and  cleverness.  It  would  be  a pity to  bring  her back
before  she  completely appreciates their  political  independence.
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
•  Editor and Publisher, I. F. STONE
Published  weekly  except the  last two weeks
of   August  at  Room  205,  301  E.  Capitol
St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.  Subscrip-
tion  rates:  Domestic,  15  a  year;  Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and  Continental
Europe,  $10  by  1st  class  mail,  $15  by air;
for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
b$ first class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.  Single
copy,  15  cents. Tel.:  LI  4-7087. Entered as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post   Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
June  20,   1953Vol.   I,  No.  22
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,   S.E.,
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED