I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953may30.pdf

============================================================

Roy  Cohn  Puts  the  Question  to  Jennings Perry, See Page  4
I.F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I,  NUMBER  19
MAY  30,  1953.20*       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Bombshell  That  Led to  Bermuda
When  the  chief  architect  of  the  cold  war   begins  to
dismantle  his  own  handiwork,  that  is—or  should  be—news.
But  most  American newspaper  readers  still  do  not  realize  the
significance  of  Sir  Winston  Churchill's  "new  Locarno"  speech
last  week.  The  bombshell  that  led  to  the  hasty  calling  of  the
Bermuda  conference  was the  most  momentous—and  the  most
poorly  covered—story  in  many months.  The  New  York  Times
did  not  give  the  Churchill  speech  in  full  text.  Commentators
shied   away  from   a  declaration  which  carried   so  many   un-
palatable  implications  for  American  foreign  policy.  The  man
who  wanted  to  strangle  Bolshevism in  its  cradle had suddenly
announced  that  he  was prepared  to  live  with  it  in  its  prime.
Since  Roosevelt's  death,  Churchill  has  been  the  Toscanini
of  Western  foreign  policy.  The  U.S.  has  footed  the  bills,  but
he  has  set  the  themes.  It  was  Churchill  who  launched  the
Anglo-American  alliance  at  Fulton  in  1945,  with  that deadly
phrase  about  an  Iron  Curtain  rung  down  on  Europe.  It  was
Churchill   who  later   the   same  year   in   Zurich  proposed   a
Franco-German  entente  and  a  United  States  of  Europe  as  a
counterpoise  against  the  East.  It  was  Churchill  who  at  Llan-
dudno   in   October,   1948,   struck   the   opening   note   of   the
"liberation"  chorus.  He  wanted to  push  the  Russians back  to
their  old  borders.  He  called  for  a  showdown  while  the  U.S.
still  had  a  monopoly  of  the  atom  bomb.
Now,  five  years later, Churchill has changed  his tune.
He  no  longer  speaks  as  if  the  problem  were  simply  one  of
dealing  with  a  Russian  menace.  It  is  worth  listening  closely.
"We   ah
1
  desire,"   he  told  the   Commons,  "that   the  Russian
people  should  take  their  high  place  in  world  affairs,  which  is
their  due, without  feeling  unsettled  about  their  own  security."
The  emphasis  is  new. The  problem  is  no  longer  to  deal  with
the  diabolic,  but  with  understandable  mutual  fears. The  Rus-
sians  are  also  people,  and  fear  us  as  we  fear  them.  Discourse
has  shifted   from   the  cold  war  hallucinations  still  dominant
here  to  the  realm of  the  real  world. And  Churchill said he  did
not  believe  "the  immense  problem  of  reconciling  the  security
of  Russia with  the  freedom  and  safety  of  Western  Europe  is
insoluble."  This  is a  new language.  It  is not  difficult  to  under-
stand   why  the   American  press   preferred   to   leave   it   un-
translated.
What  is  Churchill's solution for  reconciling  the  security of
Russia  with  the  security of  Western  Europe? A  new  Locarno.
The  Locarno  Pact  of   1925  gave  France  a  British  guarantee
against  a  German  attack  and  Germany  a  British  guarantee
against  a  French  attack.  Churchill  as  Chancellor  of  the  Ex-
chequer  had  a  part  in  the  framing  of  that  treaty.  But—and
here  we  come  to  the  crucial  point—Locarno  was not  intended
simply  to  make  possible  a  Franco-Germaji  reconciliation.  It
was intended to  free  Germany from  anxiety  about her  Western
frontier  so she would be  free  to  strike toward  the  East.
A Locarno which would  also safeguard  Russia  against
attack  from  the  West  is a  new  kind  of  Locarno. The formula
is  the  same.  The  effect   is  the  reverse.  The  old  Locarno  was
intended  to  facilitate  a crusade  against  Communism. This  new
Locarno  would  formalize  co-existence.  Churchill's   words,  as
they  came  in  'over  the  State  Department   ticker,  must  have
seemed downright  treasonable.  "Russia  has the right," Churchill   ,
said  (to  speak  of  Russia  as having  rights  is  itself  an  innova-
tion),  "to  feel   assured  that,  so  far  as  human  arrangements
can  run,  the  terrible  events  of  the  Hitler  invasion  wUl  never
be  repeated- ..."
The  main  objective  of  American  foreign  policy  for  several
years  has  been  to  rearm  Germany  in  order  to  repeat  that  in-
vasion,  this  time  more  terribly  than  before  because  supple-
mented  by  American  atomic  bombing.  And  now  let  us  pick
up  Churchill's  words  where  we  broke  off  and  see  the  very
climax  of  Albion's  new  perfidy.  Russia  also  had  a  right,  the
sentence  ended, to  be  assured  ".  . . that  Poland  will  remain  a
friendly  Power  and  a  buffer,  though  not,  1  trust,  a  puppet,
State."  This  says  good-bye  to  "liberation."  To  make  a  new
Locarno  is  to  give  up  the  "liberation"  of  Eastern  Europe.  A
"free"   Poland   was  the   main  concern   of   the   Uberationists,
for  the  road  to  Moscow  lies  across  Poland.
Our   Richard   has   deserted   to   the   Saracens.  The   vision
dreamed  up  for the  State Department  by the Jesuits of  George-
town  was  a  vision  of  a  U.S.  of  Western  Europe  cemented  by
the   confessional  ties   of   the   American   supported   Catholic
Centre  parties  of  Italy,  France  and  Western  Germany.  The
resurrection  of  a  Roman  Catholic  Poland  was  to  be  a  prime
object  of  the  new  Crusade.  Poland  was  to  resume  its  role  as
a  buffer  against  the  East, against  Bolshevism  and  beyond  Bol-
she^ism  against  the  Orthodox   heresy.  Now  this  spokesman
for  Henry  VIH's  treacherous  realm  speaks  of  Muscovy's  right
to  have  Poland  as  "a  friendly  power  and  a  buffer,"  adding—
and  here  we  see  Churchill's  genius  for  diplomacy—"though
not,  I  trust,  a  puppet  State."  With  that  deft  touch,  Churchill
opened  the  door  to  an  area  of  negotiation  in  which  Russian
security,   Polish   national   pride  and   American   liberationist
slogans  could  be  reconciled.  To  make  such  a  solution  seem
possible  must  appear  dangerously  subversive  in  State  Depart-
ment  eyes.
This  is  not  the  full  measure  of  the  havoc  threatened  by
Churchill's  bombshell.  "To  consolidate  the  peace  of  Europe"
by  such  arrangements  "as  the  key  to  the  peace  of  mankind"
is  also  to  give  up  the  complementary  dream  of  "liberating"
China.  A   new  Locarno  guaranteeing  the   new   Poland   and
Russia  against  German  and  Western  aggression  presupposes
also  co-existence  in  the  East,  recognition  of  the  new  China.
Otherwise  the  effect  would be  to  free  Moscow  from  European
anxiety  and  enable  her  all  the  more  effectively   to   support
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   May  JO,   195)
colonial  uprisings  against  the  remains  of  the  Western  empires
in  the  Far  East.  Churchill  is  not  proposing  to  preside  over  a
new  Locarno  in  order.to  liquidate   Britain's  holdings  of  tin
and  rubber  in  Malaya.  But  the  Far  Eastern  corollaries  require
the   abandonment   of   Chiang   Kai-shek   and   resumption   of
normal  relations  with  Communist  China.  To  see this  is  to  see
why  Eisenhower  is packing  his  bags  so  hastily  for  a  week-end
in  Bermuda.
Churchill's  initiative  is initiative  in  calling  off the  cold  war.
When  he  told  the  Commons  "It  would,  I  think,  be  a  mistake
to  assume  that  nothing  can  be  settled  with  Soviet  Russia  un-
less  or  until  everything  is  settled"  the  words  were  deceptively
offhand.  One  of  the  basic  axioms  of  American  "total  diplo-
macy"  as  launched  by  Acheson  and  carried  on  by  Dulles  has
been  to  avoid   piecemeal   and  peripheral  settlements   because
these  would relax  tension  and  slow up  the  pace of  rearmament.
The  idea  was  to  build  up  such  overwhelming   power  as  to
make  possible  peace  by  dictation  or  swift  victory  by  atomic
blitzkrieg.   Here   again   the   new   Churchill   line   undercuts
American   strategy.
Churchill's  view  of  internal  developments   in  Russia
since  Stalin's  death  also  diverges  strikingly  from  the   official
American  line.  The  State  Department,   its  eyes  shut  tightly,
insists  that  nothing  has  happened.  It  is  essential  to  cold  war
policy  to  allow  nothing   to  disturb  the  endlessly   inculcated
view  that  the  Kremlin  always has  and  always  will  be  occupied
by  monsters   until  the   evil   is   finally   exorcised   by  nuclear
fission  and  holy  water.  But  here  is  Churchill  saying  unexpect-
edly  and  exasperatingly  that  he  regards  "some  of  the  internal
manifestations   and   the   apparent    change   of   mood"   since
Stalin's  death  "as  far  more  important  than  what  is  happening
outside."  He  is  anxious  that  "the  NATO  Powers"  do  nothing
which  might  "supersede  or  take  the  emphasis  out  of  what may
be  a  profound  movement  of  Russian  feeling."  To  imply  that
reform  in  the  direction  of  a  less  draconian  Russian regime  is
possible  without  crack-up, war  or  counter  revolution;  to  speak
as  Churchill  does  of  a  "spontaneous   and  healthy  evolution
which  may  take  place  in  Russia"  is  his  ultimate  apostasy.
(Next   Week:  Why  Churchill   Shifted),
The  Issues in  the  Arrest  of  Cedric  Belfrage
Crucial  issues  are  raised  by the  arrest  of Cedric  Belfrage,
editor   of   the  National  Guardian. His   interrogation   by  the
McCarthy  and  Velde  committees   illustrates  again  the  way  in
which   these  Congressional   Inquisitions   usurp   the  functions
of   a  grand   jury.  Belfrage  was   questioned   about   Elizabeth
Bentley's  story  that  Belfrage  as  a  member  of  British   Intelli-
gence  during  the  last  war  had  given  information  to  Soviet
Intelligence.   A  Federal  grand   jury  heard  this  story  in   1947
and  questioned   Belfrage  about  it  at  length.   No   indictment
was  returned.  Now  the  old  charges  were  rehashed  in  public
session  under  circumstances  which  permit  no  fair  and  orderly
rejoinder.
The  country  has  grown  so  accustomed  to  this  abuse  that
few  any  longer  question  it.  Martin  Dies  said  fifteen  years  ago
that  he  proposed  to  use  the  House  Un-American   Activities
Committee  as a grand Jury.  The  procedure  combines  the worst
features  of  the  public  pillory  with  none  of  the  good  features
of  the  grand   jury.  The  grand  jury  safeguards  the  reputation
of   the   accused   by  hearing   him   and  his   accusers   in  secret.
Nothing  is  made  public  unless  the  grand  jury  is   sufficiently
impressed  to  return  an  indictment.  The  indictment  must  still
be  tried.   But  these  Inquisitorial  committees  may  destroy  a
man's  reputation   in  a  single  sitting  by  the  device  of  asking
dirty  questions.
A  related  issue  has  to  do  with  the  breakdown  in  the
separation  of  power  within  the  government.  McCarthy asked
that  a  representative  of  the  Immigration  Service  be  present
at  the  hearing.  It  was  made plain  that  Belfrage  was  to  be  ar-
rested   for  deportation   as  soon  as  he  pleaded  his   privilege.
The  Immigration  Service was to act—or  else. The  Immigration
Service  is  responsible  to  the  Attorney General.  In  the  Belfrage
case, *McCarthy  was  acting  as  a  super  Attorney  General,  just
as  in  the  case  of  the  Greek  shipowners  he  acted  as  a  super
Secretary of  State.  Must  Americans  be  reminded,  two  centuries
after  Montesquieu,  that  the  whole  theory  of  the  separation  of
powers  on  which  our  government  rests  was  intended  to  pre-
vent  just  such  concentration   of  legislative,  judicial and  execu-
tive  functions in  one  man's  hands?  McCarthyism  is  not  a  new
phenomenon.
The  most  important  issue  of  all  revolves  around  the   free-
dom  of  the  press  and   its  role   in  the  fight  for  peace.   The
National  Guardian is  the  unofficial  organ  of  the  Progressive
Party.  It  is  one  of  the  few  voices  left  which  disagree  with  the
official  cold  war  line.  Mr.  Attlee  was  telling  the  literal  truth
when  he  said  there  were  some  Americans  who  don't  want
peace;-  they  may  be  few,  but  they  are  powerful.  He  might
have  added  that  there  are  few  Americans  left  who  dare  speak
up  openly  for  peace.  The  attack on  Belfrage  and  the Guardian
is  an  attempt  to intimidate  and  silence  those" few.
McCarthy  is hunting  for  bigger  game.  James  Aronson,
managing  editor  of  the  Guardian, was  asked  at  the  hearing  in
Washington   whether  he  had  ever  taken  instructions  on  the
handling  of  the  news  from  the  Communist  Party  while  em-
ployed  by  the  New   York   Post   arid  the  New   York  limes.
Aronson  denied this. The  groundwork is being laid for  "expert"
testimony   by  Matusow  and  Budenz  with  which  McCarthy,
Velde  and  Jenner  may  harass  what  little  remains  of  inde-
pendence  and  liberalism  in  the  American  press.
The  respectables  look  the  other  way. The  New  York  Times
spoke  up  for  James  Wechsler  of  the  New  York  Post  but  the
Post  did  not  speak up  for  the  Guardian. True,  Belfrage's case is
more  difficult:   he  neither  confessed,  recanted  nor  informed.
But  the  difference  clarifies  the  real  issue  which must be  faced
if  freedom  of  the  press  is  to  be  preserved.
Congress,  under  the  First  Amendment,  may make  no
law  abridging  freedom   of  the  press.  A  law  imposing  some
kind  of  "loyalty"  standard  on  the  personnel  and  policies  of
the   press   would   be   patently   unconstitutional.  The   crucial
question  is  whether  a  Congressional  committee  can  do  by  in-
direction   under  the   guise   of   investigation  what   it  clearly
could  not  do  directly.  To  permit  Congress  to  investigate  the
ideas   of   newspapers   and   newspapermen   is   to   permit   the
enforcement  of  conformity by  harrassment.  Unless  such  right
is   denied   the   door   is  wide  open   for   any  adventurer   like
McCarthy.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May   30,  1953
I.  F.  Stone's    Weekly
•   Editor  and  fublitber,  1.  F. STONE
Published  weekly except the last two
weeks of August at  Room  205, 301 E.
Capitol  St.,  S.E., Washington 3, D. C.
Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a
year; Canada, Mexico and  elsewhere
in  the  Western Hemisphere, $6; Eng-
land  and  Continental  Europe,  $10 by
1st class  mail,  $15 by  air;  for  Israel,
Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by
1st class mail, $20 by air  mail.  Single
copy,  15  cents.  Tel.:  LI  4-7087.  En-
tered  as  Second  Class  mail  matter,
Post  Office,  Washington, D.  C.
liay  30,  19S3
Vol.  I,  No.  19
COMMENT
Last  Week's  Issue
There  is  nothing  like  a -short  stretch
as  a  small  capitalist  to  make  one  look
forward   to   the   Socialist  revolution,. if
Messrs.   McCarthy,  Jenner   and   Velde
will  excuse  the  expression.   Our  latest
trouble  as  an  entrepeneur:  last  Monday
a  week the  printers and  mailers  in all of
Washington's  commercial printing  estab-
lishments   went    out   on   strike.   The
Weekly,   which  goes  to  press  on  Tues-
days,  had  to  suspend  publication.  This,
and  not  a plot by  the  Postoffice,  explains
why  you  did  not  get  an  issue  last  week.
This  week's  was  printed  and  mailed  in
New York.
Morale  Builders
Early    Soviet   novels   used   a   vivid
phrase,  "former  people," about  the  rem-
nants  of  the  dispossessed  ruling  class.
On  the  inhospitable  sidewalks  of  Wash-
ington  these  days,  the  editor  often  feels
like one  of  the  "former  people," a phan-
tom  out  of  the  New  Deal  past  A  few
more  years  of  the  current  trend  and  we
may   furtively   be   hawking   forbidden
books    by    Jefferson    and    bootlegging
copies  of  the  Federalist  Papers  to  pass-
ersby  who  can't  resist  the  temptation  of
having  a  peek  at  subversive  literature,
despite  the  danger  of being  picked  up  by
thought  police  patrols.
Every  once in  a while,  however,  some-
thing happens which is a morale  builder.
I  went to  a  hearing on  "front"  organiza-
tions   before   the   Subversive   Activities
Control Board  and several days later my
secretary  told  me 'someone  had  phoned
from  the  Board  to  ask  whether  I  would
be  sure  and  send  a  copy  of  anything  I
wrote about  the  hearing. The  thought of
the  Board waiting feverishly  to see what
I  was  going  to  say  about  it  perked  me
up  no  end.
Victor  Lasky  has  also  been" a  help.  He
runs something called  the  Spadea  Syndi-
cate.  Last  week  he  kindly  sent  me  ad-
vance  copies  of  a  four  page  article  by
my  old friend,  John  Chamberlain,  called
"Clap-Trap  and  The  Atom."  The  editor's
note  with  the  article  said  Chamberlain
had  just  completed a  two-month  tour of
atomic  installations  but  devoted  most of
the  piece  to  an  attack  on  the  article  in
our  issue  of  April  25,  "Atomic   Power:
Biggest  Steal  of  the  G.O.P.  Era."
On  the  basis  of this  article,  Chamber-
lain  predicted  that  before  there  is  any
alteration  in  the  atomic energy  law  "the
air   of  Congressional   Committee   rooms
will  undoubtedly  ring  with  charges  that
the  wicked  capitalists  are  out  to  'steal'
the   atom  from   the  'people.'"  I  sadly
suspect  that  Chamberlain  is  overly  opti-
mistic,  but  I  carried  his  article  around
with  me  for  several  days.  It  made  me
feel   like   Quite   A   Molder   of   Public
Opinion.
Footnote  on POWs
I  called  the  Pentagon  last  week  to get
some  figures  on  prisoners  of  war.  I  had
read,  as no  doubt you have, half  a dozen
articles,  editorials  and  speeches  explain-
ing  that  the  U.S.  was  so  adamant  about
voluntary repatriation  because it  wanted
to  encourage  mass  desertions   from   the
enemy  side  in  the  event  of  World  War
III.  One writer,  the  respected  and  schol-
arly  William  Henry   Chamberlin,  even
went  so  far  as  to  suggest  that  "The  fear
of  such  defection  has  been  a  factor  re-
straining  the  Kremlin  from  other  mili-
tary  adventures."
The  figures  do  not  give  much  support
to  these  views.  The  Chinese  have  been
in  the  Korean  war  two and  a  half  years.
If  their  armies  were,  as so often  pictured
to  the  American  public,  masses  of  un-
willingly  impressed  men  sent  into  battle
by a  regime  they  hate, one would expect
them  to  surrender  easily.  The number of
Chinese  poured  into the  Korean  war  has
been  estimated  by  our  own  military  as
high  as  a  million  men.  Certainly   they
number  several  hundred  thousand.  Yet
the  latest  figure  on  Chinese  prisoners
held  is  only  21,000.
If  the  line  being handed  out to  explain
our  position on  POW's  at  Panmunjom  is
true  one  would  expect  the  figures  to
show  a sharp  increase  in surrenders  dur-
ing  the  months  in  which  we  have  in-
sisted  that  enemy  prisoners  shall  not  be
forced  to return against  their will.  Truce
talks  began  in July,  1951. The voluntary
repatriation    issue   was   first   raised   in
December,  1951, and  has  been  the  main
topic  of  disagreement   and  propaganda
since  that  time.  Yet  it  does  not  appear
to  have  had  much  influence.
The   Pentagon's  figures  showed   that
we  held  17,382  Chinese  prisoners  of  war
when  the  truce  talks   began.  This  had
risen  to  20,678  by  tile  end  of  the  year
1951  when   the   voluntary    repatriation
issue   was   raised.   The   current   figure
(available  only in  the  round  number)  is
21,000.  This  does not support  the  picture
of   mass  defections   encouraged  by   the
offer   of  asylum.
.7  3
Right  of  Asylum
I  believe  in  the  right  of  asylum  and
do  not  think  any  man  should  be  forced
to  go back  to  his  own country  if  he  does
not  want  to.  But  the  affirmation  of  this
moral  principle  at  Panmunjom  does  not
prevent  our  own  government  from  pick-
ing  up  hundreds  oi  long  term  residents
of   this  country,  many  with   American
children,   and  ordering  them  deported.
We  practice  "involuntary  repatriation"
at   home   while   preaching    against   it
abroad.
New  Obstacles  to  Peace
The  real  moral issue  at  Panmunjom  is
to ensure freedom  of choice  to prisoners.
POW's  ought  not  to  be  polled  on  their
political   views  while  held   captive;  the
conditions  are   those   of  duress.  But  a
soldier  who  tells  a  neutral  commission
that  he  does  not  want  to  be  repatriated
should  have  the  right to go  free.
The  real  difficulty   is  the  question  of
face.  The  American  military  negotiators
have  sought  to  force  concessions  on  the
issue   under    conditions   which   would
cause the most loss of face to the  Chinese.
If  the  Chinese,  after  the  new  recess,
should   accept   the   terms    offered    on
POW's,  watch  for  new  obstacles  to  an
armistice.  The  so-called  armistice  agree-
ment  carries  a  notation  saying  that  it  is
all  tentative.  There  is  already  talk  in
Washington   of   reviving   older    issues
thought to be settled. One is whether  the
North  Koreans  may  build  air fields dur-
ing  an  armistice.  Another  is  the  exact
location  of  the  cease-fire  line.
Condolences
To  the  Senate  Internal  Security  sub-
committee  on  the  unfortunate  demise of
one  of  its  more  sensational  recent  reve-
lations.  A  certain  Thad  Mason  claimed
to have  been  a Soviet  spy  and  stolen 100
blueprints  from  a  General  Motors  plant
in  Cleveland. He testified  that  he  passed
the  blueprints  on  to  a  confederate  who
worked  as  a  counterman   in  the  plant
cafeteria  who passed  them on in  turn  to
another   confederate   who  was  a  dish-
washer   "in  the   basement."  There   the
dishwasher  would  film  the  prints  in  be-
tween   washing   dishes,   and   pass   the
originals   back  up  again.  A  spokesman
for   the  General   Motors  plant  now  ex-
plains  that  it  has  no  basement  and  the
Department   of  Justice   is  investigating
Mason.                               _
Hat's Off
To  Senator  Taft,   for  blocking  passage
, on  the  consent calendar  last  week  of  the
McCarran  bill  to  deprive  witnesses  be-
fore  Congressional   committees  of  their
privilege   under   the  Fifth  Amendment;
to  Senator  Kilgore,  for  mustering  opin-
ions   against    the   bill   from  -Governor
Dewey,  Dean  Griswold  of  Harvard  Law
School  and  Donald  Richberg; and  to  the
Wall  Street   Journal,   for   an   editorial
against   the   bill  which  has  had   great
weight  in  the  Senate.
Any  day  now  we  expect  McCarran to
open  an  attack  on  "cryptc-liberalism."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,    May  30,  1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S    PAGE
Cohn  Takes  to  Phone  and  Saves  the  Public  Pence
I  think  Mr.  Roy  Cohn  and I  have  just  about  worked out
a  way  to  help  Congress  save  the  Republic  some  money.  The
high  points  of  our  collaboration  thus  far  are  as  follows:
Shortly  after  noon  on  Feb.  23, I  was handed  a  paper  com-
manding  me  to  appear  the  next  morning  at  9:30  in  Wash-
ington  to  testify  what  I  might  know  relative  to  subject  mat-
ters  under   consideration   by  the  Senate  Permanent   Subcom-
mittee   on  Investigations   of  the  Committee   on   Government
Operations.  The  paper  was  water  marked   with   the   Great
Seal  of  our  nation  and  signed  Joe  McCarthy,  with  flourishes.
I  had  been  washing  the  boat  under  the  palm  tree.  I  dried
my  hands  on  a  sponge  and  looked  in  the  morning  paper  to
see  what  wind  the  subcommittee   had  up:   apparently  it  was
the  Voice  of  America.  I  sat  down  and  wrote  a  nice  note  ex-
plaining   why  it  was  impossible   to  reach  Washington   from
Key  West  by  9:30  the  next  day.
"I'll   gladly  come  up,"  I  said,  "if  that  is  the  wish  of  Con-
gress,  though  I  fear  it  will  be a waste  of  the  taxpayers'  money,
since  I  have  little  but  opinion  to  give  that  would  be  of  the
slightest  use  to  your  subcommittee."  I  pointed  out  that  as an
editor   and  columnist   my  opinions   of  practically  everything
had  been  in  print  for  many  years. I  gave  the  phone  at  which
I  would  be  available  on  any  day  on  which  the  weather  was
not   good.   "Other   days,"   I  concluded,   "I  probably   will  be
fishing."
Two  days  later,  a  Mr.  Hawkins  phoned   for  the  subcom-
mittee,  inquired  of  the  fishing  and  told  me  that  another  time
the  subcommittee  would  let  me  know  beforehand.  I  repeated
my  view  that  the  whole  thing  was  a  waste  of  money—my
money  as  a  taxpayer,  too.  It  was  a  pleasant  and   uneventful
chat.
At  6  p.m.   on  March  5,  I  had  just  come  in  from  talking
sailfishing  with  Capt.  Jakie  Key,  who  used  to fish  Zane  Grey,
when  Washington   opened  the  wire  again.  The  voice  said  it
was   Roy   Corm^  chief   counsel   for   the   subcommittee—and,
"We'd   like  to  have  you  tomorrow  morning."
I  vaguely  recalled  having  heard  the  name,  though   at  the
time  I  would  have  settled  for  Cowan  or  Kahn.  I  didn't  ask
Mr.  Cohn  how  he  spelled  it.  I  told  him  the  facts of  time  and
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                                                        5-30-53
Room  205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.
o
C.
Please  enter  the  following   subscription.   $5  for   1  year
is  enclosed.   (See   page  3  for  foreign  rates.)
Name. .......
Street......
City. ......
State. .....
. Zone........
space,  that  the  last  plane  from  Key  West   for  the  day  had
gone,  and  that  I  couldn't  at  the  fastest  be  in  Washington
before   the   next   afternoon.   Whereat   my  caller,   some  little
put  out,  asked  if  I  would  hold  the  wire.
Alter  several  minutes,  during  which  I  worried  at  the  cost
of  the  tolls, Mr.  Cohn  came back  on  and, asking and  obtaining
my   permission   to  put  a  few  questions   "which   might   help
this   situation,"  informed  me  that  his  matter  related   to  an
artic le  I'd  written  for  the  Daily  Compass.  I  assured  him  I  had
written  a  great  many  articles  for  the  Compass.  He  did  not
say  which  article.  Instead  he  asked  me  if  I  was  now  or  ever
had   been   a  member   of  the  Communist   party.  I   told   him,
"Never   in  my  life."
"Were  you,"  he  said,  "when  you  wrote  for  the  Compass?"
"I  said  never  in  my  life."
"But  you were  a member  of  some  Communist  front  organi-
zations?"
"Not  to  my   knowledge."
"Not  to  your  knowledge  .  .  .  And that  is how you would
reply  before  the  committee?"
"That   is  right,"  I   said,  watching  the   sunset   redden   the
waters  of  the  Bight.  And  Mr.  Cohn  said,  "Well,  we  will  let
you  know."  I  reminded  him  that  he  had  my  phone,  and  he
thanked  me.  And  that  is  all  I  ever  expect  to  hear  from  Mr.
Cohn  and  the  Subcommittee  on  Investigations  of  the  Senate
Committee   on  Government   Operations.
It   all  was  rather  silly  and  expensive.  Just   having  Joe
McCarthy's  autograph  certainly  is  not  worth  the  part  of  my
tax  that  has  to  go  to  pay  for  these  calls.  And  yet,  I  have
thought  since,  how  much more  expensive  it  would  have  been
had  I,  as  commanded  out  of  hand, rushed  off  to  Washington
from  the  fishing  grounds  1200  miles  away.  There  would  have
been  the  planes,   hotels,   cabs,  meals,  tips  and,  for  the  sake
of  civilization, perhaps  a martini  or  two.
Mr.  Cohn  got  his  little  query  off  of  his  mind,  and  packed
himself  away  to  Europe  to  get  a  man  fired  for  calling  him  a
gumshoe.  A  phone  call  sufficed   (a  postcard  would  have  done
as  well),  and  I  gladly  contribute  the  difference  toward  retire-
ment  of  the  national  debt.
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol   St.,    S.E.,
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED