I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953nov07.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue:  The Truth About  Those Korean Atrocities
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   I,  NUMBER  40NOVEMBER  7,  1953WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
A  Report  on  An  Atrocity   Report
Washington
The  atrocity  report  issued  by  the  Pentagon  last  week  broke
down  its  statistics  into  three  classes:  "reported,"  "probable"
and   "known   victims."  "Reported,"  it   explains,   "represents
the  maximum  figure  possible,  or  the  total  number  actually
reported  in  each  case, irrespective of  the  merits  of  the  evidence
contained   therein."    (Italics   added.)   "Probable,"   the   next
category,  "represents   an  approximate  true  count  of   atrocity
victims,  since the figures under  this heading show the  number
which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  legal  officer  who  examined  the
file,  are  justified  by  the  available proof  and  the  general  tenor
of  the  report."    Finally,  " 'bodies  recovered'  and  'survivors'
are   self-explanatory   terms,   and    definitely   reflect    known
victims."     The   grand   total   is  given   as  57,559  "reported,"
29,815  "probable,"  10,032  "bodies"  and  533  "survivors."
This  is  an  unusual  system  of  classification.   It  means  that
of   57,000   reported   atrocities,  the   War   Crimes   Division   of
the  Army  regards  almost  half  as  improbable.    It  means  that
the  Army's  own  investigators,   after  studying  these  reports,
do  not   believe  these  atrocities   ever  happened.    Why,   then,
include them in  the  grand  totals,  knowing that  they  may  only
inflate  the  headlines  and  exaggerate  the  toll?
The  next  category  is  also vague. This  is not  called  "proven"
but  "probable."   This  "represents  an  approximate  true  count
of   atrocity  victims"   based   on   the   judgment   of   the   officer
examining  the   file.   The  figure  of  29,815  is only  an  estimate
of  probability.    This  is  a  loose  method  of  estimating   crime,
and   again  encourages   inflation   in   the   headlines  and   a   false
impression  in  the  reader's  mind.    For  few  newspaper  readers
will  be aware of  these  classifications or  their  significance.
Dubious  Confessions
What   was  the   principal   source  of   information   on   these
atrocities?    The  report   says  "the  bulk"  of  them  were  based
on  confessions  by  enemy  prisoners  in  our  hands.    How  is  a
prisoner  prevailed  upon   to   confess   a  crime   against  United
Nations  personnel  for  which  he  may  suffer  severe punishment,
indeed  death  itself?    Obviously  such  confessions  will  not  be
made  voluntarily.    A  prisoner  is not  going  to  open  up  under
interrogation  and  say,  "Oh,  by  the  way,  I  murdered  several of
your  chaps  recently."    It   would  be  interesting   to  know  in
how  many  cases  the  confessions  were  obtained   by   mistreat-
ment  or  torture,  as we  claim  (and  quite  correctly  I  believe)
that   the   enemy   elicited   germ   warfare  "confessions"    from
some  of  our  captured  personnel.    Confessions   under  torture
may  be  entirely  false.
The  report  itself  reflects  distrust   of  these  atrocity   confes-
sions.    It  says, "Since  the  bulk  of  the  cases  opened  were  based
initially  upon   the   confession  of  a  prisoner,   it   was  essential
that  every  effort  be  made  to  discover  corroborating  evidence
to  establish  the  fact  that  the  incident  had  actually  occurred,
i.e.,  the  corpus  delecti."
The  report  says that  during  March,  1952, the  atrocity  cases
were  screened  and  placed  in  two  categories:  "those  in  which
there   was   definite   evidence  of   corpus   delecti,   or   where  a
confessed  perpetrator  or  eye-witness  had,  outside  of  the  PW
compound,  verified  his  statement,  and  pointed  out  the  loca-
tion  on  the  ground,  and  those  others  based  solely  on  confes-
sions   or  statements  of   a  PW,   without   verifications."      No
figures  are  given  on  these  two  categories.    It  would  be  good
to  know  how  these  figures  broke  down,  why  the  Army  was
so   distrustful   of    these   confessions,   and    how   they   were
obtained.
Wine  and  Rice  for  the  Doomed
It  is  on  such  a  confession  that  one  of  the  biggest  atrocity
stories  of  the  Korean  war  is  based.    Readers  may  remember
that  when  Colonel  James  M.  Manley,  Judge  Advocate  of  the
8th  Army,  gave  out  his  famous  atrocity  statement  in  Pusan
on   November    13,   1951,   he   said   "Incidents   involving    the
killing  of  from   1  to   1250  UN  war  prisoners   at  a  time  are
recorded  in  the  UNC   files.   The  killing   of   1250   involved
Americans  killed  near  the   Yalu   river   in  North   Korea   by
North  Koreans between the  16th  and  18th of  September 1950.
The   prisoners  were  transported   from   a   prison   camp   near
Pyongyang  and  shot  in  groups  after  being  fed  rice  and  wine
according  to  the  report  of  the  incident."   The  wine  and  rice
incident  seemed  a  strange  detail.
Now  the  same  story  turns  up  in  this  new  report  as "KWC
#279,  Slaughter  of   1250  American  Prisoners."    The  report
says  these  prisoners  "were  slaughtered  in  cold  blood  by  their
Communist   captors   if   the   confession   of   a  North   Korean
prisoner  is true.    Unfortunately,  that  is  all  the  evidence  con-
tained  in  the  file."
Incredible  things  happen  in  war,  but  it  is  hard  to  believe
that  mass  murder  could  have  been  carried  out  on  such  a  scale
without  finding  at  least one other  witness  or  some  corroborat-
ing   detail  among  the   tens  of   thousands   of   North   Korean
prisoners   in   UN   hands.     The   report   can   only    conclude,
"Every   effort   should  be  expended  to  discover   corroborating
evidence  for  this  reported  atrocity."   This  one story  accounts
for  1250, or  20  percent,  of  the  Army's  estimate that  a  total
of   6,113  American  soldiers  were  "probably"  the  victims  of
atrocities.
Why  Weren't the  Criminals Held?
There  is  another  sidelight  on  these  confessions.    A  prisoner
who  confesses  to   the  torture  or  murder  of   soldiers  he  has
1  6  i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  7, 1958
Few  Atrocities   Since  the  Early  Days  of  The War  . . .
himself  taken  prisoner  is  subject  to  punishment  under  the
rules  of  war.    He  may  be tried  and  convicted  by the  detain-
ing  power.    The  Army  seems  to  have  made  no  effort   to
prosecute,  punish  or  even  retain  these  self-confessed   crim-
inals.   Its  press  officers  now blame the  release  on the  repatri-
ation  agreement.   But the  atrocity  report  itself  says,  "Three
primary  causes  have  resulted  in  the  release  from  restriction
or  confinement  of  individuals  implicated  in  war  crimes.  They
are:  closure  of cases,  Operation  'Little  Switch,' and the mass
breakouts  of June,  1953."   One would have thought  the  Army
would  at  least  have  segregated  the  self-confessed   perpetra-
tors  of  such  horrible  crimes  and  kept  them  under   special
guard.
The  report  says  that  on  June  30,  1953,  War  Crimes  Divi-
sion   Files   "contained    1615   alleged   atrocity   cases."    As
against  this  total,  the  report  itself  gives  details  on  only 34.
They  are  divided  into  two  classes,  "referable"  cases,  ready
for  trial,  of  which  there  are  said  to  be  34  altogether,  and
"non-referable"  cases  "in  which  there  is  sufficient  evidence
to  prove  that  the  crime has  been committed, but  which  have
not  been  referred,  primarily  because  no  perpetrators  are  in
custody."     The  total  number  of  non-referable  cases  is  not
given.
One  assumes  that  the  34 cases  on  which  details  are  given
in  the  report  are  among the  best  in  the  Army's  files.  They
are  interesting  for  several  reasons.   The  most  important  is
that  only  one  of  these  34 cases  is  alleged  to  have been com-
mitted  by  Chinese  and  only  one  is  alleged  to  have  occurred
since  January,  1951,  almost  three  years  ago.
Trying  Hard  to  Prove a  Point
The written  summary  of  the  one 'atrocity  cited  since  Janu-
ary,  1951,  begins,  "Proving that  the  Communists still  persist
in   committing   atrocities,  this   recent   case  occurred   on  21
September  1952."   The date, more than  a  year  ago,  is  not so
"recent" at  that.   But the  significant point  is that  the writer
of  the  atrocity  report  felt  under  compulsion to  prove  "that
the  Communists  still  persist  in  committing  atrocities."   The
fact  is that two graphs in the  appendix show that  there  have
been  very  few  atrocities  in  the  past  two  years.    Exhibit  H
shows  no  "referable"   case   since  the   early   part   of   1951.
Exhibit  C,  "Monthly  Totals  of  Atrocity  Cases  Classified  Ac-
cording  to  Perpetrator,"  which  covers  all  "reported"  cases
shows  no  Chinese  atrocities  reported   since  July,   1951,  and
only three small North Korean cases  reported  since that  time,
the  last  being  the  one  mentioned above.
This  latest  atrocity   of  September,  1952,  as  cited  by  the
Even  Sober  Newspapers
"This  report  of  grisly  horror  and  calculated  bestiality,
of  savage  torture  and cold-blooded massacre. . .  ."
—New  York  Times,  October 30
"To  find  an  analogy  to  the  atrocities  perpetrated  by
the   Communists  in   Korea  one   must  go   back   to   the
sufferings  of  the   European  Jews  at  the  hands  of   the
Nazis.  . .  ."
—Washington  Post,  October  31
report   may  be  an  atrocity   or  judging  by  the  summary  it
may   be  the   case   of  a  terrible  hand-to-hand   fight.   "An
American  forward  observer  team,"  the  summary  says,  "and
a  squad  of  South  Koreans  occupied  Hill  854  near  Samchi-
yong.    Their  position  was  overrun  by  the  enemy,  but  was
recovered  the  following  day  in  a  counter-attack.    The  bodies
of  two  U.S.  soldiers,  horribly  mutilated,  together  with  those
of   several   South   Koreans   were  discovered   by  a  friendly
patrol."
Confusion  Well  Confounded
Presumably   the   "referable"   cases,   set   down   "as   being
ready  for  trial"  would  be  the  best  documented.   But  even
among  these   the   summaries  reflect  far   from    satisfactory
proof.    An   example  widely  cited   in   the   news   stories   is
KWC  #67,  the  Naedae  Murders.   The  summary  fails  to  tell
when  this  happened and  ends  on a  confusing  note.    "Photo-
graphs,"  it  begins,  "clearly  reveal  that  the  six  American
soldiers  detained as prisoners  in a  Korean  house near  Naedae
were  shot  in  cold  blood  and  probably  bayonetted.    Ironically,
this  slaughter   took  place  in  front  of  a  Communist  propa-
ganda  bulletin  board.    However  there  were  five  survivors,
wounded  in  the  massacre,  who  escaped  by  feigning  death.
In  addition  a  captive  North  Korean  sergeant  has   admitted
participation  in  the  murders.    Close examination  of  the  evi-
dence  leaves  some doubt as  to whether  this case  was  properly
referred,   since  there   seems   to   be   discrepancies   between
the  confession  and  the. survivors'  statements."
The  report   gives  "ten   other   "referable"-  cases  involving
alleged  atrocities  against  Americans.    But  one,  KWC  #125,
is a  case where two American  soldiers  were  killed "in  combat
with  North  Korean  soldiers"  after  a  South  Korean  civilian
Other Testimony From Three Korean  War Correspondents
"One  of  the  'Eight  Rules of  Conduct' laid  down  by Peking
provides  for   the   good  treatment  of  captives.    It   is   the
Communist  theory  that  this  contributes  to  victory.  .  .  .
The  Chinese  were  certainly  far   more  correct   than  were
the  North Koreans.   This  is  not  surprising,  as  both  North
and  South  Koreans  are  notorious  for  their  cruelty."
—Marguerite   Biggins:   War  in  Korea
"This  period  (December,  1950) was  probably  worst  for
the  Americans,  for  there was in that  army a  very  consider-
able  fraction  of  young  soldiers  fed  on  the  ideological  spirit
of  the  war.   They  had to  think  of  the  Chinese  Communists
as  brutal  tyrants and that the  Southern  Republic  stood  for
freedom:   as   the  tales  of   mild   and  correct   behavior   to
prisoners  and  population  by  the   Chinese  began  to   filter
through  and  revelations  of  the  Republic's  festering corrup-
tion  piled  up,  these  young  men  were .left  without  ballast."
—Rene  Cutforth   (BBC  Correspondent  in  Korea):  Korean
Reporter  (London,  1952)
"Few  attempts  were  made  to  explain  to  the  American
soldier  why he  was  fighting.  Publications  similar  to  those
of  the  British  Army bureau of current  affairs  were  naive in
the  extreme.   The  national  hatred  and  fear  of  Communism
was  sufficient  in  most  cases  to  inflame  him  with  a  rather
indiscriminate  bellgerence  which  showed  itself   in  an  ugly
way,  especially  in  the  treatment  of  prisoners  of  war,  who
had  to  suffer   the  indignity  of  being  stripped  naked.    It
failed,  however,  to  bring  about  any  kind  of  sympathy  for
South  Koreans.  . .  ."
Louis   Her en   (correspondent    of   the   London   Times   in
Korea):   Brussels   Annual,   The  (British)    Armed   Forces
Tear-Book, 1951.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  7, 195S
. . . The  Real  Atrocity  is The  Spread  of  Poison  Against  Peace
had  disclosed  their  hiding  place  to  the  enemy.   "It  is  doubt-
ful,"  the  summary  ends  lamely,  "that  this  case  should  be
considered  an  atrocity,  but  appears  at  best  to  be  a  case  of
collaboration  with  the  enemy."    Three  other  "referable"  cases
involve   the   killing    of   wounded   American    prisoners    by
civilians.
Among  the  eight  "referable"  cases  involving  Koreans,  one
casts  a  grisly  light  on the  reality  of  confessions.    KWC #29
says,  "Two  North   Korean   officer   prisoners  have  confessed
to  killing  as  many  as  2000  'anti-Communists,'  but  check  with
natives   indicate  that   approximately   80  were   slain.    Two
survivors  state  that  16  were  in  the  group  with  them,  and
that  death  in  each  case  was  by  beating  at  the  hands  of  a
mob."
The  Army  Waxes Funny
There  are  evidences  of  cheerful  humor  on  the  Army's  part
in  KWC  #102.    The  summary  says,  "Obligingly    cooperative,
one  North  Korean  prisoner   stated  that  he  was  a  member
of   the   Education   and   Cultural   Section   in   the   village   of
Kwangju,  and that  in this capacity,  together  with  two accom-
plices,  on  16  September   1950,  he  took  ten  anti-Communist
prisoners  about  eight   kilometers   in  the  country   and  there
executed  them.    He  adds  that  he  used  a  carbine  and  did not
bury  the  bodies.   He  desired  to  point  out the  sites,  so accom-
Purpose
"The  United  States ...  is  launching a  counter attack
on  those   who  want   to   do  business  with  Communist
China.  .  .  .  Documented  facts  on  Communist atrocities
are  likely  to  get  wide  scrutiny.   Winning  friends  away
from  the  U.  S.  and  'shooting  its   way  into  the  United
Nations' may become a harder job for  Communist  China."
—U.  S. News  &  World  Report,  November 6
panied  by  a  war  crimes  investigator  and  a  Korean  detective
from  Kwangju,  he  directed  them  to  the  spot.    Three  badly
decomposed  bodies were  found,  and  the  suspect  insisted  that
these  were  three  of  the  ten  victims  he  had  helped  murder.
The  case  was  probably  submitted  to  accomodate  the  confes-
sor."     (Italics  added.)
Another  puzzler  among  these  Korean  "referable"  cases  is
KWC  #180.    A junior lieutenant in the  North Korean political
police  is  alleged  to  have  taken  six  political  prisoners  out  of
jail  at  Naju  on  September  28,  1950  "and  as  usual,   without
trial,  shot  and  bayonetted  them."   The  hands  of  the  victims
were  tied  behind  them.    "They  were  shot  and  the   bayonet
used  for   the   'coup  de  grace'."    The  lieutenant    confessed.
The  puzzling part  about  this  case  is  that  the  summary  says,
"Despite  this  treatment,  five  persons   [of  the  six]   survived,
although  one  died  shortly  thereafter.    All  identify  the  con-
fessor  as  the  perpetrator."
The  atrocity  report  is  almost  apologetic  about  the  absence
of  material  on  the   Chinese.    "The   predominance   of  North
Korean  incidents,"  it  says,  "is  attributable  to  the  fact  that
the  bulk  of those  recorded  occurred  prior  to  the  official   (sic)
entry  of  the   Chinese  into  the   war.     Since   October,   1950,
however,  the  Chinese  have  been  fully  as  active  as  the  North
Koreans."    Though  the  Chinese  may  well  have  been  "fully
as  active,"  the  report  only  gives  one case—a  "nonreferable"
one—of  an  atrocity  alleged  against  the  Chinese.    A  lieuten-
ant   survivor   of  a  patrol  ambushed  on  November  8,  1950,
alleged that the  Chinese set the  wounded afire and  bayonetted
them.     Corroboration  is  claimed  by  a  medical   officer   who
examined  the  bodies  when  they  were  later   recovered.
The  Report's  Striking  Omission
This  paucity   of  cases  alleging  Chinese  atrocities   makes
striking  the  omission from  this report  of the  biggest  shocker
in   Hanley's   atrocity  report  two  years  ago.     "The  largest
number   of  Americans  known  to   have   been   killed   by   the
Chinese,"  Colonel Hanley  reported,  "was  a  group  of  200  U.S.
Marines  killed  on December  10,  1950,  near  Sinhung  on orders
of  the  regimental  commander  of  the  23rd  Regiment  of   the
81st   Division  of  the   CCP  [Chinese   Communist  Forces]."
No mention of this alleged  crime  is made in the  new report.
When  the  writer  asked  the  Pentagon  press  office  why it  was
omitted,  he was  given  various  answers,  among them  (1)  that
the  new  report  was  only  an  "excerpt"  and  did  not  cover  all
cases,  (2)  that  the  War  Crimes  Division  did  not  have  that
case  yet  (3)  that  this  case  was  KWC #661,  and  included  in
the  reported  totals  but  that  the  actual  file  had  not  yet  been
forwarded  from  Korea,  (4)  that  Korea  has  "a  great  many
more  cases" and  (5)  that  while these  other  cases  are  covered
in  the  report  totals,  physical  possession  of  them  is  still  held
in  Korea.    A  phonograph  record  of  these  replies  would be  a
treasure.
Two  years  ago,  when  this  same  Marine  atrocity  made  the
headlines,  this  writer  was  told  at  Marine  Corps  HQ  that  it
had  no  record  of  any  such  atrocity  and  did  not  believe  it
had  occurred.    Last  week,  when  the  writer  went  from  the
Pentagon  to  Marine  HQ  on the  same  story,  a  query  elicited
the  unusual response  of a  written  statement, with  permission
to  quote  and  attribute.   "This  HQ,"  said  the  Marine  Corps
statement,  "was  never  able  to  confirm  the  news  report  pub-
lished  in  1951  to  the  effect  that  200 American  Marines  were
victims  of  atrocities  10  December   1950  by  members  of   the
Chinese  Communist  Forces.   At  that  time  the  total  number
of  Marines  missing  in  action  was  less  than  200.    Since  the
Armistice  39  Marines  have  been  repatriated  who  were  cap-
tured   prior   to   10  December   1950  thereby   decreasing   the
number  who could  have  been  killed  on that  date.   There  has
been  no  information  received  from  returned  prisoners,"  the
official   U.S.  Marine  statement  continued,  "which  would  cor-
roborate  this  story.    This  story  is  based  on  the  statement
of  one captured  Chinese soldier."         (Continued  on  Page  4)
ONLY  THIRTY  COPIES
Of  the  atrocity  report  were  made  available to  the  press  last  week  by  the   Pentagon.    Most  newspapermen  had  to
depend  on  the  wire  service  summaries.    At  the  UN  the  American delegation  made  public  only  a  three  paragraph  memo-
randum.    The  distortions  in  such  cursory  coverage  led  us to  devote  the  bulk  of  this  week's  issue  to  a  full  study  of  the
report.    In  this  I  believe  the  Weekly   again  performs  a  public  service  no other  publication  has rendered.    Extra  copies  are
available  on  request.    But  don't  forget  we  need  your  renewal—or  new  subscription—NOW  to  stay  alive  and  continue  the
fight.    The  rate  is still  only  $5  a  year  and  you  can  get  a  two  year  sub or  give  a  gift  sub to a  friend  for  only  $4  extra  by
using  the  coupon  on  page  four  TODAY.
With  many  thanks,  I.  F.  Stone.
1  1 *
1   6  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November 7,  19SS
Using  Atrocities  to  Plug  for  A  Bigger  Arms  Budget
What  the  Report  Really  Shows
What  this  report  really   shows  is  that  after  the  terrible
brutality   which  marked  the   Korean   civil  conflict   on  both
sides  in  the  early  months  of  the  war,  conditions  improved
from  the  time  the  Chinese  intervened  in  the  fighting.  There
is  back-handed  admission  of  this  in  the  lush  double-talk  of
the  report  itself.   It  divides  atrocities  into  "acts  of commis-
sion  and  acts  of  omission"  and  then  says,  "The  former,  the
acts  of  brutality  such  as  wilful  murder,  attempted  murder,
mutilation,  and  various  forms  of  torture,  have  greatly  de-
clined from  the  shocking rate prevalent  in the  early  stages of
the  war."
"However,"  the  report  continues,  "as  the  war  progressed
and  more  men fell  into  the  hands  of the  enemy,  coupled  with
his  limited  ability  to  provide  sufficient  food,  proper   medical
care,  necessary  clothing   and  shelter  resulted   in   appalling
death  rates  in  the  various  camps  and  collecting  points."    It
said  that  on  the  marches  to  prison  camps  "most  deaths  re-
sulted  from  non-treatment   of  combat  wounds aggravated  by
lack  of water, food  and clothing."   It  was "in this initial stage
of  capture,"  the  report  admits,  "where  most  acts  of  violence
were  perpetrated  against  the  prisoners."    Other  deaths  re-
sulted  from  "malnutrition   and  dysentery"  on the  way  to  the
final  camps.    These  are  not  atrocities  in  the  real  meaning
of  the  term,  or  as  understood  by  the  public.
The  report  goes  on  to  say,  "The  Chinese,  soon  after   the
beginning of the truce talks in July,  1951,  realizing the  propa-
ganda  value  of prisoners,  commenced a  'program  of  leniency'
which  resulted  in  slightly  better  treatment  of  captured  per-
sonnel."   It  continues,  "Medical  care,  still  woefully   lacking,
was  augmented  with   some  of  the  newer  drugs  to   combat
disease  and  infections.    The  quantity   of  food,  still   pitifully
low,   was raised  to  a  more  life-sustaining  level."
For  a  report  which  begins  by  equating  the  Chinese  Com-
munists  with  the  Nazis,  these  are  considerable   admissions.
They admit that  real  atrocities  fell  off after  the  early  months
of  the  war,  that  mistreatment  of  prisoners  occurred  on  the
marches  to  the  camps  rather  than  in  them,  and  that  the
Chinese  two  and  a  half   years  ago  began   to  improve   the
treatment  of  the  wounded and  the  feeding  of prisoners.
The  Real  Atrocity
The  real  atrocity  is  this  report  itself.    The  Korean  war
has  been  unusually horrible.   Both  North  and  South  Koreans
have  acted  with  shocking  brutality.    Our  own treatment  of
Weird  Statistics
Earlier  atrocity  reports including  Colonel  Hauler's  as
Judge  Advocate  of  the  Eighth  Army  may  be  found  ana-
lyzed  in  I.  F.  Stone's  Hidden  History   of  the  Korean War.
This  is  how  the  figures  now  stack  up:
1. General  Ridgway's  report  to  the  UN dated Novem-
ber  12,1951, said  "As  of July  20,1951, approximately  8,000
United  States  military   personnel   have  been   reported
killed  as  war  crimes  victims.  Of  this  number, approxi-
mately  7,000  were reported  killed by  North  Koreans  and
the  remainder by  Chinese Communists."
2.  Colonel  Hanley's report  as  head  of  the  war  crimes
division  in  Pusan  next  day,  November   13,  1951,  said
Chinese  Communists  had killed  2,513 American prisoners
of  war. Hanley gave the  total number  killed  in  atrocities
as  5,500.   Hanley's total  was  2,500  less  than  Ridgway's,
but  his  total  of  those  killed  by  the  Chinese  was 1,500
greater.
3.  Colonel  Hanley  in a follow  up statement from  Pusan
three  days  later,  November   16,   1951,  raised  the   total
to  6,270.
4.  General  Ridgway  in  a  statement  from  Tokyo  four
days   later,   November   20,  1951,  said   "possibly"  6,000
Americans  had  been  killed  in  war  atrocities  but  placed
the  number  of  those "definitely  known" as  victims  at 365.
5.  Now,  as   of  June  30,  1953,  the   Korea  War  Crmes
Division  places  the   number   of   "probable"  victims   at
6,113    and  attributes  2,178 of  these  to  the  Chinese.  No
"definitely  known"  figure  is  given.
prisoners   has   been  far   from   exemplary.     The  report  can
serve  no  purpose  other  than  to  inflame  public opinion.   The
report  is  a  sloppy  and  mendacious  job,  typical  of  the   stuff
the  military  has  poured  out  in this war  in  its  constant  effort
to  control  and  poison  the  American  mind.
The  final  touch  was  the  statement  with  which  Secretary
of  the  Army Stevens  accompanied the  release.   "This report,"
Stevens  said, "describing the  cold-blooded program  of torture
and  murder  carried  on  by  the  Communist  enemy  in  Korea,
is  one of  the  best  answers  that  can  be  given  to  anyone  who
questions  the  need  of  strong  military  defenses  for  our  coun-
try  and the  free  world."   So the  atrocity  story  ended  with  a
plug  for  a  bigger  military   budget.
Don't  Rue  It,  Do  It.
PLEASE  RENEW NOW
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name     .————————————————-——-—————————
Street   __
Zone_
State
Enter  this  gift  sub   for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name    ———————————————————————
Street     _——————————————————————————
Zone-
State.
11-7-68
I.  F. StoneV  Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED