I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953oct31.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive:  The ACLU's Directors Prepare to  Jettison  Its Principles
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    I,  NUMBER 39
OCTOBER  31,  1953
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS
The  Hunger   Marches  Begin  Again
Sitting  down  in  that  crowded  auditorium  they  looked  like
any  group  of  middle   class  Americans  in  their  standardized
sack  suits,  white  shirts  and  four-in-hand  ties.   But  the  backs
of  their  necks,  red  and  wrinkled  from  the  constant  sun, gave
them  away,  as  did  the  broad-brimmed  Stetsons  on  their  laps.
The  "cattlemen's  caravan"  from  the  West  and  Southwest  had
arrived.
Camera   men  swarmed  over   Jefferson   auditorium   at   the
Department   of   Agriculture,   operating   even  from   high  red
ladders  propped  up  on  the  stage.   The  Secretary  of  Agricul-
ture,  Ezra  Benson,  moved  affably   about  on  the  floor  below
them,   shaking  hands,  playing  the  democratic   host.    In  his
rimless  spectacles,  with  his  thin  nose  and  rather  anemic  ex-
pression,  the  Secretary  looked  like  the  first  vice  president  of
any  small town  bank,  or  a well-to-do deacon  playing  usher  at
church  on  Sunday.
Everybody  was on  their  best  behavior,  and  indulged  in  the
polite   prevarications   called  for   by  the   occasion.    Assistant
Secretary of Agriculture Davis assured the  cattlemen  they were
welcome,  and  their  main  spokesman,  Dennis  Driscoll, assured
the  Secretary  they  were  not  there  as a  pressure  group.   They
rose  to  their  feet  when  Benson  began  to  address  them,  and
gave  him  polite  applause  at  the  close,  but  the  only  point  at
which  they  warmed  up  was  when  he  said  his  mind  was  still
open  on  the  question  of  support  prices  for  livestock.   This
also  turned  out  to  be a fib.
The  Republicans  had  been back  in  power less  than  a  year.
Only  a  few  months  had  elapsed  since  the  fighting  stopped  in
Korea.   But  the  wheels  were  already  slowing  down  and  here
was  the  first  of  those  hunger  marches  again.   These  were  not
peasants  in  tatters,  nor  emaciated men  in  rags.   "We're  not  a
rabble,   Mr.  Secretary,"  said  their   leader,  Driscoll,  a   short
stocky  cattleman   from  Colorado   Springs,  with  a  stub  nose
and  graying  marcelled  hair.   "I  dropped   $100,000  this  year
on  1,000  head  of  cattle  and  I'm  still  in  business.   But  there
are  men  here  who  are  broke.   They  have  no  money  to  feed
their  cattle.   They're  going  to  lose  their  foundation   herds.
They  face  the  liquidation  of  their  life  work."
The   witnesses  from   the   floor   were  brief   and  eloquent.
"I've  been in  the  sheep and  cattle  business  all my  life  and  my
father  before  me,"   said  one  cattleman   from  Utah.   "As  a
young  man  I  went  broke  in  1921  and  my  wife  and  I  home-
steaded  in   the  sage  brush.   We  lost  most  of  what  we  had
again  in   19 J2.   We  see  another   depression  coming   and  we
want  to  stop it."   There was an alarmed hush from  the cattle-
man   and  a  hopeful  ripple  of  applause  from  Benson  and  his
aides  when  one  man  from  Sherman,  New  Mexico,  got  up  to
say,   "I  don't  think  my  government  owes  me  anything.   I'm
only  asking  my  just  rights  under  the  Constitution."   There
was  a  burst  of  applause  from  the  cattlemen  when  it  turned
out  that  for  him  as for  the  rest  of  them "just  rights  under  the
Constitution"  meant  support   prices  for   livestock.
One  cattleman  said,  "I   defy   any  man  to  call  me  a  socialist
or  anything."   These  men   visualized   themselves  as  rugged
individualists—and  indeed most of  them  bore the  visible  marks
of   rugged   living.    But   Benson  and   his  aides,  behind   their
composed  faces,  could  not  have  been  blamed  if  they  regarded
them  as traitors  to  the  cause of  free  enterprise.   The  attempt
to  stabilize  the  economy,  balance  the  bulget,  and  restore  a
sound   dollar   had   hardly   begun.    And   here  was   socialism
creeping—perhaps  galloping—in  again!
Benson  did  his  best.   He  spoke  of  "adjustments"   and  of
doing  everything   "practical  and  feasible."    He  spoke  of  an
overproduction  of  cattle.  He  made a  demagogic  reference  to
"the   doctolrs  and  lawyers  and  beauty  shop  operators"  who
had  "put  a  few  head  of  cattle  in  their  backyards and  sat  back
to  watch  their  money  grow."   "There  had  to  be  an  adjust-
ment,"  he  pleaded.   But  with  these,  the  men  who  would  be
"adjusted"   out   of   business,  his  plea  was  a  failure,   as  one
could  tell  from  the  angry outbursts  when  they  met  later with
their  National  Farmers  Union  sponsors  in  a  dingy  American
Legion  hall  at  Third  and E  Streets,   N.W.
The  old  problems  were  back  and  the  old  issues.   Cattle,
cotton,  wheat  and  corn  were  in  "oversupply"  again,  and  once
more  poverty  was  appearing  amid  plenty.    Benson  spoke  for
those  who  had  benefitted  by  inflation  and  had  the  money  to
weather  a  "healthy  shakedown."   His  meager  relief  measures,
like  Hoover's,  are poured  in  from  the  top  and  dribble  weakly
toward  the  bottom;  the  packers  are  the  first  beneficiaries  of
the  current  beef  buying,  and  a  Meat  Institute  man  has  been
chosen  by  Benson  to  "investigate"  the  spread  between  beef  on
the  hoof  and  beef  on  the  table.  The  clock  is turned  back  two
decades,  and  again  the  first  rumblings  of  discontent  are  from
the  farm  country.   The  difference  is  that  now  the  idea  of
government   subsidies  and  government   controls   are  so  deep
rooted  that  Benson's  position  is politically  hopeless.
Unless  a  temporary  way  out  is  found  by  renewed  war  in
Korea,  there  will  be more  of  these  "marches," as farm  income
falls  and industrial  employment  sags.  From  the  standpoint of
capitalist  economics,  these  pyramiding  subsidy  costs  and  con-
trols  are deadly.  But  so long  as people have the  right  to  vote,
it  is  hard  to  keep  them  from  voting  security  for   themselves.
Each  control,  as  Benson   rightly   argues,  forces  another  and
there  is  no  end  in  sight  short  of  complete  regulation.   Thus
while  we  carry  on  a  counter-revolutionary   crusade   against
those  "isms"  abroad they  make themselves felt  at  home.  Men
who  never  heard  of  Marx move America inescapably toward  a
socialism  of  our  own.
1   5  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   October  31,  1953
Will  They  Override the  Referendum They  Lost?
The  ACLU's  Directors Prepare  to  Jettison  Its Principles
The  American  Civil  Liberties   Union,  which  was  born  in
the  Red scare  after  World  War  I,  may  become the  victim of
the  Red scare  which has  followed  World War  II.  Its  national
board   of  directors  at  their  regular  meeting  next   Monday
(November 2)  may split the  organization  wide open by voting
to  override  the  results  of  a  national  referendum  which  has
just  decisively  rejected  three  policy  statements  proposed by
a  majority  of  the  national  board.
These  statements  have  the  effect  of  weakening  the  tradi-
tional  libertarian  principles on which the  ACLU  was  founded
and  of  putting  the  organization  in  the  position  of  condoning
(1)  guilt  by  association,   (2)  loyalty  purges  in  the  UN,  the
Federal  government,  schools and private industry  and  (3)  the
discharge  and  blacklisting  of persons  who invoke  their  privi-
lege  under  the  Fifth  amendment.
Of  the  ACLU's  23  national  affiliates,  one  abstained,  three
small  ones  supported  the  Board  and  the  remaining  19  voted
to  reject  the  proposed new statements  of  policy.  To  override
this  verdict,  the  Board  may  invoke  a  provision  newly  added
to  the  by-laws  two years  ago.   This  says  the  Board  shall  act
in  accordance with  the  majority  recommendations  of  the  bi-
ennial  conference, "the  preponderant  advice"  on any question
submitted  between  biennial  conferences and  "the  majority  in
a  referendum."   But  the  provision  adds  immediately  there-
after,  "except  where  it  [the  Board]   believes  there  are  vitally
important  reasons for  not  doing  so which  it  shall  explain  to
the  corporation  members."
A  motion  to  override  the  referendum  lost  by  one  vote  at
the  Board's  last  meeting  on  October  19.   Since  then   three
members  who voted  to  sustain  the  referendum have  said  they
wanted   to   reconsider  their   vote.   A  majority   to  override
therefore  seems assured  but a vote to override will  precipitate
a  battle at  the  next biennial  conference,  which is scheduled to
convene in  New York during  the  Thanksgiving holiday at  the
end  of  next  month.
Malin  Disturbed  by Leak
Every  effort  has  been  made  to  keep  the  fact  and  content
of  the  referendum  a  secret,  though  the  ACLU, as  America's
oldest   and  most  respected   civil  libertarian  organization   is
certainly   (to  borrow  a  phrase  from  public  utility  law)   "af-
fected  with   a  public  interest."   The  text  of  the  proposed
policy  statements  and  the  arguments  submitted  pro  and  con
in  the  referendum   leaked,   however,  through   the  militant
Northern   California  branch   of  the   ACLU,  which  printed
them  in  its  monthly bulletin,  published at  503 Market  Street
in  San  Francisco.
Patrick  Malin,  national  director  of  the  ACLU,  said  publi-
cation  had  created  "difficulty," explaining  that  "There  would
normally  be no publicity  during  a  referendum.  .  .  .  There
would  ordinarily  be  even  after   a, referendum,  no  release  of
such  complicated  and  technical  material—in  any  event,  not
without  an  attempt  at  paraphrasing  it  intelligently   for  the
general   reader,   and   at   putting   the   material   in  its.  full
context."
There  are   others   within  the  ACLU  and  outside  it  who
believe  the  fullest  publicity  called  for  when  so important  an
organization  in  times  as  difficult  as  these  is  on  the  verge of
compromising  the  fight  for  civil  liberties.   Publicity  is  espe-
cially  important  where  Malin and  a  majority  of the  National
Board  are  preparing  to override  the  referendum of their own
membership.  When  a  representative  of the  Weekly  put  some
questions   about  the  referendum  to  the  national   office,   the
edited   was  angrily   accused   of  unethical   journalism.    The
charge  is  interesting  in  view  of  the  dubious  course  on which
the  national officers  and  a  majority  of the  national board  are
preparing  to  embark.
The  three  proposed  policy  statements  are   extraordinarily
vague  and  verbose, but  their  ambiguities  and  concessions  flow
out  of  the  statement  condemning  the  American Communist
party  as  obedient  to  "a  despotic  foreign  power  which dom-
inates  a  world-wide revolutionary movement  unprecedentedly
threatening  the  national  independence  and  individual  civil
liberties  of  all  other   countries."
The  Familiar Premises  of  the  Witch  Hunt
Intellectually  this  has  been  well  disposed  of  in  one  letter
of  protest  published by  the  Northern  California Civil  Liber-
ties  Union  News  for   September   which  says  this  portion  of
the  statement  "oversimpliflies"  the  world  situation   "to  the
point  of  dangerous  idiocy."   From  this  familiar  premise  of
McCarran  and  McCarthy flows the  equally  familiar  conclu-
sion  that  Communists are  in  a  special  class.  The ACLU  says
it  will  defend  the  rights  of  Communists and  says  it  does  not
condone  "guilt  by  association"  but  declares  "it  is  not  a  vio-
lation  of  civil  liberties  to  take  into  account a  person's  volun-
tary  choice  of  associations  when  that  choice  is  relevant  to  a
particular  judgment  .  .  ."     ,
This  leads—through  a  forest  of phrases  as  tortured  as  the
conscience  of the  Board—to  the  proposition  that  despite  invo-
cation  of the  Fifth  amendment or  the  First,  "It  is not  a  vio-
lation  of  civil  liberties  for  authorities  legally  responsible  for
employment   in   certain   areas—including   government,   the
United  States  and education—to  ask . . .  questions relating
to  an  employee  or  prospective  employee's present,  recent  or
pertinent  past  membership in,  or  submission to  the  discipline
of,  the  Communist  party  or  other  totalitarian  organizations,
and—if   he  refuses   to  answer—to  take  into   account  that
refusal  and  give  it  such weight  as  may be appropriate  in  the
particular  circumstances."
This  places  the  imprimatur  of  the  ACLU on  the  widening
loyalty  purge,  and  on  punishment  for  refusal  to  answer—
not  questions  about  possible crime—but  questions about  past
or  present  associations with a political party  still  legal  in this
country.   Note  that  the  wording  does  not  deal  merely  with
membership  but  with  "submission  to  the  discipline  of"  the
Communist party, a much  looser matter, open to just the kind
of  abuse visible  in  the  Lattimore  case.
Broad  Enough  for  McCarran and McCarthy
So  much  for  employment  purges.   What  of  the   Congres-
sional  witch  hunt?   The  proposed  statement  says   weakly,
"questions  concerning Communist or  other  totalitarian  asso-
ciations  which are  not  illegal  should, in  the  case  of  a  legisla-
tive  committee, generally  be limited to  the  purpose of  possible
legislation  within its  purview."   The italics  are  ours.   This  is
broad  enough to  cover the  needs  of McCarran  and  McCarthy.
A  letter  of  protest  published by  the  Northern  California
branch  well  says  of  these  proposed  statements,  "The  threat
of  the  American Communist is  defined  as  being  of  such  pro-
portions  that  a  bet  on  democracy  in  open competition  would
be  a  poor  one."   This  is a  strange  position  for  a  civil  liberta-
rian  organization.   The  rationale  was  well  summarized  and
rebutted  by  Mr.  Justice  Black  in  his  dissent  in  the  Dennis
case.  Of the  court's  decision to abandon  the  clear  and present
danger  rule,  Mr.  Justice  Black  said,  "the   chief  reason   for
jettisoning  the  rule  is  the  expressed  fear  that .advocacy  of
Communist  doctrine  endangers  the  safety' of  the  Republic.
Undoubtedly,  a  governmental  policy  of  unfettered  communi-
cation  of  ideas  does  entail  dangers.  To the  Founders  of this
nation,  however,  the  benefits  derived  from  free   expression
were  worth  the  risk."
This  is the faith  the  ACLU is  abandoning in  its  search  for
respectability.   Instead  of  fighting  the  spreading  witch  hunt
and  the  widening loyalty  purge,  it  accepts  and  excuses  them.
Unless  the  membership  acts  strongly,  the  watchdog  of  civil
liberty  may  nestle  down  as  the  lapdog  of  its  enemies.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1.  P.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  37,  J953
I. E  Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher,  L F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  205,  301
E.  Capitol  St., S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $J
a   year;   Canada,   Mexico   and  elsewhere   in   the   Western  Hemisphere,   $6;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  (10   by   1st  class  mail,  $11  by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single   copy,   15   cents.   Tel.:   LI  4-7087.    Entered   as   Second   Clara   mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
October  31, 1953
Vol.  1.  No.  39
From  Around  the  Capitol
THE  VOTE  WE  WOULD  HAVE  CAST:   Were  we  a
resident  of  New  York,  we  would  cast  our  vote  next  Tuesday
for   Clifford  T.  McAvoy,  and  his  colleagues  of  the  American
Labor  Party  ticket,  to  help  keep  alive  one radical  party  in
New  York  and  to  show  our  respect  for   McAvoy,  an   able
public  servant  in  the  La  Guardia  Administration  and  a  cour-
ageous  defender  of  civil  liberties  in  these  cowardly  times.
PEACE POINTER:  The oil industry, a world state-within-
a-state,  with  better  sources  of  information than  many  gov-
ernments,  seems  to  expect  world  tension  to  die  down.  The
Petroleum  Administration  for  War,  set  up  after  the  Korean
fighting  began,  is  to  be  liquidated.  The  National  Petroleum
Council  has  been   summoned  to  meet  here  December   3,  a
month  ahead  of  schedule, to  pass  on  a  subcommittee  report
recommending  a  successor  agency.   This  is  expected  to  be
nothing  more  warlike  than  the  old  Gas  and  Oil  Division of
the  Department  of  the  Interior,  which  the  PAD  absorbed.
THOSE  GERMAN  CURRENCY  PLATES  STOLEN FOR
THE  RUSSIANS:   The  witch  hunt  whodonit  about  how  a
spy  ring  in the  U.S.  Treasury  during the  war  stole the  allied
military   occupation  currency  plates  for  the  Russians  was
rehashed  for  the  umteenth  time  before  the  Jenner  committee
last  week  by  Elizabeth  Bentley.   But  last  Sunday  the  con-
servative  and  respected  Washington  Star  ran  a  story  almost
two  columns  long  citing  "competent   and  informed  sources
.  .  .  American  officials  close  to  the  original  decision  on the
German  marks  deal"  as  saying  "Red  Army  in  Europe,  Not
Spies,  Got Military  Currency  Plates."  The  story  told  by  the
Star:   The  decision  to  print  occupation  currency   for   Ger-
many  was  taken  early  in  the  war  by  British,  American  and
Russian  military  fiscal  authorities.   It  was  first  suggested
that  the  money be  printed  at  one central  place  and  shipped
to  the  three  powers  in   accordance  with   allocations.   The
Russians   rejected   this.   They  said  it   would  be  simple  to
distribute  this  money  to  the  British  and  Americans  "who
were  fighting  behind  a  single  line"  but  might  be  difficult  if
not  impossible  to  get  it  to  the  Russians.   They  threatened  to
develop their  own occupation currency  unless furnished plates
with  which  to  print  their  supply  of  the  occupation  marks.
ADD  PRIVATE  ENTERPRISE:   Last  spring  the  owner
of  a  New York  building  maintenance  concern  made  a  splash
by   telling   a   Congressional   subcommittee   private   business
could  clean  government  buildings  twice   as  often   for   one-
fourth  less  than  the  government's  own  GSA  cleaning  staff.
GSA  was  hauled  on the  carpet  and  agreed  as  an  experiment
to  invite  bids  from  private  contractors  on  one  of  Washing-
ton's  biggest  buildings,  South  Agriculture.   James  A. Camp-
bell,  president  of  APL  American  Federation  of  Government
Employes,  discloses that when bids  were  opened recently,  the
low  bid  came  from   the  firm  whose  head  had  testified  last
spring.   But  his  bid  was  more  than  40  percent  higher  than
the  present  cost  of  GSA operation,  while  other  bids  ran   as
high  as  $1,208,079  a  month  as  compared  with  the  GSA cost
of  $321,152  for  the  year.
MOTE  IN  OUR  OWN EYE  DEPT:   "In  contrast  to  the
Soviet  system  of criminal  justice,  Attorney  General  Brownell
told  the  New  York  Herald-Tribune  Forum  last  week,   "our
system  sets  up  elaborate  safeguards  to  protect  the   innocent
who  have  been  charged   with  crime."    He  specified,  among
others, the  right to know the nature and cause  of any  accusa-
tion  and to  confront  accusing  witnesses.  Three  days  later  the
White  House announced that  1,456  government  employes had
been discharged  since May 27th under the  Eisenhower  Security
Order  which  Brownell helped  to  frame.   This,  like  Truman's
Loyalty  Order,  permits  Americans  to be branded  as  untrust-
worthy for  the  rest  of their  lives  often  without  being told  the
exact  nature  of  the  accusation  against  them  and  without  a
chance to confront  their  accusers.   The standard of reasonable
doubt  is  abandoned.  Where derogatory  information  turns  up
against  any  employe, the  head  of  the  department  or  agency
must  determine  "whether  retention  of  such  person  is  clearly
consistent  with  the  interests  of  the  national  security."   This
means  that  where  there  is  any  doubt,  the  doubt  is  resolved
against  the  accused.
GRATEFUL  FOR  SMALL  MERCIES  DEPT.:   Robert
Morris,  chief   counsel   of  the   Jenner   committee,   has   been
having  his  troubles  with  New York  City  bar  associations  as
candidate  for  Municipal Court  Justice  in  the  Ninth  Manhat-
tan  District.  Morris  declined  to  furnish  information   to  the
judiciary  committee  of  the  New  York  City  Chapter   of  the
National  Lawyers  Guild  on the  ground  of  "unpleasant  expe-
riences  with  two  other  bar  associations'   judiciary  commit-
tees."   Experience  as  counsel  to  the  McCarran  and  Jenner
committees  is  not  the  best  exercise  for  developing a  judicial
temperament,   but   those   lawyers   who  deal  with   all  three
witch  hunt  committees—Jenner, Velde  and  McCarthy's—have
been  so  enraged  by  the  arrogance  of  McCarthy's  Roy  Cohn
that  they  have  come to take  an  almost  idyllic  view of  Morris.
Morris  is  said  by  contrast  to  be  gentlemanly  and  ready  to
show  the  victims  and  their  counsel  at  least  elementary   cour-
tesy  on their  way  to  the  pillory.
HARVEY  O'CONNOR:  Pleaded  not  guilty  to  contempt  be-
fore  Judge  Holtzoff  in  Federal district  court  here  October 23,
released  in  $1,000  bail,  his  First  amendment  plea  set  down
for  trial  January  11.
1  1
DON'T  RUE IT -  DO  IT
Last  week  we  received  a  subscription  from  a  former  reader  of  PM  and  Compass  in  a  Western  State.   He  said  that  in
going  over  his papers  he had  just  come  across a  letter  I  sent out  last  November  asking  subscriptions  for  a  proposed  weekly.
"Now  if  your  address  is  still  the  same,"  he  wrote,  "and  that  weekly  is  being  published,  here's  my  sub  with  apologies.
I  meant  to  subscribe  then  but  somehow  .  .  ."   If  others  had  acted  like  our friend  in  the West,  there  would  have  been no
WeeWy.   There  will  continue  to  be  a  Weekly   only  if  you—yes,  you—renew  now  while  you  think  of  it.   Use the  blank  on
the  reverse  side  TODAY,  and  remember  you  ccn  get  an  extra  year  or  a  sub as  a  Xmas  gift  for  a  friend  for  $4  extra.
Let  our  friend  in  the  West  be  a  lesson  to  you.  So  we  say—don't  rue  it,  do  it.   And  do  it  today.
________                                                                                          With  many  thanks,  I.  F.  STONE
153
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   October  31,
JENNINGS     PERRY'S    PAGE
Alabama  Casts  Her   Coast   for   the  Commonwealth
All  of  us,  I  think,  must  now  root  for  Alabama,  the  first
state  to  reach  the  Supreme Court  with  a  flat  challenge  of  the
1953  submerged  lands act.    Arkansas has been in  the  running,
but   Arkansas  is,  after   all,  the   second   state   alphabetically;
besides,  it  is easier  for  Alabama, with  the  crime  on,  as it  were,
her  very  front  porch,  to  show  hurt.
Arkansas  has  a  shore  on  the  Mississippi  River,  a  navigable
stream,  and  can  argue  reasonably  that  the  Gulf   of   Mexico
must  belong  to  all  of  the  people  also,  as  a  mere  extension  of
the  river.    Alabama,  however,  has  an  80  mile  front   on  the
sea  itself.    The  new  law,  confirming  the  "historical   rights"
of  Florida,  Louisiana and  Texas  to  the  waters  out  to  ten  miles
from  the  lengthy  coasts,  of  these  states,  hems  her  in.
We  need  not  speculate on  what  might  have been  Alabama's
attitude   had  her  seashore  stretched   for  hundreds  of  miles—
as  surely  might  have  been  the  case  had  those  brave  Spanish
captains  Panfilio  de  Navaraez  and  Hernando  de  Soto  settled
Mobile  Bay  instead   of  leaving  it   to  the  French.    What  is
important,  whether  or  not  a  historical   accident  lies  at  back
of   the  emergence  of  this  champion  against  the  famous  his-
torical  rights,  is  that  the  fight  to  test  the  legality   of   the
Elsenhower  Administration's   great  give-away  of   offshore   oil
is so promisingly  launched.   Within  six weeks,  by  order  of  the
Court,  the  government  as  well  as  the  states  favored  by  the
act  must  show cause why  they  should  not  be sued  for  improper
alienation  of  property  and  for   trespass.
The   Alabama  petition  maintains  the  state's  claim,  as  one
of  the  48  states,  to  a  share  of  the  $62,000,000 in  impounded
oil  funds  held  by  the  government,  and  seeks further  to  enjoin
the  states  holding  offshore   sovereignty   under  the  act   from
demanding  licenses  of  or  otherwise  interfering  with  Alabama
fishermen.    The   relief   thus   sought,   if   granted,   would   re-
establish  freedom of  the  seas  in  the  Gulf  and  do  much  to  ease
conflicts   and   tensions  among  states,   and   not   only   among
states  but  between nations, resulting  in  that  area  from  passage
of   the  submerged  lands  act.
These  troubles probably had  not  been  foreseen  by  those  who
bulldozed  the  act  through   Congress  this  spring  as  the  first
important—as  almost  the  only  important  piece  of   legislation
completed  by  the  new  administration.     While  Sparkman  and
Kefauver  protested,  and  Wayne  Morse  filibustered,  the  rest  of
the  nation  rather   phlegmatically  assumed  that  the  Republi-
cans  "owed"  the  debt  to  the  oil  interests  which  had  helped
their  party  break  the  Solid  South  and  had  to  pay it,  and  that
would  be  the  end  of  the  business.    The  oil  fleets  rushed   out
with  their  depth  charges  to  prospect  their  new  domain.
It  was  then  that  the  interests  of   the  oil  industry   in  the
Gulf  collided  with  the  interests  of  an  industry  that  was old
and  adventurous when  oil  was  an  unsuspected  treasure  in  the
bowels  of  the  earth.   The  fishermen  out  of  Mobile,  out  of  all
the  ports  on  the  vast  curving  coast  from  Brownsville,   Texas
to  Key West,  began  to encounter  new difficulties  in  the  waters
they   always  had  used   at   will—particularly   the   shrimpers,
whose  annual  catch  makes  up  in  value  and  quantity   by  far
the  largest  part  of  the  seafood  harvest.
What  had  the  fishermen  to  do  with  state  lines?    Outside
the  traditional   three  mile  limit  they  had  hunted  without   let,
casting  their  nets  where  seemed  to  them  good.    The  idea  of
state  conservation  patrols in  the  open  sea hit  them  hard.  True,
on  the  shores of  Yucatan,  where  the  richest  hauls of  the  great
pink  shrimp  are  taken,  they  had  sometimes  had  brushes  with
the  Mexican  authorities;  but   their  own  government  always
had  been  able  to  back  them  up.    Outside  the  three-mile  limit
it  was anybody's   ocean.  .  .
Now  their own  government  can  do little  for  them.   By  the
submerged  lands  act  it  has  tied  its  own  hands:  for  the  ten
mile  limit  asserted  by  Mexico  is  based  on  precisely  the  same
historical  rights—the  old  Spanish  claims—recognized  by  Con-
gress  this  spring  to  California,  Texas,  Louisiana  and  Florida.
And  Mexico's  claim  is older  and  of  firmer  descent  than  theirs.
Under  the  circumstances  the  situation  in  the  Gulf  has  been
slipping  fast,  and  it  is  pleasant  to  suppose  that  the  plea  of
Alabama,  once  the  capitol  of  the  Confederacy,  may  yet  save
both  the  honor  and  the  commonwealth   of  the  Union.
PLEASE
I.  F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter
Name
Street  ...
r*s*w
Enter  this  gift  snb  fc
(To)  Name
Street
City
RENEW  NOW
301 E.  Capitol, Wash.  3,  D.  C.
)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Zone...  — .   State _ -—..,. _
ir  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
Zone           State
10-31-63
I.  F. StoneV Weekly
Room  209
301  E. Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered  as  •
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED