I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953dec27.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue;  Harry  White and The  German Currency  Plates
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   1, NUMBER 47
DECEMBER  27,  1953
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Ike  Enlists  in  The  Witch-Hunt
"I  was not  displeased  at  anything  I  heard,"  McCarthy  said
on  leaving  the  White  House  legislative  conference  last  week-
end.   He  had  reason to  be gratified.  The  President  had  enlisted
under his banner and Browncll's in  the witch-hunt.   The  period
of  coy  disclaimers  and  vapid invocations  of  Wild  Bill  Hickok
are  over.  The  man  who was unwilling to  turn  his back on  the
traducers  of   his  friend  and  patron,  General  Marshall,  again
demonstrates  the  flexible  conscience  he  brought  to  the  game
of  politics.   The  full  weight  of  the  White  House  is  to  be  put
behind the twin  bills Brownell, J. Edgar Hoover, and McCarthy
want:  a bill  to  legalize wire-tapping  and  give  the  secret  police
carte blanche to pry into  everyone's private conversation;  a bill
to  force  witnesses to  give up  their  Fifth  Amendment  privilege
igainst  self-incrimination.
The   liberal   organizations—ACLU,  ADA—which  testified
"against"  the  wiretap  bills  last  spring  all  added  if  and  buts
adequate  for  the  witch  hunt's  purpose.   They  all  agreed  that
in  suspected  cases  of  espionage,  sedition,  sabotage  and  treason,
the  FBI should have the  right  to  tap  wires and use the  evidence.
This  is broad  enough  to  run  a highway  through—the  highway
to  Fascism.   Wire-tapping   will  be  used  to  collect  "seditious
utterance" and evidence of "guilt by association".  The circular
reasoning  of  the  loyalty  purge—A  is suspect  because  he  knows
B and  B because he knows  C  and C  because he knows  A—will
make  its  appearance  in  criminal  proceedings.   As  for  the  im-
munity  bill,  its  real  purpose  is  to  force  radicals  to  run   the
hazards  of  perjury  contests  against  pet  informers  or  go  to  jail
for  contempt.  Many now  invoking  the  Fifth  are  innocent  of
any  crime  but  fearful  of  undergoing  the  kind  of  ordeal   to
which  Hiss,  Remington  and  Lattimore  have  been  subjected.
The  Meaning  of  the  Beria  Case for   America
For  the   sake  of  remaining  in  political   power,  fearing  an
unfavorable  verdict  at  the  polls  in  a  fair  campaign,  the  Re-
publicans are revising history,  defaming  the  dead  and launching
on  a  campaign  of  smear  and  terror   to  remain  in  power.   A
similar   process  is  taking  place  in   our   great  adversary  and
mirror-image,  the  Soviet  Union,  though  in  a  more  advanced
stage  of  degeneration.   Beria,  one  of  Stalin's  closest associates
all through  the  Great  War,  was arrested five months  ago,  held
incommunicado  and  is  now  to  be  tried  as  a  lifetime  agent  of
foreign  intelligence  and  capitalist  imperialism.   This  fantastic
rubbish  is  shielded  from   examination,  since  the  prosecution
has  invoked  the  Kirov  law  of  1934  which  provides  for  trials
in  secret,  without  counsel or  right  of  appeal,  and  for  the  im-
mediate  death  penalty.   Apparently   Beria  was  unwilling   to
"confess";  the  methods  he  himself  used  in  the  past  seem  to
have  failed  to  break him in  turn.
More  of   the   same  may  be  expected  from  Moscow,  since
Dekanozov,  one  of  the  three  other   Georgians  accused  with
Beria,   has  been   closely   associated  with   Molotov   as  deputy
foreign  minister  since  1940.   Trumped  up  charges,  distortions
of  motive  and  past  events,  are  being  used  there  as  here  in  a
political  power  struggle.   America  is still  a  long  way  from  the
Russian  pattern,  but  a  few  more  years of  the  current   trend
will  bring  us  closer.   The  weakening  of  the  right  to  counsel,
the  invasion  of  privacy,  the  policing  of  political  ideas,  the
acceptance  of  the  notion  that  the  security  of  the  State  excuses
possible   injustice   to   the  individual,  the   establishment   even
in  the  courts  of  the  idea that  the  FBI may withhold  the  source
of  evidence  to  protect  its  sources  of  information,   the   cloak
thrown   over  the  malicious  and  the  crackpot,   the   informer
and  the  perjurer—all  these  are in  the  totalitarian  pattern.   On
one  side,  as  in   some  Orwellian  nightmare,   serried   ranks  of
Communists  are taught  to  believe without  question  any  charge
against  those  whom  they  had  but  yesterday  honored—on  the
other  side,  the  same  regimented  gullibility  of  the   American
style, McCarthy  era, anti-Communist.   On either  side, to doubt
is  dangerous;  to  question  is  to  make  oneself   suspect.
The  Grave-Robbers   of The  G.  O.  P.
Pertinax wrote of  the grave-diggers of  France:  the  men who
betrayed  her  to  Fascism.   Some  day  an  American  perhaps  in
exile  will write  of  the  grave-robbers  of  America.  The  G.O.P.
campaign  this  year  depends  more  and  more on  one  dead  man,
Harry  D.  White,  exhumed  in  the  witch  hunt;  others  march
behind  a  flag,  the  Republicans  behind  a  corpse.
As  our  own  contribution  to  justice  and  sanity,  we  are  de-
voting  this  entire  issue  to  examination  of  the  latest  charge
against  White—that   he  violated  his  duty   and  "stole"   the
German mark occupation plates for  the Russians.  This accusa-
tion,  unlike  most  made  against  him,  has  the  virtue  of  being
concrete  and  specific.   In  addition,  it  also  has  the  advantage
that  it  can  be  studied  in  the  light  of  an  earlier   investigation.
How  often  the  same  canards  are  being  warmed  over!   Even
without  a trial, with  no  chance to  cross-examine  the  informer
involved,  merely  on  the  meagre  basis  of   some  documentary
material,  enough  can  be  learned  to   show  just   what  flimsy,
spurious  and  mangy  tripe  is being  served  up  to  the  American
people  as the  campaign  of  1954  gets  underway.   Beginning  on
page  two  is  the  story,  with  the  citations,  so  the  reader  may
judge  for  himself.
1  B
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  27,  1953
Harry  White  and  The  German  Currency  Plates:
Elizabeth  Bentley  Comes Up  With  A  Brand-New  One
In  her  book,  "Out  of  Bondage",  Elizabeth   Bentley  writes
(p.  841),  "He   (William  Ludwig  Ullman)   also  brought  me
samples  of  the  marks  the  United  States  was  preparing  for
use  in  the  German occupation.  The Russians  were delighted,
as  they  were  planning  to  counterfeit   them.   However,  due
to  a  complicated ink  process  this  proved  impossible—until  I
was  able  through  Harry  Dexter  White  to  arrange  that  the
United  States Treasury  Department  turn the  actual  printing
plates  over  to  the  Russians!"
This  was the  story  Miss  Bentley  elaborated  in her  appear-
ance  this  Fall  before  Senator  Mundt  (R.  South  Dakota)  sit-
ting as  a  one-man subcommittee of the  McCarthy committee.
Miss  Bentley  testified   (Transfer    of  Occupation   Currency—
Espionage  Phase: Committee on Government Operations, U. S.
Senate  83rd  Congress,  1st  Session, pps.  28-31)  that  she  was
instructed  in late  1943 or  early  1944 "that the  Russians were
very  much  interested   in  American  occupation  currency  for
Germany  in  the  event  that  we won the  war, and  I  was  asked
to  contact  Gregory  Silvermaster, who was head  of the  Silver-
master  group,  and  Ludwig  Ullman,  and  to  put  pressure  on
Mr.  Harry  D. White  in  the  Treasury  to  procure  samples of
this  occupation  currency."
Wrapped,  Like  Fish,  In  A Newspaper
Miss  Bentley  testified  that  she  relayed  these  instructions.
"I  can't  remember  whether  it  was  the  next  meeting  2 weeks
later, or the  next  after  that, but I  believe it  was Mr. Ullman
who  produced  2  or  3  samples of  occupation  marks,  which  he
gave  to  me  wrapped  in  a  newspaper.  He  informed me that
they  were  very  valuable,  and  they  must  be  returned   before
they  were  missed;  that  we  could  only borrow  them  to  photo-
graph  them."
Ullman,  according  to  her  testimony  on  other  occasions,  is
supposed  to  have  had  a  dark  room  and  a  "Contax"  camera
in  the  basement  of  the  Silvermaster  home in  which  to  photo-
stat  documents for  the  Russians.   No  one  asked  her  why, if
the  sample  marks  were  so  valuable  that  "they  must  be  re-
turned before  they  were  missed," they were not  photographed
then  and  there  by  Ullman.   Instead   Miss  Bentley  says  she
took  them  to  New  York  "and  delivered  them  to  my  Soviet
contact,  Bill."
"Put  Pressure  On White"
But  at  her  next  meeting or the  one after,  the  sample  marks
"were  returned   to   me,"   Miss  Bentley  related,  "with   the
comment  that  they  were  unable  to  photograph  them  so that
they  would  be  useful,  and  that  therefore  we  must  ask  the
Silvermasters  to  put  pressure  on Mr. White  to turn  over  the
plates  for  making  the  marks  to  the  Russians."   The  subcom-
mittee's  assistant  counsel  pressed  for  more details:
Mr.  La  Venia.   Miss  Bentley,  when  you  were  given  your
original  instructions   from  Bill,  your  Russian  contact,  was
there  any  indication  given to  you  why  Bill  wanted  copies  of
the  currency?
Miss  Bentley.   Not  in  so  many  words,  but  it  was  implicit
in  it.   Obviously  you  would  not  want  occupation  currency
unless  yon  could  use  it  for  counterfeiting.
It  was  on  this  testimony  that  Senator   Mundt  based  an
"interim  report"  last  week  (83rd  Congress,  1st  Session,  Re-
port  No.  837)  finding  that  White  "the  Communist agent  in-
volved in espionage ... a trusted  official  of the Treasury . . .
procured  the  samples  of  the  Allied  military  mark  in  direct
compliance with  orders from  his  Russian superiors.   This  was
done  with  full  knowledge  that  the  Russian  government  con-
templated  resorting  to  counterfeiting  and  forgery  if  neces-
sary  to  accomplish their  desires."
Two  other  associates  of  White,  V.  Prank  Coe and  Harold
Glasser, are  linked to the plot by the Mundt report, though  a
careful  reading  of  the  report  and  Mundt's  own hearings  will
show  that  there  is  no evidence either  participated  in  the  de-
cision  to  give  these  plates  to  the  Russians.  Coe testified that
he  did  not  enter  the  Treasury  until  10 months later  and  the
documents  on  which  Glasser's   name  appears  as  a  conferee
deal  with  later  negotiations to  determine a  rate  of exchange
for  the  Allied  occupation  marks.
The  Mundt  subcommittee also  heard  two  "friendly"  wit-
nesses who were  in the  Treasury at  the  time  and  opposed the
transfer  of  the  plates  to  the  Russians.   One  was  Alvin  W.
Hall,  still  director  of  the  Treasury's  Bureau  of  Engraving
and  Printing.    The  other  was  Daniel  W.  Bell,  then  Under
Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  now  president  of  a  Washington,
D.  C., bank.   Both  said  the  Treasury  was  reluctant  to  hand
over  the  plates.   Mundt  and  his  assistant  counsel  tried  hard
to  get  some  unfavorable testimony  from  them  about  White.
Hall  was  asked  by  La  Venia,  "Do you  recall  anyone in  the
Department  who constantly  kept the  negotiations  open rather
than turning  down  the  Russian request?"  Hall's  answer  was,
"I  don't know of anyone who kept it  alive, except the  Russians
perhaps."  Mundt  tried  a  broader  and  more leading  question:
Senator  Mundt.   During your  tour  of  duty  during the  last
long  period  of  years, did  any  people in  the  Treasury  Depart-
ment  ever arouse any suspicion in your  mind that they might
be  a  little  bit  overzealous  in  encouraging  a  Russian  point of
view, or being of assistance to  the  Russian Government from
the  standpoint  of this  monetary  transaction?
Mr.  Hall.   I  couldn't  say, Senator, that  I suspected anybody
for  any  sabotage  or  espionage  at  all.
Mundt  Was  Charitable
"Of   course,"   Senator   Mundt  commented  charitably,   "it
must  be  remembered that  that  was  a  time  when we were  an
ally  of  Russia,  and  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  a  statement
which they might make which would  sound pro-Russian  today
miffht  not  have sounded so suspicious  at  the  time."
Mundt  and  La  Venia  tried  again  when  Bell took the  stand,
but   no  more  successfully.   The  course   of  the   questioning
soon  disclosed that  at  an  executive  session earlier  in  the  day
Bell  had  spoken  highly of  White's  patriotism.  La  Venia  had
begun  by  asking  Bell  whether  he  recalled  that  "in  each  in-
stance  when  a  decision was  about  to  be  reached  adverse  to
the  Russian  government's  demands, that  it  appeared  to you
that  Mr.  White,  Harry  Dexter  White,  wanted  to  keep  those
negotiations  open."   Bell  replied, "No,  I  don't think  there was
anything  that  led  me  to  believe  that  he  particularly  wanted
to  keep  them  open."
Mundt  intervened, "I  think  the  phrase  you  used  this  mor-
ning,  Mr.  Bell,"  the  Senator  said,  "was  while  you  and  Mr.
Hall  were  aloof  to granting this request, you used the  phrase,
'Mr. White was  aloof  to turning  it  down!"  Bell  said that was
"probably  true,  but  as  I  still  say,  even with  that  it  didn't  in
any  way  arouse  my  suspicions."   Bell  said  he  thought   this
desire  on  White's  part  to  keep negotiations  open  was  "quite
a  natural  thing  to  do  in  his  contacts  with  various   foreign
governments"  and  suggested  White  might  have  gotten  this
attitude  from  "other  departments,  because everybody wanted
unity  of  action."
The  Senator  was  exasperated.  "I  was  not  assuming,"  he
said  "that  you looked  at  him  [White]  with  skepticism  or  had
any doubt about his purpose, because you  testified  this morning
also,  in  executive hearing, that  never  on any  occasion  had  he
given  you  any  acute reason to  be suspicious  as  far  as  patri-
(Continued  on  Page  S)
We  Still  Need  Your  Renewal to  Survive—Renew  Today
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  27,  1953
Why  Was She Silent  When  The  Story  Was  Still  Hot?
(Continued  from  Page  2)
otism  was  concerned."  (My italics.  As usual  with these  com-
mittees,  material  favorable  to the  victim  is  kept  in  executive
session—only  the  bad  is  disinterred).  But  hadn't  White  in-
sisted  that  negotiations  be kept open?
Mr.  Bell.   I  think  that  I  said  that  the  memorandums  and
the  records  show  that  he  was  trying  to  do  everything  he
could to  keep the negotiations open for  further  consideration.
Senator  Mundt.   That  is  right.
Mr.  Bell.  But  we interpreted  that  to  mean its  was part of
his duty.
At  that  point  Senator  Mundt desisted.
II
It  is  strange  that  Miss Bentley  never  told  this story in any
of  her  earlier  appearances  before  Congressional investigating
committees,  strange  that  she waited five and a  half  years  to
testify   about  it.   There  was  no  mention  of  these  currency
plates  in  her  public  "debut" July  30,  1948,  before  the  Senate
audit  and  expenditures  committee  nor  next  day  before  the
House  Un-American Activities  Committee.  Harry  White  was
still  alive  and  might  have been  questioned about  it.
A  year  earlier  the  Senate "committees on  Appropriations,
Armed  Services,  and  Banking  and  Currency  had  held  joint
hearings  on  "Occupation  Currency  Transactions"   in  which
the  story  of  these  plates  given  the  Russians  figured  promi-
nently.  (A freshman  Senator  named  Joe  McCarthy took part
in  the  hearings).  The  Senators  who sat  in  on those  hearings
might  have  wondered  about  certain   aspects  of  the   Bentley
story.
They  Got  Them  Faster  Officially
.They  might  have  wondered why  the  Russians  had  to  get
samples by  such slow and  roundabout methods when  they  had
already obtained samples directly  and  openly from  two  official
sources.  Hall  testified  in  1947 that  the  Bureau  of  Engraving
and  Printing  had  gotten  up  a  supply  of  sample  notes  before
going  "into  production  of  the  regular   run"   (p.   121,   1947
hearings,  as  cited,  80th  Congress,  1st  Session).  "When  the
Soviets asked for  specimens of  the  currency we printed," Hall
told the Senators  that year, "we sent them a specimen book .."
Hall  did  not  say  just  when  the  samples  were  given   the
Russians  but  there  are  two  other  documents  in  those  older
hearings  which  show  how  rapidly  they  got  samples  through
official  channels.   A  document  on  page  226  shows  that  at  a
meeting  on  February  1,  1944,  in  McCloy's  office  at  the   War
Department,  the  designs for  the  German  occupation  currency
were  approved  and   " a  decision  taken  to   go  ahead  without
awaiting  the  full  concurrence of the  British  and  Russians.
On  page  173 there  is  an  official  document dated  February
9,  1944, just  nine  days  later, from  Harry  D. White  to  Soviet
Ambassador  Gromyko "enclosing for  your information" photo-
static  copies  of  the   Allied  mark   occupation  currency  and
saying,  "It  would be  appreciated  if  you would cable  descrip-
tions  of  these  notes  to  your  Government in  order  to  keep  the
Government  informed  as  to  our  plans  here."
So  the  Russians got  sample  notes  made before the  regular
run  from  the  Bureau  of  Printing  and  Engraving  and  within
nine  days  they  also  were  sent  photostats  by  the  Treasury.
This  was  much  faster  than  Miss Bentley worked.
Judging  by the  1947 documents, the  Silvermasters  were not
the  only  ones  bringing  pressure  to  bear  on  White.   So  were
Molotov  and  Harriman.   On  page  151 there  is  a  cable  from
Harriman  in  Moscow  to  Secretary  of  State  Hull,  with  copy
for  "Mr.  Harry  White, Treasury  Department",  giving  a para-
phrase  of a  note from  Molotov.  In  this  note  Molotov  says  the
Soviet  government  does  not  consider  "sound"  the  objections
put  forward  by  "Messrs.  Morgenthau  and  White"  in  Wash-
ington  against   giving  the  currency  plates  to  the   Russians.
Molotov warned that unless the plates were given the  Russians
they 'would be forced  to  issue marks of their  own in  Germany.
Another  document on page  185 of  the  1947 hearings  hardly
bears  out the Bentley-Mundt picture of what White was  doing.
In this James  Clement Dunn says he has just received  another
cable  from  Harriman  saying  he  had  been  informed  by  the
Soviet  Foreign  Office  "that  the  Russian  government  was  not
prepared  to  accept as valid  the  arguments  advanced by  Secre-
tary  Morgenthau  and  Mr. White  in  their  conversations  with
the  Soviet  Ambassador  in  Washington  concerning  the   diffi-
culties  of making the  plates  available to  the  Russians."  This
document  shows  that  the  State  Department  and  the  Army,
unlike the Treasury,  favored  giving  the plates to the  Russians
because  they feared  the  effects  of separate occupation curren-
cies  (an  alternative  White  suggested  to  Gromyko,  according
to  a  document on page  184). "Mr.  Dunn",  on the  other  hand,
"said  that  it  would  have  a  very  nice  effect  upon  the  German
people  if  we all  used the  same  type  of  currency."
The  Order  Was  General  Marshall's
It  was  not  the  Treasury  but  General  Marshall  (p.  193,  of
1947  hearings)  who  finally  ordered  on April  13 that  the  Rus-
sians   be  given  plates  of  their  own.   The  British  Foreign
Office  agreed  (same)  two days later "that for  political reasons
the  Russians  should  be  given  plates."   The  Russians  were
given  not  only the plates but  the  proper  inks and a document
a  month later  (p.  201)  describes  a  stormy  conference  over  a
rather  silly  mix-up  with  a  very  stubborn   Gromyko.   "After
the  Ambassador and  his  representatives  left  the  room,"  this
says,  "the  others  present  remained  and  discussed  the  situa-
tion.   Mr.   White   was  anything   but   complimentary  to   the
Russian  delegation."  (My italics).
The  1947  records  show  that  the  Treasury  fought  a  rear-
guard  action  against  giving  separate  plates  to  the   Russians.
While  Miss  Bentley  spoke  glibly  of  counterfeiting,   Mr.  Hall,
the  head  of  the  Bureau  of  Printing  and  Engraving,  testified
in  1947  and  again  this  year  that  one  reason  they   objected
was  that  "it  would be  extremely  difficult  for  the  Russians  to
print  a note to be identical  to the  one we were printing"  (p. 3
Mundt  hearings)   and  it  was  feared  that  differences  in  ap-
pearance  would undermine  faith  in  the  currency.
War  Department  testimony  in  1947 was  to  the  effect  that
the  U.  S.  and  Britain  wanted  the  Soviet  government  to  use
the  same  Allied  military  occupation  marks  "as  part  of  the
plan  to  treat  Germany  as  an  economic  whole.   To  agree  to
the  Russians  using  a  different  currency  would  have  consti-
tuted  an  agreement  in  advance," Assistant  Secretary  of  War
Howard  C.  Petersen  explained   (p.  15,  1947  hearings),  "to
what  unfortunately  actually  happened—the  division   of   Ger-
many into four airtight compartments."  The Russians  agreed,
but  insisted  that they  he allowed  to print from  plates of their
own.
As  General  Hilldring  explained  (p.  119)  to  the  joint  com-
mittees  in  1947,  "the  Russians  said  to  us:  'We  agree  to  use
your  currency,  but  we cannot  trust  you to print  it  and to fly
it  halfway  around  the  world to  Moscow in  time  for  us to  get
it  out to  Zukov  and  his troops.'  When they  said  that, a  very
plausible  and  reasonable  case  was made by the  Russians."
Ill
In  his  appearance  November  17  as  backstop  to  Attorney
General  Brownell  before  the  Jenner  committee,  FBI  Director
J.   Edgar   Hoover  said  "All   information   furnished   by  Miss
Bentley,  which  was  susceptible  to  check,  has  proved  to  be
correct."   This  story   of  White  and  the   German   currency
plates  was  one of the  few stories Miss Bentley  told  which  was
"susceptible  to check."  Either  it  was held  back  from  the  FBI
(Continued  on  Page  4)
1  3
Only   Three  Weeks  to  Expiration  Date—Use  The  Blank  on Page  4
1  9  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  87,  18SS
Warming  Over An  Old  Fulton  Lewis  Bedtime   Story
(Continued  from  Page  S)
by   Miss  Bentley,  or   the   story—when   checked—proved   so
weak  that  she was  advised  not  to  relate  it  at  her  public  ap-
pearances  in  1948  before  the  Senate  and  House  committees.
If  this  was  one  of  the  stories  she  told  the  1947  grand jury
investigation,  the  currency  story  may  be  another  factor  in
explaining why that grand jury after  months of  deliberations
failed  to  indict  a  single  person  she named.
White  Was  Not  A Target  In  1947
There  is  another  angle  of this  story  which  cast  doubt upon
it.  The German currency  plate  story  first  broke  in  1947  as  a
sensational  broadcast  by Fulton  Lewis, Jr.   It  was this which
led  to  the  investigation   that  year.   The  exaggerations  in-
spired  by  the  Fulton  Lewis  broadcast  were  fantastic.   Thus
one  Congressman  (White was not a target  at  that time)  told
the  House  in  June  of  that  year  that  Morgenthau  "gave  to
Russia  American  printing  presses  in  order  that  they  might
print  invasion  dollars  to  be  redeemed  by  this  country  with
gold  at  $36 an  ounce.  All that  Russia  has  to  do today  is  to
take a  little  paper  and  print  the  money  and  then  we pay  in
gold." Rich said we had already paid Russia some $300,000,000
to  $400,000,000  in this  way.  Knowland was telling  the  Senate
at  about the  same time of reports that  the  United  States had
had  to  redeem  $380,000,000  in  occupation  currency  spent  in
Germany  by  Russian  troops!
Mundt  brought  up  the  same  figure  in  his  hearings  but  a
representative  of  the   Army  Comptroller's    Office   explained,
"That  $380,000,000, as I  recall,  Senator,  represented  the total
amount  of  excess  currency  that  we  had  in  Germany  and
Japan.   We had  about  $75 million worth of excess  currency  in
Japan,  and the  2 figures, the  225 plus the  75, plus a few more
incidentals,  made  up  that  figure."
Black  Market Money
What  is  this  "excess  currency"?  For  many  months  after
the  war  ended,  the  U.  S.  unlike  any  other  occupation  power
East  or  West,  allowed  its  soldiers  to  trade  local  occupation
currency  for  dollars  with  no limitation.  This was  a  boon  for
the  black  marketeers.   A  soldier  could  sell  a  carton  of  cigar-
ettes  for  marks  or  yens  at  ten  to  a  hundred  times  what  he
paid  for  it  in. an  Army  PX,  then  bring  in  his  marks  or  yen
and   exchange  them  for   dollars  to  be  shipped   home.   The
"excess"  measures  the  extent  of  these  practices.  This means
that  the  Army  was  called upon  to  redeem some $380,000,000
more  in  marks or  yen than  the  entire  appropriation  given  it
by   Congress   for   German  and   Japanese   occupation   costs.
Soldiers had made profits large enough to equal their  salaries,
living  expenses  and  other  occupation  costs  plus  $380,000,000.
The  $380,000,000  was  paid  by  the  Treasury.
Some  of  this  filtered  in  from  the  Russian  zone, but  not  the
way  Mundt  pictured  it.   No Russian  could  collect  dollars  for
his  occupation  marks.   Russian  soldiers,  paid  in  marks  they
could  not  exchange  for   remittance   home  as  rubles,   found
themselves  with  huge quantities  of cash  in a country denuded
of  goods.  They  bought  wrist  watches  and  other  luxuries   at
fantastic   prices   from   American   soldiers,   who   promptly
changed  their profits into dollars  and  sent them  home.  It  was
in  this way that  some Russian  occupation marks  ended  up  in
the  Treasury.
The  Same Thing Happened  In  Japan
Actually "Russian" marks were  a small part of the  picture.
The  same  thing  happened  in  Japan,  where  there  were  no
Russians—and,  again,  earlier  in  Italy  and  Belgium,  where
local  currencies  were  involved.   Everywhere  the  American
Army went, it  showed remarkable  entrepeneurial  ability. Once
the fighting was over, the "Yankee traders" got down to  busi-
ness.  The Army  never  made its  records  public, but  Treasury
investigators  are  said  to  have  found  that  one  General  made
more  than  $20,000,000  and  that  there  were  100 new  million-
aires  in the  occupation  forces.   They  "had  it  so good"  that  at
one  time the  Army owed  cable  companies a  million dollars  for
flowers cabled  home  to  mother  and  girl  friend  by  exuberant
soldiers  spending  surplus  marks.
The  sour  joke  which  tops this  story  is  that  if  the  volumi-
nous  1947  hearings  are  read  carefully  it  will  be  seen  that
it  was the  Treasury,  and  particularly  its  monetary  research
division,  with  White,  Coe and  Glasser,  which  began  early  to
campaign  for  a  system  of  scrip  payments  which  would  end
the  black  marketing,  and  the  drain  on  the  Treasury.   This
was  the  system  finally  adopted  by  the  Army  late  in 1946.
(The    same  documents  show  Eisenhower  long   opposed   the
change).  This made it  impossible  to run  a  few dollars  into  a
small fortune in marks and then  change the  marks  for  dollars
at  Treasury expense.  It  also  made it  impossible any longer  to
sell  the  Russians  $50 wrist  watches  for   $200  in  occupation
marks.   It  was  White  and  White's  associates—the  hounded
men  of  1953—who  put  a  stop  to  the  very  practices  by which
the  Russians  were  supposed  to  be  cashing  in  on  the  U.  S.
Treasury.  This is the  real  story  behind the  Bentley  testimony
and  the  newest  G.O.P.  stinkbomb.
let  Us Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  to  A  Friend—Or,  Better  Yet,  Start  A  Gift  Sub With  This  Issue
Don't  Rue  It,  Do   If.
PLEASE  RENEW NOW
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly, 301 E.  Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name     —————————
:
________—————————
Street    ____________________________
City______:______  Zone..__  State..,.____
Enter  this  gift  sub   for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Name   ________________
:
———————-
Street     _————————————————————:—————
City____________  Zone____  State_____
12-27-53
I.  F. Stone'5 Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED