I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953dec21.pdf

============================================================

Grass  Roots  Report;  The  1,001  Other  "Radtdovich"  Cases,  See Pages  2 & 3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   I,  NUMBER 46DECEMBER  21,1953WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
Dulles As Germany's  (Wobbly) Trojan  Horse
The  Dulles warning  to  France  went  over  big  here with  the
"go  it  alone"  crowd;  "go  it  alone"  means  go  it  alone  with
Germany  and  Japan.   Dulles  claims  to  be  Francophile,   but
even  Dulles's  hatred  for  Communism  and  Hitler's  pact  with
the   Soviet  Union   did  not   keep  him  from   opposing   aid   to
Britain  and France  in  1939 and  1940.  Union  of  Germany  and
France  as he  advocates it  is  an  old  pan-German  and  Hitlerite
conception  (see pages  104  and  105  of  George  Seldes's  fascinat-
ing  new  autobiography,   "Tell  the  Truth   and  Run").    It
means  domination  of  France  and  West  Europe  by  the  Reich.
Dulles  has  alarmed  his  friends,   the  Germans,  who  fear  a
new    "encirclement"    via   another   Franco-Russian   entente.
Moscow  and  Warsaw  have  been  helped  in  their  campaign  to
woo  the  French.   This  is  one  in  a  series  of  blunders  which
reflect  Dulles's  animosity  to  the  British  and  French,  and  the
arrogance  behind  his  sanctimonious  phrases.    The  British  are
annoyed  over  the  way  he  has  interfered  in  Iran  and  Egypt,
and  blocked  their  adhesion to  the  Anzus pact  with  their  own
Pacific   dominions.   The   Catholic  M.R.P.,  chief  mainstay  of
Atlantic  Pact  policy  in  France,  would  like  to  negotiate  an end
of  the  Indo-Chinese  war  but  are  frustrated   by  an  American
veto.   While  Italy  wants  Trieste  as  the  price  of  adhesion  to
the  EDC,  the  Soviet  zone  has  elected  a  Yugoslav  as  secretary
of  the  Danube   Commission.  "Containment"  is  cracking   up.
The   threat  of   French   isolation   was  undercut   by   Dulles
himself   and  next  day  by  Defense  Secretary   Wilson.   What
happens  to  that  "agonizing  reappraisal"  when  Dulles  said  at
Paris  that  the  failure  to  approve the EDC  would  not  upset  the
Atlantic  Pact?  And  Wilson  next  day,  without  making  ratifi-
cation  of  EDC  a  condition,  spoke  of  giving  atomic  weapons
to  France  and  other  NATO  members?   Geography  is  in  the
way  of  an  ultimatum.   France  is  a  necessary  bridgehead   for
an   American  invasion   of   Europe.    As  an  Atlantic   power,
America  must  inevitably  defend  the  other  shore  of  the  Atlan-
tic  against  attack  whether  from  Germany  or  Russia.   France
can  always  lock  the  Reich  in  a military  straitjacket   by  a  new
Eastern  Pact.  If  France  has  the  moral  courage,  she  can  make
both  Washington  and  Moscow  dance to  her  tune.
European  Prototype  of Ike's  Atom  Plan
The  U.  S.  is  in  danger  of   falling   behind  in  the  race  to
develop  the  peacetime  uses  of  atomic  energy.   France  in  June
of  last  year  and  Britain  last  December  launched  atomic  power
programs.   Both  countries  are  also participants  in  an  organiza-
tion  of  which little  has been heard in  this country—the  Euro-
pean  Organization   for  Nuclear  Research  established  in  May
of  1952  to  study  the non-military  uses of  the  atom.  The  other
governments  participating   are  Belgium,  Denmark,   Western
Germany,  Greece,  Italy,  the  Netherlands,  Yugoslavia,  Norway,
Sweden,  and  Switzerland.   A  $30,000,000  laboratory  is  being
erected   in   Geneva,  where  construction   was  approved  in  a
referendum  over  Communist  opposition  after  safeguards  were
adopted  permitting  the   Swiss  to  shut  the  project   down  in
event  of  war.   Three  Soviet  satellites,  Czechoslovakia,   Hun-
gary  and  Poland,  were  invited  to  participate  originally  but
turned  the  offer  down.   There  are  some  in  Washington  who
regard  the  Eisenhower  atomic  proposal  as  an  effort   to  take
this  purely  European  project  over,  as  the  Brussels  pact  was
taken  over  in  the  Atlantic  Pact.
The  new  Eisenhower  plan  finds  favor  in  Congressional   cir-
cles  only  as  a  kind  of  atomic  "Marshall  Plan"  enabling   the
U.  S.  to  control   West  European  research  and   development.
Both  the  peacetime  development  program  and  the  new   pro-
posal  to  make  atomic  weapons  available  to  NATO  will  pro-
voke  a strong  demand  in  Congress  for  an  international  agency
to   coordinate  security   safeguards   for   all  the   participating
countries.  The  FBI,  long  jealous  of  the  CIA  and  the  OSS, has
already  established  a  beachhead on  this  assignment  with  the
White  House  announcement  last  week  that  the  FBI  had  been
formally  assigned  the  task  of  investigating   all  Atomic  Energy
Act  violations,  including  illegal  export  of  materials.   Western
Europe  will  be  under  strong  pressure  to  adopt  "American"
standards of  security  as condition  for  any change in  the  Atomic
Energy  Act.
That  Korean  Truce  Talk  "Insult"
The  Chinese Communists charge that  the American  military
connived   in   the   mass  breakout  of   POW's  may  have  been
false,  but   there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  UN   command
looked  with  benevolent eye on  South Korean arrangements  for
this   truce   violation.   Robert   Sherrod,  writing   "The   Inside
Story  of  the  Korean Truce" from  Seoul  (and therefore  subject
to  censorship)  for  the  Saturday  Evening  Post   (October   17)
said  that  last  March  "our  Far  East  Command  made  a daring
proposal  of  its  own—one  which  was  never  published.   Why
1   8
not  turn  loose  the  46,000  anti-Communist  prisoners,  first  the
North  Koreans,  then  the  Chinese?  Wouldn't   that   automat-
ically   solve  the   prisoner  question?"    Sherrod  wrote,   "Such
cold  war  tactics  gave  Washington  cold  feet.   The  answer  to
Tokyo  was  No."   But  the  first  part  of  this  "daring  proposal"
of  the  Far  East  Command  was  carried out  by  Syngman Rhee.
The   guard   was  not   stiffened   to  prevent   further  breakouts
until  there  were  protests  to  Washington  from   allied  capitals,
and  from  Washington to  Tokyo.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December SI, 1953
The  Hounded  Champions  of The  Alien  Meet  in  Chicago . . .
Chicago—Walsh's  Hall  at   1014  Noble  Street  might  have
been  the  scene  of  the  Hunky  wedding  in  Upton  Sinclair's
Jungle.   The  Hall  lies  in  a  Polish  area,  one  of  those  incom-
parably  dreary  Chicago working class  districts  which  sprawl
out  across  the  bare  plain,  miles  away  from  the  opulence of
Lake  front  and  Loop.  The building is  a  three-story  walk-up,
on  the  top floor of which  is  the  "hall," a barn  of a  place, with
a  stage  at   one  end  and  a  small,  faintly   and   grotesquely
Moorish  balcony  at  the  other.   High  columns  intended  to  be
ornamental   line  the  wall  on  either  side;  they  appear  to  be
ordinary  cast  iron  waterpipe  stood  on  end  by  some  plumber
aspiring  in  his  spare  time  to  architecture.  The windows  are
long  and  narrow.   Through  them,   even  under   a   cloudless
sunny  sky,  the  wintry  Chicago   landscape   managed  to  look
'gray  and  bleak—row  on  row  of  ill-matched  dirty  brick  and
unpainted   facades   with  gaps'of   dismal  backyard  in  which
there  stood  a  few forlorn  trees.
The  hall  was  freshly  hung  with  blue  and  white  banners—
"The  Bill of Rights  Belongs to All,"  "Stop  Police State Terror
Against  Foreign   Born  Americans,"  "Public  Hearings  on  the
Lehman-Celler  Bill."  On the  stage,  against  the  faded  green
trees  of  what  appeared  to  be  a  set  left  over  from  some  for-
gotten  performance  of  "As  You  Like  It,"   a  big. benevolent
bear  of a  woman, six feet  tall  with  gray  hair,  grandmotherly
expression,   and   one  of  those  round  unmistakable   Russian
Jewish   faces,   was   reading   aloud   Elsenhower's   campaign
pledge  to  revise  the  McCarran-Walter  Act.   The  woman  was
Pearl  Hart,  a  Chicago  lawyer  famous  throughout  the  Mid-
west for  a  lifetime  of devotion to the  least lucrative  and  most
oppressed  kind  of  clients.
This  was  the  opening  session  of  a  National  Conference  to
Repeal  the  Walter-McCarran  Law  and  Defend  Its   Victims,
sponsored  by  the  American  Committee  for  the  Protection  of
the  Foreign  Born,  one of  the  last  functioning  Popular  Front
organizations.
A  Hounded Handful
At  that  early  morning  hour  the   seats   beside  the   long
wooden  tables  set  up  in  the  hall  were  but  half  filled.  That
such  a  meeting  should  be  held  at   all  was  something  of  a
miracle.   The  American  Committee for  the  Protection  of  the
Foreign  Born  is  on  the  Attorney  General's  list.   It  is  now
involved   in   proceedings   before   the   Subversive    Activities
Control  Board  to  compel the  Committee's  registration  under
•the  McCarran  Act  as  a  Communist  front  organization.    Its
.devoted  executive  secretary,  Abner  Green,  a  tall,  lean  man
with  the  kind  of  long  cavernous  face  Goya  liked  to  paint,
served  six  months  in  jail  after   refusing  to  hand  over  the
organization's  records  to  a  Federal  grand  jury  in July,   1951.
The   Secretary   of   the   local   Los  Angeles  committee,   Rose
Chernin,  was  unable  to .attend  because  she  is  under  bond  in
denaturalization  proceedings.   The  Secretary  of  the  Michigan
committee,  Saul  Grossman, who was  present  in  Chicago, goes
on  trial  in  Washington  this  week  for  contempt  of  Congress
in  refusing  to  hand  his  records  over  to  the  House Un-Amer-
ican  Activities  Committee.
Despite  this,  about  300  delegates  from  16  States  had   ar-
rived,  some from  as  far  as  Seattle  and  Los Angeles,  and 150
more  were  to.follow.   They  seemed,  considering  the  circum-
stances,  an  extraordinarily  cheerful  lot.   But  looking at  them
during  the  day  one  was  fascinated  by  several   observations.
The  first  was that  the  audience  was  a  forest  of  gray  heads,
almost  entirely  made  up  of  elderly  folk—those  who  appeared
young in that gathering were, when one looked  at  them  more
closely  seen  to  be middle aged.   This  is  unfortunately  true of
most  radical  meetings in  America  nowadays;  it  is  as  if  those
with  their  lives  still  ahead  of  them  are  too cautious  or  cowed
to  appear  at  such  affairs.   What  struck  one next  about  the
gathering  was  the  absence  of  foreign  accents—with  few  ex-
In  the  Footsteps  of  the  Holy  Office
"One  of the  conditions  [for  escaping  the  stake]  was
that of stating all they knew of other  heretics  and  apos-
tates,  which  proved  an  exceedingly  fruitful   source  of
information  aa, under the general  terror, there  was little
hesitation  in  denouncing not  only friends  and  acquaint-
ances,  but  the  nearest   arid  dearest   kindred—parents
and  children,  and  brothers  and  sisters."
—Lea's  Spanish  Inquisition,  Vol.  1,  p.  165
ceptions  one  heard  American  speech  indistinguishable  from
that  of  the  native  born.  Assimilation  has  done  its  work  and
relatively  few new immigrants are  coming in.  One also began
to  notice  that  though  the  deportation   drive  hits  the  labor
unions  hard,  there  were  no  labor  union  representatives  pres-
ent,  other  than  men from  a few  so-called "progressive" locals.
The  Left  labor  leaders  were  conspicuous by  their  absence;
the  Taft-Hartley  oath  made their  appearance at  the  meeting
of  a  blacklisted  organization  too  hazardous.
The  Only  Organization  of  Its  Kind
Not  so  many  weeks  ago  the  case  of  an  Air  Force   officer
named  Radulovich attracted  national  attention.  He was  about
to  be  blacklisted  as  a  security  rick  because  his  father   and
sister were  supposed to have Communist views or connections.
Edward  Murrow put  the  case  into  a  brilliant  TV  show  and
the  Secretary   for  Air  finally  cleared  Radulovich.   But  this
comparative handful  of  elderly  folk  in  Chicago were  fighting
a  last  ditch battle  for  a  thousand and  one other  Raduloviches
arrested—as  the  elder  Radulovich may  be—for   deportation.
This  Committee, just  21 years  old, is  the  only  one of  its  kind.
On  the  eve  of  the  conference, the  American  Committee for
the  Protection  of  the  Foreign  Born  was  given  the  treatment.
The  local  Hearst  paper  published  a  smear  attack  and  tele-
phoned   the   Committee's   various   sponsors   and   scheduled
speakers  in  an   effort   to  frighten  them  off.  The  campaign
failed.   Among those  who  spoke  at  the  banquet  in  that  same
hall  that  night  were  Professor  Louise  Pettibone  Smith,   Pro-
fessor  Emeritus  of  Biblical  History  at  Wellesley;  Professor
Robert  Morss  Lovett,  and  Professor  Anton  J.  Carlson,  the
University  of  Chicago's   famous  physiologist,  who  had   not
intended  to  speak  but  changed  his  mind  after   a  call   from
the  Hearst  press.   The  sight  of  these  three  aged  academic
Gibraltars  of  liberalism  was  inspiring,  but  again  it  was  sad
to  note  that  the  distinguished   speakers—like  the  audience—
were  elderly.
Sick  and  Elderly  Victims
An   amazingly  large   proportion  of  the   victims,   too,   are
elderly.   In  his  comprehensive report,  Abner  Green  pointed
out  that  of  300 non-citizens  arrested  in  deportation  proceed-
ings,  almost  one-third—93  in  all—are  over  the  age  of  60  and
have  lived  in  this  country  an  average  of  40 to  50 years.   The
kind  of  sick  and  aged  folk  being  hauled  out  of  retirement   for
deportation  as  a  political  menace to  this  country  would  be
ludicrous  if  it  did  not  entail  so much  tragedy.   Two  cardiac
patients,  Refugio  Roman  Martinez  and  Norman  Tallentire,
died  of  heart  attacks  in  deportation  proceedings.  The  econo-
mist  and  writer,  Lewis  Corey,  long  an  anti-Communist,  died
September  16  at  the  age  of  61  in  the  midst  of   deportation
proceedings  begun  against  him because  he  was  a  Communist
30  years  ago.   In  California,  a  Mrs.  Mary  Baumert  of  Elsi-
nore,  now 76 years  old, was  arrested  last  month  for  deporta-
tion  although  she  had  lived  here  51 years.  In  Los Angeles on
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  SI,  1958
. A  First-Hand  Full Report  from  A  Lonely  Battlefront
November  4, Mr.  and  Mrs. Lars  Berg,  69 and  67 respectively,
were  locked  up  on  Terminal  Island  for  deportation  to  their
native   Sweden;  they   have  been  American  residents   since
1904.  One Finn  arrested  for  deportation  has  lived  here  since
he  was  3 months old!
As  in  the  days  of  the  Inquisition,  the  Immigration   and
Naturalization  Service  and  the  FBI  are  engaged  in  using
fear  to  recruit  informers,  even  informers  against  their own
kin.  A striking  case  was  that  of  Francesco  Costa  of Roches-
ter,  N.  Y., arrested  for  deportation  to  Italy  at  the  age  of  83
because  he  refused  to  provide  information   to  the   Justice
Department that  could  be used to  deport  his  son,  Leonard,  to
Italy.  A triple  squeeze play was  brought to  bear  on Clarence
Hathaway,  once  editor  of  the   Daily  Worker.  When  he  de-
clined  to  be  used  as  an  informer,  denaturalization   proceed-
ings   were  brought   against   his   wife,.  Vera.    Her   brother,
William  Sanders,  65,  an  artist  who  had  never  engaged  in
politics,  was  himself  arrested  after  he  refused  to  give  testi-
mony  against  his  sister.   Sophie  Gerson,  wife  of  Simon  W.
Gerson,  one  of  those  acquitted  in  the  second  Smith  Act  trial
of  New  York  Communist  leaders,  was  arrested  for   denatu-
ralization  to  punish her husband.
The  Savage  Unfairness  of  the  Left   Itself
By  a  political  Freudian  slip,  no  mention  was  made at  the
conference  of  one of  the  worst  cases  of this kind.  In  the  Fall
of  1952, Earl  Browder and his wife were indicted for  perjury
in  her  original  immigration  proceedings  and  in  February  of
this  year  Mrs.  Browder was  arrested  for  deportation.   These
punitive actions  followed  a warning  from  Bella  Dodd to  Earl
Browder  (see this  Weekly,  No. 7, March 7,  1953)  that  he  had
better   show   some   sign   of  "cooperation."    Though  the   ex-
Communist leader  in lonely poverty  has withstood  the  tempta-
tions  of  the  rewards  which  would  be  his  were  he  to  sell  his
"memoirs" to  the  FBI  and the  magazines, little  consideration
has  been  shown him.  This  reflects the  savage  unfairness  with
which  the  Left  treats  its  heretics,  however  honorably  these
heretics behave.
The  deportations  drive  cuts   across   every  basic  liberty.
Fifteen  editors  associated  with  the  radical  and  foreign  lan-
guage  press have been arrested for  deportation  or  denaturali-
zation,  including  Cedric  Belfrage  of  The  National  Guardian,
Al   Richman   of  the   West   Coast  Peoples   World,   and   John
Steuben  of  "The  March   of  Labor."   The  foreign   language
editors  arrested   are  elderly  folk  editing  papers  which  are
dying  out  as  the  process  of  assimilation  steadily  cuts  into
the  number  of Americans who still  read  the  language  of  "the
old  country."   Almost  one-third  of those  arrested  for  deporta-
tion   are  trade   union  members  or   officials.   Ever  since   the
Bridges  cases  began  (the  government shamelessly is  about  to
launch  a  fourth  try),  the  use  of  deportation  as  a  weapon
against  labor  militants  has  been  overt  and  obvious.   Cases
are  pending  against  James  Matles  and  James  Lustig  of  the
United  Electrical  Workers  and  against  the  wife  of William
Senter,  of  St.  Louis,  another  U.E.  official,  now  up  on  Smith
Act  charges.
The  Nowak  Case
One  of  the  leading  victims  of  the  current   drive,  Stanley
Nowak, was  present  in  Chicago.  After  ten  years  as  a  Demo-
cratic  member  of  the  Michigan  State  Legislature,  part  of
this  time  as  floor  leader,  he  is  facing  denaturalization  pro-
ceedings.   This  Polish  born  legislator  played  a  role  in  the
organization  of  the  automobile industry  and  was  first  elected
to the  legislature  in  1938  from  the  West  Side area  of  Detroit,
a  Ford  worker  constituency.   Similar  charges  ten  years  ago
("communist   and   anarchist   sympathies")    were   dismissed
with  an  apology  by  then  Attorney  General  Biddle  but  have
been  revived  under the  McCarran-Walter  Act.
The  most  numerous  and  widespread  abuses  have  occurred
in  the  treatment  of  Mexican-Americans.  Reports  to  the  con-
ference  from  Los  Angeles  pictured  terror  and  lawlessness—
the  use  of  roadblocks  and  sudden'raids  on  areas  in  which
persons  of  Mexican  origin  live,  the  invasion  of  their  homes
without  warrants,  the  exile  to  Mexico of  native  born  Amer-
icans  of  Mexican parentage.  The  Mexican-American commu-
nity  is kept  steadily  "churned  up" to maintain  it  as a  source
of  cheap  labor  in  constant  flux.  Green  reported  that  during
the  first  six  months  of  1953  more than  483,000 persons  were
deported  to  Mexico—while  almost  half  a  million  others  were
being  brought  in for  low paid  agricultural work.
The  government  is  using  "supervisory  parole"  to  harass
and  intimidate  radicals  who  cannot  be  deported  because  no
other  country  will  accept  them.   Three  Communist  leaders
convicted  under  the  Smith  Act,  Alexander  Bittelman,  Betty
Gannett  and  Claudia Jones,  out  on bail  pending  appeal,  were
summoned  to  Ellis  Island  recently.  They were  told  that  they
were  being  put  under  supervisory  parole,  must  report  once a
week,  submit  to  physical  and  psychiatric  examination,  aban-
don  all  political  activity  and  give  information   under  oath  as
to  their  associations  and activities.  They  are  challenging  the
order  in  the  courts.
Snaking  Up to  St.  Patrick
Last  March 17 Attorney  General  Brownell  made a  particu-
larly  vulgar  St. Patrick's  Day  speech to  the  Friendly  Sons of
St.  Patrick—their  parents  once  the  target  of  similar  anti
alien  hysteria.  In  this he announced that  10,000 citizens  were
being  investigated  for  denaturalization  and  12,000  aliens  for
deportation   as  "subversives."   Action  on  this   scale  would
dwarf  the  notorious  deportation  raids  of  the  early  twenties.
The  suffering   in  terms  of  broken  families  and   disrupted
lives  is beyond the  most  sympathetic  imagination.   As serious
is the  moral  degradation  imposed by  spreading  terror.  People
are  afraid  to  look  lest  they  be  tempted  to  help,  and  bring
down   suspicion  on  themselves.   This   is   how  good  folk   in
Germany  walked  hurriedly by  and  shut  their  ears  discreetly
to  tell-tale  screams.   The  American  Committee  for  the  Pro-
tection  of  the  Foreign   Born  is  fighting  to  keep  America's
conscience  alive.
WHAT   BETTER  SURPRISE  FOR THE  SAGGING   STOCKING  -
Of  a friend  with  sagging  spirits  than  a  gift  subscription  to  our little weekly?  A weekly  reminder  that the world  has  not yet
come  to  an  end, that  free  journalism  is still  possible  in  America,  that  there  is  resistance,  that  Fascism  has  not  yet  arrived—
and  may not  come at  all  if  we can hang  on fighting  until  the  old  American  spirit  reawakens.    Renew  TODAY  and  give  a
gift  subscription  to  a  friend  if  you  can.   This  week's  special  report  from  Chicago  is a  sample  of  the  kind  of  job  no  other
publication  is doing.   Extra  copies  are  available.  Merry  Christmas,  and  be  of  good  cheer.
1   8  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone't  Weekly,  December tl,  1653
JEN  N INGS   PERRY'S    PAGE
Even  Fear Won't Work  in  a World  Scared  Stiff
The  next  bomb  we   loose  at  Eniwetok,  they  tell  us,  well
may  obliterate  Eniwetok.   Secretary  Dulles  ought  to  go  first
to  warn  the  gooney  birds.   Not  that  the  birds  would  be likely
to  thank  him  with  anything  but  indignation.   They  have  no
place  to  go.  But  we owe them  the same  chance  we  have  given
the  Europeans  to  cooperate  or  perish  unwept;  and  in  his  own
feeling  Mr.  Dulles  would  be  prepared  for  the  rebuff.
He  should  have  been  prepared when  he went  to  Paris to  put
the  heat  on  the  Europeans,  for  it  is not  necessary  nowadays to
go  far  from  home  to  find  out  that  living  things  have  run  just
about  as  far  as  they  will  go.   Had  he  waited  only  one  more
day  in  Washington  he would  have  had an illuminating preview
of  the kind of  response his threat was fated  to evoke over there.
As  it  was,  he  and  Val  Peterson  had  the  same  row  to  hoe  at
the  same  time:  while  Dulles  was  laying  it  down  to  the  min-
istries  over  there  the  Civil  Defense  Administrator  was  laying
it  down  to  the  American  mayors.  The  alarm  and notice  from
the  government   at  Washington  were  the  same.   "Stir   your-
selves," Dulles  told  the  Europeans, "or be  responsible for  your
own  doom."    "Your  cities  are  sitting  ducks,"  Peterson  told
the   mayors.  "It's up  to  you."    The   alarm  fell   as  flat,  the
resentment  flared  as promptly  in  one  case  as  in  the  other.
Perhaps  the  reaction at  home would have made  no  difference
in  our  course  abroad.   However   had  Mr.  Dulles  waited,  he
would  at  least  have  known  what  to  expect  la  has,  since  any-
body  could  have  foreseen  that  a proposition—a  threat—which
so  signally  failed   to   impress  even  the  astute  and  provident
heads of  our own  centers  of  population  would  not  be convinc-
ing  to  the  less  enlightened  leaders  of  lesser  breeds  across  the
seas.   M.  Bidault  might  be  as  ready  to  make sacrifices  for   the
security  of  France as is  Mayor  Clark  for  the  security  of  Phila-
delphia;  but  when  Mayor  Clark  concedes that  American cities
will  not  strain  themselves  to  organize  and  support  civil  de-
fense,  it  hardly  can be  surprising  that  M. Bidault  and many  of
his  countrymen  are reluctant  to  accept  the  rearming of  Ger-
many  as vital  to  their defense.
"  The  question remains  of  why   on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic
the  fearful  picture  our  government   paints  does  not  electrify
the  people;  and  the  answer  lies,  I  suspect,  both  in  the  out-size
of  the  picture  and  the  inconsistency   of  its  details.   One  day
our  President  describes,  in  tons  of  TNT  "equivalent," the new
weapons  poised  to  destroy  civilization;  the  next  our  Secretary
of  State  brusquely  admonishes  the  French   to  compose   their
differences  with  the  Germans,  and  ratify  the  EDC  pact,  on
pain  of  being  cast  loose  to  "commit  suicide  alone."  The  logical
French   immediately  ask  why  with  something   really  big  like
global  suicide  in  the  wind  the  United   States  does  not   make
the  same  all-out  effort  to  compose  its  differences  with  the
Russians  that  we urge  upon  them  with  regard  to  their  enemy?
We  tell  them  shortly   to  put   aside  an  ancient  rivalry  and
"trust  Adenauer."  The  French  reply  that  it  is  the  East-West
rivalry  which  menaces  all  existence,  not  just  the  existence  of
two  nations—and  why  don't  we look  for  a little  good  faith  in
Malenkov?
The  particular anxieties are  engulfed   in  the  overriding  anx-
iety.   The  American  mayors have  heard  over  and  over  of   the
new  bombs  that  can  wipe  out  whole  cities  and  the  country-
sides  around  them,  that  "the  only  way  to  win  the  next  war  is
to  prevent it."  When  they  are called upon  to  raise  the  funds
with   which   to   build   defenses   for   their  citizens,  they  ask
what  defenses?  and  what  hole  they  could  find  the  means  to
dig  that  would  save  their  city   iri  the. event  the  city  should
have  time  to  reach  the hole?
Mr.  Dulles  pointedly  hints  to  the  Europeans  that  without
better  cooperation  the  American  army  may  withdraw;  Mr.
Peterson  informs  our  cities,  now   "in  the  front   line,"  that
unless  they  fend  for  themselves federal  funds  and  the  armed
forces  will  be  inadequate  to  preserve  them.   The  free  world
friends  and  the  local  magistrates  seem  inclined  to  the  view
that  the  "threat"  Washington  dwells  upon  already  is  too  big
for  them.
The  evidence is  that  even  one  more  atomic  object   lesson  at
Eniwetok  would  be  supererogatory.
Don't  Rue  It,  Do  It.
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301  E. Capitol,  Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name               .————————————————————————
Street     _——————————————————————————
City____________  Zone-__  State_....._~~~.
Enter  thU  gift  sub   for  $4 'more  (money  enclosed):
^CTo)  Name    ————;——————————————————
Street     ——————————————————————————
City_____________  Zone___  State______
12-21-63
I.  F. Stone'J  Weekly
Room  20$
301  E. Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED