I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953apr25.pdf

============================================================

Inside  Story.  The  Atomic  Power  Grab,  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I   NUMBER   15
APRIL  25,  1953
s       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Olive  Branch—or  The  Same  Big  Stick?
The  tone  of  the  President's  address  to  the  newspaper
editors  was  moderate  and  idealistic;   there  were  passages  in
which  one might  have believed  it  was Henry  Wallace  talking,
But when Elsenhower came to the terms on which he  proposed
to  make  peace,  the  olive  branch proved  a  masquerade for  the
same  big  stick  waved  so  often  by  Truman.
Eisenhower  did  not  insist  as  a  condition  for  peace  that  a
new  government  be  installed  in  Moscow,  but  that  is  about
the  only  demand  he  did  not  make.  There  must  be  peace  in
Korea, of  course  on  our  terms;  the  Indo-Chinese  and  Malayan
revolts  are  to  be shut off,  as one shuts off a spigot; an Austrian
treaty  is  to  be  signed  and  the  Red  Army  withdrawn  from
Central  Europe;  Germany  is  to  be  united  but  remain  part
of  a Western  alliance;  and the  Russians are to  accept American
disarmament  and  atomic control  proposals  "made  firmly  effec-
tive  by  stringent  UN   control   and  inspection."   Eisenhower
asked  whether  the  Russians  were  prepared   to  accept  these
conditions  and  added,  "If  not—where  then  is  the   concrete
evidence  of  the  Soviet  Union's  concern  for  peace?"  On  this
basis  the  Soviets  can  only  demonstrate  a  sincere  desire   for
peace  by  an  unconditional  surrender  to  American  terms.
Amid  the  thunderous and dutiful  claque  (the  American
press  has  grown  almost  as  unanimous  as  the  Russian),  few
questioning  voices  could  be  heard.  Senator  Green  of  Rhode
Island  wondered  sensibly but  forlornly  whether  it  was not  "a
tactical  error  to  lay down  the  conditions  we  will  agree  to  in
seeking  peace  . . . The naming of conditions  complicates  the
problem  of  negotiations." The  Chicago  Tribune  and  Washing-
ton  Times-Herald  asked, "By setting  terms  which  to  the  Rus-
sians  must  seem  not  much  different   from  the   10  points  by
which  Secretary  Hull  goaded  Japan  into  war, has  he  (Eisen-
hower)   closed  the  door  to  more  limited   achievements,  par-
ticularly  to  an  armistice  in  Korea?"  The  follow  up  speech  by
Dulles made the  program  seem  all the more  like an ultimatum.
Where  Eisenhower  had  been  tactfully  silent  about  Formosa,
Dulles  made  it  clear  that  we  intend  to  keep  refueling  the
Chinese  civil  war  while  asking  the  Communists  to  call  off the
lesser  civil  conflicts  in  Korea, Indo-China  and  Malaya. Dulles's
horticulture  had  produced  an  olive  branch  with  thorns.
The   strategy   of  extending   a  peace   offer   so  onerous  as
almost  certainly  to   be  rejected   was  explained   in   the  Ray
Cromley  dispatch  published  by  the  Wall  Street  Journal  on
April  8.  This  was  based  on  that  famous  Dulles   off-the-record
talk  with  a  few   favored   correspondents.   Cromley   reported
the  plan  was  to  seize  the  initiative  with  a  peace   offensive
in   which  each  concession   from   the   enemy  would   be  fol-
lowed   up   by  a  new  demand  and  "if   the  Chinese  or   the
Russians   refuse   any  of   these   requests,   it   is   contemplated
that  U. S. propaganda  expert  C   D.  Jackson  will  organize  a
world-wide  campaign  aimed  at  convincing the  world  the  Reds
don't   want  peace,  really,  despite  their   talk  of  it."   Cromley
said  "The  importance  of  this  new policy—to American  diplo-
mats—is  that  heads  we  win  and  tails  we  win,  too."
The  naivete rather than the program deserves  Churchill's
characterization—"massive  and  magnificent."  The  Eisenhower
speech  followed  the  pattern  Dulles  forecast  to  the  correspond-
ents.  Thus   after   enumerating   his   terms,   Eisenhower    con-
cluded,  "If  we  strive  but  fail,  and  the  world  remains  armed
against   itself,  it  at  least  need  be  divided   no  longer  in  its
clear  knowledge  of  who has condemned  mankind  to  this  fate."
The  real  anxiety  here  is  not  to  avoid  the  fate  but  to  fix
the  blame.  The  basis  is  being  laid  for  stepping  up  the  emo-
tional  mobilization  for  war.  Dulles said  nervously  to  reporters
the  next  day,  "unless  there  is  a  prompt  response   from   the
Soviet  Union ... it will be quite  apparent  that  it  is  necessary
to  move  ahead  on  all  fronts,  East  and  West,  with  a  strong
position."  Moscow  must  not  only  surrender,  but  do  it  quickly.
The  mentality  is  much  like  that  of  Van  Fleet,  who  told  the
editors  the  same  day  the  only  solution  in  Korea  was  an  all-
out  offensive.
If  this  were  the  whole  story,  there  would  be  grounds
for  nothing  but  despair.  A powerful group  within  the  Ameri-
can  military bureaucracy and  governing  circle is as  opposed  as
ever  to  peace  in  Korea;  the  drift  to  war  is  still  the  line of
least  resistance.  Dulles  as always sees  eye to  eye with  the  mas-
ters of  the  Reich, and  Adenauer wants no relaxation  of  tension
undl  the U. S. has financed German rearmament  and made  the
Ruhr  the  world's  greatest  arsenal  again;  then  Germany  can
exact  its  own  terms  from  the  Russians.  Eastern  Europe  is  to
be  liberated  for  German  exploitation;  the  Drang  nacb  Osten
requires  that  war,  cold  and  hot,  continue.
But  Dulles  and  Van  Fleet  are  not  the  whole  story  of  this
Administration. Other  voices,  equally  powerful,  may be  heard.
The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  in  his  speech  to  the  Associated
Press  last  Monday  spoke  a  different   language,   tfie   language
of  confidence  in  American  business,  unafraid   of  peace   and
skeptical  about  the  endless  pouring  out  of  American  wealth
in  a  world  crusade  of  tension  and  hate.  Eisenhower  himself,
though  something  of  a cipher,  without  much  personal  weight
in  the  equation  of  forces within  his Administration,  yet  seems
to  be  a  man  of  peace.  There  was much  in  his  speech  Dulles
must   have   found   unpalatable   even   as  sugar-coating.   If   a
column  by  the  Alsops  was correct,  in  the  tug-of-war  over  the
drafting,  "White  House  thinking"  at  first  "did  not  absolutely
rule  out  the  disarmament and  unification  of  Germany,  follow-
ing  free  elections  . .  ." On such  a  basis  agreement  would  be
possible,  with   some  promise   of   safety   for  Europe.   I  still
believe  there  is a little more  chance of  peace  with  this  Admin-
istration  than  there  was  -with  Truman's.  The  door  to  peace
is  at  least  ajar.
.6.1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  25,  1953
Atomic  Power.  Biggest  Steal  of  the  G.O.P. Era
Eisenhower  in  1946  saved  the  atom  for
public   ownership   and   civilian   control.
Now  he  is  preparing  to  hand  it  over  to
"private  enterprise."
Eisenhower  swung  the  scales  of  a  Re-
publican  Congress  against  the  May-John-
son   atomic   energy   bill  favored   by   the
military  and  big  business.  His   endorse-
ment  clinched  the  case  for  the  McMahon-
Douglas  bill,  which  became  the   Atomic
Energy  Act  of  1946.  What  was  done  in
his  name  then  is  to  be  undone  now:  the
long  planned  campaign  to  hand  the  atom
over  to  private  exploitation  has  begun.
The  theme  of  the  campaign,  of  course,
is  free  enterprise—"laissez  faire."   A  bet-
ter  summing  up  for  the  spirit  of  the  vic-
torious    Republicans   lies   in   an    older,
franker  phrase  out  of  the  years  before  the
French   Revolution—"enrichissez   vous."
The  corporate  courtiers  swept  into  power
with  the  Great  Golfer  are  determined  to
enrich   themselves  at  the  expense   of  the
public  domain.  Bigger  than  tidelands  oil,
power   projects,   synthetic   rubber   plants,
grazing  lands  and  water  rights  is  the  10
billion  dollar  public  investment  in  atomic
development. This is to be the biggest  steal
of  the  new  G.O.P.  era.
The   campaign   could  not   begin  under
more  favorable  conditions.  The  spirit  of
the  time  in  America  is  to  get  rid  of  "so-
cialism"—creeping  or  otherwise.  The  at-
mosphere  makes  it  dangerous  to  question
the  virtues  of  "free  enterprise":  the  fa-
mous  Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists,
now  planning a  special  symposium on  the
subject,  is  having  difficulty   in  finding  a
'scientist  with  the'temerity  to  argue  the
case  for  continued public ownership.  Such
pleading  is  enough  to  create  suspicion  of
heresy  and  invite  loss  of  security  clear-
ance. The  atmosphere  created  by  "loyalty"
purges pays  off.
Transformation  of  a Hero
An   unexpected   asset  is  a   New   Deal
hero  who has  become  a  Rotarian  oracle."
David  E.  Lilienthal,  whose  name  is  syn-
onymous with TVA; first chairman of the
Atomic Energy Commission; co-author of
the   Baruch-Acheson-Lilienthal   plan   for
world   public   ownership   (no    less)    of
atomic  energy, has  since  1950 been  spark-
plugging  the  campaign  to  hand  the  atom
over  to  private  business.  In  two  articles
that  year  for  Collier's,  Lilienthal   called
for  revision  of  the  law  and  lyrically fore-
saw  the  time when  "the  first  breath  of  the
tonic   air    of   competition   would   blow
through  the  atomic  industry."  This  is not
the t«nic he administered  to the  Tennessee
Valley.
This   campaign,   like   the   rest   of   the
atomic   energy   story,   is   full   of   optical
illusions.  Not  the  least  of  them  is  Lilien-
thal  himself.  He  illustrates  the  efficacy  of
the  tactics  pursued  by  the  right  wing  of
American  politics.  The  right,  by  taking
the  initiative  and  denouncing   Lilienthal
as  socialistic,  brought  the  liberals  and  left
to  his  .defense.  In  the  process  of  proving
(quite  unnecessarily)   that  Lilienthal  was
no   socialist,   the   left-of-center   failed   to
notice  how  far  right  their  hero  had  been
pushed.  They were kept  busy defending as
non-socialistic  a  program  they would  oth-
erwise  have  criticized as  much  too favor-
able  to  big  business.  For  another  of  the
optical  illusions  in  this  story  is  the  belief
that  until  now  the  atom  has  been  under
public  ownership  in  the  full  sense  of  the
term.
The   man   who   had   administered   the
TVA  as a  "yardstick" with which to  pro-
vide  some  public  check  on  private  power
charges  administered  the  Atomic  Energy
Act  in such a way  as to provide no "yard-
stick" at  all  for  atomic  costs.
The  AECs  Obsession
James  R.. Newman, who was  counsel  to
the   Senate    (McMahon)   Committee  on
Atomic  Energy  which  framed  the  present
Act,  cast  an  astringent  eye  on  what  had
happened  to  the  statute  in a  brilliant  sur-
vey  for  the  December,   1951,  issue  of  the
Yale Law Journal.  "The  Commission," he
wrote,  "has  seemed obsessively determined
to  dispel  the  notion  that  the  Atomic  En-
ergy  Act  is  socialistic.   It  has  delegated
every   major   operating   function   of   the
production   program,   and   most   of   the
minor  one,  to  private  contractors ... A
small  but  powerful  segment  of  American
industry  is today  the manager  of the  great
bulk  of  the  atomic  energy  program."  The
Commission  did  not  even  carry  on   re-
search  in  its  own  laboratories   as  specifi-
cally  provided  by  the  Act.
Competitive   bidding,   Newman  wrote,
has   been   "systematically    disregarded."
The  administration  of  the  cost  plus fixed
fee  system  has  gone  to  fantastic  lengths.
Thus   the   1949  investigation  initiated  by
Hickenlooper   disclosed   that  a   contract
which  had  been  let  for  the  erection  of  a
plutonium  fabrication  facility  at  a  cost of
$6,225,000  was   completed   at   a   cost  of
$25,000,000  without  the  knowledge  of  the
Commission;   General   Electric   was   the
prime  contractor.  For  two years the  AEC
thought  the  facility  cost  $6,000,000  "when
suddenly,  in  early  1949,  the  Commission,
through  a  routine  inspection  by  one  of  its
members,  discovered   that   in  reality"  it
cost  four  times  as  much.  Such  contracts,
Newman  said,  were  defended  by the  Com-
mission  on  the  ground  that  "special  con-
cessions  are  necessary  to induce  the  parti-
cipation  of private  industry."
One  of the  major  concessions  for which
private  atomic  contractors  have  long  been
hankering  and  will  now  campaign  is  the
right   to   take   out   atomic   patents:   the
Atomic  Energy  Act  keeps  these  securely
under  public  ownership.  The   companies
would  like to obtain private  patents  on the
work  they  have  been  doing  at  public  ex-
pense.  The  other  major  objective  is  less
openly  proclaimed. It  is hidden  behind  the
talk  of letting private  industry develop the
peacetime power  potentialities of the atom.
This  is the  spot  at  which  the  smooth pub-
lic  relations  hand  hopes to  be swifter  than
the  easily tired  public  eye.
What  The  Insiders  Know .
A  public brought  up  on  Sunday  supple-
ment   science   still   believes  that   atomic
pellets   to   operate   atomic   vehicles   and
plants  are  just  around  the. corner.  The
insiders  know  that  it  will  be  a  long  time
before   atomic  power   can  compete   with
oil, coal, gas or other conventional sources.
They  also  know  millions  of  dollars  would
have  to  be  risked  before  ordinary  use be-
came  possible. As  Lilienthal  told  the  spe-
cil  meeting  on  the   subject   held   by  the
National Industrial Conference  Board last
October,   it  would  be  "imprudent  at  the
present  time  for  anyone  to  consider  seri-
ously  putting   substantial  private  money
into this field." This  is  not  how Lilienthal
talked  to the  general  public  in  Collier's.
The  Congressional  Joint  Committee on
Atomic  Energy   put  it  very  softly   in  its
report  last  December  on  "Atomic   Power
and  Private  Enterprise".  It  said  "To  date
no  AEC  contractor  has  suggested  that  it
undertake  an  atomic  power  project  partly
or  wholly  at  its  own  expense."  What  has
been  suggested  is that  private   contractors
be  allowed  to  take  over  plants  producing
fissionable materials,  arid  that  the  govern-
ment  be  allowed  to  make  long  term  con-
tracts  to  buy  this  material.  Power  could
then  be produced for  sale  as  a  by-product.
Then,  as  one  AEC  official  explained  at  a
conference  in  Ann  Arbor  last  June   "The
more  we  'pay' for  plutonium, the  cheaper
the  power  becomes ... if some  persuasive
individual  could  talk  the  military  into  set-
ting a  really  high  price  for  plutonium, we
could  have power  for 'nothing'".
Smart  Public  Relations
The  real  point  does  not  lie  in  the  do-
main  of  nucleonic  engineering  -but  in  that
of  smart  public  relations.  It  would  be  too
crass  to  suggest  that  a  $10 billion  dollar
industry  be handed  over  to  private  hands.
A  supposed  eagerness   to  develop  atomic
power  is  a  cover-up  for  a  desire  to  take
over  the  multi-million  dollar  business  of
providing   fissionable   materials   for   the
atom  bomb. This  is where  the  real money
lies.   As   for   atomic   power,   what   with
accelerated  amortization,  government  con-
tracts  for  research  and  other  devices,  this
can  be  developed  for  private  profit  but  at
public  risk.
The  success  of  this  campaign  will  in-
Continued  on  Page  Three)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I, F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  25,
I.  E  Stone's   Weekly
•Editor  and  Publither, ,1. F.  STONE
Published  weekly except the  last two  weeks
of  August  at  Room   205,  301  R  Capitol
St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.  Subscrip-
tion  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a  year;   Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and  Continental
Europe,  $10  by  1st class  mail, f 15  by  air;
for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.  Single
copy,  15  cents. Tel.:  LI 4-7087. Entered as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,  D.  C
April  25,   1953
Vol.   I,  No.  15
One Farewell Custard
There  are  two  voices  of  America.  One
is  the   Voice  with  a   capital   V,   which
broadcasts  in  so many languages  so many
hours  a  day  what  we  would  like people
abroad  to  think  about  us.  The  other,  the
voice  with  a  small  v,  is  the  inadvertent
message   of  our   own  actions.  This,   the
real  voice of America, broadcast  a  strange
message  last  week about Charlie Chaplin.
It  told  the  world  that  the  little  funny
man  on  whom we  were  brought  up  could
no  longer  bear  the  spirit of  contemporary
America  and  had  turned  in  his  reentry
permit.  It  said  there  must  be  something
seriously   wrong   with   our   America   if
Chaplin  could no  longer  live in  it.
The  "voluntary"  exile  of  Chaplin  is  a
measure   of   how   America  has   changed
since  we were children. He  never  became
an  American citizen  but  Charlie  Chaplin
was  and will  remain more truly American
than   the  blackguards   and  fanatics  who
hounded  him,  the  cheap  politicians  who
warned  him  not  to  come back.
We  do  not  blame  Charlie  Chaplin  for
leaving  us.   Who   could  blame  a  comic
genius—one  of  the  greatest   of  all  time—
for   being  unwilling  to  live  in  a  country
which   seems   to  have  lost   its   sense  of
humor ?  But  we  ask  him  not  to  desert  us
altogether.
The  man who made The  Great Dictator
owes  it to us and himself to put  into a new
film the  tragicomedy  overtaking America
where greasy  informers  are  public heroes,
protectors  of gambling  dens set  themselves
up  as  guardians  of  public  morality,  and
a  Senator  who is  afraid  to  answer   ques-
tions   about  his   own   financial   accounts
becomes  the  Great  Investigator  of  others.
Come  to think of  it,  The  Great  Investiga-
tor  would be  a  worthy  successor  to  The
Great  Dictator.
Turn  the  laugh  on  them,  Charlie,  .for
our   country's  sake.  This   Capitol   needs
nothing  so  badly  as  one  final  well-flung
custard  pie.
Ghost  Walks  in  Greece
Readers  of  the  Daily  Compass  may  re-
call  a  series  of columns I  wrote  last  sum-
mer  attacking  as  whitewash  the  belated
report  turned  in on the  George  Polk  mur-
der  by  the  newspaperman's  committee  of
which   Walter   Lippmann  was   chairman
and  for  which  Major   General   William
Donovan  of  the  OSS was  chief  investiga-
tor.  That  report   took  at  face  value  the
"confession"  of  the  Greek  newspaperman,
Gregory  Staktopolous,  who said  the  CBS
correspondent  was  killed  by Communists
on  his  way  to  interview  the  rebel  leader,
Markos.   Why   Communists  should  have
killed a  reporter  sympathetic  to  their  own
cause  and  critical  of  the  Greek  govern-
ment was never explained.
It  would be more logical  for  supporters
of   the   Greek  government   to   kill   Polk.
This  is  the  logic  the  government avoided
by  the  "confession"  of  Staktopolous.  That
the  government  made a  deal  for  that  con-
fession   is   indicated   by  new   revelations
from    Greece.   The    Athens   newspaper
Apoyevmatini   last   week   disclosed   that
Staktopolous,   sentenced  to  life  imprison-
ment  for  complicity  in  the  Polk  murder
is  not  in jail  but  held  in  the  headquarters
of   the   Salonika   security   police,   given
special treatment and even allowed to walk
about  the  streets.
Two  days  later  the  Associated   Press
man  in Athens filed a  dispatch beginning,
"Athens,  April  15—Gregory   Staktopolous
stepped  into  a  jail  last  night  for  the  first
time  since  he  was  sentenced  to  life  im-
prisonment  in   1949  as  an  accomplice  in
the  slaying of George  Polk  . .  ." Few pa-
pers   ran    the   dispatch.   None    queried
Athens  for  more  details.  What's  a  little
murder  and  a frame-up  among friends ?
Thanks
The  Churchman, independent  Episcopal
fortnightly,   in  its  issue  of  April   15  was
kind  enough  to  reprint  and  endorse  the
Weekly's   editorial  of  March  21,  "What
Churchmen   Could  Do",   suggesting   that
the  churches   turn   the  tables   on  Velde,
Jenner   and   McCarthy   by   investigating
the   investigators.   "We   have  long  been
convinced,"  the  Churchman  commented,
"that  the  Protestant  churches  of  America
could  be  more  effective  in  smashing  the
iniquitous   witch   hunt   than   any   other
group  . . . the inquisitors  don't  relish  fac-
ing  an  aroused  Protestant  church".  We
hope  to  say  more  in  the  near  future  on
the  subject  of  the  churches  and  the  witch
hunt.
Simplification
Dr.   Detlev   W.   Bronk,   president   of
Johns  Hopkins,  has  suddenly  decided  to
"simplify  the  academic  structure"   of  the
University  by abolishing  the Walter Hines
Page  School   of  International    Relations.
The  school  has  been  headed  since  1938—
with   distinction—by    Owen   Lattimore.
Thus  Dr.  Bronk  "simplifies"  another  of
his  problems.  A great  scholar  crucified  by
the   China   Lobby   can   conveniently   be
dropped  without  the  bother  of  waiting  to
see whether  he  is  actually  found  guilty  of
perjury.  It  always  simplifies  life  to  aban-
don  one's  obligations  of  honor.
Jefferson  on  "FBI"  Files
From  the  sixth  volume  just  published
of  the  new  Princeton  collection  of  Jeffer-
son  papers,  Jefferson's  message  refusing
Congress   access   to   the  files  on   Aaron
Burr,  accused  of treason:
"The  mass  of  what  I  have  received  in
the  course  of  these  transactions  is volumi-
nous,  but  little  has  been  given  under  the
sanction  of  an  oath,   so  as  to  constitute
formal   and  legal  evidence.   It   is   chiefly
in  the   form  of  letters,  often  containing
such a mixture of rumors,  conjectures  and
suspicions  as  render  it  difficult  to  sift  out
the  real  facts ... In  this  state  of the evi-
dence,   delivered   sometimes,   too,   under
the  restriction  of  private  confidence,  nei-
ther   safety  nor   justice  will  permit  the
exposing  names  except  that  of  the  prin-
cipal  actor  . .."
Atomic Power: Biggest  Steal of the  G.O.P. Era
(Continued  from  Page  Two)
crease  the   cost  of   fissionable  materials.
It   will   not  guarantee  speedier  develop-
ment  of atomic power;  the  giant  electrical
and  chemical  concerns which have  the  in-
side  track  on  the  program  as  AEC  con-
tractors have  not  been  notable  in  the  past
as  models of  competitive  enterprise.
This  brings  us  to  the  question  of  se-
curity.. A   befuddled   public  takes   it   for
granted  that  a  man  who  once  gave  $5  to
Loyalist  Spain  may  be a  "security"  risk.
S
But who dares recall that  many  of the  big
concerns  working  for  AEC   gave  away
vital  industrial  military  secrets  to    Ger-
many  and  Japan  via  patent-swapping  and
cartel  agreements  before  the  war?  Who
dares warn that if the atom is handed over
to   them   they   will   almost   certainly   be
swapping  patent  secrets  again  with   for-
eign laboratories ?
Finally  let   it  be  remembered  that  to
make  fissionable  materials  a  private  in-
53
dustry  is to  establish  a new private  inter-
est   in   world   tension.   The   atom  bomb
lobby  would  dwarf   the  armorplate  and
aircraft  lobbies.  The  profitable   operations
of  a  huge  industry  would  depend  on  a
high  output  of  atom  bombs.  Any  attempt
to   outlaw   this   terrible   weapon   would
threaten  the  industry  with  financial  ruin.
To  hand  the  atom  over  would be to  create
a  vested  interest  in  disaster.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  25,  1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
A  Tour  Through  An  "Oppressed" Valley
I  have  just  been  on  a  long  spring  ramble  through  a
region  in  which  five  million  Americans  are  living  in  sin,  or
what  Herbert  Hoover  considers  sia  I  mean  the  TVA  country.
The  people, I'm  afraid,  are utterly  unrepentant
In  the  cities,  on  the  farms  and  as  far  back  up  in  the  coves
as you can go they are pushing  buttons and turning  on lights  as
happily  as  never  before.  If  you  try  to  point  out  to  them  that
the  lights  are  "creeping socialism," they  look  at  you  as if  they
question  either  your loyalty  or  your  sanity,  or  both.
You  can  put  it  another  way  and  fare  no  better.  You  say,
"Don't  you  want  to  be  rescued?  Don't  you  want  to  be   free
men?'  And  they will  call,  "Come  here, Mamma, and  listen  to
what this  fool  fellow is  saying."
All  of  these  people  have  been  living  "under"   public
power  for  15  years.  Their  children  are  suckled  on   formulas^
wanned  with  creeping   socialism;   they  milk  their  cows  and
decorate  their  Christmas  trees  with  creeping  socialism.  I  never
saw  people with  dearer  consciences  about  such  a  thing.  They
simply  like  it.  You  can  tell  them  that  makes  them   "false
liberals"  if  you dare. Even Mr.  Hoover  wouldn't  dare  tell  them
to  their  faces  it  makes them  "un-American," not  even with  the
protection  of his  age and  name.
These people remember  when the Tennessee  River  ran  wild,
and  when running out  of coal oil  for  the  lamps was a calamity.
Many  of  them  voted  for  Eisenhower,  but  these  to  a  man  will
remind  you  they  voted  for  him  on  his  promise  "to  end  the
war—and  keep  his  hands  off  of  TVA."  Some  of  them  once
voted  for  Herbert  Hoover—to  keep  rum  and  Romanism,  as
they  thought,  out  of  the  White  House;  but  the  news  that
Hoover  has  been  urging  ,rhe  Republicans  to  "rescue"   them
from  TVA  has  stirred,  besides  guffaws,  only  the  sharp  com-
ment  that  "Hoover  wants to take us back—to Coolidge."
The five million Americans in this region may not stand
as much in awe of TVA and its works as do the visiting  nabobs
from  all  parts  of  the  world  who  come  or  are  brought  among
them  to  be  impressed  by  what  America  can  do.  But  each  and
every  one  of  them  is  shamelessly  aware of  being  "part  owner"
of  the  great  system  which  lights  his  countryside.  Nothing  the
Great   Engineer  can  say  at   Case  Institute   can  make  them
ashamed.
Let  Herbert  Hoover  point  out  that  public  power  is  social-
ism—creeping  or  galloping—which   is   "the   world's  night-
mare:" they will  not  stickle  for  that.  All  of  them, city dwellers
or  countrymen,  will  continue  to  push  their  buttons  without
a  twinge.  Neither   the  former  President's   morality  nor  his
reasoning  reproaches  them.  Sell  their  power  systems back  to
the  corporations?  But  their  municipalities  and  their  coopera-
tives  are corporations,  owned  by  all  of  the  people.  Turn  TVA
over  to   "tax-paying   private  enterprise?"   But  in   the  TVA
country  even the  children  know that  power  companies, whose
net  earnings  are  guaranteed  by  rate  schedules  filed  with  the
regulatory  bodies,  only  collect  taxes.
I  had  wondered  ever  since  Mr.  Hoover  came out  of his
cave  calling  upon  Mr.  Eisenhower  to  "get  the  Federal  Gov-
ernment  out  of  die  business  of  generating  and  distributing
power  as  soon  as possible"  what  the  Tennessee  Valley  people
would  be  thinking  of  the  proposal  After   all,  these  are  the
people  who can  speak  from  experience,  who  should  be  able  to
advise  the  rest of  us whether  or  not  growing  up  with electric
power  developed  by  the  Government  and  distributed  by  138
municipalities  and  consumer-owned  cooperatives  really  threat-
ens  a  "new  oppression  of  free  men  greater  than  the  old  dog-
eat-dog  economy."
They  are  thinking,  I  find,  that  it  is  a  fine  American  thing
to  have  lights  in  the  barn  as  well  as  in  the  house,  and prac-
tically  no  oppression   at'  all  to  be  able  to  afford   both.  They
appear  to be  conscious of  no  need whatever of being  "rescued"
from  services  which,  by  democratic  choice,  they  have  elected
,to render  themselves.  And  as for  Mr.  Hoover's  suggestion  that
they  somehow  are  not  the  free  men  they  were,  they  are  free
enough  rertain_y  with  down-to-earth  American rejoinders Mr.
Hoover, at his time of  life  and dignity, would not  care to hear.
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.
Please  enter  the following  subscription. f5  (or  1 year  a
enclosed.  (See  page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street
City    ..
State   .
..Zone..
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,   S.E.,
Washington 3, D. C
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED