I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953feb21.pdf

============================================================

Should  Communists  Be Allowed  to  Teach?  See  Page  2.
/. F. Stone's    Weekly
r.  >rom'l  mil.!,  lie.
VOL.  I  NUMBER  6              FEBRUARY  21,  1953
WASHINGTON, D. C
15  CENTS
Anti-Zionism  or  Anti-Semitism?
THE  RUSSIANS FEAR  WAR AND ARE SHUTTING  the  last  win-
dows  on  the West  in  preparation  for  it.   That  seems the  most
reasonable explanation  for the anti-Zionist  "show  trials" which
have begun in  the  Soviet  world.    The  Jews are  the  last  people
in  the  U.S.S.R.  and  its  satellites  who  still  had  some  contact
with  the  West  through  such  Jewish  philanthropic  organiza-
tions  as  the  Joint  Distribution   Committee.
Soviet  policy  never  went  beyond  cultural  autonomy;  cen-
tripetal  nationalist tendencies  are as much feared as in  the  days
of  the  Czars.   Nationalism   (except  at  times  for  Russians)  is
officially   stigmatized  as  "bourgeois,"  though  the  constant  at-
tacks  on  "Titoism"  in  the  satellites  show  how  strongly  it  sur-
vives  under communism.   The  Zionists,  like  the  "bourgeois"
nationalists  among  the  Ukrainian,  White  Russian  and  other
Soviet  minorities,  have  been  the  frequent  object  of  purge,  ar-
rest  and  imprisonment  since the  early years  of  the  Revolution.
After  the war, privately at Yalta, publicly  later,  Stalin  took a
more  friendly  attitude  toward  Jewish  national  aspiration  and
changed  the   anti-Zionist   line   traditional   with   the   Marxist
movement  to  vote  for  the  partition  of  Palestine  and  the  estab-
lishment  of  the  Jewish  State.    Thanks  to  that  change,  Israel
was able to circumvent the  arms embargo  imposed  by the  State
Department   and  to   buy  arms  and   receive  planes   through
Czechoslovakia—the ex post facto  "crime" of  the  Slansky  trial.
THE  RELATIONS OF  STATES ARE NOT  DETERMINED  BY SENTI-
MENT.   Israel found  favor  in Moscow's eyes when it fought  the
British.   It  lost favor afterwards because of  its Western  orienta-
tion  and  its  increasing  reliance  on  American  capital.    Zionist
longings  are  far  from  dead  among
1
 the  Jews  of  Russia,  as  the
writer can attest  from  talks  and  observations  on his own under-
ground  trip  from  Poland  to  Palestine  in  the  spring  of   1946.
The  recrudescence of  anti-Semitism  in  Russia amid  the  miseries
of  World  War  II  and  its  deliberate  propagation  by  the  Ger-
mans  in  the  occupied  areas  of  White  Russia and  the  Ukraine
provoked  from  not  a  few  assimilated   Russian  Jews  the  same
reaction of national pride that it  once did in Pinsker and Herzl.
The  fact  that  Israel  has  become  an  American  dependent  must
make Zionism  seem more than  ever  dangerous  to  the  rulers  of
the  Kremlin.
The  story  is  as  old  as  the  Bible,  where  we  read  that  the
Egyptians  enslaved  the  Jews  lest they  aid  an  enemy in  time of
war.   The  same fate  shadows  all  minorities,  as our  own  Japa-
nese  Americans  can  testify,  and  its  constant  repetition  must
strengthen  the  case  for  Jewish  nationhood.    But  the  Bible  re-
peats  another  lesson,  equally terrible,  and  that  is  to  keep  out
of  the quarrels of  Egypt and  Nineveh.    Israel  lies  npw  as then
at  the  crossroads  of  the  world,  where  it  can  all  too  easily  be
trampled  by  contending  armies.    It  needs  peace.    It'  cannot
afford  to  fight  the  battles  of  the  great  Powers.    For  no  nation
would  a new war  be  a greater  tragedy  than  for  tiny  Israel  on
the  edge  of  the  petroleum  fields which will  be  the  first  target
of  the  air  fleets.  And  no  people  needs  peace  more  than  the
Jews,  a minority everywhere.   In  a  long  conflict,  the  Jews  on
the Soviet side will be suspected of pro-Westernism  and  on  the
anti-Soviet  side of  pro-Communism.
NONE  OF  us  KNOW  WHAT  is  REALLY  HAPPENING  IN  EAST-
ERN   EUROPE.  The  vulnerable  point  of  the  Soviet  regime  in
"psychological  warfare"  is  its  extreme  suspicion.    No  one yet
knows,  perhaps  no  one  will  ever  know,  whether   the  Red
generals  executed  before the war were guilty of  treason  or  only
the  victims of  German  ingenuity  in  spreading  suspicion.    No
one  knows  what  planted  whispers  may have  played  a  part  in
provoking  these new trials.    The  Russian rulers have a way of
erecting  possibilities  into  actualities  and  then  staging  trials  to
"prove"  what  they  fear.    Their  trials  are  political  morality
plays  which  cynically assume  an  audience  too  unintelligent  to
be  impressed  by  anything   less  than   melodrama.    It   is  not
enough  to-prove  a  man  mistaken;  he  must  be  displayed  as a
monster.  "Ever since the  20's,  the  Soviet public has been  fed  on
a  heavy  diet  of  conspiracy,  treason,  poisoning  and  murder  in
this political  dramaturgy.   This  is the  perspective  in  which one
cannot  help  but  see the  Slansky trial  and  the  fantastic  charges
against  the  nine  Moscow  doctors,  six of  them  Jewish.    Their
purpose  is  to  warn  the  Jews  of  the  Soviet  world  to  break  all
ties with the West and to  stifle  all nationalist  feeling  "or  else."
The  repercussions  may be  less  than  anti-Semitic  but  are  more
than   anti-Zionist.      They   must   pander   to   the   covert   anti-
Semitism which  lingered  on  underground  after  the  revolution.
THE  SITUATION is BAD, BUT MUCH TOO SERIOUS to  be  used  as
a kind of political  sideshow for UJA  fund-raising and the  cold
war.   There  are  3,000,000  Jews  in  Russia,  the  second  largest
Jewish  community  in  the  world.    The  Jews  of  America  are
very  foolish  and  short-sighted  if  they  jump on this  affair   glee-
fully  to  show  that  those  lie  who  link  Jew  with  Communist.
Israel  will  be very irresponsible  if  it  allows  the  fate of  Russian
Jewry  to  get  involved  at  the  UN  in  another  endless  cold  war
propaganda  debate,  where it  will  be exploited,by many people
who care very little  for  Jews in  Russia or  anywhere else.  Wild
talk  about extermination,  equating  Hitler  and  Stalin,  can only
hurt  Soviet Jewry.    This  is the  time for  Israel  to  demonstrate
the  most  responsible  kind  of  statesmanship,  and  to  remember
that  Zion's  historic  mission  is peace.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.   Stone's   Weekly,   February  21,  1953
The  Campus Witch-Hunt: The  Attack  on  The  Open  Mind
Washington,  D.  C.
A  QUESTION  WHICH  DESERVES  IMMORTALITY
was  put  by  Senator  Herman  Welker,  Repub-
lican,  of  Idaho.    The  scene was  a  room  in  the
Senate  Office  Building.    The  occasion  was  the
first  of  the  college  hearings  by  the  Jenner  sub-
committee  of  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Com-
mittee.     The   witness,   Oscar   H.   Shaftel,   an
assistant   professor  of  English  in  New  York's
Queens   College,   was   being   obdurate   about
the  $64  question.     "Do   you  think,"  Welker
finally  asked,  in  a  stern  voice,  "that  any mem-
ber  of  this  committee would  hesitate  to  answer
that  question?"     The   witness   was  at  a   loss
tor  an  answer.   He  had  been  pinned  to  the mat
at  last.
Many  were  the  feats  of  casuistry  performed
by  the   committee   members  that   day  as  they
wrestled   with   the   problem   of   subversion   in
education.     Shaftel,   citing   chapter   and   verse
with  the  agility  of  a  hardened  heretic,  had  in-
sisted  that  the  Fifth  amendment  was  intended
to  protect  the  innocent.    Senator  Willis  Smith,
of  North  Carolina,  smote  him  hip  and  thigh.
"Now  you  say,"  Smith  began  softly,  "that  this
was   intended   to   protect   innocence.     But   if
you  were   not   a   member   of   the   Communist
party,  you  wouldn't  have  to  invoke  the  Fifth
amendment,  would.you?"
IN  THAT  LONG  AND ARDUOUS  FIRST  SESSION,
one  type  of  question   was  conspicuous  by  its
absence.     Though   the   declared   purpose   was
to   uncover   the   indoctrination   of   students  by
Communist   teachers,   no   question   was   asked
on  the  subject.    The  omission  seemed  strange.
A   teacher  who   denied   that   he  had   injected
subversive  ideas  into  the  minds  of  the  youth
in   his   care  could   be  prosecuted   for   perjury
if  witnesses  turned  up  to  testify  against  him.
A  teacher  who  denied  that  Communists  were
instructed  to  indoctrinate  their  students  would
risk   the   same   penalty   if   an   ex-Communist
teacher   testified   to   the   contrary.    The   mere
refusal   to  answer  questions  about  indoctrina-
tion  would  have  been   impressive.
The   range   of  the  questions   the  committee
did   ask   was   wide.     A   witness   was   asked
whether  he  had  contributed  to  the  defense of
Morris  Schappes  more  than  a  decade  ago when
Schappes  was  prosecuted  for  perjury  as  a  re-
sult   of   the   Rapp-Coudert  school   inquiry   in
New  York.    There  was  a  question  about  the
execution  of  the  Polish  Socialists,  Ehrlich  and
Alter,  in  Russia  during  the  war.    A  witness
was   asked   whether   he   belonged   to   a  Com-
mittee  to  Win  The  War  in  1943-44.    But  no
witness  was  asked  whether  he  had  ever  tried
to  lead  a  student  down  the  primrose  path  of
Marxist   doctrine.    Or   whether  as  a  member
of   a   Communist  teacher's   cell  he   had   been
instructed   to  engage  in  ideological  seduction.
THE     COMMITTEE    SEEMED    UNWILLING    to
get  to  the  supposed  point  of  the  inquiry.  Per-
haps  experience  had  taught  it  to  tread  warily.
Against   none   of   the   teachers   discharged   in
New   York   have  witnesses   been  produced   to
testify  that  there  had  been  indoctrination.   The
same  Senate   subcommittee   last   Fall   received
31  exhibits  and  heard  41  witnesses,  including
three Communists who had  recanted and turned
informer.    Its  report  last  January  2  on   "Sub-
versive  Influence   in  the  Educational  Process"
does  indeed   say,  "Evidence   was  adduced  that
the   Communists  made   an   effort   to   use   the
classroom  to  carry  on  a  program  of  indoctrina-
tion.   Thus  Dr.  Bella Dodd  testified.   She had
no   doubt   whatsoever   that  she  had   used   her
position  as a  teacher  to  influence her  students."
But  in  its  report  the  Senate  subcommittee
withheld   what   the   overwrought   but   consci-
entious  Dr.   Bella  Dodd   actually  said  in  her
testimony  on this  point.  The  passage  is  extraor-
dinary  in  its  revelation  and  deserves  quotation
in  full.  Here it  is  as it  appears  on pages. 18 and
19 of  the  printed  record:
"Senator    FERGUSON.     When   you   were   a
teacher  and  really  a  Communist,  what  did  you
do  to  the  students  and  other  teachers?
"Mrs.   DODD.    God  help  me  for  what  I  did.
I  was  not  a  member  of  the  Communist  party,
but  there  was  no  doubt  in  my  mind—
"Senator   FERGUSON.    But   you   had   a   phi-
losophy  and  you  served  the  cause.
"Mrs.    DODD.    There   is   no   doubt   in   my
mind  that  I  did  a great  deal  of  harm.
"Senator     FERGUSON.     And   how   did   you
function  among  the  students?
"Mrs.   DODD.   I  was  their  faculty  adviser  on
many   problems.     I   worked   with   individual
students.    I   was  particularly  keen  about  my
students.    I  was .very  sympathetic,  and  I  was
very  popular  among  my  students.
"Senator  FERGUSON.    Do  you  think you may
have  convinced  some  of  them  to  become Com-
munists ?
"Mrs.   DODD.    I  have  no  doubt  that  I   did.
"Senator  FERGUSON.    Was  that  one  ,of  your
purposes  in  life  as  a  teacher?
"Mrs.   DODD.   ,No.    That  is  not  true.    My
purpose  at  that  time—I  thought  my  purpose
was  to  create  an  open  mind,  to  create  a  clear-
thinking   people—people   who   would   throw
aside  all   preconceived   prejudices,   all   precon-
ceived   thoughts.    .My   thought   was   to   teach
people  how  to  think.
"Well,   I   have   discovered   since   then  that
the  mind  which  is  so  open  is  often  the  mind
which  gets  filled  With  the  first  evil  wind  that
comes  by;  that  what  you  have  to  do  is  to  see
the  truth  and  the  truth  will  help  you  to  ward
off   those  evil  influences."
Thus   the   "indoctrination"   to   which   Dr.
Bella  Dodd  confessed  with  stricken  conscience
was  not  indoctrination  in  Marxism but  in  what
we   had   been   taught    to   believe   was   basic
Americanism.    She  wanted  her  pupils  to  have
an  "open  mind"  and  it  is  this  which  she  now
thinks  wrong.    Like  so  many ex-Communists
she  has  swung   from   one  authoritarianism  to
another.     The   Roman   Catholic   Church,   to
which  she  returned  on  leaving  the  party,  has
always   believed   that   the   open   mind   was  a
danger,  that  revealed  truth  and  certified  dogma
were  the  only  safeguards  against  error.    The
implications   are   those   that   the   Very   Rev.
Hunter   Guthrie,   S.J.,    president   of   George-
town  University,  developed   in  his  commence-
ment   address   here   in   Washington   in   June,
1950,  when  he  called  academic  freedom   "the
soft  under-belly  of  our  American  way  of  life."
IF     THE     MCCARRAN     COMMITTEE     WERE
really   interested    in    the    "subversive"    ideas
which  threaten  American  education,  it  would
have  explored   Dr.   Bella  Dodd's  remark.    If
the  open   mind   is  a  danger,  who  is  to   close
it?     Against  what  ideas?    Who   is  to  deter-
mine  which  winds  of  doctrine  are  evil?    She
regrets  her  purpose  was  "to  teach  people  how
to  think."   Does  she  think  it  would  be  better
to  teach  them  blindly  to  believe?
To  the  authoritarian  ideologies  of  the  right,
the  educational  witch-hunters  turn  a  deaf   ear.
No   subpoena  has  ever  been  issued  for  Allen
Zoll,   though   his   pro-Fascist   activities   before
the  war  were  notorious  and  his  influence  on
American  education  is  growing.  When   George
A.  Timone,  of  the  New  York  Board  of  Educa-
tion,  was  before  the. McCarran  committee  last
Fall,  no  one  asked  him  about  the  meeting  he
sponsored  in  1939  at  which  Hitler,  Mussolini
and  Father  Coughlin  were  hailed  as  "enemies
of   communism."     No   one   asked   him   why
Gerald  L.  K.  Smith  wrote  in  his  news  letter
of  March  22,  1946,  "Mayor  O'Dwyer  of  New
York  is  being  congratulated  by  Christian  Na-
tionalists   for   naming   a   strong   follower   of
Father  Coughlin,  Mr.  Timone,   to  the  Board
of   Education."     Timone   was   received   as  an
ally   and   friend   by  the   McCarran  committee.
Neither  McCarran's  successor,  Jenner,  nor  the
Velde  inquiry  nor  McCarthy  is  interested   in
this   kind   of   "organized   subversion,"   though
already  so  effective   in  subverting  free  inquiry
on  the  campus.
WHEN  JAMES  B.  CONANT  WAS BEFORE  THE
Senate  Foreign   Relations  Committee  on   Feb-
ruary  3,  Senator  Fulbright  asked  him  whether
"some   good   purpose   can  be   served"   by   the
Congressional  investigations  which  are  setting
out   on   the   supposed   task   "of   determining
whether   or   not   there  is   communism  in   the
schools."    Conant's  reply  was  "No.     Frankly
I  do  not."
To   set   up   a   bar   against   Communists  in
teaching,  divorced  from  evidence  of  abuse  in
the  classroom, is  to  venture on  the  endless  task
of   determining  who   is   really  a  Communist.
This  is  to  play  into  the  hands  of  those  who
want  thought  control  in  America.    It   would
make  conformity  necessary  to  avoid  suspicion.
Few  any  longer  have  the  temerity  to  say  it,
but   defense   of   the   right   of   Communists  to
teach    is   essential   to   academic   freedom   in
America.    This  like  all  other  liberties  is  in-
divisible.    As  Conant  said  to  Senator  Wiley
at  the  same  hearing   "only  the  instigation  of
a  police  state  within  a  university itself"  would
make  it  possible  to  determine  who  were  the
Communists.   They  could  not  be  found  "with-
out  destroying  the  life  of  the  university."  This
is   the   life   threatened   by  the   campus  witch-
hunt.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   February   21,   1953
I.  F.  Stone's    Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last two  weeks
of  August at  Room 225,  1416  F  St.,   N.W.,
Washington  4,  D.  C.    Subscription  rates:
Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and
elsewhere  in  the Western  Hemisphere, $6;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by
1st class  mail,  $15  by air;  for  Israel,  Asia,
Australia   and   Africa,   $10   by   first   class
mail,   $20  by  air  mail.    Single  copy,   15
cents.     Contents   covered   by   copyright.
Telephone,   STerling  3-0938.    Application
for  entry as Second Class matter is  pending.
Vol.  1,  No.  6
,T    February  21,      1S53
COMMENT
The  Pope  Himself  .  .  .
Washington,  D.. C.
THE    TWO   MESSAGES   ON   BEHALF   OF   THE
Pope,  one  last  December  and  the  second  last
week-end,   show   how   deeply  opinion   abroad
has  been  stirred  by  the  Rosenberg  case.    The
President's   denial   of   clemency   is  inhumane
and   politically   stupid.    Comparison  with   the
sentences  in  the  Fuchs  and  Allan  Nunn  May
cases,  where  far  more  vital  atomic information
was  involved,  is  enough  to  show  how  barbaric
is  the  death   sentence   imposed  on  the  Rosen-
bergs.     When   the   Holy   See  itself   feels  im-
pelled   by   "motives    of   charity"   to   transmit
appeals   through    its   Apostolic   Delegate    at
Washington,   one  begins  to  get   a  faint   idea
of   what   a   bad   impression   execution   of   the
death   sentence  will  create.    Commutation  of
sentence   would   be   a   moral  victory  for   the
better  America  and  there  is  still  time  for  last-
minute  appeals  to  the  White   House.
Stevenson?
JUST   IN   CASE   READERS   INSIST   on   knowing
what  we  think  of  our  late  candidate's    Jeffer-
son-Jackson   Day   speech:    very  witty,   like   a
good  after  dinner  speech;  nice "plug  for  civil
liberty;  but  not  yet  adequate  for  leadership  in
these  times  when  we  are  moving  rapidly  to-
ward    war.     Formosa    was    not    mentioned.
Sparkman  did  better  than  that  in  the  Senate.
We  wait  hopefully  for  more.
From  Brannan  Plan  to
Benson  Boner
THE    TERRIBLE   NEW   DUST   STORMS   in    the
Middle  West  as we  go  to  press  only  emphasize
the  storms  of   another   and   figurative   but   no
less  serious  variety  blowing  up  in  the  West
and  South  for  the  new  Administration.   Agri-
cultural  employment  is  down  three  quarter  of
a  million  from   last  year.    Prices  received  by
farmers  have  been  moving  downward  for  two
years  and  are  now  18  percent  below  February,
1951,  while  prices  paid   by  farmers  are   sub-
stantially  unchanged.    The  Western   livestock
market   is  in  a  chaotic  condition   and  cotton
exports  are  down  sharply.   The  situation  is  so
bad  that  Taft   and  Thye,  ordinarily  no  advo-
cates  of  giving  things  away,  especially  to  for-
eigners,  have  introduced  a  bill  "For   the  relief
of  storm-stricken areas  in  the  Netherlands,  the
British  Isles  and  other  areas  of  Western   Eu-
rope."   The  bill  would  authorize  the  President
to  donate  abroad  any  and  all  agricultural  com-
modities  "acquired   through  price  support  op-
erations   and   determined   to   be   in   excess  of
domestic  requirements."    (If  dairy  prices  keep
falling,  Thye  is  liable  to  turn  Wallaceite   and
advocate  giving   milk  to   Hottentots.)
With   beautiful   Republican   ineptness,   the
new   Secretary  of  Agriculture   chose  this   mo-
ment  of  farm  history  to  make  a  speech  before
the  Central  Livestock  Association  in  St.  Paul
saying  brightly,  "Farmers  should  not  be  placed
in  a position  of working  for government bounty
rather  than  producing  for a  free  market.  .  .  .
Furthermore,   inefficiency   should   not   be   sub-
sidized  in  agriculture."    In  the  warm-up  Ben-
son—the   old   coin   phraser—said,   "I    declare
without   fear   of   successful  contradiction   that
our  rural  people   are  today  the  strongest   bul-
wark  we have  against  all  that  is  aimed ... at
the  very  destruction   of  our  American   way  of
life.  .  .  .  No  other  segment  of  our  popula-
tion   knows  so  well  that  'as  ye  sow,  so  shall
ye  reap.' "
None    other   also   knows   so   well   that   it
doesn't  matter  what  you  sow  or  reap   if  you
can't  get  a  fair  price  for  it  at  the  market.
Poor   Solomon,   Poor   Sheba,
Poor  Socrates,
Etc.
"WE   ARE NOT  AFRAID,"  Secretary   of   Com-
merce  Sinclair  Weeks  told  the  annual  Lincoln
Night   dinner   of   the   Republican    Middlesex
Club  in  Boston,  "to  trust  free  enterprise  to  be
enterprising.     Through   the  stardust  and  sweat
of  the  American  system  have  come  the  highest
standard  of  living  in  history.    King  Solomon
in  all  his  glory   never   drove   to  work   in  an
automobile  or  watched  a  baseball  game  on  tel-
evision.   The  Queen  of  Sheba  in  all  her  splen-
dor  never  enjoyed  the  luxury  of  nylon  stock-
ings."
And  Socrates  in  all  his  wisdom  had  to  drink
hemlock   instead    of   going   to   a'  nice   shiny
electric   chair.     And   Columbus   for   all   his
genius  had  to  take  a  slow  boat  instead  of  buy-
ing  a  ticket  on  TWA.   And  Cleopatra   for  all
her  wiles  never  had  a  really  good  deodorant.
Who   knows   how   much   faster,   further   and
more  fragrantly  they  might  all  have  progressed
had  they,  too,  trusted  private  enterprise.
The  Dunce's  Cap
To   SIDNEY  HOOK,  PROFESSOR  OF Philosophy
at  New  York  University,  pre-war  Marxist  and
postwar   Milquetoast,   for  telling  a   panel   on
"Freedom   in   Education"    at   the  New   York
Civil   Liberties   Forum   on  Lincoln's  Birthday,
"It   is  not  true  that  a  state  of  fear  exists  in
our  colleges  and  that  college  teachers  are  less
courageous    and    outspoken    than    they   have
been  in  the past.  .  .  ."
You  and  The   Postoffice
The  Weekly  goes  to  the  postoffice  at  3  pan.  every   Wednesday  afternoon,   and—touch   wood—
we  haven't  missed  a  deadline  yet.  Since  the  third  issue,  it  has  been  getting  service  under   sec-
ond   class   permit   pending,  but  service   is  spotty.    In   downtown   New   York,   many   subscribers
have  been  getting  their  issue  on  Friday,   but  in  Brooklyn   some  readers  complain  they  haven't
been  getting  theirs  until  Monday   or  Tuesday,  though  in   far-off   California   one   reader   reports
that  he  gets  his  on  Monday.    Some  places,  by  mistake,  the  Weekly  may still  be  getting  third  class
service.    Let  me  know—and  let  your  local  postmaster   know—about  delays.    In  the  meantime
don't  forget   you  can  get  a  free  copy  of  my  new  book,  The  Truman  Era,  with  every  two  subs;
for  $1,  with  one  sub;  or  for  $2  in  advance  of  publication.   It  will  be published  in April  at 0.50.
I  just  finished  reading  the  galleys—and  though  I  say so  as  shouldn't,  it's  a  darn  good  book.
—I.  F.  Stone
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  21, 1953
A  New   and   Safe  Form   of  Popular  Front
NEW  YORK
ROGER  BALDWIN  IN  THE  THIRTIES  was  a  Popular   Fronter.
The .annual  luncheon  of  the  New  York  Civil  Liberties  Union
over  which  he  presided  here  on  Lincoln's   Birthday  was  a
Popular   Front  of   a  new  kind.    On  the  dais,   among  the
liberals,  were  Robert  Morris,  counsel  of  the  McCarran  com-
mittee;  Godfrey  P.  Schmidt,  a  professor  of  law  at  Fordham,
who  represented  Bella  Dodd  before  that  committee;  a   staff
writer  for the  New  Leader  and  a man  named  Victor  Hartnett,
who  was introduced  by Baldwin  as co-author of  Red  Channels,
"one  of  our  favorite  works."   Of  course,  everyone understood
that  Baldwin  was joking,  and  there  was a little  titter  with  the
applause  from  the  well-behaved  audience.    But  one  wondered
what such characters—and Roy Cohn,  McCarthy's  chief  counsel
on  his  new  investigating   committee—were  doing  at  a  civil
liberties meeting.   This was indeed  infiltration and  subversion,
the  infiltration  of  libertarian  ranks  by  the  witch-hunters,  the
subversion  of  basic libertarian  principles by the  social  amenities
of  a  friendly gathering  with  their  enemies.
One panel  chairman summing up at the end of the afternoon
spoke  of  the   "wisdom   of  having  on  one  platform  men  of
divergent  views."   This  was  eye-wash.  .No  one  spoke  from
the  ranks  of  the  purged  teachers,  the  UN  employes,  the  civil
servants,  the  blacklisted  artists  or  the  Smith  Act  victims.   But
a  platform  was  accorded  their  persecutors.     They  were  ad-
mitted  into  respectable  liberal  company.    They  were  listened
to  respectfully,  and  argument  was  muted,  lest  it  impinge  on
the  untactful.    From  the  prepared  text  of  the  one  first  rate
speech  at the  conference, that  of  the  Rev. Dr.  John  Paul  Jones,
there  was  omitted   a  mild   reference  to   A  Certain   Senator,
"Senator  McCarthy,  heading  a committee to  investigate  'Com-
munist  thinking'  in  the  colleges  of  the  land,   does  not  in-
crease   our   sense   of   security,"   as   if   not   to   offend    such
honored  guests  as  McCarthy's  counsel,  Cohn.    Only  Osmond
Fraenkel  broke  the  conspiracy of  politeness  to  mention  Louis
Budenz  by  name  and  to  protest  his  smear  of  the  late  Louis
S. Weiss and  of  Professor  Walter  S. Gellhorn  as Communists.
THE  DIRECTORS  OF  THE  CIVIL  LIBERTIES  UNION  have been
sucking  their  thumbs  for  many  months,  unable  to  make  up
their   minds  about  the   Fifth   amendment  in   the   attack  on
academic  freedom  and  the  UN..  At  this  annual  meeting,  the
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                                                     *•"•"
Room  221  Kellogg  BIdg.
1416  F  Street,  N.W.,  Washington  4,  D.  C,
Please enter  the following  subscription.   $5  for  1  year  is
enclosed.   (See  page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street
City
State
Zone.
old  libertarian  stalwarts   like  Fraenkel   and  Arthur   Garfield
Hays,  who  once  spoke  for  the  ACLU,  now  appeared  merely
as  participants   in   a  discussion   under   its   auspices.    Ernest
Angell,  who  presided  over  the  panel  on  "Congressional   In-
vestigations  and  Constitutional  Protection  of  Citizens'  Rights,"
explained  that  Fraenkel  and  Telford  Taylor,  though  directors
of   the   ACLU,  were  speaking   for   themselves   alone.     The
organization  is split between  those who struggle  with diminish-
ing  energy  for  a  classic  libertarian  position  and  those  looking
for  a bridge to  respectability.    The  organization  is deadlocked
on   urgent   questions   because  part   of   its   board,   local   and
national,  really   agrees  with  the  witch-hunters,  and  hankers
for  a safe  and popular  front  with the  Morrises,  the  Cohns  and
the  new  crop  of  Liz  Dillings  who  turn  out  Counter-Attack.
The  net  effect  of  the  most  important  panel,  that  on  Con-
gressional   investigations,  was  to  give   the  witch  hunters  a
new  sounding  board,  not  to  rebut  them.    Cohn,  Morris  and
Schmidt" took  the  offensive  with  ability,  while  of  the   three
liberals,  only  Fraenkel  acquitted himself  with  precision,  learn-
ing  and  distinction.   All  three  liberals  were on  the  defensive.
None  touched  on  the  realities  in  these  Congressional  investi-
gations—their   origin   and   motivations,   their   excursions   in
perjury.    No  one  mentioned  Lattimore,  Vincent,  Service  or
their  other  victims.
THERE   WERE  INDICATIONS  IN   TAYLOR'S  TALK  of   the   line
on  which the  ACLU  may give  up  the  battle.    This  is the  line
of  "conspiracy."   Free  speech  is  protected  by  the  Constitution
unless  what  is  said  is  part  of   a  conspiracy.    So  runs  this,
the  government's,  argument  in  the  Smith  Act  cases.    But  the
concept   of   conspiracy  when  divorced   from   the   context   of
crime  and  applied  to  speech  becomes  an  easy means of  nullify-
ing  the  First  Amendment.   "The  doctrine  of  conspiracy,"  Mr.
Justice  Douglas  said  in  his  dissent  in  the  Dennis  case,   "has
served  divers  and  oppressive  purposes  and  its  broad  reach can
be  made  to  do  great  evil.    But  never  until  today  has anyone
seriously  thought that  the  ancient law  of  conspiracy could  con-
stitutionally  be  used  to  turn  speech  into  seditious  conduct."
To  cast  loose  from   the  traditional  moorings  of   incitement,
overt  act and  clear  and  present  danger  and  to  substitute  "con-
spiracy" in  this sense as a guide  is to  abandon the  cause of civil
liberty,  and  enlist  in  the  service  of   repression.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
225  Kellogg  BIdg.
14i<  F  St.,  N.W.,   Washington  4,  D.  C.
Application  for
Second  Clan  Entry
Is  Pending
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED