I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953jan24.pdf

============================================================

John  Foster  Duties:  Portrait  of  a Liberator,  See Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I  NUMBER  2JANUARY  24,  1953        7WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
From  Mink  to  General  Motors
Amid  the  glittering wives of  Elsenhower's many-million-
aired  Cabinet  even  the  wife  of  "the  plumber"   was  opulent.
Mrs.  Martin Durkin, the  new  First  Lady  of  the  Labor  Depart-
ment,  was to  appear  at  the  Inaugural  Ball  in  a  bouffant  gown
by  Countess  Alexander,  of  toast  brown  Chantilly  lace,  with
a  ten  yard  sweep  of  skirt.   The  wife  of  the  new  Secretary of
the  Treasury barely managed  to  outpace  this  proletarian  splen-
dor by wearing "huge  clips ... of rubies and diamonds."   The
political   tone   of   the   festivities  matched.     Thanks   to   the
vigilance  of  Representative  Busbey,  of  Illinois,  Aaron  Cop-
land's  "A  Lincoln  Portrait"  was  dropped  from  the  Inaugural
Concert   as   "un-American."      At   the   Inaugural    reception,
Adolph  Menjou  struck  a  suave blow  for  the  free  world  when
he turned his  back on  Soviet Ambassador Georgi Zarubin,  who
had  asked to be presented,  no doubt for  purposes  of  infiltration.
There  was  a  surprise  in  the  Inaugural  Address.    In  his
farewell  to  the  faculty  of  Columbia,  Eisenhower  had  said  he
was breaking a  release  date to  give  the  assembled  professors  a
passage  of  special  interest   from   his  forthcoming   Inaugural.
"As  long  as  we  preach  with  conviction  and  teach  with  in-
tegrity,"   Eisenhower  read,  "that  is  the  true  defense  against
communism."     The   implications   were   reassuring,   but   the
sentence   was  dropped   from   the   Inaugural,   as   Eisenhower
dropped  a  similar  passage  on  a  famous  occasion  during  the
campaign.    The  Inaugural  as  revised  carried  not  the  faintest
suggestion  of  a  plea  for  academic freedom,  or  civil  liberty  of
any  kind.   The  word  freedom  was often  used  but  only  in  the
general  sense  in  which  it  always appears  when  a  new  war  is
being whooped  up.  Eisenhower  said  "freedom  is pitted  against
slavery;  light  against  dark"  but  this  is  immemorial  metaphor.
As  far  back  as the  earliest tribal wars  over  stolen  axe handles,
the  issue has been freedom  against slavery.   The  Inaugural was
a gaudy composition,  febrile and  synthetic.   Its  prose  style was
not quite  as purple as MacArthur's but  it was sometimes almost
as  banal  as Ridgway's.  Those  who  listened  for  concrete  ideas
listened  in  vain.    All  the  cliches  which  make  one  despair  of
negotiation  were  there.    "Appeasement"   was  "futile."     We
shall  never "try to placate an  aggressor  by the  false and wicked
bargain   of   trading  honor   for   security."     Eisenhower   was
bathetic  when  he  said  "in  our  quest  of  honorable  peace,  we
shall  neither  compromise,  nor tire  .  .  ."   The  quest  will  be
very  tiring
 v
if  he  thinks  peace  can  be  achieved without  com-
promise.   Eisenhower seems  to be tired  already.   "In  the final
choice," he  said  at  one point,  "a  soldier's pack  is  not  so heavy
a  burden  as  a  prisoner's  chains."    Eisenhower  is  all  set  to
march.
Just where is  not  clear.   Eisenhower is no fire-eater, but
seems to  be a  rather simple man  v.'ho  enjoys  his  bridge  and  his
golf  and  doesn't like to  be  too  much bothered.    He  promises,
from  what was observed  of  him  by the  press  on  his  campaign
train,  to  be  a  kind  of  president  in  absentia, a  sort  of  political
vacuum  in  the  White  House  which  other  men  will   struggle
among  themselves  to   fill.   In  the  meantime  Congress,   im-
patient  as ever, wants  something  done  about  Korea.    It  would
like  to  widen  the  war  but  without  enlarging  the  risk,  and  at
the  same  time  to  reduce  the  military budget;  all  it  wants  is a
miracle.    There  are  indications  that  something  is  up.    One
does  not  send  one's  Secretary  of  State  and  Mutual  Security
Director  abroad  immediately  after  inauguration  for  a  junket,
nor  just to  "gather  information."    Not  much  information  can
be gathered  when  one  plans  as Dulles  and  Stassen  do  to  visit
seven  countries  in  nine  days.   A  rapid  fire  round  of  visits  at
this  pace  is  made  for  predigested  take-it-or-leave-it  proposi-
tions.   If  the  Korean  war  is  to  be  widened  in  search  of  trick
solutions  some quick high  level  negotiation  is necessary.
Elsenhower's path  to  the  White  House  door  is already
strewn with  time-bombs: Truman's  mischievous farewell  praise
for   the  Presidential  press  conference,  which  Eisenhower   so
much  fears;  the  order  handing  tidelands  oil  to  the   Navy;
Senator  Morse's  bill  challenging   Eisenhower  on  his  promise
to  erase  "every  vestige  of  racism"  from  the  capital.    The  most
explosive  of  all was that  laid in  the  Wilson  case by the  obtuse-
ness  of  his  own  followers,  giddy  with  victory.   Who   could
have dreamt  that  big  business would  prove  so crass  as to  drive
a  Byrd and  a  Duff  into  opposition ?   The  appointments  to  the
Defense   Department  could  hardly  have  been  more  brazen.
General  Motors,  largest defense contractor, got the top  job and
the  deputyship.    The  Army secretary  is  head  of  a  firm  which
does  a  $125,000,000  business  with  the  Army.   The  Air  secre-
tary  is  a heavy holder  of  motor  stock.   The  Navy  secretary is
a  Texas  oil  man.   A  law which  goes  back  to  1863  makes  it  a
crime  for  an  official  to  act  for  the  government  in  transactions
in  which  he  is  "directly  or  indirectly"  interested.    Charles  E.
Wilson  has  $2,500,000  in  GM  stock  and  $600,000  more  due
him in the next four  years providing he does nothing  "inimical"
to  GM's  interests.    Pending  for  action  by  the  new  Secretary
of   Defense  is  an  application   from   GM   for  an  increase  in
profits  on its contracts.  Wilson  and his associates expect  the law
to  be  waived in  their  favor  and  Wilson  sought  to  dismiss  the
ethical  problems  by  telling  the  Senators,  "What  is  good   for
General  Motors  is good  for  the  country  and  what  is  good  for
the  country  is  good   for  General  Motors."     The  remark  re-
calls that  outburst by George  F.  Baer  in  the  coal  strike  of  1902
when  Morgan's  man  rejected  pleas  for  arbitration  by  saying
that the rights of  labor  in this country would be protected  "not
by  labor  agitators,  but  by the  Christian  men  to  whom  God  in
his  infinite  wisdom  has  given  the  control  of  the  property  in-
terests  of  this  country."    That  brash  assertion  of  property's
Divine  Right  to  rule  brought  a  Bronx cheer  from  the  country
even  in  1902.   No  Administration ever  started  with  a  bigger,
more  revealing  or  more  resounding  prattfall.  Eisenhower  will
be haunted  by General  Motors  as Truman  was  by  mink.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   January   24,  1953
John  Foster  Dulles: Portrait  of A Liberator
No  dodger could  have  been more artful  than
the  new  Secretary  of  State  at  his  confirmation
hearing   before   the   Senate   Foreign   Relations
Committee.    John   Foster   Dulles   managed   to
convey   the   impression    when   questioned    by
indignant   Democrats   that   the   foreign   policy
planks  of  the   Republican   platform   were   just
rhetoric  and  at  the  same  time  to  assure  Repub-
licans  like  Taft  that  he  stood  by  every  word  in
them.    At  one  point  Senator  Humphrey   came
close  to  hitting  pay  dirt.    He  wanted  to  know
what  was meant  by  the  charge  that  the  Demo-
crats  had  abandoned  friendly   nations  like  the
Baltic   States,    Poland   and   Czechoslovakia   to
Communism.   Dulles  explained  that  this  was a
reference  to  the  policy  of  containment.    Hum-
phrey   asked   whether   it   wasn't   true  that   the
plight  of  the  Baltic  States  was due  to  the  Stalin-
Hitler  pact.    "Do  you  recall  having  made  any
suggestions   at  the  time,"  Humphrey   queried,
"as  to  how we  might  relieve  the  Baltic  States ?"
Dulles,   in  his  best  church  warden  manner,  re-
plied  that  he  had  made  no  recommendation  ber
cause  he  was  "in  private  life"  at  the  time.
It  is  a  pity  Senator  Humphrey  did  not  press
the  point  further.    The  Hitler-Stalin  pact  sealed
the  fate  of  Poland  as  well  as  the  Baltic  States.
Dulles,  though  a  private  citizen,  did  make  rec-
ommendations  on  the  subject  at  the  time.  After
the  fall  of  Poland,  on  October  28,  1939,  Dulles
made a speech  in  Detroit  at  the National  Coun-
cil   of   the   Y.M.C.A.   declaring   that   he   "saw
neither  in  the  origin  of  the  present  war,   nor
in   its   objectives   'any   affirmative   reason    for
the   United   States  to   become   a  participant'."
(NY   Times   10/29/39.)     In  other   words,  he
recommended  the  abandonment  of  Poland.  The
origin   of  the  war   lay  in  Japanese   aggression
against   China  and  German   aggression   against
Poland.    The  objectives were  to  clear  the  way
for   German   exploitation   and   enslavement   in
Eastern   Europe,   and   for   Japanese    in   Asia.
Neither  origin  nor  objectives  troubled  Dulles.
Humphrey  went   al!  the   •way   back   to  a
speech  Dulles  made in  1928  to  test  the  Secretary
of  State's  views  on  foreign  trade.  But  neither  he
nor  any  other  Senator  touched  on  the  contrast
between  the  equanimity with  which  Dulles  re-
garded  Axis aggression  before  the  war,  and  the
moralistic  fervor  with  which  he  preaches   "lib-
eration"  today.    The  architect  of  the  so-called
"peace  of  reconciliation"   with  Japan  was  rec-
onciled   from   the   very  first  to   Japanese   and
German  aggression.    A  few months after  Hitler
marched  out  of  Geneva  and  into  the  Rhineland,
tearing   up   the   arms  provisions   of   the   Ver-
sailles  Pact,  Dulles  was  moved  to  set  forth  his
views  on  international politics.    His  little  no-
ticed  and  long  forgotten  article  for  the  October,
1935,   issue   of   the   Atlantic   Monthly,   called
"The   Road  to  Peace"  is  recommended  reading
for  Inaugural  Week.    Dulles  met  the  growing
international  crisis  with  a  defense  of  the  need
for  force  in  history  which  somehow  made  the
aggressed   rather   than   the   aggressor   seem   to
blame  for  what  was  happening   in  the  world.
The   road   to  peace,   as  Dulles  saw  it,  was  to
give   Germany,   Italy   and   Japan   what    they
wanted.
Dulles  likes  to  imply  that  he  is  an  old  Wil-
sonian  but  he  regarded  the  League  as  merely  a
means  of  imposing   French   hegemony  on   Eu-
rope.    He   opposed    the   non-recognition    doc-
trine   applied   by  the   League   and  by  Stimson
"with  reference  to  the  situation  brought  about
by  Japan  in  Manchuria"—note  the   phrasing,
which   avoided    any   implication   of    Japanese
aggression.    Dulles was against   non-recognition
because  it  was  "merely  designed  to  perpetuate
the  status  quo."    Dulles  in  those  days  harped
so  much  on  the  wickedness   of  trying  to  main-
tain  the  status  quo  as  to  make  himself   sound
almost  like  a  revolutionary.   Dulles  thought  it
"at  least  conceivable"  that  what  the   Japanese
were  doing   in  Manchuria   reflected  "a   logical
and  inevitable  tendency"  which  "could   not  be
held   in   suspense   until   that   hypothetical  day
when  China   was  prepared   freely   to  acquiesce
therein."   The   circumlocutions   were   lush   but
the  meaning was plain.   The  legal  footwork was
downright  brilliant.    The  defendant,  far   from
being  guilty  of  rape,  was  the  helpless   victim
of   the   plaintiff's  obstinate   reluctance   to   give
consent!
Smooth  is  an  inadequate   word  for  Dulles.
His  prevarications  are  so highly  polished  as  to
be  aesthetically  pleasurable.   Let  us  look  more
closely  at  how he  did  it  in  the Atlantic  Monthly
article.    He  began  by  saying  that  the  drift   to
war  was  bewildering.     "Faced   by  a   situation
which  superficially  seems  so  inexplicable,"   Dul-
les  wrote,  "we  adopt  the  time-honored  expedi-
ent  of  postulating  a  'personal  devil'.    Hitler,
Mussolini   and  Japanese  war  lords  in  turn  be-
come  the  object  of  our  suspicion."    Not   they,
but  our  overheated  imaginations  were  at  fault.
We  must  identify  the  "underlying   forces  .  .  .
otherwise  we  are  striking   at  shadows."    The
true  explanation  "of  the  imminence of  war  lies
in  ...      the  fact   that  peace  efforts   have  been
directed   toward   the  prevention  of  change."
Dulles  made the  desire  for  stability  and  peace
seem  somehow  selfish.    "Those  whose  lives  fall
in   pleasant   places,"   he   wrote,   "contemplate
with  equanimity  an  indefinite  continuation  of
their  present  state.   'Peace'  means  to  them  that
they  should  be  left  undisturbed.  .  .  .  'Aggres-
sion'  becomes  the  capital  international  crime."
Notice  how  Dulles  put  "aggression"  in  quota-
tion   marks.    It   was   "no   mere  coincidence,"
Dulles  continued,  warming  up  to  his   theme,
"that   it   is   the   presently   favored    nations—
France,  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States—
whose  governments  have  been  most  active  in
devising  plans for  perpetual  peace."    There fol-
lowed   an   extraordinary   sentence,   which   the
German  clients  of  Sullivan  &  Cromwell  must
have  relished  enormously,  "If  other  countries,
like  Germany,  Japan  and  Italy,"  Dulles  went
on,  "adhere   only  reluctantly  if  at  all  to  such
projects,   it   is   not   because   these  nations   are
inherently  warlike  or  bloodthirsty.    They  too
want  peace   but   they  undoubtedly  feel   within
themselves   potentialities   which   are   repressed
and  desire  to  keep  open   avenues  of   change."
It  was  all  so  simple  when  properly  under-
stood.    Dulles   pleaded   the   necessity   for   "a
sound  body  of  public  opinion   ready  to  throw
its  influence  in  favor  of  appropriate  periodical
changes  in  national  domains"—no  doubt  as  in
Poland   and   Czechoslovakia.     Dulles    worked
himself  up  into  a  positive  crescendo  of  right-
eousness.    "Only  in  such a way,"  he  concluded,
"is  it   possible   to  end  the  unnatural  alliance
which  now  exists  between  liberals  and reaction-
aries,  both  of  whom  seek  to  maintain  the  status
quo,  the  liberals  because  they  mistakenly  think
this  means  peace,  and  the  reactionaries  because
it  perpetuates   their  exploitation  of  that  which
they  already  have."  A  man  capable  of  such  an
argument  is  a  genius  of  a  sort,  but  not  the  sort
one  welcomes  as  Secretary  of  State.
Dulles  is  a  man  of  wily  and  subtle   mind.
It  is difficult  to believe  that  behind  his  unctuous
manner  he  does  not  take  a  cynical amusement
in  his  own  monstrous  pomposities.    He  gives
the  impression  of  a  man  who  lives constantly
behind  a  mask.    Nowhere  else  did  Dulles  ven-
ture  to  indicate  his  real  views  on  foreign policy
as   openly   as  in   the   article   for   the  Atlantic
Monthly;    his    1939   book,    War,   Peace   and
Change, cloaks his  pro-Axis sympathies in heavy
abstractions.   When  that  article  is  coupled with
certain   indiscreet    outbursts   in   upstate   New
York  speeches during his  1949  Senate  campaign
against   Lehman,  the  corporation  lawyer's   real
ideological   orientation   becomes   clear.   Dulles,
who was never  moved  to denounce the "statism"
of   Hitler  and  Mussolini,   said  in  a  speech   at
Elizabethtown,  N.  Y.,  that  "bloody"  revolution
might  some  day be  necessary  in  this  country  to
combat  the  "statism"  of  the  New  Dealers.   The
rash  remark reflected  just such a readiness  to  use
force  and  violence  against  social  reform  as  pro-
duced  Fascism  in  Germany  and  Italy.  The  be-
nign  and  "realistic"  view  Dulles  took  of  Fascist
expansion  was  not  unrelated  to  a  sympathy of
outlook  on  domestic  policy.   His  New  York  at-
tacks  in  the   1949  campaign  on  "handouts   for
teachers"  and  "handouts  for  farmers,"   like  his
opposition   to   Federal   aid   for   education,   are
indicative.  The  "liberation"  with  which  Dulles
is  concerned  is  not  liberation  from  dictatorship
but  liberation  from  the  welfare  state.
Barely  eight  years after  the  war  against  the
Axis,  a  Senate  committee  has  unanimously con-
firmed  the  nomination  as  Secretary  of  State  of
a  man  who  was  and  continues to  be  both  pro-
German  and pro-Japanese.   He consistently  mis-
conceived  and  misrepresented the  nature of  Ger-
man  and Japanese  aggression.   The  Nazi-Soviet
pact  and  the  Japanese  attack  on  Pearl   Harbor
were  facilitated  by  the  mental  outlook  he  typi-
fied.   But  no  attempt  was  made  at  the  hearing
to  explore   his  views  in  the  past  nor  was  he
subject  to  real  questioning  as  to  the  policies  he
proposed  for  the  future.    His  obsessive  hatred
for   socialism  was  the  kind  the  Germans  and
Japanese   exploited   before  and  are  exploiting
again.    It  is fortunate  for  this country,  Western
Europe  and  China  that  he  was  not  at  the  helm
of   foreign   policy  before  the   war.     It   is  un-
fortunate  that  he  should  be  now.    The  same
errors  may repeat  themselves,  in  a  more  tragic
form.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,    January   24,  1953
I.  F.  Stone's    Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  Weekly  at  Room  225, 1416 F
St.,  N.W.,  Washington  4, D.  C,  50 times
a  year.    Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $5
a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and  elsewhere  in
the   Western   Hemisphere,   $6;   England
and   Continental   Europe,  $10  by  1st  class
mail,   $15  by  air;  for   Israel,   Asia, Aus-
tralia  and  Africa,   $10  by  first  class  mail,
$20   by  air   mail.  Single  copy,   15   cents.
Telephone,  STerling  3-0938.
Vol.  1,  No.  2
January  24,  1953
COMMENT
Undiplomatic Diplomat
In his address  to  the Pennsylvania  State Bar
Association  in  Scranton,  George  F.  Kennan  not
only  took  issue  with  the  "liberation"  views  of
the  new  Secretary  of  State  but  also  took   out
after  the  witch  hunters and  stepped  on  the  toes
of  the  protectionists  in  Congress.  Kennan  seems
determined  to  retire,  but  if  he  does  it  will  be
with  honor.   He  termed  the  pet  Dulles  idea  of
stirring  "subversion"   in  the  Soviet  bloc  incon-
sistent  -with  membership in  the  United  Nations.
Unkindest  of  all  was  his  dry  observation   that
the  prospects for  success  "would  be  very  small
indeed,  since  the  problem  of  civil  obedience  is
not  a  great  problem  in  the  modern  police  dicta-
torship."   Kennan  dug  up  a  magnificently  perti-
nent  warning  by  John  Quincy  Adams  against
going  abroad  "in  search of monsters to  destroy."
He   sideswiped   protectionism   as   "inconsistent
with  the  sort  of  international  relationships   we
require  at  this  juncture."  He  then  threw  down a
direct  challenge  to  the  whole  crew  of  Congres-
sional  witch hunters by saying that  he  could  not
"recall  a  single  major  decision  of  foreign pol-
icy"  during  his  years  in  the  State  Department
"which  Communist influence could have had any
appreciable  part  in  determining."   On  the  other
hand, he  said  he had  seen  "serious  damage  done
...  to  public  confidence  and to  governmental
morale by the mishandling of  our  own  measures
to  counter  precisely  this  problem of  Communist
penetration."   He  took  a whack at "the inability
of  many people  to distinguish between  questions
of  loyalty  and  questions   of  opinion."   Kennan
said  that  "As  things  stand  today,  I  can  see  no
reason  why  malicious  people  should  have  any
particular  difficulty  in  rendering  unavailable  for
service  to  this  country almost  any  person  whom
they  might  select  for  this  treatment.  All  that  is
necessary  is  to  release  a  spate  of  rumors   and
gossip  and demands for  investigation."   It  looks
as  if  Kennan will  soon  be  as  persona  non  grata
in  "Washington  as  in  Moscow.
Gunning  for  Big  Game
A  showdown  battle  within  the   Republican
party  between  the  respectable  elements  around
Eisenhower  and  the  McCarthy  type  of  crypto-
Fascist  is  likely  to  be  the  big  story  of  the  com-
ing  Administration.  There  is  reason  to  suspect
that  the  fight  will  open  much  sooner  than  ex-
pected,  and  will  center  around  the nomination
of   Eisenhower's   friend,  Gen.  Walter   Bedell
Smith,  to  be  Under  Secretary  of  State.   As  if  in
preparation  for  the  Senate  debate  on  confirma-
tion,  Senator  McCarran  secretly  reopened  hear-
ings  a  week  before  the  inaugural  in  the loyalty
case  of  John   P.  Davies.    Davies  was  one  of
McCarthy's  original  targets  in  the  State  Depart-
ment   and   was   recently   cleared   by   the   Civil
Service   Loyalty   Review   Board.    Davies   was
supported  by  General  Smith,  and  the  favorable
verdict  must  have  rankled  with  the  McCarran
committee which  has  been  trying  for  some  time
to  get  the  Justice  Department   to  indict   the
diplomat   for  perjury.    The   attack  on   Davies
focusses   around   the   allegation   that  he   urged
the  CIA  to  employ  several  alleged  Communists,
and   McCarran   seems  determined  to   keep   re-
hashing  it  until  he  gets  the  verdict  he  wants.
To  "get"  Davies would  also  be to  "get"  Smith,
and  to  throw  a  chill  into  the  Eisenhower  circle
itself.   Jenner  will  take  over  the   subcommittee
from   McCarran,   and   may  be  counted   on   to
carry  on  in  the  same  spirit.    An  indication  of
what  may be  expected  on  the  Senate floor when
Smith's  name  comes  up  for  confirmation is  the
attack  on  him  in  last  Saturday's  Chicago  Tri-
bune  and  Washington  Times-Herald.   Smith  is
blamed  for  incompetent  handling  of  intelligence
as secretary  of  the  Army General  Staff  the  night
before  Pearl  Harbor, and  criticized  for  his  testi-
mony  in  the  Davies  case.  "One of  the  tasks of
the  new  administration,"  said  an  editorial pub-
lished   by   McCormick's   Siamese   twin   news-
papers,  "will  be  to  rout  security  risks  from  the
(State)   department.     Smith's   position  in   the
Davies  case may indicate  a softness toward  these
people."
Whitewash  and  Red  Smear
Whether   Kurt  Ponger  and  Otto  Verber  are
guilty  of  espionage  for  the  Russians  is  for  the
courts   to   determine.    But   there   are   obvious
political  dangers  in  the  "dope"  stories  coming
out  of  Frankfurt  to  the  effect  that  the  two  men
were  part  of  a  ring  recruited  during  the  Nurn-
berg   trials.    An   anonymous   "high   American
official"   was  quoted   as  saying  that  the  arrest
"ties   in   with   information  showing   that   too
many  of  the  Americans employed  at  Nurnberg
were  either  Communists  or  were  being  used  by
Communists."   Another  also anonymous Ameri-
can  official  was  quoted  as saying that  one  of  the
men  who   prosecuted   the   case  against  Krupp
was  recently  removed  from  government  service
as  the  result  of  a  loyalty  check.   The   effect  of
all  this  scuttlebutt  is  to  create  the  impression
that  the  prosecution  was  somehow  or  to  some
degree   a   Communist   plot.    No   doubt   many
Germans  will  find  this  a  congenial  theory.   The
danger   in   spreading   it   is   dramatized   by   the
roundup  of  former  Nazis  on  serious  charges  in
the  British  zone and  the  indignation  with  which
the   arrests   have   been   greeted   by   the   West
German  press  and  government.   Nazism  is  far
from  dead  in  Germany,  as a  new  survey  by  the
U. S.  High   Commissioner   in   Bonn   indicates.
It  would  be  most  irresponsible  and  alarming  if
the  Ponger-Verber   affair   were   allowed   to  be-
come  a  peg  for  propaganda  putting  the  white-
wash   on   Nazi   criminals  by  putting   the  Red
smear  on  the  Nurnberg  trials.
Hat's  Off
To  Joseph  and  Stewart  Alsop  for  their col-
umn   of  January   18  urging  the  new   Attorney
General  to  investigate  our  present  crop  of pro-
fessional  informers.   Best  tidbit  they  turned  up:
ex-Red  Harvey  Matusow  recently  charged  that
the   Sunday  section   of  the   New   York    Times
alone has  "126 dues-paying  Communists."  The
entire  staff   of  the  Sunday  section,  the  Alsops
found,   only  numbers  87,  including  two   part-
time  office  boys.
Help Wanted
The  second  issue  of  my  -weekly  is  now  in  your  hands.   By  now  you  should
have  some  idea  of  the  kind  of  newspaper  I  am  going   to  put   out.    Not   the
"lowdown,"  sensational  even  if  untrue,  but  a  sober  analysis  of  facts  too  often
left  out  or  buried  on  the  back  pages  of  the  commercial  newspapers.    I  want
this  paper  to  form  a  valuable  record  of  the  next  four  momentous  years.   The
response  to  my  announcement  of  publication  has  been  -wonderfully   heartening.
You,  who have  already subscribed,  can  keep the  ball  rolling  by  getting  a  friend
or  two  to  do the  same.  And will  those  of  you  who  have  not  yet  gotten  around
to  subscribing  do  it  now  by  using  the  form  on  the  back  of  this  issue?   Five
dollars  is not  an insignificant  sum in  these  years  of  inflation but  I  hope  to  pack
five  times  five  dollars worth  of  valuable  information  into  these  pages  each  year.
With  your  help  I'll  be  able  to  do  that  job.
I.  F.  Stone
1  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J.  F.  Stone'*  Weekly,   January   24,   1953
Storm  Warnings  for  the  G.O.P.
Mr.  Truman's  final  economic report  is   embodied   in  a
document  of  218  pages.    One  has  to  read  more  than  half
way  through   before  one  begins  to  get  at  the  truth.    The
outgoing  President's  own  report  to  Congress  fills  the  first  27
pages  with  unabashed  self-glorification.    Marx  ("the false
conclusions  which  Marx  drew  from  the  defects  of  nineteenth
century  industrialism")  bites  the  dust  and  the  Democrats  are
credited   with   establishing    something   close   to   the   Earthly
Paradise.    "We   achieved   in  great   measure,"   Mr.   Truman
said,  "the  kind  of  economic  society  of  which  the  [Full  Em-
ployment]    Act   is   a   symbol—a   prosperous   and   growing
economy  of  free  men."   It  should  have  been  a two  color  print
job,  to  allow  for   blushes.
The  Council  of  Economic  Advisers  begins  its  own  annual
economic  review on page 35.  Its wordy euphemisms  are as dis-
creet  as those  of a grand  vizier  reporting  to a sultan  with  high
blood  pressure.    At first nothing  is said to disturb  the  glowing
picture  drawn  by the  President,  but  those  who  persevere  will
find  themselves  rewarded.    By the  time  page  110  is  reached
the  Council  begins  to  get  down  to  brass  tacks.  "Although
consumption  levels  since  1945  have  been  high,  total  real  per
capita   consumption  has  increased   very  little."    One   reason
appears  on  page  112,  "Contrary  to  the  common  impression,
average  hourly  earnings  in manufacturing . . .  have  riot  risen
faster  than  the  economy's  general  productivity  gains,  but  in-
stead  apparently have lagged  significantly."   Page  113 informs
us sotto voce,  "study  of  data  on  corporate  profits  confirms  the
need  for  some  relative  shift  of  before-tax  income  from  bus-
iness  to  consumers."     Manufacturing  corporations   averaged
annually  almost  25  percent  profit  before  taxes  on  their  stock-
holders'  equity  in  the  years  1947-50.
Those  "defects  of  nineteenth  century  industrialism"
on  which  Mr.  Truman  triumphantly  blames  the   misappre-
hensions  of  Marx  seem  still  to  be  with  us.    The  classic  lag
of  consumption  behind  output  is  still  observable.    While  the
national  output  rose  24 percent  from  1947  to  1952,  per  capita
income  rose  less than  10 percent.    Consumption  took  69  per-
cent  of  production  in  the  postwar  years  "up  through   1950,
and  then,  under  the  joint  impact  of  the  security program  and
a  higher  savings  rate,  tumbled  to  about  63  percent  in 1951
and  1952."   Various forms  of  foreign  subsidy, military prepa-
rations  and  the  Korean  war  have  been  filling  that  gap  be-
tween  consumption  and  output.
The  years  since  the  war  have  seen  "an  unbroken  invest-
ment  boom."    The  Council  estimates that  in  1952  alone  about
10  billion  dollars  in  new  industrial  facilities  were  made  pos-
sible by accelerated tax  amortization,  i.e.  paid  for  in  large part
by  the  U.S.  Treasury  through  tax  deductions.    The  vast  ex-
pansion  of  American  industrial  capacity  and  the  high   level
of   employment  achieved  in  the   postwar  years  was  due  in
considerable  degree  to  Rooseveltianism  turned  upside  down;
a military WPA  enabled  business to  lean  profitably  on  golden
shovels.    As  Mr.  Truman  said,  one  of  the  safeguards  against
an  economic setback  is  "a  level  of  public  expenditures  which,
while  we  all  want  to  see it  lower  as  soon  as world  conditions
permit,  stabilizes  demand  and  stimulates  private  investment."
And  what  if  world  conditions  permit  these  expenditures  to
be lowered ?  What if  Stalin should  mischievously make peace ?
Mr.  Truman  himself   admits,  "We  may  face  in  the   future,
particularly   when  defense    spending   can  safely    be   reduced,
more serious tests of  our  ability to  avoid depression  than  those
which  have  occurred  since  World  War II."
There  are  other  ways  than  war  alarum to  prime  the
pump of  business  and  the  Council  touches upon them  gingerly
in  the  closing  pages  of  its  report.    Social  security  payments
are   ludicrously  and   shamefully  low.  Almost   two   million
miserable farm  families need to be taken off submarginal lands.
Every  city  has  its  open  sore  of  slums.   The  country's highway
system  has  seriously  deteriorated.    The  schools  need   600,000
more  classrooms  by  1958.    There  is  a  desperate  shortage  of
hospital  space  and  huge  untapped   reservoirs  of  power  and
mineral  wealth  to  be  opened  up.   Wistfully  the  Council  calls
for   "full  speed  ahead  with  preparatory  measures  so  that  de-
velopment  projects  . .  . may be accelerated  promptly  as part
of  a  total  antirecession   economic  strategy."     This,  like  the
suggestion,  that  maybe  business  ought  to  pay  higher  wages
and  be  satisfied  with  lower  profits,  is  unlikely  to  find  full-
throated  echo  among  the  victorious  Republicans.   Don't  look
now while the  festivities are on, but  something may be  waiting
around  the  corner  for  Eisenhower  as  It  waited  for  Hoover.
I.  F.  Stone't   Weekly
Room  225  Kellogg  BUg.
141 < F Strott,  Wukingto-  4,  D.  C.
Plea** cater tie folbwiag  lubtcription.  $J  for 1 year  b
eacloeed.  (See page  J  for  foreign  rate*)
NOM   ....................................v......
I. F. Stone's Weekly
225  Kellogg  Bldg.   .
1416 F St., Waihington 4, D. C.
Sec.   34.66,  P.L.  and  R.
U.  S.  Poitage
PAID
Waduagtoa, D.  C.
Permit  No.  40221
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED