I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953apr18.pdf

============================================================

New  Light  on  Malenkov's  "Liberal"  Line,  See Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I  NUMBER  14APRIL  18,   1953
5       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Dulles  Afiair:  Stupidity  or  Sabotage?
The  notion  that  John  Foster  Dulles's  little  talk  with a
group  of  favored  Washington  correspondents  was intended  to
kunch   a  trial  balloon  will  not  bear  close  examination.  No
trial  balloon  was needed  to learn  that Chiang and  his  Republi-
can  friends  in  Congress  would react  violently to  the  idea  of  a
UN  trusteeship  over  Formosa.  No  test  run  was  required   to
discover  that  the  intransigeam  Syngman  Rhee  would  object
to  anything less  than  the  surrender  of  all  North  Korea.  The
reaction  of  Western  Europe  was  easily  foreseeable:  there  the
news  fed  the  suspicion  that  the  United  States  does  not  want
to  settle  the  Korean  war, and was therefore making  politically
impossible  demands.  If  the  Eisenhower  Administration  was
seriously  considering  division  of  Korea  at  the   "waist"  and
a  Formosan  trusteeship,  it  had everything  to  lose by  premature
disclosure.
If  these  proposals  were  intended  to  block  peace,  they were
well  framed. The  North  Koreans,  after  extraordinary  suffering
and  heroism,  would  be asked  to give  up  their  capital  and  most
of  their  territory.  The  Chinese,  flushed  with  their  success  in
fighting  a  major  Western  military  power  to  a  standstill  for
the first time  in  their  history, would  be  asked to  relinquish  an
island  province  they  regard  and  we  recognize  as  theirs.  But
if  the  purpose  of  these terms was to  upset  the  peace  talks, why
disclose them in advance? The timing alerted and infuriated  our
allies  and  at  the  same  time  intensified  unrest  within  Republi-
can  ranks  in  Congress.  The  effect   of  Dulles's  talk  with  the
correspondents  was to  weaken  the  Administration's  power  to
hold  in  line  its  followers at  home  and  its  allies  abroad,  while
forewarning  the  enemy.
The  trial  balloon  theory  rests  on  the  assumption   that
Eisenhower  and  Dulles  see  eye  to  eye  on  foreign  policy.  But
what  if  this assumption is untrue?  Their  first  reactions  to  the
"peace  offensive"  were  strikingly  different.  Eisenhower   said
he  would  take  conciliatory moves  at  face  value  until  proven
otherwise;  Dulles  said  nothing  had  changed  or  could  change
as  long  as  Russia  was  a  Soviet  dictatorship.  The   President's
attitude  reflected   a  readiness  to  negotiate;   the  Secretary  of
State  indicated  a  belief   that  co-existence   with  the   present
Russian   government   was   impossible.   From   such   different
premises  must flow different  attitudes  toward  peace  in  Korea.
Differences  in outlook  are accompanied  in this case by  differ-
ences  in  temperament.  Eisenhower  is  a  simple  man,  while
Dulles  is  pompous,  subtle  and  crafty.  The  latter  pushed  his
way  into  the  job  of  Secretary  of  State.  Eisenhower  has  never
particularly  liked Dulles; the  lawyer  did  not  declare for Eisen-
hower  until  his nomination was absolutely assured. The  gossip
in  Washington—gossip Dulles also hears—is that the  President
would  have  preferred  Clay  or  McCloy  in  the  job  of  Secretary
5  7
of  State,  and  intends  to  replace  him.  Dulles  is  dose  to  Mac-
Arthur,  while  Eisenhower  leans  on  the  more  sober   military
like Bradley.
Dulles  has had  ignominiously  to  tone  down  those  ideas
of  "liberation"   and  a  bold  new  foreign  policy  which  he  ex-
pressed  last  year.  The  watered  down  resolution  "repudiating"
Yalta  which  Dulles  was  forced  to  sponsor  on  the  Hill  must
have  been  as  disappointing   to  him  as  to  the  right  wing  Re-
publicans. All that Dulles  stands for must lead him to reject  the
idea  of  peace  in  Korea.  The  Adenauer  visit  must  remind  him
that   German  rearmament,  a  project   Acheson  was  able   to
launch  only because  of the  war  in  Korea, would be  endangered
by  its  cessation.  A rearmed  Western Germany,  securely  linked
to the Atlantic  Pact by the hope of recovering  the Eastern  lands,
is essential  for that rollback  of the  Russians  to their  old  borders
on  which  Dulles  and  the  "liberationists" have  set  their  hearts.
What   if   Dulles   deliberately   upset   the   apple-can?   This
hypothesis  is more logical  than that  of the trial  balloon. It  does
not require  us to believe  that so shrewd  an old lawyer as Dulles
would  not  realize the  consequences  of  "spilling" so  momentous
a  story. The  calculated  leak  is a  familiar  weapon  in  the  intra-
mural  feuds  of  American  Administrations.   There  is  evidence
of  a  sharp  difference  of  opinion  within  Eisenhower's  official
family  over  the  tempo  and  magnitude  of  rearmament.
Eisenhower's  Defense  Secretary,  Wilson,  and  his  budget
director,  the  able Detroit banker,  Dodge, have antagonized  the
military  by  their  plans  for  stretching   out  and  reducing   the
arms program. Antagonism  has grown  to  the point  where Eis-
enhower  has warned  Congressmen  against  "military  lobbyists'".
While  the  Air  Force  feeds  out  horror  stories  and  paints  the
Russian  air  fleet  in  the  most   fearful   colors   (just  as  rival
Anglo-German naval lobbies  used to do before World  War  I),
some of  the  bankers  and  big  business  men  in  this  Administra-
tion  (quite  unlike  the  picture  painted  of  them  in  Pravda)  are
fighting  government  by  alarm and pressing hard  for  economy.
This  calls for  relaxation  of  tension  and  peace,  not  "liberation".
Eisenhower  and  his  aides  may  well  have  discussed  the  idea
of  a  division  of  Korea  at  the  "waist"  and  the  old  idea  of  a
Formosan  trusteeship  as  possible  ways  of  solving  the  political
problems  with  which  a  cease-fire  will  confront  them.   The
Dulles   off-the-record   talk  may  have  made  these  ideas  seem
more  concrete than  they were.  In  any  case  by  disclosing  them
prematurely  and  as actual  proposals, Dulles  has  made  the  task
of  achieving peace immensely more difficult.  Whether  this was
done by obtuseness or design,  it must make Eisenhower anxious
to  get  himself  a  new  Secretary  of  State.  Perhaps  Dulles   felt
his  days  in  that  office  were numbered  anyway.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April   18,  1953
New  Light  on  Malenkbv's  More  "Liberal" Line
In  trying to understand the new internal
developments   in  the   Soviet   Union,   it  is
useful  to  go  back  and  restudy  the  report
made  by  Malenkov  last   October   to   the
Nineteenth   Congress  of   the   Communist
Party  of  the  U.S.S.R.
Interest  abroad  has  focused  on the  clues
this  reported  provided  as to  Soviet  foreign
policy:  Malenkov  stressed  the  possibility
of  peaceful  co-existence.  Too  little  atten-
tion  has  been  paid  to  the  domestic  aspects
of  that  report.  These  are  of  especial   in-
terest  now  in  assessing   so  startling  a  de-
velopment  as  the  announcement  in  which
the  accused   Soviet  doctors  were  cleared
and  the  secret  police  declared   guilty  of  a
frame-up.
There  is  no  way  of  knowing   whether
this  official  exposure  of  the  secret  police
portends   basic   shifts   in   internal   policy.
But  something  of  the  sort  may  have  been
foreshadowed  by the  Malenkov  report  last
October.  In  this,  the  main  address  to  the
first  Communist  party   Congress  held  in
the  U.S.S.R.  since   1939,   Malenkov  over
and  over  again  emphasized the  importance
of  encouraging  "critics from  below".
Vengeance on  Critics
The  Malenkov  report  stressed  the  need
for   such  criticism  to  put  a  check  on  bu-
reaucratic  elements.  He  had  a  good  deal
• to  say   of  those  party   "functionaries    who
... are  intolerant  of criticism  from  below,
stifle   .it   and   wreak    vengeance    on   the
critics."  These  passages  are   given  new
interest  now  because  one  way  to  prevent
such   vengeance   and' to  encourage  plain
speaking  "from  below"  would  be  to  give
the ordinary  Soviet  citizen greater  protec-
tion   against   arbitrary    officials   and   the
police.
.  The    Malenkov   report  • provides   some
acid  portraits  of  the  Soviet   bureaucracy.
Of  the  situation  in  agriculture,  Malenkov
said,  "Some  workers  in  Party,  Soviet  and
agricultural   bodies   instead   of   guarding
the  interests  of  the  collective  farms'  com-
mon  enterprise  themselves  engage  in  pil-
fering  collective  farm  property  . . . These
workers   take   advantage   of  their    official
position   to  occupy  collective   farm   land,
make  collective farm  boards  and  chairmen
supply  them  with  grain,  meat,  milk  and
other commodities free  of charge or  at low
price.  They  exchange  their  own  low  pro-
ductive   stock   for   high   productive   and
more  valuable  cattle  belonging  to  the  col-
lective  farms."
Commissars as Entrepeneurs
Malenkov   drew   a   picture   of   similar
conditions   in   some   sectors   of   industry.
Malenkov   spoke  of  "business    executives,
with   the   connivance  of  party    organiza-
tions,  submitting  obviously  inflated lists of
required   raw  materials  and  supplies,  and
.  .  .  doctoring  output   reports  to  conceal
non-fulfilment  of  production   programmes.
Quite   a   few   functionaries,"   Malenkov
continued,  "forgetting  that  the enterprises
entrusted  to  their  supervision  and  leader-
ship are  state enterprises,  try  to turn  them
into  their  own private  domains . . ."
"Another  major  evil,"  Malenkov  said,
"is that we have not a few individuals who
seem  to  think  that   Party  decisions  and
Soviet  laws  are  not  binding  on  them  and
imagine  that  we  have  two  kinds  of  disci-
pline : one for  the  rank  and file, the  other
for    the   leaders.   These   'leaders'   think
that  everything  is permitted  them  . . . and
engage  on  all  kinds  of  arbitrary   action."
Stifling  Criticism
Malenkov  complained  that  "leaders  of
Party,  Soviet  and  economic  organizations
not  infrequently  turn  meetings  .  .  .  into
ceremonial  affairs,-into  occasions  for  self-
praise  .  .  .  and  this  simply  adds  to the
complacency  and  smugness."  He   empha-
sized  the  need  for  "criticism  from  below"
as a  means  of correcting errors and as  "an
expression  of  the  creative   initiative  arid
activity   of  millions  of   working  people."
He  declared  that  "meetings  must  become
real  open  forums  for  bold  and   trenchant
criticism  of   shortcomings."
Such  real  forums,  Malenkov  said,  were
not  to  be  had  for  the  asking.  He   attacked
"the   view  that  criticism  from  below  can
develop  of  itself,  automatically  .  .  ."  He
declared  that  "It  can develop  . . . only on
the   conditions   that    every   person   who
offers   sound   criticism  can   be   confident
that  he  will  find  support  in  our  organiza-
tions and that  the  shortcomings he  reveals
will  actually  be  eliminated."  He   asserted
that  it was  "particularly  important at  this
juncture  . . . relentlessly  to combat, as the
Party's   bitterest    enemy,   everyone   who
obstructs   the  development  of  criticism  of
our  shortcomings,  stifles criticism and  per-
mits  persecution  and  reprisals  for   criti-
cism."
The  Need for Satire
Malenkov  spoke  as  the  secretary  of  the
Central   Committee  of  the  Party.  Stalin's
old  post.  He  covered  the  whole  of  Soviet
life  in  his  report,  and  his  observations  on
the  state  of  Soviet  literature  and  science
were  in  keeping  with  those  he  expressed
on   agriculture    and   industry.   He   com-
plained, for  example,  that  in  Soviet fiction,
drama  and  films  there  was  no  satire.  In
science   Malenkov  called  for   "promoting
criticism  and  the   conflict  of  opinions  in
scientific  work."
Communism  and  Free  Speech
There  is no  reason  to  suspect  that  Mal-
enkov  is  a  crypto-liberal.   But  his  report
indicates  that  it  may  be  dawning  on  So-
viet   leaders  that   some   real   freedom  of
speech  and  some  real  safeguards   against
arbitrary   police  action  are  necessary  for
the  healthy  working  of  their  society.
The   whole   system   of   planning   may
break  down  if  statistics  can  be  distorted
by  officials  to hide their  own  shortcomings.
Bureaucratic  arteriosclerosis   may  spread
if  officials  can  make  it  hazardous   for   un-
derlings   and  ordinary  workers  to  speak
out.   The   bureaucracy   may   become   too
powerful   for  the  efficient  working  of  the
state.
Malenkov said  "one  of the  most  danger-
ous  and  pernicious  infringements of Party
and   State   discipline   is   concealment   by
some   functionaries   of  the   true   state  of
affairs  in  the  enterprises  and  offices  under
their  charge".  He  asserted   that  "one  of
the   most   widespread   and   deeply   rooted
shortcomings  in  the  practical  work  of  So-
viet,  economic  arid  Party  organizations"
was  the  "lack  of  proper   verification"  of
whether  directives  had  been  carried   out.
"Our  organizations  and  establishments,"
Malenkov  continued,  "issue  decisions,  di-
' rectives and  orders  in far  greater numbers
than  is  required,  but  they  are  little  con-
cerned  about  whether   and  how  these  de-
cisions  are  carried  out."   Malenkov  said,
"Only  verification  of  fulfilment   from   the
top  combined  with  control  from  below  by
the  Party  and  non-party  masses  will  en-
sure  the  timely  elimination  of  shortcom-
ings."
A  Soviet  Habeas  Corpus?
r
But  if  rank-and-file  party  ihembers  ami
ordinary   workers   are   to  help   check  on
conditions  in  industry,  they  must  be  freed
from  the  fear  of  being  punished  or  framed
by  higher-ups.  It  may  be  significant  that
Pravda  in  the  announcement  clearing  the
doctors  laid  new  stress  on  Article   127 of
the   Soviet   Constitution  which  "guaran-
tees  Soviet  citizens  the  inviolability of  the
person.  No  one  can  be  detained  without
a  court  decision  or  an  order  of  the  prose-
cutor."
If   this   is   really   enforced,   it   will   no
longer  be possible  for  persons  to  be seized
and  held  by  the  secret  police  on  its  own
responsibility.   This   would   begin   to   be
equivalent  to  habeas  corpus.  Pravda  went
on  the  say  that  "the  defense  of  the  rights
of  Soviet  citizens ...  is  the  most  impor-
tant  foundation  for  the  further   develop-
ment   and   strengthening   of   the   Soviet
State."
Pravda  concluded  the editorial  accusing
the  secret  police of framing the  doctors  by
saying,  "No  one  will  be  allowed  to violate
Soviet   laws.  Every  worker,  every  collec-
tive  farmer,  every  member  of  the  Soviet
intelligentsia  can  work  safely  and without
fear  in the  knowledge  that his  civic rights
are  reliably  guarded  under  Soviet  social-
ist  watchfulness."
Is  this  the  beginnings  of  a  new  Malen-
kov   line   in   internal   policy   which   may
reduce  the  swollen   powers   of  the   secret
police  and.encourage  the  ordinary  citizen
to  speak  more  freely?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's Weekly,  April  18,  1953
/.  F. Stone's   Weekly
• Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F. STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two weeks
of  August  at  Room  205,  301  E.  Capitol
St.,  S.E.,  Washington   3,  D.   C.  Subscrip-
tion  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a  year; Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere  in   the    Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and  Continental
Europe,  $10  by  1st  class  mail,  $15  by  air;
for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.  Single
copy,  15  cents. Tel.:  LI 4-7087.  Entered  as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,   D.  C.
April  18,  1953
Vol  I,  No.  14
The Vanishing  Dream
Of  Coolie  Armies
A   sobering   footnote   to   Elsenhower's
happy   campaign   thought   about   letting
Asians  fight  Asians  for  us  (and  at  half
the  price,  too!)   may  be  found   in  John
Foster    Dulles's    testimony    before    the
House  Appropriations  Committee.
After   another  year   of  campaigning—
and    optimistic    predictions—the    rebel
forces   in  Indo  China  hold  more villages
than  they  did  a  year  ago.  "If  the  native
peoples,"  Dulles  said,  "are  still  under  the
impression  that  all  they are  fighting  for  is
to  keep  the  French  there  as  their  colonial
masters,  they  will  not  put  much  spirit  in
that  kind  of  fight."  Q.E.D.
But  when,  as  in  India,  Burma  and  In-
donesia,   Asians   achieve   freedom    from
their  colonial  masters,  they  show  no  de-
sire  to  serve  as  cannon  fodder  in quarrels
between   the  great   Powers.   The   dream
of  huge  coolie  armies  righting  at  coolie
wages  to  "liberate"  China  for   exploita-
tion again by Japan  and the Western pow-
ers—this   is  what  the   "let   Asians  fight
Asians"  slogan  means.
At  one  time  the  Republicans  in. Con-
gress  seemed  to  understand  that  even  the
most  illiterate coolie would  soon  catch  on.
When  the  Atlantic  Pact  was  being  de-
bated,  on  no  point  were  the  Republican
right  wingers  so  vociferous  as  on  assur-
ance  that  this  treaty   would  not  commit
us  to  the  support  of  British  and  French
colonialism  in  Asia.  But  that  was  before
Chiang  lost  power  in  China  and  gained  it
in Washington, and China Lobby  Senators
began  to shop  around  for  some cheap  way
to  recruit  the  manpower  needed to  restore
Chiang  on  the  mainland. The  Dulles  re-
port  on Indo-China  shows that  though  we
have  been  looking  around for  human  bar-
gains  all  we  have  acquired are  new mili-
tary  and  political liabilities.
Shade of  Goebbels
At the  Pentagon
A  year  and  a  half   ago  the  American
public   was   being   fed   a   heavy   diet  of
atrocity  stories  on mistreatment of Ameri-
can   prisoners  of  war.   "Reds   Butchered
Afore  Americans  Than  Fell  in  '76"  said
a  prize  headline over  an  Associated  Press
compilation  purporting to  show that  more
than  6,000  POW's  had  been  killed  by  the
Communists. General  Ridgway, lifting  his
eyes  heavenward, issued  a  statement  say-
ing  that  perhaps  God  "in  his   inscrutable
way"  had  chosen  this  method  "to  bring
home  to  our  people  and  to  the  conscience
of  the  world  the  moral  principles  of  the
leaders  of  the  forces  against   which   we
fight  in  Korea."
Unfortunately  "God"   seems  to  be  very
undependable.  The  last  time  He  arranged
for   the   release  of  American  POW's   in
enemy hands they  came back  with  reports
of  good  treatment  (see  the  Saturday   Eve-
ning  Post,  August  25,  1951,  "They  Tried
to   Make   Our   Marines   Love   Stalin").
This   time   the   Pentagon    is   taking   no
chances   on   an   inscrutable   Providence.
Now  that  sick  and  wounded  POW's  are
about  to  be  exchanged,  the  Pentagon  has
issued  an  8-page  "fact  sheet"  designed  to
discount   in  advance  anything  favorable
which  a  POW  may say about his  captors.
It  seems,  according  to this  "fact  sheet",
that  "by  deceptively  soft  and   ingratiating
treatment"   designed   to   make   prisoners
"more  susceptible to indoctrination",  these
monsters  may  have  led  some  Americans
"to  accept,  or  at  least  repeat,  many  ele-
ments  of  Communist propaganda".   So  if
a   prisoner  comes  home  and   says   "we
weren't  treated  too  badly"   or  "why   the
heck  don't  we  get   out  of  Korea?",  the
folks  will  know that  the  poor  chap's mind
was  poisoned by dialectical materialism.
And  if  the  Army can't  prove  atrocities,
it   is  determined  at   least  to   make  good
treatment  of  American POW's  seem  sin-
ister.
The Right  to  Counsel—
If  One Can Be  Found
The  4-4  decision  of  the  U.S.  Supreme
Court  upholding  the  disbarment  of  Abra-
ham  J.  Isserman  for  contempt of  court  in
the  Foley  Square  trial  is  another  blow  at
the  effective  exercise  of the  right  to  coun-
sel.  Justice  Jackson  pointed  out  for   the
four  dissenting  judges  that  they  could  re-
call  no other  instance where a  lawyer  had
been  disbarred   "merely   because  he   had
been  convicted  of  a  contempt,"  except  in
the pre-revolutionary  Peter  Zenger case in
1735  when   two  lawyers  defending  that
colonial  editor  were  disbarred  for  having
the  temerity  to  file  a  document  question-
ing the legality of the  Judges'  commission.
Mr.  Justice  Jackson  pointed out,  on  the
other  hand,  that   in  the  trial  of  "Boss"
Tweed  several  defense counsel  were  held
in  contempt for  their  attack  upon the  pre-,
siding  judge  for  bias  and  prejudice.  Yet
none were  subjected  to disciplinary action
and  the  incident  did  not  interfere  with
careers   which   became  eminent.   One  of
the contemptuous counsel  was  Elihu  Root.
Another,  David  Dudley  Field,  was  later
elected   president   of   the   American   Bar
Association.  A  third  became  Chief  Judge
of  the  New  York  Court  of  Appeals.   Ob-
viously  the  hazards  of  contempt when  de-
fending   political  corruptionists  are   con-
siderably  less  than when  defending  politi-
cal  dissenters.
Justice  Jackson  said  the  Isserman  case
would  have  been  different   if  there   had
been,  as  Judge  Medina alleged,  a  deliber-
ate  conspiracy to obstruct  justice.  But  the
Court  of  Appeals,  like  the  District  Court
in  the  disciplinary action,  found  this  was
not  proven.  The  Circuit  Court  upheld  on
contempt  alone.  Justice  Tom  Clark,  who
urged  as  Attorney  General  that  lawyers
who  defend  radicals be disbarred,  took  no
part  in  the  case  but  his  colleagues  of  the
Truman  court  evidently  share  his  views.
The   decision   again   lights  up  the  sharp
division  between  the  Trurrwn  judges  and
the  four,  Jackson,  Frankfurter,  Black and
Douglas,  whom  Roosevelt appointed.
Freedom,  Like  Charity ...
The  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R, may not be
able   to   get   together   on   the   subject  of
peace  but  on  one  point  they  agree.  They
both   dislike  the   Declaration   of   Human
Rights  and  they  dislike   it  for  the   same
reason.  They  fear  "international  interfer-
ence" with  internal  affairs.
The   Senate   bloc   behind  the   Bricker
amendment  and  Eisenhower
r
 in  declaring
that  we will not  support  the  UN  covenant
on  human  rights,  are   in  an   interesting
position.  Both  the  Senate   right-wingers
and  the   Administration   are   anxious   to
make  the  whole  world  "safe  for  democra-
cy"   by   international   action,   the   whole
world  that  is except  ourselves.
While  the  Bricker  bloc  wants  to  limit
the  treaty  power  lest  it  take  away  basic
American  liberties,  the  real  fear  is  that
international   treaties   like   the   proposed
Covenant  may help to enforce those  rights.
What  gave  the  bar  associations   and  the
Southern  Democrats  the  shivers  is that  a
California  court  has  already  thrown  out a
discriminatory land  law on the ground  that
it  violated  the  UN   Charter.  And   what
happens  to  political  restrictions  on  pass-
ports  and  visas  if  we  become  party  to   a.
treaty  upholding  the  right  to  travel ?
Hat's Off
To  Francis   Biddle  and  the  ADA   for
their  letter  to  Attorney  General   Herbert
Brownell demanding action  on the  pigeon-
holed   McCarthy   report   by   the    Senate
privileges    and    elections    subcommittee.
McCarthy  says  if  he  weren't  so  busy  he
would bring  criminal  libel charges  against
Biddle.   If   McCarthy   brought    criminal
libel   charges   against    Biddle,   he   would
have   to   discuss    the   charges   brought
against  himself  by  the  Senate  committee.
This  is  what   McCarthy  has  steadily  re-
fused  to  do,  as  he  has  a  right  to—under
the  Fifth  Amendment. Whether  he  has  a
right   to   continue   in   public   office    and
refuse  to  answer   embarrassing   questions
about  his  own  financial  practices  is  an-
other  matter.  A lot of school  teachers have
lost  their  jobs  for  less.
5  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April   18,  1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S    PAGE
The   Sweet  Mysteries  (If  Any)  of  Peace
Among the  feats  for which  I am not by nature fitted,  I find,
is looking  peace in the  teeth. I cannot keep  from  telling myself
that  there  is  nothing   mysterious  about  it;  that  after  all  the
race  is  rational,  peace  is  desirable,  and  that  the  prospect  is
better  than  usual  this  spring  simply  because  the  popular  will
has had  time again to creep  up  on  the  course  of  human events.
Conceivably  the  view  is  too  trusting.  It  may  be  indeed  that
the  recent  demarches which  have  so  lifted   the  hopes  of  the
peoples  are, as  the  experts  variously  contend,  the  result  of
factors  more  influential  with governments  than the  mere  pref-
erence  of  the  common  man  in  the  street.  For  example,  it  may
at  last  have sunk  into  those  people  "capable  of   understanding
only  the  language of  force"  that  the  United  States  does  have
atomic artillery, and a new President  who will not put  up  with
too  much  foolishness.  Or  the  new  peace  moves  could  reflect
mainly  the  need  of  the  new  head  of  the  Russian  state  to  over-
come  the  restlessness  of  the  peoples  behind  the  Iron  Curtain,
and  the  temperate  reception  of  them  in  Washington  the  need
of  a restored Republican administration  above  all to make  good
its  promise  to  balance  the  budget  and  cut  taxes.
I  am  not  convinced;  though   if  the  undeniably  brighter
outlook  for  peace  must  be  attributed  to  the  political  circum-
stances  of  new  national   regimes  cast  in   opposition   by  old
national  rivalry, acceptance  of  either  of  the  two  reasons   last
named—or  both—would  not  be  contrary  to  the  concept  of
popular  rule.  Both  relate   to  demands   in   the   street   which
cannot  be  met  save  under  conditions  of  peace.  The  heads  of
new   administrations  do   face   the   problem   of   establishing
themselves  in  the  popular   favor;  and  if  the  teachers  on  one
side  of  the  Curtain  are  preparing  to  tell  the  children  that
Malenkov  had  to  taper  off  the  Cold  War  to  keep  his  people
quiet,  and  the  teachers  on  the  other  side  are  preparing  to  tell
the  children  that  Elsenhower  had  to  do  the  same  thing   to
relieve  the  tax  burden  in  America,  it  still  will  be  taught  that
vox  populi  is  vox  del.
I   see  nothing   in   the   other   explanation  of   the  Russian
"peace   blitz"   (that  the  Kremlin  now  is  overawed  by   the
military  might   the  West  has  put   together   in   fact   and  on
paper)  that satisfies ordinary common  sense—or  that  promises
any  real peace.  It  is  a  theory  that  could  be  comforting only  to
those  who  have  maintained  there  is  no  substitute  for  victory;
it  is  a  sort  of  left-handed  claim  of  victory.  It   is,  of   course,
unprovable.  And  as a belief  on  which  the  West  might  rest  its
understanding  of  the  present  peace  moves,  it  is  a  formula  for
the  perpetuation  of  the  arms  race,  of  "world  tension"  and  of
all   the  waste  of  human  and  natural  resources   that   attends
the  effort  of  two  worlds  to  be  unendingly  "ready  for war."
It  is a  theory  which  conveniently  forgets  that  the  rulers
of  the Kremlin have been  (if  only in their  imagination)  living
under  the  threat  of  atomic  annihilation   for  the  past   seven
years  without particularly changing  their  ways,  and  which  art-
fully   supposes  that  the  rulets  of  another  country  would   be
less  willing  to  risk  the  destruction  of  their  cities  and  popula-
tions  to  preserve  their  principles and  their  honor  than we  ate
ourselves.  What  is  worse,  it  is  a  theory  which  overlooks  our
own  oft-pronounced   conviction  that  the  people  everywhere
yearn  for  peace  and  that  the  people  everywhere,  in  whom  all
power  inheres,  will exert  their  sovereignty  despite  any tyranny
whatsoever.
Our  armed might  has  done  as well  in  Korea  as anybody's
armed  might;  it  has done  loyally and  bravely  what  it  was  sent
to  do  ...    and so, we must  grant,  has the  armed  might   sent
against  it.  If  there  is a lasting  cease-fire,  each  side, if  it  chooses,
can  push  the  claim  that  the  other   was  forced  to  come   to
terms.  That  way  all  national  vanities  would  be  coddled,  and
the  myth  preserved  that  God  has  served  the  side  with  the
heaviest  artillery.
The  preservation  of  the  self-esteem of humanity would  seem
however  to  require  that  a  termination  of  the  hostilities  be
based  on  mutual  forbearance  and  the   wilful   transfer  of   all
disputes  from  the field of  battle  to  the  atena  of  reason. It  will
not hurt humanity in  its  own  proper  estimation  if  this transfer
is  acknowledged  to  be  upon  the  demand  and  at  the  direction
of   worldwide  sentiment.   It   would   be,  obviously,   the  finest
demonsttation  of  the  existence  and  usefulness  of  manly  in-
telligence   the  rest  of  animate  creation  would  ever  have  had
an  occasion  to  witness.
/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St., S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C.
Please  enter  the  following  subscription.  #5  for  1  year  is
enclosed.  (See page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street
City    ..
State    .
..Zone..
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,
Washington  3,  D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Post   Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED