I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953jan17.pdf

============================================================

New  Light  on  the  Korean  Mystery,  See Page 2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  i  NUMBER  i
JANUARY  17,  1953      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Mr. Truman's  Farewell  Evasions
The warning to  Stalin  made the headlines.   The warning
to   ourselves  was  played   down.     "War   today  between   the
Soviet  empire  and  the  free  nations,"  Mr.  Truman  said  in  his
last  State of  the Union  message,  "might  dig  the grave  not  only
of  our  Stalinist opponents,  but  of  our  own  society,  our  world
as well  as theirs."   The  outgoing  President was apocalyptic  in
his  picture  of  the  war  of  the  future.    "Man  could  extinguish
millions  of  lives  at  one  blow,  demolish  the  great  cities  of  the
world,  wipe  out  the  cultural  achievements  of  the  past  .  .  ."
Mr.  Truman  said   "Such  a  war  is  not  a  possible   policy   for
rational  men."
But  if  a  new  war  between  the  giants  of   East  and  West
threatens  their  mutual  destruction,  if  such  a  war  is not  a  pos-
sible policy for rational men, then  the alternative is co-existence.
If  the  disputes  of  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  cannot  be  settled  on  the
battle-field  without  endangering   the  survival  of  civilization,
then  they  must  be  settled   somehow  at  the  conference  table.
The  conclusion is inescapable,  but  Mr.  Truman  managed  again
to  escape it,  as he  has  all  through  his  years in  the  Presidency.
Mr.  Truman  fears  war,   but  remains  evasive  about  peace.
The  meaning of  the  H-bomb  and  the  new weapons of  destruc-
tion  is that  men must learn  to  live  together  on  the  same  planet
in  mutual  forbearance.   What  Mr.  Truman  should  have  said
is  that  in  the  awful  perspective  of  a  new  war  no  pains  must
be  spared  to  negotiate   differences   between  Washington   and
Moscow.    But  Mr.  Truman's  emphasis  was  on  his  old  hope
that  if  cold  war and  containment  were  continued  long enough
the   Soviet   regime  would   somehow   crack  up   from   within.
Negotiation   requires  compromise,  but  there  was  in  Mr.  Tru-
man's   message   the   same   self-righteous   insistence   that   any
settlement  must, be  on  our  terms.    Some  years  ago  at  press
conference  he  made  it  clear  that  what  he  sought  was uncon-
ditional  surrender  by  Moscow  as the  price  of  ending  the  cold
war.   Mr.  Truman  set  the  mood  and  Mr.  Acheson  coined  the
phrase  for  it—"total diplomacy."   It  was to  shut  the  door  on
negotiation  and  keep  the  heat  on  until  the  Soviets  crumpled.
What happens to us in the  meantime?    Mr. Truman  says
we  are being  "hurried  forward"  in  atomic  research  "from  one
discovery  to  another,  toward  yet  unforeseeable  peaks  of  de-
structive power."   Will this safeguard our own security?    "We
must  realize,"  Mr.  Truman  himself  warns,  "that  no  advance
we  make  is  unattainable  by  others,  that  no  advantage  in  this
race can be more than  temporary."
The  more  terrible  the  weapons   of  destruction  grow,   the
greater  must  become  our  fear,  that  the  enemy  also   possesses
them,  the  greater  our  frenzied  effort  to  remain  ahead.    The
atmosphere  and  momentum  of  an  atomic  arms  race  spell  ever
greater  insecurity  at  ever  greater  cost.    Like  a  new  war,  this
too is no policy for  rational men.
We  can  impose  tension  on  the  Soviet  system  only by im-
posing  tension  on  ourselves.   The  tension  which  we hope will
disintegrate  the  Soviet  system  from  within  may  do  the  same
to our own.   Mr. Truman  warns  against  "fear  that breeds  more
fear,  sapping  our  faith,  corroding  our  liberties,  turning  citizen
against  citizen  . .  .  Fear  could  snatch  away  the  very  values  we
are  striving  to  defend."    But  how  avoid  that  fear  in  a  world
of  mounting  tension,  hate  and  war  preparations ?
To  pursue  such  a  policy  with   stubborn   blindness   while
warning against its inevitable consequences is to give a  drunken
party  and  salve one's  conscience  with  a  lecture  on  alcoholism.
"Already  the  danger  signals  have  gone  up,"  Mr.  Truman  says
piously.    "Already  the corrosive  process  has begun  . . .  every
diminution  of  our  tolerance,   each  new  act  of  enforced  con-
formity,  each idle accusation, each  demonstration  of  hysteria—
each  new restrictive law—is one more sign  that  we can lose  the
battle  against fear."    It  is also a sign  that we cannot  wage  cold
war  on  Soviet  society without  waging  cold  war  on  our  own.
Mr.  Truman thinks of  himself  as a liberal.    It  is at  once
something  subtler and  more human than  hypocrisy which  leads
him  to  say,  "We  must  take  our  stand  on  the  Bill  of  Rights.
The  inquisition,  the  star  chamber,  have  no  place  in  a  free
society."    The  same  capacity  for  inviting  war  in  the  name  of
peace  made  it  possible  for  him  to  launch  star  chamber  loyalty
purges  and  peacetime  sedition  prosecutions  while  preaching
civil  liberties.   The  man who  devoted  most  of  his  years in  the
White  House  to  propagating  alarm  ends  by warning  us   "The
Communists cannot  deprive  us  of  our  liberties—fear   can."
But  how make people  accept  the  heavy burdens  of  cold  war
without  injecting  ever greater  doses  of  fear  and  suspicion?   If
the  purpose  is  to  preserve  liberty  and  safeguard   peace,   the
cold  war  is  no  more  rational  than  another  world  war  would
be.    In  any  case  the  one,  if  continued,  must  lead  inevitably t >
the  other.    At  the  Pentagon  indeed  these  last  words  of  Mr.
Truman's  must  seem  little more  than  smoke-screen  to  hide  the
full  import of  current military preparations  from  civilians.
Washington's  Farewell  Address  had  better  advice  than
Truman's.   Washington  warned  the  new  Republic—and  the
warning  now  seems  prophetic—not  to  cherish  "permanent  in-
veterate  antipathies  against  particular  nations."    Washington
saw  that  hatred  could  be  one  of  the  most  entangling  of  all
entangling  alliances.     He  said   "the   nation   which   indulges
toward  another  an  habitual  hatred ...  is  in  some  degree  a
slave.    It  is a slave  to  its  animosity."    Only  negotiation,  coex-
istence and  peace can emancipate us from  the  campaign  of  hate
and  its hateful   consequences.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   January   17,  1953
New Light  on  the Korean  Mystery
Was The  War  No  Surprise to  Ghiang  Kai-shek?
The  Senate  report  on  McCarthy   makes  it
possible  to  throw  new light  on  one of  the  most
tantalizing  episodes  in  the  Korean  War.    This
concerns  the  burst  of  speculation   in   soybeans
on  the  eve  of  the  war.    In  touching   on  Mc-
Carthy's  own  successful  flier  in  soybeans  later
that  same year,  the  report  asks  whether  he  had
confidential   information   "with   respect   to   the
trend  of  the  soybean  futures  market"  and  adds
an  intriguing  parenthesis.    It  says  "Just   prior
to  the  transaction  in  question,  the  Commodity
Exchange Authority  of  the  Department  of  Agri-
culture  conducted   an  investigation  of  alleged
soybean  market  manipulation  involving,   among
others,  a  number  of  Chinese  traders."
The  report  on  McCarthy  is  not  too  intrepid
a  document.    It  was not  surprising,  on  inquiry
at  the  Department  of  Agriculture,   to   discover
that  the  Senate  Subcommittee  on  Privileges  and
Elections  had  omitted  from  the  report  its  own
biggest  news  "scoop"  in  the  soybean  story.    In-
quiry  at the  Department  turned  up  (1)  the  full
text  of a report  on  its  investigation  into soybean
speculation  and  (2)  a  list  of  the  Chinese  who
took  part  in  this  trading:    The  original  report,
issued  on  August  10,  1950,  passed  almost  un-
noticed  at  the  time  outside  grain   publications.
It  withheld  the  names  of  the  Chinese  specula-
tors.   But  in  the file of  the  Agriculture  Depart-
ment's  later  press  releases  on  the  subject  there
turned  up  a  statement  of  last  November  26 say-
ing  that  the  Senate  Subcommittee  on  Privileges
and  Elections had  asked  for  the  names  and  ad-
dresses  of  the  Chinese  traders  "referred   to,  but
not  identified"  in  the  original  report.   Attached
was  a  list   of   names,  with   their   holdings   in
soybean  futures  when  the  Korean  war   began.
The   Department    declined   to   identify   the
names  further,  but  one  of  the  largest   specula-
tors  on  the  list  turned  out  to  be  T.  V.  Soong's
younger  brother,  T.  L.  Soong.    "T.  V."  is, of
course,  Chiang  Kai-shek's  brother-in-law.    One
of    the   smaller  'speculators   was    Nationalist
China's  executive  director  on  the  board  of  the
International  Bank  for  Reconstruction   and  De-
velopment.    These  directors  are  appointees  of
the  governments  they  represent.    Though   such
names   confirm   what   had   hitherto   only   been
suspected—that  "insiders"  close  to  Chiang  and
his  government  played  a  prominent  part  in  the
speculation—the    Senate    committee    did    not
even  mention  its   discovery.
If   the  Korean  War  was  a  surprise   attack,
how  is  it  that  Chinese  close  to  Chiang   began
to  speculate  in  soybeans  in  the  weeks  before
the fighting  broke  out?   The  question  was first
raised  by  the  Monthly  Review  in  its  issue  of
October  1951.    A  "Footnote  to  Korea"  by  the
editors,  Leo Huberman  and  Paul  Sweezy,  called
attention  to  the  unsuccessful   effort  of  the  late
Senator  McMahon  during  the  MacArthur  hear-
ings   to   elicit   information  from   Secretary  of
State  Acheson  on  reports  that  certain  Chinese
had  cornered  the  American  soybean  market  at
the  time  the  Korean  War  began.    The  "Foot-
note"  put  that  obscure  colloquy  into  new  and
startling  light  by coupling it  with  an  item  pub-
lished  two  months  later,  on  August  16,   1951,
on  the  financial  page  of  the  New  York   Herald
Tribune.    This  item  said  that  some  50  Chinese
living   in   the  United   States   and   abroad   had
cleaned  up   $30,000,000   in  speculative  opera-
tions  in  soybeans  "just  before"  the  war.
Just how  extensive  these  operations were was
not  clear  until  now.   The  original  Department
of   Agriculture   study   to  which  the   McCarthy
report calls  attention  shows that  Secretary Ache-
son was perhaps  less than  candid  in  his  answers
to  Senator  McMahon.   The  Senator  wanted  to
know  whether  Acheson  had  ever  discussed  with
Secretary   of   Agriculture   Brannan   "a   corner
that's  supposed  to  have  existed  in  the  soybean
market  a  year  ago  last  June  in  the  hands  of
certain  Chinese  in  this  country."    A  "year  ago
last  June"  was  when  the  Korean  War   began.
The   casual   listener   would   assume  from   the
Acheson  replies   that  the  matter  was  of  little
importance  and  that  little  was  known  about  it
(p.   2187,   vol.  3,  MacArthur  hearings):
SECRETARY  ACHESON:  Yes,  I  have  dis-
cussed  it  with   him.
SENATOR  MCMAHON:  Is  there  anything
that  you  can  say  at  this  time  concerning
the  personalities  who  were  engaged  in  that
operation  . . . ?
SECRETARY  ACHESON:  I  don't  know that
I  ever  knew who the personalities  involved
were.
In  the  light  of  the  information  now turned
up,  this  "I  don't  know  that  I  ever  knew"  seems
superbly  evasive.    If  the  Secretary  of  State  dis-
cussed  the  matter  with  Secretary of  Agriculture
Brannan,  they  must  have  considered  it  of  more
than  routine  importance.   Brannan could hardly
have  failed  to  tell  Acheson  that  a  full   investi-
gation  had  been  made  by  the  Agriculture   De-
partment's  Commodity Exchange Authority and
that   the   names  of   all   the   participants   were
known, as the  report  of August  10,  1950,  shows.
This  neglected   report  begins  to  indicate  the
full   dimensions   of  the   skeleton   the   Secretary
of  State  wished  to  keep  securely closeted.     The
story  the  Department  of  Agriculture  report  un-
folds  begins  several  months  before  the  Korean
War.    The  war  broke  out  on  June  25,   1950.
Four  months  earlier,  the  Commodity  Exchange
Authority  of  the  U.  S. Department  of  Agricul-
ture  began  to  receive  "a  large  number  of  com-
plaints"   from   processors   of   soybeans  in   this
country  that   the   soybean  futures   market 'had
fallen    "so   completely  under   the   control   of
speculators"  that  it  could  no  longer  serve  for
legitimate  hedging  operations.    One  complain-
ant  pointed  out  that  more  soybeans were  being
traded  on  the  Chicago  market than  all  the  other
principal  grain  futures  combined;  another,  that
the   sudden   sharp   rise   in   soybean   prices   "is
helping  only the  speculators  as a  large  majority
of  the  farmers  have  already  disposed   of   their
farm   holdings."    The   Commodity    Exchange
Authority  began  to  investigate  and  found  "very
sizable  trading  by  persons  with  Chinese  names,
and   in  some  instances  with   Hong  Kong   ad-
dresses."    Speculation  in  futures  by  Chinese  is
not   unusual   but   "no   previous  instance  had
been  found,"  it  said,  "in  which  Chinese held
as  large  a  proportion  of  the  total  open  con-
tracts  in   any   commodity."
The   Commodity  Exchange  Authority  won-
dered   why   the   Chicago   Board   of  Trade   re-
duced speculative margins on  soybeans on March
13  "from  the  already  low  level  of  8.3  percent
to 6.1 percent ... in the  face  of an  active  mar-
ket."     In  the  four  weeks  which  followed,  the
daily   average   volume   of   trading   rose   to   15
million   bushels  a  day,  as  compared  with   10
million   daily   in   the   preceding   four   weeks.
Since  few  suspected   that  war  was  coming  in
the  Far  East,  it  was  thought  that  Chinese  Na-
tionalist   interests   were   trying   to   comer   the
market.   On  August  7,  1950,  the  Chicago  Jour-
nal   of   Commerce  carried   a  front   page   item
stating  that  the  President  of  the  Chicago  Board
of  Trade  had  refuted  previously   published  re-
ports  that  a  virtual  corner  of  soybeans  by  "Chi-
nese   Nationalist"   interests   had   been   instru-
mental  in  causing  prices  to  soar  from  $2.20  to
$3.45  a  bushel.    The  refutation  was  made  to
look  somewhat  sickly when  three  days later  the
Commodity  Exchange  Authority  issued   its  re-
port  on  "Speculation   in  Soybeans,"  the  report
from  which  the quotations here were taken. This
showed  that  by  June  30,  1950,   56  Chinese  ac-
counts  held  almost  half  of  all  open  contracts
for  July  futures  on the  long  side  of  the  market,
i.e.,  of  those  playing  for  a  rise  in  price.
The  inference  is irresistible  though  not  nec-
essarily  correct  that  inner  Chinese  Nationalist
circles  knew  war  was  coming  and  cashed  in  on
their   knowledge.     If   this   ugly   inference   is
false,  the  Nationalists  should  be  anxious  for  a
Congressional  investigation  which  would  clear
them  of  suspicion  that  a  group  of  them  made
themselves  a nice little  profit  of  $30,000,000  on
a  war  which  has  cost  the  American  people  and
its  allies  heavily  in  lives  and  money.    It  may
be,  of  course,  that  they  had  informers  in  Red
China  who  tipped  them  off  to  a  coming  attack
from  North  Korea.    It  may also  be,  as I  indi-
cated  in  my  book,  The  Hidden  History  of   the
Korean  War,  that  Chiang  and  Syngman  Rhee
provoked  the  attack  from  the  North.    It should
not  be forgotten  that  in  this,  as in  any other  un-
solved  crime,  it  is  useful  to  begin  by determin-
ing   who   benefitted.     The   biggest    beneficiary
of  the  Korean  War  was Chiang  Kai-shek.   The
war diverted  the  Chinese  Reds  from  their  plans
to   attack   Formosa.     It   gave   him   a   virtual
American   protectorate   over   Formosa,   and   an
increased  flow  of  American aid.    The  $30,000,-
000  in  that   perspective   is  small  change,   but
an  investigation   into  that  small  change  might
throw  a  flood.of  new  light  on  the  origin  of  a
conflict  which  threatens  to  engulf  the  globe  in
World  War  III.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  January   17,  1953
I.  F.  Stone's    Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  Weekly  at  Room  225, 1416 F
St.,  N.W., Washington  4, D.  C,  50 times
a  year.    Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $5
a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and  elsewhere  in
the   Western    Hemisphere,   $6;   England
and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by  1st  class
mail,  $15  by  air;  for   Israel,.  Asia, Aus-
tralia  and  Africa,   $10  fay  first  class mail,
$20  by  air   mail.  Single   copy,  15   cents.
Telephone,  STerling  3-0938.
Vol.  1, No. 1
January  17, 1953
COMMENT
Fate  of  the  Compass
This  weekly  represents   an  attempt  to  keep
alive  through  a   difficult   period   the   kind  of
independent  radical  journalism
1
  represented  in
various  ways  by  PM,  the  New  York  Star  and
the  Daily  Compass.   This  new  enterprise  em-
bodies  the  hope  that  by  beginning  on  a  rock-
bottom  basis  it  will  prove  possible  to  survive
and  expand.    In  launching the  new  weekly,  I
want  to  salute  Ted. O.  Thackrey  for  the end-
less  ingenuity  and  sheer  grit   with   which  he
managed  for  three and  a  half  years  to  keep  the
Compass  alive.    The  bald  economics  of  daily
newspaper  publishing  is  enough  to  make  the
stoutest   heart   quail.    T.  O.  T.   performed  a
miracle  in  keeping  the  Compass going  as  long
as  he  did.   I  am  afraid  it  will  be  a  long  time
before   anyone  else  manages   to   duplicate   his
feat.
Many  subscribers  have  written  to  ask  what
happened  to  the  Compass  and  why  it   closed
without  an  announcement.  I  cannot  speak  for
T.  O.  T.  but  I  know  that  on  earlier  occasions
he  had  managed  to  pull  a  new  rabbit  out  of
the  hat  at the  last moment just when all seemed
over.   He  hoped  that dismal day before  election
in  November  that  he  could  do  it  again.    The
Compass  closed  down  like  the  New  York  Star
and  PM  before  it  for  the  simple  reason  that  it
ran  out  of  money.   It  ran  out  of  money for  the
simple  reason  that  there  were  not  enough peo-
ple   in   New   York   City  who   wanted   an   in-
dependent  paper  of  its  kind  deeply  enough  to
go  on  buying it  regularly.    Those  readers  who
stuck  to  it  through  some  very  thin  days  to  the
end  made  up  in  one  sense  for  the  inadequacy
of  their  numbers  by  the  quality  of  their  devo-
tion.    But  that  was  not  enough  to  balance  the
books.
It   is  not  true  that  the   Compass  was  shut
down  by Corliss  Lamont or  that  its  closing  was
a  result  of  the  fact  that  T.  O.  T.  and  I  both
supported  Stevenson rather  than  the  Progressive
Party  in  this  past  election.    Had  it  not  been
for  Lamont  the  paper  would-have  closed  much
sooner.    He  stuck  to  the  end  and  made  heavy
sacrifices  for  the  paper.    He  never  tried  in  any
way  to  dictate  its  policies.    Those  of  us  who
worked  on  it  owe him  a  vote  of  thanks.
What  He  Held  In  His  Hand
Speaking  of  Stevenson:   Readers  will  be  in-
terested  in  the  November  22  and  December  13
issues   of   the   Jesuit   weekly   America.     The
editor-in-chief,   the  Rev. Robert   C.   Hartnett,
took  McCarthy  apart  for   the  job  he   did   on
Stevenson  in  McCarthy's  TV  address  of  Octo-
ber   27.    "I   hold  in  my  hand  a  photostat  of
the   Daily   Worker,"   said   the   Senator,   but
ducked  out  before  reporters  could  look  at  it.
The  photostat  was  supposed  to  prove  that  the
Communists supported  Stevenson.   Father  Hart-
nett  reported  that  he  could  find  no  such  article
in  the  Daily  and  McCarthy  replied  by  sending
him  the  photostat.    But  the  photostat  turned
out  to be  the  last  of  three  articles  by  Alan  Max
called  "I.  F.  Stone  and  the  Fight  Against  Mc-
Carthyism,"  in  which  as  Father  Hartnett   said
the  Daily  Worker  "beat  the  Compass  over  the
head  and  read  it  a  long  lesson  for  being  in-
dulgent  toward  the  Stevenson  candidacy."    The
Jesuit  editor  labelled McCarthy's  tactics  "vicious
falsehood."    Next  time  McCarthy  does  an  "I
hold   in   my   hand"—his   favorite   stance—it
would  be more  discreet  of  him  to  keep  holding
it  where  no  newspaperman  can  see  it.    Father
Hartnett  deserves  applause  for  his  scoop  and
for  taking  out  of  Holy  Writ  and  into  the  hot
arena  of  politics  the  injunction which  fits  Mc-
Carthyism,  "Thou  Shalt  Not  Bear  False  Wit-
ness."
Best People in The U.  S. A.
A  personal  word  is  in  order.   I  feel  as  if
I  am going  to  work  for  the  best  people  in  the
U.  S. A.   The  morning  mail  since  I  announced
the Weekly  has been  an inspiration.   More  than
5,000  subscriptions   came  in  before  publication,
and  with  them  the  kindest  notes  of  good  wishes
any   newspaperman   could   want.    There  were
letters  and  subs  from  all  over  the  United   States
and   Canada.     Small   towns   in   Nevada,   the
Ozarks    and   Arkansas;   out-of-the-way  com-
munities  in  Saskatchewan  and  the  Deep  South,
are  represented   on  the  subscription   list  along
with  New  York  and  the  big  cities  of  the  East
and  Pacific  Coast.    I  start  with  no  obligations
except  those  of  gratitude   and   conscience,   in-
dependent   as  Sandburg's   hog  on  ice.    I  be-
lieve  there  remains  a  solid  substratum  of  good
sense  and  good  will  in  this  country,  that  there
are  still  people  willing  to  listen  to  an  opposi-
tion   point   of   view   if   fairly,   accurately   and
soberly  presented.    1 intend  to  fight  for   peace
and  for  civil  liberties—and  I  believe  that  both
are  indivisible.     If   readers   will  be   charitable
at  the  start,  and  give  me a little time  to get  the
hang  of  this  format,  I  will  try  and  do  a  good
job.
Clemency  for  The  Rosenbergs
As  we go to  press  for  the first time,  the final
fate  of  the  Rosenbergs  is  in  the  hands  of  Presi-
dent  Truman.    Those  who  have  known  Mi.
Truman  in  the  capital  during  his  years  in  the
Senate  and  the  White  House  know  that  he  is
a  man  of  warm  heart  and  instinctive  humanity.
I  hope  that  he  will  commute  that  barbaric  and
savage   death   sentence.    The  Rosenberg  trial,
bad  as  it  was, was  considerably  more  fair  than
the  kind  of  drum-head  procedure  in  which peo-
ple  like  Slansky were  convicted  of  weird  charges
and  whisked  off  without  appeal  to   execution.
The  commutation  of  sentence  would  really  put
a  proud  note  in  the  Voice  of  America,  a mag-
nanimous note  worthy of  a great  nation.   There
is  lynch  fever  and  blood  lust  in  the  Rosenberg
case,  a  primitive   urge  to  kill  linked  with  su-
perstitious  awe  for  the  atom  bomb,  which  has
become  a   kind   of   American   tribal   god   and
totem.   The  execution  of  the  Rosenbergs  would
be  a  victory  for  all  that  is  dark  and  dubious
in  our  unconscious  as a  nation  and  a  people.
Please  Excuse
The  rush  of  subscriptions  has  been  so  heavy  that  it  has  been  impossible  to
check  the  names  of  subscribers  against  the  mailing  lists  I  have  been  using.   So
if  you find  yourself  with  two  copies—one  a  free  sample,  please  pass  it  on  to  a
friend.    If  you  have  not  yet  subscribed,  please  do  so  now,  using  the  subscrip-
tion  blank  on  the  reverse  side.    Save  this  first  issue,  a  complete  file  will  some
day  be  valuable  and  I  •will  soon  offer  a  permanent  binder  at  nominal  cost  spe-
cially  made  for  the  weekly.    New  subscribers  can  still  get  the  first  issue.    To
the  many  •who  took  the  trouble  to  drop  a  note  with  their  subscription,   my
heartiest  thanks  and  apologies  for  not  being  able  to  answer  all  well-wishers
personally.    I hope  General  Eisenhower  feels  as encouraged  about  his inaugural
as  I  do  about  mine.
I.  F.  Stone
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,    January    17, 1953
Who  Will  Watch  This  Watchman?
The  Romans  had  a  saying,  "quis  custodiet  custodian?"
—who  will  watch  the  watchman?   The  wry  question  applies
patly  to  the  case  of  Joe  McCarthy.    The  Senator  who  is  now
the  chairman  of  the  Senate's  key  watchdog  committee  is  the
Senator  who  most  needs  watching.    The  report  made  on  Mc-
Carthy  by the  Senate  subcommittee  on  privileges  and  elections
is a monument  to  the  ineptitude of  gentlemen  in  dealing with
a  brawler  who  pays  no  attention  to  the  rules,  Queensbury  or
Otherwise.   The  report,  spottily  covered  in  the  nation's  news-
papers  despite  a  very  full  account  sent  out   (to  its  credit)  by
the  Associated  Press,  is the  first  official  full  length  portrait  of
the  most  brazen  operator  to  appear  in  the  U.  S.  Senate  since
the  days  of  Huey  Long.
The  new  document  is  the  third  Senate  report  which  has
found  McCarthy  mixed  up  in  funny  business  on  which action
by  law  enforcement  agencies  has  been  asked.    A  subcommittee
of  the  Senate  armed  services  committee  reporting  in  October,
1949,  called  for  investigation  by  the  Justice  and  Defense  De-
partments   into  the  campaign  to  save  the  Malmedy  slayers.
McCarthy  figured  in  this  as  an  advocate  of  strict  Anglo-Saxon
due  process  for  the  SS men  who  killed  350 unarmed American
prisoners  and  150  Belgian  civilians in  the  Battle  of  the  Bulge.
Nothing  happened.    The  Rules  committee  in  August,  1951,
suggested   State  and  Federal  inquiry  into  the  financial  irreg-
ularities  and  defamatory  tactics of  the  campaign  in  which  Mc-
Carthy  helped   defeat  Millard  Tydings   for  reelection  to  the
Senate  the  year  before.    Again  nothing  happened.    It  is  now
the  honor  of  the  Senate,  not  McCarthy,  which  is  going  down
for  the third  time.
McCarthy cannot complain  that  he got  less  than  the due
process  due  him.   Six times  the  subcommittee  invited  him  to
appear  and  rebut  the  charges  bravely made  by  former  Senator
Benton,  six  times  McCarthy  failed  to  show  up.    The  subcom-
mittee  lacked  the  nerve  to subpoena him.
The  picture drawn by the  new report  is of  a man who  cannot
resist  speculation  on  margin.    His  activities  in  and  out  of  the
market  since  1942 are  those  of  a  born  gambler.    A  series  of
financial   difficulties  were  eased  by  some  odd   transactions  of
which  the  $10,000  he  received  from  Lustron  for  a  housing
pamphlet  is  the  best  known.    Newly  brought  to  light  in  this
report  is the  $20,000  note  signed  for  McCarthy by  the  Wash-
ington   representative   of   Pepsi-Cola    at   a   time   when   the
Senator's bank account in  Wisconsin  was over-extended.  Pepsi-
Cola  was then  lobbying  for  decontrol  of  sugar  and  McCarthy
was chairman  of  a  Senate  subcommittee—on  sugar!
McCarthy's  financial  accounts  are  hectic.    From  January  1,
1948,  to  November   12,  1952, he  deposited  |172,000  in  one
Washington  bank;  his  administrative  assistant  and  alter ego,
Ray  Kiermas,  deposited   $96,000.   Of   these  amounts  almost
$60,000  deposited  by McCarthy and  almost  $45,000  deposited
by  Kiermas  "has not  been  identified  as  to  source."   The  Sena-
tor's  most  successful  speculation  was  his  flier  in anti-Commu-
nism.   Contributions  flowed  in  after  his  famous  attack  on  the
State  Department,  February  9,  1950.  In  the months  which fol-
lowed  more than  $20,000  was deposited  by him  in  a special ac-
count used for donations to help him fight Communism. "How-
ever," the  report  says dryly, "no  connection could be established
between  many of  the  disbursements  from  this  account and  any
possible  anti-Communist  campaign."     In  one  case  traced  by
the  committee,  McCarthy  deposited  a  $10,000  loan  to  fight
Communism  in  a  special  account,  and  then  withdrew it  three
weeks later  to pass on  to a friend  for  a speculation  in soybeans.
(See  page  two for  the  international  side of  this  soybean story.)
Outgoing  Democrats and  incoming  Republicans  will
live  equally  to  regret  that  they  did  not  cut  McCarthy  down  to
size when  they had  the  chance.  With  his  congenital  cheek  and
the  enormous  powers  conferred  upon  him  by  his  key  Senate
chairmanship,   McCarthy   promises   to   become    Eisenhower's
chief  headache.   McCarthy is in a position  to smear  any govern-
ment  official  who  fails  to  do  his  bidding.    With  much  daring
and  few scruples,  McCarthy can make himself  the  most  power-
ful  single figure in  Congress  and  terrorize the  new  Administra-
tion.    All  those  mumblings  and  rumblings  about  how Com-
munists are "already infiltrating" the Republicans are indicative.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
                                                                                        f  )783
Room  225  Kellogg  Bldg.
1416   F Street,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Please  enter  the  following  subscription.  $5  for  1 year  is
enclosed.   (See  page   3  for  foreign  rates)
Name   ..........................................
Street
City   .
State
Zone.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
225  Kellogg  Bldg.
1416  F St., Washington 4,  D.  C.
Sec.   34.66,  P.L.  wnd  R.
U.  S.  Postage
PAID
Washington, D.  C.
Permit  No.  40221
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED