I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953nov14.pdf

============================================================

Report  From  the  Grass  Roots:  Witch  Hunt in  Philadelphia's  Schools—See  Page  2
I, F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I,  NUMBER  41
NOVEMBER  14,  1953
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
16  CENTS
Desperate  Men  and  Ghoulish  Politics
The  fury  of  the  press  with  the  President  Wednesday  re-
flected  not  only  a  sense  of  elementary  fairness  but   the  frus-
tration  which   developed  Monday  when  a  major  portion  of
the  press  corps  camped  all  day  outside  the  Attorney   Gen-
eral's  office.   New  revelations  had  been  promised  in  the  White
case.   But  all  day  the  Attorney  General  could  not  make  up
his  mind  whether   to  see  the  press.   Brownell  finally  ducked
out  of  the  building  late  in  the  afternoon  after   sending   to
the   mimeograph  room  a  quite  inadequate  statement   which
not  only  added  nothing  to  the  charges  against the  late  Harry
Dexter  White  but  backed  down  on Brownell's  charges  against
former  President  Truman.
Brownell  had  told  the  Executives'  Club  luncheon  in   Chi-
cago  "I  can  now  announce  .  .  .  that   the  records  in  my
Department  show  that  White's  spying  activities  for  the  Soviet
government  were  reported  in  detail  by  the  FBI  to  the  White
House  by  means  of  a  report  delivered  to  President  Truman
through  his  military  aide."    This  says  that  the  records  show
the  report  was  delivered to  Truman.   But  there  was  a  differ-
ent  version  in  the  skimpy  statement  Brownell  issued  Monday
after   taking  a  run-out   powder  rather   than  face  the   press.
Now  Brownell merely said  that  the  FBI transmitted the  report
"to  Brigadier General  Harry  H.  Vaughan  . . . for the atten-
tion  of  the  President."
There  was  a  second  discrepancy.  In  Chicago  Brownell  said
the  December report  gave White's  spying  activities "in  detail."
These  were  the  details  for  which  the  press  corps waited.   But
on  Monday  the   Attorney   General  spoke  of   the   December
document  as "a  general report  on  the  subject  of  Soviet  espion-
age  activity  in  the  United  States."  The  document  to  which
he  referred  was printed  in  the  report of  the  Jenner  committee
last  August.   Here  White  was  mentioned  in  passing  among
many  others  named  by  Elizabeth  Bentley.   It   is  presumably
because  the  December  report   merely  mentioned  White   that
the  FBI  felt  it  necessary  two  months  later  in  February   to
compile  that  "special  and  detailed  report"  io  which  Brownell
also   referred  in   Chicago.    "As   you  know,"  Brownell   said,
"the  FBI  was  not   allowed  to  make  those  facts  public,  but
merely  to  present  its findings confidentially to  higher  authori-
ties."   The  press  waited  all  day  in  vain  for  him  to  "allow"
the  FBI  this  time  to  make  public   the   facts   on  which   its
charges  were  based.
Brownell's  Biggest  Misstatement
The  most   shocking   misstatement  made  by  the  Attorney
General  at  Chicago  was  that,-"White  died  without  the  prior
Administration  ever  having  acted  on  the  FBI  report."   While
the    reporters   were   waiting   outside   Brownell's    door,    the
Washington  Star  appeared  on  the  streets  with  a  story  which
gave  the  lie to  Brownell.   T.  Vincent  Quinn,  District  Attor-
ney of  Queens  County, New  York,  told  the  Star by  telephone
that  he  and  Thomas  J.  Donaghan  of  the  Justice  Department
presented  the  Bentley  charges  and  "everything  we  had"  to  a
special  grand  jury  in  1947  but  that  the  evidence  was  insuffi-
cient  to  indict.
The  next  day  the  Newark  Evening  News  disclosed  that  no
less  than  500  FBI  agents  worked  for  a  year  after  hearing  the
Bentley  charges.   "Every  effort,"  the  Newark  Evening  News
reported,  "was  made to  put  Miss Bentley  back  into her  espion-
age  contacts.   No  move was made  all year  by  the  FBI  against
White  or any other  suspect  . . .  the agency  did not want  to
arouse  the  suspicions  of  persons  on  whom  it  was   checking.
However,   by  January,   1947,  the   official   said,  the  FBI  con-
cluded  it  couldn't  reestablish  Miss Bentley's  contacts  and  gave
up  the  operation."
Donaghan,   the  FBI  man,  who  worked  with  Quinn   that
year  in  presenting  the  case  to  the  grand  jury,  is  now  special
assistant  to  Brownell  in  charge  of  international security.  How
can  Brownell  say  that  the  Truman  Administration  was  given
"full  and  adequate  notice  of  White's  spying  activities"  early
in   1946  when  even  a  year  later,   after   500  FBI  men  had
worked   on   the   case,  the   evidence  was  neither  "full"   nor
"adequate"  enough  for  an  indictment.
Evidence  or  Suspicion?
The  failure  to  obtain  an  indictment  throws  a  singular light
on   the   FBI  statement   upon   which   Brownell   relies.   "This
information,"   the  FBI  said  in   the  February,   1946,  report,
"has  been  received  from  numerous  confidential  sources whose
reliability   has   been  established  either   by   inquiry   or   long
established  observation  and  evalution."   If   the   sources  were
so  "numerous"   and   so  "reliable"  it   is  strange  indeed  that
Quinn,  in  telling  the  Star  about  the  grand  jury proceedings,
should  say,  "We  can't  indict  on  suspicion."   If  the  prosecutor
characterizes  this  evidence  as  mere  "suspicion,"  can  it   have
been  as  good  as  the  FBI's  "numerous"  and  "reliable"  implies?
The   man   who   ought   to   be   subpoenaed  in  this   case  is
J.  Edgar  Hoover.   There  is  reason  to  believe that  White  was
under  surveillance long  before  Miss  Bentley  told   her  story.
Brownell  said  in  Chicago,  "The  FBI  became aware of  White's
espionage  activities  at  an  early  point  in  his  government  career
and  from  the  beginning  made  reports  on  these  activities  to
the   appropriate   officials   in  authority."   White  entered   the
government  in  1934.   When  did  these  reports  begin  and what
did  they  allege?  Why  did  none  of  the  Attorneys  General—
(Continued  on  Page   Four)
1  S  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  14, 1953
Report  From  the  Grass Roots: That  Witch  Hunt  in  Philadelphia's  Schools
Robert  L.  Kunzig, who made  his  debut  in  Washington  this
year  as  counsel  to  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Com-
mittee,  is  a  tall  stoutish  young  man  with  the  manner  of  a
Restoration   dandy;  in  his  moments  of  exasperation  with  a
recalcitrant witness  or an  obtuse committee member, he  seems
almost  on the  verge  of  reaching  into  a flowery waistcoat  for
the  comforts  of  a  snuff   box.   He  is  a  Philadelphia   lawyer
(Clark,  Ladner,  Fortenbaugh  & Young)  and  takes  the  House
committee  back to  his  native  city  Monday  (November 16)  for
three   days  of  hearings.    These  deserve  national   attention.
They  will  show how a  Congressional investigating  committee
may  be  used  to  nullify  State  legislation  designed  to  protect
State  employes and  teachers  in  the  witch  hunt.
Politically,   the  hearings  will  be  a  curtain-raiser   for  the
1954  elections  in  once safely  Republican Pennsylvania, a  try-
out  on  the  local  scene  of  the  new  G.O.P.  strategy  of  staking
all  on  the   Communist   issue.   Though   these  three  days  of
televised  hearings  will  deal  with  alleged  "subversion"   in  the
schools,  they  will  have  a  wider  impact.   Their  outcome  will
affect   the   political   future   of   Philadelphia's   two   political
hopefuls,  municipal reform  Democrats  reaching  out for  bigger
conquests,  District  Attorney  Richard  Dilworth  who hopes  to
run  for  Governor  next  year  and  Mayor  Joseph   Sill  Clark,
who  may  some  day  be  a   possibility   for   the   Presidential
nomination.
A  Return  Engagement
For  Dilworth  and  Clark,  this  is  a  return  engagement.   As
Deputy  Attorney  General  of  Pennsylvania   during  1951-52,
Kunzig  led  the  fight  at  the  State  Capitol  for  the  Pechan
loyalty  bill,  lobbying  for  it  on  the  floor  of  the  Legislature.
Clark   and   Dilworth,   both   associated   with   Americans  for
Democratic  Action  and  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union,
campaigned  against  the  bill.  In  Philadelphia,  with  a  strong
Quaker  tradition, the  opposition  rallied  both  local  papers,  the
Bulletin  and  the  Inquirer,  and  many  conservatives,  including
former  Supreme  Court  Justice  Owen  J.  Roberts.   The  result
was  a  defeat  for  Kunzig, the  adoption  of  certain  model  pro-
tective  amendments  which  deserve  to  be  copied  elsewhere.
Kunzig  hopes  to  succeed  in  doing  via   Committee  hearings
what  he would be unable to do under  the  State law as  passed.
The  Pechan  Act  forbids   the   employment  in  government
and  in the  schools of "disloyal" persons and provides for  their
discharge.   But  in  its  final  form  looser  standards  of  the  sub-
versive  list  variety  were  omitted  and  "disloyalty"  or  "sub-
version"  linked  directly  to  advocacy of  change  by  force  and
violence.
The  Act provides  that  the  appointing authority  "may"  act
to  discharge  an  employe,  including  teachers,  but  this  must
be "upon written  complaint."   If  there  appears  to be  substance
to  the  complaint  "the  person  [accused]  shall  immediately  be
privately  and  confidentially notified."  The  Act  goes on to  say
that  there  shall  be  "No  public  announcement, release,  state-
ment or comment concerning the investigation  . . . unless and
until  the  person  is  discharged."    The  accused  has  the  right
to  counsel  and  to  a  hearing  within  30  days,  and  the  option
of  having  the  hearing  in  public or  private.
Safeguards   Against  The  Anonymous  Accuser
The  orignal  bill  would have  allowed the  source and  content
of  accusations  to  be  withheld  from  the  accused  on  security
grounds,  as  in  Federal  loyalty  hearings.  "The  charges,"  the
original  bill  said,  "shall  be  stated  as  specifically  and  com-
pletely  as  in  the  discretion  of  the  appointing  authority  secu-
rity  considerations  permit."  This  was  stricken  out.   A com-
plementary   section   on  procedure  in   loyalty   hearings   said
"Evidence  shall  not  be  restricted  by  the  rules   of  evidence
and  procedure  prevailing   in  the  Courts."   The  "not"   was
taken  out  and  new  provisions  added.  One  provided  that  all
testimony  had  to  be  given  under  oath  or  affirmation,   thus
excluding  anonymous accusation  and  guaranteeing  the  right
to  confront  the  accuser.   Another  accorded  the  defense  the
right  to  reasonable  cross-examination  and  to  subpoena  wit-
nesses  and  records  on  its  own behalf.
For  these precise standards  and  modes of procedure, Kunzig
will  be  able  to   substitute   methods  the   State   Legislature
rejected.   A  former  FBI  man, Earl  Fuoss,  has  been working
undercover,  and  an  advance  leak  has  already  provided  eight
column  headlines.  It  would  appear  that  House  investigators
have  found  evidence that  "at   least  20  to  30"  Philadelphia
school   system  "were   or  are"   members   of  the  Communist
party.   Since  Philadelphia  has  about   7,500  school  teachers,
that  would  seem less than  stupendous.  If  true,  it  would mean
that   one-third   of   one   percent   of   Philadelphia's   teachers
"were  or  are"   Communists.  This  drop  of  radicalism  in  the
school  system  is  unlikely  to  do  as  much  harm  as  the  Com-
mittee.
The  Board  of  Education  Panics
The  Board  of  Education  has  already  been  panicked  into
offering  up  a  sacrificial  victim.   A  favorite  target  of  Phila-
delphia's  professional  patriot  organizations  is  Mrs.  Lillian
Lowenfels,  a  teacher  of  French  in  the  veterans'  program   at
the  Benjamin  Franklin  High  School.  Her  real  crime  is  con-
nubial.  She is the  wife  of Walter  Lowenfels,  managing  editor
of   the   Pennsylvania  edition   of  the   Daily  Worker,  one  of
eight   Philadelphia  Communists  recently  indicted  under  the
Smith   Act.   Last   Monday  the   Superintendent   of   Schools,
Louis  P.   Hoyer,  ordered  her  suspended  for   "incompetency
and  persistent  and  willful  violation  of  the  laws  of  the  Com-
monwealth  of  Pennsylvania."    She  is  charged  with   refusal
to  say  whether  ten  years  ago  she  was  a  member  of  the  City
Committee  of  the  Communist Party.  Trial  has  been  set  for
December  3.
Three members of the  Board of  Education  were not  present
when  the  rest  of  the  Board  unanimously voted  to  take  this
action.    One  of   the   absentees,   perhaps   significantly,   was
Walter  Biddle  Saul,  its  president.   A  respected  elderly  con-
servative   lawyer,   a   member   of   one   of   Philadelphia's  old
families,  Saul  opposed  the  Pechan  bill  in  its  original  form
and  has  resisted  the  local  witch  hunters.   His  own  attitude
was  reflected  in  the  precise  wording of  a  statement  he  gave
the  Philadelphia  Bulletin  on  October  21.  He  said  that  so  far
as  he  knew  there  had  "never  been  any  subversive  teaching
in  any  public  school  in  the  city"  and  added that  he assumed
that  if  any  evidence of  law  violations  were  uncovered by  the
House  committee  it  would be  sent  to  the  Board  of  Education
for  appropriate'  action  "in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the
Commonwealth."     These    laws    may    already    have   been
breached by the  Board of Education  itself  in publicly suspend-
ing  Mrs.  Lowenfels in  advance  of  trial  and  by  raising  ques-
tions  not  covered  by  the  Pechan  Act.
To  say,   as   Mr.  Saul   does,  that   he  has   no  evidence  of
"subversive  teaching"  is to  speak  in  such  old-fashioned terms
as  to   seem  suspect.    The  phrase   implies  a  framework  in
which  people  are  convicted on  the  basis  of  words  or  acts  for
which  objective  proof  may  be  offered.   The  witch  hunt  rests
on  faith   in   influences   too  mysterious   to  be  susceptible  of
proof,   and   too   sinister   to   be  treated   with   due   process.
As  was  said  recently  of  the  Feinberg   law  "aimed  at   pro-
tecting  New York  school children"  from  "teachers  who were
spreading  Communist propaganda"—''the  poisonous  propa-
ganda  was  sufficiently  subtle  to  escape  detection  in  the  class
room."   This  was  not  said   tongue-in-cheek  but  quite   seri-
ously  in  an  address before the  Law  Club  of  Chicago last week
by  Attorney  General  Brownell.   If  it  was  too  subtle  to  be
detected, it  could not be proven.  In  Philadelphia, as  elsewhere,
the  idea  that  people  may  be  pilloried,  ostracized,  fired  and
punished  for  their   ideas  without   proof   of  misconduct  may
turn  out  to  be  a  good  deal  more  subversive  than   anything
a  handful  of  hounded  radicals  can  do  or  say.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  14, 1953
I.  F. Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher, I.  F. STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  20J,  301
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $5
a   year;   Canada,  Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western   Hemisphere,   $6;
England  and  Continental  Europe,   $10   by   1st  class  mail,   $15   by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   15   cents.   Tel.:   LI  4-7087.   Entered  as  Second  Class  mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
November  14, 1953
Vol.  1,  No.  41
Answer  to  the  G.O-P.'s Problem
If   it   is  important  to  keep  "subversive"   persons  out  of
government, teaching,  research  and the  opinion industries,  is
it  less  important  to  keep  them  out  of  the  place  where  the
ultimate power in  our country is  exercised—the voting booth?
A  handful  of  "subversives"  may  swing the  balance  in  a  close
election.  Or they  may infiltrate  a major party  let  us  say,  the
Democrats,  as  some  good  Republicans  have  been  suspecting
ever  since  PDR   (or  indeed  since Jefferson  himself).
A  loyalty  test for  voters  would require more subtle  methods
than  in  the  case  of government  workers or teachers.  It would
not  do  merely  to  ask  whether  the  voter  is  or  ever  has  been
.  . . He can claim to be a  Democrat.  He may be a  Republican.
When  Martin   Agronsky  on  his  TV  show,  At  Issue,  inter-
viewed  Dennis Driscoll, leader  of the recent  cattlemen's  march
on  Washington,  Driscoll  said  he  was  a  Republican  and  had
voted  for  Eisenhower  because  he  wanted  a  change.   But  as
soon  as  cattle  prices  fell,  Driscoll  wanted  a  change  again.
When   Agronsky   asked   Driscoll   whether   his   demand   for
price  supports  must  not  lead  inevitably  to  socialism, Driscoll
said  the  cattlemen  didn't  care  what  you  called  it,  so  long
as  they  got  the  government  help  they  needed.
There's   the   danger.   Merely  to  exclude  a  few  thousand
Communists  from   the  polling  places  •would  not  be  enough.
Even  outlawing  the  Democrats  (just  temporarily,  of  course,
until  purged)   would  also  be  inadequate.   What  of  the  Re-
publicans  like  Driscoll  who  want  policies  which  lead  inevi-
tably  to  government  control  of  the  economy,  as  in   Socialist
Britain  or  Communist Russia?  Why bar  a few  suspects  from
Federal  employment  and  allow  misguided  people  of this  kind
to  vote  anti-capitalists  into  our  highest   offices?
How  easily this  problem could  be solved,  and  all that worry
about  the  1954  elections  ended,  by  barring  from  the  polling
places  as  security  risks  everyone  who  ever  voted  for   FDR
or  Harry?
Back  to Burleson?
The  Espionage  Act  of  1917  makes non-mailable  any  matter
(1)  advocating  treason,  insurrection  or  forcible resistance  to
any  law  of the  United States, and  (2)  in  time  of war  making
"false  reports  or  false  statements"  with  intent  to   interfere
with  military  operations,  cause  insubordination  in  the  armed
forces,  or  obstruct  recruiting.  Wilson's  Postmaster  General,
Quote-of-The-Week
".  .  .  If  then  Russia  gets  a  promise of  financial  aid  to
develop  her  internal  resources,  and if  she  need  not  fear
attack,  then  I  believe  the  moment  will  have  come  to
negotiate  with  a  reasonable  chance of  success.   There  is
a  great  deal of fear  in the  Soviet attitude.  It  is  not fear
of  Germany,  but  of  being  attacked  by  the  ILS."—Chan-
cellor  Konrad  Adenauer, as  interviewed by  U.S.  News &
World  Report,  for  November 13, 1953.
Burleson,  distinguished  himself  in  World  War   I  by   using
these  provisions  for  widespread  political   censorship  of   the
mails,  and  they  were  utilized  in  World  War  II  against  six
publications—four   rightist   (including  Social  Justice),  one
pacifist  and  one Leftist  (the  Militant,  a  Trotzkyist  organ).
Despite  the  truce  in  Korea,  Eisenhower's  Postmaster  Gen-
eral  seems  to  be  reviving  their  use.   The  April,  1953,  issue
of  a  mimeographed  publication,  Vets'  Voice, a  Leftist  organ,
has  been  declared  non-mailable.   A  similar   proceeding   has
been  begun  by  the  Postoffice  Department  against  New World
Review,  which was  formerly  known  as  Soviet  Russia  Today.
The  September,  October,  November  and  December  1952  and
the  January,   1953,   issues  were   declared   non-mailable   (al-
though  long  since  mailed)  and  the   October   1953  issue   has
been  held  up  for  study.
Strictly  speaking,  the  government  might  be  hard  put  to
prove  that  anything  in  these issues  really  advocated  treason,
etc.,  or obstructed  recruiting,  but  (as  Zechariah  Chafee  shows
in  his  classic,  Free  Speech  in  the  United  States)  these  pro-
visions  can  and  have  been  very  loosely  construed.   Consider-
ing  the  growing  recklessness  of  this  Administration,  we  be-
lieve  it  would  be  well  for  liberal  and  radical  editors  to  con-
sult  together  now  for  mutual  defense  against  the  threat of
postal  censorship and  suppression.
The One Way to Unite Europe
It  is  a  pity  the  UN  does  not  have  power  to  hold  elections
of   its   own  in  the   Russo-American  impasse  over   Germany
and  Europe.  We  suspect  that  there  would be  similar  majori-
ties  on both sides of the  Iron  Curtain  if  Eastern  Europe  were
asked,  "Do  you  want  the  Russians  to  stay  or   withdraw?"
and  Western  Europe  were  asked,  "Do  you  want  American
bases  on  your  soil  or  would  you  rather  have  the  Americans
go  home?"   If  there  is  one  permanent  fact  of  international
politics  which no  revolution can  change,  it  is  that  no people
likes  to  have  the  soldiers  of  another  power  on  its  soil—even
allied  soldiers  in  time  of  war  are  a  source  of  irritation.  This
is  the  one issue  which  could  really  unite  Europe  today  from
the  Irish  Sea  to  the  old Russian  border.
Add  Worries
And  as  if  we didn't have  enough to worry  about,  the  Wash-
ington  Times-Herald  has  discovered, "National  Anthem  Lags
in  Record  Sales,  Survey  of  Leading  Stores  Here   Discloses.
Famed  Soprano  Calls  Situation   Shocking.   Song  Isn't  Even
Available  on  New  Speed  Discs."
INAUGURATING  A   NEW   FEATURE
With  this  issue,  we  launch  a  new  feature—Report  from  The  Grass  Roofs.   We   hope  to  make  it  a  means  of  covering
local  situations of  national  interest from time to time, especially   on   issues  and   in  areas  where  local   press  coverage   is  in-
adequate  or  one-sided.   Several  thousand  Philadelphians  who  may  be  seeing  the  Weekly   for  the  first  time  can  subscribe
by  using  the  blank  on the  reverse  side,  and  assure  themselves   of   an   independent   hard-hitting   report   from   Washington
every  week.  To regular  readers,  don't  forget that you  can get  a  renewal  and  a  gift  for  only  $9.   Renewing  ahead  of  time
will  ease  one  of  the  basic  headaches  from  which  all  publications  suffer.   So  please  do  it now.
With  many  thanks.
1  6  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  11, 195S
The  Truman-Brownell  Battle  May Prove  Decisive
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Murphy,  Biddle,  Jackson, Clark—act  upon  them?  Was  every-
body  out   of   step  but   Hoover?   Or  were  those  reports  too
flimsy  to  carry  weight?
About  a  year  and  a  half  after  White  died,  Walter Trohan,
who   has  good   FBI  news  sources,   reported  in   the   Chicago
Tribune   and  Washington  Times-Herald   (February  1,  19JO)
that   White's   mail  had  long   been  under  secret  surveillance.
"White's   name,"  Trohan  reported,  "was  on  a  postoffice   list
of   persons  wrose  mail  was  stopped  for  examination  in 1943
and  1944.   The  examination may  have  continued  until  White
left  Washington  in  1948.  .  .  .  The  White  mail  was  opened
and  photographed  in  1943   after  Chambers  named  Hiss  and
White  as  his  sources  of   government  secrets  when  Chambers
was  a  Soviet  spy." Trohan  added,  "It  could  not  be  learned
what  evidence  was  obtained by  examination of  White's  mail.
A  high  government  investigator said  the  agency  was  satisfied
long  ago  that  White  had subversive   connections."
Just  What Did  the  FBI  Find?
This   reference  to  "subversive   connections"  is   tantalizing.
For  in  the  notoriously  loose vernacular  of  government  loyalty
investigations,  "subversive  connections"  may  be  a  long  way
from  espionage.  Just  what  did  the  FBI  find?  And  just  when
does  the  presumption of  innocence  begin?   White  had  been  in
Washington  since  1934. The  FBI  began  to  watch  him  early.
If   the  Trohan  story  is  true,  his  mail  was  opened  and  photo-
graphed  from  1943 on.  After  the  Bentley story,  a  small  army
of   FBI  men  tried   to  help  her  reestablish   the  contacts  she
claimed  to  have  and  dug  up  all  the  evidence it  could  find  to
support  her.  Yet  a  grand  jury,  after  hearing  her  and  them,
failed  to  indict  not  only  White  but  a  single  one  of  the  other
persons  she  named!  After  all  this  surveillance and  effort,  is
it  fair  to  speak  as Brownell  does—to  give  the  impression  that
the  facts  were indisputable and  the  charges proven?  To  smear
man  in  his grave?
The  Newark  Evening  News  recalled  that  in  her  first  public
appearance  before  the  House  Un-American  Activities Com-
mittee,  Miss Bentley  "said  that  while  she was  sure  White  was
a  member  of  the  ring  she  had  never  seen  him."  The   News
reported,  "The  former   official   who  told  of  the  FBI's  futile
efforts  to  tag  White  with  a  grand  jury  case,  said  that  had
been  her  story  to  the  FBI, too."  Was it  fair  of  the  Attorney
General  not   to   mention   that   Miss  Bentley's   charges   were
hearsay  and  that  Chambers  himself  said  White was  too  "inde-
pendent"  ever   to   accept   the   discipline   of   the   Communist
Party?   This  is  the  background   against  which   to  assess  the
indignant   question   Eisenhower   dodged   at   press   conference
Wednesday—whether  he  thought  the  FBI report  was justified
in  calling  White  a  spy  when  a  grand  jury  refused  to  believe
it  on  the  basis  of  that  same  FBI  evidence?
Afraid  to  Tackle  Truman?
As we go to  press,  the  House Un-American  Activities Com-
mittee  has called off its  Friday  session  to  hear  former  President
Truman.    We  believe  that  Velde  and  his  colleagues,  especially
after   Eisenhower's  virtual  repudiation  of  Brownell  earlier  in
the  day, lost   their  nerve.    The  ex-President   would  make  a
doughty  witness, and we hope the  committee  will yet  screw  up
enough  courage  to  question him.
A  battle  has  begun  which  may  decide  the  future.    Either
this  excursion  in  ghoulishness  will  finally  bring  a  public  re-
vulsion  against  the  witch   hunt   or  America  will  be  driven
further  along  the  road  to  Fascism.    Brownell's  voice  was  the
voice  of  men  driven   desperate   by  fear  that  power  is  again
slipping   from   them.    The  recent  elections,  like  the   uproar
from  the  farm  country,  shows  how  superficial  was  that   cry
for   a  change.     The   tide   toward   the   welfare  state  is  not
reversible.     The   recognition    is  beginning   to   make   Fascist
adventurers  of  once  responsible   conservatives;   their   strategy
is  to  rule  by  fear  and  to  ruin  by  smear.    The  shrewd  New
York  Daily  News   said  Monday,  "By  vigorously,   incessantly
and  justly  throwing  'party  of  Moscow'  dirt  at  the  Fair  Deal
Democrats,  the  Republicans might  well remain  in  power  for  a
generation  to  come."
Don't  Rue  It,  Do  It.
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name     _——————————————————_____—_——
Street ..__
City..___
.  Zone_...__  State—____
Enter  this  gift  sab   for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
<To)  Name    _——————————————————————
Street    —————————————-————————————
City_____________  Zone___  State_____
11-14-58
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol  St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED