I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953feb14.pdf

============================================================

The  Truth  About  The  Lattimore  Case,  See Page 2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
COPYRIGHT  I HI   IT   I.   F.   STORE  S  WCCfLY,     INC.
VOL.  I  NUMBER  5              FEBRUARY  14,  1953         7
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Democrats  Move Into  Opposition
The  big  news  of  the  week  is  that  the  Democratic  party
has  begun  to  act as  an  opposition  on  foreign  policy.    The  ex-
tent  of  that opposition  is limited,  its  future  course is uncertain,
its  leaders  are  timid.   Yet  the  attack  in  the  Senate  by  Spark-
man  and  his  colleagues  on  the  foolhardy  recklessness  of  the
"bold  new policy"  in  the  Far  East  may prove  of  first-rate  po-
litical  importance.    It  made  one  major  party  in  this  country
the  sounding  board  for  the  same alarm which Western  Europe
and  the  'Asian  neutrals  feel  over  the  deneutralization  of  For-
mosa,  the  talk  of  blockading  China  and  bombarding  Man-
churia.    With   the   disappointing   news  Duties  and   Stassen
brought back from  their European trip, opposition  by the  Dem-
ocrats  may  help  put  a  brake  on  an  Administration   moving
giddily  toward  a general  Asian  and  world  conflict.
What  rankled  with  the  Democrats  and  made 'opposition  an
urgent  matter  of  party  politics  was  the  too  clever  way  Eisen-
hower  described  Truman's  Formosa  order  in  his  State  of  the
Union  message.    To  say,  as  Eisenhower  did,  that  its  purpose
was to  protect  the  Communists  on  the  mainland from  the  Na-
tionalists  on  Formosa  was  too  much  for  the  most  submissive
Democrat  to  swallow.     "Against  the  background  of  the  ac-
cusation  that   our   policy  has  been  dominated  by  pro-Com-
munists,"   Fulbright  of  Arkansas  pointed   out  angrily,   "such
a  statement  certainly  was  unfortunate."       Sparkman  chimed
in,  "I  certainly  think  it  was,  particularly  when  it  is  coupled
with  a very fine plea  in  behalf  of  a bipartisan foreign  policy."
Next  as  a  source  of  irritation  was  the  failure  to  consult  the
Democrats.    Sparkman   said  they  were  warned  that   an  an-
nouncement  on  Formosa  was  coming  but  "there  was  no  con-
sultation  so far  as developing  a policy was  concerned."
The  debate, coming  as it did three days  after  the Eisenhower
message,  had   the  marks  of   a  well  planned   demonstration.
There was an  almost  contrapuntal  neatness  about  the  interrup-
tions  with  which  Fulbright,  Lehman,  Kerr,  Johnston  of  South
Carolina,  Gillette,  Monroney,  Magnuson  and   Douglas   em-
phasized  the  main  points  of  the  Sparkman  speech  and  helped
develop  the theme  with  just the  right  leading  questions.   Then
there  was a coy by-play which  seemed  more  than  coincidental.
Magnuson  asked  the  Senator  from  Alabama "whether  the Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff  were  consulted  prior  to  this  order,"  that  is  the
order  to  deneutralize  Formosa.    Sparkman  replied,   "I  have
read  an  article  by  a  columnist  who  says  they  were  not  con-
sulted."    Thereupon,  without  asking  what columnist, Magnu-
son  asked  permission  to  put  in  the  Congressional  Record  a
column  by Marquis  Childs  which  had  appeared  in  the  Wash-
ington  Post  that  morning.    Sparkman  joined  in  the  request.
What  Childs  reported  was  indeed  sensational.    He
said  that  the  Joint  Chiefs  were  told  such  a  move  was  being
considered  but  that  Eisenhower  would  reject  it  and  that  para-
graphs  drafted  for  inclusion  in  the  message  on  the   subject
"were  torn  up  and  thrown  in  the  wastebasket."    Childs  said
2   1
this  was  the  last  the  Joint  Chiefs  heard  of  the  matter  until
they  saw  the  Formosan  recommendation  in  the  State  of  the
Union  message.    The  answer  to  Magnuson's  question,  accord-
ing to Childs,  was that  the  "wraps"  had  been  taken  off Chiang
"without  the  prior  knowledge  of  the  Joint  Chiefs."     Childs
is  one  of  the  ablest  men  writing  in  the  capital  but  it  is  hard
to  believe  that  this  column  appeared  the  very  morning  of  the
debate  without   the  prior   knowledge   of   Sparkman,  or   that
Sparkman  would  have  relied  upon  it  unless  he  had   verified
the  facts  directly  with  the  chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff,  General  Omar  Bradley.   The  Formosan  move was a  vic-
tory  for  MacArthur  and  his  allies  over  Bradley,  long  an  op-
ponent  of  fighting  the  wrong  war  at  the  wrong  time  and  the
wrong  place.    The   affair   makes  one  suspect  a  hidden  play
from  Bradley  to  Sparkman,  with  a  "leak"  to  Childs   just  in
time  for  the  debate.
Always  the  cautious  politician,  Sparkman  was  almost
ludicrous  at  times  in  his  effort  to  lead  the  opposition  and  still
protect  his  rear.   At  one point,  as Wiley, chairman of  the  Sen-
ate  Foreign Relations  Committee  was about  to  leave the  cham-
ber,  Sparkman  said  he  wanted  Wiley  "to  understand  clearly
that  I  have  not  said  one  word  m  criticism  of  the  President's
order.    In  fact,  I  said  it  was  inevitable  eventually."     When
Knowland  challenged  him,  Sparkman  hastened  to  say that  he
was  not  discussing  the  idea  of  a  China  blockade  or  "hot  pur-
suit"  across  the  Yalu.    Sparkman  is  not  the  man  to  take  un-
necessary  risks.    He  insisted  he  was  merely  asking  questions.
But  the  questions  he  asked  were  nonetheless  deadly  and  the
country  is indebted  to  him  and  his  colleagues  for  asking  them.
"Is  this  the  first  step  toward  enlarging  the  war  in  Asia,"  he
asked  in  conclusion.    "Is  this  the  first  step  toward  involving
United  States  forces  on the  mainland of  China?   Is  it  the  first
step toward  more casualties,  instead of  less ?   Is  it the  first  step
toward  global war?"   These were  not  simple  queries,  but  the
rhetoric  of   opposition.
The  Republican  excuse  for  not  informing  the  country  is  in
order  not  to  "telegraph  our  punches"  to  the  enemy,  but  the
Formosa  order  itself  was telegraphing  a  punch  months  before
Chiang  can possibly be strong  enough  to deliver it.   If  punches
are  not  to  be  telegraphed  in  advance,  what  can  be  said  in  de-
fense  of  Wiley's  loose  talk  of  bombing  China's  railways  and
Short's  leak  of  Radford's  private testimony  about  the possibili-
ties  of  blockade?    It  is  the  American people,  not  the enemy,
which  is  being  kept  in  the  dark.    The  most  urgent  question
raised  by  Sparkman  is  "Who   protects  Formosa  in  the  event
Chiang's  raids  provoke a Communist  attack  upon  the  island ?"
The  Republicans  say the  Korean  war would  have been  avoided
if  Truman  and  Acheson- had  warned  the  Communists that  an
attack  would  bring  American  armed  force  into  action.    The
doubt  over  Formosa  is  as  dangerous,  and  makes  it  look   as
though  some people would like to provoke an attack.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   February  14,  1953
The  Lattimore  Case: Ben Franklin  Was  Prophetic
When   the   Framers   of   the   Constitution
were  writing  the  treason  provisions,  Benjamin
Franklin  amended  them  to  provide  as  an  addi-
tional  safeguard that  two  witnesses be  required
for  each  overt  act.    "Prosecutions  for   treason,"
Franklin  said  sagely,  "were  generally virulent,
and  perjury  too  easily made  use  of  against  in-
nocence."    A  century  and  a  half  later  perjury
in  new  form  has  become  a  favorite  weapon  in
American   political   prosecutions,   in   ho   case
more strikingly than in  that of Owen  Lattimore.
The  bare  facts  are  eloquent.    The  China
Lobby  has  long  been  gunning  for   Lattimore.
McCarthy   called  him   "the   top  Soviet  agent"
in  the  State Department.    But  when  Whittaker
Chambers  was  before  the  House  Un-American
Activities   Committee   on  August   3,   1948   and
was  asked  whether  he  knew  Lattimore, Cham-
bers  replied   "No,   I  don't."    Even  with  Mc-
Carthy,  Lattimore seems  to  have  been  an  after-
thought.    In  his  original   attack  February  20,
1950,  charging  that  the  State  Department  was
overrun   by   Communists,  McCarthy   did   not
mention  Lattimore.    It  was  not  until  a  month
later   that  he  first  named  Lattimore,  and  then
only   as   "pro-Communist."      Within    a   week
Lattimore's    importance   swelled    enormously.
On  March  20  McCarthy  told  the  press  that  a
man   "connected   with"   the   State   Department
was  "the   top  Russian  espionage   agent  in  the
United   States,"   giving  Lattimore's  name  "off
the  record."    But  ten  days  later  McCarthy  was
back-tracking.    To  the   Senate  on   March   30,
he  said  "I  fear  in  the  case  of  Lattimore  I may
have perhaps placed  too much  stress  on  whether
or  not  he  has  been  an  espionage  agent."
The  reason  for  the  hedging  became  clearer,
when  McCarthy  was  required  to  produce  proof
before  the  special   Senate  committee  set  up  to
investigate  his  charges.    McCarthy  called  three
witnesses—Louis  Budenz,  Freda  Utley  and  a
man   named  John   J.   Huber.     Budenz,  under
questioning   by  the   committee,   admitted   that
McCarthy's  charge  against  Lattimore was  'tech-
nically  .  .  .  not  accurate."    AH he had to re-
port  was  hearsay  and  this  did  not  allege  that
Lattimore   was   an   espionage   agent.     Freda
Utley  after  three  hours  on  the  stand   admitted
that  she  did  not  think  Lattimore  was  Russia's
"top  espionage  agent,"  that  she  did  not  think
he  was  an  agent  of  any  kind  and  that  she  was
not  prepared  to  say of her  own  knowledge even
that  Lattimore  was  a  Communist.    The   third
witness,  Huber,  a  former  FBI  informer,  flew
down  from  New  York  to  testify  for  McCarthy
against  Lattimore  but  lost  his  nerve  at  the  last
moment  and  disappeared.    McCarthy  made  no
effort  to  find  him.
What   haunted   Huber   is   what   haunted
Budenz.  Huber  was supposed  to  testify  that  he
saw  Lattimore at  a  party  in  1946  at  the  home
of   Frederick  V.   Field.     Huber   had   been  an
FBI informer at the time.   J.  Edgar Hoover  had
already  shown  several  Senators  on  the  Tydings
committee  a  complete  summary  of  the  FBI  file
on  Lattimore;  no  such  incident  appeared  in  it.
Huber's  two  volume  diary  as  an  FBI informer
had  been  handed  over  the  year  before  to  the
McCarran  committee.    Huber  spent  three  days
before  the committee in  September and  October,
1949,   naming  hundreds  of   persons  as   Com-
munist   party  members  or   sympathizers.    He
never  mentioned Lattimore.
A similar shadow fell  across the Budenz testi-
mony.    Budenz  said  he  heard  Earl   Browder
praise Lattimore for  placing Communist writers
in  the Institute of  Pacific  Relations, that changes
of  party  line  were  "transmitted"  to  Lattimore,
and  that  he  saw  a  secret  Communist document
on  onion  skin  paper  which  referred  to  Latti-
more  as  "L"  or   "XL."
Members  of  the  Tydings  committee  wanted
to  know  why  none  of  this  information  was  in
the  FBI  summary  J.  Edgar  Hoover  had  shown
them,  although  Budenz  had  spent  many  weeks
telling  the  FBI  all  he  knew  after  he  left  the
Communist  party  in   1945.    Budenz  admitted
he  had  not  gone  to  the  FBI  with  this  informa-
tion  until  after  he  learned  that  the  committee
members  had  seen  the  FBI  dossier.
Budenz was soon to give a striking example
of  how  his  memory  could  be  improved  with
the   years.     Before   the   Tydings    committee,
Budenz  said   only  of  Wallace's   trip  to  China
in  1944  that  it  "was  followed  with  very  great
care  and  detail  by  the  Communist  party,"  and
of   Lattimore  "that  at  that   time  Jack  Stachel
advised   me  to  consider  Owen  Lattimore  as  a
Communist,  which  to  me  meant,  because  that
was  our  method  of  discussing  these  matters,  to
treat  as  authoritative  anything  that  he  would
say  or   advise."     But  a  year  later  before  the
McCarran  committee  Budenz was  asked  by  its
counsel  Robert  Morris,   "Did   you  hear  at  that
time   in   official   Communist  party  circles  that
John  Carter  Vincent  and  Owen  Lattimore  were
members   of   the   Communist  party   travelling
with  Wallace"  ?   Budenz answered,  "Yes,   sir."
The  story  was  growing,  but  Budenz  was  un-
comfortable.    When   McCarran   asked  him   to
elaborate,   Budenz's  reply  was  a  covert  back-
down.    In  elaborating,  Budenz  said  the  Com-
munists   followed   the  Wallace   trip   "with   a
great  deal  of  interest,"  that  in  their  discussions
"it  was pointed  out that  Mr.  Wallace  was more
or  less  under  good   influences  from   the  Com-
munist  viewpoint,"   that  he  had  with  him  Vin-
cent  and  Lattimore   "both  of  whom  were  de-
scribed  as  being  in  line  with  the  Communist
viewpoint,   seeing  eye  to  eye with  it,  and  that
they  would  guide  Mr.  Wallace  largely   along
these  paths."    If  both  men  were  Communist
party  members  why  all  this  talk  about  "more
or  less" and  "being  in  line  with  the Communist
viewpoint" ?   Why  was  Budenz hedging ?   Mc-
Carran   and   Ferguson  were   annoyed.    When
Ferguson  asked  Budenz  whether  the  Commu-
nists  succeeded  in  carrying  out  their  objective
in  the  Wallace  mission,  Budenz  replied  "Abso-
lutely  it  was  carried   out."
The  wily  Budenz  had  at  last  fallen  into  an
unintended  trap.   Within  a  few weeks Wallace
appeared  before  the  committee  with  the   col-
umnist,  Joseph  Alsop,  who  had  been  in  China
at   the   time   as   aide   to   General   Chennault.
Alsop  testified  that  "the  first  and  basic untruth
was  Budenz's  assertion  that  the  Wallace   mis-
sion  to  China  carried  out  a  Communist objec-
tive.     In   fact,   it   did   the   precise   contrary."
Alsop  showed  that  the  result  of  the  Wallace
trip  was  a  cable  to  Roosevelt  asking  him  to
remove  General  Stilwell,  who  was  friendly  to
the  Chinese  Communists, and  replace him  with
General   Wedemeyer,   who   was   bitterly   anti-
Communist.     That    provided    the   climax   to
Budenz's  tortuous  testimony  on  Lattimore.    It
explains  why  the  McCarran  committee did  not
dare  ask  for  Lattimore's  indictment  as  a  per-
jurer  on  those  points  where  his  testimony  con-
flicted  with   that  of  their   prize   witness.    To
have  done  so  would  have  required   them   to
produce  Budenz  in  court  and  subject  him  to
cross-examination   by   counsel    for   Lattimore.
The  contradictions  in  the  record  were  enough
on  their  face  to  destroy  his  credibility.
So  the  McCarran   committee  waited  several
months  and  then  last  spring  started  off  on  a
new  tack.   It  subjected  Lattimore  to  the  longest
interrogation  in   the  history   of   Congressional
investigation.     For  12  days  he  was  questioned,
as  heretics  were  once  questioned  in  the  vaults
of  the  Inquisition.    He  was  taken  back  many
years  over  obscure  details  in  an  effort  to  trip
him  up.    At  the  end  McCarran  told  a  reporter
Lattimore  had  been  caught  in  nine "significant
untruths,"   but  when   reporters   asked  whether
this  meant  the  committee  was  charging  Latti-     ,-
more  with  perjury,  the  Senator  replied  lamely,
"No.     Perjury  has  various   elements."
One  of  the  elements is materiality.   A false
statement  under   oath  must  be  material  to  be
perjury.   Here we  touch  on  the  central  point of
the  drama  which  unfolds  this  week-end  when
the  pre-trial  legal  motions  are  filed  in  the  Lat-
timore   case.     Of   the   seven  counts  on  which
Lattimore  was finally indicted  last  Fall,  six  deal
with   details   as  to  matters   which   took   place
more  than  ten  years  ago.    Whether  these  are
important  enough  to  be  basis  for  a  perjury  con-
viction  will  be  for  the  courts  to  decide.    The
other   count   is  vague   enough   to   convict  any
liberal  or  radical  in  the  current  atmosphere.   It
says  Lattimore  committed  perjury  when  he  as-
serted  that  he  had  "never   been  a  sympathizer
or  any other kind  of  a promoter  of Communism
or  Communist  interests."    This  is  so  much  a
matter  of  opinion   that  in  any  other  time  and
atmosphere  it  would  almost  certainly  be  thrown
out  by the  courts  without  trial.
As  the  hullabaloo   rises,  the   actual   charge
diminishes.    How  many people  will  realize  that
Lattimore  is  not  charged  with  perjury  for  deny-
ing  that  he  was  "top  espionage  agent"  for  the
Soviets,  or  even  for  denying that  he was a Com-
munist party member?   The  details  are now cut
so thin  that  one  count  of  the  indictment  alleges
that  he  perjured  himself  in  denying  that  any-
body  told  him  before  1950 that a certain  Ch'ao-
ting  Chi  was a Communist.   The  witch hunters
are  willing  to  settle  for  any  split  hair,  so  long
as  they  get  any  kind  of  a  conviction.   Their
own  political futures are at stake.   The acquittal
of   Dreyfus   finally   ruined   his   accusers,   and
shook  a  rotten  bureaucracy  to  its  foundations.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February   14,  1953
I.  F.  Stone's    Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher, I.  F.  STONE
Published weekly except  the list two  weeks
of  August  at  Room 225,  1416 F  St.,  N.W.,
Washington  4,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:
Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and
elsewhere  in  the Western  Hemisphere,  $6;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by
1st class  mail,  $1$  by air;  for  Israel,  Asia,
Australia   and   Africa,   $10   by   first   class
mail,   $20  by  air  mail.    Single  copy,   1)
cents.     Contents   covered   by   copyright.
Telephone,  STerling  3-0938.    Application
for  entry as Second Class matter is pending.
Vo.  1,  No.  5     «^^»7    February  14,    1953
COMMENT
Patriotic  Economy  Suggestion
Washington,  D.  C.
Senator  Wiley  has  just  introduced  a  bill  to
allow  the  Director  of  the  FBI,  the  director  of
military  intelligence,  the  director  of  air  force
intelligence  and  the chief  of  the  Office  of  Naval
Intelligence  to  tap  telephone  wires  under  cer-
',    tain  rules  and  regulations  "in   the  conduct  of
investigations  to  ascertain,  prevent,  or  frustrate
any  interference . .  . with  the national security
or  defense by treason,  sabotage,  espionage,  sedi-
tious  conspiracy,  violations  of  neutrality laws",
etc.    Stopping  such   legislation   in   this  atmo-
sphere would seem almost impossible; the  wires
are  being  tapped   anyway;  this  bill  would  at
least  require  a  permit  by  a  judge;  the  Depart-
ment  of  Justice  now  taps  wires  on  its   own.
At  the  moment we  can  only  muster enough  en-
ergy  to be whimsical about  it.
We  wonder  first  of  all  why  the  Secret  Serv-
ice,  the  Treasury investigation  bureau  and  Cen-
tral   Intelligence   operatives  are   discriminated
against  in  this  bill.    We  also  suggest,  in  this
new  and   efficient   Republican  era,  that  maybe
some  provision  ought  to  be  made for  a  kind of
traffic  control  on  tapped  wires.    What  happens
when  FBI,  G-2,  ONI,  T-operatives  and  Secret
Service  men  all  listen   in  on  the  same  wires?
Should   the   telephone   subscriber   be   allowed
some   reduction   in   rate   for   inferior   service?
Swept  up  in  the  current  enthusiasm  for  econ-
omy,  the  thought  als»  strikes  us—we  lay  it
freely  at  the  Eisenhower  Administration's  feet
—that   perhaps   the   cost   of   extensive   wire-
tapping  could   be   reduced   by  combining   the
tap  with  a  commercial  answering  service,  of
course  at  a  fair   fee.    Some  nights  the   secret
agent  might even help  earn  his  salary by sitting
up  with  the  baby.
Still  Higher  Up
Now  that  the  Secretaries  of  Defense,  Army,
Navy  and  Air  have  been  confirmed, under  spe-
cial  dispensation  allowing  them  to  pass  onward
and  upward  contracts  in  which  they might  have
a  financial  interest,   we  see  that  Eisenhower—
as  if  to  forestall  Congressional   criticism—has
put  his  own  holdings  in  an  irrevocable  trust.
The   arrangement   is  that   if   Messrs.   Talbott,
Anderson, or  Stevens see a contract of  this kind,
they  will  pass  it  on  to  their  boss,  Wilson.   As
for  Wilson,  he  told  the  Senate  Armed  Services
Committee  that  if  some  contract  came  to  him
"of  a  nature   that   could ...  be  misunder-
stood"  he  would  "step  aside  and  have  some-
body  else  make  that  decision,  if  necessary,  the
President  of  the  United   States."    And   what
happens   if   the   President   has  a  bit   of   stock
stashed   away  in  that   irrevocable   trust   which
would  earn  more  if  the  decision  went  a  certain
way?   To  whom  would  the  President  pass  on
the  contract  for final action?    God?
Since  to  judge  by  the  speeches  of  so many of
our  generals,  God  is  already  enlisted   in   our
armed  forces,  we  see no  reason  why  He  should
not   pinch  hit   as  super  Secretary  of   Defense,
except  of  course  in  those  cases  where  there may
be  some  conflict  of  interest.
The  Unhappy  Moor
There  is  a  detective   agency  in  New  York
specializing   in  domestic  matters  which  adver-
tises,  "let   us  give  you  peace  of  mind".    This
implies  that  Othello  might  have  lived  happily
ever  after  if  only  he  had  put  enough  gumshoe
men  on  Desdemona's  trail.    But  suspicion  is  a
poison  which  once injected  thrives  and  destroys.
Mistrust   paralyzes  normal   relations   where   it
does  not actively breed  misconduct.   That  detec-
tive  agency  slogan  comes  to  mind  as  the  Eisen-
hower  Administration  prepares  to  revamp  the
whole  loyalty program.   No  judgment is  possi-
ble  until  the  new  order  has  been  made  public.
From   advance  indications  it   is   supposed   to
have   the   virtue   of   allowing   people   to   be
dropped    from    government   service    without
branding  them  for  the   rest   of  their   lives   as
disloyal,  though  it  is  difficult   to  see  how  this
can  really  be  avoided.    There  would  still  be
the  tale-tale  blur  on  one's  employment  record.
Imagine  explaining  to  the  next  prospective  em-
ployer  that  you  were  just  a  security  risk,  not
really   disloyal,   at   least   in   your   own   opin-
ion.  . . .
One  difficulty  about  the  new program  is  that
those  Federal   employes  who  have  passed   the
"reasonable  grounds"  test first established  under
the Truman  loyalty  program  and  later  the   "rea-
sonable doubt"  test  with  which  it  was  amended
last   year   might   have   to   run   the   gauntlet
again   to  pass  the  new  "security   risk"  stand-
ard.    This  will  hardly  be  conducive  to   peace
of   mind   in   the   Federal   service.     My   own
feeling  is  that  this  new  setup  will  make  dis-
charge  so  easy  that  administrators  will  fire  any-
body  who  might  possibly get  them  into  trouble
"on  the  Hill".   Already  the  test  of  security  is
sometimes  whether  the  retention  of  any  partic-
ular subordinate would  render the  administrator
politically  insecure.    That  M  which   casts   its
shadow  on  the  loyalty program  is  as  often  Mc-
Carthy  or  McCarran  as  Moscow.
Hat's  Off
To  Arthur  Miller,  for  a brave and  good  play
in  "The   Crucible",  which  I  saw  last  Saturday
in  New  York.    The  author  of  "Death  of  A
Salesman"  has  made  exciting  theatre  and  mov-
ing  drama  of  the  Salem  witch  hunt.    Without
in   any   way   straining   for   parallels,   he   has
provided  a  parable  for  our  own  haunted  times.
I  hope  to  discuss  the  play  and  the   criticisms
of  it  in a later  issue,  particularly  that  line  about
"but   witches  were  purely  imaginary,  whereas
today.  . .  ."
"Capsule  Capital  Commentary"
A  bright  reader  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  pins  that  label  on the Weekly in sending  in another  sub for
a  friend.    People  seem  to  like  it,  though  the  editor  and  publisher   (who   is  also  the   office-boy)
sometimes  gets a little  breathless.   The  first  response to our book  offer  last  week  came  from  a  Japa-
nese,  who  sent  in  #6  for  a  sub and  a  copy  of  "The   Truman  Era",  a  collection  of  my  best  pieces
since  1945  in  PM,  the  New  York  Star  and  the  Compass,  soon  to  be  published  by  the  enterprising
Monthly   Review,  which  also  published  (as  its  first  venture  of  the  kind)  my  "Hidden  History  of
the  Korean  War".    The  latter  has  just  appeared  in  Japanese   translation,  which  may  explain  that
first response.    The  book  will  sell  at  $3.50  and  can  be  obtained  in advance  of  publication   free  with
two  subscriptions   to  the  Weekly,  or  you  can  get  a  sub  and  the  book  for  #6.    For  the  many  en-
couraging  letters,  some  of  which  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  answer  personally,  even  on  a double
union  day  (16  hours),  my  thanks.
—I.  F.  Stone
2  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   February   14,  1993
Second  Round  at  Foley  Square
New  York
The  second  Smith  Act  trial,  just  ended  here,  was an im-
provement  over  the  first.  Some  modicum of  justice  began  to
be apparent  in  the gloomy skyscraper which houses the  Federal
Courts  on  Foley  Square.  For  the  first time in  any of  the Smith
sedition  prosecutions  two  defendants  were  acquitted.
A  respected  veteran  of  the  federal  bench,  Judge  Edward  J.
Dimock,  conducted  the  trial  with  a  decorum  strikingly  absent
from  the  first  proceedings,  when  Judge  Harold  Medina  took
it upon  himself  to  act as a kind  of  picador, baiting  high-strung
counsel  into  contemptuous  conduct, to  the  constant  refrain  of
insinuations   that   they  were  engaged   in   a  plot   against   his
health.   The  four  brave  lawyers  who  ventured  in  the  hateful
atmosphere  of  present-day  America  to  defend  the   so-called
"second string" Communists had to contend neither  with hypo-
chondria  nor  an  obvious  hostility  from  the  bench.
The  lawyers  deserve  to  be  honorably  mentioned.    John  T.
McTernan,  Frank  Serri,  Mary Kaufman  and  James  T.  Wright
took  on  a  heavy  task  in  the  shadow  of  the  jail  sentences  and
disbarment  actions visited on  defense counsel in  the  first  Foley
Square  trial.  To  their  names''must  be  added  that  of  Professor
Thomas  I.  Emerson  of  Yale  Law School  who  ably  argued  the
constitutional  issues on  motion  to  dismiss.
The  second  New  York  trial  was also the  first  of  the current
sedition  prosecutions  in which  less than the  maximum sentence
was  imposed,  an  outcome painfully  reflected in  the  anguished
protest  of  certain  newspapers  which  have  done  their  best  to
whip  up  a  lynch  spirit.   Five  years  and  $10,000  fine  is  the
maximum  penalty  now  provided  by  the  federal  code  for  any
conspiracy,  whether to commit murder, smuggle  narcotics or—
as  in  this  case—to  advocate  at  some  future  time,  "when  the
situation  is  ripe,"  the  overthrow  of  the  Government  by  force
and  violence.  Judge  Dimock  felt  so distant  a political   offense
as  "conspiracy  to  advocate"  called  for  a  lighter  penalty  than
conspiracy  to  commit  murder.
In  this case also the  repressionists began to be hoisted by
one  of   their   own   petards.   The   directed  acquittal   of   two
defendants,  Simon  W.  Gerson  and  Isadore  Begun,  both  New
York  State  officials  of  the  Communist Party,  was based  in  part
on that  provision  of  the  McCarran  Internal  Security Act which
J.  F.  Sto*e'$  Weekly                                                 '•»••'
Room  225  Kellogg  BIdg.
141 < F Street,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Pirate  eater  the  following  tubtcription.  (I  for  1 year  i»
enclosed.   (See   page  J  tot   foreign  rates)
Name
•tract
City
State
says  no  one  shall  be  convicted  merely  for  being  a  member or
official   of   the  Communist  Party.    The   weird  provision,  of
course,  was necessary to  buttress  the  registration  provisions of
that   Act.   Under  the   Fifth   Amendment,  it  would  be  too
clearly  unconstitutional to  force  people  to  incriminate them-
selves by registering their political  affiliations  if  such  affiliations
were themselves enough  to convict them of  crime.
The victories in Judge Dimock's court, small as they are,
may  be  enough,  if  pressed  on  appeal  to  their  acid conclusions,
to   dissolve   the   shoddy  fabric  of   these  prosecutions.    It   is
difficult   logically  to  reconcile  the   directed   acquittal  of   two
"second  string"  leaders  with  the  conviction  of  the  rest,  since
it  was often only by piling  dubious inference on demonstrated
perjury  that  any kind  of  evidence was marshalled  against  them.
It  was  only  by  making  this  a  conspiracy  prosecution  that
some  semblance of  a case could  be  achieved.  The  Government
thereby  had  the  advantage  of   semantics—conspiracy  always
sounds  sinister  to  a  jury—and  of  the  looser  rules  of  evidence
allowed   in  conspiracy  trials.    It  was  no  longer   necessary  to
prove  advocacy but  only  "conspiracy  to  advocate."
The  record  is  juicy  with  examples  of  the  logical   fallacies
conspiracy  trials  invite.   Again  and  again  evidence  was  sub-
mitted  as  proof  of  conspiracy which  was  properly  admissable
only  if  a conspiracy had  already  been  proven.   Vague  remarks
made  twenty years  ago  were  adduced  as evidence  of  a  present
attitude.    General  expressions  of  approval  of  certain  Marxist
classics were twisted into evidence that a defendant was propos-
ing  to  do in  the  America of  the  1950's  what  Lenin  advocated
in  the  Russia of   1903.
The  subpoena  of  FBI  records  in  one  striking  instance
showed  that  the  most  sensational  of  the  informers had  lied  to
the  court.   A  scandalous incident  disclosed  prejudice  on  the
part  of  several  jurors.   As  the  voluminous  record  is  opened
to  study on  appeal,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  chief  victim of  the
prosecution  is  not  the  Communist  Party but  a  growing  list  of
historic   constitutional   and   procedural   safeguards.    If   these
convictions   stand,   freedom  of   expression   in   America  must
dwindle,  for  by the standards being  established  in  these  prose-
cutions,  there  are  few  dissenters and  little  dissent  which  could
not ultimately be brought  within the  nebulous purview  of  that
strange  thing  called  "conspiracy  to   advocate."
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
225  Kellogg  Bldg.
141<  F St.,  Waihwgtoa 4, D. C.
Application  for
Second  Claw  Entry
If  Pending
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED