I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953nov30.pdf

============================================================

Eye-Opener:  The  Only  "Spy"  Elizabeth  Bentley  Convicted, See  Page  2.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   I,  NUMBER  43
NOVEMBER  30,  1053
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15 CENTS
Was  J. Edgar  As  "Blind"  As  Harry?
There  is  a  strange, untouched,  perhaps  untouchable  aspect
of  the  Harry  Dexter  White  affair.   To  go  back  and  re-study
the  hearings  and  reports  since  Elizabeth  Bentley  began  telling
her  story  publicly  on  July  JO, 1948,  is to  wonder  why  it  was
never  inquired  into.  For  if  it  can  be  said  that  Harry  Truman
"knowingly"  promoted  a  Soviet  spy,  it  can  also  be  said  that
J.  Edgar Hoover  allowed a known  and registered  Russian  agent
to  operate  unscathed.   The  biggest  mystery  of  all  is  why  the
FBI  chief  should  have  been  surprised  when  Elizabeth  Bentley
first  talked in  November,  1945.   Because the  central  character
in  her  story,  the  master  spy whom  she claimed  to  have  served
as  courier  and  lived  with  as  man  and  wife,  Jacob  Golos,  had
been  publicly   accused  of   military   espionage  for   the   Soviet
government  by  the  Attorney  General  almost  six  years  earlier
and  forced  to  register  as a  Soviet  agent.
One  of  Frank  Murphy's  last  acts  as Attorney  General,  just
before  his  elevation  to  the  U.S.   Supreme  Court,  was  to  file
charges  on  January  2,  1940  against  eight  persons  and  three
business  houses  for  military  espionage  on  behalf  of  the  Soviet
government  and  for  failure  to  register  as foreign  agents.   One
of  the  men  was Golos and  one of  the  business firms was World
Tourists,  Inc.,  of  which  he  was  the  sole  stockholder.
Two  months later,  in  March,  a  special grand jury  in  Wash-
ington   indicted  "Jacob  Raisin,  also  known  as  J.  N.  Golos"
and  World  Tourists,   Inc.,   for  failure  to  register  as  foreign
agents.  The  charge  of  military  espionage and  the  case against
the  others  had  been  dropped.   The  next   day  Golos  pleaded
guilty.  He  was sentenced  to  four  months  in  jail  but  put  on
probation   and   fined   $500.   A  similar  fine  was  imposed   on
World  Tourists,  Inc.,  but  that  fine  was suspended.
Just   why   the  more  serious  charge  was  dropped  and  why
Golos  got  off  so easily  on  the  lesser charge was never explained.
The  greater mystery  is how Golos, after  being publicly accused
of  military espionage and  forced  to  register  as a foreign  agent,
was  able to  go on operating  as a master  spy.  For  according  to
Miss  Bentley, she began  in  1941  to  travel  between  New  York
and  Washington  as his  courier  and  go-between,  to  build  up  a
whole  circle  of  informants  in  the  government  and  to  bring
large  quantities  of  secretly  filmed  documentary  material  out
of  the  capital in  her knitting  bag every two  weeks or  so.  This
went  on,  according  to  Miss Bentley,  from  1941  to  1945.   Yet
her  story,  when  told  to  the  FBI, apparently came as a  complete
surprise. Either  the  FBI was extraordinarily  inefficient  or  there
is much  more to  this  affair  than  has yet  been told.
It   is  curious  that  in  her  book,   "Out   of  Bondage",  Miss
Bentley   does  not   mention  the   charge  of  military   espionage
made  against  Golos  in  January,  1940.   Here  she  was engaged
in  a  very  dangerous and  intimate  relationship  with  a  Russian
agent.   The  Attorney  General  of  the  United  States  suddenly
accuses  him  of  engaging  in  military   espionage.   The   charge
would  endanger  her,  too,  for  she speaks  of  being  shadowed  in
this  period  by  the  FBI.   Yet  this vital  fact—when  she  seemed
on  the  verge of  being  caught—is omitted.  As told  vaguely  in
the  book,  the  government   had  become  more  hostile  to   the
Communists  after  the Nazi-Soviet  pact.  The  records of World
Tourists  were  seized,  revealing  that  Earl  Browder  had  used
a  false  passport.
But  her  account  does  not   -mention  two  dramatic   episodes
which  focused  publicly  attention  sharply  on  World  Tourists,
Inc.   The  first  was Earl  Browder's  admission  to  the  Dies  com-
mittee  in  September,   1939,  that  he  had  used  false   passports
in  travelling  abroad;  it  was  as  a  result  that  in  October  the
records  of   World   Tourists,   Inc.,   were  seized.   (From   Miss
Bentley*s  account   one  would   believe  that   this  happened   in
reverse;  that  the  government  only  learned  of  Browder's  false
passports  after  it  seized  the  records.)   The  other  episode  was
the  FBI "midnight  raid" in  Detroit  and  Milwaukee, in  which
11  persons  were  arrested  on  charges  of  recruiting   soldiers  for
the  Spanish  Republican  Army.  That  occurred  early  in  Febru-
ary,  1940,  and  the  Federal  District  Attorney  in  Detroit  said
recruits  were  given  their  tickets  to  Spain  by  World  Tourists,
Inc.,  in  New  York.    Had   these  events,   and  the  charge  of
military  espionage,  been  related  in  the  book(  or  indeed  in  any
one of  Miss Bentley's  appearances before  Congressional  investi-
gating  committees)   they  would  sharply  have  raised  the  ques-
tion  of  how,  after  that,  Golos  could  still  have operated  a  spy
ring  successfully  under  the  very  nose  of  the  FBI.
It  is possible that  this  is how it  happened  but  it  is not  likely.
World  Tourist,  Inc.  with  its  link  to  Intourist  was  a  pretty
obvious  place  for  surveillance  long  before   1939.   Hoover  in
the  radio  speech  of  1942  quoted  in  last  week's  issue  said  the
FBI's  method  was to  "first  find  out who the spies are ...   and
then   carefully   keeping  them  under  scrutiny,   ascertain  .  .  .
the  identity  of  their   associates  .  .  .  finally   taking  over  the
supervision  of  the  spy  ring until  the  time  comes  to  take  them
into  custody."   Miss  Bentley  says  (p.295)  that  after  telling
her  story  in   1945  an  FBI  agent  asked  her,  "Would  you  be
willing  to  keep on  going  as you are now?  .  .  .  With  you in
there,  we  can  keep  tabs  on  what  is  going  on.   Then,  too,   it's
vital  to  keep  in  contact  with  the  Russian  secret  police  and
also  with  the  people  you  know  in  the  American  Communist
Party."  This  embodies a basic technique  of  counter-espionage,
to  try  and turn  a  spy into  a  counter-spy.   One  wonders  why
if  she is telling  the  truth  this  was not  done with  Miss Bentley
in  1940-41  when  (as  she says)  she was under  surveillance  for
a  time.   Or   was  it?   The  puzzle  is  increased  by  a   re-study
of   the  Remington   case,  and  of  her  admissions  under  cross-
examination.   These  are  discussed  on  the  next  page.
1   7   2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, November  SO,  1953
Eye-Opener:   Bentley's  One  Conviction   in  That  "Spy"  Ring
In  his  appearance  before  the  Jenner  committee,  J.   Edgar
Hoover  praised  Elizabeth  Bentley,  saying  "She has  been  sub-
jected  to  the  most  searching  of.cross-examinations;  her  testi-
mony has  been  evaluated  by juries  and  reviewed by the  courts
and  has  been found  to be accurate." The unwary reader would
never  guess  that  she  was  subjected  to  cross-examination  in
only  one  case  growing  out  of  her  sensational  spy  ring  story
to  the  FBI  in  November, 1945.  This  was  the  case  of William
W. Remington.
Remington  was  one  of  the   30-odd  government  employes
named  by  Miss  Bentley  to  the  FBI  in  November,  1945.   He
himself  was  not  questioned  until  a  year  and  a  half  later.
Presumably  the  charges  were  kept  secret  during  the  interval
while  the   suspects  were  under  surveillance.   On  April  15,
1947,   three  FBI  agents  questioned  Remington  for  three  and
a  half  hours.  Remington  denied he  had  ever  been  a  member
of  the  Communist  party  and  denied  that  he  had  ever  given
Bentley  secret information.  In  June,  1947, after  Miss Bentley
told  her  story  to  a  special  grand  jury,  Remington  testified
voluntarily  and at  length.   Neither  he nor  anyone else named
by  Miss Bentley  were  indicted.
That  grand  jury  sat  a  long  time.  In  the  spring  of  1948,
before  the  outcome was  known, Miss  Bentley called  on  Fred-
erick   Woltman   of   the   New  York   World-Telegram.    Miss
Bentley,  as  was  later  testified,  wanted  to  find  out  when  the
grand  jury  was  going  to  return  indictments.   Woltman  ar-
ranged  for  her  to  tell  her  story  to  a  fellow   staff  member,
Nelson  Frank.   Miss  Bentley  entered  into  a  contract  with
Frank  making  him her  literary  assistant  and  promising him
a  share  in  the  proceeds of  any  writings  based  upon  her  dis-
closures.  Frank  wrote  a  sensational  series  about her  for  the
World-Telegram   in  July,   1948.   On  July  30  she  was  sum-
moned  to  Washington  to  tell  her  story  before  a  Senate  com-
mittee  and  a  few  days  later  before  the  House  Committee
on  Un-American  Activities.   These  made  her   famous   and
launched  her  on  a  career   as  an  ex-Communist writer  and
lecturer.
Bentley  in  Danger
This  career—and  Miss  Bentley's  usefulness  to  those  who
wished  to  picture  the  New Deal  as  a  nest  of  spies—was soon
endangered  by the  Remington  case.  By the  time  Miss Bentley
testified   publicly  in  July,   1948,  Remington  was   (with  one
possible  exception)  the  last  of  those  she  named  still  on  the
Federal  payroll  (White and  V. Frank  Coe were  employed by
the  international  monetary  fund).   Remington  was  at  once
suspended  by  the  Department  of  Commerce pending  loyalty
proceedings.
Thanks  to  her   public,  appearance,  Miss  Bentley  was  no
longer   one  of  those  confidential  informants  whose  identity
(as  the  formula  goes)  could not be disclosed  lest  it  endanger
FBI   sources  of  information.   Remington  asked  to  confront
his  accuser.   The  Loyalty  Board  lacked  power  of  subpoena
but   invited  her  to  appear.    She  twice  accepted   and   twice
failed  to appear.  When  a third  attempt  also proved  fruitless,
the  Board  cleared  Remington.  The  decision  was  a  blow not
only  to  Miss  Bentley  but  to  the  FBI  since  it  had  marshalled
"derogatory  information"  from  many  other  sources  to  prove
that  Remington  was a  Communist.
The  verdict  was given  additional  weight  because  a  former
national   commander  of  the   American   Legion   was   on   the
Loyalty  Board  which  cleared  Remington.   A  new  blow  was
the  payment  of  $9,000  to  Remington  in  settlement  of  a  libel
suit  he  brought  against  a  TV  show  on  which  Miss  Bentley
had  repeated her charges.  A star  witness  was waning.   Some-
thing had  to be done.  In  April,  1950,  the  House Un-American
Activities   Committee  reopened  the   Remington  case.   They
summoned  not  only  Miss  Bentley  but  several  of  the  FBI's
hitherto  confidential informants  whose  accusations  had  been
before  the  Loyalty  Board.  These  new witnesses  claimed  that
Remington  had  been  a  Communist  in  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  in
1936-37.   Again  Remington  denied  the  charges  under  oath
before  the  committee and  before  a  new  grand  jury.  Again
there  was  no indictment.
A  Stacked Grand  Jury
It  was  not until  a  third  grand  jury  took up  the  matter  in
May,   1950,  that  an  indictment of  Remington was  finally  ob-
tained,  not  an  indictment  for  espionage  but  for  perjury  in
denying  that  he  had  ever  been  a  Communist.  This  grand
jury,  as  was  revealed  during  the  ensuing  trial,  was  stacked
in  Miss Bentley's  favor.  Under cross-examination,  she admit-
ted that the special prosecutor  in charge,  Thomas E. Donegan,
had  been  her  personal  attorney  in  a  suit  for  back  pay.  One
of  the  first  witnesses  called was  Joseph  E.  Egan,  her counsel
in  the  libel suit  brought  by  Remington.  And during  the  trial
two  women  who  had  been  employed  by  Miss  Bentley's  pub-
lisher  turned up to  testify  that  John  Brunini, the  foreman of
the  grand  jury,  was  collaborating  on  Miss Bentley's  book  at
the  very time the grand jury  was  drawing  up the  Remington
indictment.   This  information was  known  to  the  prosecution
(and   discussed with  Attorney  General  McGrath)  but  hidden
from  the  defense.
The  conviction of  Remington in  that  case  was  reversed  on
appeal,  but  the  indictment  was  not  dismissed.  Rather  than
let  this tainted  indictment become an  issue in a  new trial,  the
government  obtained  a  new indictment for  perjury.  Reming-
ton  was  convicted  again,  but  as  in  the  Lattimore  case  there
had  been  a  steady  deflation  in  charges.   This  time  he  was
convicted  for  denying at  the  first trial that he had given  Miss
Bentley  information to which she was  not entitled  (a  far  cry
from  the  original  espionage charge)  and  for  denying that  he
knew  there  was  a  Young  Communist League  on  the  campus
when  he  was  a  student  at  Dartmouth  (an  equally  far   cry
from  the  charge  that  he was  himself  a  Communist).
What  Bentley  Told  Her Contacts
What makes the Remington case so relevant for  study today
is  that  under  cross-examination  Miss  Bentley  admitted  that
most  of  the  persons  from   whom  she  obtained  information
in  Washington did  not  know that  she  was  a  Russian  agent.
Remington  himself  swore  (as  did  another  witness  named  by
her)  that  she represented  herself  as a research  worker.  Miss
Bentley  said  the  Silver-masters  and  Ullman  knew  what  she
was  doing and  that  "from  what  they  said,  Mr.  White knew
where  it  [the  information]  was  going  but  preferred  not  to
mention  the  fact."   Of  the  others,  she  said,  some  may  have
guessed  but  most  thought  they  were  merely  aiding the  Com-
munists  in  this  country.   "That  was  especially  true  of  the
individuals  I  contacted,"  she  admitted  at  one point,  "because
they  were  told  by  Mr.  Golos  that  this  information was  for
the  personal  use  of  Earl  Browder in  preparing  books and  in
preparing  policies  of  the  Communist party."
"The   general   policy,"   Miss  Bentley  testified  at   another
point,  "was  to  try  and keep,  at  least  for  that  period,  to  keep
American  Communists  from  knowing things  were  going  to
Russia  because if  anybody turned  sour,  as  they  called  it,  or
turned  traitor,  then  they  could  tell  a  great  deal  more  than
they  could  otherwise."
Of  the  Perlo group,  Miss Bentley  said  "no  one was  actually
told  that  it  [the  information]  was  going  to  Russia."   And of
Remington   she  admitted  that  maybe  he  had  grown   "less
willing  to  see  her"   because  he  began  to  suspect  from   the
nature  of  her  questions  that  she  might  be  a  Russian  spy.
Thus,  according  to  her  own  story  as  it  finally  came  out,
Miss  Bentley  was  taking  advantage  of  Communist or  Soviet
sympathies  to  draw  Federal  officials  into  a  dangerous  rela-
tionship   whose  real  nature  was   deliberately   hidden   from
them.  This  begins  to  appear  in  retrospect  as  an  exercise  in
entrapment,  and the  full  truth  about that  has  yet  to  be  told.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November SO,  1953
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  L F.  STONE
Published  weekly   except  the lot  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  201,  J01
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic,  $1
a   year;   Canada,   Mexico   and  elsewhere  in   the   Western   Hemisphere,   $<;
England  and  Continental   Europe,  $10  by   1st  class  mail,  $1}  by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   15  cents.   Tel.:   LI  4-7017.    Entered   as  Second   Class   mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
November  30, 1953Vol  1, No.  48
What  Country  Does Ike  Think
He's  President  Of—Denmark?
President  Eisenhower to  the  B'nai  B'rith:
"In  this  country,  if  someone  dislikes  you  or  accuses  you,
he  must  come  up  in  front.   He  cannot hide  behind  the  shad-
ows, he cannot assassinate  you or your character from  behind
without   suffering   the  penalties  an  outraged  citizenry  will
inflict."
Portrait  of  a  Fighting Newspaper
About  to  Take  a  Stand  But  Then
Quietly  Lying  Down  Again  for  Comfort
"Even   though  it   seems  necessary  to  permit   the  use   of
wiretap  evidence  in  national  security  cases,  Congress  ought
to  remember  that  such  undercover  snooping  is,  as  Justice
Holmes  called  it,  'dirty  business.'  Resort  to  this  method can
be  condoned  only  if  the  strictest  precautions  are  taken  to
avoid  abuses and encroachment upon  individual  rights  . . .
by  requiring  the  Attorney  General  to  authorize  each  request
for  permission before a  court  order  is  sought."—Washington
Post.
The  Attorney  General  being  that  renowned  defender  of
fair   play,   due   process   and   private   reputation,    Herbert
Brownell,  Jr.
Query
We  would  like  to  know  whether  the   Catholic  Bishops  of
the  United  States,  assembled  here  in  Washington,  had  any
evidence  to  support  the  language  of their  joint  statement  on
"Peter's  Chains."
"Peasants are  slaughtered,"  they  said, "and flung upon  the
pyre  of  their  burning  churches.   Innocent  children  are  torn
from  the  arms  of their  Christian  mothers  and  handed  over  to
atheist  debauchers."
We  would  also  like  to  have  some  fuller  exegesis  for  their
attack  on  "the  Voltaires  of  the  West."  It  would  seem  from
their  language that  the  Bishops have  not forgiven  the  great
champion  of  toleration  and  enlightenment.
It   has   become  one  of  the   cliches  of  American   political
rhetoric   to  equate  intellectual   freedom  and  belief  in   God.
But  the  attack  on  "the  Voltaires  of  the  West"  reflects  hos-
tility to intellectual  liberty, to toleration  of differing  opinions,
and  to  the  spirit  of free  inquiry.
There  was  a  loyalty  case  here  some years  ago  in  which  a
Federal   employe  was   accused  of  having   Rousseau  in   his
library.   Is  Voltaire  to  become "subversive,"  too?
Unerring  Instinct  for  Not  Being
Where  the  Battle  Is  Hottest
"Seen   from   Belgrade   and  Trieste,  which  I  visited  last
week, it  was clear to me that the boundary  line between Italy
and  Yugoslavia  is  not  the  crucial  problem."—Walter  Lipp-
man,  November  24,  1953.
And  on  careful  consideration,  we  agree  with  him.
The  Elephant Is  Not  Alone
In  Having  Two Heads
Adlai  Stevenson before the  Georgia  legislature:  "Root  out,
I  say,  the agents  of this  Satanic  world-wide  conspiracy.  . . .
But  for  the  love  of  heaven  let  us  do  it  with  dignity,  objec-
tivity  and  justice."
Are   sober  methods  encouraged  when  one  uses  the   very
metaphors   of  witch-hunting?   A  "Satanic  world-wide  con-
spiracy"  is  a  bogeyman, something too  occult and  elusive  for
normal  methods  of  prosecution;  too  sinister,  dangerous  and
frightening.
To  use the  language  of medieval superstition  is  to  recreate
its  atmosphere and  foster  the  revival  of its  methods.  This  is
not  the  way back  to  national  sanity.
Hats Off
To  Ed  Murrow,  whose great  Alcoa  TV  show on  the  Radu-
lovich  case  deserves  a  major  share  of  the  credit   for   Air
Force  Secretary   Talbot's  decision  last  week  reinstating  Lt.
Milo  J.  Radulovich  as  a  reserve  officer  in  the  Air  Force.
Recommended
For  the  best  background  account  of  what  lies  behind  the
anti-Israel maneuvers at the UN: Lillie Schultz's "British Plot
Return  to  Israel"  in  the  November  21  issue  of  The  Nation.
Note
The  Weekly  had  to  go to  press  early  last  week  because of
the  Thanksgiving  holiday.  The  Circuit  Court  decision  in  the
Remington  case  came too late  for  this  issue  and  will  be  dis-
cussed  in  our  next.
DON'T  BE  ALARMED
If  you've  already  renewed and  get  a  letter  asking for  a  renewal—that  letter  was sent to  all  subscribers.  It  would have
been  too  time-consuming  and  costly  to weed out the  renewals  first.  And  don't  be  worried if  you  get  a  duplicate  some  time
in  the  next  few  weeks.   Your  name  may  also  have  been  on  one  of  the  lists  we  are  using  in  the  current  50,000 promotion-
and-renewal  mailing.   To  those  who  have already  renewed—many  thanks  for  a  promptness  which  enables  us to  see  and
plan  ahead  for  the  new  year.   To  those  who  have  not  yet  renewed please  do  so TODAY  if  you  can,  and  add  a  gift sub
for  a  friend  who'd  like  something  different out  of  Washington  than the AP pap  in  his local paper.  For the  kind words which
accompanied  many  renewals, we  are  grateful  and  beg  your  forgiveness  if  these  have not yet  been  acknowledged.
With  many  thanks.
1  2
1  7 5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone'8  Weekly, November  SO, 1953
JENN1NGS    PERRY'S    PAGE
"Old  New  Dealers"  Meet  Under  the   Magnolias
Not  long  ago the  TV   people  were  looking  hard  to  find  one
prominent  Southern  liberal  willing  to  take  on  Georgia Gov.
Herman  Talmadge in  debate on segregation  in  the  schools,  and
finally  found  one.  Aubrey  Williams  had  the  gizzard  to  come
• up  from  Montgomery, Ala.,  and  say  the  Supreme Court  ought
to  rule  there  is  no  such  thing  under   the  Constitution   as
"separate  but  equal."
Last  week,  I  went   down  to  the  one-time  capital  of  the
Confederacy  to  see how  else  this  lean,  soft-spoken  Alabaman
who  headed  Roosevelt's  National   Youth   Administration   is
using  himself.  Clifford  and  Virginia  Durr  joined us at  dinner.
It  was  good  to  be  able to  come  up  with  them  all  again,  to
"catch  up"  a  little  on  their  lives  since  Washington—where,
in   those   days  of   rcinvigorated   democracy,  Williams  under
Harry  Hopkins  labored  to  set  up  the  Civil  Works  program,
Durr  served  as a  New  Deal member of  the  Federal  Communi-
cations  Commission   and  Virginia,  from  their  rambling  big
frame   house  in   Alexandria,  fervently  urged  and  aided   the
movement  to  make voting  free,  in  fact,  for  all in  the  land.
And  now, back  home  from  that  stirring  scene  and  time,
in  their  native Deep  South?  Williams is publisher of  Southern
Farm  and  Home,  a long-established  monthly  with  wide circu-
lation  in  the  rural  areas  of  the  lower  states.   He  himself  is a
farmer  and cattle-raiser,  with two  sons grown up to  share with
him  in  these  enterprises.   Cliff  Durr,  who  used  to  lecture  on
law  at  Princeton, has his own  office  now at  Montgomery. Vir-
ginia  is his  secretary.
None  of  these  people  has  changed  in  spirit  or   convictions,
though  their  environment  at  Montgomery,  beside  the  slow-
moving  waters  of  the  Alabama  River,  is  a  far  cry  from  the
strenuous  life  of  which  they  were  a  part  beside  the  sluggish
Potomac.  The  walls of  Williams'  office  at  his modern  printing
plant,   as  indeed  the  walls  of  his  quiet  suburban  home,  are
friendly  with  inscribed  photographs  from  "those  days"—  of
FOR,  of  Eleanor  Roosevelt,  of  Hopkins,  La  Follette,  Olson.
These  presences  comfort   and  stay  him, he  says,  when   the
Brownells,  the  McCarthys—and  Talmadges  "posture  as  pa-
triots."
As  always  scholarly  and gentle, Cliff  Durr  cons  the  liberty-
loving  philosophers  from  Milton  and  Mill  to  Commager  and
Conant  and  traces  the  lamentable  parallel  between  the  perse-
cutions  of  the  early  Christians  and  "atavistic"  legal  efforts  to
suppress  intellectual  freedom in  our  times.
Stricken  by  a  painful   spinal  condition  after   leaving   the
government   service,  Durr   has   recovered   completely.    His
family  has  been  seated  at  Montgomery  for   generations,  and
though  undoubtedly  his association  with  the  defense in  loyalty
hearings  in  the  East is held  against  him  by  the  predominantly
conservative  elements  of  his  home  town,  his  exemplary vir-
tues of  mind  and  manner  cannot  but  claim  for  him  increasing
respect  in  his  profession  and  community.
As  for  the  irrepressible  Virginia,  Virginia  remains  irrepres-
sible,  indignant  at  all  social  injustice  and  incapable  of com-
placence.   The  fight  for   free  suffrage  of  which  she  was, in
Washington,  "la  Pasionaria" holds  her unabated  interest in  the
far  South.  Alabama has made some amendment  of  its  restric-
tive  voting  laws,  but  the  poll  tax  still  goes before  the  ballot..
"You  just  don't  rest  with  that,"  Virginia  Durr  protests.  "It's
un-American!"
I   went   out  with  Aubrey   Williams  to   his   farm—Peace
Farm—,  a  2,500-acre  sweep  of  wooded  hills  and  bottom pas-
tures  in  a  bend  of  the  Alabama River.   The  place  is  remote.
Green oat-fields spread along the  ridges.  A herd  of  200  mixed-
breed  cattle  runs  in  the  low  meadows,  watered  by   springs
that "won't  quit."  Beside the  river  and beside the  creeks flow-
ing unhurriedly  to it,  tall live oaks drip pendants  of gray  moss.
The  one-time  Youth  Administrator's   eyes  light  up  at  all
this.  "The  neighbors  were  skittish  at   first,"   he  says.   "We
wouldn't  cheat  the  hands, and  showed them  our  books.   Now
some of  them  are coming  around.  Some  of  them  are  beginning
to  give  their  own  tenants  a  fair  shake.-  We  keep  calling  it
'the  New  Deal,  Alabama  speed.'"
Don't  Rue  It,  Do  It.
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name      ———————————————————————————
Street     ———————————————————————————
City____________  Zone___  State________
Enter  thi»  gift  snb   for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
(To)  Nanw        ———————————————————————
Street    ___________——————————————
City____________  Zone..,  .... State_____
11-30-63
I.  F. Stone'. Weekly
Room'205
301  E. Capitol  St., S.B.
Washington  ), D. C
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED