I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953aug01.pdf

============================================================

The  Oxnam  Afiair.  Protestanmm  Is  Subversive,  See  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
•-.:                   ..•   ' '"'
     r
                            •   "       •  •'.-•     '      '••"  '-•
;
'  *s
VOL. i'NUMBER'zs',,'''AUGUST  1,  1953
5       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Now  The UN  Must  Liberate The USA
With  the  signing of a truce in  Korea, the main political
task  pf  the UN, in  a  sense  must  be  the  liberation  of  the  USA.
There  ,'can' be  rib Independent'  Korea
1
 until  the  United  States
•                            •      •~\
(
  \\  • \r<            *      •. '    ' •"'     -."^  ••   i        ••'  T      •'/"•    .           -                 '   •                      "     '         '•, .
has  regaine;d  its   own  independence  . pf  all, those. forces  sym-
bplized. and  mobilized by  the  China  Lobby'1' It  will" be  difficult
to  unjfy  Korea until  some progress  has  been  made in  unifying
thp  United  $tates,l. More  serious  than  the  38tri i  parallel  across
Korea  i? , the , wall  of. paranoid  suspicion , crypto-Fascist  forces
here .have  been  erecting, around  and  across  thje  United  Spates,
dividing  Americans, from eacji  other  and  the  rest  of  the  world.
.The. Korean. ,w,a^,-.would..,haye  been . avoide,4.  if. the* TJN  had
rpsjst^d  pressure, fjtp^mSjrngman  .Rhee.anj)  John  FpsteF'pulles
for,  the -creation, of  a  separate .State,  .in  Soutri  Korea., 1>is .war
with £hina  might, have, bfsen  avoided  if^tne-.UN  in  titie^winter
of  1949-50, had .rescued  Acheson  and .Truman fr^n. imprison-;
ment..by  .the- China  Lobby-  and  insisted  on   thie  admission   of
Communist  China  to  ;tbs  UN^.iTheJtask-.nqw  ,js  .^harde^  the
danger  greater,  The, .problem  now js
;
 tq  ,sv,oi4  .Wprid ^ar  HI.
The, .principal  beneficiaries.
 (
6f  ^he  ]Ko"i;e
;
an
;
;w,ar^
L
$yrigma^ ;Rhee
afld;Chiang.JKait?hek,.aie  dMermined iolsee jt.resurneci.pn^a
larger  scale  thanifiver,  for  if  the  truce, becqrrjes^pje^.^eitiier
can.suryiye ,as a, political ^^ibrce. In,^  peacefd^ .world, .recpgnir
tion  of  Communist  .Qjina
 ;
,';s ^;in.eyifable.
i
|f
K
tc^k,rflar.tial  ^ay  to
ensurp Rhefi's;reelectionras,Presi4ent  lastiyear^  h,e, cannot .hppje
to  surviye
;
,in-a -unified  Korea, .unless  indeed  it, is, unified  for
him  by;Amer:ic^
;
arjns  and;hisgoyernnient is give,n tbe,rneans
to (fasten: the  same kind  of  police  .state on  North  ]^p
ifcey  to.
:
a  settlement  in  the  East ,is :unirkatipnr,,pf
Korea,' as:-therkey,-tO)^ettlement  in -Europe , K  the  unification, of
Germany  but   in  both  areas  neither   qf  .ther'tworcpntendjing
great ^qwiers, has  .b?en- willing  .toilet  gp, of  its, own. satellite
share: for, fear the,other's  bloe might; get  the  whole, of ,it:.  Both
have,been  agreed  oq,. unification  in  principle but both  iri prac-
tice • have- appended  conditions ,unacceptahle  to , the  other.;  One
way: out, for; the  U.S; would:be to- oflEet; to withdraw, from- Korea
altogether  and   hand- over,  > the. .'problem  of  unification,, to   the
neutral  Asian; pbwers,  if  the  Russians  and  Chinese  would  do
the  same. 'Such  a  move; would .create  much  good  will  for  the
•U.S:    and  wipe  out  .entirely  the  ugly  effect  \ of; the  "fet
:
: Asians
fight         ^^  Asians"   slogan,   which  > translated   itself 'too  easily  into
using  colonial  colored  peoples  as cannon  fodder  against  those
who -had: won  their  'independence.  An  offer: of  the  kind, sug-
gested  here  would  imply  a  sort  of  Monroe  Doctrine 'for: Asia
and  create  the  cement  necessary  to
:
 hold  the, area, together  as
an
1
 independent' bloc' between ;the^oweis.' But  such. bold. and
creative  diplomacy  seems  to  be made  impossible  by the 'obses-
sions  of  containment,  and  the  political  comfort  of  a  mulishly
^ i  3
.   ,  ,  ,           .     ,  ,             r  •  ~
inen diplomacy.,!            :
  :
  ..  •      ,     ..-..                    -.i,..               -     .
Now  if  ever  is the  time  for  the  smaller  powers  to  use .their
UN  leverage  creatively.They  have  much  to  learn  from  the
Korean  war.  Korea iwas  a .terrible .object  lesson  for-all  coun-
tries ^and  areas which  allow  themselves  to  be<divided  between
the  Americaa  ahd  the  Russian '.power.  iThe.: war  showed, that
the  American  people,  though  instinctively  kind  and'generous
in  dealing  with  distress,  may  easily  be  doped  and  duped  by
military  leadership
;
 'into  permitting  the  kind  of  unnecessary
havoc our "Air'Force wreaked in many parts of  Korea. The war
also  Showed'i that  the   American  Air  Force  is  infested •-with
publicity  men  who  are  among  the'-wofId's'  biggest  liars;'-their
inflated  'figures  aud;inftarnmatoryvreporting area  menace.-The
Warfde'ffionstrated-"again  the  delusi6n.of  victory  by:airpower
arid firepowery the  ability  of ^colonial  colored  peoples  to  han-
dlje  jet  plafles
j
and^afiti-aircfaft   ra'dar effectively,  the  tremendous
militafy^pTEi^er-  of '&*  new  CMnai -and
1
 the  willingness  of  the
Chihese'knti  the'  Rttssiahs'td  Wallow  one  provocation   after
another in theifdesifeior  peace'.
!
-           '••"• '•'•>   - -
In  this  picture,  the  American  'people  seem  a  passive
mass. tFhfr''nlilitary  haveibeen^able'to  drag .out the  truce  talks
by^ne  phoney  issUeHaftet  anbther  for  many  months i without
p6pular.':prbt«st!iHIthis'COiuntry;;Tbe  desire for^peace  is.there,
b'Ut 'the thought' ebntrbl 'drive' has' succeeded  in   stifling  the
ferctss and organirat ions-which would haveigivenitiexpr^ssion.
T^ieyfear-tKat  peace inigMt 'mean  loss of
:
 jobs' arid^business  has
.beeh^pS^ent^a^br^tbp.'a^Fe^i^               as much  as  their
employeri: MH^F'HgTJfist
;
min6
r
rities  easily'sway  this  sheep-
like  miss;  ahd f cur dbyh  sharply  tHe-jpolmcal  arid  dijpldmatic
ManeuverabiBty;8F the"
:
Eisehhower
  ?
Admihistratiptf.  The'hew
'Ptesideht  p'temi^ei  p>atfe'in  Ko^rea  and  h&  fulfilled  his  prom-
ise,  but  the''iichiev?ment  of  Cp*ecSfipus
!
tnice  seems  to'  have
just  about  exhausted  the-fSblitical  potency' of  the  new  Admih-
istratibh. Eisenni5Wiel:
?
s
r
tfMi
;
 desire for peace is a positive  factor,
but  as"a"gairBt'^s
;
the
i
t)iromise  tci
:
walk  but  of Ja'political  con-
ference   after
  :
90
rj
days
;
gives'tremendous
 ;
power  for  evil  ito
Rhee and the ArtteriefiiiMilitary
;l
meh  behind  him:
;
•'• '•-'''
:
   Were  th'ere a 'peace
f
movernent'left'
:
iri'-'this'  country-"'two of
•its  main  objectives.'in
r
the
!
-crucial  six  months  ahead  would'-be
clear.  One'would'  be  to-irestore:'greater  political  freedom  in
'South  Korea   S<J  that  • peace ?forces  there  could  provide  soine
'check'on  Syngman! Rhee.-  The  other  would' to  be  focus  the
spotlight  on  ihecomihg.Rhee-Dulles  talks: These  two  Catos
were  among  the  chief  architects  of  the  warjiThe  key point  to
•watch are  the conditions,to which  Rhee^ will.try^to commit  the
United   States  for  unification  6f!;Korea.  His: town   conditions
require! unconditional  surrender,  and ithit.^ay  lies (resumption
of  the  war.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  P. Stone's  Weekly,  August  1,1953
The  Oxnam  Affair:  Protestantism  Is  Subversive
When  a  Bishop  appears  before  the  House  Un-American
Activities  Committee  to  deny  that  he  is  a  Communist,  the
spectacle  is not  conducive  to  political  sanity. Bishop  G.  Brom-
ley  Oxnam's  valor  in  appearing   before  the  Committee  was
better  than  his  judgment.  His  intentions  were  good.  His  ap-
pearance  was a  mistake.
The  Bishop's  purpose  was not  merely  to  clear  his  name  but
to  expose  the  methods  by  which  the  Committee  assembles  its
one-sided  dossiers  and  distributes  its  unverified  slanders.  But
the  disorderly  procedure  of  the  Committee  made it  possible  to
bury  his  replies  in  irrelevant  digressions.  The  Bishop's  sup-
porters   will  feel  vindicated  by  the  final  resolution   declaring
that  he  is not  a Communist.  (The  meek  gratitude  with which
this monumental  bit  of  cheek  was accepted  tells a  tragic-comic
story  about  present-day America.)  The  Bishop's  detractors  will
be  encouraged  to  go on with  their  stale  libels  by  Congressman
Walter's  ugly postscript,  "I  don't  know  why anyone would say
he  was  cleared,  because  no  one  ever  charged  him  with  any-
thing."  The  Committee's  ranking  Democrat   gave  the  cue  to
the  anti-Oxnam  pack  when  he  insisted  the  Communists  made
dupes   of  many  high   placed   persons   and   "I   place   Bishop
Oxnam ... in this  category."
For  this  unsatisfactory  verdict,  the  good  Bishop  paid  a
heavy price.  He  has opened  doors  the  Committee  did  not  quite
dare  open   on  its  own.  Chairman  Velde  created   an   uproar
among   his  Congressional   colleagues   by  suggesting   that   the
Un-American   Activities   Committee    might    investigate   the
Churches.  McCarthy  was  forced  to  get  rid  of  J.  B.  Matthews
as  research  director  because  the  latter  had  questioned  the  loy-
alty  of  Protestant  ministers.
At  such  a  time,  the  House  Committee   would  never  have
dared   subpoena  a  Bishop   of  the  Methodist   Church,   largest
Protestant  denomination  in  this  country.  Bishop  Oxnam,  by
asking  to be heard, gave the  witch  hunters an  excuse to  do un-
der  the  guise  of  fairness  what  they  had  been  itching  to  do  all
along.  The  Bishop  also  gave  Velde  and  Kit  Clardy  an  excuse
to  dig  up  three  ex-Communists  of  ancient   vintage,   Gitlow,
Kornfeder  and  Manning,  exhausted  lemons  from  which  there
is little  left  to  squeeze, and ask them  in  executive  session  about
Reds  among  the  clergy.  They  "exposed"  familiar  targets—the
Methodist  Federation  for  Social  Service,  and  two  men  long
associated  with  it,  the  venerable  Dr.  Harry  F.  Ward  and  the
long-harried  Rev.  Jack  R.  McMichael
The  testimony  of  the  ex-Communists  was used  to  draw
the  Bishop  into  "putting  the  finger"  on  his  old  friend,  Dr.
Ward, and on  the  Rev.  McMichael. To  discuss  them  and  their
views  before  the  House  Committee   was  improper.  In   effect
the  Bishop  was led into  smearing  them  in  order  to  clear  him-
self.  He  was  not  discussing  political  and  doctrinal   differences
before  men  of  honor  and  good-will.   He  was  throwing  two
other  Methodists  to  the  wolves  and  opening  his  whole  church
to  smear  treatment   via  another   "exposure"  of  its   unofficial
Left  wing,  the  Methodist   Federation   for  Social  Service.  The
result  was  to  "prove"  through  the  Bishop  himself  that  there
had  been  "infiltration"  by  "subversives."   This  gives  the  witch
hunt  open  sesame  to  the pulpit.
The  hunt for radicals in  the  Church is logical  if one keeps  in
mind the  basic purpose of the witch hunt. It  is no accident that
Bishop  Oxnam's  grilling  touched  on  his  past  criticism  of  the
free  enterprise  system. The  witch hunt  is more concerned with
doctrinal  fidelity  to  Mammon  than  to  God.  America  is  to  be
made   unsafe   for   social  criticism   and   nonconformity.   The
Chamber   of   Commerce   crowd   still   remembers   what   the
Churches and  indeed Dr.  Ward  himself  did  to  the  12-hour day
in  steel  after  the  1919  steel  strike  seemed  to  have  been  safely
smashed.  Nor  has that  crowd  forgotten  what part  such  groups
as  the  Methodist  Federation  played  in  helping  the  New  Deal
in the  30's.
The   Churches,   especially   the   Protestant   Churches,
could  not  hope  for  exemption  from  the  thought  control  drive.
Though   Marx  called  religion  the  opiate  of  the  people,  the
possessing  classes  have  always  feared  that  it  might  turn  into
a  heady  wine. It  has never  been  easy to  equate  capitalism with
the  Brotherhood of  Man. A  religious  system  like  Protestantism
which  glorifies  individual  judgment  and  conscience  encour-
ages  "error"  and  "subversive"  ideas.  Ever  since  Protestantism
and  its forerunners unchained and translated  the  Bible, making
it  available  to  the  common  man,  revolutionary  lessons  have
been  drawn  from  it.  The  communistic  Anabaptists  and  the
socialist   Levellers    testify    to   the    inflammatory   radicalism
which  may  be  distilled  from  Holy  Writ.  Men  like  Dr.  Ward
and  the  Rev. McMichael  were  in  a  familiar  tradition  if  indeed
they  found  Marx's  "materialism"  closer  to  Jesus  and  the  He-
brew  Prophets  than  the  spiritual pretensions  of  a system which
has  its  apex  in  the  Chase National  Bank.
Such deviations into fields closely  akin  to  the  communism of
primitive  Christianity  are  natural  in  'the  loose  confines  of  an
unpoliced  system like  Protestantism.  This  is  the  reality  behind
the  convergent  attacks  upon   it.  J.  B.  Matthews  paints  the
Protestant  clergy  as the  largest  single  support  of Communism
in  this  country.  Conversely  Cardinal  Ottaviani  in  Rome  up-
holds  restrictions  against  Protestant  missionaries  by  declaring
they  find  their  "strongest  allies   and  supporters   among   the
Communists."  The  authoritarians of  the  right  fear  the  freedom
of  opinion  which  is  at  the  basis  of  Protestantism.  It   cannot
submit  to  the  witch  hunt  without  losing  its  spiritual  essence
and  abdicating  to  its  ancient  enemies.  As  seen  from   Rome,
Protestantism  is  "subversive."  When  it  ceases  to  be  "subver-
sive,"  it  will  cease  to  be  Protestant.
The  answer  to  the  witch  hunt  in  the  Churches  is  that
the  Constitution  says  Congress  shall  make  no  establishment  of
religion. Church  and  State  are  separate,  and  Congress—unlike
Parliament—may  declare   no  doctrine   orthodox.  To   inquire
into  the  political   beliefs  of  Churchmen. is  to  plunge  into  a
doctrinal  controversy.  Roman  Catholicism  and  Fundamentalist
Protestantism   regard  Liberal  Theology  as  a  breeding  ground
of   political  radicalism.  To   extend   the  Inquisition   into   the
Churches  is to  turn  the  clock  back  three  centuries  to  just  such
a  situation  as that  from  which  the  Pilgrims  first  fled,  to  link
theological  heresy again with political subversion,  and  to make
the  State  the  policeman  of  the  Church.  The  only  firm  ground
of  defense  is  to  deny  the  right  of  Congress  to  inquire  into
opinion,  theological  or  otherwise.  Ideas  are  no  concern  of  the
State  in  a  free  society.  These  premises  Bishop  Oxnam  aban-
doned.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

Z. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  1,1953
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and  Publither, I. F. STONE
Published  weekly except the  last two weeks
of  August  at  Room  205,  301  E.  Capitol,
St.,  S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C.  Subscrip-"
tion  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and Continental
Europe, $10  by  1st  class mail, $15  by ait;
for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by first class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.  Single
copy,  15 cena. Tel.: LI 4-7087. Entered as.
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office^
Washington,  D. C
Asleep  at The  Switch
August  1,  1953
Vol.  I.,  No. 28
COMMENT
Cheerful  Note
None  of  our  readers will be  unduly  de-
pressed  to  learn  that  thanks  to  the  pen-
ny-pinching  habits  of  those  money-grub-
bing   Republicans,  the   Department   of
Justice  is  being  forced  to  abandon  de-
tention   camps  it   had  ready   for   "sub-
versives"  under  the  McCarran  Internal
Security  Act  of  1950.
The  news was  tucked  away  unnoticed
in  the  recent  testimony of James  V. Ben-
nett,  Federal  director  of  prisons,  before
the   Senate   appropriations   Committee.
"Two  years  ago, at  the  time the  Internal
Security  Act  was  passed,"  Bennett  ex-
plained,  "we  took  over  six  surplus Army
cantonments  and  began  putting  them  in
repair  for  possible use  in  the  event  of an
emergency."
Under  the   detention  camp  provisions
of  the  McCarran  Act,  subversives  were
to  be thrown  into  camps  in  the  event  of
war.  Bennett  said  he  had  gotten  some of
the  camps "fairly  well in order" but that
the  reduction in estimates  imposed by the
economy   minded   Eisenhower  Adminis-
tration   "will  require  the  closing  of   at
least  half  or perhaps all  of these  camps."
Bennett  added  philosophically,  "Perhaps
the  need  for  these  camps  may  be fading
into  the  distance  a  little."
Deportations  Delirium
The  shocking arrest  for  deportation of
Jacob  Burck, the  brilliant  Pulitzer  Prize
winning  cartoonist  of  the  Chicago  Son-
Times,  because  he  was  once  a   radical,
may  serve  to  remind  us  that  we  are  in
the   midst   of   a   deportations   delirium,
quieter  but   much  more  extensive   than
that  which  followed  World  War  I.  Some
figures  on this were  also  provided by  the
Senate  Appropriations  Committee hear-
ings.
There  are  now, thanks  to  the  McCar-
ran-Walter  Act,  "some  700 grounds"  for
deportation. At  the  end of the fiscal year,
there  were more than  11,000  persons  be-
ing  investigated  for  deportation   as  sub-
versive,  "more  than  double  the  figure  of
4,500  such cases" pending  at  the  close of
the  previous fiscal year.  There  were also
in   excess  of   4,000  persona   ordered  de-
S.  R.  147, citing  Harvey  O'Connor  for
contempt,   was   called   up   by  Majority
Leader    Knowland    in   the    Senate   on
Thursday,  July  23, and passed  without  a
voice  being  raised   in  protest,   without
discussion,  without  a   record   vote  and
without  a  single  "nay."
O'Connor,  as  our  readers  know,  took
the  "Einstein  pledge" position before Mc-
Carthy,   refusing   to   invoke   the   Fifth
Amendment  but  declining  to  answer  all
questions  as  to  his  political  beliefs  and
associations.  He  challenged  McCarthy's
authority  to ask such questions under the
First   Amendment  and  under  the  pow-
ers  conferred  on  his  investigating  com-
mittee  by  the  Senate  rules  as  enacted
in  the  Legislative  Reorganization Act of
1946.
Exactly  ten  days  before  the  contempt
resolution  came  up,  Senator  Mike Mon-
roney  (D.  Okla.),  in  an  attack  on  Mc-
Carthy  also  argued  that  he  was  exceed-
ing  his lawful  authority  (full  text  print-
ed in our last issue) under the  same stat-
ute.
Yet   neither   Senator    Monroney   nor
Senator  Lehman  nor  any  of  the  liberal
Senators   who  have  been   fighting   Mc-
Carthy   raised   a   voice   in   defense   of
O'Connor  nor  sought  to  have  the   con-
tempt    resolution    reconsidered,   as   it
might  have  been,  on  the  two  legislative
days following.
Nor  were  the  Senators  the  only  peo-
ple  asleep  at  the  switch.  The newspapers
fighting  McCarthyism  have  been  silent.
The  New  Republic  has  not   even  men-
tioned  O'Connor's  fundamental  defiance
of  McCarthy.  Yet  if  as  we  believe  and
Senator    Monroney   believes,   McCarthy
has  no. lawful  authority  to  inquire  into
opinion,  then  the  issue  should  have  been
debated  before  the  contempt  resolution
was  passed  by the  Senate.
Millions  of  words  have  been  •written
on  how  to  fight  McCarthyism, but  when
one  brave  American  like  O'Connor  risks
going  to  Jail  in  order  to  challenge  Mc-
Carthy's   authority   under  the  Senate's
own  rules  and  under  the  First  Amend-
ment, remarkably little interest is shown
by  the  liberal  press. Yet  if  the  O'Connor
case is won, as it  can be won, a real blow
will  have  been  struck  at  McCarthy.
The author  of  "Mellon's  Millions" lives
at  Little   Compton,  R.  I.  We  urge  all
readers  to  write  O'Connor and to tine up
all  the  support  they  can.
ported  to  countries which would  not  take
them.  But  a  Mr.  Kelly  of  the  Immigra-.
tion  Service  testified  that  progress  was
being  made  in forcing  them  to  leave  "by
reason   of  the—I  don't  like  to  use   the
word  harass—compulsion  that  we  were
able  to  put  on them  by  keeping  them  in
detention."
The  following  humane  colloquy  took
place  at  this  point:
Senator   ELLENDER.  Is  there  anything
under  the  law  you can  do so  aggravating
that  they  want  to  leave  the country?
Mr.   KELLY.  As  I  say,  we  have  done
that.
Senator   ELLENDER.  What  is  it?
Mr.  KELLY.  By invoking the  provisions.
Senator   ELLENDER.  Can  you  not   jail
them?
Mr.  KELLY. We are  holding them in  de-
tention.
Senator  ELLENDER.  I  thought  this new
act  would  give  you  full  power  to  make
conditions  so distasteful  that they  would
not  want  to  live  in  the  United  States.  I
would  sure try  it.
Without  Hobgoblins
Secretary  of  Defense  Charles  Wilson,
when  he  said  the  Russian  air  force  was
largely   defensive,   was  treated   as  one
treats  children  who  do  not  know  better
than  to  use  certain  words  in  the  front
parlor.   But   General  Alfred  M.  Gruen-
ther,  Supreme  Commander  of  NATO, a
General  who  seems  to  operate  without
benefit   of   hobgoblins,   gave   much   the
same  estimate  in  his  Senate  Appropria-
tions  Committee testimony.
When   Senator   Robertson    (D.   Va.)
asked  General  Grnenther  how the  Soviet
air  force  compared  with  ours,  this much
of  the  reply  was  left  in the  heavily  cen-
sored  record:   "The   Soviets  have  three
main   types   of   missions   for  their   air
force,"  Gruenther  said.  "One  is  intercep-
tor  or  air   defense,  the  second  is  long
range   strategic   air,   and  the  third   is
ground  support  planes.  The  long-range
strategic   airplanes   are  the   B-29  type
which  is an  obsolescent type go tar as we
are  concerned."  At  that  point  the   dis-
cussion  went  off the  record.
The   General  also   said   (1)  that  the
Russian  ground  forces  of  175  divisions
"is  substantially   the  same  as  the  Rus-
sians  had  four  years  ago"  (2)  that  a
sizeable  portion  of  this  force  must  be
kept  in  the  Far  East  and  cannot  be  de-
ployed  in Europe and  (3)  "I do not think
war   is   ever   going   to   come,"   General
Gruenther,   who  deserves  an   award  of
some  kind  for  plain  speaking,  said  he
thought  the  danger  lay  not  in  war  but
in  efforts  to  divide  the  NATO  forces.
That  is  something  Washington   often
does  more  effectively  than  Moscow.
Bulletin
The  McCarran  "immunity  bath"  bill
to  get  rid  of  the  Fifth  Amendment priv-
ilege  against  self-incrhnination   seemed
safely   bottled   up   in   House  Judiciary
committee as we went to press. It has not
yet  been  referred  to  a  subcommittee and
if  Congress  adjourns  soon,  as  expected,
will  be  dead  for  the  session.  Our  hat  is
off   to  the  many  live  wires  among  our
readers  who pitched  in  on  this  fight.  It
is  important  to  build  up  greater  aware-
ness  of  this  measure,  since  MeCarran
will   certainly   introduce  it   again  next
session.
1  1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  1,  19)3
JENNINGS     PERRY'S    PAGE
Times  Mend,  the  Witch  Doctors  Sit  Shakily
It  seems to me that for a people who always have admired
forthrightness  in  international  communications  we  have  be-
come  distressingly  coquettish  and  that  somewhere  along  the
way  in  the  past  decade  we  have  shamefully   shuffled   off  both
our  "passion  for  knowledge"  where  the  public  affairs  are  con-
cerned   and. the   good   democratic  arrogance   which  used   to
prompt  each of  us to  "have his  idea" and  to  "speak  his  piece."
For  some  reason  our  leaders  actually  appear  to  be  afraid  of
face  to  face talks with the leaders of other countries with which
we  maintain  differences;  such  interviews  are  not  sought  but
are avoided  from  month to month and from  year to year. What
could  we  be  afraid  of:  of  being  out-talked,  of  being  taken  in
by  the  tricks  of  language,  of  fatal  exasperation,  of  losing  our
temper  and rushing  into combat?
It  was  rather  understandable  in  Mr.  Truman's  time.  Our
President  then  bravely went and sat in his place  at the  big con-
ference  table—because his predecessor  had. He went only once,
and  painfully  discovered  that  the  world  is  large  and  that his-
tory  is  long  and  full  of  end  results  doubly  confusing  to  one
who before he became President  was notoriously a poor  scholar.
Mr.  Truman  found  it  easier  to  pontificate  from   Washington
than  at  distant  tables  to  gnaw  at  problems  rooted  in  causes
old  and  hardy  even  before  Columbus.
But  Mr.  Eisenhower, now, had  been  around.  He knew
that  peoples in  different  lands spoke  different  tongues. He  had
met  his  opposite  numbers in  all kinds of uniforms  and, suavely
but  trenchantly,  had  uncovered  the  common  interest  in  the
thickets  of  misunderstanding.  The  American  people  had  ex-
pected  him  to  be  their  capable  and  willing  spokesman  among
the  spokesmen  of  other  peoples,  to  sit  down  and  "talk  sense"
as  man  to  man  with  other  men  in  high  places  presumably
as aware as he himself  that  "All  wars are stupid." Thus  far, his
countrymen  have  waited  in  vain  for  the  fulfilment   of  their
hopes  in  the  hero  who  could  "talk  to  anybody anywhere" and
have had  increasingly  to  share with  everybody everywhere the
want  of  top  level parleys  for  which the  time  is  never  "ripe."
With  one of  the great  peoples who share the  globe  with us,
the  Chinese,  with  whom  we  have  been  at  war,  we  will  not
speak  at all  Surely  nothing  in  our  times  is more fantastic than
the  pretense,  which  is  our  national  policy,  that  the  govern-
ment  of  these  people  does  not  exist  or  at  any  rate  that  it  is
beneath  our  dignity  to  recognize  its  existence,  now  or  ever.
Over  and  over  again,  our  Mr.  Duties  is  required  to  disclaim
any  plan  for  passing  so  much  as  the  time  of  day  with  the
government of the Chinese. The  tabu is sheepishly bowed to by
almost  all  of  the  members  of  our  Congress.  Yet  no  amount of
ritualistic  auto-suggestion  can  persuade  us  for  long  that  what
we  see  is  not  there,  and  nothing  really  comes  of  our  strained
and  supercillious  ignorance  of  China  but  peptic  ulcers  in  our
national  colon.  Nobody  else  is  fooled,  and  we  do  not  in  fact
fool  ourselves.
I  say that when we were healthier in our minds, when we
stubbornly  insisted  upon  facts  instead  of  fairytales,  the  Ameri-
can  people  would  not  have  permitted  themselves  to  be  put
off  or  put  upon  by these  arrant make believes.  We  should  not
have  needed  to  be  told  by  someone  "in  authority"  that  one
day  but  not  now  it  might  be  safe  to  risk  frank   discussions
with  "the  Kremlin"  on the  common problem  of building  more
bread  instead  of  more  bombs,  or  that  "Peking"  after  all  does
have a form  and a soul worth considering human.
I  say  that  when  we  regain  the  health  of  our  minds,  as
people   sincerely  dedicated  to  the  proposition  that  all  men
(not  just  certain  superpatriots)  were  created  equal,  we  will
not  need  to  wait  for  Bishop  Oxnams  to  assert  our  right  to
think  and  to  speak.  That  we  will  not  wait  for  the  Cloth  to
run  interference  for  our  secular  say-soing.  And  that  in  mid-
Twentieth   Century  we  will  brush  aside  the  silly  efforts   to
impose  orthodoxy  upon  our  seeing,  thinking  and  speaking  as
sturdily  as we were  used  to  doing  from  the  beginning  of  our
nation  up  to  only a time  not  long  ago we all  can  recall.
"Democracies move slowly." But the deep roots of our  genius
are  in  our  ability,  after  a  time  of  panic,  to  become  disgusted
with  our  aberration,  to  reject  the  dictates  of  any  judgment
but  our own. We  the  people  are feeling  a little more  assertive
now. The  new witch doctors  sit  shakily. If  we do  not  soon find
fearless  spokesmen,  we  should  recapture  the   self-confidence
to  speak  sense  back to  and  over  the  heads  of  our  censors  and
weakling  wizards.
/.  F. Stone's   Weekly
Room  203
301  E. Capitol  St., S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C
Please enter the following  nibscription. #5  for  1 year u
enclosed.  (See page 3  for  foreign  rate*)
Name   ....................................................................................
Street
City
State
..Zane...
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St., S.B,
Washington  3, D.  C
Entered  as
Second  Class   Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED