I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953apr11.pdf

============================================================

Jennings  Perry:  The  Way  to  Succeed  at  Panmunjotn,  See Page  4    .
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   I  NUMBER  15APRIL   11,  1955
7      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Greatest  Confession  of Them  All
One  of  Marx's  favorite  maxims  was "Doubt  everything."
His  Communist followers  have too long  operated  on the  oppo-
site  theory.  They  have been  trained  to  believe  everything they
are  told,  so  long  as  it  comes  from  Moscow  and  party  higher-
ups. The  beginnings  of  such an attitude must already have been
evident  in Marx's  lifetime,  since  Marx  is reported  once to have
said  with  distaste  that  he  was  not  a  Marxist.   A  few  readers
who  are  Marxists  in  this  un-Marxist  sense wrote  in  angrily  to
protest  the  astringent  observations  in  our  issues of  February  7
and   February  21  on  the  subject  of  the  charges  against  the
Moscow  doctors.   We  thought  the  charges  "too  hideous  to  be
credible," urged  that  foreign  observers  be allowed  at the  trials
and  observed, "The  Russian rulers have a way of  erecting possi-
bilities  into  actualities and  then  staging  trials  to  "prove
1
  what
they  fear.   Their  trials  are  political  morality plays  which  cyni-
cally  assume an  audience  too  unintelligent  to  be  impressed  by
anything  less  than  melodrama.   It  is not  enough  to  prove  that
a man is mistaken; he must be displayed as a  monster."
In  this  as  in  so many other  matters  a  new  and  cleaner wind
seems  to  be  blowing  through  the  Russian  capital.   Of  all  the
confessions   which   have   marked   the   Soviet   regime's   long
series  of  "show  trials"  back  to  the  20's  no  confession  is  more
startling,  more unexpected  and  more  worthy of  belief  than  the
confession  by the  Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs  that  the  doctors
had  been  arrested  on  false  charges  and  held  up  to  the  world
as  guilty  on   the   basis   of   confessions   extorted   by   "imper-
missible"  means.   The  international   implications  are  striking
enough—these  doctors  were  alleged  to  have  poisoned   Soviet
leaders on orders of  American  "imperialism"   directed  through
its  "bourgeois  Jewish  nationalist"   hirelings  in  the  American
Jewish  Joint  Distribution   Committee  and  the  Zionist  move-
ment.   If  the  charges  were false  in  the  case  of  the  doctors,  six
of  them  Jewish;  might  not  similar  charges  in  the  Slansky  and
other  trials  have  been  equally  false?  There  were  indications
of  a  wider  revision  in  a  Pravda  editorial  which  said  "careful
verification"  had  established  that  similar  means had  been  used
to  slander  "an  honest  public  leader,  the  people's  artist  of  the
U.S.S.R.,  Mikhoels. . . ." This was the Yiddish  actor,  Solomon
Mikhoels,  of  whom  nothing  had  been  heard  in  some  time.
Jewish  readers  in  the  Soviet  Union  must  see  in  that  a
hope  that  the  new  government  will  put  a  damper  on  a cam-
paign  against  "Zionists"  which  had  led  to  the  suppression  of
many  Jewish  cultural  activities  and  pandered   to   anti-Semitic
feeling.   The  general  message  at  home,  however,  must  be  far
more  startling.   The  admission  that  the  secret  police  had  com-
mitted  a  deliberate  wrong,  that  confessions  had  been  wrung
by  "impermissible"   means  from  innocent  persons,  must  seem
an  almpst revolutionary development  to  thoughtful  citizens of
the  Soviet  Union  and  the  satellite  countries  where  people  are
accustomed  to  regard  the  secret  police  as all-powerful.   This  is
a  development  far  outside  the  orbit  of  the  paranoid  specula-
tions  of  Washington   about  the  new  Soviet  "peace  offensive."
This  is a  domestic  matter,  which  opens  a  door  that  can  never
completely  be  closed  again.   If  the  secret  police  used  "imper-
missible"  means  in  this  case,  what  of  others?   Which  means
are  "impermissible"  ?  Just  how  were the  confessions extorted?
What  steps  can  be  taken  to  prevent  such  occurrences  in  the
future?   Most  explosive  of  all  is a question  which must  follow:
what  was  wrong  with  Stalin's  regime  that  such  miscarriages
of  justice  could  occur  under  it?   And  how  many  unjustly  ac-
cused  or  framed  political  prisoners  may there  be  in  the  penal
labor  camps  of  the  U.S.S.R. ?
Russian  policy  has  too  long  operated  on  the  half-truth  that
the  Soviet  Union  was  ringed  with  enemies.   The  new  regime
if  it  continues  on  this  path  will  discover  that  the  Soviet  Union
is  also  ringed  with  friends.   Even  in  "reactionary"   circles  in
the  West there  is evident  an almost wistful  readiness, to  believe
that  perhaps  peace  may  be  achieved.   There  are  other  circles,
friendly   to  socialism,  with  a  great   respect   for   the  Russian
people,  which  have  been  shamed  and  antagonized  by  much
that  has  occurred  since  the  Revolution.   Amid  the   gigantic
achievements  obscured  by  the  mists  of  hateful  propaganda,
there  has  also  been  an  indifference  to  mass  suffering  and  in-
dividual  injustice,  a  sycophancy  and  an  iron-clad  conformity,
that  has  disgraced  the  socialist  ideal.   The  atmosphere  bred
at  home  by  unlimited  dictatorship  has  been  reflected  abroad
in an unnecessary rudeness and  crudeness in  dealing  with  other
nations.   Part  of  the  Soviet  Union's  troubles  has  been  of  its
own  creation,  just  as  part  of  our  difficulties  in  dealing  with
the  U.S.S.R.  have  been  of  our  own  making.   The  world  for
nations  as  for  men  is  often  a  mirror  that  reflects  their  own
image,  returning  hate  for  hate,  good  will  for  good  will.
There  are  forces  in  the  world  which  do  not  want  peace.
There  are  forces  which  fear  socialism  and  wish  to  destroy  it
even at the  risk of self-destruction.   These forces play their  part
now  in  every Western  capital  and  seek  to  prevent  peace  from
breaking  out.   But  the  new  Soviet  regime  will  also  find  that
there  is a  large,  a  much  larger,  body  of  opinion  in  the  West,
which can be won  for  peace and  co-existence and  humane rela-
tionships  if  the  effort  is made.  The  signs  of  a change  at  home
will  do  much  to  harness  this  potential  for  peace.   Were  the
new Soviet  regime  to follow up its confession  about the  doctors
with  steps  to  make  such  frame-ups less  likely  in  the  future,  it
would  awe the  world.   Russia  needs  habeas  corpus,  the  right
to  counsel  and  the  doctrine  of  overt  act  as  the  test  of  guilt  if
it  is  to  dissipate  the  murk  of  conspiracy  on  which  its  secret
police  has  grown  great.   Internal  changes  of  this  kind  would
go  far  to  dissipate  those  fears  on  which  the  warmongers  de-
pend.
5  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  11,1953
ECONOMICS  AND   PEACE:
Does  The  Kremlin  Want A  Slump  In  America?
Should  peace  break  out  too  suddenly  the
consequences may  be disastrous.   The  world
outside  the  Soviet  bloc  is  in  the  position of
a  dope  addict  who  dare  not  too  abruptly  be
denied   his  abnormal   stimulation.   A  slow
levelling  off  of  tension  would  have  its  ad-
vantages.   It  may  seem cynical to  say so  but
fortunately  the  relaxation  of  tension  will  be
slow,  if  indeed  it  is  not  upset  altogether  by
those  who  do not want  peace.
The  same commentators  who were saying
last  year  that  the  Soviets  were  trying  to get
us  to  spend  ourselves  into  disaster  now  sug-
gest  that  Moscow's   idea  may  be  to  create
an  economic depression  in  the  West,  and  so
give   the   Communists   a   chance   to   "take
over."   These  are  the  alternative  cliches of
those  who find it  safest  to  regard  the  world
as    a    continuous    conspiracy     from    the
Kremlin.
Flanders  of  Vermont,  an  intelligent  busi-
ness  man   and   an  intelligent   Senator,   fell
back  on this variant  of  the  bogeyman  theory
in   pleading   the   need   of   plan   for   peace.
"I  think  we  may  be  certain,"  he  told  the'
Senate,  "that  our  new  and  our  old  friends
in  Russia  confidently  expect  us  to  go  into
a  tailspin  if  we  stop  our  high  expenditures
for   war."
But  it  would  be  worth  the  while  of  the
Soviet  bloc  to  do  the  planning  for  us   free
of  charge  rather  than  see  a  serious  slump
here  in  the  wake  of  peace.    A  depression
serious  enough  to  c.reate the  mere  possibility
of  revolutionary  situations  in  Japan,   India
or  Western   Europe  would  'almost  certainly
bring   American   armed   intervention   on  a
scale   far  beyond  that  in  Korea.    Imagine
the   repercussions   here   of   a   Communist
putsch   in   Italy   or   Japan.     Imagine   the
shriver  of  apprehension  which  would   run
through  American   capitalism  if   it  looked
as  if  India  might  go  the  way  of  China.
All  the  cryptp-Fascist  forces  nurtured  by
the  loss  of  China  to  the  Communists  would
be immensely strengthened.    America  would
be  frightened  into  something   close  to   full
mobilization.   Repression  would  be intensi-
fied,   and   the   prospect   of   using   a   new
crusade  against  communism  as  a  means  of
stimulating  business  would  be   irresistible.
The  drive  toward  World  War   HI  which
the  Russian  and  Chinese  Communists  are
obviously  trying  to   avoid  would   take  on
swifter  momentum.   Peace  can  only  be pre-
served  if  a  certain measure of  economic sta-
bility  can  be  achieved  in  the  wake  of  any
political  settlement.    The  Soviet  bloc,  in  its
pursuit   of   peace,   can   no   more   afford   a
slump in America than can Western  Europe.
But   the   chances   for   economic  stability
are  not  very  good.   This  is  the  situation  as
it  looks  from  Washington:
The  new  Administration  seems  to  have
but  one  consistent  economic  policy.    This
is to raise the  level of  interest rates—and  at
the   same  time   loosen   the   restrictions  on
speculation.    This  makes  sense   from   the
standpoint  of  the  banks.   It  raises  the  price
of  their  chief  commodity,  which  is  credit,
and  it  encourages  more  speculative activity
on  credit.     The   fall   in  goverment   bonds,
the  steady  rise  in  yields  and  interest  rates,
are  the  banker's   payoff   for   a  Republican
victory.
Theoretically,   such  a  policy  is  deflation-
ary.    By  increasing   the   cost   of   credit,   it
puts  a brake on business  expansion  and  con-
sumer   buying.    But   there  is  a  wide  gap
between  theory  and  actuality  in  economics.
Is   the   new  Administration   deliberately
following  a  deflationary policy?    Is  it  try-
ing  for  a  "healthy   readjustment"  in  price
and   wage   levels?     Such   purposes   would
follow   logically   from   its   money   policies.
But  there  seem  to  be  few  .if  any  informed
observers  here  who  think  there  is  any  such
broader plan behind  the  events in the money
market.    The  general  opinion  seems  to  be
that  the  purpose  is  simply  to  raise  interest
rates  and  bank   earnings.
Should  progress be quickly made,  toward
a  Korean   settlement,   however,  the   steady
tightening  of  credit   would  have  an  addi-
tional  effect  on  business  activity.
One  of  the ways to  counteract  a. lessening
of  military expenditures—and the  swift  fear
of  such  reduction—would  be by  cheapening
credit.    This  might  encourage  civilian  ex-
pansion  and  borrowing  by  cities  and  states
for  public  works.   But  this  would  run  up
against  resistance  from  the  banking  crowd.
The  easy  first  step  for  a  Republican  Ad-
ministration  would  be to reduce taxes.   Un-
fortunately  there  is  little  reason  to  believe
from  the  experience  of  the  early  30's  that
tax reduction will stimulate  either  consumer
buying  or  capital  investment  against  an  ad-
verse  economic  tide.
The  Administration,  for  all  its  shortcom-
ings,  is  considerably  more  enlightened  than
Congress.    And  in  Congress  the  Senate  is
somewhat  more  forward  looking  than  the
House,  which  has  prior  hold  on  the  purse-
strings.     This  was   dramatized   last   week
when   the   Council   of   Economic  Advisers
died  for  lack  of  funds  the   day   after   the
Communist  about-face  on  the  prisoner  of
war  issue  sent  a  premonitory  chill  through
the  stock   and  commodity  markets.    This
agency  was,set  up  by  the  Employment  Act
of   1946  to  help  cope  with  just  such  situa-
tions.    But  the  funds   needed  to  continue
the  Council  were   blocked   without   debate
by  the  House   after   an  appropriation   had
been  approved  in  the  Senate.
The  climate of  opinion in  Washington  as
regards  "economic  planning"  is  not  what  it
was  a  few  years  ago.    Senator  Taft,  who
took  the  word  "full"  out  of  the  Full  Em-
ployment  Act  before  voting'for  it  in  1946,
illustrates  the  change.   He  explained to  the
Senate  recently,  without  wincing,  that  the
purpose  of   the   Council  of   Economic  Ad-
visers  is  to  "plan   economic  policy,  just  as
the  National   Security  Council  plans  long
range   military  and   foreign   policy."     But
the  senior  Senator  from  Ohio  is  an  enlight-
ened  conservative  and  for  the  rank  and file
of    his   party   economic   planning   is   still
synonymous  with  socialism.   The  Admini-
stration  need  only  wage  a  militant  fight  for
the  Council—on  the  heels  of  its  appoint-
ment  of  a  Yalta  apologist  to  the  Embassy
in  Moscow—to  make  the  average  Republi-
can  Congressman   feel  that  Eisenhower  ran
for  office  on  the  wrong  ticket,  and  is  boring
from  within  the  G.O.P.
In   terms  of   mere  arithmetic   a  truce  in
Korea,  even  a  full  settlement  there  and  the
withdrawal  of  American  troops,  would  not
be  enough  to  cause  much  of  a  recession  in
the  American economy.   From  an economic
point  of  view,  the  Korean  affair  is distinctly
a  "police  action,"  not  a  major  war.    But
the  U.S.  is  a  very  volatile  country  and  an
armistice  may  set  off  as  sharp   a  wave  of
selling  as  the  onset  of  the  Korean  war  set
off   a   wave   of   buying.    This   may   have
serious   repercussions    abroad,   where   the
economic  margins  are  thin  and   precarious.
The  most  dangerous  spot  is  Japan,  which
would  have  been  in  the  most  serious  kind
of   difficulties  without  the  business  created
for  it  by  the  war  in  Korea.    A   Japanese
slump  would  adversely  effect  world  markets
in  which  the  Japanese  compete,   especially
the  already  depressed  textile  market.
The  position  of  Britain,  France  and  Ger-
many  is  not  much  better.    A  slight  slump
here  plus  a  reduction  in  foreign   aid  plus
the   possibility  of   a  general   relaxation   of
tension   could   have   a   disastrous   effect   in
Western   Europe  and  in  the  entire  sterling
area.    The   fact  is  that  the  crisis  of  West
European  capitalism  has  only  been  staved
off  by  American  aid  and  American  aid  has
only  been  obtainable  by  playing  on  fear  of
Russia.     An   economy   minded    Congress,
eager   above  all  for  tax   cuts,  might   react
. swiftly   to  a  diminution  of  tension.    This
Congress  will  be  as  quick  to  cut  foreign  aid
as  it  will  be  slow  to  prime   the  pump  of
business  with  public  works  in  .the  event  of
a  slump,  while  the  American  bankers  gen-
erally  may  be  foolish  enough  to  welcome
the  prospect  of  a  little  "healthy   deflation."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   April  11, 1953
I.  F.  Stone's    Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONI
Published  weekly except the  last  two week]
of  August  at  Room  225, 1416 F  St.,  N.W.,
Washington  4,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:
Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada, Mexico and
elsewhere in  the Western  Hemisphere, $6;
England  and  Continental Europe,  $10  by
1st class  mail,  $15  by air;  for  Israel,  Ask,
Australia   and   Africa,   $10   by   first   class
mail,  $20  by  air  mail.    Single  copy,   15
cents.     Contents  covered    by  copyright.
Telephone,   STerling  3-0938.  Entered   as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
Vol.   1,  No.  13•7     April  11,  1953
Time  for  A  Change
Every  year  about  this  time the  House  Ap-
propriations  Committee  releases  the annual
testimony  of  J.  Edgar  Hoover   on  the  FBI
budget.    Each  year  he  gives  the  committee
the  latest  figure  on  the  membership  of  the
Communist   party—an   exact  count,   down
to  the  last  subversive  digit,  as  if  the  com-
rades  had  been  herded  through   a   special
turnstile   by   the   FBI.     The   membership
figures  as  he  has   given  them  during  the
last  five  years  follow:
1949                   54,174
1950                    52,669
1951                     43,217
1952                     31,608
1953                     24,796
As  anyone  can   see  by  running  his  eye
down   the  figures,  the   Communist  party,
according  to  Hoover,   has  lost  more  than
50  percent  of  its  members  in  the  last  five
years.
But   while  the   number   of   Communists
has   been  dwindling,  the   number   of   FBI
men   employed  to   watch   them   has   been
growing.    The  FBI  budget  has  been  rising
at  just about the  same rate that  Communist
party  membership  has  been  falling.   In  the
fiscal  year  ended  June  30,   1948,   the  FBI
budget  was  less  than  $30,000,000.    For  the
fiscal year  beginning  next  July  1 Hoover  is
asking  $77,000,000.    The  number  of  Com-
munists  is  less  than  half  what  it  was  five
years  ago  but  the  FBI  budget  is  more  than
double what  it  was  then.
Not  Doing  So  Well
This  is  not  because  the  FBI  is  spending
more  time  chasing  bank  robbers.    Its  main
business   is  "internal   security,"   i.e.   acting
as  a  political  police.     Some  readers   will
recall  that   last  year  just  about   this  time
Attorney   General  McGranery   fired   New-
bold  Morris  as  special  investigator  of  cor-
ruption  in  government,  declaring that  if  he
saw    any   corruption    around   he   would
"straighten   it   out"   himself  with   the  aid
of  the  FBI.
Morris  replied  that  the  FBI  was  too busy
to  investigate  corruption.    He  said  Hoover
"told  me  it  was  impossible  for  his  depart-
ment  to  do  anything  except  the  task before
them  of   counter-espionage."
It   would   appear    from   Hoover's   testi-
mony  this  year  that  the  FBI  is  not  doing
too  well   at   that   task.     Hoover   told   the
House   committee   "the   enemy   espionage
rings  are  more  intensively  operated  today
than  they  have  been  at  any  previous  time
in  the  history  of  the  country."
A  statement of  this  kind,  from  any  other
official   so  long  a  part  of  the   Roosevelt-
Truman  Administration, would  provoke  a
storm  in  Congress,   if  not  an   investigation
to    determine   whether    Hoover    himself
might  not be  ...    well,  you never  can tell.
The  number  of  Communists has  been  cut
in  half,  the  FBI  budget  has  been  doubled,
the  government  has  been  turned  turvy  by
one  loyalty  purge  after  another, yet  Hoover
says   enemy   spy   rings   are   working   here
more  intensively  than  ever  before.    Either
the  enemy  must  be  devilishly  clever  or  the
FBI   must   be   devilishly    full   of   dumm-
kopjs.
The  question  which  rises  is:  if   Hoover
knows  that  enemy  spy  rings  are  working
here  so  intensively,  why  doesn't   he  break
them  up?    Either  the  director  of  the  FBI is
talking  through  his  hat  or—as  the  Repub-
licans   would   say   of   any   other    holdover
from   the   last   Administration—it   is   time
for  a  change.
Hat's  Off
In  this  connection  the  Weekly   takes  its
hat  off  this  week  to  Dean  Carl  W.  Acker-
man  of  the  Columbia  University  School  of
Journalism   for   declaring  that  he  will  no
longer  freely  open  his files to  FBI and  other
investigators  of  student  "loyalty."
Dean  Ackerman  thinks  students   should
be  free  to  talk  "without  fear  that  someone
may  make  a  record  which  may  be  investi-
gated  secretly,  upon  which  he  may  be  tried
secretly,   and   also   be   convicted   secretly,
either  by  a  governmental  official  or  a  pros-
pective   employer."
A  whole  generation  of  students  is  being
brought  up  to  believe  what  some  of  us  like
to  think  is  the  most  un-American  doctrine
imaginable.    They  are  being  brought  up  to
believe  that  it  is  best  to  keep  one's  mouth
shut.
Un-Russian  Activity
This  business  of  keeping  tabs  on Students
and  their  "loyalty"  is  a  good  old  Russian
custom.     Students   were   closely   watched
under  the  Czars  and  have  been  as  closely
watched  for  dangerous  "deviations"  under
their  Communist  successors.    Our  profes-
sional  anti-Communists  are  following   the
same   pattern.     The   self-proclaimed  de-
fenders    of   Americanism   are    themselves
spreading  the  most  noxiously  un-American
ideas  and  people  who  should  know  better
dutifully  echo  the  kind  of  nonsense  neces-
sary  for  political  respectability.
An   example   is   the   theory   of   "lawful
limits"  on  free  expression  propounded   last
week  by  the   stuffed-shirty   Association   of
American  Universities  in  its  statement  on
the  "rights  and  responsibilities"   of  univer-
sity  faculties.     The  statement  regards  the
First  Amendment much  as  Vishinsky  in  his
book  on  Soviet  Law  interprets  the  freedoms
of  speech,  press  and  assembly  as  "guaran-
teed"  by  the  Soviet  Constitution.
The  AAA  says in  effect  that  the  First  and
Fourteenth    Amendments   confer    limited
rights  only  and  "When  the  speech, writing
or  other  actions  of  a  member  of  a  faculty
exceed   lawful   limit:,  he  is  subject  to   the
same   penalties   as   other   persons."      The
italics  are  ours.    The  idea  that  there  are
"lawful  limits"  on  speech  or  writing  other
than  those  which  punish  libel  or  actual  in-
citment  to  crime  was  rejected by  the  Fram-
ers  of  the  Constitution.
Disloyal  "Founding  Father"
We  suggest  that  the  FBI  (if  it  has  not
already  done  so)  rush  agents  up  to  Prince-
ton  where  that  University's  chapter  of  the
American   Association   of   University    Pro-
fessors  have  just  adopted  a  quite  different
statement   on   academic   freedom,    basing
themselves  on  "the   convictions  of   one  of
our  Founding  Fathers  who  declared:  'The
opinions  of  men  are  not  the  object  of  civil
government,  nor  under  its  jurisdiction'  and
'to  suffer  the  civil  magistrate  to  intrude  his
powers  into  the  field  of  opinion  and  to  re-
strain   the   profession   or   propagation   of
principles  on  supposition  of  their  ill  tend-
ency is a  dangerous  fallacy.' "
We   decline   to   snitch   on   a   Founding
Father  and  leave  the  source  of  those  quo-
tations  unidentified.   If   J————   M————
should   be  marked   down   as  disloyal   and
unfit  for  government  employment,  the  fault
will  not  be  ours.
Subversive  Senator
We    wonder,    however,    after    reading
Hoover's   testimony   criticizing   those   per-
sons  who  defend  the  right  of  Communists
to  teach,  whether  there  is  now  a  loyalty
file  on  a  certain  Senator  from   Ohio.
Come  To  Think  of  It
From  an  extension  of  remarks  by the Hon.
B.  W.   (Pat)   Kennedy  of  New  York  in   the
House   of   Representatives   on   Eddie  Cantor's
Campaign  for  Red Cross Bloodbank:
Mr.  KENNEDY.   Mr.  Speaker  .  .  .  Last  eve-
ning  on  this   television   program   which   runs
from   coast  to  coast  he   (Eddie  Cantor)  dedi-
cated  a  song  entitled   'My  Sweetheart  Mamie'
...  to the wife  of the President of the United
States.  .  .  .  This  was done  in  typical  Cantor
fashion,   and   once  more   demonstrated   to   the
world  the  close  bonds  of  harmony  which  exist
between  the  American  people,  their  Chief  Ex-
ecutive  and  his  wife.
This   is   probably   the   only   country   in   the
world  where  .  .  .  freethinking  and  independ-
ent-acting  citizens  may  refer  to  the  First  Lady
of  the  land  by her  first  name.  .  .  .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   April   11,  1953
JENNINGS    PERRY'S    PAGE
The  Way  to  Succeed  This Time  at  Panmunjom
It  has  been  a  full  year  and  seven  months  since  I  hope-
fully  pointed  out  to  Admiral Joy  and  his  truce-seeking  oppo-
sites  at  Panmunjom  that  if  they  would  arrange  for  the  boun-
daries  of  the  neutral  zone to  be pushed  out one mile  every day
they  failed  to  agree  on a truce, they would get  a peace  whether
or  not  they  ever  got  an  agreement.
Unfortunately  no  such  arrangement  was made,  even  though,
it  will  be  recalled,  fixing  the  boundaries  of  the  neutral  zone
was  one  of  the  matters  left  entirely to  the  commanders  in  the
field.    Perhaps  the  idea  seemed  too  simple  or  the  device  too
mechanical.    It  would  have  served  to  backstop  the  truce  talks,
nevertheless,  and  it  is  hard  to  see  how  indeed  it  would  not
have got  a peace.
The  armies  long  ago  would  have  been  out  of  contact  with
each  other,  and  by now would  be  some  1200  miles  apart,  ours
in  Japan  or  Okinawa  and  the  Chinese  back  in  China.  Our
bombers would have  nothing  to  bomb.   In  the  slowly  expand-
ing  neutral zone the Koreans could  have planted  and harvested
two crops,  and  could  have held  at  least the first of  the  national
elections  in  which their  choice of  government  must in  the  end
be  made.
At  the  old  tent  at  Panmunjom  meanwhile,  there  need
not  have  been  more  progress  in  the  negotiation  of  a  truce
than  there  has  been  in  the  presence  of  the  stalemated  battle—
though  in all probability there would have been more: it would
have  been  difficult  not  to  recognize  the  armistice-in-fact.    In
Washington  the  supporters  of  Gen.  MacArthur  and  of  Gen.
Van  Fleet  could  have  maintained  as  endlessly  and  as  roman-
tically  what  their  heroes might  have done,  given  the  men,  the
guns—and  the  word,  to  work  a  conclusive  victory  over  the
hated  foe.    Sen.  Smith  as  keenly  could  have  pressed  her  in-
quiry  into  who had  (or had not)  the ammunition. . . .
The  thing  is  that  by  a  fair  and  honorable  contrivance  the
actual  battle  could  have  been  disjoined;  the. young  men  who
have  been  required  to  kill  each  other  would have  been  spared
the  necessity  of  killing  each  other;  the  people  and  the  land
of  Korea  could have been by degrees  relieved of  the  disaster of
war.    By this spring,  the  slopes of  Old  Baldy could  have been
green  and  quiet  again.
The  granny-knot  Admiral  Joy could  not  untangle  now  has
passed  to  Admiral  Daniel;  there  is a new and  more  promising
I. F.
Room
1416
Pie,
enclet
Name
Street
City
State
Stone's  Weekly
22 J  Kellogg  Bldg.
F  Street,  N.W.,  Waihiagtoa  4,  D.  C.
ue  enter  the following  mbecriptioa.  $J  for 1
ed.    (See   page  3  for  foreign  rate*)
Zone
4-II-5S
year ii
atmosphere  at  Panmunjom. The  ceasefire  all  have  hoped  for
may  be  decided  in  the  tent  before  another  summer  comes.
Not  many  more  of  the  young  men  may have to  be  obliterated
for   the  sake  of  taking  or  holding  an  unheard  of  height  to
keep  the war  alive.
I  suggest  again  that  the  peace  is more  important  than
the  parley;  and  that  the  world,  in  particular  the  world  in  the
trenches,  ought  to  have  a  firmer  earnest  of  it  than  the  talks
going  at  the  table.    I  suggest  again  that  the  negotiators  met
in  the  tent  with  whatever  good  will  can put  the  hopes  of  the
world  in  no  better  train  than  by  starting  a  regular,  measured
expansion  of  the  Panmunjom  sanctuary which  will  continue
to  inch  back  the  actual  battlefield  every  day  that  a  formal  ar-
mistice  is  delayed.
We  tell  ourselves  that  it  is  inconceivable that  men  lack  the
intelligence  to  terminate an  armed  strife  without  some sort  of
"arbitrament  at arms," but the  proof  waits on the  event.'   And
it is stupid during the waiting not to  abate the bloodshed  if we
know how.   Certainly in  Korea,  where  we have crucially com-
mitted  ourselves  to  turn  from  a  resort  to  arms  to  a  resort  to
sense,  it  would  be  stupid  not  to  try  to taper  off the  battle,  and
there  is  no  sure  way  to  do  this  save  by  separating  the  com-
batants.
It  could  be  of  course  that  the  Panmunjom talks  once more
will  end  in  deadlock,  and  we  may  consider  what  then  will
happen  to  the  war  if  in  the  meantime we  shall  have  put  all
of  Korea,  piece  by  piece,  out  of  bounds  for  battle?   Will  the
war  simply  dry  up  and  cease  for  lack  of  contact  between  the
forces?    The  answer  undoubtedly  is  that  it  would;  and  fur-
thermore  that,  if  no  happier  answer  can  be  found   through
negotiation,  mutual  accommodation  and  agreement,  the  result-
ing  "peace"  would  still  be  to  be  cherished.
The  worst  that  could  happen  to  the world  in  that  case
would be the  discovery that  the prolongation of  a war in which
both  sides  had  been  put  out  of  each  other's  reach  would  be
unbearably  silly.    And  that  knowledge  could  lead  —  who
knows?—to  the  healthy  realization  that  in  our  times  war  is
silly  however  it  is permitted  to  come.
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
225  Kellogg  Bldg.
1416  F St.,  N.W.,  Waihiagtoa  4,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Post   Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED