I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953feb28.pdf

============================================================

Is The  UN  A Nest of  Spies?   See Page  2.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
COPTRKHT   1»fl   IT   I.   r.   STOHl'*  WlHLT,  1*6.
VOL.  I  NUMBER  7
FEBRUARY  28,  1953
WASHINGTON, D. C
15  CENTS
This  May Be The  Last  Chance
Washington,  D.  C.
THE   CATCH  WORD  OF  THE  MOMENT  in  American  foreign
policy  is  "disengagement."   The  most  important  task  of  dis-
engagement  in  the  world  today  is  for  the  United  Nations  to
disengage  itself  from  American domination.   The  second  part
of  the  Seventh  session  of  the  General  Assembly  opening  in
New York may prove to be the  UN's  last  chance to save world
peace.    This  can  only  be  done  if  the  organization  moves  out
firmly  on  an  independent  line  of  its  own.
It  would  no  longer  be  fair  to  say that  U.  S. policy is  not  in
the  hands  of  sober  men.    Realities  have  been  rapidly  sober-
ing  the  new Republican Administration, ever since Eisenhower
himself  came back  from  Korea  with  the  bad  news  that  there
were  no  trick  solutions.   Unfortunately  a  swift  succession  of
morning-afters  have not  been  enough  to  keep  the Administra-
tion  from  new  binges  in  an  effort  to  ingratiate  itself  with  the
roughs on  Capitol  Hill where  sobriety  is suspect.    Never  has a
drunken  diplomacy fired off so many duds  as in  the  few weeks
since  Eisenhower  and  Duties  took   office.
THERE  is  MUCH  TALK  HERE  in  Washington  of  the  need  for
keeping  the  Russians  guessing.    If  that  is the  prime  objective
of  the  new  Republican  policy,  it  must  be  accounted  a  success.
It  has everybody guessing.    The  Russians indeed  may be com-
pletely  unnerved,  like  a  chess  master  confronted  with  moves
so eccentric  he  cannot  tell  whether  he  is  playing  an  unknown
genius  or  a  flea  circus  idiot.  By  now  Washington  must  look
as  much  an  enigma  to  Moscow  as  Moscow  usually  does  to
Washington.     One  week  Eisenhower   "takes  the  wraps"  off
Chiang  in  a dramatic move which makes sense  only  if  it  is  the
first  step  in  engaging  American  power  on  the  giant  task  of
"liberating"  China.    A  few  weeks  later  the  objective  is  to
"disengage"  from  the  relatively  petty  military  tasks  of  liberat-
ing  Korea.                 ,
From  whatever  direction  one  looks  at  this  pattern  it  is  diffi-
cult  to  assume—as a  scientist  might  say—that  it  is the  product
of  rationality.    Korea  is  the  classic  land-bridge  for  invasions
of  China.   It  is  our  one  bridgehead  on  the  mainland.   If  the
purpose  is to  liberate  China from  Communism, the  bridgehead
ought  to  be  widened  and  more  troops  poured  in  for  the  next
step, which would be Manchuria.   To  "disengage" from  Korea
while committing oneself  to  the  reconquest of  China would  be
like  "disengaging"  one's  hold  on  Belgium  while  committing
oneself  to  the  reconquest  of  Western  Europe.
The  pattern  is  no  less  weird  if  one  starts  with  the  hypo-
thesis  that  the  sudden  turn  to  "disengagement"   reflects  vic-
tory for  those  like General  Bradley long  opposed  to the wrong
war  at the wrong place.   If  the  purpose  is to  disengage Amer-
ican  forces  in  Korea  in  order  to  build  up  strength  for  action
elsewhere against China or Russia, then it  is hardly the  wisdom
of  the  serpent  to  disclose  that  strategy  in  advance  by  so much
loud   talk   about   never   reconciling  ourselves   to   Communist
domination  anywhere.    The  Chinese  and  the  Russians  will
not  let  us  "disengage"  ourselves  if  they  feel  that  the   forces
released  on  the  38th  parallel  may turn  up  closer  home  than
Korea.    The  enemy  will  not  let  the  eagle's  talon  out  of  the
Korean  trap  unless  assured  that  it  will  not  strike  elsewhere.
THERE  is  EVERYTHING to  be  said  of  course for  a  real  policy
of  "disengagement."     The  Korean  conflict  is  a  military  stale-
mate and a military stalemate calls for  a negotiated  peace.    The
Korean  conflict  is  a  preview  of  the  wider  and  more  terrible
stalemate  into  which  a  World  War  HI  would  bog down.    It
should  also be a warning to that larger  "peninsula" at the  other
end  of  the  Eurasian  land-mass.    All  the  horror  visited   on
Korea  by a great  power  duel  fought  so  conveniently  on  small
power  territory  may be  repeated  in  Western  Europe.
"Disengagement"   is likewise called  for  when regarded  from
the  standpoint   of  genuine   American  defense  considerations.
To  the  extent  that  America  fears  a  possible  Russian conflict,
it  is  folly  to  tie  down a  major  part  of  our  armed  forces  in  an
unimportant  sector.   It  is  also  folly  to be drawn  further  along
the  road  to  full-scale  war  with  China  if  one  fears  war  with
Russia.    These  considerations  obviously  play  their  part  in  the
calculations which  lie behind  the  Eisenhower-Dulles  slogan  of
letting  "Asians  fight  Asians."    But the  bulk  of  the  Asians  are
either  neutral or  on  the  other  side.    It  is exactly as if  we  were
to  raise  the  slogan  of  letting  Europeans  fight  Europeans  if  all
we had  to  rely on  was a Norway torn  like  Indo China by  civil
war  and  a  Franco  regime  which  had  been  ousted  from  Spain
and was ensconced  in the  Azores,  while Germany and  England
were  as neutral  as  India  and  Indonesia.
UNFORTUNATELY   THE  EISENHOWER   ADMINISTRATION   (see
page  four)  is  proving  less  the  master  in  its  own  house  than
was  Truman's.    The  China  Lobby rides  herd  on  the  new  Ad-
ministration,  while   an   impatient   and   peaceful  people  cast
about  for  some quick and  easy pushbutton  to  press  for  victory.
Three  years  ago,  on  the  eve of  the  Korean  war,  Truman  and
Acheson  all  but  invited  the  UN  to  solve  their  problems  by
voting Communist China a seat in the UN  and  "forcing"  them
to  recognize  realities.   Their  successors  as  badly  need  to  be
forced  into  a  Korean  settlement,  but  dare  not  appear  to  be
asking  for  it.   The  situation  is one  in  which  every day's  delay
invites the  desperadoes  around  Chiang to  precipitate  the  world
conflict  which  is  their  hope.    Allied  with  them  are  a  hand-
ful  of  unscrupulous men here who believe  that  war is necessary
and that  only  a  Fascist  America  can  fight  it.
2   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone'3  Weekly,   February   28,  1953
Horror  or  Hoax?  The   Spy  Charges  Against  the   UN
NEW   YORK
As   USUAL,  THE  ACCUSATION  was   news   but
the reply  made no  headlines.   Almost unnoticed
by  the   press,   counsel   for   20   dismissed   UN
employes  filed  briefs  on  appeal  here  last  week
with   the  United   Nations  Administrative   Tri-
bunal.  The  cases,  to  be  argued  in  April,  will
reverberate  round  the  world.   On  the  agenda  of
the  General   Assembly  of  the  United  Nations,
which  convenes" again  in  New  York  this  week,
is  the question  of  personnel  policy. This,  which
at first sight would  seem  an  obscure  and innocu-
ous  question,  involves  the  independence  of  the
United  Nations.  Whether  it  will  knuckle  under
to   the   current   American  witch-hunt  will   be
decided   by  the  'decision  of  the   Administrative
Tribunal  and  the  debate  in   the  General   As-
sembly.
The  background   is  a  propaganda   campaign
four  years old  to  picture  the  UN  to  the  Ameri-
can  people  as  a  nest  of  spies.   No  charge  has
been  more  frequently rebutted.   None  has  more
dramatically  illustrated  the  power  of  reiteration
in  the  technique  of  the  Big  tie.   The  appendix
to  the  main  brief  filed  jointly  by  three  law
firms for  nineteen discharged  employees  provides
a quick summary of that long exploit in denigra-
tion,  its  refutations  and  repetitions.    It   began
with  the  testimony  of  the  assistant  chief  of  the
State  Department's  visa  division  in  July,  1948;
he  made  himself  a  favorite  with  the  McCarran
committee  by  declaring  that   several   hundred
foreign  agents  used  jobs  in  the  UN  as  a  cover
for   their  activity.  Next  day  Secretary  of  State
George  Marshall  told  a  press  conference  that
he  did  not  know  of  a  single   case  of   foreign
espionage   in   the   UN.,   He   nevertheless   ap-
pointed   a  special  committee  of   three   leading
citizens,  including  the  editor   of  the   respected
conservative  Washington   Star,   to   investigate.
They not  only found  no substance in  the charges
but  formally  reported  in  September  that  they
were  shocked  by  the  "irresponsible"  way  these
charges  had  been  made.
THIS  DID  NOT KEEP  the  McCarran  committee
from   hashing   them   up   again   the   following
July,  this  time  through  the  secret  testimony of
an  unnamed  witness  identified  only  as  No.   8.
The  bombardment  was  stepped   up  two  days
later  with  "UN  Aide  Accused  as  A  Red  Cour-
ier,"  though  the  aide,  Mrs.  Mary  Jane  Keeney,
had  declared  under  oath  that  she  was  not  and
never  had  been  a  Communist  and  denied  that
she  was  ever  a  courier.  The  "courier" incident
had   itself   been   picked   up   by  the   McCarran
committee  from  an  earlier  horror  story  which
made   headlines   for   the   House  Un-American
Activities  Committee.  Mrs.  Keeney was  alleged
to  have  stepped   off  a  ship  from   Europe  on
March   9,   1946,   and   passed   a   large   manila
envelope  to  a  man  "suspected  of  being  engaged
in   Soviet  espionage."    The   man's  name  was
given,  the  statute  of  limitations  had  not  run,
both  t^f   and  Mrs.  Keeney  were  subject  to  prose-
cution  if  the  charges  were  true.   The  fact  that
no  indictment   has  ever   been   returned   is   the
best  comment  on  these  wild  charges,  but  that
did  not  keep  them  from  being  used  again  by
McCarthy  in  his  February  12,  1950,  attack  on
the  State  Department.   When  Secretary  General
Trygve  Lie  discharged   Mrs.   Keeney  the  next
year,  the  Administrative Tribunal  after  hearing
her  case  ordered  her  reinstated.
LIKE   A   WELL-TIMED   STINK   BOMB,   the    old
charges  were  blown  up  again  last  Fall  by  the
McCarran   Committee   just   three   days   before
the   Seventh   General   Assembly   convened   in
New  York.  The   American   Legion   Magazine
appeared  on  the  stands with  a  scare  story about
Red  spies  in  the UN.  Senator  Herbert  O'Conor,
Democrat,  of  Maryland,  after  hearing  ten  wit-
nesses  made  headlines  with  the  charge  that  the
committee  had  found  "American  traitors  on  the
payroll  of  the  United  States  and  the  United
Nations."
Spies  and traitors are strong  words.  If  Ameri-
can  intelligence   had  "tips"  that   certain   UN
employes  were  engaged  in  espionage,   the  tips
were   valuable.   Followed   up,   they   offered   a
means  not  only  of  prosecuting  such  people  but
of  uncovering  their  associates.    The   FBI  and
other  intelligence  agencies  have  many  ways of
following  through.    Wires  are  tapped,  "cover"
is  put  on  the  mail  of  suspects.  They   can  be
followed  and  watched.  Conversely there  is  also
the  presumption  that  when  such  charges  have
been  kicked  around  privately  and  publicly  for
so  many  years  without  resulting  in  an  indict-
ment,  there  must  be something  wrong  with  the
charges.
Assistant  Secretary  of  State  Hickerson   tried
to  tell  the  McCarran  committee last  December
31,   "The   Department   has,  not   had   evidence
justifying  the  conclusion  that  there  was  spying
or  espionage  on  the  part  of  American citizens
employed  by  the  United  Nations."   He  added
pointedly,  "If   either  the  Department   of  State
or  the  Department  of  Justice  had  had  evidence
justifying   such   a   conclusion,   prompt   action
would  have  been  taken under the  criminal laws
of   the   United   States  by  the   Department  of
Justice  which  has  responsibility  for  enforcing
those  laws."
In  any  case,  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  State
told  the  committee,  the  UN  "would  probably
be  one  of  the  last  places"  that  an  agent  would
be  placed.  "We  transmit  no  classified  informa-
tion  to  the  Secretariat,"  Hickerson   explained.
A   SPECIAL  GRAND  JURY   HAD  BEEN  impan-
eled  in  June,  1951,  in  the  Southern District  of
New  York  to  look  into  "subversive  activities
and   espionage."    It    sat    for    18   months.  "It
claimed  in  a  "presentment"   made  public  last
December  2  to  have  uncovered  "startling  evi-
dence"  showing  the  "infiltration" of  the  UN  by
"scores  of  individuals"  who  were  subversive.  If
the  Grand  Jury  in  its  18  months  of  work  had
collected  "startling  evidence"  it  was its  duty  to
return   indictments.  None   were  returned.   The>
most startling  case described  by it  was that of  "a
United  States citizen  accused before  us  in  sworn
and  uncontradicated  testimony  of  having  been
a  Soviet  agent  while  employed  by  the  United
States  government."    Even  in  this  case  there
was  no  indictment.
Either  the  Grand  Jury was  remiss in  its  duty
or  guilty  of  considerable  overstatement.  Some
of  the  grand  jurors  hit  the  headlines  a  second
time  with  the  claim  that  government    officials
had  tried  to  keep  them  from  filing  the  present-
ment.  When  hearings  were  held  on  these  new
charges  by  a  subcommittee of  the  House  Judi-
ciary  Committee,  they  showed  that government
officials  had  indeed  been divided  on  the wisdom
of  the  grand  jury's  action.  Charles  P.  Murray,
Assistant  Attorney  General   in   charge   of   the
Criminal  Division  of  the  U.  S.  Department  of
Justice  testified  that  Roy M.  Cohn,  then  a  spe-
cial   assistant   to   the   Attorney   General,   had
urged  issuance  of  the  presentment  "to  beat  the
McCarran  Committee  to  the  headlines."  Cohn
has  since  been  elevated   to  the   post   of   chief
counsel  to  the  new McCarthy  investigating  com-
mittee.
Murray  testified  that  he  believed  it  the  sole
function  of  a  grand  jury  "to  indict  or  not  to
indict."  He  said  he  was against  "presentments"
which  were  really  "statements  by Grand  Jurors
which,  for  lack  of  evidence,  fall  short  of  ac-
cusing  anybody  of  crime,  and  therefore cannot
be  defended by  the  persons  who  were  named."
"Finally,"  Assistant  Attorney  General  Mur-
ray  said,  "I.believe  that  it  is  most  important
in  times  of  emergency as well  as  in  other times
that   the   normal  functions  of   government  be
pursued  according  to  their  normal course.  I am
against  government  by  hysteria,  (or)   by  alter-
nate  hysteria  and  lassitude.  I  believe  that  an
even,   fearless  performance  of   functions  allo-
cated  to  the  various  agencies  who  mind  their
own  business  is  the  very  best  cure  for  Com-
munism  or  any  other  evil."
A  GRAND JURY  CAN INDICT whom  it  pleases.
The  prosecuting  official  has  great  influence  but
cannot  control  it.    A  prima  facie  case  on  the
basis   of   what   the   prosecution   alone   has   to
offer  is  enough  and  the  grand  jury  is  the  ulti-
mate   judge   of   that.     In   this   case   obviously
neither   the  Grand   Jury  nor   Roy  Cohn,   the
special  prosecutor,  had  the  nerve  to  indict any-
body.
"What   the   Tribunal    must   already   have
suspected,"  says  the  brief  for  the  19  discharged
UN  employes,  "should  by  now  be  inescapably
clear.     The   charges   of   espionage,   subversive
activity  and  the  like  are  but  an  elaborate  and
cruel   hoax  invented   to  conceal   the   fact   that
the  applicants  were  terminated  for  reasons  of
alleged   conviction,   sentiment   and    affiliation
alone.   .   .   Fear   engendering   claims   of  es-
pionage,  spy  rings   and  sabotage   are  the   in-
variable  means of  ensuring  the  political  destruc-
tion  of  individuals  whose  sole  offense  is  their
political   non-conformity."
Unless  the  FBI  itself  is  infiltrated  and  sabo-
taging  the  enforcement  of  the  laws,  it  is  im-
possible  to take these repeated  charges  seriously,
except  as part of  a conspiracy to  defame the  UN
and  terrorize  its  employees.
Next  Week:  The  UN   «nd  the   Fifth
Amendment*
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  28, 1953
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  weekly except the  last  two  weeks
of  August at  Room  225,  1416  F St., N.W.,
Washington  4,  D.  C.    Subscription  rates:
Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and
elsewhere in  the Western  Hemisphere, $6;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by
1st  class  mail,  $15  by air;  for  Israel,  Asia,
Australia   and   Africa,   $10   by   first   class
mail,   $20  by  air   mail.    Single  copy,   15
cents.     Contents   covered   by   copyright.
Telephone,   STerling   3-0938.   Entered  as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
Vol.   1,  No.  7
•T    February  28,  195J
COMMENT
Vacuous  Velde
OUR  HAT is  OFF this  week  to  Mrs.  Agnes   E.
Meyer   for   the   speech   she   made  in   Atlantic
City  at  the  meeting  of  the  American  Associa-
tion   of   School  Administrators.  The   wife   of
the   owner   of   the   Washington   Post,   herself
well  known as a  writer  and  social  worker,  Mrs.
Meyer  gave  Velde,  Jenner  and  McCarthy  the
drubbing   they  deserve.  The   best  part   of   her
speech   went   unnoticed   by   most   newspapers.
Mrs.  Meyer  said  neither  McCarthy  nor  Jenner
nor   Velde   had   "the  moral   or   intellectual
qualifications"   to  investigate   the  nation's col-
leges.  As  a  sample  of  Velde's  IQ,  she  pointed
to  a  bill  the  ex-FBI  man  has  introduced  which
would   require   the   Librarian  of   Congress   to
mark  all  subversive  matter  in  the   Library  of
Congress.  "The  man  doesn't  make  sense,"  Mrs.
Meyer  said  briskly.
There  are  9,000,000  volumes  in  the  Library
of  Congress,   and  Velde's  naive  proposal  leads
to  some  interesting  arithmetic.  A  staff   of  200
employes   smart   enough   to   go   through   five
volumes  a day would require  30 years to  do  the
job.  It  would  be hard  to  get  such mental  giants
at  less  than  $4,000  a  year. At  that  rate  the  job
would  cost  $240,000,000.
More  complicated would  be  the  task  of  de-
ciding  in  advance just  what  was a  "subversive"
book.  The  ex-FBI  man  does  not  seem  to  have
realized   that  this  "was  a  problem   at  all.  But
once you got  past  Marx,  Lenin  and  Stalin,  with
the  smaller  fry  Communists,  what  would  you
do   about   the   Socialists,   the   anarchists,    the
subtler   fellows  who  undermine  faith   in   free
enterprise,  the  atheists  and  agnostics  and  anti-
clericals?   What   would   you   do   about    those
writings  of  Jefferson,  which  advocate   wetting
the  tree  of  liberty  at  regular  intervals  with  the
blood   of  tyrants?  Or   those   papers   in   which
Madison   anticipated    Marx   in   his    economic
class  analysis  of  society?  There  are  men  who
trace  subversion  back  to  1917 and  others  who
go  back  to  1789.  There  are  some  who  think
Freud   and   Einstein   subversive  as  there   were
men  who  thought  Bruno,  Galileo  and  Spinoza
subversive.  The   Catholics   still   have   some  of
these  great  men on their  Index; the  Protestants,
as  the  Scopes  trial  revealed,   are  not  immune
to   a   similar   obscurantism.     Which   standard
should  guide  the  Librarian  of  Congress?  I  can
see   him   nervously   looking   at    Lobachevski's
historic  little  pioneering  paper  in non-Euclidean
geometry  and  wondering  nervously just  how  he
ought  to  list  it.  It  subverted  Euclid.
Nothing  could   better   illustrate   the  vacuity
of   the  witch  hunters   than  this  simple-minded
idea  of  Velde's  that  all  he  had  to  do  was  in-
troduce a bill  and  the  Library of  Congress  could
quickly  stamp  "subversive"  on  the  books  all
right   thinking   Americans  ought   to  avoid.
Senator  Taft
In  Liberal  Mood
OUR   HAT is   ALSO  OFF  this  week   to  Senator
Taft   for  the  views  he  expressed  on  academic
freedom  after  a  speech  to  the  National  Canners
Association   in   Chicago.   Indeed   the   Senator's
views  seemed  sounder  and  more  logical   than
Mrs.  Meyer's.  Mrs.  Meyer  thought  Communists
should  be  dismissed  from  faculties  but  Senator
Taft  told  a  press  conference  after  the  canners'
meeting  he  felt  it  would  be  "inconsistent  with
freedom   of   thought"   to   dismiss   a   professor
"simply  for  being  a  Communist"  unless  he was
teaching  Communism or  trying  to  influence  his
students  in  that  direction.
The  weakness  of  Mrs. Meyer's  view  is  that
once  you   say  Communists   should   be   barred
from   teaching,   the  door  is  wide   open   to  the
witch  hunters  to determine who is a Communist.
The  ban  at  once  leads  to  the  assumption  that
any  teachers  who  are Communists will naturally
hide  their  views  to  keep  their  jobs.  The  only
way  to  find  them  will  then  be  by   watching
for   tell-tale   evidences  of  non-conformity.  The
strength  of  Senator  Taft's  view  is  that  it  does
not  compromise  the  basic  principle  of  freedom
and  leaves  men  to  be  judged  by  what  they say
and   do,  not   by  what   some  inquisitor   thinks
they    are   really    thinking.    That   way    leads
straight  to  George  Orwell's  thought   police.
Our  Not   So  Independent
Judiciary
THE   TWELFTH   ANNUAL   CONVENTION  of    the
National   Lawyers  Guild,   which   still  miracu-
lously   survives   and   thrives,   could   not   have
picked  a more deserving  recipient  for  its  Roose-
velt  Award  than  Delbert  E.  Metzger,  who  was
denied   reappointment   to   the   U.   S.   District
Court  in  Hawaii  because he  declined  to knuckle
under  to  the  Department  of  Justice  and  refuse
bail   to  Smith  Sedition   Act  defendants.   There
has been  no  more  blatant  attack  in  our  time on
the  independence  of  the  judiciary than occurred
last  year  in  Metzger's  case.
In  accepting  the  award  Judge  Metzger  said
derisively  that  the  FBI  itself   "after   long   in-
vestigation" found  only 60  "subversives"  among
Hawaii's  half  million  people.  The Judge  wanted
to  know  how  such  a  handful  could   constitute
"a  clear  and  present  danger."  He  added,  "My
remarks  I  suppose  make  it  clear  why I  was not
reappointed  to  my  Federal  judgeship,  particu-
larly  when  judges  who  preside  over  Smith  Act
trials  where  there  are  convictions  are  promptly
promoted,  and  Smith  Act  prosecutors  are  made
judges".
New  Ally,  New  Bank
IN   A   WORLD   THAT   SEEMS  terribly  imperma-
nent  it  is  good  to hear  that  something  goes  on,
as  if   forever.     Dr.   Hjalmar   Horace   Greeley
Schacht  has  opened  a  new  bank  at  Dusseldorff
in  the  heart  of  the  industrial  Ruhr  and  another
near   the   port   of   Hamburg.     His   namesake,
Horace  Greeley,  advised  the  young  man  to  go
west,  but  Schacht's  version  is  to  go  anywhere
politically  for  a  fast  buck.    He  managed  the
feat  of  being  a  pillar  of  the  Weimar  Republic
and   then  of   the  Third   Reich.    Now   he   re-
enters  the  banking  business  just  in  time  to  par-
ticipate  in  financing   the  liberation   of  Eastern
Europe,   unless   of   course   the   Soviet   Union
should  take  over  Western   Germany,  in  which
case   our   stalwart   new  ally  would   no   doubt
manage  to  emerge   as  Commissar  of   Finance.
Call  for  Volunteers
The  Weekly  is  now  being  distributed  through   several  hundred stands in New  York  and Brook-
lyn.  I hope  soon  to invade  the  Bronx, Queens, perhaps even Westchester and North  Jersey.  But
distribution  in  other  cities  and  smaller towns  is  much  more  difficult.   There  are  usually  only
one  or  two  stands  in  the  smaller cities  which  handle  liberal  and literary  papers and magazines.
I  would  like  to  build  a  mailing  list  of  such  stands. I would  appreciate it  if  those readers in the
smaller  towns  who  have  the  time  would  get  in  touch  with stands  of  this  kind  for  me and find
out  whether  they  would  like  to  handle  the  'Weekly.
—I.  F.  Stone
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone
1
*  Weekly,   February   28,  1953
Another  of Me Carthy's  Little  Reichstag  Fires
WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
ESPECIALLY  IN  FRANCE,  where  the  sense  of  the  ludicrous  is
strong  and  the  public  likes  its  fun  well  spiced  with  sex,  the
new  Voice  of  America  hearings  must  be  a  big  success.  The
French will be delighted  by the young lady with the trim figure
who was "a  little bit  sort  of  stunned"  when her  superior  made
her  what the  New  York  Daily  News  called  "a  Marxist  propo-
sition."  The  English, their  once impregnable  sense of  superior-
ity  sagging,  will  feel  indebted  to  us  for  "Senators  Also  Told
Girl  Aid  Was  Asked  to  Bear  'Collective'  Children,"  a  New
York  World-Telegram  headline  which bears  faint resemblance
to  the  actual testimony, weird  as that  was. The  cafe  wits  from
Rome to Vienna will  fully  savor the  moral sensitivity  which led
Senator McCarthy to  shut off questioning of  the  maiden by his
Senatorial  colleagues  with  the  warning  that  they were on  tele-
vision  and little  children might  be  listening  in.
As  an  impresario,  McCarthy  is  the  best  since  Barnum.  As
a  propagandist   he  is  making  Washington   look  worse  than
clownish.  The  crimes laid  at Voice of  America's door  are  as yet
unclear, but  if  it  had  been  broadcasting  the  Communist Mani-
festo  24  hours  a  day  in  24  languages  and  enticing  innocent
schookhildren  with  free  pamphlets  on  surplus  value,  it  could
hardly  have  done  America  as  much  harm.    The  vagaries  of
American  Senators  were  an  old  story to  Europe  in  the  days of
the  Trollopes,  Mama and  son,  but  this  is  something  different.
What  has  been  broadcast  to  the  world  in  the  past  week is that
in   dealing   with   the   Eisenhower   Administration,   foreign
countries are dealing with men who do not have the courage to
be  masters  in  their  own  house,  though  freshly  installed  by
an  overwhelming  mandate.
THOSE   LIKE  WALTER  LIPPMANN  who  hoped  wistfully  that
victorious  Republicans  under  a  famous  General  would  pro-
vide   sufficient   backing  and  backbone  to  put   the  wild  men
under  control  must  be  bitterly  disappointed.  A  flurry  of  edi-
torials congratulating  Eisenhower on his first 30-days had hardly
ended  when  he  let  the  State  Department  knuckle under  three
(and  perhaps  four)  times  in  a  row  to  McCarthy.  Two  days
after  the  inquiry into  the  Voice  of  America  began,  Secretary
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
Room  221  Kellogg  Bldg.
F  Street,  N.W.,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Please  enter  the  following  subscription.  $5  for  1 year  is
enclosed.   (Sec  page  )  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street
City  .
State
Zone
of  State Dulles accepted  the  resignation of its chief, Dr.  Wilson
M.  Compton,  although  the  latter  was  highly  praised  in  the
report   just  submitted  by  a  U.S.   Advisory  Commission   on
Information  Congress  itself  had  created  in  1948.    Dulles  ex-
plained  that  Dr.  Compton  had  submitted  his  resignation   "a
month  ago"; one suspects it  was the  pro  forma  resignation  all
top  officials  submit when a  new  Administration takes  over.
In   three   other   instances,  there  were  naked  acts  of   sub-
mission.  An  inaccurate  and  insubordinate  security  agent  de-
moted   for   "blabbing"   to   McCarthy  was  reinstated   by  the
State  Department.  An  order  that  no  employe  need  talk  to
McCarthy's   investigators   and   that   none   were   to   permit
removal  of files without  specific  permission was rescinded. The
effect  was  to  give  McCarthy the  run  of  the  State Department
and  to put  its employes on notice that  McCarthy is its  reigning
power.   Most   cowardly  of  all  was  the   Dulles  order  which
followed  hastily  on  the  appearance  before  the  committee  of
the  novelist  Howard  Fast,  as famous abroad  as he  is  maligned
at  home.
AN    ADVISORY   COMMISSION  AS  POLITICALLY  PASTEURIZED   as
possible   (it   included  three   conservative  publishers  and   a
Catholic   University  professor)   had   recommended  sensibly
that  when  an  author like  Fast  said  something  favorable about
American policy that made the best kind of propaganda behind
the  Iron  Curtain  where  Fast  is  a  literary  hero.  Instead  of
standing   up   against   the   political   idiocy  of   the   McCarthy
committee  and  its  less  than  sensational  discovery that  Fast  is
pro-Communist,  Dulles  issued an order  saying that  no material
was  to  be  used  if  it  came  from   "any  controversial   person,
Communist,  fellow  traveller,   etc."    This  clears  the  air  ways
for   American  Legion   speeches   and   Knights   of   Columbus
manifestoes.  Can  anyone be  silly  enough  to  believe  that  some-
thing  nice  about  America from  Fast  is  bad  propaganda  while
one of  those "Christian  Crusade"  speeches,  threatening  to  blow
hell out  of  Russia  and turn it  back to the Tartars, will  make us
friends ?
McCarthy  is  not  stupid.  He  knows what  he  is  doing.  This
is one of  a series  of little  "Reichstag  fires"  to light his own way
to  power.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
221  Kellogg  Bldg.
1416  F St.,  N.W.,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED