I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953sep26.pdf

============================================================

Debunking  Look's,  "What  Are  They  Hiding?"
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL  I,  NUMBER   34           SEPTEMBER   26,   1953
s       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Answering  The  Russian  H-Bomb  With  An  American  Sales  Tax?
"Operation  Candor" The  Same  Old  Pentagon  Claptrap
Operation  Candor,  long  awaited  and  highly  advertised,
seems  to  have begun  in  Boston  this  week. But  judging by  the
Eisenhower  speech  it  is merely  to  be  reversion  to  government
by  alarm.  Hope  that  desire  for  fiscal  sanity  might  lead  the
Republicans  toward peace died  with  the  passage  in  which  the
President finally touched on  the  problem  of  the  H-bomb.  Here
was  the  same  mindless  rhetoric  with  which  the  military  in
every  age  have  been   accustomed   to  inflame  public  opinion
and  inflate  public  expense.
The   "enemies  of  freedom"—the  other  side  is  always  the
enemy  of  freedom—are  now  equipped  "with  the  most  terrible
weapons  of  destruction."  And  what  is  to  be  our  answer?  The
answer  of  the  armament  salesman,  the  answer  which  must  be
as old as the  first  flint-tipped  spear.  We  can meet them, Eisen-
hower  said,  "with  only  one  answer:  there  is  no  sacrifice—no
labor,  no  tax,  no  service—too  hard  for  us  to  bear"   in  the  •
"defense  of  our  freedom."  This  reopens  the  Treasury  doors
to the  Pentagon  and marks the  victory of  the military over  the
bankers.  The  brief  honeymoon  with  economy  is  over.  Never
was  candor  less  candid  than  in  these  windy  phrases  but   the
truth  peeps  out,  particularly in  the  "no  tax"  reference.  Appar-
ently  our  answer to the  Russian H-bomb  is to be an American
sales  tax.
We  are  summoned  to  defend   a  freedom  which  is van-
ishing. What  the  President  left  unsaid  is  the  testimony  of  our
servitude.  The  enemies  of  freedom   are  equipped  "with  the
most  terrible  weapons  of  destruction."  What  weapons?  Have
they  the  H-bomb?  Or  perhaps  the  newly  feared  C-bomb?  Are
they ahead of  us or behind us?  Have we more than they or  less
of  the  new  weapons?  Is  there  any  real  defense  against them?
How  effective  would  the  best  defense  be?  How  much would
it  cost? What  did  Project Lincoln report?  What  did  the Kelly
Report  say?  What  was in  Project  East River?
We   are  as  much  in  the  dark  as  those  who  live  under  a
dictatorship.  A  small group  of  men  alone  knows the  facts.  A
small group  makes the  decisions. And—from  on high—we  are
given  the  answer. "We  can  meet  them with only  one  answer,"
Eisenhower  announces.  "No  sacrifices—no  labor,  no  tax,  no
service" is  to  be  "too  hard  for  us to  bear."  Ours  not  to  reason
why. Is this  free  government or  an  atomic Charge of  the  Light
Brigade?
Is  there  no  chance  of  agreeing  on  some  form  of  atomic
control?  After  all, bombs of  this kind cannot be  manufactured
in  a  washtub.  If  we  have  instruments   which  tell  us  that  a
bomb  has  been  exploded  behind  the  Iron  Curtain, can  it  be
said  that  inspection  and  enforcement are impossible?
Would  it  not  be  better  to  try  and  make  peace  before  em-
barking  on   a  stepped   up  arms  race  in  fission  and   fusion
weapons?  Can  this  lead  to  anything but  the  most  terrible  war
of  all  history?  The  questions  are  left  unanswered.  Few  voices
will  even  raise  them  in  a  docile  press  dispensing  a uniform
pap.  The  decisions  have  been  made.  Eisenhower  says  there  is
"only  one  answer."  This  is  the  Pentagon's  answer,  the  trans-
lation  of  the  world's  most  difficult  problems  by  the  small  boy
mind. If  the Russians  shoot  us dead  once,  we must be  prepared
to shoot  them dead  twice.
If  Operation  Candor  wer« really  to  be  candid,  it would
tell quite  a different  story. There  is no complete  defense  against
any  weapon.  When  that  weapon  is  as  destructive  as  the  new
bombs,  great  cities  can  be  destroyed  if  only  a  few   attackers
slip  past  the  most  elaborate  and  costly  defenses,  as  they  in-
evitably  will.  Only  a  few  days  before  the  President  spoke,  the
Secretary  of  the  Navy  at  Quantico, Virginia, said  "the  realistic
question  of  total  mutual  destruction"  may deter  nations  from
using the  new  bombs.  Why  then  go  on piling  up  more  A and
H  bombs  if  they  may  not  be  used?  The  effect  is  to  increase
fear  and  tension  without  increasing  usable  military  power.
Remember   the   predictions   of   how  much  money  would
ultimately  be  saved  when  the  new  bombs  made conventional
weapons  and  armies  unnecessary?  Now  the  Secretary  of  the
Navy  says  the  increasing  power  of  the  new  bombs  "suggests
that   the   need   for   improvement   of  the   more  conventional
forms  of  warfare  may  well  become  greater  rather  than   less,
as  we  approach  absoluteness  in  mass  destruction."   The  more
money we spend  on atomic development,  the  bigger  and  better
must  be  our   conventional  army,  navy   and  air   forces.   The
prospect  for  the  military  is  rosy,  for  this  way  the  sky  is  the
limit on expenditure  and on military power  over our  economy.
"Freedom"  is  to  be  defended  by  creating  a  garrison  State  in
America.  The  world  is  to  be  torn  apart  between  two   fearful
giants,  neither  of which  believes  in telling its own people  more
than  an  elite  at  the  top  thinks  good  for  them.
This  speech will  serve a  useful  purpose  if  it  arouses  the
world  between  the  two  giants  to  a  full   realization  of  how
bankrupt  is American  leadership, how  suicidal is the  direction
in  which  it  is leading. To  see such  vast  power  guided  by such
small  minds  one  must  go  back  to  the  age of  dinosaurs.  There
is no protection  against the  new weapons of  destruction  except
peace,  and no way to have peace  except  by co-existence.  Russia
and  America can  live  in  the  same  world  together.  But  neither
can  destroy  the  other  without   also  destroying  itself.  This  is
what  "Candor"  would  report  if  it  were  not  another  of  those
spurious   and  hateful  military  operations,   another   excursion
in  spreading  poison and panic
1  3  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f.  F. Stone's  Weekly, September  26,  1953
The  Real  Proportions of That  Red Herring
The  Answer  to  Look's,  "What  Are  They  Hiding?"
Perhaps  to  counter  balance  its  often  relatively  liberal  line,
Look's  current  issue  features   a  shocker   "What  Are  They
Hiding?"  A  staff  member,  Fletcher  Knebel,  was  assigned  to
tally  up  the  record  of  Congressional  witnesses  who have  in-
voked  the  Fifth  Amendment's privilege  against  self-incrimi-
nation.  He  covered  "the  millions  of words  of testimony"  taken
since  1948  by .the  House  Un-American,  Senate  Internal  Se-
curity  and  McCarthy  committees, and  comes up  with  the  first
count  of  its  kind.                                        :
"Behind  the  scorching  national  controversy  over  the  treat-
ment  of witnesses," Look  begins  dramatically,  ". . . lie some
stark  facts."  The  facts,  however,  when  stripped  of  alarmist
rhetoric,  turn  out  to  be rather  puny  than  stark.
A  sample  is  the  main  finding.  "Persons  who  have  refused
to  affirm   or  deny  membership  in  the  Soviet-controlled  Com-
munist  party,"  Look  reports,  "held  key posts  in  71 bureaus,
agencies   and  departments   of  the  Federal  government  from
1933  to  1952."
The  phrasing  is  hopped-up  to  catch  the  unwary.  There  is
poetic  license  in  the  reference  to  71  "bureaus,  agencies  and
departments."  A  careful  reading  shows  that  what  Knebel  is
really  reporting  is  that  71 former  Federal  office-holders  in-
voked  their  privilege.
This  is  worth  that  second  look  few  Look  readers  will  give
it.  The years  covered are  1933 to  1952. That  is  20 years.  Fed-
eral  employment averaged" some 2,000,000 a  year  during  that
period.  There  are  no  figures  on  turnover   available.  But  ob-
viously  several  times  2,000,000 persons  were  on  the   Federal
payroll  in  those  20  years.  Yet  three  committees  of  Congress
in five years have  been able  to turn up  only 71 past  or present
Federal  jobholders  who  declined  to  say  whether   they  were
Communists.
Even  if   we  assume   for  the   moment—as  Look  leaves   its
readers  to  assume—that  all  71 are  or  were  Communists, that
is  an  amazingly  small  number.
. In those two decades, the  Communists three times ran a  can-
didate  of their  own for  President. In. 1932—their  best  year—
they  polled  roughly  pne-fourth   of  one  percent   of  the  total
vote.  In  1936  their  percentage  fell  to  one-fifth  of  one  percent
and  in  1940  to  one-tenth  of  one  percent.
If  the  proportion   of  Communists  on  the  Federal  payroll
had  been  about  the  same  as their  proportion  to  the  total  elec-
torate,  there  would  have   been   5,000   Communists   employed
by  the  government  in  1932,  4,000  in  1936  and  2,000  in  1940.
In  the  same inflated style was Look's  finding, "No less  than
113  persons  who  invoked  the   Fifth   amendment   served   in
some unit  of the  armed  forces."  A headline  based  on this  says
"Fifth   amendment  pleaders  .  .  .  even  penetrated  . .  . the
armed  forces."
There  were  more  than  10,000,000  men in  the  armed  forces.
If  the  ratio  of  Communists  in  the  armed  forces  during  the
last war  was the same  as their  ratio to voters the year  before
Pearl  Harbor,  then  there  must  have  been  about  10,000 Com-
munists  in  the  armed  forces.  To  say  that  they  "penetrated"
the  armed  forces  is melodramatic and  misleading.  The  armed
forces  were  drafted.  Communists  were  not  exempt.
"Perhaps  the  most  spectacular  infiltration  of  a  war  agen-
cy,"  Look  says,  was  in  the  OSS.  "Spectacular"  seems  an odd
adjective  when  one  goes  on  to  read  that  there  were  "no  less
than  ten  people  working for  OSS who later  invoked the  Fifth
amendment."  If  there  were  only  ten  Communists  among  the
thousands  employed  by  the  OSS  that  was  not  much  of  an
"infiltration."
Just  what  this  "infiltration"   did  or  was  intended  to  do  is
not  explained.  Some  of  the  men  Look  mentions  in  this  con-
nection  carried   out   dangerous   assignments  for   the  U.  S.
Army.  Look  says  one  was  "parachuted  into  the   Balkans."
Another  was "parachuted  behind  German  lines  in  France  to
operate   radio   installations   for   the   French   underground."
Look  does not say they betrayed  their trust. It  does not  allege
that  they  did anything  wrong.
The  most  interesting  figure  of  all  turned  up  by  the  Look
survey  has  to  do  with  the  question  of  espionage.  The  Con-
gressional  investigating   committees  have  done  their  best  for
years  to  picture  the  New Deal  and  the  Fair  Deal  as honey-
combed  with   Soviet  spies.. Look  provides  an   anti-climactic
figure  on  this.
Look  first  adds  the  113 members  of  the  armed forces  to  the
71  Federal  jobholders   (the  two  figures  overlap  since  some
men  figure  in  both  categories)   and  comes  up  with  a  grand
total  of  175  "former  Federal  employees  or  members  of  the
armed  forces"  who invoked the  Fifth  amendment.
Then  Look  reports,  "At  least  14 of  these  persons  have  de-
clined  to  state  whether  they  engaged  in  espionage  against
the  United  States."
It  is surprising  to  learn  that  in all  these  hearings  the most
Look  could  find  were  "at  least  14"  who  invoked  the   Fifth
amendment  when   asked  about   espionage.   Look,  of  course,
leaves  the  reader  to  assume  that  this  was  the  same  as  an
admission.
Look  does  not tell  its  readers that  in  the  eyes  of the  law—
for  reasons  which are  the  fruit  of  long  and  bitter  experience
—invocation   of   the   Fifth   does • not   create   an   inference  of
guilt.  It   does  not  explain. that  there  are. circumstances  in
which  an  innocent man may  "incriminate"  himself  by  his own
testimony.  It  does not  recognize  that  a  lawyer  may sensibly
advise  a  man with  a  radical  past  these  days  that  it  is  safest
to  answer  no  questions  at  all  which  might  possibly  entangle
him  in  some kind  of  prosecution.
Some  of  those  named  in  the  Look  article  undoubtedly  are
or  were  Communists.  Some are  not.  Most  of  them  have been
put  through   the   hoops—and  the  headlines—over   and  over
again.  The  striking  thing  is  that'after   so  many  investiga-
tions  there  are  so  few  allegations   of  wrong-doing.
.There  are  some  striking  cases  in  which  there  are  serious
allegations.  But whether  the allegations can be taken  seriously
is  another  matter. One man  named  in  Look  is  alleged  to have
handed  over  atomic  secrets.  He  has  been  hounded  ever  since
the   House   Un-American   Activities    Committee   made  this
charge  in  a  special  report  on  the  eve  of  the   1948  elections.
Look  does  not  tell  its  readers that the  Department  of Justice
said  of  these  allegations  in  a  formal  statement  at  the  time,
"There  is  absolutely  no competent  proof  here. ...  It  is  pat-
ently  absurd  and  unbelievable that the  Department  of Justice
in  cases  of this  character  would  fail  to  institute  prosecution,
were  the  requisite  evidence  available."
The  campaign  to  portray  New  Deal  and  Fair  Deal  as  sub-
versive  plots  has  reached  Orwellian   proportions.  It  blares
from  every  radio  and  is  repeated  in  the  pages  of  every  popu-
lar   magazine.
This  much  is  true.  Had  Hoover  been  elected  in  1932,  there
would  have  been  few  Communists  or  Socialists  or  radicals
of  any  kind  in the  government. But  a  great  deal  would never
have  been  accomplished.  For  the  nature  of  that  accomplish-
ment—whether   it   "subverted"  America   or   made   it   more
stable—we   summon  a   witness,   Elsenhower's  Secretary  of
Agriculture,  Ezra  Taft  Benson.
What  did Benson  tell  worried  farmers  at  Eau  Claire,  Wis-
consin, last  Saturday?  "Look  forward  with  confidence," Ben-
son  said.  "You  are  not  looking  down  into  the  abyss  of  the
thirties.  We are  in  the fifties and have  tools ... to  build  a
sound  economy."
These  are  the  mechanisms the  New Dealers  fashioned,  the
wage  and  price  supports   the  Republicans  opposed  as  com-
munist.  The hounded radicals  of  today  are  the  same  men who
helped  create  those  tools.  .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  26,  1953
/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I. f.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  205,
301  E. Capitol  St., SE., Washington  3,  D.  C.  Subscription  rates:  Do-
mestic, $5 a year; Canada,  Mexico and  elsewhere  in  the  Western  Hemi-
sphere, $6; England  and Continental Europe, $10 by  1st class mail, $15
by air; for  Israel,  Asia, Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by first class mail,  $20
by  air  mail.  Single  copy,  15  cents.  Tel.: il  4-7087.  Entered  as Second
Class  mail  matter,  Post  Office,  Washington, D.  C.
September  26,  1953
Vol.  I,  No.  34
Quid  Pro Quo
If  Beria  shows  up  in  Washington, we  are  prepared  to  ex-
pedite  J.  Edgar  Hoover's  escape  to  Moscow.
Witty Fellow,  Dulles
John  Foster  Dulles  is  developing  unsuspected  gifts  as  a
wit.  We  recommend  two  passages  in  his  opening address  to
the  UN  General  Assembly.  "The  United  States,"  he  said  at
one  point, with an  almost audible chuckle, "does  not  want  to
see  Russia  encircled  by  hostile  peoples."  No  doubt  when  our
bases  around  the  periphery  of  the   Soviet  zone  are  opened
to  international  inspection  it  will  be  found  that  they   are
really  social  centers,  with  emplacements  for  samovars  and
large  bins  of  pirochki,  ready  for  Russian  visitors.
We  can  almost  hear  Goering guffaw  in  his  grave  over  an-
other  of  our  favorite  passages  in  that  speech.   Dulles  told
the  UN  the  Russian  people  had  "not  forgotten  what   their
nation   suffered   from   Hitlerite   Germany  during  the  second
World  War.  They  expect  and  they  are  entitled  to,  assurance
against  a  repetition  of  such  events."  Dulles  said,  "That  is,
indeed,  the  large  purpose  of  the   European  Defense  Com-
munity."
Now  that  the  Russians  know  we  are  rearming  Germany
in  order  to  protect   them  from   aggression,   the  least   they
could   do  would  be  to  rebuild  the   Japanese   Navy  in  order
to  protect  us  from  another  Pearl  Harbor.
The  A. F. of  L.'s German  Policy
In  the  dismay  over  Adenauer's  victory,  it  is  as  well  to
remember  that  the  German  Social  Democrats  are  today  at
least  as  arrogantly  nationalistic  as  the  German  right.  Their
kind  of  thinking  is  reflected   in  the  recommendations made
by  the  executive  council of  the  A.  F.  of  L.  at  St.  Louis  this
week  on  German  policy.  The  A.  F.  of  L.,  which'  has  close
relations  with  German  Social  Democracy,  takes  the  "libera-
tion"  of  the  Eastern  zone  for  granted   and  asks  for  more.
It   declares  that  the  Russians  can  only  demonstrate  their
sincerity  by  giving  up  East  Prussia  and  forcing  Poland  to
relinquish  the  Oder-Neisse territories.  The A. F.  of  L.  would,
however,  give  "due  consideration ... to  the  national   inter-
ests  of  the  Polish  people."  It  would have  Russia  compensate
Poland  by  restoring  territories  annexed in  the  last  war. And
just  to  show  its  impartiality,  the  executive  council  adds  that
the  Western  powers  cannot  ask  the  Russians  and  Poles  to
make  these  concessions—without  also  arranging   for  France
to  give up the  Saar.
The  A. F. of L. and  Chiang Kai-shek
The  A.  F.  of  L.'s  foreign  policy  recommendations make
John  Foster  Dulles  look  like  an  appeaser.  The  A.  F.  of  L.
finds "the  widespread  dissatisfaction"  with  the  Korean  truce
terms  "understandable"  and  is  opposed  to  any  settlement  on
the  basis  of  partition.  It   is  opposed  to  recognition  of  the
Chinese  Communist regime or  its  admission to  the  UN under
any  circumstances,  though  it  recognizes  sadly  that  "in  the
present  state  of  civilization,  such  recognition  cannot  be  lim-
ited   to   states   with   high   moral   standards."   It   criticizes
Churchill for  suggesting that  Russia  may have security  prob-
lems,  too,  and  finds  it  "most  regrettable  that,  since  talk  of
negotiations   with  Moscow  has  been  in  the  air,  the  western
powers  have  already   made  heavy  reductions  in  their  arms
budgets."  It  says  the  Russians   have  been  "stepping  up  ag-
gressive   military   preparations—especially  in  the  polar   re-
gions."  The  executive  council  does  not  propose  to   abandon
the  Eskimo,  either,  without  a  fight.
The Pentagon  and the Public  Mind
The  armed  services  are  spending  more  than  $10,000,000 a
year  on  "public  relations."  Mac Arthur  had  175 military  and
civilian'"publicity  personnel."   The   Chief   of   Staff   has   157.
The  National  Council Against  Conscription  (1013   Eighteenth
Street,  N.  W.,  Washington   6,  D.  C.)  has  just  published  a
60-page  pamphlet   study,  "Press  Agents   of  the  Pentagon"
by  John  M. Swomley,  Jr.  (35 cents  a  copy)  which  we recom-
mend  as  essential  reading  for  all  who would  understand  the
way  in  which  the  Pentagon  molds  the  public  mind.
The  pamphlet  explains  the  methods  by  which  opinion  is
formed.  These  range  from  the  special  "confidential"  orienta-
tion   meetings   to   which  business,  farm   and  labor   leaders
are  invited  down to  the  comic strips.  "Much  of  Joe  Palooka's
comic  strip  when   he  was   in   uniform,"   Swomley  reports,
"was  inspired  by long  conferences at  the  Pentagon.  This  was
at  the  height  of  the  UMT campaign  when  the  Army  wanted
to  sell  children  as  well  as  parents  on the  idea  that  the  Army
was  the  place  to  build men like Joe. .Palooka—healthy,  strong
—who  don't  drink,  smoke,  swear  or  have  other  bad  habits."
One  the   main   purposes   of  the   Pentagon  in  its   "public
relations"  is  to  condition  the  public mind  for  war.  The  pam-
phlet  quotes  A.  S.  Alexander,  then  Under  Secretary  of  the
Army, as saying, "The  American people are  better  psychologi-
cally  prepared  for  war  if  it  comes than  ever  before  in  peace-
time."  The  Council says  in  conclusion  that  the  difficulties  of
achieving  a  peaceful  and disarmed  world  "should  not  be  mag-
nified  by  a  military  propaganda  machine  whose  chief  results
are  the  creation  of a  militaristic  public opinion and the  main-
tenance  of  the  vested  interest  of  a  military  autocracy."
Whispers  Around  The  Capital
Warren's   reputation  as  a  liberal  and  his  opposition  to
loyalty   oaths  in  California  have  been  a  major  behind  the
scenes  obstacle  to  the  Supreme  Court  appointment  he  wants
...  In  Indo-China,  as  in  Korea,  the  satellites  are  more  in-
transigeant  than  the  big  powers.  While  Moscow  and  Peking
both  are  anxious  to  settle  the  Indo-Chinese war,  Ho Chi-minh
has  grown  more  militant. On the  other  side,  the  French  mili-
tary,  strengthened  by  the  promise  of  more  American  aid,
are  in no mood  for  negotiations  .  .  .  Dulles  favors  a  Pacific
Pact  like  the  Atlantic  Pact  and  has  been  building  up  Con-
gressional  support  for  it  but  was  unable  to  sell  the  idea  to
Australia  and  New  Zealand   at   the   Anzus   meeting  here.
They  shy  away  from  a  pact  which  would  commit  them  to
the   support   of  Chiang  Kai-shek  against  Communist  China
.  . . The labor  movement, after  the deaths  of  Philip  Murray
and  William  Green,  like  Russia  after  Stalin,  is  in  flux,  and
surprises  are  as  possible  in  the  A.  F.  of  L.  and  the  C.  I.  O.
as  in  Moscow  . .  . The rapidly  improving  relations  between
Tito  and  the  Cominform  bloc have  given  the  Yugoslav  leader
new  leverage  in  the  dispute  over  Trieste.  Serbia  historically
oscillated  between  East  and  West,  and  the  pattern  may  be
expected  to repeat  itself  . . .  Federal  Judge  Luther  Young-
dahl,   once   Republican  Governor  of   Minnesota,  the   Judge
who  handed  down  the  recent  Lattimore  decision,  did  not  add
to  his  popularity  with  the  G-men  and  the  crypto-Fascists of
Washington  by making a  speech at  the  eight  annual  National
Conference  on  Citizenship  in  which he  said,  "hatred  of  Com-
munism  is not enough  to  make  for  good  citizenship."  .  . .
1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f.  F. Stone'i  Weekly,  September  26,
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
Adlai's Three Worlds'  Based  on  Look  at  Half
Everyone  will  have  perceived,  I  think,  that  travel has
broadened  our  Mr.  Adlai  Stevenson.  His  disquisitions  since
returning   have  been   unimpassioned,  his   advice   temperate.
Striving  honestly  to  see  us  as  others  see  us,  he  has  brought
back  the  distinct  impression   that  our  self-righteousness  no
longer  is  salable.  He  suggests  that  our  diplomacy  has  about
worn  out  the  language  of  abuse.  Somewhere  along  the  way,
perhaps  in  the  zone  of  Winston  Churchill's  emanations,  he
has   contracted   the   wholesome  idea   that  live  and   let   live,
after  all, makes  sense.
The  question  rises  now  of  what to  do with  our  Mr. Steven-
son  this  winter  and  next  year  till  the  elections:   settle  him
quietly  in  his  Chicago  apartment  to  "make  a  living"  or  trot
him  out  only  from  time  to  time  to  regale  the  gatherings  of
Democrats?  A  better  use of  him, it  seems  to  me, would  be  to
turn  him  around,  while  his  recollections   of   Syngman  Rhee,
the  emperor  of  Japan,  Pope  Pius  and  Queen  Elizabeth  still
are  fresh,  and  start  him  off  on  another   aroufld-the-world-in-
six-months  tour,  this  time  on  a  different  tack.
Thus we should  be able to keep  on broadening  our statas-
man  in  experience  and  understanding.  We  should  be  able  to
anticipate  even  finer  reports.  For  though  Mr.  Stevenson  has
viewed conditions  and  sampled thinking  in a great  many lands,
in  order  to  tell  us  how  we  stand  with  our  "friends,"  many
and  more  populous  lands—those  whose  existence  really dis-
turbs  us—were  left  unexplored.  How  it  is with  these  is  an  in-
formation  he  can  impart  with  no  more  authority  than  any
other   passer-by—a. mishmash   of   rumors   collected   at   the
borders,  of  droppings  caught  under  the  eaves.  It  is  reason-
able  to  assume  that  a man  of  Mr.  Stevenson's  open  mind  and
ready  assimilation  could  learn  as  much  by  traveling  in  these
terras  incognitas  as he  has  on  a track that  is fairly  well  beaten,
and  that  another  time  he  would  return  to  us  an  even  more
rounded  man.
If  we should  seriously consider  a course of  living and  letting
in  the   future,   our  project   unquestionably  would  require  a
sum  of  fact  in  addition  to  the  store  we  now  think  we  possess.
Our  charts  may  be  outmoded.  Who  would  have  suspected,
for  example,  that  in his circumnaviagtion Mr. Stevenson  would
have found Three  Worlds  where but  a few years ago  Wendell
Help Keep Dissent Alive In  America
By  Subscribing
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
301  B.  Capitol  St*  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D. O
Please  enter the following  subscription. S3 for 1 year  a
enclosed.  (See page 3  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street   ....
City  .................
...................Zone..........Stat»....
»-2«-68
Wilkie  saw  but  One?  And  is  it  not  at  least  possible  that, if
Mr.  Stevenson  should pursue  his  studies in  all  the  far  corners,
instead  of  merely  in  selected  ones,  he  in  turn  would discover
that  humanity is  indeed  whole?
It  is handsome for  a man  who has aspired  to be President
of  the  United  States,  and  who  yet  may  be,  to  have  first hand
knowledge of places like South Korea  and Formosa and Turkey
and  Greece.  But  our  book  on  such  places  already is relatively
well  scriven  and  annoted:  our  military and  economic experts
have poured  over them at will. The  statesman who  could, be of
real  value  to  us  would  be  one  who  would  have  first  hand
knowledge  not  only  of  friendly  lands  and  peoples  but  of  the
vast  reaches and populations  lumped into one—the hostile and
hidden  one—of  Mr.  Stevenson's  three  worlds. If  it  should ap-
pear  that  these  lands  are  not  too  different   from  our  own—
subject  to droughts,  to depletion,  to  conservation and improve-
ment—and  that  these  peoples  at  bottom  harbor  impulses  of
human  nature quite  as philanthropic  as our  own, then  our  ad-
justment  to  a  policy  of  co-existence  need  not  be  difficult   at
all.
In  any  case,  it  certainly  is  as  important  for  the  American
people  to  be  brought  up  to  date  on  the  disposition  of  the
leaders  of  Russia  and  China  as  on  the  current  viewpoint  of
the  Pope  and  the  emperor  of  Japan.  Our  relations  with  the
latter  are  not  in  doubt.  Our  problem  is  to  establish  an under-
standing with the former. And whether Mr. Stevenson's  greater
aim  is  his  own  mental  satisfaction  or  to  complete  his  equip-
ment  for  the  high  office  in  Washington,  he  could  not  better
serve  it  than  by  resuming  his  journey  and  covering  the  rest
of  the  field.
Many  commentators  have  complimented  Mr. Stevenson
on  the  "judiciousness"  of  his  estimate  of  the  present   situation
of  the  world.  The  evidence,  as  far  as  Mr.  Stevenson's  "on-the-
spot"  investigation  is  concerned,  cannot  be  all  in.  At  best,  he
knows  "the half  of  it."  Unless  with  equal  objectivity  he per-
sonally  surveys the  hopes  and  humors  of  the  other  half,  how
can  his  balances be  trusted?
Let  him,  when  he  has  rested  his  feet,  be  off  again  to  the
"interesting  spots"  he  has  missed.  His  counsel  thereafter  will
be  the  more  deserving  of  respect.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  203
301  B.  Capitol  St.,  &B.,
Washington  3, D.  C
Entered  as
Second  Class   Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED