I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953jan31.pdf

============================================================

Wilson's  Air  Secretary  and  "Flying  Coffins'",  Sec Page 2
Vol.   I  NUMBER  3January  31,  1953
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
What They  Confirmed With  Wilson
It  would  take a  Balzac  to  do justice to the hearings on
the  nomination  of  Charles E.  Wilson  to  be  Secretary of  De-
fense.    The  Business Man  and  the  Politician  confronted  each
other,  each  ready  to him  a forgiving eye on  the  derelictions of
his own kind.   Senators who had  just  voted to  seat  a McCarthy
were  in  no  positiorr to  be  righteous  about  Wilson's  reluctance
to  dispose of  his  stock  in  General  Motors.   Wilson  was taken
aback.   Had  the  Republicans not  won  the  election ?   "I  would
like to  tell  you men,"  he told  the  Senators at  one  point,  "there
is a change  in  the country.   The  people  are not  afraid  of busi-
nessmen like me  right  now."
The   full  transcript  of  the  executive  sessions  showed  that
Wilson   spoke  not  with  arrogance  but  with  naivete  when  he
said  he  could  not  conceive  of  any  conflict  of  interest  in  his
new  position  "because  for  years I  thought  what  was good  for
our  country  was  good  for  General  Motors,  and  vice  versa."
He  was proud  of  his  record  in  industry and  proud  of  his com-
pany,  as he  had  a  right  to  be,  and  genuinely hurt  that  no  one
was giving  him  credit  for  leaving  a  $200,000  a  year  job.    "I
am now risking a failure, in  my old  age,"  he  said.    "It  is quite
a  challenge.   Now,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  General  Motors
is   finished.   I  dosed  up  my  desk  in  Detroit   Saturday  with
mingled  feelings  of  regret  and  nostalgia."    And  here  he  was
being  treated  with  suspicion!
The  retirement  bonus  provided  that  it  would  go  on  being
paid  only  if  the  recipient  did  nothing  inimical  to  GM's   in-
terest.   Wilson  had  this  specially  changed   (a  fact  which  did
not  appear  until  the  transcripts  were  released)   to  read  that
nothing  he  did  in  government  service  would  be  considered
inimical to GM  "so that  no one would  feel  like I had  any  club
over  me."    When  Senator  Russell  still  questioned  the  bonus
arrangement  at  the  second  hearing,  it  was  more  than  Wilson
could  bear.    "I  know  what  you  are  talking  about,"  he  said,
"but  I  really  feel  you are  giving  me  quite  a  pushing  around.
If  I had  come here  to cheat,  by God,  I wouldn't be here."
From  a  big  business  man's  point  of  view  here  were
Senators  whom  he  could  buy  and  sell  several  times  over,  and
perhaps  some  whom  he  had.    Among  their  colleagues  were
men  not  averse  to  taking  money  by  various  subterfuges  and
sometimes  in  plain  cash.    Sure  there  were  crooks  in  business
as  elsewhere,   but  hardly  to  match  what  went  on  in  politics!
One  could  almost  hear  Wilson's  honest  indignation.
On  the other  side,  among the  politicians, were conservatives
like  Byrd  and  Russell with an  old-fashioned sense of  rectitude
and  honor,  to whom Wilson  and his  fellow business men must
have   seemed   exasperatingly  indifferent   to   elementary   legal
standards.    The  law  forbade  an  official  to  have  an  interest  in
any company with which he negotiated  on behalf  of  the  govern-
ment.    Scandalous experience,  often  repeated,  had  shown  the
necessity  for  such  safeguards.   Their  application  was  no  per-
sonal  reflection  on  Wilson;  his  record  in  business  is,  indeed,
an  honorable  one;  no  one  questions his  integrity.   But  how
can  you  staff  a  government  with  business  men  who  have  no
conception  of  the  conditions  necessary for  public service!
In  the  clash  between  the  two  points  of  view,  subtler
and  larger  considerations were  neglected.    The  conflict  of  in-
terest the  law sought  to avoid  required  more than the divesting
of  stock,  as  Senators  Morse,  Lehman and  Smith  tried  to  make
clear  in the  inadequate  one day of  debate by the  Senate; a  man
cannot  divest  himself  of  his  past,  his  point  of  view,  his  ac-
customed   associations.    Wilson   himself   volunteered   at   one
point  during  the  second  hearing,  "We  had  exactly  the  same
problem  in General  Motors:  We  had  a very strict  rule that any
of  our purchasing agents and buyers, none of  them  should  have
any  interest  in  any company that  they  bought  from."    Was  it
sound  policy  to  go  to  the  biggest  company  dealing  with .the
armed  forces,  and  pick  its  chief  executive  to  head   Defense?
Beyond  this  there  was  a  larger  area  which  went  completely
unexplored.   This  has to  do with  past  experience  in  arms  pro-
duction  and  industrial mobilization.   Wilson's  GM  and  Wil-
son  himself  in  the  mobilization  for  World   War  II   resisted
conversion  of  automotive  facilities  to  war  production,   insisted
on  "business as usual"  for  months  after  Pearl   Harbor.
The man Wilson  picked to be Secretary of  the  Army,  Robert
T.  Stevens,  a textile  manufacturer  doing  a  $125,000,000  busi-
ness  with  the  Army,  was  a  Colonel  buying  textiles  in   the
Quartermaster  Corps  in  the  last  war.    When  the   resignation
from  the  War  Production  Board  of  Robert  R.  Guthrie,  in  the
spring  of  1942,  focussed  attention  on  the  lag  in  conversion  to
war,  textiles  was one  of  the  horrid  examples.   Wool  and  jute
were  being  wasted  while  the  army  was  short  of  cotton  duck.
Facilities which could  have produced the vital cloth were stand-
ing  idle.    Stevens  at  one  point   was  prevailed   on  to   force
the  grant  of  cotton   duck  contracts  to  idle  carpet  mills,   but
beyond  this the.business  men  in  uniform would  not  go.    The
record  should have been gone  into and questions  asked.
Above all questions should have been asked of Talbott,
Wilson's  choice  to  be  Secretary of  Air.   The  post  is  the  most
important  one  of  all  in  many  ways.   The  story  disclosed  on
page two makes Talbott  seem  a shocking  choice  for  it.    Avia-
tion  is the  one major American industry today which  must  live
or  die  on  war scares.    Peace,  real  peace,  would  leave  it  wither-
ing  on  the  vine.   The  air  lobby  today is what  the  arrhorplate
and  naval  lobbies  were  before  World  Wars  I  and  II.    The
Secretary for  Air  should  be  free  in  every way of  industry ties;
this one is reluctant  to  divest  himself  even of  the  obvious  ones.
Wilson's choice of Talbott reflects  no credit  on Wilson.   What
the Senate confirmed  with Wilson  was its readiness to  acquiesce
in  handing   over  war  production  completely   to  big  business.
Experience  with  these   same  men  and  companies   in  World
Wars  I  or  II  show  that  this  is  unwise  from  the  standpoint  of
war  production,  and  hazardous  for  the  prospects  of  peace.
.1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  January   31,  1953
The  "Flying  Coffins"  and  Wilson's  Ak  Secretary
Of  all  the  scandals  in  World  War  I,  the
one  which  most  shocked  public  opinion   were
the   "flying   coffins"   turned  out  for   the  U.  S.
Air  Force.    The  man who helped  to build  them
is  the  man  C.  E.  Wilson  picked  to  be  Secretary
of  the  Air  Force,  Harold  E.  Talbott.
The  record  of  the  hearings before  the  Sen-
ate  Armed  Services  Committee  shows  that  Tal-
bott  was less  than  forthright  about  his  past  with
Wilson  and  the  committee.
Had  it  not  been  for  Senator  Russell  of  Geor-
gia,  the  story  would  have  stayed  buried.    Rus-
sell  asked  Wilson  on  his first  appearance  before
the  committee whether  he had  checked carefully
into  the  background  of  the  men  he  had  chosen
as  Secretaries  of  Army,  Navy  and  Air.    Wilson
said  he had.   The  Senator  from  Georgia  wanted
to  know  if  Wilson  had  found  anything  disturb-
ing.    Wilson  said  he  had  not.    Russell  asked
whether  he  had  looked   into  the  report   made
by  Charles  Evans  Hughes  about  Talbott's  com-
pany, Dayton  Wright Aircraft, in World War  I.
Wilson  said  he  knew  about  that:   "Harold
.  .  . was repeating  it  to  me again  coming  over
in  the  car  this  morning."    The  briefing  seems
to  have  been  as  simple-minded  as  it  was_ tardy.
"From  his  angle,"  Wilson  explained,  "It  was
all  an  attempted  shake-down.    It  was finally all
settled  on  the  basis  he  had  done  no  wrong."
Senator   Russell    asked    Wilson   whether   he
thought   Charles  Evans  Hughes  would   partici-
pate  in  a  shake-down.    "No,   sir,"   Wilson  re-
plied  staunchly,  "I  do  not,"   and  admitted  he
had  never  read  the  Hughes  report.
Talbott's   first   description   of   the   affair
when  before  the  committee  was  almost  idyllic.
Talbott  told  how  his father and  C.  F. Kettering
formed   the   Dayton  Wright   Company   during
World  War   I.   He  was  then   "a   youngster"
and  "had  nothing  much  to  do  with  the  nego-
tiations"  but  "the  result  of  it  was  that  during
the  period   of  the  war  we  produced,  I  think,
more  aircraft  for  the  Signal  Corps  than  all  the
rest  of  America.put  together."     This,   though
true, was as we shall see nothing to  boast  about.
Talbott   didn't   think   there   were   "any   other
things  of  particular  importance  in   that  back-
ground."
Again  it  was Senator  Russell who brought  up
the   Hughes   report.    "The   Hughes   report  on
our  work,"  Talbott   admitted,   "was   not  com-
plimentary  except  as  to  our  production."    Tal-
bott  said  "finally  it  came  out  in  the  newspapers
that  we  had  been  war  profiteers,  and  a  suit was
brought  against  us  to  recover  improper  profits"
but  they  filed  a  "counter-suit"   and   recovered
$600,000 and "we  were  completely  exonerated."
Talbott seems  to have begun to worry  about
this  rosy  picture  after  he  left  the  stand.    Three
days later  he  sent  the  Senate  committee  a  letter
admitting  that  the  suit  had  nothing  to  do  with
the  Hughes  report.  The  Hughes  report  was  in
1918.     The   government  filed  suit   four   years
later  tp  recover  $2,500,000  in  alleged  overpay-
ments.    The   government   finally   lost   in   the
Circuit   Court   of   Appeals,   but   it   could   not
truthfully  be  said  that  this  verdict  "completely
exonerated"  the Talbotts  of  the  Hughes  charges.
Talbott   also  explained  in  his  letter   that   the
action  he  referred  to  as a  "counter-suit"   was  in
fact   concerned  with   excess   profits   taxes   "and
in  no  way  connected  with  the  litigation  men-
tioned  above."    Thus,   by  his  own  admission,
Talbott's  picture  of  complete  exoneration  and  a
victorious  counter-suit  was  a  false  one.
Left   uncorrected   but   equally   disingenuous
was Talbott's  statement  that  Hughes  "was  very
complimentary  as   far   as  our   work  was   con-
cerned."     The   nearest   approach  to  a  compli-
ment  in  the  Hughes  report  was  his  dry  remark,
after  a summary of  the  production snafus,   "The
provisions  of  the  criminal  statutes  do  not  reach
inefficiency."    As  misleading  was  Talbott's  re-
ference  to himself  as just  "a  youngster"  in  those
days  who  "had   nothing  much  to  do  with  the
negotiations."    Talbott  was  then  already  well
above  the  age  of  consent.    He  was  thirty,  and
he  admitted in  response  to a question  by Russell
that  he  was  president  of  the  Dayton  Wright
Company  during  World  War  I.
The  fact  is  that  the  man  now  picked  by
the  Republicans  as  Air  Secretary  in  prepar-
ing for World War  III  was regarded by them
thirty  years ago  as a horrid  example of  what
went  on under the  Democrats in World  War
I.     Talbott's   company  was  severely  criticized
in   three   official   investigations:   by  the   Senate
Military  Affairs  Committee inquiry into  aircraft
production   in   the   early   months   of   1918,   by
Hughes   in  a  special  inquiry  on  behalf   of  the
Attorney  General   later  the  same  year,  and  by
the  Republican  majority  of  the  House  special
subcommittee  on  war  expenditures in  1920.
This  is  the  story,  as told  in  the  old  reports.
A  man  named  Col.  Edward  A.  Deeds  had  been
closely  associated  in  business  in  Dayton,  Ohio,
with   C.  F.  Kettering   and  the   elder   Talbott.
In  April,   1917,   Deeds  was  put  on  the  Muni-
tions  Standards  Board  in  Washington   and  in
May  on   the  Aircraft   Production   Board.    On
April  9  of  that  year  Deeds,  Kettering  and  the
two  Talbotts  incorporated  the  Dayton   Wright
Airplane  Company,  but  Deeds  while  an  incor-
porator   did   not   become   a   stockholder.    By
September,  on  the  recommendation   of  the  Air-
craft  Production   Board,  the  new  company had
cost  plus  contracts  aggregating  more  than  $30,-
000,000.    In  August  Talbott  senior  put himself
on  the  payroll  at  $35,000  a  year  and  Talbott
junior  at  $30,000  a  year,   though   the  former
was   already   getting   $60,000   and   the   latter
$18,000  from  the  Dayton  Metal  Products Com-
pany  which  was  the  "holding  company."
"Practically  at  the  inception  of  the  Govern-
ment's  aviation  activity  in  connection  with  the
war,"  Hughes  reported,  "and  within  the  sphere
of  Colonel  Deed's  important,  if  not  command-
ing   influence,  his   former   business   associates
were  placed  at  once,  through  government  con-
tracts,  in  a  position  where  they  had  the  assur-
ance   of   very  large   profits  upon   a  relatively
small  investment  of  their   own  money  and   in
addition  were  able  to  secure  generous   salaries
which  they  charged   against   the  Government's
part  of  the  cost  of  manufacturing."
The  Senate report  which  preceded  that by
Hughes  called  attention  to  the  fact  that  "enor-
mous  contracts"  were  given  the  Dayton  Wright
Company  "before  its  factories  were  completed"
while  "a  number  of  plane  manufacturers  .  .  .
in   the  business   years  prior   to  the  war,   have
been  unable  to  obtain  contracts."   The  Senate
report    said   that   of   the   first   1,000   planes
delivered  many  were  in  such  bad  shape  that
they  "should  never have been permitted to  leave
the   factory   in  their   defective  condition."     A
cable  from  Pershing  reporting the  defects  in  the
de  Havilland  4's  Talbott's   company  produced
covers   two   full   pages   of   small  type   in   the
Senate record.   There is also a report forwarded
by  Josephus  Daniels  declaring  the  planes  "not
safe   for    flying."    The   chairman   of   the   Air-
craft  Production  Board  was  Howard  E.  Coffin.
The   planes  became  known  as  "flying   coffins."
It  was  not   merely  the   bad  quality  of   the
planes  but  the  false  reports  about  the quantity
being  produced  which  led  to  investigation.   As
early  as  February  1918  public  opinion  was  led
to  believe  that  planes  by  the  thousands  were
available  but  Pershing  himself  said  it  was  not
until  August  7,  1918,  three  and  a  half  months
before  the  Armistice that  the first squadron—18
planes—finally   got   into   action.     An    official
statement  of  February  21  that  the  "first  Ameri-
can  built  battle  planes  are today en  route to  the
front  in  France"  had  set  off  these  over optimis-
tic  reports.
Before  the  Senate  Military  Affairs   Commit-
tee  on  April  2,  1918,  Deeds  denied  under  oath
that  he  had  seen  this  statement  before  it  was
issued.    But  before  the  Hughes  inquiry,  Deeds
admitted  that  he  did  see  and  revise  this  state-
ment   before   its   release.    The   Hughes   report
recommended   that   Colonel   Deeds   be   court-
martialled   for   giving   information  on   Signal
Corps  business  "in  an improper  manner"  to  his
former  business associates  in the Dayton Wright
Airplane  Company  and  for  giving  out  "a  false
and  misleading  statement  with  respect   to  the
progress of aircraft production. . . ." The Repub-
lican  majority  of  the  House  special committee
on  war  expenditures complained  two  years  later
that  Deeds  had  not been court-martialled.  When
Senator  Russell  asked  Wilson  his  opinion  of
Deeds,  Wilson  said  "A   fair  and  honest  man,
a  capable man  also."
Maybe   the   Senate   committee   and   .the
House committee  and  Charles  Evans Hughes
were  wrong.   A  board  of  review  appointed  by
the  Judge  Advocate  General  voted  against  court
martial  for  Deeds.   Newton  D.  Baker defended
him.   What  one  can  say is  that  Wilson  hardly
investigated  his  choice  for  Air   Secretary  very
thoroughly,  and  the  Armed  Services Committee
was far  from  fully  informed  on  the  facts.    The
insistence  of  Talbott  and  his  associates on  keep-
ing   their   stockholdings   recalls   what   Hughes
said   in   his   aircraft   report,   "The   absence  of
proper  appreciation  of  the  obvious impropriety
of    transactions    by   government    officials    and
agents  of  firms  or  corporations  in  which  they
are  interested  compels  the  conclusion that  pub-
lic  policy  demands  that  the  statutory  provisions
bearing   upon   this  conduct   should  be  strictly
enforced."    This,   the   issue   involved   in   the
new   Eisenhower   appointments,   is  where   we
came  in  as World  War  I  drew  to  its  close.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   31,
I.  F.  Stone's    Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher, I.  F.  STONE
Published  weekly except the  last  two  weeks
of  August at  Room 225,  1416  F  St.,   N.W.,
Washington  4,  D.  C.    Subscription  rates:
Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and
elsewhere in  the Western  Hemisphere,  $6;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by
1st class mail,  $13  by air;  for  Israel,  Asia,
Australia   and   Africa,   $10   by   first   class
mail,   $20  by  air  mail.    Single  copy,   15
cents.     Contents   covered    by   copyright.
Telephone,  STerling  3-0938.    Application
for  entry as Second  Class matter is  pending.
Vol.  1,  No.  37     January  31,  1953
Wrong  Way  to  Water  The
Tree  of   Liberty
The   Emergency   Civil  Liberties  Commit-
tee  is holding  a  conference on  the  bill  of  rights
in  New  York  City  this  week-end.   The  con-
ference   has   been   attacked   by   the   American
Committee for  Cultural  Freedom  of which  Prof.
George   S.  Counts  of   Columbia  is   chairman.
Irving   Kristol,    its    executive   director,   first
attacked  the  Emergency Civil  Liberties  Commit-
tee   as   a   Communist  front   and   then   lamely
"admitted"   (according to  the  New York  Times
of  January 20)  "that  he  had  no  knowledge  that
'outright  Communists'  were  among  the  spon-
sors  and  said  it  would  have  been  more  tactful
to  use  the   phrase  'popular   front'   instead  of
'Communist  front'."    For  these  graceful  ameni-
ties  of  political  controversy  in  the  USA,  1953,
the  editor  as  a  member  of  the  committee  and
a  participant  in  the  conference  is  grateful.   He
would  feel  more grateful  if  the  American Com-
mittee for  Cultural Freedom for  once  did  some-
thing  about  cultural  freedom   in  this  country,
where   much   can   still   he   accomplished,  and
worried   less   about   Berlin   and   points   East
thereof.    The   latter  is  one  of  those  de  luxe
crusades  which  can  be  carried  on  in  the  warm
assurance  that  neither McCarran  nor  McCarthy
will  ever disapprove.
As  soon  as  a  medal  can  be  struck  off,   the
Weekly  will  send  one  to  James  C.  Bay, super-
intendent  of  public  schools  in  Easton,  Pa.,  for
his  telegram  to  the  Emergency  Civil   Liberties
Committee,   which  answers  Dr.  Counts  in  the
kind  of  terms  called  for  by this high  level  con-
troversy.     "Strongly   urge   holding  conference
and  forum  as  planned,"  Dr.  Bay wired.     "Pro-
gram  will  be  incomplete  without  exposure  of
background   of   Counts  who   was   documented
Red  in   1935.    Underwent  brain  washing  and
became  uncivil  opponent  of  civil  rights.     The
withering  tree  of  liberty  should  not  be  further
wet  by  dogs  who  were  once  Communist  pups,
viz.,  Counts,   Hook,  Budenz,  Bentley,  Dodd."
Honorable  mention  in  the  controversy  goes
to  the  ever  tart  and  courageous  Prof.  H.   H.
Wilson, who  teaches politics  at Princeton in  the
free  tradition  and  will  yet  be  heard  from  in  a
big  way,  as  was  another  Wilson  out  of  Prince-
ton  before   him.    On   receiving   a  wire   from
Dr.  Counts  saying  that  he  was  "distressed"   to
learn  that  Wilson  was  taking  part  in  the  civil
liberties  conference,  Prof.  Wilson  replied,  "Re-
gret  your  illness.    Suggest  immediate psychiat-
ric   care.     Prospects   of   American  democracy
dim.    Quote,   the  situation  is  made  to  order
tor the demagogic, the charlatan, the adventurer,
the  madman.    Unquote."    The  quotation  was
from   Dr.   Counts'   book,   "The    Prospects   of
American  Democracy,"  published in  1938.    It's
bad  enough   to  see  liberals  turn  rabbit  under
pressure.    It's  worse  to  take  rabbits seriously
when  they  begin  to  hunt  their  old  friends  in
packs,  making  like  wolves.
Wigmore  Himself
The  Supreme  Court's  refusal   of  certiorari
in  the  Baltimore-Washington  Smith  Act  cases
is  discussed  on  page  four  of  this  issue.    The
verdict  in  the  trial  of  the  13  Communists  in
New  York will  be  the  subject  of  comment  next
week.     I   have   just   finished   reading   Judge
Dimock's   charge   to   the   jury   and   I   doubt
whether  the  great   Wigmore   himself   ("Wig-
more on  Evidence")  would understand it, much
less  an  ordinary  juror.    This  is  no   reflection
on  Judge   Dimock,  but   the   effort   to   explain
the  Talmudic  subtleties  of  conspiracy to  advo-
cate  on  top  of  the  more  familiar  difficulties  of
reconciling  free  speech  with  unlawful  advocacy
resulted  in  something  close  to  parody.   I  hope
to  provide   sufficient   samplings  next  week   to
turn  Max  Beerbohm  green  with  envy.   The  ef-
fort  to  treat  unpopular  political  ideas  as  crime
must   end  by  making   die  Federal   courts   de-
servedly  ludicrous.
Jim  Crow  in  the   Capital
Those  with  a  taste  for  caviarish  legal  humor
of   the  unintended  variety  will   enjoy   the   61
pages  in  which  the  nine  judges  of  the  U.  S.
Circuit  Courts  of  Appeals  for  the  District  of
Columbia  decide  5-4 in  three  separate  opinions
that a local ordinance of  1872 forbidding  restau-
rants  to  discriminate  against  colored  persons  is
not  valid.    The  majority   among  other  things
argues  the  proposition  that  Jim  Crow  laws  are
within  the  province  of  municipal  government,
but   laws   against   Jim   Crow   are   not.     The
majority  also  argues  that  the  old  ordinance  if
valid  has  lost  its  efficacy  through  disuse,  learn-
edly  citing  James  v.  Commonwealth  in  which
the   Supreme   Court   of   Pennsylvania   decided
125  years  ago  that  the  ducking  stool  was  no
longer  a  proper  mode  of  punishment,  though
still  on  the  statute  books.    The  majority   also
turned  up  with  a  decision  out  of  the  days  of
rugged  individualism  holding  that  the  city  of
Washington  had  exceeded  its  proper   powers
as  a  municipality in  ordering  a  freeborn  Amer-
ican  to  shovel  the  snow  off  his  sidewalk.    Such
were  the  majestic   libertarian   precedents  mar-
shalled   by  the   revered   senior   judges  of  this
Circuit  in  defense  of  the  proposition   that  no
decent  fellow  would  want  to  have  his   sister
forced   to   masticate   a  ham   on   rye  beside   a
Nigra,  suh.   The  younger  Fair  Deal  and  New
Deal    judges,   Fahy,   Edgerton;   Bazelon   and
Washington,  argued  in  vain  against  the  South's
peculiar  prejudice,  and  the  issue  is  now  up  to
the  Supreme  Court.
Hat's  Off
To  Dr.   James  Bryant  Conant,   outgoing
president  of  Harvard,  on  the  eve  of  becoming
U.  S.  High  Commissioner  in  Germany,  for  his
defense  of  dissent  and  his  warning  to  the  Con-
gressional  witch-hunters.    Instead  of  being  sent
to  Germany  on  the  hopeless  task  of  de-Nazi-
fying  the  Germans,  Dr.  Conant  ought  to  stay
home and help us de-Nazify  some  of  our  fellow
Americans.    The   District  of  Columbia  could
use a U. S. High Commissioner like Dr. Conant.
Neither  Rain nor Snow  But . . .
Weeklies  go  to  press  on  Mondays  or  Tuesdays  and  are dated the following week-end when the  paper  is delivered.
They  are dated  ahead  to give  the  reader  the  illusion  that  he  is getting  his  news by jet-propelled  carrier  pigeon.  We
engage  in  the  same   flim-flam.   We  are  dated  Saturday.     Our  final  copy  deadline  is  the  previous  Tuesday  morn-
ing.    We  are  mailed  off  in  Washington  on  Wednesday   afternoon,  and  there—with  all  due  respect   to  the  new
Postmaster  General—is  where  the  trouble  begins.   Our  first  issue dated  the  17th was mailed  right  on  the  dot  of  the
14th,  but  it  did  not  begin  to  be  delivered  in  New  York  until  the  following  Wednesday.    A  second  hand  covered
wagon  could  have  done  better.
The  second  issue  dated  January  24  was mailed  on  the  21st,  right  on  schedule,   but  again  the  postman,  whom
rain,  snow,  hail,  nor  spring  fever,  delays,  set  no  Olympic  record  in  getting  there  most  cities  (except  Washington
itself).    The  first  went  out  third  class.   This  issue  goes  out  on  second   class  permit  pending,  and  should  arrive
more  swiftly.    Send  me  your  beefs.    I  will  share  them  with  the  Postmaster  General,  who  has  little  else  to  worry
about  now  that  inaugural  is  over.    And  don't  forget  to  prod  your  friends  into  subscribing  with  that  handy  sub-
scription  blank  on  page  4,  or  give  me  their  names  and  I'll  send  them  a sample.
I.  F.  Stone
1   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone'*  Weekly,   January   51,  1953
The  Supreme  Court  Breaks  Its Word
The  U.  S. Supreme Court  made  a promise in  upholding
the  conviction  of  the  top   11  Communist  leaders  under  the
Smith  Act.   The  Court  said  that  in  future  cases  "Where  there
is doubt  as to  the  intent  of  the  defendants,  the  nature of  their
activities,  or  their  power  to  bring  about  the  evil,  this  Court
will  review the convictions  with  the  scrupulous  care demanded
by  our  Constitution."
There were  several  reasons  for  this pledge.   In  the  first  case
the  Court  passed  only  on  the  issue  of  constitutionality.    The
Court  implied  that  it  would  grant  review  of  the  other  issues
in  later  cases.    Another  reason  for  the  promise  was to under-
score the  Court's insistence  that  it  was not  outlawing the Com-
munist  party  nor  making  membership  in  it  a  crime.    Future
prosecutions  were to  require proof  of  each  accused individual's
own  intent   and  activities.    A  third  reason  for  the   Court's
promise  of   "scrupulous   care"   in   later   cases  was  to   allay
misgivings   expressed   in   conservative   circles    (Washington
Star,  Sept.  20,  1952;  NY  Times,   Aug.  7,  1952)   lest  con-
viction  of  the  leaders  open  the  way for  mass prosecutions.
This promise, at its  very  first test, has been  broken by
the  court,  in  refusing  to  review, the  convictions of  six  lesser
Communists  from  Baltimore  and  Washington.     The   refusal
to  review is made striking  by the  character of  the  U.  S. Circuit
Court decision in these  cases.   The  Fourth  Circuit went  further
than  any  other  court  in  Smith   Act  cases  in  making  mem-
bership  in  the  Communist  party  automatic  grounds  for  con-
viction.    The   standards  indicated  by  the   Supreme  Court—
"intent. . . nature of their  activities .. . power to bring about
the  evil"—were  violated  by  the- trial  judge  in  instructing  the
jury  and  by  the  Circuit  Court  in  upholding  the  convictions.
There  was  no  evidence  produced  io   show  that  any  of  these
six  defendants  intended  the  overthrow  of  the  government  by
force,  carried on activities to  achieve that  end or had the  power
to bring  about  the  evil  feared.
From  the  standpoint  of  the  legal  proprieties  the  question of
intent was crucial.   The  Smith  Act makes it a crime to advocate
revolutionary doctrine or to organize a party for  such advocacy.
The  statute  does  not  require  that  this  must  be  with  intent  to
overthrow  the   government.     Mere  philosophical  discussion
could  thus  become  a  crime.    Judge  Medina  shrewdly  felt  in
the first trial  that without such a requirement  the  statute  might
be  unconstitutional.    He  in  effect   revised  the  statute  by  in-
structing  the  jury  that  for  conviction  they  must  find  intent.
Chief  Justice  Vinson  echoed  Medina  in  saying  "We  hold  that
the  statute  requires  as  an  essential  element  of  the  crime  proof
of  the  intent  of  those  who  are  charged  with  its  violation  to
overthrow  the  government  by force and  violence."   But in  the
Baltimore-Washington   cases  the  trial  judge  permitted  the  jury
to  infer  intent  from  the  fact  of  party  membership.
The feebleness of  this conviction-by-inference is thrown
into  sharp  relief  by the  character  of  the  testimony.    The  gov-
ernment  produced  five  witnesses  who  had  been  in  the  Mary-
land-Washington  district  of  the  Communist  party  during  the
period  of  the  indictment.    Four  had  been  working  for  the
FBI  while  they  were  in  the  party.    There  was  no  evidence,
however,  that  any  defendant   had  advocated  overthrow.    On
the  contrary,  two  of  the  FBI  informers  testified  that  they had
never  heard  any  defendant  suggest  such  doctrine.    The  case
rested  essentially,  like  all  the  Smith  Act  cases,  on  what  Marx,
Lenin  and  Stalin  at  various  times  wrote.    This  is  guilt  by
association  with  ideas.
The  judicial conscience is comfortably  elastic,  but  the  Balti-
more-Washington   cases  stretched  it  a  bit  far  even  for  Vinson
and  the  Truman  appointees.    As for  Jackson  and  Frankfurter,
their  failure  to  vote  for  review  with  Black  and. Douglas  is
a  surrender  to  reaction.    Their   queasy  concurring   opinions
in the first Communist case indicated with what misgivings they
regard  prosecutions  of  opinion  when  divorced,  as  these  are,
from   the  safeguards  of  the  clear   and  present   danger   rule.
Their  eloquent  warnings  a few years ago in the  Krulewich case
against the  historic  political  dangers in  conspiracy  prosecutions
makes inexplicable  their  apparent  failure  to  vote  for  review.
The  muddy  metaphysics  of  the  law  of  "conspiracy"
has traditionally  been  the  favorite  concealment  for  dirty  busi-
ness  on the  part  of  the  prosecution.    But  there  is  in  the  Balti-
more-Washington   cases  much  which  goes  beyond  even   the
flabby  standards   of   proof   normally   allowed   in   conspiracy
trials.    To  deny  the  pending  petition   for  rehearing  would
make  it  seem  that  the  Court  was prepared  to  acquiesce  in  the
removal  of  all  restraint on  wholesale  Smith  Act arrests.
I.  P. StonS,   Weekly
Room   221  Kellogg  Bldg.
1416  F Street,  Waihington  4,  D.  C.
Pleue  enter  the  followimg  rabreription.  $5  fer  1  rear  I*
encleeed.   (See   pege  *  f°
r
   foreign  rates)
Name
Street
City
Stete
Zone
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
225  Kellogg  Kit-
1416  F St.,  Wwhingtoa  4, D. C.
Application  for
Second  Clau  Entry
Is  Pending
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED