I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953jul18.pdf

============================================================

"Warning: Senate  Passes McCarran  Bill to  "Repeal" 5th  Amendment
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I  NUMBER  26
JULY   18,  1953
5       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Full  Story and Text:
Last  Refuge  of Dissenters  in  Danger
Late' Thursday,  July  9,  at  the  tail  end  of  a  weary  night
session,  the  U.  S. Senate passed  a new  McCarran bill. This  one
might be termed a bill to repeal the  Fifth  amendment. It  would
give  Congressional   investigating   committees  a  means  of  de-
stroying  the  last  Constitutional  refuge  of  "uncooperative"  wit-
nesses—that  provision  of  the  Fifth  amendment which  says  no
man  shall  be compelled  "to  be  a witness  against  himself",  the
so-called  privilege  against  self-incrimination.
Little  attention  was  paid  the  bill  in  the  press.  News  of  its
passage  was  swamped  in  dramatic  events.  That  was  the  day
J.  B.  Matthews  was  forced  to  resign  as  executive  director  of
the  McCarthy committee.  That  night, just before debate  began
on  the  bill  in  the  Senate, the  wires carried  the  news of  Beria's
downfall  in  Moscow.  Newspapers  as conscientious  as the  New
York  Times  and  the  Washington  Post  were  able  to  give  only
a  few  paragraphs  on  inside  pages  to  passage  of  the  bill.
Yet  this  bill  may  prove  fateful   for  liberty  in  America.  If
passed,  it  would  (as  pointed  out  in  the  Weekly  for  May  16)
create  an  unwilling  army  of  informers.  Anyone  who  has  ever
had  Left  wing  associations  of  any  kind  would  lose  the  last
remaining  means of  refusing to  answer questions which might
bring  others  into  disgrace in  the current American heresy hunt.
Going  to  jail for  contempt  would be  the  only recourse  left  for
conscientious  objectors  to  Congressional  inquisition.
The  bill  has gone to  the  Mouse,  where  it  was automatic-
ally  routed  to  the  Judiciary committee.  Normally,  this  late  in
the  session,  passage  in  the  House  would  be  doubtful.  There
would  be  protracted  hearings  and  debate.  But  this  bill  was
reported   by  the  Senate  Judiciary  committee  without  public
hearings.  The  same  thing  could  happen  in  the  House,  where
McCarran's  ally, Walter  of  Pennsylvania, is still  the  most  pow-
erful  single  influence on  the  House  Judiciary committee.  Wal-
ter  and McCarran do not  always see eye to eye, but  another  Me-
Carran-Walter  bill  is  possible.  So is  hasty passage  without  de-
bate  in  the  crowded hours of  a  Congress  eager  to  wind up  its
business and  get  home.
If  the  bill  reaches the  House floor,  passage  is  certain. Rare-
ly  has  so  fundamental  a  legal  change  been  proposed  with  so
little  public  discussion  and  understanding.  The  average mem-
ber  of Congress  will  see it  only as a bill  "to  make Communists
talk."  Actually  the  measure  would  have  the  force  almost  of  a
constitutional  amendment,  undercutting  a  fundamental   right
which  has  its  origin  in  the  same  grievances which  drove  the
Pilgrim  Fathers to Holland  and then  America. The  5th amend-
ment privilege  arose  in  the  early Seventeenth century struggle
against  compulsory  testimony under  oath  before  those  inquis-
itorial  courts  of  Star  Chamber  and  High  Commission  with
which  the  English  Crown  sought  to  root  out  political  and  the-
ological  dissent  as subversive  heresy.
The  bulk of this week's  issue is being  devoted  to the bill
The  hope  is to  Paul Revere enough  interest  to  block  the  meas-
ure  in the House.  It is important  to  focus the attention  of every
organization interested  in civil liberty upon  the bill, to  demand
that  full  public  hearings  be held in  the  House,  and to  organize
pressure  on  members  of  Congress  to  vote  against  the  measure
if  and  when  reported   out.  The  time  necessary  for   hearings
would be  enough  to  block  passage  this  session.
This is another  in the  series  of those  "McCarran  bills" which
are creating  a new America,  remodelled  for  conformity,  unsafe
for  dissent,  a  chrome-plated  version  of  George  Orwell's   1984.
McCarran  continues  to  be  the  principal   instrument   for  the
achievement  of  the  U. S. Chamber  of Commerce's  blueprint  for
thought  control  in  America. The new "immunity"  bill is in  the
same pattern  as the  McCarran  bills  which established  the  Sub-
versive Activities Control  Board  and  set up  proto-Fascist  regu-
lations  over  immigration,  our own little  Iron  Curtain.
II
This  is  the  third  year  McCarran  has been  trying  to  get a
bill  through  Congress  which  would  enable  investigating  com-
mittees  to bypass the  Fifth  amendment.  In  1951  the  McCarran
bill  for  this  purpose  got  out  of  committee  but  failed  to  come
up  for  a  vote  in  the  Senate.  In  1952,  it  was  passed  but  then
buried  on  a  vote  to  reconsider.  This  year  it  almost   achieved
passage  on  the  consent  calendar  in  May  but  was  blocked  by
Senator  Taft  (See  Hat's Off in  the  Weekly  lot  May 30).  Last
Thursday,  July  9,  at  around  9  p.  m.  the  measure  was  called
up  for  a  vote  by  the  acting  majority  leader,  Knowland.
The  bill  would  compel  a  witness  to  give  up  his   privilege
against  self-incrimination  by  granting   him   immunity  from
prosecution  on any matter  to which he testified.  "The  most  im-
portant  thing,"  McCarran  told  the  Senate,  "is  to  expose   the
conspiracy.  Punishment  of  individual conspirators  is  a  second-
ary  thing."  Actually  the  mode  of  punishment  in  the  witch
hunt  is  by  publicity—to  disgrace  and  deprive  of  employment
anyone who has had Left  connections in  the past.  The  "immun-
ity"  does  not  protect  from  a public  smearing.
The  so-called  "conspiracy"  is  so  tenuous  that  even  the  top
leaders  of  the  Communist   party  have  been   prosecuted   for
nothing  more  tangible  than  "conspiracy  to  advocate."  There  is
still  no  way  to  prosecute  a  man  for  support   of  Left   wing
causes or past  membership in  the  Communist  party.  McCarran
admitted  that  most  of  the  victims  are  guilty  of  no  crime  for
1  0  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  18,1953
A  Southern  "Reactionary" Defended  The  Bill  of  Rights . . .
which  they  could  lawfully  be  prosecuted   when  he   expressed
the  conviction  that  "many  witnesses  who claim  their  privilege
. .. are improperly  asserting  that  privilege."  Fear  of  frame-up,
unwillingness  to  inform  on  others  and  opposition  in  principle
to  political  interrogation   have  led  many  to  invoke  the  privi-
lege, as indeed  it  was invoked  three centuries  ago under similar
circumstances  by  dissenters.
For  gangsters and  criminals, the immunity offered  by the
McCairan  bill  would  be  a  Godsend.  For  them,  the  immunity
would  be  real  enough.  But  for  today's  political  dissenters  and
non-conformists,  the  "immunity"  would  be  spurious.  This  is
a  device  for  widening  the  impact  of  terror-by-inquisition  and
enlarging  the  blacklist.
The  first  voice  raised  in  objection  Thursday  night  was that
of  Kefauver  (D.  Tenn.)   but  he  limited  himself,  as  he  has  in
the past, to  arguing  that such immunity should  not  be  granted
without  permission  of  the  Attorney General.  The  Senate's  one
dependable  liberal,  Lehman  (D.,  N.  Y.)  rose  to  fight  the  bill
in  principle. Kilgore  (D., West  Va.)  had  obtained  a  series of
letters  opposing  the  McCarran  bill  from  Governor  Dewey  of
New  York,  former  Attorney General  Francis  Biddle,  John  W.
Davis,  Telford  Taylor,  Paul  A.  Freund,  Dean  Erwin  N.  Gtis-
wold  of  Harvard  Law  School,  former  Attorney  General  Wil-
liam  D.  Mitchell,   Professor   Lindsay  Rogers,   former  Solicitor
General  Philip  Perlman,  and  Donald  Richberg.  Lehman  put
these  letters  (by  some  oversight  Richberg's  was not included)
in  the  Congressional  Record. Lehman said  the  bill struck at  the
separation   of  powers  and  would  "encourage  persons  to  seek
to  avoid  the  penalties  of  crimes by  accusing  others."
Monroney  (D.  Okla.)  wondered  whether  the  bill  might
not  be  used  by  a  clever  lawyer or  by a  small group  entrenched
in  some  Congressional  committee  to  give  immunity to  "a  per-
son  who  perhaps  should  be  prosecuted  for  a  million  dollar  in-
come  tax  fraud,  or even ... on a charge  of  treason." Kefauver
agreed,  and repeated  his favorite argument—that  David  Green-
glass  could  have  used  this means  to  escape  prosecution  in  the
Rosenberg  case.  John  Sherman Cooper  (R. Ky.)—the only Re-
publican  Senator  to  oppose  the  bill—did  not  think  that  the
power  to  compel  testimony  by  granting  immunity  should  be
exercised  at  all  by  Congressional  committees.  "The  granting of
immunity,"  he  said,  "ought  to  be  under  definite  safeguards"
as  "in  a  court  of  record"  where  "a  judge  or  presiding   officer
guards  the  interests  of  the  witness  and  of  the   government."
Senator  Cooper  went  on  to  a  more  fundamental  objection.
He   agreed   that   "undoubtedly"   Communists   used   the   Fifth
amendment  and  he  saw  no  reason  why  any  "loyal  or   good
American,  or   innocent   American"   should   be  unwilling   to
answer  questions  as  to  Communist  party  membership.  But  he
said  that  while  he  wanted  to  protect  the  country  from  "sub-
version",  he  also  wanted  "to  protect  the  free  structure  itself."
He  said the  Bill of  Rights protects  "the  individual who  may be
guilty, as: well as the  individual who  is  innocent"  but  that  only
so  could  "the  guaranty  of  individual rights  from  oppression"
be  made  effective.  "When  for  reasons  of  expediency  or  emer-
gency,  we  weaken  these  individual  rights  and  give  inordinate
powers  or  emergency  powers  to  any  branch  of  our   govern-
ment,"  Cooper  warned  the  Senate,  "it  is  the  record  of  history
that ,at last  that  power will be  used  wrongfully,  or  will  be  used
unwisely,  or  against  innocent  individuals."    ,
The  roll was called.  Among the Democrats  who answered
were  some  who  are  usually or  occasionally  on  the  liberal side:
the  minority  leader,  Sparkman  (D.  Ala.),  Douglas   (D.  111.),
Jackson  (D. Wash.), Magnuson  (D. Wash.), Humphrey  (D.
Minn.),  and  Murray  (D. Mont.).  None  of  these  said  a  word
during  the  debate.  As  on  an  earlier  occasion  this  year  when
Senator  George  of  Georgia  expressed  grave  misgivings  about
the  McCarran  bill,  it  was left  to  a  right  wing Southern  Demo-
crat,  Hoey  of  North  Carolina, to  make  the  most  sweeping  at-
tack  upon  the  bill.
Senator  Hoey  expressed  his  friendship  and  admiration  for
McCarran.  He  said he  usually followed  McCarran's  leadership.
But  Hoey  said,  "I  am  opposed  to  the  entire  bill.  I  believe  we
are  going  right  in  the  face  of  the  Constitution.  The  Constitu-
tion  of  the  United  States  provides  that  no  person  shall  be  re-
Full  Text  of  The  New   McCarran  Bill  as Passed  By  the  Senate
"No  witness  shall  be  excused  from  testifying  or  from
producing  books,  papers,  and  other records and documents
before  either  House,  or  before  any  committee  of  either
House,  or  before  any  joint  committee of  the  two  Houses
of  Congress  on the  ground,  or for  the  reason, that the  tes-
timony  or  evidence, documentary  or  otherwise, required  of
him  may  tend  to  incriminate  him  or  subject him  to  a pen-
alty  or forfeiture,  when the  record shows—
"(1)  in  the  case  of  proceedings before one of  the  Houses
of  Congress,  that  a  majority  of  the  Members  present  of
that  house,  or
"(2)  in the  case  of  proceedings before a committee, that
two thirds  of  the  members of  the  full  committee, including
at  least  two  members of  each  of  the  two  political parties
hiring  the  largest  representation  on such committees
"shall by affirmative  vote  have authorized that such person
be granted immunity  under this  section  with respect  to  the
transactions,  matters,  or  things  concerning  which,  after
he  has  claimed  his  privilege  against  self-incrimination,  he
is  nevertheless  compelled  by  direction  of  the  presiding  of-
ficer or  the  chair to  testify.  But  no  such  witness shall  be
prosecuted  or subjected to  any  penalty or forfeiture for  or
on  account  of  any  transaction,  matter  or  thing  concerning
which  after  he  has  claimed  his  privilege  against  self-in-
crimination  he  is  nevertheless  so  compelled  to  testify,  or
produce  evidence, documentary or otherwise.
"No official  paper or record required to  be produced  here-
•under  is  within the  said  privilege.
"No person  shall  be exempt from  prosecution  or punish-
ment  for  perjury  or contempt committeed  in  so  testifying.
"At  least  one  week  in  advance of  voting on the  question
of  granting  immunity  to  any  witness  under  this  act  the
Attorney  General  shall  be  informed  of   the  intention  to
consider  such  question,  and  shall   have  assented   to   the
granting of  such immunity: Provided, That if  the  Attorney
General  does  not  assent  to immunity  within one week after
requested  by  the  committee, immunity  can nevertheless  be
granted by the  committee if  by  resolution  of  the particular
House  of  the  Congress  having  jurisdiction  over  the  com-
mittee,  said House  by a  majority  yea-and-nay  vote author-
izes the  granting  of immunity."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,   July  18,1953
. . . While The "Liberal"  Morse  Helped  McCarran Put  It  Over
quired  to  testify  against  himself.  We   are  undertaking  to  say
that  a  committee  of  Congress  can  do  what  a  court  cannot  do.
The  courts  can  grant  immunity, but  they  cannot  force  a  wit-
ness  to  testify  against himself... The  Constitution  says  a man
does  not  have  to  do  that. I  do  not  believe  Congress  ought  to
pass  a measure such as the  one  before  us."
I  am  in  hearty  accord,"  Senator  Hoey  went  on,  "with
all the purposes  to go after  the Communists, to investigate and
prosecute them, and all that, but... I do not believe we should
forget  the  fact  that  the  Constitution  is  for  the  protection  of
all  the people. There  are other  persons  besides Communists  in
this country. I  do  not  believe  we should confer  upon  any com-
mittee of the  Congress the power to take away  the  rights which
the Constitution gives to  every individual and to  every citizen."
Ill
Given  some leadership, the liberals might have been rallied
behind  this  appeal  from  one  of  the  respected  conservatives of
the  Senate. But  when Hoey finished, Morse of Oregon, took  the
floor,  and  on  this  occasion  as  before  in  this  session  (see  the
Weekly  for  last  March 14), he  helped McCarran.
It  was  a  smooth  performance.  The  Independent  from  Ore-
gon  did  not  think  the  issue ought  to  be  decided on  "the  basis
of  a black or white determination." There  was no  doubt, Morse
said, that McCarran was correct, "when he points  out  that there
is  a  dangerous  conspiracy  abroad  in  the  land,  which  I  think
threatens our internal security". On the other  hand, Morse could
not   "escape  the  conclusion   expressed   by  the   Senator   from
North  Carolina  . . . that the proposal  of the Senator  from  Ne-
vada  in  its  present form—and  I  shall  offer  an  amendment  to
it  before  I  close—would  create  the  possibility  of  abuse."  The
italics are added. They  call attention  to  the  distortion  of  Hoey's
argument  by  Morse.  Senator  Hoey  did  not  object  to  the  bill
"in its present form." He  was against  any measure  which would
compel  a man  to  testify  against himself.
Morse then offered  his own  "compromise." But this aban-
doned  the  fight  against  compulsory  testimony in  principle and
focussed  on  the  procedure  by which  testimony  was  to  be com-
pelled. Kefauver wanted  to  make  the  grant  of  immunity sub-
ject  to  the  approval  of  the  Attorney  General.  The  most  Mc-
Carran  would  offer   was  an  amendment  giving  the  Attorney
General  a  week's notice,  during  which  that  official  might  state
any objections  to the  committee.
Morse  proposed  as a  compromise  that if  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral  did  not  assent  within  ten  days  to  the  proposed  grant  of
immunity, the grant might  nonetheless  be made on a two-thirds
vote  of  the  house  to  which  the  Congressional  committee  be-
longed. Kefauver, for  some reason,  asked  that  this  be  made one
week  instead  of  10  days.  Morse  agreed.  Then  McCarran  said
he  would  also  agree  if  Morse  would  change  his  amendment  to
provide  that  the  resolution   compelling   testimony  might  be
passed  by majority  instead  of  two-thirds  vote.
The   difference   is  considerable.  It  is  the  difference  be-
tween  a situation  in  which  a determined  minority  may defend
a  witness  and  one  in  which  the  majority  party  may  do  as  it
pleases.  But  Morse  accepted  the  change,  declaring  "I  want  to
say  to  the  Senator  from  Nevada  that  we  have  not  been  as  far
apart  in  our  objectives  as  some  of  our  remarks  might  seem  to
indicate."
The  Independent  from  Oregon,  not at all independent  where
McCarran  and  McCarthy  are  concerned,  had  succeeded  in  di-
verting  debate  from  principle  to  procedure,  and then  watering
down  even  procedural  safeguards.  The  final  outcome  is  wide
open  to  abuse.
The  bill, as thus amended, was passed  (as they say in  the
Senate)  by yea-and-nay, without  a  recorded  vote. After  such  a
vote,  any  Senators  who  wish  to  be  recorded  may  rise  and  an-
nounce  their  vote.  Only  ten  Senators  asked  that  their  names
be  recorded   as  having  voted  against  the  bill.  The  lone  Re-
publican   among  them  was  Cooper  of  Kentucky.  Two  right
wing  Southern  Democrats   were  among  the  ten—Stennis  of
Mississippi  and  McClellan  of  Arkansas,  the  latter  one  of  the
three  Democrats  who  resigned   last  week  from  the  McCarthy
committee.  "I  believe  the  bill  is  unconstitutional,"   McClellan
said. The  other  recorded  dissenters  were  Magnuson  and  Jack-
son  of Washington,  Kerr  of  Oklahoma,  Lehman of  New  York,
Hennings  of Missouri,  Murray of Montana, Hayden of Arizona.
McCarran's  bill  to  circumvent   the   Fifth   amendment   had
finally cleared  its first hurdle. Whether  it  passes the  House  may
depend  on how much public  sentiment  may be aroused  to  force
hearings.  We  urge  every  reader  to  act.  Write  your  Congress-
man.  Alert  your  friends.
Extra  Copies  of  This  Special  Issue  Are  Available
Voices  Raised  Against  The  New  McCarran  "Immunity" Bill
Dean  Erwin  N.  Griswold,  Harvard  Law  School:  "Even
when immunity  from  prosecution is  granted, there is  a cer-
tain  element inconsistent  with  our traditions  in  requiring a
person to  give testimony which  reflects against himself."
Former  Solicitor  General  Philip B. Perlman:  "The power
to  grant immunity  from  criminal  prosecution should  not be
vested  in  a  legislative body."
Donald  R. Richberg: "I must express  my feeling of  doubt
as  to  the  wisdom of  giving  Congressional  committees  the
right  to  over-ride the  constitutional  objection of  a  witness
by  granting  him immunity  from  prosecution."
Former Attorney  General  Francis  Biddle:  "I can sense  a
reluctance  on  the  part  of  several  Senators  to  change  so
fundamentally  our basic law  with  respect  to  claiming con-
stitutional  rights   under  the  Fifth  amendment.  It  is  my
sincere  hope  that  the  bill  may  be  referred  back  to  com-
mittee for further  consideration."
Governor  Thomas  E.  Dewey,  New  York:  "The  granting
of  immunity  is  an  extraordinary  power  which  should  in
all  cases  be carefully  restricted."
Donald C. Cook, chairman Securities  and Exchange Com-
mission:  "Unless  the agency  which is  empowered  to decide
whether  or  nor  to  grant  immunity  is  in  position  of   suffi-
cient  facts  and  has  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  laws  in-
volved  that  it  can  predict  the  consequences  which would
flow from  a  particular  grant  of  immunity, it  cannot  pos-
sibly  use  the  power with  sufficient  wisdom  to  protect  the
public  interest."
1   &   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  18,   1953
JENN1NGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
The  Cold  War  Needs More  Than a Change  of Name
With  that  item  of  the  report  of  the  President's  com-
mittee  on  information  which  suggests  that  the  time  has  come
to  decommission   the   terms   "cold   war"  and   "psychological
warfare"  it  is  impossible  not  to  be  bemused.  One  wonders
instantly   whether   this  might  be  the  opening   wedge  for  a
great  new  policy  of  verbal  disarmament,  the  beginning  of  a
transition   from   the  diplomacy  of  epithet   to  the  diplomacy
of  the  soft  word  that  turneth  away  wrath.
1
 In  support  of  the
possibility  one  hopefully  recalls  that  from  Truman  to  Eisen-
hower  there  has  been  some  modification  of   language,  and
indeed  of  tone,  in  official  references  to  the  other  side.  Where
the  former  could  not  say  "Red"  without  a  gritting  of  teeth
and  frothing  at  the  lips  General  Ike  has  been  able  to  discuss
"those people"  if  not  dispassionately  at  least  without  snarling.
It  just  could  be  that  in  the  judgment  of  the  advisory  com-
mittee   querulousness   now   should   be   replaced   by  a   more
adult,  a  more  civil  address  in  international  communications.
In  the  summary of  the  report  released  at  the  White  House,
the   information   committee   headed   by  New   York   banker
William  H.  Jackson  gives  the  opinion  that  the  "war"  words
not  only  are  outmoded  but   fail  to  do  justice  to  the   efforts
of  the  West  to  build  "a  world  of  peace  and  freedom."  Un-
questionably  the  point  is  well  taken:   the  usage, ill  fits  the
aim.  Unfortunately,  however,  much  of   the   content   of   the
report  was withheld  as highly  secret  and  the  quotations  made
public  offer  no  guidance  whatever  to  the  rest  of  us  who  still
will have to call the cold  war something.
The   oversight  is  especially  regrettable   since  the   good
words  which would  handsomely describe  our  efforts  have been
preempted.  While  we  have  been  speaking  blithely  of  "psy-
chological   warfare"   and   the   "cold   war,"   the   other   people
have   been   waving  doves   and   intoning   "peace"  for   years.
We  do  have  our  dignity:  we  are  not  copycats.  Up  to  now
our  limited   awareness  of  the   lameness  of  our   own   usages
has  been   manifested  mainly—almost  solely—in  a  desultory
attempt  to  discredit  by  hyphenation  the  good  words  seized
upon  by  the  other   side;  we  have  endlessly   scoffed   at  their
"peace   offensives,"   "peace  tricks,"  "peace  propaganda."  And
even  though   in  these  associations   the  bad  words  have  not
completely  corrupted  the  good,  we  hardly  at  so  late  a  date
could   adopt,   for   the   improvement   of   our   own   style,  any
of  these  terms  we  have  in  the  dreary  progress   of  the  cold
war  held  up  to ridicule.
Unless,  of  course,  what  we  now  are  seeking  is  not  merely
a  euphemism—but  an  actual appeasement  of  the  world's situ-
ation;   unless  what  the   President's   committee  is   proposing
is  that  we  move  to  end  the  cold  war  itself—not   merely  to
change  its  name.  In   that  case,  we  should  as  glibly  and  as
light-heartedly  as  anybody  else  talk  of  "peace"  day  in   and
day  out, and  if  we should  find  our  voice in tune with a chorus
already  resounding,  why, so much  the  better  for  all.
Personally,  I  am  eager  to  think  that  the  sections  of  the
Jackson group's  report  not published did  consider  and  support
the  proposition  that  the  cold  war should  be  relegated  in  more
than  name  only.  The  gain  would  be  negligible,   it  seems  to
me,  if, having cudgeled  our  wits  to  discover  a  really winsome
name  for  our  major  foreign  policy,  it  should  turn  out  that
the  very  substitution   was  a  ruse,  a  strategem  of  sound   ef-
fects,  a  part  of  the  same  old  cold  war.  By  the   same  token
it   is   difficult   to   imagine  anything  more   surely  dispiriting
than   a  fine  new  national   effort,   at  the   suggestion   of   the
information   committee,   to   prosecute   psychological   warfare
right  on,  for  the  rest  of  our  lives,  under  a  dressed-up  rose.
Peace,  at  the  best  humanity  can  hope  to  achieve,  will  be
relative.  There   is  no  possibility   that,  while  man  keeps  his
imagination,  the  rivalry  of  social  systems  will  not  continue.
We  on  our  side  and  others  on  theirs  always  will  point   to
our  and  their  "higher  standard  of  living,"  or  to  the  promise
of   it,  and  seek  thereby  to  appeal   to  the  minds  and  hearts
of  the  people.
But  this  competition   need  not  be  spiteful  and  poisonous,
as  the  world  has  suffered   it  under  the  cold  war;  it  can  be
cordial   and   instructive.  And   it   need   not   and   cannot   be
accompanied   by  hoarse,   habitual  counter-crying   "Assassins,
hate-mongers,  enslavers!"  The  President   may  have  been  so
advised;  and  if  happily  so,  the  parts   of  the   Jackson   com-
mittee's  report  held  secret  must  have  more  meat  in  it  than
the  parts  thus  far  exposed.
L  F. Stone's  Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher, I. F. STONE
Published  weekly except the  last two weeks
of  August  at  Room  205,  301  E.  Capitol
St.,  S.E.,  Washington   3,  D.  C.  Subscrip-
tion  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a  year,  Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western
Hemisphere, $6;  England  and Continental
Europe,  $10  by  1st class  mail,  $15  by  air;
for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by first class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.  Single
copy,  15 cents, Tel.:  LI 4-7087. Entered as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post   Office,
Washington,   D.  C.
July  18,  1953     <^>-      Vol.  I,  No.  26
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St.,  SJ&,
Washington  3, D.  C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED