I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953oct24.pdf

============================================================

How RC A "Tipped" The Radar Secret to the Axis, See Page Two
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    I,  NUMBER  38
OCTOBER  24,  1953
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS
McCarthy's  Hoax  and  The   Real  Radar  Scandal
The  Signal Corps  whodunit  in  which McCarthy  is  currently
starring  himself  has  an  old  history.    Almost  two  years  ago,
on  January  21,  1952, the  late Eugene  Cox  of  Georgia  rose  on
the  floor  of  the  House  of  Representatives  to  call  attention  to
reports  that   a  spy  ring  was  operating  in   the  Signal  Corps
research  center  at  Fort  Monmouth,  N.  J.    "Fortunately  for
the   safety   of   the   nation,"   Cox   told   the   House   solemnly,
"no   less  than  eight  investigative  agencies  of  the  Army,  the
Government  and  the  Congress  are  now  inquiring  into  this
affair."
Congressman  Cox  informed  the  House  that  these  espionage
charges  were  being  investigated  by   the   House   Committee
on  Un-American  Activities "with  the  full  cooperation  of  its
ranking  Republican  member,  Congressman   Velde",  by   the
McCarran   committee,   by   the   FBI,   the   CIA,   the   Military
District  of  Washington,  the  Army  Counter-intelligence  Corps
and  Gen.  J.  Lawton Collins,  then  U.  S. Army  Chief  of  Staff,
"who   is  receiving  the   coordinated  reports   of   the   military
branches."
The  result  of  these  investigations  was a two-paragraph  press
release  at  the  Pentagon  two  months  later.    This   statement
said,  "The   Army  has  completed  a  thorough  investigation  of
charges  made  late in  January  of  this  year  (1952)  by  a  group
composed  of  3  Army  officers  and  6  civilian  employees of   the
Signal  Corps  Intelligence Agency  of  alleged  subversive  condi-
tions   in  the   Agency.     This   group   petitioned   Congress   to
investigate  the  alleged   conditions."
"No  evidence,"  the  Army  statement  continued,  "has  been
uncovered  to  establish  the  existence of  any  subversive elements
in  the  Agency.    The  'suspicious  actions  of  certain  of   their
colleagues'   charged   by   the   petitioning   officers   and   civilian
employes   are   the   result,   a   spokesman   said,   of   personality
clashes   and   jealousies,   in   some   cases   coupled   with   honest
suspicions."
It  was  to  this  that  the  Army  referred  after  a  week  of  the
new  McCarthy  hearings when  it  issued  a  release  last  Friday
saying,   "The   statement  made  in   1952  that   there  was  no
evidence  that  any  documents had  been  compromised  or  that
files had  been  tampered  with  in  the  Signal  Corps  Intelligence
Agency  is still  correct.    The  documents  alleged  to  have  been
missing at  that  time were accounted  for."
Everybody  Out  of  Step  But McCarthy
The  circus   operated  by  McCarthy   has  sought   to   create
the  impression that  the  government  is infiltrated  by  Reds and
that  no  one  can  be  trusted  but  the  Senator  from  Wisconsin.
In  this  case,  he  throws  suspicion  not  only  on  the  Army  and
Central  Intelligence but   also  on  the  FBI,  the  Un-American
Activities  Committee  and  the  McCarran  committee.    "Open
hearings,"  the  Chicago  Tribune  said  in  January,  19J2,  of  the
committee  inquiries,  "may  be deferred  for  some time."   None
were  ever  held.    Either  these  two  older  witch  hunt  commit-
tees  were  satisfied  that  there  was  no  substance  in  the  Fort
Monmouth  reports  or  they,  too,  are  "dupes  or  worse."
The  Fort Monmouth  affair  was a Chicago  Tribune  sensation.
One  need  only  go  back  and  reread  the  original  story  as  put
into  the  Congressional  Record  by  Cox  to  see how  stale  and
discredited  even  then  was McCarthy's  latest.   The  story  was
based  upon  a  petition  to  Congress  by  three  Army  officers  and
seven  civilians  employed  at  Fort  Monmouth   by  the   Signal
Corps.    They  alleged a  subversive  plot  in  which  57 top  secret
documents were missing.    (It  is curious how often  the  number
57  turns  up  in  the witch  hunt.   At  one time  McCarthy  had
57  card-carrying  Communists  in  the  State  Department.   The
number  makes one  wonder  whether  these  visions  originate  at
the  breakfast table  while staring in a trance at  an H.  J.  Heinz
—"57  varieties"—ketchup  bottle.)
The  charges had  the  moldy  flavor  of  the  stuff   regurgitated
in  loyalty  hearings.    An  example  was  "5.  Numerous   allega-
tions  of  conversations  in  which  certain  employes  talked  in  a
vein  indicating pro-Communism,  in  the  opinion  of  complain-
ing  petitioners."    Apparently  these  charges  had  already  been
investigated.    Major  General  A.  R.  Boiling,  assistant  chief  of
staff,  G-2  "revealed"  at  that  time  "that  his  men  have  been
probing   accusations  against  civilian   employes  of   the  Army
Signal  Intelligence  Corps  for  more  than  a year," that  one was
found   to   be  a  Communist   sympathizer  and   had   resigned,
that   another   had  been   dismissed   but   that  "little   tangible
evidence   of   espionage   or   subversive   activities"   had   been
developed.
The  FBI,  Too, Had  Investigated
The  FBI,  too,  had  been  in  on  the  inquiry.    The  Chicago
Tribune  gave its  own  sensation  away  to  the  discerning  reader
when  it  said  near  the  end  of  the  story,  "After   comprehensive
investigations  had  been  made  by  Army  Intelligence   and  the
FBI,  indicating  no  activities  of   certain   accused  individuals
outside  the  agency  which  would  arouse  suspicion,  there  was
a  tendency  to  attribute   some  complaints  to   office   bickering
between  persons  striving  for  authority.    The  petition  to  Con-
gress  and  the  report  of  missing  documents,   however,   stirred
the  inquiry  to  great  heights."
The  ashes  of  old  charges  had  been  restirred  by  a  group  of
office  malcontents.    The  Chicago Tribune  described  how  this
little  band  "for  weeks" had  trooped  the  corridors  of  Congress.
"In  some instances,"  it  said, "they  were  unable  to  get  past  the
guardians of  the  outer  offices  of  Senators  and  Representatives."
In  others  "the  sensational  nature  of  their  charges  aroused  in-
1   5   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   October  24,  7953
How  RCA  "Tipped"  The  Radar  Secret  to  The  Axis
credulity."    Finally  Senators  Hoey,  McCarran  and  McCarthy
and  Representative   Velde  had  interceded  to  get  their  charges
a  fresh  hearing.    The  upshot  was the  dismissal of  these  charges
by  the  Army  in  March,  1952, without  protest  by  McCarran,
Velde  or   McCarthy.
That  there  is  still  no  evidence  behind   those   closed   doors
was  indicated  by  the  curious  phrasing  of  the  statement  issued
last  Saturday  by  Harold  E.  Rainville,  administrative  assistant
to  Senator  Dirksen  of  Illinois,  who  sat  in  on  the  hearings  for
the  Senator.    Rainville  said  the  number  of  civilian  employes
who had invoked  the Fifth  amendment  "clearly  indicates  . . .
widespread  communism  in  one of  the  government's  most  secret
enterprises."    But  "without  a  confession  of  actual  theft  of
top  secret  radar- information,   we  yet  have  no  alternative  to
feeling  that  this  Communist  cell  was  not  just  a  social  affair."
This  backs into  an anti-climax.   Yet  this  is the  most  Rainville
could  say a  day  after  one  witness  was alleged  to  have  broken
down  and   "confessed."
Racial  Friction  at  Fort  Monmouth
The   real   story   dimly   visible  behind   the   scenes   is  this.
There  was  a  good  deal  of  covert  discrimination  against  Jews
in  engineering  before  the  war.    Many  obtained   jobs  in   the
Signal  Corps  in  the  30's  and  have  seniority  status  now.    The
complainants   seem  all  to  have  been  non-Jews.    There  was
friction,   suspicion   and   jealousy.    Julius  Rosenberg   worked
at  Fort  Monmouth  as  a  civilian "specialist  in  1942  and  1943.
There  is  little  social  life  at  Fort  Monmouth  and  the  Jewish
engineers   there   lived   an   ingrown   social   life.     Associations
natural   at  ,the  time  may  now  be  made  to   appear   sinister.
This  is  what   lies  behind  Rainville's  odd  phrasing,  "we   yet
have  no  alternative  to  feeling  that  this  Communist  cell, was
not  just  a  social  affair."
Witnesses  have  been  bullied  and  threatened,   given  virtual
three  degree  treatment  behind  the  closed  doors.    One  woman
witness  was  asked  whether  she did  not  deserve  to  get  the  same
treatment  as Ethel  Rosenberg.    One  man  was  asked,  "If  you
had  wanted  to  steal  secret  documents,  could  .you  have  done
so?"     When  he  replied,  "But   I  didn't   want   to  steal  secret
documents,"  McCarthy   insisted,   "But   if   you   had   wanted
to.  .  ."   One  frightened  witness  seems  to  have  denied  know-
ing  Rosenberg  when  they  in  fact  shared  the  same  car  pool.
McCarthy  has  abused  the  purpose  of  executive  sessions  by
giving out  (from  what  little  one can  learn)  fantastically  one-
sided   versions   of  what   occurred.     The   result   has   been   to
spread  a  nightmareish  fantasy  across  the  front   pages  of   the
nation's  press  with  McCarthy  as  the  hero.
What  Did  Happen  A  Decade  Ago
Senator  Potter's  stand-in  at  the  hearings,  his administrative
assistant,  Robert  L.  Jones,  said  the  evidence "should  have been
brought  out   ten   years   ago."     A   decade  ago   investigation
would  have  brought  out  the  fact  that  the  secret  of  radar had
been   disclosed   to   a   foreign   enemy  power,   and  that   secret
documents    had   disappeared.     While   McCarthy    is   chasing
bogeymen,   the  real  radar  scandal  was  one  of   the   least   dis-
cussed  scandals of  war-time  Washington.
The  last  time  it  was  told  the  press  generally  ignored   the
story,  and Hawkshaw  McCarthy,  already  in  the  Senate  and on
the  trail,  paid  no  attention  to  it.    The  story  may  be  found
spread   on   the   record   of   the   hearings   held   by   the   Senate
Labor  and  Education  committee  in  July,  1950,  on  ethics  in
government.     Drew  Pearson  was  the   witness.    This  is  the
story,  as  he  told  it  under  oath.
Radar  was  developed  before  the  war  by  the  Signal  Corps
at  Fort  Monmouth.    Its  development  was  surrounded  with  as
much  secrecy  as  the  atom  bomb.    Certain  employes  of  Radio
Corporation  of  America,  however,  were  trusted  with  access
to  the project.   In  1936  a civilian employe of  the  Signal  Corps,
William  D.  Hershberger,  who  had  played  an  important   role
in  the  development  of  radar,  resigned   from   the   Corps   and
went   to   work   for   RCA.     Two   years  later   RCA  filed  an
application  for  the  basic patent.on  radar.
That  was  in  1938,  after  Hitler  had  already  seized  Austria.
The  Army  took  steps  to  prevent  the  application  from  being
made  public  and  a  patent  from  being  granted  lest  the  secret
fall  into  the  hands  of  a  potential  enemy.    But  it  could   not
prevent  RCA  from  filing  patent   applications  abroad.    RCA
obtained  patents  in  Australia  and  New  Zealand,  which  pub-
lished   them.    RCA   also  filed  for   patents   in  Germany  and
Japan,  which  denied  the  applications.    But  when  war  came
both  Germany  and  Japan  used  radar.
Doubling  in  Brass—For  the  RCA
After  the  war,  the  Army  informed  the  patent   office  that
it  had  put  in  six  years  of  work  on  radar.    The  patent   office
was  of  the  opinion that  the  Army  was entitled  to  the  patent.
"Suddenly,"   Pearson  said,  "the   Army   cooled  off."    In  1946
the patent  was granted  RCA.    Several individuals  had  shuttled
back  and  forth  between  the  Signal  Corps  and  RCA:   Hersh-
berger;  David  Sarnoff,   chairman  of  RCA,   a  brigadier   gen-
eral  in  the  Signal  Corps  during  the  war;  and  Major   Harry
D.  Newton,  an  RCA  employe who  also  worked  at  Fort  Mon-
mouth.    Pearson  testified  that  after  the  war  in  1946  Newton
returned  to  Fort  Monmouth  "and  made  a  request  to  see the
files  on  secret  radar   developments."
Senator  DOUGLAS.  He  was  then  a civilian?
Mr.   PEARSON.  Yes.  Major  Newton   tried  to  get  a  civilian
employed  at  Fort   Monmouth,   James  Enright,   to  show  him
the  file,  but  Enright  called  military  intelligence,  which  put
Newton  on  the  carpet  for  a  couple  of  hours.    I  do not  think
he  was  permitted  to  see the  files,  but  those  files  mysteriously
disappeared.
According   to  Pearson,  there  was talk  of  prosecuting  RCA
in  connection  with   the  radar  patent.  Major   General  Harry
Ingles,  who  was  then  Chief  of   the  Signal  Corps,   retired   in
March,   1947,   to   take   an   important   position   with   RCA.
"After  General  Ingles  joined  RCA,"   Pearson  testified   before
the  Senate  committee,  "his  former  outfit,  the  Signal  Corps,
cooled  off regarding any  prosecution  of  the  Radio  Corporation.
The  Army  did  send  the  entire  radar  patent   matter  to  the
Justice  Department,  however,  where  it  has  lain  dormant  for
approximately  four  years."
No  McCarthy hounds  RCA.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  24, 1953
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and  Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  20$,  301
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates: Domestic, t5
a  year;  Canada,   Mexico  and   elsewhere  in   the   Western   Hemisphere,   $£;
England   and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by   1st  class  mail,  $15  by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   15  cents.   Tel.:   LI  4-7087.   Entered   as  Second   Class   mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
October  24,  1953Vol.  1,  No.  38
Around  The  Capitol
Peace
Farther  off.  Dulles  at  State  Department  Tuesday  on  his
return  from  London  had  the  cat-and-canary  look.   Churchill
is  the  canary.  As  Dulles told  the  New  York  Herald-Tribune
Forum  that  night  "there  were  initial  differences" at  London
but  "these  quickly  fell  into  the  background as  we immersed
ourselves  in  constructive  efforts."   This  extends  occupational
therapy  into the  domain  of diplomacy.  There must have been
a  sour  chuckle  for  Churchill  in  Dulles's  remark  in  the  same
speech  that  our  power is  now "so  large  that  there  is  danger
that  -we  seem to  use  it  for  coercion."   Sir  Winston,  according
to  Dulles, was  not  coerced.  He was  merely given  constructive
work  to  do, lest  idle  thoughts  turn  again  to  Malenkov  and
Moscow.
Moscow
One  of  the  main  objectives  of  Dulles's  policy—and  Ger-
many's  (the  two  are  growing  inextinguishable)—is  to  push
Russia   back   into   gloomy   Stalinist   isolation.    The   anti-
Churchill  blast  from  Moscow,  the  first  in  many months,  rep-
resents  a  victory  for  the  State  Department.  The Russians in
desperation  are  wooing France,  but  France  has  long  lost  the
habit  of initiative  in  European  affairs  (as  will Britain,  if  the
present  trend  continues).  The  State  Department  is feeding
out  a  line  intended even  to disparage  the  fake olive branch of
a  non-aggression treaty,  lest  this  somehow  relax  tension and
interfere  with  German  rearmament.   Dulles  is  prepared  to
subordinate  all  else  to  the  creation  of  an  effective  German-
American  military  alliance.
Korea
It  will be no loss if  Korean peace talks  are  never  held  since
there  is  not the  faintest  chance of an  agreement which would
satisfy   Rhee  and  his  Congressional  supporters.   To  hold  a
conference  under these  conditions  would  merely be to  drama-
tize  failure,  to  exacerbate  East-West  relations  and  to  make
the  inevitable  Rhee walkout  (with  ourselves  in  his  wake)  a
means  of heightening world tension and  creating  a  new crisis
atmosphere.  The meaning of the  Dulles line that we will only
discuss  broader   Asian  issues  if  the  Korean   conference   suc-
ceeds  is both  simple and  subtle.  This means that  the  Chinese,
who  might  be  ready  to bargain  Korea  against  Formosa  and
a broader  settlement, will  be asked  to  relinquish  North  Korea
to  Rhee with  no  assurance  on these  other  issues.  In  leaving
no  room  for  negotiation,  we ensure  failure  in  advance.
Israel
The  new  crisis  marked  by  the  suspension  of  economic  aid
to  Israel  is  to  be  read  in  the  light  of  the  familiar  Middle
Eastern  patterns,  which  have  not  been  changed  by  Israel's
achievement  of independence.  If  concessions  have  to  be  made
to  the  Arabs,  the  Jewish  community  in  the  Middle  East  is
the  easy  expendible.  The  State  Department  takes  the  side of
France  against  the  Arabs  in  Morocco  and  of  Britain  against
the  Arabs  on  Suez.  It  must  take  the  Arab  side  somewhere.
In  the  old days before independence, the  Mandatory  power
always  managed  to  overlook  Arab  excesses  and  bear   down
hard  on Jewish  resistance.  So it  is  today.   Since  the  Tripar-
tite  Declaration   of  May,  1950,  there  have  been  866  armed
Arab  attacks  across  the  border  and  421  Israeli  killed  and
injured.    All  this  was  regarded   with   characteristic    equa-
nimity  but  the  reprisal  raid  against  Kibya  is  greeted  with
horror  and  Israel  is  brought before the  bar  of  the  UN.
The  Jordan  water  issue  is  inflated  beyond all  reason.   The
Israeli  are  digging  a  channel  to  be  used  ultimately  for  the
development  of  hydroelectric  power  in  the  Huleh  valley.  No
water  has  yet  been  diverted.   When  it  is, the  water  will flow
back  again  into  the  Jordan.   The  river flows through  Israeli
territory  in  that  area  and  Israel  is  prepared  to  safeguard
Arab interests in the  operation.
The  State  Department  crowd  is  irked  because  it  had  been
working   secretly    on   another   TVA  plan   for   the   Jordan,
Litani  and  Yarmuk  river  systems.   It  wants  an  international
setup  under  its   own  aegis  in  the  hope  of  playing  politics
with  water  as  a  means  of  appeasing  the  Arabs.   This,  too,
repeats   a  pattern  familiar  under  the  Mandate.   The  Arab
States  are  hostile  to  any  water   scheme,  because  it  would
involve  recognition  of  Israel  and  cooperation  with  it.   In  the
meantime,  the  Israeli  have  been  going  ahead  on their  own—
just  as  the  Yishuv  used  to  do under  the  British,  who were
exasperated  in  just  the  same  way.
RIP —IWO
The  International  Workers  Order  suffered  its  death  blow
this  week when the  Supreme Court refused  to hear  its  appeal
from  an  order  of  dissolution  by  the  New  York  State  Super-
intendent  of  Insurance.   A  benefit  society  with  162,000 mem-
bers  and  $6,500,000  in  assets,  with  a  margin  of  safety  over
statutory  requirements   of  40.37  percent,   was   ordered   dis-
solved  purely  as  "a  political  hazard."  The words  quoted  are
those  of  the  Superintendent  of  Insurance.   The  case  estab-
lishes  a  new high  water  mark  in  guilt  by  association.   What
if  a  reform  government some  day were to  revoke the  charter
of  a  bank  because  it  did  not  like  the  political  opinions  of  the
bank's  officers?
"EMOTIONAL  APPEAL  HELD  KEY  TO  SALES"
Said  the  headline  on the financial  page  last  Wednesday.  So what  I  can I  do  for  an  emotional  appeal?   Print  a
picture  of  my  children  barefoot  in  the  snow  outside  the  U.S.  Treasury?   Those renewals  have  started  coming  in—with  some
of  the  kindest  and  most  heartening  letters  any  newspaperman   ever  received—but  there  are  only  12  shopping  weeks  left
before  Vol.   1 ends.   Those  of  you  who  can will  save  the  editor  and  publisher  a  lot  of  headaches  and  expense  by  getting
your  renewal  in  now.   And  don't  forget  you  can  get  a  2-year  sub  for  $9  or  send  the  Weekly   as  a  gift  to  a  friend  for
another  $4.   Use the  blank  on  the  reverse  side  TODAY  and  many  thanks.                                       —I.  F.  STONE
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

Z.  P.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  24,  1953
J  EN  N  INGS   PERRY'S    PAGE
Both  Sides  Ought  to  Persuade  POWS to  go  Home
Life   Magazine  this week has given us  the  pictures  of  twenty
American  prisoners  of  war  in  Korea  who  have  told  their  cap-
tors  they  do  not  want  to  be  repatriated.   There  is  nothing
unusual  in  the  appearance  of  these  men;  a  "composite" pic-
ture  of  the  twenty  would  very  closely  resemble  the   typical
young  American  male of  the  shirt  ads,  the  hair  slickum  ads,
the  Armed  Services  recruiting  posters  with  which  three wars
—and  the  times  between—have made us  all familiar.   Looking
at  these  faces  it  is  difficult  for  any  American  not  to  echo  the
puzzled  inquiry  of  the  father  of  one of  the  prisoners, addressed
to  him  viva  voce  by  a  recording  arranged  by  the  Veterans of
Foreign  Wars:  "Son, what on  earth  is  the  matter  with  you?"
The  VFW  recordings  have  been  made and  sent  to  Korea  in
the  hope  of  conveying  to  the  prisoners,  Life  tells  us, "the
enormity   of  renouncing-their  own  country."   Conceivably
these  messages from  the  families  of  the  prisoners  if  permitted
to  go  through  will  be  more  effective  than  the  arguments  our
explanation   teams   make  at   Panmunjom.   In   any   case   the
"reconversion"  of  any  one  of  these  prisoners  will  be  regarded
by  his  countrymen  as a happy event,  a natural  and  wholesome
thing,  and  the  best  possible solution  of  the  strange  "reluctant
prisoner"  problem  that  has  risen'  from   the  strange   war  in
Korea.
What  is amazing  is  our  evident  unwillingness  to  apply  ex-
actly  the  same  reasoning  to  the  situation  of  the  far   greater
number  of  prisoners  in  our  own  hands  who  have   declared
that  they  do  not  want  to  go  home.   Whether  or  not  as  the
other  side charges we have "invented"  obstacles  to  their  effort
to  convince  these  prisoners  to  change  their  minds  and  accept
repatriation,  we  certainly  have  gone  to  great  lengths  to  pro-
tect  these  prisoners  from  high  pressure  arguments  from  their
own  countrymen  and  have  been  quick  to  applaud  their  dem-
onstrations  against exposure even  to  the  explanations  promised
in  the  truce  agreement.
Yet   plainly   if   the   renunciation   of   one's   country   is  an
"enormity,"  it  is  enormous  for  others  than  Americans.   The
North  Koreans who do not  want  to  go back  to  North  Korea,
the  Chinese  who  vociferously  demand  to  be  sent  to  Formosa
instead  of  back  to  their  homes have an  attitude which  should
be  as inexplicable  and  as unfortunate to  us,  and  to  their  own
people,  as  the  attitude  of  our  lad  who  chooses not  to  be  sent
back  to  Arkansas.  And  simply  by  conceding  the  non-exclu-
siveness of  our  own  feeling  toward  our  own.  We  ought  to  be
able  to  realize  that  the  best  possible  solution  for  the  whole
exchange  problem  would  be  for  all  prisoners,  theirs  and  ours,
to  decide to  go  back  to  the  villages,  the  farms  and  the  fam-
ilies  from  which  they  were  dragged  to  war.
The  truth  is,  I  am  afraid,   that  we  still  are  trying  to  eke
some  sort  of  token  of  "victory"  out  of  the  tragic  struggle  in
Korea,  and  that  our  concern  is far  more for  turning  the  turn-
coating  of  these  recalcitrants  in  our  bag  of  PWs  to  propa-
ganda   effect   than  for   the  fate  of   the  prisoners  themselves.
Our   purpose  in   this   confounds  our   ordinary   concepts  of
"right"  and  "wrong."   Some of  these  prisoners  deserted  to  us
on  the field of battle, surely  a crime  in a soldier: we  rationalize
it  as a  "flight  to  freedom."   We  professed  a  mission  of  libera-
tion:  thus  the  renunciation  of  country  by  men  of  the  other
side,  which  in  our  own  we  proclaim  an  "enormity,"  must  be
seen  as a virtuous  choice.
The   acid   test  of   our   fellow  feeling   for   these  freedom-
choosing  prisoners  would  be  a proposal  that  they  all  be  settled
not  in  Syngman  Rhee's  parlous  domain  nor  in  far-away For-
mosa but  on  the  really-free  soil of  Australia—or  California.
On  the  completion of  the  prisoner  exchange  depends in  large
degree  the  success  of  the  peace negotiations.  This  is  the  great
goal.,  Whatever  would expedite  the  exchange would  favor  the
peace.   Instead  of  bickering  over  the  competing  explanations
to  the  prisoners,  and  seeking  to  make propaganda of  the  PWs'
decision  to  stay or  to  return,  both  sides  should  join  in  helping
the  prisoners  to  choose  to  go  home.   What  is wrong  is  not  so
much  what  is  the  matter  with  the  reluctant  young  men of
either   side  as  what  is  the  matter  with  the  rest  of  us  who
assure  that  loyalty  to  home must  and  should  mean  less  to  the
son  of  one  land  than  to  the  son  of  another.
PLEASE  RENEW NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name                          ...
Street
City
_    Zone  .._._   State __ ........
Enter  thi»  gift  sub   for  $4 more  (money  enclosed):
JT«)  Nun*
Strwt
atr        ........
.     Zone ___  State. __
10-24-6S
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED