I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953feb07.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive:  "Suppressed" Red  Cross Reports on  POW  Killings,  Page 2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I  NUMBER 4
FEBRUARY  7,  1953       7-
WASHINGTON,  D. C15  CENTS
Formosan  Flea  and  Chinese  Elephant
Only  the ultra-respectable Washington  Star  told  the
truth  about  John  Foster  Dulles's  first  address  as  Secretary of
State.    The  Star  spoke  of  his  "gross  oversimplification   and
wishful  thinking."   The prize example was his hint that  Eisen-
*iower  "will  find  the  ways"  to  make  the  enemy  "change  his
mind"  about  Korea  and  Indo-China.   The  remark  tantalized
Capitol  Hill.   When  Dulles  met two days later  with  Congres-
sional  leaders  of  both  parties  just  before  he  left  for  Europe,
he  revealed  what the  new Administration  had  in  mind.    Next
day the  news leaked.    The  wraps were to  be taken off Chiang.
The  notion  that  the  Korean  war can be  ended  by  "sicking"
the   Formosan  flea  on  the  Chinese  elephant   reflects   an  ex-
uberant  childishness  for  which  the  older  hands  of  the  State
Department  must blush.   Only a few weeks ago the  Brookings
Institution,  scholarly  arm  of  American conservatism,  published
a  book  on  the  Formosan  problem  by  Joseph  W.  Ballantine,
long Director  of the  Department's  Office  of  Far Eastern  Affairs,
and  as  ideologically  impeccable  as  a  D.A.R.  soir4e.    Ballan-
tine  permitted  himself  an  astringent  footnote  on  the  delusions
so soon  to turn  up  in the  thinking  of  the  new  Administration.
The  assumption,  Ballantine  wrote,  "that  Chiang  Kai-shek
is  ready  and  eager  to  take his  legions  to fall  upon  the  Chinese
Communists  and  is being  restrained  from  doing  so only by  the
interposition  of  the  U.  S. Seventh  Fleet  would  be  fallacious".
Ballantine  said  Chiang  did  not  have  the   resources  for  an
amphibious  invasion  of  the  mainland  and  declared  "there  is
nothing  in  Chiang's  past  record  to  suggest  that  he  would  em-
bark  on  such  an  undertaking  unless  his  venture were  substan-
tially  underwritten by the  United  States or  the  United  Nations
or  both".    Air  and  sea  raids  on  a  hit-and-run  basis  "could
produce no  decisive results",  Ballantine warned.   "Their chief
effect  would  be  to  intensify  Chinese  Communist  hostility   to
their  authors  and  drive  the  Chinese  people,  especially  those
suffering  from  the  raids,  into  the  arms  of  the   Communists".
The way in which Eisenhower unveiled the new policy
to  Congress  was  no  doubt  regarded  by  its  authors  as
devilishly  clever.   The  new President  said  he  was  "issuing
instructions  that  the  Seventh  Fleet  no  longer  be  employed  to
shield  Communist  China".    After  that  sentence,  one  half  ex-
pected  to  hear  that  we  were  also  shutting  off  Marshall  Plan
aid  to  Mao  Tse-tung.    The   effort   to  make  public   opinion
swallow  such  feeble   stuff   must  add  a  slight   nausea  to   the
general  alarm.
Several  days  before  the  President's  message,  Chiang's  rep-
resentative  in  the  United  Nations  made  a  fiery  speech  saying
"give us the  tools"  for  "an  independent  offensive"  against  the
"puppet  regime  on  the  mainland",  but  he  cooled   off  very
quickly  once  permission   came.    "Invasion  by  Chiang  Held
Not  Imminent"  was the New York  Times  headline  over a new
interview with that  same Dr.  T.  F. Tsiang,  and the  news  from
Formosa  was in  the  same key.
.1  7
It must be remembered that the Korean  war was immediately
advantageous  for  Chiang  because  it  diverted  northward  the
troops  the  Communists had  prepared  for  the  invasion  of For-
mosa.    He  has  no  wish  to  divert  them  back  again.    Chiang
has opposed  a cease-fire in Korea on the ground  that this  would
merely   encourage  "new Red   aggression"   elsewhere.     The
"elsewhere"  he  fears  is  Formosa.    What  he  wanted  was  to
send  a token  force to  Korea, with  which  he  could  buy  himself
a  full  place  in  the  Western   alliance  and  commit  it  to  war
against  Communist China.   There  is no reason to  believe  he is
anxious to  expose his Formosan  base  to  attack in  order  to  end
the  war  further  North  which  was  his  salvation  in  1930 and
remains his  last  hope  of  a  free  ride  back  to  power.
From the  standpoint  of our  own  forces  in  Korea,  even
large  scale  attacks  on  the  mainland  from  Formosa  would  not
be  enough  to  change  the  situation  on  the  38th  Parallel  and
the  Yalu.    The  Chinese  have  been  mobilized   and   equipped
since  1950  to  the  point  where  they  can  maintain  the  Korean
stalemate and still  defend their  coastal  areas.   We  are  pointing
a popgun at Peiping's  head.   The  new policy offers  a maximum
of   provocation  with  a  minimum  of  real  annoyance  to   the
enemy.   As psychological  warfare,  it  may be  effective,  indeed
is  already  proving  effective,  but  in  the  wrong  places.    Every-
where  in  Asia and  Europe it  has upset  our  friends.
The  Japanese  are  happy  to  do  the  profitable  business  the
Korean  war  has  brought  them,  but  have  no  wish  to  be  en-
gulfed  in a widened conflict.   The  Burmese are afraid  the new
policy may encourage the  unwelcome Nationalists  on their ter-
ritory  to  raid  across  the  Chinese  border.    The  Indians  and
Indonesians  have  feared  from  the  beginning  that  American
power  would  gradually  be  committed  to  reconquering  China
for   Chiang.
The  utmost  candor  on  foreign  policy  is  promised  by
Dulles  and  Eisenhower,  but  the  key  question  was  left
unanswered.   "Members  of  Congress,"  the  Associated  Press
reported  after  the  State  of  the  Union  address,  "were  greatly
interested  to  learn  What  would  be  the  use, if  any,  of  the  7th
Fleet,  in  the   event  the  Chinese  Communists  attacked For-
mosa".   Western  Europe will  be less patient  than  Congress  in
demanding   the   answer.    Churchill   has   already   done  some
premonitory  grumbling  about  the  folly  of  leading  U.  S.  and
UN  armies into  wandering  endlessly  about  in the  vast  expanse
of  China.   Here Sevan  and  Churchill  see  eye to  eye.
Everywhere  in  Western  Europe   neutralism   and   fear   of
American  rashness  will  be intensified.   The  blackmail  implicit
in  the  Dulles-Stassen  tour  of  inspection  will  add  to  the  grow-
ing   strain   on  the  Atlantic  Alliance,   on   whose   breakdown
Stalin  counts.    The  errors  of  the  new  American  policy  are  so
consistent  as  to  appear  calculated.    One  could  almost  suspect
that  under  the  Republicans  the  Communists  really  had  in-
filtrated  die  State  Department.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly,  February   7,  1953
"Suppressed" Red  Cross  Reports  on  POW  Disorders
The  United  Nations  Command  in   Tokyo
on  January  29  released  a  five  page  statement
and  a  50-page intelligence  report  charging  that
riots  in  which  more than  200  prisoners  of  war  .
were  killed  in  UN  camps  last  year  had  been
"deliberately  planned  and  master-minded"  by
the  top  Communist armistice  negotiators.
Similar  charges  had  been. made  before   but
never  in  so  official   and  formal  a  manner.    It
was the first time that responsibility for  the  dis-
orders  had  been  pinned  directly  on  Gen.  Nam
II,  the  senior  Communist representative at  the
truce talks,  and^his deputy, Gen.  lee  Sang Cho.
The  charges  may  be  intended  to  lay  a  basis
for  calling  off  the  truce  talks  altogether,  .and
for   full-scale  resumption  of  the  war,  perhaps
on   a  wider   basis   than   before.    The   cabled
news  summaries  from  Tokyo  were  sensational
but  tantalizingly  vague.    Until  the  release  and
the  intelligence   report   are  made  available  in
full  text,  judgment must  be  suspended.
But  the  charges would  be  more  credible if
it  were  not  for  the  fact  that  representatives  of
the  Red  Cross  investigated  these  disorders  on
the  spot  last  year  and  made a  series  of  reports.
In  these  the  UN  Command  was  criticized  for
mishandling  and  mistreating  prisoners  of  war.
That  there  had  been  a  series  of  such  investi-
gations  and  reports  was  disclosed only recently,
when  the  International  Committee  of  the  Red
Cross  published  two  volumes  of  documents  in
Geneva  on  "The   Korean  Conflict".    They  ap-
peared  last  December.    A  copy  has  just  been
obtained  by  this  weekly  from  the  Red  Cross  in
Geneva  after  the  editor's  curiosity  was  piqued
by   an   obscure   press   release  put   out   by   the
State  Department  on  December  22.
This  was  the  second  time  in  little  more
than  half  a  year  that  Red Cross  material bear-
ing  on  the  actual  conditions surrounding  POW
camp  disorders  has  been  published  in  Geneva
but    effectively    suppressed   insofar   as   public
opinion  in  the  United  States is  concerned.  The
first   occasion   was   last   May   when  Reuters
briefly   reported   that   the   April   issue  of   the
Revue   Internationale  de   la   Croix   Rouge   in
Geneva  had  carried  the  report  of  a  Red  Cross
inquiry  into  the  "incident"  of  February  18  last
on  Koje  Island.    At  that  time  one  American
soldier  and  69 Korean  POWs were  killed,  and
142  prisoners  injured.
The  editor  of  this  weekly  translated  the  Red
Cross  report  from  the  French  original  and pub-
lished  the  full  text  in  his  column in  the  New
York  Daily  Compass  last  May  27  after  his  at-
tention  was  called  to  it  by  an  item  in  .the Lon-
don  Diary  of  the  New   Statesman  and  Nation
for  May  24.    That  report  on  the  Koje  Island
killings  of  February  18  and  the  two  new  vol-
umes  make it  difficult  to  believe that the  POW
disorders  were  simply a  Communist  plot.
Another  obstacle  lies  in  the  nature  of  the
prisoners  involved  in  the  February  18  affair.
Document  No.  238  dated  December  27,   1951,
reports  to  the  Red  Cross  "certain   confidential
information    received  .  .  .  from   the  Depart-
ment  of  the  Army  of  the  United  States".    In-
vestigation  of  prisoners had  "thus  far disclosed
the  presence  of  37,500 persons whose detention
is   attributable   to   various   accidental  circum-
stances  attendant  upon  the  confusion of  hostili-
ties   and   who   were  inaccurately  classified  as
prisoners  of  war".    These  were  almost  entirely
South  Koreans.   "They  have  been  redassified,"
the  report  to  the  Red  Cross  said,  "as  civilian
internees  and  are  segregated  in  camps  distinct
and  apart  from  the  prisoners  of  war".
If   disorders  were  due  solely  to  Communist
fanatics  in   secret  touch  with   the  Communist
command,  one  would  not  expect  trouble  with
South  Koreans  accidentally captured in  the war.
But  as  a matter  of  fact  the  worst  disorder,  that
of   February  18,  occurred  in   camps  on  Koje
holding   these  very  same  "civilian   internees".
The  report  published  by  the  Red  Cross  last
May  after  the  February  killings  said  that  some
of  these  internees  had  asked  to  be  sent  back  to
North  Korea  after  the  armistice  and  that  the
camp   authorities   thereupon   ordered   a   new
screening.    A  camp  trusty  told  the  Red  Cross
delegates  that  the  internees  "would  not  allow
themselves  to be questioned  anew,  alleging  that
pressure had  been brought  to bear on  them dur-
ing  their  first  interrogation".    The  Red  Cross
delegates  warned  the  commander  against  an  at-
tempt  to  rescreen  by  force.    The  killings  oc-
curred  when armed  troops  moved  into  the camp
without  warning  at  4  a.m.  on  February  18  in
an   effort   to   force  each  of  these   "civilian   in-
ternees" to be rescreened  individually.    Accord-
ing  to   the   camp   trusty,   the   internees   were
"seized  with  fear,  thinking they  were  all  going
to  be killed.   The  internees  went  out  to  defend
themselves  and  to  see what  was going  on.   The
troops  attacked  them,  using  their  arms".
That  interrogations were not  always  peace-
ful  efforts  to  poll  the  opinions  of  prisoner*
is  indicated  by  the  first  Red  Cross   complaints
recorded  in  the  new  volumes.   Document  No.
220  dated  November  19,  1951,  is a letter  to  the
State  Department   enclosing  copies   of  reports
on  visits  by Red  Cross  delegates  to  six different
POW  camps.    The  texts  of  the  reports  them-
selves  are  not  given   but  the  letter  refers  to
"the  serious  and  regrettable  incidents"  in  them.
The  letter  calls  attention  among  other  things  to
"ill-treatment  of  POW  during  interrogation  by
Republic  of  Korea  guards".
The  Red  Cross  delegates  seemed  to  acquire
a  poor  opinion  of  the  Korean  guards  employed
in  the  POW  camps.  Document  No.  341 dated
March  13,  1952,  refers  to  an  incident  of  Feb-
ruary  13  "where  according  to  the  statement of
the  Enclosure Commander a  ROK-guard  posted
outside  Compound  76 killed  a  POW  inside  the
Compound using  his firearm without any  serious
reason"   and  says  this  "shows  once  more   the
danger   of   serious   incidents   between   ROK-
guards and POWs."   It  is  suggested  that ROK
guards  not   be   used   in   handling   Communist
POWs  and  that  "Katusas"  (apparently  some
kind  of  Korean  guards)   "who  are  unable  to
refrain   themselves  from   provoking  incidents"
should  be  transferred.
Document  No.  349  dated  May  12,  1952,  is
an  aide  memoire  from   the  Red  Cross  to  the
American   consul   general   in   Geneva   dealing
with  the  "grave  occurrences"  in  Camp  No.  1
on  Koje-do  on  March   13  and  April   10  when
prisoners  were  killed.    The   Red  Cross   says,
"In  the  dual  circumstances  it  appears  that  the
firing  constitutes  a  violation  of  Article  42  of
the   Geneva   convention   of   1949".    The  Red
Cross  made  two  recommendations.     One  was
that  South  Koreans  be  withdrawn as guards.
The  other  recommendation  throws  none
too  complimentary  a  light  on  the  "political
education" of  POWi in  the  UN  camps.  The
Red  Cross  asked  "Avoidance  of  political  dem-
onstrations   of  any  kind,  and  in  particular   of
the-continuance  of  the  political  program  of  the
C.I.E.  for  the  education  of  prisoners  of   war".
The  document  adds,  "Political  questions do not
in  general  concern  the  International  Committee
of  the  Red  Cross,  but  it  thought  it  should  raise
the  present  issue  in  view  of  its  humanitarian
aspects,   political   activities   being   a   constant
source  of  incidents".
Serious  charges  against  the  UN  Command  in
handling  sick  POWs  in  a  hospital  compound
are  made  in  Document  No.   351,  dated  May
24,  1951.    This  is  a memorandum to  the  com-
mander  in  chief  of  the  UN  forces.    It  declares
"the  withholding   of  food  and  water  from  the
Prisoners  of  War  in  three  hospital   compounds
of  UN  POW  Enclosure  No.  10  constitutes  an
infringement  of  article  26  of  the  Geneva  con-
vention"  which  forbids  "collective   disciplinary
measures  affecting food".  The  Red Cross memo
adds,  "The  infringement  is all  the  more  serious
as this measure  was applied to hospital  patients
(post-operative  cases,  tuberculosis  cases,  mental
cases  and  amputees)".
More  drastic  measures  seem  also  to have been
employed.    "Furthermore,"    the    memo    con-
tinues,  "concussion  grenades  were  used   against
patients  in compound  No. 3 ...    which  caused
at  least  one  death  and  several  wounded".    The
memo  insists  that  the  Geneva  convention  re-
quires  "the  most  humane  methods  when  deal-
ing  with  hospital  patients"  and  ends  "There-
fore  the  Chief  of  the  delegation  of  the  Interna-
tional   Committee   of   the   Red  Cross   has   the
honor  to  request  from  the  Commander in  Chief
to  refrain in  future from  making  use of  coercive
measures  of  the  kind  mentioned  above."
The  reply  from  General  Mark  W.  Clark  is
given  in  Document  No.   353,  dated  June  12,
1952.     The   prisoners   in   the  hospital   com-
pounds  are  accused  of  flagrantly  defying  orders.'
The  denial  of  food  and  water  to  the   rebellious
is  defended  as  "a  much  more  lenient  step  than
... the immediate  application  of armed  force".
When   force  proved   necessary   "only   tear  gas
and  concussion  grenades"  were  used  and   "the
relatively  few  casualties  incurred  is  highly  in-
dicative  of  the  efficient   manner  in  which  our
disciplined  troops  conducted  this  action".
At  this  point  the  Communist  plot  theory
made  its  debut.    "It  has  become  increasingly
evident,"  General   Clark  went  on,  "that   such
incidents,   deliberately   planned   by   hard-core
Communist  leaders,  have  been  designed   solely
to  embarrass the  United  Nations  Command and
to  affect  current  armistice  negotiations".    The
theory  recalls  the  familiar  one  which  makes  its
appearance  when  pickets  are  beaten  in  strikes.
How  often  it  is  implied   that  the  strikers  de-
liberately  went  and  got  themselves  beaten  up
in  order  to  embarrass  the  police!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   February  7,  1953
L  F.  Stone's    Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  weekly except the  last  two weeks
of  August  at  Room  225,  1416 F  St.,   N.W.,
Washington   4,  D.  C.    Subscription  rates:
Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and
elsewhere  in  the Western  Hemisphere,  $6;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by
1st class  mail,  $1)  by air;  for  Israel,  Asia,
Australia   and   Africa,   $10   by   first   class
mail,  $20  by  air  mail.    Single  copy,  13
cents.     Contents   covered   by   copyright.
Telephone,  STerling  3-0938.    Application
for  entry as Second Class matter is  pending.
Vol.  1, No.  4
February  7,   1953
Atomic  Crisis
Washington,  D.  C.
The  Trumans  are  a  long-lived  family  and
the   ex-President   in   his   sixties   is  developing
into  the  nation's  foremost  enfant   terrible.  His
offhand  statement  that  he  is  not  convinced  the
Russians  have  the  atom  bomb  was  the  biggest
explosion  here  in  Washington  since  Hiroshima.
If   intended   as  psychological  warfare,  it   was
magnificent.   The  Russians must figure that  any
government  Macchiavellian  enough  to  pretend
to  act  as  goofily  as  the  American  government
does  must  be  up  to  super-sinister  tricks.
Those  of  us  who  know  official  Washington's
capacity  for  confusion will  wonder.   The  orig-
inal White  House  announcement in  September,
1949,  spoke  of  an  atomic  explosion.    General
Groves  who  was  head  of  the  A-bomb  project
during  the war  chimes in to say that  nuclear  ex-
plosions  in  Russia  do  not  prove  "they  have  the
bomb  in  a   workable  form".     Mr.   Truman's
actual  words  were   "I   am  not   convinced   the
Russians  have  achieved  the  know-how  to  put
the  complicated  mechanism  together   to  make
the  A-bomb work".  He  added,  pointedly,  "no-
body  knows  anything  about   it".
In  a  rationally  organized  world,  the   possi-
bility  that  the  Russians  do  not  yet  have  the
bomb  in  full  workable  form  would  be  seized
on  as  occasion  for  another  attempt  to  outlaw
the  device  before  we  and  they  blow  ourselves
to  smithereens.   But  in  the  U.  S. as now  organ-
ized,  Mr.  Truman's   remark  must  have  seemed
terrifyingly  dangerous  to a  large  number  of im-
portant   people.  It   might   almost  be  said,  as
it  was  said  of  God,  that  if  there  is  no  Russian
atomic  bomb,  it   will   be  necessary   to   invent
one.
The  American  vested  interest   in  a  Russian
atomic  bomb  is  large.    Thousands  of  American
jobs  and  careers  now  depend  upon  it.    Almost
three  billion  dollars  in  the  new  budget  is  al-
located  to  the  manufacture of  the  A-bomb  and
its  successor,  the  H-bomb.  Nobody  knows  how
many  billions  more  are  being  spent  on  planes
to  deliver  the  bomb,  naval  carriers  to  deliver
the  planes,  FBI  men  to  guard  the  secret  and
baksheesh for  the  natives of such primitive  areas
as Morocco and  Britain  in  which  we have  estab-
lished  atomic  bases.
The   political    and   financial   consequences
which  would  follow  on  the  discovery  that  the
Russians  do  not  have  the  bomb  after  all  are
too  terrible  to  contemplate.    As  a  measure  of
precaution  we  suggest  that  our  most  hush-hush
counter-espionage  apparatus  be  alerted  at  once
for  its  most daring  mission. The  security of  the
United  States,  indeed  of  the  whole  free  world,
men,   now  depends   on   delivering   the   secret,
with  sample  and  blueprint  at  Stalin's   door.
One  for  The  Voice  of  America
While  we're  on  the  subject,  the  new  ad-
ministration    could   win   no   greater    political
victory than  by granting  clemency to  the Rosen-
bergs.     In   Eastern   Europe,   commutation  of
sentence  broadcast   by  the   Voice   of  America
would  provide  a  striking  contrast  to  the  trials
in  which  so  many  Communists  are  being  tried
on  the  charge  that  (like  the  Rosenbergs)  were
of   "bourgeois   Jewish"   origin.   In    Western
Europe,  clemency  would  demonstrate  that   the
U.   S.  was  still   capable  of  just,  humane  and
moderate  action  even where  the  A-bomb is  con-
cerned.
Whatever   else   one   may   think   about   the
trial  and  the  verdict,  there  can  be  no  doubt
among   civilized   men   that   the   sentence  was
barbarous.  The  motives  of  the  American  gov-
ernment  in  commuting  the  sentence  would  be
distorted by hostile  propaganda, as magnanimity
is always misrepresented  by one's  enemies.    But
in  the  long  run  no calumny could  mar the  shin-
ing  serenity  of  such an  action.
Those  Diabolic  Doctors
We   strongly   endorse   the   appeal   made  by
Dr.  Aryeh  L. Kubovy, recently declared  persona
non  grata  as  Israeli  Minister   to  Czechoslova-
kia  and  Poland,  that  physicians  throughout  the
Western  world   ask  the  Soviet   government   to
permit  foreign  observers  to  be  present  at   the
forthcoming   public  trial  of   the   nine  doctors
recently  arrested  in  Moscow.    The  charges  on
their  face  are  too hideous  to be  credible;  melo-
drama   sometimes   occurs   in   real   life  but   is
properly  suspect  until  fully  proven.    The  trial
must  shame  and  hurt  the  Jews  of  the   Soviet
world,  whatever  its  motives.  Those  of  us  who
are  friends  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  fight  for
the  rights  of  Communists  have  a  right  to  de-
mand  that  foreign   medical   and  legal   experts
be  allowed  to  attend.  The  Nazis  even  allowed
foreign  counsel   to  participate   in  the   Leipzig
trial.  The  Soviet  Union  owes  it  to  itself  and  to
the  world  socialist  movement  at  least  to  allow
qualified   and   independent   foreign   observers.
Before  some of  my  readers  fly  off  the  handle
about  this  suggestion,  I  ask them  in  all  honesty
to  look  again  at  the  Rosenberg  case.   The  trial
and  its  atmosphere  were  far  from  fair  but  the
Rosenbergs  had  counsel  of  their  own,  were  not
subject  to  torture  for  the  extraction  of  confes-
sions,  were  allowed  to  communicate  with  their
friends.    Despite   the  anti-Communism  of   the
American   government.   Communists   were   al-
lowed  to  organize  and  agitate   freely   for   the
Rosenbergs,  even  to  picket  the  White   House
without  being  molested.    We  independents  of
the  Left  still  smart from  the  arrogant  and  high-
handed  way  Anna  Louise  Strong  was  branded
a  spy  without  proof  after  a  lifetime  of  service
to  the  world  working  class,   and   cast  out  of
Moscow  like  a  dog.    The  case  against  the  doc-
tors  is  too  much  to  swallow  without  some  in-
pendent  means  of  checking  the  procedure  and
the  verdict.  The  implications  and  repercussions
for  the  Jews  of  Eastern  Europe  are  too  serious
for  silence.   The  Soviet  Union  owes  it  to  itself
and  to  its  friends  to  demonstrate  that  this  is
a  real  case,  and  not  a  frame-up.
Thank  You,  Daniel Webster
We  can  say  of  ourselves  much  as  Daniel  Webster  said  of  his  alma  mater  in  the  famous  Dart-
mouth  College  case,  "It  is  only  a  small  paper,  sir,  but there  are those  who love  it".   (There are
also,  we suspect, those  who will  denounce it  alternate  issues,  when  one  of  their  own sacred  cows  haa
its tootsies stepped upon). We passed 6,000 circulation with the  third  issue, but need a few thousand
more  to  be  comfortable  and  to  expand  a  bit.  As  a pepper-upper we  offer  a  free  copy  of  my  forth-
coming  book,  "The   Truman  Era",  with every  two  subscriptions.  The  book  is a collection of  my best
pieces  from  PM,  the  New  York  Star  and  the  Compass  during  the  post-war  years  and  will  sell  at
$3.50.  Those  who  would  rather  can  buy  it  through  the  Weekly  in  advance  of  publication  at  #2
a  copy,  or get  a  one  year  subscription  and  the  book  for  £6.
I.  F.  Stone
2  *
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  7,  1953
Counter  Offensive  for  Civil  Liberty
One happy  by-product  of  the  Republican victory was
the  displacement of  Pat  McCarran as chairman of  the  powerful
Senate  Judiciary  Committee  by  William   Langer   of   North
Dakota,  the  only  Republican  who  fought  to  uphold  President
Truman's  veto  of  the  McCarran  Internal  Security  Act.    This
battle-scarred  veteran  of  the  old  Non-Partisan   League,  who
campaigned  for  La Follette in  1924,  is the  relic of  heroic  days
in  the  history  of  American  progressivism  and  may yet  play  a
great  role  as the  defender  of  fundamental American principles
in  these  critical  years.    Langer  dramatized  the  significance of
his  succession  to  the  Judiciary  chairmanship  by  picking  the
conference  in  New York last  week-end of  the  Emergency Civil
Liberties  Committee  for  his  first  public  speech  since  the  elec-
tion.
The  speech  made  news.   Senator  Langer  announced  that  he
was  implementing  a  forgotten  provision  of  the  La  Follette-
Monroney  Act  of   1946,  giving  the  Judiciary  Committee  ex-
clusive  jurisdiction in  the  field  of  civil  liberties.  He  disclosed
that  he had  appointed  a civil  liberties  subcommittee with  him-
self   as  chairman.    The  other  members  will  be  Dirksen  of
Illinois  and  Hendrickson  of  New  Jersey  from  the  Republican
side,  with  Kefauver  of  Tennessee  and  Hennings  of  Missouri
from  the  Democratic  side.    The  Senate  Judiciary  Committee,
which concentrated on destroying civil liberty under  McCarran,
will  now provide  a vehicle  for  defending  civil  liberty,  the  first
Senate  committee  of  the  kind  since  the  pre-war  La  Follette
Civil Liberties  Committee.
Last week-end's conference  was  also made memorable
by  one  of  the  rare  public  appearances  of  Alexander  Meikle-
john.    The  emergence  for  the  occasion  of  the  distinguished
educator  and  philosopher,  who  has  been  living  in  retirement
in  California,  was  a moral  and  political  victory  for  the  Emer-
gency Civil  Liberties  Committee,  the  best  answer to the  attacks
upon  it  by  George  Counts  and  the  American  Committee  for
Cultural  Freedom.    Dr.  Meiklejohn  took  the  offensive  on  a
philosophical  plane.    His  target  was a  passage  in  Mr.  Justice
Frankfurter's  concurring  opinion  in  the  Dennis  case,  uphold-
ing  the  conviction  of  .the  top  leadership  of  the  Communist
party under  the  Smith  Alien  and  Sedition  Act.
The  passage  which  drew  Dr.  Meiklejohn's  fire  was that  in
which  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  cited  the  words  in  which  an
J.  F.  Stone't   Weekly
Room  225  Kellojg  Bldg.
1416  F Street,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Please  enter  the  following  subscription.  $5  for  1  year  it
enclosed.  (See  p»ge  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street
City  .
State   .
Zone
earlier  Supreme  Court  in  Robertson  vs.  Baldwin  disparaged
and  subtly nullified  the  Bill  of  Rights.  The  Court  said the first
ten  amendments  "were  not  intended  to  lay  down  any  novel
principles  of government, but simply to embody certain guaran-
tees  and  immunities which  we had  inherited  from  our  English
ancestors".   This  interpretation  is  as  ancient  as  it  is  noxious.
In  relying  upon  it  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  lined  himself   up
with the  Federalist judges who  expounded  it  during the  Alien
and  Sedition  period  of  the  1790's.
This  view  is  historically  inaccurate.    The  England  of  the
time  had  an  Established  Church;  its  common  law  subjected
freedom   of  speech  and  press  to  the  onerous  restrictions  of
seditious  libel  and  constructive  treason;  its  Parliament  unlike
Congress was and  is supreme.   From the English point of view
not only the First  Amendment but the treason  provisions of  the
Constitution and its restrictions on legislative power were novel
and  revolutionary.   The  point  is  more than  a  distant  abstrac-
tion,  and  was  worth  the  gifts  of  exposition  and  scholarship
Dr.  Meiklejohn expended  upon  it. For  the  doctrine  revived by
Mr. Justice Frankfurter would cloak with a spurious  intellectual
respectability  the  drive  to  allow  Congress  to  restrict  freedom
of  speech,  press  and  assembly,  though  the  First  Amendment
clearly  says  Congress  may  not  abridge  them.
The fight being waged by the  Emergency  Civil Liber-
ties Committee is the  same  fight  the  Jeffersonians  waged
more than a century and a half  ago on precisely the same
constitutional  issue.    They  won  then.    We  are  not  yet
defeated  today. The  high  calibre  of  the  men who  took  part  in
the  panels  and  the  character  of  the  discussion  from  the  floor
were  inspiring.    Among  the  thousand  persons  who  attended
were  people  from  as  far  off  as  the  State  of  Washington.   The
fact  that  they came so far  in  so difficult  a period,  despite smear
attack,  showed  that  the  libertarian  spirit  is  far  from  dead  in
this country. It  is no  small  reward  and  no  weak  sustenance  to
feel,  as those who participated  must,  that on us  few,  weak  and
inadequate as we may be,  rests the  fate  of  the  traditions  which
have made our country great in  the  eyes of  all  mankind  in  the
past.  Such  handfuls  of  men  have  determined  the  course  of
history before and can again. There will  be another  conference
in  March  to  speed  organization  at  the  grass  roots,  on  a  com-
munity  level.
I. F. Stone's Weekly
225  Kellogg   Bldg.
1416 F St., Wellington 4, D. C
Application  for
Second  Claw  Entry
Is  Pending
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED