I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953nov23.pdf

============================================================

Eye-Opener:   The  "Evidence"  Against  Harry  D. White,  See Pages 2  &  3.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I,  NUMBER 42
NOVEMBER  23,  1953
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
America's  Own  Reichstag  Fire
There  was  an  unnoticed  bit  of  unconscious  self-revelation
in  that  speech  of  the  Attorney  General's  in  Chicago.    "Every
place  the  Communist  movement  has been  successful,"  was  the
way Brownell prefaced  his attack on former  President  Truman,
"it  has  been  preceded  by  a  period  devoted  to  breaking   down
the  faith  of  the  people  in  their  government   so  that  it  was
weak  and  helpless in  the  face  of  a coup."   Substitute  "Fascist"
for  "Communist" and  this  begins  to  describe  what  McCarran,
McCarthy,  Jenner,  Velde  and  Brownell  have  been  doing.
The  tactics  of  the  gutter  have  been  a  feature  of  our   free
and  easy  politics  ever  since  George  Washington  was  accused
of  plotting  for   a  crown.     But   surely  no  responsible   official
of  Cabinet  rank  in  our  history  has  done  more  than  Attorney
General  Brownell in  the  past  ten  days to  break  down  the  faith
of  the  people  in  their  government, spreading  suspicion  of  an
ex-President,  a  deceased  Chief  Justice  of  the  U.  S.  Supreme
Court,  and  an  Attorney  General  who  now  sits  on  that  high
bench.     Indeed  the  widening  repercussions  of   the  Brownell
charges,  if   taken  at   face   value,  must   also  engulf   the   two
Truman   Administration   officials  who  turned  State's  evidence,
as   it   were,   in   the   White   case—former   Secretary   of   State
Byrnes  and  FBI  Chief  J.  Edgar  Hoover.    For  if  they  knew
a  Soviet  spy  was  operating  in  the  top  reaches  of  the  govern-
ment,  why  did  they  also acquiesce in  the  conspiracy of  silence?
If  all  the  allegations are  true,  nothing  White  and  his  asso-
ciates  did  could  be  so  subversive  as  the  work  being  done  by
Brownell  and his Senatorial allies to  shake the ordinary person's
faith  in  the  American  government  to  its  foundations.   Their
excursion  in  creating  distrust,  panic  and  insecurity   has  now
rallied  openly  to  its  support  the  most  powerful  single  figure
in  the  American  government,  its  sacred  cow,  the  untouchable
product  of   an  unparalleled  publicity   buildup  ranging  from
gossip columnists to  comic  strips, the G-man, J.  Edgar  Hoover.
The  character  of  the  forces  with  which  he and  Brownell  have
joined  hands  was  dramatically  indicated  by  a  question  inter-
jected  in  the  midst  of  the  Attorney  General's  testimony.
The   interruption    came  when   Brownell,   in   covering   the
career  of  Harold  Glasser,  said  Glasser  had   gone  to   Moscow
early  in   1947  as  adviser  to  the  Secretary  of  State.    "What
Secretary of  State  was that?"  Senator  Jenner, sitting  as chair-
man,  asked  Brownell  with  just  the  hint  of  a  smile.    Brownell
replied,  "Mr.  Marshall."   The  Senator  from  Indiana  looked  as
if  he were about  to  lick  his  chops.   The  Senator  who  delivered
the  China  Lobby  speech  calling  General  Marshall  a  front   for
traitors  had  finally  won  to  his  dubious  banner  the  Adminis-
tration  of  Marshall's  war-time  subordinate,  protege and  friend.
A  coalition  of  calumny  had  been  cemented.    The  stage  had
been set for  what  I believe will be the  dirtiest and most  danger-
ous  year  in  U.S.  politics.  The  White  case is our  Reichstag  fire.
Questions  of  guilt  or  innocence  should  not  be  allowed   to
hide  the  broader  panorama  of  the  campaign  now   unfolding.
The.  misdeeds,  real  or  imaginary,  of  a  small  group  of  anti-
Fascist  and  pro-Soviet  officials  are  being  made  the  excuse  and
occasion  for  the  rise  to  firm  power  in  American  life  of  pro-
Fascist  and  pro-Nazi  forces  which  resented  the  last  war  and
hated  Roosevelt  as  much  as  Hitler  did.    They  are  out   not
merely  to  rebuild  German  power  abroad  but  to  rewrite  his-
tory   and  destroy   those  who  opposed  Hitler  here  at   home.
Stepping   warily,   avoiding  anti-Semitism   which   they   regard
as  the Fuehrer's  cardinal error, they are out  to  defame  Truman,
to  desecrate  the  memory  of  Roosevelt,  to  smear  our  wartime
leadership,  and  to  use against  the  popular  aspiration  for  social
welfare  the  same  tactics  of  panic,  terror  and  repression  which
Fascism  wielded  in  Japan,  Germany  and  Italy.
Was  Elsenhower  A  Pro-Red  Conspirator, Too?
It  is  fortunate  for  the  helpless  and  ineffectual  Eisenhbwer
that  he  is  the  Republican   President,   or  these  forces   would
already  be giving him  the  same treatment  they  gave Marshall.
The  installment  of  Churchill's  memoirs published by  the  New
York  Times  on  Friday, November  13,  shows  Eisenhower  may
be  accused  as easily  (if  as unfairly)  of  "selling  out"   Central
Europe  to  Communism  as Marshall has  been  for  "selling  out"
China.   Churchill  writes  that  it  was politically  important  for
the  Anglo-American  armies  in  March,  194J,  to  seize  Berlin
ahead  of  the  Russians despite  previous  agreement  and  to  meet
the  Red  Army  as far  to  the  Ea$t  as possible.   Churchill   com-
plains  that  Eisenhower,  without   consulting  the  British  and
"short-circuiting ...  the  highest  authorities,  both  military
and   constitutional,"   communicated   directly   with   Stalin   a
decision  to  strike  south  toward  Leipzig  instead  of  .Berlin  and
(as  agreed  at  Yalta)  to  meet  the  Red  Army  on  the  Elbe.
Churchill   writes  that  Marshall  upheld  Eisenhower   against
the  British  and  (as  the  Chicago  Tribune  and  the  Washington
Times-Herald   have  already  noted  in  a  restrained  but   gleeful
editorial)  that  when  Elsenhower's  dispatch  arrived  in  Moscow
the  commander  of  the  American  military  mission,  Gen.  John
R.  Deane,  was  so  disturbed  by  its  contents  that  he  delayed
delivery  for   20  hours  before  handing  the   message  over   to
Stalin. This  is an incident made to  order  for  Jenner,  McCarthy
and   Velde.    If   history   is  to   be  rewritten   by  hindsight,   if
motives  are  to  be  twisted  by  malice,  Eisenhower  may  yet  face
accusations  as unscrupulous   as  those  levelled   at  Truman.
1   6  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November SS,  19SS
Mr. Truman  Loses  The  First  Ronnd
Mr. Truman  has  never  been  more  effective  or  moving  than
in  MB TV address  Monday night.  I  am sorry  to  say,  however,
that  after  hearing  Brownell  and  Hoover  next  day,  I  believe
he  lost  the  first  round.   He  shifted  from  the  story  that  he
fired White  as  soon as  he learned  that  White was  disloyal  to
the  story  that  he  kept  White  on  in  order  to  give  the  FBI  a
chance  to  trap  him and  his  associates.  This  gave  Hoover  an
opportunity  to  pay  off  some  old  scores:  Truman  as   Senator
was  critical  of  FBI  methods  and  opposed wire-tapping.   As
President,  he  declined  to  put  Hoover  in  charge  of  the  newly
established   Central  Intelligence  Agency,  which  was  kept  in-
dependent of the  FBI.  When Truman's  long-time friend, Max
Lowenthal,  dared  publish  a  full  length  critical  book  on  the
FBI  in  1950,  Truman  with  characteristic  spunk  declined  to
disown  him.   As  the  Red  scare  campaign  gets  rolling,  the
plans  are  to  strike  at   Truman   through   Lowenthal.   Last
Monday  a  week  the  Chicago   Tribune   and  the   Washington
Times-Herald  had  an  8-column  line  page  one sensation  about
a  "plot"  to  smear  the  FBI,  referring  to  Lowenthal  and  to
Dean  Acheson's law partner, Charles Horsky, who once signed
a  report  critical  of  FBI  wire-tapping.
I  suspect that one reason  Truman paid  so little  attention  to
the  report  on White  and  praised  White  when  the  latter  re-
tired  from  government service  is that  Truman  had  a  healthy
contempt  for  FBI  loyalty  reports.   Unfortunately  he  did  not
take  the  risk  of candor  in his  speech and  gave  up  the  one line
of   defense  left  him  when  he  assumed  White's   guilt.    Had
Truman  made the  point that  the  charges  were unproven, had
he  pleaded a  man's  right  to the  presumption of  innocence, he
would  be  in  a  better  position  to  counter-attack   now  on  the
only grounds which  seem open to him—and that  is the  nature
of  the  evidence against  White and  his  associates.
What  of The  Evidence  Against  White?
Hoover  has  also  shifted  his  grounds.  The  Lowenthal  book,
a  carefully  documented study  by  one of  the  country's  ablest
lawyers,  quotes  (p.  439)  from  a  1942  radio  speech  in  which
Hoover,  explaining  his  methods,  said:  "The  Federal  Bureau
of  Investigation  has  operated  on  the  premise  that  we should
first  find  out  who the  spies  are "who  are  working  against  our
national  welfare,  and  then,  carefully   keeping  them  under
scrutiny,  ascertain  their  sources  of  information,  the  identity
of   their   associates,   their   methods  of  communication,   and
finally  taking  over  the  supervision  of  the  spy  ring  until  the
time  comes  to  take  them  into  custody.   In  other  words,  we
have followed the  practice of counterespionage,  namely spying
.on the  spies."  Charges  so serious against White  and  his  asso-
ciates  called  for  thorough  investigation  with  an  eye either  to
prosecution  or clearance.   The FBI' is  supposed  to  enforce  the
law,  not  merely  collect  half-proven  surmise  for   half-baked
loyalty   proceedings.
Unfortunately  there  was  no  Democrat  on  the  Jenner  com-
mittee  with  the  nerve  to  raise  these  or  any  other  real  ques-
tions  with  Hoover, nor  to  question  Brownell  about  the  differ-
ence  between  his  Chicago  address  and  the  two  FBI  covering
letters   to  the   White   House  which  he  put   into  evidence.
Brownell  in  Chicago  said  flatly,  "White  was  a  Russian  spy.
He  smuggled  secret  documents  to  Russian  agents  for  trans-
mission  to  Moscow.  Harry  Dexter  White  was  known to  be  a
Communist  spy by the very  people who appointed  him . .  ."
But  this  is  not  what  the  two  Hoover  letters  to  the  White
House  said.   That  of  November  8,  1946,  said  persons  in  the
government  were  furnishing  information  "to  persons  outside
the  Federal  government, who are  in  turn  transmitting  this
information.to  espionage  agents  of  the  Soviet  government."
At  the  present  time,  the  letter  went  on, "it  is  impossible  to
determine  examtly  how  many  of  these   people  had   actual
knowledge  of  the  disposition  being  made  of  the  information
they  were  transmitting."   Hoover  said  he  was   investigating
to determine "the  degree  and nature of the complicity of  these
people."   White  was  on  a  list  of  persons  who  were   "either
participants   in  this  operation  or  were  utilised  by  principals
in  this  ring."   (Italics  added).
The  letter   of  February   1,  1946,  transmitting   the   special
report  on White to  the  President  is  also  inconclusive.  It  says
first  of  all  that  information had  come to  the  attention  of  the
FBI   "charging  White  as  being  a  valuable  adjunct  to  an
underground   Soviet   espionage  organization."   A   "valuable
adjunct"  is  not  necessarily  a  spy.   The letter  also  says  that
"Material   which  came  into  his   [White's]   possession  as  a
result  of  his   official  capacity  allegedly  was  made  available
through   intermediaries  to   Nathan   Gregory   Silvermaster"
(italics  added)  who in  turn  was  alleged  to  have  been  photo-
graphing   the  documents  for  transmission.    Finally   Hoover
refers  to  a  Canadian  source fearful  lest  White  become head
of   the  International  Bank,  or  the   International   Monetary
Fund. "Fear was expressed,"  Hoover wrote, "that facts  might
come to light  in the future throwing  some sinister  accusations
at  White  and  thereby  jeopardize  the  successful  operation  of
these  important   international   institutions."   There  was  no
need  to  wait  for  sinister  accusations  in  the  future  if  White
was  already  known to  be a  Soviet  spy.
Just  Like  Me Carthy  at Fort  Monmouth
The wording of these two letters by J.  Edgar  Hoover to the
White  House  at  the  time  of  the  White  appointment  fails  to
support  Brownell's   statements.   Hoover  did  not  say  White
was  a  spy,  nor  that  he  was  smuggling  secret  documents  to
Russian  agents.   How can  Brownell  say  that  Truman  knew
these  to  be facts  when  Hoover  did  not  assert  them  as  facts?
Hoover's   words  throw  an  unflattering  light  on  Brownell's
statement in  Chicago, "there certainly  was no reason  why the
Senate   could  not  be  informed  of  the  established   fact  that
White  was  a  spy."   The fact  was  not established.
In  his  statement  to  the  Jenner  committee,  Hoover  said  the
"Red  Fascists  distort,  conceal,  misrepresent  and  lie  to  gain
their  point."   He  and  Brownell  were  not  exactly  models  in
their ,own presentation. Like McCarthy  in the Fort Monmouth
farce',  they  were  stepping  out from  behind the  closed  curtains
to  present  their  own little  driblets  of  the  alleged  evidence  as
suited  their  purpose.   This  piecemeal  ex  parts  presentation,
with  no  one  present  to  ask  questions  on  behalf   of  the  ac-
cused, is a  long way from the kind of serious  inquiry  and  fair
trial  called  for  by  such grave  charges.
The  Washington  Post,  supporting  Brownell  and  Hoover,
speaks  of  the  "devastating  nature"  of  their  "factual  presen-
tation."  But  the  only  thing  "devastating"  about  their  report
is  how  little  factual   material  they   offer   to  support   these
allegations.   There  is  first  of  all  the  anti-climactic  description
by  Brownell  of  the  section   in  the  FBI  report  relating  to
"White's   known   contacts   with   Russian    officials   over   the
years."   Brownell   said  this  "cannot  be  declassified."   Just
why  is  not  clear  since  Brownell  goes  on to  admit  that  "these
contacts  were  not  inconsistent  with  the  regular  performance
of  White's  duties  and  considered  by  themselves  are  not  in-
criminating."
There  is  next  the  gobblydegook  section  which describes  the
results  of  FBI  surveillance.   Brownell  claims  that  the  FBI
report on White "contains  much corroborative  evidence which
cannot  be made  public either  because  it  would  disclose  inves-
tigative  techniques  or  because  it  might  be  harmful  to  the
national  interest."   Presumably   the  former   refers  to  wire-
tapping  and  opening of mail.  The latter  may  mean  anything
or  nothing.   But  if  White  was  passing  out  material  and  the
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, November iS, 19SS
FBI,  forewarned by Bentley, put him and his associates under
surveillance, it  -would  do no harm to the national security now
to  report  that  one had  been  seen  passing  information to  an-
other,  that  Silvermaster  had  been  caught  copying documents
or  that  an  FBI  agent  had  seen  a  courier  picking  them  up.
The  espionage had  to  take  place  somewhere in  some tangible
form.  What  did the  FBI  find  when it  watched  these  people?
Brownell's answer is that "it  can be pointed  out" that  "over
a  period  of  three  months beginning in  November of  1945  the
activities  of  Harry   Dexter   White  were  entirely   consistent
with  all  the  previous  information  contained  in  the  report."
Does  that  mean  he  passed  out  documents?  Apparently  not.
Apparently  all  it  means  is—and  let  us return  to  Brownell's
own  words:  "White  was  in  frequent  close  personal  contact
with  nearly every  one of  the  persons  named  as  his  associates
in  the  spy  ring."  But  most  of  these  people  were fellow  em-
ployes  of  the  Treasury.   What  in  this  context   does  "close
personal  contact"  mean?
The  Attorney   General   goes  on  with  exactly  the  kind  of
vague  stuff  familiar  in  loyalty  proceedings.    White  made  a
trip  to  see  a  doctor  in  Newark  who  "had  been  reported  by
numerous  sources  as  having  had  frequent  and  close  contacts
with  numerous  Communists  in  the  State  of  New  Jersey."
White  was  seen  at  the  home  of  Alger  Hiss.   White  and  his
wife  visited  Maurice  Halperin, who in turn was  alleged  to be
a  Communist and to  have passed  on information to a  courier.
White  had  "close  personal"  relations  with  Frank  Coe,  who
was  then  one of his  chief  assistants in  the  Treasury.
Brownell  does  not  say  that  these  three  months  of  surveil-
lance proved the  allegations.  He says  White's  activities  were
"entirely  consistent  with"  the  allegations.   But  his  own  de-
scription  indicates that  this  vague  phrase  merely  means  that
White did associate  with the  close associates who were alleged
to  be  Soviet  agents.  If  this  was  the  kind  of  stuff   presented
the  following  year  to  the   grand   jury   which  heard   these
charges,  it  is  no wonder that  no indictment  was  returned.
What  They'd  Be Saying  if Hoover  Were A  New  Dealer
The  record  is  so extraordinary that  if  Hoover were  a New
Dealer  instead  of  a  rightist,  he  would be  the  main target of
the  witch hunt  attack.  Let  us  look  at  the  record  as  we now
know  it.   Frank  Coe was  accused  by  Whitaker  Chambers in
1939.   Silvermaster  was  up  on  loyalty  charges  in  1942  and
was  cleared  with  White's  support;   Hoover  complains  that
when  the  FBI  interviewed  White  in  March,  1942,  he  "spent
more  time  in  denouncing"  loyalty  investigations   than   "in
furnishing  facts."   Chambers  named  White  as  part  of  the
Communist  underground in  March,  1945,  and  August,  1946,
though  as late  as  that  (six  months after  the  White  appoint-
ment)  Chambers told  the  FBI  "It  was  not  a  spy  ring,  but
one  far   more  important  and  cunning  because  its  members
helped  to  shape  policy in  their  departments."  (Memorandum
of  conversation with  Ray  Murphy, August  28,  1946).
The  extraordinary  thing  is that with  these  early tips  from
Chambers  and  later  Bentley,  and  all  the  opportunities  for
surveillance,  the  wire-tapping,  the  mail  covers  and  the  spies
inside  the  Communist  party,  the  FBI  failed  to  get  a  single
indictment,  much  less  conviction,  for  espionage  from  among
all  the  people  named  by  Bentley  and  Chambers.   If   Hoover
were  a  New  Dealer,  he  would be  accused  of  covering up  for
the  Reds.
There's   something  fishy  about  this  business,  though  one
despairs   of   ever   disentangling   the   false   from   the   true.
Bentley's   story   does  not   seem  to  be  quite   the   same  as
Hoover's;  she  says  she made  her  first  contact  with  the  FBI
in  August;  he  says  she  told  her  story  on  November 7,  1945.
He sent his first letter to the  White  House the very next  day,
but  one  would  never  guess  from  its  wording  that  this  was
something  freshly  told  by  a  new  informant  and  as  yet  un-
checked, nor that Bentley's  story  of spying  differed  so  sharply
from  that  which  Whitaker  Chambers  had  been  telling  of  a
Communist   ring   in   the   government  concerned  only  with
policy.
Were  there  ever  the   American  equivalent  of  a   British
Royal  Commission to  provide  a  real  investigation,    attention
might  usefully  be  focused  on  Bentley's  later  testimony  that
White  drew  up  the  Morgenthau  Plan  to  "pastoralize"  Ger-
many  in  order  to  further   Communist  ends;  this  seems  con-
trived  since an  examination of Communist publications at  the
time  shows  the party's  opposition  to  the  Morgenthau  plan.
The mystery  which haunts the  whole affair is why that  1947
grand  jury  returned   not  a  single  indictment  against  any
person  Bentley  named.  There  is  no statute  of  limitations  on
war-time  espionage.   A  showing  of  intent  to  help  a  foreign
power  is  enough  to  convict  even  though  there  was  no intent
to  injure  the  United  States.   The  strict  two  witness  rule
which  governs  prosecutions  for  treason  does  not  apply  to
espionage.  A  lesser  indictment  for  conspiracy  or  attempt  to
commit  espionage  might  have  been  returned.    There  is  no
technical  reason  of  law that  I  can find  which  would  prevent
indictment  or  conviction  on  the  basis  of  Bentley's  testimony
alone  if  sufficiently  credible  to  the  jury.  Nine persons  named
by  her,  including White  and  Coe,  denied her  charges  under
oath  in  1948  and  could have  been  prosecuted  for  perjury,  as
Hiss was in denying the  testimony of  Chambers.  This  failure
to indict must be seen against  the  background of the  Truman
Administration's   eagerness  to  obtain  an  indictment, for  the
1948  campaign,  both  to  rebut   Republican  charges   and  to
strike  a blow at  the  Wallace movement, which the  Democrats
then  feared.
Hoover  said  of  Bentley in  his  testimony  last  week that  she
had  been  "subjected  to  the  most  searching  of  cross-examina-
tions;  her  testimony  has  been  evaluated  by  juries  and  re-
viewed  by  the  courts   and  has  been  found  to  be  accurate."
The  fact  is that  only  a  single  person  named by her  has  been
convicted,  and that  was  several  years  later.  This  one convic-
tion  is  so peculiar that it  undermines the  implications Hoover
intended  to  convey.
Next  Week's  Eye-Opener:  The  Only  "Spy"  Bent-
ley  Convicted
ROBIN  HOOD'S  IN  DANGER-ACT  QUICKLY  BEFORE  THEY  GET  SANTA  CLAUS!
Those  censors  who  sniffed  subversion  in  Nottingham   Forest  may  soon  be  getting  around  to  that  (Red  costumed) free
spending  old  fellow  Kris  Kingle,  no  Kautious  (Capitalist  he.   While  there's time,  in  renewing  your  subscription, add  $4  and
send  the  Weekly  as a  Christmas  gift  to  a  friend,  or  at  the  same  rate  to  several.   You'll  keep  the  gray  streaks out  of  the
harassed  publisher's whiskers  by  doing  this  form  of  Xmas  shopping early,  too,  and  we'll  send a  gift  card  announcement to
your  friend  or  friends.
With  many  thanks.
1   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  gS, 195S
JENNINGS     PERRY'S    PAGE
Who'll  Tell  Hummon  What  Webster  Told  Hayne?
There's   no  denying   that  Gov. Herman   E.  Talmadge  of
Georgia,  lately   emerged   as  the   most   outspoken    spokesman
of   those  patriots   determined   to  preserve  segregation   in   the
public   schools  as  part  of  the  American  Way,  is  both  quick
on  the  trigger  and  slick  on  the  dodge.
Having already proclaimed that his own state,  like  neighbor-
ing   South   Carolina,  is  ready   to  junk  its   school   system   to
evade  a  possible  Supreme  Court  ruling   against  segregation,
Old  Gene's  lively son now is crying  the  charge that  the  Court
itself,  if  it  should  hold  that  public  schools  must  be  open  to
all  alike,  would  be  guilty  of  "nullification."
The  charge  is  intended,  of  course,  to  build  up  blame  to
hide  blame;  and  all  in  fanning  this  quaint  backfire  the Gov-
ernor   doggedly   dances  away  from   the   crucial   question  of
whether,  in  any  case,  Georgia   proposes  to   comply  with  or
defy  the  law  of  the  land.    Over  and  over  again  in  a  recently
televised  interview  he  slid  off  of  this  point,  protesting  always
that  if   there  should  be  any  contempt   of  the  law, "radical
groups"  (the  Court)   would  commit  it.
The  interrogation  did  produce  one  exchange  in  which  the
wily  Governor   apparently  outfoxed  himself.    He  was  asked
if  in  essence the  game of  the  segregationists  were  not  to  play
with  the  Court  when  the  Court  was on  their  side but  against
the  Court  when  the  decision was the  other  way.
Gov.:  "Not  necessarily.    I  don't   mean  to  say  that  the
people  would  fail  to  comply  with  any  decision of  the  Supreme
Court  of  the  United  States;  but  if  they  had  to,  they  would
resort  to  the  extreme measure  of  abolishing  the  public  school
system  itself   rather  than  comply  with  such  an  order  of   the
Supreme  Court."
The  italics  are  mine.    The  report   is  from  Governor  Tal-
madge's  own  weekly  The  Statesman.    In  the  same  issue,  in  a
lengthy   signed  editorial,  the  Peach  State's  Calhoun  solemnly
juggles  the  nonsensical proposition  that  legality  of  "separate
but   equal"  public  schools  hinges  on  whether  the  men  who
now  compose  the  Supreme Court  "believe  that  the  Constitu-
tion  of  the  United  States  means  what  it  says  or  whether  it
means  what  they  might  say  it  says."
It  was  later,  at  the  conference   of  Southern   governors  at
Hot   Springs,  Va., that  Gov. Talmadge   handed   down   his
personal  dictum  on  the  legality  of  any  Supreme  Court  ruling
in  which  a  majority  of  the  justices  should  express  the  belief
that   the   basic  law  forbids   discrimination   in  education:   it
would  be  "blatantly   unconstitutional."
More  respectful  and  more  reasonable  patriots   well  may  be
shocked  by the  aspersions directed  at the  Court  before  the  fact
by  the  Georgia  executive  and  perhaps  merely  bored   by  his
twisting  and  turning—before  the  fact—on   the  question  of
what  his  state  will  do  to  maintain  segregation   in  education
"in   any  case."    A  present   day  patriot   of  Daniel  Webster's
turn   undoubtedly   would  be  inclined  "to  run  the  honorable
gentleman's  doctrine  a  little  into  its  practical   application,"
to  ask  him  as a  lawyer—as  Webster  asked  Hayne  when  South
Carolina  set  out  to  nullify  the  tariff   laws—how  he  proposes
to  circumvent  a  court  ruling  against  segregated   schools  and
avoid  treason?
The  Governor  does have  a  plan—or  plot  to  do  away  with
the  school   system  "and subsidize  the  child  rather  than   the
political  unit  of  government."    But   would   not   the   school
teachers  of  Georgia, pledged  to  uphold  the  Constitution,  deem
it  "somewhat  dangerous  to  resist  a law of  the  United  States?"
Would  not  the  transfer  of  school  properties  to  "private  oper-
ation"  be  quite  too  thin  a  pretense?    Would  not  the  Court
surely  hold  again  that  even  the  State  of  Georgia  cannot   do
by  indirection  what  is  forbidden  by  law?
"If   a  thing  can  be done,"  Webster  told  Hayne,  "an  ingen-
ious  man  can  tell  how  it  is  to  be  done."   But  plainly  neither
Gov.   Talmadge  nor  his  brash  mentor   in  this  matter, Gov.
Byrnes,  have  yet  hit  upon  a  foolproof  formula  for  staying  in
the  Union   while  excepting  themselves—by  any   ruse—from
what  the  Supreme  Court  says  that  the  Constitution  says.
Of  course  there  is—or  was—secession. That  has  been  tried.
Don't  Rue  It,  Do  It.
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name      ——————————————————————————
City________'           Zone___  State_._.._
Enter  this  gift  sub   for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
fTo)  Name    —————————________________
Street     ——————————————————————————
City_____________  Zone___  State_____
I.  F.  Stone** Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St.,  S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED