I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953apr04.pdf

============================================================

Jennings  Perry  Is Back,   5ee  Page  4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
COPYRIGHT   ItM   »T   1.   F.
VOL.  I  NUMBER  12APRIL  4,  1953
7      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
That  Familiar  Chill  on  the  Brink  of  Peace
A  disregard  for  human life  is supposed  to  be an  Oriental
characteristic.    Judging  by  the  pace  of   negotiations   in   the
Korean  truce  talks,  all  military  men  must  be  Oriental.     Last
December  the  Red  Cross  called  on  both  sides  in  the  Korean
conflict  for  an  immediate exchange  of  sick  and  wounded  pris-
oners of war.   It  took  two months before General  Clark  passed
this proposal  on to the Communist command.   It  took  a month
more  before  the  latter  replied,   accepting.    The  acceptance  in
turn  asserts  that  both  sides had  reached  agreement  on this  par-
ticular  point  many months earlier  in  Paragraph  53 of  the  draft
armistice  agreement,  and  says  implementation  had  been  held
up   "solely   because  the  Korean   armistice  negotiations   were
suspended."
This  is  almost  but  not  quite  true.    Actually  Paragraph  53
merely  provided  priority  for  the  repatriation  of  the  sick  and
wounded  when  an  armistice was  reached.   This  'new  readiness
to  allow  voluntary repatriation  of  the  sick  and  wounded  in ac-
cordance  with  the  Geneva  convention  before   an  armistice has
been  achieved  represents  a  new  concession.    It  fits  into  the
conciliatory  pattern  woven  by  a  whole  series  of  moves  since
the Malenkov succession.   The Communist reply "fully  agrees"
to  General  Clark's  proposal.    The  State  Department  terms  it
an   "unconditional  acceptance."    The  Department's   favorite
chestnut  in  dealing  with  any  Soviet  peace  proposal  is  to  ask
for  deeds,  not  words.   But  now  as  in  the  past  when  deeds  are
offered,  a chill  descends on  Washington  and  on  military head-
quarters  in  Tokyo.    There is talk  of  a trap.    Difficulties  begin
to  be  exfoliated.    The  military  seems  to  have  a  lawyer-like
genius  for  conjuring  up  the  nicest  points  of  possible   future
disagreements,  as  if  drawing  up  contracts  for  a  30-year  lease.
In  this  vein  the  New  York  Times  correspondent  in
Tokyo  notes  that  the  Clark  letter  of  February  22  called   for
"impartial   verification"  of  the  condition   of  ailing   prisoners
and  "a  possible  snag  was  anticipated"—how  these  snags  ac-
cumulate!—"if  the  Communists  suggested  that  each  side  be
left  to  determine  for  itself"  which  prisoners  were  to  be  in-
cluded in the  sick and wounded  category.   Yet this would  seem
to be the  most  expeditious  way to handle  the  repatriation.    To
judge by the past, the problem  of providing "impartial  verifica-
tion"  could  consume  interminable  months  of  haggling.
The  exchange  of  the  sick  and  wounded  is  not  made  con-
tingent  on  resumption  of truce negotiations,  but  the  good  feel-
ing  created  by  such  an  exchange  would  make  it   difficult   to
reject  the  Communist  request  for  renewed  talks.    These  were
broken  off last  October  18 by the  "unified  command"  in  Tokyo
with  the  statement  that  talks  would  not  be  resumed  unless  the
American  position  on  voluntary  repatriation   were  accepted.
The  Chou  En-lai  broadcast  as  we go  to  press  indicates  that
the  Communists  are  now  prepared  to  give  in  on  voluntary
repatriation,  but  the  State  Department  already  finds  "glaring
ambiguities"  in  the  broadcast  and  one wonders  what  ingenious
new  deadlocks  may be  in  the  making.
Among  the  American  military  in  the  Far  East  there  has
always  been  a  strong  if  not  dominant  faction  which  did  not
want the truce  talks  to  succeed.
General  Van  Fleet  spoke  for  this  group  when  he  told  the
Senate  Armed  Services  Committee  last  month  "the  only  solu-
tion  is a military  victory in Korea  .  .  .  anything  short of  that
would  be a  defeat ...  all you do is to  leave  an  intolerable
situation  in  Korea  and  postpone  the  agony,  because  you have
an  Iron  Curtain  across  the middle  of  Korea  .  .  .  they  could
overrun  the  country  at  any  later  time  of  their  own  choosing
.  .  .  and with  airfields  built  all over  North  Korea  that  could
threaten  Japan.    All  we  would  be  doing  would  be  to  post-
pone  the  trouble  by signing  an  armistice."    The  reference  to
airfields  recalls  an  earlier  dispute  which  may  be  revived  even
if  the  POW  issue is settled.   The  State Department  emphasizes
that  the  "draft  agreement"  submitted  to  the  UN  last  October
is a draft  but  in  no  sense  an  agreement.
Those who think a showdown  necessary may still  find  ample
obstacles  to  a  settlement.    Van  Fleet  provided  a  full  glimpse
of  this mentality when he told  the  Senate  committee  "what  we
need  to  reestablish  American  might  and  prestige,  not  only  in
the  Pacific  but  throughout  the  world,  is  a  military  victory  to
show  that  we are  supreme  and  the  Communist  arms  are  noth-
ing."    He  made  it  clear that  he  considered  the  present  stale-
mate a defeat.   When  asked  in  executive  session  later that day
(as the  released  text  now  reveals)  whether  the  war  would  not
go  on  even  if  a  new  offensive  succeeded  in  reestablishing  a
line  further  north,  Van  Fleet  replied,  "Yes.    You  will  never
get  a political  solution;  there  will  always  be  an  Iron  Curtain
until you have  it  out  with  Russia."
Van  Fleet  is a  lesser  MacArthur  and  does  not  speak  for  all
the  American  military;  the  failure  to  keep  him  on  in  Korea
after  his  retirement  deadline  of  60,  as  could  have  been  done,
is  indicative.    There  are  more  sober  counsels,  and  these  seem
to  have  the  greater  weight  with  Generals   like  Bradley  and
Collins,  and  with  Eisenhower  himself.    But  the  hesitations
over  the  new offer  are characteristic  and  revealing.    The  tactic
of  "neither  war  nor  peace,"  which  is  supposed  to  be  a Com-
munist  invention,  seems  to  be  currently  an  American  policy.
Should  peace  begin  to  break  out  in  Korea,  so  run  the  familiar
speculations,  how keep  up  the  pressure  on  France  for  German
rearmament?    And  what  happens  to  the  drive  for  bigger  air
force  and  air defense  appropriations?    And  how  explain  away
to Republicans  brought up  on the  mythology of Yalta  the  "ap-
peasement"  involved  in  recognizing the  new  realities  in  Asia?
The  Chou broadcast recalls the  agreement  for  a political con-
ference  in  three  months  on  the  broader  problems  involved  in
making  peace.    And  that  leads  straight  to  Formosa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   April  4,  1953
Time for  A Deportation—To  Wisconsin
McCarthy  will  never  be  beaten  on  the  de-
fensive.    He  loses  one  fight  and  starts  two
new  ones.    Charges  are  always  more  excit-
ing  than  their- refutation,  and  he  thereby
dominates  the  front  pages.    He  is  becoming
the  biggest  thing  on  the  national  landscape,
and  frontal  collision  with  the  President  and
his  own  party  leadership  adds  to  his  pres-
tige.   He  has  hardly  begun  to  hit  his  stride
as  master  of  the  Big  Lie.    Like  Hitler  and
Goebbels,  he  knows  the  value  of  ceaseless
reiteration.    He  has  their  complete  lack  of
scruple,  and  sets  as low  an  estimate  as they
on  the  popular  mind's  capacity  to  remem-
ber.   His  defeat  in  the  fight  against  Bohlen
is  a  minor  episode  in  the  perspective  of  his '
ambition  and  his  potentialities.
If—the  fatal  //  that  shadows  democratic
governments   in  their   contest   with   fascist
pretenders—;/ this Administration had guts,
it  would  move  now  to  act  on  the  findings
of   the  buried  McCarthy  report   submitted
by  the  Senate  subcommittee   on  privileges
and  elections.    The  new  Attorney  General,
in  a  cheap   and  vulgar   St.  Patrick's   day
speech,  announced  a heightened  deportation
campaign   against   so-called     "subversives."
The  most  subversive  force in America today
is  Joe  McCarthy.    No  one  is  so  effectively
importing  alien  conceptions  into  American
government.    No  one  is  doing  so  much  to
damage  the  country's  prestige   abroad  and
its  power   to  act   effectively   at   home.    If
"subversion"  is  to  be  met  by  deportation,
then  it  is  time  to  deport  McCarthy  back  to
Wisconsin.    Families  are  being  broken  up,
long-time  residents  driven  into  exile,  men
face  permanent  detention,  on  charges  which
are   far   more   tenuous   than   those   made
against   McCarthy  by  the   Senate   inquiry
under  the  Benton   resolution.
Far  stronger  than  the  inference  of  guilt
McCarthy  sees  in  every,  invocation   of   the
Fifth   amendment  is  the  inference  created
by  his  own  failure  six  times  to  show  up
when  invited  by  the  subcommittee  to  rebut
the   charges   made   against   him.     His   re-
peated fliers in  stock  and  commodity  specu-
lation,   the   unexplained   $105,000   in   his
bank  accounts  and  those  of  his  administra-
tive  assistant,   the  'diversion  to   speculation
of  funds  contributed  to  fight  Communism,
his   hectic   borrowings   and   his   ability   to
bank  more  than  $170,000  in  four  years  on
a  Senator's  salary  (his  assistant  banked  an-
other  $96,000 in the  same period)—all  this
cries  out  for  investigation.     The   subcom-
mittee  raises  serious  question  as  to  whether •
Wisconsin    banking   and   Federal    election
laws   have   been   violated.     Here   lies   the
means  of  stopping  McCarthy  before  he  has
grown  too, big  to  be  stopped.
There may never  be a more favorable  op-
portunity.      Young     William     Randolph
Hearst,. who   has.  several   times   put   the
damper   on  Pegler,  last  week  got   off  the
McCarthy  bandwagon  and  declared   (New
York   Journal,   March   26),   "We've   had
enough  of  this  kind  of  malicious  mischief
'in  American  life.   Joe McCarthy has  pulled
a  strategical  boner  with  his  opposition  to
the   Bohlen   appointment."      The   hitherto
favorable  Scripps-Howard  press  (Washing-
ton  News,  March  26)   attacked  McCarthy
for  his  "back-alley  tactics"  and  said   "The
amazing  thing   is  that   this  loud-mouthed
rowdy   has   attracted   a   Senate   following,
which   has  assisted  him  in  dragging   that
body   into   the   gutter   with   him."     The
magisterial.  Washington   Star,  the  most  in-
fluential  paper  in  the  capital,  said  of  Mc-
Carthy  and  McCarran  in  the  Bohlen  fight
(March 29),  "Their  attack  was vicious  and
thoroughly   unprincipled.     Their   weapons
were  the  familiar  ones of  sly hint  and  ugly,
insinuation. ....  With  this  dirtiest  of  dirty
business  there  should   be  no  compromise.''
Though   McCarthy   at  one  point  in  his
career  was  happy  to  have  Communist  sup-
port,  he  now  likes  to  picture  himself  as  a
remorseless  foe  of  Communism.    But   the
affair   of   the   Greek  shipowners  last  week
shows  how  differently  McCarthy  treats  sus-
pected   Communist   collaborators  who'are
men  of  means  from  the  way  he  treats  poor
schoolteachers.      These    shipowners — the
breed  of  the  wily  Ulysses—Have  been  sup-
plying  Communist  customers  in  ships  ac-
quired  cut-rate  from  America.    Owners  of
242  such  ships   have  gotten   an   immunity
bath  from  McCarthy  in  return  for  a  paper
promise  he  admits  is unenforceable.    These
subtle-minded Greek operators  are men who
know  their  way  around   politically.
One  would  have  expected  McCarthy  to
denounce  them  for  having  grown  wealthy
by  taking  America's  favors  and   supplying
America's  enemies.   Yet  they  are  not  to  be
exposed,  harassed   or  punished.    The   At-
torney  General  is  not  to  be  denounced  for
failure  to recover  these ships.   Instead  these
shipowners  by  their  private  deal  with  Mc-
Carthy  may  find  therein   some   protection
against   the   seizures   and'  mortgage    fore-
closures    the    Eisenhower    Administration
had  begun  to  institute  in  these  cases.   Mc-
Carthy's  mandate  from   the  Senate  to  in-
vestigate  the  operations  of  government  may
be  broad  but  it  is  not  broad  enough  to  al-
low  him  to  invade  the  sphere  of   foreign
policy   and  to'  arrange   "agreements"  by
which  possible  law  violations   may  be  ex-
cused.   It  is no wonder  he  kept  his negotia-
tions  secret  from  the  State  and  Justice  De-
partments!     His   sudden   emergence   as  a
combination  Secretary of  State and Attorney
General  in this  arrangement with  the  Greek
shipowners  calls  for  investigation.
Ever  iince that  famous  $10,000  pamphlet
for  Lustron  (let's  hope  it  doesn't  turn  out
that  McCarthy   is  .also  writing  pamphlets
now  on  the  Greek  merchant  marine),   the
Senator  has  been  moving-more  and  more
into  the  domain of  literature.   His  inquiry
last  week into the  overseas information  pro-
gram  should  give  the  State  Department  a
lesson  in  diplomacy.   The  Department  has
placed   2,000,000   books   abroad   by   more
than   85,000  authors,   among  them  Owen
Lattimore's    "Ordeal    by    Slander."    But
when  McCarthy  asked  whether  any  of  his
own  books  were  in  the  overseas  libraries,
it  appeared  there  was  not  a  single  one  on
the  list.   The  State Department  neyer com-
mitted  a  greater  faux  pas.    .
Louis  Budenz was  on  hand  as  an  expert
witness,  and  the  often  incredible Roy  Cohn
put  this  to  him:
Mr.  COHN.   I  will  ask  you  this  question,
Professor  Budenz:  Have  you  at  the request
of  the  committee examined a  partial-list  of
some  authors  whose  books  we  have  been
advised  by  the  Library  of  Congress  are cur-
rently  being  used  by  the  State Department
in  its  information  program?
Mr.    BUDENZ.     Yes,   sir,   I   have   gone
over  that  list.
Mr.  COHN.    On  that  list,  did  you  find
any  authors, who  were  known  to  you  as
Communists?
Mr.  BUDENZ.    Yes  sir,  I  did.
Mr.  COHN.    Approximately how  many?
Mr.   BUDENZ.    At  least  75.    And   four
that  had  very  close  connections  with   the
Communist  party.
The  answer  is  intriguing,  since  it  implies
that  one  can  be  a  Communist without hav-
ing  "very  close  connections  with  the  Com-
munist   party."     Naturally   Cohn   did  not
press  him  on  the  point.    After  all  a  lot  of
people  named  by  Budenz  as  Communists
never   had   "very   close  connections"   with
the  party.
The  FBI  ought  to  check 'one  unexplored
angle  of  McCarthy's  interrogation  of  Earl
Browder,   some   of   whose   books  were   in
libraries    abroad.    In    1950   International
Publishers  put   on  sale  a  book  about  the
Rajk  trial  in  Hungary  called   "Tito's  Plot
Against  Europe."    It  was  written by  Derek
Kartun,  the  foreign  editor  of  the  London
Daily Worker.  In it on pages  20-21, Kartun
says  a  counter-revolutionary group  in  1944
were  primed  for  dirty  work  in  Hungary- by
the  OSS which  gave  them  copies  of  Brow-
der's   books  "Teheran"  and   "Victory   and
After."
Kartun  explains  that  Browder's   theories
"would  have  emasculated  the  revolutionary
movement.    The  U.  S.  intelligence  service
understood   immediately  the  value  of   the
Browder  theories  in  confusing and  paralyz-
ing  the  European  Communist  parties,  and
had  distributed  large  numbers of  the  Brow-
der  books.  .  .  ."    If  this  is  correct,   then
McCarthy  in  discouraging  the State  Depart-
ment  from  circulating   these  books  abroad
must be acting  as a Communist  agent.   How
the  plots  do  thicken!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly  April  4, 1953
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  and  Publisher,  I.  F.  STONI
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two weeks
of  August  at  Room  225,  1416  F  St., N.W.,
'Washington  4,  D.   C.    Subscription   rates:
Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and
elsewhere  in  the Western  Hemisphere,  $6;
England   and  Continental  Europe,  $10   by
1st  class  mail,  $15  by  air;  for  Israel,  Asia,
Australia   and   Africa,   $10   by   first   class
mail,   $20   by  air  mail.     Single   copy,   15
cents.      Contents    covered    by    copyright.
Telephone,    STerling   J-0938.   Entered   as
Second    Class    mail    matter,   Post   Office,
Washington,   D.  C.
April  4,    1953
.1      Vol.   1,  No.    12
The  Good  Old Days  Are  Back
—In  FTC  at  Least
Elsewhere  Republicans may  be disgruntled
with  their  own  Eisenhower Administration,
but  at  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  all  is
as  it  should   be  with  the  G.O.P.  back  in
power.    There  is  a  whiff   of  the  good  old
days  before  1929  in  the  announcement  that
Edward   F.   Howrey   has   been   appointed
chairman of  the  Federal Trade Commission,
where  he  succeeds John  Carson.
The  shift  from  Carson  to  Howrey  must
be  intensely  satisfying   to  the  Old   Guard.
Once  a  crusading  newspaperman,  Carson
became  secretary in  1924  to  the  millionaire
maverick   Senator,   Couzens  of   Michigan,
and  remained with  him  until  1936.    In  the
years  when  Couzens  was  the  hair-shirt  of
the  Republicans,  Howtey   was   starting   in
practice  as  a  protege  and  law  partner  of
Coolidge's   old   secretary,  Everett  Sanders.
While Carson served  as consumer counsel
on  the  Bituminous  Coal  Commission  and
later   as   director  of   information   for    the
Cooperative  League before  being appointed
to  the  F.T.C.  by  Truman  in  1949,  Howrey
was  working  the  other  side  of  the  street.
The  new F.T.C. chairman  has  for  a  quarter
of  a  century  represented some  of  America's
most  important -business  concerns  in  fight-
ing  the  Commission  and  its  somewhat  slow
and   somnolent   efforts   to   curb   monopoly
practices.
At  the  hearing  on  the  nomination  before
the   Senate   Commerce   Committee,   when
Howrey  was  asked  just why  he  wanted  the
job,  he said,  "I  think I have  a latent  feeling
in  my  breast  that  I  would  like  to  serve  the
public  interest  sometime  in  my  life."  Sena-
tor   Potter   of   Michigan   was   ungracious
enough  to  inquire  further  into  that  "latent
feeling"   and  the   following  colloquy   took
place,  which  we  pass  on  to  pur  readers  for
a  chuckle:
Senator   POTTER.    I  don't  mean  to  ask
embarrassing   questions.     You   were   first
motivated  to  become  a  candidate  for  this
office  how? Was  your motivation  stimulated
by  your  political  activities  or  your  business
interests?
Mr.  HOWREY.   Well,  I  don't  know  what
motivated  me.    I  have  been  interested  and
have  specialized  in  this  field  of   the   law.
I  thought   it  was  an  opportunity  to   serve
.in  this  field.
Senator   POTTER.    What   I  am  trying  to
get   at,   Firestone  or   some  other  company
didn't   come  to  you  and   say,   "Now,   we
would   like  to   have  you   on   the   Federal
Trade  Commission?"
Mr.  HOWREY.   No,  I  had  the  support of
all  of  my  clients,  including  Firestone.    But
I  don't  think they  had  any  ulterior  motives
at   all   of  putting  me  on   the  Commission
because they knew very well  once I got on, I
can  certainly never  help  them any.
New  Cover  for  An  Old
Anti-Union   Tactic
Even   a   labor   movement  short-sightedly
obsessed  with  its  own  internecine political
quarrels  ought   to   see  the   danger   in   the
conviction  of  Abram  Flaxer  of  the  Public
Workers   for  contempt.     If   the  conviction
stands,   a   Congressional    committee   may
move  into  any  industry  or  strike  situation
and  demand membership lists.  The  easy ex-
cuse  of  investigating  Communism  may  be-
come a means of  reviving the  blacklist, with
the  question  of  "loyalty"  as  pseudo  patrio-
tic  cover  for  some  of  the  worst  anti  trade
union  practices  of  the  past.
Flaxer   was  willing  to  produce  the  fin-
ancial  and  other  records  of  his  union.    But
he  was  not  willing   to  give  the  McCarran
committee  the  names  and  addresses  of  its
50,000   members.     The   committee   in   its
own  report admitted that  it considered  most
of   the   members  loyal  Americans.     Why,
then, should  they be exposed  to  harassment?
The   lives  of  government  workers  are  es-
pecially  difficult   these  days  and  Flaxer  did
his  duty  as  a  trade  union  official  in  defying
the   Committee.     Is   there   anyone   in   the
labor  movement  still  foolish  enough  to  be-
lieve  that  such  attacks  on  the  right  to  pri-
vacy   in  union  membership   are   a   danger
only  to  the  Left?
Claque  on  Capitol  Hill
Our  research  assistant  had  occasion  to  go
to  the  Senate  last  week  to  page  a  Senator
off  the  floor.  Her  call  card,  indicating  that
she  represented  /.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   was
picked  up  by  one  of  the  pages   (cute  look-
ing,  she  says).    The   page   glanced   at   it
briefly  and  dashed  off  in  lukewarm  pursuit
of   the  Senator.    He  returned  shortly  sans
Senator  but  with  a  gleam  in  his  eye.    "Is
this  the  I.  F.  Stone,"  he  asked,  "who  used
to  work  for  PM?"    Our  assistant,  a  long-
time  resident  of  D.  C.,  was  about  to  invoke
the   Fifth   amendment   but   thought    better
of  it  and  answered  diffidently  that  it  was.
"Gee,  he's  a  terrific  writer,"  said  the  page
and  was  off  before  our  girl  could  do  more
than   flutter   her   eye-lashes  at   him.
Hat's  Off
In  these  topsy-turvy  times  when  we  find
ourselves   in   the   same   corner   with   John
Foster. Dulles,  defending Charles  E. Bohlen,
we  take  our  hat  off this  week  (rubbing  our
eyes)  to another one-time target  of  the  Left,
Lady  Nancy  Astor  for  her  "too-bad-it-isn't-
poison"  crack  about  that  cocktail  sipped  by
McCarthy.    (Will  the  ushers  please  throw
out  that  man  in  the   rear   who   muttered
something  about  "Cliveden  Set?")   As  we
were  saying,  we  knew  Lady  Astor  was  a
Virginian  but  we hadn't  realized  she was  a
militant  Jeffersonian   as  well.
Jennings  Perry  Joins  The  Weekly
It  is  with  the  greatest  of  pleasure  that  I  add a  page  this  week  by  Jennings  Perry,  my  old  comrade-
in-arms  of  PM,  the  New  York  Star  and the  Daily  Compass.    I  will  feel  a  little  less  like  the  Last  of  the
Mohicans  around  the  Capitol  these  days  with  Jennings  back  in  production.  The  task  of  writing  four
pages  and  handling  the  business  details  has  proven  incredibly  heavy;  this  will  lighten  the  burden.  I
could  not  hand  over  a  page  to  a  newspaperman  I  love,  trust  and  admire  more  than  Jennings  Perry.
He  will  write  from  his  home  in  Nashville,  Term.,  or anywhere else he  happens or wishes to  be.  His first
piece  is  out  of  Key  West,  one  of  his  favorite  fishing  places.  Jennings  is  a  kind  of  spiritual  Gibraltar  of
true  Americanism  in  these  degenerate  times.  I  welcome  him,  and I  know  we will  all  enjoy  reading him
again.                                                                                                                                  —I.  F.  Stone
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Slant's   Weekly,  April  4,  1953
JENNINGS    PERRY'S    PAGE
The  Kingfish  Run  and  The  Human  Race  Still Wrangles
Key  West,  Florida
As I  was saying,  the  Earth  itself  is lovely  and  careless; and
•the  answer  to what  is a good  place  for  a flame to  go  when  its
candle  is  snuffed  is  down  here,  at  land's  end,  in  the  utterly
insouciant  sun.
I  came down here  when PM  was  snuffed,  and  we went  out
to  the  Contents  and  took  cero  mackerel  on  feathers,  and  had
them  broiled  in  butter,  with  paprika  for  decoration  and  lime
juice for  tang.   When  the  Star fell, we were bolder  and  pushed
out over the  Big Reef  for  blue  dolphins  on the  blue  Stream.
This  time,  on  the  passing  of  the  Compass,  I  hied  straight-
way  again to  these  pretty  islands with  a  new  reel,  my old  rod
and  a gaudy,  frivolous  plug  called  Leaping  Lena.   With  Lena
I  managed to  convince the  first  tarpon  boated  in  the  Keys by
daylight  this  season,  and  thereupon  to  experience  the  sin  of
Pride.
In  February there came the finest run  of kingfish  on the Reef
in  seven years.   We  were in  them  off the  Dry  Docks,  and off
Satan  Shoal  and  once  inside  Cosgrove  Light,   off  the   Mar-
quesas—which  was  as  far  as  we  could  follow  the  run  in  an
open  small  boat  named  the  Free  World.
The  upshot  is that the  pre-Thanksgiving week I  came down
for  now has  stretched to  over  four  months.   The  spring  tides
are  here.   The  poincianas have  begun  to  open.    It  is  time  to
return to the United  States to see how the  cotton  is coming  up
under  Eisenhower.
The  graciously uninhabited  outer  islands here have been  full
of  peace and  industry.   I  am able to  report that  on the  fringes
of  the  Reef  the  indefatigable  polyps  are  as  busily  extending
the  land  as they have been  for  ages  (some  of  the  coral  is  red,
I.  F.  Stone'1   WetUy
Room  22)  KelkfS  BUg.
Ml*  F Strwt,  N.W.,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Please eater  the following  subscription.   »J  for  1 year il
(•closed.    (See   page  3  for  foreign  rate*)
Strwt
City
some  only  pink),  and  that  the  centipede  mangroves  are  as
diligently  as ever growing  new islands  for  us  all.
Ashore,  the  people  have  been  pleasantly  impressive  in  the
exercise  of  that  habitual   self-sufficiency,   that   rather   serene
aloofness  from  the  "crises" which agitate  the  statesmen, which
becomes  the  inhabitants  of  remote  islands  surrounded  by  the
warm, ancient, indifferent  sea.   In  such an atmosphere  even  the
tourists, one observes, make a truce with the strife that troubled
them  at  home.
The  skies  over  Key  West  almost  constantly  rumble  with
the  sorties  of  the  Navy's  jets,  blimps  and  helicopters;  yet  the
people  never  harp  upon  the  association  of  this  armada  with
the  rumors of  war.   Perhaps  it  is  their  adjustment, as island-
ers,  to  the  knowledge  that  in  any  case  they  have  nowhere  to
run.    Perhaps  it  is  a  fatalism  bred  of  living  in  the  hurricane
latitudes; but it is restful.  .  . .
The  local  press  notices  only what  happens  in  the  neighbor-
hood ; the  alarms of  the  mainland's  radio  pundits  make  small
stir  in  an  air  preempted  by Cuban  broadcasts  pushing  familiar
American  good's  in  Cuban  Spanish.     McCarthy,  McCarran,
Jenner  and  Velde are names which  down  here  echo  too  faintly
to  rouse  an  emotion.
Coming  in from  the  placid  passes  in  the  little  outer  islands,
I  have found  it  actually amazing that  in  a new April  the main-
land  papers  should  be  as full  of  the  "two  worlds"  wrangling
as  I  left  them  last  November.    It  had  been  possible to  fancy,
out there, that, if  only from  surfeit  of  the  old  epithets, the race
would have come to  terms with  itself.
There  are  fresh  whispers  of  hope;  it  may be  that  reason  is
gaining on the traces of  folly.   In that  effort  I gladly will con-
tinue on this  page,  in  good  and  familiar company,  what I was
saying  before.
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
225  Kellegg  BUg.
1416 F St.,  N.W.,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Entered   <u
Second  Clan  Mail
Matter
Pott  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED