I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953oct03.pdf

============================================================

The  Full Story: Lamont, McCarthy and  G-2,  See Pages 2 and  3.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I,  NUMBER  35OCTOBER  3,   19535       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
From  Vinson  to Warren
The  late  Chief   Justice  was a  politician   with  little  con-
cern  for  the  doctrine  of  separation  of  powers,  given  to  acting
as  if  he  were  still  part  of  an  Administration   team  and  as
self-assured  as  he  was  narrow  in  his  judgment  of  men  and
events.  He  went  on  the  bench  in  1946  at  the  very  beginning
of   the   cold   war,  and   the   decisions   handed  down  by   the
majority   of   which   he   was   a   part   dutifully   reflected   the
prejudices  of  the  period.
Vinson  and  his  colleagues   of  the  majority  dispensed   de-
generate  doctrine.  This  was the  Court  which  denied  a hearing
in  the  Hollywood   Ten   and   Barsky   cases,  permitting   Con-
gressional   inquisitors   to  breach   the   First   Amendment   and
use  the  public  pillory  to  terrorize  the  non-conformist.  This
was  the  Court  which  allowed  the  Bailey  case  to  stand,  brand-
ing  a  government   employe  disloyal  OB secret  evidence  never
fully  disclosed  to  her  or  her  judges;  the  Court  which  upheld
the  Taft-Hartley   oath  and  the  Smith  Act  cases,  where  that
monstrosity  "conspiracy   to  advocate"  was  validated  and  the
"clear  and  present  danger"  rule  abandoned.
The   common  denominator   of   this   new  Truman   Era
constitutional   law   was  the   familiar  premise   of   repressive
government  in  all  ages  and  in  all  its  various  guises—the  no-
tion  that  the  supposed  security  of  the  State  took  precedence
over  the  rights  of  the  individual  and  the  claims  of  free  in-
quiry.  Here  Vinson,  on  the  excuse  of  struggle  with   "totali-
tarianism",   relapsed   comfortably  into  the  legal  doctrines  of
his  bete  noir, Vishinsky.  The  cosmic  joke of  the  cold  war  was
this  import   into  America  of  Russia's   traditional  spy-mania
and  constant  obsessions  about  conspiracy.  The  story  is  really
a  simple  one.  A  democratic  country,  trying  to  lead  a  world
counter-revolution,  naturally  developed  counter-revolutionary
constitutional  doctrines,   revising   Madison   in   the  spirit  of
Metternich.  This   was  the  comedy  in  which  Vinson  played
his  determined  role.
It  would  recklessly  invite  disappointment  to  believe  that
the  substitution  of  Earl  Warren   for   Fred  Vinson  as  Chief
Justice  would  bring  this  ignoble  chapter  in  American  law  to
a  close.  A community preparing—or  being  prepared—for  war
is  a  community  in  which  basic  liberties,  though  they  figure
prominently  in  the  blowsy  rhetoric  of  the  warmongers,  are
always  disregarded.  The  law  is  earthbound  by  its  inescapable
instruments.  Judges,  like  juries,  vary  but  are  subject  like  the
rest  of   us  to  the   emotions   which   affect   the   human  herd.
Until  the  climate  of  opinion  changes,  the  law  as  interpreted
by  the  Court  under  Warren  is  unlikely  to  differ  sharply  from
the  law  as dispensed  under  Vinson.
But  having  said  this  as  hedge  against  the  notorious   lot-
tery  of  judicial  appointment  it  would  be  ungrateful  not   to
recognize  the  miracle  which  has  saved   us   from   some  Re-
publican  analogue  of  Clark  or  Minton.  Within  the  limits  set
by  circumstance  and  opinion, the  Court  may  sway  to  one  side
or  another.  An  Arthur  Vanderbilt  would  have  intensified  the
worst  trends  on  the  Court.  An  Attorney  General  out  to  curry
favor  with  fanaticism   might   have  persuaded   the   President
to  pick  a  repressionist  Chief  Justice  to  preside  over  a  pro-
gram   in   which   Brownell  promises   to   become   another   A.
Mitchell  Palmer.
We  do  not  know  for  that  matter  what  passed  between  the
Attorney  General  and  the  Governor   in  those  private  confer-
ences  before  the  appointment   was  announced.  We  have  no
way  of  knowing  whether  pledges  might  have  been  made  by
implication.  We   do  know   that   Warren's  position   on   the
loyalty  oath  at  the  University  of  California  made  him  suspect
in  the  eyes  of  one  wing  of  the  party,  though  the   eagerness
to  push  him  upstairs   and  out  of  the  way  may  have  over-
balanced  anxiety.
It  would  be  naive  to  suppose  that   Brownell  did  not
seek  some  assurance  that  Warren  would  not  prove  an  obstacle
to   the   intensified   deportation    drive   and   anti-"subversive"
campaign  on.which  the  new  Attorney  General  is  embarking
on  the  weird  theory  that  he  can  thereby  prove   Congressional
witch hunting  unnecessary.  But we may comfort  ourselves  with
the  knowledge  that  assurances  given  before  judicial  appoint-
ment  are  apt  to  prove  tenuous;  they  are  contracts  without  an
enforcement   clause.   It   still   seems   a   happy   accident   that
produced  a  Warren   in  the  party  of  Nixon   and  Knowland,
and  determined   the  award  of  our  highest  judicial   office   as
consolation  prize  to  a  Republican   as  respected,  humane  and
liberal  as  Earl  Warren.
There  are  grounds  for  hoping  that  with  Warren  there  will
be  a  moderately  liberal  5-4  majority  on  the  new  Court.  For
the  Negro,  the  change   from   Vinson   to  Warren   is  a  clear
improvement,   which  should  provide  a  favorable  decision   in
the  pending  action  against  Jim  Crowism  in  the  schools.  But
the  situation  on  civil  rights  in  the-sense  of  racial   equality
reflects  the  growing  political  power  of  the  Negro.  The  situa-
tion  as  to  civil  liberties is  strikingly  different;   here  no  size-
able   portion   of   the   electorate   demands   improvement,   the
victims  are  as  yet  part  of  a  tiny  minority  of  radicals  and
intellectuals.
If  world  tension  mounts  again,  with  renewed  stalemate
on  Korea  and Germany,  Warren  will certainly not  be  immune
to  the  currents  which  made  Frankfurter  and  Jackson  captive
on   so  many  fundamental  issues.   But  given  a   fair   amount
of  peace,  we  have  some  reason  to  expect  from  Warren's  past
that  there  will  now  be  five  Judges  prepared   to  put   a  rein
on  the  worst  excesses  of  the  witch  hunt.  Even  under  Vinson,
the   Court  enforced  the  elementary  safeguards  of  the   Fifth
amendment.  Perhaps  under  this  new  lineup  there  may  be
some hope  for  the First.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  3,  1953
McCarthy, Lament  and Military  Intelligence .
Washington
The    cast     assembled    slowly.    That
swarthy   urchin,  Roy   Cohn,  was  one  of
the  first  to  arrive.  Me  Carthy's  new  staff
director,  Frank  Carr,  the  former  head of
the  New  York'FBI  office,  turned  out  to
be  a   stoutish   young   man  with   a   non-
benevolent    moon    face,    small    heavily-
lidded   eyes,  and  a  pug  nose  so  tiny,  it
made  his  profile  seem  flat;  he  might  have
been   the  model  for  a  toy  Piggy-Wiggy
bank.   Louis   Budenz,   grayer   and   more
wrinkled,  dashed   in  out  of  breath,   dan-
gling  a  large  brief  case,  for  a  quick  con-
ference  with  Cohn,  Carr  and  a  big  Scan-
dinavian,  Karl  Baarslag,  who  had finally
proven  too  much  even  for. the  American
Legion   and   is  now   doing   research   for
Me  Carthy.  The  reporters  had  that  Mon-
day  morning  look.  The  big  room  was  but
sparsely  filled.  The  TV   machines   were
up  and  the  bright  camera  lights  on when
Me  Carthy,  made  his  entrance  alone,  15
minutes  late.  He  had  his  left  hand  in  his
pocket  and  walked  with  what  was  meant
to  be 'a   modest   slouch,  a   self-conscious
grin  on  his  face.  The  gray  jailbird  com-
plexion,  the  covert   look  of  a  smart  fox, .
were  unchanged.   In  that  gravelly   voice,
bored,   impersonal    and   inexorable,    like
the  detective   hero   in  a  soap   opera,   Me
Carthy   called  the  meeting  to  order.  The
scene   was   a   familiar   one—the   caucus
room  of  the  Senate   office  building,  on  a
Monday  morning  in  late  September.   The
Fall  hunting  season,  Red  hunting  that  is,
had  begun.
Out  for  Bigger  Game
This season Me Carthy  is out for  bigger
game,   the   biggest   he   has   tackled    yet.
The  attack  on  military  intelligence   risks
a  conflict  with  the  Pentagon,  far   more
powerful  and cohesive  a bureaucracy  than
the  State  Department.  Back  of  this  attack
sophisticated    Washington   observers   see
two  factors  at  work.  One- is the  long-time
ambition  of  Me  Carthy's   ally,  J.  Edgar
Hoover,  to  take  over  all  intelligence,  to
bring  the  Secret  Service,  CIA,  OSS  and
the  various   intelligence   branches   of  the
armed   services   under   his   control.   The
Congressional     investigating    committees
and the rightist  papers with which  Hoover
has   friendly   relations   have   helped   cast
suspicion  on  CIA  and  OSS  before.
The other factor at work is  Me  Carthy's
ambition  to  create  a  kind  of  dictatorship
for    himself   within   the   framework   of
established   government,  to  make  himself
the  recipient  of  complaints  from   assorted
crackpots  and  malcontents,  to  build  up  a
secret  ring  of  informants within  the  gov-
ernment,  to use their  reports  in unscrupu-
lous  smear  campaigns,  and  to  make   offi-
cials  more   fearful   of  him   than  of  their
own  superiors.
Scuttlebutt  on  Siberia
The  outlines  of  the  process  were visible
in  this   week's   hearing.   Me  Carthy   has
been  getting  scuttlebutt  from  Army intel-
ligence,  as  he  does  from  other  agencies.
Of  the  pamphlet,  "Psychological  and  Cul-
tural  Traits  of  Soviet  Siberia"  which  he
has  attacked,   Me  Carthy   said  "we  had
testimony  in  executive  session  the  other
day  that  a  Major  Wilson—I  think  it  was
a   Major   Wilson—strongly   objected   to
this,   and   pointed   out   this   was   Soviet
propaganda,  Communist propaganda,  from
beginning  to  end."
Loose  charges  are  taken  at  face  value
while  official  inquiry into  them is brushed
aside.  "He  objected  so loudly,"  Me Carthy
said,  "that  Army  Intelligence  finally  was
forced  to  call  a  board  to  pass  upon this."
The  findings  are  not  revealed  but  "for
some  strange  reason",  Me  Carthy  went
on, the  board  thought  the pamphlet should
still  be  used.  There  are   implied   threats
of   future   exposure   to   make   the   timid
tremble.  "I   should  point  out,  Me  Carthy
warned,  "it  was  a  civilian  who  was  se-
lected  to  head  this  board, and that  civilian
also  is holding  a high  position  as  of  today
over  in  the  Pentagon."  His  head  may  be
next.
In   the   Pentagon,   as   elsewhere,   Me
Carthy   is  already   dealing  directly  with
department    heads.   The   other    book   to
which  he  objects  (among  how  many hun-
dreds  on   Russia  which  military  intelli-
gence  must  use?)   is  "USSR.  A  Concise
Handbook",  edited  by Professor  Ernest  J.
Simmons  of  Columbia.  Me  Carthy   said
this  had  been  used  until  the  beginning of
this  year  "and  the  new  Secretary   of  the
Army  said  he  would  immediately check  to
see  whether  it  is  still  being  used."
Col.  R.  R.  McCormick  Dissents
Me  Carthy's  attack  on  military intelli-
gence  has  alarmed  circles  friendly  to him.
For  the  first  time,  the  Chicago  Tribune
and  Washington   Times-Herald,   Col.  Me
Cormick's   twin   publications,  have  pub-
lished  an  editorial  criticizing  Me  Carthy.
They  disagreed  with the  Senator  about the
Siberian  pamphlet,  said  his  principal  ob-
jection   seemed  to  be  that   the  pamphlet
"does  not  assert  that  all  people under  the
Soviet  tyranny  are  opposed to it."  The  Me
Cormick  organs  said  it  was  dangerous  in
war  to  embrace  "false  assumptions  about
the  enemy"  and  that  if  there  were  ever  a
Russo-American  war  "it  would be  an  er-
ror  of  the  first  magnitude  to  believe  that
every  Russian  except  the  top  crust  of  a
couple  of  million party  members was  dis-
affected  and  would turn  on  the  regime  at
the  first  opportunity."  Col.  Me  Cormick,
who  has  applauded  so  many  Red  smears,
rose  to  the  defense of  Col.  R.  S.  Bratton,
who  was  in  charge  of  preparing  the  pam-
phlet,  as  an  officer  of  good  reputation  who
had  tried  in  vain  to  awaken  the   Depart-
ment  to  the  danger  in  the  24 hours before
Pearl Harbor. Col. Me Cormick's editorial
writer  also  pointed out—quite  like  one of
us   "debunking"   a  smear  on  the   Left—
that   only  100  were  printed  and   37  cir-
culated  and  these only to  staff  officers  who
can  be  "expected   to  have  sufficient   per-
spective  to  abhor  the  Soviet  system."
This  effort   to  reason  with  Me  Carthy
has  a  refreshing kind  of amusement when
it  comes  from  the  right.  But  Me  Carthy
is  no  more  concerned  with  the  realities
and    mechanics   of   military  intelligence
than  with  those  of  the  overseas  libraries
or  the  Foreign  Service.  He  is  interested
in  hashing  up  enough  exaggeration,  false-
hood  and  alarm  to  serve  the  purpose of
advertising   himself   and   making   others
fearful  of  his  power.  For  this  purpose, as
so  often,  he  has  gone  back  to  the  same
limited  witch  hunt  cast  of  characters  and
replayed   some' of  the   same   old  cracked
records:  a  Russian  who  appeared   before
the  Me  Carran  committee and  claims once
to  have  been  in  the  Soviet  Foreign  Serv-
ice,  and  Budenz,  that  well-squeezed lemon
out  of  the  Daily  Worker   and  the  Com-
munist  Party.  He  found  Corliss  Lamont
in  the  bibliography  of  the  Siberian  pam-
phlet  and  he  found  him  and  some  other
assorted  liberals of varied  hue  in the  Sim-
mons  symposium  on  Russia.
It  was  in  the  course  of  inflating  this
wee  bogey   into  a  man-sized  scare   about
Army  intelligence  that  Me  Carthy  came
up   against   Lamont;  Lamont   was  taken
before  an executive session on a  few hours
notice  in  New  York  last  week.  On  one
side  of  the  room  sat  12 mysterious  spec-
tators—just  like a jury.  On  the other  side
in  solitary   splendor   was  Louis   Budenz.
But  Lamont  failed  to  be  awed.  Instead  of
. pleading  the   Fifth  amendment,  he  chal-
.lenged  Me  Carthy's  authority and  invited
a  test  by contempt citation,  even  risking a
perjury  charge  in  the  process  by denying
—despite  Louis   Budenz—that  he  was  a
Communist.   This  was   the   second   time
this  year   Me  Carthy's  authority  to  con-
duct   an   inquisition  was   challenged   on
First   Amendment   and   other    grounds.
Corliss   Lamont,  like  Harvey   O'Connor,
faces  trial  for  contempt.
Their  Star  Performer
Lamont  could  also  be  indicted  for  per-
jury   if  Me  Carthy  and  the  Department
of  Justice  are  prepared  to  take  the  risk
involved  in  putting  their  star  performer
into  the  witness  chair  in  a  court  of  law,
where  he  would  be  subject  to  cross  ex-
amination  and  would  himself  be  testifying
under   penalty  of  perjury.   The   hazards
become  evident  if  one  looks  carefully   at
what  Budenz  has  actually  testified  about
Lamont.
When  Budenz was  before  the  Me  Car-
ran  committee  two  years  ago  in  the  IPR
investigation,  Committee  Counsel  Robert
Morris  asked  Budenz whether  he had ever
seen   Lamont   at   Communist   meetings.
This  colloquy followed.
Mr.   BUDENZ.  Not  at  Communist meet-
ings, but  I  have  met him as  a Communist.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's Weekly,  October 3,  1953
. . . Who Was The Perjurer.  Budenz or Lamont?
Mr.   MORRIS.  You  have?
Mr.  BUDENZ.  Yes, and  I  have discussed
with  him on  several  occasions Communist
affairs,   with  him  as  a  Communist.  You
must  understand  that  while  Mr.  Lamont,
to  my knowledge,  was  a  Communist—that
is,   to   my   personal   knowledge,   and   in
meeting  with  him  as  such  and conferring
with   him,  that  he  sometimes  had  little
difficulties  with  the  Communist viewpoint
with  some criticism,  and  on  several  occa-
sions  and  specifically  on  one  that   I  can
remember,  I  was  called upon  by the Com-
munist  leaders  to  give  him  information
that  would  straighten  him  out.  This  was
with  regard  to  James  Burnham,  now  of
New  York, who  had  evidently  made  quite
an   impression  on  Lamont  and  whom  I
assured  him  was  a  Trotzkyite.
This  testimony   is  tantalizing.   Budenz
says   Lamont  was  a   Communist  but  he
never  saw  Lamont  at   Communist  meet-
ings.  Lamont  was  a  Communist,  but  he
had  been  impressed  by  James  Burnham,
a  Trotzkyite.
Now   your   true   Communist   had   the
same  horror  of Trotzkyites  that  Catholics
have   of  atheists.   The   only  people   who
needed   to  be  "straightened   out"   on   the
subject   were   persons   not   in  the   party,
friendly   to  it  but  not  under  its   orders.
The  picture   is  that  of  an  "innocent",  a
fellow  traveller,  not a party  member. This
would   explain  why   Budenz,  though   he
"met  him as a  Communist" never  saw La-
mont  at  Communist party  meetings.
However,  Budenz's  memory,  like  that
of   most   informers,  improves   with   the
years  under  pressure.  When   Me  Carthy
emerged   from   the   executive   session   at
which  Budenz  and  Lamont   testified  last
week,   Me   Carthy   had   something   new.
He   told  the   press  Budenz  had   testified
that   some  time  between   1942  and   1945
Lamont  had   told   him   on  the  telephone
that  he was a Communist.
No Kidding?
Budenz  was  -then  managing  editor  of
the   Daily  Worker   and   one  can  almost
visualize  the  conversation:
LAMONT:  Hello,  Louis,  this  is  Corliss.
BUDENZ : Hello,  Corliss,  how are you ?
LAMONT : Fine,  thanks.  Say,  Louis, did
you  know that  I  was  a  Communist ?
BUDENZ :  Gee,  Corliss.  No  kidding ?
Such  a  conversation  would  have  been
—to  say  the  least—unusual,  and  presum-
ably  would have  made  a  great  impression
on  Budenz.  Corliss   Lamont   phones   the
managing  editor  of  the  Daily  Worker  to
announce  that  he  is  a  Communist!  Had
he  just  joined?  Or  had  Budenz  doubted
that Lamont  was  a  Communist ? How  did
Lamont  happen  to  say  this  to  Budenz?
Budenz   did  not   explain.   The   questions
were  not  asked.  But  at  the  public  session
this  week,  Budenz  discreetly  omitted  the
story  of  the  phone  conversation.
This  time when  Roy  Cohn  asked  Bud-
1  0
enz  about  Lamont,  Budenz  replied:
"I   knew  about  Corliss  Lamont   before
I   joined  the   Communist  party.  I  knew
him  personally  before  I  joined  the  Com-
munist  party,  but  after  I  joined the  Com-
munist  party   I  not  only  knew  him  but
knew  of  him,  and  I  met  him  on  several
occasions  in  connection with pro-Commu-
nist  activities  . .  ."
Note,  "pro-Communist   activities."   Bu-
denz  was  then   in  the  party..  If   Lamont
was  also  in  the  party,  why did they  never
meet   in   connection   with   "Communist"
and  not  just  "pro-Communist"  activities ?
But  let  us  return  to  Budenz's  words:
".  .  .  and he  (Lamont)   was referred  to
by  Earl  Browder  as  one of the  four  prides
of   the   party,   which   included   Rockwell
Kent,  Dr.  Harry  F.  Ward,  and  the  late
Dr.   Walter   Rautenstrauch,   because   of
their always being ready  to cooperate with
any    Communist    front     or    Communist
cause."  The   italics  are  mine.  If  Lamont
was   a   Communist,   what   was    strange
about   his   being   willing   to   cooperate?
Communists  are  tightly  disciplined.  This
again  is  how  one  speaks  of  a  friend,  not
a  party  member.
Budenz  went  on  to  say,  "That  was  in
a   National   Committee  meeting   in   the
early  40's"  and   then—one  could  almost
hear   the  deep  breath—Budenz  took   the
plunge: "I  knew  also  that  Corliss  Lamont
was,  when  I  was  a  member  of  the  Com-
munist  party,  a  member  of  the  Commu-
nist  party."
How  Did  Budenz Know?
This  was  momentous  statement,  and  if
true   made   Latnont   a  perjurer.   Budenz
was not  asked  how he knew.  Had  Lamont
told  him?  Had  he  seen  his  party  card?
Had  he  collected his  party  dues ? How  did
he  know  that  Lamont  was  a  member of
the party?  The  witness had  said  what  the
Committee  wanted  to  hear.  Cohn  passed
rapidly  on  to  something  else,  as  if  afraid
lest  any  question  might  disturb  this  gem
of  testimony.
Cohn  asked  Budenz  about  the  late  Sir
Bernard  Pares. But Budenz obviously was
uneasy  about  the  Lamont  testimony.  Bu-
denz  broke   into  the   question  about   Sir
Bernard  to  say  that  "Mr.  Lamont  has  a
record   of  being  on  a  great   number  of
Communist   fronts   which,   if   we   could
analyze  them, would show  his  devotion  to
Soviet   Russia."   But   Budenz  had   just
been  saying  that  Lamont  was  a  member
of  the  Communist  party.  Why  bring  up
his  membership  in  Front  organizations?
Why  analyze  these  memberships? What
need   to   prove   by   inference   from   these
memberships  that   Lamont   was   devoted
to  the  Soviet  Union?  If  Budenz felt  that
he  was  telling   the  truth   when  he   said
Lamont  was a party member, there was no
need  for  arguing  the  point  by  inference
unless Budens  himself   felt  insecure  about
his own  testimony.
1  4  3
At  The   Soviet   Foreign    Office
Me  Carthy's  other  prize witness  at  this
week's  hearing  was  a  man  named  Igor
Bogolepov,   who  also  starred   last   year
before  the  Me  Carran  committee.  Bogo-
lepov  claimed   once  to  have  been  in  the
Soviet   Foreign   Office   and   Me   Carthy
tried  to  prove  through  him  (1)  that ma-
terial  in the  pamphlet on  Siberia  prepared
by   Army   intelligence    was   "practically
word  for  word"  the  same  as  material  in
"the   Soviet  bible,"  if  you  can  call  it  that,
"The   Problems  of  Leninism,"  and   (2)
that  the  Simmons  book  was  prepared  on
instruction  of  the  Soviet Foreign  Office.
The  parallelism  if  any  may  be  judged
from  the very first example cited by Bogo-
lepov.  He  said  that  on  the  very  first  page
of  the pamphlet, it said " the harsh  Soviet
government  has  liquidated  or  expelled  po-
tentially  rebellious   elements."  Just  how
this   statement   constitutes   Soviet   propa-
ganda  never  did  become clear.
The Myth of  "Instructions"
Bogolepov's   testimony,  when  carefully
examined,  as  few  will  be  able  to  examine
it,  was   not   much  more   satisfactory  on
the  question  of  "instructions."  Me  Carthy
asked  him  whether  "this  man  Simmons"
was  "receiving   instructions  directly  from
the   Soviet   Foreign   Office"   at   the   time
he  edited  the  handbook  on  the  U.S.S.R.
"Well,  Senator,  in  a  way,  frankly   speak-
ing,"  was  the  reply,  "there  was  instruc-
tions  but  you  must  understand  that   the
Communist   propagandists    were   clever
enough  to talk to the foreign guests  whom
they   wanted   to   indoctrinate   in   a   way
which  will  not  make  them  just  subordi-
nate  (sic)   his  instructions."
Me  Carthy  realized  this  answer  of  Bo-
golepov's  spoiled   the  picture   evoked  by
the  word  "instructions"  so  he   proceeded
to coach  the witness. "Is  it your  testimony,
Me  Carthy  asked,  "that   Simmons  came
to  the   Foreign   Office   and   received  in-
struction  from  the  Soviet  Foreign   Office,
either   through    London   or    Moscow?"
Nobody had  mentioned  London  before but
the  witness  answered  dutifully  if  vaguely,
"Yes,   at  least   in  one  instance  which  is
personally known to  me."
The   dates   are   interesting.    Professor
Simmons   made  five  trips  to   Russia   in
connection  with  his  biographies  of  Push-
kin,    Dostoyevsky   and  Tolstoy—in    1928,
1932,  1935,  1937  and  1947.  According   to
Professor   Simmons,  he  visited  the  Soviet
Foreign   Office  on  only  one  of  these  trips,
the  last,  which  was   made  on  behalf  of
the  American  Council  of  Learned  Socie-
ties.  The  handbook  on  Russia  did  appear
in  1947  but  Professor   Simmons  put  it  to
press  before   visiting  Russia. Anyway,  ac-
cording  to  Bogolepov's  testimony,  he  had
fled  from   the   Soviet   Union   five  years
earlier,  in   1942!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   October  5.  195)
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
Public  Disdains Threat  That  Leaves  No  Hope
When,  the  other  day,  the  government  released  its  official
list  of  193  cities  the  potential  enemy  probably  would  try  to
wipe  out  first,  sure  enough  my home  town  Nashville,  Tennes-
see,  had made  it.
Nobody  turned  a hair. I  looked  carefully  to  see.
The  newspapers  dutifully  rewrote  their  Civil  Defense  edi-
.torials  "in  the  light of  new facts,"  i.e.  that  the potential enemy
has  made  an   atomic   explosion   using   hydrogen.  Everybody
again  was  asked  to  "cooperate"  with  the  local  CD   officials,
whose names  nobody  had  bothered  to  remember.
That  was all.  That  is  the  way it  has  been  for  the  past  three
years;  indeed,  since  the  end  of  WW  II.  Even  the 'fact   that
our  town  had  been  mentioned  with  the  elect—those  of  such
importance  that  the  enemy  would  head  straight   for  them—
was  permitted   to   pass  without   as  much  as  a  murmur  of
satisfaction.
It  was  exactly  the  reaction,  or  lack  of  reaction,  recounted
by  deMaupassant  in  his  pleasant   little   story   of  Canneville
after  the  disaster   of  Sedan:  the  people  went  on  talking  of
whatever  they  were  talking   of  before.  But   surely  this  was
not  the  effect   the  announcement   by  the  government   should
have  produced.  A  whole  city  is not  informed  every  day on  the
highest   authority  that   its  next   moment   might   be  its   last.
I  spoke  with  my  neighbors  about  it.
The  coal  broker  on  my  left  said  with  a  cheerful  grin  that
he  supposed  they  would  have  to  save  the  old  newspapers   to
spread  over  the  children;   the  automobile   dealer   across   the
street  merely  said,  "Huh.  Hadn't  read  about  it"  and  went  on
down  to  his  office  in  the  heart  of  the  "target"  city  that  might
not  be there  when he  arrived.
The  other  cities  in  my  state  also  tipped  the  Black  Spot
were  equally  as  nonchalant.  In  New  York,  a  few  days  later,
when  the  sirens  warbled  for  the  make-believe   double-bomb
attack  from  which  the  survivors  could  only  retreat  to  Staten
Island,  there  was,  I  observed,  as  much  boredom   as  alacrity
in  popular  participation   in  the  prescribed   defense  exercises.
And  all of  this has  impressed  me.
Nashville   and   other   cities   of   the   hinterlands  could   be
skeptical  or  just  lethargic,  but  no  New  Yorker's  pride  would
/  E  Stone's    Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F. STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  205,
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington   3, D.  C.  Subscription  rates:  Do-
mestic, $5 a year; Canada,  Mexico and  elsewhere in  the Western  Hemi-
sphere, J6;  England  and Continental Europe,  $10_by  1st class mail, $15
by  air;  for  Israel, Asia, Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by first-class mail,  $20
by  air  mail.  Single  copy,  15  cents. Tel.:  LI  4-7087.  Entered  as  Second
Class  mail matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
let  him  doubt  that  his  matchless  metropolis  would  be   the
enemy's prime  mark. Why  is he, why are all of  us, I  wondered,
kicking  at  the  fallen  leaves  in  Bryant  Park,  so  unmoved  by
the  threat  of  Doomsday?  Are we  just  the  bravest  in  the  world,
the  busiest,  the  most  careless?  Can't   we  bring  ourselves  to
believe  there  really  is  an  H-bomb  or  that  anybody  would  be
so crude  as to  drop  one?
Perhaps   it   is  Mr.   DuIIes'   "measured   revelation"   of   the
fancier  trick  Science  now  has  up  its  sleeve  that  has  dulled
our  ordinary  instinct  to sauve  qui peut:  perhaps  the  argument
has  become  senseless,  when  we  are  directed   to  mobilize  our
efforts  to save any one city on what would be "a lifeless planet."
Perhaps  the  threat  is  too  big  for  our  imagination  or,  con-
versely,  so  big  in  our  imagination  that  anxiety  seems  a waste
of  emotion.
The   CD   officials   have  that  problem   of   our   strange   be-
havior  first  of  all,  for  if  we  will  not  flinch,  or  have  gooseflesh
or  even  willingly  rehearse  hiding  in  holes  when  the  finger
is  pointed   directly  at  us,  as  in  the  government's  listings  of
the  target  cities,  what  will  make  us  move?  Will  anything?
What  is  the  matter  with  us?
There  is  this  possibility,  not  too  far  from  probability,
that  nothing  is  the  matter  with  us  but  experience;  that  there
is  no  fate,  no  danger  the  new  wonder  weapons  can  hold  over
us,  we,  all  of  us  who  are  adult,  have  not  already  learned   to
discount  in  the  course  of  living.  The  threat  is  extermination.
But  all  who  have  made  the  hard  adjustment  to  the  fact  of
mortality   already  have  grasped   that   nettle.   The   difference
here  is  a  threat  of  extermination  of  all—all  at  once;  but   it
is a difference which cannot be really  appalling  to  minds more
or  less  well-accustomed  to  the  idea  that  one  day  in  any  case
they  must  cease.
The  statesmen,  the  scientists  and  the  editorial  admonitions
have  pictured  a  destruction,  if  there  should  be  an  atomic  war,
almost  too  comprehensive.   Hope  must  have  more  room;  an
enlargement  that  now  can  be  achieved  only  by  marshalling
human  effort  not  to  futile  flight  but  to  deeds  of  accommoda-
tion  and  agreement  which  would  put  war  completely  out  of
the  question.
I. R  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,  SJB,
Wsuhington  ), D. C
Entered  as
Second   Class   Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
October  3,  1953
Vol.   I,  No.  35
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED