I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953oct10.pdf

============================================================

Another  Collier'8  Phoney:  Russian  Planes  Over  Canada
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   I,  NUMBER  36             OCTOBER  10,  1953
WASHINGTON,  D. C15  CENTS
The  Fallacies  and  Flim-Flam  of Non-Aggression
Churchill  did   not   speak   of   a  non-aggression  pact  in   his
speech  of  May  11.   He  suggested  that  "the  master  thought
which  animated  Locarno"  might   be  applied  to  the  relation*
between  Russia  and  Germany.     Locarno  was  more  than  a
paper  promise  not  to  attack.   In  the  1925 Locarno  pact,  the
British  promised  "that  if  Germany  attacked  France  we  should
stand  with  the  French,  and  if  France  attacked  Germany  we
should  stand  with  the  Germans."
This  implies  a  new  system  of  mutual  guaranties  in  which
the  West  would  obligate  itself   to  aid  Germany  if  she  were
attacked  by  Russia  and  to  aid Russia if  attacked  by  Germany.
This  in  turn  would  entail  a  Russian  obligation  to  aid  Britain
and  France  if  the  Germans  attacked  westward.    Presumably
Adlai  Stevenson  had  a similar  idea  in  mind  when on  returning
from  abroad  (and  a  long  talk  with  Churchill)   he  proposed
in  his Chicago  speech  that  we "think  afresh ... in  terms of
a  European  system  of  durable  assurances  of  non-aggression—
of  non-aggression  for  Russia  as  well  as  for  France,  Germany
and  the  rest  of   us."
It  indicates  just  how  stale  the  atmosphere  has  grown  that
this  idea  should  suddenly  seem  gratefully   fresh  and  creative,
though  it  was  the  common  currency  of  diplomatic  exchange
after  World  War  I  and  was  so  disenchantingly  devalued  by
the  rise  of  Hitler  before  World  War  II.    The  system  broke
down  as soon  as Germany was ready  to  try  again.   The  assur-
ances  served  to  lull  the  predestined  victims  into  a  false  sense
of  security;  behind  the  formal  facade  of  shifting  agreements
from  Locarno  to  the  Nazi-Soviet  pact,  Russia  and  the  West
tried  to  trick  each  other  and  ended  by  tricking   themselves.
These  longer  perspectives  are,  of  course,  not  quite  fair.    It
is  as  if  one  told  a  man  recovering   from  a  heart  attack  that
he  might  die some day  from  kidney  trouble.   Postponement  is
itself  a  virtue.  • The  Churchill   and  Stevenson  speeches  made
the  concept  of  negotiation   respectable  again.   They  had  the
merit  of  restoring   discussion  of  Russian   relation*  from   the
bogeyman world  of  total  diplomacy to  the  discourse  of  reality,
in  which  it  was  recognized  that  Russians,  too,  were  human,
with  fears  as real  as our  own.
It   should  not   go  unobserved  that  this  recognition   came
at   a  time   when   the   rapid   revival   of   German   power  was
beginning   to   alarm  Western   Europe,  when   the   American
alliance  was  entering   on   the   phase  of   diminishing   returns
and  when  Korea  had  demonstrated  that  the  military   power
of  the  Soviet  bloc  was  too  great  to  risk  a World  War.
But  this promising  approach,  which  Stevenson  seems in  some
sense  to  have  "sold"  the  rather  vague  Elsenhower,  has  de-
generated  in  the  hands  of  DuHes  into  a  swindle.    To  see  the
swindle  clearly  one  must  go  back  to  the  selling  point  used
by  Stevenson.   The  glittering  premium  with  which  he  sought
to  make  the  sale  attractive   was  that  if   assurances  against
aggression  were rejected  by  the  Soviets,  this  would  "clear  the
air",  i.e.  solidify  the  Western  alliance  and  speed up  agreement
on  EDC.    Unfortunately,  as often  happens  with  clever  sales-
men,  the  prospect  has  taken  the  free  premium  and  left   the
article  it  was  supposed  to  sell.
For   the   "non-aggression"  pact   offered   by   Dulles   in  his
press  conference last Tuesday  and more transparently  displayed
in  all  its   childish   deviltry   by  Ray  Cromley's  story   in   the
Wall   Street  Journal   next   day  is  not   what   Churchill   and
Stevenson  have  been  talking  about.    Dulles  merely  proposes
to  offer   the  Russians  the  same  old  package—a  rearmed  and
united  Germany  in  the  Western   alliance—but  now  tied  up
with  a  pink   ribbon.   Moscow  is  to  acquiesce in  the  rearma-
ment  of  the  German  monster  in  return  for  a  vague  promise
that  the  monster  will  not  attack.   Dulles—one of  the  humor-
ists  of  our   time—also  offers   a  demilitarized   strip  along  the
borders  as additional security I   It  would  be  amusing to  figure
how  many  seconds  of   additional  warning  a   100-mile   strip
provides  in  the  age of  supersonic  planes.
Dulles  is no  well meaning babe  in  the  woods.   He  defended
the  Locarno  pact   in  an  Atlantic  Monthly   article   in   1935
not   because  it   offered    some   assurance   to   France   against
German  aggression  but   because  it  left  the  door  open  in  the
East  to  German  expansion  at   the  expense  of   Poland.    He
hoped  for  an  Axis  victory  before  and  works  for  the  revival
of   a  new  Axis  now.     He  is  prepared   to   offer   any  paper
promise if  it  will  make our  allies think  he is ready to  negotiate
in  good  faith.    But  all  Dulles  offers  is  another  poorly  sugar-
coated   version  of   the  unconditional   surrender  to  American
terms   at  which  Truman  and  Acheson  pegged  the  price  of
peace.    It  is  still  "take  it  or  leave  it",   though  this  time  we
offer  a  vague  pledge  of  non-aggression  to  go with  it.    What
would  we  think  such  a  pledge  worth  if  offered  by  a  Russia
with  bomber  bases  in  the  Western  hemisphere  as  part  of  a
deal  in  which  we  acquiesced  in  the  rearmament  of  a  warlike
neighbor  with  the  scan  of  invasion  still  visible  on  our  soil?
The  Russians  rejected  this  long  ago,  even  with  Locarno
style  guarantees.    When   Pravda  last  May  24  published  the
official  reply  to  the  Churchill  speech, it  welcomed  his  initiative
but   rejected   his   German   solution.     "Historical   experience
shows,"  the   Russians   said,  "that  as  long  as  militarist  and
revanchist  elements  are  given  freedom  of  action  in  Germany,
as   long   as  no   effective   measures  are   taken   to   secure   the
development  of  Germany  on  peace-loving  foundations,   Ger-
man  militarism  returns  fairly  quickly,   and  no  formal  guar-
antees   or   obligations    can   give   confidence   to    Germany's
neighbors.  .  ."   If  we were  not  blinded  by  ceaselessly  incul-
cated  hatred,  we  would  see how  true  this  is.
1  4  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  10,  1953
The  Air  Force  and  the  Alaska  Office  Both  Deny  It
Another   Collier's  Phoney—Russian  Planes  Over Canada
Washington
Last  Friday  Cottier's  took  full  page  ads  in  many  of  the
country's    newspapers   for    a    sensational    announcement,
"Russian   Planes  Are  Raiding  Canadian  Skies."   This  was
ballyhooed  as a  Collier's  "eye-witness  report". "Almost  daily,"
the  ad  said,  "at  least  one  Red reconnaissance  plane  violates
our  continental  borders."   It   reported,  "Many  have  pene-
trated  deep  into  north  central   Canada."   It  warned,  "Now
that' Russia  has  the  H-bomb,  we're  wide  open  to  a knockout
punch."
"What's being  done  about  it?"  Collier's  asked  dramatically.
"To find out, a Collier's  correspondent flew thousands of miles,
visited  top secret installations, saw the Red intruders  himself."
All  He  Saw  Was  A  "Distant  Gleam"
.This  turned   out  to  be  a  bit   of  an  overstatement.   The
doughty  correspondent, William  A.  Ulman,  told  how  he  was
playing  poker  in  an  Alaskan  radar  station  when  it  "picked
up the  blip of  an' unidentified  plane  on its  radarscope—almost
certainly  a  Russian."   An interceptor  plane set  oft
7
  in  pursuit,
with  the  Collier's  correspondent  on  board.  "Minutes  later,"
he  reported,  "we  spotted   the  distant  gleam  of  a  Russian
reconnaissance  plane,  speeding  back  to  its   Siberian  base."
That  distant  gleam   on  that  one  occasion  was  all  Ulman
claims  to  .have  seen.
According  to  the  ad,  "many"  of  these  planes  have  "pene-
trated  deep  into  North  Central  Canada."   But  the  "distant
gleam"  was  a  long  way  from  Canada.  Ulman  says  he  was
in a radar  station  with  the  waters  of Bering  Strait  "shining
dully  in  the  distance"  when  pursuit   of  that  gleam  began.
Bering  Strait  is  2,000  miles  from  North  Central  Canada.
. .The article itself,  when read  carefully,  turns  out  to contain
only  one  sentence  which; supports  the  sensational,   "Russian
Planes  Are  Raiding  Canadian  Skies."  An unnamed  "General
in  the  Alaskan   Air  "Command" is  quoted  as  saying,   "Some
have  even  penetrated   deep  into  north  central  Canada."   The
ad  converted  the  "some"  into  "many"'and  made  it   appear
that  Ulman had  himself  seen  the  "Red  intruders."
What  The  Air  Force Said
We  asked  Air  Force   HQ  at   the  Pentagon  whether  the
article  had  been  cleared  for  security.   The  first  answer  was
that  it  had  been  submitted, but  "we couldn't  go along with  a
lot  of  the  stuff  in  it."   A  security  officer  would  say  only that
the  article  had • been  returned   to  Collier's  carrying   a  dis-
claimer  stamp, which  said:
'"This  article. has  teen  reviewed  for  military. security  by
the    Office     of   Public  Information,  Department  of    Defense.
When  publishing  this article, no statement  should  accompany
it  indicating  such review  unless  the  following   statement  is
tnchtded  therein:  'Review  of  this  article  by  the  Department
of  Defense   does  not  constitute  verification   of  factual  accuracy
or  opinion."
Cottier's,  of  course,  made  no'reference  to  this  disclaimer,
but  left  it  to the  reader  to  assume that the  article  had  been
"cleared."   ,            :                                 :
The Cottier's  .article  said,  "Almost  every  day,  at  least one
unidentified    • airplane,  violates  our  continental  borders."   An
AJr  Force  officer  said  this  did  riot  agree  with  Air  Force  in-
formation:   He  said  there  were  such  reports   "occasionally"
but  they were :reports  of unidentified  "blips" on radar  screens
or..of  vapor  trails;
    :
   .
"Vfe   have  no  knowledge here,"  the  Air  Force  officer  said,
"that  Russian  aircraft   have  actually  been  seen  by  us  over
Alaska; we cannot  speak for  Canada.  There  have been vapor
trails  and  blips 'on'
:
 radar scopes  which  have  not  been  inter-
cepted.   If  people  want  to  assume  that  these  were  Russian
planes, that's  up to  them."
The Air  Force officer  added, "had  there been  any  violations
we  could  prove, you may  be  sure  you would  have heard  of it.
The  State  Department  would  have  made  a  formal  protest."
The  Collier's  story  brought  a  similar  reaction  from  J.  T.
Flakne,  chief  of  the  Alaskan  Division  at   the   Department
of  the  Interior.   Flakne  said  he  had  lived  in  Alaska   since
1929    and  been  chief  of  the  Alaskan  division  for  more  than
eight  years.   Flakne  said  he  had  heard  no  reports  whatso-
ever  of  border  violations by  Russian  planes.
The Ulman article  says  the  range  of  our radar  is  80 to 100
miles.   He  does  not  mention  that  Bering  Strait  at  its   nar-?
rowest 'point  is  only  65 miles  across.  Thus  some  "blips"  ob-
served  in" that  area  may  be in  Siberia.  Nor  does  he mention
that-radar  "blips" are  not easily identifiable.
A  recent  work  on  "flying  saucers"  says  there  are  several
hundred  different;  things,  including  atmospheric  phenomena,
which  can  cause  "blips"  on  a  radar  screen.   It   is   difficult
enough  to  identify  one  of  these  as  a  plane,  much  less  as
"Russian"  and  as  a  "reconnaissance"   plane.
At  Air:Force  HQ, it  was explained that  a  radar  operator
identifies  a  "blip"  as  a  plane  by  getting  in  touch  with  the
pilot  by   radio   telephone,  and  instructing  him  to  make  a
sharp turn ai a certain angle.  If the "blip" moves in that way,
the  radar 'operator  knows it  must  be that  plane.
A  "Plug"  For  Western  Electric?
.  The  Cottier's  story   seems  to  have  been  a  "plug"  for   a
"Distant  Early  Warning  Line"  project  being  developed  ex-
perimentally  by  Western  Electric.  At  Air  Force  HQ it  was
pointed  out  that  the  article's  appearance  was synchronized
with-a  three-page  press  release  from  Western  Electric.
The   article   pictured   Russian   planes   pouring   through
Canada  .and  said  if  they  could  "claw  their  way  through   to
pur. East  Coast"  and  drop  "only  nine  hydrogen  bombs  in  a
line  from  Boston  to  Washington, they  could  blast  out  of  ex-
istence  a  strip  50 miles  wide  and  450 miles  long"  containing
"one-  fourth
   :
the  nation's  population   and  one-third  of   its
wealth." In one fell blow, they "could kill as many as 35,000,000
Americans  and  destroy  the  U.S.  as  a  world  power."
However,  like  the  wallflower  in  the  halitosis  ads,  there  is
some  hope  for  us  yet.  Letting  Western  Electric  put  a  "Dis-
tant  Eurl'y  Warning  Line"  straight  across  northern  Canada
from  Alaska  to-Greenland  would  give  us  six  hours  warning,
allowing  all  the  Strategic. Air  Command  planes-to  disperse
and  launch  a  retaliatory  attack.  We could destroy  "as  many
as  90 percent of  attacking  enemy  bombers before  they  could
reach their  targets^—compared with the  30 percent figure cited
hi  1950  by  General  Hoyt  S.  Vandenberg."
The:cost?.:Only  $1,325,000,000 "insignificant  when matched
against  the  total  defense  budget."   And  what  if  ten  percent
of   the   bombers  still  get   through  with  those  nine  bombs?
"One    of  the  greatest  brains  in  Arctic  radio  communications"-
fold  the  Collier's  reporter,  "Well,  what  more  do  you  expect
to  buy  in .a  world  like  this?   We'll  warn  you—but  we  can't
guarantee  you security,  too!"
Our  Most Lethal  Publication
Cottier's,  is • rapidly  becoming,  our  most  lethal  publication.
Two  years  ago  it  gained  international  notoriety  with  a  bed-
time  story  preview  Of World  War  III  showing how we  could
destroy Russia'With'one big punch.  This  new sensation  shows
how .Russia  could  destroy  us  with  one  big  punch—unless  we
buy  the  Western. Electric's  new warning system.  We may,  of
course,  be  blown  to  "bits  anyway,  but  in  that  case  why mind
the  expenditure  of'another  billion?  We can't  take  it  with  us.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

L
:
P. Stone's  Weekly,  October  10,  1953
I. E  Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F. STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  205, 301
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates: Domestic,  $5
a  year;  Canada,  Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western  Hemisphere,   $<;
England  and  Continental   Europe,   $10  by   1st  class  mail,  $1!   by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   15   cents.   Tel.:   LI  4-7087.    Entered  as  Second   Class  mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
October  10,  1953Vol.  I,  No.  36
As  Seen  From the  Capitol Dome
A  recess  appointment  for   a   Chief   Justice  has  its  risks.
One  of  the  hazards  under  which  the  new  Chief  Justice  must
operate  is  that  certain  contentious  issues  on  which  he  may
pass  Before  Congress  reconvenes,  notably  the   school  segre-
gation  case,  might  affect  the vote on his confirmation .. . The
aviation   lobby  is  making  .a  strong   drive  for   another   Air
Policy  Commission  which  it  hopes  to  use  (like  the  last  one)
as  sounding board  for higher  Air Force  appropriations  . . .
The  only  visible  opposition  to  the   Spanish   accord  lies   in
economy-minded  Southern  Democratic  Senators  sensitive   to
the  restrictions  placed  by  the  Franco  regime  on  Protestant
worship.   Though  the   official   announcements  figure  aid   to
Franco at  $367,000,000, a logistics  expert  of NATO  privately
estimates' the  cost  at  $2,500,000,000.  It  is  this  figure  which
has  aroused  Senator  Russell ...  Now that  Mossadegh has
been  removed, the  Iranian  problem  as  seen  from  the  always
oil-minded  State  Department  is  not  so  much  how  to  start
Iranian  oil flowing again  as  how to keep it  from  undermining
inflated  petroleum prices in an oversupplied world market. ..
The  Church-State  quarrel  in  Poland  is  not  quite  as  simple
as  it  appears  to  be in  the  American  press.  In  Poland,  as  in
Ireland  and   French   Canada,  Roman  Catholicism  has  been
closely  linked  with  national   survival.   But  the  Pope's   per-r
sistent  refusal  to  establish  permanent  Polish  dioceses in  the
Oder-Neisse  territories  has  put'the  Vatican  on  the  German
side  in  a  fundamental national  issue.
Lee J.  Cobb  in  Death  of  A Citizen
Scene:  4:30  p.m.,  June  2,  1953,  in  room  1117,   Hollywood
Roosevelt  Hotel,  Hollywood,  California.   Characters:  Lee  J.
Cobb, star  of  "Death  of  a  Salesman",  and  William A. Wheel-
er,  an  investigator  for  the  House Committee on Un-American
Activities.    Occasion:   An   executive   session   to   determine
Cobb's  "loyalty,"  as  made public last  week.
Mn.  WHEELER.   Do  you  believe that  the  United  States
Government and  committees of  Congress have the  right—
i   I  am  not  (sic)  speaking  of  the  rights  as  set  up  by  the
:  laws  of  the  United  States,  but  the  right  to  investigate
Communists   within   any   environment   in   the   United
States?
MB.  COBB.  Yes, sir;  I  do.  *  * *
MR.  WHEELER.   Do  you  believe  that  the  Committee  on
Un-American  Activities  so-called  set  up  a  censorship of
scripts  in  the  motion picture industry  or  of  the  products
to  be  released by  the  motion  picture industry?
MR.  COBB.  No, sir;  I  have  seen  no  instance  of  it.
Having  thus  been  encouraged  to  air  his  opinions  freely,
as  befits  the  free  citizen  of  a  free  country,  Mr.  Cobb  was
given  a  passing  grade.
Scholarly  Moment  Before  The  Jenner  Committee
Writers  on  Marxism are  advised  not  to  quote Marx,  Engels
and  Lenin too often.   Palmer  Weber  many years  ago had  the
temerity  to  pick  ''Three  Uses  of  the  Concept  of  Matter   in
Dialectical  Materialism"  as  the  subject  of his  master's thesis
in  philosophy  at  the  University  of  Virginia.   Part  4  of  the
Jenner   Committee  hearings   on  "Interlocking  Subversion  in
Government   Departments"    released   this   week  shows  how
this  particular  wild  oat  caught  up  with  him.
When  Weber  was  before  the  committee,   Senator  Welker
wanted  to  know  why  "starting  on  page  121  of  your  thesis,
you  used Engels  40 times  and  Lenin  40 times  and  Karl Marx
12  times."
This  led  to  a  learned  exchange  with  the  Senator.   Weber
tried  to  explain that up  to page  121 he had  been  dealing with
earlier  concepts  of  matter,  while  from that  point  on  he  was
discussing  Marxist  concepts  and had  to  document his  sources.
"That  is  very  true,"  Senator  Welker  conceded,  "which  leads
me  to  this  question—99  of  your  references  were  Communist.
Now  at  the  time  you  wrote  that  thesis  were  you  a  member
of  the  Communist Party?"  Weber  took  refuge  in  the   Fifth
Amendment.   It  is  a  pity  the  witness  was  unable  to  reply
that  he  was  only  studying  Marxism  as  a  form  of  penance
while  preparing  for  holy  orders  on  a  grant  from  the   U.S.
Chamber  of Commerce.
Our  New  Press  Time
The  Weekly  is  now going  to  press  on  Thursday  and  being
mailed  on Friday.   It  was  formerly  sent  to  press  on  Tuesday
and  mailed  on  Wednesday.
STATEMENT   REQUIRED   BT   THE   ACT   OF   AUGUST   14.   1912,   AS
AMENDED  BY  THE  ACTS  OF  MARCH  S,  1933.  AND  JULY  2,  1946
(Title  39,  United  State*  Code,  Section  233)  SHOWING  THE  OWNER-
SHIP,   MANAGEMENT   AND  CIRCULATION OF
I.  F.  STONE'S  WEEKLY  published  Weekly  at  Washington,  D.  C.   1.  The
names  and  addresses  of  the  publisher,  editor,  managing  editor,  and  business
managers   are:   Publisher,   Editor,   Managing   Editor,   Business   Manager,
I.  F.  Stone,  5618 Nebraska  Avenue,  Washington,   D.  C.   2.  The  owner  is:
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  Inc.,  301  E.  Capitol  Street,  Washington,  D.  C.,  I.  F.
Stone,  Esther  M.  Stone,  Celia  M.  Stone,  Jeremy  J.  Stone,  C.  David  Stone,
6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  Washington.  D.  C.   8.  The  known  bondholders,  mort-
gagees,  and  other  security  holders  owning  or  holding  1  percent  or  more  of
total  amount  of  .bonds,  mortgages,  or  other  securities  are:   (It  then  ara
none,  so  state.)  None.   4.  Paragraphs  2  and  8  include.  In  cases  where  the
stockholder   or  security   bolder  appears  upon   the   books  of   the   company
as   trustee   or  in   any   other   fiduciary   relation,   the   name  of   the   person
or  corporation  for  whom  such  trustee  is  acting;  also  the  statements  in  the
two  paragraphs  show  the  affiant's  full  knowledge  and  belief  ma to  the  cir-
cumstances  and  conditions  under  which  stockholder!  and  security  holders
who  do  not  appear  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trustees,  hold  stock
and  securities  in  'a  capacity  other  than  that  of  a  bona  fide  owner.   5.  The
average   number  of   copies   of   each  issue  of  this  publication   sold  or   dis-
tributed,   through  the  mails  or  otherwise,  to  paid  subscribers  during   the
12  months  preceding  the  date  shown  was  8,204.   (e)  L  F.  Stone,   publisher.
Sworn  to  and  subscribed  before  me this  6th  day  of  October,  1953.   (s)  Eliza-
beth  S.  Gladman.  [Seal]   (My commission  expires  10/1/58).
OUR  ZERO  HOUR APPROACHES
Last  Fall,  after  the  New  York  Daily  Compass  closed down, the  task of  keeping alive a vestige of militant libertarian Jour-
nalism  in  the  age  of  McCarthy  and  McCarran  looked  hopeless.  But  thanks  to  your  help  we  have  discomfited  our  enemies and
surprised  our friends:  the  Weekly  succeeded.  Now  comes our  zero  hour.  What  breaks  most publishing  ventures  of  this  kind
financially is  the  expense of  obtaining renewals  as  the  first  year ends.  Every  mail  solicitation costs  several  hundred dollars.
The  rate  of  renewals—and  the  number  of  solicitations necessary to  get  them—will  determine when  we  can  begin  to  expand
in  size  as  we  hope  to  do.  Some  renewals  have  already  begun to  come  in, and we thank  the  thoughtful  friends  who a*nt  them.
Yon  can save  us  a lot  of  expense and headache  by sending in  your  renewal  now.  The  price  is  still  $5, but  you  can g«t  a two-
year  renewal  for  $9.  Or you can  renew  and send a  subscription to  a  friend  as  a  Xmas  gift  for  the  combination  price  of  $9.
please  renew  today.  And  don't  forget that  friend.  Just  fill  out  the  blank  on  the  reverse  side  of  this  page.
With  many  thanks, I.  F.  STONE
1 0 *
1  4  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  IO,
JENNINGS     PERRY'S    PAGE
The  GOP  Dilemma:  On  the  Horns  of the  Farmer's  Cow
/  have  just  done  a  three  days  drive  through  eight  states,
from  Connecticut  to  Mississippi,  on  the  traces  of,  literally  in
the  dust  of,  a  subcommittee of  the  House  Agriculture Com-
mittee  preparing  a  report  on  farm  conditions  and  opinion  this
year  of  the  Republican  Restoration.    Though  I  never  quite
came  up  with  the  group,  a  trustworthy  newspaperman  who
travelled  with  it  tells  me  "The Republicans were  so  blue  the
Democrats  actually  hadn't  the  heart  to  rib  them  about  it."
What  the  roving  legislators  are  seeing  and  hearing anyone
can   see  and  hear  in   the   countryside   this  fall:   the   barren
pastures,  the  empty  mows,  the  slattern,  half-hungry  cattle,
the  repentant   muttering  of  rural  patriots  who  only  a  year
ago  voted  for  Ike, Dick  and  Prosperity,  who  now  bite  down
on  the  name  Benson  as on  grit  in  their  teeth.
Evidently   it   is   not   a   happy    countryside,   and   just   as
evidently  it  is  not  the  administration  in  Washington  which
is   responsible  for   the   second  drouthy   year    hand-running.
But  it  is  a  waste of  breath,  as the  committeemen  have  found
out,  trying to  explain to  the farmer  either  the facts of  Nature
or  the  long  range  wisdom  of  Republican'policies  based  on  the
doctrinaire  assumption  that  the  farmer  is  a  typically  rugged
individual  resentful,  as  a  matter  of  independence,  of  govern-
mental  "interference."
With  his  own  logic,  bred  of  experience, the  farmer always
has  known  that  any  administration  is  to  be  held   accountable
for  its  weather;  that  its  weather  is  a  sort  of  judgment  upon
it  by  a  higher  authority  than  Man.    Of  more  recent  expe-
rience  he  has  been  confirmed  also  in  the  belief  that  his  own
well-being,  as  the  "cornerstone"  of  the  national   well-being,
is  and  should  be  of  prime  concern  to  society.   True,  he  has
no  liking  for  the  term  "relief"  and  spurns  the  use  of  it  in
connection  with  his  own  problems.   He  has  learned however
to  mistrust  those  who  trade  upon  his  dignity,  and  his  self-
esteem  nowadays  requires  rather  a  prompt  public  attention
to  the  evils that  befall  him  than  a buttery  compliment  to his
"traditional   self-reliance."
That  is why,  looking  from  his  lean  cattle  and  exhausted
pasture  lands  to  the  winter  just  ahead,  he  greets  so  sourly
the  assurances of  Secretary  Humphrey  that  in  these  past  few
Republican  months  "the cost  of  living  in  this  country  has
been  stabilized"  and  the  protestations  of  Agriculture  Secretary
Benson  that  the  livestock  "mess"  is  the  result  of  "loose  and
unsound"  policies of  the  preceding  Democratic  administration.
His  own  costs  indeed  have  been  stabilized,  at   a  very  high
level,  while  the  price  of  his  produce  has  plummeted.     And
whether  or  not   the  past  price  of   beef  is  to  blame  for   the
number  of   practically   unsalable  beeves  in   his  barnlot   the
farmer  cannot  help  feeling  that  this  explanation  of  his  grief
comes  with  particularly  poor   grace   from   a  spokesman  of
the  party   which  for   the   past   twenty   years  has  preached
"production,  production   and  more  production"—instead  of
"controls"—as  the  one  means  to  a  healthy  economy.
Suppose  the  Amercan  people  are  ready  with  their  knives
and  forks  to  "eat us  out  of  the  beef  problem."   The  farmer
finds  the  waiting  long  and  the  punishment  singular.    He  sees
no  other  commodity,  which  he  himself  must  buy  to  stay  in
business  and  to  stay  alive,  whose  price  has  been  forced  down
by  "oversupply."    It  does  nothing  either  for  his  ego  or  his
sense  of  fairness  to  gather  that  inflation  is  being  licked  by
depressing  the  price  of   beef—alone.
He   feels   left    out   and  in  a  measure  betrayed.     In  many
instances  he  has  "gone  into  cattle"  not  so  much  for  gold  as
to  serve  the  ends  of  "conservation,"  universally  urged  upon
him  and  reasonable  to  his own  mind,  turning  from  row  crop
cultivation  to  upbuilding  the  soil.    His  reward  is  to  be  left
holding   the bag.
It  hardly  is  petty  of  the  farmer  in  this  pass  to  react  politi-
cally;  in  any  case  it  is inevitable  that  he  should  recall  vividly
what  so recently  was  dinned  into  him: that  it  is  time  for  a
change.
The  drouth,  by  doubling   the  farmer's  hurt,  has  merely
doubled  the  Republican  jeopardy  in  the  countryside.    This
year,  the  farmer  can  afford  to  keep  his  cow  even  less  than
he  can  afford  to  let  it  go to  market.
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed $5:
Name  __ _____________ . _____________
Street    ._ __________ .. ________  : __________
City. ___ „ _____ .... __  Zone.-.-.... State................
Enter  this  gift  sub   for  $4  more  (money enclosed):
(To)  Name ____ . _ __. __ . __ .._; ____ ..... __ ..
Street _____ .. __________ . ________ ...
City ____ - _____ ...._..  Zone _ ......  State................
I.  F. Stone's Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED