I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953mar14.pdf

============================================================

The  Ordeal  of  Scientist  X,  See page  2.
. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    I  NUMBER  9
MARCH   14,  1953
7        WASHINGTON,  D.  C15  CENTS
"Washington  After  Stalin
Amid  the  burst  of  bad  manners  and  foolish  speculation,
there  was  remarkably  little  jubilation.    A  sudden  chill  des-
cended  on  the  capital.    If  Stalin  was  the  aggressive   monster
painted  in  official  propaganda,  his  death  should  have  cheered
Washington.    Actually  the   unspoken   premise   of  American
policy  has  been  that  Stalin  was  so anxious  for  peace  he  would
do  nothing  unless  Soviet  soil  itself  were  violated.  With  his
death,  the  baiting  of  the  Russian  bear—the  favorite  sport  of
American  politics—suddenly  seemed  dangerous.  Even  Martin
Dies  rose  in  the  House  to  say that  while  Stalin  was  "utterly
cruel  and  ruthless,  he  was more cautious and  conservative  than
the  younger  Bolsheviks."     Few  would  have  dared   a  week
earlier  to  dwell  on  the  conservative  and  cautious temperament
of  the  Soviet  ruler,  much  less  imply  that  this  was  favorable  to
world  stability and  peace.   Now  this  theme  leaked  from  every
State  Department  briefing.  There  was  apprehension  that  after
Stalin  there  might  come  someone  worse  and  more  difficult   to
deal  with.
The  cold  war  claque  was critical  of  Nehru  for  calling  Stalin
a  man  of  peace,  but  Washington's  own  instinctive  reactions
said  the  same  thing.    The  stress  put  by  the  White  House  on
the  fact  that  its  condolences  were  merely  "official"  was  small-
minded  and  unworthy  of  a  great  power.    After  all,  it  is  for-
tunate  for  America that  when  Stalin's  regime  met  the ultimate
test  of  war,  it  did  not  collapse  like the  Czar's. The  war  against
the  Axis would  have  lasted  a  lot  longer  and  cost  a great  many
more  American  lives  if  there  had  been  a  second  Tannenberg
instead  of  a Stalingrad.    Stalin was one  of  the  giant  figures  of
our  time,  and  will  rank  with  Ivan,  Peter,  Catherine  and  Lenin
among  the  builders  of  that  huge  edifice  which  is  Russia.  Mag-
nanimous  salute  was  called  for  on  such  an  occasion.  Syngman
Rhee,  ruler of  a satellite  State  precariously  engaged  in  fighting
for  its  life  against  forces  supplied  by  Russia,  demonstrated  a
sense  of  fitness  in  his  own  condolences  which   Washington
seemed  afraid  to  show.
It  is  difficult  to  pursue  dignified  and  tational  policy
when  official  propaganda  has  built up  so  distorted  a  picture of
Russia.    Many  Americans  fed  constantly  on  the  notion   that
the  Soviet  Union  is  a  vast  slave  labor  camp  must  have  won-
dered  why the  masses did  not  rise now  that  the  oppressor  had
vanished.  The  Bolshevik  Revolution  is  still  regarded  here  as
a  kind  of  diabolic  accident.  The  necessities  imposed  on  rulers
by the character of  the countries  they rule is ignored. To  under-
stand  it would  be to put  the problem  of  peaceful relations  with
Russia  in  quite  a  different  perspective  and  to  dissipate  febrile
delusions about  "liberation."   The wisest of the anti-Communist
Russian emigres of  our  generation,  Berdyaev, in  his The  Origin
of   Russian  Communism  has  touched  on  the  way  Bolshevism
succeeded  because  it  was  so  deeply  rooted  in  Russia's  charac-
ter  and  past.  Bolshevism  "made  use,"  Berdyaev wrote,  "of  the
Russian  traditions  of  government  by imposition. ... It  made
use  of  the  characteristics  of  the  Russian  spirit ...  its  search
after  social  justice and the Kingdom  of  God upon  earth  .  . .
and  also  of  its  manifestations  of  coarseness   and. cruelty.     It
made  use of  Russian  messianism. ...  It  fitted  in  with  the
absence among  the  Russian people of  the  Roman  view of  prop-
erty. ...  It fitted in  with  Russian  collectivism  which  had its
roots  in  religion."
Every  great, leader  is  the  reflection  of  the  people  he  leads
and  Stalin  in  this  sense was Russia.  He  was also  the  leader  of
something new in world history,  a party: a party in a new  sense,
like nothing  the  world  has known  since  the  Society  of  Jesus,  a
party  ruling a one-party state.  It  is this  difference  which makes
nonsense  of  prediction  by  analogy  based  on  the  principle  of
legitimacy  in  monarchy or  the  later  history  of  the  Roman  em-
pire.  Struggle  among  the  party  leaders  occurred  after  the  death
of  Lenin and  may occur after  the  death  of  Stalin,  but  the  party
itself  provides  a  cement  strong  enough  to  hold  the  state  to-
gether  despite  such  struggles.   To  regard  this  as  a  group  of
conspirators  may prove  a fatal  error.  This  is a  movement,  with
a  philosophy  comparable  to  the  great  religions  in  its capacity
to  evoke  devotion,  and   based   on  certain  economic  realities
which  give  it  a  constructive  function.     It  has  proved  itself
capable  of  industrializing Russia and  opening  new  vistas to  its
masses,  and  this  is  its  appeal  to  similar  areas  in  Asia.  This  is
a challenge  which can only be met  by peaceful  competition,  for
only  in  peace  can  the  West  preserve  what  it  has  to  offer,  and
that  is the  tradition of  individual  liberty  and  free  thought.
The  news  from  Communist  China where party  cadres  had
begun  careful  study  of  Malenkov's  work  weeks  before Stalin
died  indicates  that  the   succession  was  arranged   in  advance.
There  is  little  reason   to   expect   a  sudden  fight  among  the
leaders,  and  no  reason  to  believe  such  a  quarrel  would  snake
for  world  stability.  It  is time in  the  wake of  Stalin's  death  to
recognize  two basic  facts  about  the  world  we live  in.  One  fact
is  Russia. The  other  is  the  Communist movement.  The  surest
way  to  wreck what  remains  of  capitalism and  intellectual  free-
dom  in  the  non-Communist world  today  is  blindly  to  go  on
refusing  to  recognize  these  facts  and  refusing  to  adjust  our-
selves to co-existence on the  same planet with  them. Eisenhower
in  leaving the  door  discreetly ajar  to  possible  negotiations  with
Stalin's  successor was  wise,  and  the  lesser  powers  should  seize
on  the  sobering  moment  to  urge  Washington   and   Moscow
to  get  together.
3   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March  14,  1953
Victory  Over  Perjury:  The  Ordeal  of  Scientist  X
Washington,  D.   C.
.  The  private  passion  of  "Sciential  X," Di.
Joseph  W.  Weinberg,  is  study  of  the  life  and
work  of  Giordano  Bruno.  Unlike  his  hero,  Dr.
Weinberg  has  escaped  martyrdom. His  acquittal
by  a  jury  in  Federal  Court  here  last  week  may
go down in  the history of  this  period  as the first
great  victory over  perjury  in  the  current Ameri-
can  Inquisition.
The  verdict  was more than  the  vindication of
a  scholar  after  four  years of  calumny.  It  was a
black  eye for  the  House  Un-American  Activities
Committee,  and  for  the  Tenney  Committee  in
California  and  for  the  assorted  informers  and
Federal  agents  on  whom  these  committees  re-
lied.   For  if   Dr.   Weinberg  is  not  guilty  of
perjury,  then his  accusers were  and  ought them-
selves  to  be  prosecuted.   And  the  House  Com-
mittee  is  guilty  of  defaming  an  innocent man,
destroying  his  reputation  and  driving  him  out
of  his  university  post  for  the  sake  of  a  pre-
election  sensation.
This  is  how  it  began.    On   September  28,
1948,   on   the   eve  of   the   1948   election,   the
House  Committee  issued  a  "Report  On  Soviet
Espionage  Activities   in  Connection   with   The
Atom   Bomb."    The   80th   Congress   then   in
session  was Republican.  J.  Parnell  Thomas was
chairman   of   the   committee.    It   alleged   that
"certain  vital  information ...  of  assistance  to
the  Russians in  their  development of  the  atomic
bomb  .  .  . was actually  transmitted."   And the
report  said  "The  failure  to  prosecute  those  who
were  engaged   in  this  conspiracy  is  completely
inexcusable."    The   pre-election   message   was
clear.   The  Truman  Administration   had   pro-
tected  atomic spies.
The  most  exciting  part  of  the  report  con-
cerned  a  Scientist  X.  The  report  described  how
Scientist  X   met  Steve  Nelson,  a  Communist
party  official,  at  the  latter's  home  in  Berkeley,
California,  "late  one  night  in  March  of  1943."
Scientist   X'  "read   to   Nelson   a   complicated
formula  which  Nelson   copied  down"   because
the  formula  had  to  be  returned  to  the  univer-
sity's  Radiation  Laboratories   in  the   morning.
These  laboratories  were  "engaged  in  vital 'work
in  the  development  of  the  atomic  bomb."   A
few   nights   later—so  the  report   said—Nelson
met  a  Soviet  official  in  a  park  and  "transferred
something"  to  him.   The  committee  said,  "If
the   matter   transferred   included   the   formula
Scientist  X  had  given  several  days  previous—
and  the  inference  is  irresistible  that  it  did—it
was  a  formula  of  importance  in  the  develop-
ment  of  the  atom  bomb."   This  was as  good  as
any  Hollywood   scenario.
Scientist  X  when  summoned  before  the  com-
mittee denied  that  he knew Nelson, denied  that
he had  ever had  any such  meeting  "with  Nelson
or  anyone  else"  and  denied  that  he  had  "ever
given  to  any  unauthorized  person  any  formula
or   other   classified  information."    The   report
countered,  "This  is  in  direct  conflict  with  the
testimony  of  two  Federal  agents  who  were  as-
signed  to  the  investigation."    When  the  Com-
mittee  on  the  word   of   "a   very   reliable  and
highly   confidential  informant"  later   identified
Scientist  X  as Weinberg, the  newspaper verdict
was  guilty  and  Weinberg  soon  lost  his  post  as
assistant  professor  of  physics.  It  was  said  that
he  had  created  a  public  relations  problem  for
the  University  of  Minnesota.
The day after  the original House Committee
report  in  1948,  the  Department of  Justice issued
a  statement  saying  that  all  the  matter  covered
in  the  report  had  been  "carefully  studied  .  .  .
on   two  separate   occasions"   by  the  Criminal
Division  and prosecution  found  "unwarranted."
The  Department  said  the  report  had  been  as-
sembled  a  year  before  from   stray   intelligence
"leaks"  and  its  release  timed  by  the  Committee
for  the  eve  of  the  1948  elections.   Little  atten-
tion  was paid  to  this,  as to  other  denials.
But  to  those  few  who  read  the  Committee
report  instead  of  relying  on  the  headlines,  there
were  tell-tale  discrepancies  and  contradictions.
The  writer  called  attention  to  these  in  a  series
of  articles  for  the  New  York  Star  and  (after
the  1949  report)   in  two  columns  for  the  New
York  Compass.  While  most  took  the  charges
at  face  value,  their  weaknesses must have  been
apparent  to  the  Federal  grand  juries  of   1950
and   1951  which  considered  them.   Neither  re-
turned  indictments.   It  was  not  until  May  of
last  year,  just  three  days  before  the  statute  of
limitations  would  have  foreclosed  prosecution,
that  the  government  finally  got  an  indictment
for  perjury.
The   indictment  itself   considerably  deflated
the  original  charges.   If  these  were  true,  Wein-
berg  was guilty  of  war-time  espionage.  On  this
there  is  no'  statute  of  limitations.    But  Wein-
berg  was  only  indicted   for  perjury.   The  im-
portant   perjuries   lay   in   Weinberg's   sworn
statement  that  he  had  never  given  classified  in-
formation   to   anyone,   and   that   there   never
occurred  any  such  meeting  as  the  one  in  which
he was alleged  to have dictated  a  secret formula
to Nelson.   Neither figured in  the  indictment.
Weinberg  was indicted  on  three  counts,  none
of   which   had   anything   to   do   with   atomic
espionage.   Count  1 was his  denial  that  he had
ever   been   a   Communist.     Count   2  was   his
statement  that  he  recalled   attending   only  one
meeting of  the  Communist  party,  a public meet-
ing under its  auspices in Oakland.   Count  3 was
the  statement that  he had  never met  Nelson.
The  indictment   put  an  anti-climax   on  the
report.   The  trial   in  turn   reduced   the  indict-
ment  to a  shred.   Halfway through,  the  govern-
ment  withdrew  Count  3.   In  withdrawing   the
allegation  that  Weinberg  ever  knew  Nelson  it
took  the  last  leg  out  from   under  the  atomic
espionage  report.   A  few  days  later  the  Judge
himself,  Alexander   Holtzoff,  ruled  out  Count
2.   This  left  only  Count  1,  the  denial  of mem-
bership  in  the  Communist party.
Two  witnesses  were  produced by the  govern-
ment.    One   was   Joseph   Samuel   Biskind,   a
music  teacher   and  part  time  statistician.    He
testified   that  he  attended  40  meetings  of   the
Campus   branch   of   the   Communist  party   in
Berkeley  from   the  spring  of   1939  to  June  of
1940  and  that  Weinberg  was  at   20  of  these
meetings.   When  asked  how  he  arrived  at  this
figure,  he  said  there  were  52 weeks in  the  year
and   12  weeks  of  summer  vacation.  That   left
40   meetings   a   year   of   the   Campus  branch.
Defense  counsel  then  wanted  to  know  how  he
arrived  at  the  figure  of   20  for  the  meetings
attended  by  Weinberg.
A.  Well,  I  couldn't  prove it  from  any matter
of   fact.    I  simple  know  that  on  20  of  these
occasions I saw Mr. Weinberg.  . . .
Q.  Would  you tell  us the first occasion when
you  saw Mr.  Weinberg?
A.  Well,  I  couldn't  recall  that  at  all,  sir.
Q.  Will  you tell  us  the  second?
A.  I  know one occasion on which I  saw him
at  a  meeting ...
Q.  You  don't  remember  any  other  occasion,
is  that  right?
A.  No,  sir.
The  other  witness,  John  Graham Backus, said
he  had  "a  visual  image"  of  Weinberg  lying  on
the  floor  at  a  Communist  meeting  but  "this  all
happened  14 years  ago  and  I  could  be  wrong."
When   the  prosecutor,   William   Hitz,  angrily
began   (as  he  conceded)   to  impeach  his  own
witness,  Backus  said,   "I  have  been   over  this
thing  six  or  seven  times  with  people  from  the
FBI.   I  have had  these  two  grand  jury sessions.
I  have  had  sessions  in  your  office,   and  things
have  become  so confused  by this  time that what
pictures  I  may have had  are very  vague."
Q.   (By Hitz).  Do  you also  mean  to include
the  one  single   meeting  about  which  you  had
this  mental  photograph.   Is  that  vague?
A.  Very  vague.
The  final  blow  to  the  government's  rickety
case  was  a  .surprise  witness   for   the  defense.
Kenneth  O.  May,  professor  of  mathematics at  a
small  town  college  in  the  Middle West, had  the
humanity  to  risk  his  own  position  by testifying.
May  said  he  was  a  Communist  party  function-
ary  in  Berkeley  at  the  time,  that  he  roomed
with  Steve  Nelson,  that  he  attended   meetings
of  the  Campus  branch  regularly,  that  he  never
saw  Weinberg  at  any  of  them.   May  said  he
was  no  longer  a  Communist  and  had  never  hid
his  views.    He   testified   that  when   asked  his
profession  on  being  inducted  into  the  Army  in
1942  he  replied,  "Communist  party  organizer."
The  hours  of  waiting  in  the  witness   room
at  the  Federal  courthouse  were  but  a sample in
miniature  of  the  long  agony  imposed   on  the
brilliant  young  physicist  and  his  wife.   The  ac-
quittal   finally   made   a  dud   of   the   sensation
served  up  by  the  Committee  on  the  eve  of  the
1948  elections.   But  how wipe  out  the  suffering
and  the  stain?  Restore  honor  and employment?
And  are  those  to  go  forever  unpunished  who
use  Congressional  power  and  immunity to  deal
in  perjury   and  slander?   Not  a  single  person
named  in  that  atomic  report  has  ever  been  in-
dicted  for  espionage.   It  linked  up  with  none
of  the  real cases in  the  wake of  the  Fuchs  affair.
It  was  a  fake  from  first  to  last,  yet  all  those
named  in  it  live under  a cloud.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  14,  1953
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor and fublisbtr,  I.  F.  STONB
Published weekly  except the last two  weeks
of  August  at  Room  225,  1416 F St., N.W.,
Washington  4, D.  C    Subscription   rates:
Domestic,  $3 a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and
elsewhere  in  the 'Western  Hemisphere, $6;
England  and  Continental   Europe,  $10  by
1st class  mail,  $13  by air; for  Israel,  Asia,
Australia   and   Africa,   $10   by   first   class
mail,  $20  by  air  mail.    Single  copy,   15
cents.     Contents,  covered    by   copyright.
Telephone,   STerling   3-0938.   Entered  as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
Vol.  1, No. 9
.1        March  14,  1953
Defeat   for  McCarthy
It  would  be  hard  to  document  the  Secre-
tary  of  State's  assertion  that  John  Carter Vin-
cent's  reporting  and  evaluation  of  the  facts  on
China  were substandard, and John  Foster  Dulles
in  his  statement on  the  Vincent  case  does  not
try  to  do  so.   No  one  misjudged  the  nature of
the  Chinese  Communist  movement  more  com-
pletely   than  "Pat"  Hurley  and   no   one  was
more   critical   of   Chiang   Kai-shek   than   ,that
other   rightist   favorite,  Gen. Wedemeyer.    A
sober  study of  the  White  Paper  on  China  will
not  bear  out  the  popular  charge  that   Foreign
Service  officers   assigned  to  China  were   either
misinformed  or  more prejudiced  against  Chiang
than   the  facts   warranted.    Men  like  Vincent
and  John  Stewart  Service  are  guilty  of  nothing
but  the  misfortune  of  being  picked  as  targets
by  an  utterly  unscrupulous lobby.
But  when  that  has  been  said  it  is  necessary
in   the  light   of   political   realities   to  applaud
the  action  taken  by  Mr.  Dulles  in  the  Vincent
case.    The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  a
victory  for  decency  and  a  defeat  for  McCarthy
and  McCarran.    These  two  Senatorial  vultures
have  been  working  for  two  years  to  pick  clean
the  bones  of  Vincent's  reputation.    To  have  a
Republican   Secretary   of   State   rule   after   all
their  charges  and  "testimony"  that  Vincent  was
neither   disloyal  nor  a  security  risk  is  a  bitter
pill  for  them  to  swallow  and  must  deepen  the
nascent  hostility  between  the  Eisenhower  Ad-
ministration   and   the   crypto-Fascist   bloc   in
Congress.    The  Secretary  of  State  was  thereby
also  calling  their  pet  witness  Louis  Budenz  a
liar.     In   this   respect   the   Secretary's   finding
will  help  that  other  target  of  the  two  Me C's,
Owen  Lattimore.
Those  Christians!
Another  unexpected  pleasure  of  the  week
was  hearing  Miss  Tima  D.  Ludins,  the  retired
New  York  high  school  teacher,  give  the  Jenner
committee  a  piece  of  her  mind.    Miss  Ludins
told   the   committee   among   other   things   that
she  had  dropped   in   the  night  before   at   the
movie,  Androcles  and  The   JJon,   now   playing
in  Washington.     She  recommended  it  to  the
Committee.     "In   the   movie,"    Miss   Ludins
pointedly  related,  "Caesar   says  that  for  every
Christian   we  throw  to   the   lions,   two   more
spring  up."   Jenner  and  his  colleagues  ought
to  call  off  the  education  hearings  while  they
reinvestigate  Hollywood.   Who  had  the  bright
idea  of  putting  on  Androcles  just  at  this  time?
Everybody  knows  Shaw  was  a  Red,  and  as  for
the  early  Christians  the  less  said  about  them
the  better.    While  Jenner  and  his   colleagues
fiddle,  it   would  be  better   to   have  no   more
movies  showing  how  Rome  burned.
What?    No  Parking  Tickets?
From  a  Justice  Department  press  release
announcing denaturalization  proceedings  against
a  Communist:  "that  he  failed  to  disclose  that
he  was  not  attached  to  the  principles   of  the
Constitution  of  the  United  States,  and  that  he
did  not  reveal  that  he  has  (sic)  been  arrested
in    Lawrence,    Massachusetts,   November    10,
1931,   on   charges   of   disorderly  conduct,   un-
lawful   assembly  and  obstruction  of   sidewalk."
Pedestrian  Statue!
In  November,  1951,  General  Van  Fleet's
Judge   Advocate   General   gave   out   a   sensa-
tional  report  on  the  mistreatment  of   prisoners
of   war   by  the   Reds.    "U.   S.  Reveals   Reds
Killed  5500  G.I. Captives  in  Korea"   said  one
headline  and  another,   "Reds   Butchered   More
Americans  Than  Fell  in  '16."    But  when  Con-
gressman  O'Konski   asked   General   Van   Fleet
last  week  how  our  POW's  were  being   treated
by  the enemy, the  answer was that  we had no in-
formation.    None   of   the   awed   Congressmen
on  the  House  Military  Affairs  Committee  had
the  nerve  or   knowledge   to  ask  the   returned
hero  about  these  earlier  atrocity  reports  given
out  by the  Eighth  Army.
At   the   public   hearing   Van   Fleet   was  in
quite  a  "Pippa  Passes"   mood.     The   Eighth
Army  was  the  best  equipped,   clothed,   housed
and  cared  for  army  we  ever  had  in  the  field.
Its  men  were   "happy."    The   South   Koreans
"love  us."   Operation  Smack  was  "highly suc-
cessful   as   far   as   experience   is   concerned."
Syngman  Rhee  was  a  great  leader,  scholar  and
poet.    The  silliest  question  asked  him  was  to
tell  the  committee,   "if  it  wasn't   secret   infor-
mation,"   just  how  the  United  Nations   "trans-
muted"  its  orders  to  the  Eighth  Army.
Of   course  no  one  was  rude  enough  to  ask
the  General  just  what  he  meant  when  he  told
that  visiting  Filipino  delegation  in  Korea Jan-
uary  of  last  year,  "Korea  was a  blessing.  There
had  to  be  a  Korea  either  here  or  some  place
in  the  world."    Maybe  somebody  will  be  in-
trepid   enough   to   ask   the   question   if   Van
Fleet's   conflicting   statements   on   ammunition
leads  to  a  full   dress  investigation.    Someone
ought  to  do  a  statue  of  the  general  in   char-
acteristic  pose  with  his  foot  in  his  mouth.
Non-Sequitur  Award
After  many  years  in  the  Justice  Depart-
ment  as  counsel   to  J.  Edgar  Hoover,   it  is
not   hard   to   understand  why   Federal   Judge
Alexander   Holtzoff   was  shocked  by  the   jury
verdict   acquitting   Dr.   Joseph   W.  Weinberg.
The  verdict  was  hardly  a  triumph  for  the FBI.
But  it  was  a  striking  non-sequitur  to  dwell  on
the  supposed  situation  during  the  war  at  the
Radiation   Laboratories   of   the   University   of
California  and  then  add, "That  may  not  have
any  bearing  on  the  defendant's   guilt  or  inno-
cence."    If  the  Judge  was  not  sure  it  had  any
bearing  on  Dr.  Weinberg's  own  guilt   or  in-
nocence,  was  it  fair  to  make  a  statement  cast-
ing  a  new  slur  on  a  young  scientist  the gov-
ernment  has  long  hounded  without   ever pro-
ducing   proof   enough   to   convict?    It's  hard
enough  to  get  a  fair   trial  in  the  District  of
Columbia  without  scolding  juries  which  have
the  courage  to  disagree  with  the  government.
Hat's Off
To   Joseph   A.   Fannelli   and   Harry   I.
Rand,  defense  counsel  for  Dr.  Weinberg,  for
their  skill  and  devotion  in  winning  a  verdict
of  acquittal  from  a  District  of  Columbia  jury,
a  feat  which  recalls  Lord  Erskine's  successes  as
counsel  for  accused  radicals  in  a  similar   period
in  the  England  of  the  1790's.    Both   Fannelli
and   Rand   are   former  New   Dealers   (Justice
and  Interior).       • Fannelli   as   chairman   of   the
Board  of  Immigration  Appeals  in  1941 handed
down   a   famous   decision    (later   reversed   by
then  Attorney  General  Biddle  but   subsequently
upheld  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court)   against
the  deportation  of  Harry   Bridges.
The  Age  in  Which  The  Peace  Was  Lost
This  was the  Truman  era.    I.  F.  Stone's  The  Truman  Era, to  be  published  May 4  by  Monthly
Review  Press  in  the  United  States  and  by  Turnstile  Press  in  England,  covers  the  period  with  the
vividness  of  a  diary  and  the  charm of  a  series  of  familiar  essays.   The  collected  columns  and  dis-
patches  which make up  the  book  go  back  to  some  vivid  reportage  on  the  formation of  the  United
Nations  in  San  Francisco  and  include  some  of  his  best  satirical  pieces.   The  size  of  the  advance
sale  has  made  it  possible  to  reduce  the  price  from  #3.50  to  #3.   The  pre-publication  price  is  still
$2,  and  the  book  can  be  ordered  at  that  price  now  through  the  Weekly,  or  obtained  at #1 with  one
new  subscription  or  free  with  two  new  subscriptions.    This  is  a  book  every  PM  and  Compass  fan
will enjoy.   If  you  are a news stand  buyer  of  the  Weekly  you  can  save  #2.50  a  year  and  get  the
book  for  $1  by  using  the  subscription  blank  on  page  four.
3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  14, 1953
Morse  Truckles  to The  Witch  Hunters
Coming  from  Morse  of  Oregon  the  statement  that  aca-
demic  freedom  in  America  had  nothing  to  fear  from   Con-
gressional  investigation  provoked  surprise  at  the  Eighth  Na-
tional  Conference  on  Higher  Education  in  Chicago  last  week.
For a  Senator  who  is making  independence  and  liberalism  his
stock  in  trade,  Morse's  blind  spot  is  disturbing.    It  has  been
evident  since  January  30  when  a  resolution  came  before  the
Senate  to  give  $150,000  more  to  the  Internal   Security  Sub-
committee.    This  is the  so-called  "McCarran  Committee"  now
investigating  higher  education  under  Jenner.
It  was  natural  to  expect  that  an  independent  liberal  would
take  the  floor  to  fight  that  appropriation.     Morse  told  the
Senate  that  ever  since  Jenner  and  McCarthy  had   requested
additional  money,  Morse  had  been  getting  letters  asking  him
to oppose them.    The  Senator  said  he would  not  be a party  to
any  such  effort   and  even  doubted   "whether   the  committees
are  asking  for  sufficient   funds."
From  the  remarks which  followed  one  might  have  thought
that  Jenner  and  McCarthy  were  characters  newly  arrived  on
the  national  scene.    Morse  said  he  would  not  assume that  in-
vestigating  committees would not  live up to their  "trust  merely
because  some persons  do  not  like some of  the  committee mem-
bers  personally."    The  Senator  from  Oregon  said  righteously
that  he  would  not  "indulge  in  a  presumption of  guilt  against
anyone,  including  any colleague  in  the  Senate."
Eisenhower   merely   allowed   Jenner   to   embrace   him.
Morse   embraces  Jenner.    "To   the   Senator   from   Indiana,"
Morse  said,  "I   say  I  wish  him  well  in  the   investigation."
Morse  cast  suspicion  on  those  who  have  been   fighting   the
witch  hunt.   "Does  the  Senator  agree  with  me,"  Morse  asked
Jenner,  "that there are those  in this  country who  seem to  be in
opposition to  ...      any increase in funds  for the  investigation
of  subversive  activities  because,  for  their  own  reasons,  none
of  which  is good,  they  do  not  want the  Congress  to  put  itself
in  a position  where it  will  have the  funds  to  detect  subversive
activities" ?   The  Senator from  Indiana was delighted  to  agree.
When  Lehman  criticized  McCarran  in  the  Senate  on  Feb-
ruary  20,  Morse  agreed that  in  the  work of  investigating com-
I.  F.  Stone'3   Weekly
Room  221  Kellogf  BUg.
1416   F  Street,  N.W.,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Please  enter  the following  nibuription.   $5  for  1  ye»r  it
enclosed.    (See   page  3  for  foreign  rate*)
Nun
Street
City
State    .
Zone
mittees   "abuses   have  developed   in   the  past."    But  Morse
added charitably that this was to be expected  "because  members
of  Senate  committees  are  human."    This  is the  first  time any-
one  has  suggested  that  what  is  wrong  with  McCarran,  Mc-
Carthy  and Jenner  is their  humanity.
Morse,  in  submitting  his  resolution   for  the  reform  of  in-
vestigating   committee  procedure,  seemed  to  feel  that  only  a
set  of  rules  was  necessary  to  end  abuses.    But  it  is  not  lack
of  rules  which  is at  fault.   It  is the  notion  that  Congressional
committees  have  a  right  to  investigate  private  opinion.    And
it  is the  cowardice of  other  Senators  which  permits unscrupu-
lous  and  self-seeking   Senators  to  smear  and  terrorize  with
impunity.  One  might  as well  enact  a code  of  conduct  for  Old
Nick  himself.    McCarran  was  ready  to  agree  that  of  course
"so far  as possible  .  .  .  fair  procedures  should  be  followed."
The  trident  should  never  be  hotter  than  so  many  degrees  nor
plunged  more than  so many inches  into the subject.
Morse's  subservience to  the  standards  of  the  witch hunt
reached a new stage  last  week when  he  not  only  supported  the
resolution  to  subject  all  Senate  employes  to  loyalty clearance
but  proposed  that  this  be  extended  to  Senators  as  well.    The
amendment was shouted  down by the  Senate.   "Loyalty" clear-
ances will  serve to  do on the  Hill what they have already done
in  the  other  branches  of  the  government.    They  will  make  it
difficult  for  liberals  to  work  for  Senators  and  Senate commit-
tees.   Taft  had  the  good  sense  to  move that  Senate employes
be  cleared  only  with  the  FBI  and  not  as  originally  proposed
with  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  and  Cen-
tral  Intelligence.     But  there  are  few  liberals  against  whom
something  "derogatory"  may not  turn  up  in  the  unprocessed
rubbish  revealed  by the  Coplon  case  in  the  FBI files.
Morse would  have had  the  Senate  exclude anyone elected  to
the  Senate  "if  the  FBI  knows  that  in  fact  he  is  not  a  good
security risk, even though  he may have fooled  the  people  of  his
state  into  electing   him."    This  would  give  a  secret  police,
often  politically  illiterate  and  always reactionary, a  veto power
over  the  election  of  Senators.    It  is  hard  to  believe  that  this
was Wayne Morse of  Oregon  talking.
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
225  Kellogg    BUg.
1416  F St.,  N.W.,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Post   Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED