I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953oct17.pdf

============================================================

Extra:  Supreme Court to Pass on Un-American  Committee, See Page 2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I,  NUMBER  37
OCTOBER   17,  1953
WASHINGTON, D. C
15  CENTS
Acheson  Declares  War  on  Louis  XIV
Mr.  Acheson  shares  a  common  weakness  for  sweeping  his-
torical  parallels.    In  his  address  on  receiving  the  Woodrow
Wilson  Award,  he  said  that  five  times  in  the  last  400  years
a  coalition  had  been  necessary  "to   resist  the  imposition  by  a
powerful   state  of   its   hegemony  upon  others."    He   said  a
coalition   "defeated   the   attempt   of   Louis   XIV   to   impose
absolutism   upon   Europe,   to   make  subject   peoples  out   of
independent   peoples."     This   rather   loosely   characterizes  a
victory   which  ended  by  handing  over  the   peoples  of   Italy
and  the  Netherlands  to  the  absolutist   Austrian   Hapsburgs,
leaving  Spain  and  her   colonies   to   the   absolutist  Bourbons
and  rewarding  the  absolutist  Hohenzollerns  with  the  Crown
of   Prussia.
This  syncopated   version  of  history  might   be  left   to  die
harmlessly  in  the  newspaper files  were  it  not  that  the  Demo-
crats  may  be  making  a  come-back  in  the  next  election.   The
former  Secretary  of  State,  though  too  battered  ever  to  hold
public  office  again, exerts  a  considerable  influence within  the
party   and   among   the   pro-cold   war   intellectuals.     He   is
literate,  cultivated,  and  charming.     The  New   Republic  re-
printed   his  speech  this  week,  with  a  dreamy  little  note  by
"M.  S."  (Michael Straight)  on  its  "deeper  preception,"  which
reminded  one  of  a  bobby-soxer  drooling  over  Frank  Sinatra.
The   striking   characteristic   of    Mr.   Acheson's   address   is
that  in it  the  architect  of  total  diplomacy  again  shows himself
totally  incapable  of  thinking  in  real  terms  of  foreign  policy
past  or  present.    In  suddenly  attacking  poor  Louis  XIV,  he
treats  the  War  of  the  Spanish  Succession  as  it   would  have
looked  rewritten  by  a  new  George  Creel  whipping  up  another
of   those  wars  to  make  the  world  safe  for  democracy.    The
coalition   led  to   victory   by   Marlborough   was  no   crusade.
It   was  not  the  menace  of  absolutism  but   the   development
of  a French  Navy  and  the  growth  of  French  commerce  under
Colbert  which  brought  France  into  conflict  with  the   com-
mercial  empires  of   England   and  Holland.     The   nature  of
the  war  is  revealed  by  one  of  its  chief   prizes—England  ob-
tained  thereby  a  30-year  monopoly  on  the  business  of  supply-
ing  Negro  slaves  to  Spanish  America,  a  privilege   previously
enjoyed  by  France.
This  is  not  to  suggest  that  the  conflict  was  purely   com-
mercial.      France    sought   the    protection    of    her   natural
frontiers;   Englishman   and  Dutchman  feared  for  their   own.
Mr.   Acheson  is  as  incapable   of   seeing   the   all   too   human
melange  of  mutual  fears  and  jealousies  in  the  past  as  he  is of
seeing  them  in  the  present.   The  ebb and flow in  the  recurrent
wars  to  right  an  ever  unstable  balance  of  power  is invisible  to
him.    Each  conflict   is  a  fresh  crusade,   and  always   against
tyranny.    The  newest  came  about,  he  says,  "because  the  col-
lapse  of  Germany  and  Japan  removed  the  powers  which  stood
astride  the  borders  to  which  five  centuries  of  expansion  had
brought  the  Russian empire."
It  is  as  if  Mr.  Acheson  had  already  forgotten  the  last  war
in  his  readiness  to  mobilize  for  the  next  one.    Germany  and
Japan  "collapsed."    A  curtain  is  dropped  over  the  causes of
that  "collapse."    To  remember  would  be  inconvenient,  for
what  was a danger before may be a danger  again.   Mr.  Acheson
now  speaks  as  if  the  only  problem  for   several  centuries  has
been  Russian  expansion, and  as  if  Germany  and  Japan  could
only  be  bulwarks of  our  defense.   It  is  in  the  same headlong
spirit  that  he  speaks  of  "the   material  and  moral   rebuilding
of   Germany  and  Japan"  and  of  "the   gallant  fight  in  Indo-
China."     What   is  "moral"   about   the   restoration   of   the
Reichswehr  generals  to  respectability  and  leadership  in   Ger-
many,  and  what  is "gallant"  (especially  in  a  speech  invoking
1776)   about  the  long,  dreary  and  futile  war  against  native
aspiration  in  Indo-China?
Mr.  Acheson  says  that  if  the  United   States  is  to  exercise
the   leadership  of   the   "free   peoples",   it   must   not   always
insist  on  its  own  point   of   view  as  "the   sole  repository  of
wisdom  and resistance to  tyranny."   But  despite  this  graceful
admonition  he  himself  shows no  readiness-to see the  unfolding
scene  through  British  or  French  eyes—to  see that  in  the  old
balance  of  power  game  Germany  already  begins  to  seem  more
of  a threat  than  Russia,  to  see that  Western  Europe  stagger-
ing  under  the  arms  race  wonders  when  it  is  to  reach  that
"situation  of  strength"  at  which  negotiation  was to  begin.
Mr.  Acheson  in  this  speech  does  bring  himself   queasily  to
use the  horrid  word  negotiation,  but  he shows no  more  disposi-
tion  than  Mr.  Dulles  to  embark  seriously  upon  it.    In  this
sense,  American  foreign  policy  remains  bipartisan!    In   this
speech,  as before  in  Washington,  there  is no  clue  as to  Amer-
ican  aims or  real  interests,  what  we want  or  would  settle  for,
short  of  Russia's  destruction  and   subjugation.
There  are  other  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  those  four
hundred  years of  history  Mr.  Acheson  touches  up  in  so  melo-
dramatic   a   fashion,  moving   from   the   grand   monarch   to
Malenkov  in  one  big  3-D  production.    We  are  no  longer  in
the  age  of  the  musket.    The  bloody  minuet   of  the  balance
of  power,  building  up  today  the  enemy  of  yesterday  for  war
in  a  new  coalition  against  the  ally  of  day  after  tomorrow,
must   destroy  civilization  itself   if   carried   on  with   atomic
weapons.    We  must  die  with  the  Russians  and  the   Chinese
if  we  cannot   live  with  them.    To  live  we  need  not  submit
to  them,  but  neither  can  we  expect   them  to  submit   to  us.
The  task  of  a  humane leadership  is  to  condition  mankind  for
live-and-let-live.  Mr.  Acheson's—for  all  its  liberal  trimmings
—is  the  familiar  moralistic  rhetoric  of  the  warmonger,   never
more  obsolete,  never  more  dangerous.
1  4  J
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   October  17, 1953
For  the  First  Time  Since  Eisler  Fled
Supreme  Court  to  Pass on  The  Un-American   Committee
Washington—The   press   missed   the   significance   of   the
Supreme   Court   order   this   week   agreeing   to   review   the
Emspak  contempt  case.   It  means  that  the  Court  may now
for   the   first   time  pass   upon   the   constitutionality   of   the
Un-American  Activities   Committee.   The  review- refused   in
the  Hollywood  Ten  and Barsky  cases  is  granted  in  the  appeal
of  Julius  Emspak,  secretary-treasurer  of  the  United   Elec-
trical  Radio  and  Machine Workers  Union.  Only  once before
—in  the  Eisler  case—has  the  Court  agreed   to  review  the
powers  of  the  House  committee,  but  Eisler  fled  before   the
case  was  argued.
In  the  Emspak  case,  certiorari  was  asked  of  the  Court  on
six questions  and granted  on all  but  one, which  has  to do with
the  predominance  of  Federal  employes  on  the  grand   jury
which  returned  the  contempt  indictment.   Question  No.  5  is
"Whether  House  Resolution 5  [establishing  the Un-American
Activities   Committee],   as   construed   and   applied   therein,
abridged  the  petitioner's  freedom  of  speech,  press  and  assem-
bly  in  violation  of  the  First  Amendment."  Question  No. 6  is
"Whether  the  First  Amendment protects  a  witness  before  a
Congressional   Committee  against  the  compulsory  disclosure
of  the  identity  of  trade  union  officials  with  whom  he  is  asso-
ciated  and  of  his  political  views  and  affiliations."
This  is  the  background  of  the  Emspak   case:   The   U.E.
official  was  named  as  a  Communist by  Louis  Budenz  in  the
first  Foley  Square  Smith  Act trial.  In  October,  1949,  Emspak
filed a  non-Communist oath  affidavit  under  the  Tart-Hartley
Act,   The  general   counsel  of  the  National  Labor  Relations
Board  announced that  this  was  being  referred  to the  Depart-
ment  of  Justice  for  investigation   and  Emspak  was  subpoe-
naed  by  the  House  Committee,  appearing  before  it  on  De-
cember  5,  1949.   He  pleaded  his  rights  under  the  Fifth   and
First  Amendments  in  refusing  to  answer   questions   about
himself  and  other  officials  in  the  Union, but  at  many  points
attacked  the  Committee and evaded any  direct  answer  without
explicitly  invoking  these  rights.
A  Surprise  to  Both  Sides
The grant  of review  on the  First  Amendment question  was
a  surprise  both  to  the  government   and  the  defense.   The
main  legal  issue  was  thought  to  revolve  around  the  govern-
ment's  claim  that  "at  no time  during  his  questioning  did he
use the  simple,  familiar  language  which would  have conveyed
to  the  subcommittee  and  the  court  that  he  feared  that  his
answer  to  a  particular  question  would  incriminate  him."   It
was  on  this  issue  that  the  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  for  the
District  of  Columbia, sitting  en  bane, split.  Three  dissenting
judges,  Fahy, Edgerton  and Bazelon, thought  a new trial was
required   to  determine  whether   Emspak  "had   been   clearly
advised  that his  objections had been  rejected."
The  government's   reply  to  the  petition  for  certiorari  did
not  even argue  Question No. 5 and  dismissed  No. 6 by  saying
that  under  the  Douds   decision  upholding .the   Taft-Hartley
non-Communist  oath  "Congress  may  constitutionally  inquire
into  the  Communist membership  of  leaders  of  a   particular
union  who  are  believed  to  have  access  to  significant  defense
information."    The   Committee,   in   addition   to   its    general
hunting  license  for  the  "subversive,"  had  the  excuse  that  it
was  considering  the  Wood  bill  to  investigate   methods  used
to  screen  union officials  at  defense plants.
The  defense  pressed  hardest  on  the  point  the  Court  de-
clined  to hear.  It  argued that in the current  atmosphere,  with
grand  juries  under  constant  FBI.surveillance,  a  grand  jury
in the  District of  Columbia was not a free  agent  in a  political
case when  ten  of  its  twenty  members  were  Federal  employes
and  two  others  were  the  wives  of  government  employes.  The
First  Amendment  question  was  raised  almost  pro  forma,  at
the  close of the petition, but  its  words will  strike  a  chord with
every  American intellectual.
The  American  Index  Expurgatorius
"Surely,"  the   Emspak  petition   said,   "the   Court  cannot
ignore  the  fact  that  the  obtaining  of information  for  legisla-
tive  purposes,  the  power  in  aid  of  which  the  Resolution  was
passed,  has  become  a  hollow  pretext  for  the  compilation of  a
vast  index  expurgatorius,  the  systematic   destruction  of  po-
litical  dissent  and  the  subjection  of  thousands  of  citizens  not
merely  to  ruthless  invasions  of  privacy  but  to  serious  sanc-
tion  without  due  process  of  law.
"Congressional  committees,"  the  petition  continued,  "now
sit  in  judgment  over  the  political  liberty  of  the  American
people—teachers,  writers, trade  unionists,  editors,  preachers,
doctors  and  just  ordinary  Americans.  We  have  reached  the
stage  where  a  "clearance"  from  the  Committee is  often  in-
dispensable  to  one's  livelihood, career  and  good  name.   The
assertion  by  Congress  of these  powers  to  sit  in  political  judg-
ment  must  be  reviewed  by this  Court."
The  unexpected readiness  to  hear  argument  on this  ques-
tion  means  that  the  Emspak  case  will  be  the  first  in  which
the  Supreme Court will consider the  power of a  Congressional
committee  to  inquire  into matters  of  opinion  and  belief   pro-
tected  by the  First  Amendment. The outcome of the  contempt
actions  threatening  Harvey  O'Connor and  Corliss Lamont  for
defying  McCarthy may  be  determined  by  the  Emspak  case,
though   there   are   other   questions  involved  in  the  former,
notably  the  narrow   powers  conferred  upon  the  McCarthy
committee  by  its  enabling  resolution.
Justice  at  Last  for  Dr.  Barsky?
When  the  members of the  Joint Anti-Fascist  Refugee Com-
mittee  went  to  jail  for  contempt  of  the  House  Committee,
three  of  them  were  physicians.   The  chairman,  Dr.  Edward
K. Barsky,  an  eminent surgeon who helped the  Spanish  Loyal-
ists, was  suspended from  practice for  six months as  a  result.
The  Court  has  now agreed  to  hear  an  appeal  from that  sus-
pension.
The  case  is  of  crucial  interest  to  all  professional  workers
in  danger  of disbarment,  loss  of license  or  discharge for  com-
mitting  contempt.   Cases  against  the  two  other   doctors  on
the  JAFRC,  Drs.  Louis  Miller and  Joseph  Auslander, depend
on  the  outcome of  the  Barsky  appeal.
New  York  State  law  provides  suspension  of  revocation  of
a  doctor's  license  if  convicted of  a  felony.  Contempt of Con-
gress  is  a  misdemeanor.  The  question  on which the  Supreme
Court  has  agreed  to  pass  is  whether  the  suspension  of  Dr.
Barsky's  medical  license  violated  the  due  process  clause  of
the  Fourteenth   Amendment  and  the  constitutional  prohibi-
tions  against  double  jeopardy  and  double  punishment when
the  conviction  (1)  was not a  crime,  (2)  was  unrelated  to  the
the   practice   of  medicine  and   (3)   involved  "neither   moral
turpitude  nor  intellectual  unfitness."
Of  general  interest  is  the  point made by  the  Committee on
Discipline  of  the  Board  of  Regents  which disagreed  with  the
suspension.  Citing  the  Sinclair  case  in  the  Teapot  Dome  oil
scandal,  the  Committee  on  Discipline  said  that  committing
contempt  was  "the  traditional  method"  for  testing  the  pow-
ers  of an  investigating  body.  It  argued  that  Dr.  Barsky  could
not  be punished  "on  the  assumption  that  facts  not  shown by
evidence  to  have  existed  might  have  been  disclosed  had  the
records  [of  the  JAFRC]  been  produced."   The  Court declined
to  accept  a  brief  amid  curiae  presented  on  Dr.  Barsky's  be-
half  by  559 physicians  of  New  York  State.  If  it  should  hold
that  contempt  does  not  involve  moral  turpitude  and  call  for
loss  of  professional  standing,   the  'decision  will  be  of  great
help  in  other  areas  affected  by  the  witch  hunt.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  17, 1953
I. E  Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  last  two  weeks  of  August  at  Room  20S, 301
E.  Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription rates: Domestic, $5
a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and  elsewhere  in   the  Western  Hemisphere,  $<;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  $10  by   1st  class  mail,  J1J   by  air;  for
Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   IS   cents.   Tel.:  LI  4-7087.   Entered   as  Second   Class  mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
October  17, 1953
Vol  I,  No. 37
The  Man  Who  Rescued  McCarthy
The  extent   to   which  the   Eisenhower   Administration   is
knuckling  under  to  the  McCarthy  crowd  is  indicated  by  the
appointment  of  Robert  E.  Lee to  the  Federal Communications
Commission.   On  Friday,  July  31 last,  after   a  heated   con-
test  for  the  position,  President  Eisenhower  had  finally  ap-
proved  the  appointment  of  Robert  J.  Dean,  a  South  Dakota
broadcaster  sponsored for  the  FCC  post  by  Senator  Francis
Case,  R.,  of  South  Dakota,  and  approved  by  the Republican
National   Committee.   But   somehow   Dean  got   lost   in   the
shuffle,  the  White  House  was  led  to  reconsider  and  with  the
backing  of  McCarthy,  William  Randolph   Hearst,   Jr.,   and
John  Taber,  powerful  chairman  of  the  House Appropriations
Committee,   Lee  was   picked   instead.   On  taking   office,   he
promptly  voted  to  give  Hearst  the   Milwaukee  Channel  10
the  publisher had  long wanted.  McCarthy had been  interested
in  this  as  an  ally  of  Hearst.   The  Milwaukee Journal  has
been  campaigning  against  McCarthy  and  it  would  be  useful
to  him  to have  Channel  10 in  friendly  hands.
It  was  Lee's  handiwork  which  rescued  McCarthy  at  the
very  beginning  of  his career  when  the  Senator  was  well  out
on  a  limb.   McCarthy  is  a  gambler.    He  made  his  famous
Wheeling,  W. Va,,  speech  about  205 Communists  in  the  State
Department  in  February,  1950,  with  nothing  to  back  it  up.
Then,  according  to  the  inside  story,  he  sent   ex-FBI   man
Donald  Surine  on  a  frantic  search  for  facts  to  support  the
speech.  Surine  finally  returned  with  a  batch  of  names  and  a
summary  of  security  files  prepared  in  1947  by  Lee  for   the
House  Appropriations  Committee.
Lee  joined  the  FBI  in  1938,  became  administrative  assist-
ant  to  J.  Edgar  Hoover  in  1941  and  in  1946  was  loaned  by
Hoover  to  the   House  committee   for   special  investigations.
It  was  with  Lee's  research  work  in  security  files  that  this
Republican  controlled  committee  in  the  80th  Congress  four
years  before  McCarthy began  the  smear  attack  on the  State
Department  as  a  nest  of  Reds.  The  work  done  by  Lee fizzled
out  in  the  80th  Congress but  finally  supplied  McCarthy  with
the  57 cases  he  promised  to  supply  the  Senate  in  February,
1950.
Mrs.  Lee  and  McCarthy's  then  research  assistant,  Jean
Kerr, now Mrs.  McCarthy,  were  close  friends  and  the  former
was matron  of honor at  the  wedding.  The  Tydings report  did
not mention  Lee but  found  McCarthy's list  identical  with  his
except  that  where  Lee's  findings  were  "conditional  or  doubt-
ful,   Senator   McCarthy's  language   is  positive,  unequivocal
and  colored.  Where  Senator  McCarthy  changed  the  facts  in
the  descriptions of  the  House investigators,  he  changed  them
to  create  worse  impressions."
Broadcasting  Telecasting  Magazine  described  the  new FCC
member  as  "an  Irish  Catholic  with  a  Confederate  name."
Personally  pleasant  and  genial,  Lee has  long  been a  source of
sensational   "Red"   stories  for   favored   newspaper   writers.
His  principal  experience  in  the  industry  has  been  as  moder-
ator  on  the  TV  Facts  Forum,  sponsored  by  Texas  Oil  Man
H.  L.  Hunt,  who may  soon  put  McCarthy  on  TV.  The  Hunt
program  is  loaded and  rightist, but  Lee when  interviewed  on
his  appointment said  it  was "clean  as a hound's  tooth."
Washington Whispers
One reason  for  the hasty  Dulles trip to  London is fear  that
Britain  and  France  might  withdraw  troops  from  Korea  if
we  cannot  assure  them  that  we  will  keep  Rhee  firmly  under
control. . . . The British  moved so quickly to suspend  popular
government  in  Guiana  because  the  U.S.  has  air  bases  there
and  has  been  making  strong  representations   to  London  on
the  Red menace  in  the  colony.  . .  .  The  Trieste   dispute
threatens  to  become a  major  factor  in  the  disintegration  of
"containment."   To  disappoint  the  Italians  would  risk  their
membership  in  NATO but  to  incur  Tito's  displeasure would
disrupt  the  strategically  more  important  Balkan  alliance  of
Turkey,  Greece and Yugoslavia, which firmly holds the key  to
the  Straits. ...  A major  oil find is  reported  in  Argentina,
which   has   serious  restrictions  on  development  by   foreign
capital.  There  is  talk  in  oil  circles  that  Peron  has  been  of-
fered  a huge price  if  he will retire peacefully  from  power  and
permit  a  new regime  to  take  over  more friendly  to  American
oil  companies.  .  .  .  There  seems  to  be no way of  knowing
whether  that  Russian  explosion was  a  full-fledged  H-bomb or
only  a  "thermonuclear   device"  like  the  one  we  had  earlier
exploded.  . .  .  Moscow shows  less  and less  eagerness  to  dis-
cuss  the  German  problem, perhaps  considering  the  establish-
ment of a friendly  unified  Germany impossible and  preferring
to  keep  East  Germany as part  of  its  "defense  in  depth."
Urgent  Bulletin
Attorney  General  Brownell's  talk  to  the  National  Press
Club  on Wednesday of this  week showed that the  Eisenhower
Administration   is  going  to  put  full  steam  behind  the  Mc-
Carran  bill to deprive witnesses before  Congressional  commit-
tees  of  the  privilege  against  self-incrimination.   Write  for  a
free  copy  of  our  issue  of  July  18 last  which carried  the  text
of  the  bill  and  a  full  analysis.   The minor amendment  sought
by  Brownell  would  give  the  Attorney  General  a  voice  in  the
spurious  immunity  procedure provided,  but  an  Attorney  Gen-
eral who is working whole-heartedly  with  the  witch  hunt  bloc
in  Congress  will  be  no  protection  for  dissenters.  Alert  your
friends   and  organizations.   Study  the  bill  and  prepare  for
some  counter  action  now.
DON'T  FORGET  ABOUT  THAT  RENEWAL-AND  ADD  A   GIFT  SUB,  TOO
Last  week's  announcement  launching  our  renewal  campaign  brought  a  gratifying  response but  we've  still a  long  steep
way  to  go.   Please  renew  today  and  send a gift  subscription to a friend, by  using the blank on the reverse  side.  If  we could
reach  twice  as many  people  next  year, we  could  swing a  heftier  oar  in  a  crucial  fight.  There's  many  a  small  town  in  this
country  now where  the Weekly  brings  the  only  breath  of  dissent  from  the  cold  war  and  the  witch  hunt.   Help  me reach  a
bigger  audience and build a  bigger  Weekly  by  renewing your  subscription today.
With  many  thanks,  I.  F.  STONE
1  5  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

Z.  F.  StonSs  Weekly,  October  17,  1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S    PAGE
On  TVA  Answers to  Ike's  Perplexities  His to Command
"When  about  a  week  ago  Pres.  Eisenhower  sat  down  in  his
White   House   to   talk  TVA   with   Frank   Clement,  young,
debonair,  pious  Governor  of  Tennessee,  the  event—or  incident
—was  noticed   generally  by  the  press,  to  the  extent  at  least
of  the  presidential  reaction.    Clement   had  proposed   to  give
the   President   "the  people's   side"  of  TVA:  afterward   the
President   said  the  Governor  had  brought  him  certain  facts
of   which  he  had  not   been  fully  aware;  he  said  he  did   not
think   the   Governor   had  converted   him  completely   to  his
point  of  view. He  did not  say what facts  had  been  straightened
out  for  him  by  the  interview;  he  still  would  not  specify  the
aspects   of   TVA   alarming   to  him, which   previously   had
prompted  his  citation  of  the  valley  development  program  as
an  example  of  "creeping  socialism."
Though  apparently  persuaded  that  the  easy-speaking  young
Governor  had represented what "the people  down  there want"
and  somewhat  ashamed  of  his  own  adoption  of   the  "creep-
ing"   hate-phrase  from  the  epithets  of  John  T.  Flynn,  the
President    remained—visibly—uninformed,    unsatisfied   upon
questions   touching   TVA   deep-lodged   in  his  ear  or  his  eye
by  the  devious  and  unremitting  complaint  of  the  program's
powerful  enemies.    It   is  a  quandary  such  as  no  fair-minded
political  leader  would  care  to  be  left  in  for  long,  and  I  am
happy  to  suggest  that  the President  can round  out  his informa-
tion  from   a  reliable,  confirmable,   official   report  which   his
least  secretary  should  be  able  readily  to  place  in  his  hands.
This  report  was made, only  a few  days  before  the  President's
tete-a-tete  with  Gov. Clement,  by  TVA  Chairman  Gordon
Clapp  in  the  form  of  an  address before  the  Kiwanis  Club  at
Memphis  and  copies of  it  were  filed,  as are  all  TVA  papers,  in
Washington.    Barely noticed  by  the  press generally,  the  chair-
man's  exposition  of  facts  about  TVA  dealt  nevertheless  with
the  very  questions  about  TVA  so often  seen in  the  press,  and
the very  same, undoubtedly, persisting  in  the  President's  mind.
For  instance,  as  to  the  matter   chiefly  moot:  whether   or
not  TVA  is  subsidized by  the  nation's  taxpayers.    Mr.  Clapp
declares  for  a fact,  and  with  figures,  that  within  40  years,  as
required  by  law,  TVA  will  return  to  the  U.  S.  Treasury  all
of  the  funds  provided  by  Congress  to  build  the  TVA  power
system.    The  money  is  being  collected   from  the   consumers
of  TVA  power  and:  "Our payments  under  this  law  are  well
ahead  of  schedule."
But:  "TVA is  subsidized  by  cheap  money."     Mr.   Clapp
declares  for  a  fact  and  with  figures  that  in  the  past  20  years
the   net   income   from   TVA's   power   operations,    belonging
entirely   to  the  nation  as  sole  owner,  represents  a  return  of
more  than  4  per  cent  of  the  investment  of  the   government
in  the  TVA  power system. "This  return  more  than  covers  the
cost  of  money  to  the  Government."
The  1,300,000  retail  consumers  of  TVA  power,  distributed
to  them  by  148 locally-owned  public  agencies, enjoy  low-cost
electricity—but:  "This  is  because  these  agencies  buy   power
from   TVA  at  subsidized  rates."    The  truth  is,  Mr.   Clapp
asserts,  with  figures,  that  the  wholesale rate  for  TVA  power
is  only  1-1/100  of  one  cent   less  than  the  wholesale  power
rate  of  private  power  companies  in  the  same  area.
Mr.  Clapp  further  points out, to  those  "alarmed"  by  the
expansion  of  TVA, that  almost  half  the  generating   capacity
of  the  entire  TVA  system is  to  serve  the  demand  of  govern-
ment   defense  plants,  principally   the  plants   for   developing
atomic  energy;  and  that  the  increasing  benefit  to  the  nation
from  the  increasing  productivity,  purchasing  power  and tax-
paying  power  of  the  Valley  stays  and  supports  the   general
prosperity.
Now,  the  Governor of  Tennessee  was the  President's  invited
guest  and  hardly  could  be  pressed  to  "prove"  his  representa-
tions.  But  the  TVA  chairman  is  an  employe  of  the   Govern-
ment;  the  President  can  hold  him  to  account  for  any  act  or
statement.
There  is  no  reason  for  the  President  to  continue  troubled.
He  has heard what  "the people  down  there" want  and  cherish
—and  certainly  regard  as no "sin."   The  medicine  for  his own
qualms  is to  find  out  for  himself  what  they  have  learned  to  be
good.
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  15:
Street
City
Enter  this  gift  sab  for
(To)   Nnme
Street,
City
... Zone....—..-.  State.-—..  -----  -
$4  more  (money  enclosed):
... Zone..  ... .   State
10-17-63
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol St., S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED