I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953may02.pdf

============================================================

POW  Atrocities  and  Military  Press  Agents,  See  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I   NUMBER  16
MAY  2,   1953
s       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Making  America  A  Police  State
The  most  important  event  of  the  past  week  at  home  or
abroad  was  the  issuance  by  the  Subversive  Activities  Control
Board  of  its  first  order.  The  Board  was  established  by  the
Internal  Security  Act  of   1950  which  President  Truman,  in
vetoing  it,  called  "the  greatest  danger  to  freedom  of  speech,
press and  assembly since the  Alien and Sedition  Laws of  1798."
The  Act  requires  the  registration  of  "Communist  action"  and
"Communist  front"  organizations.  It  went  into  operation  on
April  20  when the  Board  issued  an  order  requiring  the  Com-
munist  party  to  register  as  a  "Communist   action"  organiza-
tion. Two  days later  the  Attorney  General  announced that  he
was  petitioning the  Board  to  order  twelve other  organizations
to  register  as  "Communist  fronts."
Ostensibly  these  actions  affected  only  a  minority party  and
a  dozen  organizations  regarded  as  within  its  political   orbit.
The  party  is  relatively  if  not  absolutely the  smallest Commu-
nist  party  in  any  Western  country  enjoying  political  liberty.
According  to  J.  Edgar  Hoover's  latest  annual  official  estimate
(see  the  Weekly   for  April  11),  it  now has  less  than  25,000
members.  Its  top  leaders  are  in  jail.  It  is  dwindling  in  size
and  influence;  the  membership,  according  to  the  FBI  chief,
is  half  what  it  was  in   1950.
The  organizations   named  as  "Communist   fronts"  by  the
Attorney  General  have  been  so  harried  by  Congressional  in-
vestigators  and  miscellaneous  prosecutions  that  only  a  hand-
ful   of  hardy  folk  still  dare  belong  to  them,  or  turn  up  at
their  meetings.  That  these  few  should  be  made  the   target
of  yet  another  proceeding   does  not  say  very  much  for   the
self-confidence   of  those  now  in  power  in  America,  nor   for
their  faith  in  the  capacity of  their  own  ideas  to  survive under
conditions  of  free  competition.
The  situation  would  be  ludicrous  were  the  impact  of
the  new statute  limited  to  the  vermiform appendix  of  Ameri-
can  Communism,  a  movement  unable  in  its  heyday—unlike
the  Communist  parties  of  Britain,  France  or  Italy—to  elect
a  single  open,  real  or  avowed  Communist  to  public   office.
But  the  effect  of  the  act  is  not  to  be  measured  by  its  ap-
parent  purposes.  The  effect  is  sharply  to  step  up  the  hazards
of  non-conformity  in  America.  To  the  dangers  of  smear  via
Congressional   committee   and   loss  of   employment  through
various  forms  of  loyalty  purge  and  blacklist   is  now  added
the  possibility   of  being  haled  before  the  Subversive  Activi-
ties  Control  Board  on  a  charge  of  failing  to  register   as  a
Communist.  The  penalty  for  non-registration  is  five  years  in
jail, a 110,000 fine, or both.    ,
Once  an  organization   is  ordered  to  register,  the  path  of
radicals  suspected  of  being  members  is  lined  with  legal  pit-
falls.  It  becomes  a  felony  for  a  member  of  a  Communist or-
ganization  to  apply  for  a  passport,  to  take  a  government  job,
or  to  work  in  a  defense plant  without  disclosing  his  politics.
Publications   and  broadcasts  emanating  from  an  organization
ordered  to  register  must  be  labelled  as  "Disseminated   by  a
Communist  organization."  The  words  are  those  of  the   Act
A series of possible  prosecutions  opens up in which the  burden
of  proof—and  the  burdeA  of  proof  to prove  a negative  propo-
sition—will  be  on  the  accused in  trials  held  in  an  atmosphere
hardly  conductive  to  objective  judgment.  In  the  land  of  the
free  and  the  home  of  the  brave,  it  will  be  all  the  wiser  to
keep  one's  mouth  shut  and  to  take  no  chances.  The  rabbit
will replace  the  eagle  as our  national emblem.
This  Act  was  intended  to  make  it  unsafe  to  question
the  status  quo.  Its  passage  over  President  Truman's  veto was
the  triumph of  a campaign master-minded by the  U.  S. Cham-
ber  of  Commerce  to  give  America  our  own  slick  chrome-
plated  version  of  Fascism. The  strategy  of  the  Mundt-Nixon,
Mundt-Ferguson  and  McCarran  bills  which  eventuated in  the
Act  was simple.  Peaceful  social  reform  is  the  product  of  free
associations  acting  as  pressure  groups.  If  it  could  be  made
risky  to  associate,  social  reform  could  be  stifled  at  the  roots.
Since  there  are  few  social  reforms  the  Communists  do  not
also  support,  there  are  few  reform  movements  which  cannot
be  attacked  as  vaguely  "communistic"  once  enough  suspicion
and  hysteria  have  been  created.  An  Act  requiring  organiza-
tions  in  effect  to  prove  that  they  are  not  subject  to  registra-
tion  as communistic  is  an  Act  calculated  to  frighten  away  all
but  the  most  intrepid.  It  is  also  a  means  of  giving  the  secret
police  wider  authority for  surveillance  over the  political think-
ing  and  activity of  the  American people. The  more  the  Com-
munists  are  driven underground  the  more  excuse  the  FBI has
to  peer  into  every meeting  and  every  mind.
The  question  is  not  whether  the  Communists  are  part  of
an  international  movement;  of  course  they  are.  The  question
is  not  whether  these  organizations  named  by  the  Attorney
General  are  "fronts";  let  it  be  assumed  that  they  are.  The
question   is  whether  we  are  to  abandon  the  standards  and
habits  of  a  free  society,  fleeing  the  risks  of  freedom  for  the
deadlier  risks  of  repression.  The  question  is  whether  we  are
to  relinquish  the  standards  of  Jefferson  for  those  of  Torque-
mada.
The  McCarrans  and  the  McCarthys  are  the  tools  of  big
business  organizations  in a real conspiracy to  convert America
into  a  corporate  State.  The  Supreme Court  has yet to  say the
final  word  on  the  medieval  monstrosity  of  a  "Subversive  Ac-
tivities  Control  Board"  in  a supposedly  free  society.  The  com-
ing  appeal  against  this  first  registration  order  is  one  which
every  believer  in  fundamental  American principles  must  sup-
port or live  to  regret  his betrayal of  all that made this country
great  in  the  past.
6   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  2,  19J3
Military  Press  Agents,  Peace and  POW  Atrocities
The  American military are  well  staffed
with advertising  and publicity men in uni-
form.  The  Korean  war  from  the start  has
been  given  Batten,  Barton,   Durstine  &
Osborne  treatment.  The   news  has  been
screened, molded, cut and rearranged.  The
purpose  has  been  to  make  public opinion,
not  to  inform  it.  The  war  has  been  han-
dled  like  a  soap-selling  campaign. This  is
the  background against  which  to examine
the  flare-up  of  atrocity  stories  last  week
in  the  American  press.    .
There   are  two  points,  not  one,  to  be
noted,  however.  One  is  that  the  Ameri-
can  military  in the  Far  East by their  deft
handling  of the  POW  news showed them-
selves  as  anxious  as  ever  to  poison  the
public  mind  against  peace.  But  the  other
is   that   the   Eisenhower  Administration
demonstrated  its  own .desire  for  a  settle-
ment  in  Korea  by  putting  the  damper  on
these  stories  and on  the  attempt  to ampli-
fy  atrocity  charges  by  means  of  Congres-
sional  "investigations".            •                                     .
This  inconsistency  of  policy will  puzzle
those  who  imagine -the  American  govern-
ment  is  a  coordinated  affair.  The  fact  is
that  the White  House  has  always  had dif-
ficulty in  controlling  Tokyo  HQ.  The  fact
also  is  that  while  the  White  House  had
favored   a  limited  war   and   now  wants
"disengagement"  from  Korea, Tokyo  HQ
has always wanted a military  victory even
at  the  risk  of a  Third  World  War.
"If  True"
Like  Truman  before  him,  Eisenhower
showed  no  disposition  to  take  the  atrocity
stories  at  face  value.  When  the  first  big
atrocity   story  broke  in  November   1951,
Truman  said  it was terrible  "if true"  (See
"Atrocities  to  the  Rescue"  and  "Weird
Statistics"  in  my  Hidden  History   of  the
Korean   War).
When  Eisenhower  was  asked  about  the
new  flare-up  last  week,  he  said   (direct
quotation  forbidden)  that  he  still  was not
in  a  position  to  separate  facts from,  let  us
say,  just  isolated   instances  and  was  not
prepared  to  express   any  sweeping  con-
clusions.   The   strongest   expression   used
by  Eisenhower  was  that  the' POW's  had
been  subjected  to  difficult  treatment.
The  day  before  the  President's  press
conference,   Under   Secretary    of    State
Walter  Bedell Smith appeared  at  a  closed
session    of   the    Senate   Appropriations
Committee.  When  the  hearing  was  over,
the  chairman,  Senator   Bridges,  had  de-
cided  that  it  would be  better  not  to  upset
the  exchange  of  prisoners  by  investigat-
ing  atrocities  now.  Timely  intervention
had   prevented  what   might   well   have
turned   into   another   China   Lobby  field
day.  '
Suppressing  Lies
This  is  not  a  case  of  suppressing  the
truth  but  soft-pedaling  lies.  The  weight
of   the  evidence  indicates  that   since  the
Chinese  entered  the  Korean  war,  there
has  been  a  marked  improvement in  the
treatment   of  prisoners.   Earlier   horrors
occurred  largely   in  connection  with  the
headlong  retreat  of  the  North  Koreans  in
the  Fall  of  1950.  This  is  when  the  so-
called  "Death  Marches"  took  place.
Indeed what worried the military on the
eve of the  prisoner  exchange  was  that  too
many  people might  learn  that  the Chinese
were not mistreating  prisoners. The  "Fact
Sheet"  issued by the  Pentagon  on  the  eve
of  the  exchange  was  intended to  put  this
in  as  bad a  light  as  possible.
"While  their  use of brutality  and  physi-
cal  mistreatment  of  peoples  is  well  docu-
mented  and  widely  understood,"  the  Fact
Sheet  began,  "the  Communists have  also
attempted  to  use  deceptively  soft  and  in-
gratiating   treatment   if  that  promises  to
serve    their    purpose.   These    'leniency'
and  'good  treatment* methods are  less well
known  or   understood."
Page  George  Orwell
Having prepared the  mind  for  the reve-
lation  that  the  Chinese  had  not  been  tor-
turing  prisoners,  this  is  the  lush  double-
talk   in  which  the  news  was  clothed  by
the  Fact  Sheet  (how  like George  Orwell's
1984 to call  this a "fact  sheet"!):
"When   Korean,  American  and  United
Nations  soldiers  first  .set  out  to  halt  the
Communist   aggression    in   Korea,"   the
Fact  Sheet  said,  "the  story  of Communist
treatment  of  prisoners  was  one  of  crude
brutality.   But   after   the   Chinese   Com-
munists  entered  the  conflict,  the  policy of
dealing with  prisoners  appeared  to  under-
go  an  abrupt  change,  although,  needless
to   say,   brutalities   continued   to   be   re-
ported.
"Apparently    the    order    was    spread
throughout   the   Communist  armies   that
captured   prisoners   were   to   be   treated
with  kindness  and  leniency."
How  horrible!
"It  Would  Not  Be  Fair"
The  military did not  confine themselves
to  issuing  this  "Fact  Sheet."  When  the
exchange  began,  returning  prisoners were
"processed"  and  "screened".  Not  all were
allowed   to   speak  with  the  press.   "The
identity  card  of  one  American,"  the  As-
sociated    Press    reported    (Washington
Times-Herald,   April  21),   "was  marked
on  the  back,  'no  interviews',  persumably
because of  pro-Red  leanings."  It  would be
interesting   to   know  what   the  military
considered   "Pro-Red    leanings."
.A  more  revealing  glimpse of what  was
happening  came  from   the  British  press
where  Renter's   reported  from   Panmun-
jom  (London  Times,  April  21)  "General
Clark,  who flew  from  Tokyo  to  greet  the
returning  prisoners,  said:  'Some  of  our
chaps  coming  back  have  obviously  been
swayed   by  Communist  'brain   washing.'
He   said   these   prisoners  would  not  be
available  for  interviews as  'it  would  not
be  fair'."
Through British  Eyes
Few  American readers  must have  real-
ized  that  access  to  prisoners  was  limited
and  that   interviews  with  these  regarded
as  "pro-Red"  were  not  allowed.  The  re-
sult  was  to  high-light  the  atrocity  stories
at  the  expense  of  a  more  balanced  view.
•To  read  the  stories  as  they  came through
in  the  air   mail  edition  of  the  Times  of
London  was  to  get  a  completely  different
impression from  that  created  in the Amer-
ican  press.
April  21:  "No  British  prisoner  com-
plained  of  unduly harsh  treatment  by  the
Chinese; the  consensus was that  they had
been  treated  as  prisoners, with  occasional
good  will  gestures  by their  captors.  .  .  .
Hospital    treatment   was   generally    fair,
and  the  prisoners  spoke well of their  doc-
tors  and  nurses."
April  22:  "It  seems that  in  some camps
attempts  at  political  education  were more
intense  than  in others ... at first ...  at-
tendance  was  virtually compulsory,  but of
late  months  such  activities   had   largely
ceased,  as  most  of  the  men  showed  no  in-
terest  in  them.  Food,  which  was  bad  at
first .  . .  improved  as  time  went  on, and
the  prisoners  were  allowed  to  run  their
own  kitchens  and  even  to  slaughter  their
own  pigs,  which the  Communists supplied
•in  droves."                                      '       *
April  23:  "United  Nations  officials  and
correspondents  . . . described  reports,that
non-Koreans  were  sent  on  death  marches
as   'greatly   exaggerated'   .   .'  .   'death
marches,'  occurred  late  in  1950  when  the
Communists    were     retreating    rapidly.
Their    prisoners    had   to   make   forced
marches,  too,   and  those  who  could  not
keep up were abandoned  in the cold. Many
died."
April  24;  "Certainly  so  far  there  is no
definite  proof  of  any  deliberate-campaign
of  atrocities  by  the   Chinese  and   North
Koreans.  .  . .  Something  like a competi-
tion  in  atrocity-mongering  is  developing
between  the  Communists  and  the  United
Nations  and  there  is  a  real  danger   that
the  bad  feeling  engendered  by  these  alle-
gations  may jeopardize  the  success  of  the
armistice  negotiations."
Dissipating  Good-Will
The   propaganda   purpose   was   plain
enough   in   some   of   the   worst   horror
stories.  The  campaign  reached  its  height
in  the   afternoon  papers  of  Wednesday,
(Continued  on  Page  Three)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  2,19)3
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
•Editor  and  Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  weekly except the  last two weeks
of  August  at  Room  205,  301  E. Capitol
St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.  Subscrip-
tion  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and  Continental
Europe,  $10  by  1st class  mail,  $ 15  by air;
for  Israel, Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by  first  class  mail,  $20  by air  mail.  Single
copy,  15 cents. Tel.:  LI 4-7087. Entered  as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,  D.  C
May  2,  1953Vol.  I,  No.  16
McCarthy,  Wechsler
And  A  Free Press
It   is   ironic   that   the   first   target   of
McCarthy  in American journalism should
be an  editor  who advanced his  own career
by  deft  use  of  anti-Communism  in  inner
newspaper  politics.  One  editor  after   an-
other   made  James   Wechsler   a   protege
only  to  be  repaid  with  a  self-serving Red
smear:  Leo  Huberman,  whom  Wechsler
thus  succeeded   as  labor   editor  of   PM;
Ralph  Ingersoll,  whom  he  later  tried  to
succeed   as  editor   of  PM;   and  Ted   O.
Thackrey,  Wechsler's  predecessor  as  edi-
tor   of  the   New   York   Post,  who  gave
Wechsler  a job  after  the latter  left  PM  in
a   self-ignited   blaze   of  anti-Communist
glory.
It  is to  Wechsler's  credit  that  as editor
of   the  New   York   Post  he  has   followed
the liberal  Democratic line rather  than the
New  Leader's.  Within the  Americans for
Democratic  Action  he  has  fought  for  a
more  liberal  position  than  that  advocated
by  his  columnist,  the  ignominious  Arthur
M.  Schlesinger,   Jr.,   whom   Carey   Mc-
Williams  in  the  New  Statesman  and  Na-
tion  last  year  called  "a  McCarthy  with  a
Harvard  accent." Schlesinger  has used his
column  in  the  New   York  Post  to  smear
those  liberals  who  have  had  the temerity
to  defend  the  rights  of  Communists,  and
thereby  organize  a  principled  opposition
to  McCarthyism.
Not  much principle was  left  by the  way
Wechsler    himself   answered    McCarthy.
"No  doubt,"  Wechsler   wrote  of  his  ex-
perience  in  the  New  York  Post  last  Mon-
day,  "I  could  have  found  numerous  legal
grounds  for  refusing  to  answer  many of
the  questions  addressed  to  me  that  were
clearly   beyond   the   boundary   of   proper
Congressional  inquiry  and  a  flagrant  in-
vasion of  the  area  of press  freedom.  In  an
earlier  American  time  I  doubt  that  any
editor  should  have  responded  to  some  of
the  inquiries."
Wechsler's  decision  to  answer  was  un-
derstandable.  "It   is  probably  a  measure
of  the  ground  we  have  lost,"  he  went  on,
"that  I knew McCarthy  could successfully
twist  any  silence  to  his  own  advantage."
He  felt  boxed  in  by Pegler,  Winchell  and
McCarthy. But there was  no need to go on
and  hurt  other   people  by  saying,   "The
Communists,  of  course,  have   intensified
the  problem  by  hiding  behind  constitu-
tional  privileges  on  all  occasions".   This
was  to  slur  the  basic  constitutional privi-
lege  he  compromised  by  acquiescing  in
interrogation.   Many   have   invoked   the
privilege  as  their  only  way  to  avoid  what
they  considered  improper questions.
Wechsler  is  an  ex-Communist  and  ex-
Communists  are  only  safe  in  America  if
they  turn  informer and run with  the pack.
Wechsler   is  a  target  because  he  has  re-
fused  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  Budenz
or  Rushmore.  But  the  effort  at  the  same
time  to  defend himself with  certificates of
good  behavior  is painful  to  watch.
Odd  Testimonials
"For  the record," Wechsler wrote of his
executive   session   with    McCarthy,    "I
noted  that  at  the  time  I  was  appointed
editor  of  the  Post  in  May, 1949, I  had
received  a  letter  of  congratulations  from
Lew  Nichols,  then  public  relations  man
for  J.  Edgar  Hoover  and  now  deputy  di-
rector  of  the  FBI.  McCarthy  gazed  out
the  window.  I  introduced  a  letter  I  re-
ceived   from    Richard   Nixon   in   1950,
praising  an  editorial  I  had written  on the
conviction  of  Alger  Hiss.  McCarthy  was
bored."  Others  may  be  just  a  little  bit
bored,  too, by these  testimonials.
The  right to dissent was not established
and  will  not  be  preserved  by  submitting
certificates  of  conformity.  McCarthy  had
no  right  to  question  Wechsler,  but  Mc-
Carthyism   cannot   be   fought    effectively
until  men are  prepared  to  deny  the  right
of  Congress  to  interrogate  any  American,
newspaperman  or  not, anti-Communist  or
not,   on   his    political    beliefs.    Neither
Wechsler's  own  mode  of  defense  nor  the
vast  indifference  of the  American  press  to
this  first  attack  on an  editor  is promising.
As  we  go  to  press,  only  the  Washington
Post  (McCarthy's  probable  next  target)
has  had  the  interest  or  the  courage  to
protest.
Military  Press Agents, Peace  and POW  Atrocities
(Continued  from  Page  Two)
April  22,  in  this  country  when  the  New
York  Journal  American   had  2,165   UN
prisoners   victims   of   atrocities   and   the
New   York   World   Telegram   page   one
headline  screamed,  "PWs  Bayonetted  by
Reds;  Wounded  Pushed  Off  Cliff."
The  World  -Telegram  story  was  a  UP
dispatch  from  Tokyo.  After summarizing
a  series  of-horrors,  the  dispatch  reported,
"Allied  officers  refused  to  comment on  the
disclosures,   nor   would   they   say   what
effect  they  would  have  on  the  truce  talks.
But  it  was  certain  the  stories  of  the  re-
turned  prisoners,  coupled with  the violent
attacks   on  the   UN   by  the   Red   China
Peiping   radio,  had   abolished   any   good
will  which  might  have  resulted  from  the
sick  and  wounded  exchange."  There  was
satisfaction  evident  between  the  lines.
This   story   was   a   prize   example   of
atrocity  propaganda.  The  lead  said,   "Lib-
erated.  American  soldiers  told   today  of
seeing  American  war   prisoners   'pushed
off  a  cliff  and  left  there  to  die" during a
J*
horror  filled   Korean   death   march   and
how  others  were  deliberately  bayonetted
by  Chinese guards  in a Red prison  camp."
Typical  Atrocity  Tale
But  the  story  bore  out  neither  the  head
nor  the lead. The  lead  said  American  "sol-
diers"  (plural)   told  of  "seeing"  POW's
pushed   over   a   cliff.   But   the   dispatch
quoted only one soldier, a  Private William
Moreland  of  Atlanta,  Georgia,  and  he  did
not  say he saw this  happen. What  he  said
was,  according  to  that  same  dispatch,  "I
just  heard  that  there  were  some wounded
kicked  over  the  cliff."
As  for  the  "bayonetting"  this  was  its
basis,  "Cpl.  Donald  K.  Legay,  Leomin-
ster,   Mass.,   said   'jumpy'   Chinese   Com-
munist guards  jabbed two or  three Ameri-
can  prisoners  with  bayonets  when  they
refused  to  cooperate  and  walked  out  of  a
Communist  movie theatre."
The  Korean correspondent  of  the  Lon-
don   Daily  Mirror  warned  on  April  24
6  7
against  the  horror  stories  being published
in  the  American  press  as  "greatly  exag-
gerated   versions   of   tales   told   to   cor-
respondents."  He  cabled  his  paper,  "It  is
obvious  that  the   South  Korean   govern-
ment   authorities   will   allow   repatriated
soldiers  to  talk  to  the  press  only  if  they
talk  of  atrocities."
It  would be an  exaggeration  to  say that
this  was   true  of   the  American  military. •
There  is  evidence,  if  our  dispatches  are
read   closely,   that   American   prisoners
testified  to  good  treatment  in  the  camps,
especially   after   the   Chinese   took   over.
But  it  is  also  clear  that  a  relatively small
group  was  made  available  for  interview-
ing,  and  that  the  public  relations   officers
and  the  American  press  focussed   largely
on  horror   instead   of  seeking   to  provide
a  fair  picture.  This  distortion  hurts  the
chances  of  peace  and  hardly  helps  those
Americans   still   left   prisoner   in   enemy
hands.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's Weekly,  May  2,  1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
Rehashing  Atrocities May  Make Hash  of  Peace Hopes
My  grandfather,  God  rest  him,  was a  P.O.W.  Wounded
and  captured  at  Resaca   (a  minie  ball  in  the  heel),  he  was
held  for  four  months  at  a  Yankee  prison  in  Indiana.   The
food  was  pretty  awful:  he  lost   18  pounds.  Meanwhile  Sher-
man's  "horde"  burned  his  barns,  tore  down  his  fences  and
made  off with  his  corn  and  his cattle. ... I  was brought  up
on  those   atrocities.
My  wife's  grandfather, a New  Yorker  (God  rest  him, too),
was  wounded  and  taken  at  Bull  Run   and  barely  survived
Libby  Prison  at  Richmond.  The  story  handed  down  on  that
side  was  just  the  other  way  around:   the  Rebels  were  the
"beasts."
And  so,  a  couple  of  lifetimes  later,  at  Panmunjom;  to  say
nothing  of  all  the  wars between. Each  side  gets  back  its  men,
that  have been  in  the  enemy's  hands,  and  immediately  begins
to  pry  from  them  the  proof  that  the  enemy  is  as  brutal  as
all  along  he  has been  alleged  to  be. The  world  is  supposed  to
be  shocked  anew,  and  its  hatred  of  "the  enemy"  revived.
What  anybody  stands  to  gain  from  this  exchange  of un-
pleasantries  is  hard  to  see,  and  the  target  world,  I   suspect,
remembering  how  it  has  been  always  the  same  in  war  after
war,  is  not  really  shocked.  It  has had  no  reason  to  expect  one
war  to  be  nicer  than  another.  In  its  moments  of  repentance
and  resolve  it  has  perceived  and  proclaimed  that  war  itself  is
in  contempt of  reason, a regression  from  civilization:  it  cannot
be  unprepared  for  the  revelation  that  a  part  of  a  great  bar-
barity  is  also  barbarous.
We  have done  well  to  rejoice  for  and  with  our  exchanged
prisoners,  that  they  have  lived  to  return  home;  and  we  have
shared  to  the   fullest   extent  possible  the   natural  delight  of
their  next  of  kin—caught  for  us  on  film,  on  the  TV  screen
and  in the printed  report.
But  the  exchange  of  the  wounded  and  sick  has  grand  im-
portance  only  if  it  prefaces an  armistice  to  halt  the  replenish-
ment  of  the  prison  camp  hospitals  with  new  litter  cases—
and  new  amputees.  And  there  is no  service  of  this  end  in  the
labors  of  our  propaganda,  and  of  the  other  side's  propaganda,
to  show,  by  selected  accounts  fished  for  in  the  testimony  of
the  RPs,  that  cruelty  to  prisoners  has  been  the  rule.
After   all,  if  humanity  hopes  to  succeed  in  its  prudent
attempt  to  bring  the  war  to  a  dose  by  an  act  of  intelligence
instead  of  by  the  attrition  of  artillery,  there  can  be  no  ques-
tion  of  war  crimes  courts  to  be  set  up  afterward.  There  will
be no  victor  to sit  in  judgment and  no vanquished  to  be  tried
and  punished.  There  will  be  agreement,  either  understood  or
explicit,  that  the  war  never  should  have  -begun  and  that  by
ending it  the  race shall have at  last  lived  up  to its proud claim
of  rationality.  Under  the  circumstances  the  rehashing  of  the
charges of  bestiality  toward prisoners  is pointless.
By  no  means  all  of  our  RPs  have  brought  back  stories  of
ill-treatment  and  we must  assume  that  not  all  of  the  prisoners
our  side  has  held  have  gone  back  across  the  Parallel  to  cry
witness  to  our  "inhumanity."  It  is  regrettable  that  the  expe-
riences  related   by  these  more   fortunate  P.O.W.S  have  not
been   given   at   least   equal  circulation   with   the   reports  of
"death  marches,"  starvation  and  "medical  murder."  For  our
part,  it  is  no  disparagement  of  the  hardships  our  captured
soldiers  have  undergone  to  recall  that  their  removal  to  the
enemy's  rear  over  roads  under  constant  attack  by  our  own  air
force  could  not  but  have  been  hazardous;  and  the  other  side
has plenty  of  evidence in  the  condition of  its men  turned  over
at  Panmunjom that  neither  our  doctors  nor  our  mess  sergeants
have  tried  to  exterminate  them.
I  hope  excitable  people  like  Sen.  Stiles  Bridges  will  keep
their  shirts  on—or  put   them  back  on.  It   would  help  for
reasonable  people   like  Sen.  Sherman  Cooper  to  take  them
aside  and  accustom  them  to  the   fact  that  the  facts  of  war
are  ugly.  My  P.O.W.  grandfather  lived  long  enough   after
his  war  to  concede  that  Yankees  were  fairly  representative
human  beings, and  his opposite number,  though  he may never
have  shaken  off  the  horrors  of  Libby,  did   pass  on  life   to
descendants  who  could  marry South  without  too grave a  sense
of  degradation.  By blaming  war  instead  of  each  other  it  will
be  easier  one  day  for  Americans  and  Chinese  to  be   friends
again.
/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C
Please  enter  the following  subscription.  f5  for  1 year  is
enclosed.  (See  page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street
City    ..
State  .
..Zone...
I.  R  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E.  Capitol  St.,   S.E.,
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED