I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953may16.pdf

============================================================

A  Bill  to  Make  America  A  Nation  of  Informers,  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's   Weekly
VOL.  I   NUMBER   18
MAY   16,  1953
5       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
Van  Fleet's  Pipe-Dream  in    Life
In   Life   last  week  General  James  A.  Van  Fleet  told  a
dramatic  story.  In  April,   1951,   he  was  ordered  to  take  over
command   of   the   Eighth  Army  in   Korea.   He   arrived  on
April  14.  "The  atmosphere  at  Taegu  was  tense.  The  Eighth
Army  had  taken  some  bad  beatings.  We   had   managed  to
fight  back,  but   now  it  appeared   that  the  enemy  was  about
to  attack with  tremendous  forces  and  try  to  drive  us  into  the
sea."
"And    then,"  Van   Fleet  went  on,  "came  the   sudden  and
dramatic  shift  in  the  tides  of  war  that  every  American  must
surely  remember  from  the  spring  of  1951.  The  next  six  weeks
were  among  the  greatest  in  the  history  of  the  U.  S. Army.
We  met  the  attack and routed  the  enemy. We  had him  beaten
and  could  have  destroyed  his  armies  .  .  .  Then  our  govern-
ment's  high  policy  intervened,  and  we  were  ordered  not  to
advance  any  farther. The  stalemate  began,  and  then  the  long
and  futile  armistice  talks  . .  ."
The  implication  of  the  Life  article  is that  the  truce talks
saved  the  enemy from  defeat, that  the  stalemate  was the  result
rather  than  the  cause  of  a  decision  to  negotiate,  and  that  a
decisive  victory  can  be  won  in  Korea  if  only  we  stop  talking
and  get  down  to  "business."  Van  Fleet  told  much  the  same
story  to   the   Senate  Armed  Services  Committee   in   March.
But  when  Van   Fleet's  superior,  U.S.  Army   Chief   of   Staff,
J.  Lawton  Collins,  appeared  before  the  committee,  he  cut  the
ground  from  under  this  dramatic  story.  "When  the  negotia-
tions  began,"  General   Collins  said  in  answer  to  a  question
by  Senator  Case,  "there  was  no  fighting  of  any  consequence
by  either  side  . .  ."
When   Senator  Byrd  asked  General  Collins,  "Didn't  Gen-
eral  Van  Fleet  have an  offensive  in June,  1951?", Collins  could
recall  no  major  military  operation  at  the  time.  "Well,  if  it
was,"  Collins  told  Senator  Byrd,  "it  was  a  local  offensive,  if
I  recall  rightly."  Van  Fleet  was present.  Collins  turned  to  him
and  said,  "Maybe  General  Van  Fleet  can  answer that  directly."
The   colloquy  which  followed  deflated   Van  Fleet's  story  of
a  great  offensive  tragically  shut  off  at  the  moment  of  victory:
General  VAN FLEET. The  operations  going  on  in  the
early  part  of  1951  were  limited   offensives.
Senator   BYRD.  What  was  the  date,  General,  that  you
told  the  committee  that  you  thought  you  could  have
gotten  a  very  great  victory  had  you  been  permitted   to
go ahead? Wasn't  that  June   1951?
General  VAN  FLEET.  Early  June  of   1951.
Senator  BYRD. That  is the  offensive  I  was talking about
was  the  one  in  June  1951.
General  VAN  FLEET.  That  was  the counter-offensive,
limited  in  nature.
The  proof  that  Van  Fleet's  story  in  Life   is a pipe-dream
may  be   found   on  pages  108  and   132  of  the   hearings  on
"Ammunition  Supplies  in  the  Far  East"  as  published  by  the
Senate   Committee   on  Armed   Services.   The   testimony   de-
bunks  Van  Fleet's  glamorous account of  the  greatest  six  weeks
"in  the  history of  the  U. S. Army" in  which we had  the  enemy
beaten  "and  could  have  destroyed  his  armies."  The  Army's
Chief   of   Staff   never  heard  of   those  greatest   six  weeks   in
the  history  of  the  U.S.  Army  and  Van  Fleet  had  to  knock
down  his  own  story  when  asked  about  it  by  Senator  Byrd
the  day  Collins  was  present.
But  for  every reader  reached by  this  Weekly  with  the  truth
about  Van  Fleet's  story,  a  half  million  or  more  will  swallow
unawares  the  pernicious  poppycock  dished  out  by  the  series
in  Life.   The  important   point  is  not  that  Van  Fleet  is  a  ro-
mantic  liar.  The  important  point  is that  at  the  moment  when
the  Chinese have  made  dramatic  new concessions  in  the  peace
talks,  vast  engines  of  propaganda  are  set  in  motion  to  poison
the  American  mind   against  peace.   Life    took   full   pages   in
newspapers  all  over  the  country  to  advertise  the  Van  Fleet
series  in  advance,  "The  Truth  About  Korea:   From  a  Man
Now  Free  to  Speak"  in  which  "Our   Combat   General  .  .  .
Warns  Us  Not  to  Overestimate  Our  Enemy  in  The   Future."
Van  Fleet  picks  up  where  MacArthur  left   off  in  the
battle  of   the   fire-eaters   against   the   more   sober   American
military.   Van  Fleet  aims  directly   at   the  Chairman   of   the
Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff,   Omar  Bradley,  when  he  promises   in
his  next  installment  to  prove  that  "Korea  is  for  us  the  right
war  in  the  right  place  at  the  right  time  and .  .  .  with  the
right  allies",  by  which  Van  Fleet  means  principally  Syngman
Rhee's  South  Koreans.  Van  Fleet   does  not   explain   in    Life
why  he  told  a  visiting  Filipino  delegation   two  winters  ago
that  Korea  was  "a  blessing"  but  he  speaks  for  powerful  forces
in  the  American  military  bureaucracy  who  want  the  "bless-
ing"  to  continue. The  ultimate  aim was indicated  in  a  remark
Van  Fleet  made  to  the  committee  but  was  too   circumspect
to  repeat  in  Life.   "You  will  never  get  a  political   solution,"
Van  Fleet  said  of  the  Korean  situation,  "there  will  always  be
an  Iron  Curtain  until  you  have  it  out  with  Russia."
This  is  the  language  of  those  who  think  a  new  world  war
inevitable  and  desirable,  who  see  the  Korean   conflict   as  a
useful  means  of  maintaining  tension  and  the  pace  of  mobili-
zation.  While  the  peace  movement  in  this  country  has  been
silenced   by   intimidation,   the   voice   of   the   warmongers   is
amplified.  A  deaf  ear  is  turned  to  India's  new  warning  that
the  Chinese  may  compromise   no  further.  A   cold   shoulder
greets  Churchill's   call—and  the  Pope's—for   top  level  talks.
As  we  go  to  press  Premier  Chou  En-lai  protests  that  U.S.
planes  killed  or  wounded  more  than  250  Chinese  kst  Sunday
and  Monday  in  raids  on  two  Manchurian  cities.  Van  Fleet's
pipe-dream  is  part  of  a  larger  pattern.
.7  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   May  16,  1953
An  Editor  Who  Informs  On  His Own  Staff
In  the  Inquisition,  the  victim  was  re-
quired  to  confess,   to  abjure   heresy,  to
denounce  ethers  and  to  refrain  from  any
criticism  of  the  Holy   Office.  The  trans-
cript  of  the  Wechsler  hearings  before  the
McCarthy  committee  shows  that  the  edi-
tor  of  the  New  York  Post  met all  but  one
of  the  medieval  standards.   He  confessed
his  youthful  errors.  He  submitted  proofs
of   orthodoxy.  He   "named   names".   He
failed   on  only  one  count  to  qualify   for
reconciliation.  He  had  criticized  the  In-
quisitors—the FBI,  the House  Un-Ameri-
can  Activities  Committee  and,  of  course,
McCarthy.
Lea's  monumental  history   of  the   In-
quisition  in  Spain,  which  begins  to  read
more  and more like a  contemporary  docu-
ment,  tells  us  that  "criticism"  of  the  In-
quisition   "was   held  to  be  impeding  its
action  and  was  a  crime  subject  to  con-
dign  punishment."  The  logic  was  twofold.
Criticism,  even  when justified,  was  wrong
because  it  brought  scandal  on  an  institu-
_tion  doing  a  sacred  task:  "I  don't   like
"McCarthy  either,  but  this  is  a  job  that
had  to  be  done."  Then,   also,   to   attack
those' rooting  out  heresy  was  to  cast  sus-
picion  on  the  fervency  of  one's  own  op-
position  to  heretics.
The  Madness  in  His  Method
Once  the  Inquisition  is  accepted,   it  is
futile  to  protest  that  its  victims  should  be
chosen   and  broiled  more  carefully.  This
is the  vice  in  Time's  alarm  last  week  over
"McCarthy's   methods:   he   seemed   even
less interested  in systematically investigat-
ing  subversives  on U.  S.  newspapers  than
in carrying  on a personal  vendetta  against
a  persistent  critic."  There  is—to  reverse
the    chestnut—a    madness    behind   Mc-
Carthy's  methods.  One  cannot   acquiesce
in  the  madness   and  effectively  fight  the
methods  it  produces.
To  talk  as  if  Congress  has  a  right  or
duty  "systematically",    as  Time   says,  to
ferret  out  "subversives"   on  U.  S.  news-
papers  is  to  accept  the  premises  of  Mc-
Carthyism   and   undercut  any  successful
fight  against  it.  If  we  are  to  replace  free
discussion  with  a  system  of  debate  lim-
ited  and  policed  against  the  "subversive",
we   nlUst   expect    the   wielders   of   such
power  to  abuse  it  and  we must  expect  the
orbit   of  suspicion  to  widen  to  the  point
of     paranoia—real      or      simulated—in
Wechsler's  case.
Heresy  to Doubt The Devil
The  weakness  evident  in those  few pub-
lications    supporting    Wechsler     springs
from   this   unwillingness  to   combat   the
notions  from  which  McCarthyism  springs
and  to  counter  them  with  the  courageous
risk-taking  affirmations  of  a  free   society.
For    if   Communists   are   such   cunning
devils—to  doubt  the  consummate cunning
of  Satan  was a  particularly insidious form
of   heresy—then   is   it   not   possible   that
Wechsler  as  a  promising young  Commu-
nist  was  ordered  many years  ago  in  Mos-
cow  to  pretend  anti-Communism in  order
all  the  more effectively  as  McCarthy  said
"to  attack  and  destroy  any  man who  tries
to  hurt  and  dig  out  the  specific  traitors
who  are  hurting  our  country?"
To   develop   an   atmosphere   in   which
such  hobgobblin  fantasies  are  eagerly  be-
lieved   by   a   substantial   portion   of   the
population  is  a  necessary  preliminary  to
the  establishment   of  Fascism.  And  there
is reason  to believe  that  McCarthy  consci-
ously   and   skillfully   is  working   toward
just  that  goal.  It  is  easy  to  see  what  he
has  gained  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  what
he  can  lose   in  the  battle   as  waged  by
Wechsler.  For   the   fight   as   waged  by
Wechsler  concedes  that  McCarthy  has  a
right  to  subject   newspapermen  to   ideo-
logical   interrogation,    that   they   have   a
duty   to   testify   and   that  they  must  not
falter  even when asked  to act as informers.
An  editor  who  will  inform  on  his  own
staff    members    "to    keep    the    record
straight"  is  an  editor  who  has  allowed
himself  to  be  degraded.  To  break  the  in-
tellectuals  morally  is  part  of  the  strategy
of  the  witch  hunt.  The  exaction  of  the  in-
former's  role  helps  to  spread  panic  and
distrust;  this  is  as  important  a   function
as  learning  who  else  may be dragged  into
the  pillory.
Edgerton's Barsky  Dissent
It   is   only   by   denying   the   right   of
Congress  to  investigate  political  opinions
that  the  basic  freedoms may be  preserved.
The  lines  of  effective  and  principled  bat-
tle   were   laid   down   by   U.   S.   Circuit
Judge  Edgerton  in  his  great  dissenting
opinion   (167  F  2nd  254)   in  the  Barsky
case,  an  opinion  which  will  some  day  be
regarded   as  we  today  regard  the  similar
dissents  in  a  similar  period  by  Holmes
and  Brandeis.
"The    investigation,"   Judge   Edgerton
said  of the  House  Un-American Activities
Committee  . "restricts    the     freedom    of
speech   by  uncovering   and   stigmatizing
expressions  of unpopular views. The  Com-
mittee  gives  wide  publicity to  its  proceed-
ings. .This  exposes   the  men  and  women
whose  views  are   advertised  to   risks  of
insult,  ostracism  and  lasting  loss  of  em-
ployment  .  .  .  The  effect  is  not limited
to  the  people  whom  the  Committee  stig-
matizes  or  calls  before  it
y
  but  extends   to
others   who   hold   similar   views  and   to
still   others   who   might   be   disposed   to
adopt  them  . . .People  have  grown wary
of   expressing   any   unorthodox  opinions
...  it  affects  in  one degree  or  another
all   but   the   very   courageous,   the   very
orthodox  and the very  secure  . . .  What
Congress  may not  restrain,  Congress  may
not  restrain  by  exposure  and  obloquy."
Must  All  Americans  Become  Informers?
The   question   of   the   proper   attitude
toward  Congressional  Inquisition  is  made
urgent   by  the  prospect   that  before  this
issue  is  in  the  mails  the  Senate  will  have
passed  the  McCarran  bill  to  destroy  the
protection  afforded  by  the  self-incrimina-
tion  provisions  of  the  Fifth  Amendment.
A  similar   bill  was  introduced   by  the
Nevadan  last  year   and  the  year  before
but  failed   to  come  up  for  a  vote.   This
year  the  bill,  S-16,  was  reported  by  the
Senate Judiciary  Committee without hear-
ings  ftnd  would  have  passed  on  the  con-
sent   calendar    Wednesday    of  last   week
but  for  the  objections  of  Senator   Taft.
The  original  McCarran  bill would have
compelled  a witness  to  testify  if  a  major-
ity  of  the  investigating   committee  voted
to  give  the  witness  immunity. This  was
amended  last  year  on  motion  of  Senator
Ferguson,  R.,  of  Michigan  to  provide  for
a  two-thirds  vote,  including  at  least  one
member  of  the  minority  party.  This   is
the  form  of  the  present  bill.
Only  The   Fifth
The  only  ground  on which  the  Supreme
Court  has  so  far   upheld  the  right  of  a
witness  to  refuse  an  answer  is  that  pro-
vision   of   the   Fifth   Amendment   which
says  no  man  shall  be  compelled  to  be  a
witness  against  himself.  Theoretically  the
provision  can  only  be  invoked  if  the   ans-
wer  might  provide  some  link  in  a  chain
which  would  justly  or  unjustly   incrim-
inate  the witness.
But  in  practice  the  provision  can  and
has  been  used  for  other  and  broader  pur-
poses.  The  rule  laid  down  by  Chief  Jus-
tice   Marshall   in  Aaron   Burr's   trial  for
treason  makes  the  witness  the  sole  judge
of  whether  the testimony might be incrim-
inating   and  says  that  if  the  witness   so
declares   under  oath   "the   court  can  de-
mand  no  other  testimony  of  the  fact."
Safeguard  Against  Frame-Up
As  a  result  the  provision  has  been  in-
voked  by non-Communist  liberals  or  Left-
ists  fearful   of  being  framed   for  perjury
by   some   professional   informer    if   they
denied   Communist   membership   or   con-
nections.   It   has   also   been   invoked   to
avoid   being   forced   into   informing   on
others. Once a man testifies  as to his own
politics  he  may  not,  on  pain  of  contempt,
refuse  to  answer  questions  about  others.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  16,  1955
A  New Era Opens In  The Witch Hunt
The  Fifth  Amendment has  also  been  the
sole  refuge  from  the  arbitrary  procedures
of  Congressional  committees and  the  one
way  to  avoid   political  interrogation  on
principle  without  risking  jail   for  con-
tempt.
The  Pilgrims Understood
Of  all  the  provisions  in  our   Constitu-
tion,  none  other—except  that  which for-
bids  an  establishment  of  religion—would
have  had  more  meaning  for  the  Pilgrim
Fathers than  this.  Their  flight  to  Holland
and  later  the  New  World  was  bound  up
with  struggle  against  similar  Inquisition
whose  most  potent  weapon  was  to   put
religious  dissenters  under  oath  and  force
them  to  testify  against  themselves,  their
families   and   their   friends.   Elizabeth's
Court  of  High  Commission and  its  older
lay   twin,   the   Court   of  Star   Chamber,
both   used  compulsory  testimony  to  ' en-
force  doctrinal  conformity.
The  firm  establishment  of  the  privilege
against   compulsory  testimony  goes  back
to  the  case  of  John  Lilburne,  a  conten-
tious character  who lived to become known
as  "Freeborn  John".  He  was  arrested  in
1637  on  his  return  to  England  from  the
freer  atmosphere  of  Holland  and  accused
of   having  printed  certain  heretical   and
seditious  books  for  distribution  in  Eng-
land.  Lilburne  was  then  a  youth  of  20.
When  brought  before  the  Court  of  Star
Chamber,  he  refused  to  take  the  oath  and
asserted  that  no  one had  a  right  to com-
pel  him  to  incriminate  himself   and  his
friends.   He   was   publicly  whipped,  pil-
loried  and  imprisoned.  In  1641  the  revolu-
tionary  Long  Parliament  set him free  and
abolished  the  courts  of  High  Commission
and  Star  Chamber.  One  of  the  successful
demands  of  Cromwell's  New  Army  was
that  no man be  required to  testify  against
himself.
A  Spurious Immunity
This  is the  ancient privilege which may
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and  Publisher, I. F. STONE
Published  weekly except the  last two weeks
of  August  at  Room  205, 301  E. Capitol
St.,  S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C.  Subscrip-
tion  rates:  Domestic,  $3  a  year;  Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the  Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and Continental
Europe,  $10  by  1st  class  mail,  $15  by air;
for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by first class  mail, $20  by  air  mail. Single
copy,  15 cents. Tel.:  LI 4-7087. Entered as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
soon  be overturned by  the  McCarran  bill.
On  its  face,  as  required  by  the  Constitu-
tion,  it  offers  immunity from  prosecution
in  return  for   the   loss  of  the  privilege.
But  this  immunity,  which  may  prove  a
Godsend  for  gangsters,  is  spurious when
applied  to  political cases.
Federal   law   cannot   grant   immunity
from  prosecution  under  State  legislation
against  sedition  and  "criminal   anarchy".
Dragnet     conspiracy    prosecutions    are
being  utilized under  the  Smith  Alien  and
Sedition Act, and  it  is  doubtful  that  there
can  be  complete  immunity against  them.
Witnesses   are  still  liable  to  prosecution
for   perjury   and   contempt;   the  former
exposes  them  to  the  danger  of  frame-up
by  political   informers,  the  latter   hangs
over  their  heads  if  they  refuse  to  betray
their  friends.  The  immunity is  conferred
only  as  to  such  portion  of  the  testimony
on  which  the  Fifth  Amendment privilege
has  been  invoked.
Pitfalls  of Conspiracy
As  I  explained   in  an  article   for  the
Daily  Compass two  years  ago  when  this
legislation  first  came  up,  "A  man  might
testify  to  activities  which  he  considered
innocent  and  then  wake  up  to   find   that
these  activities   have   been   spun  by   the
government   into   some   weird   fabric  of
'conspiracy' ...  If  he  invokes  his privi-
lege  before  telling  of  things  he  considers
innocent,  he  may  be  accused   of  abusing
the  privilege.   If   he  fails  to   invoke  his
privilege,  he  may  one  day  find  the  testi-
mony  used  against him."
The   McCarran   bill   is  calculated   and
intended to turn  the  American  people  into
a  race  of  stoolpigeons.  As  in  the  days of
the   Spanish   Inquisition,   people   will  be
required  to  trample  on  all  considerations
of  kinship  and  honor  to  inform.  In  those
days  men  could  not  trust  their  wives  or
children,  and  none  knew  whether   those
they  sought   to  shield  might  not  already
have  betrayed  them.  Yet  there  seems  to
be  no  opposition  of  principle  to  this rev-
olutionary  measure.
Kefauver's  Only  Objection
The  only minority view which  emerged
from  the  Senate  Judiciary  Committee was
Senator  Kefauver's  and  his  objection  was
a  limited one. He  thought  "the dangers of
interfering   with   necessary   Federal  law
prosecution  and  innocently  granting   im-
munity  to  dangerous  and  heinous  crimi-
nals  is too great  under  this  bill."  He  cited
the  Rosenberg  case  and  said  that  David
Greenglass,  had  he  been  summoned  as  a
witness before a Congressional  committee,
might  have  won  immunity  from   prosecu-
tion   by  testifying.   He   wanted   the   bill
amended  to  require  the  Attorney  General
and  the  FBI   to  be  informed  in  advance
by  any  committee  considering  a  grant  of
immunity  to  compel  testimony.
It  is  a  bad  sign  that  the   Washington
Post  on  the  eve of the  vote  declared,  "We
think   the   general   principle  "behind  this
measure  is  sound"  but  urged  that  grant
of    immunity   be   more   carefully    safe-
guarded.   From   the   standpoint   of   real
crime   enforcement,    such    general    im-
munity  statutes  open  the  way  to  grave
abuses.  These  arise  naturally   from   the
dangerous  fallacy that  Congressional com-
mittees  may  act  as  roving  public  grand
juries.   From   the  standpoint   of   political
persecution,  the  effects  are  appalling.
Since  the  intention  is  to  punish  by  ex-
posure  and  blacklist  for   political   affilia-
tions   past   or   present,   the   "immunity"
means little. The  purpose  is  to  widen and
intensify   terror-by-investigation.   Should
the  bill  become  law, we  will  enter  a  new
stage  in  the  American  Inquisition.
Only  by invoking the  First  Amendment
and   risking  imprisonment  for   contempt
will  it  then  be  possible  to  evade  the  role
of  informer.
May  16,  1953
•5       Vol.  I,  No.  18
"The Truman  Era" Published
"The  Truman  Era",  a  collection  of  my  best  pieces  from  1945
to  1952,  has  just  been  published  and  will  probably  meet  the  same
boycott  from  reviewers as my "Hidden  History of  the  Korean  War."
Advance  response,  however,  indicates  that  this  new  book  like  its
predecessor  will  have a  substantial  sale  at  home  and  abroad.  I  am
proud  of  "The  Truman  Era" and  believe  you will  like  it.  The  book
sums up  my political  philosophy  and  preserves  the  best of my news-
paper  work  in  more  permanent  form.  I  believe  it  will  some day
have  an  honored  place  in  the  annals  of  American  journalism.  The
book  can  be  ordered  from  the  Weekly  at  the  bookstore  price,  $3,
and  there  are  still  some copies  of  "The  Hidden  History"  available
at  $5. Much that  is now  happening  at  Panmunjom  becomes  clearer
in  the  light of that  book.
—I. F. Stone
7  S
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  16,  1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S    PAGE
Courts Must  Say What  Congress  Can't  Give  Away
Before  we  go  on,  I  would like  to  contribute  one  citizen's
earnest  mite  to  the  commendation  the  American  people  owe
Wayne  Morse, Paul  Douglas, John  Sparkman,  Estes  Kefauver,
Clinton  Anderson  and the  30 other  senators  who tried  to  hold
the  door  against  the  tidelands oil bill. Unfortunately the  horse
was  stolen  last  Nov.  4,  when everyone  was  looking  the  other
way.  What  might  happen  to  a  fabulous  national  treasure off-
shore,  under  water  and  out  of  sight,  seemed   inconsequential
beside  Candidate  Eisenhower's  undertaking,  as  it  was  hope-
fully  received,  to  go to  Korea  personally  and get  the  war  over
with.  The  issue  is  not  yet  well  understood,  and  then  was seen
dimly.  Had  it  been  clear  in  the  view of  all,  however,  it hardly
would  have had decisive weight with  even one  American voter
who  believed  the  election  of  the  General  would  do  most  for
the  chances of  peace.
This  does  not  mean  that  the  nation  by  elective  choice  has
given  or  signified  its  willingness  to  give  the  submerged  riches
to  the  coastal  states. Nor  has it  been  established  by passage of
the  bill that Congress, or any representative  body, has the  right
to make such a gift.
What  has  been  established, by the  Supreme  Court's 1947
ruling,  is  that  the  lands  in  question  are  the  property  of  the
United  States,  of  all  of  the  people  thereof.  From this ruling  it
now  is  contended,  even  by  "leading"  legal  minds  among  the
opponents  of  the  give-away  bill,  that  the  legislation  passing
title  to  the  states,  though  profligate  and  probably  unpopular,
is  competent,  that  precisely  because  the  federal  right  is  para-
mount  the  act  of  Congress  disposing  of  the  property  is  valid
and  conclusive.  The  contention  itself   is  plausible  of  course
only  to  the  extent  that  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  the  affairs
of  the  nation,  in  all  things,  are  at  the  mercy  of  its  govern-
mental  creature.
There  still  is  room  to  swing  a  healthy  doubt  that  Congress
has  full  authority as a real  estate  agent  for  the  public  domain,
that  it  can  sell,  bargain,  devise  or  give  away  to  individual
states  of  the  Union,  or  to  any foreign  state,  the  most valuable
tracts of  the  commonwealth. Already  on  the  initiative of  West
Virginia  the  tidelands case is pointed  again towards the  courts
and  it  is not  unlikely that other  states,  troubled  for  the equity
of  their citizens in  the  natural  resources  of  the  country's terri-
torial  possessions, will  join  in  the  proceedings.
We  may  confidently  expect  many  pithy questions  of con-
gressional  authority in  the  premises  to  be  raised,  many  possi-
ble  parallels  to  be  probed.  For  it  is  unreasonable  to  suppose
that  the  people  as a  whole  are  so indifferent  to  their  interests
that  they  will  permit  to  pass  unchallenged  a  precedent  by
which,   another  time,   a  headstrong   Congress   could   justify
"giving  back"  all  that  remains  in  the  nation's  sole  name of
the  Louisiana  Purchase—the  Mississippi  river—to  Louisiana,
or  ceding  the Gadsden Purchase to Mexico, or  (for  an  extreme
example)   selling  Alaska  back  to  the  expansive  state  within
whose  historical  boundaries  Alaska—indisputably—once lay.
These  absurd suppositions  will have to be exercised,  I think,
not  only  to  set  off  the  absurdity  of  the  tidelands  deal  but  to
locate,  by  adjudication,  the  limits  restraining  even  Congress
in  the  alienation  of  parcels  and  tracts of  the  national  holdings.
There  must be such limits. There  always will be  ready  "takers"
for  any part  of  the  land  by which  the  United  States  allows  its
patrimony  to  be  diminished.  This  time  it  was  the  great  oil
statesmen  of  Texas,  California  and  Louisiana who  slipped  up
on  our  blind  side  during  an  election,  planting  an   "issue"
(while  our  chief  concern  was claimed  by a distant  battlefield)
that  would  enable  them  to  demand  of  a  new  and  unwary ad-
ministration   the   transfer   of   the   oil-rich   sea-bottom    from
federal  ownership  to  more  amenable  jurisdictions.  Tomorrow,
we  may  be  beset  by  similar   machinations  looking  to con-
gressional   cession   of   other   public   properties   loaded   with
natural  prizes  whose existence  is yet  unsuspected.
Sen. Morse  and  his fellow conservationists have done us this
service,  for  which  we ought  additionally  to  esteem  them,  that
their  deliberately  prolonged  debate  has  alerted  us  to  a  nicer
regard  for the. commonwealth  and  the  need  of a sharper watch
upon  what  appear  to  be  side  issues  in  presidential  campaigns.
I.  F. Stone's   Weekly
Room  203
301  E. Capitol  St., S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C
Please  enter  the following  subscription. £5  for  1 year  is
enclosed.  (See page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name   ....................................................................................
Street
Gty      .,
State   .
..Zone..
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  B.  Capitol  St., SJB.,
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class   Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED