I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953aug15.pdf

============================================================

The  Soviet  H-Bomb: Total Destruction and Total Diplomacy, See Page 2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I  NUMBER   30
AUGUST  15,  1953
s       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Co-Existence  or  Non-Existence
Publicly  the  line  in  Washington  is  to  treat  Malenkov's
announcement  of  a  Soviet  H-bomb  with  skepticism.  The  word
passed  out  is  to  laugh  it  off. Privately,  however,  there  is  no
disposition to assume that  Malenkov was bluffing.  When  Molo-
tov  in   1947  said  the  "secret"  of  the  atom  bomb  had  "long
ceased  to  exist",  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  called  this
a  misleading  statement  for  home  consumption.  This  time  the
Commission's   reaction  is  sober.  Malenkov's  wording  is  im-
portant.   Molotov   in   1947   spoke  only  of  the  atom   bomb's
"secret".  Malenkov  now  says,  "the  U.  S.  has  no  monopoly  in
the  production  of  the  hydrogen  bomb  either." Note  the  word
"production".
It  is  not  impossible  that  the  U.  S.  S. R.  may  have beaten
the  U.  S. in  the  race  for  the  H-bomb.  Truman  directed  work
on  the  H-bomb   in  January,   1950.   But  at  least   four  years
earlier,  the  Austrian  physicist,  Hans  Thirring,  with  no  access
to  secret  information, American  or  Russian,  devoted  a  chapter
to  describing  the  theory and mechanism of the  hydrogen bomb
in his book,  "Die  geschichte der atombombe"  (Vienna,  1946).
It  would  be  naive  to  suppose  that  the  Russian  govern-
ment  had  to  wait  for  this  book  to  appear  before  it  was aware
of  the  H-bomb.  Fuchs  is  said  to  have  learned  of  it  when  he
was  in  Los  Alamos  from   1944   to   1946.   The  Russians  may
well  have  tackled  the  problems  of  the  atom  bomb  and  the
H-bomb  at  the  same  time.  If  Malenkov  spoke  truthfully,  the
Soviets  are  already  producing  the  hydrogen  bomb.  Whether
we  have  produced   it  yet  is  not  known.  The  well-informed
Washington  Post, which  follows  atomic  developments  closely,
speaks  of  the  "thermonuclear  device"  exploded  in  the  Pacific
last  year  as  "the  forerunner  of  the   hydrogen  bomb."  Since
U.  S. military-diplomatic  policy  has  been  based  on  the  hope
of  frightening  the  Russians  into  submission,  the  production
and  test  of  an  American  H-bomb  would probably  be  well ad-
vettised.
Unlike  the  Pentagon,  the Kremlin  did  not  use its announce-
ment  as an  occasion  for  threats  or  bluster.  Malenkov followed
his  news  about  the  H-bomb  with  another  plea  for  peaceful
co-existence  of  the  U.  S.  and  the  U.  S.  S.  R.  "It  would  be  a
crime  before  mankind,"   he  said,  "if   the   certain  relaxation
which  has  appeared   in  the  international  atmosphere  should
be  replaced  by  a  new  intensification  of  the  tension."  Unfor-
tunately  the  news  must  lead  to  greater  tension  unless  it   is
seized  upon  as  a  means of  breaking  the  ice  of  the  cold  war
and  initiating  top  level  talks  for  a  settlement.
If  Churchill  is  well  enough,  the  Russian announcement
may give  him  the  leverage he  needs  for another  try  at negotia-
tions.  The  public  is  so  punch-drunk  on  large  numbers  and
mass  destruction  that  one  despairs  of  awakening  some  realiza-
tion  of  what  H-bomb  warfare  would  mean.  Thirring  wrote,
"God   protect   the   country   over  which  a  six-ton   bomb  of
lithium  hydride will  ever  explode."  In  the  April,  1950,  issue
of  Scientific   American,  Dr.  Hans  A.  Bethe,  who  was  chief  of
the  theoretical  physics  laboratory  at  Los  Alamos,  warned  "By
the  blast  effect  alone  a  single  bomb  could  obliterate  almost  all
of  Greater  New  York  or  Moscow  or  Londoa"  In  the  July,
1953   issue  of  foreign   Affairs,    J.  Robert   Oppenheimer   ex-
plained,  "We  may  anticipate  a  state  of  affairs  in  which  two
Great  Powers  will  each  be  in  a position  to  put  an  end  to  the
civilization  and life  of  the  other ... We  may be  likened  to
two  scorpions  in  a  bottle,  each  capable  of  killing  the  other,
but  only  at  the  risk  of  his own  life."
Though  the  words  may sound  like  a  soap  slogan,  it  is  lit-
erally  true  that  whether  the  Russians  or  ourselves  have  the
H-bomb  now  or  will  have  it  tomorrow,  the  issue  simply  and
literally  for  millions  of  us  on  this  planet  is  a  choice  between
co-existence  or  non-existence.  There  is  no  safety  in  an  arms
race,  especially  an  H-bomb  race.  "Suppose,"  Harold  C.  Urey
writes,  "that  two  countries  have  the  hydrogen   bomb.  Is  it
not  believable  that  sooner  or kter an incident  may occur which
would  precipitate the use of bombs?  . . . The probability  that
a  war  will  start  is  increased  if  two  groups  each  believe  they
can  win  that  war.  .  .  .  An  exact  balance  of  power  is  very
difficult  to  attain.  This  is  what  we  know  in  physical  science
as  a  situation  of  unstable  equilibrium;  one  like  balancing  an
egg  on  its  end.  The  slightest  push  topples  the  egg  in  one  di-
rection   or   another."
Gordon  Dean,  in  his  final  press  conference   here  on
June   25  when  retiring   as  chairman  of  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission, tried  to get  across some of  the  suicidal  potentiali-
ties  in  the  present  situation.  "We  have  said  many  times,"  he
declared,  "that  we  are  ahead  of  the  Russians,  but  that  is  not
enough.  It  does us no good  to  reach the point where we would
be  able  to  wipe  out  an  enemy  20  times  over  if  he  reaches  the
point  where  he  can  wipe  us  out  just  once."  The  statement
provoked  these  alarmingly  cryptic  questions  and  answers:
"The   PRESS: ... You are not suggesting that
the  Russians  have  reached  the  point  where
they  can wipe  us  out  ?
"Mr.  DEAN: I  am not  suggesting  because  I
can't   answer   the  thing  I  would  like   to  see
publicly  discussed.  Today  I  can't.
"The    PRESS:  You  are  not  saying  they  can
or  they  can't?
"Mr.    DEAN:  I  am  not  saying  they  can  or
they  can't.  .  .  .
"The    PRESS:   Mr.  Dean,  do  you  think   the
public's attitude  toward  defense  would  change
if   they  knew  these  various  things  about  the
Russian's  atomic   bombs?
"Mr.    DEAN:  Yes,   I  think   they  would  be
much  more  sober  about  what  the  real  danger
may  be  in  the  next  few  years."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  P. Stone's  Weekly, August  15,1953
Total  Diplomacy  and  Total  Destruction
The   Russian  H-bomb  announcement  is  important  be-
cause  it  may  open  a  door  the  Truman  Administration  kept
tightly  shut   against   public  discussion  of  the   super-weapon.
The  H-bomb  is  a  striking  example  of  the  way atomic  secrecy
has  served  to  ensure  control  of  national  policy  by  a  handful
of  military  and  political  leaders.
In  an  age  which  boasts  of  world  wide  communications, the
Truman  Administration  was able  to  keep  the  H-bomb  a  secret
in  this  country  though  its  theory  had  been  fully  discussed  in
a  book  published  in  Vienna  after  the  war.  It  was  only  when
a  Senator  indiscreetly  mentioned  the  super  bomb  on  the  air
in  the  Fall  of   1949   that  it  became  known  to  the  American
public.
The   remarks  of  Senator  Johnson  of  Colorado  opened
a  promising  debate  in  foreign   policy.  David  Lilienthal  ap-
pealed  to  Truman  to  negotiate  with  Moscow  before embark-
ing  on  an  H-bomb   race.  The  late  Senator  Me  Mahon  and
Senator  Tydings  began  a  campaign  for  disarmament, co-ex-
istence  and  a  50-year  program  for  world  development.  Dis-
cussion  was  cut  short  (1)  by  Truman's  decision  in January,
1950, to  proceed with  production of  the  bomb,  (2)  by  Ache-
son's campaign  for  "total  diplomacy,"  and  (3)  by Me Carthy's
debut  on  the  national  scene  with  a  sensational  attack  on  the
State  Department   in  February,   1950.  This  diverted  the  en-
ergies  of  Tydings   and  Me  Mahon  and  distracted  attention
from  the   H-bomb.
Recently  there  have  been  overtures  by  Gordon   Dean  and
Robert  J.  Oppenheimer  for  a  reopening  of  public  discussion.
The  drive  for  private  control  of  the  atom  has  had  the  good
effect   of  stimulating  a  campaign   for  greater  release  of   in-
formation  to  the  public. Unless  the  grip of  secrecy  is  loosened,
the  industry can  hardly  be  handed  over  to  private  ownership.
The  White  House  has  shown  its  sympathy.  There  has  been
pressure  from  scientists  and  others  concerned  with  civil  de-
fense  and  worried  by  public  indifference.
A  major  obstacle  to  the  release  of  more  information is
that  public  knowledge  of  the  danger  would  make  impossible
the  maintenance  of  that  rigid  foreign  policy  which  Acheson
called  "total diplomacy."  It  is total  in the  sense  that  it demands
total  acquiescence  at  home  in  a  policy  of  totally  avoiding  any
negotiations  which  might  relax  tension.
There  is  unfortunately  no  sign  that  the  present   Adminis-
tration  is  prepared  to  abandon  total  diplomacy.  Though  the
resistance   in  Congress   to  any  increase   in   the  debt   ceiling
showed  the  strength  of  business  forces  which  want  economy
in  government,  the  same  men  often  demand  lower  taxes  at
home  and  more  costly  commitments  abroad.  The   truce  in
Korea  is  regarded  by  Dulles  and  the  Pentagon  merely  as  an
occasion  for  returning  to  the  policy  of  the  arms race and more
bases.  The  strategy  is  to  "sit  tight"  in  Korea,  walking  out  of
the  political  conference  after  90  days  to  avoid  withdrawal of
American  troops  and  the  political  headaches  of  unification.
The  "sit  tight"  strategy  was made  clear  by  Dulles  at  his
last  press  conference  before  leaving  for  Korea.  When  asked
what  hope  he  had  for  the  unification of  Korea  without  mak-
ing  "undue  concessions"  to  Red  China,  the  Secretary  replied,
"I  have  not  only  the  hope,  but  I  have  the  faith  and  belief
that  it  is  possible  to  detach  satellite  areas ...  I  think  some
of  the  things that  are going  on  in  the  satellite  area of  Europe
—in  the  Soviet  sector  of  Berlin  and  in  the  Soviet   zone  of
Germany  and  Czechoslovakia—all  indicate that  there  can  be
an  attraction  of  these  areas  for  the  Western  world  so strong
that  it  will  not  seem  worthwhile  for  the  Soviet  masters  to
keep  them  under  their  rule."  If  North   Korea  and  Eastern
Germany  can  be  "detached"  by continuing the  cold  war, there
is no  need  to  negotiate  for  the  unification  of  either country.
But  centrifugal  forces  are  set  in  motion  on  both  sides  by
this  kind  of  a  policy.  Capitalist  Japan  cannot  afford   to  give
up  the  China  trade  permanently.  Adenauer—to   Washington's
dismay—has  been  talking  of  offering  Moscow  a  "non-aggres-
sion"  pact  in  return  for  a  unified  Germany. The  burden  of
the  arms  race  is  reviving  Popular  Frontism  in  both  Italy  and
France.
The  most  important  political  development  in  Italy  has
gone  almost  unnoticed  in  the  American press.  The  right  wing
Socialist,  Saragat, continues  to  urge  that  the  Left  wing  Social-
ist,  Nenni,  be  brought  into  the  government,  though  Nenni  is
allied  with  the  Communists.  In  France  the  general  strike  in
which  Socialist,  Catholic  and  Communist unions  joined  forces
was  a  portent.  A  "sit  tight"  policy  can  maintain  the  pump-
priming  benefits  of  rearmament here  but  the  other non-Com-
munist  countries   are   too  poor   to   stand  the • pace.   Western
Europe,  if  allowed  freedom,  will  move  further  toward social-
ism.  Its  economic  problems  are  insoluble  under  the  kind  of
decadent  capitalism  to  be  seen  in  Italy  and  France.
The  latest  bulletin  of  the  U.N.  Economic  Commission  for
Europe  shows  severe  crisis  conditions  in  Czechoslovakia  and
Eastern  Germany,  but  it  also  shows a  slowdown in  West  Eu-
ropean  economic  growth.  The  figures  indicate  continued  ex-
pansion  elsewhere  in  the  Soviet  zone  and  there  is  no  reason
to  believe  that  East  Germans  and  Czechs cannot  be  held  by
force  if  necessary.  "From  the  most  skeptical  studies"  of  Soviet
economic  statistics,  says  a  writer  in  the  July,  1953  Foreign
Affairs,    "the  fact  of  a  superior  rate  of  growth  does  emerge."
The   article   is  called   "The   Soviet  Economy  Outpaces   The
West".  It  should  be  required  reading  for  those  who  assume
that  a  few  riots  in  East  Germany  may  shake  the  Soviet  dic-
tatorship.
Unless America's  allies  and  our  own German  and  Japan-
ese  satellites  press  hard  for  a  settlement,  the  danger  is  that
the  Soviet  H-bomb  announcement  will  merely  intensify  total
diplomacy  and  let  it  drift  toward  a  war  of  total  destruction.
The  American  military  may  easily  seize  on  the  possibility  of
a  Soviet  H-bomb   to  exploit  public   panic   for  greater   arms
expenditures,  and  the  swift  development  of  a  garrison   state
regime.
Now  is  the  time  to  press  for  peace  talks.  H-bombs  cannot
be  made  in  hall  closets.  The  enormous  plants  required   lend
themselves  to  enforcement  by  inspection.  As  for  international
public  ownership  of atomic  facilities, the  U. S. Congress  would
be  the  first  to  balk  if  the  Russians  ever  agreed  to  it.  Above
all  solution  depends  not  so  much  on  any  treaties  or  enforce-
ment  devices  but  on  a  different  atmosphere.  So  busy  are  the
spreaders  of  hate  that  one  almost  despairs  of  achieving  it.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  15,  1953
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor  and Publisher,  I. F. STONE
Published  weekly  except the  last two weeks
of  August  at  Room  205,  301  E. Capitol
St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.  Subscrip-
tion  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and Continental
Europe,  $10  by  1st  class  mail,  $13  by air;
for  Israel,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by first class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.  Single
copy,  15 cents. Tel.: LI 4-7087. Entered as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
August  15,
5      Vol.  I,  No.  30
COMMENT
Vacation
The  Weekly  is  published   50  weeks  a
year. It  will not be published the last two
weeks  in  August.  Our  next  issue  will  be
that  of  September  5.
J. B. Matthews  20 Years Ago
A  correspondent   sends  us  this  tid-bit
from   a   book   published  in   1935   called
Partners  in  Plunder.
"The  social  significance  of  the  church
in  a  business  society  cannot  be  gauged
by  the  brave  utterances  of  a  few  indi-
vidual  clergymen.  .  .  .  The moral  codes
of   the   church   are   pervaded   with   em-
phases  that  are  wholly  congenial  to  the
defense  of  business  practices  and  inter-
ests.  .  .  .  Frightening   phrases  are a
specialty  of  the   pulpit,   phrases  which,
in  the  interests  of  an  economy  of  scarci-
ty,  serve  to  frighten   the  impressionable
away  from  collectivism.  . . . The leader-
ship  of  the  present-day  Church,  at  least
in  Protestant  communions,  is   definitely
committed   to   a   philosophy  of   liberal-
ism.  .  .  .  The liberal  approach  to  social
questions  is  eminently  suited  to  the  pur-
poses  of  business  reaction."
The  book  was  by  Matthews and  Shall-
cross  and the  Matthews  was J.  B.
Voltaire  as Well as Marx
Under  cover  of  the  fight  against  Com-
munism,  clerical  forces  are  carrying  on
a  struggle  against  liberalism  and ration-
alism. Fordham University has a Russian
Institute.   One  of  its  members,  the  Rev.
Andrei   Ourosoff,   S.J.,    has   been   on  a
speaking  tour  of  the  United  States  and
Canada.  The  full  text  of  one  of  his  lec-
tures  may  be found  inserted  in  the Con-
gressional  Record  of  August  4.
An  excerpt  will  show  that  this  Jesuit
with  the  Russian name attacks the  whole
tradition   of  free   thought   and   scientific
inquiry.  "The  most  evil  side  of  Marxism,
the   materialist   atheism,"   he   tells   his
audiences,  "was   a  heritage   of  the  long
and  steady  development  taking  place  in
the  thinking and  philosophies which  had
grown  up  through   the  centuries  in  the
West."
Father    Ourosoff    declares   "Marxism
is  the  result  of  the  thoughts  of  men  like
Voltaire,  the  French  encyclopaedist,  so-
cial   dreamers  like  Jean-Jacques   Rous-
seau, the  German philosophers of the last
century  and   many  other   so-called   out-
standing   European  thinkers."
Father  Ourosoff  is  full  of contempt  for
the  West  and its  traditions.  At one point
he   glorifies   Communist  virtues  and   in
an   unfavorable  comparison   says,   "All
these  qualities have  always  been  wanting
in  the  West  because there  is  no  faith."
Apparently   faith   in  freedom,   faith   in
reason, faith  in scientific inquiry, faith  in
the  common  man  and  faith  in  truth—the
great  faiths  of  the  Western  tradition—
count  for  nothing.
How-Crazy-Can-You-Get Dept.
We  noticed  with  pleased  surprise  that
the  day  Congress  adjourned,  Jenner  (R.
Ind.)  made a  speech  on  the  Senate floor
in  which  he welcomed  the  truce  in  Korea
and  said,  "every   legitimate   goal  which
can  be  achieved  by  war  can  be achieved
better  by  diplomacy."
We  were  startled,  however, to  see just
what  Jenner   expects  diplomacy  to  ac-
complish.  He thinks  "all  American policy
must  start  from  a  firm  decision  to  re-
establish  the  legitimate  anti-Communist
government on the  China mainland"  with
an  army,  navy and  air  force  well enough
equipped  "to  open  a  second  front  on  the
mainland   of   Asia."   He   wants   Korea
"unified  to  the  Yalu,"  with  armed  forces
"equipped  to  hold  their  share  of  the  line
against   Russia's   advance  in  Asia."  He
also  proposes  "a  Japan  fully  armed  and
equipped  to  hold  its  share  of  the  line,"
and "a united Germany, able to  defend  its
share  of  the  line  in  the  West."
Suppose  that  the  Russians  do  not  fall
in   with   this  kind  of   diplomacy?  "We
will  move  to  expel Russia from  the  UN,"
Jenner  said.  If  the  UN  does  not  agree?
"We  will  interpret  a  vote  against  us,  or
a  refusal  to vote,  as  a  vote for  our  with-
drawal  from  the  UN,"
While  preparing  to  muster   Nationalist
Chinese, Koreans,  Japanese and  Germans
in  martial  array,  Jenner  made  it  clear
that  he  wanted  no more  Koreas.
"We  want  no  American forces  sent  to
Southeast   Asia,"   he   told   the    Senate,
"to finish the  Korean  war  under new and
more   terrible   conditions.   We  want   no
carefully  contrived  emergencies by which
we  shall  be forced  to  consent in  haste  to
the  sending  of troops to Vietnam  or Thai-
land."
(We hope the  Senator was not  thinking
of   our  new  Ambassador  to  Thailand—
General  William  J.  Donovan  of  the  OSS
when  he  spoke  of  contrived  emergencies
in  that  area).
This  did  not  end  the  toll  of what  Jen-
ner  expects  "diplomacy"  to  accomplish.
While  clearing  China  and  North  Korea
of   Communists  and  rearming   the   Ger-
mans  and  Japanese,  Jenner  wants   the
budget  balanced and  taxes  cut.
Exit  "Free Enterprise"
Air  transport  is  now big  business.  In
terms   of  passenger   revenues  last  year,
the   country's   biggest   common   carrier
was   American  Airlines,  which   ranked
ahead  of  our  largest  railroad,  the  Penn-
sylvania.
Since   the   Civil  Aeronautics  Act  of
1938,  the   volume  of  air   travel  has   in-
creased  twenty-fold.  Yet  the  Senate  Se-
lect  Committee  on  Small   Business   dis-
closes that  in  this  period  the  Civil  Aero-
nautics  Board  has  refused  to  certify   a
single   new  air   carrier   on  the   trunk
routes.  The  number  of   companies    per-
mitted  to  operate  has  actually  declined
"from  18  when  the  act  was  under  con-
sideration   to  a  probable  12  by  the  end
of  1953."
The   report   made  public  by   Senator
Thye  (R.  Minn.),  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee,  says  air  transport  was  "an  in-
fant  industry"  when  Congress  gave  the
CAB   "the    right   to   protect   the   then
existing  companies from  competition  un-
til  such  time  as  they  became strong" but
did  not  intend  "to  bar  all  future  entry
into  air  transportation."  The report  re-
veals  the  monopoly conditions  regulation
has  fostered  and  protests the  CAB's  hos-
tility  to the  so-called  "non-sked" airlines,
which  pinoeered low cost air  coach travel.
The  Senate  Small  Business  Committee
report  said  the  issue  "involves  the  right
of  entry  of  new businesses into  an  indus-
try.  Freedom  of  opportunity  has  always
been   a   basic   American   economic   doc-
trine."  The  press  which  usually  rises  to
cheer these  cliches was remarkably  silent
about   this   report.   When    regulations
serves  to buttress  monopoly, little  is  said
about  "free  enterprise,"
New  Low in Deportation Drive
Hardly  a  day  passes  without  a  press
release  from  the  Department  of  Justice
announcing  that  another  deportation  ac-
tion  has  been begun against some  radical,
past or present. In  last  week's batch was
the news that  Attorney  General  Brownell
had  directed  the  filing  of  a  petition  to
cancel  the  naturalization  of  Sophie  Ger-
son,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  This  is  the   story
behind  the  news  release.
Sophie  Gerson  is   the   wife   of  Simon
W.  Gerson,  one  of  two  Communists  ac-
quitted   by  Federal   Judge   Edward   J.
Dimock  last  September   in  New  York's
second   Smith   Act  trial.  Gerson,  State
legislative    director   of   the   Communist
party, thereupon  went on a speaking tour
in  defense  of  his  fellow  defendants.  The
acquittal  and  the  tour  did not  add  to  his
popularity  in  certain  government  circles.
The  first  hint  of  unpleasantness   was
a   note  in   Howard  Rushmore's  weekly
column  for  the  New York  Journal-Amer-
ican, saying that  Gerson would  soon have
something  to  talk  about,  when  someone
close  to  him  was  deported.
Mrs.  Gerson  was  born  in  Russia  and
came  to  this  country  at  the  age  of  12.
She  has  two  children—a  boy,  14,  and  a
girl,  7. She was naturalized  in  1945, with
a  group  of  women whose husbands  were
in  the   armed   forces.   Gerson   was  then
an  infantryman  with  the  U.  S. Army.
The  Department  press release  says she
was  arrested  in   1928  in  New  York,  in
1929  at  Gastonia,  North  Carolina,  and
in  1931  at  Paterson,  N. J.  She was a  la-
bor  organizer  and  these  were  strike  ar-
rests.   The    most    "famous"    of   these
strikes,  according  to  the  Department  of
Justice,  was  the  "Gastonia  mill  strike of
1929".  There   were  no  convictions. Now
this record  of  more than  two decades  ago
is  being  raked  up.  This  is  one  way  to
even  scores  with  an  accused  man  after
a  Judge  directs  a  verdict  of  acquittal.
1   2   J
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. P. Stone's Weekly, August  15,1953
.;'.''.    JENfJINGS      PERRY'S     PAGE
Should  Assert  Korean  Truce  as a Triumph
'  If  in  his  slab-sided  glass  palace-on  the'  East  River  Dag
Harnniajrskjpld   still  has_  about   him   ajBy'part   of   the  gift  of
poetry <.he  reputedly
;
 had, in., the  spruce, fpresis', pf  Sweden,  he
should''give,;about  now,
:
 with
r
a  brave, prideful  baita4,on
:
h,pw
the ,-UN;,di2;
;
,sp.
|i
tfiumph
/
:, m' Kp,rea.,;IJow  it  did  repel  the
aggression,-as  it  contracted; tp.^p.
:;
Hpw it  did  stop,the  fight
in  the-rttiddleJrl^think'fee"-should  -bull  -'Put  all'the
1
" stops  and"
;••;?-•-•  ;ii  -••)•;   'I.'. ,:U-tT uV   b'.!.v.1ii.
:
   Ji'!  tvi   ,..,,.••       • ,     .  i,.
claim .the, accomplishment,  g<y,e, yoipe  and  dignity  to  the  exul-
tation  tji ^whichnhC'.people  everywhere ;are  inclinedrn-aqd  are
enUtle^^fldfpOse, &£
:
^r$i|i
 :
ife ^i
n
  -ajitidote:to-the-dyspeptic;
lament  6f-idhe;ijoyekiilers/_anioog,;us
;
fwhq   drearned,
!
ohl^  of  a
victory  dictated"by)MacAtfhur>jin,Mpscow.
t^hy'..3raj£'.fpf'fjist&fy    to- U|iseraniblie
:
 the...facts?-;  There,--is.-•
room 'and, need, ^gfit^Vay; tpr;',a.!i>tight  ;paean
;
,in  celebratidh";
of'''the'  "CeaSeifirej
  ;
p
;
f  ;
;
the    painfully-achieved.jfubstii-ijtjiin'jbf,;
b>rairisI'fprJtjiijletsliK'  pn^'aig^imen^. The,'ilisgruntled;-"experts"-
either  for UN  or  U."S1" and goes oh to desjiise the'"intef national
kibitzer"-(.-the. UJN^  perrru'tted^.torstand,behiiidrthis'couhtfy's
chair   "and .veto  the  obvious  plays."   Groansi the  plush,easy/
chair,  "MacArthur  rjad   his"  ears  pinned, .back  for- naively'• at-  •
tempting'tP'
:
win-this'Korean'war,  which the,  with  Straterneyer"•
aHi^P^f^^fl^^^^^y^'b'een'iJone.''  At the TPentagon^
lateiy;(G^ri.cMarlc;Glark;;HasVdar
i
kJy  hintisdVthat 'w"e  may  yet-have
to unlimb'er. the'atorn
:
borrib  to 'do''this" job  up  brpwri>Back  in
March',^predicting' trie
  !
fi
>
sinjg^pf;'tHe;'Gi?rjerarsistaur,,  Nrewsweek.
glowingly  noted, instability  -"to,keep ibis  lip  -buttoned", at  the
fight'itirne."
:5
Npw
f
Gen.i
i
Gla:rkv
;
briefing'"us
i
on  wnat  we must lie".
rM"d.y
K
"to'Cdp*.'ifj[,t,h;e
v
  'truce;'; i$  b'rplcen;  ahd  suggesting-that, .it
akeady  may5have:beenvSurHciehtly.
:
 broken  by-the      < other   = side's.  >
failvjrp.t^return^"tp  jis  as "many'rfteri'as  we  have listed "as  hiiss-
ing,:further>'.unbuttons  to  -warn us'that  nothing  is  to  be  gottpn.,.
from  th^s'e'|3ebt>le;'reallyj--'saye.
1
 by  force,  r.;      .•;;,.,           •-;_<     ;•.:<:
,''C|ur^'t^'^o^.d^s,'pOt;;S|y
:
^^ti(>;bie: nasty'  about
 ;
it;'His;'
verse,has.:betterj,tp
 (
ip, than, to.'.^ecali.'that  the  naive  attempt  >
to  wi/i.ih'-KpjrHelS'by,. the; precious  formula  of/force  brought: a>
^e'^! itrj^'
>!
Yalu  and' got  us
r
  pinned "
8-15-53
i;.vRo'om-2Q5;
?i
;
-       PJea.e  enter  the  following  subscription.  #5: (or  1 year  i»; •-..
,
f;:
;  enclpted.'-CSee  page  3  £orforeig:h  rates)                                        ''   '•
'"   Naine  n.
1
::-:.
back  to, the Pusan  perimeter  with  great  losses, and  almost  into
the  sea.  It  should  be  enough  in  proper  stanazs  to  point  out
• that  any  morning  since, the  shooting  stopped,  while  unhappy
editors  have  not  left  their  comfortable  couches,  divers  young
men  in  uniform  live  to  see  the  sun  who  would  .have  been
"missing"  or torn  or  dead  had there  not  been  at  last'some sort
f
bf  triumph  of  mind  over  MacArthur.
                           T
"
;
With   a   little   imagery   and   emphasis   a'spokesman'  for"
the UN  should  be able  to make it  clear that, Gen.  Clark's  fore-
bodings,, to  the  contrary  notwithstanding,  keeping  the  atom
•  bomb  on  the  ground  will  be  the  finest  service
1
  the  UN   can
. lender .mankind,  .just  as  up  to  now  the  fairest   justification'
;.pf  its  existence  that  can  be  chalked  up  is  the.  part,  it  has
"had  to  play  in  separating  the, [fighting  forces in   Korea  even.
'. b,y  tjsvo  miles.'A  couplet' could: be  turned,  and  would:be  wel-
:
  corned,: on: the  theme  that  only  those  who  only'respect'force
themselves   monotonously  -insist,,that; • others ,0^ .understand
.  nothing  else'.                         '"
                         :
  ,.    _'"  .!/"''  ,                                                                            ^  ..•-•.....-      •  .,
.,.:.•  It  is not  goW.for^tlliie.UN'horiforithe  hppes' %hianjty.has
in  it  for.those
;
who  disparage  the  truce  in'Korea>  who'are  in-
capable  bf  .cpnceiying  .that; the^ breaking'off  of  a  war  in   full
career  is incomparably..a  stouter  proof  of  human .rationality
than  any  "final"-  arbitrament  by  force  and  who
:
-hasten  to   as^
.  sume  that  the/, truce  must,lend  in'a,reversion  to  arrns'tq  go
• ^unchallenged.: To   the. incontinent
;;
 fuming.  pf^,such /.skeptics,
• bully  boys  and  .second  guessers'the  UN   ought  vigorously  to
oppose,its own  pride  and  purposei'.^,;
r
       ,     .      ^     ; /f'
1
       ",;
•-Who  can  guarantee  that  thej/truce.'can  be; nursed,into  a
\glbfipus  peace,  or  even'that  peace  can-be  gloribus?  But  who
pij.thi  pther.hahd can convince'this generatipn/that the wager-
'  ing: of  untold thousands  of/lives  on  the'throw  of  the  A-bbmb
in','an   effort  "to  prove   that   whaS
1
 was-naively  attempted     • by
.. WacArthur  still  can  be  done' would  not   be  an  act"  in  "cpn-
tempt  of  rsense  and   of   existence?  The   world  has  got.  this
reprieve  in   Korea  and  should  be  impressed  by it.'  The-'UN
^slipiUd  vaupt  ifV'And   if  Dag  Hammarskjold  can't  make-that
:rhyme:and.5ing  and  excite,  then'the  quiet  fbrests
1
" of  S'wedeh
;' have been'-of  no'help'to ,us ;and
:
 h'eisnobard."..'    .'      ,
    :
; '
Lip,  Stone's  Weeiciy
-...     Robm;2Q5
•;-;';-3«U  El  Capitol  St., SJB-,
i.'.    Washington  3y  D.   C.
uy:,,:..   ;*.;.,.
.       ;•:-.   •>-•'.    ;•••
")    •-.  '        si    :>-
»&•• '  <".-•»
;                  .•  .Entered' -as  ,-       , .
Second  Class  Mail   ;
rf
V                _    ';   Mafter      -
:
'
!
 ''-"'•<••
['.'-  :'.'.' ,Pqsi  (^fficis:     .'' f,;v
•  ^Washington, t).  C/
•--. ;.•.-...•'•  •    •>:;:'.      *   •   !'i;;i;i>!,!  '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED