I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953dec14.pdf

============================================================

Extra!   Eliz. Bentley Lets Slip the  Truth  About  Wire-Tapping, See Page Two
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   I,  NUMBER  45
DECEMBER  14,  1953WASHINGTON, D. C.
15 CENTS
Evaluating  the  Eisenhower  Bombshell:
Diplomacy   a  la  B.  B.  D.  &  O.
At   the  very  entrance of  the  difficult  path  toward  peace lie
two  similar  problems.   One  is  the  unification  of  Korea,  the
other  the  unification of  Germany.   These  cannot  be separated
from  each  other   or  from   the  broader   context   of   strategic
relations  between  the  two  great  Powers.
If   the   Russians  were  sure,  for   example,  that   peace  had
been  made  in  the  Far  East,  they  might  be  willing  to  release
their  hold  on  Eastern  Germany.   But  it  would  be  folly  for
them  to  give  up  Eastern  Germany  if  there  is  still  danger  in
the  East,  for  any  resumption  of  hostilities  might  flare  up  into
world  war.  Eastern  Germany  is  an  additional  buffer  protect-
ing  the  borders of  the  Soviet  Union.
There  is a similar perspective  from  Peking. Korea *has always
been  a  minor  concern  of  the  Chinese  Communists,   a  distinct
diversion  of  their  strength   away  from  Formosa  and  internal
construction.   A  proposal  for  the  unification  of  Korea  and  for
neutralization  would  take  a  military  liability  off  their  hands.
But  such a  solution  makes  sense  only  if  there  is  to  be  stability
in  the  Far  East.   On  the  other  hand,  if  war  is a  possibility, if
Formosa  is  to  be  used  as a  springboard  for  intervention,  then
it  hardly makes  sense for  the  Chinese to  move back  to  the Yalu
and  release  the  entire  Korean  peninsula  for  possible  use  as  an
avenue  of  invasion.
What  blocks  world  peace is that  the  American  government
insists  on   approaching  each  of   these  problems  in   isolation.
It  wants  the  Russians to  give  up Eastern  Germany  and  release
their  hold  on  Austria  without  assuring  them  of  peace in  the
Far  East  or  even  that  German  bases  would  not   be  used  as
springboards for  a new war of  "liberation."  At  the  same  time,
in  the  Far  East,, our  government  wants  the  Chinese  to  relin-
quish  the   Communist   hold  on  Korea  and  abandon   historic
claims  to  Formosa  with  no  assurance in  return  of  recognition
and  stable  relations.
We  are  trying  to  get  something  for  nothing.   We  do  not
wish  even to give paper promises in return, as shown by the  cold
shoulder  Washington   gave  Adenauer  last   summer  when  he
fished about  for  some  "non-aggression"  formula  with  which
to  sugarcoat  for  the  Russians  the  loss  of  the  East  German
buffer.   Our   desire  to  dictate  instead  of  negotiating   is  what
haunts  our  allies,  and  it  is  this  which  must  have  been  the
preoccupation  of  the  British  and  French  at  Bermuda.   They
want  a  formula  which  might  possibly  lead  to  success  at  the
forthcoming  negotiations  in Berlin.   Dulles, on  the  other  hand,
merely  wants   to   get  the  talking  over   with   as  rapidly  as
possible  in  order  to  press  on  with  German  rearmament  and
after  that  with  the  big push  eastward.
When  this  picture  is  looked  at  in  the  context  of  the  atom
and  hydrogen  bomb,  the  outlook  is frightful.   For  resumption
of  the  old  German-Slav  struggle  in  the  area  of  atomic  war-
fare,  with  the  U.  S.,  China  and  Western   Europe  drawn  in,
threatens—literally—the   destruction    of   world   civilization.
Against  this  background,  it  must  have  been  furiously  frus-
trating  for  Churchill  at  Bermuda  to  find  serious  discussion of
these  serious  questions  sidetracked  in  favor  of  preparing   the
gaudy  pinwheel  of  a  firecracker  President  Eisenhower  was  to
set  off  at  the  U.N.    The  President's  proposal  in  its   original
form,  according  to  British  sources,  would  have  been  another
childish  attempt  to  frighten  the  Russians with  threats  of  how
many  and  how  potent  were  the  atomic  weapons  in  American
hands.   This  was  said  to  have  been  softened  on  Churchill's
insistence  in  favor  of  the  "constructive"  aspect  of  the  Eisen-
hower  address.
In  assessing  this,  the  President's  desire  for   peace  and  his
sincerity  need  not  be  questioned.   But  the  naivete  is  evident
enough.   If  his  proposal  was  intended  to  change  the   subject
and  to  confuse  the  public  mind,  to  give  Washington  the  in-
itiative  over  Moscow  in  the  headlines,  it  was  well  fabricated.
It  is pure  B.B.D.KO.—Burton,  Barton,  Durstine & Osborne—
American  publicity  and  advertising  at  its  chrome-plated   best.
But  it  is not  diplomacy.
We  cannot make up our minds  whether  to  let  private  Amer-
ican  industry  in  on  atomic  development  for  peacetime  use.
We  are  unwilling  to  share  our  secrets  with  our  closest   ally,
the  British.   Ever  since  we  scrapped  UNRRA,  we  have  been
against  giving our  help to  the rest of  the  world  through inter-
national  organizations.   We  hobbled  the  World  Bank  and  kept
Point  4  out  of  the  UN.   Suddenly  it  is proposed  that  through
the  UN   we  set  up  an  agency  in  which  our  scientists   and
Russia's  will  share  the  work  and  the  secrets  of  atomic  power
development!   If  Russia  ever  accepted  this,  Congress  would
reject  it.
How  can  Powers  arming  to  the  teeth  against  each  other  at
the  same  time  work  together,  sharing  atomic  secrets?   How
can  we  oppose exery  effort  to  relax  world  tension,  and  at  the
same   time   put   forward  a  plan   which   the   ever   suspicious
Russians  (and our  ever  suspicious  Congress)  could  accept only
after  a  period  of  successful  international  cooperation  on  much
less  touchy  subjects?
This  is  psychological  warfare,   not  peacemaking.   The  Rus-
sians  by  their  first  furious  reaction  have  already  fallen  into
the  trap.   And  with  only  a  few  weeks  to  that  crucial  Berlin
conference,  the  air  will  again  be  filled  with  the  mutual   re-
criminations the  enemies of  peace and the  advocates  of  German
rearmament  so fervently   desire.
1  8  'i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December U,  18SS
IE  Stone's   Weekly
•   Editor  and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  weekly  except  the  Ian  tiro  weeks  of  August  at  Room  20),  301
E.  Capitol  St., S.E., Washington  3,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:  Domestic, $5
t   year;   Canada,   Mexico  and  elsewhere  in  the   Western  Hemisphere,   $£;
England  and  Continental  Europe,  (10  by   1st  class  mail,  $15  by  air;  for
brad,  Asia,  Australia  and  Africa,  $10  by  first  class  mail,  $20  by  air  mail.
Single  copy,   15  cents.   Tel.:   LI  4-7087.   Entered   as  Second   Class  mail
matter,  Post  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.
December  14, 1953
Vol.  1,  No.  45
Round  the  Capitol and  the  Globe
Towards  Full  Emancipation:  Our  readers,  we  are  sure,  do
not  need to be briefed  on the  school segregation  case  reargued
last  week  before  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court.    Nothing  is  more
clear  in our generation  than  the  steady  progress  of the  Negro
to  full  emancipation.   The  South  is  waging  a  losing  battle—
and  its  leaders  know  it.    Despite   the  new  millionaire  Re-
publicans  of  Texas,  the  ballot  has  proven  its  potency.   Both
the  Democratic  and  Republican  parties  through  two .succes-
sive  Attorneys  General  have  been  compelled by  the  political
power  of  the  Negro  to  oppose Jim  Crow in  the  schools.   The
reappearance   of  John   W.   Davis,  already   a   half-forgotten
figure, to argue for  segregation  was a  symbol.   Davis  in  1936
was  the  American  Liberty  League,  and  the  basic  liberties  it
espoused  seems  now  to  have  included the  "liberty"  to  keep
the  Negro  down.   We  believe  the  hydraulic  force  of  political
power  and  human  aspiration  will  refashion  the  law  to  their
purpose.    We  even  expect  to  see the  day  when  the  National
Press  Club, last  citadel  of segregation  in  the  national  capital,
admits  Negroes  to  membership,  though  at  the  present  pace
this  may  be  shortly  after  the  Daughters  of  the  Confederacy
takes  in  the NAACP.
Crucial  Difference:  While American  Congressmen junket  to
Formosa  and make pilgrimages  to Bonn, a French  parliament-
ary  delegation  has flown behind  the  Iron  Curtain  for  a  visit
to  Poland.    This  was  perhaps  the  most  poorly  covered  story
of  the  week,  and  we  are  probably  the   only  publication  in
America  to  give  the  names  and  party  affiliation  of this  nine-
man  delegation.    There  were  two  Radical  Socialists,  former
Premier  Daladier  and  Verneuil;  two  Gaullists,  Jacques  Sou-
stelle,  formerly  Secretary  General  of  de  Gaulle's  R.P.F.,  and
Lebon;  two  Socialists,   Darou  and  Conte;  and  one  delegate
each  from  the  Catholic  M.R.P.  (Denis),  the  Peasants  (Lou-
staunau-Lacau)   and  Pleven's   party,  the   U.D.S.R.  (Lanet).
It   thus   represented  every  major   shade  of  French   opinion
except  the  Communists.   Its  leaders,  Daladier  and  Soustelle,
are  leaders  of  the  opposition  to  the  European  Army  plan.
Their   announced  purpose  was  to   study  at-first   hand   the
Oder-Neisse  territories  which  the  Germans  want  to  recover
and  a  Polish  paper,  Trybuna  Ludu,  quotes  Lebon  as  saying
that the  Oder-Neisse line "is  extremely  important  to France."
German  Social  Democrats  on Militarization: In this  connec-
tion  it  is  worth  noting  what  few  if  any  American  papers
reported—that  in  the  debate  at  Bonn  on  December  2  Ollen-
hauer,  leader  of  the  German  Social  Democrats,  opposed  the
bill  submitted  by  the  Adenauer  government  to  amend  the
Basic  Law of the  West  German Republic to  enable  it  to  raise
armed  forces  for  the  European  Army.    Ollenhauer  took  the
position that this would embarrass  an  East-West  understand-
ing  and  prejudice the  position  of  Germany.
Just  Like Wild Bill: Several  commentators have pointed out
that  the  desperadoes  of  the  West,  despite  the  romantic  views
of  them  derived  by  President  Eisenhower  from  dime  novels,
favored  the  shot  in  the  back  as  the  safest  and  most  expedi-
tious  mode  of  execution.    Any  doubt  that  the   Eisenhower
Administration  is  going  to  adopt  different  methods  in  deal-
ing with  government  employes may be set  at  rest  by  (1)  the
Val  R.  Lorwin  case  and  (2)  the  remarks  Eisenhower  made
in  "attacking  McCarthyism"  at  his  December  2 press  confer-
ence.    Eisenhower   backtracked   on  the   Wild   Bill  Hickock
speech  in  which   he  spoke  of  the   right  to   confront   one's
accuser,  and  said  this  did not  apply  to  government  employes.
He   also  said   any   subversives   located  by  a   Congressional
committee  will  be  removed just  as  promptly  as  any  others.
Now  Lorwin,  a  former  State  Department  employe, is  to  be
tried  for  perjury.    He  denied  in  1950  that  he  had  been  a
Communist  in  1935,  and  the  indictment  came just  a  few  days
short  of  the  statute  of  limitations.    Since  Lorwin  has  been
out  of  the  government  for  several  years  (after  clearance  in
Extra! Elizabeth  Bentley  Exposes  Wire-Tap Drive
Last  week's  issue,  "Exposing:   The  Fallacies   in  The
Wire-Tap   Drive,"  had  hardly   appeared   on  the   news-
stands  when  it  was,unexpectedly  confirmed  by  Elizabeth
Bentley  herself.    Miss  Bentley  was  asked  about  wire-
tapping  by Raymond P. Brandt,  chief  Washington  corres-
pondent  of  the   St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch,  when  she  ap-
peared    on>  Meet-the-Press   Sunday   December   6.     Her
answers,   though   strikingly   at   variance   with   Attorney
General  Brownell  and  FBI  Chief  Hoover,  were  not  con-
sidered  newsworthy  by  the  Associated  Press.    And  so
we  give  the  text  here  as  transcribed  by NBC:
Q.  Attorney  General   Brownell  recommended   to
the  Jenner  Committee that  there  be  legislation  on
wire-tapping.    In  your  contacts  with  these  people,
do  you  think  wire-tapping, had  [it]  been legalized,
would  have  helped  make  a  stronger  case  against
them?
A.  In  other words,  you  mean you'd  be  able to  use
the  information  which  you  obtained  through  wire-
tapping   not  just  as   an  information  lead  but  as
actual  concrete evidence?
Q.  You  can  divulge  it  to  a  great   many  people.
Under  the  law,  you  cannot  divulge  what  yon  get
from  wire-tapping.
A.  Probably not  in  the  case  of  my  Soviet  agents,
because  we  were  so  frightened  of  telephones  we
never said anything over them.   That's been my own
experience.
Brandt  was  startled  and  repeated  the  question.    This
time  the  romantic  Miss  Bentley  varied  her  answer:
Q.  The  real  agents  did  not  use  the  telephone?
A.  We  used  the  telephone,  yes,  but  our  code  was
so  mixed  up that  an  outsider  could not  have  gotten
and  understood  it.
The  first  answer,  that  they  were  so  frightened  of  the
telephone  that  they  never  said  anything   over  them,  is
not  quite  the  same  as  the  second  answer,  that  they  used
the  telephone  but  kept  conversations  in  code.    But  the
two  answers  do  agree  in  one  respect—that  wire-tapping
would  not  have  provided  proof  of  espionage.    They  also
dispose  of the  fallacies,  still  being  propagated  by  editors
who  should know better, that Miss Bentley's  collaborators
were  not  prosecuted  because   (as  the  Washington  Post
said   December  7  in  an  editorial,   "The   Silent   Men"),
"wire-tapping  was  used  to  expose  these  offenses."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  U,  1S5S
loyalty  proceedings)  it  is hard  to  see what  purpose  this  cruel
prosecution  will  serve  other  than  to  prove that  the  Adminis-
tration  can  outdo  McCarthy.
Subversion  from  The  Sea:  William  Hitman's  umteenth  ap-
pearance   before   a   Congressional   investigating   committee
last  week  provided  one  new  angle.    Senator  Welker  of  the
Jenner  committee  asked  him  whether  Harvey  Cedars,  N.  J.,
(where  Ullman  and  Gregory  Silvermaster  are  in  the  building
business)   was  on  the  sea.    Ullman  admitted  that  it   was.
Welker  then  wanted  to  know  whether  he  ever  had  visitors
from   the   ocean.    Ullman  pleaded  the   Fifth.     Welker  did
not  make  clear  whether  he  had  in  mind  Russian  submarines
or  indoctrinated   mermaids.
Old  School  Tie  Over  Africa:  Mr.  Lyttleton,  Secretary  of
State  for  the   Colonies,  in  the  course  of  explaining  to   the
House  of  Commons why  he  deposed the  Kabaka  of  Buganda:
"I  had  a  long  talk  with  the  Kabaka  this  morning.   I  did not
wish  to  press  him  into further  discussion  of  political  matters
more  than  he wished.   He was  alone.   He feels  very  severely
the  loss  of  his  sister,  which  I  am  sure  the  whole  House  de-
plores.     (Hear,   hear.)     This   conversation   could  not   have
been  more friendly.   It  was  extremely  painful to  me because
of  the  dignity  and  correct  bearing  of  the  Kabaka  in  all  these
matters.   It  was  all  the  more  painful  to  me  ["and  his  voice
broke  here"  says  the  parliamentary  reporter]  because  he  is
a  member of  my university  and  regiment  and  a  friend  of  my
son  at   Cambridge."
The  Lesser  Breeds  Grow  Fairer:  Fair  procedure was  once
the  Anglo-Saxon  pride  but  it  was  left  to  the  lesser  breeds
to  raise  the   elementary  point   during  the   UN  debate  on
Korean  atrocities.  Despite  Pakistan's  anxiety  for  American
military  aid,  its  representative,  Sir  Zafrullah  Khan,  was  bold
enough to  announce that he would abstain  on the  vote  because
there  had  been  no  hearing.    Sir  Zafrullah  said  he  had  no
reason  to  believe  the  evidence  manufactured  but  found  the
tendency not  to  hear  all  parties  disquieting.    The  Indonesian
delegate   also  felt   the   accused  should  have   been   given   a
chance  to  state  their   case.    The  resolution   was   dutifully
voted, but  many delegates  noted that the  documents presented
by  the  American  delegation  turned  out  to  cover  only  eight
cases,  all  but  one  of  which  occurred  in  1950,  and  that  one
the  Imjin  river  affair  of  which we  provided  a  glimpse  in  last
week's  issue.
Iran:  The  problem  is  a  long  way  from  being  solved.  The
populace  is  not  at  all  happy  about  recognizing  Britain   again
and  Britain  is  not  at  all  happy  about  Herbert  Hoover, Jr.'s,
proposal  that  the  marketing  of  Iranian  oil  in  the  future  be
handled  by  a  consortium  of  American  and  British  oil  com-
panies  instead  of  by  Anglo-Iranian  alone.    The  net  effect  of
"nationalization"  seems to  be  Americanization  of  Iranian   oil.
Chalk  Up  One  for  Fair  Procedure:  The  National   Labor
Relations  Board  received  two  well  deserved  setbacks  in  the
Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  in  the   District   of  Columbia  last
week  in  its  effort  to  act  as  if  the  Butler  bill  were  already
Convulsions  at  the  ACLU
The  directors  of  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union
are  still   trying  to  rewrite  its  principles   against   the
wishes  of  its  rank-and-file.    The  Weekly  in  its  issue  of
October  31 disclosed  (1)  that  the  directors  had  sent  out
three  proposed  policy  statements  which  would  have  ac-
cepted  much  of  the   premises  and  mechanisms  of   the
American   Inquisition,   (2)   that   these   had  been  over-
whelmingly  rejected   in  a  referendum  by  the   ACLU's
affiliates  and (3)  that  the  National  Board was  preparing
to  set  aside  the  results.
The  sequel  is  now  provided  by  the  December  issue  of
the  bulletin published by the  Northern California branch,
the  most militant of the  ACLU's affiliates.   The final vote
had  shown a  majority  of  2300  votes  against  the  proposed
•policy  statements.    To avoid  anything  so  barefaced  as  a
Board  vote  to  override, the  executive  committee  of  the
Chicago  affiliate  was  repelled  by  telephone.   It  was  an-
nounced  that  Chicago,  one  of  the  largest  affiliates,  had
shifted  and  that  (under the  ACLU's complex weighted
system  of  voting)  there  was  now a  2500  vote  majority in
faror  of  the  policy  statements.    But  on November 12 the
Chicago  executive committee adopted a  motion to  return
to its  original position.
Perhaps  as  a  result  the  biennial  conference,  at  which
the  whole  dispute would  have been aired, was postponed
from  Thanksgiving  week-end  until  next  February.   The
national  board  and the  national committee are  3-to-l  for
the  change  in  policy.   The  affiliates,  on  the  other  hand,
cast  all  but  600  of  their  16,000  votes  against   it.    The
rank-and-file  in  February  may  yet  save  the  ACLU from
abandoning  its  traditional libertarian  principles.
law.  That  bill  would  deny the  benefits of  the  NLRB to  unions
which  the  Subversive  Activities   Control  Board  found  to  be
Communist  dominated.  The  NLRB tried  to  withdraw   collec-
tive   bargaining   privileges   from   the  Fur   Workers   because
Ben  Gold, its  leader,  is  under  indictment  (though  not  yet  con-
victed)   of  falsely   swearing   in  his  Taft-Hartley   non-Com-
munist   affidavit.     The  Board   also   threatened   to   withhold
NLRB  privileges   from  the  Fur  Workers,  the  U.E.  and  the
American   Communications  Association   unless  their    officer
reaffirmed  their  Taft-Hartley  oaths.   The  Circuit  Court  ruled
against  the  NLRB  in  appeals  from  both  actions  and  Judge
Bazelon  commented,  "To  impose  this  penalty  upon  the  great
mass  of  innocent  union  members  is  as  reckless  as  firing  a
shotgun  into  a  crowd  of  people  in  an  attempt  to  stop  one
who  is  picking  their  pockets."
To  Be  Filed   But  Not  Forgotten:  On  December   7,   1953,
twelfth  anniversary   of  Pearl  Harbor,  Air  Secretary  Harold
E.  Talbott  made  a  speech  announcing  that  the  U.S.  would
help  Japan  build  another  air  force.
TO  AN  ANXIOUS SUBSCRIBER
A  Mr.  J.  H.  B. in  upstate  New  York  was good  enough  to  subscribe  early in  November  and  now inquires  anxiously  why
the  expiration  date  under  his  name  and  address  has not  been changed. Other  sharp eyed readers may be  asking the  same
question.   The  answer  is that  the  new  plates  for  renewals  are  going  to  be  made  all  at  once,  for  reasons  of  efficiency  and
economy.    The fact  that  the  change  has not  yet  appeared  on your  name  plate  does  not  mean  that  your  renewal  has gone
astray.   Also—those  who  subscribe  early  lose  nothing thereby.   The renewal  counts  from  your  expiration  date,  not  from  the
date  of  renewal.    But those  readers  who  have  sent  in  their  renewals  early—an  amazingly  large  number—have  saved  our
tiny  office  force  the  burden  of  handling  all  renewals  in  one  mad rush.    They  have  also  brought  the  encouraging  news  that
me Weekly  can face  its  second  year  with  confidence.   Renew now if  you  can, and  give a gift  subscription  to  help  us grow.
The  response  so far  has given  yours  truly  fresh  heart.
1  8  j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone'8  Weekly,  December  U, 19SS
Two  Appeals to  The  Courts  Against  The Witch Hunt
Sooner  or  later,  the  courts  will  be  forced  to  interfere   with
the  witch  hunt.   There  is  ample  precedent  for  such  interfer-
ence  in  past   cases  where  the   courts   intervened   to  protect
property  rights  from  Congressional  investigation.    The  value
of  filing  motions  to  quash  subpoenas  and  applications  for  in-
junctions   (just  like  Jay  Cooke  and  Harry  Sinclair)   is  that
such  actions,  though  unsuccessful  at  first,  will  serve  to  build
a  record  of  sober  affidavit  and  pleading  which  must  eventually
have  their  impact  on  the  courts.
One  such  action  was initiated  in  the  Federal  district  court
in  New  York  last  week by Mrs.  Eleanor Hutner, who  appeared
as   a  witness   in   executive   session  during   McCarthy's   Fort
.Monmouth  hearings.*    She asked  that  McCarthy  be  enjoined
from  questioning  her  again  in  public  session.    Judge  Clancy
refused  her  petition  on  December   8  but  her  counsel,  Victor
Rabinowitz,  says an  appeal will  be  taken.
In  her  petition,  Mrs.  Hutner  said  her  employment  at  Fort
Monmouth   terminated   ten  years  ago,  that  she  has  had  no
contact  since  with  Fort  Monmouth  or  the  Signal  Corps,  that
her  job  required  no  technical  training  and  that  she  had  no
access  to  confidential  or  secret  material.    Mrs. Hutner  at  an
executive  session of  the  McCarthy  committee  on  October  13
denied  that  she had  ever  committed  espionage,  or  given  classi-
fied material  to  any  Communist  or  to  the  Rosenbergs.  Mrs.
Hutner  did not  invoke the Fifth  amendment until  asked  about
her  personal  political   beliefs.
An  injunction  was  asked  on  the  ground  that  the   legisla-
tion  under  which  the  Government  Operations  Committee  was
established  (see  text  in  the  Weekly   for  July  25)  gave  it  no
authority   to  investigate   "subversion"  or  possible   commission
of   crime.    No  purpose  would  be  served,  it  was  pleaded,  by
recalling  Mrs.  Hutner  for  a  public  session,  except  to  hurt  her
health   and   reputation.      (Another   woman   witness   in   the
*  An  article  by  Walter  Millis,  "The' Scandal  at  Fort  Monmouth,"  in  the
New   York  Herald-Tribune   (Dec. 8)   supports  the  charges  made  six  week*
earlier  by  this  Weekly   ("McCarthy's  Hoax  and  The  Real  Radar  Scandal,"
Oct.  24)  and says McCarthy's  hearings  have  wrecked  this  "sensitive  military
installation   .  .   .  more   thoroughly   than   any   Soviet   saboteur   could   have
dreamed  of  doing."
The  Informer:   Self-Portrayed
"The  informer  is  different,  particularly  the   ex-Com-
munist  informer.   He  risks  little.   He  sits  in.security
and  uses  his  special  knowledge  to  destroy  others.   He
has  that  special  information to  give  because  he  knows
these  others'  faces,  voices  and  lives,  because  he  once
lived  within their  confidence,  in a  shared faith....  If  he
had  not  done  those  things  he  would  have  no  use  as  an
informer.    Because  he  has  that  use, the  police  protect
him.      When  they  whistle,  he  fetches  a  soiled  bone  of
information....  He is  no longer  a  man.   He is  free  only
to  the  degree  in  which he  understands  what he  is  doing
and  why  he  must  do  it.    Let  every  ex-Communist  look
unblinkingly  at  that  image.   It  is  himself."—Whit taker
Chambers:  Witness,  p. 454.
Fort Monmouth  hearings had a miscarriage;  she was  threatened
with   the  electric   chair.)     The  application   said  the  hearing
resembled  a  grand  jury   proceeding,   except   that   there  were
constant  "leaks"  to  the  press  and  the  supposedly   executive
sessions  were  attended  "by   friends   and  perhaps  relatives  of
the  Senator."
A  Drive  to  Coerce  Informing
A  similar  motion  to  quash  subpoenas  issued  by  the  Velde
committee  was  denied   by   Federal  Judge  Goodman   in  San
Francisco.    There   the  grounds  were  narrow—that  the  sub-
poenas  failed   to  specify  where  the  hearings  would  be  held.
The  action  was brought  by the American  Civil  Liberties  Union
of  Northern  California,   on  behalf  of  eight   witnesses.
"All  of  them,"  the  Northern  California   ACLU  explains,
"either  dropped  out  of   the   Communist   party   or  were  ex-
pelled  from  four  to  eight  years  ago.   Several  of  them  have
had  repeated  visits  from  FBI  agents  who  have  sought  unsuc-
cessfully   to  secure  names  of  persons  who  were  in  the  party
with  them.    One  witness,  who  lives  in  a  small  town,  has had
two   agents  come  to  his  home  once   a  month  during   a  six
months period.   The  agents  suggested  that unless he  cooperated
with  them  he would  not  be able  to  stay  in  the  town.  .  .  ."
Don't  Rue  It,  Do  It.
PLEASE  RENEW  NOW
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name     ——————————————————————————
Street    —————————————————————————_
City_____________  Zone___  State_______
Enter  this  gift  sub   for  $4  more  (money  enclosed):
OTo)  Name       _____________________________
Street     ____________________________
City_____________  Zone___  State______
12-14-63
I.  F. Stone'5 Weekly
Room  205
301 E. Capitol  St.,   S.E.
Washington  3, D. C.
Entered as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED