I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953mar07.pdf

============================================================

The  Man Who  Refused  to  Be A  Budenz,  See  Page  4.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   I,  NUMBER  8MARCH  7,  1953
7       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Time to  Leave  That Tent  at  Panmunjom
IN   THE  SPEECH,   "TEN  FACTS,"  with   which   Henry   Cabot
Lodge  Jr.,   reopened   the  Korean   debate  at  the  General  As-
sembly, he said righteously of the  Indian proposal  on  prisoners
of  war,    "It  seemed  impossible  that  there  could  be  rulers  in
this  world who would  object to this  offer,  but  it  soon  appeared
that  there  were.  The  regimes  of  China  and  of  North  Korea
have turned  it  down. ..."  But on the press  tables  that  very
same  day the  representatives of  the  Republic  of  Korea  placed
copies  of  a  statement  by  Syngman  Rhee's  Minister  of  Foreign
Affairs,  Dr.  Y.  T.  Pyiin.    The  copies  bore  the  notation  that
delivery  had  been  "blocked  by  Soviet  and  Indian   objection."
In  that  speech,  Rhee's  representative  objected  to  the  Indian
proposal  and  accused India of  fronting  for  the Russians.
Nationalist  China,  too,  attacked the  proposal  as futile.   And
Mr.  Lodge  seems to  have  forgotten  that  last  November  17,  as
soon  as  the  Indian  plan  was  put  forward,  it  was  strongly
attacked  by a U.S.  spokesman.    It  was not  until  Mr.  Vishinsky
rejected   the  plan  that  Mr.  Acheson  accepted  it.    Had  Mr.
Vishinsky  said  "da,"  it  is  certain  that  Mr.  Acheson   would
have  said  "nyet."    On  November  23  the  New  York   Times
reported  that  the  State  Department  regarded  the  Indian  pro-
posal  as "a  cover-up and  a sell-out,"  of  course  to  the Russians.
Four  days  later Mr.  Vishinsky bitterly  attacked the  Indian plan
as  a  cover-up  and  a  sell-out  to  the  Americans.    Blessed  the
peacemakers may be—but  not in  this  world.
IN  EVERY  QUARREL,  there  comes  a  point  at  which momentum
has  brought  both  sides  to  such  a  pitch  that  only  the  vigorous
interposition  of  third  parties  can  bring  peace.    The  Korean
quarrel  has  long  passed  this  stage.    The  exchange  has  be-
come  one  of. recriminations,  in  which  both  sides  have  become
entangled  by  fury  in  ludicrous  contradictions.    The  United
Nations   exchanges   communications  with  the  Chinese   Com-
munist and North  Korean regimes,  but will  not consent to hear
them.    The  "unified  command"  at  Panmunjom  is  forced  to
recognize  that  they  exist,  but  the  UN  would  still  like  to  pre-
tend with the  U.S.  that they are not  really there.
Chou  En-lai  objects  to  the  UN  that  the  Indian  resolution
as  adopted  by the  General  Assembly is  based  "on  the  hypoth-
esis   that   there   are   actually  some   among   the   Korean   and
Chinese  captured personnel  who  'refuse  to return home'."  The
Foreign   Minister   of   Communist   China   says,'  "This   does
not  accord  in  the  slightest  with  human  nature;  still  less  does
it  square  with  the  facts."   But  if  Chou  En-lai  is  so  sure  that
all  the  prisoners  would  go  home,  why  should  he  object  to  a
plan  which  would  hand  them  over  to  a  Swedish-Swiss-Czech-
Poiish  Commission,   operating  in  a  demilitarized  zone  with
the  aid  of  Red  Cross  teams  from  both  sides,  where  they  could
decide  freely  whether  they  wished  to  return  or  not?    The
representative  of  Communist  China  objects  feebly  that  in  the
demilitarized  zone  the  prisoners of  war  would  still; be  subject
to the influence of Chinese Nationalist and  South Korean  secret
agents  planted  among  them.    The  representative  of  Syngman
Rhee  objected  in  the  same  way that  the  Indian  proposal  was
bad  because the  prisoners  in  the  demilitarized  zone would  be
subject  to  "terrorism"  by Communist agents  among  them.
ONE  DIFFICULTY  IN  THIS  SITUATION  arises from  the  nature  of
the  "unified  command"  which  speaks  in  the  UN's  name  but
over  which  the  UN  has  no  control.    Even those  nations  with
troops in  Korea have no direct  voice in the operations  in which
their men participate;  the  "liaison" committee  at the  State De-
partment through  which they  are briefed  reminds one of  those
"liaisons" which drag  on  long  after  love has fled.
At  Panmunjom  the  truce  talks  have  been  carried  on  a  la
MacArthur,  between  the  military men  in  the  field.  The  only
military  men  represented  on  our  side  are  the  U.S.  and  South
Korean  forces.    The  British,  French,  Canadians,  Turks  and
other  allies  are not  represented  even  by observers  in  the  truce
tent.    The  South  Koreans  have  been  opposed  openly  to  the
talks  from  the  start.    The  hostility of  the  American military
in  Korea  to a truce has been  little  more roncealed.   The  POW
issue  did  not  make its  appearance until  the  American military
recognized  that  the  enemy  would  get  many  more  men  back
than  we  would  if  there  was  a  mass  exchange.    The  "moral"
issue  of  voluntary  repatriation  then  began  to  make  its  ap-
pearance.    This  has  been  bedevilled  because  two  issues  were
confused.     One  was  whether  anti-Communist  prisoners  had
a  right to  resist  repatriation.    The  other  was whether military
captors  have  a  right  to  subject  prisoners  in  their  custody  to
political  interrogation.   On  the  second the  "unified command"
has  been  clearly  in  the  wrong.    On  the  first  it  is  true  that
"voluntary  repatriation"  was  specifically  rejected  in  the  draft-
ing  of  the  Geoeva convention  (largely on  the  insistence of  the
United  Kingdom),  but  if  the  roles  were  reversed  the  other
side would be insisting  on the right of  "anti-Fascist"  prisoners,
as  at  Stalingrad,  to  claim asylum.
NEVER  HAS  so  MUCH  CANT  ABOUT  so  FEW MEN held  so much
danger  to  world  peace.   Chinese soldiers have been  switching
sides  with  ease  ever  since  the  Chinese  civil  war  began,  and
whole  regiments  have been  sold  over  the  counter  to  the  Reds.
The  mercenaries are in  no danger if  returned,  and no great  loss
to the  Communists if  not  returned.   The  devoted Reds will  go
back:  the  others  are  not  worth  fighting  over,  much  less  worth
the  price of  continuing  the  captivity of  our  own  men  in enemy
hands.    Is  there  no  way  for  the  UN  to  bring  both  sides  to
their  senses?   The  first  step  might  be  to  take  the  stalemated
truce  talks  away  from  Panmunjom  altogether   and  authorize
a  committee  of  neutral  States to  try  a  fresh  start.
3  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,   March  7,  1953
Surmise  and  Suspicion:  The  UN  and  The  5th  Amendment
NEW   YORK
THE   FIFTH  AMENDMENT   SAYS  no   one   "shall
be  compelled  in  any  criminal  case  to  be  a wit-
ness   against   himself."     This  is  the   privilege
against  self-incrimination.   Question:   If  a  man
invokes  the  privilege  against  self-incrimination,
does  that  mean  he  is  guilty  of  some crime?
In  the  voluminous  brief  presented  to  the Ad-
ministrative  Tribunal  of  the  United  Nations  by
three  lawyers  on  behalf   of   19  dismissed   UN
employes,   the  question   is   answered   with   "a
classical  law  school  situation"  recently  cited by
the  U.  S. Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  (193  F  2d
1002),  "A  workman  on  his  way  to  his  job
finds his  enemy  lying  by  the  road  with  a  knife
sticking  in  him.    He  pulls  out  the  knife.   Be-
fore  the  grand  jury  he  claims his  privilege  not
to  answer  the  question,  'Were  you  standing be-
side the dead man with  a knife in your hand?' "
To  answer  truthfully  would  be  to  say  "Yes."
To  admit  that  he  had  been  standing  beside  the
body  of  the  dead  man  with  a  knife  in  his  hand
might  incriminate  him  and  lead  to  his  convic-
tion,   though  he  was  not  guilty   of  the   crime.
It  is  in  this  sense  that  Wigmore,  the  leading
authority  on  Evidence,  says  "The   truth  is  that
the  privilege  exists  for  the  sake of  the  innocent
—or  at  least  for  reasons  irrespective  of  the  guilt
of  the   accused."
A  similar  example  is  cited  from  the  leading
New   York   case,   (People   ex   rel.   Taylor   v.
Forbes,  143 N.Y.  219).     A  student  had  been
killed  by  gas.    Foul  play  was  suspected.    An-
other  student  had  invoked  the  privilege  and re-
fused  to  answer  certain  questions.   He  was held
in  contempt.    The  highest  court  of  the  state
overruled  the  conviction.    It  said  of  the  student
who  had  refused  to  answer  questions,  "He  be-
longed  to  the  sophomore  class  and  the  class  in
chemistry.   He  boarded  at the house from which
the  jugs  £of  gasj  were  taken  by someone.    His
room  mate,  at  least,  seems  to  have  been  one of
the  persons   suspected   as  being   in   some  way
connected  with  the  transaction.   He  was so sur-
rounded   by  elements   of   circumstantial  proof
that  the  answers  to  any of  the  questions  might
form  a  link  in  the  chain  sufficient   to   subject
him  to  the  hazard  of  a  trial  upon  a  criminal
charge.  .  .  .  He was placed  thus  in  a  position
where  he  might  lawfully  claim  the  protection
of  the  law  and  remain  silent."
A    MORE    RECENT   DECISION   by   the   Supreme
Court  of  Illinois   (In  re  Holland  377  111.  346)
cited  this  New  York  case  and  said,   "without
such  safeguard  any  person,   judge,   lawyer  or
layman, may be forced to answer questions upon
the   mere   suspicion   of  the   public   prosecutor,
or  in  furtherance  of  a  misuse  of  his  discretion
for    political    or   other    improper   purposes."
The  words  might  have  been  used  of  the  Mc-
Carran   committee   long   harassing   the   UN.
(See  last  week's  issue,  "Horror  or  Hoax:  The
Spy Charges  Against  the UN".)
The  same  Illinois  court, ruling  in  favor  of a
man  who  had   invoked   the   privilege   though
claiming  innocence,  went  on  to  say,  "While  it
is  not  to  be  construed  as  the  opinion  of  this
court  that  respondent's  fears  of  an  unjust  prose-
cution  are well  founded,  yet .  .  .  the  common
knowledge  of  those  familiar  with  the  processes
of  the  criminal  law,  that  such  processes  have
at  times  been  used  for  purposes  not  founded
on  the  furtherance  of  justice,  must  be  consid-
ered  in  determining  respondent's  good  faith  in
fearing   indictment."
If   this  is  true  of  the  ordinary  processes  of
the  criminal  law,  it  is  doubly  true  of  the  cur-
rent  processes  by  which  political  questions  are
put  to  public  officials  by witch-hunting  investi-
gators,  flanked  by  professional  informers, in  an
atmosphere  where   accusation  of    "subversive"
affiliations  or  sympathies is  tantamount  to  con-
viction  and  denials   are  brushed   aside   as  ex-
pected.
IS  A  PUBLIC  OFFICIAL   IN  A  DIFFERENT  Category
from  the  ordinary citizen ?   Can  be he  dismissed
for  invoking  his  privilege ?   The  answer is  that
he  can,  but  only  under  certain  circumstances.
In  the  absence  of  a  specific  legal   provision,
an  office-holder  cannot  be  deprived  of  his  job
for   pleading    his   privilege   under   the    Fifth
Amendment.   This  is  true  even  in  the  case  of
judicial   officers,   whether   judges   or   lawyers.
The  Illinois case quoted  above involved a judge;
it  was held  that  he  could  not  be  disciplined  for
pleading  the  privilege.    The  highest  court  of
New   York   State   similarly   (Matter   of  Grae,
282  N.Y.  428)  refused  to discipline  an attorney
who   had   insisted   on   pleading   the   privilege.
At  present  officers  of  New  York  State  or  New
York  City  may  be  removed  from  office  for  in-
voking   their   privilege   but   this   required   an
amendment  to the  State  Constitution  and  of  the
New  York  City  Charter.
These  provisions,   however,   contain   an  im-
portant   limitation  which  has  been   overlooked
in  the  UN   cases.    A  New  York'State   office-
holder  may  be  dismissed  only  for  refusing  to
testify  "concerning   the  conduct  of  his  office  or
the  performance of  his  official  duties."
In  the  UN  hearings,  of  course,  neither   the
grand  jury  nor  the  McCarran  committee  could
arrogate  to  itself  the  right  to  question  UN  em-
ployes  about  the  conduct  of  UN  affairs.    The
McCarran   inquiry   was   a   fishing   expedition.
One  of  these  nineteen  suspended  UN  employes
was  asked  whether  he  had  ever  advocated  giv-
ing  the  atom  bomb  to  the  Soviet  Union;  an-
other,  "Have  you  ever   expressed   disapproval
of  the  Soviet  Union's  army?"    A  third   after
denying  membership  in  the  Communist   party
was  called  on  to  say  whether  he  had  ever  en-
gaged   in  any  activity  against   the   Communist
party.    One  prize  question  was  whether  Com-
munists  and  Communist  countries  ought  to  be
allowed  in  the  UN.    Ruth  Crawford  was  asked
whether  she had  been  active  with  the  National
Committee  to  Repeal  the  McCarran   Act.
ONE  OF THE  SILLIEST  but  most  significant  pas-
sages  in  the  hearings  was  the  angry   interroga-
tion   of  Frank   C.  Bancroft  by  Senators  Smith
and  O'Conor:
Senator   SMITH:   I  am  not  asking  you  about
your father  or  grandfather.    My  ancestors  were
here  300 years  ago,  too.    But  to  whom  do  you
look  and  give  your  greatest  loyalty,  the  United
States  of  America of  which  you  are  a  citizen,  or
the  United  Nations?    No  man  would  have  to
ask  me  that  but  once,  no  matter  what.
Mr.   BANCROFT:     You   are   not   an  interna-
tional  civil servant.
Senator  SMITH:  And  I  don't  want  to  be,  if
I  have  to——
Senator  O'CoNOR:  Are  you  prepared  to  an-
swer  further ? . . . Your  regard  for  your United
States  citizenship  is  not  such  that  you  would
be  prepared  to  say  now  that  you  would  always
place  that  as  highest?
Mr.   BANCROFT:  Sir,  my  regard   for  United
States  citizenship  is  so  high  that  I  am  proud  it
belongs  to  an  international  organization  for  the
preservation  of  peace  in  the  world  and  I  can't
see  any  conflict  between  the  two.
Senator  O'CoNOR:  But  you  will  not,  how-
ever,  state  that  it  is  superior  to  any  obligations
of  the  international  organization,  in  the  event
of  conflict?
It   seemed   almost   as  if  Mr.  Bancroft   were
being   asked  whether  he  would  be  willing  to
bear  arms  against  the  United   Nations.     The
Senators  seemed  completely  unaware  that  the
Charter  was  drafted  to  make  the   staff   of   the
UN  independent  of  all  national influences.  The
oath  they take  is  to  their  obligations  as interna-
tional  civil  servants.   Similar  regulations bound
the  staff  of  the  League of  Nations.   A  drafting
subcommittee   at   San  Francisco  reported   that
this  created   "no   practical   difficulty   except  in
the  case  of  Fascist  States."
THE     EFFECT    OF    THE    AMERICAN      LOYALTY
purge  has  been   to  drive   non-conformists   out
of   the   government   and   staff   its   civil   service
with   safely   mediocre  minds.    The   McCarran
hearings  represent  an  effort  to  extend  the  proc-
ess  to  the  United  Nations,  to  make  the  inter-
national   organization  a  captive   body,  subject
to  the  weird  judicial  standards  of  the  American
witch  hunt.
The  nature  of  the  "adverse"  reports  Trygve
Lie  had  been  receiving  from  the  State  Depart-
ment  and  secretly  applying  to  his  staff  is   suffi-
ciently  indicated  by  a  passage   from   Assistant
Secretary  of  State  Hickerson's  testimony  at  the
McCarran   hearings.     Senator   Ferguson   asked
whether  the  word  "adverse" in  the  private  per-
sonnel  reports to the UN  meant that  the  person
was  a  member  of  the  Communist  party  "or  was
subject  to  the  discipline  of  the   Communists":
.     Mr.  HICKERSON:  Senator,  it  doesn't  go  quite
that  far.   In  some  cases  it  indicated  that  there
was  a  strong  suspicion,  or  a  likelihood.
Senator   FERGUSON:  In  other  words,  the  test
of  what  you  were  trying  to  convey,  whether  it
was  absolute  or  doubtful,  was  that  the  person
that  you  were, giving   adverse  information  on
was  either  a  Communist  or  was  subject  to  the
discipline  of  communism?
Mr.  HICKERSON:  Or  likely  to  become  so.
Senator   FERGUSON:  Or  likely  to  become  so.
Mr.  HICKERSON:  Or  that  we  suspected.    Of
course,  we  didn't  have  the  facilities  for  mak-
ing a  full  investigation. ...
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J.  F.  Stone'5  Weekly,  March  7,  1953
I.  E   Stone's    Weekly
•   Editor and Publisher,  I.  F.  STONE
Published  weekly except the last  two weeks
of  August  at Room 225,  1416 F St., N.W.,
Washington  4,  D.  C.   Subscription  rates:
Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,  Mexico  and
elsewhere  in  the Western  Hemisphere,  $6;
England  and  Continental   Europe,  $10  by
1st  class  mail,  $15  by air; for  Israel,  Asia,
Australia   and   Africa,   $10   by   first  class
mail,  $20  by  air  mail.    Single  copy,   15
cents.     Contents    covered   by    copyright.
Telephone,    STerling   3-0938.   Entered   as
Second   Class   mail   matter,   Post    Office,
Washington,   D.  C.
Vol.  1, No.  8
March  7,   1953
Man  Against  Myth
IN  REFUSING  TO TELL  the  House  Un-American
Activities  Committee  anything  more  than  his
name,  address   and   time  and   place   of   birth,
Barrows Dunham has given  Congressman Velde
and  his  colleagues  just  about  all  they  have  a
right   to   know   about   any   college   professor.
Dr.   Robert  L.  Johnson,  president  of  Temple
University,  in  suspending Dr.  Dunham  as head
of  its  philosophy  department,  says  every teach-
er  has  a  duty  to  cooperate  "with   responsible
government  authority  to  preserve  the  freedom
of   our  society."   But  the  Velde  witch  hunt  is
not   responsible   authority.   The   House Com-
mittee   is   demonstrably  irresponsible   in   its
actions.   It   has   no   authority  to  inquire   into
education.   Until   these   latter   benighted  years
no  one  ever  suggested  that  the  way  to "pre-
serve   the   freedom   of   our   society"   was   to
harass  and  intimidate non-conformists.
The   distinguished    author   of   Matt   Against
Myth   has  boldly  entered  the  lists  against   the
most   dangerous  myths   of   our   time   in   chal-
lenging  the  right  of  the  House  committee  to
investigate  education.  His  pusillanimous  chief
retires  to  become  head  of  the  Voice  of  Amer-
ica.  But  some  day  it  well  be  recognized  that
the  real  voice  of  America  spoke  through   the
philosopher  he  has  suspended.   Dr.  Dunham's
"Man   Against  Myth"   won   the   applause  of
minds  as  diverse  as  John  Dewey,  J.B.S.  Hal-
dane  and  Albert  Einstein.  His  action  deserves
the  support  of  every  teacher  and  of   everyone
who  believes  in   free   education.  The  fight  to
reinstate  Dunham  will  be  a  fight  to  reinstate
freedom  of  education  in  America.
Suggestion
As   AN   ex-FBI   MAN,  Congressman   Velde   is
assumed  to  be  a  trained  investigator.   But  the
man  who  has  set  out  to  investigate  America's
colleges  does  not  seem  capable  enough   to  in-
vestigate  adequately  the  people  he  hires  for  his
own  staff.  When  Mrs. Agnes  E.  Meyer,  wife
of  the  chairman  of  the  board  of  the  Washing-
ion  Post,  criticized  Velde's  college  witch  hunt,
the  ex-FBI  man  retorted  by  declaring  that Mrs.
Meyer  had  written  a  pro-Soviet  letter  quoted
by  Pravda.  When  it  turned  out  that  the  letter
was  written   by  a  Mrs. G.   S.  Mayer  of  Port
Clements,  British  Columbia,  Velde  announced
he  had  fired  the  investigator   responsible   but
declined  to  give  his  name.
It  now  appears  that  Velde  might  easily  have
learned   that   this  investigator  was   unreliable.
No  wire-taps,  mail-covers,  informers,  or finger-
prints  would   have  been   required.   A   routine
check   back   over   newspaper   clippings   would
have been  enough.  Last Sunday the  Washington
Post's    crack   reporter,   Alfred   Friendly,  dis-
closed that  the investigator was Robert  R.  "Bug-
Eye"  Barker,  and  added  some  interesting  de-
tails.     Barker  was  a   star   witness   six  yean
ago  for  those  who  tried  to  block  the  nomina-
tion   of   David   E.   Lilienthal   as   chairman  of
the  Atomic  Energy  Commission.
"Bug-Eye"   came  forward  with   a  letter   he
claimed   to   have   filched   in   1940 from Com-
munist    Party   headquarters   in    Birmingham,
Alabama,   while   working   for   Martin   Dies.
Barker  claimed  to  have  made  two   photostats
before   returning   the   letter   to   the  files  and
testified   that  when  he  showed  them  to  Dies
the  Texan  ordered   him  to  make  a  full   dress
investigation   of   TVA.   The   letter    pictured
Communism   as  rampant  in   the   TVA   under
Lilienthal.
Martin   Dies   was   queried   about    Barker's
testimony  by  the  Washington  Post  at  the  time
but  denied  that  he  had  ever  heard  of  the  docu-
ment  until  it  was printed  in  1943  by the  Knox-
ville, Tenn.,  Journal.  Barker  denied  having  sold
the  document  to  the  Journal   but   two  of  its
editors  insisted  that  they  bought  it  from him,
but  in  mimeographed  form.  Barker  could pro-
duce  no  photostats  and  Senate  members  of  the
joint   committee  mentioned   the   possibility   of
perjury  charges  but  none  were  brought.  Barker
threatened   the   Washington   Post   at   the   time
with  suit  for  libel.
It  would  have  taken  no  sleuth  to  check  on
Barker's    record   before   hiring   him,   and   it
takes   no    psychologist    to   see   why    Barker
could   so  easily  confuse  a  Mrs.  G.   S.  Mayer
of   British   Columbia  with   a  Mrs.  Agnes   E.
Meyer  of  Washington,  D.  C. Were Mrs.  Meyer
a   poor   college   professor,    of   course,    such
"errors"  might  not  have  mattered.  The  smear
would  have stuck. A  person  less  powerful  than
a   publisher's   wife  would   not   have  had   the
resources   to   track   down   the   error   nor   the
means   to   overtake  falsehood   with   fact,     TCht
Weekly  suggests  that  Velde call  off  his  college
inquiry  and  investigate   his  own  staff   instead.
How  many  others  like  "Bug-Eye"   are  in   his
employ?
Ideological  Controversy  on  the
Floor  of  The  House
MR.   PATMAN.   This  bill   (amendment  to   the
National  Housing  Act  to  have  the  government
guarantee  home repair  and  improvement loans)
comes  nearer  being vulnerable  to  the  charge  of
being  socialistic   than  any  other   law  I   know
of  that  has  been  passed  in  recent  years. How-
ever,  I  do  not  look  upon  it  as  socialistic   at
all.  It  serves  a great  need.  . . .
MR.   LANMAM.  The  gentleman   admits  it   is
socialistic?
MR.  PATMAN.  No,  I  am  not  admitting  that.
MR.  LANHAM.  The  gentleman  says  it  is  sub-
ject  to  that   charge.   Does   not  'the  gentleman
mean,  then,  that  it  is  good  socialism?
MR.  PATMAN.  No;  I  did  not  say it  is  good
socialism.  I  beg  the  gentleman's   pardon.  I say
it  is vulnerable to  the  charge  of  socialism.  1 do
not  say  it  is  socialistic,  I  say  it  comes  nearer
being   vulnerable  to   the   charge   or   as   near
being  vulnerable  to  the  charge  of  socialism  as
any  act  this  Congress  has  passed  in  20  years.
MR.  LANMAN.  I  think  the  gentleman  is beg-
ging  the  question  and  that  it  is  socialism,  but
that  it  is  justified.
MR.  PATMAN.  The  gentleman  can  place  his
own  interpretation  on it for himself. . . .
Hat's  Off
TO  THE ONLY  TWO  MEMBERS  of   the  House  of
Representatives   who   had   the   nerve   to   vote
against   this  year's  $300,000  appropriation  for
the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee,
Emanuel  Celler  of  New  York,  and   Roy  W.
Wier, of  Minnesota.
Just  A Phone  Call  to  A Friend
With  this  issue  the  Weekly  passes  6,800  subscribers.    It  needs  8,000  to  be  solidly  io  the  black
and  to  permit  something  less  arduous  than  one-man-and-an-office-girl   operation.  Those  who  are
buying  it  on  the  stands  can  save  themselves  #2.50  by  using  the  subscription  blank  on  page  four.
Those who have already subscribed can put the Weekly  over  the  top  by  getting  one  or  two  more
subscribers.    They  can  also  obtain a  free  copy  of  my forthcoming  book,  The  Trumen  Era  (to  sell
at  #3.50  after  publication  in  April)  with  two  new  subscribers,   or  get   a  copy   for   ^1  with  one
new  subscriber.   Just a  phone  call  to  a  friend  who  may  be  intending  to  subscribe  anyway  will  put
the  Weekly  on  a firm foundation.    Won't  you  make that  call   today?
—I.  F.  Stone
3  *
3  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   March   7, 1953
The  Man Who  Refused  to  Be a  Budenz
THEY   HAD  KNOWN    EACH   OTHER   FOR  MANY   YEARS  in    the
Communist  party.   When   Bella   Dodd   phoned   she  said,   "I
don't  suppose  you'll  want to  talk  to me, but it's urgent.  I  have
a  message  from  Roy Cohn.  There's  pressure  from  Washington
to  indict  you. They  don't  want  to  do  it.  But  you  must  make
some gesture  of  cooperation.   Will you call  at  the  U.S. Attor-
ney's office?"   When  he refused,  she replied,  "They'll send you
to  jail.    They  have  an  open  and  shut  case."
Ten  days  later  a  Federal  grand  jury  in  New  York  handed
up  a perjury  indictment against the man and his wife.   Hearst's
Journal  American  indicated  that  action  was  being  taken  be-
cause  he  had  declined  to  "cooperate."  The  man  who  refused
to  be  another  Budenz  was  Earl  Browder.   In  1945 he  was
removed  as  head  of  the  Communist  Party,  USA. In  1949 be
lost  his  job  as  American  representative  for  Soviet   publishing
houses.    He  had  his first  chance to  tell  all within  two  months
of  his  ouster  in  1945.   Summoned  before  the   House   Un-
American  Activities  Committee  in  September,  1945, Browder
refused   to   talk.   Browder's   most   dramatic  episode  in non-
cooperation   was  his  appearance  in  1950 before  the   special
Senate  committee  investigating  the  McCarthy  charges  against
the  State  Department.  Budenz  had  testified  Browder  told  him
Lattimore was a Communist.   Browder  denied  this under oath.
AMID  THE   FIERCELY    LILLIPUTIAN   SECTARIANISMS  of    the
left,   only  grudging'  recognition   has   been   given   Browder's
record.  He  has  eked  out  a  precarious  living  in  obscurity  when
he might  have sold  his memoirs for  a small fortune to  any one
of  a  half  dozen  big  magazines.  On  the  heels  of  the  perjury
indictments  last  Fall,  the  Justice  Department  last  week  issued
a   warrant   for   deportation   of   his   wife,   mother   of   three
American  born  sons.
"The  place  of  justice is a hallowed  place"  it  says  on  one of
the  stone  carvings  along  the  Pennsylvania  avenue  side  of  the
Justice Department.  There  could be nothing  less  hallowed  than
this   attempt   to   destroy   a  man   and   his   wife   because  he
refuses   to   become   an   informer.  The   Browders   met   in   a
cafeteria  in  Moscow  in  1926, and  were  married  there.  She
entered  the  U.S. from   Canada  in  1933. A  warrant  for  her
deportation  was  issued  in  1940.  All  the  facts  involved  in  the
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                                          ••'•"
Room  225  Kellogg Bldg.
1416   F  Street,  N.W.,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Please enter  the  following  subscription.   $5  for  1  year  if
enclosed.    (See  page  3  for  foreign  rates)
Name
Street
City   .
State
Zone.
current  deportation  action  and  in  the  perjury  indictment  were
gone  over  extensively  in  four  years of  administrative  hearings.
The  deportation  warrant  was  cancelled.
IN  1946 MRS.  BROWDER  APPLIED  for  citizenship.  In  that  pro-
ceeding  both  she  and  her  husband  declared  under  oath  that
she  had  not  been  a  Communist.  The  application  was neither
granted  nor  rejected  but  three  years  later  the  Browders  were
summoned  by  the   Immigration   and   Naturalization   Service
and   asked   the   same  questions  again,  under  oath,   as  if   to
keep  the  matter  fresh*  The  statute  of  limitations  in   perjury
is  three  years.  By  repeating  the  same  questions  and  answers
in  1949,  the  government  extended  for  three  years  more  the
period  in  which  a perjury  prosecution  might  be  initiated.  The
trap  was  sprung   last   Fall.   The   indictments  were   obtained
exactly  two  weeks   before   the   statute   of   limitations   would
again have  barred   prosecution.
"They  have  an  open  and  shut  case,"  Bella  Dodd  had  said
to  Browder.  But  the  government  does  not  seem  to  think  so.
Trial  of   the   Browders  on  the   perjury   indictment   was  re-
peatedly postponed  on  request  of  the government.  On February
24 the government  asked  indefinite postponement,  hinting  that
the  case  was being  dropped.  The  defense  agreed.readily.  Next
day  the  warrant  for  deportation   was  issued.
THE   SWITCH   IN   TACTICS  is  A  CRAFTY  ONE. The   indictment
would  have  to  be  tried  in  a  court  of  law, where  it  would  be
difficult  to  prove  that  Mrs. Browder  lied  about  her  beliefs  and
that  her  husband  lied  in  saying  she was  not  a  member  of  the
Communist  party.  There  is  a  line  of  cases  which  says  that  a
person  cannot  be  held  guilty  of  perjury  on  a  matter  which
involves  opinion  or  belief.   Membership   in  the  Communist
party  is  a  question  on  which  proof   would  have  to  be sub-
mitted.  By  shifting  to  deportation,   the  government  takes  the
whole   matter   into   its  own   administrative  tribunals   where
the  rights  of  aliens  are  sharply  limited.   Should  the  govern-
ment win,  the  Russians would not take Mrs.  Browder  back. She
might be detained  for  the  rest  of  her  life  as a deportable  alien.
This  is how  they put  the  screws on  a man  who  refuses  to  be a
Budenz.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
225  Kellogg  Bldg.
1416  F St.,  N.W.,  Washington  4,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Post  Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED