I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1953
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1953jul11.pdf

============================================================

A  Steel Magnate Pleads for Peace and  Co-Existence,  See Page 2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  I  NUMBER  25
JULY  11,  1953
•S       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Elsenhower's Air-Conditioned  Answer
The  British  and  French  emissaries  in  Washington  this
week-end  for  the  Foreign  Ministers Conference  would  do  well
to  begin  by  considering  the  events  which  occurred  here  on
July  1.
On  July  1  the  new  Republican  Administration  woke  to
find  itself  confronted  with  (1)   what  seemed  to  be  an  op-
portunity  to  make  good  on  all  its  campaign  talk  of  "libera-
tion"   for  Soviet-held   Eastern  Europe  and   (2)    the   largest
peacetime  deficit   in   U.S.  history.  The   two  were  linked  by
more  than  coincidence.  Even  to  dabble  in  intervention  would
mean  a  larger   deficit.   To   concentrate   on   the   deficit,  con-
versely,  was  to  reduce  the  military  means  available  for  that
rollback  of  the  Russians  which  was  so  recently  Mr.  Dulles's
favorite   theme.  The  Administration  decided   to  concentrate
on  the  deficit.
The  decision  was  evident  at  the  President's  press  con-
ference  that  day.  The  headlines  and  the  cables  were  full  of
disorder  and  unrest  in  East  Europe,  much—but  far  from  all
of   it—exaggerated;  the  Polish  "revolt"  seems  concocted  but
the   abject   "mea   culpas"   of   the   East   German  Communist
leaders  and  the  riots  which  produced  them  were  all  too  real,
as  were  the   dissatisfactions   reflected   by  Czech   Communist
scoldings,  Hungarian Communist  reforms and Bulgarian Com-
munist  penal  sentences  for  absenteeism.
But   when   Roscoe  Drummond   of   the   Christian  Science
Monitor  asked  Eisenhower  whether  he  was  considering  "any
tangible   action   to   support   liberation",   this   was   the   air-
conditioned  answer,  "A.  Well,  of  course,  we  had  always  said
we  were  for  free  elections  in  those  countries.  He  did  not  be-
lieve  there  was  any  thought   of  taking  any  physical  action
of  any  kind  that  could  be  classed  as  intervention."  There  has
not  been  so much caution  in  the White House  since  Coelidge.
The  President  was  in  no  mood  for  clarion  calls.  In   the
House  of  Representatives  that  same  day,  the  chairman  of  the
Appropriations  Committee  was reading  a  letter  from  General
Eisenhower  criticizing  the  tendency  of  the  military  to  "seek
after   total  or  at  least  disproportionate   military  protection."
The   President   wrote,   "I   should   like   to   re-emphasize  that
our  plan  for  national  security, in  contrast  to  earlier  programs
.  . .  seeks to avoid  the  exceedingly  costly,  demoralizing,  short
range  effort  premised  upon  an  imaginary  date  of  maximum
danger."  This  year  no  Soviet  submarines  were  sighted  off  the
coast in  time  for the  vote  on  the  military appropriations.
On  much  else  the  Republican  party  may  be  divided,
but  not  on  this  decision  to  concentrate  upon  the  deficit.  It
was a straight  party  vote  by which the  House  last  week  passed
a  budget  cutting  more  than  6  billion   dollars   from   military
requests.  It  was the  Democratic  party which Symington  rallied
in  the  Senate  this  week  with a  bitter  attack  on  "the  inexperi-
enced  Pentagon   civilians",   "the   money-first   men",  who  had
dared  cut  5  billion  from  the  Air  Force  budget  and  question
Air  Force  General  Vandenberg's   judgment.  The  millionaire
Senator  from  Missouri was assailing  the  Republicans  for  think-
ing  of  "money  first";  the  operating  heads  of  General   Motors
(Wilson  and  Kyes)   were  attacked  as  inexperienced   in  pro-
duction!
In  the  Senate,  with  a  one-vote  margin,  the  Administration
may  not  be  able  to  prevent  amendment  of  the  budget  to  add
the  extra  $1,175,000,000  asked  for  the  Air  Force  by  Vanden-
berg.  But  the  signs  there,  too,  indicate  a  general   revulsion
against past policies of alarm and  intervention.  The  crass  theme
implicit  in  the  debate  over  the  new  foreign  military  aid  pro-
gram  was that  we  need  friends  abroad  because  we  need  their
bases. There  was much sympathy for Gillette  of Iowa when that
moderate  Republican  said  he  was  voting   against   the  MSA
program  this  year  because  "I  believe  we  have  lost   sight  of
our  goal  of  peace  in  our  pursuit  of  the  goal  of  world  wide
military  security."  There  was  much  agreement  with  his  warn-
ing,  "The  Soviet  government  can  defeat  us without  war  if  we
prepare  to  defend  ourselves  only  against  war."  Both  parties
in  the  Senate  showed  themselves  eager  to  wind  up  MSA.
This  is  an  Administration  of  conservatives  not  adven-
turers,  at  a  time  when  the  prevailing  mood  is  one  of  civilian
weariness  with  military  demands.  The  anxieties  of  the  Re-
publicans,  as  of  the  country,  are  domestic.  Once  again   the
chief  interest  in  foreign  affairs  is  the  effort  to  find  some  place
abroad  to  dump  troublesome  farm   surpluses.  The  prize  for
which  the  two  parties  contend  again  as farm  prices  fall  and  a
new  dust  bowl  spreads  is  the  farm  vote;  the  lack  of  adequate
public  grain  storage  facilities  is  the  issue  which  may  decide
the  next  elections.  The  Republicans  are  fighting  hard  to make
some  progress   toward  a  balanced  budget   and  a  tax  cut  by
November,  1954;  the  liberation  they  want  is from  the  shame-
ful  necessity  to raise the debt  limit. The  setback  which obsesses
the   Administration   was   its   forced   reversal   of   deflationist
policy;  the  expansion  of  an  already  over-inflated  credit  base
so  it  could  borrow  six  billions   last  week—an  unprecedented
sum—in  tax  anticipation  warrants  to  meet  its  cutrent  bills.
At  this  juncture  the  Administration  would   like   nothing
better  than  a new Joshua  somehow  to make the  sun stand  still
abroad.  It  does  not  want  to  meet  with  Malenkov.  or  to  risk
new  talks  on  Germany,  and  it  wishes  Korea  North  and  South
would  obligingly  slip  into  the  sea.  The   "Wall  Street   war-
mongers"  now  running  the  show  here  want  peace  and  quiet.
But  peace  and  quiet  are  what  Syngman  Rhee  is   determined
they  shall  not  have,  and  behind  Rhee—giving  him  leverage—
is  the  American  military, who  see their  budgets  further  men-
aced  by  a  relaxation  of  tension.  It  is  this  which  lies  behind
the  spate of  stories  from  Korea  on  how  helpless  the  UN  forces
would be without Syngman Rhee.
i n
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.P. Stone's  Weekly,  July  11,1953
A  Steel  Magnate's  Plea  for  Peace  and  Co-Existence
For   several  years   the  steel   magnate,
Ernest  T.  Weir,  whom  we  all attacked so
bitterly  during  New  Deal  days  when  he
successfully   opposed  unionization  of  Weir-
ton  Steel,  has  been  carrying  on  a  cam-
paign  for  world peace.
The   article  which  follows  is  made  up
of   excerpts   from   the   new   pamphlet   he
has just  issued  on his  observations abroad
during  April   and  May   of  this  year,  his
fifth   such  trip  since  the  end   'of   the war.
Copies  of  the pamphlet may  be  obtained  by
writing   his   office,    2800   Grant   Building,
Pittsburgh  19, Pennsylvania.
Weir   was   sharply   critical  of   Truman
cold   war   policies  and   supported    Eisen-
hower  in  the  last  election.  Weir's   views
are  of  especial  interest, because  of  his  long
business   association   with    George    M.
Humphrey,  Elsenhower's  Secretary  of  the
Treasury.   Weir   founded   National   Steel
Company.   Humphrey    was   chairman    of
its  executive  committee.
BY  ERNEST  T.  WEIR
The  European  attitude  toward  the  situ-
ation  now  existing  between  the  Western
and  Communist  worlds  may  be  stated  in
three  sentences:
1. They  feel  that  European  nations can-
not  continue  to  spend  the  large  amounts
presently  devoted  to  defense because  they
have  neither  the  money  nor  the  credit.
2.  They  do  not  think  there  is  any  im-
minent  danger  of war.
3.  They  believe  the  time  is  ripe  for  a
positive  approach  to  peace  . . .
They   know  that   no   Western   nation
would  initiate  war. Of  all  other   nations,
there  is only  one that has  sufficient  indus-
trial  and  military  power  to  even  think of
war—Russia.
Europeans  do not profess to  know more
about  what  is going  on inside Russia  than
we  do.  But  they   reason   that  the   same
forces  are  at work  in Russia  and the  satel-
lite  countries  as'in  the  Western  nations.
Their  people,  too, know  the   destruction
and suffering of war. They  also know that
a  third  war  would  be  far  more  terrible
than  the  last one.
To  assume that  these  people would  will-
ingly undergo  such  an ordeal  is to  declare
them  inhuman. And  to  assume  that Rus-
sian  leaders  would  attempt   to  take   the
unwilling citizenry of  their  own and  other
countries  into  a  war   of  such  magnitude
is  to  ascribe  to  those  leaders  a  degree of
stupidity that  they  have not  yet  shown.
Further,  although  totalitarian   govern-
ments  do  not  have  the  same  problems of
debt  and  inflation  per  se; the  same effect  is
produced  by  utilizing great  quantities of
material   and   labor   for   war   production
which  otherwise  could  be  devoted  to  im-
provement  of  the  countries  and  of  living
conditions  of their  peoples . . .
Since  Stalin  Died
Just  as  they  believe the  danger  of  war
is   absent    from    the   current   situation,
Europeans  are  convinced  that  a   definite
possibility  of  peace  is  present.  For   one
thing  they  believe  that  there  has  been  a
significant  change in the attitude of Russia
since  the   death  of   Stalin.   None  of   the
present  Russian  leaders  has  anything  ap-
proaching  the  stature  of  Stalin  in the  eyes
of  the  Russian  people.  The   new  leaders
require  time  and  stable  conditions to con-
solidate  their  position  and  win  the  sup-'
port   of   the   people.   An   assured   peace
would  meet  their  needs  to  a  far   greater
extent  than  war or threats of war . . .
I  have  been  unable  to  see  the  logic  in
the  position of those persons  in the  United
States  who have been so critical  of  Europe
and  so opposed to  any  attempt  at  negotia-
tion  with  Russia.  The  apparent  basis  of
their  thinking is that  Russia  can  never  be
trusted,  that  she  is  likely  to  outsmart  us
in any negotiations,  and that,  in any event,
an  agreement  acceptable  to  Russia  could
not  be  acceptable  to  us—therefore,  we  do
nothing.
Negative Thinking
This   is   negative   thinking.   It    offers
nothing   constructive.   Its   implication   is
that  the  United. States  and  the  countries
of   Europe   must  go  on  year   after   year
spending  huge .sums  of  money  and  devot-
ing  a  great  part  of  their  productive  ca-
pacity  and  manpower to military purposes
and  go  on  year  after  year   prepared   to
meet  Communist  countries  with  force  of
arms  whenever  our  interests  clash  with
theirs  anywhere  in  the  world.
That  presents  a  grim  prospect  which
is  all  the  more  grim  because  it  inevitably
would  lead  to  world  war. When  nations
continue   to   enlarge   their   military  ma-
chines,  there  is  ever  present  danger  that
the  machines  will  be  used.  Of  this  I  am
sure.  If  such  thinking  becomes  the  basis
for   our   national  course   of   action,   the
United  States  will  become  a  leader  with-
out  followers ...
Suppose  we  just  continue  the  way  we
are   going?   What   will   be   the   conse-
quences?   From    a   material   standpoint
alone,  the  prospect  is appalling. The  pres-
ent  high  cost  of government is  due  chiefly
to the  cost of defense.  Even with continua-
tion  of  extremely  high  taxes  it  is dubious
that   we  can  balance  our  budget.  If   we
cannot,  then  we  are  headed  in  the  same
direction  as the countries  of Europe  .  . .
Even  the  United  States  cannot  continue
indefinitely  to  devote  a  huge  proportion
of   its  wealth  and  productive  capacity  to
military  purposes.  If  we  fail  to  bring  our
debt   and   spending   under   control    our
eventual   fate  will  be  the   same  as  with
every  other  country  that  has failed  . . .
Property Values and Peace
Parenthetically,  it amazes me that  there
are  some people who  actually  seem afraid
of  peace.  The  decline  in  the  stock  market
that  has  been taking  place  for  some weeks
over  the  prospects  of  a  Korean  truce,  for
instance, is ridiculous. Everything we own
will  be  worth  more  if  we  have  genuine
peace  than   if  we  have  war   or  continu-
ance  of  the  present  tension.
We  have  become  so  accustomed  to  a
war  economy  that  some  people  think  we
must  have  it  to  sustain  employment and
production.   The   plain  fact   is  that   war
production  is economic waste.  Progress  is
not built on waste. All  the  great  advances
in  human  history  have  come  in  times  of
peace.   If   peace  can   be  established,   the
prospects   for   development  of  the  world
economy  are  so great that  there  is not  an
individual  anywhere  who  will  not  bene-
fit ..."
HAPPY   y
2
   BIRTHDAY
The  Weekly  is  six  months  old  today.  We  thank  our  readers  for  their  support  and  for  their  many  kind  letters.
Growth  has been  steady  and  encouraging. One  way you can  help  while  on  vacation  is  to  pass  out  copies  to   friends.
We  will  be  glad  to  send  you  free  sample  copies  in  small  quantities  of  this  or  any  particular  past  issues  for  the pur-
pose. Just drop a postcard request to  301 E. Capitol Street.
L  F.  STONE'S   WEEKLY
Independent  in  The  Cause of  Peace and  Civil Liberty                                  \
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f. F. Stone's Weekly,  July  11,1953
I.  F. Stone's   Weekly
•  Editor and Publisher, I. F. STONE
Published  weekly except the  last two weeks
of  August  at  Room  205,  301  £.  Capitol
St.,  S.E.,  Washington  3,  D.  C.  Subscrip-
tion  rates:  Domestic,  $5  a  year;  Canada,
Mexico   and   elsewhere   in   the   Western
Hemisphere,  $6;  England  and Continental
Europe, $10  by 1st class mail, $15  by air;
for  Israel,  Asia, Australia  and  Africa,  $10
by first class  mail, $20  by  air  mail. Single
copy,  15 cents. Tel.:  LI 4-7087. Entered as
Second   Class  mail  matter,   Post   Office,
Washington,  D.  C.
July  11,  195?
Vol.  I,  No.  25
COMMENT
Happy  Solution
Our  heart  goes  out  to  the  FBI  and  the
Atomic Energy  Commission in  the  case of
Robert   L.  Condon,  the  California   Con-
gressman  they  barred  as  a  security  risk
from   the   atomic   weapons   test   at   Las
Vegas.
The  affair  illustrates  a  weakness  in  our
system  of  loyalty  and  security  precaution.
Congressmen  fulfill  a  far  more  important
function   than  ordinary  government  em-
ployes,  teachers  or   defense  workers  yet
they   are   allowed  to  take   office   without
being  cleared  by  the   FBI.
It   is  argued  that  Condon  was  elected
by  his  constituents  with   full   knowledge
of  past  Leftist  association.  This  does  not
prove  Condon's  loyalty.  It   merely   casts
doubt  on  the  loyalty of  his  constituents.
The   only  solution  we  can  see  is,  ad-
mittedly,  a  radical  one.  No  one  should  be
allowed  to  vote  for  a  member of  Congress
without  first  obtaining  FBI   clearance.
On   second   thought,   since  this   might
prove  expensive,  perhaps  the  same  result
might  be  achieved  by  just  leaving  mem-
bers  of Congress  to be  picked by J.  Edgar
Hoover.
Propaganda Day-Dream
This  business  of  disseminating   litera-
ture  abroad  as  propaganda  has  its   com-
plexities. In  the reply sent  by John Foster
Dulles  to  Senator  Hennings,  D.,  of  Mis-
souri,   the   Secretary   of   State   said   he
wanted  to  make  sure  the  United   States
Information  Service  "would  not  dissemi-
nate   information  which  might   advance
the  cause of  Soviet   Communism."
At  first  blush  this  would  seem  clearly
to  bar  the  writings  of  Doxey   Wilkerson
from   U.S.I.S.  libraries   abroad.   Doxey
Wilkerson  is  one  of  McCarthy's  less  sen-
sational   discoveries.   Wilkerson   publicly
joined  the Communist  party  in June,  1943,
as   educational    director   for    Maryland,
wrote   a  column  for  the  Daily    Worker,
and published a recruiting  pamphlet,   "The
Negro People and The  Communists".
McCarthy  Jikes  sitting  ducks.   Wilker-
son has  been  "investigated" over  and  over
again.  As  recently  as  last  March  he  was
before  the  Jenner  committee.  It  is  about
as  difficult  to  detect  traces  of communism
in  Wilkerson  as  it  would be for  the  Holy
Office   to  detect  traces  of  heresy  in   the
writings  of  Brann  the  Iconoclast.  When
a  copy  of  Wilkerson's  "Special  Problems
of   Negro   Education"   turned   up   in   the
USIS  library   in   London,   it  was   duck
soup  for  the  Senator.
Should  the  American  government  use
the  taxpayer's  money  to  buy  books  by  a
Communist  for  USIS  libraries   abroad?
As  Senatorial  rhetoric,  the  question  may
seem  unanswerable. But I  cannot  imagine
a   better   piece   of   propaganda   for   the
United  States at  this  moment than  to  take
a   Britisher   into   the  USIS   library   in
London  and  say,  "What's  all  this  about
McCarthyism?   Here   you  have   a   book
by  a  Communist, a  Negro  Communist, on
one   aspect   of   our   touchiest   problems,
made  available  to  readers  abroad  at  our
government's   expense.   Furthermore   the
book  was  written  for  the  President's  Ad-
visory   Commission  on  Education.   Who
says America  is afraid  of free  discussion  ?"
Lest  some  patriotic   reader   in  London
act  upon  this  day-dream,  we  hasten   to
warn  him  that  the  Wilkerson   book  got
into  that   one  library   by  accident,   that
the   President's    Commission    was   not
Elsenhower's   or   Truman's   but  FDR's,
that  it  passed  out  of  existence  before  the
war,  that  the  Wilkerson  "book"  is  really
a   pamphlet  written   as  a   special   study
("Staff  Study,  No.  12")  for  the  Commis-
sion,  that  Wilkerson was not then  a  Com-
munist  and that the  book—far  from  being
the   bitter   and   inflammatory   work   Mc-
Carthy  made  it  seem to  be—is  a  scholarly
but  pedestrian  statistical  work  with  con-
clusions  which  appear  ultra   conservative
today.  Wilkerson  did  not  attack   separate
segregated   schools  for   Negroes.   All  he
argued for was a "just and equitable"  dis-
tribution   of   funds   between   white    and
Negro  schools  in the  South.
And  anyway  the  book's  off  the  shelf  in
London  by  now.
Thick  Plot  Thickens
One  of  the  darkest  plots  ever  to  come
before  McCarthy  remains  veiled  in  dark-
ness  because  the  Senator's  researchers  in
this hot  weather have been  slighting their
work.  Among  the  authors  hauled  up  be-
fore  the  McCarthy  committee  last  week
was the  gifted  Richard  O.  Boyer.  One of
Boyer's   books,  "The  Dark   Ship",  has
been found  in a USIS library abroad. Part
of  this  book  had  originally  been  printed
in  The  New   Yorker  as  a  profile  of  Joe
Curran,  head  of  the  National   Maritime
Union.  Just  about  the  time  the  book  was
going  to  press  Curran  broke  with  the
Communists.
In  the  book  as  it  appeared  some  last-
minute additions about  the  break  differed
markedly   from   the   laudatory   tone   in
which  the  profile  bad  been  written.  The
enthusiasm  for   Curran  had  evaporated.
A   reviewer  in  The  Nation   (August  9,
1947)  referred  to  the  book  as illustrating
"the  occupational  hazards  confronting  a
journalist   who   follows   the   Communist
party  line."  The  reviewer  was  another of
the  authors  recently  favored  by  the  Mc-
Carthy  book  inquiry. The  name  signed  to
the  review  was James  A. Wechsler.
Now   it   is   McCarthy's   theory   that
Wechsler   has   been   writing   anti-Com-
munist  articles (and perhaps  even, as one
famous   question   implied,   authoring   at-
tacks  upon  himself  in  the  Daily   Worker)
as   protective  coloration.  A   fascinating
question  would  have  confronted  the  Great
Investigator   if  his   researchers  had   not
missed  this   item.   If   Wechsler   attacked
others  (including  Boyer)  in  order  more
effectively  to  carry  on  his  own  nefarious
work   for   the   Party,   what   was   Boyer
really  doing  when  he  appeared  to  echo
party   line?   Infiltrating   the   waterfront
for  the  D.A.R. ?
Subversive  Geometry
Dr.  Julius  H.  Hlavaty  (see "The  Case
of  The  Cooperative Teacher" in  our  issue
of  March 21), now  fighting  for reinstate-
ment  as  teacher   of  mathematics   in   the
Bronx  High  School  of  Science,  was  one
of   the  authors  "purged"  from  libraries
abroad by our house-broken  State Depart-
ment.
"I  remember,"  Dr.  Hlavaty writes us,
"reading  with  some  interest  in your  Feb-
ruary  28  number  that  if  Velde  had   his
way  Lobachevski's  paper  on  non-Eucli-
dean  geometry might  some day  be marked
'subversive'.   Today   I   find   that   even.
Euclidean   geometry   is   not   safe.    The
modest  little  opus   of   mine  which   had
been  banned  from  the  overseas  libraries
is   a   50-page   booklet   entitled   'Review
Digest  of  Solid  Geometry.'  Perhaps  if  I
had  stuck  to  Plane  Geometry,  or  better
yet, to one dimensional geometry, I  might
have obtained  clearance."
Subtle  Candidate
Temus  R.  Bright,  a  used  car  dealer  in
Baltimore  who  is  also a  Republican  can-
didate   for   Governor   of   Maryland,   un-
veiled  a  monument  last  week-end  to  Mc-
Carthy. This  seemed  an  obvious  effort  to
get the pro-McCarthy vote. But the nature
of  the monument makes us wonder wheth-
er  this  might  not  be  a  more  ambivalent
vote-getting   maneuver.   The   Associated
Press  delicately  termed  the  monument  a
"shaft".  But the Baltimore Sun, which was
on the  scene for the unveiling, described  it
frankly  as  "an  8-foot  high  granite  tomb-
stone   dedicated  to   Senator   McCarthy."
We  can just  see  Mr.  Bright hauling the
anti-McCarthy  voter  into  the  back  room
and  whispering,  "Why, man, I  hate  Joe
so much I  even got his tombstone  ready."
1  o  ^
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  11,1953
JENNINGS     PERRY'S     PAGE
Korea  Could  Be  Man's   First  Peace  Preserve
I  do  not  see  how  Reason  can  fail  to  like  very  much
Sen.  Knowland's  plan  for  cutting  the  Korean  knot—by set-
ting  up  the  country  as  a  neutral  guaranteed  by  the   "great
powers."
I  hope  it  is  a  plan.  The  suggestion  has  been  exercised  in
this  column  in  all  weather  for  the  past  three  years.  But  the
weather   is  more  favorable  now  for  a  resort  to  reason,  and
the  Californian,  highly  placed  in  our  present  administration,
is  in  an  excellent   position  to  champion  the   proposal.
The  time  for  great  resolves  is  when  we  are  grown  sick  and
tired  of  bloodletting,  and  the  time  to  push  for  major  reforms
in  human behavior  is when the  object  lesson  of  futile  destruc-
tion  is  fresh  before  us.  To  establish  the  neutrality  of  Korea
by  a  contract  of  the  powers  would  snatch  one  brand   from
the  burning—and  might  well  show  us  the  way back  to  other
and  wider  undertakings  we  subscribed  to  in  our  elan  at  the
close  of  the  last  world  war.
The  case  for  making  Korea  a  little  "park  of  peace"  for,
say,  the  next  hundred  years  is  from   all  viewpoints   strong.
Certainly  the  unfortunate  peninsula   has  served   its  turn  as
a  battleground;   it  has  been  beaten  and  bombed  and  blooded
from   one  end  to  the  other.  All  the  new  weapons  but  one
have  been  tried  out  upon  it.  A  hundred  years  would  be  a
reasonable   time   to  allow  it   for   repairs.
An  extension  of  this  imposed  and  underwritten  neutrality
to  the  whole  nation  is, one  gathers,  the  essence  of  Sen.  Know-
land's  plan.  The  expeditionary  armies  would  withdraw,  dis-
arming  the  native  population   as  they  went  by  repossessing
all  of  the  death-dealing  weapons  which  have  been  brought
in  and distributed  by one side and  the  other. The  16 divisions
we  have  trained  and  armed  would  go  back   to   their   rice
fields  and   hat   shops,   and  all  the  Red  divisions  that  have
been  trained  and  supplied  by  the  other  side  would  perforce
do  likewise.  As  neutrals  the  Koreans  would  need  no  armed
establishment,  whkh  obviously  they  cannot   afford,   and   in
time  would  compose  a  government  satisfactory  to  themselves
by  civil means, and  prosper.
7. F. Stone's  Weekly
                                                          7
Room  205
301 E. Capitol  St., S.E., Washington  3, D.  C.
Please enter the following  subscription. #5 for  1 y
enclosed.  (See page 3  for  foreign  rates)
Name             .....                   ......... ......
Street       .  .. ................... ...............
t
-11-53
ear u
Thus the  intervention  of  the United  Nations  would stand
up  at  last  as  the  police  action  it  was  declared  to  be,  and  the
threat  at  the  Yalu  which  brought  the  Chinese  into  the  war
would   be  permanently   removed.   Humanity  at   large  could
point  to  one  corner  of  the  earth  at  least  set  apart  by  the
most  powerful  guarantee  as  a  peace  preserve.
Sen.  Knowland  is  of  the  opinion  that  all  of  the  nations
would   welcome  the   creation  of  the   Korean  sanctuary  and
would  pledge  their  word  to  it.  Of  course  this  would  mean
that  our  own  nation  as  well  as  those  on  "the other   side"
would  have  to  shake  hands  all  around  on  the  proposition.
For  example,  we would  have to  shake hands with  the  Chinese
and  recognize  in  them  a  capacity  for  good  faith—that  is  a
valid  kinship  in  the  human  family.
And  we  would  have  to  be  prepared  for  the  resurrection  of
the other peace projects  I have mentioned  above,  which  seemed
so  natural  and  fair  at  the  end  of  World  War  II.  For  if  it  is
a  good  thing  to  solve  the  Korean  problem  simply  by  exempt-
ing  Korea  from  the  two-worlds  line  up,  and  sparing  Koreans
the   necessity  of   bearing   arms,   it   must   follow   as   a   good
thing  that  the  neutrality  of  other   nations  that  have  served
their  time  as  battlegrounds,  and  that  previously  have  been
snatched  from  the  burning,  should  be  proclaimed  by  contract
and  guaranteed  by  disarmament.
The   effort  of  Japan  to  cling  to  her  morning-after  re-
nunciation  of  war  and  of  military  power  would,  by  the  same
logic,   claim  universal  respect   and  support.   And  the   efforts
of  the  victors  on  both  sides  to  outfit  the  irresponsible  Ger-
mans  with  another  war  machine  would  be   abandoned  for
the  grand  folly  that  it  is.
If  the  world  cannot  bring  itself  to  get  out  from  under  its
arms  all  at  once,  it  should  pass  up  no  opportunity  of  getting
out  from  under them  piecemeal. At  this moment, being  sated
with  battle  in  Korea,  it  could  discharge  Korea  from  guard
mount  with  no  pain.  It  could  declare  Korea  hors  de  combat
henceforth,  neutral  itself  and  out  of  bounds  for   all  armies.
And  it'then  could  begin  to  add  other  neutral  territories  to
this  bit  to  cut  down  the  room  left  on  earth  for  any  war.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room  205
301  E. Capitol  St., S.E.,
Washington  3, D.  C
Entered  as
Second   Class   Mail
Matter
Post   Office
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED