I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964mar02.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on  The   MLF
Fresh  Evidence Only The Germans Among Our  NATO Allies  Are  Pressing  for  The  MLF
Mr.  CHAMBERLAIN  (R.  Mich):  I  want  to  discuss  with
you  this  MLF  requirement.
Secretary  MCNAMARA:  Yes.
Mr.  CHAMBERLAIN:  You  said  yesterday  that  we  had
no  urgent  military requirement  for  this  MLF  and  that  we
are  not  trying  to  sell  it.    Well,  Mr.  Secretary,   if  we  are
not  trying  to  sell  it,  who  is,  because  I  haven't  discovered
anyone  that  wants  it  except  perhaps  the  Germans.
Secretary  MC NAMARA:  Oh, the  Germans  are  very, very
much  interested  in it.    ...
Mr.   RIVERS   (D.   S.C.):   Now,  about   the   multilateral
force,  we  ran  into  this  at  NATO.
Secretary   of  the   Navy   NITZE:  If   the  other  European
countries  in  sufficient   number  desire   it,  it  is  the  Defense
Department's  view  that  we  should  support  it.
Mr.  RIVERS:  You  don't  have  much  support  and  accept-
ance  of  it.    The  only  people  who  wanted  it  were  the  Ger-
mans.   They  helped  us defend  it.    ...
Mr.  CHAMBERLAIN:  Who  is  pushing  it  [MLF]?
Secretary   NITZE:  There  is  a  very  serious  problem  in-
volved  in  the   alliance.    It   revolves  primarily  around  the
Germans,  but  it  involves other  members  of  NATO  as  well,
as  to what the  future  relationship  to  strategic nuclear  weap-
ons  will  be. . . .
—House  Armed  Services  hearings  on  the  new  defense   program,  released Feb.  18.  Pps.  6975,  7268-9,  7390-1.
I. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XII,  NO.  9
MARCH  2,  1964
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Bogey  of An  Independent  German  Nuclear Deterrent
MLF   are  the   initials  of  multi-lateral  force.     This   is  the
proposal  for  a  nuclear  armada  to  be  manned  by  mixed  crews
from  the  NATO  nations  under  their  joint  control.    MLF  is
presented  as  an  effort  to  meet  European demands for  a greater
voice  in  the  use  of  the  nuclear  deterrent.    It  is  supposed   to
be   the   symbol   of   "interdependence"    between   the   United
States  and  its  NATO  allies,  to  provide  a  closer  military  and
political   integration  between  them.    Yet,   even  before  they
agree  to  this  plan,  we  have  declared  it  non-negotiable  at  the
new  Geneva  disarmament talks  where  it  has  become  a  major
obstacle  to  any  new  agreement.
WEU  Turned  MLF  Down
In  the  past  four  months,  there  have  been  two  occasions  on
which  to  test  sentiment among  our NATO  allies  on  the  MLF.
The  first  was  the  Paris  conference  Nov.  7  of  NATO  parlia-
mentarians,  which  is  a  kind  of  Atlantic Community Congress.
Its  military committee  turned  in  a  report  calling  MLF  "waste-
ful"  and  "superfluous"  while  the  political  committee  also  re-
jected  MLF.    The   "consensus"   of  the  meeting  as  a  whole
was  against  MLF  and   "full   support   for   the  plan   seems  to
have   been   confined   to   the   American  and   German   delega-
tions"  (The   Times,  London,  Nov.  8).   The  second  occasion
was  on  Dec.   4  in  the  Assembly  of   the  Western   European
Union,  which  speaks  for  the  inner  core  of  NATO  in  Europe
—Britain,  France,  Germany,  Belgium,   Holland,   Luxemburg
and  Italy.    Here  an  attempt  was  made  to  put  the  WEU  on
record  for   MLF.    The   strongest   speech  in  favor  of   it  was
by  West  Germany's  Foreign   Minister   Schroeder  who   called
it  "one  of  the  boldest  and  most  fruitful  initiatives  of  the  free
world"  (Le  Monde,  Dec.  5).   The  attack  was  led  by  George
Brown,  deputy  leader  of  the  British  Labor  Party.    He  called
it  "a  multi-lateral  farce."    On  this  occasion,   "the  first  time
that  the  MLF  proposal  has  come  to  a  direct  vote  in  an  inter-
national  body"  (The  Times,  London,  Dec.  5),  MLF lost.  Yet
we  ignore  these  views  and  insist  at  Geneva   that  MLF  is  a
must.    This  is  a  strange  way  to  practice  "interdependence."
3 *
The   Official  German  View
"It  was  a  wise  decision  on  the   part  of   the  United
States  to  propose to  its  European Allies  the  establish-
ment  of  a  nuclear  force  on  a  truly   multilateral  basis
as  regards  the  possession  and  control  of  nuclear weap-
ons.    This  proposal  has  repeatedly  been  interpreted as
an  attempt  to  meet  the  German  wish  for  participation
in  consultations  and  decisions  on  the   use   of  nuclear
weapons,  but  to  refuse  Germany  the  right  of  actually
using  such  weapons  under  her  own  national  responsi-
bility.    These  comments  are  well  known  in  Germany,
but  they  reflect  a  very  narrow  outlook.   The  decisive
aspect  of  the  project  for  a  Multilateral  Force  is  the
chance  it  offers  to  make  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons  a
common  Allied  responsibility. .  .  .  NATO  must  be capa-
ble   of   employing   nuclear   weapons  under   conditions
where  their  use  is  not  a sign  of  despair, but  is governed
by  military  and  political  considerations."
—Van  Hassel,  West  Germany's  Minister  of   Defense,
deputy   chairman   of   the   Christian   Democratic  party,
urriting  in  Foreign  Affairs    quarterly,  Jan.  1964.
The  most  interesting  idea  put  forward  by  the  new  Johnson
Administration  at  the  outset  of  the  Geneva  talks  was  for  a
"freeze"   on  nuclear  delivery  systems.    Essentially  this   asks
the  Russians  to  accept  a  position  of  inferiority  in  planes  and
missiles  for  the  sake  of  putting  a  brake  on  the  arms   race.
In  this  it  resembles  the  limited  nuclear  test  ban  treaty,  and
rests  like  it  on  the  view  that  "enough  is  enough,"  that  the
question  of  who  is  ahead  in  numbers  of  missiles  or  tests  has
lost   much  of   its  meaning  when   neither,  side   can  escape   a
devastating  return  blow  from  the  other  should  either  venture
a  first  strike.    The  natural  complements  of  a  freeze  on  de-
livery  systems  wpuld.be  an  agreement  against  proliferation  of
nuclear  weapons  and  an  end  to  the  production   of  more  fis-   '*'•
sionable  weapon   material.    But  if   we  set  up   an  MLF   for
NATO,  the  Russians  may  have  to  set  up  an  MLF  for  the
Warsaw   Pact.    As  the  power  inferior   in  nuclear  stockpiles
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  2,1964
(Continued   from   Page   One)
and  number  of  delivery systems,  this  could  put  them  at  a  dis-
advantage  if  they  were  committed   to   freeze   the   production
of   both.    Above  all  the  MLF  looks   to  the  Russians   (as  it
does  to  our  reluctant  Western  allies)  as  the  first  move  to  put
a  German  finger  on  NATO's  strategic  trigger,   on   weapons
which  could  be  used   to  threaten  or  make  a  direct  attack  on
the  Soviet  Union.
Like  That  "BLF"  in  Cuba
These  fears  should  not  be  too  difficult  for  us  to  understand
if  we  recall  our  own  reaction  a  year  ago  when  the  Russians
put  what  might  be  called  a  BLF,   a  bi-lateral  force  of   some
40  medium  range  nuclear  missiles  in  Cuba.    We  would  have
felt  no  less  alarmed  if  these  missiles,  instead  of   being  em-
placed   in  Cuba,  had  been  set  up  on  a  BLF  force  of  subma-
rines  or   surface   vessels  in  the   Caribbean.    The   MLF  calls
for  a  joint  fleet  of  25  ships  with  8  Polaris  each.    The  only
difference   in   principle   between   the   Russo-Cuban   BLF   and
our  MLF  is  that  the  Russians kept  control  of  the  warheads—
there  was  no  Cuban  finger  on  the  trigger—while  the  MLF  is
supposed   to  give  the  Germans  a  vote  and  a  veto  among  the
15  NATO  fingers  on  the  MLF   trigger.     Indeed   (see   box
below)   they  are  asking  us  to  give  up  our  veto  in  return  for
some  system  of  majority  or  "weighted"  control  in  which  the
Germans,  who  are  to  put  up  40%   of  the  cost  would  have  a
correspondingly  preponderant  voice  in  running  it.    There  is
little   doubt   that   most   of   our  NATO   allies  would   prefer
to  abandon  the  MLF  for  an  agreement  with  the  Soviets  freez-
ing  the  arms  race  in  delivery  systems  and  nuclear  stockpiles,
and  putting  a  stop  to  the  further  spread  of  nuclear  weapons.
Two  related  questions  need  to  be  disentangled  to  see  MLF
clearly.     One   is  the   problem   of   greater   integration  within
NATO.    The  other  is  the  problem  of  German  access  to  stra-
tegic  weapons.    Many  opponents   of  the  MLF  in  NATO  are
for    fuller   discussion  and   consultation   within   the  alliance.
The  problem  of  integration is  at  least  as  old  as  ancient  Greece
where  the  disparity  in  power  between   Athens  and   its  allies
(as   between   Sparta  and   its  allies)   tended   to  turn  alliances
into   forms  of   empire.     The   tremendous  power   of  nuclear
weapons  has  given  this  problem   new  acuteness.    The   non-
nuclear  powers  are  as  much  satellites  as  allies; indeed  NATO,
Prophetic   Remark  A  Year  Before
The  Missile   Crisis
"Under  no  circumstances   should  the  Federal  Republic
create  the  impression   that  it  cherishes  the  ambition  of
becoming   the   'decisive*  military   power   of    continental
NATO.    Even  less  permissible   would  be  any  move  to
acquire  armament  which  in  itself  gave  rise  to  the   im- •
pression   that  Germany  was  claiming   parity  with  the
Soviet   Union.    No  government   of  the   Federal   Repub-
lic   should   therefore   demand   that   the   Republic  needs
'the  same  weapons   as  the  Soviet   Union.'    It  is  plainly
absurd    for   the   Federal    Republic,   looking    over    its
shoulder  at  the  Soviet  Union,  to  demand  strategic  mass
destruction  weapons.     For  the  Federal   Republic  to  be
equipped  with  nuclear   missiles   capable   of   devastating
Moscow   or   Leningrad   would   inevitably   provoke   the
Soviet   Union   in  just   the  same   way   as  the   supply   of
nuclear   missiles    to   Cuba   would   provoke   the    United
States."
—Defense   or  Retaliation:  A   German  View,  by   Hel-
mut   Schmidt,   leading   military   expert    of   the   Social
Democratic  Party,  in  the  Bundestag  since  1953,  where
he  is  a  member  of  Defense   Committee.  Praeger,  1962.
like  the  Warsaw  Pact,  may  be  seen  as a  new  form  of  imperial-
ism.     If   we  wish  to  ease  this  problem   by  consulting   more
fully  with  our  allies  and  giving
4
 them  a  greater   voice  in  the
decisions  which  may  mean  life  or  death,  this  is  no   obstacle
to  world   peace  or  to  progress  in  disarmament.    Indeed   we
might  make  more  progress  in  this  direction   if  we  consulted
all  of   them   at  this  juncture  instead   of   responding   only  to
German  wishes.
It   is  the   other   problem   which   spells   trouble.   It   is  this
which  must  be  examined.    One  way to  start  is with  the  famil-
iar   argument   that   unless   some   device  like  MLF   gives   the
Germans   a  hand   in   a   strategic   nuclear   striking   force,   the
Germans  will  develop  an  independent  deterrent  of  their  own,
as  have  the   British  and   the   French.     But   there  are  many
reasons  why  such  a  course  would  be  difficult   and   dangerous
for   the   Germans.     They   have  the   technical   capacity;   they
have  the   economic   resources.     But  where   would   they  test?
Unlike  the  French  and  British  they  have  no  dependent   areas
in  Africa  or  the  Pacific.    To  test  would  be  a  violation  of  the
test  ban  agreement  which  Bonn   accepted   so  slowly  and   un-
Rusk's  Evasive   Reply  to  German  Demand  U.S.  Relinquish  Veto  Over  The  MLF
"On  the  MLF,  Defense  Minister  von  Hassel  said  that  in
the   beginning   the   other   partners   must   concede   the   veto
power  of   the  American  President.     As   soon   as   the  MLF
becomes   a  military   reality,  however,  it   should  be  able   to
persuade  the  American  partner  to  give  up  his  veto  and  to
establish  majority  rule  for  the  political   and  military  use  of
this  force.  .  .  .  'We  must  show  consideration  for  the  French,
who  will   never  join  this   force  if   its   effectiveness   can  be
blunted  by  the  veto  of  one  state.    Whether  to  have  a  veto
or  majority  rule,  will  first  come  up  for  decision   when  this
military  instrument  becomes   a  reality.'
"Von  Hassel  believes  that  the  political  worth  of  .the  MLF
should  be  seen  in  the  strong  binding  together   of  American
and  European   interests.     Until  now  the  Atlantic  Pact  had
excluded  the  nuclear  type  of  mutual  dependence.    So  NATO
will  be  strengthened   by  the  still  tighter  linking  of  Amer-
ica  to  Europe  in  an  integrated  nuclear  politics.  .  .  .  'Every
speculation   that   the  German  side   regards  the  MLF  as  a
way  of  obtaining  nuclear  weapons   for  itself   is   completely
misleading'. ..."
—Interview  at  the  close  of  the  Ottawa  NATO   conference
in  the  Frankfurter    Allgemeine  Zeitung  May  25,  1963,  and
summarized   by  the  New   York   Times,  May  28,  1963.
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,   sir,   the   West   German  Defense  Min-
ister  has  been  quoted  as  saying  that  while  West   Germany
would  go  along  at  the  outset  with  a  veto  on  the  use  of  a
nuclear  fleet,  that  eventually  the  fleet  would  not   be  mili-
tarily   effective  if   the   U.S.   veto   remains.     What   is   the
U.S.   position  on  this  view?
A.  Well,  I  would  not  wish  to  comment  on  a  partial  report
of   an  interview  or  statement   made  by   a  Minister   that   I
have  not  myself  seen.  .  .  .  Now,  if   Europe  at  some  stage
organizes  itself  and  makes  arrangements   by  which  it   makes
its  voice  heard  collectively   in  these  matters,   then  we  can
take  that  question   up.    But,   under  present    circumstances,
I  feel  quite  confident  that  in  these  nuclear  matters,  the   U.S.
must  participate  in  the  decisions.
—Secretary  Rusk's  Press  Conference,   May  29,  1963.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  2, 1964
willingly.  To  produce  nuclear  weapons  on  German  soil  would
be  a  violation  of  the  pledge  given  by  Adenauer   in  1954,  a
pledge   embodied   in   the  Western   European   Treaty   of   that
year  and  enforcible  by  its  Arms  Control  Agency.    The   anger
and  alarm  would  be  as  great  in  Western  as  in  Eastern  Europe
if  Germany  were  to  set out  on  this  path;  it  would  be  seen  that
the  Germans  once  again,  as  in   1914   on  Belgium,  were  treat-
ing  their  treaty  obligations  as  scraps  of  paper;  it  would   be
a  signal  that  war  was  coming.
Again  War  on  Two  Fronts
Long   before  Germany   could   produce  nuclear   weapons   in
any   significant   amount,   there   would   be  time   for   East   and
West  to  draw  together  and  stop  the  process.    Germany  would
be  faced  again  with  the  fatal  error  of  its  last  two  world  wars
—it  would   have  to  fight  East  and  West.     The   balance  of
forces  against  her  would   be  greater  than   before.     Germany's
only  hope  of  getting  nuclear  weapons  is  to  do  so  under  cover
of   NATO,   and  her  only  hope   of   blackmailing   the  East  into
recovery  of  her  1937  frontiers   is  as  the  spearhead  of  a   West-
ern  coalition  in  which   Germany   plays  a  dominant   role.
From  any  other  point  of  view  MLF   is  as  foolish  for   the
Germans   as  for  other  West  European   peoples.    If  Germany
fears  that  the  U.S.  veto  and  the  nuclear  stalemate  have  robbed
the  American  deterrent  of  credibility,  would  the  deterrent  be
any  more  credible  if   14  other  nations  had   the  veto  as  well?
If   the  U.S.  might  hesitate  to  destroy   itself   in  a  world   con-
To  Unify   NATO  Or  Split  It   Apart?
"The  other  European  countries  that  have  agreed  to
participate  [in  MLF]  .  .  .  are  more  likely  to  do  so  to
keep   an   eye   on  Germany  than   because   of   strategic
convictions. ...  If  the  influence  of  West   Germany  in
the  MLF  becomes  too  great,  neutralism   may  grow   in
Britain,  Scandinavia  and  the  Low  Countries.  .  .  .  It  is
in  nobody's  interest—least  of   all  West   Germany's—to
set  in  motion  events   that  can  only  end  with  suspicion
and  concern  in  most  of  the  countries  of  the  West.  .  .  .
A  divided  country,  which  in  the  space  of  50  years  has
lost   two  wars,   experienced   three  revolutions,   suffered
two  periods  of  extreme  inflation  and  the  trauma  of  the
Nazi   era,   should   not—in   its   own  interest—be   placed
in  a  position  where,  in  addition  to  its   inevitable  ex-
posure  to  Soviet  pressure,  it  becomes  the  balance  wheel
of  our  Atlantic  policy.    We  are  encouraging   tendencies
we  may  later   regret."
—Henry  Kissinger  in  The  Reporter,  Mar.  28,  1963.
vulsion   because   of   some   threat   to   Germany,   is   there   any
reason  to  believe  that  the  British,  the  Belgians,  the  Dutch  or
the  Danes  would  be  any  more  ready  to  die  for  them?     The
MLF  no  more   takes  the  place  of   an  independent   deterrent
than  NATO,  but  the  price  of  such  a  deterrent  would  again
be  the  isolation  and  defeat  of  Germany.
The  MLF  politically,  whether   with  15  fingers  or  5  fingers
on   the   trigger,   is  a  comic  strip   contraption.     Militarily,   its
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
The  German  Socialist  View  Which  Sees  Disengagement   As  A  Peaceful   Solution
"The  idea  of  easing  the  intractable   situation  in   Central
Europe   by   means  of   military   readjustments   and   thereby
making  real  progress  toward  the  reunification  of  Germany
was  first  put  forward  in  1952  by  Dr.  Pfleiderer,  formerly  an
FDP  [Free  Democratic  Party,  a  right-of-center  big  business
party—IFS]  representative  in  the  Federal  German  Parlia-
ment  and  later  German Ambassador  to  Belgrade.    The  idea
attracted  little notice  at  the  time. ...  It  was  not  until the
Berlin  Conference  of   1954,  when  Sir  Anthony  Eden   came
out  with  the  idea  of  a  Central  European  zone  of  arms  limi-
tation  and  control  that  the  idea  first  assumed  international
importance.  .  .  .  Eden  later  submitted  a  variant  of  his  pro-
posals   to   the   Geneva   Summit  Conference   of   1955.   .   .  .
When,  two  years  later,   the  Russians  seemed  for  the  first
time  to  be  ready  seriously   to  pursue  these   ideas,  further
consideration  of  them  was  obstructed  by  the  Federal  Ger-
man  Government.    In  the  same  year  Hugh  Gaitskell  made
a  set  of  very  far-reaching   proposals   .  .  .  later   worked  out
in  detail  by  Denis  Healey.   These  proposals  related  to Ger-
many,   Poland,  Czechoslovakia,  and  Hungary.   .   .  .   They
have  also,  after  a  lapse  of  time  and  with  certain  modifica-
tions  become   an  ingredient   of   the   German  Social   Demo-
cratic  political  platform.  .  .  .
"In  the  autumn  of   1957  the  so-called   Rapacki  Plan   was
made  known  to  the  world.    This  at  first  confined  itself   to
the  creation  of  an  atom-free  zone  in  Central  Europe.  .~   .
The  flat,  uncompromising  rejection  of  the  Rapacki  Plan  and
the  refusal   to  contemplate  any   negotiations   on   proposals
of  a  like  nature  must  be  regarded,  even  today,  as   a  dip-
lomatic  failure on  the  part  of  the  West.    The  German  Social
Democrats  once  again  took  up  the  idea  of  a  zone  of  arms
limitation  and  control  early  in  1959,  and  made  it  the  subject
of   an  independent  and  detailed   presentation   in  November
of  the  same  year.  .  .  .  [calling   for  a  nuclear  free  Central
Europe  with  limited  conventional  armies  but  not  conditioned
on  Germany  leaving  NATO  or  the  Eastern   States  leaving
the  Warsaw   Pact  in  the  hope   that  easing  tensions  would
pave  the  way  for  German  unification—IPS],
"The  military  objections  raised  by  the  West  against  the
ideas  put  forward  hinge  almost  entirely  on  spatial  require-
ments.  Some  people,  for  example,  maintain that  there  would
be  too  little  room  for   NATO's  strategic   nuclear  weapons
to  be  adequately  deployed  or,  alternatively,  to  be  provided
with  sufficient   area  for  forward  protection.    This  objection
smacks  clearly  of  dilettantism;  for,  as  far  as  Western  Eu-
rope  is  concerned  strategic   nuclear  weapons   are  stationed
exclusively  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  there  is  so  far  no
intention   of   deploying   them   on   the   European   Continent.
The  creation  of  a  zone  of  control  in  Central  Europe  would
not  make  the  U.K.-based  strategic   weapons  any  more  vul-
nerable  than  they  are  now.    There  is  also  no  force  in  the
general  argument  that  NATO  could  not  give  up  the  200-250
miles  broad  Federal  Republic because  the  area  available  for
maneuver  would  lose  critically  in  depth.    The  Soviet  Army
stands   today  60  miles  from   the  Kiel  Canal  and  75  miles
from  Frankfurt.   In  future  it  would  be  500-625  miles  dis-
tant   from   these  vital  points;  its   tanks  would  not  be  sta-
tioned   just  across  the  Elbe  but  away  to  the  east   of   the
Vistula  and  the  Bug.
"Whereas  today  the  Soviet army  need  cross only  one  river
in  order  to   move  forward  into  the   Federal   Republic,  and
whereas  the  exits  from  the  Baltic  are  immediately  exposed
to  attack  by  the  Soviet  ground  forces,  these  would in  future
—together  with  the  bases  for  their  naval  forces   and  sea-
borne  troops—be  stationed   very  much  further  to  the  east.
The  Soviet   army  would  have,  in  the  event   of   war,   three
major  rivers  to  cross,  at  each  of  which  it  would  be  exposed
to  the  full  force  of  interdiction at  the  hands  of  the  Allied
tactical  air  forces  and  medium-range missiles.    By  contrast
the  troops  of  the  other  NATO  powers  stationed  in  the  Fed-
eral   Republic  would  have   to  cross   only   one  extra   river,
the  Rhine."
—Defense   or  Retaliation,  by  Helmut  Schmidt,  military  expert  of  the  German Social  Democratic  Party  (Praeger  1962).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 2,1964
A  Job Handling  Liquor  Is  Hardly  the  Way  to  Cure  An  Alcoholic
(Continued    -from    Page   Three)
worthlessness  is  underscored  by the  various  forms  it  has  taken.
Norstadt's  first  proposal  was  for  a  missile  force  mounted   on
barges  and  trucks  on  constant  patrol  in  Central  Europe;   then
somebody  thought   of  the  revulsion  which  would  occur  if  in
West  Germany,   Europe's   most   crowded   area,  one   of   them
were  to  blow  up  accidentally;  Germany  would  go  neutralist
overnight  in  the  wake  of  such  a  mishap.    Then  it  was  pro-
posed   to  have  a  fleet  of   Polaris  submarines  until   Admiral
Rickover  and  his  friends  let  it  be  known  that  there  would
be  a  bitter  fight  before  Congress   allowed   the  secrets  of   the
Polaris  submarine to  be  given  out  so  freely.    The  present  plan
is  for  a  25-vessel  surface  fleet;  this  is  a  grisly   joke  on   the
Germans  since  all  other  fleets  are  going  underwater.    These
ships  would  be  easy  to  spot,  track  and  destroy.
The  Deliberate  Use  of  Monster  Weapons
The  MLF  makes  sense  only  politically.    If  it  can  become  a
mechanism  for  a  tighter   alliance  with  America  against  Rus-
sia,  it  is  worth   the  $5  billion   or  more   Germany's    Defense
Minister  von  Hassel  figures  it  will  cost.    The  Germans  want
us  to  give  up  our  veto  in  MLF  once  it  is  operational;   they
are  to  pay  the  largest  share  of  the  European   contribution   to
its  cost  and  expect  to  have  commensurate  power   in  it.    It  is
in  this  light  that  one  must  read  von  Hassel's  ominous  words
in  Foreign  Affairs    last  January  (see  box  on p..l).    "The  de-
cisive  aspect  of  the  project  for  a Multilateral  Force,"  he  wrote,
"is  the  chance  it  offers   to  make  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons
a  common  allied  responsibility.  .  .  .  NATO  must  be  capable
of  employing  nuclear  weapons   under   conditions  where  it  is
not  a  sign  of  despair,  but  is  governed   by  military  and   politi-
cal  considerations."     This  means  the  use  of   these   weapons
not  in  "despair"  as  a  last  resort  but  for  "military  and  politi-
cal  considerations,"   i.e.   as  bargaining   counters   for   military
and  political  aims.    This,  for  the  Germans,   means  to  black-
mail  Russia  into  restoration  of  their  1937  borders.    These  are
the  dangerous  games  into  which  Germany's  dominant  Chris-
tian  Democrats  and  militarists  would  draw  us.
MLF  runs  counter  to  all  the  hopeful  elements  in  the  mili-
tary  policies  associated  with  Kennedy  and  McNamara.     The
The  Ideal  Solution  for  Germany
'The   ideal   situation   would   be   a   Germany   strong
enough  to  defend  itself  but  not  strong  enough  to  at-
tack,  united  so  that  its  frustrations  do  not  erupt  into
conflict  and  its  divisions  do  not  encourage  the  rivalry
of   its   neighbors,   but  not  so  centralized  that  its   dis-
cipline   and  capacity  for   rapid   action  evoke   counter-
measures  in  self-defense.    Such  a  Germany  has  existed
only  at  rare  periods.    To  help  establish  it   must  be  a
major  task  of  Western  policy.  .  .  .
"As  long  as  Germany  remains divided, the  danger of
an  explosion  exists,  whatever  the  wishes  of   the  chief
protagonists.    Measures  to  control  armaments  in  Cen-
tral  Europe,  to  be  effective,  should  therefore accompany
a   political  settlement.    The  natural   dividing  line  for
arms  control  schemes  is  the  Oder,  not  the  Elbe.    The
two   problems   of   German   unity   and  arms  control   in
Europe  are  thus  closely  related.    Unification without a
scheme   for   arms  control   will   frighten  all   the   states
surrounding   Germany.    A   European  security   system
without  German unification  is  either  a  palliative  or  it
will   magnify   conflicts  in  Central   Europe."
—The   Necessity   for   Choice   by  Henry   A.   Kissinger
(Harper,   1961).
tighter   command  and  control   they  built  up  to  prevent   acci-
dental  war  would  be  undercut  by  this  dispersion   of   weapons
and  responsibility.   Their  effort  to  enlarge  conventional  forces
in  order  to  draw  back  from  the  brink  and  prevent   escalation
would  be  hampered   by  MLF.     The  $5  billion  it  would   cost
for  duplicate  missile  facilities  on  vulnerable  vessels  will  draw
funds  from  conventional  arms—NATO's  real  military  need.
Nor   does   it  fit  into  the  Grand  Design  of   seeking   a  world
settlement   with   the   USSR;   on   the   contrary,   the   very   idea
is  enough   (as  we  can  see  at  Geneva)   to  serve  the   German
goal  of  blocking  any  arms  agreement   until  the  Reich  has  its
hand   on   strategic   nuclear   weapons.     Most   ludicrous   of   all
is  the  notion  that  MLF  will  keep  the  Germans   from  going
off   on  a  nuclear  binge  of  their  own.     MLF  would   give   the
Germans  their  first  chance  for  training  in  the  use  of   strategic
nuclear  weapons,   their  first,  chance  to  play  with  these  mon-
sters.    Whoever  heard  of  curing  an  alcoholic  by  giving  him
a  job  in  a  liquor  store?
We  Think  It   Important  to  Get    This  Issue  As  Widely  Distributed  As   Possible—We'll   Send   Free   Copies   If   You   Send   Self-Addressed
Stamped  Envelopes—Bulk  Orders Available  at  5  Cents  A  Copy  Postpaid
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly        5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ....................................................................•....••••-—••••_
Street   .:.....................................................................—.......—
City  ............_.........................Zone......._.State....................
3/2/64
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name   ................................................_.———.———
Street   ........._.................._...................................................
City  ..........._.........................Zone......._.State...........-.~...
Shall  we  send  (rift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
LE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,    N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class  foamge   j-ai<r   iti.   wasn.mjion,   I).   C.  "Published  every  Monday  except  in  August  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..
Washington.  D.  C.    An   independent  weekly   published   and  edited  by   I.   F.   Stone:   Circulation  Manager.   Esther   M.   Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.;   $6 in  Canada:  SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe:  S20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED