I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964jan27.pdf

============================================================

James  Baldwin on A  Kidnapping  Which  Never  Happened,  P.  2
Dallas  Police Wonder  Whether Oswald  Was  FBI  Informer, Houston (Tex.) Paper Reports
"DALLAS—Was  Lee Harvey  Oswald  a  stool  pigeon  for  a
federal   government   agency?    That's   the   question   being
asked  by  many  people  in  responsible   positions  here.  .  .  .
Oswald  did  know  of  Joe  Hosty,  the  FBI  agent  who  handles
subversive  matters  in  the  Dallas  FBI  office.  'He  had  Hosty's
phone  number,  office  phone  and  car  license  numbers,'  said
Bill  Alexander,  assistant  district  attorney  to  Henry  Wade
and  one  of  the  state's  most  able  prosecutors.  .  .  .
"Mrs.   Marguerite  Oswald,  mother  of  Oswald,  had  a  terse
'no  comment'  when  asked  if  her  son  had  told  her  he  was  or
had  at  least  been  asked  to  be  an  informant  in anti-subver-
sive  work.    She  did  not  deny  it.    However  she  was  quoted
in   the  Philadelphia Inquirer  as  saying  her  son  had  been
approached  by  a  government agent  to  be  an  informer.
"Inasmuch   as  she   had  no  direct   contact  with  her  son
after  Sept.  of  1962,  the  contact,  if   made,  would  have  been
before  she  went  to  work  for  a  Fort  Worth  matron  in  the
same  month  and  indicated  to  her  employer  that  'Lee  was
doing  important  work.'   The  social  matron  said  she  got  the
impression  from  Mrs.  Oswald  that  Lee  Oswald  was  doing
some  sort  of  work  for  the  Federal  government.  .  .  .
"Informed  sources  in  Dallas  tell  of  seeing  a  report for-
warded   to   the   commission  investigating  President Ken-
nedy's  death that  states  that  'at  2:30 p.m. Friday,  Nov. 22'
an  FBI  agent  told  Dallas  police  the  FBI  knew  of  Oswald
and   had  conducted  some  surveillance  of  him.  If   this   is
true,   veteran  police  and  sheriff's  investigators  ask,  their
watch   on  Oswald   must   not  have  been  too   good   or  they
would  have  noticed  the  possible  significance  of  his working
in  a  building  on  the  route  of  the  motorcade.
"It  is  this  point  that  has  led: to  speculation by  police  and
sheriff's  deputies  in  Dallas  that   Oswald  might  have  been
an   informant   because,   as   one  put   it,   'you  just  wouldn't
think  to  check  out  one  of  your  own  stoolies'."
—Houston,  Texas, Post, Jan. 1,1S64-
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII, NO.  4
JANUARY  27, 1964
101      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Only One Place to Build A New Canal and Run It That Way
Where  a  people's  interest  and  pride  is  concerned,  as  ours
is  in  the  Panama  Canal,  nothing   is  harder  to  see  than   the
obvious.    In  1956 we  made  it  possible,  by  our  intervention,,
for   the  Egyptians  to  seize  and  keep   the  Suez  Canal.     We
forced   Britain,  France  and   Israel  to  withdraw  their  troops,
in  large  part  because  our  big  oil  companies  didn't  want  the
Arabs  "upset."    Panamanians  naturally  find  this  bit  of his-
tory   interesting.
The  Rare  Assets  of  The  Poor
Both  Egypt  and  Panama  regard  the  canals  across  their ter-
ritory  as  national  assets,  on  which  they  should  be  able  to  cash
in;  drey  have  top  little  else.  The  Egyptians  drew  revenues  of
$115   million   from   their   Canal   in   1961  and   almost   |120
million   in  1962.   From  1936  to  1955  the  Panamanians  got
only  $430,000  a  year  for  their  Canal  rights;  since  1955, this
has  been  $1,930,000  a year.   This  looks  pretty  paltry  as  their
share  of  the  $58  million  in  tolls  we  collected  last  fiscal  year.
What  makes  it  look  worse  is that  the  tolls  are  still,  thanks  to
the  U.S. shipping  lobby,  what  they  were  before  World  War  I.
The   Panamanians   feel,   as  their   Ambassador   said   on  CBS
Face  The  Nation  (Jan.  19),  that  they  are  indirectly  subsidiz-
ing  "the Merchant  Marine  of  the  U.S. and  of  the  world  by
permitting  those  low  tolls  to  be  in  force  today  as  they  were
50  years  ago."
No   country   in   Central   America,   whether   Colombia,   or
Nicaragua,  or  Mexico,  is  going  to  let  us  build  a  canal  across
its  territory,  and  run  it  the  way  we  have  run  the  Panama
Canal.    Nobody   is  going  to  give  us  a  grant  in   perpetuity.
Nobody  is going  to  give  us  sovereignty  over  the  land  around
a  Canal  and  let  us  put  up  a  fence  to  keep  its  citizens out.
Nobody  is  going  to  let  us  fix  rates  without  asking  them,  and
Before  Castro  Was  Born
Mr.  [Paul]  NIVEN  (CBS News):  Mr. Boyd,  our Sec-
retary  of  State  and  Secretary  of  the  Army  have  said
that   while  the  dispute  originally  broke  out   between
U.S.   students  in  the  Canal  Zone  and  Panamanian  stu-
dents,  it  was  quickly  exacerbated  by  Communist agents,
some of  whom had only  recently  arrived in Panama. ...
Secretary   of   the   Army   Vance   said  that  ten   persons
suspected   of   being  agents,   including  one  sniper,   had
been  taken  into  custody  by  Panamanian  authorities   at
the  request  of  the  U.S. Army.   Is  this  not  correct?
Ambassador  BOYD:  My  government  has  instructed
me  to  deny  emphatically that  there  was  any  participa-
tion  of  Communists  in  Panama.
Mr.  NIVEN:  In  other  words,  you  are  taking  the  posi-
tion  that  Castroite  agents  or  Communists have  had  no
part  in  this  from  beginning   to end.
Ambassador  BOYD:  Sir,  we  are  taking   the  strong
position  that  this  is  a  nationalistic  movement and  that
it  would  be  a  terrible  mistake  if  we  mislead  the  public
opinion   of   this   country   by   saying   that   Castro   or
Khrushchev  had  something  to  do  with  it.    This  is  a
problem  that  we  have  been  living  with  before  the Bol-
shevik  Revolution or  before  Castro  was  born.
—CBS  Face  The Nation, Jan. 19.
juggle  the  accounts  any  way  we  please,  charging  off   against
revenues  many  items  which  have   only  a  remote   connection
with  running  the  Canal.  There is only one place we could  build
and  run  a  canal  that  way  and  that  would  be  straight  across
the  USA  from  New  York  to  Los  Angeles.    Short  of  that,  we
ought   to  stop  talking  nationalistic  nonsense  and  negotiate  a
revision  of  the  treaty  to give  Panama  a break, establishing con-
ditions  of  joint  operation  which  would  restore  Panama's  self-
respect  and  good  neighbor   relations.                               Jan.  20
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  27,1964
New  Government  Discoveries  in  Products  and  Planning  Methods  Could  Enrich  Civilian  Life
Humphrey  Proposal  for  Special  Jobs  Commission  Opens  Creative  Prospects
Labor,  civil  rights  and  peace  groups  can  find  a  useful  ve-
hicle  for  common  action  in  supporting  the  bill  introduced  by
Senator  Humphrey   (with  the  support   of  Senators  Hart  and
Clark)   for  a  32-man  Commission  on  Automation,   Technol-
ogy  and  Employment.    Its  authority  would  be  broad   enough
to  deal  with  the  problem  of  jobs  in  every  respect,  from  im-
proved   technology  to  armament  cutbacks.    It  would  have  to
report  within  two  years  and  this  report  could  have  historic
impact.    Among  other  things,  the  Commission  would  be  in-
structed  to  study  and  report  on  the  incidence  of  automation
"upon  particular  occupations  and  groups  of  workers"  and  to
examine  new  technical  developments  resulting  from  Federal
research   in  the  arms  and  other  programs   "with   a  view  to
discovering  those  areas  potentially  most  promising  for  civilian
and  industrial  exploitation."
Whole  New   Industries  Possible
Industry  has  been  slow  to  tap  promising  civilian  applica-
tions  of   weapons   and   space  research.    Humphrey   told   the
Senate  (Jan.   15)   "whole  new  industries  could  be  created  in
this  way."     Humphrey  said   cutbacks   in  bases,  military  per-
sonnel  and  uranium  output  "must  not  be  permitted  to  result
in   reduced   gross   national   product   or   increased   unemploy-
ment."    He  called   attention   again   to  the   insistence   of   the
Pentagon   on  classifying  as  secret  the  survey made  by  his  dis-
armament  subcommittee  of  some  360  defense  contractors  to
learn   their   attitude  toward  the   impact   of   arms  cuts  on   the
economy.     The   survey  turned   up   unexpectedly   optimistic
results.
One  passage  in  Humphrey's  speech  was  of  special  interest
to  those  who  believe  large-scale  economic  and  social planning
necessary  to  handle  the  problems  of  automation  and  disarma-
ment.    "A  whole  new  'systems  approach'  to  large-scale  prob-
lems,"  Humphrey  said,  has  been   developed   in  government-
sponsored  research.   This  involves  highly  expert  people  and
disciplines  working  together.    We  must  plan  to  translate  this
skill  and  this  method  to  large-scale  problems  of  the  Nation,
Better  Lung  Cancer  than  Psychosis?
"As  the  poet  has  said,  there  is  good  and bad in  every-
thing.    The  history  of  America   and  the  history  of  to-
bacco   run  parallel.     Tobacco   was   once   used   here   as
money.     And   it   has   been   smoked   here   for   over   350
years—with  satisfaction.    And  that,  in  itself,   is  a  com-
mentary.    Who  can  say  with  assurance  that  we   would
have  been  better   off  without  tobacco?    I  want  to  make
it  clear  that   I  am  not  a  tobacco  raiser,  though  in  our
State   much   tobacco   is   grown—and  Maryland   is  noted
for   its   high-quality   tobacco.
"I  am  not  a  scientist.    I  cannot  discuss  this  issue  on
a  scientific  basis.    However,   let   me  interject   one  idea
of  a  layman  on  the  subject  of  health.    Mental  health
is  a  subject  much  in  the  public   mind.    Psychiatry  has
come  into  its  own  because  of  the  stress  and  strain  of
the  present  day.     Most   doctors  will  tell  us,  I  believe,
that  this stress  and strain  accounts  for  much  of  the  dis-
ability   of   today.     Possibly   we   need   more   relaxing,
more  contemplation.     And  may  I  ask,   what  better   tool
for   relaxing,   for  contemplation,   than   a   good   smoke?
Let  us  be  sure   that  we  do  not  kill  one  evil   with   per-
haps   a  bigger    one."
—Beall  (R.  Md.)  to the Senate, Jan.  U.
in  regional  development,  city  planning,  transportation,  air  and
water  pollution,  and  more."
Humphrey   saw  jobs  enough   to   absorb  all   the   country's
manpower  if  we  were  to  learn  to  cope  with  "the  sheer  logis-
tical  problems  of  living"   in  urban  areas.    "The    possibilities
now  opening  up  to  release  some  money  from  the  requirements
of   defense  and   the   prospect   of   more   to   come,"   he   said,
"project  us  both  into  the  possibility  of  planning  ahead  and
make  that  planning  a  necessity."    The  Commission  would  be
empowered  to  initiate  disarmament  reconversion  planning  by
principal  defense  contractors  and  it  could  become  a  means  for
launching  the  kind  of  pragmatic  joint  action  by  public  and
private  enterprise  which  has  proven  so  fruitful   in  countries
like  France  and  Sweden.   Industry  and  labor  would  each  have
three  representatives  on  the  Commission.
James  Baldwin  Appeals  for  Justice  in  A  Kidnapping Case Where  No  One Was Kidnapped
"I  want  to  call  your  attention   to  a  case  which  is   crucial
for  the  civil  rights  movement   and  for  justice  in   America.
"This  is  the  so-called   kidnap  case  in  Monroe,   N.C.    This
is  a   'kidnap'  case   in  which   there  was  no  kidnapping;   in
which  a  white  couple  took  refuge  in  a  Negro  leader's  home
during   the  disturbances   following   a  police-encouraged  riot
against  Freedom  Riders  and  local  Negro  pickets.    After   a
brief  stay  the  white  couple  went  their  way  unharmed.    Yet
this   incident   has   been   made   the   basis   for   legal   charges
carrying   a  mandatory  sentence  of  20  years  and  maximum
of  life   imprisonment.
"Three  young   men—two  Negro  teenagers  from   Monroe
and  a  white  Freedom  Rider  from  New  York—were  arrested
several  days  later  and  held  for  64  days  in  the  medieval  con-
ditions  of  the  local  jail  before  this  committee   was  able'to
secure   their  release  on  heavy   bail.     A   fourth    defendant,
a  Negro  mother,   who  had  been   in  Monroe   helping  in   the
civil  rights  effort  there,  has  just  been  extradited   from  Ohio
after  a-two-year  legal  battle  to  Monroe,   N.C.
"Monroe's   Negro   leader,   Robert   F.   Williams,    informed
—James  Baldwin,  on  behalf   of  the  Committee   to
that  he  'would  soon  be  hanging'  from  a  tree  in  the  court-
house  square,  fled with  his  family  and  found  safety  in  exile.
After   his   flight,   he,   too,   was   included   in   the    indictment
which  serves  as  an  effective  bar  to  his  return  since  no  one
questions   that   the   racially   discriminatory   and  prejudiced
juries  of  the  area  would  unhesitatingly    and  regardless  of
evidence   give  him  a  life   sentence.
"For   almost   two  and  a  half   years  now  the  prosecution
has  refused   to  bring   the  three  young   men  defendants   to
trial.   This  is  not  only  a  denial  of  their  constitutional  right
of   speedy   trial  but  constitutes  a  refined  form   of   torture.
The  deliberate   prolongation  of  the  case  also  exhausted  the
financial  resources  of  this  defense  committee   and  served  to
dim   the  case  in  the   public   consciousness.
"Now,   however,   we  expect  the  case  to  come   to  trial  in
February.    It  is  vital  that  we  prevent  innocent   people  from
being   victimized  because  they   fought   for  racial   justice  in
America.    The  defendants   must   be  afforded  the  best  legal
defense  possible  and  the  facts  of  the  case  must  be  brought
to  the  conscience  of  the  American  people."
Aid   the  Monroe   Defendants,    168  W.  23rd  St.,   N.Y.C.,    11.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  27, 1964
Carey  Exposes  Plan  to  Let  U.  S.  Chamber  of  Commerce  Pick  Oil  Man's  Successor  on  AEC
Time Labor and the Consumer Had A Voice on the Atomic Energy Commission
The   day  labor   leaders   met   with   President   Johnson   for
lunch  at  the  White  House,  James  Carey  of  the  UERMWA
sent  him  a  letter  protesting  that  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Com-
merce  was  being  allowed  to  pick  the  successor  to  Robert  E.
Wilson  on  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission.    This  was con-
firmed   in   Nucleonics   Week.  (Jan.  9)   which   said   the  U.S.
Chamber  "presumably  at  Wilson's  suggestion,  has  submitted
a  recommended  list  of  candidates  to  Chairman  Seaborg"  and
that  "President  Johnson  will  be  counselled to  recruit  a  suc-
cessor  from   industry."
Leo  Goodman  A  Labor Candidate
Carey,  James Patton of  the  Farmers Union and  Dr.  Russell
H.  Morgan  of  Johns  Hopkins,  one  of  the  country's  most emi-
nent  radioologists,  are  supporting  a  labor  candidate  for   the
vacancy.    He  is  Leo  Goodman,  secretary  of  the  Atomic  En-
ergy   Technical  Committee  in  the   Industrial  Union  Depart-
ment  of  the  AFL-CIO.    In  the  past  10 years  the  indefatigable
Mr.   Goodman   has  made   an   international   reputation   as  an
authority  on  atomic  problems.
There  has  never  been  a  labor  representative  on  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission  in  all  its  history.    Though  a  number  of
independent-minded  scientists  and  public  officials  have  served
on  it,  the  AEC  has  tended  to  be  pretty  firmly  under  the con-
trol  of  the  military-industrial  complex.   Under  the  chairman-
ships  of  Strauss  and  McCone,  it  shared  military  hostility  to
any  cessation  of  testing  and  the  reluctant  industrial  point  of
view  toward  peaceful  development of  the  atom.    It  has  been
industry-minded   in   dealing  with   worker   health  and   safety
problems.   The  lack  of  candor  which  marks  its  record  on  fall-
out  also  marks  its  record  in  this   field.   Wilson  himself,  a
retired  chairman  of  Standard  Oil  of  Indiana,  was  several times
attacked  by Senator  Anderson  on  the  ground that he represent-
ed  an  industry  which  produced  a  competing fuel  and  wanted
A  Double  Danger  We  Should. Not  Ignore
That   underground  test   in   Nevada   January   16   was
the  100th  announced  underground  test  since  testing  re-
sumed  Sept.  1961  and  the  15th  since   the  nuclear  test
ban  treaty  was  signed  last  Fall.   It  was  a  large  one—
somewhere  between  20  and  200  kilotons.    No   venting
was  reported  by  the  AEC  next   day,  but   underground
tests  often  do  vent,  discharging  radioactivity  into  the
atmosphere.     This   has   a   double   significance.     E.   A.
Martell   claims   in   the   Jan.   10  issue   of   Science   that
venting  from   underground  tests  is  a  major  source  of
radioactive  iodine.    Venting  is  also  important  because
Article   I  of   the  nuclear  test   ban  treaty   pledges   the
signers   not   to   test   underground   if   such   explosion
spreads   radioactive  debris  outside   its   territory.    The
heavy   volume  of   U.S.   underground  testing   may   pro-
voke  the  Soviet  military  to  press  for  resumption;  radio-
active  debris  from  such  tests  might  provide  the  excuse.
Are  these  tests  really    necessary?
to  block  atomic  power  for  civilian  uses.
Carey's  letter  seems  to  have  blocked  the  plan  swiftly   and
quietly  to provide  a  like-minded  successor  from  industry.    Mr.
Goodman  was  a  labor  candidate  for  the  AEC  in  1962  when
there  were  two  vacancies.    He  would  give a  voice  not  just tp
labor  but  to  the  consumer.    Most  important  of  all  he  would
provide  a  creative  influence  in  dealing  with  the  problem  of
converting  atomic  industry  to  peaceful  uses  as  military  stock-
piles  grow  beyond  any  possible  need  and  more  progress  is
made  toward  disarmament.   Carey  spoke  with  vision  of  thjs
problem  in  his  testimony  on  the   test  ban  treaty  before   the
Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee last  Fall.    He  listed  a
series   of   atomic   projects   for   underdeveloped  areas   which
would   open   up   the   enormous  potential  of   the   atom  and
"wash  away  the  terrible  image  of  the  mushroom cloud."    A
labor  man  on  the  AEC  could  help  make  these  ideas a  reality.
Somebody  Ought  to  See  Whether That Little  Man in  the  Soviet  Bank  Is  Still  There
"Constructive  Step  in  the  Cold  War.    More  Public   Dis-
closures  By  the  CIA  Held  Valuable  Service  to  the  Nation."
—David  Lawrence's  column  Washington  Star;  Jan.  16.
"Several  authorities  on  the  Soviet  economy  are  question-
ing  a  recent  Central  Intelligence  Agency  estimate  that  Rus-
sia's  gold  holdings  have  fallen  to  less  than  $2  billion.  .  .  .
Leon  Herman,  the  Library  of  Congress  senior  specialist  on
Soviet  affairs,  says  the  CIA's  estimate  was  speculative  and
that  'common  sense  points  in  the  other  direction.'
"Mr.  Herman  and  other  economists   who  did  not  wish  to
be  named  said  that  if  Russia  were  facing  a  gold  squeeze  it
most  likely  would  have  sought  credits  for  its  multi-million
dollar  wheat  imports  instead  of  paying  in  cash. ...  A re-
cent  memorandum on  Soviet  gold  prepared  within  the  Gov-
ernment   has   become   available.     This   memo   puts    Soviet
annual   production  at   between   $182  and   $206.5  million  a
year,  higher  than  the  CIA's   estimate."
—Washington  Star,  same   day,   same   page.
"The   new  estimates   on  Soviet   gold   production  and  re-
serves,  published  in  Washington  this  week  by  the  CIA  have
caused    considerable    surprise   among   experts   in    London.
They    [the   CIA  estimates]   place   Soviet    gold   output   at
$150m   a   year,   which   would   correspond   to   4,300,000    oz.,
compared  with  the  estimates  of  the  U.S.   Bureau   of  Mines
—an   official   Government  Bureau   of   the  highest   technical
qualifications—of    12,200,000   oz.   for   1962   and    11,800,000
oz.  for  1961.  .  .  .
"With   production   estimates    coming   up   against    insur-
mountable  difficulties,  any  guesses  on  the  prevailing   Soviet
gold  reserves  appear  to  experts   completely   useless  unless
their  source  could  claim  the  confidence  of  the  leaders  of  the
Government  or  at  least  of  the  President  of  the  Soviet  State
Bank.*    The  question  which  the  publication  of  these  new
estimates  has  raised  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic,  indeed,   is
not  so  much  the  accuracy,  or  otherwise,  of  the  figures  but
the  CIA's  purpose  in  publishing  them  at  all.    It  might  have
served   the   agency's   reputation   better   if   it   had  kept   its
estimates  to  itself.
"Meanwhile  the   Soviet  authorities  do  not  appear   to  be
particularly  worried  about  the  reported  'smallness'  of  their
gold  reserve.    They,  at  any  rate,  continue  to  pay  cash  for
their   wheat  purchases  right   up  to  the  present  time,  even
where  credit  facilities  are  available."
—Financial  ("City")  Editor  of  the  London  Times, Jan.  10.
* The  CIA  in  rebuttal  seems  now  to  be  claiming  that  its
estimates  are  based  in  part  on  a  new  defector.    Some   U.S.
newsman   in   Moscow   ought   to  drop  by  and   see  whether
that  little  man  behind  the  cash  register  in  the  Soviet  State
Bank  (and  the  cash  register)  are  still  there.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  27,1964
Voluntary  Methods  Fail  to  End  Skilled  Union  Labor's  Traditional  Hostility  to  The  Negro
Negro  Squeezed  Between  Automation  and  Lily-White  Apprenticeships
While  automation  dries  up  unskilled  and  semi-skilled  jobs
for  Negroes,   pushing  unemployment  among  them  to  depres-
sion  proportions,  it  does  create new opportunities  at  the  skilled
levels,  where  openings  are  plentiful.    But  here  Negroes  are
denied   "the  opportunity  for  training."     In   effect,   therefore,
the  Maryland  Advisory  Committee  reports  to  the  U.S.  Com-
mission  on  Civil  Rights,  "Negroes  are  squeezed  out  at  both
ends  of  the  job  spectrum."    This  Maryland  report  was  one of
nine   "Reports   on   Apprenticeship"   from   advisory  units   in
eight  States  and  the  District  of  Columbia just  released  by  the
Commission.
Poorly  printed  by  offset  from  hard-to-read  typewriter  copy
(for  lack  of  funds)  this  volume  deserves  more  attention  than
it  is  likely  to  get.    It  shows  that  the  apprenticeship  system,
as  operated  by  U.S.  trade  unions,  remains  a  basic  obstacle  to
real   equality   of   opportunity.    The   apprenticeship   program
has  a  medieval  guild  flavor;  its  main  aim  is  to  maintain scar-
city  of  skilled  help  and  it  tends  to  create an  almost  hereditary
privileged  class  in  the  ranks  of   labor.
North  Differs  Little  From  South
The   Negro   is  the. main   victim.    In   Washington,    D.C.
where  55  percent   of  the  population   is  non-white,   only   5.5
percent  of  the  apprentices  in  the  building  trades  are  Negroes.
The  North's   record   is  not   substantially  different   from   the
South's  in  this  respect.     In  Connecticut  Negroes  constituted
only  seven-tenths  of  one  percent  of  the  apprentices.    In  New
Jersey,  they  were  less  than  half  of  one  percent—15  Negroes
out  of  3,980  apprentices.    The  Federal  Bureau  of  Apprentice-
ship  and  Training  after  25  years  of  existence  is  only  now  and
reluctantly  being  pushed  into  action  in  this   field.   Even  so,
of   15  Maryland  programs  approved  by  the   Bureau,   10  had
no  Negroes  at  all  and  five  had  three  or  fewer  Negroes  en-
rolled.    Of  the  50  crafts  and  trades  in  Tennessee's   appren-
ticeship  programs,   only  eight  included  Negro   apprentices—
and  four  of  these  were  connected  with  all-Negro  unions.    In
I960,  Negroes  were  22  percent  of  New  York  City's  popula-
tion  but  only  2  percent  of  the  apprentices  were  Negroes.
After  A  Quarter  of  A  Century
'The  [Commission on  Civil  Rights]  hearings  of  1961
focused   public  attention  on  the   [Federal]   Bureau  of
Apprenticeship  and  Training  for  the  first  time  in   its
quarter   century   of   operation.    Negro  exclusion  from
the  programs was  debated  vigorously.  .  .  .  Questioning
by  the  subcommittee  chairman  established that  the  Bu-
reau  itself  did  not  employ  Negroes  as  field  representa-
tives  or  in  positions above GS-5, and  that  the  Director
of  the  District  of   Columbia  Apprenticeship  Council,  a
Bureau  staff   person,  followed  the  practice  of  marking
the   application   forms   of   Negroes   for   apprenticeship
with  a  '2  or  N'  as  an  identification  of  the  applicant's
race.    The  racial  designations  were  ordered  stopped  by
the   Secretary  of   Labor  before  the   hearings  had  ad-
journed,  but  it  was  not  until  March  4,  1963,  that  the
Dept.  of   Labor  could  announce  the  hiring  of   the  Bu-
reau's  first  Negro  field  representative."
—Report  on  Apprenticeship,   U.S.  Civil  Rights  Com-
mission,  January   20.    A   footnote   indicates   that   the
Bureau   was   itself     found    guilty   by   the   President's
Committee  on  Equal  Employment  Opportunity  of  anti-
Semitic  attitudes   toward  a  militant   State   supervisor.
Some  figures  supplied   by  the  D.  of  C.  committee  are  of
special   importance.    The   proportion   of  Negro   apprentices
where apprenticeship  committees were run  jointly by labor  and
management  showed  8.9  percent  Negro.   Where  the  training
was  by managment alone,  the  proportion  of  Negroes  was  29.2
percent.    The  figures  speak  eloquently  of  the  racism  in  the
working   class  itself.    The   Commission's   staff   editors   note
with  quiet  despair,  "As  long  as  the  Federal  government  de-
pends  on  such  voluntary  relationships  with  management  and
the  unions, perhaps  little  real  progress  can be  expected."     The
New   York  advisory  unit  recommends  as  a  final  resort   that
Congress   "enact   legislation   declaring  that   admission   to  ap-
prenticeship  in  the  construction  trades  is  a  matter   affecting
interstate  commerce"  and  that  such  admission  be  regulated  by
an  agency  analogous  to  the  Civil  Service  Commission. Agi-
tation  for  law  of  this  type  would  at  least  help  to  put  more
heat  on  our  lagging  trade  union  movement.
Free  Copies  of  Our   1963   Index  Still  Available   If   You  Send  Stamped,  Addressed   Envelopes
I. F.  Stone's Weekly
          56
18  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Pleas*  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .............................................................................-....—
Street   ............................................,..........................—........—
y  ............   .........................     .............     ..................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  .....................„................................................—..
Street   ........._.................._...................................................
City  ...........—.........................Zone......._..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tea  D    No  D
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebroika  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.
Stone's   Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid   at   Washington,   D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  in  August  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,
Vashington,  P.   C.    An  independent   weekly   published  and   edited  by  I.   F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.;   $6 in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED