I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964feb03.pdf

============================================================

That  Penny-Ante  "Ail-Out  Assault  on  Poverty",  P.  2
Is  The  CIA  Trying;  to  Work  Up  A  White  Man's  Burden War  For  Us  In  East  Africa?   See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  5FEBRUARY  3,  1964
<oi       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.15  CENTS
LBJ's  One  Big  Happy  Family
President  Johnson's  frenetic  pace  may  be  producing  an  epi-
demic  of  ulcers  in  the  executive  branch,  where  men  work  in
terror  of  sudden  midnight  conference  calls  from  the  White
House,   but   it  has   spread   an  extraordinary  euphoria   in   the
body  politic.    Nobody  has  ever  chucked  so many diverse  inter-
ests  under  the  chin  in  so  short  and  swift  a  time,  nobody  has
uttered  just  the  right  soothing  phrase  to  so many contradictory
anxieties.    He  may, be  a  little  vague  on  his  current  events,  he
may  have  the  MLF  confused  (see  adjoining  box)—like  many
of  us—with  a  cigarette  slogan,  his  prose  style  at  press  confer-
ence  may  sometimes  make  Eisenhower's  seem  like   Flaubert's,
but  he's putting on  a performance that  reflects  a kind of  genius.
The  most  flabbergasting  evidence,  of  course,  is  the  latest  Louis
Harris  poll  which  shows  that  Johnson  has  the  overwhelming
confidence  of  both 'Southern  whites  (two-thirds  'for  him)   and
Negroes  (three-fourths  for  him).     If  only  Abraham  Lincoln
had  done  as  well.
The  Southern  Oligarchs  Behind  LBJ
The  Southern  oligarchs  are swinging  into  line  behind  John-
son.      The  sitdown  strike  on  Capitol   Hill  seems  to  be  over.
Civil  rights  is  coming  out  of  Rules  in  the  House.    Byrd  has
speeded  up  the  tax  bill.    Russell  of  Georgia,  while   deploring
Johnson's  stand  for  civil  rights,  makes  a  speech  declaring,  "In
my  opinion  Johnson  has  the  potential  to  become  one  of  the
country's  great  Presidents."    Smathers  of  Florida  in  a  speech
at  Birmingham  struck  the  note  on  which  the  party  will  cam-
paign  in  the   South  despite  civil rights;  he  appealed  to  regional
pride.    "We  in  the  South,"  he  said,  "can  take  pride  and  satis-
faction  in  the  leader  of  our  party  in  1964—the first man  of  the
South  to  become  President  of  the  United  States  in  100  years—
a  great  American—Lyndon  B.  Johnson."    The  years  Johnson
•spent  and  the  skills he  acquired  wooing  Rayburn  in  the  House
and  Russell  in  the  Senate  are  paying  off  for  Johnson.     The
changing  attitude  of  the  Southern  leadership  reflects  a  combi-
nation   of   flattery,   persuasion,   brass-tacks   politics   and   deals
already  made.    The  fear  that  Goldwater  may break  up  the  one
party  system  in  the  South,  depriving  the  area  of  its  seniority
leverage   in   Congress,   plays  a  major   role.     Then   again,   a
Southern  President  may,  as many  of  us  hope,  make  civil  rights
more  palatable  to  the  South.
What  Johnson  has  managed  to  do  with  Southern  oligarchs
and  Negro  leaders,  he  has  also  done  with  big  business   and
labor,  and  with  economizers   and  spenders.    The  spectacle  is
often   ludicrous;   the  new  President   runs   around   the  White
House turning  off lights  and  complains  to  visitors  at  receptions
about  the  light  bills.    He  pleases  Russell  and  Byrd  by  pinch-
ing  pennies  everywhere   while  proclaiming   "an  all-out  assault
on  poverty"   (see  p.  2)   which   is  penny-ante   stuff   but   raises
hopes  that  must  burst  the  budgetary  seams.    Hpw  long  John-
2  *
Did  No  One  Brief  LBJ  on  MLF?
Q.  Mr. President  .  .  .  there  seems  to  be a  wide diver-
gence  of  views  on  the  question  of  the  multilateral  force.
Mr.  JOHNSON:  On  the  question  of  what?
Q.  On  the  multilateral  force.     [No  reply.]
Q.  The  Soviet   Union  says  that  this  is  in  contradic-
tion   to   the   pledge   for   non-dissemination   of   nuclear
weapons.    Thanks  to  your  efforts   and  thanks   to   the
efforts  of  Mr.  Khrushchev  the  atmosphere  seems  to  be
pretty  good.    Do  you  think  there  can  be  a  solution  or
compromise  on  this  particular  point?
Mr.  JOHNSON: We  are  hoping,  praying  and  work-
ing  very  hard  to  find  some  solution  to  all  of  our  differ-
ences.    Our  viewpoint  is  that  we  are  consistent  in  our
position.    Our  general  position  is  that  we  want  to  do
anything  that  responsible   men  of  conviction  and   good
will  can  do  to  preserve  peace.    Mr. Foster  [head  of  the
US  arms  control  agency]   spent   some  hours  with  me
before  he  left  [for  Geneva].    We  thought  we  put  forth
an   affirmative   program  and  we   welcome  anyone   who
wants  to  join  us.
—President  Johnson's press  conference  Jan.  &5.
"Foster   told   West   German  observer   Lothar   Lahn
Wednesday  that  the  U.S.  will  prevent  negotiations   on
the  multi-national force.    A  U.S.  delegates'   spokesman
reiterated  yesterday  that  the  U.S.  will  not  discuss  the
force  in  any  way  'other  than  in  terms  of  it  being  estab-
lished  American  policy.'    This  could  mean  a   deadlock
on  three  of  President  Johnson's  five  points  [in  his  mes-
sage   to   Geneva]:   The   non-dissemination   of   nuclear
weapons,  a  verified  freeze  of  strategic   nuclear   delivery
systems  and  a  controlled  halt  in  the  production  of  fis-
sionable   materials."
—Associated  Press  ticker  from  Geneva,  Jan.  23.
"'Would   agreement   be   possible   if   West   Germany
were  kept   out  of   the   multilateral  force?'  one   news-
man  asked  Tsarapkin.    'Without  West   Germany   there
would  be  no  multilateral force,'  he  replied.
—Associated  Press  ticker  from  Geneva,  Jan.  24.   Ex-
cept  for  the  ticker  we  saw  these  items  only  in  the  pro-
disarmament  York,  Pa.,  Gazette  &  Daily,  Jan.   24  and
25.   Why  did  no  other  AP  papers  use  them?
son  can  keep  this  up  without  defaulting   too  openly  and  too
soon  on  too  many  conflicting  promissory  notes  remains  to  be
seen.    He  is  a  tight-rope  performer,  and  will  be  satisfied  if  he
gets  past  November  breathless  but  still  in  one  piece.
One  area  of  Johnsonian  euphoria  which  does  not  seem  to  be
as  neatly   balanced   as  the  rest  of  his  performance  is  in   the
field  of  peace  and  arms  control.    Those  in  the   bureaucracy
concerned  with   bringing  the  arms  race  under  some  control
are  full  of  new  hope;  the  military  are  unhappy.   Under  Ken-
nedy,   the  wraps   were   on;  he  had  his  test  ban  treaty  and
wanted   to  take  no  more  political  risks  for  peace  until   after
November.   A  less  energetic and a less.yain man than  Johnson
(Continued   on Page  Four)
1   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  3,1964
Comparing  the  Program   For  the  Poor  With  The  Profit  Boosting  Plan  for  The  Rich
How  to  See That  "Ail-Out  War  on
There  are  several   ways  of  looking  at  President  Johnson's
"all-out  attack  on  the  problem  of  poverty."    The  U.S.,  in  his
new  budget,  will  spend  somewhat  more  than  $1  billion  a  week
on  the  defense  program.    The  President  is  asking  something
over  $1  billion  dollars  in  new  obligational  authority   for  his
"all-out"  war  on  poverty.    If  he  spent  it  all  in  one  year,  he
would  be  spending  as  much   in  one  year  to  fight  poverty  as
we  will  be  spending  in  one  week  on  armies  and  armaments.
Actually   this   $1   billion   figure   for   the   "all-out   war"   on
poverty  is  for   obligational   authority,  not  expenditures.     The
budget  itself  shows  only  $200  million  in  expenditures  for  the
"attack  on  poverty" during  the  next  fiscal  year.   We  will  spend
six  times  that  amount  next  fiscal  year  on  "military  assistance,"
most  of  it  to  the  doddering   dictatorships   we  support  in  Asia.
How  Higher  Figures  Are  Obtained
Higher  figures  are obtained  if  one  adds  to  this  $200  million
or  $250  million   (the  latter  figure  appears  in  the  special  allow-
ance   section   of   the  budget)   for   the   "attack   on   poverty",
another   $100    million  for   Appalachia   and   something  under
$100   million  for  educational   aid  to  "disadvantaged  children."
This  adds  up  to  $400  to  $450  million   but  is  referred   to  as
$500  million   for  the  attack  on  poverty.    If  one  adds  to  this
several   miscellaneous   existing   programs  including   the  Peace
Corps  and  the  Manpower  Training   Act,  you  get  the  round
figure  of   $1  billion   in  actual  expenditures  next  year   for   all
kinds   of  welfare   and   anti-poverty   measures,  the  figure  used
in   the  President's  economic   report.
Another  crude  but  not  too  unfair  way  to  measure  the   mag-
nitude  of  the  "all-out"  war  on  poverty  is  provided  by  some
figures  in  this  economic   report.     It  says  there  are  35  million
men,   women  and   children   in  our  country  whose  annual  in-
come  was  only  $590  as  against  $1,900  per  capita  for  the  na-
Poverty"  In  Its  Real  Dimensions
Expanding   Economy   Not  Enough
"What   is  crucially   different  about   our  high  income
economy  is  the  fact  that  high  rates  of  economic  growth
do  not  do  away  with  poverty.    Similarly  it  is  now  clear
that    significant    rates   of    economic    growth    can   be
achieved  without  proportionate  increase  in  the  employ-
ment  of  human beings.  We  also  know  that  even   greater
than  historical  rates  of  expansion  in  employment   does
not  necessarily   mean  decreases  in  poverty.  .  .  .   Even
were  we  to  grant  that  achieving full  employment  means
doing   away  with  poverty,   achieving  full  employment
calls  for  a  growth  rate  of   about   10  percent   per   year
sustained  at  least  until  1975.  .  .  .  Policies   aimed  at  the
economic  improvement  of  the  total  society  and  believed
therefore   to  help  the  poor  are  of  very  limited  use  in
the  fight  against   poverty."
—Dr.  Oscar  Ornati,  Prof,   of  Economics  at  the  New
School   for   Social  Research,  at   the   Georgetown   Univ.
"Poverty  in  Plenty"  Conference,   Wash.,  D.C. Jan.  23.
tion  as  a  whole.    These  35  million  are  the  poor.    They  need
a  wide  variety  of  social  services  to  put  them  on  their  feet.    If
that  billion  dollars  were  evenly  distributed  in  one  year  among
the  35  million,   it  would   add  a'little  less  than   $30  or   about
60  cents  more  a  week  to  their  income.    If  you  take  the  figure
of  $250  million  for   the  new  expenditures  in  the  general  as-
sault  on  poverty,   this  adds  up  to  15  cents  a  week.
It  is  interesting  to  compare  this  with  the  handout  to  busi-
ness.    The  Economic  Report  says  corporate  profits  have  risen
44   percent   in   the   last   three   years,   from   a   rate   of   $381/2
billion  in  early  '61  to  $55  billion  at  the  end  of  1963   without
counting   $2.%   billion   in  liberalized   depreciation.      To   this,
thanks  to  the  tax  cut,  and  economic   stimulation,  the  Adminis-
tration  hopes  to  add  $5  to  $7  a  year  more.    This  closely  fol-
lows  Gospel—to  him  who  hath  shall  be  given.
Gunnar  Myrdal  Sees  The  Negro  "Rebellion"  As  Ending  The  Usual  Apathy  of  U.S.   Poor
"Poverty  breeds  poverty  in  a  vicious  circle.    The  whole
milieu  becomes  degrading.    This  under-class  has  been,  and
is   largely   still,   what   I  have  been   accustomed  to  call   the
world's  least  revolutionary  proletariat.    They  don't   organ-
ize  themselves  to  press  for  their  interests.    The  trade  union
movement  comprises  only  about  one-fourth of  the  workers,
mostly   its   upper   strata   who,  in   the   main,   belong   to   the
prosperous   majority.    To   a  relatively  higher   extent   than
normally  they  do  not  register   and  vote  at  elections—even
apart  from  the  large  masses   of  Negroes  in  the  South  who
are  prevented from  doing  so.   This  fact  is  not  unconnected
with  the  other  fact  that  in  almost  all  respects—minimum
wages,  social  security,  agriculture,  housing,  etc.—American
economic  and  social   policies   show   a  perverse   tendency   to
favor  those  above  the  most  needy   groups.
"We  have  seen  one  important  break  in  this  empirical  rule
of  the  political apathy  of  the  poor  in  America—the   rebel-
lion  of   the   Negroes  in  Southern   and  Northern  cities.     It
will  not  be enough  to  give  the  Negroes  legal  rights  equal  to
the  white  majority  and  to  enforce  these  rights.    What  will
be  needed  arc  social  sanctions to  defend  the  Negroes'  equal
opportunities  to  employment against  the  resistance  of  trade
unions   more  than  employers.     Even   when   all  this  is   ac-
complished,  the  Negro  masses  will  continue to  suffer  all  the
lasting  effects  of  the  disabilities  of  their  poverty, their  slum
existence  and  their  previous  exclusion   from  easy  access  to
education  and  training  for  good   jobs.
"Neverthless  I  am  convinced  that  the  demand  for  a  dis-
crimination  in  reverse  to  the  advantage   of  the  Negroes  is
misdirected.     Nothing   would  with   more   certainty   create
hatred   for  Negroes  among  other   poor   groups   in  America
who  have  anyhow  always   mostly   been  their   bitterest   ene-
mies  as  they  have  been  the  only  ones  who  have  felt  them
as   competitors.    Negro   housing   cannot  very   well   be  im-
proved,  except   as  part  of   a  plan  to  improve  the  housing
situation  for  poor  peoples  in  general.    The  same  is  true  of
education.     What   America  needs   is   a   Marshall   Plan   to
eradicate  poverty.    A  rapid  and  steady   economic   growth  is
impossible  without  the  productive  power  of  the   poor."
"The  present   unemployment  cannot   be  cured  merely  by
expansion.    The  additional  means  to  the  eradication  of  pov-
erty   is  direct  redistribution of   incomes.    The  reforms   in-
clude   a  redirection  of  agricultural  policy  to  aid  the  petty
farmers,  tenants  and  agricultural  workers;  a  change  of  the
taxation  system  so  that  it  is  not  as  now  regressive  in  the
lower   income  brackets;  redirection  of   the   so-called   urban
renewal  to  provide  also  new  housing   for  the  poor;   better
health  facilities;  the  broadening  of  the  social  security   sys-
tem  for  the  unemployed, the  families  with  many  children,
particularly  those  without  a  father,  and  the  aged.     In  all
these  fields  America  is  'still  lagging   far  behind'  the   most
advanced  among  the  other  rich  countries."
—Gunnar   Myrdal    (abridged)     at   the  Georgetown   Univ.
Conference   on Poverty  in  Plenty,  Washington,  D. C. Jan.  23.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  3,1964
French   Recognition   Foreshadows   Peking   In  UN   and  Rightist  Drive   Here   to   Withdraw
Is the Cl A Trying to Whoop Up A White Man's Burden War for Us In  Africa?
We   suggest   that   the  Senate   Foreign   Relations  Committee
look  into  a  curious bit  of  journalism.   On  Friday,  Jan.  24,  the
Washington   Evening   Star   ran   an   8-column   scare   headline,
"U.S.   Alerted  On  Coups  in  Africa",   over  a  story   datelined,
mysteriously,   Nairobi,   Kenya,  which   gave   it  as   the    "sober
estimate  of   senior  diplomatic   officials"   there   that   the   U.S.
might  have  to  intervene with  military  force  to  prevent  a  Com-
munist  take-over  of  East  Africa.    The  story  carried  no  byline;
the  Star  has  no  regular  correspondent   in  Nairobi.    The  style
was  early  Wm.  Randolph  Hearst;  such  a  takeover  would  be
"of   infinitely  greater   importance  than   the  Communist  attack
on  South  Korea  .  .  . more  disastrous to  the  West  than  a  Com-
munist  attack  on  West  Berlin";   it  followed   the  "Castroist"
takeover  in  Zanzibar  and  "a  preconceived  pattern"  set  "by  the
Communist   Chinese."
Another  of  Those  Leaks?
That  story  seems  to  have  provoked   official   protest.    Next
day   the  Star   ran   another   front   pager,   this   time  headlined,
"U.S.   Discounts  Africa   Peril,   Sees  No   Red  Plot   Evidence."
Though  the  story  the  day  before  claimed  to  be  based  on   "the
sober  estimate  of  senior  diplomatic  officials"   which  had   been
"transmitted   to  Washington",  now  we  were   informed   that
"both  State  and  Defense  Department   sources  emphasized  that
on  the  basis  of   reports   reaching  Washington  they  have   not
found   any  evidence  of  a  Communist   plot   to  overthrow   the
young   regimes   there."    What,   then,   was  the   source   of   the
earlier  story?    Was   it  another  of  those  intelligence  leaks  for
which  two  Star  staff  members  have  become  notorious  ?    Is  the
CIA  trying  to  whoop  up  a  "white  man's  burden"  war  for  us
in  Africa?
Though   you'd   never   guess  it  from   the  State   Department,
de  Gaulle  is  hardly  a  pioneer  in  recognizing  Peking.     France
is  the  49th  country  and  the  sixth  U.S.   ally  to  open   relations
with   Communist   China.*     Former   Premier    Edgar    Faure,
whose  mission  to  Peking  paved  the  way  foe  de  Gaulle's  action,
spoke  of  the  move  with  eloquent   idealism  on  a  French   tele-
cast  to  Europe  (Le  Monde,  Jan.  19-20).    He  said  none  of  the
The  Other  War  in  Vietnam
"The  U.S.  Army  and  the  U.S.  Air  Force  are  secretly
fighting   one   of   the   most   bitter  wars   in   Washington
history.  .  .  .  The Army wants  to  build a  huge  air  force
of  its  own and the Air  Force  is  battling  to  stop  it.    ...
Instead  of  old-fashioned  slow-paced  artillery,  the  Army
intends  to  try aerial firepower .  .  .  integrated with  fast-
moving  infantry. .  .  .  Some  of  these  new  Army theories
are   being   tested   in   combat   against   the   Communist
guerrillas  in  South  Vietnam.  .  .  .  Air  Force  experts  .  .  .
maintained  that  the  Army  is   in  no  hurry  to  win  the
war  in  South  Vietnam.    'Out  in  Saigon,  our  Army   offi-
cers   secretly   refer   to   South  Vietnam  as   'the  labora-
tory',  one  Air  Force   officer  told  me.  .  .  .  The  Army  is
answering  in  kind.    Not  long   ago  Lt.  Col.  John  Paul
Vann,  Ret.,  a  former  U.S.  Army  adviser  charged  in  a
public   interview  that   Air   Force   fighter   planes   have
killed   more  innocent  civilians  than  enemy   guerrillas."
—This  Week  magazine, Jan.  5.
three  great  questions  "on  which  all  our  lives  depend",  peace-
ful   co-existence,  disarmament  and  the  progress  of  the  under-
developed    countries,   could   be   solved    without   the   country
which  represents  "nearly   one-fourth  of  humanity.  .  .  .  The
problem  of  peaceful  co-existence  with  Russia,"  M.  Faure  said,
"is  on  its way to  solution.    It  is necessary  that  we  apply  peace-
ful   co-existence   to  China,  or  rather  that  we  bring  about   the
entrance   of   China   into  the   system  of   peaceful    co-existence,
and  persuade her  to  choose  that  as  her  policy."    French  recog-
nition  brings  Peking's  admission  to  the  United  Nations  closer,
and  U.S.   public  opinion   should   be  prepared   for  that,  lest  it
lead  to  a  campaign   here  for  our  withdrawal  from  the  UN.
* Peking   has   been   recognized   by   5   U.S.   allies—Britain,
Holland,  Denmark,  Norway  and  Pakistan;   4  European  neu-
trals—Finland,  Sweden,  Switzerland and  Yugoslavia; 8  Asian
countries—Afghanistan,    Burma,   Cambodia,   Ceylon,   India,
Indonesia,   Laos   and   Nepal;   5   Middle   Eastern   countries—
Iraq,  Israel,   Egypt,   Syria  and  Yemen;  14  African  countries
—Algeria,   Morocco,  Tunis,   Barundi,  Ghana,  Guinea,  Kenya,
Mali,   Uganda,    Sudan,   Somalia,   Senegal,   Tanganyika   and
Zanzibar;  11  Soviet  States  and  one  Latin  American country
—Cuba.    Mexico  may  be  next.
New   Zanzibar  Revolutionary  Regime  Denies Aid  Either  From  Cuba  or  From Mars
Nairobi,  Kenya, Jan.  21—Two  leaders  of  Zanzibar's revo-
lutionary  government  today  denied  that  Cuba  or  any  other
foreign  power  was  involved in  the  revolution  which  toppled
this  island's  previous government  last  week.
Foreign   Minister   Abdul    Uahman   Mohamad  Babu   and
Vice  President   Abdullah  Kassim  Honga,  who  arrived  here
yesterday  for  talks  with  the  Kenya  Cabinet  issued  a  state-
ment  before  leaving  today  to  return  home.    "We  want  to
state  categorically  the  revolution   in  Zanzibar  is   purely  a
Zanzibar   affair,"   the   statement   said.     "There   was   not   a
single  man  either  from  Cuba  or  from  Mars.    The  motives
behind  the  revolution  are  simply  the  motives  of  oppressed
people  rising  against   the  oppressor   and  are  entirely  dis-
connected  with  any  international movement."
—Reuters  press service, Jan.  21.
Q.  Is  there  any  comment,-or  have  you  any  information
about  the  training  of  African  students   in  Cuba  for  guer-
rilla  activities?
A.  African  students  have  for   some   time  been   receiving
scholarships  for  various  kinds  of  training  from  the  USSR,
various   satellite   countries   and  from   nations   in   the   free
world.    Of  African  students   going   abroad  for   training  a
relatively    small    number,including    some    from    Zanzibar
have   been   or   are   in   Cuba.    We   have   no   indication  that
there  is  any  extensive  number  of  students  from  other  parts
of  Africa  going   to  Cuba  for  training.    While  some  Zanzi-
bar!,   who  have   been   in   Cuba,  participated  in   the   recent
revolt,  it  would  be  an  exaggeration   to  say  that  the   recent
coup  in  Zanzibar  resulted  primarily  from  the   efforts   of   a
Cuban  trained  element.    The  Afro-Shizari  party—
Q.  How  do  you  spell   that?
A.  Afro-Shizari party  which  is  now  in  power  in  Zanzibar
and  which  polled  54  percent  of  the  vote  in  the  last  election
has  long  resented   the  dominance  of  a  minority  group  rep-
resented   by   the   Zanzibar   Nationalist   Party.     This,   with
some  other   factors,   appears  to  be  the  cause   of  the  revolt
in  Zanzibar.
—State  Department  briefing,  Jan.  23.
2  I
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.'Stone's  Weekly,  February  3, 1964
Suppose  Moscow  Proposed  An  MLF With  Ulbricht's  Finger  on  The  Trigger
(Continued   from  Page  One)
might  have  been  content  to  rest  on  Kennedy's   record.    But
in  this  field,  as  in  others,  he  wants  results.    Just  as  he  wants
a  tax  bill  and  a  civil  rights  bill,  no  matter  much  what  is  in
them,  so  he  wants  some  disarmament  or  arms  control   agree-
ment  of  some  kind,  no  matter  what,  as  some  step  forward  to
which  he  can  point  in  the  campaign.    Another  factor,  not  to
be  overlooked,  is that  the  economy-minded Southern  conserva-
tives  are  worried  about  mounting  arms  costs.     So  the  arms
control  and  disarmament agency,  which  had  been  in  the  dol-
drums,   was   ordered   to   produce   something   for   the   White
House  soon  after  Johnson  took  over.    The  Khrushchev  appeal
for   no   forcible   changes   in  boundaries  was   answered   more
positively  than   the  dominant  elements   in  State   Department
wanted  it  to  be;  the  Johnson  reply,  after  being  worked  on  by
so  many  hands,  was  a  sloppy, jumble,  at  one  point  incompre-
hensible,  but  not  entirely negative.
Arms  Controllers  Encouraged
The  Johnson   5-point  message  to  the  Geneva  arms  confer-
ence  is  regarded  by those  who  worked  on  it  inside  the bureau-
cracy  as  a  major  break-through.    They  derive  their  enthusiasm
from  point  2  where  Johnson   asked  Soviet  agreement   "to  ex-
plore   a  verified   freeze  of   the  number  and   characteristics  of
strategic  nuclear  offensive   and  defensive  vehicles."     This  re-
flects  an  alliance between  the  arms  controllers  and   McNamara
against  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staffs;  it  was  worked  up  without
being  put  through  the  mill  of  the  famous  Committee  of  Prin-
cipals  which  includes  all  agencies  concerned  and  is guaranteed
by  its nature to  grind  out  nothing at  all.   The  word  "explore",
which  reduced  this  to  study  rather  than  agreement,   is  said  to
have  been   inserted  to  soften   the  blow   for   a  reluctant  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff.     The  word  "defensive"  is  a  key  word,  for  a
freeze   would   prevent   a  sharp   escalation   in   the   arms   race
through  the  production  and  placement  of  billion  dollar  anti-
missile  systems  buttressed  by  astronomically expensive  shelters
against  blast  as  well  as  fallout.    It  would  ask  the  Russians to
accept  inferiority, as  in  the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty,  in  return
for   some  brake  on  the  arms  race.    The  hitch  is  that,  unlike
the  treaty,  it  also  requires  "verification."   What  looks  like  a
Salute  to  A  Prodigal  Son
,^A  forgotten   story,   which   indicates   the   healthy   im-
provement   in   atmosphere   since   McCarthy's   day,   de-
serves  attention   in  the  unanimous   decision  of  the   Fed-
eral   Communications    Commission   granting    Pacifica's
application  for  license  renewals  in  Berkeley,  New   York
and  Los  Angeles.   This  was  a  defeat  for  Senator  Dodd
and  the  Internal   Security  Committee.    They  have   done
their   best  to  smear  this  independent  network.    It  was
also   a   fundamental   decision   in   favor   of   freedom   on
radio  and  TV,  declaring  that  to  give  too  much   weight
to    complaints    against     "provocative    programming"
would  allow  "only  the  bland,  the  inoffensive"  on  the  air.
"No  such  drastic   curtailment,"  the  seven  Commission,
ers   ruled,   "can   be  countenanced   under   the   Constitu-
tion"    One  of  the  seven  was  Robert  E.   Lee,   who   con-
curred,  objecting  only  to  bad  taste  in  one  program  on
homosexuals.    Lee  is  the  ex-FBI  man  J.  Edgar  Hoover
loaned  in  1945  to  a  House  committee  which  began  the
postwar  witch  hunt  against  Federal  employes  and  sup-
plied   McCarthy   with  his  original  list  in  1950.     Lee,   as
the  Weekly  protested  Oct.  17,  1953,  won  his  job  on  the
FCC   through   the   backing   of   McCarthy    and   Hearst
(who   then  got  the  Milwaukee   Channel  10  he  wanted).
Lee   has,   however,   made   an   honorable   record   on   the
FCC  and  we  salute  his  turn  to  liberalism.
break-through  in  the  stale  atmosphere  of  inter-agency  deadlock
in  Washington  may only look  like  another  U.S.  ploy  at  Geneva,
the  beginning  of  another  round  in  the  interminable argument
about  inspection.
Last  November   Gromyko  agreed  to  freeze  a  minimum  de-
terrent  until  the  last  stage  of  general  and  complete  disarma-
ment.    The  Poles  are  asking  a  freeze  on  nuclear  weapons  in
Central  Europe.    Can  a  dialogue  be  developed   between  these
ideas  of  a  freeze  and  ours?    The  obstacle  to  a  freeze,  as  to
our  proposals  for  non-dissemination of  nuclear weapons,  is  the
multi-lateral  nuclear  NATO  force,  with  a  German  finger  on
the  trigger.    If  positions  were  reversed,  we  would  think  the
Russians  swindlers  if  they  proposed  to  freeze  delivery  systems
but  make  some  available  to  a  joint  satellite  force  in  which
Ulbright  played  the  key  role;~if  they  asked  us  not  to  give  nu-
clear  weapons  to  our  allies,  while  they  thus  proposed   to  give
some  to  theirs.                                                                     Jan.  28.
Complete   That  Youngster's  Education  At  College   With  A  Subscription  to  The   Weekly
I. F.  Stone's Weekly
         56
i8  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ,
Street
City   ...........................................Zone.............State...................
2/3/04
Enter  gift  sub for  (2  (6  mos.)  or $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)    Name  ........................................................................._
Street   ........._..................._................................:..................
City   ............._...........................Zone......._....State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  Q    No  D
/ F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.    Published   every  Monday  except  in  August  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,
Washington,   D.   C.    An   independent  weekly   published   and   edited  by   I.   F.   Stone;   Circulation   Manager,   Esther   M.  Stone.     Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.i  $6 in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  {20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED