I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964jan13.pdf

============================================================

McCarthy's  Attack an  CIA,  P.  2
Morse  Warns  Against  Plan  to  Hide  Military  Aid  Next  Year  in  Pentagon  Budget,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  2
JANUARY  13,  1964
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.1&  CENTS'
Why Moscow's Peace Proposal Was Labelled "Disappointing"
In  a  message  to  Premier  Khrushchev  on  New  Year's  Day,
President  Johnson  called  on  the  Soviet  leader  to  make   1964
a  year  in  which  we  take  further  steps  "toward  peace."    Next
day  the  Soviet Premier  sent  a  note  to  all  world  capitals  urging
renunciation  of  force  in  the  settlement  of  territorial  disputes.
This has brought  the standard cold  war  reaction  from  the  State
Department,  which  describes  the  note  as  "disappointing."   As
usual  American  public opinion  is being  formed,  not  by a  study
of  the  document  itself,  but  by the  headlines generated  in  hasty
briefings  at  the  State  Department.    "U.S.  Finds  Little  New  in
K's  Note"'  said  a  typical  headline  in  the  Washington  Post
Jan.  4,  "Officials  Suspect  'Booby-Traps'  in  Moscow  Proposal."
This   was  followed   Jan.   6  with  an  unusually  inane   "back-
grounder"  in  which  its  diplomatic  correspondent,   after  smok-
ing  hashish  in  the  public  relations  dens  of  the   Department,
emerged   with  the  self-congratulatory  view  that  the  Depart-
ment  has  shrewdly  changed  its  style,  that  it  was  now  saying
"no,  but"  instead  of  "no"   in  a  devilishly  clever  maneuver  "to
avoid  being  cast  in  a  negative  anti-peace  position."   The  State
Department,   the   Washington   Post   reports,   is   determined
"never  to  let  the  Soviet  Union   corner  the   issue  of  peace."
The   anxiety  is  not   about   peace,   but   the   fear   of   losing   a
propaganda  battle.
Why  Is  Bonn  So  Nervous?
The  Soviet  note  was  "disappointing"   because  Moscow  got
in  ahead  of  Washington  with  the  first  concrete  proposal   of
the  New  Year.    It  was "non-objective"  because  it  did  not  look
at  the  world  the  State  Department's  way.   A  better  test  of  its
objectivity  may  be  obtained   by  freeing  our  minds  from   the
barrage  of  propaganda  let  loose  by  State  Department  briefings
and  taking a fresh  look  for  ourselves.   The  Soviet  note  is ably
written  and  moderately  phrased   and  it  puts  its  finger  on  a
major  problem,  that  of  territorial  disputes.    The  first  observa-
tion  to  be  made  is  that  the  Soviet  proposal  is  no  different  in
principle  from  the  proposal  we have  ourselves  made  the  prime
condition  of  negotiation   with  Communist  China,  that  it  re-
nounce  the  use  of  force  to  recover  Formosa.    Renunciation  of
force,  we  have  been  telling  Peking  for  several  years,  does  not
mean  renunciation  of  claims,  but  only  their  peaceful  negotia-
tion.    We  like  this  in  the  Far  East  where  our  nuclear  armed
7th  fleet  commands  the   Formosa   straits.    But  we  and   our
principal  allies  the  Germans  don't  like  it  in  Europe   where
the  latter  still  hope  that  a  nuclear  armed  Germany  by  threat
of  force  will  yet  be  able  to  recover  the  Eastern  territories  lost
to  Russia  and  Poland  in  the  last  war.    Indeed  the  immediate
reaction  from  Bonn  was  that  the  Soviet  note  was  intended  to
block  its  declared  ambition  to  recover  the  boundaries  of   1937.
But  if,  as  the  Germans  have  said,  they  intend  only  to  do  this
De  Gaulle  as  Peace  Maker
Both  big  powers  talk  peace,  but  if  you  look  closely
you  will  see  that  France  really  practices  it.    An  inde-
pendent  world  peace  policy  as  well  as  an  independent
nuclear  deterrent  is  being  created  by  de  Gaulle.    We
note  some  significant  year-end items.
For  all  practical  purposes  Moscow  and  Washington
are  united  in  a  policy  of  isolating   China.    But  an  in-
terview  with  Prime  Minister  Chou  En-lai  was  telecast
over  the  government  owned TV  station  in  France  (text
in  Le  Monde, Jan.  1)  as  part  of  a  growing  entente  be-
tween  Paris  and  Peking.    This   could  lead  to   China's
admission  to  the  UN,  since  the  French  African  states
under  de  Gaulle's  influence  have  enough  votes  to  swing
the  balance  in  China's  favor.    Chou En-lai  used  the  in-
terview  to  deny  that   China  was  against   peaceful  co-
existence  and to  state  his  complaints  against  the   U.S.
A  second  item  concerns  Cuba.    Last  Dec.  4,   Senator
Keating   protested   offers  of   French   economic   aid   to
Castro;  now  Havana  radio  (New  York  Times,  Jan.  4,
Late  City  ed.)  reports  de  Gaulle singled  out  the  Cuban
Ambassador   at  a  New  York  reception  in  Paris  for  a
talk  in  which  he  expressed   sympathy  for  Cuba.
A  third  and well  known item  concerns  the  Far  East,
where  both  big   powers   are  at  a  loss;  there   French
diplomacy   maintains   Western   influence  in   Cambodia
and  alone  offers  the  hope  of  a  healing  peace  in  Viet-
nam.
The  fourth item, which passed  unnoticed in  the  press
but  not  in  governmental  circles,  was  subtle  and  start-
ling.    In  his  New  Year  broadcast,   in  expressing   the
hope  for  a  truly  united  Europe,  which  might  include
the  Soviet  States  as  their  internal  regimes  liberalized,
General   de  Gaulle   mentioned  among  the  Communist
capitals  the  two  black  sheep,  Moscow's  outcast   Tirana
(capital  of  Albania)  and  the  West's   outcast  Pankow
(capital  of  East  Germany).   This  unexpected   and  un-
usual  courtesy  to  Ulbricht,  coming  from  de  Gaulle, the
alley  of  West  Germany, seemed  almost  a  form  of  rec-
ognition.    Since  de  Gaulle  is   also  the  only   Western
leader  publicly to  accept  the  Oder-Neisse  line  as  final,
this  friendly  reference  to  Pankow  indicates  that  mave-
rick  initiatives  on  the  German  question  by  France  are
also  possible.    Perhaps .de  Gaulle  can  rescue  this  one,
too,   from  the  cold  war's  deep  freeze.
peacefully  by  negotiation,   why  do  they  respond  so  nervously
to  a  proposal  that  force  be  renounced?
Of  course  the  Communist  like the  capitalist world  is  incon-
sistent.    Each  side  likes  renunciation of  force  where  it  suits
its  purpose,  as  each  side  likes  free  elections  where  it  can  win.
They're  for  free  elections  in  Vietnam  and  we're  for  free  elec-
tions  in  Germany,  just  as  we're  for  renunciation  of  force  over
Formosa  but  not  over  Germany.    They  would  make  Formosa
an  exception   to  their  general  formula,  as  historically  a  part
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  13, 1964
Sen.   McCarthy  in  Satevepost  Discloses  That  Assassins  Are  on  the  CIA's  Payroll
A Congressional Watchdog Committee Will Not  End  Cloak-and-Dagger Evils
The   unintended   are  as  important  as  the   intended   revela-
tion  in  Senator  Eugene  McCarthy's  "The   CIA  Is  Getting  Out
of  Hand"   in  the  Saturday   Lroiing   Post   (Jan.   4-11).     He
hints   (see   adjoining  box)   that  the  missile  threat  from   Cuba
was  exaggerated.     He  puts  the  Bay  of  Pigs   in  perspective  as
an  invasion  by  a  secret  agency  of  Congressional  power  to  or-
ganize  armies  and  to  make  war.    He  pictures  the  U-2   affair
not  as  a  blunder  but  as  an  incident by  which  the  CIA,  in  up-
setting  the  summit  conference,  made  foreign  policy.    He  pro-
tests   the   sinister  process   by  which   a   supposed    information
gathering  agency  has  been  "taking  over  the  roles  of  the  State
Department,    Defense   Department   and   Congress   as  well   as
carrying  the  nation  to  the  edge  of  war."     Most  important  of
all,  in  discussing  the  growth  of  the  CIA  to  the  point  where
it   employs   14,000   men   and   is  one   of   the   most   powerful
agencies    in   Washington,   he   reveals   that   hired   killers   are
among   its  agents.       It  has  on  its  payroll,  he  writes,   "special-
ists   in.  intelligence  analysis   and   espionage,   U-2   pilots   and
iixsdssiin"    (our  italics).
Any  Means  to  Reach  Our  Ends?
But  neither  Senator  McCarthy,  nor   the   Saturday   F.reniiig
Post  in  an  editorial  that  same  week  on  the  President's   assassi
nation,  seems  to  see  that  the  employment  of  assassins  by  our
own  government  is morally monstrous.    Even  that  tragedy  has
not  been  enough   to  free  them  from  the  evil  notion   fostered
by  the  cold  war  that  our  ends  are  so  righteous  that   somehow
any  means  to  achieve  them  are  justified.    The  Senator  makes
the  conventional  plea  that  the  Cold  War   requires  tactics  the
authors  of  the  Constitution  could  hardly  have  imagined.    It  is
time this  stereotype  were  challenged.    Assassination as  a politi-
cal  weapon   is  as  old  as  history; the  enemy  of  the  moment  has
always  been   the  embodiment  of  Satan.     The   struggle   for   a
civilized  world,  which  had   been   going   on  long  before   1789
much  less  1947,  was  to  impose  law  on  international  relations
and  bounds   even  on  warfare,  much   less  hostility  in  time  of
peace.    The  fact  is  that  na  other  government  but  ours  boasts
Cuban  Missile  Threat  Exaggerated?
"A   watchdog   committee    [to   supervise   the    CIA]
would   also   stop   some   irresponsible   talk    concerning
U.S.  activities abroad.   The  presence  of  Soviet  missiles
in  Cuba  18  months  after  the  Bay  of  Pigs  invasion,  for
example,  loosed  a  torrent  of  oratory  on  the  magnitude
of  the  Soviet  threat  in  Cuba.    If  the  CIA  had  briefed
a   watchdog   committee  certain   inaccurate   statements
which   stemmed   from   ignorance   of   the   facts   would
never  have  been  uttered."
—Se?!.  McCarthy  on  the  CIA  in  Satevepost  Jan.  4.
of   such   an  agency,  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  any  other
government  today  employs  assassins  in  carrying out  its  policies.
The  remedy  Senator  McCarthy  proposes  is  too  mild  for  the
disease.     The   CIA's   director,   John   McCone,    demonstrated
when  head  of  the  AEC  how  easily  he  could   twist  a  supposed
watchdog,   the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  to  his  pur-
poses.     In  any  case,   to  set  up  a  Congressional   committee   to
pass   on   requests   for   funds   and   permission   to   kill   foreign
leaders   we   dislike  and   overthrow   foreign   governments   of
which  we  disapprove  would  only  be  to  institutionalize the  evil
and   spread   the   corruption.     Only  by  ending  all   cloak   and
dagger   activities  and  reducing  the  CIA  to  normal   intelligence
tasks,  as  former  President  Truman  suggests,  can  this  cancerous
growth  be  excised  from  a  free  society.
When   Senator   McCarthy    discusses   the   Guatemala     affair
(see  box  below)  he  inadvertently  discloses  how  dangerous  it
is  to  let  a  agency  of  our  government,   even  if  supervised,  carry
on  secret  war  against  other  governments.     Ignorance  and  un-
consciojis  arrogance  are  revealed  in  his  easy assumption  that  the
U.S.   "undoubtedly   benefitted"   from   the  CIA's  overthrow   of
Arbenz.    The   United   Fruit   Company,   yes.     But  the   USA?
And  even  if  we  did  benefit,  have  we  the  right  to  impose  our
views  by  force  and  stealth   upon   our  neighbors  against   their
wishes,  to  decide  what   is  best  for  them,  or  if  not   for  them,
then  at  least  for  us?
A  Liberal  Senator  But  On  Guatemala  Far  to  The  Right  of  Britain's   Tories
"The  CIA  also  claims  to  have   masterminded  the  over-
throw   of   the   Communist-influenced   government  of  Jacobo'
Arbenz  Guzman  in Guatemala  in  1954.   In  this  instance the
result   undoubtedly   benefitted   the   United   States,   but   the
question  remains as  to  whether  the  CIA  is  the  proper  tool
for  such endeavors."
— Sen.  McCarthy   (D.  Minn.)  in  Sat.   Eve.   Post,  Jan.4-11.
"\  special   problem   was  created   [in  Guatemala] by  the
extensive  estates  of   the   United   Fruit  Company  .   .  .  the
parts  of  the  Company's  holdings  lying  fallow  could,  under
the   provisions   of   the   [Arbenz  Agrarian  reform]   law   be
legally  forfeit.    The  Company argued  that  such  unused  re-
serves  were  temporarily  necessitated  by  the  technical  con-
siderations  of  banana  production.   Large  tracts  of  its  prop-
erly,   including  some   areas   under  cultivation,  were  never-
theless   expropriated.     Sharp   diplomatic   protests   followed
from   the  U.S.,  and  the  whole  reform  came  to  be   regarded
as  an  an:i-U.S.  act  and  a  means  of  turning  Guatemala into
a   Communist  state.  .  .  .  Nearly  one  million  hectares,   in-
clndir.u   a  large  tract  of   United  Fruit  Company  territory,
were expropriated and divided up among  100,000 rural  work-
ers.  .  .  .  One  of   the  first  acts  of   the  Government  of  Col.
Castillo  Annas,  in'1954  [after  Arbenz'  overthrow],  was  to
cancel  the  Agrarian Reform law  and  restore  the  status  qua.
"In  considering  the  abortive  Arbenz  reform,  it   may   be
asked  to  what  extent  its  denunciation as  a  Communist men-
ace  was   justified.    The  provisions   of   the   law  were  by  no
means  of  an  extreme  revolutionary  nature.    The   applica-
tion  of  these  measures  was,  however,  in  some  cases  revo-
lutionary.   The  Communists clearly  spared  no  effort  to  turn
the   situation   to  their  advantage.    Yet   few   cases   of   vio-
lence   against   landowners   was   reported,  and   no   attempt
seems  to  have  been  made  to  set  up  peasant  collectives.  .  .  .
It  is  at  least  arguable  that,  if  left  to  take  its  course,   the
reform   would  have  worked  out  in  much  the  same   way   as
in  Mexico and Bolivia."
—Agrarian   Reform    in  Latin  America,  a  pamphlet   by
Chatham  House   (the   Royal  Institute  of  International    Af-
fairs,   the  citadel   of  the   Tory   point  of  view  toward   colonial
problems),   Oxford    Univ.  Press   (London    and  Fair  Lawn,
N.J.)   Nov.   1-1B2.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  13, 19ti4
Summing   Up  Fallacies  That  Lead  Us  to  Waste  Billions  in  Foreign  Aid
Morse  Warns  Against  Plan  to  Hide  Military  Aid  in  Pentagon  Budget
The   recipients  of   our   military   aid   cannot   maintain   large
military  establishments  out  of   their  own   economic   resources.
If   they  could,  they  would   not  need   the  military  aid  from  us.
In  that  sense  we  are  leaning  on  weak  reeds  wherever  we  send
military  aid,  because  a  country  that  is  militarily  dependent   on
others  in  time  of   peace   is  hopelessly   dependent   upon   others
in  time  of  war.
Take  Iran.    There  is  a  country  on  the  border  of  the  Soviet
Union  to  which  we  have  sent  $633  million  in  military  aid  be-
tween   1946   and   1963.     We   sent   Iran  $789  million  in   eco-
nomic  aid  in  the  same  period.     But  suppose   some  Soviet  ag-
gression  occurred  against  Iran.    Ignoring  for  the  moment  the
purely  military  value—if  any—of  the  Iranian  forces,  the  U.S.
would  have  to  pour   still  more   American  wealth   into  Iran  it-
self  to  keep  it  going  under  war  conditions.
This  Applies  to  Most  of  the  Program
Exactly   the   same   is   true   of   Turkey,    Taiwan,    Pakistan,
Greece,  Korea,  the  Philippines,  Thailand  and  South   Vietnam,
all   of  which   account   for   the   great   bulk  of   foreign   aid   out-
side  the  Alliance  for  Progress.
We   have   heard   repeated    over   and   over   again   that   it  is
cheaper  to  maintain  in  uniform  a  South  Korean,   a   Formosan,
a  Pakistani,  a  Turk,  when   the  fact  is  that  we  maintain  them
and  our  own  forces  as well;  and  it  is  our  own  forces,  and  not
their  military  defense,   that  give  them  the  security.
There  is  the  ugly  fact,  which  the  world   needs  to  face,  that
if  war  were  to  break  out  with  Russia,  it  would   not  be  a  con-
ventional  war.    All  the  billions  of  dollars  of  military  aid  that
we  have  poured  into  these  countries  would   be  recognized   as
having   been   wasted.     It   would   be   a  nuclear   war   of   short
duration  and  the  probabilities  are  that  both  of  the  major  com-
batants  would  destroy  themselves.
The  time  has  come  for  a hard,  long  look  at  military  aid.    I
warn  the  American  people  what  the  next  move  will  be.    The
next  move  will  be  a  move  of  partial  concealment,  by  taking
Why,  Then,  An  Alliance   for  Progress?
"It  is   said   both  in  Latin  America   and  in  the    U.S.
that  if  we  expect  these  countries  to  move  too  fast  and
do  very  much  to  help  themselves,  they  will  become  un-
settled  politically and that  might  lead  to  unsettled  mili-
tary  consequences.   This  is  why  the  apologies  are  made
for  the  juntas  in  Latin  America.    The  apology   makes
the   case   that   reform   upsets   the   ruling   classes   and
causes  them  to  seize  the  government.    But  if  the  same
old  system   is  to  remain  entrenched  in  Latin  America,
then  I  see  no  reason  for  the  Alliance  for  Progress.    If
the   juntas   take   over   to   prevent   reform,   and   if   the
juntas  are  desirable  because  they  keep  the  Communists
down,  then  there  is  really  no  reason   for  any  further
American  investment  in  the  nations  to  the  south."
—Morse  of  Oregon  to  the  Senate, Dec.  30.
military  aid  out  of  the  general   aid  bill,  and  having   it  consid-
ered  in  connection  with  the  U.S.  defense  budget.    It  does  not
belong  there  because  it  is  a  foreign  policy  issue.
Plans  to  separate   economic   aid   from   military  aid  will,   if
carried  out,  lead  to  increases  in  both.    It  has  been   commonly
said  for  many  years  that  Congress  would  approve  just   about
any   amount   of   military   aid   if   it  were  hidden   away   in   the
budget   of   the   Defense   Department.    There  is  a  wide   body
of  opinion   in  the  administration  that  economic  aid  should  be
sacrificed,  if  need  be,  to  the  objections  made  to  foreign  aid  in
general,   but  that  military  aid  should   be  put   in  the   Defense
Department  budget  where   it  will  be  rubber-stamped   by   Con-
gress.     But  even  if  it  is  carried  out,   its  proponents  will  find
out  eventually that  the  nations  favored  for  even  more military
aid  cannot  make  use  of  it  without  large  sums  of  economic   aid.
I  am  opposed  to  such  separation   for  another  reason.     Put-
ting  military  aid   into   the   Defense   Department  budget   in  a
effort  to  remove  it  from  true  Congressional   scrutiny would  be
a  final  step  in  the  direction  of  military  diplomacy.
—Morse  to   I he  Senate  Dec.  30   (abridged).
Three  American  Eye-Witnesses   Protest  The  New  Dictatorship  in  Dominican  Republic
"Senator  Morse,  in  the  almost   2  months   I  spent   in  the
Dominican   Republic  after   the   new   dictatorship  took   over
from  Juan  Bosch,  1 have  seen  with  my  own  eyes  thousands
of   people,  on  many  occasions,  tear-  and  nausea-gassed  by
the   police.     Students   kicked   and   beaten,   for   trying   to
march  or  demonstrate,  and  in  one  case  I  watched  a  night
high  school  student  die  with  a  bullet  hole  through  his  abdo-
men.    The  'civilian  junta'  or  triumvirate,  as  it  is  called  in
the  now  controlled news,  is  a  military  dictatorship, trying
to  impose  control through terror."
pears  that  now  on  about  11  fronts  there  is   fighting   in  the
mountains  and  countryside.    The  triumvirate claims  this  is
a   Communist  movement.    Naturally  they  must,  to  excuse
their  suppression  of  it.    One  of  the  leaders   of  one  of   the
fronts   is   'Manolo'  Tavarez,   leader   of   the   leftist   '14th  of
June'  party  [since  killed  by  the  military—IFS].
"4.  But  the  resistance   is  in  truth  universal  and  is  being
joined  by  upper  and  middle  class  and  urban  youth   of   the
lower  class,   [who]    represent   all  shades  of   political  opin-
ion."
"Last  month  I  returned  to  the   U.S.   after  two  years  in
the  Dominican Republic.    Because  I  love  the  Dominican Re-
public  and  of  course  our  country, I  don't  want  to  see  either
of  them  go  wrong.
"1.  Under  the  government  of  Juan  Bosch  there  was  com-
plete   freedom   of   movement,  opinion,  publication,   expres-
sion.    Law  was  enforced,  and  there  was  no  cause  for,  nor
interest  in, rebellion.
"2.  The   leftover  Trujillo   military,  in   combination  with
the   great  hereditary  rich,  seized   power  on  Sept.  25,  1963,
and  have enforced  a  new dictatorship.
"3.  Pacific   resistance   by   the   people   has   failed.     It   ap-
"Last   December   [1962]  hope   had  a  beginning—for   the
first  time  in  their  lives,   the   campesinos'   voice   had  some
meaning,  and  their  votes  put  a  man  in  office.     But  the  re-
cent   'golpe  de  estado*  [military  coup]   proved   once   again
that  the  wealth  and  power  groups  will  run  the  country  the
way  they  want  to.    We  Peace  Corps  volunteers  are  sick  at
heart."
—From  three,  letters  from  Americans  who  saw  what  hap-
pened  in  the  Dominican  Republic,  us  put  into  Ihc  Congres-
sional   Record   by   Senator   Morse   Dec.     :!/>    pf>s.      2J/:l!)8-J:/9,
along  with  equally  pamful   letters  from  Honduras  where  we
also  have  recognized  a  new  military   dictatorship.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  13,1964
Soviet  Pact  Should  Be Supplemented  by  An  Arms  Embargo  to  Disputants
(Continued   from  Page   One)
of   China.    But  if  you  leave  Germany  and  China  out  of   the
picture,  if  you  get  the  two  great  Powers  to  put  aside  the  dis-
putes  in  which  their  own  allies  are  involved,  it  is  not  hard  to
see  how  useful  a  contribution  this  new  Soviet  proposal  could
make  to  world  peace.
One-Third  The  Human  Race
The  two  biggest  nations  on  earth,  with  more  than  one  bil-
lion  people  between   them,   more  than   one-third  the   human
race,  India  and  China,  have  been  involved  in  a bitter  and  non-
sensical  border  dispute  that  takes  bread  from  the  mouths  of
their  hungry  peoples.     On  the  other  side  of  India,  its  border
quarrel  with  Pakistan  over  Kashmir  keeps  more  than  a  half
billion  human  beings  in  constant  hostility.    Another  hundred
million  people  are  involved  in  the  smoldering  quarrel  among
Indonesia,  the  Philippines  and  Malaysia  over  the  latter's  bor-
ders.    There  may be  new trouble  this  spring  between  the  Arab
States  and  Israel.    Africa,  from  Somalia  in  the  East  to  Morocco
in  the  West,  is girding  for  war  over  border  troubles.    A  world
agreement   to  negotiate  such  disputes,  buttressed  by  an  agree-
ment   between   Moscoii'   and   Washington   not  to  supply   arms
Io   either   side—would   this   not   immeasurably  contribute   to
world   peace?
A  creative  diplomacy  on  our  side,  really  concerned   to  win
battles   for   peace,   could   easily  take   the   initiative  from   the
Russians  by  extending   and  completing  this  proposal,  first  of
all  in the field of  an  arms  embargo  to these quarrelling   powers.
Russian  arms  to  Egypt  and   Iraq   have  greatly   increased   the
danger   of  war  in  the  explosive  Middle  East;  why  not  chal-
lenge  Moscow  to  a  joint  agreement  which  would  help  to  pre-
vent  war  and  force  negotiation  with  Israel  in  that  area ?   Rus-
sian  arms  to  Somalia  in  its  conflict  with  Kenya  and  Ethiopia,
Russian  arms  to  Indonesia   in  its  quarrel  with  Malaysia,   in-
crease  the  dangers  of  new  wars  spreading  out  of  East   Africa
and  Southeast   Asia.    But  would  we  be  willing  to  give  up  the
similar  leverage   for  expansion  which  -the  Sino-Indian   border
dispute  has  given  us  in  India  and  the  Indian   Ocean,  where
Western  arms are ending  Indian  non-alignment,   though  at  the
Why  They  Turn  to  Moscow
"'While  paying  lip  service  to  self-determination,  the
U.S.   supplies   its   ally,   Portugal,   with   arms  that  are
used  to  kill  us.'     Another  example  of   'American   hy-
pocrisy",   Mr.   Roberto   said,   is   that   G.   Mennen   Wil-
liams,  Ass't   Secretary   of   State   for   African    Affairs,
tried  to  convince  the  Congolese  Premier,  Cyrille  Adou-
la,  not  to  recognize  the  Angolan  exile .government."
—-"Angolan   Rebels   to   Take   Red   Aid",   New    York
Times  from  Leopoldville,  Jan.  4.
cost   of   diverting   precious   resources   from   the   war   against
India's  immemorial  hunger   to  military  preparations  for  war
over   bleak  uninhabitable  and   never  clearly  marked   borders
with  Tibet?     If  we  feel  this  proposal   is  "non-objective"   on
Formosa,  why  not  propose  that  Formosa  be  included?    But
are  we,  then,  willing  to  be  objective  about  Germany?    The
Oder-Neisse   border  is  not  worth  a  world  holocaust.    On  the
other  hand,  within  the   terms  of   the   Soviet   note,   why   not
negotiate  firm  access  rights  to  Berlin  as  a  safeguard  against
indirect  border  aggression   against  that   free   city?    There  is
much  that  can  be  done  with  that  note  if  we  really  mean  busi-
ness  about  peace.
One   stale   State   Department   objective  needs   to  be  nailed
down  hard.   This  is its  rejoinder that  this  proposal  would  still
leave  the  Communists  free  to  wage  colonial  "wars  of  libera-
tion."    The  mythical  view  that  colonial  revolts  are  generated
by  Moscow  has  died  everywhere  else  but  here.    Most  of  Asia
and  Africa  have  been  liberated  in  response  to  irresistable  pres-
sure  from  its  peoples,  and  only  where  the  Western  powers  in
their  folly  have  tried  to  hold  back  the  tide  have  the  Commu-
nists  taken  over.    Right  in  the  midst  of  State  Department  in-
spired   stories  on  this  theme   comes   the  news,   for   example,
that  Holden  Roberta,  the   leader   of  the  pro-western   faction
among   the  Angolan   rebels   against   Portugal,   has  turned   to
Moscow  for  help  in  despair over  undercover  U.S.  aid  to  Portu-
gal   (see  box  above).    The  way  to  keep  these  peoples  from
falling  into  Moscow  or  Peking's  sphere  of  influence  is  not  to
force  them  into  it.
Free  Copy  of  Our  1963   Index  Now  Available  If  You  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed  Long  Envelope—Why  Not  Keep  Issues  In  A  Claw  Binder
With  Index—There's  Much  In The  Weekly  You Won't  Find  Elsewhere
I. F.  Stone's Weekly
         56
ig  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ......................„.......................„.......................«...—....._
Street   ........._.............................................__...._......._
City  ..........._.........................Zone......._.State....................
1/13/01
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..........™...................................^..................._..—
Street   ........._.........................................................................
City  ......._.._........................Zone......_..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No D
/ E  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class   Postase   Paid  -at   Washington.   D.   C.    Published  every  Monday  except  in  August  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,
Washington,   D.   C.    An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited  by   I.   K.   Stone;   Circulation   Manager.   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.:     S6  in  Canada:  SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  {15  to  Europe;  S20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED