I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964dec21.pdf

============================================================

Morse  Sees  Goldwaterism  in  Vietnam Policy,  P.  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XII,  NO.  43DECEMBER  21,  1964ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Early  Distant  Warning  Out  of the  Congo
United  Nations,    N.Y.
It  is a  pity  more  Americans  could  not  have  seen  the  events
of  the  past  week  through  African   and  Negro  eyes  from  the
vantage  point  of  the  UN   debate  on  the  Congo.    The  sum-
mary  dismissal  of  charges   against   the  accused   killers  of   the
three  civil  rights  workers  in  Mississippi,  the  refusal  to  hear
the  confession by  one  of  the  accused,  could  not  have  come  at
a  more  terrible  moment.   Mr.  Botsio of  Ghana,  on  the  open-
ing  day  of  the  Congo  debate,  had  already  told  the  Security
Council  that  under  international law  the  U.S.  was  no  more
entitled  to  intervene in  the  Congo  than  Ghana  in  the  Amer-
ican   South   where   "Afro-American  inhabitants"   are   "from
time  to  time  tortured  and  murdered  for  asserting  their  legiti-
mate  rights."    Next  day  came  the  news  from  Meridian,  like
a  flash  of  lightning  before  a  storm,  revealing  sharply  the  true
lineaments   of   the   racial  landscape,   with   the   colored   man
everywhere  a  creature  of  lesser  concern,  even  to  white  men
of  good   will.
Their  Common  Bond
Nothing   could   be  more  unwise  for   our  country  than   to
treat  the  Congo   debate  as  another  inning  in  the   cold  war,
calculating  its  effects  on  the  UN  dues quarrel  and  China mem-
bership  issue,  as  if  following  a  familiar  sporting  event  on  a
score-card.    The  protests  to  the  Security  Council  were  down-
graded  in  our  press  as  coming  from  "left-leaning"   African
states,  the  implication  being  that   ideology   explained   it   all.
This   is   dangerous   self-delusion.    The   common   bond   that
unites  Negro  and  Arab,  African  and  Asian,  Hindu  and  Chi-
nese,  and   the  whole  underworld   of   mixed   blood   in  Latin
America,  is  the  all   too  fresh  recollection   of  humiliation  at
the  hands  of  the  white  man.    This  is  what  the  Congo   epi-
sode  stirred  up  and  this  is something  they  do  not  need  to  read
about  in  pamphlets  from  Peking.    There  never  was  a  sharper
cleavage  at  the  UN  between  white  and  colored  than  on  the
Congo  question.    Intervention   to  protect  lives  and  property—
gunboat  diplomacy—has  too  long  been  the  traditional  excuse
of  imperialism  in  Latin  America and  Eurasia.   The   Western
plea  of   humanitarianism  created   solidarity  among   those  ac-
customed  to  being  regarded   as  not  quite  human.    Suddenly
Africa   was  talking  about  Mississippi  and   Cuba,  as  if   in  a
world-wide  colonial  and  racial  upsurge.
Mr.  Beovagui  of  Guinea  protested  to  the  Security  Council
that  the  U.S.  and   Belgium  had   tried  for   weeks  before  the
rescue  at  Stanleyville  to   impose  a  military  solution   on   the
Congo  while  the  African   States  were  seeking  to  bring  about
a  political  reconciliation.    He  complained  that  white  mercen-
aries  "under  the  protection  of  U.S.  military  planes  piloted  by
Cubans-  recruited   and  financed  by  the  U.S.—soldiers  of  for-
tune  trying  to  redeem  their  fiasco  in  the  Bay  of  Pigs"  had
massacred  Congolese  civilians  and  "bombarded   cities  held  by
the  forces  of  the  National  Liberation  Front ...  as in  Albert-
View  from  The  Lower   (and  Darker)   Depths
'The  most  pressing  problem,  as  far  as  my  govern-
ment  sees  things,  is  that  of  poverty.  .  .  .  The  poor
cannot  be  persuaded to  wait.   They  are  no  longer  poli-
tically  illiterate  either.  They  do not  have  to  be  educated
to  listen  in  on  their  own  or  their  neighbor's  radio  sets
telling  them,  with  a  great  deal  of   vanity,   about  the
staggering   sums  of   money  misspent  on  this  or  that
scheme—I  need  not  mention  nuclear  weapons,  studies
of  outer  space  and  what-not,  things  which  do  not  help
people  to  live  happily  or  become  human  beings  in  the
strict  sense  of  the  word,  things  which  will  only  add  to
the  destruction of  civilization.  .  .  .  And  poverty nowa-
days   seems   to   be   the   lot   of   the   colored.    A   most
alarming   phenomenon.     The   indignity   they   suffered
over  the  centuries is  receding,  but  their  political eman-
cipation  was  only  the  first  step  on  their  long  road  to
redemption  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word."
—Mr.  Maghoub  (Sudan),  in  UN  Gen. Assem. Nov. 10
ville  and   Bakavu"  without  stirring  any  indignation   in   the
West.    "Was   it,"  he  asked,  "because  the  thousands  of  Con-
golese  citizens  murdered  by  the  South  Africans,  the  Rhodes-
ians,  the  Belgians  and   the  Cuban   refugee  adventurers   had
dark   skins  just  like  the   colored   U.S.   citizens  murdered   in
Mississippi?"    This  is  a  bitterness  we  would  do  well  to  heed.
The  debate  was  a  Distant  Early  Warning   Line  on  which  we
may  hear   in   time  the   approach   of   a  conflict   more   serious
than  the  anti-Communist  cold  war  with  which  we  continue
to   be   obsessed.     Mississippi,   Rhodesia,   South   Africa   and
Brazil  each  in  their  own  time  and  their  own  way  may  bring
about  a  new  polarization  between  white  and  colored,  rich  and
poor,   threatening  a  war  in  which  our  ICBM's   would  stand
impotent,  a  war  from  which  all  mankind  would  lose.
We   exaggerate   the   divisions  among   the   African    States.
Senegal,  with  Liberia  and  Nigeria,   is  counted  "on  our  side."
The  speech   made  by  Mr.  Thiam  of  Senegal   to  the  General
Assembly  a  week  earlier  should  put  us  on  guard  against  such
over-simplifications.     Mr.   Thiam   did   indeed   address   some
perceptive  advice  to  his  fellow  Africans.     "Very  often,"   he
pointed  out,  "it  is  we  ourselves  who  start  the  cold  war  in  our
countries.    Because of  internal  rivalries  between  men  and  dif-
ferent  political  tendencies,  we  invite others  to  interfere  in  our
domestic  affairs."    He  said  interventions are  approved  or  con-
demned,  depending  on  whether  they  were  from  Washington
or  Moscow,   without  concern  for  the  principle  of   non-inter-
vention,  "bringing   into  question  our  independence   and  our
sovereignty."    But  Senegal's  spokesman  is  no  Western   mouth-
piece.  He  opposed  expulsion  of  the  Soviets  on  the  debt  issue.
He  warned  that  the  chaos   in  the  Congo  was  a  preview  of
what  would  happen   in  Angola   unless   Portugal   unlike   Bel-
gium  began  to  train  native cadres  to  take  over.    He  ended  by
touching  on   issues   more   fundamental   than   color:  the  con-
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 21,1964
The  New  Gore-Ribicoff   "Dynamic  Cost-Sharing  Plan"  A  Hidden  Snare  for  The  Aged
Time  to  Challenge  Timid  Liberals  For  A  Stronger  Medicare Program
The   number  one  item  on   President   Johnson's   legislative
agenda  should  not  be to pass  medicare  but  to  re-write it.    The
version  the  Senate  approved  last  August  is  not  merely  inade-
quate;  it  is  a  fraud.    In  the  closing  moments  of  that   debate
Senators  Ribicoff   (D.,  Conn.)  and  Gore  (D.,  Tenn.)  quietly
added  a  provision  that  makes  the  aged   and  not  the   govern-
ment  responsible   for  paying  future  increases  in  the   cost  of
hospitalization.    The  provision  is  delicately  being  called   "The
Dynamic  Cost  Sharing  Plan."    We   asked  an  actuary  at  the
Social   Security  Administration  to  translate  that   for   us  into
dollars  and  cents.    This  is  what  we  learned:
Upping  The  Costs  For  The  Aged
Hospital  costs  are  increasing  at  the  rate  of  7%  a  year.    At
this  rate  they  will  double  (from  $40  to  $80  a  day)   within
ten  years.    Because  of  cost  "sharing,"  the  aged  will  then  be
paying  for  hospitalization  under  medicare  what  they  are  now
paying  for   it  without  medicare.     Social   Security  now   taxes
only  the  first  $4800  of  a worker's  wages.  If  Congress   chooses
to  increase  this  wage  base  to  keep  up  with  the  4%   annual
rise  in  wages—something  which  it  has  refused  to  do  for  the
past  several  years—then  the  benefits  of  medicare  will  still  be
negated  though  in  fifteen  years,  instead  of  ten.    The  objective
of  cost  sharing  was  to  pacify  Rep.  Wilbur  Mills  (D.,  Ark.),
chairman  of  the  House Ways  and  Means  Committee.    He  has
been  arguing  that  because  hospital  costs  are  rising  so  rapidly
medicare  would  soon   bankrupt   all   social   security  programs.
Mills  is  right,  but  the  solution  lies  not  in  further   pauperizing
the  aged  but  in  attacking  the  problem  of  hospital  costs.
This  is  what  the  liberals  in  Congress   have  been  too  timid
to  do.    Medicare  in  fact  will  probably  cause  costs  to  spiral  at
a  rate  higher  than  7%  a  year.    Like  Blue  Cross,  Blue  Shield
and  most  commercial plans,  it  is  a  hospital-centered  program:
it   provides  benefits   (except   for   some  home  care)   only   for
hospitalization  or  for  nursing-home  care  after  hospitalization.
This  encourages  over-utilization of  hospitals  and  higher  costs.
Reformers  in  the  medical  field  have  long  been  urging   more
treatment  of  patients  "on  the  hoof   rather  than  between   the
sheets."     But  the  insurance  plans  have  generally  refused   to
offer   more  comprehensive  coverage   out  of   deference   to   the
wishes  of  the  hospitals  and  doctors.
More  comprehensive  health   insurance  is  a  matter  of   lives
as  well  as  money.    The  just  released  report  of  the  President's
Commission  on  Heart  Disease,  Cancer  and  Stroke  stresses  the
While  the  Sick  Are Negleclted
" 'We  face   so  many   real   threats,'  Dr.  Brown  said,
'that  we  can't  afford   to  occupy  ourselves  with  imagi-
nary  ones.'   Among  the  'imaginary  threats'  of  the  last
few  years  was  the  mythical bomber  gap  and  the  pros-
pective   missile   gap   that   never   materialized.     These
false  alarms  caused  the  U.S.  to  invest  billions  in  the
DEW  Line,  liquid  fueled  ICBM's  and  other  devices  that
are  now  either  obsolete  or  of  little  value.."
—Dr.  Harold  Brown,  Director  of  Defense    Research
at   the   Pentagon,   New   York   Herald-Tribune,  Dec.  6.
importance  of  early  detection  in  combatting  these  three  great-
est killers.  (They  account  for  about  7  out  of  every  10 deaths.)
Almost  three  out  of  four  strokes  can  be  detected  before  they
occur  and  many  can  then  be  prevented.    So  can  many  forms
of  heart  disease  and  cancer,  if  they  are  detected  early.   What
the  Commission  does  not  say  is  that  the  entire  system  of  hos-
pital-centered    health    insurance    discourages    early   detection.
Most  people  go  to  hospitals  only  when  already  ill.     Preven-
tive  medicine  requires  a  health   insurance  system  that  encour-
ages   periodic   check-ups   by  paying   out-of-hospital   physician
fees.    This  in  turn  may  mean  paying  doctors  a  fixed  salary.
There  never  was  a  better  time  for  a  comprehensive   medi-
care  bill.    Inside  the  House  Ways  and  Means  Committee  the
Southern  Democrat-Republican   alliance  that  bottled-up  medi-
care  is  about  to  be  broken.    Speaker   McCormack  has   given
his  approval   to  a  plan   for  increasing  the  Democratic   repre-
sentation  from   15  to  17  and  reducing   the  Republican   from
10  to   8.    Provided   the   two   Democratic   appointments   are
liberals,  the   Southern   Democrat-Republican   alliance  will  be
reduced  from  a  majority  of  13  to  a  minority  of  11.    Instead
of  pressing  this  advantage,  some  liberals  are  urging   further
compromise.
On  December   11,  Senator  McGovern  proposed  "give  and
take  conference  sessions"  with  the  AMA.     Somebody  should
remind  him  that  the  AMA  announced  at  its  last  meeting  that
it  will  not  compromise.     And   somebody   should   remind   the
AMA  that  their  House  Of   Delegates   once  indorsed   a  com-
pulsory   national  health  insurance  program.     "The   time  has
come  when  we  can  no  longer  resist  the  social  movement,"   its
Board  of  Trustees  reported  in   1916,    "and   it  is  better   that
we   should   initiate  the   necessary   changes   than   have   them
forced  on   us."
COFO Volunteers Explain How HUAC Aids  The  White  Supremacist  in  Mississippi
"HUAC  and  similar  legislative  investigating committees
have  been libel-free  centers  for  false  accusations; they  have
dignified  irresponsible  smears  as  'official'  government find-
ings.  They have thus  promoted  among the  white community
in  Mississippi  the  belief  that  civil  rights  protest  is  synony-
mous  with  subversion  and  treason.    The  Mississippi  press
and  public  officials  consistently  smeared  participants in  the
1964   Summer   Project;   they   relied   primarily   on   HUAC
'citations'  for  their   smears.
"The  pervasive feeling  among  white  Mississippians that
the  civil  rights  movement  is  'red-inspired'  enables  Missis-
sippians   to  dismiss  civil   rights   as   illegitimate,  to  avoid
—Petition   To  Abolish  HUAC,  signed
admitting  the  existence  of  the  intolerable  conditions  of  the
Mississippi  Negro  which  give  rise  to  such  protest,  and  to
rationalize  violence  and  economic  intimidation against  civil
rights  workers  as  'patriotic   acts'."
"Having   witnessed  the  workings  of   a  closed   society—
where  the  First  Amendment  is  not  operative,  where  white
as  well  as  Negro  is  labelled  'subversive'  if  he  dissents—we
feel  more  deeply  the  need  to  oppose  threats  to  free  speech
and  free   association   in  the  rest  of   the  country.    HUAC,
condemning  ideas  and  associations  as  'Un-American',  is  the
fountainhead   of   the   threat   to   an   open  society.    HUAC
denies  what  we  went  to  Mississippi  for."
by  142 workers  in  the  Mississippi  Summer  Project,  Dec.  10.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 21, 1964
The Senate's No. 1 Peace  Champion  Sees Vietnam  as  LBJ's  "First  Great  Test"
Morse  Fears  Johnson  Administration  Swinging  Toward  Goldwater  Policy
By  Senator  Wayne  Morse *
A  few  weeks  ago,  people  laughed  when  Presidential  candi-
date   Barry   Goldwater  talked   blithely  of   "interdicting"   the
routes  from   North   Vietnam  into  South  Vietnam,  especially
by  use  of  chemicals and  radiation  to  defoliate  the  trees  that
conceal  the  jungle  trails.    But  today  there  is  every  evidence
that  the  American  Ambassador  has  returned  to  Saigon  from
Washington   with  something  very  similar   to  the   Goldwater
prescription   for  the  civil  war  in  South  Vietnam.  A  traditional
signpost  that  points  to  this  conclusion  is  the  increased  em-
phasis   upon   infiltration   of   men   and   supplies   from   North
Vietnam  through   Laos  into  South  Vietnam.    This  new  em-
phasis  is  in  total  contrast  to  the  previous  official  testimony  on
this  point  presented  to  the  Foreign  Relations  Committee.    In
fact,  no  new  evidence  has  been  offered   to  change  the  assess-
ment  that  the  great  bulk  of  the  Vietcong   rebels  were   local
residents,  that  close  to  90%   of  their  weapons  were  captured
from   government   sources,   and   that   their   civil   war   would
continue  whether  or  not   it  received  aid  or  leadership   from
North  Vietnam.
Mistake  Admitted  But  Perpetuated
But   the   100%   expansion   of   the   South   Vietnamese   Air
Force  and  the  drumbeating  in  both  Washington   and   Saigon
about   alleged   infiltration  from  North   Vietnam,   suggest   to
these  experienced  ears  that  air  attacks  by  U.S.  jets  flown  by
U.S.  and  Vietnamese  pilots  will  soon  commence  in  Laos,  as
they  may  already  have  begun   in  the   de-militarized  zone  of.
North  Vietnam.    One  of  the  most  astonishing  elements  in
the  discussions   of  this  policy  is  the  number   of  Washington
officials   who  will  tell  you  that  getting   into  South   Vietnam
was  a  hideous  mistake,  but  once  involved  we  have  no  choice
but   to   continue.
It  has  cost  American  taxpayers  $51/2  billion,  exclusive  of
the  cost  of  our  own  forces,  to  try  to  keep  a  Western   foothold
in   Southeast   Asia.    Journalistic  spokesmen   for   the   Defense
Department  are  vehement  in  declaiming  that  to  lose  our  foot-
hold  in  Vietnam  is  to  lose  all  we  fought   for  in  the   Pacific
in  World  War  II.    Nothing   is  further  from  the  truth.    Be-
Bombing  Supply  Lines  Futile
"All   this   talk   about   blocking   Communist   supply
routes   to  the  Viet  Cong  operating  in  South  Vietnam
with  bombs indicates  one thing:  Somebody has  not  done
his  homework on  the  effectiveness  of  air  assault  against
supply  lines  in  Korea—or  World  War  II,  for  that  mat-
ter.     As  any   Korean   veteran  can  tell   you,  the  Red
Chinese  sustained  a  million-man army  at  the  far  end
of   a  300-mile  supply  route  in  the   teeth   of  the   best
aerial   effort  the  U.S.  could  mount.  .  .  .  There  were  8
highways  leading  from   Manchuria  south   to  the   38th
parallel  and  for  a  solid  month  aircraft   from  the  Air
Force,  Marines  and Navy  plastered  all of  them.  .  .  .
The  Chinese simply  used  manpower  to  make  temporary
road  repairs  at  night  and  quickly  moved  their   trucks
under  cover  of  darkness. ...  By the  time  the  all-out
assault  was  brought  to  a  halt—no  targets  left   appar-
ently—there  was  no  indication  that  the  fighting  abili-
ties  of   the   Chinese   troops   had  been   drastically   im-
paired.   They  were  still  able  to  mount  an  offensive  in
which  they  could  fire  as   much  as   100,000  rounds  of
artillery  ammunition in  one  3-day  fight."
—Bern Price, AP, in  Wash. Post, Dee.  IS.
"Abridged  from  a  speech  in  Denver,  Dec.  11.
fore  World  War   II,  the  most  we  ever  had  was  the  Philip-
pines,  which  we voluntarily relinquished  in  1935  and  formally
freed  in  1945.    Since  1945,  we  have  maintained  base  rights
in   the  Philippines,  as  in  Japan;  and  we  have  kept   a  base
in  Okinawa,  won  by  conquest.     Our   present   "foothold"   in
South  Korea  is  a  legacy  of  World  War   II,  not  its  objective.
What  these  Defense  Department  spokesmen  really  have  in
mind  are  not  the  strictly  American footholds  and  bases  in  that
part  of  the  world  but  the  whole  network  of  French,   Dutch
and   British  possessions   that  in  World   War   II  were   freely
used   by  Americans  in   the   prosecution   of   the   war   against
Japan.    The   possibility  that   these   staging   areas  should   no
longer  be  available  for  use  at  our  pleasure  vis-a-vis  China  is
for  many  of  them  so  unthinkable that  they  believe  it  is  worth
a  war  to  retain  at  least  one  of  them.
It  still  is  not  too  late  for  President  Johnson  to  lead   the
American  people  out  of  this  morass.    Whether   he  leads  us
out  or  further  in  will  be  the  first  great  test  of  his  Admin-
istration.
The  AP's  No. 1 Man in  Saigon  Reveals  How The News  From  Vietnam  Is Prettied  Up
"Frequently,  sins  of  dishonesty  by  the  Vietnamese  were
compounded  by  U.S.   officials.    As  a  trivial  case  in  point,  the
Viet   Cong  released  two   U.S.    Army  prisoners  on  May  1,
1962,   after   holding  them  in  the  jungle  for  several  weeks.
The  idea  that  the  Communists  would  voluntarily  release
prisoners  ran  counter  to  the  Saigon  propaganda  line,  and
its  information   directors  let  it  be  known  that  a  detachment
of   Vietnamese  had   overwhelmed   a  Viet   Cong  camp   and
liberated  the  Americans.   This statement,  with details  about
the  valor  of  the  government  unit's  commander,  was  passed
along  to  correspondents  by  the   U.S.   military   information
office.    Some  news  stories  spoke  of  the  government  troops
"slashing  their  way  into  a  Viet  Cong  camp,"  and  made  the
whole  thing  sound  like  a  cowboy   movie,  in  which  the  good
guys  wiped  out  the  bad  guys.
"A  few  of  us  smelled  a  rat.     The  Viet   Cong  had  never
before  let  themselves  get  surprised  into  a  jam  like  that,
and  it  seemed  an  odd  coincidence  that  the  Americans  were
freed   on  May  1—a  big  Communist   holiday.    It  turned  out
later  that  the  Viet  Cong  had not  only  released  the  two  men,
but  had  sent  a  squad  of  escorts  with   them  to  make  sure
they  got into no further  trouble on the way back. . . .
"For    a  long  time,   U.S.   information    policy  tried  to  avoid
publishing   American   battle  casualties.    On  one  occasion,
U.S.    military   authorities   reported   to   newsmen   that   an
Army   enlisted   man  had  'slightly   injured   his  arm'  on  'a
training   exercise  with   Vietnamese   troops,   when   he   acci-
dentally  tripped  over  a  wire."    But  about  one  week  later  I
learned  that   the   man   involved   was  a  sergeant   friend   of
mine,  and  I  looked  him  up  at  the  hospital.   It  turned  out
that  he'd   been  on  patrol  with  Vietnamese  troops,  all  right,
and  he  had  tripped  over  a  wire.    He  had  tripped  because
the   wire  was  connected   to  an   electrically  detonated  Viet
Cong  land  mine,  which  had  blown  away  half  his  elbow."
—Malcolm  Browne,  the  AP's   senior  correspondent  in  Saigon,  in  Columbia  Journalism  Review,  Fall,  1964.
1   7   :,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  21,
Adlai  Could  Not  Have  Made  A  More  Feeble  Reply  to  Che  Guevara
(Continued   from   Page   One)
tinued  fall  in  the  raw  material  prices  on  which  the  ex-colonial
countries   depend;   the   damage   done   them   by  the   one-crop
economies   imposed   under  imperialism;  "the   elementary  duty
of   justice   and   humanity"   which   requires   the   ex-colonizers
"not   to  go  away  and  leave  us  to  pay  the  bill";  the  need  for
"a. new  organization  of  our  planet   based  on  a  new  ethics."
This  was  man's   better   conscience   speaking   through   Africa.
Savagery—After Auschwitz?
Mr.   Spaak   of   Belgium   defended   his   country  with   elo-
quence.    He   said  he  would  not   attempt   to  give  lessons  to
black  men  because  after  Buchenwald  and  Auschwitz  the  white
man  had  no  right  to  give  lessons  in  humanity.   He  said  that
in  the  Nairobi  talks,  the  representative  of  the  rebels  had  de-
manded  a  cease-fire,  which  Belgium  and  the  U.S.  could   not
obtain  because  the  Leopoldville  government  opposed  it.    But
Tshombe  was  put  into  power  by  Belgium  and  the  U.S.    They
could  have  put  pressure  on  him  if  they  were  not   themselves
opposed  to  a  peaceful  settlement  which  would  bring  the  rebels
into  the  government.    Spaak  was on  stronger  ground  when  he
discussed   the  people  Belgium  had   rescued.     He   said   these
were  the  technical  assistants,  the  professors,  the  veterinarians,
the  doctors  for  whose  services  the  Congo  had  asked.    "They
went  to  the  Congo  at  our  request,"  he  said,  "and   it  was  be-
cause  we  had   a  special   responsibility  toward   them   that  we
had   to  make  a  special   effort   in  their  behalf."     How   could
Africa  get  the  white  technical  aid  it  needed   if  they  were  to
become  the  hostages   of  internal  struggle?
But  one  felt  that  the  quarrel  had  reached  that  blind  stage
where   neither  side  hears  the  other,  and   each   is  more  con-
cerned  with  his  own  grievances  than  in  squarely  meeting  the
issue.    The  Belgians felt   aggrieved  that  after  being  asked  to
come  back  they  were  being  mistreated  and  denounced.    The
Africans  remembered  Leopold  and  the  horrors  of  his  Congo
Free  State;  this  is  but  yesterday  for  them.    They  recalled  how
the  CIA   had  connived  in  the  overthrow  of   Lumumba,   the
Congo's  one  national  leader,  and  picked  that  clown,  Mobutu,
as  our   strong  man.    They   regard   Tshombe   as  Lumumba's
murderer  and  our  puppet  and  feel  as  a  slight  on  all  of  them
That  Two  Deaf  Nations  May  Hear  Each Other
Except   for  the  writer  Edgar  Snow  and  relatives  of
Americans  imprisoned  in  China,  Dr.  Samuel  Rosen  of
New   York   is   the   first   American  in   10  years   to   be
cleared  by  both  sides  for  a  visit  to  that  country. There
is  a  gratifying  symbolism in  this.    This distinguished
ear  surgeon  discovered  and  perfected  the "mobilization
of  stapes"  operation  for  deafness.    Both  China  and  the
U.S.   need  to  hear  each  other  again.    Dr.   Rosen   has
taught   his  technique  in  27  countries  including  Egypt
and  the  Soviet  Union,  where  five  doctors  he  instructed
have  been  awarded  Lenin  Prizes.    Dr.  Rosen  was. first
invited  to  China  two  years  ago  by  its  medical  associa-
tion  but  then  the  State  Dept.  said  "no."    The  invita-
tion  was  renewed  last   spring,  and  has  not  only  been
approved  now  but  the  story   was   given  out  by   State.
We   hope  it   is   a   harbinger  of   better  relations.    Dr.
Rosen's  favorite  proverb  is,  "If  every  man  would  mend
a  man, the  world  would  soon  be  mended."   He  lives  by
it.    We might  add,  as  a  grateful  postscript,  that  it  was
he  who  operated recently  on  our  right  ear,  with  results
that  promise  to  be  near-miraculous.    We  hope  to  have
the  other  done  when  he  returns.—IPS
the  headlines  about   a  cannibalism  that  never  occurred.     In
their  rage  they  forgot  that  their  own  savagery  to  each   other
in  the  Congo   was  worse  than  anything  the  white  man  had
done  to  them.
There  never  was  greater  need  for  the  voice  of  reason.   The
debate  may  cost  Africa  aid  it  badly  needs  from  the  U.S.  Con-
gress.    The   news  from  the  Congo  will  not  make  it  easy  to
recruit  the  technicians  it  requires.    Che  Guevara  in  his  green
fatigues,   symbol  of   the  guerrilla   fighters   against  whom   the
West  has  proven  powerless,   suited  the  mood  of  the  moment
and  was  given  an  ovation  by  the  Afro-Asians  after  a  revolu-
tionary   speech   even   the   Chinese  might   have  thought  a  bit
sweeping.     He  was  escorted  out  of  the  hall  by  a  throng  of
admiring  blacks.    Mr.  Stevenson  could  not  have  made  a  more
foolish  reply  than  calling  Guevara  "a  man  with  a  long  Com-
munist  and  revolutionary  record  in  Latin  America."     In  that
atmosphere  it  sounded  to  the  Europeans  as  a  feeble  echo  of
McCarthy  and   to   the  embittered   Afro-Asians   as  a  positive
accolade.                                                                   Dec.  13,  1964
The  Weekly  is not  published  the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  First  in  January.    Next  Issue Dated  Jan.  11
Happy   Holidays   to  Afl  Our  Readers
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street   ..................................
City   ......................................
For  the  enclosed  $5  send
(To)   Name  ........................
Street   ..................................
City   ......................................
For   $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
a  sub  for  the   enclosed   $5:
...Zone............State....................
12/21/04
a  gift  sub  to:
...Zone............State....................
Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
/ F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first   week  in
January  and   Bi-Weekly  during  July  and   August  at    5618   Nebraska  Ave..   N.W.,    Washintrton.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;     $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail  rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED