I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964apr13.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue:   The  Military-Industrial  Complex  at Work
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  15
APRIL   13,  1964
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Pentagon  and the  A.T. & T.:  A  Long  Standing  Alliance Against  the  Public Interest
How  the  Missile  Makers  Rob  the  Government
The  missile  manufacturers   have  been  robbing  the   govern-
ment  blind.    This,  in  brief,  is  the  finding  of  a  Senate  Gov-
ernment  Operations   subcommittee.    Its  report,  "Pyramiding
of   Profits  and   Costs   in   the   Missile   Procurement   Program"
(Sen.  Rept.  970)   came from  a  committee chaired  by  a  South-
ern  conservative,  McClellan  of  Arkansas.   It  bore  the  signa-
tures  of  a  Republican  as  far  to  the  right  as  Mundt  of  South
Dakota  and  a  Democrat  as tender  to  the  missile-aviation lobby
as  Jackson  of  Washington.     The  hearings  on  which  this  re-
port  was  based  were  held   two  years  ago.     The   long  delay
in  filing  it  will  lead  the  knowledgeable   to  suspect   prolonged
haggling  by  the  Defense  Department  and  the  missile  makers
to  cut  this  and  soft-pedal  that.    Yet,   to  McClellan's   credit,
it   emerged   as  one   of   the   most  critical  studies  of   the   arms
business  since  the  Nye  committee  inquiry  in  the  30's.
Still  the  Same  Cost  Plus  Racket
The   McClellan   investigation   showed   that   30  years   after
cost-plus  contracts  were  outlawed  in   the  wake  of   the   Nye
revelations,  virtually  the  same  methods  are  still   being  used,
now  thinly  disguised  as  "estimated  total  costs  plus  fixed  fee."
The   word   "fixed"   is  to  be  read   in  a  poetic  sense.     If   the
estimates  weren't  high  enough  to  start  with,  they  can  be  re-
vised  upward.    The  more  the  contractor  charges,  the  more  he
makes,  since  the  fee  is  a  fixed  percentage   of  the  whole.     In
addition,  thanks  to  a  new  wrinkle  in  missile procurement,  the
less  the  contractor  does,  the  more  money  he  makes.    The  new
practice  of  making  one  producer  the  prime  contractor  for   a
whole   "weapons   system"   enables   him   to   pyramid    already
padded   profits.
This  is  how  it  worked  in  making  the  Nike  missile,  "by  far
the  largest  program  for  Army  ordnance."    Each  Nike  system
comprised   four   major   sub-systems:  electronic,   aeronautical,
mechanical  and  automotive.    The  last,  for  example,  was  the
truck  on  which  the  missile  was  carried.     Each   "sub-system"
was  separately  produced  and  even  separately  delivered  to  the
Army.    But  by making  one  company,  in  this  case  A.T,  &  T.'s
Western    Electric,   the   prime   contractor,   it   could   collect   an
overall  fee  on  the  whole  job,  though  75%  of  the  work  was
done  by  others.    Thus  from   1950   to   1962   it  took   a   7.9%
fee  on  $1.5  billion  in  Nike  orders,  or  a  profit  of  $112.5  mil-
lion.    But  only  $359  million  of  the  work  was  actually  per-
formed   by  Western   Electric.     So   it   actually  earned    $112
million  on  $359  million,  or  a  sales  markup  of  31.3%.    It  is
not   surprising  that   from   1951   to  I960,  Western   Electric's
annual  rate  of  return  before  taxes  on  average  net  investment
in  doing  government  business  was  28.3%.    If  the   Johnson
Administration   really  wants   to   save  money,   it   might   keep
the  lights  turned  on  at  the  White  House  some  night  and
study  these  figures.
Why  They  Insisted  on  Paying Rent
"Much   of   Western  Electric's   Nike   production   was
done  at  two  government   surplus   plants,   which  under
the  ordinary  method  of  doing  business  with  the  Gov-
ernment  would have  been  supplied to  Western  Electric
without   cost.     However   Western   Electric,  instead  of
having  the  plants  supplied free,  rented  them  from  the
Government.    Western  Electric  included  the  rentals  as
part  of  its  overall costs  and  then  charged  the Govern-
ment  a  profit  on  these  costs.      The  total  rentals  paid
to   the   Government   by   Western   Electric   for   these
plants  amounted   to  over  $3,000,000.    When  added  to
Western   Electric's  costs,   the  rentals   generated  addi-
tional  profits  to  the  company  of   $209,000.    In  such  a
situation,  there  could  be  little  resistance on  the. part  of
Western  Electric  to  having  the  Government  raise   the
rent,  because  as  the  rent  went  up,  so  did  Western Elec-
tric's  profit,  since  the  complete  amount  of  the  rent  was
repaid   by   the   landlord   back   to   the   tenant  together
with  a  profit."
—Senate  Report  on Pyramiding   Missile  Profits.
Western   Electric   farmed  out  the  aeronautical,  automotive
and  mechanical  "sub-systems."    But  instead  of  subcontracting
them  separately,  it  made  Douglas   Aircraft   the   "prime  sub-
contractor"  for  all  three.    This  gave  Douglas  a  chance  to  do
the  same  kind  of  pyramidal padding,  and  of  course  the  more
Douglas  padded,  the  larger  the  total  on  which  Western  Elec-
tric  took   its  overall  cut.    Douglas   Aircraft   farmed  out   the
mechanical   sub-system  to  U.S.   Steel's   Consolidated   Western
Steel,   and   the   automotive    sub-system   to   Fruehauf    Trailer.
Douglas   then  turned  in  a  bill  to  Western  Electric  for  $645
million   plus  a  7.6%    fee  or  $46  million.    Examination  by
the  committee  showed  that  only  17%  of  this  work  was  done
by  Douglas.    Its  real  fee  was  44.3%.
The  committee  found  similar  pyramiding  in  the  bills  sub-
mitted  for  the  Atlas  and  Bomarc  missiles.    General  Dynam-
ics/Astronautics    earned   a   178%    fee   on   the   work   actually
performed  by  it  as  prime  contractor  for  the  Atlas.     Boeing's
success  in  applying  the  same  methods  on  the  Bomarc  are  in-
dicated  by  its  average  annual  rate  of  return  to   stockholders'
equity  during  the  10  years  1951-60   on  government  business.
This  was  74.3%  -before  taxes  and  35.6%   after,  an  extraordi-
nary  return  on  risk-free  business.
This  pyramiding  of  profits  was  soon  the  target  of  criticism
from   government   auditors.     By  1953   the   Army's  Chief   of
Ordnance  thought  millions  of  dollars  might  be  saved  by  buy-
ing  Nike  spare  parts  and  components  directly.    But  the  civil-
ian  secretaries,   in  what   the   McClellan   committee  calls   "an
unprecedented  action"  gave  Western  Electric  a  veto  over  such
purchases.    It  graciously   consented   to  allow  direct  procure-
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April 13, 1964
ment    but    only    for    screwdrivers,   pliers,    anti-freeze    and
paper   cups!
In  negotiating  with  the  missile  makers,  the  Army  depends
for   technical  advice  on   its   Missile   Command   at   Redstone
Arsenal  in  Alabama,  which  theoretically  manages  21  missile
systems  costing  more  than  2l/
2
  billion  dollars.     "In   the  18
years  from  the  time  it  retained  Western  Electric,"  the  Army,
according  to  the  McClellan   report,   "has   regularly  and   con-
sistently  permitted  the  competence  of  its  own  technical  forces
at  Redstone  Arsenal  to  deteriorate."     As  a  result  it  has  to
depend   on   Wes'tern   Electric  for   the   facts   upon   which   to
make  its  decisions.
In  the  Hands  of  One  Army  Colonel
As  if  to  make  even  more  sure  that  it  could   not   bargain
effectively,  the  Army  put  the  bulk  of  its  missile  procurement
in  the  hands  of  one  Army  Colonel   for  most  of  the  last  ten
years,  a  practice  "hardly  calculated,"  the  committee  observes,
"to   provide   the   arms   length   relationship   so   essential   for
proper   Government   procurement."     This   Colonel   was  dis-
pleased  when  an  auditor  (see  box  bottom  p.  3)   called  atten-
tion   to  the   fact   that   in  one  contract   Douglas   Aircraft   was
being  allowed  a  total  profit  of  $1.2  million  on  a  total   effort
of  only $3,000.    The  full  amount  was  paid  without  question.
The  Committee  notes  that  the  same  Colonel  is  still  in  charge
of   contracts  with  Western   Electric  and   was   "distressed   to
learn  from  Lt.  Gen.  John  H.  Hinrichs,  Chief  of  Army  Ord-
nance,  in  April  1962  that  if  production  of  the  multi-billion
dollar  Zeus  [anti-missile]   should   be  ordered"   the  Army  in-
tended   to   contract   the   program   in   the   same   way   through
Western   Electric.
Instead  of  eliminating  the  evils  uncovered   by  these  hear-
.ings,  Secretary  McNamara  set  up  ("think-tank"  style)  a  high-
sounding   Logistics   Management   Institute,  with   a   board   of
trustees  drawn  mainly from  the  universities,  which  gave  it  an
academic  facade.  When   we  sent   a  reporter   around   to  find
out  who   actually   staffed   the  Institute,  it  took  two  hours  of
argument  before  the  names  were  angrily  released.     It  turned
out   that   almost   all   the   staff   were   from   industry,   includ-
ing  Douglas,  Boeing  and  General  Dynamics.    The  committee
Just  Helping  Small  Business
"As   a  matter  of  fact   I  think  Douglas   Aircraft   has
an   enviable  record   of   subcontracting   and   supporting
the  small  business   program. ...  If  reasonable    profit
earned  in  the  discharge   of  these  responsibilities   is  to
be  the  subject  of  criticism,  then  those  of   us  who  are
attempting  to  operate  in  the  spirit  of  the  small  busi-
ness  program   are  being   penalized."
—Donald   W.   Douglas,   Jr.,   pres.  Douglas     Aircraft,
before   the  McClellan  committee,  April  4,  1962.
'The  Douglas  subcontracted  work  amounted  to  more
than   $495,000,000   for   Nike   production.     Its   total   in
plant  effort  amounted  to  less  than  $103,000,000.    More
than   $209,000,000   of   the   Douglas    out-of-plant    effort
was  in  the  Fruehauf  Trailer  and  Consolidated   Western
Steel   (a   U.S.    Steel   subsidiary)   subcontracts.     These
two   contracts   produced   profits   for   Douglas    of   over
$14,000,000.  .  .  .  Douglas  argues  that  important  assist-
ance   to  small  business  rises  from  substantial   subcon-
tracting.    The  subcommittee fully  concurs  that  a  much
larger   portion  of   defense   work  could   and   should   be
given   to   small   businessmen,   but   it   hardly   considers
Fruehauf  Trailer  and  U.S.   Steel   as  small  business."
—McClellan  Missile  Report   March  31,  1964  (and  see
box  below  on how  Douglas  helped  a small  business   man).
notes  sourly  that  as  a  result  of  "reforms"   worked  out  by  the
Institute  the  overall  fee  on  the  latest  Western   Electric mis-
sile  contract  went  up   instead  of   down.
Unfortunately  the  committee's  recommendations are  not  as
vigorous  as  its   findings.   The  committee  is  torn  between  its
observations  and  its  preconceptions.     The  Nye  committee  30
years  ago  recommended  nationalization  of  the  armament busi-
ness  not  only  to  step  profiteering  but  to  end  the  sinister  in-
fluence of  these  "merchants  of  death"  in  the  councils  of  gov-
ernment.    Today  the  armament industry is  nationalized in  the
sense  that  most  of   its  work   is  done   in  government   owned
plants  with  government   tools   and  government  funds.    But
industry  runs  the   show.    The   committee  stultified   itself  by
starting  from  the  premise  that  "unquestionably  this  nation's
great   industrial  might   is  best  put   to  use  in  producing   our
weapons  when  properly  motivated  toward  producing  a  profit."
How  Uncle  Sam  Was  Taken  For  A  Ride in  A  "Redesigned" Nike  Missile Truck
"Perhaps   the  most  striking  example  of  savings  effected
during  breakout  (the  term  for  breaking  a  subcontract  out
of   the  prime  contract  and  buying, directly,  to  avoid   profit
pyramiding   and   to   allow   competitive   bidding—IFS)   in-
volved   the   missile   highway  transporters.     They   were  de-
signed  to  carry  several  Ajax-Nike  missiles   or  parts  of  the
Nike  Hercules  missile.    The   Government  had  ordered  520
of  them  from  Western  Electric.    Western   Electric   subcon-
tracted  the  job  to  Douglas  Aircraft  which  in  turn  sub  sub-
contracted   it   to   Fruehauf  Trailer.     By   the  time  the   520
trailers   were   delivered,  with   the   addition   of   each   firm's
profits,  the  trailers  bore  a  price  tag   of  $12,000  each.
"The  Government  was   finally   successful   in  getting  per-
mission   from   Western   Electric   to   procure   a   quantity   of
these  highway  transporters  from  firms  other  than   Western
Electric.    It  was  agreed  that  some  would  be  procured  from
Douglas  Aircraft,  and  another  lot  at  the  same  time  directly
from   Fruehauf   Trailer.    The   price  on  those   bought   from
Douglas  dropped  to  $10,700;  the  price  on  those  bought  from
Fruehauf  dropped  to  $10,300.    [Notice  that  up  to  this  point
the   contracts   had   been   kept   in   the   same   "family"   of   3
big  firms—IFS.]
"In  June  1959  the  Government  needed  another  578  high-
way   transporters.    Procurement  officials   in   the    Pentagon
finally  made  the  decision  that  this  relatively  simple  trailer
could   be   offered   competitively.     Bids   were   sought    from
various   manufacturers  throughout   the   U.S.     The   winner
of  the  competition was  the  Henney  Motor  Co.,  of  Canastota,
N.Y.,   which   bid   $5,304.31   per   unit.
"Shortly  after  Henney  was  awarded  the  contract  to  pro-
duce  the   578  trailers,  Western   Electric   made  Government
funds  available  to  Douglas  Aircraft  to  'redesign'  the  high-
way  transporter.  .  .  .  Within  6  months  after   Henney  was
awarded   the   contract,   the   design   was   so   complete   that
Douglas  Aircraft  was  awarded  a  contract,  in  January  1960,
to  produce  100  of  the  new  transporters.    The  contract  with
Henney   was   terminated  after   only   266   were    produced.
Douglas'  price  for  each  of  the  new  models  was  $34,000."
—McClellan   report   on  missile   profits.     This   story   had
two  sequels.    The  Henney   company,  which  employed  300  to
400  people  in  its  small  town  area,  went  out  of  business.    In
1961  a  contract   for  the   redesigned   truck  was  put   out  for
competitive    bids,  and  won  by  a  Tulsa   concern  "which  bid
$10,000,  less  than  a  third   of  Douglas'   price."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April 13, 196!t
This,  of  course,   is  the  religion  of  American  business.     Who
holds  to  it  need  not  be  surprised  to  see  the  arms   monopolists
make  off  with  as  big  a  buck  per  bang  as  they  can  steal.
The  Same  Racket  As  in   Telephones
The  committee's  first  recommendation   is  for  the  President
to  appoint   "a  high-level   study  group  to  reassess   the  govern-
ment's  procurement  practices."    This  should  be  apple-pie   for
our  skillful  armament  wire-pullers.     A  convocation  of  stuffed
shirts  from  our  better  heeled  universities  could  well  end   up
with   a  recommendation   that   the  government   stimulate  pri-
vate  enterprise  by paying  rent  on  the  Pentagon   to  A.T.   &  T.
It  seems  to  run  the  place  anyway.   Whether  one  studies  the
missile  business  or  space  contracts  or  satellite  communications,
or  civilian  telephone   business,  one  comes  sooner   or  later  on
an  alliance  between   A.T.   &  T.  and  the  Pentagon,   with  the
latter   as  junior  partner.     This   is  what   makes   the   commit-
tee's  second   recommendation   so  naive.    This  is  that,   maybe,
we  ought  to   regulate  the   arms   monopolists  as  we  do   the
utilities  and   the   telephone   business.     The   committee   seems
to  be  unaware  of  the  fact  that  the  system  of  profit  pyramid-
ing   in   missile  procurement   resembles   the   system   by  which
A.T.   &  T.  has  long  hamstrung  regulation   of  the  telephone
business.     In   the   contract   pyramid,  there   is  no   "privity  of
contract"   for  the  government   below   the  prime  contract,   i.e.,
it  cannot  inquire  into  or  revise  the  prices  paid   subcontractors
and  sub-subcontractors.  In  much  the  same  frustrating  way  Fed-
eral   and   State   regulatory   agencies   are  unable   to   look   into
the  prices  Western  Electric  charges  the  telephone   companies
for  equipment.    The  more  they  pay  their  corporate  alter   ego,
Western   Electric,   the  more   they   can  charge   the   public   for
telephone   service.
In   this  connection   I  would   like  to   call   the   attention   of
the  FCC,  the  public  utility  commissions   and  the  Justice  De-
partment  to  the  table  at  p.  39  of  the  McClellan   report.    The
purpose  of  this  table  was  to  show  that  Western  Electric   takes
Boeing  Warns  Low  Profits  Imperil  Defense
"Serious  consideration  should  be  given  as  to  whether
the   profits   now   competed   for   by   industry   are   high
enough—high  enough,  that  is,  to  foster  the  competition
and  attract  the  caliber  of   management,  the  technical
skills  and  the  capital  which  will  result  in  the  acquisi-
tion  of  the  best  possible  defense  equipment  at  the earli-
est  possible  date  and  for  the  least  total  cost.    There  is
great  danger  to  our  Nation's  continuing ability  to  pro-
tect  itself  if  profits  are  established  at  too  low  a  level."
—R.  W.  Tharrington  of  Boeing  Co.  testifying      before
the  McClellan  committee  investigation  of  missile   profits,
May  25, 1962.
Boeing  Company  Profits  on  Government Business   as
a   percentage   of   stockholders   equity:
Year               Before  Taxes               After  Taxes
1960                        65.1                                 31.2
1959                        68.3                               32.7
1958                        74.0                                35.5
1957                        70.0                                33.6
1956                        66.3                                31.8
1955                        64.4                                31.0
1954                      100.1                                48.0
1953                      108.6                                52.1
1952                        91.0                                43.6
1951                        36.0                                17.3
10-Year   Average      74.38                             35.68
—McClellan  Committee  Missile  Profits   Report,  Mar.  SI.
a  lower  markup  on  its  sales  to  the  government   than  on  its
non-government   business,  which  is  almost  entirely  telephone
equipment.    But,  in  the  process  of  showing  this,  it  also  dis-
closed   profits  on   the   telephone    business   much   larger   than
ever  suspected  before.    The  table  shows  that  its  profits  before
taxes  as  a percentage  of  net  investment  on  its  non-government
business  in  the  ten  years  1951-60  averaged  22.2%  a  year,  and
ran  as high  in  one  year  as  33%.     The  rate  of  return  supposed
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
When  An  Auditor  Went "Out of  Line"  and  Objected  to  Exorbitant  Profits
"This  report  has  given  the  details  of  the  procurement  of
a  group  of  Nike  launcher  loaders.    In  that  case,   Douglas
Aircraft,   with   total   certified   inhouse   costs   of   just   over
$3,000,  was  permitted to  make  a  profit  of  over  $1,200,000,
while  with  total  certified  costs  of  just  over  $14,000,  West-
ern  Electric  made  almost  another  $1,000,000  in  profit.    The
actual  work  was  done  by  the   third  tier  sub-subcontractor
Consolidated  Western  Steel   [U.S.   Steel].    The subcommit-
tee   received  in  exhibit  a  Government  auditor's  report  in
which  he  was  severely  critical  of  the  profit  rate  being  taken
by   Douglas   Aircraft.    Col.   Graham's *   reception   of   this
finding  is  indeed  remarkable:
The  Chairman  (Sen.  McClellan):  Here  is  an  audit  report
that  says  this  fee  is  not  reasonable.
Col.  Graham:  Sir,  it  is  not  normally  the  responsibility  of
an  Air  Force  auditor  or  a  Navy  cost  inspector  to  comment
on  fees.
The  Chairman:  You  think   he  was   out   of   line,  then,   in
making  the  comment  that   the  fee   was  not  reasonable?
Col.  Graham: I  do  not  say   he  was   out  of  line,   sir.     I
*  Col.  John  Wm.  Graham,   in  charge   of   the   New   York
Ordnance  District  since  1953;  contracting  officer   on  $2  bil-
lion   of   the   $2'/
2
   billion   in  contracts  awarded  to   Western
Electric  on  the  Nike  missile;  he  "remains  to  this  day   as
the  Army's  contracting   officer   with  Western   Electric."
simply  say  it  is  normally  not  part  of  his  responsibility.
The  Chairman:  He  was  not  censured  for  doing  it,  was  he?
Col.  Graham: I  have  not  any  power  of  censure  over  the
Air  Force  auditors,  sir.
"Col.  Graham   has  auditors,  lawyers,  price  analysts  and
technical  advisers  to  assist  him  in  arriving  at  prices  that
are  fair  and  equitable  to   the  Government:
Mr.   [Jerome  S.]  Adlerman  [general  counsel,  the McClel-
lan  subcommittee]:  Did  this  (auditor's  report)  go  through
four,  five  or  six   boards?
Col.  Graham:  It  went  through  two  boards  and  my  own
office.
Mr.  Adlerman:  And  nobody  commented  on   it?
Col.  Graham:  I  can't  find  any  evidence   in  the  file  that
they  did.
"The   subcommittee  must   conclude  that   something   was
seriously  amiss  at  the  New  York  Ordnance  District  when
a   comment  of   unreasonableness,  containing  the   shocking
figures   that   it   did,  would  go   unnoticed   or  uncommented
upon,  through  various  stages  of  review,  all   of   which  we
set  up  as  a  result  of  past  congressional   investigations  in
order  to  close  serious  drains  of  Federal  funds. ...  It  can-
not  be  claimed  that  this  item  just  slipped  through  as  an
unimportant  one,  because  this  was  a  major  expenditure  in
the  most  important  program in  the  largest  Army Ordnance
district   office."
—McClellan  committee  report  on missile   profits.
6   ,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  13,1964
We  Need to Know  More About the  Missile  Monopolists Than Their  Profits
to  be  allowed  the   telephone   monopoly   by  regulation   is  be-
tween  6  and  7%.     This  is  all  it  could  make  on  its  equip-
ment,  too,  were  it  not  for  the  device  of  putting  it  in  a  sepa-
rate  wholly  owned  corporation,  out  of  regulatory   reach.
Corporations   may  not  have  souls  but  they  sometimes   seem
to  have  a  sense  of  humor.    In   1957  there  was  a  conference
at  Redstone  Arsenal  to  discuss  a  rising  volume  of  complaint
about   Western   Electric's  missile  profits.     Its  vice-president,
Fred  Lack,  pleaded  "that  Western   is  regulated  by  the  Public
Utility   Commission   [sic],   who   constantly   look   over   their
shoulders.    If  the  Government  profits were  reduced,  the  Com-
mission   might   suggest   that   telephone   profits  be    reduced."
We  had  to  go  on  paying  more  for  missiles  so  we  could  go
on  being  charged  more  for  telephone  calls.
The  Military  and   Anti-Trust
It  is  a  pity  there  is  no  other  committee  of  Congress  to  take
up  the  task  of  investigation  where  the  McClellan  committee
left  off  and  look  into  the  influence of  A.T.   &  T.  on  the  mis-
sile  race  itself.    Its  influence  in  other  spheres  fs  documented,
if  not  widely known.    Senator  Long  of  Louisiana, in  the  un-
successful  filibuster  against  the  communications  satellite  bill
put   the  whole  story  into  the   Congressional   Record  on  Au-
gust   17,  1962.     He  asked  the  Senate  then,   "Is  the   Depart-
ment  of   Defense   a  secret   arm   of   the   American  Telephone
&   Telegraph   Company?"     For   30  years  the   Pentagon   has
helped  A.T.  &  T  fight  off  attempts  to  break  up  the   Western
Electric   combination   and    force   competition    in    telephone
equipment.    The  military  bureaucracy tried  to  prevent  Attor-
ney  General  Clark  from  filing  an  anti-trust  suit  for  this  pur-
pose  in  the  Truman  Administration and  it  helped   A.T.  &  T.
defeat  the  suit  with  a  consent  decree  in  the  Eisenhower  Ad-
ministration.    The   Pentagon  went   so  far   as  to  slip   private
government   memoranda   to  A.T.   &  T.  when  a  House  com-
mittee  under  Celler  investigated  this  whole  sellout.
As  far  back  as  the  years  before  the  first  World  War,   par-
liamentary  investigations  in  Germany  and  England   began   to
expose  the.role  played  by  arms  makers  in  fomenting   tension,
suspicion  and  war.    A  corporation   like  A.T.   &  T.  is  a  face-
Multi-Million  Dollar  Free   Ride  Dept.
"Figures  were  introduced by  the  subcommittee  staff
showing  Douglas  Aircraft  profits  of  $63,800,000.    Don-
ald  Douglas   testified   that  the   corporate   profits  were
only    $34,000,000   before   taxes,   if   consideration   was
given  to  costs  unreimbursed  under  the  contracts.    At-
tempts  were  made  during  the  hearings  to  get  a  break-
down   on   the   apparent  discrepancy  between   subcom-
mittee  figures  and  Douglas   figures.   Douglas  insisted
that   the  disallowed  costs   were  specifically   assignable
to  the Nike  contracts. ...
"The  hearings on  the  Nike  program  ended  on  April
18,   1962.    On  April   27,   1962,  the   chairman  received
from  Douglas  the  requested breakdown of  the  $34 mil-
lion.    The  subcommittee  learned to  its  amazement that
Mr.  Douglas  claimed   that   the   $34,000,000  discrepancy
consisted  of  more  than  $23,000,000  in  costs  incurred  in
the  development  of   the  DC-8  commercial jet  airliner,
that   more  than  $1,000,000   additional  related  to   costs
incurred   in  developing   the   DC-7  commercial  aircraft,
the  DC-6 commercial  aircraft,  and  even  the  DC-3 com-
mercial  aircraft.    The  latter  was  a  pre-World  War  II
airplane."
—McClellan  Report  on Missile   Profits.
less  private  collectivity  cranked  up  for  one  purpose  only  and
that  is  profit.    It  is  as  intrinsically  un-moral  as  an  IBM   ma-
chine.    What  part   did   it  and   other  missile  makers  play  in
the  fake  missile gap  hysteria  before  the  I960  elections?    In
the  decision  to  go  ahead  and  build  a  stupefying total  of  some
1200  missiles  even  after  the  gap  was  found  to  be  non-exist-
ent?    In  the  plan  for  a  $5  billion  dollar  multilateral  missile
force  in  NATO,  which  has  the  additional  advantage  to  the
missile   monopoly    of    blocking    disarmament   negotiations?
What  is  their  influence   in  the  Pentagon   now  that  we  stand
at  a  fateful   crossroads?    Down   one  road   lies  relaxation  of
tension  and  a  minimum  missile  deterrent.     Down  the  other
lies  a  $20  billion  anti-missile  program   which  will   raise  the
arms  race  and  tension  to  new  heights  and  force  our  cities  to
begin  to  move  underground  in  vast  blast  shelters.    We  ought
in  self-defense  to  know  more  about  A.T.   &  T.  and   General
Dynamics  and  Boeing  than  their  profits.
You  Con  Still  Get A  Copy  of  I.  F.  Stone's  Book,  "The    Haunted  Fifties,"   By  Using  the   Blank   Below
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly        5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ...............................„...........................................—...._
Street   ......................................................................._.........—
City   ............_.........................Zone.........~.State....................
4/13/64
For  this  additional  $5.35  please  send  a  copy  of  I.  F.
Stone's  "The   Haunted   Fifties."
(To)   Name   .............................................
Street   .......__..„.............._..................
City   ...........—.........................Zone........
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?
..State...................
Yes  D   No O
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F
.  Stone's   Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington.   D.   C.    Published   every  Monday  except  in  August  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,
Washington.   D    C.    An   independent    weekly   published   and   edited  by   I.   F.  Stone:   Circulation   Manager.   Esther   M.  htone.     [subscription:
in  Canada;  $14) elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
$5 in  the   U.S.:
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED