I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964oct12.pdf

============================================================

LBJ  and  The  Oil- Gas Lobby,  P.  3
Why Was This Revealing Article on Vietnam Never  Published  in  English?
Our  attention  has  been  called  to  an  article  in  the  French
magazine  Realites  last   May  which  has  not  been  published
in  its  English  language  edition, though  of  great  interest   to
Americans.     The   article   "Vietnam—A   New   Korea"   was
written  by  Edgar  Ansel  Mowrer,  who  now  edits  a  NATO
publication,  Atlantic  Community.   This  article  makes  some
interesting  revelations  (1)   that  Brigadier Gen. Edward  A.
Lansdale,  ret.,  who  helped  Magsaysay  defeat  the  Huks  in
the  Philippines,  favors  a  joint  declaration  by  the  U.S.  and
South  Vietnam calling  for  an  anti-Communist revolution  in
North  Vietnam  (2)   that  as   Diem's  military  adviser  from
1954    to   1956  Lansdale   had  already   organized   commando
raids  on  the  North,  (3)   that  3,000  Vietnamese,  many  na-
tives  of  the  North,  had  been  trained  in  Special  Forces   for
further  action  of  this  kind   (4)   that  after   some  tentative
attempts  at  "counter  belligerency"  the  Kennedy  Adminis-
tration,  over  the  objections  of  Assistant   Secretary  of  State
W.  W.  Rostow,  called  off  the   operations   as   "too   difficult
and  too  dangerous"  but  that   (5)   a  number  of  American
military   chiefs   still   favor   them.     Mowrer  also   says   he
was   informed   that   in  September,   1963,  Kennedy  ordered
Avercll  Harriman  to  draw  up  a  plan  of  neutralization  for
South  Vietnam  by  stages,  beginning  with  the  elimination
of  Diem.    In  our  issue  of  August  24  we  called  attention  to
an  article  in  Le  Monde  (Aug.  7)   which  said  U.S.  training
of  commando  units  against  the  North  began  in  1957,  three
years  before  the  rebellion  broke  out.    Mowrer dates  them
even  earlier.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  34OCTOBER  12,  1964
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
When  That  Chinese  A-Bomb  Does  Go Off
Secretary  Rusk  made  a  generous  contribution   to  the   15th
anniversary  of  the  Chinese  Communist  regime.    His   predic-
tion  that  the  explosion  of  China's  first  nuclear  device  was  im-
minent  gave  Peking  a  birthday  boost  almost  as  resounding  as
would  have  been  the  nuclear  blast  itself.    The  failure  of  Pe-
king  to   reciprocate   by  setting   off  a  bomb   must   seem   poor
sportsmanship  to  our  intelligence  services.    They   have  been
consistently   optimistic   about   China's   nuclear   potentialities.
The  Rand  Corporation's   leading  necromancer  on  the  subject,
Alice  Langley  Hsieh,   predicted   in  her   "Communist    China's
Strategy  in  the  Nuclear   Age"   (1962)  that   China  might  be
expected   to  detonate   its  first  atom  bomb   in   1962-63.     Our
propaganda  agencies  have  been  telling  us  for  years  (1)  that
China  was  on  the  verge  of  collapse  and  (2)   that  it  was  also
on  the  verge  of  becoming  a  nuclear  power.   The  loyal  Ameri-
can  could   only  conclude  that  Mao  had  hit  upon   some   do-it-
yourself  shortcut,  like  that  which  turned  out  the   home-made
product  known   in  our  prohibition   era  as  bathtub  gin.
Ten  Years  Is  No  Eternity
The  tone  of  the  Rusk  statement  was  splendid   in  its  omni-
competence.     "The   United  States,"  it  said,  "has   fully  antici-
pated  the  possibility  of  Peiping's  entry  into  the  nuclear   weap-
ons  field  and  has  taken   it  into  full   account   in   determining
our  military  posture  and  our  own  nuclear  weapons  program."
The  Manchu  Court  in  Peking  must  have  been  as   complacent
about  the  first  penetrations  of  the  Outer  Barbarians  into  their
empire.     The   press   was   told   reassuringly   in    backgrounder
briefings  that  before  China  had  a  sizeable  stock  of  bombs  and
the  means  of  delivering  them  on  distant  targets,  it  would  be
at  least  five  years  and  more  likely ten!    Ten  years  are  a  mere
tick  of  the  clock  in  the  history  of   China  and  ten  years  are
very  little  time  in  which   to  adjust  American   thinking  to  a
world  in  which  China  will  also  be  a  nuclear   power.
The  gravest  decisions  are  just  around  the  corner.   Will  we
give  nuclear  arms  to  Chiang   Kai-shek   to  deter  atomic   attack
Another   Way  to  Widen  The  War
".  .  .  it  is  difficult   to  understand  why  some  promi-
nent   officials,   a  few  weeks  before  a  national   election
should  be  talking  so  openly  about  expanding  the  war,
and  not  only  advocating  but  almost  lobbying  for   such
a  course  of  action.    It  is  even  possible  now  to  hear  of-
ficials  of  this  government  talking  casually   about  how
easy  it  would  be  to  'provoke  an  incident'  in  the  Gulf
of  Tonkin  that  would justify  an  attack  on  North   Viet-
nam.  .  .  .  There  is,  of  course,  always  a  lot  of   casual
talk  here  while  major  policies  are  in  dispute,  but  this
is  an  odd time  and  an  odd  way  to  proceed  on  anything
so  important  as  risking  a  war  with  China."
—James  Reston, New  York  Times, October  2.
"Taipeh,   Formosa    (Associated    Press)—Nationalist
guerrilla  raids  on  the  China  mainland  will  be  stepped
up,  the  Mainland Recovery  Planning   Board   announced
Sunday  after  a  two-day  meeting.    Vice  President   Chen
Cheng,  the  board's  chairman,  said  measures  also  will
be  taken  to  incite   anti-Communist  revolts."
—Boston  Herald,  Sept.  28.
from   the  mainland,  and  how  will  we  make  sure  he  doesn't
use  them  to  set  off  the  war  he  has  so  long  desired ?   Will  we
encourage  Japan  to  give  up  its  renunciation  of  war  and  manu-
facture  atomic  bombs  of  its  own,  or   accept   them  from   us?
And  how  will  we  be  sure  that  the  pacific  Japan  of  today  does
not  respond   to  the  possession   of  this  new  military  muscle  by
reverting   to  the   aggressive   Japan   of   yesterday,  thirsting   to
revenge  itself  upon  us  for  Hiroshima?    Indonesia  has  already
received  Badger  planes  from  the  Soviet  Union  which  can  carry
nuclear   bombs.     Will   we   compete   for   Sukarno's   favor   by
being  the  first  to  provide  bombs   for  them?    Will   impover-
ished  India  be  encouraged   to  divert  more  food  from  its  hun-
gry  millions  to  embark  on  the  production   of  nuclear   arms?
We   are  approaching  one  of   the   decisive   choices   of  human
history.    Will  we  continue  to  confront   the  new  China  with
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 12, 1964
(Continued  from  Page  One)
hatred,  and  give  new  and  more  dangerous   dimensions  to  the
nuclear  arms  race?    Or  will  we  seek  a  Far  Eastern   settlement
which  would  bring  China  back  into  the  family  of  nations?
A  Fresh  Report   from   China
The  average  American  has  been  led  to  believe  that  China's
is  a  tottering  regime  which  holds  by  terror  alone  700  million
hungry  slaves.    Le  Monde   (Sept.  18-Oct.  1)  has  just finished
publishing  a   12-part  account  by  Robert   Guillian  of  his  first
visit  to  China  in  seven  years.    Now,  as  in  his  past   writings,
Guillian   has  many  misgivings  about   the   regimentation   and
thought   control   in  the  new  China.     But  he  was  impressed
with  the  progress  and  self-confidence,  particularly  in   master-
ing  the  tremendous  difficulties  created  by  the  abrupt  recall  of
Russian  technicians  and  the  ending  of  Soviet  aid.     A  people
which  has  been  able  to  cope  not  only with  the  isolation   forced
on  them  by  American  power  but  with  the  body  blow  of   the
break  with  Moscow,   is  a  people  which  feels  it  can   overcome
any  obstacle.    The  bomb  will  be  a  symbol  of  their  power  to
raise  themselves by their  bootstraps.
The  delusions  about  China  built  up  among  the  American
people  by   15  years  of  hateful  propaganda   are  dangerous   to
our   future   and   to  world  peace.    McCarthyism  was  in  large
part  the  product  of  the  China  Lobby  and  a  new  rightist  storm
in   our   politics   may  some   day  be   precipitated   if    leadership
lacks  the  courage  to  provide saner  and  more  humane  views  of
China.    A  therapeutic and  timely  anthology  of  past  misinfor-
mation  has  just  been  provided   in  Felix  Greene's  new  book,
"A  Curtain  of  Ignorance"  (see  boxes  on  this page).   Its  most
important  chapter  traces the  way  in  which  Chinese  views  have
been   distorted   to  make  it  appear   that   they  would   welcome
nuclear  war.    Greene  traces  this  back  to  a  New   York   Times
dispatch  (June  16,  1958)  which  reported,   "without  mention-
ing  names  or  places,  Marshal  Tito  said  the  Chinese  liked   to
boast  that  their  population  of  600,000,000  was  a  guarantee  of
victory  in  war.    According  to  President  Tito,  Peiping   calcu-
lated   that   'if   300,000,000  were  killed   there   would   still   re-
Clouded  Crystal   Ball  Dept.
"What   is   happening   in   China  is   that   the   Soviet
Union   is   detaching   the   northern   provinces   of  China
from  China and is  attaching  them  to  the Soviet  Union."
—Secretary  of  State  Dean  Acheson  to  the   National
Press  Club, Jan.  12,  1950.
"We  can  tell  our  friends  in  China  that  the  U.S.  will
not  acquiesce  in  the  degradation  which is  being   forced
upon  them.    We  do  not   recognize   the   authorities   in
Peiping   for   what  they   pretend   to   be.    The   Peiping
regime  may  be  a  colonial  Russian  government—a  Sla-
vonic  Manchukuo on  a  larger  scale.    It  is  not  the  gov-
ernment  of  China. ...  It  is  not  Chinese."
—Dean  Rusk,  then  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for
Far  Eastern Affairs,   May  18, 1951.
"[Walter  S.]  Robertson  [Ass't  Secy  of  State  for  Far
Eastern   Affairs   1953-59]  had  made  no  secret   of   his
conviction  that  Mao Tse-tung  was  a  passing  phenome-
non  and  Chiang  Kai-shek  remained  China's  'real'  sym-
bol.     Indeed   in   1957  the   affable   Assistant   Secretary
assured  me  at  a  Washington  party:  'Mao  has  no  more
real   influence  than  the  first  taxi  driver  who  goes  by
outside'."
—Felix   Greene  in  his  new  book,  "A   Curtain  of   Ig-
norance"   (Doubleday:   $5.50)  from   which  these   quota-
tions  are  taken.    We  recommend   the  book  as  a  correc-
tive  to  the  poisonous  nonsense   on  China  in  our  press.
main  300,000,000  Chinese!'".    This  was  amplified  and  em-
broidered  to  the  point  where five  years  later  a  newspaper com-
mentator  was  reporting  that  "Mao  is  said  to  have  remarked
in  Moscow"  that  even  if  a  third  world  war  came  and  half  the
people  of  the  world  were  killed,  half  of  those  who  survived
would  be  Chinese  and  they  would  rule  the  world.    Scholar-
ship  has  kept  pace  with   journalism.     One   scholar  cited  by
Greene  quoted  from  Mao's  writing  to  prove  moral   indiffer-
ence  to  war  but  omitted  a  key  sentence.    In  it  Mao  called  war
"this   monster  of   mutual  slaughter"  and   predicted   its  final
elimination  "through  the  progress  of  human  society,  and  in
no   distant   future."     That  is  quite  an   omission.     Not   one
American  in  a million  knows  that  Mao  expressed  such  a hope.
It's  A  Wonder  There  Are  Any  Chinese  Left  At  All
1950:  "Famine  this  year  will   be  catastrophic"  —   New
York  Times editorial,  March  26.
1951:   "Food  riots  are   reported  among   peasants"—U.S.
News  & World  Report,  March  16.
1952:  "Shanghai  is   a  city  of   hungry   millions"—United
Press from  Formosa, June 23.
1953:  "There  is  no  hiding  the  fact  that  multiplied  mil-
lions  of  Chinese  are  starving"—New  York  Times  editorial,
June  21.
1951:  "Red  China's   leaders  are  already  trying  to   pre-
pare  against  the  pressures  of  starvation"—Same,  May  10.
1955:  "Signs  of  a  spring  famine  in  Communist  China  are
filtering   from  the  mainland"—Ted  Sculz  in  the  New   York
Times  from  Hongkong, April  24.
1956:  "Red  China  Beset  by  Spring  Famine"—New  York
Times  headline,  March  27.
1957:  "The  threat  of   famine  stalks  millions  of  Chinese
again  this  spring"—AP  from  Hongkong,  May  -13.
1958:    "Peasants    are   deserting    the    collective   farms.
Cities   are   packed   with   hungry,   jobless   millions"—U.S.
News & World  Report,  April  4.
1959:  "Famished  Red  China  slaves  Steal  Pigs'  Slops"—
headline,  N.Y.  World  Telegram,  Hongkong  cable,  June  25.
1960:  "The  hunger  that   stalks  mainland  China  for   the
third  straight  year"—Time, Aug. 22.
1961:  This  was  the  banner  year  Joseph  Alsop  informed
his   readers   (May  12)  that  the   Chinese   were   reduced   to
dining  on  afterbirths  and  (Sept.  13)  that  the  Communist
government  had  put  the  population on  a  national  diet  aver-
aging  600  calories  a  day,  Felix  Greene  points  out  that  the
U.S.  National  Research  Council  says  709  calories  a  day  is
the   absolute  minimum   to  maintain  a  2  to   6  months  old
13-lb.  baby!
1962:  "The  Chinese  masses  are  now  receiving  a  nation-
wide  average  of  1300 to  1600 calories  a  day  .  .  .  the  figures
raise  the  question  whether Communist China  is  not  caught
in  a  remorselessly  descending spiral  from  which  a  vast  up-
heaval   of   some   sort   is   the   only   likely  escape."—Joseph
Alsop, April  13.
1963:  "March  and  April  will  be  the  months  to  watch.    It
is   then  that   food  stocks   will   be  lowest.     Unrest   among
Chinese   peasants  is   expected.     Revolts   are  likely"—U.S.
News  & World Report,  Jan. 7.
—From  Felix  Greene's  "A  Curtain of  Ignorance."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 12,1961,
Will  LBJ  As  President  Reject  the  Oil-Gas  Lobby  He  Served  As  Majority   Leader?
Proxmire  Warns  of  Another  Assault  on  Federal  Regulation  of Natural  Gas
The  oil  and  gas  lobby  is  preparing  its  third  assault  on  fed-
eral  regulation of  natural  gas  producers.    This  will  be  a  test
of  President  Johnson.    As  Senate  leader,  he  engineered   the
two  previous  de-regulation  bills  through  Congress.    Truman
vetoed  the  first  and  Eisenhower  reluctantly  vetoed  the  second
when  former  Sen.  Case  disclosed  a  $2,500  offer  for  his  vote.
"Unfortunately,"  said  Sen.  Proxmire  in  a  Senate  speech   (Sept.
25)   that  warned  of  the  coming  assault,  "there  is  some  doubt
that  similar  bills  would  be  vetoed   at  this   time."     A  veto
would   be   in   striking  contrast  to   the   Democratic   Platform
which  boasts  that  the  spiral  of  natural  gas  prices  in  the   50's
"has   been  halted   by  vigorous   regulatory  action"  and    "the
Nation's  36  million   consumers  have  benefited  from  rate  re-
ductions and  refunds."
The  Producers  and  the   Pipe-Lines
FPC  Chairman Swidler recently  explained  the  need  for  fed-
eral  regulation  of  gas producers.    In  a  speech  before  the  Inde-
pendent  Natural  Gas  Association,  he  spoke  of  "the  dominat-
ing  bargaining  position  of  a  handful  of  producers  who  con-
trol  our  major  gas  reserves."    Although  there  are  over  6,000
producers  who   sell   interstate,   the   23  largest   accounted   for
60%  of  total  (interstate)   pipeline  purchases  in  1962.    These
giant  companies  are  also  the  nation's   major  oil   companies.
They  are  under  no  compulsion   to  sell   natural  gas   because
they  have little  funded  debt  and  a  very  profitable  oil  business
to  sustain  them.   The  pipeline  companies,  on  the  other  hand,
are  under  considerable  compulsion  to  buy.    They  have  large
funded  debts  and  billions  of  dollars  invested  in  fixed  facili-
ties,  which  become  wasting  assets  if  gas  is  not  kept  flowing.
Furthermore,  the  pipelines  are  tied  to  relatively  limited   pro-
ducing  areas  and   cannot  move  to   other   sources  of   supply.
"Under  these  circumstances,"  said  Swidler,  "if  producers  were
freed  from  regulation  they  could  sit  on  their  reserves  until  in
desperation  the  pipelines  met  their  terms."
The  renewed  attack on  producer  regulation  comes  when  the
FPC  is  about  to  abandon  the  idea  of  holding  separate   rate
cases  for  each  of  the  many  thousands  of  gas  producers.     In-
stead  it  will  fix  a  single  price  for  an  entire  geographic  area.
Four  area  cases  now  underway will  dispose  of  the  rates  for
What  LBJ  Said  in  1956
"If  the  Senate  sits  supinely  by  and lets  the  Supreme
Court  write  the  laws  of  the  nation,  I  warn  Senators
that  if  the  Supreme  Court  can  do  it  with  respect   to
gas,   it  can  do  it  also  with  respect  to  other  commodi-
ties.    If  the  Senate  by  inaction   or  by  defeating   the
pending    [Harris-Fulbright]    bill,   lets   the    Supreme
Court  say  to  the  Texas  farmer  or  to  the   Louisiana
farmer  or  to  the  Texas  Oil  Co.  or  the  Louisiana  Oil
Co.,  'This  is  going  to  be the  heyday  of  the  price-fixers'
and  that  the  control   contingent   has  come  back  to  the
Capital  of  the  Nation,  I  warn  every  Senator  that  what
applies  to  gas  may  apply  to  oil—they  come  out  of  the
same  hole,  and  that  what  applies  to  oil  can  apply  to
coal.   If  it  can apply  to  coal,  it  can apply  to  butter and
to  autos  and  to  everything   that  is   produced.    If  we
wish  to  follow  our  free  enterprise   system,  we  can  say,
'We  the  Senate  can entrust  to  reasonable  men the  duty
of  setting  reasonable  prices'."
—LBJ,  in the Senate, Jan.  18,1956.
75%  of  the  gas  flowing  in  interstate  commerce.    One  danger
with  area  rates  is  that  they  may  bring  windfall  profits  to  the
large  companies  whose  costs  tend  to  be  below  average  while
depriving  the  small  high-cost  firms  of  a  fair  return.    As  an
alternative,  the  Supreme  Court  has  suggested  that  the  Com-
mission  regulate  only  the  large   producers.
If  either  system  is adopted,  it  will provide  the  first  effective
regulation  of  producers  since  passage  of  the  Natural  Gas  Act
in   1938.    Until  1954  the  Commission  interpreted  the  Act  to
apply  only  to  pipeline  companies.    In  that  year  the  Supreme
Court  reversed  an  FPC  ruling  and  held  that  producer  prices
must  also  be  regulated.    (Phillips  Petroleum  Co.  V.  Wiscon-
sin,  342  U.S.  672.)     The  Eisenhower-appointed  Commission
recommended   legislative   relief   from  the  Court's   decision   in
annual  reports   from   1955  through   1960.
The   Kennedy  Commissioners  may  never  get   a  chance  to
complete  their  work.    There  are  already  two  vacancies on  the
five-man  Commission.     When   he  fills  these,   Johnson   will
have  put  his  stamp  on  the  majority.    As  Vice  President,  he
influenced   the  choice  of   Commissioner  Lawrence  O'Connor,
probably  the  only  Texas  oil  executive  to  sit  on  the   FPC.
How  Public  Utilities  Conceal  Aid  To
"The  nation's   electric  light   and  power  industry  is  noted
for   its   generous   philanthropy.    Not  so  well   known,  how-
ever,  is  the  fact  that  many  lOU's*  give  financial  and  lead-
ership  support  to  a  host  of  reactionary,  rightwing   propa-
ganda  groups.    I  have  just  made  a  far-from-complete  sur-
vey   of   this  situation,   which   disclosed   more  than  200  in-
stances  of  private  power  contributions to  such   groups.
"The   great   majority   [of   contributions]—84%—are   for
less  than  $500  each.    Small  donations  are  more  easily  con-
cealed   from   regulatory   agencies.     Although   FPC   regula-
tions  require  all  lOU's  to  file  an  annual  report  of  contribu-
tions  and  other  expenditures,  the  Commission  has  not  re-
quired  itemization of  donations  under  $1,000,  and  in  many
cases  companies  have  been  allowed  to  file  reports  in  which
nothing  is  itemized.   The  Commission  originally  proposed
requiring  that  all  donations  in  excess  of  $100  be  itemized.
The   lOU's,   however,  objected   and,  as  a  result,  the  Com-
mission  backed off.
The  Radical  Right  As  Charity
"In  1962,  the  private   power  industry's  unitentized  lump-
sum  (donations)  totaled  more  than   $15  million.     Detroit
Edison—the  grand  champion—reported  $815,006  in  uniden-
tified  lump-sum  expenditures  last  year.    I  was  able  to  ob-
tain  breakdowns  of  such  expenditures  from  only  57  of   the
Nation's   220  private  power  companies.    This   is   where  I
found   most   of   the   recent   rightwing   contributions—con-
cealed  in  lump-sum  expenditures   labeled  'charitable  contri-
butions'  and  'miscellaneous  expenses.'    The  vast   majority
of  (this)  is  included  in  the  companies'  operating   expenses,
so that  the  consumers—the  public—wind  up  footing the bill.
"I  think  the  American  people  have  a  right  to  know  when
their  local  power  company  supports  group  which  for  three
decades   have  plastered  the  labels  of  'socialism'  and  'com-
munism'  on  every  legislative   effort  to  ease  pain  and  suf-
fering,  hunger  and  want,  injustice  and inhumanity."
—Sen. Metcalf   (D.  Mont.),  in Cong. Rec., Sept.  25  (abr.).
* Investor   Owned  Utilities.
1    3     ':
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,   October  12, 1964
Footnote  on  Medicare's  Defeat:   U.S.  Spending  Relatively  Less  on  Welfare  Than  in  1936
The  Arms and Oil Lobbies Won  Victories in The  Rush  to Adjourn  Congress
The   Civil  Rights  Act  and  the  Equal  Employment  Oppor-
tunities  Act—historic  as  is  the  achievement  they  represent—
are  only  part  of  the  story  of  the  88th  Congress.     A   Senate
speech  by  Clark  (D.  Pa.)   in  the  closing hours  helped  to  place
these  more   spectacular  accomplishments in  perspective.     "In
terms   of   investment  in   our   nation's   wealth—roads,   urban
renewal,  resource  development,  education  and  welfare,"  said
Clark,  "the  United  States  stands  at  the  bottom  among  the  in-
dustrialized  countries  of  the  West."   He  pointed  out  that  in
the  early  1960's  we  actually  spent  less  annually  (relative  to
GNP)    on  our  domestic  welfare  than  we  did  in  1936.     This
makes  more  damning  Congress'  failure  to  pass  medicare  and
the  Appalachian  Development  Program.    The  one  compensa-
tion  is  that  liberals  will  now  have  a  chance  to  re-work  these
proposals,  which are  themselves so inadequate.
Private   Sales  of   Arms
In  the  rush  of  adjournment,   some  unfortunate  changes  in
major  legislation  went  unnoticed.    The  arms  and  oil  lobbies
got  the  foreign  aid  conference  committee  to  strike  two  salu-
tary  amendments.     One,   by  Sen.   Ellender,  would  have   for-
bidden    a   new   government    program    underwriting   private
sales   of   military   equipment   to   foreign   governments.      The
Defense   Department   justifies  the  guarantees  as  a  way  to  cut
down   on  public  grants  of  military  aid.    To  us  they  seem  a
way  of  increasing  military  aid  behind  the  public's  back.    The
other  amendment,  by  Sen.  Proxmire,  would  have  put  an  end
to  a  $35  million  a  year  handout  from  AID   to  seven  major
international  oil  companies.    The  agency  has  been  purchasing
$100   million   of   oil  annually  at   prices   somewhere    between
20%   and  40%  higher  than  the  world  market.    The  amend-
ment   required  competitive  bidding  on   all   future   purchases.
Another   indication  of  the  power  of. oil  may  be  seen  in  the
restoration  of  aid  to  Indonesia.    "The   reason  for  the  contin-
uation,"  explained  Sen.  Morse,  "is  the  investments  of  Ameri-
can  oil  companies  there.    We   are  constantly  lulled  with  the
theory  that  we  have  to  preempt  all  the  oil  fields  in  the  world
to  keep  them  from  falling   into  Communist  hands,"  he  con-
tinued.    "What  we  are  really  trying  to  do  is  extend  our  con-
Unnoticed  Contradiction
Rep.  Jack   WESTLAND    (R.   Wash.):   ][  should   like
to  talk  about  this   matter   of  control   of  nuclear   weap-
ons.     In  reading   many   newspaper   articles,  you   would
think   that   the   matter   of   giving   any  control   or   more
say  to  NATO  had never  been  discussed,  that  the  Presi-
dent  was  always  going  to  have  the  final,  ultimate  say
on  whether  or  not  nuclear  weapons   were  ever  going  to
be  used.    If  this  is  the  case,  then  why  has  this  admin-
istration   so  persistently    urged   this  multilateral   force,
which   would  consist  of   members   of   NATO   countries,
Germans,  Italians,  Greeks,  and  Turks,   all   in  the  same
ship   with   nuclear   weapons,    with   Polaris   weapons?
Why  would  they  persist  in  having  this  sort  of   NATO
force  if  it  is  not  to  give  NATO  allies  more  control?
Rep.   Craig   HOSMER   (R.   Cal.):   A   great    schizo-
phrenia  exists   here   between   the   MLF   approach   pur-
sued   by  the  administration   on  the   international   front
and  the  zealous   harboring   of  nuclear   control  which  it
pursues  on  the  campaign   trail.
—In  the  House,  Sept.  22  (abr.).
trol  over  as  much  of  the  supply  as  possible  in  order  to  main-
tain  an  artificially high  price  for  oil  on  the  world  market."
The  Supplemental  Appropriation  Bill  also  contained  disap-
pointments.    The  House  Appropriations  Committee   removed
from  it  $1.9  million  for  a  Public  Health   Service  research  and
education  campaign  on  the  hazards  of  cigarette smoking.    The
Senate  Committee  might  have  restored  the  funds,  but  Health,
Education   and   Welfare   never   filed   the   necessary    petition.
This  is typical  of  the  Department's   timidity with  big  business,
whether  drugs  or  tobacco.    It  illustrates  why  the  regulation  of
cigarette   labeling  should   go  to  the  Federal  Trade   Commis-
sion   and   not   to.  HEW,    as  some   tobacco-state    Congressmen
have  been  suggesting.    Also  missing  from  the   Appropriation
bill  were  funds  for  a  $50  million  rehabilitation  loan  program
authorized  in  the  Housing   Act.    The  low-interest  loans  were
to  provide owners  of  deteriorating  homes  and  businesses  with
an  alternative  to  relocation,  which  often   creates  more   slums.
Apparently  the  real  estate  interests  thought   that  rehabilitated
dwellings   would   mar   the   beauty  of   their   high-rise   luxury
apartments.
We'll  Send  A   Free  Sample   Copy  of   This   Issue  to  A   Friend   If   You   Send  A   Long  Stamped  Self-Addressed   Envelope
I. F. Stone's
Please   renew
Street    ............
City   ................
For   $5.35  extr
(To)   Name  .
Street   ...........
City   ...............
Shall  we  send
Weekly       5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
(or   enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
..........................Zone............State....................
10/12/64
a  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
........................ ..Zone............State....................
gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.   D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week   in   December  and   the  first  week   in
January   and   Ri-Weekly   during   July   and   August   at   5618   Nebraska   Ave..   N.W.,   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by   I.   F.  Stone:   Circulation   Manager,   Esther   M.  Stone.     Subscription:   S5  in   the   U.S.:     S6   in   Canada;   $10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
S15  to  Europe:   S20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED