I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964dec07.pdf

============================================================

Eyewitness  in  The  Congo, P.  2
President  Johnson Shows His  Anger  Over War-Mongering Press  Speculation on Vietnam
"Q.  Mr. President,  is  expansion  of  the  Vietnam  war  into
Laos  or  North  Vietnam  a  live  possibility  at  this  point?
"A.  I   think   Mr.   [Malcolm]    Kilduff    [assistant   White
House  press  secretary]   reviewed  with  you  yesterday  the
feelings  of  this  Administration  [when  he  advised  the  press
not  to  expect  "any  great  horrendous decision"].  .  .  .  When
you  crawl  out  on  a  limb,  you  always  have  to  find  another
one to  crawl  back  on.   And  I  have  just  been  sitting  here  in
the  serene  atmosphere  of  the  Pedernales  for  the  last  few
days  reading  about  the  wars  that  you  have  involved us  in,
and  the  additional  undertakings  that  I  have  made  decisions
on,  or  that  General  Taylor  has  recommended, or  that  Mr.
McNamara  plans,  or  that  Secretary  Rusk  envisages.  .  .  .
Some  people  are  speculating  and  taking  positions  that  are
somewhat  premature. ...  In  retrospect,  as  you  look  back
over  your  writings  .  .  .  they're  somewhat  similar. ...  I
don't  know  whether  you  have  a  blacksheet  that  you  take
out  and  every  time  we  have  a  meeting   on  it   [Vietnam],
rewrite  it.    But  at  Honolulu  we  had  these  dire  predictions.
...  I  anticipate  that  there  will  be  no  dramatic  announce-
ment  to  come  out  of  these  meetings,  except  in  the  form
of  your  speculations."                  —LBJ  at ftta ranch Nov. 28.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  41DECEMBER  7,   1964
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
LBJ's  Historic  Opportunity  for  Peace
The   crises  in   foreign   policy  which   confronted   President
Johnson  on  his  return  to  Washington  may be  summed  up  in
one  question.    Is  our  objective  to  build  a  more  stable  world,
or  to dominate the  earth ?   Whether  we  look  at Southeast  Asia,
or  at  the  Congo,  or  at  the  conflict in  NATO  over  MLF,  or  at
the  split  threatening  the UN,  we see stresses  developed  by  U.S.
insistence  on  having  its  own  way.    If  it  were  possible  to  im-
pose  a. Pax  Americana on  the  globe,  Roman  style,  the  salutary
end  might  justify  the  painful  means.    But  the  number  of  our
missiles  is  a  delusive  measure  of  our  power.    These  give  us
the  capacity  to  destroy  the  world,  but  not  to  make  it  obey  us.
The  Vietcong  peasant  with  his  home-made  shotgun,  the  Con-
golese  rebel  with  his  spear,  de  Gaulle  with  his  nuclear   sling-
shot,  illustrate  difficulties  our  superiority  in  firepower,  though
.fantastic,  cannot  overcome.    We  cannot  impose  our  will  on
Asia  nor  on  Africa  nor  on  a  recovered  Western  Europe.    "We
made  a  mistake  in  going  in  there,"  Senator  Russell  said  of
Vietnam  after  a  visit  to  the  LBJ  ranch  Nov.  25,  "but  I  can't
figure  out  any  way  to  get  out  without  scaring  the  rest  of  the
world."   What  will  frighten  the  world  more  is  if  we  persist
in  wasting  our  strength  trying  to  solve  complex  problems  by
military  means.    Nothing  would  reassure  it  more  than  to  see
us  use  our  resources  to  take  the  leadership  in  a  struggle  of  a
very  different  sort,  for  a  safer  world.
A Wilful  Horse
This  is  the  choice  the  President  must  make.    "Never  since
1945,"  the  British   Left   Laborite  Michael  Foot  wrote  in  the
London   Tribune   (Nov.   27)   on  the  eve  of  Prime   Minister
Wilson's  visit  to  Washington,   "has   an  American   President
occupied  a  better  posture  from  which  he  can  launch  a  real
initiative  for  peace."    His  electoral  victory  gives  Mr.  Johnson
in  the  next  few  months  a  power  for  peace  he  is  unlikely  ever
to  have  again.    But  to  use  it  he  has  to  exercise  leadership  of
an  unmistakable  kind.    The  military,  diplomatic  and  intelli-
gence  bureaucracies of  this  country's  government,  like  most  of
its  press,  are  geared  to  permanent  cold  war  and  rendered   in-
secure by any turn  toward  relaxation  of  tension.   Only  a  strong
President,   freshly   elected   by  an  overwhelming   majority,  can
As Labor's Left  Sees MLF
"I  regard  with  gloom  the  prospect  of  the  first  inter-
national  act  of  the  Labour  Government  having  to  go
off  to  Washington to  sign  on  as  'Tail-End  Charlies'  in
an  American  nuclear  bomber  with  a  German  co-pilot.
.  .  .  The  present  situation  does  not  call  for  any im-
mediate  measures  to  strengthen  NATO but rather  .  .  .
of  how to  get  on with disarmament. .  .  .  The crisis  [in
NATO]  is  being  brought  about  by  the  fact  that  the
U.S.  wishes  to  appease  the  West   German  desire   for
nuclear  weapons.  . . .  We should  take  our  stand  on the
UN  Charter and not  on the  military  alliances.  .  .  .  Un-
less  and  until  Germany  agrees  to  accept  her  frontiers
...  we  should  be  totally  opposed  to  any  more  arma-
ments  for  Germany.  .  .  .  We  should  give  notice  that
...  in  case  they  go  on  with  policies  we  consider  pro-
vocative  such  as  the  MLF,  we  will  start  pulling   our
troops  back  from  NATO  .  .  .  and using  the  money  for
our  economic  and  social  program  at  home."
—Konni Zilliacus in  the House  of  Commons, Nov.  28.
take  initiatives  which  go  against  the  grain  of  this  mammoth
apparatus.    Mr.  Johnson  complained  at  his  ranch  last  week-
end  of  the  warmongering   in  the  U.S.  press  about   Vietnam.
His  complaint  was  justified.    But  as an  experienced   Washing-
ton  hand  he  also  must  know  that  these  were  planted   stories
intended   to  deprive   him  of  freedom  to  decide  freshly  just
what  he  wants  to  do.
As  Mr.  Johnson  approaches  his  hour  of  decision,  he  cannot
do  better   than  remember  the  humiliating  disaster   to  which
John    F.  Kennedy  was  led  at  the  Bay of  Pigs  in  the  very  first
months  of  a  new  Administration.   The  outcome  demonstrated
that  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff   and  the  CIA  for  all  their  re-
sources  were  incapable  soberly  of  assessing  the  situation  in  a
little  country  as  close  to  us  as  Cuba.    The  same  apparatus  is
now urging  expansion  of  the  war  in  Southeast  Asia and  deeper
involvement  in  the  Congo,  which  may easily  become  a  second
Vietnam.    That  Rube  Goldberg  device,  the  MLF,  is  another
product  of  the  same  bureaucratic  labyrinth,  as  is  our  collision
course  at the  UN  on the  question  of  peace-keeping  costs.    Mr.
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
\  6
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  7,1964
The  One Safe  Way Out
"If  the  U.S.  and  Belgium  continue  to  back   Tshombe
militarily,  they  will  find  themselves  opposed  not  only
by  the  Congolese  rebels  but  by  most  of  Africa.  .  .  .
There  is  only  one  way  in  which  the  Belgians  and  the
Americans   can  extricate   themselves  from  the  present
situation   in  the  Congo  and  damp  down  the  dangerous
anti-Western    feelings    which   are    inflaming    Africa.
They  should  publicly  identify   themselves  with  the  Or-
ganization  of  African  Unity's  insistence  on  a  cease-fire
in  the  Congo  to  be  followed  by  political    reconciliation.
.  .  .  They   should   then   seek  agreement  with  the  OAU
to  secure  the  quarantining   of  the  Congo  from  all  for-
eign  military  intervention   through  a  new  initiative   at
the  UN. ...  If  the  West  genuinely   proposes  to  disen-
gage  itself  from  the  Congo,  the  Russians  will  support
an  OAU-UN   initiative.     Their   own  interests  are  in-
volved   in   securing   Western   and   Chinese   disengage-
ment."
—Colin Legum in  The  (London)   Observer, Nov.  29.
A  French  Correspondent,  Just  Back  From  The  Congo,  on The  Savagery  We  Don't  Hear  About
Tshombe  Would  Fall  Without  White  Mercenaries  and  U.S.  Arms  Aid
By  Emile  Lejeune*
When   I  returned  to  Paris,  I  saw  in  a  large  evening  news-
paper,  spread  across  8  columns,  a  horrible headline:  "Stanley-
ville  Hostages  Wait  to  Be  Eaten".    I  did  not  recall  that  one
could  push  indecency  so  far,  nor  that  one  could  exploit  horror
to  such  a  point.    What   the  hostages  feared  was  not  canna-
balism.    It  was  death,  and  that  was  enough.    Everything in
this  story  is hateful:  from  the  very  idea  of  hostages  up  to  the
assassination   by  his   own   troops  of   the   revolutionary  chief
who  tried  to  stop  the  massacre  of  the  whites.
One  will  never  be  able  to  say  enough   about  the  hideous
senselessness of  these  murders.   But  one  could  at  least demand
that  emotion  make  no  distinction  between  victims  of  different
color  and  that  indignation  not  be  so  cynically  selective.    For
in  the  course  of  the  last  four  months  I  have  seen  planes  strafe
and  burn  dozens  of  villages.    I  have  seen  tens  of  thousands
of   peasants  exterminated  in   the   bush  by   the   army   of   M.
Tschombe.   Their  corpses are  still there;  the  stench  hangs  over
the  streets  and  the  fields  of  a  ruined country.
Double   Standard
Who   cares?    Only  when   the  troops   of  General  Olenga,
commander   of   the   Armee   Populaire    (termed   "a   band   of
rebels"),  threatened  to  execute  white hostages  did  the civilized
world,  as  it  is  termed,  notice  that  a  savage  war  was  raging  in
the  Congo,  one  that  did  not  spare  civilians.    No  voice  is ever
raised  in  the  Western  world  in  favor  of  the  Africans.    Those
elements   of   the   Congolese   army   which   swept   through   the
Albertville  area  like  a  flaming  lance  set  fire  to  all  the  villages
in  the  region  of  Fizzi  and  of  Baraka.  That  was  the  mission as-
signed  them.    They  grilled  alive  all  the  men  and  women  they
encountered.     These   were  their  orders.    Only  the   children
were  spared.    No  government  intervened.    There  is  one  law
for  the  Whites  and  another  for  the  Blacks.
For  six  months   the  Tschombe  government  has  stayed  in
power  thanks only  to  white support.   Only  mercenaries, come
from  Rhodesia  and  South  Africa  for  the  pleasure of  "cracking
Negro  heads",  have made  it  possible  to  stop  and  then  to push
back  the  revolutionary  wave.    Tschombe's  military  adviser  is
a  Belgian,  Colonel  Van  de  Walle.    The  planes which  supply
the  regular  forces  are  American,  piloted  by  Americans.    The
pursuit  planes which  machine-gun and  bombard the  Soumialist
troops  and  the  villages  which  have  joined  the  rebellion  are
American  and  piloted  by  anti-Castro Cubans.    Massacred  by
the  American and  Belgian  military,  the  insurgents threatened
to   revenge  themselves  on   American  and   Belgian   civilians.
That's  abominable, but  it  is  not astonishing.
Where  would  the  Congo  be  today without foreign interven-
tion?    It  would  probably  be  in  the  hands  of  the  rebels.    No
force  seems  able  to  stop  them.    The  Katanga  gendarmes ?  For
several   weeks   after   his   accession   to   power,   M.    Tschombe
thought  that  he  could  make  them  the  spearhead  of  the  Con-
golese  army.    He  was  wrong:   the  gendarmes   began  by  de-
manding  their  back  pay.    Then  they  asked  an  advance.    Fi-
nally,  they  refused  to   fight.   At  Bukavu  their  weapons  served
to  intimidate the  street-walkers when  the  girls  demanded  pay.
Why  make your  livelihood  in  the  risks of  combat  if  you  can
do better  by pillaging  and  by selling  arms  to  the  rebels?  That's
how  they  see  it  in  the  Congolese  army.
Unable   to   wage   pitched   battles   with   their  rudimentary
weapons  (which  very  often  were  not  firearms),  the  troops  of
Gaston  Soumialot  are learning today in  blood  and fire the  hard
lesson  of  the  Algerian  and  Indochinese  peasants:  how  to  wage
guerrilla  war.    Thanks   to  these  methods,  Pierre  Mulele  has
been  able to defy  the  legal  authorities for  a year.   M.  Tschombe
can   win   military   victories,   Belgian   parachutists  can   retake
Stanleyville,  but  peace  cannot  be  reestablished  that  way  any
more  than   in   South   Vietnam.    Achieving  power   after   the
murder  of  Lumumba  by  the  grace  of  the  mining  companies;
victorious,  thanks  to  white  mercenaries  and   foreign   armies;
rejected  by the  Organization of  African  Unity and  by the  third
world  as  a  whole,  M.  Tschombe  has  no  way  of  rallying  the
Congolese  nation to  his banner.
*  M. Lejeune, just  back  from  the  Congo,  wrote  this  for  the
splendid  first  issue  of  Le  Nouvel  Observateur  (Nov.   26)  the
new  French  liberal  weekly  (10  rue  des  Pyramides,  Paris  ler)
edited  by  Jean  Daniel,  formerly  of   L'Express.
Two  Senators  Warned  Last  August  Against
"Mr.  President,   yesterday's  announcement  that  the   U.S.
is  sending  4  Air  Force  transports  and  106  American  fight-
ing  men,  including  40  paratroopers,   to  the  Congo  arouses
my  apprehension. ...  Is  this  but  the  first  of  a  series  of
steps?  .  .  .  Will  it  be  followed  by  others  which  gradually
escalate  our  efforts,  so  that  ultimately  we  shall  be  involved
in  another  undeclared  war,  as  in  Vietnam?"
—Stennis  (D. Miss.)  in  the Senate  Aug.  14.
U.  S.  Intervention  in  the, Congo Rebellion
"The  news  of  increased   U.S.   involvement   in  the   Congo-
lese  revolution   is  disturbing.  .  .  .  Already  it  appears  that
three  Americans  have  lost  their  lives  in  the  tribal   rebellion
in  Kivu   province.     Before   long   more   American  lives  are
likely  to  be  lost  if  our  unilateral  participation  continues  to
increase.  .  .  .  The  jungle  of  emergent  African   politics   is
marked  with  pitfalls  for  the  unwary  outsider."
—Mansfield   (D. Mont.)  in  the Senate  Aug.  Zl.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 7,1966
Speaking- of  Savages
"At  least  50  persons  were  partner  to  the   conspiracy
to  murder  Mr.  Schwerner,  it  is  believed  here.    As  for
motivation  for  murder,  it  is  suggested  by  some  that
the  Klan  mob  was  worked  up  to  an  embittered   convic-
tion  that  the  state  was  facing  an  invasion  by  Yankee
beatniks,  Jews  and  other   'scum'  and  decided  to   make
Mr.  Schwerner  an  example.  .  .  .  Even  today  there  are
Philadelphians   who  say   they   cannot   comprehend   'all
this  fuss  over  two Jews  and a nigger.'"
—Homer  Bigart  in  the  New  York   Times,  Nov.  29.
Mississippi  Negro  Farmers  Unrepresented  on  Loan  and  Crop  Committees
Secretary  of Agriculture  Promises  Action  on  Rural  Discrimination
A  Negro's  life  in  the  rural  South  can  be  utterly  wretched
when  U.S.   farm   programs  are  run  by  and   for  whites  only.
And  that  is  just  how  they  are  being  run  in  Mississippi.    To
give  Washington   a  worm's-eye  view  of  the  problem,  the  Stu-
dent  Non-Violent   Coordinating  Committee  recently  brought
nine  Mississippi  Negroes  here.   Their  stories,  which  they  told
at  a  little noticed public hearing,  were  so painful  that  they  in-
spired  a meeting  at  the  Department   of  Agriculture  with  all  its
top   officials,   including  Secretary  Freeman.
"The  White  Man Takes Your  Land"
Charles  Dixon,  who  farms  27  acres in  Holmes  county,  told
why  until  this  year  he  had  not  applied  to  the  Farmer's  Home
Administration  for  a  loan  to  build  a  new  home  for  his  wife
and  ten  children.   They-now  live  in  a one  room  building with
three  beds,  two  for  four  children  each  and  "two  in  bed  with
me  and  my  wife."     "I   was  afraid,"   Dixon   explained.     "I
didn't  apply  because  I  thought  I  would  lose  my land  too.  .  . .
AH  they  [the  FHA]  want  you  to  do  is miss one  payment,  and
the  white  man  takes  your  land."    No  regular  member  of  the
82  FHA  county  committees  is  a  Negro,  even  though  Negroes
constitute  62%  of  the  farm  population,  and  committee   mem-
bers  are  appointed  by  the  Secretary  of   Agriculture.
There  also  are  no  Negroes  on  the  all-important  Agricul-
tural  Stabilization and  Conservation  (ASC)  committees.    They
administer  the  crop  allotment  program;   that  is,  they  decide
how  much  of  his  land  a farmer  may  plant.    The  ASC county
committees  are  elected.    When  asked  why  he  didn't  vote  this
year,  Dixon  said  he  never  received  a  ballot.   Just  last  week  in
Panaloa   county,  the   ASC  chairmen   tried   to   intimidate  ten
Negroes  who  had   been  nominated   for  places  on  the  county
committee.     Four   of   them   withdrew   their   names,   but   the
Agriculture  Department  had  three  of  the  names  restored.
The  cruelest  discrimination  takes  place  in  the  Surplus  Food
Program.    The  food  is  supposed  to  go  to  impoverished  fami-
lies.    Sometimes  county  officials  don't  request  the  food  from
Washington  because they know  90%  of  it  will  go  to  Negroes.
Some  food  items  that  are  requested  have  a way  of  being  side-
tracked  into  white  retail  establishments  where  they are  sold  to
the  public.    At  the  SNCC meeting,  Fannie  Lou  Hamer,  who
ran   for   Congress   on  the   Freedom   Democratic   Party   ticket,
testified  that  she had  never  seen  butter  among  the  surplus  food
although  it  is  supposed  to  be  there.    When  a  relative  of  hers
went  to  the  local  grocery  store,  he  came  back  bearing  a  crate
in  which  butter  had  been  packaged.    It  bore  the  label,   "U.S.
Surplus  Food—Not  For  Sale."
Secretary  Freeman  is  said  to  have  been  shocked  by  some  of
these  revelations.    He  committed  his  Department  to  remedial
action.    He  already  has  ordered  an  investigation  of  the  sur-
plus   food   program.     In   addition,  he  promised   to  appoint
Negroes  to  the  three-man  FHA  county  committees  and  to  the
state   ASC  committees   in  Mississippi.     Similar  appointments
in   the   past   have   been   selected   from   the   ranks   of   "Uncle
Toms."    This  time  they  will  be  chosen  from  a  list   drawn
up  by  COFO  workers.    Freeman   also  promised   to   establish
an  Ad  Hoc  Negro  Advisory Board  to  report  on  the  adminis-
tration  of  all  the  Department's  programs.    Each  county  will
have  one  Negro  advisor.    They  will  meet  every  month,  ex-
penses  paid,  with  a  Department  consultant   in  each  of   Mis-
sissippi's  six  congressional  districts.    The  consultants  will  in
turn  fly  to  Washington   for  monthly  meetings  with  the  Secre-
tary.  Freeman  is moving just  in time. The  Civil Rights  Commis-
sion  is  about  to  issue  a  report  on  discrimination  in  his   De-
partment's  programs.    The  test  of  his  commitment  will  come
January  1,  the  date  on  which appointments  to  FHA  and  ASC
committees  must  be  made.    If  he  doesn't  follow  through,  it
will  be  a  blow  to   the  war  on  poverty.    Rural   Mississippi
counties  are  among  the  poorest  in  the  country.
A  Half  Century  Ago  Hoover  Regarded  the  Negro  Rights  Movement With  Suspicion
In   his   outburst   about   Martin  Luther  King,   J.   Edgar
Hoover  was  running  true  to  form.    For  nearly  a  half   cen-
tury  Hoover  has  regarded  the  movement  for  Negro  equal-
ity  with  suspicion."  Forty-five  years  ago  Hoover  was  made
chief  of  a  new  division   in  the  FBI  to  deal  with  sedition.
Among  its  earliest  reports  were  two  which dealt  with  "agi-
tation"   among   Negroes.     "The   reds   have   done   a   vast
amount   of  evil   damage,"   said  a  report  sent  to  Congress
late   in   1919,   "by  carrying   doctrines   of   race   revolt"   to
Negroes.    A  collection  of   articles   from  the  Negro  press
was  captioned,   "Radicalism   and  Sedition   Among   the   Ne-
groes  as   Reflected  in  Their   Publications."     One   quotation
said,   "The   colored  people  .  .  .  must  arouse   themselves  to
the   fullness   of   their   powers   and  inherent   rights."     Ap-
parently  Hoover  regarded  this  as  subversive.
With   World  War  II,  the   Negro   became  strong   enough
politically   to   demand   Federal    enforcement    of   his   civil
rights.    Hoover  opposed  this.    In  a  letter  to  the   Attorney
General  in  1946,  he  argued  that  the  FBI  was  "expending   a
considerable  amount  of  manpower"   investigating  crimes  in
the  South  "in  which  there  cannot  conceivably  be  any  viola-
tion  of  a  Federal  statute."    He  felt  it  was  "a  mistake  for
the   Department  to   accept   for   investigation   so   many   of
these  cases."
Hoover's  animosity  to  the  Negro  was  again  visible  in  the
first   public  speech  he  made   since  the  protests  stirred  by
the  press  conference   in  which  he  attacked  the  Rev.  King.
In  his  "Sword  of  Loyola"  award  speech  in  Chicago  Nov.  24
he  pledged   that  the   FBI   would  remain  "objective   in   its
investigations"  and  spoke  of  pressure  groups  "which  would
crush  the  rights  of  others  under  heel  in  order  to  achieve
their  own  ends"  and  accused  them  of  "carping,  lying  and
exaggerating."   A  few  more  speeches  of  this  kind  and  some-
body's  liable  to  award  Hoover  an  honorary   nightshirt.
"See  Max  Lowenthal's  "The  FBI"   (1950)  and  Fred   J.
Cook's  "The  FBI   Nobody  Knows"  (1964).   Recommended.
i   6
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 7,1964
Germany's  Socialists  Are  The  Only  Ones  In  Europe  to  Approve  the  MLF
(Continued  from  Page   One)
Johnson  has  mounted  a  wilful  horse,  which  can  carry  him  off
to  one  bad  spill  after  another,   if  he  does  not  make  it  clear
now,  who  is  the  master.
A Fresh  Look Before  A Fresh  Plunge
The  country, needs  and  deserves  a  fresh   look  at  a  whole
series  of  stale  situations.    The  same  military  and  political  ad-
visers  who  persuaded  Mr.  Johnson  to  call  the  inglorious  Diem
"the  Churchill  of  Asia"  on  his  visit  to Vietnam in  1961  would
drag  him  deeper  into  that  morass.    The  demonologists  who
continue   to  see  the   colonial   upsurge   as  a  Communist  plot
would  commit  us  further  to  military  support  of  Tshombe  in
the  Congo  against  the  will  of  all  Africa.    Never  was  a  more
complex  tangle  reduced  to  a  more  simpleminded  melodrama
than  to  represent  the  intricate  tribal  rivalries  and  elitist  aspira-
tions  in  the  Congo  as  a  long-range  seduction  from   Moscow
and/or  Peking.    The  question  in  the  Congo  is not  the  right  to
rescue  citizens  in  trouble,  but  the  wisdom  of  policies  which
got  them  into  trouble.     Beginning  last  spring"  we  identified
the  U.S.  with  Tshombe  by  placing  U.S.  planes  and  military
men,   "counter-insurgency"   experts   and  the  Cl A,  at  his  dis-
posal  in  the  savage  war  of  extermination  (See  P.  2)   he  has
been  waging  against  rebellious  provinces,  a war  that  has  made
Americans  hated  in  the  Congo.
Above  all  the  President  needs  to  free  himself  from  the  im-
prisoning  web  spun  by his  bureaucracies on  the  MLF.    Its  re-
jection  by Belgium, the  attack upon  it by the  new  British  Prime
Minister  in  the  Commons  last  Monday,  the statement  by Chair-
man  Chet  Holifield  of  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic Energy
that  he  has  "grave  doubts"  about the  project  should  warn  Mr.
Johnson   that  it  faces  a  growing  storm  at  home  and   abroad.
Kennedy  was  dubious  of  this  contraption.    If  Mr.   Johnson
wants  to  know  why  it  creates  such  disquiet  in  both   Western
and  Eastern  Europe,  let  him  ask  his  aides  for  a  full   report
on  the  party  conference  held  last  week  by  Germany's  Social
Democrats.    Behind  the  podium  was  a  huge  map  of  Germany
in  its  1937  frontiers;  to  achieve  them  would  require  war  or
atomic  blackmail against  Poland  and  Russia.    Equivocal  sup-
port  was given  the  hopes  of  the  Sudeten Germans for  a  return
What  Vietnam's  Civilians  May Not  Understand
"Whatever   the  outcome  of  South  Vietnam's  war  for
survival  the   U.S.   Armed  Forces  will  emerge   from   it
vastly  better  prepared  to  cope  with  guerrilla-type   wars
—the  most  likely  sort  of  conflict  in  the  years  ahead.
.  .  .  There   are  now  about   20,000   U.S.   military  men
advising   and  training   South   Vietnamese   forces.  .  .  .
Thousands   more  are  likely  to  get   their   turns   before
that  war  is   finished.   It  all  adds  up  to  a  body  of  ex-
perience   that   may  pay  important   dividends   in  future
operations  elsewhere. ...  All of  this  'on  the  job'  train-
ing  has  had  its  price—U.S.  casualties  in  a   three-year
campaign  are  creeping  toward  the  2,000-mark  in  dead,
wounded  and  missing.    But  for  the  first  time  in  Amer-
ican  history  this  Country  may,  as  a  result,  be   ready
for  new  conflicts  and military  challenge  with  the  weap-
ons  of  the  future  rather  than  with  those  of  past  wars.
The  men  on  the  line  in  South  Vietnam  understand  this,
though  the  civilian  population  may  not."
-   —Vietnam:   Laboratory   for   War,  in   The   National
Guardsman,  December,  1964.
to  the  Czechoslovakia  they  dismembered  with  Hitler  in   1938.
(Anatole  Shub  from  Karlsruhe  in  the  Washington  Post,  Nov.
27.)     When  Max  Brauer,  the  venerable  former  Burgomaster
of  Hamburg,  pleaded  with  the  delegates  that  the  MLF  "ghost
fleet"  would  violate  the  ancient  customs  of  the   sea  by  pre-
tending  to  be merchantmen  (Die  Welt,  Nov.  27),  his  protest
drew  little  echo.    The  conference  voted  for  MLF  though  its
opponents  pointed  out  that  this  would  mean  that  they  would
be the only  Socialists  in Europe to approve  the project   (London
Times,  Nov. .27).     The  scene  must  recall   in  both   Belgium
and  the  East  how  the  majority  German  Socialists  rallied  to
the  Kaiser  in  1914.    Under  cover  of  a  cry about  strengthening
NATO, we are strengthening  a revanchist Germany.   In  doing
so  we  are  blighting  the  hope  of  progress  toward  an  easing  of
the  arms  burden  and  the  war  fear.    "A  defense  policy  which
does  not  contain  within  itself  the  seeds  of  further  progress
towards  disarmament,"  Prime  Minister  Wilson  told  the  Com-
mons  last  Monday,  "is  one  which  in  the  present  state  of  the
world,  we can no longer  regard  as appropriate."   These are  the
warnings  and  the  voices  Mr.  Johnson  should  heed  before  he
finds  himself  and  the  country propelled  into  a  sea of  troubles.
We'll Send A  Free Sample  Copy Of  This  Issue To  Friends  If  You  Send Stamped  Self-Addressed  Envelopes
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street   ..................................
City   ......................................
For  the  enclosed  $5 send
(To)   Name  .......................
Street   ..................................
City   ......................................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a  sub  for  the   enclosed  $5:
....Zone.. ........ ..State.. ..................
12/7/64
a  gift  sub  to:
....Zone.. ....... ...State.. ....... ...........
Stone's  The  Haunted    Fiftiet
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  In
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.W.,    Washington,  D.  G.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;     $6  in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
S15  to  Eurone:  S20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED