I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964mar09.pdf

============================================================

On  Vietnam:  We  Need  Those  Lie  Detectors at  Home,  P.  3
Why  The  Pope  Kept  Silent—From  the  State  Dept's  Diplomatic Records
"Mr.   Harold   H.  Tittman,  Ass't   to  the  President's    Per-
sonal  Representative   to  Pope  Pius  XII,    to  the    Secretary
of   State."
"The  Holy  See  is  still  apparently convinced  that  a  forth-
right  denunciation by  the  Pope  of  Nazi  atrocities,  at   least
in  so  far  as  Poland  is  concerned,  would  only  result  in  the
violent  deaths  of  more  people.    Mgr.  Montini   [then  Papal
Under   Secretary   of   State,   now   Pope   Paul   VI]   however
stated   to   me  that   the   time   may  come  when,  in  spite   of
such  a  grievous prospect,  the  Holy  Father  will  feel  himself
obliged  to  speak  out. .  .  .  Another motive,  possibly  the  con-
trolling  one,  behind   the   Pope's   disinclination   to  denounce
Nazi  atrocities  is  his  fear  that  if  he  does  so  now,  the  Ger-
man  people,  in  the  bitterness of  their  defeat,  will  reproach
him  later  on  for  having  contributed,  if   only  indirectly,   to
this  defeat.    It  has  been  pointed  out  to  me  that  just  such
an   accusation  was   directed   against   the   Holy   See   by   the
Germans   after   the   last   war,  because   of   certain  phrases
spoken  and  attitudes adopted  by  Benedict  XV  while  hostili-
ties  were  in  progress.    When  it  is  borne  in  mind  that  Pius
XII   had  many  years  of  conditioning in  Germany,*  it  will
not  seem  unnatural  that  he  should  be  particularly  sensible
to  this  particular  argument.    Vatican   City,   Oct.  6,  1942."
—Pps.  776-7,  Foreign.  Relations,  19^2,  Vol.  Ill,  published
1952,   one  of  several  documents   which  show  U.S.  Allied   and
neutral  efforts    to  inform   the  Vatican   about  the  "death   fac-
tories"  and  to  elicit  some  protest.
—  "Pius  XII, as  Nuncio  to  Germany,  had  been  assured-by
the  German  Catholic  aristocracy that  Hitler  would  'end  the
peril  of  Bolshevism'.  .  .  .  Not  even  the  murder  of  the Catho-
lic  Action  leader,  Klausener  in  1934,  was   sufficient   to  dis-
illusion  him.   He  even showed mild  disapproval of  the  Papal
Encyclical   of   March   14,  1937,  in  which   Pius  XI   accused
Hitler  of  breaking faith  with  the  concordat, and  on  the  day
of   his  coronation,  on  March  12,  1939,  urged  'patience  and
moderation'  in  the  Vatican's  dealings  with  Hitler."      .
—The  Day   of   The  Lion:  The   Rise   and   Fall   of   Fascist
Italy,   by   Roy   MacGregor   Hastie   (Coward-McCann)    just
published.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  10
MARCH  9,  1964
101       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.15  CENTS
What  Some People Have Forgotten About God's "Deputy"
One  of  the  elements  missing  in  Rolf  Hochhuth's  play   "The
Deputy"  and  in  comment  upon  it  is  recognition  of  the  crucial
role  played  by  the  Vatican  in  the  rise  of  Fascism.    The  Vati-
can  opposed  modem   liberalism  from  its  very  inception.     It
denounced  Marxism,  whether  democratic  or  totalitarian.    But
everywhere   it  welcomed   Fascism—in   Italy,  in   Germany,   in
Spain,  in  Austria,  in  Slovakia  and  in  Hungary.    Many  com-
mentators   have   contrasted   Pius   XII,   the   central   figure   in
Hochhuth's   play,  with  his  predecessor,   Pius  XI.     But   Pius
XII,   in  being  friendly   to  Hitler,  was  only  following   in  the
footsteps  of  Pius  XI.     Mussolini's   seizure  of  power   in  Italy
could   have  been   blocked   if   the   powerful   Catholic   Popular
Party,  and  its  priestly  leader,  Don  Luigi  Sturzo,  had  been  al-
lowed  to  follow  the  policy  now  being  applied  by  Italy's  Chris-
tian  Democrats.     An  "opening  to  the  left"  which  united  the
Popular   Party  with   the   Socialists   and   the   Liberals   against
Fascismo,  would  have  choked  off  this  pestilence  at  the  start.
Twin  Pacts  With  The  Devil
But  Pius  XI   decided   otherwise.     He   disliked   Don   Luigi
and  his  party,  which  had  won  a  following   among  the  peas-
antry  by  its  advocacy  of  land  reform.    He  joined  the  indus-
trialists  and  the  army  officers   who,   like  their  counterparts   a
decade   later   in   Germany,   saw  Fascism   as  a  protection   for
property   rights   against   the   clamor   for   social  reform.     The
Popular  Party  was  dissolved  and  Don  Luigi  driven  into  exile.
In   Italy,   as   in   Germany,   Catholic   anti-Fascists   were   sacri-
ficed  for   a  concordant   with   the   dictatorships.     These   pacts
with  the  devil  lent  first  II  Duce  and  then  Der  Fuehrer  a  cloak
of  Catholic  approval  when  they  most  needed  it.    The  March
on  Rome  which  Pius  XI  facilitated  was  the  first  step  toward
Auschwitz  which  Pius  XII  never  condemned.    The  louts  and
Christian Anti-Nazis Abandoned, Too
"Clergy  and  laymen,  priests  and  men  of  political life,
who   ventured  to   think   and  practice  resistance,   could
count  on  the  sympathy of  their  church  leaders,  neither
in  prison  nor  on  the  scaffold."
—Friedrich  Heer,  German   Catholic  historian,  in  his
book,  Die  Deutschen,  der   Nationalsozialismus  und   die
Gegenwart,' quoted  by  Rolf   Hochhuth  in  the   appendix
to  his  play  sThe  Deputy,  p.  305  (Grove   Press).
paranoids  Mussolini  marshalled  for  his  coup   were  the   same
type  who  later  stoked   the  human   furnaces  for   Hitler   with
Jews,  gypsies  and  Slavs  too weak  to  work  for  Krupp  and  I.  G.
Farben.  More  than  the  sin  of  silence  lies  on  the  consciences  of
God's  "deputies."     They   were  accessories  in  the  creation  of
these  criminal  regimes.
A  second  element  has  to  do  with  Allied  policy.    While  the
Allies   were   pressing   Pius   XII   to   condemn   Nazi   atrocities
against  the  Jews  for  its  propaganda  value,  they  were  far  from
whole-hearted   about   saving  the   victims.     I   remember   as  a
young   newspaperman   the   coldness   one   encountered   in   the
State  Department   on  the  subject  of   refugees  and   the   inhu-
manity  with   which   the  British   turned   away   from   Palestine
boatloads  of  Jews  fleeing from  Hitler's  ovens;  two,  the  Struma
and  the  Patria,  sank  with  their  human   cargoes.     Last  Octo-
ber  12,  the  State  Department  released  a  volume  of  diplomatic
papers  from  the  year  1943   (Vol.   I:  General)   in  which  two
painful   stories  are  disclosed.    One   (at  p.   134)    is  a  British
Embassy   memorandum   expressing    fear   lest   the    Germans
"change  over  from  the  policy  of  extermination  to  one  of  ex-
trusion,  and  aim  as  they  did  before  the  war  at   embarrassing
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  9, 1964
"Peace"  Senators  Limit  Selves  to  Defense  of   McNamara  Against  Bomber  Lobby
Few  Speak  and None Vote  "No" As Congress Rubber  Stamps Huge  Arms  Bill
Not   a  single  member   of  Congress  voted   against   the  $17
billion  weapons  procurement   authorization   bill  for  1965.    It
passed  House  and  Senate  last  week  after  five  hours  debate  in
which  only  a  handful  participated.     Attacking   Secretary  Mc-
Namara's   cost-effectiveness   program   apparently   required   the
privileged  sanctuary  of  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce   and
the  Council  of   State  Chambers   of   Commerce,   which   offered
plans   for   cutting   the   bill   $1   billion   and   $1.4   billion   re-
spectively.
Nelson's  Lone  Protest
The   small   group   of   pro-disarmament    Senators   confined
themselves   this  year   to  the   safe  position   of   defending   the
Secretary   of   Defense   against   the   aviation   lobby.     But  Sen.
McGovern  suggested  he  "may have  some  amendments"  to  the
appropriation    bill.     Genuine   dissent  was  limited   to   Senator
Nelson's  (D.  Wis)   eloquent   protest   against    rubber-stamping
the  largest  procurement  bill  ever  when  there  is  now  no  ques-
tion  about  the   capacity   of   both   the  United   States   and   the
Soviet   Union   for   mutual   destruction.     Protesting  that   testi-
mony  on  the  bill  had  not  even  been  printed  before  -the  debate,
he  questioned   "what  is  apparently  an  established  tradition—
perhaps  a  national  attitude—which  holds  that  a  bill  to  spend
billions  for  the  machinery  of  war  must  be  rushed  through  the
House  and  Senate  in  a  matter  of  hours,  while  a  treaty  to  ad-
vance  the  cause  of  peace,  or  a  bill  to  guarantee   the  rights  of
all  our  citizens  must  be  ...    thrashed  over  for  weeks  and per-
haps months."
Debate  in  both  Houses  over  whether  to  authorize  an  un-
requested  $52   million   for   bomber   research   revealed   a  new
approach   to   defense   spending   which   would   maintain   high
budgets  despite  Rep. Vinson's  statement  that  "we  are  coming
up  pretty  close  to  our  total  needs."   This  would  have  us  build
weapon  systems  which  have  no  rational  purpose  other  than  to
Four  Anti-Militarist  Films
It  is  a  pleasure  to  report  that  four—no   less—films
are  now  playing  in  Washington  which  attack  the  mili-
tary   and   militarism.     We   recommend  each   of   them
highly.   One is  a  savage  satire  on  the  nuclear  age,  "Dr.
Strangelove,  or  How  I  Learned  to  Stop  Worrying  and
Love  the   Bomb."    Stanley   Kubrick   deserves   a   Nobel
prize  for  it.   The  second  is  the  superbly  played  "Seven
Days  in  May"—the  gifted  Rod Serling  has  made  a  first
rate  movie' script  of  a  second  rate  book.  Civics  teachers
anxious  to  explain  the  meaning  of  civilian  supremacy
in  the  U.S. Constitution  could  make  no  firmer  impres-
sion  than  to  take  their  classes  to  this  movie.   The  third
is  "The  Man  in  The  Middle," the  story  of   an  attempt
by  the  high  brass  to  fix  a  court  martial.   The  fourth  is
"The  Victors"  a  film  by  Carl  Foreman  worthy  to  stand
beside   his   "High   Noon."    Its   final   scene,   a  drunken
knife   fight   between  a  U.S.  and  Soviet   soldier   in  the
ruins  of  Berlin is  symbolic  of  the  poisonous  and suicidal
cold   war   brewed  by  the   Germans  in   the   moment   of
their  defeat.   P.S.  for  Soviet  readers:  Paste  this  item
on  a  postcard  and  send  it  to  Marshal  Malinovsky  who,
like  the  Pentagon,  has  been  objecting  to  anti-war  and
anti-militarist  literature  and   films.   Capitalist  or  Com-
munist,  brass  hats  are  alike.
force  the  Soviets  to  divert  their  more  limited   resources   into
building  defensive  counterparts.    Thus  Chairman  of  the Sen-
ate  Armed  Services  Committee  Russell   said,  "If  we  eliminate
the  bomber  and  let  the  Russians  devote  all  their  resources  to
defend   against  missiles,   they  are  sure  to  develop  such  a  de-
fense  more  rapidly  than   they  would  if  they  had   to  prepare
two  defensive  systems  .  .  .  (whereas)  we  can  afford   to  de-
velop  the  two  weapon  systems  and, at  the  same  time,  work  on
defenses   against   theirs."    The  U.S.  at  Geneva   is  trying   to
sell  the  idea  of  a  bonfire  for  obsolete  bombers.     If  the  avia-
tion  lobby  has  its  way, there  will  be  plenty  to  burn.
The  Games  Our  Military  Play
"This  amendment  will  be  aimed  at  that  part  of  the  Navy
procurement   called  the  VAL   aircraft.     You  will  find  the
VAL  explained  on  page  11  of  the  committee  report.  Any-
one  with  the  temerity  to  point  out  that  the  three-line  ex-
planation  there  comes   to  about  $60  million  a  line  will  be
met  with the  argument  that  the  details  are  secret.  To  those
of  you  who  may  feel  slighted,  I  want  to  say  to  you  that  you
are  not  missing  a  thing.   I  want  to  assure  you  further  that
the  more  you  study  this  particular  procurement  the  more
firmly  you  will  be  convinced of  the  need  for  secrecy,  not  to
protect  the  details  of  the  program  from  the  terrible  Com-
munists,  but  to  keep  the  details  from   our  taxpaying con-
stituents.
"The  VAL  is  a  new  attack  aircraft  for  the  Navy.    The
Navy  called  it   a  modification   of   an  existing  aircraft.    It
was  just  a  tiny  little  modification—consisting  of  a  new  en-
gine,  fuselage,  wings  and  avionics.   If  this  can  be  done  by
reprogramming,  the  Navy  can  reprogram   a  barge   into  a
battleship  or  a  carrier  into  a  catamaran.
"Why  did  they  do  it  by  reprogramming?     Because,   they
said  time  was  of  the  essence.    So  important  was  time  that
they  waited  from  November until  February  before  announc-
ing  that  this  little old  $2  billion  program  was  heading  deep
into  the  heart  of  Dallas.    Everyone  in  the  aircraft  industry
knew  it  was  heading  for  Dallas  back  in  December,  but  the
Navy   played  games  with   Congress.
with  Congress  at  Budget  Time
"[Now]  to the  merits of  this  aircraft.   Today  the  Navy  is
producing  one  interceptor  and preparing  to  produce  another,
but  [it  says]  it  needs  a  new  attack  plane  [VAL].   The  Air
Force  is  producing one  attack  plane  [A-6A]  and  preparing
to  produce another.    And  one  amazing  thing  about  it  all  is
that  the  interceptor  the  Navy  is  producing  and  the  attack
plane  the  Air  Force  is  now  producing  are  the  same  plane.
Another  amazing  thing  is  that   the  TFX  which  the  Navy
calls  an interceptor and the F-lll  which the  Air  Force  calls
an  attack  plane  will  also  be  the  same  plane.
"The   VAL   is   designed   to   keep   some   production  lines
which  were  to  close  down  this  summer  in  operation.   What
will  this  magnificent  new  aircraft  do?    I  quote  from  Ad-
miral  Thach,  page  7319 of   the   hearings:
"QUESTION:  Can  you  tell   me  any   mission  which  your
new  VAL  can  accomplish  that  the  A-6A cannot?
"Admiral  THACH: No, sir.
"QUESTION:  Is  it  not  also  true  that  the  A-6A can  ac-
complish  a  great  many  missions  which  the  VAL  cannot?
"Admiral  THACH:  That  is  also  true,  sir.
"This  is  a  brand  new   $2  billion  program, illegitimately
conceived  and  dedicated  to  the  proposition  that  the  Mem-
bers  of  Congress  will  vote  for  any  military program  because
they  would  rather  be  called  soft  in  the  head  than  soft  on
communism."
—Rep.  Pike  (D. N.Y.),  defense   debate,  Feb. 20   (abridged)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 9,1»64
We  Need  Those  Lie  Detectors  In  Washington  More  Than  in  Saigon
The  Most  Hopeful  News  of the  Week: LBJ  (and  Russell)  on  Civil  Rights
The   most   encouraging   news  of   the   week  was   President
Johnson's  forthright  endorsement   at  press  conference  of   the
civil  rights bill  as  passed  by  the  House  and  the  defeatist  tone
of  Senator  Russell's  appearance  on  CBS  "Face  The   Nation"
next  day.    Russell's  admission  that  Johnson  can  nevertheless
carry   Georgia   and   his  complaint  that   "brain-washing"  has
brought  about  increased  support   for  civil  rights  in  his  State
indicate  that  while  the  white  supremacist  Old  Guard  may  not
surrender  it  knows  itself  defeated.
The  President's  press  conference,  the  first  of  its kind  in  his
career  as  a political  leader,  went  off well  and  should  cure  him
of  his  nervousness  about  facing  the  press.    His  English  was
good   (we  were  guilty  of  unfairness  and  intellectual  snobbery
a  few  weeks  back  in  a  slighting  smart-aleck  reference  to  his
prose  style).     His   conciliatory   remarks   about   Panama,   his
tamping  down  of  alarmist  speculation  about  Vietnam  and  his
remarks  about  world  peace  were  encouraging.
Less  Hopeful  Indicators
One  could  breathe  more  easily,  however,  if  it  were  not  for
less  hopeful  indicators  behind  the  scenes.    It  was  the  White
House  itself  which  stimulated  press  reports  that  an  extension
of  the  war  to  North  Vietnam  was under  contemplation.  John-
son's  hand-picked  coordinator  for  Latin  affairs,   Tom  Mann,
in  private  speaks  a  very  different   language  from  that  which
the  President  used  at  press  conference  about  Panama.    Mann
expresses  "tough  guy"  views more  suitable  to  the  era  of   "dol-
lar  diplomacy"  than  to  contemporary  Latin  America.    He  is
arrogant  and  simple-minded—the  kind  of  American  diplomat
who   feeds   stereotypes  about   Yanqui  Imperialism.     So  will
Johnson  if  he  lets  the  Commerce  Department  go  through  with
the  plan  to  interfere with  lard  shipments  to  Cuba.    We  have
made  a  big  show  of  humanitarianism  in  exempting  food  and
medicine  hitherto  from  our   embargo.
At  his  press  conference,  as  in  almost  every  speech  he  has
made,  Mr.  Johnson  emphasized  the  awful  power  a  President
now  has  to  "destroy   100  million  people  in  a  matter  of  min-
utes"  and  added  "our  opponents  can  do  likewise."     He  said
simply,  "I  don't  think  the  people  of  the  world  want  that  to
happen  and  I  think  we  are  going  to  do  everything  that  we
can  to  avoid its happening."  *    But  a  recognition  of  the  brink
on  which  mankind  stands  requires  more  than  caution  in  our
* It  is  indicative   that   it  was  a  Polish  reporter,  the  able
Zygmunt  Broniarek  of  Trybuna  Ludu  who elicited  this  state-
ment  from  the  President  and that  the  U.S.  press  paid  so little
attention  to  the  answer.
The Phantoms That  Bedevil  Peace
"New   Communist  advances  in  Laos  that  brought  a
strong   U.S.   protest  on  Friday,  were  touched  on  only
briefly  in  the  news  conference.  .  .  .  Informed  sources,
however,   said   nothing   very   encouraging   about   Laos
came  out  of  talks  held  in  Moscow  Friday  between  Am-
bassador  Kohler  and Soviet  Foreign  Minister  Gromyko."
—Washington  Post  Mar.  1 on Johnson press   conference
"Vietiane,   Laos,   Feb.    29  —   A   neutralist   military
spokesman  said  today  that  a  neutralist  reconnaissance
company  dispatched  to  Phou  Khe  Mt.  found  no  trace  of
reported  units  of  Pathet  Lao or  North  Viet  Minh.  .  .  .
It   was   on  the  basis   of   these  reports  that   the     U.S.
charged  on  Friday  that  the  Communists  had   committed
a   'flagrant'  violation   of   Laotian  neutrality."
—Same  paper, same day, same page
"A  right-wing  military  spokesman  said  Thursday  . . .
that  six  North Vietnamese  battalions  had taken  part  in
the  assault,  though  most  military  observers  here  were
skeptical  of  the  report.  .  .  .  Neutralist   officers   have
been  critical  lately  of  what  they  consider  highly  exag-
gerated  right  wing  reports  of  North  Vietnamese   par-
ticipation  in  Laotian   fighting.   They  have  also  indicated
a  belief  that  the  right  wing  troops  had  fled  their  posi-
tions   at   Phou   Khe  before   any   infantry   assault   had
been  launched."
—New  York  Times from  Vietiane, same  day.
bipolar  relations  with  Moscow.     It  also  requires  a  new  flexi-
bility  and  a  new  magnanimity  in  areas  where  we  continue  to
impose  suffering  on  native  populations   (as  in  Vietnam   and
Cuba  in  frustrated  stubborness.
Almost  as  an  afterthought,  in  his  press  conference  of  Feb-
ruary  27,  Secretary of  State  Rusk  let  slip  the  truth  about  Viet-
nam  when  he  said  "no  miracle  in  the  North  is  going  to  sud-
denly  transform  or  eliminate  the  problem  in  South  Vietnam."
But  if  the  war  in  South  Vietnam  is  simply  a  case  of   aggres-
sion  from  the  North,  an  effort   to  impose  Communism  on  a
helpless   people   "struggling   for   its   freedom"   (our    official
mythology),  then  of  course  a  miraculous  shift  in  the  North
would   solve  the  problem.     Rusk's  remark   implies  that   the
problem  is  local,  deep-seated   and  not  to  be  solved  from  out-
side.    This  contradicts  all  that  he  and  McNamara  and   the
White  House  have  been  saying about  the  war  for  three  years.
There  are  reports  from   Saigon  that  we  are  going  to  use  lie
detectors  on  the  prisoners  we  capture  there.    A  pity  we  can-
not  use  those  lie  detectors  on  our  own  top  officials  at  home.
Do  they  really  believe  what  they  continue  to  tell  us?
The  Senate's  Clearest  Voice  for  Common  Sense  in  Vietnam
"It  is  apparently   France's  purpose  to  work  for  a   diplo-
matic   rather   than  a  military   solution  to  the  problems  of
the  peninsula  once  known  as  Indochina ...  we  should  not
spurn  the  participation.     France  has  advantages  here  we  do
not  have.    Language,   culture,   and  capital  are  hers.    She
could  make  good  use  of  these  advantages.  .  .  .  Our  policy
should  be  flexible  enough  to  allow,  even  to  encourage  such
exploration.
"Our  policies  need  reevaluation,  and  central  to  this  re-
evaluation  is  the  defusing  of  Red  China  as  a  domestic  policy
issue.   We  must  be  able  to  discuss  Red  China  as  we  discuss
other nations,  Communist   or  free.
"France  is  now  attempting  to  draw  the  Chinese   Commu-
nists  to  something  closer   to   normal   diplomatic   relations.
If  this  serves  to  better  the  exchange  of  information   on  atti-
tudes  and policy,  then  this  will  be  to  the  benefit   of  all.  .  .  .
If   we  are  to  have  anything   like   a  peaceful   resolution  of
southeast  Asia,  China   must  be  party  to  the  resolution."
—Bartlett  (D. Alaska)  in  the Senate, Feb.  19.
i,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  9, 1964
Apparently  Some  British  Officials  Feared  Too  Many  Jews  Might  Be  Saved
(Continued   from   Page One)
other  countries  by  flooding  them  with  alien  immigrants." Mil-
ton  Friedman  of  Jewish  Telegraphic  Agency,  the  only  Wash-
ington  correspondent  who  paid  attention  to  these   documents,
commented   "It  would  appear  the  concern  existed  20  years ago
in  some  high  places   that  too  many  Jews  might   escape  from
Hitler  and  burden   the  democracies  with  their  presence."
Neither  Jewish  Gospel   Helped
His  Majesty's  Government   in  the  same  memorandum  said
it  was  ready  to  take  4500   Jewish  children   and   300  women
from  Bulgaria  but  could  not  accept  adult  males  from  enemy
occupied   countries  in  Palestine   owing  to  "the acute  security
problem"  and  the  White  Paper  of  1939, which  severely  re-
stricted  Jewish  immigration  to  the  Holy  Land  lest  this  antag-
onize  the  Arabs.    The  British  were  not  alone  in  this  kind  of
thinking.     The  same  volume  at  p.  296  contains  a  memoran-
dum  from  the  U.S.  Chiefs  of  Staff  objecting  to  a  plan  to  move
4500  refugees  from  Spain  to  camps  in  North  Africa  lest  this
"cause  resentment  on  the  part  of  the  Arab population."  From
a  Jewish  point  of  view,  it  was  not  the  Pope  alone  who  failed
the  test  of  conscience..   Neither   the  Gospel  of  Jesus  nor  the
Gospel  of  Marx  prevented   their  highest  respective   spokesmen
from  making  pacts  with  Hitler.    In  all  the  great  capitals, poli-
tical   expedience   came   before   humanity.     The   whole  bitter
story  still  feeds  Jewish  nationalism.    When  our  people  were
thrown   to  the   furnaces,   few  really   cared.
It  helps  to  heal  our  hearts  that  a  young   German   should
.have  written  "The Deputy."     It  is  also  a  good  sign  that  the
play   should   have   aroused   such   animosity—like   a   painful
memory  dragged  unwillingly from  the  subconscious  of  a  whole
generation.    The  protest   and  the  shame  indicate  that  under
the  hypocrisy and  the  cant  there  lives  on  a  concern  for  human
and  moral  values.    The  crematoriums  should   not  be  forgot-
ten.    That  one  set  of  human  beings  could  do  this  to  another
set  condemns   our  whole  species.    There  are  savages  within
us  against  whom  we  must  be  on  guard.    The  excuses  of  race
and   statecraft  that   are   used   to   justify   murder,   and   silence
about  it,  now  threaten  the  entire  human   race  with   a  "final
This  Alone  Will  Posterity  Remember
"It  could harshly be said: It  was  not  the  highest  duty
of  the  Pope  to  rescue  Jews.   The  Pope  can't  save every-
body.    But  it  was  his  duty  to  keep  Christendom  in  a
literal  sense  from  going  to  the devil: that  in  the  middle
of   his  West,  Christians  should  do  Satan's  work, with
which  not  only  Germany  but  all   Christendom  will  be
forever  stained.   Posterity will  over  and over again look
at  this  Pope  and wonder  about  his  silence.  .  .  .  Just  as
one  can  already  see  that  of  the  whole history  of  Hitler
and  the  Second  World  War, only  two  words will  remain
in  the  memory  of  mankind—Auschwitz  and Hiroshima
—so  one  also  feels  that  of  Pius  XII  there  will  survive
only  the  memory  of  his  silence."
—Sebastian  Haffner,    writing   of  The  Deputy  in   the
German  illustrated  weekly,  Stern,  April  7, 1963, quoted
at   p.  235  of   Summa   Iniuria   oder   Durfte   der   Papst
Schweigen?  (Rowohlt)   a  collection  of  German   articles
about  Hochhuth's   play.
solution."
For  the  play  as  presented   in  New  York,  Herman  Shumlin
deserves  a  high  mark  for   courage,   a  lesser  one  for  artistry.
His   version   is  an   oversimplified   and   sometimes   vulgarized
shadow  of  the  original.    Gerstein,  Jacobson  and  Fontana  are
all   debased   from   Hochhuth's   original  conception.     In   the
original,  the  SS  man,  Gerstein,  who  tried  to  help  the  Jews,
was  not  a  hysteric.   Jacobson,  the  Jew  hiding  out  in  his  apart-
ment,   was  not   the   vulgar   creature   in  Jerome   Rothenberg's
adaptation.    Fontana,   the  young  Jesuit  who  goes   to  Ausch-
witz  in  protest,  is  also  diminished  in  the  New  York  version.
But   Emlyn  Williams   is  magnificent  as  the   Pope.     Severely
shortened,  the  play  as  produced   also  focuses  too  narrowly  on
the  moral  responsibility  of  the  Pope  while  Hochhuth's  origi-
nal  brings  the  German  people   into  the   full   orbit   of   guilt.
But  to  see  the  play  is  still  an  experience  we  recommend  as  a
moral  and  political  duty,  though  the  play  in  book  form (ex-
cellently  translated  by  Richard  and  Clara  Winston  for  Grove
Press)   is  essential  to  grasp  the  author's  full  design  and  mem-
orable  intention.     It  is  Hochhuth's   achievement  so  painfully
to  have  twisted  the  conscience  of  the  Church   and  the  world.
Free  Sample  Copies  Still  Available  of  Matthews  and  MLF   Issues   If   You   Send   Envelopes   But   Please   Specify  Which   Issue—or   Both
I.  F.  Stpne's Weekly        5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .
Street
City   ............_.........................Zone.......~.State....................
3/9/642
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)    Name   .........................................................................—
Street   ........._,.................._...........................................—...
City   ..........._.........................Zone......._..State..............._...
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
/ F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I    F   Stone's  Weekly.     Second    Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington.   D.   C.    Published   every  Monday  except  in  August  at  6618  Nebraska   Ave..  N.  W.,
Washington.  D.   C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and   edited   by  I.   F.   Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.     Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.: $6 in  Canada:  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe:  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED