I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964mar30.pdf

============================================================

For  the Real Face  of  Our  War   in  Vietnam,  See P.  3
The  Only  Way  to  Wage  A  Really  Total  War  on  Poverty  in  An  Age  of  Plenty
"It   is   essential   to   recognize   that   the   traditional   line
between  jobs  and  incomes  is  being  broken.    The  economy
of   abundance  can  sustain  all  citizens  in  comfort  and  eco-
nomic  security  whether or  not  they  engage  in  what  is  com-
monly  reckoned as  work.    We  urge,  therefore,  that  society,
through  its  appropriate  legal  and governmental  institutions,
undertake  an  unqualified  commitment to  provide every  indi-
vidual  and  family  with  an  adequate  income  as  a  matter  of
right.   This  undertaking we  consider  to  be  essential   to  the
emerging   economic,  social  and  political  order  in  this  coun-
try.     We  regard  it  as  the  only  policy  by  which  the  quarter
of  the  nation  now  dispossessed   and  soon-to-be  dispossessed
by  lack  of  employment can  be  brought  within  the  abundant
society.    The  unqualified  right  to  an  income would take  the
place  of  the  patchwork  of  welfare  measures—from  unem-
ployment  measures   to  relief—designed   to  assure  that  no
citizen  or  resident  of  the  United  States  actually  starves."
—Manifesto   on the  Triple  Revolution  (see  page  2).
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XII,  NO.  13
MARCH  30,  1964
101       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.15  CENTS
Remember  This  Is  Our  Third  Attempt  to  End  Poverty
The  President's  spokesmen  have  now  completed  their  pres-
enation  of  his  poverty  program  to  the  House  Labor  and  Edu-
cation   Committee.    They   proved   an   impressive  team.    Sar-
gent   Shriver   and   Secretaries   Wirtz,   McNamara,   Freeman,
Hodges  and  Celebrezze  spoke  with  an  idealism and  a  concern
which   attested   the   high   quality   of   the   Cabinet   Kennedy
gathered  and  Johnson  inherited.   These were  big  men  launch-
ing  a  big  idea.    The  questions  put  to  them  were  largely  nit-
picking.
Poverty  has  been  put   squarely  into  the  arena  of  practical
politics.    But  how  fruitful   this  proves  to  be  will  depend  on
the   way  the   program   is  shaped   in   the   coming  months   of
debate  upon  it.    This  is  not  the  first  but  the  third  time  in  a
generation   that   the   idea   of   eliminating   poverty   has   been
broached  in  a  big  way  politically.    The  first  time  was  early
in  the  New  Deal  when  the  Social  Security  system  was  estab-
lished.     The   second   was  during   Mr.   Truman's    Fair   Deal
when  the  Employment  Act  of  1946  was  passed.    It  is  urgent
to  remember   that  the   compromises   made  on  both   occasions
were   crippling.
A  War  Which  Could  Already Have  Been  Won
If  Social  Security  had  been  used  as  a  means  of  redistribut-
ing  income,  financed  by  taxes  on  wealth   rather  than   by  re-
gressive  payroll  levies  on  worker,  consumer  and   entrepeneur,
if   it  had   established   a  guaranteed  minimum  subsistence   for
every  American  instead  of  a  makeshift  and   inadequate  dole
against   unemployment   and   old   age,   there   would   be  little
poverty  today  to  make  war  upon.    The  radical  New  Dealers
saw  this  clearly  at  the  time  but  were  defeated.     In  the  same
way,    the   idea  of   economic  planning   for   full   employment,
which  the  Employment  Act  of  1946  was  intended  to  embody,
was  so  watered  down  in  passage  as  to  become  ineffective.    If
that  Act  were  working  along  the  lines  originally   conceived,
the  war  on  poverty  would  have  been  won  two  decades   ago.
So  it  behooves  us  now  to  examine  this  new  program   astrin-
gently,  lest  another  historic  opportunity  miscarry.
The  Johnson  program  avoids  all  direct  attack  on  the  prob-
lem.    The  program  is  based  on  the  calculation  that  those  9.3
million  families  with  incomes  under  $3,000  a  year  are  living
in  poverty.    Many  breadwinners  are  not   jobless  but  simply
4  *
Poverty  Plays   2d  Fiddle  to  Private  Business
Washington—Federal  planners  have  put  together   a
revised  prescription  for  curing  the  Appalachian  Moun-
tain  area's  economic  and social  ills  .  .  .  the  lesser em-
phasis   on  welfare,  a  diminished  Federal   role   and  a
turn  away  from  the  industrial  cooperatives  mentioned
in  the  fall  proposals  strongly  boost  its  chances,  strat-
egists  feel.   'It's  watered  down,  but  adding  water  can
make  medicine  more  palatable,'  comments   an   official
of  one  agency  .  .  .  [Appalachian  Region]  Commission
officials  say  their  cause  will  be  aided  in  Congress  .  .  .
by   the   concept   of   providing  only   enough   public  ac-
tivity   to   build  a  framework  for   private  business   to
function.  .  .  .  The  initial  Appalachia  plan  called  for  a
corporation   that   would  engage   in   over-all   economic
planning.  .  .  .  Now the  idea  is  for  a  Commission  .  .  .
to  serve  largely  as  a  coordinator.    There  would  still  be
a   Federal   State   cornoration,   but  with   quite   limited
functions.               — Wall  Street  Journal,  March  19.
ill  paid.    One  direct  attack  would  be  to  extend  the  minimum
wage  to  all  workers  and  the  hourly  minimum  to  $1.50.   This
would   make  $60  a  week,   or  $3,000  a  year,   the   minimum
wage.    Another   direct  approach   was  touched  on  but  quickly
passed  over  by  Walter  Heller  of  the   Council   of   Economic
Advisers  when  he  remarked  to  the  House  Committee,  "Arith-
metic  tells  us  that  the  cost  of  levelling  up  all  poor  families  to
an  annual  income  of  $3,000  would   be  about   $11  billion   a
year."    Measured  against  the  $50  billion  plus  we  spend  each
year  on  war  preparations  or  against  the  billions  of  oil,   real
estate  and  other  profits  which  slip  untaxed  through  the  loop-
holes  in  our  sloppy  income  tax  system,  this  is  no  large  sum.
Paid  out  to  the  poor  under  such  a minimum  subsistence  guar-
antee  as  is  advocated  in  a  newly  released   manifesto  on    "The
Triple  Revolution"    (see   boxes  on  pages  one  and  two)    this
would  wipe  out  poverty  and  quickly  raise  our  faltering   rate
of  economic  growth.
Another   direct   attack   would   be   by   economic   planning.
Bernard  Nossiter  of  the  Washington   Post  in  his  new  book,
"The   Mythmakers,"  a  refreshingly  iconoclastic  survey  of  cur-
rent  economic   realities,  in  one  chapter  provides   the  first  ac-
count  in  popular  form  of  the  non-coercive   planning  methods.
(Continued  on Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  30,1964
Work  Camps Will  Not  Wipe  Out  The  Slums Which  Stunt  Our  Youth
(Continued  from  Page  One)
which  have  maintained  a  high  level  of  growth  and  employ-
ment  in  less  hidebound   areas  of  the  capitalist  world.     Nor-
way,  France  and  Japan  have  all  combined   economic  planning
with   free   enterprise   in   pragmatic   mixed   systems.     This  is
what   we  were  supposed  to  do  under   the  Full   Employment
bill  of   1946   until  Taft,  in  taking  the  word  "full"   out  of  the
title,  took  the  essence  out  of  its  spirit.    The  idea  of  planning
for  full  employment   seemed   too  subversively  close  to  social-
ism,  a  subject:  on  which  all  we  Americans  have  been  brain-
washed.    Even  the  advanced   intellectuals,  some  of  them   old-
time  radicals,  who  helped  to  frame  the  manifesto  on    "The
Triple   Revolution"   to   which   we   call   grateful   attention   in
these  pages,  avoided  it  lest  it  set  the  alarm  bells  ringing.  The
idea  of  economic  planning  is  conspicuously  absent  even   from
their  blueprint.
The  Key Question
The   key  question   is  whether  poverty  is  peripheral   in  our
society  or  due  to  inadequate  demand.     If  it  is  the  latter,  then
some  form  of  economic  planning  is  necessary to  deal  with  it.
The  President  s  program  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  pov-
erty  is  peripheral  because  only  on  this  basis  can  it  be  fought
with   minimum   disturbance   to   our   dominant   business   class
and  its  sacred  myths  about  free  enterprise.     It  is  true  that  the
Negro,  the  aged,  tfie  slum  youth,  represent  special  problems.
But  it  is  well  to  remember   that   when   the  government   sets
full  employment   goals  as  it  does  in  wartime,  then   these  spe-
cial   problems   are   soon   solved.     Neither   race   nor   sex   nor
age  nor  disability  is  allowed  to  stand  in  the  way  as  business-
men  scrape  the  bottom   of  the  human   barrel,  mustering  and
retraining  every  hand  they  can  get.     If  aggregate  demand   is
The  Signers  of  "The  Triple  Revolution"
Donald  G.  Agger,   Dr.  Donald  S.  Armstrong,  James
Boggs,   Dr.   Louis   Fein,   W.   H.   Ferry,   Todd   Gitlin,
Roger  Hagan,  Michael  Harrington,  Tom  Hayden, Rob-
ert   L.  Heilbroner,   Ralph  L.  Helstein,  Dr.  F.  W.  Her-
ring,   Gen.   H.   B.   Hester,   Irving   Howe,   Everett   C.
Hughes,  Gerald  W.  Johnson,  Irving  F.  Laucks,  Stewart
Meacham,   A.   J.   Muste,   Gunnar   Myrdal    ("in   broad
agreement   .   .   .  though   not  entirely"),  Gerard  Piel,
Bayard   Rustin,   Ben   B.   Seligman,   Robert   Theobald,
Wm.   Worthy,  Alice   Mary   Hilton,  Maxwell   Geismar,
Philip   Green,  H.   Stuart   Hughes,   Linus  Pauling  and
John  Wm. Ward.
l:ept  high   by  government   planning   and   direction,  all   these
human  problems   become   soluble.
The  worst  features  of  the  Johnson  program  are  provisions
which  would   subsidize  the  land  speculator   and   the  business
man  to  get   some   increase  in  help  to  the  small  farmer  and
some   increase   in   jobs.     James   Roosevelt    for   one   fleeting
moment   touched   on   the  realities  when   he  said   to  Secretary
Wirtz  that  he  saw  no  point  in  "lending  money  just  for  some-
body  to  set  up  a  business  when   there  is  no  chance  for   that
business  being  a  success."    If  go^ls  are  pitched  high,  jobs  will
be  created  and  farm  surpluses  absorbed  by  those  now  ill  fed.
This  program  does  not  even  attack  the  peripheral  problems
in   adequate   fashion.     Shriver   showed   how   hollow   was   the
talk  of  a  "total  war  on  poverty"  when  he  assured  the  Com-
mittee  in  true  Johnsonian  fashion  that  it  "does  not  raise  the
national   budget   by  a  single   dollar."     Our   schools   and   our
slums  are  scandals.     The  stunted   youth  Shriver  would  help
are  their  product.    The  remedy  is  to  wipe  out  the  causes  not
to  skim  off the  human  effluvia  and  put  them  into  work  camps.
A  Program  to  Meet  A  "Triple  Revolution"
"As  machines take  over  production from  men, they  absorb
an  increasing proportion  of  resources  while the  men  who  are
displaced  become dependent on  minimal  and  unrelated  gov-
ernment   measures—unemployment  insurance,  social   secur-
ity,  welfare  payments.    These   measures  are  less  and  less
able  to  disguise  an  historic  paradox:  that  a  growing  pro-
portion  of  the  population is  subsisting  on  minimal incomes,
often  below  the  poverty line,  at  a  time  when  sufficient  pro-
ductive  potential is  available  to  supply  the  needs  of  every-
one  in  the  United  States.  .  .  .  The  continuance  of  the  in-
come-through-jobs   link   as   the  only  major  mechanism  for
distributing   effective   demand—for   granting  the   right   to
consume—now  acts  as  the  main  brake  on  the  almost  un-
limited  capacity  of   a  cybernated  productive  system.  .  .  .
The  major  problem  is  not  how  to  increase  production  but
how  to  distribute  the  abundance ....  We  propose:
"1.  A  massive  program  to  build  up  our  educational  sys-
tem   .  .  .  tens  of   thousands  of  employment  opportunities
.  .  .  particularly  for  younger  people  may  be  thus  created
...  an  additional   100,000  teachers  annually  are  needed.
"2.  Massive  public  works ...  to  construct  dams,  reser-
voirs,  ports,  water  and  air   pollution  facilities,  community
recreation  facilities  .  .  .  For  each  $1  billion  per  year  spent
on   public  works  150,000  to   200,000  jobs  would  be  created.
$2  billion  or  more  a  year  should  be  spent  this  way.
"3.  A  massive  program   of   low-cost  housing  to  be  built
both  publicly  and  privately,  and  aimed at  a  rate  of  700,000
to  1,000,000 units a year.
"4.  Development  and  financing  of  rapid  transit   systems,
urban  and interurban....
in  Cybernetics,  Weaponry  and  Human  Rights
"5.  A   public   power  system   built  on   the   abundance  of
coal   in  distressed   areas,   designed   for   low-cost   power   to
heavy  industrial  and  residential   sections.
"6.  Rehabilitation  of   obsolete   military  bases   for   com-
munity  and  educational  use.
"7.  A  major  revision  of  our  tax   structure  aimed  at  re-
distributing  income ...  an  expansion  of  the  use  of  excess
profits  tax   would  be  important.    Subsidies   and  tax   credit
plans  are  required  to  ease  the  human  suffering  involved in
the  transition   .  .  .  from  manpower  to  machinepower.
"8.  The trade  unions  can  play  an  important  role  .  .  .  (a)
use  collective bargaining to  negotiate  .  .  .  for  those  thrown
out  of  work  by  technological   change,    (b)   bargaining  for
prerequisites  such  as  housing  .  .  .  and  similar  programs,
(c)  obtaining  a  voice  in  the  investment  of  the  unions'  huge
pension   and   welfare   funds,   and   insisting   on  investment
policies  which  have  as  their  major  criteria  the  social  use
pud  function  of  the  enterprises  in  which  the  investment  is
made,    (d)  organization  of  the  unemployed .  .  .  and cam-
paigns  to  organize  white  collar  and  professional  workers.
"9.  The   use   of   the   licensing   power   of   government   to
regulate   the   speed   of   cybernation  to   minimize   hardship
and  the  use  of  the  minimum wage  power  as  well  as  taxing
powers  to  provide  the  incentives for  moving  as  rapidly  as
possible  toward  the  goals  indicated  by  this  paper."
—The.  Triple  Revolution:  Drawn  up  by  an  Ad  Hoc  Com-
mittee  led  by  W.  H.  Ferry,  of  the  Center  for   the  Study  of
Democratic  Institutions.  Copies  of  the  document  may  be ob-
tained   from    the   committee    c/o   Maurer,   Fleiaher,  Zon  &
Associates,  1120  Connecticut   Avc.,   Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  30, 1964
What  We  Are  Doing  to  Innocent  Villagers  in  Vietnam  and  Cambodia
Ordinarily  the   Associated  Press  will   sell   photos   like  the
one  on  this  page  to  non-subscribers for  $15.    We  ran  into  a
fog  of  double-talk  when  we  tried  to  buy  this  one  from   the
AP  last  week.    Permission  was  refused,  though   for  no  clear
reason.    We  obtained a  glossy  print  through  channels  of  our
own.    We  think  it  tells  a  story  every  decent  American should
heed.    This   is  what  we  are  doing  to  the  innocent  in  South
Vietnam  and  Cambodia.    The  AP,  early  in  our  negotiations,
wanted   to   be  sure  that   we  would   not   change   the  caption
under  the  picture.    Its  caption  said:
INNOCENT    VICTIM—A   Vietnamese   child,   body   com-
pletely  covered  with  burns  from  a  napalm  bomb,  is  held  by
father    after    rescue   from   Vietnamese   village   near   the
Cambodian   border.     Child  was   found   in  a  plain  of   reeds
after   Vietnamese   Air   Force   bombers   strafed   a   village,
where   Communist    Viet   Cong   guerrillas   sought   to    hide
among  innocent   civilians.
The  Right  of  Pursuit
The  New   York   Times,   in  printing  the  picture,  March  20
left   out  the  reference  to  napalm  bombs  and  said  it  was  an
injured  Vietnamese  child  being  comforted  by  its  father   after
an  air  assault  on  a  village  near  the  Cambodian  border.     We
suspect  this  was  the  Cambodian  village  which  the  Vietnamese
with  the  aid  of  our  "spotters"  bombed  on  March  19.  The  U.S.
now  says  this was  a  mistake.    But  our  Vietnamese  allies  have
long   insisted   (AP   from  Saigon,  Baltimore  Sun,   March   21)
that  they  should  be  "permitted  to  pursue  Communist  guerril-
las  a  reasonable  distance into  Cambodian  territory"  and  there,
presumably,  do  what  they  do  at  home—burn  out  any  village
in  which  they  suspect  guerrillas  may  be  hiding.
For   this   purpose,   in   addition  to   napalm,  we   supply   "a
phosphorous   explosive,   fired   from   artillery   and   also   from
fighter  bombers"   which   "erupts   in   a  white  cloud,   burning
through  everything  it  touches"   (AP  from  Saigon,   Washing-
ton  Star  March  22).    "With  explosives   such  as  these,"  the
same  dispatch  went  on  apologetically,   "civilians  are  bound  to
get  hurt."    We  hope  the  villagers,  too,  will  see this  as  a kind
of   military  traffic  mishap.    "The   spectacle  of  children  lying
half   alive  with  napalm  bombs  across  their  bodies,"  this  AP
report  added,  "was  revolting  to  both  Vietnamese  and  Ameri-
cans  entering  a  Cambodian  village  after  it  had  been  under  air
attack  by government  planes  Thursday."     That  was  March  19,
the  date  of  this  picture.    We  hope  you  find  it  revolting,  too.
Sen.  Church:  "Wars  Against  George  Washingtons  Not  Easily   Won"
Q.  Is  it  your  view  that  we  are  succeeding  in  Vietnam?
A.  I'm  not   optimistic.    If   Ho  Chi  Minh,  the   leader  of
North  Vietnam,  is   regarded  by  most  Vietnamese   people,
North  and South,  as  the  authentic  architect  of  independence
from  the  French,  as  the  George  Washington  of  Vietnam,  it
will  be  hard.     Wars  against  George  Washingtons  are  not
easily  won.
Q.  Do  you  think  the  way  out  in  Vietnam  may  be  to  carry
the  war  into  North  Vietnam,  or  even  Red  China?
A.  That  is  certainly  not  the  way  out.    As  I  look  at  the
map,  that  is  the  way  in.    I  would  hope  that  we  don't  make
South  Vietnam   a  launching  pad  for  another  Korean   War.
Q.  Do  you  see  merit  in  President  DeGaulle's  suggestion
of  a  neutralist  settlement  in  Southeast  Asia?
A.  If  the  whole  of  the  archilepago  could  be  neutralized,
including   North   Vietnam,   then   I   should   think   that   this
would  be  positively  in  the  American   interest,  as  well  as  in
the  general  interest  of  all  the  people  concerned.
Q.  Do  you  think   we   can  achieve  the   neutralization  of
South  Vietnam  so  long  as  we  are  or  appear  to  be  losing?
A.  It  happened  in  Laos.    It  could  happen  in  Vietnam.
Q.  You  don't  agree  with  the  official  position  that  neutrali-
zation  would  mean  giving  Vietnam  to  the  Communists?
A.  Several  neutral  countries  in  that  region  are  not   Com-
munist.    Laos  and  Cambodia   are  examples.    I  thought  we
had   gotten   over   regarding   neutralism   as   anti-American.
Q.  Then  would  you  say  the  Geneva  accords  of  1962  on  a
neutral  Laos  are working?
A.  It   became  obvious   from   the   course  of   the   fighting
preceding  that  agreement  that  without  it  the  whole  of  the
country  would  soon  have  fallen  under  Communist  control.
—Sen. Church  (D.  Id),  Wash.  Sun.  Star Mar.  15  abridged.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's-Weekly,  March  30,196It
Though  Death   Toll  100,000  Annually,  AMA  Supports  Tobacco  Industry
Consumers  Union  Asks  Total  Ban  on  Radio-TV  Ads  for   Cigarettes
The  AMA  is  operating  true  to  form.    It  sent  a  letter  to
the   Federal   Trade   Commission   urging   "further    research"
rather   than   regulation   of   cigarette   advertising.     The   FTC
held  hearings  March  16-18  on  its  proposed  regulations,  which
would  require  manufacturers  to  label  packages  with  a  health
warning  and  advertisers  not  to  contradict  it.
The  AMA   letter   arrived   the  day  the  Assistant  Attorney
General  testified  that  responsible   scientists  had  estimated  the
death  toll  from  smoking  at  more  than  100,000  annually. The
Surgeon  General's  report  didn't  mention  the  figure,  Dr.  Hud-
ley  said,  because  it  is  only  a  rough  estimate.
Press  Still  Burying  The  Story
This   tobacco-tainted  insistence  on   scientific   precision   has
kept  important  information  from  the  public  since  1937,  when
smoking  first  was  unequivocally   condemned   as  a  "health  haz-
ard"   by  a  distinguished  study  group   organized   by  the   Na-
tional  Cancer  and  Heart  Institutes.    Following  publication  of
their  report,  Harold   Ickes  accused  New  York  newspapers  of
"omitting   or   burying  evidence"   against  smoking.     They're
still  doing  it.
Mildred   Brady,   Assistant   Director   of   Consumers   Union,
exposed  this  and  similar  tactics  in  her  superb  statement  to  the
Commission.    She said  a  1962  report  on  "Smoking  and  News
Coverage,"    published   in   the   Columbia,  Journalism   Review,
concluded   that  while   "newspapers  have  presented   adequate
coverage  in  the  aggregate,"  they  have  left  "the story  so  frag-
mented"  as  to  create  confusion.    The  New  York  Daily  News
distinguished   itself  in  1957  with   the  headline,   "Cigies  As-
sailed   Again—Ho  Hum."    Mrs.  Brady  said  that  no   major
magazine  has  sponsored   a  health   education   campaign  with
regard   to  smoking  except   Consumer  Reports,  which   accepts
no  advertising,  and  Readers'   Digest,   which  carries  no  ciga-
rette  advertising.    Among  the  networks,  only  CBS  has  fea-
tured   programs   on   smoking—five   in   the   last   decade—and
these  have  suffered   from  poor  press  previews  and  summaries
influenced   by  advertising  firms.
Mrs.  Brady  was  the  only  witness  who  criticized  the  Com-
mission's  proposed  regulations  for  being  "far  too  permissive."
She  noted  that  only  in  Italy  where  all  cigarette  advertising
Free Copies  of  This  or  Any  Other  Issue  Mailed  Free  to  Friends  If   You
Just   Accidentally   Photographing?
"Some   authorities  have   suggested   that  the   plane,
equipped  normally,  would  carry  camera equipment and
that  a  regular  training  mission  would  include  practice
photography.    In  this  view,  they  might  well  have pho-
tographed    East     Germany    accidentally    after    they
strayed  off  course.   If  this  were  the  case  these  [U.S.]
officials   said,  Soviet  authorities  could  have  found   the
films  when  they  inspected  the  wreckage  of  the  plane.
American  authorities  have  been  kept  away   from   the
wreckage.     In   any   case,   the   Russians  are  expected
eventually  to   produce  evidence  that  they  were  on  an
intelligence  mission."
—Henry   L.   Trewhitt,   Bonn   correspondent,   in   the
Baltimore  Sun,  March  21, just  before   the  three   "stray-
ed"  U.S. fliers  in  that  latest  "routine  training"  incident
on  the  East  German  border  were  released.    Was  this
leak  to  prepare  U.S.  opinion  for  surprises  at  the  trial?
When  will  the  military   be  ordered  to  stop  playing  dan-
gerous  games  on so  sensitive  a  border?
I. F.  Stone's Weekly        5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .
Street
City   ...
.......................Zone........-..State....................
3/30/64
For  this  additional  $5.35  please  send  a  copy  of  I.  F.
Stone's  "The  Haunted   Fifties."
(To)   Name  .......................................••••••
Street   .....;... — .................._...................
City  ........... — .........................Zone.......
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?
..State...............~...
Yes  D   No D
has  been  banned  has  cigarette  consumption  been  significantly
inhibited.    She  proposed   that   advertising  of   cigarettes,   like
that  of  distilled  liquor,   be  banned  entirely  from   radio  and
television.     She   suggested   that   the   Commission's   rule   2,
which  pertains  to  advertising  copy,  be  made  as  stringent  as
the  regulations  governing  the  advertising  of   new   securities.
This  would  confine  copy  to  the  brand  name,  the  length,  type
and   style  of   cigarette,   the   health   warning,   and   where   the
brand  may  be  obtained.     "Surely,   controls  to  prevent con-
fusion  in  the  advertising of  a  product  dangerous  to  life,"  she
said,  "should   be  at  least  as  demanding  as  those  affecting   the
promotion  of  a  sale  that  threatens  only  the  pocketbook."
Another  of  her  proposals   worth  promoting   is  the  use  of
a  state  licensing  system  to  control  cigarette  retailers.    In  many
states,  retailers  have  themselves   sponsored   similar   proposals
in  their  desire   for   a  legal   means  to  prohibit   price-cutting.
"Is   it  asking  too  much  of   the   business  system,"   she  ques-
tioned,  "that  it  support  for  the  sake  of  the  health  of  children
proposals  it  fostered  to  curtail  price  competition?"    That  her
testimony  went  unmentioned  in  the  press  is  an  indication  of
the  answer.
Send  Stamped   Self-Addressed    Envelope  and   Specify  Which   Issue
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
.
in  the U.S.;
,yg£5rJS5£   ttf  " --
;   SIO  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  ana  Atrica.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED