I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964jun15.pdf

============================================================

To  Prevent  Bloodshed  in  Mississippi,  P.  4
A  Glimpse of  Hell or How  to  Kill  25 Guerrillas and Recruit  1500 More
"Tay  Ninh,  South  Vietnam,  Jane  5  (AP)—Loudspeakers
blared  strident  orders  Monday night  above  Vietnamese  vil-
lages  in  a  20-mile-long  strip  of  Communist-infested  terri-
tory  adjoining  the  Cambodian  frontier.    'We  are  going  to
clear   oat   this   area,'   warned   airborne   spokesmen   for   a
jungle-trained  task  force  of  Americans  and  South  Vietna-
mese.    'There  will  be  no  life  left  here.    Move  out!'
"Today  that  strip  of  territory  is  wrecked and  barren.   A
hazardous   scorched-earth   operation   that   may   set   a  new
pattern  in  the  war  against  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  ended  last
night.    About  25  guerrillas  were  killed,  but  the  prime  tar-
gets   of   air   and   ground   attacks   were   shelter,   food   and
transport.    Huts  are  in  ashes.   Sampans  are  sunk.   Bullock
carts  are  smashed.    Rice  stores,  poultry  and  livestock   are
destroyed  or carried off.
"About   700   civilians—women,   children   and   old   men—
have  been  moved.   That  clears  the  region  for  later  all-out
strikes   against   the   able-bodied  villagers   and  Viet   Cong
troops  based  among  them  who  chose  to  flee  and  fight  on
under  the  Red   flag.   Officers  estimated  these  totalled  1500.
.  .  .  American advisers  were  divided in  their  opinion of  the
effect  of  breaking  up  Viet  Cong  families,  some  feeling   it
might  spur the  men to  fight  harder."
—Baltimore  Sun,  June  S
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  21JUNE   15,  1964
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
On  Goldwater,  Ike  and  The  GOP's  Gutless  Wonders
It  looks  like  Goldwater,   and  if  that  ruins  the   Republican
party  it's  no  more  than  its  so-called  liberal  leaders   deserve.
We  have yet  to  see a  bigger  collection  of  gutless  wonders  and
inane   mediocrities,   from   Eisenhower   down.     In   particular,
after   watching  Scranton   (see   adjoining  box)    on   Face   The
Nation   last   Sunday,  we  found   our   sympathies  with   Gold-
water.    If  we  were  a  Republican,  we  might  be  for  him,  too.
He  may  be  a  crazy  mixed  up  kid  from  Phoenix,  but  like  Pop-
eye  he  is  what  he  is.    Nobody  knows  what  the  rest  of  them
are.    Rockefeller  is  more  dangerous  because  sugar-coated   by
the  necessities  of  New   York   state  politics.     He's   just   about
as  liberal  as  Allen  Dulles  and  a  little  more  belligerent  in  for-
eign  policy.   As  for  Eisenhower,  it  is time  the  truth  were  told
about  him.    No  man  ever  got  further  on  less:  he  hasn't  the
foggiest  notion  what  domestic  politics  are  all  about,  he  seems
to  think  Lincoln  fought  that  war  to  defend  States  Rights.    He
showed  his  spinelessness  years ago  when  he  refused  to  defend
his  friend   George   Marshall   against  McCarthy,  and  he's   too
lazy  ever  really to  exert  himself.    His  off-again,  on-again  per-
formance  about  Goldwater  was  true  to  form.
Put  The  Birchites  Where  They  Can  Be  Seen
The  Goldwater  campaign  will  probably  put  a  half   dozen
Birchites   into   Congress   but   that   doesn't   make  us   nervous
either.    One  of  the  things  that  killed  McCarthy  was  making
him  visible on  TV.    The  more  the  public  gets  a  look  at  these
crypto-Fascist  screwballs,   the  worse  for   them.     Rather   than
leave  the  Goldwater  coalition  of  Birchites  and  Rip  Van   Win-
kle  McKinleyites  feel   that   they  had   been   cheated   of   their
chance  by  Eastern  seaboard   influences,  we'd   rather  see  them
get  it.  We  have  no  doubts  about  the  outcome.  The  bad  thing
about  a  Goldwater  campaign  is  that  it  will  enable  Johnson  to
move  rightward,  but  maybe  that  will  free  the  liberals  from
his  clutches  for  action  on  their  own.    On  Cuba  and  on  Viet-
nam,  it's  hard  to  distinguish  between   the  so-called   "extrem-
ists"  and  the  men  in  power;  the  only  difference  between  them
is  in  the  degree  to  which  they  would  wage  war,  and  this  dif-
ference  is  largely  the  difference  between  being  in  power   and
6  *
Just  A  Man  of  Principle
Mr.  OTTEN  (Wall  St.  Journal):  Are  you  saying  that
Sen.  Goldwater does  not  fit  that  image  of  Lincoln and
Eisenhower?
Gov.    SCRANTON: No,  I  am  not  saying  that.  .  .  .
I  think   the  most  important  thing,  first  of   all,  is   to
find  out  precisely  where  the  Party  is  moving  in  this,
and  to  make  sure  that  it  does  stand  by  the  principles
that  it  has  always  stood  for.    And  if  I  am  convinced
that   this   will   not   occur,   then   you  will  see   quite   a
little  activity  on  my  part  to  make  sure  that  it  does.
Mr.  NIVEN  (CBS  News):  Does  that  mean  becoming
a  candidate, perhaps?
Gov.   SCRANTON:  I  would  doubt that,  sir ...    I  don't
plan  to  go  out and try  and defeat  Sen.  Goldwater .  .  .
But  I  do  think  it  important  .  .  .  that  the  Party  keep
to  a  sound  footing.  .  .  .
Mr.  NIVEN:  Would  you  consider  Mr.  Goldwater  an
unsuitable  nominee  if   he  had  just   voted  against   the
civil  rights  bill?
Gov.   SCRANTON: No,  not  necessarily.  I  don't  think
one  bill  makes  the  difference.  .  .  .
Mr.  NIVEN:  Would  you  accept  a  nomination  to  run
with  Sen. Goldwater?
Gov.   SCRANTON: Well, maybe....
Mr.  OTTEN:  Even  though  you  would  not   be  com-
fortable  campaigning  with  him?
Gov.   SCRANTON: I  am  usually  pretty   comfortable
campaigning. ...
—On CBS Face  The Nation,  Sunday  June  1
8   3
sobered  by  it,  and  being  out  of  power  and  free  to  indulge  in
demagogy.    We  remember  how  Kennedy  spoke  against  Eisen-
hower  in  I960  on  Cuba,  Laos  and  that  imaginary  missile  gap.
The  Financial  Times  of  London  said  quite  rightly  last  week
that  a  campaign   between  Goldwater   and  Johnson  would  be
like  a  contest  in  England  between  the  extreme  right  wing  of
the  Tory  party—and  its left wing,  i.e.  between  a bit  of  a  crack-
pot  and  a  moderate  conservative.    In  any  case,  should  Gold-
water  be  nominated,  we  don't  advise  readers  to  leave  for  New
Zealand.    It'll  be  much  more  interesting  here.
June  8
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June   l.
r
>, 1964
West   German  Bundestag   Ratifies  Nuclear  Test  Treaty  Only  After  U.S. Assurances  on  MLF
British  Laborite  Wilson  Claims  K  Agreement  to  Mideast  Peace  Moves
We   hope  there  was  more  to  the  Johnson-Eshkol  meeting
than  appeared  in  public.    Otherwise  the  meeting  was   little
more  than  a  bit  of  mutual electioneering.   It  helped  Johnson
with  the  Jewish  vote,  without committing the  U.S.  to  anything
which  would  antagonize  the  Arabs  and  their  friends   among
the  oil  companies.   It  may  help  Eshkol  in  the  fight  he  now
faces  with  Ben  Gurion  over  the   Lavon   affair.     Most  disap-
pointing  was  the  lack  of  any  concrete  progress  on  Johnson's
unexpected   offer   last  February  of   "cooperative   research"   in
the  desalinization  of  sea  water  by  nuclear  power.    The  final
communique  only  promised  joint studies.
One  Way  to  Get  Nazi  Scientists  Out  of  Egypt
In  this  respect  Labor  Party  leader  Harold  Wilson's  trip  to
Moscow   seems  more  promising  than  Eshkol's  visit  to  Wash-
ington.    The  U.S. press  and  wire  services paid  little attention
to  Wilson's  Middle  East  initiatives  there.     He   claimed  at  a
press  conference  in  Moscow   after  seeing  Khrushchev  that  the
Soviet  Premier  had  responded  favorably  to  proposals   (1)   for
a  treaty  forbidding  any  nation  to  let  its  scientists help   others
build  nuclear  weapons  and  missiles and  (2)   for  an  arms  ship-
ment  control  commission  to  prevent  an  arms  race  in  the  Mid-
dle  East.*
On  general  disarmament  Wilson's   talks  were  less   fruitful.
The  stumbling  block  is  the  MLF,  on  which  the  U.S. is pro-
ceeding  despite  the  fears  of  the  Eastern  bloc  and  the  misgiv-
ings  of  all  its  Western   allies  except  the  Germans.     Moscow
cannot  take  our  talk  of  wishing  to  stop  the  proliferation  of
nuclear  weapons  seriously while  we  propose  to  put  a  German
finger  on  the  nuclear  trigger  via  the  MLF.  We   would   feel
the  same  way  if  Moscow  were  setting  up  a  joint  satellite  nu-
clear  force  for  its  Germans. The  British Labor  Party  has  made
it  rlear  that  it  will  not  support  MLF  if  it  wins  the  next  elec-
tion.    Belgian,  Dutch  and  West  German  trade  union  leaders
pointedly  abstained  when  Jean  Monnet's  unofficial  Committee
for   a  U.S. of   Europe  backed  a  joint   U.S.-European  nuclear
force  though  without  endorsing  the  MLF.  Fears  East  and
Why  Korea's  Students  Revolt
"The  dismal  fact,  which  neither  South  Korea  nor  the
U.S.   will  admit  publicly,  is  that   the  costly  American
program   to   rebuild  agrarian   South   Korea   has  failed
while  industrial  North  Korea   under  Communist  meth-
ods  has  achieved  relative  stability  and  prosperity.  Two
months  ago  North  Korea  dramatically  contrasted con-
ditions  in  the  divided  halves  of  the  country  by  offering
unemployed  South  Korean  students  full-time  jobs.  .  .  .
Of   more   than   30,000   students   leaving   university  in
South   Korea   this   year   only   600  have   secured   worth-
while  employment.    The  Japanese  believe  that  in  these
circumstances   and  with  the   bitterness  of   the   Korean
war  receding   many  South   Koreans   would  rather  seek
reunion  than  adopt  the  only  alternative  of  closer  ties
with  Japan—and  the  risk  of  reim posed  Japanese   finan-
cial  dominance."
—Richard   Hughes   from    Tokyo    in   The   Guardian
(London)    May   17,  quoting   an   im-namcd   U.S.  diplo-
mat  as  saying,  "We   don't,  shout  it  aloud   but  with  all
its  risks  and  dangers,  a  reunion  of   the   two  halves  of
Korea   has  never  been  nearer  than  now."
*  Le  Monde of  June  5  which  arrived  at  press  time  carries
an   AKP   dispatch   from   Moscow  quoting   Wilson   as   saying,
"I   asked   Khrushchev  if   he   was   against    Egypt   and   other
countries  becoming  nuclear  powers.     He  was  very  categoric.
He   said   he   did   not   want   countries   like   Egypt   to    become
nuclear  powers."
West  will   be  increased   by  the   {act   that   the  West   German
Bundestag  did  not  ratify  the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty  until  U.S.
negotiator   Wm.  C.  Foster   arrived  in  Bonn   with   assurances
that  U.S. disarmament  proposals   at  Geneva  "will  do  nothing
to  endanger  the  planned   multilateral  nuclear  force."    (Balti-
more  Sun, June   6).
The   State  Department   and   undercover   agencies   are   still
doing  their  best  to  keep  full  awareness  of  MLF's   significance
from  the  U.S.  public.    The  visit  to  the  Hague  of  a  Women's
Strike   for   Peace   delegation   representing    women    from   all
NATO  countries  was  blacked  out  of  the  U.S. press  though  it
provided  picture  and  feature  story  material   otherwise   attrac-
tive  and  widely played  in  Dutch  papers.    The  barring  of Mrs.
Linus  Pauling  at  the  Dutch   border  was  the  kind  of   disgrace-
ful  business in  which FBI  and  CIA  specialize. The  women pre-
sented  a  petition  to  the  NATO  Council   meeting   signed   by
some  of  the  world's  greatest  scientists  and  thinkers  but  it  is
hard  to  find  any  mention  of  this  in  the  U.S. press.    WISP  is
planning  nationwide  demonstrations   July   15  when   the   De-
stroyer  Biddle is  launched  at  Norfolk   as  an  MLF  pilot  project
with  49  German  sailors  aboard.    This  will  probably  also  get
blackout  treatment.
So The Pentagon's Real Purpose Is Not  To Keep An  Eye  On Castro But  To Humiliate Him
"U.S.   reconnaissance  satellites  have  been   photographing
the  face  of  the  earth,  including  Russia  and  her  satellite  na-
tions   for   five   years.     But   the   Pentagon   has   said   little
about   its   satellite   system   since   a   few   months   after   the
first  experimental  vehicle  was   orbited   in  1959.  So  no  of-
ficial  Pentagon   comment  was  stirred  by  the  report  yester-
day  that  Khrushchev  has  expressed   belief  that  this   coun-
try   should   conduct  its   inspection  of   Cuba  in  this   manner
and  avoid  a  new  crisis  arising  out  of  overflights.   .  .  .
"American   officials,   when  asked  about  the   feasibility   of
using   satellite    reconnaissance    over   Cuba,   say   that   this
would  not  meet  the  American  purpose  at  all.  The  Ameri-
can  surveillance  must  be  conspicuous   in   order   to   demon-
strate  that  the  'right'  to  fly  over  Cuba  claimed  since  the
missile  crisis  is  still  being  exercised.    Actually  no  one  in  a
responsible  position  in  the   American   government  believes
that  there   are  offensive  missiles   in  Cuba.    Introduction   of
long-range  missiles  could  be  checked  easily  by  satellite  pho-
tography,   radar-carrying   aircraft   flying   off   Cuba,   or   by
conventional   espionage.
"But  these  methods   would  be  invisible  to  Premier   Fidel
Castro  and  the  Cubans.    Surveillance  is  maintained   by  U-2
aircraft  flying  over  the  island   at  an  altitude   that  is  high
but  not  so  high  that  the  Cubans  cannot  try  to  shoot  them
down.    Administration  policy  is  that  if  one  is  shot  down  all
of   the   Cuban  surface-to-air   missiles,   supplied   by   Russia,
will  promptly  be  destroyed   in   retaliation.
"In  other   words,   the   over-flights  are   really   a   dare   to
Mr.  Castro  to  start  something."
—AP  in  the Washington  Evening Star May 30
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  15, 1964
Should  U.S.  Scientists in  Drug  Frauds  Be  Allowed to  Plead  "Superior  Orders"?
Time  to  Hit  A  Sensitive  Nerve  By  Calling  It  "Johnson's  \y
ar
"
Aiken's  speech  on  Southeast  Asia  in  the  Senate  June  2  was
doubly  significant:  the  first  Republican to  join  the  small  peace
force   gathered   around   Morse   and   Gruening;   and,   unlike
Morse,    who   has   been    tactfully   calling   this   "McNamara's
War,"   Aiken  put  the  responsibility  where  it  belongs—on  the
President.    Johnson  cannot  be  allowed  the  mantle  of   peace-
maker  and  war-maker  at  the  same  time.    True,  he  inherited
the  war  from  Kennedy.   But  the  decisions now  are  his.    His
favorite  line  is,  "Come,  let  us  reason  together."     When   will
he  apply  it  to  Southeast  Asia?    In  Eastern  Europe  his  policy
is  to  detach  the  Soviet's  satellites by  trade  and   cultural   rela-
tions.    When  is  he  going  to  apply  the  same  method  to  Viet-
nam?    Aiken  opposed   extension  of  the  war  and  favored  an
international  conference.   This  is  the  way  to  avoid  the stigma
of  "Johnson's  War."     The  peace  forces  ought  to  step  hard  on
this  sensitive  nerve.
The  Moral  Duty  of  Scientists
At  the  Nuremberg  trial,  the  court  insisted  men  could  not
escape  punishment  for   inhuman  acts  by  pleading  they  had
only  been  carrying  out  orders  from  their  superiors.    Federal
Judge  McGuire  here  in  the  District  of  Columbia  applied  a
more  lenient  rule  in  the  Richardson-Merrell  case.    Three  sci-
entists  who  pleaded  nolo  contendere,  the  equivalent  of  guilty,
to  charges  of  supplying   misleading   reports  to  the  Food  and
Drug   Administration   on   a   harmful   anti-cholosterol   patent
medicine  were  allowed  to  go  free  on  six  months   probation.
Judge  McGuire  said  he  felt  the  blame  rested  "on  the  failure
of   proper   executive,   managerial   and   supervisory   control."
This  is  dangerous  judicial  doctrine.  Scientists  know  what  they
are  doing.    Not  to  punish  them  is  to  encourage  similar  viola-
tion  of  moral  duty  in  other  laboratories.     MER-29,  marketed
as  an  anti-cholosterol   drug,   caused   cataracts  and   impotence.
The   company  sold  $12,000,000  worth—and  now  gets  away
with  an  $80,000  fine!
The  wisdom  of  outlawing   loyalty  oaths  is  reinforced  by  a
figure  the  Baltimore  Sun  disclosed  June  4.  The  editorial  wel-
comed  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  against  the  oaths   imposed
by  the   State  of  Washington  and  suggested  repeal   of  Mary-
land's  Ober  Act  which  has  a  similar  loyalty  oath.    The  Sun
pointed  out  that  "on  a  secret  list  Ober  enforcers  have   3,000
The  Case  For  A  Cease-Fire  Now
"It  is  becoming  increasingly  evident  that  the  unde-
clared  war  in  Vietnam  can  and  will  ultimately  be   set-
tled  only  at  the  conference  table.    If  that  is  the  case
then  the  sooner  the  U.S.  takes  the  initiative  in  the  UN
to   obtain   a   cease-fire  the   better.     On  June   1   the
Washington   Post   editorialized   that   the   U.S.   should
take  a  'middle  course.'    Admitting  that  the  issues  of
Vietnam  will  ultimately  have  to  be  settled   at  the  con-
ference  table,  the  editorial  would  nevertheless  advocate
needless   sacrifice   of   thousands   of   American   lives   to
strengthen  our  hand  at  the  conference table.    The  mili-
tary   might  of  the   U.S.  does  not  need  to  prove  itself
by  the  needless   loss  of  thousands  of  its  fighting  men
nor  by  the   incineration  of  villages  by  napalm  bombs.
The   New   York   Times   adopts  a   similar   position  edi-
torially,  saying  in  its  May  29  issue,  'The  prelude  to  a
peaceful   settlement  through  negotiation   may  have  to
be  a  temporary  increase. ...  To get  our troops  out of
the  area ...  it  may  be  necessary  first  to  put  more  in.'
In  other  words  we  have  got  to  kill  a  lot  more  Ameri-
can  boys  as  well  as  Vietnamese  and  spend  more  mil-
lions  of  dollars  before  we  do  what  we  know   we  will
have  to  do  ultimately.    What  utter  folly!"
—Gruening    of    Alaska    in    the    Senate    June     3
(abridged)    a  speech  most   of   the  press   ignored.
names,  although  they  admit  there  are  no  more  than  100  'die-
hard'  Communists  in  the  State."    This  means  that  the  Ober
Act  in  its  15  years of  existence  has  given  Maryland  an   excuse
to  keep  Left  and  liberal  organizations  of  all  kinds  under  sur-
veillance  and  to  build  a  black   (or   "Red")   list.
While  Secretary  Rusk  hailed  the  Shah  of  Persia  as  "a  sym-
bol  of   stability"   and   the   Washington    Star  as   "a   cause   for
democratic  rejoicing,"  the  State  Department  and  the   Iranian
Embassy  did  their  best  to  frustrate  a  press  conference   called
in  protest  by  the  Iranian  Student  Association.  The  Shah  is  a
symbol  of  police  state  rule  and  a  fake  land   reform  used   to
siphon  U.S.  aid  dollars  into  Swiss  banks.     Hardest  of  all  for
the   students   to   understand   is  why  three   American   univer-
sities  confer  honorary  degrees  on  a  ruler  who  sent  troops  with
"shoot  to  kill"  orders   into  the   University   of  Teheran  two
years  ago killing one  student  and  wounding  2,000  others.  The
only  appropriate   degree  would   be  Doctor  of  Despotism.
Ignorance  and Inhumanity Uncovered  in  the  Defoliation-by-Atom-Bomb Controversy
The  defoliation  controversy   is   uncovering   not  only   the
irresponsibility  of  Senator  Goldwater  but  the  ignorance  and
inhumanity  of  the  Air  Force.    The  atomic  physicist  Ralph
E.  Lapp  in  a  letter   (New  York  Times  June  5)  takes  issue
with  the   General  from  whom  Goldwater  got   the   idea  of
using   atomic   bombs  to  deprive  guerrillas   in  Vietnam  of
their  leafy   cover.     The   proposal   for   defoliation-by-atom-
bomb  (of   Hiroshima  power)  was  put  forward  in  the  Air
University  Quarterly  Review  (Spring,  1960)  by  Gen.  Fred-
eric  H.  Smith,  Jr.,  now  retired  but  then  at  U S.  Air  Force
HQ in  Europe.
Dr.  Lapp  wrote  that   Gen.  Smith's   "thesis  is   in  violent
disharmony  with  the   official  data  on  nuclear  weapons   ef-
fects."     He  pointed  out  that,  on  page  346  of   "The   Effects
of  Nuclear  Weapons",  the  Bible  on  the  subject,   "there  ap-
pears  a  photo  of  an  area  1.25  miles  from  Ground  Zero  at
Hiroshima."    The  trees  in  the  photo  are  "intact,  no  limbs
ar  broken,  and  leaves  are  in  place."    Where  trees  were  de-
nuded  in  Hiroshima or  Nagasaki  it  was  by  fire  storm.    The
probability   of  a  fire  storm  in  the  rain  forests  of   Vietnam,
Dr.  Lapp  went  on,  was  very  low   "due  to  the  high   water
content   of  the  leaves."
Dr.  Lapp's  letter  dealt  only  with  the  defoliation   problem.
A  more  serious  question  is  raised  by  Gen.  Smith's  article.
"We  must  achieve,"  the  General  wrote,  "through   education
and  through  clear-cut,  logical   tactical   doctrine,   a  general
acceptance  by  the  U.S.   of  the  requirement   for  the  use  of
nuclear  weapons  in  limited  war."    He  expressed  the  belief
that  "limited  aggression"  could  be  deterred  if  enemies  were
convinced  "that  we  can  and  will  employ  nuclear  firepower
from  the  outset."   Thus  his  article  is  to  be  read  as  part  of
a  campaign  to  get  the  American  public  used  to  the  idea.
We  don't  think  it  will  endear  us  to  the  peasants  of   Viet-
nam.
8
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  15,1964
Five  Unsolved  Negro  Murders  in  Five  Months  in  Mississippi
Will the White House Wait for  More Bloodshed This Summer Before Acting?
There  will  be  murder  this  summer  in  Mississippi.     More
urgent  than  the  Civil  Rights  Bill,  which  seemed  sure  of  pas-
sage  as  we went  to  press,  are  steps  to  inhibit  violence  in  Miss-
issippi  when   1,000  volunteers  invade  the  State  to  help  Ne-
groes   register.     The   Council   of   Federated    Organizations,
which   is  running   this  Mississippi   Summer  Project,   held   a
hearing  here  last  Monday  before  a  panel  of  writers  and  edu-
cators  on  which  we  hope  to  report  more  fully   in  next  week's
issue.    The  testimony showed  a  campaign  of  terror  by  official
and  unofficial  white  agencies  in  the  State  to  prevent  the  regis-
tration  of  Negro  voters.
The  Basic  Law  Is  White  Supremacy
Law  enforcement  there  is  enforcement  of  white  supremacy.
This  is an  old  story  but  it  still,  as  naive  questions  at  the  hear-
ing  indicated,  seems  to  surprise  good  people  in  the  North.
Some  of  our  best  boys  and  girls  are  going  to  get  the   same
treatment  in  Mississippi  this  summer  unless  strong  preventive
action  is  taken  in   advance.
The  ideal  move  would  be  to  send  troops  or  Federal  mar-
shals   to  Mississippi   before   instead   of   after  bloodshed.    A
politically  more  practical move  would  be  to  press  for  hearings
in  Mississippi  this  summer  by  the  Civil  Rights   Commission.
The  Kennedy  Administration  vetoed   hearings   in  that   State.
Johnson  ought  to  be  petitioned  to  order  them.    The  crisis  in
civil  rights  will  come  in  Mississippi "this  summer.    The  Com-
mission  ought  to  be  on  hand  to  observe  it.  Its  presence  would
inhibit  violence.  The  restraining  influence would  be  strength-
ened  if  the  President  announced  that  an  FBI  man  and  a  Jus-
tice  Department  man  would  be  on  hand  at  each   hearing.
If  the  White  House  cannot  be  moved  then  we  urge  that  a
citizens'  panel  like  that   (under   Dr.   Harold   Taylor)   which
presided  at  the  hearing  last  week  be  formed  to  hold  hearings
during  July  and  August  in  Mississippi.
Steps  of  this kind  will  save lives. The  testimony at  the  hear-
ing  showed  that  there  have  been  five  unsolved   murders  of
Negroes  in  Mississippi  during  the  past  five  months.  One  was
that   of   Louis  Allen,  who   witnessed   the   unpunished    1961
slaying  of  Herbert  Lee,  a  registration  worker  by  E.  H.  Hurst,
Another  Nail  in  the  SACB's  Coffin
As  we  were  about  to  go  to  press  a  major  victory  was
won  in  the  fight  against  the  registration  provisions  of
the  Internal  Security  Act.    The  Supreme  Court,  by  re-
fusing  to  grant  a  review,  left   standing   a  unanimous
decision  by  Chief   Judge  Bazelon  in  the  Court  of   Ap-
peals  which  held  that  officials  of  the  Communist  Party
could   not,   under  the   5th   amendment,  be  required   to
register  the  Party.   Just  three  years  ago,  the  Supreme
Court  5-to-4  upheld  the  registration  provisions  as  not
in  violation  of  the  1st  amendment  but  declined  to  pass
on  the  5th  amendment  question  until  someone  had  been
convicted  for  failure  to  register.    The  dissenters,  War-
ren,   Black,  Douglas  and  Brennan,  held  then  that  the
5th   amendment   applied.     Of   the   original   majority,
Harlan,   Clark   and   Stewart   are   still   on   the   Court.
White  took  no  part,  since  he  had  been  in  the  Justice
Department  when  the  case  was  being  prosecuted.   The
government  may,   under  the  decision  below,  ask  for  a
new  trial  and take  on  itself  the  almost  impossible   bur-
den  of  proving  that  the  Party  may  find  a  "willing   vol-
unteer"  to   register  it   without   incriminating   himself.
In  the  absence  of  such  a  request,  an  acquittal  will  be
ordered.    This  would  not  mean  the  end  of  the  Subver-
sive  Activities  Control  Board  with  its  power  of  black-
listing  radical  organizations,  but  it  would  be  another
judicial  nail  in  its  coffin.
a  member  of  the  State  legislature.    Allen  later  signed  an   affi-
davit  saying  that  Hurst  had  killed  Lee  "without  provocation."
Allen  was  warned  to  leave;  had  his  jaw  broken  by  a  deputy
sheriff;  asked  the  Justice  Department   in  vain  for   protection.
His  head  was  blown  off  by  a  shotgun  just  12  hours  before  his
scheduled  departure.  That  is  how  they  play  it  in  Mississippi.
The  gap   between  what   Congress  enacts   and   what   Miss-
issippi  obeys  is  an  abyss.   One  brave  Negro  testified  that  after
he  tried  to  register  his  house  was  fire-bombed—and  then  he
was  arrested  for  arson!    James  Travis,  a  SNCC  field  worker,
was  shot  in  the  back  of  the  head  while  returning  from  a  voter
registration  rally.    Suspects  were  arrested  after  pressure  on  the
FBI  but  have  never  been  brought  to  trial.    These  stories  are
a  sample  of  what  to  expect  this   summer.
You  Can  Use  The  Blank  Below  to  Give  A  Sub  or  Stone's  "Haunted   Fifties"    (Or  Both)  As  A  Graduation   Gift
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly       5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street      ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
0/15/64
For  $5.35  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted     Fifties
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ...........!..............................Z6ne............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday   except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first   week  in
January  and   Bi-Weekly  during  July  and   Auuust  at   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.W..   Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the   U.S.;    $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:^
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.                                                                     ^^
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED