I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964apr27.pdf

============================================================

Deflating   That Draper  "Scoop"  on  Cuba, P.  3
Morse  Submits  Evidence That  War Is  Already  Being  Extended  Secretly  Into  North  Vietnam,  Page  2
L R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  17
APRIL  27,  1964
»ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Time  We  Caught  Up  To The  Rest of the Capitalist World
The  war  on  poverty  may  become  more  manageable  if  we
begin  by  regarding  ours  as  an  underdeveloped  country—un-
derdeveloped  in  its  ideas.    For  a  half  century,  since,  the  out-
break  of  the  first  World   War,   the  business  man  has  brain-
washed  this country into  so pious  a  belief  in  something called
free  enterprise that  we  are  incapable  of  facing  the  real  prob-
lems  of  a  real  world.    A  simple-minded  horror  of  socialism
and  a  simple-minded  faith  that  the  business  man  knows  best
are  at  the  root  of  our  troubles  in  foreign  and  domestic  policy.
It  explains,  for  example,  our  slap-happy  attitude  toward  the
Brazilian  coup,  and  it  explains  why  the  war  on  poverty  pro-
ceeds  in  a  benevolent  fog.
A  Real  Political  Difference  at  Last
This  fog  will  not  clear  up  until  we  begin  to  recognize  that
unaided   free   enterprise  is  failing,   and  that  we  cannot  suc-
cessfully   wage  the  war  on  poverty  without  adopting   "social-
istic"  measures,  such  as  overall  economic  planning  through
the  Federal  government.    It  is  the  great  virtue  of  the  report
filed  by  the  Senate's  subcommittee  on  employment  and  man-
power  under  Senator  Clark  (D.  Pa.)  that  it  says  this,  though
tentatively  and  gingerly.    Indeed  it  opens  up,  for  a  change,
a  meaningful  difference  in  our  two  party  system,  long  stalled
on  a  stale  dead  center.    Here  the  five  other   Democrats   on
the   subcommittee—Randolph,   W.   Va.,   McNamara,   Mich.,
Pell,  R.I.,  Kennedy,  Mass.,  and  Metcalf,  Mont.—stand   with
the  chairman  for   reactivating  the  Employment  Act  of   1946
and  making  it  an  instrument  of  economic  planning.    Of   the
three  Republicans,  Prouty  of  Vt.  and  Jordan  of  Idaho,  attack
this  as  "guided   capitalism"   while  the  third,   Javits  of   New
York,  oscillates  between  his  liberal  insights  and  his  need  to
keep  his  party card.    On  the  one  hand  he  recognizes  that  the
government  "must  play  its  own  positive  role  in  the  private
sector  of  the  economy."    On  the  other  hand  he  feels  that  "the
subcommittee's  majority   proposal   implies  a  note  of  rigidity
and  planning  inconsistent  with  a  free  economy."     It's   hard
to  be  a  Republican.
It's  also  not  easy  to  be  a  liberal  Democrat.    Note  the  word
"implied"   in  that  last  quotation  from  Javits.    The  majority
were  so  nervous  about  their  main  recommendation  that  they
buried   it   in   a   very   muffled   report—somewhat   like  a   man
trying  to  talk  through   a  heavy  blanket—and   left   the   most
important   observations  to   implication.    It   was  left   to   the
minority  to  state  clearly  what  the  majority  was  afraid  to  say.
This  is  how  Prouty  and  Jordan  put  it.    "Implicit  in  the  ma-
jority's  proposals,"   they  wrote,  "is  the  assumption  that  if  the
establishment  of  overall  national  economic  goals  is  desirable,
then  the  establishment  of  growth   targets   for   specific  indus-
tries  would  be  even  more  desirable."     So  it  would.
If   our   mixed   society  were  invigorated  by  an   infusion  of
socialist   thinking,  we   would   recognize   boldly   that   poverty
represents   an  untapped   market,  that   unemployed  hands  are
5  *
When  fieMay  Asked  for   100  Megatons
Mr.   MAHON   (D.   Tex.   Chrm.   Subcom.   on  Defense
Appropriations):  You  were  talking  about  the   Russians
being  able to  do this and  that.   As  a  result  of  this  phil-
osophy  of  what  the  Russians  could  do  a  few  years  ago
we  developed the  bomber  gap  and we  appropriated $800
million,  I  believe,  to  stop  the  bomber  gap  and  later  we
were  told  there  was  no  bomber  gap.
As  a  result  of  this  same  reasoning  as  to  what  the
Russians  could do, we  developed the  missile  gap. Every-
one  admitted  generally  speaking  there  was   a  missile
gap.      Now   we   come  along   later   and  everyone   says
there  never  was  a  missile  gap.
Now,    are  you  by  this  testimony  opening  up  a  so-
called   megatonnage  gap   which   will   never   occur   and
which  will   be  just   as   phony   as   the   bomber   and   the
missile  gap?
Gen.  LeMay: This  is  entirely  possible,  Mr.  Chairman.
—1965  Defense   Budget  hearings  rel. April  H.
potential  wealth,  that  the  presence  of  idle  facilities  and  re-
sources  they can  work  upon,  is  not  a  curse  but  an  opportunity.
The  Federal  government  ought  to  do  more  than  set  general
goals.    There  is  no  reason  why  it  cannot  inventory  specific
needs  for  specific  industries.    If  we  knew  how  many  pairs  of
shoes,   how   much   plumbing,   how   much   lumber,   and   how
much  clothing  would  be  needed   to  raise  the  miserable  mil-
lions  on  the  fringe  of  our  society  to  decent  living  standards,
we  would  see  the  market  and  the  jobs  the  war  on  poverty
could   open.
The   majority  nowhere  dare  speak   in  such  concrete   terms.
But  the  mere  suspicion  of  such  a  possibility  fills  the  minority
with  alarm.    In  sounding  it  they  make  a  revealing  admission.
This   admission   shows   how   backward   our   own   country   is
compared   with  the  other   advanced  capitalist  countries.     "It
is  not  too  much  to  say,"  Senators  Prouty  and  Jordan   protest,
"that   the   majority's  recommendations  eventually  would   re-
place  our  system of  decentralized  decision-making  by  millions
of  individuals and  businesses with  a  system  of  economic  plan-
ning  and  control  by  the  Central  Government.     This,"   they
then  admit,  "//  the  drift   of  affairs    in  other  Western  countries.
[Our   italics.]    The  U.S.  surely  will  be  pushed  in  the  same
direction  if  the  economic  planners  among  us  have  their  way."
To  understand  this  more  fully  let  us  turn  back  to  the  ma-
jority  report.    The  majority  report  recommends  action  to  re-
duce  the  level  of  unemployment   in  this  country   to   3%   by
1968.    This,  under  the  most  optimistic  assumptions,   will  re-
quire  a  $5  billion  dollar  a  year  increase  in  Federal   expendi-
tures  and  considerable  "guidance"  from  the  Federal   govern-
ment.     Actually   (according   to  a  financial  page  column   by
Harvey  H.  Segal  in  the  Washington   Post  April   20)   unem-
ployment  has  fallen  below  3%  in  the  past  half  century  only
(Continued   on  Page   four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  27, 1964
Another  Urgent  Peace  Warning  The  Press  Ignored,  Despite  Startling  Revelations
Morse  Declares  War  Already  Being  Extended  Secretly  into  North Vietnam
The  press  blackout  on  the   handful   of   Senators   opposing
the   war   in   Vietnam   is   scandalous.     Senator   Gruening  of
Alaska   called  attention  April  15  to  the  fact   that  American
casualties   this  year  were  twice  those  of   last   and  said  that
in  his  five  years  in  the  Senate   "I  have  never  received   mail
comparable  in  volume  and  in  virtual  unanimity to  the  recom-
mendation  I  made  on  March  10  that  the  U.S. should  get   out
of   South   Vietnam."    This   is   another   index  of   how  poorly
the  press  reflects  opinion.   The  worst  example  of  suppression
was   the  failure  to  report   Senator   Morse's   speech   of  April
14  with  its  sensational  revelations  from  Aviation  Week.   We
give  the  gist  of  this  in  the  abridgement  and  the  box  below.
By  Wayne  Morse
In  the  April   6  issue  of  Aviation  Week   (see  box  below)
there  is  a  very  interesting   article.     I  do   not  know   how   it
happened  to  get  into  print.    The  story  points  out  that   oper-
ations  have  gone  beyond  the  borders  of  South  Vietnam.  That
has  been  a  growing  practice.     I  am  reading   these   paragraphs
because  I  have  heard   Senators  say  in  the  cloakroom  that  they
really  do  not  think  there  is  much  danger  that  the  war  will  be
escalated  into  North  Vietnam.    If  the  advocates  of  our  pres-
ent  policy  could  only  get  a  wide  section  of  American  public
support   for   that   kind   of   operation,   we  would   start   losing
American   boys  by  the  scores.
Nuclear  Weapons  to  Be  Used
Mr.  President,  we  cannot  answer  charges  that  will  be  made
against  us  if  we  escalate  the  war  into  North  Vietnam.     If  we
escalate  it  into  North  Vietnam,   I  warn   the   Senate   that  the
plan   is  to  use  nuclear   weapons.     I  have   been   heard   to  say
before   that  if  we  drop  nuclear  weapons  on  North   Vietnam,
we  had  better   start  looking  around  the  world   for  friends.
In  looking  at  the  consequences  if  we  used  nuclear   weapons
to   escalate   this   war   into  North   Vietnam,   we  ought   to  be
forthright  enough  as  a  nation  to  say, "We  want  to  do  every-
thing  we  can  to  try  to  settle  this  dispute  in  South  Vietnam  by
resorting   to  peaceful  procedures  of  international  law."    We
have  not  tried  that.    We  have  not  even  tried  to  use  it.    We
Better  Recheck  Those  Computers
"Today   the  government  of  General  Khanh  is  vigor-
ously  rebuilding  the machinery  of  administration.  .  .  .
He   is  an  able  and  energetic   leader.     He   has   demon-
strated  his grasp. . . ."
—Secretary  McNamara:  speech  on Vietnam, Mar.  26
SAIGON—Vietnamese  political  observers  say  a  coup
against   Premier  Maj. Gen. Nguyen   Khanh  is   only   a
matter  of  time.    These   observers,   who  accurately pre-
dicted  the  two  previous  coups,  feel  a  third  coup  is  in-
evitable   —   either   through   assassination   or  military
might.    In  fact  these  observers   predict  a  fourth  coup:
'The  next   coup  will   solve  nothing.    Anyone  can  seize
power,   but   no   one   has   enough   support   to   stay   in.'
Gen.  Khanh  is  concerned  enough  to  sleep  in  a  different
house  each  night,  to  admit   to   foreign   correspondents
that  his  wife  is  worried  and  to  house  her  and  their  4
children  350  miles  from  Saigon."
—New  York  Herald-Tribune,  April  19.
have  not  endeavored  to   create   a  SEATO  trusteeship,   or  to
pursue   the  meaning  of   what   de  Gaulle  had   in  mind con-
cerning  a  program   for   neutralizing  this   area   of   the   world.
The   newspapers  today   stated »that  there  is  some   evidence
the  Vietcongs  are  trained  in  North  Vietnam.     I  do  not  think
there  is  any  doubt  about  that—just  as  the  South   Vietnamese
are  trained  by  U.S. military.  All  that  means   is  that  two for-
eign  powers  are  training  the  participants  in  a  civil war.
I  am  greatly  concerned   about  the  danger  of  escalating   the
war.    I  think  we  ought  to  give  a  great   deal  of  heed  to  the
article  from  which   I   read.
The  article  shows  that  we  have  already   aided  and  abetted
the  extension  of  the  war  beyond   the  borders   of  South   Viet-
nam.    I  am  fearful  that  as  the  proof   of  that  becomes  clearly
established—as  I  believe  it  can  be—we  may  wake   up  some
morning   to   find   charges   being   levelled    against   us   in   the
United  Nations   because   I  do  not  believe  we  have  any  inter-
national  law  basis  for  being  in  South  Vietnam  as  a  combatant.
Aviation  Week  Disclosures   Show  McNamara Not  Telling  The  Truth
Saigon—War  against  the  Communists already  has  erupt-
ed  over  the  borders  of  South. Vietnam  in  hit-and-run guer-
rilla  raids  and  infiltration  moves  as  far  north  as  China.  .  .  .
With  U.S. backing  in  aircraft,  weapons  and  money,  an  esti-
mated   50,000   elite   South   Vietnamese   troops    are    being
trained  to  take  the  offensive   in  over-the-border  strikes   at
Communist  supply centers  and  communications routes.    De-
spite  Defense   Secretary  McNamara's  implication  in  Wash-
ington  March  26  that  the  decision  has  not  yet   been  made
to  extend  the  war, it  is  known  here  that  guerrilla  strikes
against   the   Communists  have   been   increasing  since   last
summer. ...
Key  factor  in  the  current  raids  is  airlift  provided by  Air
America,  a  U.S. cargo  company  incorporated  in  Delaware
under   a   maze   of   legal   obscurities   that   camouflage   its
U.S.   government  sponsorship.  .  .  .  U.S. military  advisers
here  are  optimistic that extending the  war  beyond  the bord-
ers,   plus   a   stable   government   in   Saigon,   will   force   the
Communist  insurgency  to  collapse  in  a  year.  .  .  .
Special  forces,  which  now  constitute  one-tenth  of  the  half
million  South  Vietnamese  under  arms,  are  essentially air-
borne  troops  not  connected  with  any  formal  military organ-
ization.    They  rely  on  Air  America. ...  In  its  open  oper-
ations  Air  America  is  a  parent  company  of  the   Civil  Air
Transport  (CAT)  airline.  .  .  .  But  in  its  covert  operations,
Air  America  uses  numerous  secret   airstrips  in  South  Viet-
nam  and  Thailand.  .  .  .
Hub  of  Air  America's  activities  in  Southeast   Asia—open
and  secret—is  Din  Muang airport at  Bangkok, Thailand. .  .  .
Southern   Laos,   the   principal   pathway  for   reinforcements
from  North  to  South  Vietnam, is  only  125  miles  wide.    By
operating   from   fields   in   Eastern   Thailand  and  from   the
northern  part  of  South  Vietnam, Air  America can  penetrate
to  the  interior  of  Laos  on  relatively  short  flights.  .  .  .
Air  America  has  been  flying  in  Laos  under  charter  to  the
U.S.  Aid  Mission  in  Vientiane  (Laos).    Much  of  this  work
consisted  of   hauling  medicines, • food  and  clothing  to  refu-
gees  of  the  Laotian civil  war.    On  March  18,  after   protests
by  the  Communist  Pathet  Lao  that  Air  America  was  mix-
ing  its  relief   airlift  with  military  airlift,   Seaboard  World
Services  was  hired  for  the  refugee  airlift  job. ...
Last  Fall  when  U.S. officials  decided  that  it  was  impos-
sible  to  win  the  war  by  confining  it  inside  South  Vietnam-
ese  borders,  they  began  an  expanded  program  of  training
the  special  guerrilla  forces  at  secret  bases.  Courses  empha-
sized  techniques  of   operating   beyond  national  borders."
—"South   Vietnamese    Raiders   Extending   War"   from
Aviation  Week  (April   6).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  27, 1964
A  Step-by-Step  Account  of  How  A  Phoney  Story  Was  Deflated
Theodore  Draper's  "Scoop" About  A  Secret  U.S.  Aid  Offer  to  Castro
The   phoniest  yarn  of   the   past   week   was  Max   Frankel's
page  one  story  in  the  New   York   Times  April   13  on  Theo-
dore   Draper's   article,   "Fulbright   and   Cuba"   in   the   New
Leader  of  that  date.    Draper   claimed  that  just  before  Castro
closed    his   trade   agreement   with   Mikoyan   in   February   of
1960,   "the  U.S.  made  an  effort—until  now  a  closely  guarded
secret  on  both  sides—to  offer   Fidel  Castro's  regime   aid  and
cooperation."     Frankel   wrapped   this   all   up   as   a   work   of
high  scholarship.
Weasel   Words  at  State  Dept.
The   State  Department's   reaction  that  day  was  as  phoney.
Its  spokesman,   when   asked  about  the  story,  said  the  U.S.  in
1959   and  early  I960  had  "repeatedly   .  .  .  indicated  to  the
Cuban  government   its  desire   to  hold   full   and  frank  discus-
sions."     But  in  the  course   of  questioning   he   admitted   that
in  these  "exploratory  exchanges-.  .  .  the  question  of  U.S.  aid
did  not  arise."
Next  day  the  State  Department  was  asked  about  a  follow-
up   story   from   Roy  Rubottom,   then   Assistant   Secretary   of
State  for  Latin  American  Affairs.     Rubottom  claimed  he  had
offered   Castro  aid  in  that  period.     The   spokesman   said  that
during  Castro's  visit  here  in  April,   1959,   Rubottom  met  with
some  of   the   officials   who   accompanied   Castro   "and   invited
them  to  indicate  Cuba's   needs."     He   said   the   Cubans    "re-
buffed  Mr.  Rubottom's   offer."    The  next  question   was,   "Can
you  say how?"    The  answer  was,  "I  would  assume  by  simply
being   unresponsive."     This  colloquy   followed:
"Q.  Well,  what  does  that  mean?     Why  indicate  Cuba's
needs?    What  types  of  needs  are  you  referring  to  there?
"A.  In  terms  of   economic   programs.
"Q.  Are  you  suggesting   this  was  the  last  attempt  ever
made  with  the  Castro  government?
"A.  Yes,  sir.
"Q.  Well  how  does  that  fit  in  with  your  statement   yes-
terday  that  no  aid  was  offered  to  them?
"A.  The  matter  at  hand  yesterday   was  the  story  involv-
ing  a  year  later,  which  was  the  subject  of  a  news   story.
"Q,  Can  you  be  more  specific  about  this  offer,  Bob?  You
say  'invited  them  to  indicate  Cuba's   needs.'    Was  this  a
Lest  Cuba  Flourish
"Bleak   as   this   sounds,   U.S.   officials   hasten   to   dis-
avow  any  notion  that  economic  woes  threaten  Castro's
downfall.   .  .  .  The  Castro   government  can   probably
claim  some  recent  headway  in  improving the  lot  of  the
average   Cuban.  .  .  .  Distribution  problems  are   being
untangled;  transportation  is  improving;  rationing  may
even  be  eased  on  some  items  this  year.    'You  just  can't
sink  this  island  economically,'  says  one  veteran  of  the
Cuban  scene.    Adds  a  colleague,  'Every  day  Castro  re-
mains  in  power,  he  becomes  less  weak  politically.'    But
U.S.   officials   do  think  their   economic  squeeze  on   the
island  is  making  Cuba,  as  one  puts  it,  'look  a  lot  less
rich  than  it  otherwise might'  to  other  Latin  lands.  And
that  is  a  major  aim  of  the  U.S.  trade  embargo.  .  .  ."
—Wall  St.  Journal,  "Troubled  Cuba",  April 16
formal  session  with  a  formal  presentation,  and  an  exten-
sive  discussion   or  just  a  brief—
"A.  Well  it  was   formal  in  the  sense  that   it  invited   a
submission   of   some   ideas   on   areas   in   which   the    U.S.
could   be  helpful.
After  the  spokesman  admitted  that  Castro  himself  was  not
present   at   these   "discussions,"    another   question   finally   cut
through   the  fog  to  solid   ground:
"Q.  Was  there  ever  a  time  in  which  the  U.S.   indicated
its   desire   to  talk  about  Cuba's   economic  needs   to   Fidel
Castro  himself?
"A.  Not  that  I  am aware of."
Next  day  the  Neu>  York   Times  (April   15)   printed   a  let-
ter  from  Sergio  Rojas  Santamarina,  a  former  Cuban  Ambas-
sador   who  in  June  I960  took   refugee  in  the  Argentine  em-
bassy  in  Havana.    He  claimed  the  Argentine  Ambassador  as
intermediary    for    U.S.    Ambassador    Bonsai    offered    Castro
$300,000,000  in  U.S.   aid  if  Castro   would   end  his   "vicious
campaigning"   against   the   U.S.    and   negotiate    outstanding
differences.      But   when    the   former   Argentine   ambassador
himself   was  interviewed   (New    York   Times,  April   19)   he
denied   that  he  had   conveyed  any  "specific   offer   of  financial
aid"  in  his  talks  with  Castro.
How to Speak to the National Press  Club and Keep Every Word  You  Say  Out of  Print
Q.  On  the  basis   of   your  experience   with  Castro,  would
you  classify  him  as  a  wild-eyed  irrational  kook?
A.  Castro  is  crazy  like  a  fox.    Castro  has  been  brilliantly
—there  is  no  adverb  I  can  think  of  that  is  more appropri-
ate—playing   the   U.S.   against   Russia,   and   both   against
Communist   China,  for   some   years   and  with   considerable
success.    The  fact  is  that  whether  or  not  various   elements
in  the  U.S.  want  to  realize  it,  the  island  of  Cuba  belongs  to
Castro.    These  oversimplifications  of  Castro  being   a  pawn
of   Khrushchev   are  simply   absurd.     His   relationship   with
Khrushchev  can  be  likened  to  looking  through  two  ends  of
a  telescope.     Khrushchev  may  be  looking  through   his  end
and  seeing  how  Castro  is  serving   his  purposes,  but  I  can
assure  you  Castro  is  looking  through  his  end  and  he  knows
how  he  is  using  Khrushchev.
Q.  Do  you  believe  Communist  Cuba  will  develop  a  viable
economy  and  is  the  U.S.  missing  the  boat  by  not maintain-
ing  political and commercial contact  with  the  Cuban  people?
A.  The  Cuban  economy  has  been  in  very  great   difficulty.
This  has  been  due  to  a  variety  of  factors,  especially   at  the
outset   to  a  shortage   of  spare   parts  since  virtually  every-
thing  in  Cuba  came  from  the  U.S.    I  am  not  in  a  position
to  appraise  how  effective   the   embargo  has   been.     It   has
not  deterred  a  number  of  our  allies  from  making  an  honest
dollar.    I  am  sure,  however,  of  this:  No  one  is  hungry  in
Cuba.
He   also   unquestionably   has   been   growing  in  strength.
His   primary   drive  has   been   toward  the   youth  of   Cuba.
Lenin  once  said,  'Give  me  the  children of  a  country  for  four
years   and  I  can  assure   its   future.'    Castro  is  now  in  his
sixth  year  with  these  children.   There  is  no  question  that
among  them,  whether  one  wishes  to  attribute it  to  the  gov-
ernment  schools,   the  heavy  indoctrination  and  characterize
it  as  brain-wash—however  one  wants  to  characterize  it—
there  is  no  question  but  that  the  youth  of  Cuba,  whatever
they  may  think  of  the  Communist  party  or  Maxism,   they
are  fanatically  devoted  to  Fidel.
And  I  may  add that,  in  my  judgment,  Cuba  today  is  more
Cuban  and  Latin  than  Marxist.
—James  B.  Donovan,  who  negotiated   release  of  the   Bay
of   Pigs   prisoners,    before    the   National   Press   Club,   April
10,  in  questions  and  answers  few  newspapers   reported,   per-
haps   on  the  principle   that   anything   good  said   of   Castro,
is  (as  Orwell  might   have  said)   un-news.
6   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  27,1964
How  Planning  May Provide  More,  Not  Less,  Economic  Freedom
(Continued   from   Page   One)
under  the  impact  of  war-created  demand  in  1918-19,  1943-45
and   1951-53.    The  one  exception   to  this  pattern  is  the  year
1926,   the  one  time  this  level  was  reached  in  a  truly   peace-
time  economy.    The  record  suggests  that  our  free   enterprisers
left  to  themselves  will  never  achieve  this  goal.   Yet, as  the
majority  points  out,  "Countries  such  as  Sweden,  France,  West
Germany  and   Japan   have,   by  aggressive  monetary,   taxation
and  expenditure  policies  maintained  a  high   level  of   produc-
tion  and  unemployment  levels  below  2%  by  U.S.  definitions."
In  all   these   countries,   though   in  varying  ways,  the   central
government   has  set  out  goals   and   planned   to   reach   them.
Their  high  growth   rate  and  our  lag  testifies  to  the   effective-
ness  of  planning  in  a  mixed  society.
What  Only  Government   Can  Do
This  does  not  mean,  as  the  minority  insists,  replacement  of
"decentralized  decision-making  by  millions  of  individuals and
businesses."    //  does  mean  establishing  a  mechanism  for  mak-
ing   the   kind   of   decisions  no   individual   business  man   can
make.    No  individual  business,  no  matter  how  powerful,  can
take  the  decisions  required   to  end  the  decay  of  a  whole  re-
gion,   as  in  Appalachia,  or  to  raise  a  whole  segment   of   the
population   out  of  misery  and  into  the  normal  market.    Busi-
ness  men  understand  this  very well  when  it  comes  to  the  kind
of  government  interference   they  like;  our  network   of   tariffs
and   subsidies  represents   central  planning   for   their   benefit.
What  they  fight  against  is  central  decision-making  in  the  so-
cial  sphere,   for  the  benefit  of  the  poorer   classes,  though   ex-
perience  at  home  and  abroad  has  shown  that  they  too  benefit
by  it.    Such  central  decision-making  would  not  replace  decen-
tralized  decision  by  individuals but  provide  a  better   context
for  those  decisions.    Let  me  illustrate.
The   individual  shoe  manufacturer  cannot   figure   that   he
could  sell  a  million  more  pair  of  shoes  if  Harlem  and  Appa-
lachia  were  released  from  poverty.    He  has  to  make  his  but-
put   decisions  on  the  basis  of  the  restricted   market  which  is
the  only  one  he  can  count  on.    Only  the  central   government
can  decide  to  set  production  goals  in  the  wider  terms  of  hu-
man  need  and  then  take  the  steps  to  make  these  goals   pos-
sible  by  guaranteeing  the  necessary  purchasing   power.    The
Next  Week:  The  Clark  and  Appalachia Reports
Alsop's  Latest
To  the  delight  of   Senators   Smathers  and  Eastland,
Joseph  Alsop  has  discovered  that  the  civil rights  move-
ment  is  being  infiltrated  by  Communists. Martin Luther
King,  CORE  and  SNNC  were  all  given  the  treatment
in   his   column  April  15.    Next   day   Smathers   hailed
Alsop  in  the  Senate  as  a  "totally  responsible"  journal-
ist.    The  adverb  seems  a  little  strong   for  those  who
remember  Alsop's  role  in  propagating  the  bomber and
missile  gap  myths.    Smathers  said  he  was  writing  J.
Edgar  Hoover  for  more  details  and  on  April  18  East-
land  told  the  Senate,  "He  (Alsop)   is  saying  the  same
thing  Jim  Eastland  has  said  since  the   1954  Supreme
Court  decision." This  new  Alsop  scoop,  like  his  bomber
and  missile  gap  campaigns  and  his  famous  discovery
that   people  in   China  were  eating   after-births,   seems
to  be  an  intelligence  agency  leak.
We   cannot  imagine  anything  more  foolish   for   our
foolish  intelligence  agencies  to  do  than  to  trot  out  the
tired  old  Red  scare  against  the  civil  rights  movement.
We  cannot  imagine  anything  likely  to  enrage   Negroes
more  than  the  hint  that  they  are  being,  somehow, arti-
ficially  "agitated."   It  is  not  ideology,  it  is  frustration
and  despair  which  are  tearing  the  civil  rights   move-
ment   apart   and  driving  it   to  wild  words  and  action.
A  silly  column  like  Alsop's  can  only  add  to  the   self-
destructively  blind  rage  of  those  who  have  lost  faith  in
white  men's  comprehension.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly        5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .
Street
City   ...
......................Zone........_.State....................
4/27/64
For  this  additional  $5.35  please  send  a  copy  of  I.  F.
Stone's  "The  Haunted   Fifties."
(To)   Name  .............................................
Street   .........._...................^...............^.
City  ............_.........................Zone........
Shall  we  send  (rift  announcement?
..State..................
Yes n   No D
setting  of  the  goals   themselves   gives  the  decentralized   deci-
sion  makers  confidence  that  they  can  expand  output  without
going  broke  on  unsold   surpluses.
This  is  what  the  majority  means  when  it  says  that  one  of
the   lessons  to  be  drawn   from   foreign   experience   "is   that
policy  measures  which  set  overall  goals  and  determine  over-
all   rates  of   employment   growth   and   price   stability  without
involving   Government   in  the   market   process   may  result   in
more  rather  than  less  economic  freedom."     How  explain  this
seeming  paradox?    "Once  assured  of  full   employment   and
production,"  the  majority  report  continues,   "labor  organiza-
tions   and  private  firms  have   been   less   given   to   restrictive
practices  or   monopolistic   tendencies   and   have   therefore   re-
quired   a  lesser   degree  of   government   control."
(Moire  on  This  Next  Week)
and  the  Socialist  Party's Conference  on Poverty
LR Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.    Published  every  Monday   except  in  August  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..
Washington.   D.   C.    An   independent  weekly   published   and   edited  by   I.   F.   Stone:   Circulation  Manager    Esther    ML   Stone.    Subscription.
SB  in  the  U.sT;  $6  in  Canada;   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $16 to  Europe;  J20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED