I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964feb24.pdf

============================================================

Morse  on  The  Crisis  Over  Cyprus,  P.  3
A  Warning Signal  The  Peace  Movement Ought to  Heed  While There's  Still  Time
"There  is  no  doubt  that  the  stakes  are  high  in Vietnam.
They  are  considerably  more  important  than  the  economic,
political  and strategic  value  of  the  country.  For  in  Vietnam
the   U.S.   has   fielded   for   the   first   time   its   concept   of
'counter-insurgency'.  .  .  .  Because   the  U.S.  has  been  mor-
ally,   militarily   and  politically   committed  in   South   Viet-
nam,   because  its  prestige  is  involved  and because  the  conse-
quences   of   failure  would  have   world-vide   repercussions,
most,  but  not  all,  Washington  officials  believe  the  price  «f
victory  must  be  paid  even  if  the  price  includes  some    tinted
commitment  of  U.S.  combat  forces.  . . .  Victory,  ••  matter
what  is  done,  is  far  away."
—Hanson   W.  Baldwin,  No.  1  US.   military  miter  and
trusted  Pentagon  confidant,  in  the New  York  Time*  Fel.  16.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO. 8FEBRUARY  24,  1964
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Outlook  for  Civil  Rights  in  The  Senate
A  most  hopeful  augury  the  day  the  Civil  Rights bill  made
its  debut  in  the  Senate was  the  remark  by  Republican Leader
Dirksen   that   the  accommodations  section  was  "much  more
acceptable"  to  him  than  the  original  version.   This  looks  like
the  beginning  of  a  climb-down  which  would  put  the   GOP
leadership  in  the  Senate  as  solidly  behind  the  bill  as  it  was
in  the  House.    There  is  hope  in  the  air.    The   civil  rights
forces  emerged  from   the  fight  in  the  House  with  increased
confidence   in   themselves  and   a   new   respect   for  President
Johnson.    The  Leadership Conference,  with  the  help  of  the
labor   movement,  probably   did   the   best   organized   job  of
lobbying  ever  seen  on  Capitol  HilJ.    There  was  a  system  of
"spotters"  in  the  gallery  to  watch  the  teUer  votes  closely  and
to  bring up  votes  quickly  from  a  network  of  whips organized
by   the   Democratic  Study  Group.    There   was   an   informal
whip  system  by  the  civil  rights   forces   themselves  on  each
floor  of  the  House  office  buildings  to  notify  members  of  the
votes  coming  up.    One  Congressman  was  even  hailed,  pro-
testing,  out  of  a  "hot"   poker  game  to  do  his  bit  in  history.
In  place  of  indiscriminate "marches",   hundreds  of  selected
people  with  influence  were  brought  in,  including  one  Negro
oil  millionaire  from   the   Southwest.     The   AFL-CIO  itself
marshalled  a  hundred  or  more  key  labor  people.    .
A New Faith In LBJ
The  most  extraordinary part  of  the  whole  affair  is  the  trust
President   Johnson   has  won   in   a   few   short   months   from
Negro,  labor  and  liberal  leaders  strongly  opposed  to  him  in
the   past.    Leadership  Conference  spokesmen,  in  discussing
the  atmosphere  in  the  House,  said  the  Democrats  "knew  he
meant  business."    They  praise  the  quality of  the  White  House
liaison  with  the  Hill  during  the  fight,  and  the   close  and
effective  support  given  by the  Justice Department.    Mr.  John-
son's  hand was credited  when  ten  Texans  signed  the  discharge
petition.     Four—Brooks,  Gonzales,  Pickele,   and   Thomas—
even   voted   for   the   bill.     Chairman   Emanuel   Celler   of
House   Judiciary  piloted  the  bill  with  a  patience,  skill  and
fortitude  that  added  another  wonderful  chapter  to  this  old
Gibraltar's  record  in  the  House.  McCulloch  of  Ohio,  the rank-
ing Republican on Judiciary, from  a district with few  Negroes,
won  the  gratitude  of  the   <Svil  rights  forces  by  the  way  he
led  the  Republican wing  of  the  victorious  coalition.    German
(Col)   and  Rodino   (N/)    on  the  Democratic  and  Lindsay
A Christian View  of  Cuba
"The  American  blockade  of   Cuba  is  morally  repre-
hensible,  pragmatically futile  and politically  disastrras.
.  .  .  The  time  has  come  to  abandon  the  un-American,
unchristian  and anti-human  doctrine  that  what  is  •Hi-
mate  in  international  relations  and  the  shaping  of  his-
tory  is  physical  power,  material  wealth  and  the  relent-
less  pursuit  of  self-interest.  .  .  .  The hour  has  arrived
when  Fidel  Castro  should  be  afforded  the  opportunity,
hitherto  denied  him, to  expound  his  position  and  to  ne-
gotiate  the  issues  that  vitiate  relations  between  Cuba
and   the   United  States.    Failure  to  achieve   sack   en-
counter  will  darken  the  horizons  of  the  western  hemi-
sphere  and  of  the  world.    On  the  matter  of  ««r  rela-
tions   with   Cuba,   Christians   and  Christian  ekndies
dare  no  longer  remain  silent."
—The   Christian   Century:   Return  to  Cuba  by   Dr.
John  A.  Mackay,   president  emeritus, Prmceton   Theo-
logical  Seminary,  Feb.  IS.
(NY)    and  Mathias  (AW)  on  the  Republican  side  were  able
and  devoted  lieutenants.   In  the  fight  over  amendments  de-
signed  to weaken by widening the  bill, Mrs.  Green  of  Oregon
stood  alone  among  the  women  members  in  opposing  a  spuri-
ous  "women's  rights"  amendment  and  that  grand  old  man,
Barrett  O'Hara,  fought off  an  equally  spurious  amendment  to
protect  the  aged.    Best of  all  was  the  fact  that  so little racism
appeared  in  the  debate;  Jones  of  Missouri  was  the  worst  in
this   respect.     "The   day  of  the  old   Southern   demogogue,"
said  one  Leadership  spokesman,  "seems  to  be  over."
The  Senate  is,  of  course,  a  far  grimmer  obstacle  man  the
House,  but  the  civil  rights  forces  go  into-die  fight  there with
a  strange  feeling which might  best  be  described  as a  lingering
distrust  of  their  own  optimism.   The  Southerners  undoubtedly
have  some  tricks  up  their  sleeves;  but  so  do  the  civil   rights
forces.    Even  as  the  House  bill  reached  the  Senate  floor,  a
draft  was  circulating  among  friendly  Senators  which  would
add  two  new tides  to  the  bill.   These,  if  sponsored  by  liberal
Republicans,  would  raise  the  ante  with  die  Democrats  and
provide  new  pressure  on  die  leadership.    They  offer,  at  die
least,  something  to  swap  in  a  bargain  and  at  die  most   the
threat  to  the  South  of  a  much  stronger  bill  should  some  new
outrage   suddenly  change  die   picture   as  die   Birmingham
(Continued  on  Page  Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  24,1964
Gore  Tried  to  Raise  Exemptions  at  the  Bottom  Instead  of  Profits  at  The Top
The War  on  Poverty  Starts  Off  With  A Tax  Bill "To Make the Rich  Richer"
The   tax  bill  is  a  measure  of  the  Administration's  "uncon-
ditional   war  on  poverty."    The   Senate   tax  debate   was  the
logical  place  to  begin  the  battle,  but  became  the  scene  instead
of   an   unconditional   surrender   to   the   rich.     "The    majority
of  our  people,"  Gruening   (D.   Ala)    told   the  Senate   in  the
finishing  stages  Feb.   5,  "having  heard  so  long  of,  and  waited
so  long  for,  tax  relief,   will  wonder   where  it  is.    To   para-
phrase  Winston  Churchill,  it  might  be  said  that  never  will  so
many  have  waited  so  long  for  so  much  and  received  so  little.
This  will  not  be  true  of  the  affluent  minority."
The  day he  spoke  the  New   York   Times  reported  that  more
American  corporations  made  more  money  in  1963  than  in  any
year  in  business  history.    The  combined   net   income  of   150
companies  was  up   11.0%     from    1962;   General  Motors  re-
ported  the  largest  profit  ever  made  by  a  U.S.  company,  more
than  $1.5  billions.    To  pass  a  tax  bill  cutting  corporate  and
high  bracket  income  taxes  in  the  face  of  such  a  record  was  a
steal.    That   the   labor   movement   went   along   only   demon-
strates  the  feeble  fat  in  its  leadership.     Gruening   called  this
a  bill  "to  make  the  rich   richer."
False  Forecast  and  Fallacious  Theory
The  tax  bill  was  predicated  upon  a  false  prediction  and  a
fallacious  theory.  'The  prediction,   18  months  ago,  when  the
tax  bill  was  launched,  foresaw  a  recession   in  1964.     The   biH
was  supposed   to  insure  against  this.    But  as  Gore  (D.   Tenn)
told  the  Senate  Feb.   4,  employment,  production,  profits  and
dividends  are  at  an  all-time  high.    The  theory  is that  the  way
to  deal  with  a  recession  and  with  the  problem  of  the  impov-
erished  "lower  fifth"  of  our  society  is  to  make  business  more
profitable  by  tax  cuts  and   special   tax  privileges.    These  are
the  remedies  which  have  been  applied  since  the  tax  revision
of  1954.    The  result  has  been  to  speed  up  investment  at  pub-
lic  expense   in  labor  saving  devices—and   add   to  unemploy-
ment.    "Almost  1 million  more  people  were  employed  in  our
factories  7  years  ago,"   Gore   told  the  Senate,  "than   are  em-
ployed  today."
The  tax  structure  could  be  used  in  one  of  two  ways to  fight
poverty.    One  would  be  not  only  to  retain  high  tax  rates  on
the   record   profits   of   U.S.  industry  but   close   the   loopholes
which   make  these  rates  illusory—and   then   spend   the  extra
revenue  on   the   special   measures  required  to  deal  with   the
"lower    fifth"—education,    housing,    slum    clearance,   better
hospitals,   retraining,  and   large  scale  public  development  of
Poets  Need  It  More  Than  Oil  Men
PROXMIKE  (D.  Wis.):  The  argument  is  made  that
the  depletion  allowance  is  necessary   because  this  is  a
hij;h  risk  industry.    Is  it  not  correct  that  Dun's  Review
shows  that  the  construction  industry  has  failures in  the
neighborhood  of  86  per  10,000,  the  retail  industry  has
failures  of  400  per  10,000.  .  .  .  How  many  failures are
there  in  the  petroleum industry?
DOUGLAS  (D.,  III.):  Four  out  of  every  10,000.
PROXMIRE:  Four  out  of  every  ten  thousand?
DOUGLAS:  Yes.    It  is  the  lowest  of  any  industrial
group.    It  is  one  of  the  safest   industries  to   go  into.
The  ratio  is  20  in  food  and  86  in  construction, but  only
4  in  oil,  gas,   and  mining.    If   these  people  claim   we
must  give  them  a  tax  break,  what  are  we  going  to  do
for   the  corner  grocer?     What  about   poets?     Should
not  poetic  genius  have  a  depletion  allowance?   Should
not  there  be  a  depletion  allowance  for  defeated   poli-
ticians?                      —In  the Senate  tax  debate,  Feb.  6.
national  slums  like  Appallachia.
The   other   way  would   be  to   raise   individual   income   tax
exemptions  to  end  what  Senator  Gore  called  "the  taxation  of
poverty."    These  exemptions   are   unfairly   low.     In   1940   a
man  and  his wife  had  a  personal  exemption  of  $2,000.   "Now
the  cost  of  living  is  more  than  twice  as  much   as  it  was  in
1940,"   Gore   protested,    "and    the   exemption    is   down   to
$1,200."    He  proposed   to  restore  the  $1,000  per  person  ex-
emption  as  a  substitute  for  the  corporate  and  individual  rate
reductions  in  the  tax  bill.   This  would  give  real  relief  to  the
"lower   fifth"—how   do  you  raise  a  child  nowadays  on  $600
a  year?—and  stimulate  consumer  buying.
This  would   raise  the  standard  of  living  at  the  bottom  of
society  instead  of  raising  the  rate  of   profit   at  the  top.     But
Henry  Ford   2nd  and  the   U.S.   Chamber  of   Commerce   have
not  been  campaigning  for  that  kind  of  a  tax  cut.    Gore's  pro-
posal  was  rejected  on  a  voice  vote.    Then  he  suggested   rais-
ing  the  tax  exemption   from  $600  a  year  to  $800.   This  was
defeated  6l-to-33  on  a  motion  to  table.    But  the  idea  of  not
taxing  poverty  should  reverberate.    Higher  exemptions  at  the
bottom   plus   repeal   of   excise  taxes  should   be  the  target  of
labor  and  the  progressives.    This  tax  bill  is  a  scandal,  likely
only  to  set  off  stock  market  speculation   and   inflation.     Infla-
tion  in  its turn  will  again  tax  the  poor  and  fixed  incomes  for
the  benefit  of  great  wealth.    They  get  the  poor  coming  and
going.
From  Medicine  Hat   to  Dar-es-Salaam,  When  Anything  Goes  Wrong
"1   had   thought   that   the   classic   manifestation   of  hum-
bug,  the  effort  to  merchandise our  errors  and  omissions  as
the  machinations  of  the  Communists  went  out  approximate-
ly  with   Harold  Talbot.    But ...  in  the  last  few  days,  in
the  person  of  Castro,  Communists  have  became responsible
for  everything  that  has  gone  wrong  from  Medicine  Hat  to
Dar-es-Salaam.
"For   years,   diligent   public   servants  have   tried   to   do
something  about  Panama.    There  they  have  encountered a
backward  social  structure  and  the  revelation of  some  Amer-
ican  residents  that  they  were  another  chosen  people.   Here
at  home,  they  have  encountered the  conviction  that,  unlike
the  repressive colonialism  of  the  British  or  the  French,  our
needs  in other countries are  sanctified  both  by  high strategy
and  the  peculiar  charity  of  our  hearts.
"Given  these  difficulties,  there  was  much to  forgive  in  the
recent  crisis.    But  the  prompt  and  wonderfully reminiscent
statement  from  the  foreign  policy  establishment that  it  was
moatly   the   fault   of   the   Communists   should   have   been
greeted  with  public  hilarity.
"We  can  all   be  persuaded  that  Fidelistas  were  around.
We  might  even  be  willing  to  assume  that  there was  a  certi-
fied,  registered,  insured,  prepaid,  cooperative  (and  remark-
ably  foresighted)  plot.    Even  then  the  first  thought  of  an
American   official   should  have  been:   'Won't   the  American
people  ask  who  gave  them  their  chance'?"
—Former   Ambassador   John   Kenneth   Galbraith   at   a
Washington   Post  Book  lunch,  Con.  Record,  Feb.  4,  p.  1744.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  U,  1964
the  Cyprus  Issue  Is  In  the  UN
A  Speech  The  Press  Ignored:  Warning  Against  Becoming   "Policeman  to  The  World"
Morse  Declares  That  the  Place  for
By  Senator Wayne  Morse *
The   official   American   position   that   Cyprus   is  a  NATO
problem  does  not,  in  my  opinion,  withstand analysis.   Cyprus
is  not  a  member  of  NATO.    The  only  NATO  problem  there
is  the  possibility  of  rising  rivalry  between  Greece  and  Turkey
as a  result  of  the  conflict.   That  is the  only  place where  it  can
be  said  with  any  justification   that  NATO  should  deal  with
the  issue  and  not  the  United  Nations.
Other  NATO  Powers  Reluctant
But  even  there,  NATO  consists  of   a  lot  more  than  just
Britain  and  the  United  States.    If  any  action  is needed  to  keep
Greece  and  Turkey  from  getting  involved  directly, that  action
should  be  taken  by  the  entire  North  Atlantic Treaty  Organi-
zation,  and  not   by  the  United  States  and   Britain   acting  in
the   guise   of   NATO.     France   has   already   made  perfectly
clear,  as a  member  of  NATO,  that  she  will  have  none  of  it.
Let  the  State  Department  tell  the  American people  how  many
other  NATO  countries  look  with  great  reservation  in  regard
to  NATO  intervention  in  Cyprus.    The  proper  place  for  the
Cypriot   issue  is  in  the  United  Nations.    How  can  we  con-
demn   France  and   the   Soviet  Union   for   circumventing  and
ignoring  the  United   Nations   at  their  convenience,  when  we
do  the  same  thing?
I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand  what  the  Under   Secretary  of
State,   Mr.   Ball,   is  doing   in   London,   much   less   flying   to
Cyprus  for.    It  is  perfectly   obvious  what  the  British  want.
They  want  the  United   States  to  pick  up  the  check,  for  the
failure  of  the   British  Government   in  Cyprus.    The   British
Government  has  been  attempting  to  run  out  on  its  responsi-
bilities  in  instance  after   instance,  as  its  colonial  policies   go
down  the  drain  around  the  world,  and  looks  to  the  United
States  to  pick  up  the  check.
I  am  alarmed  at  the  policy  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr.
Rusk,  and  the  Under  Secretary  of  State,  Mr.  Ball,  who  are
apparently  laboring  under  the  illusion  that  the  United   States
Is  Criticism  of  Bonn  Verboten  at   NATO?
MR.   WARBEY   (Lab.)  asked  why  the  speech  of  M.
Spaak   at   the   NATO   Council  meeting  last  December
had  been  classified  as  a  secret  document.
MR.     MATHEW    (Under    Secretary    for    Foreign
Affairs—Proceedings  in  the  North  Atlantic  Council  are
confidential   and  all   records  of   them  are  classified.
MR.  WARBEY—At  a  press  conference  following  the
meeting   the  NATO  press  officer   was  very  willing   to
give   full   accounts  of   speeches  made  by  the   Foreign
Secretary   and  other  Foreign  Ministers,  but  refused  to
make  any  comment  on  the  speech   made  by  M.  Spaak.
Was  this  because  M.  Spaak  expressed  concern   at   the
veto   placed  by   the  West   German  Government  on  an
approach  towards  the  Soviet  Union  to  reach  a  peaceful
settlement  in  Europe?
MR.  MATHEW—I  do  not  propose  to  be  drawn  into
breaking  this  rule  of confidence.
—House  of  Commons,  Feb.  10  (London    Times).
•Abridged  from  a  speech  to  the  U.S.  Senate,  Feb.  10.
can  step  in  and  take  the  place  of  all  the  former  colonial  pow-
ers  in  the  troubfe  spots  of  the  world.    Of   course,   they  will
try  to  get  American  boys  into  Cyprus.
NATO  is  no  longer  what  it  is  "cracked  up"  to  be.    In  my
judgment,  NATO  is  rapidly  becoming   a  great   liability  for
the  United  States,  and  this  move  of  the  British  is  the  latest
in  the  attempt  of  some  of  our  NATO  allies  who  have   not
lived  up  to  their NATO  commitments  to get  the  United  States
to  assume  a  burden  which  is  beyond  all  equity.
If  we  believe  in  the  United  Nations  and  call  on  other  na-
tions  to  respect  it,  we  must  believe  in  it  and  respect   it  our-
selves.     We   are  not   doing  that  when   we  try  to  keep   the
Cyprus  problem  out  of  the  U.N.     We  know  what  happened
with  regard  to  the  attitude of  France,  Belgium,  and  the  Soviet
Union  in  regard  to  the  Congo.    They   walked  out  on   their
obligations  under  the  United  Nations  charter.    I  do  not  want
to  see  my  country  make  the  same  mistake.
If  the  United  States  allows  itself  to  be  made  the  policeman
of  the  world,  we  are  going  to  end  up  just  as  Great  Britain
ended  up—dead  broke.
Sen.  Pell's  Plea  for  An  End  to  Our  Stale  German  Policy  Reaches  the  SEP
"Since  the  late  1940's  our  policy  on  Germany  has   been
frozen.     We  have  insisted   on  early  reunification  through
free  elections.    We have  insisted  that  Communist East Ger-
many  does  not  exist.    We  have  insisted  that  East  Germany
and  East  Berlin  are  the  Soviet  areas  of  a  four-power  mili-
tary  occupation, and  that  our  rights  are  based  on  occupa-
tion  agreements  which are  almost  20 years  old.   This policy
simply  does  not  fit  the  facts  of  today.
"We  based  our  original  support  of  a  reunified  Germany
on  the  assumption  that  such  a  Germany  would  be  neutral.
If  Germany  were  somehow  to  be  reunified  today,  the  result
would  be  a  military  colossus.    The  very  idea  worries  our
West  European  allies and sends shivers up the  spines  of  the
East  Europeans.    It  is  high  time  for  us  to  face  the  impos-
sibility  of  a  peacefully  unified  and  armed  Germany  in  the
near   future.    Yet,  these   thoughts   are   rarely   uttered  in
public.    Why?     Because,   as  BO  often  happens  in  democra-
cies,  -we  become  frozen  into  positions  that  relate  more  to
the  past  than  present.    Any  suggestion  of  a  change  sounds
almost un-American.
"We  should  initiate  policies  which  will  not  only improve
conditions  for  all  of  Berlin  and  Germany but  lead  to  a  re-
laxing  of  tensions  in  central  Europe.    The  most  important
single  concession  we  must  gain  is  absolute  freedom  of  ac-
cess  to  Berlin.    Officially,  we  claim  we  already  have  these
rights.    But,  as  repeated  crises  on  the  highway  show,  they
are  constantly  open  to  challenge.     What  I  propose  is  that
our  rights  of  access  be  completely  spelled  out  and  that  the
main  highway be  declared  an  international territory  subject
to  no  controls  of  any  kind.
"What  can  we  offer   in  exchange?    I  believe  we  should
offer   to  accept  the  Oder-Neisse  boundary;   for   another,   I
believe  we  should  grant  de  facto  recognition   to  the  Gov-
ernment  of   East  Germany.   Is  this  too  much  to  offer   in
return  for  guarantees  of  a  right we  claim we  already  hold?
1  think  not.    We  would  simply  be  recognizing  realities  that
presently  exist."
—Sen.   Claiborne   Pell,   (D.   R.I.)    "Berlin:   Let's   Stop
Courting  Disaster,"  Saturday   Evening  Post,  Feb.  8  (abr.).
3  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  24,1361
There  Are  Many  Ways  to  Wear  Down  and  Defeat  A  Filibuster
(Continued  from  Page  One)
church  bombings  did  last  year  in  the  House.    One  new  title
would  tighten  up  the  police  brutality section  of  existing  civil
rights  law,  make  communities  and  counties  liable  to  suit  for
the  actions  of  their   officers   and  establish   a  new  civil  rights
police  to  take  the  place  of  the  FBI  in  this  area  of  enforce-
ment.   The  other  title  would  tighten  up  voting  provisions by
making  the  orders   of   Federal  registrars  directly  enforcible,
giving  the  Civil  Rights  Commission  power  to  issue  cease-and-
desist  orders  against   interference  with  voting  and   empower
the  Commission   to  void  elections  where  the  right  to  vote  of
certified  voters  was  denied.    It  would  also  provide  for  imme-
diate  steps  to  cut  down  the  South's  representation  in  Con-
gress  under  the  2d  section  of  the  14th  Amendment.
Surprise  Tactics  Expected
The  tactics  on  the  floor  are  also  likely  to  provide  surprises.
Mansfield,  smarting  under  unfavorable  comparisons  between
his  leadership  and  Johnson's,  has  appointed  four  able  and  un-
compromising  Senators  to manage the  fight  for  the bill:  Hum-
phrey,  Magnuson,  Clark  and  Hart.  Mansfield  himself   opened
debate   the  first  day  with   an  eloquence  which   matched  the
great  occasion.     In  his  appeal  for  the  Senate  to  act  he  said
the  fundamental   issue  raised  by  the   bill  "will   involve  all
Americans  and  all  the  institutions, public  and  private, which
hold  us  as  a  society  of   diversity  in  one  nation,  and   it  will
involve  all  for  a  long  time  to  come.    In  truth,  it  is  a  uni-
versal   issue  which,  for  this  nation,  having  begun  with  the
Declaration   of  Independence  and  persisted  through  the  dec-
ades,  will  hardly  dissolve in  the  Senate of  the  88th   Congress."
The  rhetoric  was  not  too  lofty  for  the  first  page  of  what  we
all  hope  will  be  a  close-to-final  chapter  in  the  American  Ne-
gro's  struggle   for   full   emancipation.   But   Mansfield's  real
test  will  be  mote  arduous than  the  achievement of  style.    He
must  demonstrate  a  new  militancy.    There   are   many  ways,
short   of   round-the-clock  sessions,  by  which  a   firm   majority
under  tough  leadership  can  hold  the  reins  on  a  filibustering
minority.  And  perhaps  win  the  fight without  resort  to  cloture,
which  might  entail  serious  compromise.   The  rules  are  being
studied  as  never  before,    A  majority  of  51  by  the  use  of   the
motion   to   table,   which  is   not   debatable,  can   block   time-
That's  Jefferson  Turning  In  Mis  Grave
Two  amendments   to  the  Civil  Rights  bill  which  indi-
cate  how  far   we   have   drifted   from   the   principles   of
a  free  society  were  accepted  by  the  House.    One  would
bar  atheists  and  the  other  Communists  from   utilizing
Title   VII   which   guarantees   equal   employment    oppor-
tunity.    The  Rev.  Kenneth   Marshall,   a  Unitarian   Min-
ister  in  Washington,   was  quick  to  point  out  in  a  sermon
that   the  atheist   amendment   would   have   made   second
class  citizens  of  Ben  Franklin,  Thomas  Jefferson,  Tom
Paine,    Robert   Ingersoll,   Thomas   Edison   and   Albert
Einstein,   none   of  whom  were  religious  in  the  conven-
tional  sense.     Holifield   (D.  Cal)  courageously  opposed
this  amendment  on  the  floor  Feb.   8  and  was  supported
by  Rodino  (D  N.J.),  Joelson  (D.  N.J.),  Ryan  (D.  N.Y.)
and   Roberts   (D.   Tex.)   but  it  passed   137-98   over   the
angry  protest  of  Chairman  Celler.    It  takes  nerve  now-
adays  to  uphold  the  right  to  disbelieve  in  God.    It  takes
even  more  nerve   to  uphold  the  right   to  be  a  Commu-
nist.    When  the  companion   amendment   (by  Colmer  of
Mississippi)   to  bar  Communists   from  using  the  FEPC
came  up  on  Feb.   10  Celler  cast  doubt  on  its   constitu-
tionality  but  no  one  spoke  against  it.    "If  we  oppose
this  amendment,"  Roosevelt   (D.  Cal)   said  bravely,  "it
would   put  you  in  company  with  Communists  or   pro-
Communists.     I  do  not   think   any   member   should   be
put  in  that  light.  I  believe  in  the  patriotism   of  every
member   of   this   House."    A   consistent   belief   in   the
First  Amendment  is  by this  standard   unpatriotic.  These
provisions   may  yet  be  used  against  Negroes  in  those
areas  where   militancy   is  easily  equated  with   atheism
and   communism.
consuming   amendments.     A   skillful   use   of   the   "morning
hour"  can  cut  down  the  ambit  of  the   filibuster.   There   are
other,   rarely   used  weapons,   available  to  a  presiding   officer
prepared  to  be  strict and  ruthless.   Best  of  all,  several  months
of  old-fashioned white  supremacist  ranting  from  the  South-
ern  die-hards, blocking all  other  public  business,  and  making
the  U.S.  look  foolish  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  may  generate
so  derisive  and   impatient  a  storm  from  the   country  as  to
force  cloture  without  compromise.    The   South  knows  itself
defeated;  it  feels  a  new  era  is  just  around  the  corner.    Men
like  Russell  already  belong  to  the  past.    They  could  not  find
a  more  graceful  opportunity  to  lose  than  now,  with  a  South-
erner  in  the  White  House.
Free  Copies  Still  Available  of  Matthews  Cuba  Issue   If   You  Send  Stamped   Self-Addressed      Envelopes
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Av«.,  N.  W.
L F. Stone's Weekly
Pleaae  renew  (or  enter)
Naaie  ..
Street  __ ......................
City  ______ ..............
Eater  gift  anb  for  $2  (6
(T»)  Naa»  ....  ................
StrrH
CUy  ___ . ___ ..............
Shan  we  Mud  gift   anno
5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
my  tub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
......Zone....... _ State...................
2/24/64
mo..)  or  $4 (1 yr.)  additional:
......Zone......._..SUte............ —— .
oneeatent?         Tea  D    N«  D
Washington   15.  D.  C
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone'.  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage   Paid   at   Washington.   D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  in  August  at  6818  Nebraska  Ave.,  N,  W..
Washington.  D.  C.    An   Independent  weekly   published  and  edited  by   I.   F.   Stone:   Circulation  Manager.   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
»6  in  the  U.S.;  »6 in  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  116  to  Europe:  120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED