I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964jan20.pdf

============================================================

The  CTA and  Soviet  Growth Rates,  See P.  3
A  Neglected Warning  of  Four  Years  Ago  About  Trouble  Brewing  In  Panama
"Panama  has  about  1  million  people  who  are  very  poor
and"  about  56  families  who  are  very  rich.    It  also  has   the
Canal   Zone   with   about   3500  Americans,  all   of   whom  are
rich,   relative  to   most   Panamanians,   and   many   of   whom
obviously  feel  themselves  the  social  superiors  of  all  Pana-
manians.    Given  the  economic  and  social  conditions which
exist  in  Panama,  it  is  not  surprising  that  there  should  be
widespread  unrest.  .  .  .
"In  this  situation,  the  U.S.   offers  a  natural  and  inviting
target  .  .  .  irresistible  in  view  of  the  need  for  an  outlet  for
popular  unrest  which  might  otherwise  be  directed   against
the  Panamanian  oligarchy. ...  As  long  as  the  U.S.  presence
remains  so  overwhelming,  there  will  continue  to  be  Pana-
manian   agitation  over. the  canal,   regardless  of   whatever
concessions  the  U.S.  might  make.
"The  end  result- would  be  either  holding  the  Canal  Zone
by  force  or  withdrawing  completely.    The   first   alternative
is  perhaps  militarily  feasible,  but  it  is  wholly  impractical
politically  in  the  20th  Century.  .  .  .  Should  the  situation
continue  to  deteriorate  as  now  seems   likely,  we  would  do
better   to   contemplate  and   explore   fundamental  changes
which  would  reduce  the  American  presence  in  Panama  and
enable  us   to  share  with  others  the  political  liabilities  in-
herent  in  maintaining and  operating  the  canal.    One  means
of    doing   this    would    be   through   internationalizing   the
canal.  .  .  ." —Report  by  Sen.  Aiken  (R.  Vt.)   Feb.  2,  1960.
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL,   XII,  NO.  3JANUARY  20,  1964
O
iot       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
What  LBJ and  the  Country  Need  Is  A  Left  Opposition
There  was  the  anonymous  Republican  who  said  President
Johnson's  first  State  of  the  Union  message   offered   a  cut-rate
Utopia  and  the  anonymous Senator  who  said  it  was  two  parts
Hubert   Humphrey   and   one  part   Harry   Byrd.     It   had   the
virtue  of  putting  poverty  in  the  headlines,  but  as  one  cynical
friend   of  mine  phrased   it,  "First  they  thought  that   if   they
didn't   talk   about   it,   poverty   would   go   away.   Now   they
seem  to  think  it  will  go  away  if  they  talk  about  it."    The  new
President's   energy  commands  awe  and  his  virtuosity,  admir-
ation.    But  from  an  objective  point  of  view,  and  not  just  as
100-proof   fire-water   for   the   election   campaign,   inadequacy
is  the  word  for  this  program.
Token  Liberalism
The  civil  rights  people  talk  of  token  segregation  and  this
might   be  termed   token   liberalism.     Kennedy   was   sophisti-
cated   and   Johnson   is  folksy,   but   there's   continuity   in   the
razzle-dazzle.     The   budgetary   cuts,   slipping   a   little   more
spending  into  Kennedy's  last  fiscal  year  to  make  it  look  like
less  spending  in  Johnson's  first,  represent   such  swift  sleight-
of-hand   that   it   will   be   some   time   before   anybody   knows
which  savings  are  real  and  which  expenditures  are  up   which
sleeve.    The  State  of  the  Union   Message   declared   "uncondi-
tional  war  on  poverty  in  America"  but  translated  into  money
this  "unconditional"   turns  out  to  be  $500  million  in  new  ob-
ligationat  authority  and   $300,000,000   in   new   expenditures,
which  is  just half  and  three-tenths  of  one  percent  respectively
of  our  100  billion  dollar  budget.    The  President   eloquently
said   that  "even   in   the   absence   of   agreement   we  must   not
stockpile  arms  beyond  our  needs  or  seek  an  excess  of  military
power  that  could  be  provocative  as  well  as  wasteful."    This
is  taken  as  the  government's  first  recognition   of  "overkill"  as
urged   by  Ralph   Lapp   and   Seymour  Melman.     But  the  one
percent  cut  in  our  50  billion  dollar  arms  budget  bears  no  re-
lationship  to  its  monstrous  overkill  capacity.    Rather  it  is  due
to  McNamara  economies   in  procurement  and   inventory,  i.e.
to  the  belated  recognition  of  the  over-buying   and   over-stock-
ing  of  military items  to  which  Senator  Paul  Douglas  has  long
When  Small  Minds  Run  A  Big  Country
Two  examples  of  what  happens  when  small  bureau-
cratic  minds  run  a  great  country:  The  Commerce  De-
partment  has  denied an export  license  to  ship  powdered
milk   to   Cuba,   where   the   recent   hurricane   damaged
dairy  herds.    The  Emergency  Committee  for  Disaster
Relief  to  Cuba  was  ready  to  ship  3500  pounds  to  the
Hospital  Nacional  in  Havana  but  the  Department  ruled
this  would  be  "contrary   to  the  national  interest."    Is
it  in the  national interest  to  make Latin Americans  feel
we  are  so  vindictive  that  we  are  ready  to  hurt  Cuba's
children  and sick?    The  State  Department   has  refused
visas   to  7  representatives  of   the   Soviet   Peace   Com-
mittee.    The  Russians  were  to  come  as  guests  of   A.
J.  Muste's  Committee for  Non-Violent  Action  in  return
for   Soviet  permits  allowing  pacifist   peace  walkers   in
Oct.    1961  to   march  to   Moscow.    This   was   a   liberal
gesture   from  the  Soviets,   hitherto  hostile   to  pacifists.
We  decline  to  match  it.
tried  to  call  attention.     "It   is  in  this  spirit,"  Mr.   Johnson
said,  that  we  were  cutting  back  also  on  our  uranium  and  plu-
tonium  stockpiles.    These  are  notoriously  big  enough  to  blow
up  this  planet  several  times in  several  world  wars  with  enough
left  over  to  blow  up  the  moon,  too,  when  we  get  there.    But
all  this  program  provides  is a  25  percent  reduction,  not  in  the
stockpiles,  but  in  the  rate  of  adding  to  these  already  apocalyp-
tic  inventories.    Everything  in  this  message   is  advertised   as
if  it  were  20  times  as  big  as  it  really  is, like  one  Texan  selling
another  an  oil  well.
It  may  very  well  be  that  this  is  the  best  any  President  can
do,  given  the  configuration  of  forces  in  the  country,  the  Con-
gress  and  the  military  bureaucracy.    It  may  also  prove  true
—we  hope  it  will—that  LBJ's  skill  may  get  us  more  on  civil
rights,  on  the  war  against  poverty  and  on  negotiations   toward
peace  than  could  be  obtained  by  a  more  liberal  but  less  adroit
President.    But  all  this  really  points  up  is  how  badly  in  need
both  LBJ  and  the  country  are  of  a  real  opposition  to  the  Left
of  him.    The  country's  political  center  of  gravity  has   shifted
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  20, 19B4
Even  Voices  as   Moderate   as  ADA's  Keyserling's  and  Gore's  Have  No  Party  Vehicle
The  War  Against  Poverty  Cannot  Be Won  Without  Socialistic  Measures
(Continued   from   Page   One)
so  far  right  in  recent  years  that  enlightened  conservatives  like
Johnson    and    Kennedy   look    liberal    while   crypto-Fascists
cracked  enough   to  think   Eisenhower   a  Marxist-Leninist  are
referred  to  as conservatives.
Not  Even   Keynesian
The  new  budget  isn't  even  Keynesian; the  cuts,  where  real,
will  only  undo  the   effects   of  the  tax  reduction;  the  tax  re-
duction   itself   gives  more  heavily  to  the   rich  than  the   poor
because  otherwise it would  be  impossible  to  get  it  through  this
Congress.    The  reader  can  see  from  the  boxes  on  this  page
that  even  liberal organizations as  moderate  as  the  ADA,  old-
time  Truman  advisers like  Leon  Keyserling  and  neo-Populists
like  Gore  of  Tennessee  are  (1)   well  to  the  Left  of  Johnson,
as  they  were  of  Kennedy,  on  tax  and  fiscal  policy  and    (2)
lack   any  party  vehicle  for   effective   pressure.     Johnson   like
Kennedy   before  him   speaks  for   a  "center"  position   which
can  win  elections  but  is  not  vital  enough  to  get  the  economy
out   of   the   doldrums.    An   infusion   of   new   ideas  is  badly
needed.     A  Left  opposition  would  at  least  provide  a  way  to
scare  the  right  into  a  few  real  concessions.
A  delegation  of   miners  were  here  last  week   from   seven
counties  in  Eastern  Kentucky  hard  hit  by  automation,  the  re-
covery  in  Europe's  mines  and  the  UMW's  loss  of  militancy.
If   there   is  to  be  a  war  against  poverty,  this  is  one  of   the
places  to  start  it.    But  there  is  no  sign  of  readiness to  think
and  act  in  the  dimensions  required.    A  new  TVA,  i.e.  a  re-
gional  program  based  on  public  ownership  and   development,
can  alone  harness  the  unused   resources,  human  and   natural,
of   Appalachia's  huge   rural  slum.    Private  enterprise  won't
come  in  until  the  market  has  been  created,  as  it  was  in  the
Tennessee   valley.    But  local  interests  in  this  backward  area
exhibit  the  same  attitudes as  the  Latin  American  oligarchies;
they   resist  an  industrial  development  which  would   sop   up
The  Reward  of  Virtue
"I  asked   Mr.  [Henry]   Ford   if   he   knew   how   much
increase  in  take-home  pay  the  [pending  tax]   bill   would
provide  for  the  average  industrial  worker.     He  said  he
had  not   computed   it.     I  asked  him   if   he   knew   what
the  increase  in  take-home  pay  would  be  for  a   corpora-
tion  executive  with  a  taxable  income  of  $300,000  a  year.
He  said  he  'had  not  figured  it  out.'    I  remarked   to  him
that  I  had  computed  it.    While  the  bill  would  increase
the   take-home    pay   of   an   industrial    worker   with   a
$4000-a-year   taxable   income   by   $3   a   week,   the   in-
creased  take-home  pay  of  this  corporation   official   would
be  $1,000  a  week.    Then  I  asked  Mr.  Ford  if  he  thought
that  was  fair.    His  answer'was,  'Yes,  since  it  has  taken
so  long  for  him  to  work  his  way  up  in  the  company.'
I   turned   to  my  distinguished   colleagues   to  right  and
left   and  commented   on  how  long  it  took  Mr.  Ford   to
'work  his  way  up'."
—Gore  (D.  Term.)  in  the Senate  Jan.   8   (abridged).
surplus   labor   and   raise   wages.     They   would   rather   leave
resources  idle  than  have  them  developed   by  government  ac-
tion.    The  country  is  going  to  have  to  go  back  not  just  to
Keynes  but  to  Norman  Thomas   and  the  Socialists  for  ideas
if  the  war  on  poverty  is  to  be  more  than  a  collection  of  su-
perficial   makeshifts  which  do  no  more  than  scratch  the  sur-
face  of  human need.   Americans  must  learn  to  hear  the  word
socialism  without  blanching  if  they  are  to  solve  the  problems
of  stunted  national  growth  and  "endemic  poverty.    This  hor-
ror  of  socialism  blocks pragmatism.   It  makes  impossible that
mixture  of  public and  private  enterprise  less  hidebound  coun-
tries  like  France  have  used  so  successfully  in  achieving  a  high
rate  of  economic  progress.    Without   large  measures  of  eco-
nomic  and  social  planning,  we're  going   to  limp  along  with
a  permanent margin  of  unused  resources  and  human  misery.
The  time  is  not  far  off when  we're  going  to  find  out  that  the
lag  in  our  growth  rate  is  due  to  a  lag  in  our  thinking.
Tax  Bill  Criticized  As  Bonanza   for   the  Wealthy  by  ADA  and  Keyserling
"A  tax  cut  that  accrues  mainly  to  high  income  taxpayers
would   not   only   be   inequitable   but   largely     self-defeating
economically.
"The   bill  passed  by  the   House  ignored   the   Administra-
tion's   recommendation    to   narrow   the   loophole   by   which
capital  gains  received  a  preferential  tax  treatment,   and  in-
stead   gave   high   income   taxpayers   further   preference   by
reducing  the  tax  rates  on  capital  gains.  .  .  .
"ADA   supports   the  proposals  to   reduce   the  scandalous
oil  depletion  allowances  through  which  oil  millionaires  es-
cape  taxation  entirely.    The  Senate  Finance  Committee  has
further  corrupted  the  House-approved   tax  bill.  .  .  .  Unless
the  Senate  reverses  the  Finance  Committee's  regressive  pro-
visions  .  .  .  this  will  be  a  tax  bill  that  milks  the  Treasury,
and  is  a  rich  man's  bonanza.    It  deserves  defeat  or,  failing
that,  the  President's   veto.
—ADA  on  the  pending  tax  bill,  Jan.  6.
"Xow,   when  corporate   profits  are   higher   than  ever  be-
fore,  when  retained  earnings  are  higher  than   ever  before,
when  the  Secretary   of  the  Treasury  and  many  others  have
admitted  that  we  have  a  prolixity  of  savings  jammed  up  in
all   our  savings   institutions,   when   we   have  large   unused
plant  capacity,   why  do  we  need  to  pay  out  about   $4  billion
in   subsidies   in  this  corporate  tax   cut  plus  the  cut  of   1962
to  increase   the  after-tax  disposable  income  of  investors  by
35  percent.    What  are  they   going  to  do  with  the  money?
They  are  going  to  save  much  of  it.     ...
"I  would suggest  that  no  economic  or  social  argument   can
be  made  for  any  appreciable   part  of  the  corporate  tax  cut
at  this  time.  .  .  .
"On  the  personal  tax  cuts,  the  current  distribution   of  the
personal  tax  cuts  of   $8.9  billion  would  be  $4  billion  to  the
12'/2  percent  of  the  taxpayers  who  have  incomes   of   $10,000
and  above,  and  $5  billion   to  the  87'/i   percent  of   the   tax-
payers  who  have  incomes  below   $10,000.
'This   is   extremely   wasteful   on   economic   grounds,   be-
cause  much  of  the  cuts  in  the  higher  levels  will  be  saved,
and  if  they  were  not  going  to  be  saved  but  were   going  to
be  spent   for  consumption,  then  there  would   be  no  possible
social   justification  for   increasing   the   consumption    of   the
$200,000  family  by  16  percent   and  of  the   $3,000  family   by
2   percent.
"So  taking  that  consumption,   I  would  suggest  that  about
$2  billion  of  the  $4  billion  tax  reduction  for   the   12'/
2
   per-
cent  at  the  top  be  sliced  off  and  used  lower  down."
—Leon  Keyserling,  chairman  of  the  Council  of  Economic
Advisers   under   Truman,   testifying    on  the  tax   bill    before
the  Senate  Finance  Committee  last  Oct.   22.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  20, 1964
The  Fundamental  Objection  to  That  CIA  Briefing   on  Soviet  Growth
Bad  Public  Policy  to  Allow  Secret  Police  to  Form  Public  Opinion
The  first  objection  to  that  CIA  briefing  on  Soviet  growth
is  that  whether the  figures  are  right  or  wrong  it  is  bad  pub-
lic  policy  to  allow  a  secret  police  agency  to  embark  on   the
task  of  forming  public opinion.
If   the   Commerce  or   Agriculture  Departments  issue  esti-
mates  in  their  respective  fields  of  competence,  their  sources,
their  calculations  and   their  experts  are  all  available  for  ex-
amination   in  public.     But   a  secret  police  agency  cannot   be
subject  to  such  scrutiny.    The  CIA  provides neither  the  names
and  backgrounds  of  its  experts,  nor  the  source  of   its  figures,
nor  the  assumptions  upon which  they  are  based.    Instead  and
inevitably  they  reach the  public mind  invested  with  the glamor
of   a  highly  publicized  gumshoe  agency,  and   as   if  snitched
straight  from  some  Kremlin  safe.    The  result  is  brain-wash-
ing,  not  education.
Figures  for  A  Special  Plea
A   second  objection   is  that   these   estimates   are  rendered
suspect  by  being  so  obviously  linked  to  special  pleading,  in
this  case  the  campaign  to  prevent  European  nations  from  ex-
tending  longer  than  5  year  credits  to  the  Soviet Union.    The
Soviet   Union   obviously   has   some   great   difficulties   but   it
would   seem  unwise  to  reach  long  range  growth conclusions
from  two  years  of  bad  crop  weather.    The  very  day  after  the
briefing,   in   its  annual   economic  review  of   Europe  and   the
Middle  East,  the  New   York   Times   (Jan.  10,  p.  59)   ran  a
chart  showing  that  in  the  past  three  and  a  half  years  Soviet
industrial   production  rose  more  sharply  than   ours   or   any
major  Western  country  except  Italy.*
There  is  another and  immediate objection  to  this  briefing.
The  head  of  the  CIA,  John   A.  McCone,  a  Republican  big
*  For  a  sober  and  objective  view  of  this  whole  question  we
recommend   the  new  book,  "The  Future  of  Russia"  (Macmil-
lan)  by  Harry  Braverman,  who  was  co-editor   of  The  Amer-
ican   Socialist.
We  Could  Threaten  to  Bomb   Moscow
Unless  the  Russians  Stay
"The   accelerated   pace  of  the  withdrawal  of  Russian
troops  from  Cuba  has  left  the  Administration   uncertain
about  whether  U.S.  security  will  be  enhanced  or  dimin-
ished  as  a  result.    U.S.  officials  want  all  Soviet  troops
to  leave,   but  some  are  nevertheless  concerned  by   the
possibility  that  Cubans  left  in  charge  of  Russian  weap-
ons   might   prove   to   be   more   trigger-happy    than   the
visiting  [sic!]  troops.  As  American  U-2  reconnaissance
planes   are  still   flying  over   Cuba,   the   Cubans,    should
the  SAM sites  be  handed  over  to  them,  might  try,  it  is
feared  to  bring  one  of  them  down."
—Washington  Post  Jan.  10.
business  man  and  not  just  a cold  but  a holy warrior, is  opposed
to  any  and  every  kind  of  detente with  the  Soviet  Union—as
head  of  the  AEC  he  was  against  cessation  of  nuclear  testing.
He  sees  eye-to-eye  with  Senators like  Mundt  who  fought  the
Russian  wheat  deal.    These  figures  give  the  rightists  in  Con-
gress  and  the  country  a  weapon  against  the   Administration
itself.    If  the  Russians  are  on  the  rocks, why  help  them with
wheat?    This  was  Mundt's  argument in  the  Senate,  and  this
will  be  the  argument against any  relaxation  of  tension.    It  is
well  to  notice  that  in  the  wheat  sale  debate,  except  for   the
speech   by  Fulbright   (see   box   below),   the   Administration
forces  developed  no  principled argument  and  fell  back  on  the
plea  that  the  wheat  sale  restriction  would  hobble  the  Presi-
dent's  power over  foreign  policy.   This  itself  reflected  the  Ad-
ministration's  effort  to  ride  two  horses at  once,  one  in  the  di-
rection  of  easing  the  cold  war,  the  other  toward  maintaining
strict  bars  on  Russian  trade  with  the  West.    Sooner  or  later,
the  Administration  will  have  to  decide which  way  it  wants to
go.    In  the  meantime it  has  allowed  McCone  to  strengthen
the  enemies of  any detente.
Fulbright  Eloquently  States  The  Case for  Soviet  Trade and  Against  Perpetual  Cold  War
"It  seems  to  me  that  a  basic  assumption   on  the  part  of
those  who  are  so  strongly  opposed  to  the  utilization   of  the
Export-Import   Bank   [for   wheat   sale  credits]  js  that   the
cold  war  as  it  has  existed  during  the  past  15  or  16  years  is
an   unalterable   relationship   and   that   it   should    continue.
Sometimes  I  am  almost  disposed   to  believe  that  they  would
be  disappointed  if  it  did  not  continue.  .  .  .
"We  do  have  to  deal  with  the  clashing   interests  of   the
Soviet  Union  and  of  the  United  States.    We  will  do  so  far
more  effectively  if  we  deal  with  these  clashing  interests  in
terms  of  our  own  national   interest,  which  is  the   security
of  the  U.S.  and  the  free  world,  and not  in  terms  of  a  strug-
gle  to  the  death  between  crusading   ideologies.
"The  logic  of  the  bill  proposed  by  the  Senator  from  South
Dakota  is  that  sooner  or  later  either  our  type  of  society  or
the  Soviet  Union's   must  be  destroyed—either  through  war-
fare,  subversion  or  internal  collapse.    This  logic   allows  no
room  for  the  possibility  of  change   through  a  long  process
of   evolution.    Yet   it   is   precisely   this   possibility   which  I
see   as   the   hope,   perhaps  the   only   hope,   of   avoiding  the
irreparable  catastrophe   of   thermonuclear  war.
' There  have  been  evolutionary  changes  in  the  Soviet  Un-
ion  in  recent  years. ...  It  seems  to  me clearly  in  the  inter-
est  of  the  U.  S.  to  encourage  these  changes.   We  need  to  be
pragmatic  rather  than  dogmatic.     From  our  point  of  view,
Khrushchev  is  a  lesser  evil  than  Stalin;  Tito  is  less  objec-
tionable  than  Mao Tse-tung.  .  .  .
"Trade   between   Europe   and  the   Soviet   bloc   has   tripled
in  the  past  decade.     It   is   clear   that   our  virtual  embargo
on  nonstrategic  trade   has   become  self-defeating.     It   does
not   deny   the   Communist   countries   the   goods   which   they
wish  to  buy,  but  only  assures  that  they  will  buy  them  from
countries  other  than  the  United  States.  .  .  .  Trade  is  one of
many  ways  in  which  we  can  reduce  animosities  and  inject
an   element   of   normalcy   in   our   relations  with   the   Com-
munist  nations.  .  .  .
"On  the  other  hand  if  we  pass  this  [Mundt]   bill  and  the
wheat  deal  falls  through,  we  will  have  handed  the  Russians .}
a  tailor-made  propaganda  weapon. ...  To  lay  down  condi-
tions  which  bring  about  the  rejection  of  a  deal   as  advan-
tageous  to  us  as  this  can  only  furnish  proof   to  the  Rus-
sian   people   that   we   are  not   really  willing   to   engage   in
peaceful  competition.
"At  the  same  time  we  will  lend  great  weight  to  the  Rus-
sian   argument   that   the   satellites    must   maintain   strong,
unbending  ties  to  the  Soviet   Union  and  that  the  West  has
no  concern  for  their   problems."
—Fulbright  (D.  Ark.)    Io  the Sinatc  Dec.   Ifl.
1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  January  20, 1964
Latest  Annual  FBI  Report  Can  Spare  Only  Two  Curt  and  Frigid  Paragraphs  for  Civil  Rights
Federal  Anti-Bombing  Law  Non-Existent  So  Far  As  FBI  Is  Concerned
The   time  is  coming  when   civil  rights  organizations  will
have  to  ask  the  establishment of  a  special Federal  police  force
to  investigate civil  rights  cases.    The  FBI  drags  its  heels  for
two  reasons.    One  is its  friendly  relations with  the  Southern-
ers  in  Congress;  they  have  been  allies  in  many  a  reactionary
crusade.   The  other  is  its  close  ties  with  local  police.    A  ma-
jor  segment  of  civil  rights  cases.  North  and  South,  has  to  do
with  -police  brutality.
Can See  No  Menace  on  The  Right
The  FBI's  lack  of  interest  in  civil  rights  cases  is  apparent
in  its  newly  released  annual  report  for  the  fiscal  year   1963.
In  a  46-page  report,  there  is  an  8-page   section  called   "Pro-
tecting   Democracy."     But  this  -does  not  deal,  as  the  naive
might  assume,  with  such  matters  as  protection  of  Negro  vot-
ing  rights  in  the  South.     It  is  entirely  devoted  to  J.   Edgar
Hoover's  favorite  menace.    The   Communist  Party  can  never
grow  too  small  to  be  his  main  obsession.    Nothing   in  this
"Protecting  Democracy"   section  deals,   of   course,  with   any
analogous  menace  on  the  Right;  there  is  no  mention  in  the
report  of  any  danger   from  racists,  Ku  Kluxers,  or  Birchites,
though  these  are  secret  associations  which  could  be  regarded
as  unlawful   conspiracies   aimed  to  deprive   other   Americans
of  their  civil-rights.
The   most  striking  omission  is  any  mention  of  the  4x»nb-
ings  which  have  become  a  feature  of  the  Southern   landscape
in  the  fight  to  intimidate the  civil  rights  struggle.   The  wave
of  church  and  synagogue  bombings  which  began  in  1957  and
1958  led a  group  of  Senators  on  both  sides of  the  aisle—in-
cluding  the  late  President  Kennedy,  then  a  Senator—to  spon-
sor  -Federal  anti-bombing  Jegislation. This  was  finally  enacted
as-part  of  the  I960  Civil  Rights   Act.    It  made  "bombings  a
Federal   offense   with  heavy  penalties  where   death  or   injury
occurred  if  the  explosives  were  transported   interstate.    Best
of  all  it provided  that  it  was a  rebuttable presumption   in  any
such  bombings that  the  explosive  had  been  taken  across  state
lines.
Now,  three  years  after  the  passage  of  this  law  from  which
so  much  was  expected,  one  would  never  guess  from  the  FBI
All  the  FBI  Says  of  Civil  Rights
"Aliened   violations  of  various  civil  rights   statutes
totalled  2,692  in  the  1963  fiscal  year,  an  increase  of  607
over  the  prior  12  months.    Each  of  these   allegations
was carefully  and  impartially  investigated  by  specially
trained  FBI  Agents,  and  the  results  reported  to  the De-
partment  of  Justice  which  determines  if  further  -action
is  warranted.    Six  convictions  for  civil  rights  violations
were  recorded  during  the  year.
"FBI  Agents  were  involved in  the  investigation  of  a
number  of  highly  publicized  civil  rights  matters  in  the
1963    fiscal    year,   including   the   burning   of    Negro
churches  in  Georgia  and  the  slaying  of  a  Negro   leader
in   Mississippi.    An   investigation   is  conducted   when-
ever  there  is  indication  of  a  Federal  violation.   With-
out  such  indication, the  FBI  has  no authority to Investi-
gate."
—N-ewly   released  annual  FBI  report  for  -fiscal   1963.
report  that  any  such  law  existed.  It   is  nowhere   mentioned.
The  two  page  summary of  statistics  on  all -Federal  laws  en-
forced   includes  figures  on   such  momentous  crimes  as  inter-
state  transportation of  lottery tickets  and  stolen  cattle  but  none
on  bombings.    The  anti-bombing  law  is  mentioned  neither  in
the  section  on  criminal investigations  nor  under  civil  rights.
Civil  rights  may  be  the  country's No.   1  concern  this  year,
the  greatest threat  to  public  order  and  the  greatest   challenge
to  public  conscience.    But   the   FBI,   on   which  the  country
must  depend  in  the  enforcement  of  civil  rights  laws,   devotes
only  two  short  and  frigid  paragraphs  to  civil  rights  (see  text
in  box  above)  in  its annual report.   No  indignation, only-the
slightly   disparaging   phrase,   "highly   publicized,"   marks   its
reference  to  the   Georgia   church   burnings  and  the   still  un-
punished  murder  of  Medgar  "Evers.    As  if  to  reassure  local
police  the  report  says  "specially   trained"  FBI  men  are  used
to  investigate  civil  rights  complaints.    There  were  2,692  al-
leged  violations  in  fiscal  1963,  up  607  from  the  year  before,
but  t>nly  6  convictions.    The  Avtde  gap  between  .alleged  viola-
tions   and   convictions  makes  one  wonder  -just   what   they're
specially  trained  for.
We'll  Send  Free  Copies  of   Thi*  Io  Friends  If   You  Send  Stamped,  Addressed   Envelopes
1 F.Stone'sWeekly      ssig  Nebraska  Ave* N. W.
Washington  15.  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Street   _.._.._.___...____.___________
Gity  .. _ _. _,.,_..._. .........Zone............State........—.—...
1/20/64
Enter e»t sub for  $2  (6 tnos.) .or JM  O yr.^ additional:
<T«)  Naaie   ——————————————-—~~.—————
Street      ——————.....———————————————————
Shall  me «e*d  g&t  awnuneeBeat?
Te«  D   No O
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5«18  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Wadiwgton  IS,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D.  C.
'J.'W..
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED