I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964jun22.pdf

============================================================

Johnson's  Brinkmanship  in  Laos, P.  4
"It'll  Be  A  Hot  Summer  in  Mississippi—And  I Don't Mean  The Weather"
"Well,  I  can  say  there  will  be  a  hot  summer  in  Missis-
sippi,  and  I  don't  mean  the  weather.    Because  the  people
are  really  getting   prepared.    They  have  been  riding  with
guns.   But  Ruleville  is  a  very  small town.   There  are  about
2,000  people in there.   I  see  now they  have  a tank,  and they
are  keeping  the  dog  riding  on  the  back  of  the  truck  so  if
the   truck   stops,   the   dog  won't  have  anything  to  do  but
jump  off.   And  the  mayor,  he  would  ride  around  and  tell
folk   don't   let   the   outside  people  come  into  their  homes,
because  after  they  stay  awhile, they  would  just  beat  them
up.    But  they  say,  'Don't  say  anything  to  Fannie   Lou.'
"I'm    not  even  going  on  that  street.     My  husband  was
fired the  day  after  I  qualified  to  run  as  congresswoman  in
the  Second  Congressional  District.   Last  week  he  had  got-
ten  a  second job.   The  mayor  went  out  on  this  job  on  which
he  was  working,  so  he  will  probably  be  fired  by  the  time  I
get  back home."
—Testimony   of   Fannie   Lou   Hamer   before    COFO  Citi-
zens  Panel  on  Mississippi.   Transcript   put  in  Congressional
Record  June  17 by  Rep.  Ryan   (N.Y.)
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  22
JUNE  22,  1964
101       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.15  CENTS
A  Noble  Task  for This  Generation  in  America
At  every  turn  the  long  fight  over  the  Civil  Rights  Bill  of
1964   has  attested   the  power   of  minorities.    A  minority  of
Southern  Senators  was  able  to  hold  up  action  for  months  by
filibuster  until  shut  off  by  a  two-thirds  vote.    A  minority  of
the  minority  Republicans  was  able  to  water  the  bill  down  as
the   price   of   reaching   the   two-thirds   required   for   cloture.
Neither   the  Republicans   nor  the  Democrats   could   afford   to
antagonize  the  Negro  minorities  in  the  urban  and  industrial
centers  of  the  North.    The  bill  itself,  the  first  comprehensive.
Federal  civil  rights  legislation   since  the  days  of   Reconstruc-
tion,  marks the  arrival of  the Negro  as a major  force  in Amer-
ican  politics;  what  the  Radicals  sought  to  confer  upon  him  as
a  gift  after  the  Civil  War  he  has  now  obtained  on  his  own.
Finally,  it  is  no  secret  that  the  Negro  upsurge  has  been  the
work  of  a  minority  of  a  minority.    SNCC  and   CORE   and
SCLC  and  NAACP  are  made  up  of  heroic  but  pitifully  small
numbers  well   padded   out   on   every  picket   line  with   white
sympathizers.    As  in  almost  every  revolution,  social,  national
or  racial,  the  discerning  will  see the  apathetic  or  cautious  mass
behind  the  glamorous  scene.    Here  we  see  again  what  a  few
who  care  can  do.
Russell  Deplores  The  Clergy
The  bill  is  also  a  triumph  of  conscience.    "I  have  observed
with  profound   sorrow,"  Russell  of  Georgia   told   the   Senate
last  Wednesday,   "the   role  that  many  religious   leaders  have
played.  .  .  .  We  have  seen  cardinals,  bishops,  elders,  stated
clerks,  common  preachers,  priests  and  rabbis  come  to  Wash-
ington  to  press  for  the  passage  of  this  bill."    He  complained
—could  there  have  been  a  greater  confession  of  obtuseness ?—
that  they  had  sought  to  make  its  passage  "a  great  moral  issue"!
The   four  little  girls  killed   in  that   bombing   of   the  Negro
Church  in  Birmingham  last  September  did  not  die  in  vain.
Here  again  a  minority  played  its  part,  a  religious  leadership
minority  and  the  minority  of  the  imaginative  and  sympathetic
whites.    Right  was  on  the  Negro's  side,  and  the  white  ma-
jority  was  ashamed.
There  was  a  third  major  factor.    "Lyndon  Johnson,"  Rus-
sell  said  bitterly  on  the  floor  the  day  the  filibuster  was  shut
off,   "had  more  to  do  with  this  than  any  one  man."    The  re-
'I   Could  Hear  People  Screaming'
On  August   31,  in  1962,  I  traveled  26  miles  to   the
county  courthouse  to  try  to  register  (to  vote.)    I  was
fired the  31st  of  August  from  a  plantation  where  I  had
worked  as  a  timekeeper and  sharecropper for  18  years.
My  husband  had  worked there  thirty  years.
On  the  10th  of  September,  they  fired  into  the  home
of  Mr.  and  Mrs. Robert  Tucker  16 times  for  me.    That
same  night  two  girls  were  shot  at  Mr. Herman Sissel's.
Also,  they  shot  Mr. Joe  Maglon's house.   I  haven't  had
a job since that  day I was fired.
In   1963,  I  attended   a  voter  registration   workshop
and  was  returning  back  to   Mississippi.    At  Winona,
Miss.,  I  was  arrested.    After  I  was  locked up  in  a  cell,
I  began  to  hear  the  sounds  of  licks,  and  I  could  hear
people  screaming.   I  don't  know  how  long  it  lasted  be-
fore  I  saw  Miss  Ponder,  the  Southwide supervisor  for
SCLC   (Southern   Conference  Leadership  Conference)
pass  the  cell  with  both  her  hands  up.   Her  eyes  looked
like  blood,  and  her  mouth  was   swollen.    Her  clothes
was  torn.    (Then)  I  was  carried  out  of  the  cell  into
another  cell  where  there   were  two   Negro   prisoners.
The  state  highway  patrolman  gave  the  first  Negro  a
long  blackjack  that  was  loaded  with  something,  and  I
was  beat  until  I  was  exhausted.
—Testimony    of    Fannie    Lou    Hamer,
Miss,  (abr.)   before   the  COFO  panel.
Ruleville
mark  was  not  meant  as  an  accolade.     Russell   himself   later
struck  it  from  the  Record  lest  so  burning  an  accusation  come
back  to  haunt  him  later  as  a  party  regular.    But  the   fact  is
that  the  same  Lyndon  Johnson   who  made  his  debut  in  the
Senate  15  years  ago  as  an  opponent   of   Federal   civil  rights
legislation  of  any  kind,  even  against   lynching,  has  made  his
debut  as  President   by  successfully   putting   through   Congress
the  most  sweeping  civil  rights  bill  in  a  hundred  years.     He
who   once  upheld   the   filibuster   as  a  guarantee   of  minority
rights  has  now  presided  over  the  first  application   of   cloture
to  shut  it  off  on  a  civil  rights  measure.    The  bill  as  passed
under  Johnson   is  better  than  the  bill  originally  proposed  by
Kennedy.    The  latter  found  himself  stalemated   between   the
deep  hatred   of  the   South   for   this  Catholic  Yankee  Negro
(Continued    on  Page  -Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  22, 1964
Biggest  Defect  Absence  of  Stronger  Powers  Against  Police  Brutality
lover  and  the  glee  of  the  Republican leadership  which  hoped
to  benefit  by  a  party  split.    The  appearance  of   a  new  Presi-
dent,  the  fact  that  he  spoke  with  a  Southern  accent  and  was
himself   a   conformist  rather  than   maverick   Southerner,   the
fact  that  he  had  to  prove  himself  to  the  Northern  liberal  and
the  Negro,  changed   the  political  situation  overnight.    John-
son's  enormous  gifts  as  a  persuader  and  wheeler-dealer  made
themselves  felt  in  both  House  and  Senate.    He  was  the  No.  1
lobbyist   for   civil  rights.
The  Value  of  Three-Judge  Courts
Republicans  in  the   Senate  exacted   compromises   to  supply
the  votes  needed  for  cloture  and  passage,  but  even  so  the  bill
retains  sections  on  fair  employment  practices and  equal  access
to   public  accommodations.   Neither  was   included   in   Ken-
nedy's  original  proposals.    Voting  rights  were  still  the  main
emphasis  of   his   Civil   Rights   message.     Then   he   suggested
that  the  courts be  authorized  to  appoint  voting  referees where
the   Attorney   General   certified   that  less  than   15%    of   any
racial  group  was  registered.    Now   the  Attorney  General  can
act  wherever  he  finds  a  "pattern  or  practice"  of   discrimina-
tion.    Best  of  all  he  may  detour around  the  white supremacist,
judges  on  most  of  the  Federal  District  Courts  in  the  South  by
asking  for  a  three-judge  court  to  be  set  up  by  the  Chief  Judge
of  the  Circuit.    Three-judge  courts  may  also  be  asked  where
Negroes  arc  refused   access  to  public accommodations.
Except   for   the  absence  of   stronger  powers  against  police
brutality  and   the  deletion  of  authority  to  allow  the  Attorney
General  to   initiate  preventive  action   against  the   suppression-
of  basic  rights,  the  bill  is  almost  as  broad  as  one  would  have
wished.     Its  weakness  lies  in  its  enforcement  provisions. This
is  most  striking  in  the  case  of  the  Equal  Employment Oppor-
tunity   Commission,  which  has   been   steadily   watered  down.
The  Clark  and  Roosevelt  bills  would  both  have  established  a
Commission  with  power  to  issue  cease  and  desist  orders,  like
other  regulatory commissions, enforcible  in  the  Circuit  Courts
of  Appeals.    The   House  Republicans  moved  the enforcement
power  to  the  Federal  District  Courts  and  gave  them  the  right
to  make  their  own  findings  di;  iioro.    The  Dirksen  substitute
weakened  this  further.     If   the  Commission  is  unable  to  ob-
Without   Anaesthesia
"February  28,  1963,   I  attended  a  voter  registration
meeting  in  Greenwood,   Mississippi,   along  with  Robert
Moses  and  Randolph  Blackwell.  After  the  meeting  was
over,   we  left   the   SNCC   office   en  route  to   Greenville.
A  white  Buick  began  following  us.    There  were  three
white  men  in  it.    When  no  other  cars  were  in  sight,  it
pulled  up  alongside  and  opened  fire  with  a  submachine
gun.    I  was  hit  in  the  back  of  the  head  and  shoulder.
"They  took  me  to  the  hospital  in  Greenwood.    The
doctor  took  some  X-rays  and  he  wanted  to  remove  the
bullet.    But  I  did  not  want  him  to  because  I  was  afraid
he  would  not  do  his  best.    The  following   day   I   was
transferred  to  a  hospital  in  Jackson,  a  university   hos-
pital.    The  bullet  was  removed  that  afternoon    without
any  anaesthesia.
"Two  days  after   they   took  the  bullet  out,  the  doctor
came  in  after  breakfast   and  said,  'You  are  discharged.'
I  told  him  I  didn't  feel  up  to  it.    He  came  in  (again)
after   supper  and  he  said,  'You  are  discharged   and  you
got  to  leave.'    So  I  left.
"The   people  who  did  the  shooting  were  arrested  and
released  on  bond.    And  in  November   the  trial  was  to
come  up,  but  after   the   death  of  Pres.  Kennedy   they
postponed   it.    They  said  people  would  have  resentment
because   of  the  assassination.    And  nothing  more   has
come  of   it."
—Testimony  of  James  Travis, SNCC  worker.
tain  voluntary  compliance,  the  complainant  is  free  to  bring  a
civil  action  in  court!    If  the  employer  or  labor  union  fails  to
obey  the  court's  order   "the  Commission  may  commence  pro-
ceedings  to  compel  compliance."    This  is  certainly  going  the-
long  way round.   On  the  other  hand  where  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral  finds  a  "pattern  or  practice"  of  discrimination, as  in  the
South,  he  can  bring  a  civil  action  on  his  own.
Going  Easy  on  the  North
The   essence  of  the  Dirksen-Humphrey  compromise  was  to
go   easy  on  the  North   for  the  sake  of  better  enforcement  in
the  South.    The  North  has  been  provided  with  a  major  loop-
hole  by  requiring that  fair  employment  and  public  accommo-
dations  cases  first  be  brought  before  State  civil  rights   agen-
The  Sheriff  Put  One Hand  On His  Blackjack  And The Other  on  His  Pistol
Mr.  FREEDMAN:  I  understand  you  ha\c  been  involved
in  attempts  to  register  to  vote.    Have  you  been  successful?
Mr.  TURNBOW:  No,  sir,   I  haven't."   The  second  time   I
went  to  take  it  over  again,  the  Circuit  Clerk  told  me  no,  I
didn't  pass,  1 wouldn't  never  pass.    And  he  tried  to  raise  a
big  fuss  with  me,  so  I  walked  out.    The  first  time  we  had
lots  of  trouble.    We  had  heard  of  a  citizenship school  being
taught  in  Lcflore  County.    Some  of  the  citizens  in  our  area
asked  them  to  come  down  and  tell  us  about  it.    John   Ball,
he  come,  and  he  talked  to  us  and  told  us  that  he  was  learn-
ing   us  how  to  register,  since  we  were  not   familiar   with
registering  in  Mississippi.     So  in  a  two  week   period,   four-
teen   of  us; thought  we  knowed  it  well  enough   to   go   reg-
ister.   We  went  to  Lexington.   We didn't  drive  our  cars  up
in  town.    We  stopped  them  outside  and  we  walked  uptown.
We  didn't  walk  in  a  big  gang.    We  walked  in  two's  about
ten   or   twelve   feet   apart,   so  they   couldn't   say   we   was
demonstrating.
So  we  was  met  by  the  sheriff,  Mr.  Andrew  P.  Smith.    He
met  us  at  the  south  door  of  the  courthouse.  And  he  stopped
us.    So  Samuel   Block  was  leading  us.    And  Samuel   Block
said   "March  forward."     And  Mr.  Smith   put   one  hand   on
his   blackjack  and   the   other   one  on   his   pistol   and   said,
"None  of  that  goddamned   forward   stuff   here."
So  I  stepped   out  the  line.    I  said,  "Mr.   Smith,  we  only
come  to  register."    He  said,  "Well,  Turnbow,  go  around  to
the  north  side  of  the  courthouse   and  stop  under  that  tree
and  don't  go  in  no  big  crowd, go  in  two's."    So  we 'did  that,
Mr.  Smith,  Mr.  Andrew  I".  Smith,  he  came  round  there  un-
der  the  tree  where  we  were  standing  and  he  looked  at  us,
he   put   one   hand   on  his   blackjack   and   the   other  on   his
pistol  and  raised   his  voice.    He  said,  "All  right,  now,  who
will   be    first?"    And   the   fourteen   of   us   got   scared   and
looked  at  the  other.  So  when  the  fourteen   commenced   look-
ing  one  at  the  other,  I  just   stepped  out  of  the   fourteen.
I  said,  "I  will  be  first,  Mr.  Smith."    No  sooner  I  said  I  will
be  first  than  Mr.  Smith   calmed   his  voice.    He  said,    "All
right,  Turnbow,  go  down  the  side,  and  go  in  the  courthouse
and  do  what  you  KO'<O  do."     [See   the  seauel  next  page.]
—Testimony  of  H.irtman  Turnbow,  Tchula,  Miss.  (abr.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, June  22,  1964
. . . Courts  Can Shut  Down  Non-Complying  Businesses  Until They  Obey
cies;  these  exist  only  in  the  North.  Most  of  them  are  pretty
poor.    There  has  been  speculation  that  the  South  might  set
up  agencies  of  its  own  to  take  advantage  of  this  method   for
giving  the  Negro  a  run-around.    But  one  hopes  this  would
prove  little  more than  a  delaying  action  since  time  limits  are
placed  on  the  state  agencies  and  the  law  requires  that  they  be
"effective."
The  South's  Big  Loophole
The  big  loophole  for  the  South  is  the  Morton  amendment
requirement  for   jury  trials  in  all  criminal  contempt   cases—
except  those  arising  out  of  voting  rights  where  a  Judge may
still  impose  a  prison  sentence  of  up  to  45  days  and  a  fine  of
up  to  $300  without  a  jury.    Southern  juries  are  expected  to
acquit.    In  public  accommodations  and  fair  employment  cases
the  courts  nevertheless  have  a  powerful   civil  remedy.    They
can   close  down   a  restaurant  or   a   factory   until   it   complies.
The  most  important  new  punitive  power  in  the  bill—and  the
one  the  South  most  fears—is   the  cutting  off  of   Federal  aid
where  there  has  been   discrimination   in   its  use.    Much  will
depend  on  the  will  to  enforce,   especially  on  the  part  of   the
Attorney  General;  on  the  militancy  of  the  Negro;  and  on  the
extent  to  which  opinion  can  be  mobilized   by  the   President
for  large-scale  voluntary  compliance,  particularly  in  access  to
public  accommodations.    Here  it  will  be  easiest  for  the  Negro
to  make  his   impact   felt   without  prolonged  and   costly   liti-
gation.
Fresh  Heart  to  Fight
No  one  can  tell  just  what  effect  the  law  will  have.    Some
Northern  States  like  New   York  have  long  had  much  better
civil  rights  laws  and  yet  the  Negro  in  them  still  lives  a  life
apart  and  degraded.    The  testimony  from   Mississippi  in  the
boxes  on  our  first  three  pages from  the  hearing held  in Wash-
ington  June  8  by  a  citizens'  panel  shows  the  brutal   reality
which  confronts   the  Negro  when  he  tries  to  vote  in  many
parts  of  the  South.    The  law  will  not  change  that,  except  in
encouraging  the  Negro  to  be  more  militant.    That  is perhaps
its   most   important   function.     By  recognizing   his   rights,   it
gives  him  fresh  heart  to  fight  for  them.   But  his  road  to  free-
dom   is   still   a   long,   rocky   and   probably   bloody  one.     His
It's   Dangerous   To  Go  Home  Again
Mr.   PERCY   BREWER:   (brother    of   Charles    and
Greene  Brewer)  Well,  now,  after  he  (Charles)   came  to
three  days  later,  after  he  got  where  he  could  talk,  he
said   he   [had   gone]   in   the   store   and  called   for   two
pops,  one  for  him  and  one  for   my  brother  over   here
(Greene)   and  said   the   store   owner   asked   him  if   he
wanted   the   pops   opened,  and  he  told   him  yes.     The
man  said,  "When  a  damn nigger  goes  north  and  comes
back,   he  gets   beside   himself,  and  he  gets   where   he
can't  respect   white  folks."     (Charles)   turned  to  walk
out  of  the  store.    Mr.  Rittle  reached  behind  a  heater
and  pulled  out  an  axe  handle  and  cut  him  off   between
there  and  the  door.    He  turned  around  and  Mr.  Hunter,
the  store  owner,  swung  at  him with  an  axe  handle.    He
throw ed  up  his  left   arm,  and  grabbed  the  axe   handle
with  his  right  hand  and  said  a  lick  come  from  behind
him,  and  that   is  all   he  remembered  before   the   next
four  days  in  the  hospital.    So  I  asked  the  doctor   what
condition  was  he  in,  and  the  doctor  told  me  he  didn't
have  no  broken  bones  but  for  about  five  days  he  would
throw   up  blood  by  the   pan  full,   bleed  from   his  nose
and  mouth  and  ears.    He  stayed   in  the   hospital   for
eight  days.    He  came  out  of  the  hospital  on  the   12th
and  was  drafted  into  the  army  on  the  17th.    And  that
is  where  he  is  now."
—Testimony  before   COFO  panel.
rights  must  remain  theoretical  so  long  as  his  education  is  in-
ferior,  and  he  is  caught  in  the  vicious  circle  of  poverty  and
ignorance.    But  he  is  not  the  only  one  who  needs  to  be edu-
cated.    The  fight  which  the  Presidency,  the  clergy,  the  labor
leadership  and  intellectuals  of  all  kinds  have  waged  to  win
this  bill  must  now  be  applied  to  the  harder  task  of  changing
white  men's  attitudes.    The  bill  and  the  effort  behind  it  does
our  country  proud.    There  are  few  nations  on  earth  which
have  so  mobilized  all  their  leadership  circles  in  a  concerted
drive  against  racism,  a  disease  that  poisons  human   relations
everywhere  on  this planet.   India  has  done far  less  for  the  un-
touchable  than  we  for  the  Negro;  the  new  Negro  republics
tend  to  be  as  racist  as  the  white.    To   set  a  better  example
here,  to  bring  Negroes  into  the  full   orbit  of  American   life,
to  make  them  feel  this  is  their  country,  too—what  a  noble
task  for  this  generation  of  Americans.
They  Fire-Bombed  His  House—And  Then  Arrested Him  for  Arson
Mr.  TURNBOW:  So  after   dinner,  I  went   back  in    [the
courthouse]  and  [the  clerk]  was  in.   He  said,  "What  do you
want?"     I   said,   "I  want   to   register   to   vote."    He   just
handed  me  the  form  and  I  rilled  it  out  and  signed  it  and
handed  it  back  to  him.    So  then  after  that   I  noticed   the
next   day  the   Lexington   Herald,  a  little  local   paper   they
write—they   had  a  write-up  that   "Hartman  Turnbow   was
an  integration   leader."     About  two   weeks   or  little   after
that  my  house  was  fire-bombed  and  shot  in  all  at  the  same
time.    My  wife  and  daughter,  she  is  sixteen,  they  jumped
out   of   bed  screaming   and  hollering  that   the   house   is   on
fire,  it  has  been  bombed.    I  had  a  little   old  22  automatic
Remington  sitting  over  in  the  corner.    I  picked  it  up  and
pushed  the   safety  off  and  run  out.    And  no  sooner   I   got
out  in  the  open  with  my  rifle  in  my  hand,  I  saw  two   white
men,  and  one  of  them  no  sooner  he  saw  me  shot  at  me.    I
had  my  22  already  in  position  and  I  just  commenced  shoot-
ing  at  him  right  fast.    But  while  me  and  this  one  on  the
back  were  shooting   at   each  other,   somebody   on  the   front
was  shooting   all  in  the  front  of  the   house.
After  daylight  broke,  we  got  in  the  car  and  we  went  out
to   Mitchell's,  and  we  asked   them   to  call  the  Justice  De-
partment  and  ask  them  to  send  an  FBI  to  investigate   the
shooting  and  burning.    They  were  there  investigating  when
the  sheriff   [Mr.  Smith]   got  there.    After  the  FBI  left,  he
asked  me  "How  did  it  start?"     I  told  him  how  it   started.
He  said,  "You  could  have  done  it."    Then  when  he  said  I
could  have  done   it,   I  said,   "Mr.  Smith,  can   I  ask   you   a
question?"  He  said,  "Yes,  you  can  ask  me  a  question,   one."
I  said,  "Well,  do  you  think   I  would  set   my   house   on   fire
and  don't  have  no  insurance   on  it?"
So  late  that  evening,  about  dark,  Mr.  Smith  come   back
to  my  house  and  called  me.    I  walked  out  there  where  he
was.     He  said,  "I  got   an  arson  charge   against   you,   get
them  up."  I  got  them  up,  and  they  pat  me  down.  I  got  on
in  the  car.  So  they  took  me  to  Lexington  and  put  me  in  jail.
—From   testimony   of   Hartmcrn   Tumbow,   resident   of
Tchula,  Mississippi,  Leflore    County   (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  22,1964
Senator  Bartlett  Again  Urges  That  We  Try  de  Gaulle's  Road  to  Peace  in  Asia,
Johnson  Practicing  Brinkmanship  in  Escalating  The  War  in  Laos
It  now  seems  the  purpose  of  the  Honolulu  meeting  was  to
prepare   for   the  escalation  of   the  war   in  Southeast   Asia,  to
use  bombing  planes  in  Laos  and  to  get  ready  for  wider  action
if  the  Chinese  meet  the  challenge.    This  is  brinkmanship on
a   particularly  deep  brink—a  war  with  China  which   would
begin   with   successful   bombardment   of   Chinese   cities   and
then  bog  down  into  a  prolonged   conflict  on  the  ground.    The
human  suffering  that  could   lie  ahead  is  beyond  Conception.
The  split  between  Moscow  and  Peking  is  so  fundamental that
the  Russians  may  not  be  at  all  averse  to  letting  us  weaken
China  for  them,  and  at  the  same  time  tie  pur  power  down  in
Asia.    It  is  appalling  that  we  should  let  ourselves  be  sucked
into  this  deadly  quagmire  without  the  American  people  be-
ing  consulted  or  even  made  aware  of  what  is happening.  .  .  .
As  the  war  clouds  gathered,   Bartlett  (D.   Alaska)   made  a
speech   in  the  Senate  (June   15)—largely  unreported   in  the
press,   like   most   of   the   peace   speeches—warning   that   we
could  not  make  peace   in  Southeast   Asia  without  China  and
supporting    de   Gaulle's   proposal   to   reconvene   the   Geneva
conference  and  seek  a  settlement  by  neutralization.  .  .  .  After
hearing  Rusk  in  executive  session,  Morse  told  the  Senate  that
same  day,  "I  am  more  convinced  than  ever,  after  listening  to
the  Secretary  of  State,  that  we  are  heading  for  a  major  war  in
Asia  if  we  continue  our  unilateral  military action.  .  .  ."
At  the  Supreme  Court
The   essential   conflict   in  the  historic  reapportionment   de-
cisions  may  be  seen  from  a  passage   in  a  dissent  by  Justice
Stewart  complaining  that  the   majority   "forever   freezes  one
theory  of  political  thought  within  our  Constitution,"  denying
the  States  freedom  by  districting  to  avoid  "absolute  domina-
tion  by  a  geographically  concentrated  or  highly  organized  ma-
jority"—in  plainer  words,   the   philosophy. of,  majority  rule.
The   obstacle   to  its   "absolute   domination,"   in   Justice   Stew-
art's   question-begging    phrase,   lies  in   constitutional   guaran-
tees  of  minority  rights  and  free  expression.    It  does  not  lie  in
district  lines  whfch  give  a  rural  minority  the  right  to  govern
urban  majorities.    These  new  decisions   should   end   the   one-
party  system  in the South  and  advance  the Negro  struggle.  . . .
First  Voice  for  Peace  in  The  House
"One   possibility  [for  negotiating  peace]  would  be  a
minimal  agreement  that  both  North   and  South  Viet-
nam  would  not  join  any  military  alliances  or  attempt
to  overthrow  each  other,  either  by  subversion  or  direct
warfare.    Each  would  be  allowed  to  develop  its   own
form  of  government  and  to  live  in  peace.    Under  this
proposal  the  South  would  agree  to  normalize trade  re-
lations  with  the  North,  but  that  would  not  necessarily
mean  diplomatic  recognition.    The  relationship between
East  and  West  Germany  could  be  used  as  an  example.
A  variation  of  this  proposal  might  include  joint  eco-
nomic  development  projects  between  North  and  South,
which  could look toward eventual  reunification and  free
elections  for  the  entire  country."
—Rep.   Wm.  Fitts  Ryan   (D.  N.Y.)   June   10,  the
first   speech   in   the   House   for   a  negotiated   peace.
Burton  (D.  Cal.)  rose  to  commend  him'  and  to  asso-
ciate  himself   with  Ryan's   remarks.
The   Supreme  Court   last  Monday   agreed   to  hear   the  ap-
peal  by  Dr.  James  A.  Dombrowski  and  the  Southern   Confer-
ence  Educational  Fund  from  the  2-to-l  decision  of  a  statutory
3-judge  court  in  their  suit  to  recover  records  seized  from  them
by  the  Louisiana  Un-American  Activities Committee.    Circuit
Court  Judge  John  Minor  Wisdom,  the  dissenter  in  that  ruling,
said  the  real  question  was  whether  Louisiana  "under  the  pre-
text  of  protecting  itself  against  subversion,  has  harassed,  and
humiliated  the  plaintiffs   and  is  about  to  prosecute   them  be-
cause  their  activities   in  promoting   civil  rights   for   Negroes
conflict  with  the  State's  steel-hard  policy  of  segregation."   The
Court  also  allowed  the National  Lawyers Guild  and  the  Amer-
ican  Civil  Liberties  Union  to  file  briefs  amicus  in  the  appeal.
Justice  Black  took  no  part.  .  . .
The   Washington    Star   in   an   editorial   June  8   called   the
MLF  a  "multilateral   farce."   .  .  .  The  State  Department   is
encountering    strong   disagreement    from    leadership    groups
being  briefed  privately  in  favor  of  these  floating  naval  Towers
of   Babel  in  which  the  Germans   would   be  given  a  finger  at
last  on  the  nuclear  trigger.  .    .  .
You  Can  Use  The  Blank  Below  to  Give  A  Sub  or  Stone's  "Haunted  Fifties"    (Or  Both)  As  A  Graduation    Gift
I. F. Stones  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name   ..........................................................................................
Street      ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
6/22/64
For  $5.35  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
(To)   Name        ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   K  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Pairl  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week   in
January   anil   Bi-Weekly  during   July   and   August   at   5618  Nebraska   Ave..   N.W..   Washington.  D.  C.    An   independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by   I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   55   in  ihe   U.S.;     $6   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED