I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964nov09.pdf

============================================================

What  the German  Generals Dream  About  The  Next   "War.,  P.  3
The  Worse The  War  in  Vietnam  The  Finer  The  Double-Talk  in Washington
"The    Administration took  the   Bienhoa  attack  as  an  oc-
casion  to  issue  new  warnings  to  North  Vietnam  and  Com-
munist   China.    It  cautioned  them  against   believing   that
after  the  election  the   U.S.   would  alter  its   Asian  policies
and  move  toward  disengagement   from   the   Vietnam  war.
Officials  also  insisted  that  while  the  new  episode   was  im-
portant   because   of   the   losses   suffered,  it   should  not  be
taken  as  proof  that  the  overall  situation  in  Vietnam  was
deteriorating.    In  fact, high  officials  were  adamant  in main-
taining  that  the  Administration was  greatly  encouraged  by
the  formation  of  a  civilian  government  in  Saigon  last  week
and  that  it  hoped that  the  stabilization of  the  political  situ-
ation   would   be   reflected   in   better    conduct  of   the    war
effort."  —From  Washington  in  the  New  York  Times  Nov.   &.
"One    year  after  the  overthrow  of  the  Diem  regime,   the
war   with  the  Communist  guerrillas  has   reached   a  stage
more  desperate  for  South  Vietnam than  ever.    The  deterio-
ration  is  both  military  and  political,  and  it  has  touched  all
aspects   of  the  life  of  a  weary  people."
—From  Saigon, same  page,  same  paper,  same  day.
"Officials  indicated  that  as  few  as  nine  guerrillas,   using
captured  American  ammunition,  had  been  able  to  damage
in  varying  degrees  jet  aircraft  with  a  replacement  cost  of
$25 million."
—From  the  wrecked  air  base, same  paper,  same  day.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  38
NOVEMBER  9,  1964
101       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.15  CENTS
An  Election  to  Make  Us  Proud  of  Our  Country
The  election  returns  make  me  proud   of  my  country.    The
United  States  voted  overwhelmingly  for  racial  justice,  for  pa-
tience  in  foreign   policy  and  for  continuation  of  the  welfare
state.    The  landslide  for  Johnson   was  a  landslide  for  a  sane
nuclear  policy.    The  white  backlash  against  the  Negro  proved
to  be  a  myth.    In  the  East  at  least  there  were  Polish  and  Ital-
ian  neighborhoods  which  turned  in  bigger  majorities for  John-
son  than  they  had  for  Kennedy;  except  in  the  South,  racism
fared   far  more  poorly  here  than  it  did  in  the  recent  British
elections.    Coming  on  the  heels  of  the  strongest  Civil  Rights
bill in  our  history, and  in  the  wake  of  a  Negro  upsurge  which
threatened  white  supremacy  in  the  skilled  trades  and  the  lily-
white  housing   areas  of  the  North,  the  vote   showed  plainly
that  conscience  was  stronger   than   interest  in  the  white  ma-
jority.    The   American  ideal  of  the  equality  of  man   demon-
strated   its  power.     If  we  look  about  the  world   objectively,
recalling  the  bloody   recent  clashes  between   so-called   colored
races  in  places   like  Singapore,   noting  that  tribalism  and  rac-
ism  afflict   the  human   race  all  around   the  globe,  the  election
results  in  America  should  hearten  good  men  everywhere,  and
give  our  Negro  fellow  Americans  a  healing  moment  of  sur-
prise  and  pleasure.    The  result  was  achieved  without  demean-
ing  compromise;  Johnson  picked  as  running  mate  the  Senator
most   clearly  identified  with   justice  for   the  Negro,  and   he
himself  did  not  pull  his  punches  on  the  racial  issue  even  in
his  native  South.    On  no  issue  was  there  a  clearer  verdict  in
this  election,  and  we  are  grateful  to  Lyndon  Johnson   for  it.
A  New  Dawn  in  The  South
In  the  South   itself,  which  Goldwater   had  hoped  to  carry
solidly,  the  old  order  has  been  shattered.     The  one  party  sys-
tem  has  been  broken,  and  though  the  Republicans  tried  to  be
more  lily-white than  the  Democrats,  their  emergence  in Louisi-
ana,   Mississippi,  Alabama,  Georgia   and  South  Carolina  must
bring  both  parties  around  to  seeking  the  Negro's  good  graces
for  he  will  hold  the  balance  of  power.    The   unprecedented
heavy  turnout  of  Negro  voters  in  every  Southern  State  except
An  Unremarked  Bit  of  Progress
A   remarkable  incident   occurred—and   went   unre-
marked—in   the   closing   days   of   the   campaign.     We
refer  to  the  President's  warning to  the  steel  companies
not  to  raise   prices,  and  Goldwater's  failure  to  make
an  issue  of  this.    Here  were  two  candidates  who  have
tried  to  outdo  each  other  in  devotion to  free   enterprise.
Here  we  had  the  President,  without  statutory   author-
ity,   deliberately interfering  in  the  free  market  because
he  thought  a  steel  price  rise  would  be  unwarranted and
unwise,  unwarranted because  steel   profits   rose   about
25%  in  the  first  9  months  of  this  year,  unwise  because
it  might  set  off  an  inflationary  spiral.    Such  tinkering
with  natural  law   should  infuriate  every  faithful  fol-
lower  of  Adam  Smith  or  Milton  Freedman.    The  stock
market  dropped sharply Oct.  28  when  the  White  House
warning  appeared  on  the  ticker.   This  seemed  to  prove
everything  Goldwater had been  saying  about  the  Demo-
crats.    It  was  Presidential  dictatorship,  an  act  of  eco-
nomic  planning,  in  short  socialism,  if   not  down  right
C———m.    But  Goldwater was  silent.    Block  of  Inland
Steel   protested,   "Prices  should  be  determined  by   the
free  play  of  the  market."   Barry  did  not  echo  his  cry.
Neither  did the  other  steel  magnates.    On the  contrary
they  accepted  the  President's  ukase   (only  in  Russian,
as  you  see,  could  one find the  right  word  for  it).  There
will  be  no  general  steel  price  increase.     Creeping   so-
cialism  has  crept  a  long   way  when  a  country   which
talks  as  much  about  free  enterprise  as  ours  does,  takes
it   for  granted   that  the  White  House   has  a  right   to
block  a  steel  price  rise,  agrees  that  the  rise  would  be
bad  for  business  and  acquiesces   in  this  unmistakable
form   of   government   economic   planning.     Obviously,
without  realizing  it,  we  are  face  to  face  with  a  new
consensus.     "Free   enterprise"  seems   to  have  lost   the
election.
Mississippi,  where  they  were  barred  by  a  murderous  terror  and
blatant  trickery,  is  a  foretaste  of  the  future.     The   victory  of
the  liberal  Yarborough  in  Texas,  the  defeat   of   the  rightist
Republican,  Bruce  Alger  in  Dallas,  the  reelection  of  the  cou-
(Continued   on  Page   four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  9,19G4
No  Civilian Government, If  Free,  Will  Continue  An  Unpopular War
The  Next  Big  Surprise  in  Vietnam   May  Be  A  Call  for  Peace
We   suggest   that  the  peace  movement  call  for   a  cease-fire
in  South  Vietnam,  and  the  holding  of  free  elections  by  secret
ballot  under  international  non-aligned  auspices.    The  daring
attack   on   our   biggest   airfield   just   12  miles  outside   Saigon
indicates  how  little  control  we  have  managed  to  achieve  over
that  unhappycountry  in  three  years  of  "advising"  its  military.
Major  Gen.   Max  S.  Johnson,  Ret.,  until  recently  head  of  the
U.S.  Army  War  College,  just  back  from  Saigon,  writes  in  the
Nov.  9  issue of  U.S.  News  &  World   Report  that  our  military
there  are  now  talking  of  "a  12 to  20-year  war."    We  have  no
right  to  impose  this  on  the  Vietnamese  against  their  will.
K
  Very  soon  we  shall  have  to  decide  whether  to  go  on  with
the  first   steps   toward   civilian   government   taken   in  Saigon,
or  move  back  to  a  military  dictatorship.   Since  every attempt
at  military  dictatorship  has  failed,  this  time  we  will  have  to
be  the  dictators.    This  means  a  large  American expeditionary
force  to  occupy  and  police  the  country.    It  is. true  that  the
new  civilians talk  of  total  war  against  Communism.    But  there
are  indications  that  all  this  is  only  for  our  benefit.     Dennis
Bloodworth   reported  to  the  London  Observer  (Nov.   1)  from
Saigon  that  the  Americans face  "a  conspiracy  of  peace"  which
may  soon  pose  "an  even  more  acute  problem"   than  the  war
against  the  Vietcong.
What  The  New  Head  of  State   Seeks
A  free  choice,  if  allowed,  will  lead  to  peace.    Bloodworth
cabled  his  paper  that  intimates  of  Phan  Kac  Suu,  South  Viet-
nam's  new  Head   of  State,   "claim  discreetly  that  behind  this
democratic  demand  for  early  elections  to  a  new  National  As-
sembly  lies  one  outstanding  purpose:  To  arm  the  future  Gov-
ernment   with  a  popular   mandate   so  it  can  negotiate   peace
with  the  Communists  without  its authority being  challenged."
It  is  time  to  bring  home  to  Americans  the  full   cruelty  of
the  war  we  have  been  supporting.     "If   I  were  a  peasant,"  an
American   military   adviser   in   Vietnam  told   the   Associated
Press  in  a  dispatch  we  saw only  in  the  Baltimore  Sun  Oct.  25,
"I  don't  think  I  would  be  exactly   overjoyed   every  time  the
usual  government  unit  moves  into  my  area  on  an  operation.
The  regular  soldiers  have  had  no  special  indoctrination on  the
need  to  win  friends  and  influence  people.  So they  rob  peasants
blind,  they  force  them  into  labor  detachments,  they burn  down
houses  and  raise hell  generally—and  act  more  like an  invasion
force  than  citizens  of  the  same  nation."    These  are  the  "lib-
erators"   on  our  payroll.
A   former   U.S.   military   adviser   to   Diem,   from   1955   to
It  Happened to  the  French, Too
"In  addition  to  the  environmental  limitations,  there
was  the  enemy;  an  enemy  who did not  possess  a  single
aircraft  but  who  over  the  years  had  acquired  a  great
deal  of  proficiency  in  anti-aircraft  gunnery  and  in  de-
stroying   parked  aircraft   and  airbase   installations   in
daring   commando  raids.     The   latter   finally   reached
strategic   importance   during  the   battle   of   Dien   Bien
Phu,  when  a  Viet  Minh  commando infiltrated  the  larg-
est   French   airbase   in   North   Viet-Nam,   Cat-Bi,   by
crawling  for  more  than  a  mile  through  the  sewers.
"Cat-Bi,  situated  near  the  coastal  city  of  Haiphong,
was  heavily  fortified,   surrounded  by  electrified  barbed
wire   and   mine-fields   and   watched  even   by   infra-red
devices,  in  addition  to   crack   troops   and  watch  dogs.
By  an  incredible  act  of  raw  courage  and  stamina,  the
Viet-Minh  raiders  (who  would  have  helplessly drowned
in   the   sewers   had   there   been   even   light   rain  that
night)   emerged  directly  in  the  aircraft  parking  area
and   attached   explosive   charges   to   eighteen   of   the
transport  planes  virtually  needed  to  supply  the  French
garrison  in  a  faraway  fortress."
—Bernard  B. Fall:  Street  Without  Joy,  pps.  262-3, a
new  edition  with  much  new  material   bringing   up  to
date   the   story   of   the   Indochinese    wars     (Stackpole:
$7.95)  especially  recommended  for  its  compilation  in  a
new  chapter  of  the  falsely   optimistic  reports   issued  by
U.S.  authorities in  1963-Ji.
I960,  Lieut.  Gen.  Samuel  T.  Williams,  Ret.,  was  interviewed
in  the  Nov.   9  issue  of  U.S.  News  &  World   Report  on  why
we're   losing  the  war   in  Vietnam.     It's   not   very  impressive
but  the  truth  breaks  through  at  two  points.     Gen.   Williams
recognizes  that  we  may  face  a  crisis  when  a  civilian  govern-
ment  asks  us  to  get  out  so  it  can  make  peace.     He  also  pro-
tests  the  indiscriminate  bombing   and  napalming  of   villages
"because  every  non-Communist  in  such  a  village  is  going  to
be  a  darned  good  Communist  by  the  time  you  get   through."
This  is one  reason  why  the  longer  the  war  goes  on,  the  strong-
er  the  guerrillas  become.
"How  can we  explain  to  a  mother  when  her  child  is burned
by   napalm?"   Father   Hoa   asked   in   Manila   recently     (N.Y.
Times,   Sept.   1)    when   this   famous   anti-Communist  Viet-
namese  priest  was  given  the  Magsaysay  award.    "And   how
can  we  expect  a  young  man   to  fight  for  us  when  his   aged
father  was  killed  by  artillery   fire?   Indeed  how  can  we  claim
to  be  with  the  people  when  we  burn  their  homes  simply  be-
cause  those   houses   happen   to  be  in  the   Vietcong-controlled
territory?"    This  is  what  lies  on  the  conscience  of  America.
All  Deliberate Speed—Or  How  to  Get  W
Ten years after the Supreme Court's desegregation  decision
98.8%  of  the  South's  Negro  children are  still  in   segregated
schools.    Even  this  figure  is  deceptively high.   The  statisti-
cal  charts  at  the  end  of  the  Civil  Rights Commission's  1964
report  on  education  reveal  that  one  state,  Texas,   accounts
fof  more than  half  of  the  integrated  enrollment.    It  has  an
estimated  18,000  Negro  pupils in  desegregated  schools.    By
contrast,  in  Alabama  there  are  21  and  in  South  Carolina
there  are  only  9  Negroes  going  to  school  with  whites.    This
is  respectively .007%  and .003% of  the  total  pupils  enrolled
in   desegregated   schools.    Mississippi  had  no   school   inte-
gration  below  the  college  level  until  this  fall  when  a  court
here  You Don't Want  to  Go in 1,000 Years
order  opened  up  three   public   school  districts.     In  one  of
these  districts,  in  Clarksdale, no  Negro  pupil  tried  to  reg-
ister  at a white school.
In  other  Southern  States  desegregation   is  concentrated  in
a  few  school districts.   Louisiana had  1,814 Negro  pupils  in
desegregated  schools,  but  these  are  located  in  only  3  out  of
67  bi-racial  school  districts.    In  Georgia  only  10  out  of  181
bi-racial  districts  are  desegregated;  in  Arkansas  21  out  of
228;  in  Texas  289  out  of  899;  in  North  Carolina  61  out  of
171;  in  Florida  21  out  of  67;  and  Tennessee   58  out  of  142.
At  this  rate—little  more  than  one  percent  in  a  decade—
it  will  take  almost  ten  centuries  to  desegregate  the  South.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly,  November  9,
What  Some  German  Generals  Dream  Is  What  the  Rest  of  Europe  Fears
The MLF As A Posthumous U.S. Device to Help Germany  Win the Next War
In  discussing the  MLF  with a  colleague,  I  turned up  a prize
item  for  an  anthology  of  nuclear  horrors.    He  had  been  talk-
ing   with   German   military   men   in   Washington,   who   are
strong,  of  course,  for  this  idea  of  a  25-vessel  fleet  each armed
with  8  Polaris  missiles  on  whose  triggers  the  Germans  would
have  a   finger.   The  German  fear  is  that  in  the  event  of  a
Soviet  clash  with  Germany,  the  U.S.  would  not  risk  its  own
destruction  by  a  nuclear  exchange  with  Russia  but  would  try
to  limit  the  war  to  Central  Europe  and  conventional  arms.    I
asked  what  difference  the  MLF  would  make,  since  the   U.S.
would  still  be  able  to  veto  its  use.
The  German  military,  he  found,  make  a  different  calcula-
tion.    They  believe  that  a  new  war  may  begin  with  a suicidal
nuclear   exchange   between   U.S.   and   U.S.S.R.   which  would
leave  both  in  ruins.    The  Soviet  armies,  however,  might  still
remain  largely  intact  and  would  move  westward,  if  for   no
other  reason  than  to  escape  radioactivity and  find  Food.   With
the  U.S.  out  of  the  picture,  the  Germans  could  then  take  over
and  use  the  MLF  to  "interdict"   and  destroy  these  armies  by
nuclear  bombardment,  and  emerge  the  victor  from  the  Third
World  War!     Obviously  someone  has  been  giving  the  Ger-
man  Generals  Herman  Kahn  for   Christmas.
Five  Basic   Counter-Arguments
I  can think of  better  posthumous  pleasures  than  the  thought
that  we  had  arranged  for  Germany  to  dominate  Europe  once
America  had  passed  away.    Unfortunately  the  Johnson   Ad-
ministration  was  committed  to  putting  this  monstrous  device
through  Congress  early  next  year  in  time  to  help  Erhard  win
the  next  German  election.    The  peace  movement  had   better
organize  a  counter-campaign    quickly.    An  MLF  treaty   will
have  to  be  ratified  by  a  two-thirds  vote  of  the  Senate.   There
is-thus  a  fighting  chance of  stopping  it.    The  main  arguments
against  it are that (1)  it  is contradictory to McNamara's  policy
of  recognizing  nuclear  overkill  and  shifting  emphasis  to  con-
ventional  weapons  (2)   it  cannot  be  reconciled  with  Johnson's
policy  of  preventing  proliferation  of  nuclear  weapons,   since
many  nations  East  and  West  fear  MLF  as  a  halfway  house  to
a  German  nuclear  deterrent,   (3)   it  conflicts  with  the  policy
of  seeking  relaxation of  tension, since putting  a German  finger
on  the  nuclear trigger  will  be  regarded  by  the  Soviet  countries
as  a  hostile  act  (4)    it  will  drive  the  Soviet  bloc  closer  to-
And  on A-Arms For  Germans?
"London,  Oct.  30—The  British   Government  has  de-
cided  to  ban arms  sales  to  South  Africa.  .  .  .  An  arms
embargo   for   South   Africa   has   the   support   of   the
whole  Labor Party,  but  it  has  been  particularly  dear  to
its   Left-wingers.     There  are  signs  now  that  the  way
Prime  Minister  Harold  Wilson  intends  to  cope  with  the
foreign   policy  demands   of  left-wing  Socialists  in   his
Cabinet   is   to   satisfy    them   on  highly   emotional   but
secondary   issues   such   as   South   Africa,   Spain,   and
Portugal's  African  colonies.    But  where  necessary,  he
apparently  will  overrule  them  on  such  major  issues  as
those   involving    Anglo-American    relations,   Germany
and  East-West  negotiations."
—Washington  Post Foreign  Service,  Oct. 31,
gether  helping  to  heal  the  rift  between  Moscow  and   Peking
and  (5)  it  will  encourage  those  revanchist  forces  in  Germany
which  look  to  a  new  showdown  to  regain  their  1937  borders.
The  MLF  is  supposed  to  tighten  NATO  unity.   It  will  do
the  opposite.    Unanimous  opposition  to  MLF  was  registered
at  the  opening  of  Norway's  Parliament  Oct.   23.    The   U.S.
sees  MLF  as  a  means  of  weakening  the  bonds  between   Ger-
many  and  France,  and  binding  Germany  closer   to  the   U.S.
It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  de  Gaulle  is  threatening  to
leave  NATO  if  the  plan  is  approved.    The  threat  of  a  Ger-
man-American   "multilateral   force"   is  being   used   to   bring
other  reluctant  NATO  members  into  it.    Here  we  are  told
the  U.S.  will  always  have  a  veto  over  its  use,  but  the  Ger-
mans  have  been  encouraged  by  the  State  Department   to  be-
lieve  that  ultimately  a  system of  weighted  majority voting  may
be  substituted.  The  Germans,  as  the  largest  European  contrib-
utor,  would  have  the  biggest  European  vote  under   such  an
arrangement.
De  Gaulle's   threats  and  British  Labor  negotiations   for  a
modified   plan   may   delay,   even   possibly   shelve,   the   plan,
especially  if  enough  popular  opposition   can  be  aroused.   The
Laborites  campaigned   against  MLF  but  seem  now  to  be  pro-
posing  to  accept  a smaller MLF  in  a  new joint NATO nuclear
command  to  which  they  would  contribute  their  own   "inde-
pendent"  deterrent.    The  effect  would  be  to  water  down  Ger-
man  influence.    This  has  already evoked  a  sour  reaction  from
Bonn  which  wants  to  be  No.  1  in  the  MLF.
Belgian  Statesman, Back from  Cuba,  Pleads  for  A  More  Humane U.S.  Policy
A  plea  for  joint  European   action  to  bring  about  a   "re-
thinking"  of  the  U.S.  attitude  toward  Cuba  is  made  by  M.
Raymond  Scheyven  in  a  series  of  four  articles  in  Le  Monde
Oct.  27-30.    M.  Scheyven,  brother  of  the   Belgian   Ambas-
sador  to  the  U.S.,  represents   Brussels   in  the  Belgian  Par-
liament.    He  is  a  Catholic,  a  leading  member  of  the  domi-
nant  Christian  Social  Party  and  a  former  Minister  of  Eco-
nomic  Affairs.    This  visit  was  part  of  a  tour  in  which  he
had  interviews  with  Belaunde  Terry  in  Peru,  Eduardo  Frei
in  Chile,  and Castello  Branco  in  Brazil  as  well  as  a  10-hour
talk  with  Castro.     In  Washington,   on  his   way   home,  M.
Scheyven   spoke   with  Secretary   Rusk   and  later   in   New
York  to  U  Thant at the  UN.
M.  Scheyven  reports   that,   despite   great   difficulties   im-
posed  by  the  U.S.  blockade, most  of  Cuba's  people  are  bet-
ter  fed  than  before  the  Revolution.    He  says  progress  is
being   made  in  mechanization  of   the  sugar  industry.     He
found  the  atmosphere  less  restrictive   than  in  other  Soviet
countries   and   he   thinks   that,   given   peace,   Cuba   would
evolve  rapidly  toward  greater  freedom.    "It is  for  this  rea-
son,"   he  writes,  "that  I  doubt  the   wisdom  of   the   policy
adopted  by  the  State  Department."    He  found  Castro  will-
ing  to  renounce  all  Soviet  military  aid  if  the  U.S.  withdrew
from  Guantanamo  and  made  peace  with  Cuba.   The  Belgian
found   Latin  American  leaders  dubious  of   U.S.   policy  and
anxious  for  reconciliation,  notably  the  newly  elected  Chris-
tian   Democratic    President    of   Chile,   Eduardo   Frei.    M.
Scheyven  suggests  that  a  united  European  policy  on  Cuba
could  make  the   U.S.   realize  that   "like  the   cordons   sani-
taires  of  yesterday,  the  blockade  of  today   cannot   overturn
the  Cuban  regime—the  quarantine  makes  Cuba's  little  peo-
ple  suffer  rather  than  weakening  the  team  in  power."
!   5      -
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  9,196U
People  Ready  to  Translate  Generalities  About  Peace Into  Concrete  Policy
(Continued   from   Page One)
rageously  outspoken  Weltner  in  Atlanta,  were  the  gratifying
highlights   of   the   Southern   returns.    Those   bloody  streaks
across  the  sky  in  Mississippi were  the  signs  of  a  new  dawn.
A  Setback  for  Fascism
Had  Goldwater  been  elected,  the  whole  world  would  have
felt  a  tremor of  fear.    In  every country Fascist elements  hoped
for  a  Goldwater  victory.   Among  the  neo-Nazis  in  Germany,,
the   Phalangists  in   Spain,   the   white  supremacists  in   South
Africa   and   Rhodesia  and   Angola,   there  was  an  instinctive
feeling  of  fraternity  for  the  man  behind  whom  all  the crypto-
Fascist  forces  in  our  own  country  had  rallied.    His  defeat  is
a  setback  to  the  paranoids  everywhere.    It  is  also  a  defeat  for
the  military.    His  cave-man oversimplifications,  his  get-tough
stance,  reflected  the  dominant  stereotypes  of  the  military  bu-
reaucracy  which  has  grown  so  strong  on  the  cold  war,  but  has
failed   to  carry   the  country  with. it.    The   candidate  of   the
know-nothings,   of   the   Birchites,   and   of   the   ignorant   rich
failed   to  carry  a  single   State  outside  the   South   except   his
native  Arizona.    In  every  class,  in  every  region,  and   among
every  ethnic group  outside  the  South,  the  verdict  was  against
him.    The  suburban  vote  was  particularly  significant,   for  it
showed  that  among  the  better  educated,  though  the  more  pros-
perous,   there  was  a  sober   readiness  to  accept  welfare  state,
justice  for  the  Negro  and  a  crusade  against  poverty.     How
much  has  changed   since  the   days  when   the  well-to-do  saw
only  a  threat  of  Communism  in  the  New  Deal!    The   press,
which  was overwhelmingly against  FDR  a generation  ago,  was
now  overwhelmingly  against  Goldwater.    This  was  a  victory
for  the  educated,  and  above  all  for  the  education  which  the
New  Deal  gave  this  country.    It  is  a  pity  Eleanor   Roosevelt
did  not  live  to  see  these  returns.
A  New  Maturity  in  The  Country
Johnson  won  his  victory  despite  the  dirty  campaign  waged
against  him.   Dirty  campaigns  are  hardly  new  in  our  history.
What  was new was  the  sign  of  a  new maturity and  of  a  higher
level  of  good  taste  in  the  electorate.     The  cheap  and  vulgar
Miller  antagonized  the  country;  the  reaction   to  the  Jenkins
affair  showed  that  it  had  grown  up.    The  McCarthy-style Red
Democracy  Marches  On  (and Out) in  Brazil
"Lincoln  Gordon,  U.  S.  Ambassador  to  Brazil,   was
quoted  in  Washington  as  saying  that  earlier  fears  in
the  U.S.  that  Brazil's  military-backed  government  was
anti-democratic  had  practically  disappeared."
—Baltimore  Sun  from  Rio de  Janeiro,  Oct. 22.
"A   new   period  of   tension   between  Brazilian  poli-
ticians  and  military  authorities  appeared  imminent  to
observers  here  today. ...  A  number of  State  Gover-
nors—including   Mauro   Borges   of   Boias,   accused   of
harboring   Communists   in   his    Administration—were
under  renewed  military  pressure.    There  were rumors
that  some  military extremists  would  like  to  close  Con-
gress  altogether   and  impose  a   military   dictatorship.
Mouro  Andrade  (President  of  the  Senate)  warned  that
'not  even  President  Castello  Branco  is   immune   from
being   the  next   victim.'    He  added,  'A  regime  is   no
longer  democratic when a  Lieut.  Col. judges  the  Presi-
dent  of  the  Congress;   a   Major,  a  scientist   of  world
reputation;  and  a  Lieutenant,  a  university   professor."
—Washington  Post  from  Rio,  Oct. 27.
menace  books  with  which  the  Goldwaterites  flooded  the  coun-
try  seemed  to  have  an  impact  only on  a  minority already  nutty.
Something  has  been  learned  from  the  witch  hunt  years.  Per-
haps  the  most  heartening  aspect  of  the  whole  election  was  the
fact  that  it  so  obviously  turned  on  fear  of  what  a  man   like
Goldwater  might  do  if  his  hands  were  on  the  nuclear  trigger.
However   poorly   informed   on   other   matters,   the   electorate
showed  that  it  had  instinctively  and  universally seized  on  the
new  facts  of  life  in  the   nuclear  age.   The   country   realizes
that  we  live  on  the  brink  of  world  catastrophe,   and  that  the
new  weapons  call  for  a  new  sobriety.    We  believe  that  the
reaction  of  the  country  to  the  nuclear  issue,  which  seems  to
have  outweighed   even   racism  in  parts  of  the   South,   is  the
most   hopeful   development.     The   American  people   showed
itself  more  intelligent  than  its  political  leaders  have  given  it
credit  for.  We  believe  that  the  country  would   be  prepared
to  follow  Johnson  if  he  were  now  to  translate  his   campaign
generalities  about  peace  and  restraint  into  concrete  peace pol-
icy  on  Vietnam,  Cuba  and  China.    The  people  have  shown
their  confidence  in  Johnson.     We   look  to  him  to  show  his
confidence  in  the  people.
We'll Send A  Free  Sample  Copy Of  This  Issue To  Friends  If  You  Send Stamped  Self-Addressed  Envelopes
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State..........»........
H/9/6*
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
<To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ......................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............Stat«....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   fiftiet
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first   week  in
January  and  Bi-Weekly   duping:  July   and  August  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.. Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  {5   in  the  U.S.:   $6  in   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mall  rates:
S15  to  JSurope:   $20 -to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED