I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964apr06.pdf

============================================================

Morse  Challenges LBJ  to Extend  His  Peace Policy  to  Vietnam,  P.  2
Opinion  Poll  Shows Bigger  Vote for  Neutralization Than Extension of  The War
A   Louis  Harris  opinion   poll   (Washington   Post,  March
30)  reported  a  bigger  vote  for  ending  the  war  in Vietnam
by   neutralizing  the   South   than   for   extending   it   by   air
strikes   against  the  North.    On  neutralization:  35%   were
in  favor,   28%  opposed   and  37%  not   sure.    On  extending
the  war:  only  26%  were  in  favor,  45%  opposed   and  29%
not  sure.    "Back  of   this  reluctance  to  carry  the  military
campaign  to  North  Vietnam," Harris  wrote,  "is  the  added
fact  that  no  more  than  3  in  every  10  have  been  recorded
as  willing  to  risk  war  with  Red  China  or Vietnam."
Apparently   the   six   Senators  who  have   spoken   up  for
neutralization  are  more  representative  than  their  numbers
indicate.    If   a  third  of   the   people   are  for   neutralization
and   another   third   "not   sure"  despite   State   and   Defense
Dept.  propaganda,  it  is  clear  the  President   could  mobilize
strong  support  for  ending  the  war  on  the  basis  of  free  elec-
tions  in  a  neutral  South  Vietnam.
McNamara   seems   to  have  other   plans.    A   Washington
Star  editorial  the  day  this  poll  was  published reported  Mc-
Namara   had  said  "privately  on  Capitol  Hill"  that  if   the
war  did  not  take  a  turn  for  the  better  in  about  six  months
(right   after  November,  perhaps?)   it   would  be   extended.
The  idea  of  first  consulting   Congress   or  the  country  does
not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  the  Pentagon's   computers.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  No.  14
APRIL   6,  1964
101       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
15  CENTS
What  Fulbright,  Too,  Does  Not  Dare  to  Think
Behind  the  scenes,  even  more  than  in  public,   Senator   Ful-
bright  has  long  been  a  civilizing  influence.    He  was  the  one
voice  in  opposition   at  the  inner  Kennedy  council  on  the  eve
of   the  Bay  of   Pigs.    He   has  tried   to  inject   some   common
sense  and  humanity into  the  boy  scoutish  delusions  about  the
efficacy   of  counter-guerrillas  which  continue  to  dominate  our
bankrupt  Southeast  Asia  policy.     Now,   in  the   stuffy,    closed
room   of   official   U.S.   foreign   policy   discussion,   his   speech
comes  as  a  welcome  breath  of  fresh  air.     But  judged  by  the
standards  of  the  outside  world,   and   the  world   of   the   out-
siders,  the  really  free  world,  the  world  which  is  not  chained
by  respectability  to  cold   war   cliches,  the   speech   only  illus-
trates  how  backward  U.S.  thinking  is.    Fulbright   challenges
the  country  to  "start  thinking   some  'unthinkable'  thoughts"
but  he  himself  does  not  dare  rethink  some  of  the  basic  "un-
thinkables"  of  our  foreign  policy.    We   offer   a  few  samples:
The  Tale  of  Two  Canals
1.  Panama,  where  Fulbright  was  at  his  best.    Isn't  it  time
we  dared  to  think  through  the  parallel  with  Suez?    In   1956
when  England,  France  and  Israel   invaded  Egypt  after   Egypt
seized  that  canal,  we  joined   Moscow   in  forcing   their   with-
drawal.    Our  oil  companies  did  not  want  their  relations  with
the   Arab  countries  disturbed.    In   the   case   of  both  canals,
rights  had  been  imposed  by  force  and  chicanery  in  an  earlier
era.    We  allowed  Egypt  to  expropriate  British  and  French  in-
vestors  in  the  Suez  Canal.    We  refuse  to  recognize   Panama's
right  to  a  revision  of  the  archaic  terms  of  our  own  property
in  the  Panama  Canal.    In  the  rest  of  the  world  this  looks  like
a  typical  case  of  Big  Power  double  standards,  willing   to  be
liberal  but  only  about  other  peoples'  property.
2.  Cuba,  where  Fulbright  is  feeble.  Even  he  does  not  dare
ask  us  to  measure  our  conduct  against  that  of  other  Western
powers.    Holland   in  Indonesia,  Belgium   in  the  Congo  and
France  in  Algeria  lost  far  more -than  we  did   in  Cuba.     Yet
only  a  few  days  ago,  without  waiting  for  payment  on  seized
Dutch   properties,   the  Netherlands   have  resumed   trade   talks
with  Sukarno.    The  Belgians  are  supplying  technical  aid  to
The  CIA,  Like  George  III
FULBRIGHT:  I  agree  that  an  element  of  civil  war
is  involved,  but  a  very  strong   element  of  outside  in-
terference  is  also  involved.   Such  facts  are  difficult   to
document,  but  studies  have  been   made.    A   CIA  com-
mission  has   made  a   study   of   the   situation.    It   has
been  confirmed  that  the  source  of  much  of  the  trouble
is  North  Vietnam.  .  .  .
MORSE: I  suppose  we  ought  to  have  some  apprecia-
tion  of  the  British  viewpoint  at  the  time  of  the  Amer-
ican   Revolution,  when  the   British   did  not   look   with
favor  upon  the  French  assistance  to  the  American  Col-
onies.  .  .  .  The  fact  that  one  group in  South  Vietnam  is
obtaining  assistance   from  North  Vietnam  and  another
group  is  obtaining  assistance   from   the  U.S.   does  not
change  in the  slightest  degree  the  fact  that  it  is  a  civil
war.   .  .  .  We  do  not  like  the  sources   from  which  the
Vieteong  are  getting   assistance   and  the  Vietcong   do
not  like  the  sources  from  which  the  South  Vietnamese
are  getting  assistance.    But  it  is  still  a  civil  war.
—Zn  the  Senate, March  25.
the   Congo.     France   has   suffered   from  Ben   Bella   far   more
than   we   have   suffered    from   Castro;   three   generations   of
Frenchmen  were  uprooted  from  their  homes  in  Algeria.    Yet
de  Gaulle  continues  to  aid  Ben  Bella,  who  is  much  the  same
kind  of  radical  socialist  nationalist  as  Castro.
If   de  Gaulle  had  treated  Ben  Bella  as  we  treat  Castro,  if
he  had  cut  off  all  aid  and  called  on  NATO  to  join  him  in  a
trade  embargo,  he  would  long  ago have  forced  Ben  Bella  into
the  Soviet  camp  and  brought  into  being  a  Soviet   bridgehead
on  the  other  side  of  the  Western   Mediterranean,  as  we  did
by  our  folly  in  the  Caribbean.    De  Gaulle  would   have   poi-
soned  his  relations  with  Africa  and  the  rest  of  the  Arab  world
by  prolonging   a  struggle   against  Arab   nationalism  he   was
wise  enough  to  see  he  could  not  win.
We   saw  all   this  clearly—elsewhere.    We   supported   the
anti-colonial  struggle  in  Algeria,  in  the  Congo  and   in  Indo-
(Continiied   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  6, 1964
Some Myths and Realities That  Fulbright  Overlooked  in  Southeast Asia
Morse  Challenges  Johnson  to  Extend  His  Peace  Policy  to  Vietnam
By  Senator  Wayne Morse*
The   President   said   yesterday   [in   his  speech  to  the   AFL-
CIO  Building  Council]  that  today  finds  us just  where we  were
10  years  ago  in  South  Vietnam.     But  that  is  not  quite   true.
We  are  $2  billion  poorer  for  the  economic  aid  we  have  put
into  that  area  of   14  million  people  and  we  are  an   unknown
amount  poorer  for  the  military  aid  we  have  put  in.  We  have
added   15,000  U.S.  troops  to  the  ante  since  1954.     Over  200
Americans  have  been  killed  there.    Even  so,  the  military  and
political  situation  has   deteriorated.
We   are  there  we  say  at  the  invitation  of  the  South   Viet-
namese   government.     But  that  government   is  our  own  crea-
ture.    We   know  it  and  the  world   knows  it.    One  might  as
well  try  to  claim  that  the  Soviet  Army  is  in  East  Germany  only
at  the  invitation  of  the  East  German  Government.    A  puppet
is  a  puppet,  and   South   Vietnam   has  not  had   more  than   a
U.S.  puppet  government  in  its  10  years  of   existence.
"Forever"  Called  Optimistic
The  most  optimistic  American  forecast   for  South   Vietnam
was  made  by  the  Secretary  of  Defense  when  he  said  that  we
would  aid  that  country  'forever.'     If  the  policy  stated  by  the
Secretary  of  Defense   is  the  policy  of  the  Johnson  Administra-
tion   in   South   Vietnam,   then   every   President   10   years,   20
years,  50  years  from  now  will  find  himself  where  Elsenhower
and   Johnson   found   themselves.     But  the   price   will   go   up
every  decade  just  to  keep  the  U.S.   in  the  same  place.
The  President  does  not  believe  it  necessary  to  send  Marines
into  Cuba.     Why,   then,  does  the  President   believe  it   neces-
sary  or  desirable  to  send  our  Special  Forces  to  South  Vietnam ?
.We  took  a  tiger  by the  tail  10  years  ago  and  no  one  in  high
office  knows  how  to  let  go  of  it.    So  we  call  that  a  commit-
ment.    What  is really  meant  is  face  and  prestige.    We   backed
a  puppet  there  10  years  ago  and  we  are  afraid  the  world  will
laugh  at  us  if  we  recognice  that  it  has  been  a  flop.
There  are  no  Chinese   soldiers   fighting   in  Vietnam;   there
are  no  Russian  soldiers.    The  only  foreign   troops  are  Amer-
Low  Blow  and  Lame Apology
"One  would  think  that  the  State  Dept.  would  recog-
nize  that  it  had  been  damaged  enough  by  the  applica-
tion  of  the  tactics  of  McCarthyism  not  to  resort  to  the
use  of  the  same  tactics.    The   Secretary   of   Sate   last
night  in  Salt  Lake  City  out  McCarthyed  McCarthy.
"I  find  in  the  press  report  of  Secretary  Rusk's  speech
that  he  applied  the  word  'quitters'  to  those   of  us  who
disagree   with   our   present   policy   in   South  Vietnam.
The   Secretary   is   further   quoted  as   saying,   'That   is
what  the  Communists  want  most.    Their  favorite  slo-
gan   is  "Yanks,  Go  Home."    Insofar  as   anybody  here
or  abroad  pays  attention to  the  quitters,  they  are  giv-
ing   aid  and  comfort  to  our  enemies.'
"The  Secretary  of  State  knows  very  well  that  he  is
using  the  phrase  which  defines  treason   in  our  Consti-
tution.     Mr.   Rusk   would   not   use   these   disreputable
tactics  if  our  policies  could  withstand logical  analysis."
—Morse  (D.  Ore.)   in  the  Senate  March  20   (abridged).
"I  was  thinking  of  the  mail  I  get   at  the  State   De-
partment."
—Rusk's  lame  apology  on Face  The Nation  March  22.
"American   citizens,  be   they   U.S.   Senators   or   any
other  citizen,  should  have  the  right  to  make  such  pro-
tests   without   having  a   Secretary   of   State   call   them
quitters  or  traitors."
—Morse  replying   in  the Senate  March  23.
'Abridged   from  a   Senate   speech   March  25   in   which  he
took  issue  with  Fulbright's  support  for  the  war  in  Vietnam.
icans.     Every  time   an   American   dies   in   Vietnam,   the   flag
should   be  lowered   to  half   mast   over   the   Capitol,   over   the
White   House,  over  the  State  Department  and  over  the   Pen-
tagon   because   those   boys   are   dying   in   the   execution   of   a
unilateral  policy  that  no  longer  has  a  direct   bearing   on   the
defenses  of  the  United   States.     I  am  satisfied   that  once  the
American   people   obtain   the   facts   about   American   foreign
policy  in  South  Vietnam,  they  will  repudiate  the  policy.
President  Johnson  said  yesterday,  'And  that  is why  we  must
follow  the  Prophet  Isaiah  many,  many  times  before  we  send
the  Marines,  and  say,  'Come  now  and  let  us  reason  together.'
Mr.  President,  when   is  the  United   States   going  to   apply
your  words  to  Vietnam?
Does  Our Civilian Right  Hand  Know  What  Our Military  Intelligence  Left  Hand  is  Doing?
"Moscow,   March   27   (UPI)—The   Soviet   Union,   in   an-
nouncing  the  release  of  the  RB-66  officers,  asserted   for  the
first  time  today  that  it  had  photographic evidence  on  which
to   try   the  fliers  as  spies.    An   official   statement   said   the
fliers  were  being  released  because   the   U.S.   had   expressed
its   'regrets'  and  had  given   assurances   there   would  be  no
more   such   overflights."
—New  York  Times, March  28.
Q.  Mr.  Secretary  was   the   release   of   the   two  American
fliers  today   in  any  way  contingent  upon  public   assurances
on  the  part  of  the  U.S.  that  there  would  be  no  longer  any
overflights   over   Communist  territories?
A.  Well,  it  is  not  a  contingency  (sic)   because   that   does
not  lend  itself  to  a  condition.    We  have  already  indicated
that   we   recognize  that  this  plane  was   where   it  was   not
supposed   to  be,  and  we  have  also   indicated  that  we  have
taken   additional   measures   to   try   to   prevent  this   kind  of
straying  in  the  future.    But  this  is  not  a  condition  in  any
Q.  Mr.  Secretary  .  .  .  what  about  the  Russian  claim  that
they   have  evidence  that   the  fliers  were   spying?
A.  ...    We are ourselves  convinced because  we  know  what
their  instructions were  .  .  .  that  they  were  not  engaged   in
any  mission  over  East  Germany.   Now,  it  is  true  this  was
a  tactical  reconnaissance   aircraft   as   a  member  of   a   tac-
tical  reconnaissance  squadron.    It  had  certain  equipment  on
board.    And  I  suppose  the  Russians   looked  at  this   pretty
hard.    But  I  think  I  will  just  leave  it  at  that,  until  we  have
a  chance  to  talk  with  these  fliers  and  find  out  exactly  what
happened   because  it   is,  quite  frankly,  a  little   mysterious
as  to  how  they  could  be  that  far  off  course."
—Secretary  of  State  Rusk's  press  conference   March  27.
"The  President  said  he  had  given  instructions  to  the  De-
fense  Department  'and  followed  through  very,  very  vigor-
ously'  on  the  necessity   for  pilots  to  'observe  the  corridor
assigned   to   American  planes   flying   over   East   Germany.'
His   purpose  was   to  prevent  another   incident."
—Washington  Post  from  Austin,  Tex.,   March  29.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  6, 1964
Justice  Department  Courageously  Sides  Against  Expropriated  U.S.  Sugar Interests
Behind  The  Miracle  of A  Supreme  Court  Decision  Upholding  Cuba
Conclusions   rather   uncomplimentary   to   democracy   flow
from   the  Supreme  Court's   decision   in  the  Cuba  sugar   case.
How  much  more  wisely  men  can  act  when   they  are  not  sub-
ject  to  the  ignorant  passions  of  the  majority   and  when  they
are  supported   by  a  great   tradition,  that   of   the   law!     It   is
something  of  which  we  can  be  proud  that,  in  the  midst  of  the
mania  which  has  seized  this  country  on  the  subject  of  Castro,
the  Supreme   Court   should   rule   8-to-l   in  Cuba's   favor  and
against   U.S.   investors  he   expropriated.     No   elected    official
would  dare  hand   down  such  a  judgment.
There  could  hardly  have  been  a  more  unequal  contest.    On
one  side,  filing  briefs  amicus  on  behalf  of  the  U.S.  sugar  in-
terests  involved,  were  some  of  the  stuffiest  and  most  expensive
leaders  of  our  bar.    On  the  other  side  was  the  firm  of  Rabin-
owitz  &  Boudin,  a  team  famous  for  its  civil  liberties  work.
Et  Tu,  Mr.  Justice  Harlan?
The   lower   courts   had   upheld   the   claim   of   expropriated
U.S.  sugar  interests  to  $175,000  in  Cuban   sugar  receipts  on
deposit   in  New   York   banks.    Those  judges   ruled   that  our
courts  have  a  right  to  treat  foreign  expropriation  decrees  as
invalid  "if  in  violation  of  international  law."     The   Supreme
Court  was  asked  to  uphold  these  rulings  by  the  big  guns  of
the  corporate   bar,  concerned  with  oil,  sugar  and  other  clients
who  fear  expropriation  elsewhere.     It  must   have  been   pain-
ful  to  them  to  lose  8-to-l   (only  Mr.  Justice  White  took  their
point  of  view)  and  to  have  the  opinion  written  by  Mr.  Justice
Harlan,  a  Wall  Street  corporation  lawyer  before  his  elevation
to  the  bench.  Even  Holmes  could  not  have  been  more  Olym-
pian  in  his  detachment   an'd-  insight   (see   box  below).
Another   marvel   occurred   during   argument.     The   No.   2
man   of   the   Justice   Department,   Deputy   Attorney   General
Katzenbach  appeared  to  ask  that  the  lower  courts  be  reversed,
Cuban   law  upheld   and   the   act  of   state   doctrine   reaffirmed.
This  ancient  Anglo-American  doctrine  holds  that  the  courts
of  one  country  cannot  pass  on  the  validity  of  the  public   acts
a   foreign   government  takes  on  its  own   territory.    This  was
sound  law  but  risky  politics,  and  Attorney  General   Kennedy
deserves  credit  for   it.
A  Victory   for  Political  Freedom
The  Emergency   Civil  Liberties  Committee  and  their
counsel,   Leonard   Boudin,   deserve   applause   for   their
successful   defense   of   three   students   at   Indiana   Uni-
versity   arrested   under  a  1951  State   law  "to  extermi-
nate   Communism  and   Communists   and   any   and   all
teachings  of  the  same"—the  barbarous  language  is  that
of   the   statute.     Judge   Nat   U.   Hill   of   the   Monroe
County   Circuit   Court   held   the   law    unconstitutional
under   the   Supreme   Court's   1956   decision   voiding   a
similar  Pennsylvania  statute  in  the  Steve  Nelson  case.
The   students   were   members  of   the   Young    Socialist
Alliance,  a  Trotzkyist  group.
To  jettison  this  common  sense  rule  in  order  to  satisfy   the
anti-Castro  passions  of  the  moment  would  be  to  invite  trouble.
Only  recently  the  U.S.   itself  argued  the  act  of  state   doctrine
when  Swiss  courts  tried  to  interfere  with  our  seizure  of   the
Nazi-tainted  I.  G.  Farben's   American  assets  during  the  war.
Expropriations   for   one   reason   or   another    are   a   common
feature  of  the  international  landscape,  by  no  means  confined
to  Communist   or  even  colonial  countries.    Our  courts  in  the
past  have  upheld  the  doctrine  and  refused  to  interfere   when
private  suits  were  brought   in  past  years  to  seize  Mexican   and
later  Russian  Soviet  assets  in  this  country  as  compensation   for
property   expropriated.
The  Justice  Department   argued  that  decisions  by  American
courts  "striking  down  foreign   official   acts  of  state  which  im-
pair  American  property  interests  will  probably  not  be  viewed
abroad   as  dispassionate  applications   of   neutral   international
law   principles"   but   rather   as   "reflecting   merely    parochial
American   views   partisan   to   American   national   interests."
It  said  the  way  to  deal  with  expropriations  was  by  diplomacy.
It  cited  successful  negotiations  with  Mexico  over   seized   U.S.
agrarian  and  later oil  properties.    It  pointed  to  the  settlements
reached   with   Yugoslavia,  Rumania,  Bulgaria   and  Poland  on
their  post  World  War  II  property  seizures  and  it  said  similar
negotiations  with  Cuba   "may  prove  possible  in  the  course  of
time."     A  major  obstacle   is  the   State  Department's    fear  of
practicing  the  diplomacy the  Justice  Department   advocates.
A  Supreme  Court  Decision  Which Views The World With Olympian  Detachment
'There  are  few  if  any  issues   of  international law  today
on  which  opinion  seems  to  be  so  divided  as  the  limitation
on  a  State's  power  to  expropriate  the  property  of   aliens.
.  .  .  Communist countries,  although  they  have  in  fact  pro-
vided   a   degree   of   compensation  after   diplomatic  efforts,
commonly  recognize  no  obligation on  the  part  of  the  taking
country.    Certain  representatives  of  the  newly independent
and    underdeveloped  countries    have    questioned   whether
rules  of  state  responsibility toward  aliens  can  bind  nations
that  have  not  consented  to  them  and  it  is  argued  that  the
traditionally  articulated  standards  governing  expropriation
of  property  reflect   'imperialist'  interests  and  are  inappro-
priate   to   the  circumstances  of   emergent   states.
"The  disagreement as  to  relevant international law stand-
ards   reflects  an   even   more  basic   divergence  between  the
national  interests  of  capital  importing  and  capital  export-
ing  nations  and  between  the  social  ideologies  of  those  coun-
tries  that  favor  state  control  of   the   means  of  production
and  those   that   adhere  to  a  free  enterprise  system.     It   is
difficult   to  imagine  the  courts  of   this  country  embarking
on  adjudication  in  an  area  which  touches  more  sensitively
the  practical  and  ideological  goals   of  the  various  members
of  the  community  of  nations.  .  .  .
''Against   the   force   of   such  considerations,  we   find   re-
spondents'   countervailing   arguments   quite   unpersuasive.
Their  basic  contention is  that  U.S.  courts  could  make  a  sig-
nificant  contribution  to  the  growth of  international  law.  .  .  .
But   given   the    fluidity    of   present   world   conditions,   the
effectiveness   of   such   a   patchwork  approach   towards   the
formulation  of  an  acceptable  body  of   law  concerning  state
responsibility  for  expropriations is,  to  say  the  least  highly
conjectural.     Moreover   it   rests   upon   the   sanguine   pre-
supposition  that  the  decisions  of  the  courts  of  the  world's
major  capital  exporting  country  and  principal  exponent  of
the  free  enterprise  system  would  be  accepted  as  disinter-
ested  expressions  of  sound  legal   principles  by  those  adher-
ing  to  widely   different   ideologies."
—Mr.  Justice  Harlan's  decision  in  the  Cuban  sugar   case.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  6,1964
Behind  Latin  America's  Blind  Oligarchies  Too  Often  Stands  Our  Own
(Continued   from   Page One)
nesia.     As  long   as  it  was  somebody   else's  colonialism,   we
were  all  against  it.    But  in  Cuba  when  Castro  dared   touch
the  properties  of   United   Fruit   and   Standard  Oil,  we   rang
down  an  iron  curtain  hard.    That's  something   else  we  dare
not  think   about.
Fulbright's  Bravest   "Unthinkable"
The   closest   Fulbright   comes   to  the   really   "unthinkable"
is  his  recognition  that   the  character  of  the  Latin  American
oligarchies  makes  it  unlikely  that  social  reform  there  can  be
achieved  peacefully.    But  even  he  does  not  venture  to  say
that  behind  the  local  oligarchies  stand  powerful  private  North
American   interests   strong   enough   to   frustrate   even   liberal
U.S.  policies  as  they  did  recently when  they  drove  Juan  Bosch
out  of  the  Dominican  Republic,  its  first  elected  President  in
a  generation,  a  man  who  was  both  a  reformer  and  a  demo-
crat.    The  sugar  and  oil  companies  said  he  had  to  go,  and
he  went.
Fulbright  wisely asks us  to  look  ahead  and  decide  whether,
if  peaceful  reform   fails,  and  there  are  revolutions  elsewhere
in  Latin  America,  we  will  tolerate  or  support  them  if  they
are ' not   Commmunist  but   follow   the   Mexican   or   Nasserite
pattern.    He  did  not  mention  our  bitter  hostility  to  Mexican
agrarian  reform,  or  the  Dulles   veto  on   Aswan  that  nearly
drove  Nasser   into  the   Soviet   camp.     Castro,  too,  tried  to
follow   an   independent  or   Titoist   course,   but   we  wouldn't
let  him.    What  needs  even  more  to  be  said  at  this  moment
is  that  our  Latin  policy  is turning in  the  other  direction. With
serious  trouble  ahead  in  Brazil  and  Chile,  we  are   dropping
hints  that  we  are  not  as  opposed   as  Kennedy  was  to  military
dictatorships.    We  preach  social  reform,  but  in  a  showdown
prefer  the  bayonet.    That  way  lies  temporary  relief  and  ulti-
mate  disaster.    This,  too, needs  to  be  thought   about  before
we  find  ourselves,  rather  than  Castro,  isolated  in  this  hemi-
sphere.
3.  China.    Here  Fulbright  makes  China's  abandonment  of
Formosa  the  condition of  better  relations.    This  is  one  of  the
most   pernicious   "unthinkables"  of  U.S. policy.    When  we
deal  with  a  subject   on  which  both  sides  in  the  China   civil
Who's   Snowing  Whom?
"Gen  Khanh  is  developing  a  plan  for  national  mobil-
ization  of   all   personnel   and  resources   in   South   Viet-
nam.   .   .   .   We  will   provide   the  necessary  financial
assistance.  .  .  .  About  $50,000,000  will  be  added  to  our
foreign  aid  programs  as  a  result."
—Secretary  McNamara  on NBC-TV  "Sunday"  Mar.  29.
"Khanh's    bold-sounding    proposal    for    a    'national
mobilization' ...  so  far  has  produced  no results  except
confusion  among  government  officials  and  panic  among
Saigon's  non-mobilized youth.  .  .  .
" The    Vietnamese   national    mobilization   plan   has
been   announced   in  Washington   and  written   about   in
Saigon,'  said  one  source  close  to  the  Vietnamese gov-
ernment,  'but  that's   about  all  that  has  happened.  .  .  .'
" 'Washington  has  jumped  the  gun  on  this  mobiliza-
tion   idea,'  one  reliable  American  source   said.   'Wash-
ington   is  probably  seeking   American  popular  support
because  more  money  will  be  poured  in  here.    So  much
has  been  written  about  the  Vietnamese  not  being  with
the  war   effort   that  Washington   wanted  to   show   the
American  people  they  are'."
—New  York  Herald-Tribune   from  Saigon  same  day.
war  despite  all  their  other  violent  differences  are  agreed, i.e.
that  Formosa  is  part  of  China,  we  had  better  reconcile our-
selves  to  this  as  a  fact  of  life.    It  is  we  who  someday  will
have  to  renounce this  distant island  on  another  nation's  door-
step.
4.  Vietnam,   where  Fulbright  was  poorest.    Here  he   sees
the  picture  askew,  as  do  McNamara  and   Rusk.    The   truth
is  that  we  are  not  defending  South  Vietnam  from  an  inva-
sion.    We  are  continuing the  French  effort  to  impose  a  mili-
tary  dictatorship  and   foreign   control  on   a   people   with   an
ancient  sense  of  nationhood  and  a  deep  longing  in  modern
times  for  democratic government.     China's   desire  for   trade
with  the  West,  Ho's desire  for  trade  with  the  South  and  the
National   Liberation  Front's   program   for   a  democratic neu-
tralized   South  Vietnam  provide   the   elements   for   a  viable
settlement.    But  in  this  inflammable  area,  Morse,   Mansfield,
Bartlett,   Gruening,   Church   and   Ellender   have   been   more
ready  than  Fulbright  to  think  the  unthinkable.
You  Can  Still  Get  A  Copy  of  I.  F.  Stone's  Book,  "The  Haunted  Fifties,"   By  Using  the   Blank   Below
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly       5618  Nebraska  Ave^  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  .................................................................................——
Street    .................................................................................—
City   ............_...................~...Zone........_..State....................
4/6/64
For  this  additional  $5.35  please  send  a  copy  of  I.  F.
Stone's  "The Haunted   Fifties."
(To)   Name  .........................................................................—
Street    .........—.................._...............................................-••
City   ............_.........................Zone.......-....State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tea  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Second    Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.    Published  every  Monday  except  in  Auprust  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,
Washington.   D.   C.    An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;   Circulation   Manager,   Esther   M.  Stone.     Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED