I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964nov30.pdf

============================================================

Democracy  — The  One
  (<
Option"  We  Shy Away  From  in  Vietnam,  P.  3
The General  Who First  Launched  the  Idea  of  MLF Now  Predicts Its  Rejection  by  NATO
"Los  Angeles,  Nov.  21  —  Gen.  Lauris  Norstad,  former
commander   of   the   North   Atlantic   Treaty   Organization,
said  yesterday  the  U.S.  proposal  for  a  multilateral  nuclear
force  'has  succeeded  in  dividing  rather  than  unifying   the
member  nations  of  NATO.'    Norstad  told  a  news  confer-
ence  he  doubts  NATO  nations  will  ever  adopt  the  proposal.
'It  doesn't  appear  that  any  agreement  is  imminent,  and  an
impassioned   speech   at   a   conference   table   won't   alter
things,'  he  said.    'Gen.  de  Gaulle  will  not  agree  now,  later
or  ever,'  Norstad  continued.    'The  plan  has  not  been  ac-
cepted  by  Britain  either,  and  Germany  agreed  only  under
pressure'."  —Associated  Press  in  Washington Post, Nov.  22.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  40NOVEMBER  30,  1964
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
J.  Edgar  Hoover's  Novel  View  of  Racism
J.  Edgar  Hoover  turned  up  at  Gwen  Cafritz's  party  here  in
Washington  the  other  evening  and  found,  according  to  the
Washington  Star's  society  reporter  (Nov.  21)  that  he  couldn't
get  past  the  entrance  "as  he  drew  group  after  group  of  guests
expressing  admiration  for  his  outspoken  comments  during  an
unusual   three-hour  press  conference  with   women   reporters
earlier  this  week."   The  spontaneous  ovation  showed  that  be-
neath  the   cynical  surface   of  Washington   society  there  beats
a  warm  heart,  ready to  welcome the  dissenter  even  in  this  age
of   conformity.     Mr.   Hoover   told   the   admirers   thronging
around  him  that  he  was  surprised  at  the  reaction  from   the
country.    He  said  he  had  received  almost  400  telegrams,   "all
favorable  except  for  two or  three who  were critical or  hostile"
and  these  he  said  "were probably  from  racist groups  associated
with  Martin Luther  King."
Not  Even  Bull  Connor  or  Ross  Barnett
We  have  often  asked  why  Mr.  Hoover  did  not  speak  out
on  the  subject  of  racism.    We  are  encouraged  to  see  that  he
has  at  last  broached  the  subject,  though  from  a  novel  angle.
We  had  never  thought  of  Rev. King  or  the  organizations  asso-
ciated  with  him  as  racist,  though  we  suppose  that  in  a  sense
they  are.    Mr.   Hoover  obviously  considers  as  racist  any  or-
ganization  which  seeks  to  give  the  Negro  equality  with  the
white  man,  to  set  race  against  race  by  insisting  that  Southern
registrars  register  Negro  voters,  too,  and  generally  to  stir  up
the  Negro  against  white  supremacy.   This  has,  come  to  think
of  it,  long  been  the  South's  point  of  view  but  no   Southern
spokesman  has had  the  daring to  express  it  in  quite  so original
a  way.   It  never  occurred  to  Bull  Connor  to  assert  that  he  had
set  the  dogs  on  those  demonstrators  in  Birmingham  to  protect
the  city  from  racism.    Nor   has  Ross  Barnett  thought  of  de-
fending  the  burning  of  Negro  churches  in  Mississippi   as  a
means  of  safeguarding  the  State  from   racist  agitation.     To
call  Martin  Luther  King  "the  most  notorious  liar  in  the  coun-
try"  may  have  seemed  a  little  extreme  even  to  members  of
the  White  Citizens'  Councils.    But  to  come  up  with  the  idea
that  NAACP,  CORE,  SNCC  and  Southern  Christian  Leader-
ship  Conference  can  be  termed   "racist"  organizations—that's
close  akin  to  genius.
This  observation  by  Mr.  Hoover  shows  the  wisdom  of  his
attitude  toward   press   conferences.     Though  Mr.   Hoover   is
constantly  writing  articles  on  various  favorite  menaces  (usually
red  or  pink)  in  the  Sunday supplements,  his  usual  practice  on
1  1 *
Three  Leading  Papers  on  J.  Edgar
"The    extensiveness   of  his  list  of  hates  and  the  in-
temperance   of   many   of   his   utterances   speak   poorly
for  the  clarity  of  his  judgment. ...  It  would  be  wise
to  let  the  mandatory provisions  of  the  Federal   retire-
ment  law  take  effect  on  Mr.  Hoover's  70th  birthday."
—New  York  Times, Nov. 20.
"Mr.    J.  Edgar  Hoover  hasn't  been  in  the  habit  of
holding  news  conferences,  and  his  performance  Wed-
nesday  suggests  it  may  have  been  just  as  well  for  his
reputation.   He managed ...  to  state  as  fact  that  'no
one'  dares  to  walk  in  New  York's  Central  Park  'even
in   the   daytime*—a   purported   fact   which   would   no
doubt  surprise  the  thousands  of  New  Yorkers  who  use
the  park  daily.  .  .  .  For the  holder  of  one of  the  most
sensitive   posts   in  the   government,  the   FBI   director
showed  a  cavalier  recklessness  with  fact  and  fancy."
—New  York  Herald-Tribune, Nov.  20.
"Unaccustomed  as  he  is  to  public  criticism,  J.  Edgar
Hoover  customarily  responds  to  its  occasional   expres-
sion  by  impugning  the  integrity,  virtue  or  patriotism
of  his  critics.  .  .  .  This  kind  of  talk,  if  it  came  from
any   other   bureau   chief   in   the   Federal   Government,
would  be  generally  recognized  as  insufferable   effron-
tery  on  the  part  of  a  public  servant."
—Washington  Post,  Nov.  21.
interviews  is  to  answer  prepared  written  questions  submitted
in  advance.    The  lucky  reporter  gets  the  answers  in  written
form  and  a  handshake.    In  4o  years  as  head  of  the  FBI,   Mr.
Hoover  had  never  before  held  a general  press  conference,   and
even  this  first  of  its kind  was restricted  to  women.    According
to   The   Washington   Post's  society   reporter,   Marie   McNair
(Nov.   21)  Mr.  Hoover   explained   this  at  the  Cafritz   party.
"With  men  journalists,"  he  told  his  admirers,  "the   questions
are  loaded  and  the  reporters  are  trying  to  trip  you up.    How-
ever,  there  are  exceptions  to  this,  he  declared,  naming  half  a
dozen  newspapers  throughout  the  country  in which he  has  con-
fidence."    It  is  reassuring  to  learn  that  Mr.  Hoover  does  not
regard  the  entire  American  press  with  suspicion,  and  is  pre-
pared  to  grant  clearance  to  six  newspapers  at  least.    It  is  easy
to  imagine  what  the  run-of-the-mill   subversive   Washington
correspondent   (male)  would  have  done  at  a  press   conference
in  which  Mr.  Hoover  implied  that  Martin  Luther  King  was a
racist.     Some   slippery   fellow   might   even   have   asked   Mr.
Hoover  blandly  whether  he  was perhaps  thinking  of  arresting
the  Rev.  King  under  the  new  Civil  Rights  Act.
1   6
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  30,196t
Our  Liberal  Democrats  More  Timorous  About  Public  Control  Than  England's  Tories
Britain  Far  to  The  Left  of  U.S.  on  The  Crucial  Question  of  Steel
Britain   is  on   the  verge   of   nationalizing  its  private   steel
monopoly  for  the  second  time  in  little  more  than  a  decade.
We  have  not  begun  to  regulate  ours.    In  comparison  with  our
retarded  politics  even  the  British  Conservatives  look  like  left-
wing  radicals.   As long ago as  1951  they renounced  the  idea of
a  free  market  in  steel.    They  established  a  regulatory  commis-
sion,  the  Iron  and  Steel  Board,  with  authority  to  set maximum
prices   and  supervise  major  investments.   That's  a  good   bit
further   than  many  of  our  liberal  Democrats  would   be  pre-
pared   to  go  even  now.     The   steel   debate  in  the  House  of
Commons  November  9  showed   that  the  Conservatives  have
moved  still  further  left.    The  main  question  for  many was  no
longer  whether  to  nationalize  steel  but  by  how  much.
The  London   Economist  framed  the  question   similarly  last
May  when  it  came  out  with  reservations  for  "[public]  owner-
ship  or  control  of  part  of  the  industry."    Even  the  steel  indus-
try  is  not  pressing  for  a  return  to  unregulated   competition.
Its  Iron  and  Steel  Federation  wrote  recently  that  "in   such  a
key  industry  as  steel,  the  public  has  a  right  to  know  whether
the  activities  of  the  companies  accord  with  the  public  interest,
and  to  ensure  that  they  do."    Our  steel  companies  won't  even
let  Congress  see  their  costs  of  production!    When  Kefauver's
Antitrust  Committee  tried  to  subpoena  the  figures  in  1962,  the
companies  simply  'refused.
Barrier  To  Full   Employment
The  need  for  some  form  of  government  control  over  steel
is  as  great  here  as  in  Britain.   There  the  main  economic  prob-
lem  is  a  trade  gap;  here  it  is  an  employment  gap.     Solutions
to  both  are  linked  with  the  price  of  steel  since  it  is  our  most
important  industrial  material.    The  high  price  of  steel  since
the  war  has  contributed  to  reduced  demand  and  increased  un-
employment  throughout  the  economy.    Prof.   Otto  Eckstein,
now  on  the  Council  of  Economic  Advisers and  no  great  eco-
nomic  radical,  told  the  Kefauver  committee  in   1959  that  at
least  50%   of  the  wholesale  price  inflation  in  the  1950's  was
due  to  the  steel  companies  raising  prices  when  they  should
have  been  lowering  them.    The  committee  calculated  that  a
price  raise  in   1957   had  added  $540  million  to  the   cost  of
Germany's   Foremost  Physicist  Against  MLF
"The   relationship  of  the  MLF  to  Germany  and  the
German  question  is  a  painful  problem  for   international
politics.     The  Federal   Republic  is  the   only   European
country   that   gives  the   impression   of   really   wanting
the  MLF.   To  the  foreign  observer  there  must  appear
a  good  reason  for  this.  .  .  .  The  MLF seems  to  be  the
only   way  for  the   Federal   Republic  to   come   close  to
control   over  nuclear  weapons.    At  the  same  time  the
Federal  Republic is  the  only  country  in  Central  Europe
that   publicly   raises   territorial   claims.    The  Federal
Republic  gives  assurances  in  full  sincerity  that  it  will
seek  to  achieve  those  aims  peacefully.    It  is  not  in our
power  to  eliminate  mistrust  in  our  sincerity.    In  these
circumstances,   the   entire    world,   including   even   the
West,  must  react  nervously   to  Germany's   approaching
the  status  of  a  thermonuclear   power."
—C.  F.  van  Weizsacker,  the  Reich's   leading  nuclear
physicist   in  Die  Zeit   (Hamburg)    Nov.  20.
steel  products  and  this  was  just  one  of  three  price  increases
within  a year.   Although  Congress  has  investigated  steel  prices
in  no  less  than  seven  out  of   the* last  fifteen   years,  so  far   no
member  has  been  bold  enough  to  offer   a  legislative  remedy.
Steer  pricing  is  too  important  to  be  left  to  the  vagaries of
presidential   politics.     Kennedy   blocked   an   across-the-board
price  rise  in   1962  but  then  permitted  piecemeal  increases  on
the  sly.   The  logical  place  to  tackle  this  problem  is within  the
context   of   Sen.  dark's  Planning-For-Full-Employment   Bill.
The   original  Full  Employment  Bill  of   1945,   before  it  was
emasculated,  authorized  the   regulation  of   monopoly   prices.
Sen.  Clark  should  go  at  least  as  far  in  his  bill.    It  would  be
gentle  treatment  for  his  steel  mogul  constituents  in  Pennsyl-
vania  when   compared   with  the   position  taken   by  Britain's
Conservative  Prime  Minister  Harold   Macmillan  in  his  book,
"The   Middle   Way".     "The   Socialist  remedy  should  be  ac-
cepted,"  he  wrote,  "where  the  general  welfare of  the  economy
requires  that  certain  basic  industries  and  services  need  now  to
be  conducted  in  the  light  of  broader  social considerations than
the  profit   motive."
Erich  Fromm Believes  U.S.  Drive  for  MLF Played  Part  in Khrushchev's  Downfall
"Khrushchev's  fall  has  been  explained  as  a  result  of  his
permitting   the   rift   with   China   to   become   unbridgeable.
The  fact,  however,  which  is  hardly  mentioned  in  the  press,
is  that  Khrushchev's failure  can  be  understood  only  if   we
consider   his  total   political   strategy   and  our  part  in   con-
tributing  to  his  failure.   His  aim  was  accommodation  with
the  United  States,  thus  securing   his  Western  flank  while
facing  a  hostile  China.  .  .  .  Khrushchev  was  afraid  of  the
spread  of  nuclear  weapons,  especially  among  his  two  most
dangerous   opponents—China   and   West   Germany.    There
are  good  reasons  to  assume  that  his  concept  of  an  accom-
modation  with  the  United  States  included  the  aim  to  pre-
vent   (perhaps   through   the   UN)    the   Chinese   and   West
Germans  from  obtaining   nuclear  weapons.  .  .  .
"Khrushchev    did   his    best    to   achieve   this    aim.    He
stopped  technical  aid  for  the  Chinese  nuclear  development.
He  made  the  important concessions  to  the  United  States  of
dropping  his  plan  for  a  peace  treaty   with  East  Germany
—Erich  Fromm,  author  of  "May  Man  Prevail",  in
and  political   neutralization  of  East  Berlin.  .  .  .
"But  when  we  had  gotten  this  concession  we  went  ahead
to  threaten  him  in  a  more  vital  area:  the  multilateral  force
which  is  likely  to  give   West   Germany  a  de  facto  posses-
sion  of  nuclear   weapons,   a  Germany  which  has  not  relin-
quished  its  claims  to  the  pre-war  boundaries  in  the  east.
Thus  Khrushchev's  policy  has  led  to  a  situation  where  the
Soviet  Union  is  threatened  on  both  flanks—a  political  fail-
ure  which  would  remove   any  leading  statesman   from   his
position  in  any  country. ...
"If   the   United   States  goes  on  with  its   plans   for   the
MLF,  the   new   leaders   will   be  forced   to   seek   an  accom-
modation  with  China,  and  to  follow  an  aggressive   policy,
or  they   will  be  replaced   by  a  still   tougher   group.     The
next  months  may  offer  an  opportunity  of  avoiding  this  by
not  going   ahead  with  the  MLF.   Khrushchev's  fall  should
be  a  lesson  showing   where  further  'victories'  in   the   cold
war  will  lead."
a  letter   to  the  Wash.  Post,  Nov.  19.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  30, 1964
Could  We  Find  A  More Honorable  Way  Out  Than  to  Give  The  Vietnamese  Free  Choice?
Gen.  Taylor  and  His  Chief  Aides  Make Some Revealing Admissions in  Saigon
On  the  eve  of  Gen.  Maxwell  Taylor's  return  from   Saigon
and  possible new  decisions on  Vietnam, much  can  be  learned
from   a  close  and  careful  reading  of  the  interview  Life   pub-
lished  Nov.  27  with  him  and  the  other  heads  of  U.S.  mission
in  that  country.    A  good  place  to  begin  is  with  an  admission
by  Deputy  Ambassador U.  Alexis  Johnson.    "This  country,"
he  said,  "has  never  had  any  experience  at  government.   Dur-
ing  the  whole  period  of  their  colonial  administration, no  in-
dependent   political   activity   was  permitted.    This  was   also
true,  from   1954  to   1963,   during  the  Diem   period."     This
admits  that  our  domination like  the  French  was undemocratic.
The   "freedom"   we  claimed  to  be  protecting   was  cold  war
rhetoric,  not  the   reality  of  self-government.
Where  We  Look   Totalitarian
To   the  peasants,  Barry  Zorthian  of   USIA   admitted,   the
totalitarian  side  seemed  to  be ours, not  the  Vietcong's.    When
he  was  asked  about  the   motivation  on   the   Vietcong   side,
Zorthian  replied  that  "only  a  small  portion"  were  "hard-core
Communist",  that  "many  went  over  to  the  other  side  because
of  the  Diem  government,  because  of  their  reaction  to  what
they  felt  were  totalitarian  methods  under  the  Diem  govern-
ment.    They  have  not  perhaps  been  persuaded  sufficiently   to
come back as yet. ..."   Perhaps a  real  offer  of  freedom  would
persuade  them  to  "come   back."
In  the  urban  areas,  Zorthian  went  on,   "the   appeal   of  a
democratic  form  of  government  is  a  very  strong   one"   and
"part  of  the  political  unrest"  is  due  to  the  fact  that  for   the
first  time  "educated  Vietnamese"  have  a  chance  to   "express
themselves  politically."    He   did   not  add  that   from   all  ac-
count  what  they  are  trying  to  express  is  their dissatisfaction
with  a civilian  government  of  dodoes  hand-picked by  the  mili-
tary  and  completely under  their  thumb.    It  is  a  fraud,  which
only  sharpens desire  for  the  real  thing.
If   the  Communist hard  core  of  the  Vietcong  is  small,  if
the  desire  for   free  government  is  widespread,  why  don't  we
Bulletin  Board   .
To  Norman  Thomas,  homage  on  his  80th  birthday:
The  main-stream  of  American  life  would  have  been  a
lot  more  stagnant  but for  his  influence.    We  hope  he  is
with  us  for  many   more  years  to  come,  an  inspiration
by  his  sense  of  humor,  his  magnanimity  and  his  never
flagging concern  for  human   suffering  everywhere  .  .  .
To  readers:   Many  thanks  for  the  flood  of  cards  and
notes  on  our  recent  ear  operation,  which  forced  us  un-
fortunately  to  skip  an  issue. ...  To  indignant  Cali-
fornians:  Our  election  editorial  had  to  be  written  be-
fore  returns  from  their  state  later  showed  the  shame-
ful   victory  of  racism  in  their  housing  referendum.
try  giving  South  Vietnam  the  freedom  for  which  we  claim  to
be   fighting?   If  the  majority  want  self-government,  isn't  the
satisfaction  of  that  desire  the  one  way  to  win  the  majority
from  hard-core Communist leadership  and  to  establish  a  stable
regime?   These  questions  were  not  put  by Life.     But  they  are
there,  between  the  lines.    This  is the  one  "option"  we  do  not
discuss.    The  "options"  we  prefer  to  talk  about  are  forms  of
.  widening  the   war.
When  Gen.  Taylor  was asked  about these  military "options"
he  gave  the  answer  of  an  honest  and  troubled  man.    "These
possibilities  do  exist,"  he  said,  "but  they  have  their  pros  and
cons.     /   would   add   again   that   military  action  outside  the
country,  just  as  pure  military  action  inside  the  country,  will
not   win.     (Our   italics).    We  must  restore  a  viable  society
within  these provinces of  South  Vietnam."    The  real  "crunch"
is  that  a viable society means a  democratic  society and  a  demo-
cratic  society  will  vote  for  peace  and  possibly  a  coalition  gov-
ernment  of  national  reconciliation.   This  is  why  we  fear   a
democratic  solution,  and  talk  of  bombing  Hanoi  instead.   But
isn't  it  worth  the  risk?    Why   not  demonstrate  our  sincerity
about  self-government,  challenge   the  other   side  to   interna-
tionally  supervised  elections,  and  allow  the  Vietnamese a  fn.c
choice?    Could  we  find  a  more  honorable  way  out?
Screening  Communist  Mail Propaganda  from  Abroad  Held  Contrary  to  First  Amendment
"The  Postmaster  General   and  the  Customs  Bureau  main-
tain  11  screening  posts  in  the  U.S.   for  the  interception  of
'communist   political    propaganda.'  .  .  .  The  addressee   is
mailed   POD   Form    2153-X   identifying    the   mail   and   ad-
vising   him  that  it  will  be  destroyed  unless  he  signifies  a
desire  to  receive  it.  ...     In  the  instant  case  plaintiff  .  .  .
refused  to  sign  the  card  and  instead  filed  this  suit.    There-
after  the  General  Counsel  of  the  Post  Office  notified   plain-
tiff  that  the  filing  of  this  suit  constituted  an  expression  of
a  desire  to  receive   [all   such]  mail. ...  In  short,  contrary
to  plaintiff's  wishes,  his  name  was  placed  on  a  list  of   peo-
ple  desiring   to  receive   'communist  political  propaganda.'
"Initially,  defendants  argue  that  this  suit  has  been   ren-
dered   moot   by  the   aforementioned   action   of   the   General
Counsel.  .  .  .  This  same  defense  was  raised,  successfully,  in
Lament  v.  Postmaster  General,   229  F.   Supp.   913   (1964).
We  cannot   agree   with   that  distinguished   court. ...  To
render  this  case   moot ...  is  to  approve   a  device   which
would  enable  defendants  to  prevent  any  potential  recipient
of  mail  originating  abroad  from  ever  testing  constitutional-
ity.  .  .  .  Furthermore,   we  think   contrary  to  the  court  in
Lamont  that  plaintiff  may  also  assert  the  rights  of   third
parties.   .  .  .  Persons  interested  in  receiving  political    mat-
ter  from   abroad   may  be  deterred  from   bringing  suit  .  .  .
lest  this  be  construed  as  expression  of  a  desire  to   receive
'communist   political   propaganda.'    The  social   stigma  and
economic  injury  they  may  suffer   is  very   real.    We  do  not
think  a  person  should  be  made  to  suffer  social   disapproba-
tion  in  order  to  assert  his  constitutional  rights.  .  .  .
"Similar  lists  under  earlier  non-statutory  screening  pro-
grams  were  routinely  turned  over  to  the  House   Committee
on  Un-American   Activities.  .  .  .  Assurances  by  defendant
that  these  practices  have  been  discontinued  cannot  be   rea-
sonably  expected  to  mitigate  a  person's  reluctance  to  have
his  name  associated  with  'communist  political   propaganda.'
There  are  no  similar  assurances  that  this  information   will
not  be  made  available  in  the  future  in  view  of  the  lack  of
a  statutory   requirement   that   [this]   information   .  .  .  re-
main  confidential.   .  .  .
"The   purpose   of   the   new  legislation   was   primarily   fo
control,  restrict  and  prevent  the  delivery   of  matter  found
to   be   communist    propaganda,   an   infringement   upon   the
dissemination  of  ideas  and  therefore  a  clear  and  direct  in-
vasion  of  First   Amendment  territory.   .  .  .  We  are  com-
pelled  to  declare  the  statute  unconstitutional  on  its   face."
—Ninth  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals,  Nov.  17.
I  6   t
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  30,1964
Endless  Debates  on  Liturgy  But  The  Question  of  Nuclear  Weapons  Shelved  in  48  Hours
The  Ecumenical  Council  as the  "20th  Congress"  of  Roman  Catholicism
The   Ecumenical  Council,  which  has  just  closed   its  third
session  in  Rome,  is  in  a  sense  the  "20th  Congress"  of  Roman
Catholicism.    Khrushchev,  who  opened   the  windows  at  the
20th  Congress  and  let  in  a  little  fresh   air  on  the  stagnant
atmosphere  of  Stalinism,  resembled  in  some  ways  Pope  John
XXIII,  who  within  three  months  of  ascending  the  throne  of
St.  Peter,  decided  to  call  the  first  Ecumenical  Council  since
1870,  and  bring the  Church  "up  to  date."    Both  were  men of
the  people,  almost  peasant  types,  with  a  sense  of  humor  and
good  sense  often  absent  in  their bureaucracies.
We  deal  here with  two  dogmatic  world  systems,  which  owe
their  ultimate  origin  to  the  Jewish  passion  for  social  justice
(one  in  Jesus,  the  other  in  Marx).    Both  have  congealed  into
vast   power   structures,  claiming  infallibility  through   revela-
tion.    Both  have  the  intrinsic intolerance  of  systems  claiming
to  possess  the  one  and  only  truth.    Both  are  having  slowly  to
adjust  to  man's  instinctive desire  for  intellectual  freedom.
A  Sharp  Contrast  With  Its  Predecessor
Compared  to  the  last  Council  in  1870  and  to  Pius  XI  who
presided  over  it,  the  new  Council  shows  a  fresh  wind  blowing
through  the  ancient  structure.    Pius  XI,   in  his  reign  of  32
years,  set himself  like a  Canute  against  all  the  tides  of  modern-
ity.    The  achievement  of  his  Council  was  an  exercise  in  ana-
chronism,   the   promulgation    of    Papal    Infallibility.     The
sharpest   contrast   is  on  religious  liberty,   which  Pius  XI   at-
tacked  along  with  all  other  forms of  liberalism in  his  notorious
Syllabus  of  Errors.   In  this  Council  only  a  last-minute  maneu-
ver  by  the  Roman  Curia,  abetted  by  Pope  Paul,  who  is  no
liberal,   blocked   a  majority   declaration  for   religious   liberty.
That,   and  a  new  majority   declaration  clearing  the   Jews  of
guilt  for  the  Crucifixion,  seem  certain  of  adoption  at  the  next
session.     The   latter  will  help   shut   off   a  poisonous   source
of  anti-Semitism.
Compared  with  the  needs of  the  modern  world,  the  Church's
progress  is  snail-paced.    The  progressives  failed  to  get  a  new
stand  on  birth  control,  and  asked  in  vain  for  the  Church  to
recognize   the   right   of   conscientious   objection   in   wartime.
Most  disappointing  was  the  debate  on  nuclear  weapons,  when
Pius  XII's  Fear  of  Hitler
The  latest   volume  of   German   Foreign   Office   docu-
ments   simultaneously   released  by  the  State   Depart-
ment   and   the   British   Foreign    Office   covers   the   6
months  from   Hitler's  attack  on  Russia  to  the  end  of
1941.    One  document  (No.   309)   made  headlines.    In  it
the  German   Embassy  in  Rome  reported,  "In  his  heart,
one  is  assured  time  and  again,  Pius  XII  stands  on  the
side  of  the  Axis  powers."    The  news  stories  did  not
mention  that  the  same  report  added,  however,  that  the
Pope  was  unwilling   publicly   to  take  a  stand  against
Russia  because  he  feared  "that  after  the  defeat  of   Bol-
shevism,  the  Catholic  Church,  and  indeed  all  Christian-
ity,   would,  so  to  speak,  go  from  the  frying  pan  into
the   fire."   The  Italian  Ambassador  in  Document   No.
330  said  Pius  XII  complained  that  "Germany  was  the
first  in  making  every  effort   to  get  along  with  Bolshe-
vism,  not  the   Holy   See,"    a  reference   to  the   Hitler-
Stalin  pact.  "If  I  should  talk  of  Bolshevism,"  the  Pope
asked  him,  "should  I  then  say  nothing  about  Nazism?"
The   Pope  deplored   "that   parody   of   Our  Father"  in
which  German  children  were  taught  to  "thank  Hitler
for  their  daily  bread"  and  said  he  had  been  "told  long
ago"   that  if  Hitler  won,   he  would  "do  away  with  the
Vatican,  because  there  was  no  place  for  it  in  the  new
European  order."
Bishop  Hannan   of   Washington   pleaded   against  their   con-
demnation,  especially when  "small" and  "clean."   An Oriental
Patriarch,  Maximos  IV,  in  opposing   use  of  the  atom   bomb,
asked  the   Council   to  imitate  St.  Ambrose,  who  barred   the
Emperor  Theodosius  from  his  Cathedral  for  having  ordered
the   massacre  of   an   innocent   population.     The   Council  re-
sisted  such  romantic  pleas.    Le  Monde's   correspondent  noted
(Nov.   12)  that  after  debating  minor  liturgical  questions  end-
.   lessly the  Council  disposed  in  less  than  48  hours  "of  this  most
agonizing  question  for  the  whole  of  mankind"—by  postponing
action.    Those  prelates  of  the  Church  who  believe  even  these
horrible  weapons  may  be  used  in  a  "just  war"  are  not  how-
ever  alone.    Except  for  a  handful  of  pure  pacifists,  this  is  a
doctrine  on  which  all  mankind,  from  Rome  to  Peking,  seems
to  be  achieving  a  unique  and  miraculous  near-unanimity.
We'll  Send A  Free Sample  Copy Of this  Issue To  Friends  If  You  Send Stamped  Self-Addressed  Envelopes
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Naine  ........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone........
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)    Name   ....................................................
Street    ..............................................................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
11/30/64
/ F  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  in
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.W.,    Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.:     $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED