I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964apr20.pdf

============================================================

Fulbright  on  The  Cost  of  the  Cold  War,  P.  2
Prophetic  Warning  From  One  of  the  Victims  in  Brazil's  Reign  of  Terror
"This  [industrial] development  of  which  we  are  so  proud
has  brought  about  no  change  at  all  in  the  living  conditions
of    three-fourths   of   the   country's   population.     Its   main
feature  has  been  a  growing  concentration  of  income,  both
socially  and geographically. .  .  . The  majority  of  the Brazil-
ian  population  has  reaped  no  benefit.  .  .  .  Economic devel-
opment  has  produced  social  results  of  an  extremely  nega-
tive  character.     Because  of  the  anachronistic  structure  of
Brazilian  agriculture, it  has  led  in  many  regions  to  a  rela-
tive  increase in  the  rent  from  land,  thus  rewarding parisitic
groups.    Similarly ...  a  variety of  subsidies—in  the name
of  development—have  very  often  put  a  premium  on  invest-
ments  which  .  .  .  fostered  a  still  greater  concentration  of
income  in  the  hands  of  privileged groups.  .  .  .
"Over   half   of   the   Brazilian  population  gets  its  living
from  the  land.   If  this  sector  maintains its  present rigidity,
every  peasant  movement will  tend  rapidly  to  adopt  revolu-
tionary  techniques of  the  Marxist-Leninist  type.  .  .  .  The
imposition  of  a  right-wing  dictatorship,  making  the  whole
political  structure  rigid,  would  also  create  favorable  condi-
tion^   for   an   effective   revolution   of   the   Marxist-Leninist
type.  ,  .  .
"If  we  are  to  avoid  dictatorial  regimes,  whether  of  a  so-
cial  class  or  ideological  group  or  rigid  party  machine,  we
must   (a)   prevent  all  forms  of  retrogression  in  our  social
and  political  systems  and  (b)  create  conditions  for  fast  and
effective  change  in  the  country's  archaic  agrarian structure.
.  .  . Political retrogression  will  not come haphazardly, but  as
a   reflection  of  panic  among  some  privileged  groups.  .  .  .
Where  structures are  rigid,  preventing  gradual adjustment,
these  pressures  may  create  cataclysmic situations,  leading
to  emergency  solutions  or  preventive  coups."
—Celso  Furtado,  then  Minister   of  Economic  Planning   un-
der  Goulart, now  banned  from  politics  by  the  military,  writ-
ing  in  Foreign  Affairs,  April  1963.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  16APRIL  20,  1964
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
A  New   Alianza   — for  Reaction  and   Revolution
The  attitude  of  the  American   government  on  Brazil  is  a
tragedy.  In  the  gigantic  struggle  now  underway  between  Mos-
cow  and  Peking  for  leadership of  the  revolutionary movement
in  the  colonial  world,  our  government's   blind  folly  aids  the
Chinese.    As  Maurice  Duverger  wrote  in  an  article  "End  of
'Kennedyism'?"   in  Le   Monde   April   10,   the   overthrow  of
Goulart  helps  one  understand  "why  Marx  wrote  a century ago
that  ruling  classes  would   never   accept  without   violence   the
loss  of  their  privileges."     In  a  world  of  thermonuclear  weap-
ons,   peace   is  a   necessity  and   peaceful   reform   its   corollary.
Revolutionary  uprisings  in  Latin  America  will  poison  the  at-
mosphere  of   politics  at  home   and   abroad,   making   humane
policy  less  likely.    The  world   is  sick  of  hatred   and   killing,
whether  among  nations,  races  or  classes;  the  embers  have  bare-
ly   cooled   in  Auschwitz  and   Hiroshima.    Yet   now   we   have
made  the  dispossessed   in  Brazil  and  elsewhere  feel  that  their
misery   cannot  be  ended   without   bloodshed.     The   Kennedy
Administration,  for  all  its  failings,   at  least  gave  them   some
hope.    President  Johnson  had  best  stop  now  and  realize  that
he  is  extinguishing  it.
Even  A  Token  Land  Reform
The  nature  of  the  new  Brazilian  regime  was  made  unmis-
takable  by  the  first  act  of  its  military chief,  Gen.  Branco.  This
was  to  cancel  Goulart's   land   reform   decree.     It  would   have
affected  only  some  3 percent  of  Brazil's privately  owned  land.
It  was  based   (London   Financial  Times,  April  2)   on  an  un-
used  law  22  years old  which  allowed  the  government  to  requi-
sition  land  up  to  6  miles  on  either  side  of  all  roads,  railways
and  canals.    It  was  the  only  legal  device  available to  Goulart.
It  was not  more  than  a  token  gesture  in  a  country where  60%
of  the  people  depend  on  farming  for  their  livelihood  but  S%
of   the  landowners  own    l°>
c
fo    of   the   tilled   land.    l
:
or  years
Scholar-Statesman  at  Work
Mr.   John   SCALI   (ABC  State  Dept  Corr):  Do   you
think  that  what  happened  in  Brazil  advanced the  cause
of  democracy  in  the  Western  Hemisphere?
Mr.  McGeorge  BUNDY  (Spec.  Asst.  to  the  President
for   International   Security  Affairs):   Yes,  I  do.
—On ABC-TV's  Issues  and Answers, April  5.
we  have   been   preaching  agrarian  reform  to  Latin  America.
Now  we  support  a  military regime  which  has  blocked  its first
beginnings  in  Brazil.    Last  July  when  the  Brazilian  Chamber
of   Deputies  was  within  reach   of   an   agreement   on   broader
measures   of   land   reform,   two   extreme   right   wing   parties
blocked   it.    The   leaders  of  those  parties,  Governor   Lacerda
of  Guanabara  and  Gov.  de  Barros  of  Sao Paulo  were  the chief
civilian  architects  of  the  anti-Goulart  uprising   and  are  now
the  favorites  of  U.S.  policy.    The  Roman  Catholic  Bishops  of
Brazil  issued  a  collective  statement  last  July  in  favor  of  agrar-
ian  reform,  declaring  that  payment  in  bonds  rather  than  cash
would  not  be  a  violation  of  property  rights.    But   Goulart's
message  to  Congress  March  15  asking  a  constitutional   amend-
ment  authorizing  such  payment  was  among  the  excuses  for  the
military   take-over.
The  constitutional   reforms  Goulart  proposed  to  Congress
would  have  created  a  more  democratic  Brazil.    He  asked  that
the  literacy  test  on  the  right  to  vote  be  lifted  and  that  in  the
Army  the  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates  be  given  the
same  right  of  the  ballot  now  enjoyed  only  by  the  officers.  To-
day  Brazil  though  a  nation  of  close  to  80  millions  has  a  Con-
gress  elected  by  11  million.    The   privileged   were  especially
reluctant  to  see  the  vote  extended  to  the  lower  ranks  of  the
(Conlinued   on  Page    Fo//r)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  20,1964
A  Second  Great  Speech  by  Fulbright:  The  Cold  War  in  American   Life
"Too  Much  To  Pay  For  Life  in  a Honky-Tonk"
By  Senator  William  Fulbright *
Of  all  the  changes  wrought  in  American  life  by  the   cold
war,  the  most  important  by  far,  in  my  opinion,  has  been   the
massive   diversion  of  energy   and  resources  from  the  creative
pursuits  of  civilized  society  to  the  conduct  of  a  costly  and  in-
terminable   struggle   for   world   power.    The   result   has   been
accumulating   neglect   of  those  things  which  bring   happiness
and  beauty  and  fulfillment   into  our  lives.
The  cold  war  has  put  a premium  on  avoiding  innovation  at
home   because  new  program's  involve  controversy   as  well  as
expense  and  it  is  felt  that  we  cannot  afford   domestic  division
at  a  time  when  external  challenges  require  us  to  maintain  the
highest   possible   degree  of  national  unity.    This   is  the  price
that  we  have  been  paying  for  the  cold  war,  and  it  has  been  a
high  price   indeed.
The Consent of the Misgoverned
At  least  as  striking  as  the  inversion  of  priorities  which  the
cold  war  has  enforced   upon   American  life   is  the   readiness
with  which  the  American  people  have  consented  to  defer  pro-
grams  for  their welfare  and  happiness  in  favor  of  costly  mili-
tary  and  space  programs.    Indeed,  if  the  Congress   accurately
reflects  the  temper  of  the  country,  then  the  American  people
are  not  only  willing,  they  are  eager,  to  sacrifice  education  and
urban  renewal  and  public  health  programs—to  say nothing  of
foreign   aid—to  the  requirements  of   the  Armed   Forces   and
the   space   agency.     I  sometimes  suspect  that  in   its  zeal   for
armaments,  the  Congress  tends  to  overrepresent  those  of  our
citizens  who  are  extraordinarily  agitated  about  national  secur-
ity  and  vigorous  about  making  their  agitation  known.
Without   becoming   militarist   in   the   sense   of   committing
themselves   to   the   military  virtues  as  standards  of   personal
behavior,  the  American  people  have  nonetheless  come  to  place
great—and,  in  my  opinion,   excessive—faith   in  military  solu-
tions  to  political  problems.    We  are  permitting  the  vast  Mili-
tary  Establishment  largely  to  run  itself,  to  determine  its  own
needs,  and  to  tell  us  what  sacrifices  are  expected   of  us.
A  Malady  That  Outlived  McCarthy
"The  fears  and  passions  of   ideological   conflict   have
diverted   the   minds   and  energies  of   our   people   from
the  constructive  tasks  of  a  free  society  to  a  morbid  pre-
occupation   with  the  dangers  of  Communist   aggression
abroad   and   subversion   and  disloyalty   at   home.     The
problem  did  not  end  with  the  McCarthy  era  of  a  decade
ago  nor  is  it  confined  to  the  neurotic  fantasies  of  to-
day's   radical   right.    The   cold  war   malady   affects   a
much  broader  spectrum  of  American  society.    It  affects
millions  of  sensible  and  intelligent  citizens  whose   gen-
uine  concern  with.national  security  has  persuaded  them
that  the  prosecuation  of  the  cold  war  is  our  only  truly
essential  national    responsibility."
—Sen. Fulbright  at  the  U. of  North  Carolina,  Apr.  5.
'Abridged  from  an  address delivered  April  5  at  the  Univer-
sity  of  North  Carolina  1964  Symposium,  "Arms  and  the  Man:
National  Security  and  the  Aims  of  a  Free  Society."
The   abnegation   of   responsibility  by  the   Congress   in  this
field  is  strikingly  illustrated  by  its  debates  or,  more  accurately,
nondebates,  on  the  defense  budget.   When,  for  example,  Sen-
ator  McGovern,  of   South   Dakota,   suggested   last   September
that  defense  spending   might   be  reduced  by  five  percent,   the
Senate,   with   virtually   no   discussion,   voted   the   McGovern
amendment  down  by  a  vote  of  70  to  2.    Again  this  year,  Con-
gress  is  speeding   the  enactment  of  the  Defense   budget  with
splendid  indifference  to  its  size  and   content.
Many  Americans  may  regard  huge  military  and  space  pro-
grams  as  the  only  truly  urgent   requirements  on  our  national
agenda,   but  it   is  difficult   to  believe  that  this  enthusiasm  is
shared  by  the  4.2  million  Americans  who  are  unemployed  or
by  the  30  million  Americans  who  have  incomes  of  less  than
$3,000  a  year.
The  cold  war  has  diverted  us  from  problems  both  quantita-
tive  and  qualitative.    The  quantitative  problem   is  essentially
to  devise  ways  of  elevating  the  one-fifth   of  our  people  who
live  in  poverty  to  the   level   of   the   four-fifths   who   live  in
greater   material  abundance  than   any  other   society  in  human
history.    While  the  attention  and  energy  of  our  public  policy
have  been   focused  through  these  postwar   years  on  crises  in
Berlin  and  Cuba  and  the  Far  East,  America  has  been   more
and  more  taking  on  the  physical  appearance   and  the  cultural
atmosphere   of  a  honky-tonk   of  continental   proportions.
FCC  Chairman  Says  TV  More  Concerned  With  Its  Commercials Than  Its  Freedom
"During   the   past   year   the  Commission  renewed   the   li-
censes  of  the  Pacifica  Foundation  radio  stations   which  had
been  on  deferred  status  for  over  three  years.     Complaints
originally   came   to   the   Commission   from   several   sources
and  varied  from  disgust   over   allegedly   obscene    program-
ming  to  charges  of  the  possible  affiliation  of  key   personnel
with   the  Communist  Party.
"When  a  regulatory  agency   is  called   upon  to  handle  al-
legedly   obscene  communists,  it  indeed  has  a  hot  potato  on
its   hands.     The   Pacifica   potato   was   admittedly  handled
gingerly   for   too   many   months,   but  I   am   proud   that   the
Commission  showed  its  calluses  while  I  was  its   Chairman.
It  issued  a  forceful,  broad-gauged  opinion  clearing   Pacifica
of  the  charges  levied  against  it.    In  my  judgment,  this  ac-
tion  will  stand  as  a  bulwark  against   the  enemies   of   free
broadcasting   and  free  speech.
"At  every  public  meeting  of  broadcasters   I  have  attended,
a  speaker  has  only  to  declare  himself  in  favor  of   "freedom"
to  be  rewarded  by  an  automatic  burst  of  applause.     If   ever
there  was  a  time  when  the  freedom  of  broadcasting   was  at
stake,  this  was  it.    Who  took  action  in  this  case?
"Which   State   Association    sent   delegations  to    Congress
charging  that  the  FCC had  deferred  the  Pacifica  licenses  for
an  unwarranted  period  and  was  operating  outside  its  juris-
diction?    Which  of  you  wrote  me  a  letter  urging  the  Com-
mission   to  dismiss  these  charges  and  to  reaffirm  the  Com-
mission's  time-honored  adherence   to  the  principles   of   free
broadcasting?
"When  you  display  more  interest   in  defending  your   free-
dom  to  suffocate   the   public  with  commercials   than  in  up-
holding   your  freedom  to  provide  provocative  variety—when
you  cry   "Censorship!"   and  call   for  faith   in  the   founding
fathers   only  to  protect  your   balance  sheet—when  you  re-
main  silent  in  the  face  of  a  threat   which  could  shake   the
first  amendment's   proud  oak  to  its  very  roots—you   tarnish
the  ideals   enshrined   in  the   Constitution."
—FCC  Chairman  William  Henry   to  the  National  Associa-
tion  of  Broadcasters,  April  7    (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  20,1964
Mississippi  Appealed  to  Black's  Dissent  in  the  Case  of  A  Negro  Communist
Ironic  Aspects  of  the  Supreme  Court's  Decision  in  Barnett  Contempt  Case
From  a  Negro  point  of  view  the  Supreme  Court's   decision
in   the  Barnett  case  must  seem  another  example  of  how   the
Jaw   somehow   bends  to  the  white  man.    Though   the  Court
5-to-4  upheld  the  right  to  try  Governor  Barnett  and  Lt.  Gov.
Johnson  of  Mississippi   for  criminal  contempt  without  a  jury,
it  warned  in  a  footnote  that  the  conviction  might  be  reversed
if   the  penalty  imposed  were  not  a  "petty"   one.
In  the  perspective  of  the  long  struggle  to  end  summary
trial  without  a  jury  of  criminal  contempts,   this  was  a  gain.
For  the  first  time  there  seems  to  be  a  majority  on  the  Court
prepared   to  uphold  trial  by  jury  in  criminal  contempts   where
substantial  penalties  are  imposed.    Negroes  may-note bitterly
that  this  swing  toward  the  liberal  side  came  in  the   case  of
a  Mississippi governor  whose  defiance  of  Federal  law  cost  two
deaths  and  risked  the  life  of  James  Meredith.
Red Menace But...
The   pleadings   by  the   State   of   Mississippi   make   curious
reading.    On  the  one  hand  its  Attorney  General,  Joe  T.  Pat-
terson,  invoked  the  Red  menace.    If  the  U.S.  may punish  the
State,  he  argued,  "by  unlawfully  impeaching,  pauperizing  and
imprisoning  the  Governor,  we  need  not  wait  for  Communism
to  destroy  our  great   Constitution."    On  the  other  hand,  he
appealed   to   Mr.   Justice   Black's   reasoning   in   a  dissent   six
years  ago  on  behalf  of  two  Communists,  one  of  them  a Negro,
Henry   Winston,  who  lost  his  sight  under  prison   treatment.
In  that  case,  Green  v.  U.S.,   a.  majority  5-to-4  upheld  3-year
sentences  for  criminal  contempt  without  a  jury  trial  on  Win-
ston  and  Gil  Green  for  their  flight  from  a  Smith  Act  convic-
tion.     Black   argued   that   convictions   for   criminal    contempt
without  a  jury  trial  were  unconstitutional.    He  led  a  dissent-
ing  minority of  four  liberals  again  in  defense  of  Barnett.  But
this  time  there  was  a  difference  in  the  outcome.     The   same
majority   (except   for  White)   which   was  willing  to  uphold
a  3-year  sentence  on  the  two  Communists  now  warns  that  it
will  reverse   sentence  on  Barnett  and  Johnson   unless   it  is  a
minor  penalty.    Otherwise  there  must  be  a  jury  trial.
On  this  issue Mississippi   invoked  the  history  of  labor's  long
fight  against  "government   by  injunction."    The  story  of  how
a  Federal  judge  broke  the  Pullman  strike  in  1895  and  sent  its
Better  Speak  Up  Now
Two  hundred  women  from  25  States  came  to  Wash-
ington  last  week  to  lobby  for  peace   in  Vietnam,  and
heard  Senator  Gruening  (D.  Alaska)  tell  them  it  is  time
the  U.S.  got  out  of  a  civil  war  we  should  never  have
entered  in  the  first  place.   All  the  polls  show  the  hand-
ful  of  Senators  like  Gruening who  call  for  peace  speak
for  substantial,  perhaps  majority,  opinion.    But  unless
other  organizations  follow  the  example  of  the  Women's
International  League  for  Peace  and  Freedom  and  begin
sending  delegations  here,  we  may  plunge  further  into
this  war.    A  Wall  St.  Journal  story   (April  13)  says
the  U.S.  is  already  arming  the  South  Vietnamese  with
bombers  that  can  reach  Hanoi  and  that  the  decision  to
let   them   loose   will  depend  on  how  the  White   House
sizes  up  the  effect  on  the  election.    The  Khanh  regime
is  fast  falling apart, and the  alternative  to  a  negotiated
peace  is  full-scale  U.S.  entrance  into  the  war.     Now's
the  time  to  speak  up.
leader,  the  Socialist  Debs,  to  jail  without  a  trial  is  retold  in
Mississippi's  brief  with  an  indignation   that   comes   strangely
from   the   State   where   labor's   rights   to   this   day  are   least
respected.
None  of  this  was  really  relevant.    Nowhere  did  the  plead-
ings  or  the  court  touch  on  the  essential  realities.    Barnett  and
Johnson   were  far  more  guilty   than  Green  and  Winston  of
conspiring   to  overthrow   the  government  by  force   and   vio-
lence.   This was  rebellion  and  Barnett  should  have  been  jailed
under  martial  law.    In  leaving  defiance,  weakly,  to  the  courts
and  contempt   citation,  the  government   got  entangled   in  the
jury  trial   issue,  which  was  confusing   and   misleading.
Trial  by  jury  derived   from  the  idea  of  preventing   feudal
class  oppression   by  letting  a  man  be  judged   by  his  "peers,"
i.e.  his  own  class.    The  jury  system  breaks  down  where  (1)
a  dominant  white  majority  is  determined   to  oppress  a  Negro
minority  and  (2)   the  case  involves  not  enforcement  of  crim-
inal  law  but  of   racial  justice.     Before   a  jury  of   his  peers,
Barnett  was  sure  of  acquittal.    Even  under  this  ruling,   after
some  light  penalty,  he  will  get  away,  literally,  with   murder
and  emerge  a  hero.
How Red Herring  and Racism Were Dragged
Mr.  REUTHER  WAW):  The  rich  are  getting  richer and
the  poor  are  getting  poorer. ...  In  1953  the  richest  1% of
the  nation's  families  got   24%  of   the  family  income.    In
1955   they  got  26%;  in  1961,  28%.
Mr.   FRELINGHUYSEN  (R.   N.J.):   You   can   advocate
sharing  the  wealth,  Mr.  Reuther,  but  that  will  not  get   us
to  the  problem  of  discussing   this  bill  this  morning.
Mr.  REUTHER: I  am  not  advocating  sharing  the  wealth.
This  whole  question  of  how  we  learn  to  share  abundance
is  the  key  to  the  future  of  our  society.
Mr.   FRELINGHUYSEN:  I   found   his   statement   to   be
extremely  provocative.   It  smacked  to  me  of  socialism,  and
perhaps  this  Landrum  bill  with its  billion dollar expenditure
will  be  one  small  step  in  that  direction.
Mr.  REUTHER: I  would  like  to  be  invited  back,  if  you
will  give  me  enough  time  to  have  a  philosophical  discus-
sion  about  what  socialism  is.    It  is  quite  obvious  that  you
don't   understand  what  socialism   is.
Mr.   FREHNGHUYSEN:   Is   it   your   feeling   that   this
6
 ;
In Against the Landrum (Anti-Poverty)  Bill
Landrum  bill  should  be  aimed  primarily at  alleviating  the
problems  of  the   Negroes?
Mr.   REUTHER:  Obviously  the   fight   against   poverty
should  be  color-blind.   But  the  Negroes,  because  they  have
been   discriminated  against    more   than   any   other   group,
would  get  a  larger  benefit  out  of  this  because  they  are  the
victims  of  poverty  more  than  any  other  group.
Mr.  LANDRUM  (D.  Ga):  I  want  to  have  it  clearly under-
stood  with  reference  to  this  bill  under  my  name,  and  I  am
proud   to  have  my  name  upon  it,   any  assistance   that   it
might  be  providing  towards  the  Negro  race  is  a  source  of
pride  to  me.   I  come  from  a  section  of  the  country  that  has
been  bombarded with  a  great  deal  of  demagoguery.    There
are  many,  many  Negroes  in  the  country  who  are  poor.
I  join  the  distinguished  labor  leader  here,  with  whom  I
have  disagreed  on  many  points.    I  join  him  in  saying   that
this  effort  to  remove poverty from  the  American  scene  must
be  color   blind.
—Before   the  Senate  Educ.  & Labor  Com.,  Apr.   9  (abr.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  20,196/
t
The  Regime  We  Hailed  as Constitutional  Is  A  Reign  of  Terror
(Continued   from   Page   One)
armed  forces  which  had  developed   (as  The  Times  of  London
noted  in  an  editorial  April  2)   "a  strong  sense of  kinship with
the  civilian  labor  movement,  increasingly  frustrated  by  eco-
nomic  development  which  seems  always  to  enrich  those  who
already  have enough  without  doing  much  for  those  who  have
almost  nothing."     Even  with  the  restricted   franchise,  when
Goulart   16  months  ago  put   to  a  plebiscite   the   question  of
restoring  strong  presidential  powers,  he  won  9  to  1  over  the
same military  and  right wing opposition  which  has overthrown
him.   These  are  the  men  we praise as defenders of democracy.
Not  Smart  Politics
Our  national  leadership  must  look  pretty  poor  to  sophisti-
cated  Latin  Americans.   Why  the  rush  to  approve  the  Brazil-
ian   coup   d'etat   before  the   situation  had   clarified?     There
seem  to  have been  two  counter-revolutions.   The  first  was  the
overthrow  of  Goulart  and  his  replacement  by  the  president  of
the  Chamber  of   Deputies,   Senhor   Mazzili.    This  could   be
disguised  as  constitutional,  if  you  overlooked  the  fact  that  the
military  had  deposed  the  President.    This  revolt  was followed
in  a  few  days  by  a  second  one,  when  the  Congress  refused  to
grant  sweeping  purge  powers  asked  of  it  by  the  military  and
Lacerda's  extreme  right  wing  party.    The  first  revolt  had  the
support  of  centrist  and  moderate  right  parties. The  second  did
not.    The  regime  as  it  emerged   from  the  second   revolution
has  the  support  only  of  the  extreme  right  and  the  military.
It  is  so  rigid  that  it  is  bound  to  defeat  itself.   Shrewder  mid-
dle  of  the  road  politicians  like  former  President  Kubitschek,
who  realize  that  some  social  reform  is  necessary,  see  the  U.S.
supporting  die-hard elements  who  have  only  minority  support
even  in  the  favored  classes.    The   difference   between  Kubit-
schek  and  Lacerda  is  like  the  difference  between  a  Taft  and
a  McCarthy,  between  a  thoughtful  conservative  and   an   un-
scrupulous  rightist  demogague.    To  put  our  chips  on Lacerda
and  the  military  is  not  smart, politics.
No  enemy could  have hurt  us  more  than  our  own  action  in
endorsing  as constitutional a  military  regime which has  purged
one-tenth  of  the  Brazilian  Congress,  jailed  at  least  two  State
Governors,  among    thousands    arrested,    dissolved    Peasant
Goulart's  Own  Ignored  Defense
Montevideo,  Uruguay,  April  5  (AP)—Joao  Goulart,
ousted   President  of   Brazil,   said   his   regime  and  the
reforms   it   fostered   were   to   prevent   a  Communist
takeover.    Asked  about  charges  by  those  who  led  the
revolt  that  his  government  was  becoming  Communist,
Goulart   replied:  "That   was   the   great  banner  waved
against   my   government  and  I  was  highly   mystified."
Action   on  land   expropriation,  banking   regulations,
administrative  and  taxation  changes  was   "to  restrain
Communism   in   Brazil,"  Goulart  declared.
These  proposals,  he   added,  were  constitutional and
were  designed  to  "gain  maximum  democracy, to defend
the   popular  economy  and  the   poor  people  of  Brazil."
—York,  Pa., Gazette  & Daily,  April  6, the  only  place
we  saw  this  Associated  Press   dispatch.
League  and  labor  unions  in  the  impoverished  northeast,  and
ended  freedom  of  the  press.  The  military chiefs  have  imposed
an  "institutional  act"  Congress  refused   to  pass.    "While  the
measure  is  aimed  at  Communists  and  leftist  extremists,"  the
Washington  Star  explained  April  12,  "no  proof  of  Red activi-
ties  is  required  nor  is  any  judicial  appeal  provided."    This  is
a  reign  of  terror.    The  jails  are  full.    Two  ships  in  Rio  har-
bor  are  being  used  for  the  overflow.   So  is  the  island  of  Fer-
nand  Noronha,   on  which  we  have  a  tracking  station.    John-
son,  Rusk  and  McGeorge  Bundy hail  all  this  as  a  triumph  of
freedom.     The   leader  of  the  moderate  Labor  Party   in  the
chamber  of   Deputies   spoke  history's  verdict  when   he   pro-
tested  "There  is  no  justice,  no  law,  no  order  in  the Brazilian
nation  now.    it  would  be better  in  these  circumstances to  shut
down  Congress   and  do  away  with  this  farce  of  democracy"
(London  Times  from  Rio,  April  6).  What  he  calls  farce  we
call  the  new  Johnsonian pragmatism.    As  the  Scripps  Howard
man  at  State Department  explained  (Washington   Daily  Neivs,
April  3)  there  are  "Good  military  coups  as well  as bad  ones.
The  one  in  Brazil  this  week  exemplified  the  good  kind  .  .  .
Bad  democratic elections  as  well  as  good  ones.    The  one  in
Chile  next  September  may  demonstrate  that."    When  we  fear
the  democratic  verdict,  we  invite  the  military  to  take  over.
This  is  a  new  Alianza—for  reaction  and  revolution.
Use  the  Blank  Below  to  Send  I.  F.  Stone's  "The  Haunted  Fifties"  as  a  Graduation  Present
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly        5618  Nebraska  Aye.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City   ..
.......................,.Zone.........State.................».
4/20/04
For  this  additional  $5.35  please  send  a  copy  of  I.  F.
Stone's   "The  Haunted  Fifties."
(To)   Name   .............................................
Street    .........„.,..................._...................
City   ...........__.........................Zone........
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?
..State....................
Teg D   No D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I    F.   Sl.mu's   Wci-My.     Scrond   Class  Postasu   Paid   at   WashinKton,   D.   C.    Pnl.lishiil  every  Monday  except  in  AuKust  at   5618    I>
Washington.   D.   C.     An   independent   weekly   published    and   edited   !>y  1.   F.   St.,tie;   Circulation    Mana
K
er.   I'.slher   M.   Stone
$5  in  the  U  a.'  SO in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  ratea:  $15 to  Europe:  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
Monday   except  in  August  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,
"  '   "   "'  --      Subscription:
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED