I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964nov16.pdf

============================================================

How  NEC's  Gen. Sarnoff    Went  to Bat  for  the  Cigarette-Maker^  Pps. 2-3
The Author  of  "The Quiet  American" on  Our Not-So-Quiet Use  of  Torture in Vietnam
"In  the   past  few   weeks  photographs  have  appeared  in
.  the   British   press   showing   the   tortures   inflicted   on  Viet
Cong  prisoners  by  the  Vietnam  army.    In  the  long   frus-
trating  war  in  Indochina  there  has,  of  coarse,  always  been
torture—torture  by  Viet  Minh,  torture  by  Vietnamese,  tor-
ture   by  the   French—but  at  least   in  the   old  days  of   the
long,  long  war  hypocrisy  paid  a  tribute  to  virtue  by  hush-
ing  up  the  torture  inflicted   by  its   own  soldiers  and  con-
demning  the  torture  inflicted  by  the  other  side.  The  strange
new  feature  about  the  photographs  of  torture  now appear-
ing  is  that  they  have  been  taken  with  the  approval  of  the
torturers  and  published  over  captions  that  contain  no  hint
of  condemnation.   They  might  have  come  out  of  a  book  on
insect  life.    'The  white  ant  takes  certain  measures  against
the  red  ant  after  a  successful  foray.'    But  these,  after  all,
are  not  ants  but  men.   The  long  slow  slide  into  barbarism
of  the  Western  world  seems  to  have  quickened.   For  these
photographs  are  of  torturers  belonging  to  an  army  which
could  not  exist  without  American  aid  and  counsel.    Does
this  mean  that  the  American  authorities   sanction   torture
as  a  means  of  interrogation?"
—Graham  Greene  in  the  London Daily   Telegraph  Nov.  6.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  39NOVEMBER  16,  1964
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  MLF  — One  Sure  Way  to  Heal  the  Sino-Soviet   Rift
An  important passage  in  the  French  Prime- Minister's warn-
ing  against  the  MLF  was  not  reported  in  the  U.S.  press.    M.
Pompidou  (Le  Monde,  Nov.  7)   told  the  French  Parliamen-
tary  correspondents   that  the  American  plan  for   20  Polaris-
armed  ships  with  a  German  finger  on  their  triggers  would  be
"destructive   for   Europe   and   provocative   for   certain   other
countries."    He  dedared  that  "if  we  take part  in  a  permanent
confrontation  between  the  two  blocs"  there  will be  "no  dur-
able  equilibrium"  in  Europe.    M^  Pompidou   concluded  that
"the  two  blocs  ought  to  be  less  rigid  and  they  ought  even  in
some  degree  to  interpenetrate  each  other  [s'interpenetrer]  in
order  to  facilitate  the  peaceful   co-existence   for  which  every-
one  wishes  at  the  present  time."    In  other  words  the  French
Prime  Minister  sees  the  MLF  as  a  device  which  will  harden
the  division  of  Europe  and   stifle  hopes   for  a  continued  de-
tente  between  East and  West.
How  Germany's  Army  Officers  Think
Americans  will  begin   to  see  the  full   implications  of   the
MLF  if  they  compare  this  French  view  with  the  views  which
Prof.  Amitai Etzioni of  Columbia  found  among  officers  of  the
West  German  Staff  College  in  Hamburg  when  he  spoke  there
a  few  days  before  M.  Pompidou's  address.    Prof.  Etzfoni  told
M.  S. Handler  in  an  interview  in  the  New  York  Times   (Nov.
8)   that  a third  of  them,  the  most  senior  group,  saw the  MLF
as  a  means  of  "political  blackmail"  to  compel  the  Russians  to
permit   reunification   on  West   German   terms  while   another
third  thought  it  could  be  used  to  force  the  dismantling of  the
Berlin  wall  and  guarantees  for  West  Berlin.    Thus  for  two-
thirds  the  MLF  was  a  means,  by  implied  threat   of   nuclear
war,  to  exact  concessions  from  the  Eastern  bloc.    The  higher
the  rank  of  the  officer,  the  Columbia  professor  said,  the  more
ardent   his   support   for   the   nuclear  force.     A  third   of   the
officers,   presumably  the  younger  men,  thought  that  Germans
cannot  and  should  not  be  trusted  with  nuclear  weapons.     The
reactions  of   these  German   officers   show   that  M.   Pompidou
was  not  opposing  MLF  out  of  mere  de  Gaullist  pique,  as  the
State Department  would  like us to  believe.
Kennedy   was  cool   to  MLF.     Johnson   is  reported   to   be
strongly  for  it.    We  find  it  hard   to  reconcile  those   reports
The  Grimmest  Computation
"How    many  of  the  5500  sailors,  who  would  serve  on
the  MLF  rocket-ships,  may  survive  the  zero  hour  of
an  atomic  war,  has  likewise  already  been  estimated  by
the  military  planners  in  Washington:  more  than  half.
But  no  one  has  yet  figured  out  how  much  chance  the
survivors  of   these   modern   Noah's   Arks  would  have,
ever  to  set   foot   again  on  unharmed   and uncontami-
nated  land."
—Conclusion  of  a  critical  article  on  the  MLF   in  Der
Spiegel, Germany's  leading  independent  weekly,  Nov.  4.
with  the  interview  which  the  President  gave  the  German  pic-
ture  magazine,  Quick  (May  3)   shortly  after  Erhard's  visit  to
Washington.    "When   it  comes  to  peace,"  Johnson   told  his
German  interviewer,  "we  will  meet  the  Russians  halfway and
more   than  halfway  if   necessary.     When   Chancellor   Erhard
was  here,  1  told  him:  'Put  yourself   in  the  place  of  the  Rus-
sians.    Try  to  understand   their  feelings.     They  are  worried
about  the  Germans,  and  that  is understandable.    The  Russians
are  afraid.'     I  begged  Erhard  to  do  everything  he  could  to
arrive  at  better  relations  with  the  Germans  and  dissipate their
anxieties."    The  MLF will  increase  those  fears.
All   this   casts   its   shadow   over   Asia   as  well   as   Europe.
Washington   is  complacently  sure  that  there  will  be  no  firm
Sino-Soviet  reconciliation.     MLF  could  bring  it  about.     It  is
China's  strongest  argument  with  the  Soviet  bloc.     "Johnson
seems  to  be  very  keen,"  said  the  Peking   Peoples  Daily   Oct.
22,  "about  preventing  nuclear  proliferation.    But  as  a  matter
of  fact  it  is  the  U.S.  itself,  and  not  any  other  country  which
is  engaged   in  spreading  nuclear  weapons.    The  Johnson   Ad-
ministration  is  pushing   ahead  with  the  so-called  multilateral
nuclear  force  plan  for  placing  nuclear  weapons  in  the  hands
of   NATO  countries,   and   in   particular  those   of   the   West
German  revanchists."     If   there  is  anyone  the  Russians  fear
mote  than  the  Chinese,  it  is the  Germans.    This  also  goes  for
the  Poles,  the  Czechs,  the  Hungarians,  the  Yugoslavs  and  the
Rumanians.    If  we want  to  refreeze  the  Soviet  bloc,  and  deep-
freeze  the  hopes  of  peacefully reuniting Germany,  if  we  want
to  increase  the  power  of  the  intransigeant  Chinese   over   the
conciliatory  Russians,  MLF  is  the  way  to  do  it.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  16,1964
Tobacco  Industry's  Profits  Still  Rising  10  Months  After  Surgeon  General's  Report
NBC's  General  Sarnoff   Goes  to  Bat  for  the  Cigarette  Makers
The  Surgeon   General's  report  on  smoking  and  disease  has
so  far   caused   the   tobacco   industry  remarkably  little  annoy-
ance.     Every  cigarette   company   but   one  has  now   reported
1964  third-quarter  profits  slightly  higher  than  last year's. Only
R.   J.   Reynolds   showed   a   decline   in   profits   and   this   was
blamed  on  the'high  cost  of  promoting  a  new  brand  (Wall  Si.
Journal,  Oct.  30)  !   The  industry as  a  whole  has  registered  a
net  decline  in  profits  of  only   0.1%.
The  Dissenter  Won
The   crucial  test   between   cigarette  profits  and  health   will
come  early  next  year  when   Congress   debates   federal   regula-
tion  of  cigarette  advertising  and  labeling.    The  industry  will
be  well-prepared.     It  has  won  a  series  of  preliminary  skir-
mishes  that  place  it  in  a  comfortable  position.     Its  latest  vic-
tory  was  won  behind  the  closed  doors  of  the  President's   Com-
mission  on  Heart  Disease,  Cancer;  and  Stroke.    The  Commis-
sion  was  appointed   last  February  "to  map  an  attack  for   the
Nation  on  these  three  great  killers."    It  will  issue  its  report
in  late  December,  just  before   Congress   convenes.     A   source
who'attended  its  meetings   told  us  the  Commission   was  pre-
pared   to  go  beyond  the  Surgeon   General's  report  in  recom-
mending   "very   vigorous"  regulatory   action   against   cigarette
advertising.    A  strong  statement  had  been  drafted  by  Emer-
son  Foote,   a  member   of   the   Commission   who   recently   re-
signed  as  chairman  of  the  board  of  McCann-Ericksori  because
the  advertising firm  would  not  drop  its  tobacco  clients.  Foote's
proposed  draft  never  came  to  a  vote,  however,  because   Gen-
eral  David  Sarnoff,  chairman  of  the  RCA  communications  em-
pire,   threatened  to  take  the  matter  to  the  White  House  and
said   he   would   prevent   the   Commission    from   adopting   a
unanimous   report.       Tobacco  company   advertising   averages
around   a  quarter-billion   dollars   a  year,  half   of   it  on   TV.
(When  we  told  Sarnoff's  Washington  and  New  York   offices
we  were  going  to  publish  this  story,  neither  would   comment.)
Foote   withdrew   his  statement  even  though   Sarnoff   was  the
only  dissenter.    This  is  a  pity  since  the  Commission's   authori-
tative  voice  would  have  off-set  tobacco's  other  recent  victories.
The  first  of  these  came  when  Rep.  Oren  Harris  (D.,  Ark.),
Chairman  of  the  House  Interstate  Commerce  Committee,  chal-
4500  New  Young  Smokers  A  Day
Rep.  Lionel  VAN  DERLEEN  (D/CaL):  You  would
agree  that  any  warning  that  was  imposed  upon  (ciga-
rette)   advertising  and  especially  broadcast  advertising
might  achieve  the  proportions  of  a  national  joke.
Dr.  SCOTT  (President  of  the  American  Cancer  As-
sociation):  It  does  not  necessarily   have  to  become  a
joke  or  anything  of  the  sort.    We  have  to  remember
there  are  4500  young  people  taking  up  cigarette  smok-
ing  everyday.   These  are  all  new  people.    It  has  to  be
a   continuing   and   repetitive   process   to   be   effective.
Even  the  advertising  people  tell  us  that  for  their  own
product.
—Interstate  Commerce  Comm.  Hearings   on  Tobacco,
Jl.  2.
lenged  the  right  of  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  to  regulate
cigarette   advertising   and   labeling   without   specific  authority
from  Congress.    The  Commission  was  in  the  midst  of  issuing
a  rule  which  requires  all  labels  and  advertisements  to  carry  a
warning  to  the  effect  that  "cigarette  smoking  is  dangerous   to
health  and  may  cause  death  from  cancer  and  other   diseases."
This  rule  is  weaker  than  the  Commission's  original   proposal
but  not  so  weak  as  the  one  Congress   is  likely  to  turn   out.
Tobacco^state   congressmen   chair   one-fourth   of   the    Senate
committees  including  Finance,  Banking  and  Currency,  Armed
Services,  and  Post   Office   and  Civil  Service.     In   the  House,
they  chair  7  out  of  21  committees,  including  the  nearly  omni-
potent   Rules  Committee.    This  helps  explain  why  Congress
until  late  last  session  had  never  held  hearings  for  any  one  of
30  bills  on   the   cigarette  danger.     The   one   exception   that
proves  the  rule  was  Rep.  John  Blatnik's  investigation  in  1957
of   false   and   misleading   filter-tip   advertising.     Before   his
Government   Operations  subcommittee  could  finish  its  work,
the  subcommittee  was  dissolved.
The  tobacco  industry  won  a  third  victory  at  the  Harris  com-
mittee  hearings  this  summer.    These  gave   it   a  pseudo-scien-
tific  smokescreen,  as  the  boxes  on  these  pages  indicate.   Every
scientific  witness  but  one  supported  the  tobacco  companies  and
attacked   the   Surgeon    General's    report.     Their    statements
looked  so  much  alike  they  led  one  congressman  to  suspect  a
single   author   (see   box  at  bottom).     One   witness   admitted
How  The Tobacco Companies Helped  Prepare  The Testimony  of  The  Scientists
Rep.  J.   A.   YOUNGER   (R.   Cal.):   The  format  of  your
testimony  and  Dr.  Garland's who  is  to  come,  appears  to  be
exactly  the  same.    Were these  printed or  mimeographed  at
the  same  place?    What  causes  all  of  these  to  be  exactly
the  same?
Dr.  Henry  RUSSEK  (Consultant in  Cardiovascular Dis-
ease,  U.S.  Public  Health  Service  Hospital,  Staten  Is.,  New
York):  I  submitted  a  statement  quite  similar to  his  with  a
few  differences.    I  said,  for  example, the  undersigned  is  so
and  so  on  and  I  was  told  perhaps it  would be  better  before
a ^congressional  committee to  say  rather  than  "the  under-
signed,"  "I am."
Rep.  YOUNGER:  You submitted them  to  whom?
Dr.   RUSSEK:  To   an   attorney  for   one   of   the  tobacco
companies.    I  showed  him  the  statement  that  I  would give.
Rep.  YOUNGER:  Are  you  employed  in  any  way,  shape
or  form  by  any  tobacco  company?
Dr.  RUSSEK:  In  no  manner  whatever.   This  statement
that  I  have  given  here  I  gave  at  the  AMA  meeting   last
week  in  San  Francisco.
Rep.  YOUNGER:  AH  of  these  start   out  in  exactly   the
same   format.    My  experience  with  witnesses  before   the
committee,   I   rarely  find  that.     I   was   just   wondering  if
there  was  any  correlation  between  the  format that'we  have
and  the  position that  all  of  you  take  in  regard  to  smoking?
Dr.  RUSSEK:  No,  it  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with
this?
Rep.  YOUNGER: Who mimeographed  yours?
Dr.  RUSSEK:  I  imagine  it   was   mimeographed  by  Mr.
Hardy  of  one  of  the  tobacco  corporations.
Rep,   YOUNGER:  That  is  what  I  am  trying  to  get   at.
Evidently  they  were  all  mimeographed  by  the  same   com-
pany.                  Dr. RUSSEK: I  presume  so.
—Interstate  Commerce Comm. Hearings  en  Tobacco.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  16, 1961>
Congressional  Hearings  Stacked  by  Nicotine-Stained  Scientists
... Reported  Blocking  Strong  Stand  by  President's  Commission  on   Cancer
he  had  consulted with  an  attorney  for  the  tobacco  companies
before  submitting  his  statement.     Another  admitted  that  he
had  gone  over  his  testimony  with  a  medical  consultant   for
the  American  Tobacco  Co.    Several  said  the  tobacco  compa-
nies  had  done  the  printing  of  their  statements.    At  least  one
witness  admitted  he  had  recently  received  a  grant  from   the
Council   for   Tobacco  Research,   a   tobacco   company    affiliate.
Dr.  Wendell  Scott,  President  of  the  American  Cancer  Society
and  the  only  non-tobacco-tainted  expert  to  testify,  said  that  to
his  knowledge  none  of  these  witnesses  had  ever  published  a
paper  or  done any  original  research  on  smoking  and  health.
A  Quarter-Million  Deaths  A  Year
The  testimony  of  these  "experts"  was  as  specious as  their
credentials.    Their  favorite   ploy  was  to  point  out  that   the
Surgeon   General's   report   did   not   "prove"    that   smoking
"caused"  cancer  because  it  was  based  only  on  statistical  evi-
dence.   This  is  the  same  stale  line  that  the  industry  has  been
using  for   15  years.    It  was  emphasized  by  the  statistician  in
the  group, Mr.  Alan  Donnahoe,  who  also  happens to  be  vice-
president  of  The  Richmond  Times.    The  Surgeon  General's
statistics  show  that  ten  times  as  many  moderate smokers  die
of   lung  cancer  than  do  non-smokers.    Donnahoe  calculated
off-the-cuff   that  if  these  figures  are  adjusted  for  all  possible
error,  they  show  only  five  times  as  many  smokers  dying  of
lung  cancer.   That  seems  pretty  bad  too.   Actually,  a  scientist
at  the  Public  Health  Service  told  us  that  the  Surgeon  Gen-
eral's  report   "leaned  over  backwards  to  underestimate"   the
health  hazard,  and  that  instead  of  40,000 deaths  it  would  not
be  too  much  to  speak  of  250,000  to  300,000  deaths  annually.
One  witness  upon  whom  the  committee  lavished  innumer-
able  compliments  was  Bowman  Gray,  chairman  of  the  board
of  R.  J.  Reynolds  and  spokesman  at  the  hearings  for  all  the
tobacco   companies.     Gray   revealed   the   industry's   strategy
when  he  said  he  favored  a  "congressional  [regulatory]  stat-
ute  pre-empting  the  field"  from  the  States  because  "this  is  the
big  year  for  state legislation" and  "unless  something  such  as
How  to  Form An Opinion Without Even  Trying
Mr.  Paul  ROGERS (D.  Fla.):  You  feel  there  is  real-
ly  no  basis  in  these  studies  at  all  to  show  this  connec-
tion   [between   cancer  and  cigarette  smoking]?
Dr.  BURFORD  (identified  below):  No,  sir.    I  have
to   stick  firmly  with  my  somewhat   dogmatic   opinion.
This  opinion   was  not  formed  easily.    I  would  remind
the   committee   that  this  opinion  was   formed   when  I
was  working  side  by  side  with  one  of  the  really  great
surgeons  of  America,  Evarts  Graham.
*         *         *         *
Rep.  J.  A.  YOUNGER  (R.  Cal.):  Dr.  Scott,  do  you
know  Dr.  Thomas   H.   Bnrford?
Dr.  SCOTT  (Pres.,  American  Cancer  Society):   Yes.
Dr.  Burford  is  one  of  my  close  friends  and  associates.
I  work  with  him  almost  every  day  of  the   year.
Rep.  YOUNGER: How  do  yon  account  for  his  state-
ment  (above)?
Dr.  SCOTT:  He  has  felt  this  way  from  the  very  be-
ginning.    When  Dr.  Ernest  Windaur  first  came  to  him
to  undertake  the  first  studies,  Dr.  Burford  did  not  feel
there   was   any   merit.     Dr.  Windaur  went   to   Evarts
Graham,  the   professor   in  charge   of   the  department,
and  he   said,   "AH  right,   we  will   go   ahead   with   the
studies   (anyway)."     This   is   Dr.   Burford's    personal
opinion.    It  is  not  supported   by  a  series  of   scientific
studies  and  investigations.
—Hearings  on  Tobacco Regulation, Jl. 2.
this  is  done  there  will  be  a  rash  of  [state]  action."   When
asked  how  much  advertising  the  industry  would  do  if  it  had
to  use  the  FTC's  health  warning,  Gray  answered,  "Doggone
little."    This  was  the  best  argument  for  regulation  that  we
saw  in  the  five-volume  set  of  hearings.
These  stack  the  public  record  against  the  consumer.   They
give  the  well-meaning  but  timid  congressman  an  excuse  not
to   offend   the   industry   or   the   powers   in   Congress.    Only
some  White  House  magic  can  defeat  the  industry  now,  but
two  of  our  Sorcerer's  chief  apprentices, Earle  Clements  and
Abe  Fortas,  have  the  tobacco  companies  for  clients.
How  One Expert Witness Evaded  The Facts About  Lung  Cancer
"I  have   found   no   really   convincing   evidence   that   the
incidence  of  lung  cancer  is  actually  increasing  although  cig-
arette  consumption  has been  rising  for  several  decades.  . .  .
Post  mortem  examinations   today   are  carried  out  in  a  far
more  careful  and  meticulous   fashion   than  they   were   two
decades  or  even  one  decade  ago  resulting   in  more   frequent
discovery  of  lung  cancer."
—Dr.  Thomas   Burford,    Chief    of   Thoracic   and   Cardio-
vascular  Surgery,  Barnes  and  Allied  Hospitals,   St.  Louis,
before   House  Interstate  Commerce  Committee, June  29.
"In  the  United  States,  for  example,  only  371  deaths  were
attributed  to   lung   cancer   in   1914.    This   number  rose   to
2,357  in  1930;  7,121  in  1940;  18,313  in  1950,  and  36,420  in
1960.  .  .  .  (1)   The  simple  bulk  of  the  increase   makes  im-
proved  diagnosis  an  inadequate  explanation.    (2)  Improve-
ments  in  diagnosis  also  occurred with  respect  to  such  other
forms   of   cancer   as   stomach   cancer.     Yet   no  comparable
rise  in  reported  cancer  rates  generally  or  in  cancer  at  other
internal  cites  has  occurred.  .  .  .  (3)   There  is  the  strange
but  unchallenged   fact   that   lung   cancer   remains  today   a
rare  disease  among  men  and  women  who  do  not  smoke  and
who  have  never   smoked.    Improved  diagnosis,  to  the  ex-
tent  that  it  has  affected  the  statistics  through   the   years,
would  have  produced  a  rise  among  non-smokers."
—"The   Consumers   Union   Report    on  Smoking   and   the
Public  Interest,"  (Consumers   Union,  1963)  pp.  16-20.
*        *        *        *
"It  seems  to  me  that   any  unbiased  examination   of   the
world's  scientific  literature   will  conclude  that  there  is   as
much  or  more  reason  to  suspect  air  pollutants  as  there  is
to  suspect cigarette  smoking."
—Dr. Burford   at  tobacco hearings, June  29.
"[In]  Iceland  .  .  .  lung  cancer  remained  a  rare  disease
and  cigarette   smoking  a  relatively   unpopular  habit  as  re-
cently  as  1940.    Since  then,  cigarette   smoking  has  become
increasingly  popular  and  lung  cancer  increasingly   common.
.  .  .  The  increase   cannot  be  attributed  to  air  pollution  for
at  least  since   1943  Reykjavik   (where  most  of  the  deaths
occurred)  has  had  the  purest  air  in  Europe.    A  municipal
heating  system  based  on  hot  springs  near  the  city  has  re-
placed  both  coal  and  oil  for  heating  purposes."
—"Smoking  and the  Public  Interest,"  p. 24.
1  1
1   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  16, 1964
CIA  Director  McCone  Leaving?    A  Poor  Way  to  Improve  U.S. Standing  in  Brazil
Easy W ay for Bobby Kennedy to Prove He Can Be Liberal and Magnanimous
Now   that   Bobby  Kennedy   has  been   elected,  one  way  for
him  to  refute  his  critics  and  demonstrate  liberalism  and  mag-
nanimity  would   be  to  join   in  a  protest  to  ABC  to  reinstate
Lisa   Howard,   whom   it   once   billed  as  TV's No.   1   News-
woman   but   has   dropped   for   helping   to   organize   Demo-
crats-for-Keating.    Her  TV  interviews with  Castro  and Gue-
vara  were  courageous   forays   for   better   understanding.  .   .  .
There  was  good  news  in  Joe  Alsop's  resumed  column  Nov. 9
(we  dislike  his  views  but  are  glad  to  see  he's well   again)
that  CIA  Director  John  A.  McCone  "may  have  to  return  to
California,  to  keep  an  eye for  a  while on  his  large  West  Coast
enterprises."     McCone   managed  as  AEC  Chairman  and  CIA
Director   to  keep   these  enterprises  despite   conflict-of-interest
laws  governing  both  posts.    But  the  main  objection  to  him  is
that   he   is  a  Republican  of   far   right   views,  who   would  fit
better  into  a  Goldwater  government.  .  .  .
Ambassadorial   Errand  Boy?
It  was  poor  public  relations  for  U.S. Ambassador Lincoln
Gordon   to  accompany  John  J.  McCloy,  acting  as  lawyer  for
the  Hanna  Mining  Interests  of  Cleveland,  on  a  visit  to Bra-
zil's  new  military  dictator President  Castelo  Branco  in  Brasilia
Nov.   6.    The   vice  president  of  Hanna   is  George  H. Hum-
phrey,  Ike's  Secretary  of   the  Treasury,  and   a  leading  Gold-
water  supporter,  who  has  used  influence  of  all  kinds  to  obtain
control   of   rich   iron   deposits   in   Brazil.     The    concessions
granted  him   5  years  ago  were  later  cancelled  June  30, 1962,
by  a  Nationalist  Minister  of  Mines.    The   cancellation  is  on
appeal   to  the   Brazilian   Supreme   Court.      "After   presenting
Mr.  McCloy,"   the  New   York   Times  reported  meaningfully,
Nov.   7,  "Ambassador   Gordon   paid  President   Branco  a sec-
ond  visit  outlining  the  U.S. financial and  economic  mission  to
Brazil."    First the  U.S.  supports  a  military  coup  which  purges
some  of  Brazil's  leading  statesmen  from  public  life  and  then
it  brings  pressure  for   iron  deposits  that  Brazilians  from   far
right  to  far  left  prefer  to  keep  under  public control.    This  is
hardly  the  way to  lay the  spectre  of  Yankee  Imperialism.  .  .  .
Remember  the  campaign  for  continued  underground   testing
Civil  Liberties   Cases  at  The  Court
The  Supreme  Court  this  week  agreed  to  decide  the
constitutionality   of   a   Landrum-Griflin   Act   provision
which  makes  it  a  crime  for  a  Communist to  serve  as
an  officer  of  a  labor  union.    The  9th  Circuit  Court  of
Appeals  set  aside  the  conviction  of  Archie  Brown,  an
officer   in  a  San  Francisco  local  of   the  ILWU,  on  the
ground   that    Congress    could   not    "impose   personal
criminal  sanctions  on  ...     (the) basis  of  political  af-
filiations."    The   Solicitor  General   has   asked  the   Su-
preme  Court  to  overturn  this  ruling.    The  Court  also
said   the   NAACP  and   the   ACLU   could   file   amicus
curiae  briefs in  support of  James  Dombrowski, director
of  the  Southern  Conference  Educational  Fund,  indicted
in  Louisiana for  subversive (i.e.,  civil  rights)  activities.
on  the  plea  that  it  was  required  to  perfect  our  means  of  de-
tection?    Since  the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty  went  into  effect,  we
have  staged  38  tests.    The   official   AEC  run-down  as  of Nov.
9  shows  30  weapons  tests,  six  Ploughshare  (supposed   civilian
uses),   one  joint  weapons   test  with  the  United  Kingdom—
and  one  Vela  (test  detection).  Moscow  is  now  asking  a  com-
plete  ban  on  all  tests.    How   can  the  Russians  convince  the
Chinese  to  stop  testing  when  we  go  on  doing  so?  ...     Are
these  tests  really  necessary  or  just  provocative  "needling"  ex-
ercises?   .  .  .  An  Agence  France  Presse  dispatch  from  Bonn
in  Le  Monde   (Nov. 5)   reports  that  the  West  Germany gov-
ernment   is  resuming  talks  for   a  trade  agreement   with  Red
China.    These  were  postponed   earlier  this  year  on  Washing-
ton's  request  until  after  the  elections.   .  .  .  We  welcome  the
news  from   Moscow   (New  York   Times,  Nov. 4)   that  the
Leningrad  poet  Brodsky  and   Boris  Pasternak's  friend,  Olga
Ivinskaya,  have  been  released  from  prison  by  the  new  regime
as  a  conciliatory  gesture   to   Russian  intellectuals  and   -world
opinion.     Brodsky  was  sentenced   to  five  years  in   jail   as  a
"social  parasite"  for  his  non-conformist  verses  and  the  Khru-
shchev  regime  took  out  on  Ivinskaya its  displeasure  with  the
author  of  "Dr. Zhivago."    This  sensitivity  to  world  opinion
is  a welcome change  from  the  days  of  Stalinism.
IFS  Is  Being  Operated  on  For Deafness  Nov. 12  and  Hopes  to  Put  Out  the  Next  Issue As  Usual  But  Asks  Reader
Indulgence   If   He  Has  to  Skip  An   Issue
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name   ......................................................................;•.—..............
Street     ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
11/16/64
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name     ..............................................................................
Street        ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
I. F. Stones  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid   at  Washington,   D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  the  last  week   in  December   and  the  first   week   in
January  and  Pi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.. Washington,   D.  C.    An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited
by  I.  F.   Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;   $6   in   Canada:    $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED