I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964aug10.pdf

============================================================

Special  6-Page  Report:  A   Visit  to Harlem  and  the Black  Bronx
A  Mao Tse-tung Republican: How  Goldwater  Won  in  The  Past  and  Hopes  to  Win  Again
"Mao   Tse-tung,  the  Communist revolutionary  general,  has
written  a  valuable  book  on  the  tactics  of  infiltration.   In
it,  he  says:  'Give  me just  two  or  three  men  in  a  village  and
I  will  take  the  village!'    In  the  Goldwater  campaigns  of
1952    and  1958  and  in  all  other  campaigns  where  I  have
served  as  a  consultant   I  have  followed  the  advice  of  Mao
Tse-tung.  .  .  .  The  individuate  we  enlisted  became  a  secret
weapon  possessing  strength,  mobility and  real  impact. They
were  able  to  infiltrate  centers   of  opposition  support,  keep
us  informed of  opposition  tactics. ...  In  1958  we  had  Cell
Group  members  working  for  most  of  the  radio  and  televi-
sion  outlets   in  Arizona.    We  were  informed  immediately
when  the  opposition  tripled  its  request  for  time.  .  .  .  The
security  surrounding  campaign  headquarters  can  be  pene-
trated.    Knowing  in  advance  what  the  opposition  proposes
is  very  useful  information  indeed.  .  .  ."
—"How  to  Win  An  Election",  a  newly  published  book  by
Stephen   C.  Shadegg,   one   of   Goldwater's   political   aides.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  27
AUGUST   10,   1964
ioi       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
The Ferment and the Fury in New York's Negro Ghettoes
I  spent  several  days  in  New  York  last  week  trying  to  learn
more  about  the  racial  situation  there,  on  which  so  much  may
depend.    To  see  the  great  city  again   after  the   Harlem   and
Bedford-Stuyvesant   riots  is  to  see  it  with  eyes  freshly  opened.
Driving  in  from  Long  Island,  over  the  Tri-Borough  bridge,
into  125th  Street,  I  saw  the  Negro  ghetto  looking  as  dingy
as  ever,  but  relaxed  and  somnolent,  as if  its  fury  spent.  Down-
town,   walking  on  opulent  Fifth   avenue,   amid   all  the  new
steel  and  glass  skyscrapers,  one  noticed  with  a  new  sharpness
the  almost  complete  absence  of  black  or  brown  faces.     Except
for  an  occasional  poorly  dressed  messenger  boy,  one  saw  only
whites,  and  one  felt  that  this  wonder  city,  with  its  towering
and   majestic   beauty,   rested   like  ancient   Athens   on  a  skve
class, kept  out  of  sight  in  a menial  quarter  of  its  own.    I  went
to  the  theatre  and  saw  three  plays  on  the  race  question,  two
by Negroes:  James  Baldwin's  Blues  for  Mister  Charlie,  Le Roi
Jones's  Dutchman   and  Martin  Duberman's  In  White  Amer-
ica.     The  message   of  the  first  is  hate;  the  second,  loathing;
the  third,  the  only  one  by  a  white  man,  compassion.     Even
at  these  performances,   though  the  audiences  were  responsive,
it  was  as  if  the  stories  told  were  of  another   world,  far   re-
moved  from  these well-dressed  and  educated  white  and  Negro
intellectuals,  some  of  them  mixed  couples,  but  otherwise  mov-
ing  about  racially  separate  to  talk  and  smoke  during  intermis-
sion.
Moratorium  Opposed
I  began  my  exploration  of  this  other  world  at  the   down-
town  headquarters   of  the  Congress  for  Racial   Equality   in  a
rundown  loft  building  on  Park  Row  just  across  the  little  park
that  fronts  on  City  Hall.   It  was a  hectic  morning. The  papers
that  day  carried  the  text  of  the  statement  by  the  leaders  of
major  Negro  organizations  calling  for  a  temporary  suspension
of   mass  demonstrations   until  after   election   day  because   the
defeat  of  Goldwater  was  more  important  "than  any  local  or
state  condition."    My  talk  with   the  white  press   officer   was
constantly  interrupted  by  angry  phone  calls  from  branches  of
CORE   as  far   away  as  California   protesting   any  'such   mora-
torium.    James  Farmer  of  CORE   and  John  Lewis  of  SNCC
did  not  sign  the  statement  with  Roy  Wilkins  of  NAACP;
War  Behind  Our Backs
The  White  House  tried  to  play  down  the  shooting  off
North  Vietnam,  but  most  of  the  press  could  not  resist
the  temptation to sell  papers and spread  the news  across
page  one  in  flaring  headlines.  Chairman  Russell  of  the
Senate  Armed  Services  Committee  tried  to  deflate  the
crisis atmosphere after  Secretaries  Rusk and McNamara
gave   his   committee  and  Senate   Foreign   Relations  a
briefing.  "There  have  been  naval  operations  in  the  Gulf
of  Tonkin by  the  South  Vietnamese,"  he  told  the  press,
"and   this  could  have  confused  the  North  Vietnamese."
It  now  appears  that  South  Vietnam  has  been  carry-
ing  the  war  to  the  north  with  U.S.  support.  A  Wash-
ington  report  in  New  York  Times  Aug.  4  said,  "that
the  [U.S ]  destroyers  on patrol  have  sometimes  collab-
orated with South Vietnamese hit-and-run raids on North
Vietnamese   port  cities,   though  the   destroyers   them-
selves  stay  in  international  waters."   A  dispatch  from
Saigon  in  that  same  day's  paper  said,  "There  was  spec-
ulation  that   Hanoi's  call  for   vigilance  by  the   armed
forces  and the  resulting  tension  may have  been a  factor
in  the  still  unexplained  attacks  by  three  torpedo  boats
on  the  U.S.  destroyer  Maddox." In an  editorial  the  same
day  the  New  York Times  threw further light  into  these
shadows   when  it   said,   "South  Vietnam's  small  naval
forces  have staged  a number of  raids  on the  North Viet-
nam  coast.  One theory  in  Washington  is  that  the Amer-
ican  destroyer,  as  seen  on North Vietnamese radar, may
have  been  taken  for  a  similar  South  Vietnamese  ship."
The day  before the  attack the  North Vietnamese radio
charged  that  on Friday  U.S.  and South Vietnamese  war-
ships  had shelled  "the  Hon  Me and  Non  Ngu  islands" in
North  Vietnam.    The  attack  on  the  Maddox,   according
to  the  Washington  Post  Aug.  3,  took place  "less  than  20
miles  from  the  Island  of  Hon  Me." Washington  says  it
has  "no  knowledge"  of  an  attack  on  these  islands.   But
U.S.  participation  in  raids  on  North  Vietnamese   ports
has  not  been  denied.  This  is  carrying  on  war   behind
our  backs.                                                                 Aug.  4.
\  0
Martin   Luther   King  of   the   Southern   Christian   Leadership
Conference;   Whitney  M.  Young,  Jr.,  of  the  National   Urban
League,   and   A.  Philip   Randolph,   chairman   of   the   Negro
American  Labor  Council.    But  Wilkins  told  the  press  both
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  10,1964
Farmer  and  Lewis agreed  with suspension of  mass demonstra-
tions  and   withheld  their   signatures  until   meetings  of   their
steering  committees.  The  press officer  vehemently denied over
and  over  again  that  Farmer  had  made  any  such  statement;  he
said  Farmer  agreed  with  the  estimate  of  the  Goldwater  dan-
ger,  but  not  with  the  call  to  suspend  mass demonstrations.   It
was  soon  clear  from  the  tone of  these phone conversations  that
the  black  backlash against any  suggestion  for  halting militancy
was  as strong  as the  white backlash on  the  other  side.
A  Frantic   Call  from  the   South
During, the  phone  calls  I  had  a  chance  to  look  around  the
loft,  jammed with  battered  desks  and  old  typewriters on which
a  whole  corps  of  volunteers  were  working.    I  ran  into  old-
timers   like   Jim   Peck,   the   pacifist-anarchist,  who   has   been
beaten  up  on  more  picket  lines for  more  good  causes  since  the
1930s  than  any  other  man  in  the  country;  here  he  was  back
on  the  firing  line,  after  a  bout  with  tuberculosis,  as  diffident
and  devoted  as  ever.    While   I  was  looking  around  a  more
dramatic  telephone   call  came  in  from   the   Sheriff's   office   in
Jonesboro,  La.,  where  a  CORE  volunteer,  Dahny  Mitchell,  a
young  Ph.D.   from  Syracuse,  had  been  arrested  on  the  usual
charge  of  "contributing  to  the  delinquency  of  a  minor"   pre-
sumably  for  recruiting  some  local  Negro  into  the  voter  regis-
tration  drive.    Carl  Rachlin,  another  old-timer,  of  the  Work-
ers  Defense  League,  now  general  counsel  for  CORE,  got  on
the  other  extension.    "We  won't  forget  you,"  he  assured  the
caller.    "We'll  get  right  on  it."    The  words  suddenly  evoked
the  terrifying  scene  2,000  miles away  in  the  Deep  South.  The
phone  was  no  sooner  hung  up  than  another  call  reached  law-
yer   volunteers   in   the   area  and   sent   them   speeding   to   the
Sheriff's  office.    Rachlin told  me  of  a similar  frightening  night
call   a   few   weeks   earlier  when   another   volunteer   worker,
Ronny  Moore  of  Southern  University, was  shot  at  while  cross-
ing  the  Mississippi  at  St.  Francisville.    He  took  refuge  in  a
Negro  home  at  Jonesboro   only  to  have  it  surrounded  by  a
mob  of  whites  threatening  to  burn  the  house  down.    A  frantic
phone  call  to  the  Justice  Department  in  Washington   for  help
elicited  no  response.     In  desperation  a  call  was  put   through
to  FBI  headquarters  in  New  Orleans.    It  had  stayed  open  all
night.    The  alert  FBI  man  who  took  the  call  phoned  the  local
police  in  Jonesboro.    On  his  urgent  demand,  the  local  police
dispersed  the  mob  and  prevented  a tragedy.
Just  Admission  Price  for  the   CIA
"When  are  we,  in  the  Foreign   Relations Committee
and  in  the  Senate,  going  to  delve  into  the  military aid
program?     Year  after  year   the  Committee  accepts  in
almost  dead  silence  whatever  the  Defense  Dept.  tells  it
about  military aid.   We  shove  the  critical reports  of  the
Comptroller  General  under  the  table  when  the   Secre-
tary  and  Assistant   Secretaries  of   Defense   testify  be-
cause  we  don't  want  to  embarrass  them.  .  .  .
"The  real  justification for  'forward  defense'  aid  is  not
that  the  recipient  can  use  it  against   Communism,  be-
cause   a  non-industrial  country   that  cannot  support  a
peace-time   army  cannot   sustain  a  war   effort   against
Russia  or  China.   What  'forward  defense'  aid  does  buy
is  entree  for  American  military  and  intelligence   agen-
cies  close  to  Communist  borders.    For  these  privileges,
we  have  paid  since  World  War  II  a  dozen  times  more
than  we  need  to  have  paid."
—Sen. Morse,  in  the Senate  foreign  aid debate,  Aug.  3
With   a  telephoned  introduction  from   the  downtown   office
I-went  next  to  the  CORE  office  in  Harlem  at  307  W.  125th
St.    This  turned  out  to  be  on  the  second  floor  of  a  decayed
business  property.  The  office  had  one  old  desk  and  typewriter.
The  walls were  decorated with  tattered  signs  and  photos.    One
said,  "Please  report  all  injuries  caused  by  stick  happy  police
to  CORE."  George  Johnson,  the  CORE  official  in  charge,  is  a
Negro  from  a  small  town  near  Cincinnati, with  a  master's  de-
gree  in  education from  the  University of  Michigan.  He  taught
special  children's classes in  the  Cincinnati schools  before  going
full  time  into  the  civil  rights  movement.    He  himself  lives  in
the  Bronx  and  said  he  found  Harlem  "very  depressing."
The  Only  Ones  Who  Stay
"The   only  people  who  stay  in  Harlem,"   Johnson  told  me,
"are  those  who  have  no  alternative.   As  in  the  South,  all  who
can  get  away, do  so.   We  perform  all kinds of  social  and  civic
services.    People  come  to  us  in  desperation  because  they  have
nothing  to  eat  or  no  place  to  sleep  and  we  try  to  do  what  we
can.    We   try  to  awaken  people  to  their  responsibilities,  to
teach   them   why  civil  rights  are  important   and  why,   being
black,  they  should  be  in. the  movement.    We   tell  them  they
have  two main weapons—the  ballot  and  selective  buying.  Reg-
istration  is  low.    During  the  riot  we  operated  a  first  aid  sta-
tion  and  won  20  new  recruits.  People  could  see we were  doing
More  Nuclear  Information to  Our Allies  As  Bait  For  Joining  the  MLF
The  new  Atomic Information Agreement  between  the  U.S.
and  NATO  confirms our  worst  fears  about  the  proliferation
of  national  nuclear  weapons  via  a  multilateral  force.     As
an  inducement  to  participate in  that  force,  the  U.S.  is  offer-
ing  individual  NATO  states  access  to  information  about  de-
livery  systems  for  nuclear   weapons.
The  new  Agreement  and  the  1955  Agreement   it  will  su-
persede  are  parallel  except   for  a  few   key  omissions  and
additions.   Omitted from  the  new  Agreement  is  the  require-
ment  that  information  transferred  by  the  U.S.  to  NATO  be
used  "exclusively   for  ...     NATO  defense   plans."    Whereas
the  1955  Agreement   requires   that  information   transferred
by  the  U.S.   to  NATO   "not  be  transferred   by  NATO  .  .  .
beyond   the   jurisdiction   of   that   organization,"    the   new
Agreement  contains  this  same  requirement  with  one  excep-
tion:  "Unless  otherwise   specified  by  the   U.S.,   atomic   in-
formation   provided   to   NATO   may   be   communicated   by
NATO   to  its   member  states.  .  .  ."    This  may  occur   only
where  the  information  is  "necessary  to  carry  out  functions
related  to  NATO  missions.  .  .  ."  Thus  access  to  information
is   made   contingent   upon   participation   in   NATO's    MLF.
Finally,  the  new  Agreement   allows  the  U.S.  for  the  first
time  to  share  with  "NATO  and its  member  states" informa-
tion  related  to  "the   development   of  delivery  systems"  for
atomic  weapons.  The  '55  Agreement  speaks  only  of  informa-
tion  realted  to  "defense  plans,"  "the  training  of  personnel,"
and  "the   evaluation"   of   enemy   capabilities.     In  the   past,
the   great   cost   of   research   and  development   for   delivery
systems   has   been   the   major   barrier   to   proliferation   of
national  nuclear   forces.
Unless  Congress  vetoes  it,  the  new  Agreement   will  be-
come  effective  approximately  60  legislative  days  from  June
30.    This   means   late   September   or,  if   Congress   adjourns
before   then,   next   January.     In   either   case,   a   dangerous
agreement   is  likely  to  slip  past   an  unsuspecting    public.
—The  Agreements  are in  the Cong.  Rec., Jl. 27, p. 16131 ff
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  10,1964
a  service.   We  had  spotters out  and  whenever  they  saw a  knot
of  tension  they would  phone  in  and  we  would  send  somebody
out  to  calm  the  people  and  ask  them  to  go  home.    What  does
Harlem  need?    Vast,  mass  preferential   assistance  for   better
education,   employment  and   housing.     We   in   CORE   have
about  exhausted  moral  persuasion.    Do  we  reach  down  to  the
grass  roots?    We  have  about  1,000  members  in  a  community
of   close  to   half   a  million.    The   No.    1   influence   is   the
churches.    Then   come  the   Black  Muslims,  the   Malcolm   X
people  and  Nationalists of  various kinds.   We  come  next,  but
far   below  them  in  influence."
A  Visit   to  a  Muslim   Mosque
A  middle-aged  woman  came  in  to  consult  Johnson.     She
said  her  white  employer had  accused  her  13-year-oid  daughter
of  taking  $20  from  the  white  woman's  purse.    She  declared
her  daughter was  innocent.    Johnson  interrupted to  phone  the
Malcolm  X  headquarters  and  the  Black  Nationalist  bookstore
at  125th  St.  and  Seventh  avenue  to  ask  that  someone  there
talk  with  me.    A  young  Negro  college  student  from  Phila-
delphia  had  been  hanging  sadly  around  the  office,  waiting  for
something  to  do;  he  was assigned  to  accompany  me.    A  white
man  is safer  in  the  streets of  Harlem  if  walking with  a Negro.
Our  first  stop  was the  Malcolm  X  headquarters  on  the  second
floor  of  the  Hotel  Theresa  on  Lenox  avenue  which  I  had  last
visited  when  a  reception  was  given  there  for  Fidel  Castro  sev-
eral  years  ago.    Room  128,  the  Muslim  Mosque  of  Malcolm
X,  turned  out  to  be a  large  meeting  hall  with  a big blackboard
at  one  end.    Malcolm  X  was  in  Egypt  but  one  of  his  chief
aides,  James  67X  was  explaining  the  essentials  of  Islam  to  a
young  snub-nosed  Negro  girl  while  a  light  brown  secretary  at
the  reception   desk  looked   on  adoringly.     A  placard  behind
the   door   advertised   a   Pan   African   Students   "High   Life"
dance.    James  67X  was  a  neatly  dressed  young  man  with  a
thin  fuzz  of  beard  on  an  intense  brown  face.    He  used  a ruler
to  make  his points  and  he  addressed  the  one  young  convert  on
the  five  basic  duties  of  Islam  with  the  passion  he  might   have
used   in  speaking   to  a  multitude.     I  found   myself   listening
with  rapt  attention  as  I  waited.
"Islam,"  James  67X  explained,  "is  Arabic.  It  means  to  sub-
mit,  to  surrender.    A  Muslim  is  one  who  surrenders  his  will
to  God's.   His  first  duty  is prayer.    The  Koran  says  men  must
pray  five  times  a  day.    Every  living  thing  is  an  act  of  prayer.
When  a  rose  grows,  it  is a  prayer.  You  must  practice  charity.
Those  Exasperatingly  Peaceful  Laotians
"One  Vientiane   general  explained  why  the  hill  area
was  quiet:  'Phou   Kout  is  too  hard   to  attack   and  too
difficult  to  defend.'   To  Western  strategists  this  analy-
sis   summed   up  the  Laotian  attitude   toward   the   war.
The   Laotian   army,'  one  European  remarked  today,  'is
the  worst  in  the  world.'    'I  only  wish,'  another  Western
military  leader  said,  'that  they  wouldn't  get  drunk  after
every  battle'."
—New  York  Times  from  Vientiane, Laos,  Aug.  1
Two  and  a  half  percent  of  all  you  make,  give  to  the   poor.
Anything  you  give,  you  must  get  back  in  return,  that  is  the
law  of  the  universe.   Whatever  you  plant  in  earth  shall  come
back  seven-fold.    A  kind  word  is  an  act  of  charity.   To  feed
pigeons  is  an  act  of  charity.    To  help  a  blind  man  across  the
street  is  an   act  of  charity.    Every  act  of   charity  brings   the
planet  to  a greater  state  of perfection.    After  prayer  and  char-
ity  comes  fasting,  for  there  is  nothing  like  hunger  to  let  you
know  that  all  men  are  alike;  in  Ramadan  all  hunger  together.
The  fourth  duty  of  Islam  is  pilgrimage,  so  that  one  may  see
men  of  all  colors  join  in  Mecca  in  the  praise  of  God,  all  wear-
ing  the  same  white  cloth,  so  there  is  no  distinction  between
prince  and  peasant,  rich  and  poor.    The  fifth  and  last  of  the
basic duties is Jihad, holy war, which Westerners  have  confused
with  war.  But  Islam's  greatest  achievements  have  been  accom-
plished  not  by  bullets  or  the  sword  but  by  the  conquest   of
intelligence.    Spain  was  conquered  by  intelligence  and   when
Islam   left,   Spain   slipped   backward.     Jihad   is   using   any
method  that  is  worthy  to  bring  any  form  of  life  that  is  not
in  submission to  the  will  of  God  into  submission  and  into  a
state  of  tranquility  and  peace.    There  will  never  be  peace  on
earth  untill  all  men  submit to  the  will of  God.  This  is Jihad."
A  Harlem  Mystic
This  is  a  shortened  but  verbally  faithful   version  of   what
James  6"7X  said.    It  seemed  to  me,  in  its  humanity, on  a  level
with   Islam   as   interpreted   by   its   own   greatest   mystics   and
poets.    There  was  not  a  word  of  hate  in  anything  he  said.
In  an  off  the  record  talk  afterward, he  was  wary  and  distrust-
ful.     I  was  interested   in  his  background.    He  was   Harlem
born,   largely   self-educated,   and   had   left   the  Black   Muslim
movement  of  Elijah  Mohammed  before  Malcolm  X  did.    He
would  say nothing  in  the  slightest  derogatory,   even  by  impli-
The  Truth  About  Castro's  Cuba  Begins  to  Seep  Through  to  the  U.S.  Press
"Although  it  is  difficult  for  an  American  correspondent  to
say  so  without  being  accused  of  Communist  sympathies,  the
fact  is  that  conditions  here  are  not  as  bad  as  the  exiles  say
they  are.  .  .  .  There  is  much  which  can  be  said  in  criticism
of  Mr.  Castro's  Cuba,   but  the  version  reaching  Americans
is  in  some  respects  widely  exaggerated.    Cuba  is  more  like
Peron's  Argentina   or  Nasser's   Egypt   than   it   is   Stalin's
Russia."
Wm.  R.  Frye  from  Havana  in  the  independent   conserva-
tive  Washington   Evening  Star,  July   21.
"The  refusal   of   Mexico,   Chile,   Bolivia   and  Uruguay   to
vote  for  a  total  embargo  of  Castro  means  that  he  lost  little
ground  in  the  nearly  all-out   effort  by  the  Johnson   Admin-
istration  to  unseat  him.    Like  him  or  lump  him,  the  guy  is
going  to  be  around  for  a  long  time.    If  he  would  permit
an  honest  election  tomorrow,  which  he  won't,  he  would  win
by  an  overwhelming  majority.    He  would  win  on  his  record,
the  only  record  a  majority  of  the  Cuban   people  care  about,
and  that  is  that  he  has  taken  from  the  entrenched  rich  and
given  to  the  poor,  has  provided  schooling  for  children  who
could  never  have  had  it   under   his  predecessors,  hospitals,
roads  and  sense  of   being   important   in  the  world—at   the
expense  of  freedom  of  speech,  assembly  and  of  movement
in  and  out  of  the  country,  losses  which   a  majority   of   the
Cuban  people  seem  willing  to  suffer  in  exchange  for   more
food  and  opportunity  for  their   children.   .  .  .
"This   revolution    is   unlike   anything  else   in   the   Soviet
sphere.    Everybody   is  permitted  to have  a  gun,  all  [church]
denominations  are  again  wide  open  and  well-attended.  Ordi-
nary  people  interrupt   Castro  in  the  middle  of  a  speech  and
question   him.   .  .  .  He   must  be  as   much   of  a  puzzle   to
Khrushchev  as  he  is  a  pest  to  Johnson."
—Bob  Considine  in  the  Hearst  press  from  Havana,  New
York  Journal-American,  July  29.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  10,1964
cation,   of   Elijah.     After   leaving  the   latter's   movement   he
spent  weeks  alone  reading  and  meditating   on  the   roof   of  a
Harlem  tenement.    His  Islamic creed  is  far  more  sophisticated
and  humane  than  Elijah's  mixture  of  black  racism  and  super-
stitious  hate  of  "white  devils."    He  winced  when  I  said  that
Muslim  Arab  traders had  sold  his  people  into  bondage.     He
insisted   that   a  slave  could   free  himself   by  accepting   Islam
while  slavery  was  accepted  and  institutionalized  under  Chris-
tianity,  for  which  he  feels  a  deep  repugnance,  though  brought
up  by  Baptist  parents.    One  felt  in  talking  with  this  gifted
young  Negro  that  finding  himself   alienated   from  American
society  he  was  drawn  to  as  distant  and  alien  a  creed   as  he
could  find,  that  of  Islam,  and  had  created  a  dream  world   in
fraternity  with  those  distant pilgrims  in  Mecca.    He  had  gone
into  an  internal  spiritual  exile  as  a  refuge  from  the  miseries
of  the  Negro  ghetto  in  white  America.
An  African   "Zionist"
I  encountered  an  older,  more  conventional,  form  of  Negro
retreat   from   white   realities  in  Michaux's   Black   Nationalist
bookstore  on  the  other  side  of  Seventh  avenue.    This  is  the
bookstore  made  famous  in  countless  pictures  with  the  placard
in   front   advertising  the   book,   "The   God   Damned   White
Man."    The  walls,  tables  and  even  parts  of  the  floor  overflow
with  books,   mostly  on  Negro  problems   and   Africa.     I  was
ushered  through  a  back  door  on  which  hung  a  large  portrait
of  Nasser  into  a  back  room  crowded  with  more  books   and
mementoes.  There  at  an  ancient roll-top  desk  sat  a  thin  elderly
Negro  in  his  70s.    This  was  the  proprietor  Lewis  Michaux,  a
lifetime  follower  of  Black  Nationalism.   He  burst  into  speech
like  a  volcano,  stopping  only  from  time  to  time  to  show  me
another  cherished  memento  from  a  long  table  full  of  African
carvings  and  oddities.    His  special  joys  were  products   from
Ghana.  He  showed  me  a bottle  of  lager  beer  brewed  in  Ghana,
a  can  of  lemon  squash  made  in  Ghana,  a  jar  of  peppers   put
up  in  Ghana,  as  if  these  were  precious  relics.    He  had  visited
on  cocoa  ships  in  New  York  harbor  from  Ghana,  and  it  was
Ghana  of  which  he  thought  first  when  he  spoke  of  "back  to
Africa."    He  was  like  an  old  Zionist  longing  for  Eretz  Israel,
and  despite  the  Black  Nationalist  fervor  a  gentle  humor  and
a  human  kindness were  evident  as  he  talked  with  me.
"No  Negro  is a  citizen,"  Michaux burst  forth.     "Otherwise
there  would  be  no  need  for  a  Civil  Rights  Act.    Dr.  King  is
not  a  citizen.   Dr.  Bunche  is  not  a  citizen.   Russians can'be-
New  Man  at  the  SEC
The   nominatian   of   Francis  Wheat  to   fill   the   next
vacancy  at  the  SEC creates  suspicion.   He  is  Johnson's
third   appointment  to   the   five-man   commission.    The
first.  Commissioner  Owens,  was  securities administra-
tor  in  Oklahoma,  closely  connected  with  the  Kerrs. The
second,   Hamer   Budge,   is   an   arch-conservative  from
Idaho.    Wheat  is  a  political  unknown.    Who  sponsored
him   is  a  mystery.    California  Governor   Brown  knew
nothing  of  the  appointment in  advance.   Neither  did  the
Los   Angeles    Congressional   delegation   nor    Senator
Engle's   office.    We  think  the  Senate  Banking  and  Cur-
rency  Committee  should  question  him  closely.    He  is  a
member  of  a  large  Los  Angeles  law   firm.   Have any  of
its   clients  cases   pending  before  the   SEC?     What  is
Wheat's    attitude   toward   the   1940   Investment    Act,
which  is  supposed  to  police  mutual  funds?     Wheat,  as
head  of  the  American Bar  Association's  Investment  Act
subcommittee,  will  be  familiar  with  the  loopholes.     Is
he  disposed  to  close  them?
come  citizens.    Germans  can  become   citizens.    But  not   Ne-
groes.  Neither   the  pulpit  nor  the  politicians  give  our  people
leadership.     In  the  last  uprising   [his   term  for  the  riot]  no
preacher  and  no  politician  could  venture  into  the  streets.    The
people  organized  themselv.es  block  by  block.    You   ask  who
does  speak  for  the  Negro  masses?    Nobody   speaks  for   the
grass  roots.  Those Negroes  who  claim  to  speak  for  them  don't
even  associate  with  the  Negro  masses  they  claim  to   represent.
They  all  live  up  in  penthouses  and  they  never  come  down  to
the  henhouses,"   Michaux   chuckled,   "until   they   want   some
eggs.  But  the  chickens  are  no  longer  laying  eggs.  The   classes
never  meet  the  masses  till  trouble  starts.    There  are  two  ele-
ments  of  Negroes—one  integrationist,  the  other   separationist.
The  class  Negro  is  integrationist.    The  mass  Negro  is  separa-
tionist,  that  is,  Nationalist.     Aren't  they  suffering   from   too
much  separation  already, you  ask.  Well,  they're  born  sufferers.
To  enjoy  anything  else  but  a  life  of  suffering  would  kill  them
quicker.    The  white  man's  heart  will  never  change.     If  his
heart  hasn't  changed  in  400  years,  we  don't  think  he  has  a
heart.    What  could  be  done   for   Harlem   now?    Take   that
money  that's  going  to  the  moon  and  put  it  into  Harlem,  and
set  an  example  for  all  the  Harlems  of  the  USA.    Give  people
jobs  and  there  will  be  no  muggings.     Men  don't  steal  when
they  have  enough  to  eat.    Give  people  proper  ideas  and  there
Some  Dubious  Aspects  of  A  Giant  Railroad  Merger  Against  Which  Kefauver  Warned
Senator  Kefauver  warned  two  years  ago  that  a  case  by
case  approach  to  railway  mergers  would  lead  the  ICC  to
a  merger  between  Pennsylvania and  the  New  York  Central,
the  nation's  first  and third largest  railroads.   He  urged  the
Commission  to  plan  a  rational  transportation  system.    The
Commission  yielded  to  industry  pressure  instead.   It  merged
the   B&O-C&O  and  last   month  the   Norfolk,  Nickel  Plate,
and  Wabasli.  and  now  must  approve the  Penn-Central  as  a
counter-weight  to  these  two  powerful  systems.
The  economic  power  of   a  Penn-Central  system  will   ex-
teiMl  far  beyond transportation.   The  25  members  proposed
for  its  board  of  directors  sit  as  directors  of  180  other  cor-
porations  whose  assets   total  over  $113  billion.    Some  are
now  major  suppliers and  shippers  to  the  two  lines.   This  is
hardly   the   arms  length  relationship  between   buyer  and
seller   required  by  law.
The  identity  of  those  who  control the  Pennsylvania  is  un-
known.    Seven  of  its  ten  major  stockholders  are  listed  on
the   merger   application  as   brokerage   houses   and   Swiss
banks.    They  own  20%  of   the   stock,   enough  to   exercise
control.    The  ICC,  although  it  has  the  power,  will  not  ask
these  nominal owners  to  reveal  the  beneficiaries.   The  Cen-
tral  has  equally  anonymous stockholders,  but  it  claims  con-
trol  by  Allegheny  Corp.,  a  holding  company  whose  major
asset  is  Investors  Diversified  Services,  the  world's   largest
investment   complex.
The  suspicion  is  that  a  Penn-Central  merger  will  unite
the  Mellon  Empire  with  Alleghany.    The  extent  of  Mellon
influence  is  also  unknown.   The  FTC  recently  studied it  but
won't   make  its  report  public.   The  most  recent   public  in-
formation  is  a  1942 monograph by  the  Temporary  National
Economic  Committee.   That  showed  Mellon  wealth  concen-
trated  in  finance  but  also  in  control  of  7,  and  influential  in
17,  of  the  200  largest  non-financial  corporations,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, August  10,1964
will  be  no  difference   between  white  and   black.    Till  then
nothing  will  happen."
He  Gave  Up  His  Lincoln
I  went next  day to  another  of  New  York's  Negro  ghettoes,
one  not  yet  in  the  news.    On  McKinley  Square  in  the  East
Bronx.    I  talked  with  Herbert  Callendar,  chairman  of  Bronx
CORE.    I  last  saw  this  section  of  the  Bronx  more  than  30
years  ago  when  it  was  a  Jewish  neighborhood;  today  it  is  a
rundown  Negro  slum,  almost  as  grimy  as  Harlem.    I  found
Callendar  in  a  huge  warehouse-like  second  floor  lined  with
banners  bearing  the  names  of  Medgar  Evers  and  other  mar-
tyrs  in  the  civil  rights  struggle.    He  turned  out  to  be  a  big
slim  brown  young  man  of  30,  who  gives  the  impression  of
quiet  patience  and  great  strength,  and  of  complete   devotion
without  fanaticism  or  hate.    He  is  New  Yo*k  born,  went  to
high  school  in  Manhattan,  and  was  in  the  Army  two  years,
part  of  them  in  Japan.    He  went  to  work  on  his  return  in  the
Ford  works  at  Mahwah,  N.J.    His  ability  soon  made  him  an
organizer  for  the  UAW.    "I  had  a  Lincoln  and  a  house  in
the  upper  Bronx,"   Callendar  said  of  those  days.    But  then
he  went  on  a  Freedom  Ride  through  the  South  in  1961  and
came  back  a changed man.   "I  came back with  my eyes open,"
he  said,  "and  dedicated  to  civil  rights.    I  was  arrested  down
there  for  the  first  time  but  I  realized  that  it  was not  so  differ-
ent  for  the  Negro  up  here.    I  saw that  only  the  lowest  and
hardest  and  poorest  paid  jobs  were  open  to  the  Negroes  in
the  Ford  shops  and  I  began  to  use  the  grievance  machinery
to  advance the  Negro.    I  became  a  thorn  in  the  side  of  man-
agement  and  I  got   fired."   He  found  that  in  his  own  local
there  were  racists  and  even  Birchites,  mostly  from  rural  New
York  and  New  Jersey, typical of  the  kind  of  union  members
swept  up  by  compulsory  union  shop  contracts  instead  of  by
persuasion  and  the  hard  lessons  of  experience.    He  lost  his
fight  for  reinstatement and  went  into  CORE  instead.    I  asked
him  how many of  Bronx CORE were white and  he  said  about
30%,  some  Italians, a  few  Irish  and  Puerto  Ricans  but  mostly
Jewish.    He  was  setting  up  car  pools  and  block  captains  to
get  out  the  vote  this year; he  told  me  only  about  40%  of  the
Negroes   in  his  area  were  registered.     "But   we're  going  to
register  them  as  independents,"  he  said.  -"We  can't  afford  to
be in  anybody's hip  pocket."    He  had  teaching teams out  help-
ing  people  to  pass  their  literacy  tests.    He  objected  strongly
The Place  to  Start  is  Harlem,  Not  on the  Moon
"If  we  could  only  supplant  the  fear  and  the  hate,  the
bitterness  and  the  division,  the  poison  and  the  venom
that  our  fellow  man  contains,  with  the  hope  and  the
optimism  and the  achievements represented  by  this ven-
ture  here,  how  much  better  our  world will  be  for  our-
selves,  our  children  and  our  grandchildren."
—President  Johnson  after   hit   briefing    by  scientists
on  the  Ranger  7 moon shot.
to  any moratorium on  demonstrations.
"The  NAACP's  had  a  moratorium  on  demonstrations  for
15  years,"  Callendar  said.    "Negroes  are  losing  faith  in  civil
rights   organizations.    We   need   demonstrations   on   specific
issues  if  we  are  to  keep  unrest  channelled   in  a   responsible
non-violent  peaceful  way.    We've  scheduled  demonstrations
against  Jim  Crow  in  the  building  trades,  and   against  slum
landlords—some  parts  of  the  East  Bronx  are  as  rat-ridden  as
Harlem—and   against   police  brutality.     We   have  one   case
where  police  spread-eagled  a  Puerto  Rican  in  his  cell  as  if  he
were  being  crucified.   This  community  can  blow  up  as  easily
as  Harlem  if  we can't  show  them  accomplishments.    The  most
important  task  of  all  here  is to  save  our  youth.    We  need  job
opportunities  for  them  and  above  all  we  need  to  save  them
from  narcotics.    The  rate  of  addiction  in  the  East  Bronx  is
tremendous,  and  it  will  be worse  in  the  next  generation  unless
we  take  steps  to  stop  it  now.    We  need  a  hospital  for  re-
habilitation,   a   training   center   where   addicts   can   go   after
they've  been  cured  and  learn  a  trade.    Otherwise  they'll  soon
be  back  on  the  drug  out  of  hopelessness.     A  big  portion  of
all  the crime in our Negro sections is linked  to  dope  addiction.
Wiping  it  out  would  be  the  biggest  single  step  forward."
An  Extraordinary   Teen-Ager
Of  all  the  people  with  whom  I  talked  in  New  York  the
most  extraordinary  was  Callendar's  youth  coordinator,  Judy
Howell,  a  young  girl  of   17,  who  has  worked  six  years  for
CORE.    Her  beautiful  brown  African  face,  her  sharp  intelli-
gent   eyes,  her  trim  person,   radiated   energy,   purposefulness
and  capacity.   While  I  interviewed  her,  we  were  constantly
being  interrupted  by  youngsters   in  white  sweat  shirts  with
CORE  in  blue  letters  on  them  and  she handled  these  subordi-
Harlem  and  Arms:  More  Money  Wasted  on
"We  are  surprised  when  the  neglected  evils  of  Harlem's
ghetto  eruDt  into  the  violence  that  is  taking  place  today.
Incredibly  bad  housing,  poor  schools,  few  jobs,  little  recrea-
tion,  or beauty, or joy—these  are  the  earmarks  of  a  sizeable
section  of  the  greatest  city  of  the  Western  World,  and  a
disgrace  in  the  eyes  of  us  who  believe  in  the  promise  of  a
better  America.  .  .  .  Our preoccupation  with  the  cold  war
and  our  concentration on  massive  arms  spending  have  been
largely   responsible   for   many   of   our   neglected  domestic
problems.  .  . .
"There  is  a   further   reason  for  a   modest  reduction  in
arms  spending—the  importance  of  curtailing needless  waste
in  our defense  program. .  .  .  We have,  for  example,  appro-
priated  funds  in  recent  years  of   $1.5  billion  to  build  the
RS-70  bomber—an  ill-advised  project  which  the  Air  Force
will  never  use.    This  costly  fiasco  has  wasted  more money
than  we  have  just   authorized  for   the  President's  nation-
wide  war  on  poverty  for  this  year.   The  reports  issued  by
the  Government  Accounting  Office  for  the  year  ending  May
Bomber  Than  Poverty  Program  Will  Cost
1  ...    indicate  another half  billion dollars  of  waste  in other
poorly  conceived  projects.  .  .  .
"In  yesterday's   Washington   Post   there  was   an  article
entitled   'Parking   Lot   for   Air   Force   Swimming   Pool   as
"Essential  for  Defense"  Irks  GAO'. ...  The GAO accused
the  Air  Force  of  using  funds  to  build projects  without  con-
gressional   approval.    The  examples  '. .  .  included  a  golf
course,  a  riding  stable  and a  pet  hospital.  .  .  .
"I  think  our  servicemen  are  entitled  to  things  such   as
swimming pools.... The point  I  should  like  to  make is that
those  same  things  are  needed  in  other  parts  of  the  country.
Perhaps  if   we  had  more  swimming  pools  in  Harlem,  we
would  have  had  less  trouble  in  the  summer  of  1964."
—McGovern   (DJSJ).)    urging  the  Senate  July  tS   to  cut
4%  or   f 1.8  billion  from  the  new  f46.7   billion  armi   budget,
a  proposal   only   four   other  Senators,  all  Democrats,   sup-
ported:  Clark  (Pa),   Morse  (Ore),  Nelson  (Wit)   and  Neu-
berger  (Ore).
\   1  ,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I..F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  10,
Negro  Youth  Leader  Blames  Police  Stupidity  for  the  Harlem  Riots
nates  with  an  almost  Napol .onic  speed  and  decisiveness.  "Let
the kids fix the place  up  themselves,"  she told  one  subordinate
worried  about  a new  branch  headquarters.    "Then  they'll  con-
sider  it  their  own  and  keep  it  in  good  shape."    She  told  me
how  she  was  organizing  the  youth  of  the  East  Bronx,  gang
fashion,   for   constructive  purposes.     The   teams,  with   th'eir
block  and  field  leaders,  are  to  be  set  up  in  the  same  hierarchi-
cal  semi-military  fashion  as juvenile gangs,  with  ages  from  11
to  21,  the  older  boys  and  girls  in  the  leadership  positions.
"These  teams will  be  used  to  distribute  leaflets,  to  help  get
out  a  community  paper,
1
  to  organize  block   parties   for   civil
rights,  to  join  in  getting  out  the  vote,  to  run  clean-up  cam-
paigns  in  each  block,  and  to  arrange  trips,"  she  said.  "There
will  be  competition  between  the  various  blocks.    Boston  Road
might  get  an  award  for  getting  out  the  biggest  voter  registra-
tion.    Freedman  street  might  be  first  in  the  clean  block  con-
test.    Each  block  will  try  to  win  in  some  activity..   Here  at
headquarters  we're  setting  up  a  field  staff,  a  secretarial   staff,
a  newspaper  staff—we  hope  to  publish  a weekly—and  an  edu-
cation  staff,  which  will  take  care  of  complaints  from  parents
and  various  school  problems."
It  Takes  a  Riot  to  Get  Attention
Judy  is  in  her  last  year  at  high  school  and  hopes  afterward
to  enter  Hunter  College  and  then  make a  career  in  stage  man-
agement  and  production.    When   I  asked  her  how  the  youth
drive  originated  she  said  it  was  her  idea  and  that  she  sold  it
to  the  adults in  CORE.    "They  didn't  realize,"  she said,  "that
young  people  had  to  be  handled   differently  and  needed  spe-
cial  organization."    As  she  spoke,  the  phone  rang.    Callen-
dar  answered  and  then  shouted  across  the  room  that  Bedford-
Stuyvesant  had  just  gotten  a  special  grant  for  its  youth  work.
"Maybe  we'd  better  have  a  riot  here,  too,"  Judy  said  laugh-
ingly.  "Those  people  downtown didn't  have  a  dime for  young
people  till  the  riots  broke  out  in  Harlem  and  Bedford-Stuy-
vesant.    Now  the  churches  have  come  up  with  $100,000  and
the  city  with $200,000.    We  here  in  the  Bronx  have  managed
on  less than  $60  so  far  this  summer."
Judy  herself  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  youth  demon-
stration  which  led  to  the  Harlem  riot  and  gave  me  her  own
It   Must   Have  Been  Those  Godless  Reds
"Jackson,   Miss.,   July    31—Another   Negro   church
burned  to  the  ground  in  Mississippi  last  night,  bringing
to  at  least  15  the  number  damaged  or  destroyed  by  fire
since  the  statewide  civil  rights  drive  opened  in mid-
June.  .  .  .  Last  week  Senator  James  O.  Eastland  and
some  local  officials   had  charged  that  some  of  the  civil
rights  workers  participating  in  the  Mississippi  Summer
Project  had  Communist  records."
—In  the New  York  Times, Aug.  1
account  of  how  it  happened.    The  purpose  was  to  protest  the
slaying  of  15-year  old  James  Powell  by Police  Lieutenant Gilli-
gan,  to  urge  the  latter's  suspension  and  to  ask  Police  Com-
missioner  Murphy  to  come  to  Harlem   and   speak  with   the
people.     She  said  that  when  the  demonstrators  marched   to
Police   Precinct   28   on   123rd   Street,   Inspector    Pendergast
would  not  let  any  of  the  youth  leaders  speak  but  instead  re-
ceived  Rev.  Nelson  C.  Dukes,  a  Negro  Baptist  minister,  who
tried  to  take  over  the  leadership  of  the  demonstration.  "They
didn't  know  who  Rev.  Dukes  was  and  were  suspicious  of  the
report  he  made when  he  came out  of  the  police  station,"  Judy
related.    "Inspector   Pendergast  wouldn't  listen  to  any  of  us
and  the  crowd  wouldn't  listen  to  him.    Finally  he  yelled,  'To
hell  with  the  niggers,  get  them  out  of  here  any way you  can.'
Then  the  police  arrested  me  and  the  other   15  youth   leaders
and  began  pushing  the  crowd  back.   That's  when  trouble  be-
gan.    We  could  have  stopped  it  in  a  minute  if  they  had  just
let  us  use  the  bull  horn.    Instead  they  rushed  all  of  us  youth
leaders  into  the  police  station.    The  police  aren't  popular  in
the  neighborhood   anyway  and  cans  and  bottles  began  to  fly.
I  was  the  only  girl  arrested  and  a  policewoman  took  me away
after  I  had  been  kicked  and  hit  over  the  head.    The  others
were  given  a  beating  and  the  crowd  outside  could  hear  their
screams.   We  didn't  know  a  riot  had  started  until  we got  out
of  night  court  at  2  a.m.    The  man  to  be  blamed  is  Inspector
Pendergast  who  is  supposed  to  be  experienced  and  to  have  a
reputation  for  fairness.    If  it  wasn't  for  his  stupid   handling
of  the  affair,  there  would  have  been  no  riot."
Readers  Might  Like  to  See My  Review  of  Wm.  S. White's  Biography  of  Lyndon  Johnwn  in  the  July  30  New  York  Review  of  Books  (250  W.
57th  St.,  NY  City)  and  My  Review  of  Goldwater's  Writings  in  the  Aug.  20   issue,   each  35*   on  newsstand  or  from  the   Review  itself.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  IS,   D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name      ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
8AO/84
For  $5.35  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fiftiet
(To)    Name   .............................................................................
Street       ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Clu*  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  in
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
br  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5   In   the  U.S.:  16   In  Canada:   110   elsewhere.     Air   Mall   rates:
$16  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED