I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964jan06.pdf

============================================================

Our New  "Open  Door" to China, P.  2
Only  Repeal  Can  End  the  Multiple Menace  to  Political  Freedom of the  Internal  Security  Act, See Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
xii,  NO.  i
JANUARY  6,  1964
<°<       WASHINGTON, D.   C.
20  CENTS
While  We  Talk  of  Ending  The  Cold  War
It  is  difficult   to  see  what  if  anything  is  happening  in  re-
gard  to  the  problem  of  peace.   Perhaps  a  good  point  to  begin
is  with  a  story  in  The  Times  of  London  which  indicates  that
not  much  of  anything  really  is  happening.    The   Times  re-
ported   from   Paris   (Dec.   17)   that   at   the  opening  of   the
NATO   Council  meeting  Paul  Spaak  of   Belgium  had  made
so  angry  a  speech  attacking  the  "immobilism"  of  the   West-
ern  alliance  that  his  remarks  were  "suppressed  by  the  NATO
secretariat."  Apparently  M.  Spaak's  speech  had  to  be  obtained
from  other  sources.    The  Times  said  "one  diplomatist"  had
informed   it  M.  Spaak  "advocated  that  the  West  should  get
in  a  few  ideas  of  its  own  without waiting  for  Russia  to  take
the  initiative."    President  Johnson's  glorified   barbecue with
Chancellor  Erhard  deep  in  the  heart  of  Texas  does  not  seem
to  have  changed  this  situation.    "No  new  initiatives  are  im-
mediately  planned,"  Caroll  Kilpatrick  reported  from  Austin
in  the  Washington  Post  Dec.  30.    "The   Chancellor  stressed,
and  the  President  agreed,  that  any  new  agreement  depends
upon  a  change  of  attitude in  the  Kremlin."
Rusk  Took A Hard  Line in  Paris
What  this  means,  in  effect,  is  that  any  substantial  step  to-
ward  relaxation  of  tension  depends  on  a  Russian  willingness
to  surrender on  Germany.   This  becomes  clearer  if  one  looks
at  the  NATO  speeches  as  reported   in  Le  Monde  of  Paris
(Dec.   17-18-19)  which  gave  by  far  the  fullest  coverage.    It
appears  from   these  that  the  dividing  line  in  NATO  is  be-
tween  those  who  would  subordinate  all  else  to  the  German
problem  and  those  who  would  postpone  German   unification
while  solving  less  difficult  questions.  According  to  Le  Monde,
M.  Halvard  Lange  of  Norway,  in  supporting  M.  Spaak,  said
NATO  ought  to  "avoid  a  static  attitude."    If  there  was  no
chance  at  the  moment  to  solve  the  German  problem,   "one
could  by  stages,"  he  proposed,  "improve  East-West   relations
by  accords  on  'peripheral'  problems."     This  point   of  view
was  shared  by  the  British,  the  Canadians  and  the  Danes  but
opposed  by  the  Germans,  French,  Dutch  and  Turks  with  the
support  of  the  Secretary  of   State.    "His   language,"  Andre
Fontaine  said  of  Mr.  Rusk   (Le  Monde,   Dec.   18)   "hardly
differed  from  that  of  M.  Couve  de  Mutville."
The  only  difference  which  appeared  at  the  NATO  Council
tetween  Mr.  Rusk's  position  and  that  of  the  German   For-
eign  Minister,  Merr  Schroeder,  was  that  the  Secretary  of  State
expressed   the  view   (somewhat   to  the   dismay,  it   later   ap-
peared,  of  the  State  Department)   that  it  was  in  the  West's
interest  that  Khrushchev's  policy  of  co-existence  should  pre-
vail  over  Mao  Tse-tung's  more  belligerent  stance.    The  Ger-
man  Foreign  Minister,  on  the  other   hand,  seemed  to  have
reverted  to the  paranoid  politics of  the  Dulles  era;  he  thought
Mao   less   dangerous   and   regarded   peaceful   co-existence   as
Air  Force  Intelligence  at  Work
It  isn't  often  that  we can  get  a  glimpse  of  the  think-
ing  which  goes  on  in  Air  Force  Intelligence.   A  rare
insight  of  this  kind  was  unwittingly  provided  by   the
Washington  Post  (Dec.  20)  in  assigning  a  new book on
national  security   to  review  by  a  Robert  A.  Kilmarx
(what  a  lovely  name  for  a  Pentagon   official!)  who  is
special  adviser  to  the  assistant   chief   of  staff   of   Air
Force Intelligence.,
Mr.  Kilmarx wrote  that  the  book  came  "at  a  most
fortunate  time"  because the  signing  of  the  nuclear  test
ban  treaty  had created  the  danger  of  a  "euphoria  about
national   security"   which   could   be   "compounded  by
apathy  toward  cold  war  conflict"  especially  if  the  So-
viets   "continue  to  avoid  precipitating  major  crises."
This  is  the  first  mention we  have  seen  of  what  might
be  called  a  crisis  gap.    Perhaps  the  CIA  can  fill  it  by
fabricating  some  crises  of  its  own.
We  were especially fascinated by  Mr. Kilmarx's  fear
that  President Kennedy's  assassination  "may  have  re-
inforced  this  danger,  since  the  forces  of  intolerance,
hatred  and  extremism  which  many  people  apparently
believe  contributed to  his  death may  be  viewed  as  the
product  of  cold  war  instability,  ideological  conflict  and
economic  frustration."  In  other  words the  killing may
have  led  the  American  people  to  wonder  about  the  ef-
fects  upon  them  of  that  system  of  perpetual  fear  and
hatred  we  call  the  cold  war.   This  Air  Force  expert
seems   to   think   such   moments   of   sober   reflection,
though  rare,  are  a  menace to  national  security.
"an  instrument  that  Moscow  uses  to  divide  the  alliance"   (Le
Monde,   Dec.   17).    Merr  Schroeder  claimed  to  be  an  advo-
cate  of  "movement"  but  not  apparently  in  any  peaceful  di-
rection.    He  opposed  long  term  credits  to  Moscow   (as  did
Mr.  Rusk)  lest  this  "permit   it  to  resume  its  politics  of  in-
timidation  and  tension"  and  he  pictured  the  Soviet   campaign
for  an  agreement  against  the  proliferation  of  nuclear  weapons
as  a  sinister  effort  to  prevent  the  establishment   of  a  multi-
lateral  NATO  nuclear  force.    These  positions  make  it  easier
to  understand   the  headlines  from  Texas  two  weeks   later,
"Thaw  in  Cold   War   Doubtful,   Erhard  Cautions   Johnson"
(Washington  Star,  Dec.  29).   It  certainly  is,  if  the  Germans
have  their  way.
It  would  be  a  mistake,  however,  to  blame  all  this  on  the
Germans.     Though   President  Johnson  has  twice  spoken  of
his  desire  to  end  the  cold  war,  first  at  his  December  13 diplo-
matic  reception  and  again  in  his  Dec.  17  address  to  the  UN,
the  country,  the  press,  and  the  government  are  all  geared  the
other  way.   This  was  reflected  in  the  difference  between   the
New  York  Times  and  the  London  Times  in  their  treatment,
on  the  eve  of  the  NATO  Council  meeting,  of   Khrushchev's
closing  speech  to  the  Central  Committee  in  Moscow  Dec.   13.
(Confined   on  Page  Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  January   6,1964
Hilsman's   Naive   Self-Righteousness   Contrasted    With  De  Gaulle's  Astute   Politics
Still  A  Long  Way  to  Go  Before  We  Get  Back  to  Reality  in  the  Far  East
Three  points  strike  one  about  the  Roger   Hilsman   speech
in  San  Francisco  "opening  the  door"  to   improved   relations
with  Communist  China.    One  is  its  naive    self-righteousness.
"These,"   Mr.   Hilsman   said   of   Peking's   rulers,    "are    the
'Marxist  Puritans:'  they  see all  the  world  as  a  conflict   between
unblemished  good  and  unredeemable  evil  .  .  .  there  are few
people  on   earth  as  sublimely   confident   as  are  the    Chinese
Communist  leaders  that  they  are  always  right  and  good."  One
of   the  few  people  this  description  fits  is  ourselves,    particu-
larly  the  State  Department   crowd—their  customary  view  of
the  world  is  just  such  a  simple-minded  black-and-white.   "We
are   confronted,"   the   Assistant  Secretary   of   State   for   Far
Eastern   Affairs   said,   "with  a  regime  which   .  .  .  has  used
hatred  as  an  engine  of  national  policy.    The  U.S.  is  the  cen-
tral  figure  in  their  demonology."    How  aptly  this  applies  to
our  China  policy.
Why  China  Wants  The  Bomb,  Too
The   second   point  is  that   the   State   Department    does   not
seem  to  realize  that  its  emphasis  on  the  differing  Russian  arid
Chinese  attitudes toward   "the  realities  of  the  nuclear  age"   is
susceptible  of   very   different   interpretation   in  Peking.     Our
relations  with  Russia  are  better  than   those  with   China   not
just  because  Moscow   is  more  aware  than  Peking   of  the   nu-
clear  peril  but  because  Moscow  has  the  H-bomb,  too,  and  its
possession   forces  us  to  be  more  sober  in  our  dealings  with
the  Russians.    The  Chinese  may  well  feel  that  the  "realities
of  the  nuclear  age"   dictate  a  tremendous  effort   to  obtain  its
weapons,  too,  so  that  they  can,  like  the  Russians,  exact  a  mu-
tual  , fear   and   respect   in   their   relations   with   Washington.
From   this  viewpoint  our   rude  and   swift   rejection  of   every
offer   they  have  made   for   a   "nuclear   free   Pacific"   may  yet
prove  a  serious  error  on  our  part  since  that  proposal  implied
Peking's  readiness  to  give  up  any  attempt  to  obtain   nuclear
weapons.
The  third  point  is  the  width  of  the  gulf  which  separates
the   two  capitals.    In   the   U.S.   political  frame   of   reference,
(his  speech  marks  an  advance  toward  realism  in  the  Ear  East,
but  that  is  also  an  indicator  of  how  far  from  reality  we  have
drifted.    In  the  Chinese  frame  of  reference,   this  patronizing
lecture,   with   its  childish   conspiratorial   notion   of   somehow
Unfit  to  Print?
There  were  two  omissions   by  the  New  York  Times
(Dec.   11)   when  it   reprinted  from   the   New   Republic
Jean  Daniel's  account  of  his  interviews  with  Kennedy
and  Castro.    M.  Daniel  wrote that  he  asked  the  Presi-
dent   "Could  the   U.S.   tolerate   economic  collectivism"
and  Kennedy replied:  "What  about  Sekou  Toure?  And
Tito?    I  received  Marshal  Tito  three  days  ago  and  our
discussions  were  most  positive."    This  was  omitted  by
the  Times.    It  also  omitted  Castro's   comment,  "Why
am   I  not   Sekou  Toure?     Because  the   Russians  have
never  done  us  any  injury  such  as  the  Yugoslavians and
the  Guineans  have  complained  of  in  the  past,  and  be-
cause  the  Americans  have  never  given  us  any  of   the
benefits    for    which   these    two    nations  congratulate
themselves  today."    This  indicates  that   Castro  might
assume  a  neutralist  position,  too,  if  he  met  with  friend-
liness.     Why  did  the  editors  of  the  New  York  Times
consider this  unfit  to  print?
dividing  the  younger  Communist   leadership  from  the  elder
and  its  praise  of  Chiang's  regime  in  Formosa,  must  make  us
look  as  if  we  are  still  living  in  a  dream  world.    De  Gaulle's
politics  by  comparison  are  subtly  aware  of  realities  and  their
possibilities.    This  is  that   China  is  prepared,   in  return   for
better  relations  with  France  and  the  West,  to  see  South-East
Asia  stabilized  and  neutralized  even  though   in  a  way  which
would  restore  French  cultural  and  economic  hegemony   in  the
regime.    This  is  the  deal   shaping   up   between   Peking   and
Paris,   and   it   makes   sense.     We   by  contrast   still   oppose  a
conference  on  Cambodia   lest  it  open  the  door  also  to   peace
in  South  Vietnam.    In  this  respect,  from  China's   standpoint,
we  remain  a  dangerous  Canute  in  Far  Eastern   waters.
BITTER   PILL   FOR  EASTLAND:  The   grounds   on   which   the
Court  of  Appeals   has  for  the  second   time  reversed  the   con-
tempt   conviction  of   newspaperman   Robert   Shelton    promise
trouble  for  Eastland  in  the  suit  brought   against   him  by  the
Southern   Conference   Educational  Fund.    For  the  raid  upon
the  SCEF,  like  the  subpoena   for  Shelton,  was  never   author-
ized   by  the  Senate   Internal   Security  subcommittee.   .  .   We
salute  in  the  passing  of  A.   J.  Liebling  a  great  reporter  and
a  great  critic  of  the  U.S.  press.
One  Lone  Senate  Voice  and  Indian  Protest  Against  U.  S.  Navy's  Latest  Expansion
"I  invite  attention  to  (he  latest  maneuver  in  the  Penta-
gon  in  connection  with  foreign  aid.   This  is  the  expansion
of   both   the   military   aid   program  and   the   presence   of
American  military  forces—at  one  and  the  same  time—into
southern Asia.
"Over  the  years,  one  of.  the  largest  of  all   U.S.  military
aid  programs has  seen  billions  go  to  Pakistan  on  the  theory
that  she  was  a  partner  with  us  against  Communist  aggres-
sion.    That  theory  has  already  proved  fallacious.    But  the
only  response the  Pentagon  is  able  to  come  up  with  in  such
matters  is  to. throw  good  money  after  bad.
"So  it  is  programming  a  military  aid  program  for  India
that  is  on  about  the  same scale  as  that  for  Pakistan.    I  am
satisfied   that  if  any  use  of  our  aid  to  these  countries ever
occurs,  it   will  be  against  each  other  and  not  against   any
Communist  power.
"But  the  Pentagon  is  [also]  preparing to  send  American
naval  forces  into  the  Indian  Ocean  on  a  permanent  basis
for  the  first  time.    Expansion  of  the  fleet  into  the  Indian
Ocean  is  described in  one  press  report  as  achieving what  it
calls  a  long-standing  ambition  of  the  Navy.
"I  do  not  doubt that  the  U.S.  Navy  is  anxious  to  replace     •
the   British  Navy  in  international   waters.,   But  I  remind
the  Pentagon  that  the  only  reason  the  British  Navy  is  no
longer  dominant  on  the  seven  seas  is  that  the  British  tax-
payer  went  broke  trying  to  support  a  worldwide  network
of  naval  forces,  colonies,  enclaves,  lifelines, army  and navy
forces,   and  puppet  governments.
"At  the  rate  the  Pentagon  is  going,  we  Americans have
the same fate  in store."
—Morse  (D.  Ore.)  in  tht: Senate  Dec..  1(1   (abridged).
"By  what  right  except  that  of  sheer  military  power  docs
the  U.S.   propose  to  police  the  Indian  Ocean?"
—Times  of  India  quoted  in  London  Times  Dec.  17.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  January  6,  19(14
Only  Repeal  Can  End  The  Multiple  Threat   of  This  Thought   Control  Ruling
Menace  of  the  Internal  Security  Act  Not  Ended  by  Registration  Ruling
We   predicted  many  months  ago  that  the   Supreme   Court
would  eventually throw  out  the  registration  provisions  of  the
Internal    Security   Act   as   unenforceable   under    the    Fifth
Amendment,   since   anyone   signing   a   registration   statement
would  incriminate  himself.    Such  a  final  decision   is  brought
closer  by  the  unanimous opinion  with  which  Judges  Bazelon,
Washington   and  McGowan   on  the   Court   of   Appeals  ruled
against   the   government's   move   to   punish   the  Communist
Party   for   failure   to   register   with   the   Subversive   Activities
Control  Board  under  the  Act.    But  this  decision,  even  when
upheld  by  the  Supreme  Court,  as  we  believe  it  will  be,  will
not  finish  off  this  sinister  piece  of  thought  control  legislation
which   Congress   passed   13  years   ago   over  Harry   Truman's
veto,   itself   a   message   in   the   best   Jeffersonian  tradition.
Many  Issues  Still   Pending
The  Court  will  still  have  to  decide  (in  the  Gus  Hall  and
Ben  Davis  cases)   whether   known   officials   of   the   Party   can
use  the  5th  amendment  to  evade  orders  to  register  the  Party,
and   whether   (in   the   Albertson  and   Proctor   cases)    known
members   of   the  Party  can   use  the   5th  amendment  to   defy
orders  to  register  personally  as  member  of  the  Party,  or  face
the  fantastic  penalties  of   5  years  in  jail,  a  $10,000  fine  for
every  single  day  in  which  they   fail   to  register.     Still   to   be
decided   (in  the  Flynn  and  Aptheker  cases)   is  whether   pass-
ports  can  be  denied  to  members  of  organizations  ordered   to
register,   and   whether   organizations  ordered   to   register   can
be  forced  to  label  their  publications  as  subversive.
The  Court  will  have  to  decide   (as  in  the  Robles   case  in
Seattle)   whether   a   member   of   an   organization   ordered   to
register  can  be  punished   as  a  criminal  for  working   in  a  de-
fense  plant.    It  will  also  have  to  decide   (in  the  Mine,  Mill
case)   whether   a  trade  union   can  be  adjudged   "Communist
infiltrated"   because   elected   officers,   whether   or  not   Commu-
nist  party  members,   acted  to  support  Communist   causes,   even
though   these   causes  were   in   themselves    lawful.
Most  important  of  all  there  will  be  appeals  from   two  of
the  Communist   "front"   cases  handed  down  by  the  Court  of
Once  A  Communist,  Alawys  A   Communist?
"The  hearings  were  held   in  1954  and  much  of   the
evidence  dates  back  to  the  late  1930s  and  early  1940s.
As  the  court  points  out,  our  relations  with  the  Soviet
Union  have shifted  radically in  the  meantime.   The  Re-
publican  cause  in  the  Spanish  Civil  War  engaged  the
loyalties  of  sincere  democrats  as  well  as  Communists.
"The  evidence about  Harold  Smith  goes  back  to  1946,
when   Earl  Browder  was  expelled  from  the  Party  and
Smith,  his  bodyguard,  remained  loyal  to  him.    Contin-
ued  loyalty  to  a  man  who  was  expelled  in  1946   does
not  support  an  inference  that  Smith  was  a  party   func-
tionary  in 1952.
"The  record was  stale  when  the  Board  made  its  find-
ings.    In  the  8  years  since  then  there  have  been  tur-
bulent  changes  in  world  affairs  .  .  .  the  views  of  many
who   were  sympathetic  to  the   Communist  cause   have
undergone  profound  change,  particularly after  the  bru-
tal   suppression  of  the  Hungarian  revolt  in  1956."
—Judge   Ilazclon  dissenting  in  the  Court  of    Appeals
from  the  order  requiring  the  Veterans  of  the  Abraham
Lincoln  Brigade  to  register  as  a  Communist  front.
Appeals  the  same  day.    The   order   against   the  Veterans  of
the  Abraham  Lincoln  Brigade  was  based  on  evidence  so  stale
and   dubious  (see   the  Bazelon  dissent  at  the  top  of  col.   2)
that   the   Court   itself   invited   a  petition   for    reconsideration,
an   almost  unprecedented   gesture.     The  other  order,  against
the   American   Committee   for   Protection   of   Foreign   Born,
raises  the  question  (see  the  Bazelon  dissent  below)  of  wheth-
er  people  can  be  punished  as  "fronters"  for  carrying  on  activi-
ties  in  themselves  entirely  lawful.    We   believe  that  the  Su-
preme  Court  will  uphold  Judge  Bazelon's  view  that  this  can-
not  be  done  under  the  First   Amendment.
But  even  if  all  these  cases  are  won,  the  Subversive  Activi-
ties  Control   Board   could   still  live  on   as  an   administrative
agency  empowered   to  put   radical   organizations   and  publica-
tions  out  of  business  by  branding  them  with  a  scarlet  letter.
Only  the  repeal  of  the  Act  can  end  its  multiple  threat  to
free  political   discussion.
The  Majority's  Tortured  Reasoning  and  Bazelon's  Dissent  in  the  Foreign  Born  Case
"The  Committee  for  the  Protection  of  the  Foreign  Born
undoubtedly  devoted  the  major  portion  of  its  efforts  to  con-
testing  the  deportation  of  aliens.  .  . .  But the  protection of
the  rights  of  the  foreign-born  is  not  only  a  laudable  objec-
tive;  it  is  a  basic  one  in  this  country.  .  .  .  What,  then,  of
an  organization  which  vigorously  devotes  itself  to  the  pro-
tection  of  the  rights  of  all  and  any  foreign  born  who  seek
its  help?    Is  it  to  be  held  a  Communist  front  because  the
ends   sought   are  Communist  aims?     Of  course   not.    But
.  .  .  the  Congress  .  .  .  found  as  a  fact  that  these   [Com-
munist]  action  organizations  operate  to  a  substantial  ex-
tent   through   'fronts,'   which  in  most   instances   are   used,
created  or  used   in  such  manner  as   to  conceal  their  true
character  and  purposes,  and  that  a  result  of  this  method  is
to  obtain  support  from  persons  who  would  not  extend  such
support  if  they  knew  the  true   purposes."
—Judge   Prettyman  with  Danaher  in  a  2-to-l   Court  of
Appeals    opinion   upholding   the  Subversive  Activities   Con-
trol   Hoard   order   to  register   the  American  Committee   for
1'rotection  of  the  Foreign  Born  as  a  Communist  front  under
the  Internal  Security    Act.
"Congress   chose  not  to  outlaw   the  Communist  Party   or
prohibit  all  its  activities.    Besides  the  objectives  of  over-
throwing   the  government   and  establishing  a  dictatorship,
the  Party  has  innocent   objectives   and activities   .  .  .  e.g.,
promoting  school   integration  .  .  .  contesting  the  deporta-
tion  of   aliens.   .  .  .  Most  of  the  severe  penalties   of  the
Act   apply   not  only   to   members   of   Communist-action  or-
ganizations   but   to   members   of   Communist   fronts   also.
These  sections  .  .  .  make  it  unlawful  for  members  of  either
sort  of  organization  to  hold  any  non-elective  office  or  em-
ployment   under  the   United  States,  or  to  be  employed  by
any   labor  organization,  or  to  use  a  passport,  or  even   to
apply  for  a  passport   .  .  .  their  severity   shows  that   Con-
gress  had  no  intention of  inflicting them  on  otherwise  inno-
cent   people   merely  because   of   membership  in   otherwise
innocent  organizations  that  the  Communist  Party  uses  to
advance an innocent aim... .
"Activities  protected by  the  First   Amendment cannot  be
restrained  because  of  association  with  an  organization  some
of  whose  activities are  not  so   protected."
—Judge  Bazelon  dissenting.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  January  6,1964
K's Troop Cut  Offer  Buried  or  Belittled  in  U.S.  Press
(Continued   from   Page   One)
From  the  standpoint  of  arms  reduction   the  most   important
point  in  the  Khrushchev  speech was  his  reaction  to  Secretary
McNamara's   speech   of  Nov.   18  to  the   Economic  Club  of
New  York.    In  that  speech  the  Defense  Secretary  disclosed
that  the  supposed  gap  between  the  conventional  forces  of  East
and  West  was  as  fictional  as  the  earlier  bomber  and   missile
gaps,  that  NATO- now  had   bigger   ground   forces   than   the
Warsaw   Pact  and  more  men  on  the  ground   in  Central  Eu-
rope  than  does  the  bloc.    Khrushchev  in  reply  pointed   out
that  the  West  had  hitherto  rejected  proposals   for  reductions
in  conventional  forces  on  the  ground  that  the  Soviets  had  so
many  more  men  under  arms.    Since  McNamara  now  believed
that   the   West   had   a   clear   superiority,   "why   don't   you
proceed  now,"  Khrushchev  asked,  "toward   an  agreement  on
the  reduction  of  armed  forces  and  armaments?"    This  was
coupled   with   an   announcement  of   some   reduction   in   the
Soviet  military  budget  for   1964.
Johnson  Encouraged  Arms  Agency
The  Times  in  London  (Dec_  16)  headlined  this,  "Mr.   K's
Hint  Opens  New  Prospects"  and  accompanied  it  with  an  op-
timistic  story  from   its  Washington   correspondent.     The  lat-
ter   reported   the   announcement  was   greeted   hopefully'  in
Washington   where  it  was  felt  that  "a  reduction  or   levelling
off  of  defense  expenditures  could  be  the  beginning  of  a  new
chapter  of  negotiations."    The  Khrushchev  speech  had  coin-
cided  with  a White  House  meeting to  discuss the  new  Geneva
talks  and  Disarmament  Agency officials,  according to  the  Lon-
don  Times  man,  had  emerged  from  these  talks  encouraged  by
Johnson's  "strong  support.   He  (Johnson)  said . . . he would
prefer  to  solve  the  peace  question  more  than  any other."   But
State  Dept.  officials   seem  to  talk   differently   for   home   con-
sumption.    The  Khrushchev  speech  had  hardly  come  off  the
ticker  before  U.S.  correspondents  were  summoned   in  for  a
private  briefing   designed  to  bury  or  belittle  it.    The   New
York   Times  like  the  rest  of  our  press  accompanied  the  story
from   Moscow  with  disparaging  comment  from   Washington.
There  is  more  involved  here  than  a  press  and  a  bureau-
cracy   brainwashed   by   years   of   cold   war.     Secretary   Mc-
Namara's   speech  was  not  intended  to  ease  the  way  for  arms
Truman  Warns  Against  The  CIA
Too  little   attention   has   been   paid   the    syndicated
article   (Washington   Post,   Dec.   22)   in  which   former
President  Truman,  who  set  up  the  Central  Intelligence
Agency,   declared  the  time  has  come  to  "take  another
look"  at   its   operations.     Mr.  Truman  wrote  that   he
never  intended  its  use  in  "peacetime  cloak  and  dagger
operations"  and that  he  now feels  "there  is  something
about  the   way  the  CIA  has  been  functioning   that   is
casting  a  shadow"  over  our institutions.    We  hope  that
Senators   like  Mansfield,  who  have  long  advocated  the
setting  up  of  a  joint  committee  to  exercise  some  check
on   CIA,  will   arrange   for   hearings   on  several   such
pending  bills  and  ask  Mr. Truman  to  testify.    Present
supervision  is  negligible.    When  Lindsay  of  New  York
delivered  a  comprehensive  speech  on  this  in  the  House
last  August  16,  Norblad  of  Oregon  interrupted  to  say
that  the  Armed  Services   subcommittee   which  is   sup-
posed  to  keep  an  eye  on  the  CIA  and  of  which  he  was
a  member  "met  annually  one  time  a  year  for  a  period
of  two  hours  in  which  we  accomplished  virtually  noth-
ing."    The  U.S.   today  has  the  sinister   distinction   of
being  the  only  government  in  the  world  with  a  cloak-
and-dagger   agency   which   overthrows   and   sometimes
has  a  hand  in killing  the  rulers  of  countries  with which
we  are  at  peace.    One  of  these  days,  unless   stopped,
they  may  try  to  do  at  home  what  they  have  been  ac-
customed  to doing  abroad.
reduction  talks  but  to  get  rid  of  "misleading  or  obsolete  no-
tions"  whkh   (as  he  said)  "produce  an  attitude  of  hopeless-
ness  toward  any attempt  to  prepare  to  meet  Communist  forces
in   ground   combat."     The   purpose   in   other   words  was  to
encourage  NATO  to  build  up  its  conventional  forces.     The
very  day  the  President  was talking  to  the  UN  in  such  inspir-
ing  terms  of  the  need  to  end  the  cold  war  and  divert  arms
spending  to  a  global  attack  on  poverty,  the  Secretary  of  De-
fense  was  urging  NATO  members  to  spend  more  on  arms,
both  on  bigger  conventional   forces  and  on  the   multilateral
nuclear  NATO  force.    We  continue  to  press  for  this  even
while  assuring  the  world,  as  Johnson   did  the  UN   that  we
want   "to  prevent  the  dissemination  of   nuclear  weapons   to
nations  not  now  possessing  them."     Rarely  have  words  and
deeds  been  so  beautifully  mismatched.                         Dec.  30
Stone's  "The   Haunted   Fifties"   Still  Available  at  Reduced  Rate  of  $5.35  Postpaid
I.P.   Stone's  Bi-Weekly  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..................................................................................._
Street    ...........„.........„....._.......„.......».„.......„..........—........_
City   ............_.........................Zone........_.St8te....................
1/6/64
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  .........................................................................—
City  ......._.._.........................Zone......._..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yea  D    No  D
LEStone'sBi-Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,   D.  C.
F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..
Washington   D.  C    An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U S.;   S6  in  Canada;   SIO  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  S20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED