I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964feb10.pdf

============================================================

Sen.  Gore  On  Our  Tax Bill Fallacies,  P.  3
McNamara's  Latest  Defense  Report  Shows  Why  A  Freeze  on  New  Missiles  Is  Urgent; See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XII,  NO.  6
FEBRUARY  10,  1964
101       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Untested  in  War  But  Already  A  Genius  At  Finance
A   charming   note   of   self-sacrifice   was   struck   by   South
Vietnam's  new  dictator,  Gen.  Khanh,  on  his  first  visit  to  the
countryside  to  give  out  candy  to  the  children,  GI  style,  and
establish  his  "image"  as  just  folks.     He  told   junior   officers
in  Ben  Cat  that  the  men  he  overthrew  were  "unworthy"   lead-
ers  "who  spent  their  time  in  night  clubs  flirting  with  girls!"
He,  on  the  other  hand   "is  now  in  a  position  to  flee  South
Vietnam  with  $10  million  and  'live  an  easy  life—but  I  have
chosen   this  one'."    We  saw  this  account  in  the  New   York
Herald-Tribune   Feb.  3.    All  the  other  papers  we  read   seem
to  have  omitted  this  charming  on-the-scene  report.     It  may
make  readers  wonder  how  a  minor  general  in  a  country  like
South   Vietnam   could   spare   enough   time  from   the   task  of
fighting  guerrillas  night  and  day  to  amass  $10  million.    Our
new  strong  man  may or  not  turn  out  to  be  much  of  a  general,
but  he  is  already  a  success  as a   financier.   Perhaps  our  psycho-
logical  warfare  corps  can  make  good  use  of  this.    We  can
see the  posters  going  up  in  the  most  remote  villages,  with  the
story:   South   Vietnam   as  a  land   of   opportunity   under   free
enterprise,  where  the  humblest  village  boy  may  aspire  to  be-   .
come  a  General  and  amass  10  million  bucks.    We  can  safely
double-dare  Ho  Chi-minh  to  try  and  match  that   one.
What  They  Fear  to  Say  Publicly
While this  Horatio  Alger hero was busy building up  morale
in   the  villages,  we  were  happy  to  see  that  the  New    York
Times  led  off  its  editorial  page  Feb.  1  with  a  plea  to  utilize
de  Gaulle's  initiative  for  a  neutral  solution  in  Vietnam  like
that  originally  intended   (until  Dulles  upset  it)   by  the   1954
Geneva  settlement.    The  Times  said  there  were  few  respon-
sible  officials   in  Washington   "who,   privately,  would  not  be
delighted  to  do  just  that."    That   same  day,  President   John-
son  at  press  conference  indicated  that  if  de  Gaulle's   proposal
were  to  neutralize  North  as  well  as  South  Vietnam  it  would
be  "considered   sympathetically."    De  Gaulle's  proposal  is  to
neutralize North  as well  as  South  Vietnam.    Edgar  Snow  in  a
recent  interview  raised  this  question  with  Chou  En-Lai  with-
out  eliciting  a  direct  refusal  (complete  text,  Washington  Post,
Feb.  3).    We  believe  the  path  to  peace  lies  through  a  con-
ference  on  Cambodia  in  which  the  two  sides  'can  feel   each
other  out  unofficially  on  Vietnam.    The  Vietnamese  war  is  a
blind  alley  which  is  destroying  faith  in  our  government  not
only  there  but  at  home.    One  day  McNamara  says  the  situa-
tion  is  grave;  next  day  that  we're  making  progress.    The  day
after,  in  its  weekly  Vietnam  report,  the  Pentagon's   statistics
show  that  the  war  is  going  worse  than  ever,  while  the  latest
news  is  that  for  the  first  time  since  1959  the  Viet  Cong  were
bold  enough  to  raid  and  bomb  a  U.S.  military  compound.
The  biggest  obstacle  to  a  settlement  is  the  myth  that  the
South  Vietnamese  war  is  an  invasion,  not  a  rebellion.    Sec-
Our  Best  People  Were  The  Buyers
One   aspect   of   the   Bobby   Baker  case   involves   the
inner  clique  which  runs  the  Senate   and  which  Baker
served.   This  is  the  oligarchy of  which  the  late  Senator
Kerr  was  a  central  figure,  and  its   main  concern  is  to
manipulate  public  resources  and  the  tax  structure  for
maximum  profitability  to  private  interests.    Baker  and
the  lobbyists who  figure  in  the  inquiry  so  far  were  only
their  tools,  picking  up  a  little  "chicken-feed"  on  the
edges.   It  is  the  Senate  establishment   which  should  be
on  trial,  and  we  applaud Senator  Williams of  Delaware
for  declaring  in  a  TV  interview  with  Senator   Keating
Feb.  2 that  the  Senators  should not  be  the  untouchables
in  this  inquiry.   If  it  were  not  for  Williams  of  Dela-
ware  the  whole  dirty  business  would have  been  hushed
up  long  ago.    Another  aspect  of  the  Baker  case  is  the
use  of  girls  in  the  manipulation  of  the  Senate.     This,
if  opened  up,  could  ruin  men  who  should  have  known
better.    It  helps  explain  why  both  parties  in  the  Sen-
ate  hope  to  sidetrack  and  bury  the  Baker  case  during
the  debates  over  taxes  and  civil  rights.
Williams  is  the  main  obstacle.    But  even  if  he  were
removed,   some  half   dozen  violations   of   Federal   law
have  already  been  uncovered,  and  could  not  be  hushed
up  without  the  connivance  of  the  Justice  Department.
Some  of  these  matters  reach  into  the  new  President's
personal   staff,   and  the   insurance  kick-backs   into   his
family  affairs.    If  this  is  the  extent  of  his involvement,
he  and  the  country  are  lucky.    But  Baker was  for  eight
years   his   protege,   and   right-hand   man   as  majority
leader  of  the  U.S.  Senate.  In  all  fairness,  if  the  Pres-
idency  is  to  be  brought  in,  then  there  ought  also  to  be
an   investigation  into   Drew    Pearson's    charges   that
three  oil  men  bankrolled  Elsenhower's  farm  at  Gettys-
burg   and   then   tried   unsuccessfully   to   deduct   their
largesse  as  a  business  expense.     Mr.  Eisenhower   has
called  this  "a  tissue  of  lies."    It  can  easily  be  checked
in  Internal Revenue  records.    A  thorough airing might
improve  public  standards.   But  the  nomination of  Con-
gressman  Byrnes  as  a  favorite  son  for  the  Presidency
by  Wisconsin's  GOP, after   his   profitable participation
in  one  Bobby  Baker  exploit  came  to  light,  shows  little
public  indignation about  making a  fast  buck  by  selling
legislative   influence.     After   all   the   buyers  were  our
best  people  and  they  go unscathed.
retary  Rusk  in  his  speech  Jan.  22  at  the  75th  anniversary  of
Barnard   College   trotted   out  this  same  stale  official   version.
The  dangerous  corollary  of  the  view  that  it  was  all  a  plot
from  outside  is  the  reckless  proposition  that  the  way  to  end
the  fighting  around  Saigon  is  to  bomb  Hanoi.    That  way  lies
a  new  Korea  or  worse.    Short  of  occupation  by  a  major   U.S.
army,  which  the  guerrillas  can  bog  down  for   years  as  they
did   the   French,   there   is  no  alternative  to   negotiation   and
neutralization.    It  is  a  pity  more  opinion-makers  do  not  have
the  courage  to  say this  aloud  as  did  the  New   York   Times.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  10,1964
McNamara's Report  on the  Defense  Budget  Shows A  New  Monster  Lurking  Around  the  Corner
Why  A  Freeze  on  Offensive   and  Defensive  Missile  Systems  Is  Urgent
We   hope  neutral  delegates   at  Geneva  will  obtain  a  copy
of  Secretary  McNamara's  annual  report  to  the  House  Armed
Services  Committee  Jan.  27  on  the  defense  budget.    His  dis-
cussion  of  the  anti-missile missile  may  help  them  to  see  how
urgent  is the  subject opened  by Wm.  C.  Foster,  the  chief  U.S.
disarmament   negotiator,   in  his  Jan.   31  presentation   to  the
Geneva  conference.    This  began  to  spell  out  in  detail the  U.S.
proposal   for   a   free2e   on   offensive   and   defensive  strategic
weapons.    Just  around  the  corner  lies  a  new  monster.    Should
either  of  the  two  great  powers  move  into  the  production  and
placement  of  anti  missile  systems,  the  costs  of  the  arms  race
will  skyrocket  again  and  with  it  there  will  be  a  sharp  rise
in  tension.    The  time to prevent  this is now,  and  the  U.S.  pro-
posal  deserves  the  most  careful,  consideration,  especially  since
the  enforcement  measures  spelled  out  by  Mr.   Foster   do  not
seem  too  onerous.
Missile  Sites  No  Secret  Anyway
The  most  comprehensive  account,  in  the  New  York  Herald-
Tribune  Feb.  1,  indicates three  main  measures of  control    (1)
missile  plants  and  testing  sites  would  be  declared  and  placed
under   international  control;   (2)    each  nation  would   be  al-
lowed   an   agreed   number  of   strategic  bombers  and   missiles
and  permitted  to  replace  only  those  destroyed  under  interna-
tional   control;  and   (3)    while   missile  testing  without   war-
heads  would  be  allowed  to  insure  reliability,  no  nation  would
be  permitted   to  develop   "a   significantly   new  typ
e
"  of   de-
livery  vehicle.    Missile  plants  and  testing  sites,  like  bomber
plants  and  air  fields,  are  huge   affairs  which  cannot  be  kept
hidden   from   intelligence  anyway.    The   idea  of   negotiating
an  agreed  number  of  strategic  delivery  vehicles  is  not  so  far
from  Mr.  Gromyko's proposal  of  last  September  for  an  agreed
minimum   deterrent.     The   nine-point  program   unveiled   by
Mr.  Tsarapkin  at  Geneva  Jan.  28,  while  it  contains  little  that
is  new,  does  reiterate  Soviet  readiness  to  accept  controls  over
"actual  disarmament measures."    From  a world  point  of  view,
it  would  be  good   if  the  U.S.   freeze  proposal  were   coupled
with   an  actual  cutback  and   the   abandonment   of   our   MLF
gimmick  for  putting  the  German  finger  on  the  nuclear  trigger.
In  the  absence  of  some  such  freeze  as  proposed   in  the  U.S.
plan,  we  shall  all  be  pushed   sooner  or  later  into  the  new  and
nightmarish  stage  of  the  arms  race  sketched  out  by  Mr.  Mc-
Namara.     Anti-missile  systems  would  be  a  bonanza  for   the
missile  and  electronics  industries  which  see  dwindling  mar-
kets  ahead.    Mr.  McNamara  is  not  at  all  sure  that  the  anti-
missile  systems  now  under  development  would  be  worth  their
Look  Who  Kept  Calm
"Sen.    Barry   Goldwater,   R.,  Arizona,   an   Air   Force
jet  pilot  himself,   said  it  is  'hard  to  believe'  the  plane
really   got   lost.     'I   don't   know   what   they  were   doing
over   East   Germany,'  the   Senator   said  in  Pittsburgh,
where  he  was  addressing  a  Republican  fund-raising   din-
ner.    'It's  kind  of  hard  to  believe  that  all  your   naviga-
tional   equipment   would   go   out   at   once   on   that   air-
plane.'    Sen.  Goldwater,  who  is  a  Major  General  in  the
Air   Force  reserve,  with   250  hours  at   the  controls  of
T-39s   said,    'If   you're   over    enemy    territory   where
you're   not  supposed  to  be,  you  can  expect  things  like
that'."                  —New  York  Herald-Tribune,  Jan.  30.
Bad  Time  to  Boast
It   is   most   unfortunate   that   the  evening   before   the
U.S.   at  Geneva  presented  a  detailed  plan  for  a  freeze
on  missiles  the  A EC  released  an  unusually   candid  ac-
count   of  its   underground  testing  program.    The  test
ban  treaty   was  also  a  freeze   on  development    of   nu-
clear   weapons,   in  which   the  Soviets  accepted   inferior
status  for  the  sake  of  putting  some  brake  on  the  arms
race.    The  AEC  boasted  that   it  has  been  able  to  test
weapons  yielding  as  much  as  200 kilotons—10  times  the
Hiroshima  bomb—underground,  achieving  a  wide  range
of  improvements.    It  disclosed  that  23  secret  tests  had
taken   place   in   addition    to   those   earlier    announced,
bringing   the   total   at   the   Nevada   Testing   Grounds
alone   since  Sept.   1961   to  109  tests.    The  report   out-
lined   an  extensive  program   of   future   testing.    Why
did  the  usually  secretive  AEC  become  so  candid?    The
effect   of   its  revelations   must   be  to  raise  pressure  in
Moscow   to  resume  testing,   too.
enormous  cost.    Even  one  (he   says)  which  would  be  "rela-
tively   effective"   against   "small   to  moderate  missile  attacks"
would   cost  $16   billion  plus  additional  amounts  to   operate
plus  the  cost  of  a  national  fallout  shelter  program  and   "even
then  fatalities  would  number  several  tens  of  millions."    Ex-
tensive  fallout  shelters  would  be  required   because   otherwise
"offensive  missiles  could  easily  be  targeted  at  points  outside
the  defended  area  and  thereby achieve  by  fallout  what  other-
wise  would  have  to  be  achieved  by  blast  and  heat   effects."
On  the  other  hand  an  anti-missile  system  for  use  against
all-out  attack  would  require  shelters   against  blast  and   heat.
These  really  require,  though  Mr.  McNamara   does  not  say so,
putting  urban  populations  underground   and  the  costs  would
be  astronomical.    Otherwise  the  attacker  could  elude  the  anti-
missiles  by  detonating  his  missiles  at  altitudes  where  it  would
be  difficult   to  distinguish   real  warheads  from   decoys.
Here  is  how  Mr.  McNamara  explains  this  in  his  calm  tech-
nological  discussion  of   the  lengths   to  which  human  lunacy
may   soon  go  in  the  atomic  era.     "The   effectiveness  of   the
Nike-X  system  against  attacks  employing  decoys,"   Mr.  Mc-
Namara  told  the  House  Committee,  "would  vary  with  the  al-
titude  at  which  the  incoming  warheads  must  be  engaged.   The
lower  the  altitude,  the  better  the  chances  of  discrimination,
but  the  greater  the  chance  that  the  weapon   might  be  deton-
ated  before  it  is  intercepted.    But,  the  lower  the  altitude  at
which   the   weapon   is  detonated,   the   higher   the   blast   and
thermal  effects  on  the  ground  for  any  given  yield.    Thus,  to
the  extent  that  we  can protect  the  population  against  the  blast
and  heat  of  a  nuclear  explosion,  we  can  wait  longer   before
engaging  an  enemy  missile  and  can  thus  be  surer  that  we  en-
gage  the  warhead,  not  a   decoy."
All  this  takes  place,  as  Mr.  McNamara  did  not  explain,  in
split  minutes.    It   takes  some   30  minutes  for   a  missile  to
travel  between  U.S.  and  USSR.    It  might  be  spotted  in  five
or  ten  minutes, hit  at  15  or  20  or  25.    The  extra five minutes
would   make  it  easier  to  distinguish  the   decoys.     But   how
do  you  get  urban  populations  into  billion  dollar  burrows  in
5  or  10  minutes,  in  the  panic  of  a  nuclear  alarm,  when  even
snow  stornis  clog  our  city  streets  for  hours ?   This  is,  however,
the  madness  which  lies  ahead  unless  we  can  somehow  freeze
missile   development.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  10,1S64
A  Speech  The  Press Ignored:  Corporations  Spent  On New  Plant  Only  50  Cents  of  Each  Tax-Saved   $1
The  Myth  That  Corporate Tax  Cuts  Are the  Way  to  Create  More  Jobs
By  Senator  Albert  Gore *
It  seems  to  me  that  neither  equity  nor  economics  dictates
a  reduction in  rates  paid  by big  business.   I  do favor  and  sup-
port  the  reversal  of  the  normal  and  surtax  rates  so  that  the
rate  for  small  business  will  be  cut  to  22  percent.
As  for  big  business,  it  seems  we  could  dismiss  equity  con-
siderations  quickly.    Although   the  corporation   is  a  separate
entity,  its  assets,  earnings  and  profits  ultimately  inure  to  the
benefit  of  its  stockholders.    Corporations  we  know  are largely
owned  by the  affluent.    The  poverty-stricken do  not  own  Gen-
eral  Motors  or  A.T.  &  T.  stock.    A  study  now  underway  at
the  Wharton  School  of  Finance  at  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania  shows  that  1 percent  of  individual taxpayers own  about
half  of  all  corporation  stock  held  by  individuals.
Corporate  Tax  Rates  Have   Gone  Down  Steadily
Since  the  rich  and  the  very  rich  are  given   such   generous
tax  reductions  in  this  bill,  there  are  no  equity  grounds   for
reducing  corporate  taxes.    The  fact  is  that  we  have  been  re-
ducing  the   effective   tax  rates  for  corporations  quite  steadily
and  regularly  during  the  past  few  years.    There  were  rapid
amortization  changes  during  the  Korean  war,  accelerated  de-
preciation  enacted  in   1954,   administrative  changes  in  depre-
ciation   approved   by  the   Treasury   last   year,  the   investment
credit  enacted  last  year,  and  the  further  liberalization of  this
credit  contained  in  the  current  tax  bill,  HR  8363.    Of  course
we  have  retained  the  same  stated  rates,  but  the  effect  of  these
rates  has  been  drastically altered,  thus  materially  reducing  the
rates  actually  paid.
Corporations  got  about  $2.4  billion  in  tax  reduction  under
the  1954  Internal  Revenue  Code.    Last  year  they  got  another
$2.25  billion  as a  result  of  changes  in  depreciation  and  enact-
ment   of   the   investment  credit.    What  is  the   effective   cor-
porate  tax  rate?    In  1946,   corporate  taxes  amounted  to  about
33   percent   of   profits   plus   capital   consumption   allowances
[i.e.   depreciation,  investment  credits,  etc.].    Today  the  com-
parable  figure  is  about  29  percent.     This   is  an  effective   tax
reduction  of  about  10  percent.
* Slightly  abridged  from  a  neglected  speech  made  in  the
Senate  by  Albert   Gore,  D.,  of  Tennessee,  who  seems  to  be
the  last  agrarian   radical   left   in  the   upper   house  and  has
been  campaigning  against  the  inequities  and  fallacies  of   the
pending   tax  bill.
Lower   Incomes  Often  Pay  Higher  Tax  Rates
Sen.    HUMPHREY:     The   tax—as   a  percentage  of
income   for   the   group   with   $5   million   and   over—is
24.6%?
Sen.   DOUGLAS:     As   compared    with   an   apparent
rate of  90.7%.
Sen.   HUMPHREY:      Yes.     In  other  words,  we  read
about   the  90%   tax  on  incomes  or  the  75%   tax   on  in-
come,  but  the  fact  seems  to  be  that  when  we  examine
the   rates,   a   worker   who  receives   an  income   of   less
than  $10,000   a  year  may  well  be  paying   a  larger   per-
centage   of   his   income    in   taxes   than   the    multimil-
lionaire.
Sen.   DOUGLAS:     That   is   correct.
Sen.   HUMPHREY:     I  never  could   quite   understand
how,  if  taxes  were  as  high  as  people  said  they  were,
there  could  be  any  money   left.
—Colloquy  in  the  Senate  Jan.  23  when  Douglas  of
Illinois   attacked   new  loopholes  in  capital  gains.
Not   only  have  we  been  cutting   tax  rates  in  a   disguised
form,  but  these  cuts  have  not  really  been   effective—or   they
have   been   inefficient—in   promoting   investment   and   equip-
ment.    We  have  concrete  proof   of  this.
The  most  optimistic statements  I  have  seen  about  the  effects
of  the  $2.25  billion  tax  reduction  given  corporations  last  year
have  been  to  the  effect  that  this  cut  has  induced  $1.2   billion
of  increased  spending  for  plant  and  equipment.    This  is  an
efficiency   of   about   50  percent.     Can   we   expect   any   better
performance  from  this  year's  proposed  cuts?    I  think  not.
The  upshot  of  all  this  is  that  we  give  corporations   a  tax
cut  of  $2  to  induce  them  to  spend   $1  for  plant  and  equip-
ment.    Hopefully,  this  kind  of  expenditure,  costly  as  it  is  to
the  government,  will  create   jobs.    Actually  it  has  not   and
likely  will  not,  at  least  not  in  manufacturing.   We  have  lost
almost  1,000,000  jobs  in  manufacturing  during  the  past   10
years,  despite  increased  production.
A  tax  cut  is  a  most  inefficient  way  to  induce  expenditures
by  corporations.    And  plant  and  equipment  expenditures  are
not  likely  to  create  any  jobs.    Indeed  industry  is  daily acceler-
ating  the  trend  toward  automation,  thereby  not  only  failing
to  create  jobs,  but  even  failing  to  maintain  current  job  levels.
Should  we  not,  then,  consider  eliminating the  corporate  rate
reductions,   except   for   small   business,  and   either   save   this
amount  of  revenue  loss  or  use  it  to  give  a  better  break   to
low  income  consumers?
The Related Myth That  A  Lag  in Profits  Behind  GNP  Explains  Economy's  Slowdown
"It  [a  comparative   table  in  the  Congressional  Record   at
page   1001,    Jan.   23]   shows,   for   instance,   that   corporate
profits   after   taxes  just   barely   doubled   between   1946   and
1963,  while  GNP  [Gross  National  Product]  almost   doubled.
This  has  led  many   to  believe,  and  to  state  that   corporate
profits  have  not  kept  pace  with  GNP.    This  has  been  cited
as  one  of  the  reasons  for  our  alleged  slow  rate  of  growth
in  recent  years.    It  has  been  said  that   this  is  one  reason
for  the  lack  of  sufficient  investment  in  new  plant  and  equip-
ment,   and   that   this   has,   in   turn,   been   one   of   the   main
causes  of  unemployment.
"Nothing  could   be  further   from   the  truth.    Let  us  look
at  cash   flows.   Corporate   profits   after   taxes,  plus  capital
consumption    allowances,   have   kept   pace   with   GNP,    run-
ning   at   a  pretty   steady   10  percent.     Furthermore,   divi-
dends  have  kept  pace  with  GNP,   running   about   3  percent.
"If  one  claims  that  only  the  profit  figures   are  to  be   con-
sidered,   then  he  must  of  necessity  condemn  corporate   man-
agement  for  paying   out  too  much  in  dividends.     Dividends
being   paid  out   today   amount   to   about   two-thirds   of   cor-
porate   profit   after   taxes.    As   a   percentage   of   corporate
profit  after  taxes,  dividends  have  gone  up  50  percent  since
1946.    If   bookkeeping    profit   is   in  reality   the   key   figure,
then  dividend  payments  are,  without  question,  too  high.*
"The   fact  is  that  corporations  are  highly  liquid,  and  cash
flows  have   in   recent   years   exceeded   investment   in   new
plant  and  equipment."
—Gore  (D.  Tenn)  to the Senate, Jan.  23.
*  What  would  happen  to  the  stock  market  if   dividends
were  reduced,  cutting  already  low  yields?—IFS
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  10, 1964
How  Civil  Rights  Reforms,  Particularly  on  Voting  Rights,  Are  Sabotaged  in  The  District  Courts
Time  to  Put  the  Spotlight  on  Racist  Southern  Federal  Judges
As this was  being written   (Feb.  4)  the  historic  civil  rights
bill   seemed   headed  for   an   almost   complete  victory   in   the
House.    This  is  a  good  time  to  recall  that  the  effectiveness
of  the  Act  will  depend  in  considerable  measure,   particularly
in   voting   cases,   on  the   readiness   of  the   Federal   District
Judges  to  enforce  it.    Congressman  Corman   (D.  Cal)   in  an
extension   of  remarks   the   second  day   of  the   debate (pps.
1593-4,   Con.  Rec.  Feb. 1)   called  attention   to   the   way   in
which  Southern  Federal  District  Judges  hostile  to  civil  rights
had  succeeded  in  sabotaging  past  reforms.  The  most  dramatic
evidence  of  this,  as  he  pointed   out,  was  the  fact  that  de-
spite  the  big  reform  of  the  1960  Act,  its  provision  for  voting
referees,  "No  Federal  voting  referee  has  ever  been  appointed
by  any  Southern  Federal  district  judge  regardless  of  the  de-
gree  of  voting  discrimination  proved  in  court."
Congressman   Corman  called  the  attention   of  the  House  to
a   masterly   43-page   piece  of   legal   sleuthing,   an   unsigned
"Comment"   in   the   Yale   Law   Journal   for   last   November
entitled     "Judicial     Performance     in    the     Fifth      Circuit"
which  covers  the  deep  South.    This,  the  first  careful   study
of  its  kind,  turned  up  many  cases"—as  Mr.  Corman  told  the
House—of   delay,  inaction  and  even  total  refusal   to  enforce
the   laws  that  we  have  enacted."    The  Yale  'Law   Journal
study  found that  "of  President  Kennedy's  eight   appointments
to  district  courts  in  Georgia,  Alabama,  Louisiana  and  Missis-
sippi,  four  have  indicated  a  considerable  reluctance  to  fol-
low  the  letter  and  spirit   of  the  prevailing  law  in  the  civil
rights area."   The study  found  "numerous"  instances  of  "dis-
obedience  of  higher  courts."
Eastland's  Influence  on  Judgeships
Normally   such   judges   would   be  sifted   out,   before   con-
firmation,  by  the  Attorney  General  and  by  a  vigilant  Senate
Judiciary   Committee.    Unfortunately   Chairman   Eastland's
political  power  has  fostered  the  appointment  of  Judges'  hos-
tile  to  the  law  they  are  supposed  to  enforce.  Robert  Kennedy
has  played  along  with  him.   The  3-judge  court  reform  in  vot-
ing  cases  being  passed  by  the  House  as  this  is  written  will
not  wholly  end  this  evil,  since  the  same  type  of  judges  will
often  be sitting  on the  3-judge  courts.   It  is  time  to  organize
counter-pressure.     If  a  handful  of  Yale  Law  School  students
can  do this  good  a  job, what  couldn't  be  accomplished  by  an
official  investigation?    Two  such  are  feasible,  and  could  out-
flank  Eastland.    Dawson's   Government  Operations   Commit-
tee  in  the  House,  chaired  by  a  Chicago  Negro,  has  full  power
to  investigate  the  conduct  of  these  Southern  judges.    An  in-
quiry  could  also  be  made  by  a  constitutional  rights  subcom-
Louisiana  Witch   Hunt
The  witch  hunt  may  have  died  down  on  the  national
scene  but   it  rages  on  in  the   South.    Two  officers  of
the  Southern  Conference Educational  Fund  and  the  law
partner    of   one   of   them   were   indicted  Jan. 29   on
charges   of   violating  Louisiana's   subversive    activities
law   which—like   the   Internal   Security   Act—requires,
the  self-registration  of  "subversives."   SCEF's  subver-
sion  is  its  work  against  racial  discrimination;  the  Rev.
Fred  Shuttleworth  of  Birmingham  is  its  President.  Dr.
James   A.   Dombrowski,  its   executive  secretary,   had
been  fighting  a  lonely  battle  against  segregation  years
before  the  Negro  revolt.    Only  white  men  have   been
charged—perhaps  to  maintain  the  myth  that  but  for
outside  agitators  all  would  be  well.    Dombrowski  and
Benjamin   E.  Smith,  SCEF's  treasurer,  have  been  in-
dicted.     The   latter's   law   partner,    Bruce   Waltzer,
though  not  an  SCEF  official,   has   also  been  indicted—
for   failing  to  register   that   he  was  a  member  of  the
National   Lawyers'   Guild!    The  Guild's   subversion   is
providing  counsel  in  civil  rights  cases.    The  penalties
are   $10,000  fine  and/or  10  years  at  hard  labor.    The
SCEF  has  long  been  a  target  of  Eastland   and  the  Sen-
ate  Internal  Security  Committee  which  seized  and  pho-
tostated  its  records  while  suit  was  pending  in  Federal
court  for  their  return.    Senator  Keating  (R.  N.Y.)  told
a  delegation   from   the   New  York  Council  to   Abolish
the   Un-American  Activities   Committee  he  would  ask
the  Senate  committee  to  reconsider   the  resolution   au-
thorizing  this  lawless  procedure.    He  claimed  he  was
not  notified  of  the  meeting  which  voted  the  resolution.
mittee  of  House  Judiciary  as  urged  by  three  members,   Ger-
man,  Kastenmeier  and  Edwards.
Mr.   Corman   also   suggested   that   the   Supreme    Court,
through   its   power   to  change   the   rules   of   civil   procedure
could  tighten   the  reins  on  recalcitrant   judges  by  providing
strict   time   limits   on  granting  or  denying  injunctions.     It
could  also  provide  for  a  civil  rights  docket  in  any  district  to
which  a  judge  could  be  assigned  specially  in  the  discretion  of
the   Chief   Judge   of  Circuit   and   with   the   approval   of   the
Chief  Justice.    Mr.  Corman  submitted  a  proposed  new  Rule
71B  to  accomplish this.    It  would  prevent  foot-dragging   by
the  new  three-judge   panels  in  voting  rights  and   speed   up
justice  in  all  other  civil  rights  cases  as  well.
Why  Not  Order  "The  Haunted  Fifties"  at  the  Special  Price  of  $5.35  When  You  Write  In  for  Your  Free  Copy  of  the  1963  Index.
I. F. Stone's Weekly
        56
i
8
  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ....................................................................................._
Street   ....................................................................................—
City   ............_.........................Zone.............State....................
2/10/64
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name  ............................................................................
Street   .........—.................._....................................................
City  ..........._.........................Zone.......~..State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yea  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid   at   Washington.. D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  in  August  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,
Washington,   D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and   edited  by  '.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.;  $6 in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED