I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964oct19.pdf

============================================================

Supreme  Court  to Pass  On Our Iron  Curtain  Around  Cuba, P.  2
No.  1 Liberal  Campaign  in the  Next  Congress:  Clark's  Bill  for  Economic  Planning,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  35OCTOBER  19,  1964«><       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Why  I  Would  Not  Vote  for Bobby  Kennedy
The  New   York  Senatorial  race  has  been  a  dull  show  be-
cause  there  is  little  difference  between  Keating  ard   Kennedy.
A  decade  ago  both  belonged   to  the   fervently  witch-hunting
sector   of   the   political  spectrum.    With   the   change   in   at-
mosphere,   both  have  moved  toward  the  moderate  center  in
domestic   affairs.      In   foreign  policy,  they  are   about  equally
belligerent,  notably  on  Cuba,  where  Keating  was  stirring  up
a  missile  crisis  before  there  was  evidence  that  the  missiles
had  arrived.    Both  are  for  civil  rights  but  both  reacted  the
same  way  at  the  point  where  Negro  aspiration  clashed  with
white  backlash,  i.e.  on  the  school  busing  issue.    There  they
both   begged   the  question  by  saying  they  were  against  long-
distance  busing,  something  the  New  York  City  Board  of  Edu-
cation  had  not  proposed.
The  Best  Argument  for  Keating
From   the   standpoint   of   justice  for   the  Negro,   Keating
offers   one  advantage  over  Kennedy.  Keating  is  one  of   those
Republicans,  like  the  liberal   Lindsay,  who  gave  the  Negro
leverage  to  obtain  a  stronger  Civil  Rights  Act  than  the  Ken-
nedys  desired  or  thought  it  politic  to  ask.    The  Kennedy  Ad-
ministration  originally  wanted  no  new  civil  rights  legislation
at   all.     When   a   House   Judiciary  subcommittee  drafted   a
strong  measure,  the  Attorney  General  tried  to  water  it  down.
He  did  not  want  stronger  powers  to  enforce  14th Amendment
rights  and  he  was  at  best  lukewarm  about  a  Fair  Employment
Practices  Commission.    Liberal  Republicans  made  it  possible
to  win  from  the  House  and  put  through   the  Senate  a  strong
Civil  Rights  Act  this  year.    It  was  this  which  led  Clarence
Mitchell  of   the  NAACP   to   come   out  for   Keating   in   the
Afro-American    (Sept.  8).     Though   he   praised   Kennedy's
record,  too,  Mitchell  said  Keating  was  "one  of  the  men  who
must  help  to   save  the   Republican   Party  from   becoming   a
haven  for  advocates  of  white  supremacy  and  racial  discord."
The  best  argument  for  Kennedy  is  one  that  is  put  forward
quietly   in  Washington,   quietly  that   is  in   the  hope   that   it
won't  be  overheard  by  Lyndon  Johnson.     It  is  that  Kennedy
in  the  Senate  would  provide  an  alternative  center  of   power
and  opposition  when  an  expected  landslide  gives  LBJ  a  man-
date  so sweeping  there  will  be  little  check  on  his  power.    But
there  are  any  number  of  Democratic  Senators  whose   liberal-
ism   has   been   demonstrated   over   the   years,   and   who   will
naturally  move  into  opposition  on  many  issues.    Any  one  of
them  would  be  a  more  dependable   focus  of  opposition  than
Bobby  Kennedy.    A  vote  for  Kennedy  is  not  just  a  vote  for
a   U.S.   Senator.    He   acts  as  if   the   country  owes   him   the
White  House.    Two  years  ago  his  authorized  biography   (by
Thompson  and  Myers)   already  urged  the  country  after   1968
"to   forget   their  fears   of   dynasty  and   stake  their  hopes  on
Robert   Francis  Kennedy."
The  U.S.   and  the  Cairo  Parley
The  Cairo  conference  of  the  non-aligned  nations   has
been  played  in  the  U.S.  press  as  a  defeat  for  Commu-
nist  China.    It  is  true  that  the  "peaceful  co-existence"
group  won  out  over  those  who  followed  the  Peking  line.
But  look  more  closely   at   the  two   main  recommenda-
tions  affecting   the   U.S.    One  called  for  peaceful   co-
existence  between  the  U.S.  and  Cuba.   The  other  called
for   the  resumption  of   the  Geneva  Conference  to  end
the  Vietnamese war by negotiation.  The  U.S.  is  opposed
to  both.    Cuba  has  been asking  for  months  to  negotiate
differences  with  the  U.S.;  it  is  we  who  have  been  re-
jecting   them.     China,   for   all   its   fierce   rhetoric,   has
been  supporting  Ho  Chi-minh  of   North  Vietnam  and
Sihanouk   of   Cambodia   in   asking   for   peace   talks   in
Vietnam.    It  is  we  who  say  no.
The  AP  (Baltimore  Sun,  Oct.  12)  said  the  conference
had  rejected  "Peking's  violent  approach to  international
life."    Insofar  as  Cuba  and  Vietnam  is  concerned,  this
is  also  ours.    The  conference,  in  asking  us  to  lift  our
economic  blockade  of  Cuba, declared that  "foreign   pres-
sure  and intervention to  impose changes  in  the  political,
economic  and  social  system,"  of   another  country   are
contrary   to   "the   principles  of   international   law   and
peaceful  coexistence."   This  is  embodied in both the  UN
and  in  the  OAS  Charters;  we  have  subscribed  to  both,
but   conform  to   neither   in   our   relations   with  Cuba,
which   we  hope  to   treat   as   we   did  Guatemala.     The
"revolutionary"  powers   do  not   say   they   are   against
peaceful  co-existence.    They  say  the  U.S.  will  not  per-
mit  it.    Cuba  is  their  best  argument,  and  if  we  persist
it  is  we  who  will  bring  the  defeat  of  the  moderates.
As   Attorney   General,   Bobby   Kennedy   gathered   an   able
team  around   him  and  set  a  standard  in  refreshing   contrast
to  the  low  cast  of  characters  which  had  run  the  place   since
Francis  Biddle's  day.    Except  for  Wm.  Rogers,  who  made  an
honorable   record   in  Ike's  final  years,  there   had   never   been
a  more  depressing  succession  of  Attorneys  General;  the  worst
was   Keating's   campaign   manager,   Herbert    Brownell,   who
abused  the   office   shamefully  in  his  "twenty  years  of  treason"
campaign  against  the  Democrats.    But  in  anti-trust,  Kennedy's
record   was  not   as   good   as   that   made   under   Eisenhower.
Where  FDR  and  Truman   made  monopoly  a  major   concern,
both  Kennedys  were  anxious  to  prove  themselves  not   hostile
to  big  business.    Bobby  emphasized  action  against  price-fixing
—the  easiest  and  politically  safest  aspect  of  anti-trust.
Kennedy's    record    is   most   disturbing   on   civil    liberties.
In  one  of  his  speeches  (Nov.   12,  1962)   on  a  favorite   sub-
ject,  counter-guerrilla   operations,   the  Attorney  General   told
a  story  of  a  brave  young  American  prisoner  of  war  in  Korea
who  was  asked  by  his  Chinese   captors  what   he  thought  of
Gen.   Marshall   and   insisted   on   terming   him   a  great   man
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone'*  Weekly,  October  19,1964
The  GOFs  Involvement  in  the  Billie  Sol  Estes  Case—Freedom  in  Danger  in  Poland
Supreme  Court  Agrees  to  Hear  Test  of  U.S.  Iron  Curtain  Around  Cuba
Last  June  the  Supreme  Court  ruled  in  the  Aptheker   case
(378  US.   500)  that  an  individual's  freedom  to  travel  could
not  be  restricted  because  of  his  political beliefs or  associations.
The  ruling,  however,  fell  short  of  guaranteeing  absolutely  the
freedom   to   travel.     It   left   open   the   question   of   whether
the   government   may  prohibit   travel   to   specific   geographic
areas.    The  Court  last  week  agreed  to  hear  a  case  (Zemel   v
the   Secretary   of   State)    in  which  this   is  the   central   issue.
Louis  Zemel  applied   twice  in   1962  for  a  passport  for  travel
to  Cuba  and  each  time  was  refused.    A  three-judge  U.S.  Dis-
trict  Court  split  2  to  1 against  his  plea  for  validation.   Circuit
Judge  Smith  declared  in  his  dissent  that  "the  present  statutes
[the   Passport   Act  of   1926  and  section  215  of  the  Immigra-
tion  and  Nationality  Act}  do  not  authorize  area  restrictions
on  travel  and  that  the  Executive  cannot  restrict  the  right  to
travel   without   specific   statutory   authority."     The   Supreme
Court  might  go  further,  as  it  has  been  asked  to  do  and  de-
clare  area  restrictions  on  the   right  to  travel   a  violation  of
the  Firts  Amendment.
The  GOP  and  The  Estes   Case
The  Republicans  can  no  longer  claim  a  monopoly  On vir-
tue  in  this  election.    The  House  Government  Operations  re-
port  on  Billie  Sol  Estes  reveals  that  there  were  no  less  than
four   abortive   investigations   of   Estes  under   the   Eisenhower
Administrations.    One  in  1953  showed  that  grain  storage  fa-
cilities  which  Estes  built  with  government  loans  were  being
used   to  house   Mexican  workers   (Jbraceros)    and  were  struc-
turally  incapable  of  holding  grain.    Another  in   1958   found
that  Estes  by  fraudulent  claims  was  planting  about  ten  times
more  cotton   than  he  was  entitled  to  plant  under  the  cotton
allotment   program.     Most   suspicious   is  the   fact   that   James
McConnell,   an  Assistant  Secretary  of  Agriculture   from   1955
to  '56,  served  as  a  consultant   to  Secretary  Benson  on  grain
storage  matters  at  the  same  time  he  was  a  director  of   Com-
mercial  Solvents  Corporation   (from   1957   to  1959).    Com-
mercial  Solvents  had  a  direct  interest  in  Estes'  grain   storage
contracts  with  the  government   because  he  had   assigned   his
revenues  from  the  contracts  to  the  company.
Freedom  in   Poland
Everyone  who  has  been  to  Poland   (as  I  have)   and  has
been  impressed  with  its  intellectual  freedom  will  deplore   the
Protest  Few  Heard  on  MLF
"The  indications are  that  we  are  rushing  headlong
into  a  new  military  arrangement  of  doubtful  strategic
value  and  with  severe  political  drawbacks.   Originally
we  were told  that  MLF  would  be  a  genuine  NATO op-
eration  which would  strengthen  that  key  alliance.   But
now  it  appears  that  virtually  every  NATO  country—
with  the  sole  exception  of  West  Germany—wants  none
of  it.    Yet  nevertheless  some  zealots  in  the  State  De-
partment   keep  pushing  ahead  toward  a  treaty  which
almost  no  one  in  the  Congress  or  the  country  knows
anything  about,  and  which  will  make it  even  harder  for
our  negotiators  in  Geneva  to  get  the  Soviet  Union  to
agree   to   an   all-important   pact   prohibiting  the   dis-
semination  of  nuclear  weapons  to  nations  that  do  not
now  have them.
"If  we  are  to  believe  the  newspaper reports,  this  new
German-American   joint  nuclear  venture  may   be   ac-
complished  fact  by  the  time  Congress   comes  back  in
January.    It  seems  to  me  that  the  State  Department
owes  it  to  the  Congress  and  the  American  people  to
slow  this  thing  down  and  let  us  see  what  it  is  we  are
getting  into.    The  MLF  idea  has  been  kicking  around
for  years.    Surely  a  proposal  of   such  great  military
and  political  importance can  wait  a  few   more  months
until  the  Congress  can  take  a  good,  hard  look  at  it."
—Sen. Clark  (D., Pa.), press  release,  Oct. 7.
arrest  of  writer,  Melchior  Wankowic,   two  days  after  he  par-
ticipated  in  a  meeting  between  Polish  authors  and  the  Polish
government.     Last  March  Wankowic   was  one  of   34   Polish
writers  who  signed   a  manifesto   charging   censorship.     This
leaked  abroad.    The  very  fact  that  such  a  protest—impossible
in  any  other   Soviet  state  including  Yugoslavia—could   have
occurred  reflected  credit  on  Poland.    Yet  he  now  faces  three
years  in  jail  under  a  law  making  it  a  crime  to  "harm  the  in-
terests  of  the  State"  or  "lower  the  prestige"  of  the  State's
authorities.     Such   laws  would   at   once   be  attacked  as  bar-
barous  in  the  "bourgeois  West."    In  1919   Lenin  boasted  that
freedom  of  the  press  had  ceased  "to  be a hypocrisy,  because  the
printing  presses  and  the  paper  are  taken  away  from  the  bour-
geoisie."    They  have  since  been  taken  away,  too,   from   the
best  minds of  the  proletariat  and  the  intelligentsia.    Marx  and
Engels  never  dreamed  that  socialism  would  bring  censorship,
and  Poland  since  Golmulka  has  been  the  bright  spot  in  a  slow
dawn   of   freedom   within  the   Soviet   zone.     We   hope   the
Wankowic  prosecution  will  be  abandoned.
OWNERSHIP,   MANAGEMENT  AND  CIRCULATION
(Act  of  October  23,  1962;   Section  4369.  Title  39.  United  States  Code)
1.  Date  of   Filing;:   October   1.  1964.
2.  Title  of  Publication:  I.  F.  Stone's Weekly.
3.  Frequency  of  issue:  Every  other  Monday   except  last  in  December  and
first  in  January  and  bi-weekly  in  July  and  August.
4.  Location  of  known  office  of  publication:  5618  Nebraska  Avenue,    N.W.,
Washington.  D.  C.  20015.
5.  Location  of   the  headquarters  or  general  business  offices   of   the    pub-
lishers:   5618  Nebraska  Avenue,   N.W..   Washington.   D.   C.  20015.
6.  Names  and  addresses  of  publisher,  editor,  and  managing  editor:  I.  F.
Stone^same  address.
7.  Owner    (If    owned   by  a  partnership   or  other  unincorporated   frm,   ttt
name   and   address,   at    well   as   that   of   each   individual   must   be   given):
I.   F.   Stone.   5618   Nebraska   Avenue.   N.   W..   Washington.   D.   C.   20015;
Esther  M. Stone,  same  address.
8.  Known  bondholders,  mortgagees,  and  other  security  holders  owning  or
holding   1  percent  or  more  of   total  amount  of   bonds,  mortgages  or  other
securities   (If  there  are  none,  so  state):   none.
9.  Paragraphs  7  and  8  include,   in  cases  where  the  stockholder  or  secur-
ity   holder  appears  upon   the  books  of   the  company  as  trustee  or  in  any
other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of   the  person  or  corporation  for   whom
such  trustee  is  acting,  also  the  statements  in  the  two  paragraphs  show  the
affiant's   full  knowledge  and  belief  as  to  the  circumstances  and  conditions
under  which  stockholders  and  security  holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the
books  of  the  company  as  trustees,  hold  stock  and  securities  in  a  capacity
other  than  that  of  a  bonande  owner.
Average No.  Copies
Each  Issue During
Preceding 12 months
21,500
Single Issue Nearest
To Filing Date
21,500A.  Total   No.   Copies   Printed
(Net   Press   Run)
B.  Paid  Circulation
1.  To  Term  Subscribers  by
Mail,  Carrier  Delivery,  or  by
other  means                                        19.051                                 19,075
2.  Sales  Through  Agents,  News
Dealers  or  Otherwise                         1,253                                   1,342
C.  Free  Distribution  (including
samples)  by  Mail,  Carrier  De-
livery,   or  by   Other  Means                      50                                      50
D.  Total  No.  of  Copies  Distributed             20,354                                 20,467
(Sum  of  lines Bl,  B2 and  C)
1  certify   that  the  statements  made  by  me  above  are   correct  and    com-
plete.   I.  F.  Stone,  editor.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  October  19,1964
Little  Noticed  Measure  May Provide  Focal  Point  for  Liberal  Push  in  Next  Congress
Clark  Submits  Economic  Planning   Bill  for  Full  Employment
Since  the  debate  over  the  Employment  Act  of  1946,  few
men  in  Congress  have  seriously  tackled  the  problem  of   full
employment.    On  one  of  the  last  days  of  the  88th   Congress
(Oct.   1),   Sen.  Clark   (D.,  Pa.)  introduced  legislation   that
promises  to  do  so.    It  is  the  culmination  of  several  months
of  hearings  in  his  Labor  Subcommittee  on  Employment  and
Manpower.    We  criticized  that  committee's  initial  report  be-
cause  it  failed  to  speak  out   boldly  for   economic  planning.
The   Clark  bill   makes  no   such   evasion.     Where   President
Johnson  has  offered  a  grab-bag  approach  to  poverty,  the  Clark
bill   provides   for   a   coordinated,   frontal   assault.     Senators
Morse  and  Nelson  have  already  joined  Clark  as  co-sponsors,
and  in  the  not  unlikely  event  of  a  Democratic  landslide in
November,  the  bill  should  become  the  center  for  a  left  oppo-
sition  to  the  Administration.
Where  They  Left  OS  in 1945
It  attempts  what  Senator  Murray's  Full  Employment  Bill
of   1945  failed  to  achieve.    That  bill  was  emasculated  by  a
series  of  legislative  compromises.    "Full"  was  taken  from  its
title  and   "federal   responsibility  for   full   employment"  was
taken  from  the  body.    Most  important,  the  planning  mech-
anism,  a  National  Employment  and  Production   Budget,  was
eliminated.    In  its  place  was  substituted  the  innocuous  annual
Economic  Report  of  the  President.     Today  we  are  burdened
with  those  compromises.    We  face  not  only  the  problem  of
converting  an   arms  race  economy  to  a  peace   economy  but
of  doing  it  with  millions  already   unemployed   or   underem-
ployed.    The  retreats  which  defeated  the  aims  of  the Mur-
ray  Bill  must  be  erased.
The  heart  of  the   Clark   bill  is  the  requirement  that   the
President  submit  to  Congress  at  the  beginning  of  each  year
a  National  Production  and  Employment  Budget  and  a  Full
Employment  Federal   Budget.    The  first  would   identify   the
gap  between  where  the  economy  is  and  where  it  must  be  in
order  to  achieve  full   employment.    The   second   would   re-
quire   short  and   long-range   proposals   needed   to   close  that
gap.     Together    they   would   establish   federal   responsibility
for  full  employment  and  would  permit  no  obfuscation  of  the
amount  of  effort  needed  to  achieve  it.    Any  deviation  from
Where  Europe  Is  Ahead  of  Us
"Employment  policy  has  not  meant  the  same  thing  in
Western  Europe  and the  United  States  in  recent  years.
The  employment  goal  has  been  set  high  in  Europe  and
the  success  in  achieving  the  goal  has  been  impressive.
Unemployment  in  the  United  States  has  not  been  below
5   percent   since   1957.    Contrast   this  with   [the   fact]
that  not  a  single  [major]  European  country  had  an un-
employment  rate  as  high  as  4  percent  in  1961  or  1962.
Only  Italy  has  experienced  unemployment  in  excess  of
4  percent  since  1955.    In  the  last  half-dozen  years  or
so,   France,   West  Germany,  the   Netherlands,   Sweden,
and  the  United  Kingdom have  regularly  been  operating
at  unemployment  rates well  below  3 percent  and usually
below  2  percent."
—"Putt   Employment   As   A   Policy   Goal,"   by     Prof.
R.  A.  Gordon, economist at  U. of  Calif.,   Berkeley  (abr.).
that  goal  in  favor  of  price  stability  or  balance  of  payments'
equilibrium  would  have  to  be  justified  in  the  Budget.   Con-
gress  would  be  required  to  debate  the  Budget  as  a  whole  and
by   doing   so  would   become   an   institution   for   determining
economic  policy   rather  than  a  meeting  place   for   petty  ac-
countants.    Not   least  important,   the  bill  would   define   full
employment  as  a  level  of  unemployment  no  greater  than   3%
after   1968  and  no  greater  than  4%  until  then.    This  would
reverse  the  current  practice  of  adjusting  the  definition  to  the
state  of  the   economy.
Federal  planning  and  an  expansion  of  the  public  sector  of
our  economy  are  long  overdue.   Even  enlightened  business-
men  are  beginning  to  doubt  that  private  capital  can  cure  our
economic  ills  (see box  below).     Clark  told  the  Senate   that
planning  has  virtually  eliminated  the  business  cycle in  Europe
and   reduced  unemployment   in  many  countries   to   less   than
2%  (see box  above).    Here  it  is  put  officially  at  5
l
/
2
%   but
the  Clark  committee  report  estimated  it  to  be  as  high  as  9%
when  one  includes  the  underemployed  and  those  who  stopped
looking  for  work.   This  is  a  travesty  and  in  large  part  it  is
the   result   of   our   military  expenditures.     "Throughout  the
Cold  War,"  said  Clark,  "we  have  been  deceived  into  believ-
ing  that  because  the  Federal  Budget  has  been   large,   it  has
been  pumping  life  into  our  economy."
Clark  Quotes  A  Banker's Speech on
"What  seems  to  be  happening  is  that  in  an  evolutionary
way  scientific  processes,  not  just  automation,  are  bringing
the  American  economy  to  a  point  where  smaller  amounts
of  capital  are  producing  larger  outputs  of  consumables.    In
order  that  a  relatively  free  market  economy  may  adjust  to
this  structural  change,  consumption  expenditures  as  com-
pared  with  saving  must  grow  proportionally larger.    In  the
absence  of  a  steady  stream  of  exciting  new  products,  there
is  little  chance  of  this  just  happening  when  needed.    For  a
time,  perhaps,  the  excessiveness  of  saving  is  disguised,  as
funds  chase  each  other  in  the  stock  market  and  find  outlet
overseas.    But  if  consumer  spending  stay  at  the  same  per-
centage  of  income,  saving  remains  redundant  and  business
activity  is  sluggish.  .  .  .
"Unfortunately,  it  is  particularly  difficult  for  businessmen
to  see  this  problem  in  true  perspective.    First,   they  can
scarcely  admit  to  themselves  the  need  for  ever-larger Gov-
ernment   spending  and  conversely  smaller  inputs  of  capital.
the  Need  for  Lower  Rates  of  Profit
Instead,  they  ask  for  larger  profits,  greater  permissible  al-
lowances  for  depreciation  reserves.  .  .  .
"Formerly,  high  profits   were  needed  to  lure  cash  from
current  consumption  into  necessary   investment   in  produc-
tive  facilities.    Now  more  current  consumption  is  in  order.
Formerly,  high  profits  seemed  only  just  compensation   for
the  tremendous  risks  undertaken. .  .  .  Now depressions  are
'against  the  law'  and  even  recessions  do  not  always   check
yearly  advances  in  GNP.  .  .  .  Formerly,  corporations  did
not  generate  as  much  of  their  investment  funds  internally.
They  had  to  show   good  profits  to  get   needed   money  for
expansion.    Now  huge  depreciation  allowances  permit  cor-
porations   to   generate   their   own   funds.     It   is   clear   to
sophisticated  businessmen  that  profits   up  to  former  stand-
ards  are  inappropriate at  this  time.  .  .  ."
—John  R.  Bunting,  vice  president  of  the  Federal  Reserve
Bank   of  Philadelphia,   "What's   Ahead   for   Business?",   in
Atlantic    Monthly    for   June,  1964  and   Cong   Rec.,  Oct.   1.
10
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone't  Weekly,  October 19,1964
Bobby  Kennedy's  Biggest  Blindspot  Is  Civil  Liberties
(Continued  from   Page  One)
though  each  time  he  was  knocked  down  for  saying so. Bobby
did  not  add,  of  course,  that while this  POW was being  beaten,
he  went  to  work  for  McCarthy  though   McCarthy  had  just
trampled  Marshall  on  the  Senate  floor,  calling  him  an   officer
whose  decisions  invariably  served  "the   world   policy   of   the
Kremlin."    Kennedy  did  not  quit  McCarthy  until  he  picked
Bobby's  rival  Roy  Cohn,  as  general  counsel.    As  recently  as
four   years  ago,   in  his   book,   The   Enemy   Within,   Bobby's
only  criticism  of  McCarthy  was  that  he   didn't   do   enough
research  and  relied  too  much  on  Cohn  and  Schine!    As  chief
counsel  of   the  McClellan  rackets  committee,  though  Bobby
helped  clean  a  lot  of  hoodlums  and  corrupt  dictators  out  of
the  labor  movement,  he  acted  much  as  had  McCarthy,  equat-
ing  invocation  of   the  Fifth   amendment  with  confession  of
guilt  and  treating  a  Congressional  investigation  as  a  pillory
in  which  people  he  disliked  could  be held  up  to  public  scorn.
A  Lost  Opportunity
Bobby  would  like  this  record  to  be  forgotten,   but  as  At-
torney  General  he  lost  his  chance  to  dispel  the  misgiving  it
arouses.    The  prosecutions  of  Roy  Cohn  and  Hoffa  were  car-
ried  out  in  the  spirit  of  personal  vendettas.  His  sweeping  anti-
crime  legislation  evoked  opposition   from  the  American  Civil
Liberties  Union.   He  supported  a  House  Un-American  Activi-
ties   Committee   bftl   which-  would  have  authorized  hearing?
without  confrontation  or  cross-examination  in  the  industrial
security  program.     He   supported   the  bill   to  overturn   that
part  of  the   1956  Supreme  Court  decision  in  the  Yates   case
which  narrowly  interpreted  the  word  "organize"  in  the  Smith
Act.    The  most  conspicuous  evidence  of  how  little  he   had
learned  sinee the  McCarthy  days was  his  sponsorship  of  wirer
tap  legislation.    The  New  Republic  (Sept.  19)   irt  endorsing
Kennedy  for  Senator  said  he  had  had  a  change  of  heart  and
that  his  new  bitt  would  forbid  the  FBI  to  tap  wires  without
court  order  and  allow  the  Attorney  General  on  his  own  to-
authorize  wiretapping   "only   when   the   national   security   is
patently  involved."    The  editors  had  better  look  again.    The
FBI  could  be authorized   by  the  Attorney  General to  tap  wires
without  court  order  in  a  wide variety  of  sa-ealled  national  se-
Improving  the  Kennedy  "Image"
An  example of  "improving  one's  image"  turns  up  in
Robert  F.  Kennedy's newly  published  book,  "The  Pur-
suit  of  Justice."   He relates  that in  1938 his  father  was
appointed  Ambassador  to  England  "and  there  we  saw
the  approaching war.  .  .  .  We  went  to  Germany.   The
sight  then of  Nazism  and  storm  troopers  will  never  al-
low  any  of  us  to  forget  the  price  of  dissolution  and
tyranny.    Our eldest  brother, Joe,  was  in  Spain during
part  of  the  Civil  War.  .  .  ."  The  impression  is  of  a
family  stirred by  the  dangers of  Fascism.    With  all  due
respect  to  the  memory of  a  man  who  died  as  a  flier  in
World  War  II,  Joe,  Jr.,  did  not  visit  Spain  until three
months  after  Franco won*  a  victory to  which  his  father
contributed.    Hugh  Thomas in  his  recent  history  of  the
Spanish  Civil  War  recalls  that  an  angry  cable  of  pro-
test   from   Ambassador  Kennedy   was  instrumental  in
persuading  FOR  not  to  lift  the  Spanish  arms embargo
after  Secretary  Hull  had  agreed  with  Senator  Nye  to
recommend  it.   Thus  ended  the  last  hope  of  saving  the
Spanish  Republic.   As  late  as  the  spring  of  1941  the
elder  Kennedy was  for  appeasement, warning that,  "We
cannot  divert  the  tides of  mighty  revolution  now  sweep-
ing  Asia  and  Europe."   Bobby  was  12  in  1938 and can-
not  be  blamed  for  what  happened then.   It  is  the  dis-
tortion  of  the  record  which  is  objectionable.
* Vivian  Cadden's  summary  in  Redbook  last  Febru-
ary  of  the  privately  published,  Kennedy  family  memoir,
"Joe  As  We Knew  Him."
subversive   activities.    The  McCarthy   period  and  the  FBI's
record  shows  how  loosely  these  categories  can  be  interpreted
and  how  easily  they  can  be  abused.    Bobby  quoted  Jefferson's
"eternal  hostility  against  every  form  of  tyranny  over  the  mind
of  man"  as the  frontispiece  to  The  Enemy  Within.    The  rec-
ord  hardly  indicates  irresistible   Jeffersonian    impulses.
Equally  grave  are  the  fear&  Bobby  stirs  in  the  field  of  for-
eign  policy.    Anti-guerrilla   activity  has  been  one  of  his  en-
thusiasms  and  he  was  among  the  planners  of  the  Vietnamese
adventure,  now  so dangerously  near  collapse  into  a wider  war.
He  is  reputed  to  have  opposed, more  extreme  measures  in  the
Cuban  missile  crisis  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  would
favor  a  more  thoughtful  and  humane  policy  toward  Cuba  or
Communist   China.    To  start  him  on  the  road  to  the  Presi-
dency  without   knowing   where  he  stands  on  these  possibly
life  and  death matters  is a  gamble  I  would  not  take.curity  cases,  including  suspicion  of  "seditious  conspiracy"  and
We'll Send A  Free Sample  Copy  Of  This  Issue To  Friends  If  You  Send Stamped  Self-Addressed  Envelopes
IE  Stone's  Weekly
561 &  Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
I. F.  Stone's
Please  renew
Name  ..............
QtfAali
City  ................
For  $5.35  extr
(To)   Name  .
Street   ...........
City  ...............
Shall  we  send
Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
(or  enter)  a  sub  for  the   enclosed   $5:
..........................Zone............State....................
10/19/84
a  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   Fifties
..........................Zone.....«.....State....................
gift  announcement?          Yes  O   No  D
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  the  last  week   in  December  and  the  first  week  in
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July   and  August  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;    $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rate*:
$15  to  Europe;   »20  to  Israel.  Asis  and-  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED