I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964jun01.pdf

============================================================

Special  Report  from   Israel
Not  Just  One But  Two  "Integration"  Problems:  Darker  Oriental  Jews  As  Well  As  Arabs
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XII,  NO.  19
JUNE   1,  1964
D
ioi       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.15  CENTS
An  Affluent  Society  But  Living  Beyond  Its   Means
To  sec  Israel  again  after  eight  years  is  to  be  struck  at  every
turn   by  the  triumphant   evidence  of  progress.    The  flood  of
new  immigrants,  wliith  has  more  than  tripled  its population
since  the  achievement  of   independence    18  years  ago,   is  re-
flected   in  a  continuous  building  boom.    The   dismal  acres  of
shanty   towns   (niit'abaroth)    hastily   erected   for   new  immi-
grants  were  still   distressingly  visible   in   1956.     Today   they
have  given  way  (except  for  a  hard-core  of  3,000  which  still
clings  to  the  old  hovels)   before  whole  new  neighborhoods
—and  cities—of  towering apartment  houses.    The  roads  have
widened,  the   traffic   jams  grown   worse.     The   country   throbs
with  expansive  vitality.  Israel  has  become  an   affluent  society.
Even   in   the  once  Spartan  kibbutzim,   the   outhouse  and   the
cold  outside  shower  have  been  replaced  by  private lavatories
and  running  hot  water,  provided  by  individual   solar  heaters.
Everywhere  there  are  flowers.    Even  in  Tel   Aviv  the   whole-
new  northern  extension  of  that  rather  grubby  city  has  become
downright   pretty  with  tree-lined   boulevards   and  flower  gar-
dens.    Not  all  the  changes  are  to  the  taste of  those  who  loved
the  old  Palestine.   The  Dan  Hotel  in  Tel  Aviv  has  become  as
over-sumptuous  as  its  counterparts  in  Miami.   The  Desert  Inn
outside  Beer  Sheva,  no  longer  a  sleepy  Bedouin  town,  might
be  in  luxurious  Palm   Springs,  except   for   the  mezuzoth  be-
side  every  door  and  the  Arab-with-camel  on  duty  at  the  en-
trance.   The  dolce  vita  has  arrived,  as the  old-timers complain,
complete  with  juvenile delinquents  and  call  girls.
No  More  Fedayeen
The  other  big  change   since  the  spring  of   1956   is  in   the
sense  of  security.    Then  infiltrating  jedayeen   from  Egyptian
training  centers  in  the  Gaza  strip  and  Sinai  were  shooting   up
settlements  at  night  and  making  travel  after   dark   hazardous.
The  Sinai campaign  later  that  year  may  have  been  a  humiliat-
ing  setback   for  England  and  France,   but  for   Israel   it  put  a
stop  to  these  terrorist   raids,  smashed   Czech  and  Soviet   arms
dumps  across  the  Egyptian  border  and  established  a  UN   force
at  the  narrow  straits  where  Eilat's  access  to  the  Red  Sea  had
been  shut  off  by Nasser.   This  much  was  accomplished,   what-
ever  the  wisdom  of  the  retaliatory  spiral  which  led  up  to  the
Sinai  campaign,  and  its  cost  in  the  alienation  of  Afro-Asian
sympathy  from  Israel.*  Today  one  can  travel  everywhere  with
assurance.     Unusually   heavy   rains   had   turned   the   country
greener  and  lovelier  than  we  had  ever  seen   it  in  seven   pre-
vious  trips.  Our  visit was  a  succession  of  unforgettable   scenes:
Haifa's   gleaming   harbor   from   the  top  of  Mt.   Carmel,   the
wide  lawns   of  Mishmar   Ha-Emek,  the   rich  green  vistas  of
*  See  Michael  Bar-Zohar's  Suez:  Ultra  Secret,  newly  pub-
lished  in  Paris  and  Simha Flapan's  critical  article  on  it  in  the
May  issue  of  The  New  Outlook,  a  Middle  East   monthly  de-
voted  to  Arab-Jewish  reconciliation.
Some  TovarischI
"Your  struggle  against   imperialism   and  exploitation
give  me  the  right  to  call  you  comrade,  my  dear  friend,
President  Nasser."
—Premier   Khrushchev   at   Hie  Aswan  Dam,  May  14
"NASSER:  Our  nations,   hand  in  hand,  will  shape   a
better   future.    Our  mutual  affection   has   an   historic
background,  and  I  believe  that   our  common  interests
in  so  many  areas  will  draw  us  ever  closer.    Have  you
ever  found  an  Arab,  a  Minister  or  a  simple  man  in  the
street,  who  is  not  friendly  to  the  Germans?
"FREY:  Certainty not.
"NASSER:  You   will   never   find   one   because    there
aren't  any.    That  would  run  counter  to  our   mentality.
Our  sympathies  in  the  Second  World  War  were  on  the
German  side.   The  Speaker of  our  Parliament  was  then
imprisoned   for   pro-German   sympathies.
"FREY:  We  would gladly have  won  the  war  and  freed
the  Speaker  and all  the Arabs.
"NASSER   (laughs   heartily):  We  will  work  together
for  freedom  and  peace  on  the  basis  of  justice.    For  us
Arabs  this  means  the  right  to  the  unity  of  our   nation
on   our  hereditary   territory   and  for   you   Germans   it
means  exactly  the  same—reunification  in one  State.  That
is  our  heart's  desire.    All  my  good  wishes  to  the  Ger-
man  people  and  for  you  personally,  my  dear  Dr.  Frey,
and  for  your  great   purposes."
—This  was  an  Interview  given  by  Nasser  in  Cairo,  on
the   eve   of   Khrushchev's   visit,   to   Dr.   Gerhard   Frey,
publisher     of    Germany's    leading   neo-Nazi   organ,   the
Deutsche  National  und  Soldaten  Zeitung, and  published
verbatim  under  flaring  headlines  "War  With  Israel  Un-
avoidable"  in  its   issue  of  May  1.
the  once  malarial  Valley  of  Israel,  the  holy  places  of   Naza-
reth,  Tiberius  and  Safad,  lunch  on  the  eastern  shores  of  Lake
Galilee  at  Ein  Gev  within  the  shadow  of  the  Syrian  border,
the  mauve  hills  at  twilight  which   look   down   on  the   fertile
collectives   in  that  narrow   "finger"   of   Israel  which   stretches
northward  between   Lebanon   and  Syria.    Later  we  saw  Ash-
dod,   Israel's   biggest  seaport   rising  on  the  dunes  where  the
Philistines  once   dwelt,   and  Kiryat  Dan,  a  new  complex  of
factories  and  farms  to  the  north   of   Beer   Sheva.     We   saw
old  friends  in  kibbutzim  like  Shoval  and  Hatzor  nearby  which
were  once  lonely  military  outposts  and  are  now  thriving  cen-
ters  of  rural  industry  as well  as  agriculture,  for  since  1959   the
industrial   byproducts   of   the   collective   settlements   equal   or
surpass  their  agricultural  output.    The  climax  was  our   climb
up   those   venerable  hills  to  Jerusalem.     There  one  can  still
step  backward  in  time,  and  savor  ways  of  life  centuries  apart.
A  fashionable   crowd   takes  tea  on  the  veranda   of  the  King
David  overlooking  the  walls  of  the  Old  City  and  a  few  blocks
away  little  boys  in  ear  curls  and   suspenders   rock   back   and
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  1,1964
(Continued   from   Page   One)
forth  over  their  pious  schoolbooks  in  the  back  alley  yeshivahs
of  Mea  Shearim,  keeping  alive  a  medieval  universe  of  ortho-
dox  Jewry.
Beneath  the  prosperous   and   picturesque   surface  there  are
problems   grave  enough  to  threaten   Israel's   future.    But  for
those  who  have  seen  the  crises  of  its  earlier  years  it  is  impos-
sible  not  to  be  optimistic.    I  first  saw  Palestine  November  2,
1945,   the  day  the  Haganah  began  the  war  against  the  British
by  blowing  up  the  watch  towers  from  which  they  laid  in wait
for   illegal  immigrant  ships;   it  seemed   hopeless   for  so  small
a  force  to  challenge  so great  an  empire.    In  the  spring of   1946
I  travelled  with  the  illegals  on  one  of  these  Jewish   Mayflow-
ers.    In   1947   I  saw  the  British   impose  martial  law  on  Tel
Aviv  in  an  effort   to  wipe  out  the  terrorist  campaign  against
them.     In   1948   I  was  a  witness  to  the  joint  attack  of   the
Arab  States  on  what  was  then  an  ill-prepared  tiny  community
of  650,000  Jews.*    In  1949  and  1950  I  saw  the  lack  of  food
and  the  letdown   in  morale  which  followed   the  war  and  the
onset  of  the  Arab  blockade.     To  have  seen   such  odds  over-
come  makes  it  hard  to  take  too  tragically  the  problems  of  the
dynamic,  confident and  expanding  Israel  of  today.
A  Growing  Trade  Deficit
They  are  nonetheless   serious.    The  first  is  fiscal:  Israel  is
living   beyond   its  means.     Its   rate  of   economic   growth   is
topped  only  by  Japan's  and  few  countries  can  match  its  steep
rate  of  increase  in  exports.    But  in   1963   its  adverse   surplus
of   imports  over  exports   was  still  $420   million  and   in   the
first  quarter  of   1964   its  trade  deficit  rose  to  three  times  that
in  the  first  quarter  of   1963.     Capital  imports  have  been  run-
ning  ahead  of  the  trade  deficit  so  that  the  government's   cash
reserves  have  been  growing.     But  of  total  capital  imports  in
1963   of  $500  million,  $162   million  was  in  German   repara-
tions  and  restitution  payments  which will now  decline sharply.
Israel  will  soon  have  to  meet   the  challenge  of  austerity  and
better  distribution of  income.     Its  affluent  society,  like  Amer-
ica's  has  little-seen  but  wide  fringes  of  poverty.    An   osten-
tatious  luxury  by  the  rich  does  not  make  this  more  bearable.
And  there,  as  in  America,  the  problem  of  poverty  is  intensi-
*  In  Underground  to  Palestine  (1946)   I  told  the  story  of
the  illegal  trip  and  in  This  Is  Israel  (1948)   the  story  of  how
Israel  won  its  war  of  independence.
Bonn's  Strange  Delay
"Bonn—Herr  Hoecherl,  the  West  German  Minister of
the  Interior, told  the  Bundestag yesterday that  Dr.  Er-
hard  had  given  his  approval  to  amending  the  passport
laws  -,vith  the  intention of  hindering the  disputed  activi-
ties  of  German  scientists  and  technicians in  Egypt.   He
expressed  regret,  however,  that  the  efforts  of  his Min-
istry  to  draw up  a  bill  had  so  far  met  with  little  outside
support.
"The   Minister's  replies  failed   to   satisfy   the  Social
Democrats.    They  pointed  out   that  10  months  after  a
unanimous   Bundestag  resolution,  a   Bill   had  still   not
been  tabled,  or  a  date  given  by  the  Government  when
it  would  so  so.    For  more  than  a  year  now,  Israel  had
been  urging  the  Federal  government  to  devise  ways  to
stop  German  citizens  helping the  Egyptians develop of-
fensive   weapons.    Herr  Hoecherl  maintained  that  'ex-
ceptional   legal   difficulties'   had  prevented  the  Federal
government  from  responding before.
"An  SPD   [Social   Democrat]  member  argued  that   it
was not  only  legal  difficulties  but  political  pressure  from
Arab   countries  that   had   induced   the   Government  to
hold  back."
—The  Times  (London)  May  1
fied  by  color  and  "race."    Israel  has  a  double  "Negro"  prob-
lem.    The   darker  Jews  from  the  Orient   and  North  Africa,
as  well  as  the  Arab  minority, suffer  from  prejudice.
The  usual  Jewish  attitude  toward  the  Arabs  is  one  of  con-
temptuous  superiority.   Our  driver  northward was  a  Jew  who
had fled from  the  Nazi  advance  into  Hungary  but  that  did  not
save  him  from  racist habits.   When  I  suggested   that  we  give
a  boy  a  lift,  he  refused,  saying the  boy was  an  Arab.    When  I
asked  what  was  the  difference,  he  said  Arabs  smelled  bad.    I
said  that  is  what  anti-Semites  said  of  us  Jews   in  the  outside
world  but  this  made  no  impression.    His  attitude,  it  is painful
to  report,  is  typical.    Israel  is  a  country  not  only  of  full  em-
ployment  but  of  labor  shortages.     Thousands  of  Arabs  do  the
menial   tasks  of  Tel   Aviv.    They  find  it  as  hard   to   obtain
decent  lodgings  as  Negroes  do  in  America  and  for  the  same
reasons;  many  "pass"   as  Jews   to  circumvent  prejudice.     In
Haifa   I  visited   the  only  secondary  school   attended   by   both
Jews  and  Arabs  but  even  there  the  classes  turned  out  to  be
separate.  The  State  of  Israel  has  done  much  in  a  material  way
for   the   Arabs   but   the   sense  of   humiliation   outweighs  any
improvement.    The   spectacle  fills  one  with  despair.     For  if
Nasser  Turns  One  Face  Toward A  French  Socialist Editor, Quite Another  to  a  Neo-Nazi
"Yemen  is  not your  last  combat. . ..  Now it  is  necessary  to
look  toward  Palestine."
—Nasser   to  his  shock  troops,  quoted  in  the  French  inde-
pendent  Socialist   weekly,  France-Observateur, April  30.
"War  is  not  a  solution. ...  It  is  relatively easy  to  begin  a
war,  but  who can  know  where  it  will  lead  or  how  it  will  end?
No,  we  do not  want war.   But  we  are  rendered uneasy  by  the
logic  of  Israel's development."
—Nasser  to  Gilles  Martinet,   of   France-Observateur, inter-
view  in  its  issue  of  April  30.
"FREY:  Do  you  regard  a  peaceful  solution  of  the  Israel
problem  as  possible?
"NASSER:  Absolutely  not.  .  . .
"FREY:  Your  Excellency,  allow  me  to  ask  quite brutally:
Will  you  crush  Israel?
"NASSER:  I  hope  so.   ...
"FREY:  Will  you  be  able  to  clean  up  the  Israel  question
within  a generation?
"NASSER:  In  schaa  Allah  (If  Allah  wills).
"FREY:  If  the  German  [reparations]  payments  [to  Israel]
should  one day dry up ...    (hiatus  in original).
"NASSER  (Interrupting):   That  is  an  especially sad  chap-
ter,  a  burden  on  our  friendship.   The  German  payments   are
the  elixir  of  life  for  Israel.   Israel  is  unthinkable without
your  supplies.    I  no  longer  understand  the  Germans.
"FREY:   Those   payments  were  based  on  the   murder  of
Jews.
"NASSER:  But  the  lie  about  six  million  murdered  Jews  is
not  taken  seriously  by  anyone,  not  even  by  the  simplest  man
here  in  our  country."
—Nasser's   interview   with   the   publisher   of   the   Deutsche
National  und  Soldaten  Zeitung  in  its   issue  of  May  1  which
we  picked  up  at  a  newstand  in  Athens  on  our  way  to  Israel.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  1,1964
Jews,  after   all  their  experience  of   suffering,   prove  no  better
than  the  rest  of  mankind once  in  the  majority,  what  hope  for
a  world  as  torn  apart as  our  is  by  tribalism  and  hate?
Yiddish  Becomes  Upper  Class
More  progress  is  being made  in  dealing  with  Israel's  other
integration  problem—that  of  the  Jews  from  the  Orient  and
Africa.     For  these  —  unlike  the  Arabs  —  are  people  Israel
wants.    That  does  not  save  them  from   being   looked  down
upon.     Half   the   people   of   Israel  are   now   from  countries
where  Yiddish  is  unknown.    But  in  Israel,  for  the  first  time,
the  tender  language of  East  European ghettoes  has  become  an
upper   class  tongue.     The   Ashkenazi,  the Yiddish-speaking
Jews,  hold  the  commanding positions  in  the  community.   The
Sephardi,  or  Oriental  Jews,  speaking  Arabic,  French  or   the
Old  Castilian  of  the  Spain  from  which  they  were  driven five
centuries  ago,  are  the  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water.
They  make up  half  the  population but  their  children  are only
15%  of  those  in  secondary schools  and  only  5%   of  those  in
the   university.    Their  cultural  level  is  lower.    They  cannot
afford  to  send  their  children to  the  higher  schools.    Discrim-
ination  has given them  solidarity  and  "communal"  tickets have
begun  to  appear  in  local  elections,  pitting  Sephardi  against
Ashkenazi.    The   right  wing  parties  are  making  demagogic
appeals  to  the  Oriental  Jews.    On  the  other  side  one  Yiddish
speaking  meshuganah  has  just published  a  book  to  prove  that
the  Yiddish-speaking  from  the  West  are  the  only  true  Jews!
The  government  is  trying  its  best  to  give  preferences  to  the
Orientals  where  equally   qualified.     It   fears   lest   Israel   run
into  a  situation  like  that  of  Belgium  where  after   150  years
the  conflict  between  Walloon  and  Fleming  divides the  nation.
Fortunately  the  common  language  of  Hebrew,  and  the  melt-
ing  pot  of  school  and  Army, are  available to  ease  Israel's  divi-
sions.    Education  is  seen  as  the  key  to  amalgamation  but  edu-
cation  costs  money  and  here  we  come  to  Israel's   other   big
headache,  that  of  defense.
The  amount  spent  on  defense  is  a  secret  but  some  notion
of  its  magnitude  may  be  gathered  from  a  veiled  figure  in  the
budget.    This  shows  that  about  a  third  goes  for  an  item called
"Security,  special  budget  and  reserve."    This  has  been  rising.
It  was less  than  $300 million  or  28.3%  of  the  1963/64  budg-
Why  Some  Want  Nuclear   Arms
"In  Paris,  Gamal  Abdul  Nasser  made  it  clear  that  he
intends  to  make  war  on  Israel,  though  the  threat  was
couched   in   diplomatic   language.     To  say   that   unless
Israel  implements  UN  resolutions   concerning   the  repa-
triation  of  Palestinian   refugees,   these  refugees  will  use
force  to  achieve  their  aims,  and  the  Arab  States  assist
them,  in  practice  means  war—for  though   the  UN  reso-
lutions   speak   about   'repatriation  or  resettlement',  the
Arab  states  will  certainly  prevent  any  attempt  to  reach
agreement   on  the  basis  of  resettlement   and  compensa-
tion,  and  Israel  cannot  afford  to  permit  repatriation   of
hundreds  of  thousands  of  hostile  Arabs.
"The  Egyptians  are  meanwhile reported  to  have  provi-
dentially  fixed   the   date   of   their   attack   on   Israel   for
Easter  1966, by  when  they  hope  to  have  sufficient   mis-
siles  available  to  wipe  out  the  major  Israeli   population
centres.     The  German  scientists   are   continuing    their
work  in the missile sphere....
"There  is  nothing  inherently  improbable about  the  1966
date  for  war  in  the  Middle  East.   The  best  way  of  delay-
ing  such  a  war—barring  resolute  UN  action  in  advance,
which  seems  wishful thinking  at  the  moment—is  further
strengthening   of   Israel's   striking   force—especially   as
regards  unconventional  weapons."
—The  Israel  Economist,  April  1964
et  and  close to  $400  million  or  30.9%   of  the  1964/65  budget.
The  next  largest  item  was  education, but  this  is  less  than  8%
of  the  budget.    Were  the  arms  race in  the  Middle  East  to  end,
Israel  could  afford   to  make  secondary  education   free,   too,  as
elementary  education  is  now.    Nothing  could  do  more  to  de-
velop  her  human  resources  and  end  the  rankling   inferiority
of  Oriental  Jew  and  Arab.    Another  way  to  measure  the  im-
pact  of  the  arms race  is to  notice that  "security,  special  budget
and   reserve"   amounts   to   more   than   German    reparations,
UJA,  private  gifts  and  donations  of   food  surpluses  put   to-
gether.    If  Israel  enjoyed  real  peace,  she  would  no  longer  be
dependent  on  the  bread  of charity.
However  one  looks  at  it,  peace  is  Israel's  overriding  prob-
lem.    It's  hard  for  a  poor  country to  keep  up  with  the  Joneses
in  armament.    "In   the  war  for  independence,"   said  one  of
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
An Appeal By Israeli Liberals Against A  Nuclear  Arms  Race  in  the  Middle  East
"Our  Committee   is  concerned   with  the  prevention  of  nu-
clear  arms  in  the  Arab-Israeli  area.    We  support  the  denu-
clearization  of  the  whole  Middle East,  but  lay  stress  on  the
Arab-Iraeli   region    (which   includes   a   part    of    Northern
Africa).   The reasons  are  obvious:
"1. There  is  little  danger  of  war between other  Mid-Eastern
States.   The Israeli-Arab relations,  however,  are  permanently
strained  and  often  on  the  brink  of  war.   Two  wars  occurred
between  Egypt  and  Israel  in  the  last  15 years:  1948 and 1956.
"2.  The  main  antagonists,  Egypt  and  Israel,  have  densely
populated  centres,  among  the  densest  on the  globe,  the  Egyp-
tian  Nile  delta  and  the  Israeli   Mediterranean  coast.    Even
a   'primitive'   nuclear   encounter    would   destroy   millions   of
human  beings   (and   two  of   the   most   important  traditional
sites  of  the  Western  World).   Owing  to  geographical,  tech-
nological  and other  limitations no  warning system  is  feasible.
The   deterrent   aspect   of   nuclear   weapons   has   no   meaning
here,  since  the  first  strike  may  finish  the  job.
"3.  Although   Egypt   and   Israel   are   small   parties,   their
military  conflict  would  have  immediate  international   implica-
tions.    With  a  nuclear   background,  it   may  provoke  a  uni-
versal  disaster.
"4.  Both  in  Egypt  and in  Israel,  there  are  influential  circles
who favor  a  nuclear  'option.'  The  attitude  of  President Abdul
Nasser  is  at  least  equivocal.    Israel,  being  a  democracy,  is
discussing   the   problem   openly.     Our  Committee   initiated
the  debate,  and it  is  continuing  at  a  growing  measure.  Egypt,
with  its  one-party  system   unfortunately  has  no  such  possi-
bilities.
"International  friends  of  both  countries,  who  care  for  the
fate  of  humanity  at  large,   may  be  helpful  by  bringing   to-
gether   responsible   leaders   of   both  sides.    You  are   surely
aware  that  Lord  Russell  and his  friends  expressed  their  deep
anxiety  over  the  current  developments  in  our  area,  by  pub-
lishing their  message  to  the  rulers,  Prime Ministers, and  peo-
ples  of  the  States  concerned.   The reaction  was  not  encourag-
ing.    An  unofficial  approach  to   influential  individuals  and
groups  may  perhaps  be  more  fruitful  at  this  stage."
—Committee  for   the  Denuclearization   of  the   Israeli-Arab
Area.   Among its  members  is  the  philosopher,  Martin  Buber.
1   :
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  1,
Now  Is  The  Time to Nip  in The  Bud  A Middle Eastern  Nuclear  Arms  Race
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
those  tireless  old-timers  who  make  Israel  the  dynamic commu-
nity  that  it  is,  "a  Spitfire  was  hot   stuff.     We   could  buy  one
second-hand   for   2,000  pounds.    Now   the  Mystere  costs   us
$750,000;  the  Mirage,  $1,000,000;  the  super-Mirage,  $1,250,-
000.    But  planes  and  tanks are  given  to  Egypt  by  the Russians
for  very  little.    They  gave  Nasser  15  submarines  and  a  flotilla
of   Komars,  swift   mosquito   boats  armed  with  missiles which
can  shoot   from   30  kilometers   offshore.     Now   we're   afraid
Kgypt  may  get   enriched  uranium  from   Moscow,   too."     Be-
tween   Russian   aid  and  German  scientists  there  is  a  real  fear
that  Egypt  may  some  day  be  the  instrument  for  a'second  go
at  Hitler's  "final  solution."    Khrushchev's  visit  stirred   deep
anxiety.    "The   Government  of  Israel  regrets,"  Prime  Minister
Eshkol  told  the  Knesset  pointedly  May  20,  "that  in  spite  of
the   Egyptian  ruler's  aggressive  declarations  against  Israel  he
receives  political  support  and  supplies  of  arms  from  sources
that  generally  advocate  peace  and   co-existence."     It  is  tragic
that  Israel  could  not  have  joined  its  neighbor  in  rejoicing over
so  fruitful   and  historic  an  achievement  as  the  Aswan  Dam.
And  it was  mischief-making demagogy  for  Khrushchev  to  join
the  Arab  States  in  stigmatizing  as  an  imperialist  plot  the  be-
ginnings  of  the  Jordan  water  scheme  which  could   benefit  the
whole  area  and  does  no  more  than  put  to  use millions  of  pre-
cious  gallons  otherwise   wasted   in  the  Dead   Sea.
The  Shadow  of   Ben  Gurion
To  inflame  the  Arab-Israeli  quarrel  is  to  risk  no  small  con-
flagration.    Eshkol's  statement  on  the  eve  of  his  visit  to  the
United  States  reiterated  previous  denials  that  atomic  develop-
ment  in  Israel  was  designed  for  other  than  peaceful  purposes.
But  doubts  persist.    There  are  circles  in  Israel  which  see  nu-
clear  arms  as  a  necessity  for   survival.     They   fear   that   neo-
Nazi  German   scientists  are  using  Egypt  as  a  proving  ground
for  "unconventional"  weapons.    The  arms  race  between  Egypt
and   Israel  can  become   the  next  hot  spot  in  the   proliferation
of  nuclear  arms.    A  committee  of  distinguished  scholars  and
scientists  in  Israel   (see   box  bottom  of  p.  3)   have  began  to
agitate  for  a  denuclearized  Arab-Israeli  area  but  there   is  no
Jews  and  Germans
"I  am  75  years  old  and  my  age  disqualifies  me  from
appearing   on  the   Junior   page,   but   I  cannot   resist   an
urge   to  compliment  Mr.  Kurt  Schwar/er  most  warmly
on  his  letters.
"Are    we,  as  Israelis  and  as  Jews,  going  to  be  given  a
lesson  in  our  own  Talmudic  teachings  by  a  German  and
a  Christian  namely  to  'Show  love  to  your  neighbor  be-
cause  he  is  like  yourself?"    Moreover  the  word  'neigh-
bor'  does  not  refer  only  to  members  of  our  own  people
because   a  few  verses  further  in  the  text,  the   Egyptian
is  designated  by  the  same   term.    And  'Do  not  despise
the   Egyptian,  for  you  were  a  dweller  in  his  land'  and
'The  sons  shall  not  die  for  the  sins  of  their  fathers,  but
each  one  shall  die  for  his  own  sins.'
"If  we  condemn  outright  all  Germans  and abstain  from
all  contact  with  them,  are  we  then  better  than  the  Nazis
who  had  condemned  all  Jews?    This  mentality   might
help  us  build  up  a  political state  of  Israel—a  haven  of
refuge  for  the  remnants  and  for  the  persecuted—but  it
will  never  be  a  true  Jewish  State,  the  guardian  of  the
spiritual  heritage  of  our ancient  Kingdom  and of  the  rich
ethical   and  moral  legacy  of  our  long  Exile."
—Dr.  Elias   Frenkel   in  a  debate   among  German  and
Israeli  youth  in  the  Jerusalem  Post  May   IS.
echo  from  Egypt,  where  a  police  state  represses  free  opinion.
Behind  the  quarrel  which  is dividing  Israel's  ruling  party,  the
Mapai,  the  quarrel  between  Ben  Gurion  and  Eshkol  over  the
irrepressible  Lavon  affair,   is  a  struggle  between  younger  mili-
tary  men  who  put  their faith  in  force and  an  Old  Guard which
wishes  to  steer  a  course  of  moderation  away  from  the  apoca-
lyptic  adventurism  of   Ben  Gurion.    The   Suez   affair   showed
that  E.G.  and  the  military  were  able  to  carry  on  secretly  be-
hind   the   back   of   civilian  government.    They  might   do  so
again.    If  the  conversations with  President  Johnson  strengthen
Eshkol,  they  will  make  a  contribution   to  peace.    Now  is  the
time  to  prevent  Egypt and  Israel  from  wasting  their  substance
and   endangering   the  world   in  the  blind   alley   of  a  nuclear
arms  race.    I  hope  to  report  further  on  this  in  a  later  issue.
You  Can  Use  The  Blank  Below  to  Give  A  Sub  or  Stone's   "Haunted   Fifties"    (Or  Both)  As  A  Graduation    Gift
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly     5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name
Street    .............................................................. ...........................
City   .......................................
For  $5.35  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
(To)    Name   .....................................................••••••••.•••••--••-
Street    ...............................................................••••••••.••••••--••••
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?            Yes  D    No  D
6/1/64
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618     Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  0.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
'l    F   Stone-   Circulation  Manner.
M.  Stone.
.<!."   to   Ku
Subscription:       -S.">   in   Ihf    U.S.;          ?*>   i
opc;   $JO  to   Isr:u-I,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED