I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964jul13.pdf

============================================================

Will  the Murchisons  Control  the SEC? P.  2
Gruening  Asks the  Senate:  If  A  Cease-Fire in  Laos, Why Not  in Vietnam?
"I  congratulate President Johnson and  Secretary  Rusk  on
joining  Britain,  Canada,   Thailand   and  South  Vietnam   in
calling  for  a  cease-fire in  Laos.  .  .  . 'But  our  action  should
be  extended to  a  cease-fire  in  South  Vietnam. .  .  .
"Suppose  we  win  an  apparent  military  decision.   Suppose
we  succeed  in  identifying   all  the  Vietcong  and containing
them  behind  barbed  wire.  .  .  .  We  would  have  to  feed  and
clotl e  them  well  into  the  future.    We  would  have  to  seal
off  the  borders  with  U.S.  soldiers.    We  would  have  a  U.S.
colony  in  Southeast  Asia.   This might have  been considered
—Gruening  (D.  Alaska)   in  the  Senate  July  2
an  accomplishment  in  the  15th  or  16th  centuries  but  not  in
the  20th.  .  . .What  about  the  South  Vietnamese  people not
behind  bars?    Would  we  have  instilled  in  them  a  love  of
the  U.S. as  the  great  peace-maker  who  killed  or imprisoned
their  fathers,  brothers  and  cousins?     Is  this  the  way  to
spread  the  light  of  democracy  abroad?  .  .  .
"The    GOP  would-be  policy-makers are   advocating   war
and  the  perpetual colonization of  South  Vietnam.   The  ac-
tion  to  be  taken  with  respect  to  South  Vietnam  is  to  call
for  a  cease-fire  and  take  the  issue  to  the  United  Nations."
in  another  peace  speech  which  the  press  blacked  out.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  25
JULY  13,  1964
101      WASHINGTON, D.   C.
15  CENTS
"Let  Us  Close  The  Springs  of  Racial  Poison"
The  words  are  from  President  Johnson's  statement  on  sign-
ing  the  Civil Rights  Bill.    Their  noble  plea  matched  the  high
occasion.     The   moment  was  one   to  make   every   American
proud.    In  a  world  poisoned  by racialism and  tribalism  of  one
kind  or  another,  from  Mississippi  to  the  Congo,  the  U.S.  is
the  one  country which  has  made  the  eradication  of  racial  dis-
crimination  a  major  national goal.    Side  by  side  with  this  po-
litical  accomplishment,  on  behalf  of  the  Negro  in  a  country
90  percent  white,  is  an  even  more  extraordinary  spectacle.    A
small  band  of  college  youngsters  has  headed  South  ready  to
risk  beatings and  death  in  the  cause  of  racial  equality.    Most
of   them  have  never  themselves   suffered   from  the   evil  they
propose  to  eradicate.    Most  are  white,  from  well-to-do   fami-
lies,  children  of  the  privileged,  well-educated,  with  sure  fu-
tures.    Three  have  already  disappeared,  victims  of  the  racial
savagery  which  makes  the  Deep  South  as  dangerous  for  them
as  the  jungle.    Their  disappearance  has  not  stopped  the  oth-
ers.    History  can  show  few  examples  of  such  pure   idealism.
These  youngsters  honor  our  country  and  our  generation;  they
stand  among  the  foremost  in  the family  of  man.    '
No  Time  for  Euphoria
But  we  dare  not  pause  more  than  a  moment  in  the  mood
of  euphoria  brought  about  by  passage  of  the  Act  and  its  first
few  successful tests  in  such  deep  South  cities  as Jackson,  Miss.
The  President,  in  nominating  former  Governor  Leroy  Collins
of  Florida,  to  be  director  of  the  Community  Relations  Service
the  Act  sets  up,  has  made  a  first-rate  choice.    Governor  Col-
lins  set  an  example  of   courage  on  the  civil  rights   issue  in
Florida  which  seemed  at  one  time  to  have  cost  him  his  politi-
cal  future.    The  country  is  fortunate  to  have,  in  Collins  and
in  Secretary  Hodges,  two  liberal  Southerners  who  may help  to
smooth  the  path  toward  compliance.    It  may  also  be  grateful
to  Ellender  of  Louisiana  for  being  the  first  Senator  from   the
South  to  speak  up  against  disobedience  to  the  civil  rights law.
To  rally  the  better elements  in  the  South  swiftly,  to  give  them
support  against  the  lawless,  to  show  by  determined  enforce-
7  *
Just  A  Racially  Impartial Fellow
"Sheriff  Rainey  [of  Neshoba  County  where  the  three
"disappeared"]   killed  two   Negroes  in  the   past   four
years,  but  said  both  killings were  in  self-defense.    The
six-foot  one  inch,  250-lb.  Sheriff  said  it  also  had  been
necessary  to  'knock  the  fire  out  of   persons  resisting
arrest  several  times,  but  that  he  used  such  force  'more
often  against   whites  than  niggers'."
—Wash.  Daily  News  from  Phila.,  Miss.,  July  1.
ment  that  the  Federal  government  means  business  is  urgent
and  essential  if  serious  trouble  is  to  be  avoided.
One  step  would  be  an  immediate  expansion   of  the  ludi-
crously   small   Civil   Rights   Division   in   the   Department   of
Justice.    Another  is  for  Attorney  General  Robert  Kennedy  to
admit  that  he  was  wrong  in  saying  that  the  Federal   govern-
ment   has  no  power   to  protect  civil  rights   workers  in  the
South.    A  third  is  pressure  on  the  FBI  to  find  those   respon-
sible  for  the  kidnapping  and  probable  murder  of  the  Missing
Three.    They  seem  to  have  been  the  victims  of  a  conspiracy
in  which   local  law  enforcement   officials   played  a  key  part.
The  FBI  has  been  most  reluctant  to  do  anything  in  the  past
about  the  racist police  officers  of  the  South.
The  students  working  in  the  South  are  doing  the   Federal
government's  work  in  making the  right  to  vote a  reality.  There
is  no  reason  why  a  specially  deputized  Federal  marshal  can-
not  be  assigned   to  each  group.    A  letter  in  the  New   York
Times  July  7  from  a  student  voter  rights'  worker  in  Fayette
County,  Tennessee,  reports  that  "in  the  past  two  weeks  these
students   have  been   subjected  to  beatings,  shootings,   threats
- and  intimidation"   with  no  protection   from  the   local   police.
Charles  A.  Haynie  writes  with  force  and  justice:
Our  nation  must  appear foolish  if,  although  it  sends mil-
lions  of  American  soldiers  to   »H  corner*  of  the  globe  to
defend  the  liberties  of  free  men,  it   cannot  preserve  the
right  to  travel,  to  vote,  to  walk,  to  talk,  to  assemble  and
to  think  in  one  of  our  own  States  of  this  Union.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  IS, 1964
Proxmire  Reveals  Struggle  for  Control  of  Giant  Investment   Empire
How  Budge  Appointment  May  Give  Murchisons  Control  of SEC
The  day the  Senate  approved  Hamer  Budge  by a  voice  vote
as  Securities   and  Exchange  Commissioner,   Senator   Proxmire
delivered  a  speech  in  opposition.    It  brought  to  light  a  strug-
gle  by financial  titans  for  control  of  $4.1  billion  in  other  peo-
ple's  money.    This  is  the  sum  managed  for  five  affiliated  and
four   subsidiary  firms  by  Investors   Diversified   Services,   Inc.,
the  country's  largest  investment  trust  complex,  which  in  turn
is  controlled  by  Alleghany  Corp.,  a  $6.7  billion  holding  com-
pany  that  can siphon  IDS  funds  into  its  other  properties,  New
York  Central,  Missouri  Pacific  and  Webb  & Knapp.
When   Murchison   Bros,   of   Dallas   controlled   IDS   from
1953  to  59,  they  used  it  as  a  market  for  securities  offered  by
their  own  financial  interests,     (see  box   below).     In    1959,
after  five  years'  litigation,  a  court  order  divested  the  Murchi-
sons  of  controlling  interest  in  IDS  because  of  "improper   ac-
tivities"  in  acquiring  it.    Alleghany  had  allowed  them  to  "buy
in"  after  they  helped   it  wrest  New  York  Central   from   the
Vanderbilts.     One   month   after   the   divestiture   order,   the
Murchisons  began  a  proxy  contest  for  indirect  control  of  IDS
through  Alleghany.    In  1961   they  won  the  entire  empire  for
a mere $28  million  investment..
The  Abuse  of  Proxies
Small   investors'  enjoy   little   protection   against  investment
advisors  who  have  secret  interests  in  the  securities  they  pro-
mote.    A  limited  form  of  protection  may  result  from  a  court
suit  brought  against  IDS,  Alleghany,  and  Murchison  Bros,  by
Randolph  Phillips.    As  amicus  curiae,  the  SEC  can  influence
the  outcome.    Victory  would  mean  the  refund  by  IDS  of  $10
million  in  underwriter and  advisor  fees  to  the  shareholders  of
its  largest   affiliate,   Investors  Mutual,   Inc.    At   issue  in   the
case  is  whether  investors  are  to  be  protected  under  the   1940
Investment  Act  against  an  unauthorized  change  in  control  of
their   investment  advisor  when   that   change   results  from   a
proxy  contest  in  the  holding  company.    U.S.  District   Judge
Archie  Dawson  has  denied  a  trial  to  determine whether  brok-
erage   house  proxies  were  committed  to  the   Murchisons   in
return  for  IDS  business.   Instead  he  ruled  that  the  Investment
Act  does  not  apply to  proxy  contests  because  they  are   "demo-
cratic  elections."    Phillips  will  appeal.
Proxmire's  speech   disclosed   that  Budge's   vote  may  deter-
mine the  position  the  SEC takes  in  court.  It  first  voted  4-1  for
the  broad   (pro-investor)   construction   of   the   Act  urged  by
Alan  Conwill,  Director  of  Corporate  Regulation.   It  then  re-
versed  itself   3-2  in  favor   of   the  Murchisons  and  will   soon
As  Goldwater  Is  To  Carry  Harlem
"Regulatory   bodies  have  great  power  and  discretion.
They  are  constantly   subject  to  great   pressure  by  the
people  whom  they  regulate.   It  takes  a  man of remark-
able   character   and  objectivity   to  resist  that   kind  of
pressure. ... In the course  of  hearings before  the  Com-
mittee  on  Banking  and  Currency,  I  asked  Mr. Budge  to
give  his  views  concerning  the  function  of  the  SEC and
what  he  believed  his  job.should  be.    He  said,  'If  a  per-
son  were  a  crook,  whether  he  is  in  the  securities  indus-
try   or  any  other  industry,  I  would  deal   with  him  as
such.   This  position  is  not a bit  different  from  the  posi-
tion  I  now  hold  on  the  trial   bench.'  .  .  .  There  is  all
the  difference  in  the  world  between  being  a   Securities
and  Exchange   Commissioner  and  being  a  judge  or  one
who  will  carry  out  the  law  as  written.
"This  nominee  is  about  as  likely  to  help  make  the
SBC  the  vigorous  watchdog  of  the  marketplace  that  it
should   be  as   Senator   Goldwater  is   to   carry   Harlem
for  the  Presidency   next   November,"
—Proxmire  (D.  Wis.)  in  the Senate, June  26.
reconsider  again.    Proxmire  was warning  Budge  that  he  could
not  serve  on  the  SEC with  the  same  immunity he  enjoyed  as
spokesman   for  private  power,   mining  and  banking   interests
while  congressman   from   Idaho.     (He   once  voted  against  a
publk  power  project  unanimously approved  by  his  state  legis-
lature.)     But  to  keep  an  eye  on  Budge,  Proxmire  must  stop
the  SEC from  voting  in  secret,  a  practice  it  began  in  I960.
The  Murchisons  soon  may regulate  the  SEC rather  than  the
other  way  round.    Johnson's  personal  adviser,  Abe  Fortas,  is
their  lawyer  before  the  SEC.    A  Murchison-appointed  presi-
dent  of  IDS,  Tom  Moses,  was  being  considered  for  the  posi-
tion  finally  given   to   Budge.     It   was   decided   instead  that
Moses  should  replace  resigning  SEC Chairman  William  Cary.
When  Moses  turned  out  to  be  a  Republican  (Cary  is  a  Demo-
crat),  the  plan  had  to  be  dropped.     Alan  Conwill's  resigna-
tion  was  also  a  Murchison  gain.    He. resigned  when  Johnson
did  not  carry  out  Kennedy's  intention  of  appointing  him  as
replacement  for   Commissioner  Allen   Frear.     Frear   resigned
the  day  after  the  Bobby  Baker  scandal  broke.    Johnson  could
dispel  suspicion  by  replacing   Chairman  Cary  with  a  liberal.
Even  better,  he  might  initiate  reforms  in  the  1940   Investment
Act  to  prevent  practices  by  which  Texas  oil  millionaires  can
control—and   manipulate—a   $4   billion  pool   of  investment
capital  with  a  $28  million  investment.
How  the  Murchisons Used  Their  Control  of  Alleghany's Investment Trusts
"From   December   1953,   when   Murchison   Brothers    ac-
quired  their   first   block  of   Investors  Diversified   Services,
Inc.  common  stock  until  April  1960,  when  control  of   IDS
was  returned  by  Murchison  Bros,  to  Alleghany  Corporation,
no  less  than  a  total  of  $113,587,000  of  IDS  and  its   affili-
ated  companies  funds  had  been  lent  to  or  invested  in  banks,
oil  and  gas  and  miscellaneous   companies  identified  as  hav-
ing  transactions  with  the  Murchison  interests.
"In  1955  a  company  called  Grilling  Oil  privately  obtained
$5,000,000  in  capital  funds  from  IDS  or  a  subsidiary   com-
pany.    The  IDS  Finance  and  Law  Committee   subsequently
discovered  that  Grilling's  controlling   persons  were  Holman
Jenkins,  principal  Dallas  attorney   of  the   Murchisons,  and
other  associated  persons.     In  April  1956,  IDS  and  Mutual
bought  no  less  than  $22,500,000   of  5-year  notes  of  T.  J.
Bettes  Co.,  a  Dallas  Mortgage   broker.    It  was   discovered
that   Bettes   had  acted   as   a   broker   in   finding   mortgage
money   for  the   customers   of   Murchison  companies   in   the
house-building   business."
—From   the  Phillips'   petition   to   enjoin   the   Murchisons
from  use  of  Investors  Mutual  funds   after   they  had  gained
control  of  Alleghany   Corp.  and  IDS   in  1961.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  13,1961t
Despite  The  Furore  Over  Bobby  Baker,  The  Senate  Is  Hostile  to  Its  Own  Reform
Loopholes  Clark  Would  Close  to  End  Influence  On  Capitol  Hill
This   issue  went   to  press   before    the   release  of   the   long
awaited  Senate   report   on  the  Bobby  Baker   case.    But   two
votes  in  the  Senate   July   2  showed  how  little  disposed   that
body  is  to  end  any  suspicion  of  influence-peddling.    It  voted
66  to  25  against  a  Morse  amendment  to  a  Federal  pay  raise
bill  which  would  have  required  all  members  of  Congress,  all
Federal  employes  earning  over  $10,000  a  year,  all   officers    of
the  Armed  Services  with  the  rank   of  Colonel  or  above  and
all  members  of  both  national  political  party   committees   to
disclose  all  income  and  gifts   and  all  dealings  in  commodities
and  securities.    A  "little  Morse   amendment"   covering   only
members  of  Congress  and  its   employes  was   then   offered     by
Heating.    This  more  limited   version  was  also  rejected   61
to  25.    The  leadership  of  both  parties  in  the  Senate   opposed
these  amendments,   and  the  Southerners   (except   for   Thur-
mond  of  South  Carolina)  were  a  solid  bloc  against  disclosure.
These  votes  do  not  augur  well  even  for   the  weak  disclosure
rule  reported  out  by  the  Senate  Rules  Committee  last  week
which  will  come  to  a  vote  later  this  summer.    So  our  read-
ers  can  see  the  issues  involved  we  reprint   the  heart  of   the
separate   report   made   by   Clark   of   Pennsylvania,   who   has
played  a  leading  part  in  seeking  reform   of  the  Senate   rules.
By  Senator  Joseph  S.  Clark
While  I  have  joined  with  the  Committee  in  voting  to  re-
port  this  [disclosure]  Resolution  to  the  floor,  I  view  it  as
merely  a  small   and   timid   first   step.     My  proposal   would
broaden  the committee's  resolution  in    ...
1.  Asset  disclosure.    The  Committee's   proposal  would  re-
quire  disclosure  of  the  identity  of  business  entities  in  which
an  interest  is held,  but  not  the  value.    My  amendment  would
also  require  disclosure  of  the  fair  market  value  of  the  asset.
A  Senator  Should  Disclose  His  Creditors
2.  Liability  disclosure.    In   my  view,   the   holding   of   an
obligation  of  a  person  in  high  public  office  is  as  much  a  lever
for   evil  influence  as  the  sharing  of  a  business   undertaking.
Consequently,  my  amendment  would  require  the  disclosure  of
each  liability  in  excess  of  $5,000,  together  with  the  name  of
the  holder  thereof,  owned  by  a  member,  officer,  or  employee
of  the  Senate,  or  by his  spouse.
3.  Capital  gain  disclosure.   A  familiar  means  of  passing  a
reward  to  one  to  whom  a  gift  cannot  be  given  is  the   "hot
issue."    By  means  of  this  device,  one  in  possession  of  infor-
mation  concerning  a  future  dramatic  rise  in  the  value  of  a
particular  security can  pass  that  information  on  to  others,  thus
permitting  them  to  take  advantage  of  the  surge  in  value.  .  .  .
There  is nothing  in  the  Committee's  recommendation  which
would  force  disclosure  of  transactions of  this sort  if  the  securi-
ties  had  been  sold  prior  to  "reporting  day":  January  1  of  the
preceding  year.    My  amendment  on  the  other  hand  requires
disclosure  of  both  the  source  and  amount  of  all  capital  gains
realized  during  the  year  in  any  amount  exceeding  $5,000,  by
(1)  the  person  required  to  report   (2)   by  his  spouse,  or  by
him  and  his  spouse  jointly;  or  (3)   by  any  straw  man.    My
amendment  would  require  the   disclosure  of  the   source   and
amount  of  every  item  of  income  in  excess  of  $100   received.
5.  Disclosure  of   association   with   professional     firm.     The
Committee  resolution  goes  part  way toward  meeting  the  prob-
lem  of  the  Senator  or  Senate  aide  who  maintains  an  associa-
tion  with  a professional  firm  which  engages  in  practice  before
an  agency  of  the  Federal  government,   by  requiring   disclosure
An  Appeal  by  SCEF  to  the  Senate
A  petition was  filed  in  the  U.S.  Senate  July  7  by  the
bi-racial  Southern  Conference  Educational  Fund  ask-
ing  the  Senate  to  order  the  Internal  Security  Commit-
tee  to  return  records  illegally  seized  from  its  offices  in
New  Orleans last  year.   The petition was  signed among
others  by  the  Rev. Fred  L.  Shuttlesworth,  president  of
the   SCEF,   and   Aubrey   W.   Williams,   its   president
emeritus.   This  is  believed  to  be the  first  time  that  the
Senate   has  been  petitioned   to  police  action  taken  by
one  of  its  own  committees.   The  petition cited  a depo-
sition  taken  last   December   30  from   J.  G.  Sourwine,
chief   counsel   of   the   subcommittee,  that   the   records
were  seized  on  the  basis  of  a  phone  call  to  the  Chair-
man,    Eastland,   without  authorization   from   the  com-
mittee.    Sourwine  admitted  that  the  records  disclosed
no  evidence of  any  illegal  or  subversive activity.  "Now
that  the  Senate   has  passed  the  historic  Civil  Rights
Act  of  1964,"  the  petition  said,  "it  is  imperative that
organizations   seeking   to   bring   about   peaceful  com-
pliance   with   that   law    should   not    be   impeded   or
harassed."
of  the  name  and  address  of  the   firm.   My  amendment  carries
the  rule  to  the  logical  next  step  by  requiring  disclosure   also
of  the  name,  address  and  principal  business  of  any  client  of
the  firm  for  whom  any  services  involving  representation  be-
fore   a  government   agency  are  performed,   together   with   a
statement  of  the  total  fees  which  were  charged  for  such  serv-
ices.
6.  Disclosure  of  financial   condition  and  activity  of  spouse.
The   splendid   cartoonist  Lichty,  in  his   "Grin   and  Bear   It"
depicted  an  address  being  delivered by  "Mrs.  The  Hon.  Sena-
tor  Snort"—"The  pressure  of  public  service  is  indeed  terrific
and  a  wife  must  do  all  she  can  to  help  .  .  .  such  as  letting
the  Senator  put  all  his  investments  in  my  name."    By  failing
to  make  any  provision  for  this  time-honored   technique,   the
Committee  left  a gaping  loophole which  renders  all but  worth-
less  the  other  provisions  of  this  Resolution.
7.  Prohibition  of  joint  ventures  with  lobbyists.    These  ac-
tivities  would  be  prohibited  by  my  amendment.
8.  Accepting  gifts   from  lobbyists.    It  would  seem  to  me  to
be  wholly  salutary  to  set  a  limit  on  the  value  of  a  gift  which
a  Senator  or  Senate  aide  might  properly  receive  from  a  lobby-
ist.    My amendment  sets  this  at  a  most  generous   $100.   .  .  .
9.  Testimony   of  Members  of  the  Senate.    My  amendment
would  authorize  any  duly  authorized  Committee  of  the  Senate
to  request  any  Senator  to  come  before  it  and  give  any  perti-
nent  testimony  which  it  has  reason  to  believe  he  can  give  on
the subject matter under investigation.
10.  Moonlighting   by Senate  officers   and  full-time  employes.
The  facts  of  the  Baker  case  are  such  as  to  cast  grave  doubt  on
the  practice  of  permitting  officers  and  full-time  employees  of
the   Senate  to  serve  as  managers   or  proprietors  of   business
enterprises,   to  engage  in  a  regular  professional  or   consulting
practice,  or  to  maintain  an  association  with  a  professional   or
consulting   firm.   My  amendment  would   prohibit   moonlight-
ing  of  this  sort.    Even  if  there  had  been  no  Baker  case,  this
rule  would   stand  well  recommended   by  the  Biblical   dictum
that  no man shall  serve  two  masters.
I  0 ,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  IS, 1964
Irrevocable  Steps  Toward  German  Atomic  Rearmament  May  Be  In  The  Making
The  Best  Time  to  Sneak  A  New  Nuclear  Arms  Agreement  Past  Congress
While  public  attention  is  focused  on  Mississippi  and  Viet-
nam,  irrevocable  steps  may  be  taken  on  the  path  toward  Ger-
man  nuclear rearmament.   On  June  30 the  President  sent  Con-
gress   a  message  on  a  new  agreement  with  NATO  and   the
NATO  countries  for  the  exchange  of  nuclear  weapons  infor-
mation.    The  message,  and  the  appended   letters  from  Secre-
tary  Rusk and  (jointly)  from  Secretary  McNamara  and  Chair-
man  Seaborg  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  can  only  be
described  as opaque.    If,  as explained  privately,  this has  noth-
ing  to  do  with  the  creation  of  a  multilateral  nuclear   force,
why  isn't  this  said plainly and  publicly?
Tricky   Timing
The  timing  of  the  message  is  tricky.   Under  the  1958 re-
vision  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Act,  agreements  of  this  kind  be-
come  law  60  days  after  their  submission  to  Congress   unless
overruled  in  the  meantime  by  a  joint  resolution.    This  nega-
tive  veto  is  difficult   to  wield  under  the  best   circumstances.
The  60  days  ahead  will  find  Congress  mostly  out  of   session,
its members  attending  the  two  political  conventions,  the  scanty
sessions  in  between  taken  up  with  urgent  domestic  legislation.
Even  if  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  should   hold
hearings,  little  attention  will  be  paid  them  during  the  excite-
ment  of  the  campaign.     Its  chairman,  Senator  Pastore    (D.
R.I.)   is  up  for  reelection  this  Fall.    This  is  an  ideal  time  to
sneak  something  through.
The  New   York   Times  (July  1)  reported   that  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission  had  just  announced  that  the  gas  centri-
fuge  process  has  been  put  on  the  secret  list  again.    It  may
some  day  provide  a  cheaper  way  of  producing  the  enriched
uranium  necessary  for  speedy  accumulation  of  a  nuclear  stock-
pile.    Some  short-cut  of  this  kind  would   change  the  whole
picture,  and  speed  up  the  proliferation  of  nuclear  arms.   Will
information  on  this  process  be  made  available  to  the  Germans
under the  new agreement?
The  Russians  at  Geneva  on  July  2  declared  that  if  the  West-
ern  powers  wanted  an  agreement   to  stop  proliferation  of  nu-
clear  weapons,  they  would  have  to  abandon  the  MLF.   To  the
5,000  Appeal  on  Vietnam
"We,  five  thousand  American  college  and university
educators,  urge  a  neutralized  Vietnam.   It  would  end
the  terror  and  suffering  in  this  war-ravaged  land.    It
would  end  the  continuing  loss  of  American  and  Viet-
namese  lives.   It  would  be  preferable to  deeper involve-
ment  or  irresponsible  pull-out.    We  therefore  appeal
to  you,  Mr.  President,  not  to  enlarge  the  scope  of  the.
war,   but  instead  to  work  for  a  neutralized  North  and
South   Vietnam,   as   separate,   federated   or   reunified
states  protected  by  international  guarantees  and peace-
keeping  forces  against  all  outside  interference."
—Circulated  by  the  National   Committee  for  a  Sane
Nuclear   Policy  and  presented  July   10  by  Hans   Mor-
genthau,  David  Brooks  Arnold  and  Robert  S.  Broume,
the  latter  two  recently  returned  from  government  serv-
ice  in   Vietnam.
U.S.  argument  that  the  MLF  was a  device  for  keeping  nuclear
arms  from  the  Germans,  M. Zorin  replied  that  he didn't  think
men  as  shrewd  as  the  leaders  of  West  Germany—which  will
foot   40%   of   the   cost—would   put   up   billions   of   dollars
"for  a fiction" (Le  Monde,  July 4) !
The  British  seem  to  be  fighting  a  rear-guard  action  against
MLF.    On  July  2  they  presented  to  a  NATO  working  group
in  Paris plans  for  mixed  manning  of  existing  aircraft  and  mis-
sile  forces.   The  Defense  Correspondent  of  the  London  Times
(July  3)   reported   that  despite  official   assurances  to  the  con-
trary  these  are  intended   as  alternatives   to  MLF.     He   wrote
that  one  reason  for  British  reservations  about  MLF  "is  that  a
newly  constituted   force  is  more  likely  to  be  provocative   for
the  Soviets  than  a new  command  system  for  an  existing  force."
To  permit  a  German  finger  on  the  nuclear  trigger  so  soon
after   the  second  world  war,  and  with  so  many  of  the   same
Germans  responsible   for   it  in  charge   of  the  West   German
industry  and  military,  is  criminal  negligence,  inviting  a  third
and  final  holocaust.     Those  who  would   like  to  stop  it  may
find  useful  information  in  a  remarkable  pamphlet  put  together
here  by  a  group  in   Women   Strike   for   Peace  (Box 4005,
Washington,  D.C. $1)   on  "The German  Problem."
David  Dellinger  Will  Report  on  His Trip  to  Cuba  and  IFS  Will  Speak  on  Peace  With  Castro,   First
Congregational  Church, 945 C St. NW., Washington,  D. C, July  22,  8 P.M.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name
Street   ...............................................................................:........
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
7/13/64
For  $5.35  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............St*te....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  Q
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraika  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15.  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
We   Go  on  Every-Other-Week  Summer  Schedule  —  Next  Report  From  San  Francisco
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED