I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964jun08.pdf

============================================================

Why  Our Man  in Laos Runs An  Opium  Den, P. 3
Look  Who  Now  Laments  The  Decline  of  Moscow's  Power  in  South-East  Asia
"Washington,  May  29—The  most  dangerous  new  element
in  the  foreign  policy crisis  now  confronting President  John-
son  is  the  resounding  collapse  of  Russian  power  in  South-
east  Asia. .  .  .  For nearly  a  decade—from  the  fall  of  Dien-
bienphu  in  1954  until  last   year—Russia  was  a   significant
power  in  the  East-West  pulling  and  hauling  over  Southeast
Asia.  Indeed  it  was  the  major  Communist  military  presence
in  Laos,  where  Soviet  planes  were  busy  airlifting  supplies
to  the  Pathet  Lao  rebel  forces.
"Russia   played  the   game   hard,   and  against   America's
best  interests.    But  it  contributed on  the  whole  a  stabilizing
influence  highly  valued  by  U.S.  officials ...  a  restraining
influence  on  North Vietnam, for  a while, even  on  Red  China.
For  example,  Moscow   played  a  key   role  in  checking   the
Pathet  Lao  grab  for  Laos  in  1962,  when  a  direct  collision
with  the  U.S.  threatened.     The  Soviet  also  helped  Amer-
ican  negotiators  engineer  the  patchwork  Geneva  agreement
on  Laos,  then  worked  to  put  it  into  effect.  .  .  .
"American  Kremlinologists  regard  Russia's  present  noisy
declarations  of  support  for  the  Communist effort  in  south-
east  Asia  as  just  a  smoke-screen.      They  feel  this  is  Mos-
cow's  way  of  confessing  that  it  is  really  no longer  in  a  posi-
tion  to  influence  its  old  partners. .  . . This  fact  greatly com-
plicates  and  limits  the  choices  of  action  for  the   U.S."
—Michael  O'Neill's  Capitol   Stuff    column  in  the  Neanderthalish   right-wing   New  York  Daily  News  May   30.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XII,  NO.  20JUNE  8,  1964
101      WASHINGTON,   D.   C.15  CENTS
Some  Truths  About  Laos  Adlai  Helped  to  Hide
Adlai  Stevenson's  speech  to  the  Security  Council  on  South-
east  Asia  was  a  moral  disaster.    He  deserves  better   employ-
ment  than  reading  the  repellant  scripts  of  the  State  Depart-
ment.    Once  before  on  Cuba,  as  now  again  on  Indochina,  he
found  himself  assigned  the  defense  of  the  indefensible.  Morse
was  right   when   he  told   the  Senate   last   Thursday   that   the
speech   "extinguished   a  light   of  world   statesmanship,"   and
that   Stevenson  should   have   resigned   rather   than   make   it.
Morse   was  particularly   disturbed,   in   view   of   the   growing
speculation  about  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons,  because  Steven-
son   declared   the   U.S.   ready   to  '"take  whatever   means  are
necessary"  to  enforce  its  will  in  Southeast   Asia.    As  an  ex-
ercise  in  the  disingenuous  and  the  palpably  false  the  Steven-
son   speech   topped  even  McNamara's  March   26  address  on
Vietnam  to  the  National   Security  Industrial   Association.    A
striking  example  pointed   out  by  Morse:   Stevenson   cited   the
special  report  by  the  Indian  and   Canadian  members   of   the
International   Control   Commission   in  June,   1962,    accusing
North  Vietnam  of  violating the  Geneva  accords  by  armed  aid
to  the  South  Vietnamese  rebels.     Stevenson  did  not   mention
that  the  report   also  accused  the  U.S.   of  violating  those  ac-
cords   by  its  military  activity  in   South   Vietnam!    We   had
a  right  to  expect  something  better  from  a  man  like  Stevenson.
Three  Rightist  Coup  d'Etats
Stevenson  spoke  of  the  alternation  of  periods  of  calm  with
periods  of  limited  aggression  in  Laos.    He  failed  to  mention
that  the  "periods  of  calm"  have  been  broken  by the  intrigues
of   our  military-intelligence  establishment.     The   recent   out-
burst  of  fighting  was  a  reaction  to  the  third  attempt  by  the
rightist  military on  our  payroll  (Laos  was long  the  only  coun-
try  in  the  world  whose  Army'was  entirely  paid  by  the   U.S.)
to  overthrow  a  coalition  regime  headed  by  Souvanna  Phouma.
The  first  time  was  in  1958,   the  second  in  I960.    Morse  told
the  Senate  we  should  have  taken  our  case  against  the  viola-
tion  of  the  Geneva   accords  in  Laos  to  the  United   Nations.
6
What  If  The  Mistake  Had  Been
Made  With  An  Atom  Bomb
A  La Goldwater?
"Cha  La,  South  Vietnam, May  25—At  six  one  morn-
ing  about  two  weeks  ago,  an  Air  Force  plane  swept
low  over  Cha  La.    What  followed  was  one  of  the  more
tragic  mistakes  of  the  war  in  South  Vietnam.    Major
Victor   Chandler   of   Austin,  Tex.,   watched  in   shocked
dismay  as  a  plane  whipped back  and forth  over  the  rice
paddies  and  pineapple groves  on  which  Cha  La  depends
for  its   prosperity.    Major  Chandler  recognized  it  im-
mediately  as  a  defoliation   plane.    Obviously  the  pilot
had  misread  the  map.   Plant-killing chemicals intended
for   enemy  country  deeper  South  sprayed  the   ground
below.  Major Chandler's shouted protests  went unheard.
"That,  Col.  Jim  Keirsey  of  Durant,  Okla.,  senior  ad-
viser  to  a  South  Vietnamese  division,  said  grimly  later
on, was  the  last  defoliation mission flown on the  Ca Mau
peninsula—until  we  get  some  things  straightened  out.
But  that  does  not  save  Cha  La's  paddies  and pineapple
growers.  Today  their  green  is  slowly  turning  to  brown,
and  the  months  ahead  look  bleak  indeed.    Cha La is  the
outpost  we  have  selected  to  turn  into  a  model  town."
—Jim  G. Lucas in  the  Seripps-Haward  press May  SS.
I  J
In  his  judgment  the  U.S.  "has  a  case  it  can  prove"  in  an  in-
ternational  investigation.    The   fact  is  that  our  first  effort   to
overthrow  Souvanna  Phouma  has  been  investigated   and  by  a
committee  of  our  own  Congress.    In  the  spring  of   1959   the
subcommittee  on  foreign   operations  of  the  House  Govern-
ment  Operations  Committee  took  984  pages  of  testimony  on
what  we  were  doing  in  Laos.    They  showed   gross   violation
of  the  Geneva   accords   by  the  United   States.
The  Geneva   accords  provided   for  free  elections  to  reunite
Laos  as well  as  Vietnam.    We  blocked  free  elections  in  Viet-
nam  but  failed  in  Laos.    In  the  spring  of   1958   elections  re-
united   the  northwestern   provinces   under  Pathet  Lao  control
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  8,196i
(Continued   from   Page   One)
with  the  rest  of   the  country.     A  coalition   government   was
formed  under  Souvanna  Phouma  and  the  Pathet   Lao  troops
taken  into  the  Royal  LaO Army.    The  U.S.  used  its  power  to
overthrow  Souvanna  Phouma   and  set  up  a  military  dictator-
ship.     The   Leftists   were   purged   from   the   Parliament,   the
Pathet  Lao  troops  thrown  into  concentration   camps  and  their
leader  Prince  Souphanouvong,  Souvanna  Phouma's  half-broth-
er,  was  jailed  on  trumped  up  charges  of  treason.    The  troops
and  the  Prince  both   broke  out,   and   renewed   rebellion   with
them.
We  Overthrow   Phouma  Again
Souvanna  Phouma   came  back  to  power   again  in  I960  in
the  wake  of  a  revolt  by  a  parachute   Colonel,  Kong  Le,  dis-
affected   by  the  corruption   whose   roots   in  the  U.S.   aid   and
military  program  were  uncovered   in  the   1959   investigation.
Souvanna  Phouma  again  set  up  a  coalition  Cabinet  intended
to  reunite  the  country.    He  offered  the  post  of  Deputy   Pre-
mier  and  Minister of  the  Interior  to  our  favored  military man,
Gen.   Phoumi  Nosavan.    But  Nosavan   with   the  support  of
the  U.S.   and  Thailand   began   a  military  revolt   instead.     Its
failure  led  the  U.S.  to  agree  to  the   1962   Geneva  conference
at  which  a  new  coalition  government   was  set  up  under  Sou-
vanna  Phouma.    Our  military  and  intelligence  agencies  caused
the  Kennedy  Administration  a  lot  of  trouble  during  the  pro-
longed   negotiations;  they  opposed  a  new  coalition    Cabinet;
the  were  never   reconciled   to  it.    The   rightist   military  they
favored   overthrew   Souvanna   Phouma   again   in  the   coup   of
April  19.
                                                                         l
The  U.S.  reacted  quickly  against  the  coup—it  could  hardly
have  done  otherwise  in  view  of  the  united  opposition  by  Mos-
cow  and  London—and  forced  the  reinstatement  of   Souvanna
Phouma  as Premier.    But  it  would  be  a mistake  to  believe  that
this  put  a  happy  ending  on  the  affair.    The  U.S.  military  in
South  Vietnam  was  as  hostile  to  the  neutralist  regime  in  Laos
as  in  Cambodia.    Just  as  those  who  favor  neutralization  be-
lieve  it  must  be  applied   to  the  whole   region   so  the  military
see  the  existence  of  neutralist  regimes  in part of  the  region  as
Those  Invaders  From  Red  China
"Pro-rightist  Meo tribesmen  have  captured  two  Com-
munist  Chinese  soldiers  in  Phongsaly   Province  in  the
far  north  of  Laos.  .  .  .  This  was  the  first  definite  evi-
dence  that  there  are  Red  Chinese  troops  in  Laos.  .  .  .
One  of  the  captured Chinese  is  said  to  be  an  officer,  and
the  other  is  a  sergeant.    Both  men,  in  their  20s,  were
wearing  Chinese  uniforms  when  captured."
—UPI  from  Vientiane  in  Washington  Daily News  May
S3,  which  played  it  under  banner  headlines  on page  one
"First  Evidence  of  Chinese.Red   Troops  in  Laos."
"Coupled   With   Kong   Le's   indictment  of   the   North
Vietnamese  was  a  report  by  a  Western  observer  that
right-wing  troops  at  Paksane  are  holding  two  men who
were  found  to   be  carrying   Communist   Chinese  docu-
ments  when  they  were  captured  by  Meo  guerrillas  in
northern  Laos.   He  said  he  was  shown  the  captives  and
the  soldiers  told  him  they  were  an  officer   and  a  non-
com  but  did  not  say   whether  they  were   Chinese."
—AP  from.  Vientiane  in  Washington  '.Post May  24.
"The  Vientiane headquarters  of  the  right-wing  army
claimed  a  wave  of  terror  followed  the  capture  of  two
Chinese  Communist  soldiers  in  the  northwest  corner  of
Laos  bordering  China.   The  right-wing  official  bulletin,
Laos  Presse,  said  that  Communist  Chinese  authorities,
together  with  the  Pathet   Lao  and  North  Vietnamese,
arrested  all  village  and  district  leaders  and  people  in
the  area  and  killed  and  tortured many.
"The  right-wing  army  had  claimed  the  two  Chinese
were  captured  May  8  in  Muong  Sing,  20  miles   south-
east   of  the  Chinese  frontier.    The  two  men  were  re-
portedly  brought  to  Vientiane,  but  Western   newsmen
have  not  been  able  to  find  them."
—AP  from  Vientiane  in  Washington  Star May 27.
a  bad  example  for  war-weary  South  Vietnam.    The  U.S.  has
allowed  the men  who  made  the  coup  to  remain  the  real  power
in  Laos.    They  have  sought  to  achieve  their  aims  more  subtly
and  to  use  Souvanna  Phouma  as  their  front  and  captive.     The
U.S.  which  shut  off  aid  in  1958  and  I960  to  overthrow  Sou-
vanna  Phouma  has  not  cut  it  off  this  time  to  force  the  rebel
Generals  out  of  power.
Calmer View of  The Laotian Fighting  Taken  By  The  Responsible  British  Press
"Recent   advances  by   the   Left-Wing  Pathet   Lao   forces
in  Laos  have  certainly  jolted  this  part  of   Southeast   Asia,
but  after  visiting Laos  and  Siam  as  well  as  South  Vietnam
in  the  last  two  weeks  it  is   possible   to  suggest   that   the
Pathet   Lao's  immediate  territorial  objectives  are  probably
more  limited than  appear  from  a  distance.  .  .  .
"1.  Regaining  all  territory  lost   or  threatened  by  earlier
Right-wing   probes   since   1962.  .  .  .  Right-wing  advances
there   last   year  had  threatened,   and  occasionally   cut,  the
main  Pathet  Lao  supply  line  from  North Vietnam.
"2.  Establishing  complete  control  over  the  central   Plain
of   Jars,  where   until   recently  the  whole  of   the  neutralist
army  of  9,000  men  and  some  units  of  the  Right-wing forces
were  said  to  be  'dug  in.'  .  .  .  Since  the  coup, the Right-wing
forces. had  been  deliberately  withdrawn   in   the   hope  that
the  Pathet  Lao  would  not  attack  the  purely neutralist force,
but  the  Pathet  Lao  have  preferred  to  take  the opportuniy
to  gain  an  even  easier  victory  than  usual  with  the  excuse
that  under  the  new  Vientiane regime  'neutralists'  no  longer
exist   except   on   their   side—to   which   some   have   indeed
defected. ...
"They  may  be  poised  now  to  demand  objective  No.   3—
the  reconvention  of  the  Geneva  conference  of  14  nations  to
consider  the  Right-wing breach of  the  1962 agreements,  fol-
lowed  by .a  restitution  of  a  'coalition  Government'  on  their
own   terms."
—The Guardian  (London)   from  Saigon, May  SI.
"The  critical  situation  which  developed  last  week  in  Laos
after   the   pro-Communist  Pathet   Lao  forces   occupied   the
neutralist  headquarters  in  the  Plain  of  Jars  seemed  to  have
eased  somewhat  by  the  week-end.    The  situation,  both  on
the  spot  and diplomatically, remained confused, but  the  tone
of   the  Chinese  press  showed  that  Peking  supports  Prince
Souphanouvong,  the  Pathet  Lao  leader,  in  declaring  that  he
wishes  merely  to  restore  the  situation  as  it  was  before  the
recent  Right-wing  coup  in  Vientiane  and  to  have  the  de-
clared   amalgamation  of  Right-wing   and  neutralist    forces
cancelled.    Both  China  and  the  Pathet  Lao  appear,  there-
fore,  to  be  content  to  consolidate  their  recent  gains  in  the
Plain  of  Jars,  and  to  be  working  for  a  restoration   of  tri-
partite  coalition  government  in   Laos."
—Diplomatic  Correspondent,  The  Times  (London)  May  25.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  8, 1964
The  Generals  insisted  that  Souvanna  Phouma  agree  to  re-
organize  his  Cabinet,  to  appoint  new  members  named  by  the
military  and  to  merge  the  neutralist  forces  with  the  rightists.
He  agreed  over  the  protests  of  the  Pathet  Lao.    On  May  16
the  Pathet  Lao  attacked  and  took  the  neutralist  headquarters
on  the  Plain  of  Jars.    Souvanna  Phouma  in  a press  conference
two  days  later   (Le   Monde,   May  20)   disclosed  that  he  had
been  warned  by  Prince  Souphanouvong  that  the  Pathet  Lao
would  attack   if  he  agreed  to  these  changes  particularly   the
merger  of  the  armed  forces.    Indeed  Peking  claims  that  the
attack  was  a  revolt  by  neutralist  troops  objecting  to  the mer-
ger.    Le  Monde   (May  19)   in  reporting the  attack  said  that
"of   the  ten  battalions  of   Leftist  troops  which  have  partici-
pated  since  Saturday  in  the  offensive  on  the  Plain  of  Jars,  six
came  from  the  neutralist  camp  and  even  constituted,  so  one  is
told  officially,  the  elite troops."    These  battalions passed  over
to  the  Pathet  Lao, Le  Monde   reported  "because they  rejected
the  integration  of  the  armed  forces  decided  upon  by  Prince
Souvanna  Phouma  in  the  wake  of  the  rightist  coup  d'etat."
Notorious  for  False  Battle  Reports
Whether  an  uprising  or  an  attack,  the  fighting   seems   to
have  ended  with  resumption  by the  Left  of  the  control  it  had
over  the  Plain  of   Jars  before   the   cease-fire   of   June,   1962.
These  movements were  not  much  more than  skirmishes  with
few  casualties,  and  indeed  little  contact  between  the  opposing
forces.     The   neutralists  with  Kong  Le  seem  to  have  with-
drawn  as  soon  as  shelling  began, or  even  when  hostile  forces
appeared  in  the  neighborhood.    But  all  this  has  been  blown
up  in  the  headlines of  the  U.S.  press  as  if  it  were  a  major
war.    Laos  is  not  very  accessible  to  the  outside world.    Few
reporters  get  to  Vientiane.    Fewer  still  ever  get  to  see  a bat-
tlefield.    They  are  dependent  for  their   information   on   the
military,  local and  U.S.,  in  rightist-controlled  Vientiane. These
h -ve  made  Laos  notorious  for  exaggerated battle reports.
M   1959  false  reports  of  North  Vietnamese  and   Chinese
invasions  created  a  crisis  atmosphere  on  the  eve  of  Khrush-
chev's  visit  to  Eisenhower  but  when  a  United  Nations com-
mission  investigated  it  could  find  no  evidence  of  these sup-
Some  Merger
"Although  the  coup  of  right-wing  generals  had  dis-
solved  somewhat  under  pressure  from  Western  govern-
ments,  it  did result  in  a  merger  of  neutralist  and  right-
wing    armies."
—Washington  Sunday  Star's  Weekly  Summary,  May   21*
"Vientiane,  May  21  (AP)—Still  unused  in  the  fight
against  the  Pathet  Lao is  a  rightist  army  of  about  50,-
000  troops,  allies  of  the  neutralists  in  the  coalition  gov-
ernment.     Military   authorities   said   it   was   impossible
for  the  rightists  to  move  from  garrison  centers  in  the
major  towns  without  leaving  vital  routes  open  to  the
pro-Communists   and  that   air   transport   necessary    to
carry  out  a  sufficiently  rapid  reinforcing  move  was  not
available."
—New  York  Times, May  22.
"Thus   far   Laotian  army  right-wing  forces   haven't
been  heard  from.   They  are  concentrated  mostly  in  the
Laotian  panhandle.    Their  combat  record  is,  to  put  it
charitably,   undistinguished."
—Keyes   Beech   of   the   Chicago  Daily   News  Service
from   Vientiane  in  the  Washington  Post  May  27.
posed  incursions.   Then  in  June  1962  another  crisis  was gen-
erated  by  false  reports  that  the  Pathet  Lao  were  marching on
Thailand;  Lao  troops  fled  in  panic  across  the  Mekong  river
but  reporters,  when  they  arrived  in  their  wake,  could  find  no
trace  of  the  invading  army.    Now   again  the  dispatches  fed
the  headlines with  reports  of  invading  Red  Chinese  and North
Vietnamese.    Proof  of  the  former  seems  to  have evaporated
(see  box  top  of  page two)  while  the  only  proof  of  the  latter
we  have  seen was  an  AP  dispatch from  Vientiane  in  the Bal-
timore  Sun   May  30  which  quoted  some  villagers  near   the
Plain   of  Jars  as  saying  that  Communist  North  Vietnamese
must  have  been  among troops they  encountered  because  "mili-
tary  commissary  agents  bought  two  dogs  as  well  as  rice  and
chickens  from   them  and  this  proved  foreigners  were  among
the  Red  soldiers  because  Laotians  do  not  eat  dogs."    On  such
rubbish  the  peace  of  the  world  may hang.
Why  Our Favorite General  in  Laos  Opened A Gambling  Joint And An  Opium  Den
"Phoumi  Nosavan  is  44  years  old.    No  one  questions  his
intelligence,' his  guile  and his  political  sense. ...  He  linked
his  fortunes  to  those  of  Prince  Boun  Oum  and  the  Amer-
icans.     When   Boun   Oum  disappeared   from   the   political
scene  two  years  ago,  Phoumi  Nosavan  entered  the  coalition
government  of  Prince  Souvanna  Phouma  and  patiently  be-
gan  the  slow  process  of  regaining   his  place  as  the  No.  1
man  in  Vientiane.     Last   year  Phoumi  Nosavan   hesitated.
The  Americans  had  left,  drying  up  the  source  of  those  dol-
lars  without  which  the  hundred and  twenty  Generals  of  the
nationalist  army  [which  General  Phoumi  commands—IFS]
would  not  remain faithful.   What  to  do?    Play  the  neutral-
ist  game?    Or  bring  about  so  anarchic  a  situation  in  Laos
that  the  Americans  would  have  to  intervene  directly?   .  .  .
"In  the  meantime,  a  thunder  clap  in  Saigon.    Last   No-
vember  1,  a  group  of  Generals  overthrew  the  Diem  regime.
In  Vientiane  Phoumi  was  worried.    He  had  a  great  many
Generals  around  him.    Some  of  them  might  be  tempted  to
adventure  politically.    It  was  necessary   to  calm  the  impa-
tient,  and  for  that  to  find  money.
"One  then  witnessed  at  Vientiane  some  remarkable  finan-
cial  operations.    To  begin  with  the  abattoirs  of  the  capital,
which  are  very  profitable,  were   assigned  to  the   military.
Then—again  for  the  profit  of  the  army—Phoumi   Nosavan
authorized  the  opening   of   a  gambling   house.    One  could
play  there  at  roulette,  dice  or  dominoes.  The  Asian  passion
for  gambling  emptied  the  pockets  of  Vientiane   inhabitants
for  the  profit  of  the  General  Staff.  .  .  .
"Finally,   the  latest   monopoly   of   the   military  in  Vien-
tiane:  an  opium  den.    It  is  the  only  one  in  the  whole  world
which  exists  legally.    Since  its  opening,  it  has  always   been
full.    It  is  very  primitive,  but  contains  150  cots.    A   pipe
costs  70  kips,  that  is  to  say   about  100  old  francs   [about
20  cents].    That   is  not  much  when  one  smokes  only   two
or   three;   it   is  a  great   deal   when  one  smokes  50  or  100
pipes.    The  money  rolls  in.
"To  forestall  the  expected  criticism  from  their  American
allies,  the  Vientiane  military  hit  upon  a  wonderfully  clever
idea.    They  put  a  placard  over  the  doorway  of  the  opium
den:  'Clinic  for  The  Cure  of   Addicts'."
—G.  Penchenier,  well  known  French  writer  on  military
and  South-East  Asian   affairs     in   Le  Monde   (Paris)    May
24-25,  one  of  a  aeries  of  four  articles  (also  May   23,  27  and
28)  on  the  three  Indochinese  States  we  recommend   highly.
8   .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  8,1964
A  Sad  Footnote  to  Nehru's  Death;  The  Supreme  Court's  Belated  Action  on  Loyalty  Oaths
Dr.  Leo Szilard  Matched  His  Humanity  to  His  Science
Dr.  Leo  Szilard  helped  to  create  The  Bomb  and  then  spent
most  of  his  life  trying  to  save  humanity  from  it.    He   rose,
as  if  by  sheer  will,  from  what  was  supposed  to  have  been  his
death  bed  from  cancer  to  found  the  Council  for  A  Liveable
World.    He  set  his  fellow  scientists  and  his  fellow  men  a
noble  example.   We  mourn  his  passage.  .  .  .
To   all   that   outpouring   of   sorrow   and   eloquence   about
Nehru   we  would  add  only  a  small,  sad  note  of   our own.
When  Nehru  last  appeared  May  16  before  the  central  Com-
mittee  of  the  Congress  party,  he  was  given  an  ovation.    But
when  he  ended   (so  London's   Peace  News   noted  May   22)
there  was  meagre  applause.    He  had  spoken  of  his  hopes  for
peace  with  Pakistan  and  he  had  dwelt  with  sorrow  on   the
violence  done  to  Moslems  by  the  Hindus  in  India.    So  long
as Gandhi  and  Nehru  led  the  Hindus  against  the  British, they
were  adored.   But when  they  tried  to  restrain  the  evil  passions
of  their  own  people:  Gandhi  was  shot  by  a  Hindu  religious
fanatic.    Nehru's  last  public  reception  was cold.  .  .  .
The  Height  of  Treason
More  shocking  than  any  Southern  mob  is  the   record  re-
morselessly  set  forth  by  Mr.  Justice  Harlan  for  a  unanimous
Supreme  Court  in  NAACP   v.  Alabama.   For  here  Alabama's
.best  people,  its judges  and  highest  law  officers,  stand  convicted
of  conspiring  to  abuse  basic  concepts  of  fair  trial  for   eight
years  in  their  campaign  to  outlaw  the  NAACP.    Among  the
charges   against  the  NAACP,   along  with  aid  to  the  Mont-
gomery  bus  boycott, was that  it  tried  to  pressure  the  Governor
of  Pennsylvania and  the  Penn  State  football  team  into  "a  boy-
cott  of  the  Alabama  football  team!"    This  was  the  very  peak
of  its high  treason. ...
Two   notions,  one  simple-minded,  the   other   sinister,  lay
behind  the  wave  of  loyalty  oath  legislation   which  inundated
this  country  in  recent  Cold  war  years.  One  was  that  "subver-
sives"  would  be  inhibited  from  their  "subversion",  by a loyalty
oath;  the  other  was  that  the  vagueness  of  these  oaths   would
make  it  easy  to  punish  non-conformity by  perjury  prosecution.
The  Supreme  Court's  7-to-2  decision  in  the  State  of  Wash-
ington  cases  (see box  this  page)  recognizes  the  threat  of  such
Loyalty  Oaths  and the  First Amendment
"A  teacher  must  swear  that  he  is  not  a  subversive
person.  .  .  .  The  Communist  Party  is  declared  in  the
statute  to be a  subversive organization.   Does  the  stat-
ute  reach  endorsement  for   Communist  candidates  for
office?     Does   it   reach   a  lawyer  who  represents   the
Communist  Party  or  anyone  who  supports  any  cause
supported  by  the  Communist  Party? ...  Is  it  subver-
sive   activity    to   attend   international  convention  of
mathematicians   and   exchange   views   with    scholars
from   Communist  countries?    Would   any   person sup-
porting  peaceful   but  far-reaching  amendments  be  en-
gaged  in  subversive activity?     Could  one  support par-
ticipation  by-this  country  in  a  world government?    We
also  conclude  that   the  1931 oath  offends   due  process
because  of  vagueness.    The  oath  exacts  a  promise that
the   affiant   will,  by  precept  and  example,  promote  re-
spect  for  the  flag  and  the  institutions  of  the  U.S.  and
the  State  of  Washington.  .  .  .  The  oath  may  prevent
a  professor  from  criticizing his  state  judicial system  or
the  Supreme Court. ...  Or it  might  be  deemed  to  pro-
scribe   advocating  the   abolition   of   the   Civil   Rights
Commission,   the   House   Committee  on   Un-American
Activities,  or  foreign   aid."
—Mr.  Justice   White   invalidating   loyalty   oaths  re-
quired   by  the  State  of   Washington  for   teachers  and
other  public  employes.
oaths  to  First  Amendment  rights.     It  is  a  pity  our  highest
tribunal  in  the  regrettable  years  of  the  witch  hunt  was  not  as
clear-sighted  as  it  is  now, when  the  country  is  coming   out
from  under  this  nonsense.  Mr.  Justice  Clark  dissenting   (with
Mr.  Justice  Harlan)   indicates  the  magnitude  of  this  recovery
when  he  protests  that  in  1951 the  Court  unanimously  affirmed
a  Maryland  Act  (the notorious  Ober  law)  "written   in lan-
guage   identical"  with  Washington's.     Clark   also    protested
that  the  language   of  the  Washington   statute  was  no  more
vague  than  that  upheld  by  the  Court  that  same  year  of 1951
when  it  validated  the  Smith  Act  intended  to  outlaw  the  Com-
munists.    "Where,"  Clark  asks  plaintively,   "does  this  leave
the  constitutionality   of  the  Smith   Act?"     A  good   question.
Use  the  Blank  Below  to  Start  A  Gift   Subscription   With  This  Issue
(Or  We'll Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  to  Friends  If  You  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed   Envelope)
I.  F. Stone's Weekly      5618 Nebraska  Ave., N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
6/8/64
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street     ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  Q    No  Q
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  in
January   and   Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618  Nebraska   Ave..  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and   edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail  rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED