I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964oct26.pdf

============================================================

Bobby,  The  Vietnamese  War  and  Joe  McCarthy,  P.  2
Just  Another  Item  on  The  Moral  Issue  in  This  Presidential  Campaign
"In  the  meantime  it  was  learned  that  Mr. Goldwater  felt
a  light-hearted  tolerance  about  a  political embarrassment
of  his  own.   This  was  the  charge  that  John  Grenier,  execu-
tive   director   of   the   Republican   National  Committee,  had
paid  $1,000  to  a  Democratic Party  employee  to  steal  con-
fidential  messages   and  information.
"The    source  said  that  Mr.  Goldwater  said  that,  frankly,
he  thought  the   culprit   was   the   one  who  would  take  the
money,  that  it  was  not  a  case  of  Mr. Grenier's  being guilty
but the  other  fellow.
"Mr.    Goldwater,  who  picked  Mr.  Grenier  for  the   No.   2
post  at  the  national  committee,  has  not  spoken  with  him
about  the   bribe  charge,  the  source  said.    The  source  said
that  Mr. Goldwater would  not  have  paid  such  a  bribe  him-
self—because  he  thought  it  would  have  been  possible to  get
the  wanted  intelligence on  the  Democratic  Party  for  noth-
ing."
—New  York  Times,  (Late  City  ed.)  p. 22, Oct. 16.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  36OCTOBER  26,  1964
tot       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
In  Which We  Nominate Nikita for the Nobel Peace  Prize
Before  Khrushchev  passes  from  the  stage,  he  more  than  any
man  on  earth  deserves  the  Nobel  peace  prize.    It  should  not
be  forgotten  that  in  the  world's  first  nuclear  confrontation,  it
was  Nikita  Sergeyevitch  Khrushchev  who   did  what   so  very
few  leaders  have  been  willing  to  do  in  comparable  situations,
and  that  is  to  risk  his  power  by  climbing  down  for  the  sake
of  peace.    The  other  day  Robert  F.  Kennedy  told  a  gathering
of  nuns  that  his  brother  decided  against  a  direct  air  strike  on
Cuba's  missile  bases  because this might  have  cost  25,000  lives;
this  was  put  forward  as  an  example  of  humanity.    But  the
escalation  President  Kennedy  invited  in  insisting on  the  Rus-
sian  backdown  and  withdrawal,  risked  easily  25,000,000  lives.
If  Khrushchev  had  not  given  in,  if  the  mushroom  clouds  had
begun   to  rise  around  our  planet,   would   the  survivors  have
thought  Kennedy  justified  in  destroying  so  many  human  lives
rather  than  negotiating  peacefully ?   Or  even  accepting  on  this
side  of  the  world   the  kind  of   bristling  nuclear  bases  with
which  we  had  surrounded  Russia  on  the  other?    To   accept
the  Russian  missiles  in  Cuba  might   have   cost  Kennedy  his
political  future.    To  have  accepted  the  U.S.  ultimatum  might
have  cost  Khrushchev  his.    It  was  Khrushchev  who  paid  the
price  for  peace.   .
The  Clue  to  K's  Removal
On  the  other  hand,  the  Cuban  missile  affair   demonstrated
that   streak   of   impulsiveness   which   may  hold   the   due   to
Khrushchev's  removal.    Those  missiles,  an  all  too  easy  target
in  the  event  of  war,  would  not  have  made  a  decisive  differ-
ence  in  the  horrible  arithmetic  of  Soviet-American  deterrence.
It  was  not  worth   the  cost  in  undermining  relations   between
Moscow  and  Washington;   it  was  rash  and  ill-considered,  as
light-headed  in  its  way  as  Khrushchev's   sudden  call  for  troika
leadership  of  the  United  Nations.    In  this  perspective,  it  is
easy  to  see  that  younger   men,  though   devoted  to  the   same
general  principles, might  easily  decide  that  Khrushchev's  lead-
ership  had  become  a  menace  and  a  liability.    But  before   he
goes,  one ought  also  to  remember  his  other  historic   contribu-
tions,   especially   the   20th   Congress  "secret  speech"   forever
destroying   the  mythology  of  Stalinism,  and  his  signature  of
the  limited  nudear  test  ban  on  American  terms.    It  was  this
which  cleared  the  skies  of  fallout,  at  the  price  of  accepting
1
SANE  Words  on  That  Chinese  Bomb
"Keeping  a  doctrinaire and  nuclear-armed country  in
a  state  of  semi-isolation endangers  world  security.   We
urge  immediate  efforts  by  the  U.S.,  Great  Britain,  the
USSR  and the  105 other  signers  of  the  nuclear test  ban
treaty  to  bring  China  and  France  to  accept  its  provi-
sions,  and to  extend  the  treaty  to  underground tests  as
well.    In  addition the  U.S.  should  press  for  China's  in-
clusion  in  disarmament negotiations.    China  would  be-
gin  to  take  part  in  the  .world  community.   China  and
the   U.S.,   now  limited  to  occasional   contacts   through
their  ambassadors  in  Warsaw,  would  have  an addition-
al  channel  of  communication.   Additional  steps  by  the
U.S.   which  in  time  would  encourage  moderation  by  the
Chinese  leaders:  1.  Negotiate  the  exchange  of  journal-
ists.    2.  Exchange  of  scientists   and  scholars   between
China  and  the  U.S.  3.  Removal of  restrictions  on  trade
in  non-strategic   goods.    4.  Offer   of   surplus  food   for
sale  in  case  of  agricultural  shortages  in  China.    5.  En-
couragement    to   non-governmental    organizations    to
sponsor  informal  meetings  with  their  Chinese  counter-
parts."
—Dr. Benj. Spock, co-chairman of  SANE, Oct. 16  (abr.)
U.S.   superiority  and   U.S.  continuation  of  underground   test-
ing.    We—let  us  speak  honestly—gave  nothing.    On  the  con-
trary   Khrushchev's    fall   may   be   linked   to   our    continued
"tough"   policy:   36  announced   underground   tests   since   the
treaty  was  signed,   the  campaign   for  an  MLF  force  with  a
German  finger  on  the  nuclear  trigger,  and  our  new  moves  to
expel   Russia   from   the   UN   unless   it   pays  up   assessments
which  the  French,  too,  oppose  as  contrary  to  the  UN  xharter.
These  are  hardly  contributions  to  peace  nor  advertisements   for
Khrushchev's   policy  of  "peaceful   co-existence."
One  hopes  for  the  sake  of  the   Soviet  peoples  and  world
stability   that   the  new  leadership   will   move  toward  a   more
civilized  and  constitutional  method  for  change.    They  got  rid
of   Khrushchev,   as  he  got  rid  of  Malenkov  and  later  of   the
"anti-party"  group,  in  palace   intrigue  fashion.     Neither  the
people  nor  «ven  the  party  are  told  the  real  issues;  the  other
side  is  never  allowed  to  explain  its  case;  in  the  placid  streets
the  people go  about their  business,  politically  inert,  as  if  theirs
(Continued  on Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  26, 1961
Kennedy  Interview on Meet  the  Press  Shows  Need  to  Challenge  Him  on  Foreign  Policy
Bobby  Cites  Vietnamese  War  As  No.  1 Benefit  of  Federal  Spending
We  were  struck  by a  recurrent  phrase  which  cropped  up  in
Robert   F.   Kennedy's   appearance   last   Sunday   on   Meet   the
Press.    At  one  point  in  explaining  his  qualifications  for   the
Senatorship,  Mr.  Kennedy  said  he  had  been  involved  in  mat-
ters  which  "intimately  affect  the  State  of  New  York,  whether
it  be  the  question  of  survival   [our   italics]  or  whether   it  be
domestic  matters."     At  another  point,  when   asked  about  his
ultimate  objective,  he  said  "I  think  first  and  most   important
is  the  question  of  survival."
Survival,  Not  Peace?
The  phrasing   is  curious.     He  did  not  say  the  question  of
peace   but  of  survival.    A  related   glimpse   into  his  thinking
was  provided  when  he  was  asked   about   his  loss   of   temper
with  a  young  man  heckling  him  about  Federal  spending.    "I
explained,"   Mr.  Kennedy   said,   "the   great   things   that   were
being.done  by the  Federal  government  and  by others  for  him.
There  were  people  who  were  fighting  in  Vietnam,  there  were
people  who  were   fighting,   standing   on  the  wall  of   Berlin,
there  were  those  who had  been   ready  to  invade  Cuba.  .  .  ."
Mr.  Kennedy  put  the  Vietnamese  war,  the  Berlin  wall  and
the  readiness  to  invade  Cuba  first  on  his  list  of  the   benefits
that  young  man  derived  from  Federal  spending.     This  was
the  answer  of  a  man  taken  up  with  war,  hot  and  cold.    I
would  guess  that  when  Mr.  Kennedy  talks  about  the  "ques-
tion  of  survival"  he  means  finding  a  way  to  win  that   war,
and   that  he  thinks, of   it  as  an  unlimited  struggle,  in  which
one  is prepared,  as  in  the  missile crisis, to  stake  everything  on
the  outcome.
In  trying  to  establish  his  experience   in  foreign  policy,   Mr.
Kennedy   did   not   mention  any  of   the   peaceful    accomplish-
ments  of   his  brother's  administration,  such   as  the  test  ban.
He  cited  his  service  as  chairman  of  a  "Committee   on   Guer-
" rilla  Warfare."     This  was  a  new  disclosure,  but.no  one  asked
him  how  he  thought  we  were  doing  against  guerrilla  warfare
in  Vietnam.    It  is  a  pity  there  is  no  pro-peace   candidate   in
Bobby  Disapproved  of  McCarthy?
Mr.   [Edwin]   Newman  (NBC  News):  In  short  you
disapproved  of  Senator   McCarthy's  conduct,  did  you?
Mr.  Robert  F.  Kennedy:  Yes,  in  the  operation  of  the
committee.                        —On Meet  the Press, Oct.  18.
"Robert  Kennedy  remembers  that  when  he  met  Joe
McCarthy  for  the  first  time  at  the  University  [of  Vir-
ginia],  'I  liked  him  almost  immediately.'    The  feeling
was  mutual  and  it  was  one  that  did  not  change.  .  .  ."
—Robert  F.  Kennedy:  The Brother  Within, a  biogra-
phy  by  Thompson  and  Myers,  published  in  1962,  boost-
ing  Bobby  for  President  in  1968.
".  .  .  not  only  was  Bobby  a  legal  counsel  to   Senator
Joseph   R.  McCarthy's  committee,   but  he  would  have
remained  quite  happily  on  the  subcommittee  if  he  had
not  run  afoul  of  another  young-man-on-the-make,  Roy
Cohn.    As  it  is,  Joe  McCarthy  was  a  close   personal
friend  and  his  loyalty  to  Joe's  memory   continues.
"Lately,  Bobby  has  spent   a  good  deal  of  time  pro-
moting  the  movie  of  The  Enemy  Within.    He  decided
he  wanted  Paul  Newman  to  play  the  part  of  himself
as  counsel   to  the  McClellan  committee.    Newman  de-
clined.    Bobby  asked  to  meet  him face  to  face.  .  .  . The
conversation  was  amiable  until  Bobby  asked  Newman
what  he  was  doing  next.    Newman  said  that  he  hoped
to  narrate  a  documentary  about  the  late  Senator  Mc-
Carthy.
"Bobby  snapped:  'You  shouldn't  allow  your  name  to
be  associated  with  that.'   Newman  said: Why not?  . . .
Besides  he  [Newman]  didn't  like  McCarthy. . .  .  Bobby
exploded:  Newman  wasn't  qualified  to  judge.    He knew
nothing   about   McCarthy.    Newman  said  that   he  had
followed   McCarthy's  career  at  the  time;  he  had  also
read  Richard  Rovere's  book  on  the  subject.    'Well,  Ro-
vere  didn't  know  anything  about  it  either,'  said  Bobby."
—Gore  Vidal  in  Esquire,  March 1963.  .
the  field  to  press  him  on  this  and  on  that  "question  of  sur-
vival."    Of  all  the  blank  spaces  in  the  inane  New  York  cam-
paign,  this one  is the  most  disturbing.
What  Kennedy  Has  Discreetly Forgotten About His  Work on the McCarthy  Committee
Mr.  Newman:  Mr.  Kennedy,  you  were  at  one  time  con-
nected  with  a  Senate  committee  when  Senator  Joseph  Mc-
Carthy  of  Wisconsin  was  on  it,  chairman  of  it,   and  that
conceivably  will  cost  you  some  votes  in  November.    What
precisely   was   your  connection  with  that   committee   and
how  did it  come about?
Mr.  Kennedy: ...  I  worked  for  Mr.  [Francis]  Flanagan
[the   ex-FBI  man  then  general  counsel   to   the   McCarthy
committee].    I  was   hot  involved  in   any   of   the   so-called
Communist   investigations  during  that   period   of   time.    I
was  involved  in  matters  such  as  the  fact  that  the  govern-
ment  purchased  some  palm  oil  and  put  it  in  tanks.  .  .  .
Momentous matters  such as  that.
—On Meet  the  Press, Oct. 18.
".  .  .  as  Robert  Kennedy   recalls,  McCarthy  during  De-
cember  1952  and  January  1953,  painted  an  impressive  pic-
ture  of  the  future  he  had  in  mind  for  the  committee.  .  .  .
'I  felt   the  investigation  of   communism   was   an  important
domestic  issue,'  he  (Kennedy) says.  .  .  .  His  biggest  job in
that  period  was  an  investigation  of  East-West  trade,  that
produced  some  startling  results,  including  angry denuncia-
tions  of  young  Kennedy  by  the  British.  .  .  .  Investigator
Kennedy  said  .  .  .  that  in  the  first  three  months  of  1953,
while  the  Korean  war  was  still  flaming,  'an  absolute  mini-
mum  or   162  Western  vessels,  100  of  which  were   British,
did   business   with   Red  China.    Then   he   added   the   real
shocker:  Two  ships  owned  by  the  British  firm  of  Wheelock-
Marden  had  transported  Chinese  Communist  troops.   .  .  .
McCarthy  said:  'It  seems  unbelievable, unheard  of  ...     that
a  nation  would  have  ships  owned  by  its  nationals   trans-
porting  the  troops  to  kill  its  own  soldiers."
—Robert  F. Kennedy,  by  Thompson and  My era  (1962).
These  charges  by  Kennedy  turned  out  to  be  a  typical  Mc-
Carthyite  mish-mash.   There were two  ships  involved.   One
was   the   Perico,  owned  by  Wallem  &  Co.  of   Hong  Kong.
"The   company  said"   (Facts   on   File,   178N,   1953)   "the
Perico's  captain  took  462  unarmed, allegedly  sick  Reds  and
about  12  armed  guards  from  Kwangchbwan  to  Canton  June
22,  1951, because  he  was  warned  that  'somebody  would  be
shot'   if   he   refused.    The   other   ship  was   the.  Miramar,
owned   by   Wheelock-Marden  under   Panamanian   registry.
It  came  under  Chinese  Communist control  in  August  1951
and  was  used  to  transport  troops  to  Shanghai  in  June 1952.
The  British  Ambassador in  Washington warned against  us-
ing  "such  isolated  and doubtful  cases  to  cast  aspersions"  on
British  loyalty  in  the  Korean war.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  P.  Stone'8 Weekly,  October 26,    lff6^
Goldwater's  Finance  Chairman  Comes  From  One of  The  Nation's  Largest  Arms  Contractors
Billionaire  Families  of DuPont  and  Mellon  Are  Quietly  Backing  Barry
American  business  has  not  deserted  the  Republican   Patty's
leading  exponent  of  free  enterprise  so  completely  as  is  gen-
erally  assumed.    Billionaire families  like  the  Du   Fonts  and
the  Mellons,  for  example,  are  conspicuously  absent  from  the
ranks  of  Johnson  supporters.    Although  they  aren't  publicly
endorsing   Goldwater   either,   they   have   been   helping   him
quietly.    Lament  DuPont   Copeland,  president  of  E.  I.  Du-
Pont  deNemours,  and  Pierre  DuPont,  its  vice-president,  were
co-hosts   at  a  Goldwater   luncheon  for  businessmen   this   fall.
The  Mellons  have  been  more  subtle.    They  have  been  con-
tributing  to  Goldwater  through  closely  held  corporations  like
Gulf  Oil  and  Consolidated  Coal.    Gulf   has  given  a  fortune
to  right  wing  organizations  which  in  turn  support  Goldwater
(see  box  at  right).    It  has  also  urged  its  employees  to  make
campaign  contributions.    (N.  Y.  Times,  Sept.  12).    Consoli-
dated  Coal's  vice-chairman, R.  Livingston  Ireland,  appeared
in  the  "Businessmen   for  Goldwater"  ad  in  the  Wall  Street
Journal   (Oct.   1).     So  did  Bennett  Chappie  Jr.,  a  vice-presi-
dent'  of  U.S.  Steel,  also  a  Mellon-dominated  enterprise.    An-
other  Mellon  ploy  is  to  offer  support  through  the  Scaife  side
of   the  family.     (R.  K.  Mellon's   daughter  Sarah  married  a
Scaife.)      Human   Events   reported   last   fall   that   Raymond
Scaife,  R.  K.'s  nephew,  was  lining  up  behind  Goldwater.
The Weapons  Makers  and the  Utilities
The  weapons  merchants and  the  electric  utilities have  also
been  careful  not  to  endorse  Goldwater  publicly.    (With  one
or  two  exceptions  they  have  not  endorsed   Johnson   either.)
This  is understandable since one  depends  on  government  con-
tracts  and  the  other  on  government  regulation.    But  Ralph
Cordiner,   recently  retired  chairman   of   General   Electric,  is
chief   fund-raiser   for  Goldwater.    GE  gets  most  of  the  sub-
contracts  for  electrical  work  on  armaments  and  makes   more
profit  from  armament than any other U.S.  firm  (over  $100 mil-
lion  annually).   Another major  Goldwater  supporter  with  ties
into  the  Pentagon  and  big  business is  the  American Security
Council  (see  box  below).    The  clearest  public  expression  of
electric  utility  support  for  Goldwater  has  come  from  a  trade
journal,  Electrical  World.    It  commented  shortly  after  the  Re-
Big  Business  and  the  Radical  Right
"A  total  of   113  industrial,  mercantile,  and  banking
firms,  and  twenty-five  electric  and  gas  companies  have
been  identified   as   having   contributed  in  the  last   few
years  to  organizations  of  the  American  Right  Wing.
.  .  .  Broadly   speaking,  oil,  steel,  and heavy  machinery
producers,   and   manufacturers   of   motors   and   motor
controls,  tend  to  predominate. ...  So do  chemical and
textile   companies.    The  names  of   electric,   gas,   and
power  companies  in  various  sections  of  the  country  ap-
pear  as  contributors  with  noticeable  frequency.
"Harding  College  and  the  National  Education   Pro-
gram  located  on  its   campus  have  received  corporate
contributions  that  total  hundreds  of  thousands  of   dol-
lars  over  the  years.    The  Republic  and  United  States
Steel  corporations,  as  well  as   Gulf   and  Humble   Oil
companies   were  among  the   major   corporate  contribu-
tors."     —Forster  and  Epstein,  Danger  on  the  Right
publican  convention  (Aug.  10)  that  "present  restraints on  the
investor-owned  electric  utility  industry  would  be  relaxed  in
the  wake  of  November   Republican   victory."     Besides   their
contributions  to  right-wing  groups,  which  have  been  volumi-
nous,  the  utilities are  supporting  Goldwater  quietly  by  means
of  retainer  fees.    These  are  paid  to  a  large  number  of  law-
yers,  advertising  agencies  and  engineering  firms  with  the  un-
derstanding   that  a  substantial  portion  of  the  fee  must  go  to  a
designated  candidate  or  political  organization.    The  utilities
then  write  off  the  fees  as  operating  expense.
Also  backing  Goldwater   are   several   insurance  companies
who  don't  like  social  security  and  don't  want  medicare.   The
Hazard   (Kentucky)   Coal  Operators  Assn.,  is  pro-Goldwater;
both  oppose  the  Appalachian Development  Program.    But  the
big  monopolies   support   him  for   a  larger  reason.     A  good
Goldwater  showing  in  November  would  shift  the  whole  spec-
trum  of  American politics  further  to  the  right  and  away  from
any  tendency  toward  "socialist"  planning.    This  is  also  why
corporations  supply  a  large  part  of  the  $25  million  which  is
poured  annually  into  crackpot  groups  on  the  far  right.  These
zanies  now  appear   weekly  on  over  7000  separate  radio  and
TV  programs.
"Businessmen  For  Goldwater" Draws  Support  From  Industrial  Witch-Hunters
McCarthyism  may  be  out  of  fashion  for  the  moment   in
government,   but  it   is   very   much   alive   in  industry.    It
flourishes  there  in  the  American  Security  Council,  a  rapidly
growing   tax-exempt   corporation  which  operates  a  loyalty-
security  blacklist  for  employers.    Its  files,  according  to  a
Group  Research  special  report,  now  contain  the  names  of
over  1,000,000  "subversives,"  and  its  annual  operating  bud-
get  is  around  a  quarter  of  a  million  dollars.    It  was   found-
ed  in  1955  by  an  ex-FBI  agent  and  now  has  several   more
on  its  staff.    Also  on  the  staff  is  Karl  Baarslag,  a  research
director  for  McCarthy's  Government   Operations    Committee
and  later   a  consultant   for   HIJAC.    Its   field   director   is
Cleon  Skousen,  who  as  Chief   of  Police  in  Salt   Lake   City
was  even  too  much  for  Mayor  J.  Bracken   Lee,   himself   an
ardent  right-winger.   In  1960  Lee  fired  Skousen  as  "an  in-
cipient  Hitler."
Some  of  the  most  prominent   members  of  "Businessmen
for  Goldwater"  are  also  active  in  the  Security  Council. One
Goldwater   vice-chairman,   Patrick    Frawley    (Chairman    of
Schick  Safety  Razor)   is  a  major  fund-raiser  for  the  Coun-
cil.     Another   Goldwater   vice-chairman,   Bennet   Archam-
bault   (chairman   of   Stewart-Warner)   is   on  the   Council's
Senior  Advisory   Board.     Other   Goldwater   businessmen  on
the  Advisory  Board  are  Robert  Gavin  (President  of   Moto-
rola),   General   R.  E.   Wood   (Director  of   Sears   Roebuck),
Wayne   Johnston   (President  of   Illinois   Central   Railroad),
and  F.  K.  Weyerhauser,  (Chairman  of  Weyerhauser    Co.).
Even  without   a  like-minded   spirit  in  the   White   House,
the   Security   Council   enjoys  considerable   influence.      Rep-
resentatives  from   U.S.   Steel  and  General  Electric  are   its
vice-presidents.    Many   retired   military   officers   are  on   its
staff.    When  Secretary   McNamara  in  1962  appointed   a  citi-
zens  advisory   committee   to   look   into  Senator  Fulbright's
complaint  about  military  sponsorship  of  seminars  on  com-
munism,   one  of  the  appointments  was  Frank  Barnett,  al-
though  he  was  himself  a  member   of  the  Security   Council
and  had  been  singled  out  by  Fulbright  as  an  organizer  of
the  seminars!
1  0  *
1  4   I
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  26, l»6!t
The  U.S.  Still  Does  Not  See the  No.  1 Item  on  the  Planetary Agenda
(CanlinnvJ  jrom  P^>-'   One)
but   to  do  and   die.    "The   worst  thing,"   Togliatti  wrote  in
-his  testament only  a  few  weeks  before,  "is  first  to  give  an  im-
pression  that  everything  is  always  fine  and   then  suddenly  to
be   forced   to   talk   about   difficult   situations   and   to   explain
them."    Moscow  lacks  a  mechanism for  legitimacy;  the  murky
and   incestuous  smoke-filled   rooms  of  the  Central  Committee
are  a  poor   substitute.    The   Czars  at  least  had  primogeniture
as  a  guide  to  the  succession.   Now  there  is  only  covert  whis-
pering  in  the  corridors.    Equally  bad  is  the  habit  of  building
up  the  leader  as  a  hero  one  day  and   a  monster  or   fool   the
next;  this  must  develop  a  quiet  contempt  for  the  party  lead-
ership  among  the  thoughtful   in  the  Soviet  Union.    The  me-
chanical  feat  of  catapulting  some  more  tonnage  into  space  is
no    recompense   for    this   barbarously   bureaucratic   conduct,
which  is  then  labelled—as  it  was  by  Brezhnev  in  his welcom-
ing   speech   to  the   astronauts   last  Monday—as   "socialist  de-
mocracy" !    A  hundred  years  after  the  abolition  of  serfdom,
the  Russian  people  still  are  given  no  say  in  the  decisions of
government.
What  We  Do Abroad Shapes  Our Society  at Home
All  this  should  not  blind  us  complacently  to  the   epochal
changes  taking place.    Russian  predominance  in  space  and  the
explosion  of  the  first  Chinese  nuclear  bomb  punctuate the  end
of  an  epoch.    The  American Century  is drawing  to  a  close;  it
lasted  barely two  decades.    We  must  adjust  for  a  time,  not  far
distant,  in  which  two  other  great   Powers  match  us  in  brute
power  and  soon  after  that  in  affluence.  We   can  adjust  wisely,
setting  an  example  in  civilization  or   foolishly,   and   perhaps
stumble  into  disaster.   Even  if  major  war  is  avoided,  how  we
act  abroad   will  shape  the  character  of   our   society  at   home.
The  heritage  of  order  and  liberty  we  enjoy  can  easily  be  de-
stroyed  if  we  react  by  building more  missiles.    The   problems
of  the  near   future   are  twofold.    One   is  the  delicate  "three
body  problem"  which  physicists and  astronomers  have  never
solved:  how  to  estimate  the  mutual  adjustment   between   two
great  powers  is  difficult  enough;  among  three,  it  is  almost  in-
soluble.    The  other  is  rapidly  to  bring  China  into  the  family
How  The  Vietnamese  Feel  About  Our  War
"It  was  the  first  light  of  gray  dawn  as  our  armored
cavalry   swung   off  the   highway   and   into   the  flooded
paddies.   This  was  a  police  action.    A  manhunt.    The
villages  of   Phu   Le  and  Tung   Cai,   secure   behind   the
water  that  cut  them  off  from  Dong  Ha  and  Quang  Tri,
were  to  be  searched   for  draft  dodgers  and  deserters.
Able-bodied   males   between   21  and  25,  who  could   not
explain   their   status,   would   be   hauled   in   for   ques-
tioning.
"Recently,   in   this   sector,   400   draft   notices   were
mailed   out.     Seven  less-than-able   bodied   young    men,
confident   they'd   be  rejected,  reported.     South   of   here,
in  the  Delta,  whole  communities  turned  on  the  military
when  it  tried  to   round   up  draft   dodgers.    They   sur-
rounded  planes  and  prevented  their  taking  off.   At  one
village  they   started   a   riot   during   which  many   draft
dodgers   escaped.     Phu   Le's   draft   dodgers   had   had
ample  warning.    Only  five  bewildered  youths  were  col-
lared.     Under  guard  they   stared   straight  ahead.    The
parents  of  one  showed  up.    The  mother  was   outraged.
Later  there  were  tears  and  entreaties.    The  boy  cried,
too.     He  didn't  want  to  be  a  soldier."
—Jim  Lucas from  Vietnam,  Wash.  Daily  News,  Oct.  15.
of  nations  before  the  nuclear  ajinn   is  wholly  out  of   control
and  every  sizeable nation  has  the  power  of  precipitating  holo-
caust.
In  the  face  of  such  momentous  problems,  the  President's  re-
cent   speeches   on   foreign   policy  are   feeble   and   inadequate.
Nothing   better   demonstrates   the   slow   drift   of   our   politics
from   reality  than  the  general  agreement,  shared  even  by  Mil-
ler  with  Humphrey,  that  we  ought  to  invite  China  to  sign  the
nuclear   test  ban—but  without  granting  recognition!    When
we  see  how  the  whole  world  is  shaken  by  a  bomb  in  China,
a  succession  in  Moscow,  or  the  possibility  of  an   irresponsible
like  Goldwater  entering  the  White  House,  we  see  how  obso-
lete  are  the  divisions  among   nations.    All  mankind  has  an
urgent  interest,  and  should  have  some  voice,  in  these  n&  long-
er  distant  decisions.    The  No.  1  item  on  the  planetary  agenda
is  now  some  federal  form  of  world  government   or  ultimately
world  catastrophe.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly       5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
10/20/64
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed  $5:
Name    ..........................................................................................
Street     ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State... .................
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift   sub  to:
(To)    Name    ...........................................................
Street    .......................................................:.............
City    ....................................... ...Zone.. ........ ..State.
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted     Fifties
We'll  Send A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of  This  Issue To  Friends  If  You  Send 'Stamped  Self-Addressed   Envelopes
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
ror  9;)..w  exira  sena  i.  r.  stones  me   tiaumea    fifties
I.     !•".  Stone's   Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,   I).  C.    Published   every   Monday  except  the  .last  week   in   December   and   the   first   week   in,
Jjunmry   and   Hi-Weekly   during   July  and   August   at    "iBlS   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.W.,   WashinKton,   I>. 0.     An   independent   weekly   publisher!  and   edited
by   1.  K   Stone;   Circulation   Manage iv  Esther  M.j Stone.    Subscription:      .S".   in   the   U.S.:          -S*>   in   Canada;    $10   elsewhere.      Air    Mail   rates:
$ly  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED