I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964mar16.pdf

============================================================

Morse's  Neglected  Warning   Against  A  Wider  War  in  Asia, P. 3
Carry  The  Fight  to  North  Vietnam?    Hard  Enough  to  Make  Them  Fight  in  The  South
"Recent   talk   about   sending   South   Vietnamese    raiding
parties  into  Communist  North  Vietnam  is  shrugged  off  by
veteran  U.S.  advisers  here.    'We  have  trouble  enough   get-
ting   the  troops  to  fight  in  the   south,'  says   one.     'What
makes   the   Pentagon   think   they   will   do  any   better   up
north.' ...  In one typical  week  last  week  the  U.S.  military
headquarters    here   tallied   2,800  actions  by  small   govern-
ment   patrols.     But   only   3%  of   these   made   any   contact
with  the  enemy.  .  .  .  One day  last  month  an  L-D  spotter
plane  reported  seeing  a  band  of  guerrillas.    A  South  Viet-
namese  army  unit  was  nearby,  and •   U.S.  adviser  urged  it
to   close   in  on  the   Reds.    Instead   the   Vietnamese   com-
mander  called  for  rocket-firing  U.S.   Army  helicopters.  Five
of  the  aircraft,  each  valued  at  $250,000,  were  sent  in  to  do
battle  with  at  most  a  half   dozen  enemy  soldiers."
—Wall  St.  Journal dispatch from Saigon, liar. 8.
IR  Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  11
MARCH  16,  1964
<oi       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
When  A  Nation's  Leaders  Fear  to  Tell  the  Truth
Our  emissary  to  Saigon,  Secretary  McNamara,  seems  to  be
as  confused   as  he  is  confusing  on  the  subject  of  the  war  in
Vietnam.    In  January  he  made  a  statement which  led  people
to  believe that  the  U.S.  was  committed to  total  victory  at  any
cost  in  that  area.    In  his  annual  military  posture statement
Jan.    27  to  House  Armed  Services  Committee  he   said   "the
survival  of  an  independent  government  in  South  Vietnam  is
so  important  to  the  security  of  all  southeast  Asia  and  to  the
free  world  that  I  can  conceive of  no  alternative  other  than  to
take  all  necessary  measures  within  our  capability  to  prevent
a  Communist  victory."    This  led  many  to  believe  that  the
U.S.   was  ready  to  extend the  war  in  order  to win.
Our  "Options"  Seen  as  Dangerous
But  under  questioning by  the  committee in  closed  session,
he  took  a  very  different  position.    Unfortunately  this  was  not
released  until  Feb.   18  and   was  buried  in  more  than   1,000
page&'-of  testimony.    The  first  time  the  matter  came  up  was
when  Congressman Stratton (D.  N.Y.j  asked him,  "Wouldn't
you  say that  in  the  event that  things  do  not  go  as  well  as you
hope   they  will,  that   unquestionably  we   can't   continue   to
withdraw  any  more  of  our  forces?"    This  elicited  a surpris-
ing  answer.    "No,   sir;  I  would  not,"   McNamara  replied,  "I
don't  believe  that  we  as  a  nation  should  assume  the  primary
responsibility  for  the  war  in  South  Vietnam.   It  is  a counter-
guerrilla  war,  it  is  a  war  that  can  only  be  won  by  the  Viet-
namese  themselves."    When  Congressman  Cohelan  (D.   Cd.)
said  he  wanted  to  be  sure  "we   are  very  conscious  of   other
options  that  we  might  have  to  exercise  if  things  were  not
going  quite  the  way we want  it,"  the  Secretary answered,  "It
is  the  unsatisfactory  character  of  most  of  those  other  options
that  leads  me  personally  to  conclude  we  should  continue our
program  in  South  Vietnam."    Among  the  other  "options"  of
course  is  to  widen  the  war  by  an  attack  on  North  'Vietnam
which  might  bring  the  Chinese  in.
Later  Congressman  Pike  (D.  N.Y.)   said he  was  "concerned
with  what  I  think  to  be  a  conflict  between  what  we  say about
the  importance  of  this  area  and  what  we  actually  propose  to
do  about  it."    McNamara  replied,  "Well,  I  think  they  are  in
agreement  and  it  goes  back  to  the  point  I  made  earlier,  that
only  the  Vietnamese  can  win  this  war."     He  said  it  wasn't
What  McNamara's   Computers. Miss
"Most  of   the   Vietnamese  do  not   really   care  about
the  war;   most  of  them  do  not  want  to   fight.   Under
the  circumstances  this  is  understandable.    There  are
numerous   families   in   Vietnam    without   homes,   and
without  a  job.    Even  in  Saigon  there  are  people  sleep-
ing  in  doorways  and  on  the  sidewalks  and  begging  for
food. ...  In  combat,   when  the  Vietnamese  do  have  a
chance  to  fire  on  the  Vietcong,  quite  often  they  refuse.
"There   are  some  people  who  are  profiting   from  this
war.    I  have  never  seen  so  many  colonels  and  generals
in  one  place   in  all  my  life.    They   are  living  here  at
government   expense,   in  beautiful   villas  with   two  or
three   servants   per  household.    I   have   talked   to   so
many  who do  not  even  want  to  go  home  because  they
could  not  afford  such  luxuries  at  home."
—Letter  from  the  wife   of  a  serviceman  in   Vietnam
to  Senator  Young  (D.  Ohio)  Con. Ree. Mar.  3.
"artillery   shells   but   the   confidence  of   the   peasants"   that
would  "ultimately determine  the  outcome  of  the  war"  and  he
added   that   "doubling   our   military   aid  would   not,   in   my
opinion,  substantially increase  the  effectiveness  of  their  mili-
tary  operations."    The  question  was  raised  again  and   elicited
an  even  clearer  answer  later  in  these  closed  hearings:
Mr.  LONG  (D.  Md.):  If  the  Vietnamese  war  goes  very
badly,  do  yon  contemplate  another  Korean   war  from   oar
point  of   view,  our  pouring   in  hundreds  of   thousands  of
troops?
Secretary McNAMARA: No,  sir.
Mr.  LONG:  Yon  mentioned  before  that  this  is  an  area
we  must  hold at  all costs?
Secretary   McNAMARA:  I   don't   believe  that   pouring
in  hundreds  of  thousands  of  troops  is  the  solution  to  the
problem  in Vietnam.
These  answers  were  supplemented  by  an  even  more   sober
reply  from  Army  Chief   of   Staff   General   Wheeler   to   Mr.
Bedcer  (R.  N.Y.).    "It  would  seem  to  me,"  Mr.  Becker  said,
"that  in  South  Vietnam,  and  through   North   Vietnam   and
these  other  areas  they  [the   Chinese]  can  keep  sending  them
in  for  years  (italics  added),  and  eventually  the  South  Viet-
namese,  no  matter  how  much  they  may  desire  to  save  their
own   country,  eventually   are  going  to  be  weakened   to   the
point  where  they  can  no  longer  do  it."     The  basic  fallacy
(Continued  on Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  16, 1964
$300,000  Appropriation  Moved  to  Floor  Without  Advance  Warning  to  Avoid  Debate
House  Leadership  Pulls  A  Fast  One  to  Help  the  Un-Americans
In  a  surprise  move  that  caught  every  abolitionist  but  one
outside  the  chamber,  the  House  March  4  authorized  a  whop-
ping   $300,000   for   its   Un-American   Activities  Committee.
The  authorizing  resolution,  $60,000  less  than  last  year's,  was
brought   to  the  floor  only  one  hour  after   the  Committee  on
House  Administration had  approved  it.    James  Roosevelt   (D.
Cat.)  inquired   if  "it  was  necessary   to  shroud   this  matter  in
such  secrecy  .  .  .  because  some  Members  may  be  ashamed  of
it."     Whatever   the  reason,  trickery  of   this  kind  is  predict-
able  and  the  liberals  should  have  been  prepared   for  it.
Burton  Blocks  Unanimous   Consent
The  measure  would  have  passed  by  unanimous consent  had
it  not  been  for  the  objection  of  freshman   Congressman  Phil-
lip  Burton  (D.  Ca!.).   This  was  a  fitting  congressional  debut
for   Burton.    For  eight   years  as  a  California  State  legislator
he   defended   civil   liberties   against   loyalty   oaths   and   witch
hunts.     Last  month,   running   against  seven  other  candidates,
he  won   his   congressional   seat   by  a  majority   of   votes   on  a
platform   that   included   medicare   for   all   citizens,  conversion
from   defense   to  public   works,   trade  with  Red  China,   and
abolition   of  HUAC.    His  San  Francisco   district  with   15%
unemployed   is  one  of  the  most  depressed  urban  areas  in  the
country.     Is  Burton   the  first  of   many  dissident   voices   that
automation  will  bring   to   Congress?
Two%jeanti-HUAC  speeches,  one  by. Ryan  (D.   N.Y.)
and  one  byF!«bstein  (D.  N.Y.),  also  helped  to  redeem  the
liberals.    Ryan  deflated  the  committee  with  ridicule.    He  said
only  twenty-six  of  the  almost   10,000  public  bills  introduced
into  the  House  last  year  were  referred  to  the  committee  and
yet  it  maintained  a  61 -member   staff,  the  third   largest   in  the
House.    Eleven  of  the  twenty-six bills  have  been  around  for
years.    In  its  26-year history  the  committee  has  been   respon-
sible  for  only  three  laws,  including one  to  correct  an  error  it
made  in  writing  the  Internal  Security Act.
The   committee's   main   event   in   1963  was   to   investigate
travel  to  Cuba  and  pro-Castro   activities  in  the  United   States.
Hearings  ran   for  more  than  six  months,  included  forty-two
witnesses  and  produced   four  publications  totaling  632  pages.
Ryan  pointed  out  that  when  the  chairman  finally   introduced
a  bill  to  ban  travel  to  specific  countries,  it  was  appropriately
When  Injustice  Is  Not   Unjust
In  the  Yellin  case  last  year  the  Supreme  Court  for
the  first  time  reversed  a  conviction for  contempt of  the
Un-American  Activities  Committee on  the  ground  that
it   had  failed  to   abide  by  its   Rule  IV   which  provides
for   executive  sessions   where   a   public   hearing  might
"unjustly"  injure  the  reputation  of  a  witness.     Judge
Luther  W.  Youngdahl  followed  Yellin  last  week  in  re-
versing  the  contempt conviction  of  Bernard Silber who,
like  Yellin,  had. asked  a  private  hearing.   In reversing
the  contempt conviction of  Frank  Grumman,  the  Judge
went  a  step  further.    Grumman  had  made  no  request
for   a   private   hearing  before  being  called  in   public.
Judge  Youngdahl put  the  burden  on  the  Committee to
obey  its  own  rules.    He  cited  as  an  "improper" stand-
ard  testimony  by  Richard  Arens,  then  its   staff   direc-
tor,  to  the  effect  that  if  the  Committee knew  a  witness
would   be   unfriendly   it   called  him   in   public  because
then  any   injury  to   his  reputation  would   not   be  "un-
just"!    Both  Silber  and  Grumman   were  members   of
the  American  Communications Association.
referred  to  another  committee, Judiciary.
However  easy  to  ridicule,  the  committee  remains  a  power-
ful   instrument in  the  hands  of  racists  and  cold  warriors.    In
the  New  York  Times  Feb. 17,  Claude  Sitton  reported  that  the
committee's  files  were  being  used  to  intimidate white  integra-
tionists  in  Alabama.    This  isn't  the  first  time  denial  of   civil
liberties  has  been   used  against  civil  rights.     In  1958 Chair-
man  Walter   took  his  red-hunters  to  Atlanta  to  slander  white
radicals  and  liberals active  in  the  Negro  cause.
Itself  sustained  by  the  cold  war, the  committee  speaks  for
those  who  oppose  peaceful  accommodation  and  villify  all  who
seek  it.   Rep. Farbstein  recalled  the  letter  the  committee cir-
culated  among  Senators  during  the  test  ban  debate.    The  com-
mittee,  referring  to  the  lobbying  activities of  Women  Strike
for  Peace,  wrote  that  "excessive  concern  with  peace  .  .  .  pre-
vents  adequate   defense,   hinders   effective   diplomacy,   under-
mines  the  will  to  resist  and  saps  national  strength."     Farb-
stein  warned  that  if  we  are  "to  avoid  a  perilous  future  .  .  .
we  cannot   cheaply  dismiss  any   individual  or   any  group  of
citizens  by  a  slur  on   their  motives."     It   remains  the com-
mittee's  one  virtue  to  reveal  more  clearly  than  any  critic  the
distance  between  us  and  a  wholly  free  society.
Keating  Protests  Eastland's  Seizure  of  Southern  Conference  Records
"I  understand  that  the   records  of  the  Southern Confer-
ence   Educational  Fund,  Inc., were  subpoenaed   October  5
at   your  discretion.    I  understand  further  that  they  were
transferred   to   Mississippi  October  27,  ten   days   after   a
request  by  officials  of  the  SCEF  in  the  Louisiana  Criminal
District  Court  for  a  permanent  injunction  to  bar  removal
of   these   records  from   the   area.
"I  further  understand  that  on  November  14  some  mem-
bers   of   the   Internal   Security   Subcommittee   approved  a
resolution  to  incorporate  portions  of  this  material  by ref-
erence  into  the  hearing  record  and  to  photostat  it  in  full
before   returning   it.    That  resolution  was  not  brought   to
my attention until my staff  specifically  inquired January 27.
"I  would  therefore  like  to  take  this  occasion  to   express
my  deep  concern  over  the  action  taken.    First,  I  question
what   federal   legislative   purpose   is   served   by   the   sub-
poenaing  of  material  already  under  review  by  a  committee
of  a  state  legislature.    Secondly,  I  am  very  much  opposed
to  the  subpoena  of  any  records  that  are  material  to  pend-
ing  litigation  in  a  state  court.    This  strikes  me  as  a  start-
ling  violation  of  states'  as  well  as  individual  rights.
"Thirdly,  I  am  disturbed  that,  although  a  member  of  the
subcommittee   which  has, in  effect,  ratified  this   action,   I
was  not  informed  of  this,  action  or  given  any  opportunity
to express my dissent.
"Regardless  of  the  nature  of  the  group  involved  in  this
case,   I  believe   the   action   taken   by  the   subcommittee   is
most  unfortunate  and  I  strongly  urge  that  no  further  ac-
tions  be  undertaken  by  the  committee  along  these  or  simi-
lar lines without full discussion by the entire subcommittee/'
—Letter  from  Sen. Keating   (R.  N.Y.)  to  Sen.  Eat Hand
(D.  Miss.),  Chairman  of  Senate  Judiciary   Committee.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  16, 1964
One  Day  After  Rusk's  Secret  Briefing  on  Vietnam,  Morse  Discloses  Danger   Ahead
An  Expanded  War  in  Asia  Could  Only  Be Won  If We  Used Nuclear Arms
By  Senator  Wayne  Morse *
When   one   looks   at   a   map,   and   at   the   central   position
China  occupies  in  relation  to  all  the  countries  which  frame
the  Indian  Ocean,  the  China  Sea  and  the  Pacific  Ocean,  it  is
evident  that  it  is China  that  is going  to  dominate Asia wheth-
er  the  United  States  likes  it  or  not,  and  no  matter  what  we
choose  to do  about  it.
As  I  said  to  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  Foreign Relations
Committee  yesterday,  those  troops   [in   Vietnam}  should   he
brought  home.     They   never  should  have  been  sent  there  in
the  first  place.    American  unilateral  participation  in  the  war
of  South  Vietnam  cannot  be  justified,  and   will  not  be  justi-
fied  in  American  history.    As  I  have  made  clear  to  the  State
Department,   this   administration   had  better  be  warned   now
that  when  the  casualty lists  of  American  boys  in  South  Viet-
nam  increase until  the  mothers  and  fathers  of  those  boys  start
crying  "Murder,"  no  administration  will  stand.
Southeast  Asia  Not  Essential  To  Our  Defense
We  must  keep  in  mind  the  fact  that  we  have  always  con-
sidered   southeast  Asia  to   be  beyond   the   perimeter  of   U.S.
defense.     Southeast  Asia  is  not   essential  to  U.S.  defense.
China   is  the   whole   interior  of   the   world's   largest   land
mass.     We   are   interested   in   preserving   its   fringes   as  U.S.
footholds.     That   is  as   futile   an   effort   as  this  country  will
ever  embark  upon.    The  concept  of  the  Pacific  as  an  Ameri-
can   lake  was  possible   only  at  the   close   of   World   War   II
when   Japan  lay  temporarily  prostrate.
It   is  not   beyond   the   realm  of   possibility  that   China   -will
embark  upon  the  kind  of  aggression   that  Imperial  Japan  em-
barked  on  in  the  1930's  and   1940's,  futilely  seeking  an  out-
let  for  her  population  and  for  her   ideological  designs.    But
that  is  a  contingency  that  the  United   States  cannot  possibly
prevent   with   foreign   aid   programs,    military  missions,  by
"showing   the  flag"  with  a  few  ships  or  even   15,000  troops.
I   am  completely   opposed   to   increasing  the   scale   of   our
participation  in  the  Vietnamese  war.    I  am  opposed  to  it  be-
cause  American  involvement  in   any  Asian  conflict   is   going
to  be  nuclear  involvement.     I  am   satisfied   that  there   is  no
other   way  this  country  could   meet   the   manpower   and   geo-
graphic  advantages  that  a  Chinese-backed  force  would  have.
/  am  permitted   to  say,  within  the   bounds   of   secrecy   and   in
my  capacity   as  a  member  of  the  Foreign  Relations   Committee
who  individually   has  passed  a  judgment   upon   American   for-
*  Abridged   from   a   speech   in   the   U.S.   Senate    March   4
which  the  press  largely  ignored.
New  Policy  Needed  for  A New  World
"The  world  has  moved  beyond  World  War  II.    It  is
beginning  to  move  beyond  the  cold  war.   When are  the
foreign   and   military   policies   of   the   United    States
going  to  move beyond World  War  II  and  the  cold war?
When   will   the   United  States  develop  a   foreign  and
defense   policy   that   will   recognize   that   every   event
everywhere  is  not  vital  to  us,  and that  even  if  it  were,
we   could   not   put   out   enough   money   and  manpower
to  control  all  these   events?
"That  is  the  foreign  policy  challenge  that  faces  this
administration.    It  is  a  challenge  for  a  post-cold  war,
missile  age  international  policy.   It  must  take  into  ac-
count  the   breakup  of   the   two   dominant  world  blocs,
and  the  technological  changes  that  have  bypassed  the
need  for   far-flung   bases   of  the   kind  that  were  once
needed   to   carry  conventional  war  to   two   continents
outside  the  Western   Hemisphere."
—Morse   (D.  Ore.)  in  the  Senate,  Mar.  4    (abridged).
eign  policy  in  Asia,  that  we  cannot  win  a  land  war  in  Asia
u-ith  American   conventional   ground   forces.   (Italics  added.)
That  is  fully  recognized   by  outstanding  military  experts.
I  listened  yesterday  to  a  briefing  by  the  Secretary  of  State,
which  gave  rise  to  this  speech   today.    I  say  to  the  American
people   they  have  a  right  to  a  clarification   of   American  for-
eign   policy  in  Asia.    They   have  a  right  to  know  what   the
plans  of  this  government  are  in  respect  to  Vietnam.
I  am  satisfied  that  this  country  would  make  the  gravest mis-
take  of   its  history  by  carrying  a  war.  nuclear  or  otherwise,
onto  the  mainland of  Asia.   What  we  might  do  if  we  were
attacked  was  answered  in  World  War   II;  but  today  we  have
not  been  attacked  by  any  Asian  country.    Our  responsibilities
toward  South  Vietnam  are  no  more  than  those  of  every  other
member  of  the  South   East  Asia  Treaty  Organization.    What
joint  policy  has  been   worked  out  with  these  SEATO  mem-
bers  for  action  in  Vietnam ?   None.
The  South  Vietnamese  government  toward  which  we  have
exercised  these  unilateral  policies  is  little  more  than  our  own
creation.    We  constructed  a  government  there  in  1954,  which
we  then  propped  up  with  huge   amounts  of  aid  and  which
we  say invited  American  troops.    The  rationalization that  our
Government  gives  for  American  troops  being  in  South  Viet-
nam  is  that  the  South  Vietnam  government  invited  them   in.
But   control   of   the   South   Vietnam   government   has   been
passed  around  within  the  American-financed  governing clique
until  its  association  with  U.S.  support   is  closer  than   its  as-
sociation  with  the  people of  Vietnam.
India   and  Pakistan  Only  Taking  U.S.  Military  Aid  to  War  on  Each  Other
"CENTO  does  not   exist   for   all   practical  political  pur-
poses,  and  Pakistan  has  belonged  to  it  for  only  one  reason
—the  U.S.  aid  she  could  get  out  of  it.    I  have  come  to  the
conclusion   that   there   never   was   a   time   when   Pakistan
would  have  fulfilled  het  CENTO  obligations  vis-a-vis Rus-
sia.    And  even  the  most  obtuse  must  realize  by  now  that
Pakistan's   membership   in    SEATO    is    rendered    totally
meaningless  by  her  close  ties  with  China.
"Pakistan  has   belonged   to  those  organizations  for  one
purpose  only—to  get  military  aid  from  the  United  States
that  would  build  her  forces  against  her  one  avowed  enemy
—India.    Not   only  does  the   United  States  not  have  any
quarrel   with   India,  but   we   have  recently   undertaken  an
expanded  military  aid  program  to  India,  which  I  believe  is
a  mistake  equal  only  to  our  heavy  aid  to  Pakistan.
"India  and  Pakistan  will  string  along  American military
men  and  AID  officials  to  keep  them  happy,  to  keep   guns
and  money  coming,  but  they  are  going   to  put  our  aid  to
work  strictly  for  their  own  purposes  and  not  for   ours."
—Morse  (D.  Ore.)  in  the Senate, Mar.  4   (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, March  16,
So  Long  As  Rusk  and  McNamara  Continue  to  Propagate   Delusions
(Continued  from  Page  One)
here  lies  in  the  words we  have  italicized.    It  is  that  the  South
Vietnamese  war  is  an  invasion, somehow  run  by  the Chinese,
when  it  is  actually a  rebellion  by  the  South  Vietnamese them-
selves.    This  was  implicit  in  General  Wheeler's  reply:
If   we  can  ever   get   the   Government   leaders  of   Sooth
Vietnam  in  control  of  their  territory  and  their  own  people
—that  is  if  the  Government  leaders  identify  themselves  to
the  people  as  being  the  protectors  of  the  popnlation,  ad-
vancing  their  interests  politically,  economically,  sociologi-
cally  and  every  other  way—there  won't  be  any  way   for
the   enemy   to   infiltrate,   because  guerrillas   have   to   live
among   the   people.     Guerrillas   can't   survive   unless   the
people  hide  them.     Mao  Tse-tnng  has  a  thesis  that  goes
something  like  this—guerrillas  hide  among  the   popnlation
aa  the  fish  hide  in  the  sea.     This  is  a  very  true  adage.
Now,   as  I  say,   if  the  South  Vietnamese  government   can
ever  achieve  this  degree  of  control  of  their  own  territory
and  people,  you  will  have  no  guerrilla  problem.  There  will
be  a  threat  and  this  will  be  th'e  threat  of   the   regular
North  Vietnamese  forces,  backed   by  the   Chinese.     How-
ever  this  is  an  entirely   different   problem   than   the  one
we  are  faced  with  today.
The  Army  Took  The  Same  View  in  1954
This  clear-sighted view  is  characteristic  of  the  Army.   Gen.
Wheeler's   predecessor   as   Chief   of    Staff,   Gen.   Ridgeway,
threw  his  weight  on  similar  grounds  against  intervention  in
the  same  area  when  it  was  advocated  by  Duties,  Nixon  and
Radford   in   1954.     Unfortunately  this  realistic  estimate  was
given  in  closed  hearings  and  is  buried  in  a  voluminuous  rec-
ord.    It  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  demonological views  im-
pressed  on  American  thinking by cold  war  propaganda.   This
has  led  us  to  see  the  Vietnamese uprising  simply  as  a  Com-
munist  plot,   and  Communism  as  an  occult  conspiracy  with
magical  powers  whereby  a  handful   of   infiltrating  agitators
can   "infect"    a   whole   population   with   Marxism-Leninism
though  these  same natives  can  barely  read  the  directions  on  a
can  of  soup.    It  then  seems logical to  infe'r  that  this  infection
(like  witchcraft)   can  only  be  stopped   by  burning  out   its
source  in  Peking  whence  these  diabolic  subversives  fan   out
like  a  corps  of  Fausts  to  seduce  all  these  maiden  minds.
The  basic problem  is  not  in  Vietnam but  in  the  USA.   So
long   as  these   melodramatic  nightmares  color   so   much   of
An  Ambiguous Victory
Every   newspaperman  will  be  gratefiul   that   the   Su-
preme   Court   has   unanimously   reversed   the   $500,000
verdict   won   by   a   Montgomery,   Ala.,   police   commis-
sioner  against  the  New   York  Times  and  four   Negro
ministers  who  signed   a  protest   ad  in  it.     While  the
case  has  been  remanded,  the  review  of  the  evidence  in
the  opinion  and  the  standards   established   make  it  un-
likely  that  this  suit  will  be  renewed.     But  what  of  11
other  suits  by  Southern   officials  against  the  New  York
Times  and  five  other  suits  against  CBS  for  a   grand
total  of  $7,730,000—and  what  of  the  future?    The  de-
cision  held  that   "actual   malice"  must   be  proven  and
that  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the  official  bringing  the
suit  where  he  claims  a  libel   in  "an  otherwise   imper-
sonal  attack  on  government   operations."     But  what  if
the   official   is  attacked   by  name,  as  was  not  the  case
in  this  New  York  Times  ad?     In  effect  the  press  and
radio-TV  are  left  at  the  mercy  of  Southern  juries  and
the  gamble  of  how  the   appellate   courts   review  their
findings  of  fact.    The  Anglo-American  press  struggled
for  centuries  to  free  itself  from  the  old  common  law
which  made  criticism   of   public  officials   punishable   as
civil,  criminal  or  seditious  libel.    Justices  Black,  Doug-
las  and  Goldberg  protested  that  the  First   Amendment
right   to   criticize  public  officials   should   not   be   made
dependent   as  Goldberg  said   "upon  the  probing   by  the
jury  of  the  motivation  of  the  citizen  or  press."    The
fear  of  long  and costly  litigation  under  this  new  ruling
may  serve   to  inhibit  reporting   about   the  South.
American  political  thinking,  there will  be  demands  for  exten-
sion  of  the  war,  though we  can  smash  all  North  Vietnam  and
China  with  nuclear  bombs  without making  the  peasants in  the
Mekong  Valley  any more content with  the  corrupt and repres-
sive  governments  we  have  maintained   in  power  over  them.
This  is  no  doubt  what  Secretary  Rusk  meant  when  he   said
cryptically  Feb.  27  that  "no  miracle"  in  the  North  would
solve  the  problem  in  the  South.   But  such  remarks  are made
sotto  voce.    Into  the  headlines which  mold  the  public mind
Rusk  and  McNamara continue to  pour  a  picture of  the  con-
flict  as  an  invasion  from   the  North,  supplied  by  arms  from
China.    So  long  as  they  fear  to  tell  the  truth  about  the  war,
they  cannot  free  themselves from  the  undertow pulling them
toward   its  suicidal  extension.
Free  Copies  of  This  or  Any  Other  Issue  Mailed  Free  to  Friends  If  You   Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed   Envelope  and  Specify  Which   Issue
/ F.  Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly         5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.   C.
Pleaae  renew  (or  enter)  my  *nb  for  the  enclosed  $5:
NfURt   „„.„„.„,......«....»,................«.*•••••••••••••*••«••••••••
Street   .........
City   .............
3A6/M
For  this  additional  $5-35  please  send  a  copy  of  I.  F.
Stone's  "The  Haunted   Fifties."
(To)   Name
Street
City  ...........
Shall  we  Mnd  rift  announcement?         Tee  D   Ne  D
....Zone.—
State..
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I  v
Chuis  Po»taee  Paid   mt  Washington.   D.   C.    Published  every  Monday  except  in  August  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..
C.         indSS,deS  Seekl" puWlA-ir aid  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation   Manager.   Esther  M   Stone.     Subscription:
15  in  the U.S.;  16  in  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  »16  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED