I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964sep14.pdf

============================================================

Togliattis  Posthumous Blow for  Freedom,  P.  4
The  Next  Crisis  Just  Around  the   Bend  in  U.  S.  Relations  With Chile
"In  addition   to  providing  previously   ignored  social  out-
casts   with   opportunities   for   genuine   participation   in   the
national  life,  Chile  faces  difficult  tasks  of  capital  formation
if   genuine  economic  advances  are  to  be  made.    Given   the
past  failures  of  private  capitalism  to  respond  to  the  chal-
lenge   of   capital   formation,   Chilean   reform   advocates  of
every   political   affiliation   insist   that   it   will   be   necessary,
at   least   at   the   outset   to   rely   on  certain  socialistic   and
even   Marxian   methods.    Should   a   reform   administration
come   to  power  in   Chile   the   U.   S.,   would  be   faced  with
certain   psychological   difficulties,   for   the   majority  of    its
citizens  subscribe   to  the  notion  that  in  the  name  of   the
revered  Monroe  Doctrine  all   'un-American'  practices  must
be  excluded from  the  entire  hemisphere ...  in  Chile  there
may  be  no  other  means  by  which  new  social  elements  can
acquire  purchasing   power  and  education,   gain   bargaining
power   in   the   sociopolitical  complex,  and   help  ultimately
thereby  to  usher  in  a  system  of  effective  democracy."
—Frederick  B.  Pike:  Chile and  the  U.S.  (Notre   Dame,  1963)  highly  recommended  for  the  Left   Catholic point  of  view.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  30SEPTEMBER  14,  1964
io'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
What  Chile  Needs  Is  An  Opening  to  the  Left
While  the  center  of  gravity  in  U.S.  politics  is  moving  to-
ward  the  right,  the  center  of  gravity  elsewhere  in  the  hemi-
sphere  is  moving  left.    Here  a  broad  national front  has  been
formed  behind  a  Texas  conservative  to  defeat  the  danger  of
Fascistic  influence  in  the  White  House.    In  Chile  a  broad  na-
tional  front  was  formed  behind  a  Catholic  Leftist  to  defeat  a
Popular  Front  candidate with  Communist  Party  support.  This
divergence  in  development  forecasts  trouble  unless  the  time
the  U.S.  gained  by the  Chilean  victory  is put  to  good  use.  The
first  essential  is  to  understand  better  what  happened  in  Chile
and  what  might  have  happened  in  the  U.S.    The  election  of  a
Communist-supported   Socialist  in   Chile,   pledged   to   nation-
alize  U.S.  copper  and  nitrate  properties,   would  have  pushed
U.S.  politics further  rightward.    The  prospect  of  another  Cas-
tro  in  the  hemisphere,  this time  in  one  of  South  America's  Big
Three,  would  have  let  loose  a  burst  of  hysteria  worse   than
that  we  have  seen  over  Cuba.    It  would  have  given  the  Gold-
waterites  a  boost  in  this  election,   impelled   Johnson   to  new
demonstrations  of  toughness   this  time  in  Latin  America,  set
back  the  fragile   beginnings   of  peaceful   understanding   with
Moscow  and  the  hope  after  the  election  of  negotiating  an  end
to  the  Indochinese  war  with  Peking.    When  a  power  as  big
as  the  U.S.  has fits, the  whole  world  shakes,  and  fits  we  would
have  had  if  the  Left  had  won  in   Chile.
No  Victory  for  Free  Enterprise
If  we  are  to  use  the  reprieve  wisely,  it  is  important  to  real-
ize  that  Frei  Montalva's  victory  in  Chile  was  not  a  victory  for
democracy  or  free  enterprise  as  they  are  defined  in  the  simple-
minded  U.S.  lexicon.    Chile  is  barely  beginning  to  be  a  de-
mocracy  in  our  sense  of  the  word;  it  is  a  nation  in  which  a
landed  aristocracy has  played  the  game  of  parliamentary  musi-
cal  chairs  much  as  it  was  played  in  England  before  the  Nine-
teenth  Century  Reform  Bills  gave  lower  class  Englishmen  the
right  to  vote.    It  is  only  in  recent  decades  that  pressure   from
below  has  forced   Chile's   oligarchy  to  utilize  one  makeshift
after  another  to  protect  its  privileges.    The  latest  was  to  sup-
port  a  Catholic  Leftist  as  a  lesser  evil.   This  oligarchy  is anti-
democratic   and   anti-capitalistic.     The   paradox   in  Chile,  as
Another  Goldwaterite  for  Talks  With  China
"Sen.   Goldwater   in   a  spirit   of   desperation  under-
standable   in   the   light   of   the   speed   with  which   his
enemies  pounce  on  any  realistic  suggestion,   has  now
said  that  maybe  the  time  has  come  to  negotiate   with
the   Red  Chinese   Government.    There   is   a   sense   in
which,  considering  the  politically available  realities,  he
is   absolutely   and  unchallengeably  correct   .   .   .  the
American  people  are  not  prepared  to  make  the   sacri-
fices  that  are  apparently  necessary  to  keep  South  Viet-
nam  free. ...  So  that  President  Johnson,  like  Barry
Goldwater,  has  only  the  alternatives:  We  will  surren-
der,   or  we  will  negotiate. ...  If  you  cannot  beat  the
enemy,  either  because  you  lack  the  strength  to  do  so,
or  the  will,  the  thing  to  do  is  to  negotiate.  .  .  . Rather
negotiate  now with  the  Red Chinese,  than a  few  months
from   now  when  Saigon   falls   into  the   hands   of   the
neutralists."
—Wm.  F.  Buckley,  Jr.,   editor   of   the  rightist   Na-
tional  Review  in  his  newspaper   column,  Sept.  6-7.
elsewhere   in  Latin  America,  is  that   U.S.   capitalist   interests
allied  themselves  with  the  big  landowners  in  policies   designed
to  prevent  industrial  and  capitalist  development.     U.S.  copper
and  nitrate  companies   have   been   interested   in  getting  raw
materials  out  of  Chile  as cheaply  as  possible,  not  in  developing
native  industry.    For  landowners   and  copper  magnates   alike
this  would  mean  higher  labor  costs.    The  biggest  push   toward
industrialism  and  capitalism  in  Chile  came  from  its  first  Popu-
lar  Front  government,  which  was elected  in  1938  and  launched
the  Chilean  Development  Corporation,  the  first  of  its  kind  in
Latin  America.    It  initiated  a  wide  variety  of  public,  semi-
public  and  private  enterprises,  giving  Chile  its first  steel  plant,
its  first  oil  industry  and  its  first  public  power  company.     The
most  important  measure  required   for  peaceful   relations   with
Latin  America  and  peaceful  reform  there  is to  educate  the  U.S.
to  the  need  for  such  governmental  planning  and  direction  if
development   is  to  get  off  the  ground   in  time  to  match   the
population  explosion  and  popular    aspiration.
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
1    2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  U, 1964
Frei  For  Peace  With  Cuba  and  Trade  With  the  Communist  Bloc
(Continued   from   Page   One)
U.S.  public  opinion  will  also  have  to  accept  the  fact  that
this  new  regime  will  not  "stand  firmly  with  the  West"  if  that
means  isolating  Cuba  and  embargoing  trade  with  the  Com-
munist  countries.    Even  Frei's   conservative  predecessor   had
begun  making copper  deals with  Moscow,  Prague  and  Peking.
Frei  deplored  the  break  with  Cuba  and  in  a  press  conference
after   his   election   expressed   the   hope   that   Cuba   could   be
brought  back  within  the  hemispheric  fold  on  the  basis  of  the
principles  of  self-determination after  the  U.S.  elections.    U.S.
public  opinion  must  also  be  prepared  for  domestic  measures
in  Chile  more  drastic  than  those  proposed   by  Bosch   in   the
Dominican  Republic,  Villeda  Morales  in  Honduras  and  Gou-
lart  in  Brazil  before  U.S.  interests encouraged  their  overthrow
by  the  military.
Reforms  Urgently  Needed
The   first   necessity  of   the  new  -Chilean  regime  is  to   stop
Latin  America's second  worst  inflation  (after  Bolivia),  a  bon-
anza  for  landowners and  primary  producers  but  a  savage  cap-
ital  levy  on  its  working  class.    This  means  effective  taxes  on
large  incomes  and  properties.    The   second  necessity  is  swift
land  reform.    Only  about  one-fourth  its  best  arable  land  is
under  cultivation,  forcing  Chile  to  import  food.  With  600,000
landless  peasants and  most  of  the  land  in  the  hands  of  a  few
great  families  indifferent  to  its  wise  use,  the  big  estates  must
be  broken  up.     On   top   of   this,  Frei  Montalva's  Christian
Democrats,  while on  record  for  the  ultimate nationalization of
the  big  copper  mines,  want  immediate control  of  the  industry
to  expand   refining   at  home   and   marketing  abroad.     Here
there  will  be  a  frontal  conflict  with  U.S.  interests.
The   inner  weakness  of  the  Christian  Democratic   majority
will  make  itself  felt  as  soon  as  these  conflicts  begin.    For  in
Chile,  as  in  Western  Europe  after  the  war,  all  kinds  of  reac-
tionary  interests  jumped  on  the  Christian  Democratic  band-
wagon  because  they  had  nowhere  else  to  go.    Only  anti-Com-
munism  put  together  the  big  majority  in  Chile.    As  soon  as
Frei  moves to  implement  his program  in  the  Chilean  Congress,
to  which  elections  are, scheduled  in  March,  his  coalition  will
begin  to  fall  apart.    He  will  be  reduced  to  a  minority  regime
Capitalism  in  Chile
"In  its   dealings   with   Chile,  the   U.S.   appeared   to
align  itself   unquestioningly  with  the  traditional   groups
of   privilege,  seeming   to  feel   that   if   only   they   were
allowed  to  preside   over  a  free-enterprise   system,   the
social   deformities   of   the   country   would   somehow   be
ameliorated.   The  Chile  of  the  dispossessed  has  not  un-
til  very  recently,  directly  concerned  the  U.S.   To  a  cer-
tain  extent,  this  is  because   there  has  been  a  tendency
to  assume  that  private capitalism  will  function in  Chile
as  it  now  operates  in  the  U.S.    Actually,  Chilean  capi-
talists  have  not  been  forced  to  heed  the  lessons  brought
home  to  U.S.  business  leaders  after  1929.    Their  basic
policies   are  still   founded   upon  belief   in   suppressing
rather  than  cooperating  with  lower  classes,  upon  small-
scale   production   and   excessive   per-unit   profit,   upon
government   protection—but  never  government   regula-
tion—  and  upon  special  privileges  which  make  possible
the  perpetuation  of  superannuated  means  of  production.
...  So far  as  Chile's  lower  classes  are concerned,  capi-
talism  has  been  synonymous  with  social  injustice."
—Frederick  B. Pike: Chile  and the  U.S.
unless  he  can,  like  the  Christian  Democrats  in  Italy,  achieve
an  "opening  to  the  left"  and  form  an  alliance with  those  ele-
ments   of   the   Popular   Front,  which   favor   peaceful   reform
rather  than  revolution.    Here  Frei's  friendship  with  Allende
and  the  latter's  own  Socialist  background  should  prove  fruit-
ful.    It  should  also  be  facilitated  by  the  shift  in  the  position
of  the  Chilean  Catholic  hierarchy  in  recent  years  from  sup-
port  of  feudalism  to  support  of  social  reform.    Only  a  new
alliance  of  this  kind  can  give  Chile  the  social reform  it  needs
if  major  convulsion  and  perhaps  war  are  to  be  avoided.    But
can  U.S.  public  opinion  be  educated  to  understand  this?    Or
will  we  back  a  military  coup  if   the   Chilean  oligarchy  and
the  U.S.  copper  companies  cannot  corrupt  a  Frei  regime?  Last
January  the  Engineering  and  Mining   Journal,  welcoming  the
appointment  of  Thomas  Mann  as  Johnson's  policy  "czar"  for
Latin  America expressed  satisfaction  with  his  "tough,  no  non-
sense  approach"   and  said  Chile  would  be  his  first  test.     In
Chile  the  U.S.  can  easily  destroy  the  last  bulwark  to  what
it  fears.
The  House  Un-Americans  Give  Students  from  Cuba  Their  Annual Go  Over
There   were   some   new   tactics   this   year    as   the   Un-
American   Activities   Committee  faced   the   young'   people
who  went  to  Cuba.    Chairman  Willis  did  not   preside   and
was  absent   throughout   most  of  the  two-day  hearing.   Last
year   his   temper   got   the  best   of   him  whenever   the   stu-
dents  charged  that  he  was  not  entitled  to  sit  in  Congress
because   Negroes  in  his   Louisiana  district   were   being   de-
prived  of  the  right  to  vote.    In  his  place  as  chairman  sat
Rep.  Ichord,  a  shrewd  former  District   Attorney   from  Mis-
souri  who  professed  a  desire  "to  protect  the   Constitutional
rights   of   the  witnesses."     Behind  him,  was   the  Commit-
tee's  concession   to  the  Civil  Rights  Act,  a  Negro   employee
wno  periodically  fetched   pitchers  of   water.
The  announced  purpose   of   the   hearing   was   to   uncover
loopholes   in  the   Foreign   Agents   Registration   Act.     The
implication   was   clear.     All   who  say   a   kind   word   about
Castro   or   Cuba   must   be   dupes   of   international   commu-
nism.    The  students   selected   by  the   Committee,   although
they  shaved  their  beards  and  dressed  neatly  this  year,  did
not  present  a  convincing  case.  They  spoke  in  the  language  of
super-revolutionary   fantasy.     To   them   Castro   Cuba  is   a
paradise,   America   a   tyranny,   and   the   American   wage-
slave   about  to  burst   his  chains.     In  this   they   echo   some
old-timers  from  the   '30s,   like   Truman   Nelson,   who   was
present    to   address   an   anti-HUAC  rally   after   the   first
day's  hearing.  "We  in  America   are  being   separated   from
revolutionary   renewal,"   he   said   as   if   in   the   carnage   of
revolution  there  was  nourishment  for  the  soul.
The  most  painful   voice  came  from  a  young  Negro  just
back  from   Cuba.    His   name  was   Charlie   "Mao"  Johnson,
and  he  earned  his  nickname.    For  him  the  Negro  was  no
mystic   revolutionary   symbol   but  a   "super-exploited   beast
of  burden."  He  thought  Cuba  had  only  "begun   to  do  away
with  racism"  and  he  dismissed   the  American  white  worker
as  no  friend  of  the  black  man.    Not   once   did   he   mention
HUAC,  as  if  it  were  no  worse  than  the  rest  of  our  society.
This   was   really   a  voice   from  the   depths   of   black   racial
despair.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's Weekly,  September  U,  1964
Appalachia  Act  Tailored  to  Suit  Coal,  Rail  and  Power  Interests
Feeble  Development  Plan  A  Challenge  to  Liberals  in  Congress
After   four   years'   incubation,  the   Appalachian   Regional
Development  Act  comes  before  Congress  next  week.     "Our
problem,"  we  were  told  by  one  of  its  drafters,  "has  been  to
show  that  the   Appalachia  program   is  not   another  TVA."
About  this  there  can  be  no  mistake.    This  inadequate  plan
is a  challenge  to  liberals  in  Congress,  and  calls for  a complete
overhaul  if  it  is  not  to  disappoint  the  hopes  it  has  aroused.
The  Act  creates  no  federal planning  authority.    A  regional
commission  composed  of   one  federal   representative  and   the
governors  of  the  11  Appalachian  states  must  pass  on  all  de-
velopment  plans.    This  at  best  is  cumbersome;   at  its  worst
it  gives  a  near  veto  to  the  vindictive Governor  Wallace  and
his  sympathizers  in   the   other   southern   Appalachian   states.
The  victory  won  over  states'  rights  in  the  Civil  Rights  Act
has  been  surrendered  here  without  a  stir.    Likewise,  the  cen-
tral  authority  imposed  upon  federal  agencies  at  work  in  the
Tennessee  Valley  has  no  counterpart  in  the  Appalachian  Act.
The  regional  commission  must  deal  separately with  each  fed-
eral  agency.   The  prerogatives  of  bureaucrats  have  become  as
impregnable  as  the  "rights"  of  States.
A  Public  Power   Program
Nowhere  is  the  Act  more  timorous  than  before  the  power
of   the   public   utilities.     Appalachia's   primary   resource   is
coal;  mining  it  is  the  only  skill  of  the  region's  unemployed.
A   low-cost  federal   power  program,   using  coal   to   generate
electricity  at  the  mine  mouth,  would  put  the  unemployed  to
work,   attract  industry  to   the   region,   and   produce    enough
profits   to   finance   schools,   roads   and   other   public   works.
(See   box  below).   The  Act  does  not  mention  this  plan  al-
though  it  was  submitted  to  the  President's  Appalachian  Com-
mission   and   to   Congress   by   the   region's    own   residents.
There   is  instead  a   specific   prohibition   against   the   use  of
funds   "to  finance  the   generation,   transmission  or  distribu-
tion   of   electric   energy."     Only   the   Senate   Public   Works
Committee  has  encouraged  the  public  power   plan.     In   its
report  on  the  bill  it  recommends  another  study.  "The  public
utility  lobby  has  been  conspicuous  by  its  absence,"   one  Com-
mittee   staff   man  told  us.    Little  wonder   when  the   govern-
ment  does  the  lobby's  own work.
The  utilities  are  not  alone  in  their  opposition  to  a  public
power  program  for  Appalachia.   They  are  joined  by  a  coali-
tion  of  coal  mine  owners,  the  UMW,   and  the  railroads.  The
coal  interests oppose  any  step  that  might  offend  the  utilities,
which   have   become   the   primary   purchasers   of   bituminous
coal.    The  railroads  are  in  opposition  because  the  generation
of   electricity  at   the   mine-mouth  would   eliminate  a   major
part  of  their  freight  revenues  derived  from   the  shipping  of
coal  to  distant generating  plants.
A Mellon Fief
This   coalition   is  welded   together   by  monopoly   control.
In  fact,  it  is  only  a  minor  exaggeration  to  see  Appalachia  as
personal  fief  of  the  Mellon   family  of  Pittsburgh.     Through
Mellon  National  Bank  and  Trust  the  family  controls  the  Ap-
palachian-based   Consolidation  Coal   Co.,   the  nation's   largest
producer  of  bituminous  coal.    Through   Consolidation    Coal
the  Mellons  used  to  control  the  Virginian  Railway.    Its  re-
cent  merger  with  the  Norfolk   &  Western  may  have  diluted
Mellon   ownership,   but   Mellon   intimates   still   sit   on   the
Norfolk   board  to  influence  if  not  control  it.    The   merged
company  is  now  the  largest  domestic  originator  of   bituminous
coal,  carrying  76%   of   the  total   tonnage  handled  in   1962.
With  their  influence  firmly  established  in  coal  and  rails,  the
Mellons   in  recent  years  have  turned  to  utilities.     In    1961,
when  Consolidation  Coal  acquired  what  many  consider  to  be
controlling   interest   in  Chrysler  Corp.  and   U.  S.  Steel,  the
company   also   purchased   over   100,000  shares  of  American
Electric   Power,   a   holding   company   for   six   utilities   oper-
ating  throughout  Appalachia.   American  Electric's  president  is
Donald   Cook,  a  close  friend   of  President   Johnson.
TVA  never  had  to  battle  a  monopoly  like  this  one.    At
the  American  Public  Power   Association  we  were  told,   "If
Johnson   would   back  it,   and   some  Senator  with   a  heart—
a  Gaylord  Nelson  or  a  Maurine  Neuberger   would  fight  for
it,  Appalachia  could  have  its  own  TVA."     Perhaps,   but  it
seems  more  likely  that  those  who  have  exploited   Appalachia
in  the  past  will  continue  to  do  so  with  all  the  impunity  of
monopolists  in  a  foreign  land.
The  Case  for  A  TVA-Style  Approach  to  Appalachia's Problems
"In  June  and  again   in  September,   1963,  representatives
of   the   Eastern   Kentucky   Redevelopment    Administration
sent   resolutions   to   the  President's  Appalachian   Commis-
sion  calling  for  a  Federal   agency  patterned  after  TVA  to
develop   the   electric   power   potential   of   the   area   and  to
undertake  its   general   social  and  economic  rehabilitation.
"The   Edison   Electric   Institute   has   estimated   that   the
colossal   sum  of   $175  billion  will   have  to   be  invested   in
new   electric-power   generating   facilities   in   the   next   20
years.     Steps   must  be  taken  to  insure  that  the  huge   coal
resources   of  Appalachia  are  utilized  in  meeting  this  goal.
Dams   at   strategic   locations    in   the   Kentucky   highlands
could   provide   storage   for   cooling   water   to   be   used   by
huge   mine-mouth   generating    plants.      Extra-high-voltage
transmission   lines   and  the   expanding   grid   system   would
make  it  possible  to  send  low-cost  power  into  New  England,
a  region  of  high  power  costs.    The  [proposal]  of   Consoli-
dated   Edison   of   New   York   to   go   some   1,100   miles   to
Labrador   for   hydropower   points   up   the   possibilities   of
using  Appalachian  coal  for  electric  power  in  the   Northeast.
"The   hydro-   and   thermal-power   potential    of    eastern
Kentucky   could  be  developed  for   a   billion   dollars.     And
this   could   be   made   entirely    self-liquidating    [within   35
years].    However,  such  a  self-financing  corporation   should
be  given  a  stern  mandate  to  plow  back  into  the   impover-
ished  counties  in  which  it  would  operate  a  substantial   por-
tion  of  the  money  from  power  sales.    At  least  1  mill  per
kwh  should  be  added  to  the  price  and  invested   in  schools,
roads,   airports,   flood-control,   reforestation   and   reclama-
tion  and  perhaps  the  building  of  entirely  new  towns.   Sus-
tained   capital  investment   over  a   generation   would   bring
this   deprived  corner   of   the   American  hinterland   abreast
of  the  rest  of  the  nation."
—Harry  Caudill,  Kentucky  attorney  and  author  of  Night
Comes  to  the  Cumberland,  before   House  and  Senate  Public
Works   Committees,  June,   1964.
1   2   •'
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. 'Stone's  Weekly,  September  U, 1964
The   Dead   Italian   Leader   Attacked   Khrushchevite  Reluctance  to  Push  On With  Reform
Togliatti's Testament Will Inspire New  Hope for  Freedom in  the  Soviet  Bloc
The   memorandum   written   by   Palmiro   Togliatti   on   the
eve  of   his   death   and   now   published  by  Luigi   Longo,   his
successor   as  head   of   the   Italian  Communist  Party,  is  a  po-
litical   event   of  first  importance.     It   performs   a   service   for
the  best  elements  in  the  Soviet  bloc  by  protesting   the   "slow-
ness    and    resistance"    of    the   stodgy    Soviet    leadership   in
"overcoming   the   regime   of   restrictions  and   suppression   of
democratic    and    personal    freedom   introduced    by   Stalin."
Khrushchev  and  his  circle  are  still  Stalinist  in  spirit,   though
much  less  harsh  in  conduct.    This  posthumous   nudge   from
the   foremost   intellectual   of   world   Communism,   and    from
the   Italian   party,   the   most   powerful   and   sophisticated   in
the  West,  will  give  fresh  hope  to  the  youth  (and to  the  old
idealists)   everywhere   in   Eastern   Europe   from   Warsaw   to
Moscow.
Lenin,  Too, Allowed Little  Freedom
Eight   years  ago,  in  his  comments  on   the   20th   Congress,
the   Italian   Left   Socialist   leader   Nenni,   astringently    noted
how  inadequate  was  the  concept  of   "personality   cult"  to  ex-
plain   the   horrors   of   the   Stalin   period.    Now   his   old  ally,
Togliatti,    also   criticizes   the    effort    "to   explain   this   solely
through    Stalin's   serious    personal    defects."      To    put    the
blame  wholly  on  Stalin  is  to  evade  the  need  for  basic  reform.
Even  Togliatti   fails  to  see  how   far   these   reforms   must   go.
He  speaks  of  the  need  to  restore  "the Leninist   [our  italics]
norms  that  insured  within  the  party  and  outside   it,  a  wide
liberty  of  expression  and  debate  on  culture,  art  and   also  on
politics."     The   loss   of   liberty   began   with   Lenin,   as   Rosa
Luxembourg,    Martov,   Kautsky   and    Emma   Goldman    saw
quite  early.    Leninist  democracy  is  a  Trotzkyist  myth.
In  opposing  a  world   conference  of   Communist  parties  to
deal    with,  the   obstreperous    Chinese,    Togliatti    recognized
that   their   expulsion   and   a   split   would   inevitably   mean   a
witch  hunt  for  those  suspected  of  Chinese  sympathies  and  the
reimposition  of  Stalin-style discipline  directed  from   Moscow.
The  heavy-handed  Russians  do  not  have  the  brains  to  direct
a  world   movement,  and  the  situations  confronted   by  the  in-
dividual   Communist   parties   are   much   too   diverse   for  cen-
IFS  Speaks  on  Arab-Jewish  Relations  Under  the  Auspices  of   THE
Guild,   133
Elizabeth   Gurley  Flynn
In  one  sense   Elizabeth  Gurley  Flynn  died  a  failure
but   in   another   she   died   a   success.     The  Communist
Party  of  which  she  was  chairman had  lost  almost  all
influence    and   respect;   younger,   more   independent-
minded  members drifted  away  when  it  failed  to  recog-
nize  the  implications  of  the  20th  Congress  and remained
an  uninspiring  echo  of  Moscow.   Its  leadership  became
a   kind   of   leftwing   Old  Folks   Home,  clinging  to   the
conspiratorial  and  bureaucratic habits  of  the  past.    It
was   a   strange  position  for   her  latter  years,   as   the
stuffy  atmosphere of  Moscow's  hierarchy was  a  strange
place  for  her  to  die.   The  fiery  young Irish  labor agita-
tor,   most  passionate   and  eloquent  of   America's  now
vanished  IWW's,  the  long  time  mate in  free love  of  her
fellow  anarchist, the  wonderful  Carlo  Tresca,  deserved
a  better end.   The  pity  of  it  is  that  so  few  will  realize
how  much  Elizabeth  did  in  her  long  and  devoted  life-
time  for  the  betterment of  the  American working  class.
The  great  strikes  she  led  on  the  eve  of  World  War  I
were  part  of  the  epic  struggle  of  U.S. labor  to  win  its
rights.   The  American Civil  Liberties Union  she  helped
organize  is  our oldest  sentinel  of  basic  liberties.   A jail
term   under  the  Smith  Act  and  isolation  were  the  re-
wards  of  her  old  age, but  some  day, in  a  quieter  atmos-
phere,  her  services  to  her  country  will  be  remembered.
Because  of  her  and  other  radicals  like  her, American
workers  are  no  longer  the  helpless  victims  of  exploita-
tion  to  be  found  elsewhere   in  this  hemisphere.     This
was  her  success.
tralized  control.     When  one  recalls  the  fatal  errors  Moscow
and   the   Communists  made   in   dealing  with   the   menace   of
Nazism,  one  shudders  to  think  of  a  new  Third  International,
embroiled  with  a  new  Fourth   directed   from  Peking,  "in. in-
ternal  polemics   of   a  purely   ideological   nature   (as  Togliatti
wrote)  far  removed  from  reality."    In  Italy  Togliatti   showed
his  wisdom  in  his  friendlier  attitude  toward   the  Church  and
the  non-Communist  Left.    There  as  in  many  other  countries
the  Communists  are  a  major  political  factor.     More   sensible
policies  on  their  part  are  essential  to  a  saner  world.    Togli-
atti  made  a  great  contribution  toward  this  by  his   testament.
NEW   OUTLOOK  Sept.   18  in  New  York,  8:30  p.m.  at  the  Newspaper
W.  44th  Street.
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street   ...........
City   ...............
For   $5.35  extr
(To)    Name  .
Street   ...........
City  ................
Shall  we  send
Weekly     5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
9/14/64
a  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
..........................Zone............State....................
gift  announcement?           Yes  D    No  D
/ E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except  the  last  week   in  December   and  the  first  week  in
January   and   Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.W., Washington,   D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  published   and   edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   55   in   the   U.S.;   $6   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail  rates:
$15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,   Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED