I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964jun29.pdf

============================================================

That  Delusive Parallel Between  Vietnam  and  Cuba, P.  4
Morse  Tells  Senate  That  Johnson  Is  More  Belligerent  In  Asia  Than  Ike  Was
"President   Johnson's  comments  in   San   Francisco  about
our  Asian  policy  grossly  overstepped  his   moral  and  legal
rights.  His  reference to  an  "offensive  pursuit of  peace  based
on  overwhelming  military   power"  is  as  artful  a  piece  of
double-talk  as  has  been  uttered  in  the  Cold War.   No  Presi-
dent   is   alone  entitled   to   threaten  war  or  to  commit  the
United  States  to  war.  .  .  .
"The    President's  lamentable excuse  is  said  to  be  that  the
Southeast  Asia Treaty  Organization gives  him all  the power
he  needs.    He  should  read  the  Treaty  again.    It  makes  no
provision   for   war  by  the  Organization  as   a  whole,  much
less   the  United  States  acting  alone.    It  calls  for  nothing
m»re  than  consultation.  .  .  .
"President   Johnson   is   making   th«   United   States   th«
world's  leading  threat  to  world  peace,  and  he  will  discredit
himself  and  his  Administration  in  the  eyes  of  history  if  he
leaves  our  people  the  legacy   of  a  unilateral  war  in  Asia.
Even  President  Eisenhower  declined  in  1954  to  commit  this
country  to  a  unilateral  war  in  Indo-China,  unsupported  by
allies  or  a  specific  mutual  defense   treaty.  .  .  .
'The  only  possible  result  of  such  an  American adventure
would  be  that  the  United  States  would do  Russia's  "job"  on
China,  leaving  the  Soviet  Union  free  from  confinement  on
both  her  borders.    I  cannot  imagine  a  greater  service   the
United  States   could  do  the   Soviet   Union  than  to  whittle
down  her  Chinese  adversary  at  a  huge  and  bloody  cost  to
ourselves."
—Sen. Morse, in  the Senate, June  22.
1. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  23
JUNE  29,  1964
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Judicial  Sustenance  for  the  Southern  Racist
Justices  Bkck,  Harlan  and  White  have  done  the  country  a
double   injury   by  their  dissent  in  the  sit-in  cases.    The   ma-
jority  decisions,  by  one  device  or  another,   found   it   possible
to  reverse  or  remand   the  convictions  without   passing   upon
the  fundamental  issue,  which  is  whether  the  States  may  under
the   14th   Amendment   in  any  way  enforce  racial  discrimina-
tion  in  public  accommodations.     The  case  which  Black,  Har-
lan  and  White   made  their  main  battle  ground   was  Bell   v.
Maryland,   which  involved   12  Negro  students   convicted   of
criminal  trespass  for  a  restaurant  sit-in  in  Baltimore  in  I960.
Since  that  time  both  the  City  of  Baltimore  and  the  State  of
Maryland  have  passed   public  accommodations   laws.     Under
these  laws  what  the  students  did  is  no  longer   a  crime.    The
majority,   speaking   through   Mr.   Justice  Brennan,   therefore
vacated   the   judgments   against   them   and   remanded   to   the
State  courts  for  such  action  as  may  now  seem  justifiable  under
the  State  law  as  changed.
A  Mischief-Making  Dissent
At  this  moment  in  our  national  history,  when  Congress  is
in  the  final  stage  of  passing   the  first  public  accommodations
law   since  the   Civil   Rights  Act   of    1875,   there   was   good
grounds  for  restraint  in  the  Court.    If  it  could  not  muster  a
majority   clearly   to   affirm   the  right  to  equality   then   it  was
wiser  to  postpone  the  issue,  especially when  there  were  sound
legal  grounds  for  doing  so.   The  risk  otherwise  was  to  throw
doubt  in  advance  on  the  constitutionality  of   the  new  statute
by  a  split  within  the  high   Court   itself   and   thus   to   cast  a
baneful   influence  into  the   scales  wherever  public  opinion  is
precariously   poised   between   resistance   and   compliance.     It
was  mischievous  of   Black,  Harlan   and  White  to  open   the
question  up  and  to  open  it  in  such  a  way  as  inevitably  to  give
emotional  support  to  mass  resistance.    "We   fully   recognize,"
Black   wrote   apologetically   for   the   dissenters,  "the   salutary
general  judicial  practice  of  not  unnecessarily reaching  out  to
decide  constitutional questions.    But  this  is neither,"  he quick-
The  Right  to  Travel   Decision
Practically   the   Supreme   Court's   decision   upholding
the  right  to  travel  is  a  victory.    Philosophically  it's  a
disappointment.     It   leaves   loopholes   that   may   prove
dangerous  in  the  future.   Practically,  it  is  another  blow
at  the  Internal  Security   Act,  a  thought   control   meas-
ure  fathered  by  Mundt   and  Nixon   in  tke  Fifties.     It
holds  that  Section  6  of  that  Act,  in  denying  passports
to  members of  Communist  organizations  or  "fronts"   is
unconstitutional  because  it  "too  broadly  and indiscrim-
inately    restricts    the   right    to    travel   and   thereby
abridges  the  liberty  guaranteed  by  the  Fifth  Amend-
ment."    But  this  implies  that  a  more  carefully  drawn
statute  might  command a  majority  on  the  Court.  Only
Mr.  Justice  Douglas  firmly  upholds  the  right  to  travel
(see  box  bottom of  p. 3);  even  Black, while condemning
the   Internal   Security   Act  altogether   says   that  Con-
gress  has  "broad  powers  to  regulate   the  issuance  of
(Continued  on Page  Three)
ly  added,  "a  constitutional  nor  a  statutory  requirement."     So
off   they  went,   in   an   opinion   which   sounded   as   if   it   were
written  by  David   Lawrence.
They  protected   themselves   in  the   small  print,   of   course.
They  said  they  were  not  passing  on  the  constitutionality  "of
any  existing  or  proposed  state  or  federal  legislation."    In  his
oral,  as  in  his  written  text,  Mr.  Justice  Black  was  careful  to
say  that  he  meant  only  that  the  14th  Amendment  did  not  of
itself   and  without  Congressional  legislation,  prohibit  denial of
public   accommodations  to  Negroes.    These  fine  points  will
not  protect   the  country  from  the  bigots   who  will  now  say,
"Why   even   Black.  .  .  ."    The  whole   emotional   coloration
of   the   Black  dissent   is  on  the   side  of   the   aggrieved  white
Southerner,  not  his  Negro  victim.   He  waded  in  with  joyous
abandon  on  the  side  of  Harlan  and  White,   with  whom  K
otherwise  rarely  agrees.    For  Harlan  property  rights  h:-.\,  al-
ways  been  a  No.   1 consideration;  he  has  always  subordinated
(Continued    on  Page  Tii'o)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  2,9,  1964
A  State  With  A  Color  Line  Can't   Suddenly  Claim  It's   Color  Blind
civil  rights  to  them.    But  this  was  a  new  stance  for  Black.
The   13th,   14th  and   15th  Amendments  were  intended  to
free  the  Negro  from  slavery  and  give  him   first  class  citizen-
ship.    The  Southern   States  sought  to  circumvent  them  first
by  the  Black  Codes  and  then  by  Jim  Crowism.    In  this  they
were  aided  by  Supreme  Court  decisions  which  read  the  14th
amendment  so  narrowly  as  to  take  the  heart  out  of  the  first
Civil  Rights  Act.    Their  spirit  lives  on  in  the  Black-Harlan-
White   dissent.    Here   is  a   sample   of   its   question-begging
formulations.     The    14th   Amendment,   it   says,   "does   not
forbid  a  State  to  prosecute  for  crimes committed against  a  per-
son  or  his   property,  however   prejudiced  or  narrow  the  vic-
tim's  views  may  be."     Of  course  not.    But  is  it  a  crime  for
a  Negro  to  try  and  buy  a  meal   at  a  lunch  counter   which
otherwise  serves  the  public?   "Nor,"  they  go  on,  "can  what-
ever  prejudice  and  bigotry  the  victim  of  a  crime may  have  be
automatically  attributed  to  the   State  that   prosecutes."      Not
automatically,  of  course.    But  the  records  of  these  cases  is  full
of  testimony that  restaurant  and  hotel  owners  refuse  service  to
Negroes  not  because  of  their  own  prejudices  but  because  they
fear  those   "local   customs"   the  Southern   States   foster.
Hardly   "Past  History"
The   Solicitor   General,   in   a   brilliant   supplemental   brief
ttmicus,  argued  that  "a  State  which  has  drawn  a color  line may
not  suddenly  assert  that  it  is  color  blind."    Black  argues  that
if  this  were  accepted   "we  would  have  one  14th  Amendment
for  the  South  and  quite  a  different  and  more  lenient  one  for
other  parts  of  the  country."     It  is  not  the   14th  Amendment
which  is more  "lenient"  in  the  North.    It  is the  North  which
is  far  less  harsh  and  brazen  than  the  South  about  defying  the
Amendment.    Black  complains  that  to  infer  State   responsi-
bility   where   there   is  racial  bias   in   public   accommodations
would  leave  constitutional rights  to  be  "governed   by  past  his-
tory   in   the   South—by   present   conduct   in   the   North   and
West."    Surely  these  Justices  do  not  think  racial  discrimina-
tion  in  the  South  is  merely  a  matter  of  "past  history?"
It  is  the  standard  Southern  answer,  to  say  as  the  dissenters
do,   that   "the    14th   Amendment   of   itself   does  not   compel
either  a  black  man  or  a  white  man  running  his  own  private
business  to  trade  with  anyone  against  his  will."    This  is  a
tissue  of  invidious misstatement.    The   14th  Amendment  can
and  should  be  read  as  part  of  the  public  policy  of  this  coun-
try,  which  is  against  racial  discrimination.   What  a  man  does
in  his  "private  business"  may  be  his  own  affair.     But  where
he  has  a  business  which  opens  its  doors  to  all  comers  then  he
cannot  deny  entrance  or  service  to  some  solely  because  of  their
race.    When  he  does  so,  he  cannot  under  the   14th  Amend-
ment  have  State  support   in  the  shape  of  police   and   judicial
action  to  enforce  the  discrimination  via  "criminal  trespass."
Nor   can  States  which  have  done  all  they  could   to maintain
The  Choice  The  14th  Amendment   Made
"In  granting  Negroes  citizenship   and  the  equal   pro-
tection   of   the   laws,   it   was   never   thought   that   the
States  could  permit  the  proprietors   of  inns  and  public
places  to  restrict   their  general  invitation  to  the   public
and  to  citizens  in  order  to   exclude   the  Negro   public
and  Negro  citizens. ...  A  fundamental   assumption  of
the   14th   amendment   was  that   the  States   would   con-
tinue,   as   they   had  for  ages,   to   enforce   the   right   of
citizens  freely   to  enter  public  places.  .  .  .  The  dissent
would   hold   in   effect   that   the   restaurant   proprietor's
interest  in  choosing  customers  on  the  basis  of  race  is
to  be  preferred   to  the  Negro's  right  to  equal   treatment
by  a  business  serving  the  public."
—Mr.  Justice   Goldberg,  with  Chief   Justice   Warren
.and  Mr.  Justice  Douglas  in  Bell  v.  Md.
the  Negro  in  subjection  then  come  into  court  and  claim  that
they   are   merely   enforcing  property   rights.     This   was   the
argument   of   the   Solicitor  General   and   of   counsel   for   the
sit-in  demonstrators.
Of  course  it  is  not  easy,  in  this  as  in  other  basic questions
of  constitutional  law,  to  find  clear  answers  to  present  prob-
lems  in  the  debates  and  intentions of  its  framers.    But  Black
in  other  cases  has  not  hesitated  to  pour  new  wine  into  the
old  bottles.     However  obscure  the  details  may  be,  the  main
lines  are  clear.    The   South  has  been   engaged   for  a  century
in   attempting   to  nullify   the  Negro's  emancipation.    It  has
done  its  best,  in  the  vivid  phrase  of  the  first  Mr.  Justice  Har-
lan,  this  one's  grandfather,  to  turn  the  13th,   14th  and   15th
amendments   into   "splendid   baubles,   thrown   out  to   delude
those  who  deserved  fair  and  generous  treatment  at  the  hands
of   the  nation."     Those  words  are  from   a  dissent   in    1883
which  at  last  is being  made  the  law  by  the  Civil Rights  Act  of
1964.      Congress   is   thereby   reversing   the   Supreme   Court.
Goldberg,   Warren   and  Douglas   would  have  had  the   Court,
too,   reverse  that, 1883  decision   on   public   accommodations.
Mr.  Justice  Douglas  felt  that  the  Court  dodged  its  duty  in  not
doing  so.    He  asked  scornfully,  "how  is  a  'personal'  right  in-
fringed  when  a  corporate  chain  store,  for  example,   is  forced
to  open   its  lunch  counters  to  people  of  all. races?"    He  put
the  issue  unanswerably  when  he  wrote:
Segregation   of   Negroes   in   the   restaurants   and  lunch
counters  of  parts  of  America  is  a  relic  of  slavery.    It  is  a
badge  of  second  class  citizenship.    It  is  a  denial  of  a  privi-
lege  and  immunity  of  national  citizenship  and  of  the  Equal
Protection   guaranteed   by   the   14th    Amendment    against
abridgement   by  the   States.     When   the   state   police,   the
state  prosecutor   and  the  state  courts  unite  to  convict   Ne-
groes  for  renouncing  that  relic  of  slavery,  the  'state'  vio-
lates  the  14th  amendment.
It   is  tragic  at  this  moment,  when   the   strongest   kind  of
stand  is  necessary to  avoid  bloodshed,  that  the  Supreme  Court
did  not  do  its  duty  and  take  that  unequivocal  position.
The  Bitter  Protest  From  Douglas  Against  The  Court's   Dodging   Of  The  Issue
to   make   it   their   first   order   of   concern;  law   enforcement
officials  are  deeply  implicated,  north  as  well  as  south;  the
question  is  at  the  root  of  demonstrations,  unrest,  riots,  and
violence  in  various  areas.    The  issue  in  other  words   con-
sumes  the  public   attention.    Yet  we  stand  mute,  avoiding
decision  of  the  basic  issue  by  an  obvious  pretense."
—Justice  Douglas's  Separate   Opinion  in  Bell  v.  Md.
"On  this  last  day  of  the  Term,  we  studiously  avoid   deci-
sion  of  the  basic  issue  of  the  rights  of  public  accommoda-
tion  under  the  Fourteenth  Amendment,   remanding  the  case
to  the  state  court   for  reconsideration  in  light  of  an  issue
of  state  law.  .    .  .
"The  whole  Nation  has  to  face  the  issue;  Congress  is  con-
scientiously   considering   it;   some   municipalities    have  had
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  29, 1964
Court  Implies  State  Dept. May Put  Iron  Curtain  Around  "Sensitive"  Areas
(Continued  jrom  Box  on  Page  1)
passports  under  its  specific  power  to  regulate  commerce  with
foreign  nations."    Congress  also  has-power  to  regulate  inter-
state  commerce.    Would  that  give  it  power   to  require  pass-
ports  between  one  State  and  another?
There  were  three  passport   decisions.*    Two   non-Commu-
nists,  who  refused   to  take  a  non-Communist  oath  on   prin-
ciple,  had  been  denied  passports.     The  denials  had   been  up-
held  in  the  Courts  of  Appeals.     Without   opinion  and  with
only  Clark,  Harlan  and  White  dissenting,  the  Court  ordered
these  lower   court  orders   vacated   in   the   cases  of   Milton   S.
Mayer   and   of  Vincent  Copeland,   the  former  a  well-known
writer   and   lecturer   of   pacifist   inclination;  the   latter,  editor
of  Workers'   World.
How  "Security"  is  Best   Safeguarded
"The  Subversive  Activities  Control  Act   is   supposed
to  be  designed  to  protect  this  Nation"s  "internal   se-
curity."    This  case  offers  another  appropriate  occasion
to  point  out  that  the  Framers  thought  (and  I  agree)
that  the  best  way  to  promote  the  internal  security   of
our  people  is  to  protect  their  First  Amendment  free-
doms  of  speech,  press,  religion  and  assembly,   and  that
we  cannot  take away  the  liberty  of  groups  whose  views
most  people  detest  without  jeopardizing the  liberty  of
all   others   whose   views,  though   popular   today,   may
themselves  be  detested  tomorrow."
—Mr.  Justice  Black  concurring  in  the  passport   case.
No  Dodges  Available
The  Court's  opinion  was  handed  down  in  appeals  refresh-
ingly  free  from  subterfuge.    They  were  brought  by  Elizabeth
Gurley  Flynn,  chairman of  the  Communist  Party,  U.S.A.,  and
Herbert   Aptheker,   editor   of   its  theoretical   organ,   Political
Affairs.      The   Court  could   not  dodge  the   issue  by  declaring
party  membership  unproven.     It  had  to  decide  the  right  of
indubitable  Communists  to  travel.    This  eliminated the  famil-
iar  question-begging   procedural   and  evidentiary  detours.   The
advantage  of  a  decision  upholding   the  right  of  known  party
members   to   travel   is   that   it   lifts   from   other   radicals  and
liberals  the  onus  of  proving   themselves   politically  antiseptic
to  get  a  passport.
But   the  majority's  reasoning   was  not   as  clear-cut   as   the
cases.    No   doubt  this  was  due  to  the  difficulty   of  finding  a
common  denominator  for  agreement,  but  this  only  shows  how
few   members  of  the  Court  are  willing  to  uphold  the   right
to  travel  with  no  strings  attached.   Mr.  Justice  Goldberg  for
the  majority objected  to  Section  6,  the  passport  section,  of  the
Internal   Security  Act  on  the  ground  that  it  applies  to  travel
by  a  member  of  a  registered   organization  "regardless  of   the
security-sensitivity  of  the  area  in  which  he  wishes  to  travel."
Even  were  he  to  apply  for  a  passport  "to  visit  a  relative  in
* The   Court  in   another   Internal   Security   Act   case   also
granted  an  appeal  by  the  Veterans  of  the  Abraham Lincoln
Brigade  from   a  Subversive  Activities   Control  Broad  regis-
tration  order.
Ireland,  or  to  read  rare  manuscripts  in  the  Bodleian  Library
of   Oxford   University,  the   applicant   would   be  guilty   of   a
crime."     (The   Act  makes  it  a  crime  merely   to  apply   for   a
passport,   if  a  member  of  a  proscribed  organization).
We   don't   like  the  implications.    It  implies  that  to   travel
one  must  explain  one's  purposes,  to  say  one  is  only  going  to
visit  a  maiden  aunt  in  Killarney  or  to  check  Chaucer's   spell-
ing.    The   right  to  travel  is  not  secure  if  one's  motives   and
journeys  have   to  be  explained.     Above   all,  we  dislike   the
reference   to   "the   security-sensitivity   of   the  area"   in   which
one  wishes  to  travel.    This  plays  directly  into  the  State  De-
partment's   hands.    It  can  no  longer   deny  passports   to  indi-
viduals.    But  it  still  shuts  off  travel  to  whole  countries  and
areas  in  its  own  "Papa  knows  best"  fashion.
Travel   has   become   a   weapon   in   its   hands,   of    reprisal
against   the   tourist   trade   of   countries   like  Cuba  and   of   an
Iron  Curtain  against  countries  it  does  not  wish  to   recognize.
North   Korea,   China,  North   Vietnam   and   Albania—all  ac-
cessible  to  visitors  and  journalists from   every  other  Western
country,  are  off-bounds  to  us.    The  dangerous   ignorance  this
may   develop   is  all  too  apparent   in  the  current   Far   Eastern
crisis.     In   two   obscenity  cases,   one   involving  a  movie,   the
other  sexy  books,  Black  joined  Douglas  in  asserting  that  un-
der  the  First  Amendment  there  is  no  right  to  censor  in  this
country.    By doing  so  he  cut  through  a  lot  of  nonsense  which
is  turning  the Nine  Old  Men  (as  we  used  to  call  them  in  the
30's)    into  a  general   board   of  censorship   over   pictures  and
books  unfit  for  their  venerable  eyes.    Why  can't  Black  be  as
forthright  about  the  right  to  travel?
Douglas  Calls  Freedom of  Travel  Essential  to  Free  Society
"I  would  not  suppose   that  a  Communist,  any  more  than
an  indigent,  could  be  barred  from  traveling  interstate.    I
think  that  a  Communist, the  same  as  anyone  else,  has  this
right.    Being   a  Communist   certainly   is  not  a  crime;  and
while  traveling  may  increase  the  likelihood  of  illegal  events
happening,  so  does  being  alive.    If,  as  I  think,  the  right  to
move  freely  from  State  to  State  is  a  privilege  and  immu-
nity  of  national citizenship  (see  Edwards v.  California, 314
U.S.   160,   178),   none  can   be   barred   from   exercising   it,
though   anyone  who  uses   it   as   an  occasion   to  commit  a
crime  can  of  course   be  punished.
"Free  movement by  the  citizen  is  of  course  as  dangerous
to  a  tyrant  as  free  expression  of  ideas  or  the  right  of  as-
sembly  and  it  is  therefore  controlled  in  most  countries  in
the  interests  of  security.   That  is  why  riding  box  cars  car-
ries  extreme  penalties  in  Communist  lands.  .  .  .
"Those  with  the  right  of  free  movement use  it  at  times  for
mischievous  purposes.    But  that  is  true  of   many  liberties
we  enjoy.    We  nevertheless   place  our  faith  in  them,  and
against  restraint,  knowing  that  the  risk  of  abusing  liberty
so  as  to  give  rise  to  punishable conduct  is  part  of  the  price
we  pay  for  this  free  society.
"War  may  be  the  occasion  for  serious  curtailment  of  lib-
erty.    Absent   war,  I  see  no  way   to  keep  a  citizen  from
traveling  within  or  without   the   country,  unless   there   is
power  to  detain  him.    Ex  parte  Endo,  323  U.S.  283.    And
no  authority  to  detain  exists  except  under  extreme  condi-
tions,  e.g.,  unless  he  has  been  convicted of  a  crime or  unless
there  is  probable  cause  for  issuing  a  warrant  of  arrest  by
standards   of   the   Fourth   Amendment.    This   freedom   of
movement  is  the  very  essence  of  our  free  society,  setting  us
apart.    Like the  right  of  assembly  and  the  right  of  associa-
tion,  it  often  makes  all  other  rights  meaningful—knowing,
studying,   arguing,   exploring,   conversing,   observing,   and
even  thinking."
—Mr.  Justice  Douglas  concurring  in  the  passport   case.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  29, 1964
How  Does  A  Nation  Take  A  Firm  Stand,  When  It  Has  Nothing  Firm  to  Stand  On?
Those  Parallels  Between  Vietnam  and  Cuba—or  Berlin—Are  Delusions
Some  silly  parallels  are  making  headlines  and  creating  new
illusions  in  the  Far  Eastern  crisis.    The  favorite  is with  Cuba.
The  two  situations  are  quite  different.     In  the  Cuban  crisis,
the  U.S.  threatened  war  unless  the  Soviet  Union   removed  its
intermediate  range  nuclear missiles. Khrushchev  backed  down
and  took  them  put.    But  even  if  he  wanted  to,  Mao  Tse-tung
couldn't  take  the  guerrillas  out  of  South  Vietnam:    He  might
shut  off  aid  but  that  wouldn't   end  the  war.    The   unnamed
senior   American  military  adviser   who   gave   that   pessimistic
off-the-record  briefing  to  the  press  the  day  Gen.   Harkins  left
Saigon  "said  90%  of  the  guerrillas'  weapons"   came  from  the
supplies  we  sent  South  Vietnam  (Reuters  in  New  York   Times,
June  18).  It's not  the  Mao  Tse-tung  trail;  it's  the  LBJ  pipe-
line  that  keeps  the  war  going.
Made  to  Order  for   Miscalculation
Kennedy's  success  in  the  missile  crisis  was  due  not  only  to
a  limited aim  but  to  his  close  relations with  Moscow.    He  had
met  and  sized  up  Khrushchev  personally.    The  two  capitals
were  in  touch  through  normal  diplomatic relations.    The  two
heads   of   State   were   engaged    in   a   private   correspondence
which  facilitated  settlement.    But  in  the  Far  East  we  have  no
listening  posts  in  either  Peking  or  Hanoi,  no  diplomatic  fela-
tions,  no  personal  contact  between  Johnson  on  the  one  hand
and  Mao  or  Ho  on  the  other.    On  both  sides  decisions  are
being  made  in  considerable  ignorance  of  the  other.    This  is
a  situation  made  to  order  for  miscalculation.
The  parallel  with  West  Berlin  is equally  deceptive.    When
a  nation  takes  a  stand,  it  has  to  know  where  it's  standing.    In
West  Berlin   we  defend   a  geographical  and  political  entity.
Its  people  don't  want  to  be  swallowed  up  by  the  East.   Their
supply  lines  to  the  West  were  established   by  agreement  of
both   sides  and   are  clearly  marked.    The   line  the   Commu-
nists  cannot  cross  is  unmistakable.
But  where   is  the  line  in  South  Vietnam?    A   substantial
part  of  its  people  support  the  rebellion, and  see  it  simply as  a
continuation   of   their  struggle  against  the  French.     Another
large  portion  undoubtedly  wish  the  Americans  and  the  Com-
munists,  home-grown  or  otherwise,  would  go  fight  somewhere
Another  Senator  Questions   the  War
"One  of  the  most  important  assumptions of  all  which
still  needs  to  be  tested  concerns  the  very  nature  of  the
war  itself.    Is  it   indeed  a  war   supplied  and  directed
from  Hanoi  as  our  government  insists  or  is  it  a  civil
war  as  many  critics  have  suggested?  ...  If  we  are in
fact  confronted  with  a  civil  war  fought  under  self-con-
tained  direction  and  only  incidental  outside   encourage-
ment,  we  must  start  again  to  ask  new  questions   and
test  new  assumptions.    We  will  need  to  know  if   the
Viet   Cong  has   a  coherent  set   of   political   objectives.
We  will  need  to  know  the  probable  limits  of  endurance
to  which  the  Viet  Cong  must  be  pushed  before  its  poli-
tical  objectives can  be  modified.    And  we  will  need  to
know   what   possible   accommodations  can   be   reached,
short  of  total  annihilation  of  the  Viet  Cong  forces,  to
resolve   the  internal  conflict.    The  important  thing   is
that  there  be  no  further  delay  in  bringing  the  tools  of
diplomacy  into  full  play."
—Sen.   Claibo'.-ne   Pell   (D.  B.I.),  in   a   speech   at   a
public  meeting   in  Wash.,  D.C.,  June  17.
else.    Those  who  support  the  Khanh  government  are  few;  a
Saigon   dispatch  in  the   New   York   Herald-Tribune    June   21
reports   that   the   Vietcong   even   collects   taxes   inside   Saigon
from   contractors  working  for  the  U.S.  Of   all  the   troubles
we  don't  talk  about  in  Vietnam,  the  foremost   is  our  fear  lest
Khanh's  government  fall  to  a  new  neutralist  coup  from  with-
in  and  expose  our  political  nakedness.     We  can  threaten   to
bomb  Peking  and  Hanoi  all  we  want  to  but  nothing  they   (or
we)   can  do  will  turn  Khanh  into  an  Asian  Willy  Brandt.
As  for  Laos,  that's  not  a  war,  it's a  chess  match,  punctu-
ated   by   occasional   artillery  blasts.     Whichever    side   blows
noisier,   the   other   retreats.     Our   favorite  General,    Phoumi
Nosavan,  seems  to  be the'world's  No.  1 military  pacifist.   We
keep  his  large  army  (the  numbers   range  up  to  70,000)  on
our  payroll  but  in  all  the  recent  fighting  on  the  Plain  of  Jars,
they  haven't  fired  a  shot.    They've  left  the  fighting  if  any  to
Kong  Le's  split  neutralists.   The  only  outcome  we  can  see  in
Laos  is  an  ultimatum  to  Ho.     Either  he  puts  some   fighting
men  on  our  side,  too,  or  we  bomb  Hanoi.
Please Send  Us A  Postcard Saying You've  Wired The  White  House  Urging Action Against the Terror  in  Mississippi
—Your  Telegram  May   Save  A  Life
'  I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street   ............
City   ................
For   $5.35  send
(To)   Name  .
Street   ...........
City   ...............
Shall  we  send
Weekly      5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
........................ ..Zone... ........ .State...... ..............
0/29/04
I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fiftiet
..................... .....Zone... ....... ..State....................
gift  announcement?         Yes D    No n
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Aye.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's   Weekly.     Second   Class  Postasre  Paul  at  Washington,   D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  the  last  week   in   December  and  the   first   week   in
January   and   Bi-Weekly   during   July   ami   Aujrust   at   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,   N.W.,   Washington,  D.  C.    An   independent  weekly   published   and  edited
Uy   I.   F.   Stone;   Circulation   Manager,   Esther   M.   Stone.     Subscription:    S3   in   the  U.S.;  S6   in   Canada;    510  elsewhere.     Air    Mail   rates:
S15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED