I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964jul06.pdf

============================================================

Morse  Challenges Johnson  to Act  in  Asia  As  He  Does in  Cyprus,  P.  3
While  LBJ  Talks  of  "A Brutal  and  Bitter  Struggle  for  the  Freedom  of  A  Friend'
"The  army's  heart  is  not  in  the  fight  with  the   Vietcong.
It  is  ashamed of  waging  a  civil  war. ...  A  westerner  vis-
iting  the  countryside not  long  ago  was  held  up  for  half  a
day  by  a  Vietcong detachment.   While  he  was  waiting,  he
was  surprised  to  see  several  government  soldiers  walking
casually   and  unarmed  through  the  village  and  asked   his
guards  why  they  did  not  arrest  them.  They  come  from   [a
local  government outpost].   We have  given them permission
to  do  their  shopping  here,'  came  the  answer.    On  another
occasion,  a  French  reporter  was   out  in  the  field  with  an
artillery  battery that  was  'advised'  by  an  American captain.
The  two  stopped  to  have  a  drink,  and  when  they  came  out
of  the  hut  were  surprised  to  see  the  column  about  to  make
off   in  an  unexpected  direction.   'We  have  just  heard  there
is  a  strong  Vietcong  barrier  on  the  road,'  the  Vietnamese
commander  explained,  'so  we  shall  take another  route.'   'But
you  can  attack  and  break  it  up  with  your  guns,'  said  the
astonished  reporter.   'If  he'—designating  the  American  offi-
cer  with  his  head—'wants  to  go,  he  is  free  to  do  so.    But
this  is  not  our  war,'  replied  the  Vietnamese officer  leading
the  convey  off  in  the  opposite  direction."
—A  French  reporter  in  the London Economist, June  27.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  24JULY  6,  1964
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
How  to  Avoid  A  Military  Occupation  of Mississippi
Two    days    after    Attorney   General    Kennedy    told    the
NAACP  the  Federal  government   had  no  power  to  take   pre-
ventive  police  action  in  Mississippi,  the  FBI—under  pressure
from   the  White  House  and  public  opinion—showed  that  it
could.    The  arrests  at  Itta  Bena  dispose  of  the  idea  that,  short
of   a  military  occupation   of   Mississippi,   the   Justice   Depart-
ment  has  no  power  to  protect  the  youngsters  down  there  for
the  Summer  Project.    Two  Northern  young  white  men  and  a
local  Negro  volunteer   were  threatened   by  three  white  men
while passing  out  leaflets  advertising  a voter  registration  meet-
ing.     They   managed  to  get   away  without   harm,  but   were
routed  out  of  bed  in  the  Negro  section  early  next  morning  by
FBI  agents,  and  asked  for  descriptions  of  the  men  who  threat-
ened  them. That  day the  three  white  men  were  arrested  under
the  old  Civil  Rights  statute  which  makes  it  a  crime  punish-
able  by  ten  years  in  jail  and  a  $5,000  fine  to  conspire  to  "in-
jure,  oppress,  threaten  or  intimidate"  any  citizen  in  the  exer-
cise  of  rights conferred  upon  him  by the  Federal   Constitution,
in  this  case  the  right  to  vote.    A  few  more  instances  of  such
quick  preventive  action  may not  only  save  lives  in  Mississippi
but  prevent  the  Kluxers  from  taking  over.
Before  the  Mob Gets  Out  of  Hand
It  begs  the  question  to  keep  on  saying  that  under  our  con-
stitutional   system  primary  responsibility  for   law  and   order
rests  with  local  and  State  authority.    Federal  law  has  always
been  the  responsibility  of  Federal  officers.    This  is  particularly
true  where  Federal  law  is  in  fact  obstructed  by  State  and  local
officials   engaged   in  a  conspiracy  to  "keep  the  Negro  in  his
place"  and  preventing  Negroes  from  registering  to  vote.  The
volunteers  of  the  Summer  Project  are  only  doing  what  an  ade-
quately  staffed  and  properly  motivated  force  of  Federal  officers
would  do.    These  boys  and  girls  are  doing  the   government's
work  and  deserve  the  government's  protection.    There  is  no
reason  why  Federal  marshals and  FBI  men  cannot  be  on  hand
at  voter  registration  rallies  and  attempts  to  register  Negroes.
Two  hundred  Federal  marshals  and  FBI  men  working  out  of
the  dozen  or  so  Federal  courthouses  in  Mississippi   would  go
7
Protect   Negroes  As  We  Would  Banks?
"If   you   have,  for   example,  a   bank  robber  at   the
American  Security & Trust  Co.,  who  is  going  into that
national  bank  and  you  know it  and  you  call  up  the  FBI
or  Federal  marshals,  they  are  going  to  be  there  quick.
That  guy  isn't  going  to  have  a  chance.  .  .  .
"Under  the  statutes  there  is  absolutely  nothing,  for
example,  to  prevent  the  Attorney  General  of  the   U.S.
from  stationing  20,  40,  200  marshals  in  various  cities
in  Mississippi  and  having  a  marshal  present  whenever
he  is   notified  that  a  registration  effort   or  a  freedom
school  or  any  other  situation  which  might  result  in  re-
taliation   from   the  local  authorities  is   about  to   take
place.
"There  is  no  reason  why  he  could  not  have  Federal
law  enforcement officers  there,  precisely  as  would  occur
if  he  were  notified  that  a  bank  robbery  of  a  national
bank  were  about  to  take  place."
—Wm.  L.  Higgs,  Washington   civil  rights  consultant,
before   the  citizens'  panel  June  8, transcript  in  Con.  Rec.
of  June  16, p.  13523.
9   5
far  to  prevent  trouble.    It  would  be  better  to  send  them  in
now  than  wait  until  some  outbreak  makes  it  difficult  even  for
troops  to  reestablish   order.
The   notion   that  the  Federal  government   cannot   move  in
until  there  is virtual  insurrection  is  dangerous  nonsense.  Those
who  would  like  to  get  some  idea  of  the  broad  powers  avail-
able  to  the  Federal  government  may  be  referred  to  the  testi-
mony  of  three  lawyers  before  the  hearing  held  here  by  a  citi-
zens'  panel  on  Mississippi  June  8  and  reprinted  in  the  Con-
gressional  Record  for  June  16.    Not   only  Federal   marshals
but  FBI  men  now  have  the  power  to  make  arrests   without
warrant  on  the  spot  where  they  have  reasonable  grounds  to
believe  that  a  Federal  offense  has  been  or  is being  committed.
The  law  was  changed  in  1951  to  give  FBI  men  this  power,
as  a  result  of  the  Coplon  case.
The  two  main  laws  available  in  the  Mississippi   affair   are
the  conspiracy  statute  under  which  the  arrests  were  made  in
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'p  Weekly,  July  6,1964
The  Old  Stalinist  Methods
The  Soviet  government  claims  that  it  has  abolished
the  forced  labor  camps  which  were  so  dreadful  a  fea-
ture  of   the  Stalin  period  and  that  it  no  longer   uses
"administrative  measures"  against  unorthodox writers.
Both  claims  seem  to  be  untrue,  according  to  the  story
told  by  Patricia  Blake  in  the   New  York  Times  Book
Review  (June  21)  of  how  the  non-conformist  poet  Josif
Brodsky   has   been  sentenced  to   five   years   of   forced
labor  in  the  far  north.   We  know  Miss  Blake  as  a  warm
friend  of   Russia's  best   young  intellectuals.    By  clan-
destine   route  she  has  received  copies  of  protests  sent
to   the   court  by   Shostakovitch,  Chukovsky   and   Mar-
shak.   Philistinism  and anti-Semitism  mark  the  attacks
on  this  gifted  young  poet.    We  recommend  a  reading
of  Miss  Blake's  article  to  all  concerned  with  the  fight
for   justice  and  artistic  freedom  in  the  Soviet  Union,
and  suggest   a  round  robin  protest  to  Moscow  by   U.S.
intellectuals  which  we  would  be  glad  to  join.
Fulbright  Pleads  Unsuccessfully  for  More  Attention  to  Human  Needs  on  Earth
House  Kills  Medicare  and  Senate  Approves  $5 Billion  "Moon  Doggie"
The  House  killed  medicare  and  the  Senate  approved    $5.3
billion  for   space  travel  within  one  day  of  each  other.    The
same  Southern  conservatives  who  have  bottled   up  the  health
insurance  bill  in  the  Ways  and  Means  Committee  for  three
years  will  enjoy  almost  $1.5   billion  in  space  contracts.    This
inversion  of  national  priorities  did  not  escape  one  Southerner.
"Is  it  more  important   to  make  a  more  adequate   attack  on
some  of  the  grave  deficiencies  of  our  society or  to  put  a  man
on  the  moon  by  1970?",  William  Fulbright  asked  the  Senate.
His   effort   to  cut   10%   from   the  NASA   authorization  was
narrowly  defeated   42-38.
The  Senate  leadership  threw  its  weight  on  the  side  of  the
space   industry.    The  first  time   round   the  bill  was   rushed
through   an  almost  empty  Senate   in  one-half   hour  and  was
passed   by  a  voice  vote.    When  the  next  day  Wayne   Morse
demanded  reconsideration and  a  roll-xall  vote,  Majority  Lead-
er  Mansfield  waited  until  the  liberals  were  absent  and   then
arranged  a  one-hour  time  limit  on  debate.     Even  then   Ful-
bright  could  muster  only  six  Senators  to  listen  to  his  plea.
A  New  Form  of  Pie-in-the-Sky
How  is  it  that  in  four  years  a  nation  can  spend  $16  bil-
lion  for   space  and  not  vote  one  penny  for   any  new  major
social  welfare  projects?    Fulbright   turned  for  the  answer  to
Amitai  Etzioni's new  book,  The  Moon-Doggie.     It  all  began,
says  Etzioni,  as  an  attempt  to  rebuild  U.S.  prestige  after  the
Bay  of  Pigs  and  to  end  the   1960-61  recession  with   federal
funds  acceptable  to  conservatives  in   Congress.
Now  that  the  funds  have  been  distributed—"a  goody   for
everybody  here,"  Fulbright   complained—the  program   is  al-
most  impossible  to  stop.     "Not   having  any  State  interest  in-
volved,  I  can  be  objective about  it,"  said  Fulbright.    So  could
most  of  the  37  other  Senators  voting  with  him.    Their  states'
share  in   1964  space  funds  was  only  $850  million   compared
with  $4.8  billion  for  the  states  of  the  42  Senators  who  voted
against  the  Fulbright   amendment.
The  10%  cut  would  have  removed  only  a  small  portion  of
the  padding  from  NASA's  request.    Last  year  77%   of  space
contracts  were  cost-plus-fixed-fee.     The   Senate   Space   Com-
mittee  is  supposed   to  protect   the  taxpayer  against  this  kind
of   inflated   profit,   but   it  has   been   designed   to  protect   the
contractor  instead.    On  it  sit  S.  L.  Holland  of  Florida   (loca-
tion  of  Cape  Kennedy),  Stuart  Symington  of  Missouri   (home
of   McDonnell    Aircraft,  the   company   which   produced    the
Mercury  capsule  and  now  is  on  contract   for   the  $308  mil-
lion   project  Gemini)   and  Warren   Magnuson   of  Washing-
ton  (home  of  Boeing  Aircraft).
Too  few  realize  that  the  enormous  sums  voted  for  NASA
are  being  used  by the  Air  Force  for  the  militarization  of  space.
The   1958   Space  Act  established   NASA  as  a  civilian  agency.
A   1963  United  Nations  resolution  outlawed  nuclear   weapons
in  space.    Contrary  to  both,  the  Air  Force,  whose  own  space
funds  have  been  limited  to  a  "mere"  $1.5   billion,  is  using
NASA's  project  Gemini  to  train  pilots  for  space  bombers  and
interceptors.    For  the  hardware  itself,  NASA  pays  the  heavy
cost  of  research  and  development   that  go  into  building  first
models;   then   the  Air  Force  buys  the  next   ones   "at   cost."
"The   space  program  of  NASA  is  completely  tied  in  with  the
space  program  of  the  military.    They  are  identical,"   Senator
Anderson,  the  Space  Committee's   chairman,  told   the   Senate
last  year.    This  should   answer  those   liberals  who  push  the
space  race  as  the  answer  to  the  arms  race.
Bobby Baker Himself Couldn't Have Picked A
At   the  end  of  Everett   Jordan's   first   dag  in  the  Senate
at  dusk  of  May  6,  1958,  a  reporter  stopped   him  in  the  cor-
ridor   and  inquired   what  great  things  had  transpired   in
those  first  auspicious  hours.   "Oh, I  went  over  to  the  Sen-
ate   chamber,"   the   kindly   old  man  replied,   "and I  staged
there  until  Bobby  Baker  told  me  I  could  come  home"
—Bobby  Was  The  Boy  To  See,  by  Don  Oberdorfer   and
Ben  H.  Bagdikian,  Saturday   Evening   Post,  Dec.  7, 1963.
Under  the  chairmanship  of  this  same  Senator  Jordan  of
North  Carolina,  the  Senate Rules  Committee  has  just  voted
out  about  as  weak  a  resolution as  was  politically  possible
in  the  Bobby  Baker  case.   Never  has  a  greater scandal  been
more  skillfully  and  swiftly  hushed up.  Baker was  the  right-
hand  man of  Lyndon  Johnson as  majority  leader of  the  Sen-
ate  and  the  fair-haired  boy  of  the  Southern  conservatives
who  are  the  inner  core  of  the  Senate  Establishment.    He
resigned   last   October  rather  than  answer  questions  about
his  conduct  as  secretary  to  the  Democratic  majority.    The
Better  Chairman for Inquiry Into His  Affairs
charges  he  preferred   not  to  discuss   involved  the  sale  of
legislative  favors  and  the  political  use  of  call  girls.
But  for  the  assassination of  President  Kennedy, the  Baker
scandal  might have cost  Johnson  the  Vice  Presidential nom-
ination  this  Fall.    His  elevation  to  the  Presidency inhibited
investigation  of  his  own  links  to  Baker.    But  the   Senate
Rules  Committee  has  gone  beyond  a  reluctance  to  embar-
rass  a  new  President  in  an  atmosphere of  emergency.
It  has  limited  its  investigation  to  Senate  employes,  ex-
empting   Senators,  and  it   has   now  reported  a   conflict-of-
interest  rule  so  weak  that  as  Senator  Case  said,  "it  would
not  have  brought into  the  open  some  of  the  most  flagrant
of   his  (Baker's)  financial  dealings."    A  stronger  rule  for
Senators  and  Senate  employes  by  Clark,  supported  by  Pell
and  Cooper,  was  rejected  in  the  committee.   For  the  honor
of  the  Senate  and  the  sake  of  clean  government in  the  fu-
ture,  we  hope they  will take their battle to  the  Senate floor,
and  at  least   make  the  whitewash  visible.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  6,1964
"War  Against  China  Safer  Than  War  Against  Russia?   I  Think  Not'
Morse  Asks  Why   LBJ  Practices  Peace
By Senator Wayne Morse *
The  words  of  President  Johnson  yesterday  in  Minneapolis
give  rise  to  both  hope  and  despair.    They  give  hope  because
the   President   recognized   the   great   contribution   to   world
peace  afforded  by  the  United  Nations  and  by  our   adherence
to  it.    But  they give  rise  to  despair  because  President  Johnson
seems  to  have  separated  our  responsibility  to  the  rule  of  law
from   our  activities  in  Southeast  Asia.
How  can  the  United  States,  through  its  President,  proclaim
the  rule  of  law  for  the  problems  and  issues  of  other  nations,
and  practice  the  law  of  the  claw  where  our  own  problems
are  concerned?   The  President  quoted   from   the  Sermon  on
the  Mount  when  he  said,  "Blessed  are the  peacemakers.  .  .  ."
But  a  few  lines  later  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  we  are
given  some  clues  of  how  to  go  about  making  peace,   "Agree
with  thine  adversary  quickly, while  thou  art  in  the  way  with
him;  lest  at  any  time  the  adversary deliver  thee  to  the  judge,
and  the  judge  deliver  thee  to  the   officer   and   thou   be  cast
into  prison.    Verily  I  say unto  thee,  Thou  shall  by  no  means
come  out  thence,  till  thou  has  paid  the  uttermost  farthing."
Every  War  A  Gamble
No   government   that   is  prepared   to  risk  war   can  know
where  or  how  that  war  will  end,  and  more  often  than  not
an  entire  nation  and  a generation  of  its  people pay  the  "utter-
most  farthing."     Before  any  Administration threatens  to  take
the  U.S.  into  war  it  should   exhaust   the   last   possibility  to
avoid  it.
This  Administration  has  not  exhausted  any  possibilities  in
Asia.    We  are  exhausting  all  the  possibilities  to  keep   Greece
and   Turkey   from   war.    We   are  using   personal   mediation,
summit  diplomacy  and  the  United  Nations.    But  what  of  our
own  conflict  in  Asia?    There  we  talk  of  nothing  but  war.
We  look  upon  China  as  a  weak  adversary,  lacking  not  only
nuclear  weapons  but   much  of   the   ordnance   and  industrial
capacity  for  even  a  modern  conventional  war.    We  are  will-
ing  to  practice  a  brinkmanship  against  China  in  her  backyard
that  would   be  unthinkable  against   Russia  in  her  backyard.
But  does  that  mean  that  war  against  China  is  safer   for   the
U.S.   than  war  against  Russia?    I  think   not.     The   nuclear
bombs  may  not  fall  upon  American  cities.    But  the  casualties
-Making  in  Cyprus  But  Not  in  Asia
Scientists  Oppose  Anti-Ballistic  Missile
"The  cost  of  the  presently  proposed  American  Nike-X
anti-ballistic   missile    system    for   deployment    around
'twenty-odd  metropolitan  centers   containing   some  35%
of  the  population'  is  about  $14  billion.    For  a  fraction
of  that  cost  an  enemy  could  double  or  triple  the  num-
ber  of  missiles  he  could  launch  against  the  same  tar-
gets.    The  answer  to  the  creation   of  an  ABM  system
by  an  adversary  does  not  lie  in  the  erection  of  one  of
our   own  but   in  shifting   the   nature   of   our   offensive
system.
"The  U.S.   [ABM]   would  be  destabilizing.     If  either
party   in   a   deterrent   situation   should   become   appre-
ciably  more  secure  and  invulnerable,  or  appear  so,  the
deterrent  balance  will  be  upset.    The  side  which  feels
its  security  reduced  might  be  inclined  to  strike  first  in
crisis  situations.
"Optimistic  evaluations  of  the  ABM could  lead  to  dis-
astrous  decisions.    In  any  nuclear  strike,  an  ABM  sys-
tem  would  tend  to  insure  that  greater  numbers  of  war-
heads   and   higher   levels   of   megatonnage   would   be
employed  with  the  probable  consequence  of  greater,  not
lesser   destruction."
—Statement  prepared  by  the  Committeee  for  a  Sane
Nuclear   Policy   and  signed   by  twenty-three    scientists
and  strategy   experts    (abridged).
*  Slightly   abridged  from  a  speech  to  the  Senate   June  29.
and  the  cost  would  still  vastly  exceed  the  value  to  us  of  the
territory  we  claim  we  are  protecting.
I  think  we  would  find  our  interests  in  Southeast  Asia  se-
verely  weakened  by  such  a  war.  Communism  has  fed  on  war.
It  has  spread  its  dominion  through  war.    Unless  the  U.S.  is
prepared   to  do  with  China  what  we  did  with  Japan  at  the
close  of  World  War   II—to  occupy  it,  rebuild  it,  and  recon-
struct  its  society—there  is  every  likelihood  that  Communism
would  spread  in  Asia  if  a  full-scale  war  developed  there.
I  say  to  President   Johnson   and  to  his  Secretary  of   State
and  to  his  Secretary  of  Defense,  and  to  Admiral  Felt,  that
not  a  single  one  of  you  has  offered   to  the  American  people
a  goal,  a  purpose  in  Asia,  that  could  be  accomplished   or  ad-
vanced  by  war.    You  have  not  been  able  to  establish   those
viable  nations  about  which  you  like  so much  to  talk  even  with
an  investment  of  billions  of  dollars.    How  do  you  expect  to
establish  the  viable  nations  with  war?   No,  Mr.  President  let
us  get  away  from  the  policy  of  peace  for  Cyprus  but  war  for
Asia.
Federation of  American Scientists  Protests  Use  of  Defoliants  in  Vietnam
"Biological  weapons  are  potentially  very  cheap,  and  their
dissemination,  particularly   among  the  non-nuclear   nations,
would  have  the  effect  of  providing  these nations  for  the  first
time  with  a  striking  power  comparable  to  that  afforded  by
nuclear   weapons.     Thus,   most   nations,   small   and   large,
could  easily  and secretly  acquire  a  significant  biological  and
chemical  warfare  capability,  which,  furthermore,  would  be
much  less   susceptible   to   inspection   and  control   than   are
nuclear   weapons.
"Civilian  masses  are  peculiarly   vulnerable,   not  only  be-
cause   of   their   relative    lack   of   discipline   and   protective
equipment,  but  because  of  the  greater  effectiveness   of  bio-
logical  agents  in  areas  of  high  population  density.   Though
some  mention  has  been  made  of  the  development  of  so-called
"humane"  weapons  resulting  in  incapacitation   rather   than
death,  the  published  information  suggests  that  considerable
effort  is  being  devoted  to  development  of  lethal  agents  such
as  those  causing   anthrax  and  pneumonic  plague.
"Reports  that  defoliating  agents  have  been  used  [in  Viet-
nam]   to  destroy   protective   cover  have  been   confirmed  by
representatives   of  the  Defense  Department.    These  charges
give  rise  to  the  broader  implication  that  the  U.S.  is  using
the  Vietnamese  battlefield  as  a  proving   ground   for   chem-
ical  and  biological  warfare.    FAS  is  opposed   to  the  "first-
use"  of  chemical  and  biological   weapons.     We  are   further
opposed  to  experimentation   on  foreign  soil."
—Federation  of  American Scientists  statement, released  to  but  ignored  by  the  press, June  19  (abr.).
9    "/
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  6,1964
The Main Enemies of Civil Rights in The  South Are The Poilce Themselves
(Continued   •from    Page   One)
Itta  Bena  and  the  statute making  it  a  misdemeanor  punishable
by  a  year  in  jail  or  $1,000  fine  to  deprive  anyone of  his  rights
"under   color  of  law."     This  applies  to  local  police   officials
who  pick  up  voter-workers  on  faked  traffic  violations  or  arrest
peaceful  demonstrators.    If  FBI  men  were  to  take  pictures  of
a  few  such  incidents  and  then  arrest  State  or  local  officers,  it
would  have  a  salutary  effect.    In  addition,  as  Professor  Rob-
ert  Harris of  the  University  of  Michigan  Law  School  pointed
out,  the  Supreme  Court  held  in  the  Debs  case  that  the Attor-
ney   General   "without   any   specific   statutory  authority,  may
seek  injunctions  against  those  who  obstruct  the  Government
in  carrying out  its  enumerated  powers."  Prof.  Harris  testified:
If   the  courts   today   should   hold   that   the  Federal   gov-
ernment's  duty  to  keep  open  the  franchise  and  the  political
process  in  Mississippi   is  as  important  as  it  was  to  keep
open  the  railroad  lines  during  the  Pullman  strike,   police
officers  and  conspirators  may  find  themselves  in  contempt
of  court  without jury  trials  if  they  persist  in  ignoring  Fed-
eral  civil  rights  laws.
Reluctant   to  Prosecute
It's  not  the  power  but  the  will  that  has  been  lacking.    If
the  Summer  Project  were  threatened  by  Reds  rather  than  rac-
ists,  J.  Edgar  Hoover  would  never  have  left  the  headlines  to
his  old  rival, Allen  Dulles,  or  waited  for  White  House  orders
to  infiltrate  the  Klan.    The  G-man  would  have  gone   South
and  had  his  picture  taken  with  the  men  arrested  at  Itta  Bena.
The  denial  of  rights  to  Negroes,  and  the  murder  of  Negro
militants,  have  too  long  been  taken  for  granted.    Even  now
it's  only the  tragic  disappearance  of  two  white  volunteers,  and
the  danger   to  others,  which  has  roused   the  country.    Mis-
treatment  of  Negroes  by  the   police,   a  means  of   enforcing
white  supremacy,  is  regarded   as  a  peccadillo;   the  FBI   does
not  like  to  upset  its  fraternal  relations  with  the  local  cops  by
making  a   fuss   over   such  things.    Letters  submitted  to   the
Mississippi  hearing  here  showed  that  though  there  were  102
complaints  of  police  brutality  in  Mississippi  in  the  14  months
ended  Feb.  28  of  last  year  (and  remember  not  many Negroes
have  the  nerve  or  knowledge  to  make  a  complaint)   only  18
were  ever  presented   to  grand  juries.    The   ACLLT   protested
Not  The Same  Enthusiasm
Mr.   Lawrence   SPEISER    [Wash,   office,    American
Civil  Liberties  Union]:  We  feel  there  is  a  serious  mis-
conception  on  the  part  of  the  Justice  Dept.  as  to  what
their  role  could  be  in  the  State  of  Mississippi   as  well
as  in  other  States  in  utilizing  more  effectively the  Civil
Rights  Act,  section  242,  to  prosecute  local  law  enforce-
ment  officers   Who  violate  constitutional  fights   of   citi->
zens.
Mr.   Monroe  FREEDMAN   [counsel    olf   the   hearing
panel]:  Mr. Speiser,  perhaps  you  can  confirm  my  recol-
lection  that  the  Justice  Dept.  prosecuted  James   Hoffa
five  times  unsuccessfully   before  they  finally  convicted
him  on  the  sixth  try.    Are  you  aware  of  any  similar
extended   efforts  on  the   part  of   the  Justice  Dept.   in
prosecution   of   any  State   official   accused  of   brutality
or  violation  of  civil  rights?
Mr.  SPEISER: I  have  never  heard  of  any.
—Citizens'   Panel  Hearing  on  Mississippi   in   Wash-
ington  June  8, transcript  in  Con. Ree. June  16, p. 135S1.
in  a  letter  to  Burke  Marshall  of  the  Civil  Rights  division  that
he  was  applying  a  stricter  standard  to  these  than  to  ordinary
cases.    He  replied  that  he  did  not  think  he  should  use  his
prosecutive  authority  more  broadly  "even  where  the  ultimate
purpose   is  to   effect   a  desirable   sociological   change."      We
don't  like  that  word  "sociological."    It  unconsciously  echoes
the   Southern   notion   that  the   race  problem   was   something
thought  up  by Gunnar  Myrdal.  It  implies  that  Southern   police
brutality  to  Negroes  is  a  kind  of  folkway,  a  matter  for  sociol-
ogy  rather  than  law.
It  is  against  this  attitude  that  the  heat  must  be  applied  if
the   brave  youngsters  of   the   Summer  Project   and   the   even
braver  Negroes  working  with  them  in  Mississippi   are  to  be
protected.  For  the  enemy  often  is  not  the  mob  but  the  local
police  or  Sheriff.    Thus  one  question  which  cries  out  for  FBI
investigation  in  the  disappearance  of  the  three  is  the  timing
of  their  arrest  and  nocturnal  release  which  so  suited  the  con-
venience  of  their  kidnappers.     Another,   as  raised  by  Wm.
Bradford   Huie,   in   a   dispatch   to   the   New    York   Herald-
Tribune  June  29,  is  how  many  Mississippi  police  officers   are
themselves  Klansmen.
If  You  Haven't  Wired  the  White  House  Yet  Asking  More  Marshals and  FBI  Men  for  Mississippi,  Please  Do So
Now  and  Send  Us A  Postcard  to  Keep  Tally.    Your  Wire  May  Save  A  Life
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please   renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name   ........,...........................................................................;.....
Street
City   ..........................................2one............State....................
7/6/64
For  $5.35  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
(To)   Name   ..............................:...............................................
Street    ..........................;.............................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?           Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
•tie
IFS  Speaks  at  the  Sherton  Palace,  San  Francisco,  8  p.m.,  July  10
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED