I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964may04.pdf

============================================================

The  Failure  of  Free  Enterprise,  Pps. 2-3
Senator  Clark's  Report Calls  for  a  Planned  Economy  to  Fight  That  War on  Poverty,  Pages  2-3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XII,  NO.  18
MAY   4,   1964
3
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
How   to  Make  Peace  in  Cuba,  Vietnam  and  the  World
1.  Cuba.    It  might  be  well  to  remember  that  the  last  Com-
munist  satellite  which  shot  down   U.S.  reconnaissance  planes
ended  up  a  few  years later  by  switching from  the  Soviet  camp
to  a  U.S.  protected  neutralism.    That  was  Yugoslavia.   We're
not  predicting  such  an  outcome  for  our  relations  with  Cuba
but  stranger  things  have  happened.     The  story  illustrates  the
virtue  of  patience  and  the  folly  of  too  deep  an  emotional  en-
tanglement  with  today's  quarrels.    In  any  case  our  Cuban  ob-
session  is  again  making  us  ludicrous  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.
First  there's  a  world  crisis  because  the  Russians  send   troops
to   Cuba;   now  there's  a  new   crisis   because  they're  leaving.
When  the  last  ones  go,  24  anti-aircraft  missile  sites  capable
of  shooting  down  U-2s  will  be  in  Cuban  hands.    Castro  says
he  won't  stand  for  aerial  reconnaissance;  we  threaten  action
if  he  interferes.    What  do  we  do?    Beg  the  Russians  to  re-
main—at  least  until  after  the  election?
No  Cuban  Planes  Over  Florida
We  suppose  it's  hopeless  to  point  out  that  it's  a violation
of  international  law  to  enter  another  nation's  airspace  against
its  will;  we're  parties  to  treaties   which   establish   this.     We
don't  invite  Cuban  planes  to fly  over  Miami,  Florida,  to  check
by  aerial  photography  whether   any  new  Bay  of  Pigs  invasion
is  in  preparation.     If  Russian  or  Chinese  planes   ever  appear
over  our  territory,  we'll  shoot  them  down.    We  stopped  send-
ing  U-2s  over  the  Soviet  Union  when  the  Russians  shot  one
down,  and  we  use  sateltites  and  oblique  angle  photography  in-
stead.    We  could  do  that  over  Cuba,  too.    But  it  would,  we
suppose,  hurt  our  national  pride  not  to  be  able  to  violate  in-
ternational  law  over   such  a  small   country.
We  have  one  war  on  our  hands  in  Vietnam.    Do  we  want
another   in   Cuba?     Since   1961,    the   number   of   right   wing
dictatorships  in  Latin  America  have  risen  from  three  to  nine;*
we  helped  bring  many of  them  into  power;  we  co-exist  peace-
fully  with  all  of  them.    The   latest,  Brazil,  is  our  pride   and
joy.    It's   about   time—just  to  show  our  impartiality—we  co-
existed   peacefully  with  the  one  leftwing  dictatorship  in  the
hemisphere.    We  suggest  that  James  B.  Donovan  be  sent  back
to  Cuba  to  negotiate   compensation   for   U.S.  property   owners
as  part  of  a  deal  to  include  resumption  of  trade  and  diplo-
matic  relations;  we  can  see  a  lot  more  on  the  ground   from
Havana  than  up  in  the  air  from  a  U-2.    Secondly  we   suggest
that  Donovan  explore   the  offer   made  by  Cuba  to  the   United
Nations   just  before  the  missile  crisis  to  accept  demilitariza-
tion   of   the   island   if   given   firm   international   guarantees
against   aggression.    Finally  we   propose,   since  we're   afraid
Castro   might   export    revolution,   an   ideological    non-aggres-
Just  in  Time
"Goulart  later,   March   30,  declared  in   a  nationwide
TV  broadcast  that  he  would  continue  to  seek  economic
reforms  despite  opposition to  his  program  by  his  politi-
cal   enemies.      He   charged    that   this   opposition   was
financed  by   illicit   remittances  from  big   foreign  com-
panies  (drug  manufacturers and  petroleum  companies)
and   landowners."     [Parenthesis   in  original.]
—Facts  on File, March  2G-April  1, p. 103
"New  Brunswick, N.J.—American  drug  companies  in
Brazil  would  have  been  expropriated  on  April  7  if   the
Goulart    government   hadn't   been   overthrown,   P.    B.
Hofmann,  chairman of  Johnson  &  Johnson,  said  at  the
annual  meeting.    Mr. Hofmann said  he  understood  that
a  decree  already  had  been  written and  signed  to  expro-
priate   U.S.   drug  manufacturing  operations   in  Brazil.
He  described  Johnson  &  Johnson's  operations  in  Brazil,
employing  2,200  persons,  as  'our  biggest  problem.'    He
added,   however,  that  with  the   new  Brazilian  govern-
ment  the  outlook  is   much  better."
—Wall  Street  Journal,  April 15
* Only  Paraguay,  Haiti  and  Nicaragua  were  rightist  dic-
tatorships  at  the  beginning  of  1961.    Since  then Guatemala,
Honduras,   El   Salvador,   Dominican   Republic,   Ecuador   and
Brazil  have  been  added  to  the  list.
sion   pact   between   the   U.S.   and   Cuba   whereby   both   sides
agree  not  to  finance,  train  or  arm  groups  openly  or  covertly
designed   to  overthrow  the   regime  of  either  country,  or  any
other  country  in  the  hemisphere.     We   believe  this  could  be
made  a  politically  attractive  package  at   home.
2.  South   Vietnam.     Last   August   a   leader   of   the   South
Vietnamese  National   Liberation  Front  told  Georges   Chaffard
of  Le  Monde   (Aug.  24)   that  the  Front  did  not  wish  to  ex-
change  one  dictatorship  for  another  nor  to  become  dependent
on   the  North.     We   propose  that   this  be  explored   to  see
whether  the  Front   would  end  the  guerrilla  war  if  free  elec-
tions  under  UN   auspices  were  held  to  establish  a  democratic
regime.    The  Front  has  been  on  record  since August  15,   1962
for   a  neutral  belt  to  include  South  Vietnam,  Cambodia   and
Laos    (Georges    Cha\}ard:   Indoch'ine,   Paris    1964    p.     193).
Such  a  belt  could  end  the  war  in  South  Vietnam  and  trouble
in  Laos.     A  neutral,  democratic  Republic  in  South  Vietnam
would   provide   a  face-saving  exit  for   our   own   country  and
an  end  to  the  misery  of  its  people.
What   would   China's  attitude  be?     "The    French   delega-
tion"  at  the  SEATO  conference  in  Manila  "was  said  to  have
maintained"  according  to  a  dispatch  in  The  Times  of   London
April   16  "that  Chinese  fears  of   South  Vietnam  being   used
as  an  American base  would  have  to  be  dispelled  before  a  neu-
tralist  solution  could  be  achieved."    One  way to  do  this  would
be  to  restore  the  1954  pact  which  ended  the  Indochinese  re-
volt  against  the  French.    Then  Cambodia,  Laos  and  Vietnam
were  to  have  been  neutralized.    Our  CIA  violated  those  ac-
cords   in   Laos,   provoking   revolt   and   intervention  from   the
(Continued   on   Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 4,1964
The Clark  Report Shows Failure of "Free Enterprise" to Meet The Jobs Crisis .
If  the  President,  by  his  poverty  message,  served  the  historic
purpose  of  putting  poverty  into  the  headlines,  the  Clark  re-
port*  serves  the  purpose  of  sketching  in  the  true  dimensions
of   the  problem  and  of   the   steps   necessary  to  deal  with  it.
For  the  first  time  since  the  passage  of  the  Employment  Act
of    1946,   a   group   of   Democratic   Senators   suggest,    though
gingerly,  the  need  for  a  planned  economy  and  for  an  unprece-
dented   expansion   of  public  expenditure.     We   recommend  a
close  study  of  it.  Even  the  Republican  minority  (Prouty,  Jor-
dan  and  Javits),  though  opposed  to  planning,  have  some  ex-
cellent  suggestions  for  long  overdue  reforms  in  social  security
and   in  the  lagging   "food   stamp"  plan.     Above  all  the  hu-
mane   Senator    Clark   of   Pennsylvania   and   his   Democratic
colleagues   (Randolph,   McNamara,   Pell,  Kennedy  and   Met-
calf)   deserve  applause  for  moving  the  country  toward.a  war
on  poverty  which  could  be  more  than  a  deceptive  metaphor.
For  as  Ralph  Helstein  of  the  Packinghouse  Workers   told  a
Socialist  Party  conference   on  poverty  here  two  nights  before
the  Clark  report  was  released,  "This  is  the  first  war  we  ever
began  by  announcing  we  would  fight  it  on  a  balanced  budg-
et."     The  very  next  day,  as  if  to  emphasize  the  ambivalence
of  the  Administration's approach,  we  heard  Mr.  Johnson  boast
that  total   Federal  employment,  thanks  to  the  absence  of  an
accelerated  public  works  program,  was  down  13,000.    "That
figure,   I   know,"   Mr.   Johnson   said,   "will   interest   Senator
Byrd."    A  war  on  poverty,  waged   with  one  eye  on   Senator
Byrd,  can   easily  become   a  series  of   retreats.
Three  Million  Fewer  Jobs
Where  the  Clark  report  calls  for  vigorous  amplification by
others  is  its  failure  to  say  loudly  and  clearly  enough  that   free
enterprise  cannot  solve  our  problems.     But  the   unmistakable
facts   themselves   are   there.     Let  us  summarize  just  what   is
this  "manpower   revolution"  as  described  in  the  Clark  report.
In  the  10  years  1947-57,  employment  in  industry  rose  three-
quarters  of  a  million  per  year.    But  in  the  six  years   from
1957-63  "despite  substantial  increases  in  output  and  creation
of   new  products  and   industries,"   employment  in  the  indus-
trial   sector   actually   declined  by   300,000.     The   number   of
workers   engaged   directly  in  production   was  about   500,000
* Toward Full  Employment.   A  Report  by  the Subcommit-
tee  on  Employment  and  Manpower,  U.S.   Senate.    Joseph  S.
Clark,   Pa.,   Chairman.    Edward  D.   Friedman,   Counsel;  Dr.
Garth   L.  Mangum,  research  director.   This  is  the  second  of
two   articles   dealing  with   the   report.     The  first  appeared
last  week.
No  Longer  The  Poverty   of  Horatio  Alger
"The  20%  of  American families with  annual  incomes
under  $3000  are  of  increasing  concern  not  only  because
the  general  level  of  affluence   has  left  them relatively
more  depressed,  but  because   poverty  in  America  has
been  changing  in  nature.    The  American frontiersman
knew  poverty  as  he  struggled  to  build  a  society   suffici-
ently   productive   to   offer   a   more   abundant  life.     The
immigrant  knew  poverty  as  he  entered  a  new  land  an3
prepared  his  children  to  move  upward  in  the  economic
and  social  scale.    In  both  cases,  poverty  was  a  transi-
tion  stage  to  better  things.    Poverty  in  modern  Amer-
ica  tends  to  be  a  permanent state,  concentrated among
certain  disadvantaged  groups  and  in   many  cases  con-
tinuing  generation  after  generation."
—Clark  Report:  Toward  Full  Employment
less  than  in  1947.    In  construction,  though  activity  is up   17%
since  1956,  there  has  been  no  increase  in  employment.  "When
agricultural   employment   is  included,"   the   report   says,   "the
goods-producing   sector   has   experienced   a  net   loss  of   more
than   3  million  jobs  over  the  last  6  years."     This  is  the  rate
at  which  machines  have  been  displacing  men.
It  is  against  this  appalling  backdrop  that  we  must  measure
the  magnitude  of  the  unemployment  problem.  This  is  figured
at  a  persistent  5
l
/2%  of  the  work  force,  though  the  real  rate
may  be  between  7  and  9%.    Yet   only   to   keep   joblessness
from   rising  any  higher,  to  keep  pace  with  population  increase,
we  need  $y
2
  million  new  jobs  every  year  through  the  rest  of
this  decade.    To  reduce  unemployment   to  3%—the  goal  set
by  the  Clark  report  for  1968—we  would  have  to  create  some-
where  between  6  and  8  million  new  jobs  a  year.    So-called
free  enterprise  cannot  begin  to  meet  a  challenge   of  those  di-
mensions.     On   the   contrary   it  has   been   failing  steadily  to
keep  up  with  the  need  for  jobs.    In  the  six  years  from   1957
to  1963,   when  total  non-farm  employment   increased  4.3  mil-
lions,   "The   net   increase  in  full-time  employment   generated
by  the  private  profit-making  non-farm  sector  of  the  economy
has  been  only  300,000  jobs  since  1957."
That  is  an  average  of  50,000  a  year.    Measure  that  against
the  31/2  million jobs  we  need  to  take  care  of  the  youth  coming
up,  or  against  the  6  to  8  million  jobs  we  need  to  reduce  job-
lessness  to  3%   of  the  population,   and  you  can  see  how   hol-
low  and  dangerous  is  all  the  pious  nonsense  about  free  enter-
prise  which  is  the  ideology  and  religion  of  our  businessman's
civilization.    Without  a  change  in  our  thinking,   our  society
Despite Privation, Too Little Use  Being  Made  of  "Food  Stamp" Program
"How   effective   has   the   administration   been   in  helping
to  resolve one  of  the  most  challenging  problems of  our time
—the   problem  of  sharing  our  huge  agricultural  surpluses
with  people  who  are hungry?
"With  respect  to  the  existing  direct  distribution  of  food
packages—a   program   for   which  the  States  and  localities
bear  the  entire  administrative  costs—a  few  food  items  have
been   added,  including  peanut   butter   and,   from   time   to
time,  canned  chopped  meat.    But,  in  general,  the  program
has  been  limited  to  about  10  items  including  butter,  non-
fat  dried  milk,  dry  beans,  milled  rice,  cornmeal,  flour,  lard,
rolled  wheat,  and  cheese.
"As  to  the  'food  stamp'  program,  hailed  as  a  bold  new
step   forward,   the   actual   expenditures   show   that   it   was,
indeed,  a  limping  step.     For  of   the   $50  million   allocated
only  $13.5  million  was  spent  in  1962  and  just  $18.6  million
in  1963.   Although over  200  communities have  asked  to par-
ticipate,  the  program  has  been  limited  to  45  areas.
"Some  problems  [have  been]  developing  even  in  so  small
a  program.    Participants  have  found  it  difficult  to  meet  the
requirement   that   ['bonus   stamps']   be   purchased   once   a
month  in  a  lump  sum.      For  example,  a  family  of  five  with
a  monthly income  of  $105  must  put  up  $46  in  a  lump  sum
to  receive  'bonus  stamps'  amounting  to  $42.
"Despite   the  privation  in  many  poverty   stricken   areas,
the   administration failed  to  use   more  than  a  fraction  of
the  money  allocated  for  the  food  stamp  program."
—OOP Minority  In  The  Clark  Report    (Abridged)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 4,
. . . Planning  and  A  $5 Billion  Annual  Stepup  In  Public  Works  Advocated
will  stumble  into  serious  social  struggles   in  the  years   ahead.
Abroad  capitalist  societies  less  wedded  than  ours  to  simple-
minded   myths   about   free   enterprise  have   succeeded,  as  the
Clark   report   shows,   in   holding   unemployment    below    2%.
Various  combinations  of   central   planning   in  mixed   societies
with  large  areas  of  public  ownership  have  made  this  possible.
But  what  capitalists  in  Japan,   Germany,   France,   Sweden   and
Norway  take  for  granted   looks  revolutionary here.    Yet  with-
out   such   "revolutionary"   steps  we  cannot   hope   to  meet   the
challenge  of  the  manpower  revolution.  The  Clark  report   does
not  say  this  strongly  and  clearly.  But  the  message   is  there  all
the   same.
On  The  Most  Favorable    Assumptions
If   the  Clark  report  is  less  outspoken   than   il  should   be,  it
is   more   outspoken    than   the   labor   movement.     Where   the
labor  movement   calls  for  $2  billion  a  year  in  public   works,
the  Clark  report  says  that  on  the  most  favorable    assumptions
about  private  sector   employment,   it  will  take  a  $5  billion  a
year  increase  in  Federal  expenditures   every  year  between   now
and   1968   to  reduce  unemployment   to  3%.     Those  assump-
tions,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  footnote  on  pages  40-1  of  the
report,  a  bit  of  dynamite  in  small  type,  are  highly   improbable.
More  will   be   required,   unless   the   government    by   central
planning  for  the  private   sector   orchestrates   an  industrial  ex-
pansion   commensurate   with   human   need.     This,   which   is
accepted  as  good  sense  in  capitalist  societies  abroad,  will  bring
an  hysterical  outcry  about  socialism  here.
The   choice   is  not   between   free   enterprise   and   planning.
The   choice   is  between   an  economy   planned   on   a  profitably
restricted  basis  as  now,  or  one  planned   for  maximum  human
need.     The   choice   is  not   between   an  individualistic  capital-
ism  and  collectivism.  The  choice  is  between   a  society  planned
by  the  private  collectivisms  we  call  corporations,   planned   to
suit  the  needs  of  the  fortunate,  and  a  society  planned  by  the
whole   collectivity  for   the   benefit  of   all   its  members.     It   is
here  that  a  strong  infusion  of  old-fashioned  socialist  analysis
and  thinking  is  essential  just  to  move  us  abreast  of  the  other
"capitalist"   nations  with  their  mixed   societies   and   pragmatic
forms   of   central   direction   for   the   maintenance   of   demand.
This  is  where  the  Socialist  Party,  whose  Michael   Harrington
did  so  much  to  put  poverty  on  our  political  map,  could   per-
form  a  service,  and  it  was  this  which  led  me  with  so  much
The  Paradox   Which  Could  Be  Fruitful
"The   U.S.  finds  itself   in  the  interesting  position  of
having  idle  manpower  and  industrial  capacity  and  im-
mense   backlogs  of   unfulfilled   public  needs   for   which
the  manpower  could  be  used  and  the   funds   expended.
It   was  in  reference   to  this  paradoxical  situation   that
the   Swedish  economist,   Gunnar   Myrdal,   remarked   to
the  subcommittee,  'It  is  almost  fortunate,  as  I  see  it,
that  you  have  such  tremendous  amounts  to  be  done  in
reconstructing  your  cities  and  modernizing  your   trans-
port  system.'  .  .  .  These  needed   expenditure   increases
plus   additional  amounts  to   offset   possible   reductions
in   defense   expenditures   or   other   existing    programs
make  an  attack  on  accumulated  social  ills  .  .  .  not  only
possible   and  desirable  but   a   necessary    condition   for
full-employment."
—Clark  Report:  Toward  Full  Employment
interest   to   its  conference   on   poverty.
Unfortunately   our  politics  are  so  lopsided   that   everything
(including  me)   is  skewed  to  the  right.    The  people  we  call
conservatives   are   usually   reactionaries   like   Goldwater    or
crypto-Fascists  like  the  Birchers.    The  liberals,  as may  be  seen
from  the  Clark  report,  are  just  about  where  the  conservatives
are  in  Western  Europe  and  Japan.     And  the  Socialists,  as  I
heard  them  at  their  conference,  are  not  much  more  than  mili-
tant  liberals.    And  even  I,  in  trying to  popularize  some  famil-
iar  Socialist  concepts  from   the  past,   am  only  in   desperation
advocating  the  modernization  of  American  capitalism!
Perhaps  the  most  important  suggestion  at  the  Socialist  Con-
ference  was  by  Prof.  Aaron  Levenstein  of  City  College  when
he  said  that  if  computers  can  solve  the  problems  of   produc-
tion,  they  can  solve  the  problems   of  distribution.    It  would
be good  to  get  away from  stale  talk  of  public works  and  down
to  the  brass  tacks  of  matching  our  production   system  to   the
needs  of  our  people.    A  national  inventory  of  human   need,
in  concrete  terms  of  specific  commodities  and   services—food,
clothes,   housing   and   education—would   lay  the   basis   for   a
Plan  really  to  transform  America.    Let's  feed  poverty   to  the
computers   and   we'll   soon   see  how   much   work   there   is   for
idle  hands  to  do.    In  the  30s we  spoke  of  production  for  use,
not  profit.    Down  this  road  lies  the  only  way  to  wage  a  really
unconditional  war  on  poverty  at  home  and  abroad.
The  Inadequacies  and  Injustices  of  Our Social  Security  System
"What   is   even   more   disturbing   is   the   increase   in   the
number  of  social  security  beneficiaries  who  must  apply  for
welfare.     In  1950  about  300,000  persons   were   under  both
programs.    Today  the  figure  is  over  800,000  meaning  that
almost  4  out  of  every  10  welfare  recipients  (37%)   are  on
social   security.    The   question   may   legitimately  be   asked
as  to  whether social  security  has  any  real  meaning  to  these
people.
"What  is  the  cause  of  this  growing  dilution  in  the  mean-
ingfulness   of   the   social   security   benefit?     Certainly   the
major   factor  is  the   size   of  the  benefit  itself—a   worker's
benefit  which  can  be  as  low  as  $40  a  month  and  which  aver-
ages  just  a  little  over  $75  a  month.    These  are  benefits  at
poverty  levels.
"Moreover,  there  are  devices  built  into  the  social  security
system  which  actually  hinder  a  worker  who  has  the  initia-
tive  to  try  to  bring  himself  up  to  a  level  of  decency.    The
principal   offender  is   the   social   security   "retirement   test"
or  income  limitation.   Let's  see   how  this  affects  our  aver-
age  retired worker and  his  spouse.    He  and  his  wife  receive
benefits  totaling  about  $103  a  month, or  $1,236  a  year.    He
can  earn  $1,200  a  year  without  losing  any  benefits,  but  this
only  brings  the   family   income   up  to   $2.436,    considerably
below  the  annual family  income level  of  $3,000 which admin-
istration   spokesmen   say   indicates  the   "poverty"  line.    If
our  aged  worker  decides  to  earn  another  $600,  he  will  find
that  earning  this  additional  amount  has  cost  him  $350  in
benefits.    But  the  "treadmill"  is  only  warming up  for  when
his  earnings  pass  $1,700  a  year  the  social  security  law  re-
quires  that  for  every  dollar  of  earnings  a  dollar  of  benefits
will  be  lost.
"This  is  a  perfect  example  of  the  risrht  hand  not knowing
what  the  left  hand  is  doing.    The  administration declares
"total   war"  on  poverty  but  does  not  suggest   amendment
of  existing   programs  which  are  perpetuating  the  disease."
—OOP  Minority  In  The  Clark  Report    (Abridged)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F, Stone's  Weekly,  May 4,1964
There  Can Be No  Missile  Freeze Until  The  Germans  Are  Frozen  Out
(Continued   from   Page    One)
other  side.    We  broke  the  pact  by  sending  our  military  into
South   Vietnam.     Restoration   of   the   Pact   would,   of   course,
include  North  as  well  as  South   Vietnam.    The  pact  pledged
all  these  countries  not  to  allow  foreign   military  bases,  not  to
make  any  military alliances  and  not  to  allow  foreign  military
personnel   on  its  territory.     Both  North  and   South   Vietnam
would    again   be   neutralized   —   another   face-saver   for   the
world's   most  Oriental  Western  country.
North   Vietnam  Wants  Peace
What  of  North  Vietnam?     On   three   occasions,   Western
foreign   correspondents   have  been   told   by  Ho   Chi-minh   or
Pham   Van   Dong,   North    Vietnam's   Prime   Minister,   that
North  Vietnam  was  prepared  to  postpone  reunification  if  trade
were  resumed  in  peace  between  North  and  South;  the  normal
exchange   of   Hanoi's   surplus   coal   for   Saigon's   surplus  rice
would   wipe   out   most   of   the   trade   deficits   on   either   side.
China,  for  its  part,  needs  peace  in  Southeast  Asia  in  order  to
expand   trade  with  the  West  as  a  substitute  fo'r  the   supplies
it  used  to  get  from  Russia.    De  Gaulle  as  intermediary  is  in
the  best  position  to  draw  these  strands  together  in negotiation
for   a  durable  peace   in  the  area.    The   conjecture   of   forces
favors   a  settlement.
Admittedly,  from  a  narrow political  point  of  view,  it  would
be  more  comfortable  to   let   the   Vietnamese  people   go   on
suffering—and   Americans dying—in  Vietnam  until  after   the
election.    Johnson   is  afraid   of  being  outflanked  on  the  issue
by  Lodge   and   the   Republicans;  McNamara,   in  light-headed
fashion,  has  staked  liis  political  future  on  the  war.    But  there
is  no  reason  to  believe  UK   -var can  be  kept  on  ice  until  after
November.     Our   puppet   forces  have  lost  the  will   to  fight.
Johnson   may  soon  have  to  choose  whether  to  intervene  with
U.S.   troops  to  please  the  hotheads  or  take  constructive  steps
toward   peace,  steps  which,  as  recent   polls   show,   have  sub-
stantial  support   among  the  American   people.
3.  The    Big   Picture.     We   believe   President   Johnson   is
deeply  devoted  to  the  cause  of  peace.    We  are  impressed  with
what  he  has  said,  almost  in  every  speech  he  has  made,  of  the
Suckers   For  Arms   Salesmen
"An  atmosphere  now  prevails,  based  on  the  few   sig-
nificant   successes  that  more  [weapons]   breakthroughs
are  just  around  the  corner;  that  all  one  has  to  do  is
give  large  sums  of  money  to  industry and  they  will  be
produced.    The  military  became  like  the  poor  boy   al-
lowed  to  roam  freely  in  a  large  toy  shop  before  Christ-
mas.
"The   military   men,  because   they  are   not  generally
knowledgeable   in   this   area   and   because   of   the   high
respect   they   accord   men   in   industry,   are  frequently
persuaded   to  support   developments conjured   by  sales
engineers.     In   many   cases   such   projects   are   offered
just  to  keep  the  organizations  alive.    Once  the contract
is  obtained,  the  contractor  is  protected  by  the  mantle
of    military    necessity.     Frequently   the    only   people
knowledgeable  about  what  is  going  on  are  the  contrac-
tor  personnel themselves who  have  a  vested  interest  in
seeing   to   it   that   that   contract   is   kept   going.    What
concerns   me   most  about  this   military-industrial  com-
plex  is  that  it  has  decreased  our  national  strength  by
equipping  our  fleet  with  unreliable  weapons."
—Adm.  Rickni'cr,  IfiO.'i   Defense    AI>I»-OI>.  Hearings
urgency  and  necessity of  peace.    His   offer  of  a  missile  freeze
and   his  new  joint  action  with  Khrushchev  on   a  cutback   in
nuclear   materials  output   represent   initiatives   for   which   the
new  Administration  deserves  credit.    We  are  inching  our  way
toward  a  settlement with  the  Russians,  though  as  yet  the  only
agreements  whether  written,  as  in  the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty,
or  tacit,  as  in  the   uranium  cutback,   reflect   no   more   than   a
recognition  on   both  sides  of   how   badly  basic  resources   are
being  wasted  in  overkill  preparations.
To  move  beyond  this  to  genuine   measures  of   disarmament,
however,  will  require greater  flexibility  and  more  imagination
on  our  part. The  obstacle  is the NATO  multilateral  force.   We
cannot  talk  of  preventing  the  proliferation  of  nuclear  weap-
ons  while  at  the  same  time  giving  the  Germans  greater   access
to  them—against  the  wishes  of  most  of  our  allies  as  well  as
our  opponents.     Nothing  will  come  of  the  potentially  fruitful
freeze  proposal  until  we  are  ready  to  freeze  the  Germans  out
of  the  nuclear  picture.                                                  April  22
We'll  Be Clod  to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Self-Addressed   Envelope
Vacation  Notice
Dear   Readers:
We  can't  go  on  a  vacation  this  summer  be-
cause  of  the  two  conventions  so we're taking  our
usual  vacation  now and combining  it  with  a  trip
abroad,  hoping  to  report  among  other  things  on
the  water  crisis  in   Israel   and  the  Middle   East.
So  we are  suspending  for  three  weeks.    The  next
issue  will  be  the  one  dated  June   1.     It's   been
immense   fun   back   on  weekly   schedule.     Our
deepest  thanks   for   the   many  kind  letters  re-
ceived  about  it,  few of  which  unfortunately  (we
ask  forgiveness)   we  have  been  able  to  answer.
/ F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
et:
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   V.  Stone's   Wei'kly.     Second   Class   ToBhice   Paid   at   Washin
K
ton.   D.   C.    Published  every  Monday  except  in   AuKUSt  lit   .".GIS  Nebraska.  Aye..  N.  W.,
Washington,   I).  C.     An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   !•'.   Stone;   Circulation   Manaiwr,   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
S3  in  the  U.S.:     $6 in  Canada;   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED