I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964oct05.pdf

============================================================

The  Terror  in  McComb,  P.  4
Where  the  FBI  and the  Secret Service  Were  Culpable  in  Kennedy's Assassination
"There  was   insufficient   liaison  .  .  .  between  the  Secret
Service  and other  Federal  agencies.  .  .  .  Although  the  FBI
.  .  .  had  secured  considerable  information  about  Lee  Har-
vey  Oswald,  it  had  no  official   responsibility,  under  the   Se-
cret  Service  criteria existing  at  the  time  of  the  President's
trip  to  Dallas,  to  refer  to  the  Secret  Service  the  informa-
tion  it  had.   The  Commission  concluded,  however,  that  the
FBI  took  an  unduly  restrictive  view  of  its  role.  .  .  .
"At  the  time  of  the  trip  to  Dallas,  the  Secret  Service  as
a   matter  of   practice  did  not  investigate,   or  cause   to  be
checked,  any  building  along  the  motorcade route.  .  .  .
"On  Nov.   4   [FBI   man]   Hosty   telephoned   the   Texas
School  Book  Depository and learned that  Oswald was  work-
ing  there.  . .  .  Agents of  the  FBI  in  Dallas  did not  consider
Oswald's   presence   in  the   Texas   School   Book   Depository
Building  overlooking  the  motorcade  route  as  a  source  of
danger   to   the   President   and  did  not   inform   the   Secret
Service...."  — The  Warren Report  (at  pps. 24, 438  and  443).
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  33OCTOBER  5,  1964
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
The  Left  and  the  Warren  Commission  Report
All  my  adult  life  as  a  newspaperman  I  have  been  fighting,
in   defense  of   the   Left   and   of   a  sane  politics,  against  con-
spiracy   theories  of   history,   character  assassination,  guilt  by
association  and  demonology.    Now  I  see elements  of  the  Left
using  these  same  tactics  in  the  controversy  over  the  Kennedy
assassination  and  the  Warren   Commission  Report.    I  believe
the  Commission has  done  a  first-rate  job,  on  a  level  that  does
our  country  proud  and  is  worthy  of  so  tragic  an  event.    I  re-
gard  the  case  against Lee Harvey Oswald  as  the  lone  killer  of
the  President as  conclusive.   By  the  nature  of  the  case,  abso-
lute  certainty  will  never be  attained,  and  those  still  convinced
of  Oswald's  innocence have  a  right  to  pursue  the  search  for
evidence  which  might  exculpate  him.    But  I  want  to  suggest
that  this  search  be  carried  on  in  a  sober  manner  and  with  full
awareness of  what is involved.
Slander,  Not  Controversy
It  is one  thing to  analyze  discrepancies.    It  is  quite  another
to  write  and  speak  in  just  that  hysterical  and  defamatory way
from  which  the  Left  has  suffered   in  the  last  quarter  century
or  more  of  political  controversy.    I  want  to  start  with  my
dear  and  revered  friend,  Bertrand  Russell.    He  owes  it  to  all
of  us  who  have  looked  to  him  as  a  world  spokesman  of  the
peace  movement,  as a  great  philosopher  and  humanitarian,  to
speak  more  responsibly  on  this  subject.    It  was  not   respon-
sible,  on  the  basis  of  a  transatlantic  phone   call  from   Mark
Lane,  to  attack  the   report   as  "a   sorrily  incompetent   docu-
ment"  which  "covers   its  authors  in  shame"  without   having
first  read  it.    This  is  on  a  par,   in  its  febrile  prejudgment,
with   Lord  Russell's  earlier   statement   comparing   Lane's  de-
fense  of  Oswald  with  Zola's  defense  of  Dreyfus,  and  declar-
ing,  "There has  never  been  a  more  subversive,  conspiratorial,
unpatriotic  or  endangering  course  for  the  security  of  the  Unit-
ed  States  and  the  world  than  the  attempt   by  the  U.S.   Gov-
ernment  to  hide  the  murderers  of  its  recent  President."   This
assumes  instead  of  proving.    It  is  slander,  not  controversy.
Statements  of  this  kind  imply  not  just  one  but  three  con-
spiracies.    One  was  a  conspiracy  to  kill  the  President.    The
second   was  a  conspiracy  to  kill  Oswald   lest  he  talk.     The
third  is  a conspiracy  by  the  Warren  Commission  to  hush  up
They  Finally  Listed  Rightists
"When  the  special  file  [in  the  Protective   Research
Section  of  the  Secret  Service]  was  reviewed  on  Nov.  8
[for  the  President's  trip],  it  contained  the  names  of
no  persons  from  the  entire  Dallas-Ft.  Worth  area,  not-
withstanding  the  fact  that  Ambassador Stevenson  had
been  abused  by  pickets  in  Dallas  less  than  a  month
before ...  (pps.  432-3).
"Since  the  assassination,  both  the  Secret  Service  and
the   FBI   have  recognized  that  the   PRS   files   can  no
longer   be  limited   largely   to   persons   communicating
actual  threats  to  the  President.    On Dec.  25,  1963,  the
FBI  circulated  additional  instructions  to  all  its  agents,
specifying  criteria  for  information to  be  furnished  the
Secret  Service.  .  .  .  The new  instructions   require  FBI
agents  to  report  immediately  information  concerning:
"'Subversives,   ultrarightists,   racists    and   fascists
(a)   possessing  emotional   instability  or  irrational  be-
havior,   (b)   who  have  made  threats   of   bodily  harm
against  officials  .  .  .  (c)  who express  or have  expressed
strong   or  violent   anti-US   sentiments   and  who   have
been  involved in  bombing.  .  .  .'"  (p.  461).
—The  Warren  Commission  Report.
!  3
the  facts.    These  are  monstrous   charges,   and  cannot  honor-
ably  be  made  on  the  basis  of  surmise.    Russell's   American
advisers  have   fed   him   not  evidence  but   misstatement   and
poppycock.    The  Warren  Commission   was  chosen  to  provide
a  bipartisan   body  which  would   command   the  widest  public
respect.     Russell   calls   it   "utterly   unrepresentative   of   the
American  people."    This  is  nonsense.    The  two  Democrats
chosen   from   either   House  of   Congress,  Senator  Russell  of
Georgia  and  Congressman   Boggs  of  Louisiana,  are  highly  re-
spected  even  by those  who  disagree  with  them.   Lord  Russell
dismisses   them   as  men   "whose  racist   views   have  brought
shame on the  United  States."   What  do  their  typical  Southern
prejudices   have  to  do  with  their  probity?    Russell  dismisses
the   two  Republicans  as  "Senator  Cooper  of   Kentucky   and
Congressman  Gerald  L.  Ford  of  Michigan,  the  latter  of  whom
is  a  leader  of  his  local  Goldwater  movement  and  an  associate
of   the  FBI.
1
'    Ford   is  chairman   of  the  House  Republican
Conference.    He  is  supporting  his  party's  ticket  in  this  elec-
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 5,1984
(Continued  from  Page  One)
tion  but   far   from   being   "a   leader   of  his   local   Goldwater
movement"  he  nominated  Romney  for  President  at  the  Re-
publican  convention  in  the  hope  of  stopping  Goldwater.    He
denies  any  association  with  the  FBI  and  there  is  no  evidence
of   any  such  link.    John   Sherman  Cooper   in  the  Senate  in
1954,  when  every  Democratic  liberal  Senator  except  Kefauver
lost  his  nerve,  made  the  one  uncompromisingly  principled
speech  against  the  Anti-Communist  Act  passed  in  that  year.
There  never  was  a  more  dangerous  year  in  which  to  stand  up
against  hysteria.   I  knew  John  J.  McCloy  during  the  war  as
a  public  servant   of   unusual   competence.     I  have  criticized
Allen  W.  Dulles  constantly  over  the  years.    But  I  would  not
impute  to  him  or  any  other  member  of  the  Commission  con-
duct  so  evil  as  to  conspire  with  the  secret  services  to  protect
the  killers  of  a  President.    This  is  also  to  assume  that  Chief
Justice  Warren,  whom  the  right  hates  for  his  decisions  pro-
tecting  Negroes  and  radicals,  would  be a party to  a conspiracy
to  protect  a  cabal  of  rightist  assassins.
This  Is  Demonology
This  is  what  I  call  demonology,  and  this  is  what  has  so
often  been  used  against  the  Left.    Demonology  is  the  notion
that  because  a  man  disagrees  with  you  politically,  he  must  be
impervious  to  honor,  duty,  patriotism,  and  mercy—in  short  a
demon,   i.e.   all  of  one  piece,   black  evil,  and  not  a  human
being,   i.e.   full   of  contradictions.    Demonology   also   implies
that  such  a  person  is  fair  game  for  any  libel  or  slander,  since
ipso  facto  beyond  the  pale  of  decency.    This  is  the   standard
applied  by  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  and
the  Eastland  Committee  and  McCarthy  before  them  to  Left-
wingers.    It  is  no  less  evil  when  applied  to  the  right.    Here
is  a  sample  from  Joachim  Joesten's  book,  "Oswald:  Assassin
or  Fall-Guy".    To  provide  a  motive  for  the  conspiracy  he  al-
leges,  Joesten  writes,
"Cuba  sticks  in  the  craw  of  the  CIA.    The  fiasco  of  the
Bay  of  Pigs  cost  Allen  Dulles  his  job.    Moreover,  once
Kennedy  began  a  policy  of  easing  the  Cold  War,   some  of
the  CIA,  like  much  of  the  Pentagon,  would  be  dismantled
and  the  agency  brought  under  presidential  control.   I  am
sure  there  are  men  in  the  CIA,  just  as  there  are  General
Walkers  in  the  army,  who  simply  couldn't  accept  this  sit-
uation  and  who  thought  of   Kennedy  as  a  traitor.    And
traitors  are  executed."
The  Metal  Files  That  Never  Were
"Oswald's  apartment,  too,  was  filled  with  fascinating
things.   Besides  the  batches  of  leaflets  with  the  legend
'Hands   Off   Cuba'   and   bearing   the   unauthorized   im-
print   of   the   Fair   Play   for   Cuba   Committee,   police
found  seven  metal  file  boxes  filled  with  names  of   Cas-
tro  sympathizers.    How  did  he  manage,  in  so  short  a
time,  to  compile  so  extensive  a  list?"
—Oswald  and  the  FBI  (The  Nation,  Jan.    27).
"Commission  finding—The  Dallas  police  inventories
of   Oswald's   property   taken   from   his   room   at    1026
North  Beckley  avenue  do not  include  any  file  boxes.   A
number  of  small  file  boxes  listed  in  the  inventory   as
having  been  taken  from   the  Paine  residence  in  Irving
contained  letters,  pictures,  books  and  literature,  most
of  which  belonged  to  Ruth  Paine,  not  to  Oswald.    No
lists   of   names   of   Castro   sympathizers   were   found
among these  effects."
—The  Warren  Commission Report,  p.  666.
This  is libellous  in  the  extreme.    It  implies  that  Allen  Dul-
les  would  be  a  party  to  killing  Kennedy  and  hushing  up  the
truth  because  he  lost  his  job  after   the  Bay  of  Pigs.    Such
charges,  as  sloppy  as  they  are  wild,  are  dishonorable  and  dis-
solve  the   fabric   of   society.    They   seek  to  destroy  a   man's
reputation  on  the  basis  of  evil  surmise  and  guilt  by  associa-
tion.    People  on  the  Left   ought  to  recall  the  all  too  recent
past  before  allowing   themselves  to  be  drawn  into  folly  by
such  tactics.
The  Joesten   book  is  rubbish,  and  Carl  Marzani—whom  I
defended  against  loose  charges  in  the  worst  days  of  the  witch
hunt—ought  to  have  had  more  sense  of  public  responsibility
than  to  publish  it.    Thomas  G.  Buchanan,  another  victim  of
witch  hunt  days,  has  gone  in  for  similar  rubbish  in  his  book,
"Who   Killed   Kennedy?"     You  couldn't   convict  a  chicken
thief   on   the  flimsy  slap-together   of   surmise,  half-fact   and
whole  untruth  in  either  book.    Here  again  elementary  fair-
ness  is  involved.    The  Joesten  book  implies  that  the  rightist
Texas  oil  millionaire  H.  L.  Hunt  was  involved  in  the  plot  to
kill  Kennedy.    Buchanan  names  an  oilman  he  calls  Mr.  X.
This  imputes  murder  to  a  man  whose  views  we  dislike,  and
does  so without  evidence  of  any  kind.   Buchanan writes  as  if
he  were  penning  a  whodunit.    "I  believe  the  murder  of  the
The Kind of  False Rumors  That  Might  Have  Provoked  Armed Action  Against  Cuba
"Literally  dozens  of  allegations  of  a  conspiratorial   con-
tact  between  Oswald  and  agents  of  the  Cuban  government
have  been  investigated  by the Commission...  .  'D',  a  young
Latin  American  secret  agent  approached  the  U.S.   authori-
ties  in  Mexico  shortly  after  the  assassination  and  declared
that  he  saw  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  receiving  $6500  to  kill  the
President  .  .  .  'D'  and  his  allegations  were  immediately
subjected  to  intensive  investigi^-on.    His  former  employ-
ment  as  an  agent  for  a  Latin  American  country  was   con-
firmed,  although   his   superiors  had  no  knowledge   of   his
presence   in   Mexico  or  the   assignment   described   by   'D'.
Four  days  after   'D'  first   appeared  the   U.S.   Government
was  informed  by  the  Mexican  authorities  that  'D'  had  ad-
mitted  in  writing  that  his   whole  narrative  about  Oswald
was false....
"The   investigation  of  the  Commission  has  thus  produced
no  evidence  that  Oswald's  trip  to  Mexico  was  .in  any  way
connected  with  the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy,  nor
has  it  uncovered  evidence  that  the  Cuban  government  had
any  involvement  in  the  assassination.   To  the  contrary,  the
Commission  has   been  advised  by  the   CIA  and  FBI  that
secret  and  reliable  sources  corroborate  the  statements  of
Senora   Duran   [a   Mexican  national  employed  in  the  visa
section  of  the  Cuban  consulate  in  Mexico  City]  in  all  mate-
rial  respects  and  that  the  Cuban  government  had  no  rela-
tionship  with  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  other  than  that  described
by  Senora Duran....
"Speculation—On  Nov.   27,  1963,  in  a  speech  at  the   Uni-
versity   of   Havana,  Fidel   Castro,   under   the   influence   of
liquor,  said  'The  first  time  that  Oswald  was  in  Cuba.  .  .  .'
Castro  therefore   had   knowledge   that   Oswald   had   made
surreptitious visits to  Cuba.
"Commission   finding—Castro's   speeches   are   monitored
directly   by  the   U.S.   Information   Agency   as   he  delivers
them.    A  tape  of  this  speech  reveals  that  it  did  not   con-
tain  the  alleged  slip  of  the  tongue.   Castro  did  refer  to  Os-
wald's  visit  to  the  'Cuban  Embassy'  in  Mexico. ....
—The  Warren  Report,  at  pps.  307-9  and  659.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 5,1964
President,"  says  Buchanan,  "was provoked,  primarily,  by  fear
of  the  domestic  and  international   consequences   of  the Mos-
cow  Pact:  The  danger  of  disarmament  which  would  disrupt
the  industries on  which  the  plotters  depended   and  of  an  in-
ternational  detente  which  would,  in  their  view,  have  threat-
ened   the   eventual   nationalization   of   their   oil   investments
overseas."     And   the  whole   commission,  from   Chief   Justice
Warren  down,  and  its  whole  staff,   and  the  vast  network  of
the  police,  the  FBI, the  CIA  and  the  Secret  Service  all con-
spired  to  keep  this  secret?    Not   one  man  felt  impelled  by
conscience  to  break  out  and  tell  the  truth?    People  who  be-
lieve  such  things  belong  in  the  booby-hatch.
Gen.  Walker  Also  Cries  Whitewash
If  the  FBI  and  the  CIA  were  so powerful,  why  didn't  they
take  advantage of  the  murder  by  a  supposed   Communist  and
Castroite  to  set  off  a  wave  of  anti-Red  hysteria,  to  poison  our
relations  with  Cuba  and  the  Soviet  Union?    Why  did   they
clear   the   Communists   at   home   and   abroad   of   complicity?
Why  did  they  disprove  the  wild  stories  about  Oswald's  links
with  Castro?    The  box  at  the  bottom  of  page  two  gives  a
sample  of  the  wild  whoppers   an  unscrupulous  secret  service
could  have  set  loose.   If  they  had  so  much  power  in  the War-
ren  Commission  why  didn't   they  hush  up  its  damning  criti-
cism  of  the  FBI  and  the  Secret  Service  (see  box  on  page
one)  ?    If  Oswald  was  innocent,   why  did  they  have  to  kill
him  to  shut  him  up?    If  he  was killed  as part  of  a  conspiracy,
why  was  he  killed  in  full  view  of  the  TV  cameras  when  he
might  have  been  bumped  off  in  a  fake  ambush  while  being
moved  at  night  to  another  prison?   This  is  an  insane  morass
of  paranoid  conjecture,  and  those  who  remain  in  it  even  after
the  Warren  report  are  either  unscrupulous   or  sick.    Look  at
the  ultimate  lunacy:  General  Walker,  who  regarded  Kennedy
as  a  tool  of   the  Communists,   is  sure  he  was  killed   by  the
A  Whopper  of  Neo-Nazi  Origin
"The  Enquirer  story  goes  on  to  say  that  the   Dallas
police  suspected  Oswald and  Ruby  of  being  involved  in
an  attack  on  General  Walker,  and  was  going  to  arrest
the  two  when  the  FBI  intervened  and  asked  the  police
not  to  do  so  for  'reasons  of  state.'   The  police  agreed
only  upon  receipt  of  an  official  communication from  the
FBI.   While  the  National  Enquirer  is  not  the  most  re-
liable  newspaper  in  the  world,  the  story   bears   inner
marks   of   authenticity   because   the   recipient   of   that
FBI  letter  was, of  course,  Chief  of  Police  Curry,  who
leaked  it  to  reporter  Henshaw."
—Joachim  Joesten:  Oswald:  Assassin  or  Fall   Guy?
(Marzani  & Munsell)  1964.   Page  12&.
"Commission   finding—This   allegation   appeared   in
the  November  29  issue  of  (actually  printed  on  Nov. 25
or  26)  of  a  German  weekly  newspaper,  Deutsche  Na-
tional  Zeitung  and  Soldaten  Zeitung  published  in  Mu-
nich   [Germany's  leading  neo-Nazi  organ—IFS].    The
allegation   later  appeared  in  the  National   Enquirer  of
May  17,  1964.  The  Commission  has  been  reliably   in-
formed  that  the  statement  was  fabricated  by  an  editor
of   the   newspaper.     No   evidence   in   support   of   this
statement   has  ever   been  advanced  or  uncovered.    In
their  investigation   of   the   attack   on  General  Walker,
the  Dallas  police  uncovered  no  suspects  and  planned  no
arrests.   The  FBI  had  no  knowledge  that  Oswald  was
responsible   for   the   attack   until   Marina  Oswald' re-
vealed  the  information  on  Dee. 3,  1963."
—The   Warren   Commission  Report,   Appendix    XII:
Speculations  and Rumors, p. 662.
Reds.  He  attacks  the  Warren  report  as a  whitewash.  "There's
bound  to have  been  a plot," Gen. Walker  says.    On  the  other
hand   Leftists  who   lean   to   the   Chinese   viewpoint   and   re-
garded  Kennedy   in  his  lifetime  as  a  warmonger   and  tool  of
the  right,  are  now  sure  he  must  have  been  killed  by a  rightist
conspiracy.    How  wacky can you get?
How  The Warren  Commission Decided  Oswald Was Neither A Soviet Nor U.S. Agent
"If   the   Soviet  agents  had  communicated   with   Oswald
while  he  was  in  the  Marine  Corps,  one  of  the  least  prob-
able  instructions   they  would  have  given  him  would  have
been  to  defect.    If  Oswald  had  remained  a  Marine  radar
specialist,  he  might  at  some  point  have  reached  a  position
of  value  as  a  secret  agent.    However, his  defection  and  the
disloyal  statements  he  made  publicly  in  connection  with  it
eliminated  the  possibility  that  he  would ever  gain  access  to
confidential  information or  programs of  the  U.S.  The  very
fact  that  he  defected,   therefore,  is  itself   persuasive evi-
dence  that  he  was  not  recruited  as  an  agent   prior  to  his
defection,  (p.  257). .  .  .  Moreover  persuasive  evidence  that
Oswald's   conduct   was   not   carefully    coached   by   Soviet
agents  is  provided by  some  of  his  actions  at  the  Embassy.
The  single  statement   which  probably  caused   Oswald   the
most  future  trouble  was  his  declaration  that  he had  already
volunteered  to  a  Soviet  official  that  he  would,  if  asked,  tell
the  Soviet  Government all  that  he  knew  about  his  job  in
radar  as  a  Marine.    Certainly   a  statement  of  this  type
would   prejudice   any  possibility  of   his   being   an   effective
pro-Communist  agent,  (p.  265)....
"Speculation—Oswald   was   an   informant   of   either   the
FBI  or  the  CIA.  He  was   recruited  by  an  agency   of   the
U.S.  Government  and  sent  to  Russia  in  1959.
"Commission's    finding—Mrs.    Marguerite    Oswald  fre-
quently   expressed  the  opinion  that  her  son  was   such  an
agent,   but   she   stated   before   the   Commission,  T   cannot
prove  Lee  is  an  agent.'    The  directors  of  the  CIA  and  of
the  FBI  testified  before  the  Commission that  Oswald  was
never  employed  by  either  agency  or  used  by  either  agency
in  any  capacity.    Investigation  by  the  Commission  has  re-
vealed   no   evidence  that   Oswald  was   ever   employed   by
either  the  FBI  or  the  CIA  in  any  capacity.
"Speculation—Oswald  told   Pauline   Bates,   a  public  ste-
nographer  in  Fort  Worth,  Tex., in  June  1962 that  he  had
become  a  'secret  agent' of  the  U.S. Government  and that  he
was  soon  going   back  to  Russia  'for  Washington.'
"Commission   finding—Miss  Bates   denied   a   newspaper
story  reporting  that  Oswald  had told  her that  he was work-
ing  for  the  U.S. Dept.  of  State.    She  stated  that  she  had
assumed  incorrectly  that  he  was  working with  the  Dept.  of
State  when  he  told  her  that  the  State  Dept.  had  told  him
in  1959 that  he  would  be  on  his  own  while  in  the   Soviet
Union.
"Speculation—The  FBI  tried  to  recruit  Oswald.    An  FBI
agent's   name,  telephone   number  and   automobile   license
number  were  found  among  Oswald's  papers.
"Commission's  findings—FBI  officials  have  testified   that
they  had  never  tried  to  recruit  Oswald  to  act  on  behalf  of
the  FBI  in  any  capacity.    The  Commission's   investigation
corroborates  this  testimony.  An FBI  agent,  James P. Hosty,
Jr.,  had given  his  name  and telephone  number  to  Mrs.  Ruth
Paine  so  that  she  could  call  and  give  him  Oswald's  address
in  Dallas  when  she  learned  it.   Mrs.  Paine  and  Marina  Os-
wald  have  stated  that  Mrs. Paine  gave  Oswald  a  slip  of
paper  with  the  agent's  name  and  telephone  number  on  it.
Marina   Oswald  had  taken   down  the   license   number   of
Hosty's  car  and  given  it  to  her  husband."  (p. 660).
1   3   ..
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 5, 1964
A  State  Policeman Threatened  a  Bombing  Victim  With  More  Dynamite
What Five Negroes From McCornb Told Washington  About the Terror There
The  White  House requested  a.n FBI  investigation  of  Negro
violence  in  nine  northern  cities.    It  has  asked  for  no  similar
report  on  anti-Negro  violence in  the  Deep  South.    If  it  had,
the  report  might  resemble  a  letter  to  Asst.  Attorney  Gen-
eral  Burke  Marshall  from  Jessie  Harris,  Project  Director  in
McComb,  Miss.    It   tells  of  relative   quiet  in  McComb  until
mid-August.    Then  12  of  the   16  FBI  agents  there  began   to
leave.    Then,  also,  public  attention  turned   away  from   the
Mississippi  Summer  Project.    Local  COFO  workers  planned
their  first  voter  registration  drive  for  Aug.  18.   The  terror
began   on  Aug.   15.    Twenty   city,   county  and   state  police
raided   COFO  Freedom   Houses  and  searched  the   files.   On
Aug.  23, they  began  to  raid  Negro  establishments   patronized
by  COFO  workers.    The  proprietors  were  arrested.    Three
COFO  workers   were   beaten   in  daylight   in  downtown  Mc-
Comb.  Bombings  began  on  Aug.  29.  There  were  6  within  72
hours  in  early  September.    The  latest  ones  have  been  ac-
companied   by  mass   arrests   of   Negroes   under   a  criminal
syndicalism  law  passed   early  this   summer.     It   carries  a
maximum  penalty  of  10 years  in  jail,  and  a  $1,000  fine.
What  the  FBI  Said
We  had  a  chance last  week  to  talk  with  five  Negroes  from
McComb.   Three  were  women whose  homes  had  been bombed
because  they   gave  help  to  COFO.    Mrs.  Quin's  home  was
destroyed  September  20.   Neighbors  were  reluctant  to  keep
her  two  injured  children while  she  was  away  in  Washington,
"People  are  so  scared  their  eyes  turn  a  different  color,"  she
explained.   The  women came  at  SNCC's  expense  to  tell  their
story  directly  to  the  Justice  Department.     They  could  trust
no  local   authority.     The  police  arrested   Mrs.  Dillon's   hus-
band  the  day  their  house  was  bombed  in  late  August.   He  is
still  in  jail.    A  state  highway  patrolman   waved   sticks  of
dynamite  at  her  and  said  she  would  be  killed  if  she  didn't
stay  away  from  COFO.   The  FBI  agent  who  questioned  her
about  the  bombing  asked  her  to  take  a  lie  detector  test  to
prove  she  hadn't   done  it  as  a  publicity  stunt.    "The   FBI
were   sympathetic  at   the   beginning  of  the   summer,"   said
Mrs.  Quin, "but  now  they  tell  us  they  can  only  comply  with
local  laws."   When the  women saw  the  President,  they  asked
him  to  open  an  FBI   office  in  the  Negro  part  of  town.    Now
the  FBI  stay  at  an  inn  in  the  white  section  and   Negroes
are  afraid  to go there.
Before  they  left  for  home,  Mrs.  Quin's  19 .year-old  daugh-
ter  called  to  say  it  was  too  dangerous  for  them  to  return.
McComb  Police  Chief  George  Guy  reportedly  told  her  that  if
they  came  back,  "they  must  pack  their  rags  and  get  out  or
Must  We  Have  Three  More  Martyrs?
"The  situation  which  is  developing  in  Pike  County
resembles  that  which  developed  throughout  Mississippi
immediately   before   the   Summer   Project,  culminating
in  the  murders  of  three  civil  rights  workers  in  Phila-
delphia. ...  A  newspaperman  with  reliable  contacts  in
the  white  community  has  reported  that  there  is  a  defi-
nite  plan  to  "get"  three  of  the  COFO  workers: Dennis
Sweeney,  Jesse  Harris,  and  Mendy  Samstein.   The  Mc-
Comb  police  have  just  put  on  the  force  a  local  Negro
bootlegger   known   to   have  served   time   at   the   state
penitentiary,  to  have  shot  two   persons,   and  to  have
seriously  beaten  at  least  three  others. ...  At  present
there  are  only   4  FBI  agents  in  McComb,  a  decrease
from  the  peak  of  16  reached during  the  summer.    Un-
less  responsible forces  are  brought  to  bear  in  McComb,
what  happened  in  Neshoba  County  will  happen  here."
—Letter  from  Jesse  Hams,  McComb  Project  Direc-
tor,  to  Burke  Marshall,  head  of  Civil  Rights  at  Justice
Dept.
be  blown  out."    The  women  left  anyway.    "We  got  to   go,"
said  Mrs. Brant, "It's   our home."
The  other  two  Negroes  from   McComb  were  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Ardis  Garner.  They  won't  be  going  back.  Mr.  Garner  knows
too  much.    He  joined   the   McComb   police  force  when   he
heard  they  wanted  Negroes.   He  resigned  after  being  asked
to  spy  on  COFO  workers.    (Another  Negro  on  the  force  is
considered  so  dangerous  by  the  Negro  community  that  150
have   signed   a   petition   to   have   him   removed.    See   box.)
The  Garners'  house was  bombed  minutes after  they  left  Mc-
Comb.    They  fled  on  a  bus  in  the  middle  of  the  night  and
left  their  belongings.    (They  will  try  to  settle  in  San  Fran-
cisco.)    Garner  told  the  Justice   Dept.  that   McComb  needs
federal  marshals  to  stand  guard  while  Negroes  try  to  sleep.
Now,   he   said,   they're   "workin"   all   day   and   watchin'   all
night."
Negroes  have  not  been  the  only  ones  to  suffer.    Friendly
whites   have   been  intimidated   too,   and   there   are   several
northern   students   who  plan   to  stay   through   winter.    All
would  gain  if,  as  Kep.  Ryan  (D.  N.Y.)   suggested,   the   Jus-
tice  Dept.  convened a  grand  jury  to  investigate  collusion  be-
tween  local  police and  white  terrorists.    McComb  must  leam
quickly  that  it  is  still  being  watched.   There  is  a  rumor  that
it  has  already  selected  its  three  young  victims.
Still  Time  to  Enter  A  Sub for  That  Boy or  Girl  Going  Off  to  College
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    .......................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............SUte..........™.......
10/5/64
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   Fifties
(To)   Name   .............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
/ F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December   and  the  first  week   In
January   and  Bi-Weekly  during  July   and  August  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  published  and   edited
by  I.   P.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.     Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.:    J6   in   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mall  rates:
$15  to  Europe:  920  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED