I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964sep21.pdf

============================================================

How   USIA    Secretly  Subsidizes  Books  and   Writers,  P. 3
But  When  Will  These  Humane  and  Pragmatic  Views  Be  Applied  to  Cuba  and  Vietnam?
"The  Senator's   [Goldwater's]  assumption  that  the  Rus-
sians  can  be  counted  on  to  accept  humiliation rather  than
war  is  a  dangerous  delusion.    It  is  based  on  the  fantastic
premise  that  the  American  people  will  prefer  the  destruc-
tion  of  their  cities and  perhaps a  hundred  million  deaths  to
an  adjustment  with  the  Communists,  but  that  at  the  same
time   the  Russians  will  surrender  to  an  ultimatum  rather
than  accept  the  risk  of  nuclear  war. .  .  .  Permeating  Sena-
tor  Goldwater's  view  of  the  cold  war  is  an  unshakeable belief
that  Communist  and  free  societies  cannot  survive  together
in  the  same  world.... It  is,  I  believe,  an  understanding  of
human  diversity,  and  of  the  inability  of  one  man  or  nation
to  determine  what  is  best  for  all  others,  that  forms the  core
of  the  democratic  idea.    When  'freedom'  is  worshipped  as
a  sublime  and  mystical  state  rather  than  simply  a  neces-
sary  condition  for  human  fulfilment,   the  faith  in  freedom
itself  ceases  to  express  the democratic  spirit ...  it  ceases
to   express  the  conscience  of   a  conservative  and   becomes
instead  the faith  of  a  fanatic.  .  .  . Goldwater Republicanism
is  the  closest   thing  in  American politics  to  an  equivalent
of  Russian  Stalinism.  Each  makes  a  religion  of  its  ideology.
.  .  .  The  Republicans  build   their  policy  on  the   ideologies
that  divide  the  world; the  Democrats  look  beyond  ideology
to  the  common  hopes,  the  common  interests  and  the  com-
mon  dangers  that  unite  the  human race."
—Fulbright  in  the Senate, Sept.  S.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  31
SEPTEMBER  21,  1964
'°<       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
What A Little  Lanolin  D Can Do for That War in Vietnam
We  sat  in  at  our  TV  the  evening  of  Sept.  10  on  the  begin-
ning  of  a  new  ABC  series  called  Letters  from  Vietnam   about
"The   Daring   American."     The   program,   if   not   the   war,
seemed  to  be  self-sustaining.   It  was  sponsored  by  Purex,  the
cleanser  with  the  woman's  touch;  Instant  Pels,  with  that  built-
in  fabric  softener;  Trend,  with  the  tiny  suds,  so  much  better
than  the  big  bubbles;  and  Sweetheart  Soap,  which  makes  ele-
gance  affordable  today.    Part  of  the  hour  long  program  per-
mitted  us  to  listen  in  as  a  U.S.  Army  Lieut.  talked   into  a
dictaphone  for  his  absent  wife  those  "Letters  from   Vietnam"
which  gave  the  program  its  name.    Part  of  the  program  per-
mitted  us  to  sit  in  on  battle  scenes  which  lived  up  to   the
advance  billing,  "Specially  mounted  cameras  on  combat  heli-
copters  take  you  into  battle,  show  you  what  it's  like  to  come
within  a  hair  of  being  shot  down  on  a  rescue  mission."     It's
a  new  sensation  in  warfare  to  know  that  you're  going  into
battle  with  TV   cameras  trained  on  you  for   the  folks  back
home,   and   that   if  you're  wounded   the  whole   country   will
see it,  unless  you  have  the  misfortune  of  being  hit  during  the
commercial.
No  Callus  on  Hand  or  Heart
It  was  nice  to  be  assured  that  our  soldiers  don't  take  the
war   as  personal.    The   lieutenant  explained   to  his  wife  on
the  dictaphone  that  to  our  righting  men  the  Viet  Cong  are
"vermin,  they're  not  human,  so  you  don't  worry  about  it  as
you  shoot  them  up."    The  finer  feelings,  like  the  finer  hands
in  washing  with  Purex,  are  not  calloused.    In  another  mem-
orable  scene  we  could  watch  a  village  being   shot  up  from
the  air.    The   announcer   explained,   "the   VC  got  his   back
a  thousand  fold—a  return  designed  to  make  VC  even  more
unpopular   in   the   countryside."    Without   this   explanation,
shooting  up  a  whole  village  because  we  suspected  a  few  guer-
rillas  were  hidden  in  it  might  be  regarded   as  making  us  a
little   unpopular   in   the   countryside,  too.     "We   may   some-
times  kill  women  and  children  inadvertently,"  the  Lieutenant
Is  Peace  Breaking  Out  Despite  Us?
"Both  American and  Vietnamese  officials  vehemently
deny  that  any  cease-fire  measures  are  under  consider-
ation,   or   even   possible   under   present   circumstances.
Such  measures  are  very  much  in  the  minds,  however,
of   Vietnamese  not  now  in  positions  of  responsibility.
Buddhist  leaders,  for  instance,  have  called  on  both  the
Government  army  commanders and  Vietcong  leadership
to  'slow  down*  the  war,  if  not  actually  cease   fighting.
Furthermore,   independent   military    observers    detect
signs—there  is  no  clear  proof—of   increasing  numbers
of  de  facto  cease-fire understandings  growing  up  in  re-
cent  weeks  among  individual  units  in  widespread  parts
of  the  country.   These  take  the  form  of  local  stated  or
tacit   agreements   by   Government  and  Vietcong   com-
manders."
—Peter  Grose  from   Saigon  in  the  early  editions  of
the  New  York  Times  (p.  ZO)  Sun., Sept.  IS.    This  pas-
sage  was  omitted  in  the  Late  City  Edition.
wrote  his  wife  that   night,   "but   never  on  purpose."    Then
he  added  what   seemed   to  us  a  dangerous   thought,  that   he
supposed   the  VC  have  a  family,   too.     A  later  sequence,   to
demonstrate  his  kindly  feelings,  showed  the  Lieutenant  visit-
ing  an  orphanage   in  Saigon.     As  the  orphans  waved   good-
bye,  the  painful  scene  merged  into  a  happy  commercial,  with
American   children   playing   about   their   mother,   her   hands
protected   against   dryness  by  Gentle   Pels   soap,   which   con-
tains  Lanolin  D,  "nature's  own  skin  conditioner  to  make  your
work   easier."     We   hope   the  Vietnamese  war   can  be   kept
going  until  this  series  is  completed.    It  shows  how   smoothly
a  war  can be  fought,  with  a  little  Lanolin  D.
The   war  may  not  be  going   as  well  as  we  would   like   it
from   a  military  point  of  view,  but  with  this  series  we  have
hit  our  stride  when  it  comes  to  merchandising  it.    The  war
is   at   last   being   packaged   properly,   and   it's   the    package
which   makes   the   sale.     The   U.S.   Army   has   achieved   a
break-through.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  21,1964
First  Congressional  Investigation  in  Quarter  Century  Into  Economic  Concentration
Senate  Antitrust  Examines  A  New  Kind  of  Corporate  Super  Monster
For  the  first  time  in  a  quarter-century  Congress  is  taking
a  look  at  economic  concentration  in  American  industry.     Its
last  study  was  in   1939   when   the  Temporary   National   Eco-
nomic  Committee   began   work   on   40   volumes   of   hearings
and   monographs.      Now    the   Senate   Antitrust    Committee
under   Senator'  Hart   is  in  the  midst  of   a  new  set  of   hear-
ings.      Although    virtually   unmentioned   in   the   press,   the
revelations  have  been  as  striking  as  any  uncovered   by  Sena-
tor  Kefauver  when  he  led  the  Committee  into  price-fixing  in
the  steel  and  drug   industries.
The   hearings   have   established   the   first   broad   consensus
behind   the   opinion   that   concentration   has   been    increasing
and   increasing   rapidly   since   the   end   of   World   War    II.
Findings  of  the  Federal  Trade  Commission,   the  Census  Bu-
reau   and   the   Committee's   own  chief   economist   (Dr.    John
Blair)   all   indicate  that  the   100  largest   U.S.   manufacturing
corporations   control   about   25%   more   of   the   nation's   net
capital   manufacturing   assets   than   they   did   15   years    ago.
This  means  they  now  hold   57%  or  just  short  of   three-fifths
of   all  property   used   in   U.S.   manufacturing.
The  Conglomerate  Giant
Even  more  startling  (and   one  does  not  startle  easily  after
so  many  years  of  bigness)   is  the  way  these   corporate   giants
have  grown.    At  the  time  of  the  TNEC  investigation,   the
giants  confined   themselves   to  activity  within   a  single   indus-
try.    They  expanded   horizontally  to  acquire  competitors  and
vertically  to  acquire  firms  within   their   stream   of   production
and  distribution.    John   Blair's   testimony   reveals  the  growth
of  a  new  kind  of  super-giant,  the  conglomerate.     It   expands
by   diversifying   into   industries   totally   unrelated   to   its  ma-
jor   field   of   production    (see   box   below).     Textron,   for
example,   is  now   engaged   in   practically   every   U.S.    indus-
try  except  textiles,  the  one  in  which  it  began.    At  least  one
of  the  100  largest  manufacturing  corporations  is  now   among
the   4   largest    producers   in   more   than    half    the   product
classes   of   U.S.   industry.     Since  product   class   (rather   than
products)  is  the  category  that  most  closely  approximates  the
market,  these  figures  show  the  giants  in  direct  "competition"
How  Much  Bigger  The  Big  Have  Grown
"In  1962,  the  population  of  American manufacturing
enterprises  consisted  of  about  180,000  corporations  and
240,000  partnerships  and  proprietorships.    These   420,-
000  business  units  had  combined  assets  of  about   $296
billion.   The  20  largest  manufacturing corporations  had
$73.8  billion  in  assets,  or  an  estimated  25% of  the  total.
The   419,000  smallest   companies   accounted   for   only
25.2%  of  total  assets.   Thus  the  total  assets  of  the  20
largest  corporations  were  approximately  the  same   as
those   of   the   419,000  smallest.     Concentration,   when
measured  in  terms  of  net  profits  or  net  capital  assets,
is  greater.   For  example,  the  20  largest  manufacturing
corporations,  with  25.4% of  total  assets,  accounted  for
38%  of  profits  after  taxes.    The  net  profits  of   the  5
largest  corporations  were  nearly  twice  as large  as  those
of  the  about  178,000  smallest   corporations."
—W.  F.  Mueller,   head  of  Bureau  of  Economies   at
FTC,    before   Senate  Antitrust   Comm.,  July   2   (abr.)
with  the  majority  of  U.S.  manufacturing  firms.
These  figures   really   underestimate   the   extent   of   concen-
tration   and   conglomeration.     They   are   based   upon   the  as-
sumption   that  a  company   must  own  more  than   50%  of  the
stock   of  another  in  order   to  control   it.    This  standard   has
long   been   obsolete.     Even   the   conservative   SEC   presumes
control   with  the  ownership   of  25%   or  more   of  the   stock.
In   large   corporations,   where   ownership   is  widely    diffused,
control  often  comes  with  as  little  as  10%  of  the  stock.   "One
is  the  recipient,  of  so  many  slings  and  arrows  in  this  work,"
one  Committee   staff   member  explained,   "that  we  lean   over
backwards  to  use  the  most  conservative   statistics."
The   corporate   giants,   unwilling  to  risk  smaller   profits  by
lowering   costs   and   expanding   production,   have   turned   in-
stead   to  investments  in  conglomerate   mergers.     The   Justice
Department   and  the  FTC  have  been  reluctant  to  fight  these.
(The    FTC's   recent    decision    against    Proctor    &    Gamble's
acquisition  of  Chlorox  is  the  one  exception  and  may  indicate
a   new  policy.)      If   Senate   Antitrust   decides   on   legislation
to  break  up  the  conglomerates,  it  will  be  attacking  a  major
barrier  to  full  employment  of  machines  and   manpower.
Economist  Asks  For  New  Antitrust  Law  To  Break  Up  Giant  Conglomerates
"A  firm  possesses  conglomerate   power  when  its   opera-
tions  are  so  widely  diversified  that  its  survival  no  longer
depends  on  success  in  any  given  product  market.   Its  abso-
lute  size,  its  sheer  bigness,  is  so  impressive  that  it  can dis-
cipline  or  destroy  its  more  specialized  competitors.    It  occu-
pies  a  position  much  like  the  millionaire  poker  player  who,
in  a  game  of  unlimited  stakes,  can  easily  bankrupt  his  less
opulent  opponents.
"General  Dynamics,  for  example,  turns  out  a  diversified
product  line  ranging  from  Atlas  missiles  to  sand  and  grayel.
Martin-Marietta  produces  aero-space  equipment, cement  and
concrete,  printing  inks,  dyestuffs,  adhesives  and  resins,  and
household  cleaning  products.   Textron,  perhaps  the  greatest
conglomerate  in  U.S.  industry,  is  an  amalgam  of  27  sepa-
rate  divisions  and  113  separate  plants—making  such  widely
dissimilar  products  as  helicopters,  chicken  feed,  mailboxes,
paints  and  optical  machinery.
"Since  the  conglomerate  firm  is  composed  of  functionally
unrelated  enterprises,  it  loses  the  advantages  of  specializa-
tion  and  economies  of  scale.    It  cannot  claim  to  be  society's
benefactor  through  greater   efficiency.
"Since  conglomerate  bigness  is  relatively  new  in  Ameri-
can  manufacturing, neither  economic  theory  nor  public  pol-
icy  has  yet  devised  effective  means  of  coping  with  it.    Cer-
tainly,  it   is   doubtful  whether   the   Sherman   and  Clayton
Acts  are  adequate  to  the  task.    Nevertheless,   we  do  have
a  precedent  of  a  specialized  antitrust  law—the  Public  Util-
ity   Holding  Company  Act  of  1935—which  addressed   itself
to  the  phenomenon of  conglomerate  bigness  in  a  single  in-
dustry.    Section  11,  the  heart  of  the  statute,  required  hold-
ing   companies   to   divest   themselves   of   widely   scattered
utility  properties  which  had  no  operating  relationship  with
respect  to each other.
I  suggest  that  this  Committee  explore  the  feasibility  of
adapting   the   Public  Utility  Holding  Company  Act  provi-
sions  to  conglomerate  bigness  in manufacturing.
—Dr.  Walter  Adams,  Prof,   of  Econ.,  Mich  State  U.,  be-
fore   the  Sen.  Antitrust  Subeom.,  Sept.  10  (abr.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  21,1964
How  "Cultural  Exchange"  Became   A  Propaganda  Operation  At  Home  As  Well  As  Abroad
USIA  Secretly  Subsidizes  Books  and  Writers  to  Spread  Its  "Line"
In   1948   Congress  passed   a  U.S.   Information   and  Educa-
tional  Exchange  Act.    It  authorized  the  Secretary  of  State  to
provide   for   the   exchange   of  books,  periodicals   "and    other
educational   materials"   with   foreign   countries   and   for   the
dissemination    abroad    of    "information     about    the    United
States."  In  1953  these  powers  were  transferred  to  the  newly
created  U.S.  Information  Agency.  It  now  appears,  from   testi-
mony   taken  in  executive  sessions   (see   box  below)   by  the
House  Appropriations  Committee,   that  this  authorization  has
been  stretched  by  the  USIA   secretly  to  subsidize  the  writing
and  publication   of  books  at  home  as  well  as  abroad.
Buying  Stature to Get  Credibility
Thanks  to  Glenard   P.  Lipscomb   (R.  Cal.),  a  member  of
the   Appropriations   Committee,   more   information   has  been
elicited  about  this  "book  development  program."     Lipscomb
questioned  USIA's  authority  to  engage  in  such  activities,  and
has  released  the  Comptroller   General's  reply.  This  letter  dis-
closes  that  the  book  contracts  with   USIA   "provide   publica-
tion  shall  be  without  attribution  to  the  Agency  [USIA]  and
that   there   shall   be  no  publicity   of   the   Government's    con-
nection  with  the  book."    The  names  of  books  thus   bought
were  censored  out  of   the  committee  hearing  record   at   the
USIA's  request.    One  of  them,  as  the  reader  will  see  below,
was  described  by  Reed  Harris,  the  USIA   official  in  charge  as
covering  "the  whole  Communist  strategy  of  deception."    Mr.
Harris  seemed  unaware  that  he  was  describing  our  own  gov-
Comic  Strips,  Too
Mr.  Lipscomb (R.  Cal): I  was  interested  in  an  article
that  appeared  in  the  Washington   Star  Sunday  maga-
zine  of  Jan.  12,  1964,  which  refers   to  a  'Comic  Strip
Mill'  and states  that  'USIA  [US  Information  Agency]
artists  in  Washington  turn  out  material  for   thousands
of  publications  abroad.' ...  It  says,  'Five  seemingly
innocent  comic  strips  are  slipped  into  some  5,000  pub-
lications  around  the  world  every  week.    Although  their
readers  and  sometimes  even  their   editors   don't  know
it,  the  comic  strips  carry  a  hidden  message;  they  are
American   propaganda.'
—House   Appropriations   Committee,  March  S
ernment's   strategy   of   deception.    The   USIA   does  not  em-
ploy  writers  on  its   staff   but   seeks   out   "commercial   writers
who  have  stature  in  the  literary  world"  because  this  "results
in  greater  credibility."    Despite  this  prized  stature,  "we  con-
trol  the  thing,"   [our   italics]  Mr.  Harris   explained,   "from
the  very  idea  down  to  the  final  edited  manuscript."
The  Comptroller   General's  letter  upholding   this  stretches
the  law  and  misses  the  point.    Congressman   Lipscomb   has
promised  to  sponsor  legislation  either  to  stop  the  practice  or
require   that   books   subsidized   by  the   USIA   be  so  labelled.
Otherwise  the  reader  has  no  way  of  distinguishing  between
objective   scholarship  and   paid  propagation  of   the   govern-
ment's  line.    Milton  described   a  book   as  "the   life-blood  of
a  master  spirit."    Nowadays   it  may  also  be  a   custom-made
masterpiece,   cut  to  the  government's  cloth.
The  Testimony  Which  Disclosed  Our  Own  Government's  Strategy  of  Deception
Mr.  (John)  RODNEY  (D.  N.Y.):  At  page  18-7  entitled
"Book  Development" you  would seek  an  increase  from  $90,-
000  in  the  current  year  to   $195,000  in  the   coming   year.
What  is  the  alleged  necessity  for that?
Mr.    (Reed)    HARRIS    (Information    Center     Service,
USIA):  That   is   the   program  under  which  we   can  have
books  written  to  our  own  specifications,  books  that  would
not  otherwise  be  put  out,  especially   those  books  that  have
strong  anti-Communist  content  and follow  other  themes  that
are  particularly  useful  for  our  purposes.    Under  the  book
development  program,  we  control  the  thing  from  the  very
idea  down  to  the  final  edited  manuscript.
Mr.  ROONEY: What  are  the  details?
Mr.  HARRIS:  Mr. Chairman, we  would be  able  to  go  into
the  titles  if  we  might  be  allowed  to  do  it  off  the  record  be-
cause  our  interests  in  certain  of  these  books  should  not  be-
come  a  matter  of  general   public  information.
*                   »                   »
Mr.  ROONEY:  Tell  us  about  this  book.
Mr.  HARRIS: This  book, sir,  covers  the  whole  Communist
strategy   of   deception.
Mr.  ROONEY:  How  many  books  have  been  written  on
this  subject?
Mr.  HARRIS: I  could  not  tell  you  all  of  them  but  this
is  a  very  down-to-earth book  and  is  the  kind  of  thing  that
warns  people  —
Mr.  ROONEY: There  is  nothing  new  about  this  subject  is
there?    I  can  remember reading  about  it  over  30  years  ago.
What did it cost?
Mr. HARRIS: In this case, it  cost  $14,952.
»                  *                 *
Mr.  ROONEY: How  many  writers  do  you  have  in   the
USIA?
Mr.  Louis  FANGET   (Chief,  Publications  Division):  We
do  not  employ  any  writers,  sir,   on  the  staff.    We  try   to
reach  outside  commercial  writers  who  have  stature  in  the
literary  world,  we  try  to  get  them  to  do  books.    This  re-
sults  in  greater  credibility,  sir.
*                *               *
Mr.  (Glenard)  LIPSCOMB  (R.  Cal.):  How  many   books
do  you  have  of   the   nature  of   *  which  were  financed  by
USIA  but  are  now  being  put  out  by  American   publishers
for  sale  in  the  United  States?
Mr.  FANGET:  Sir,  it  is  our  intent  to  have  all  the  books
published  by  the  American  publisher  for  sale  commercially
not  only  in  the  United  States  but  we  hope  overseas  so  that
the  book  has  the  credibility  we  want  it  to  have.
Mr.  LIPSCOMB:  I  am  having  a  hard  time   understanding
why  USIA  must  finance  a  book  and  then  have  it  go  on  the
market  for  sale.    If  a  publisher  thinks  a  book  is  good  —
Mr.  FANGET:  The  kinds  of  books  we  support  are  those
that  would  not  be  published  ordinarily.
Mr. LIPSCOMB:  Why not?
Mr.  FANGET:  Because   they  would  be  difficult   to  sell.
An   American  publisher   would  not   ordinarily   publish   an
anti-Communist  book  because  they  do not  sell  commercially.
And   even   those   published   commercially   sometimes   have
some  Federal  support  behind  them.   An  American  publisher
will  only  publish  those  books  on  which  he  believes  he  can
make  a  profit.   These  books  habitually do not  make a profit.
For  example,*—.    If  we  had  not  invested  money  in  it,  it
would  not  have  come  to  light.   It  is  considered  by  authori-
ties  to  be  one  of  the  best  books  on  the  expose  of  the  Com-
munist  system.
—Before   the  House  Appropriations  Comm., March S  (abr.)
•Indicates book title was censored.
1   2   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September   21, 196k
The  Price  Party  and  Nation  Pay  for  the  United  Front  Against  Goldwater
Liberal  Democrats  Help  Johnson  Try  to  Bury  the  Baker  Case
In   the   Senate   last   week   the   liberal   Democrats   declined
the  chance   to  set  up   a  genuine  Bobby   Baker  investigation.
The   voting  was  so  close  on   almost   every  question   that   the
change  of  a  few  liberal  votes  would  have  been  decisive.    A
change  of  four  would  have  sent  the  re-opened   inquiry  to  the
new  Select  Committee  on  Ethics  rather  than  back  to  Rules,
where   it  got   nowhere  the  first  time  round.     Another  four
liberal  votes  would  have  permitted  the  minority  members  in
Rules  to   call   witnesses  whom   the   majority   refused  to   call.
Six   liberal   votes   would   have   given   the   investigating   com-
mittee  explicit  authority  to  examine  all  government   building
contracts,   not   just   the   one   for   the   District   of   Columbia
Stadium.
Only  Douglas Refused  to Compromise
Senator   Douglas  was  the  only  liberal  to  vote  consistently
for   these   proposals   and   others   like  them.     Clark,   the   pro-
ponent   of   Senate   reform,   took   a   live   pair   against   almost
every  one.    Morse,  McGovern  and  Neuberger  voted  with  the
party   leadership   all   the   way.     Gruening   and   Nelson   scat-
tered   their  votes  both   for   and   against.    Church,   McCarthy
and  Pfoxmire  played  the  game  of  voting  for  an  amendment
only  to  switch  their  votes  at   the   last  moment   if   it   seemed
the  amendment  might   pass.
Under   other   circumstances  a  vote   for   a  tough   Baker   in-
vestigation   would   have   been   a   vote   to   expose   the   Senate
Establishment    and    its   tie-in   with   Big   Business.      Unfor-
tunately   a   thorough    investigation  would    lead   straight   into
the  White  House.     The  leader  of  the  Establishment  is  now
the  white  hope  of   American  liberalism   against    Goldwater.
This  illustrates  what  Dean   Sayre  of   Washington    Cathedral
meant  when   in  an  unusually  outspoken   sermon   Sept.  13  he
deplored    the   character   of    the   men    between    whom    the
American  people  must  choose   in  November:   "one   a  man  of
dangerous   ignorance  and   devastating  uncertainty,  the   other
a  man  whose  public house  is  splendid  in  its  every  appearance
but   whose   private   lack   of   ethic   must   inevitably   introduce
termites  at  the  very  foundation."
The   Rules  Committee  is  almost  certain  to   stifle   this  new
The  FBI  and  the  Baker  Case
"The    Senator  from   Montana   [Mansfield]  raised  the
question   about  whether  the   [Baker-McCIoskey]   ques-
tion  had  been  referred  to  the  Department  of   Justice.
At  the  time  I  made  my  speech   last  week  it  had  not
been.    It  has  since  been  referred  to  the  Department.
The  Department  sent  its  representatives  around  to  see
me.    This  happened since  the  President  authorized  the
FBI  to  go  into  the  question.   They  did  come  around  to
my  office,  and  I  must  say  that  I  was  much disappointed
in   that   interview.    They   seemed   to   think   that   there
were  two  questions  of  prime  importance: First,  "Where
did  you  get  the  check  and  who  gave  it  to  you?    Who
is  your  informant?"   Second,  "When  did  you  get   the
check?"    Neither  point  is  material  so  far  as  they  are
concerned.   .   .   .   They   spent   three-quarters   of   their
time  in  my  office   trying  to  find  out  where  I  got   the
information."
—Sen.  J.  Williams   (R.  Del),  in  the  Senate,  Sept.  9
inquiry  as  it  did   the  last.    The   key  figure  is  Matthew   Mc-
Closkey,  contractor  for  the  D.C.   Stadium,  who,  according  to
Senator  Williams   (R.  Del.),  conspired  with  Bobby  Baker  to
add   25,000  to  the  cost  and  divert   this  to  the  I960   Demo-
cratic  campaign  fund.     Sen.  Jordan,  Chairman  of  Rules,  re-
fused   to  promise  that   he  would   ask   McCloskey   to  testify.
His  colloquy  with   Senator   Williams   is  typical:
Sen.  WILLIAMS: I  should  like  to  ask  the  Senator  if  in
his  next  inquiry  he  intends  to  call  Mr. McCloskey?
Sen.  JORDAN: I  shall  answer  the  question  this  way:
If   the   resolution   is   turned  over   to   the   Committee  on
Rules,  we  will  do  the  investigating.
Sen.  WILLIAMS: Will  the   Senator   from  North  Caro-
lina  call  Mr.  McCloskey  as  a  witness?
Sen.  JORDAN: That  will  be  for  the  Committee  to  de-
cide.
Mr.  WILLIAMS: Will  the  Senator  tell  us  how  he  per-
sonally   will   stand?
Mr.  JORDAN:  If  the  Senator  will  wait  until  we  have
the  opportunity  to  act,  we  will  determine  how  to   proceed.
The   Democratic   maneuver   may   not   work.     As   Senator
Scott   (R.   Pa.)   said,   "The   danger   in  burying  a  live  issue  is
that  the  ghost  returns  to  haunt  the  happy   morticians."
Still  Time  to  Enter  A  Sub for  That  Boy or Girl  Going  Off  to  College
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street  ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
9/21/64
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
(To)   Name    ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................:...............Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?           Yes  D    No  Q
/ E Stones  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class   Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week   in
January  and   Bi-Weekly  during   July  and  August  at   5618  Nebraska   Ave..  N.W..   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by  I.   F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manairer.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5   in   the   U.S.:    $6   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   520  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED