I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964sep28.pdf

============================================================

Jurists  Condemn Brazil  Coup  US. Backed,  P.  3
'Violence  in the  Streets"  But  What of  (Anti-Negro)  Violence  in  the  Rural  South?
Republicans   and   Democrats   outdo   each   other   in   con-
demning  "violence  in  the  streets,"  a  euphemism  for  Negro
crimes  against  whites  in  the  North.    Both  are  silent  about
violence  in  the  South against  Negroes  and white civil  rights
workers.   This  is  unmentioned  in  the  campaign  speeches,   as
it  was  in  the  platforms.    Crimes  against  whites  have  been
exaggerated;  the  crime  rate  in  Goldwater's almost lily-white
Phoenix  turns out  to  be  higher  than  in  New  York  or  Wash-
ington.     Violence  against   Negroes   is   played  down.     The
body  of  a  Negro  CORE  worker  was  fished  out  of  the   Big
Black   River  near  Pickens,  Miss.,   Sept.  9  without   a  ripple
of    indignation.     Church   burnings   have   become  routine.
When   a  Negro  church  was   bombed  and  an  Indian  church
burned   down   near   Philadelphia,  Miss.,   Sept.   19,   the   few
newspapers  which  carried  the  item  buried  it  in  their  back
pages.     Two  days  later,   when  bombs  were   thrown   at   a
church  in  McComb,  Miss.,  and  into  a  house  where  two  chil-
dren  miraculously  escaped  death,  these  did  make  headlines
in   the   New   York   evening   papers   but   only   after    angry
Negroes  drove  police  out  of  the  neighborhood  with  bricks
and  bottles.   Failure  to  punish  Southern  white  bombers  and
killers  is  taken  for  granted.    No  one  has  yet  been  arrested
for  the  murder  of  three  civil  rights  workers  last  summer
near  Philadelphia,  Miss.    The  Klansmen  tried  for  shooting
Lemuel  Penn  in  Georgia  have  been  acquitted.   The  murder
of  Medger Evers  is  still  unpunished.   Nobody  has  been  ar-
rested   for   cutting   the   heads   off   two   young   Negroes   in
Mississippi   last   spring   and  throwing  their   bodies   in   the
Yazoo  river.   There  are  parts  of  the  South  in  which  shoot-
ing  Negroes  is  known as  "funning."   It's  time  Johnson  and
Humphrey,  Goldwater and  Miller,  were  forced  to  say  where
they  stand  on  this  Southern  form  of   amusement.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  32SEPTEMBER   28,  1964
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Like A  Bar-Room  Brawl  With  The  Lights  Out
It  is  not  surprising  that  Secretary  McNamara   abruptly  shut
off   his  press  conference  on  the  latest  Tonkin   Bay  incident  so
he  would  not  have  to  answer  questions.    The  U.S.  has  never
engaged  in  a  more  obacure  bit  of .brinkmanship.    The   Wash-
ington   Post  (Sept.  20)   in  reporting  the  White  House  reac-
tions  said  President  Johnson  "believes  that  history  might  have
turned  out  differently  if  Kaiser  Wilhelm  and  Chancellor  Adolf
Hitler   had  not  made  miscalculations  about   the   U.S."     The
parallel   is  doubly  unfortunate.     Germany   twice   precipitated
world  wars  by  a  "right  is might"  policy  ours  has  begun  to  re-
semble.    The  Germans  did  indeed  miscalculate  U.S.   reaction,
but  that  miscalculation  was  a  simple  affair.    Then  Berlin  did
not  know  what  Washington  would  do.    Here  we  have  a  situ-
ation   in  which  Washington    itself   does   not  know  what   it's
doing.     Neither  Washington   nor   Moscow   nor   Peking   nor
Hanoi  can  calculate  clearly  because  none  of  them  seem  sure  of
what  happened.     We  say  we  shot  at  some  blips  on  a  radar
screen;  Peking  and  Hanoi  say,  in  substance,  that  nothing  at  all
happened;  and  Moscow  says we  sank  three  ships.  Now  Wash-
ington  says  it  thinks  maybe  we  did.    This  is  beginning  to  re-
semble  a  bar-room  brawl  with  the  lights  out.
There's  Many  A  Blip  .  .  .
Last  time  our  Navy  at  least  claimed  to  have  heard  and  seen
gun  flashes.  This  time  the  whole  encounter  took  place  on  the
radar  screens.    We  don't  seem  to  know  what  the  hostile  blips
were,  or  what  happened  to  them.  According  to  Mr.  Johnson's
press  conference  of  Sept.  21,  when  the  early  reports  came  in
some  persons  had  urged   rapid   retaliation   again,  as  after   the
alleged  attack  on  August  5,  which  Peking  and  Hanoi  also say
never  happened.    Fortunately  Mr-  Johnson  said  he  preferred
to  wait  until  daylight  when  the  situation   could  be  better  un-
derstood  and  evaluated.   One  more  swift  reprisal  raid  like  the
last  one,  and  it  would  have  been  hard  to  tell  from  the  blips
on  the  political   radar   screen   whether   that  was  Johnson   or
Peking  on  That  First  Tonkin  Bay  Battle
"According   to   the   'chronology',   at   7:40  p.m.  local
time,   U.S.   warships   encountered   these   'surface   ves-
sels'  and  at  9:52  an  'engagement'  took  place.     Fierce
fighting  continued  for  more  than  three  hours  and  last-
ed  till  1:30  on  August  5.   The  whole  process  lasted   for
nearly  six  hours.    This  was  truly  a  sea  battle  of  con-
siderable  scale.    But  anybody  with  a  little   knowledge
of  military  science  knows  that  torpedo  boats  have  high
speed  and  short  range  and  are  fit  for   short  distance
surprise   attack   and   hit-and-run   tactics.     How   could
they  be  engaged  in  fierce  fighting  with  powerful  U.S.
destroyers  for  three  hours  on  high  seas  more  than  60
nautical  miles  off  the  coast?     Secondly,  if  these  ves-
sels  were,  as  alleged  by  Johnson,  'hostile  vessels  of  the
Government   of   North   Vietnam',   which  made   'delibe-
rate,   wilful   and  systematic   attack   on   U.S.   vessels',
why   didn't   they   start   the   attack   immediately   after
spotting   the   U.S.   vessels,   instead   of   paralleling   the
tracks  of   U.S.  vessels,  until  9:52,  that   is,   more   than
two  hours  after  U.S.  vessels  spotted  them,  got  every-
thing  ready,  and  even  had  time  to  call  in  an  escort  of
aircraft?"
—Peking  Review,  Aug.  14.   We  are  indebted  for  this
quotation  to  (of   all  places)   the  Goldwaterite  National
Review   (Sept.   22)   whose   editor,   Buckley,   advocates
negotiating  with  China   to  end  the  Viet    war.
Goldwater   shooting  from  the  hip  again.  McNamara  may have
fled that  press  conference  because  answers,  or  unwillingness  to
answer,  certain  questions  might  have  been  embarrassing.    He
might  also  have  fled  lest  the  press  discover  that he,  too,  didn't
know  the  answers.     It's  not  news  that  the  American   people
long  ago  lost  touch  with  what  is  really  happening  in  Vietnam.
It's  painful  to  discover  that  their  leaders  aren't  sure  either.
In  the  last  Tonkin  Bay incidents  the  alibi  was  that  while
the  CIA  knew,  it  failed   to  let  the  Navy  know,  that  attacks
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  28,1964
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
were  being  made  on  the  North   Vietnamese  coast  while  our
destroyers  cruised   nearby.    After   that  incident,   it  was  an-
nounced  that  our  patrols  were  being  removed  from  the  Bay of
Tonkin  but  that  we  reserved  the  right  to  resume  them  later.
Now  again  the  AP  from  Washington   (Baltimore  Sun,  Sept.
22)  carries  the  news,  "The   two-destroyer  patrol  involved  in
last  Friday's  shooting  incident  has  been  withdrawn  from   the
Gulf  of  Tonkin,  informed  sources  said  tonight.    The  patrol
was  finished  on  schedule,  they  said,  and  it  is  indefinite when
another  will  go  into  the gulf. ..."   Was this  the first patrol
since   the   August   5   affair?*     Were   any  covert  operations
scheduled  at  the  same  time  by  the  South  Vietnamese,  using
the  naval  vessels  we  have  given  them?    How   does   North
Vietnamese  radar  distinguish  U.S.  naval  vessels  when  under
U.S.  command  from  the  same  vessels when  under  South  Viet-
namese  control?    Do  U.S.  patrols   engage  in  reconnaissance
which  pinpoints  radar  and  coastal  defense  installations  along
the   North   Vietnamese   coast   and   is  this   information   then
turned  over  to  the  South  Vietnamese  to  help  them  in  raiding
activities ?   If  Russian or  Chinese  destroyers prowled  the  Flor-
ida  coast  while  ships  they  supplied  Castro  engaged  in  coastal
raids,  what  would  we  do?    Send  hampers  of  Florida  grape-
fruit  to  their  skippers?
What  the  Desperadoes  Want
We  may have  double  electronic  locks  on  our  nuclear  weap-
ons  but  we  seem  to  have  less  and  less  control  over  our  own
and  our  puppet  forces  in  Vietnam  though  these  could  spark
off  a  wider  war.    The  situation  in  South  Vietnam  is  falling
apart  so  quickly  that  one  suspects  it  is  too  fast  for  the  Viet-
cong  as  well  as  ourselves.    Divisional  capitals  are  left   un-
guarded—and  yet  are  not  taken  over—as  commanding  gen-
erals  move  their  troops  on  Saigon  to  see  if  they  can  emerge
as  the  new  "strong   men"  or  at  least  get  themselves  another
star  on  their  shoulder  straps as consolation prizes. The  indiffer-
ence  of  the  populace  in  Saigon  was  the  most  striking  feature
of  the  abortive  coup.    The  country  is  sick  of  war  and  sick  of
us,  especially of  our  habit  of  napalming and  machine-gunning
•"Navy  chiefs,"  said  the  Washington  Wire  of  the  Wall
Street  Journal  Sept.  4,  "plan  to  send  another  sea  patrol  into
the   Gulf   of  Tonkin  soon.    It  will  resemble  the  force  that
encountered   North   Vietnamese   attacks   in   early   August.
Officers  talk  of  the  plan  as  just  another  reconnaissance   mis-
sion.    But  it  could  test  Red  belligerency  afresh."   Was  this
advance  leak  part  of  a  war  of  nerves?
Congress  And  The  Court
"The  Constitution  says,   The   Supreme   Court  shall
have  appellate  jurisdiction,  both  as  to  law  and  fact,
with  such  exceptions,  and  under   such  regulations  as
the  Congress  shall  make.'  .  .  .  But  these  constitutional
provisions  no  more  authorize  Congress  to  prevent  the
judicial  power  of  the  United  States  from  enforcing  the
right  to  equal  protection  of  the  laws  than  the   same
provisions  authorize  Congress  to  prevent  the  judicial
power  from  enforcing  the  right  to  freedom   of  speech,
or  trial   by  jury,   or   any   other   constitutional   right.
Congress  cannot  nullify   constitutional   rights   by   the
simple  device  of  forbidding   U.S.   courts  to  decide  cases
in  which  these  rights  are  involved."
—Henry    W.   Edgerton,   retired   judge   of   the     U.S.
Court  of  Appeals   for   the  District  of  Columbia,  in  o
letter   to  the   Washington   Post  Sept.   16,  on  the   re-
apportionment   controversy  in  Congress.
whole  villages  to  get  at  a  few  suspected  guerrillas.    Behind
the   Catholic-Buddhist  feud   is  a   division   between   Catholic
extremists  anxious to  carry on  the  war  at  any  cost  and  Budd-
hists  who want restoration  of  civilian government  and  a  cease-
fire.   The  most  dangerous  element  in  the  situation  are  those
military  men  who  see  a  widening  of  the  war  as  the  only way
to prevent  a  negotiated  peace.    One  of  these  is  the  young  Air
Force  Commander  and  playboy,  Nguyen  Cao  Ky,  to  whom
Khanh  owes  his  survival.    In  an  interview  with  Le  Monde
(Sept.  17)  Ky  advocated  extension  of  the  war  to  the  North
and  when  asked  whether  the  Americans  would  permit  this
declared  angrily,  "M.  I  can  order  and  carry  out  these  opera-
tions  at  any time,"  and  cut  off the  interview.   This  is  the  new
power  behind  the  collapsing  throne  in  Saigon.
Our  puppets  have a way of  making us dance to their  strings.
It  would  be  well   to  be  on  guard   against  provocations   or
phony  news  stories  designed  to  provoke  or  excuse what  these
light-headed  desperadoes  want.    In  this  category  is  the  story
from  Saigon  in  the  New  York  Times  (Sept.  22)  as we  go  to
press  quoting  "reliable  military  sources"  as  saying  that  South
Vietnamese  forces  had  inflicted  heavy  casualties  on  two  com-
panies  of  North  Vietnamese who  had  crossed  over  the  demili-
tarized  zone that  separates  the  two parts  of  Vietnam.   The  AP
(Baltimore  Sun,  Sept.  22)   treated  this  more  circumspectly  as
a  "possibility"  that  U.S.  authorities were  investigating.   Why
should  North   Vietnam  risk  an  invasion  and  a  U.S.  attack
when  the  collapse  of  the  South  Vietnamese  government  and  a
negotiated  peace  may  be  in  sight?
Why  Morse  Opposes  Javits  or  Any  Other  "Compromise"  Court   Resolution
"I  shall  vote  for  no  proposal  that  in  any  way  casts   dis-
respect  upon  the  Federal  court  system.   The  back-seat  driv-
ing  that  the  Javits  substitute  represents  is  always  an  un-
sound  disruption  of   our  constitutional   system,   no  matter
how  innocuously  it  may  be  framed.    The  courts  will  ignore
it  but  the  public  will  not.    For  those  who  want  to  stir  up
resistance   to  court   decisions  and  resentment  against   the
courts  in  general,   any  critical  advisory   opinion   from   the
Congress  is  a  victory.
"For   at   least   10  years,   'court-busting'  bills   have  been
on  this  calendar  in  every  session.    We  have  had  bills  to
overturn  the  Nelson  decision  on  State  subversive  laws;  bills
to  overturn  the  passport  decisions; bills to  overturn  the  pro-
tection  of  persons  charged  as  security  risks;  bills  to  over-
turn  the  Mallory   rule.    If  we  who  fought  those  measures
had  started  dickering  with  their  advocates  to find something
we  could  all  agree  on,  most  of  them  would  have  been  adopt-
ed  in  one  form  or  another.
"It  was  not  Earl  Warren  who  laid  down  the  theorem  that
the  Supreme  Court  is  the  final  arbiter  of  the  Constitution;
it  was  a  great  Virginian,  John  Marshall.    If  the  American
people  are  adamant  in  their  opposition  to  the  Court  rulings
on  reapportiohment  a  constitutional  amendment   can  always
undo   what   the   Supreme   Court   has   already   done.     It   is
those  who  know  that  once  popular  representation  is  a  fact
the  people  will  welcome  it,  who  are  trying  to  suspend  the
administration of  justice."
—Morse  in  the Senate Sept.  15   (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's Weekly,  September  28,1964
Commission's   Report  Says  Military  Feared  Congress  Would  Approve  Goulart's   Reforms
World  Jurists  Condemn  Brazil's  Military  For  U.S.  Supported  Coup
When    the    conservative   International    Commission   of
Jurists   condemns  Castro  or  criticizes   the  Soviet   bloc,  it
makes  headlines  in  the  U.S.  press.    But  its  recent  criti-
cism  of   the  military    coup  in   Brazil   the   U.S.  supported
was  almost  entirely   blacked   out   of   the   U.S.  press.     We
cabled   the   Commission  in   Geneva  for   a   copy   and  here
present  the  heart  of  that  report  from  its  September  bul-
letin:
President  Goulart   was  effectively   overthrown   by  April  2,
1964,   in  a  military   coup   which   was  fortunately   bloodless.
The  accusations  made  against  him  by  the  military  leaders  of
the  coup  were  of  trying  to  introduce  a  dictatorship   of   the
extreme  Left,  of  violating  the  Constitution,   and   of   increas-
ing  his personal  power  at the  expense  of  that  of  Congress.. ..
It  is  difficult  to  find  any  justification  for  the  overthrow  of
President  Goulart  by  the  military  without  waiting  for   Con-
gress  to  express  its  views  on  his  proposals.  .  .  .  Whether  or
not  President  Goulart  was  a  good  or  bad  executive,  Left-wing
or  Right-wing,  efficient  or  inefficient,  he  was  the  constitutional
President  of  Brazil  and  constitutional  methods  existed  to  re-
strain   him   from   accomplishing   any  of   the   three   things   of
which  he  was  specifically  accused  by the  military. The  obvious
conclusion  to  be  drawn  from   the  fact  that  the  military  did
not  wait  for  Congress  to  pronounce  upon  President  Goulart's
proposals  is that  they  feared  that  Congress  might  accept  them.
Any  pretext  of  acting  in  the  higher  interests  of  the  Constitu-
tion  or  to  protect   the  Constitution   against   the  activities  of
President  Goulart  is  self-evidently  hollow.  .  . .
The  Real  Reason  for  the  Coup
President  Goulart's   programme   was  to  "transform  an  ar-
chaic   society   into   a   modern   society   authentically  free   and
democratic."    A  small  agrarian  reform  had  been  effected  by  a
decree of  March,  1964.    In  order  to  proceed  to  a more  sweep-
ing  reform  President  Goulart  had  asked  Congress  in  his  an-
nual  report  of  March  15,  1964,  to  approve  amendments to  the
Constitution.  .  .  .  The  reform  already  effected  by  decree  con-
cerned   3%   of  the  land   surface  and   covered   non-cultivated
land  less  than  ten  kilometers  on  either   side  of  part  of   the
federal  communications  system.    Such  land  had  been  the  ob-
ject  of  fearful   speculation.    More  fundamentally,  the  project
of  agrarian  reform  aimed  to  abolish  the  abuses  of  latifundia.
...  In  Brazil  62%  of  cultivable  land  belongs  to  3%  of  the
How  LBJ  Welcomed  The  Coup
"The   American  people  have  watched  with  anxiety
the   political  and  economic  difficulties   through  which
your  great  nation  has  been  passing.  .  .  .  The relations
of  friendship and  cooperation  between  our  two  govern-
ments  and peoples  are ...  a  precious  asset  in  the in-
terests   of   peace  and  prosperity   and  liberty   in  this
hemisphere  and in  the  whole world.   I  look  forward  to
the  continued  strengthening  of  those  relations  and  to
our  intensified  cooperation  in  the  interests  of  economic
progress  and social  justice  for  all.  .  .  ."
—Johnson's  message  welcoming  Goulart's  overthrow,
Apr.  2.
population;   0.5%   is  divided  up  into  400,000  parcels  of   less
than  5 hectares;  there  are 9  million  landless  peasants  of  whom
4  million  are  not  paid  wages  in  money.
As  political  reforms,  President  Goulart  wished  to  give  the
right  to  vote  to  illiterates  and  to  those on  military  service,  and
asked  for  universal  suffrage.    He  also  proposed  that  his  pro-
gramme  of  reform  should  be  submitted  to  a  popular  refer-
endum  in  which  all  Brazilian citizens  aged  18  and  over  would
be  entitled  to  vote.  .  .  .  These  reforms,  unless  there  be  some
hidden  sinister  significance,  are entirely  in  accordance  with  the.
Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights.  .  .  .  Moreover,  the
late  President  Kennedy  expressed  his  approval  of  this   social
programme  as  entirely  in  conformity  with  the  spirit  of   the
Alliance  for  Progress.    It  would   seem  more  than  a  little  in-
congruous   to  label   as  Communist   a  programme   which   met
with  the  approval  of  President  Kennedy,  or  which  in  prin-
ciple  is  self-evidently  necessary  for  the  proper    advancement
of  human  dignity  in  a  country  where  the  disparity   between
rich  and  poor  is  still  of  frightening   proportions.
Something  of  the  measure  of  the  respect   for   fundamental
rights  which  is  held  by  the  new  military  regime  in  Brazil  can
be  gauged  from  its  actions  since  assuming  power.    The   land
reform  [decree]  was  abrogated.     Approximately  forty  mem-
bers  of  Parliament  have  been  divested  of  their  seats,   censor-
ship  of  the  press  has  been  established,  approximately  8,000
persons  have  been  arrested,  and  all  likely  opponents  of  stand-
ing  at  the  forthcoming   presidential   election   have   been   de-
prived  of  their  civil  rights.
How  Brazil's  New  Military Chiefs  Faked  Evidence  of  a  Communist  Plot
"Five   months   after   the   'glorious   Christian  revolution,'
both  ordinary   and  military  prisons  are  overcrowded  with
political  prisoners,  numbering  now  several  thousands  and
including  a  number  of  MPa,  a  few  deposed  State  governors
and  mayors,  priests,  university  teachers,  and  so  on.    The
net  for  this  frantic  witchhunt  has  been  cast   far  and wide
to  gather  in  every  man  and  woman  even  remotely  suspect
of  progressive  or  Left-wing  opinions.    In  some  places,  like
the  State of  Minas Gerais, this  went to  the  extent  of  pounc-
ing  rather  on  the  progressives  or reformist  Catholic groups,
while  leaving the  few  Communists  at  liberty.  .  .  .
"Immediately  after  the  military  coup,  peasants   (includ-
ing   many  women)  were  rounded  up  in  hundreds  by  army
and  police  units  and  thrown  into  local  jails  and  beaten  up.
Many  of  the  leaders  were  killed  or  emasculated  by  gangs
of  thugs  organized  by  the  landowners,  who  were  known  to
have  been  buying  and  storing  arms  for  some  time.    It   is
true  that  the  regime  has  not  dared  so  far  to  break  up  the
"Labour  Courts"  legally  set   up  in  country  towns  to  deal
with  peasants'  complaints,  but  the  judges  have  been  subject
to  much  pressure  and  at  least  one  of  them  was  arrested.
"In  order  to  give  some  semblance  of  truth  to  the  hack-
neyed  and  already  discredited  story  of  a  'Communist  plot',
the  military  chiefs  have  organized  a  number  of  'exhibitions
of   subversive  material'  which   they  claim  to   have   seized
from   Left-wing   organizations   (the   press   cliche   'copious
subversive  material was  seized'  is  always  good  for  raising
a   laugh  nowadays).    One  of   these   ludicrous  affairs   was
found  to  consist  mostly  of  books  (Djilas's  The  New  Class,
textbooks  on economic  development, etc.),  but  pride of  place
was  given to an Egyptian flag!" .  . .
—The  Tribune  (London), Sept.  11.
9  *
1   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  28,  1964
Cozy  Relations  Between   Doctors   and  Insurance   Companies  Drive  Up  Cost  of  Health  Care
As  An  Alternative  To  Medicare  Why  Not  Regulate  Private  Health  Plans?
For  almost  a  third  of  a  century  an  alliance  of  doctors,  hos-
pital   trustees   and   health   insurance   companies   has   blocked
passage  of  a  federal  health  insurance  program.     F.D.R.  en-
dorsed  compulsory  national  health  insurance  for  every  Amer-
ican  whe,n  he  first  sent  the   Social   Security  Bill  to  Congress
in  1935.   President   Truman   throughout   his  administration
fought   for  a  comprehensive  medicare  program   that   included
doctor,  dental   and   laboratory   insurance  as  well   as   hospital
care.    Today,  as we  go  to  press,  Congress  is  still  debating  the
whittled  down  remains  of  this  plan—a  program   of   hospital
and  nursing  home  care  for  those  65  and  over—and  it  seems
almost  certain  that  even  this  will  be   defeated.
Why  Doctors   Oppose  Medicare
The  opponents  of  medicare  have  more  at  stake  than  their
Puritan  ethics  and  capitalistic ideology.    Private  health  insur-
ange  for  them  has  been  a  lucrative  venture.     In  1959, for
example,  it  supplied  one  in  eight  general  practitioners and  one
in  four  specialists  with  50%   or  more  of  their  average  earn-
ings.     Some  hospitals,   especially  in   industrial  areas,   derive
as  much  as  70%   of  their  income  from  Blue  Cross  alone.    If
this  income  were  solely  the  result  of  an  "arm's  length"  rela-
tionship  between  the  vendors  of  medical  care  and  the  insur-
ance  carriers,  one  might  expect  it  to  continue  under  any  form
of   insurance,  public  or   private.     Unfortunately,   their   rela-
tionship  at  best  has  been  one  of  reciprocal  backscratching.
In  the  case  of  Blue  Cross  and  Blue  Shield,  doctors  and  hos-
pitals  enjoy  direct  control  through  the  boards  of  directors  of
the  local  plans.    According  to  Herman  and  Anne  Somers  in
their  classic  (and conservative)   study,  Doctors,  Patients  and
Health  Insurance,  they  outnumber  representatives  of  the  gen-
eral  public  on  these  boards  by  a  2-to-l  margin.    In  the  case
of  commercial  companies,  their  influence  is  more   subtle   but
just  as  powerful.  The  doctor,  as  the  Somerses  explain,  is  the
commercial  carrier's  umbilical cord.    His  good  will  can  bring
subscribers   and   his   assistance,  as   in   promptly   discharging
patients  from   hospitals,  can  reduce  benefit  payments.
One  consequence  of  this  is  that  insurance  plans   are  more
often   tailored  to  the  interests  of  the  vendors  than  the con-
New  Atomic  Pact  Becomes   Official
The  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  has   unani-
mously   endorsed   the   new   atomic   information    agree-
ment  with   NATO  and  its   member  nations.    The  old
dissenters   like   Sen.  Anderson    and   Representatives
Holifield  and  Price  may  consider  the  battle  against  nu-
clear  dissemination  already  lost.    Senator   Aiken   told
us  of  his  personal  misgivings  but  he  too  chose  to  re-
main  silent  in  the  committee's  report.     The  agreement
becomes  official   on  September  24  in  the   absence  of   a
veto  from  both  houses  of  Congress.    The  five  congress-
men  who  submitted  resolutions  of  protest  in  July  have
decided  not  to  carry   the  fight  further.    They  say  they
will   conserve  their  limited   resources  for  an  effort   to
defeat   an  MLF  agreement   in  late  winter.    We  hope
they  show  greater  determination  then  than  they  have
now.
sumers  of  medical  care.    Most   plans  encourage  hospitaliza-
tion  and  surgery  even  when  these  may  not  be  medically  nec-
essary.    Others   like  Major  Medical  tempt   doctors   and hos-
pitals   to   charge   higher   prices   than   they   would  ordinarily
charge  the  uninsured.    As  a  result  medical  prices  have  been
spiraling  upward  about  three  times as  fast  as  the  general  price
index.    The  insurance  carriers  have  been  either  unwilling  or
unable  to  regulate  this price  spiral.   When  several  Blue  Cross
groups  attempted  to  do  so  in  the  late  1950's,  they  received  a
sharp  warning  from  the  president  of  the  American   Hospital
Association  against  any tendency  to  act as "defender  of  [their]
subscribers  against  the  hospital  rather  than  as  an  agency   for
the  prepayment  of  hospital  care  as  it  is  determined  to  be  by
the  hospitals  and  doctors."     The  carriers  have  turned  instead
to   higher   premiums,   restricted   enrollment    and   inadequate
benefits.
In  the  absence  of  a  federal  health  insurance  program,  fed-
eral   regulation   of   private  insurance  plans   is  necessary.     It
would   tend  to  counteract  the   influence   of   doctors  and hos-
pitals  and  strengthen  the  hand  of  those  in  the  insurance  com-
panies  who  desire  to  control  medical  costs  rather  than  raise
premiums.    Health  has  become  too  big  a  business  to  remain
both  unnationalized  and   unregulated.
Still  Time  to  Enter  A  Sub for  That  Boy or  Girl  Going  Off  to  College
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street   ...........
City  ...............
For   $5.35  extr
(To)    Name
Street   ...........
City   ...............
Shall  we  send
Weekly      5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
..........................Zone............State.. ..................
9/28/04
a  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
..........................Zone............State....................
gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  O
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  in
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618 Nebraska   Ave..  N.W.. Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by  I.  F.   Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED