I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964feb17.pdf

============================================================

Fidel  Says  Those  Missiles  Were  His  Own  Idea,  See P.  2
Canada's  Leading  Paper  Satirizes  U.S.  Devotion to  International  Law  in  Cuban  Crisis
"It  (seizure  of  the  Cuban  fishing  boats)  presents  a  ludi-
crous  picture—the  U.S.   protesting   a  violation  of  interna-
tional  law,  as  represented   by  38  men  and  boys  fishing  in
Florida  waters  without  a  license,  to  the  country  over  which
it  has  been  flying  regular  surveillance  missions  in  violation
of  international  law.  .  .  .
"The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  say  it,  but  the  State  De-
partment  has  been  encouraging  speculation  that  the  Cuban
government  sent  the  boats  into  Florida  waters  as  a  matter
of  deliberate provocation.   Its  alleged  purpose was  to  bring
Cuba's  demand  for  the  evacuation  of  Guantanamo  to  world
attention  once  more.   This  is  to  attribute  prescient  clever-
ness  to  the  Cubans  or  at  worst  a  stroke  of  blind  luck.    It
was  impossible  for  the  Cuban  government   to  assume  the
imprisonment  of  the  crews  by  the  U.S.  Government,  since
the  federal  statute  dealing  with  encroachments  on  territor-
ial  waters  contains  no  penalties.
"Havana  could  hardly  have  proceeded  on  so  preposterous
an  assumption  as  that  the  U.S.  would  turn  over  the  crews
to  the  State  of  Florida to  be tried  for,  of  all  things,  fishing
without  a  license.    That  is  what  was  done,  however."
—Toronto  Globe  and  Mail  from  Washington, Feb.  8.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII, NO. 7
FEBRUARY  17,  1964
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Report  on Cuba The  New  York  Times  Was  Afraid  to Print
This  issue is edited  as much  for  editors  abroad  as for  readers
at home.    It  illustrates the  extent  to which  independent  report-
ing  and  thinking  about  Cuba  in  this  country  have  been   re-
stricted   by  intimidation.    The   report   on  Cuba  to  which  we
give  over  this  week's   issue  is  by  no  obscure   journalist,  with
access  only  to  the  small  publications  on  the  fringes  of  our  so-
ciety.    He  is Herbert  L.  Matthews  and  an  editor  of  America's
greatest  newspaper,  the  New  York   Times.    His  paper  only  a
few  weeks  ago reprinted  from  The  New  Republic  a  sensational
and  friendly  report  on  Cuba  by  the  French   journalist,  Jean
Daniel.     Yet   when   Matthews  visited  Cuba   and   came  back
with  an  equally  sensational  report,  not  a  line  appeared  in  his
own  paper.    Apparently  a  Frenchman  or  some  other  foreign
journalist  can  be  allowed  wide  publication  about  Cuba  in  the
United  States  even  if  he  transgresses  American  "party  line"
on  this,  our  most  controversial,  subject.    But  when  an  Ameri-
can  does  it,  the  report  seems  to  be  unfit—or  at  least  too  haz-
ardous—to  print  in  the  New  York   Times.    It  was left  to  the
Hispanic   American   Institute   at   Stanford  University,  whose
scholarly  monthly  report  on  Latin  American  affairs  has  a  total
circulation  of   2500,  to  bring  out  the  Matthews  report  in  a
special  pamphlet  from  which  we  present  salient  excerpts  in
our   pages.
No  Subject  More  Important  to  Our  Future
We  do  not  say this  to  hurt  the  New   York   Times.    In  our
lifetime  it  has never  been  a  better  or  a more  liberal  newspaper.
Its  editorials  on  the  silly  and  mendacious  crisis  whipped   up
by  the  State  Department   over  the  Cuban  fishing  boats  in  the
past  week  deserve  applause.    It  is  the  first  U.S.   daily  to  re-
establish  a  bureau  in  Havana,  a  major  result  of  the  visit  made
there  last  Fall  by Mr.  Matthews.    But  considering  the  paucity
of  news from  Cuba,  the  sensational  character  of  one  story  Mr.
Matthews  brought  back  (see  page 2),  and  the  weight  attached
to  his  opinions,  it  is striking  that  these  were  not  published  ty
the  New   York   Times   itself.    Mr.  Matthews   knows  Spanish
well.    He  distinguished  himself  by  his  courageous  and  sym-
pathetic  reporting  of  the  Spanish  Civil  War  in  the  New   York
Times   in  the   30's   under   circumstances   almost   as  difficult   as
Our  Iron  Curtain  Around Cuba
"It  is  axiomatic  in  journalism  that  it  is  not  possible
to   know  what  is  happening  anywhere  unless  you  go
there.    In  my  own  case,  I  had  not  been  to  Cuba  since
August  1960.   The  intensely  hostile  climate  of  opinion
in  the  United  States,  some  of  which  is  directed  towards
me  and the  New  York  Times,  and  the  difficulties  placed
in  the  way   of  all   visitors   by  the   U.S.   and  Mexican
Governments,  made  an  earlier  trip  unwise.
"The  freedom  for  Americans  to  know  and  to  travel
has  been  curtailed,  so  far  as  Cuba  is  concerned.    For
teachers  and students  this  is  frightening.   As  scholars
they  are  not  allowed by  the  U.S.  Government to  go  to
Cuba  to  study  one  of  the  most  important  political  and
social  phenomena  of  modern  times.    As  a  result   none
of  our  leading  Latin  Americanists  knows  what  is  hap-
pening  in  Cuba; they  cannot  teach  with  authority  on
the  subject;  they  cannot  even  .read  the  many  articles
and  books  on  the   Cuban  Revolution  now   being   pub-
lished,   with   the   ability   to   judge   whether   they   are
right  or  wrong,  good  or  bad.
"AH  they  can  do  (and  Theodore  Draper  does  it  bril-
liantly  and  effectively,  as  always,  in  the  January  1964
issue  of  Commentary)  is  to  try  to  construct  a  plausible
picture  by  piecing  together   speeches,   decrees  and  re-
ports,  and  interpreting   them  by  applying  Marxist  and
American   liberal  democratic  yardsticks.     Tree   after
tree  is  accurately  described,  but  the  forest  is  missed."
—Herbert  L. Matthews:  Return  to Cuba.
those  which  surround  the  Cuban  revolution  today.    He  knows
Latin  America  and  Cuba.    His  interview with  Fidel  Castro  in
the  Sierra  Maestra  in  1957  was  a  journalistic  feat,  disproving
the  claim  of  the  Batista government  that  Fidel's  little  band  of
guerrillas  had   been   wiped   out.    No   U.S.   reporter   is  better
equipped  to  provide  a  thorough,  an  informed  and  an  objective
report  on  Cuba  today.    On  no  subject  is  it  more  important  to
develop  a  balanced  public  opinion   in  this  country.    It  is  no
exaggeration   to  say—as  the  missile  crisis  demonstrated—that
our  future  and  the  world's  may  be  placed  in  jeopardy  by  the
mishandling  of  our  Cuban  relations.    Yet  only  a relative  hand-
ful   of  Americans   will  ever  read  this  Matthews   report.
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  17, 1964
Castro  Insists  It  Was  His  Idea,  Not  Moscow's  To  Put  Missiles  in  Cuba  . . .
The  excerpts  on these  two  pages  were  taken  from  a  spe-
cial  report  just  issued  by  the  Institute  of  Hispanic Ameri-
can  and  Luso-Brazilian   Studies,   Bolivar'  House,   Stanford
University,   California.    This  report  was  written  by  Her-
bert  L.  Matthews  of  the  New  York  Times,  who  is  on  the
Board   of   the   Institute.     It   is   called   "Return  to   Cuba."
Twice  before,  in  1959  and  1960,   Mr.  Matthews issued  out-
standing  reports  on  the  Cuban  problem  through  the  Insti-
tute.    Its   director,   Ronald  Hilton,   has  the  distinction   of
being  the  first  man  in  the  U.S.  to  expose  the  existence  of
the  CIA's  training  camps  in  Guatemala  for  the  April, 1961,
Cuban  invasion.    The  monthly  Hispanic  American  Report
published  by  the  Institute   is  invaluable for  Latin  Ameri-  .
can   affairs.     If   you   wish   to   read  the   full   report   from
which  these  few  excerpts  were  taken,  you  can  obtain  it  by
sending   $1  to   the  Institute   at  the   address   given   below.
Please   mention   the   Weekly.    What   follows   is  from  the
Matthews  report:
By  Herbert  L.  Matthews
He  [Castro]  talked  a  good  deal  about   the  nuclear  missile
crisis  of  October   1962   (which  Cubans  always .refer  to  as  'the
crisis  of  the  Caribbean').    It  was  in  most   respects,   the  same
story  that  he  told  three  and  a  half  weeks  later  to  Jean  Daniel
of   L'Express    of   Paris,   and   which   was   widely   reproduced.
However,   in  one  crucial  detail  of  historic  importance   it  was
the  opposite  of  what  Jean   Daniel   had   understood.
The  essence  of  Fidel's  account  was  that  the  Cubans,  on  the
basis  of  information  they  were  getting  early  in  1962   from  a
number  of  sources,  felt  almost  sure  that  the  U.S.  was  prepar-
ing  a  military  invasion  of  Cuba.    They  were  strengthened   in
this  belief  after  Aleksei  I.  Adzhubei,  Premier  Khruschev's  son-
in-law  and  editor  of  Izvestia, had  an  interview  with  President
Kennedy  early  that  year.    The   official  report  of  the  interview
was   conveyed   to   the   Cubans   who   interpreted   some   of   the
things  that  President  Kennedy  said  as  confirmation  of  their
belief  in  a  planned  invasion.    (The   State  Department   denied
that  President  Kennedy  was  so  threatening,  or  that  the   U.S.
was  planning  an  invasion.)
Castro  Says  The Missiles  Were  "Defensive"
The  Russians,  Fidel  Castro  argued,  were  also  persuaded   that
Cuba  was  going  to  be  attacked.    In   these  circumstances,   he
asserted,  the  nuclear  weapons  were  'defensive';  they  were  in-
tended  to discourage  the  U.S.  from  going  ahead  with  its  plans.
"In  the  world  today,"  he  went  on,'  "there  are  two  war  pho-
bias,  one  of  a  nuclear  war  which  can  be  ruled  out  because  no-
The  Food  Situation  In  Cuba
"There  is  enough  to  eat  on  the  whole,  but  it  is  dull,
with  not  much  variety,  and  with  constant   distribution
bottlenecks  in  Havana  and  other  cities.    There   is  no
starvation   or   even   serious   malnutrition,  but  getting
enough  food  is  often  extremely  difficult  and  tiring   for
housewives.     There   is   also   enough   fish   in   quantity,
thanks  to  the  high  seas  vessels  bought  from  Japan and
the  ones  the  Russians  gave  Cuba,  but  it  is  fish  that
Cubans   never   ate   and  do   not   like—tuna,   hake,  and
soon-to-be-marketed  herring  and  cod.
"Children  are  especially  well  fed.    Every  child to  the
age  of  seven  gets  a  quart  of  milk  a  day  without  fail.
As  a  result  of  the  hurricane  the  egg  ration  for   adults
in  Havana  was  suspended  while  we  were  there,  but  not
for  the  children."
—Herbert  L.  Matthews:  Return to  Cuba.
Cuba's  Dependence  on  the  Soviets
"The  Cuban  leaders ...  do  not  see  their  economic
dependence   on  the   Soviet   bloc  as   comparable  to   the
previous   economic  domination  by   the   U.S.     For   in-
stance,  the  Russians  buy  Cuban  sugar,  but  they  do  not
own  any  Cubar  sugar  plantations  or  mills  and  do  not
want  to.    The  Cubans  assert   that  they   will  take  no
dictation   from    the   Russians    and—for    anyone   who
knows  Cubans—this  is  plausible.
"The   cost  of  the  Soviet  bloc  of  sustaining  the  Cuban
revolution,  I  was  told  in  Havana,  has  been  greatly  ex-
aggerated   by   Washington   and   the   American   press.
Cubans  say  it  is  nothing  like  the  $1,000,000 a  day fig-
ure  generally   given   in  the   U.S.     I  could  not   get   a
valid  figure,  although  one  good  authority  ventured  an
estimate  of  $100,000,000  a  year."
—Herbert  L.  Matthews:  Return to  Cuba.
body  wants  it,  and   the  other   of   local  wars.    The   U.S.   and
Russia,  in  the   crisis  of   the   Caribbean,  were  facing  a  world
war  but  Cuba  was  facing  a  local  war.    She  was  going  to  be
attacked  by  the   U.S."
If  Cuba  were  attacked,  Fidel  continued,  the  Russians  would
have  been  drawn  in  because  of  their  commitment  to  the  Castro
government.
At  this point  he  said  to  us  flatly,  in  response  to  my  question,
that  the  idea  of  installing the  nuclear  weapons  was  his,  not  the
Russians.    Jean  Daniel,  in  his  account,  published  in  the  Neiv
York  Times  and  New  Republic,  on  the contrary wrote:  "Castro
confirmed   that  the  initial  idea  originated   with   the   Russians,
and  with  them  alone:     The   only  thing  we  asked  the  Russians
to  do  was  to  make  it  clear  to  the  U.S.  that  any  attack  on  us
was  an  attack  on  the  Soviet  Union.    We  had  extensive  discus-
sion  before  arriving  at  the  proposal   of  installing  guided  mis-
siles,  a  proposal  which  surprised  us  at  first  and  gave  us  great
pause.    We  finally  went  along  with   the  Soviet  proposal  be-
cause,  on  the  one  hand,   the  Russians  convinced   us  that   the
U.S.  would  not  let  itself  be  intimidated  by conventional  weap-
ons,  and  secondly  because  it  was  impossible  for  us  not  to  share
the  risks  which  the  Soviet  Union  was taking  to  save  us'."
In  order  to  get  this  important  point  straight,  once  and  for
all,  I  spoke  to  Premier  Castro  over  the  telephone  on  the  night
of  Jan.   7,   1964.     He  confirmed  what  he  had   said  to  us  in
Havana  and  in  no  uncertain  terms.    In  fact,  he  clearly  wanted
the  Daniel   version  of  what  he  said  (I   regret   to  say,  for  my
profession,   that  he  called  it  "a  journalistic  version")   to  be
corrected  for  the  historic  record.
He  also  said  that  Daniel  was  wrong   in  putting  the  entire
emphasis  on  Adzhubei's  talk  with  President   Kennedy.    This,
said  Fidel,  was only  one  element  ("un  elemento  en  el  juicio")
among  a  great  many  that  were  taken  into   consideration.
Then  he  said,  and  during   our   15-minute  conversation   he
repeated  it  emphatically at  least  four  times:  "Fuimos  nosotros
que  hemos  planteado  la  idea  de  los  misiles"   ("We    were  the
ones  who  put   forward   the  idea  of  the  missiles.")
At  another  point   he  said  it  was  not   for   the  Russians  to
make  such  a  suggestion:  "It  was  for  us  to  do  so.   We  showed
them  in  an  incontrovertible  way  that  an  invasion  was  being
planned."    His  conclusion   in  discussing  the  whole   crisis  del
Caribe  with  us  was this:  "War   was  avoided  but  peace  was  not
gained."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February   17, 1964
.  . . Communists  Take  A  Back  Seat  in  "Marxist-Leninist"  State  He  Set  Up
(More  From  the  Matthews  Report  on  Cuba)
To  concentrate  on  Cuban  Communism  is  to  miss  the  forest
for   the  trees.    The   Cuban  Revolution  is  a  very  complicated
phenomenon.  It  is bad  and  good,  depending  on  what  one  looks
at,  what  classes  of  people  one  considers.
It  is  also  worse  or  better  depending  on  how  moral  judg-
ments  are  applied.    If  Communism  is  a  sin,  a  heresy,  a  mor-
ally  evil  system,  then  Cuba  has  to  be—as  it  is  in  the  United
States—condemned  as  if   it  were  a  hell  on  earth.    If  moral
judgments  are  used  to  say,  for  instance,  that  is  better  for  the
children  of  the  poor  to  be  well  fed,  well  taken  care  of,  well
clothed,  educated,  taught  trades—as  the  greater  part  of  them
are  in  Cuba  today  for  the  first  time  in  history,  even  if  they
are  indoctrinated  with  Marxism-Leninism—then  one  reaches
another  result.                                                                                         ,
One  can  say  that  liberty  is  what  we  have  under  the   U.S.
Constitution,  and  since  the  Cubans  do  not  have  these  liberties
they  are  not  free.    Fidel  Castro  asks:  "Can   you  really  say  to
a  Cuban  Negro  who  now,  for  the  first  time  has  full   equal
rights  and  no  discrimination  that  he  is  not   free,   and  say  to
a  Negro  in  Alabama  or  Mississippi  that  he  is  free?"    There
is a  valid  answer to  this question,  but  it  is not  a simple  answer.
Fidel  and  the  Cuban  CP
...  the  Cuban  Communist  steadily gained   influence  in  that
early  period;  the  old  political parties  disappeared;  the  26th  of
July  Movement  split  into  Left  and  Right  and  faded  into  the
background.    The  links  to  Russia,  the  break  with  the  United
States,  the  embrace  of  Marxism-Leninism  all  pointed   in  one
direction.    Then  came  Fidel  Castro's  stunning  attack  on   "sec-
tarianism"   and   the  old-line  Cuban  Communists  of   the  PSP
in  March  1962.    It  was  directed  specifically at  the  Organizing
Secretary,  Anibal  Escalante,  who  was  trying  to  put  party  men
into  all  key  positions.
Fidel  saw  his  revolution,  his  Cuban  revolution,  threatened
and  broke  the  power  of  the  PSP  so  effectively  that  it  has  never
come  back.    The  problem  of  giving  Cuba  a  hopefully  perma-
nent  "Marxist-Leninist"   political  structure  was  already  under
way.    A  preliminary,  tentative  political   setup,  the   Organiza-
ciones  Revolucionarias  Integradas  (ORI)  was  loosely   thrown
together  in  mid-1961  with  the  understanding  that  it  was  to  be
supplanted  by  a  formal,  permanent  institution  called  the  Par-
tido  Unificado  de  la  Revolucion  Socialista  de  Cuba  (PURSC).
The   important  feature  to  report  today  is  that  the  PURSC
Fidel  Not  A  Puppet  of  The  Reds
"The  belief  fostered  by  Washington  and  the  Cuban
exiles  that   Fidel  Castro  is   a  prisoner  of   the  Cuban
Communist   apparatus   or  a   puppet  of   Moscow   is   a
myth.    He  is,  by  character,  incapable  of  accepting  or-
ders  or  even  advice.    The  path  he  has   chosen   forces
him  into  a  conformity to  most  of  the  needs  and desires
of  the  Soviet  bloc,  but  that  is  a  different  matter.
"Now  that  five  years  have  passed,  it  is  surely   time
for  American officials  and  the  American public  to  real-
ize  that  whatever  they  want  to  think  of  Fidel  Castro,
he  is  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  men  of  our  age.
The  U.S.  has  paid  heavily  for  a  shocking  underestima-
tion  of  Fidel  Castro's  intelligence  and  abilities."
—Herbert  L. Matthews:  Return to  Cuba.
is  approaching  its  completed   form  .  .  .  the  idea  is  to  bring
together  all  the  elements   that  will  serve  the  Revolution   loy-
ally  and   efficiently.     The  PSP—the  Cuban   Communists—are
merely  one  element;  they  do  not  control  the  PURSC  or  even
play  the  most  important  role  in  it.    The  baffling   distinction
between   Cuban   Communism   and   Cuban    Marxism-Leninism
has  to  be  made  here  as  elsewhere.     The  remnants  of  the  July
26  Movement   and  the  old  political   and  trade   union   groups
are  included,  plus  the  very  important   element   of  the   young
men  and  women  who  are  coming  into  the  economic   structure
and  political life  without  any previous  connection  with  politics.
Construction  of  the  PURSC  started  at  the  grass  roots.    Each
farm,   factory,  public  utility  or  working   group  of   any  type
selected  what  were  supposed  to  be  their  best  men  and  women.
.  . . The  PURSC  is therefore  a carefully  chosen  elite,  dedicated
to  the  Revolution.    I  asked  Fidel  if  it  was  not  similar  in  con-
ception  to  the  Communist  Party  in  the  Soviet  Union,  the  Fasc-
ist  Party  in  Italy  and  the  Nazi  Party  in  Germany,  and  he  said
that  roughly  it  was.    It  does  not  govern;   it  has  no  adminis-
trative  powers.    Its  function  is  to  carry  out  the  economic  and
political  policies  of  the  Government  at  every  level.  .  .  .
The  Government,  as  now  constituted  is  headed  by  an  execu-
tive  committee,  or  directorate,  of  six:  Fidel  Castro,  Raul  Cas-
tro,  Che  Guevara,  President  Dorticos,  Bias  Roca  (the  old  line,
PSP,   trade  union  leader   who  was  a  Cabinet   Minister   under
Batista  in  the  1940s)  and  Emilio  Aragones  Navarro   (former
head   of   the   Federation   of   Bank   Workers,  ex-26th   of   July
Movement,   an  accountant  from  the  middle  class).    Of   the
group,  only  Bias  Roca  is  an  old-style  PSP   Communist.
Castro  Less  Friendly in Talking to  Matthews About Kennedy (Then Alive) Than to Daniel
"President  Kennedy  was  still  alive  when  we  saw  Premier
Castro,  and  his  comments  on  President  Kennedy  were  less
friendly  than  they  were  more  than  three  weeks  later  when
he  saw  Jean  Daniel,  the  French  correspondent,   just  at  the
time  President  Kennedy  was  assassinated.     President  Ken-
nedy,  Fidel  said,  was  doing  more  harm  to  the  U.S.  than  to
Cuba  in  the  long  run  by  policies  aiming to  destroy  the  Cas-
tro   regime  through   isolation,   trade   embargoes   and   CIA
support   for   counter-revolutionaries,  saboteurs   and   guer-
rillas.  'The  U.S.  is  essentially  in  a  more  dangerous  position
internationally  than  Cuba,  and  the  U.S.  will  lose,'  he  said.
'Kennedy  makes  a  fine  speech  to  the  American University,
with  its   emphasis   on  peace,  understanding,  coexistence—
and   then   he   goes   off   to   Berlin   and   makes   a   bellicose
speech.    How  can  you  figure  him  out?'
"Fidel   still   has   the   primitive  ideas   one  often   finds   in
Latin  American  leftists  of  the  U.S.  as  a  rapacious,  imper-
ialistic,  aggressive   country.    Like  his  associates,  he  is  sure
that  there  are  going  to  be  other  revolutions  in  Latin  Amer-
ica,  although  no  one  predicts  where.    However,  Castro  did
inquire   several   times   what   the   United   States   would  do
about  Brazil  when,  as  he  seemed  to  expect,  there  is  a  revo-
lution  there.
"When  we  asked  him  about  the  subversion  that   Cubans
are  accused  of  in  Latin  America,  he  replied:  'Of  course   we
engage   in   subversion,   the   training   of   guerrillas,   propa-
ganda! Why not?  This  is  exactly  what  you  are doing  to  us."
—Herbert  L. Matthews:  Return to  Cuba.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  17,  1964
Secretary  Rusk's  Unctuous  Concern  for  A  World  Common  Law
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Frankly  we  hope  by giving  the  Matthews  report  wider  cir-
culation   in   our   own   pages   to   elicit   comment   in   Western
Europe   which  may  shame   the   American  government,   press
and  public  into  an  awareness  of  what  a  ludicrous  figure  we  cut
in  the  world  by  our  state  of  mind  on  Cuba.    We  do  not  set
outselves  up  in judgment  over  the  New  York  Times  but  we  do
think   it   important   to   call  attention  to   its  timidity  and   the
causes  for  it.   The  New  York   Times  was  the  No.  1  target  of
Senator  Eastland's  Internal  Security  subcommittee  in  its  1955
attempt  to  "investigate",  i.e.  to  smear  and  intimidate the  press.
Then  the  same  committee  in  I960  seized  on  the   1957  Mat-
thews   interview  with  Castro  to  draw  a  paranoid   picture  of
Batista's  downfall  as due  to  a  conspiracy  between  liberal  news-
papermen   and  certain  officials  in  the  State  Department.   These
Congressional  witch  hunts  added  to  other  factors  have  created
an  arrogance,  an  ignorance,  and  a  frustration  over  Cuba  that
make  the  U.S.   a  kind  of  "sick  man"  on  the  subject.    There
is  no  topic  on  which  it  is  more  dangerous  to  be  objective  in
the  United   States  today.    Since  such  attitudes  may  again  en-
danger world  peace,  this American  sickness is a world  problem.
Biggest  Bargain  Since   Manhattan
We  believe  the  observations  we  have  culled  from  the  Stan-
ford  Institute  pamphlet  by Mr.  Matthews  may help  to  develop
a  more  adult  and  sober  opinion  in  our  own  country.   We  be-
lieve  the  incident  itself  may help  Western  Europeans and  neu-
trals  to  understand  how  the   U.S.  government   is  locked   into
rigid,  inhumane  and   self-defeating  attitudes  toward   Castro.
We  think  this  important  at  a  time  when  our  own  government
is  trying  to  coerce  its  allies  and   friends  into  a  blockade  de-
signed   to  strangle  the  Cuban  revolution.    It   does  not  make
our  country  look  better  to  have  this  effort  coupled,  as  Secre-
tary  of  State  Rusk  coupled  it  at  his  last  press  conference,  with
unctuous  asurances  about  our  concern  for  developing  what  he
calls  a  "world  common  law."    If  anything  has  been   accepted
as  world   common   law,  it  is  that  an  economic  war  like  ours
against   Cuba   is  a  violation  of   freedom   of   the   seas   and   in
direct   conflict  with  the  charters  of  the  United   Nations  and
the   Organization   of   American   States.     Mr.   Rusk   demon-
Castro  and  Religion
"Fidel  Castro  is  a  maverick among  men,  and it  could
be  said  that  Marxist-Leninist  Cuba  is   a  maverick  in
the   Communist  fold.    Religion  is   an  example.    The
Roman  Catholic  Church  (Cuba  is  perhaps  90%  Catho-
lic)  naturally  took  a  stand  against   Communism.   For
Fidel   this   was    'counter-revolution',   and   in   1960-61
there  was  a  period of  conflict  during  which he  expelled
most  of  the  Spaniards who  made up  a  large  proportion
of  the clergy.
"However  it  was  significant  that  Pope  John  XXIII
and  the  Vatican never  broke  diplomatic  relations  with
Havana.    The  controversy  died  down.   Today,  there  is
not  only  an  Inter-Nuncio in  Havana  and  a  Cuban  Am-
bassador  at  the  Holy  See,  but  there  is  complete  free-
dom   of   religion.    In  speaking  to   one  of   the  highest
Catholic  prelates  in  Cuba,  I  was  told  that  freedom  of
worship  was  'total'.    One  of  the  most  important  U.S.
Protestant   churchmen  happened  to   be  in   Cuba  when
we  were  there  and  he  said  the  same  for  the   Protestant
community.
"As   Marxism-Leninism   takes   a   stronger   hold,  re-
ligiosity   will   no   doubt  weaken,  especially   with   the
young,  but  that  is  for  the  future  to  determine.    For
the  present,  the  attitude  was  doubtless  well  expressed
by  Fidel  in  speaking  to  us.     'I  don't  care  whether  a
person  is  religious  or  not,'  he  said,   'or  what  his  re-
ligion  is'."        —Herbert  L. Matthews:  Return  to  Cuba.
strated  his  own  ideas  of  proper  conduct  in  his  Feb.   7  state-
ment  on- Cuba  by withholding  the  information that  as  early  as
Dec.  9  the  Cuban  government,  through  the  Swiss  government,
notified   us  that  its  vessels  would  be  fishing  in  the  Gulf   of
Mexico  near  the  Dry  Tortugas.    To  have  disclosed  this  would
have  exploded  the  idea  the  State  Department  fostered  that  the
fishing  boats  were  engaged   in  a  provocation  to  get  us  out  of
Guantanamo.    This  is  a  question  we  are  foolish  to  raise;  no
other  country would  dare  claim  that  a  treaty  imposed  by  force
on  Cuba  more  than  60  years  ago,  under  which  we  pay  only
$3,000'a  year  for  31  square  miles  of  land  and  14  square  miles
of  harbor  is  somehow  so  sacrosanct  that  any  move  to  question
it  calls  for  united  action  by  all  Christendom.     Not   since  we
bought  Manhattan  from  the  Indians did  we pull  off so fraudu-
lent  a  deal  and  get  so  big  a  bargain  as  Guantanomo.
We'd    Like  This  Issue  to  Reach  As  Many  People  As  Possible—WHI  You   Help   Us  By  Addressing   Stamped   Long   Envelopes  to   Friends   In
Which  We  Will  Send  Free  Sample  Copies
I. F. Stone's Weekly
        56
i
8
  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  O.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  aub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .............................................................................~......—
Street   .......................................................................—........—
City  ............_.........................Zone.............State....................
2/17/64
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name   .........................................................................—
Street   ........._.................._.............................................._
City   ...........—.........................Zone......._..State..............._...
Shall  we  mend  gift  announcement          Tea  D    No D
/ F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   IS,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I    F   Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Clans   Pontage   Paid   at   Washington.   D.   C.    Published  every  Monday  except  in  August  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..
Washington.   D.  C.    An   independent  weekly   published   and   edited  by   T.  F.   Stone:   Circulation  Manager,   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.;  $6  In  Canada:  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rate*:  115  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED