I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964jul27.pdf

============================================================

From  San  Francisco,  With  Dismay
The  President  Draws  A  Clear  Line  Between  Himself  and  Goldwater  on  Peace
Q.  Mr.  President,  I  wonder  if   you  feel,  sir,  if   Senator
Goldwater's  rather  bellicose  statements  on  attitude  toward
the  Communists and  our  foreign  policy  in  general  has  in-
creased  the  difficulties  of  this  Government  in  its   relations
with its  allies abroad?
A. ...  I have not  the slightest  doubt  but what  the upper-
most  problem  in  the  mind  of  every  American and  the  mind
of  most  people  of  the  world is  how  to  live  with  our fellow
man  and  how  to  achieve  peace  in  this  period  in  which  we
live  in.
And  as  long  as  I  am  permitted  to  hold  the  office  that  I
now  occupy,  no single  statement  of  mine—and  no single  act
of  mine  is  going  to  be  in  the  direction  of  provoking  a  war.
And  I'm  going  to  utilize  every  resource  at  the  command  of
the  Federal  government  and  all  of  its  people  and  all—and
command  the  intelligence  of  all  the  people  of  both   parties
to  try  to  find  the  road  to  peace."
—President  Johnson's  news conference  July  18.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  26
JULY  27,  1964
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Goldwater  Rallies  An  Odd  Tribe  for  A  Strange  War
The  process  of  picking  a  presidential  candidate  bears  only
a  distant  relation  to  sober  discussion  of  political  issues.    To
see  one  in  action  is  to  see  first  of  all  that  politics  is  a  form
of  sports;  the  atmosphere  in  the  crowded   lobbies  of  the  St.
Francis  and  the  Mark  Hopkins  in  San  Francisco,  where  each
candidate  had  his  rooters   and  his  pennants,   was  much   like
that  before  a  football  game.    At  some  of  the  most  exciting
moments,  the  convention  seemed, to  call  for  coverage   by  an
anthropologist.     To    descend    from   the   galleries    into   the
depths   on   the   Cow   Palace   floor  during   one   of   the  many
demonstrations  was  to  dive  into  a  brightly  lit  jungle,  a  high
forest  of  banners, with  the  horns  blaring  and  the  drums  beat-
ing,    as  if   for   tribal  war.     At   duller   moments,   during   the
long  stretches  of  venerable  cliches  in  the  nominating  speech-
es,   the   convention   seemed    to   provide   a   psychic   massage
through   semantic   manipulation;   all   those   familiar    phrases
about  free  enterprise  began  to  seem  like  incantations,  handed
down  from  the  past  as  sure  formulas  for  the  ills  of  the  body
politic.    The  platform  could  be  read  as  ritual,  as  a  form  of
verbal  magic,  the  reassuring  recitation  of  a  secular  mass.
The  Insecurity  of  the  Rich
We   are  familiar  with   the   politics   of   insecurity  when   it
exploits  the  insecurities  of  the  poor.    At  the  Republican   con-
vention  one  could   see  in  action  the  politics  which  plays  on
the  insecurity  of  the  rich.    The  Goldwaterites  made  their  ap-
peal   to  people  who   were  afraid—rich,   powerful,   fortunate
beyond  any  dominant  class  in  history,  yet  afraid.    Some  of
the   fears   were  obvious:   fear   of   losing   their   property   and
power,  fear  lest  the  value  of  their  dollars  be  diminished  by
the  inflation  which  accompanies  the  welfare  state.    Above  all
they   did   not   want   to   lose  the   old   familiar   devil   of   their
neatly   Manichean   universe,   the   need   for   a   devil   being  as
deep  as  the  need  for  a  God.     Communism  as  the  devil  had
long   been   one   of   the   main   pillars   in   the   edifice  of   their
simple  faith.    Now   it,  too,  was  threatened   by  more   sophis-
ticated  and  pragmatic  attitudes.
Goldwater  expressed  their  alarm  when  he  told  the  platform
committee,  "I  was  surprised,  and  am  concerned,   that  during
these  Platform  hearings,  mention   even   of   the   word    'Com-
LBJ  Puts  McCarthyism  Into  The Campaign
"I  criticized  Senator  McCarthy  for  practices   he  em-
ployed.    I  voted  to  censure  him, as  did  every  Democrat
who  was  present  at  that  time."
—Johnson  at  his  press  conference  of  July  18.
"Like  him  or  not,   McCarthy   is  the  strongest   voice
now  speaking  in  America  against  Communism. ... To
remove  such  a  man  from  honor  and  influence in  Amer-
ica  at  this  juncture would be  a  strong  victory  for  Mos-
cow in the field of  American public  opinion ... a propa-
ganda  thriumph  for  the  Attlees,  the  Mendes-Frances,
and  the  double-talking  co-existence-with-Russia  crowd
here at  home."
—Goldwater  against  censure: Senate, Nov.  12,1954.
munism'  has  been  the  exception   rather  than  the  rule."    He
complained   that  "even  in  the  keynote  address"  it  seemed   to
be  taboo.    "This   Administration,"  he   protested,   "pretends
that  Communism  has  so  changed  that  we  can  now  accommo-
date  it.    Our   party  cannot  go  the  final  and  fatal  step  and
pretend   that   it   doesn't   even   exist."     They  didn't  want   to
hear  about  the  differences   between   Russia  and  China  or  the
deviationist   tendencies  in  Rumania  or  to  be  told   that   some
Communists  were  better  than  others.    They  wanted  their  old
comfortable   picture  of  a  monolithic   Communism   restored.  A
pragmatism   without   a  devil   frightened   them   more  than   a
Communism   without   a  God,     To   realize  that  even   at  Re-
publican   platform   hearings   people  had  stopped  speaking  of
Communism  seemed  to  them  almost  impious,  if  not   evidence
of  the  subtlest   Communist  plot  of  all.
The  Goldwaterite   picture   of   themselves,   as  of  their  hero,
is  as  distant  from  reality  as  the  rest  of  the  private   universe
they  are  defending.     The  frontier  virtues   they  claim  to  em-
body  are  as synthetic as the  frontier  they  inhabit.  Their  desert
is  air-conditioned  and  landscaped;   their   covered  wagons   are
Cadillacs;   their   chaps   are  from   Abercrombie   &  Fitch;   their
money,  like  their  candidate's,  is  mostly  inherited  from  grand-
pappy,  or  acquired  with  their  wives.    In  their  favorite  cam-
paign  photos,  on  that  horse  and  under  that  10-gallon  Stetson,
(Continued   on Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  27,1964
looking  into  the  setting  sun,  is  no  cowboy  or  even  rancher
but  a  Phoenix  storekeeper.    The  Western   trade  he  caters  to,
in  business  as  in  politics,  is  dude  ranch.
The  Promoter  of  "Antsy-Pants"
This  he-man's  claim   to  fame   in  business  is  the   develop-
ment  of   "antsy-pants,"   men's   underdrawers   decorated   with
ants,  a  cute  specialty  item  he  advertised  some  years  back  in
the  wide  open  spaces  of  Manhattan through  the  New   Yorker
magazine.     He   roughs   it  in  a  $150,000  gadget-filled  show-
place  of  a  home,  designed,   his  architect  said,  as  "a   rough-
hewn  house  for  a  rough-hewn  guy,"  a  sort  of  de  luxe  model
log-cabin  to  give  one  that  authentic  latter  day  Lincoln   decor.
Low  education  and  low  intelligence,   Goldwater  once  declared
to  the  delight  of  his  equally  well-upholstered   followers,   are
the  real  causes  of  poverty.    One  wonders  what  he,  who  did
not  last  out  more  than  one  year  of  college,  would  have  done
if  a  family  fortune  and  a  family  business  did  not  await  him
back   home.     What   he  preaches   is  the   same   "rugged   indi-
vidualism"  with  which  Herbert  Hoover  sought  to  combat  the
New  Deal  30  years  ago.     Its  essential   phoniness   could   not
have   found   a   more   perfect   embodiment.     The   crowning
touch   is  that   this  half-Jewish  grandson  of   a  Polish   Jewish
peddler   who  won  acceptance  for  himself  and  his  family  on
the  tolerant  frontier  should  emerge   into  politics  as  the  hero
of  the  racist  forces  in  our  society.    It's  enough  to  make  one
anti-Episcopalian.
This Mr.  Conservative  of  1964  is  quite  different  from  Taft,
the  Mr.  Conservative  of   1952.    In  foreign   policy  Taft  was
an  isolationist;  he  wanted  to  keep  the  country  out  of  trouble.
Goldwater,  if  not  exactly  an  internationalist,   is  an  ultra-na-
tionalist,   who's   ready  to  get   into   trouble   anywhere.     Taft
fought  NATO;  Goldwater   wants  to  strengthen   it  with  nu-
clear  weapons.    Taft  was what  used  to  be  called  a  Republican
standpatter  but  with  progressive   fringes;   Scranton  was  right
when  he  declared  several  times  in  San  Francisco  that  on  such
specific  issues  as  labor,  education  and  housing,  he  was  closer
to  Taft  than  was  Goldwater.    In  the  political  spectrum  Gold-
water  is  half   reactionary,   half   rightist   European   style.     The
same  man  who,  in  The  Conscience of  A   Conservative,  wrote
that  "our   tendency  to  concentrate  power   in  the  hands  of  a
few  men  deeply   concerns  me"  could  also  say  on  ABC-TV's
Issues  and  Answers   (April  7,  1963),  "I  don't  object   to  a
dictatorship  as  violently  as  some  people  do  because  I  realize,
that  not  all  people  in  this  world  are  ready  for   democratic
processes.    If  they  have  to  have  a  dictator  in  order  to  keep
Goldwater  on  War  and  Peace
(With  A  Post script   by  Dick   Gregory)
"We  should  get  back  to  the  Eisenhower-Dulles  doc-
trine  of  brinkmanship, where  everybody  knows  we  have
the  power  and  will  use   it."
—Press  Conference, Hartford,  Conn., Oct. 24,1963.
"We  do  not,  of  course,  want  to  achieve   victory  by
force  of  arms.   If  possible,  overt  hostilities  should  al-
ways  be  avoided;  especially   is  this  so  when  a  shooting
war  may  cause  the  death  of  many  millions  of  people,
including  our  own.    But  we  cannot,  for  that  reason,
make  avoidance  of  a  shooting  war  our  chief  objective."
—The  Conscience  of  A  Conservative  (1960).
"If   Goldwater  gets  in  in  November  and   Khrushchev
makes  him  mad,  ain't  none  of  us  gonna  have  no  civil
rights."
—Dick  Gregory in San  Francisco at  the Hungry  I.
Communism  out,  then  I  don't  think  we  can  object  to  that."
It  is  no  wonder  that  his  nomination  was  regarded   with  dis-
may  abroad  everywhere  but  in  Franco  Spain  and  South  Afri-
ca,  and  among  the  neo-Fascists   of  Italy  and  Germany.    For
this  has   been   one  of   the  principal  alibis  for   Fascism   ever
since  the  March  on  Rome.    II  Duce,  too,  only  acted  to  save
Italy  from  Communism,  and  there  are  Rightists  who  would
emulate  him  here  if  they  could.
The  menace  of  the  Goldwater  movement,  however,   is  not
that  its  ranks  are  full   of  "kooks"  but  that  on  the  contrary
most  of  those  who  showed  up  at  the  convention  were  upper
middle  class  solid  citizens,   no  more  (or  less)   looney   than
their  fathers  were  30  years  ago  when  the  American  Liberty
League   and   the   Un-American   Activities   Committee   under
Martin  Dies  readily  led  them  to  believe  the  New  Deal  was
a   Communist  plot,   and   that   American  workers   then,   like
Mississippi   Negroes   today,   would   be  wholly  content   were
it   not   for   foreign   agitators   and   conspirators.     Even   the
Southern   delegation,   whose  headquarters   at  the  Jack  Tar   I
visited,  in  no  way  matched  the  dangerously  delusive   picture
of  this  movement  as  made  up  of  little  old  ladies  in  tennis
shoes.    The  one  Texan  I  talked  to  there  said  Johnson   would
probably  carry  Texas.    Every  one  of  the  half  dozen  Southern
delegates   I  talked   with  put   "fiscal   responsibility"   not  civil
rights  as  the  No.  1  issue.    Whether  this  was  how  they  really
felt  I  have  no  way of  knowing  but  I  believe  it  was  an  accu-
rate  reflection  of  a  major  concern.    The   retired  bulk   large
Views  That  Make  Goldwater  A  Favorite  With   Germany's  Rightists  and  Military  Men
"Q.  Do you  want  to  give  more  military  strength  to  Ger-
many,  too?
"A.  Yes,  in  fact,  I'll  say  this—not  because  you're  here  in
the  interest  of  a  German  magazine—that  I  think  the  peace
of  this  world  depends  upon  a  large  measure  to  a  constant
alliance   between  our  country  and  Germany.    I   think   we
have  to  work—although  I  can't  suggest  any  route—to  a
united  Germany.   This  is  the  One  deterrent  that  has  always
worked against Russia.
"An alliance with  Germany  I  think is  imperative.   I think
two  wars have  demonstrated  it.   And I say  this with all due
respect  to  our military: had not  Germany  in  both  wars  been
subjected  to  the  command of  men—of  a  man  in  any  case—
who  didn't  understand  war,  I  think  Germany    would  have
won both  of them."
—Goldwater's  interview  with Der  Spiegel, June SO.
"I   wouldn't   be  afraid   of  an  armed   Germany  again.    I
think  it's   worth  the  risk,  because  the  only  country  in  this
world  that  Russia  really  fears  is  Germany—armed.   And if
West  Germany  were  armed  we might find a  solution  for  this
[Berlin]  problem.    It  might   cause  trouble,  but  I  think   it
would be worth  the  effort....
"Germany  is  a  country  we  must  keep  as  our  ally  this
time.   We've  been  in  two  scrapes  with them  and nearly  lost
both  of  them.   Germany, had  she  been  more wisely  led  mili-
tarily  in  the  last   war,  would  have  conquered  Russia  and
probably  have  seen  an  end  to  Communism,  at  least  tempo-
rarily."      —Radio  Interview,  Fed.  Women's  Club,      4/S8/6S.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July
in   the   ranks  of   the   Goldwaterites;   the   perpetual    inflation
with  which  we  have  been  accustomed  to  financing  the  wel-
fare  state  taxes  them,  like  all  others  (including  workers)  on
fixed  incomes,  unfairly.    The   declining  value  of  the  dollar
haunts  them,  and  as  one  nice  lady  from  North   Carolina  ex-
plained  to  me  sweetly,  "money  is  one  of  the  most   important
things  in  the  country."     Significantly  another   reporter   told
me  he  found  hostility to  Wallace  among  these  Southern  Re-
publicans;  they  saw  eye-to-eye with  him,  of  course,  on  race
but  regarded  him  on  non-racial  issues  as  too  much  of  a  "lib-
eral,"  i.e.  a  social  welfare  spender.
Rockefeller   A-  Secret  Socialist?
Goldwater's  support  shades off toward  the  right  into  a wide
variety  of  offbeat   organizations and  stray  woozy millionaires.
Most  of  them  were  loosely  united  under  "Independent  Amer-
icans  for  Goldwater"  which  opened   a  headquarters   at  1175
Mission  Street  in  San  Francisco  during  the  convention.    The
organizers  were  Kent  and  Phoebe  Courtney,  authors  of  such
works  as "Disarmament—a  Blueprint  for  Surrender"   and  edi-
tors  of   The   Independent   American.     Books   by  Goldwater
and  Welch  of  the  Birch  Society  were  on  sale  along  with  a
wide  selection  of  pamphlets   proving  that  Rockefeller  was  a
tool  of  an  international   socialist  conspiracy  and  that  Nixon
was  soft  on  communism.   The  size  of  the  movement  may  be
indicated   by  the  fact  that  a  pre-convention  rally  drew  only
700  people  and  the  paid  circulation  Courtney  claims  for  The
Independent   American  is  only  20,000.    He  turned  out  to  be
a  blond,  stout-man  with  a  high-powered  salesman's  manner.
He  said  he  was  Minnesota  born,  but  had  lived  in  New  Or-
leans  since  he  was  10.   He  still  has  no  trace  of  Southern  ac-
cent.    He  said  he  was  in  marketing  research  before  launch-
ing  his  publication  and  movement.    He  claimed  to  "pick  up
where  the  Birch  Society  leaves  off."    He  said  he  was  still  a
member   of  the   Society  but  no  longer  an  organizer   for   it.
Courtney   is   also   affiliated   with   the   Citizens   Councils   in
Louisiana  and  told  me  that  if  the  U.S.  cut  off  relations  with
the  Soviet  Union   "the   whole  civil  rights  movement   would
die  on  the  vine."    He  claims  to  have   sponsored  the  first
GoJdwater  for  President  meeting  in   1960   and  thinks   Gold-
water  will  win  unless,  he  hinted  darkly,  "we  run  into  a  con-
trived   international  crisis."    He   boasts   of   defeating  Judd
for   reelection  in  Minnesota   as  "soft   on  Communism,"   and
regards   the   Council   on   Foreign   Relations,   a   rather    stuffy
What  Robert  Welch  Said  of  Goldwater
"I  know  Barry  well.    He  is  a  great   American.   I
raised  around  two  thousand  dollars  in  my  state  and
sent  it  to  him early  in  1958.  .  .  .  Barry  Goldwater has
political  know-how  and  the  painstaking  genius  to  use
that  know-how with  regard to  infinite  details.   He  is  a
superb  political  organizer,  and  inspires  deep  and  last-
ing  loyalty.   He  is  absolutely  superb  in  his American-
ism,  has  the  political  and moral  courage  to  stand  by  his
Americanist  principles, and in my  opinion  can be trusted
to  stand  by  them  until  hell  freezes  over.    I'd  love  to
see   him  President   of   the   United  States,  and  maybe
some day we shall."
—Robert  Welch, founder  and  "Fuehrer"  of  the  Birch
Society  in  its  Bible,  "The  Blue  Book",  pp. 119-20.
group   which  includes   Allen   Dulles   and   publishes  Foreign
Affairs    quarterly,  as  the  center  of  the  Communist  conspiracy
in  America.    This  is  the  kind  of   character  Goldwater  was
asked   to  disavow  by  those  who  wanted  a  strong  platform
plank against   extremists.
Several   times  Goldwater   challenged   his   critics  to   define
"extremism."     I  am  convinced  that  in  his  mind  the   difficulty
was  a  real  one.    The  common  denominator  of  these  right-
wing  crackpot  groups  is  that  America  is  menaced  by a  world-
wide  Communist  conspiracy.    But  this  is  also  a  common  ar-
ticle  of  belief  in  America.    In  Germany the  way  to  Hitlerism
was  prepared  by  several  generations  of  paranoid   inculcation
in   the   existence   of   a   Jewish-Marxist   conspiracy.     So   the
emergence  of  Rightists  in  control  of  the  Republican  party  was
prepared  by  more  than  30  years  in  which,  first  as  part  of  the
fight  against  the  New  Deal  and  then  as part  of  the  cold  war,
Americans  have  been   led  to  believe  in  a  Communist  con-
spiracy.    The   differences   are  in  degree,   but   the  effect   is  to
push  all  of  American  politics  rightward,  so  that  groups  which
in  any  other  country  would   be  recognized  as  hopeless  reac-
tionaries  or  crypto-Fascists  can  parade  here  as   conservatives.
While  the  Left   in  this  country  has  shrivelled   since    1948,
rightism  has flowered; it  is  almost  impossible  to  tune  in  a car
radio   at   any  hour   without   hearing   Rightist    speakers   fi-
nanced  in  part  at  public  expense  via  some  tax-exempt  foun-
dation  or  some  oil  millionaire  grown  rich  on  depletion   allow-
ances.
Interlocking  with  these  civilian  extremists  is  a  broad  band
of  military  extremists  to  whom  Goldwater  belongs.   His   af-
A  German  American Who  Once  Termed  Ike  A  War  Criminal  Now  Hails  Goldwater
Newspapermen   in   San   Francisco  wondered  why   Gold-
water,  after  refusing  all  their  requests  for  interviews,  had
given  one  to  the  German  weekly,  Der  Spiegel.    There  was
one  report  that  Goldwater  had mistaken  Der  Spiegel  for  the
National   Soldaten-Zeitung.    The  latter,  the  leading  organ
of  Germany's  right-wingers,  has  strongly  supported  Gold-
water  while  the  former  has  distinguished itself  by  exposing
the  ex-Nazis  in  Germany's  government  and  armed  services
today.   Its  liberal  viewpoint was  indicated in  a  sharp  ques-
tion  it  put  to  Goldwater.   "You are  passionately  in  favor  of
the  freedom  of  the  people  living  under Communist rule,"  it
asked  him,  "but  you  did  vote  'no'  to  the  civil  rights  bill  in
the  Senate  the  other  day  which  is  supposed  to  advance  the
freedom    of    Negroes."     Goldwater   responded,    "I   voted
against  this  because  of  constitutional   principles."
No  such  embarrassing  question  would  have  been  put  to
Goldwater  by  the   Soldaten-Zeitung.     The  June  26  issue
carried  an article  by Dr.  A.  J.  App of  Philadelphia,  national
president  of  the  Federation  of  American Citizens of  German
Origin,  headed  in  English,  "Welcome,  Mr.  Republican."
Dr.  App  has  long  been  active  in  rightist  circles.    One  of
his  books,  History's  Most  Terrifying   Peace,   published  in
San  Antonio  in  1947,  asks,  "Who  committed  the   greatest
crime  of  this  age?    The  Italians,  Japanese  or  Germans?
Wrong.   It  is  the  Allies."   It  says,  "So many  of  the  harsh-
peace   revenge   policies   towards  especially   Germany  have
come  from  Jews  that  one  cannot  talk  about  a  truly  Chris-
tian  peace  without  condemning  this  vocal  and  influential
Jewish  clique of  politicians  and  publicists."   In  The Broom,
a  now  defunct   rightist   publications   (Feb.   18,  1946),   Dr.
App  published  & letter,  "Will  Elsenhower  Hang  For  Stutt-
gart  Rape of  2,000  Women?"   People  who hate  Eisenhower
seem  to  have  an  affinity  for  Goldwater.   Welch  branded  Ike
a  Communist; Dr.  App  called  him  a  war  criminal.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  27,1964
Extremist  Past  of  Man  Who  Ghost-Wrote  Those  Phrases  About  Extremism
(Continued  from   Page'Three)
finity  for  the  German   militarists is  instinctive;  he  belongs  to
the   .same   breed   as   the   right-wing   German/generals   who
thought  they  could   use  the  Nazi   riff-raff   for  their  own  pur-
poses.    Goldwater   told  Der  Spiegel   (see  box  on  page   two)
the  German   Generals   could  have  won  the  war  but  for  inter-
ference  by  Hitler;  the  war  itself  might  have  been  avoided  if
they,  by  interfering   in  politics,  had  not  helped  bring   Hitler
to  power.*     Goldwater's   simple-minded   ideas   are   precisely
the   kind   the   military   has   been   spreading   in   this   country
through  those  "strategy  for   survival"   conferences   Fulbright
attacked  in  1961   and  Goldwater  and  Strom  Thurmond,  both
Air  Force  Reserve   Generals,   defended.    These  reserve  gen-
erals  make  up  by  the  ferocity  of  their  politics  for  the  paucity
of  their  combat  records.    They  may  not  be  as  wacky  as  Gen-
eral  Walker  but  they  buy  ideas  from  the  same  sources.    Gold-
water's  speech  writer,  Karl  Hess,  the  man  who  wrote  those
phrases  about  extremism  in  the  defense  of  liberty  never  being
a  vice,  is  an  example.     He  was  a  former  editor  of   Counter-
Attack,   the   vehicle   of   the   entertainment   blacklist;   a   con-
tributing   editor   of   the  American  Mercury   during   its  worst
years  under   the  anti-Semitic  Russell  Maguire;  a  member  of
the   anti-Communist   liaison   set  up   by   the   evangelist   Billy
James  Hargis  in  1963  which  included  Birch  Society  members.
Yet  he  was  also  made  a  consultant  to  the  Advisory  Commit-
tee  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  on  Non-Military   Instruction
set  up  in  the  wake  of   the   famous  Fulbright   memorandum.
From  such  sources  does  Goldwater   obtain  support,  ideas  and
phrases.    For  him  to  condemn   "extremism"   would  be  to  un-
dercut   his  main   political   stock   in   trade.
Not  Conservative  In  Any  Sense
The   Goldwater   candidacy  gives  the  nation  a  clear   choice
but   it  is  not   a  choice  between   conservatism  and   liberalism.
The  Goldwaterites   who  shrieked  like  a  lynch  mob  at  Nelson
Rockefeller   and  responded   with  the  wildest  enthusiasm  of  the
convention  when  Eisenhower  attacked  "columnists"   are  in  no
real .sense  of  the  word  conservatives.    The  true   conservative
Just  A Temperate  Fellow
"I  don't  think   intemperate  language  ever   helps."
—Goldwater  July   13  commenting   on  Scranton's   bit-
ter  letter  to  him.
"After   Lyndon   Johnson—the   biggest   faker  in   the
United  States?    He  opposed  civil  rights  until  this  year.
...  He's  the phoniest  individual  who ever  came around."
—Goldwater   two  days   later  when  a  reporter    asked
whether  the  refusal   to  strengthen  the  OOP  civil  rights
plank  might  not  give  the  Democrats  a  good  issue.
* One  reporter  after  hearing  Goldwater's  remark  suggest-
ed  a  plank  in  the   Republican  platform   condemning  Hitler
for  having  lost the  war.
is  their  pet  hate;  he  disturbs their  most  cherished  dreams  and
nightmares  by  insisting, as  Rockefeller  and  Lippmann  do,  that
the   Republicans   must   adapt   themselves   to  the   real  world.
The  Goldwater  movement  is  a  merger  of  the  worst  Southern
racists,  the   right   wing   military  and  the   obsessed  inveterate
anti-Communists,   with    those   elements   which   have   never
reconciled   themselves  to  the  New   Deal.     Their   candidate  is
ready  to  dabble  in  any  irresponsible  demagogy  if  it  promises
votes.    The   man  who   is  so  strong  for  States  rights  when  it
comes  to  civil  rights  spoke  as  if  the  Federal  government   had
police   power   to   protect  Northern   cities   from   marauders—
(Negro,  that  is)— but  not   Mississippi  Negtoes   from   mob-
sters.    I  don't  think  he  can  win  but  to  assume  from  the  polls
that  his  defeat   is  a  foregone   conclusion   would   be  criminal
folly   especially  after   the   Wallace   withdrawal;  popular   ma-
jorities  are  in  no  event  the  same  as  electoral  college   majori-
ties.    The  Harlem  riots  are  a  foretaste  of  what  could  happen
elsewhere  to  magnify  that  "white  blacklash"  on  which  Gold-
water   and  the  white  supremacists  count.    We  are   fortunate
that,  as  in  the  final  censure  and  political  destruction  of  Mc-
Carthy,   the    forces   opposing   Goldwater    are   headed    by   a
conservative  and  represent  a  coalition  of  civilized  forces,   con-
servative  and  liberal.    The  anti-McCarthyities found  a  leader
in   the   Midwestern   conservative   Watkins.     The   anti-Gold-
water  forces  are  lucky  to  be  led  by  a  moderate  conservative
Democrat   from   Texas.     But   the   victory  will   not   be  easy,
and  no  one  should  stand  aside  from  the  struggle  for  it.    The
peace  of  the  country  and  of  the  world  may  be  decided  by  the
outcome.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies   of   This   To  Friends   If   You  Send  A  LONG  Stamped  Self-Addressed    Envelope
I. F. Stows Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.   W.
Washington    15,   D.  C.
I. F. Stone's Weekly5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name   ..........................................................................................
Street ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
7/27/64
For  $5.35  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
(To)    Name    ..............................................................................
Street    ..................................................................................—•.
City     ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  Q    No  Q
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at   Washinftton,   D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week   in  December   and   the   first   week   in
Jsmuary   and   Bi-\VeekIy   during  July   and   August   at    5618   Nebraska   Ave..  N.W..  Washincton,  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly   published  and   edited
by   I,  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;    S6  in   Canada;    $10   elsewhere.     Air    Mail   rates:
31 5  to  Europe;   S20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED