I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964sep07.pdf

============================================================

State Dept.  Admits  Risk  of  Spreading  Nuclear Arms, P.  2
The  GOP  Turned  Into  A  Peace  Party  on  Korea—It  Might  Again  on Vietnam
Johnson  and  Humphrey,  at  a  loss  for  a  way  out  of  the
Vietnamese  mess,  ought  to  go  back  and take  a  hard  look  at
what  the   Republicans  did  about  Korea   in  the   1952 cam-
paign.   Then, as  now, they  began  by  talking  tough.    In  the
platform   they   adopted  in   July,   1952,  they   accused   the
Democrats  of  having  "produced  stalemate  and ignominious
bartering.  .  .  .  They  offer   no  hope  of  victory."   Then  in
the  final  hours  of   the  campaign,  the   GOP  did  an  about-
face.    On  Oct.  24  Elsenhower  cinched  the  election  with  his
pledge  to  go  to  Korea  and  end  the  war. After  accusing  the
Democrats  of  appeasement, the   Republicans  made  peace.
Something  similar  may  be  brewing.    On  his  yacht  Aug.
27   Goldwater   suddenly   suggested   peace  talks   with   Red
China.    "Any  President  should  always  be  interested  in  ne-
gotiations,"  he  said.    "That's  the   way  to  end  wars.    I've
thought  for  some  time  that  a  talk  like  that  with  the  Red
Chinese  might  be  profitable."    Maybe  this  was  just  another
eccentric  remark  from   an  eccentric  candidate.    But  it  re-
sembled  the  equally  sensational  proposal  by  Clare  Boothe
Luce,  one  of  Goldwater's principal  advisers,  in  her  speech
June  14  at  St.  John's  University.   "While  the  key  to  peace
in  Europe still  lies  in  Moscow," Mrs.  Luce  said,  "today  the
key   to  peace  in  Asia  lies  in  Peking.    Let  us  be  no  less
ready,  and  no  more  afraid,  than  our  allies  to  discuss  ways
of   relaxing  tension  with  Mao  Tse-tung."    From  so   fero-
ciously  right  wing  a  lady,  this  was  indeed  a   surprise.
It's  time  for  a  new  tack.    That  "show  of   strength"   in
Tonkin  Bay  was  followed by  the  collapse  of  our  pet  Khanh
regime,  demonstrating  again  that  bombings  in  the  North
cannot  solve  the  hard  political problems in  the  South.    Be-
hind   the   anti-Catholic  riots   was   resentment   against    a
fanatical   minority  which  wants  continuation  of   the   war.
Soon  we  must  assume  power  openly  in  Saigon,  taking  up
the  hopeless  task  of  pursuing  gnats  with   sledge-hammers
which   the   French  gave   up  ten   years   ago,   or  negotiate
peace.    Viable  and  face-saving  terms  are  possible:   an  in-
dependent   South  Vietnam  linked   in   a   neutral   belt   with
Cambodia  and  Laos  is  the  National  Liberation  Front  pro-
gram.    North  Vietnam  would  be  glad  to  underwrite  it  in
return  for  resumption  of  trade  with  the  South.    If   John-
son  plunges  instead  into  a  new  Korea,  the  Republicans  will
make  the  most  of  it.
L F. Stone
9
s  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  29
SEPTEMBER  7,  1964
101       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Why  We  Support  Johnson  and Humphrey
Like  Atlantic City's  Steel  Pier,  with  fun  for  young  or  old,
the   Democratic  convention   under   the   new   LBJ  brand   had
something  for  almost  everybody,  except  the  Daughters  of  the
Confederacy,  and  it  would  not  surprise  me  if  the  indefatig-
able  Ladybird  paid  them  a  visit  soon  as  a  consolation  prize.
Everybody   complained   but   everybody  secretly  had   a   good
time,  including the  youngsters  who  sat  on  the  boardwalk  for
hours  in  support  of  the  Mississippi  Freedom  Party  delegation.
Sympathetic  bystanders  brought   them  box  lunches;   a  white
woman   from   Virginia   distributed   salt   water   taffies    among
them  with  assurances  of  sympathy;  and  one  lady  from  Mis-
sissippi,  who  seemed  totally unaware  of  the  civil  rights  strug-
gle,  came  around  to  inquire  if  any  were  delegates   from  her
part  of  the  State,  with  whom  she  could  have  a  cozy   gossip
about folks back  home.
Mississippi's  Isolation  and  Defeat
Humanity   obtruded   itself   into   this   otherwise   mechanical
and   controlled   proceeding   only   on   the   Saturday   afternoon
before  the  convention  opened  when  the  Freedom  Democratic
Party's  delegation  pleaded  its  case  before  the  credentials  com-
mittee.    There,  under  the  able  and   devoted   generalship   of
Joseph   L.  Rauh,  the  brave  handful  from  Mississippi   had  a
chance  to  give  the  convention  and  the  television  audience  a
glimpse  into  the  realities  of  white  supremacy  in   Mississippi.
Even  then  the  President  soon  shut  them  off  from  view  when
he  preempted   the  networks  in  the  middle  of  their   presenta-
tion  to  make  his  talk  to  the  Governors   in  Washington.    To
the  managers  of  the  convention  the  Freedom   Party  delegates
were  an  unwelcome  guest,   though   among   the   rank-and-file
they  commanded  the  widest  sympathy.    A  floor  fight  would
Planning  Is  Not  A  Dirty  Word  In  Japan
"Paris,  Aug.  30—The  Western   industrial  powers  de-
clared  today  [in  a  report  by  the  Organization for  Eco-
nomic  Cooperation  and  Development]  that  the  growth
and  performance of  Japan's  economy  since  World  War
II  has  been  'remarkable'  .  .  .  Japan  has  grown  faster
in  the   postwar   years  than  any  other  non-Communist
country,  and  approximately as  fast  as  the  Soviet  Union
in   its   best   years.    In   its   postwar   recovery  period,
through  1953, Japan's  total  output  grew  by  almost  11
percent  a  year.    Since   then  it  has  averaged  close  to
9'/
2
   percent.  .  .  .  The  principal  lesson  that  the  report
drew  from  other  countries  was  government   planning.
It  said  that  the   readiness   of  business  to   invest  and
expand  itelf  'is  thought  in  Japan  to  have  been  stimu-
lated  by  the  process  of  central  economic  planning,'  be-
cause  planning  has  strengthened   business  men's   con-
fidence  in  continued  economic   growth."
—New  York  Times financial page Aug.  SI.
have  expressed   their  moral   revulsion  against  the  murderous
folkways  of  the  deep  South  but  it  would  also  have  torn  the
party  apart.    The  efficacious  mechanics  of  the  Johnson-Hum-
phrey   team  were  demonstrated   even   before   the  Vice  Presi-
dential  choice  was  announced.    While  Johnson  sold  the  com-
promise  package  to  the  Southern   delegates,  Humphrey,  with
aid  from  Walter  Reuther,  kept  the  Freedom  Democratic  Party
delegates  from  expressing   their  dissatisfaction   too  wildly.
From   the   standpoint   of   conventional   politics,   the   com-
promise  was  an  extraordinary  victory  for  what  began  as  little
more  than  a  publicity  gimmick.    From  the  standpoint  of  the
cost   the   Freedom   Party  delegates  may  pay  on  their  return,
(Continued  on Page  Four)
1  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September   7,1964
Five  Congressmen   Try  to  Stop  New  Atomic  Exchange  of  Information  Pact
State  Department  Admits  It  Risks  The  Spread  of Nuclear  Weapons
A  new  agreement  for  transferring  nuclear  information   to
NATO  has  provoked   a  minor  rebellion   in   Congress.     Just
before   recess  for   the   Democratic  convention,  five  congress-
men   (Kastenmeier,  Rosenthal,  Burton,  Ryan   of  New   York
and  Brown  of  California)  submitted  resolutions  disapproving
the  agreement.    It  has  yet  to  be  shown,  they  argue,  that  the
agreement  "is  essential  to  the  military  mission  of  NATO,"
"would  not  aid  and  abet  the  development"   of  national  nu-
clear   forces,   and   "would   not   contribute  to  the   negotiation
and  execution"  of  an  MLF.
The   Joint  Committee  on   Atomic  Energy  discouraged   in-
quiry   into   these   matters  at   its  public  hearing.     Witnesses
against  the  agreement  (Women  Strike  for  Peace,  WILPF,  and
Rep.  Rosenthal)  were  made  to  play  the  part  of  humble  peti-
tioners  come  before  royalty.   Rosenthal  even  received  a  gently
chiding  lecture  on  the  select  quality  of  the  Joint  Committee
when  he  complained  that  Congress   was  Tseing  asked  to  ap-
prove  an  agreement  whose  contents  it  was  not  permitted   to
know.
Who's  Pounding  On  Our  Nuclear   Door?
They   can  hardly  be  blamed  for   failing   to  ask  some   im-
portant  questions.    Rep.  Holifield  denied  that  "Germany  was
pounding  on  our  door   for   more  weapons."    Rep.   Hosmer
claimed  that  past  agreements  "have  stood  in  the  way of  extra-
ordinary  efforts  on  the  part  of  some  nations  to  obtain  nuclear
weapons."     No    one   explored    the    possible    contradiction.
Senator  Aiken  said  he  "understood  this  agreement  would  per-
mit  us  to  give  blueprints  to  NATO  nations."    Did  his  un-
derstanding  come  from  the  secret  hearings?    Were  the  blue-
prints  for  missiles?    No  one  asked.
The  Committee  was  more  cooperative  with  Administration
witnesses.    Evasive  answers went  unchallenged.    When   Holi-
field  asked  Robert  Shaetzel,  Asst.  Secretary  of   State  for   the
Atlantic  Community,  whether  the  agreement  would  "be  used
as  a  means of  transferring  information  to  an  MLF  when  and
if   it  is  established."    Shaetzel  answered,  "No,   there  is  noth-
ing  in  this  agreement  designed  to  facilitate  the   negotiations
now  going  on  in  Paris  in  connection  with  the  MLF."     One
hopes  the  Committee listened  more  closely  in  its  executive  ses-
An  Ignored  Soviet   Offer
Too  little   attention   has  been  paid  revelations   made
by  Matthew  Meselson,  a  Harvard  professor  of   Biology
and  a  close  student  of  disarmament,  in  his  August  17
letter  to   The  New   York   Times.     Newspaper   stories
out  of  Geneva  have  left  the  impression  that  the  Soviet
Union   will  not  agree  to  a  treaty   against   dissemina-
tion  of  nuclear  weapons  until  the  United  States  aban-
dons  its  plans  to  create  a  nuclear  mixed-manned  fleet
(MLF).    Meselson's  study  of  the  official  verbatim   rec-
ord  of  the  July  2nd  conference   reveals  a  different  im-
pression.     The  Soviet  delegate,  V.  A.  Zorin,  told   the
conference,  "If  the  Western   Powers  are  really   anxious
for  a  positive  solution  to  the  problem  of   non-dissemi-
nation,  we  are  prepared  to  negotiate  .  .  .  without  put-
ting  forth  any  preliminary  conditions."    This  would  be
good  news  were  it  not  for  the  fact  that  some  Adminis-
tration  officials  have  implied a  willingness  to  relinquish
our  veto  power  over  the  firing  of  MLF  missiles.    This
obviously    would   mean   dissemination     and    therefore
would  be  unacceptable   to   the   Russians.     "Would   we
guarantee  to  retain  our  veto," asks  Meselson,  "in  order
to  obtain  a  nuclear  non-dissemination   agreement?"
The  agreement,  even  if  unrelated  to  MLF,  is  based  on  the
same  dangerous  assumption  that  NATO  can  be  held  together
with  nuclear  bait.    Shaetzel,  in  an  unusual  lapse  into  candor,
admitted  this  when  asked  the  purpose  of  the  agreement:
I  think  the  foremost  point  I  would  like  to  stress  is  the
continued   commitment   of   the   Administration   to   NATO
and   to   having   a   more   cohesive   and   effective   alliance.
We  certainly   have  been  persuaded   as  the  years  go  by  of
the  need  to  balance   out  the   role  of  sharing  on  the   part
of  members  of  the  alliance,   and  the  staff  of  NATO  itself,
with  nuclear  information,  with  retaining  security  of  infor-
mation  and therefore  not  creating  a  situation  which  would
see  a  further  proliferation   of  national   nuclear   forces.
This  short-sighted   policy  of   risking  nuclear   proliferation
for  the  sake  of  political  unity  is  far  too  important  to  remain
under  the  exclusive jurisdiction  of  the  Joint  Committee.  Con-
gress  should   seek  a  public  debate  and,  in  particular,   should
ask  the  Secretaries  of  State  and  Defense  for  a  full  report  on
just   how   close  Germany  and   other  NATO  nations   are  to
having  independent  nuclear  capability.    A  Resolution  of  In-
quiry,  passed  by  either  house,  would  compel  them  to  answer.
"As  Dangerous As  Quenching Thirst With Salt Water"
"I  appear  here  this  morning  in  support  of  my   resolution
and  three  other  similar  resolutions   expressing    congression-
al   disapproval  of   the   proposed    [NATO]   agreement    [on
atomic  information].    The  pressures  for  the   dissemination
of  nuclear  information  are  still  competitive  pressures,  not
cooperative  ones,  and  buying  cohesion  among  nations   with
the  currency  of  nuclear  information  is  still   as   dangerous
as  quenching  thirst  with  salt  water  because  the   short-run
formula  for  survival  may  become  in  fact  the  ultimate   cause
of   death.
"One  fundamental  question  about  this  agreement  is  why
is  it  needed,  unless  it  is  to  usher  in  a  major  change  in  our
NATO  nuclear  policy.   Under  this  proposed  agreement,  for
the  first  time  we  shall  provide  NATO  with  information  for
the  development  of  delivery  systems  compatible  with   the
atomic  weapons  which  they  carry.    It  would  appear  from
the   testimony   of  the   other   witness  this   morning   [Asst.
Secretary  of  State  Shaetzel]  that  the  United  States  is  al-
ready   providing   this   information   under   bilateral' agree-
ments  and  therefore  that  we  should  not  object  to  the  new
agreement   because  on  the  face  of  it  it  is   superfluous.
"However,  it  seems  to  me that  under  the  proposed  agree-
ment,  we  are  opening  a  backdoor  approach  to  establishing
MLF.     We   may   find   ourselves   having   established   MLF
without  ever  really  intending  to  do  so.
"If  there   is  no  legitimate   reason  for  the  agreement,  if
it  is  superfluous,  if  we  have  the  bilaterals  with  the   nine
countries  and  we  can  give  them  all  we  want  to  give  them
under  those  agreements,  why  enact  the  agreement?     If  the
administration's  answer  to  that  is  that  there  are  valid  rea-
sons  for  the  agreement,  let  them   show  the  necessity  and
that  there  are  no  undisclosed   reasons  for  the   agreement."
—Rep.  Benjamin   Rosenthal   (D.  N.Y.),   before   the  Joint   Committee   on  Atomic  Energy,   Aug.   18    (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  7,  1964
Morse Splits With Humphrey In Fight  Over Foreign Aid
Liberals  Join  Southerners  In  Attacking  Arms  for  Military  Dictators
For  three  days  a  handful  of  Senators  tried  to  eliminate  the
boondoggle  that  sits  just  beneath  the  surface  of  foreign  aid.
It  was  like  attacking an  iceberg  with  a  rowboat.    "The  Sena-
tor  from  Minnesota  [Humphrey]   talks about the  malaria pro-
gram,  the  health  program,  and  the  farmers'  cooperative.    I'm
all  for  it,"  said  Senator  Morse,  "but  these  are  only minor  fea-
tures  of  foreign  aid.    The  Senator  has  not  addressed  himself
to the bulk of  the  program."
The   bulk,  over  $1  billion,  is  mostly  military  aid.    Rep.
Otto  Passman  recently called  it  "a  dumping  ground  for  excess
military  equipment"  and  suggested  it  was  a  way  "to  keep  a
certain  industry  alive  in  America."    Morse  sought  to  reduce
it  indirectly.    His  amendment  would   have  given   priority  in
economic  aid  to  "those  countries  whose  military  budgets  do
not  exceed  their  legitimate  and  reasonable  needs."     Among
the  few   (17)    Senators  voting  for   it  was  Richard  Russell,
chairman  of  the  Armed  Services  Committee.    Only  one  other
reform   amendment  received  fewer  votes.    This  would  have
outlawed  aid  to  governments  seizing  power  via  military  coups.
Six  Latin  American  Foreign   Ministers  told   Morse   that   no
single   action   could   be   more   helpful   to   the   Alliance   for
Progress.    It  was  defeated  59-12.
A  Guarantee  for  Gunrunning
The  reformers,  this  time  led  by  Ellender   (D.  La.),  did
succeeding  in  eliminating  a  new  military  aid  provision  that
had  the  U.S.  government  underwriting credit  sales  of military
equipment.  "Why,"  asked  Ellender,  "should  Fairchild,  Doug-
las,  General  Motors  or  other  large  suppliers  to  our  arsenal  be
allowed  to  encourage   the  sales  of  hardware  to  foreign   na-
tions  with  a  full  guarantee  of  the  U.S.  government"    Senator
Aiken  (R.  Vt.)  was even  more  blunt.   "If  we guarantee  gun-
running,  we  will  likely  find  some  people  encouraging   con-
flicts  between  countries."
A  surprise  amendment  by  Senator  Proxmire  has  also   put
the  oil  lobby  to  work.    It  eliminates  a  $20-to-$35  million  a
year  handout  that  AID  and  its  predecessors  .have  been  giving
for   the  past  decade  to  seven  major   international  oil  compa-
nies..   "AID  virtually insists  upon  purchases  of  oil  at  posted
A  Pyrrhic   Victory?
House   passage   of   the   anti-reapportionment   Tuck
bill   may  have   been   a  pyrrhic  victory   for   rural   con-
servatives.   In  order  to  report  the  bill  to  the  floor  for
a  vote,  the  Rules  Committee  had  to  rely  on  an  obscure
precedent   which  permits   it   to   consider   a   bill   even
though  it  has  not  been  reported  out  or  even   considered
by   one   of   the   legislative    committees,    in   this   case,
Judiciary.    By  his  point  of  order  challenging   this  ac-
tion,  Rep.  O'Hara  (D.   Mich.)   forced   Speaker   McCor-
mack  to  establish  the  precedent   anew.    Now  it  can  be
used  to  pry  liberal  legislation   like  medicare  from  the
clutches  of  conservative  committee  chairmen.    The  one
stumbling   block  is  the  conservative  Rules  Committee.
Originally  the  Committee   worked  in  harmony  with  the
House  leadership  because   both  were  elected  by   party
caucus.    Now  that  committee's   posts  are  filled  by  sen-
iority.    When  the  89th  Congress   convenes,  the  liberals
will  seek  a  return  to  elections.
prices,"  Proxmire  told  the  Senate.    A  posted  price  is  the  ar-
tifically  high  price  that  integrated  oil  companies  pay .their  af-
filiates  in  producing  countries  so  that  profits  can  be  retained
there  where  taxes  are  low.    Proxmire's   amendment  requires
AID   to  purchase  oil  at  competitive  prices,   usually   20-40%
below  posted  prices.    Unexpected  approval  from  Senator  Ful-
bright,   a  sometime   friend  of   the   oil   lobby,   permitted   the
amendment to  pass by a voice  vote.
Few  taxpayers  realize  that  a  large  part  of   economic  aid,
called  program  loans,  finances  an  artificial  export  market  for
American  business.    The  exact  nature  of  these  loans  is  often
undisclosed  even  to  Senators.    "If  the  Senator  could  get  the
details,"  Aiken  explained  to  Morse,  he  would  find  this  money
goes  "to  pay  off  American creditors  of  foreign   governments."
Last  year  about  two-thirds  of  development  loan  fund  money,
intended  for   specific  projects  like  dams  and  roads,  went  in-
stead  for  general  program  loans.    Even  the  veteran  Senator
Douglas  said  he  was  "shaken"  by  this  "unrefuted"  informa-
tion.    Morse's  amendment to  curtail  these  loans  was  narrowly
beaten  42-40.    "The   Senator  from  Alaska  must  not   despair,"
he  told  Gruening.    "We  are  making  a  little  progress."
Congress  Establishes  Automation Commission That  Could  Be  Planning Board
The  President   recently   signed  into  law  a  National   Com-
mission   on  Technology,   Automation   and  Economic   Prog-
ress.    The  legislation   is  careful  not  to  say   so  explicitly,
but  it  in  fact  creates  a  national  economic   planning   board,
the  first  civilian  one  of  its  kind  in  our  history.    The  Com-
mission  has  authority  to  assess  (although  none  to   enforce)
"the  most  effective  means  for  channeling  new   technologies
into  promising  directions,  including  civilian  industries  .  .  .
and   [to]   assess  the  proper  relationship   between   govern-
mental  and  private  investment   in  the   application  of   new
technologies   to  large-scale   human  and  community  needs."
One  indication  of  the  President's  commitment  to  the  war
on  poverty  will  be  the  man  he  appoints  to  head  the  Com-
mission.    Another  will  be his  efforts  to  extend  its  life.    Its
final  report  is  scheduled  for  January,  1966.
Other  legislation   lost  in  the  flood  of  convention  news  is
the   Freedom   of   Information  Bill   which  has   passed   the
Senate   but   faces   pigeonholding   in   the   House   Judiciary
Committee.     The   present   disclosure   statute   for  adminis-
trative  agencies  contains   loopholes  so  broad   that,   accord-
ing  to  the  Senate  Judiciary's  report,  "it  is  cited  as  author-
ity  for  withholding  virtually  any  piece  of  information  that
an  official  or  an  agency  does  not  wish  disclosed."   The  new
bill,  sponsored   by  Senator   Long   (D.   Mo.),  would   replace
the  vague  withholding  standard   of   "public  interest"  with
the  more  specific  one  of  "national  security."    It  would  also
require  regulatory   agencies   to  disclose   the  votes  of  indi-
vidual   commissioners.     Voting   in   secret,   as   is   regularly
done  by  the  SEC,  invites   obvious  abuse.
The  new  Housing  Bill  is  less  admirable.    It  contains  no
provision  that  would  prohibit  the  building  of  luxury  hous-
ing  on  slum-cleared  land.    Rep.  Farbstein's   attempt  to  in-
clude  one  was  defeated  by  a  voice  vote  after  the  influen-
tial   Albert   Rains,   chief   architect   of   the   federal    housing
program,   said   it   was   "totally   incompatible  to   build  ex-
tremely  low-cost  housing  on  extremely  high-cost  land."  In-
compatible  with  what?    The  profits  of  the  nation's  land-
lords  and  slumlords  or  an  end  to  Harlem  and  "The  Jungle."
1    1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  7, 1964
LBJ's  Choice  of  Humphrey  Indicates  His  Ultimate  Direction
(Continued  from  Page  One)
and   the  hypocrisy  about  a   "legality"   that   is  only  legalized
fraud   and  race  oppression,  the  compromise  looked  too  much
like  another  offer   of  tokenism,  and   of   separate  but  unequal
representation.     There   was  talk  of   mass  civil  disobedience,
and  of  several hundred  going  to  jail.  This  might  have sparked
the  kind  of   outburst  in  Atlantic  City  that  happened   a  few
days   later   in   Philadelphia,  with   irremediable  harm   to   the
Negro  and  the  nation.   As  it  was,  the  affair  ended  with  Mis-
sissippi  isolated  from  the   rest  of  the  South,  Alabama  split,
and   Bull   Connor   led   off   from    the   floor   in   humiliation.
Georgia  with  four  Negroes  in  its  delegation   became  the  sym-
bol  of  a  new  moderate  South,  and  leverage  has  been  provided
for  open  Democratic  parties  in   1968.
The  Savage  Within  Us
There  are  three  main  objectives  to  be  sought  in  this  elec-
tion  and  it's  not  going  to  be  easy  to  keep  our  minds  firmly
on  them  amid  the  pulling and  hauling on  specific  issues.   One
is  to  defeat  Goldwaterism  so  overwhelmingly  as  to  demon-
strate  for  a  long  time  to  come  that  the  American  people,  of
all  classes  and  origins,  are  opposed   to  the  irruption  of  Fas-
cistic  elements   into  our  political  system.    The   second   is  to
make  progress  on  the  racial  front  with  a  minimum of  trouble.
Everywhere  we  look   in  the  world  we  see  how   murderously
men  hate   each  other  across  the  divisions  of   color,   race,   re-
ligion  or  tribe;  the  bloody  riots  in  Vietnam are  only  the  latest
evidence of  the  savage within us.
Our   country  is  doing  more  about   racism  than  any   other
country  in  the  world.    To  the  extent  that  the  South  can  be
cajoled,  coaxed,  and  persuaded  peacefully,  we  are  all  the  gain-
ers.    This  is  what  Johnson   is  doing,  and  it  is  important  that
this  Southerner  emerge  from  the  election  not  rejected  by  his
own   section  but  with  considerable  Southern  support.     This
means  to  unite,  rather  than  divide,  the  country.    In  this  re-
spect  Johnson  is  not  just  a  superb  political  tactician  but  serv-
ing  the  highest  national  and  human  purposes.     If  the  plat-
form  is  tepid  on  civil  rights,  if  it  gives  some  semantic  com-
fort  to  the  South,  that's  worth  the  acquiescence  it  purchases.
The  CIA  Just  Can't  Resist  A  Bargain
That   CIA   Board   of   National   Estimates   paper   by
Willard  Matthias,  which  leaked  to  the  Chicago  Tribune,
and  made   headlines   about  a  possible  neutral   solution
in  Vietnam  is  open  for  inspection   by  newsmen  at  the
State   Department.     One  remarkably   sensible  passage
has  not  been  reported   in  the  press.    "Despite  any   dis-
inclination  to  get  involved  in  crises  or  any  interest  in
a  detente  which  may  exist,"  Matthias   wrote,  "the    sit-
uation  in  most  of  the  underdeveloped    world  is  so   dis-
orderly   that   many    situations   are   likely   to    develop
from   which  the   great   powers   will   have   difficulty   re-
maining   aloof   or  which  they  will  have   difficulty   con-
trolling   if   they   get   involved.     Individuals   or  groups
calling    themselves   Castroites   or   Communists    might
stage    revolutionary    attempts    or   initiate    guerrilla
movements   not  on  the   orders  of   Moscow,   Peiping  or
Havana  but  in  the  hope  of  gaining  their  support.  Simi-
larly   individuals   or   groups   may   organize   or  execute
plots  simply  to  gain   U.S.   support.     Once  outside  pow-
ers  do  become  involved,  whether  by  accident   or  design,
crises  can  develop  which  will  engage  their  prestige  to
a  degree  incommensurate  with  the  intrinsic  or strategic
value   of  the   area   itself."    The  paper   concludes,   "One
consequence  of   this   disorder   and  of   inhibitions   upon
open  involvement   is  likely   to  be  an  increase  in  clan-
destine   activities  designed  to   influence   the  course  of
events."    Then  it  recommends  such  activities  because
of  their  low  cost  among  other  things!
In  any  case  the  Negro  has  the  new  Civil  Rights  Act  and  a
vice-presidential  candidate who  has  been  his  firmest  champion
in  the  Senate.
No  man  deserved  the  nomination  more;  none  has  worked
harder  for  liberal  causes;  Humphrey's   choice  by  Johnson   for
the  succession  creates  confidence  in  LBJ's  ultimate  direction,
especially   in   the   third   great   objective.    That   is   slowly   to
bring  this  country  back  to  a  sense  of  reality,  to  face  up  to  its
limited  power  and  to  adjust  in  Vietnam  and  Cuba  to  change.
Peace   is  the  third  great   objective.    I   believe  Johnson   will
move  toward  it,  and  that  when  he  picked  the  chief  architect
of   the  nuclear  test  ban  treaty  as  his  running  mate,  he   gave
evidence  of  where  he  really  stands  on  this  issue,  too.
A  Sub to  the  Weekly  Is  An  Ideal  Gift  for  the  Boy or  Girl  Going  Off  to  College.
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street   ...........
City   ...............
For   $5.35  extr
(To)   Name  ..
Street   ...........
City  ................
Shall  we  send
Weekly      5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the   enclosed   $5:
..........................Zone............State....................
9/7/64
a  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   Fifties
..........................Zone............State....................
gift  announcement?         Yes d   No D
I. E  Stone's   Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.   W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week   in  December  and  the  first  week  in
January   and   Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618   Nebraska   Ave..   N.W..  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by  I.   F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5   in   the   U.S.;    $6   in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED