I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964nov02.pdf

============================================================

That  Judge  Cox in  Miss.  Was  Bobby's  First  Appointment,  P.  4
And Now—The Last Straw?—We Learn  That  Saigon  Refuses  to  Bomb Hospitals
"Saigon,  South  Vietnam,  Oct.  22  (Reuters)—Communist
guerrilla  forces  in  South  Vietnam  have  developed  an   ef-
ficient  and  well-equipped  medical  service  to  care  for  their
rising   battle  casualties,   according   to   a   new  intelligence
estimate.    Evidence shows  that  the  Vietcong  are  well sup-
plied  with   modern  drugs,  including  anti-biotics,  and  their
facilities  include  large  base  hospitals  and  medical  training
centers.
"Government   forces  say   they   know   the   exact  sites  of
several  of  the  hospitals.    Some  U.S.  officials  are  mystified
at  Saigon's  apparent  reluctance  to  take  military  action  to
put  these  hospitals  out  of  operation.    They  say  this  would
provide  a  major  psychological  setback  to  Communist troops
risking  danger  in  combat.
"Much  of  the  drugs  and  other  supplies  the  Communists
use  is  of  Western  manufacture,  some  of  it  imported  into
South  Vietnam under  U.S.  aid programs."
—New  York  Times  (early  edition)  Oct. 25.
I. F. Stands  Weekly
VOL.  XII,  NO.  37NOVEMBER  2,  1964
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Whom The Gods Would Destroy,  They First Render  Smug
Secretary   McNamara's   press   conference   Oct.   22   on   the
Chinese  bomb  was  a  mixture  of  insight  and  smugness.    On
the  one  hand  he  recognized  that  "nuclear   spread"   is  one  of
"the  greatest  dangers  facing  the  world   today."     It  was  so,
he  said,  because  "nuclear   technology  is  advancing  so  rapidly
that   the   cost   of   building   a   minimum  nuclear   capability,
whether   measured  in   terms   of   capital  expenditure,   human
skills  or  the  time  required  to  achieve  that   capability,  is  de-
creasing   dramatically."    These   sobering   words   deserve   the
closest  attention.    On  the  other  hand,  he  exhibited  a  danger-
ous  complacency  about  the  Chinese  bomb.    He  said  we  had
enough  nuclear  capacity  to  survive  a  surprise  attack  and  still
"assure   the  simultaneous  destruction"  of   Russia  and   China.
He  added  that  he  saw  no  reason  to  revise  our  strategic  plans
"because  the  Communist  Chinese  cannot  for  many  years  ob-
tain  the  capability  to   inflict  nuclear  damage  on  this  country
or  on  our  allies."
China's  Neighbors  Already  In  Danger
Such  talk  creates  a  false  sense  of  security  and  is  an  obstacle
to  the  fresh  rethinking  of  our  China  policy  which  the  bomb
makes  urgent.  It  may  indeed  take  a  decade  before  China  has
the   capability  to   inflict   damage   directly   upon   the   United
States.    But  it  is  not  at  all  certain  that  she  cannot  even  now
make  a  nuclear  attack  on  American  allies  around  her  borders.
"Poor  as  is  China's  bombing  fleet  by Western  standards,"  the
respected   military  commentator   Mark  Watson  wrote  in   the
Baltimore  Sun   (Oct.   17),  "it   is  adequate  for  a  fairly   long
haul,  and  nobody  can  be  more  fully  aware  of  that  than  the
nearby  nations  of   Asia."
Secretary  McNamara  said  the  Chinese  bomb  was  "a   crude
device"   too  heavy  to  be  delivered  by  available  Chinese  air-
craft.    Dr.  Ralph  Lapp,  the  nuclear  physicist  who  worked  on
our  A-bomb  during  the  war,  told  UPI  that  our  first  bomb
was  also  crude  and  heavy  and   delivered   over  Hiroshima  by
another   "crude  device,"  the  now  obsolete  B-29.    Dr.   Lapp
told  us  that  Secretary  McNamara's  estimate  that  the   Chinese
bomb  weighed   9,000  pounds   was  surmise.     "We   have   no
way  of  knowing,"  Dr.  Lapp  said.    The  U.S.  was  surprised  to
find  from  examination  of  the  radioactive  debris  that  the  Chi-
When  Barry Told  The Truth About Himself
"Mr.  Goldwater  is  a  Presidential  candidate  by  inad-
vertence.    Until  a  late  date  he  spoke  of  himself  and
thought  of  himself  as  an  improbable Republican selec-
tion,  and  he  gave  reasons.    As  recently  as  January  of
this  year  he  said  in  Phoenix,  'I've  never  done anything
to  get  the  nomination and  yet  all  of  a  sudden everyone
wants  to  thrust  it  on  me  and,  doggone  it,  I'm not  even
sure  that  I've  got  the  brains  to  be  President   of   the
United States.'   It  was  an engaging  self-evaluation, and
unlike  many  things  Mr. Goldwater says  off  the  top  of
the  head  it  had the  ring  of  verity."
—The  Sun  (Baltimore)   endorsing LBJ  Oct. 25.
nese  bomb  was  set  off  by  a  trigger  more  sophisticated  than  we
expected  and  that  it  was  made  not  of  plutonium,  like the  first
Russian,  British  and  French   bombs,   but  from   enriched  ura-
nium,   U-235.     This   requires   greater   industrial   proficiency
than  we  thought  the  Chinese  had.    Dr.  Lapp  said  it  was non-
sense  for  the  President  to  say  that  it  was  a  national  tragedy
for  China  to  have  gone  the  enriched  uranium  route   because
of   its  heavier  cost.    The  possession  of  facilities  for  making
enriched  uranium  of   its  own  will  provide  enriched  material
for   its  reactor  complex,  and  a  greater  total  output  of  power
as  well  as  bomb-stuff.   Similar  surprises  are  possible  in  terms
of   the   bomb's   weight   and   China's   delivery  capacity.    But
that  is not  the  real  point.    The  point  is that  fear  of  a  Chinese
bomb  will  make  India  and  Japan   think  the  time  has  come
for  them  to  make  A-bombs,   too.
The   President  has   offered   a  pledge   of   protection   to  any
nation  threatened  by  nuclear  attack  from  China.    The   Penta-
gon  has  let  it  be known  that  we  placed  a  squadron  of  15 B-52
heavy  jet  nuclear  bombers  on  Guam  last  spring,   only    1,000
miles  from  Communist  China,  the  first  time  that   the  long-
range  B-52s  have  been  stationed  overseas.    But  these   moves
will  not  solve  the  problem,   which  is  political   not  military.
If  China  had  been   recognized   ten  years  ago,   if  it  had   been
admitted  to  the  United  Nations,  if  it  had  been   included  in
the  nuclear  test  ban  negotiations,   it  might   have  felt  secure
(Continued   on   Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  2,1961,
Only  An  Agreement  With  Peking  Could  Stop  Nuclear  Spread  in  Asia
(Continued   from   Page   One)
enough  not  to  embark  on  this vast  nuclear  enterprise.  China's
A-bomb  is  its  answer  to  American hostility.   If  this hostility
continues,   if   China   is  still  excluded   from   the   councils   of
mankind,  if  we  keep'it  in  outlawry,  it  may  in  ten  years  time
have  not  only  atomic but  thermonuclear  bombs  and  the  means
to  deliver  them.    India  and  Japan,  looking  forward  to  that
possible  time,  will  ask  themselves  as  does  Western   Europe
today:  Can  we  count  on  America  coming  to  our  defense  if
that  means a  suicidal  exchange which  could  cripple  the  United
States?    Will  the  Americans  risk  Detroit   or  New  York  to
save  Tokyo  or  Bombay?  \Would  we  not  be  safer  with  weap-
ons,  air-fleets  and  missiles,  of  our  own ?   Thus  the  instability
of  the  Far  East,  which  our  policies  have  perpetuated,   leads
straight  to  a  nuclear  diffusion  which  is  dangerous  to  ourselves
and  the  world.    This  is what  our  leaders  should  be  telling  us.
What  If  Moscow  Sets  Up  A  Pacific  MLF?
The  emergence  of  the  Chinese  as  a  nuclear  nation  has  al-
ready   changed   all   the   earlier   equations   of   power   politics.
McNamara's   self-assurance   is   based   on   the   conviction   that
China  will  remain  isolated.   But  what  if  the  Russians were  to
make  their  peace  with  Peking  and  counter  the  creation  of  an
MLF  in  Western  Europe  with  an  MLF  of  their  own  in  the
Far  East?    An  MLF  of  25  Polaris  armed  surface  ships  will
not  change  the  atomic  stalemate  between  Russia  and  America.
But  a joint  Russo-Chinese  fleet  of  ships  or  planes,  armed  with
nuclear  weapons,  would  change  the  strategic  situation  in  the
Pacific  overnight.    It  would  provide  a  nuclear  umbrella  un-
der  which  China  could  wage  non-nuclear  war  on  the  ground
in  Southeast  Asia,  or  even  attempt   a  non-nuclear  attack  on
Formosa.    Or  what  if  the  Russians,  angered  by  the  sight  of
nuclear  weapons  within  reach  of  their  enemies,  the  Germans,
were  to  give  Peking  supersonic  planes  or  missiles,  and  aid  in
speeding  up  its  achievement  of  thermonuclear  weapons?    Dr.
Lapp  estimates  that  with  Russian  aid  China  could  have  the
H-bomb  in  two  years.   If  China  were  suddenly  given  even  a
limited  city-killing capacity  to  retaliate  for  any  nuclear  attack
from  America, we  would  face  the  same  stalemate  in  the  Far
East  as  in  Europe.    We  would  be  unable  to  threaten  the  nu-
That's  All  We  Need  Now—
A  Chiang  Kai-shek  A-Bomb
"Last  week's  convulsive  events  left  a  deeper  mark on
Americans  than  it  did  on  two  neighbors   next   door  to
Red  China  and  the  Soviet   Union.    Both   Formosa  and
Poland  took  the  nearby  shocks  calmly,  their  Ambassa-
dors  said last  night.
"Ambassador  Tsiang  reported  his  people  were  'more
prepared'  for  the  Communist  China  A-bomb  than   the
Western  World  and had been  told  through  its  papers  to
expect   it.
"Furthermore,   he  said,  nuclear  research  on   Formosa
continues  at  full  speed  and  has  a  reassuring  effect  on
the  people."
—Society   Page  Column,  "Diplomatically   Speaking"
in  the  Washington  Star, Oct. 21.
clear  escalation  of  the  Vietnamese  war  without  putting  our
own  cities  in  danger.    We  would  have  to  use  ground   troops
at   a  disadvantage  of   distance  and   numbers.    A   prolonged
Asian  war,  diverting  American  power  to  the  Pacific,   would
weaken  Western   Europe  and  Western  Germany  vis  a  vis  the
Soviet  Union.    The  Russians might  feel  about  a  war  between
China  and  the  U.S.  as  some  Americans felt  before  Pearl  Har-
bor   about  the  Nazi  attack  on  the   Soviet  Lhiion—a   chance
to  let  two  rivals  bleed  themselves  to  death.
It  is  foolish  that  the  State  Department  dismisses  all  this  as
light-headedly  as  does  the  Pentagon.     It  is  tragic  that  only
one  American  of   any  prominence,   Alfred   M.   Landon,   the
GOP  candidiate  for  President   in   1936,   should  have  spoken
out   for   consideration   of   Peking's   Oct.   16  proposal   for   a
nuclear  summit  conference.     Mr.  Landon  thought   this  pro-
posal  should   be  treated   "with   cordiality  and  caution  rather
than  with  coldness  and  negativity."    Only  one  paper  in  the
East,  the  Baltimore  Sun  Oct.  22  even  mentioned  the  speech.
It  went  almost  unnoticed  until  Secretary, General  U  Thant  at
a   press   conference   later   that   day  welcomed   Mr.   Landon's
idea  of  a  "dialogue"  among  the  5  nuclear  powers.     Unless
we  act  quickly, the  Chinese  bomb  will  set  off  a  chain reaction
in  India  and  Japan  whose  consequences  we  will  live  to  regret.
The  Speech in  Which Pres.  Johnson Offered  Hope  of  Restrained Policy  in  the  Far  East
"Some   of   our  people—Mr.  Nixon,   Mr.  Rockefeller,   Mr.
Scranton   and  Mr.  Goldwater-—have   all,   at   some   time   or
another,  suggested  the  possible   wisdom  of  going  north  in
Vietnam.    Well,  now,  before  you  start  attacking   someone
and  you  launch  a  big  offensive,  you  better  give  some   con-
sideration  to  how  you  are  going  to  protect  what  you  have.
And  when  a  Brigadier  General  can  walk  down the  street  of
Saigon  as  they  did  the  other  day,  and  take  over  the  police
station,  the  radio  station,  and  the  government  without  fir-
ing  a  shot,  I  don't  know  how  much  offensive  we  are  pre-
pared  to  launch.   As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  want  to  be
very  cautious  and  careful,  and  use  it  only  as  a  last  resort,
when   I   start  dropping  bombs  that   are  likely  to  involve
American  boys  in  war  in  Asia  with  700 million  Chinese.  .  . .
"When   we   retaliated   in   the   Tonkin  Gulf,   we  dropped
bombs   where  they   had  their   PT   boats   housed,   and   we
dropped  them  within  35  miles  of   the   Chinese   border.    I
don't  know  what  you  would  think  if  they  started  dropping
them  35  miles  from  your  border,  but  I  think  that  is  some-
thing  you  have  to  take  into  consideration.    So  we  are  not
going  north  and we  are not  going  south.  .  .  .  We think  that
losing  190 lives  in  the  period  that  we  have  been  out  there
is  bad,  but  it  is  not  like  190,000  that   we  might  lose  the
first  month  if  we  escalated   that  war.  .  .  .
"The  second  illusion  1  want  to  talk  to  you  about  is  the
illusion   that   the   U.S.   can  demand   resolution   of   all   the
world's  problems  and  mash  a  button  and  get  the  job  done.
...  I  do not  think  that  our future  is  going  to  be  a  simple
one. ...  I  expect  victory.    We  are  going  to  have  victory.
But  it  is  not  going  to  be  a  swift  victory.    It  is  not  going
to  be  the  victory  of  arms,  and  it  is  not  going   to  be  the
victory  of  the  grave.  .  .  .As  the  threat  of  war  fades,   that
victory,  I  want  to  warn you,  is  going  to  take  great  strength
and  going  to  take  patience.    It  will  take  men  willing  to
deal  with  the  real  events  of  a  real  world  and  not  trapped
by  the  dangerous  illusions  of   fantasy."
—LBJ  at  Manchester, New  Hampshire, Sept. 28.
Verbatim  White  House  text  as delivered.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

r. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  2, 1964
Historian   Makes   Sliirtliiig   Disclosure
Founding  Fathers  Never   Cleared!
To  the  Editor:
It  was  startling  to  read  in  your  Oct.  16  editorial  on
the  Jenkins  case   the  dogmatic  assertion   that   "every
Government  official  should  have  a  security   check."
Studies  by  the  Fund  for  the  Republic and  the  Cornell
Civil   Liberties  project   provide  persuasive  arguments
that,  over the years  the program of  security  checks  and
clearances  has  done  more  harm  than  good  to  the  public
service.    In  any  event, it  is  relevant  to  recall  that  there
was  no security  check  on  the  men  who  wrote the  Decla-
ration  of   Independence,  and  no  security  check  on   the
men  who  drafted  the  Constitution of  the  United  States
and that  we  somehow  managed  from  1789  to  1947 with-
out  a  program  of  security  checks.
Have  standards  of  public  service  really  been  so much
higher  since  1947  than  they  were  in  the  preceding  160
years?                                         Henry  Steel  Commager
—Letters  to  the  Editor,  New  York   Times  Oct.  25.
D.  C.  Sanitation  Department  Cleaning  Out  Leftists  As  Well  As  Trash
A  New  Police  State  Practice  Comes  to  Light  in  Washington
A  little  known  police  state  practice  has  recently  come   to
light  here  and  may  be  the  subject  of  congressional   investiga-
tion  in  January.    It's  a  trash  cover.    Like  wiretapping,  elec-
tronic  eavesdropping,   and  mail  covers,   it  is  used  by  govern-
ment  officials  to  pry  into  the  private  lives  and  political  activi-
ties  of  citizens.    In  this  case  the  government's  agent   is  the
local  garbageman.     On  orders  from  above  he  puts  the  trash
of  designated  individuals  into  special  bundles  which  are  then
turned  over  for  inspection.
A  Lawyer's  Waste-Basket
The  trash  cover  first  came  to  public attention  when  the  wife
of  a  prominent  Washington   lawyer  reported   to  the   National
Capital   Area   Civil   Liberties  Union   that   her   trash   was  re-
ceiving  special  treatment.    Local  press  stories  treated  the  com-
plaint  as  an  isolated  incident,  but  the  NCACLU   told  us  they
have  received   two  more  complaints,   one  from  a  local  Black
Muslim  leader.    A  letter  which  we  were  permitted  to  see tells
an  even  more  disturbing  story.    The  author,  who  must  remain
unidentified,   has  close  connections  with  the  D.C.   Sanitation
Dept.   He  wrote,  "The   practice  is  very  widespread   in  all  sec-
tions  of  the  city.    It  is  estimated  that  every  truck  has  at  least
one  'special'  a week  and  some have one or more a  day."    This,
he  noted,  was  considerably  less  than  during  the  McCarthy  pe-
riod.    "One   oldtimer   says  that  during  the  period  right  after
the  Korean  war,  and  during  it,  the  practice  was  so  prevalent
in  Georgetown   that  it  seemed  like  every  time  a  truck  went  to
the  incinerator,  it  had  2 or  3  specials.    Since  a  truck  makes  an '
average  of  7  loads  [a  day],  and  there  are  maybe  7  trucks  com-
ing   into   the   Georgetown   incinerator,   that   is  an   impressive
estimate."
Just  who  is  ordering  the  trash  cover  and  why  remains  un-
clear.    In  a  phone  conversation   with  the  above  source  it  was
suggested  that  the  D.C.   police   may  have   requested   some  in
order  to  track  down  narcotics  and  numbers  rings.    Others  ap-
pear  more  directly  related  to  political  activity  and  may be  the
work  of  the  FBI  or  perhaps of  a  D.C.   "Red  Squad."   The  let-
ter  just  quoted   says  "foreigners  are  the  most  frequent  targets"
in  one  area.    The  lawyer  whose  wife  first  complained  of  a
trash  cover  has  represented  Communists  and  has  been   active
in  civil  liberties  work.
Unfortunately,  the  NCACLU  has  dropped  the  case  and  con-
siders  it  closed.    It  says  it  has  been  assured  by  an   independent
source  that  the  practice  has  been  discontinued.    Maybe   so,
but  no  city  or  federal  official  has  said  so  on  the  record.     The
cover  could  be  continued  again  at  any  time  and  may  be  going
on  now  in  other  cities.    For  this  reason  we  were  pleased  to
learn  that  Congressman  Gallagher  (D.  N.J.)   may conduct  an
investigation  when  Congress   convenes.     He  was  recently  ap-
pointed   chairman  of  a  new   special   subcommittee   of   House
Government  Operations  Committee.     Its  task  is  to  look   into
the  investigating  practices  of  federal   agencies,   including  the
FBI.  Gallagher  has already written  D.C.  Commissioner  Duke  to
find   out   "what   federal   agency   requested    that   garbage   be
segregated."
Trash   covers  are   dirty  business  in  more   than   one   sense.
They  seem  to  be  a  relatively  recent   refinement  in  snooping.
We  can  find  no  mention  of  them  in  Corpus  Juris  Secundum
or  Wigmore's  On  Evidence,  but  they  bring  to  mind   counsel's
noble  plea  in  that  English  court  case  in  1765  which  inspired
the  drafters  of   our   Fourth   Amendment   prohibition  against
unreasonable   searches  and  seizures  (Entick   v.  Carrmgton,  19
Howell's  State  Trials  1029).  "What?"  asked  counsel,  "has  a
secretary  of  state  a  right  to  see  all  a  man's  private  letters  of
correspondence,   family   concerns,  trade   and   business?    This
would  be  monstrous  indeed;  if  it  were  lawful,  no  man  could
endure  to  live  in  this  country."
The  FBI's  Latest  Report Offers  Its
The  FBI's  1964  annual  report  (released  Oct.  19)  devotes
one  chapter  to  the  domestic  communist  menace  but  only
one-third  of  a  page  to  civil  rights.   The  agency's  anti-com-
munist  activity  is  entitled   "Protecting   Democracy".   Civil
rights  is  buried  in  a  section  on  "Combating  Crime."   There
we  are  told  that  all  civil   rights  cases  receive  "impartial
treatment."    Southern  sheriffs  may  see  a  fraternal  wink  in
that  phrase.    The  report  makes  no  mention  of  white  ter-
rorist  organizations  and  indicates no  FBI  effort  to  infiltrate
these  as  it  does  the  Communist  and  liberal  organizations.
There  is  no  reference  to  the  bombings  that  have destroyed
dozens  of  Negro  churches  and  homes  nor  any  indication  of
FBI  activity  under  the  federal  anti-bombing law.
The  sins  of   commission  are   even   more  damning.    The
Usual  Comfort  to  Southern  Racists
Southern  racist  is  comforted.   He  is  told  that  Communists
worked  unremittingly to  increase  their  influence  in  the  ra-
cial   struggle"    and  "waged   a   constant    effort   to   exploit
civil   rights."     Is   this   not  the   South's   own  propaganda?
The  report  feeds  the  delusions of  the  radical  right.   It  says
the  Party  "stepped  up  its  activity  on  all  domestic  fronts,"
was  encouraged  by  the  signing  of  the  test-ban,  and is  aided
by  talk   of   withdrawal  from  Vietnam.    The   picture  of   a
mailed    fist    stamped   CPUSA   and   surrounded   by   tags
marked  "peace",  "women",  "youth",  "civil  rights  and  liber-
ties"   is   used  to  illustrate  communist  front  activities.    If
President  Johnson  desires  to  end  racism  and  bring  a  new
sobriety  to  foreign  affairs,   he  might  begin  with  the   FBI
which  still  equates  co-existence  with  subversion.
!  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

l.-F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  2,  1S6U
Eastland  Praised  Bobby's  Nomination as  Attorney General
That  Judge  Cox,  Eastland's  College Chum, Was Kennedy's First Appointment
It   is  a  pity  the  Keating-Kennedy campaign  was  so  flaccid.
The  clash  between  Federal  Judge  W.  Harold  Cox  of  Missis-
sippi  and  the  Department  of  Justice was  a  chance  for  Keating
to  hit  hard  at  Kennedy's  civil  rights  record.    More  important
he  could  have  put  the  spotlight  on  the  way  the  Kennedy  Ad-
ministration  named  so  many  racists  to  the  Federal   bench   in
the  South.    Cox  was  the  first  Kennedy  appointment,   one  of
' six  racists  named  to  the  District  Courts  and  two  racists  to
the  Fifth  Circuit Court  of  Appeals  in  the  deep  South.
Ike  Named  The  Liberals
The   Fifth  Circuit  is  one  of  the  most  liberal  in  the  country
because  it  is  largely  filled  with  Eisenhower  appointees.     As  a
Republican  he  could  ignore  the  wishes  of  .Democratic  South-
ern   Senators.    So  can  a  Democratic  President  if  he   chooses.
FDR  turned  down  a  Bilbo  nominee  in  the  40's.    The  wave
of  terror  in  the  South  against  Negroes  and  civil  rights  workers
is  encouraged  by  the  presence  of  racist  judges  on  the   bench.
Judicial  candidates  are  investigated  thoroughly,   but  no  one
seems  to  investigate their  attitude  toward  Negroes.
Cox  told  a  New  York  Times  reporter   (March  8),  "I'm  not
interested  in  whether  the  registrar  is  going  to  give  a  registra-
tion  test  to  a  bunch  of  niggers  on  a  voter  drive."    The   clash
between  him  and  the  Justice  Department  arises  from  a  two-
year  campaign   on  his  part  to  use  the   perjury   laws   against
Negro  civil  rights  leaders, seizing  on  immaterial  discrepancies
in   voter   registration  testimony.    Such   prosecutions   would
add  another  element  of  terror  against  Negro  voting.
The   need   for   impartial   judges   has   been   vividly   demon-
strated  in  recent days.    Convicted bombers  go  free  while  civil
rights  leaders  are  subjected  to  wholesale arrests.    The  current
issue of  Rttniparls.  a  new  militantly  progressive Catholic  month-
ly  published in  Menlo  Park, Cal.,  carries an  "eye-witness"  story
by  Louis  E.  Lomax  on  how  Chancy,  Schwerner  and   Goodman
were  murdered  in  Mississippi.    Part  of  the  terrible  story  is
how  the  martyred  three  were  shadowed  by  the  police  in  their
fatal  trip to  Neshoba County.   The  police  broadcast every  move
over  a  short  wave  band  used  by  the  KKK.
Bobby's  Reluctance  on  Civil  Rights
"In  January  of   1963,  the   Misissippi  Advisory  Com-
mittee  of  the  U.S.  Commission  on  Civil  Rights suddenly
woke  up  to  the  sobering  fact  that,  as  far  as  Negroes'
rights  were  concerned,  Washington  had  been  dragging
its  feet  for  generations  .  .  .  the  Committee stated  that
wide-spread  police  brutality  was  the  most  urgent  civil
rights  problem  in  the  state.    When  confronted with  un-
mistakable  evidence  of  both   official   and  unofficial   vio-
lence,  Attorney  General  Robert F.  Kennedy  consistently
maintained  that  the  Justice  Department  did  not  have
power to do any  more in  Mississippi than it  was  doing—
which  was very  little. ... On June  24, 1964,  Robert  Ken-
nedy  told an outraged  NAACP delegation that  the situa-
tion  in  Mississippi  was  'a  local  matter  for  law  enforce-
ment*  and  that  the  Federal  authority  in  that  state  was
'very  limited.'    He  was  immediately  contradicted by  29
of  the  country's  foremost  law   professors."
—Wm.  M.  Kunstler  in  Ramparts   Magazine.
This  has  a  direct  bearing  on  a  suit  brought   by  Wm.   M.
Kunstler  on  behalf  of  COFO  under  an  1866  statute  long  neg-
lected   by  the  Justice  Department   (see  box  this  page)  for  an
injunction   barring  state,  county  and   local   officials,   the  Klan
and   other   racist  organizations   from   violence   against   rights
workers.    That  suit  has  to  be  argued  before  this  same  Judge
Cox!
Judge   Cox,   the   first   Kennedy   appointment    ("I'm    very
proud  of  the  judges  that  have  been  appointed,"  Bobby  told  the
New  York  Times April 27)  was Senator  Eastland's  close  friend
and   college  chum.     At   the  hearing   on  Kennedy's   appoint-
ment  as  Attorney  General,  Keating  tried  unsuccessfully  to  get
a  commitment  from  him  for  stronger   civil  rights   legislation.
Eastland  and  the  other   three  Southerners   on  the   committee
passed  Kennedy  without  a question.    Eastland  moved  the  nom-
ination  in  the  Senate  calling  him  "qualified  in  every  respect."
Kennedy's  authorized  biographers   in  The  Brother  Within  ex-
plain  that  this  is  because  most  Southern  Senators  are  "realistic
and  philosophical   individuals."
We'll  Send A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of  This  Issue  To  Friends  If  You  Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed  Envelopes
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a  sub  for  the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street     ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
11/2/04
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street        ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
I. F. Stones  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last,  week   in  December  and  the  first  week  in
January  and   Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618   Nebraska   Ave..  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
liy   I.   F.  Stone:   Circulation   Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.:     $6   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED