I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964mar23.pdf

============================================================

What  Moscow  Can Do  About Matzoth,  P.  4
If  LBJ  Ready  to  Talk  Peace  "Any Place, Any  Time",  Why  Not  in  Vietnam?
"I  want  this  government  first  of  all  to  be  dedicated   to
peace  in  our  time,  and  do  everything  that  we  can  conceiv-
ably  do,  any  place,  any  time,  with  anyone  to  resolve   some
of  the  differences  that  exist  among  mankind.  .  .  .
"Q.  One  of  your  speeches   at  the  University  of  California
indicated  a  kind  of  hint  to  me  that  we  might  carry  the  war
to  the   North  Vietnamese  if   they  didn't  quit   meddling  hi
what   you  call   a   'dangerous   game.'    Are   there   any   such
plans  that   you  can  talk  about,  sir?
"A.  No,  and  I  made  no  such  hint.    I  said  it  was  a  dan-
gerous  game  to  try  to  supply  arms and become an  aggressor
and   deprive   people   of   their   freedom,   and  that   is   true,
whether  it  is  in Vietnam or whether it  is  in  this  hemisphere,
wherever  it   is.       '
"Q.  Mr.  President,  do  we  face  the  decision  on  Vietnam
of  the  order  of  magnitude  of  Korea,  for   example?
"A.  No, I  don't  think  so.    ...
'Some  of  our  people  become  very  impatient.    They   cut
the  water  off  on  us  in  Cuba. .  .  .  Some  of  them  have  said—
some  of  the  men  have  even  wanted  me  to  run  in  the  Ma-
rines,  send  them  in  immediately.  .  .  .  There  are going  to be
these  demands  from  time  to  time,  people  who  feel  that  all
we  need  to  do  is  mash  a  button  and  determine  everybody's
foreign  policy.  .  .  .  But  we  are  not  living  in  that  kind  of
a  world  any   more."
—President  Johnson's  TV  Interview  March  15.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XII,  NO.  12
MARCH  23,  1964
101       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
The  Poverty  of  Ideas  in  The  Poverty  Message
In  his  address  to  the  Organization  of  American  States  on
the  third  anniversary  of  the  Alliance  for  Progress,   President
Johnson   said   "Progress   in   each   country   depends   upon   the
willingness   of   that   country   to   mobilize  its   own   resources,
to  inspire  its own  people.  .  .  .  Those  who  are  not  willing  to
do  that  which  is  unpopular,  and  that  which  is  difficult  will
not  achieve  that  which  is  needed  or  that  which  will  be  last-
ing."     These  words  may  serve   as  the   epitaph   of   his   own
"war   against  poverty,"  perhaps   his  administration.     Anyone
looking   objectively  at  his  poverty  message  and   his  prelimi-
nary  remarks  about  it  on  TV   the  previous  night   must  con-
clude   that  the   most  serious  obstacle  to  a  real   assault   upon
poverty  in  this  country  is  the  poverty  of  ideas  in  the  White
House.
A  Cal  Coolidge  Democrat
For  the  new .President's  consistent  restraint  in  foreign  policy
and  his  sober  realization  of  what  nuclear  war  means,  we  are
grateful,  as we  are  grateful  for  the  determination  he  has  dem-
onstrated  in  the  civil  rights   fight.   But  the  poverty  message
is  deeply  disappointing.     In  this,  as  in  his  address  to  the  Or-
ganization   of   American   States,   Mr.   Johnson   emerges   as  a
kind  of  Democratic  Cal  Coolidge,  with  a  simple-minded   faith
in  free  enterprise  as understood  in  Country  Club  locker  rooms.
As  a  politician,   he  is  showing  himself   far  more  skilful  than
his  Republican  rivals,  but  these  are  no  geniuses.    This  is  the
conventional  politics  good  enough  for  the  conventional  world
in  which  our  upper  and  middle   classes   are  comfortably   co-
cooned.    But  in  Latin  America,  as  in  Africa  and  Asia,  and  in
our  slums,  are  smoldering  crises  which  cannot  be  dealt  with
by  trite  ideas  and  campaign   rhetoric.  The  poverty   message  is
completely   lacking   in   any  big   conceptions  while   the   OAS
speech  seemed  wholly  unaware  that  the  Alliance  for  Progress
is  on  the  rocks  and  there  may  be  little  time  before  a  revolu-
tion  in  Brazil   or  Peru  confronts   us  with   a  new  and   many
times  bigger  "Cuba."
k
Where Were You Then?   Where Are You Now?
We  went  to  an  extraordinary  luncheon  last  week  for
an  extraordinary  man.    It  was  given  for  Aubrey  Wil-
liams  by  the  National  Committee  to  Abolish   the  Un-
American   Activities   Committee.     He  is  one  of  those
very   few   Southerners   with   the   courage   to   be   truly
Christian  in  their   relations   with  the   Negro.    Martin
Luther  King's  assistant,   the  Rev.  Wyatt  Walker,  said
the  Southern  Christian  Leadership  Conference  was  born
in  Williams'  backyard  in  Montgomery,  Alabama.     No
one  played  a  more  inspiring  role  in  the  New  Deal  than
Williams  as  head  of  the  National   Youth  Administra-
tion.    Now,  in  his  70's,  he  is  still,  as  always,   in  the
hardest   fight—against   HUAC.    The  luncheon  showed
that  in  a  country  which  is  constantly  patting  itself  on
the  back  for  its  recovery  from  McCarthyism  too   few
are  willing  to   stand   up  in  the   fight  against  HUAC.
McCarthy  was  only  another  in  the  line  of  witch  hunters
which  began  with  Martin  Dies   as  head  of   HUAC  in
the  30's.    For  a  quarter  of  a  century  this  Committee
has  smeared  and  blacklisted   some   of   the  best  Amer-
icans  of  our  time.    Its   methods  are  the  same  as Mc-
Carthy's.     Today  in  the   South   HUAC  is   being   used
against   those  fighting  segregation.     Yet  at  the  lunch-
eon  it  was  pretty  much  the  same   slim  handful,   older
and   grayer,   who   fought   McCarthy,   who   turned   up
against   HUAC.    Is  there  no  way  to  grasp  the  silent
by  the  lapel  and ask  them:  Where  were  yon  in  the  fight
against  McCarthyism?    Where  are  you  now?
The  simple  truth  is  that  reliance   on  so-called  free   enter-
prise  has  failed  at  home  and  abroad.    The  most  bathetic  part
of  Johnson's  TV  interview  was  his  soggy  tribute  to  the  men
who  "head  our  big  industries"  and  "are  willing  to  get  up  at
daylight  and  get  to  bed  at  midnight  to  offer  employment  and
create  new  jobs."   This  may have  been  successfully  calculated
to  leave  not  a  dry  eye  in  any  house  where  elder  statesmen  of
the  National  Association  of  Manufacturers  were  gathered  be-
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 23,  1964
Must  Viet  Peasants  Go  On  Dying  Because  We  Have  An  Election  Coming?
(Continued   from   Page  One}
fore  the  TV  screen.    But  an  analysis  on  p.  22  of  the  man-
power   report   the  White  House   and  the  Labor   Department
sent  to  Congress  March  9  tells  a  different  story.   Of  4,300,000
new  jobs  created  in  this  country  between  1957  and  1963  only
300,000  were  "full  time  jobs  generated  by  private  demand."
Government  directly  or  through   its  procurement,  mostly  for
war,  created   most  of  the  new  jobs.    The   country's   growth
lags  because  its  business  system  sags.
With  One  Eye  on  Harry  Byrd
The  poverty  message  represented  LBJ's  moment  of  decision.
Here  he  had  to  choose  between  pleasing  Harry  Byrd  by turn-
ing  off  lights  in  the  White  House  or  alienating  the  conserva-
tives  by  turning  on  some  new  lights  in  our  national  thinking.
His  nervous  disavowal  on  TV  of  any  intention  to  take  from
the  haves  to  give  to  the  have-nots  was  advance  indication  of
where  the  choice  would  be  made.    Johnson   built  himself   a
war  on  poverty  plank  for  the  campaign  by  putting   together
some  second  hand  lumber  at  bargain  basement   prices.     But
the  idea  of  a  general  attack  on  poverty,  which  Johnson   took
over  from  Kennedy's  agenda,  cannot  easily  be  stifled.     It  is
up   to  the  independent   liberals  and   radicals   of-  this  country
now  to  spell  out  a  program   in  big  terms  and  begin  to  sell
it  to  the  country.    Jf  that  job  is  done,  the  politicians  will  come
along  on  poverty  as  they  are  coming  along  on  civil  rights.
New  ideas  and  movements  need  also  to  be  generated   from
below  on  foreign  policy.    Trouble  lies  ahead   in  Panama  if
public  opinion  cannot be taught  to see that  the  perpetual  privi-
leges  we  forced  Panama  to  give  us  a  half   century   ago  are
anachronistic  in  today's  world.    Johnson  here  illustrates  that
well   meaning   commonplaces   are  no   substitute   for   positive
leadership.    We  are  not  living  in  a  world  which  is  guaran-
teed  to  wait  on  the  convenience  of  American  elections.   We'd
better  stop  expecting  the  stars  to  stand  still  in  their  courses
every   other   November.
Nowhere  is  this  more  true  than  in  South  Vietnam.    John-
son  seems  to  want  to  hold  the  war  in  suspense,  neither  with-
drawing  or  expanding  it  until  after  the  election.    Lodge  likes
the  war  because  it  builds up  his  "image"  of  the  brave  sentinel
on  anti-Communism's  frontiers.    The  Pentagon  likes  the  -war
because  it  is  a  testing  ground  for  new  weapons  and  a  train-
Reform  At  Last
".  .  .  the  American  government  was  long  opposed  to
aiding   public-controlled  industrial   development.     This
policy   was   particularly  noticeable   during   the   Eisen-
hower  administration,  and  was   the  cause  of   consider-
able  strain  in  Vietnamese-American  relations.  It  gradu-
ally   gave   way   before   Vietnamese   insistence   upon   at
least  mixed  public-private  ownership  of  naw  industries."
—South  Vietnam:  Nation   Under  Duress  by  Robert
Scigliana   (Houghton-Mifflin,      1964).
"Saigon,   Mar.  8  (Reuters)—Premier  Nguyen  Khanh
in  a  broadcast  to  his  nation,  last  night  promised  sweep-
ing  reforms  aimed  at  rebuilding   South  Vietnam.  .  .  .
Private   enterprise   would  be   encouraged   as   much   as
possible.     'The  government  will  sell  its  commercial  in-
terests ...  to  private  investors  and establish  a   stock
market'."
—Washington  Post,  March  8.
This  should  make  it  easier  for  the  peasantry  to  buy
some  good  common   stocks.
ing  ground  for  new  tactics.    If   a  few  more  American  boys
are  killed  in  the  process,  that  is too  bad.    If  more Vietnamese
peasants  have  to  be  napalmed  with  their  women  and  children
to  rout  out  guerrillas,  that  too  is  "c'est  la  guerre."    But  it  is
building  a  picture  of   America  as  a  lazy  giant  who   is  pre-
pared  to  sacrifice  other  people's  lives  and  security  because  it
lacks  the  intelligence  and  flexibility  to  adjust   to  realities.
Yet  all  this  cannot  be  laid  solely  at  the  door  of  the  White
House.    The  number  of  voices  raised  against  it  in  the  Senate
can  be  counted,  literally,  on  the  fingers  of  one  hand.  Gruen-
ing  of  Alaska  last  week  joined with  his  colleague  Bartlett  and
with  Mansfield,  Morse  and  Ellender  to  question  this   whole
stupid  war;  Gruening  had  the  courage  to  call  for  our  with-
drawal.    But  the  press  gives  scant  coverage  to  these  speeches
and  the  country  is  indifferent.     So  we  have  the  silly  comedy
of  our  Secretary  of  Defense  in  South  Vietnam  pledging  our
support   "forever"   to  another   of   those  here-today-and-gone-
tomorrow   "strongmen."      This   latest  military  miracleman  is
idiot  enough  to  whip  up  a  campaign  to  extend  his  war  to
the  North-  when   he   can  hardly  hold   a   50-mile  perimeter
around  his  capital  in  Saigon.    From  such  folly  we  seem  tem-
porarily  to  be  saved.    But  how  long  before  we  start  slipping?
Gen.  Khanh  Does  A  Swift  Job  of  Pulling  The  Wool   Over  McNamara's  Eyes
"Saigon,  Mar. 6  (UPI)  Vietnamese  Chief  of  State  Nguyen
Khanh  has  been  quietly  carrying   out  a  major  shakeup  in
this  country's  military  command ...  to  reward  close  sup-
porters  of  his  Jan.  30  coup.    Khanh's  shakeup  was  disclosed
on  the  eve  of   a  new  Saigon   fact-finding   visit   by   Defense
Secretary    McNamara.     The   reorganization   was    reported
causing  concern  as  the  new  Vietnamese  chief   of  state  had
assured   Ambassador   Lodge  there  would  be  no  such   major
shakeup   which   could  interfere   with  the  war  effort   .  .  .
almost  all  the  new  appointments  have  been  made  Cor poli-
tical  reasons. ...
"Qualified   U.S.   military  observers   believe  in  some  cases
the  new  commanders  are  as  competent  as  the  ones  they  re-
placed.     But  in  other   cases   the  military  qualities  of   the
appointees  are  unproven,  while  in  still  others  they  are  defi-
nitely  inferior.    The  most   prominent  example  of  the  third
category  is  in  the  vital  4th  army  corps,  which  is  responsible
for  the  southern  half  of  the  Communist  dominated  Mekong
delta.
"The  original  commander  there,  Brig.  Gen.  Co  is  consid-
ered  an  outstanding  officer  by  American  advisers.    Co  was
replaced  by  newly  promoted  Major  Gen.  Duong  Van  Due,
an  exile  general   who  returned  after  the  coup  which  over-
threw   the  NGO  family  regime.     Due's   military  ability   is
believed  inferior  to  Co's.     He  is   also   considered   by  some
qualified   observers   to  be  somewhat  emotional  and  erratic.
Due  was  one  of  Khanh's  closest  collaborators  in  the  coup."
—Washington  Post, March  7.
"Hoa,  Hoa,  March  9  (AP)   .  .  .  McNamata  told  newsmen
that  he feels  there  has  been  progress  in  South Vietnam  since
his  visit  here  in  December.    He  credited  Khanh's   reorgan-
ization  of  the  nation's    leadership."
—AP  ticker  March  9, the  day  after   McNamara's  arrival.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  23, 1964
Long  of  Missouri Takes  The  Offensive  Against  The  Use  of  Secret  "Mail  Covers"
A  Bill  to  End  A  Police  State  Practice  by  The  U.S.  Postoffice
A  little  known  police  state  practice  carried  on  secretly  by
the  Post  Office  would  be  ended  by  a  bill  which  Senator   Ed-
ward  Long  (D.  Mo)  has introduced  to prohibit  "mail  covers."
The  practice  consists  of  recording  all  information on  the  out-
side  of   letters.     It  came  sharply  to  public   attention   a   few
weeks  ago  when  Roy  Cohn's   lawyer  protested   that  his  mail
had  been  under  this  type  of  surveillance.     Serious  consider-
ation  is  assured  the  bill  by  the  support   of   Senator   Johnston
(D.  S.C.),  chairman  of  the  Post   Office   Committee.
Used  to  Detect  "Subversion"
Although   almost  unknown  to  the  public,  mail  covers  are
frequent  practice  in  the  Post  Office.    Its  Chief  Counsel  Louis
Doyle  admitted  in  1962  to  Senator  Long  that  there  were  be-
tween  500  and  750  in  operation  on  a  single  day.    The  num-
ber  was  probably  higher  during  the  McCarthy  era  when,  ac-
cording  to  Doyle,  the  practice  was  "useful  from  time  to  time
in   connection  with  espionage   and   subversion."
Doyle  invoked  two  Court   of  Appeals  decisions   to  defend
the  legality  of  mail  covers.    One,   US    v.  Costello  (255  Fed
2d  876),   held  that  mail  covers  do  not  violate  the  law  for-
bidding  detention  and  opening  of  mail.    The  other,   U,S.  v.
Schwartz  (283  Fed  2d  107),   held  that  postal  regulations  are
not  violated  when  information  from  a  mail   cover  is  turned
over  to  Justice  Department.
Neither  meets  the issue  squarely.   Neither  did  Judge  Archie
Dawson   in  the  Cohn   case.    He   declined   to  dismiss  on  the
ground  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  mail  had  been
opened!    It  is  obvious  that  the  government   by  a  mail  cover
can  obtain  valuable   information  without   opening  the  mail.
This  is  the  kind  of  practice  Brandeis  had  in  mind  when  he
said  "at  the  foundation  of  our  civil  liberties  lies  the  principle
Let  Freedom  Ring
(But  Make  Sure The  Wire  Is Tapped)
''Freedom  has  been  taking a  real  beating  at  the  hands
of   Federal  agents   during  the   past   few   months.    In
September   we   learned   that   our   military  intelligence
people   in  West   Germany  were  wiretapping   on  behalf
of  a  German  intelligence  agency  because  the  agency  it-
self  was  prohibited  from  tapping  by  the  German Con-
stitution.    This  was  certainly  a  great  example  for  the
German  people.    Shortly  after,  there  began   to  unfold
a  story  of  wiretapping  at  the  State  Department.   The
Deputy   Assistant   Secretary   of   State   had  through  a
'misunderstanding'  caused  the  tapping  of  the  telephone
of  one  of  his  subordinates.   This  was  followed  by  the
report  that  we  are  using  a  field-type  lie   detector   on
the  Vietnamese  people.    A  practice  that  is  ensured  to
instruct  them  in  the  ways  of  free  men."
—Long  (D.  Mo)  to  the  Senate  March  11   (abridged).
which  denies  to  government   officials   an  exceptional   position
before   the   law."
Like   all   clandestine    surveillance    techniques,   mail   covers
should   be  banned   as  beyond   effective   public  control.     Mr.
Cohn  only  learned  of  this  through  a  tip.    Not  even  the  pres-
ent  Chief   Postal   Inspector   knows  the  present   extent   of   the
practice.     Any  one  of  his   1,000   inspectors   can  authorize  a
"cover"  and  often  do  as  a  favor  to  FBI  or  local  police.
Ironically,  "mail  cover"  first  came  to  public  attention   when
a  Senate  committee  found   in   1954   that  they  had  been  used
in  investigating  McCarthy.    Now  ten  years  later  they  are  in
the  headlines   again   because   of  their   use  against  McCarthy's
one-time  lieutenant,  Roy Cohn.   No  matter  to  whom  applied,
they're  dirty   business.
Clark  Questions  the  Right  of  Senators  to  Double  in  Brass  As  Army Reserve  Officers
Mr.  CLARK  (D.  Pa.).  There  is  one  more  point  I  believe
I  should  raise  for  the  first  time.    There  is  a  grave  consti-
tutional  -issue  as  to  whether  those  holding  commissions  on
active  duty  io  the  Armed Forces  of  the  United  States  have
any  right,  either  to  speak  in  a  matter  with  respect  to  which
there  is  an  obvious conflict  of  interest,  or  any  right  to  serve
as  Senators  of  the  United  States  under  the  Constitution.
Mr. GOLDWATER  (R.  Ariz.). The  Senator has just  raised
the  question  of  the  constitutionality of  Reserve  officers  serv-
ing  as  Senators.    I  must  remind  him  that  I  introduced  a
resolution  at  the  first  session  of  this  Senate   to  call  upon
the   Judiciary   Committee  to   determine  this   question.     I
seriously  resist   the  charge  of  conflict   of   interest.
Mr.  THURMOND  (D.  S.C.).  I  am  amazed  that  any mem-
ber  of  this  body  should  continue  to  bring  up  this   question.
In  1930,  Congress  enacted  a  statute   on  this  very  subject,
in  which  it  was  held  that  a  Reserve  officer  is  not  an  officer
or   employe  of   the   U.S.  Government.
There  is  an  effort  in  this  country  to  bring  about  a  senti-
ment  against  the  military.   I  have  commented  today  on  a
book,  written  by  a  man  who  is  a  confidant  and  adviser  of
Cyrus  Eaton,  Khrushchev's  capitalist  friend  who  wants  to
see  this  country  unilaterally  'disarmed.    The  book  I  am  re-
ferring  to  is  called  "The  Passion  of  the  Hawks." *
This  man wants  to  downgrade the  Military  Establishment.
The  whole  effort  is  to  work  toward  disarmament.    That  is
the  motive behind  this  effort.    Those  who  have  been  trying
to  impugn  the  motives  of  the  Reserve  officers  are  invariably,
almost  without  exception,  people  who  favor  disarmament.
Mr.  CLARK.   In  my  view,  the  statute  on  which  the  Sena-
tor  from  South  Carolina  relies  is  unconstitutional.
—Abridged  from  the  Congressional  Record  Feb.  21  in  the
midst    of   Clark's   attack   on   the   $52  million    amendment
which  the  bomber  lobby  attached   to  the  annual  defense   bill
over  the  objections   of  Defense   Secretary    McNamara.
*  This  book  by  Tristram   Coffin,   subtitled   "Militarism   in
Modern  America"  (Macmillan:  $5.95),  which  we  recommend
highly,  gives  a  list  of  the  82  members  of  Congress  who  are
Reserve  Officers.    The  highest   ranking   are  Major  General
Goldwater  of  the  Air  Force  and  Major  General  Thurmond
of  the  Army.   The Army  has  34,  the  Air  Force  23, the  Navy
20  and  the  Marine Corps  5  officers  in  Congress.    Mr.  Coffin
characterizes   this   as  "an  ingenious   and  almost   fool-proof
system"  for  organizing   the  political  strength  of  the   mili-
tary.    He  writes,  "The  wearing   of  both  the  toga  and  the
sword  is  plainly  illicit  and  in  violation  of  the  Constitution"
which  says  "No  person  holding  any  Office  under  the  United
States  shall  be  a  member  of  either   House  during  his   con-
tinuance  in   office."
4   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  2S, 1964
Easy  Way  For  Moscow  to  End  the  Usual  Flow  of  Ugly  Pre-Passover  Stories
Jews  Worse  Off In  Soviet  Union  Than  Anywhere  Else  In  The  Bloc
There  is  one  easy  way for  the  Soviet  authorities  to  stop  the
flood  of  damaging  stories  in  the  Western  press  as  Passover
approaches  about  the  difficulties  Soviet  Jewry  has  in  obtaining
matzoth.   This  is  simply  to  reinstate  the  system  whereby  until
1962,   and  even  in  the  worst  days  of  Stalinism,  the  Jews  ob-
tained  unleavened  bread  from   State  bakeries  for  the  holiday.
It  would  also  improve  the  standing  of  the  Soviet  Union  in
the  outside  world  if  Trad,  the  Soviet  labor  paper,  would  cease
the  publication  of  vulgar  and  scurrilous  attacks  on  Israeli  dip-
lomats  which  seem  to  be  an  annual  feature  of  this,publication
as  Passover  approaches.    This  year's  article  by  "N.  Ehrlich"
is  similar  to  those  he  has  written  in  the  past.    If  the  Soviet
authorities  do  not  want  Israeli  visitors  to  leave  behind  prayer
books  in  the  few  synagogues  still  open  in  the  Soviet  Union,
they  can  easily  make  it  unnecessary  by  allowing  Soviet  Jews
to  print   their  own.
Poland's  Exemplary   Record
One  way  to  judge  Soviet  policy  is  by  comparison   with  Po-
land.    Poland,  like  Russia,  has  historically  been  a  hotbed  of
anti-Semitism.   Yet  in  Poland today the  Jews  enjoy  a  freedom
that  would   seem  like  paradise  to  their   Soviet  brothers;   it  is
not  surprising  that  Soviet  Jewry  was  not  allowed   to  send  a
delegation   to  Warsaw   last  April  for  the  commemoration  of
the  20th  anniversary  of  the  Ghetto   Uprising.
The  policy  laid  down  by  Gomulka  after  his  restoration   to
power  in   1956   contrasts  sharply  with  Khrushchev's.     In  an
official  statement  published  that  year  by  T-rybuna  Ludu,  Polish
Jews  were  offered   freedom  of   choice  among   three   courses:
assimilation,  the  enjoyment of  cultural  and  religious  autonomy
within  the  Polish   nation  or  emigration  to  Israel.    This  has
remained  Polish  policy  since,   and  has  been  accompanied  by
an   intense   campaign   against   the   survival  of  anti-Semitism
among  the  people.
Each  Communist  regime  in  Eastern  Europe  seems  to  have
a  different  Jewish  policy.    Yugoslav  Jewry,  before  and  since
the  break  with  Stalin,  has  never  suffered  from  discrimination.
In  the  bloc  itself,  Bulgaria,  had  little  anti-Semitism  either  be-
fore  or  after  the  Revolution.     In  the  bloc,  the  condition  of
From  An  Appeal  to   Khrushchev
"Many  of   us  are  lifelong  non-believers  in  any   reli-
gion.    Nonetheless we  believe the  the  freedom  to  prac-
tice   religious   views  should   be   allowed  Jews   of   the
Soviet  Union in  the  same  manner that  such  freedom  is
granted  people  of  other  religious  persuasion.    We  are
concerned   that   the   process   of   restitution   of  Jewish
cultural   activities  has   been  slow.    The   journals  and
theatres  of   much  smaller  groups  are   more  plentiful.
We  are  deeply  troubled that  there  should be  articles  in
Soviet  journals  of  many  Republics expressing  hostility
to   Jewish  people  as   such   and  using  terms  such   as
'vermin',  'blood-suckers',  'parasites'  in  combination with
caricatures  of  Jews."
—From  a  letter  recently   sent  Khrushchev  by  Bert-
rand   Russell,   Queen  Elizabeth  of   the   Belgians,   Max
Born,    Martin    Buber,   Ricardo    Lombardi,    Francois
Manriac,  Otto  Nathan,  Lord  Boyd  Orr,  Linus  Pauling,
Albert    Schweitzer,   Norman    Thomas   and    Gisuseppe
Ungaretti.
the  Jews  is  best  in  Poland;   Hungary  is  next,  then  Rumania
and  Czechoslovakia.    The  Soviet  Union's  record  is  the  worst.
In  each  case  the  status  of  the  Jews  is  an  index  of  de-Staliniza-
tion,  and  of  the  cultural  level  of  the  ruling  bureaucracies.
Among   the  Russian   intellectuals   today,   the   fight   against
anti-Semitism  is  as  closely  linked  to  the  fight  against  Stalin-
ism  as  it  once  was  to  the  fight  against  Czarism.    It  is indica-
tive  that  poets  like  Yevtushenko  and  writers  like   Nekrassov
are  champions  of  the  Jews—and  are  constantly  in  hot  water
with  the  bureaucrats  from  Khrushchev   down.
The  famous  veteran  Soviet  novelist  Konstantin  Paustovsky,
accused  Soviet  authorities  in   1956  of  anti-Semitic  views  "of
a  kind  worthy  of  pogrom-makers."     That  this  has   changed
but  little  is  indicated  by  the  kind  of  cartoons  which  illustrate
a  booklet   "Judaism  Without   Embellishment"   published   last
year  in  the  Soviet  Union  by  the  Ukrainian  Academy  of  Sci-
ences.    These  cartoons  are  of   the   vicious  type  which  once
appeared  in  the  Nazi  Der  Stuermer.   This  whole  .Soviet  rec-
ord  is  a  disgrace  to  socialism.
Free  Copies  of  This  or  Any  Other   Issue  Mailed  Free  to  Friends  If  You   Send  Stamped  Self-Addressed   Envelope  and  Specify  Which   Issue
IF. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,    N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly        5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ....................'...*.......».....*...««.............•*.•....••••••.•.•.••_••••._-
Street    .......................................................................~—.....——
City  ..........._.........................Zone........-..8tate............—...
3/23/64
For  this  additional  $5.35  please  send  a  copy  of  I.  F.
Stone's  "The  Haunted  Fifties."
(To)   Name  .....................„.................................................—..
Street   .........__..................._...................................................
City  ..........._.........................Zone......._.State...................
Shall  we  send  jrift  announcement?        . Tea  D    No  D
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I    F   Stone's  Weekly      Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington.   D.   C.   Published  every  Monday  except  in  August  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,
Washington,  D.   C.    An   independent   -weekly   published  and   edited  by   I.   F.  Stone;   Circulation    Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.S.;  16  in  Canada;  SIO  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  S15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED