I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964aug24.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on  The  Indochinese    War
The  International Law  We Violated in  Our Reprisal  Raids  on  North  Vietnam
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  28
AUGUST  24,  1964
io'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
What  Few  Know  About  the  Tonkin  Bay Incidents
The   American  government  and   the   American   press  have
kept  the  full  truth  about  the  Tonkin  Bay  incidents from   the
American  public.    Let  us  begin  with  the  retaliatory  bombing
raids  on  North  Vietnam.    When   I  went  to  New   York   to
cover  the  UN   Security  Council  debate  on  the  affair,  UN  cor-
respondents   at   lunch    recalled   cynically   that   four   months
earlier  Adlai  Stevenson told  the  Security  Council the  U.S.  had
"repeatedly  expressed"  its  emphatic  disapproval  "of   retalia-
tory   raids,  wherever   they   occur   and   by  whomever  they   are
committed."    But  none  mentioned  this  in  their  dispatches.
When  Britain  Staged   Reprisals
On  that  occasion,  last  April,  the  complaint  was  brought  by
Yemen   against   Britain.     The   British,  in   retaliation  for   at-
tacks  from  Yemen  into  the  British  protectorate  of  Aden,  de-
cided  to  strike  at  the  "privileged  sanctuary"  from   which  the
raids  were  coming.    The  debate  then  might  have  been  a  pre-
view  of  the  Vietnamese  affair.    The  British  argued  that  their
reprisal  raid  was  justified   because  the  Fort  they  attacked  at
Harib  was  "a  centre  for  subversive  and   aggressive  activities
across   the   border."     The   Yemeni   Republicans  in  turn  ac-
cused  the  British  of  supporting  raids  into  Yemen  by  the  Ye-
meni   Royalists.     "Obviously,"   Stevenson   said,   "it   is   most
difficult   to  determine  precisely  what  has  been  happening  on
the  remote frontiers  of  Southern  Arabia."    But  he  thought  all
UN   members  could  "join   in  expressing  our  disapproval  of
the  use  of  force  by  either side  as  a  means  of  solving  disputes,
a  principle  that  is  enshrined  in  the  Charter,"  especially  when
such  "attacks  across  borders"  could  "quickly  escalate  into  full-
scale  wars."    The  outcome  was  a  resolution  condemning   "re-
prisals  as  incompatible  with  the  purposes   and  principles  of
the  United  Nations."    That  resolution  and  Stevenson's  words
are  as  applicable  to   Southeast   Asia  as  to  Southern   Arabia.
Though  the  Czech  delegate  cited   them  in  his  speech   to  the
Council  on  August  7  about  the  Vietnamese  affair,  no  word  of
this  appeared  in  the  papers  next  day.
In  the  AuguSt  7  debate,  only  Nationalist  China  and  Britain
supported   the  U.S.  reprisal  raids.    The  French   privately  re-
called  the  international  uproar  over  the  raid  they  had  made
under   similar   circumstances   in   February,    1958,    into    the
"privileged  sanctuary"   afforded   the   Algerian   rebels   by  Tu-
nisia.   They  struck  at  the  Sakiet-Sidi-Youssef  camp  just  across
the  border.  Senators  Kennedy,  Humphrey,  Morse  and  Know-
land  denounced  the  raid  and  Eisenhower  warned  the   French
the   U.S.  would   not  be  able  to  defend   their   action   in  the
Security  Council.
Reprisals  in  peacetime  were  supposed   to  have   been   out-
Jawed  by  the  League  of  Nations  Covenant,  the  Kellogg  Pact
and  the  United  Nations  Charter.    All  of  them  pledged  peace-
Whose  Freedom?  What  Freedom?
"He  (Stevenson)  ventured  to  repeat that  the  peoples
of   Laos,   Vietnam   and  Cambodia  wished   to   be   left
alone.    To  whom  was  he  addressing  himself?     Would
he  not  do  better  in  telling  this  to  his  Government,  to
the  Pentagon,  to  the  CIA?     He  alleged  that  the  U.S.
is  in  Southeast  Asia  for  the  purpose of  helping  friends
to  preserve  their  opportunity  to  be  free.    What  kind
of  friends are  these?    Yesterday  it  was  the  Ngo  fam-
ily,   with  their  torture  chambers;  then  it  was  a  mili-
tary  junta;  and  now  it  is  Khanh  who,  in  order  to  save
himself   from  impending  fall,  has  just  now  proclaimed
martial  law  and  suppressed  the  last  vestiges   of  free-
dom  in  the  remnant of  the  territory he  holds  with  U.S.
support,  and  is  trying   to   create   new  provocation  of
war  and  following  the  example  set  by  the  aggression
on  the  coast  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of   Vietnam,
by   unleashing  aggressive   actions  against   his  neigh-
bors.    Tomorrow  it   may  be  perhaps  another  puppet,
equally  as  corrupt  or  possibly  even  more  so,  and  per-
haps  more brutal."
—Czech  delegate  to  the  Security   Council  Aug.  7.
ful  settlement  of  disputes.   Between  nations,  as  between  men,
reprisals  are  lynch  law.    Some  White  House  ghost  writer  de-
serves  a  literary  booby  prize  for  the  mindless  jingle  he  turned
out  to  defend  ours  in  Vietnam.    "The  world  remembers,  the
world  must  never  forget,"   were  the  words  he  supplied   for
Johnson's   speech   at  Syracuse,  "that  aggression   unchallenged
is   aggression   unleashed."     This  gem   of   prose   is   a  pretty
babble.    What  the  world  (and  particularly the  White  House)
needs  to  remember  is  that  aggression   is  unleashed  and  esca-
lated  when  one  party  to  a  dispute  decides  for  itself  who  is
guilty  and  how  he  is  to  be  punished.    This  is  what  is  hap-
pening  in  Cyprus,  where  we  have  been  begging  Greeks  and
Turks  to  desist  from  the  murderous  escalation  of  reprisal  and
counter-reprisal.     Johnson   practices  in   Southeast   Asia  what
he  deplores   in  the  Mediterranean.
More  Reprisal   Raids  Coming?
Public  awareness  of  this  is  essential  because  the  tide  is  run-
ning  strongly  toward  more  reprisal  raids  in  the  Far  East.    The
first  was  the  raid  by  U.S.  Navy  planes  in  June  on  Pathet  Lao
headquarters   in   Laos  in  retaliation  for   shooting   down   two
reconnaissance  planes.    We  would  not  hesitate  to  shoot  down
reconnaissance  planes  over  our  own  territory;  such overflights
are  a  clear  violation  of  international law.    But  the  U.S.,  now
seems  to  operate  on  the  principle  that  invasion  of  other   peo-
ple's  skies  is  our  right,   and   efforts   to  interfere  with   it   (at
least  by weaker  powers)   punishable  by  reprisal.    This  is  pure
"might is right"  doctrine.
The  very  day we  took  the  Vietnamese  affair  to  the  Security
1   1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly, August  24,1964
Council,  Cambodia illustrated  a  sardonic  point  to  be  found  in
Schwarzenberger's   Manual    of   International  Law—"military
reprisals  are  open  only to  the  strong  against  the  weak."    The
UN  distributed  to  Security  Council  members  the  latest  in  a
series  of  complaints  from  Cambodia  that  U.S.  and  South  Viet-
namese  forces  had  been  violating  its  borders.    It  alleged  that
at  dawn  on  July  31  "elements  of  the  armed  forces  of  the  Re-
public   of   Vietnam,   among   them   Americans  in   uniform,"
opened  fire  "with  automatic weapons  and  mortars,"   seriously
wounding  a  peasant  and  killing  a  bull.    If  Cambodia  could
only  afford  a fleet large  enough,  we  suppose  it  would  be justi-
fied  by Johnsonian  standards  in  lobbing  a  few  shells  into  the
U.S.A.
The  Law  We  Applied  at   Nuremberg
Even  in  wartime,  reprisals  are  supposed  to  be  kept  within
narrow  limits.    Hackworth's  Digest,  the  State   Department's
huge  Talmud  of  international law,  quotes  an  old  War  Depart-
ment  manual,  Rules  of   Land   Warfare,    as  authoritative   on
the   subject.    This   says   reprisals   are   never   to   be   taken
"merely   for   revenge"   but   "only   as  an  unavoidable   last  re-
sort"  to  "enforce  the  recognized  rules  of  civilized   warfare."
Even  then  reprisals  "should  not  be  excessive  or  exceed  the  de-
gree  of  violence  committed  by  the  enemy."    These  were  the
principles  we  applied  at  the  Nuremberg  trials.    Our  reprisal
raids  on  North   Vietnam  hardly  conformed   to  these   stand-
ards.    By  our  own  account,  in  self-defense,  we  had   already
sunk  three  or  four  attacking  torpedo  boats  in  two   incidents.
In  neither  were  our  ships  damaged  nor  any  of  our  men  hurt;
indeed,  one  bullet  imbedded  in  one  destroyer  hull  is  the  only
proof   we  have  been  able  to  muster  that  the  second  of   the
attacks  even  took  place.    To  fly  64  bombing  sorties   in  re-
prisal  over  four  North   Vietnamese  bases  and  an  oil  depot,
destroying  or  damaging  25  North   Vietnamese  PT  boats,  a
major  part  of  that  tiny  navy,  was  hardly  punishment  to  fit
the  crime.   What  was our  hurry?  Why  did  we  have  to  shoot
from   the  hip  and  then  go  to  the  Security  Council?    Who
was  Johnson  trying  to  impress?    Ho  Chi-minh?    Or   Barry
Goldwater ?
This  is  how  it  looks  on  the  basis  of  our  own  public  ac-
counts.    It   looks  worse  if  one  probes   behind  them.     Here
we  come  to  the  questions  raised  by  Morse  of  Oregon  on  the
Senate  floor  Aug.  5  and  6  during  debate  on  the   resolution
giving  Johnson  a  pre-dated  declaration  of  war  in   Southeast
Asia.    Morse  was  speaking  on  the  basis  of  information  given
in  executive  session  by  Secretaries  Rusk  and   McNamara  to
a  joint  session  of  the  Senate  Committee  on  Foreign  Relations
and  Armed  Services.    Morse  said  he  was  not  justifying   the
attacks  on  U.S.  ships  in  the  Bay  of  Tonkin   but  "as  in  do-
mestic  criminal  law,"  he  added,  "crimes  are  sometimes  com-
mitted  under  provocation"  and  this  "is  taken  into  account  by
a  wise  judge  in  imposing  sentence."
Morse  revealed  that  U.S.  warships  were  on  patrol  in  Ton-
kin   Bay  nearby  during  the  shelling   of   two  islands  off   the
North  Vietnamese  coast  on  Friday,  July  31,  by  South  Viet-
namese  vessels.    Morse  said  our  warships  were  within  3  to
11  miles of  North  Vietnamese  territory,  at  the  time,  although
North  Vietnam  claims  a  12-mile  limit.    Morse  declared   that
the  U.S.  "knew  that  the  bombing  was  going  to  take  place."
He  noted  that  General  Khanh  had  been  demanding  escala-
tion  of  the  war  to  the  North  and  said  that  with  this  shelling
Neither  Party  for  Peace
"The   last   episode—the   attack   by   North   Vietnam
vessels  on  U.S.  naval  vessels—I  consider  an  inevitable
development  of  the  U.S.   steady  escalation  of  onr  own
military  activities. ...  I  regret,  and consider  it  a  pity,
that  both  our  political  parties  appear  now  to  be  com-
mitted  to  a  policy  of  war.    Yet  American  public  opin-
ion,  judged  by  my  mail,  is  overwhelmingly  committed
to  a  different  policy—a  policy  of  peace.  My  mail  poors
in  with  virtual  unanimity  on  this  subject.    It  comes
from  a  truly  representative  cross  section  of  the  Ameri-
can  people.    It  includes  bishops,  deans  of  colleges,  uni-
versity   professors,   business   executives,   teachers,   re-
tired  Army  officers."
—Sen.  Gruening  (D.  Alaska),  in  the  Senate, Aug.  6
who  with  Morse  east  the  only   two  votes  in  Congress
against  the  war  resolution.
of   the  islands   it  was  escalated.     Morse   declared   the  attack
was  made  "by  South  Vietnamese  naval  vessels—not  by  junks
but  by  armed  vessels  of  the  PT  boat  type"   given  to   South
Vietnam  as  part  of  U.S.  military  aid.    Morse  said  it  was  not
just  another  attempt  to  infiltrate  agents  but  "a  well   thought-
out  military  operation."    Morse  charged  that  the  .presence  of
our  warships  in  the  proximity  "where  they  could  have  given
protection,  if  it  became  necessary"  was  "bound  to  be  looked
upon  by  our  enemies  as  an  act  of  provocation."    The   press,
which  dropped   an  Iron  Curtain  weeks  ago  on  the  anti-war
speeches  of  Morse  and  Gruening,  ignored  this  one,  too.
Yet  a  reading  of  the  debate  will  show  that  Fulbright  and
Russell,   the   chairmen   of   the   two   committees   Rusk   and
McNamara   had   briefed   in   secret   session,    did   not   deny
Morse's  facts  in  their  defense  of  the  Administration  and  did
not  meet  the  issue  he  raised.    Fulbright's  replies  to  questions
were  hardly  a  model  of  frankness.    When  Ellender  of  Louisi-
ana  asked  him  at  whose  request  we  were  patrolling   in  the
Bay  of  Tonkin,  Fulbright  replied:
These   are  international   waters.    Our  assistance   to
Sooth  Vietnam  is  at  the  request  of  the  Sooth  Vietna-
mese   government.    The  particular   measures   we   may
take  in  connection  with  that  request  is  our  own  respon-
sibility.
Senator  Nelson   of  Wisconsin  wanted  to  know  how  dose
to  the  shore  our  ships  had  been  patrolling:
Mr.  Fulbright:  It  was  testified  that  they  went  in  at
least  11 miles  in  order  to  show  that  we  do not  recognize
a  12-mile  limit,  which  I  believe  North  Vietnam  has  as-
serted.
Mr.  Nelson:  The  patrolling  was   for   the   purpose  of
demonstrating  to  the  North  Vietnamese  that  we  did not
recognize a 12-mile limit?
Mr.  Fnlbright:  That  was one reason  given.  .  .  .
Mr.  Nelson:  It   would   be  mighty  risky  if   Cuban   PT
boats  were  firing  on  Florida,  for  Russian  armed  ships  or
destroyers  to   be  patrolling   between  ns   and   Cuba,   11
miles   ont.
When   Ellender   asked  whether   our  warships  were   there
to  protect  the  South  Vietnamese  vessels  shelling  the  islands,
Fulbright  replied:
The  ships  were  not  assigned  to  protect  anyone.   They
were  conducting  patrol  duty.    The  question  was  asked
specifically   of   the  highest  authority,  the   Secretary  of
Defense  and  the  Secretary  of  State.    They  stated  with-
out  equivocation  that  these  ships,  the  Maddox  and  the
C.  Turner  Joy,  were  not  on  convoy  duty.    They  had  no
connection   whatever   with   any   Vietnamese   ships  that
might  have  been  operating  in  the  same  general  area.
Fulbright  did  not   deny   that   both   destroyers   were  in   the
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August 24, 3964
area  at  the  time  of  the  July  31  shelling  and  inside  the  terri-
torial  limits  claimed  by  North  Vietnam.    He  did  not  deny
Morse's  charge  that  the  U.S.  knew  about  the  shelling  of  the
islands  before  it  took  place.    He  merely  denied  that  the  war-
ships  were  there  to  cover  the  operation   in  any  way.    Our
warships,  according  to  the  official   account,  just  happened   to
be  hanging  around.    Morse's  point—which  neither  Fulbright
nor   Russell   challenged—was   that  they  had   no   business  to
be  in  an  area  where  an  attack  was  about  to  take  place,  that
this  was  bound  to  appear   provocative.     Indeed   the  only  ra-
tional  explanation   for   their   presence   at  the  time  was   that
the  Navy  was  looking   for  trouble,   daring  the  North  Viet-
namese  to  do  something  about  it.
Why  Our  Ships  Moved  Out  to  Sea
Morse  made  another  disclosure.  "I  think  I  violate  no  privi-
lege  or  secrecy,"  he  declared,  "if   I  say  that   subsequent   to
the   bombing,   and   apparently  because  there  was  some  con-
cern  about  the  intelligence  that  we  were  getting,  our   ships
took  out  to  sea."    Was  this  intelligence  that  the  ships  were
about  to  be  attacked  within  the  territorial  waters  claimed  by
North  Vietnam?   Morse  said  our  warships  went  out  to  sea
and  "finally,  on  Sunday,  the  FT  boats  were  close  enough  for
the  first  engagement  to  take  place."    This  dovetails  with  a
curious  answer  given  by  Senator  Russell  at  another  point  in
the  debate  to  Senator  Scott  of  Pennsylvania  when  the  latter
asked  whether  Communist  China  had  not  published  a  series
of  warnings  (as  required  by  international  law)   against  viola-
tions  of  the  12-mile  limit.    Russell  confirmed  this  but  said,
"I   might  add  that  our  vessels   had  turned   away   from   the
North  Vietnamese  shore   and  were  making  for   the  middle
of  the  gulf,   where  there  could   be  no  question,  at  the  time
they  were  attacked."
The  italics  are  ours  and  call  attention   to  an  evident  un-
easiness  about  our  legal  position.    The  uneasiness  is  justified.
A  great  many  questions  of  international  law  are  raised  by  the
presence   of   our   warships   within   an   area   claimed   by   an-
other  country  as  its  territorial  waters  while  its  shores  were
being   shelled   by   ships   we   supplied   to   a   satellite   power.
There  is,  first  of  all,  some  doubt  as  to  whether  warships  have
a  right  of  "innocent  passage"   through  territorial  waters  even
under  peaceful  circumstances.    There  is,  secondly,  the  whole
question  of  territorial  limits.    The  3-mile  limit  was  set  some
Prize  Explanation
Mr.  Robert  PIERPONT  (CBS   News):  Do  yon  have
any  thoughts  yourself   on  why  the  North  Vietnamese
Navy  would  have  decided  to  take  on  the  U.S.  Navy?
Senator   Eugene   McCARTHY   (D.   Minn.):   I   don't
know.    It  may  be  that  they  were  bored."
—On CBS  Face  The Nation,  Aug.  9.
centuries  ago  by  the  range  of  a  cannon  shot.     It  has  long
been   obsolete   but   is  favored   by  nations  with   large   navies.
We  make  the  3-mile  limit  the  norm  when  it  suits  our  pur-
poses  but  widen  it  when  we  need  to.    We  claim  another  9
miles  as  "contiguous   waters"   in  which  we  can  enforce  our
laws  on  foreign  ships.    While  our  planes  on   reconnaissance
operate  three  miles  off  other  people's  shores,   we  enforce  an
Air  Defense  Identification  Zone  on  our  own  coasts,  requiring
all  planes  to  identify   themselves  when  two  hours   out.     In
any   case,   defense   actions   may  be   taken   beyond   territorial
limits.    The  law  as  cited  in  the  U.S.  Naval  Academy's  hand-
book,  International  Law  for   Sea-Going  Officers    is  that   "the
right  of  a  nation  to  protect   itself   from   injury"  is  "not   re-
strained  to  territorial  limits ...  It  may watch  its  coast  and
seize  ships  that  are  approaching   it  with  an  intention  to  vio-
late  its  laws.    It  is  not  obliged   to  wait  until  the  offense  is
consummated  before  it  can  act."
If  the  Cubans  Shelled  Key  West
More  important  in  this  case  is  the  doctrine  of   "hot   pur-
suit."    The  North  Vietnamese  radio  claims  that  in  the  first
attack   it   chased   the   U.S.   warships   away   from   its   shores.
"The   right  of  hot  pursuit,"   says  Schwarzenberger's  Manual
of   International Law,  "is  the  right  to  continue  the  pursuit  of
a  ship  from  the  territorial  sea  into  the  high  sea."    The  logic
of  this,  our  Naval  Academy  handbook  explains,  is  that   "the
offender  should  not  go  free  simply  because  of  the  proximity
of   the  high   seas."    It   is  easy  to   imagine  how  fully   these
questions  would  be  aired  if  we  spotted  Russian  ships  hanging
around  in  our waters while  Cuban  PT  boats  shelled  Key West.
Our  actions  hardly  fit  Johnson's  description  of  himself  to  the
American  Bar  Association  as  a  champion  of  world   law.
There  are  reasons  to  believe  that  the  raids  at  the  end  of
July  marked  a  new  stepup  in  the  scale  of  South   Vietnamese
operations  against  the  North.   These  have  been  going  on  for
U.S.  Secret Operations Against North Vietnam  Began 3 Years Before  Rebellion in  South
"However  sensational   the  latest  events  in  the   Gulf  of
Tonkin    and   whatever   their   exact    circumstances,   they
should  not   make   one  forget   that   the   American   'Special
Services'  for  several  years  have  encouraged  and  supported
guerrilla   operations  against  North  Vietnamese  territory.
"Thus  as  early  as  1957  there  was  created  at  Saigon  a
'service   of   liaison   in   the   presidency',   headed   by  several
American  specialists  and  charged  with  the   organization,
training  and  command  of  parachutist  commandoes  special-
izing   in  intelligence   and  counter-espionage.     Within  this
service  'Section  45,'  assisted  by  four   American   advisers,
was  trained  for  operations  in the  North.  .  .  .  These  recruits
finished  one  stage  of  training  in  a  camp   at   Nha-Trang.
Then  the  best  were  sent  on  to  Formosa  or  Guam  for  more
advanced   training.    It  was  only  then  that  these  agents,
grouped  in  commandoes,  tried  their  luck  in  Tonkin.  .  .  .
"Until  1960,  however,  the  pace  of  these  operations  was
very  slow.    The  United  States  had  not  yet  intervened  di-
rectly   in   the   second   Indochinese   war   and  the   southern
commandoes  lacked  zeal.    Things  changed   from   1961   on
when  Washington  decided  to  step  up  its  efforts  in  Vietnam.
The   objectives   also   were   to   be   changed.    The   purpose
henceforth  would  be  to  disorganize  the  economic  and  mili-
tary  potential  of  the  North  in  order  to  prevent  its  aid  to
the   rebels  in  the   South,   an  aid  one  feared   without   yet
having  formal  proof   of  it.    The  overturning  of  the   Com-
munist  regime  was  consigned  to  second  place.   The  famous
Staley-Taylor  plan,  which  forecast  the  pacification  of   the
south  in  18  months,  assigned  an  important  role  to   com-
mando  operations  against  the  North.    At  the  same  time,
the   government  of   Hanoi,  from   1961   on,  more  and  more
often   announced   the   capture   of   'American-Diemist   sabo-
teurs,  caught  in  the  act.'  .  .  .  Most  of  the  agents  inter-
cepted  had  been  recruited   among  Catholic  refugees   from
Tonkin  or  former  soldiers  in  the  French  army."
—Georges  Chaffard    in  Le  Monde,  Aug.  7.
1   1   .1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  24, 1964
Was  the  Reprisal  Raid  A  Long  Planned  Strategic  Bombardment?
some  time.    In  fact,  a  detailed  account  in  Le  Monde   (Aug.
7)   says  they  began  (See  Box  p.  3)   three  years  before  the
rebellion   broke  out   in  South  Vietnam.    Ever  since  January
of  this  year  the  U.S.  press  has  been   full   of   reports  that  we
were  planning  to  move  from  infiltration   and  commando  op-
erations   to   overt   attacks   against   the   North.       Newsweek
(March  9)   discussed  a  "Rostow  Plan  No.   6"   for   a  naval
blockade   of   Haiphong,   North   Vietnam's  main  port,   to  be
followed   by   PT   boat   raids   on   North   Vietnamese   coastal
installations   and   then   by  strategic  bombing   raids.     In   the
middle  of  July  the  North  Vietnamese  radio  reported  that  the
U.S.  had  given  South  Vietnam  500  "river  landing  ships"  and
four   small  warships  from  our  mine  sweeping   fleet.   A  dis-
patch  from  Hong  Kong  in  the  New   York   Times   (Aug.  14)
quoted  an  "informed  source"  as  saying  that  the  North  Viet-
namese  had   concealed  the   fact   "that  the  shelling  of   the  is-
lands"   on   July   31  "had been   directed   at   a   sensitive   radar
installation."    The  shelling  of  radar  installations would  look
from  the  other  side  like  a  prelude  to  a  landing attempt.
How  The  Public  Is  Brain-Washed
These   circumstances   cast   a   very   different   light   on   the
Maddox  affair,   but  very  few  Americans  are  aware  of  them.
The   process   of  brain-washing  the  public  starts  with   off-the-
record  briefings  for  newspapermen   in  which  all  sorts  of  far-
fetched  theories  ate  suggested   to  explain  why  the  tiny  North
Vietnamese  navy  would   be  mad   enough   to  venture   an  at-
tack  on  the  Seventh  fleet,  one  of  the  world's  most  powerful.
Everything  is  discussed  except  the  possibility that  the  attack
might   have  been   provoked.     In  this  case  the   "information
agencies,"  i.e.   the  propaganda  apparatus  of   the  government
handed   out   two   versions,   one   for   domestic,   the   other   for
foreign   consumption.    The   image  created  at  home  was  that
the  U.S. had   manfully   hit   back  at  an  unprovoked   attack—
no   paper   tiger  we.    On   the   other   hand,   friendly   foreign
diplomats  were  told   that  the   South  Vietnamese  had   pulled
a  raid  on  the  coast  and  we  had  been  forced  to  back  them  up.
As  some  of  the  truth  began  to  trickle out, the  information
agencies  fell  back  on  the  theory  that  maybe  the  North  Viet-
namese  had   "miscalculated."    That   our  warships  may  have
been  providing  cover  for   an   escalation   in  raiding  activities
The  Day  After  The  Battle  Was  Over
"I  find  the  speech  of  the  Senator  from  South  Dakota
[Mr.     McGovern]   very   interesting    but   very   belated.
For  approximately  6  months  the  Senator  from  Alaska
[Mr.    Gruening]   and  the   Senator   from   Oregon   have
been   urging   support   for   the   very   suggestions  which
the   Senator   from   South   Dakota   made   this   morning.
If   Senators   who  have   held  the  views   of   the   Senator
from   South   Dakota—and   many   of   them   have   held
them  privately  for  these  many  months—had  joined  the
Senator  from  Alaska  and  the  Senator  from  Oregon  5
or  6  months  ago  in  urging  a  diplomatic  settlement   of
the  Asiatic  strife  under  the  rules  of  international  law,
we   might   have   been   able   to   change   the   warmaking
course   of   our  government   in   Asia.     But   one  of   the
saddest  things  is  that  during  all  those  months  the  talk
of  many  Senators  in  the  cloakroom  has  been  noticeably
different  from  their  silence  on  the  floor  of  the  Senate."
—Morse  Aug.  8, day  after   the  war  resolution   passed.
never  got  through  to  public  consciousness  at all.
The   two  attacks  themselves  are  still  shrouded   in  mystery.
The  Maddox  claims  to  have  fired  three  warning  shots  across
the  bow  of  her   pursuers;  three  warning   shots   are   used   to
make   a  merchantman  heave-to   for   inspection.     A  warship
would   take  this   as  the   opening   of   fire,   not   as  a  warning
signal.    The  North   Vietnamese  radio  admitted  the  first  en-
counter  but  claimed  its  patrol  boats  chased  the  Maddox  out
of  territorial  waters.    The  second  alleged  attack  North  Viet-
nam  calls  a  fabrication.    It  is  strange  that  though   we  claim
three   boats  sunk,  we  picked  up   no   flotsam   and   jetsam  as
proof   from  the  wreckage.    Nor  have  any  pictures   been   pro-
vided.    Whatever   the  true  story,  the  second   incident   seems
to   have   triggered   off  a   long  planned   attack   of   our own.
There   are   some   reasons   to   doubt   that   it   was  merely   that
"measured  response"  against  PT  bases  it  was  advertised  to  be.
Bernard  Fall,  author  of  "The  Two  Vietnams,"  who  knows  the
area  well,  pointed   out  in  the  Washington  Post  Aug.   9  that
"none  of  the  targets  attacked"   in  the  reprisal  raids  "was  pre-
viously  known  as  a  regular  port  or  base  area.    Hon-Gay,  for
example,  was  one  of  the  largest  open-pit   coal  mining   opera-
tions  in  Asia,  if  not  the  world."    Was  this  one  of  the  stra-
tegic  industrial  targets  in  Rostow's  "Plan  No.  6?"
Extra  Copies  This  Issue  Available  at  $5  per  100  or  $40   per  1,000  or  we'll  send free  copies if  you furnish  long  stamped  addressed envelopes
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
8/24/64
For  $5.35  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
(To)    Name    ......................................................................'........
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..................;.......................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?           Yes  D    No  Q
/ F.  Stone's  'Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week   in  December  and  the  first   week  in
January  and   Bi-Weekly  during  July  and   August  at   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.. Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED