I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1964
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1964dec14.pdf

============================================================

HUAC  (30  Years  Old)  Gets  Roses and  A  Brickbat,  P.  3
The  Truth  About  the  Vietnamese  War  As  Seen  By  Our Experts  on  China's  Doorstep
"Hong   Kong—Hope  that  an  accommodation   with  Com-
munist  China  might  provide  an  alternative  to  either  the
present  effort  or  a  military  escalation  in  South  Vietnam  is
regarded  as  wildly  optimistic by  most  China  experts here.
.  .  .  Even  if  Peking  chose  to  call  off  the  war  in  Southeast
Asia,  it  probably  lacks  influence  in  Hanoi  and  among  the
Vietcong.  .  .  .  Even  with  Chinese  moral  support  and  the
limited  supply  of  arms  and  men  from  North  Vietnam,  the
struggle  in  the  South  has  been  and  remains largely  a  na-
tive  Communist  rebellion.  .  .  The analysts  here  believe  that
in  the  event  a  policy  decision  is  taken  to  cautiously  esca-
late  the  war .  .  .  and even  puts the  U.S.  in  a  strong  enough
position  to  negotiate for  a  settlement, the  bargaining would
have   to   be  done   primarily   with   Ho  Chi  Minh,  not   Mao
Tse-tung.    In  fact,  Ho  with  his  inherent  Vietnamese  dis-
trust   and  fear   of   the   Chinese  is   probably   the   man  we
should   be  secretly   feeling  out   now   and  perhaps  already
are."—Richard   Critchfield   in  the  Washington  Star,  Dec.  3.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XII,  NO.  42
DECEMBER  14,  1964ioi       WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
If  Only  Neshoba  County  Were  In  The  Congo
If  the  U.S.   felt  as  deeply  about  tacist  murders  in  Missis-
sippi  as  it  does  about  racist  murders  in  the  Congo,  there  is
much  it  could  do  as  a  government  and  as  a  people.    It  would
be  Utopian  to  expect  paratroopers  to  be  dropped  on  Jackson
to  protect  Negroes  endangered  by  a  State  virtually  in  rebellion
as  we  dropped  paratroopers  on  Stanleyville.    It  may  not  be
possible  even  to  force  an  impartial trial  of  the  men  arrested
for   the  murders  of  the  three  martyred  civil  rights  workers,
Schwerner,  Goodman  and  Chancy,  a  crime unpunished  for  six
months,  though  the  circumstances have been  an  open  secret  in
the  community,  where   their  killing   was  cold-bloodedly  ar-
ranged.    But  the  Federal  government,   the  Congress  and  the
better  conscience of  the  country  have  immediate means  to  act
against  the  system  of  white  supremacy  which  these  murders,
like  countless  forgotten  others  in  the  years  since  Reconstruc-
tion,  were  meant  to  enforce  by  naked  terror.    This  is  what
could  be done:
The  Crime  of  1890
The  right  of  Mississippi's  five  Congressmen  to  their  seats
could  be  denied  when  Congress  convenes  next  month  until  it
has  passed  on  the  suits  filed  here  a  few  days  ago  to  contest
their  election.    These  suits  call  sharply  to  public  attention  for
the  first  time  in  this  generation  that  the  State  of  Mississippi
has  been  violating  the  conditions  under  which  it  was  read-
mitted  to  the  Union  in  1870.     One  of  those  conditions  was
that  the  "Constitution  of  Mississippi  shall  never  be  so  amend-
ed  or  changed  as  to  deprive  any  citizen  or  class  of  citizen  of
the  United  States  of  the  right  to  vote  who  are  entitled  to  vote
by  the  constitution herein  recognized."    The  words  are  those
of   the   1870   statute  readmitting   Mississippi   to  the   Union.
The  constitution  "herein  recognized"  was  that  of  1869  which
granted  the  vote  to  all  male  inhabitants  21  or  over  who  had
resided  in  Mississippi  for  six  months   and  were  not   insane.
Since  1890,  when  there  were  70,000  more  registered  Negro
voters  than  whites  in  Mississippi,  the  State  has  embarked  on
a   series  of   discriminatory election   law   changes   which  have
reduced  the  number  of  registered  Negro  voters  from  189,884
in   1890   to  23,801  in   1961.     There  could  not  be  a   clearer
case  of  electoral  fraud  and  racial  oppression.
In  three  of  the  five  Congressional   districts,   the  seats  are
Detente  Preferred  to  MLF
We  hope  that  on  the  eve  of  the  Johnson-Wilson talks
the  White  House  noted  two  developments imperfectly
covered  in  the  U.  S.  press.    One  is  the  rising  opposi-
tion   in   Congress   to   MLF:  the  latest  dissents  were
those   of   Sen.   McGovern   and   Reps.   Brademas   and
Reuss—these  two  on  their  return from  Europe report-
ed   even   the   Germans   privately   lukewarm   to  MLF.
The  other  was  the  action  taken  by  the  Western  Euro-
pean  Union,  the  "Parliament  of  NATO."    Its   resolu-
tion   for   a   European  nuclear   force,   which   our   press
represented   as   an  endorsement  of  MLF,  was   passed
only  after  all  reference  to  MLF  in  it  had  been  exclud-
ed;   even   then  the   vote   was   only   37  to   15  with  9
abstentions.    But  a  resolution  unreported  here  calling
on  the  NATO powers "to  make  east-west  arms  control
and  the  normalization  of  relations  between European
powers  the  overriding  aims  of  their  foreign  and  de-
fense   policies"   (London   Times,   Dec.  3)   was   passed
unanimously.    The  W.E.U.  preferred  detente  to  MLF.
contested   by   three   candidates  of   the   Mississippi   Freedom
Party,  Fannie  Lou  Hamer,  Victoria  Gray  and  Annie  Devine.
They   claim  that  the  elections  held   by  their  party  were  the
only  ones  which  conform  to  the  non-discriminatory standards
established  by  Congress  when  Mississippi  was  readmitted   to
the  Union.    Four  years  ago,  in  the  election  contest  of  Roush
v.  Chambers, the  House  by  resolution  refused  to  allow  Cham-
bers  to  take  the  oath  of  office  though  certified  by  the  Indiana
Secretary  of  State.    Both  men  were  given  pay  as   Congress-
men,   office   space  and   the   privileges  of   the  floor  until   the
Subcommittee  on  Privileges  and  Elections  had   reported   and
the  House  acted,  when  the  contestant  Roush  was  awarded  the
seat.    There  could  be  no  better  rebuke  to  the  racist  atmo-
sphere  which  condones  the  killings of  the  martyred three  than
the   passage   of   a  similar  "in   all  fairness"   resolution   when
Congress  convenes  giving  these  three  brave Negro  women  the
privilege   of   the  floor  until  their  challenges   have  been  de-
cided.   The  effect,  the  world  over,  would  be  electric  as  a sym-
bol  of  America's  determination  to  see  racial  justice  done.
The  liberal  "Study  Group"  in  the  House,  which  hopes  to
see  its  number  increase  to  175  with  the  new  session,   should
(Continued  On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December H, 1964
Former  FCC  Official  Says  It  Promotes  Instead  of  Regulating  Telephone Monopoly
Break-Up  of A.T. &  T.  Super-Giant  (Into  35 Little  Giants)  Urged
For   almost   two-thirds  of   a   century   the   government   has
tried  to  prevent  the  American  Telephone   and  Telegraph  Co.
from  monopolizing  the  nation's  telecommunications.    So  far
it  has  failed.    A.T.&T.  has  become  the  world's  largest cor-
poration  (fee  box  at  right)   and  is  now  about  to  put  its  only
remaining   nationwide  competitor,   Western   Union,   out   of
business.    This  prospect  caused  the  Federal  Communications
Commission  in  1962 to  order  a  Domestic  Telegraph  Investi-
gation.     At  hearings  last  month,  Prof.  Dallas  Smythe, for-
merly  Chief  Economist  for  the  FCC  and  now  at  Saskatchewan
University,  proposed  a  "final  solution"  to  the  A.T.&T.  prob-
lem.    He  would  break  it  into  30  to  35  separate  pieces.    Each
of   its   regional   companies  would   become   independent.     So
would  Bell  Telephone  Laboratories,  A.T.&T.'s  long  distance
operations,  and  Western   Electric,  which  manufactures  90%
of  U.S.  telephone   equipment.    Average  total   assets   of   the
independent  units  would  be  approximately $800  million each!
The  Pentagon   Speaks   Up  For  A.T.&TV
This  was  heresy.    A.T.&T.'s  counsel  urged  that  it  be  strick-
en  from  the  record.    Within  the  space  of  a  few  moments  he
managed   to  call  it  "scurrilous,"   "vituperative,"    "unsupport-
ed,"    "irrelevant,"     "unwarranted,"    "irresponsible,"     "frivo-
lous,"  "abusive,"  and  "defamatory."     The  Defense   Depart-
ment's  spokesman  supported  the  A.T.&T.  objection.  Smythe's
testimony,  he  said,  was  "a  discussion of  law  by  a  non-expert."
We  recollect  a  similar favor  in  1956:  A.T.&T.  was  permitted
to  ghost-write  the  letter  that  Secretary  of  Defense  Wilson  sent
to  the  Justice Department  recommending  that  A.T.&T.  not  be
divested  of  control   over  Western   Electric,  a  favorite  defense
contractor.
Smythe  has  been  the  only witness  so  far  to  recommend dis-
solution  of   the  Bell  System.    Not   too  long   ago  such  ideas
were  commonplace.    Pres.  Wilson's   Postmaster  General rec-
ommended  public  ownership  of  the  entire  telephone  and  tele-
graph    industry.     Congressional    committees    had      reported
favorably  on  the  idea  no  less  than  17  times.    Instead  the  Jus-
tice  Department   chose  to  compromise.    It  required  A.T.&T.
only  to  divest  itself  of  Western  Union  stock  with  the  implicit
understanding  that  it would  stay out  of  the  telegraph   business.
Today  42%   of  domestic  telegraph  revenue  goes  to  A.T.&T.
The  Hoover  Commission  reported  in  1948 that  "any real
regulation   of   the   telephone  industry  continues  to  remain   a
matter  of   statutory  hope."    Smythe's  testimony  shows   how
little  h'as changed  since  then.    The  FCC, despite  much con-
AT&T  =   U.S.  Steel  +   GM +   Esso  (N.J.)
"Bell  System  revenues  in  1959 were  larger  than  the
combined  national  public  revenues  of  Canada  and  Swe-
den.    They   were  $2  billion  larger   than  the   combined
national.public  revenues  of  Denmark,  Norway,  Sweden
and   Finland.    They   were   $2  billion  larger   than   the
public   revenues   of   Italy. .......  To   equal   the
total  assets  of  the  Bell  System   at  the  end  of   1959,  it
would  be  necessary  to  add  together   the  total  assets  of
Standard  Oil  of  New  Jersey,   General  Motors  and  the
U.S.  Steel  Corporation."
—Prof.   Dallas  Smythe,   before    the  FCC, Nov. 4.
gressional  criticism,  still  sets  most  A.T.&T.  rates  on  the  basis
of  informal  negotiations.    All  other  federal  regulatory  agen-
cies  hold  formal  rate hearings.    FCC  officials  conceded  to  The
New   York   Times  November  26  that  "the negotiation   proce-
dure  might  yield  slightly  higher  rates  than  those  that  could
be  established by  a  unilateral order."    Smythe,  who  examined
a  transcript  of  the  1961-63  meetings,  was  more  blunt.     The
Commission's  attitude,  he  said,  "is  one  of  deference  bordering
on  collaboration:"    The  meetings  are  private.    Industry  pre-
sents  its  own  witnesses,  examines  them,  cross-examines  Com-
mission   witnesses,  if   there   are  any, and   calls  rebuttal wit-
nesses.    "The telephone  rate  payers,"  he  said,  "get a  species
of  star  chamber  treatment."
Sloppy  regulation  has  permitted  A.T.&T.  to  subsidize  its
expansion  into  the  telegraph  business  at  the  expense  of  tele-
phone  users.   This,  Smythe said,  can  be  seen  from  a  compari-
son  of  earnings:  a  10.7% return  on  private  line   telephone
business  but  less  than  2%   on  private  line  telegraph.    This
loss-leader  pricing   long   went  unnoticed   by  the   Commission
because  it  looked  only  at  A.T.&T.'s  overall   rate  of   return,
about  8%.     The   cost  to  the  consumer  of   this  and  similar
monopoly  practices  has  never  been  adequately  measured.    It
is  impossible  to  know,  for  example,  the  price  of   telephone
equipment  in  a  competitive market when  Western  Electric  has
eliminated  all  competition.     Since  it  controls  Western   Elec-
tric,  A.T.&T.   has  little  interest  in  reduced  equipment  prices;
it  can  pass  the  cost  on  to  the  consumer.    The  abortive  anti-
trust  prosecution   in  1949 to  separate  Western   and  A.T.&T.
concluded  with  the  three  participating  federal  agencies  (De-
fense,  Justice  and  FCC) all  recommending  the  position  taken
by  A.T.&.T.  That  leaves  only Prof.  Smythe,  and  the  American
Communications  Assoc.  for  which  he  spoke,  representing  the
public.
Latest  Cut  In  Telephone  Rates  Still  $50 Million  Less  Than  FCC  Staff Recommended
The  FCC's  order  for  a  $100  million  cut  in  A.T.&T.'s  long
distance  telephone  rates  will  do  more  for  the  agency's  pub-
lic  image  than  for  the  public itself.    The  inadequacy  of  the
reduction  has  been  pointed  out  in  The  Wash.  Daily  News
(Dec.  1)  by  Rice  Odell,  the  only  Washington   reporter   who
sdtems  to  speak  critically  of  A.T.&T.    The  cut  is   supposed
to  lower  A.T.&T.'s   rate  of   return  to  7  per  cent,   but  the
FCC's   staff   has  repeatedly  suggested  that  a  6.5  per  cent
return  is  adequate.   The  difference:  $50  million  a   year.
It  seems  doubtful,  Odell  wrote,  that  the   reduction   will
lower  A.T.&T.'s  earning  even  to ~7  per  cent.  Normal  growth
in  demand  and  the  decreasing  cost  of  electronic  equipment
have   frustrated   past   attempts  to   reduce   returns   to  this
point.    In  1963  the  Commission   ordered  a  similarly  large
reduction  but  earnings   remained  at  7.5  per  cent.     Twelve
months  later  they  were  at  7.7  per  cent  and  today  are  at.8
per  cent  or  more.    In  1959  the  Commission  ordered  a  $50
million  rate  reduction  that  also  was  expected  to  bring  the
earnings  level  down  to  7  per  cent.    Instead,  earnings   were
at  a  record  7.9 per cent  in  1959.
As  mild  as  the  reduction  was  the  reaction  of  Mr. Kappel,
A.T.&T.'s   Chairman.   "The Commission   has   now  insisted
on  rate  reductions  larger  than  we  think  justified,"  he  said.
But  he  offered,  magnanimously,  not  to  appeal  the  decision.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F..Stone's  Weekly,  December U,  1964.
After  30  Years,  Isn't  It  Time  To  Abolish  This  Excrescence  on A  Free  Society?
WSP  Slyly  Sends  Flowers,  and  100 Leading  Lawyers  A  Brickbat,  to  HUAC
Anyone  watching Channel  5 Sunday night  Dec.  6  and  hear-
ing  former  President  Truman  describe  the  Un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee  again  as  "the  most  un-American committee
in  the  government"  might  have  imagined  it  a  thing  of  the
past,  linked  as  it  was  in  that  "Great  Moments"  show  with  a
line  of  similar  horrors  back  to  the  Salem  witch  hunt.    But
next  morning  there  it  was  on  Capitol  Hill  still  in  business.
It   had   subpoenaed   Dagmar   Wilson   and   Donna   Allen  of
Women's  Strike  for  Peace  and  Russell Nixon  of  the  National
Guardian.     Object:   what   happened   when   the   two  women
visited  the  State  Dept.  in  Nov.   1963  to  urge  an  entry  visa
for  Prof.  K.  Yasui,  of  the  Japan  Council  Against  the  A  and
H  Bomb.    Yasui's  subsequent  lecture  tour  was  sponsored  by
the Guardian.
You  Can't  Be  Too  Careful
After  an  all-day  wrangle  in  which  the  witnesses  refused  to
testify  except  in  public  session  and  the  subcommittee*  threat-
ened, contempt  proceedings,  it  turned  out  that  this  was  to  be
the  tenth  in  a  series  of  secret  hearings  begun  last  February
to  investigate  "whether  certain  executive  agencies  of  the  gov-
ernment  [Justice  and  State]  in  permitting  by  special  waiver
the  entrance  into  the  U.S.  of  aliens  inadmissible  under  the
Immigration  and  Nationality  Act   [i.e.   persons  suspected  of
Communism]   are  acting  in  accord  with  the  security  interests
of  the  United  States."    The  two  women  peace  leaders  later
told  reporters  they  were  subpoenaed   because  they  were  the
only  two  to  go  in  person  to  the  State  Department  to  ask  a
visa  for  Yasui.    The  target  of  the  investigation  this  time  is
not  Women's  Strike  for  Peace  or  the  Guardian  but  State,  a
department  HUAC   (like  McCarthy  before  it)   regards  with
suspicion.    It's  just  safer  for  discreet  citizens  not  to  go  there.
Last  time  HUAC  had  Dagmar  Wilson  before  it,  the  Com-
mittee  didn't  do  so  well.    This  time  it  wanted  to  hear  her
first  in  private.    The  executive  session,  in  the  long  history  of
the  witch  hunt,  has  usually  served  not  as  a  way  of  protecting
witnesses  but  the  committee.     It  provides  a  dress   rehearsal.
The  three  witnesses  by  refusing to  testify  except  in  open  ses-
sion  put  the  committee  on  the  spot  since  any  contempt  action
must  be  filed  before  the  year end.   With  Congress  out  of  ses-
sion,  this  requires  action  by the  Speaker,  McCormack.   There
* Two  lame-ducks  defeated  in  the  last  election,  Johansen
(R.  Mich.),  and  Brace  (R.  Ind.).   The  other  two  were  Ichord
and  Poole  (D.  Tex.)  who  chaired  the  hearing.
Heart  of  the  Abolition  Petition
"The  Committee  on Un-American Activities .  .  .  has
attempted  to  create  in  the  legislative   branch  a  per-
manent  institution,  consisting' of  staff,  files,  informants
and  similar  machinery,  designed  to  serve  as  a  bureau-
cratic  Big  Brother  to  censor  the  opinions  and  associa-
tions  of  American citizens.  .  .  .
"We  do  not  suggest   the  abandonment of  all  legisla-
tive  machinery  for  investigation  of  matters  pertaining
to  legislation  necessary  for  assuring  internal  security.
.  .  .  Adequate authority  for  these  purposes  is  already
vested  in  ...     the  Committee of  the  Judiciary  (which)
.  .  .  now  has  jurisdiction  over   'bankruptcy,   mutiny,
espionage  and counterfeiting.' ...  In  the  event mem-
bers  of  the  House  feel  that  the  authority  of  the  Com-
mittee  should  be  clarified,  however, this  can  readily be
accomplished  by  amendment.   In  order  to   avoid  per-
petuation  of   the   problems  noted  previously,  such  an
amendment  should  make  clear  that  the  Judiciary  Com-
mittee  has  power  to  investigate  overt  actions  but  not
'propaganda'  or  other  forms  of  expression  or  associa-
tion. ...
"There  remains the  question of  disposing  of  the  files
of  the  Committee on  Un-American Activities  .  .  .  con-
taining  miscellaneous  and  often  inaccurate data  about
millions  of  citizens.  .  .  .  Self-respecting  citizens  of  a
democratic  country  cannot  allow  their   representatives
in  government  to  keep  dossiers  on  their  beliefs,  ideas,
political  views or associations. ... We recommend that
the  files  be  transferred  to  the  Archives, not  to  be  open
for  official  or  public  inspection  for  50  years."
—Petition for  abolition of  HUAC.
ought  to  be  pressure  on  him  to  refuse,  especially since  he  and
the  late  Congressman  Dickstein  of  New  York  launched  this
monstrosity  on  its  career  just  30  years  ago  as  the  Dickstein-
McCormack   committee   to   investigate   un-American   propa-
ganda.    It  was  aimed  at  the  Nazis  but  soon  turned,   in  the
hands  of  Dies  of  Texas,  into  an  anti-New  Deal  smear  factory.
While  Women's  Strike  for  Peace,  with  sly  and   subversive
femininity,  flooded  the  hearing  room  and  the  corridors   out-
side  with  flowers wired  from  all  over  the  country  (roses  were
individually  offered   to  each  subcommittee  member  but  patri-
otically  rejected),  100  constitutional  lawyers  hurled  a  formid-
able  brickbat  at  HUAC:  a  petition   (see  box  below)  calling
for   its  abolition.    Thurman  Arnold  and  Henry  Steele  Com-
mager  were  among  the  distinguished  signers.    The  time  to
act  is  when  Congress  reconvenes.
Swedish  Double Agent  Says We Began Mapping Soviet Bomb Targets 10 Years Before U-2
Some  fresh  revelations  about  the  cold  war  were  inadvert-
ently  supplied  by  the  Senate  Internal  Security Committee
in   translating   and  releasing   the   testimony  of   Col.  Stig
Wennerstroem,  recently  convicted as  a  Soviet  agent  in Swe-
den.    The  testimony  discloses   that   he  began   his   spying
activity  as  a  U.S.  agent  with  "a  feeling  of  sympathy  for
NATO  and  an  antipathy  for  the  Soviet  Union."    The  oc-
casion  for  the  shift  in  sympathies,  he  explained,  "was  that
it  became  quite  clear  in  my  mind  that  the  Soviet  intelli-
gence  service  was   purely-  defensively   oriented,  while  the
American  one  was  offensively  oriented."
Wennerstroem  testified  that  the  U.S.  began  sending  re-
connaissance  planes  over the  Soviet  Union ten  years  before
the  U-2  spy-plane  incident  of  1960.    The  purpose  "was  to
obtain  information  on  bombing  targets."    He  said  the  op-
eration  also  made  use  of  tourists  inside  Russia.   When So-
viet  air  defenses  developed  the  range  to  hit  these  earlier
spy   planes,   the   U.S.   resorted   to   higher-flying   and   un-
manned  balloons.
The  Wennerstroem  transcript also  threw  new  light  on  the
U.S.  planes  shot  down  along  the  East  German  border,  the
latest  one  last  March.    U.S.  officials  said  they  had  strayed
accidentally   into   East   German   territory.     Wennerstroem
testified  they  were using  special  radio equipment to  contact
secret  agents  inside  Russia.    The  altitude  permitted  com-
munication  at  longer  distances  than  from  the  ground.
1  2
1  7  i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

t. F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 14,1964
For  40 Days  MFDP  Counsel  May Do
^Continued  From Page  One)
declare  this  its  No.   1  Battle.    It  will  make  a  mistake  if  it
limits  itself  to  an  attack  on  the  seniority  and  party  privileges
of  Mississippi's  John  Bell  Williams  and  South  Carolina's  Al-
bert   W.   Watson    for-  having   supported  Goldwater.     The
White  House  is  reported  ready  to  forget  and   forgive  such
peccadilloes;   if  this  is  true,  it  will  pull  the  rug  out  from
under  the  liberals-   But  the  issue  of  the. Mississippi  elections
can  be  fought  independently  of  the  White  House.     Though
the  elections  subcommittee  is  chaired  by  Ashmore  of  South
Carolina  and  all  but  one  of  its  Democrats  is  a  Southerner,  it
must  submit  a  recommendation  to  the  House.     If   sufficient,
pressure  is generated,  it  can be  forced  to  hold hearings  on  the
evidence  which  will  be submitted  to  it.    Under  the  rules  gov-
erning  such  contests,  the  seats  will  remain  in  doubt  at  least
until  next  July.   By  then  the  Supreme  Court  will  have  heard
and   may  have  decided   the   case  of   U^  S.  V.  Mississippi   in
which  tie   Justice  Department  is  asking^ that  all  the  discrimi-
natory  voter  laws  enacted  by  Mississippi   since  1890  be  de-
clared   unconstitutional.    The   laws  attacked  in  the  election
contests  are  the  same  ones  attacked  by  the  government  in  its
suit.   This  offers  the  House  Kberals  powerful  leverage.
A  Hitherto  Unused  Weapon
Whatever   the  liberal  Congressmen   da,  the  election   laws
give  the  Mississippi  Freedom  Democratic  Party  a  novel weap-
on.    Within  40  days  of  the  filing  (Dec.  3-4},. the  Congress-
men  must  furnish  their  answers.    Within  the  period  of  40
days  from  their answer, which  will  begin  in  January, attorneys
for   those  bringing  the  challenges  are  empowered  by  law  to
issue  subpoenas  and   take  sworn  testimony  from   anyone  in
Mississippi   who  has  information  bearing  on  the  alleged   il-
legality  of  the  elections.    During  that  period  volunteer  teams
of  counser  can  do  what  the  Department  of  Justice  and  the
Civil  Rights  Commission  ought  to  be  doing.   The  challenges
rest  in  part  on  acts  of  terror  to-discourage  the  voter   regis-
tration  drive.    Many  of  these  are  alleged  against  Mississippi
law  enforcement  officers   themselves.    Such  acts  are  a   clear
violation  of  the  Federal  civil  rights  laws  even  as  most  nar-
rowly  construed,  and  the  interrogations  should  lay  the  basis
What  Justice  Dept. Should  Be Doing
Bulletin  Board
We  hope  California readers  wilt give  utmost  support
to  the  students  at  Berkeley; college  students  willing  to
fight  for  free  speech  and  association   are  all  too  rare
on  today's  campuses.  .  .  .  We deplore  the  resignation
of  Ronald  Hilton as  director  of  the  Hispanic  American
Report  at  Stanford-  and  the   end  of  this  irreplaceable
source  of  information  on  hemispheric  affairs.    Hilton
was  the  first  to  expose  the  training  camps  in  Guate-
mala  for  the  Bay  of  Pigs  invasion;  his  was  an  inde-
pendent   and-  sympathetic  Latin  American  scholarship
alt  too  rare fat the  U.S. ...  A  distinguished*  reader,
Erwin  Panofsky  of  Princeton,  asks  us  to  correct  the
error  in  the  Nov.  30  issue  which  referred  to  Pins  XI
when  Pius  IX  was  meant.  We  regret  the  injustice  to  a
Pope,  "I  and  many  other  scholars  of  my  generation,"
Dr.   Panofsky   writes,   "fondly   remember   as    Mons.
Achille  Ratti,  the  kindly  and  ever  helpful  prefect  of
the  Ambrosian  Library  in  Milan." ...  We salute  the
death  at  80  in  Philadelphia of  David  Levinson,  a  law-
yer  who  fought  all  his  life  long  for  justice  to  the  op-
pressed.
not   only  for   a  successful   election   contest   but   for   Federal
prosecutions-   Wm.  Kunstler  and  Arthur  Kinoy,  counsel  for
the  MFDP,  have  already  served notice  on  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral   and   the   Civil  Rights   Commission   of   their   plans  and
asked  that  observers  be  assigned  to^ go  with  these  teams  of
lawyers,  to  pave  the  way  for  prosecution  where   warranted.
During  those  40  days  much  can  be  accomplished  if   enough
volunteers  and  funds  can  be  mustered.    A  memorial  fund  to
the  Martyred Three  is  being  established   thus  to  attack  die
racially  stacked'  electoral  system  they  fought   against   at   the
expense   of   their   lives.     (The   MFDP's  Washington   head-
quarters,  for  the  memorial  fund   and  volunteers,   is  at  1393
U Street, Northwest).
Those, whose  consciences  are  stirred, may also  by  letter  and
otherwise  bring  pressure  directly  upon  the  White  House  (1)
to  make  sure  that  the  FBI  and  Federal  marshals  provide  pro-
tection  to  the  lawyer-teams  in  the  election  challenge  and  (2)
speed  up  action  under  the  new  regulations  for   withholding
Federal  funds  from  communities  which  practice  segregation.
This  is  what  Mississippi   most   fears.
For  the  Way   to  Peace  in  Southeast  Asia  See  IPS  in  the  New   York
Review  of   Books  Dec.   17  (250  W.   57th  St.  NYC  35c).
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)  Name  ....................................................
Street    ..............................................................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's   The  Haunted   Fifties
12/14/64
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  in
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.W..   Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.:     $6  in   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   120  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED