I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971sep20.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue:  Scandalous Revelations  The  Press Ignored,  Pps. 1—4
The  Economic  and  Political Menace  in  The  Growth  of  Conglomerate Corporations
Explosive  growth  by  acquisition by  our  largest  corporations  has  resulted  in  changes  that  confront   the  public  with  a
situation  where  the  American  economy  will  be  dominated by  virtually  self-contained  economic  domains  .  .  .  dominated
by  a  few   hundred  business  suzerainties  and  under  whose  influence  a  multitude  of  small,  weak,  quasi-independent   cor-
porations  will  be  permitted  a  subordinate  and  supplementary  role.
—House  Judiciary  report  on Conglomerates,  Sept.  7.
You  cannot  preserve political  liberty,  you  cannot  secure  American  standards of  living,  unless  some  degree  of  industrial
liberty  accompanies it.
—Louis  D.  Brandeis  testifying    in  the  1911 Senate  hearings   which  led  to  passage   of  the  Clayton  Anti-Trust    Act.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL,  XIX,  No.  16SEPTEMBER  20,  1971
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
U.S.  Capitalism's  Dirty  Underwear
While  President  Nixon  was  celebrating  Labor  Day  with  a
Billy  Graham-style  sermon  on  the  work-ethic,  the  really  best
way  to  make  a  fast  buck  was  being  explained  by  a  Congres-
sional  committee  staff  report.   Unfortunately  it  got  very  little
attention.   The  report  summed up  the  findings  of  an investiga-
tion begun  almost three years ago by the anti-trust subcommittee
of  House  Judiciary  into  the  sharp  rise  in  recent  years  of  con-
glomerate  corporations.   These  monstrous  concerns  bring  to-
gether  under  one  corporate  roof   the  most   diverse  kinds  of
enterprise.   Since  1965  they  have  grown  with  unprecedented
speed.   In  the  four years 1965-68  conglomerates  absorbed  more
assets  in  manufacturing  and  mining than  in  the  preceding  two
decades.   This  was  one  of  the  byproducts of  the  Vietnam  war,
though  the  report  does  not  connect  the  two.   The  inflation  and
the  speculative  fever  the  war  engendered  alone  made  it  possi-
ble  for  shrewd operators  to  buy  up  other  businesses  at  inflated
values  and  then  recoup  with  "growth  stocks"  on  a  booming
stock  market.
Corrupting  Business   Management
In  the  pages  of  this  study,  the  young  can see the  morals  and
mores  which  mold   our  economy  and  threaten   some   day  to
remold  our  politics.   For  as  corporate  concentration  grows,  the
threat of  a corporate  state  grows  with  it.  The  100 largest manu-
facturing    concerns    today   hold   about   half   the   total   assets
devoted   to  manufacturing;  their  share  is  as  big  as  that  held
20  years ago  by  the  200  largest.   The  problem  created  is  two-
fold—one  is  that  of  domination  and  the  other  of   corruption.
These  conglomerates   are  feudal  empires   which  can  cushion
themselves  against  competition  by  internal  deals  and  by  recip-
rocal  favoritism.  At  the  same  time  their  creators  corrupt  busi-
ness  management  by  various  forms  of  what  can  only  be  called
bribery  to bring  about  mergers.   They  divert managerial  energy
from  productive  enterprise  to  stock   speculation.    They  claim
to  be  imaginative  innovators  in  technology,  but  the  one  tech-
nology  in  which  they  really  excel  is  public  relations,  i.e.  flim-
flam.  The  situation  is  not  improved  by  the  fact  that  some  of
the  biggest  conglomerates  depend  for  their  viability  on  Penta-
gon  orders  and  continuation  of  the  arms  race.
The  report  shows  how  insurance companies  are taken  over  so
their  surpluses  can be  used  for  speculation,  how  balance  sheets
are  manipulated  to  make  hazardously  inflated  investment  look
like  "growth",  how  weakly  the  SEC  and  the  Stock   Exchanges
deal  with  these  falsifications,  how  banks  use their  trust  depart-
ments  to  help  their  conglomerate  satellites  on  corporate  raids,
Kefauver's  Prophetic  Warning
We   must  decide  very  quickly  what  sort   of  country
we   want   to   live   in.    This   Nation   was   founded   and
built   by   men  who   believed   in   individualism.    It   has
grown  under  a  system  carried on  largely  by  individual
capital.   The  increased concentration of  economic power
is  dooming free  enterprise.  The  present  trend  of  great
corporations   to   increase  their  economic  power  is   the
antithesis   of   meritorious   competitive  development.  It
is  no  accident that  we  now  have  a  big  government,  big
labor  unions  and  big  business.  .  .  .  Local  economic in-
dependence   cannot  be  preserved  in   the   face   of   con-
solidations  such  as  we  have  had  during  the  past   few
years.    The  control  of   American  business   is  steadily
being   transferred   from   local   communities   to   a   few
large  cities  in'  which  central  managers  decide  the  pol-
icies  and  the  fate  of  the  far-flung  enterprises  they  con-
trol.    Millions  of   people   depend  helplessly    on   their
judgment.    Through  monopolistic   mergers   the   people
are   losing   the   power  to   direct   their   own   economic
welfare;  they  also  lose  the  means  to  direct  their politi-
cal future.
—The  late  Senator  Estes  Kefauver,   then  a  Congress-
man,  testifying    to  House  Judiciary   in  1947.
though  the  trust  accounts  are  supposed  to  be  kept  strictly  sep-
arate  from  the  commercial  departments.   Yet  these   disclosures
were  hastily  brushed  under  the  rug  in  skimpy  stories  buried  in
the  back  pages  even   of   leading   papers  like  the  New   York
Times,  The   Wall  St.  Journal,  and  the  Washington   Post  Sep-
tember   7  while   little   if  anything  appeared   in   most   of   the
country's  newspapers*.
Part  of  the blame  for  the  poor  coverage  rests  on  the Judiciary
Committee   itself.    It   did   its  best  to  hide  its  light  under   a
bushel.   The  printed  report  is dated  June  1 but the   Committee
waited  three  months  and  released  it  during  the  Labor  Day
week-end,  Washington's  dullest,  when  most  people  were  away
on  vacation,  and  it was certain  to  fall  into  routine hands  at  the
wire  services.   Though  the  report  had  been  on  the  shelf   three
months,  and  the  hearings  ended  in  May,  1970,   and  there  was
plenty  of  time  to  prepare an  index  none  was supplied  with  the
report  or  the  hearings.   The  report  fills  703  pages.  The  hear-
(Continued  On Page  Two)
•If,  after  reading   our  report,   you  agree,  call   your  local
editor  and ask  him  why  he  carried  little  if  any  coverage.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  20, 1971
ings  fill  7  volumes  totalling  6,310 pages.   Lack  of  an  index  is
almost  as  good  as  a  censor's  pencil.    Some  of   Washington's
smartest  lobbyist-lawyers  turn  up  in  the  hearing  record;  they
know  their way around.
Chase  Manhattan's   Operations
The  hottest  and  most  newsworthy  section  of  the  report  was
the  part  played   by  respectable   New   York   banks  like  Chase
Manhattan,    Lehman   Brothers   and   Lazard   Freres   in   these
razzle-dazzle  operations.    No   reference  to  them  appeared  in
the   5-page  single  space  press  release   by  Chairman  Celler  of
House  Judiciary  which  accompanied   the  report.    Perhaps   the
juciest banking  story  told  in  the  staff  report  was the  way  Chase
Manhattan—in  league  with  its pet  conglomerate,  Gulf  & West-
ern—used  its  fiduciary  department   in  an  attempted   corporate
takeover.   It  signed  an  agreement  to  exchange  1,500,000 shares
of  Pan  American  common   in  its  pension  and  other  trusts  for
what  its  own  research  department   called  "the highly  volatile
and  speculative"   stock  warrants  and   subordinated  notes  of  a
Nassau  gambling  resort.   The  story  should  have made headlines
in  the  New  York  press  but  Celler  made  no  reference  to  it.
When  Chairman   Celler  opened   these  hearings  on  July  30,
1969   he  said,   "An   inexorable   increase  in  the  concentration
of   economic   power   in   the   American  economy   is  our   basic
problem."   How  can  the  problem  be  brought  forcibly  to public
attention  when  his  findings  are  presented  in  a  way calculated
to  attract  as  little  attention  as  possible?    I  cannot understand
why  Chairman  Celler  went  out  of  his  way  in  his  press  release
to  butter  up  the  very  operators  his  own   staff   report   exposed.
The  press  release  said  "the conglomerate  merger  movement has
produced  a variety of  results,  many  of  which  are  beneficial    (my
italics)  and  the  staff  has  recommended  that  the  Subcommittee
commend  the  sample  companies  for  their  contribution."  I  have
read  every page of  the  report  without  finding  a single  beneficial
result  specified.  The  press  release  went  on  to  say  of  the con-
glomerates  studied—
Top management officials  of  each  of  the  sample companies
have  been  outstanding  individuals with  exceptional  abili-
ties  .  .  .  Chairman  Celler  stated  that  Harold S.  Geneen  of
ITT  is  an  exceptional leader  in  American  business.  Charles
G.  Bluhdorn  of  G.&W.; Saul  P.  Steinberg  of  Leasco;  Glen
McDaniel,   Charles   B.  Thornton   and  Roy   Ash   of   Litton;
Eugene  Klein  of  National  General;  and  James  J.  Ling  of
LTV  have  provided  imaginative concepts  that  brought  their
respective  corporations   to  positions   of  eminence.   As  indi-
viduals  they   led  their  organization   in  assaults  upon out-
moded  industry  traditions.
It  is  true  that  these  compliments  are  taken  from  one  para-
graph  (pps. 440-1)   of  the   staff   study.   But  this   paragraph
reads  like  a  bit  of  interpolated   salve  after  the  most  devastating
analysis  of  how  badly  these  same  men  ran  the  businesses  they
acquired.   Here  is  a  sample   on  Litton  from  page  361—
Litton  has  assiduously  promoted  an  image  of  technologi-
cal  and organizational superiority  .  .  .  Litton's  image-mak-
ing  has  developed  flamboyant  sham  into  an art.  Overstate-
How  "Insiders"  Could  Profit   On  Mergers
Stock   price  activity  of   thirteen  of   the   major  com-
panies   that   were  acquired  by   Gulf   and  Western  has
been  tabulated  to  ascertain  whether  there  was  a cor-
relation   between   price   increases   and   merger  discus-
sions.   The  tabulation  indicates that,  in  every  case,  the
common   stock   of   the   major  acquired  companies  had
appreciated   in  varying  degrees   from   6  percent   to  67
percent  during  the  month  prior  to  the  date  the  merger
was  announced.  Column  5  shows  that  on  the  date  of
the  merger, the  market value  of  the  shares  of  all  com-
panies,  except  two,  continued  to  rise.   Column  6  shows
that  a  substantial  profit  could  have  been  made  if   one
purchased   the   shares   of   an  acquired  company  before
the   first   press   release   announcing  the   merger,   and
then  sold  those  shares  on  the  date  of  the  merger  .  .  .
The   record   indicates   that   the   "insiders"   who   were
privy  to  the  corporate  plans  of  G&W before  public  an-
nouncement,   for   the   most   part,   had   a   professional
relationship,  such  as  its   lending  institutions  and out-
side legal counsel.
—Report   on  Conglomerates,  pgs.  195-197.
ment  is  a  way  of  life  .  .  .  Litton  has  utilized  all  of  the
sophisticated   accounting  techniques   and   statistical  gim-
micks  available.   It   is  adept  at  concealment,   misdirection
and  incomplete  statement.
Or  let us take another  of  these  eminent  businessmen,  Eugene
Klein  of  National  General.   The  report  (at  p.  281)  describes
Klein's  operations  as  "flamboyant  and  opportunistic."    It  tells
(at  pps. 296-8)   how  National   General,  as  part  of  a  plan  to
take  over  insurance  companies   in  order  to  tap  their   surpluses
for   speculative  expansion,  obtained   control  of   Great   Ameri-
can  Insurance  Company  in  January,  1969,  and  at  once  declared
a  dividend  of  $173 million  from  the  insurance  company's  port-
folio.   When  the   SEC  asked  National   General  what   it  was
going  to  do  with  the  $173 million,  National  General  hid  the
fact  it  was  preparing  to  take  over  another  insurance  company,
Republic   Indemnity,  with   the   cash   from   Great   American's
"kitty".   This  deception  and  this  use of  holding  company  tech-
niques,  to  circumvent   insurance  company  regulation—is   that
what  Mr.  Celler  means  by  "assaults   upon   outmoded   industry
traditions"?
Or  let  us  take  James  J.  Ling  of  LTV—Ling-Temco-Vought,
Inc.   How  does  his  eminence differ  from  that  once  occupied  by
the  Swedish  match  king,   Ivar   Kreugar,   or  that   other   artist
of  the  20s, Sam  Insull  of  utility  holding  company  fame?   In
I960  Ling  began  to  expand   a  profitable  electronics  firm,  its
business  virtually  all  military,  into  a  conglomerate.    By 1969,
(pps.   321-3)   LTV  "had  become   a  colossus.    Fourteenth   in
size  among  U.S. industrial  corporations  .  .  ."  But  profits  from
operations   in  those  nine  years  declined  23.4 percent.   LTV's
net  income  in  I960,  when  it  had  only  $93.5  million  in  assets,
was  $3.1 million.  Nine  years  later—when  its  assets  were $2.9
billion—its  net  operating  income  was  down   to  $2.3  million.
Rebutting  The  View  That  Bigness  in  Business  Pays   Off   in  Technological  Advances
A   number  of   people  have  challenged   the   concept  that
large  size  is  essential   to  discovery  and  introduction of  new
products.   Peter  Drucker noted  that  new  technologies rarely
emerge  from  a  big   old  company:  "It  is   not   RCA  or  GE
that   have   the   computer,   but  IBM,   which  at   the   eve   of
World   War  II   had  no  scientists   or  engineers   and  was   a
very   small  company  despite   the   ambitious  'International'
in  its  name.   It  is  not  the  printing-press  makers  with  their
seemingly  impregnable  monopoly  who  have  the  new  dupli-
cating  and  reproduction  technology;  it  is  Xerox,  which  as
late  as  1950  was  a  tiny,  local  shop."
In  an  address  to  the   Federal   Bar  Association's   Council
on  Antitrust  and  Trade  Regulation,   Richard   W.  McLaren,
Assistant   Attorney  General,  Antitrust  Division,  advanced
the  view that technological advances  are  not  dependent upon
economic   concentration,  huge   size,   or  substantial  market
power.   "The bulk  of   the   available  evidence  runs  counter
to  the  hypothesis  that  high  concentration,  huge  size,  and
substantial   market   power   are   prerequisites  for   research
and  innovation.  Indeed,  some  of   the  most  careful   studies
find that,  if  anything, market  power  and  the  security  of  big-
ness,   with  the  concomitant  vested   interest   in   the   status
quo,  may  have  a  stultifying  effect."
—Report  on Conglomerates, pgs. 56-58.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  September  20,1971
At  the  hearings  (p.  341)  LTV's  long  term  debt  turned  out  to
exceed  its  saleable  assets  by  $170  million.   By  1970  when  it
lost  $69.6 million and  could  not  cover  its interest charges,  Ling
was  forced  out  by  his  creditors.
Making  Debt  Look  Like Growth
One  reason  these  conglomerates  ran  into  trouble  is  because
they  grew  by  paying  far  more  for  the  businesses  they  acquired
than  they were worth.   A table  (p.  414)  shows  that  ITT  under
another  Celler  hero,  Geneen,  acquired  31  domestic  companies
between   1964   and   1968.    Their  combined   net  worth   when
acquired  was 3534  million.   ITT  paid  $1,278 million,  or  $744
million  more  than  that.   By the  "pooling"  method  of  account-
ing,  however,  ITT  could  add  the  earnings  of  these  companies
to  its own  to  show  apparent  "growth" without  disclosing  these
huge  overpayments.    If  this  excess  investment  in  "goodwill"
had  been  accounted  for  and  amortized  over  a  10-year  period,
"ITT's  reported  net  income  for   1968  would  be  overstated  by
70.4  percent."    Pooling   permits  the  actual  cost  of  acquisition
to  be  concealed  from  the  unwary  investor.   Growth   in  unwise
debt  may thus  be  made  to  look  like  a growth  in  earnings.
After  hailing  these  operators  as  businessmen  on  page  one  of
his  press  release,  Celler  (on  p.  2)   quotes  a  deadly  conclusion
about  them  from  the   staff   study,   "The   orientation  of  merger
motivation  in  financial  and  security transactions  resulted  in  im-
pairment  in  the financial stability of  the  sample companies.  The
financial  stability  of   ITT,   G.&W.,  LTV   and  Litton  deterio-
rated."  Then   on  page  3  of  the  press  release  one  finds,  again
from   the  staff   study's  conclusions,   "In  general  the  major  ac-
quisitions  by  the  sample  companies  were  corporate  organiza-
tions  that  were  profitable"  but  "in  most  instances the  acquired
companies   operated    less   efficiently    after   acquisition."     The
staff  study  said  (at  p.440) —
Management   difficulties   with  newly   acquired  companies
indicate  that  combination  frequently  had  an  injurious  effect
on   efficiency,   on   productivity   and   upon  corporate  values.
What  we  really  need  is  an  investigation  of  this  investiga-
tion.   Why  did  Celler  soft-pedal  the   findings?   A  superb  job
was  done  by  Kenneth  R.  Harkins,  who  was  special   counsel,
and  by  his  staff.   The  hearings  and  the  report  are  in  a  tradi-
tion  that  goes  back  to  the  Pujo  money  trust  investigation  by
Congress  in  1912  which  helped  prepare  the  way  for  the  anti-
trust  and financial reforms  of  the  Wilson  Administration.  But
this  time  the  findings  were  handled  in  such  a  way  as  to  guar-
antee  little  attention  and  little  result.   Mr.  Harkins  has  been
elevated  to  that  mausoleum,  the  Court  of  Claims.   The   staff
which  did  the  work  and  had  the  expertise  for  remedial  legis-
lation,  has  been   disbanded.    Of   the   anti-trust   subcommittee
members  who  took  part  in  the  hearings,   all  but  Brooks   (D.
Texas')   have  been  reassigned  to  other  subcommittees.
The  real  significance of  the  findings  may  explain  the   effort
to  bury them.   In  the  wake of  the  1929  stock  market  crash,  the
How  Bankers  Fatten   On  Mergers
Investment  banking  firms,  management    consultants,
loan   officers   in  commercial  banks  and  other  members
of   the  financial  community  have  played  a  prominent
role   in   the   merger   movement.   These    groups   have
stimulated  mergers  and  have  secured  substantial  com-'
pensation  from  functions  as  merger  brokers  . . .  Lazard
Freres   and  Company,  as  investment  bankers   perform
several   classes   of   services.    During  the   period  1964-
1968,  the  merger  and  acquisition  function  became  in-
creasingly  important  in  relation  to  its  other  business.
From  January  1,  1964  to   September  5,   1969,  Lazard
Freres   received   $16,058,243   in   merger   fees.   During
this  period,  the  firm's  gross  income  increased  roughly
21/2  times,  256  percent,  while  at  the  same  time  its  in-
come   from   merger  and  acquisition  services  increased
nearly  six  times,  584 percent.
—Report   on  Conglomerates,   pgs.   150-151.
financial   legislation   of   the  New  Deal  period  sought  to  bar
commercial  banks  from  stock  speculation.   None  of  the   "won-
der  boys"  who  built  so many  of  the  conglomerates  could  have
gotten  anywhere without  the  banks behind  them.   These  opera-
tors  and  their  conglomerates  gave  banking  interests  an  oppor-
tunity  to  do  indirectly what  they  could  not  do  directly, to  play
the  market.    Let  us  take,  for   example,   the  meteoric  rise  of
another   Celler  hero,  Bluhdorn   of  Gulf   &  Western.   G.&W.,
until  then  in  the  automobile  parts  business,  bowed  into  the  big
time  in  1966  with  the  acquisition  of  New  Jersey  Zinc  by pay-
ing  $40  a  share  for  shares  then  worth  $33.   The  attraction  was
the  zinc  company's   surpluses.    As  Fortune   reported   in  May
1969,   Zinc   "was   at  that   time  sitting  on  a  lot   of   cash   and
Bluhdorn  knew  right  away  what  he  thought:  'It  looks  like  a
bank,' he said.   'Buy it!' "
But  Bluhdorn  was  able  to  buy  it  only  because   Chase  Man-
hattan  advanced  him the  $83.4 million  he needed.  He  got  the
entire  amount  on  an  unsecured  demand   note  at  5%   percent.
Bluhdorn   later  described  this  as  "imaginative   lending."    The
same  kind  of  free-and-easy credit  from  Chase  made  it  possible
for  G.&W.   to  take  over  Paramount  Pictures,  E.  W.  Bliss  and
Universal   American.    The   report   shows   the   many  ways  in
which   Chase  Manhattan   profited   from  these   dubious   opera-
tions.    From   I960  to   1969,   the  long   term   debt   of  Gulf  &
Western  grew  53,396%!   "This  is  nearly  three  times  greater
than  the  increase  in  total  assets,"  says  the  staff  study  (p.    188),
"nine  times  greater   than   the  increase   in  total   revenue,  and
about  31  times  greater  than  that  of  net  income."   No  wonder
that  when  the  stock  market  began   to  weaken   and   the  truth
to  leak  out,   G.&W.   stock  fell   $836  million   in   18  months.
What  business  has  a  commercial  bank  to  be  involved   in  such
a  roller  coaster  operation ?  What  an  example  to  be  set  by  the
biggest  bank  in  the  country!
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
Americans  A  Half  Century Ago  Saw  The
A  great  merger  wave is  sweeping  across  American indus-
try.   Although  recent   industrial   restructuring  transcends
anything   we   have   seen   since   the   great   trust   movement
around  the  turn of  the century,  historians  will  note  a  distinct
difference   in   public   response.    Social   control   of  industry
occupied  a  central  place  in  the  Nation's  priorities for  over
three  decades  around  1900.  Perhaps  Supreme  Court  Justice
Harlan,  writing in  1911,  best  characterized the  mood of  the
country  when  he wrote:  "All  who  recall  the  condition  of  the
country  in  1890  will  remember  that  there  was  everywhere
a  deep  feeling  of  unrest.  The  nation had  been  rid  of  human
slavery   but  the  conviction  was  universal  that  the  country
was  in  real  danger  from  another  kind  of  slavery,  namely,
the   slavery   that   would  result   from   the   aggregations   of
Danger  More Clearly Than  We  Do  Now
capital  in  a  few  individuals and  corporations,  for  their  own
profit  and advantage  exclusively. .  .  ."
Quite  clearly,  there  exists   today  no  universal conviction
that  our system  is  endangered  by the  contemporary   merger-
induced  industrial restructuring.  Historians  may  quite well
record   that   while  Americans  were  debating  about  other
great  public issues  of  the  1960's  and  1970's—the  war,  pollu-
tion,   civil   rights—they   largely   ignored   the   unparalleled
centralization  of  economic   power  that  occurred  during  the
period.   Compared  with   today's   industrial  elite,   the  early
20th  century  business  monarchs ruled  very  modest  domains.
—Prof.   Willard  F.  Mueller,  Univ.  of  Wisconsin,   formerly
with  the  Federal   Trade  Commission,  in  a  statement  to  the
investigation  of  conglomerates,  Pt.  7, p. SSO.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  20,1971
The  Tax  Laws  Encourage   Mergers
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
Celler  said  in  his  press  release,  "As  soon  as conditions in  the
securities  markets  again  become  favorable  to  aggressive  spec-
ulators,  resurgence  in  the  pace  of  merger  activity may  reason-
ably be expected."  The  job  is to prevent  it.   In  the  early  1900s
and    the  20s,   mergers    capitalized   on   monopolistic   price-
fixing.   The  conglomerate  movement,  on  the  other  hand,  is
fueled  principally  by tax  considerations.  These  encourage bus-
inesses  with  tax  losses  and  unused   investment   credits,  symp-
toms  of  their  inefficiency,  to  use them as  financial  tools  to  take
over  (and  loot)  going concerns with  cash  surpluses.  The 1969
"tax   reform"   act  made   only   a   few   feeble   and  superficial
changes,  thanks  to  another  genius,  Wilbur  Mills.
The  U.S.  Treasury   is  subsidizing  concentration  of  control
and  stock  market  flim-flam  while  the  Internal  Revenue  Serv-
ice  and  the  SEC  collaborate,   the  latter  by  allowing  "Mother
Hubbard"  consolidated financial  reports  which  hide  more  than
they   reveal.   The   staff   report   shows  (p.4l6)  'that  the  SEC
allowed  Gulf  & Western  to  overstate  its  1969  earnings  by  $32
million  and  LTV  to  show  a  $2.3  million  net  income  in 1969
when  it  should  have reported  a  $16.7  million loss.  The  sleight
of  hand  was  accomplished   by  an  extraordinary con  operation.
LTV  counted   as  1969 earnings  a  tax  credit  of  $19  million
from  operating   loss  and  investment  credit  carryovers  "which
(the   staff  report  says)  may  or  may  not  be  realized  in  future
years."  Even  LTV's  own  accountants,  Ernst  & Ernst,  balked—
it  takes  a  lot  to  make  these  big  accounting  firms  balk—and
"qualified"  this  item.   But  the  SEC let  it  pass!
Obviously  a  whole  series  of  reforms  are  required.   Celler
muffles  his  own  investigation  just  when  Congress  has  all  these
sensational  findings  to  work  with  and  comes  forward  instead
with  a  grandoise  plan  to  put  all  existing  anti-trust authority
in  an  Office  of  Industrial  Organization  to  be  established  in  the
Executive   Office  of  the  President  and  pass  on  all  proposed
mergers.   This  bears  a  resemblance  to  the  kind  of  plans  put
forward  by another  of  the  geniuses  Celler  touted—Roy  Ash  of
Litton  Industries.    Soon  after  taking   office  Nixon   appointed
Ash   chairman   of   an   Advisory  Council  on   Executive   Reor-
ganization,  a  prestigious  post  of  murky  dimension  and   great
potential,  but—happily  for  Ash—not  requiring  Senate  hearing
and  confirmation.  Litton  is  another  of  the  bubbles  that  burst
"Synergism"  As  Hi  Falutin'  Sucker   Bait
From   the   inception   of   the   investigation,   the Sub-
committee   sought   information   that   would  bear   upon
the     contention     that     conglomerate      organizations,
through   superior   management,  and  institutional   rela-
tionships,   could   produce  more  than  the   sum   of   their
parts.    A  name,  reputedly  coined  in  Litton  Industries,
for   this   highly   touted  phenomenon  was   "synergism."
This  concept  has  its  basis  in  physiology   where  it  de-
scribed  cooperative  action  of   a  mixture  of  drugs   such
that   the  total   effect   is  greater  than  the  sum  of   the
effects   taken   independently.   In  other   words  two  and
two  make  five.  No  support  for  this  concept  was  found
in  the  materials  supplied  by  the  sample  companies.  In
fact,  management  difficulties  with  newly  acquired com-
panies  showed,  if  anything,  that  combination  frequently
had   injurious   effect   on    efficiency,    productivity   and
corporate    values.    The   experience   of    all    the com-
panies  in  the  sample,  particularly  Litton  and  National
General,  shows   the  lack  of  substance  in  the   synergism
concept.
—Report   on  Conglomerates,  pg.   404.
in  recent  years;  major  investment  trusts  have  unloaded  their
holdings  and  the  insiders  (who  only  hold  six  percent  of  their
"own"   company's  shares)   have  for  the  past   18  months  been
selling  it.*
Ash,  too,  wants  to  centralize  power   in  the  White   House.
Celler  would  create  the  biggest  regulatory  "conglomerate"  of
all  time,  in  just  the  place  where  it  would  be  most, susceptible
to  political  influence.   The  most  risky  part  of  this  plan  is  that
it  would  repeal  those  provisions  of  the  Clayton  and  Sherman
Acts  which  have  provided  a  weapon  against  mergers  in  the
past.   It  would  be  ironic  if  an  investigation  of   conglomerates
ended  with  a  reform  that  facilitated them  in  the  future.   The
Administrator  of  Industrial  Organization  under  Celler's   plan
would  have  power  to  veto  mergers  in  advance,  but  the  stand-
ards  Celler  would  write  into  the  law  have  already  proven  in-
adequate  to  stem  the  conglomerate  movement.
*Value  Line  Investment   Survey  (Sept.  10).  .Litton  now  be-
lieves,  according  to the  same  survey,  that  its  outlook  next  year
will  improve  with  its  new  multi-billion  dollar  naval  construc-
tion  awards.  Its  one  hope lies in the  arms  race.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed  Envelope
FOR  STONE'S  NEW  BOOK
For  the   enclosed  special  subscribers'  price  of   $8.95
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics  and  Prophecies:
1967-70  (Random House). Regularly $10.
(To)   Name                                 ..............................................
Street   ....................
City
.........  Zin...............  State..............
Indicate  if   gift   announcement  wished    D
Please renew  D   or enter  D   a sub for  the  enclosed
Name  ..........  ......    -  ------          --     -~—    ~-  -     .  -  — --  -
Street  ...................
City  ........................
I.  F
4420  29th  St.
Zip
..........    State  .....
$5:
.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
                   9
/
20
/
TO
N. W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St., N.W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid at  Washington.  D.C.  Published   every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..  N.W..  Washington.  D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  {5  in  the  U.S.; 18  in  Canada-
$10  elsewhere.  Air  Mail  rates: f 17  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED