I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971jul12.pdf

============================================================

How  The  Supreme  Court Failed  on  The First  Amendment
Exactly  What  The  Founding  Fathers  Hoped  The  Press  Would  Do
Far  from  deserving  condemnation  for  their  courageous   reporting, the  New   York   Times,  the  Washington   Post,  and other
newspapers  should  be  commended  for  serving  the  purpose  that  the  Founding  Fathers  saw  so clearly.  In revealing  the  work-
ings  of  the  government  that  led  to  the  Vietnam  war,  the  newspapers  nobly  did precisely  that  which  the  Founders  hoped  and
trusted  they  would  do.—Black  (with  Douglas   concurring   in  the  case  of  the  Pentagon   Papers).
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX,  No.  14JULY  12,  1971      '°'°
WASHINGTON,  D. C.20  CENTS
The  Crisis  Coming  For  A  Free  Press
In  the  Pentagon  Papers,  the  government  had  a  poor  case  on
the  facts.   It  had  an  even  poorer  case  on  the  law.  It  is  a  pity
that  the  upshot  was  not  the  kind  of  historic  defense  of  a  free
press  that   the   weak  pleadings  and   the   grave  circumstances
called  for.   The  press  did  its  duty   but  the  Supreme   Court  did
not.   Its  splintered opinions left  a  bigger  loophole  than  before
for  prior restraint—something  English law  abandoned  in  1695
and  the  American  press  has  never  experienced.   In  addition
five  of  the  nine Justices encouraged  the  government  to  believe
that  they  would  give  it  wide  latitude  if  it  sought  to  punish
editors  for  publishing  official  secrets  after   they  did  so  instead
of  trying  to   enjoin   them  in  advance.   Two   Justices  indeed
spent  most  of  their  opinions helpfully  spelling  out possibilities
for   successful   criminal  prosecution.    It  will  be  a  miracle  if
this  Administration, which  is  almost  paranoid  in  its  attitude
toward  the  media,  is  not  encouraged   to  include  editors  and
reporters among  the  "all  those  who  have violated  Federal crim-
inal  laws"  the  Attorney  General  now  says  he  will  prosecute.
Fresh   Need  For  Secrecy
The  coming  attempt  to  prosecute  for  violation  of  the  gov-
ernment's   classification  orders   involves  nothing  less  than  the
future   of  representative  government.    For  if  the  government
can  continue  to  abuse  its  secrecy  stamps  to  keep  the  press,  the
Congress  and  the  people  from  knowing  what  it  is really  doing
—then  the  basic  decisions  in  our  country  are  in  the  hands  of
a   small  army  of   faceless  bureaucrats,  mostly  military.    The
struggle   comes   at   a   climactic  moment   when   Hanoi's   new
peace  offer  and  public  weariness  with  the  war  make  it  all  the
more  necessary  for  the  bureaucratic  machine  to  prevent  new
leaks  by  intimidating its  own  mavericks  and  the  press.    Du-
plicity  is  more  requisite  then  ever  when  the  other  side  makes
it  necessary plainly to  choose  between  release  of  the  prisoners
or  continued  pursuit  of   a  military-political  victory  in   South
Vietnam.    From   every  indication,  Nixon's  answer,   however
veiled,  will  be  to  pursue  the  war.   This  will  intensify  his  con-
flict  with  the  media.
First,  as to the  facts:  Trial  of  the government's  action  against
the  New   York   Times  and  the  Washington  Post  proceeded  on
the  assumption  that  two  documents  in  their  entirety  were  in
the  hands  of  these  newspapers—a  47-volume  Pentagon  history
of  our  involvement  in  Vietnam  from   1945   to   1968,   and   a
"Command  and  Control"  report  on  the  Tonkin  Gulf  incidents
of   1964.    The  government  was  invited  to  "pinpoint"  for  the
trial  judges,  the  two  Courts  of  Appeal  and  the  Supreme  Court
Freedom   Of  Information  Act:  A  Joke
Q.  What  protection  does  the   public  have   under   the
current  situation  against  any  administration  using  na-
tional   security   laws   to   shield   its   own   mistakes   and
politically  embarrassing  decisions?
A.  Well,  in  addition to  the  Court's  decision—and  the
Congressional   power,  which  is   considerable—you   also
have  the  Freedom  of  Information statute.  .  .  .
—Secretary  of  State  Rogers  at  the  press   conference
July   1  in  which  he  invited  newsmen   to  clear  material
in  advance  with  the  government.
But  Rogers  as  a  lawyer  knows  that  the  Freedom  of
Information  Act  contains  a  loophole  as  big  as  a  barn
door.   Only a  few  days  before  he  spoke  the  government
seized  on  this  loophole  to  argue  before  the   Supreme
Court   in  the   case   of  the   Pentagon  Papers  that   the
Freedom  of Information  Act  actually authorizes  secrecy!
"Congress has recognized," its  brief  said, "the  authority
of  the  President   to  protect  the  secrecy  of  information
relating  to  foreign  relations  and  national  defense.  The
first   exemption   to   the   Freedom   of   Information   Act,
which  generally  provides  for  making  public  information
in  the   hands   of  the   government,   specifically  exempts
from   the  statute's  disclosure  provisions  'matters  that
are—(1)  specifically required  by  Executive  order  to  be
kept  secret  in the  interest  of national  defense  or  foreign
policy.' "  So how can the  Act protect  the  public ?
precisely  which  portions  of  these  documents  were  so  sensitive
that  their publication warranted an  order  forbidding  the  papers
to  publish  them.   To  give  the  government   greater   leeway,  it
was  allowed  to  present  much  of  its  evidence  in  secret.   This
was  the  first  secret  proceeding  of  its kind  ever  held  in  the  U.S.
courts,  itself  a  disturbing  precedent  for  the  future.   Yet  of  the
27  Federal  judges  who  passed  on  the  government's   pleadings
not  a  single  one  thought  the  evidence  impressive  enough   to
warrant  a  preliminary injunction.   The  government  was  able
to   obtain   nothing   more   than   temporary   restraining   orders
pending  trial  and  appeal,  and  those  who  dissented  on  the  ap-
peals  courts  and  the  Supreme  Court  did  no  more  than  argue
for  a  remand  for  further  hearing.   This  is  the  best  measure  of
just   how   dubious   the   government's    system   of   classification
looked  even  to  sympathetic  judges  in  secret  hearings.
Some  of  the  dissenting judges  thought  the  case  was  disposed
of  too  hastily,  and  that  the  government  should  have  had  more
time.   But  the  government  had  had  ample  time  to  review  the
two  documents  involved.   The  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Com-
mittee  has  been  negotiating  with  the  Pentagon   for  the  Com-
(Continued  On Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July  12,1971
Raising  An  Alarm  About  Documents  Never  Leaked  to  the  Press
(Continued  From Page  One)
mand  and  Control  document  since  early  in  1968  and  the  so-
called  Pentagon  Papers  since  November,  1969.  At  least  half
a   dozen   letters  have   passed   between  Chairman   Fulbright
and  Secretary  Laird  about  these documents, and the  Pentagon
classification   officer  who  was  assigned  to  review  them  as  a
result  of  Fulbright's  repeated   requests  testified  during  the
trial.   The  government  had  plenty  of  time  to  decide  what  in
the  documents  was  really  sensitive.   Apparently  the   Judges
didn't  think  very  much  was.   But  only  as  this  is  written   the
Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee   has   finally   received
copies  of  both.   It  took  a  tidal  wave  of  a  leak  to  pry  them
loose  but  they  arrived  still  stamped  "Top  Secret"!  The truth
about  the  Tonkin  Gulf  incidents  may  be  buried  in  the  Com-
mand  and  Control  report  but  the  New  York   Times  completed
its  series  without  disclosing  what  was  in  this  document and
the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  is  still  forbidden by
the  "Top  Secret" stamp from  discussing  the  contents publicly.
It   will  be  seven   years  next   month  since  the   Tonkin   Gulf
incidents  occurred  and  we still  don't  know the  full  truth  about
them,  though  they  were  used  to  get  a  blank  check  for  war
from  Congress.
The  two  dissenting  judges  who  were  most  impressed  with
the  government's   case  were  Judge   Wilkey  on  the  Court  of
Like,  Maybe,  In  The  Year  2,000?
Philadelphia,   (UPI)   —  Attorney   General   John   N.
Mitchell  said  today  the  public  has  "an  absolute  right"
—but  not  at  this  time—to  the  Pentagon's   study  pub-
lished  recently  in  the  New  York  Times  and  the  Wash-
ington  Post.
—Washington  Post, June  22.
Appeals  for  the  District  of  Columbia and  Mr.  Justice  Black-
mun on the  Supreme  Court.  They  felt  that if  the  newspapers,
had,  and  if   they  published,  certain  documents  dealing  with
diplomatic  negotiations  this  would  do  great  harm.   But  Dr.
Ellsberg  at  his  press  conference  in  Cambridge  June  28  said
he withheld "several" of the  47-volume  Pentagon  Papers  from
the  newspapers because they  involved  secret negotiations with
Hanoi,  Moscow and  other  foreign  capitals.   On  NEC's  Today
show July  2 he  said  he gave  the  full  set  to  the  Senate  Foreign
Relations  Committee  but  did  not  retain  any  copy  of  these
diplomatic  volumes  "since  I  had  no  intention  of  giving  them
to  the  newspapers   at  any  time."   In  oral  argument  before
the  Supreme  Court,  the  Solicitor  General  said  he  had   "pin-
pointed"  10 sensitive  items  in  his  secret  brief  and  that  one of
them  was  made  up  of  four  volumes  "all   dealing  with  one
specific  subject."   Are  these  the  volumes  Dr.  Ellsberg  with-
held?
Just  A  Pentagon  "Suggestion"
For  Starving  Out  A  Million   People
At  least   one  plan  was  suggested  to  immobilize  the
North  the  secret  documents  disclosed.  John  McNaugh-
ton,  then  an  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense,  said  North
Vietnam's  intricate  lock  and  dam  system  was particu-
larly  sensitive.   Destroying  it,  flooding  rice  fields  and
raising   the   specter   of   national  famine,   if  correctly
handled,  could  "offer  promise,"  McNaughton  suggested.
The  documents  quoted  his  memo  as  saying:  "It  should
be  studied.   Such  destruction  does  not   kill   or   drown
people.   By  shallow-flooding  the  rice,  it  leads  after  time
to  widespread  starvation  of  more  than  a  million   (?)
unless  food  is  provided."  This,  the  memo  added, the  U.S.
could  offer  to  do  "at  the  conference  table."
—AP   in  Baltimore  Sun  July   3  based   on  the  docu-
ments  released  by  Senator  Gravel.   The  memo  seems  to
have  been  early  in  1965.  In  our  issue  of  July  12, 1965,
"Will  We  Do  In  Vietnam  What  The  Nazis  Did  in  Hol-
land?"  we warned  against  just  such  bombings  and noted
that  destruction   of  the  Dutch  dikes  was  one  of  the  war
crimes  for  which  the  Nazi  occupation  chief   was  ordered
hung  at  Nuremberg.   The  article  may  be found  reprinted
in  my   book  "In   A  Time  of  Torment"   (Random   House
and  Vintage,  1967).
The  newspapers  provided  the  court  with  inventories  of  the
documents  in  their  possession.   The  Solicitor  General  told  the
Supreme  Court  that  the  government's   experts   had   difficulty
in  matching  this  inventory  against  the  47-volume  Pentagon
Papers.  There may  have  been  difficulty  in matching individual
items  but  it  is  hard  to  understand  why  they  could  not  match
up  an "item" as  large  as four  related  volumes.  A week  before
the  oral  argument,  the  Christian   Science  Monitor  (June  19)
carried   a   story   from   Washington    saying   that    Pentagon
experts,  after   they   compared  the  published  reports  in  the
Times  "with  the  still  guarded  and  highly  classified  originals,"
decided  that  the  disclosures  were  "something  less  than  cata-
strophic."   They  informed  higher  officials  "that  some  poten-
tially  damaging  material,  particularly   in  terms  of   America's
relations  with  other  nations   [our  italics]  had  been   omitted."
This  sounds as  if  they  spotted  the  material  Ellsberg  withheld.
It  is  a  pity  the  secret  record  cannot  be  opened  up  to  resolve
this  mystery.   The  government's   most  impressive   cause  for
alarm would have  been eliminated  by the  admission  that  these
volumes  had  never  reached  the  newspapers  at  all.
All  this  may  explain  the  curious  vagueness  and equanimity
displayed  by  Deputy  Under  Secretary  of  State  Macomber  on
the  Today   show  July  5,  the  day  the  New  York   Times  series
ended.   He  admitted   that   Dr.  Ellsberg   had  withheld   some
Black  (With  Douglas)  Voice  The  Orthodox  And  Traditional  American Doctrine
In  the  First  Amendment  the  Founding  Fathers  gave  the
free  press  the  protection  it  must  have  to  fulfill  its  essential
role in our  democracy.  The press  was  to  serve  the  governed,
not  the  governors.  The  Government's   power  to  censor  the
press  was  abolished  so that  the  press  would  remain  forever
free  to  censure  the  Government.   The  press  was  protected
so that  it  would bare  the  secrets  of  government  and  inform
the  people.   And  paramount  among  the  responsibilities   of  a
free  press is the duty to  prevent  any  part  of  the  government
from  deceiving  the  people  and  sending  them  off  to  distant
lands  to  die  of  foreign  fevers  and  foreign  shot  and  shell.
The  Government  argues  in  its  brief  that  in  spite  of  the
First  Amendment,  "the  authority  of  the  Executive  Depart-
ment  to protect  the  nation  against  publication  of information
whose  disclosure  would endanger  the  national  security  stems
from  two  interrelated  sources:  the  Constitutional  power  of
the  President  over  conduct  of  foreign   affairs   and  his  au-
thority  as  Commander-in-Chief."
The  Government  does  not  even  attempt  to  rely  on  any
act  of  Congress.  Instead  it  makes  the  bold  and  dangerously
far-reaching  contention  that  the  courts  should  take  it  upon
themselves  to  "make"  a  law  abridging  freedom  of  the  press
in   the   name  of   equity,   presidential   power   and   national
security,   even  when  the   representatives   of   the   people  in
Congress  have  adhered  to  the  command of  the  First Amend-
ment  and  refused   to  make  such  a  law.   To  find  that   the
President  has  "inherent   power"  to  halt  the  publication of
news  by  resort   to  the   courts   would  wipe  out   the  First
Amendment   and  destroy   the   fundamental   liberty  and  se-
curity  of  the  very  people  the  Government  hopes  to  make
"secure."
The  word  "security"  is  a  broad,  vague  generality   whose
contours  should  not  be  invoked  to  abrogate  the  fundamental
law  embodied  in  the  First  Amendment.   The  guarding  of
military  and  diplomatic  secrets  at  the  expense  of  informed
representative  government  provides  no real  security  for  our
Republic.
—Black  with Douglas  concurring  in  the press  cases,  (abr.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July  12,1971
20  Million  Classified Documents — Only  1/2  of  1 Percent  Really  Sensitive
sensitive  documents and  that  the  newspapers  themselves  had
withheld  others.   When  asked  whether  the  New   York   Times
or  the  Washington  Post  had  published items  "the  government
has  pointed  to  as  particularly   sensitive,"  he  replied,  "I  don't
think  the  Washington   Post  has.   I  think  the  New  York   Times
may  have.  I  don't  want  to  say it  has.   I'm  not  sure."  So this
is  the  molehill to  which the  government's   mountainous  origi-
nal charges dwindled.
Nullifying  The  Intent  Of  The  Framers
The  government  made  an  even  poorer  showing  on the  law.
Solicitor  General  Griswold's  argument  was  downright  trivial
and  the  few  precedents  he  cited  were  irrelevant  and  quoted
out  of  context.   Unfortunately  the  newspaper  lawyers  were
no  better.  Never  was  a  great  case  argued  so feebly.  No one
took  the  First  Amendment  as  his  client.   The defense  lawyers
argued  the  case  as  narrowly  as  possible  in  order  to  get  their
newspaper  clients  off the  hook. Prof.  Alexander Bickel,  whom
the  New  York  Times  retained  specially for  the  occasion,  is no
firm defender  of  the  First  Amendment; he  holds the  "balanc-
ing"  view  Frankfurter  among  others  propounded.   This  holds,
as  Griswold flatly said  during  argument,  that  where  the  First
Amendment  says  "Congress  shall  make  no law . . .  abridging
freedom   of  the   press,"  it   does  not   mean   what   the   plain
words  say  but  only  that  freedom  of  the  press  must  be  "bal-
anced" against other public  considerations.  Bickel  agrees with
Griswold.  This  nullifies  the  intention  of  the  Framers.
The  crisis  for  which  the  bar  and  the  press  must  mobilize
lies  in  the  fact  that  never   before  have  the  courts   had  to
confront  the  freedom  of  the  press  issue  in  this  form.   The
publication  of  secret  government   papers  is  hardly   new.  A
patriot  newspaper  in  Boston, thanks  to  a  leak  from  Benjamin
Franklin,  published  the  Royal  Governor's  correspondence  on
the  eve  of  the  Revolution.* The  furor  over  the  Sedition  Act
began  in  1798 when John  Franklin  Bache  (Benjamin's  grand-
son)   published  secret   diplomatic  documents  to   attack   the
covert  Federalist  war  against  France.   But  this  was  before
the  days  of  "classification"  and  leaks  of  this  kind  were  prose-
cuted  as  seditious  libels  intended  to  bring  the   government
into  disrepute.   What  we  face  now  are  the  first  prosecutions
of  the  press  for  upsetting  the  government's  system  of  classi-
fication.  The  freedom  of  the  press  issue  is  thereby  entangled
with  the  question  of  national  security.
A  government  cannot  be  denied  the  right  to  some  secrets,
especially  in  wartime.   But  what  makes  this  case  so  crucial
is  that  Dr.  Ellsberg's   leak  and  its  publication  in  the  press
represented  the  first  open  revolt  against  a  system  of  secrecy
Even  If  The  Documents  Are  Stolen
The  mere  fact  that  a  newspaper  man  obtained  infor-
mation  in  a  clandestine  fashion  or  in  a   surreptitious
manner  or  because  somebody  unguardedly  and  unwit-
tingly  reveals  confidential information,  or  even  through
a  breach  of  trust   on  the  part  of  a  trusted   employee,
does  not  give  rise  to  an  action  for  an  injunction.  The
courts  may not review  the  manner in which a newspaper
man  obtains  his  information and  may  not  restrain   the
publication  of  news  merely  because the  person  responsi-
ble  for  the  publication obtained it  in  a  manner  that  may
perhaps  be illegal or  immoral. It  would be a far  reaching
limitation  on  the  freedom  of  the  press  if  courts   were
endowed  with  power  to  review  the   manner   in  which
the  press  obtains its  information  and  could restrain  the
publication  of  news  that  is  obtained  in  a  way  that  the
court  does  not  approve.   If  such were  the  law,  we  would
not  have a free  press;  we would  have  a  controlled  press.
Such, however, is not the  law.
—District  Judge  Alexander   Holtzoff    in  Liberty  Lobby,
Inc.  v.  [Drew]  Pearson, 261  F.  Supp.  726, 728-9  (D.D.C.
1966),  aff'd.  390 F.  2nd  49  (D.C.  Cir.  1968).   Quoted  in
the  Washington   Post   brief   in  the  Supreme   Court.  The
ruling   is  given  added  force  because  it   came  from  one
of   the  most  right-wing  members  of  the  District  bench, a
protege  and  former   counsel  of  J.  Edgar   Hoover.   And
because  the  Court  of  Appeals   decision  upholding   him
was  -written  by  Warren  Burger,  now   Chief   Justice  of
the Supreme   Court!
which  has  reached  cancerous  proportions  and threatens  unless
checked  to  destroy  free   government   itself.   The  amount  of
information  now stamped  secret  and  withheld  from  the  press
and  Congress  is  staggering.  The  Washington  Star  estimates
(July  8)  that  Pentagon  Xerox  machines   produce  about  100
million  documents  a  year.  A  recently  retired  Air  Force  se-
curity  officer  told  a  House  Government  Information  subcom-
mittee  June  24,  "I  would  guess  that  there  are  at  least  20
million  classified  documents,  including  reproduced   copies,  in
existence"  and  added, "I  sincerely  believe  that  less  than  one-
half  of one percent of the  different  documents  actually contain
information  qualifying  even  for  the  lowest  defense  classifica-
tion."
The Pentagon  Papers  showed' that  the  government  has  been
carrying  on  secret  warfare   in  Indochina  since   1954.    They
(Continued  On Page  Four)
27  Members  of  Congress  Spell  Out  the  Danger  Now  Threatening  Freedom  of  the  Press
In  cases  at  the  bar,  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of
this  country,  various  formulations  have  been  proposed   for
an  exception  applying broadly  to  national  security  matters.
Judge  Gurfein  would  allow  an  exception for  "information  or
documents absolutely vital  to current  national  security." The
Court  of • Appeals  for  the   Second  Circuit  approved   censor-
ship  of  items  which  "pose  such  grave  and  immediate  danger
to  the  security  of  the  United  States, as  to  warrant   their
publication being  enjoined."
The  Government's  proposal   would   permit   an   injunction
against  the  publication  of  any  classified  material  unless  the
publisher  could  show  that   the  classification  was   arbitrary
and  capricious.  If  this court  sanctions  such  a  rule  the  press
will  be  at   the   mercy  of  the  Department  of  Justice.   The
Government  will  be in  a  position  to  leak  any  classified  infor-
mation  that  serves  its  own  purposes  and  shut  off  counter-
vailing  information.
The   formulations   of  Judge   Gurfein   and   the   Court   of
Appeals  for  the  Second  Circuit,  although  most  stringent  on
their  face,   would  be  almost   equally  destructive  of   a   free
press  in  America.   We  do  not  make  this  statement   lightly.
Under  any  of  these  formulations  the  Executive  can  hold  up
publication   simply  by   alleging   that   a   serious   breach  of
national  security  would  occur.   The  court  would  then  issue
a  restraining   order,   allow  the  Government  to  present   its
case,  and  then  decide  whether  there  was  sufficient   danger
to  warrant   issuance   of  an   injunction   against  publication.
This  process  in  itself  is  a  system  of  prior  restraint.
Moreover,  most  of  the  proceeding—certainly  the  critical
parts—would  take  place  in  camera.   Both   the  New   York
Times   and  the   Washington   Post  cases  followed  this   pro-
cedure,  on the  ground  that  otherwise  the  injury  to  national
security  would  occur  in  the  course  of  the  hearing.  Only  the
defendants  and  their  counsel  were  permitted  to  attend   the
in  camera  session.   More  than  that,  no  one  was  allowed  to
be  present   unless  he  was  first  given  security   clearance  by
the  Government.  Hence  the  plaintiff   in  the  case  was  able
to  dictate   what  individual  defendants,   and  what   counsel,
were  entitled  to  participate  in  determination  of  the  issue.
Such  procedure  can  hardly  be  recommended  in  a  democratic
society.
—Brief    of   twenty-seven   members   of  Congress,  as  amid
curiae,  filed  by  Rep.  Bob  Eckhardt  (D-Tex)   and  Thomas  I.
Emerson,  Yale  Law  School,  in  the  Supreme   Court,  (abr.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  July  12,1971
Freedom  Is Worth  The  Price  of A  Few  Secrets  Leaked
(Continued  From  Page  Three)
disclosed  for  the  first  time  the  full  dimensions  of  the  arro-
gance,  duplicity  and  inhumanity  with  which  successive  Ad-
ministrations  got  us  into  this  horrible  mess  which  is  tearing
the  country  apart  and  demoralizing  the  armed  forces  them-
selves.   It   was  the  height  of  Nixon  era  banality  for   Chief
Justice  Burger  to  say  that  a  newspaper  editor,  handed  such
documents,  should,  like  a  taxi  driver  who  finds  stolen  goods
in  his  cab,  turn   them  over  to  the  police!   To  reduce  such
historic  revelations  in  the  midst  of  an  agonized  public  debate
over the  war  to  the  dimensions of a  simple case  of larceny and
receiving  stolen  goods  is  utterly  to  miss  the  function   of  a
free  press  in  a free   society.
Representative  government  is  menaced today  by  a  cloud  of
secrecy.  The  Daniel Ellsbergs  and  Neil  Sheehans  are  too few;
a  Senator  like  Gravel  willing  to  challenge  the   classification
system  in  which Congress  has  acquiesced  for  so  many  years,
is   unique.   We  need   more  such   rebels,   not   fewer,   if   free
government  is  to  survive.
The  Philosophy  Of  Risk
In  the  fight  against  government  secrecy  we  need  to  apply
in  a  fresh  form  the  philosophy  of  risk  which  laid  the  foun-
dations  for  real  freedom  of  the  press  in  the  earlier  struggle
against   the   law  of   seditious   libel.    It   is   often    forgotten
that  after   prior  restraint  or  censorship  ended  almost  three
centuries  ago,  the  press  was  still  shackled  by  the  common
law  of  seditious  libel.  Editors  went  to  jail  for  bringing  gov-
ernment  into  disrepute;   the  rule  was  that  the  greater  the
truth  of  their   publications   the  greater  the   offense;   royal
governors  decided  the  law  and  made  conviction by  the  jury
almost  a foregone  conclusion.  The reformers  sought  to protect
the  press  by  making  the  jury  the  judge  of  the  law  as  well  as
the  facts,  and  to  make  truth  a  defense.   The  Sedition  Act of
1798,   so  notorious  in  our   history,   actually   embodied  these
reforms,  though  its  purpose  was  repressive.  Like  Fox's  his-
toric  Libel Act  six  years  earlier  in  England,  it  made  the  jury>
the  judge  of  the  law  as  well  as  the  facts;   in  addition  the
Sedition  Act  made  truth  a  defense,  something  English  law
did  not  achieve until  1843.
But  these  long  sought  reforms  proved  illusory.   In  the  heat
of  partisan  passion,  only one jury  failed  to  convict  in  a  Sedi-
tion  Act  case  and  "truth"  proved   difficult   to  determine.    It
became  clear  that  freedom  of  the  press  could  only  be  secure
if   the  press  were   allowed  to  propagate  error.    Otherwise
Agnew Must Envy Thieu's Way With The Media
The  radio  and  television  networks  here,   which   are
controlled  by  the  Government,  have  virtually  been  di-
rected   to  ignore  all   mention  of   the   contents  of   the
Pentagon   papers.   In  response   to  questions  today,  Vu
Khanh,  an  official  of  the  Information Ministry, said  the
radio  and  television  networks   here  "agreed   with   the
idea  that  the  substance  of  the  Pentagon  papers  as  re-
ported   by  the   New  York  Times  and  other  American
papers  do  not  have  news  value  for   the  local   public."
—Alvin  Shuster,  from   Saigon,   N.Y.  Times,  July   2.
censorship was  only  replaced  by  prosecution  after publication.
It  was  in  the  battle  against  the  Sedition  Act  that  the  Jeffer-
sonians   for   the   first   time*  hammered   out  the   libertarian
doctrines  which have  made  ours  the  freest  press  in  the  world.
The  philosophy to  which we  are  indebted  runs  in  a  great  line
from  Madison,  the  Father  of  the  Constitution,  to  Brandeis,
and  from  them  to  Black and  Douglas.   It  says that  freedom  is
impossible  without  risk,  and  that  the  risks  of  free  discussion
are  wiser  than  the  risks  of  repression.  This  is  what  the  best
young  people  yearn  for  under  Communist  rule  and  this   is
what  we  are  in danger  of forgetting  in  the  Nixon  era.
We  must  apply  the  philosophy  of  risk  to  the  new  cii-cum-
stances.   Talk  of  reforming  the  classification system  will  soon
evaporate.   Successful  prosecutions  would  only  nail  it  down.
The  path  of  least  resistance  is  that  which  Nixon  has  already
charted:  to  cut   dow-n  the  number  of  persons  with  access  to
secret  documents  and  to  tighten  up  on  security.  It  would  in
any  case  take  a  small  army  many  years  to  review  the  classi-
fication  of  all  our  secret  documents.   The  only  hope  lies  in
jury  acquittals   in  the  coming  prosecutions,  and  in  arguing
that  the  only  possible  check  on  the  abuses  of  overclassifica-
tion  and  secrecy  is  to  allow unpunished the  leak  and  publica-
tion  of  documents  like  the   Pentagon   Papers.   Congress   by
twice  refusing  to  enact  an  Official  Secrets  Act  in wartime  has
shown  itself   of  a  similar  mind.   Men  of  courage  are  all  too
rare;  the  circumstances  which  bring  establishment  papers  to
print  such  documents  are  even  rarer.  This  is  the  only  safety
valve  we  have  if  the  people's  right  to  know is  not  entirely  to
disappear.                                                                             July  9
*One  may  find  this  ably  developed  in  Leonard  W.  Levy's
book, Freedom  of Speech and Press in Early  American  History.
Off  On  Vacation —   Next  Issue  Goes  To  Press  Aug.  31
FOR
For  the  enclosed
send  I.  F.  Stone's
1967-70 (Random
(To)   Name  ..........
Street   ....................
City  ........................
Indicate   if
Please renew  [3    o
Street   ....................
City  ........................
I.  F
4420  29th  St.
STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
special  pre-publication  price  of  $8.95
new  book,  Polemics  and   Prophecies:
House). Regularly   $10.
............  Zip................  State....................
gift   announcement   wished   D
r enter Q   a sub for  the enclosed   $5 :
...........  Zip................  State....................
.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                7/12/71
N. W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.   Published   every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..    N.W..    Washington   D C
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the   U.S.;    $6  in  Canada-
$10 elsewhere.  Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to Europe;  $20 to Israel,  Asia and Africa.                                                             '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED