I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971feb08.pdf

============================================================

Nixon's  New  "Soak-the-Poor"  Tax  Reform,   See P.  3
Internal  Security  Alert
Only  a  few  weeks  ago  Nixon  declared  himself  a  Kcynesian.  Now  in  his  State  of  the  Union  message,  he  goes  further
and  proclaims  himself  a  revolutionary.   While  Bernardine  Dohrn  of   the   Weathermen is  said  to   be  shifting  rightward
toward  moderation,  Nixon  seems  rapidly  to  be  passing  her  in  the  opposite  direction.   Much  as  we  oppose  wiretapping,
we  think the  FBI  had better listen  in  and  make  sure  nobody's  making  Molotov  cocktails in  the  White House basement.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL. XIX, No. 3
FEBRUARY  8,  1971         '°<o
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Power  to  the  People—From  Madison  Avenue
The  state  of  the  union  is  in  disrepair  because  of  the  Indo-
china  war.  To  submit  a  state  of  the  union  address which  does
not  deal  with  the  war,  and  to  follow  this  up  with  a  budget
message  and  an  economic report  which  again  black  out  the  cost
of  the  war,  is  to  leave  the  country  in  the  dark  on  the  most
fundamental   question  of  policy.  Nixon   is  said  to  have  been
a  great  poker  player  from  way  back,  but  playing  government
with  his  cards  this  close  to  his  chest  is  not  the  way  to  win
the  confidence  of  Congress  and  the  country.  Fully  as  serious
as  the  inflation  of  prices  is  the  inflation  in  these  messages  of
rhetoric,  of  statistical  projections  and  of  deception.  Cruelest  of
these  deceptions  is Nixon's  now-you-see-it-now-you-don't  reve-
nue-sharing  proposals.  These  have  little  meaning,  Wisconsin's
newly  elected  Governor,   Patrick  J.  Lucey,  told  the  Joint  Eco-
nomic  Committee  Jan.  29,  until  we  cut  down  "the   irrational
expenditures  being  made  for  the  machinery to  make war."  As
long   as  we   spend   "over   $75   billion   a   year   for   defense,"
Governor  Lucey  said,  "there  will  never  be  enough  money  to
cope with  local  and state problems."*
A  Chance  To  End  The  Arms  Race
"Defense"   is  a  euphemism  for  an  endless  minor  war  9,000
miles  away  and  for  an  arms  race  we  started  and  we  maintain.
Both  are  crippling  the  security  of  this  country,  weakening  its
currency  and  poisoning   its  institutions.   But  Nixon   shows  no
real  disposition  to  make  the  hard  decisions  which  could  end
either  one  of  them.  On  the  contrary,  he  is  widening  the  war
into  Laos  and  Cambodia  and,  in  his  new  budget,  continues  to
step up the arms race. With his genius  for  secrecy,  he has  sealed
off  the  arms  talks  from  public  knowledge  and  public  pressure.
Now  we  learn  through   a  news  leak   (Hedrick   Smith,   N.Y.
Times,  Jan.  29)  that  he  disregarded  a  unanimous   recommen-
dation  from  his  own prestigious  advisory  committee  on disarm-
ament   last   year  to  clear  the  way  for   an  agreement   to  stop
MIRV  by  dropping   his  insistence  on  on-site  inspection.   The
proposal  was  made  after  it  became  apparent  at  Helsinki  that
the  Russians were  ready  for  an  agreement  to  stop  the  ABM  or
* Nelson  Rockefeller, testifying  the  same  day,  asked for  an
additional   $5  billion  in  revenue   sharing   and  $8  billion   for
welfare.    Proxmire   three   times   asked   Rockefeller  whether
this  $13  billion  could  not  best   be  obtained   by  cutting   the
military  budget.  Each  time  Rockefeller  evaded  the  question,
pleading   that   he  did  not  know  enough   about  the   cost   of
defense.    Rockefeller,   with   Henry   Kissinger   as   his   aide,
launched  the  campaign in  the  late  50s  for  the  sharp  increase
in  military  spending  which  began  with  Kennedy.   A  Rocke-
feller  Brothers  report  blueprinted  expansion  of  conventional
arms  and counter-insurgency  as  well  as  "limited" and  "clean"
nuclear  weapons.  If  he  isn't  aware  of  the  billions  his   pro-
posals have  cost,  he must  be in a  fiscal  coma.
Not  Instructors   Or  Advisers—Just   "Auditors"
Q.  Mr. Secretary, earlier  you  said  to  the  Cambodians
that  there  will  be  no  American  ground  combat  forces
introduced into Cambodia. [Italics  added].
Secretary  Laird:  That is correct.
Q.  Choose your  words carefully.   Does  this  mean that
there  might  be  other  ground  forces  introduced?
Secretary  Laird:   We  are  carrying  on  a  military  as-
sistance   program.   We  are   going   to   do  our   best   to
assure  that  this  program will  be  carried out  efficiently.
This will  require, of  course, that  we audit the delivery of
equipment.  That  audit responsibility will  be  carried out
by  ou,r  military equipment  delivery  teams.  [Abridged].
—A t a Pentagon  press conference  January  20.
Saigon,  Jan.  20—The  Army's Green Berets  will  prob-
ably  make  up  most  of  the  "military equipment  delivery
teams"   .  .   .  the   Green  Berets   ostensibly    would  be
checking  on  the  use  of  $185  million  in  military  assist-
ance  being  given  Cambodia.  Actually,  military  sources
here  said,  the   Green  Berets   would  be  providing what
was  described  as  "minimal,  basic  training"  in  the  use
of  the  relatively  simple,  unsophisticated  weapons  .  .  .
They  would  also  be  able  to  provide some  instruction  in
the   gathering   of   intelligence,  organization   of   strikes
behind   enemy   lines    and   multi-battalion  operations.
While  conceding that  such training might  cross  the  thin
line  between  instruction  and  advising,  the  sources  here
said:  "The training  will  not last  long  enough  to become
advising."—Michael  Parks  in  the Baltimore Sun, Jan. 29.
limit   it  to   defenses   around   the  two  national   capitals.   The
significance  of  the  advisory  committee  recommendation  is  that
it  might  have  made  agreement  easier  on  both  defensive  and
offensive   strategic   weapons.   These   obscure   technical   issues
involve  a  last  chance  to  prevent  a  new  and  unsettling  spiral  in
the  arms  race  and  offer  an  immediate  way  to  save  billions  on
the  budget,  money  desperately  needed  to  save  our  near  bank-
rupt  and  rotting  urban  areas.
The  arms  race  and  the  military  are  not  only  swallowing  up
the  bulk  of  the  "peace  dividend"  but  mortgaging  the  nation's
future.  The  ABM  is  to  get  another   $1.28   billion   this  year,
and  if  its  expansion   is  not  stopped  could  easily  cost  another
$10  billion.  Putting  more  MIRVs  on  nuclear  submarines  will
cost  $409  million  next  fiscal  year  compared  -with  $382  million
this  year;  putting  more  MIRVs  on  Minuteman   3  is  up  from
$720  million  to  $926  million.  The  Navy,  though  by  far  the
most  powerful  in  the  world,  will  get  another  $3.3  billion  for
new  construction.  Then  there  are  "tip   of  the  iceberg"   items
as   certain   new   monsters   move   closer   to   production.   The
spending   on   ULMS,   the   new   strategic   nuclear    submarine
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  8,1971
is  up   from   $45   million   this   year  to   $110  million   in   the
new  budget.  It  is  to  replace   Polaris  and  Poseidon,  and  will
cost  easily  another  $7  to  $10  billion.  Spending  on  the  new
B-l   bomber   to   replace   the  B-52  is  up   from   $75  to   $370
million—it  is  estimated  by  the  Pentagon  to  cost  $10  billion
before  it  is  completed.  Then  there  is  $145  million  more  for
AWACs  to  protect   us  from   a  non-existent  Russian  bomber
threat—the   total   cost   will  be   $2.6   billion.  There   is   $807
million  for  the  F-14, the Navy's  version of  that  Rube Goldberg
plane,  the  TFX—it  will  cost  $8.2  billion  before  it  is finished.
(See  the  table  on  36  major  weapons  systems  in  the  Jan.  23
issue  of  National  Journal).  This  provides  the  merest  glimpse
of  why  Nixon  is  asking  for   $6  billion  in  new  obligational
authority   next  fiscal  year  for  the  Pentagon,  and  upping   its
research  funds  from  $5.2'billion  to  $7.7  billion  next  year—
to   be   spent   on   exotic   new   weapons   systems   (like   lasers)
which  are  still  a  gleam  in  some  technician's  woozy  eye.  We
wouldn't   want  our  military  nursery  to  run  out  of  new  toys.
How  The  Peace  Dividend  Vanished
All  this  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  Pentagon  budget  is
.moving  up  though   the  costs  of  the  Vietnam  war  are  going
down.   It  is  also  another   reason   why  the  cost  of  the  war  is
being  kept  secret.  The  Pentagon   briefings  indicated  that  there
is  a  firm  figure  despite   the   growing   escalation   into   Cam-
bodia  and  Laos;  apparently  extra  costs  above  the  target  figure
are  to  come  out  of  other  parts  of  the  military  budget.  But  to
make  the  target  figure  public  would  show  how  much  of  the
"peace  dividend"  has  already  been  swallowed  up  by  the  mili-
tary.  The   Washington   Star's  veteran  Pentagon  reporter,   Orr
Kelly,  reported   (Jan.  29)   that  the  war's  cost  this  fiscal  year
is  about   $12  billion   and   next   year  would  be   "well   below
$10  billion." The  cost  of  the  war-peaked  in fiscal '69  at  almost
$30  billion.  So  the  current  year's  cost  was  about  $18  billion
less  and  next  year's  cost  should  be  more  than  $20  billion  less.
But  this  year's  military  budget  is  running  only  $4.8   billion
below   and  next  year's  will  be  only  $3.3  billion   below   '69's
(unless   actual   spending,  as  usual,   does   run   several  billions
more  than  the  estimates).  If  the  total  "peace  dividend"  were
deducted  from  the  '69 peak,  the  new military  budget  would  be
$61.2  billion.  Instead  it  is  $77.5  billion.
When  Budget  Director   Schultz  was  asked  at  his   briefing
•why  the  budget  again  had  blacked  out  any  figure  on  the  cost
of  the  war,  he replied  cutely  "being overly precise would  overly
How Tricky Can You Get Dept
"We  won't  send  men  into  Cambodia  to  fight  on  the
ground.   Secondly,  we   won't  have  advisers  for   Cam-
bodian  units.   Now,  advisers,  I  believe—and  I  told  the
Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  this  yesterday—I
believe  'advisers'  means  that  we  will  not  send  Ameri-
cans  with  a  combat  unit  in  a  combat  environment  to
give  them  advice  about  how  to  conduct the  combat."
—Secretary   of  State  Rogers  at  press   con/.  Jan.  29
This  seems  to  leave  the  door  open to  having  advisers
with  a  combat  unit  so  long  as  this  is  not  in  a  "com-
bat   environment."  Next    we'll   be   hearing  that   the
ban   on   "ground  combat  troops"  does   not   apply   to
ground  troops  so  long  as   they   are  not  in  combat  nor
to  combat  troops  so  long   as   they   are  not  directly   on
the  ground—whether  in  helicopters or  in  jeeps.  Maybe
even  as  long  as  they  are  not  in  bare  feet?
disclose  the  President's  precise  strategy."  It  might  also  disclose
that  he  has  no  intention  of   effecting   a  complete  withdrawal
from   Indochina.   Robert   Benson,  who   was   special   assistant
to  the  Pentagon  Comptroller   1966-68  and  is  now  working  on
the  "alternative  budget"  soon  to  be  released  by  the  National
Urban  Coalition,  estimates  that  if  troop  withdrawals were  to
continue  next fiscal  year  at  the  rate  projected  to  May  1 of  this
year,  the  total  cost  next  fiscal  year  should  be  only  about  $6
billion.  But  that  rate  of  withdrawal  would  bring  U.S.  forces
in  Vietnam  down  to  84,000  by  the  end  of  June,   1972,  and
get  all  of  them  out  by  the  end  of  the  year.  The  Pentagon  is
talking  of  between   100,000  and  150,000  troops  remaining  by
June  30,  1972,  and  of  a  residual  force  of  50,000  for  "military
assistance"  and  several  thousand  more  in  Air   Force  units,  a
more  or  less  permanent  garrison  as  in  Korea.  Indochina  may
be  sharing  billions  in  revenue  for  years.
The  Pentagon  is  putting  out  figures  to  prove  that  were  it
not  for  inflation  and  the  drive  to  create  a  professional army,
its  budget  would   show  a  sharp  drop.  It  could   also  show  a
sharp  drop,  despite  inflation  and  the  $3.6  billion  for  Pentagon
pay  raises,  if  we  put  a  stop  to  the  arms  race.  The   inflation
argument  is  a  curious   one,   since  the  war   and   the  military
budget  are  prime  causes  of  the  inflation.  Every public  service,
from   schools   to  hospitals,   have  been  cut  because  of  it,  and
old  age  pensioners  are  driven  by  hunger  to  shoplifting.  Why
should  the  military  alone  be  exempt  from  the  inflation  it  has
The First,  The  Most  Outspoken and  The Most  Liberal  of  the  Democratic  Candidates
I  seek  the  presidency  with  the  conviction that  I  can  pro-
vide the  sense  of  history,  the  toughness  of  mind and  resolve,
and  the  spirit  of  deep  compassion  .  .  .   Our intervention  in
Vietnam's  civil  war  was  not  an  act  of  national  strength  but
rather  a  drifting  with  the  tide  of  old  ideas  and  illusions.
President   Nixon's  failure  to   pull   us  out  of   the  Vietnam
quicksand  promptly and decisively  is  not  an  act  of  strength,
but  rather  reveals  a  lack  of  the  strength  needed  to  face  up
to  the  enormity  of  our  error  .  .  .  Vietnamization ...  is
merely  prolonging  the  bad dream  .  .  .  An  America  with  a
Constitution  that  placed  its  war-making power  in  an  elected
Congress  now  finds  that  power  wrested  away  by  the  CIA,
the  Pentagon  and impetuous  chief  executives ...  I  want to
provide  a  second  chance  for  America  itself ...  I  want  to
dispel  the heavy fog  of  despair.
—McGovern  announcing  his  candidacy  for  President
In  announcing  I  made  one  commitment  above  all  others,
I  pledged  to  seek  and speak  the  truth  .  .  .  That  standard
requires  an  early  effort  to  dispel  the  fog  and  myth  which
have  for  twenty  years  befuddled  our  actions  toward  main-
land  China.   They  have  isolated  the  U.S.  from  a  large  and
growing  body  of  world  opinion.  They  have  pushed  Chinese
leadership  into belligerence  and suspicion.  They  have placed
us  on  the  wrong side  of  nationalistic aspirations throughout
Asia  and  have  forced  our  alliance  with  governments which
degrade  the  very  principles of  democracy.  And  they  have
brought  us  twice  into  major  wars,  with  a  toll  of  100,000
American  dead  in  Korea  and  Vietnam.
Our 'policy  still  reflects  a  belief  that  the  present  govern-
ment  in  Peking  is  but  a  temporary  usurper  of   power  in
China.  This  is  pure  fantasy.
—Abridged   from   his   first   campaign   speech   Jan.   24  in
Stockton, Calif.,   opposing  an  anti-Chinese  ABM  and  propos-
ing  that  we  recognize  Peking,  as  Canada  has,  and  support
its  admission  to  the  United  Nations.
I   introduce  for   myself   and  for   Senator   Hatfield   a  bill
entitled  the  Vietnam Disengagement  Act  of  1971.  The com-
mitment  to  complete  withdrawal by  a  date  certain  [Dec.  31,
1971]  can  open  the  way  to  a  political  settlement.   It  offers
the  one  realistic  means  of  bringing  U.S.  prisoners  home.
McGovern  in  the  Senate  Jan.  27.  This  bill  was  also  spon-
sored  by  Bayh,  Cranston,  Eagleton,  Gravel,  Hart,  Hartke,
Hughes,  Javits,  Kennedy,   Mondale,  Moss,  Nelson,      Ribicoff,
Tunney  and  Williams.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  8,1071
done  so  much  to  cause?  As  for  the  professional army,  it's  for
the  birds.  We're  going  to  wake  up  and  find  ourselves  with
both  a professional army and  a  draft.  The  cancer  of  militarism
and  imperialism in  our  society  will  not  be  cured  by giving  the
Pentagon  a  professional army.  The  more  men  and  arms  it  has
to  play  with, the  more  trouble  and  expense  it  will  get  us  into
around the world.
For  A  Qualitative  Arms Race
Unfortunately  as Nixon  turns into  a  "Keynesian"  Democrat,
he  is  also turning—as  we  predicted  he  would—to  the  favorite
Democratic  device of  using  the  arms  race  as  a  means  of  stimu-
lating  the  economy. Nixon  wouldn't  make a  deal  at  SALT  now
even  if  the  Russians  were  ready  to  sign  on  the  dotted   line,
unless  it  were  a  deal  which  would  allow  a  qualitative  arms
race  to  go  on  under  cover  of  a  mere  agreement  to  limit  num-
bers.  And  that  is  what  the  U.S.  has  been  asking  all   along.
The  President's  budget  comes  with  a  "pie"   diagram  which
shows  that  only  34  cents  of   every  dollar  goes   to  national
defense.  This  is  the  biggest  slice  of  mallarkey  in  the  budget.
If   the  trust  funds,   including  social  security,  are  deducted  as
they  used  to  be,  then  we  can  see that  the  military  still  takes  47
cents of  every dollar in general  revenues.  Indeed  social security,
our  most  regressive  form  of  taxation,  now  takes  in  so  much
more   than   its   trust   fund   pays   out   that   it   has   become   a
major  way  of  masking  the  real  size  of  our  deficits.  For  fiscal
'70,  '71  and  '72,  the  trust  funds  will  generate  a  surplus  of
$28  billion  while  the  administrative budget   suffers   a  cumu-
lative  deficit  of  $61.8   billion  (even  on  Nixon's  overoptimistic
computations).  The  trust  fund  surplus  makes  this  look  like  a
cumulative   defict   of   only  $33  billion,  though   the   Treasury
must  issue  bonds  to  the  trust  funds  for  that  $28  billion.  This
surplus  represents  a contribution  by the  low  income  population
to  the  fight  against  inflation.  Yet  Nixon  is  planning  to  make
the  tax   system  even   more   regressive   (see   the   box  below)
by  imposing  a  value-added  tax,  i.e.  a  Federal  sales  tax,  and
using  the  funds  in  part  to  cut  income  and  corporate   taxes.
Here we come to  the  very heart  of  that monumental  swindle,
Nixon's  "New   American  Revolution."  What  the  country  re-
quires  is  a  massive  cut  in  private  expenditure  and  a  massive
increase  in  public  services.   The  billions  wasted  on  gadgetry
and  unnecessary  luxury  could,   if  diverted  in  time,  keep  our
The  Vagaries  of  Revenue-Sharing
WILBUR  MILLS:   The  revenue-sharing  formula  ad-
vocated   by  the  administration  is  wasteful   in  that   it
shares  revenue  with  States  with  little  relative  need,  as
well  as with those  where there  is a substantial  need  . . .
If  the  revenues  are divided  on  the  basis  of  the  revenues
raised locally, this  means that  those  localities  which are
the  wealthiest  and  best  able  to  raise  revenue  will  re-
ceive  the  largest  shares  of  the  Federal  revenue.  On the
other  hand, if  the  sharing were  to  be  based on  the  rela-
tive   expenditure   of   each   locality—another   formula
which  has  been  considered—the  formula  then  would be-
come  a  positive  inducement  for  a  spending   spree.
LONG   of   Md:   The  gentleman   has   indicated   that,
under  at  least  one  formula  being  considered,   is   one,
"to him who hath shall  be given."
MILLS:  Yes.  The  other  possible  .formula  would  pro-
vide  "to  whosoever  already  spends  much, there  shall  be
given  more to  spend."—In  the  House  January   26.
country  from  becoming   unlivable.  This  is  the  revolution  we
need.  But  Nixon  instead  seeks  to  increase  the  funds  available
to  the  private  sector.  "One  great  objective  of  my  Administra-
tion,"  he  said  in  his  budget   message   "is  to  increase  the  role
of  private  citizens  and  State  and  local  governments  in  allocat-
ing  our  national  resources  in  accordance  with  individual  and
local  needs."  He  warned  against   "-a  regimented  economy"  and
a  budget  that  would  allow  government  spending  to  "preempt
resources  that  should  be  left  to  be  used  by  private  citizens  or
State  and  local  governments."   (Our  italics.)  But  we  are  in  a
growing  crisis  deeper  than  any  war  we  have  yet   experienced.
To  meet  it  we  must  redirect  national  priorities   from  private
consumption  to  public  reconstruction.  The  very  air  we  breathe
and  the  water  we drink  is at  stake.
But  Nixon,  under  cover  of  all  his  high  school  commence-
ment  oratory,  would  lead  us. in  exactly  the  opposite  direction.
He  wants to  cut  income  and  corporation  taxes,  and  behind  the
facade  of  "revenue-sharing"   and  governmental   reorganization
to  turn   back  the  clock   of  a  generation's   progress  in   social
welfare.  His  "revolution"  is  a  counter-revolution,   an  echo  of
the  American  Liberty  League  campaign  in  1936  which  sought
to  block  and  dismantle  the  New  Deal  in  the  same  name  of
Nixon's  New  Treasury  Nominee  on  the
Sen.  Harris:  I  noticed  in  Joseph  AIsop's  column  (Jan.  28
Washington  Post)  "the  upshot  of  the  Nixon-Connally  meet-
ings  was a firm Presidential  directive ...  to  design  brand
new  federal  tax  systems.  The value-added tax,  an enormous
revenue raiser, will be one of  the  new systems'  centerpieces."
[Alsop  said  this  sales  tax  would  be  used  in  part  to  cut  in-
come  taxes—IPS].   Would  it   not  be  just  the  opposite  of
stimulating  consumer  demand,  particularly that  kind  of  na-
tional  sales  tax?  Would that  not be particularly inconsistent
with  the  depreciation  allowance  that   has  given  a   rather
large  measure  of  relief  to  wealthier  people?
Mr.  Connally:   I  do  not  want  to  take  exception   to   that
newspaper  story.   He  [the   President]   wants  us  to  take  a
look  at  every  conceivable  new  tax  measure  for  study.   He
is  extremely  concerned  about high income taxes  at  all levels.
Sen.  Harris:   Do  you  think  it  would  be  good  tax   policy
to  reduce  income taxes  and increase  the  sales  tax?
Mr.  Connaily:   Not  necessarily,  no.
Sen.  Harris:  Not  necessarily?
Mr.  Connally:   It  depends  again  on  the  specifics.
Sen.  Harris:   If  we  got  to  the  point  where  we  needed  to
increase   taxes,   Governor,   and  a   much   tougher   minimum
income  tax  was  advocated,  which  some  of  us  advocated  a
couple  of  years  ago  and  I  do  now,  raising  thereby  the  in-
Tax  "Reform"  Now  Being  Cooked  Up
come  tax  that  certain  wealthier  people  would  pay   [Harris
is  referring  to  a  proposed  minimum  tax  on  wealthy  persons
who  escape  income  taxes  altogether   through  various  loop-
holes—IFS],  would  there  be  anything  in  your  background
which  would  make  you  oppose  that  approach,  rather   than
a  value-added tax,  even  though  it  [the  minimum tax]  could
enter oil and gas  [depletion] income?
Mr.  Connally:  I  believe  that  taxes  ought  to  be  levied  on
those  most  able  to  pay.  But I  also  believe  that  everybody—
almost  everybody: I  say  almost  because  obviously  the  very
destitute  cannot—but  I  think  everybody  ought  to  pay  some
tax.   I  think  it  is  wrong  to  have  a  democracy  where  some
people  do  not  contribute  something  to  the  preservation   of
democracy.   I  do  not  think  he  [Nixon]  would  recommend
it   [the   value-added  tax]   unless  he  had  a  good  chance  of
getting   revenue-sharing   to   alleviate   the   cities   and   lift
some  of  the  burden  from  homeowners.
Sen  Harris:   If  yon  finance  a  revenue-sharing  program
through  a  regressive  Federal  sales  tax,  would  you  not  be
removing  one  of  the  main  arguments  for   revenue-sharing?
Mr.  Connally:  You  do  not  need  to  fear  any  recommenda-
tion  with  respect  to  the  value-added  tax  unless  it  is  a  part
of  a  sweeping  change  in  the  whole  tax  structure.
—Senate  Finance Committee  hearing  Jan.  28   (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  8, 1971
reviving  local  and  individual "liberty",  the  liberty of  the  rich
and  powerful  to  exploit  the  poor  and  the  blacks.
Not  The  Activism  Of  The  New  Deal
Nixon's  spending  and  Nixon's  "activism"  is  not  the  spend-
ing  and  the  activism of  the  New  Deal.  Then  deficit  spending
was  used  directly to put  the  jobless to work. It  revived business
by  reviving  their  purchasing  power.  Nixon's   deficit  spending
and  activism  is  seeking  a  stock  market  boom  in  time  for   the
election   even  at  the  cost  of  more   inflation,   from  which  the
poorest  and  most  helpless   will  suffer   most.  He   is  sacrificing
his  conservative  pledges   of  fiscal  stability,  not  to humanitar-
ianism   or   reform,   but   to   political  expediency  and   a   new
jamboree  of  speculation   into  which  the  investing  public  will
again  be drawn  and  again  be  sheared.
Nixon  is  a  great  "streamliner".  Before  his  election  he  was
going  to  streamline  the  White  House  staff  but  within  a  few
months of  taking  office  he  had  30 principal White  House  aides
as against LBJ's  22 and  Kennedy's 16. Last year  he  put  through
another self-styled "revolutionary"  reorganization of  the Execu-
tive   Office   which   seems   to   have   succeeded   in   making   the
•government    all    the    more    topheavy.   The    government    is
hard  to  run  for  any  President  because  it's  too  big  to  handle;
the tendency is to creat  a mini-government in the White  House;
to  pile  a  new  bureaucracy  on  the  old.  Now  Nixon  offers  more
of  the  same,  another  new  "revolution"   in  which  already  un-
wieldy  departments  will  be  merged  into  even  bigger  and  less
manageable  bureaucratic  mammoths.  It   is  symbolic  that   the
chart  for  this  comes  from  an  advisory  committee  headed  by
Roy  Ash  of  Litton  Industries,  one  of  those   "conglomerates"
which  had  such  a  dizzy  vogue  on  the  stock  market  but  have
proven  so  disappointing  in  profits and  management.
Ash  is applying  "conglomeratism"  to  government.  His  own
Litton  Industries  (though  it  moved  last  year  from  21st  to  9th
place  among  the  nation's  biggest  military  contractors)   showed
in  1970  its  lowest  earnings  since  1965.  Business  Week    (Nov.
30,  1968)    reported   that  "Wall  Street"  felt  that  bringing  so
many   diverse  businesses  under  one   roof   (Litton   and   LTV
were  mentioned)   made  their  management  "perilously   com-
plex"   and   explained   their   financial   setbacks.   Is   there   any
reason   to  believe  the   same  methods  applied   to  government
will  make  it  any  more  manageable?  Should  so  momentous  a
Social  Life  In  Washington
Franco  Spain  strikes  the  visitor  as  a  land  ruled  by
old  Generals, old  priests  and  old  ladies—the  most  prud-
ish  in  Europe.  But  Nixon  in  toasting  Franco's  chosen
successor,  Prince  Juan  Carlos, called  it  "young  and for-
ward-looking!"  The  Prince  reciprocated  by  saying that
what  he  most  admired  in  us  was  our  "moral  values"—
no doubt  as  in our readiness to  overlook  any  tyranny for
the  sake  of  bases!   Princess  Sophia  was  so  loaded  down
"with  diamonds  and  rubies"  that  "for  the  first  time,"
a   Washington   Post   society   gal   reported,   "the   White
House  had  a  policewoman  in  evening  dress circulating
among  the  guests."   Checking  the  guest  list,  we  noted
that   the   Secretary  of   the   Treasury—perhaps   as   an
extra  precaution—was  not  among  those   invited.   In  a
government  as  hard  up as  ours, you  can't  be  too  careful.
Footnote   in  Disgust:    Sen.  and  Mrs.  McGovern,  Sen.
and  Mrs. Kennedy,  Justice  and  Mrs. Douglas all  turned
up   for   the   lush  Spanish  Embassy   party   for  Prince
Carlos,  who is  pledged to  "continuismo",  i.e.  to continue
Fascism   after   Franco  dies.   No  self-respecting  Euro-
pean  liberal  would  be  caught dead  at  a  Franco  regime
party.   What  makes American liberals  so insensitive?
reorganization, threatening social welfare, labor and  civil  rights
advances  hard-won  over  many  years,  be  left  to  a  wholly  big
business  advisory conjmittee,  which  has  made  a  report  to  the
President  not  available to  Congress  or  the  public ?
Nixon's   messages   are  a  triumph  of   public  relations  and
advertising.  As  in  selling  soap,  his  aides  will  make  any  state-
ment   which  might  befuddle  the   consumer  into  buying  the
product.  So  it  is  with  the  ludicrous  and  most-far-out  echo  in
the  State  of  the  Union  message,  his  talk  (Black  Panther  style)
of  "power  to  the  people."  The  people  he  has  given  power  are
con men  from  Madison Avenue. If  he really wants to make gov-
ernment  more  responsive to the  popular  will,  he  need  only start
with  the  latest  Gallup  poll   (Jan.  31)   which  shows  73%  of
the  American  people,   up   from   55%   in  September,   in  favor
of  the  Hatfield-McGovern  proposal   for  total  withdrawal  from
Vietnam  by  the  end  of  this  year.  To  obey  that  overwhelming
public  verdict,  to  bring  the  troops  home  by  Christmas,  would
really  provide  revenues to  share.                                          Feb.  1
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped, Self  Addressed  Envelope
Bi-Weekly Mart
—To  subscribe   or  to  send  a  gift   subscription,    send
$5 with  your  address  and  zip  code  to  the  address  below.
—To  get  Stone's new collection,  "Polemics  and  Proph-
ecies:   1967-70"   (Random  House:   $10)   at   the   special
$8.95  price  postpaid  for  Bi-Weekly  readers,  send  check
or  money  order  to  the  address  below.
—If  you  want  Stone's  new  paperback,   "The   Killings
at  Kent  State:  How Murder  Went  Unpunished"  (New
York  Review  and  Vintage  Press)  the  price  is  $1.95.   It
contains   the   full  text,  available  nowhere   else,  of  the
so-called   "secret  FBI   report",  the   summary   of   FBI
findings  prepared  by  the   Civil  Rights  Division  of  the
Justice  Department  but  never  submitted  to  the  Ohio
Grand  Jury.
—Stone's  "Hidden   History  of  the  Korean  War",   the
inside  story  of   America's   first   Vietnam,   long  out  of
print  is  available  again  (Monthly  Review  Press)   $7.50
postpaid.
—Paperback   editions   (Vintage   Press)   of   Stone's
earlier  collections,  "In  A  Time  of  Torment"  ($1.95)  and
"The   Haunted   Fifties"   ($2.45)  are  available  at   book-
stores.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  Street  NW,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N.W.
Washington,  D.C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..  N.W..  Washington.  D.C
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther   M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;    16  in  Canada;
SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:  520  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED