I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971apr05.pdf

============================================================

Ben  Gurion For  Peace  Not  Real  Estate,  P.  2
That  Silent  Majority  Seems  to  Be  Growing  Bored
According   to  the   Associated  Press,   17,000,000   homes   watched  a movie on NEC  the  night Howard  K. Smith  interviewed
Nixon  and  14,000,000 others  watched  the  Doris  Day  and  Carol  Burnett  shows  on  CBS. Nixon  ran  third  with  5,000,000
homes.   The  Nielsen  ratings  were  not  yet  available on  a  national  basis  when  we  went  to  press  but  the  New  York  area
Nielsens  were.  These  showed  that  ABC  would  have  done  better  with  its   usual  Monday  night  movie  in  that   time  slot.
The  average  rating  in January for  the  Monday  night  movie was  19'/e.   Smith's  interview with  Nixon drew  1%.
I. F, Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX, No.  7
April  5,  1971      '»'WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Humphrey's  Leadership  Is  Not  Good  Enough
A   basic  problem   of   mankind   is   to   free   itself   from   the
tyranny  of  technology.   That  is  why  the  defeat  of  the  SST was
of  historic  importance,  and  should  encourage  a  fresh   attempt
to  stop  the  ABM  and  the  MIRV.  The  SST in  the  civilian, like
ABM  and  MIRV   in  the  military,  field  are  examples  of   the
inertial  power  of  technological  discovery.  To  have  blocked  the
one  shows  it  is  possible  to  stop  the  other.   The  defeat  of  the
SST  was  a  defeat  for  that  usually  insuperable  alliance  of  the
military,  its industrial suppliers and  the  organized  labor  move-
ment  also  behind  the  continued  arms  race  which  ABM  and
MIRV  entail.   Indeed  Stennis  sought  to  rally  support   in  the
Senate  for  the  SST  by  linking  it  with  defense.   The  SST, he
pleaded   before   the   vote  was  taken,   "is   now   the   only con-
necting  link,  in  the  research,  development,  evaluation, testing
and  engineering   .  .  .  with  the  long-range   bomber   we  have
decided  now  we  do  need,  the  B-l."   The  old  clincher  didn't
work.   Proxmire  of  Wisconsin,  who  led  the  fight  against  the
SST,  has  also  been  questioning  the  utility  of  a  new  bomber  in
the  missile  age,  and   may  rally  the   Senate   against   the   $370
million  Nixon  and  Laird  are  asking  for  the  B-l  in  fiscal  72.
This  military  SST will  cost  between  $15  and  $20  billion.
It  Would  Have Been  Political  Suicide
The  defeat  of  the  SST reflects  an  awakening  in  every section
of  this country to  environmental dangers,  to  military waste  and
folly,  and  to  the  urgency  of  new  priorities  if  our  country's
future  is  to  be  safeguarded.   A  new  America,  freed  from  the
grip  of  militarism  and  imperialism,  would  be  able  at  last  to
turn  its  giant  energies  to  reconstruction  and  racial  reconcilia-
tion.   But  such  leadership  cannot  come  from   those   who   are
wedded  to  the  cold  war  and  Pax  Americana past,  and  willing
to  do  little  more  than  beat  a  minor  tactical  retreat—just   like
Nixon  is  doing—before  the  tidal  wave  of  discontent  and dis-
trust.   The  country  is fed  up  with  the  idea that  the  only way  to
combat  unemployment  is  through  highly  lucrative contracts  to
socially wasteful  aerospace  and  armament  industries.  An  index
of  that  revulsion  was  the  failure  of  the  AFL-CIO  lobby  to
rally  its  liberal  Democratic  friends  for  the  SST.  Except   for
Jackson,  not  a  single  liberal  Democratic  presidential  hopeful
voted  for  the  SST, Humphrey  included.  In  the  present  temper
of  the  country  and   especially  its  youth,  it  would  have  been
political  suicide for  Humphrey to  have  done  otherwise.
The  day  after   the   vote  on  SST, Humphrey   delivered   his
first major  address  since reentering  the  Senate,  on  his  old sub-
ject,  the  arms  race.  That  speech,  and  his  Moskowitz  lecture  at
New  York  University  last  January  25  which  foreshadowed  it,
shows  the  limitations  of  Humphrey's  leadership.   The   speech
called  for  a  freeze  on  ABM  and  MIRV,  and  it  came  just  in
That  Same  Old  Tunnel,  18  Years  Later
Let  me  say  I know  when we  are  getting out.  We have
a   plan,  it  is  being  implemented  .  .  .  But  as  far  as  a
deadline  is  concerned,  while  the  next  announcement,  I
am  sure,  will  give  some  indication  as  to  the  end  of  the
tunnel,  we  are  not  going  to  tell  them  now  .  .  .
—Nixon   to  Howard   K.  Smith,  ABC-TV,   March  27.
Henri  Navarre himself  is  confident   of  ultimate  vic-
tory,  and  he  has  communicated  this  to  many  of  those
[including  Nixon  at  the  time—IFS]  who  are counting
on  him.  Said  one  of  them  last  week:  "A  year ago,  none
of  us  could  see  victory.   There  wasn't  a  prayer.   Now
we  can  see  it  clearly—the  light  at  the  end  of  a  tunnel."
—Time   Magazine    cover   story,   "Navarre    of    Indo-
China",  September   28,  1953. Barely   six   weeks  later
Nixon,  then   Vice  President,  turned  up  in  Hanoi—yes,
Hanoi,  which then  seemed  to  be  firmly  in  French  hands
—to  oppose  a  negotiated  peace  in   Indochina.
time.   For  three  days  later,  on  ABC  TV's Issues  and  Answers
even  Jackson  put  forward  a  proposal  of  his  own  for  a  MIRV
freeze.   The  old  champion  of  disarmament could  hardly  afford
to  lag  behind  the  Senator  from  Boeing.   And  the  tide  of ani-
mosity  to  the  arms  race must be  high  if  even  Jackson—Nixon's
first  choice  for  Secretary  of  Defense—feels  impelled  to  offer  a
freeze  proposal.
The  three  points  that  Jackson  put  forward  on  TV   seemed
to  presage  the  kind  of  phony  formula  to  be  expected  of  the
Senate's  foremost  advocate of  the  arms  race.  It called  for  a one-
year  freeze  on  MIRV,  combined  with  a  freeze  on  more  Soviet
land-based  missiles  and  a  go-ahead  for  just  the  kind  of  ABM
we  are  building.  This  would  freeze  U.S. superiority  and  keep
alive  Soviet   fear  that  our  ABM  might   develop  into  an  area
ABM  and  thus  part  of  a  first  strike  threat.   It  fails  to  meet
the  issue which  seems  to  worry the  other  side  most—  our  un-
willingness   to   include   7,200   forward   based   U.S.  nuclear
weapons  in  any  agreement  freezing  the  number  of  strategic
launchers.    The   Jackson   proposal   must  be   read   against   the
realization  that part  of  what  is going  on  at  SALT  is maneuver-
ing  to  blame  any  breakdown  in  the  talks  on  the  other  side,  so
the  Pentagon  can  then  piously  claim that  we  have  no alterna-
tive  but  the  arms  race.  Jackson's  proposal  fits  that  strategy.
Humphrey's  speech   is  on  a  much  higher  level.   Indeed   it
would  have  been  a great  speech  two  years ago.  It  has one  novel
idea,  which  we  think  other  Senators  and  the  peace  movement
might  take  up—the  idea  of  putting  MTRV  funds  in  escrow
while  the  negotiations  are  in  progress,  though   a  simpler  and
better  way would  be  to  vote  down  funds  for  ABM  and  MIRV
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  5,1971
EPITAPH   (!N  PLAIN   AMERICANESE)  ON   THE  INGLORIOUS
END  OF  THE  LAOTIAN   INVASION:    Was  there  ever  a  bigger
bunch  of  blowhards,  windbags  and  alibi  artists  than  our  Gen-
erals  and  their  civilian chiefs ?
Ben  Gurion  Speaks  Up
ISRAEL'S  ELDER  STATESMAN,  David  Ben  Gurion,  himself  a
a hard liner in  his time, says  in the  Saturday  Review  (April  3),
"Peace  Is  More  Important  Than  Real  Estate".   If  he  were  still
Prime  Minister  he  would  give  back  all  the  occupied  territories
and  return  to  the  1967  borders  except  for  East  Jerusalem  and
the  Golan  Heights.  "Real  peace  with  our  Arab  neighbors—
mutual  trust  and  friendship,"  he  said,  "that  is  the  only  true
security."   The  international conjuncture of  events  offers  a rare
opportunity  for  a  settlement  which  can  lay the  foundations  for
such  a  peace.   Rebuilt  lives  for  Arab  refugees  in  a Palestinian
state  of  their  own,  not  Sharm  El  Sheikh  or  some  other  Lillipu-
tian  border  adjustment, is the  key to  a stable  future.
A   BIGOTED   ATTORNEY    GENERAL   was   reproved   and    the
First  Amendment widened  when  a  three  judge  statutory  court
in  New  York  ruled  2-to-l  that  the  government  was wrong  in
.denying  a  visa  to  the   independent   Belgian   Marxist,  Ernest
Mandel,  editor  of  La  Gauche,  to  debate  John  Kenneth  Gal-
braith   at   Stanford  two  years  ago.    The   decision  by  Judge
Dooling, with Judge  Feinberg  concurring,  voids that  section of
the  McCarran-Walter   Immigration  Act  of   1952  which  bars
"subversive"  visitors unless  specially exempted  by the Secretary
of  State  and  the  Attorney  General.   Rogers  recommended  but
Mitchell   denied  the   visa  application.    A  group   of   scholars
including  Noam  Chomsky and  Robert  Heilbronner  thereupon
retained   the  noted   civil  liberties   lawyer  Leonard   Boudin  as
counsel  and  sued.  The  Court  ruled  that  though  Mandel,  as an
alien,   had   no  constitutional  right   to   enter,   the   scholars  as
American  citizens  had  a  right  to  free  exchange  of  ideas under
the  First  Amendment and  that  this and  academic freedom were
violated  when  the  visa  was  denied.   It  would  be  ironic  and
shameful   if   on  appeal  the   Supreme   Court,   as  remolded  by
Nixon  and  Mitchell,  at  a  time when  the  Soviet  Union  is turn-
ing  back  to  neo-Stalinism,  should  also  revert  to  closed  society
doctrine  and  reinstate  this  little  Iron  Curtain  of  our  own.
"NixoN   ON    MARKET   If    PROVING    CORRECT   AFTER   11
MONTHS,"  said  a  New   York   Times   financial   page  headline
'March  28.   The  Dow-Jones  index  has  indeed  risen  more  than
40  percent  since Nixon  met privately with Wall  Streeters  at the
White  House  last  May  and  set  the  stage  for  the  rise.   But  it
went  up  because  he  told  insiders  he  was  going  to  pump  fresh
The  Buddy  System  on  Capitol  Hill
The  leadership  had  the  freshman  Democrats  down  to
a  session  the  other  day.   All  of  them  (House   Speaker
Albert,  Majority  Leader  Boggs,  Majority  Whip  O'Neil)
were  giving  it  to  us:  "Don't  be afraid  to  speak  out  .  .  .
we  need  you  to  prod  us  .  .  ." That  sort  of  thing.  Right
then  I  thought  about  asking   them  about  the  Vietnam
war   resolution   that's  coming   up  at  our  next   caucus.
I  started  to  say  "what  about  helping  us  on  this  one?"
But  I  didn't  and it  was  all  sort  of  buddy-buddy ...  I
kicked  myself  later  on  for  not  doing  it.
—Rep.  Drinan  (D.-Mass.)  Wash. Daily  News  Mar.  20.
funds  into the  money market again.  But the  only rational  basis
for  the  rise is an unhealthy kind of  confidence—confidence  that
we  are  facing  another  prolonged   period  of   inflation   because
Nixon  is determined to  have a  stock  market boom  for  the  elec-
tion.   Pumping  in  more  credit   (and   further   weakening  the
dollar)   will  not  solve  the  long  range  problems  of  American
business.   The  market rise is  rouge  on  the  pale  cheeks of  a sick
economy.
RAIL-PAX  Is  A  NEW  NAME   for  an  old  tactic  that  has  been
ruining  U.S.  railroads  for  a  generation.   The  bright  idea  ever
since  bankers  took  control  has  been  to  meet  changing  condi-
tions  by giving  less service for  more money.  The  new  national
Railroad  Passenger  Corporation  is  a  device  to  get  around  the
ICC and  cut passenger  service more sharply than  ever, this time
to  about  half  the  existing  lines.   The  result,  predictably,  will
be fewer riders,  lower  revenues and  a bigger  bankruptcy.
"IT  DOES  APPEAR   INCONSISTENT,"   Rep.  Mikva  (D.    III.)
told  the  House  March  25  in  a  speech  marking the  150th  anni-
versary  of  Greek  independence,  "for  a  nation  which  has  dedi-
cated  itself  to  liberating  South  Vietnam  at  virtually any  price
not  even  to  be  willing  to  speak  out  against  the  lack  of  basic
freedoms  in  Greece."   We  applaud  the  irony but  deny  the  in-
consistency.   The   U.S.  has  spent  $4  billion  on  Greece   since
1946,  and  gave  $45  million  in  arms  last  year  to  the   Greek
dictatorship,   for   the   same  reason   we  fight  in  Vietnam—to
maintain  strategic  bases  irrespective  of  popular   wishes.
ADVERTISING  AGE, "THE  NATIONAL   NEWSPAPER   OF  MAR-
KETING",    has   jumped   into   the   controversy  over   the   CBS,
"Selling  of  the  Pentagon",  with  an  editorial  March  15  oppos-
ing  government  advertising  on  the  ground   that  it  could  be
used  to  punish  dissent.   It  cited  the  threat  to  cut  off  CBS from
the  Army's new  $10,600,000  radio-TV  campaign.   As our  own
An  Investors  Magazine  Skeptical  About
Clues  are  beginning   to  pile  up  that  there  may  be   huge
quantities  of  crude  oil  in  the  waters  of  the  Far  East  and
Southeast    Asia.    Discoveries   by   Natomas,   Atlantic   Rich-
field,  and   Union   Oil  have   triggered   a  frantic    exploration
race off  Indonesia.   An optimistic  report  by  a  United  Nations
team  about  possible  oil  deposits  between  Japan  and  Taiwan
is  fueling  speculation  that  the  entire  Far  East  could  contain
oil  deposits  rivaling  those  of   the   Middle  East.    Some   of
these  deposits  would  almost  certainly   lie  off  Vietnam.   No
drilling  has  taken  place.    But  preliminary  United  Nations
surveys  have  given  the  area  good  marks.   There  are  plenty
of  rumors.   One  is  that  a  British  company  has  found  signs
of  oil  on  the  prison   island   of  Con   Son.
If  the  oil  is  there,  or  even  probably   there,   the   question
of  who  rules  in  Saigon  takes  on  a  more  than  political   sig-
nificance.    Already,   U.S.   antiwar   groups  are  beginning  to
suggest   that   a  desire  to  insure   friendly   governments  in
the   Indochinese   area   could   slow   down   President   Nixon's
withdrawal  from  the  war.   An  organization  called  "Another
Mother  for  Peace" has flooded the  Senate  Foreign   Relations
The Political Entanglement in  Vietnam  Oil
Committee   with   over   10,000  letters  calling   for   hearings.
Not  surprisingly,   the  oil  companies  are  less  than   anxious
to  discuss  the  topic.
In  any  case,   mounting  U.S.   activity  in  the   area   raises
huge  political  questions   that  must  be  balanced  against  the
economic   benefits   for   Southeast   Asia   and   the   U.S.:    1)
Might  a  discovery   lead  to  pressure   for  slowing   down  the
pace  of  U.S.  troop  withdrawals?  2)Might  oil  industry  agree-
ments  with  the  present   Thieu-Ky  regime  commit  the   U.S.
even  closer  to  this  controversial  government?  3)If  the  war
in  Indochina  bogs  down  permanently,  won't  the  oil  industry
run  the  risk  of  being  made  the  scapegoat  for  whatever  goes
wrong?  4)Is   a  "friendly"  regime  in  Saigon  really   vital  to
U.S.   access  to  such   oil?   After   all,   many   Arab   countries
are  rabidly  unfriendly  to  the  West  but  sell  their  oil   there.
5)   What  will   the  effect   be  on  the  political   and   military
policies  of  Jaoan  and China?
—Forbes  Magazine  March  15  reprinted   in  the  Congres-
sional  Record  March  15,  p.E1890  by  Rev.   By an   (D  NY)
with  a  plea  for  investigation  by  Senate  Foreign   Relations.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  5,1971
contribution  to the  fracas  we suggest  that  newspaper editors ask
why  the  Pentagon,  amid  a  flood  of  useless  releases,  withholds
the  texts  of  the  speeches  our  Generals,  from  Westmoreland
down,  are  constantly making  in  private  VIP  briefings  around
the  country.
The  GAO and  The  Arms  Lobby
A   TIP  OF  THE  HAT  to   Bernard   Nossiter   for   exposing
(Wash.   Post   March   16,   18,   19  and   27)   how  the   General
Accounting  Office  allowed  the  big  lobby  trade  associations  of
the  military-industrial  complex  to  soften  its  study  of  defense
profits—a   sample   of   146  contracts   showed   a  56.1  percent
return  on  equity  capital, yet Deputy  Defense  Secretary Packard
(Wash.  Post  financial  page  March  17 by Nossiter)  thinks  "we
have  to  do  something  to  get  profits  up  a  little  bit"!   And  a
bravo  to  Rep. Bob  Eckhardt  (D.  Tex)  and   12  other   House
Government   Operations   Committee   members   for   forcing   a
public  hearing  on  these  curious  revisions.
"THE  NAVY,"  said  the  Business  Week  Letter  March  1,  "in
arguing  the  need  for  a bigger  U.S. fleet, postulates  the  Indian
Ocean  as the  next  major  area  of  political  competition   between
America and  the  Soviet  Union.   Some Navy geopoliticians  even
look  sourly  on  any  Middle  East  settlement  that  might  reopen
the  Suez canal,  thereby  giving  the  Soviet  fleet,  including com-
mercial  vessels, easy access to the  Indian  Ocean." Prof.  Howard
Wriggins  of   Columbia,   a  member  of  the  National   Security
Council   staff   1967-8,   told   an   Indian   Ocean   conference   at
Georgetown's  hard-line  Center  for  Strategic  Studies  March  27
that  U.S. interests  would  best  be  served  by  announcing  our
desire  for  a nuclear-free Indian  Ocean  and  a  U.S.-Soviet  agree-
ment  to  limit  deployment  in  this sea.
Too   LATE  FOR THIS  ISSUE  we  have just  received  from  that
"Citizens'  Commission  to  Investigate  the  FBI" a  selection  of
documents  taken  from  FBI  offices  with  a manifesto which  says
in part,  "we believe  that  democracy can survive only in an  order
of  justice,  of  an  open  society  and  public  trust ...  we  believe
that  the  FBI  has  betrayed  its  democratic  trust  and  we  wish  to
present  evidence for this claim to the  open  and  public  judgment
of  our  fellow  citizens,"   This  is really  in  the  Boston  Tea  Party
tradition.
ALSOPOMANIA:    "Yet  optimism   is  in  order,"  Joseph
Alsop  wrote  March   24  about  the  end  of  the  Laos  invasion.
"Suppose  a  man  tries  to  cut  his  bitter  enemy's  throat,  and  in-
stead  only  manages  to  break  both  his  enemy's  legs."   What  if
Helping  Profits  Instead  of  Consumer   Demand
On   January   11,   President   Nixon   announced   new
depreciation  rules  allowing  businesses  a  faster  writeoff
of  expenditures  for  new  equipment.  The change  will  re-
sult  in  a  reduction  of  Federal  revenues  of  $2.7 billion
in  FY  1972,  rising  to  $4.1 billion  in  FL  1976. This  is
roughly  equivalent  to  a  7-percent  tax  cut  for  corporate
business.  Capital  spending  experienced a boom  through-
out  the  1960's,  increasing  considerably  faster  than out-
put.   As  a  result  of  that  boom, and  of  the  recent  down-
turn,  business  is  now  operating   at  76  percent  of  capa-
city.   It  is,  therefore,  hard  to  believe  that  firms  have
much  of  an  incentive  to  increase  investment  in  equip-
ment.  The new rules  represent  a  windfall  gain  for busi-
ness.   Businessmen  cannot   buy  machines  for  the  sake
of   buying  machines;  they  do  so  with  the  expectation
that  they  will  be  able  to  produce  and  sell  goods  at  a
profit.   This  expectation   of  production  at  a  profit  will
continue  to  be  absent  until  something  is  done  to  stimu-
late  consumer demand.  What  is  hard  is  understanding
how  the  President  can  allocate  $2.7 billion  to  corporate
profits  while  vetoing  funds  for  job  training  and  public
service  jobs.
—Eagleton  (D.-Mo.)  in  the  Senate  March  19  (abr.).
he  tries  to  cut  an  enemy's  throat  and  only  gets  his  own  legs
broken ?
PERSONAL  NOTE:   On  March  24  we  were  given  a  Special
George  Polk  Memorial   Award  from  Long   Island   University
with  this  (somewhat  overstated,  we  fear)   citation:
/. F.  Stone  is  most  certainly  a  direct  descendant  of  Amer-
ica's  earliest  editors  and  itg  personal  journalists  of  the 19th
and  early  20th  centuries.   The  wan, the  medium,  the  organi-
zation,  and  the  drive  were  all  one:  at  the  very  least, singular
and  uniqiie;  at  most, cotarageous, exciting, a  maker  of  events,
and,  perhaps,  a  phenomenon.    We  may   appreciatively   recall
Franklin,  Adams,  Greeley, and,  in  our  own  century,   McClure
and  Mencken.   We  do  have  I.  F.  Stone,  and  we  must  prize
him,  for  his  type  is now  scarce, indeed.  As  publisher/editor  of
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly  (and, it  should  be  noted,  too, as  a
frequent   contributor  to  The  New  York  Review  of  Books),  he
has   assaulted    the   military    establishment,    questioned   the
means  and  intent  of  civilian  authority,  dismayed  and   fright-
ened   men   of   power   everywhere,   and   put   obscure   political
complexities  into  brilliant  focus  for  untrained   mind  and  in-
tellectual  alike.   His  has  been  great  political  reporting   thc,t
reaches  readers  not  alone  through  its  logic,  but  also  through
the  profound  sincerity  that  is  its  source.
More  Humane  To  Flush  Them  Out  And  Shoot  Them Than Burn Them  Up  With Napalm
Sen.  Fulbright:  Are  you familiar with the  field  study  "Ob-
servations  on  the  Employment  of   Riot  Control  Agent  CS
in  Vietnam," done  by  the  RAND Corporation?
G.  Warren  Nutter  [Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  for
International  Security  Affairs]:  I  am  familiar  that  there
was  such  a  study,  yes, sir.
Sen.  Fulbright: Do  you  know  whether this study supports
the  position  that  tear  gas  as  used  in  Vietnam  is  employed
primarily  to  save  civilian  or  enemy  lives  and  is  therefore
more  humane?
Mr.  Nutter:  I  would  not  make  that  assertion,   Mr.  Chair-
man,  that  it  would  be  used  primarily for  that  purpose  .  .  .
Sen.  Fulbright:  My  attention  is  called  to  this  Carnegie
Endowment  for  International Peace  article  "The  Control of
Chemical   and  Biological   Weapons."   This   is   a   point  we
touched  on  a  moment ago, this  question  of  the  lethal  use  of
non-lethal  weapons.  It  says  "As  described in  Army training
manuals  CS  is  also  used  in  conjunction  with  artillery  and
air  strikes.   If  the  chemical  agent  is  placed  on  the  target
immediately   prior   to   bombardment  with  anti-personnel
munitions   the   enemy   may   be   panicked  into  leaving   his
cover  to  escape  the  CS  and  thereby  be  rendered  more  vul-
nerable  to  conventional  arms."   What  is  your  comment  on
that?
Mr.   Nutter:   My  comment,   Mr.  Chairman,   is  that   that
is  a  possible  use  of  riot  control   agents.
Sen.   Fulbright:  What  does   that  do  to   your  argument
about  a  more  humane method of  warfare?
Mr.  Nutter:  I  did  not  intend  to  make  that  blunt  a  state-
ment,   Mr.  Chairman.   My  statement   was   that   there   are
many  cases  in  which  the  use  of  riot  control  agents  in  pur-
suit   of  a  legitimate   military   objective   would  cause  less
suffering  than  the  use  of  other  weapons  that  are  not pro-
hibited  by  the  rules  of  customary  international  law,  and  we
are  not  aware  of  any  uses  such  as  this  one  in  which  the
riot  control  agent,  use  of  it,  would  impose  more  suffering.
If  the  riot  control  agent  were  not  used  some  other  weapons
such  as  napalm  or  flame  would  be  substituted  for  the  riot
control  agent.
—Hearings   on   the   Geneva  Protocol  and   Nixon's      effort
to   exempt    herbicides   and    "riot   control"   gases      before
Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  March  22.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  5,1971
(Continued  from  Page   One)
altogether.   Several  times  Humphrey  said  that  Eisenhower  and
Kennedy  took  unilateral  initiatives to  clear  the  way  for  arms
pacts.  But  the  resolution  Humphrey  submitted  calls  neither  for
unilateral  initiatives nor  for  putting  MIRV  funds  in  escrow.
Instead  it  is  a  sense-of-the-Senate  resolution  asking  Nixon   to
propose  a  total   ban   on,  or  low-level   deployment   of,   ABM
coupled  with  a  mutual  freeze  on. the  testing  of  MIRV  and  on
deploying  new  missiles during  the  negotiations.
Like  Augustus  Caesar
What  we object  to  in  the  Humphrey  speech  is its  obsequious
attitude  toward   Nixon.    "The    President,   as  Commander-in-
Chief,  is  primarily  responsible   for  our  security.   He,  alone,"
Humphrey  said  in  the  manner  of   a  Roman  Senator  making
obeisance  to  Augustus  Caesar,  "must  make  the  final  decision
...  we owe him  our  support  and  allegiance  in  declaring our
own  position  on  the  best  way to  proceed  to  SALT."   After  two
years  of  Nixon  and   18 months  of  SALT  talks,  it  is time  to  cut
the  cant.   Nixon   ignored   a  similar  sense-of-the-Senate  freeze
resolution  last  April  9,  though  adopted   72-to-6  by  the  Senate
and  supported  by  the  State  Department,  the  CIA  and  Nixon's
own  disarmament advisory  committee.   Behind the  "He   alone"
was  the  Pentagon  and  the  same  military  crowd  which  has  just
demonstrated  its  incompetence  and  mendacity  again  in   Laos.
It  is time  to  say plainly  that  the  SALT  talks  are  a  deceptive
charade.   It  is  time  to  state  plainly  that  the  Nixon-Laird  arms
doctrines  as  revealed  in  their  wordy  but  opaque  posture  state-
ments  and  state of  the  world  messages  imply  a  stepped  up  race
in  conventional  arms,  an   intensification   of   the   technological
race  in  research   and   development,  extensive  preparation   for
"limited"   nuclear  war   and   a  continued   increase   in  nuclear
striking power,  even  if  it  should  be  masked  by an  agreement  to
impose  numerical limits  on  strategic  launchers.  The  real  policy
which  emerges  is  a  desire  to  fill  what  Laird  years  ago  called
"the  strategy gap",   i.e.  an  ability  to  use  the  threat  of  a nuclear
first  strike  in diplomatic bargaining.  That  is a  dangerous  game,
and  one  that  cannot  be  fitted  into  an  arms  control  agreement.
The  reason  Humphrey  doesn't  say  these  things  plainly was
indicated  in  the  Moskovitz  lecture  last  January.  There  he  put
The  1970  Index  Is  Ready  Free  If  You
IPS  will  speak  at  a  peace  rally  8  p.m.,  April  17
Dept.  of  Post-Mortems
If  They  Hadn't  Been  So  Vicious,
ARVN  Might   Have  Stayed  To  Tea
"The   North  Vietnamese  reacted   in   a   very  vicious,
violent  fashion."
—Secretary   Laird    March    22   to   reporters   after    a
closed   door   session   with   the   Senate    Appropriations
Committee  explaining   that  the  Laos   drive   was  never-
theless   "r/oing   foiivard    according    to   plan."
"If  the  enemy  had  not  reacted,  they  (the  South  Viet-
namese)   might  have  stayed  longer."
—Jerry    Friedheim,    the   Pentagon's    chief      briefer,
March  23,  explaining   that  the  Laos  invasion  was   really
a  success   and  ARVN   had  "won   the  overall   battle."
"If  the  pressure  were  heavy,  we  couldn't  have  with-
drawn  as  (safely  as)  we  did."
—Vietnamese  Colonel  at   the   official    ARVN     briefing
in   Saigo-n   March   22,  explaining   that   the   withdrawal
was  "tactically  perfect"   (Washington  Post,  March   23).
a  call  for  a MIRV  and  ABM  moratorium  in  the  broader  con-
text  of  foreign  policy.  That  context  shows  how  his  own  basic
attitudes  are  frozen  in  a  bankrupt past  which  sought  domina-
tion   through   military   superiority  behind   a   smokescreen   of
moral  pretensions  and   led  us  into  the  Southeast  Asian  trap.
Let  us  listen  to  his  words:
Any  return  to  isolation  violates  not  only  our  national
interests  but  our  role  of  morale leadership.   We  must  not
let  our  experience  in  Vietnam  obscure  the  fact  that  for
26 years  we  helped  preserve  the  world  from  a  major  war
and,  in particular,  from  a nuclear  holocaust  . .  . The  pri-
mary  responsibility  for  security   and  development  rests
with  the  Asian  nations  themselves.   Chief  among  these
Asian  nations  is  Japan,  with  whom  we  have  strong  ties.
These  ties  must  be  continued  and  expanded  as  the  best
hope   of   promoting  development  and   stability   in   Asia
without  holding the ring ourselves.   Whatever   role  we  play
in  Southeast  Asia  should  carefully   follow  three  guidelines:
self-help,   regional  and multilateral  assistance  and selective
involvement.   [Emphasis    added].
How  does  this  differ  from  the  Nixon  Doctrine?   How  closely
it  matches  Nixon's  own  words!   What  was  Vietnam  but   a
"selective  involvement"?
Send  A  Stamped Addressed  Envelope  For  It
at  the  Unitarian  Church,  9601  Cedar  Lane,  Bethesda
Bi-Weekly  Mart
—To  subscribe   or  to  send  a  gift   subscription,   send
$5 with your  address  and  zip  code  to  the  address  below.
—To  get  Stone's new collection, "Polemics  and  Proph-
ecies:    1967-70"   (Random  House:   $10)   at   the   special
$8.95  price  postpaid  for  Bi-Weekly  readers,  send  check
or  money  order  to  the  address  below.
—If  you  want  Stone's  new  paperback,   "The   Killings
at  Kent  State:   How  Murder  Went  Unpunished"   (New
York  Review  and  Vintage  Press)  the  price  is  $1.95.   It
contains   the   full   text,  available   nowhere   else,  of   the
so-called   "secret   FBI   report",  the   summary   of   FBI
findings  prepared  by  the   Civil  Rights  Division  of   the
Justice  Department  but   never   submitted   to  the   Ohio
Grand  Jury.
—Stone's  "Hidden   History  of  the  Korean   War",   the
inside  story  of   America's   first   Vietnam,   long   out  of
print  is  available  again  (Monthly  Review  Press)  $7.50
postpaid.
—Paperback   editions    (Vintage   Press)   of   Stone's
earlier  collections,  "In  A  Time  of  Torment"  ($1.95)  and
"The  Haunted  Fifties"  ($2.45) at  bookstores.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  Street NW, Washington,  D.C.  20008
$5  A  YEAR
                                                   4
/-V-i
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420   29th   St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
IMPORTANCE  NOTICE:  We  need  time  to  prepare  a definitive study of the SALT talks
so we are  skipping the  next  issue, April  19,  to prepare  a double issue to be dated May  3.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED