I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971jan25.pdf

============================================================

The  Kidnap  Kissinger  Conspiracy,  P.  2
The  "Understanding"  Too  Few Understand
There  has  been  discussion  regarding  our  "understanding" with  North Vietnam. The  implication  is  that  we  will  resume
the  bombing  if  they do not  live  up  to  the  bargain. Who is  kidding whom?  We stopped the bombing because it  was  a failure.
It  is  said  the  North  Vietnamese  hated  the  bombing, and that  this proves it  was  doing  some  good.  Certainly  they  hated  it.
They  hated  it  so  much  they  united  against  the  threat  they  could  see  in  their  skies.  The  harder  we  bombed,  the  harder  the
other  side  tried,  and  the  more  American men  paid  with  their  lives.  If  President  Nixon  resumes  it,  he  will  be  signing  the
death  warrants of  thousands  of  American  troops.—Leggett    (D. Cal.)  in  the House  Jan. 2.  (abr.)
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL. XIX, No.  2JANUARY  25,  1971
WASHINGTON,  B.C.
20  CENTS
The  Dollars  and  Sense  of The  Nixon  Doctrine
"Mr.  Nixon," William  H.  Lawrence of  ABC News  wrote  in
the  New  York  Times  Jan.  12,  "simply  does  not  like to  level."
He  was  writing  of  Nixon's  press  conferences.  Ambivalence
and  ambiguity are  hardly  unfamiliar  tools  of  government.  But
Nixon  is  exceptionally  adept  at  hiding  his  aims.  Who  knows
where  he  stands  on  the  SALT  talks,  still  treading  water  after
two   years?  Or   what   Vietnamization   means  in   his   private
dictionary?*  The  outstanding  example  is  the  Nixon  Doctrine.
He  has  never  been  willing  to  explain  it  directly  and  on  the
record.  It  was  originally  set  forth  in  a  press  briefing  at  Guam
on  his  way  to  Southeast  Asia  in  July,  1969.  But  direct  quota-
tion  was  not  permitted.  The  transcript  published  by  the  New
York   Times   was  not   only  veiled   by  indirect  discourse  but
Nixon  himself  a  few  days  later  seemed  to  contradict  himself.
On  Guam  he  seemed  to  be  charting  disengagement;  in  the
speeches  which  followed,  notably  in  Thailand,  he  seemed  to
be  taking  on  heavier  commitments.  Was  he  planning  to  get
out, or  digging  in deeper ?
Food  For  Peace  —  Uh,  i.e.  War
An  investigation  into  the  military  assistance  program   has
been  launched  by  Senator  Proxmire  as  chairman  of  the  Joint
Economic  Committee.  It  provides  fresh  facts  and  perspectives
for  a  study  of  the  dollars  and  sense  of  the  Nixon  Doctrine.
Unfortunately   this  was  lost   to   sight   in   certain   sensational
tidbits  which came out  of  the  hearings.  One  was  the  discovery
that  Food  for  Peace  is used  to  generate  money to  buy  weapons
for  war.  The  House  Agriculture  Committee  then  admitted  be-
latedly  that  such  use  of  Food   for   Peace  funds  was  actually
authorized  by  the  original  enabling  act  17  years  ago,  and  that
more  than  $1.3   billion  had  been  used  for  military  purposes
since.  Then  there  was the  related  revelation  that  no  one  really
knows  in  how  many  different  ways  we  give  military  aid  nor
exactly  how  much  it  all  adds  up  to.  The  only  item  clearly—
but   deceptively—labelled   military   assistance   in   the   current
* Latest  example:  "This  Administration," he  said  in  his
appeal  to  the  younger  generation  at  the  University  of  Ne-
braska  Jan.  13,  "has  no  higher  priority  than  to  end  the  war
in  a  way  that  will  bring  lasting  peace."  (Emphasis  added.)
This  implies that  his  first  priority  is  not  ending  the  war  but
ending  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  "bring  lasting   peace."  What
does  this  mean?  How can this  distant  and limited Asian  war
have  so  decisive  an  impact  on  all  the  problems  of  mankind
as  to  bring a  lasting  peace?  Or does  he  believe  a  victory for
the   United  States  is   necessary   to   make  others   afraid   to
challenge  us  elsewhere?  If  so,  we  are  back  with  Pax  Ameri-
cana  delusions.
We  Can't  Contain  China  And  Still  Disengage
The   problem  that  I  have  with  large-scale military
assistance to Southeast  Asia  [under the Nixon  Doctrine]
is  simply  that  we cannot, on the  one  hand,  really expect
any  of  these  nations  to  be  a  substitute  for  the  United
States  if  the  purpose  is  to  contain  Communist  China.
On  the  other  hand,  both  China  and  Vietnam  are  likely
to  continue  to  aid  and  assist  insurgent  movements  for
a  long  time to  come.  If  this  is  true  then  I  have  serious
doubts  that  large-scale  military  assistance  is  in  fact
going   to   result   in   either   U.S.   disengagement   or  in
political  stability  in  that  part  of  the  world.  The  more
insurgency  the  more  counter-insurgency and  repression
is almost inevitable.
—Former  Under  Secty  of  State  Katzenbach  to  the  Jt.
Econ. Com. hearings  on military  assistance  Jan.  5.
budget  totals  $409  million.  But  this  is  only  what  Fulbright
called  "the  tip  of  the  iceberg."
Two  Pentagon   officials,  pressed  for  a  complete  total  at  the
hearings,  got  out  their  pencils  in  a  moment  of  high  comedy,
disagreed  between  themselves  and  finally  came up  with  a  total
of  nearly  $4.9  billion,  or  almost  ten  times  as  much.  Fulbright
introduced  a  table  of  his  own  showing  more  than  $6.9  billion
in  military  assistance  and  sales  for   the  next  fiscal  year.   He
estimated  that  total  military outflow  from  the  U.S.  since  1945
might  add  up  to  $175  billion!  This  is  what  Proxmire  meant
when  he  said  military  assistance  suffered   from   "««manage-
ment"  and  had  become  "a  giant  discount  supermarket  with  no
checkout  counters,   no  cash  registers,   no  store  manager."  To
enable  other  countries  to  utilize  all  the  splendid  toys  we  give
away, we have a Military Assistance Training Program.  Deputy
Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  Selden  disclosed  that  since  the
end  of  World  War  II  we  have  trained  320,000  military  men
from   more  than   70  countries.  This,  he   said   affords   many
foreign  military  men  "an  exposure  to  all  that  is  inherent  in
what  we  think  of  as  the  American  Way."   No  doubt  Brazil
and  Greece  are  examples  of  this  beneficent  indoctrination.
The  Nixon  Doctrine  is  only  a  variant  of  the  policy  which
has  led  us  since  World  War  II  to  man  the  frontiers  of  con-
tainment   with   foreign   armies,   as   the   Romans   once   used
barbarians  on  the  limits  of  their  empire.  The  Proxmire  com-
mittee  brought  to  public  attention  for  the  first  time  a  "Joint
Strategic  Operating  Plan"  drawn  up  each  year  by  our   Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff.  This,  according  to Townsend  Hoopes, who was
(Continued  On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  January  25,1971
An  Amalgam  of Provocateurs  and  Imprudent  (Wiretapped)  Remarks? .
POLITICS,  Too,    HAS  ITS  FASHIONS  and   kidnapping  is   in
style.  Sooner  or  later  some  far-out  group   in  this  country  is
going  to try  it. When  they  do,  it's  going  to  set back  the  whole
peace  movement,  just  as  the  Wisconsin  bombing  set  back  the
student  movement.  Tactics  of  this  kind  (but  only  when  the
victim   is  unhurt)   may  have  some  desperate   justification   in
military dictatorships like Brazil and  Greece, where the regimes
torture  political  prisoners.  They  have  neither  moral   justifica-
tion  nor  sense  in  a  society  like  ours  which  is  still  relatively
free.  We  were  sorry  to  see Wm. Kunstler  begin  his  defense  of
the  Berrigan  group  by comparing charges  to  the  Reichstag fire.
Old  radicals,  like  old  generals,  are  always  refighting  the  last
war.  But  hysteria and  hyperbole can only help  us  lose  our way.
Nixon   is  not   Hitler;   the   Republicans  are   not   Nazis;   the
Capitol  has  not  been  set  afire.  We  hope  the  coming  trial  will
not  be  turned  into  another  circus  like  Chicago.  We  are  im-
pressed  with  the  passionate  conviction of  the  priests  and  nuns
and  lay  people  in  this  group;  we  believe  their  denials.  We
suspect  that  the  FBI  through  wiretaps  and  informers  may  be
hoping  to  add  two  and  two  and  try  to  make  it  add  up  to  13.
Groups  which  feel  impelled  to  violent  non-violence  are  sitting
ducks  for   the   secret  police.  A  combination  of   provocateurs
and  imprudent  remarks  may  be  woven  via  "conspiracy"  into
a  sensational   net.  The   honor  of  the  accused—all  people  of
deep  religious   devotion—and  of  our  country—which  would
be  shamed  by  a  frameup—call  for  sober  defense  and   careful
trial.  This  means,  among  other  things,  allowing  the  Berrigans
free  access  to their  lawyers outside the  hearing of  prison guards
and  bugged  prison  walls. We  think  the  kidnapping charge  is a
fake,   and  we  know  there  are  forces  in  the  Administration
which  would  like  to  smear  the  peace  movement  with  it.  But
the  charges  in  this  case  do  not   involve  utterances  or   ideas
protected  by  the  First  Amendment.
ANGELA   DAVIS  Is   A   BRILLIANT  YOUNG  WOMAN  driven
to  revolutionary views and  associations  by  the  suffering  of  her
people. But  the  seizure and  killing  of  a Judge—and  the  supply
of   arms  with  which  to   do  it—are  not   acts   for   which  any
society, irrespective  of  isms, hands  out  medals.  Her  defense has
been  hampered  because  some  people  wanted  to  defend  what
happened  as  a  revolutionary  act  and  others  to  attack  it  as  a
frame-up. 'The air  has  been  cleared  by her  declaration  of  inno-
cence  and  she  deserves  the  widest  possible  support   for  a  fair
trial.  That  trial  must  also  and  inevitably  become  a trial  of  our
racist  society.  Looked  at  from  the  lower  depths  of  black  ghetto
Relief   Roll  Realities
If  you  are  black  in  Alabama  you  cannot  get  welfare
unless  you  agree  to  have  white  sponsors  for  whom  you
must  work  as  a  maid.  For  the  mother  who  bears  more
than   her  'quota'  of  illegitimate  children,  she   and  the
children   are   denied    food   assistance   benefits   in  some
cities   of   our   country.   If   you   work   only   during   the
harvest  season  to  pick  sugarbeets  or  grapes  or oranges,
you  will  not  meet  the  residence  requirements   for  public
assistance  in  other  communities.   The  welfare  system  is
a  perfect  unhappy  example  of  the  dangers  of  the  latest
fad   of   local   control.   Local   governments   run   welfare
assistance  programs  even   though   each   State   program
is  financed  in  part  by  the  Federal  Government.  In  1969,
nearly  54  percent  of  the  total  welfare  costs  were   paid
by  the  Federal  government,  but  each  State  operates and
administers  programs  according   to  its  own   discretion.
The  sad  repressive  result  is  that  those  hometown   of-
ficials  who  are  least  responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  poor
can   deny    them   benefits    to   which   they   are   legally
entitled.—Kennedy   in   the  Senate   Dec.  29    (abridged).
and  prison,  it  looks  far  different  than  to  white  middle  class
liberals  like  ourselves.  We   consign   people   like  the   Soledad
brothers  to  hells,  and  it  will  be  good   for  us  all  if  the  trial
shows  us our  country's ugly underside. We  applaud  the  invita-
tion  to  Soviet  intellectuals  to  attend,  and  think  this  would  be
therapeutic for  both  societies.
A  7-To-2  MAJORITY  on  the  Supreme  Court   (but  with  the
two  Nixon  appointees  withholding  full  approval)   has  ruled
that  under  the  Voting  Rights  Act  Mississippi  cannot   change
voting  practices  "in  even  a  minor  way"  without  approval  of  a
special  3-judge court  in  Washington  or  the  Attorney  General.
But  the  day before  the  Court  handed  down  its  opinion,  Aaron
Henry   revealed   at  a  press   conference  here  in  Washington
with  Congressman  Conyers  of  Detroit   how  little   protection
there  was  in  the  Attorney  General's  supervision.  Mitchell  has
approved  two  measures  taken  by  the  white  supremacists.   He
gave  six  Mississippi  counties  permission  to  wipe  their   voter
registration  slates  clean,  thus  undoing  what  Henry  called   "ten
years  of  blood  and  sweat"  which  had  increased  Mississippi's
black  voters  from  10,000  to  214,000.  Mitchell  also  approved
a  plan  which  this  year  will  make  Mississippi   the  only  state
that  does  not  list candidates  by party  affiliation.  This  does away
The  Stronger  Our Satellites  Become,
When  South  Korea  was  attacked  in   1950,   it   possessed
a  ragtag  army  of  100,000  men  and  no  clear  security   com-
mitment  from  the  United  States.  Today  the  ROK  Army  ia
five times larger,  and also far  better trained,  better  equipped
and   better   positioned.   It   outnumbers  its   North   Korean
counterpart  540,000  to  345,000,  and has  an air  force  of  24.000
that is  beginning  to include the  F-4.  There is  now,  moreover,
the  most  explicit  U.S.   treaty  commitment  to  defend  South
Korea  against  attack,  and  to  this  are  added  various    U.N.
resolutions,  including  the  threat  that,  in  the  event  of  an
attack  on  South  Korea,  the   U.N.   response  might  not  be
confined  to Korea.
These  factors  create  a  prospect  which  is,  to  understate
the  case,  unattractive  for  North  Korea  if  it  should  be  con-
templating  an  attempt  to  unify  the  country  by  force.  More-
over,  there  is  nothing  in  the  record  to  indicate  that   China
is anxious  to assume high  risks for the  sake of  North Korea;
indeed,  it  is  clear  in  retrospect  that  China's  participation  in
the  1950-53  Korean War was  reluctant,  and largely  provoked
The More Military Aid  They  Blackmail
by  General  MacArthur's  insistent  sweep  to  the  Yalu  River
boundary—a  move  that  was  contrary  to  President  Truman's
understanding  and  quite  possibly  in  defiance  of  Truman's
instructions.
The  military  balance  in  Korea  is  thus  rather  favorable,
and  the  wider  threat  does  not  seem  unmanageable.  Never-
theless,  President  Nixon,  in  his  message  to   Congress  of
November  18, expressed  the  view  that  South  Korean   forces
need  a  much  larger  military  assistance  program.  Not  only
did  he  request authority  to  transfer  all  of  the  modern  equip-
ment  that  will  be  left  behind  by  20,000   U.S.   forces  now
scheduled  to   be  withdrawn—a   reasonable  proposition;  he
also  requested  another  $150  million  for  further  moderniza-
tion  of  South  Korean  forces.  Congress  would  be' well  advised
to  examine   more  closely  the  question  as  to  why  such  a
robust  increase  is  either  a  military  or  a  political  requisite
for the withdrawal.
—Townsend  Hoopes,  former   Dep'y   Ass't  Secy  of   Defense
for  Military  assistance  before  the Jt. Eton. Com.  Jan.  S  (abr).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  January  25,1971
Saigon  Already  Claims 90% of  Its  POWs Don't  Want  to  Go  Home
with  primaries  and  undercuts  the  racially  mixed  Democratic
Party   of   the   State   of   Mississippi  which  the   1968  national
convention  recognized.  In  addition  the  Secretary  of   State  of
Mississippi  has  ruled  that  the  party  cannot  refuse  to  register
lily-white  opposition  candidates  as  loyal  Democrats.  This  will
protect  their seniority  in  Congress—and  their racism.
ANOTHER    WARNING    OF   A   POW   WRANGLE   like   that
which  delayed a  Korean  settlement  by  18 months  and   140,000
casualties  was  a  story  from   Saigon  in  the  Los  Angeles   Times
Dec.   23  which  said  South  Vietnamese   officials  were   "embar-
rassed" because  almost  90%  of  the North  Vietnamese prisoners
they .hold   do   not   want   to  go   home.   These   officials    "deny
having  conducted  any  specific  poll"  but  say  they  learned  this
by  infiltrating  agents  into  POW   camps  "and  holding  Volun-
tary'  indoctrination  sessions."  The  South  Vietnamese,  like  the
South  Koreans,  would  like  to  delay  U.S. withdrawal.  A  long
wrangle  over  "voluntary  repatriation"  could  delay  a settlement
—and  return of  our  own  men—for  a  long  time  (see our  issues
of  Dec.  28  and  Jan.  11).  Official   U.S.  statements  here  and
in  Paris  speak  of  releasing  rather  than  exchanging  prisoners.
The  wording  foreshadows  trouble.
Two     CONGRESSIONAL   LIBERALS   DIFFERED   on   the   Presi-
dent's  action  in  giving  business  a  $2.6 billion  tax  reduction  in
the  shape  of  liberalized  rules  for  depreciating  new  equipment.
Proxmire  hailed  it,  Reuss  attacked  it.  The  latter  said  that  with
25%   of  present  plant  and  equipment  idle,  the  problem  was
not  to  stimulate  new  capital  spending  but  "to  spur  consumer
demand."  A  survey by the  Wall  Street  Journal  Jan. 12  showed
that   business   executives   and   conservative  economist   Milton
Friedman  agree  with  Reuss.  The  only  effect  will  be  to  increase
the  "cash  flow"  by  reducing  tax  liabilities.  Proxmire   said  he
hoped  Nixon  would  be  "equally  active  in pushing  programs  to
create  jobs,  retrain manpower  . .  ." But Nixon has just  finished
vetoing  bills  to  create public  employment  and  manpower  train-
ing  for  the  jobless.  Congressman   Vanik   (D.   Ohio)   pointed
out  that  the  new  depreciation  rules  really  reinstate  in  another
form   the   7%   investment   tax   credit   repealed   by   Congress.
JOURNALISM  NOTE: The  heads  of  Chase  Manhattan,  Time,
Inc.,  A.T.&T.,  and  General  Motors  signed  a  statement  calling
for  a  $20  billion  cut  in  the  Pentagon   budget,  but  neither  the
signers  nor  the  cut  were  mentioned  in  an  AP  dispatch  buried
on  p.  12  of  the  New   York   Times  Jan. 15  (though   discussed
in  Reston's  column  the  same  day). The  statement,   released  by
Sol  Linowitz  for  the  National  Urban  Coalition,  was  a curtain-
raiser  for  an  "alternative  budget"  and  5-year  "rebuild  Amer-
Double  Standard  For  Welfare  Recipients
The   question   is   whether   receipt   of   largesse   from
government  makes  the  home  of  the  beneficiary subject
to  access  by  an  inspector.  Judge  Skelly  Wright  stated
the   problem  succinctly,   "Welfare  has  long   been   con-
sidered  charity  and  its  recipients  have  been  subjected
to  dehumanizing experiences in  efforts to  police welfare
payments.  Over half  a  billion  dollars  are  spent annually
for  administering and  policing  the  Aid  to  Families  with
Dependent  Children  program.  No  such  sums  are  spent
policing  the  government  subsidies  granted  to  farmers,
airlines,  steamship  companies  and  junk  mail  dealers."
It  may  be that  other  frauds,  less  obvious,  will be perpe-
trated.   But  if   inspectors   wish   to   enter   against   the
wishes   of   the   lady   of   the   house,   they   must   get   a
warrant. The  need  for  exigent  action  as  in  "hot  pursuit"
is  not  present  for  the  lady  will  not  disappear;  nor  will
the  baby.  The  values  of  the  home  protected  by  the  4th
Amendment  are  not   peculiar  to  capitalism;  they   are
equally  relevant  to  the  new  form   of   socialism   which
we  are  entering.  As  the  number  of   functionaries  and
inspectors   multiply,  the   need   for   protection   of   the
individual  becomes  more  essential  if  the  values  of  a
free  society  are  to  remain.
—Justice   Douglas   dissenting  from   the  new    "Nixon
era"   6-to-3  Supreme    Court   decision   allowing     welfare
inspectors   to  enter   homes  without  a  warrant   (abr).
ica"   plan   this   prestigious   group   will   release  after  Nixon's
budget  message.  That  should  stir  fruitful  debate.
SOME   MYSTERY   ATTACHES   To    THE    LATEST   "protective
reaction"   strikes  against  missile  sites  in  North  Vietnam.   The
U.S.  claims  that  fighter-bombers  accompanying   reconnaissance
planes  fire  on  the  missiles  when  their   radars   fasten  on   the
planes  in  preparation   for  firing.  The  Shrike  is  an   ingenious
missile  built  to  "shoot  down  the  barrel"  of  the  enemy's  own
radar  beam  and  ride  it  to  the  missile  site.  The  way  to  use  the
Shrike  is  to  "flush"  the  enemy  by  threatening  passes,   getting
them  to  turn  on  their  radar.  Until  the  radar  is  turned  on,  the
Shrike  is unable  to  hit  its  target.  Thus  the  game  is  to  provoke
a  "protective   reaction"  on  the  part  of  the  enemy.  On  the  other
hand   if  the   enemy  suddenly  shuts  off  the   radar  beam,   the
Shrike   loses   its  guidance   and   falls  free,   landing   anywhere,
including  villages   and   other   populated   areas.  This  counter-
tactic  may  explain  why  communiques are  often  so  vague  as  to
whether  the  Shrikes  had  actually  hit  their  target.
A  Pro-Military  Senator  On The Lessons  To Be  Derived  From  The Vietnamese  War
The  first  lesson   is   that  in  the  future  there  must  be  a
declaration  of  war  by  the  Congress   with  respect  to  these
engagements   unless,  of  course,  there  is  some  major  Pearl
Harbor-type  attack  on  the  country. The Vietnam  war  is  now
the  longest  war  in  our  history.  Only  by  a  direct  vote  in  the
Congress  can  there  be  a  real  test  of  the  sentiment  of  the
country   for   supporting   any   war   and  mobilizing  all   our
resources.  I  totally  reject  the  concept  that  the  President  has
certain  inherent  powers  as  Commander-in-Chief which  en-
able   him   to   extensively   commit  major  forces   to  combat
without  Congressional  consent.
This   Asian  war  as  well  as  other   factors  necessitate  a
reassessment  of  our  worldwide  commitments.  First   of  all,
the   Vietnam  war  teaches   us  that   the  limitations   of  our
manpower  and  resources  will  not  permit  us  to  aid  every
Asian  nation  any  time  it  is  confronted  with  a Communist
threat   both  from  within  and  without.  Moreover,  we  must
make  certain  that  a  preponderant  proportion  of  the  people
in  a  country  must  be  willing  to  adhere  to  the  principles  of
freedom  and  be  united  in  their  willingness  to  defend  their
freedoms  to  the  death  if  necessary.  I  think  that  the  extent
to  which  the  Vietnam war  problem was  a  civil  war  was  not
fully  recognized  in  the  beginning.
I  anticipate  that  one of  the  hardest  fought  battles  in  this
new  session  will  be  the  extension  of  the  Selective   Service
induction  authority.  Without the  draft  a  significant  element
of   our  combat  forces   will   become  ineffective  in   a   short
period  of  time.  Let  me  say  a  word on  the  current  discussion
of  reaching  a  zero  draft  call  and  having  an  all  volunteer
armed  force.  I  do  not  oppose  this  effort  in  principle.  It  is  a
flight  from  reality  and will be impossible  to  achieve.  So  long
as  the  Vietnam  war  is  on  our  hands  there  is  no  hope  of
having  a  volunteer  Army.  In  Vietnam  today,  out  of  every
100  riflemen  in  a  company,  that  is,  the  men  who  actually
carry  the  M-16  rifles  and slug  it  out  in  the  mud, only  about
15  are  true  volunteers.  Only  about  2% of  the  men who enlist
select  the  specialty  of  a  rifleman  in  the  infantry.
—Senator  Stennis  in  Jackson,  Miss.  Jan.  11  (abr.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  January  25,1971
No  Amount  of  Military  Assistance  Can  Make  Giants  of  Pygmies
(Continued  From Page  One)
Deputy   Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  from   1965   to   1967,
presumes  to establish  "the  desirable  size and  composition  of  the
military  forces  of  neatly  every  sovereign  non-Communist  na-
tion  in  the  world"  with  the  incremental  aid  required  to bring
them   up   to   JCS  standards.  The   totals   were   described   as
"astronomical."   They   are  not  likely  to  grow   smaller  as  we
proceed   with   "Vietnamization"   under  the  Nixon   Doctrine.
For  this  seems  to  assume  that,  as  American  troops  withdraw
and  military  aid  is  increased,  Saigon,   Bangkok,  Manila  and
Seoul  will  take  over  the   task  of  containing  China.  But,  as
Hoopes  said,  military assistance  no  matter  how  large   "cannot
make  giants  out  of  pygmies;  it  cannot  determine  the  military
balance of Asia."
Another  Hawk  Begins  To Coo
Both  Hoopes  and  former  Under  Secretary  of  State  Katzen-
bach   saw  the   Nixon   Doctrine   as   an   effort   to   put   off   the
necessary  task  of  coming  to  terms  with  China.  As  long  as  we
finance  China's  containment,  China  will  support   insurgencies
to  counteract  our  efforts.   "If   this  is  true,"  Katzenbach  told
the  committee,  "then   I  have  serious  doubts  that   large-scale
military  assistance is  going  to  result  either  in  U.S.  disengage-
ment  or  in  political   stability  in  that  part  of  the  world."  He
saw  our  support  of  large-scale  military  forces  in  these  small
countries  as inhibiting their  economic  development,  and  delay-
ing  political  settlements with  insurgent  forces.  Proxmire  asked
what  would  have  happened   if  in  1964-65,  instead  of  putting
more  aid  and  troops  into  Vietnam,  "we  had  withdrawn   and
forced  an  accommodation."  Would   this  have  created  "a  more
stable   and   over-all   better   situation  from   the   standpoint  of
American  national interests?"  Katzenbach,  a hawk  in  Johnson's
day,  replied,  "I  would  think,  in  retrospect,   yes."
Military  assistance  breeds  Canutes.  It  encourages  the   effort
to  confront  political   and  economic  problems   with   force.   It
exacerbates  economic  distress  by  imposing  the  burden  of  large
armies,  and   intensifies   rebellion  by  repression.  This  is  why
"Vietnamization"  failed  to  work when  the  French  tried  it,  and
when  Eisenhower  and  Kennedy  followed  suit.  Nixon  is trying
to  get  back  where  they  started.  As  Proxmire  said,  it  is  not
just  the  waste  of  money  but  the   fact  that  military  assistance
tends  to be  self-defeating. Yet,  as Katzenbach  pointed  out,  the
Pentagon   is  using   the   Nixon   Doctrine   as  justification  for
Corruption—Semantic  And  Otherwise
The  most  shocking  concealment of  military  assistance
funds  in  terms   of   rhetorical   techniques   concerns  the
Food  for  Peace  Program. According to  the  budget  docu-
ment,  "This  program,  closely  linked  to  the  AID  pro-
gram,   combats    hunger    and   malnutrition,    promotes
economic  growth  in  developing countries,  and  develops
and   expands  export   markets  for   U.S.  commodities."
That  is  a  direct  quotation  from  the  Act.  Yet,  we  find
that  in  the  past  six  years  nearly  $700  million  of  Food
for   Peace   funds  have  been   channeled  into  military
assistance   programs.  In   1970  $108  million   worth  of
Food  for  Peace  has   gone  for   military   aid  to  foreign
governments.  To  continue  using  Food  for  Peace  funds
for  military  purposes  is,  to  say  the  least,  a corruption
of  the  English language.
—Proxmire's  opening statement  at  the military  assist-
ance  hearings  before   the  Joint  Econ.  Com.  Jan.  4.
increased  arms  shipments.   Its  many  military  missions  abroad
acquire  a  vested   interest   in  maintaining   the   arms  flow  on
which their cushy foreign  assignments  depend.  Empire  provides
them  with a life more luxurious than  they  could  enjoy at  home,
as  it  did   Britain's  younger   sons  in  the  Nineteenth   century.
The  means  become  the  end,   and  the  military   establishment
has  the  same  kind  of  stake  in  military  assistance  as  in  tension
and  the arms  race.
But  delusions  die  hard.  A  witness  from  Rand  Corporation
testified  that  the  solution  lay  in  special  training  for   military
assistance  teams  so  that  their  "inevitable   involvement"   in  the
political  life  of  the  countries  where  they  are  stationed   would
be  "a  conscious,  deliberate  process  in  the  hands  of   competent,
politically  informed  military-political  analysts!"  This  is  a  dis-
tant  echo  of  the  white  man's  burden,  of  our  smug  belief  we
can  govern  other  people's  lives  better  than  they  can,  of  that
imperialism  cloaked  in  liberalism which  got  us  into  the  South-
east  Asian  morass.  It  takes  us  all  the  way back  to  the  Boy  Scout
branch  of  the  CIA,  and  to  the  Lansdales  and  Leo  Chernes
who  were  going  to  make  an  enlightened   ruler  of  Ngo   Dinh
Diem.  At  the  risk  of  being  accused  of  dialectical  materialism,
we  note  that  this  witness's  recipe  differed  principally  from  the
Pentagon's   in  providing'jobs  for  "military-political    analysts"
—like  RAND's  maybe.                                                     January  18
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed  Envelope
FOR
For  the  enclosed
send  I.  F.  Stone's
1967-70  (Random
(To)   Name  ..........
Street   ....................
City  ........................
Indicate   if
Please  renew   (or
Name  .....................
Street   ...................
City  ........................
I.  F
4420  29th  St.
STONE'S  NEW  BOOK
special  pre-publication  price  of  $8.95
new  book,  Polemics  and   Prophecies:
House). Regularly   $10.
............  Zip................  State....................
gift   announcement  wished   Q
enter)  a   sub  for  the   enclosed  $5:
............  Zip................  State....................
.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                1/25/71
N.W,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St., N.W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bl-Weckly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.   Published  every  other  Monday  except  In  August  at  4420  20th  St..  N.W..   Washington,   D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  (5  in  the  U.S.;    $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,' Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED