I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971mar22.pdf

============================================================

Jackson  Launches—and  Symington Debunks—A  New  Missile  Gap, P.  2
And  B-52s,  We  Suppose,  Are Doves
"I  rate  myself  as  a  deeply committed pacifist."—Nixon  to C. L.  Sldzberger  New York  Times  March  9.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX, No.  6
MARCH  22, 1971
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Imperialism  Is  Not  Internationalism
Internationalism  made  its  appearance  in  American  foreign
policy  with  the  administration of  Woodtow  Wilson.  It  rested
on  three  premises whose validity  was  demonstrated by the  great
power  rivalry  which culminated in  World  War  I. The first was
that  balance  of  power  politics  could  not  be  relied  on  to pre-
serve  peace  but  only exacerbated mutual suspicion. The  second
was  that  the  arms  race  which  accompanied  balance  of  power
politics  had  itself  become  a  primary  source  of  tension  and war.
The  third  was  the  need  for  a  world  organization  as  a  frame-
work  for  peaceful  settlement of  international  disputes  and  for
the  reduction  of  national  armies  to  levels  necessary only   for
internal  order.  This  was the  grand  design  with which  Wilson
declared  America's intervention in  Europe a  "war to  end war"
and   sought  unsuccessfully   to  make  that  a  reality  by  leading
the  United  States into  the  League  of  Nations.   By those  stand-
ards Nixon  is  not  an  internationalist but  an imperialist.
Not  Every  Little  Firefight
On   several  occasions  Nixon   has   wrapped  himself  in   the
mantle  of  Wilson  and  invoked  the  rhetoric  of  World  War  I
to  support  the  Vietnamese  conflict.*   But  the  policies  outlined
by Nixon  in  his  interview  with  C.  L.  Sulzberger, as  in  his  new
state  of  the  world  message,  clearly  outline  an  attempt  single-
handedly  to  police  the  world.  The  supposed  "low posture"  of
the  Nixon  Doctrine  turns out  to  be  little more  than  an  optical
illusion  to  appease  a public sick  of  unilateral intervention.  "Of
course,"  Nixon  told  Sulzberger,  "we're  not  going  to  get  into
every  little firefight everywhere."  But  where  other  nations "are
ready  to  fight  a  fire"  we  "should  be  able  to  furnish  the  hose
and  water."  These  homely  but  deceptive  analogies  apply  only
to  the  sideshows.  "Our responsibilities,"  Nixon  saia  grandly,
"are  not  limited  to  this  great  continent,  but  include  Europe,
the  Middle  East,  Southeast  Asia,  East  Asia,  many  areas  whose
fate  affects  the peace  of  the world." This covers just about every
place  on  earth  except  the  South  Pole.   Of  course  our   motives,
Nixon  says,  are  benign.  But  there  has  never  been  an  imperial-
ism  yet  from  Kipling's   "white  man's  burden"  to  the  Kaiser's
"Kultur"  which did  not claim  to be  altruistic.
Considering  the  territorial  sweep  of  the  Nixon  Doctrine,  it
is  hard  to  see how  he  can  "seriously  doubt"  that  "we  will  ever
have another war"  and  add as he did, "This is probably  the very
last  one." For a man  who claims  "I  know  this  world"  how can
he  overlook  the  scores  of  national  rivalries and  conflicts in  this
vast  area,  any  one  of  them  capable  of  flaring  up  into  a  good-
sized  "firefight"  at  any  time?   No  cop  ever  volunteered  for  a
wider  and  more  dangerous  beat.  Yet  Nixon  could  also  say  in
the  same  interview  that  the  period  of  "expansion  as typified by
Theodore  Roosevelt   and   the   idea   of   Manifest   Destiny"   is
* I am describing  Wilsonianism  at  its  best.   At  its  worst,  in
dealing  with  Latin  America,  it  was  as  imperialistic  as  the
"dollar  diplomacy"  of  Roosevelt  and  Taft  which  the  Demo-
crats had criticized.
Nixon  And  That  Silent  Majority
Let  us  give  the  people  of  America a  chance,  a bigger
voice  in  deciding  for  themselves   those   questions  that
so  greatly  affect  their  lives.
—Nixon  in  his  State  of  the  Union  message  Jan. 22.
I   am   certain   a   Gallup   poll   would   show   that   the
great  majority  of  the  people  would  want  to   pull  out
of  Vietnam.   But  a  Gallup  poll   would  also  show  that
a   great   majority  of   the   people  would  want   to   pull
three  or  more  divisions  out  of  Europe.   And  it  would
also  show  that  a  great   majority  of  the  people  would
cut  our  defense  budget.   Polls  are  not  the  answer.
—Nixon  to Sulzberger   New  York  Times  March   10.
Neither  it  seems—for  Nixon—is  majority  rule.
"fortunately  gone."  No  one  ever  dreamt  in  TR's day  that  we
would  some  day consider  it  our  destiny to  impose  a Pax Ameri-
cana  on  the  whole  world,  or  to  wield  a  Big  Stick  as  big  as
our  present  Pentagon.  Nixon  told  Sulzberger  we   confronted
two great powers,  Russia and  China "motivated  by a philosophy
which   announces   itself   as  expansionist   in   character."   What
could  be  more  expansionist  than  the  Nixon  Doctrine   itself?
It  is  dangerous   to  have   a-  leader  so  unaware  of  any  mote  in
his own eye.
In  a  realm  of  discourse  in  which  words  have  lost  all  normal
meaning,   it  is  not  surprising  to  hear  that  Nixon   also  told
Sulzberger,   "I   rate  myself   as  a  deeply   committed   pacifist."
Many men  have  been  "committed"  for  less  obvious  lapses  from
reality.   His  is  a  pacifism which  does  not  require  extended sur-
veillance  by  military  intelligence.  Nixon's  pacifism  implies  a
perpetual  arms  race.  "We  can't," he said,  "foolishly  fall  behind
in  the  arms  competition."  This  from  the  leader  of  the  world's
most  heavily  armed  nation,  with  an  arms  budget  almost  as  big
as the  rest  of  the world's combined!
Even  Laird,  whose  whoppers  fill  one  with  reluctant  admira-
tion,  has  never  gone  as  far  in  misrepresentation   as  Nixon  did
when  he  told  Sulzberger,   "The  Soviets  now  have  three  times
the  missile  strength  of  ourselves ...  By  1974 they  will  pass
us  in  subs  carrying  nuclear  missiles."  Table  2  of  Laird's  new
posture  report  shows  that  we  can  launch  2600  nuclear   "force
loadings"  or  more than  twice  as many as the  Soviet's  2,000. By
1974  the  Soviets  may  pass  us  in  the  number  of  nuclear sub-
marines  but  only  because  we  plan  to  concentrate  on  MIRVing
our  fleet,  increasing  the  number  and  accuracy  of  its  warheads
rather  than  the  number  of  submarines.*  The  Institute  for  Stra-
(Continued  on Page  Four)
* As  with  land-based  ICBMs  where  we  have  also  concen-
trated  on  MIRVing  Minutemen.  The  Soviets  may  be  ahead  of
us  in  numbers  of  ICBMs but  many  are  obsolete  and  few  are
solid-fuel.   For  a  full  picture  see  my  "Memo to  the  AP:  How
Laird  Lied"  in  the  New  York  Review  of  Books  last  June  4.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  22, 1971
Golda  Meir's  Hard-Line Position  Would  Bar A  Palestinian  Arab  State  . . .
'     THE  BEST  GUARANTEE  OF  SECURE   BORDERS  lies  in   friendly
neighbors.  Israel  has  a  good  case for  some adjustments  in  the
1967   borders.  But  to  push  beyond this  is  to  make  harder  the
reconciliation  with  the  Arabs  on  which  Israel's  future  in  the
long  run  depends.   The  hard  line taken  by  Mrs.  Golda  Meir in
her  interview with  the  London  Times  (N.Y.   Times  March  13)
would  prevent  the  establishment  of  a  Palestinian   state  and
reduce  the   West   Bank  to  Israeli  tutelage  but  without   the
benefits  either  of  inclusion  in  Israel  or  of  a  separate  state.
Her  views  are  disputed  by  many  in  Israel,  including  leading
figures  in  her  own  party  like  Eliav  and  Sapir.   A  good  dis-
cussion   of  the  internal   Israeli  debate   by  a  leading  Israeli
journalist,   Victor   Cygielman,  may  be  found   in  the   March
issue  of  Le  Monde  Diplomatique.    We  hope  American  Jewish
opinion   will  not  let  itself   be  stampeded  into  a   monolithic
lobby  for  the  hard-liners  nor  allow  Mrs.  Meir  to  stall  in  the
hope of injecting  the  Israeli issue  into next  year's  Presidential
campaign.    There  are  already   signs  of  movement  toward   a
coalition  of  Zionists  with  the  AFI-CIO  and  the  arms  lobbyists
behind Jackson  for  the  Democratic  nomination.  This  is a  time
for  Israeli magnanimity  to  match  Egypt's  readiness  for  peace.
The Truth About  Tchepone
WHEN  THE   TRUTH   ABOUT  THE   LAOS  CAMPAIGN  begins   to
leak  out,  we  believe  it  will  appear  as  a  costly  failure  and  it
will  be acknowledged  that Tchepone  itself  was  never  taken by
the  ARVN forces.   A careful  review  of  the  dispatches  reveals
(1)   that  the   U.S.   command  was  remarkably   silent   about
Tchepone's  supposed  capture,  (2)  that  Saigon  began  to  admit
that  only  reconnaissance   teams  had  entered  Tchepone. and
that  the  tow7i  was  not  (sour  grapes!)  worth  taking,  and  (3)
that  some  of  ARVN's  best  battalions  have  been  chewed  up  in
this  operation.  Earlier  in  this  invasion  one could  hear  specu-
lation  that  the  French  might  have  won at  Dienbienphu  with
more  air  support  and  that,  with  the  ARVN  as  "bait",  our
gunships were  going to wreak  havoc  with  the  other  side  when
they  counter-attacked.   Now  a  typical   headline   (New    York
Daily  News,  March  13)  tells  a  different  story,  "South  Viets
Quit  Sepone  as  30,000  Reds  Close  In."   Instead  of  seizing  the
chance  to  decimate  the  enemy  from  the  air,  we are  ferrying
out  the  ARVN troops  in  a  swift  retreat.   Everybody   lies  in
wartime,  but we think  our  side  has  the  bigger liars in this  one.
We   recommend  for   a   view   from   the   other   side   Wilfred
Burchett's  account  in  The  Guardian  March  13.  We  believe  it
closer  to  the truth  than  the  U.S.-ARVN accounts.
ACCORDING  To   CHARLES   BARTLETT   (Wash.  Star   Mar.   9)
Nixon  had  a  fresh  slice  of that  Ho  Ohi Mihn  trail  oil pipeline
flown in  on  top  priority  for  his  press  conference  of  March  4
But  Papadapoulos Is  Our  Pet
While  Allende's  In  The  Doghouse
Elizabeth  Drew  (Atlantic  Monthly):  To  what  extent
are   we   going   to   be   concerned  about  what   kind   of
governments  come  to   power  where?
Secretary   Rogers:  Well,   I  think   we're  going  to  be
less   concerned  about  that  than  we   have   in  the   past
for  the  simple  reason  that  we've  found  we  can't  affect
the  outcome  to  the  degree  that  we  thought  we  could.
Mrs.   Drew:  Well,  let's  take  an  example—Chile.  We
have  said  that  we  will  not  interfere  with  its  domestic
policies  but  we're  going  to  watch  closely   its  foreign
policies  and  we  made  it  pretty  clear  we  disapprove  of
its  establishing   relations  with  Cuba.   But  what  do  we
do  about  it?    What  are   our  sanctions?
Secretary   Rogers:   Well,   we're   not   going   to   use
sanctions  in  the  sense  that  you  use  the  word.
Mrs.   Drew:  Is  that  all  we'll  do,  is  to  say  we  don't
like  it?
Secretary  Rogers:  Well,  that's  true  in  many  cases.
It's  true  in  the  case  of  Greece.  We  have  very  friendly
relations   with   Greece  but   we've   made  it   clear  that
we're  somewhat  disappointed that  they  haven't  moved
toward  representative  government  more  quickly.
Mrs.   Drew:  There's  a  question  as  to  how  clear—
Secretary   Rogers:  We've  made  it   crystal  clear.
—On  PBS  "SO Minutes   With  .  .  ."  WET A  March  9.
We've   also   made   it   pretty   clear   we  prefer   right
wing dictators to  freely  elected  Marxists.
in   case  anybody  had   asked   him  about  the   credibility   gap
created  by the  previous  pipeline  section  shown  at  the  Penta-
gon  Feb.  24.  The  Pentagon  admitted  later  that  this  earlier
sample  was  not  a  trophy  of  our  current  incursion  into   Laos
but  had  been  obtained  before.   The  important  fact  about  this
pipeline  never   did  get  into  the  papers,  though  revealed  by
Gen.  Vogt himself  at  the  Pentagon  briefing.   He said the  pipe-
line  was  made  up  of  sections  with  "a  very  clever  simple  dis-
connect  system."   Gen.  Vogt  explained  that  this   disconnect
feature  despite  intensive  bombing  "has   made  it  possible  for
the  North  Vietnamese  to  take  a  ruptured  section  of  the  pipe
out  in  a  few  minutes  and  insert  a  new  section,  and  the flow
continues."   How ingenious  those  Stone  Age  people   are!
FORMER  SENATOR  YOUNG  OP  OHIO  calls  attention  to  a  shift
in  the  ratio  of  non-combat  to  combat   deaths  in   Indochina.
Since  1961  deaths  due  to  accidents  have  averaged  20 percent
Jackson  (Violating Secrecy)  Launches—and  Symington  Rebuffs—A   New  Missile  Scare
Sen.  Jackson:   It  will  come,  I  think,  as  a  shock  to  a  lot
of   Americans,  after   much   discussion   here,   that   they'd
leveled  off  on  the  deployment of  the  SS-9's,  to  know  that
the  Russians  are  in  the  process  of  deploying  a  new  genera-
tion,  an  advance  generation,  of  offensive  systems  .  .  .  the
new  developments   are  ominous  indeed.   We  do  not  know
quite  what  it  means,  but  I  can  say  to  you  that  these  are
huge,  new  missiles.
Robert   Novak   [columnist]:    You   say   ominous,  sir,   do
you  mean  that  you  think,  seriously  the  Soviets  might  en-'
tertain  a  first  strike  with  these  weapons?
Jackson:   I'm  sure  that  1  can't  answer  that  question.   I
can  only  say  to  you,  when  you  look  at  these  huge  weapons
systems,  you  have  to  ask,  what  can  they  be  used  for,  other
than  a  first  strike?
—Face  The  Nation, March  7
Many  new  occurrences  come  with  spring—some  pleasant
—warmer  weather,  Japanese  cherry  blossoms;  some  not  so
pleasant—proposed   higher   defense   budgets,   warnings  of
grave  new  dangers  to  this  country  because  of  new  develop-
ments  in  Soviet  weaponry.   Last  week,  in  a  session  secret
to  the  point  where  no  record  was  kept,  the  Senate  Armed
Services  Committee was  briefed  about  Soviet  missile  plans.
This  briefing  included for  the  first  time  purported  details  of
new  Soviet  missilery.  One  cannot  fail  to  remember several
comparable   Spring   announcements   of   previous  years—in
the   early   1950's   those   thousands   of   long-range  bombers
the  Soviets  were  going  to  build,  but  never  built; in  the  late
1950's  those  hundreds upon  hundreds of  long-range  missiles
the  Soviets  were  going  to  build,  but  never  built.  As  a  re-
sult  of  these  and other  inaccurate intelligence  reports,  how-
ever,  the  American  taxpayer  is  currently  bearing  the  bur-
den  of  tens  of  billions  of   dollars   of   additional weaponry
we  know  now  is  not  needed  for  his  or  our  security.
—Symington   (D-Mo.),  in  the  Senate,  March  10
Symington   speaks   from   experience.    He   was   himself
taken  in  by  the  bomber  and  missile  gap  scares  of  the  50s
and  60s.   He  chose  this   way  to  tell  the   Senate   that   the
information  used  by  Jackson  was  classified.   He  might  also
have  added  that  all  U.S.  intelligence  has  seen  are  holes  for
new  missiles,  not  the  missiles  themselves.   Jackson  is  an
old  hand  at  whipping  up  arms  race  nightmares.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  22, 1971
. Picking  A  Master  of  Advertising  Fakery  As  Chairman  of  the  SEC
of   those   in   combat.   Young  notes  that  last   December   the
Pentagon  listed  more  non-combat  than  combat  deaths:   160 to
138.   During the  past  two  weeks  non-combat  deaths have  been
more  than  50 percent  of  combat  deaths:   the  March  4  report
gave  69 and  37;  the  March  11—44  and  23.  The  official  term—
deaths   due  to   "non-hostile"   action—   is  vaguer   than   non-
combat, since  men may  die in combat  without  being  hit  by  the
enemy.   Young's  suspicions  were  aroused  when  the  son  of  an
Ohio  constituent  was  listed  as  dead  of  sunstroke.  The  father
was startled,  since this  was a farm  boy accustomed  to working
in  the  sun.  Young queried  the  Pentagon.  The father  and  the
widow  then  received  telegrams  explaining  that  death  by  sun-
stroke  was  assumed  since the  body  lay  in the  sun  before  being
evacuated   and  was  burned  red.   Later  three  bullet  wounds
were  found.   Is  the  rise  in  deaths  attributed  to  non-hostile
causes  a  "body count'' in reverse,  designed  to minimize casual-
ties ?  Won't  some  Senator  ask  for  a  full  explanation ?
FBI And Faceless Informers
SENATOR    MCGOVERN'S   TEMERITY   in   criticizing   J.   Edgar
Hoover  for  "exiling"  to  Montana  a  dissident   FBI  agent   has
brought  down  upon  him  a  mini-avalanche  of  abusive  letters.
These  he  put  into  t.'ie  Congressional  Record  March  8.   They
represent  something  less  than  an  outpouring  of  popular  in-
dignation.   All  20 letters  came  from  veteran  FBI  men,  eight
of   them   assistant   directors    and   one   an   assistant   to   the
director.    One  deserves   notice  from  historians.   All  through
the  witch hunt  of  the  50s,  Hoover  defended  the  use  of  anony-
mous  informers  and  often  charged   (as  he  did  Oct.  3,  1955  to
the  International   Association  of  Chiefs  of  Police)  that  there
was  a  "conspiracy"   to  discredit  "faceless  informers"  run  by
"Communist  lawyers,  skilled  in  concealing  foul   and  despic-
able  acts behind the  Fifth  amendment."   But  now ten  younger
FBI  men have  written   McGovern a  letter  criticizing  the  FBI
(Con.  Rec.  March  1 p.  S2163)   but  withheld  their  names  for
fear   of  retaliation.   "I  am  not  impressed,"  Ivan  W.  Conrad,
Assistant   Director  of  the  FBI  wrote  in  protest  "by  the  state-
ments  of  'faceless'  accusers;  such  accusers  are  foreign  to  the
American  philosophy."   The  FBI  had  better  check  him  out.
THE  SEC   WAS SET  UP  To   PROTECT  investors  from   false
claims.  Wm. J.  Casey,  Nixon's  choice  for  SEC chairman,  has
been  his No. 1 agent in fake  advertising.  In  1969  Casey  turned
up  as  head  of a "grass roots" organization   claiming  that 84%
U.S.  Intervention's  Double  Standard
Almost   every   instance   of   the   use   of   presidential
force  in  the  past  has  been  against  small,  backward, and
distraught  peoples:  the  situation  today.    Call  the  roll
of   the  victims  of   presidential  application  of   force   in
the  past:  Spanish  Florida,  Honduras,  Santo  Domingo,
Nicaragua,   Panama,  Haiti,  Guatemala,  a   China  torn
by   civil   war,  a   Mexico  distraught   by   civil   war,   a
Russia  and  a  Vietnam  riven  by  war—it  is  a   sobering
fact  that  presidents   do  not  rush  in  with  the   weapons
of   war   to   bring   Britain,  France,   Italy,   Russia,   or
Japan  to  heel.   Would  we  have  bombarded Southamp-
ton  to  collect  a  debt?   Would  we  have  sent  an  expedi-
tion  into  Rome  to  protect   Americans  against  a  threat
from   a  fascist  government?    Would  we  have  precipi-
tated   a  war  with  Britain  over  a  boundary  dispute   in
Maine?    Would   we   bomb   Siberia  for   years   if   shots
were  fired—without  any  hits—at  an  American  vessel?
And  does  it  realy  comport  with  the  honor  and  dignity
of  a  great  nation  to  indulge  its  Chief  Executive  in  one
standard   of   conduct  for   the   strong   and  another   for
the weak?
—Henry   Steele   Commager—the   dean   of   American
historians—before  Senate  Foreign  Relations, March  8.
of  the  American  people  favored  an  ABM. The  "grass  roots"
turned  out  to  be  Room  495 in  the  White  House  annex.  A few
months  later  he  was  appointed  adviser  to  the  Arms  Control
and  Disarmament  Agency.   In  October  of that  year  full  page
ads  called  for  "silent  Americans"  to  speak  up  for   Nixon's
Vietnam  policy.  The  chairman  again  was  Casey.  On  Novem-
ber  17 there was a full  page ad in  the  New  York  Times, "Hold
Your  Ears  Hanoi:   Here  Comes  America's  Silent  Majority."
There  was  Casey's  name  again   along  with  other  such  silent
Americans  as  Clare  Booth  Luce and  Leo Cherne.  Such  f akery,
if  used  to  sell  stock,  would  violate  the  Securities  Act    Thanks
to  Senator  Proxmire,  the  hearings  on  Casey  disclosed  that  he
has  already  been  in  trouble  under  the  Securities  Act.   Casey
settled  one  investor  suit  against  himself  out  of  court  (along
with  a  plagiarism  case)  and  is defendant  in another.  But this
odoriferous  appointment  will  probably  be confirmed.
How  The  Presidential  Power To  Make  War  Has  Grown  To  Imperial  Dimensions
Five  times  in the  past  ten  years  Presidents  have  mounted
major   military  interventions   in   foreign   nations  without
prior   consultation  with  the   Congress:    the   Bay   of   Pigs,
the   invasion  of   the   Dominican  Republic,   the   attacks   on
North  Vietnam,  Cambodia,  and  Laos.   None  of   these  now
appear   to   have   represented   a   genuine   emergency;  none
were  in  response  to  attacks  upon  the  United  States.   None
therefore  appear  to  meet  the  requirements  for  the  exer-
cise   of   war   powers  by   the   President   formulated  by   the
makers  of  the  Constitution.
There  is  no ambiguity about  the  intent  of  the  Framers  of
the  Constitution.   They  proposed  to  make  it  impossible  for
a   "ruler"  to   plunge   the   nation   into  war.   The  founding
fathers  were  determined that  no  American executive  would
have  the  power  of  a  George  III  or  a  Frederick  the  Great.
It  is  only  in  the  last  twenty  years  or  so  that  Presidents
appear   to   have   thrown   caution   and   even   constitutional
scruples  to  the  wind,  and  ventured, on  their  own  authority,
into  military  operations  that  were  in  fact  acts  of  war, that
were  on  a  large  scale,  that  were  in  distant  parts  of  the
globe.   Our  current  presidential  commitments  are  justified
by  new  doctrines  such  as  that  of  "Vital  Interest"  or  by  the
"Nixon  Doctrine" of  shared  responsibility.   Of  both  of  these
it  can  be  said  that  their   most  conspicuous  feature  is  the
fog  which  enshrouds  them.   Thus  Secretary   Rusk's  asser-
tion  in  1966  that  "no  would-be  aggressor   should   suppose
that  the  absence  of  a  defense  treaty,  Congressional  declar-
ation,  or  United  States  military  presence,  grants  immunity
to  aggression;"  the  key  words,  for  our  purposes,  are  "ab-
sence  of  treaty"  and "absence  of  Congressional   declaration."
The  assumption  of  our  constitution  framers,  that   Presi-
dents  could  not  engage  in  war  on  their   own,  was   greatly
strengthened   by  the  elementary  fact  that  he  could  not  if
he  wanted  to  because  there  were  no  armies  or  navies  with
which  to  war.  At  the  time  of  the  ratification  of  the  Consti-
tution  the  U.S.  Army  consisted  of  719  officers  and  men,  not
a  formidable  force  for  military  adventures.   The   situation
did  not  change perceptibly  over  the  years.  Our  armed  forces
increased  to  some  20,000 by  1840,  to  28,000 on  the  eve  of  the
Civil  War  and  to  38,000  by  1890.  Even  in   1915,  with  the
world   locked  in   mortal  combat,  the   armed  forces   of   the
United  States  were less  than  175,000.
Now  we  have  a  wholly  new  situation.    Not   only  do  we
keep  some  three  million  men  under  arms  at   all   times—
since   1951  the  number  has  rarely   fallen   below   that—but
we  have  the  greatest  and  most  formidable  armaments  that
any   nation   ever   commanded.   What  this   means   is   quite
simply  that  while  in  the  past  Presidents   could  not  involve
the  nation,  or  the  world,  very  deeply  in  war  without   Con-
gressional approval,  now they  can—and do.
—Henry  Steele  Commager   before   the  Senate  Foreign Relations Committee  March  8   (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March 22,1971
How  Nixon  Is Concentrating  Power  In  The White House
(Continued  from  Page  One)
tegic  Studies  estimates  that  by  1975  our  strategic  forces  will
have  11,000  nuclear  warheads  while  the  Soviets  in  this  insane
race  may  reach  5,000,  or  still  less  than  half  as  many. Then  if
war  comes  our  overkill  will  be  four  times—and  the  Soviet's
21/2  times—what  it  is today. That  should  make us  all  feel  more
secure.   Yet  Nixon   closed   the  Sulzberger   interview  with  an
argument   for  giving   arms  expenditure   higher  priority  than
health,  education  and  environment.  "After   all,"   Nixon  said
brightly,  "if  we manage  to improve the environment  and  living
conditions  in  this  country we  must  also  assure that  we  will  be
around  to  enjoy  these  improvements."  We  haven't  heard  such
clinchers  since  we  left  high  school.
Power  To The People?
Nixon's  philosophy   of  representative  government  matches
his  foreign  and  military  policy.  Here,  too,  what  he  says  and
how  he  portrays  himself  do  not  match  what  he  is  doing.  Only
Jules   Feiffer   has  begun   to   do   justice  to   his  quick  change
artistry,  now  a  Pentagon  pacifist,  in  a  Ghandi  loincloth;  now,
with  the  "power to the people" theme  in his  State of  the Union
message,  practically  a  Black  Panther  in  a  dashiki.   The  point
Senator  Symington  tried  to  make  in  his  "Kissinger  syndrome"
speech  in  the  Senate  March  2 is that Nixon  has  been insulating
himself  more  and  more  from  Congressional  and  popular  con-
trol  by concentrating  power  in  a greatly enlarged  White  House
staff.  The  press,  always  avid  for  personality  clashes,  focussed
on  Kissinger  and  Rogers.  It  overlooked  the  fundamentals of
what  Symingon  was  trying  to  say.  Though   Nixon  talked  in
the  1968  campaign  of  "streamlining"   the  White  House   staff,
its  numbers  have  more  than  doubled  and  its  cost  has  tripled.
By  moving  more  and   more   of   the   decision-making  process
particularly  in  foreign  policy  into  the  White   House,  where
those who take part  are protected  by  "executive  privilege"   from
interrogation   by  Congress,  Nixon   has  covertly  moved  power
further  away  from,  not  closer  to,  "the  people."
The   anti-imperialists  who   fought   the   annexation  of   the
Philippines   in   the   1890s   warned   that   imperialism   would
weaken  democracy. Even  they  could  hardly have  imagined that
a  future  government  could  carry  on  a  war  in  Indochina  so
Still   Underestimating   the   North   Vietnamese
The   disruption   of   the   supply   lines   of   the  enemy
through  Laos,  which  has  now  occurred  for  three weeks,
has   very  seriously  damaged  the   enemy's   ability   to
wage  effective  action  against  our  remaining forces  in
Vietnam   and  assures   even   more   the   success   of   our
troop  withdrawal  program.
—From  Nixon's  press  conference,  March  4.
"The    whole   panhandle   is    full    of    potential   trail
routes,"  the  military  said.  Using  the  west  half  of  the
panhandle  does  not  put  the  communists further  away
from   South  Vietnam  in  terms   of  total   mileage,  they
said.   The  U.S.  military  says  the  enemy  is  unable  to
cut  across  the  Savannakhet Plain  because  it  is  an  area
open  to  air  strikes   and,  later   in  the   season,  muddy.
Lao   generals   discount   this   U.S.   assessment.     "The
Americans  are  always underestimating  the  North  Viet-
namese  capability  to   move,  just  like  the   French  did
at  Dienbienphu,"  a  Lao  general  said.
—Tammy   Arbuekle  from   Laos,  Wash.  Star  Mar.  4.
plainly  against  the  popular  will.  "Frankly,"  Nixon  told  Sulz-
berger  in  talking  of  opposition  to  the  war  among  the  elite,  "I
have  far  more  confidence in  our  people  than  in  the  Establish-
ment."  He  shows  it  in  strange  ways.  At  one  point  he  said  to
Sulzberger,   "In   1966   and   1967—culminating  in   1968—the
American  people  began  to  tire of  playing a  role  in  the  world."
What  they tired of  was the  war  in  Vietnam  and  heavy  military
spending,  of  interventionism  and  the  Pax  Americana,  not  of
"playing  a  role  in  the  world"  put  of  Lyndon  Johnson's  con-
ception  of  that  role  and  Nixon's  which  is  really  the  same  as
LBJ's.  That  all  this  is  contrary  to  popular  will  was  admitted
by  Nixon  himself  when  he  said  in  the  Sulzberger  interview
that  he  was  "certain  a  Gallup  poll  would  show"   (in  fact  the
polls  have  shown)   that  "the  great  majority"  want  to  get  out
of  Vietnam,  to  reduce  our  military  forces  in  Europe  and   "cut
our  defense  budget."  Then  he  added  lamely  "but  polls  are  not
the  answer."  Two  years  ago  Nixon  was  appealing  to  a  silent
majority.  Now  that  it  is  no  longer  silent,  he  is  saying  that  it
must   be   ignored.    This   is  the   Caesarism   inseparable   from
empire.                                                                             March  14
The  1970    Index  Is  Ready   Free  If  You  Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope  For  It
Bi-Weekly  Mart
—To  subscribe   or  to  send  a  gift   subscription,   send
$5 with  your  address  and  zip  code to  the  address  below.
—To  get  Stone's new collection,  "Polemics  and Proph-
ecies:   1967-70"  (Random  House:  $10)  at  the  special
$8.95  price  postpaid  for  Bi-Weekly readers,  send  check
or  money  order  to  the  address  below.
—If  you  want  Stone's  new  paperback,  "The  Killings
at  Kent  State:   How  Murder Went  Unpunished"  (New
York  Review  and Vintage  Press)  the  price  is  $1.95.   It
contains   the  full  text,  available   nowhere  else,   of  the
so-called   "secret   FBI   report",   the   summary   of   FBI
findings  prepared  by  the  Civil  Rights   Division  of  the
Justice   Department  but  never   submitted   to  the   Ohio
.Grand  Jury.
—Stone's  "Hidden  History  of  the  Korean  War",  the
inside  story  of   America's   first   Vietnam,  long   out  of
print  is  available  again  (Monthly  Review  Press)  $7.50
postpaid.
—Paperback   editions    (Vintage   Press)   of   Stone's
earlier  collections,  "In A  Time  of  Torment"  ($1.95)  and
"The Haunted Fifties" ($2.45) at bookstores.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th Street NW, Washington,  D.C.  20008
$5  A  YEAR                                8/22/71
I.  F. Stone's Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,   N. W.
Washington,  D.C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone'1  Bl-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.   Published  every  other  Monday  except  In  August  at  4420  29th  St..  N.W..   Washington.   D.C.
An  Independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  (5  in  the  U.S.;    $6  in  Canada:
(10  elsewhere.   Air  Mall  rates:  117  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED