I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971apr19.pdf

============================================================

Demonstrate  For  Peace: Put  Your  Body   Where It  Will  Count
The  Question  Nixon  Never Answered
The  President  feels  it  is  not  in  the  national  interest  to  set  a date.  The  Secretary  of  Defense  said  there  would  be no total
withdrawal  until  the   prisoners   are   released.    What  no  one   in  the  Administration  has  explained  is   how  50,000   troops
left  in  South  Vietnam  for  air  and  logistical  support  can  persuade  North  Vietnam to  negotiate  seriously  if  500,000  could  not.
—Mrs.   Gerald  A.   Gartley,  Dunedin,  Fla.,  mother  of  a  POW  flier,  before   House  Foreign  Affairs,   March  31.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX, No. 8
April  19,  1971          ">•«
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
What  Nixon  Hopes  We  Won't  Remember
One  passage  in  Nixon's  Vietnam  address  of  April  7  has
escaped  the attention it  deserves.   It  shows better than  any other
how   dishonest  the   man   is.   "When   I   left   Washington   in
January  of   1961,  after  serving  eight  years  as  Vice  President
under  Eisenhower,"  Nixon   said,  "there  were  no  American
combat  forces  in Vietnam.  No  Americans  had  died  in  combat.
When  I  returned   as  President   eight  years  later,  there   were
540,000   Americans  in   Vietnam.   Thirty-one  thousand   had
died  there."   Nixon  pictures  himself  as  a  man  who  kept  the
peace  in  Indochina  only  to  have  the  Democrats  drag  us  into
war  after  he  left  office.   The  truth  is that  if  Richard Nixon  had
had   his   way  American  boys  would   have  begun   to   die   in
Vietnam   a   decade  earlier,   and   intervention  when   it   began
under   Kennedy   and  Johnson   would   have   been   wider   and
bloodier.   Nixon   has  been  the   foremost  hawk  of  the   Indo-
Chinese   adventure,  and   this   old   emotional   and   ideological
attachment  explains  his  stubborn  effort  to  carry  it  through  to
some  kind  of  a victory  at  whatever  cost.
In  The  Name  Of  Self-Determination
As  early  as  April  16,  1954,  in  an  address  to  the  American
Society  of  Newspaper  Editors  Nixon  proposed   the  U.S.  send
its  own  troops  into  Indochina  if  France  gave  up  the  fight  and
made  peace  at  Geneva.   "I  have  visited  Vietnam  many  times,"
Nixon  said  the  other   night  in  his  latest  appeal  for  public
support  in  bringing  about  a  "just  peace."   Indeed  he  has,  and
in  every visit he  has  sought  to  deepen  American  entanglement.
One  of  the  earliest was his  visit  to  Hanoi  (then  still  in  French
hands)  in  November,   1963,   to  make  a  speech  opposing  the
idea  of  a negotiated  peace  and  head  off the  Geneva  conference.
Another  visit is worth  keeping  in mind  as we approach  another
rigged  Presidential  election  in  South  Vietnam  to  keep  Thieu
in  power.   That  visit  was  on  July  6,   1956.    Diem   had   just
succeeded    in   electing   himself   a   rubber-stamp    Constituent
Assembly   by   suppressing   many   independent   candidatures,
arresting  many  opposition  leaders*  and  by  so  restricting  free-
dom  of  speech  and  press  that  most  of  the  opposition   finally
boycotted  the  elections.   Nixon  in  an  address  to  the  Assembly
said  "the  entire  free  world"  derived  "great  inspiration"   from
Diem's  achievements.   When  Nixon  tells  us  as  he  did  in  his
latest  speech  that  we  must  hang  on  and  end  the  war  in  a  way
which  will   achieve  the   goal   of   "a   South   Vietnam   free   to
determine  its  own  future,"   it  is  well  to  remember  that  first
fake   election   under   Diem.    For  two   decades  we  have   been
imposing  puppet   regimes   on   Saigon   in   the   name   of   self-
*The  widely  respected  and  still  active  Dr.  Pham  Quang
Dan,  then  leader  of  the  Republican  party,  was  one  of  those
arrested   for   distributing   leaflets   protesting   the   terms   of
Diem's   electoral   law.    Keesing's   Archives    (London)   pp.
14,951-2, for   1956.
Speaking  Of  Restraint  In  Judgment
(Or  When Agnew  Bites Nixon)
Now  most  knowledgeable  people  realize  that  you  can-
not  fully  assess the  effect  of  that  military  operation  [in
Laos]  at  this  time.   There  are  exaggerated  claims  by
both  sides.   We  firmly  believe   [italics  in  original]  the
operation  has  been  successful  for  the  South  Vietnamese
and  that,  as  in  Tet  and  Cambodia,  the  enemy  has  paid
a  heavy  price  and  has  been  greatly  weakened.   But  only
the  future  will  show  for  certain.   This  would  seem  to
call  for restraint in judgment.
—Agnew  in Los Angeles, April  7 Noon  PST.
The  disruption  of  enemy  supply  lines,  the  consump-
tion  of  ammunition  and  arms  in  the  battle   [in  Laos]
has  been  even  more  damaging  to  the  capability  of  the
North  Vietnamese  to  sustain  major  offensives  in  South
Vietnam   than   were   the   operations   in   Cambodia   ten
months  ago.    Consequently   tonight  I  can  report   that
Vietnamization  has  succeeded.
—Nixon  from  the  White  House that  evening.
determination.  But the stale double-talk  still  goes on.
Nixon   says  that  when  he  left   office   as  Vice  President  in
January  1961  there  were  no  American  combat  forces  in  Viet-
nam.   He  did  not  say he  soon  did  all  he  could  to  put  them  in.
In   February    1962   after   Kennedy   sent  General   Harkins   to
Vietnam  to  head  a  U.S.   Military  Assistance  Command,  the
Republican   National   Committee's   publication,   Battle   Line
(Feb.  13),  declared  that Kennedy had  been  "less  than  candid"
about  U.S.  military involvement, asked  whether  we  were mov-
ing  toward   "a  new  Korea"   and   said   the   American  people
should   not   have  to  wait   "until   American  casualty  lists  are
posted"  before  knowing  the  full  truth.  Two  days  later  Nixon
disagreed  in  a  statement  saying—
I  don't  agree  at  all  with  any  partisan  or  other  criticism
of  the  U.S.  buildup in-Vietnam.  My only  question  is  whether
it  may be  too  little  and too  late ...  I  support  President
Kennedy   to  the  hilt,  and  I  only  hope  he  will  step  up  the
buildup  and  under  no  circumstances  curtail   it  because  of
possible  criticism.
Shortly  afterward  "18  Notables,"  including  Roman  Catholic
leaders,  appealed  first  to  Diem  and  then  to  the  U.S.  Ambassa-
dor   (March    13,   1962)    for   the   restoration   of   elementary
political  and  civil  rights,  declaring  that  popular  support   had
been  alienated  by widespread  repression.  Nixon  turned  as deaf
an  ear  as  Kennedy  to  this  appeal   for  the  freedom  we  were
supposedly defending.
In   1964   as  the  presidential  campaign   warmed  up,   Nixon
said  Lyndon  Johnson,   then  pretending  to  be  dovish,   "lacks
the  idealism and  sense  of  purpose"  both  Eisenhower  and  Ken-
nedy  "were  able  to  project"   and  that  under   Johnson   it  was
(Continued  on Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  19,  1971
Time Is Ripe For  A Full Investigation  Into the  FBI's  Surveillance  of Politics
THE   IDEA  THAT  FBI   INVASIONS  OF   LIBERTY  are  an  aber-
ration   of  J.  Edgar  Hoover's  old  age  is  nonsense.   This  has
been  the  pattern  of  the  Bureau  ever  since  its  creation.  Under
its   first  chiefs,   the   notorious   Bielaski   brothers,   it   ran   the
"deportations    delirium"   which  marked   the   Red  hunt   after
World  War  I.  Hoover  showed  his  suspicion  of  liberals during
the  New  Deal.   During  World  War  II,  I  published  a  series
of  articles  in  the  newspaper   PM   based   on  the  transcripts of
some  20  FBI  loyalty  interrogations.  These  showed  that  Federal
employees  made  themselves  suspect  by  such  activities as having
blacks  as  guests   in  their  homes  or  reading   Nation   or   New
Republic.   During  the  Coplon  espionage trial  in  1949  a Federal
judge  ordered  the  FBI  to  make  public  the  wiretap  and  other
records  in  that   case.   A  National   Lawyers  Guild   committee
including  former  FCC  commissioner  Clifford  Durr  and  Prof.
Thomas  I:  Emerson  of  Yale  released  a  study  of  these  internal
FBI  records  in  January  1950.   This  showed  that  FBI wiretaps
had  less  to  do  with  possible  crime  than  with  "social,  political
and   economic   views."    Some   publisher   should   reprint  that
report  and  the  documents  recently  stolen  from  FBI  records  in
Media,  Pa.,  for  an  in-depth   look  at  our  political  police.
A  Sacred  Cow  Too  Long
The  witch  hunt  after  World  War   II  began   when   Hoover
"loaned"  Robert   E.   Lee,   now  an   FCC  commissioner,  to  a
Republican   House   committee   to   compile   a   list   of   suspect
Federal  employes.  This  list  was the  origin  of  the  one  used  by
Joe  McCarthy,  whom  Hoover  admired.   After  the Republicans
came  back  to  power  in   1953   Hoover   joined  the  G.O.P.  in
calling  Democratic  rule  "20  Years  of  Treason."   The  Media
documents  disclosed  that  the  FBI  seeks  deliberately  to  provoke
paranoid  attitudes  on  the  Left,  to  make  people  think  there  is
an  FBI  man  behind  every  mail  box  and  a  tap  on  every  phone.
Hoover   can  hardly  complain   if  this  paranoia  has  spread   to
Congress.    Hoover   denies   the   phones   of   any   Congressmen
have  been  tapped.   In  an  article  (58  Yale  Law  Journal   401)
in   1949   Hoover  declared,   "The   FBI  does  not,  has  not,  and
never  will  as  long  as  I  am  director  investigate  political  views."
The  Coplon   documents   soon  showed   this  was  untrue.   In  an
. unwary   moment   Deputy    Attorney   General    Kleindienst   on
CBS  April   7  indignantly   replied   to  the   wiretap  charges  of
Congressman   Hale  Boggs  by  calling  for  a  Congressional  in-
White House Invitation To Demonstrate
Q:  As  a  practical   matter  is  it   hoped  and  expected
that  this  may  quiet  the  public  clamor  over  this  whole
matter  [the  Galley  conviction]?
John  Ehrlichman  [Asst.  to  the  President  for  Domes-
tic  Affairs] :   I  think  that  is  certainly  not  one  of   the
motives.    I  think   the   feeling   is   that  there   had  been
enough  sincere questions about what is  going  to  happen
in  this  whole  process  that  they  deserved  an  answer.
But  I  don't  think  it  is  on  the  basis  of  asking  people  not
to  make  their  feelings  known.   Obviously,  it  is  part  of
the  democratic  process  for  people to  make  their feelings
known.   This  is  good.
—Briefing   on  Galley,  San   Clemente,  April  3.
vestigation  into  "the  methods,  the  procedures and  the policies
of  the  FBI,  not  only  now  but  in  the  past."   Then   24  hours
later  he  backed  down  and  proposed  a  narrow  inquiry  only into
the   Boggs'  charges.   This   is  the  time  to  demand  the   fuller
investigation   by   Senator   Sam   J.   Ervin's   vigilant  Constitu-
tional  Rights subcommittee. When  Life   magazine  puts  Hoover
on   its  cover  as  a  Roman  Emperor,  and   he  becomes  a  target
of   the   mass  media,  the   time   is  ripe   for   an  investigation.
Hoover  has  been  a  sacred  cow  too  long.
NIXON'S  INTERVENTION  IN  THE   GALLEY   CASE   was  cheap
opportunism,  but  the   peace  movement  may  easily   drift  into
the  same  posture  by  covertly  pandering to  Know  Nothingism
with  demagogic   slogans  about  Calley  being  only  a  scapegoat.
Certainly  the  higher-ups in this war  should  be  investigated for
war  crimes.  Johnson,  Rusk  and  McNamara  as  well  as  Nixon,
Laird  and  Westmorland  all  share the'guilt.   But  Calley wasn't
convicted  of   war  crimes  in  the  Nuremburg  sense.    He   was
convicted   of   violating  the   U.S.   Army's  admirable  Rules  of
War    in   shooting   nonresistant  men,   women   and  children.
Many  army   officers   take  these  rules  very  seriously;  this  was
demonstrated   by  the   panel   of   officers,   all   combat  veterans,
who  convicted  Calley.   The   trial  and  Capt.  Aubrey  Daniel's
eloquent  letter  of  protest  to  Nixon   do  our  country  honor;  I
know  of  no  other  which  can  show  a  like  prosecution   in  the
midst  of  a  war.  To  join  the  right  in  palliating Galley's crimes
is  to  alienate  the  best  military  officers  from  the  movement   for
peace—and  to  make  Asians  feel  we  forget  humanitarianism
in  dealing  with  them.
What  The  Tell-It-To-Hanoi  Crowd  Never  Tell  The  U.S.  About  Prisoners  of  War
When  they  [Major  Thompson  and  Major  Carpenter]  were
released,  they  were  soon  assigned  by  the  Air  Force  as  in-
structors  of  other  pilots.   It  seems  incomprehensible to  me
that  the  Vietnamese   would  release  captured  pilots  if   they
are  to  be  put  to  training  other  men  to  go  and  do  the  same
thing  they  have  been  doing  in  Vietnam.
—Stewart  Meacham  of  the  Friends  at  the  House   Foreign
Affairs    hearing   on  POWs   March  SI.     (Abridged)
Previous  to  our trip  in  December   1969,  prisoners  had  been
allowed  to  receive  packages  only  for  holidays  and  special
occasions.   Since   then,   however,   6-pound   packages   every
other  month have  been  permitted  . . .
According  to  the  families,  packages   are  being   acknowl-
edged   and   gourmet    requests   are   frequently   made   and
honored.    Items   such   as   dried   foods,   vitamins,   proteins,
socks,   thermal   underwear,   T-shirts,   blue-jeans,   handker-
chiefs,   reading  glasses  and  air  mattresses  are  among  the
long  list  of  allowable  items.  This  is  hardly  compatible with
what  Secretary  Rogers,  in  one  of  his  more  sweeping  flights
of  rhetoric,  has  referred  to  as  "the  most  barbaric  treatment
in  the  history  of  man."
COL  has  accepted  and  delivered  to  Hanoi  special  items
to  be  hand-carried with  mail,  such  as  reading  glasses,  an
extra  supply of  penicillin for  a  pilot with  a  terminal kidney
condition,  a  brace  for  a  pilot  with  an  injured  leg,  and  spe-
cific medications.
—Cora  Weiss,  Co-Chairman   of  the  Committee   of  Liaison
with Families  of  POWs,  same  hearings.
It  is  impossible  to  know  with  certainty  what  is  happening
in  the  prison  camps.  The  fact  that  20  out  of  a  total  of  368
POW's  (6%)  have  died  strongly  suggests  that  the   treat-
ment  North  Vietnam  accords  Americans  in  their  power  is
far  better  than  the  Japanese  treatment  of  prisoners during
the  Second  World War  when  27%  of  the  prisoners  died.   It
is   unquestionably  better   than   the   treatment   accorded   to
North  Vietnamese  and  Viet  Cong  prisoners  by  South  Viet-
namese  and  Americans.  .  .  .  The  executfon  of  VC  prisoners,
such  as  the  one  1st  Lt. James  Duffy  shot  in  September  1969
and  for  which  he  was  convicted  of  involuntary manslaughter
and  fined  $250,  has  been  commonplace.
—Richard  J.  Barnet, ex-State  Department    official    and  de-
fense  consultant, same  hearings.    '   •'
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  April  19,  1971
Surest Way  To Curb The Nuclear Arms Race Is To End Underground Testing
THE  SWIFTEST  WAY  To   STOP  THE  ARMS  RACE  is  to  stop
underground  testing.   An  AP  dispatch from  Mercury, Nev., we
saw  only  in  the  Washington  Star  April  11,  disclosed  that  test-
ing  had  been  halted  ever  since  an  underground  test  last  Dec.
18  burst  through   and   vented  radioactivity  over   13   Western
states.  This  was  the  longest  halt  since  Eisenhower  unilaterally
initiated   moratoriums  on   atmospheric   testing   which   lasted
from   1958  to  1961,  when  the  Russians  broke  the  ban  by  test-
ing.   While  the  AEC  investigated  the  accidental  outburst  of
last  December,   "the   prototypes  of   future   nuclear   weapons,"
the   AP   said,   "sit   in   the   laboratories  at   Berkeley  and   Los
Alamos."    Our   heart   is  breaking.   The   AEC  told   the   AP,
"There  is only  so  far  you  can  go  theoretically.  Then  you  have
to  go  out  and  test  it."  The  tempo  of  testing  has  grown   since
the  limited  test  ban  treaty  put  all  testing  underground.   The
AEC   has   "announced"    (an   undisclosed   number   are   kept
secret)   228  U.S.  and  47  Soviet  tests  in  those  eight  years;  in
the   18  years  before  the  treaty  there  were  210  U.S.  and   126
Soviet  tests.   Without   the  underground  tests  there  would  be
no  ABM  and  no  MIRV.
Strange  Way  To  National  Security
A  secret  meeting  of  scientists  last  summer  at  Woods  Hole,
Mass.,  on  the  problem  of  detecting underground  tests  surfaced
April  11  in  a  Washington  Post  scoop  by  Thomas  O'Toole  and
Marilyn  Berger.   In  5  years  the  level  of  detectability has  gone
down, from   20  kilotons  to   1  kt   (1,000  pounds).     Nuclear
tests  below  1,000  pounds  are  rare  and  of  little  value.   A  ban
on underground  tests  and  an  ABM  agreement  might  still  brake
the  proliferating  MIRV  menace.   Its  gravity  was  emphasized
when   the   first   Poseidon   submarine  was  deployed   April   1,
Fool's  day—symbolically  ideal.   For  this  first  Poseidon,  with
at  least  10  separately  targetable  MIRV  warheads  on  each  of
its   16  launchers,  can  wipe  out   116  Soviet   cities   (they   only
have  about  60  cities  with  population  over  100,000!).   Thirty
more  Poseidons  are  to  follow  in  this  insane  race  for  overkill
and  soon  the  Soviets  too  will  be  able  with  one  submarine  to
hit   116  of   our   cities.   Some   fun!    Some  way  for   U.S.   and
USSR  to  become—as  the  military-scientific  maniacs  assure  us
and them—more secure!
SOME  WONDER   WHY  THERE  Is  NOT  MORE  OUTCRY  from
people  like  ourselves  about  the  civil war  in  Pakistan.  Certainly
West  Pakistan   is  guilty  of  suppressing   the  majority  in   East
Look  Who's  Worrying  About  Thieu  and  Ky
When  Humphrey  was  asked  recently  about  his  posi-
tion,  he  said  that  he  had  been  for  a  U.S.  pull-out  since
his   speech   in  Salt   Lake  City   in  October  1968.   That
isn't  the  way  the  speech  was  remembered  by   reporters
who  were  there,  with  some  interpreting  it   as  dovish
and   others   calling  it   hawkish.    The  text   itself   was
thought  by  some  to  be  couched  in  ambiguities.   As  re-
cently  as  last  December 10, before  Humphrey had joined
the  McGovern-Hatfield  drive,  he  was  emphasizing  cau-
tion   and  warning  against   "crypto-isolationism."    He
said  that  he  wanted  to  be  sure  the  Democrats  did  not
go  berserk,  cop  out  or  try  to  withdraw from  the  world
order.   With  specific  reference  to  Vietnam, Humphrey
said,   "I  think   President   Nixon  wants  to   get   out.    I
would  have  been  proceeding  that  way,  but  a  little  more
carefully.   We  have  to  be  careful  not  to  let  Thieu  and
Ky  collapse."
—Richard  Dudman  St.  Louis  Post  Dispatch  March  7.
Pakistan  by methods  fully  as cruel  as  those  we  have  been  using
in  Vietnam.   But  it  is  more  important  to  keep  the  war  from
spreading  into  a  general  conflagration.  The  history  of  conflict
in   Bengal   is  witness  to   human   ferocity.    First   Hindu   and
Muslim  Bengalis  slaughtered   each  other  when   India  was  di-
vided.   Now  that  the  Muslim  Pathans  of  West  Pakistan  are
killing  the  Muslim  Bengali  of  East  Pakistan,  the  Hindu  Ben-
galis  are  sympathetic  to  their  brethren.    But  for  how   long?
Could  they  submerge  religious  fanaticism  and  live  together  in
one  Bengal  state?   All  we  can  do  is ask  U.S.,   USSR  and  China
to  stop  supplying  arms  to  West  Pakistan,  and  join  in  a  united
call  for  peace.
FREEDOM  OF   INFORMATION  NOTE:  The   Washington  Star
April    11   revealed   that   nine   farms   received   more   than   $1
million   each  in  crop  subsidies   in   1970,   and   14  others   more
than  $500,000 each.   A UPI  item  in the  Washington  Post  same
day  disclosed  that  the  Agriculture  Dept.  is  charging   $150   a
copy  for  the  total  list  of  137,000  subsidized  farmers.    Other-
wise  there  is  only  a  single   copy  available   for   inspection   in
a  closely  guarded  records  room.   Agriculture  Dept.  always  has
been  tender  toward  rich  farmers.
FOOTNOTE   ON  THE  POW   HYSTERIA:  Too  few   Americans
seem  to  realize  that  the  Geneva   convention   on  prisoners   of
war  provides  for  their  release  only  after  the  end  of  hostilities.
Fulbright on Israel's Self-Reliance and
For  reasons   which  may  warrant  our  sympathy,  but  not
our  support,  Israel   pursues  a  policy  of  antiquated—and  to
a  great  degree   delusional—self  reliance.   As  Foreign  Min-
ister  Eban  expressed   it,  "a  nation  must  be  capable  of  tena-
cious  solitude."   In  fact,  Israel  is  heavily  dependant  on  the
U.S.   Only  last  December  Congress  appropriated a  half  bil-
lion  dollars  for  military  assistance  to  Israel.   Since  1948 the
U.S.  Government has  provided $1.4 billion  in direct economic
assistance   to  Israel;  this  does  not  include  military  aid.  In-
cluded  have  been  aircraft,  missiles  and  electronic  systems
more  advanced  than  those  provided  to  NATO  and  SEATO.
I  do  not  see   how  this  can  be  reconciled  with  a  policy  of
"tenacious  solitude."
Premier  Meir says  we  ought  not  to  press  for  Israeli  with-
drawal   from   the   conquered   Arab   territories   because    as
she  puts  it,  "This  is  not  the  border  of  the  USA.  .  .  ."  If  Is-
rael,  as  the  Premier says,  really  were  prepared to  "stand  up
for  itself  without  involving others,  it  might  make  sense  to
let  the  Arabs  and Israelis  work out  their  differences,  or  fight
them  out.   We  all  know,  however,  that  this  is  not  the  case,
that   American   interests  of   the   most   crucial   nature   are
the U.8.  Addiction to Anti-Communism
involved,  that  another  war  in  the  Middle  East  might  well
set  us  against   the  Russians,  and  that,  therefore,   we  have
the  right  to  bring an influence  to  bear.
Israel  has  a  different   conception   of   American  interests
in   the   Middle   East,   an   essentially   cold   war   conception.
Picturing  herself  as  the  bastion  of  democracy  in  the  Middle
East,  Israel  professes  to  be  defending   American  interests
by  holding  the  line  against  a  surging   tide  of   Communist
imperialism.   I  perceive  in  this  some  of  the  same  old  Com-
munist-baiting  humbuggery  that  certain  other  small  coun-
tries  have  used  to  manipulate  the  United  States  for  their
own   purposes.    When  it   comes   to  anti-communism,  as  we
have  noted  in  Vietnam  and  elsewhere,  the  United  States  is
highly  susceptible,  rather  like  a  drug  addict,  and  the  world
is  full  of  ideological  "pushers."   It  is  a  fine  thing  to  respect
a  small  country's   independence.   It  is  quite   another   when
really  because  of  our  continuing  obsession  with  communism
we  permit  client  states   like  Israel  and  South  Vietnam   to
manipulate  American  policy  contrary  to  our  interests,  and
probably  to theirs  as  well.
—Sen. Fulbright,  at  Yale,  April 4,  abridged.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  April  19, 1971
As  Early  As  1964  Nixon  Wanted  Invasions  of  Laos  and  The  North
(Continued  from  Page  One)
hard  to  find  a  place  on  the  map  of  the  world  "where  the  U.S.
is  not  being  kicked  around,  insulted,  blackmailed  or  threat-
ened."    This   struck  the  first  note   of   Nixon's   now   familiar
"poor,  pitiful   giant"   theme.    On   his  return  from   a  tour  of
Asia   (April   16)   he  called  for   military  action  against  bases
in  North  Vietnam  and  Laos  to  show  the  "enemy  he  can  no
longer  have  privileged  sanctuary," and  repeated  a  call  for   "hot
pursuit"  into  Laos  and  North  Vietnam  in  a  speech  two  days
later  before  that  favorite  forum  of  his,  the  American Society
of  Newspaper  Editors.  "To  win  the  war,"  he  told  them,  "the
initiative  must  be  carried  north."    Perhaps  Nixon   (who  was
about  to  address  the  Society  again  as  this  was  written)  likes
to  address  our  senior  editors because  they  so  obligingly  forget
what  he  does  not  wish  the  public  to  remember.
Against  A  Negotiated  Withdrawal
When  Johnson  finally  began  to  bomb  North  Vietnam  and
,to  send  in  combat  troops  in  1965,  it  was  a  triumph  for  Nixon.
He  opened  the  year by proposing  (Jan.  26)  that  the  U.S.  Navy
and  Air  Force  be  used  to  bomb  supply  routes and  staging  areas
in  Laos  and  Vietnam;  he  conceded  this  might  bring  a  direct
conflict  wtih  China  but  said  negotiation  would  be tantamount
to  "surrendering  on  the  installment  plan."    After   Johnson's
first  air  raids on  North  Vietnam  in  February, Nixon   declared
them  insufficient  and  called  for  U.S.  warplanes  to  bomb  supply
lines  "day  by  day,  and  for  that  matter,  night  by  night"   (Feb.
10).    Fifteen  days  later  he  asked  Johnson  to  reject  any  peace
talks  that  would  require  U.S.  withdrawal from  South  Vietnam.
On  April  2  he  approved   Johnson's   introduction  of  gas  war-
fare.   In  September  after  Johnson  had  widened  the  war  in  the
air  and  on  the  ground,  Nixon   returned  from  another  visit  to
Vietnam   and   (Meet    the   Press,   Sept.   12)   declared  himself
more  optimistic.  He  called  for  the  bombing  of  military  targets
in   Hanoi   and  two  months  later   (same   program,   Nov.    21)
asked  Johnson   to  mine  Haiphong   harbor.    In  November   he
joined  Dean  Acheson  in  signing  a  Freedom   House  manifesto
saying  that  critics  of  the  war  "have  a  right  to  be  heard,  but
they  impose  on  the  rest  of  us  the  obligation  to  make unmistak-
.ably  clear  the  nation's  firm  commitment"   to  Vietnam.
Mathematical  Miracles  In  Laos
"Look   at   it  this  way,"  a  doubtful   American  officer
said.    "The   Vietnamese  said   they   have   killed  nearly
14,000  Communists  in  Laos.   If  you  figure  that  at  least
two  are  wounded  for  every  soldier  killed,  that  means
at   least   42,000   Communists  were   put   out   of   action.
Since   there   were   supposed   to   be   only   30,000  Com-
munists  in the  area  in  Laos, they  are  now  minus 12,000."
"Now     the   command   says   we   killed   something  like
15,000  trucks  along  the  trail  since  the  dry  season  be-
gan   in  October,"  he  continued.   "They   had  only  about
12,000,  so  again  Hanoi  is  short,  this  time  about  3,000
trucks.    So,   if   they   are   minus  9,000   men   and  3,000
trucks,  it's  a  wonder  they  can  still  keep  going.
—Alvin  Sinister  from  Saigon,  N.Y.   Times  April  1.
Johnson  could  never  do  enough  in  Vietnam  to  please  Nixon.
In   August  of   1966,   after   another  visit  to  Vietnam,  Nixon
called  for  a  25  percent  increase  in  U.S.  troops,  bringing   the
total  to  500,000  men.   He  said  he  was  "convinced"  that  such  a
massive   buildup  would   reduce   casualties!    He   warned   the
American   Legion   later   that   month   "if   Vietnam   falls,   the
Pacific  will  be  transformed into  a  Red  ocean."   A  year  later  he
was  still  echoing  military  criticism  of  Johnson   for    "gradual
escalation"  and  calling  instead   (Boston   Aug.   21,   1967)    for
"massive  pressure"  short  only of  nuclear weapons.   In   October
of  that  year  in  Chicago Nixon  reached  a  new point  of  hysteria.
He  declared  the  alternative to  a  "successful"  conclusion  of  the
Vietnam  war  might  be  World  War  III.   He  said  it  was 'neces-
sary  to  make  the  American  people  realize  U.S.  "vital  strategic
interests"  in  the  conflict  and  to  bring  home  to  them  that  "this
war  is  about  peace  and  freedom  in  the  world."   In  February
1968   he   criticized   Johnson's   "bombing  pause,"   a   pause   in
which  some  people  hoped  negotiations  might  begin.
Can  a  man  so  tricky  and  so  brazen  as  to  so  distort  that  past
record   ever  be  trusted ?   The   record   helps   us  to  understand
what  Nixon  meant  on  April  7  when  he  appealed   for  support
"to  end  this  war—but  to  end  it  in  a  way that  will  strengthen
trust  for  America  around  the  world."   What  he  means  is  not
trust  but  fear.   What  he  means  is  that  America's  will  must  be
imposed  on  Indochina,  at  whatever  cost  to  its  people  and  ours.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed  Envelope
Bi-Weekly  Mart
—To  subscribe   or  to  send  a  gift   subscription,   send
$5 with  your  address  and  zip  code  to  the  address  below.
—To get  Stone's new collection, "Polemics and Proph-
ecies:    1967-70"   (Random  House:   $10)   at   the   special
$8.95  price  postpaid  for  Bi-Weekly  readers,  send  check
or  money  order  to  the  address  below.
—If  you  want  Stone's  new  paperback,  "The  Killings
at  Kent  State:   How  Murder Went  Unpunished"   (New
York  Review  and  Vintage  Press)  the  price  is  $1.95.   It
contains   the  full   text,  available   nowhere  else,   of  the
so-called   "secret   FBI   report",   the   summary   of   FBI
findings  prepared  by  the  Civil  Rights   Division  of  the
Justice   Department   but  never   submitted   to  the   Ohio
Grand  Jury.
—Stone's  "Hidden  History  of  the  Korean  War",  the
inside  story  of  America's   first   Vietnam,   long  out  of
print  is  available  again  (Monthly  Review  Press)   $7.50
postpaid.
—Paperback   editions    (Vintage    Press)   of   Stone's
earlier  collections,  "In  A Time  of  Torment"  ($1.95)  and
"The  Haunted  Fifties"  ($2.45)  at  bookstores.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th Street  NW,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
$5  A  YEAR                               V19/71
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Plans  For  The  Double  Issue  On  SALT  Were  Delayed  By  The  Nixon  Report  April  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED