I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971may31.pdf

============================================================

Nixon's  Tricky  SALT  Announcement, P.  2
They  All  Treated  Dissent  As  Subversive  and  Criminal
Unity  carried  to  unreasonable   extremes   can  destroy   a  country.  The  Kaiser  achieved  unity  in  Germany.  Hitler  again
achieved  the  same  unity  at  the  cost  of  freedom  many  years  later.   Mussolini  achieved  unity   in  Italy.   The  leaders  of
Japan  through   a   method   of   so-called  thought  control   achieved   unity   in   Japan.    In   every   case   policies   adopted   by
these  enforcers  of  unity  led  to  the  destruction  of  their  own   country  .  .  .  Today  it  is  just  as  easy   for  us  to  adopt  a
false  foreign  policy  leading  to  the  destruction  of  our  people  .  . .  The best  safeguard  against fatal  error  lies  in  continuous
criticism  and  discussion.—Senator   Taft    protesting   in  1951  against   the  first  commitment  of  U.S.  troops  to  NATO   with-
out  Congressional  approval.   Quoted  by  Fulbright  to  the  Senate  May  19 in  debate  on  the  Ma.nsf.eld   troop  cut   amendment.
IF.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX,  No.  11
MAY  31,  1971      '°'WASHINGTON,  D. C.20  CENTS
Lyndon's  Barbecue  and  the  Mansfield  Amendment
There  is  another  Texas,  and  we  are  indebted  to  it  for  an
irreverent  view  of  that  huge  monument  Lyndon Johnson  has
built   himself   in  Austin.   During   the   two  May   days   when
10,000   people   were   arrested   here   commemorating  another
LBJ  memorial,  the  Vietnam  war, Mrs.  Johnson  gave  the  press
a  preview.   One  of  those  invited  was  Molly  Ivins,  co-editor
of  the  always  impious  Texas  Observer.   Her  tart  and  hilari-
ous  description  appears  in  its  May  21  issue.   "When  he  dies,"
was  one  whispered  comment  after  a  trip  through  the  window-
less  Pyramid-like  mausoleum-library,  "they'll  put  him  inside
and  seal  it  and  let  Lady Bird  throw  herself  in  a  pyre  on   top."
For  visitors  who  don't  want  to  read  a  lot  of  musty  old  docu-
ments  there  are  mannequins  of  Luci  and  Lynda  wearing  their
original  wedding  dresses  and  a miniature theatre in  which they
can  see  films  of  LBJ's  Finest  Hours.   There  is  even  a  large
reproduction   of   the   first   bulletin   Johnson   received   on   the
Tonkin Gulf.  Miss  Ivins  suggests  "a  display  of  Great  Moments
that got left  out"—
The  campaign when the  dead  folks  voted  in alphabeti-
cal  order  .  .  .  the  scar,  the  beagles'  ears  .  .  .  the day
we  invaded  the  Dominican  Republic,  those  winning  TV
performances  when  he  looked  like  a  stomach  with  eyes
and  told  us  to  pray,  Abe  Fortas,  Bobby  Baker  and  other
ethical  people,   "we  will  not  send   American  boys"  and
other  great  promises  . . . *
We  half  expect  that  Lyndon  will  match  those  other  modern
necrophiliac   Pharaohs  and  arrange  to  have  his  body  put  on
permanent  exhibition  in  it  like  Lenin  in  Moscow.   A  modest
charge   to  see  the   First   Embalmed  President   could   go  to  a
foundation   for   needy   oil  men  who  had   run   through   their
depletion   allowances.
Two Parties  But  Siamese  Twins
Some   future  Gibbon   may  observe   that   as  American  im-
perialism  ebbed,  it  was  fitting  that  one  of  its Presidents  should
behave  with  the  gargantuan   ostentation  of  a  late  Roman  Em-
peror.   The  mammoth  barbecue  with  which  the  Library  was
dedicated,  and  the  clan  who  gathered   for  it,  can—like  the
fight  on  the  Mansfield   amendment   a  few  days  earlier—tell
us  a  lot  about  the  present   state  of  the  Union.   For  in  both
we  could  see  the  old  Imperial  Establishment  close  ranks;  the
two  party  system  became   one  when   the  continuance  of   the
Pax  Americana   was  in   danger.    Here  were   old   antagonists
gathered—Goldwater   and  Nixon   with   Johnson   in   a  good-
fellowship   possible   only  for   those   who   disagree  merely  on
secondary  issues  and  the  possession   of   office.   Here  were  the
* The  Texas  Observer's  address  is  504  W.  24th  St.,  Austin,
Tex.  78705.  It  is  25  cents  and  $7  a  year.   We  recommend it.
The  Fib  That  Sold  The  Senate  on  NATO
Sen.  HICKENLOOPER:   I  believe  you  said  earlier
in your testimony today that  it  was  contemplated that a
great  portion  of  the  armament,  or  the  developed  arma-
ment,  of  Western  Europe,  in  the  nations  of  this  pact
would  be  carried  under  their  own  weight.   I   presume
that  refers  also  to  the  manpower  in  their  armies.   I
am  interested  in  getting  the  answers  as  to  whether or
not  we  are  expected to  supply  substantial  numbers  .  .  .
of  troops  and  troop organizations, of  American  troops,
to  implement  the  land  power  of  Western  Europe  prior
to  aggression.   Is   that  contemplated  under  Article  3,
where  we  agree  to  maintain and  develop the  collective
capacity  to  resist?   In  other words, are  we  going  to  be
expected  to  send  substantial  numbers  of   troops  over
there  as  a  more  or  less  permanent  contribution to  the
development  of  these  countries'   capacity  to  resist?
Secretary  of  State  ACHESON:   The  answer  to  that
question,  Senator,  is  a  clear  and  absolute  "No".
—From  the  original  hearing  on NATO   before   Senate
Foreign  Relations  April  27, 1949.  Page  47.
familiar  hangers-on  of  the  American  imperial  court,  the  ex-
idealists  turned  lobbyists  and  lawyer-servants,  the  fixers  and
the  flatterers  who  raise  campaign  funds   from  their  corporate
masters  for  either party.  In  so joyous a  burst  of bi-partisanship
none   felt  more  at  home.   Here  was  Nixon  hailing   Johnson
(and  by implication praising himself)  in  saying that  the  times
required   Presidents  who  put   principle  above  party.    "Prin-
ciple"  was shorthand  for  the  Vietnam war  to  which  they  were
equally  dedicated, for  a NATO  which maintains the  American
empire   over   Western    Europe,   for   that   Johnson    Doctrine
which   became  a  Nixon   Doctrine   for   extending   a   Monroe
Doctrine   over   East   Asia,   and   for   the   far-flung   forces   re-
quired  to  police  the  world's  air  and  seas  and  more  than  half
its land mass.
Here   was   Johnson   expressing   the   liberal   mythology   of
U.S.  imperialism  when  he  said  his  Library  records  "the  time
when  liberty  was challenged  in  Europe  and  Latin  America  and
Asia"  and  "America's  responses  to  those  challenges."   Liberty?
Bosch  deposed  in  Santo  Domingo ?  Cuba  driven  into Stalinism
by  U.S.  blockade?   Brazil under  its  military torturers?   Greece
pushed   into   Fascism?   Franco   with   a   U.S.   crutch   for   his
decayed   old   age?    Barely  disguised   police   states  under   our
patronage  in  South  Korea,  Taiwan,  South  Vietnam,   Thailand
and  the  Philippines ?
And  there,  in  the  happy  crowd  at  the  barbecue,  as  in  the
vote  on  the  Mansfield  amendment,  one  could  see  those  like
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May  31, 1971
ON   SALT: Nixon's  Exaggerated  Claims  Make  Circumspection  Advisable
THE  FIRST  THING  To  BE  SAID about  the  President's  new  an-
nouncement  on  the  SALT  talks  is  that  no  one  here  in  Wash-
ington   among   all  the   experts   knows  what   it   really  means.
The  second   is  that  the  first  practical  effect   will  be  to  stymie
opposition  in  Congress  to  the  new  military  budget.   This  pro-
vides  S7.6  billion  in  new  obligational  authority  for  strategic
weapons  systems,  including  more  MIRVs,  more  ABMs,  a  new
bomber,   a  new  long-distance   nuclear  submarine  and"a  new
airborne  warning  and  control  system  (AWACS).   The  budget
also  provides  $900 million  more  for  research  and   development
of  future  weaponry.   These  will  be  defended  as  "bargaining
chips"  and  a  new  wave  of  optimism  about   SALT  will  make
it   difficult   to  cut  them.    Any   proposed   cuts  will   be  termed
"unilateral    disarmament."    Thus   the   SALT    talks   continue
to  serve  as  a  cover  for  an  intensified   arms  race.  Arms  control
negotiations  have  become  the  Pentagon's  chief  weapon  in  dis-
arming—the  movement   against  the   arms   race.
Millennium Just Around The  Corner
Nixon's   own  gloss  on  the  astringent  and  ambiguous  joint
communique   ended   by  saying  that   if   successful   his   "major
breakthrough"  would  open  "a  new  era"  in  which  "all  nations
will  devote  more  of  their  energies  and  their  resources,  not  to
weapons  of  war,  but  to  the  works  of   peace."   This  is  super-
inflation.   There  is  no  sign  here  whatsoever,  even  at  the  best,
of   more  than  a  readiness  to  negotiate   a  numerical  limit  on
strategic  weapons  while  a  qualitative  strategic  arms  race  goes
on.   Work  on  a  new  bomber,  a  new  submarine  and  a  better
MIRV  would  continue.   In  the  meantime  any  savings  would
be  transferred  to  an  upgrading  of  conventional  arms  in  which
the  Pentagon   feels  that  it  is  lagging.
The  announcement  would  have  been  less  suspect  if  couched
with   more   restraint.   There   was  a   deadlock  at   SALT   over
the  agenda,   i.e.  what  to   begin  negotiating   after   18  months
of  preliminary "discussion."   A  compromise  was  reached.   The
U.S.  gave  in  and  agreed  to  "concentrate"  on  an  ABM  agree-
ment  while  the  Soviets  gave  in  and  agreed  to  negotiate   "cer-
tain  measures"   limiting  offensive   arms  as  well.   This   was  a
bit  of  progress  in  these  glacially  slow  talks,  but  unless  secret
. understandings   have  already  been   reached,  this  is  only   the
beginning  of  a  long  and  complex  wrangle.
The  big  question  is  this:   if  both  sides  agree  to  limit  their
respective   ABMs,  what  do  we  offer   to  limit  in  the  field  of
offensive  arms  in  return  for  a  Soviet  agreement  to  limit  their
Bomb  China  By  The  Same   Logic?
Sen.   CHURCH:  The  American  participation  in  the
invasion  of  Cambodia  and  Laos  was  done  on  the  theory
that  the  President   had the  right  to  send  our  troops   into
those  countries   to   make  war  in  order   to   protect   our
troops  in  South  Vietnam,  that  it  was  necessary  to  inter-
dict  the  supply  routes  that  constituted   a  threat   to  our
troops.    The   same   argument    could   be   made   for   an
American   aerial   bombardment  of  the  supply  lines  that
China  uses  to  send  war  material  into  North   Vietnam.
Do   you   believe   the   President    has   constitutional    au-
thority  to  commence  the  bombing  of  these  routes  with-
out  first  securing  the  consent   of   Congress?
Sec'y  ROGERS:  Well,  there  again,  I  would  want  to
know  a  lot  more  about  the  situation  before  I  answered
it  hypothetically.   I  think  under  those  conditions  which
you  have  outlined,  clearly  we  would  come   to  Congress
and  present  the  facts.   Now  —
Sen.  CHURCH:  But  you  did  not  come  to  Congress
in the  case of  Laos and Cambodia.
Sec'y  ROGERS:  No,  and we went  all over-this.
Sen.  CHURCH:  Is  this  because  China  is  a  big  coun-
try  and  Cambodia  and  Laos   are  small   countries?
Sec'y   ROGERS:  No,  it  is  quite  different.   China   is
not  used  as  a  sanctuary   area.
—Before  Senate  Foreign  Relations May  H   (abr)
SS-9S,  which  the  Pentagon  has  built  up  as  the  bugaboo?   An
Administration  spokesman warned at the White  House  briefing
that  any  attempt  at  a  general  limit  on   offensive   arms  would
come  up  against  the  problem  which  has  been  the  main stum-
bling  block—the  "forward   based  systems."   We   have   7,000
"forward   based"  nuclear  weapons  in  Western  Europe  and  on
our  naval ships in  its  waters.  These  can  blast  Soviet  cities  and
bases  as  surely  as  our  more  distant  weapons.   They  want  these
counted  as  "strategic".    We   call  them   "tactical"   and   would
exclude  them  from  the  SALT  talks.   It  is  as  if  the  Soviets  had
nuclear  weapons  in  Cuba  or  the  Caribbean  but   insisted  that
they  were  only  "tactical."
An  ABM  agreement  would  put  a  brake  on  the  arms  race.
It  is easier  to  negotiate  than  one  on  offensive  arms.   It  would
maintain  the  insane balance-of-terror  for  a  little while  longer.
If  this  is  what  Nixon   is  heading  for,  with  a  little  face-saver
on  offensive   arms,  we're  all  for   it.   But  it's  the  ballyhoo—
and  the  effect  on  the  coming  defense  budget  debate  in  Con-
gress—that make us circumspect.
On  The  Folly  of  Sending Congressmen
Chairman  Fulbright.   One of  the  bills  proposes,  Mr.  Stev-
enson's,  that  we  send  a  Congressional  delegation,  to  well,
observe  the  elections.   What  do  you  think  about  that?
Don  Luce.   I  am  opposed  to  it.   Fulbright.   Why?
Luce.   To  begin  with,  I  do  not  believe  that  the   elections
this  fall  in  Vietnam  can  be  meaningful.   The  candidates  can-
not  speak  out  about   the  major  issues  of  the  times.    They
cannot,  for  example,   speak   about   a  coalition    government.
Truong  Dinh  Dzu,  who  was  the  runner-up  in  the  1967  elec-
tions  has  been  in  jail  since   1968  for  just  proposing   talks
with  the  NLF.   As  I  mentioned  before  there  are  a  hundred
thousand   political   prisoners.   These   prisoners  cannot   par-
ticipate in the election ...
Fulbright.   Were  you  there  when  the  Congressional  dele-
gation  was  there  observing  the  last  election?
Luce.   Yes,  I  was.
Fulbright.   What  effect  did  they  have  on  the  election?
Luce.   I  think   the  first  thing  which  they  did,  the  worst
thing,  was  that  they  legitimized  an  election  that  the  Viet-
namese  did not  believe  in  ...     —for  example,  the  elections
To  "Observe"  Saigon's  Rigged  Elections
committee    in   the   constituent   assembly    voted   something
like  16  to  2  against  validating  the   election.
Fulbright.   What  I  am  talking  about  is  the  role  of  Ameri-
can  Congressmen,  are  they  equipped  and  capable   of   insur-
ing  a fair election?
Luce.   I  don't  think  they  did  anything   and  I  don't  believe
they  can do  very  much ...   A  comment  from  a  Vietnamese
friend  of   mine  was  this.   He  said,   "Well,  in  your   1968,  in
your  elections,  we  are  going   to   send   22  Vietnamese   who
don't  speak   English  to  the  United  States  for  four  days   to
see  if  your  elections  are  fair,"  and this  is  what  we  did.  We
sent  22  Americans   who  didn't   speak   Vietnamese  to   Viet-
nam  for  four days  and they  came  back  and  said  the  elections
were  fair.
—Don   Luce  May   13   before   Senate  Foreign   Relations.
Luce  first  went   to  South  Vietnam  in  1959  as  a  volunteer
in  agriculture.  It  was  he  who  led  visiting  Congressmen   to
the  "tiger  cage"  prisons  of  Con  Son  last  year.   The  Saigon
government  expelled   him    OH   May   9  in  retaliation  for   his
independence  as  an  investigator  and  free  lance  journalist.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Si-Weekly,  May 31, 1971
A  Campaign  of  "Harassment  and  Interdiction" Against  The  Peace  Movement
THE   GOVERNMENT   Is   MOVING  from   the   policy  of   mass
arrest   of   demonstrators    to   mass   harassment   of   the    peace
movement.   The  strategy  is  to  tie  up  leaders  and  funds  in  a
multiplicity  of  actions without  worrying much  about  evidence,
legality  or  the  ultimate  outcome.   The  tactics  recall  the  indis-
criminate   "harassment   and   interdiction"  tactics  notorious   in
Vietnam,  where  the  U.S.  military  doesn't  care  how  many vil-
lagers  are  hurt  so  long  as  a  few  guerrillas may  be  hit.   These
cynical  tactics  are  effective  up  to  a  point,  the  point  where  the
overkill  swells  the  ranks  of  those  the  government  is  trying  to
crush.   The   negative  effects   are  already  apparent   here  in  the
District  of  Columbia  where  passersby  were  swept  up   by  the
police,  and  many  radicalized by  their  experience.   A  revealing
statistic  is  that  of  the  first  2,000  May  Day  arrest  cases  proc-
essed   in   the   D.C.   Superior   Court,   the   vast   majority   were
found  not  guilty  or  had  the  charges   against   them  dropped.
Of   thou  u'ho  contested   the   charges  against  them   only  jour
u-ere found   guilty.
Conspiracy—On the Platform and TV!
Of    the   May   Day   leadership,   Rennie   Davis   and    John
Froines  have  been  arrested  for  conspiracy, though  no  evidence
of  illegal  plotting or  planning was adduced  at their preliminary
hearing,   only   public   statements.    It   is   a   strange  conspiracy
which  is  carried  on  in  the  open  and  on  TV.   Bradford  Lyttle,
a  lifelong  pacifist  and  a  gentle  creature,  has  been  arrested  on
the  preposterous  charge  of  assaulting  a  policeman;  he  claims
he  was  grabbed   by  the  police  from  behind  outside  the  Justice
Department  and  did  no  more  than  drop  his  bullhorn.    Signifi-
cantly  this  is  an  escalation  from  the  original  charge   of  dis-
orderly  conduct  and  prosecution  has  been  taken  over  from  the
District   U.S.   Attorney   by  the   Internal  Security  division   of
Justice.   A  special  grand  jury  was  about  to  be  convened  when
we  went  to  press  and  will  no  doubt  be  used,  Harrisburg  and
Seattle  style,  to  put  all  sorts  of  people  through  the  wringer  in
an  effort  to  elicit  testimony  under  the  threat  of   contempt.
The  House  Internal  Security Committee  has  also  swung  into
action.   Its  first  defeat  came  when  a  Federal  Judge,  on  appeal
from  the  National  Peace  Action  Coalition,  ruled  that  the  com-
mittee  may  no  longer  seize  its  bank  records  without  giving  it
notice  and   an   opportunity   to   challenge   the   legality  of   the
subpoena.  A  similar  preliminary  ruling  was  made  against  Sen-
ate  Internal   Security  last  month   in  a  suit  by  the   Progressive
Labor  Party.   These  committees  not  only  have  access  by  Presi-
Double  Gee  Whiz  Dept.
The  House   Internal  Security  Committee,  on  an  an-
nounced   hunt   for   evidence   that   the   recent   anti-war
demonstrations  here  were  Communist inspired, was  told
that  the  Washington Monument was  in  danger  of  being
destroyed  by  the  peace  demonstrators.   At  least  that  is
the  theory  of   Russell  Dickenson,  director  of   National
Capitol   Parks,  who  testified   yesterday.    That   is   why
40  U.S.   park  policemen spent  much  of  the  night  of  the
April   24   demonstration   inside   the   monument  while
thousands   listened  to  rock  music  on  the  grounds  out-
side.   "Otherwise we  might  not  have  had  the  Washing-
ton   Monument,"   said   Mr.  Dickenson   to   a   surprised
committee.—Wasluiigtoii  Daily  News  May  19
And  that's  a  committee  ordinarily  ready  to  believe
anything.
dential  order  to  income  tax  records  but  are  the  only  agencies
of  government  that  subpoena  bank  records  without  notice  to
the  owners.   This  is  a  curious  way  to  manifest  their  devotion
to  private  property.   The  House  Committee   (by  reading  the
Trotzkyist  Militant   and   the   Communist   Daily   World)    dis-
covered  some  well-known  Trotzkyists  in  the  leadership  of  the
Peace  Coalition and  some  well-known  Communists  in  that  of
the  Peoples  Coalition  for  Peace  and  Justice.   Neither  fact  is  a
secret,   and   we  believe  the  country  is  too   sophisticated,   too
bored   with  the  Red  menace  and  too  hostile  to  the  Vietnam
war  to  be  impressed  by  this  replay of  McCarthyism.   We  think
the  attempted  smear  will  boomerang.
An   18-year-old  testified   that   Fred   Halstead,   who  was  the
Socialist   Workers    (Trotzkyist)    candidate   for   President    in
1968,   seemed   to  be  in   charge   of   the  NPAC   office   because
"he  had  the  key  to  the  Coke   machine."    The  revelation  may
cost   Halstead   the   nomination   in   1972.    The   witness   who
turned  him  in  said  he  had  spent  three  nights  at  the  NPAC
office   stuffing   envelopes   to  find  out  what  was  going  on   for
the  Freedom  Leadership  Foundation,  a  subsidiary of  the  Holy
Spirit  Association  for  the  Unification  of  World   Christianity
started  by a Korean  anti-Communist gitrn.  His  ecstatic  followers
live  in  communes  and  hold  an  annual  mass  marriage  in  Seoul.
Sitting  on  the  Committee,  vigilant and  militant,  was  the  Birch-
ite  Congressman   Schmitz  of  California.  When  a  Birchite  can
use   a   Committee   of   Congress   to   expose   Trotzkyites,   U.S.
politics  need  a  psychiatrist.
Twelve Members of Congress Assail HUAC/HISC Campaign to Smear The Peace Movement
Only  three  weeks  ago—during  a  debate  in  the  House  over
funds  for  the  House  Internal  Security  Committee  (HISC)
—we  cautioned our colleagues  that  continued funding of  this
committee   could  only   result   in  continued  harrassment  of
those  individuals and  groups  involved  in  activities  of  which
the  committee  does not  approve.  Our warnings  were  ignored,
the  committee  received  more  money  than  ever  before  and
HISC—in  what  appears  to  be  an  attempt  to  discredit  the
peace  movement  in  this  country—is  beginning  hearings  on
organizations   that  have  sponsored  anti-war   demonstrations
here  in Washington  over the last month.
Once   again   HISC  has   determined   to   ignore   the   First
Amendment  rights  of  every  citizen  of  this  country  and  will
attempt  to  intimidate  those  who  would  exercise  their  rights
to  peacefully   protest  a  policy  of  this   government.
However,   if   HISC  is   to  disparage   the   entire   anti-war
movement,  it  will have  to  take  on an overwhelming majority
of  the   people  in  this  country.   Anti-war  sentiment   is  not
restricted   to  a  few  dissenting   groups  or  individuals at  this
point  in  time;  it  is  shared  by  over  73  percent  of  the  public,
a  percentage  that  is  constantly  growing.   HISC  cannot  at-
tack  or  single  out  any   individual   anti-war  group   at   this
time  without  impugning the  integrity  of  millions  of  Ameri-
cans   who   are   opposed   to   our   involvement  in   Southeast
Asia.   By  initiating   another  witch  hunt,  HISC  is   actually
questioning   the  integrity   of  a  majority  of  Americans  who
desire  peace,  who  abhor  killing  and  senseless  destruction,
who  long  for  the  day  when  billions  of  dollars  now  spent  on
bullets   and   guns   can   be   used   to   revitalize  our  decaying
cities,  to  improve  our  schools,   and  to  provide  health   care
and  a  decent  home  for  every  American.
In  this  context   HISC  is  guilty  of  what  we  would  term
the  ultimate un-American activity  and we  call  on  all  Ameri-
cans  to  join  with  us  in  expressing  abhorrence  of  this  latest
and  most  outrageous   action  of  this   committee.
—Statement  -issued  May   18  by  Democratic  Congressmen
Burton   (Cal),    Cony cm   (Mich),    Edivards    (Cat),   Fraser
(Minn),   Harringtan   (Mass),   Koch   (NY),    Helstoski     (NJ),
Kastenmeier   (Wise),   Mikva    (III),    Rosenthal    (NY)     and
Ryan  (NY).     They  were  joined   by  Bella  Abzug     (NY).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May 31, 1971
Nixon's  Credibility  Gap  Now   Slightly  Larger  Even  Than  LBJ's
(Continued  I'rnm  Page   One)
Muskie  and   Humphrey  who  are  prepared,  albeit  after   some
tactical  retreat  in  South  Vietnam,  to  carry  on  the  Pax  Ameri-
cana  with   all  that   entails.    When   someone   told   Humphrey
at  the  barbecue  that  the  crowd   seemed   like  "the government
in  exile"   he  replied   (Washing/an    Post   May  23), "Oh, no.
This   is  a  government   in   preparation.   You've   heard   of   re-
cycling  haven't  you?"   There  was  more  truth  in  the  jest  than
in  a  dozen  prepared  speeches.    Recycling  the  leftovers  of   the
Johnson   regime,  particularly  this  political  Beagle  whose   ears
LBJ  had  twisted  irreparably out  of  shape,  for  re-use.   If   the
bi-partisan   Imperial  Establishment  has   its  way,   we   can   see
here  the  shape  of  the  next  election, shaped  so that  the  military-
industrial  complex  can  stay  in  business  no  matter  who  wins.
Still  Drafting   Jesus
The   spectacle   was   ripe   for   a   new   Satyricon.    There   was
the  Rev.  Billy  Graham   between  barbecue  munches  giving  an
interview  on  revitalizing  the  Christian  spirit,  perhaps   in  time
. for  some  more  Mylais  in  Asia.   There  was  Lyndon  embracing
that   overgrown   Boy  Scout,  Gen. Westmoreland   and   giving
him   absolution   for   Johnson's   military   mistakes.   Kept   at   a
distance  were  500  anti-war  demonstrators,  among   them  Viet-
nam   veterans  who  threw  their  medals   over   the   police   lines
while  Elizabeth  Carpenter,   once  Mrs. Johnson's   press   secre-
tary,   shouted    at   the   demonstrators,   "Who  do   you   think
you're   picketing   anyhow ?   The   people   in   there  are  people
who  fought  for  things  you  believe  in—civil  rights  and  educa-
tion."    The   plea   was  pathetic  in   its   inability   to   understand
the   revulsion  of   the   young   against  the   evils  this   superficial
and   opportunist   liberalism  masked,   or   the   swelling   loss  of
public  confidence  generally.   A  new  Gallup  poll   shows   that
Nixon's   credibility  gap   is  about   the   same  as  Johnson's  at  a
comparable   point   in  the  latter's  Presidency—6l
c
/c   disbelieve
Nixon   as  65^(   disbelieved  Johnson  but   both   go   on   as  if
nothing   had   happened.    Among   the   displays   of   supposedly
memorable  campaign  statements  Johnson  showed  Nixon  in  his
tour  of  the  Library  was  the  latter's  "I  believe in  the'American
dream."   What  dream?   The  dream  is  becoming  a  nightmare
of   rotting   cities,  growing   race   revolt   and   a   decline  of   the
•once  almighty dollar  as  we  continue  to  squander  on  our  over-
Speaking'  of  Precipitate   Action
Sen.   SYMINGTON:   In  the  debate  on  the  Mansfield
amendment   which   I  fully  support,   the   word   "precipi-
tate"  has  been  used   [as  if]  we  were  rushing  into  some-
thing.   For  five   lonfj  years   I  have   been   one   of   those
who  supported   efforts   to   achieve   a  substantial    reduc-
tion   of   the   American   forces   in   Europe.    On   October
26,   1963, President    Eisenhower    in   an   article    said:
"Though  for  eight  years  in  the  White  House   I  believed
and   announced   to   my   associates  that   a   reduction   of
American   strength   in   Europe   should   be   initiated   as
soon  as  the  European  economy  was  restored,  the  matter
was  then  considered  too  delicate   a  political  question  to
raise.   I  believe  the  time  has  now  come  when  we  should
start  withdrawing some  of  these  troops.   One  American
division  in  Europe  can  'show  the  flag"  as  definitely  as
can several."  Do you agree?
Sec'y  ROGERS:   Well,  I  do  not  like  to  disagree  with
President   Eisenhower,    but—no,   I,   we,   if   you    would
like  to  discuss  the  Mansfield  Resolution   I  can. We  are
very  much  opposed  to  it,  Senator,  for  a  lot  of  reasons.
Sen.  SYMINGTON:   Senator  Mansfield  only  wants  to
take   out  half   as   many   as   President   Eisenhower sug-
gested eight  years  ago.  Do you even disagree  with  that?
Sec'y  ROGERS:   I  think  that  the  passage  of  this  bill
at  this  time  would  be  a  very  serious  mistake.
—Before  Senate Foreign  Relations May  H   (abr)
grown   military  establishment  abroad  the  billions  we  need   for
reconstruction  at   home.
Behind   the   frustrated   debate   on   the   Mansfield   amend-
ment  to  cut  our  NATO  troops   in  half   were  the   interrelated
issues  of  spending  priorities,  of  imperialism  and   of   a   Presi-
dential  power  which  has  escaped  Congressional  control.    The
barbecue   was  a  celebration  of   the   joint  victory  won   by   the
dominant   forces   in   both   parties  in   resisting   change   on   all
three  fronts.  The  victory  is  precarious.   As  on  Vietnam,  there
must  be  some   tactical  retreat  to   hold   the   line.   But   a  little
give  here  and   there   will   not   do  the  job.  Without   a  giant
and  radical  reordering  of  priorities,  the  American  dream  will
end   in  tragedy.   The   old   bipartisan   leadership  menaces   our
country's  future.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy   Of   This  Issue  To  A   Friend   If  You  Send  Us  A  Long,  Stamped,   Self  Addressed   Envelope
FOR  STONE'S  NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  special  pre-publication  price  of  $8.95
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics  and  Prophecies:
1967-70  (Random House).  Regularly $10.
(To)    Name
Street    .........
City   ....................................   Zip................ State....................
Indicate  if   gift   announcement  wished   Q
Please  renew  D    or  enter  D    a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street    .....................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................  State
I.  F.  Stone's   Bi-Weekly
6/31/71
4420  29th  St.   N. W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420   29th   St.,   N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weckly.   2<1  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washinprton.  D.C. Published   every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.. N.W..  Washington,
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manaser,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;  $6  in  Canada-
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  517  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
D.C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED