I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971nov29.pdf

============================================================

Jackson's  Throttlebottom-Style  Debut, P.  2
When  An  Evasion  Is  As  Good  As  An  Answer
Q.  A  recent  Harris  poll  indicated  that  the  American  people  would  like  to  see  our  troops  out  of  Vietnam  by  May  1.   I
think  the  vote  was  about  3-to-l.   Do  you  think  there  is  even  a  slight  possibility  that  we  could  get  them  all  out  by  then?
A.  Since  I  have  been  Secretary  of  Defense,  I  have  refused  to  make  projections  or  forecasts.—Laird  on  Meet  the   Press
two  days  after   Nixon's  latest  troop  withdrawal   announcement.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX,  No.  20
NOVEMBER  29,   1971
WASHINGTON,  D. C.20  CENTS
What  Rehnquist  Saw As A  Black  Day  In  The  Court
Our  Committee  .  .  .  limits  its  conclusions  to  the  profes-
sional  competence, judicial  temperament,  and  integrity  of
the  nominee .  .  .  We recognized, however,  that  in  the  selec-
tion  of  a  person  for  the  Supreme  Court  by  the  President,
and   the   consideration  of   that   selection   by   the   Senate,
there  are  involved  other  factors  of  a  broad  political  and
ideological  nature.
—ABA   Committee   letter   to  Senate   Judiciary   Nov.   2
unanimously  approving  the  nomination  of  Louis  F.  Powell,
The   real   question   is:   can  this  country  afford,   at   this
perilous  time,  an  individual  on  the  court  with  an  ideology
so  out  of  tune  with  the  times  that  if  his  philosophy should
prevail,  even  in  part,  it  would  tear  at  the  slender  threads
now  holding  us  together?   Make  no  mistake  about  it,  the
Court  is  viewed  as  the  last  hope  by  millions of  Americans
and  especially blacks  and other  oppressed minorities.
—Rep.  Conyers  of  Detroit,  testifying   against   the  Rehn-
quist  nomination  for  the  Black  Congressional  Caucus.
You  tell  a  Senator  that  Rehnquist  doesn't  really believe
in  the  Bill  of  Rights  nor  in  civil  rights  and  he  asks  you,
"What  have  you  got  damaging on  him?"
—Civil  rights  lawyer  in  off-the-reeord    disgust.
By  the  standards  of  civil  libertarians,  June   17,  1957,  was
one  of  the  greatest   days  in  the  history  of  the  U.S.   Supreme
Court.   By  the  standards of  William  H.  Rehnquist  it  was  the
worst.   An  examination  of  the   decisions  the   Court   handed
down  that  day  indicates the  kind  of  "conservatism"   he  would
bring  to  the  Court.   One  of  his  attacks  on  the  Warren   Court
was  an  article  he  wrote  for   the   American   Bar  Association
Journal    (44ABAJ229)   in   1958.     It   began,    "Communists,
former   Communists  and  others   of  like  political   philosophy
scored  significant  victories  during  the  October   1956  term  of
the  Supreme  Court,  culminating  in  the  historic  decisions  of
June  17,  1957."   Joseph  L.  Rauh,  Jr.  called  attention   in  his
testimony  on  Rehnquist  before  the  Senate  Judiciary  Committee
to  the  four  historic  decisions  handed  down  by  the  Court  that
day  in  the  field  of  civil  liberties.   Mr.  Justice Harlan,  the  great
conservative   whom   Rehnquist  has   been   named   to   succeed,
wrote  two  of  those  decisions  and  concurred  in  the  other  two.
He  must  certainly  be  surprised,  on  his  hospital  sick  bed,  to
hear  them  described  as  victories  for  Communists  rather  than
for  strict  construction  of  the  Bill  of  Rights.
It  is a  pity that  a  clash  between  Rauh  and  Senator  Kennedy
over  Rehnquist's   affidavit   of   non-membership   in   the  Birch
Society  distracted  attention   from  Rauh's  exposition   of   those
four  cases.  To  compare  these decisions with Rehnquist's descrip-
tion  is to  see how  far  to  the  right  are  his  political  preconcep-
Now  You  See  It  Now  You  Don't  Dept.
Q.  Can  you  tell  us  if   you  now,  as  a  result  of  this
two   month   withdrawal,   foresee   an   end  to   the   U.S.
combat  role  in Vietnam?  .  .  .
A.  Well,  the  combat  role,  let   us  understand,   based
on  the  casualties,  as  far  as  the  offensive  situation  is
concerned,  is  already  concluded.
—Nixon's  press  conference   of  November  IS.
Q.  Our  strategy   is   really   moving  away   from   the
ground  role  or  the  ground  combat  role  that  is  already
over,  but increasingly  relies  upon  air  .  .  .
A.  I  think  that  term  is  used  very  loosely.   We  have
turned  over  the  ground  combat responsibility  in  Phase
I   to   the   forces  of   the   South  Vietnamese.    Now  our
particular  forces  that  are  stationed  in  Vietnam  today,
as  we  turn  over  air,  artillery  and  logistics,   we  will  be
conducting  some  security  missions,  because  I  think  it
is  absolutely  essential   that  our  forces  that  are  there
are  protected  adequately,  and so it  is  the  ground  combat
responsibility  in  the  country that  has  been  turned  over,
but  there  will  be  a  ground combat  role  for  some  of  the
forces  in  a  security  mode.
—Defense  Secretary  Laird  on Meet the  Press Nov.  14.
tions.   Only  one  of  them  dealt  with  Communists  at  all.   That
was  the   Yates   decision   (354   US  298)    where   Mr.   Justice
Harlan  reversed  the  conviction  of  the  California   Communist
leaders  and  held  that  advocacy  of  revolutionary  doctrine   was
protected   by   the   First   amendment   unless   accompanied    by
advocacy  of  action.   This  decision  was,  to  all  intents  and  pur-
poses,  the  deathblow  to  the  Smith  Act,  our  first   peacetime
sedition   statute  since  the  Alien  and   Sedition   laws  of   John
Adams.   The  other  decision   by  Harlan   was  a  landmark   case
in  the  field  of  loyalty  and  security.   It  ended   (354  US   123)
the  long  and  shameful   harassment  of  John  Stewart   Service
inspired  by  the  China  lobby,  and  it  ordered  his  restoration  to
the  State   Department.
Two  other  decisions  that  day  were  also  setbacks  to  the  witch
hunt  of  the  50s.  Wat/kins  v.  US.   (354  US  295),  which  Rauh
argued   for  the  defense,   was  the  first  major  setback   to   the
Un-American  Activities  Committee.   The  Court   reversed   the
contempt   conviction   of  an  Auto  Workers'   official.    Warren
(with  Harlan   and  Frankfurter)   held  that   Congress  had  no
power  of  "exposure  for  exposure's  sake."   The   fourth   case,
Sweezy  v.  New  Hampshire   (354  US  239)   was  a  victory  for
academic  freedom   against   a  State  witch  hunt.   Warren  and
(Continued   On  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  29, 1971
Washington Ready As Pnom Penh To Ignore "The  Sterile Game of Democracy"
In    1969    Jackson   was   Nixon's   choice   for    Secretary   of
Defense.    In   1971   he  is  the   favorite  of   the  hardliners:  the
military-industrial  complex,   the  Zionist   lobby,   the  AFL-CIO
bureaucracy.   On   foreign  policy  he  is  to  the  right  of  Nixon;
on   domestic,   he   stands   everywhere   and   nowhere,  including
"law  and  order,"  his  No.  1  theme.   In  announcing  his  candi-
dacy,  he  promised  over  and  over  again  to  "tell  it  like  it  is.'
But  his  prepared   statement   sounded   like  Throttlebottom    for
President;  it  didn't  miss  a  cliche;  it  didn't  have  one   simple,
honest   word   about   any  real  problem;  it  turned   up   on   both
sides  of  most  issues.    A  sample:   "I  don't  believe  we  should
play  world  cop.  But  let  me be blunt:  I don't  believe  we  should
cop  out  on  the  world."   You  can't  get  much  blunter  than  that.
On  the  economy,  he  spoke  only  of  making  jobs.   But  he  didn t
say  how,  or  how  to  deal  with  inflation.  You  have  to  read  the
prepared   text  to  get  the  full   corny   flavor.  It's   unbelievable.
Terror   From  The  Skies
Like  Humphrey,  Jackson  supports Nixon's  policy  of  keeping
a  residual  force  in  Indochina  indefinitely—with  unlimited  air
support—as  a  "bargaining  tool"  for  the  release  of  the  POWs.
Neither   Humphrey,   in  his  comment  .on  Nixon's  latest  troop
withdrawal   announcement   of   November   12  nor   Jackson   at
his  press  conference  explained   how  you  can  get  an  enemy  to
.release  imprisoned  aviators  when   the  main  tool  of  policy  is
still  the  Lyndon  Johnson   formula   of   beating-the-hell-out-of-
them  from  the  air.   A  Cornell  study  shows  that  Nixon  in  three
years  has  dropped  more  bombs  on  Indochina  than  Johnson  did
in  the  three  years  before  the  bombing  pause.   Though  terror
from  the  skies  hasn't  worked,  it  goes  mindlessly  on.    Hanoi's
negotiators   in  Paris  have   said   that  'release  of  POWs   would
begin   once  we  begin   to  implement   a  total   withdrawal   date.
But  Nixon's  real  concern   is  to  protect  his  political  flank  on
the  right  by  keeping  a  satellite  regime  in  power   in  Saigon,  as
Humphrey  and  Jackson  are  with  the  hard-line  core  of  Demo-
cratic  leadership  which  shares  this  objective,  which  was  John-
son's  as  it  is Nixon's.
The  war  to  make  Indochina   safe  for   democracy   rings   up
one  political  victory  after   another—Cambodia   and   Thailand
have   dropped    democratic   facades   in   the   wake   of   Thieu's
rubber-stamp  election.   In  Washington,  the   Republican-Demo-
cratic  leadership  seems  as  firm  as  Lon  Nol  against  "the   sterile
game   of   liberal   democracy."     In   the   wake   of   Harris   polls
showing  that  62%   of  the  American   public  favors   total   with-
drawal  by  next  May  and  that  65%   believe  it  is morally  wrong
How  The  High  Brass  Proliferates
There   are   more  three   and  four   star   generals   and
admirals   in   uniform   today   than   there   were   at   the
height  of  World  War II.  ...    At  the  peak  of  the  Korean
War  we  had  3.6  million  men  in  uniform  and  today  we
have   only   2.7   million.    However,  we   have   190   more
Generals  and Admirals today than  we  had  at  the  height
of  the  Korean  War.  .  .  .  Much  of  this  proliferation of
high   ranking  officers   results   from   the   assigning   of
military  men  to  traditionally  civilian  jobs.   Every  few
years  the  Dept.  of   Defense   announces  a   "Civilianiza-
tion"  program  .  .  .  However  what  has  evidently  hap-
pened   over   the   years   is   a   rather   rapid   and  drastic
"Civilianization  in  reverse"  or  "Militarization"  of  many
of  the  higher  level  civilian  jobs  .  .  .  Not  only  do  some
high  ranking  officers  cost  more  in  terms  of  salary  and
benefits  but  there  is  the  added  cost  of  first  having  to
train  them  for  a  new  job.
—House  Appropriations   on  the  1972  defense   budget.
for  us  to  be  fighting  in  Vietnam,  the  Ed  Boland  amendment
to  cut  off  funds   for  the  war   was  defeated   in  the  House  by
238  to   163.    Though   60%   of  the   Democrats   voted   for   it,
the   leadership  joined  hands  with  Republicans  and   Southern
Democrats  to  defeat  the measure.
Speaker   Albert   voted   "no".     Majority   Leader   Boggs   ab-
stained.  The  maverick  whip,  O'Neill  of  Massachusetts,   voted
"yea"   but  of  the  21  Democratic  committee  chairmen  16  voted
"nay"   and   only   one,   Garmatz   of   Baltimore,   voted   for   the
anti-war  amendment  (he  has  a  peace candidate breathing  down
his  neck).  The  vote  showed  a  rise  of  4  points  from  the  vote
on   the   Nedzi-Whalen   cutoff   last   June   which   got   56%   of
the  Democrats.    At  this  rate  popular  feeling  may  finally  make
itself  felt  in  "the  sterile  game  of  liberal  democracy"  by   1978
or  thereabouts.   In  the  meantime,  Nixon,  in  signing  the  new
military  procurement   bill,  announced  that  he   would   ignore
the  Mansfield  rider  calling  on  him  to  end  American involve-
ment   -"at   a  date  certain."   Majority   rule   is  doing   as   poorly
here  as  in  Indochina.
McGovern   in  a five minute  TV  broadcast  said  "four  billion
dollars—the  cost  of  bombing  Vietnam  this  year—would  build
a  good  school  or  health  clinic  in  3,000  of  our  cities  and  still
leave  one  billion  dollars  to  strengthen  the   income   of   hard-
pressed   family   farmers."    The   country  may  be  listening   but
the  Democratic  party  leadership  isn't,  though   new  dry  season
offensives  may soon  up  the  cost  of  the  war  in money and  blood.
U.S.  Analysts  In  Saigon  Do  Not  Share
In  Washington  the  view  on  Vietnam  is   more  optimistic
than  that  held  here.   "I  think  South  Vietnam  has  a  pretty
good  chance  of  surviving  because  I  just  don't  see  how  the
North  Vietnamese  can  keep  going,"  a  senior   U.S.   official
says.   But  another  analyst  puts  it  differently:  "I  would  be
optimistic  if  it   weren't   for  the  dreadful  ebullience  of   the
enemy."    How   North   Vietnam—which   President    Johnson
once  called  "a raggedy-ass   little  country"—has  been  able  to
keep  fighting  this  long   against  America's   military   might
' has  confounded  waves   of   U.S.   war  planners.   The  betting
here  seems  to  be  that  Hanoi  will  confound  some  more.
The  South  Vietnamese  seem  increasingly   embittered.   The
toll  of  combat  deaths  last  week  was  down  to  two  Americans,
but  the  toll  of   South  Vietnamese   was  269.   South  Vietna-
mese  casualties  this  year  are  running  ahead  of  1968.   More
and   more   Vietnamese   are   talking   about   a    "Vietnamese
solution   to  a  Vietnamese   war."    Even   some   traditionally
anti-Communist  Catholic  priests  are talking  in  this  vein and
Washington's  Optimism About  Vietnam
so  are  some  younger  army  officers.
Officials  also  worry  that  an  increasingly  unpopular  Presi-
dent  Thieu  will isolate  himself  further, that  he will  be  more
suspicious,  more  repressive,  less willing or  able  to  deal  with
the  moral  malaise  that  infects  this  society.    Even  without
any  abrupt  change  in  U.S.  policy,  Thieu's  position  may  get
shakier.   American  influence   with  the  ARVN   generals   is
mostly  based  on  American  aid  to  fuel  their  patriotism  and
fatten   their   pocketbooks.   As   U.S.   aid   declines,   so   may
ARVN loyalty  to  America's  man Thieu.
Vietnam's   economy,   after   years   of   inflationary  crisis,
now   is   something   of   a  success   story.    The  longer   range
outlook  is  gloomier.   For  as  far  as  anyone  here  is  willing
to  peer  into  the  future,  Vietnam  will  be  a  beggar   nation.
The  general  view  here  is  that  without  continued   American
assistance  at  roughly  the  present  level,  the  economy  would
collapse.—Peter  R.  Kami  from  Saigon  in  the  Wall  Street
Journal  Nov  11    (abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  29,  1971
Another  Shakeup In  Intelligence—But Will It  Really Make Much  Difference?
Intelligence   operations  of  the  Dept.  of  Defense  have  grown
beyond   actual   needs  of  the  Dept.  and  are  now  receiving  an
inordinate   share  of  its  fiscal  resources  .  .  . The  same  informa-
tion  is  sought  and  obtained   by   various   means  and   organi-
zations  .  .  .  Far   more   material   is  collected  than  essential.
Material  is  collected  which  cannot  be  evaluated  in  a  reason-
able  length  of  time  and is  therefore  wasted.
—House  Appropriations   report   (No.    92-666)   on  the   1972
Defense   budget   explaining   why  it  cut  $181,000,000  from   the
classified     request   for    intelligence   activities.    The   CIA    is
largely  financed  from   these  same  secret  Pentagon  fiends.    In
addition  the  Committee  cut  $49.4  million  "in  certain    classified
activities."
Our  sprawling  intelligence  establishment seems  to  be  cost-
ing  more  and  producing  less—less  of  value,  that   is.    House
Appropriations   complains   that   despite   promised   economies,
the  Pentagon's   1972   intelligence  requests  were  higher   than
ever.   This  dim  view  seems  to  be  shared  by  the  White  House.
On  Nov.   5,  over  Pentagon   objections,  it  ordered   a   reshuffle
of  intelligence  agencies  and  their  centralization  under  a  new
National   Security  Council  Intelligence  Committee  chaired  by
Henry  Kissinger.  The  White  House   release  said  this  would
provide   "a   continuing   evaluation   of   intelligence    products
from  the  viewpoint of  the  intelligence  user."
The  "Consumer"   Is   Irate
The  principal  "user",  and  irate consumer,  seems to be Nixon
himself.   White   House   dissatisfaction   was  reflected   in   U.S.
Neivs  &  World   Report   (Nov.  22).   "Too   often,"  it  reported,
"the  President  has  been  inundated  with  information  he  does
not  need,  or   fails  to  receive  in  sufficient   quality  or  quantity
the  data  he  considers vital."   Most  recent  example,  "one  White
House  aide  disclosed,  was  unhappiness  over  the  time  it  took
to  get  reliable   intelligence  on  current  developments   in  Red
China."   A  network  which  costs  between  $5  and  $6  billion  a
year,  one   surmises,  proved   no  better   than   Hongkong   press
scuttlebutt,  though   hard  information  (on  Lin  Piao's   eclipse,
for  example)   is  essential  for  the  forthcoming  trip  to  Peking.
Also  resented:   the  failure  of  the   Sontay  raid   and   incorrect
forecasts  on  Hanoi's  reaction  to  last  spring's  invasion  of  Laos.
The   reorganization,   without  consulting   Congress,    brought
protest  from  Fulbright  and  Symington,  both  angry  over  their
inability  to  get  information  on  secret  CIA  activities  in  Laos
and  Cambodia.  Both  expressed  the  fear  that  putting  Kissinger
in  charge  would  mean  more  refusals  of  information,  this  time
on  the  plea  of  executive  privilege.    Symington,  a  member   for
15   years   of   an   Armed   Services   subcommittee   supposed    to
oversee   CIA   activities,  protested   that  this  subcommittee   has
not  met  even  once  this  year.
Educational   Footnote
Through  a  professor  secretly  on  the  CIA  payroll  as
a  talent  scout,  Marchetti  netted  the  prize  all  would-be
spies  dream  of—an  immediate  job  offer  from  the   CIA.
—From  a  UPI  intervieiv  by  Edward  K.  DeLang  ivith
Victor  Marchetti,  who  quit  the  CIA  in  disenchantment
after   14 years.  Full  text  reprinted  in  the  U.S.   News &
World  Report  Oct.  11.  Marchetti's   "The   Rope  Dancer",
a  novel  about  the  Vietnam  ivar  and  Russian  strategic
advances  as  seen  from  within  the  intelligence  apparatus
has  just   been  published.
There  are  no  professors  secretly  on  the  CIA's   pay-
roll,  although  some  have  assisted  the  Agency  in  spot-
ting  individuals who  might  qualify   for  intelligence  work
abroad.
—From  the  rebuttal  in  the  same  issue  of    USN&WR
by  Lyman B. Kirkpatrick,  Jr.,  now  professor  of  political
science  at  Brown,  ivho  was  ivith  the  CIA  from   1947  to
1965,  rising   to  Executive   Director-Comptroller.
"How    can   the   integrity  of   the   intelligence   product   be
assured,"  Symington  asked  the  Senate  Nov.   10, "when  respon-
sibility  for  the  most  critical  aspects  of  intelligence  analysis  is
taken  out  of  the  hands  of  career  professionals  and  vested  in
a  combination  of  military professionals  and  the  White   House
staff?"    Imagine   what   Rostow   would   have   done   to  intelli-
gence  on  the  Vietnam  war  with  the  powers   now  given  Kiss-
inger!
A  resolution   (S.  Res.  192)   to  set  up  a  select  Senate  com-
mittee  to  oversee  all  departmental   activities  abroad,   whether
by  the  military,  the  foreign  service or  intelligence  agencies,  was
introduced  by  Symington  Nov.   13.   The  committee  would  be
made  up  of  three  Senators  each  from  Foreign  Relations  and
Armed   Services.   It  would   meet   at  least  once   a  month   and
have  subpena  powers.   The  resolution   reflects  the  exasperated
recognition  that  the  Senate's  constitutional  power  over  foreign
relations  is made  a  nullity  by  secret  activities  which   determine
issues  of  war  and  peace  without  its  knowledge.    But  the  reso-
lution  recalls  Senator  Mansfield's  unsuccessful  efforts  over  the
past   decade   to   create   a   special   committee   to   oversee   CIA
activities.   The   chances  of   passage,   this   late  in   the   session,
do  not  look  good.   The  truth,  if  it  were  fully  known,   would
show  (we  believe)  that  not  only  Congress  but  even  the  White
House—and   probably   the   nominal   heads   of   CIA   and   the
other  gumshoe  agencies—cannot  really  control   so  well-heeled
and   far-flung   a   secret   establishment.    This  is  a  tail  bound
to  wag  the  dog.   The  only  remedy  is  to  clip  it off.
A  "Defector's"  Expose  of  Secret  CIA  Shenanigans—and  The  Agency's  Rebuttal
Marchetti  said  areas  where  the  CIA  might  launch   future
clandestine  paramilitary  activities  include   South  America,
India,  Africa  and the  Philippines—all  places  in  the  throes  of
social   upheaval.    Upheaval,   he  said,   is   what   prompts   the
CIA  Director  to  begin  planning  possible  clandestine  activi-
ties  in  a  country.   "That  is  so  if  the  President  says,  'Go  in
and  do  something';   he's    already   got   his   fake   airlines   to
fly  in   people.    He   may   have   a   program   going   with   the
police  in this  country  or  the  military  in  that."
In  addition  to  Air  America,  Marchetti  said,  the  CIA  has
set   up  both  Southern  Air  Transport  in  Miami   and   Rocky
Mountain  Air  in  Phoenix  for  possible  use  in  paramilitary
operations   in   South   America.   Similar   fake   airlines   have
been  bought  and  sold  all  over  the  world,   he  said,  including
one  in  Nepal  and  another  in  East  Africa.
He  also  said  the  CIA  has  a  big  depot   in  the   Midwest
United   States   "where   they   have   all   kinds   of    military
equipment,  all  kinds  of  unmarked  weapons.   Over  the  years
they  have  bought  everything  they  can  get  their  hands  on
all  over  the  world  that  is  untraceable—to  prepare  for  the
contingency  that  they  might  want  to  ship  arms  to  a  group
in   a   place   like   Guatemala,"   Marchetti   said.   "They   even
used  to  send  weapons  buyers  around  to  buy  arms  from  the
(Soviet)  bloc  countries."
—From  the  same  interview  quoted  in  the  box  above.
As  far  as  the  depots  of  "untraceable  arms",  airlines  and
other   installations   are   concerned,   one   wonders   how   the
CIA  could  accomplish  the  tasks  required  of  it  in  Southeast
Asia  without  such  facilities.   Or  perhaps  it  is  being  sug-
gested  that  the  Communists  should  be  allowed  to  ignore  the
1962  Geneva  Accord  and  take  over  Laos  without  a  struggle.
—From  the  rebuttal  quoted  in  the  same   box.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  fli-Wcekly,  Not-ember    •>!>, 1971
(Continued  from  Page One)
the   majority   ruled   as  they  did   in  Watkins  but  Harlan   and
Frankfurter   took   a  stronger   position,  voting   for   reversal  on
First  Amendment grounds.   Paul  Sweezy,  an  editor  of   Monthly
Reiieir.  is an  independent  Marxist  of  international reputation.
These  are  the  decisions  Rehnquist  found  so  deplorable.
The  Brown   Decision:  His  No.  1  Target
Rehnquist's  twin  passions  in  his  attacks  of  the  late  50s  on
the  Court  were  the  witch  hunt  and  school   segregation.   Much
attention   has  been   focussed   on   the  article  he  wrote   for   the
Harvard  Lau-  Record  of  October  8,  1959 urging  the  Senate  to
restore  "its practice   of   thoroughly   informing  itself   on   the
judicial  philosophy  of  a  Supreme  Court  nominee  before  voting
to  confirm  him."  Less  attention  has  been   given  the  animus
he  displayed  in  that  article  against  the  historic  Brown  decision
for  school  integration.  Rehnquist  protested  that  in   confirming
Mr.  Justice  Whittaker,  the  Senate  had  failed  to  inquire  what
he  "thought  about  the  Supreme Court  and  segregation  or  about
the  Supreme  Court  and  Communism."
As   recently  as  Feb.   14,  1970 Rehnquist  defended   Cars-
well's  anti-integration  record   and   sneered   in   a  letter   to   the
Washington   Post  that  it  was  attempting  to  set  up   "a  rather
detailed  catechism  of  civil  rights  decisions"  as  "the  equivalent
of  subscription  to  the  Nicene  creed  for  the  early  Christians."
But  he  wanted  a  catechism-in-reverse to  make  sure  that  nomi-
nees  were  hostile  to  school  integration.
It  is  ironic  that  Rehnquist,  who  argued  little  more  than  a
decade  ago  for  the  fullest   inquiry  into  the  political  opinions
of  Court  nominees,  should   have  resisted  inquiry  into  his  own
in  the  hearings  on  his  nomination.   He   declined  to  give  his
opinion  on  the  constitutionality of  the  Mansfield amendment,
on   the  power  of   Congress   to  cut  off  funds  for  war, on   the
circumstances  under   which   newspapers  may  be  subjected   to
prior   restraint,  i.e.   censorship,   on   whether   he  thought   indi-
vidual  freedoms  more  important  than  property  rights,  on  what
constitutes  reasonable  search  and  seizure, on  what  bail  is  exces-
sive,   on   what   school   boards   should   do   instead   of   bussing
when  taxes  cannot  be  increased  to  provide  quality  education.
At  times,  as on  wire-tapping,  preventive  detention,   no-knock
Now   You  See   It  Now   You  Don't   Dept.
If   the  situation  is  such  that  we  have  a  negotiated
settlement,  naturally  that  means  a  total  withdrawal of
all   American   forces.   It  also  not  only   means ...  a
discontinuation  of  our  air  strikes  and  also  withdrawal
of  forces  stationed in  other  places  in  Southeast  Asia  or
in  the  Asian  theatre  that  are  directly   related  to   the
support  of  our  forces  in Vietnam.
—Nixon  nt  press  conference   November  12.
Q.  Isn't  it  true  that  as  long  as  war  continues   and  we
want   to   support  the   South   Vietnamese   government,
American   air   power   will   be   necessary    far   into   the
future?
A.  In  the  defense   report  which  I  made  to  the Con-
gress  this  year,  I  tried  to  point  out  that  we  would  be
continuing  air  and sea  power  .  .  .  This  idea  that  some-
how  or  other  the  Nixon  Doctrine  means  that  we  will
not  have  air  or  sea  power  in  Asia  is  a  great   mistake
because  that  isn't  part  of  the  partnership  .  .  .  We  are
trying  to  build  up  through  our  military  assistance  pro-
gram   those   forces   to   handle  many   of   the   military
situations,  but  in  the  air  and  sea  certainly  we  will have
a  presence  in  Asia  for  some  time  to  come.
—Secretary  Laird  on  Meet  the  Press Nov. 14.
police   entry,   FBI   surveillance  of   demonstrations,    bugging,
and   the  equal  rights  amendment,  Rehnquist  came  up  with  a
new   doctrine  for   evasion.   He   claimed   the   right  to   silence
because  of  a  client-attorney relationship  with  the  government
on  these  issues.  This  evoked  a  letter  from  19  of  the  26  mem-
bers  of  the  Catholic  University  Law  School  to  the  Judiciary
Committee  in  which  they  asserted,  "The attorney-client privi-
lege  is not  the  attorney's. It  is for  the  protection  of,  and  belongs
to,   the   client."    They   argued   furthermore   that  Rehnquist's
client  as  a  Justice  Department  official  was  "the people  and  not
the  President."    They  said  no  nominee  before  had  ever  made
such  a  claim  "against   the  Senate's  right  to  know."   Certainly
Rehnquist  never  advocated  any  such  doctrine  when  he  wanted
to  block  or  reverse  the  liberal  rulings  of  the  Warren  court  by
stricter  Senate  inquiry into  the  beliefs  of  Court  nominees.  His
nomination  and  Powell's  are  two  major  steps  toward  the con-
version  of  the  Court  into  a citadel  of  reactionary  jurisprudence.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed Envelope
For
send  I
1967-7
(To)   ]
Street
City   ..
Please
Name
Street
City
FOR   STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
the   enclosed   special  subscribers'  price  of  §8.95
.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics  and  Prophecies:
0  (Random  House).  Regularly  $10.
Vame  ........................................................................
Zio
...............  State......... ...........
Indicate  if   gift   announcement  wished   n
renew  D     *>r enter  D   a sub for  the  enclosed  $5 :
...........................         Zin...   .....     State..
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly              11/29/71
4420  29th  St.  X. W ,  Washington,   D.C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th   St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.   20008
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  B.C.  Published   every  other  Monday except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.. N.W..  Washington. D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada;
*10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  fl'i   to  Europe;  520 to  Israel,  Asia  and Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED