I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971sep06.pdf

============================================================

Special  6-Page  Issue:  On  China  and   The  Dollar  Crisis
Epitaph  For  A  Law  And  Order  Administration
How  can  killings  in  America  be  "unnecessary,  unwarranted  and inexcusable" [as  Attorney  General  Mitchell  himself said
the  Kent  State killings  were] and yet  no  effort  made  to  prosecute?
—Joseph  Kelner,  counsel  for   the  family  of  Jeffrey     Miller,  one  of  the  four  students  who  died  at  Kent  State.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XIX, No.  15
SEPTEMBER  6,  1971         '»'<.
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
What's  Nixon  Up To?
When   I  was  in  England  while  vacationing abroad  I  was
asked  whether  I  had   any  presentiment  of  Nixon's  decision
to   visit   Peking.   "Not    exactly,"   I   replied   modestly,   "but
of   course   I   knew  China   was   there   and   that   Nixon   was
President  and  sooner  or  later—give  or  take  a  hundred  years
—I  suppose  I  would  have  to  put   two  and  two   together."
After   all,  there  is  nothing  that  a  good  newspaperman like
any  Hegelian  or  Marxist historian cannot  foresee  as inevitable
once  it  has  happened.   Nixon's  turnabout  on  China,  like  his
turnabout  on  economic policy,  if  taken  to  heart,  should  prove
spiritually  salutary  for  our  know-it-all  journalistic profession.
It  is  good  for  us  to  be  humbled  and  it  makes  the  job  of  ob-
serving  Washington   exhilarating  to  be  reminded  again  how
unpredictable   human  behavior  can  be.    The   moving  com-
plexity  of  events  can  slip  out  of  the  most  plausible explana-
tory  equations  we  construct  and  take  sudden  turns  in  a  new
and  sometimes  hopeful  direction.
Not  Since  The  Nazi-Soviet Pact
The  Peking-Washington  rapprochement  is the  most  startling
event  of  its  kind  since  the  Nazi-Soviet  pact,   and   like  it  a
reminder  of  how  superficial   a  guide  ideology   can  prove  to
be  in  foreign  policy.   As  for  Nixon's  New  Economic Policy,
it  is  as  if  Herbert  Hoover,  instead  of  Franklin  D.   Roosevelt,
had  taken  the  United  States  off  the  gold  standard  and  given
himself   a  chance  to  win  the  election   of   1932.    To   return
home  after   such  180  degree  turns   in  foreign   and   domestic
policy  makes  one  feel  like  Rip  Van  Winkle.   Nixon   seems
' to  have  knocked  his  critics  and  opponents   off  their   rockers.
There   is  an  undercurrent  of   hysteria  in   some   of   the   com-
ment  emanating  from  Democrats,   laborites  and  Leftists.    He
has  not  only  upset  their  pre-election   calculations  but—more
unnerving—the  stereotypes  in  which  we  all  thought  we  could
comfortably  analyze  and  forecast  Nixon's   policies.    Nothing
can  be  so painful  as  an  ingrown  cliche.
On  China  policy,  there  were  hints  of  a  change.   Checking
back   over   them,   however,   I   can  understand   why  none  of
us   took   them   seriously.   The   earliest   was  Nixon's    article
"Asia  After  Vietnam"   in  the  October   1967  issue  of  Foreign
Affairs.     Any  copies  in  the  libraries  of  Mao's  China  had  best
be  put   under   lock   and  key  before  Nixon's   arrival.  Nixon
complained  in  the  article  that  "In  Japan,  public  opinion  still
lags  behind   official   awareness  of  military  needs"   but   hoped
that   "the   solidifying   awareness  of   China's   threat"   would
make  it  possible   to   convert  the   Asian   and   Pacific   Council
under  Japanese  leadership   into  a  military  pact  for  the  con-
Happy  Campaign  Days  In  Saigon
Saigon   (Reuter)—Stick-swinging   South  Vietnamese
broke   up   an   election  rally   behind   Saigon's   national
assembly  today  and  arrested  an  antigovernment  candi-
date  for  this  Sunday's lower  house  election  and  at  least
10  students.  Under  arrest  was  Iran  Tuan  Nham,  who
called  the  rally  to  protest  confiscation  and  defacing of
his  campaign  posters  that  depict  President  Thieu  with
a  Hitler  mustache.   Prime  Minister  Tran  Thien  Khiem
earlier  this  week  ordered the  posters  confiscated.   Eye-
witnesses  claimed  Nham  was  badly  beaten before being
thrown  into  a  police  truck  and  driven away.
—Washington Post,  Aug.  26.
tainment  of  China.  The  article,  it  is  true,  called  for  eventual
readmission  of  China  into  the  community  of  nations  but  only
after  "dynamic  detoxification  .  ;  . to  help  draw  off the  poison
from   the   Thoughts   of   Mao:"   That   one   sentence,   put   in
posters  on  Peking's  walls,  could  start  the  Cultural   Revolution
all  over  again.  "Dealing  with  Red  China,"  Nixon  wrote,  "is
something  like  trying  to  cope  with  the  more  explosive  ghetto
elements  in  our  own  country."   The  comparison,  if   it   got
out,  would  not  endear  him  to  the  Chinese,   who  have  the
world's  oldest  and  most  snobbish  racial  superiority   complex.
We  may  be  forgiven  for  having  failed  to  see  in  this  article
premonitions of  a  revolutionary  reversal  in  China  policy.
But  our  own   ideological   blinkers   and   frozen   stereotypes
of  Nixon  were  to  blame  for  failing  to  sit  up  and  take  notice
when  Edgar  Snow  in  Life   last  April  reported  that  Mao  was
ready  to  welcome  Nixon   in  China  and  when  Nixon   replied
coyly  a  few  days  later  that  he  hoped  to  visit  "mainland  China
sometime  in  some  capacity."    Even  with  hindsight,   however,
one  can  find  no  hints  at  all  that  a  turnabout   in   economic
policy  was  also  brewing.   Three  days  before  Kissinger  landed
in  Peking,  Nixon  was  dropping  more  hints  on  China  in  his
Kansas  City  briefing  for  news  executives  July  6  but  on  eco-
nomic  policy  he  seemed  as  firm  as  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Com-
merce.   "It,  of  course,  has  not  gone  unnoticed,"   he  told  the
editors,  "that  many at  this  time  tend  to  throw  up  their  hands
and  conclude  that  the  only  answer  to  the  problem   is  to  go
to  wage  and  price  controls."   Who   could  have  guessed  that
Nixon  would  soon  swing  over  to  the  Thoughts  of  Chairman
John  Kenneth  Galbraith?
I  remain  as  skeptical   as  ever   about   Nixon's   motives   in
both  turnarounds,  and  think  that   now  more   than   ever   he
needs   watching.    But   Nixon   deserves   credit   on   both.    To
(Continued  On Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  September  6, 1971
govern  is  to  stop  drifting.    Nixon   has  made  two  hard   and
fundamental   decisions.  He  has  changed  the  course  of  history
at  home  and  abroad  by  recognizing,  for  whatever  reasons  and
whatever  motives,   two  realities.    One  is  China.    The   other
is  the  need  for  price  and  wage  control  at  home   (and   a  new
monetary   relationship   abroad)    to   combat   inflation   and   set
the  stage  for  recovery.   Kennedy  and  Johnson  had  their  chance
on  China  and  lacked  the  courage.    Democrats   have  been  ask-
ing  for   wage   and  price   controls;   Nixon   had   the   nerve   to
put  them  into  effect.   No  one  can  foresee  the  consequences of
these   two  turnarounds.    We   can  only  be  sure  that   neither
the  world  nor  our  country  will  be  the  same  again.   If  liberal
Democrats   come   to   power   next   year,  their' maneuverability
at  home  and  abroad  will  have  been  immensely  increased  be-
cause  Nixon  broke  the  ice  for  them  with  China  and  got  the
business  community   to   accept   the   idea   of   controls   and   of
going  off gold.  This  is no  small  contribution.
Still  Avoiding  Reality  In  Vietnam
Nixon  admired  de  Gaulle,   and  these  moves  in  their  mag-
' nitude  begin  to  recall  the  great  Frenchman,  but  the  differences
may  prove  crucial.   De  Gaulle  bit  the  bullet  on  Algeria  and,
to the  discomfiture  of  the  military who  brought  him  to  power,
decided   on   complete   withdrawal,   recognizing   the   war   as
hopeless.   Nixon  on  the  other   hand  is  still  trying  to   avoid
facing   up   to  our   Algeria.    He   has  finally   recognized   the
realities  in  China  but  only  in  the  hope  that  he  might  thereby
avoid  the  realities  in  Vietnam.    Nixon   in  Vietnam,  like   the
French  rightists  in  Algeria,  has  always  regarded  the  national
rebellion  as  essentially  part  of  a world  Communist  conspiracy.
I  have  always  thought   that  his  secret  plan  to  end  the  war
was  to  make  a  deal  at  the  head  office  in  Moscow.   The  most
revealing  dispatch  on  the  China  turnabout  that.  I  saw  while
abroad   was   Henry   Brandon's   from   San   Clemente   in   the
London  Sunday  Times  of  July  18.
Nixon  has  always  been  more  open  with  British  than  Amer-
ican  newsmen  no  doubt   because  he  feels,  quite  rightly,  that
we  are  all   biased   against   him.    Brandon's   dispatch   unmis-
takably  reflected  a  high  White  House  briefing.   "Shortly   after
his  inauguration,"    Brandon   wrote,   "Mr.   Nixon   approached
the  Soviet   Union   in  the  hope  that  it  would   aid  him  in  his
negotiations   with   Hanoi.    But  the   Russians  proved   without
influence.   Almost   at  the   same  time,  he  instructed   Dr.   Kis-
How  Do  You  Improve  Competitive   Spirit
By  Reducing   Competition?
Q.  Mr.   Secretary,   what    about   denying    millions   of
Americans  the  lower  prices  of  foreign  imports?   I  think
of    automobiles,    Japanese   televisions,   the   electronics
industry.    Won't   this  result,   really,   in  an  increase  in
the  cost  of  those  items?
A.  Yes.  The  imposition   of  the  10%  import  surcharge
is  going  to  increase  the  cost  of  imported  items  into  the
United  States.  That  is   precisely   the   point;   to  try  to
provide   a  means   and  a  time  where   American   industry
and   American   workmen   can  regain   their  competitive
spirit  and  their  competitive   capabilities.
—Secretary   Connally   at  Press  conference,   Aug.   16.
singer  to  initiate  secret  approaches  to  Peking."    Brandon  said
Kissinger  never  gave up  hope  of  a  negotiated  settlement  "and
now  he  and   the   President   appear   convinced   that   they  can
get   a  better  bargain  than  the  North   Vietnamese  offered   in
their  seven-point  plan  without  running  the  risk  of   suffering
President  Johnson's  fate."   Brandon  was  told  that  the  first  of
the  seven points put  forward  by the  North  Vietnamese,  "which
asks  the  U.S.  to  set  an  end  to  its  military  involvement  and
to  give  up  its  'Vietnamization'  policy,  is  considered  quite  un-
acceptable."  This   indicates  that  Nixon   is  holding  out   for  a
Korean  solution,  for  a  satellite  regime  in  Saigon,  a  deal  he
hopes  to  buy  in  Peking.
It  is  difficult   to  see  the  outcome  but   it  would  be  foolish
to  believe—on   ideological  grounds—that   Nixon   might   not
emerge   with   some  kind   of   arrangement,   especially   if   the
price  he  offers  Peking  is  high  enough.   I  doubt  that  Peking,
any  more  than  Moscow,   could  make  a  simple  deal   of  this
kind,  but  there  are intermediate  possibilities that Peking  might
offer   Hanoi.   The  trouble  is  that  the  desperate  last  resort  of
going  to  Peking  has  itself  rendered  the  situation  more  un-
stable.   Nixon  is  like  a man  trying to  navigate  in  a quicksand.
Everywhere  in  Asia  the  projected  visit  has  signalled  the  end
of  China's  containment. Accommodation  is  the  order  of   the
day.   The   thaw   has  even  reached  Korea,   where   Seoul   has
for   the  first  time  since  the  Korean  war  agreed   through   the
Red  Cross  to  talks  which  would  begin  to  open   some   holes
in  the  Iron  Curtain  on  the   38th  Parallel.    How  in  such  an
atmosphere   does  one  erect  a  new  hard-line  regime   on   the
17th   parallel?   Kissinger's   trip   to   Peking   made   Thieu   an
The  U.S.  Seems  To  Feel  That  International   Law  Is  Only  For  Others  Not  Ourselves
Our  present  attitude  toward  international  law  and  China
reflects  our overall  foreign  policy,  which,  as  Earl  C.  Ravenal
has  put  it,  is  based  on  "the  principle  that  this  nation  has  a
privileged  purpose  that  it  must  impress  on  the  rest  of  the
world."   Let  me  illustrate  what  I  mean  by  reference  to  a
recent  New   York   Times  report  that,  in  order  to  avoid  any
incident  that  might  interfere  with  President  Nixon's   forth-
coming  visit  to  Peking,  the  Administration  has  suspended
flights   over  China  by  manned   SR-71  spy   planes  and  un-
manned   reconnaissance   drones.   American   reconnaissance
satellites  will  continue  their  missions  over  China,  it   was
reported,  because  such  missions  are  considered  relatively
unprovocative  in  view  of  the  fact, that  they  take  place  well
above   China's   airspace.    Certain   Administration   sources,
while  admitting  that  the   SR-71   has  been  used  to   overfly
North  Korea,  have  denied  its  use  over  China,  but   even  they
concede  that  the  drones  have  until  recently  been  entering
China's airspace.
On  the  face  of  things,  the  suspension  of  whatever  recon-
naissance  flights  have  been  taking  place  in  China's  airspace
seems  like  a  statesmanlike  act  that  will  eliminate  the   pos-
sibility  of  repeating  the  1960  U-2  fiasco  that  cancelled  the
Elsenhower-Khrushchev  summit  conference.   What   virtually
no  one  seems   to  recognize   is   that   announcement   of   the
suspension   of   flights   implicitly   confirms   that   the   United
States  has  for  years  been  systematically  violating  Chinese
airspace  contrary  to  the  accepted  rules  of  international  law.
This  is  no  news  to  Peking,  of  course.  Indeed,  it  has  issued
almost   500  protests  against   such   infractions,   and  it   has
shot  down  a  number  of  drones.
One  can  imagine  the  outrage  of   American   officials   and
public  opinion  if  Chinese  military   aircraft   were  repeatedly
violating  our airspace.  Yet  somehow  it  seems  right  to  Amer-
icans  that  China—and  North  Vietnam,  North  Korea,    Cuba
and  other  Communist   states—should  abide  by  the  rules  of
the  world  community   while  tolerating  our  failure   to  do  so,
unless,  of  course,  for  reasons  of  expediency  we  choose  to
honor the  rules on occasion.
—Jerome  Cohen, East  Asian Legal  Studies, Harvard  Law
School,  before   the  Joint  Economic  Committee,  August  11.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  6,1971
anachronism.   To   South  Vietnam's  shrewd  and   subtle  poli-
ticians,  it  must  have  spelled  the  danger  of  assuming Ameri-
can  firmness  in  holding  to  an  old  style  anti-Communist  line,
the  wisdom of  shifting  toward  a  position  on  which a  compro-
mise  regime  satisfactory  to  the  NLF  could  be  erected.    The
political  uncertainties accumulating in  the  wake  of  the  Minh
and  Ky  withdrawals  from   the  Presidential  race  may  cut  the
ground  from  under  any  planning  by  Washington   or  Peking.
How  The   Gamble  Paid  Off
Yet  the  China  gamble  has  already  paid  dividends  to  both
sides.   It  took  Nixon  off  the  hook  of  Hanoi's  offer   to  begin
releasing  prisoners   as  soon   as   a  date   for   total  withdrawal
was  set,  and  negotiated  withdrawals  began.   In  the  euphoria
which  the  news  from   Peking  created,  the  peace  talks   were
relegated  to  the  back  pages,  the  prisoners  forgotten.   Nixon
was  saved  at  the  very  last  moment  by  the  bell  from  Peking—
saved  from  peace  in  Vietnam.   If  a  Vietnam  settlement  were
Peking's  No.   1  priority,  it  could  have  delayed  the  Kissinger
visit  until  an  agreement  had  been  made  at  Paris.   Chou  En-lai
gave  Nixon   precious  time,  in  which  Nixon   had  hoped   and
still   hopes   somehow   to   keep   the  Thieu   regime  in   power.
What  Peking  was  promised  no  one  knows.   But  one  reward
was  the  rush  of  countries  like  Iran  and  Turkey  in  the   U.S.
orbit   to   recognize  the   Communist   regime  and   to   cut   ties
with  Chiang  Kai-shek's.
How  this  will  show  up  in  the  votes  at  the  United  Nations
is  murky.   "For   ways  that  are  dark  and   for   tricks  that   are
vain,"  Billy  Graham's   pious  White  House   parishioner  out-
does  any  heathen  Chinee.   Nixon's  two-China  policy,  which
both   Peking   and   Taipei   reject,   has   everybody    bewildered
and  suspicious.   But  it  is  hard  to  believe  that   some  under-
standing  has   not   already  been   reached   on   this.    Clearly  a
resolution  of  the  question  unacceptable  to  Peking  would  mean
no   trip   for   Nixon.    Two   such   experienced    diplomats   as
Chou  En-lai  and  Kissinger,  meeting  after  so  many  months  of
secret   preparations,   must   have   dealt   with   this   and   other
problems   between   the  two  countries.   They   must  have   dis-
cussed   their   respective   entangling   alliances   and   embarrass-
ments.    They   must   have   canvassed   what   each   side   would
have   to   go  on   saying  publicly  to   satisfy   its  own   satellites
and  to  maintain   some  semblance   of   ideological   consistency.
There  must   have  been   some  agreement   as  to  the   necessary
leeway  each  side  would  have  to  be  allowed,  ours  in   dealing
with  Chiang  Kai-shek,  theirs  in  dealing  with  Hanoi.
We  may  be  sure  that  the  stance  in  public  will  not  be  the
same  as  in  private,  and  that  neither   side  would   have  risked
publicly   arranging   for  a  Nixon  visit  without   a  pretty  firm
understanding.     I  find  it  very  hard   to   believe   that   this  is
based   on  a  total   U.S.   withdrawal   from   Asia;   if  that   were
China's  intention,   it  could  have  waited  at  least  until  we  had
set   a   date   for   total   withdrawal    from   Vietnam.   It   seems
clear  to  me  that  China  in  this  balance  of  power  game   wants
a   U.S.   counterweight   against   Russia  and   Japan.    Last   time
that  Western  and  American   imperialism   were  swept   out  of
Asia,  China  found  itself  alone  with  Japan.   China  may  prefer
Aerospace  Already  Eyes  The  China Market
Interest  in  Communist   China  as  a  potential   market
for  U.S.  commercial  aircraft  is  growing  on  Capitol  Hill.
With   an   eye   on   this   prospect,   Congress   may   equip
President  Nixon  with  authority  to  arrange  trade  agree-
ments  on  his  coming  trip  to  mainland  China  scheduled
for  sometime  before  next  May.
—Aviation  Week  and  Space  Technology,  August  23.
a  residual  U.S.  presence,  even  in  Southeast  Asia.   Peking  may
fear   that   Russia's  support   of   the   Lon  Nol  government   in
Cambodia  means  a  Russian  foothold   south  of  China.   I  think
the  overriding  and  immediate  Chinese  fear   is  of  Russia  and
the  longer  term  fear   of  Japan.   How   can  the   U.S.   provide
some  help  against  either  if  it  gets  entirely  out  of  Asia?   The
Nixon  doctrine,  of  letting  Asians  contain  China,  may  shift
to  a  new  Pacific  role  friendly  to  Peking  in  which  we  exploit
Russia's  fear  of  China  and  Japan's  anxieties  about  China  as
a  means  of  improving our  bargaining  power  with  both  sides.
The  Russo-Chinese enmity  is  now  the  deepest  split  among
the  great  powers,  and  next  to  the  Indo-Pakistan  dispute   rep-
resents  the  biggest  threat  of   a  major  war;  the   latter   might
even  ignite  the  former.  Natural  fears  have  escalated  to  para-
noid   proportions   on   both   sides.    Both   are   proceeding   on
the  old  axiom  of  power  politics that  the  enemy  of  my  enemy
is  my  friend.   Everywhere from  the  Balkans  to  the  Sudan  to
Bengal,  China  is  pursuing  an  anti-Soviet  policy   irrespective
of   ideological  or  human  considerations.   Neither   the   blood-
thirsty  anti-Communism in  the  Sudan,  Tito's   "revisionism"
nor  West  Pakistani  inhumanity  deters  Peking's   policy,  as  it
did  not  deter  the  rapprochement  with  Nixon  though  he  had
long   been   its  No.   1   demon.   The   Chinese  may  well  see
the  Czech  invasion as  a  warning.  They  do  not  underestimate
the  Kremlin's  potential  for  brutal  power  politics.   They  fear
above  all  a  preemptive  nuclear  strike.
These  fears  will  not  be  lessened  by  the  leak  of  the  under-
ground  Soviet  newspaper,  "Political  Diary",  to  the  New   York
Times   and   the   Washington   Post.    The   latter    (Aug.    22)
quoted  a  passage   which  will   inflame  Peking's  anxieties.    It
is  from   a  private   discussion   in   which   "an   academician,   a
government  official  and  a  reserve  officer",  after  the  Sino-Soviet
border  dispute  flared  up  in  1969,   called  war  with  China  in-
evitable  and  advocated  a  first  strike  to  destroy  China's  nuclear
rocket  industry and  bases.   Peking's  secret  services  must  know
a  great   deal  more  about  this  than  the  West  does.    It   must
seem  essential  to  China  to  build  up  its  own  nuclear  deterrent
as  rapidly  as  possible.   U.S.   aid  could   make  a  huge   differ-
ence   even   if   it   only  took   the   indirect   form   of    speeding
Chinese  industrialization.   Some  very  enticing   prospects   are
implicit  in  the  American  rapprochement,  with  U.S.  industry
in  need  of  new  markets.   Kissinger  did  not  go  empty-handed.
Russia's  Oldest   Nightmare
On  the  other  side,  fear  of  China  seems  to  be  the  one  bond
between   the   Soviet   government   and   dissident    intellectuals.
The  Yellow   Peril  is  Russia's  oldest   nightmare;  the   prospect
Words  To  Remember  When  We  Ask  Japan  To  Share  Our Military Burdens  In  Asia
Our  military  expenditures  in  Asia  have  largely  been  in  response  to  a  non-threat.   Moreover,  to  some  extent,  they  have
actually provoked a latent Chinese  military defense  posture which  in turn  we  can use  to justify  further  defense  expenditures.
—Prof.  Allen  S.  Whiting,   once  chief   of  research  and  intelligence  in  the  State  Dept.,  now  teaching  at  the  Center   for
Chinese  Studies  at  the  University   of  Michigan,  testifying    before   the  Joint  Economic  Committee  of  Congress,  August  11.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  September  6,1971
of   a  full  grown   nuclear  China  with  four   times  the   popula-
tion   of   the   Soviet  Union—and   irredenta   between   them—is
its   latest   form.   The   intellectuals  who   looked   hopefully  to
China  in   1956  when  Mao  Tse-tung  began  to  bid  a  hundred
flowers  contend   now  see  the   Chinese  regime   as  worse   even
than   Stalinism  in   its  cult   of   personality   and   its  draconian
thought  control.   The  two  regimes  are  separated   by  the  big-
gest  gulf   of  all  in  being  rival  branches  of  the  same  mother
church.   Historically  in   such   situations  either   side   has   pre-
ferred  the  pagan  unbeliever without  to  the  schismatic within.
China  now  commands  sympathy  as  the  underdog   but   what
happens  when   she  is  top   dog?    If   the   U.S.   rapprochement
forecloses   a  Soviet  nuclear  first  strike,  it  will  be  more  than
justified.     If    a   new   U.S.    foreign   policy   thereupon    seeks
reconciliation   rather  than   the   exploitation  of   mutual   Sino-
Soviet   and   Sino-Japanese  fears,   all  mankind  will  be   in   our
debt.    It  must  never  be  forgotten  that   we  are  dealing  here
with  that  old   balance  of   power   politics  which  brought   on
World   Wars   I  and   II  and  which  the  United  Nations,   like
•the  League  of  Nations  before  it,  was  intended  to  replace  by
a safer  world  order.
New  Excuse  For  Pax  Americana?
History  teaches  us  that  old  enmities  between  nations  usu-
ally  are  resolved  only  in  the  rise  of  new  ones.  The  causes  of
war,  instead  of  being  removed,  are  only  changed.   The  grow-
ing   jealousy  in   American  industry   of   Japanese  commercial
progress   begins   unpleasantly   to   recall   English   jealousy  of
German   trade  before   1914.    It  will   be  a  pity  if  the  newly
opened  door  to  China  only  replaces  old  tensions  with   new,
providing   fresh   excuse   for  playing  the   policeman's  role   in
East   Asia  and   for  a  bigger   arms  budget,   especially  for   the
Navy.   The   Pentagon   doesn't  really  care  whom  it  will  pur-
port  to  defend,  so  long  as  it  has  an  excuse  to  continue  the
Pax  Americana  in  any  form.   Here  we  come  to  the  heart  of
the  dollar crisis.
II
As   Senator   McGovern   said   here   at   a  breakfast  with  fi-
nancial   writers   Aug.   24,   the   single   biggest   contribution
President  Nixon   could  have  made  to  U.S.   economic  health
at  home  and  abroad  would  have  been  an  announcement  that
he  was  ending  the  war  in  Vietnam  and  diverting  the  savings
into   public   purposes.     Instead,    while   welfare   reform    is
dropped,  the  Pentagon  is  slated  for  an  extra  $3  billion.   The
financing  of  the  Vietnam  war   (unlike  the  Korean  war)   by
inflation   and   without  excess  profits   taxes   has   been   pricing
U.S.  goods  out  of  the  export  market.   In  the  early  60s,  our
Nader:  Surest  Way  To  Lower   Prices
As   a  longer   range   solution  to  the  inflation  problem
the  Nixon  administration should  lead  an  antitrust drive
on  the  corporate   giants  which  dominate  our  economy.
Only  when  their  monopoly  powers  are  uprooted  can  the
structural  tendency  toward  high  prices   and,  hence  in-
flation,  be  curbed.   This  deconcentration   effort,  in   the
eyes  of   most  industrial  economists,   can  only  have  the
effect   of  lowering  prices   across  the  board;  prices  will
then  be  moored  to  costs,  as  they  are  supposed   to  be  in
competitive   capitalism,  and   not   to   monopoly    power.
This  is  well  known  to  the  President's  advisors   at  the
Antitrust  Division  and  to  the  Federal   Trade  Commis-
sion.   As  Federal  Trade  Commission  studies  show,  if  our
highly  concentrated  industries  were  decentralized  until
the  four  largest  firms  controlled  40
r
,v  or  less  of  industry
sales,   prices   would  fall   by   25%   or   more.   Only   then
could  the  President   fulfill   his  own  proclamation,   upon
issuing  his  economic  edict,  that  "we  welcome  competi-
tion,  because   America  is  at  her  greatest   when  she   is
called  upon to  compete."
—Ralph   Nadcr    011  Nixon's   freeze,   August  16.
price  rise  was  generally  the  same  as  in  other  industrial coun-
tries.   From   1965  to   1970,  our  export  prices  rose   16  percent
while  those  of  Western  Europe  rose  10  percent  and  those  of
Japan  only  9  percent.
The   hemorrhage   of   the   dollar   is  due  to  war,  militarism
and  imperialism.  This  becomes  clear  if  one  takes  the  balance
of   payments  for   the    11   years   I960   to   1970   inclusive.    In
those   11  years  the  total  net  imbalance   of  payments  was  $17
billion.    But   the   total   net   dollar  outflow   for   military   pur-
poses   in   the   same   period   was   over   §30   billion.    Without
the  dollars  spent  abroad  on  the  war  and  the  Pax  Americana,
there  would  have  been  a  surplus  of  $13  billion.
The  arms  race  we  led  and  stimulated  has  also  had  its  ef-
fect  in  lessening American capacity  to  compete  in  world  mar-
kets.   Research  and  development   money,  and—more  impor-
tant—research  and  development  talent,  have  gone  dispropor-
tionately  into  war  and   space  industry.   One   of   the   harmful
side-effects   has  been   the  growth   of   the   cost-plus  mentality.
The  Vietnam  war  exported   inflation   and  now  we  are  trying
to  export  unemployment.   We   are  forcing  our   foreign   com-
petitors   to   share   the   burdens   of   the   maladjustments   we
created  by  accepting  a  revaluation upward  of  their  currencies,
especially  of  the  mark  and  yen.   This  is  asking  them  to  ac-
cept    a   price   disadvantage   in   the   world    export    markets.
The   monetary   situation   is  extraordinarily  complex    and   at
some  crucial  points  veers  off  into  sheer  metaphysics.   There
(Continued  On  Page  Five)
How  U.S.  Policy  Forced  China,  Despite
In  terms  of  the  Chinese  nuclear  story,  I  think the  develop-
ment  of  Chinese  nuclear  weapons   is  one  of  the  most   mis-
perceived   and   misunderstood   stories   of   this   country.   We
threatened  the  Chinese  with  nuclear  weapons  in  the  Korean
War  in  the  spring  of  1953.  President   Eisenhower   and  Secre-
tary  Duties  sent  nuclear  threats  to  Peking  in  February  and
May  of  that  year,  and  forced  their  acceptance  of  our  terms.
In  1970  we  deployed,  as  I  indicated  in  my  testimony,   nuclear
missiles   that   could   fire   600   miles   into   Chinese    territory
from  Taiwan.  It  was  not  until  Mao Tse-tung  went  to  Moscow
in  1957  that  he  won  from  the  Russians   any  kind  of  nuclear
weapons   assistance  program.  In  1958  we  gave  the   Nation-
alists  8-inch howitzers on the  island  of  Quemoy  and indicated
that  they  could  have  nuclear  heads  in  them  to  wipe  out  the
Chinese  batteries   on  the  mainland.  The  Russians   responded
Its  Poverty, To Become A  Nuclear Power
to  the  Chinese  demand  and  for  years   gave  them  important
ingredients  in what  has  subsequently  become  an  independent
nuclear capability.
When   we   say,   why   would   the   Chinese   go   for   nuclear
weapons,  while  it  may  be  the  ticket  of  equality  that  Profes-
sor  Cohen  has  referred   to,  but  it  also  has  had  an  important
strategic  response  to  our strategic  threat.  Former  Secretary
of   State   Dean   Rusk   said   only   a   month   ago:   "I   cannot
imagine  a  war  with  China  that   would  not  be  nuclear."    If
the   U.S.   leadership  assumes  that   nuclear   weapons   are  an
option  against   China,  then  surely  China  is  going  to  have  to
develop   some  nuclear  deterrent   capability  at  least  against
the   bases   in   the   Western    Pacific   which   they   can    hold
hostage  against  a  first  strike  from  us.
—Prof.   Whiting:   Joint   Economic   Committee,  Aug.   11.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  6,1971
(Continued  From  Page  Four)
are  many  valid   ways   of  looking  at   it.    But   this  is  one   of
them.    A  settlement  will  be  made  easier   if  the   U.S.   public
learns  to  see  it  as  it  looks  from  the  other  side.
"Protecting  The  Free  World"
While  we  let  the  military  spend  billions  on  the  excuse  that
they  are  defending  "the  free  world",  we  never  stop  to  consult
either  the  other  capitalist  powers  or  the  developing  nations
when  we  embark  on  adventures  dangerous  to  them.  Nothing
Moscow  or  Peking  has  ever  done  or   was  likely  to   do   has
been  anywhere near  as  harmful  in  its  long-term  effects  as  the
Vietnam  war.   Its  economic,  political  and   military   repercus-
sions  have been  intensely  destabilizing  elsewhere.  The  leader
of  the   free  world  takes  the  other  capitalist  nations  up   and
down  the   roller  coaster   as  we  please.  The   10  percent  sur-
charge   on   imports,  in   its  arrogance   and   its   disregard   for
our  signed  pledges   in  GATT,   is  characteristic.
Our   country  is   still   the   greatest   and   the   richest   nation
on  earth.   We   should  learn  to   wear   the  mantle  of   power
with  commensurate magnanimity.   Otherwise we  can  do  great
harm  to  others  and  ourselves.   It   does  not  help  to  prepare
the  public  for   the  drastic  changes  which  lie  ahead   in   our
economic  arrangements,  domestic  and   foreign,  to   have   the
President  turn  the  dollar  crisis  into  a  melodrama and  trot  out
a   bogeyman—the   foreign   exchange   speculator—as   the   vil-
lain.   It  is  all  the  harder  to  stomach  when  Nixon  for  months
has  been  stimulating  stock  exchange  speculation  at  home   to
further  his  reelection. The  emphasis  on  the  foreign  exchange
speculator  is  on  a  par  with  Nixon's   old-time  Red  scares.   It
was   also   in   keeping   with   the   shallow,  self-congratulatory
Madison   Avenue  soap   advertising  style  of   the   August   15
TV   address.    How   refreshing,   how   confidence-creating,  it
would   have   been   if   Nixon   had   confessed   that   we   were
compelled  to  embark  on   uncharted  monetary  and   economic
seas,  and   asked   public   support   for   the   sacrifices   and   mal-
adjustments  entailed!   It  is  the  low  style and  tone,  so unlike
de   Gaulle,   which   intensifies   old   biases  even   when   Nixon
basically  does  the  right  thing.
The    "gnomes    of   Zurich"    are   hobgoblins    for    morons.
Dollar  speculation  abroad  is  not  only  a  minor  factor  in  the
picture  but  a  necessary  part  of   the   free  market  mechanisms
on  which  world  trade  depends.   The  biggest   trading   nation
on  earth  cannot   afford   an   electorate   brought   up   on   xeno-
phobic  bed-time  stories.   The  situation,  as  Nixon  pictured  it,
Under  The  Surface  Of  China
Since  1952  campaign  has  succeeded  campaign,  each
one  leaving  a   great   wall   in  its   wake,  a   wall   which
estranges  one  man from  another. In  such circumstances,
no  one  dares   to  let   off  steam   even  privately   in   the
company  of  intimate  friends,  let  alone  speak  his  mind
in   public.   Everyone  has   now  learnt   the   technique  of
double-talk; what one says  is  one thing, what one thinks
is another.
—Kuang Ming Daily, June  5,1957, quoted in  Roderick
MacFarquhar's   The  Hundred  Flowers  Campaign   and
the  Chinese  Intellectuals,  a  study   of  the  brief   period  in
which   officials    and  intellectuals   were  invited   to  speak
their  minds  in  response  to a  campaign  by  Mao  to   rectify
the   Party's    "style   .of    work."     The   "hundred    flowers
period"   in  which   he  sought   to  wed  John  Stuart  Mill
with  Marx   remains  a  warning   of   the  realities   which
existed  then  and  almost  certainly  still  exist  beneath  the
smooth  surface   of  Chinese  thought  control.
Profits  Up,  Tho  Output  Down
Q.  Mr.  Secretary, when  you  decided  to  freeze wages,
prices  and rents did you consider at  all  freezing profits?
If  not, why not?
A.  There  was  no  authority   to  freeze  dividends,   al-
though  as  you  heard  the  President  say  last  night,  he  is
calling  on  American  businessmen  to  observe  the  spirit
and  letter of  it.  [The  Economic  Stabilization  Act  of 1970
passed  by  Democratic majorities  in  Congress  limits any
freeze  to  prices,  rents,  wages  and  salaries.   It  did  not
include  dividends,  interest  or  profits—IFS].  Again,  we
felt   that   to  try  to  analyze  and  to  make  it   apply   to
profits  over a  90-day  period  was  not  a  practical manner
of  proceeding. We  felt  that,  in  controlling  prices,  the
profits  of   American  business  have  not  been  that  big.
—Secretary  of  the  Treasury   Connally,  Aug.  16.
To    the  contrary,  First  National  City  Bank  of  New
York  reported   a  few  days  later  in  its   August  letter
that  corporate   earnings  in  the  second  quarter  of  this
year  were  up  11%  over  the  year  before,  and  that  the
index  of  after-tax    earnings   in  manufacturing   in   the
second  quarter  of  this  year  was  18%  higher   than  in
1967  or  almost  at  the  all-time  high  of  119  (1967 = 100)
reached  in the  4th  quarter  of  1968.  AH this in a  sluggish
period  when output  was  about  73%  of capacity!
was  all   the   fault   of   those   wicked   foreigners.    He   said   we
had   spent   $143   billion   in   foreign   aid   yet   those   ingrates
abroad  were  hurting  out  trade  with  "unfair  exchange   rates."
No   mention,   of   course,  that   those  billions  came  home   to
enrich  us  and  scant  mention  of  the  part  played  in   depressing
the   dollar   by  our   unwise  fiscal  and   domestic   policies   and
by  the  war  he  continues.   A  new  currency  setup,  long  over-
due,  requires  a  new  public  sophistication   not  a  fresh  set  of
imaginary  grievances.    Part   of   the   problem   with   the   mark
and   yen,  for   example,   is  that  we   deliberately   under-valued
them  after  World  War   II  to  help  their  recovery.    Our  com-
pensation  was  an  overvalued  dollar  with  which  we  expanded
our  business  empire  abroad   enormously  at  a  discount.    Our
foreign  investments  have  tripled  since  1950.    In  the  past  11
years  they  brought  home  an  average  of  more  than  $7  billion
a  year  in  earnings.
If  we  restrict  trade,  how  do  foreign   countries  pay  interest
and  dividends  on  those   investments,  and   how   do  they  pay
for   imports   from  us?   Nixon's  presentation   Aug.   5,  as  in
the   July   6  briefing  at  Kansas   City,   was  one-sided.    There
has  been  a  phenomenal  expansion  of  trade  since  World  War
II   from   which   everybody  has   benefitted.    Japan's   sales   to
us  have  boomed,   but  so  have  our  sales   to  Japan.   Japan   is
now  our   biggest   customer   after  Canada,  taking   as  much  of
our   exports   as  France   and  West   Germany   combined.    The
unfavorable  balance  of  trade  with  Japan   is  more  than   com-
pensated  by  a  favorable  balance  of  trade  with  the  Common
Market.   If  we  substitute   short-sighted   bilateral  computations
and  deals  for  multilateral   world  market   perspectives,   every-
body's  trade  will   shrink.
The   President's   10  percent   surcharge   on   imports    carries
a  reminder  of  our  last  experiment  in  protectionism  40  years
ago.    His   ultimate   legal   authority   for   the   surcharge   stems
from,   and   is  limited  by,  the   notorious   Hawley-Smoot   tariff
of   1930.   This  ill-fated  venture  into  high  import  barriers  to
defend  the  dollar  only  resulted  in  deepening  the  depression.
To  use  the  10  percent  surcharge  now  as  "a  bargaining  tool",
is  to  whet  protectionist   appetite  and  risk  another  episode  in
(Continued  On  Page  Six)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  September  6,1971
Part  of  The  Democratic  Party  Now  To  The  Right  of Nixon
(Continued  From  Page  Fire)
beggar-my-neighbor   economics.    Negotiation    is   made   more
complicated   by  the  Administration's  linkage  of   the  currency
issue  with  the  issues  of  military  costs  and  trade  restrictions.
The  Jackson-Meany  Axis
A  bad  political  situation  is  shaping  up.   Part  of  the  Demo-
cratic  party  and  of  the  labor   movement   is  now  to  the  right
of  Nixon  on  certain  issues.   The   Jackson-Meany  axis  wants
a  harder   line  on  Vietnam,   on  China,  on  the  arms  race  and
probably  also  on  protectionism.    In   closing   ranks  for    1972,
the  left  wing  of  the  Democratic  Party  is  in  danger  of  being
led  by   demagogy   and   desire   for   party  unity  into   positions
that   lack   statesmanship   and   sense.    Our   favorite  candidate
for   President,   McGovern,   has   been   almost  hysterical  in   his
attacks  on   Nixon's   new   economic   policy.   He   went   so   far
as  to  tell  the  financial  writers  that  he  is  sorry  he  voted   for
the   price   stabilization   bill   last   summer   which   gave   Nixon
authority   for   the   price-wage   freeze.    He   even   compared   it
' to   the   Gulf   of   Tonkin    resolution.    But   only   three   days
before  Nixon's  90-day  freeze,  McGovern  asked  for  a  6-month
freeze.   There  has  been  general  agreement  in  the  labor  move-
ment  and  in  the  Democratic  party,  as  in  the   latest   and  ad-
mirable  Proxmire   committee  report,   on  the  need   for   an  in-
comes   policy   if   we   are   to   have   full   employment  without
unacceptable   inflation.    Nobody   knows  quite  how  to  do  this
but  it  clearly  means  some  government   restraint  on  big  busi-
ness   and   big   labor,   some   way   to   substitute   public   price-
fixing  for  their  private price-fixing.
Nixon  with  the  freeze  has  made  it  politically  feasible  for
the  Democrats  to  pursue  a  new  economic  policy.   If  a  Demo-
cratic  President   had   imposed   the   freeze,  the   business  com-
munity  would  be  in  revolt.   As  on  China,  it  has  taken  a  Re-
publican  President  to  make  the  break-through.   His  economic
program   is  weighted  heavily  on  the  side  of  the  rich  and  big
business  but  these  are  his  constituency.   The   Democratic   Na-
tional   Committee   in  one  overwrought   statement   complained
that  his  was  "a  Republican  program."   This   was  naive  and
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of  This  Issue   To  A   Friend
If  You  Didn't  Gel  The  July  12  Issue   (Postal  Service  Was
On  The  Eve   Of  Nixon's   Freeze
In   a   modern   full   employment   economy    reasonable
price  stability   can   be  consistently   maintained  only   if
the  Government   assumes  responsibility   for  specifying
the   rates   of   price  and  wage   increase   that  are  in   the
public   interest   and  for   insuring  that   these   rates   are
not  exceeded ...  In  short,  we  reject  the Administra-
tion's  contention  that  income  policies  "won't  work."  It
is   the   policies   presently   being   followed   which  are   a
failure.  Monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  unaided  by  incomes
policy,  cannot  come  to  grips  with  inflation ...  If,  in the
President's   judgment,  a   temporary   price-wage   freeze
would   facilitate   the   introduction  of   a   comprehensive
guidepost  policy,  Congress  has  given  the  President  clear
authority  to  impose   such   a  freeze   .  .  .  There   is  now
widespread  recognition  that  incomes  policy  must  be  a
regular  part  of  overall  economic  policy.   Business,  labor
are  ready  to  support  such  a  policy  because  they   recog-
nize its  necessity.
—Democratic  majority   report  on  the  Joint    Economic
Committee  under  Proxmire written  on  the  eve  of  Nixon's
wage-price   freeze   but  released  the  day    after.
unfair.   The  fiscal  trimmings  are  Republican   and  designed  to
make  it  palatable  to  his  supporters.   But  the  heact  of  it—the
freeze  and  the  devaluation—was  taken  over  from  the   Demo-
crats.   It  is  up  to  the  Democrats  now  to  show  that  they  can
do  the  job  better.   Their  task,  when  Congress  meets,  is  two-
fold:  to  revise  the  fiscal  program  to  increase  spending   from
the  bottom   and  in  the  public  sector,  replacing  the  bonanzas
Nixon   offers  business;  and  to  prepare  a  long  range   incomes
policy  which  will  also  cover  interest  and   profits   and   be  ac-
ceptable   to   labor.     Readjusting    currency   values   will    not
solve  the  deeper  problems  behind  the  dollar  crisis,  foremost
among  them  the  costly  momentum  of  imperialism  and  mili-
tarism.   Let  Nixon's  two  major  turnabouts  on  China  and  the
economy  remind  the  Democrats  how  badly  they  have  under-
estimated  his  flexibility  or  opportunism,  call  it  what  you  will.
He  might  steal  more  of  the  Democratic  thunder  on  the  war
and  on  the  economy  and  get  himself  reelected.            Aug. 28
If  You  Send  Us  A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed   Envelope
Unusually  Bad)  Send  An  Envelope For Another Copy
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
For   the   enclosed   special  subscribers'  price   of   $8.95
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics   and   Prophecies:
1967-70  (Random  House). Regularly  $10.
(To)    Name
Street    .........
City
............................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate   if   gift    announcement  wished    Q
Please  renew  Q   or enter  D    a sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ,
Street
City   ....................................   Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                  »/«/7
4420  29th  St.  N. W.,  Washington,   D.C.   20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.    2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.  Published   every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..  N.W.,   Washington.   D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;    $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED