I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971jun14.pdf

============================================================

Shortest  Missile  Gap  in  History,  P.  2
National Security, Like Charity, Begins At Home
National  security  rests  as  much  on  the  condition  of  our  domestic  society   as   it   does   on   protection   against   potential
physical   attack  on  the  United  States  by  other  nations.   The  most  effective  way  of  improving our  relations  and  standing
with  other  nations  is  by  providing  a  model  of  democracy  at   home—a  society   in  which  respect   for  law  abounds  and  in
which  all  citizens  are  allowed  to  develop  according  to  their  potential.
—Sol  Linowitz,  chairman  vf  National   Urban  Coalition,  in  asking   for   a  major   cut   in   the  Pentagon   budget,  May   2k.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX,  No.  12
JUNE  14,  1971
WASHINGTON,  D. C.20  CENTS
How  Much  The  Pax  Americana  Costs
The  National  Urban  Coalition's  testimony  on  the  fiscal  '72
military budget  offers  for  the  first time in  clear form  an answer
to  two  basic  questions.   One  is  the  cost  of  imperialism or  the
Pax  Americana, as  distinct from  the  cost  of  what  can properly
be  called  defense.   The  other  is  the  question  of  how  much  is
really  enough  for  either  and  both  purposes.   Naturally neither
answer  can  be  precise.   There  are  too  many  imponderables,
variables  and  overlaps involved.  But  for  the first time  we have
a  sober  approximate  answer  to  two  questions  the   Pentagon
has  always tried  to  avoid.   Its  size,  its  power  and  its  expansion
have  depended  on  keeping  both  questions  fuzzy,   so  that  con-
gressional  debate  and  public  decision  could  not  focus  effective-
ly  on  the  underlying choices  involved  in  the  military  budget.
As  one witness  for  the  Coalition put  it  to  the  Senate's  Defense
Appropriations  subcommittee  on  May  24,   "In   the   Defense
budget  as submitted to  the  Congress,  it  is practically impossible
to  relate  money  to  programs  and  to  relate  programs   back  to
the  objectives."   The  witness, Dr.  Robert  Anthony,  now Pro-
fessor  of  Management  Control  at  the  Harvard  Business  School,
should  know.   For  he  was  Assistant  Secretary of  Defense  from
1965  through  1968 and  his  job  was  that  of  Comptroller, i.e.,
McNamara's  chief  aid  for  accounting,  auditing  and  budgeting.
An  Alternate Budget
The  Coalition's   answers  are  made  the  more  impressive  by
their  Establishment  auspices  and  their  conservative  character.
The  chief  of  staff  in assembling and  writing  the  Counterbudget
it  presented   is  Robert  S.  Benson,  who  served  as  an  assistant
to  Anthony  in  the  Pentagon.   According  to  the  Coalition,  "a
number  of  former  senior  military leaders  and  government   offi-
cials  in  the  field  of  military  affairs"  participated.  Just  as  Secre-
tary  of  Defense  Laird  presented  his  formal  posture  statement
in  March  on  the  '72  budget  and  the  Pentagon's  5-year projec-
tion  for  fiscal  1972-1976  inclusive,  so  the  Coalition  presented
its  own  counter  proposals  and  analysis  for  the  same  five  year
period.*   The  Coalition's  military  budget  challenges  none  of
the  fundamental  preconceptions of  power  politics.   It  is written
as  if  prepared  by an  alternative  Pentagon  think-tank.   It  never
uses  the  word  imperialism  nor  the  term  Pax  Americana.    It
seeks  only  ways  to  do  the  job  at  less  cost  in  order  to  free
revenues and  energies  for  the primary  purpose  which  led  to  the
Coalition's  founding  in  the  riot-torn  summer  of  1967,  and  that
is  to  improve  life  in  the  nation's  cities.   Its  members  include
business  leaders  as  prestigious  as  David  Rockefeller  of   Chase
Manhattan  and  James Roche  of  General  Motors.
"This is  part  of  "Counterbudget:   A  Blueprint  for  Changing
National  Priorities"  covering  the  entire  Federal  budget  edited
by  Robert  S.  Benson   and  Harold   Wolman  for  the  National
Urban  Coalition,  published  in  paperback  by  Praeger,  $2 95
For Futile Death In a Futile War
We  have  a  situation  in  which  we  have  said  to  the
youth  of  America,  "This   is  a  war  which  does  not  in-
volve  the  vital  interests   of  this  country  and  we  know
now  that  it  never  did.  It  has  not  been  worth  the  sacri-
fice  of  50,000  deaths;  the  sacrifice  of  300,000 wounded;
the  sacrifice of  $150  billion  in  treasure;  the  disillusion-
ment  of  the  youth  of  America;  the  loss  of  confidence
of  the  people  of  this  country  in  the  decision  making by
the  authorities."   Every  young  man  in  America  knows
it.   He  knows  that   what  we  are  doing—and  it  is  the
truth   of   the   matter—is   filibustering,   seeking   a pre-
text  to   get   out  of   Vietnam  and  save   face;   get out.
That   is   all   there   is   to   it.    So   we  are   saying   to  a
young   man,  "While  we  are  trying  to  devise   a  pretext
to  get  out  to  save  the  face  of  the  political  leaders  of  this
country,  you  go  over  there  and  risk  your  life."   I  would
not  ask  my  son  to  do  that,  and  I  would  not  ask any-
body else's son to do it,  either.
—Nelson   to  the  Senate,  May  25,  on  his   amendment
to  keep  draftees   out   of  Vietnam,  defeated   52-21.
The  most  startling  discovery which  emerges  from  the  Coali-
tion's  analysis  is  that  our  role  as  policeman  of  the   so-called
"free  world"   is  far  more  costly  than  defense  proper.    "Pure
defense  of  the  United  States,"  the  Coalition   points  out,  "ac-
tually  costs  very  little  in  comparison  to  the  total  size  of  our
so-called   'national   defense'   budget."    Most   of   our   defense
money  is  spent  on  conventional  forces  and  these  are  largely
geared  to  the  defense  of  other  countries,  not  the  United  States.
In  this '71 fiscal year, of  $74.5  billion  in  the  Pentagon  budget,
strategic  forces—both  offensive  and  defensive—with  required
backup  supporting   components   including  intelligence  and  re-
search  add  up  to  $16.3 billion,  or  little  more  than   one-fifth
of  the  total**.  "The surprise,"  the  Coalition's   report  to  the
Senate  Appropriations  Committee  continues,  "is  that  not  much
more  in  U.S. military   forces  are  really  required  for   defense
of  the  United  States."  No  country  in  the  world,  the  Counter-
budget   points  out, "has the  combination  of   sufficient   troop
strength,  airlift  and  sealift  capability,  and  amphibious   landing
capability  to  execute  successfully  a  major  conventional   attack
on  the  United  States."
The   Coalition   might   have   gone   further   in   its   strategic
analysis.   It  might  have  provided   an  antidote  to  the  annual
alarms  the  military-industrial complex  propagates,  by  sketching
in  the  strategic   advantages   the  U.S. has  over  its  one  super-
power   rival,   the   Soviet   Union.    The  U.S.  has  no   borders
(Continued   On  Page Two)
**Even  this  is  more  than  "pure  defense"  since  this  same
nuclear  umbrella  deters  attack  upon  our  allies  as  well.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

l.F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  14, 1971
The  Pax  Americana  Costs  Three  Times  As Much  As The  Nuclear  Deterrent
(Continued  from   Page   One)
threatened  by  conventional  attack.   It  has  wide  open   seas  on
its  east  and  west  and  the  longest  demilitarized  borders  in  the
world  to the north  with Canada and  to the  south with Mexico.*
The   Soviet   Union   on  the  other   hand  has  the   longest   land
borders  in  the  world  to  defend,  to  the  east  with  its heretical
Communist rival China,  to the  south with Iran and  Turkey,  and
to  the  west  where  it  faces  the  double  problem  of  confronting
West  European  capitalism  with  its  forward  American   nuclear
bases  and  holding  down  the  ever  restive  satellites  in  its  own
Soviet empire where there is always the  danger that  the demand
for  more  freedom  will  spread  from  Prague  and  Warsaw   to
Kiev  and   Moscow.
Where The Money Goes
Our  conventional  or  General  Purpose  forces  are  almost  en-
tirely  geared  to  the  defense  (or  control)   of  other  nations.   As
McNamara   put  it,  in  a  summation  quoted   by  the   Coalition
from  his  final  posture  statement,  "the  overall  requirement  for
, General  Purpose  forces  is  not  related  so  much  to  the  defense
of  our own territory  as it  is to  the  support  of  our  commitments
to  other  nations."   These  General   Purpose   forces  are  costing
more  than  $44  billion  in  the  current  fiscal  year,  or  almost
three  times  as  much  as  the  $16.3   billion  cost  of  our  strategic
offensive  and  defensive  forces.   The  Coalition  points  out  that
this  $44  billion  goes  to  implement  commitments  of  vinous
kinds  to  45  nations—21  in  the  Western   hemisphere,**   13
in  Western  Europe,  two  in  Central  Asia,  six  in  Southeast  Asia
and  the  Pacific, and  three  in  the  Far  East.   The  Pentagon   does
not  customarily  display  the  allocation  of  these  General  Pur-
pose  forces  to  various  regional  contingencies.   But  Wm   W.
Kaufman,  a  Pentagon  consultant  under  McNamara,  author  of
"The    McNamara   Strategy"   provided   the   first   overview  of
these  allocations  last  year  in  testimony  to  the  Joint  Economic
Committee.   The  Coalition  utilizes  this  to  show  that  the  $44
billion  spent  on  General  Purpose   forces   this  fiscal  year   (ex-
cluding  the  incremental  cost  of  the  Vietnam  war),  was'allo-
cated—.
Europe                             $19.6 billion
Asia                                 $15.8 billion
Latin  America                $  1.3 billion
Strategic    Reserve        $  4.3  billion
R  and  D                           $  3.0  billion
•The  strongest  argument  for  disarmament, incidentally,  is
that  if  we  once  begin  rearming these  borders,  putting  troops
on  them  as  "deterrence,"  Canada  and  Mexico would  have  to
follow  suit,  tension   would  rise  and  little  arms  races   begin,
with  increasing instability  and mutual  fear.
"The   imperialist  character  of  these  commitments  is  most
When Pentagon Overruled White House
Members  of  Congress  for  Peace  Through  Law  seeks
to  cut  the  arms  race  and  to  strengthen  the  United  Na-
tions.   It  began  on  May   4  the   release   of   15   reports
dealing  with  various  Pentagon  programs  and policies.
The   first,   by  Senator   McGovern  and  Rep. Seiberling,
attacked  the  B-l;  the  second,  by  Senator  Hartke  and
Rep.  Bingham,  criticized  the  F-14  and  the  F-15;  a  third,
on June 7, by  Senator  Stevenson,  was  to  deal  with  anti-
submarine  warfare.  This organization (201  Mass. Ave.,
N.E.,   Wash.   20002)   is   bi-partisan   and   now   has   29
Senators   and  87  Congressmen.   It   is   supporting  the
Proxmire-Mathias  bill,  to   cut  the   pending   $75  billion
military  authorization for  fiscal  '72  to  $68  billion.   Its
report  on  military  spending last  year  will  be published
by  Praeger  in  July  and  outlined  proposals  it   claimed
would   save   $100  billion   over   ten   years.    Air   Force
Magazine,  organ  of  the  Air  Force  association,  rushed
an  8-page preprint  to  Senators  assailing  the  McGovern-
Seiberling   report  on   the   B-l    and   calling   MCPL   "a
genuine  threat  to  our  security  program."  But judging
by  an article  in the  Feb.  1. Armed  Forces Journal  many
of  the  same  objections  to  the  B-l   were  raised  earlier
this  year  by  George  M.  Schultz,   Nixon's  top  budget
man,   on   instructions   from   the   White   House   which
asked  reconsideration of  this  costly  manned airplane.
But  Deputy  Defense  Secretary  Packard  threatened  to
resign  if  overruled  and  the  White  House  backed  down.
The  whole question  of  new  priorities  is clarified  if  we  now
look  at the three purposes  for which  we are spending $74.5
billion through  the Pentagon  this fiscal year:
Nuclear  Deterrent  For  Defense        $16.3  billion
Pax  Americana                                         $44.0  billion
Vietnam  war                                         $14.2 billion
Total                                                            $74.5  billion
Looked   at  this  way,  it   is  quite  clear   that   the   bulk  of   the
money  being   spent  by  the   "Defense   Department"   has  very
little  to  do  with  the  actual  defense  of  this  country.  The  big-
gest  menace  to  our  security  is  at  home.   The  black  rebellions
that  set Watts  and  Detroit  and  parts  of  Washington  afire  were
the  Early  Warning  signals.   At  a  time  when  $3  to  $4  billion
extra  a  year  would  end  hunger  and  an  extra  $4  billion  a  year
could  eliminate all  substandard  housing  within  five  years,  at
evident  in  Latin  America  which  no  one  threatens  except  us,
as  no  one  threatens   Poland  and  Czechoslovakia  except   the
Soviet  Union itself.   The  Brezhnev  doctrine  is  Russia's  vari-
ant  of  our  Monroe  Doctrine,  a  means  of  domination in  the
name  of  protecting satellite  neighbors.
Shortest  Missile  Gap  In  History:   The  Truth  Leaks  Out  About  Those  Fearful  Holes
We  have  just  witnessed   the  shortest   missile   gap  in  his-
tory.   In  mid-April,  Secretary   Laird  and  Senator  Jackson
issued  a  series  of  "scare  'em"  statements   based  on  the  fact
that  the  Russians  had  dug  forty  new  holes.   On the  wholly
unproven  assumption  that  these  holes  were  designed  for  the
huge  new  25  megaton   SS-9  missiles,  Secretary   Laird  told
us  that  the   "U.S.   may  be  moving  toward  a   second   rate
strategic  position."   Senator  Jackson  charged  that  ".  .  .  the
overall  strategic  balance  may  be tilting  in  Moscow's  favor."
I  said  at  the  time that  these  were  highly  exaggerated  and
even   semi-hysterical   conclusions.    I  said  that  every   year,
Just  when  the  crocuses   push  through  the  winter  soil  and
the  forsythia  and dogwood  burst  into  bloom, one  can predict
a  new  round  of  speeches  based  on  selected  intelligence   data
telling us that the Russians  are ten feet  tall.
Now  the  facts  are  out.  The  New  York  Times  reports  to-
day  that  ". .. the  Central Intelligence Agency  concluded  that
at  least  two-thirds  of  the  large  new  silo  holes  recently  de-
tected  in  the  Soviet  Union  were  intended  for  the  relatively
small  SS-11 intercontinental  missile  and not  for  a  large  new
weapon  as  the  Defense   Department  has  suggested."    The
source  was  Senate  Republicans  who  were  informed  of  the
CIA  assessment  by  non-government arms  control  experts.
The-strategic  balance did  not  "tilt."   We  have  not  become
a  "second  rate"  power.  In  a  month,  without  the  U.S.  lifting
a  finger  or  spending  a  dime,  this  missile   gap  was   closed.
The  lesson  is  clear.   Congress   and  the   public  should  not
be  swept  off  their  feet  by  leaks  designed  merely  to  propa-
gandize  for  a  fatter  military budget.
—Proxy/lire,  in  the  Senate,  May  26  (abr.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

l.F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June U, 1971
The  Containment  of China  Costs  Close  to  $15 Billion  A  Year
a  time when  we  are  spending  less  than  half  a  billion for  clean
water  and  hardly  $100  million for  clean  air, even  minor econ-
omies  in  these  huge  military  and  imperial  expenditures  would
help  our  crying  domestic  needs.
How  Much  Is  Enough?
This  brings  us  to  the  question  of  "how much  is  enough,"
enough   for   the   nuclear   deterrent   and   enough   for   the   Pax
Americana.   The  question  was  first   raised  in  those  words  by
Gen.   Maxwell  Taylor   in  his  book   The   Uncertain   Trumpet.
He  said  the question  "can and  has been  side-stepped  for  years."
Enthoven  and   Smith  failed   to  answer  the  question   in  their
book,  How  Much  Is  Enough?  published  last  year.  The  Coali-
tion,  operating  on  very  conservative  assumptions  and   after   a
close  analysis  of  every  military  program,  believes  the  military
budget  could  be  reduced  by more  than  $14  billion  in  the  next
fiscal year,  from  the  current  $74.5  billion  and  Nixon's  recom-
mended  $78 billion  for the  next fiscal year, down  to  $50  billion
in  each  of  the  fiscal  years  1973-76  inclusive.  This  would  be
$22  billion  less  than  is currently being  spent.   These  take  into
account  projected  price  rises,  and  they   make   no  basic     differ-
ence  in  military  policy.
A   measure  of   the   Coalition's   caution  is   its  treatment   of
NATO.    Its   overall   chart   dispels   much   of   the   nonsense:
NATO's   forces   are   50   percent   greater   than   those   of   the
Warsaw  Pact.  Western  Europe  is big  enough  and  rich enough
and  populous  enough  to  take  care  of  itself,  especially  against
a  Russia  with  a  hostile  China  at  its  back.   Yet  the   Coalition
merely  suggests   a  50,000  reduction  in  support   (rather   than
combat)   troops  in  the  European  theatre  and  the  elimination
of   one  of  the  four  divisions  at  home  which  are  earmarked
for   European   defense.   This  would   leave  combat   troops  in
Western  Europe  unchanged.    If  men  estimating  that  cautious-
ly  and  conservatively  can  see  $22  billion  in  safe  economies   a
year  during  '73  to  76  inclusive,  without  basic  change  in  nu-
clear  strategy  or  U.S. imperialism,   it  is  easy  to  see  how  much
a  more   radical   revision   of   priorities  could   divert   from   our
swollen  military  expenditures.
We   recommend   the   Coalition's   analysis.   It   represents   a
tremendous amount  of  work.   It  gives  us  an  alternative view  of
Why MIRV-ing Should Be Held Up
The  rapid  deployment of  MIRV  can  only  give  Soviet
opponents  of  arms  limitations an  excuse  to  oppose  the
SALT   agreements.    The   deployment   of   U.S.  MIRV
becomes   potentially  especially   wasteful   if   an  agree-
ment  on  ABM  is  imminent since  the  MIRV  is  our  an-
swer  to  a  Soviet  ABM—an  ABM  which  now  seems  es-
pecially  unlikely  to  arise  because   it  will  be  precluded
by   agreement.    The   irreversible  deployment  of  U.S.
MIRV  tends  to  make  agreements   on  MIRV   impossible,
just  when  there  is  a  greater  hope  they  might  succeed.
And  it  throws  away  our  bargaining   chip  to  secure  a
halt  in  the  Soviet  MIRV  program by  making our  MIRV
a  fait  accompli.   An  agreement   on  ABM  might  logic-
ally   be  followed  by   a  U.S. Soviet   agreement   on  of-
fensive    weapons   like   MIRV.    President    Nixon   has
stated   that   this   preliminary   agreement   "will   create
more   favorable  conditions  for   future  negotiations   to
limit  strategic  arms."  Thus,  the  new  SALT  possibilities
suggest,  for  many  reasons,  that  this  committee  should
escrow  the  MIRV  funds  until  the  negotiating  situation
is  clarified  next  year.
—Dr. Herbert  Scoville, Jr., chairman, FAS  Strategic
Weapons   Committee,  Senate  Approp.  Com. May  25.
the  military budget  as  seen  by men  who  have  worked  on  it.   It
clarifies  for  the first time  the  basic questions  of  policy  and  their
dollars-and-cents  costs.    It   opens   the   way  for   more    funda-
mental  rethinking.   Example:   if  Western  Europe  stood  on  its
own   feet  militarily  insofar   as  conventional   armies  are con-
cerned,  relying  only  on  the  U.S. for  the  nuclear  deterrent,  the
saving  would  run  close  to  $20  billion.   If  we  disentangle  from
the  folly  of  trying  to  "contain"  China  by  policing  East  Asia,
we could  save  close  to  $15  billion.  If  there  were  no  Pax  Amer-
icana, and  most  of  the  world  between  the  U.S. and  the  U.S.S.R.
could  be neutralized,  our  mutual  navies  and  armies  withdrawn,
and  the  United  Nations  strengthened,  we could  save  more  than
$40  billion   a  year  and  the   Russians  a  comparable   amount.
Even  without   SALT,  the   Coalition  figures  that   the   nuclear
deterrent  could   safely  be  reduced  $5  billion  by  1976.   These
figures  indicate  the  dimensions  of  the  military  monster  eating
up  the  resources  we  need  so  badly  at  home.
The Case Against ULMS, The New Multi-Billion Dollar Underwater  Battleship
ULMS  [Underwater  Long  Range  Missile  System]  is  us-
ually  justified  as  having  longer  range  missiles.   But  if  the
threat  most  often  mentioned  in  connection  with  Polaris  is
the  possibility—which  we  do  not  consider  very  plausible—
that   following  Polaris   submarines  was   the   threat,  what
good   would   it   do  to   build   a  new  submarine  with   longer
range  missiles?   Some  respond  that  the  ULMS  submarine
could  be  stationed   in  our  continental  waters   where  other
submarines  could  not  follow.   But  if  we  want  missiles  in
continental  waters,  why  build  an  ocean  going submarine?
Even   if   by   some   technological   breakthrough  it   were
possible  to  make  the  oceans  transparent  so  that submarines
could  be  continuously  located,  and  this  is  most  unlikely,  it
would  be  necessary  to  have  some  mechanism  for  destroying
all  the  submarines  at  a  given  moment.   After  all, the  at-
mosphere  is  transparent  to  radar,  but  no  one  has  any  idea
how   to  destroy  bombers  on  air  alert  or  how  to   build  an
ABM  system  which  could  provide  protection  to  the  popula-
tions.
It   is   clearly  premature  to   freeze   on  an   ULMS   design
in  the  near  future.   The  Administration   proposal  for  trade-
off  studies  would  seem  to  recognize  this,  but  the  budgeting
of  $100  million  for  FY  '72  and  the  reference   to  submarine
and  facility  design  might  indicate  a  freezing  on  the  nature
of  the  system  which  would  not  be  warranted  at  this  time.
This  fear  is  further  supported  by  Secretary  Laird's  state-
ments   over  the   past   year   on  the   need   to   make   "tough"
and  "expensive"  decisions  within  the  next   twelve   months.
There  are  reports  that  ULMS will  be  one  and one  half  times
as  large  as  Polaris  and carry  50% more  large  missiles  with
MIRV's.   It  is  hoped  that  the  Navy  is  not  prematurely  ex-
tending  its  outdated  and  costly   philosophy  of  large  battle-
ships  and large  carriers  to  large   submarines.
—Dr.  George  B.  Kistiakowsky,  Science  Adviser  to  Eisen-
hower,  testifying    for  the  Federation  of  American  Scientists
before    the  Senate  Appropriations   Committee  May   25.   He
was  one  of  four   FAS   witnesses, including  Dr.  Herbert Sco-
ville, Jr., former   deputy   director,  the  Cl A  and  the  ACDA;
Dr.   Marvin    Goldberger,    chairman   Princeton's    Physics
Dept,  and  Dr.  Leslie  H.  Gelb,  former   Acting  Deputy   Ass't
Sec'y   for   Arms   Control   and   Policy   Planning   under   Mc-
Namara.   They  called  for  cancelling   the  Minuteman    MIRV,
deferring    the  Poseidon   MIRV,    cancelling   the  B-l   bomber
and  the AW ACS  bomber  defense,  halting  the   SAFEGUARD
ABM   and  reducing   the   U.S.  carrier  force   from   17  to  9.
They   estimated  that  over  the  next  10  years  this  program
would  save  $50  b'Mion  in  •procurement  and  from   $30  to  $40
billion  in  maintenance  and   operation.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.F. Stone's  Bi-Weekhj,  June  U, 1971
It  Doesn't  Take  Much  Freedom  To  Qualify  For  The  Free  World
FREE  WORLD,   SOUTHEAST   ASIA  SECTION:    M.   Ngo   Cong
Due,  editor  of  the  opposition  paper,  Tin   Sang,  whose  arrest
after  a  brawl  raised  a  storm  in  the  South  Vietnamese  Assem-
bly,  of  which  he is a member,  published  an  article in  Le   Monde
last  year  (April  8)   entitled  "Vietnamization  Means  Dictator-
ship and  War."    Last  September  in  Paris he  proposed  the with-
drawal  of  U.S.  troops  and  a  provisional  government.   He  has
long  been  a  thorn  in  the  side  of  the  Thieu  regime  and  the
U.S.  Embassy.  Last October  his  home,  and  in  March  his  news-
paper  office,  were  bombed.
FREE  WORLD,   FASCIST  SECTION:   Neither   the  wire  services
nor  any other  paper  but  the  Washington  Star  (May  30:  Rich-
ard  Mowrer  from  Madrid)   called  attention  to  the significance
of   Nixon's   sending  Admiral  Moorer,  chairman  of   the   U.S.
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  to  represent  the  U.S.  at  the  celebration
June  6  of  Franco's  victory  in  Spain's  civil  war.   Never   before
has  the  U.S.  put  its  approval  so  explicitly on  Spanish  Fascism.
UNFIT  To   PRINT?   Earl  Caldwell,  who  has  been   covering
the  Black  Panthers  for  the  New   York   Times,  was  picked   to
•deliver  this  year's  Henry  F.  Pringle   address  at  the  Columbia
School  of  Journalism May  28,  but  not  a  line  about  it  appeared
next  day  in  his  own  (or  any  other)   paper.   Caldwell  spoke  of
his  fight  against  a  contempt  conviction  soon  to  come   before
the  Supreme  Court  involving  a  reporter's  privilege  under   the
First  Amendment   in  dealing   on   a  basis   of   confidence  with
radical  groups,  in  his  case  the   Panthers.
NIXON  DOCTRINE  AND  ASIAN  CANNON-FODDER:   Secretary
Laird  told   the  Fifth   Annual  Dept.  of   Defense   Seminar   for
business  leaders  May  21,  "In   Asia,  manpower   is  a   resource
which  they  have  in  abundance,"  and  indicated  that  the  Nixon
doctrine  means  we  will  save  money  by  arming  Asians  to  fight
Asians,   adding,   "but   American   military  manpower   on   the
ground,   no,  in  that  area  of  the  world,   and  that's  what   this
total  force  concept  is all  about ..."
A   GOOD   ANTIDOTE  to  naval  propaganda    about   the   fear-
someness  of  the  Soviet  Navy   (and  the  need  for  larger   appro-
priations   for  ours)   was  George  C.  Wilson's   survey   in   the
Washington  Post   (May   31),    "Soviet   Navy   Still  Far  Behind
U.S.  Sea Power"  .  .  . Advertising  Age  (May  31)  reports  that
Gulf  Oil  will  sponsor  two NBC-TV  specials  on  Tricia  Nixon's
'wedding  June  12.  We  suppose  if  this  were  England,  Princess
Appeal  For A Brave  Judge
Those  who  saw  the  movie  "Z"  will  never  forget  the
brave  magistrate  who  resisted  pressure  to  dig  out  the
truth  in  the   Lambrakis   affair.    His  name  is   Christos
Sartzetakis.   The  rightist   Greek  regime   took   revenge
on  him last  December.  He  has  been  held without  formal
charges   in  a   secret   military   prison   for   five   months.
Le  Figaro  reports  (May  28)  that  a  delegation   repre-
senting  six  different  associations  of  French  judges  and
lawyers,   headed   by    Holland,   President    of   France's
highest   court   of   criminal  appeal,   asked   the   French
Ministry   of   Justice   to   intervene   on   behalf   of   their
Greek   colleague.   They   protested   that   M.  Sartzetakis
is   "in  the   hands  of   men   known   for   the   practice   of
torture"  and  presented  documentation  from  the  Greek
Ministry  of  Justice  at  the  time  of  the  Lambrakis  affair
to   prove  the  high  esteem   expressed   for   him  by   the
Greek  Ministry  of  Justice  in  those  days.   We  hope  some
American  judges  and  lawyers  will  follow  suit.
Tricia's  wedding  would  be sponsored  by British  Petroleum  .  . .
PARTICIPATION  IN  THE  OPIUM  TRAFFIC  is  fairly   common
among  middle  level  government  officials  throughout   Southeast
Asia,  John  E.  Ingersoll,  director  of  the  Bureau  of  Narcotics
and  Dangerous   Drugs,   told  the  House  Select   Committee   on
Crime  June  1. He  said  the  heroin  traffic  is costing  the  U.S.  $3.5
billion  a  year.   He  revealed  that   176  pounds  of  opium   were
found  four  weeks  ago  on  a  plane  of  Air  America,  the  CIA's
airline  in  the  Laos  war.
NECROLOGY:    Max   Lowenthal,   at  83,   a  lawyer  of   excep-
tional  qualities,  who   spent   his   life   on  many  public   causes,
from  the  interests  of  railroad  investors,  and  labor  unions,   to
civil   liberties.   He   was  a  close  associate   of   Truman   in   the
pre-war  Senate  railroad  investigation   and  might  have  become
a   Supreme   Court   Justice  were   it   not   for   the   smear    attack
launched   against   him   by   the   FBI   in   1950   because   of   his
critical   book,   "The    Federal    Bureau   of   Investigation,"   the
first  and  still  the  best  of  its  kind.
PERSONAL   FOOTNOTE:    On   May   28   IPS   was  given   the
Columbia   University  Journalism   award   for   lifetime   achieve-
ment  (it  went  last  year  to  Walter  Lippman)   and  on  June  7
an  honorary  Doctor  of  Letters  by  Brown  University.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed Envelope
For
send  I
1967-7
(To)   ]
Street
City   ..
Please
Name
Street
City
•      FOR  STONE'S  NEW    BOOK
the  enclosed  special  pre-publication  price  of  $8.95
.  F.  Stone's   new  book,  Polemics  and   Prophecies:
0  (Random House).  Regularly  $10.
Vame   ..............................................................................
..................................   Zip................  State....................
Indicate   if   gift    announcement  wished   D
renew  D'   or enter  D    a sub for  the  enclosed  $5 :
..—..................„.........   Zin. ...............   State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
                  6
/
14
/
71
4420  29th  St.  N. W.,  Washington,   D.  C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington   D.C.   Published   every  other   Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..   N.W..   Washington.   D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  publ.shed  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  J6  in  the  U.S.;    *6  in  Canada;
*10  elsewhere.  A
ir
  Mail  rates:  J17  to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED