I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971may03.pdf

============================================================

Nixon's  Tricky  Non-Witbdmwal  Policy,  P.  3
The  Biggest   Nothing   In  History
The  country  doesn't  know it  yet  but  it  has  created  a  monster,  a  monster  in  the  form  of  millions  of  men  who  have  been
taught  to  deal  and  to  trade in  violence,  and  who  have  been  given  the  chance to  die  for  the  biggest  nothing in  history; men
who  have returned  with  a sense  of  anger,  and a  sense  of  betrayal  which  no one  has  yet  grasped.
—John  Kerry,  leader  of  the  Vietnam  Veterans   Against  the  War,   before   Senate  Foreign   Relations  Committee   April  22.
IF.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX,  No.  9MAY   3,  1971
WASHINGTON,  D. C.20  CENTS
Peace  Is  Still  A  Long,  Long  March  Away
After   the   Inquisition  made  Galileo  recant  the   subversive
notion  that  the  earth  revolves  around  the  sun,  he  is  said  to
have  whispered,  defiantly,   "Eppur   si  muove!"   (but   still  it
moves).   In  the  euphoric  wake  of  the  huge  anti-war  gathering
here  on  April  24,  one  can  only  paraphrase  Galileo  and  say of
the government,  "But  still  it  doesn't  move!"  There  will  be no
peace  in  Vietnam  until  we  get  rid  of  Nixon  as  we  got  rid  of
Johnson.  But  the  chances are slight  that  Nixon's  successor  will
not  be  somebody  like  Muskie or  Humphrey  who  will  carry  on
the  tactical retreat  Johnson  began.   That  retreat  is  designed  to
appease   anti-war   sentiment   by   withdrawing   most,   and   if
necessary  all,  of  our  troops  from  South  Vietnam  but  to main-
tain  a  satellite  regime  in  Saigon,  supported  by  airpower  from
the  Seventh  fleet  and  Thailand.   The  aim  is  still  the  mainte-
nance of  U.S.  power  in  East  Asia  as part  of  the  Pax Americana.
There  can  be  no  generation  of  peace  until  we  somehow  curb
the militarism  and  imperialism which gave  us Vietnam and  will
create  new  Vietnams.   But the  Pentagon  is already utilizing  the
reduction  in  the  cost  of  the  Vietnam  war  to  give  it  funds  for  a
leaner  but  better  equipped  force  with  which  to  go  on  playing
the  world  policeman  role.  Yet  the  dominant  elements  of  both
parties  decry anti-imperialism as a return  to isolationism.
Mostly  Young,  White  and  Middle  Class
From  the  top  of  Capitol  Hill,  the  marchers  looked  like  a
mass of  brightly colored  human  confetti  as  far  as  the  eye could
see  up  Pennsylvania  and  Constitution   Avenues.    It  took  five
hours  for  the  last  of  the  demonstrators  to  come  within  hearing
range  of  the  speakers,  and  more  bus  and  train  loads  were  still
pouring  into  town  when  the  demonstration  was  half  over  in
mid-afternoon.    No  one  expected  so  huge  a  turnout,  perhaps
the  biggest  since  the  Civil  Rights  March  of   1963.   The  peace
movement  has  risen  bigger  than  ever,  from  the  ashes  of  Viet-
namization  and  withdrawal.   But  it  still  has  a  long,  hard  way
to  go.   Though   sedately   dressed   older   persons   were  visible
amid  the  brightly  colored  rags  that  are chic with  today's  youth,
the  crowd  was still overwhelmingly  the  other  side of  30.  There
was  a trainload  of  1500  from  District  65,  many  busloads  from
New  York's  hospital  workers  (Local  1199),  some  UAW  and
Teamsters,  but  these  were  fringe  elements  long  opposed  to  the
war;  clearly  the  organized   labor   movement,   rank-and-file  as
well as leadership, is still  wedded  to  the military-industrial com-
plex  by bread-and-butter as well  as ideology.   The  Third  World
contingent  was  far  less  than  one  percent  of  the  300,000  or
more  who  turned  out.   These,  despite  the  favorite  sterotypes of
the  Far  Left,  were  overwhelmingly   white  and  middle   class.
There  is  a  lot  of  missionary  work  to  be  done,  in  the  ghettoes
and  out  in  the  country.
The   stars  of   this  year's  demonstration   were   the  Vietnam
Veterans  Against  The  War.    The  drama  associated  with  their
One  Of  The  "Best"  Defends  Agnew's  "Misfits"
In   1970  at   West   Point   Vice  President  Agnew  said
"some  glamorize  the  criminal  misfits  of  society  while
our  best  men  die  in  Asian  rice  paddies  to  preserve  the
freedom  which  most  of  these  misfits  abuse."   This  is  a
terrible  distortion  because  we  in  no  way  consider our-
selves  the  best  men  of  this  country,  because  those  he
calls   misfits   were  standing  up  for   us   in   a  way  that
nobody  else  in  this  country  dared  to,  because  so  many
who  have  died  would  have  returned  to  this  country  to
join  the  misfits  in  their  effort  to  ask  for  an immediate
withdrawal   from   Vietnam,   because  so   many   of   those
best  men  have  returned  as  quadriplegics and amputees,
and  they  lie   forgotten  in   the   VA   hospitals,   and   we
cannot  consider  ourselves  America's best  men  when  we
are  ashamed  of,  and  hate,  what  we  were  called  on  to
do  in  Southeast  Asia.   And  to  attempt  to  justify   the
loss  of  one  American life  in  Vietnam,  by  linking  such
loss  to  the  preservation of  freedom  which  these  misfits
supposedly  abuse,  is  to  us  the  height  of  criminal hypoc-
risy,   that   kind   of   hypocrisy   which   we   feel   has  torn
the country apart.
—Kerry   of  the  VVAW   testifying    on  April  22   (abr).
four  day  encampment  on  the  Mall  touched  the  heart  of  the
country  and   was  mainly  responsible   in  my  opinion   for   the
unexpected  size of  the  turnout.  They  stared  down  the  Attorney
General  of  the  United  States  in  an  episode  without  parallel  in
the  history of  American  constitutional  law.   He  went  to  court
to  obtain  an  injunction  forbidding  them  to  sleep  on  the  Mall,
and  then  after  winning  a  victory  from  Chief  Justice   Burger
and  later  the  entire  court,  lost  his  nerve  and  went  back  to  the
District  Judge who  issued  the  original  order  and  asked  him  to
reverse it!
The  failure  of  nerve  is  understandable.    I  can  remember  as
a  young  newspaperman  what  happened   after  Herbert  Hoover
called  out the  troops to drive the  tattered  Bonus  Marchers,  who
were  also  veterans,  out  of  town  in  1932;  that  was  the  biggest
mistake  he  made.   If  police  or  troops  had  driven  the  VVAW
out  the  night  after  the  Supreme  Court  decision,  it  would  have
been  the  biggest  mistake Nixon  ever  made.   Pictures  of  legless
veterans  being  carried  out  of  the  park  could  have   precipitated
riots  in  military encampments  here  and  in  Vietnam.   Scores  of
men  in  the  nearby  82d  Airborne  Division,  which  would  have
been  called  up,  sent  word  that  they  would  join  the  vets  rather
than  act  against  them.   Contingents  of  active  troops  from  Ft.
Bragg,  Ft.  Meade,   Ft.  Belvoir  and  Andrews   Air  Force  Base
turned  up  at  the  various  affairs  associated  with  the  VVAW en-
campment:    the   candle-light   procession    around   the   White
House,  the  parade  of  veterans  throwing  away  their  medals  at
the  Capitol,  the  Memorial  Service  for  the  Dead  at Washington
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May  3, 1971
"To Search Out And  Destroy The  Last  Vestiges of This Barbaric  War"
By John Forbes Kerry*
In  our  opinion,  and  from  our  experience,   there  is  nothing
in  South  Vietnam  that  realistically  threatens  the  United  States
of   America.   Many  of   the  men  who  have   returned   to  this
country  are  probably   angriest  about  all  we  were  told   about
the  mythical  war  against  Communism.  We  found  most  people
didn't  know  the  difference   between   communism  and   democ-
racy.   They  only  wanted  to  work  in  rice  paddies  without  heli-
copters  strafing  them  and  bombs  with  napalm  burning  their
villages  and  tearing their  country  apart.   They  practiced  the  art
of  survival  by  siding  with  whatever  military  force  was  present
at  a  particular  time,  be  it  Viet   Cong,  North  Vietnamese   or
American.
The  Cost  Of  Hamburger  Hills
We  fought  using  weapons  against  "oriental  human  beings,"
with  quotation  marks  around  that,  which  I  do  not  believe  this
country  would  dream  of  using  were  we  fighting  in  the  Euro-
pean  theatre.  We  watched  while men charged  up  hills  because
a  General  said  that  hill  had  to  be  taken,  and  after  losing  one
platoon  or  two  platoons  they  marched  away  to  leave  the  hill
for  reoccupation  by the  North  Vietnamese.   We  watched  pride
allow  the  most  unimportant  of  battles  to be blown  into extrava-
ganzas  because  we  couldn't   lose  and  we  couldn't   retreat  and
because  it  didn't  matter  how  many  American  bodies  were  lost
and  so  there  were  Hamburger   Hills  and  Khe  Sanhs  and  Hill
881s  and  Fire  Base  6s.   Now  we  are  told  that  the  men  who
fought  there  must  watch  quietly  while  American  lives  are  lost
so  that  we  can  exercise  the  incredible  arrogance  of Vietnamiz-
ing the  Vietnamese.
We  are  here  in  Washington  also  to  say that  the  problem  of
this  war  is  not  just  a  question   of  war  and  diplomacy.   It  is
part-  and   parcel   of   everything   that  we  are  trying  as  human
beings  to  communicate  to  people  in  this  country,  the  question
of  racism, which  is  rampant  in  the  military, and  the  hypocrisy
in  our  taking  umbrage  over  the  Geneva  Convention  and  using
that  as  a  justification for  continuation  of  the  war  when  we  are
more  guilty  than  any other  body  of  violations  of  those  Geneva
Conventions,   in  the  use  of   free  fire  zones,   harassment   and
interdiction  fire,  search   and  destroy   missions,   the   bombings,
the torture of prisoners.
We  are  here  also  to  ask,  and  to  ask  vehemently,  where  are
the  leaders  of  our  country?   We   are  here  to  ask  where  are
McNamara,   Rostow,   Bundy,   Gilpatric   and   so  many   others,
where  are  they  now  that  we,  the  men  whom  they  sent  off  to
'Before  Senate  Foreign  Relations  April  22 (aftr.).
How  We  Treat  The  Heroes
When  They  Come  Home
The  hospitals  across  the  country  won't  or  can't  meet
their  demands.  It  is  not  a  question of  not  trying,  they
haven't   got   the  appropriations.  A   man  recently  died
after  he  had  a  tracheotomy  in  California,  not  because
of  the  operation  but  because  there  wasn't  enough  per-
sonnel   to  clean   the   mucous  out   of   his   tube  and  he
suffocated  to death.
Another  young  man  died  in  a  New  York  VA hospital
the  other  day.   A  friend   of   mine  was  lying  in  a  bed
two  beds  away  and  tried  to  help  him  but  he  couldn't.
He  rang  a  bell  and  there  was  nobody  there  to  service
that  man  and  so  he  died  of convulsions.
Fifty-seven  percent I  understand  of  all  those entering
the  VA  hospitals  talk  about  suicide.   Some  27 percent
have  tried,  and  they  try  because  they  come  back  to  this
country  and they  have  to  face  what  they  did  in  Vietnam
and  then  they  come  back  and  find  the  indifference  of  a
country  that  doesn't  really care,  that  doesn't  really care.
—Kerry  of  the  VVAW   testifying   on April  22.
war,  have returned ?  These are  commanders  who  have  deserted
their  troops,  and  there  is  no  more  serious  crime  in  the  law  of
war.   The   Army  says  they  never  leave  their  wounded.    The
Marines  say  they  never   leave   even   their  dead.   These  men
have  left  all  the  casualties and  retreated  behind  a  pious  shield
of  public rectitude.  They  have  left  their  reputations bleaching
behind  them in the sun.
Finally,  this  Administration  has  done  us  the  ultimate  dis-
honor.   They  have  attempted  to  disown  us and  the  sacrifices  we
made  for  this  country.   In  their  blindness  and  fear  they  have
tried  to  deny  that  we  are  veterans  or  that  we  served  in  'Nam.
We  do  not  need  their  testimony.  Our  own  scars and  stumps  of
limbs  are  witness enough  for  others  and  for  ourselves.
We  wish  that  a  merciful  God   could  wipe  away  our  own
memories   as  easily  as  this   Administration  has   wiped   their
memories  of  us.  But  all  that  they  can  do  is to  make  more  clear
than  ever our  own  determination  to  undertake  one  last  mission,
to  search  out  and  destroy  the  last  vestige  of  this  barbaric  war,
to  pacify  our  own  hearts,  to  conquer  the  hate  and  the  fear  that
have  driven  this  country  these  last  ten  years,  so  that   when
years  from  now  our  brothers  go  down  the  street  without  a  leg,
without  an  arm  or  a  face,  and  small  boys  ask  why, we  will  be
able  to  say  "Vietnam"  and  not  mean  a  desert,  nor  a  filthy
obscene  memory,  but  instead  the  place  where  America finally
turned  and  where  soldiers  like  us  helped  it  in  the  turning.
How  Secretaries  Of  Defense  Can  Be  Deceived  And  Top  Generals  Deceive Themselves
Sen.  SYMINGTON: One  final  question,  Mr.  Kerry,  from
your  experience  in  Vietnam  do  you  think  it  is  possible  for
the  President  or  Congress  to  get  accurate  and undistorted
information  through  official  military  channels.
[Shouts  of  "No"  from  the  veterans  in  the  audience.]
Mr.  KERRY:  I  can  recall   often   sending  in  on  the   spot
reports which we  made after  each  mission,  and including the
GDA,  Gunfire  Damage  Assessments,   in  which  we  would  say
maybe  15  sampans   sunk   or  whatever  it  was,  and  I  often
read  about  my  own  missions  in  Stars  and  Stripes   and  the
very  mission  we  had  been  on  had  been  doubled  in   figures
and tripled in     figures....
Men  in  the  military,  have  a  tendency  as  do  men  in  many
other  things,  to  report   what  they  want  to  report  and  see
• what  they  want  to  see  . ..  Secretary  Laird came to Vietnam
once  and they  staged  an  entire  invasion  for  him  .  .  .  When
the  initial  reeon  platoon  went  out  and  met  with  resistance
they  changed  the  entire  operation  the  night  before  and sent
them  down  into  the   South  China  Sea   so   they   would   not
run  into  resistance  and  the  Secretary  would  have  a  chance
to  see  how smoothly the  war  was  going.
I  know  General Wheeler came  over  at  one  point  .  .  .  and
Gen.  Wheeler  went  out  to  the  field  and  saw  12  pacification
leaders  and  asked  about  ten  of  them  how  things  were  going
and  they  all  said,  "It  is  really  going  pretty  badly," and  the
llth  one  said,  "It  couldn't  be  better,  General, we  are  really
doing  the  thing  here  to  win  the  war," and  the  General said,
"I  am  finally  glad  to  find  somebody  who  knows  what  he  is
talking  about." ...  I  think  the  intelligence  which finally
reaches  the  White  House  does  have  serious  problems with
it  ...    I  served  as  an  aide  to  an  Admiral  in  my  last  days  in
the  Navy  and  I  have  seen  exactly  what  the  response  is  up
the  chain  of  command,  and  how  things   get  distorted  and
people  say  to  the  man  above  him  what  is  needed  to  be  said,
to keep everybody happy.
—John  Kerry,   of  the  VVAW   to  Sen.  For.  Rel. April  22.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. r.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May 3,  1971
The  Slippery  Record  on  Nixon's  Promise  of Total  Withdrawal
Our   goal   is  a  total   American  withdrawal  from   Vietnam.
—Nixon  on TV  April  1
Q.   Mr.  Secretary,  after   the  President's   speech  and  after   a
White  House  conference,  Senator  Scott  interpreted  the  Presi-
dent  as  saying  that  he  does  have  a  time-table  for  ending  the
war,    that  that   time-table  is   sometime   preceding    December
1972,  and  he  has  no  intention  of  having  a  residual  force  in
South  Vietnam.  Is that  your understanding?
Secretary   LAIRD:   I  think  the   President's   statement   and
speech  speaks for  itself.
Q.  Would   you  enlarge  on  your  own  frequently  promised
course  that  you're  going  to  terminate  American  involvement
in  the   war,  and   tell  us  whether   terminate  means   what   the
dictionary  says it means.
LAIRD:  It means exactly what the President said.
Q.  What  does  it mean when you have used the term,  sir ?
LAIRD:  Exactly the  same  as the  President.
Q.  Would  you tell us what it means ?
LAIRD:  I  would  be  glad  to  give  you  a  copy  of  the  Presi-
dent's  speech.
Q.   I am sorry, I heard  that.
LAIRD:  Whether  it's "terminate"   or  a  total  withdrawal  I
am  not  going  to  quarrel  about  the  difference  in  words.
Q.   Can  we  get  at  it  this way: Do  you  plan,  a  Korean-type
solution  in  Vietnam,  leaving  X  number  of   Americans  there
as  a  support   force  indefinitely,  or  do  you  plan  to  get   them
completely out, period ?
LAIRD:  I think  the President made that very clear.
Q.  What do  you say, sir ?
LAIRD:  I support  the  President.
Q.   I don't think that's an  answer.
LAIRD:  I  think  it  is  a  pretty  good  answer  and  I  will con-
tinue to  support  the  President  in  his  (speech)  of  April 7.
Q.  Sir, he  has  never  addressed  himself  on  this  question.
LAIRD:  I  think  that  anyone reading  the  speech  would  find
the question  is answered.
Q.  I  did  read  it  and  I  listened  to  it  ...     How  can  we end
American  involvement  when  it's  implicit  in  the  Vietnamiza-
tion  program  that  we  continue  military assistance ?
LAIRD:   Military  assistance   will   take   on   important  sig-
nificance  if  we  are  going  to  reduce  the  commitment  for  Amer-
ican  manpower  as  far  as  ground  combat  forces-are   concerned
in  that  area  of  the  world.   Military  assistance,  yes; American
ground  troops,  manpower,  no.   I  certainly  would  not  want  to
mislead  anyone  that  we  will  not  need  military  assistance  pro-
grams  as  far  as  applying  the  Nixon  Doctrine  in  Asia.
Q.  What  does  Vietnamization  and  the  Nixon  Doctrine  en-
vision  in  terms  if  U.S. air  support   in  Indochina  after  these
troops are pulled out ?
LAIRD:  I  would  envision  that  the  U.S. presence  as  far  as
Asia  is  concerned,   as  far   as  Naval   forces  are  concerned,   as
far  as  Air  Forces  are  concerned,  that  this  would  be  part  of  the
realistic deterrent  which  we  will maintain  in  Asia.
Q.  Do  you  envision  those  air  and  naval  units  remaining  in
Fifteen   Or  20  Years  More
I  implemented  a  plan  to  train  and  equip  the  South
Vietnamese;  to  withdraw  American  forces,   and  to  end
American  involvement in  the  war  just  as  soon  as  the
South  Vietnamese  had developed  the  capacity  to defend
their  country against  Communist  aggression.
—Nixon's  address  of  April  7.
The  Vietnamization  plan  is  not  completed  yet, so  we
still  have  many  things  to  do  not  only  in  the  military
field  but   in  other  fields,  socially,  politically   and eco-
nomically.   So  if   Vietnamization  means  making  South
Vietnam  strong,  capable  to  defend  itself,  it  will  take
15 or  20 more years.
—Vice  President  Ky  at an impromptu  news  conference
in  Saigon  at  which  he  also  said   that  if  Senator  Mc-
Govern  came  to  Vietnam  "I  will  kick   him  out   person-
ally."   AP  in  Baltimore  Sun, April  19.  (The  same  day
the  New York  Daily  News  Saigon  correspondent   Joseph
Fried   quoted   Ky   as   terming   a  military   victory   and
invasion   of   the   North   impossible   and   saying,   "both
parts  of  Vietnam  must  stop  the war  .  .  .  We are not
going  to  fight  and  kill  each  other   forever."
combat  in  carrying out  that  role?
LAIRD:  I  wouldn't  care  to  discuss  that  particular  question.
I  look  forward  to  the  reduction  of  warfare  in  that  area  of  the
world  and  I  do  not  believe  that  we  should   look   forward  to
the  maintenance  of  that  kind  of  warfare.   We  must  maintain
a  capability,  however,  in  order  to  be  realistic  about  the  situa-
tion  that  we  do  face  there,  and  in  order  to  restore  peace  and
to maintain peace  in that  area.
—Press conference  at the  Pentagon  April  13   (abridged).
Emmett  DUDMAN  (Chicago Sun Times) : Mr. President you
mentioned  ending  our  involvement  in  the  war  in  Vietnam  and
yet  the  Secretary  of  Defense  said  the  other  day  that  we  would
remain  in  South  Vietnam  (sic).   How  do  you  reconcile  these
two  statements  or  is  there  a  conflict  there  in  your  opinion?
The   PRESIDENT:  No.   Mr.  Dudman,  there   really  isn't  any
conflict ...  I  said  that  we would  end our  involvement ...  I
said  that  our  goal  is  total  American  withdrawal  from  Vietnam
...  As  far  as  Mr.  Laird's  statement  was  concerned,  what  he
was  referring  to  was  that  pending  the  time  that  we  can  have
a  total  withdrawal  consistent  with  the  principles  that  I  laid
down  last  week,  it  wilhbe  necessary  to  the  U.S. to  retain  air
power  and  to  retain  some  residual  forces.  .  . .
Eugene  V.  RISHER  (UPI):  Mr.  President,   I  would  like  to
follow  up  on  this.   Does  that  mean  that  if  Hanoi  agreed  to
release  the  American  prisoners,  that  we  would  shut  down  the
five  air  bases  that  we  have  in  Thailand,  as  part  of  the  with-
drawal ?
The   PRESIDENT:  Mr.  Risher,  the  air  bases  that  we  have  in
an  area  around  Vietnam,  of  course,  are  there  for  reasons   other
than  Vietnam.   As  you  know,  we  have  a  treaty  with  Thailand
and  these  air  bases  are  maintained  there,  in  part,  in  order  to
sustain  that  treaty.
—American Society  of  Newspaper  Editors  April  16.
Nixon's  Tricky  Final  Reply  Was  Undercut  By  Thailand's  Foreign  Minister
Bangkok,   Thailand—Foreign   Minister  Thanat   Khoman
said  today  that  if  the  United  States  wants  to  keep  forces  in
Thailand after  the Vietnam war,  a new treaty  will be  needed.
Thanat  was  commenting on  President  Nixon's  remarks that
some  American forces  must  remain  in  Southeast  Asia  after
the  war  and  on  Defense   Secretary   Melvin  R.  Laird's com-
ment  that  a U.S. air  and naval  presence  would be maintained
in  Southeast  Asia.
Thanat  said  that, according  to  the  present  Thai-American
treaty,  U.S.  forces   are  to  stay   in  Thailand  only  for  the
duration  of   the  war.  He  said  American  troops  here  have
only   a  supporting   role   in  the  Vietnam  war.  The  United
States   has  reduced  the  number  of  its   troops   in  Thailand
from  a  peak  of  50,000  three  years  ago  to  about  32,000  at
the  present.   Thanat  spoke  at  an  airport  interview  before
leaving  for  Washington  to  attend  the  Vietnam  allies con-
ference  later this  week.
—AP in the Washington Star, April 19.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May  3, 1971
If  We're  Wooing  China,  Why  Go  On  Fighting  A  War  Of  Containment?
(Continued   From  Page   One)
Cathedral  organized  by  the  Concerned  Officers  movement  and
the  march of  the  24th  itself.
A  Scene  For The History  Books
Just   as  the   relative  handful   of   the   Resistance   saved   the
honor  of  France  so these  thousand  or  more veterans of  Vietnam
will  some  day  be  seen  as men  who  saved the  honor  of  America.
Think  of  how  differently  Germany  would  have  gone  into  the
Nuremberg  trials  if  it  could  have  pointed  to  demonstrations  in
which  German  veterans had  cared  or  dared  to throw  away  their
medals  in  shame  and  protest  while  the  very  horrors  of  World
War  II  were still going on!  I  know  of  no  war and  no  country
in  which  there  has  ever  been  such  a  scene  as  that  which  took
place  on  the  West  side of  the  Capitol  that  morning.   It  will  be
remembered  with  pride  in  our  history  books.
"We  looked  for  leadership,"  said  the  ex-officer  who  opened
the   medal   ceremony,   "but   found   closed   doors   and   closed
minds."   The  Armed  Services  Committees,  always the   faithful
satellites  of  the  high  brass,  refused  to  hear  them.   But  Senator
McGovern  held  an  improvised  session  that  afternoon  to  hear
a  succession  of  the  veterans  tell  of  the  atrocities  and  the  atro-
cious  military  tactics which had  finally  turned  them  off the  war.
And  Senator  Fulbright  had  the  distinction  of  being  the  only
committee  chairman  in  Congress  to  hold  an  official  session  to
hear  a spokesman  for  the  veterans,  a  27-year old  Naval  Lt,  j.g.,
from  Waltham,   Mass.,  named  John  Forbes  Kerry.   His  testi-
mony,  from  which we give many excerpts  in  this  issue, was  the
most  moving  and  eloquent  we  have  heard  in   30  years  as  a
Washington   correspondent.    He  spoke  with  a  firmness,  a  tact
and  a grace  that  made  the  Senators  seem elderly fumblers.   The
veterans have given the  peace movement  a  fresh  voice.
As  this  is  written  the  second   wave  of  protests   has  begun
under  the  Peoples  Coalition  For  Peace  and  Justice.   The  bold
slogan  is to  shut down  the government  if  it  does  not  shut  down
the  war. No  one aware of  the terrible immobility of the govern-
ment  can  fail  to  have  some  sympathy  with  this  effort.   But  it
remains  to   be   seen   whether   the   Peoples   Coalition   has   the
troops.   There  were  not  more  than   1500   here  at  the  start  of
what  was  billed  as  a  major  exercise  in  massive  but  peaceful
The  Fake  Issue  Of  Freedom
Each  day  to  facilitate  the  process  by  which  the  U.S.
washes  her  hands  of  Vietnam  someone  has  to  give  up
his  life  so  that  the  U.S. doesn't  have  to  admit something
that  the  entire  world  already  knows,  so  that  we  can't
say  that  we  have  made  a  mistake.  Someone  has  to  die
so   that   President  Nixon  won't  be,  and  these   are   his
words,  "the  first  President  to  lose  a war."
We  are  asking Americans  to  think  about  that because
how  do  you  ask  a  man  to  be  the  last  man  to  die   in
Vietnam?   How  do  you  ask  a  man  to  be  the  last  man  to
die  for  a mistake?  If  you  read  carefully  the  President's
last  speech  to  the  people  of  this  country,  you  can  see
that  he  says  clearly,  "but  the  issue,  gentlemen,  is com-
munism,   and  the  question  is  whether  or  not  we  will
leave  that  country  to  the  Communists  or  whether  we
will  try  to  give  it  hope  to  be  a  free  people."  But  the
point  is  they  are  not  a  free  people  now  under  us,  and
we  cannot  fight  Communism  all  over  the  world,  and  I
think  we  should  have  learned  that  lesson  by  now.
—John  Kerry  of  the WAW   testifying   April  22  (abr)
civil  disobedience  in  the  Gandhi  tradition.  In  all  this anti-war
theatre  perhaps  the  pantomime  which  most  undercuts  the  war
is  Nixon's   sudden  honeymoon  with   Chou  En-lai.   The   con-
tainment  of  China  is  what  it's  been  all  about  for  two  decades
since  we  began  to  pour   out  first  treasure  and  then  blood  in
Southeast  Asia.   Hanoi  was  Peking's  tool,  and  we  had  to  stop
those  hordes  in  Vietnam  or  fight  them—remember?—on  the
beaches of  California.  What  was billed  as the  Asiatic Armaged-
don  now  dissolves into a Ping  Pong tournament.  So why go  on
with  the  killing?   What's  left  of  the  war  but  inertia?  Yet  I
have  a  terrible  fear  that  if  Nixon  can  pull  off  another   rigged
election  in  Saigon  next  October  and  keep  Thieu  in  power  with
minimum  cost  the  country  may  forget  what  we  are  doing  in
Southeast  Asia  as  easily  as  it  forgets  what  we  have  done   in
Greece.   There  the  controlled   press  and  TV  are  playing  up
congratulatory  messages   from  Nixon  and   Secretary  of   Com-
merce  Stans  on  the  fourth  anniversary  of  the  dictatorship  we
helped  to  impose  on  the  very  cradle  of  freedom.    And   who
cares ?  As  nobody  would  have  cared  about  Vietnam  either  if  it
hadn't  been  made too painful  and  costly  to  bear.         April  26
We'll  Send   A  Free  Sample   Copy   Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send   Us  A  Long,  Stamped,   Self  Addressed  Envelope
Bi-Weekly Mart
—To  subscribe  or  to  send  a  gift   subscription,    send
$5 with  your  address  and  zip  code to  the  address  below.
—To  get  Stone's new collection, "Polemics  and  Proph-
ecies:   1967-70"   (Random  House:   $10)   at   the   special
$8.95  price  postpaid  for  Bi-Weekly  readers,  send  check
or  money  order  to  the  address  below.
—If  you  want  Stone's  new  paperback,   "The   Killings
at  Kent  State:  How Murder  Went  Unpunished"   (New
York  Review  and  Vintage  Press)  the  price  is  $1.95.   It
contains  the  full  text,  available  nowhere  else,  of  the
so-called   "secret  FBI  report",  the   summary   of   FBI
findings  prepared  by  the   Civil  Rights  Division  of  the
Justice  Department   but   never   submitted   to  the  Ohio
Grand  Jury.
—Stone's  "Hidden   History   of  the  Korean  War",  the
inside  story  of  America's   first   Vietnam,   long   out  of
print  is  available  again  (Monthly  Review  Press)  $7.50
postpaid.
—Paperback   editions   (Vintage   Press)    of    Stone's
earlier  collections, "In A  Time of  Torment"  ($1.95)  and
"The  Haunted Fifties"  ($2.45)  at  bookstores.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  Street  NW,  Washington, D.C.  20008
$5  A  YEAR                                 5/3/71
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th   St.,  N. W.
Wishington,  0.  C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.  Published   every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..   N.W.,  Washington.  D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:   $&  in  the  U.S.;    $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED