I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971oct04.pdf

============================================================

The  Plain  Truth  About  Attica, P. 2
Famous  Last  Words  Dept.
The Vietnam  war  will  never  be  placed  on  the  back  burner  as  long  as  I  am  in  the  Senate.
—Democratic  Leader   Mansfield    Sept.  16  just   before   he  threw   in  the  sponge  on  an  end-the-war   date   and  the    draft.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX,  No.  17
OCTOBER  4,  1971        ">'
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
The  Fear  That  Fuels  The  Arms  Race
The  United   States  is  like  a  man  with  a  brood  of  hungry,
brawling  children  who   insists  on  keeping  an  elephant  as  a
house  pet.   The  pet  is the  Pentagon,  and  the  annual discussion
of  its  huge  needs  has  just  begun  again  in  the  Senate,  as  usual
with  far  too  little  public  attention.   It  looks  as  though   total
spending   for  military  purposes  this  fiscal  year  will  again  be
about  $80  billion,  or  as  much  as  at  the  peak  of  the  Vietnam
war.  Half  that amount spent  every  year  for  ten  years could  go  a
long   way  toward   cleaning  up   this  country,  its  prisons,   its
pollution,  its  schools,  its  slums.  Even the  much  smaller  "peace
dividend"  from  the  winding down  of  the  Vietnam  war  would
help  at  a  time  when  we're  stingily  shaving  7  cents  a  day off
the  meagre  school  lunches  for  poor  children.
The  Peace  Dividend  Is  Gone
But  the  peace  dividend,  too,  has  disappeared  in  the   Penta-
gon's  hungry  maw.   The  "incremental"   cost  of  the   Vietnam
war,  the  conservative  way  the  military  figure  it,  will  be  down
from   its  $24  billion  peak  to  $8  billion  this  fiscal  year,  or  a
saving  of  $16  billion.   The  army  will  be  reduced   a  million
men  by  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year,  a  saving  of  $10  billion.
Eliminate  the  overlap  and  you  still  have  a  saving  of  $20  to
$22  billion.   Deduct  $12  to  $14  billion  for  military pay raises
and  inflation—again  a  liberal  estimate—and  you  still  have  a
net  peace  dividend  of  somewhere  between  $8  and  $10  billion.
That,  too,  has  disappeared  in  current  budget  requests.
The  arms  race  grows  more  costly  and  insane,  but  the  fight
against  it  is  weakening.   Fear  of  more  unemployment  is  the
military's  strongest   ally.   Local  pressure  from   both   business
and  labor  makes  itself  strongly  felt  in  the  Senate.   The  first
three  major  votes  on  the  new  defense  procurement  authoriza-
tion  bill  were  overwhelmingly   defeated.    From  a  long  range
point  of  view,  the  most  important  was  Humphrey's  motion  to
put  MIRV  funds  in  escrow  until  we  see  the  outcome  of  the
SALT  talks.  MIRV  is the  single  most  destabilizing,  dangerous
and  expensive  new  escalation  of  the  arms  race.   Fbr  the  past
five years  the  military, with  its  industrial  and  scientific  allies,
has  worked   to  make  MIRV   a   fait   accompli;   to   limit  any
agreement   on  strategic   weapons   to  the   number  of  missiles,
allowing  a  qualitative  race to  put  more  and  "better"  warheads
on  each   missile.   Humphrey  would  have  put   a  stop   to  any
more  MIRVing  by embargoing  this  year's  funds.  Nixon  "does
not  hesitate,"  he  told  the  Senate,  "to  take  $12  billion  in  funds
appropriated  by  Congress  for  hospitals,  sewers,  food"  and  put
them  in  escrow.   But  arms  funds  are  sacied.  The  motion  was
beaten  Sept.  24,  39  to  12.
McGovern   had  no  better  luck  the  day  before.   His  motion
would  not  have  cut  this  year's  budget   at  all  but  given   the
Congress  greater   leeway  when  next  year's  budget  comes   up.
He  would   have  required   the  President   next   year  to  present
along  with  his   military   budget    (1)    an   alternative  tudget
A  Mighty  Pillar  Of  Freedom  Falls
Every   dissenter,   like   myself,   for   whom  the   First
Amendment  is  the  breath of  life,  must  feel  a  deep  per-
sonal  loss  in  the  death  of  Mr.  Justice  Black.   No  man
in  our  history  has  done  more  to  keep  freedom  alive  in
our country and  no  man  on  the  Supreme Court  to  bring
justice  for  all  closer  to  reality.  We  also  grieve  for  the
future   of   the   court.    The   retirement   of   Mr.  Justice
Harlan  removes  a  conservative judge  of  stature,  a  ju-
dicial  craftsman  of  high  order,  a  man  capable  of  going
against  his  own  preconceptions,  as  he  did  in  the  Cali-
fornia  case   which  wrecked  the  repressive  Smith  Act.
The  men  who  picked  Haynsworth and  Carswell can  now
remake  the   Court   for  a  long  time  to  come.   At   best
they  are  likely  to  give  us  mediocrities; at  their  worst,
repressionists  and white  supremacists.
showing  what  the  military  establishment  would   look   like  if
cut  to  $60  billion,  as  suggested  in  the  "Counterbudget"  pre-
sented  by  the  Urban  Coalition  and  (2)  recommendations  for
job-creating civilian programs  to  alleviate  any hardships  caused
by  the  cut  in  weaponry.  "I  think  that  something  more  useful
could  be  thought  up,"   Fulbright  said  with  admirable   under-
statement   at   one   point   in   the   debate,   "than   an   obsolete
weapon."  McGovern  argued  at another  point,  "military  spend-
ing  is a  very  poor  creator  of  jobs  per  dollar  spent ...  a  given
level   of   spending   in   high   technology   area   produces   many
fewer  jobs  than  the  same  number  of  dollars   would  provide
in  such  priority  areas  as  housing  and  transportation."    But  no
one  was  so tactless  as to  mention  that  arms  spending  is  a  form
of  welfare  for  the  rich;  it  may  be  a  poor  creator  of  jobs  but
it  is  a  major  producer   of   profits.   McGovern's  motion   was
beaten  46 to 36.
As   always  the   annual   debate   was  preceded   by  a    "gap"
scare,  and  as usual  the  scare  made  headlines  while  the  rebuttal
didn't  rate  the shipping  pages.   Though  the  U.S.  spends  almost
half  the  world's  arms  bill,  and  about   twice  as  much  as  the
Soviet   Union,  it   is  constantly  in  danger   (according  to   the
Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff)   of  becoming   a  second-rate  power;   to
hear   their   melancholy  tales,   Mexico   is  liable   to   retake   the
Alamo  any day now.   This  year's gap  scare was that  the  Soviets
had  secretly  developed  a  new  swing-wing   bomber,   and   put
the  U.S.  five  years  behind   in  strategic  bomber   development.
Proxmire  replied  in  the  Senate  Sept.  21 that  this  Soviet  plane
was  discussed  by  Laird  in  his  annual  defense  report  two  years
ago,  when  he  said  prototypes  had  already  been  produced  and
tested;  its inferiority  to  the  FB-111  (already  operational  in  the
Strategic  Air  Command)  is  discussed  in  the  1970-71  edition
of  Jane's  All   The  World's   Aircraft;   it  is  a  medium   bomber
(Continued  on Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J. F.  Stone's Bi-Weekly',  October  4, 3973
The  Attica  Uprising  A  Problem  in  Race  Relations  Not  Prison  Reform
THE LAW Is  BASICALLY  CONCERNED with property.  In every
time  and  in  every  society,  most  of  those  in  prison  are  poor.
Everywhere  prisons  are  an  abomination, and  always  have  been,
as Victor  Hugo,  Dickens, Dostoyevsky and  Solzjenitsyn  remind
us.   But  the  uprising  at  Attica  represents  not   a  problem  in
penology  but  in  race  relations.   To  talk  about  it  in  terms  of
prison  reform  is  to  miss  the  essential  point.   The  coincidence
of  race  and  poverty  in  American  society  is  explosive,  for   it
makes  our  underclass  of   blacks,  Chicanoes  and   Indians  feel
that  the  cards  are  doubly stacked  against  them,  that  they  and
their   children  and  their  children's  children  are   doomed   to
deterioration,  that  only  a  token  handful  can  make  it  upward.
They   suffer   more   from   crime  than   the  whites  but   they  see
Attica  as  a  racial uprising,  and  the  way  it  was  handled  as  a
form   of   racial  war.  How   they  feel   should  be  a  matter  of
first  concern,  whether  the  feeling  is  justified   or  not. Unfor-
tunately  their   feeling   is  justified.    To   recognize  this  is   the
necessary  first  step  toward  reconciliation.
The  Hostages  Were Expendable
The  specific  circumstances were  even  more  deadly than  the
general  situation.   Deep  in  the  psyche  of  Nelson  Rockefeller
there  is  a  frightened  little  rich  boy;  his  readiness  for  nuclear
war,  whether  in  the  colonies  or  against  Communism;  his  ob-
session  with  fallout   shelters;  his  cold  warrior  temperament;
all  are  of  a  piece  with  his  instinctive reaction  to  Attica.   He
saw  it  as  revolution, as  a  menace to  the  social order;  he  didn't
care  what happened  to  the  hostages  so  long  as  it  was crushed.
From  all  I  have  been  able  to  learn,  the  State  troopers  went
in  with murder  in  their  hearts,  like  a  lynch  mob  in  the  South
"to  get  them  niggers."    The  lies  about  the  hostages   having
their  throats cut  and  the  sexual  atrocities  (projecting  onto  the
prisoners  exactly  what   old   fashioned   lynch  mobs   so  often
practiced  on  their  black  victims),  the  readiness  of  the country
to  believe  those  lies,  the  accident  of  a  brave  and   honorable
coroner  who  refuted  them—all  this  makes  the  blacks  feel  how
easily  mob  action  could  be  whipped  up  against  the   ghettoes
on  the  basis  of  just  such  atrocity propaganda.  Coming  on  top
of   the   killings   at   Jackson   State,   the   disturbing   questions
about  the  Angela  Davis  case,  the  revelation  that  George  Jack-
son   was   shot   in   the   back,   Attica  has   created   a   mood   of
resentment,  fear  and  hatred  in  the  black  community which  is
How  Billions  Go  On  Being  Squandered
Weapon   systems  now  in  development   will   cost   at
least   $104.6   billion  before   procurement  is   completed.
.  .  . The purchase  cost  of  modern  weapon  systems  has
increased  by many times even  within  the  last  few years.
.  .  . Fighter  aircraft  now being  developed  for  procure-
ment  in  the  mid-1970's  will  cost  five  to  six  times  more
than  comparable aircraft  at  the  beginning  of  the  1960's.
The  cost  of  tanks  is  increasing  over  fourfold  during  the
1965-75  decade.  . . . The avionics  package  in some  types
of   new  military   aircraft   will  alone  weigh   2  or   more
tons  and  cost  several  million dollars. At  over  $1,000  per
pound  this  is about  twice  as costly  as  gold.
—Senate  Armed  Services   on  the  '72  defense    budget.
F-14  is  not  only  a  largely  hopeless,  but'  an   unneces-
sary  effort  to  protect   attack   carriers   because   carrier-
based  sorties  are  most   unlikely  to  be  critical   in U.S.-
Soviet   wars  .  .  .  F-14 is   gold-plated.   The  fiscal   "72
request  is  for  $1.038  billion  for  48  planes ...  'At  this
rate  the  cost  for  the  300  planes  desired  will  be  $6 bil-
lion!  .  .  .  The  effectiveness   of  the  F-14 depends   upon
the  Phoenix   missile   which ...  is  not  yet sufficiently
tested  .  .  .  Besides  the  ABM,  no  DOD  program   more
richly  deserves cancellation  than  the F-14.
—Federation  of  American Scientists  Sept.  2S
Yet  Armed  Services  approved  and  the   Senate  was
certain  to  vote  this  $6 billion  military  boondoggle!
all  the  more  dangerous  because  repressed.
In  this  terrible  atmosphere  even  the  repeal  of  the  detention
camp  act, welcome  as  it  was,  has  made  little impression. There
is  a  growing,  almost  paranoid  terror,  that   some  day  whites
in  this  country  will  do  to  blacks  what  Germans  did  to  Jews.
Whites  may  hear  this  with  horror;  they  feel  they  harbor  no
such   thoughts.    But  there   is  a  delicate   seismograph   in   the
hearts   of   the   oppressed   and   they  may  know   the  oppressor
better  than  he  knows  himself.  The  fear  is  real,  and  if  sick,  no
sicker  than  our  racialism.   Now   is  the  time  for  the  White
House  to  ask  the  black  community  along  with  Chicanoes  and
Indians  to  make  their  own  report   on  Attica,  to  give   their
representatives  access  to  the  prisoners,  to  help  us  see  it  as  the
underclass  of  color  sees  it.   Above  all  this  would  be  the  worst
possible  time to put  a white  supremacist  like  Poff  on  the  Court.
Subpena  Of  Gravel  and  His  Aide  in  Pentagon  Papers  Dispute  Attacked  in  Senate
The  tendency,  if  not  the  intent,  of  this  effort  is  to  harass
the   Senator   [Gravel]  from  Alaska,  and  thereby   to  silence
him  and other  critics in  this  body  along  with  those  who  are
outside  these  halls.  This  action  is  of  a  pattern  we  have  seen
recently.  The  private  citizen  must  fear  the  Army  spies  and
the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  which  will  retaliate
against  Administration  critics;  the  press  must  fear   injunc-
tions  and  treason  charges  should  it  publish  facts  which  are
secret  only  because   they  are  embarrassing;  and  now  Sena-
tors  and their  aides  must  face  subpenas  [like  Leonard  Rod-
berg],  Even  officials  within  the  Administration  are  threat-
ened  with  the  insult  of  the  lie-detector  if  unkind  or  critical
information  leaks out.
The  Administration   is  not  slow  to  assert  its   own  priv-
ileges,  even  when  they  do  not  exist.  They  will  not  produce
Army   generals  to  testify   about   Army   surveillance.  They
will  not  produce  Dr.  Kissinger  to  testify  about  foreign pol-
icy.  They  will  not  produce  State  Department   plans   which
explain  our  foreign   aid  policy.  They   will  not  tell  us  what
the  standards  are  for  putting  a  citizen  into  an  internal  se-
curity   computer.
The  affairs  of  the  executive   branch  are  hidden  from  the
scrutiny  of  Congress  and  the  American   people.  What  they
do  is  sacrosanct  and  immune  from  criticism.  But  if  a  Sena-
tor  should  dare  offend  those  in  power  by  disclosing  to  the
American  people  information   improperly   kept  secret  by  the
executive  branch,  then  it  claims  the  right  to  haul  him  be-
fore  the  grand  jury  and  make  him testify.  Should  this  prove
the  case,  the  logical  next  step  would  be to  assert  a  right  to
prosecute the  Senator  for  making  the  speech,  on the  grounds
that  it  contained  stolen  information.
When  the  speech  and debate  clause  is  involved  in  a  clash
between  the  executive  and the  legislative,  the  history  of  this
legislative  immunity  is  especially  important.  The  immunity
was  finally  gained  after  Charles  I had lost  his  head.  And he
lost  his  head  in  part  at least  because  he  imprisoned  members
of  Parliament   who  had  opposed  him  in  needless  and  costly
overseas  wars,  even  to  the  extent  of  presuming  to  vote  to
deny  him  funds  for  the  war.
—Ervin  (D. N.C.)  in  the Senate Sept.  SO. The  privilege  to
which  he refers  is in Art. I, Sec. 6, of  the Constitution which
gives  members  of  Congress  immunity  from  arrest  "for   any
speech  or debate m either  house."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October  4,1971
Wilbur Mills Cloaks Nixon's Billions for  the Rich With Peanuts For The Poor
THE  OPENING  BATTLE  FOR AN  EQUITABLE economic  stabi-
lization  policy  has  been   lost   in  the  House   Ways   and   Means
Committee,  and  with  it  the  first  battle  for  a  liberal  Democratic
alternative  to  the  Nixon   program.    The   tax   program   voted
out  by  the   Committee  is  substantially  that   asked   by   Nixon,
though  the billions for  corporations  are  camouflaged  with  some
peanuts  for  middle  class  and  poor;  a  family  of  3 with  $9,000
income  will  save  $26!   The  only  major  change   (on   motion
by  Vanik  of  Ohio)—was  to  limit  what  he  called  that   "billion
dollar  loophole"  the  Domestic  International Sales  Corporation
proposal  which  died   in   the   Senate   last  year  as  too   brazen.
Vanik  tried  to  eliminate  it  altogether,  but  won  on  an  amend-
ment  limiting  this  export   subsidy  to  incremental  increases  in
exports  over  the  average  of  the  last  three  years.   It  is  still  an
entering  wedge  for  a  new  tax  abuse,  and  another  impediment
to   freer   international  trade.    The   worst  part   of   the   Nixon
fiscal program  survived  with  minor  changes  in  committee;  it
piled   (and   fattened)   the  Investment  Tax   Credit   on  top  of
the  ADR  depreciation  privileges  Nixon   imposed  by  executive
order;  the  two  together  will  give  business  a  $50  billion  hand-
out  in  the  next  ten  years.
More  Loopholes  For  Oil  Barons
Vanik  was  voted  down   20-to-5  when  he  offered  an  amend-
ment   to  keep  the   oil  and   other   mineral  resource  industries
from  adding  these  new  loopholes  to  the  scandalous  depletion
and  intangible drilling  allowances  they  already  enjoy.  Thanks
to  these  existing  loopholes  the  oil  industry  already  pays  taxes
(the  September   First  National   City  Bank  newsletter   pointed
out)   on  only  half  of  its  profits.   The  most'offensive  aspect  of
the  Ways  and  Means  action  is  the  undemocratic way  it  steam-
rollers  through  the  House  the  special  tax  privileges  it  provides.
The  public  hearings  were  lopsided  in  favor  of  business.  In  the
executive  session  writing  the  bill,  members  were  not  allowed
to  have  their  staff   tax  aides  with  them  but  the  Treasury  had
40  agents  of  its  own  present  to  swamp  the  Committee  with
its  own  stacked   figures.   The  bill,  as  usual,  will  almost   cer-
tainly  be  given   a  closed   rule,   making   it  impossible   for   the
House  to  debate  and  reject  any  part  of  the  package  separately.
Manipulation   of  the  tax  structure  is  today  one  of   the  main
sources   of   enrichment   in   our   society,   redistributing  wealth
from  the  consumer,  the  poor  and  less  favored  tax  sectors   to
the   privileged   rich.   But   the   whole   process   is  perfected   by
a   small   army  of   lobbyists   in   an   effective   secrecy  only   the
Confirming  Meany's  Testimony
(See   Box  Below)
President    Nixon's   proposed   tax   credit   of   10%   on
business  investments   in  new  machinery  and  equipment
appears  more  likely  to  increase  corporate  profits  than
to  create  additional  jobs  for  unemployed workers.  .  .  .
Few  new  jobs  will  be  created  quickly  through  plant
expansion  or  in  the  industries  supplying  new  machin-
ery,    the   survey   indicated.  Most   businesses,   however,
will  reap  extra   profits  if  the  tax  credit  is  passed  be-
cause  it  applies  to  equipment   already   ordered  and  to
machinery  that   would  have  been  ordered  even   if   the
tax  credit  had not  been  announced.  .  .  .
An  executive  for  one  of  the  country's  large  steel  pro-
ducers  said  it  was  doubtful  whether  any  capital  spend-
ing  programs  in  his  company  would  be  accelerated  by
the  tax  credit.  He  pointed out  that  the  industry  has  just
finished  a  major  round  of  capital  improvement  and  is
currently  operating  at  only  about  50%  of  capacity.
—Michael   C.  Jcnsen,  reporting    results   of   a   special
New  York   Times  survey  in  its  financial  pages  Sept.  20.
Pentagon's  blue-pencil artists can  match.
SPEAKING   OF    PELF   AND   PRIVILEGE,  House    Commerce
Committee  Chairman  Staggers  can  put  through  his  committee
a  contempt  action  against  CBS  in  three  days.   But  nothing  has
been   done   either  by  him   or  by  Magnuson   of   Senate   Com-
merce   (nor   Hartke   of   its  transportation   subcommittee)    on
legislation   requested  last  year  by  the  ICC  and   again   in  July
of  this  year  to  deal  with  the  financial  abuses  which  led  to  the
Penn  Central  bankruptcy, the  largest  in  U.S.  history.
THE  LATE  ROMAN  EMPIRE and  the  Greek  Orthodox  Church
were   torn   apart   in  the   Eighth   and  Ninth   centuries  by  the
controversy   over    images   in   which   our   word    "iconoclast"
originated.    These   "breakers    of   images"   finally   lost    their
struggle  against  this  survival  of  pagan  idolatry.   Nikita  Khru-
schev  will  go  down   in   history  as   (after  Trotsky)   the  first
major   "iconoclast"   of   Communism.    His   was  an   analogous
struggle   against  the  neo-Czarism  which   afflicts  every   Commu-
nist  society  in  the  form  of  "cult  of  personality."  His  successors
are  so  fearful   they  buried  him  as  inconspicuously   as  possible
lest  dissidents  make  his  burial  a  demonstration.  We  honor  the
man  who  destroyed  Stalin  and  for  a  moment  threw  open  the
windows  on  the  stale  air  of  the  Soviet  Union.
George  Meany  Calls  Nixon's  Economic
What  is  proposed  here  is  a  radical  distribution  of  the  na-
tion's  income  and  wealth  in  favor  of  the  rich  and  at  the  ex-
pense  of  the  public interest.  Altogether,  the  President's  pro-
gram  would  give  big  business   $70  billion  over  the  next  ten
years.  This  would  be  the  biggest  tax  bonzana  in  corporate
history  and  would  severely  lessen  tax  responsibility   of  cor-
porations, shifting it  to wage and salary earners.
For  those  who  have  much,  the  President   proposes   more.
For  those  who  have  little,  the  President   proposes  less.  The
$70  billion  the  President   would  give  big  business  over  the
next  ten  years—$37  billion  in  already  ordered  depreciation
allowances  and  the  balance  in  his  new  proposals—should  be
used  to  meet  the  needs  that  actually  exist.
What  are  these  needs?   America  needs   schools   and  hos-
pitals.  America  needs  a  vast  expansion  of  medical  facilities
and  medical  personnel.  America  needs  25  million new  hous-
ing  units.  America  needs  new,  efficient,  low-cost  transit   sys-
tems  in  every   major  city.   America  needs  new  waste-dis-
posal  systems,  new  technology  and new  hardware  to  extract
poisons  from  the  air,  the  water  and  the  soil.  Public  invest-
Program   "Socialism  for  Big   Business"
ment,  in  short,  is  precisely  what  America  needs  in  order  to
strengthen  the  economy  and  provide millions  of  much  need-
ed  jobs.  With   6.1  percent   of   the   labor  force   jobless—5.1
million   workers   without   employment—the   United   States
needs   incomes  and  purchasing  power  to   put  these   people
back  in the  marketplace  to  buy the  goods of  plants  now  idle.
The  President's   program  does  not  go  to  these  needs.  In-
stead,  he  proposes  to  hand  over  the  people's  money  to  in-
dustry  in  order,  he  says,  to  stimulate  industrial  investment.
But  at  this  very  hour industry  can find no  use  for  27  percent
of  the  industrial  capacity  that  already  exists.  The  President
labels   this   scheme   a   "job   development  program"  but   he
knows  well  that  much  of  industry's  investment   in  new  ma-
chinery  and  equipment will  eliminate  jobs.
When  all  of  the  economic  proposals  are  examined  closely
—who  will  be  the  recipients,   who  will  be  the  losers,  who
will  have  to  pay  more out  in  taxes,  and who  will  pay  less  in
taxes—it  is  clear  that  the  President's  proposal  is  a  form of
socialism  for  big  business.
—Meany   before   House  Ways   and  Means,  Sept.  13  (abr.).
5  *
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  October 4,1971
(Continued  From Page One)
(a  fact  Pentagon  propaganda  withheld),  a  potential  threat  to
China  or  Western  Europe,  not  the  U.S., and  in  any  event  (as
Proxmire  said)   "is  only  the  latest  in  a  long  line  of  Soviet
prototype   aircraft,   few  of  which  ever  go  into  production."
Finally   Proxmire   drew   from   Chairman   Stennis   of   Senate
Armed  Services  an  admission  on  the  Senate  floor  that  "their
(the   Soviet's)   bomber   forces  are  old  and  their  capability  is
not  as great  as ours."   That,  too, is  an  understatement; Laird's
own  budget  presentation  this  year  showed  that  we  have  three
times  as  many  heavy  bombers  as  the   Soviet   and   that   their
fleet is still  declining.
Even  In  North  Vietnam
But  none  of  this  had   any  effect   on  the  Senate  when  Mc-
Govern's  motion  to  slow  up  development  of  the  B-l,  a  new
strategic  bomber,  came  up.   The  strategic  bomber  is  obsolete,
a  rich  nation's  luxury  to  keep  bomber  admirals  happy.   Ful-
bright  pointed   out  that  if   ABMs   can   shoot   down  missiles
flying  at  5,000  miles  an  hour,  they could  certainly  shoot  down
the   bigger    and   far   slower   target   of   a   strategic   bomber.
McGovern,  one  of  the  few  bomber  pilots  in  Congress,  pointed
to  what  is  happening  in  the  skies  over  North  Vietnam.  There
we  are  afraid  to  use  our  B-52s  because  they are  so vulnerable
even  to  the  "rather  primitive"  SAMs  the  Soviets  have  given
Hanoi.   If  strategic  bombers  cannot  safely  operate  there,  how
could  they  penetrate  the  better  defended  Soviet  Union?
Light  at  The  End  of  A  Tunnel—
And  Only  "Several   Generations"  Away
Q.  Mr.  President,  on  the   South  Vietnamese  election,
once  it  is  completed,  will  you  feel  then  that  the  Amer-
ican   objective   of   achieving   a   democratic  process    in
Vietnam,   the   objective   that   you   stated,   and   before
you  President   Johnson,  so  many  times—do  you   think
that with  the election that objective  will  have  been  met?
A.  No.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  that  objective  will  not be
met  perhaps  for  several   generations.  But  at  least  we
will  be  on  the  road.
—From  Nixon's   press  conference,  Sept.  16.
McGovern  would  have cut  the  $370  million  asked this  year
for   the   B-l   to   $31  million,  restricting  all  work   on   it   to
research  and  holding  up  on  prototypes.   The  B-l   is  variously
estimated  to  cost  from  $40  to  $75  billion over the  next  decade.
If  the  big  war  ever  comes,  bombers  will  do  their  crazy  work
when  it's  all  over  anyway.   But  the  Senate  voted  McGovern
down  on  a  voice  vote—he  didn't  ask  for  a  roll  call  because
only  about  12  votes  for  his  motion  were visible. So the  military
juggernaut  rolls  on.   Why  can't  the  press  pay  more  attention
to  this debate,  especially  since it  is  only  the  first  round?  After
the  authorization  must  come  the  appropriation  bill,  a  second
chance   to   cut   the   monster's   feed   allowance.    Is   there   no
way  to   rouse  the   country  against  this  waste  of   funds   and
march  to  destruction ?                           .                           Sept.  27
OWNERSHIP,  MANAGEMENT AND  CIRCULATION
(Act   of   October  23,  1962:  Section  4369,  Title  39,  United  States  Code)
1.  Date  of  Filing  Sept.  27. 1971.
2.  Title  of   Publication:  I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.
8.  Frequency  of  issue:   Every  other  week;   not  published  in   August.
4.  Location  of  known  office   of  publication:  4420  29th  St., N.W.,  Wash-
ington,  D.  C.  20008.
5.  Location  of   the  headquarters  or  general   business   offices   of   the pub-
lishers:  4420   29th  St.. N.W..  Washington,  D.  C.   20008.
6.  Names  and  addresses  of  publisher,  editor,  and  managing  editor:  I.   F.
Stone,   same  address.
7.  Owner   (if   owned   by  a  partnership   or  other  unincorporated   firm,   its
name   and   address,   as   welt   as   that   of   each   individual   must   be    given):
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly, Inc..  same  address.
8.  Known  bondholders,  mortgagees,  and  other  security  holders  owning  or
holding  1  percent  or  more  of   total   amount  of   bonds,  mortgages   or  other
securities   (If   there   are   none,   so  state):   none.
9.  Paragraphs  7  and  8  include,  in  cases  where  the  stockholder  or
 t
 secur-
ity   holder  appears  upon  the   books  of   the  company  as  trustee  or  in   any
other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person  or  corporation  for  whom
such  trustee  is  acting,  also  the  statements  in  the  two  paragraphs  show  the
affiant's   full   knowledge  and  belief  as  to  the  circumstances   and  conditions
under  which  stockholders and  security  holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the
books  of  the  company  as  trustees,  hold  stock  and  securities  in  a   capacity
other  than  that  of  a  bonafide  owner.
Average  No. Copies
Each  Issue  During   Single  Issue  Nearest
Proceeding  12 months        To Filing  Date
69,360A.  Total  No.   Copies  Printed
B.  Paid  Circulation
1. Sales  Through  Agents.  News
Dealers  or  Otherwise                          2,777
2. To  Term  Subscribers  by
Mail.  Carriers  Delivery, etc.               65,683
C.  Total   Paid   Circulation                           68,360
D.  Free  Distribution   (including
samples)  by  Mail,  Carrier  De-
livery,   or   by   Other   Means                 458
Copies  to  News  Agents  Not  Sold               842
E.  Total  No.  of   Copies  Distributed         69,160
F.  Office   Use,  Etc.                                          200
G.  Total                                                           69,360
72,600
3,669
68,013
71,682
274
326
72,282
218
72,500
I   certify   that  the  statements   made  by  me  above   are   correct   and  com-
plete.  I.  F.  Stone,  editor.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed  Envelope
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed   special  subscribers'  price  of  $8.95
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics   and  Prophecies:
1967-70  (Random  House).  Regularly  $10.
(To)    Name
Street   .........
City   ....................................   Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if   gift   announcement  wished  n
Pleaae  renew  Q   or enter  D   a sub for the  enclosed $5:
Name  ...
Street           ,
City   .....
..............................  Zip................  State....................
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                10/4/71
4420  29th  St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420   29»h  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St., N.W..  Washington, D.C.
An  Independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  (5  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.  Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED