I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971dec01.pdf

============================================================

An  Autobiographical  Fragment
"Tu mihi  curarum  requies,  tu  nocte  vel  atra  lumen, et  in  solis  tu  mihi  turba  locis"*
This,  the  final  issue  of  the  Bi-Weekly,  is  dedicated  in  gratitude  to  my  wife,  Esther.   Her  collaboration,  her  unfailing
understanding,  and  her  sheer  genius  as  a  wife  and  mother,  have  made  the  years  together  joyous  and   fruitful.
—*Tibullus  IV  :13, "You  are  the  solace  of  my  cares,  light  in  the  blackest  night  and  company  in  lonely  places"
I. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX,  Nos.  21  &  22
DECEMBER   1971         '°<
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Notes  On  Closing,  But  Not  In  Farewell
Last  September  I  had  been  a  Washington  correspondent  for
31  years.   Next   February  I  will  have  been  a  newspaperman
for  50.  This  month  represents  a  double  milestone.  In  Decem-
ber,  1933,  I  made  my  debut  in  the  Big  City,  as  an  editorial
writer  on  the  New  York  Post  for  J.  David  Stern  who  had  just
purchased  it.   This  month  also  marks  the  completion  of   19
years  for  the  Weekly,  now  Bi-Weekly.   Regretfully, this  is  the
last  issue.  I will  be  64  this  month  and  I  have  decided  to  heed
the  familiar  warning signals  and  shift  to  a  less  exacting  pace.
On  January  1,  I  move  to  the  New   York  Review  of  Books  as
a  contributing editor.   I  have  written  for  it  off  and  on  with
pleasure  since  1964  and  look  forward  to  a  new  challenge.   I
also have in mind a  major  work on  the  problem  of freedom.
Publisher  at  14
In  this  final  issue  it  seemed  appropriate  to  talk  a little  about
myself.   Almost  as  far  back  as I  can  remember  I  wanted  to  be
a  newspaperman.   At  14, while  in  my sophomore  year  at  high
school  in  Haddonfield,  N.J.,  the  small  town  in  which  I  grew
up,  I  began  to  publish  a  monthly  called  The  Progress.   The
very  first  issue  struck  that  note  of  impractical  idealism  which
was,  I  suppose,  to  become  characteristic.  I  attacked  Hearst  for
his  Yellow  Peril campaign and  called  for  the cancellation of  the
World  War  I  debts  on  condition  that  the  debtor  nations  agree
to  a  25-year  holiday   from   the   arms   race.   The   paper   was
printed  in  the  job  shop  of  a  local  weekly,  and  the  linotypist,
after   setting   some   of   these   early  radical   effusions,    opined
between  meditative squirts  of  tobacco  juice,  that  I  would  come
to  a bad end.
The  paper   was  a  commercial   success.    It  carried   advertis-
ing  I  obtained  after  school  on  my  bicycle  from  merchants  in
the  area.   But  my  father,  returning  from   a  convalescence   to
find  me  a  publisher,   wisely  made  me  stop  publication   after
three  issues  when  it  became  clear  that  I  was  falling  behind  in
my  school  work.  This draconian  measure was too  late.  Within
a  few  months  I  was  working  for  a  local  weekly  paper,  and  in
my  junior  year  I  became  a  full-fledged   reporter.    J.  David
Stern,  who owned  the  Camden,  N.J.  Evening  Courier,  stopped
by  my  father's  store  one  Saturday  night,  said  he  had  heard  of
me  and  asked  whether  I  would  like  to  cover  Haddonfield   for
his  paper.   That  at  15  was  the  real  beginning   of  my  career.
I  was a  natural  at  the  business  from  the  start.   But  one  result
of  working  as a  reporter  after  school  is that  I  graduated   from
high  school  49th  in  a  class  of  52,  was  turned  down  by  Har-
vard   (which   I  still  long  to  attend)  and  made  it—thanks  to
open  enrollment   for  high  schools  in  the  Philadelphia  area—
to  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.
Some  Valedictory   Tributes
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly  has  been  packing  more  hard
and  important  news  into  its  four  pages   than  many  a
newspaper  carries  on  20  times  that  many  pages  every
day  in  the  week ...  It  is  a  comfort  to  know  that  this
wise,   good  and  most  civilized  of   reporters  will  con-
tinue  to  speak  out.
—From  an  editorial  in  the  Boston  Globe  12/9.
His  achievement  can be traced  to  a  striking  independ-
ence   of    mind—independence   from   government   press
handouts,   independence   from   political   dogma,  and  an
even  more  difficult  kind  of  independence,  the  independ-
ence  to  take  up  causes  unpopular  even  with  his  own
readers ...  In an  age  of  mass  organization,  Stone  has
demonstrated   that   personal   journalism   can   exert   a
major    influence.
—From  an  editorial  in  the  Los  Angeles  Times   12/8.
I.  F.  Stone,  Bane  of  Liars  in  Govt,  Closing  up  'Shop
—Headline  in  the  New  York  Post,  December  7.
I  loved  learning  and  hated  school.   I  devoured  books  from
the  moment  I  first  learned  to  read  but  resisted  every  effort  to
make  me  study  whatever  I  saw  no  sense  in  learning.   A  few
teachers  I   loved,   the  rest  I   despised.    At  college   I  was  a
philosophy  major,  and  Penn  had  two  philosophy   teachers  of
stature,  Newbold  and  Singer,  whom  I  revered.   I  thought  I
might   teach   philosophy   but   the   atmosphere   of   a   college
faculty  repelled  me;  the  few  islands  of  greatness  seemed  to  be
washed  by  seas  of  pettiness  and  mediocrity.    The  smell  of  a
newsroom  was  more  attractive.   I  was  full  of  romantic  non-
sense  and  looked  down  on  college  degrees  as  artificial.  I  quit
college  in  my junior year, when  I  was working  10 hours after-
noon   and   night   after   school   on   the  Philadelphia   Inquirer.
In  the  mornings,  feeling  like  Jude  the  Obscure   (how  I  loved
Hardy's  dark  vision  in  those  days!),  I  would  go  to  the  library
and   read.    The   high   points   of   my   self-education   in   that
period  were  two  books  of  the  De  Rerum  Natura  of  Lucretius
in  Latin  and  one poem  of  Sappho's  in Greek.  The  other books
I  gobbled   are  too  numerous  to  mention,   but  I  still  feel  like
a  drop-out  whose  education  was cut short.
I  became  a  radical  early.  The first  book  I  remember   which
began   (about   12)  to  open  my  eyes  to  the  modern  world  was
Jack  London's  Martin  Eden.   By the  time  I  was bar mitzvah  I
had  read  Herbert  Spencer's  Pint  Principles  and  become   an
atheist.    Nfy  idol  a  few  years  later  was  Kropotkin.    Engels*
Socialism  Scientific   and  Utopian  was  enthralling  and  I  joined
the   Socialist   party,  becoming   a  member  of  the  New   Jersey
State  Executive  Committee  before  I  was  old  enough  to  vote.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December 1971
But  Kropotkin's  communist  anarchism,  his  vision  of  a  volun-
tary  society  without  police  or  oppression  of  any  kind,  seemed
to  me  then  and  still  seems  now  the  noblest  human  ideal.
For  La  Follette   in  1924
My  basic attraction to  anarchism did  not  keep  me  from  more
normal  politics.   In  1924  I  was  for  La  Follette,  the   Progres-
sive  candidate  for  President.    In   1928,  though  I  had  consid-
erable  respect  for  Al  Smith,  I  worked  as  a  volunteer  for  Nor-
man  Thomas.   I  immensely admired  his  capacity to  deal  with
American   problems   in  Socialist  terms  but   in   language   and
specifics   that  made   sense   to  ordinary  Americans.   I   was  a
passionate  anti-Fascist and  got  into  trouble  with  the  business
manager  of  the  Camden,  N.J.,   Courier  after   I  was  sent   to
cover  a  Rotary  Club  meeting  on  Italy.   The   speaker  was  a
pro-Fascist  propagandist.    I  denounced   him   from   the   press
table  when  he  was  through.   Fortunately  for  me  the  Courier's
editorial policy  was  anti-Fascist,  despite  the  presence  of  a  large
Italian  minority in  Camden  which  was  for  the  most  part  un-
thinkingly  pro-Fascist.   Though  nominally Republican  in  what
was  then  a  G.O.P.  stronghold,   the  Courier  fought  the  local
Republican   machine,   praised   La  Follette   and   was  the  only
paper  in  the  Camden-Philadelphia  area  which  was  pro-Sacco
and  Vanzetti.  I  quit  the paper  because the  city  editor  wouldn't
let  me  cover  their  execution,  and  walked  out  of  the  city  room
with  a  $5  bill  and  an  extra pair  of  socks  to  hitch  hike  my way
to  it—but  that  is  another  story.
It  sounds  strange  coming  from   a  loner  like  myself   but  I
liked  just  about   every  boss  I  ever  worked  for.   The  first,  a
boyhood  hero  who  recently died,  was Stern.   I  worked  for  him
on  the  Philadelphia  Record  after  several  stints  on  the  Courier.
When   he  bought  the  New   York   Post  in  December   1933   I
went  to  New  York  with  him  as  editorial  writer.   Among  the
others  were  Freda  Kirchwey  of  The  Nation,  a sympathetic  and
courageous  liberal  editor,  then  Ralph  Ingersoll  who  founded
PM  and  John  P.  Lewis  his  managing  editor.   Ingersoll   had
genius,  and  taught  us  all  new  ways  of  writing;  Lewis  was  a
small  town  newspaperman  who  ran  a  team  of  temperamental
big   city   intellectuals   and   won   their   respect   and    affection.
Then  there  was  the  late  Joseph  Barnes  who  edited  the   New
York  Star.  The  last  was Ted  O.  Thackrey  who  fought  so hard
When  The  Poor  Marched  On  Washington
To  see  the   Poor  People's   March  on  Washington  in
perspective  remember that  the  rich  have  been  march-
ing  on  Washington since  the  beginning.  They  came  in
carriages  and  they  come  on  jets.   They  don't  have  to
put  up  in  shanties.   Their  object  is  the  same  but  few
people  are  untactful  enough  to  call  it  handouts  .  .  .
The   fiscal   and  banking   system  of   the   new   Republic
was  established  on  the  basis  of  a  $20  million  handout
[to  speculators who had bought up defaulted obligations
issued  to  finance  the  Revolution] and  on  the  Hamilton-
ian  theory  that  if  the  new  government  would  channel
enough  wealth  to  the  top,  some  of  it  would  eventually
trickle  down  .  .  .  The  tax  structure  and  the  laws  bear
the  imprint  of  countless  marches  on  Washington;  these
have  produced billions  in  hidden  grants  .  .  .  Across the
facade  of   the   U.S.  Treasury  should  be  engraved,  "To
him  who  hath  shall  be  given."
—From  the   Weekly  of   May   13,  1968. ,
against  such heavy odds  to  keep  the  New  York  Daily Compass
afloat,  and  had  finally  to give  it  up  the  day before  election  day
in  November   1952.   Every  one  of   them  gave  me  freedom.
They   also  set  an  example.    In  its  small  way,  my  newsletter
has  carried  on  where  they  left  off.
My  first  move,  when  the  Compass  closed,  was  to  ask  for
my  old  job  back  as Washington  Editor  of  The  Nation,  which
I  held  from  1940  to  1946.   But  The  Nation  was,  as  usual,  in
financial  difficulties,  and  I  waited  several  weeks  without  being
able  to  get  either   a  yes  or  no  answer.   There  would   have
been  no  Weekly   if  The  Nation   had  taken  me  back.   I  only
started   the   newsletter   as  a  last  resort.    In   the   1948   Arab-
Jewish  war  in  Palestine,  the  Israelis  said  their  secret   weapon
was  ain  breira,  which  is  Hebrew   for  "no  alternative."   That
was  my  situation.    I  had  been  thinking  of  a  newsletter   for
several  years.  George  Seldes  had  shown  the  way  with  his  4-
page  newsletter  In  Fact  a  decade  earlier.   I  had  seen  one  ex-
periment  after  another  in  liberal-radical  journalism  go  down  to
defeat.   I  thought  the  time  had  come  to  cut  the  cloth  to  the
dwindling  market,  and  try  a  paper  so  small  and   inexpensive
it  could  pay  for  itself  even  in  bad  times.   With  the  help  of
my   energetic   and   resourceful   younger   brother,   Marc,   I  set
about  preparing  to  launch  a  newsletter.
The  Weekly's  Debut:  A  Criticism  of  Truman  and a  Warning  Against  The  Cold  War
Mr.  Truman fears  war,  but  remains  evasive  about  peace.
The  meaning  of  the   H-bomb  and  the  new  weapons  of  de-
struction  is  that  men  must  learn  to  live  together  on  the
same  planet  in  mutual  forbearance .  .  .  But  Mr.  Truman's
emphasis  was  on  his  old  hope that  if  cold  war  and contain-
ment  were  continued  long  enough  the  Soviet  regime  would
somehow  crack  up  from   within  .  .  .  Mr.  Truman  set  the
mood  and  Mr.  Acheson  coined  the  phrase  for  it—"total  di-
plomacy" ....
We   can  impose  tension  on  the  Soviet   system   only  by
imposing   tension   on  ourselves  .   .  .   Mr.  Truman   warns
against   "fear  that   breeds   more   fear,   sapping   our  faith,
corroding  our liberties, turning citizen  against  citizen  .  .  ."
But  how  avoid  that  fear  in  a  world  of  mounting  tension,
hate    and   war   preparations?  .  .  .  "Already   the    danger
signals  have  gone  up," Mr. Truman says  piously."  .  .  .  each
new  act  of  enforced  conformity,  each  idle  accusation  .  .  .
each  new  restrictive  law—is  one  more  sign   that   we  can
lose  the  battle  against  fear  .  .  ."
Mr.  Truman  thinks  of  himself  as  a  liberal.   It  is  at  once
something  subtler  and  more  human  than  hypocrisy  which
leads  him  to  say,  "We  must  take  our  stand  on  the  Bill  of
Rights.  The  Inquisition, the  star  chamber, have  no  place  in
a  free  society."   The  same  capacity  for  inviting  war  in  the
name  of   peace   made  it   possible  for   him  to   launch  star
chamber  loyalty  purges  and  peacetime  sedition   prosecutions
while  preaching  civl  liberties.   The  man  who  devoted  most
of   his   years   in   the   White   House   to   propagating   alarm
ends  by  warning  us,  "The  Communists   cannot   deprive  us
of  our  liberties—fear  can."
But  how  make  people  accept  the  heavy  burdens  of  cold
war  without  injecting  ever  greater  doses  of  fear  and  sus-
picion?   .  .  .   Washington's   Farewell   Address  had  better
advice  than  Truman's.  Washington  warned  . .  .  that  hatred
could  be  one  of   the   most  entangling  alliances.    He   said
"the   nation   which   indulges   toward   another   an   habitual
hatred ... is in some  degree  a slave.  It is  a slave  to  its  ani-
mosity."     Only   negotiation,    coexistence    and   peace   can
emancipate  us  from  the  campaign  of  hate  and  its   hateful
consequences.
—"Mr.  Truman's  Farewell  Evasions", in  the Weekly,  Vol.
1,  No.  1,  January   17,  1953.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December  1971
Since  others may try  the  same course in  the  future,  the finan-
cial  details  may be  interesting.  The  Weekly  was made possible
first  of   all  because  it  had   a  kind  of   piggy-back   launching.
The  shock  of  the  closing  of  the  Compass  provided  a  recep-
tive  audience;  the  existence  of  mailing  lists  of  Compass  and
PM   subscribers  provided   an   easy   way  to   reach  them.    The
second   factor  which  made  it  possible  was  that  I  had  $3500
severance  pay  in  escrow  when  the   Compass  closed;  and   we
owned  our  little  home  in  Washington   so  our  expenses  were
low,  even  with  three  children.   Then  there  was  an  unexpected
angel.   A  fan,  the  late  Arthur  Wiener,   took  me  to  lunch  in
New  York   and  lent  a  sympathetic  ear.   I  walked  down  the
street,  with  him  after   lunch  at  the  Museum  of  Modern   Art.
"I'm   going  to  keep  on  fighting,"  I  told  him,  "if  I  have  to
crank  out  a  paper  on  a  mimeograph  machine  in  the   cellar."
He  loaned  me  $3,000  without  interest  (which  I  am  happy  to
say  I  repaid  in  full  before  he  died).   There  were  a  few  others
who helped,  but  none  on that  scale.  With  less than  $10,000 in
two  mailings  my  brother  and  I  managed   to  get   5,300   sub-
scribers  with  which  to  start,  and  the  Weekly   made  its  debut
on  January  17,  1953.
Despite   McCarthyism
Its   survival   and   growth   were   made   possible   by  several
factors.   One  was  the  relatively low  level  of  costs  at  that  time.
The   second   class   mail   rate   made   it   possible   to   mail   the
Weekly   in  those  days  at  only  one-eighth  of  a  cent  per  copy,
the  minimum  piece   rate  then;   it  is  1.5  cents  now.   I   shall
always  be  grateful  that  the  Postoffice  not  only  granted  second
class  quickly  but  gave  me  a  refund   for  the  first  few  issues
mailed   at   a  higher   rate.    Second   class   made   my  survival
possible.   Though  I  was  regarded  in  the  paranoid  atmosphere
of  those  McCarthy  years  simply  and  plainly  as  a  Red,  I  had
no  trouble  whatsoever  with  the  postofHce.   No  political  ques-
ions  were  asked  me.   I  was  treated  with  the  utmost  courtesy
by  the  postal  authorities  then  and  since.   It  is  no  small  testi-
monial  to  the  strength   of  the  First  amendment  that  a  new
publication    could    be   launched   in   those   years   with   what
amounts to a  postal  subsidy  to  a  left-wing  journalist.
I  had  two  basic  decisions  to  make  when  I  started,  one  busi-
ness,  the  other  editorial.   The  first  was whether  to  go  out  and
raise  money  for  promotion  and  try  to  grow  fast,  or  concentrate
From  Our  Tribute  To  Einstein
A   world   made   up   only   of   statistical   probabilities
offended  his  profoundest   instincts;  he  was  like  Bach  or
Beethoven,  striving   for  new  harmonies,  but  with   the
tools  of   mathematics   and  physics.  .  .  .  The  man  who
sought  a  new  harmony   in  the  heavens  and  in  the  atom
also  sought  for   order   and  justice   in  the   relations  of
men ...  he  fought   Fascism   everywhere  and  feared
the  signs  of   it  in  our  own  country.   .  .  .  His  was  a
beautiful   and  satisfying   life,   and  nothing  would  have
pleased  him  more  than  how  many—and  such  diverse—
people    remember    him   with    affection,    especially   the
children   of   the  neighborhood    in  Princeton  who  recall
the  cookies  he  gave  them.   In  that  Olympus   where  he
goes  to  dwell  with  his  few  peers,  this  is  something  all
his    own.     Newton    and   Copernicus    and   the    misty
Pythagoras,   too,   could   sweep  the  heavens  with   their
grasp—but   none   of   them   were   remembered    by   so
many   humble  friends,  for  so  many  simple  human  kind-
nesses.    In  this  realm,  far  beyond  politics  and  physics.
Einstein  reigns  alone  in  warm   human   memory.
—From   the  Weekly  of  April   US,   1955.
my  energies  on  doing  as  good  a  job  as  possible  and  hope  that
the  quality would  sooner  or  later  attract  a  larger  audience.   I
felt  that  no  matter  how  much  money  I  could  raise,  a  radical
publication  in  the  atmosphere  of  1953  could  only  grow  slowly
anyway;  that  money-raising was  too  exhausting  and  humiliat-
ing,   and   would   leave   me  too  little  time   and  strength   for
reporting  and  writing.   I  have  never  regretted   that  decision,
though  the  Weekly   at  first  grew  very  slowly.*
The  other,  the  editorial,  decision  was  the  character  of  the
new  paper.    I  decided  to  do  a  radical  paper   in  conservative
format,   with  lovely  typography   (Garamond,   an   old   French
face,  was  the  basic  type  I  chose),  to  eschew  sensational  head-
lines,  to  document  what  I  had  to  say  from  governmental  and
standard  sources.   I  wanted  a  paper  which  would  be  sober  in
statement  and  as accurate  as  I  could  make  it.  I  wanted  a  paper
which  a  campus  reader,  in  the  hostile  atmosphere  of  that  time,
*Here   are   some  basic   figures   on  average  circulation   as
reported   every   September   to   the   postoffice   under   second
class  mail  regulations.   I  hit  10,000  in  1955  but  it  took  eight
years  more  until  I  reached  20,000  in  1963.    In  1968,  the  first
year  of  publication  as  a  bi-weekly,  I  reached  40,000.   It  was
50,000  in  1969,  60,000  in  1970  and  70,000  this  year.
From  My  Article  on  The  Six-Day  War
Israel's  swift  and  brilliant  military  victory  only  makes
its  reconciliation  with  the  Arabs  more  urgent.   Its   future
and  world  peace  call  for  a  general  and  final  settlement  now
of  the  Palestine  problem.   The  cornerstone  of  that  settle-
ment  must  be  to  find  new  homes  for  the  Arab  refugees,
some  within  Israel,  some  outside  it,  all  with  compensation
for  their  lost  lands  and  properties.   The  world  Jewish  com-
munity,  already  girding  itself  for  a  huge  financial  effort   to
aid  Israel,  should  be  thankful   that  its   victory  has  come
with  so little  loss  of  life  or damage  to  either  side.  The  same
funds  can  now  be  diverted  to  a  constructive  and  human
cause.   It  was  a  moral   tragedy—to  which  no  Jew  worthy
of   our  best  Prophetic  tradition  could  be  insensitive—that
a  kindred  people  was  made  homeless  in  the  task  of  finding
new  homes  for  the  remnants  of  the  Hitler  holocaust.   Now
is  the  time  to  right  that  wrong,  to  show  magnanimity  in
victory,  and  to  lay  the  foundations  of  a  new  order  in  the
Middle  East  in  which  Israeli  and Arab  can live  in  peace  .  . .
Abba  Eban  exultantly  called  the  sweep  of  Israel's  armies
"the  finest  day  in  Israel's  modern  history."   The  finest  day
Which  Has  Been  So  Unfairly  Distorted
will  be  the  day  it  achieves  reconciliation  with  the  Arabs.
To  achieve  it  will  require  an  act  of  sympathy  worthy  of  the
best  in  Jewry's  Biblical   heritage.   It  is  to  understand  and
forgive  an  enemy,  and  thus  convert  him  into  a  friend.   A
certain   obtuseness   was   unfortunately   evident   in   Eban's
brilliant  presentation  to  the   Security   Council.   To  rest  a
case  on  Jewish  homelessness  and  refuse  at  the  same  time
to  see  the   Arabs  who  have   been   made  homeless  is   only
another  illustration  of  the  tribal  blindness  which  plagues
the   human   race  and  plunges  it  constantly  into  bloodshed.
The  first  step  toward  reconciliation  is   to  see  that   Arab
bitterness  has  real  and  deep  roots.  .  .  .  Israel  cannot  live
very  long  in  a  hostile  Arab  sea ...  No  quickie  military
victories   should   blind   it   to   the  inescapable—in   the   long
run  it  cannot  defeat  the  Arabs.   It  must  join  them.   The
Jews  played  a  great  role  in  Arabic  civilization  in  the  Mid-
dle  Ages.   A  Jewish  state  can  play  a  similar  role  in  a  new
Semitic  rennaissance.   This  is  the  perspective  of  safety,  of
honor  and  of   fraternity.
—"The  Harder  Battle  and  the  Nobler  Victory"   6/12/67.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  December  1971
The  No.  1 Task: A  Synthesis  of  Socialism  and  Freedom
.   From  The  Secretary  General  of  The  United  Nations
I  received  with  much  sadness  your  circular  letter  giving  the  news  that  your  Bi-Weekly  will  discontinue  publication  as  of
the  first  of  the  year.   During  19  years  of  independent  reporting  and  publishing,   you  have  set  a  pattern  of  objectivity  and
courage,  and  have  shown  great  steadfastness  in  the  cause  of  peace  and justice.   Your  magazine  will  be  sorely  missed.
—U  Thant,  in a letter  to I. F. Stone, Dec.  9.
could   pass  on  to  a  conservative  colleague  without  having  it
dismissed  as  just  another  hysterical  rag.   People  on  the  other
side  might  not  agree  but,  if  they  read  me  at  all,  would  have  to
take  my  findings  and  analysis  seriously.   I  decided   to  make
no  claim  to  "inside   stuff"   or  private  sources  in  the  govern-
ment  since  I  had  none  and  was  unlikely  to  get  any  in  the
McCarthy   era,  when  public  officials   were  too  intimidated  to
leak  material  to  a  left-wing   newspaperman,  or  even  be  seen
talking  to  one.   Finally I  wanted the  paper  to  have readability,
humor  and   grace.    I   dreamed   of  taking  the  flotsam  of  the
week's  news  and  making  it  sing.    I  had  a  vision  of  a  paper
'which  would  be urbane,  erudite  and  witty;  with  substance,  but
as  light  as  a  souffle.    Needless   to  say  I  rarely  felt  that  I  had
succeeded  but  that  was  my  idealized  image  of  what  I  wanted
the  Weekly  to  be.
The  Price  Was  Ostracism
The  early  years  were  lonely.   I  am  naturally  gregarious  but
found  myself  ostracized.   I  was  sustained  by  my  readers.   No
one  ever  had  a more  loving  audience,*  and  the  letters  (few of
which—please  forgive  me—I  was  ever  able  to  answer)  made
up  for  the  coldness  of  Washington.    No  one  could  have  been
happier  than  I  have  been  with  the  Weekly.    To  give  a  little
comfort  to  the  oppressed,  to  write  the  truth  exactly as  I  saw it,
to  make  no  compromises  other  than  those  of  quality  imposed
by  my own  inadequacies,  to  be  free  to  follow  no  master  other
than  my  own  compulsions,  to  live  up  to  my  idealized  image
of  what  a  true  newspaperman  should  be,  and  still  be  able  to
make  a  living  for  my  family—what  more  could  a  man  ask?
From  "In   Defense  of  The  Campus  Rebels"
Lifelong  dissent  has  more  than  acclimated  me  cheer-
fully  to  defeat.   It  has  made  me  suspicious  of  victory.
I   see  every  insight   degenerating   into   a  dogma,  and
fresh  thoughts  freezing  into  lifeless  party  line.   Those
who  set  out  nobly  to  be  their  brother's  keeper  some'
times  end  up  by  becoming  his  jailer.   Every   emanci-
pation  has  in  it  the  seeds  of  a  new  slavery.   But  these
perspectives,   which   seem   so  irrefutably  clear  from   a
pillar  in  the  desert,   are  worthless   to  those   enmeshed
in   the   struggle.    They   are   no  better   than   mystical
nonsense  to  the  humane  student  who  has  to  face  his
draft   board,  the   dissident   soldier   who  is  determined
not  to  fight,  the  black  who  sees  his  people  doomed  by
shackles  stronger   than   slavery   to   racial  humiliation
and  decay.   The  business  of  the  moment  is  to  end  the
war,  to  break  the  growing dominance of  the  military  in
our  society,  to  liberate  the  blacks,  the  Mexican-Ameri-
can,  the  Puerto  Rican  and  the  Indian  from   injustice.
This  is  the  business  of  our  best  youth.   However  con-
fused   and  chaotic,  their   unwillingness  to  submit  any
longer  is  our  best  hope.
—From  the  Weekly  of  May   19,   1969.
•    *Nor   a  friendlier   bunch  than   at   McDonald   &  Eudy,   my
printers  for  the  past  18 years,  to  whom  I  am  grateful.
I   have  been  able  to   live  in   accordance  with  my  beliefs.
Politically  I  believe  there  cannot  be  a  good   society  without
freedom   of  criticism;  the  greatest  task  of  our  time  is  to  find
a  synthesis of  socialism and  freedom.  Philosophically  I  believe
that  a man's  life  reduces  itself  ultimately to  a  faith—the  fund-
amental   is   beyond   proof—and    that   faith   is   a   matter   of
aesthetics,  a  sense  of  beauty and.harmony.   I  think  every man
is  his  own  Pygmalion,  and  spends  his  life  fashioning  himself.
And  in  fashioning  himself,  for  good  or  ill,  he  fashions  the
human  race  and  its  future.                                      December  14
IMPORTANT  NOTICE  TO  READERS AND   LIBRARIANS:    The  annual  index  is being  prepared  as  usual.   If  you  send  a  long
stamped  self-addressed  envelope  we  will  mail  you a  free  copy  as soon  as it is ready.
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420   29th   St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE
The   Weekly    is   available   on   microfilm  from    University
Microfilms,  a  subsidiary  of  Xerox.   I  would  welcome  bids  for
the  right  to  reprint  full   size.   Three  books  made  up  of  col-
lected  pieces  from  the  Weekly   and  the  New   York   Review  of
Books  are  in print:   The  Haunted  Fifties,   In  A  Time  of  Tor-
ment  and  Polemics  and  Prophecies,  in  hard  cover  by  Random
House,  and  the  first  two in  paperback  by  Vintage,  its  paper-
back  affiliate  which  also  published   (with  New  York   Review)
The  Killings  at  Kent  State:  How  Murder  Went   Unpunished.
Monthly  Review  Press  has  reprinted  in  both  hard  -cover  and
paper  my  Hidden  History   of  the  Korean  War,  a  book  which'
has  given  rise  to  much  distorted  criticism,  usually  by  people
who  have  never  read  it.   Next  Fall,  Random  House  and  Vin-
tage   will  reprint   The   Truman   Era:    How   The   Cold   War
Started,  a  collection  of  my  best  pieces  from  the  New  York
Daily  Compass,   which  was  originally   published  by  Monthly
Review  Press  in  1952  and  like  the  Hidden  History,  has  long
been  out  of print.  Next  Spring,  Penguin  will  publish  in  Eng-
land   an  /.   F.  Stone  Reader,   made  up  of  pieces   from  the
Weekly  specially  selected  by  Neil  Middleton.  My other  books,
The  Court  Disposes   (1937),  Business  As   Usual  (1941),  Un-
derground  to  Palestine   (1946)  and  This  Is  Israel   (1948),  are
out  of print.
I   F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.   Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..    N.W..    Washington,    D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the   U.S.;      >6  in  Canada;
f 10 elsewhere.  Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to Europe; $20  to  Israel,  Asia and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED