I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971jun28.pdf

============================================================

All  About   Those  Pentagon  Papers
Another Dangerous Document Whose Publication Had Better Be Enjoined
I  want to take  this opportunity to  assure  you and your committee  that  this  Administration is  dedicated  to  insuring  a
free  flow  of  information  to  the  Congress  and  the  news  media—and  thus  to  the  citizens.  You  are,  I  am  sure,  familiar  with
the  statement I  made  on  this  subject  during  the  campaign.  Now  that  I  have  the  responsibility to  implement this  pledge,  I
wish  to  reaffirm  my  intent to  do  so.   I  want  open  government  to  be a reality in every  way  possible.
_Nixon  letter  to  Chairman  Moss,  House  Government   Information   Subcommittee,  April  7, 1969.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX,  No.  13
JUNE  28,  1971       '°'c
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
The  Real  Secret—Empire  and  Democracy  Don't  Mix
When  men  as  different   as  Truman,  Elsenhower,  Kennedy,
Johnson  and  Nixon   are  found  locked   into  the  same  essential
course,  when  we  see  them  caught  in  so  extensive  a  web  of
deceit  and  inhumanity as that  revealed  by  the  secret  Pentagon
papers  the  New   York   Times  and  the  Washington   Post  had
begun  to publish,  we  are  dealing  with  factors  deeper  than  per-
sonality  or  political  outlook.   We   must  try  to  determine  the
forces  and  the  institutional patterns  which  led  men  so diverse
into  the  same  crimes  against humanity  and  crimes against  free-
dom,  culminating in  the  current  effort  by  the  Nixon  Adminis-
tration  to  turn  back  the  clock  of  Anglo-American   law  by three
centuries  and  subject  the  press  to  prior  restraint.   Even  those
few  reporters  like  myself,  who  were  critical  of  the  war  from
the  beginning,  turn  out to have been  naive.  We  never   imagined
that  the  makers  of  policy  were  quite  so  mendacious  and  un-
scrupulous.   Judge  J.  Skelly Wright  spoke  for  us  all  when  he
said  in  his  dissent  on  the  Court  of  Appeals  in  the  Washington
Post  case,  "As  if  the  long  and  sordid  war  in  Southeast  Asia
had  not  already  done  enough  harm  to  our  people,   it  is  now
used  to  cut  out  the  heart  of  our  free  institutions  and  system
of  government."
The  "Dominoes"  Are  No  New   Theory
What  are  the  circumstances that  made  these  men  so untrust-
worthy ? The  answer was given  by those  Americans who  fought
the  annexation  of  the  Philippines  after  the  Spanish-American
war.   They  saw  this  as  the  beginning  of  imperialism  and  pre-
dicted   that   empire   and   democracy   would   ultimately   prove
irreconcilable.    "What  is  desperately   needed   in  this   country
today,"  Senator  McGovern  said  on  CBS Face  The  Nation  June
20,  "is truthfulness  from  our government..."  It  is  impossible
to  run  an  empire  "truthfully".    In  an  empire,  there  is  always
war  of  one  sort  or  another   being  waged,   or  brewing,   some-
where  on  its borders and  war  requires  some  measure  of  secrecy.
How  much  is  left  when  one  pleads,  as  Senator  McGovern  did,
for  "/*//  information    on  matters  that  in  no  way   jeopardize
national  security."   That's  a  pretty  safe  standard  in  governing
Iceland,  where  security  doesn't  extend  much  beyond  the  3-mile
limit.   But  in  an  empire  like  ours  "national  security"  can  rea-
sonably  be  stretched   to  cover  events  in  far  corners  of   Laos,
Turkey  and  the  Congo.   For  empires   always  fear  erosion   at
their  edges,  and  the  domino  theory   can  be  seen  in  action  as
far   back  as  Pericles  and  as  recently  as  the  Soviet  invasion  of
Czechoslovakia.
The   bigger   the   empire,   the  more  numerous   its  potential
New  Policy  On Vietnam?
Presidential   Press   Secretary   Ziegler   refused   to  be
drawn  into  a  discussion  of  the  [New  York  Times]  re-
port on  the  ground  that the  study dealt with "something
that  occurred  in  the  previous administration."  He  said
the  Nixon  Administration had  developed  a  new  policy
on Vietnam.
—New  York   Times,  June  16.
Q.    Mr.  Secretary,   is   it   a  basic   principle   of   this
government,  as  it  has  been  of  previous administrations,
that  South  Vietnam  must  remain  independent  and  non-
communist,  and  that  this  is  non-negotiable?
Rogers.    To  the  extent  that  we  want  to  prevent  the
North   Vietnamese    from   overrunning   South   Vietnam
militarily,  yes;  the  answer  is  yes.
—Secretary   Rogers'   press  conference   June   15.
President  Nixon  is  committed  to  ending  the  war  in
Indochina.   But  he  is  also  committed  to  ending  it  on
a  responsible  basis  .  .  .  Let  us  understand at  the  outset
that  President  Nixon,  having  inherited  American com-
mittments   and   recognizing   America's   responsibilities
in  Asia,  will  not  abandon  those  committments.
—Dole,  Nixon's   chief   Senate  spokesman,   on  "Amer-
ica's  Southeast  Asian  Policy  in  Perspective:   The  Lead-
ership  of  Six  Presidents"  in  the  Senate  June  16.
enemies;  allies,  too,  must  be  watched  lest  they  waver  or  defect.
A  world-wide  intelligence  network  becomes  a  necessity,  and  an
additional  reason  for  secrecy.   To  maintain  the  empire,  larger
armed  forces  are required  and  armies are by their  nature  closed
societies,  authoritarian and  hierarchical.  The  bigger  the  armies,
the   more   the  inner  councils   of   government   are   molded   by
military  considerations.    These  reinforce  the  instinctive  secret-
iveness  of  the  bureaucrat.   The  bureaucrats,  civil  and  military
alike,  feel that  their  freedom  of  action would  be  limited  if  they
had   to  explain   what   they   were   doing.    How   explain   to  a
Congressman   from  Kansas  the  complex  intrigues  in  our  Bra-
zilian  policy  which  may  some  day  give  us  a  bigger  Vietnam?
How   draw   a  firm  line   between   contingency   planning   and
policy?   Genuinely   difficult   questions   provide   ready   excuses
for  the  arrogance  that  expertise  and  power  generate.  Elitism  is
inevitable. The  real  enemy is the  bureaucrat's  own  people.  They
must  be  deceived,  watched  and  if  necessary  repressed.    In  the
documents  so  far  published  one  can  see  over  and  over  again
facts  kept  from  the  U.S.  public  which  were  not  only known  to
the  enemy,  but   deliberately  transmitted  by  intermediaries  or
"signals".  Hanoi  was  forewarned   of  destruction  in  1964;   only
the  voters  at  home  thought  Johnson  a  dove.   Documents   were
(Continued  On  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.F. Stone's  Bi-Weckly,  June  28,1971
(Continued  From  Page  One)
"classified"  to  make  sure  that  we  would  be  the  last  to know.
So  it  can  be  said  of  a  whole  series  of  Presidents  since  the
U.S.  began  to run  a world empire that they  sought  "purposely
and  systematically ... to keep the  American people  in  ignor-
ance  of  the  true  state  of  things  at  the  seat  of  war,  and  by  all
sorts  of  deceitful   tricks  to  deprive  them  of  the  knowledge
required  for  the formation of a  correct  judgment."   The words
are  those  of  the  great  liberal  editor  Carl  Schurz, writing  in
1899  of  how  McKinley  carried  on  the  war  in  the  Philippines.*
The  same  mentality  still  rules  our  national  councils.  On CBS
June  16, Marvin  Kalb  asked  Gen. Maxwell  Taylor,  a principal
character   in  the  documents  being  disclosed,  "What   do  you
make,  General,  of  the  principle  of  the  people's  right  to know
when  steps  of  this  dimension  are  taken?"   The  General  re-
plied, in phrases  which recall the  Charge  of  the Light   Brigade,
"I  don't  believe in that  as  a  general  principle ...  A citizen
should   know  those  things  he  needs  to  know  to  be  a  good
citizen and discharge his  function."   Ours not to  question  why,
ours but to do and die....
Secret Senate Debates, Secret Trials
The  secrecy  bred  by  empire  spreads  like  a  cancer  through
the   government,   undermining   our   most   basic   institutions.
The  Senate  held  a  secret  session  on  a  secret  war  in  Laos.
Judges  Gurfein  and  Gesell  held  part  of  their  hearings  in  the
New  York   Times  and  Washington   Post  cases  in  secret  and
secret   briefs   were  filed  on  appeal.   For   the   first   time  in
American  history  the  Supreme  Court  may  be  asked  to  hear
argument   in  camera  or  at  least  consider  evidence  taken  in
secret  and  forever  sealed from  the  public eye.  With  every  step
confidence   in   government   crumbles,  our   crusade   against
communism  begins  to  climax  in  the  spread  at  home  of  those
totalitarian   practices   against   which    we   are   supposedly
spending  billions to  protect  ourselves.  When Johnson  "off  the
record,  not  for  attribution   but  please  use"   tells   Time  that
release   of  the  Pentagon   papers  was  "close  to  treason,"  he
begins to  sound  like those other free  world  leaders, Papadapo-
lous  and  Franco.   This  hysterical  reaction  by  the consummate
old  faker  can  best  be  measured  against  Judge  Gurfein's  de-
cision  dismissing  the  government's  application  for  a  tempo-
rary  restraining  order.
The  circumstances   made  that  ruling  all  the  more  impres-
sive.   In  choosing  to  file  so  momentous a  case  before  Judge
Gurfein,  the  Attorney  General picked a  brand-new Republican
judge,   freshly   beholden  to   the   Administration;   this   was
characteristically  crass  of  Mitchell  and  Nixon.   Judge   Gur-
fein's   preliminary   observation   that   he   didn't   see  why   a
patriotic  editor  wouldn't  take  the  documents  to  the  govern-
ment   before   deciding   whether   to  publish  them   revealed   a
Nixon's  Fakery  On  The  POW  Issue
Would  the  President withdraw  all  of  our  troops  from
Vietnam   now,  if   he   could   be  assured  that   doing   so
would  guarantee  the  return  of  all  American  prisoners
of  war?   The  answer  is  "no."  He  would  not  unless  he
changes  his  mind,  because  he  said  that  he  believes  the
forces  must  remain  in  any  event  until  the  South  Viet-
namese  have  the  chance  to  defend  themselves,  when-
ever  that  might  come  to  pass.  The  prisoners must  wait
until  such  time  as  General  Thieu   and  General   Ky  or
whoever  is  in  power in  Saigon,  are  capable  of  conduct-
ing   the   war  without  American  forces—and   God  only
knows  how  long  that  may  be.   I  submit,  further,  that
Vietnamization  places the  keys  to  the  prisons  in  which
those  American  men  are  held  squarely in  the  hands of
the  Thieu-Ky  regime.   All  that  government  need  to  do
to   perpetuate  American   forces  in   South  Vietnam   is
exhibit  its  weaknesses;  all  it  need  do is  everything  it
can  to  prolong  the   American  presence,  and  Vietnami-
zation  says  we  will  stay  there  to  prop  it  up.
—Mi-Govern,  in  the  Senate,  June  15.
*p. 28 Twelve Against Empire: The  Anti-Imperialists, 1898-
1900   by  Robert  L.  Beisner,  McGraw-Hill,  1968.  $6.95.
naivete  that  was  appalling!   He  granted   the  request  for  a
secret hearing  at  which representatives  of- State, Defense  and
the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  could  testify.   This  was  to  allow  the
government,   the   Judge   said,  "an   opportunity  to  pinpoint
what  it  believed  to  be vital  breaches  to  our  national  security
of  sufficient  impact  to  controvert  the  right  of  a  free  press."
But  after  hearing  the  secret  testimony,  he  declared,  "I  am
constrained  to  find  as  a  fact"  that  the  evidence  presented
"did  not  convince this  court  that  the  publication  of  these  his-
torical  documents would  seriously  breach  the  national  secur-
ity."   He  ruled that  "no  cogent  reasons  were  advanced"  why
the  documents "would  vitally  affect  the  security  of  the  na-
tion."   All  he  saw  was  embarrassment  to  those  who  partici-
pated.   He  ended  with  an   eloquent  reaffirmation   of   funda-
mental   free   press   principles   for   which   every    American
newspaperman  must  be  deeply  grateful.   We  honor him,  too,
for  demonstrating  so  dramatically  the  independence of  the
judiciary, and  pause  to  point out that  the  institutional  frame-
work  of  the  law  molds  men  into  a  different  pattern  of  be-
havior  than  the  institutional  framework  of  militarism  and
imperialism.
Much  as  we  deplore  secret  trials  under  any circumstances,
the  in  camera  hearings  held  in  these  cases  create  an  imme-
diate  advantage  on  appeal  for  the  press.  They  gave  the  gov-
ernment  the  fullest  leeway  to  prove  harm  to  national  secur-
ity.   When  two judges  as  different  in  background  and philoso-
phy  as  Judges  Gurfein  and  Gesell  after   such  hearings  both
make  findings  of  fact  against  the  government,  it  will be  diffi-
cult  for  the  higher  courts  to  reverse.   Indeed  the  findings  of
fact  are  so  sweeping  as  to  cast  doubt  on  the  ability  of  the
How Nixon Circumvents The Law To
Two  years  ago  the  Senate  placed  an  overall  ceiling  on
Defense  Department expenditures in  support of  Vietnamese
and  free  world  forces  in  Vietnam  and  in  support  of  local
forces  in  Laos and Thailand.  Last year, we sought  to  tighten
that  provision by  making  it  unlawful—we  thought—for  the
United  States  to  hire  troops  of  other  nations  to  defend  the
governments  of  Laos  or  Cambodia.  Nothing,  however, dem-
onstrates  with  more  clarity  the   difficulty   of  devising  ade-
quate  legislative  controls  of  the  clandestine  military  under-
takings  of  the  executive  branch, or the  executive's  utter dis-
regard  of  the  will  of  the  legislative  branch,  than  the  pres-
ence  today of  U.S. financed Thai troops  in  Laos.  In  a  state-
ment  issued  on  the  day  of  the  secret  session  in  which  the
Senate  was  told the  facts  regarding the  Thai troops  in  Laos,
the  State  Department acknowledged  for  the  first  time  that
the   United   States  was  providing  Thai   "volunteers"   with
financial  and  material support.
The  deceptive  nature  of  this  characterization  of  the  re-
cruitment  and  payment  of  Thai  soldiers   to  fight  in  Laos
Carry On That "Secret War"  In Laos
will  be  all  too  evident  to  any  member  of  the  Senate  who
reads  the  report on  U.S. activities in  Laos that  was  prepared
by  the  staff  of  the  Subcommittee on  United  States  Security
Agreements  and  Commitments  Abroad.   We  earnestly  hope
this  report will  be  promptly  declassified.
At   the   same   State   Department  briefing   preceding  the
closed   Senate  session,   the  Department's  spokesman  main-
tained  that  the  payment of  Thai troops was  legal  because  it
antedated   the   enactment  of   the   amendments  which   had
been  designed to  prohibit  it.   If  the  hiring of  Thai  troops  to
fight  in  Laos  is  legal,  why  has  the  executive  branch  gone  to
such  lengths  to  keep  it  a  secret  from  Congress?   Why did
the  State  Department  feel  the  need  to  point  out  that  this
practice  had  begun  prior  to  the  passage  of   la'ws  designed
to  prohibit  it?   To  us  such tortured  and contradictory argu-
mentation  can  mean  only  one  thing:   The  executive  branch
was  determined  to  find  a  way  to  circumvent the  will  of  the
Congress;  and under  the  cover of  secrecy, they succeeded.
—JSymington,  in  the  Senate, June  15,  (abr.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  June  28, 1H71
government  to  convict  those  who leaked  and  those  who print-
ed  these  documents.  The  government's  case  must  have  been
very  tenuous  if  even  in  camera  it  made  such  a  poor  impres-
sion  on  these  judges.   Judge  Gesell  found  no  compromise of
intelligence,  despite  all  the  nonsense  spilled  to  the  press  in
backgrounders   about  the  danger  to   U.S.   secret   codes.   He
found  the  government failed  to  show  that  the  documents  "at
the  present  time  and  in  the  present  context  are  Top  Secret."
Nonetheless,  whatever  the  outcome,  the  case  creates  serious
precedents   for   the   future.    Publication  has   been   held   up,
editors  have  been hauled into  court.  What  happens  next  time
when  the  government's  case  is  less  flimsy  and  more  margi-
nal ?  We need  a firm ruling  that  the  risks  to  "national  secur-
ity"  are  outweighed  by the  advantages  of  a  free  press.
A Means of Seduction and Brainwash
But  the  press,  too,  has  been  corrupted  in  its  own  way  by
the  web  of  secrecy  woven by  imperialism.   One  aspect  of  the
whole  system  of  classification  has  not  had  sufficient  attention.
The  volume  of  classified  material  gives  elected   officials   and
bureaucrats  a  ready  means  of  seducing  and  brainwashing  the
press.  Selective  declassification  becomes a  means  of manipu-
lation.  A half-truth  may  be  more  deceptive, because  less  easy
to  rebut,  than  a  whole  lie.   The  system   of  "leaks"  makes  it
easy  to  mislead the  public and  to  make  reporters  beholden to
officials  for  these  phoney "scoops."  To be  excluded from  those
cozy  backgrounders  whence  so  much falsification  is  generated
represents  one  of  the  basic  advantages  of  heretical   reporters
like  myself.  It  also  explains why the  establishment  press, de-
spite   so   much   first   rate   reporting    from    Vietnam,   has
taken  so long  to  disengage  from  the  "party-line"  on  the  war.
So  while  we  find  ourselves  truly  proud   of  the   American
press  for  closing ranks  against  the  government  in  defense of
freedom,   and   to  the   editors   of  the  New   York   Times, .the
Washington   Post  and  (at  press  time)  the  Boston  Globe  for
printing the  Pentagon  papers,  we wish  they  had started  earli-
er.   Neil  Sheehan  of  the  New  York   Times  deserves  a  special
salute,  and  whoever  leaked  the  documents  will  go  down  in
history  as  a  hero.*  It  is nevertheless  true  that  no small  part
of  what  is  now  coming  to  light  was  visible   years  ago,  for
those  who cared  to  look,  as  my  own readers  in  the   Bi-Weekly
and  the  Neiv  York  Review  of  Books  are  aware.**'   If  the  big
*  Hisses  to  Sidney  Zion  for  naming  Daniel  Ellsberg  as  the
source  of  the  leak  to  the  New  York  Times,  and  to  Rep.  Paul
McCIosky  for  telling  the  press  he  got  copies  from  Ellsberg.
**  The  Columbia Journalism  Review  in  a  special Vietnam
issue  last  winter  said,  "One  American journalist  who  raised
continuing  doubts  about  the  veracity of  the Administration's
accounts  was I. F.  Stone.  In his  small,  outspoken  sheet,  Stone
reported  the  South  Vietnamese  attacks  on  Hon  Me  and  Hon
Ngu.   Ho  was  the  only  one  to  cover  in  detail  the   charges
Drafting  For  Soldiers—Or  Servants?
During  our  debate   on  the   draft   extension,   the  De-
partment  of  Defense  has  admitted  that  projected   man-
power  shortfalls during  fiscal  year  1972, depending  on
the  size  of   the  pay  increase,  will   range   from  20,000
to  40,000  in  the  absence of  the  draft.  Shortfalls of  such
minor  proportions, in  a  force  level  of  2.4  million  men,
have  raised  serious  questions  about  the  need   for  any
continuation  of  the  draft,  much  less  a  2-year  extension
of  the  induction  authority .  .  .  Gen. George  I.  Forsyth,
Special  Assistant  to  the  Army  Chief  of  Staff,  noted  in
the  May  17,  1971 edition  of  Armed  Forces  Journal,  that
there  are  35,000 GI's  engaged  in  KP,  and  another  60,000
cutting    grass    and   engaged   in   similar    nonmilitary
household  chores.  This  means  that  we  have  95,000  men
doing  jobs  that  should  be  performed  by  civilians  .  .  .
These  95,000  slots  are  what  this  debate  is  all  about.  In
the  name  of  national  security  we  are  being  asked  for  a
2-year  extension,  so  that  men  in  uniform  can  provide
domestic  service  to  their  superiors.
—Schweiker  (D. Pa.)  in  the Senate,  June i.
press had  examined  the  original  hearings  on  the  Tonkin Gulf
and  printed  Senator  Morse's  two  speeches  revealing  all  that
the  censor  had  taken  out  of  the  transcript,  they  would  have
known  much  of  the  truth  seven  years  ago   (as   would   the
Senators  who  voted  like  sheep  for  the  resolution,  only  Morse
and   Gruening   dissenting).   Instead  the   New   York    Times
swallowed  the  prefabricated   Tonkin  Gulf  incidents  and  saw
(Continued  On Page  Four)
raised  by  Senator  Morse  about  the   incidents,  and  he  even
raised  questions  about  whether  the  second   attack  even  oc-
curred.   While Time  and  Life  were  adding  embellishments  to
the   nineteenth-century  theme  of   "they've  sunk  one  of   our
gunboats,"  I.  F.  Stone  was  asking  the  crucial  questions.  One
of  the  major shortcoming of  opinion  writers  was  their failure
to  ask:  does  the  punishment fit the  crime?   The total damage
in  both  attacks  was  one  bullet  hole  in  the  Maddox.  No  U.S.
ships  were  sunk,  no  American  boys  were  even  wounded.  In
turn,  we  not  only  claimed  to  have  sunk  four  North  Vietnam-
ese  vessels  but  went  on  to  the  bombing of  the  North, sinking
the  major  part  of  the  North  Vietnamese  Navy,  and  wiping
out  more  than  10  percent  of  its  oil  storage  tanks.   The  over-
whelming   response   of   the  editorialists  was  that   President
Johnson  should  be  commended for  his  restraint  in  limiting
the   bombing.    Among  Washington  journalists,   only   Stone
opined that  indeed  the  American  response  was  'hardly punish-
ment  to  fit  the  crime.'   His  small  circulation   sheet   received
little  attention."—Don  Stillman,  "Tonkin:  What  Should   Have
Been  Asked."
Gen.  Ridgway  For  Unconditional  Withdrawal  Of  All  US  Forces
It  is   difficult   to  see  how  a  war  can  be  ended  unless  all
participants  agree  to  terminate  it.   And  in  the  light  of  our
announced  intention  that  residual  forces,  including  but  not
limited  to  American  airpower,  will  remain  until  such  agree-
ment  is  reached  and  captives  are  released,  it  is  still  more
difficult  to  reconcile  these  statements  with  the  promise that
the  war  is  nearing  its  end.   For  my  part  I  must  conclude
that  so  long  as  U.S.  armed  forces  remain  on  the  mainland
of  South  Vietnam,  if  only  to  provide logistical  support  for
the   South   Vietnamese   Army   (ARVN),  our   men  will  be
mortared,  shelled  or  otherwise  attacked;  and  that  so  long
as  they  are  attacked  they  will  counterattack  with  fire  and
movement,  and the  war will  drag on, not  end.  .  .  .
The  disquieting  factor   to   me  is   the   openly   expressed
threat  of  the  use  of  force  in  an  attempt to  compel release  of
captive  U.S.  personnel.  The  recovery  of  these  men  demands
and  deserves,  of  course,  unceasing  effort  on  the  part  of  our
government.   We  owe  them  and  their  families  and  kin  no
less,  and no less  can  serve  the  nation's  honor.   But  whether
stepped   up  bombing  of   North   Vietnam  targets,   including
population  centers,   will  accomplish  that   result  is  open  to
serious question.  There  is  further uncertainty in  our  present
course   which  gravely  concerns  many  of  our  people.   How
can  we reconcile retention of  a  "residual  force," of  which  the
Secretary  of  Defense   speaks,  with  "complete withdrawal"
to  which  the   President  is  publicly  committed?   And   does
"complete  withdrawal" mean  exactly  that—the  removal  of
all  ground,  naval  and air forces?  . . .
The  prisoner  question  is  a  torturing  one,  which  should  be
examined  from  every  angle,   as  I  have  no  doubt  is  being
done  constantly.    It  is  conceivable  that  an  offer  to  Hanoi,
made  under  the  tightest   possible  cloak  of  secrecy,  that  we
would  agree  to  complete  withdrawal  from  the  mainland  of
all  U.S.  armed forces  personnel  by  a  stated  date,  in  return
for  the  release   unharmed  of  every  captive   American  now
held,  would  be  accepted.
—Gen.  Ridgway   in  Foreign  Affairs  for  July,   proposing
that within six  to nine months, "regardless  of  developments"
we  withdraw  all  U.S.  Army,  Navy,  Marine  and  Air  Force
personnel   "except   Embassy  guards"  from   Vietnam.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  June  28,1971
When  Agnew  Defends Johnson:  Imperialism's  Birds  of A  Feather
(Continued  From  Page  Three)
them  as  "the beginning  of  a  mad  adventure  by  the   North
Vietnamese  Communists" while the  Washington  Post  assailed
Morse  as  a  "reckless  and  querulous"  dissenter.
Even the AP Was Ignored
When  the  Associated  Press  three  years  later,  in  an  extra-
ordinary  feat   of   reporting,   interviewed   three   dozen   crew
members  and  began  to  expose  McNamara's  lies  about   the
Tonkin  Gulf  incidents,  neither  the  Times  nor  the  Post   ran
the  5,000-word expose  by  Harry  Rosenthal  and  Tom Stewart.
The  Arkansas  Gazette  seems  to  have  been  the  only  paper  to
publish  the  full  report.  A year  later  the  Times  and  the  Post
were  equally  remiss  in  failing  at  all  adequately  to  cover  the
fumbling  but  revealing  new Fulbright hearings on the Tonkin
Gulf  incidents  and  the  sensational  revelations  made  by  Morse
about  them  in  three  great  Senate  speeches,  Feb.  21,  28, and
29,  1968.  Nor  did  any  of  these  big  papers  bother  to  look when
in  the  New  York  Review  of  Books,  Feb.  13,  1969  I   presented
evidence  that  the  second Tonkin  Gulf  incident never  occurred
nor  when  in  the  Bi-Weekly   April  21  of  that  year  I  called
attention   to  "The   Best  Kept   Secret   of  the  Vietnam   War."
This was the  revelation  in Westmorland's final report  on the
Vietnamese  war  that  the  South  Vietnamese  government  in
1964  and  1965 resisted  the  introduction of  U.S.  combat  troops
and  that  McNamara  backed  Westmoreland  in  ignoring Sai-
gon's wishes.  The Pentagon  Papers, prepared  by  McNamara's
men,  draw  a  veil  over  both  these  stories  damaging   to  Mc-
Namara's  reputation.*
I  believe  the  reason,  the  Nixon  Administration  is  so  des-
perately  anxious  to  stop  the  New  York   Times  is  because  the
Times  has  in  its  possession  a  summary  of  the  Command and
Control  report  on  the  Tonkin  Gulf  incidents  which  Fulbright
has  been  trying  to  get  for  seven  years.   I  believe  this  will
show  that  the  second  Tonkin  Gulf  incident,  used  by  Johnson
to  unleash  his  first  big  bombing of  the  North,  never  occurred.
I  also  believe that  the  Pentagon   Papers  covering  the  Eisen-
hower  years  may  throw  fresh  light  on the  part  Nixon  played
with  Dulles  and  Radford  in  trying  to  bring  about  U.S.  inter-
vention  at  the  time  of  Dien  Bien Phu,  if  necessary  with  tacti-
cal  nuclear  weapons  as  well  as  U.S.  ground  troops.   But  the
overriding reason  for  trying to suppress  the documents is that
they  show the  continuity  of  policy and  conduct.  Nixon  is  still
Simple  Question  Meets  Slippery  Fellow
In  Paris  Jan.  6 Laird  told  a  news  conference that  the
U.S.   would   terminate   its   "combat   responsibility"  in
South  Vietnam  by  mid-summer   1971.
—Facts  on  File  page  10C2 Jan.  7, 1971.
George  Herman  (CBS  News)—Secretary  Laird,  you
said  that  American troops  would  have  a  combat  role  for
several  months to  come.  When is  it  going to  end?
Secretary  Laird:   Well,  as  long  as  there  are  Ameri-
can  troops  stationed   in  Vietnam,  and  as  we  move  for-
ward  to transfer  the  air,  the  logistics,  the  artillery  roles
to  the  South  Vietnamese  under  Vietnamization, we will
have  combat  forces  stationed  in  a  security  role  in  Viet-
nam.   These  particular   forces   will  carry   on  security
missions,  and will  be involved in combat  . . .
Bob   Schieffer    (CBS   News):    Well,   Mr.  Secretary,
when  are  we going  to  be  able  to  say  that  the  U.S.  has
turned  over  ground combat  responsibility  to  the  South
Vietnamese?    I   know  you  said   earlier   this   year   it
would  be  some  time  this  summer—
Laird:   Yes—
Schieffer:   Are  we  on  schedule?
Laird:  We are on schedule  . .  . but I  don't  want  to
give  the  impression to  anyone listening  to  this  program
that  the  Americans  that  are  there, in  the  logistics  role,
in  the air  roles,  in the  artillery   roles  .  .  .  that  those
Americans  will  not  be engaged  in  any  combat  activities
in  this  security   role,  because   they  will.   And  I  don't
want  to  raise  any  question  as  far  as  credibility  on that
issue  with  anyone  listening  to  this  program.
—On  CBS  Face  The  Nation,  June  13.
* They  may  be  found  in  my  book  Polemics  and  Prophecies.
looking   for   the   same   unattainable    victory    Kennedy   and
Johnson  sought,  and  is  as  unwilling  as  they  were  to  let  the
public   know  what   he   is   really   doing   in   Southeast    Asia.
Newsweek   reports  that  Lyndon  Johnson  feels  "the danger
now  is  that  President  Nixon  will  be  pressured  to  get  out  of
Vietnam  before  achieving  the  main  objective—getting  South
Vietnam  in  shape  to protect  itself."   Time  reports  that  John-
son feels  it  was a  mistake  not to  impose  censorship.   Is  it  any
wonder  Agnew in  Los Angeles  criticized  the  New  York   Times
for  printing  the  Pentagon  Papers  and  denied  that   Johnson
had   misled  the   American   people  in   1964-65?   This  is   the
bi-partisan  solidarity  imperialism   breeds.                   June  21
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed  Envelope
For
send  I
1967-7
(To)    1
Street
City  ..
Please
Name
Street
City
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
the  enclosed  special  pre-publication  price  of  $8.95
.  F.  Stone's  new book,  Polemics  and  Prophecies:
)  (Random House).  Regularly   $10.
Vame   ..............................................................................
..................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate    if   gift   announcement  wished   Q
renew  D   or enter  D   a sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
..............................     Zin .....            Stato
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
                6
/
28
/
71
4420  29th  St.  N. W.,  Washington,   D.C.  20008
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N.W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.,  N.W..   Washington.  D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $6  in  the  U.S.;  $6  in  Canada;
$10 elsewhere.  Air  Mail  rates: $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel, Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED