I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971jan11.pdf

============================================================

Franco  and  the Kremlin:  Comrades in  Senescence,  P.  2
How  Bureaucracy  Stifles  Free  Debate  and  Free  Government
Classification  often  permits  an  ambiguity  about  various  commitments.   The  practice  often  is  to:    Maximize commit-
ment  in  secret  discussions   with  foreign   governments;  then  minimize  the  risk  of  commitment  in  statements  made  to
the  American  public  .  .  .  Americans  pride  themselves   on  having  an  open   society,   nevertheless,   it  is  becoming  an  in-
creasingly   closed  government.   Yet  neither   the   Congress   nor  the  people  can  make  intelligent  judgments  without  ques-
tions  which  may literally  involve our  survival  unless  they  have  free  access  to  all  pertinent  information  .  .  .
—Security  Agreements  and  Commitments  Abroad:  Report  of  the  Symington  subcommittee   of  Senate  Foreign  Relations.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
»VOL  XIX,  No. 1
JANUARY  11,  1971           '<"<•
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
The  Price  We  Pay For Empire
The  revelations  of  the  Symington  subcommittee  report  on
"Security  Agreements  and  Commitments  Abroad"  would   fall
into  better  focus  if  it  began   by  saying  plainly  that  the   U.S.
since World  War  II  has  become  the  biggest  empire  the  world
has  ever  known.  The  huge  military  and  intelligence  establish-
ments  required  to  maintain  that  empire  become  increasingly
difficult  to  control.   Their  size  and  secrecy make  ours  a partial-
ly  closed  society.   The  truth  is  that  no  one,  not  the  President
or  the  Secretary of  Defense,  or  even  the  heads  of  secret  service
agencies  like CIA,  DIA,  or  NSA,  much  less  the  Congress  can
fully   control  these  monstrous  bureaucracies.   In  their  murky
depths  moves  are  made  which  may  turn  out  later  to  have  set
the  course  for  disastrous  military  interventions.  We   are  all
trapped  by  the  sheer  inertial  mass  of  the  machinery required
to  run  the  empire.  In  dozens  of  ways  it  frustrates free  decision
by  freely  'elected  government,  and  there  is  always  the  danger
that  it  may,  if  challenged  or  given  the  chance,  apply  at  home
the  methods  it  employs abroad.   Widespread   Army  spying on
anti-war  civilians  may  be  seen  as  the  application  at  home  of
the  "pacification" techniques the  military  intelligence apparatus
has  developed  in  Vietnam.   As  in  ancient  Rome,  the  price  of
empire  may be  the  downfall  of  the  Republic.
What We Never Knew  Before
"Under    the   Constitution,   the   Congress,   particularly  the
Senate,"  the  report  begins,  "has  a  responsibility  to  keep  itself
fully   informed   about   matters   of   foreign   policy."    The   28
pages  are  packed with examples of  how  poorly  informed—and
often   deliberately  misinformed—the   Congress   has   become.
Senate  leaders  did  not  learn  until  the  Symington  hearings that
our  bombing  operations  in  Laos  began,  not  with  interdiction
of  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  trail,  but  in  support  of  Royal  Lao  forces
in  Northern   Laos.   The  Nixon   Administration  talks  of  im-
proving  relations  with  China  but  raids  on  the  mainland  con-
tinue  from  Taiwan,  unmanned  U.S.  reconnaissance  planes  still
fly  over  China,  air  bases  on  Taiwan   have  been   enlarged   to
handle  B-52 bombers  and  the  Nationalist  Army,  "despite  U.S.
efforts  to  make  it  appear  otherwise",   still  trains   (with   U.S.
supplied  equipment)   for  return  to  the  mainland.    Until  the
Symington  hearings,  no  one knew  that  the  U.S.  had  conducted
joint  military  exercises  with  Franco's  army  to  combat  a  hypo-
thetical  uprising.   "Creeping  commitments"   spark  new  wars  in
fighting  old  ones:   "After  Thai  approval  of  U.S.  use  of  Thai
bases  for  bombing  in  Laos  and  Vietnam,  insurgent   elements
surfaced  in  Thailand.   In  turn,  the  U.S.  increased  its  counter-
insurgency  forces."   In  Ethiopia,  to  obtain  the  use  of  Kagnew
Trouble Ahead For  POWs
Q.  I  wonder  if  we  could  go  back  to  the  prisoner   re-
patriation   issue  a  moment.   In  considering   the  return
of  Communist  prisoners, how much of  a  problem  do  you
have  in  getting  prisoners  who are  willing  to  go  back?
A.  You  mean  from  the  South  to  the   North?
Q.   Yes.
A.  Well,  a  lot  of  them  don't   want  to  go  back.
Q.  To what  extent?
A.  I'm  not  sure  I  could  put  it  in  percentage   terms,
but  there  is  a  considerable  number of  them  that,  when
given  the  opportunity,  do not  want  to  return.
—Secretary  of  State  Rogers   to  the  press  Dec.  23.
This  colloquy,  which  went  unreported,   confirms   the
warning  in  our  Dec. 28 issue  (which went  to  press  Dec.
17)  that  the  "voluntary  repatriation"  issue  which  de-
layed  the  Korean  truce  by  18 months  (and  140,000  cas-
ualties)   may   reappear   in   the   Vietnam   peace   talks.
Rogers'  replies  reveal  that  some  kind  of  poll,  and  per-
haps  the   same  kind  of  POW  "re-education"   program
as  in  Korea,  have  taken  place  behind  the  scenes.   Why
is the  press,  in the  midst  of all the  uproar  about  hasten-
ing  a  POW  exchange,   failing   to  cover  a   development
which  may  delay  an  exchange  by  many  months?
Station  (obviously  for  U-2  flights  over  the  Soviet  Union),  the
U.S.  secretly  agreed  in  the  50s  to  finance  a  40,000-man  army
for  Ethiopia.  U-2  flights  have  been  replaced  by  satellites  but
Kagnew  station  is  still  in  operation.   It  is  now  threatened  by
Arab-supported  Eritrean  guerrillas,  and  the   Soviets  have  re-
acted   by   supplying   arms   to   Ethiopia's   traditional   enemy,
Somalia.   So  cold  war  engulfs  another  part  of  the  globe.
Every  business  man  knows  the  problem  of  keeping  tabs  on
what  goes  on  in  his  own  business.  Imagine  trying  to  ride  herd
on  the  biggest  business  in  the  world:   U.S.  military  and  intel-
ligence  operations.   Nobody  knows  the  full  cost  but  it  prob-
ably  comes  close  to  $100  billion  a  year.   "As  but  one  illustra-
tion  of  the  incredible  duplication  and  waste,"  the  report  says,
"at  one  time   the  three   military  services,   along  with   AID,
USIA   and   CIA,   were   each   operating   independent   counter-
insurgency  programs"   in  Thailand.   The  report  discloses  that
no   mechanism   exists   in   the   executive   branch   to  eliminate
duplication   between   civilian  and  military  snoopers   and  that
even  in  the  Pentagon  there  is  no  overall  review  of  competing
military  intelligence  programs—this,  despite  the  establishment
by   McNamara   years  ago   of   a  DIA    (Defense   Intelligence
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  January  11, 1971
THE   COMMUTATION   OF   THE   DEATH   SENTENCES  in   the
Leningrad  and  Burgos  trials  have  similar  backgrounds.   Both
reflect  the  desperation  of  suppressed  national  minorities:    in
the  one  case of  Russian Jews,  in  the  other  of  Spanish  Basques.
Both occurred  in slowly decaying dictatorships,  one Communist,
the  other   Fascist.    Both  will  be  followed   by  new  trials,  in
Russia   of   more   Jews   accused   of   Zionism,   i.e.,   of   national
deviations;  in  Spain,  not  only  of  Catalans  as  well  as  Basques
but  of  other   Spaniards  accused  of   "subversion."    Rebellious
Basque  and  Catalan  separatists  have  become  focal  points   for
general  animosity  to  the   senescent   Franco   regime.   Kremlin
fears  of  similar  repercussions  in  the  Soviet  Union  may explain
why  no  national  publicity  was  given  the  Leningrad  trial until
after  it  was  over.   Perhaps  the  Soviet  bureaucracy  feared  other
rebellious   minorities   or   Great   Russian   dissidents  would   be
sympathetic  to  the   Jews  and  might   try  hi-jackings  of  their
own  to  get  out.   For  Russia  is  again  what  it  was  under   the
Czars  "a  prison-house  of  nations."   If  the  Kremlin  should  ever
allow   free   emigration   to   Jews,   half   the   population   would
convert  to  Judaism.
U.S.  Paratroopers for Franco
IN   BOTH  COUNTRIES  THE   GOVERNMENT'S   GRIP   is  weak-
ening.    In   Spain,   two   leading   papers    Ya   and   ABC   asked
clemency  for  the  men  who  murdered  the  sadistic  police  chief
in   Burgos.    In  the   Soviet   Union,  though  the  press  remains
suffocatingly   "unanimous,"   actions   took   place  which   would
have  been  unthinkable  in  the  Stalin  era:   The  physicist Sakha-
rov  showed  his  solidarity  with  the  accused  by  attending   the
trial,  sympathizers  demonstrated  outside  and   foreign  corres-
pondents   were  given   summaries  of   the   statements  made  in
court  by  the   defendants;   these   boldly   defended   Jewish  na-
tionalist  aspirations  bred  by  discrimination  and  the   regime's
covert  dabbling  in  anti-Semitism.    One   effect   of   the   Lenin-
grad  trials was to  deepen  the  widening  rift  between  the  West
European  Communist  parties  and  the  Kremlin.   A  disturbing
aspect  of  the  Spanish  trial  is  that  the  U.S.  seems  to  have  been
the  only  NATO  government  not  to  intercede  with  Madrid.
The  newly  released  Symington  committee  report  on  U.S.  com-
mitments  abroad   reveals   (pps.   11  &  22)   that   in   1967-69
U.S.   Army   paratroopers   were   flown   from   Germany   and
dropped   in   Spain   as  part   of   joint  unconventional   warfare
exercises  with  the  Spanish  army  to  put  down  a  hypothetical
uprising  in  north  central  Spain  not  far  from  the  Basque  prov-
inces.   Such  a  rising  begins  to  seem  less  and  less  hypothetical.
THE  MAIN  TARGETS  OF  THE  WORKERS  REVOLT  in  the  Bal-
tic  cities  of  Poland,  as in  the  Hungarian  and  Polish  risings  14
Only  Following  Civilian   Example
There  has  been  much  blaming  of  the  Army  for  all  of
this,  but  we  must  recognize  that  the  responsibility  lies
not  with  the  Army,  but  with  all  of  us.  Those  of  us  who
have  supported  legislation  designed  to  limit  legitimate
constitutional  rights,  who  voted  for  the  so-called  Riot
Act  and  all  the  rest,  helped  create  the  climate  of   fear
that  resulted  in the  Army's  decision  to  create  its  domes-
tic   spy   network,   a  network   that   eventually   cast   its
eyes  of  doubt  on  men  whom   we  know  to  be  loyal  and
patriotic.  That  climate  of  fear  had  the  majority   of   Con-
gress saying that we should  imprison  people  who crossed
State  lines  with  the  intent  of  creating  a  civil  disturb-
ance.    Enforcement   of   such   a   law   requires   knowing
what  is  in  a  traveler's  mind.   What  was  the  Army   to
do,  but  follow  the  lead  of  Congress?   It  is  little  wonder
that   some  charged   with   protecting   against   civil    dis-
order  read  their  mandate  broadly,   broadly   enough   to
have  them  set  up  a  network  designed  to  find  out  what
was  in  the  minds  of  people  whom  the  Army  felt  might
cause  trouble—people  whom  the  majority  of  Congress
said   should   be   in   jail—oddballs,   loud   dissenters,   un-
conventional  people.   Those  who  seek  to  read  the  politi-
cal  minds  of  legitimate  dissenters  must  expect  the  mind
readers  to  read  any  mind  they  please.
—Gonzales  (D.  Tex)   in  the  House   Dec.   19   (abr).
years  ago,  were  the  hated  secret  police,  the  party headquarters,
and  the  "company  union"  style trade  unionists.  The  Commu-
nist  bureaucracy  is  seen   by  the  working  class  as  its  No.   1
enemy.   The  "Marxist-Leninists"  remain  blind  to  this  ironic
dialectic in the  workers' paradise. To  recognize it would  require
them  to  relinquish  their  special  privileges  and  power.    The
blindness  extends  even  to  China  which  is  supposed  to  have
undergone  an  antibureaucratic shakeup  in  the  Cultural Revolu-
tion  and  is  the  only  Communist  state  to  support  the  Polish
rebels.   Unfortunately there  is no  breath  of  reality in  the  Mao-
ist  gibberish   with  which  the  Peking  Review   (Dec.   25)   at-
tributes  the  uprising  to  anger  against  "revisionism"  and   "res-
toration   of   capitalism."    One   of   the  main  demands  of   the
Szcecin  workers  (as  of  Budapest's  in  1956)   was  freedom  of
the  press.   Jeffersonianism  is  again  a  revolutionary  creed.  Go-
mulka  promised  more  candor  when  he  took  power   14  years
ago  as  Gierek   does   now.    But  Gomulka  ended   by  crushing
Poland's  promising  experiment  in  a  freer  press.   There  is  less
reason  to  believe  Gierek's   promises  since  the  hard-line  and
anti-Semitic  secret   police  chief   Mosczar  has  risen  to   greater
power  in  the  wake  of  Gomulka's  removal.   Stanley  Karnow,
Must  The  Greek  People  Give  Up  Their  Freedom  To Serve  U.S.  Security?
It  was  good  of  you  to  reply,  on behalf  of  President  Nixon,
to  the  open  letter  we  addressed  to  him,  expressing  our   con-
cern  and  protest  on  the  decision  to  resume  the  shipment
of  heavy  arms  to  Greece.
Your  letter,  dated  November' 10, reaffirms  an  earlier  State
Department  spokesman's  statement  about  the  "trend  toward
a  constitutional  order  is  established"  in  Greece,  and  reiter-
ates  the   "firm   commitment"  of   one   United   States   to   a
policy   which   is   concerned   with   "steady   progress   toward
restoring  Greece  to  political  Government."   That  was  only
just  over  three  weeks  ago.    Today  we  learn  about  the  new
wave  of  arrests  in  Greece,  where  the  predawn  knock  on  the
door  came  for  some  30  to  40  unsuspecting  citizens;  about
the  new  cases  of  torture;  about  the  sham  election  of  the
so-called  "consultative   body",  virtually   the   regime's  own
nominees.   The  harsh  press  law  is  now  extended  to  foreign
correspondents inside  Greece,  and even to journalists writing
abroad  about  Greece.
All  this, however, is  apparently  irrelevant  to  your  Govern-
ment's decision  to  resume  full  arms  deliveries  and to  render
support  and encouragement  to  the  Athens  regime.
For,  with  total  inconsistency,  you  also  tell  us  that:   "The
decision  to  resume  the  shipment  of  the  suspended  items  to
Greece  was  based  entirely   on  considerations  which  concern
the  security  of  the  United  States."   We  confess  that,  when
we  read this  passage  of  your  letter,  we  were  taken  aback.
And  we  know  that  large  numbers  of  Greek  people  having
read  your  letter  in  the  Greek  press  (although  they   were
not  given  the  opportunity  to  read  ours),  saw  it  as  an  aston-
ishing display  of  official  cynicism.
Can  it  really  be  true,  as  we  must  conclude   from   your
letter,  that  Greece  was  chosen,  alone  among  the  countries
of  Europe,  to  forfeit  its  vital  freedoms  in  order  to  preserve
the  security  of  the  United  States?
—25  Leading  Greek  Journalists  in  Exile  to  Deputy   Asst
Secretary  of  State  Davies in  Con.  Rec.  Dec.  17  S20409.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  January  11,1971
who  was  in  Poland   a  few  months  ago,  writes  (Wash.  Post
Dec.  28)   that  a  Warsaw  editor  told  him, "The  system  isn't
working  because  nobody  believes  in  it  and  nobody  believes  in
it  because  it  isn't  working."   Without   freedom  of  the  press,
the  rulers  nowhere  in  the  Soviet  world  know  what  the  people
are  really  thinking,  and  people  have  no  confidence   in  their
rulers  because  they have  no  way  of  knowing  what  their  rulers
are  really doing.
The Pentagon's Biggest Scandal
THE  TFX  WAS  THE   LARGEST  SINGLE  defense  contract  of
the   Kennedy-Johnson-McNamara   years,   and   the   most   ex-
pensive   blunder.    Thanks   to   a   split   within   the  military-
industrial  complex  between  General  Dynamics,  which  won  the
contract,  and  Boeing,  the  low  bidder   (which  lost)  the  deal
was  thoroughly  investigated  by  the  Senate's  McClellan  com-
mittee.   The  Kennedy  assassination  cut  the  inquiry  short  just
at  the  point  where  the  trail  of  politics  and  corporate   influence
led  straight  into  the  White   House.   When  the  committee  re-
sumed  the  inquiry  three years  later,  the  Johnson  administration
shut  off  access  to  the  records.   These  were  not  made  available
until  Nixon   took   office,   and  the  Committee  has  finally  made
its   report.    Two   sacred   cows   of   the   liberal   establishment,
Robert  S.  McNamara   and   Roswell  Gilpatric,   come  out   very
badly  in  it.   Muskie  did  his  best  to  protect   them  during  the
earlier  inquiry  and  Javits  declined  to  sign  the  report   (though
three  other  liberals  on  the  committee—Ribicoff,   Metcalf   and
Percy—did  so.)
The  two  leading  papers  of  the  liberal  establishment  press,
the  Washington   Post  (Dec.  29)   and  the  New   York    Times
(Jan.   2)   in  their  editorial  comments  did  their  best  to  dis-
parage  the  report.   Gilpatric  is  a  director  of  the   Washington
Post   but   it   did   fully   report   the   findings   criticizing  him.
He   was  condemned   in   the   report   for   a   "flagrant   conflict
of   interest."     He   was   counsel   for   General   Dynamics   be-
fore  becoming   Under   Secretary  of  Defense   and   returned   to
the  same  law  firm  after  leaving  the  Pentagon.   Javits  claimed
Gilpatric  played  only  a  "minor  role"  in  the  contract   award.
The  record  does  not  bear  him  out.  The  multi-billion  dollar
contract  saved  General  Dynamics  when  it  was  on  the   verge
of  receivership  and  kept  its  Fort  Worth,  Texas,  Convair  plant
Two Silver  Star Heroes Score Son Tay
Two  new  members  of  the  Georgia  General  Assembly
questioned  the  wisdom of  raiding prison  camps  in  North
Vietnam  to  free  American  servicemen  after   Assistant
Secretary  of   Defense   Richard   Capen  told  a  group  of
POW  families  here  that  the  Defense   department   has
not  ruled  out  more  raids  similar  to  the   Nov.  21  raid
against   Son  Tay.    DeKalb  Senator-elect   Max  Cleland,
a   former  Army  Captain  who  lost   both  legs   and  an
arm  in  Vietnam, and  DeKalb Representative-elect Wal-
ter  D.  Russell,  a  former  lieutenant  colonel  and nephew
of   Georgia   Sen.   Richard  B.   Russell   took   issue  with
Capen.   Cleland  and  Russell,  both  Silver  Star  winners,
said  they  believe  a  negotiated  withdrawal  of  U.S.  land
forces  from  Vietnam  in  return  for  a  cease-fire  and  a
swapping  of  war  prisoners  is  "the  best  path  our country
could   follow  at  this  time."   They  said  they  will  intro-
duce  a  resolution  when  the  legislature   convenes   next
month.   AF  Maj  Fred  Thompson,  one  of  the  nine  re-
leased  POWs,  agreed  with  Cleland  and  Russell.
—Atlanta Constitution,  Dec. 19   (abridged).
from   a  shutdown.   The  final  report,   though   it  exposes  Mc-
Namara's   conceit  and  deceit,  and  shows  Gilpatric's   efforts   to
hide  his  close  relationship  with  General   Dynamics,  does  not
go  far  enough.   It  casts  a  veil  over  the  politics  of  the  contract
and  is  less  than  forthright   in  dealing  with  General  Dynamics
itself.  This holding  company  seems  to  play  no  role  other  than
as  a  conduit  for  political  influence;  some  of  its  manufacturing
subsidiaries  have  a good, some  like  Convair  a bad, record.   For
a  fuller  story,  fully  supported  by  the  report  as  far  as  it  goes,
see my two-part  analysis in the  New  York  Review  Jan. 2,  1969.
The  main  analysis  may  be  found  in  my  Polemics  and  Prophe-
cies  to  be  published  Feb.  1  by  Random  House.
GRIM  ITEM  FOR  A  CERTAIN  FOOTBALL  FAN  IN  THE  WHITE
HOUSE:  "Even  the  captain  of  the  Army  football  team,"  said
a  survey  of  the  new  spirit  sweeping   college  athletes   on  the
sports  page of  the  New   York   Times  Dec.  13,  "shocked West
Point  and  the  Pentagon  by  revealing  that  'if  you  polled   the
football   team   and   asked   everybody   about   Vietnam,   I  think
the feeling  would  be overwhelmingly  in favor  of getting out.' "
Like  A  Story Out of  Dreiser:  American  Capitalism  In Its  Dirtiest  Underwear
This   is   a   case   study   of   corporate   disaster   stemming
from  the  almost  unbelievable  history   of   one  of   the   Penn
Central's   important  non-railroad  related   subsidiaries—Ex-
ecutive   Jet   Aviation   (EJA)—and  how  Penn   Central  lost
almost  all  of   its   $21  million  investment.    The  large   non-
railroad  investments   were  a  major  factor   in  the   collapse
of  the  Penn  Central.   The  study  raises  most  serious  ques-
tions  about  the  commercial banking  industry  (which)  made
massive  amounts  of  credit  available  to  EJA  for  what  ap-
peared  to  be  highly  questionable—if  not  at  times  illegal—
activities.   The staff  data suggests  strongly  that  the  loan de-
cisions  were  made  exclusively  because  the  banks  and  EJA
had  mutual  friends  at  Penn  Central.
There  was  an  astonishing  lack  of  fiduciary  concern.   The
decisions   were   made  almost   exclusively   by   David   Bevan,
chairman  of  the  Pennsylvania   RR  and  Finance   Committee
and  his   protege,   Wm.  Gerstnecker,  PRR  Treasurer.    They
did  not  request   Board  approval  for   the   EJA   investment.
The  investment  was  initiated   with  full   realization  that   a
railroad's  control  of  an  air  carrier  without  CAB  approval
was  in  direct  violation  of  the  law.   Some  $6  million  in  un-
secured  PRR  investments  were  made  in  EJA  after  the  CAB
order  to  the  railroad  to divest  itself.
The  disastrous  PRR  nonrailroad  investment  program  was
mapped  to  a  large  extent  by  Chas.  J.  Hodge,  a  senior  mem-
ber  of  the  investment  firm  of  F.  I.  du  Pont-Glore   Forgan.
EJA   entered   into   a   series   of   secret,   illegal   and   extra-
ordinarily  complex  transactions.    Four  million  dollars—part
of  $10 million in  European  bank loans  to  the  PRR  to  finance
the   reconditioning   of   railroad   cars—was   seized   from   a
Liechtenstein   trust  by  one  of   the  men  involved  in   EJA's
program.   Bevan  did  not  disclose  the  loss  to  the' chairman
of  the  PRR  Board  until  9  months  after.
Bevan  was  aware  of   repeated   recommendations   in  1967
for  removal  of  O. F.  Lassiter  [Brig.  Gen.  USAF  ret.]  chief
executive   of  EJA.   Hodge  himself  made  such  a  recommen-
dation  in  1968.  Nor  did  Bevan  seek  Lassiter's  removal  even
after  the  discovery  that  Lassiter  had transferred  EJA  funds
to  his  own  company,  Lassiter  Aircraft.   Bevan  and  Hodge
were  both  aware  that  Lassiter  had  squandered  millions  of
dollars  of  EJA  assets.   In  1968  J.  H.  Ricciardi,  a  former
EJA   employee,  filed  suit  to  recover   salary   and  expenses.
(He)  testified  under  oath  that  at  Lassiter's  request  he had
provided  female   companions   for  Bevan  and  Hodge   to  re-
lieve  the  pressure  they  were  exerting  on  Lassiter.  The  suit
was  settled  out  of   court  in   1969  on  payment   of   $13,000.
Lassiter,   Bevan   and   Hodge   have   denied   the   allegations.
Where  the  money  came  from  remains  unanswered.
—Abridged  from  Chairman  Patman's  letter  transmitting
to  the House  Banking  and  Currency  Committee  Dee. 21 Part
II  of  a  staff   study  into  the  Penn  Central  failure,  the  biggest
bankruptcy  in U£.  history.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  January  11,1971
Secrecy  Makes  It  Hard  To  Nip  New  Missile  Crises  In  The  Bud
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Agency)  supposed to  coordinate  all  Pentagon  gumshoe  work.
The   total  cost  of   military   intelligence   in  1970, the   report
reveals,  was $2.9  billion,  no  bagatelle  even  in  the  Pentagon.
The  secret  services  are  big  enough  to  run  their  own  secret
wars.   "Everyone  recognizes,"   the  report  says,  "that  national
security  imposes  limits  on  the  disclosure of  information.  But
the  multimillion  dollar  support  of  a   30,000   man   army  can
in  no  way be considered an  intelligence operation."   The  refer-
ence  is  to  the  CIA  in  Laos.   There  may  be  some  benefits  in
secrecy.   Considering  the  monumental  misjudgments  of U.S.
intelligence  in  the  past  two  decades  in  Korea,  in  Cuba,  and
in  Vietnam, it's just  as  well  that  intelligence  reports  are  con-
fined  to  a  select  circle.   The   Symington  report   has  a  lovely
quotation  from  Walter  Lippmann.  He  once  wrote  of  the  in-
formation  funnelled  into  our  policy  makers  that  the  men  re-
porting  to  them  realize  "that  it  is  safer  to  be  wrong  before
it   has  become   fashionable  to   be  right."    Every  bureaucracy
likes  its  intelligence  apparatus  to  confirm   its   preconceptions.
But couldn't  this  reassuring yesmanship be  done  more  cheaply ?
A David-and-Goliath  Achievement
The  passion  for  secrecy,  and  its  use  to  hide   misjudgments
from   those  who  must  ultimately  foot  the  bill   in   lives  and
money,  was  the  main  obstacle  in  this  two-year  investigation.
It  ever  there  was  a  David-and-Goliath  operation,  this  was  it.
A  newspaperman,  Walter   Pincus,  and  a  lawyer,  Roland  A.
Paul,  were  the  two-man  staff  of  this  special  subcommittee  of
Senate  Foreign  Relations  under  Senator  Symington.   Their  job
was to survey commitments to more than 43 nations  represented
by   375  major,   and   3,000   minor,  U.S. bases  abroad.    They
visited  23  countries  and  held  37  days  of  hearings.   The  pub-
lished  record  fills  over  2,500  heavily  censored  but  nevertheless
revealing  pages.   The  hearings  were  made  possible  by Syming-
ton's  conversion  in  recent  years  from  a  pillar  of  the  military
establishment  to  one  of  its  severest  critics.   The   report   de-
serves wider  reading  and  closer  study than  it  is  likely  to get.
The  subcommittee's  greatest   difficulty  was  in  dealing  with
the  subject  of  nuclear  weapons.   We   seem  to  have   scattered
these  all  around  the  globe.    Some  day  rebels  against  govern-
ments  we  support  may  "kidnap"  and  use  some  of  them   for
a  kind  of   blackmail.    A  leak  during  'the  hearings  disclosed
that  our  military  feared   something  like  this  in  Greece.    The
danger  to  these  sacred  monsters  we  have  planted  around  the
What  The  Back-To-Bombing  Advisers  Forget
President  Nixon  has  decided  to  use  the  threat  of  es-
calation  in  the  air  to  prevent  the  enemy  from   building
up  its  capacity  to  launch  offensives  in  South   Vietnam.
... It  may sound  impressive to  speak  of  bombing   Hanoi,
mining  Haiphong  harbor  and  destroying  the  rail  lines
to  China.   Yet  it  is  worth  recalling  that  during  the  en-
tire  course  of   the   French   Indochina  war, the   French
actually   controlled   Hanoi,   Haiphong    harbor,   and   the
China  rail  lines—and  still  the  enemy  was  able  to con-
duct  a  successful   guerrilla  war  throughout   Indochina.
It  is   hard   to  conceive  how  bombing  of  these  targets
will  succeed  where  French  control  of  them  failed.
—From,  Goodell's  last  speech  in  the  Senate Dec. 22.
globe   may  yet   serve   as  additional   rationale   for   helping   a
Chiang,  a  Papadapolous  or  a  Franco  to  put  down  a  rebellion
against  the  lack  of  freedom  in  so  many  corners  of  our  "free
world."   At  one  point  "the Executive  Branch  claimed  that  this
subject  is  of  such  high  classification  that  it  could  not  be  dis-
cussed  before  this  Foreign  Relations  subcommittee under  any
circumstances."    Subsequently   it   relented   and   agreed   to   a
single-day  world-wide  briefing  of  the  full  Senate  Foreign  Re-
lations  committee  but  only  on  condition  that  there  be  but  one
transcript,  and  this  to  be  held  by the  State  Department!   This
is  a  long  way  from  the  Constitution,  which  begins  to  seem  a
quaint  relic.
The  bureaucracy,  with  its  gift   for   reassuring  euphemism,
sold  the  country  long  ago  on  "containment."    It  sounded  neat
and  sanitary.   No  one  ever  put  the  question,   "Shall  we  sow
instant  death  around  the  borders  of  the  Soviet  bloc  and  China
by  ringing  them  with  nuclear  devices  and  delivery  systems?"
This  is  what  has  been  going  on  since  the  50s. The   report
reminds  us  that  the  U.S. went  to  the  brink  of  nuclear  war
in  1962  "when  faced with  the  possibility  that  the  Soviet  Union
was  putting   missiles   in  a  country  90  miles  from  the U.S."
We  must  assume  that  "the  Soviets,  as they  view  our  placement
of   tactical  nuclear  weapons  in  countries   far   closer   to   their
borders  than  Cuba  is  to  ours,  will  seek  to  break  out  of  the
nuclear  ring  that  has  been  drawn  around  them."   New  missile
crises  may  not  be  resolved  as  peacefully  as  in  1962. How  can
Congress   and   the   country   take  preventive   measures   when
censorship  blacks out  so  much  of  what  we  need  to  know ?  The
full  price  of  empire  has  yet  to  fall  due.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample   Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed   Envelope
FOR  STONE'S  NEW  BOOK
For  the  enclosed special pre-publication  price  of  $8.95
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics  and  Prophecies:
1967-70  (Random House).  Regularly $10.
(To)   Name                      .......... .........................................
Street   ............
Pirv
Indicate
Please  renew
Name  ...............
Street   ............
City  .................
I
4420  29th
..................  Zip................
if   gift   announcement
(or  enter)  a  sub  for
Zip
State....................
wished   D
the   enclosed   $5:
State....................
.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
           l
'
ll/n
St.  N. W.,  Washington, D.C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420   29th  St., N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bl-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C. Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  20th  St..  N.W..  Washington. D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly   published  and  edited  by  1.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  »o  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada;
SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED