I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971nov01.pdf

============================================================

Mansfield   on  Our  Crimes  in  Cambodia,  P.  2
Law  and  Order  Note
It  took  the  Federal  government  only  a  matter  of  hours  to  form  a  Federal  Grand  Jury  to  investigate  the  New   York
Times  for  its  release  of  the  Pentagon  papers  but  somehow  over a  year  after  four  young Americans were killed protesting
the  invasion  of  Cambodia  we  can't  get   an  investigation by  a  similar  jury.
—Senator  McGovern   commenting   Oct.  15  on  a  petition  signed  by  10,380  Kent  State  students   asking  President   Nixon
to  override  Attorney   General  Mitchell   and  order  a  grand  jury   investigation  of   the  Kent  State   massacre.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX,  No.  18
NOVEMBER  1,  1971
        10
'
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
The  Fastest  Track  To  A  Repressive Era
You  cannot  stem  a  declining  respect  for  law  by  degrading
the   one   legal   institution   in   our   society   which   is   still   re-
spected.   That   is  what  Richard  Nixon  is  doing   to  the  Su-
preme  Court.  The   last  hope  of  holding  our  society  together
may   well   depend   on   maintaining   the    faith,    which   still
survives  even  among  the  most  disaffected,   that  in  our  high-
est  court  there  is  still  equal  justice  under  law.   Destroy  that
confidence,  and  the  cement  of  social  cohesion  crumbles.   For
law  and  order  in  the  long  run   depend  on  a  general  agree-
ment  that  authority  is  both  legitimate  and  just.   Nixon,   who
fought   his   election  campaign   largely  on   the   issue   of   law
and  order,  is  himself  undermining  their  foundations  by  the
men  and   the  methods  of  his   Supreme  Court   appointments.
Any  Joe  Blow  From Kokomo
Call   the   roll   of   Haynsworth,   Carswell,   Poff    and   Byrd
and   you  have  the   distinct   impression   that   Nixon   is   shop-
ping  around   for  racial  bigots.    Add   the   names  of   Herschel
H.  Friday  (a  buddy  of  Mitchell's  in  municipal   bond   law)
and  Judge  Mildred   L.  Lillie,  and   you  get  the   feeling   that
he's   looking   for   Supreme   Court   Justices   so   mediocre,   and
in   Judge   Lillie's   case   so   incompetent,   that   they   can   be
trusted  to  rubber-stamp  any  measures  Nixon   cooks  up,  how-
ever  contrary  to  traditional  constitutional   standards.   In   his
campaign   for  the  Presidency  Nixon   spoke   of   Brandeis   and
Frankfurter   as  his  models  of  what  a  Supreme   Court   Justice
should   be.   But  it  is  clear  that  if  they  were  alive  he'd   pre-
fer   any  Joe  Blow   from   Kokomo.   His  first  choices   have   all
been   low   in   quality.    Of   the   six   names   he   sent   to   the
American   Bar   Association,   only   one   (Byrd,   and   only   be-
cause  he  is  a  Senator)   had  even  made  Who's  Who,   though
it   is  full   of   nonentities.    Thirteen   Catholic   University   law
professors   protested   to  the  ABA  that  the  Nixon  six   "con-
tains   few   if   any  persons   who   should   be   considered    seri-
ously"  for  the  Supreme  Court.   Dean  Sacks  and  34  members
of  the  Harvard  Law  faculty  declared   the  Nixon  list   "plainly
unqualified  persons."   There  are  few  Presidents  who  haven't
occasionally  put  a  dud  on  the  Court.   Nixon  is  the  first  who
seems  to  seek  them  out—like  a  prosecutor   trying  to  pick  a
hanging   jury.
To   put   forward    the   names   of    PofF   and   Byrd   in   the
wake  of   the   Attica   slayings   was   a   provocation.    It    must
have  left   a  bitter   taste  in   the   mouth   of   every   black   and
brown   American.    Both   men  have   a  record   of   being  anti-
Next  Order  Of  Business  After  The  UN  Vote
The   United  Nations  vote   to   admit   Peking  was   a
major  defeat  but   is   not   the   end  of   the   most  costly
counter-revolutionary  crusade  of   all  time.   It   may  be
years  before  we  know  the  full  cost  in  lives  and  money
of  our  unwillingness to  recognize realities in  China.  We
have  spent  billions  to  prop  up  a  satellite Nationalist
regime  so  corrupt,  that  it  could  neither  hold  the  main-
land  against  more  poorly  equipped  Communist  armies
nor  win  popular   support  even  on  a  Taiwan  rendered
prosperous  by  huge  infusions  of   U.S.  aid.   Our  inter-
vention  in  the  Chinese civil  war  led  step  by  step  to our
intervention   in   other   Asian   civil   wars   on   China's
borders,  first  in  Korea  and  then  and  still  in  Vietnam,
Laos  and  Cambodia.  Until  we  withdraw  from Indochina,
negotiate  a  firm  peace  instead  of  the  precarious truce
in   Korea,  and  facilitate  a  private  accommodation be-
tween   Peking   and  Taipeh,   we   are   at   the   mercy  of
provocation  and  intransigent  satellites.   So  long  as  we
have   not-  liquidated  the   remnants  of   the   folly  which
led  us  into  the  effort  to  become  the  paramount power
in  East  Asia,  we  remain in  a  trap.
black,   anti-welfare   and   anti-poor.   Poff   had   practiced   law
very   little   before   his   election   to   Congress   and   Byrd   has
never  practiced  at  all.  Poff   is  a  shade  below  Haynsworth   and
Byrd  is  on  a  par  with   Carswell.   Nixon  really  reveals  him-
self   in  these  first  choices,  as  he   did   when   he—the   perfect
square—used   a   four   letter   word   about   the   ABA   after   it
turned   thumbs   down   on  his   next   two   choices,   Friday   and
Judge  Lillie.   Billy  Graham's  foremost  acolyte  so  shocked  his
normally  discreet  White   House   staff   that   the   obscenity   re-
verberated  thrdugh  Washington  in  24 hours.   All  this  should
not  be  brushed   under   the   rug   as  if   accidental   aberrations.
They  make  up  the  self-portrait  of  a  man  passionately   intent
on  dragging  down  the   level  of  our  highest  court.
It   is  as  if  Nixon   will   name   competent   lawyers   only  as
a  last  resort—Blackmun  after  Haynsworth  and  Carswell,  and
now   Lewis  Powell   and  William  Rehnquist.    It   is  as  if   he
fears   that   men   who   are   well-trained    lawyers   cannot    be
trusted    once   elevated   to   the   Court.    After   all   Harlan,   a
conservative,  gave  the  death   blow  to  the   Smith  Act  though
he  had  upheld   it  on  the  Court   of  Appeals.   But  it  would
be  a  mistake  to  throw  our   hats   in  the   air   because   at  the
last   minute   Nixon  picked   two  nominees  who   are   at   least
(Continued   On  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  1, 1971
(Continued  From  Page  One)
constitutionally  literate.
Nixon   never  runs  out  of   tricks.    In   his  TV   address  an-
nouncing  the  appointments,  he  said  the  two  men  were con-
servatives   "but  only   in   a   judicial,   not   a   political   sense,"
as   if   innocently   unaware   that   Rehnquist   is   a   Goldwater
Republican    and    Powell    a    Byrd   Democrat!   Powell    and
Rehnquist   are   only   more   polished  specimens   of   the   type
Nixon   has   been   seeking.    Their   greater   legal   ability   may
make  them  more  effective   instruments  of  Nixon's  desire   to
undo  the  work  of  the  Warren court.
No Hill-Billy  Bigot But   ...
Powell  is  no  hill-billy  bigot  like  Byrd;  white   supremacy
has    been    maintained    in    Virginia    by    more   gentlemanly
methods.   But  Powell  will  take  to   the  high  bench   all   the
prejudices  of   the  upper  class  and   the   standard   model  cor-
poration   lawyer.   These  are  displayed   in   his   article  in   the
October  issue  of  the  FBI   Law  Enforcement   Bulletin,  "Civil
Liberties   Repression:   Fact   or   Fiction?"   He   writes   of   "a
mindless  campaign   against  the   FBI,"   and   of   "the   outcry
against  wire-tapping" as  "a  tempest  in  a  teapot."    He   sees
(after   the   Pentagon   Papers!)   "no   prior   restraint   of   any
publication,  except  possibly  in   flagrant   breaches  of  national
security."   He  declares  there  is  "no   significant  threat  to  in-
dividual   freedom   in  this  country  by  law  enforcement"   and
dismisses  "the  plot"   against   Black  Panthers,  the   indictment
of   the   Berrigans,   the   forthcoming   trial   of   Angela  Davis,
and  the  mass  arrests  during  the  Mayday  riots"  as  "examples
ritualistically   cited."   (Will   he   disqualify   himself   in  these
cases  if   on  the  high  bench?)    He   calls  the   charge   of   re-
pression   an   attempt   "to   brainwash   our   youth"  by   Leftist
elements  working  in  close  collaboration "with  foreign  Com-
munist   enemies."   This   is   the   cold   war   mentality  Nixon
himself   is  making  obsolete.
Powell's  record,  as  so  far   disclosed,  shows   not   a  single
act   of   gallant  nonconformity—of   some  witch  hunt  victim
defended,  or  a  poor  black  taken  on  as  client  in  sheer  pas-
sion   for   justice.   As   befits   "Hunton   and   Gruntin',"   Rich-
mond's  foremost   law  firm,  his  clients  and   his directorships
are  in  the  top  board  rooms of  the  nation,  from  Ethyl  Corp.
to  Commonwealth  Natural  Gas.   He  was  on  the  "blue  rib-
bon"   committee   appointed   by   Nixon   in    1969   to   study
Pentagon  procurement  which  Proxmire  attacked   as  a   sham
Institutionalized  Insanity  Dept.
Omaha—The   FB-111   bomber,   a   descendant   of   the
politically  controversial   and  trouble-plagued  TFX,  has
begun  to  take  over  some  of  the  burden  of  the  United
States   nuclear  deterrent,  the   Strategic   Air  Command
disclosed  today.   At  least  12  of  the  swing-wing  planes
are  now  on  constant  ground  alert  at  SAC  bases  in  the
Northeast.    Each   of   the   supersonic   planes   is   armed
with  six  nuclear  bombs  with  a  total  yield  of  about  five
megatons,   equal  to  the  explosive   force  of  five  million
tons  of  TNT.   Four  of  the  weapons  are  nestled  in  bomb
bays   and  one  is   mounted  on   an  external   rack  under
each  wing.   The  bombers  are  poised   on  alert  pads  at
Pease   Air   Force   Base   at,  Portsmouth,   N.H.,   and  at
Plattsburgh   Air   Force   Base   in   Northern   New   York.
The  command  acknowledged  today  that  a  portion  of
the   FB-111   force   had  been   written  into   the   nation's
nuclear   war   plan,   an   integrated   operations   plan   for
all  strategic  forces  of  the  United  States  and  the  North
Atlantic  Treaty  Organization.  But  a  spokesman  at  SAC
headquarters  here  said  he  could  not  disclose   the  exact
number  of  FB-111  that  had  been  declared   operational.
—Reuters,  New   York   Times,  Oct.  6.
because  so  many  of  the  members,  Powell  among  them,  had
major   defense   contractors  as  connections   or   clients.   When
installed   as  President   of   the   American   Bar  Association   in
the   racially   rumultous   year   of   1964,   he   thought  that   the
nation's   basic  need  was   "a   far   deeper   concern   for  ethical
and  moral  values."  This  had  all  the  smugness  of  the  view
from  the  well-padded  pew.
There   is,   I   believe   and   hope,   a   point   beyond   which
Powell,  as  a  conscientious  and  able  lawyer,  will  not   let  his
preconceptions   sweep   away   constitutional   guarantees.    He
is   after    all   exactly   the   same   type   of   conventional   legal
eminence  which  manned   the   ABA  committee  that   has  just
turned  thumbs  down  on  Judge  Lillie  and  Herschel  Friday.
But  I  do  not  have  any  such  hope  in  the  case  of  Rehnquist.
After  a  year  as  law  clerk  with  Mr.   Justice  Jackson  in  1953,
he  first  came  to  public  attention  when  U.S. News  &  World
Report   (December  1957)  published  an  interview  in  which
he  pictured  the  Justices  of  the  Supreme  Court  as  cat's-paws of
Leftist   law  clerks.   This  pandered  to  the  paranoid  view  of
the  Warren court.   He  entered  the  Justice  Department  under
Nixon   as   a   protege  of   Deputy   Attorney   General   Klein-
dienst,   another  Goldwater   Republican  from   Phoenix,   who
marked   his   own   debut  in   office   by  telling  an   interviewer
What  U.S.  Intervention  and  Almost  A  Billion In  Aid  Has  Done  to  Poor Cambodia
A  year  and  a  half  has  elapsed  since  the  military  over-
throw  of   Prince   Sihanouk  and  the   subsequent    U.S.   incur-
sion  into  Cambodia.   At  the  time,  these  events  were  hailed
as  quickening  the  end  of  the  war  in  Vietnam.   A  year  and
a  half  later,  the  war  still  goes  on  and  this  obscure   episode
of  the  long  tragedy   of  Indochina  is  all  but  forgotten.
It  is  not   forgotten,   however,   by   the   families   of   more
than  350  Americans  who  died  in  the   Cambodian   invasion.
Nor  is  it   forgotten   by  the   hundreds   of   other   Americans
who  were  wounded  in  that  brief  campaign.   Nor  is  it   for-
gotten,   I  should   think,  in  Cambodian  villages  which   have
since   been   bombed   or   burned,   undoubtedly   in   order   "to
save  them."
In   retrospect,   what   was   really   achieved   by   the   Cam-
bodian  gambit?    Enemy  Vietnamese  forces—even  the  "high
command"—were  supposed  to  have  been  killed  or  captured
in  their  "sanctuary"  along  the  Vietnamese-Cambodian  bor-
der  by  this  essay.   Well,   to  the  extent  that  enemy  forces
were   there   in   the   first   place,   they   withdrew   from   the
border  and  since   then,   about   all  of  Cambodia  has  become
the   enemy   "sanctuary."   Cambodia   has  also   emerged   as
another  battlefield  of  the  Indochina  war  over  which  Amer-
icans   are   fighting   and  dying.    The  indications   are,   more-
over,   that   Cambodians   are   forming   under   the   banner  of
Prince   Sihanouk   and,  together  with   their   Vietnamese   al-
lies,   have   already   taken   control   of   most   of   the   country-
side.
Before   the   government    of   Sihanouk   was    overthrown,
nothing—zero—in  the  way  of   U.S.  aid  was  going  to  Cam-
bodia.    Their   country   was   an  oasis   of   order   in  war-torn
Indochina.   In  one  and  a  half  years  of  coup  gbvernment  in
Pnom   Penh,   the   picture   has   been   completely   reversed.
Cambodia  is  being   reduced  to  chaos   and  devastation   even
as  it  is  now  well  on  its   way  to  receiving   its  first  billion
dollars  in  direct  or  indirect  support  from  the  United  States.
—Mansfield   in  the  Senate  Oct.  IS   (abr.).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  1, 1971
(Elizabeth  Drew   in  the  Atlantic  Monthly,   May  1969),   "If
people  demonstrate  in  a  manner  that  interferes  with   others,
they  should   be  rounded   up  and   put  in  a  detention   camp."
Rehnquist   soon   matched   this   with   a   similar   unwary   but
revealing   statement,   "law   and   order   will   be   preserved   at
whatever    cost   to   individual   liberties   and   rights."     These
were  the  principles  applied   to  the  May  Day   demonstrators,
when  newsmen,   doctors   and   nurses   were   swept   up    along
with   ordinary   passersby,    treated    with   indiscriminate  bru-
tality,   and   held   incommunicado   for   hours   in   a   makeshift
stadium,  detention  camp   style.   Rehnquist  later  aroused   Sen-
ator  Kennedy's   anger   by  describing   this   blandly  as   "modi-
fied  martial  law,"   a  phrase   which  could   serve  to  cover  any
kind   of  kind  of  high-handed   police   action.
A  Fantastic   Talent  Indeed
Nixon   in   his   TV   address   called   Rehnquist    "fantastic",
"one   of  the  finest  legal  minds  in  the  whole  nation."   He  is
indeed.    It  took   a  fine  legal  mind  to  provide   the   kind   of
skilled   draftsmanship  and   agile   sophistry  with  -which  Rehn-
quest   as  head   of   the   Justice   Department's    Office   of   Legal
Counsel  has  been   able  to  dress  up  as  constitutional   anything
this    Administration    wanted    to   do.    Neither   Nixon    nor
Mitchell   have   the   skill  Rehnquist   has  shown   in   defending
wiretapping   without   court  order,   widespread   surveillance   of
peaceful    demonstrations    by   Army   intelligence    and    other
snooper    agencies,   and   the   injunction   obtained   against    the
New   York    Times   in   the   Pentagon    Papers,   the  first  prior
restraint   in   American   history.    No   pleading,   however   con-
trary  to  fact,  is  too   difficult   for  his  talents.    They   provoked
Senator    Bayh   to   anger   when   Rehnquist    defended    Hayns-
worth's   ethics   and   Carswell's   judicial   capacity,   as   he   later
did  those  of  Judge  Lillie.   He  drafted  the  Presidential   order
to   revive   the   Subversive   Activities   Control   Board   and  his
draftsmanship   put   a  gloss  on  the  D.C.   crime  bill   with   its
"no   knock"   entry   and   preventive   detention   provisions.    If
Nixon  wants  a  Court  to  rewrite  the  Constitution,    Rehnquist
is  preeminently  the  man  for  the  job.
Nixon's   own   feeble   capacity   as   a   constitutional   lawyer
was  on  display  in  his  TV  address  on  the  Powell  and  Rehn-
quist  nominations.    A  first  year  student   at  law  school   would
blush    at   such   shallow    and   insipid    presentation    of   what
the  court   does  in  interpreting   the  Constitution.   His   vulgar
description  of  the  Court  as  "the   fastest  track"   in  town  was
The  Truth  About  Corporate  Profits
In   the   last   several   years,   giant   steps   have  been
taken   to   reduce  corporate   taxation.   Since   1967   the
percentage  of  corporate  tax   to  total   tax   receipts  has
fallen  from  36  to  25  percent.   This  [new  tax]   bill  will
further   reduce  corporate  contributions   to  the  cost   of
government.   Some  corporate-owned  economists  argue
that  the  profitability  of  American  corporations  is  lag-
ging.   For  some  enterprises  this  is  true;  but  for  most
it   is   a  false   premise.   Recent   tax   law   changes  have
permitted   more   and   more   corporate  earnings   to   be
washed   out   by  depreciation,   tax   credits,   and  a  wide
variety  of   accounting  systems   which  confuse   the   tax
collector  and  the  public  as  well.
The  investor  measures  corporate values  by  cash  flow
and  tax-free  income  potential.   The  annual corporation
financial  report  makes  public  the  set-aside  for  income
taxes.   This  misleading  figure  seldom  bears  any  rela-
tionship  to  the  actual  Treasury  payment.   One  of  the
urgent   needs   is   a   standardized  truthful   system   of
accounting.  A  "truth in annual statements"  law  is  most
urgently  needed.
—Vanik   (D-Ohio)   in  the  House,  Oct.  5  (abr.).
matched   by   the   bad   taste   with   which    Nixon     managed
several   times   to  pat   himself   on   the   back   as  a   lawyer   and
Supreme  Court  pleader;  he  takes  time  out  for  his  own  com-
mercials.   The  fallacies  implicit  in  the  Nixon  address  would
make  a  good  beginning  for   an   introductory  course   in   con-
stitutional   law.   Nixon  said  we  need  Judges   who  will   just
strictly   apply   the   Constitution   and   not   "twist   or  bend"   it
to   read   their   own  views   into   the   law.    No   President   has
read  the  Constitution  less  strictly.   From  the  Cambodian   in-
vasion  to  the  price-wage   freeze,   Nixon  himself   has   twisted
and   bent  the  Constitution   into   a  shape   the   Framers   would
have  found  unrecognizable.    His  attack  on  the  Warren  Court
springs    from   its   consistently    strict    interpretation    of    the
First   amendment   in   protecting    civil  liberties   and   of    the
Fourth,  Fifth  and Eighth  amendments  in  protecting  the  rights
of  the  accused  against  lawless  conduct  by  the  police.   Nixon
wants  judges  who  will  read  the  ancient  safeguards  as  loosely
as  possible.
Nothing   runs   more   contrary   to   the   philosophy    of   the
Framers  than  Nixon's  effort  to  set  up  a  dichotomy   "between
the   rights   of   society  and   the   rights   of   defendants   accused
of  crimes  against   society."    The   Constitution   is  based   upon
(Continued   On  Page   Four)
A  Rare  Challenge to  the  Economic Idiocy
The  President   requested  repeal  of   the  auto  excise   tax
as   a   means   to  stimulate   production   and  employment   in
the  automobile  and  related  industries.    Repeal  of   the   tax
may  provide  this  stimulus  to  some  extent.  Unfortunately,
it  would  have  the  defect  of  concentrating  benefits   on  one
industry   and  one   type   of   purchase—new   cars.    Also,   it
would  encourage   the  production  of  a  commodity  which   is
not  particularly high  on  our  list  of  national  priorities.   The
estimated   cost   of  the   proposal   was   $2.2  billion  for   fiscal
1972   alone.    Because   the   Committee  has   extended  repeal
of  the  tax   to  include  purchases   of  small  trucks,   the  cost
has  risen  to  more  than  $2.5  billion  for  fiscal  1972.
There  are   now  10  million   motor  vehicles   on  our  roads
and  highways.   Particularly  in  our  urban  areas  these  cars
and  other  vehicles  present  us  with  some  significant  social
costs,  including  pollution,  noise,  traffic  congestion,  and  land
use  for  highways.   In  my  own  case,  more  cars  on  the  road
has  meant  an  increase   in  my  commuting  time  into  Wash-
Of  Encouraging The  Sale  of  More  Cars
ington   from   30  to   50  minutes,  even  though  considerable
Federal   funds  were  spent  to  improve  the  roads  I  drive  on.
We  are  making  some  progress   in  solving  the  problems
caused   by  an  overabundance  of   cars.   However,  there   are
good  indications  that  we  should   be  moving  toward  devel-
opment   of   more   adequate   public  transportation   facilities
rather  than  buying  more  cars.   Finally,  repeal  of  the  auto
excise   tax   would   discriminate   against   those   who   don't
need  a  new  car  or  can't  afford  one.   Some'kind  of  general
tax   reduction  for   individuals   or   tax   credit   for  consumer
purchases   would  seem   much   more  appropriate.   Just   as
we  not  long  ago  used  a  ten  percent  surtax  to  reduce  con-
sumer  buying  power  and  combat  inflation,   we  might  now
consider  the  use  of  a  similar  temporary  tax   reduction  to
increase  disposable   income.
—Gibbons,   (D-Fla.)   dissenting   from    the   House    Ways
and  Means  report   on  the  tax   bill,  Sept.  29.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  1, 1971
Toward  A  Second  Reconstruction  On  The  Supreme  Court
(Continued    From   Page   Three)
the  premise  that  society  has  a  profound   stake  in  protecting
the  individual  and  his  rights  against  the  government  and  its
"peace  forces."   Totalitarian  society,  whether  Fascist  or  Com-
munist,   in   placing   the   supposed   "rights   of   society"   fore-
most,   ends   by  putting   the   individual  at   the   mercy  of   the
police   and   the   State.    Nothing   so  undermines   respect   for
law  as  a  lawless  police;   this  has   been   a  prime   provocation
in   the   ghetto  riots.    The   rights   of   a   free   society   are   en-
dangered   when   the   rights   of   any  individual  are   trampled.
Nixon   would   have   us  believe   the   Bill   of   Rights   a   cloak
for   subversives   and   criminals.   It   is  the   bedrock   of  every-
one's  freedom  and  security.
The  Meaning  of  Miranda
The   real   issue  and   the   real   danger   may  be   seen   if   we
focus   on   the  Miranda  decision  in   1966,  the   bete   noire  of
the   right-wingers,   a   target   of   Powell's   hard-line    dissent
•on  the  Presidential  Crime  Commission  in  1967  and  of  Rehn-
quist  in  a  recent  speech.   To  see  Miranda   in  perspective  one
must  begin  by  noting  that  the   South  managed* to  win  back
in  the  Supreme  Court   after   the  Civil  War   much  of  what  it
had   lost   on   the   battlefield.    Judges   with   white  supremacy
preconceptions   turned  the  Fourteenth  amendment  into  a  bul-
wark   of   the   great   corporations    rather   than   of   the   freed
black  man.  In  recent  years  the  Supreme  Court,   largely  under
the   inspiration  of   Mr.   Justice   Black,   began   to   restore   the
Fourteenth  amendment's  original  purpose  by  making  the  Bill
of   Rights   applicable   to   the   States   as  well   as  the    Federal
government.    Warren's   decision    in   Miranda    brought    that
development   to  a  climax,  and   it  did   so  in   the   form   of   a
decision  which  closed  the  door  on  "third  degree"  tactics  by
police  in   the  States.    The  fight  against   Miranda   is  really  a
struggle   for   a   second    Reconstruction,    and   to   allow    the
States  to  obtain  confessions   by  "third  degree"  methods.    As
Warren  noted,  the  FBI  has  long  operated    (as  do  the   best
police   forces   abroad)    on   the   rule   that   when   a   suspect   is
'taken   into   custody   he   must   be   apprised   before   interroga-
In  Memoriam:  J.  David  Stern
Few   people  realize  how  few   newspapers  supported
the  New  Deal.  In  the  30s,  to  back  Franklin D.  Roose-
velt  was  to  lay  oneself  open  to  suspicion  and  to  ad-
vertising  boycotts in  the  business  world. J.  David  Stern
was  one  of  the  handful  who  gave  the  backing  of   his
papers  to  FDR  and  social  reform.   Under  his  direction,
the  New  York  Post  was  the  President's  only supporter
in  New  York  as  his  Record  was  in  Philadelphia.   I  be-
gan   to   work   for   him   as   a   boy  of   15  in   Haddonfield,
N.J.,  when  he   owned   the   Camden   Courier-Post   and  I
worked  for  him  off  and  on  from  1923  to  1939,  at   first
while  I  went  to  High  School  and  college,   later  as  an
editorial  writer  for  the  Record  and  the  New   York  Post.
He   had  a   warmth,   a  courage   and  an   instinctive   re-
action   against  injustice  that   made  me  love   him  and
love   working  for   him.   He   was   no   rich-man-turned-
publisher  but  an  extraordinarily able  all-round  news-
paperman.   The  way  he  ran  his  papers  as  a  force  for
justice   deserves   to   be   studied   by   a   hew  generation
seeking   a   "committed"  journalism   in   place   of    an
anemic  "objectivity" which  only  cloaks  acquiescence  in
conventional  sham.
tion  of  his  right  to  keep  silent  and  his  right  to  have  coun-
sel.  Miranda  extended  that  rule  to  the  States  in  order  to  end
the  practice  of  beating  or  frightening  confessions  out  of   the
ignorant  and  the  helpless  before  their  arraignment.   In   doing
so  Warren  construed   the   Fifth   amendment   strictly  and   ap-
plied  it  to  State  as  well  as  Federal  police.   This  is  the  heart
of  the  ruling  and  the  case.   Its  implications   for  racial  justice
and  individual  rights   are  obvious.    Its   reversal   will   be   the
primary  aim  of  the  Nixon  court.
When  Nixon  in   his   1968   campaign   crassly   accused   the
Supreme   Court   of   "giving   the   green   light"   to   crime,   he
had   decisions   like  Miranda   in   mind.   When   he   now   tells
us,  as  he  did  in  the  concluding   passages   of  his  TV   address,
that   we  must   respect  the  Court   he  then  defamed,   it   is  be-
cause   he   sees   within   his   grasp   a   new   Court   which    will
give  the  green  light  to  repression.
Terribly  Sorry  But  Illness  Made  It  Impossible For  Me  To  Get  Out  The  Oct.  18  Issue
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed Envelope
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed   special   subscribers'   price  of   $8.95
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics  and  Prophecies:
1967-70  (Random House).  Regularly  $10.
(To)   Name
Street   .........
City  ....................................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate   if   gift   announcement  wished   D
Please  renew  D    or enter  Q   a  sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ,
Street
State...
City   ....................................  Zip.........
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N.W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.   Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.,   N.W..   Washington.    D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $6  in  the   U.S.;    $6  In  Canada;
$10 elsewhere.  Air  Mail  rates: $17 to Europe;  $20 to Israel. Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED