I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971feb22.pdf

============================================================

A   "Scenario"  For Nuclear  War  On  China,  See Page  4
Deep,  Dark  Military  Secret
Take  the  howls  about  General  Abrams'  famous  "news  embargo"  for  example  .  .  .  this  supposedly  wicked  embargo
evidently  left  Hanoi  utterly   uncertain   about  where  the  blow  would  come.                       —Joseph  Alsop's  column February  10
On  Saturday,  with  the  operation   under  way  in  the  north  since  the  early  hours,  the  supposedly  secret  troop  movements
were  being  openly  discussed   in  Saigon.   One  American  soldier  in  Saigon  for  the  day  remarked  that  he  had  heard  that  the
South  Vietnamese   were  planning  to  invade  Laos.   "Where  did  you hear that?"  he  was  asked.  "The  mama-san  who  cleans
my  hootch told  me,"  he said.                                                                      —Ralph  Blumenthal from  Saigon, New  York  Times, Feb 5
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX,  NO. 4
FEBRUARY   22,   1971
WASHINGTON,  D.C.
20   CENTS
From  Body  Count  To  Chicken  Count
The   official   U.S.   Air  Force  History   of   the   Korean   War
disclosed  that  as  enemy  ground  fire  improved,  "we  were,"  in
the  words  of   the   Fifth   Air   Force's   director  of   operations,
"trading  B-26s  for  trucks  in  a  most  uneconomical  manner."*
It  is  again  timely to  recall  that  though  we  had  full  command
of  the  air  we  could  not  prevent  the  reoccupation  of   North
Korea  by  Communist Chinese  volunteers  nor  choke  off  their
supply  lines,  just  as the  far  more  intense  bombardment  of  the
Ho  Chi  Minh  trail  has  failed  to  cut  off  the  enemy's  supply
lines  in  Vietnam.  The  balance  sheet  of  planes  lost  as  against
the  cost  of  trucks  destroyed  was pretty  lopsided  in  the  Korean
war,  and  is  far  more  lopsided  now  when  warplanes are  several
times  more  expensive.  We  wonder  how  the  balance  sheet  will
look  some day in the Laotian "incursion" where the  anti-aircraft
fire  is  formidable  and  the  helicopter   losses  heavy.  An  early
triumph  was  the  announcement  that   our  side  had   captured
2,000  chickens  and  ducks.  When  helicopters  cost  from  a  half
million  upward  (the  Cheyenne,  before  it  was  cancelled,  was
figured  at $3 to $4 million)  it  takes a lot  of  poultry to compen-
sate for  one  helicopter.  You  could  buy enough  chickens to  feed
the whole  South Vietnamese army  for  the  price  of  one  "Huey".
Disturbing  Military  Arithmetic
In  the  Laotian  invasion,  we  are  trying  a  hazardous  opera-
tion  on  the  cheap.   General  Westmoreland   and  Ambassador
Bunker  had  been  talking  to  visiting  newspapermen  since  1967
about  an  operation  to  cut  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  trail  (see  among
other   such  reports,   Henry  Brandon  in  the   London   Sunday
Times  Feb.  14).   But  they  estimated  that  they  would  need  at
least  three  U.S.  divisions.  That  would  be  some  60,000  men.
The  South  Vietnamese  army has  mustered  20,000  men  for  the
invasion.  Though  these  are  said  to  be its  very best,  can  20,000
ARVN  do  the  job  for  which  Westmoreland   wanted  at  least
60,000  U.S.  troops?  The  air  support  we're  giving  ARVN  we
would,  of  course,  have  given  our  own  troops,  too.  Under  the
circumstances,  it  is  easy to  understand  why  the  ARVN  troops
are moving  so slowly  into  that  dense  and  tangled  mountainous
jungle  region.  The  murk  of  censorship  is  heavy  but  there  are
breaks  through  which  one  can  see.  The  latest  issue  of  News-
week  (dated  Feb.  22  but  available  Feb.  15)   said  for  example
that   despite  "slow-going"  a  10,000-man   ARVN   force  had
* p.  425,  Robert  P.  Futrell,  The  I7-S.  Air  Force  in  Korea:
1950-53, Duell, Sloan and Pearce,  1967.
Maybe  He's  Only Trying  To Scare  Hanoi—
He Certainly Scares Us
Q.  South   Vietnamese   leaders   in   recent   days   have
indicated  that  perhaps  an  invasion  of  North   Vietnam
might   be  necessary,   coupled   with   invasion   of   Laos.
Will  the  United  States  back  such  an  invasion?
Secretary  Laird:   I don't care to  comment  on possible
future   military   operations,  possible  future   POW   res-
cues;  those  particular  types  of  military  operations.   I
do  not  believe  that  as  Secretary  of  Defense  I  should  be
involved  in  speculation.
—News  Conference,  Phoenix,  Arizona,  Feb.  12.
There couldn't be a coyer way to encourage the  specu-
lation  Laird  says he wants to avoid.
"managed  to  push  all  the  way  to  the  village  of  Tchepone—
the  enemy's  main  supply  base  in  all  of  Southern  Laos."  But
that  same   day's  New   York   Times  quoted  ARVN's  military
spokesman   in   Saigon   as  saying   "The    deepest  point  of   our
advance  into  Laos  is  now  around  20  kilometers  (12  miles)
east of Tchepone."
Twelve  miles  from  Tchepone  is  13  miles  from  the  border,
and   13  miles  seems  to  be  the  limit  of   range  of   the   U.S.
artillery  which  has  been  covering  the  ARVN  advance  from
the  Vietnamese  side. That  same day's  Washington  Post  carried
an   AP   dispatch   saying  that   ARVN   supply  convoys  "were
remaining south  of  the  border,  the  third  successive day without
a  border  crossing."  This  led,  the  AP  reported,  "to  speculation
that  the  North  Vietnamese  had  cut  Highway  9  behind  the
advancing   South   Vietnamese   tanks   and   armored   personnel
carriers."  This  helps  us  to  understand  what  Vice  Premier  Ky
meant  when  he  talked  in  Saigon  about  the  danger  of  a  Dien
Bien  Phu.   Heavily  armed,   road-bound   conventional   troops,
strung out  along  a narrow jungle  road  through  mountain passes
can  be  sitting  ducks  for  a guerrilla  force which  looks  for  weak
spots  where it can achieve tactical  surprise and  local  superiority,
whenever  a  bit  of  bad  weather  hampers  air  support.  These  are
classic  guerrilla  tactics  and   fear  of   them   may  explain  why
two  leading  hawks  on  the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee
were  less  than  exuberant  after  Laird  briefed  the  committee  on
the  Laotian  invasion  Feb.  9.  Both  Senators  Stennis and  Jackson
"warned  [John  W.  Finney  in  the  New  York  Times  Feb.  10]
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  22,1971
Taking On  Long-Range Strategic Liabilities For  Short-Range Tactical Gains...
that  the  South  Vietnamese  troops  might  run  into  what  Senator
Stennis  described  as  'real  trouble'."  Should  that  "real  trouble"
threaten  the  destruction  of  the  ARVN  invaders,  would  Nixon
leave  them  to  their  fate  or—with  or  without  a  special  appeal
to  Congress—send  U.S.  combat  troops  to  the  rescue ?
Another  "Quickie"  Gimmick
The  Laotian  invasion  will,  I  believe,  go  down  in  history  as
another   of  those  quickie  "gimmicks"   by  which  we—and  the
French  before  us—hoped  to  win  an  unwinnable  war.  If  the
ARVN  troops merely  make  a quick  stab  into  the  Ho  Chi Minh
trail,   destroy   some   supplies   and   get   out  while  they  can,   it
will   make   little   difference   even   on   short-term.   If    ARVN
settles  down  to  stay until  the  end  of  the  dry  season,  there  are
a  lot  of  bloody  ambushes  ahead.  We  tend  to  forget  that  just
as  declining  U.S.  casualties  have  muffled   protest   in  our  own
country,  rising  ARVN  casualties  in  the  wake  of  "Vietnamiza-
tion"  have  fueled  a  growing   anti-war  movement   in   Saigon.
The  cost  to  ARVN  of  the  Laotian  adventure  must  add  to  the
• unrest   in   South   Vietnam.   A  pro-peace   force  has   grown   up
between  the  NLF  and  the  Thieu  regime  and  major  reverses  in
Laos  could  bring  it  into  the  streets.  One  contingency  for which
our  military  may  have  plans   is  the  possibility  of   a   popular
uprising  against  the  Thieu   regime.  It  would  be  ironic  if  the
invasion  of  Laos  culminated  in  a  re-invasion  of  South  Vietnam.
In  the   Laotian   invasion,  as  in   the   Cambodian,  Nixon  is
taking  on  long-range   strategic  liabilities  in  return  for  short-
range  tactical  gains.  These  impatient  gambles  can  only  serve
to  widen  and  extend   a  war  against  a  foe  whose  major  asset
lies  precisely  in  his  patience.  The  Vietnamese  national  revolu-
tion  which  began  a  quarter  century  ago  will  not  be  stopped
now  even  if  we  succeed   in  destroying  one  dry  season's   sup-
plies.  We  have  widened  the  war  and  the  enemy  can  widen  it
further.  If  the  enemy  responds  by taking  over  the  rest  of  Laos,
most  of  it  in  enemy  hands  already,  we  face  the  prospect  of
serious  political  and  military  complications.  We  can  no  more
let  Laos  be  lost  than  we  can  afford   to  let  Cambodia   be  lost
if  the  ARVN  troops  fail  in  either  country.  The  fall  of   Cam-
bodia  to  a  neutral  or  hostile  regime  would  make  the  present
blockade   of   Sihanoukville   untenable,   and   turn   the   whole
' country  into  an  enemy  sanctuary.  The  fall  of  Laos  would  bring
A  Laotian  General's  Lament
General  Nouphet said that  he  would  not  attack  Muong
Phalane  even   if   he  could  because   many  civilians  re-
mained  behind  when  he  withdrew  his  troops.   For  the
same  reason, he said, he does not want the  United  States
Air  Force  to  bomb  there.   He  added:  "Every  time  the
Americans  are  called  in  to  bomb,  they  destroy  friends
and  not  enemies."  The  general  said that  as  far  as  Laos
was  concerned the  war  seemed  nearly  lost  because  the
North  Vietnamese  now  control   about  two-thirds  of  the
country  and  there  was  no  longer  any  place  in  which  to
seek  refuge.  He  said  he  was  fighting  against  the  North
Vietnamese   invaders   to   protect   his   native   soil   and
villages  but  not  for  the  Americans.  "If  we  came  under
the  Communists,  we  could  no  longer  be  killed  by   the
Communists,"  General  Nouphet  said.   But,  he  added,  if
all  of  Laos was  conquered by the  Communists, the whole
country  might  be  subjected  to  American bombing.
—Henry  Kamm  from  Laos, New  York  Times,  Feb.  6.
the  war  up  to  the  borders  of  Thailand  where  we  have  major
strategic   bombing   bases   and   the   Communists   have   several
fertile  areas of  economic  and  ethnic unrest  for  guerrilla move-
ments.  The  Thais  may  pay  a  price  for  the  troops   they  have
been   covertly  putting  into  Laos  in  preparation   for   Saigon's
"incursion."
Escalating  to  disengage  has  the  same woozy  logic  as frighten-
ing  the  enemy  into  negotiating  on  our  terms  by  withdrawing
combat   troops.    The   little   noticed   result   of   Nixon's   latest
bluff   in  Vietnamese  poker   is  the  first  redeployment  of   U.S.
combat  troops  back  to  the  war  zone.  I  refer  to  the  1,500   U.S.
Marines  who  appeared  off  the  DMZ   Feb.   11  on  ships  of  the
7th  fleet,  with  artillery  and  tanks  ready  for  a  landing.  These
were  elements  of  the  Third   Marine  Division  which   operated
below   the   buffer    zone   until   November    1969.    They   were
evacuated  with  much  publicity  (but  only  to  Okinawa)   in  the
"winding  down"  of  a war  which  now  seems  to  be winding  up.
Their-announced  purpose  is  to  block  the  North  Vietnamese  if
they  counter  the  thrust  at  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  trail  in  the  west
by  an  invasion  across  the  DMZ   in  the  east,  thus  threatening
the   rear  of   the   ARVN   invaders.  But  what   if   Hanoi   takes
Mendel  Rivers' Successor Excusing
Q:    Do you think that  a  lot  of  the  people  who were killed
in  My  Lai  were  Vietcong?
F.  EDWARD HEBERT  [Chairman,  House  Armed  Serv-
ices  Committee]:  There's  no  doubt  about  it.
Q:    There  also  is  no  doubt,  though,  isn't  there,  that  a  lot
of  people  who  were  killed there  were  not  Vietcong,   couldn't
possibly  have  been?
HEBERT:    What  were  they  doing  in  that  village,  for  25
years  a  Vietcong  stronghold?
Q:    Well,   I'm  talking   about   the   women   and   children,
though.
HEBERT: What were they  doing there ?
Q:    Well,  they  were  living  there.
HEBERT:    That   place   had   been   cleaned    out   several
times,  and they  went  back  to  the  Vietcong.
Q:    Right,  but  I  mean  there's  no  question  that  some  of
those  who  were  killed  at  My  Lai  could  not  possibly  have
been  Vietcong;  they  were  little  children,  they  were  1  year,
2  years  old ...
HEBERT:  They  were just  growing  up to  be  big  Vietcong.
Those  little  children  throw  grenades,  you  know.
Q:  Yeah,  but  there  were  some  children  there  who  were
1 year  old and 2 years old ...
My  Lai:  "They're Little Vietcong"
HEBERT:    That's  going  into  testimony  which  we  didn't
take.    [Hebert   was  chairman  of  the   House   Subcommittee
that  investigated  My Lai].  All  we  said was  that  Vietnamese
in  civilian clothes  were  killed,  wantonly  killed, unnecessarily
killed.  That's  what we said.
Q:    Those  two  things  seem  to  be  in  conflict.  On  the  one
hand  your report  saying  that  they  were  unnecessarily  killed,
and  on  the  other  hand  you're   saying   now  that   they  just
would  have  grown  up  to  be  big  Vietcong.
HEBERT:   I   can't   resolve   that   either  .  .  .   I've   said
they're  little  Vietcong  who'll  grow  up  to  be  big  Vietcong.
Q:    So  why was  their  killing  unnecessary?
HEBERT:    You  can  kill,  in  an  atrocity,   unnecessarily,
even  the  enemy.   Just  because   you  kill  them  doesn't  mean
you  can slaughter  the  enemy.
Q:    So  then  your  real  objection  to  the  event  at  My  Lai
was not that it  happened, but how it  happened?
HEBERT:    How it  happened.
Q:  The way  in  which they  were  killed, not that  they  were
killed?
HEBERT:   That's  correct.   I  think  that  would  be  fair.
—From  an  interview  by  Scott  Kaufer   Feb.  5  for  a LOB
Angeles high  school paper,  The  Oakwood  Gorilla.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's Bi-Weekly,  February  22,
... The Undertow  Is Toward  Nuclear  War  On  China,  The  Last  Sanctuary
seriously   Ky's  talk   of   invading  the  North   and   regards   the
Marines  positioned  off  the  DMZ  (and  heavy  bombing  north
of  the  buffer  zone)  as harbingers of  invasion?  If  Hanoi  strikes
across  the  line  first,  or  appears ready to  strike, this  would  give
Nixon  an  excuse  to  resume  heavy  bombing  of  the  North.  Do
the  Marines represent  a  feint  for  this  very purpose?
As  Seen  From  Peking
The   search   for   a  military  solution  to  a  political  problem
has  drawn   Nixon   into   brinkmanship,   and  onto  a   slippery
slope  which  could  lead  to  war  with  China.  The  quick  White
House  reaction  to  Chinese  alarm  over  the  Laotian  invasion
shows  that  Nixon   is  well  aware  that  this  is  the  biggest  risk
of  all.  Ziegler's  immediate  statement  that  the  invasion  posed
"absolutely   no  threat  to   Communist  China"   may  soothe   a
confused   and  gullible  Senate  but  not  Peking  even   if  Nixon
means  it,  as  we  believe  he  does.  But  from  the  perspective  of
Peking,  the   Indochina   war   since  we   began   to   finance   the
French  in   1950  has  been  aimed  to  contain  China.  The   Thai
bases  were planned,  long  before our  own  military  intervention,
to  bring  China  within  range  of   nuclear  bombers.   China—
whatever  Nixon's  intentions—must  feel  that  in  Laos  and  at
the  DMZ  the  war  is moving toward its very doorstep,  and  with
it  the  spectre  of  a  nuclear  attack.  Imagine  our  alarm  if   the
nuclear  imbalance were  reversed  and  Chinese  troops  in  Mexico
appeared  to  be  moving  up  closer  to  the  Texas  border  while
nuclear-armed  Chinese  warships—and  a  Chinese  Marine  land-
ing  force—appeared  off  Brownsville.                                                                                                                        •
Nixon   is  trapped   by  his   desire  to   avoid    "humiliation."
He  is  caught  in  what  the  French  call  the  "engrenage"—the
gears   he  has  set  in  motion.  The   search   for   one   more   last
sanctuary  to  clean  out   for   victory  leads  from   Cambodia   to
Laos  to  North  Vietnam  to  China  itself,  the  ultimate sanctuary
of   the  Vietnamese  revolution,  if   not  to  the   Soviet  Union,
Hanoi's  major  supplier.  For  unless  Peking  and  Moscow  desist,
the  war cannot  be  ended—and  Peking  cannot  let  Hanoi  down
without  endangering its own  security. The  road  leads to nuclear
war.  We  call  attention  on  the  next  page  to  a  "scenario"  for
The  Toll  Of  The  Suffering  We  Impose
We  have  been  told  our  continued  presence   is   neces-
sary  to  prevent  a  bloodbath.   How  have  we  saved  the
people  of   Southeast  Asia   from   a  bloodbath?    Let  us
look  at  Laos.   Seven  hundred  thousand  refugees   have
been   produced  as  a  result   of   war-related  activities—
one-fourth   of   the   population.   Of   an  estimated   Meo
population  of  400,000 in  1960,  at  least  40  to  50  percent
of  the  women and  children  have  fallen  as  war  casual-
ties.  Between  1966  and  1969,  Laos  suffered  the  highest
per  capita  casualty  rate  in  the  world,  and  experienced
the  heaviest  per  square  mile  bombing  in  history.   The
bombing  last  year  alone  on  the  Plaine  des  Jarres  has,
in  the  words of  one  U.S.  AID  official,  left  "most  villages
and  fields  now  almost  completely ruined"
—Rep.  Rya-n  (D.-N.Y.)   in the House, Feb. 4.
nuclear  war  in  Asia  not   because  we  believe  such  action  im-
minent  but  because  we  believe  the  undertow  is  in  this   direc-
tion.  The  No.  1  lesson  of  this  war  is  that  we  can  win  it  only
by  destroying  the  countries  we  claim  to  be  defending   from
Communism.  Nixon,  who  was  ready  to  use  nuclear   weapons
at  Dien   Bien  Phu,  is  in  command  now.  He  is  being  drawn
by  forces  ever  harder  to  resist  toward   a  "final  solution"  as
horrible  as  Hitler's,  but   which  this   time   could   engulf   our
country  and  the  world.  This  is the  direction  on  which  we  are
embarked,  unless  we  turn  back  while  we  still  can.  Let    1914
remind  us  that  there  comes  a  point  when  the  momentum  is
irresistible  even when  nobody  really wants  war.             Feb.  15
CORRECTION  AND  APOLOGY: Though  the  Span-
ish  Embassy  and the  Washington  society  pages  listed
them  as  present,  neither  Mr. Justice  and  Mrs.  Douglas
nor  Senator  and Mrs. McGovern attended  the   reception
for  Juan  Carlos  and  had  no  intention  of  doing  so.  We
are  happy  to  be  proven  wrong,  and  regret  that   Sen.
and  Mrs.  Kennedy  were  present  to  honor  the  Fascist
dictator's  chosen successor.
We Hate To Disillusion Alsop But  The Lao Generals  Are Acting Like  Chiang's Did
If   their   [North   Vietnamese]   unique  lifeline  is  in  fact
severed  as  planned, they  will  get  almost  no replacements,  or
ammunition   or   other   military   supplies.    In   South   Laos,
where  virtually  no  food  is  locally  available,  they  will  also
get  none  of  the  rations  they  need  from  the  north.   The  cata-
strophic  potential  should  therefore  be  obvious.
—Joseph  Alsop's   column,  February  10.
The  South  Vietnamese  incursion  into  the   Ho  Chi  Minh
Trail   area   near   Sepone  in  the   north  sector  of   the   Laos
panhandle  will  not  cut  off  the  North  Vietnamese  from  food
supplies,  well  informed  American  sources  here  say.  This  is
because  between  7,000  and  10,000  tons  of  rice  are  being  sold
to  the  Communists by  Lao officials  further  south  in  the  pan-
handle,  disgusted   Americans  say.    This  is  enough  rice  to
supply   one  North  Vietnamese  division  with  food  for   one
year.   The  rice  is  surplus  produce  from  Laos'  4th Military
Region around Pakse.
Sources  allege  Prince  Boun  Oum himself,  the  traditional
rightist  ruler in  the  area,  may  be  implicated  and  named  one
of  his  associates,  Boun  Lieng,   and  the  commander  of   the
garrison  at   Paksong  town  on  the  Bolovens  Plateau,   Gen.
Kong  Vongnarat,  as likely  involved  in the  sales  to  the  Reds.
Americans  say  the  U.S.  Agency  for  International  Develop-
ment  in  Vientiane  is  well  aware  of  the  rice  sales  but  unable
to  do  much  because  high  ranking  people  are  involved.  The
AID  people,  in  an  effort  to  stop  the  traffic,  offered  to  buy
the  rice  surplus  at  $48  per  ton,  $18  more  than  the  usual
to  cover  rice  delivery  from  Pakse   to  rice-short   northern
Laos.
AID  planned  to  use  the  rice  to  feed  CIA-supported  guer-
rillas  and tribal  refugees  in  northern  Laos.   However,  Pakse
officials  and  merchants  tried  to  make  a  double  profit.  They
continued  to  sell  the  Pakse  surplus  to  the  enemy  and at  the
same   time   purchased   cheap   rice   in   northeast   Thailand,
eliminating  the  delivery  costs  while  getting  the  high  price
of  $48 per ton  from AID.  The  scheme  came  apart  when  AID
was  informed  of  the  plot  in  an  anonymous  letter.
Military   Region  4  Commander  Gen.  Phasoak,  close  Lao
associates  say,  is  aware  of  the  rice  traffic  but  he  believes
Kong  is  less  greedy  than  other   general   officers,   therefore
as  long  as  he  remains  in  his  post  less  rice  will  reach  the
enemy  than  might  be  the  case.  Middle level  American   offi-
cials  apparently are tired of  the  dealings,  however.  They  fail
to   see   why   U.S.-supported   officials    more   interested   in
money,  should   get   away  with  feeding   Hanoi  troops  who
almost   certainly   will  be  engaged  against   U.S.   troops  in
South  Vietnam.
Although  the  Americans  know  what's  going  on,  they  say
there's  little   proof.    Gen.   Phasouk   forbids   Americans   to
travel  on  Paksong  Road,  claiming  it  is  insecure.   Paksong
Road,  however,  has been  hit  only  once  in  the  past two  years
by  the  Reds  and some  Americans  believe  the  Lao don't  want
U.S.  AID officials to see the rice traffic.
—Tammy  Arbuckle from  Vientiane  Wash.  Eve.  Star Feb. 9.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  February  22,1971
A Morally  Imbecile "Scenario" From Herman Kahn's Unthinkable Think Tank
By  Edmund  O.  Stillman*
Unable  to  solve  its  dilemmas  in  South  Vietnam  and Cam-
bodia,   the   United    States   invades  North   Vietnam   with  an
amphibious  force  of  four  to  five  divisions.  The  intention  is  to
seize  the  Hanoi-Haiphong   area,  driving the  North  Vietnamese
government  from  its capital and  thereby  destroying  its  prestige
as  a  legitimate  government   in  the  North  and  as  the   sponsor
of  a  "winning"   insurrection  in  the  South.  The  invasion suc-
ceeds   beyond   expectations   and   the   authority  of   the  North
Vietnamese  governmnt  begins  to  disintegrate.  The  Communist
Chinese,  led  by  a  militant  faction,  intervene.  As  in  Korea,  the
Chinese   score   important   successes   in   the   initial   phase,   and
U.S.-South  Vietnamese  forces  suffer  major  reverses.
A  One-Megaton  Bomb  Over  Peking
The  United   States  considers  alternative  policies.  Because  of
the  prevailing  political  climate  in  the  United   States  and  the
weight  of  man-power  and  material  needed,  the  alternatives of
fighting  a  localized  conventional  campaign  against  the  Chinese
in  Vietnam  or  of  a  conventional  invasion  of  China  itself  are
rejected.   United    States   conventional    air   power    is   judged
(rightly  or  wrongly)   insufficient   wholly  to  interdict  logistics
into  North  Vietnam  or  to  wipe  out  Chinese  industry.  Instead,
the  United  States  detonates  a  one-megaton  weapon  at   500,000
feet   above  Peking   as  a  demonstration,  together  with  limited
nuclear  attacks  on  selected  military  targets.  Simultaneously the
United    States   begins   round-the-clock  broadcasts   and   drops
leaflets  proclaiming  that  Chinese  nuclear  facilities  and  air  de-
fenses  have been  destroyed.
With  such  attacks,  the  United  States  is  primarily  disarming
the  enemy capacity to  harm  the  United  States'and  targeting  the
morale  of  the  Chinese  people,  in an attempt  to unhinge  Chinese
society.  It  is  felt  that,  subjected   to  these  attacks,  the  Chinese
people   may  bring  irresistible  pressure   against   the  regime   to
compromise  with  the  United  States;  or,  alternatively, acting  out
of  fear,  destroy  the  regime;  or,  finally,  destroy  the  regime  not
*  From   an   article   in  the   November  1970 Annals   of    the
American  Academy  of  Political  and  Social  Science.  Stillman
is   director   of   the   European   division   of   Herman   Kahn's
Hudson  Institute  and  a  consultant  to  the  Defense  Dept.  and
the  Atomic  Energy  Commission.
The  Root  Problem  And  The  Root  Mentality
The  root  problem  of  the  Nixon  Doctrine  is  its  abiding
commitment  to the containment  of  China . . . Yet it  also
intends  to  scale  down  our  conventional  military capabil-
ity ...  If  we  maintain .  .  .  present  Asian  commitments,
while  adopting budget-constrained strategies,  we  risk  a
future  defeat  or  stalemate  or  we  allow  ourselves  to  be
moved  toward  reliance  on  nuclear  weapons.
—Earl   C.  Ravcnel,  Director  of   the  Asian  Division
(Systems  Analysis),   Office    of   the  Secretary  of   Defense
1967-69, in  the  Jan. 1970  issue  of  Foreign  Affairs.
If   a  President  does  decide  to  launch  a  nuclear war-
head  against  Vietnam—he  will  not  lack willing hands  to
carry  out  his  orders.   This  is  the  unsurprising  impres-.
sion   I  gained  while  wandering  through  the    Pentagon
.  .  .  None  of  these  men bluntly urged  the  use  of  nuclear
bombs  in  the  current  war, but  a  number  of  them  had
a  good  deal  to  say  about  our  failure  to  do  so  in  the
Korean  war  when  the  hordes  of   Chinese  troops   were
crossing  the  Yalu  river  .  .  .  One civilian official  told  me,
"If  the  Chinese invaded Vietnam,  it  would be  a  national
disgrace   if   we   didn't  clobber  them  with  nukes.    And
another  thing—this  time  the   Russians  wouldn't  mind
it."            —Daniel  Lang, The New YoAer, Jan. 9.
so  much  through   purposeful  revolution  as  simply  by  with-
drawing  support,  Chinese  society  dissolving  into  anarchy.  The
assertion  that  nothing  stands  between  the  Chinese  people  and
annhilation  but  U.S. self-restraint  is  intended  to  demonstrate
the  helplessness  of  the  leaders  and, thus,  to  destroy  any  charis-
matic  authority  of   the   Communist   party—which   is   perhaps
thereby  shown  to  have  lost  whatever  it  has  left  of  the "Man-
date of  Heaven."
The  United  States  then  announces  the  forthcoming  destruc-
tion   (within,  say, 48  hours)   of  one  of  ten   (named)   cities,
simultaneously  announcing  sanctuary  areas.  The   announcement
of  ten  likely  cities  is  intended  to  augment  the  quality of  terror
and  to  drive  large  segments   of  the   population   into   motion,
disrupting   or  contributing  to  the   disruption   of   the   govern-
mental  structure and  authority. The  announcement  of  sanctuary
areas  is  intended  both  as  a  humanitarian  measure  and  as  an
important  contribution  to  U.S. peace  of  mind  in  the  aftermath.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed  Envelope
Bi-Weekly  Mart
—To  subscribe   or  to  send  a  gift   subscription,  send
$5  with  your  address  and  zip  code  to  the  address  below.
—To  get  Stone's  new  collection,  "Polemics  and Proph-
ecies:    1967-70"   (Random  House:  $10)  at   the   special
$8.95  price  postpaid  for  Bi-Weekly  readers,  send  check
or  money  order  to  the  address  below.
—If  you  want  Stone's  new  paperback, "The Killings
at  Kent  State:  How  Murder  Went  Unpunished"  (New
York  Review  and  Vintage  Press)  the  price  is  $1.95.  It
contains   the  full  text,  available  nowhere   else,   of   the
so-called   "secret   FBI   report",   the   summary   of   FBI
findings  prepared  by  the   Civil  Rights   Division  of   the
Justice   Department   but  never   submitted   to   the  Ohio
Grand  Jury.
—Stone's  "Hidden  History  of  the  Korean  War", the
inside  story   of   America's   first   Vietnam,  long   out  of
print  is  available  again   (Monthly Review  Press)   $7.50
postpaid.
—Paperback   editions    (Vintage    Press)    of   Stone's
earlier collections,  "In A  Time  of  Torment"  ($1.95)  and
"The   Haunted   Fifties"   ($2.45)  are  available   at  book-
stores.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  Street  NW, Washington, D.C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C. Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.,  N.W..  Washington. D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;  16  in   Canada:
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:  J20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED