I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971nov15.pdf

============================================================

Is  The  U.S.  Becoming A   Second-Rate  Power? P.  3
The  Issue
The  issue  is whether  the  President  can  force  the  U.S.  Senate to  accept a  person who believes that  Negroes  should  not be
treated  like  other  people.—Clarence  Mitchell,  Sr.,  legislative   representative   of  the  NAACP,  on  the  appointment   of  William
H.  Rehnquist,  an  anti-civil  rights  Goldwaterite,  to  the  Supreme   Court.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX,  No.  19
NOVEMBER   15,  1971                '<>'<.
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
When  Imperialism   Masks  Itself  As  Altruism
In  a  sarcastic  reference  to  Senator  Fulbright  and  defeat  of
the  foreign  aid  bill,  Deputy  Defense   Secretary  Packard  at  a
press  conference Nov.  4  said  "I  hope  we  don't  go  back  to  a
Fortress  Arkansas  posture."   If  the   Pentagon  wants  to  see  a
real  Fortress  Arkansas,  it  should  read  the  speech  delivered  by
the  other  Senator  from  Arkansas,  McClellan,  the  day  foreign
aid  was  defeated.  Sen.  McClellan  said  the  bill  contained only
one  item  deserving  of  support—the  $250  million  it  would
have  authorized  for  East  Pakistani  refugees.  The  chauvinism
and   isolationism   to  which  Nixon   and   Rogers  covertly  pan-
dered  after  the  UN  vote  on  China  found  uninhibited expres-
sion  in  the  McClellan  speech.  He  called  the  vote  "this  insult
to  America's good  will  and  unparalleled  beneficence."  He  in-
serted  a  table  in  the  Congressional   Record  showing  that  the
U.S.  had  given  $43  billion  in  aid  since  World  War  II  to  the
nations  which  voted  against  the  U.S.  on  China.  "When  they
so  viciously  bite  the  very  hand  which  has  sustained  them,"
McClellan  said,  "it  is  time  to  stop  giving  them  our  taxpayers'
money."  This  is  the  kind  of  talk  which  goes  down  far  better
in  rural  and  small  town  Arkansas  than  Fulbright's   idealism.
Those  attacking  Fulbright  on  foreign  aid  would   do  well  to
consider  how  differently  the  U.S.  would  look  to  the  rest  of  the
world  if  the  other   Senator  from  Arkansas  were  chairman  of
Senate  Foreign  Relations.
"Foreign  Aid"  A Misnomer
Both  Senators  from   Arkansas  voted   no  when  the   foreign
aid  bill  was  finally  rejected.  But  on  the  way  to  that  final  bal-
lot,  they  voted  quite  differently.  To  look  at  their   contrasting
positions  on  the  various  amendments  offered  is to  begin  to see
the  multiplicity of  issues  involved.  Lumping  them  all   together
in  a  so-called  "foreign   aid"  bill  gives  an  erroneous   impres-
sion  of  what  the  fight  was  all   about.   Nor   can  the  various
votes  on  various  issues  simply  be  classified  as  "international-
ist"  or  "isolationist."    Let  us  begin  with  the  issue  of  Greece,
which  ranked  high  on  the  Pentagon's  concerns.  The  Nixon
Administration  programmed  $90  million  in  military  aid to  the
Greek  dictatorship  this fiscal year  and  $118  million  next fiscal
year.  The  foreign  aid  bill,  as  reported   out  of   committee  by
Fulbright,   called   in   effect   for   a  ban  on  all  military  aid   to
Greece  until  free  institutions  have  been   restored.   This  is  in
accord  with  the  46  to  8  vote  by  which  the  NATO  Assembly
as  recently  as  Sept.   27,  called  on  all  the  NATO  powers   to
press  for   the  restoration  of   democracy   in  Greece.   Secretary
Rogers,  in  his  Oct.  30  statement  on  the  defeat  of  the  foreign
aid  bill,  said  we  "cannot  retreat  from  the  realities  of  our  in-
A  Money  Tree  For  Private  Business
The  present  [aid]  program  is  designed  primarily  to
serve  private  business  interests.   The  search   for  for-
eign  investment opportunities by  the  largest American
corporations  is  relentless  and  irrepressible,   as  the  big-
gest  profits  are  to  be  found  abroad,  where  the  tax  bite
can   frequently   be  reduced   or  averted.  Moreover,   the
risk  of  loss  due  to  political instability,  riot, revolution
or  expropriation, has  been  largely  lifted  from  the  in-
vestor  and  shifted  to   the  U.S.  Government. OPIC,  the
Overseas  Private  Investment  Corporation,  backed  by
the  Federal Government,  readily insures American com-
panies  against  risks  abroad^ The  multi-million   dollar
losses  incurred  by  American  copper  companies,  result-
ing   from  the  nationalization of  their  holdings  by  Al-
lende's  Marxist  regime  in  Chile,  are  likely  to  be borne
—not   by   the   companies—but   by   the   American  tax-
payer.  Our  foreign  aid  program  has  become  a  spread-
ing  money  tree  under  which  the  biggest  American busi-
nesses  find  shelter  when  they  invest  abroad!
—Church  (D.  Idaho)   in  the  Senate  Oct.  29  (abr.).
terdependence  with  the  rest  of  mankind."   Which   represents
such  a  retreat?  The  Nixon  insistence  on  aid  to  the  Greek  dic-
tatorship,  despite  the  views  of  our  NATO  allies,  or  the  Ful-
bright  call  for  an  arms  embargo?  Packard  said  we  might  have
to  withdraw  our  6th  fleet  from   the  Mediterranean   without
Greek   and  Turkish   bases.  Is  that   internationalism  or   impe-
rialism?   When   the   Administration  pressed   successfully  for
restoration  of  Greek  military  aid,  McClellan  voted   for  it  and
Fulbright  voted  no.
Or  let  us  take  the  vote  on  the  Buckley  amendment,   where
Fulbright   was  allied  with   the  Administration.   New   York's
rightist  Senator  would  have  cut the  $139 million  recommended
for  a group of  UN  organizations  to  $37.5  million.  This  would
have  been  seen  as a  China  Lobby  reprisal  for  the  exclusion  of
Taiwan.  It  would  have  had  a  crippling  effect  on  the  UN  De-
velopment  program,  its  Children's  fund,  the  FAO  world  food
program,  the  World  Health  Organization   and  the   miserable
pittance   UNRWA   provides   for   Palestinian   Arab    refugees.
Fulbright   spoke  strongly   against   the  cut,  as  did  Javits,   and
it   was   defeated   55   to  28.    McClellan    voted   with   Gold-
water,  Dole,  Eastland  and  most  of  the   Southern    Democrats
for  the  Buckley  amendment.  But  the  battle  lines  shifted,  and
the  Administration  was  dependent  on  these  same   right-wing
votes when  it  came  to the  heart  of  the  struggle,  which  was  not
over  disbursements  but  over  the  war-making  authority.
(Continued   On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  15, 1971
Was  The  Amchitka  Test  Worth  The  Fears  and  Animosities  It  Aroused?
Was   the  Amchitka   test   worth   the   fears  and  animosities
it  aroused   in  Canada,   Japan   and   elsewhere?   "The  test  has
no  real  purpose,"  Dr.   Wolfgang   K.  H.   Panofsky   of  Stan-
ford   told  the  Neif    York   Times  Nov.  3,  "and  is  being  held
because  of   technological   inertia."    He   said  the   Spartan sys-
tem  for  which  the  giant  warhead  was  tested  would  be  unable
to   differentiate   between   incoming   rockets   and   decoys,   that
its  warheads  would  tend  to  destroy  each  other,  and  that  the
first  wave  of  our  ABMs  would  black-out  our  own  radars.
More  Testing  Ahead?
Imagine  what  our   press  would   be  saying  if   the  Russians
were  ignoring  international protest  and  environmentalist fears
to  hold   a  test  of  this  kind  out   in  the  North   Pacific!    The
most  important  long  range   effect   is  to  weaken  the  non-pro-
liferation    treaty.    Asahi,   one   of    Japan's    biggest    papers,
pointed   out  that   the  treaty  pledged   the  big   powers   to  end
the  nuclear  arms  race,  that  we  put  pressure  on  the  Japanese
to  sign  but  we're  now  going  ahead  with  a  major  nuclear  test.
•  The   NPT,  like   the   earlier   atmospheric    test   ban   treaty   of
1963,  committed  the  US  and  the  USSR  to  work   for  a  treaty
banning  all  tests.   But  a  newly  released   comprehensive  report
by    the    Stockholm    International    Peace    Research   Institute
(SIPRI)   says   it   is  doubtful   whether   either   side   "strongly
desires"   a  complete   ban  now.  The   U.S.  could   get   one  by
giving  up  its  insistence  on  on-site  inspection;   the   USSR  by
returning  to  its  earlier  offer  of  3  inspections  a  year.   If   SALT,
as  seems  probable,   freezes  the  number  of   ABMs  but  allows
qualitative  improvements,   the   arms   race   and   testing  under-
ground   may  escalate  in   a   race   to  improve   both   ABM   and
MIRV.
Senator  Muskie,   in  releasing   a  staff   report  by  his  disarma-
ment  subcommittee,   pleads   for  an  end  to  underground   test-
ing  to  brake   the   arms   race  in   offensive   and   defensive  nu-
clear   weapons,   to   spare   the   world   the   environmental dan-
gers  of  more  large  underground   tests,  and  to  prevent  other
nations  from   developing   their   own   weapons.    Senator   Case
told   the  Joint   Committee   on   Atomic   Energy  at   a  hearing
Oct.   28  that  recent  technical  advances  were  not   being   fully
exploited  in  the  existing  U.S. seismic  monitoring  system.   He
said   total   funds   for   monitoring    research    and   deployment
had   been  reduced   by  one-third  since  1963,  down   from   $41
million  then  to  less  than  $13  million   this  year.   By  contrast
the  two  underground  Alaskan  tests  have   cost   $200  million.
The   inference  is  that   the   nuclear   authorities   are   more   in-
terested   in  improving   weaponry   than   the  means  of   policing
Another  Nixon  Tax  Gift  To   Corporations
Yesterday    the    Commissioner    of   Internal    Revenue
announced  that  corporations  will  not  be  subject  to  tax
for  undistributed  profits  which accrue  from  the   "freeze"
on  dividends  provided  by  the  President's  Executive   or-
der.   I   seriously    doubt   the   Commissioner   of    Internal
Revenue  has  statutory   authority   to  exercise  adminis-
trative  discretion  to  suspend  a  statutory  tax  to   accom-
modate  an  executive  order.
This  action  is  in  keeping  with  an  apparent   effort  by
this  administration  to  eliminate  all  corporate  taxation.
Earlier  this  year  the  adoption  of  the  asset  depreciation
range  wiped  out  $40  in  corporate   taxation  in  the  next
decade.  The  revenue  act  which  just  passed   the  House
of    Representatives   at    the    administration's    request
"washed  out" a  total  of   another  $52  billion  of   corpo-
rate  taxation  in  the  next  decade.   These  losses  in cor-
porate   taxes   ominously   point  to   an   increase   in  indi-
vidual  tax  rates  after  the  election  of  1972.
—Vanik   (D.   Ohio),  militant   member   of   Ways    and
Means,  speaking  in  the  House   Oct. 13.
a   full ban.
Information   presented   to  the  Joint   Committee   on  behalf
of  a  group  of   14  eminent  scientists  said  on   the  basis  of  ex-
isting   unclassified   technology,  the   threshold   of   sure   detec-
tion  could  be  lowered   to   2  kilotons.   Since  I960,   according
to  the  Muskie  staff  report,  the  U.S. has  conducted  four  times
as many announced  underground  tests  as the  USSR  and  would
benefit  from  a  complete  ban.  The  SIPRI  report  provides evi-
dence  that  there  have  been  many  more   tests   on   both   sides
than  the  announced  number,  and  that  there  are  other   secret
non-seismic  ways  of  monitoring  an  underground ban.
A  new  report  of  the  UN   Secretary  General  on  the  world
arms   race   shows   that   annual   expenditures   rose   one-third
from    I960   to   1970,  from   $150  billion   to   $200   billion.
The   total   for   the   decade   is   almost   two   trillion   dollars!
Six  countries—the  US,  the  USSR,  China,  France,  the   United
Kingdom    and   West   Germany—account   for    four-fifths    of
these   expenditures   but   they   also   eat   into   the   scanty   re-
sources  of  every  nation.   At  the  present  rate,  the  UN   experts
estimate,  annual  expenditures   may  reach   $300  to   $350 bil-
lion  by  the  end  of  this  decade.   Total  world  outlay  on  arms
is  almost  30  times  as  large  as  its  outlay  on   development—
$200   billion  for   the  one,  $7  billion   for   the   other.    These
are  the  dimensions  of  this  institutionalized  madness.
How  Control  Profits  When  So  Many  Corporations Hide  The  Figures?
The  problems  faced  by  President  Nixon's  recently   created
Price  Commission   provide  a  timely  illustration   of  how  our
ignorance  of  corporate   affairs  may  frustrate    public  policy.
Although  the  President  promised  that corporate  profits  wou'd
not  be  controlled  directly,  he emphasized  the  Price  Commis-
sion  would  look  to  the  profit  records  of  certain  strategic  in-
dustries  in  determining   whether   particular  price  increases
were  justified. But this  is  easier  said  than  done.  There  are no
reliable  data  available on  the  profits  of  particular industries.
The  only  information   currently  available  of  profitability
in  manufacturing  industries  is  gathered  for  the  FTC  Quar-
terly  Financial  Report  on  Manufacturing.  Yet  in many  eases
these  "industry"  data  are  worse  than  useless;  they  are  not
only  extremely  aggregated—e.g., electrical  machinery, equip-
ment  and supplies—but  individual industries  include the  en-
tire  consolidated   profits  of  large  corporations  that   operate
across  many  industries.
For  example,  ITT's  profits  are  included   in  a  single  FTC
"industry"  despite  the  fact  that  nearly  half   its  profits  are
earned  from  foreign  operations,  another  substantial  amount
from  nonmanufacturing  industries,  and  the  remainder   from
such  diverse  manufacturing  industries  as  electronics,  paper,
baking,   publishing  and  chemicals.  Yet,  powerful    corporate
interests  have  succeeded  to  date  in  resisting  efforts  by  the
FTC  to  require  corporations  to  report  their  profits  on  an  in-
dustry  rather  than  a  consolidated  basis.
Nor  can  this  problem  be  brushed  aside  by  arguing   that
the  new  Price  Commission  will be  given  subpoena  powers  and
will  therefore  develop  its  own  data.  It  is  entirely   unrealistic
to  expect  that  this  is  something  that  can  be  done  on  an  ad
hoc  basis  in  the  crisis  atmosphere  within   which  the  Price
Commission  will  inevitably   make  its  decisions.  Despite   all
the  loose  talk  about  the  vast  powers  of  the  Federal   Govern-
ment,  the  unfortunate  truth  is  that  it  does not have  sufficient
economic  facts  to  do this job.
—Prof.    Willard   Mueller,   Univ.   of   Wisconsin,   formerly
with  the  FTC,  speaking   at  Ralph   Nader's   Conference   on
Corporate   Accountability,  Washington, D.C.  Oct. 30.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  15, 1971 .
On  Pentagon  Propaganda  About  The  U.S.  Becoming  A  Second  Rate  Power
The   notion  that  the  U.S.,   through   inadequate  defense  ex-
penditure,  is  about   to  become   a  second   rate  power,   is  now
being   propagated   by  the   Pentagon   to  prepare   the   way   for
a  bigger  arms  budget  next  year.  This  is  the  sheerest nonsense.
Here  are  some  basic  figures,  as  culled  from  the  latest  edition,
just  arrived  from  London,  of  the  Military   Balance  study  for
1971  by  the  International  Institute  for  Strategic Studies.
The  Dollar  Figures  Tell  A  Different  Story
In  the  first  place  U.S.  military  expenditures  continue  to  be
far  greater  than  Soviet.   The  U.S.S.R.  is  spending  $55  billion
this  year;  the   U.S.,   $78  billion.  Soviet  per   capita   defense
expenditure  was  $222;  U.S.  $373.   The  USSR  was  spending
a  larger  portion  of   its  Gross  National  Product  on   defense
(11%  as  against  our  7.8%)    but  the  Soviet  GNP   was  $312
billion,   or   less  than   a  third   of   the   U.S.   GNP    which  was
$977  billion.
In  nuclear  strategic  forces  the  U.S.  continues  to  be  several
years  ahead   technologically.    This  is  reflected   in   our  ability
to   deliver   a   far   larger   number   of   nuclear  warheads.    The
USSR   is  trying  to  make  up   in  quantity  of  ICBMs  for   this
disparity.    Soviet   ICBMs   rose   in   number   from   50   to   460
between   1961   and   1967   while  ours   rose   from   63  to   1,054.
In   1967   we  set  out  to  develop  multiple  warheads  instead  of
increasing  the  number   of  missiles.   By  this  year  the   Soviets
had   1,510  ICBMs  while  we  still  had  only  1,054.   But  all  but
54   of   our   missiles  were   solid   fuel   while  only   60   of   the
Soviet's   were  the  quicker-firing  solid   fuel   variety.
The   Soviet  Union   is  still  testing  and  has  yet  to  deploy  a
multiple  cluster  warhead  -while  we  have  passed  that  stage  and
are   already   deploying   multiple   independently   targeted   ve-
hicles,  the  MIRV.   Of   our   1,054   ICBMs,   500   Minutemen
are  being  equipped  with  3  MIRVs  each.   By  1975  our  ICBM
force   will   be   able   to   deliver   2,054   separate   warheads   on
separate  targets.   //  will  have  doubled   its  striking  capacity.
The   same  disparity  in  our   favor   exists  in  Europe  and   at
sea.   The  U.S.   and  the  NATO  forces  have  some  7,000  nu-
clear  warheads  in  the  European  theatre  as  against  about  3,500
in  the  hands  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  its  Warsaw  Pact  allies.
At  sea,  the  Soviet  nuclear  strategic  submarine  fleet  may  soon
draw  closer   to  that  of  the  U.S.   in  numbers  but   is  far   out-
distanced   in  warheads   and   in   range.    The   Soviets   are  only
now   testing   an   SLBM   with   an   estimated   range   of   3,000
miles  which  would   make  it  comparable   to  our  Polaris.    The
Soviets  have  about  350  underwater   launchers  as  against   our
Unfortunate   Analogy   Dept.
It   is   unfortunate,   perhaps,  that  each   generation  of
weaponry  must  purchase  geometrically  improved  capa-
bilities   with   geometrically  increased  costs.   However,
this  has  been  a  problem  since  the  crossbow supplanted
the   lance—the  U.S.  Navy  did  not  create  it.
—Admiral   Radford    (ret),   protesting  in  a  letter  to
the  Washington  Post  Oct.  13  its  opposition   to  the  F-U
as  costly,   cumbersome   and  (like   the  carriers   it   is  to
protect)   of  dubious  value.
The   Admiral's   argument  is   apt   here,   but   not   we
think,  to  his  side  of   the  argument.  It   was  relatively
simple  crossbow  (and  longbow)  warfare,  after  all  that
did   so   much   to   make   obsolete   the   heavily    armed,
mounted,  lance-bearing knight  of  medieval  Europe....
Encased  in  so   much  metal  that  he  had  to  be  hoisted
onto  his  mount,  the  lance-bearing  fighter  was  rendered
helpless  by  the  simple  arrow  that—if  it  did  not  pierce
his  armor—could  easily  fell  his  horse.   Just  so,  there
is   a   school  of   thought  which   holds  that   the  heavily
and  expensively  defended  carrier  can  be  rendered  in-
operable  by  comparatively simple Soviet  weapons.
—Washington  Post  editorial   reply   same   day.
656.    But   432   of   our   launchers  are   the   Polaris   A-3   with
triple  warheads  and  64  are  the  newer  Poseidons  with  at  least
10  MIRVs  each.   The  Soviets  may  catch  up  to  us  in  numbers
of   nuclear  submarines  by  the  mid  70s  but  by  that   time  we
will  have  increased  the  number  of  our  underwater   strategic
ballistic   missiles   "from   about   1,500    (capable   of   attacking
656   separate   targets)    to   over   5,400    (capable   of   attacking
some   5,000   separate  targets)."    In  addition  we  are   already
developing  a  new  underwater monster,  ULMS.
A  similar  proliferation  of  warheads  is  taking  place  in  our
bombing  fleet  through  the  addition  of  the  new  Short   Range
Attack  Missile  or  SRAM.   This  will  do  for  the  bomber   what
MIRV    does  for  the  ICBM.   While  our  bomber   force  is  still
about  three  times  as  large  as  the  Soviet,  the  number  of  nu-
clear  warheads   each   bomber   carries  will  be   increased  enor-
mously  by  SRAM.    Each  B-52  could  eventually   carry  up   to
24   SRAM   while  the   proposed   new  B-l   bomber   would   be
able  to  carry  32  SRAM.    The   ISS  survey  says,   "The   Soviet
Union   has  shown  no  apparent  interest  in  matching this  par-
ticular  effort."   All  this  would  give  us  an  overkill  of  stupefy-
ing   proportions.
Fulbright  Terms  Nixon's  Boost  in  Military  Aid  "Pax  Americana  By  Proxy"
Judging  from  the  amounts contained  in  this bill—amounts
totaling  more  than  $3.2 billion—it  is  "business  as  usual" for
foreign  aid,  despite  the  state  of  our  economy,  the  Govern-
ment's   fiscal   dilemma,   and  our   domestic   needs.   This  bill
would authorize $1.3 billion more  than  the  amount  appropri-
ated  for  these programs in  the  1970  fiscal  year.
The  distortion  of  the  aid  program  for  military  purposes
continues.  Of  the  amounts  approved by  the  committee, $1.7
billion  is  for  military and  related  aid  and  $1.2  billion  is  for
economic aid, not counting the  special  authorization for Pak-
istan  relief.  This  compares  with  the  1970  program  when  $1
billion  was  for  economic  aid  and  $815  million  went  for  mili-
tary  purposes.
And the  money in this  bill  for  military  aid  represents only
about  one-third  of  the  total  military  aid  planned  to  be dis-
tributed  around the  world in  this year.  At  the  same  time  the
President   seeks   to   assure   the  American  people  that   the
United   States   is   winding  down   its   military  involvement
abroad.  Yet,  in the last year  the executive  branch has adopted
a  new client  state  in  Cambodia,  reversed a long  standing ban
on  arms  to  Indonesia, doubled  our  aid  to  Korea, waived  the
Congressional  ceiling  on  arms  to  Latin America and  Africa
and the  list  goes on.
In  fiscal  year  1970 Congress  appropriated  $421 million  for
military  aid  and  credit  sales.  This  year  the  President asked
for   $1.2  billion  for  these  two   programs—three  times  the
amount  Congress   provided  only  two  years  ago.  What  does
this  vast  increase  in military  aid signify?  Does  it  mean  that
U.S.  policy  is  now  to  carry  on  a  Pax  Americana by proxy,
with  arms as  the  carrot for encouraging foreign cooperation?
The  $3.2  billion is  just  a  down payment of  the  total  price
of  the  foreign  aid  program, just  the  tip  of  the  foreign  aid
iceberg.  The  total   price  tag   on  all  foreign  aid  and  related
programs  for  fiscal  1972 is  actually  $9.5  billion.  And  if  the
cost  of  all  these  and  other  aid  programs  is  projected  over
the  next  five  years,  the  grand  total  comes  to  approximately
$51  billion.
—Fulbright,  on Foreign  Aid,  October  26.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  November  15,1971
Either  The  Nixon  Doctrine  Is  Obsolete  or  The  Visit  To  Peking  A  Fraud
(Continued  From  Page  One)
The  foreign  aid  bill,  as  it  came  from  the  Fulbright commit-
tee  was  an  anti-war and  an  anti-imperialist  measure.  The  for-
eign  aid  program  over  the  years has  provided  the first stealthy
steps   toward   military  commitment   in   Indochina.   Programs
first  sold  as  foreign  aid  were later  cited  as authority for  armed
intervention.  It  was therefore  natural that  the  foreign  aid  bill
should  become  the  vehicle to  reverse the  process.  The Admin-
istration  then  made  it  clear  that  it  preferred  to  veto  the  bill
and   drop   foreign   aid   altogether   rather  than  accept  amend-
ments  which  would  force  it  to  wind  up  the  war  in  Indochina.
Its   first   target   was   the   Cooper-Church    amendment   which
would   have  prohibited   the  use  of   funds   for  U.S. forces  in
Indochina  for  any  purpose  other  than  withdrawal.  Its  second
was  the  Symington-Case  amendment  to  put  a  ceiling  on  in-
volvement  in  Cambodia,  which  threatens  to  become  a  second
Vietnam.   When   the  Administration  succeeded   in   knocking
out  the  first  and  weakening  the  second,   many  supporters  of
' foreign  aid like  Fulbright,  Nelson, Tunney  and  Hatfield  among
others  voted  against  the  bill.
Cambodia—A  New  Vietnam?
The  final  vote  reflected  the  anxieties  triggered  by  the  reve-
lation  in  the  New   York  Times  Oct. 13  that  the  Joint  Chiefs
of  Staff  were planning  the  expansion  of  the  Cambodian armed
forces  to  more  than  500,000  men  by  1977.  This  would  mean
putting  nearly  half  the  adult  male  population  under  arms.  It
would  also  boost  aid  for  Cambodia  to  half  a  billion  dollars  a
year  by  1977.  Fulbright  said  that  the  Administration  s  actions,
in  planning  to  transfer  the  war  from  Vietnam  to  Cambodia
and   Laos,  "strike   me  as  being  quite   inconsistent"   with   the
supposed  purpose   of  Nixon's   trip  to   Peking.   "I   think  the
longer  we  prolong  the  war,  and  certainly  we  do  so by expand-
ing  it  in  Cambodia,"   he  told  the  Senate,  "the more   difficult
it  will   become   for   the   President   to   achieve  any   significant
agreement   with   the  Chinese."   The  Nixon   Doctrine   of   (in
Dulles's  phrase)   "letting   Asians   fight   Asians"   to   contain
•China  for  us  is  either  obsolete  or  the  new  gestures   toward
Who  Suffers  When  "Aid"  Is  Cut
Many  U.S. businessmen  are as  anxious as overseas re-
cipients  to  resurrect  in  some  form   the  scuttled  foreign
aid  bill.  .  . .  Among  other  things,  the  aid  program pro-
vides  about  $1  billion  of  sales  annually  for  American
manufacturers,   gives  U.S.  shipping   companies   about
one-fourth  of  their  total  revenue  from   outbound  cargo.
.  .  .  Late  yesterday  the  Pentagon  released  details  of
the  potential  impact  of  the  Senate  rejection.  The  nega-
tive  vote  there   wiped   out—at  least  temporarily—De-
fense   Department  plans  to  award  the  following con-
tracts;  $175 million   to   McDonnell  Douglas   Corp.   for
aircraft;  $116 million   to  General  Electric  Co.  for air-
craft  engines;  $61  million  to  Lockheed  Corp.   for air-
craft   and  maintenance  services;   $89   million   to   Bell
Helicopter   for   helicopters;   $10   million   to   Chrysler
Corp.  subsidiary  for vehicles  . . .
—Robert  Keatley,  Wall  Street  Journal,  November  3.
China  are  a  fraud.
The   Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee   is   fighting   not
against  foreign  aid  but  against   the  use  of  foreign  aid  as  a
cloak   for   interventionism,  a  cover   for   secret  actions  by  the
military  and  the  CIA  which  undercut  the  power  given  Con-
gress  by  the  Constitution  to  decide  the  basic  questions  of  war
and  peace.  The  Committee  by  splitting   a  substitute  measure
into  two  bills,  one  for   military  and  the  other  for  economic
assistance,  has  helped  to  clarify  the  issue.  The  new  measures
heading  for  a Senate showdown  as this  is written contain many
of  the  restrictions  on  the  military  and  the  CIA  in  Indochina
and  elsewhere  which  were  in  the  original  bill.  This  is  not  a
fight  over  foreign  aid  but  an  effort  (1)  to  get  us  finally  and
completely   out   of   Indochina  and   (2)    to   substitute   multi-
lateralism   and  a  genuine   internationalism   in   helping   other
nations  for  an  imperialism  which  has  too  long  succeeded  in
masking  itself  as  altruism.  The   scarred   landscape   of   Indo-
china  should  be  enough  to  open  the  eyes  of  this   generation
to the realities.                                                                    Nov.  9
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy   Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed  Envelope
FOR  STONE'S   NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  special  subscribers'  price  of  $8.95
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics  and  Prophecies:
1967-70  (Random  House).  Regularly $10.
(To)    Name
Street   .........
City   ..............™...................  Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if   gift    announcement  wished  n
Please  renew  D   or enter  Q   a sub for the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street   ..............._...................................................____....
City  ....................................  Zip..............;.  State..™.........._
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly           "/i5/7i
4420  29th  St.  N. W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St., N. W.
Washington,  O. C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C. Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..  N.W..  Washinsrton.  D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;  $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.  Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED