I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971may17.pdf

============================================================

The  New Berrigan  Letters; Bad  News from  Cuba, pgs. 2 & 3
More  policemen  assaulted  kids  than  kids  assaulted  policemen,  but they  can  get  away with  it.   They  don't  get  charged.
—Judge   Charles  W.  Halleck,  D.C. Superior   Court,  who  accepted  no  contest  pleas  from   those  arrested   in  the  May  Day
demonstrations,  sentenced  them  to time  already  served  and  released  them.
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL.  XIX,  No.  10
MAY   17,  1971     '
01
WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
The  Kooks  Nobody  Noticed
One  way  to  assess the  recent  peace  actions  in  Washington  is
to  begin  with  the  counter-demonstrations. Nixon   may  have
been  as  unaffected  as  he  claims  by  the  anti-war  rallies, but  the
counter demonstrations  must worry him.  Their  size and charac-
ter  indicate  how  overblown  are  his  warnings  of  a  backlash  if
we  withdraw  from  Vietnam without  some  kind  of  a  victory.
The  contrast  between  the  pro  and  anti-war  mobilizations  is  so
sharp  that  it  can  reflect  only  a  vast indifference  to  the  outcome,
an overwhelming  desire simply  to  get  out.*  The  silent  majority
Nixon  claimed  when  he  started  out  to  win  by Vietnamization
has  dwindled  to  a  wooly  fringe.   The  first  pro-war  march,  on
May  1,  designed  as  an  answer  to  the  quarter million  or  more
who  gathered  here on  April  24,  drew  some  125 demonstrators,
including  one  black, a  17-year  old  in  a  dashiki.   The  second,  a
week  later,  after  the  May  Day  events, proved  to  be  the  biggest
bust  yet  staged  here  by  the  fundamentalist  radio  preacher,  the
Rev.  Carl  Mclntire.   He  predicted that  his  turnout  would  sur-
pass  the  250,000  of  April  24.   He  ended  by  claiming that  he
had  drawn  25,000.   A  Washington  Post  counter  along  the  line
of  march  logged   4,800   participants.   Even  the  hard  hats,  of
whose   support   Mclntire   boasted,   disavowed   him.    Peter   J.
Brennan, president of  the building trades council in New  York,
said   he   was   "not   aware"   that   any  building   trades   leader
planned  to  attend,  and  added  that  the  ironworker  who  did
appear spoke only for himself.
Kookiest  Man  In  Congress
The  two  members  of  Congress  who  showed  up  must  make
Nixon  queasy.  Republican John  G.  Schmitz of  Orange  County,
California,   said  he  was  there  "to   show  the  public  that  the
members  who   joined  the   demonstrations  last  week   are  not
representative  of  Congress."   Schmitz  is much  less  so.   He  lists
himself  in  his  official  biography as  a member  of  the  John  Birch
Society.   The  other  Congressman  to  address  the  pro-war  rally,
John  J.  Rarick of  Louisiana,  is even  further  right.   He  told  the
crowd,  while  cheers  rose  and  Confederate  flags  waved,  that
the  Nixon  Administration lacked  "the  guts  to  end  this  war  in
five  to  six  weeks,  as  every  veteran  military  leader  says  could
be  done."   Rarick  is the  kookiest  member  of  Congress  and  the
most  blatantly  racist.   As  a  judge,   he  once  greeted   a  black
lawyer  by  saying  "I  didn't  know  they  let  you  coons  practice
law"  (Time,  Aug.  16,  1968).  He  has filled the  Congressional
Record  with  an  endless  cascade  of  writings  by  the  freaks  of
the  far  right  with  speeches  of  his  own  to  match.   During  the
Johnson  years  a  typical  selection  (11/7/67)  was  "Walt  Ros-
tow:  Another  Alger Hiss?"
From  Rarick's  speeches  and  insertions  so  far  this  year  one
* Even  Senator  Dole  of  Kansas,  chairman of  the Republican
National  Committee,  told  James Doyle in an interview (Wash-
ington  Star,  May  9),  "Whenever I'm talking  to  farm  groups
or  business  groups  or  whoever,  they  tell  me  they  think  the
President   is  doing  a   great   job,   but  they  always  wind  up
asking,  'When's the  war going to end.'"
3  *
No  End  In  Sight
Vietnam's  future  after  U.S.  departure looks  bleak  to
many  analysts.   Even  the  optimists  expect   Saigon  will
face  years  of  hard  fighting  against  a  still-strong  Com-
munist  insurgency.  Red striking  power will surely  build
again  unless  the  South  Vietnamese  can  hit  repeatedly
at  bases,   supply  lines  in   Laos   and  Cambodia.    Even
now,  the  enemy  shows  it  can  hammer  installations   in
South  Vietnam's  central   and  northern   provinces.   Re-
building  the  economy  in  Vietnam, with  the  war  drag-
ging   on,  threatens   to   be  far   harder  than  in  Korea.
"Americans tend to think of  war as having a distinct end
followed   by   peacetime  rebuilding,"  says   an   analyst,
"but  that  won't  happen this  time."  The  strain  of  main-
taining  a  big  army  will  hinder  recovery  efforts.   Some
Americans  favor  at  least  token  cuts  in  Saigon's  army.
South  Vietnam's   big  cities,  overcrowded  with  restless
war  refugees, could erupt in rioting.
—Wall  Street  Journal,  April  30.
may  learn  that  the  famous  TV  program  for  children,  Sesame
Street,  "is  actually  subversive  and  contrary  to  our  Christian
heritage"   (3/25/71);  that   "the   die  for  totalitarianism"  was
cast  when  the  Supreme  Court  upheld  the  vote  for  18-year  olds
(3/4/71);  that  Attorney  General  Mitchell,  though  posing  as
"Mr.  Law and  Order,"  is insidiously refusing  to  put  the  Black
Panthers  on  his  subversive   list  (2/4/71);  and  that  Nixon
committed  treason  when  he  opened  the  door  to  better  relations
with  China  (3/2/71).   The  flavor  of  the  demonstration  was
indicated  by  a  gentleman  in  the  crowd  who  claimed  to  be  a
lawyer.   He  told   a  reporter   Nixon   was  only  pretending  to
oppose  Communism—"he's trying to keep  the  American public
fooled  until  he  can  get  them   totally  enclosed   in   socialism."
This   is  the   loony-bin   constituency  which   provides   the   last
hope   of   certain   support   for   the   victory  policy   Nixon   dare
not  too  openly  avow.
Unfortunately   any  lunatic  can   escape   detection   today   by
getting   his  hair  cut.   The  pro-war  demonstrators   dwell,  like
Rarick  and  Schmitz,  in  a  paranoid  world  where  it  seems  all
too  logical  to  suspect  that  Nixon,  like  Eisenhower  before  him,
may  be a  conscious  tool  of  the  Communist  conspiracy.   Birchite
theory  may  be  a  joke  now  but  this  is  just  the   conspiratorial
miasma  in  which  all  the  horrors  of  Fascism  and  Nazism  were
bred  a  generation   ago,  and  can  germinate   again.   Nixon  and
Mitchell  intersect  with  it  because  at  bottom  they,  too,   believe
that  all  their  troubles  with  today's  youth  and  the  peaceniks
spring  from  conspiracies  hatched  by  a  diabolically  clever   few,
that  if  only  they  can  throw  Rennie  Davis  in  jail  most  of  their
troubles  will  be  over,  and  that  to  preach  an  end  of  the  war
and   of  social  injustice  as  the  path  to  domestic  peace  is—as
Nixon   put  it  in  his  Phoenix   speech  last  October—"appease-
ment."   The   "tough-minded   approach  to  violence"   he  advo-
cated  at  Phoenix  was the  guide-line the  police  and  the military
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May  17, 1971
A Maneuver Which May Indicate The Kissinger Kidnap Plot Was Abandoned
THE  LETTERS  APPENDED  to  the  new  indictment  in  the  Ber-
rigan  case  lower  our  opinion  of  the  government  and  the  de-
fendants.  People who  (1)  would  talk so loosely  of kidnapping
Kissinger  and  some  unnamed  "liberals"  to  "try"  him  and   (2)
put  it  on  paper  are  silly  and  dangerous.   The  next  step  after
kidnapping   is  murder,  as  we  saw  in  Quebec.    The   idea  of
conscience  as  a  higher,law  can  be  overdone;  the  fact  that  a
man,  however  sincere,  feels  something  deeply  neither  makes
it  true  or,  if  true,  warrants taking  the  law  in  his  own  hands.
Lynchers and  Torquemadas  were produced  by the  same process;
it  is time to  put  the  brakes on  fanaticism in our  own  ranks.
The  Clue  To  The   Puzzle
But  the  government  is  itself  guilty  of  disrespect  for  law  in
releasing  these  letters  with  the  new  indictment,  and  we  cannot
believe   that   the   courts   will  not   treat   this  latest   maneuver
harshly.  It  is another  effort,  like J.  Edgar  Hoover's  sensational
testimony  last  year,  to  try  the  case  in  public.   We  agree  with
Gary  Wills,  author  of  Nixon  Agonistes,  who  told   a  Johns
Hopkins  audience  after  the  new  indictment came  down   (Balti-
more  Sun,  May  3)  that  Hoover  would  not  have  revealed  the
alleged  kidnap  plot  "if  the  plot  had  not  been  given  up.   He
would  much  rather  have  caught  the  plotters  in  the  act."   The
letters  show  that  Rev. Philip  Berrigan  had  serious  doubts  about
the plan's feasibility.
If  one  assumes  the  plot  was  abandoned,  all  the  pieces  of
the  government's   puzzling  conduct  begin   to   fit.   It  would
explain  why  Hoover   disclosed  the  plot  instead  of  waiting  to
catch  the  plotters  red-handed.  It  would  also  explain  why  the
government  released  the  letters  with  a  new  indictment  instead
of  waiting  to  use  them  as  key  pieces  of  evidence  in  the  trial.
On  trial,  the  letters  would  have  had  to  be  authenticated;  the
judge  would  rule  on  admissibility.  They  might  look  very dif-
ferently  in  the  full  context  of  other  evidence,  and  they  could
not  be  used  as  evidence  against  the  other  alleged  conspirators
if  their  cases  were  severed.   A  defense  motion  to  sever  was
pending.   So  was  a  defense  motion  to  get  a  look  at  this  and
other  evidence  under  a  protective  order  preventing   pre-trial
public  disclosure.
Instead  of  waiting  for  a  court  ruling  on  these  motions,  the
government  jumped  the  gun  by  releasing  these  letters.   This
endangers  their  admissibility but  serves  the  purpose  of  damag-
ing  all  the  defendants,  though   the  letters  would  have  been
Freedoms  We're   Defending   Dept.
The  repression  of  newspapers  continues  and  indeed
has  been  increased.   The  Catholic  biweekly   Doi  Dien—
Face  to  Face—has  been  closed  for  6  months  and  its
editor,   Father   Chan   Tin,   has   been   sentenced   to   9
months  in  jail.   Father  Truong  Ba  Can  has  also  been
sentenced   to   9  months   for   an  article   which   he   pub-
lished  in  the  Catholic  biweekly  Doi  Dien.   As  of  March
1,   1971,   Vietnam's  largest   circulation  newspaper   Tin
Sang—Morning  News—had  experienced  the  suppression
of  11 of  its  past  12 issues.  Tin  Sang  is  edited  by a Viet-
namese  Congressman,  Ngo  Cong  Due.
It  is  also  distressing  to  note  the  way  in  which  the
US  Government   aids  and  abets  the  systematic  repres-
sion  of  political  dissent  in  South  Vietnam.    The  1970
report   to   the   Ambassador   from   the   Director  of   the
USAID   program   in  Vietnam  notes  that   in   1971   the
United  States  will  pay  $30,000,000  for  prisons  and public
safety  whereas  in   1970  the   US   paid  only   $20,900,000
for  this  category.   At  the  same  time  the  total   expendi-
ture   for   public   health  financed  by  the   US   decreased
from  a  total  of  $27.8  million  in  1970  to  $25  million  in
1971.
—Rep.  Drinan  (D.  Mass.)  in  the  House  April  20.
admissible  if  authenticated  and  in  the  event  of  severance  only
against  those  who  wrote  them.   One  can  only  conclude  that
this  maneuver,  like  the  attempt  to  peddle  the  documents  to
Time  Magazine,  indicates  that  the  letters  really  wouldn't   add
up  to  much  if  subjected  to  fair  trial  procedures.   Time,  to  its
credit, declined to take part  in the  smear.  While  Time  will not
disclose  the  source,  it  seems  obviously  to  have  been  the  FBI
itself  which offered  the  letters.
To   top   it   all,   the   new   indictrfient   adds   to   the   alleged
conspiracy  acts  of  draft   record  burning  for  which  there  are
already  admissions  and  even  convictions.  Since  these  are  now
lumped   with  the  kidnap  plot  in  one  conspiracy  count,  the
government  may  easily  win  a  conviction  even  if  the  jury  be-
lieves  there  was no  plot  to  kidnap  Kissinger  and  sabotage  the
capital's  heating  ducts.   The  form  of  the  indictment  forecloses
separate  verdicts  and  it  might  look  as  if  the  government  had
proved  the  kidnap  plot  when  all  it  had  done  was  "prove"
what  everybody  admits—that  there  was  a  plot  to  burn  draft
records.  Pretty tricky!
HISC/HUAC  Gets  A  New  Lease  On Life  Despite  A  Record High  Vote  For  Its  Abolition
In  March  the  California   State  Senate  voted  to  abolish  its
Un-American  Activities  Committee   after  the  president  pro
tempore  of  the  Senate,  James Mills  of  San  Diego,  discovered
that  the  committee  kept  a  file  on  him  among  other  "subver-
sives."  Congressman  Edwards  of  California   suggested  that
the  House  of  Representatives  follow  that  example  and  abol-
ish   its   own  Internal   Security   Committee,   as   House   Un-
American  is  now  named.   Though  18  of  California's  38  Con-
gressmen  voted  to  abolish  HISC/HUAC  when  its  annual
appropriation  came  up on  April  29, it  got  $820,000  by  a  vote
of  298 to  75.  Just  a  few  minutes earlier,  104 members  voted
for an Edwards motion  to recommit the appropriation request
for  public  hearings  on its  necessity.  These  were  the  largest
votes  against  this  witch  hunt  body  since  it  was  established
as  a standing  committee  of  the  House  by  a  bare  majority  of
146  to  134  in  1945.
The  votes  came   after   Father   Drinan.   a  Jesuit  recently
elected  from   Massachusetts  and  the  only   civil   libertarian
heretic  on  the  committee,  revealed  for  the  first  time  that  it
too  has  a file on  members  of  the  House,  though  the   Commit-
tee  claims  that  dossiers  on  present  Congressmen  are  not
kept  in  its  active  files  but  held  highly  secret.   Yet  Edwards
pointed  out that  guilt-by-association  material  from  the  Com-
mittee   files   about   Senator   McGovern   and   Congressman
Dellums  turned   up  in  a  McCarthy-era   style  speech  on  the
peace    movement    by    Republican    Congressman   John   G.
Schmitz  of  Orange  County   California  which  filled  45  pages
of  the  Congressional  Record  April  21.  Schmitz  lists  himself
in   the   Congressional   Directory   as   a   John   Birch   Society
member,  but  we'll  bet  a  dollar  to  a  doughnut  HISC/HUAC
doesn't  have  a file on  Schmitz.
Father  Drinan  touched  a  tender  nerve  when   he  told  the
House  a  vote  for  this  discredited  committee  could  be  justi-
fied  only  by  a  fear  that  a  member's  vote  would  be  "carica-
tured  by  future   political   enemies  as  a  vote  which  indicates
that  he is  'soft  on communism.'"  How long,  he  asked,  "must
members   of   the   Congress  be  subservient  to. this   craven
fear?"  The  same  members,  like  Boggs.  who  object  to  FBI
surveillance,  submit  to  that  of  HISC/HUAC.   Others,  who
criticize   Army  spying  on  civilians,   meekly   vote  for  a  com-
mittee  whose  anonymous   and  secret  files  are  a  source  of
slander against dissenters  of  all  kinds.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May  17,1971
Nixon's  Own  Unnoticed  "Pulitzer  Prizes"  In  The  Kent  State  Killings
Two    KINDS  OF  PRIZES  were  given  out  last   week  on  the
anniversary   of   the   Kent   State   killings,  one   publicly,   one
covertly.   Pulitzer  prizes  went  to  the  Akron   Beacon-]ournal,
a  Knight  Newspaper,  for  its  thorough  and  courageous  special
issue  on  the  shooting  and  to  John  Paul  Filo,  21-year  old  free
lance  photographer,   for  that  heart-rending  picture   of   Mary
Vecchio  crying  out  over  the  body  of  Jeffrey  Miller,  a  feat  for
which  Filo  has  been  punished  by  joblessness.   The  awards  on
the  other  side  of  the  fence  were  the  almost  unnoticed  nomina-
tion  by  Nixon  of  Hobart  Lewis,  executive  editor  of  Readers
Digest,  and  of  James  Michener,  as  members  of  the  Advisory
Committee  to  the  U.S.   Information  Agency.   Michener's  ac-
count  of  the  Kent  State killings  in  the  March  and  April  issues
of  the  Digest  did  for  Nixon  what  the  Scranton  Commission
refused  to  do—excuse  the  killings  as  due  to  a  plot  by  a  few
agitators.   The  Digest  has  been  a  virtual  Nixon  house-organ
for  years; it  put  a  research  team  on  the  Kent  killings  last  year
and  then  got  Michener  to  do  the  writing.   The   result  was
expected.   Since the  appointments  require  Senate confirmation,
we hope  some  Senator will block  unanimous consent  and  make
a  speech  on  the  Kent  State  murders and  the  quality of  Digest
coverage  and  ask  whether  this  is  the  kind  of  information  we
want  spread  world-wide.  And  a  scowl  for  the  Senate  Foreign
Relations  Committee  which  approved  these  nominations with-
out  a murmur.
The  Indifference  Of  The  Media
While  CBS marked  the  anniversary with  a  moving  program
about  the  families  of  the  four  killed  at  Kent,  the  press  and
the  media  generally  showed  a  basic  indifference  in  their  treat-
ment  of  a  press  conference  held  here  May  3  by  an  interfaith
group  which is pressing  the  Justice Department  to  quit  stalling
and  to  name  a  special  Federal  grand  jury.   So far  as the  clergy-
men  have  been  able  to  learn,  the  Akron  Beacon-Journal  was
the  only  paper  to  cover  the  statement  they  issued  on  the  un-
answered  questions  and  the  need  for  a  Federal  grand  jury.   The
National  Council  of  Churches,  the Union  of  American  Hebrew
Congregations,  the  Board  of  Christian  Social  Concerns  of  the
United   Methodist    Church   and   the   Synagogue   Council   of
America  joined  in  the  appeal  and  hoped  to  see  the  Attorney
General  soon.   A  Federal  grand  jury  in  Mississippi  failed  to
indict  in  the  Jackson  State  killings but  did  at  least  expose  the
perjury  and  the  conspiracy  to  obstruct   justice  of  the  Jackson
police.    This  may  help   the  families  of  the  victims  in   their
private  suits.   It's  a  strange  kind  of  law and  order  which  treats
the  killing  of  students,  white  and  black,  as a  peccadillo.
What  Michener  Kept  Off  The  Today   Show
What  makes  us  uneasy  is  that  .  .  .  effective  literary
atmosphere  is  sometimes  created  at  some  distance  from
reality  as  we  on  campus  know  it  ...      Full  page  city
newspaper  ads  claim  the  Digest's   version  tells   "what
really  happened"  .  .  .  that  the  truth  about  a  sinister
"Haunted  House"  is  revealed.  Considering  that,  at  least
as  condensed,  these  "truths"  are  established  by  highly
dubious  and  even  inaccurate  use  of  facts,  the   Digest's
claims  will  mislead  their  millions of  readers  .  .  . The
"Haunted   House"  is   presented   as  a  hippie  commune
visited  by people whose names,  it  is  claimed, answer  the
question,   "Was  Kent  State  attacked  by  outside   agita-
tors?" But this  house  is  not  a commune. It  is  a 4-apart-
ment  house   rented   by  the   local   Catholic  Church  and
regularly   houses   college  faculty,  fraternity  men  and
other  ordinary  people.   It  is  not  ca'led  "The  Haunted
House"  by  townspeople,  and  its  sinister  atmosphere  in
the  Digest  is  a  literary  creation.
—From  a  statement  by  Craig  Morgan,  Student  Body
President,   Kent   State    University,    endorsed    by   the
Student  Senate  March   8,  on  the   first   installment  of
James  Michener's  book  on Kent  State  as  it  appeared  in
the  March  issue  of  Reader's  Digest.  Th
:
s  is whit  Mich-
ener  prevented   me  from   quoting   on  the  NBC    Today
show  on  Apr'1  28  by  shouting  me  down  as  the  program
ended.  For  the  truth  about  the  killings  read  the  on-the-
scene  report   by  two  Cleveland  Plain  Dealer  reporters,
Michael  D.  Roberts  and  Joseph  Eszterhas  in  their  un-
justly  neglected  book, "Thirteen  Seconds."
THE   SAIGON   GOVERNMENT  has  taken   steps  to  make  a
lonely  pilgrim  for  peace  a  man  without  a  country.   It  has
invalidated  the  passport   of  the  Buddhist  monk  and  poet,
Thich  Nhat  Hanh,  now touring  the  U.S.  for  the  Fellowship
of   Reconciliation  and   advised   the   American   government
{Baltimore   Sun  from  Saigon,  May  7)   that  he  is   illegally
abroad.    Saigon  hopes  he~will  be  deported   back  to   South
Vietnam  where  prison  awaits  him.   He  is  head  of  the  Viet-
namese  Buddhist  peace   delegation   in  Paris   and   has  been
asking  that  the  U.S.   declare  a  unilateral  cease-fire,  end  all
bombing  and  set a  date  for  total  withdrawal.   He  is a  saintly
man  who  speaks  for  a  suffering   people.   His  deportation
would   add  to  our  country's  shame.    Please  protest  to  the
State Department.
Bad  News  From  Cuba:  Stalinist-Style   Confession  Wrung  From  Revolutionary  Poet
When  Heberto Padilla was  awarded a  poetry  prize  in 1968
by  the   Cuban  Union  of  Artists  and  Writers,  Verde   Olivo,
organ  of  Castro's  armed  forces  protested.   Brass  hats  run
true  to  type in every  society,  and Padilla's  passionate concern
for  truth was  too  much  for  them.  Their power has  since  in-
creased  and  on  March  20 Padilla was  imprisoned on  unspeci-
fied  charges   in   Havana.   On  April   9  a   group   of  leading
Leftist  writers in Western  Europe and Latin America,  includ-
ing   Jean-Paul   Sartre,   Car!os   Fuentes,   Octavia   Paz   and
Carlos  Franqui  protested  in  an  open  letter  to   Castro    (JLe
Monde,  April  9  and  New  York  Review  May 6)  that  "the  use
of  repressive  measures  against  intellectuals and writers who
have  exercised  their  right  of  criticism  within  the  revolution
can  only have deeply  negative  repercussions among the  anti-
imperialist  forces  of  the  entire  world."  On  April  27, Padilla
was  released  but  only  after  signing  a  confession  (text,  Le
Monde,  April  29)  as  phony  as  the  worst  in  the  Stalin  era and
in  Czechoslovakia's Slansky  affair.
The  Cuban novelist,  Juan  Arcocha,  who  once  represented
the  Castro  daily, Revolution,  in  Moscow  declared in  the  same
issue  of  Le  Monde  that  it  could  only  have  been  obtained  by
torture.    The  confession   accused   the   independent  Leftist,
K.  S.  Karol,  author  of  "The  Guerrillas  in  Power,"   and  the
Left  Socialist  agricultural  expert,  Rene  Dumont,  author  of
"Cuba:  Est-ll   Socialist?"  of  being  CIA  agents.   Both  have
visited  Cuba  several  times on  Castro's  invitation.  Both  books
criticize  the  growing  militarization  of  Cuba  and  the  nega-
tive  effect  on  agriculture and  on  popular  support.
Castro  replied  to  the  letter   of  protest   in  a  speech   {Le
Monde,  May 4)  in  which  he  said  it  was  good  news  that  "the
liberal  bourgeoisie  are  at  war  with  us."   Stalinist-style,  he
evaded  the  basic  issue.   How  can  the  regime  be  saved  from
military   and   bureaucratic  rigidity,   how   can   Cuba's   full
human  and  natural  resources   be  mobilized,  if   there  is   no
freedom  of  criticism?   In  an  earlier  day,  Castro  and  Che
Guevara  themselves   made  this  point.   Today  Castro  is  sur-
rounded  by  yes  men.  His  own  vanity  and  megalomania  have
become  enemies  of  a  besieged  revolution.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  May 17,  1971
"Will  You  Be A  Good  German  And  Look  The  Other  Way?"
(Continued  From Page  One)
applied  to the  May Day  protesters  even  when  they were largely
and unmistakably non-violent.
Just  As  They  Have  Done  In  Vietnam
This,  as much  as  the  emergency,  explains  why  of  more  than
10,000  seized,  hardly  20  percent  were  arrested   legally,  and
why  they  were  held  under   disgraceful   conditions  in  packed
jails   and   makeshift  detention   centers  during  the   May  Day
events.    Traffic   moved   but   law  was  suspended,   and   in   the
process  many  otherwise  staid  citizens  were  angered  and  radi-
calized.  This  is what  Kennedy, the  only  Senator  to  defend  the
May Day tribe,  meant when  he said  in a speech  at  lona College,
"The   system  has  responded  as  poorly  to  the  war  protests  as  it
has  to  the  war."   Here,  as  in  Vietnam,  Nixon   carries  on  the
policy  of  trying  to  solve  a  political  problem   by  military  or
police  means.   The  over-reaction  sprang  from  basic  approach
as  much  as  police  necessity.   Every  reporter  I  know  who  had
contact  with  the  May  Day  tribe  were  impressed  as  I  was  by
their  kindliness to  each  other,  the  tact  they  showed  in  street
arguments   with   older   people,   the   devotion   and—yes—love
which  led  them  to  the  risks  they  took,  their  striving  toward  a
more  ethical  world  which  is  the  inner  core  of  their  non-con-
formity.   But  they,  whom  Thoreau   and  Gandhi  would   have
saluted   as  their   children,  were   treated   as  dangerous   kooks
while  the  real  kooks  were  regarded  indulgently  as  miguided
patriots.   And  this  was  not  just  because  these  youth  had  re-
verted  to  the  hair  styles of  Charles  II  and  Louis XIV,  creating
a  moronic  shock  effect.   There  was more  than  barber  shop  bias
behind   a  frequent   police   barbarity.   Nothing  ever   makes  a
society  feel  more  menaced  than  its  saints.
The  May Day  events  were  remarkably disciplined,  especially
considering  the  little  Pearl  Harbor  surprise  attack  with  which
the  police  and  the  military  drove  most  of  the  rock-and-roll
fans  out  of  town  early  Sunday  morning.   Wilder  elements  in
the  wings  were  kept  under  control,  trashing  to  a  minimum.
Such  incidents  as  the  rough-housing  in  the  offices  of  Senators
Goldwater  and  Tower   were  very  much  the   exception.    Both
incidents  were  deplored   by  the  leadership;  both  Senators  had
been  most  courteous—as  is  their  wont—in  talking  with  non-
violent  peace  delegations.   Tower,  in  protesting   the   disorder
Just  A  Little  Sport
For  the  most  part,  the  crowd  was  peaceful.   But  at
one  point,  after  six  FBI  agents  dashed out  of  the  build-
ing  to   arrest   a  young  man  who  was  writing  on  the
exterior  walls, an  attempt  was  made to  charge  the  gate.
Among  those  who  helped  drag  the  young  man  into  the
Justice  Department,  courtyard  and  wrestle  him  to  the
pavement  was William C. Sullivan, 57, the  No.  3  man in
the  FBI  and  one  frequently  mentioned  as  successor  to
J.  Edgar  Hoover.   Sullivan  described  the  action  to  a
reporter  as  "just  a little  sport."
—Washington  Post, May  5.
of  one group,  admitted  "both  the  dissenters and  I  have  gained"
from   his  other   discussions.    How   would  we   feel   if  pro-war
goons  roughed  up  the  offices  of  pro-peace  Senators?
Were  the  May  Day  events  worthwhile?  Much  of  the  dis-
approval  from  other  sectors of  the  peace  movement  were stand-
ard  expressions  designed   to  protect   their  own  respectability.
The  peace  movement  is  divided  between  those  who  wish  to
persuade  and  those  who  wish  to  "bring  the  war  home."   The
May   Day   tribe   represented   the   non-violent   section   of   the
latter.   Both  approaches  may  be  necessary.  Why  shouldn't  we
undergo  some  little  disruption  of  traffic  to  make  the  sluggish
conscience  of  the  country aware  of  the  misery  and  murder  we
continue  to  rain   down  on  Indochina?   The   relatively  mild
reaction  of  the  citizenry  to  the  disruption,  and  the  widespread
criticism  of  the  police,   reflect  not  only  a  weariness  with  the
war  but  a  general  recognition  that  the  government  is  not  re-
sponding  as  it  should  to  normal  political processes  and  bring-
ing war  to an end.  Just  as a handful of  guerillas can be  effective
only  where   hope   of   change   by  normal  political  means  has
disappeared,  so it  is  here  with  the  tactics  of  disruption.  In  the
wake  of  May  Day,  there  are  two  main  worries  for  the  govern-
ment  if  it  persists.    One   is  the   painful   potency  of  that  cry
raised  by  the  May  Day  tribe,  "Will  you  be  a  good  German
and  look  the  other  way?"   The  other  is  how  much  turmoil  a
relative handful created.  If  there  had  been  100,000  youngsters
here,  or   50,000,  instead  of   10,000,  the  task  of  maintaining
order  would  have  been  formidable.   That  should  keep  Nixon
and  Mitchell  awake at  night.
We'll  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed Envelope
FOR  STONE'S  NEW  BOOK
For  the  enclosed special pre-publication  price  of  $8.95
send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  Polemics  and  Prophecies:
1967-70  (Random House). Regularly  $10.
(To)   Name
Street
City   ....................................   Zip................  State....................
Indicate  if   gift   announcement  wished  d
Please  renew  Q   or enter  Q   a sub for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street  ......................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................  State..
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly                6/17/71
4420  29th  St.  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N.W.
Washington,  D.C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published   every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th   St..   N.W.,   Washington,   D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published   and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;  $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.  Air  Mail  rates: 517 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED