I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1971
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1971mar08.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue:  How   They  Lie  About  Laos
That's  Telling  Them
"Reds Call  Laos Drive Stalled."—Reuters in  Baltimore  Sun  February   ,"j
"Laird  Says  Drive  Has  Paused,  Not  Stalled."—Same  I'upcr,  Same  Dinj
I. F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
VOL. XIX, NO.  5MARCH  8,  1971        i°'«WASHINGTON,  D. C.20  CENTS
The  Military  Machine  Is  In  Command
Nothing  had changed. There  were  the  same  star-studded,
medal-bedecked  uniforms,  but  on  different  generals.   The
same  top-secret  confidential  charts  and  the  same  self-as-
sured   masculine  tones   explaining  exactly   how   we   were
winning  the  war  to  save  the  fighting  little  democracy  of
South  Vietnam.  It  was  like  the  old  movie  on  the  late  late
show.   And  President  Nixon  looked  in   admiration   at   his
generals  like  a  football  player   looks  at   his  hero  coach—
just like  Lyndon Johnson did.
—Rep.  Rees  (D.  Calif.)—a  World   War  II    infantryman—
describing  a  White  House  briefing  for  Congressmen  Feb.  IS.
The   first  problem   raised  by  the  Laotian   invasion  was  how
to  get  the  ARVN  troops  in.  Now   it  looks  as  if  the  next—and
harder—problem  will  be  how  to  get  them  out.  On   Feb.   24
Secretary   Laird  assured   a  press  conference  that   the   ARVN
forces  were  "achieving  their  objective  .  .  .  The   initiative  no
longer  belongs  to  the  enemy."  But  as  this   was  written  on
March   1,  the   South   Vietnamese  troops   had   just   abandoned
their  fifth  base  in  a  week.  ARVN   troops  had  to  flee  on  foot
carrying  their  wounded   from   one   base   "because   heavy  anti-
aircraft  fire,"  according  to  the  UPI  (Wash.  Star,  March   1),
"prevented  U.S.  helicopters   from  dropping  supplies  or  evacu-
ating  the   wounded."   Airpower   is  again   proving  indecisive.
This  Time  It's  The  Failure  of  Tactical  Air
The  invasion was  attempted  because  even  the  heaviest  bom-
bardment   in  history   (see   footnote   p.   3)   had   failed   to  cut
enemy  supply  lines  on  the  Ho   Chi  Minh   trail.  Interdiction
having   failed,    it   was   hoped    that   overwhelming   airpower,
applied  tactically in  support  of  ground  troops,  would  make  it
possible  to  cut  the  trail  on  the  ground.   The   U.S.   mustered
what  seems  to  be  the  biggest  concentration  of  helicopters   in
the  history  of  warfare.  Their   sheer  number  was  supposed   to
add  an  entirely  new  dimension  to  the  conflict.   It  was  hoped
that  they  could  not  only  supply  and  succor  the  ARVN  troops
on  the  ground   but  use  the  invaders  as  bait  and  then  clobber
their  attackers  from  the  air.  Route  9,  the  road  into  Laos,  had
been  rendered  unsafe  by  enemy  ambushes  so  the  plan  was  to
establish  fire  bases  to  the  north  and  south  of  it  to  secure  the
road.  Gunships   were   to  protect  these  fire  bases   from   attack
while helicopters  dropped  supplies  and  picked  up  the  wounded.
Now   it   looks  as  if   airpower   is  failing  tactically,  as   it   has
already  failed  at  interdiction.
The  consequences   may  be  far-reaching.  The  helicopter   was
supposed  to  be  technology's  answer  to  insurgency,  the  weapon
of  the  uebermensch  in  developed   societies  against  those  lesser
breeds  in  the  underdeveloped  world  unwise  enough  to  revolt
against   him.  Now   it  looks  as  if   heavy  ground  fire  pays  off
enormously  against  the  helicopters,  which  are  very  vulnerable,
and  even  against  fighter-bombers.   Cost  effectiveness—in   Mc-
Namara's  lingo—seems  to  be  on  the  side  of  the   "natives."
On  The   Credibility  Of  Generals
"I  have   been   disturbed   by   reports,  usually   attrib-
utable  to  a  junior  officer  in  the  field  that  this operation
has  bogged down."
—Lt.  Gen.  Vogt  at  a  Pentagon   briefing,  Feb.  24.
M.  Francois  Sully  covered  the  Indochina  war  as   a
combat  correspondent.   He  was  one  of  the  last  corres-
pondents  to  leave  the  doomed  fortress  at  Dienbienphu
and  later  loved  to  tell  of  his  experience  there—one  of
the  many  that  led  him  to  believe that  the  way  to  cover
a  war  was  to  talk  to  the  privates, not  generals.   On  his
arrival  at  Dienbienphu,  he  recalled,  he  was  briefed  by
a  French  general  on  the  impregnability  of  the  fortress,
the  military weakness  of  the  Yietminh,  the  Communist
enemy,  and  the   assured French victory.   But  in  wander-
ing  around  the   camp,  M.  Sully  remembered,  he  asked
an  old  Foreign  Legion  sergeant  for  his  opinion  of  the
situation;  the  sergeant   looked  around  at  the mountains
rimming  Dienbienphu,  where the  Vietminh  were gather-
ing,  and  said:  "It's   a  stink  hole."
—From  M. Sully's  obituary  New  York   Times  Feb.  24
Ammunition  and  anti-aircraft  guns  are  cheap  while helicopters
and  their pilots  are  expensive. The  fighting  in  Laos  is destroy-
ing  the  Buck  Rogers  delusion  behind  the  Nixon   Doctrine,  in
which  Asians  fight  Asians on  the  ground  while  we,  the  super-
men,  ensure  victory  for  our  side  from  the  air.  In  extremis  the
helicopter  was  also  counted  on  to  evacuate  ARVN  troops  if  a
retreat  proved  necessary.  Evacuating demoralized  and  wounded
troops  under  heavy ground  fire  is more  difficult  than  dropping
supplies.   Dunkirk  and   Dien   Bien   Phu   must   appear   in   the
nightmares  of  the  generals.  As  more  U.S.  helicopters  are  shot
down,   and  we  begin  to  drop  ground   troops   for   "protective
encirclement"   (the   Pentagon's   latest  semantic  invention)  to
rescue  their  pilots,  what  happens  when  the  rescuers  have  to  be
rescued ?
Some  of  ARVN's   best  battalions  have  already  been  chewed
up  in  Laos.  We  are  rushing  more   ARVN   troops  and   more
U.S.  helicopter   into  the  battle.  But  this  is  one  the  enemy  can
afford  to  lose more  easily than  we  can.  They  can  withdraw  and
wait  for  the  next  dry  season.  But  a  serious  setback  for   ARVN
could   upset   our  plans  to  get  Thieu  reelected  President   next
Fall.   Already   "Big"    Minh,   the   chief  hope  of   the  anti-war
forces   in   Saigon,   usually  super-cautious,   is  quoted   as  saying
(New   York  Times,  Feb.  28),  that  the  Laotian  operation   could
have  a  "disintegrating   effect  on  the  army  as  a  whole,"   adding
that  it  performs  best  "when  it  fights  for  the  defense  of  the
fatherland,  not  for  any  other  purpose  and  least  of  all  for  the
purpose   of  invasion."   The  crafty  old  opportunist   must   scent
a  crisis  ahead;   he  has  been   quiet   for   weeks.   Nixon   cannot
present   Vietnamization  as  a  success  in  his  own   fight   for  re-
(Continned  on Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-We.ckhi,  March  8, 1071
How Do You Cut The Ho Chi Minh Trail Without Reaching Its Hub?...
"The  operation—and  I  read  a  complete report  from General
A hr a ins  this  morning—has  gone  according  to  plan.  The South
Vietnamese  have  already  cut   three   major   roads—when   we
call  them  roads,  let's  say   trails—which  led  from  Tchepone
down  into  Cambodia and,  of  course,  into  South  Vietnam  .  .  .
The Cambodia  action  in May and June  cut one lifeline  . . . This
action  would  either  cut  or  seriously  disrupt  the  other  pipeline
or  lifeline,  the   lifeline  coming  down  through  Laos,  the  Ho
Chi  Minh  trail  .  .  .  The  North  Vietnamese  .  .  .  have  to  fight
here or give up the  struggle."
—President  Nixon  at  his  news  conference   of  Feb.  17.
Five  days  later,  when  it  was  clear  that  South   Vietnamese
troops  were  stalled  more  than  10 miles  east  of  Tchepone  (or
Sepone),  government   officials   denied  that  this  was  a  major
objective,  but  declined  to  do  so  on  the  record  or  permit   the
press  to  identify  their  Department.  When  they   were   asked
how  the  traffic  could  be  choked  off  without  taking  Tchepone,
they  acknowledged  an  apparent  contradiction.   Another   cor-
respondent  asked:  in  view  of  the  fact  that  Sepone  has  been
called  the  "Grand  Central  Station"  of  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  trail
complex,  could  the  operation   be  regarded  as  a  success   if  it
did  not  get  through  to  Sepone,  or  cut  the  trails  to  the  north
or  south  of it?  The  spokesman   replied  (direct  quotation  for-
bidden)   that   he   didn't   think   that   you   could   judge   this
operation   not   to   have   been   a   success   if   it   doesn't   go  to
Sepone.  There  was  hilarity  over  this  triple  negative.
Two   days   later  Secretary   Laird   held   a  Pentagon  press
conference   (with  Lt.  Gen.  Vogt,  of  the  Joint  Chiefs   of     Staff),
saying   that  he  (Laird)    always   had  "felt   that  the  American
public   was  entitled   to  the  straight   facts."    The  reader   can
judge   for   himself   how  "straight"   were  the  "facts"   he  gave:
From  The  Pentagon Transcript
Q.  How  disappointed  would  you  gentlemen  be,  if  at  all,  if
the  transportation   complex   at  Sepone   was  not  broken   up  by
theARVN?
LAIRD.   I  don't   know  what  you  refer   to  as  a   complex.
There  are  certain  roads  that  cross  there.
Q.  The  White  House   has  called  it  a  great  transshipment
point.
1AIRD.  Sepone,  as  such,  has  never  been  an  objective  .  .  .
Q.  The   general   [Vogt]  has  just  identified   it  as  a  chief
transshipment point.
LAIRD.  It  is  a  hub  as  far  as  the  road  network  is  concerned.
I  think  that's  the  important   thing  to  bear  in  mind.
Q.  If  they don't  reach  that  hub,  would  you be disappointed?
LAIRD.  I  think  we should  hear  from  General  Vogt  on  that.
VOGT.  I  think  a  key  to  the  answer  to  that  question  is,
does  the  enemy  in  fact  intend  and  will  he  make  use  of   the
Even  Dead  Cows  Uody-Counted
The  defendant  [('alley]   suggested   another  possible
incentive   for  what  happened   at   Mylai—the   pressure
to   produce  "a   high   body   count"   in  Vietnam  combat.
"The  division  was  pressing  for  it,"  ('alley  recalled,  "be-
cause  they  wanted  to  get  the  America!  Division  up  to
the   standards   of   the   other   divisions   that   had   been
there  for  a  longer  period  of  time.  And, of  course, every
company  was  competing  with  body  counts."   The   pla-
toon  leader  clearly  thought  it  was  an  absurd  way  to
measure  the  war's  progress.  "There  is  no way  to really
figure out  exactly a  body  count,"  he said.  "At  that  time,
anything   went   into  a   body  count—VC,   buffalo,   pigs,
cows,  anything dead,  you  put  into  your  body  count."
—Wm. Greider  in the  W<tshi>iytoii  Post, Feb. 24
After  the  shooting  stopped,  he  and  the  other   officers
of  Charlie Company  lunched  together  and  chatted  about
a  "body  count"   for   the   mission.   "Off  the   top  of  my
head,"  Calley  said  he  estimated  30  to  40  for  his  platoon.
But the  company commander generously  gave  him credit
for  50.—Same, from  the  Calley  trial  Fcb 25
artery  systems  that  go  to  the  west  of  the  Sepone  area.  As  I
have  indicated,  there  is  no  evidence that  he  is  moving  in  that
direction.  If  he  does  and  he  makes  major  use  of  those  roads
to  the  west,  then,  obviously,  we'll  have  to  take  some  action
against it...
Q.   Is it a key thing to break up  the  hub  which was described
by the  General near  Sepone ?
LAIRD.  The   key  thing   is  to  disrupt  the   logistics  supply
routes  and   I  have  always  made  that  very  clear   in   repeating
any  briefings  that   I  have  had.   I  believe  that  this  operation,
even  if  it  were  to  terminate—and  there  is  no  time  limit,  fixed
time  limit  on  it—now  has  been   successful   in  disrupting  the
logistics  supplies.
Q.   Mr.   Secretary,  how  can  you  say  you  have  disrupted  it
if  you  have  no  remote  idea  how  much  of  the  traffic  you  have
stopped ?
LAIRD.   We   have  made  it  substantially  more  difficult   for
them  to  use this  road  network.  We  will  have  those  appraisals.
I  don't   like  to  give   specific  numbers  of  tons  until  we  have
evaluated  the  intelligence,  and  we will  be making those  evalua-
tions.   I  believe  that   it's   better   from   the   standpoint   of   the
credibility  of  this  Department   .  . .
Q.   Mr.  Secretary,  are  you  saying  in  effect,   if  I  understand
what  has  been  transmitted  this  morning,  that  the  field  reports
Veteran  War  Correspondent  On Statistical  Fakery In  The Mekong  Delta  "Pacification*
The  U.S.  command  reports  that  Vinh  Long's  Vietnamiza-
tion  is  moving  along,  that  U.S.  troops  are  pulling  out  stead-
ily,  and that  only  20,000  U.S.  troops  remain  in  the  Mekong
Delta.   What  the  command  didn't  report   was  that  in  1967
the  U.S.  had  only  4,000  troops  in  the  Delta—now  there  are
five  times  that   many.
Saigon  forces  now  carry  the  bulk  of  the  fighting  and oper-
ate  also  at  night,  according   to  the  military  briefings.   If
you  talk   to  American  advisors   in  the  field,  you  find  out
however  that  there  is  little  contact  with  the  NLF.    Saigon
troops   are  now  required  to  make  nightly   forays   into  the
jungle,  so  they   go  out  a  few  yards  every  night   sometime
between  10  p.m.  and  midnight,  usually  along  the  same  path,
and  then  return.   If  any  ammunition  is  expended   in  one  of
these  forays,  it  is  reported  as  an ambush  by the  South  Viet-
namese  troops.   In  one  district,  out  of  1200  night-time  am-
bushes,  only  three  involved  any  firing  of  guns,  and  no  one
knows  what  the  targets  of  the  shots  were.
The  U.S.  Army  claims  that  92%  of  the  Mekong  Delta  is
pacified,  meaning  that  the  people  in  control  of  the  villages
are  loyal  to  the  Saigon  government.   Such  figures  are  really
the  product  of  statisticalization  of  the  war.
The  American  computer  names  one  Vinh  Long  hamlet  a
Class  B  pacified  hamlet—not  quite Class  A,  but  highly  paci-
fied.   Not  long   before,   the  villagers   had  assassinated  the
hamlet   chief   and   his   deputy—both   of   whom  worked   for
Saigon.   In  an  average  month,  a  district  advisor  must  feed
the  answers  to  5,379 multiple choice  questions  into  the  com-
puter   in  Saigon.    In  one  district   the   senior   advisor  had
visited  only  25  of  43  hamlets  and  yet  had  filled  out  scores  of
reports  on each  one.
—Harvey  Myerson,  former   Chicago  Daily  News  war  cor-
respondent,   author  of   a   book   on  Vinh   Long   in   Vietnam.
(Houghton-Mifflin,      1970)   "now   a   teacher   at   the   Univ.  of
Hawaii,  reports   over  KPOI-FM   in  Honolulu   on  a  revisit  to
the  province  (Liberation  News  Service).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  8,
The  Fibs  and  The  Fluster  As The  Drive  For  Tchepone  Bogged  Down
that  arc  being  filed  by  the  correspondents  in  Vietnam about  an
operation  that  lias  bogged  down  16  to  17  miles inside  Laos  are
incorrect  and,  in  fact,  that  the  South  Vietnamese  forces  have
stopped  because their immediate  objectives have been achieved,
have  been  obtained,  and   not  weather  or  the  enemy  have  ne-
cessitated  that  stoppage  and  that  these  reports  from  the  field
are  incorrect ?
First   Dod»'e,  Then   Deny
I.AIRD.  1 would  only  state  that  the  objective of  disrupting
the  logistics  routes is being  achieved. Now  if  the  enemy should
react  and  use  route  23  or  some  other  route  to  the  west  of  the
complex  that  has  been  used,  then  a  decision  will  be  made  at
that  time,  I  am  sure,  by  the  South Vietnamese.
Q.  You  don't  consider  the  operation  bogged  down  now,  to
use  the  term  of  the  journalists  over there?
I.AIRD.  No.  The  operation  is  going  according  to  plan.
Q.   Mr.  Secretary, is  it  possible  that  the  enemy  is  not  using
route   23   because   they   don't   have  to,   they  are   still   getting
everything  they  need  down  the  present  course?  Are  you  not
exaggerating  the  importance of  what  has  gone  on  up  to  now?
LAIRD.   I  hope   I  haven't  exaggerated   it.  I  have  tried   to
face  up  to  the  realities  of  the  situation  .  .  .
Q.   Mr.  Secretary,  from  all  of  this  information would  it  be
fair  to  come  to  this  conclusion:  That  with  all  our  air   power
and  with  all  our  electronic devices,  sensors,  that  it  is  not  possi-
ble  with  those  means  alone,  air  power  plus  electronics,  to  stop
the  flow  of   traffic  down  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  Trail  during  the
dry  season ?
LAIRD,  The   best  means  of  interdiction  that  has  ever   been
developed  militarily,  and  the  surest,  is by  ground  forces.  With
all   apologies   to  the  United   States   Air   Force,  ground   inter-
diction   is  still   the  surest  way  of  accomplishing  this  kind  of
objective.*
Q.   Mr.   Secretary,  if  92   is  impassible, as  the  general   said,
and  23  is  not  being  used,  as  the  general  said,  has  the  flow  of
supplies  been  reduced ?
LAIRD.   Yes.  That  is  a  different  question  than  the   number
of  tons.  They  have  been  reduced,  yes.
Q.   Is  it  different  than  the  number  of  tons?
LAIRD.   I  was  asked  for  the  specific  number  of  tons.
Q.  No,  sir,  you  were  not.  You  were  asked  whether  it  was
roughly  half,  a  quarter  or  three-quarters.
LAIRD.   It has been  reduced.
On  Those  Helicopter  Statistics
Khe  Sanh—Some  of  the  heaviest  antiaircraft  fire  of
the  war   is  downing  an  average  of   10  American heli-
copters  a  day  pilots  here  report. ...   To  date  the  U.S.
command  in  Saigon  has  announced  the  loss  of  29  heli-
copters  in  combat  since  the  invasion  began  Feb.  8—18
in   Laos,  11  in  South  Vietnam  .  .  .  But  the  command
figures   do  not  include  helicopters  that   are  shot  down
and  later  recovered.   Pilots  and  other  military  sources
believe  this  category   includes  a  third  or  more  of   the
estimated  fleet  of   500-plus  helicopters  to  support  the
Laos  invasion .  .  .  Pilots  earlier this  week  were ordered
by  the   command  not  to  discuss  downed  but   salvaged
helicopters  with  newsmen.
—Michael  Parks  in  the  Baltimore  Sun  Feb.  25
Said   one   American  Colonel:   "If   they   can   cut   the
tail  number out  of  the  wreckage and glue  a  new chopper
to  it,  they'll  never  admit the  aircraft  was  lost."
—Newsweek:   Indochina,  the  New Optimism  March  1
Q.   By what  percentage  ? [No   answer]
Q.   Is  there  not  another  route  between  914  and  23  known,
I  believe,  as 234?
VOGT.  It  is  not  passable  to  trucks.  They  can  get  one  or
two  vehicles  through   a  day.  It's  an  extremely  rough   terrain.
Q.   Aside  from  the  military  operations,  can  you  say  whether
or  not  the  military  achievements  so  far  have  compensated    for
the  political  disadvantages, that  is, the  criticism  in this country?
LAIRD.  Yes,  I  think  it  has,  because   I  feel  confident  that  it
has  insured  our  troop  withdrawal  schedule.  .  . .
*  "The  Ho  Chi  Minh  trail,"  the  UPI  reported  from  Saigon
(Wash.  Daily  News,  Feb.  2),  "has  withstood  more  bombs  than
allies  dropped  on  Nazi  Germany in  World  War  II  ...     The
road  network  and the  supplies  survive  despite  .  .  .  300 to  400
missions  a  day  by  jet  fighter-bombers  and  waves  of  B-52s,
each   capable  of   dropping  30  tons   of   bombs   on   a  specific
target."   For   a   glimpse   of   the   limitations   of   airpower  in
tactical  support  see  Alvin  Schuster's  report   from  Saigon  in
the  New  York  Times,  Feb.  27  where  he  quotes  a  South  Viet-
namese  officer  at  a  forward  command  post  near  Khesanh  as
saying,  "The  symptoms  are  very  bad.  This  is  not  because  of
our  lack  of   ability  to   fight   at   the   hill   but  because   of   the
almost   total   ineffectiveness   of   American   airpower."  These
limitations   were   also   evident   in   the   Korean   war   both   in
interdiction and tactical  support.
7th  Air  Force  Commander In  Southeast
BOB  SCHIEFFER   [CBS  Reporter] :  Mr. Secretary,  there
will  be  another  dry  season  next  year.   Will that  require  an-
other   South   Vietnamese   operation   into   Laos   to   interdict
supplies?
SECRETARY  LAIRD:  Well,  that  would  be  a  matter  that
would  certainly  be  up  to  the  South  Vietnamese.   I  would—
to  be  very  frank  with  you  they  will  even  have  a  greater
capability  to  carry  on  those  kind  of  operations   next   year.
SCHIEFFER:   As  I  understand  it  there's  no  plan  now  to
train  or equip the  South  Vietnamese  to  handle  this  bombing
of  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  Trail  in  Laos  once  the  United  States
stops  that.   What  do  you  do  about  that?    Does  the   United
States  just  stay  there?    Will  we  be  required  to  stay   there
and  bomb as  long  as  the  North  Vietnamese   send  supplies—
LAIRD:   I  don't   know  where  you  got  your   information
that    they  weren't  being   prepared  in  this  area,  but  we  are
turning  over  the  gunships,  we  also  are  using  the  A-ls  and
other  types  of  aircraft  that  can  carry  on  a  very   effective
interdiction  campaign  as  far  as  the  South  Vietnamese   are
concerned.
Asia  Contradicts  Laird  On A  Vital  Point
SCHIEFFER:   You're  telling  me that  that  plan  is  already
underway?
LAIRD:  The plan is  underway  to  give  the  South  Vietnam-
ese  Air  Force  an  interdiction  capability.
—CBS  News  special  report,  February  16.
CHARLES  COLLINGWOOD  [CBS  Reporter]: Do  we  con-
template    training    and   equipping   the    South    Vietnamese
eventually   to  undertake  the  interdiction   missions   that  we
are  now  flying  in  Laos  and  Cambodia?
GEN.  LUCIUS  CLAY,  JR.   [Commander,   7th  Air   Force
in  S.E.  Asia]:  No,  sir,  we're  not.   Basically,  the  Vietnamese
Air  Force  is  being  trained  to  handle  the  insurgency   problem
within  the   country,   within  the   Republic  of   Vietnam.    As
you  may  know,  the  fighter  aircraft  we  ar«  leaving  with  the
Vietnamese  Air  Force  are  basically  A-ls   and  A-37s;  basic-
ally  short  range,  close-support   type  airplanes.    So  we're  not
leaving   heavy   carriers   of   ordnance,   long-range    type   air-
planes,  which  are  the  kind  necessary  if  you're  going  to  be
operating   in  the  trails  of  Laos  and  outside  the  Republic  of
Vietnam.—Interview  on the same CBS  program.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly,  March  S,  1971
(Continued  from  Page  One)
election   in   1972  if  .some  variety  of   neutralist—after   all  the
agony—should   win   the  Presidency  in  South  Vietnam.  After
Cambodia  and  Laos,  what  will  be  Nixon's  next gamble?  What
will the military  sell him next?
Why  The  Pax  Americana
Every  indicator,  from  events  in  Indochina  to  the  new  State
of  the  World   message,  demonstrates  that  the  military  machine
is   in  command.  The   reasons   for   this   are  many.  The   most
obvious  is  the  impatience which  domestic  politics  imposes  on
Nixon,  and  his  emotional  commitment  to  victory.  This  makes
him  an  easy  mark  for  any  quick  fix  in  the  military  salesman's
bag  of  contingency  plans.  The  basic  reason  lies  in  the   sheer
inertial  mass  of  our  huge   military  establishment,  the   biggest
and  most  murderous  the  world  has  ever  seen.  The  means  has
become  the  end.  It  is  not  political  doctrine  which  determines
military  size  but  military  size  which  determines  doctrine.
The   banner   headline  in  US.   News   &  World   Report   for
March  8  sums  up  the  impression  the  Nixon   Doctrine   is  in-
tended  to  create:  "A  Changing  U.S.  Role  in  the  World:  The
Nixon  Concept".  But  under  the  shift  in  tone  and  tactics—the
soft-sell—the  course  set  by  the  new  message   is  still  the  same
course  on  which  the  U.S.  embarked  with  the  Truman  Doctrine
in  1947  and  its  reaffirmance  for  Asia  in  the  Johnson  Doctrine
of    1967.   The   whole   non-Communist  world   is   declared   an
American  protectorate  and  preserve,  as  Latin  America—to  its
sorrow—has  been  for  a  century  and  a  half  under  the   Monroe
Doctrine.   The   only  difference   in  the  Nixon   Doctrine   is  its
revival  of  the  Dulles  hope  that  we  could  enlist Asians to  fight
Asians.  Significantly,  this  is  not  extended  to  Western   Europe;
there  Nixon  does  not  suggest  any scaling down  in  U.S.  troops;
there   he  asks  our  NATO   allies  only  for   a   stepup   in   con-
ventional  arms  expenditure.  The  smug  official   line  is  that  we
give  Asians  the  arms  to  defend  their  freedom.    The  reality,
visible  in  the  Calley  trial  in  all  its  racial  rawness,  is that  dinks,
slopes,   slant-eyes  and   gooks  are   cheap   and   expendable—as
"wastable"  as  Kleenex   for  mine-detection  and  other  sanitary
tasks.  And  we are  being  brain-washed into  the  moral imbecility
required  for  this  imperial  operation  by  the  Pentagon's   propa-
ganda  machine.*
Almost  everything  Nixon   says  in  the  new  message  and  the
radio   address  explaining  it   is  more   safely   read   in   reverse.
National   Survival  Or  National  Suicide?
South  Vietnam  now  has  an  excellent  opportunity  not
only  to  survive  but  to  build  a  strong  free  society.
—From  Ni.ron's  address   on  foreign   policy,   Feb.    25.
It  is  Asians  now  fighting  Asians—and  they  do  it  for
our   purposes  more  than   their   own.    What  regard  do
we  have  for  them,  for  those  villages,  those  children,
those  women,  those  soldiers?    The  are  merely  Asians
righting   Asians,   and   if  luck   smiles   upon   us   in   this
great  game  of   life   and  death   in  Southeast   Asia,  we
will  reap  the  political  benefits  from   this  new  ante  on
the   war's  table—the   political   benefit   that   will   keep
America  cool,  while  Vietnam  falls  deeper  into  the    pit,
her  armies  in  three  theaters,  her  future   more  dismal.
—Senator  Kennedy,  to  tlie  Business  Executives  Move
for  Peace,  Feb.   17, text,  Con.    Rec.   S1539,  Feb.   18.
That  "generation  of  peace"  he  promises  is a generation  of  arms
race,  tension  and  war.  Events  in  the  short  run  and  doctrine  in
the  long  run  point  toward  war  with  China.  China is mobilizing
its  people  now   in   huge   rallies  in   every  major   city  for   the
possibility  of  intervening  in  Indochina  if  Nixon's  next  gamble
brings  our   forces  closer   to   its  borders.   Though  Nixon   has
promised   not   to   use   "tactical   nuclear   weapons"   in   North
Vietnam,  there  is  little  doubt   that   strategic   nuclear   weapons
would  be  used  in  the  event  of  war  with  China.  That  is  the
holocaust  which  can  still  be   prevented   if  Congress  votes   to
ban   U.S.   troops   in  North   Vietnam  and   for  the  McGovern-
Hatfield  bill  to  bring  home  our  troops  by  the  end  of  this  year.
But  the  perspectives  of  the  peace  movement  must  go  beyond
Vietnam.  Implicit  in  the  Nixon  message  are  more   Vietnams,
preparation  for  "limited  nuclear  war"  and  an  intensification of
the  nuclear   arms  race.  The   SALT  talks  are  a  mere  holding
operation,  disarming  public  opinion   while  we  go  ahead   with
ABM  and  MIRV,  and  prepare   new  monsters   of   destruction.
We  are  trapped  by  militarism  and  imperialism.  These,  and  the
ancient  sanguinary  habits  of  mankind,  are  the  enemy.
* That  CBS  should  dare  to  expose  this  so  brilliantly  in  its
"Selling  of  the  Pentagon,"   Feb.    23  was  an  event  of  prime
importance.  For  a  fuller  view  we  recommend  highly  Senator
Fulbright's  new  book,  The  Pentagon  Propaganda  Machine,  a
main source for  the  CBS show.
We'll  Send  A   Free  Sample  Copy  Of   This  Issue  To  A  Friend  If  You  Send  Us A  Long,  Stamped,  Self  Addressed  Envelope
Bi-Weekly Mart
—To  subscribe  or  to  send   a   gift   subscription,  send
$5 with  your  address  and  zip  code  to  the  address  below.
—To  get  Stone's new collection,  "Polemics  and  Proph-
ecies:   1967-70"   (Random   House:   $10)   at   the   special
$8.95  price  postpaid  for  Bi-Weekly  readers,  send  check
or  money  order  to  the  address   below.
—If  you  want  Stone's  new  paperback,  "The   Killings
at  Kent  State:  How Murder  Went  Unpunished"  (New
York  Review  and  Vintage  Press)  the  price  is  $1.95.   It
contains  the  full  text,  available  nowhere  else,  of  the
so-called   "secret   FBI   report",  the   summary    of   FBI
findings  prepared  by  the   Civil  Rights  Division   of  the
Justice  Department  but  never  submitted  to  the   Ohio
Grand  Jury.
—Stone's  "Hidden  History  of  the  Korean  War",   the
inside   story  of  America's   first   Vietnam,  long   out  of
print  is  available  again  (Monthly  Review  Press)   $7.50
postpaid.
—Paperback   editions   (Vintage   Press)   of   Stone's
earlier  collections,  "In  A  Time  of  Torment"  ($1.95)  and
"The  Haunted  Fifties"  ($2.45)  at  bookstores.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420 29th Street NW, Washington,  D.C.   20008
$5  A  YEAR                              3/8/71
I.  F. Stone's  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Bi-Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.   Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..  N.W..    Washington.  D C
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  r.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  fa  in  the  U.S.;    $6  in  Canada'
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:  120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED