I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965feb22.pdf

============================================================

Norman  Thomas  on  the  UN  Crisis, P.  2
Portrait  of  An  Ambassador  Bravely  Intent  on  Self-Deception
"Ambassador  Taylor  said  in  the  interview  [with  Mutual
Broadcasting  System  in  Saigon]  that  he  believed  that  this
week's  air  strikes  had  had   'a   very   good   effect'   on   the
morale  of  the  South  Vietnamese."
—New  York  Times Feb. 11 from Saigon.
"The  air  strikes  have  had  no  noticeable  or  beneficial   ef-
fect  on public  thinking  as  far  as  Saigon  is  concerned.   The
average  Vietnamese  in  Saigon,  if  he  paid  any  attention   at
all  to  the  war,  has  long  felt  that  it  was  something  that
has  been  taken  out  of  Vietnamese  hands  anyway,  b "most
countries  the  threat  of  national  disaster  is  enough  to  make
rival  factions  put  aside  their  differences  and  form  a  udn*d
front.   Things  do not  work quite  that  way  in  Saigon.   The
greater   the  threat,  the  greater  the  in-fighting  and  squab-
bling  among  generals  and  civilians  alike."
—John  Maffre    from  Saigon,  Washington Pott  same day.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL. xni,  NO. 7FEBRUARY  22,  1966toi       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
16  CENTS
A  Word  of Good  Advice  From  Mao  Tse-Tung
It  has  become the  fashion  among our military, as among the
French  before  their  defeat  in  Algeria,  to  read  Mao  Tse-tung.
In  the  Pentagon,  and  at  the  Special  Warfare  school  in  Ft.
Bragg,  Mao's  manual  on  guerrilla  warfare  is  regarded  as  an
indispensable  handbook  for  combatting  "wars  of  liberation,"
almost  as  if  it  were  a  captured  secret  document,  which  dis-
closes  the  plans  and  tactics of  the  other  side.    If  the  military
find  Mao  so  rewarding,  we  poor   civilians  may  hardly  be
blamed  for  taking  him  seriously,  too,  and  we  are  glad  that
The  New   Republic  in  its  issue  of  Feb.  27*  is  printing  the
full  text  of  Edgar  Snow's  interview  with  the  leader  of  the
Chinese  Revolution.    The  most  important  word  of  advice  in
it  is  the  one  most  likely  to  go  unheeded.
Why  The  Trumpet  Proved  Uncertain
The  bit  of  caution  to  which  we  refer  comes  at  a  timely
moment.    The  most  important  casualty  of  the  reprisal  raids
after  Pleiku  is the  collapse  of  the  hopes  that  our  military, and
certain  New  Frontier  intellectuals  like  W.  W.  Rostow,  had
attached  to  counter-guerrilla  warfare.    The  decision  to  bomb
North  Vietnam  confessed  that  after  four  years  of  try-out  in
South  Vietnam,  their  counter-guerrilla  theories  had  failed;  the
guerrillas  were  stronger,  better  armed,  enjoyed  more  popular
support  and  controlled  more  territory  than  when  our  inter-
vention  began  in  1961.    The  reprisal  bombings marked a shift
back  to  the  simplistic  theory  that  "wars  of  revolution"   are
operated  by  remote  control  from  Hanoi,  Moscow  or  Peking.
We  are now prepared  to  escalate back to  John  Foster  Dulles's
"massive  retaliation"  if  these  distant  sorcerers  do  not  call  off
their  annoying apprentices.   Mao  told  Snow that  he  had  read
Gen.  Maxwell  Taylor's  book,  "The  Uncertain  Trumpet"  and
some of  the  U.S.  anti-guerrilla  manuals which sought  to apply
Mao's  ideas  in  reverse.    Their  weakness  Mao  told  Snow,  is
that  they  ignore  "the  decisive  political  fact  that  .  .  . govern-
ments  cut  off  from  the  masses  could  not  win  against  wars
of   liberation."  •
Voices for  Peace
"Bombing   North  Vietnam  in  retaliation  against  at-
tack  on  U.S.  base  in  South  Vietnam  constitutes  admis-
sion  of  impotence  of  our  policy.    Inability   to   defend
American   soldiers  implies  lack  of   support  by   South
Vietnamese   which   cannot   be   corrected   by   bombing
North.    Attack  on bases  in  North  during  Kosygin  visit
shows  poor  judgment  in  use  of  power,  invites  directed
intervention   by  North   Vietnamese   army,   China  and
U.S.S.R.    Urge  renewed  diplomatic  probes  to  explore
negotiated  settlement  with  international   guarantee*."
—Telegram  to  White  Home  by  Dr.  Benjamin   Spoek
and  Prof.   H.  Stuart  Hughes  of   SANE.
"America  is  falling  into  a  Vietcong  trap.    America
should  not  permit  the  Vietcong  to  determine  American
foreign  policy  by small  guerrilla  attacks .. .  provoking
this nation into military  actions which  if  continued  will
result  in  a  major  escalation  that  will  force  first  Com-
munist  China  and then  Russia  into  war.  .  .  .  This na-
tion  should  announce  its  willingness  to  seek  a  peaceful
settlement  that  will  result  in a  neutral  Vietnam,  guar-
anteed  by the  major  powers  with  a  UN  presence  .  .  .
ADA  urges  . . .  world-wide call  for a  cease-fire.  .  .  ."
—John  P.  Roche,  Americans  for  Democratic  Action.
"The  current  war  in  Vietnam  is  being  waged  in  be-
half   of  a  succession  of  unpopular  South   Vietnamese
dictatorships,  not  in  behalf  of  freedom."
—Students  for  A  Democratic  Society.
* A  substantial  but  incomplete  text  was  published  by  the
Washington  Post  Feb.  14.   Abroad  it  appeared  in  West Ger-
many's  Stern  (Feb.  21),  the  London  Sunday  Times  (Feb.  14)
and  Le Nouveau  Candida in Paris  (Feb.  18).  The last  provided
an  uncut  version.    It  is  a  pity  it  got  wider circulation  abroad
than  in  the  United  States  where  an  understanding  of   the
Chinese  viewpoint  is  most  needed.
Reprisal  raids  are  no  substitute  for  popular  support;   they
merely  deepen  the  revulsion  and  widen  die  area'of   conflict.
What  would  we  do  with  the  "Pleiku  doctrine"  ip  the  Con-
golese  civil  war,  Dr.  Bernard  Fall,  the  author  of   "The  Two
Vietnams,"   asked  the   other  day.    Will  we  bomb   Algeria
and  Egypt  for  supplying  the  rebels?    Latin  America,  where
we  have  been  training  the  local  military  and  gendarmerie  in
"special  warfare,"  may  soon  provide  a  reductio  ad  absurdum
of   the   reprisal   doctrine.     What   if  a  revolt  breaks  out   in
Brazil  against  the  military  dictatorship  we  helped   to  impose
on  that  huge  country?   Will  we  threaten  to  bomb  Havana,
Moscow  or Peking  unless  the  desperate peasants of  the  North-
east  march  back  to  the  plantations  with  their  hungry  bellies
rumbling ?
The  failure  to  grasp  Mao's  point   in  South  Vietnam  does
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
2   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  22,1965
The  ADA  Deflates  LBJ's  Budget
"Although   nominally   held   below   $100   billion,   the
Budget  actually  provides  for  a  modest   increase   of  $6
billion  in  expenditures,  much  too  modest  in  an  economy
which  grew  by  nearly  $40  billion  last  year.    This  Bud-
get   offers  no  prospect—and  no  hope—that   unemploy-
ment  in  the  coming  year  will  be  brought  close  even  to
the  'interim  goal'  of  4%.    By  choosing   to  cut  income
taxes,   [the   Budget]   favor[s]   more   private  affluence
over  urgent   social  needs.-    For  example,  the   education
system   needs   $5  billion  of   Federal   aid  or   more   this
year.    A  few  urban  school  systems  alone  could  usefully
absorb  more  than  the  amount   proposed  in  the  Budget
[$1.5   billion.]     The  housing   and  urban   renewal   pro-
grams  are  hardly  enough  to  prevent  further  deteriora-
tion  of  our  cities.    The  Council  of  Economic   Advisors
expects  a  decline  in  new  home  building  in  1965  instead
of  the  50%  increase   needed   to  start  depopulating  our
slums."
—Statement  of  ADA  National  Board,  Feb.  7  (abr.).
Suppose  the  U.S.  Were  Taxed  for  a  General  Assembly  Operation  It  Opposed?
Norman  Thomas  Criticizes  U.S.  Position  on  UN  Dues  Crisis
by  Norman   Thomas*
It  is  one  of  life's  grim  ironies  that  this  year,  the  20th  an-
niversary  of  the  creation  of  the  United  Nations,   was  to  be
celebrated   as  the  year  of  international  cooperation.    Instead
it  may  be  the  year  of  the  breakup  or  the  great  weakening  of
the  U.N.     The  problem,  of  course,  is  the  failure  not  only  of
Russia,  but  of  France,  to  pay  assessments  levied  by  the  Gen-
eral  Assembly for  peace-keeping  operations  in  the  Congo.  The
United  States  insists  that  the  Charter  penalty  be  invoked  by
depriving  these  nations  of  their  votes  in  the  Assembly.
The  effect  of  this might  very  well  be  the  withdrawal of  two
nations  altogether  from  the  U.N.    If  they  retain  membership,
it  would  be  at  the  price  of  resentment  and  opposition  which
would  come  close  to  paralyzing  the  U.N.     If  the  American
demand  should  come  to  a  vote  and  be  defeated  by the  Assem-
bly,  the  effect  on  the  U.N.  itself  and  American public  opinion
would  be  only  somewhat  less  disastrous.   The  danger  is  com-
pounded  by  the  fact  that  the  real  government  of  China, which
has  never  been  in  the  U.N.,  and  the  arrogant  Sukarno's  Indo-
nesia,  which  has  withdrawn  from  the  U.N.,  are  talking  about
a  possible  counterinternational  organization.
An Immovable Stand
The  average  American,  I  suspect,  if  he  pays  any  attention
to  this  serious  issue,  will  agree  with  what  seems  to  be  our
Government's  immovable stand.  They  say or  think:  "If  worse
comes  to  worse,  better  have  nations  withdraw  from  the   U.N.
rather  than  to  stay  in  defiance  of  its  basic  rules."
This  is  a  decision  I  seriously  question.    By  the  Charter  of
the  U.N.,  it  was  the  Security  Council,  in  which  each  of   the
Big  Five  had  a  veto  power,  which  had  the  right  to  impose
assessments  and  penalties  for   nonpayment.    This  right  was
transferred   to  the   Assembly  owing   to  the   stalemate   in   the
Security  Council.    An  advisory  opinion  of  the  sharply   divided
World  Court  sustained  what  we  might  call  the  constitution-
ality  of  the  Assembly's  power  to  assess.    The   Soviet  Union
and   France  for   different   reasons  challenged   the  Assembly's
right  to  assess  nations  which  refused  to  support   the  U.N.'s
peacekeeping  operations  in  the  Congo.     (The  success  of  those
operations  was  scarcely  a  shining  refutation  of  their   opposi-
tion.     The   Tshombe   whom   the   U.N.    fought   is  now  the
*A  letter  to  the  Washington  Post,  February  12.
Tshombe  whom  the  U.S.  aids  by  the  loan  of  airplanes.)
Finally,  it  must  be  remembered  that  assessments  are  levied
by  an  Assembly  in  which  the  tiniest  nations  and  those  with
the  least  financial  strength  have  each  one  vote  along  with  the
big  powers.    It  is  in  this  situation  that  the  Soviet  Union  and
France  refused   to  pay  up.     It  requires  little  imagination  to
predict  the  storm  that  would  arise  in  the  United  States  if  we
were  taxed  under  such  conditions  for  an  operation   in  which
we  did  not  believe.    I  hope  I  would  then  argue  that  we  ought
to  pay but  I would  also  argue  that  the  makeshift provision, for
levying  assessments  to  support  U.N.   action  is  dangerous   and
must  be  changed.
I  doubt  the  statesmanship  which  at  this  time  has  brought
about  so  sharp  a  confrontation  as  to  threaten  the  existence  of
the  U.N.,  and  I  think  popular  opinion  ought  even  at  this  late
date  to  encourage  our  government  to  go  along  with  the  Sec-
retary  General  of  the  U.N.   in  finding  some  way  out.    That
way  cannot  be  found  merely by  repeated  postponements  of  the
issue,  but  perhaps   the  question   could   be  postponed   until  a
definite  future  date,  during  which  a  committee  of  the  Assem-
bly  could  work  out  some  solution  of  this  issue  together   with
a  sounder  and  more  acceptable  formula  for  future  assessments.
Meanwhile,  the  Assembly could  address  itself  to  the  construc-
tive  tasks  before  it.
Proposal  to  Replace  FBI  on  Civil  Rights Provokes Clash  With  J.  Edgar Hoover
The  press  paid  scant  attention  when  the  New  York  Civil
Liberties  Union  Feb.  10  presented   Joseph  L.  Rauh,  Jr.  with
its  annual  Florina  Lasker  Award  for  his  devotion  to  civil
rights  and  liberties.    The  oversight   was  an  ironic   tribute
to  a  man  who  with  little  public  support  has  dared  over  the
years  to  be  a  constant  critic  of  J.  Edgar  Hoover   and  the
FBI.    In  his  acceptance  speech,  Rauh  made  public  a  letter
from   Hoover   responding   to  the   ADA's   call   for  a  special
civil  rights  investigative   agency  to  replace  the  FBI  in  the
South.    Hoover  said  he  was  "astounded"  at  the  charge  that
he   was   "not   wholeheartedly    determined"   to   enforce    the
civil  rights  laws.    He  asked  for  "specific  facts"  which  indi-
cate  a  failure  "to  fulfill  any  assigned   duty."
It  is  the   word  "assigned"  that  belies  Mr.  Hoover's  en-
thusiasm   for  civil  rights.    "I  cannot   help  recalling,"  said
Rauh,   quoting   from  a   recent   article   in  The  Progressive,
"that  the  FBI  did  not  even  have  a  regional   office  in  Mis-
sissippi   until   after   the   Philadelphia   slayings,   when  Mr.
Johnson  finally   persuaded   the   FBI   chief   to   remedy   that
lamentable   oversight."    Hoover's  letter  claimed  as  credits
for  the  FBI  the  recent  solving   of  a  few  civil  rights  slay-
ings  and  bombings.     These  were  made  possible,  Rauh  re-
plied,   only   because   the   agency,   after   years   of   prodding
from  civil  rights  groups,  finally  infiltrated  the  Klan.
When   Mr.  Hoover   opened  the   FBI   office   in   Mississippi
last  fall,  he  referred  to  the  "harsh  approach  to  the  Missis-
sippi   situation"  taken   by  the   authorities  in  Washington.
"It  is   hardly   consistent   with  a  'wholehearted   determina-
tion'  to  enforce  the  civil  rights  laws,"  said  Rauh,  "to  call
Attorney   General  Kennedy's  actions  in  Mississippi  'harsh'."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  22, 1965
At  The  Present  Pace  Selma's  Negroes  Will  Be  Registered  In  2,000  Years
LBJ's  Promised  Deadline  of  Feb.  15 Passes With  No  Voting  Rights  Bill
The  Administration  has  been  dragging  its  heels  in drafting
new  voting  rights  legislation.    In  his  State  of  the  Union  mes-
sage  the  President  promised  to  send  Congress  a  bill  by  Feb-
ruary  15,  but  as  we  go  to  press  neither  the  White  House  nor
the  Justice Department  has  made  the  usual drafting-stage con-
tacts with  civil rights  leaders  in  Congress.    "I  do  not  feel  the
sense  of  urgency  on  the  part   of  the  Department   of   Justice
that  we  should  feel  under  these  circumstances,"  Senator  Jav-
its  told  the  Senate  when  it  confirmed  Nicholas  Katzenbach  as
Attorney  General.    The   Senator  was  referring  to   the   slow
pace  of  Negro  registration  in  the  blackbelt  counties  of   the
Deep  South.    In  Dallas  County,  Alabama, whose  county  seat
is  Selma,  there  were  275  Negroes   registered  in  1956.     Nine
years  later,  after  the  passage  of  three  civil  rights  acts  and  the
prosecution  of  more  than  a  half-dozen  court  cases,  there  are
now  335  Negroes  registered—an  increase of  60.    At  this  rate
it  would  take  more  than  2,000  years  to  register  the   15,000
Negroes  in  the  county.
House-to-House  Registration
Progress  so  slow  calls  for  a  fresh  approach,  and  a  bill  in-
troduced   last  week   by  freshman  Rep.   Joseph   Resnick   (D.,
N.Y.)   offers  it.    The  intent  of  the  I960  Civil Rights  Act was
to  achieve  mass  registration  of  Negroes  through  the  appoint-
ment   of  voting  referees  wherever  there  was   "a  pattern   or
practice"  of  discrimination.   This  has  not  happened   for  two
reasons:  Determination  of  "a  pattern  or  practice"  was  left  in
the  hands  of  the  Southern  courts,  and  on  the  three  occasions
when  they  have  appointed  voting  referees,  few  Negroes  have
sought  registration  because  the  law  requires  that  they  first  try
to  register  with  local  county  registrars.    This  is  a  fearful  con-
dition  to  meet,  as  the  boxes  on  this  page  indicate.   The  Res-
nick  bill  would  eliminate  both  these  obstacles  to  mass  regis-
tration.    It  would  transfer  the  power  to  determine  "a  pattern
or  practice"  from  the  courts  to  a  Federal  Voting,  Registration
and  Elections Commission  whose  six-member bipartisan  board
would  be  appointed  by  the  President  with  the  consent  of  the
Senate.    After  making  such  a  determination,  the  Commission
Inside  Selma's Prison  Camps
"Mrs.   Mary   FOSTER   (age   46):   Tuesday   morning
we   stood   in  courthouse   trying   to   register   and   they
pushed  us  with  cattle  prods  and  loaded  us  on  the   bus.
After  they   arrested  us  they   sent  us  to  Camp   Selden
and  we  didn't  have  heat.    Tuesday  afternoon  they  sent
us  to  Camden,  [Ala.]  camp  on  a  cold  bus,  no  heat  in
cell,  and  it  was  about  100  feet  long  and  20  feet  wide,
about  55  women  in  the  cell.    This  is  where  Negro  pris-
oners  are  kept.    No  fire  all  winter,  no  smoking.    They
had  wood  floors  with  holes  between  planks.    They  gave
us  mattresses  later  and  cotton  blankets  but  they   didn't
give  us  enough.     Women   took   turns   to  use   blankets
and  every  time  one  woman  turned  over   she  woke  up
everybody   in   the   cell   because   there   was   too   many
women  in there.
"Mrs.  Atline  TAYLOR:  While  we  were  in  jail  one
of  the  men  told  the  clerk  to  hit  us  against   the   walls,
and  then  they  wouldn't  give  us  water.    We  stayed  in
jail  four  days  and  had  no  water  during  this  time.    We
drank  water  from  the   commode."
—Testimony   taken  Feb.  5  by  Congressional   delega-
tion  to  Selma.    Cong.  Rec.,  Feb.  9,  pps.  2382-85.
could  appoint  voting  registrars with  authority to  register  Ne-
groes  on  a  house-to-house  basis,  thus  by-passing the  intimida-
tion  and  harassment  of  public  county registration.
The  Resnick bill  would  eliminate two  additional weaknesses
in  the   1964   Act.    Under  it  a  6th  grade  education  creates  a
rebuttable   presumption   of   literacy.     Any  Negro   registered
under  this  provision  can  be  challenged  to  prove  his  literacy  in
lengthy  court  litigation.    The  Resnick  bill  would  make  a  6th
grade  education  a  conclusive  presumption   of   literacy.     The
1964   Act  also  applies  only  to  federal  elections;  it  thus  per-
mits  greater  discrimination in  the  election  of  the  Jim  Clarks
and  Ross  Barnetts  who  stand  most  directly  in  the  way  of  Ne-
gro  equality.    The   1957  and  I960  Acts  applied   to  all  elec-
tions   and   the   Resnick  bill  would   return   to   this  principle.
When  the  President finally does  submit his voting  rights legis-
lation,  the  Resnick  bill  will  serve  as  a measure  of  its  adequacy.
Selma's  Voter  Registration  As  Told  By  The  Negroes  In Line
"Rep.   CONYERS   (D.,  Mich.):  It   took   you  how   many
years  to  register to  vote?
"Mrs.  MOORE  (a  schoolteacher   for  26  years):  Twelve.
"Mr.  WEST:   I   am   a   house   painter   by   trade   which   I
took  up  by  GI  bill  of   rights.   I've  taken  it  up  for  18  or  19
years.   Since  participating  in  the  movement,  the  sheriff  and
others  know  me  now  so  I  can't   get   any  work.
"Rep.  COHELAN  (D.,  Col.):  How  frequently   have  you
tried  [to  register] 7
"Mr. WEST:  Four  occasions—the  first time in  1963.
"Rep.   COHELAN:  Why   didn't   you   try   to   register   in
1962?
"Mr.  WEST:  I  was  afraid.    I  had  been  warned  by  some
older  Negro  citizens   if   you  try   you  might  be  whipped.
"Rep.  COHELAN:  Why  did  you  get  courage  in  1963?
"Mr.  WEST:  I  felt  more  stronger  with  others   with  me.
"Mrs.  FOSTER:   We  have  to  sign  a  register   before  we
can  get  a  number.    If  we  sign  the  register  the  sheriff  will
tell  our  boss  and  the  boss  will  fire  employees.    If   people
who  receive  social  security  and  old  age  pension  checks  try
to  go  to  mass  rallies  they  cut  off  their  checks.
"Mrs.   COOPER:  I  went  down  to  register  to  vote,  so  I
was   standing   in  line.    I  was  working  at  the   Dunn   Rest
Home  as  a  practical  nurse.    My  employer  came  down  and
he  looked  in  the  line  and  he  saw  me.    He  had  his  super-
visor  to  call  a  friend  of  mine  and  told  her  to  tell  me  that
I   was  fired  because   he  saw   me  in  line.
"Mr.  GRANT: Last  Wednesday  I  was  arrested.    I  was  at
the   head   of  the  line  and  there   was  other  fellows   behind
me  and  they   were   arrested  and  carried  to   the   jailhouse.
When  we  got  on  the  elevator,  there  were  two  deputies  and
they   used  cattle   prods  and  struck  me  in  the  jaw  and  just
everywhere.     The   man   who   was   behind   me—he   was   64
years   old—they   struck   him  in  the   temple   and  the   blood
flew.
"Rep.  COHELAN:  Does  this  frighten  you  from  possibly
going  through  this again?
"Mr.  GRANT:  It  frightened   me.    I  don't  think  if   a  per-
son  don't  be  afraid  of  Sheriff  Jim  Clark  he  ain't  got   good
sense.     I'm   just   going    anyway,   and   ask   the   Lord   for
strength and courage."
—Testimony  taken  by  Congressional  delegation,  Feb.  5.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February It, 1865
Mao  Suggests  U.S.  Troops  Might
(Continued  from   Page   One)
not  arise  from  any  special  stupidity.   The  trouble  is  that  the
situation  there  has  degenerated  to  the  point  where  any  gov-
ernment  which was not  cut  off from  the  masses would  respond
to  their  war-weariness.    It  would  open  negotiations  with  the
rebels  and  ask  our  troops  to  leave.    It  has  proven  so hard  to
form  a  new  government  because  it  becomes  ever  harder  to
find  political  figures  willing  to  continue  the  war.    In  our
latest  effort  to  provide  some  cover  for  a  naked  military  dic-
tatorship  we have had  to  fall  back  on  men  to  the  right  of  the
late  Ngo  Dinh  Diem.    Diem's  earlier  reputation  was  based
on  his  refusal  to  serve  as a puppet  for  the  French.    The  three
leading  figures  in  the  ktest  regime  in  Saigon  were  all  col-
laborators   in  the  years  when  Diem  preferred   an   honorable
exile  in  America.   The  new Prime  Minister,  Phatn  Huy  Quat,
was Minister of  National  Defense  in  the  Bao Dai  regime  from
1950  until  the  French  defeat  in  1954.    This  is  hardly  a  testi-
monial  to  his  prowess  or  his  patriotism.    Of  the  three  Vice
Premiers,  two  of  them  were  also  Ministers  in  the  Bao  Dai
regime  (see  Francois  Nivolon's  dispatch  from  Saigon  in  the
Paris  Figaro  Feb.  15).   The  Dai  Viet  party to  which  the new
Premier  belongs  is  a  party  of  the  far  right,  expansionist  and
Fascistic.    The  day  he  took  office  troops  fired  on  demonstra-
tors  demanding  peace.    We  can  empty  every  bomb  load  in
the  7th  Fleet  on  North  Vietnam  but  it  won't  make  this  re-
gime  any  more  popular  in  the  South.    This  is  the  dead-end
street  of  which  Mao's  words  would  warn  us.
Not  At  All  Bellicose
Snow's  interview  with  Mao  is  given  additional  interest  by
another   casualty  of   the  Pleiku   reprisal   raids.    They  killed
the  hope,  perceptible  in  some  quarters  of  the  Administration,
that  the  Russians would  get  us  off the  hook  in  South  Vietnam
without  our  having  to  negotiate  with  the  Chinese.    In  the
long  run  in  any case  no  stable  settlement  is possible  in  an  area
so dose  to  China without  taking  Peking's  wishes  into  account.
It  is  as  if  the  Chinese  and  Russians  between  them  were  to
try  and  determine  the  destiny  of  Mexico  without   consulting
Washington.    The  U.S.  has  a  Monroe  Doctrine;  the  Russians
Stay  While  Peace  Was  Negotiated
Vietcong   Collect  Tolls  on  No.  1  Highway
Saigon,  Vietnam—Vietcong  troops,  virtually  unhin-
dered   by   South   Vietnamese   government   operations,
have  placed  a  stranglehold  on  the  only  overland  route
from  Saigon  to  the  border  of  Communist  North  Viet-
nam.  . . .  Vietcong  toll  booths  on arterial  route  1    ...
have  been  operating  openly  and freely  since  November.
.  . .  These  toll  booths are believed  to  have financed the
Communist  offensive  at  Binh  Gia  hi  December.  The  op-
eration  cost  government  forces  500  casualties,   includ-
ing  a  score  of  Americans.  .  .  .  Nearly  all  cars,  buses
and  trucks  are  stopped  at  the  toll  points  and  charged
$2  to  $10.  .  .  .  During  the  recent  holiday  season,  uni-
formed  soldiers  without  weapons  were  allowed  through
the  checkpoints  but  were  stripped  of  their  uniforms.
Vietcong  troops  in  the  area  all  wear  government  uni-
forms.  . .. All this  has had a devastating  effect  on the
economy  of  communities   all  the way up the  coast.  .  .  .
In   the   event   of   a   full-scale   conventional   war   with
North  Vietnam,  this  situation  could  become  desperate.
—Associated  Press in  Washington Star, Feb.  11.
insist  on  friendly  neighbors;  neither  can  logically  deny similar
geographical  spheres  of  influence  to  Peking.  But  can  we  nego-
tiate  with  China?    Snow  interviewed  Mao  on  January  9,  just
about  the  time  Washington  was  full  of  inspired  stories  that
an  attempt to  sound  out  the  Chinese  had  evoked  only  an arro-
gant  reply:  first  the  U.S.  must  withdraw  its  troops  and  then
China  would  see what  could  be  done.  Just  where  these  stories
originated  is not  known but  they  are hardly borne out  by what
Mao  said  to  Snow.   The  Chinese  leader  was  neither  bellicose
nor  dogmatic;  he  expressed  the  hope  of  improved  relations
with  the  U.S.    He  said  peace  could  be  negotiated  before  an
American  withdrawal  or  after  "or  a  conference  might  be  held
but  U.S.  troops  might  stay  around  Saigon,  as  in  the  case  of
South  Korea."    The  U.S.  would  be  better  off  out,  but  this  at
least  offers  face-saving possibilities  (how  Oriental  we  are  all
becoming!)  which  would  seem  to  be  worth  exploring.     It's
easier  to   drop   bombs  than   talk   peace,   but   LBJ's  favorite
Biblical  admonition,  if  we  recall  correctly,  is  not  "come  and
let  us  throw  bombs  together."                                      Feb. 16
We'll Send A  Free Sample  Copy Of This  Issue To  Friends  If  You  Send Stomped  Self-Addressed  Envelopes
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name    ....................................................................:.....................
Street   ..........................................................>.............................
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
2/22/85
For  the  enclosed  $5 tend  a  gift  sob  to:
(fo)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street      ........................................................................................
City   .........................................JEone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Baumted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished   D
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'1  Weekly.    Second  Clan  Portage  P«ld  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday  except  the  last  week  In  December  and  the  firit  week  In
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July   and  Augurt  at   5618  Nebraika  Ave..  N.W..   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  pnbliEhed  and  edited
by  I.  F° Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Erther  M.  Stone,    Subscription:   K   in  the   U.S.:    IS   in   Canada:   flO   elsewhere.    Air   Mail   ratee:
»16  to  Europe;   120  to  brad.  Alia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED