I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965sep27.pdf

============================================================

What  the MFDP   Won,  P. 3
On  The  Progress  of  Our Crusade to  Save  Vietnam
"Banmethuot,   South   Vietnam—Vietnamese   troops   have
been  terrorizing  the  civilian  population  in  the  central  high-
lands  . . . looting  villages.  . .  ."
—N.  Y.  Times Service in York,  Pa., Gazette, Sept.  18.
"Saigon—U.S.  forces  have  been  ordered  to  take  special
and continuing  measures  to  decrease  the  number  of  civilians
killed  by American  air strikes  and military  operations.  .  . .
In  an  order  issued  Sept.  7,  the  U.S.  Commander Gen. West-
moreland  admonished  his  subordinates  that  the  use  of  un-
necessary  force  will  embitter  the population. ...  He  called
for  tight  control  of  air  strikes."
—N.  Y.  Times Service in  York,  Pa., Gazette, Sept.  18.
"Saigon  (AP)—A  high  ranking  U.S.  spokesman  admitted
American   planes   bombed  the  demilitarized   zone   [between
North  and South  Vietnam]  twice  at  the end of last week....
The  second  attack   hit  a  South  Vietnamese  hamlet   in  the
zone,  killing  20  persons,   including   eight   policemen.   .  .  .
Loudspeakers  from  the  North  Vietnamese  side  were  blaring,
The  Americans  are  even  bombing  you  now.'"
—Washington  Post, Sept.  20.
L R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XIII,  NO.  31
SEPTEMBER   27,  1965
«>'       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Mote  In  Our  Own  Eye
It  would  clarify  the  struggle  for  world  peace,  if   attention
were  focussed   on  the  resemblance  between   the   Indian-Paki-
stani  war  and  the  war  in  Vietnam.    The  basic  cause  of   the
conflict  in  both  is  the  failure  to  honor  an  obligation  to  hold
free  elections.    A  plebiscite  to  decide  whether  divided   Kash-
mir  would  join  India  or  Pakistan  was promised  by the  British
in  1947  and  voted  by  the  United  Nations  Security  Council  in
1948.    The  Indians have refused  to  allow  a vote,  for  the  same
reason  that  we  blocked  the  Vietnamese  elections  promised  by
the  Geneva  Conference  of  1954—the  Indians  were  sure  they
would  lose.    Having  decided  against   free   elections,   the  In-
dians  were  forced  to  use  police  state  methods   in  ruling   the
part  of  Kashmir  they  held,  just  as  we  have  been  forced  to
do   in  South   Vietnam.    This  course   ended   in   Kashmir   by
alienating  even  pro-Indian  Muslims whose  great  leader  Sheikh
Abdullah  was  and  is  again  imprisoned,   though   he  dreamed
of  a  neutral  solution  in  which  an  autonomous  Kashmir  would
provide  the  bridge  to  reunite  India  and  Pakistan.
India  Follows  Our Example
Similarly  in   South  Vietnam,  we  have  supported   military
dictatorship,  suppressing  all  political  parties  lest  they  seek  the
peace  and  neutralism their  war-weary people  desire,  but  which
would  end  our  use  of  the  country  as  a  military  bridgehead
in  Asia.   In  both  Kashmir and  South  Vietnam, the  suppression
of  opinion  and  the  destruction  of  hope  have  given  rise  to  a
guerrilla  uprising.   This  has  had  help  from  across  the  border,
and  India  has  retaliated  by  reprisal  raids  into  Pakistan,  as  we
have  done  with  our  air  raids  on  North  Vietnam.   In  the  dis-
cussions  before  the   cease-fire,   India's  terms  were  much  like
our  own  in  Vietnam.   India  was prepared to  accept a  cease-fire
if  the  guerrilla  forces  were  withdrawn  and  Indian control  of
Kashmir   left   intact;   but   how   distinguish   between  Muslim
guerrillas  native  to  Indian-held   Kashmir  and  Muslim  guer-
rillas  from  Pakistani-held  Kashmir?    It  is  clear  that  in  both
places,  in  the  Jong  run,  there  will  be  no  peace  without  free
elections  and  at  least  some  neutral  autonomous status between
What  Did  They  Fear  He  Might  See?
"Since  the  time  of  the  Bay  of  Pigs  fiasco  when Mr.
Arthur  Sylvester,  the  voice  of  the  Pentagon,  asserted
the  government's  right  to  lie  to  save  itself,  we  have
seen  recurrent   examples   of  news  management.  .  .  .
Some  time  ago,  Mr. President,  after  the  Pentagon  had
claimed  smashing  victories  in  our  air  strikes  against
the  North  Vietnamese,  I  asked  to  see  photographs  of
the  damaged  areas.   I  was  told  they  were  'not  avail-
able.'   I asked why U.S.  television networks  were carry-
ing  films  by  Vietcong  photographers  but  were  seem-
ingly  unable  to  obtain  footage  showing  the  effects  of
our  raids.    There  was  no  explanation."
—Hruska  (B. Neb.)  in  the Senate, Sept.  IB.
the  contending  great   Powers.    Indian  internal  politics  have
long  blocked  such  a  solution,  as  does  ours  in  Vietnam.
India  fears  the  effect  of  a  humiliating  withdrawal  in  Kash-
mir,  as we  do  in  Vietnam.    But  to  India  and  Pakistan,  John-
son  and  Goldberg  preach   law,   and   adherence   to  the   UN
Charter;  they  say nothing  is  worth  what  a  war  will  cost  the
people,  that  compromise  is  necessary.    Unfortunately  there  is
no  greater  Power,  which  holds  purse  strings  on  us  as  we  do
on  Indian  and  Pakistan,  to  force  us  to  listen  to  the   same
arguments  for  a  cease-fire  in  Vietnam.  -There  we  ignore  the
law  and  the  Charter.   We  are  burning  up  the  country  merci-
lessly,  and  our  military are  jubilant because  neither  Russia  nor
China   has   dared   intervene.     As  our   military  see  it,   both
wanted  us  to  appear  a  paper  tiger.    We  have  made  them  ap-
pear  paper  tigers.    What  matter  if  the   cost  is  paid   in   the
blood  of  the  people  we purport to  be liberating?    And  in  the
blood  of  our  own  sons?    What  matter  if  the  shooting  goes
on  for  years?   Vietnam  has  become  a  target  practice ground
for  new  weapons  and  new  anti-guerrilla  techniques.    So  talk
of  peace  in  Vietnam  is  dying  down  in  Washington, while  we
achieve  it  in  Kashmir.   We  were  afraid  the  Indo-Pakisuai  war
might  interfere  with  ours  in  Vietnam.    But  what  if  ihe   UN
now  turned  and  demanded  a  cease-fire  there  too?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  27, 1965
Dodd's  Reply  The  Same  White  House  Rubbish  Against  Independent  Press  Coverage
Behind  Fulbright's  Attack  on  Our  Intervention  in  the  Dominican  Republic
Of  Fulbright's  speech  on  the  Dominican  Republic  (see  box
below),  a  number  of  things  need  to  be  said:  1.  It  was  one  of
the   few   times  in  American  history  in  which  a  U.S.  Senator
has  spoken   of   Latin  American  policy  with   uncompromising
objectivity.     It  will   do  our  country  good   by  making  Latins
feel  there  are  still  North  Americans  in  high  places  who  look
on  their  problems  with  humane  and  sympathetic  eye.    2.  In
the  opinion  of  many  well  informed  people  here,  however,   it
also  reflects  a  breakdown  of  hope  among  liberal  Senators  that
they  could  influence  the  President  privately  on  foreign  policy.
It  is  thought  that  Fulbright  spoke  out  publicly  because  he  felt
that  he  would  not  be  heard  otherwise.    This  means  that  the
more  optimistic  atmosphere   in  the  capital   I  reported   on  re-
turning  from  vacation  is  beginning  to  dwindle.  3.  The  speech
is  not  just  about  the  past.    It  should  be  read  carefully  because
of  the  shadow  it  casts  over  the  future  of  the  Dominican  Re-
public.    The  U.S.-armed  military  are  still  powerful;  the  ani-
mosity  to  Bosch  on  our  part  is  still  there.    Will  we  covertly
support  Trujillo's   right-hand   man  Balaguer  against   Bosch?
Liberals  Afraid  to  Speak  Out
4.  The  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  is  again   dem-
onstrating   its  inability  fully   to   perform   its  function.     Not
only  were  its  hearings  on  the  Dominican  Republic  all  held  in
private,  but  the  Committee  was  unable  to  bring   in  a   report.
There  is  no  reason   why  there   could   not  have  been   majority
and   minority  reports  on   the  Dominican   intervention.    One
suspects  that  the  liberal  majority was  itself  split  and  too  fear-
ful   of  the  White  House  and  anti-Communist   stereotypes   to
speak   out.     So  Fulbright's   speech  took  the  place   of  a  com-
mittee  report  and  Dodd's  reply  of  a  minority  statement.     On
the   floor   only   Morse   and   Clark   dared   support     Fulbright
though   a  substantial  minority  of  the  committee  if  not  a  ma-
jority  privately  agrees  with  the  chairman  on  the   Dominican
Republic  as  on  Vietnam.    5.  Russell's  speech  Sept.  21  defend-
ing  intervention in  the  Dominican  Republic  splits  the  ranks of
those  for  negotiating  peace  in  Vietnam.
LBJ's  False  Atrocity Figures
"U.S.  policy  was  marred  by  a  lack  of  candor  and  of
misinformation.     The   former   is   illustrated  by   official
assertions  that  U.S.  military  intervention  was  primarily
for  the  purpose of  saving  American  lives;  the  latter  is
illustrated   by   exaggerated   reports   of   massacres   and
atrocities  by  the  rebels—reports  which  no  one  has  been
able  to  verify.    It  was  officially  asserted, for  example—
by   the   President   in   a  press   conference   statement   on
June  17  according  to  an   official   State  Dept.  bulletin—
that   'some   1,500  innocent   people  were  murdered  and
shot,  and  their  heads  cut  off."    There  is  no  evidence  to
support  this statement."
—Fulbright  in  the  Senate, Sept. 15.
6.  Dodd  and  Fulbright represent  two  diametrically  opposite
approaches  to  foreign  policy.    Dodd   with  Eastland  and  their
Internal   Security   subcommittee  represent   the   paranoid   ap-
proach,   the  last  Senate  committee  operating  on   McCarthyite
lines.     Fulbright   represents   the   civilized   view.    There   has
been   bad   blood   between  the   two   men   ever   since   Fulbright
exposed   the  fact   that  Dodd  had   been  on  the  payroll  of   the
Guatemalan   dictatorship.    Dodd   supported   Johnson   for   the
Presidential  nomination in  I960  and  Johnson  as  a  reward  put
him  on  Foreign  Relations ahead  of  Clark,  who  had   seniority.
The  assignment  was  an  affront   to  the  chairman.    7.  The  de-
bate  in  the  Senate  last  week  brought  out  that  Dodd  had  at-
tended  only  one  of   the   13  sessions  the   committee  held   on
the  Dominican  affair.     His  complaint  about  the  "background
information"   pamphlet   the   Committee  published   was  ludi-
crous  and  largely, a  smear  attack on  the  Neu
1
  York  Times,  the
\'ew  York   Herald-Tribune   and  the  Washington  Post  for  their
reporting  from   Santo  Domingo.     He   did  not   really  answer
Fulbright  at  all  but   hashed  up   all  the   original   Communist
charges  without  even  sifting   out   the   since  admitted   factual
errors.    It  was  in  short  rubbish  but   it  is  the  kind  of   rubbish
the  White  House  itself   put  out  in  its  feud  with  press  cover-
age of  the  intervention.
What  North  Americans  Too  Easily  Forget  About  the  Principle  of  Non-intervention
"Article  15  of  the  Charter  of  the  Organization of  Ameri-
can  States  says  that,  'No  state  or  group  of  states  has  the
right   to   intervene,  directly   or  indirectly,  for   any   reason
whatsoever,  in  the  internal or  external  affairs  of  any  other
state.'    Article  17  states  that,  'The  territory  of  a  state  is
inviolable;  it  may  not  be  the  object,  even   temporarily  of
military  occupation ...  on  any  grounds  whatever."    These
clauses  are  not  ambiguous. ...  It  may  be  that  we  should
never  have  accepted  this  commitment  at  Bogota  in  1948;  it
is  obvious  from  all  the  talk  one  hears  these  days  about  the
obsoleteness  of  the  principle  of  non-intervention that  some
U.S.  officials  regret  our commitment to  it.   The  fact  remains
that  it  ...     represents   our  word  .  .  .  embodied  in  a  treaty
which  was  ratified  by  the  Senate  Aug.  28,  1950.  .  .  .
"We are  currently  fighting  a  war  in  Vietnam, largely,  we
are  told,  because  it  would be  a  disaster  if  the  U.S.  failed  to
honor  its  word. ...  I  do not see  why it  is  any  less  a matter
of  vital  interest  to  honor  a  clear  and explicit  treaty  obliga-
tion  in  the  Am ericas  than  it  is  to  honor  the  much  more  am-
bigous  and less  formal  promises  we  have  made  to  the  South
Vietnamese. .. .
"Many  North  Americans  seem  to  believe  that,  while  the
U.S.  does  indeed  participate in  Latin American affairs  from
.time  to  time,  sometimes  by  force,  it  is  done  with  the   best
of  intentions  .  .  .  and  therefore  cannot  really  be  considered
intervention.    The  trouble with  this  point  of  view  is  that  it
is  not  shared  by  our  neighbors  to  the  South.    Most  of  them
do  think  they  need  protection  from  the  United  States  and
the  history  of  the  Monroe Doctrine  and  the  'Roosevelt  corol-
lary'  suggest   that   their  feelings  are  not  entirely   without
foundation.  .  .  .  However  much  it  may  hurt  our   feelings,
they  prefer  to  have  their  security  based  on  some  more  ob-
jective  standard  than  the  good  intentions of  the  U.S.    The
standard  on  which  they  rely  most  heavily  is  the  principle
of  non-intervention.  .  .  .
"In  the  eyes  of  educated,  energetic  and  patriotic  young
Latin  Americans—which  is  to  say,  the  generation  that  will
make  or  break  the   Alliance  for  Progress—the  U.S.   com-
mitted  a  worse  offense  in  the  Dominican  Republic  than  just
intervention;  it  intervened against  social  revolution  and  in
support,  at  least  temporarily,  of  a  corrupt,  reactionary mili-
tary  oligarchy."            —Fulbright  in  the  Senate,  Sept.  15.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September   27, 1965
Challenge  Lost,  But  A  Giant  Step  Forward:  Eastland  Up  At  Next  Election
For  the  First  Time  Since  1882,  Miss.  Negroes  Reappear  on  House  Floor
For  the  first  time  in  history  Negro  women—three  of  them
—were  seated  on  the  floor  of  the  House  of  Representatives.
For  the  first  time  since   1882,   when   Mississippi  last  had   a
Negro  Congressman,  Negroes  from  that  State  appeared  on  the
floor  of  the  House.    A  Negro  party,  the  Mississippi  Freedom
Democratic  Party,  a  political  freak   in  the   one-party   South,
exerted  enough   influence  to  muster  143  votes  against  228  in
its  fight  to  unseat  the  Mississippi  delegation.     This  was  far
from  being  a  defeat.    It  was  a  giant  step  forward.     And  it
was  achieved despite  the  hostility  of  the  Negro  Establishment
in  the  North,   the  defection  of  many  liberals  and  the  social
squeamishness  of  certain Negro  Congressmen.    Adam  Clayton
Powell  asked  Mrs.  Fannie  Lou  Hamer,  "Do  you  know  who  I
am?"  in  the  tone  of  a  man  who  felt   himself  God's  gift   to
Negritude.    Mrs.  Hamer  said  she  did  but  refused  to  yield  to
his  plea  that  the  three  women   stay  off  the   floor.   He  said  it
would  cost  the  MFDP  votes,  but  the  three  women  must  have
felt   more   snobbery  than   strategy  in   the   appeal.     They   sat
and  made history.
The  Villains  of  The  Piece
The   villains  of   the  piece  were  the   leaders  of   the  liberal
Democratic  Study Group.    Holifield  (D.  Cal.)  was  paired  for
the  resolution  to  dismiss.    Blatnik  (D.   Minn.)   and  O'Hara
(D.   Mich.)   voted  for  it.    The   latter   as  vice-chairman   had
been  given  a  special  assignment  to  the  Mississippi  challenge.
The  major  architect  of  the  defeat  was  Frank  Thompson    (D.
N.   ].)   chairman  of  the  DSG,   (see   box  this  page)   and  a
member    of    the    House    Administration   Committee   which
passed   on  the  challenge.    He  told  Republicans  on  the  com-
mittee  the  DSG  membership  would  largely  support  the  mo-
tion  to  dismiss.    It  did  not  do  so,  most  of  them  voted   the
other  way,  but  this  was  enough  to  make  friendly   Republicans
hesitate  to  come  out  to  the.left  of  the  Democratic  "left."
So  400  Misssissippi  Negroes   come  north  to  listen  in  from
the   gallery—itself   a  portent   of   a   changing   era—heard   all
kinds  of   obscure   rules  cited  against  them   in   favor  of   men
who  did  not  hesitate  to  break  more  fundamental  rules  against
the  Negro  effort  to  vote:  rules  against  murder   (at  least  five
in  the  vote drive  since  1961),  against  bombings  (17  churches,
homes  and  businesses  from  June  to  October  of  last year  alone,
Two  Contrasting  Northern  Liberal   Views
"Would  due  process  be  served  in  attempting  to  cor-
rect  almost   100  years  of  acknowledged  wrong  to  our
Negro  citizens  in  Mississippi   and  other  States  by  ap-
plying  House  precedents  created  during  the  stormy  Re-
construction  Congresses  whose harsh  enactments  helped
create  and   foster   the   closed   society   which  over   the
years  is  responsible   for  these  injustices?"
—Thompson   (D.  N.J.)   who  voted  with  the  South  to
dismiss   the  Mississippi   challenge,  and  whose  reasoning
Dixie-style    blames  Reconstruction  rather   than   White
Supremacy   for  Negro    disenfranchisement.
"The   majority  report   [for  dismissing   the   challenge]
gives  dominant  weight  to  the  proposition   that  'what-
ever  electoral  practices  may  have  occurred  in  Missis-
sippi  during  the  1964  elections,  it  is  doubtful  that  any
disenfranchisement,   even  if   proven   here,   would  have
actually  affected  the outcome.  . . . There  are few  dis-
tricts  in  the  predominantly one-party  South  where  the
number  of potential   [i.e.  Negro]  voters  . . . could  alter
the  outcome.  . .  .  The majority  says  that  the  Voting
Rights  Act  'provides  thorough  and  complete  remedies
for  any  and  all  such  discrimination  and  disenfranchise-
ment.'   The  act's  authors  had  no  such  illusions,  and  its
diehard  opponents  make  clear  every  day  that-they  hold
no  such  fears."
—Ryan  (D.  N.Y.)  who  led  the  fight  for  the  challenge.
false  arrests  (32)   and  beatings   (9).
Six  hundred  witnesses  risked  life  and  livelihood  to   testify
to  all  this  lawlessness;  200  volunteer lawyers  spent  close  to  a
half  a  million  dollars  drawing  up  their  depositions  in   3,000
pages.     This   was   never   considered   by  the   committee   nor
even  circulated  to  members  of   the  House   for  consideration.
Thompson  could   have  forced   hearings.     If   Speaker   McCor-
mack   had   had   his  way,  there  would  not   even  have  been  a
roll  call.    It  was  the  Republican  Curtis  of  Missouri  who  out-
witted   him   and   forced   the   members   to   stand   up   and'  be
counted.  The  MFDP  was  counted  out  this  time,  but  after  that
burst  of  tears  on  the  Capitol   steps,   the  Mississippi  Negroes
went  home  with  new  determination.    They   deserve  national
support   in  preparing   for  next  year's  election,  when  Eastland
comes  up  for  a  new  term—and  MFDP  opposition.
A  New  Form  of  Dum-Dum  Bullet  for  Use  Against New  Forms  of  Colonial Uprising
"High-lethality  AR-18 lightweight  automatic  rifle will  pro-
vide  capability  for   virtually  tripling  firepower  of  NATO-
equipped  combat  troops. . . . After  conferring  with  military
and  political  leaders. . . . Armalite  President   Chas.  H. Dor-
chester  became   convinced  of  the   urgent   need   for   such   a
weapon.  . . .  Mass  production  can help  strengthen  the Free
World  against   future  aggression,   while  offering  a  substan-
tial  return  to  investors.  .  .  .  Highly  effective  in  guerrilla
warfare  and  against   human  wave  assault-type  tactics."
—Advertisement  in  the  Wall  St.  Journal,  Sept.  21.
The  ad failed  to mention that this new rifle  fires  a  modern
version  of  the  dum-dum  bullet  outlawed  by  the  Hague  con-
vention  of  1899.    The  British  developed them  in  an  arsenel
at  Dum  Dum  outside  Calcutta  for  use  against  colonial  up-
risings  in  India  and  the  Sudan.    "Their  peculiarity,"  the
Encyclopaedia   Britannica  explained,  "consisted  in  their  ex-
panding  on  impact  and  thus  creating   an  ugly  wound,  and
they  had  been  adopted  in  Indian  frontier  fighting  owing  to
the  failure  of  the  usual  type  of  bullet  to  stop  the  rushes  of
fanatical   tribesmen."     Rumors  of  their  use  by  the   British
in  the  Boer  War  provoked  protest  and led  to  their  outlawry.
The  Armalite  is  a  modernized  version  of  this  Kipling  era
weapon  for  use  against  "lesser  breeds  outside  the  law."    It
has  been  tried  out  in  Vietnam.   It  shoots  a  bullet  so  light
that  that  it  "tumbles".   Instead  of  a  sharp,  clean wound, it
tears  a  gash  in  the flesh, usually  causing  death  from   shock.
This  "splash  effect"  recalls  that  the  Hague  Declaration  for-
bade  the  use  of bullets "which  expand  or  flatten  easily  in  the
human  body."   The  U.S.  did not  sign  this  treaty  but  it  has
become  part  of  "world  declaratory   law"  binding  on  all  na-
tions,  whether  signatory  or  not,  as  the  U.S.  argued  at  t;he
Nuremberg  trial.   Thus  civilization   marches  on.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  27,1965
McNamara's  Latest  Paradox:  How  Arms  Sales  Abroad  Bring  About  Arms  Reduction!
If  We  Were  A  New  Yorker  We'd   Now  Be for  Lindsay  for  Mayor
If  we  lived  in  New  York,  we'd  vote  for  John  V.  Lindsay
for  Mayor,  to  break  the  hold  of  a  stale  Democratic  machine
on  the  city  and  to  start  an  able  young  liberal  on  his  way  up
in  the  Republican   party,  as  competition   for  the  Democrats.
.  .  .  Israelis,  watching  the  India-Pakistan  war,  are  worried
about  State  Department   assurances  that  U.S.  arms  given  the
Arab  States  would  be  used  only  against  Communist  aggres-
sion  or  "internal  security"  since  similar  assurances  were  given
the  Indians  and the Pakistanis.  .  .  .  When   Secretary  McNa-
mara  boasted  at  his  Sept.  16  press  conference  that  in  four
years  the  U.S.  had  sold  $9  billion  worth  of  arms  abroad,  he
was  asked,  "as  you  know,  you  have  been  urging   the  Saudis
to  buy  the  F-5.    I  wonder  when  you  undertake  the  foreign
sales  how  much weight  you give  to  the  consideration  that  such
sales  might   increase  the  tension  in  certain  areas?"     McNa-
mara  never  answered  the   question   about   Saudi  Arabia  but
claimed  that  the  Pentagon  uses  the  leverage  given  it  by  arms
gifts  and  sales  to  get  underdeveloped   countries  "to  reduce  the
share  of  their  resources  devoted  to  defense."    It  would  take  a
Mark  Twain  to  do  justice  to  this  idea  that  arms  salesmen  are
really  engaged   somehow  in  negotiating   disarmament!
The  Jews  in  The  Soviet  Union
According  to  an  Agence  France  Presse  dispatch  from  Ha-
vana  in  Le  Monde  (Sept.  14),  a  new  book  by  Che  Guevara
"Socialism  and  Man  in  Cuba"  has  gone  on  sale  in  Havana.
.  .  .  Although  we  believe  it  does  Russian  Jewry  a  disservice
to  make  it  a  tool  of  the  cold  war,  we  think  independent  pro-
test  called  for.    The  Soviet  Union  is  the  only  Soviet  state  in
which  internal  passports  are  stamped with  a  J  for  Jewish,  and
the   Jews  are  also  the   one  national  minority  in  the  Soviet
Union   which   does   not   enjoy   cultural   freedom.      Pravda's
(Sept.   12)   attack  on  anti-Semitism,  the  first  of  its  kind  in
years,  shows  the  effect  of  criticism  from  abroad.  .  .  .  Philo-
sophically,   the   debate  at   the   Ecumenical   Council  in   Rome
over  religious  liberty  is  closely  akin  to  the  debate  over Stalin-
ism  (and  Maoism)  in  the  Soviet  world.   When  the conserva-
tive  Cardinal Ottoviani,  secretary of  the  Holy  Office  (i.e.   the
Inquisition)  said  "Truth  and  falsehood cannot  be given  equal
Dodd's  Attack  on  Martin  Luther  King
"When  Dr.  Martin  Luther  King  takes  advantage  of
his  pulpit  as  the  prime  leader  of  the  civil  rights  move-
ment  in  this  country,  to  call  for  the  admission   of  Red
China  to  the  United  Nations;  to  demand  that  the   U.S.
commit   itself   to  negotiate  with  the  Vietcong;  and  to
advocate  that  the  U.S.  reorient  its  foreign  policy   along
the  lines  of  accommodation   with  communism,  then  I can
only   regret  that   the  leader   of  the  civil  rights  move-
ment,  by  his  intemperate  alignment   with  the  forces  of
appeasement  in  foreign  policy,  has  alienated  much  of
the  support  which  he  previously  enjoyed   in  Congress.
...  It  is  nothing   short  of  arrogance  when  Dr.  King
takes  it  upon  himself  to  undermine   the  policies  of  the
President.. ..  There has already  been  too much  private
intervention  in  the  sphere  of  foreign  policy,  and I  think
that  the  time  has  come  when  Congress will  have  to  look
into  this  entire  situation  with  a  view   to  drawing   up
more  stringent  statutes  than  now exist.."
Dodd  (D. Conn.) in the Senate, Sept.  15.
Next  day  Senator  Young (D. Ohio)  reminded  Senator
Dodd  of the  First  amendment, told  the  Senate  Dr. King
had  as  much  right  to  express  his  view  as  Dodd,  and
put  into  the  Congressional  Record  an  editorial   from
the  Cleveland  Plain  Dealer,  Sept.  11, advocating  admis-
sion  of  China  to  the  UN.
value.     Special   care  must   be   taken   to   protect   the   unlet-
tered"  i.e.  from  "error"  he  was  also  expressing  the  Commu-
nist  view that  the  State  (like  the  Church)  possesses  the  only
valid  truth  and  has  a  right  therefore  to  protect   the  public
from  false  doctrine.  .  . .
The  day we  called  attention  (Sept.  20)  to  Secretary Rusk's
speech  in  May,  1951,  declaring  Communist China completely
a  puppet   of  Moscow,  the  Newsletter  of  the  GOP   Congres-
sional  Committee  turned  up  with  a  speech  Rusk  made  on
January  13,  1950,  comparing  the  Chinese  Communist revolu-
tion  to  1776  and  saying  it  was  "not  aiming  toward  dictator-
ship"   and   "not   Russian   in   essence."     Rusk   called   this   a
canard   but  the  GOP   newsletter  .came  up  with  a  report  of
the  speech  at  the  time  from  the  staid  Philadelphia   Bulletin.
We  never  dreamt  the  Secretary was  such  an  acrobat.
We  Now  Offer  Special  Rates  for  Schoolroom  Bulk  Subscriptions
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Name
Street  ........................................................................................
City   .........................................^one............State....................
9/27/65
For  the  enclosed  $5 Mod  •  gift  sub  to:
<fo)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............SUte....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifttei
Indicate   if   announcement  wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  0.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last   week   in   December  and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  L  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   J5  in   the  U.S.:  $6  In  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED