I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965jan25.pdf

============================================================

Johnson's  Education Message,  P.  3
The Alliance for Progress Was Not  Supposed to  Buy  Latin  American  Troops  for  Vietnam
"It  is   difficult   to  understand  the  legal  right  which  the
U.S.    professes  in  extending  an  invitation  to  Latin Ameri-
can  countries  to  join  us  in  the  fighting  in  Vietnam.  .  .  .
The  pressures  exerted  by the  U.S.  .  .  .  will  seriously  retard
the  Alliance  for  Progress  and  cast  doubt  upon  its  very ob-
jectives.   Our neighbors  to  the  south  .  .  .  have  a  long  way
to   go   in  correcting   the   social   and  economic   inequalities
with  which  they  are  beset.  .  .  .  We should  not  be  encourag-
ing  them  to  spend  additional  sums  in  the  empty  gestures
of  'showing  the  flag'  in  a  war  not  of  their  concern  thou-
sands  of  miles  away."
—Gruening  (D. Alaska), in the Senate  Jan.  15.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIII,  NO.  3
JANUARY  25,  1965
101       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
It's  Been  A  Faked   Class  B  Movie  From  the  Beginning
Associated  Press  correspondent  Peter  Arnett  drove  south  of
Saigon  Jan.  14  to  check  reports  of  a battle  and  found  U.S.  In-
formation   Officers  staging  fake  war  scenes  for  a  propaganda
film.  '"We  don't  want  to  show  cruel  things  like  bodies,"  an
information   officer   in  charge  explained,  "And   we  will  avoid
references  to  tanks,  fighter  aircraft  and  artillery.    This   is  a
people-to-people  film.  .  .  ."    When  the  story  broke,  the film
was,    of  course,  disavowed  by  USIA  Director  Carl  T.  Rowan.
Only  those  with  short  memories  will  be  taken  in  by  the  dis-
avowal.    The  Vietnamese  war,  as  far  as the  information  given
the  American  people  is  concerned,  has  been  a  faked  class  B
movie  from  the  beginning.    The  Moss  subcommittee  of  the
House  two years  ago protested  the  information  practices of  the
State  Department  on  Vietnam.    It  called  attention  to  a  speech
by  Mr.  Rowan  in  which  he  spoke  of  the  public's  "right  not  to
know  in  a period  of  undeclared  war."    Even  this  cynical  state-
ment  misstated  the  facts.    What  is  involved  is  not  just   "the
right   not  to  know"   but  the  government's   right  to   deceive.
President  Kennedy  himself   (see  box  on  p.   3)   tried  at  one
point to get  a New  York  Times  man  transferred  from  Vietnam
because  he  was  reporting  the  war  too  independently  for  the
government's  taste.
Doctoring The Record
Every  agency  of  government  is  drawn  into  this  campaign  of
deception.    The  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  last  week
put  out  what  purported  to  be  an  objective  volume  of  "Back-
ground  Information"   on  the  war  in  Vietnam.    It  is  supposed
to  be  a  compilation  of  the  important  official  statements.    But
the  record  is tailored.   The  fullest  official  reports  to  the  public
on  the  war  were  the  Blue  Book the  State Department  issued  in
the  Fall  of  1961   to  explain  Kennedy's  decision  to  intervene;
Secretary  Rusk's  speech  to  the  Economic  Club  in  New   York
April  22,  1963,  and  Secretary  McNamara's  speech  to  the  Na-
tional  Security  Industrial  Association  (an  arms  lobby  mouth-
piece)   on  March  26  of  last  year.    All  three  pictured  South
Vietnam  under  Diem  as  a  model  of  progress  and  democracy,
an   "economic   miracle"   comparable   to   West   Germany   (no
less!),  a  land  of  such  contented  people  (land  reform,  educa-
tional  expansion)  that  the  Communists in  desperation  resorted
to  invasion  as their only  hope  of  reunifying  the  country.   This
notion  that  guerrilla  war  can  successfully   be  carried  on  in  a
prosperous  country,  amid  a  happy  people,  is  so  preposterous
The  Wild  Far  East  and  The  Wild  Far  West
"Americans  in  Asia  are  basically  aliens,  of  a  differ-
ent  race,  religion  and  culture.    Moreover,  the   Vietna-
mese  are  nationalistic  and  race-conscious  in  their  out-
look.    As  one  on-the-scene   observer   pointed   oat,   'If
you  imagine  a  Chinese  Sheriff  speaking  Cantonese  and
trying  to  keep order in  Tombstone,  Arizona, in  its  hey-
day,   you will  begin  to  get  the  problem.'"
—McGovern  (D. S. Dak.)  in the Senate  Jan.  IS.
that  even  a  public  as doped-up  as  ours  could  no  longer  be  ex-
pected  to  take it  seriously.   In  the  Foreign  Relations "handbook
not  a  scrap  remains  of  the  two-volume  Blue  Book.    Rusk's
speech  has  disappeared  altogether.    Discreet  editorial  scissors
have  cut out  of  McNamara's  speech  the  whole  opening  section
with  its  glowing  picture  of  what  McNamara  called  the  Viet-
namese  "success  story."    Why  should  the  Foreign  Relations
Committee,  which  is  supposed  to  provide  some  check  on  the
State  Department,  help  to  hide  this  record  of  deception?
Even  Senators  Uninformed
Even  members  of  Congress,  who  get  private  briefings,  show
an  extraordinary   ignorance  of  what  has  been  going  on.    Mc-
Govern  of  South  Dakota  made  a  good  speech   in  the   Senate
Jan.   15.    It  echoed  de  Gaulle's   suggestion   that  the  war  be
ended   by  negotiating   the   neutralization   of   the   area.    Mc-
Govern   opposed   expansion  of  the  war.    "Attacks  on  North
Vietnam,"  he said,  "will not  seriously  weaken  guerrilla fighters
a  thousand  miles  away,  fighters  who  depend  for  80%  of  their
weapons  on  captured  U.S.  equipment  and  for  food  on  a  sym-
pathetic  local  peasantry."    But  then  he  went  on  to  make  a
suggestion  which  shows  how  little  Senators  are  told.    He  said
that  "the  most  practical  way"  to  put  pressure  on  North  Viet-
nam  was  "quietly  through  infiltration and  subversion  by  South
Vietnamese units"  into the North with  the aim not  of  "military
victory"  but  of  "bringing   Ho  Chi  Minh  to  the   negotiating
table."
This  is  doubly  ludicrous.    Ho  Chi  Minh  has  been  trying  to
get  to  the  bargaining table  for  two  years.   The  problem  is  to
get  the  United  States  to  the  bargaining  table.    He  has  made
clear  his  readiness  to  accept  a  neutralized  independent  South
Vietnam  in  return  for  peace  and  resumption of   North-South
(Continued  on  Page  Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  25, 1965
RR  Nationalization:  For  the  First  Time  in  Years  A  Radical  Proposal  from  U.  S.  Labor
"I  Ain't  Got  Much  Confidence   in  Mississippi  Doing  Anything  Right"
For  years  the  FBI  and  the  Justice Department have excused
slack  follow-through  on  Civil  Rights  complaints against  police
brutality   in  the   South  on  the  grounds  that   indictments  and
convictions  could  not  be  obtained.   The  arrests  in  the murder
of   the  Martyred  Three   in  Philadelphia,  Miss.,  show  that  if
enough  evidence  is mustered, Southern grand  juries  will  some-
times  indict.    Maybe  petit  juries  will  convict.    In   any  case
what  is  happening  to  the  Sheriff   of  Neshoba  county  and   his
deputy  puts  similar  types  in  the  South  on  notice  that  the mur-
der  and  beating of  Negroes  and  civil  rights  workers  may  not
be quite  as  safe  as  it  used  to  be.    Still  we  hold  our  breath  and
agree  with  the  redoubtable  Mrs.  Lillie Jones  who  keeps  a  shot-
gun   handy  in  Philadelphia,  Miss.    She  told   Homer   Bigart
(N.Y.   Times  Jan.  17),  "I  ain't got  much  confidence  in Missis-
sippi  doing  anything  right."
Public  Ownership  Long  Overdue
The  railroad brotherhoods  have  let  a  fresh  breath  of  air  in
on  a  stale  problem  by  demanding  nationalization  of  the  rail-
roads.    The  glamorous  improvement  in  service  between  Bos-
ton  and  Washington,  on  which  the  President  touched  in  his
State  of  the  Union  message,  is  impossible under  present  man-
agement.    The  railroads have  too  long  been  in  the  hands  of
a  banker-lawyer bureaucracy devoid  of  business  enterprise.    At
the  end  of  World  War  I,  the  entire labor  movement  and many
farm   organizations  campaigned  for  public  ownership,  under
the  once  famous  Plumb  Plan.    "A  low  degree  of  managerial
skill,"  Glenn  E.  Plumb  wrote  about  his  plan  in  The   Nation
(Aug.   16,  1919),  "cannot   be  taken  into  account  at  a  rate-
hearing."    A  great  national  resource  has  been  plundered  and
run  down  by  incapable hands.
Congress  may  soon  authorize  four  new  judges  for  the  Fifth
Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  which  covers  the  deep  South.  These
with  two  vacancies on  the  present  bench  will  make  way  for  six
new   appointments,   and   may   change   the   character   of   this
hitherto  liberal  court,   on  which  civil  rights  enforcement   so
much  depends.    Negro  organizations  are  petitioning   for  the
nomination   of   Clifford   Durr   of   Montgomery,   Alabama,   an
outstanding  Southern  liberal,  one-time  New   Dealer   and  ex-
FCC Commissioner  for  the  Court.    Unless  pressure  is built  up,
all  the  new  appointments  may  go  to  segregationists.
An  Echo of McCarthyism
At  the  end  of  a  first-rate  speech  in  the  Senate   Jan.
12   on   the   radical   right   by   Church  of   Idaho,   Morse
boasted   that  in  1954  he  co-sponsored   a  bill  to   outlaw
Communism  "which  is  the  law  of  the  land  today."  This
referred   to   a  shameful  incident  of   the   McCarthy  pe-
riod.     The  right-wingers  had   put  in   a   bill   to   subject
labor    unions    to    the    Subversive    Activities   Control
Board.    Most  of  the  liberals  were  afraid  to  oppose   it
directly.    They   offered   as   substitute   a  bill   to  outlaw
the   Communist  party.     When   this   maneuver  failed,
they   accepted  both  the  original  bill  and  their  amend-
ments.     The   purpose,   as   Morse   said   on   the    Senate
floor  at   the   time,   was   "to  remove   any   doubt   as   to
where  we  stand  on  the  issue  of  communism."   The  law
was  never  applied  because  so  loosely  written  as  to  be
clearly  unconstitutional.    It  defined  membership  in  the
Communist  Party   so  broadly  that  the  liberal   sponsors
could  themselves  have  been  outlawed   under  it.     They
made  it  unlawful  to  indicate  "by  word,  action,  conduct,
writing  or  in  any  other  way  a  willingness   to  carry  out
in  any  manner  and  in  any  degree"   Communist   "plans,
designs,  objectives  or  purposes."    This  is  broad  enough
to  label  Morse  a  Communist  for  advocating  withdrawal
from    Vietnam.     Only    Kefauver    and   John    Sherman
Cooper   had  the   nerve   to   oppose   this   cowardly   non-
sense  at  the  time.    We  did  not  expect   to  hear   Morse
boast   of   it.
The  appointment  of  -freshman   Congressman  John  Conyers
(D.   Mich.)   to  the  House  Judiciary  Committee  is  auspicious
for  civil  rights.   Conyers  is  a  Negro  lawyer  from  Detroit   who
worked  last  year   in  the  Mississippi  Summer  Project.     Mrs.
Fannie  Lou Hamer  went  to Detroit  to campaign  for him.  .  . .
The  assignment  pf -Maurine  Neuberger   (D.  Ore.)   to  the  Sen-
ate  Commerce  Committee  strengthens  the  hand   of   its  chair-
man,  Magnuson   (D.   Wash.)  in  his  campaign  to  put  a  cigar-
ette  labelling  bill  through  Congress.  .  .  .  We  applaud  Dom
Bonafede  for  his  story  in  the  New   York   Herald-Tribune   Jan.
14  exposing  the  close  connections  between  W.  Ellis  Meehan,
chief  investigator for  the  Senate  Rules  Committee  in  the  Baker
inquiry,  and  Thomas  D.  Webb,  friend  of  Bobby  Baker's  and
Washington   man  for  the  Murchison  empire.  .  .  .  We  mourn
the   death   of   our   old   friend,   Fowler   Harper   of  Yale  Law
School,  a  lifelong  fighter  for  civil  liberties.
Why  Is  The  Supreme  Court  So  Timid  When  Confronted  With  The  First  Amendment?
Mr.  Justice   Stewart's  opinion  for  a  unanimous  court  in
the  case  of  Stanford   v.  Texas  last  Monday  was   disappoint-
ingly  narrow.    Stanford   did  a  mail  order  book  business  in
San  Antonio  under  the  trade  name,  "All  Points  of   View."
His  premises  were  raided  and  some  2,000  of  his  books  and
pamphlets   seized.    The  raid   took   place   under   the   Texas
Communist   Control  Law  of  1951.    The  search  warrant   was
issued   in  response  to  an  affidavit   by  two  Assistant  Attor-
neys  General  of  Texas  asserting  that  mailings   by  Stanford
of  "pro-Communist  material  and  other  information   received
in  the  course  of  investigation"   indicated  that  Stanford   "has
in  his  possession  the  books  and  records  of  the  Texas  Com-
munist  Party."    A  four  hour  search  turned  up  no  such  rec-
ords  but  the  police  made  off  as  consolation   with  the  works
of  suspect  authors   as  diverse  as  Marx,  Sartre,  Pope   John
and  Justice   Black.
The    conviction     was    attacked     on    First     Amendment
grounds  as  an  invasion  of  political  freedom.    But  the  Court
chose  instead  to  rule   under  the  Fourth   amendment   which
makes  search  and  seizure  under  general  warrants   unconsti-
tutional.    This  gave  Mr. Justice  Stewart  occasion  for  much
romantic   rhetoric   about  James  Otis  and  John  Wilkes  and
how  in  Tudor   England  general  writs  were   used   "to   sup-
press  and  destroy   the  literature   of  dissent."    But  all  the
Court   ruled  in  ordering  Stanford's  books  returned   is  that
"the   constitutional   requirement   that   warrants   must   par-
ticularly  describe  the  'things  to  be  seized'  is  to  be  accorded
the   most    scrupulous    exactitude    when    the   'things'   are
books."    So  what  if  the  Texas  warrant  had  asked  to  seize
Marx's  Capital  or  Lenin's  Imperialism?     Would  that  have
made   the   seizure   constitutional?     How   pusillanimous   to
leave  the  question  open.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  25, 1965
Almost  40%  of  the  School  Funds  Will  Go to  Eleven  Southern  States
Johnson  Combines Political  Shrewdness  and Humanity in Education   Program
The   President's   education  program   combines  shrewdness
and  humanity.    It   is  Mr.   Johnson   at  his  best,  and   there  is
every   reason  to  be  grateful.     His  program  aims  to   improve
our   education  system  where  it  is  now   most  deficient,   at   the
elementary  and   secondary  level.    Presidents  Truman,   Elsen-
hower  and  Kennedy  all  failed  at  this,  although  they  did  win
aid  for  higher  and   vocational  education.    President  Johnson
almost  surely will  succeed,  but  not  because  he  is  handing  out
little  scraps  for  everyone.    His  bill  concentrates  federal  funds
in  proportion  to  poverty.    Suburbs  will  generally get  less  than
urban  and   rural  centers;   Southern   and   industrial   states  will
get  more  than  those  of  the  Middle  West  and  West.    Perhaps
most   refreshing  is  that  for  once  the  main  theme  of  a  Presi-
dential  education  message  was  really  education,  not  national
security.
Winning  Over  Southerners and Catholics
There   are   compromises   in  his   bill,  but   these   strengthen
rather  than  mar  it.    In  the  past,  a  coalition  of  Republicans,
Dixiecrats  and  Catholics  have  blocked  federal aid  to  lower  edu-
cation.    The  President's   program   is  designed   to  win  support
from   the  latter   two.     Almost  40%   of  the  funds  will  go  to
eleven  Southern  states.   This  results  from  drawing  the  poverty
line  at  family  incomes  of  $2,000,  a  level  which  includes  most
of  the  Southern  rural  poor  but  excludes  many  poor   Northern-
ers  whose  incomes  tend   to  group   in  the  $3,000  range.     It
would  be  wrong  to  see this  as only  a gimmick  to  win  Southern
votes.    It  is also  a  way to  focus  aid  on  the  South's  poor  whites
and  Negroes.    If  they  can  be  made  to  share  it  together,  the
education  bill  will  mean   a  leap  forward  for  both   the  mind
and   the   spirit   of   the   South.     The   bill's   compromise   with
Catholics   is  also  to  the  general  good.    It  permits   parochial
school   students   to   attend   supplementary   educational   centers
along  with  public  school  students.    Here  is  an  opportunity  to
let   fresh   air  into  minds   that  all   too   frequently   have   been
closed  and   retarded.
If  the  education  bill  is encouraging  in  what  it  sets  out  to  do,
it  is  depressing   in  what  it  reveals  about  the  extent  of  poverty
in  America.    The  bill  entitles  a  school   district  to  federal  aid
when  either  3%   or  100  of  its  school-age  children  come  from
families  with  annual  incomes  less  than  $2,000.    An  informa-
Inequities of  the  Wheat  Program
Wheat  products  are  among  the  major  food  items  in
the  diet  of  the  poor. In  a  country with as  many  sources
of  revenue  as  this  one,  there  seems  to  be  little  excuse
for   a   tax   on  wheat,  especially  one  that   amounts  to
50'/<   of  the  price  of  every  bushel.    There  is  even  less
excuse  for  such  a  tax  if  most  of  its  proceeds  go  direct-
ly  into  the  pockets  of  some  of  the  wealthiest  farmers
in  the  United  States.    Yet  this  is  exactly  what  is  hap-
pening    under   the    wheat    certificate   program    that
passed  Congress  last  year  with  the  help  of   President
Johnson.    A  farm  subsidy  like  this  one  is  supposed  to
aid   poor  farmers  producing   for   glutted  markets.    In
a  House  speech  last  week,  Rep.  Paul  Findley  (R.,  111.)
revealed  that  the  $350  million  raised  by  the  wheat  tax
will  be  parcelled  out  so  that  1,300  big  wheat  farmers
receive  payments  averaging  $15,000  per  farmer  while
small   farmers—over   a   million  of   them—receive  pay-
ments  averaging  only  $58.    Still  worse,  less  than  one-
third   of   wheat   farmers   have   agreed   to  participate.
Most  of  the  really  small  farmers,  the  15-acre  ones,  re-
fused  because  participation  would  have  required taking
too  much  of  their  already  scarce  land  out  of  produc-
tion.    The  President  in  his  State  of  the  Union  message
spoke  of  the  need  "to  direct  more  of  our  effort  to  the
small  farmer   who  needs   help  most."    The  wheat   tax
program  would  be  a  fine  place  to  start.
tion  sheet  released  with  the  bill  explains  that  school  districts
in  95%   of  the  counties  in  the  United  States  will  qualify  for
aid  under   this  formula.     This  is  appalling.    It   means  that
poverty   is  not  regional  but  nationwide;  that  our   economy  is
fundamentally  out-of-joint,  and  that  it,  not  ignorance,  is  the
taproot  of  poverty.    It  means  also  that  unless  the  President  is
as  imaginative  and   earnest   in   creating   jobs   as  in   educating
children,  America  may  soon  be  confronted  by  a  generation  of
poor  young  people  who  because  they  are  better  educated  will
be  even  more  frustrated.
The  President's   higher  education  bill  has  not  been  drafted
yet,   but   his   message   lacked   any  indication  of   a   request   to
broaden   the  Higher  Education  Facilities  Act  of   1963.     This
permits  federal  funds  for  facilities in  science,  math,  engineer-
ing   and   foreign   language,   but   none   for   the   social   sciences
and  humanities.
How  the  White  House  Tried  to  Discourage  Independent Reporting  From Vietnam
In  the  January  issue  of  Commentary, David  Halberstam
of  the  New  York  Times  tells   how  the  Kennedy  Adminis-
tration  tried  to  discredit  and  silence  independent  reporters
in  Vietnam.    A  coordinated  attack  on  Halberstam  himself
began  in  September  1963.    Here  is  part  of  his  story:
"In  early   September,  a   friend   sent   me  a  column  from
the   New   York  Journal-American in   which   I  was   accused
of  being  soft  on  Communism and  of  preparing  the  way   for
a  Vietnamese  Fidel  Castro.    A  few  days  later,  Joseph  Al-
sop,  after   a  brief  visit  to  Vietnam,  attacked  a  group  of
'young  crusaders'   in  the  Saigon  press  corps.  .  .  .  The  Pres-
ident's   press  secretary,   Pierre   Salinger,  and  other  White
House  staff  members  more  interested   in  their  chief's  politi-
cal  standing  at  home  than  in  the  status  of  the  war  in  Viet-
nam,  would  knowingly  inform  White  House  reporters  that
we  in  Vietnam  never  went  on  operations.    At  the   Penta-
gon,  in  the  higher  reaches  where  the  realities  of  the  war
rarely  penetrated,  the  criticism was  particularly  vehement.
'It's  a  damn   good  thing  you  never  belonged  to   any  left-
wing  groups  or  anything  like  that,'  a  friend  of  mine  high
up  in  the  State  Department  told  me  after   I  left   Saigon,
'because  they  were  really  looking  for  stuff  like  that.'
"On  October  22,  Arthur  Ochs  Sulzberger,  the   new  pub-
lisher  of   the  Times,  went  by  the  White  House   to   pay  a
courtesy   call  on  the  President.     Almost   the   first   question
the  President  asked  Mr.  Sulzberger   was  what  he   thought
of  his  young  man  in  Saigon.    The  President  suggested  that
perhaps  I  was  too  close   to  the   story,   too  involved.    The
President  asked  if  perhaps  Mr.  Sulzberger  had  been  think-
ing   of  transferring   me  to  another  assignment.     No,   said
Mr.   Sulzberger,   the   Times   was   quite   satisfied   with   the
present  distribution  of   assignments."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  25,1965
That  Bridge  at Ban Ban  Was  No  "Bridge  Over  the  River  Kwai"
{Continued  from  Page One)
trade  (see Bernard  Fall's  The  Two  Vietnams).    The  idea  of
using  commando  raids  on  the  North  for  "infiltration and sub-
version"  which  McGovern  recommends  is  not  new.  There  is
evidence*  that  such  raiding  operations  were  begun   10  years
ago when  our  leading  counter-guerrilla expert,  Gen. Lansdale,
was  Diem's   military  adviser.    These  operations   represent   a
major  political  and  military  defeat.    The  infiltrees have  never
succeeded   in  sparking   local   anti-Communist  guerrilla  upris-
ings.     Richard  Dudman   of  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch  re-
ported  a  year  ago  (Feb. 26,  1964)  that  officials  were  disillu-
sioned  about  infiltrating  the  North.    "Although  it  is  not gen-
erally  known,"  Mr.  Dudman  wrote,  "special  South  Vietnamese
troops  already  have  been  parachuted  into  North  Vietnam  on
missions  of  espionage   and  sabotage.     They  have  vanished."
How  We Broke  The Geneva  Pact
These  cloak-and-dagger   activities,  which  began  five  years
before  fighting  broke  out  in  the  South,  were  a  violation  by  the
United   States   of  the  Geneva   agreement   of   1954.   Though
we  did  not  sign  the  agreement,  we  pledged   ourselves  not  to
upset  neutralization  of  the  area  by  force.    The  training  and
supply   of  those  early  commando  raids  violated  that   pledge.
So  did   our  Programs   Evaluation  Office   in  Laos,  a  disguised
military  mission  of  U.S. officers   in  civilian  clothes  who   took
over  control  of  the  armed  forces  in  Laos  in  the  same  period.
They  twice  engineered  the  overthrow  of  its  neutralist  Prime
Minister  Souvanna  Phouma  and  are  still  at  it.
It  is a pity  Chairman  Fulbright  of  Senate  Foreign  Relations
does  not  take  time  off  from  retailing  safe  liberal   generalities
about   easily  discernible   "myths"   and  use  his   committee   to
give  the  U.S. public  a  thorough  investigation  of  what  is going
on.    We  went  to  the  conference  table  in  Geneva   in  1962 to
save  Laos  from  being  completely  taken  over  by  the  Left  when
our  rightist  military  proteges  faced  collapse.    The  price  was
an   agreement   to   neutralize   the  country   and   to   establish   a
While  We  "Blast  Supply  Lines"  1,000  Miles
to  The  North
Before  retreating  from  Tan  Buu,  the  Viet  Cong  stole
all   the   weapons   from   the   armory,   carried   away   so
much  ammunition  they  could  not  paddle  it  all  down  the
river,  and  even  swiped  the  commander's   boots  and uni-
forms.    They  captured  four  heavy  weapons  and  enough
rifles   to  equip  a  new  company;  three   American-sup-
plied  radios,  which  enables  them  to  listen  to  radio  com-
munications    of    government    forces;    classified    docu-
ments,    and   even   a   government    trooper's   hammock.
.  .  .  'The  Viet   Cong  has  now  the  same   weapons   that
we  have,'  an  American  adviser   lamented  after  the  at-
tack.    It  appears  we  are  equipping  both  sides.  .  .  . The
attack  was  made  in  an  area  supposedly   pacified  under
the   Hop  Tac   Plan,   designed   by  Gen. Westmorland,
commander   of   American   forces   in   Vietnam   and   ap-
proved  by  Secretary   of  Defense   McNamara.   The  plan,
using   Saigon  as  the  center  of  the  so-called   'oil  spot,'
calls  for   gradual   expansion  of   government    authority
into  the  six  provinces   around  Saigon."
—Beverly  Deepe, New  York  Herald-Tribune,  Jan. 17,
describing  an  attack  made just  10 miles  outside  Saigon.
* See  Edgar  Ansel  Mowrer's  boastful  account  in  the  Paris
magazine,   Realites,  May  1964,  and  Georges  Chaffard's  sober
account  of  these  activities  in  Le  Monde,  Aug. 7, 1964.
coalition  government  of   the  three  factions  under  Souvanna
Phouma.    The  aerial  bombardment  of  Laos  now  coming  to
public  knowledge  with  the  loss  of  more  planes  to  enemy  ac-
tion  was  made  possible  by the  overthrow  of  Souvanna  Phouma
for  the  third  time  last  April.    Though  he  was  restored,  the
conditions were  such as to  make him  and  the  neutralists prison-
ers  of  the  right.   With  the  coalition  destroyed,  the  way  was
clear  to  escalate  the  war  by having  the  Laotian government  in?
vite  the  U.S. to  send  its  planes  into  Laos  for  "reconnaisance."
This  violated the  promises  made  at  Geneva  in  1962.   Laos  of-
fers  an  ideal  way  to  satisfy  the  demand  for  escalation  without
direct  attacks on  North  Vietnam  or  China.   The  recent  bomb-
ings,  notably that  on  the  bridge  at  Ban  Ban,  have  been  over-
played  in  the  U.S. press.    Our  public,  brought  up  on  movies
about  the  bridge  across  the  River  Kwai,  pictures  Ban  Ban  as a
jugular  attack.    But  this  bridge   is  not  anywhere  near   that
legendary  Ho  Chi  Minh  supply  trail  to  South  Vietnam,  and
bridges  are  of  little  importance  anyway  in  small  scale  guerrilla
fighting.    This  is  another  phony  "movie"  about  the war.
We'll Send A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of  This  Issue To  Friends  If  You  Send Stamped  Self-Addressed  Envelopes
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name   ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............Stmte....................
1/25/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
cfo)   Name   ........•..................;...................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate   if   announcement  wished    CU
I. E  Stone's Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.   ZOO 15
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December   and  the  first  week  in
January   and   Bi-Weekly   during  July  and   August  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An   independent   weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.   F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.;  $6  in   Canada;    $10   elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe:    S20  to  Israel.  Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED