I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965mar15.pdf

============================================================

Selma A  Negro  Victory,  P. 3
Now  It  Looks As  If  Some of  the Viet Cong Even Get Their Basic Training At Our Expense
"Dong  Da,  South  Vietnam,  March 6  (Reuters)—A  dozen
sorry-looking  figures,  bare  but  for  ragged  shorts,  slouched
through  punishment  exercises  with  weighted  packs  on  their
skinny  backs.    They  are  recruits  who  ran  away,  some  of
the  many  who  go—but  the  few  whom  we  catch,'  explained
an  officer  at  the  South  Vietnam  Army's  national   training
center  here.   Desertions  .  .  .  amount  to  as  much  as  30%
of  the  some  3,000  men  in  training   here  at  any  one   time.
.  . .  Some  officers  estimate  that  as  many  as  10% of  the  re-
cruits  are  actually  Communist  Viet  Cong,  who  slip  away
again  when  the  Government has  given  them their training."
—Baltimore  Sun,  March  7.
L R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XIII,  NO.   10
MARCH   16,   1965
ioi       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
16  CENTS
LBJ  Rushes  In  Where  Ike  and  Kennedy  Feared  to  Tread
In  1954,  when  Nixon,  Radford  and  Dulles  wanted  U.S.  in-
tervention   in  Vietnam  to  prevent   the  negotiation   of   peace,
Eisenhower  "remarked",   according  to  his  memoirs,   Mandate
for  Change,  "that  if  the  U.S.  were,  unilaterally,  to  permit  its
forces  to  be  drawn  into  conflict  in  Indochina  and  in  a  suc-
cession  of  Asian  wars,  the  end  result  would  be  to  drain  off
our  resources  and  to  weaken  our  overall  offensive  position."
Kennedy,  it  was  recently  revealed,  faced  a  similar  demand  and
made  a  similar  decision  his  first  year  in  office.    Arthur  Krock
in  his  New   York   Times  column  Feb.   14  disclosed   for   the
first  time  that  Kennedy  turned  down  a  proposal  by  the  Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff  to  send  40,000  U.S.  troops  to  Vietnam.    Mr.
Krock  said  he  was at the White House  on Oct.  11,  1961,   when
"the  President  had  just  come"  from  a  meeting  with  the  Joint
Chiefs  at  which  he  rejected  this  recommendation.   He   told
Mr.  Krock,  according  to  notes  made  by  the  latter  right  after
this  off-the-record   talk,  that  "he  still  believed ...  the  U.S.
military  should  not  become  involved  on  the  Asian  mainland"
particularly  in  "civil  disturbances  created  by guerrillas."  What
both   Eisenhower   and   Kennedy  refused   to   do  Johnson   has
now  done.    He  has  landed  U.S.  combat  troops  in  Asia.
Coy  Hints  of  A  Wider War
It  is  true  that  the  arrival  of  3500  U.S.  Marines  at  Danang
was  accompanied  by  the  usual  double-talk.    "Because  of   the
limited  number  and  role  assigned,"  said  the  Washington  Post
March  9,  "the  U.S.  Government  does  not  consider  that  it  has
'put  land  combat  troops  in  Asia'  in  the  sense  this  is  usually
understood."     Our  Generals  can  be  as  subtle  as  Greek  theo-
logians.    It  is  true  that  there  is  a  certain  military logic  in  the
dispatch  of  the  Marines.   Danang  is  the  air  base  from  which
we  have   been   bombing   Laos  and  North  Vietnam.     Hawk
ground-to-air  missiles  were  placed  there  to  defend  the  base
from  any  possible  retaliatory  air  attack  from  the  North.    The
next  problem  was  to  defend  the  missiles  from  the  guerrillas.
Recently  at  Pleiku  and  earlier  at  Bien  Hoa,  disastrous  night
attacks  on  U.S.  bases  showed  how  unreliable  were  the  guard
arrangements  of  our  South  Vietnamese allies.   Marines were
thereupon   sent  in,   as  the   New   York   Times   correspondent
politely  phrased  it  March  8,  "freeing  Saigon's troops  for  com-
bat  duties."    But  the  Marines  are  not  just  going  to  sit  there.
They  might  even go  out  and  do  a  little shooting  on  their  own.
We  Can  Only  Hope  Things  Stop  "Improving"
"The  Vietnamese  forces  are  hurting  the  Viet   Cong.
According  to  the  best  figures  we  can  get—recognizing
that  the  nature  of  the  war  is  such  that  these  may  not
be  exact—about  75,000  Viet  Cong  have  been  killed  so
far.     Our  aviation   operations   have  contributed  mate-
rially   to  this  success.    Improvements  in  the   profes-
sional  competence  of  Vietnamese  officers,   improvements
in  the   sub-sector   advisory  system,  and  improvements
in  the  actions  of  the  popular  forces  all  encourage  us  to
think  that  the  Vietnamese  will  be  better  able  to  defend
themselves  and to  cope  more  effectively  with  the  infil-
tration  from  the  north  than  has  been  the  case  in  the
past."
—Gen. Harold K.  Johnson,  Chief   of  Staff,   U£.  Army
to  the  Senate  Committee  on  Armed  Services,  March  3.
"Saigon,   Vietnam    (AP)—The    Vietnamese     armed
forces  suffered  their  heaviest  casualties  yet  against  the
Viet  Cong  during  February,  U.S.  military  officials  re-
ported  today.    The  report  said  870  men  were  killed,
1820  were wounded and  1450 are  missing.   Many  of  the
missing  are  presumed to  be deserters.  .  .  .  The Ameri-
can  report  also listed a new high  in  loss  of   government
weapons—2,950—while  the  Viet  Cong  lost  655  weapons
in  combat."
—Washington  Evening  Star, March  4-
For  as the  Baltimore Sun  reported  March  9,  the  two battalions
are  "more  than  infantry"  because  equipped  with  light  tanks
and  rocket  launchers,  though  the  idea  of  using  them  as   "the
spearhead  of  a  prospective  offensive  force ...  it  is  stated,  is
not  even  remotely  contemplated."     The  "it  is  stated"   refers
to  an  off-the-record  briefing  at  the  Pentagon   the  day   before.
The  New  York  Herald  Tribune  reported  the  same  day on  the
basis  of  the  same  briefing  that  while  there  was  no  plan  to
send  more  ground  units  to  join  the  Marines,  "there  are  hints
that   such  units  might  be  ordered   if  a  Communist   takeover
seemed  imminent."    With  such  coy hints,  we  slide  into  that
wider  war  President  Johnson  keeps  saying  he  does  not  want.
If  U.S.  "military  advisers"  are  killed  with  the  South   Viet-
namese  troops  they  are  advising,  the  defeat  does  not   involve
U.S.  prestige  directly.    But  if  two  battalions  of  U.S.  Marines
should  be  overwhelmed  by  guerrillas,  this  would  be  a  loss of
face  for   U.S.   forces.    We   would  be  compelled   to  send   in
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  15,1965
Justice   Douglas's   Remarks,   Concurring,  on  Buddhism  Should  Impress  Vietnam
Supreme  Court  Unanimously  Widens  Right  of  Conscientious  Objection
The  Supreme  Court  is  only  a  few  hundred  yards  from  the
Capitol  and  a  mile  from  the  White  House.    But  the  atmos-
phere   reflected   by  the   Court's   unanimous  opinion   in   the
Seeger,  Jakobson  and  Peter  cases  last  Monday  is  a  whole  uni-
verse  apart.    The  major  premise  of  White  House  policy  on
Vietnam,  and  of  its  overwhelming  Congressional  support,  is
that   the   killing  of   more  human   beings,  whether  our  own
countrymen  or  others,  is of  minor consequence.   The  Supreme
Court,  on  the  other  hand,  has  chosen  this  moment  to   affirm
as  the  highest  moral  principle  in  our  constitutional  system that
a  man  has  a  right  to  refuse  to  kill  for  his  country.
What  Is  Belief  In  A  Supreme  Being?
The  right,  it  is  true,  is  slightly  qualified.    The  Court  has
yet  to  rule  that  this  may  be  accorded  an  atheist,  though  moti-
vated  by  the  deepest  concern  for  other  human  beings.    But,
speaking  through  Mr.  Justice Clark  the  Court  has unanimously
read   the   conscientious  objector  provisions  of   the  Universal
Military Training  Act  so loftily  as  to  cover  any objector  whose
personal  views  may  be  regarded  as  religious,  though   in  the
most   unconventional   sense.    Not   to  have  done  so—as  Mr.
Justice  Douglas  points  out  concurring—would  have  been  to
violate the guarantee of  the  free  exercise of  religion  in  the  First
Amendment  and  the  equal  protection  clause in  the  Fourteenth.
The  statute  allows  exemption  from  combatant  service  where
the  individual's objection  springs  from   "belief   in  relation  to
a  Supreme  Being  involving  duties  superior  to  those  arising
from  any human  relation"  but  not  from  "essentially  political,
sociological   or  philosophical   views."
All  three  of  the  conscientious  objectors  before  the  Supreme
Court  had  been  convicted  in  the  District  Courts  on  the  ground
that  their   refusal  to  take  human  life  did   not   spring   from
belief   in   "a   Supreme  Being."     Daniel   Andrew  Seeger  had
said  that  his  ethical  views,  like  those  of  Plato,  Aristotle  and
Spinoza,  were  "without  belief  in  God,  except  in  the  remotest
sense."     Forest  Britt  Peter  would  not   go  beyond  belief   in
"some  power  manifest  in  nature which  helps  man  in  the  or-
dering  of  his  life."     Arno  Sascha  Jakobson  believed   in   no
A  New  "Declaration  of  Conscience"
"Because  the  use  of  the   military   resources  of   the
U.S.  in  Vietnam  suppresses  the  aspirations   of  the  peo-
ple   for  political  independence   and  economic   freedom;
Because   inhuman   torture   and   senseless   killing   are
being  carried  out  by  forces   armed,  uniformed,  trained
and  financed  by  the  U.S.;  Because  we  believe  that  all
peoples   of   the   earth,   including  both   Americans   and
non-Americans,  have  an  inalienable  right  to  life,  lib-
erty,   and  the   peaceful  pursuit   of   happiness   in   their
own  way;  and  Because   we  think  that   positive   steps
must  be  taken  to  put  an  end  to  the  threat  of  nuclear
catastrophe   and  death  by  chemical  or  biological  war-
fare, whether these  result  from  accident or escalation—
We  hereby  declare  our  conscientious   refusal   to  co-
operate  with  the   U.S.   government   in  the   prosecution
of  the  war  in  Vietnam.    We  encourage  those  who  can
conscientiously  do  so  to  refuse  to  serve  in  the  armed
forces  and  to  ask  for  discharge  if  they  are  already  in.
.  .  .  We  urge   others  to  refuse ...  to  work  in     ...
weapons  development."
—From  a  petition  originated   by  A.   J.  Muste  and
sponsored   by  the  Catholic  Worker,   the  Committee   for
Nonviolent  Action,  the  Student  Peace   Union,  and  the
War  Resisters  League.   Signers  (there  are  now  2,400)
face  possible  penalties  of  5  years  imprisonment    and/or
a  fine  of  f5,000  for   advising  draftees   to  refuse   service.
more  than  "an  Ultimate  Cause."
Mr.  Justice  Clark in  a  truly  reverential opinion,  citing  some
of   the  foremost  theologians  of  our  time,  among  them   Paul
Tillich,   decided  that  the   exemption   covered   anyone  whose
views  hold  the  same  place  in  his  life  "as  an  orthodox  belief
in  God"   does  for  the  conventionally   religious.    Mr.  Justice
Douglas  noted  that  Buddhism's  conception  of  God  is  so  un-
like  the  Western  as  often  to  seem  atheistic.    He  pointed  out
that  there  are  171,000  Buddhists  in  the  U.S.  and  that  to  rule
otherwise  would  be  to  deny  them  the  right  of  conscientious
objection.     This   Supreme  Court  opinion,   circulated   in  pre-
dominantly   Buddhist  South  Vietnam,   may  help  to   demon-
strate  that   we   Americans  are   not   all   savage   dispensers   of
napalm.
Foes of  HUAC Plan New  Fight to  Force Abolition  Proposal  Out  of  Rules  Committee
The  next   step  by  Congressional   opponents  of   HUAC  is
to  force  Judge  Smith,  Chairman  of  the  House  Rules  Com-
mittee,  to  release  one  of  the  thirteen   abolition  resolutions
which  he  currently   has   bottled   up  in  committee.     A   dis-
charge   petition  signed  by  281  members   is   the  only   way.
Last  month  the  abolitionists   used  a  new  tactic  and  tripled
their  support  in  battle  over  the  committee's  annual   operat-
ing  funds   ($370,000).    They  first  introduced  a  motion   re-
quiring  the  committee  to  justify  its  funds  in  a  public  hear-
ing.    This  won  64  supporters  (including  6  paired).    Thirty-
two  congressmen   (3  paired)   voted  against  the  appropria-
tion  itself.    This  too  was  progress.     Only  20  voted  against
the  appropriation  two  years  ago  and  only  6  before  that.
The  debate  was  less  lopsided   than  the  scoring.    HUAC
partisans   and  opponents   turned   out  in  nearly   equal   num-
ber,  and  from  the  applause  it  appeared  that  the  partisans
were  concentrated   on  the  Republican  side.    Only  one  anti-
HUAC  speech  failed  to  win  applause,  and this  significantly
was  when  Rep.  Joelson   (D.,  N.J.)  urged  HUAC  to   investi-
gate   the   right-wing.      "Our   objections    are    fundamental.
They  are  constitutional,"   Don  Edwards  (D.,  Cal.)   objected,
"The  same  constitutional   disabilities  exist  regardless  of  the
political   philosophy  of   the  committees  targets."    To  en-
courage  any  of  his  colleagues  who  might  fear  "adverse   po-
litical   reaction"   from   voting   against   the   committee,   Ed-
wards   recalled   names   of   those   who  had  opposed  a   1946
HUAC   appropriation.     Among    them   were   four   present
chairmen   of   House   committees    and,   to   everybody's   sur-
prise, Lyndon Johnson.
Only   one   congressman,    Leonard   Farbstein   (D.,   N.Y.),
mentioned   the  three   peace  workers,  Donna   Allen,   Dagmar
Wilson  and  Russell   Nixon,  now  under  indictment  for   con-
tempt  because  they  refused  to  testify  in  a  HUAC  executive
session.    Nor  did  any  member  point  out  the  tragic  conse-
quences   of   HUAC's   hearings   in   Buffalo  and  Minneapolis
last   year.    Six  of  the  fifteen  Buffalo  witnesses  called   to
testify   lost  their  jobs.    In  Minneapolis   it  was  two  out  of
eleven.    A  third  was  forced  to  stand  trial   before  his  labor
union.    HUAC  is  not  the  extinct  volcano  that  it  sometimes
seems  to  be  around   Washington.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  15,1965
Alabama  Mobsters  Not  The  Only  Obstacle;  How  Justice  Dept.  Drags  Its  Heels
The  Selma  Beatings,  Like  the  Birmingham  Bombings, Will  Help  The  Negro
This  is  written  after  the  first  march  at  Selma  but  goes  to
press  before  the  second.    Governor  Wallace  and  Sheriff  Clark,
the  state  police   with   their  tear  gas  and  the   posse   with   its
whips,  the  white   onlookers  with  their  imbecile  gloating,  will
prove   to  have  made   the  greatest  single   contribution  to  the
Negro's  cause  since  the  Birmingham  bombings  forced  passage
of  the  1962  Civil  Rights  Act  from  a  reluctant Administration.
The  brutal  suppression   of  Negro  efforts   to  exercise  rights  as
elementary   as   those   of   voting   and   peaceful   demonstration
must  focus  the  eyes  of  all  the  world  on  us  at  the  unbearably
painful  moment  when  we  are  trying  to  muster  support  abroad
for  our  war  to  make  Southeast  Asia  "safe  for  democracy."  It
will be  hard  to  explain  why  the  cause  of  freedom,  like charity,
should   not  begin  at  home.    Nor   to  hide  the  striking  resem-
blance  between  our  rationale  for  the  war  in  Vietnam  and  that
put   forward  by  such   characters  as  Sheriff   Clark.     In   terms
that  recalled  the  White  Paper,  he  explained  on  ABC's  Issues
and   Answers   March   7   that   all   would   be   well   with   the
"Nigras"  in  Alabama  if  only  those  Northern  agitators  would
go  away!
Delaying  Democracy  in  Mississippi
The  Alabama  mobsters  are  not  the  only  obstacle  to  racial
justice.    In   the  wake  of  the   Supreme  Court's  decision   last
Monday    in    U.S.   v.   Mississippi,    the   Mississippi   Freedom
Democratic  Party  pointed  out  that  the  Court  was  ready  to  rule
on  the  merits  and  throw  out  the  elaborate   system  by  which
Mississippi     for    two    generations    has    disenfranchised   its
Negroes.    Mr.   Justice  Black   for   a  unanimous  court  said   it
was  sending   the   case  back  for     trial  because  that  was   the
course  asked  by  the  Solicitor  General.    The  MFDP  said  that
it  had   been   urging  the   Justice   Department   for   months   to
ask  for  immediate  and  full  relief.    The  MFDP  said  that  to
ask  only  a  remand  for  trial  would  result  in  months,   perhaps
years,  of  further   denial   of  the  right  to  vote   in   Mississippi.
This  delaying  tactic,  and  the  Administration's  failure  to  sub-
mit   its  promised  bill   on   voting   registrars,   suggest  behind-
scenes  love-feasts  with  Eastland.    It  was  likewise  a  blow  the
Aubrey  Williams
If   Aubrey  Williams  had   been   different,   he   might
have  become  a  Governor of  his  native  Alabama  or  rep-
resented   it  in  the   Senate.     He  came  of   an  old  "Con-
federate"  family.    He  had  a  natural  eloquence,  which
reflected  the  streak  of  poet  in  him,  and  his  sympathy
with   common  folk   fitted   into   that   Alabama  Populist
tradition  from  which  Justice  Black,  and  Senators  Hill
and  Sparkman sprang.    But  Aubrey  would  never  com-
promise  or  even  consent  to  be  silent  on  the  racial  is-
sue.    He  had  a  grandfather  who  freed  1,000  slaves  be-
fore  the  Civil  War,  and  Aubrey  was  ruined  politically
by  that  streak  of  humanity in  his  genes.    His  heyday
was  the  New  Deal.    He  was  right-hand  to  Harry Hop-
kins  in  FERA,  WPA  and  NYA,  the  alphabetical   agen-
cies  which  sprang  up  to  help  the  hungry  and  the  job-
less  and  to  give  new  hope  to  youth.    Aubrey  was  of
that  inner  circle  of  the  devoted  on  whom  Franklin  D.
Roosevelt  relied.   One of  FDR's  last  acts  was  to  nomi-
nate  Aubrey  Rural  Electrification Administrator.    The
power   trust   defeated   him  by   using   the   racial   issue
against  him, especially  his  sponsorship  of  the  Fair  Em-
ployment  Practices   Commission  in   1941.    All   his   life
he  fought  for  the  rights  of  the  Negro,  as  publisher  of
The  Southern Farmer  and  in  the  Southern   Conference
Educational  Fund.    When  he  died  he  was  head  of   the
Committee  to  Abolish  the  House  Un-American  Activi-
ties  Committee; that  was  dying  with  his  boots  on.  His
old  enemy  Eastland  attacked  him  and  his   championing
of  the  Negro  finally  forced  The  Southern  Farmer  out
of  business.    He  loved  his  native  South  but  found him-
self   so  isolated  that  he  finally  moved  to   Washington,
where  he  battled  a  fatal   illness  for  months.    None  of
the  prominent and  powerful  whom  he  had  helped,  from
Lyndon   Johnson  down,  came  to  his   funeral.    Loneli-
ness  in  death  as  in  life  was  the  price  of  living  in  full
accord  with  a  tender  conscience.    Nothing  in  our  time
has  been  harder than  to  be  a  truly  Christian  white  man
in  today's  South.    Aubrey  was.
day  after  Selma  to  have  the  Court  rule,  as  it  did  in  Swain  v.
Alabama  through  Justice  White  over  the  dissent  of  Goldberg,
Warren  and  Douglas.    For  the  first  time  since  1880  the  Court
upheld  the  death   sentence   conviction   of  a  Negro  by  a  jury
from  which  Negroes  were  systematically  excluded.
The  High  Cost  to  the  Negro  of  Farm  Program  Discrimination in  The  South
In  one  sense  the  Civil  Rights  Commission's  report  on  the
administration  of  U.S.  farm  programs  in  the  South  follows
the  pattern  of  its  previous  indictments.    There  is  the  same
painful   story    of    our   government's   acquiescence   in   ra-
cial  segregation   and  exploitation,  but  now  it  is  the  Depart-
ment   of   Agriculture   rather   than   Justice   or   HEW   that
stands   guilty.     Here  are  two  representative   samples:  Al-
though  discrimination  in  federal  hiring  has  been  prohibited
by  Presidential  directive  for  over  twenty   years,   the  1,350
Southern  offices  of  the  crop  allotment  program  had  a  "total
permanent  employment  of  Negroes  that  consisted  of  1  full-
time  Grade 3  clerk  and  7  part-time  workers."    In  applying
the  farm  credit  program,  the  average  size  of  loans   going
to  poor  whites  was  four  times   greater   than  those   going
to  equally  poor  Negroes.
It  is  when  discussing   the  consequences  of  this  discrimi-
nation  that  the  Commission's  report  offers  a  new  and  more
radical  perspective:   Over  the  past   thirty   years,   the  Com-
mission  writes,  "Southern  white  farmers  have  raised  their
incomes,   increased   the  size  of  their  farms,  improved  their
housing   and  advanced  their  education."    From  this  prog-
ress  the  Negro  farmer  has  been  virtually  excluded.    It  is
for  him  as  if  the  depression  never  ended.    Negro  tenants,
for  example,  were  farming  an  average  of  40  acres  in  1935
and  an  average  of  35  acres  in  1959. White  tenants,  by  con-
trast,  operated  farms  averaging  97  acres  in  1935  and  200
acres  in  1959.   Similar  figures  could  be  cited  for  full  and
part  owners   and  cash   tenants.     In  the   past  thirty   years
overall  acreage  held  by  whites  increased   by  3  million  and
declined  by  22  million  for  Negroes.
The  gap  between  white  and  Negro  income  has  grown  as
rapidly  as  the  gap  in  landholding.    By  1959  Negro  income
had  not  even  reached  the  1949 income  level  for  whites.   On
a   state   by  state  basis,  the   richest   Negroes,   who  live  in
Maryland,  were  poorer  than  the  poorest   whites,  who  live
in  Kentucky.   Two-thirds  of  rural  Negro  families  had  less
than  a  $2,000  income  in  1959,  but  this  was  true  for   only
one-fourth  of  white  families.    No  poverty  program  that  is
limited   to   providing   "equal   opportunity"    can   succeed   in
closing  gaps  like  these.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly, March  15,196S
Me  George Bundy  Admits  Vietnam  Is  Not  A  "Vital" Interest
(Continued  from  Page  One)
more  troops  and  urged  to  do  more  retaliatory  bombing  in  the
North  to  restore  our  "prestige."    Once  we  begin  committing
combat  troops,  we  are  caught  in  what  the  French   call   the
"engrenage",  in  the  "gears"  that will  drag  us further  and  ever
more  painfully  in.    The  Marines  are  landing  at  a  time  and  a
place  that  invites  a  Dunkirk  if  not  a  Dienbienphu.    Danang
is  set  like  Dienbienphu  in  a  bowl  of  hills  dominated  by  the
Viet  Cong;  the  only  fortunate  difference   is  that  it   offers   a
quick  escape  route  by  sea.   The  military  situation   all  about
the  place  is  deteriorating.    One  plane  with  Marines  was  shot
at  while  landing.    Though  the  defense  perimeter  is  supposed
to  be 8  miles  out,  guerrillas  overran  a  regional  forces  platoon
only  three  miles  south  of  Danang  runway  the  night  before  the
Marines  began  arriving.  To  the  south  of  Danang,   guerrillas
have  cut  the  North-South   railway  and  the  one  highway  to
Saigon.    For  most  intents  and  purposes  they  have  cut  South
Vietnam  in  half.    The  few  coastal  towns  still  held   by  the
government  in  the  central  portion  of  the  country  are  crowded
with  refugees  with  no  way  out  except  by  air.   Heavy U.S.
bombings  are  exacting  their  toll  of  civilians,  though  they  have
not  stopped  the  guerrillas.    The  rate  of  desertions  from  the
South  Vietnamese army is  rising  sharply,  and  if  there  is  going
to  be  war  much  longer  we  are  going  to  have  to  wage  it.
They  Agree  With  deGaulle
War  weariness has spread.   A correspondent in  Le  Nouveau
Candide  (Paris)  Feb. 25-March  4,  describes  the  frenzied  ef-
fort  in  Saigon  to  cash  in  whatever  property  is  saleable  and
get  out.   The   "information  agencies"   here   in   Washington
are  doing  their  best  to  hide  the  full  truth.    NEC's  radio  cor-
respondent  Robert  Goralski   said  in  a  broadcast  from   Saigon
March  4  that  a  top  ranking member  of  the  South Vietnamese
government  told  him  that  it  is  "basically  in  accord with  Gen.
deGaulle's   position  that  the  only  way  out  is  to  sit  down  at
the  conference  table  with  the  North   Vietnamese."    Though
this  appeared  on  the  AP  ticker,  the  only  paper  in  which  we
saw  it  was the  York,  Pa.,  Gazette  and  Daily   (March  5),  and
it  was  soon  dropped  by  NEC.    A  caller  checking  with  NEC
Some  People  Are  Funny  That  Way
"Although  it  is  sometimes   officially  denied,  the  Sky-
raiders   have   dropped  napalm   bombs   throughout   the
South.    No  napalm  has  been   used  in  either   Laos  or
North  Vietnam  so  far, however.    Restrictions  on  talk
about  the  use  of  napalm  came  after  the  Vietcong  gave
particularly   effective  propaganda   distribution   to   the
photograph  of   a  villager   and  his  child  after   a   raid.
[That   was  the   Associated  Press   photo   we   reprinted
last   March  30—IFS].    But  the  bombs  have  been   too
valuable  in  penetrating   caves  and  trenches  to  give  up.
'The  public  seems   to  have  an  aversion  to  napalm,'  a
senior  American  officer  said,  'because  people  think it's
kinder  to  blast  a  man's  head  off  than  to  fry   him  to
death'."
—New  York  Times from  Saigon, March  7.
was  told  that  it  was not  broadcast  again  because  the  Assistant
Secretary  of  State,  presumably Wm.  P.  Bundy,  advised  NBC
the   interview  was   "off-the-record."     One   touch  of  realism
was in  the AP's  account from  Camp Pendleton,  Cal.,  of  Opera-
tion  Camelot  (Washington  Star,  March  7).    In  this  exercise
Marines  came  ashore  "in  the  friendly  but  war-torn  nation  of
Lancelot."    One  feature  of   the   exercises  showed  somebody
was  familiar  with  the  "friendly"  realities  they  will  face  when
they  come ashore  in  Vietnam.  The  AP  said  "relief  units  of  the
1st  Marine  Division"  were  under  simulated  "sporadic  attack
by  civilians unsympathetic to  the  U.S.  peacekeeping  mission."
The  Marines  seem  to  be preparing  to  land  on  hostile  beaches.
While  more  combat troops  are thus  being  readied,  the pub-
lic  is  being  prepared  for  a  U.S. naval  blockade;  Goldwater
must  think   he  won  the   election!     The  one  hint  of   more
sober  thinking  at  the  White  House  came in  a  talk  McGeorge
Bundy  made  here  to  the   Radcliffe   Club  (Washington   Post
society  page,  March  3).    In  answer  to  a  question,  he  denied
that   Vietnam   represented   a  "vital"  interest  of   the  United
States  in  the   sense  of   a  life  or  death  matter.    "It   would
hardly  be  in  the  interest  of  either  side,"  the  President's  chief
foreign   affairs   adviser  said,  "if   there  should  be  a  full-scale
thermonuclear  war."    We're  glad  to  hear  a  war-hawk  cooing.
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send A  Sample  Copy of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —   Send  A  Stamped  Self-Addressed Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
Please  renew   (or  enter)   a  sab  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
3/15/85
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
Name
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every  Monday  except  the  last  week   in  December   and  the  first  week  in
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   6618  Nebraska  Aye..  N.W..  Washington,   D.  C.    An  independent   weekly   published   and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.;  J6   in   Canada;    $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail_rates:
tie  to  Europe;  120  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED