I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965jun14.pdf

============================================================

The  Patent  Steal  in  the  Space  Race, P.  3
An Item To Remember  When Reading Those  OfiFicial  Figures  on  Vietcong  Casualties
"Vietcong  casualty  figures  have  always  been  difficult   to
pinpoint.    As  the  Communists withdrew   from  Quangngai
last  Monday,  U.S. jet  bombers pounded  the  hills  into  which
they  were  headed.   Many  Vietnamese—one  estimate  was  as
high  as   500—were  killed  by   the  strikes.    The  American
contention  is  that  they  were  Vietcong  soldiers.    But  three
out  of  four  patients seeking treatment in  a Vietnamese hos-
pital  afterward  for  burns  from  napalm,  or  jellied  gasoline,
were  village women."
—Jack  Langguth from  Saigon in New  York  Times June 6
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XIII,  NO.  23
JUNE  14,  1966
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16   CENTS
Lyndon  Johnson  Lets  the  Office  Boy Declare  War
There  seems  to   be  a  peculiar  division  of   labor   here   in
Washington.     The  President  makes  peace  speeches  and  the
Pentagon   makes  foreign  policy  but   the   unpleasant  task  of
declaring  war  is left  to  the  poor  State Department.   The  news
that  U.S.  troops  in  Vietnam  have  been  authorized  to  engage
in  full  combat  is  the  news  that  we  are  embarking  on  a  new
war.    Article  I,  Section  8,  of  the  Constitution,  that  half-for-
gotten  document,  put  the  power  to  declare  war  in  the  hands
of  Congress.    Its  members might  insist  at  least  that  they have
the  right  to  hear  declarations  of  war  from  some  official   higher
up  than  the  press  officer  of  the  State  Department.    It  is  hard
to  find  any  constitutional  or  administrative  reason  to  explain
why  Robert  J.  McCloskey,  the  press  officer,  should  have  been
pushed  suddenly  into  the  pages  of  history  by  being  assigned
the  task  of  announcing  at  his  daily,  usually  routine  and  al-
most   always  boring,   noon  press   briefing   that  we  were  no
longer  advising  or  patrolling  or  defensively  shooting  back  in
Vietnam  but  going  full-scale  into  war.    As  a  major  decision,
it  should  have  been  announced  at  the  White   House.    As  a
change  in  military  orders,  it  might  have  been  made  public
at  the  Pentagon.    As  a  hot  potato,  both  seem  to  have  passed
it  on  to  the  State  Department.    There  in  turn  it  was  passed
on  down  from  the  Secretary through  the  many  Assistant  Sec-
retaries  to  the  lowest  echelon  available.    Maybe  the  higher-
ups  are hoping  it  will.be  called  not  Johnson's  or  McNamara's
but  Bob  McCloskey's  war.
Dirksen's  Foolish   Candor
Nothing  better  attests  the  slim  popular  support  for  the  war
than  the  care  thus  exercised  by  Lyndon  Johnson  not  to  be
photographed  marching  at  the  head  of  the  troops  straight  into
it.    The  White  House  acted  as  if  it  couldn't  be  bothered  by
such  trivial  matters.     "The  White  House,"  The   Washington
Post  reported  June  9,  "declined  to  comment  on  the  State  De-
partment  announcement.    Informed   officials   sought   to  play
down   the   significance  of   the   announcement,  arguing   that
American  forces  already are patrolling  vigorously and  that  the
commander  should  not  be  inhibited  in  making  the  best  use
of  his  troops."   This  genius  at  obfuscation  was evident  in  the
very  form   of   the  announcement  given  McCloskey  to  read:
the  U.S.  commander  in  Saigon  had  been  authorized  to  com-
mit  U.S.  troops  to  "combat  support"  of  South  Vietnam  units
if   asked  to  do  so  by  the  South  Vietnamese government.   This
would  seem  to  put  the  power  to  declare  America  at  war  in
the  hands  of  whoever  happened   to  be  on  top   in  Saigon's
The  Hypocrisy   Is  Worse  Than  The   Bombing
"I  do  not  believe  it  is  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God
for  men  to  separate  morality  from  their  might."
—LBJ  at  Catholic  University's  commencement June 6
"One  who listens to  the President...  would  think we
were  killing  no  one in  North  Vietnam. ...  If  anyone
says  we  can  bomb  munition  centers,  bridges,  transpor-
tation  centers,  terminal centers  and  railroad  yards  and
not  kill  human  beings,  he  is  misleading  the  American
people....  Of course  we  are killing  North  Vietnamese.
We  are killing  thousands  in  South  Vietnam. .  .  . The
Defense  Department  keeps and publishes all  the  figures
of  killings  and casualties  in  the  south  committed by  the
Vietcong.    But  they  tell  nothing  of   the   South  Viet-
namese  civilians  we  are  killing  and  maiming with  our
napalm  and our strafing  and our artillery. . .. The pe-
riod  of  this  war  will  not  be  a  proud  chapter  in  then-
country's  history  for  future  American  boys  and  girls
to  read."                               —Morse  in  the Senate, June 7
Ferris  wheel  changes  of  government  and  military  command.
This  is  quite   a  departure   from   the   tight   centralization  of
powers  characteristic  of   the  Johnson   Administration.     Here
in  Washington   minor   officials   can  hardly  announce  a  new
postoffice   for  Chilicothe,  Ohio,  without  clearing   it  with   the
White  House.    But  whether  or  not  our  troops  move  into  full
combat  will  be  decided  by  someone  9,000  miles  away  whose
name  the  papers   can't   even  spell  properly.     Delegation  of
powers  has  never  been  so  distant.    It  looks  as  if  while  the
rest  of  us  may  be  plunged  into  war,  Lyndon  Johnson   wants
to  keep   as  far   away   from   it   as  possible.     Maybe  he   can
blame  it  on  Dirksen,  who  was  foolish  enough  to  say  plainly
that  he  feared  this  new  move  would  "transform   this  into  a
conventional  war."    That's  the  kind  of  candor  that  lost  Re-
publicans  the  last  election.
The  truth  is  that  the  South  Vietnamese  army  is  out  of  re-
serves,  though  the  expected  Viet  Cong  monsoon  offensive  is
only  just  getting  underway.   The  urgent  problem  at  the  mo-
ment  is  to  supply  from  U.S.  combat  forces  the  extra  160,000
men  McNamara  was so  confident a  few  months  ago  he  could
mobilize  from  among  Saigon's  idle  but  indifferent  youth;  die
men   who  couldn't   be  drafted  there  will   soon   have  to   be
drafted  here.    The  political  situation  is  as  precarious  as  die
military.    The  Quat  government,  which  has  no  real   popular
base,   is  tottering  under  attack  by  Catholic   extremists   who
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  14,1965
Liberals   Split  Wide  Open  in  Connecticut  Birth   Control   Decision
Ban  on  Communist  Labor  Leaders  Outlawed, 5-to-4  By  Supreme  Court
The  diverse  decisions  handed  down  by  the  Supreme  Court
last  Monday  on  the  final  day  of  term  illustrate  the  mysterious
ways  in  which   the   Court,  like  a  secular   Providence,   moves
its  wonders  to  perform.     In   two   cases,  confronted  by  new
technological   and   social   developments,   the   Court   did   not
merely  split,  it  positively shattered.    It  took  the  nine  Justices
seven  separate  opinions  to  reverse  the  Billie  Sol  Estes   convic-
tion   5-to-4  on   the  ground   that  a  pre-trial  televised   hearing
created  such  a  circus  atmosphere  about  his  case  as  to  make  a
fair  trial  impossible,  but  only  four  judges  were  prepared   to
shut  the  door  permanently  on  TV   coverage.
The  Use  and  Abuse  of  "Due  Process"
The   nine   also   required   six   separate   opinions   to   explain
their   attitudes  in   the   Connecticut   birth   control   case.    This
raised  profound   questions  of  constitutional  adjudication  and
split   the  liberals.     A  generation   ago  Holmes   and   Brandeis
complained  that  a  conservative  majority  was  invalidating  pro-
tective  social  and  economic  regulations  by  reading   its  laissez
faire  preconceptions  into  the  due  process  clause  of  the  Four-
teenth  amendment.
In  the  Connecticut  case,   the  majority  liberals   had   trouble
finding   any   specific   clause  which   could   be   used   to   protect
birth  control  information,  and  fell  back  on  the  same   tactics
used   by  the  conservatives.    They   read  their  conceptions  of  a
"higher   law"—Goldberg,  Warren  and  Brennan  called   it  the
"traditions  and  collective  conscience  of  our  people"—into  the
Constitution.     Black  argued   dissenting  that   the   Court   must
restrain  itself  from  acting  as  a  super-legislature   and  limit   the
judicial  veto  to  clear  infractions   of  specific  constitutional   in-
hibitions.    Harlan  rejoined  that  this  formula  was  "more  hol-
low  than   real"   and   that   "specific"   provisions   no   less   than
"due  process"   lend  themselves  "as  readily  to  'personal'  inter-
pretations"  by  judges.    The  truth  is  that  beneath  the  consti-
tutional  fictions  the   Court   acts  as  a  council   of   Philosopher
Guardians  in  Plato's  sense.    No  possible  formula  can  contain
the  Court's  protean  creative  role.
The   most  delightful   tidbit   for   aficionadoes    of   the   Court
was  to  find  Douglas  and  Black  concurring  with  the  majority
in  a  decision  against  the  United  Mine  Workers.    This  arose
out  of  that  strange  situation  which   has  made   Appalachia  a
wasteland.    There  the  powerful  U.M.W.  has  used   its  finan-
cial  control   of   certain  coal  companies   to  drive   smaller   con-
cerns  out  of  business  and  -ensure  a  privileged   position   for  a
A  New  Form  of  Contempt
Within   the  framework   of   higher  court  rulings,   the
best   that   Dagmar  Wilson,   Donna  Allen   and   Russell
Nixon  could  have  expected  in  their  trial  for contempt
of  the  House  Un-American  Activities Committee would
have  been  acquittal  on  some  technicality.   They  won  a
greater  victory  when  U.S.   Judge  Curran   found  them
guilty  but  suspended  sentences   of   $100  fines  and  four
to  12  months in  prison.   This  implied  that  contempt  of
the  Committee at  least  under the  circumstances  of  their
case  was  so  inconsequential  or  justified  that  it  did  not
warrant  punishment.    The  suspended  sentence  was  it-
self  a  manifestation of  judicial contempt.   The  convic-
tions  will  be  appealed,  but  the  Committee has  already
suffered  a  moral  defeat  in  its  effort  was  to  smear  the
peace  movement by  making it  appear that  the  three had
committed  some  kind  of  offense  by  arranging  for  a  tour
of  this  country by  a  Japanese  anti-bomb crusader.
trade   union   minority  in   alliance  with   the   big    companies.
Douglas  and  Black  joined  to  uphold   "free  enterprise ... as
expressed   in  the   anti-trust  laws"  against  an   "oligopoly"  of
"big   business  and  big  labor."
The   most  important  civil  liberties  decision   was  the   5-to-4
ruling  which  held   unconstitutional  a  provision   of   the  Lan-
drum-Grirfin  Act  of  1959  making  it  a  crime  for  a   Communist
to  be  an  official  of  a  labor  union.    This  was  enacted  as  a  sub-
stitute  for  the  Taft-Hartley  non-Communist  oath.    The    1949
decision  upholding  this  oath  was  the  first  in  a  series  of  cold
war   rulings  aimed   to   impose   outlawry  on   the   Communists.
Black,  who  dissented  eloquently  at  that  time,  has  lived  to  see
a  new  majority   virtually  reverse  it.     Goldberg,   who   argued
against  the  oath  in  1949  as  counsel  for  the  Steelworkers,   par-
ticipated  in  this  new  decision.    It  holds  the  bar  on   Commu-
nists   a  violation  of   the   Constitutional   provision   forbidding
"bills   of   attainder."    These  were   ancient   devices   for   con-
demning  political  rebels  by  legislative  vote  instead  of  judicial
trial.     Just   19  years   ago   Black   and   Douglas   were   on   the
Court  which  invoked  this  clause  to  block  an  earlier   McCar-
thy,  Martin   Dies  of  Texas,  when  he  and  the   Un-American
Activities  Committee  tried  to  cut  three  liberals,  Lovett,  Dodd
and  Watson,   off  the  Federal  payroll.    That  was  more   clearly
a  bill  of  attainder  than  this  anti-Communist  provision.     The
liberals  this  time  might   have   avoided   some  legal   difficulties
if,  like  the  Ninth  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals,   they  had   simply
declared  the  law  contrary  to  the  First   Amendment.
Noted  Jesuit  in  Chicago Protest  Likens  House  Un-American Committee to  Inquisition
"As  an  educated Catholic I  am  all  too  familiar  with  the
experience  my  church had  with  the  Inquisition.   In  the  long
run  we  are  agreed  that  the  Inquisition  did  more  harm  for
the   Church  than  good.
"We  are  concerned  here  with  a  committee  that  has  had a
long  tradition of  abuse  of  the  First  and  Fifth  amendments
to  the  Constitution.   The  same  secret  hearings  that  charac-
terized  the  Inquisition, the  same  unsupported testimony,  the
same  refusal  to  allow  the  accused  to  face  his  accuser  or  to
have  counsel  has  stained  the  good  reputation  of   Congress.
We  have  scorned  the  propaganda  trials  of  Moscow  and  yet
at  times  the  open  hearings  of  some  Congressional  commit-
tees  have  approached  these   trials  in  their  atmosphere  of
fear  and  in  their  ruined  reputations.
"It  would  be  bad  enough   to   anticipate  continuation   of
this  same  kind  of  thing,  but  now  it  seems  a  further  attempt
is  to  be  made  to  extend  to  the  whole  civil  rights  movement
the  smear  of   un-Americanism.    Catholic  Americans,   espe-
cially,  ought  to  be  in  the  vanguard of  this  protest  for,  re-
membering  their  disabilities  in  former  times,  they  should
realize  that  their  own  freedom  would  be  most  precarious  if
it  were  not  for  these   amendments."
—The  Rev.  G.  G.  Grant,  S.J.,  at  a  meeting   in  the  First
Congregational   Church,   Chicago,   May   23   to  protest   the
HUAC   hearings  in  that  city,  put  into   Congressional   Rec-
ord  (p.  A2776)  June  1  by  Rep.  Yates   (D.  III.),    abridged.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  U,  1965
Only  Four  Senators  Vote  Against  A  New  $5.2  Billion  NASA   Appropriation
The  Space  Race  As A  Gravy  Train  Joy-Ride  for  A  Handful  of Rich  Concerns
While  Gemini  IV  was  circling  the  earth  last  week,  many of
the  illusions  which  helped  to  put  it  there  were  under  attack
in  Congress.    In  the  House,  the  Military  Operations  subcom-
mittee  with   Chet  Holifield   (D.,   Cal.)   as  chairman  issued  a
lengthy  space  report  which  found  little  of  value  in  the  NASA
program  for  either  the  "the  Defense  Establishment or  for  that
matter   the  domestic   economy."     "Considering   the  multi-bil-
lion-dollar  costs,"   the  report   said  with  unusual  candor,   "the
contemporary  fallout  benefits  are  relatively  few   and   far   be-
tween."    The  original  and  still  the  main  reason  for  going  to
the  moon,  the  report  said  approvingly,  is  simply  "to  beat  the
Russians."    The  committee  apparently saw  no  need  to  ask  the
obvious  question  that  Senator   Douglas   posed   when   only  he
with  Morse,  Fulbright  and  Robertson  voted  last  week  against
the  $5.2  billion  NASA   authorization  for   1966.     "Why,"  he
asked,  "should  we  race  to  get  to  a  place  where  neither  of  us
gains  by arriving there?"
What  To  Do  With  the  Moon?
For  those  inclined  to  believe  that  there  must  be   something
more  substantial  to  this  $25  billion  project,  the  remarks  of
Senator   Margaret    Chase   Smith   during   the   NASA    debate
should   disabuse  them.     As   top-ranking   Republican   on   the
Senate  Space  Committee,  she  is  no  foe  of  the  program.     "For
several   years  now,"   she  said   in  despair,  "I   have   asked   the
same  question:  'What  are  our  plans  in  space  after  the   moon
landing?'    What  are  we  to  do  with   the  multibillion-dollar
space   investment?    If   there  are  any  plans,"  she  concluded,
"we  are  not  informed  what  they  are."
An  amendment   offered   by  Senator  Russell  Long  (D.,   La.)
gave  the  Senate  its  one  chance  to  bring  some  public  good  out
of  the  space  program.     It  would  have  restricted  NASA's  au-
thority  to  give  away  patent  rights  on  any  valuable  by-prod-
ucts  of   space   research   (see   box  below).    The   logic   behind
patents  is  that  they  offer  a  temporary  monopoly  to  the  inven-
tor   to   offset   the   risk  of  making  his   invention.    When   the
government  finances  all  research  and  development,  as  it  does
in  the  space  program,   there  is  no  risk;  payment  of   all   costs
While  We  Frolic  In  Space
Sen.  DOUGLAS  (D.,  111.):  What  is  the  use  in  com-
peting  with  other  countries  in  experiments  [in  space]
that  have  no  importance either  to  military  security  or
to   human   improvement?    Five   billion,  two   hundred
million  dollars  is  an  enormous  sum  of  money,  of  which
probably  $4 billion can  be earmarked as  being  connected
with   the  attempt  to  put  a  man  on  the   moon.    That
means  an  expenditure  of  at  least   $20  to  $25  billion  in
the  next  five  years.    I   think  it  is  a  pity  to  have  us
largely   waste   these   resources   when   they   could   be
turned  to  better   account.
Sen.   MORSE   (D.,  Ore.):   I   think   of   the  education
crisis;  I  think  of  the  juvenile delinquency crisis;  I think
of  a  social  security  system  that  does  not  begin  to  pay
the  monthly  benefits to  the  elderly  of  the  country  that
can  keep  them  in  health  and  decency.    Yet  when  some
of   us  have  proposed  for   many  years   to  increase   the
social   security   benefits,  we   are   told   that   we   cannot
afford  it.    What  hypocrisy.
Sen.   CLARK  (D.,  Pa.):  I  wish  to  express  my  com-
plete  agreement  with  the  views  expressed  by  the  Sen-
ator  from  Oregon.   I  voted  for  the  bill  but  I  intend  to
propose  an  amendment to  the  appropriation bill  to pro-
vide  for  an  across-the-board  cut.
—In  the Senate, June  1st  and 2nd  (abr.)
plus  a  healthy  profit  is  assured  in  advance.    To  tax  the  pub-
lic  for   research  and   then  turn   monopoly   rights   over   to   the
contractor   so  that   he   can   charge   monopoly   prices   is   what
Senator   Long   on  an  earlier  occasion   called   "public   taxation
for  prjvate  privilege."     Yet  the  Senate  killed  his   amendment
59  to  26  on  a  motion  to  table  by  Senator  Dodd.     Even  such
supposed   liberals  as  Hart   (Chairman   of   Senate   Antitrust),
Javits  and  the  Kennedy  brothers  voted  in  opposition.
The   defeat  of   the  Long   amendment   is  the   real   tipoff   to
what   is  behind   the   space   program.      Earlier   this   year   the
Senate   passed   similar   amendments   to   the   Appalachia   and
water  pollution  bills.  -On  NASA,  however,  the  Senate  balked.
"That,"  said  Long  bitterly,   "is  because  we  have  touched  the
sensitive  nerve  of  the  military  complex."
Russell  Long's  Unsuccessful  Plea  to  Block  A  Patents  Steal  in  the  Space  Program
"If  the  American  citizen  is   going   to  receive   some   eco-
nomic  benefit  from  the  $4.5  billion  poured into  research  on
this  [space]  program,  it  will  have  to  come  as  a  result  of
[the  by-products]  that  we  develop  in  spending  the  $4.5 bil-
lion.    We  cannot  tell  what  might  be  developed.   A  contrac-
tor  might  develop a  fuel  cell,  which  would  not  be particu-
larly  helpful   to  Louisiana  because   we  produce  oil,  but   it
would  greatly  reduce costs  and  increase  efficiency  of  power.
All  kinds  of  fantastic  things  could  be  developed  under  the
NASA  contracts.
"By  1970,  almost  $25  billion  will  be  spent  under  the  re-
search  program of  NASA  alone.    Do  we  desire  the  192  mil-
lion  people  of  our  country  to  have  the  benefit  of  that  $25
billion   of   research?   or  do  we   wish  those   benefits  to   be
locked  up  for  a  few  special   interests,  a  few  large   private
companies  which  have  filed  for"private  patent  rights  on  it?
I  know what  the  Congress  is  being  importuned to  do by  the
various  associations   of   industrialists,  the  electronic  firms,
the  chemical  manufacturers  and  every  big  manufacturer  in
this  country.   The  government  is  being  importuned  to  give
away  private  patent  rights  on  everything  that  the Govern-
ment  does  in  the  field  of  research.
"I  submit  that  there  is  no  more  outrageous  thing  that
can  be  done  to  the  public  interest.     Many  of  these   people
have  much  influence.    I,  like  others,  have  importuned some
of  them  for  campaign  contributions  for  my  party  and  my-
self.    Nevertheless,  we  owe  it  to  the  people,  now  and  then,
to  save  one  or  two  votes  for  them.    This  is  one  such  in-
stance.
"If   any   Senator   should  suspect  that  he  might   lose   his
campaign  contributors  by  voting  with  me  today,  I  might
assure   him  that  I  have  been   able  to  obtain  contributions
from  some  of  those  people,  even  though  they  knew  I  voted
for  the  public  interest  as  I  see  it  on  such  issues  as   this.
We  Democrats can  trade on  the  dubious assumption  that  we
are  protector  of  the  public  interest  only  so  long  if  we  per-
mit   things  like  these  patent  give  aways."                        '
—Russell  Long, in  the Senate  June  8, when he fought   the
military-industrial   complex  and  lost  (see  above).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly, June U, 1885
The  Vietnamese  War  Will Be Harder  to  Contain  and  Settle  Than  Korea's
(Continued  from  Page  One)
will  be  satisfied  by nothing  short  of  an  Asian  anti-Communist
Armaggedon.    The   shaky  government  and  its  shakier   mili-
tary needed  the  shot  in  the  arm  of  a  public  announcement  that
they  were  being  given  a  blank  check  to  draw  as  they  pleased
on  American  manpower.    But  worse  is  in  the  offing.     Mili-
tary  planners  here  must  be  prepared  to  deal  with  the  possi-
bility  that  the   Viet  Cong  may  soon   inflict  so  heavy  a  blow
as  to  demoralize  the  South  Vietnamese  forces  and  make  im-
possible  the  maintenance  of  any  governmental   facade  in  be-
leaguered   Saigon.    Very  shortly   the  problem   may  be  more
serious  than  providing  mobile  reserves  to  rescue  South   Viet-
namese   forces  from   unexpected   attacks.    The  problem   soon
may  be  that  if  resistance  is  to  go  on,  the  U.S.  will  have  to
take  over  the  government  and  the  war  altogether.
What  We  Swore  We'd  Never   Do  Again
So  we  will  do  what  we  swore  after  the  Korean   war  we
would  never  do  again—commit  American  troops  to  an  Asian
land  war.  Militarily  and  politically,  McCloskey's  war  is  folly.
It  will  tie  down  a  major  portion  of  U.S.  military  power   in
a  minor  theatre  of  conflict, and  create  an  image  made  to  order
for  hostile  propaganda.    White  men  will  be  fighting  colored
men  in  an  effort   to  put  down  a  rebellion   so  deeply   rooted
that  it  has  gone  on  for  two  decades,  and  extended  its  power
steadily  during  the  four  years  in  which  we  trained,   directed
and  supplied  a  satellite  native  army.   We  are  worse  off politi-
cally  than  the  French  were  a  decade  ago:  they  at  least  had
a  puppet  Emperor,  Bao  Dai,  to  cover  the  nakedness  of  im-
perial   rule.     Once   again,   as  against   the   Japanese   and   the
French,  the  Communists  can  muster  wide  support  as  leaders
of  a  resistance  to  alien   domination.    We  have  again  made
Ho  Chi  Minh  a national  leader.
It  would  be  hazardous  to  comfort  ourselves   by   expecting
no  more  than  another  Korea,  a  distant  limited  conflict,  rela-
tively  minor   in   casualties   and   rich   in   business   stimulation.
Vietnam  is  not  Korea.    Korea  was  a  civil war  between  North
and   South;   there   were   few   Communist   guerrillas   behind
South  Korea's  lines.    South  Korea  had  a  real  government  and
it  was  headed  by a  national  hero.    Syngman  Khee,  for  all  his
Obviously  They  Haven't  Read The White  Paper
"Surveys  taken  among  Vietcong  prisoners  and  de-
fectors  have  outlined a  high  morale and confidence  that
the  Communist  fortes  will  win  their  battle  in  South
Vietnam.  .  .  .  The polls  found  most  native  South Viet-
namese  guerrillas  unaware  of   any  North  Vietnamese
role  in  the  war, except  as  a  valued ally.   Few  of  them
considered  themselves Communists  or  could  give  a  defi-
nition  of Communism."
—New  York  Times from  Saigon, June 7
failings,  was  a  man  who  had  devoted  his  life  to  his  country's
liberation   from   Japanese  rule.    There  is  no  such  figure  to
head   a   South   Vietnamese   government;   the   guerrillas   hold
most  of  its  territory  and   can  at  will  shut  off  road  and   rail
supply  to  the  besieged  cities.    It  is  doubly  a  civil  war,  within
the  South  as  well  as  between  South  and  North.    It  therefore
does  not  lend  itself  to  the  kind  of  neat  settlement  arrived  at
in  the  Korean  war.   That  war  could  be  ended  when   Chinese
"volunteers"  pushed  our  forces  back  to  the  38th  parallel  and
reconstituted  the  status  quo  ante.    It  was  also  relatively  easy
to  limit  the  Korean  war  on  the  understanding  that  our  side
would   not   bomb   the   privileged   sanctuary   in   China   from
which  the  "volunteers"   were  supplied   and  their   side   would
not  bomb  the  privileged  sanctuary  in  Japan  from  which  our
troops  operated.    It  will  be  more  difficult   to  keep  this  war
contained.
If  our  troops  meet  serious  reverses  in  the  South,  it  will  be
hard  to  resist  the  clamor  for  a  tougher   bombing   policy   in
the  North.    If  Hanoi  and  Haiphong   are  bombed,  the  North
will  have nothing  to  lose  and  will  escalate  the  war  by  moving
its  army  south.   Those  elements  in  our  military  itching  for  a
preventive  war  against China will press  for  bombing  the  roads
and  railroads  which  connect  it  with  Vietnam.    Whether  and
how  China  will  react,  what  Russia  will   do,  are   unknowns,
perhaps  as  much  in  Peking  and  Moscow  as  in   Washington.
To  go  to  war  is  to  leave  oneself  at  the  mercy  of  the  unex-
pected.    How  far  it  will  spread  and  how  many  lives  it  will
cost  depends  on  the  capricious  roulette  of  war.    One  thing
alone  is  certain.    The  further  we  get  in,  the  harder   it  will
be  to  get  out.                       •                                             fane  9
We'll  Be Clod  to Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
The  1964  Index  It  Ready—You  Can  Have  One  Free  If  You  Send  a  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
6AV08
For  the  enclosed  15  tend  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   .........................................J5one............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone'*  The  Haunted    FiftUt
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
IE  Stone's Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D. C  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone'1  Weekly.    Second  Clan  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  In
January  and  Bl-Weekty  during  July  and  August  at   6618   Nebraska  Ate..  N.W.,   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.   F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   86   in   the   U.S.;    $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED