I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965sep06.pdf

============================================================

How Hanoi and  the  Viet  Cong See It,  P.  3
The  Words  Were  Hardly  Out  of  His  Mouth
"The   targets  are  military  targets:  military  lines  of  com-
munication,  military  barracks, military  depots.    There  has
been  no  miscellaneous  bombing of  any  old  target  in  North
Vietnam.  .  .  .  The  targets  have  been  directly  related  to  a
campaign of  infiltration."
—McGeorge  Bundy  on CBS, Aug. 23.
"Saigon—U.S.  planes  bombed  a  dam  and   hydroelectric
power  plant  in  North  Vietnam  twice  over  the  week-end,  a
U.S.    military  spokesman  reported  today. ...  It  was the
first  attack  on  a  dam  in  North Vietnam."
—AP  in Washington Star,  Aug. 23.
"Destruction  of  the  dams  risks  the  flooding  of  the  rice
crops,  which are  gathered from  June  to  November, and ren-
dering  difficult   irrigation  for  future  harvests."
—Le  Monde  (Paris)  Aug. 24.
"The   bombing of  the  dam . . .  raised  the  question whether
there   was   any   consideration   of   attacking   one   of   North
Vietnam's   most   vulnerable   points,   the  complex   system  of
dikes  in  the  Red  River  delta.  .  .  .  Some  observers   believe
widespread  destruction  of  dikes  could  devastate  the  most
populous  part  of  North  Vietnam  and  cause  serious  famine."
—Chas. Mohr  from  Saigon, N.Y.  Times  Aug. £4.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII, NO.  28
SEPTEMBER  6,  1965
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15   CENTS
A  Fresh  Look  At  Lyndon  Johnson
I  returned  to  Washington  after  a  month's  vacation  to  find
a  new  mood  of  cautious  optimism.   Desperation  has  been  re-
placed  by a little  hope  in  those  circles  of  the  capital  concerned
with  peace.    This  has  been  accompanied  by  a  re-evaluation  of
Lyndon  Johnson  where  there  had  been  only  bitterness  before.
The  change  is  due  to  many  factors.    One  is  his  extraordinary
accomplishments  in  the  field  of  social  legislation;  were  it  not
for  Vietnam  and  the  Dominican  Republic,  Johnson  would  be
the  hero  today  of  the  left-of-center.     Not   since  FOR  has  so
much  reform  legislation  been  won  from  Congress.    This  and
his  whole-hearted  commitment  to  the  Negro  struggle  for  full
equality  have  been   overshadowed   by  the  fear  of   war.    Six
months  ago  he  seemed  to  be  on  a  collision  course;  now  he
seems  to  be  shifting  in  an  effort  to  find  a  way out.    The  most
dramatic  evidence  of  this  is  the  new  attitude  toward  the  Unit-
ed   Nations:   the   appointment   of   Mr.   Justice   Goldberg   as
Stevenson's  successor,,  the  sudden  elevation  of  this  third   rate
job  to  first  rank  importance,  and  the  swift  backdown  on  the
"peacekeeping   expenses"  issue  which  had  deadlocked   the  or-
ganization  for  a  year.    This  fresh  and  energetic  action  was
Johnson  at his best.
Filling  the  Vacuum  of  Rusk
Viewed  from  abroad,  Mr.  Justice  Goldberg's  shift  from  the
Court  to  a  post  in  which  Adlai  Stevenson  atrophied,  at  first
looked  absurd:  the  transformation  of  a  first-rate  judge  into  a
State  Department   errand  boy  and  mouthpiece.     But  a  closer
look  in  Washington  leads  one  to  revise  this  view.    By  putting
a  new  and  important   face  in  the  United  Nations  post,  John-
son  was  able  to  deflect  attack  from  the  necessary  climb-down
on  the  dues  controversy.     The   effort   to  use  this  as  a  club
against  the  Soviet  Union  was  a  piece  of  cold  war  idiocy  from
the  first,  since  the  General  Assembly  is  no  longer   controlled
by  the  West  and  the   U.S.   too  might   some   day  find  itself
asked  to  pay  for  a  peace-keeping  operation  it  considered  con-,
trary  to  its  national   interests.     The  State  Department,   with
characteristic  genius,  had  painted   itself  into  a  corner  and  did
not  know  how  to  get  out.    Johnson  did  what  he  will  have  to
do  some  day on  Vietnam  and  that  is  simply  and  plainly  admit
8
Unreported  Senate  Welcome  for  Mme.  Chiang
"Mr.   President,  over  the  years  billions  of  dollars  of
our  taxpayers'  money  has  been  paid  out  to  maintain
Chiang  Kai-shek.    Now  Mme. Chiang  is  in  this  coun-
try.   .  .  .  The most  fantastic  proposal  that  he has made
recently,   and   no   doubt   Mme.  Chiang   will   make   in
speeches  and in  talks with  any  government officials  who
will  listen  to  her,  is  that  we  invite  some  of  Chiang's
600,000  troops  to  participate  in  the  Vietnamese  war.
...  It  would  be  a  stupid  and  foolhardy  policy  on  the
part  of  the  U.S.  to  permit  even  a  token  force  of  100
of  these  troops  to  be  transported to  Vietnam. .  .  . The
only   thing   accomplished  would   be   to   aggravate   the
rulers  of  Red China. ...  Of  course  some  of  the  super-
duper   war   hawks  in   this   country   will   echo  Mme.
Chiang's  plea  that  the  U.S.  should  immediately perpe-
trate  a  Pearl  Harbor—engage  in  a  day  of  infamy—by
destroying  Red China's  crude  nuclear  installations.  .  .  .
The  facts  are  that  the  Vietnamese  regard  the  Chinese
as  their  natural  enemies. ...  In  fact  the  troops  of
Chiang  Kai-shek  invaded  Vietnam  after  World  War  II
and  looted  and  killed in  the  northern area  of  Vietnam."
—Young  (D.  Ohio)  in  the Senate Aug.  26.
a  mistake.   The  razzle-dazzle  of  putting  a  Supreme  Court Jus-
tice  in  the  UN   post  somehow  made  an  ignominious   defeat
look  like  a  bit  of   triumphant  pageantry.    The   appointment
also  represents  an  upgrading  of  the  United  Nations,   in  John-
son's  anxiety  to  find  some  way  out  of  the  Vietnamese  morass,
and  a  major  change  in  his  foreign  policy  team.     Goldberg,
like  Johnson,   is  very  much  a  non-ideological    and  pragmatic
"operator,"  not   afraid   to  take  risks  and  dot  conditioned   to
cold  war  sterility.    He  helps  to  fill  that  vacuum  represented
by  Secretary  of  State  Rusk,  the  capital's  most  cultivated  nul-
lity;  Goldberg   is  neither  a  cookie-pusher   nor  a  Hamlet  and
he  speaks  Johnson's   practical  wheeler-dealer   language.     He
gave  up  his  high  post  because  he  believed  he  could  make  a
.  "contribution  thereby  to  peace.
*  His  successor,  the  first  Johnson  appointment  to  the  Supreme
Court,  is  a  man  who  by  all  indications should  develop  into  a
great  liberal  Justice.   The  nomination  is  a  reward for  lifelong
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
\  o j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September   6, 1965
(Continued  from  Page  One)
service  to  Johnson  all  the  way  back  to  that  dubious  count  by
which  he  first  won  election  to  the  Senate,  when  Fortas  by  a
successful    appeal    to   Supreme    Court   Justice   Black   finally
blocked  a  recount.    But  this  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  the
nominee  made  a  brilliant record  in  the  New  Deal  and  a  cour-
ageous   record   as  a  lawyer.    Those   of   us  who   covered   the
dreadful   days  of   the   loyalty-security witch  hunt   in   the   late
40s  and  the  China  lobby  onslaught  in  the   50s  on  the   State
Department  via  McCarran  and  McCarthy   never  dreamed  that
the  lawyer  who  dared  defend  Dorothy   Bailey,  the  victim  of
faceless   informers,  and  Owen   Lattimore,  the  No.   1  target  of
the  anti-Communist paranoids,  would  some  day  be  elevated  to
the  Supreme  Court.    Those  who  want  to  sample  the  flavor  of
those  bygone  days  can  catch  its  full   aroma   in  Senator  East-
land's  interrogation  of  Fortas  which  ranged  all  the  way  from
association  with  the  pre-war  Southern  Conference  for  Human
Welfare,   which   was  hounded   out  of   existence,   through   the
Hiss  case  to  Lattimore's  application  last  year  at  the   passport
division  for  permission  to  visit  China.    Fifteen  years  ago  this
would  have  made  headlines  and  might  have  blocked  the  ap-
pointment;   this  year  it  passed   almost  unnoticed,  along   with
Fortas's  final  letter  to  Eastland.    In  this  the  new  Justice  de-
cided  to  forego   the  opportunity  offered   him   by  Eastland   to
"comment  upon  the  record"  of  the  hearing,  i.e.  to  eat  humble
crow.     "I   should   like  to  point  out  however,"   Fortas  wrote,
"that  it  is  not  merely  the  right  of  lawyers  to  defend  unpopu-
lar  causes,  but  also  their  duty."    This  is  the  first  time  in  the
history  of  the  old  Senate  Judiciary  Committee  plantation  that
a  judicial  nominee  has  thumbed  his  nose  at  Old  Marse  East-
land.
Russell's  Influence for  Peace
The   President  who   nominated   Fortas   to   the   Court,   put
Medicare through Congress,  generalissimoed  the  Voting  Rights
Act  of  1965,  and  opened  up  the  forbidden  topic  of  birth  con-
trol   (with  the  assistance  of  Gruening,  the  only  Senator  bold
enough   to   touch   the  subject)   is  obviously  not   Barry   Gold-
water.    If  he  now  succeeds  in  negotiating  peace  in  Vietnam
and  giving  the  poor  people  of  the  Dominican  Republic  a  free
election,   the  polemical  identification   of   LBJ  with  Goldwater
by  angry peaceniks  like  this  writer will  turn  out  to  be history's
No.  1 case of  mistaken  identity.   We  hope  it  does.   After  talk-
ing  to  trusted  friends   on  Capitol  Hill  and  trying  soberly  to
catch   up   with   events,   it   is   good   to   report   a   change   of
atmosphere.     A   lew  months  ago   in   the   Johnson   entourage
When   You  Hunt  Fleas  With   Sledgehammers
Saigon—U.S.  Air  Force  B-52  bombers   staged   their
llth  raid  of  the  summer  yesterday   on  suspected  Viet
Cong  positions   in  South  Vietnam,  striking  at  Commu-
nists  in  the  Zone  D  jungle  30  miles   northeast   of  'Sai-
gon.  .  .  .  The  raid  was  the  fourth  by  B-52s  since  June
18  on  the  zone  .  .  .  the  number  of  B-52s  and  the  num-
ber  of  bombs  was  not   disclosed."
—New  York  Herald-Tribune   Aug.  27.
Saigon—The  jungle  where  he  was  held  prisoner  four
months  by  Viet  Cong  guerrillas  was  repeatedly  bombed
by   U.S.   and  Vietnamese   planes,  Donald  Charles   Daw-
son   said   yesterday   after   his   release.     "Sometimes    I
could  see  the  bombs  spilling  out  of  the  bomb  bays  as
the  planes  came  in,  but  they  never  did  register  a  direct
hit,"   Mr.  Dawson   said.     The   28-year   old   Californian
was  detained by  the  guerrillas  in  April  when  he  walked
into  their territory  in  a  vain  search  for  the  body  of  his
brother,  Lt.  Daniel  Dawson,   27,  who  was  shot  down  in
a  light  plane  Nov.  6.    When  the  bombers  flew  over,  Mr.
Dawson   said,   the   prisoners    were   herded   into   under-
ground  shelters  but  the  guards  remained  above  ground,
casually  smoking  cigarettes.    The  prison  is  in  the  much
bombed  Zone  D  outside   Bien   Hoa,   which   is   12   miles
northeast  of  Saigon.
—Same  paper,  same  day,  same  page.
there  seemed  to  be  the  feeling  that  there  was  no  alternative
but   to  see  the  war  through   no  matter  how   far  that   course
might   lead   unless  the   other   side   backed   down.     Now   the
President  himself has  said  the  war  cannot be  won,  that  a  peace
must  be  negotiated,  that  the  Viet  Cong  may  have  a  place  in
the   talks,  and   that  we  would   accept   elections;   reunification
has  been  mentioned  publicly and  coalition, it  is  said,  discussed
privately.    Senators  like  Fulbright,  virtually  barred  from  the
White  House  since he  questioned  the  war  last  June,  have  been
called  in  for  consultation.    On  the  Hill,  where  personal  fac-
tors  loom  large  and  are  perhaps   overestimated,  major   credit
for  the  shift  in  direction is  given  to  Senator  Russell  of  Geor-
gia,  chairman  of  the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee,  long
Johnson's  mentor,  and  long  dubious  about  the  whole  Vietna-
mese  adventure.
Since  his  recovery from  a  serious  illness,  the  Georgia  patri-
cian,   perhaps   the   most   respected   man   in   the   Senate,   has
thrown  his  influence  on  the  side  of  negotiation.    His  August
1  appearance   on   Face   The   Nation,   with   its  prediction   that
the  war  might  easily  cost  $10  to  $12  billion  if  escalation  con-
tinues  cast  a  chill  on  the  cost-conscious  White  House,  while
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
The  Happy-Go-Lucky  Arithmetic  For  Estimating  Enemy  Casualties  in  Vietnam
"The   number   of   Viet   Cong   bodies   actually  counted   to-
talled  552.    Another  50  dead  were  observed   from  the   air.
UPI  quoted  a  Marine  spokesman  as  saying   1,000   guerrillas
had  been  wounded.   In  the  past,  estimates  of  the  number  of
guerilla  wounded  have  been  made  by  doubling  the   number
of  dead."
—New  York  Herald-Tribune   Aug.  20 of  the  Chulai  battle.
"According   to   military   authorities,  the   Air   Force   esti-
mates   the  effects  of   its  bombing  attacks  by   a  highly   in-
volved  computation  based   on  the   area  hit,  the   number  of
people  that  must  have  been  in  it,  the  number  of  bombs  that
should   have   landed   in  it.     'Then   they   put  these   two  un-
knowns  together,   come  up  with  an  apparent  "known,"  and
ship  the  figure  off  weekly  to  Washington,'  says  one  Saigon
officer   despairingly."
—Philip  Geyelin  in  the  Wall  St.  Journal   Aug.   24.
"Saigon—American   correspondents    are   wrangling   with
American   military  headquarters   here   over   the   release  of
casualty   figures   which   some   newsmen   consider   to   be  de-
liberately   misleading. ...  At  yesterday's  briefing,  for in-
stance,   a  military   statement   announced   a   'kill   ratio'   last
week  of  8.4  Viet  Cong  to  one  member  of  American  or  South
Vietnamese  forces.    This  ratio  was  described  as  the  highest
of  the  war.  .  .  .  Sharp  questioning  of  a  military  spokesman
by  correspondents  caused  a  U.S.  Information  Service   official
to  chide   the  reporters  for   acting   'like  certified  public  ac-
countants.'    But  the  questioning   also  led  to  a  sharp  reduc-
tion  in  the  'kill  ratio'—down  to  three  or  four  to   one."
—Arnold  Bcichman in New  York  Herald-Tribune   Aug.  26.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September   6,1965
North Vietnam  and  the Viet  Cong  Also  Look  for A "Key  Signal"
By  Sanford   Gottlieb
Political  Action  Director,  SANE
While  Secretary  of  State  Rusk  is  looking  for  the   "key  sig-
nal"  from  Hanoi  which  would  bring  the  Vietnamese  war  to
the  conference  table,  Hanoi  and  the  Viet  Cong  say  they  are
looking  for  one  from  us.    The  signal  they  would  like  to  re-
ceive  is  an  act  of  military  self-restraint  by  the  U.   S.  such  as
an   end   to  the  bombing  of  North   Vietnam.    The   National
Liberation   Front,   the  Viet   Cong's   parent   organization,   also
suggests  an  end  to  the  bombing  of  South  Vietnam  and  a  halt
to  further  American  troop   reinforcements.
This  conclusion   is  drawn  from   talks  with  North   Vietna-
mese  and  NLF   officials  this  summer  in  Algiers  and  Paris  on
behalf  of  SANE.    I  also  visited  South  Vietnam  as  an  adviser
to  the   interdenominational group  of   clergymen  on  the   fact-
finding  mission  sponsored  by the  FOR.    The  statements made
to  me  may,  of  course,  mask  prior  decisions  not  to  negotiate
until  there  is  a  military   victory  or   an   improvement  of   the
situation  on  the  ground  during  the  monsoon  season.    On  the
other  hand,  I  doubt  that  we  can  be  certain  of  the  intentions
of  those  we  facelessly  call  "the  other  side"  until  the  Adminis-
tration  is willing at  least  to  stop  the  bombings of  North  Viet-
nam  without  conditions,  ultimatums, or  deadlines.    For   the
Vietnamese  Communists'  distrust  of  the  Administration is  so
deep  and  their  perception  of  American political  reality  so dis-
torted  that  professions  of  peaceful  intent  by  President  John-
son   are  greeted   with   derision  and   renewed   appeals   to   the
"large  masses of  (American)  people  of  various walks  of  life"
to  demonstrate  violently  against  the  "cold-blooded  murderers
at  the  White  House   and  the  Pentagon."    The   quotation  is
from  a  letter  addressed  to  American  intellectuals by  Nguyen
huu  Tho  of  the  NLF.
How  Hanoi  Sees  The  Bombings
Deeds  by  Washington  can  perhaps  overcome this communi-
cations  barrier and  convince Hanoi  and  the  NLF  that  the  Ad-
ministration  really wants  a .negotiated  settlement.    (Washing-
ton  has  been  acting  increasingly  of  late  as  if  it  had  convinced
itself,  that  it  wants  negotiations).    The  one  deed unanimously
emphasized  by  the  independent  observers  with  whom  I  met
in   France   and   Southeast   Asia—French   scholars,  journalists
and    officials    and   Cambodian   government    advisers—was   a
complete  halt  to  the  bombings  of  North  Vietnam.    No  proud
nation  (and  the  regime  of  Ho  Chi  Minh  represents  the  only
Asian  people  in  modern  times  to  win  their  freedom  by  mili-
tarily  defeating  a  Western  colonial  power)   will  talk  peace  as
the   result   of   punishment   through   aerial  bombardment.     In
Hanoi's   view,  the  U.  S.  is  the  aggressor  in   bombing   North
Vietnam   and  should   take  the   first   step  simply   by   stopping.
Secretary  Rusk  has  indicated  he  will  not  stop  without  a  price.
The  North  Vietnamese   have  been  asked  to  withdraw  the  ele-
ments  of  their  325th  Division  identified  in  South  Vietnam  or
to  take   other   tangible  reciprocal  action.*    The   bombing  of
North  Vietnam  by  the  most  powerful  nation  in  the  world  is
of  dubious  military  value  but.  Of  great  political  and   psycho-
logical  importance.    Can't  we  afford  to  take  the  small military
risk  involved  in  the  hope  of  political  gain?
*  Hanoi  radio  as  if  in  reply  has  just  denied  that  the  325th
is  in  South  Vietnam.   Ed.
Navy  Aviators   Dislike   Bombing  North
Grumblings   about   the   value   of   air   attacks   upon
North  Vietnam  were  reported  in  the  New  York  Herald-
Tribune  (Aug.  29)  by  its  correspondent,  Arnold   Beich-
man,  aboard  the  USS  Midway  in  the  South  China   Sea.
Beichman  said  the  Midway alone  had  lost  12 pilots  over
North  Vietnam  and  that  more  than  60  aircraft  have  re-
portedly  been  lost  in  these  strikes.    "When  the  military
look  above  the  17th  parallel,"  Beichman  cabled,   "they
see  little  but  high  risk  and  low  return."    The  feeling
seems  to  be  that  the  rate  of  loss  would  be  justified  only
if  there  were  to  be  a  ground  invasion  of  the  North  or
if  the  Air  Force  were  allowed  to  bomb  major   industrial
targets  and  cities.    Beichman  reported  that  the  avia-
tors   preferred   strikes   against   South   Vietnam   where
ground  troops  can  follow  up  and  where  "there  is  less
anti-aircraft fire."
If   the  two  sides  were  to  begin   negotiating,   what   would
they  discuss?    That  question  can  now  be  answered   in   some
detail.    Hanoi  has  been  clarifying   its  position  through  inter-
mediaries,  and  Washington   has  begun  to  elaborate   concrete
negotiating  positions.   The  two  have  been  discussing  at  long
range  the  basis  on  which  talks  could  take  place.     A  major
step   forward   was  taken   when   the   Administration  was   con-
vinced  that  the  four  points  outlined  in  April  by North  Viet-
namese  Foreign  Minister  Pham  Van  Dong  were  being  posed
"in  principle"  rather  than  as  preconditions.   The  significance
of   this  diplomatic  subtlety  can  be  seen  as  it   applies   to   the
withdrawal  of  the  U.  S.  forces.    If  the  withdrawal  of  all  for-
eign  troops  is  agreed  upon  "in  principle,"  the  negotiators  can
work  out  the  details.    If,  on  the  other  hand,   withdrawal   of
U.  S.  troops  were  being  demanded  before   talks   could   begin
there would  be no  talks.
Pham  Van  Dong's  four   points  can  be  divided   into   two:
the   principles  of   the   1954   Geneva   Accords,   and   an  NLF-
dominated  coalition  government  in  Saigon.    Washington  has
evolved  in  recent  months  toward  acceptance  of  the   principles
of   Geneva—the  independence  and   sovereignty  of   Vietnam;
peaceful  reunification  of  the  divided  country;  removal  of  for-
eign  military  forces  and  bases,  and  a  prohibition  against  mili-
tary  alliance.   The  coalition  in  Saigon  will  remain  the  major
obstacle  facing  the  negotiators,  the  problem  of  creating  a  gov-
ernment  which  reflects  today's  realities.    The  NLF  is  holding
open   11  seats  for  the  "unrallied"  elements  in  addition   to  the
31  on  their  executive  group,  I  was  told   in  Algiers.    This  is
presumably  the  Front's  version  of  a  coalition.    It  is  certainly
not   Washington's   and   Saigon's.     Washington  has   belatedly
discovered  that  there  are  non-Communists  in  the  NLF  and  is
looking  to  them  in  any  coalition.   Washington   is  also  belated
in  discovering  the  room  to  maneuver  it  possesses   because  of
subtle  but  visible  differences  in  approach  between  Hanoi  and
the  NLF.     Hanoi   lays  heavy  stress  on  the  principle  of   re-
unification,  while  the  Front  maintains  that  it  wants  to  avoid
domination  by  the  North  and  that  reunification  can  take  as
long  as  20  years.    If  the  NLF   means  what  it  says,  the  crea-
tion  of  a  new  coalition  in  Saigon   may  be  a  less   staggering
task  than  it  now  appears.     Nevertheless,   the  present   Saigon
regime,    representing    few    Southerners    beyond   the    armed
forces,  may balk  at  the  whole  idea.    And  the   Administration's
domestic  critics  on  the  Right  have  not  yet  been  heard  from.
1  1  '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly,  September  8,186S
Another  Way  of  Looking  at  the  Question  of National  Honor
(Continued  from  Page  Two)
the  State  Department  was  thrown  into  a  dither  by  his  calm
estimate  that  Ho  Chi  Minh  would  probably  win  a  plebiscite
today.     "Whenever   the   people   go   to   calling  their   leader
Uncle,"  Russell  said  shrewdly of  "Uncle"  Ho,  "you  had bet-
ter   look  out."   But   considerations  of  fiscal  prudence   and
strategic  sobriety  weigh  more  heavily  with  Russell  than  hu-
manity.     For   in  his  Sept.  6  interview  with   17.5.  News  &
World    Report,   Russell   can   callously   say   that   stepped-up
bombing  to  cut  supply  lines  "and increase  the  misery  of  the
civilian  population  in  the  North"  represents  the  best  chance
to  bring  Ho  to  the  conference-  table.    This  reliance  on  terror
from  the  skies,  this  inability  to  understand  the  psychology of
a  colonial  struggle,  is  a  heartless  blindspot.
Their  Misery  and  Our  Profits
The  Vietnamese  can  stand  more  misery  more  easily  than
our  business  community  can  stand  the  prospect  of  the  mobi-
lization  and  the  price  controls  that  further  escalation  of  the
war  entails.    The  key  to  the  shift  toward  peace  lies  in  the
fact  that  the  business  community,  enjoying  record  profits,  is
in  no  mood  to  shut  off  the  boom  for  the   sake  of  a  distant
struggle  in  Southeast  Asia.    The  guerrillas  have  won  in  the
sense  that  the  U.S. now  recognizes  that  it  cannot  win  the  war
militarily  either  on  the  ground  or   from   the  air,  but  must
negotiate.   The  other  side  must  also  realize,  however,  that  the
U.S.  can  afford  to  hold  on  to  the  cities  and  the  coastal  en-
claves  for  years,  burning  up  much of  the  country  in  the  proc-
ess.    The  stalemate  points  to  die  peace  table,  but  the  path  to
it  is  rendered  difficult  by  the  intense  and  justifiable  suspicion
on  the  other  side.    Our  government  and  its  well-heeled   un-
dercover  men  have  cheated  on  every  agreement  it  has  made
in  Southeast  Asia  since  1954, in  Vietnam,  in  Laos  and  in
Cambodia.   The  rebels  will  not  lay down their  arms to  resume
the  same  old  comedy in  the  name  of  a  Geneva  agreement  we
did  not  honor  before  and  have  not  explicitly  promised  to  up-
hold  in  the  future.    Those  who  speak  of  upholding  our  na-
tional  honor  should  look  to  this  record  of  trickery.    Some
people  believe  honor  lies  in  keeping  our  word;  others  that  it
consists  of  burning  up  other  people's  villages.     Negotiations,
Brazil's  Dictator   and  JFK's  Memory
The  affection  in  which  the  memory  of  the  late Presi-
dent  Kennedy  is  held  in  Latin  America  is  a  national
asset  not  lightly  to  be  east  away.    Robert  F.  Kennedy
will  be  helping  to  destroy  it  by  his  trip  to  Brazil.   For
thoughtful  Latin  Americans,  the  seizure  of  power  by
the  military  in  that  country  last  year  and  the  instant
welcome  given  the  coup  d'etat  by  Johnson  and  Rusk
signalled  the  end  of  the  hopes  Kennedy  had  aroused.
To  speak  before  the  purged  and  intimidated  Brazilian
Congress  Nov. 22,  the  anniversary  of  the  Kennedy  as-
sassination,  would be  to  lend  the  magic  of  the  Kennedy
name  to a military  dictatorship  which  stands  for  all  the
evils  the  Alliance  for  Progress  was  intended  to  elimi-
nate.    The  final  touch  would  be  for  Kennedy  to  accom-
pany  Castelo  Branco,  the  military  dictator,  on  a  tour
of  the  poverty-stricken  northeast.    If  Robert  Kennedy
wants  to  understand  the  depth  of  the  reaction  he  in-
vites,  let  him  read  the  bitter  and  despairing  interview
given  Le  Monde  (July  31)  by  Miguel  Arraes,  the  en-
lightened  and  exiled  governor  of  Peraambueo.    Brazil,
he  told  Le  Monde,  has  been  "Handed  over  to  the  mili-
tary-industrial   complex   of  the   United   States,"    This
ugly  oligarchic  regime,  a  medley  of  militarism,  MeCar-
thyism  and   rightist   Catholicism,  has  become  our  pet
ward  in  the  hemisphere.    It  is  Montalvo  Frei  in  Chile,
whom  the  State  Department,  distrusts,  who  deserves  a
hand  from  Kennedy,  not  Castelo  Branco.
if  they  begin,  will  center  around  the  makeup  of  a  new  coali-
tion  government  in  the  South.   This  may take months  and  the
war  hawks  will  take  advantage  of  every  bogdown  to  try  and
start  up  the  fighting  again.
Mme.  Chiang's  arrival   and  the  newly  projected   visit  of
her   son  and   Defense   Minister   for   consultations   with  Mc-
Namara  show  that  the  desperadoes  sense  the  danger  of  a set-
tlement.   De  Gaulle  is right  in  insisting  that  this  must  include
China.  Peking's  admission to the UN  and the end of  our trade
embargo would  not only give China a motive for  peace but sta-
bilize the Far  East.  Mansfield's new speech  at press time "Nar-
rowing the  Issues"  and  the  unusual action  of  the White  House
in  at  once endorsing  it,  are the  latest  signs  of  substance in  the
new  hope  for  peace.  Six months ago  Mansfield  spoke  only  for
a  despairing  handful  in  the  Senate.                                Sept.  1
Send  That  Youngster  Off  to  College  With  A  Gift  Sub to  the  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew  (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
0/8/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate   if   announcement  wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  NebtMka  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Pf.id  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except  in   August,  the   last   week   in   December   and   the
nrst  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W., Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $6  in   the   U.S.:    16   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mall   ratca:
*15  to  Europe;   120  to  Israel,  Ada   and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED