I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965may24.pdf

============================================================

The  White  House  and   The  Teach-in, Pps. 2-3
G.O.P.  Senator Berates  Administration  for  Taking  A  Run-Out  Powder on  the Teach-in
"Could  it  have  been  that  such  a  momentous  crisis  was
brewing  Saturday  afternoon  that  the  White  House,  the  De-
partment  of  State,  and  the  Defense  Department  could  not
produce  even  one   spokesman   to   defend  their   policies   in
Vietnam  to  an  audience,  live  and hooked-in, of  tens  of  thou-
sands  of  persons? ...  Is  our  policy  in  Southeast  Asia  so
indefensible  that  no  one  in  Mr. Bandy's  absence  could  meet
the  attacks  of  earnest  critics?    Is  the  Administration  so
unsure  of  itself?  .  .  .  Whatever may  have  been  said  about
Senator  Goldwater,  as  President   he  would  not  have  been
afraid  to  level  with  the  American  people."
—Prouty  (R.  Vt.)  in  the Senate  May  17.
I. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  20
MAY  24,  1965
."»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15   CENTS
An  Elephantine  Power With  More  Muscle  Than  Brain
We  may have  the  world's  largest  and  most  expensive  mili-
tary-intelligence-diplomatic  apparatus,  but  it  is  also  probably
the  world's  clumsiest.   The  Bay of  Pigs  was  the  first  warning
that  this  apparatus  was  not  too  competent.    Events  in  the
Dominican  Republic  are  the  second.     We  have  again  been
made to appear  in Latin American  eyes not  as a paper  tiger  but
as  an  elephantine  power  with  more  muscle  than  brain.    First
we  attack  the  constitutionalist  forces  as  Communistic,  then  we
turn  around  and  try  to  purge  the  military junta  and  bring  the
pro-Bosch   forces  into  a  new  government   of  men  we  have
picked.    Now  neither  side  trusts  us.
The  Computers  Are  A  Menace
One  of  the  casualties  of  the  Dominican  affair   is  the  cher-
ished  theory  of  Tom  Mann,  Johnson's  top   official   for  Latin
America,  that  the  military  provide  the  most  stable  basis  on
which  to  build.    One  Latin  American  diplomat  in  Santo  Do-
mingo  told  Barnard  L.  Collier   acidly   (New   York   Herald-
Tribune,  May  19)  the  "big  worry"  of  the  Communists in  the
future  "is  going  to  be  that  the  U.S.  Marines  might  not  inter-
vene."     The  size  of  our  forces  in  the  Dominican  Republic
evoked   derision.     "I   could   understand   a  thousand,   maybe
2,000  troops,"   Collier   quoted   another   diplomat   as  saying,
"But  to  bring  in  30,000—that  is  ludicrous.    What  you  have
done  is  put  the  Communists  wise  to  the  fact  that  100  well-
trained  agitators  can  tie  up  divisions  of  U.S.  troops."    When
Collier  asked  U.S.  military spokesmen  about  the  massive  troop
buildup  they  said  "that  once  an  operation  of  the  Dominican
type  goes  into  the  computers  there  is  no  simple  way  to  trim
the  size of  the  U.S.  force  that  must be  committed."    All  of  us
may  one  day  be  fed  into  those  same  computers.
In  Vietnam  lack  of  perimeter  patrols  and  other  elementary
precautions   enabled   the   guerrillas   to   kill   five   Americans,
wound  76  others  and  destroy  or  damage  27  planes  at  Bien
Hoa  air  base  last  November.    Now  explosions  have  killed  at
least   21  Americans  and   destroyed   or   damaged   another   40
planes  at  the  same  base.    In  an  angry  letter  in  the   Congres-
sional  Record  May  18   (pps.   10920-1)   Congressman   Min-
shall  (R.  Ohio)  demanded  aa  investigation.    "There  is a his-
tory  of  bungling,"  he  wrote,  "throughout  the  entire  Vietnam
operation,  but  I  could  not  conceive  of  such  grievous misman-
agement.  .  .  .  The cardinal  rules  of  dispersal  and revetment
obviously  were  completely  ignored.    Our  planes  were  stacked
6
Goldwater Hops Aboard LBJ's Gunboat
"Gunboat  diplomacy is  the  only  name  for  the  action
in  which  the  U.S.  is  now engaged.  And it's  •bout  time.
.  .  .  The Dominican  operation  began  on  the flimsy ex-
cuse  of  protecting  American civilians  in  that  area.  Bat
it  rapidly  became  obviona  that  .  .  .  the  U.S.  Marines
.  .  .  are  carrying  out  a  policy  operation.    This  became
clear  when  the  President  announced  what  close  observ-
ers  of  the  situation  had known from  the  first  shot,  that
the  revolutionary  forces  were  armed,  trained  and  con-
trolled  by  Castro  Communists."
—Barry  Goldwater in N.  Y.  Herald  Tribune May  16.
"The  CIA  now  says  Dominican  revolutionaries  were
being  trained  in  Cuba  and  they  knew  it  all  the  time.
But  when  I  was  in  Havana  a  few  months  ago  I  saw
plenty  of  Venezuelan  and  other  Latin  revolutionaries,
but  no  Dominicans,  and  the   Dominican  Republic  was
not  even  mentioned  by  Cuban  officials.  .  .  .  And the
Cubans  are  not  addicted to  keeping  secrets.  .  .  .  There
is   reason   to   believe  that   the   Communists  were  not
even  aware that  the  pro-Bosch  counter  coup  was  likely
to  occur."
—J.  Halcro  Fergtuon,  Latin  American  editor  of  the
London  Observer  in  its  May  8  issue.
like  dominoes  at  the  air  base,  lined  up  like  sitting  ducks  for
enemy  attack."    Whatever  the  mistakes,  we  are  sure  the  mili-
tary  will  find  some  way  to  "classify"   them.
Our  diplomacy seems to be as inept.    The  differences  among
Peking,  Moscow,  Hanoi  and  the  Viet  Cong  are  real.    Exit  we
utilize  them  so  crudely as to defeat  our  purposes.    One  can  be
played  against  the  other  to  modify  the  terms  of  settlement  but
none  can  be  put  in  the  position  of  "selling  out"  the  others.
The   cessation  of  bombing  raids  may  have  been   mainly  in-
tended  to  clear  the  way for  a talk  between  Rusk  and  Gromyko
at  Vienna  over  the  week-end  but  the  latter  brushed  Rusk off
while  ostentatiously  giving   Couve  de  Murville  a  two  hour
breakfast.    Now  the  raids  are  resuming,   this  time  with  eco-
nomic  targets.    The  U.S.,  presumably,  die  AP  said   (Wash-
ington  Star,  May  19)  "would  have  been  satisfied  if  the  Com-
munists stopped  the flow of  arms and  recruits  to the  Viet  Cong
in  the  South."    What  this  asked  in  effect  was  to  leave  the
Viet  Cong  wholly  at  the  mercy  of  American  military  power.
The  stage  is  now  set  for  wide;  war  on  the  excuse  that  Hanoi
has  rejected  U.S.  peace  terms.
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
7  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May n,  1965
The White House Outsmarted Itself  and Put the Spotlight on The Teach-in ...
The  Washington  teach-in  was  both  the  dupe  and  the  bene-
ficiary of  White  House  manipulation.   In  order  to  obtain Mc-
George  Bundy's  agreement  to  debate,  the  committee  in  charge
made  no  less  than  30  different  changes  in  program  and  panels.
Bundy  even  insisted  on  vetoing  the  committee's  choice  of  who
was to  debate with him.   He  declined to  match wits with  Prof.
Hans  Morgenthau,  perhaps  because  Bundy would  be  unable  to
treat  so  respected  a  senior  political scientist with  the  crisp  con-
descension  which  is Bundy's  stock  in  trade.    All  was  arranged
to  suit  his  wishes;  this  was  reflected  in  Bundy's  last-minute re-
grets  when  he  said  the  program  was  "fair  to  a  fault."    On  the
other  hand,  it  was  because  the  President's  right  hand  man  on
foreign  policy  was  expected  to  take  part  that  the  teach-in  ob-
tained  such  widespread  commercial  TV,  radio  and  press  cov-
erage.    In  this  respect  the  White  House  outsmarted  itself.    It
put  the  spotlight  on  the  meeting  and  Bundy's failure to  appear
made  it  look  as  if  the  Administration  was  unwilling  to  stand
up  to  its  critics  in  a  fair   debate.
Will  Bundy  Accept  The  New Challenge?
Whether   Johnson   felt  that   Bundy  simply  had   to  go   to
Santo  Domingo  or  seized on  this  as  a  last-minute  excuse  is  not
something   one  can  determine  from  the  outside.     But  if   the
Dominican  emergency  was  the  real  reason,  some  other   official
could  have  come  in  his  place  and  read  his  speech   for  Mm.
Instead  all  the  White  House   sent  was  Bundy's  statement  of
regret.    The  suspicion  that  the  Administration was  only  look-
ing  for  an  excuse  to  back  out  may  easily  be  countered.    All  it
need  do  is  permit  Bundy  on  his  return  to  accept  the  univer-
sity  committee's  challenge  to  reschedule  the   debate.
Whatever   the  White  House   does,  the  teach-in  should  be
extended  from  the  campuses  to  as  many  local  communities  as
possible.    The  organizers  should  emphasize  the  difference  be-
tween  the  Washington  teach-in  and  the  kind  of  foreign policy
seminars  the  State  Department  organizes.   These,  preferably,
are  semi-private  briefings   in   whicli   (as   in   the   closed   parry
meetings in the  Soviet Union)  only  the  official  line  is  expound-
ed.    Even  the  wider  public  forums  on  foreign   policy  which
Smaller  NATO Nations Disturbed
"M.   Fanfani   (Italy),   in  spite  of   his   sympathy   for
Washington,   insisted  on  the  necessity  of  a  political  so-
lution  in  Vietnam  and  on  the  danger  of  putting   impos-
sible  choices  before  the  USSR  in  Southeast  Asia.  .  .  .
M.  Lange  (Norway)   emphasized  the  fears  inspired  by
'escalation'  in  Vietnam.     He  was   equally   clear   about
the   Dominican  affair,  observing  that  a  country   of  the
size  of  Norway   could  not  approve  the   philosophy  un-
derlying  the  landing  of  the  Marines  in  Santo  Domingo.
M.  Haekkerup  (Denmark)   .  .  .  basing   himself  on  his
experience  in  a  recent   visit  to  East  Africa,   cautioned
his  colleagues  against  an  attitude   of  excessive  suspi-
cion  toward  the   young   countries   of  the   'third  world.'
Its  leaders,  though   not  Communist  today,   could  finish
by   becoming   so   if   treated   as   such   by   the   Western
countries."
—Le  Monde  (May  IS)  on the  NATO   Council meeting.
the  State  Department  helps  to  organize  around  the  country  are
notable  for  the  absence  of  any  real  opposing  point   of  view.
The   Department   prefers   these   brain-washing   operations   to
genuine  debate.    In  this  it fits perfectly  with  the  Johnson  Ad-
ministration.
While  some  Administration officials  of  minor  rank  took  part
in  the  evening  panels,  the  only  defenders  of  its  point  of  view
in  the  morning  and   afternoon   sessions  were  other  academi-
cians.    There  was  no  one  who  could  speak  for  the  Adminis-
tration.     Even   Arthur   Schlesinger,   Jr.,   who   debated   Prof.
Morgenthau  at  the  morning  session,  turned  out  to  be  not  a
spokesman  for  the  White  House  but  for  the  opposition  bloc
beginning  to  form  around  the  two  Kennedy  brothers  in  the
Senate.
The  pointed   asides  of  this  "defender"   must  have  rankled
more  with  the  White  House  than  the  attacks he  was  supposed
to be answering.   Schlesinger  said  Johnson's  speech  the  preced-
ing  Thursday  promising economic aid  for  Vietnam  was merely
an  echo  of  Bobby  Kennedy's  speech  in  the  Senate  the  day  be-
fore;  that  after  reading  the  White  Paper  he  reflected  on  the
gullibility  of  Secretaries  of  State;  that  he  did  not  approve  of
A  Picture  of  Walt  Rostow  in  Action On A Washington Teach-in  Panel
Walt   W.  Rostow,   Chairman  of   the   State  Department's
Policy   Planning  Council,  was  the  highest   government   of-
ficial  to  turn   up  at  the  teach-in  on  the   Vietnamese   war.
He  spoke  at  the  panel  on  "The  Making  of  American   For-
eign   Policy"   and  appeared   to  be  complacent   and   impene-
trable  under  criticism.   Stanley  Hoffman,  Professor  of  Gov-
ernment   at  Harvard  and  one  of  the  panelists,  said   after-
wards  with  a  shrug  of  his  shoulders,   "He  (Rostow)  was  a
man  standing   in  the  rain  and  yet  completely   rainproof."
Hoffman  was  Rostow's  most   telling   critic  on  the   panel.
He  said  that  instead   of  taking   as  his  reference   Rostow's
latest   book,  View  From  The  7th  Floor  (of   the  State  De-
partment),   he  would  prefer  to  use  the  book  Rostow   wrote
while  looking   at   U.S.   policy   from  the   windows   of   M.I.T.
In  The  United   States  and  The  World  Arena,   according  to
Hoffman,   Rostow   argued  that  "every  revolutionary   war  is
prima  facie  evidence  of  the  failure  of  social  and   economic
reform."    "Do we  really  believe,"  Hoffman  asked  in  a  ques-
tion  that  went  to  the  heart  of  Rostow's  optimism  about  the
war,  "that  a  force  independent   of  the  Viet  Cong  exists  on
which  to   build  the   socio-economic   reforms   we  talk   about
and,  if   not,   do  we  believe—as  the   French   mistakenly   be-
lieved   in  Vietnam   and  Algeria—that   such   a  force   can  be
created  in  the   midst  of   war."
Rostow   acted  as  if   he  hadn't   heard  Hoffman   and  as  if
there  was  no  need  to  explain  the  contradiction   between   his
earlier  analysis  and  his  current  positions.    When  Professor
Morgenthau   said   U.S.   policy   was   stuck   in  a   bureaucratic
rut,  Rostow   responded,  "I  do  not  believe  the  foreign   policy
of  the  United  States  has  been  static. ...  I  believe   it  has
been   applied  with   great   imagination   in   Latin   America."
He  was  discreetly   silent  about   the   Marines   in  Santo  Do-
mingo.    Rostow   talked  with  nostalgia  about  his  recent  trip
to  Japan  but  did  not  mention  the  anti-U.S.    demonstrations
that  forced  him  to  cut  his  visit  short.    He  said  kind  things
about  the  Japanese   press  without  acknowledging   that  it  is
almost   unanimously   opposed  to  U.S.   action  in   Vietnam.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 24,1965
... Campus Awakening Is Making Democracy  Meaningful  on The No. 1 Issue
the  bombing of  North  Vietnam  and  that  "if  we  took  the  Ma-
rines  we  now  have  in  the  Dominican  Republic  and  sent  them
to  South  Vietnam,  we'd  be  a  good   deal  better   off  in   both
countries."    It  was  clear  from  Schlesinger's  speech  that  John-
son,  in  winning  Goldwater,  had  lost  the  ADA.
How  the  CIA  Got  Its  Man
Prof.  Hans  Morgenthau  charged  that  instead  of  a two-party
system  in  foreign   policy  the   Administration  sought  what  it
"euphemistically  called  consensus,"  and  that  the  "spontaneous
movement"  represented  by  the  teach-ins  was  filling  the   func-
tion  of  a  parliamentary  opposition.    He  said  that  instead  of
policy  being  based  on  facts,   facts  were  being  distorted  to  fit
policy.    He  said  he  warned  Diem  in  1955  that  if  he  continued
his  repressive  policies  he  would  finally  have  no  support   left
outside  his  own  family.    He  said  one  of  the  members  of  the
afternoon  panel  had  located  Diem  in a monastery  in  this  coun-
try  "and  presented  him  to  the  CIA"  in  1954.
Isaac  Deutscher,  the  third  speaker  at  the  morning  session,
said  he  spoke  as  "an  unrepentant  Marxist."    He  said  he want-
ed  io  put  the  crisis in  perspective  by reviewing some  of  the  as-
sumptions  underlying  the  cold  war:  "As  long  as  we  accept
them,  we will go  from  crisis  to  crisis."   The  principal one was
that  of  a  military  threat  from   the  Communist  powers.     He
said   the  Truman   Doctrine   and  NATO  were  based   on   the
myth  of  a  Russian  military  threat  to  Europe.    "Propaganda'
pictured  two  colossi,"   the  biographer  of  Stalin  and  Trotzky
said,  "but  if  we  looked  closely one  saw a difference.    The  U.S.
had  emerged  from  the  war  with  barely  a  scratch  while  Russia
was  prostrate  and  bleeding  profusely.   It  had  suffered  20  mil-
lion  dead  alone  and  had  only  31  million  men  against  53  mil-
lion  women.    Russia  was  physically  unable  to  be  a  military
threat  to  anyone.    I  have  been  all  my life  a  critic of  Stalin  for
lack  of  freedom  but  he  was  no  menace  to  the  peace  of   the
world.    That  was  a  myth  inflated  to  apocalyptic  dimensions."
Deutscher  saw  a  similar  myth  about  China  in  the  propaganda
of  the  Vietnamese  war.    Deutscher   concluded  by  saying  that
the  class  struggle  had  degenerated  into  the  morass  of  power
Looks Like  We're Not  So Popular
"I  have  listened  to  testimony  here  for  the  last  sev-
eral  years  on  Vietnam and  it  develops  now  that  about
two-thirds   of   South   Vietnam   is   definitely   under  the
control   of   the   Viet  Cong.    Preceding  witnesses  have
said  that  one  of  the  major  problems  is  that  the  people
who  do  damage  at  night  hide  among  the  people  next
day.    When  we  go   down  the   streets  we   cannot  tell
which  cr.a  shot  us  up  and!  which  one  did  not   because
apparently   nobody   reports   on  anybody.
"When   it   develops  that   OOF  bases  of  operation   are
SE!r-o3~dad  ay  territory  that  is  under  the  control  of  the
SoElfe   Yisisaraese    [sic,    apparently   he   meant    Viet
Caffig]   and  in  some  instances,  to  say  the  least  we  do
not  have  enough  laad  to  protect  ourselves—if  I   c«sn!d
look  at  this  thing  objectively,  it  would  take  a  whole
lot  more  thoE  that  to  convince  me that  there  was  any
real  desire  os  the  part  of  the  South   Vietnamese   peo-
ple  to  keep  tic  there.   It  would  appear  the  South   Viet-
namese   people  are  not  too  strong  for   us."
—Whitten  (D.  Miss.)  in  House  Military    Appropria-
tions  hearings  for  1966 p.  419  released  May  14.
politics,  into  a  struggle  of  oligarchies,  one  falsely  under   the
banner  of  socialism,  one  falsely  under  the  banner  of   freedom.
He  spoke  a language  Washington  has not  heard  in public since
the  cold  war  and  the  witch  hunt  began  two  decades  ago.
The  afternoon  session,  which  was  fully  covered  in  the  New
York  Times  Monday,  May  17, was a little disappointing.     The
panel  method  gave  none  of  the  participants  adequate  time  for
a   full   exposition.    The   discussion  tended,   as  in  TV   panel
shows,  to  fly  off    in  all  directions.    I  was  a  "resource  person"
(horrid  phrase)  on  a  panel  myself  in  the  evening  on  the  ori-
gins  of  the  war  and  the  nature  of  the  Viet  Cong.    It's   difficult
to  be  both  a  reporter  and  a  participant  evsn  on  a  small  scale.
It  was  an  inspiring  occasion.    Those  intense  and   concerned
young  faces,  eager  to  learn,  filled  one  with  new  hope.    The
teach-in  movement   is  making  democracy  meaningful   on   the
one  issue where  it  has  counted  least  and  is  needed  most.    The
intellectuals  are  beginning  to  do  their  duty.
A  Peasant  and  A  Middle  Class  Answer  to  A  Key  Assertion  by  Prof.   Scalapino
"Does  the  Vietcong  really  command the  support  and  al-
legiance  of  the  people  of  South  Vietnam?     I  think  again,
though  the  answer  is  complicated,  the  answer  on  balance
must  be  no."
—Prof.  Scalapino  at  the  Washington  teach-in, May  17.
"It  would  be  a  serious   mistake   to  consider   Communist
power  in  South  Vietnam  as  based  predominantly on  terror-
ism  or  military  strength,  or  even  upon  the  indifference  of
an  ignorant  peasantry.  .  .  .  The  fact  is  that  Communism,
in  the  dress  of  nationalism  and  its  advocacy  of  land  to  the
peasants,  represents   a  powerful  force   in   South  Vietnam,
and  one  which  receives  widespread  support  from  the  peas-
ant  population.  .  .  .  The peasantry  is  not  so  much  a pawn
or  a  prize as  it  is  the  arbiter  in  the  struggle  between Com-
munist  and  anti-Communist   nationalism."
—South  Vietnam:  Nation   Under  Stress  (pps.  158-9)  by
Prof.  Robert  Scigliano  who  defended    the  government's   side
in  the  same  teach-in.
"All  observers  are  in  agreement  on  one  point:  The  pro-
gram   and  the   conduct  of   the   National  Liberation  Front
have  won  it  the  adherence,  enthusiastic   or  resigned,   of  a
very  large  part  of  the  Vietnamese  population.   This  is  a
fact  which  becomes  particularly  clear  when  one  interviews
middle  class  and  intellectual people in  Saigon.  One  of  them
summarizes  the  problem  in  this  way:  'We  have  a  choice
between  two  solutions:  to  wage  an  endless  war  while  plac-
ing   ourselves   more  at   the   mercy   of  the   Americans,  and
without  any  guarantee  that  this  will  end  in  a  clearcut vic-
tory,  or  categorically   to  demand  the  end  of  the   war  and
trust  to  the  good  faith  of  the  National  Liberation  Front's
leaders   and  to  their  willingness   to  carry  out  a  program
which  to  us  appears  acceptable.'  .  .  .  One thing  at  least  is
sure:  the  fiction  that  American  military  power  has  been  in-
troduced  upon  demand  of  a  people  fighting  communism  no
longer holds  today."
—Max   Clos  from   Saigon  in  the  (conservative   and  pro-
American)   Le  Figaro  Litteraire, Paris, March  3,  translated
at  page  7860  of  the  Congressional  Record  April  SI.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  t4,1965
The  Last  Time  We  Backed  A  "War   of Liberation"  in  Latin  America
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Johnson's  proclivity for  strong-arm methods  in  Latin Amer-
ica  has  a  long  history.   The  Johnson  Doctrine  may trace back
to  the  Johnson   resolution  he  introduced  in  the  Senate  June
22,  1954,  four  days after  a  CIA-backed  "Army of  Liberation"
invaded  Guatemala  from  Honduras  to  overthrow  the  Arbenz
regime.    Knowland,  Smathers  and  McCarran  were  Johnson's
chief  supporters,  and  he  himself  in  a  Senate  speech combined
a  highly  simplistic view  of  the  Monroe  Doctrine  with  refer-
ences  to  the  Smith  and  McCarran  Acts  against  Communism as
if  they  made  law  for  the  hemisphere.   Johnson  said  he  was
"proud"  to  have  voted  for  both.    The  late  Senator  Langer,
the  only  member  of  Congress  to  vote  "no",   said  astutely,  "we
would  like  to  know  whether  this  is a  situation  of  interference
by  the  international  Communist  movement  or  interference  by
the  United  Fruit  Company."     After  Arbenz  was  overthrown,
the   lands   United   Fruit   lost   in   his   agrarian   reform   were
restored.
The  Split  in  the  OAS
In   the  Dominican   crisis,  as  in  that   over  Guatemala,  we
sought  not  only  to  prevent  the  UN  from  interfering  but  took
unilateral  action  lest  the  OAS  States  fail  to  do  our  bidding.
The  OAS  sessions  on  the  Dominican  Republic  have  been  held
in  secret;  it  fears to  let  the  people of  Latin  America hear  what
is  said.    Enough  has  leaked  out  to  indicate  that  Venezuelan
reluctance  to  go  along  with  the  United  States  nearly  created  a
crisis  within  a  crisis.    The  Venezuelan  government  fears  that
if  the  rightist  military succeed  in  the  Dominican  Republic they
will  be  encouraged  to  try a coup  in  Venezuela.    Drew  Pearson
reported   (Washington  Post,  May  11)   that  when  the  OAS
voted  a  "peace  force"  in  support  of  the  U.S.  Marines  a  cable
was  already  on  its  way  from  Caracas  instructing  the   Vene-
zuelan  delegate  to  vote  "no."  He  had  abstained.    Since  the
resolution  had  carried  only  by one  vote  (the  vote of  a  Domini-
can  representing  the  defunct  Reid  Cabral  regime),  the  Vene-
zuelan  "no"  would  have  blocked  it.
Similarly Virginia  Prewett reported  in the Washington  Daily
News  (May  19)  that  one  reason  Johnson  sent  "his  top  team
The  Suffering  We  Cause
"Five    babies,    including     5-month-old    twins,    were
among  the  14  people  with  whom  we  shared  a  half-hour
of  terror  in  the  no-man's-land  separating  the  forces  of
junta  leader   Gen.  Antonio  Imbert  and  those  of   rebel
leader  Col.  Francisco  Caamano  Deno  in  the  northwest
industrial  section  of  this  embattled  city.  .  .  .  We  joined
the  rebel  fighters,  who  were  dressed  in  every   tattered
variety  of  civilian  clothes,  outside  the  house  for  sev-
eral   moments.    They   were  angry,  frustrated,  but, it
seemed,  utterly  determined   men.
" 'We  are  not  Communists,'  one  of  them  said  typical-
ly.    'Why  must  we  suffer  like  this  because  the  Yankees
don't   want   us  to   have   a  constitutional   government?
Why  must  our  families  go  hungry?'    As  we  returned
to  the  taxi  and started  off  again  toward  the  rear,  they
looked   at  us  almost  pleadingly—as  if   we  had  magic
answers  that  could  somehow  spell  an  end  to  their  suf-
fering."
—Dan  Kurzman  from  Santo  Domingo in  the  Wash-
ington  Poet,  May  18.
of  fire-fighters"  to  Santo  Domingo  last  week-end  was  because
Venezuela  began  pressing  the  OAS  for  recognition  of  the  con-
stitutionalist  forces.   This  apparently  was the  emergency which
required  McGeorge  Bundy's  trip  to  Santo  Domingo.    It  may
also explain  the  effort  to  bring  about  a  coalition  regime  before
Latin   American  pressure  enabled   the   Bosch  forces  to  win.
Miss  Prewett  reported  that  there  was  a  split  in  the  OAS  be-
tween  the  pro-Bosch  forces  favored  by  former  Presidents  Be-
tancourt  of  Venezuela  and  Figueres  of  Costa  Rica  and  former
Governor  Munoz  Marin  of  Puerto  Rico  on  the  one  hand  and
the  military  dictatorships  of  Paraguay,  Guatemala  and  Nicar-
agua.   The  constitutionalists  charged  according  to a New  York
Times  dispatch  May  19  from  Santo  Domingo  "that  the  U.S.
was  willing  to  allow  at  least  a  near-victory  by  the  Junta  to
bring  pressure  on  them"  to  accept  our  hand-picked   Cabinet.
Caamano was  elected  by a  majority of  the  last  lawful  Domini-
can  Congress.    Guzman,  our  choice  for  interim  President  was
picked  by  Johnson  at  a  secret  meeting  in  the  White  House.
The  laying on  of  hands  by LBJ is not  the  same  as a democratic
election.
We'll  Be Clad to Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
Tit*  1964  Indm li  Ready—You  Can Have One Free  If  You Send  •  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone'8 Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  |5:
Name ..........................................................................................
Street  ........................................................................................
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
5/24/68
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  anb  to:
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.85  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Second  Class  Postage   Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  In
January   and   Bi-Weekly  during  July  and   August  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M,  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.; $6  In   Canuda;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED