I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965oct25.pdf

============================================================

Morse  Calls for  More  Peace Marches,  P.  3
Despite  Heavier  Bombings  and  Bigger   Boloney
"Saigon—The  number  of  Vietcong  fighting  in  South Viet-
nam   increased   sharply  in   September  despite   near-record
battle  losses  and  defections,  according  to  American  High
Command  estimates.   Neither bombing of  infiltration start-
ing  points  nor sea-patroling  apparently  has  interfered  seri-
ously  with  the  continuing Vietcong  buildup,  although  some
of  its  increased  strength  may  be  due  to  forced  recruiting*
of  young  men  in  areas  where  guerrillas   hold  sway.    The
number  of  main  force  insurgents—those  who  are  full-time
fighters   in  organized  units—is  estimated  by  American  in-
telligence  sources  at   80,000  an  increase  of   15,000  over  a
month  ago.
'The number of  part-time guerrillas—farmers  by  day  and
raiders  in  black  pajamas  by  night—has  increased  from  an
estimate  of  80,000  to  100,000  in  August  to  from  100,000  to
120,000  in  September.    Growth  of  the  Vietcong  as  learned
today  was  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  flurry  of  favorable  nu-
merical  indicators  that  the  enemy is  losing  personnel  faster
than  ever  before."
—Jack  Foisie,  Washington Post,  Oct.  17   (abridged).
* Isn't  it  just  barely  possible  that  one  or  two  might  have
joined  up  in  protest  against  our  indiscriminate  slaughter?
—IPS
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII.  NO.  35
OCTOBER  25,   1965
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
If  We  Could  Only  Get  Rid  of  Christ  and  Constitution
Those who  remember  how the  Romans  felt  about  the  Chris-
tians  will  not  be  surprised   that   one  of   them   should   have
burned   his   draft   card.     Christians  have   always  claimed   to
render  unto  Caesar  what  is Caesar's,  but  this  may be  Aesopian
language.     Under   apparent  submission  to  authority  lies  en-
couragement  to  civil  disobedience  since  the  saying  leaves  un-
answered  who  is  to  determine what  is  Caesar's.    If  each  man
insists  that   his   conscience  be  his   guide,   the   end   result   is
anarchy.    Thoughtful  men  have  long  recognized  the  peril  in
the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  primacy  of  conscience.     Defense
counsel  tried  to  make  the  West  see  what  openings  this  gave
Moscow  but  their  warnings  were  brushed  aside  at  the  Nurem-
berg  trial.   Der  Fuehrer  saw the  danger  and  wanted  to  replace
this  pacifistic  religion  with  a  more  virile  Germanic  creed,  but
his  efforts  were  frustrated  by  the  need  to  placate  the  Papacy,
which  is  again  showing  its  true  colors.    When  the  Pope  vir-
tually  advocates admission of Red China to the United  Nations,
little  wonder  that  a  devout  young  Catholic  refuses  to  fight  in
Asia.
Most  Catholics  Loyal
We  do  not  wish  to  suggest  that  Roman  Catholics  are  not
to  be  trusted.    Most  of  them  are  loyal  citizens.   Their  priests
often  preach  the  most  invigorating  sermons  in  wartime.   But
judge  and  jury  at  the  trial  of  David  J.  Miller  for  burning  his
draft  card  must  be  made  to  see,  in  extenuation,  that  the  re-
ligious  doctrines  to  which  this  young  man  was  exposed   left
him  unfit  to  understand  practical  realities.    The  Church  itself
in  the  Middle  Ages,  by  keeping  the  laity  from  reading   the
Gospels,  acknowledged  that  they might  have  an  unsettling  ef-
fect  on  immature minds.   We  would  be  the  first  to  protest  if
this  led  the  government  to  take  hasty  action  against  church-
going.    But  it  is  not  without proper  means  for  dealing  with
those  who  abuse  freedom  of  religion.    The  Internal  Security
Act  was  framed  to  cope  with  the  Communist menace  but  its
provisions  are general  enough  to  cover any international move-
ment  which  takes  positions paralleling  those  of  the  Commu-
Perhaps  the  Next  Step  Will  Be to  Seize
Papers  Which  Print  Lippmann  at  Home
"SAIGON,   Oct.   17—The   Saigon   English-language
Daily  News   was  ordered  to  halt  publication  for  five
days  for  infringing  the  country's censorship  laws.   The
newspaper  was  told  it  infringed the  laws  by  publishing
articles  without  first  submitting  them to  the  censor.   It
was  understood  that  an article by  the  syndicated Amer-
ican  columnist  Walter Lippmann  displeased  the  govern-
ment.   The article published Oct. 12, described the  South
Vietnamese   army   as   war-weary  and  said  it   had  too
little  morale  to  occupy  territory  that  American  forces
seized  from  the  Vietcong."
—Reuters,  Washington Post,  Oct. 18.
nists.    Their  members,  their financial contributors,  their  print-
ing  presses  and  publications,  must  be  disclosed  to  the  Subver-
sive  Activities  Control  Board  by  registration.    This  is  dearly
usable  against  Roman  Catholic  pacifist  groups,  opposing  the
war  in  Vietnam,  in  concert with the  Vatican.
Next  to  the  problem  of  Christians  who  take  their  Gospel
too  seriously  is  that  of  Americans who  take  the   Constitution
too  literally.    McCarthy  taught  us  to  look  with  suspicion   on
"Constitution-lovers."     We  must be  on  our  guard  against  con-
stitutionalist   infiltration.    The   day  before  Attorney   General
Katzenbach  spoke  in  Chicago  of  prosecutions  against  the  stu-
dent  peace  movement,  the  Associated  Press  asked  Justice  De-
partment  for  comment  on  Senator Stennis's  demand  for  action.
"One   top  level   lawyer"   said   (Washington   Star,  Oct.    16),
"You  just  can't  make  a  snap  judgment  on what  you would  do
if  someone  should  put  out  a  pamphlet  or  make  a  speech  ex-
horting  others  to  be  draft   dodgers.     Sure  we're  keeping   an
eye  on  this  thing,  and  we  know  what  the  law  is,  but  we  also
keep  an  eye on  the  First  amendment."    Katzenbach  had  better
begin  his  investigation  right  in  his  own  Department.     How
are  we  going  to  make  Asia  safe  for  democracy if  we  allow  all
this  subversive talk  about  free  speech?
1   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 25, 1965
Why   We  Welcome  and  Support  the  Nov. 27 Peace  March  on  Washington
We  are  devoting  this  entire  issue  to  the  peace  movement  be-
cause  of  the  attempt  to  smear  and  intimidate it.    The  strategy
of  the  government,   as  Senator  Morse  pointed  out  in  a  speech
Oct.   19  too  late  for  fuller  discussion  in  this  issue,  is  to  focus
on  the  far  fringes  of  the  movement   in  order  to  "tag all dis-
sent  as lawless,  reckless  and  bordering  on  sedition."    The  press
and  TV   are  abetting  this  by  their  coverage.     Sober  speeches
at  peace  rallies  are  ignored  and  a  caricature  created  by  empha-
sizing  the  bizarre.    This  is  a  good  way  to  howl  down  honest
misgiving  for  the  moment.     In  the  long  run, it  will  exact  a
price  in  many  spheres   of  public  policy.    We   suggest  a few:
Exaggerating  Communist    Importance
1.  The  question  of  drajt-dodgers.     This  has  been  blown   up
out  of  all  proportion  in  the  strategy  of  the  smear.    Those  who
say  that   peace  protest   encourages   the  other   side  must   admit
that  the  government's  own  arrests  also  exaggerate  the  extent
of   opposition  to   the  war.   Anyone   abroad   who   reads   the
alarms  of   Katzenbach   and  J.   Edgar   Hoover   must   begin   to
think  that   America's   tiny   and   splintered   Communist   move-
ment  is  a  major   force.    The  conservative Baltimore  Sun pro-
tested   in  an  editorial  (Oct. 20)   that  an  AP  survey  of  draft
boards   "shows   no   evidence  of   organized   draft    avoidance."
It  sees  "the vast  majority"   of  young  Americans  as  ready   to
serve as always.   This  pumped-up hullabaloo will end  by  creat-
ing  more   draft  avoidance.
The   draft  law  is  not  the  only  law  it  is  illegal  to  obstruct.
The  Civil  Rights  Act  of  1964 and  the  Voting  Rights  Act  of
1965   both  carry  provisions  making  it  a  crime  to  obstruct  their
enforcement.    The  anti-war extremists burn  draft  cards.    The
anti-equality  forces  burn  Negro  churches.     The   swiftness  of
the.  crackdown  on  one  contrasts  dangerously  with   the   slow-
motion  on  the  other.    The  government  is foolish  to  invite this
comparison,  just  as  it  was  foolish  to  make  a  young   Catholic
pacifist  its  first  test  case.    No  matter  how  loud   the   mob-like
chorus  of  the  respectable   they  will  not  drown   the  still  small
voice  of  conscience.    This  is  a  cruel,  a  barbarous,   an   immoral
and  an  illegal  war.  If  our  country  were  attacked,  few   would
oppose  the  call  to  arms  in  its  defense;  it  is  not  lack  of  patrio-
tism,  on  the  contrary it  is concern  for  the  good  name and  better
traditions  of  our  country  which  leads  so  many  to  protest   this
distant  and  dubious  conflict.
Ruby  Dee's Questions
"When  I've listened  to  the  President  talk  about   the
war   in  Vietnam—its  value  to  peace  and  freedom—he
has  seemed  so  earnest  and  sounded  so  sincere  that I've
found  myself  waiting  for  that  great   reason,   that per-
haps  I  had  not  heard,  that  reason   that  truly  justifies
the  slaughter  of  men—in  the  name  of  peace  and  free-
dom  and  in  the  name  of  God.   So  many  questions  come
to  mind:  when  has  war  brought  peace  on  earth?    Can
we  truly  deny  that  wars  are  primarily fought  for  pride
and  power?    Has  not  our  country  emerged  from  each
war   richer  and  more  powerful?     Are  not, primarily,
the  darker  peoples  of  the  earth  subjected  and  exploited
through  war?    Will  we  ever  fight  the  white  people  in
South  Africa,  for  a  major example,  to  free  the  Africans
so   shamelessly   wronged?     Oppression   now  exists   in
South  Africa  mostly  because  the  British  and  American
interests  support  it  in  apartheid.    Can  we  really  care
about   the   Koreans,   the   Vietnamese   or   other   colored
people  on  this  earth,  when  in  fact,  were  they   on  our
land  we  would  discriminate,  segregate  and  force   them
to  suffer  in  life-consuming  fashion  for  their  non-white-
ness?—Ruby  Dee,  March  on  Washington   press   confer-
ence,  Oct. 18.
2.  The  need  for  a  peace  movement.    Congressman  George
E.  Brown   (D.   Cal.)   made  an  important  point  at  the   poorly
covered  press  conference  announcing  the Nov. 27  peace March
on Washington.    I  made  the  same  point  in  my talk  at  the  New
York   demonstration  the  previous  Saturday.    When  the   time
comes   for  negotiation,  as  I  hope  and  believe  it  will,  the  Ad-
ministration  in  power  will  need  support.    There  is  also  need
for   a  counter-balancing  force   left   of   center   to  hold  off   the
rising  chorus  on  the  right  for  unrestricted  bombing  of  North
Vietnam  and  even  of  China.    It  is foolish  for  the   government
to  lock  itself  in  with  a  monolithic  opinion   which  will  make
negotiation  and  restraint  impossible.     If  the  peace   movement
provides   a  false  picture  of  majority  opinion   it  does  so  in  a
way  which  gives  the  U.S. a  propaganda   dividend.     It   makes
the   American   people   look   more   concerned,    more   humane,
more  free  and    more  courageous  than  they are.
3.  Military   vs.  civilian   control.    The   Pentagon's  forte   al-
ways  was  publicity.    The   military  is  at  its  best   in   its  press
releases.     Its  vast  propaganda  machine   is  at  work  spreading
Notre  Dame Faculty  Member  Gives A  Catholic's  View  of  the  Coming  Peace  March
"I  speak  as  a  Catholic, not  for  all  Catholics, but  as  a  man
and  a  Catholic.   Less  than  two  weeks  ago, Pope  Paul  in  his
magnificent  address  before  the  UN  praised  and,  in  a  sense,
consecrated  that  body  of  nations.    He  urged  a  renewal  of
spirit   among  men,   an   abandonment  of   national   pride,   an
effort  to  embrace all  nations  including those  outside  the  UN
(China).    As  a  follower  of  Paul   (as   indeed   many  are  in
spirit  if   not  in  fact),   I  look  for  a  magnanimous  response
from  my  own  country  and  do  not  find  it  from   government
spokesmen.    The  monotonous  movement  of  bombers   scorch-
ing  the  Asian  earth  continues.   The  draft  is  increased,   the
old  argument about China's  entry  into  the  UN  are  increased.
"If   I  believe  Paul's   words,  and  I  do,  I  cannot   be   silent
now.     Now   when   generosity   is   expected,   a   hardness   of
spirit  obtains.    Now  when  an  appeal  to  our  common   origin
and  common destiny  as  men  is  made,  a  relentless  cry  of  na-
tional  interests  and  closure  of  all  discussion  deafens  us.    I
find  a  drift  toward  a  brutality  of  mind  and  action   among
our  nation's  leaders  that  must  filter  down  to  the  people.    I
do  not  say   that  conversely   the   North  Vietnamese   or   the
Viet  Cong  are  moral—but  their  immorality  does  not  justify
ours.    I  appeal  to  people  of  good  conscience  to  act  on  the
call  of  their  conscience.    It  is  a moral  obligation  to  bear wit-
ness  to  the  cause  of  peace.    The  United  States  must   make
great   efforts,   particularly  through   the   UN,   to  negotiate.
It  must  manifest  its  generous   and  adaptable  proper  frame
of  mind by  ceasing  its  bombing-missions,  and  its  cutting  off
of  the  build-up of  truth.   That  I  regard  as  a  moral  impera-
tive  to  be  urged  by  those  who  take  part  in  the  Peace  March
and  Rally."
tains.     rNow  wneii  an  appeal  io  our  cummuii  uiigm        «*nu  »»t»».j.
—Joseph  M.  Duffy,   Jr., Associate  Professor   of  English  at  Notre  Dame,  at  peace  march  press  conference,   Oct. 18.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   October  25, 1965
to  the  military  bureaucracy as  Stennis  of  Mississippi  in  his  last
the  delusion  of  victory  by  attrition,  though  a  Senator  as  close
letter   to  constituents  spoke   of   a   15-year   effort   in   Vietnam.
Russell   of   Georgia   advanced  a   curious  argument   Oct.   18
against  the   peace  movement.    He   said  he  was  one  of   those
who  opposed  our  involvement  in  this  conflict  but   that  now
"flag",   "honor"  and   "prestige"  were  at  stake.    This   is  the
usual  way  the  military  trap  their  countries  into disastrous wars
to  cover  up  past  mistakes.    How  far  do  we  follow  this  route?
Into  war  with China?
The  Warnings  of  Our Soldier  Presidents
Elsenhower  objected  to  the  peace  rallies.     But  he  himself
a  few  weeks  earlier  contradicted  Johnson   and   said  our  com-
mitment  in  South  Vietnam  was  only  one  of  aid  and  supplies.
It  is  time  to  remember  that  our  two  greatest  military  presi-
dents,  Washington   and  Eisenhower,  both  warned  us  in  their
farewell  addresses  against  undue  military  influence,  the  latter
against   the   military-industrial   complex,   the   former   against
"overgrown   military  establishments"  as  a  menace  to   liberty.
Every   major   military   figure   from   MacArthur   down    has
warned  us  against  ever  again  getting  involved  in  a  land  war
in  Asia;  Eisenhower  decided  against  it  when  he  was  in   the
White  House,  but   there   we   are.     Every  thoughtful  soldier
we  have   sent   to  Vietnam  since  the  Taylor  mission  in    1961
has  stressed  the  need  for  political  and   social  reform  to  quell
the   rebellion.    The   rebellion   has   grown   because   we   have
weakly  acquiesced   in  the  refusal  of  our  puppets  to  give  the
people  greater   liberty.    Now  we  are  impelled  to  restrict  lib-
erty  at  home  as  well  as  in  Vietnam  to  carry  on  this  unpopular
war.
4.  The   pretense  of   democracy.     A  vast  expansion   of   the
war  effort  has  been  covered  by  a  smoke-screen  of  peace  talk.
Now  that  we  have  a  situation  of  strength  high  officials   (like
Rusk  at  Johns  Hopkins  in  an  answer  to  a  question  Oct.   16)
imply  that we  must fight  the  war  through  to complete  victor)'.*
This  is  the  line  of  least  resistance  because  many  would  rather
go  on  killing  people,  ours  and  theirs,  rather  than  allow  the
popular  will  in  South  Vietnam  to  express  itself  if  that  should
mean   a  coalition  with  the  National   Liberation  Front.     The
*  Mansfield  in  the  Senate  Oct. 19 protested the  off-the-record
interview   which   gave   rise   to   a   rash   of   such   stories   last
week.    "Many  Washington  newsmen,"  Murray  Marder wrote
in   the     Washington   Post   Oct.  20,  "did  know  the   original
source,  who  happened  to  be  a  very  high  official  indeed."
Appealing  to  A  Red  Cross  We  Ignored
"The  editorial  in  the  New  York  Times  of  Oct  1  errs
when  it  blames  the  Vietcong  and North Vietnam of  uni-
laterally  violating  the  Geneva  conventions.    The  Viet-
cong  fighters  are  as  protected  by  the  Geneva  conven-
tions   as   the   American  GIs   are.     Dramatic   protests
against   violations  of   the   Geneva  Conventions  should
have  been  made  when  the  first  Vietcong  prisoners  were
shot,   when   they   were   tortured,   when   the   American
army  started  to  destroy  Vietcong  hospitals   and  to  cut
off    medical   supply.  If    the   North   Vietnamese    shoot
some  American prisoners  now, then  this  is  the  result  of
a   long   series  of   breaches   of   the   Geneva   rules   com-
mitted   by   the   Americans  and  South   Vietnamese.    It
is  utterly  hypocritical  to  condone  wholesale  violations
of   the   Red   Cross   principles  on  one  side   and  protest
reprisals  against  them.
"The   shooting   of   the   two   fliers   and   the  menacing
trials  of  other  American  prisoners  may  be  tragic but  if
they   help  to   stop   the  wholesale   murder  of  Vietcong
prisoners,  the  tortures,  the  bombing  raids  against  hos-
pitals  and  villages  and  all  the  inhuman  rest  and  bring
about   respect   for   Red  Cross   rules   in  all  cases,   then
they  will  have  been  useful."
—Hans   Henle,   former    member   of   the     information
service,  International  Committee  of  the  Red  Cross,  Ge-
neva,  (abr.)  in  New  York  Times  (international   edition
only)   Oct.  14.
Administration  which,  through   Thomas  Mann,   opposes  any
alliance   with   the   Communists   in   Latin   America   is  hardly
likely  to  negotiate   a  coalition  with  them   in  Vietnam   unless
greater   public  understanding  and  protest   is  aroused.      We'd
rather   leave  a  lot  more  of  our   boys  dead   than  allow   South
Vietnam  to  be  a  little  red,  even  if  that  is what  its  people   pre-
fer  to  the  burning  up  of  their  country  by  our   bombers.
So  we  welcome  the  March   on  Washington    scheduled   for
Nov.   27.    On  these  pages  and  the  next  we  offer   the  text  of
some   sober   statements   explaining  it.     A   distinguished   list
from  Norman  Thomas  to  Saul  Bellow  support  it.    It  will  seek
not   civil  disobedience   but   persuasion.     Last  week-end's   na-
tionwide  protests   discomfited   the  "hawks"  by  their  size  and
support.    The  March  must  not  be  a  failure.    To  join  it  is  to
help  save  human  life  and  perhaps  our  own  freedom.    As  war
fever   rises,  the   fools   and   the   cowards  are  always  hailed  as
patriots  while  those  who  urge  reflection  are  howled  down  as
subversive.    Which  is  the  greater  patriotism?    To  run  with
the  pack?    Or  to  urge  at  some  personal  risk  what  one  believes
the  wiser  course  for  one's country?
Morse  Tells  Senate  U.S.  Needs  to  Hear  The Tramp  of  Marching  Feet  in  Protest
"I  made  this  long  speech  today because  tomorrow in vari-
ous  parts  of  the  country  various  groups  of  varied  political
complexion  are  going  to  protest  America's  involvement  in
war  in  Vietnam.    I  certainly  do  not  endorse   all  the  views
and  the  conduct that  may  be  taken  by  some  of  these  groups.
Neither  do  I  endorse  the  McCarthyism of  the  superpatriots
and   shocking   rightists   in   this   country   who   are   already
charging  those  who  tomorrow  will  protest  outlawry  of  the
United  States  in  Asia  as  being  traitors.   Short  of  a  declara-
tion  of  war  what  is  needed  in  this  country  is  the  protests  of
millions  of  Americans  against   the  policy  of  their  Govern-
ment  in  Asia.
"What  is   needed   in  America,   short   of  a  declaration  of
war  is   the  tramp,  tramp,  tramp  of   marching  feet   in  the
communities   of   America,   of   free   people   protesting;   non-
violent  demonstrations  against  the  course  of  action  of  the
United  States  in  violation  of  both  the  Constitution  and  our
treaty   obligations.     Mr.  President,   there   are   those   who
would  silence  those  of  us  who  are  there  to  protest  the  out-
lawry  of  our Government.  There  are  those,  even  in  this body,
who  believe  some  sort  of  censorship  ought  to  be  placed  on
free  men  who  practice  their  freedom  by  protesting  the  in-
excusable  foreign  policy  of  the  Johnson  administration.    I
thank  my  God  that  there  are  in  this  country  thousands  of
people  who  will  be  heard  from  tomorrow  and  in  the  weeks
and  months  ahead  and who will not  be  cowed  into  submission
by  the  intolerant  bigots  of   America  who  believe  that  be-
cause  our  country  is  on  an  illegal  course  of  action,  we  must
support  its  illegality."
—Wayne   Morse   (D.  Oregon)  in  the  Senate  Oct.  15.
\    3    ,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October iS,  1965
Purpose  of  Nov.  27  March  on  Washington  Explained  in  Statement  Press  Ignored
U.S.  Brushed  Off Peace  Feeler  From  Hanoi  During  Bombing  Lull  Last May
By  Sanford  Gottlieb
Coordinator  of  the   NOT.  27th  March  on  Washington
We  are  here  today  to  explain  why  we  feel  compelled  to.
organize  a  March  on Washington  for  Peace  in  Vietnam.    In
the  words  of  the  distinguished  Americans  who  are   sponsors
of  this  March, "We see no gain  coming from  the .war  in  Viet-
nam.   We  see  only  the  victimization  of  the  Vietnamese  peo-
ple,  the  erosion  of  a  better  society  at  home,  and  the  clear
possibility  of  a  world  conflict."
Danger  of  A  New  McCarthyism
As  the  war  continues,   we  believe  the  administration   will
inevitably  turn  its  resources  and  energies  toward  the  mili-
tary  conflict  and  away  from  its fledgling programs  to  eradi-
cate racial injustice  and poverty  at  home.  Moreover, as mind-
less  chauvinism  takes  hold  and  public  frustration   mounts
along  with  the  casualty  lists  we  expect  many  of  our  fellow
citizens  to be caught up in a new search for  scapegoats—a new
wave  of  McCarthyism.    The  early  signs  are  already  there:
the  denunciation   of  the  protest  movement  as  "Communist-
led";   the  cries  for  action  against  'opponents  of  the  draft;
the  refusal  by  some  local  authorities  to  grant  permission  to
hold  parades  or  even  to  use  public  buildings  for  a  two-sided
debate  of  the  issues.
We  seek  to  end this  war.    We  affirm  that  no party  to  the
conflict,  the  U.S.  included has  done  all  it  can  to  bring  about
negotiations,  and  since  the  war  will  ultimately  end  at  the
conference   table,  we  ask   new  actions   to   speed  that   day.
These  new  actions  must  be  designed   to  show  military   re-
straint,  not  military  escalation.    We  disagree  with  the  ad-
ministration's  assumption  that  added  military  pressure  will
bring  the  North   Vietnamese  to  the  conference  table.    No
proud  nation—and  the  regime  in  Hanoi  represents  the  only
Asian   people  in  modern  times  to  win  its  independence by
militarily   defeating   a   Western   colonial   power—will   talk
peace  as  the  result  of  aerial  bombardment.
We  now  question  whether  the  Administration  is  interested
in  negotiations.    A  new  mood  in  Washington,  produced  no
doubt  by  the  first  American  victories  in  South  Vietnam,  is
exemplified  by  this  report  in  the  Washington  Post  of  October
16:  "The  Capital  talks  less  of  peace  by  negotiation  and  it  is
unanimously  thankful  that  Hanoi  did  not  opt  for  the  con-
ference  table  last  winter  when  disaster,  it  is  belatedly  con-
ceded,  was  on the  military  horizon."    In  point  of fact,  Hanoi
So  Two  Were  Well  Enough  to  Protest
"The  President's  pastor, the  Rev. George R.  Davis  of
National  City  Christian  Church,  yesterday  denounced
demonstrations  against  America's  fighting  in  Vietnam
as  'disgraceful.'    The   violation  of  law  and  disregard
of  responsibility'  in  Saturday's demonstrations  'are  no
guarantee  of  the  future,'  he  declared.   'Anarchy  is  not
the  way  to  democracy.'   Dr.  Davis  said  the  demonstra-
tions  did  not  reflect  the  general  feeling  of  either  civil-
ians  or  military.   He  had  been  told,  he  said,  that  no
complaints  have  been  heard  from  wounded  soldiers   at
Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center,  'except  from   two
men who were  the least  hurt.'"
—Washington   Post,   Oct.  IS    (abridged).
did  opt  for  talks  proposed  by  U.N.  Secretary   General   U
Thant  in  February,   while  the  U.S.  refused.    Furthermore,
we  now  have  confirmation  from  the  State  Department   and
the  U.S.  Mission to  the  U.N.,  that,  the  day  before  the  end of
the  six-day  pause  in  the  bombings of  North  Vietnam  in  May,
the  French  government  was  approached  by  the  North  Viet-
namese  representative  in Paris  with  the  request  that  the  fol-
lowing  message  be  transmitted   to  Washington:   Hanoi  was
prepared   to  negotiate  on  the  basis  of   the  four  points  pro-
posed  by  its  foreign  minister  in  April.    According  to  some
versions  of  this  report,  Hanoi  specified  that  it  was  not  de-
manding  the  prior  withdrawal  of  U.S.  troops.    I  was .told  in
the  State  Department  that  this  message  was  indeed  received
in  Washington,  but  it  was  not  the  kind  of  message  we  were
looking for.   The Administration did not  investigate  further;
it  resumed  the bombings.
We  can  only wonder what  kind  of  message  Washington  is
looking  for.    And  we  can  organize,  as  concerned  citizens,  to
help  Washington  give  and  receive  the  proper  signals  before
South  Vietnam  is  transformed  into  a  funeral  pyre.    In  so
doing,  we  believe that  we  are  not  damaging  the  morale  of
American  troops  in  Vietnam, but  trying  to  bring  the  war  to
an  end  before  more  of  our  people  are   killed.    We  are  con-
vinced  that  we  speak  for  many  Americans,  including  great
numbers  of  those  now  included  in  the  broad but  shallow  con-
sensus  behind  the  President, who feel  in their  hearts that  the
burning  of  villages  by  napalm  and  artillery  fire  is  not  the
way  to  preserve  freedom   or  to  promote  the  dignity  of  the
individual.
Extra  Copies  This  Issue  Available  in  Bulk  at  Penny  Apiece  Plus  Postage
I. F. Stone's Weekly
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City   ...
...Zone............State..
10/25/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)  Nune   ....................................................
Street   ..............................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............SUte....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished   D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F   Stone's  Weekly     Second  Class  Pottage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except   in   August,  the  last  week   in   December  and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bl-Weekly  during;  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..  Washington.   D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  published  and   edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Either  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   »5  in   the   U.S.:    S6   in   Canada;    SIO  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,   Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED