I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965apr26.pdf

============================================================

How  Big  Business Runs  The  Poverty  Program,  P.  4
When  A  General Gets Jet  Airplanes and  Doesn't  Know  What  to  Do With  Them
"Saigon, April 15 (DPI)—A force of  230 aircraft  from all
four  UJL  services  carried  out  a  dawn-to-dusk  saturation
bambiag  today  of  forest  sheltering  the  Viet  Gong  supreme
headquarters in  South Vietnam."
—St. Louis Post-Dispatch  April  15.
"Saigon.  April  18 (AP)—Since Friday  (April  16)  ground
traops hare been  searching  the tangled  jungle north of Black
Virgin mountain trying to assess the damage  eanaed by MM
tons of  booths dropped by 230 UA  warplanes.   The  ground
troops  have  found  no evidence  that  the  jangled  region  was
what  intelligence  reports  said  it  was—«  major  Viet  Coag
headquarters   region—U.S.  sources  said.    No  Viet   Cong
bodies  have been found and only a  handful  of  weapons have
been picked up."
—Washington  Sunday  Star,  April  18.
The   joint  strike was undertaken after  Gen. Wm. C. West-
morland, commander of  the  DJ3. military  command, ordered
a   "maximum   effort.'   Gen.  Westmareland,  who   originally
asked  for the use of VS.  jet  aircraft  within  South Vietnam,
has  urged his  intelligence  officers  to find targets for  the  po-
tent  airpower  made  available  to  him."
—New  York  Times from  Saigon, April  16.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL. Xm,  NO. 16
APRIL 26,1965
•'"•       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15   CENTS
A  Great  Storm  Is  Gathering
Tess  Vietnamese  leadership  and  people,  in  Hanoi  and  Sai-
gon,  aa  She hideoots of  die guerrillas  and  in  their exik  homes
BE Paris, bad  better  IEOVC qakkly.   Only the mirade of  direct
megcfiiatisMJs  between  tfeon  caaae save  their  poor  conntay  from
as  teescheiora  a  srio  of  defenders  as  ever  came  to  plague  a
samPI fflatJkjffi. Vifiteans  is caught  io  a  triangular  Great  Power
staggk  wliicfa  may  or  may cot  end  in  a  world  war,  but  is
srBKEtfeitig  Jts  eardi  and  decimating  its  people.   Hie  civil  war
aanremg  Shemseh/es  is  the  real  lever  of   foreign   intervention,
arnd  caty  its  end  by  fraternal  talks  can  save  it  from   enemies
asi-d  friends  equally  dangeiOTS  no  matter  whether  looked  at
ffmcsm  tfce  right  or  the  left     It  may  be  that  only  the  Viet-
tihemsdves  can  save  the  red: of  us  from  disaster.
Strange  Talk  From  A  Big  Brother
Tbs  Chinese  talk  big  but  their  only  Gantribotion  so  far
was  (t»  delay  the  arrival of  air  Affnt?    miwifc;  from  Russia.
It ffiE.it be  painful  to  the  Vietnamese  to  read  Choa  En-lai's
esplsaatim  in  the  April  18  issue  of  the  Algerian  weddy,
feaye  Afriqxe.    When  Ben  Bella  asked  him  whether  it  was
fenae  that  Soviet  supplies  had  been  held  op,  Chou  En-lai  ie-
p3iai  Siat  it  was  normal  for  Peking  to  preserve  its  rights  of
scweieignry  by  subjecting  such  material  to  inspection!    The
nsal  season  for  his  government's  attitude,  the  Chinese  leader
went  on,  was  that  Russian  defense  missiles  would  mean  the
esiSsy  of  Russian technicians  to  man them  "that  is  to  say, Rus-
sian  troops  and  that  is  snmprhing  die  peoples  of  Sooth-East
Asia  cannot  admit  or  tolerate."   This  is  tantamount  to  saying
ttfesi China   prefers   to   leave   Hanoi   defenseless   against   air
aJSack.*
Tbs  Russians  are  almost  paralyzed  between  their  terrible
fend with die Chinese  and their hope for relaxation  of  tension
Our  Firmest  Allies  in  South  Vietnam
"There are two  groups of  Vietnamese  who stand firm-
ly behind the Americans.  First are the middle classes in
the towns who make vast  fortunes out  of  the war. Every
third  shop  has  been  made  secure  against  attack  from
terrorists  with  prisonlike  bars  and  turned  into  dark
sleazy  night  dubs filled with  girls from  six  in  the  eve-
ning, anxious  to please  at a  price.
"Hotels are packed while rents of  flats  are as high  as
in  Central  London or Paris.  There  has  been  no attempt
to  control  prices.    Indeed  many  merchants  have  been
given  dollar  credits  to  import  goods  at  the  official  rate
of  about  120 piastres to the dollar.  This  makes luxuries,
silks,  cameras,  record  players  really  cheap."
—From Saigon, Manchester  Guardian Weekly  Apr.  IS
* C!«o» En-lai  said he f eared a  new  Cuba -that  is  to
sitnatwB  wtuch  would end in a Bnw-AHcrieu
sack  as  the  one  between   Kennedy  and  Khrushchev  which
"feaeriSeed  the  interests  of  the  Crihoi  people."   But  Cob.  is
tetter  •*  today  than  if  it  had bee*  plunged  into  war. and
Vietrauo.  could  do worse  than a  similar  hands-oC  agreement
betweai the two Kg  powers.
5                                                                                                        6 3
with  the  United  States;  they  cannot  abandon  North  Vietnam
without  loss  of   face  to  the  former,  nor  defend  it  without
risking  a  nuclear  confrontation  with  the  latter.    If  the  issue
were  not  precipitated  in  a  small  Communist  and  Asian coun-
try,  endangering  Russian  prestige  in  both  the  Communist and
Afro-Asian  worlds,  they  might  find  a  direct  dash  between
China  and  die  U.S.  as  attractive a  way  to  weaken  both  rivals
as  some  in  the  West  did  the  Nazi  attack  on  Russia.    China
maneuvers  to  use  the  Vietnamese  crisis  as  a  wedge  between
Russia  and  the  U.S.,  while  die  U.S.  maneuvers  to  use  it  as a
wedge  between  Russia  and  China.    This  would  be  fascinat-
ing if  it were only  chess,  but it  is a game  in which  every  move
adds to Vietnamese suffering and the  danger of  a nuclear war.
What  if,   under  die  growing   pressure,   die  Russian  military
were  to  take  over  from  the  cautious  bureaucrats?
From  all  indications  the  tiny  handful  who  make  policy  in
Washington  are playing  this  game  with  zest.    Johnson,  like a
second  husband,  anxious  to  outdo  his  predecessor,  scans  to
want  another  eyeball-to-eyeball  confrontation  like  Kennedy's
over  Cuba.   While he  woos  the  peace  movement  with private
letters  and  talks  in  order  to  disarm  it,  he  is  steadily  escalat-
ing  the war.   The  moves  toward  peace are few  and faint,  just
enough  to  confuse  opposition  at  home  and  abroad,  while  the
(Continued  on Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  26,1965
(Continued  from  Page  One)
moves  toward  a  wider  conflict  are  swift  and  covert,  but  un-
mistakeable.    Large-scale  commitment  of  combat  troops  is  in-
dicated  by  the  statement  Senator  Stennis,  acting  chairman  of
the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee,   issued  from  his  home
in  Dekalb,  Mississippi,  over  the  Easter  week-end.   He  recalled
that  in  three  Senate  speeches  he  had  opposed  the  sending  of
U.S.   military  to  Vietnam  when  the  men  were  first  ordered
there  in  1954.    But  he  said  that  we now had  to  face  "the  hard
fact  that  we  are  now  in  a war  that  is getting  bigger."  He  pre-
dicted  that  more  U.S.  troops  would  be  sent  in,  and  that  the
struggle  might  last  ten  years!    "Warning  against  paying  too
high  a  price  for  peace,"  declared   the  press  release  his   office
circulated  over  the  holiday,  "Stennis  said,  'While  we  want  to
end  the  war  as  soon  as possible,  we  must  be  certain  we  do  so
on  terms  acceptable  to  us'."    This   is  the  authentic  measure
of  Johnson's  peace  terms.
Combat  Troops  Next
The  conference  on  in  Hawaii  as  this  is  written  is  accom-
panied  by  the  familiar  hints  and  qualified  disavowals   which
herald  a  widening   of   the  conflict.     "No   decision  has   been
made,  Pentagon   sources  say,"  the  AP  reported   (Washington
Star,  April  19),  "to  throw  American  ground   troops  directly
into  the  war."     All   sorts  of  possibilities   are  being   leaked.
Both  the  Sunday  Times  and  the  Sunday  Telegraph  in  London
(April   11)   reported   talk   in  Saigon  of  moving  South  Viet-
nam's  boundary  up  from  the   17th  to  the   19th  parallel;  the
destruction   of  roads  and  bridges  leading   south  from   Hanoi
would   prepare  the  way  for   such   a  move  but   U.S.   ground
troops  would  be  necessary to  achieve  it.   This  would  be  mov-
ing  from   aerial  bombardment   to  invasion.    The   arrival  of
Soviet  SAM's  (surface  to  air  missiles)  in  Hanoi  would  make
attack  on  the  capital  too  costly;  to  take  a  piece  of  the  country
would  save  face.     "The   sharpening  of  North  Vietnam's  air
defenses,"   the   Washington   Post  speculated  editorially April
17,  "may  tend  to  shift   American  support   tactics  to   ground
forces."     A  straw  in  the  same  dreadful  wind  was  provided
by  a  speech  Senator  Proxmire  made  in  Wisconsin  April   19
supporting  the  war  and  declaring  "This  country  must  be  pre-
pared  for  the  possible  commitment  of   tens  of  thousands  of
additional  American  troops  and  perhaps  much  more,  with  a
sharp   acceleration  of   American  casualties."     (Press   release
from  his  office).    Huge  eight-inch howitzers  capable  of  firing
atomic  shells  have  been  landed   at  Da  Nang.     Major   Gen.
Max  S.  Johnson  (ret.),  former  planner  for  the  Joint   Chiefs
of  Staff,  speculates  in  U.S. News  & World  Report  (April  26),
that  instead  of  "a  solid  cordon  of  U.S.  troops"  such  weapons
could  be  used  to  create  "a  nuclearized  zone"  against  invasion
from  the  North.    Such  are  the  trial  balloons  going  up.
A  New  Note  Heard  in  Saigon
There  are  some  indications that  the  signals  are  not  entirely
wasted  on  the  Vietnamese.    The  most  important   suggestion
in  the  joint communique issued  by the  Russians  and  the North
Vietnamese  in   Moscow   was  its  call  for   "the   formation  in
South  Vietnam  of  a  national  democratic  coalition  government
carrying  through   a  policy  of  independence  and  neutrality  in
full  conformity with  the  Geneva  agreements  of   1954"    (text
in  Washington  Sunday  Star,  April  18).   This  has gone  almost
unnoticed   in  our  press.    Right-wing   sources  here   complain
How  to  Feel  Optimistic  in  A  Quicksand
"Today  the military situation is  worse,  although there
has  been  an  upturn from  its  very  worst  about  45  days
ago, and the  government is only slightly less shaky than
last  fall.    And  yet,  paradoxically,   there  is  a  ripple  of
confidence  beginning  in  both  American  and  Vietnamese
circles.    All  thought  of  an  American  withdrawal  has
vanished  as  indicated by  the  escalation  of  U.S.  involve-
ment."
—Los  Angeles  Times  Foreign  Service  from  Saigon  in
Washington  Post,  April  IS.
that  the  Saigon  government  is  being  purged  of  Catholic  pro-
war  elements  in  favor  of  generals  and  civilians  favored  by  the
Buddhists  who  want  peace.    On  his way through  Paris  a  Vice-
President  of  the   Saigon   regime,   Tran   Van  Tuyen,   told   Le
Monde   (April  16)  it  was  necessary  to  stop  the  war  and  that
a  democratic  socialism  in  Saigon   would  make  it  possible   to
integrate  the   South   Vietnamese  left  and   end  the   rebellion.
This  was  a  new  note.    It  should  be  read  in  connection  with
the  interview  that  Gen.  Nguyen   Chanh  Thi,  who  seems  to
have  become  the  most  powerful  of  Saigon's  Generals  and  is
being  attacked  here  by right  wing  commentators,  gave  to Rich-
ard  Critchfield  (Washington  Star,  April  14),  saying  that  U.S.
aid  to  South  Vietnam  had  only  made  the  rich  richer  and  the
poor  poorer.    The  race  may  be  on  between  peace  tendencies
in  Saigon  and   U.S.  military  plans  if  necessary  to  take  over
the  country  and  the  war  altogether.
The  Student   Peace  March
Now,   before  we  slip  over  the  brink,  it  is  urgent  that  all
peace  forces  in  our  own  country  bury  their  sometimes  petty
and  personal  differences   and  awaken  our  fellow  countrymen
to  the  dangers.    The  President's  cancellation  of  visits  by  the
leaders of  India  and  Pakistan  reflects  his  headstrong  unwilling-
ness  to  listen  to  counsels  of  caution,  especially  from  countries
which  reflect  Asian  sympathy for  a  small  Asian  country  help-
less under  U.S.  air  attack; we  would  never  dare  strike this way
against  a  big  country  able  to  retaliate  on  its  own.    The  stu-
dent  peace  march  on  Washington   last  week-end  put  the  big-
gest  picket  line  ever  outside  the  White  House   and  brought
20,000  people   including  a  delegation   from   Mississippi  to-
gether  in  a  huge  rally  at  the  Washington   Monument.     Sen-
ator  Gruening  of  Alaska  had  the  honor  to  be the  one  member
of   Congress  with  the  courage   to  address   the  students.     His
proposal  for  an  end  to  the  bombing   of  North  Vietnam  was
echoed  a  few  hours  later  by  Senator  Fulbright.  Gruening's  call
for   negotiations  with  the  Viet   Cong  was  sneered  at  by  the
conservative   Washington    Star  although   a   few   days  earlier
(April  12)   it  had  itself  said  editorially,  "It  is  very   difficult,
to  say  the  least,   to  see  how  a  settlement   can  be   negotiated
without  their  participation."     The  right-wing  press   attacked
the  demonstration  and  as  usual  most  of  the  press  ignored  the
Gruening   speech.     Even   the   liberal   New    York    Post  was
stampeded  by  nervous  adult  peace   leaders   into  running   an
editorial  before  it  took  place  saying  there  was  "no   justifica-
tion  for  transforming  the  march  into  a  one-sided   anti-Amer-
ican  show."    If  it  had  waited  24  hours,  it  would   have  seen
that  the  "show"  was  neither  one-sided  nor  anti-American  but
a  disciplined  and  sober  affair   for  which  the  students   deserve
the  country's  deepest  thanks.                                       April  20
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's Weekly,  April  26,1965
How  State  Dept.   Intervened  To  Block  Low-Cost  Drug  Plan  for  Latin   America
Senate  Antitrust  Committee  Drops  Too-Hot-To-Handle  Drug  Inquiry
After   two   years  of   shillyshallying,   the   Senate  Antitrust
Committee  has  canceled  its  investigation  of   how   U.S.   drug
manufacturers  and  high   U.S.   officials   joined   forces  to   block
a  low-cost  drug  program   in  Colombia,  Latin  America.    The
Committee  voted  unanimously  (Mar.   25)   to  drop   subpoenas
which  the  late  Estes  Kefauver  issued  in   1963   against  Parke-
Davis,   Pfizer,   Schering,  Sterling,   American  Cyanamid,  Olin
Mathieson,   and   the   140-member   Pharmaceutical   Manufac-
turers  Association.    The  few  fragments  of  the  story  that  are
known  must  look   to  Latin  Americans  as  a  typical  instance
of  Yankee  imperialism.
From  30c  to  3c A  Tablet
In   1962,   the   Colombian   government   announced   that   it
would  guarantee  distribution  throughout   the  country  of  some
32  drugs  if  the  manufacturers  would   agree  to  sell  them   un-
der  generic  (chemical)   names  rather  than  brand  names.    This
would  avoid  the  high  cost  of  advertising  promotion  and  per-
mit  lower  drug  prices.    The  only  U.S.  firm  to  accept  the  offer
was  McKesson-Robbins,  which   had   inspired   the   Colombian
program  by  selling  an  important  antibiotic  under  its  generic
name  for  3c  a  tablet  while  other  U.S.  firms  were  selling  it
under  brand  names  for   30c  a  tablet.     Shortly  after,   Vene-
zuela  and  Costa  Rica  indicated  an  interest   in  a  similar  pro-
gram,  but  they  soon  changed   their  minds.*
On   January   14,   1963,   the   Pharmaceutical   Manufacturers
Association   and   some   Colombian   drug   companies   met   in
Washington.     According  to  a  transcript   of  that  meeting  re-
vealed  by the  Colombian  Minister  of  Health,  a  special   counsel
for  PMA,  Mr.  Lloyd  Cutler,  proposed  a  program  to  mobilize
official   support   inside  the  State  Department   against  the  gen-
eric  drug  plan.     On   February   4,   Under   Secretary   of   State
George   Ball  announced   the  formation  of  an  Advisory   Com-
mittee  on  International   Business   Problems   "to  review   .  .  .
specific  business  complaints  submitted   by  American  business-
men   in   connection   with   their   overseas   operations."     By  a
happy  coincidence,   Mr.  Cutler   was  among  the  five  men  ap-
pointed  to  the  Committee.    On  April   1,  minus  Mr.  Cutler,
LBJ  And The Drug Industry
A  leak  to  the  press  last  week  that  Mr. Lloyd   Cutler
was  about  to  be  appointed  Under  Secretary   of  Com-
merce  seems  to  have  temporarily  stymied  the  appoint-
ment,   but  it   set   us  to  counting  the   drug  industry's
friends  within  the  Johnson  Administration.    Cutler  is
a  special  counsel  for  the  Pharmaceutical  Manufacturers
Assn.  (see  main story).  At  Commerce he would be work-
ing  under  Secretary  John  Connor,  who is  the immediate
past  president  of   Merck  &  Co.  with  drug  interests  in
some  dozen  foreign  countries.    Secretary  of  the  Treas-
ury   Henry   Fowler,   appointed   last   month,   was   chief
Washington  lobbyist  for  Merck  before  he  entered  the
Treasury  Department  under  Kennedy.  Among  the  Pres-
ident's  close  personal  advisers,  Thomas  Corcoran  is  a
prominent   drug   industry   attorney   whose   brother   is
president  of  three  international  subsidiaries  of  Sterling
Drug.    The  law  firms  of  Abe  Fortas  and  Clark  Clifford,
two   other   Presidential   confidants,   represent   the   two
largest  drug  advertising  firms  in  the   country.
* The  Wall  Street  Journal,  April  14,  reported  that  Britain
may  take similar action  against  high-priced  U.S.  brand  drugs.
the  Committee  began  a  trip  to  every  Latin  American   country
except   Paraguay.
Meanwhile,  a  news  story  had  come  to  the  attention  of  Sen.
Kefauver  that  indicated  foreign  aid  to  Colombia  might  be  cut
off   because  the  generic  drug  program   infringed  on   American
patent  rights  and  could  therefore  be  interpreted  as  expropria-
tion  of  American  property.    In  May,  Kefauver  issued  his  sub-
poenas,  but  their  due  date  was  postponed  when  Sen.  Dirksen
led  a  revolt  within  the  committee.    He  insisted  that  it  "seek
the  advice"  of  Senate  Foreign  Relations.    In  an  executive  ses-
sion,  June  25,  the  president  of  McKesson-Robbins   told   For-
eign  Relations  that  U.S.  drug  firms  now  refused  to  supply  his
Colombian   operation   with   raw  materials.     In   spite  of  this,
Sen.  Morse  proposed   that  the  matter  be  referred  to  the  State
Dept.,  AID,  and  Justice  for  a  quiet  investigation  that  would
not   harm   our   foreign    relations.      Morse   was   in   a   com-
promising  position   since  the  counsel   for  the  drug   companies
before  Foreign  Relations  was  his  long-time   friend,   Thomas
G.   Corcoran,   who  had   recently  sponsored   and   largely   sub-
sidized  a  fund-raising  luncheon   for  Morse's   1962    campaign.
After  the  Foreign  Relations  hearing,  the  drug  subpoenas   were
extended   seven  times  before  they  were  permanently  canceled.
New  Commission On Patent  Policy  Rigged   In  Favor  Of  Private   Industry
President  Johnson  last  week  established  a  Commission  on
the  Patent  System  that  is  stacked  from  the  start  against
the  public  interest.   The  major issue  the  Commission is  ex-
pected  to  consider  is  whether  private  industry  should  be
granted  patent  rights  on  products  that  are  developed with
public  funds.    Many  of   the   major  new   products  in  elec-
tronics,  transportation   and  medicine  since   World  War  II
have  been  federally   financed.  Current federal  research  and
development  contracts total  over  $15 billion  a  year  and  the
figure is  rising  rapidly.   Patents  on these  products should be
placed  in  the  public  domain  to  encourage  competitive  pro-
duction  and  pricing.   To  grant  patent  rights  to  private  in-
dustry  is  to  create  an  undeserved  17-year  monopoly.
Yet  the  structure  of  the  President's   Commission  makes
this  outcome likely.   The  executive  order  establishing  the
commission  provides  seats   for  the  Commerce  and  Defense
Departments,   the   National   Science   Foundation   and   the
Small  Business  Administration.   The  first  three  currently
give  away  patent  rights  on  all  products  developed  under
their  R&D  contracts.    The  SBA  does  not  engage   in  B&D,
and  as  a  relatively  weak  agency   it  is  not  likely  to   offer
much   opposition.     Commerce  Secretary    Connor,   who   is
thought  to  have  been  instrumental  in  setting  up  the  Com-
mission,  has  fought  strongly in  the  past  for  the  drug  indus-
try's   right   to   patents   on   all   products   developed   under
HEW's  cancer  chemotherapy  program.
Excluded  from  the  Commission are  all  the  public  agencies,
like  Justice,  the  Federal  Trade  Commission,  and  HEW, that
have  represented the consumer interest during the  past  three
years  of  heated debate.   Also excluded are  Departments like
Agriculture  and Interior,  that  currently  refuse  to  turn  over
patent  rights  to  private industry.   The  ten  members  of  the
Commission  from  private life  have  yet  to  be  announced, but
it  would  be  heartening  to  see  just  one  dissenting  voice.
6     -
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone'. HTeefcfy. April t6. ItSS
Pentagon—Big  Business  Crowd  Hold  Top  Position  In  War On Poverty
Why  Not  Allow  The Poor  To  Elect Their  Own  Representatives?
When   Sargent  Shtiver  introduced  his  top  aides  and  gave
their  background at  last  week's hearings before die House  Edu-
cation and  Labor  committee, he unwittingly revealed  a lot  about
the  War  on  Poverty.  Shriver  was reluctant  to  make  the  intro-
ductions  and  had  to  be  prodded  by  Chairman  Adam  Clayton
Powell.    Among  the  men he  introduced  was  Holmes  Brown,
a  director  of  communications  at Martin  Marietta  Corp., a large
defense  contractor,  who  subsequently  served  with  Ford  Motor
Co.,   the   Secretary  of   Defense   and  Rockefeller   Bros.     The
man  in  charge  of  administration   in  the  poverty  program  is
Willliam  Kelley,  formerly  director   of  contracts  for  NASA,
the  nation's  space  agency.    Ferdinand  Nadherny,  the  execu-
tive  secretary  of  the  program,  was  a  high  class  Boston  busi-
nessman  with  the  Cabinet  Corp.,  and  Milton  Fogleman,  the
man  in  charge  of  negotiating  contracts  with  private  industry
to  operate  the  job  corps  camps,  was formerly  in  charge  of  all
Air  Force  contracts.
The Same Cold Warriors
Chairman  Powell  and  his  committee  protested   the  absence
of  the  poor  from  local  anti-poverty  committees,  but  no  one
questioned   the  preponderance  of  cold  war  and  big   business
types  at  the  upper  echelons.    Towards  the  end  of  his  testi-
mony,  Shriver  again  linked  the  War  on  Poverty  with  men
whose  main  contribution  over  the  past  decade  has  been  to  the
cold  war.   "We have  a  subcontract  right  now with ... the
Institute  for  Defense  Analysis,"  Shriver  said.  "We  have  about
six  people  from  there  helping  to  develop  a  weapons  evalua-
tion  system  so  that  we  in  the  war  against  poverty  can  begin
to  evaluate  our  weapons."    The  man  in  charge  is  Dr.  Kern-
shaw,  on  leave  from   the  Rand  Corporation,   the  Pentagon's
chief   think-factory.
A  Poverty Program with  this  kind  of  personnel  could  quick-
ly  become  an  adjunct  rather  than  an  alternative  to  the  cold
war.  It  already  is  on  its  way  to  anti-democratic  paternalism
and  big  business  subsidies.    One  proposal   that  might   stem
this  trend  came from  Rep.  Albert  Quie, a  Republican  member
of  PowelTs  committee.  He  proposed  special  elections  at  which
the  poor  would  elect  their  own  local  representatives   to  the
Constitution Protects  The Kfetn Too
The   nub  of  the  issue  is  this:  no  committee  of  He
Congress has  the authority  to  determine whether or »ot
any  organization,  incfadinK  the  Klin,  will  be  proved  to
be on-American.  I do not like  the  racist  right  mar—ftar
that  matter—the  totalitarian  left; but  if  they  have vio-
lated a  Federal  law, then let  them be tried in a  Federal
court.    If   the  laws  are  not  strong   enough,  let   as
strengthen  them, but  let  as  not bring  up indrdduafc and
pillory  them  and  bring  associations  of  free  men  into
calumny.
"I note  with interest  that  not  one  responsible  spokes-
man  for  the  countless  number  of  Negroes  and  others
who  have  been  involved  in  civil  rights  actions  or  who
have been maimed, killed or hart in the North as weD  as
the   Sooth—not  one  responsible  spokesman  has  sup-
ported this resolution.   Why?   They have withstood the
temptation  to  strike  oat  at  the  Khtn  via  this  improper
forom  because  they know the Constitution protects none
of  us, unless it  protects all of  us."
—Rep.  Phfflp    Burton  (D.,  CaL)  when the  House voted
$50JOOO  for  HUACTt  Klan  inquiry.   A  euriout  eoatUion
of  43 liberal* and Southern racists voted ayanut.   Host
liberals  favored  an  inquiry  fry  Judiciary;   ontg  Burton
and  Dunean  (D.,  Ore.)  opposed  any.
anti-poverty  boards.    This  received  no  support  from  the  rest
of  the  committee,  but it  is  a  first  rate  idea.   The  present  sys-
tem  of  appointing  die  poor  (and  so  far  very  few  have  been
appointed)  makes it  easier to  bypass the militant poor  in favor
of  the more easily intimidated.   Elections  would give die poor
an  independent  base of  power and would  create a more articu-
late,  class-conscious  organization  among  diem.    A  precedent
for  special  elections  is  the  Agricultural Stabilization  Commit-
tees  elected  by  farmers  to  run die  farm  subsidy program.
An  indication  that  die  poor  themselves  may press  for  diis
kind  of   approach  came  from  the  Rev.  Lynward  Stevenson,
who  spoke  for  a  Negro  community in  Chicago.  "Our  dignity
can  no  longer  be  bought  for  a pittance or  decided  by others,"
he  told  the  committee  bitterly.  "We  would  rather  starve dian
survive as fawning pets of  Ward Committeemen and city hall."
The  1964  Index  I* Ready—You  Cm  Havo One  Free  If  Yon  Send  a  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone'8 Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)  a  sob  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   .......................................................................................
Ctty   ..........................................Zone............State....................
4/26/66
For  the  enclosed  $5 send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
Ctty   ,...
i
.....................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   Pi/tie*
Indicate  if  announcement wished   D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Avo.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C   20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone'*  Weekly.    Second  Class  Portage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  a     Pnblished  every  Monday  exeept  the  last  week  to  December  and  the  «rmt
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   6818  Nebraska  tae..  N.W    WiMhington.  D   C.   An  independentweeUy   P<jb!i«h«d  and «
by  L  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Either  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $6  In  the   U.S.:    *6   to   Canada;    SIO  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:
$16  to  Europe;   S2Q  to  brad.  Aata  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED