I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965jun21.pdf

============================================================

The  No.  1  Mystery   of  Santo Domingo, Pps. 2-3
This  Is  Where Our Bankrupt Policy  of  Bombing  North  Vietnam  Had  Its  Origins
"Let  us  assume  that,  in  the  fall  of  1964,  we  would have
warned  the  Communists  that  unless  they  ceased  supporting
the  guerrillas  in  South Vietnam,  we  would destroy  a major
military  supply  depot  in  North  Vietnam.    Through  radio
and  leaflets,  we  would have  advised  the  civilian population
living  near  the  depot  of  our  ultimatum  and  of  the  exact
time  of  our  attack so  that  civilians  could be  evacuated.   If
the  Communists had  failed  to  heed  our  warning  and  con-
tinued  to  support  the  rebels,  we  would  have  gone  through
with  the  threatened attack and  destroyed  the  depot.  And if
this  act  of  'persuasive deterrence' had  not  sufficed,  we would
have  threatened  the  destruction  of  another  critical  target
and,  if  necessary,  would have  destroyed  it  also.   We  would
have  continued  this   strategy   until   the   Communists   had
found  their  support of  the  rebels  in  South  Vietnam  too  ex-
pensive  and  agreed  to  stop  it.    Thus,  WITHIN  A  FEW
DATS  and  with  minimum  force,  the  conflict  in  South  Viet-
nam  would  have  been  ended  in  our  favor.   Beyond  this,  we
would have gained  immeasurably  in prestige...."   (Empha-
sis added).
—Design  for  Survival,  by  Gen. Thomas  S.  Power, retired
Commander-in-Chief   of  the Strategic  Air  Command,  a  book
he  was  forbidden   to  publish  while  in  service.    The  jacket
boasts  that  he  "personally   led  the  mission  that  incinerated
16  sq.  miles  of  Tokyo—history's   most  devastating  air  raid"
and  "literally  had  his  finger  on  the  nuclear trigger  during
the  Cuban missile  crisis."   The  book—and  the  results  of  the
North  Vietnamese  bombings—show  how  simple-minded   our
top  military  commanders  can  be.
I. F. Stands  Weekly
VOL.   XIII, NO. 24
JUNE  21,1966
""       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Why  Not Peace Through Free Elections in South Vietnam?
Senator  Fulbright   declares  "the   tragedy  of  Vietnam"   lies
in  the  failure  of  the  United   States  to  appreciate   "the  power
of  nationalism  in  Southeast  Asia."    The  trouble  with  Senator
Fulbright   is  that  he  so  rarely  translates  his  generalized   in-
sights  into meaningful  policy.   The  Senator  sees  our  failure  in
Vietnam  arising  from  "the  intransigeance  of  a  colonial  power
and  the  initial  failure  of  the  U.S.   to  appreciate  the  conse-
quences  of  that  intransigeance."     As  a  result,  Fulbright  said,
"the  nationalist  movement  became, associated  with  and  largely
subordinate  to  the  Communist  movement."    But  the  Admin-
istration  stubbornly persists  in  the  same  intransigieant  attitude.
It  will  not  recognize  the  nationalist  character  of  the  struggle.
It  will  not  negotiate  with  the  South  Vietnamese  National  Lib-
eration  Front.   It  insists  on  treating  South  Vietnam  as a  "sov-
ereign  nation",  the  North  as  an  aggressor,  the  Viet  Cong  as
mere tools  of  the North.   The  fact  that this is a war of  national
liberation,  which began  against  the  Japanese,  continued  against
the  French  and  is  now  being  waged  against  us,  is  the  primary
political  fact  about  the  war.    But  Fulbright   nowhere  faces
up  to it.
Fulbright  Overlooks the  No. 1 Precondition
On  the  contrary,  Fulbright  enlists his  talents  in  the  defense
of  the Johnson  Administration.  He  praises  Johnson  for  "stead-
fastness  and  statesmanship"   in  "the   goal  of  ending  the  war
at  the  earliest  possible  time  by  negotiations   without   precon-
ditions."   The  Administration's   spokesmen  have  never  offered
negotiations  without  preconditions.     On  and  off  the  record,
they  have  stressed   that  they  were  only  offering  "discussions
without  preconditions."    The  main  precondition   is  that  we
will  not  negotiate  with  the  men  who  actually  control  most  of
the  country  and  are  doing  the   fighting.   We  have  shopped
around   trying  to  buy  some   settlement   on  the   cheap   from
Moscow  or  Peking,  as  if  the  revolt  in  South  Vietnam  could
be  turned  off  by a  spigot  from  either  capital.    From  the  very
beginning  U.S.  policy  has  refused  to  recognize  the  grass  roots
character  of  the  rebellion.   The  attempt  to  suppress  it  by  dic-
A  Phi  Beta  Kappa  "Award" for  Bundy
"We,  members  of   Phi  Beta  Kappa,  dissociate  our-
selves from  the  honor  accorded McGeorge  Bundy as this
year's  convocation Orator.   Mr. Bundy has  been  clearly
identified   as   an  architect  and  defender  of  American
policies  in  Vietnam  and  the  Dominican  Republic.    Not
only  do we  feel  that  these  policies  endanger  the  peace
and   threaten   the   deepest   spirit   of   our   republican
institutions;  we  hold,  moveover,  that  by  his  outspoken
contempt  for  critics,  lay  and  academic,  Mr.  Bundy  has
disqualified   himself  to  address  a  group  dedicated  to
humane  inquiry and the  strengthening  of  a  free  society
through  honest  debate.    We  deplore  the  obscurantism
and  disingenuousness  resorted  to  by  Mr.  Bundy  and
other  government  spokesmen  in  their  efforts  to  make
any  opposition  appear at  best  uninformed and  at  worst
wilfully   subversive.    We  have  chosen   to   speak   out
against  a  morally deadening consensus  in  the  hope that
the  democratic ideals  and the  intellectual  honesty  that
have  guided  our  policies  in  the  past  may  not  continue
to  be  mocked In  practice."
—Protest  by 100 Phi  Beta Kappa  key  holders  at  Har-
vard, June 13.
tatorship  and  war  explains  why,  in  Fulbright's  own  words,
"the  nationalist  movement  became  associated  with  and  largely
subordinate  to  the  Communist  movement."    Our  policies  gave
discontent no  other  effective  channel  except  joining  this  Popu-
lar  Front  with  the  Communists  just  as our  refusal to  negotiate
with  the  National  Liberation   Front   gives   it  no   alternative
but  to  carry  on  the  armed  struggle  with  whatever  help  it  can
get—and  that  has  been  little  and  late—from  the  Communist
bloc    Yet  Fulbright  will  not  bring  himself  to  say so.
In   the  absence  of  plain   speaking   on   this   basic  issue  of
negotiations   with   the   Viet   Cong,   Fulbright's   speech   boils
down  to  apologetics   foe  the  new  policy  of  committing  combat
troops   to  South  Vietnam  and  fighting  out  the  war  on  the
ground.    His  whole  speech  supports  the  Administration's  view
that  there  is  no  present   alternative.    The   shrewd   raanip-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
9  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Weekly, June tl, 1865
Murchison  Lobbyist  Used  by  State Department  in  Dominican  Talks . . .
In  its  projected  hearings  on  the  Dominican  Republic,  the
Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  ought  to  look  into  a mys-
tery  that  has the  correspondents who have  been  there puzzled:
What happened  to  the  agreement  McGeorge Bundy had  reach-
ed  in  Santo  Domingo   with  die  constitutionalists?    Col.   Ca-
maano,  with  the  approval   of  Juan  Bosch,  had  agreed  with
Bundy  on  a  new  government   under  Antonio  Guzman,  who
was  Bosch's   Minister  of  Agriculture.    The  new  government
would  have  operated  under  the  democratically  adopted   1963
constitution.    This  settlement  was  blocked  in  Washington   on
Bundy's  return.    There   is  talk   instead   of  Joaquin  Balaguer
as  head  of  a  new  government,  though  he  was  for  30  years
Trujillo's  faithful  rubber  stamp.
Texan   Multi-Millionaires
One  place  to  start  such  an  inquiry  would  be  with  the  role
being  played  in  the  Dominican  affair  by  I.  Irving  Davidson,  a
Washington   lobbyist  whose  $l,000-a-month  activities  for  the
Somoza  dictatorship  in  Nicaragua   came  to  light  in  the   1963
investigation   into  lobbying  by  the  Senate   Foreign   Relations
Committee.    It  turned  out  that  Davidson  is also  a Washington
representative  for  the  Murchisons  of  Texas,  who  have  inter-
ests  in  Haiti  and  Nicaragua.   Is  Davidson  acting  for  them  in
the Dominican   affair?
Walter  Pincus,  the  brilliant  young  newspaperman  who  dug
up  the  facts  for  the  lobby  investigation,   is  now  employed  by
the  Washington  Star.   In  that  paper  June  9  he  disclosed  that
the  Justice  Department  had  asked  Davidson  to  register  as  an
agent  for  Joaquin  Balaguer  only  to  have  Davidson  claim  that
he  was  acting  for  the  S^tte  Department   in  "contacting"  Bela-
guer!   A few days earlier John M. Goshko had  reported  to the
Washington   Post  from  Santo  Domingo   (June  6)   that   "the
exiled  Balaguer  has  been  mentioned  with  increasing  frequency
by  State  Department   officials  as  a  man  who  might  satisfy  all
parties."     It  is  hard  to  believe  that  Balaguer  would   satisfy
anyone  but  U.S.  interests  which  benefitted  from  the  Trujillo
dictatorship,  the  Trujillo   family  and  the  Dominican   military
AFL-CIO True to  Form  in  Latin Crisis
In  Juan  Bosch's  book  about  his  overthrow  (Crisis  de
la  Democracia  de  America  en  la  Republica  Dominicana:
Mexico,  1964),  he  says  the  military  coup  against  him
was  supported by  Dominican trade unions  the  AFL-CIO
favors.    This  anti-Bosch  bias  is  evident  in  the  latest
Inter-American  Labor  Bulletin  (June,  1965)  issued  by
ORIT,  the  Inter-American Regional Labor Organization
affiliated  with the  AFL-CIO.   Its  editor,  Andrew C. Me-
Lellan,  in  a  by-line  story  on  the  new  Dominican  upset
shares  Time  Magazine's  enthusiasm  for  Gen.  Wessin  y
Wessin,  calling  him  "one  of  the  few  incorruptible  top
elements in  the  Dominican army."   McLlellan  gives him
credit  for  "two  notable  bloodless  coups",  in  Jan.  1962
against   Gen.  Echevarria   and   in   Sept.   1963  against
Bosch.    The  editor  says  Wessin  overthrew  Bosch  be-
cause  the  latter  "was  unable to  control  the  lawlessness
which  had  enveloped  the  nation"!    The  Bulletin  sup-
ports  U.S.  armed  intervention  and  deplores  the  "doc-
trinaire  reaction" it  provoked in  Latin  America.   Bosch
is  criticized for  favoring  Communists and  "hooligans."
who  so  long  served  the  dead  Benefactor.
In  the  Senate,  the  day  after  the  Star's  story  was  published,
Senator  Morse  put  into  the  Congressional  Record  the  complete
iranscript  of  Davidson's  interrogation  by  the  Senate   Foreign
Relations  Committee  March  8,  1963.    The  Senate  committee
found  that  Davidson  boasted  to  the  Somozas  that  through  his
friendly   relations  with  Hoffa   and   the  Teamsters   Union   he
could  mobilize  12,000  workers  in  the  I960  presidential   cam-
paign.    Davidson  said  he  was working  to' obtain  the  Republi-
can  nomination  for  Nixon   and  the  Democratic   for  Lyndon
Johnson.    He  added  (see  box below)  that  he  had  been  prom-
ised  "a  general  house-cleaning"  in  the  Central  American  sec-
tion  of  the  State  Department   to  rid  it  of  elements   insuffici-
ently   anti-Communist   and   therefore   unfriendly   to  dictators
like  the  Somozas.
At  the  time,  in  1963,  this  sounded  like  the  characteristically
inflated   boasting   of  a  Washington   "influence  peddler"   (as
Morse   termed   him)   especially   since   the   slick   and   evasive
Why  Nicaraguan  Dictator's  Lobbyist  Supported  Johnson  for  the  Nomination  in  1960
Letter  from  I.  Irving  Davidson  to  His  Excellency,  Senor
Luia A.  Somoza, President  of  Nicaragua, dated July  7,1980:
"Dear  Luis:  Today  I  am  taking  off for  Los  Angeles,  for
the  Democratic  Convention  where  I  will  be  in  the  active
camp  of  Lyndon  Johnson. ...  I  am  operating  behind  the
scenes.    So  far   as  Nicaragua   is  concerned,  everyone   with
whom  I  am dealing  knows that  I  am your-registered  repre-
sentative,   and  everyone  knows  that  much  of  the  money  I
spend  throughout  the  year  is  made available  to  me through
your  generosity.   I  do have  a  promise  from  the  LBJ  policy
board  that  we will be  given  first  refusal  for  representations
(ambassadorial,   military,  et  al),  but  more  important,  there
will  be  a  general  housecleaning  of  the  policy  makers  of  the
State  Department  for Central  America.  . .  ."
The  CHAIRMAN  (Fulbright):  Did you  write that  letter?
Mr.  DAVIDSON: Tes.  This  letter  looks  familiar.  .  . ,
The  CHAIRMAN:  What  do  you  mean by  the  active  camp
of  Lyndon Johnson?
Mr.  DAVIDSON: Well ...  I  thought  that  Lyndon John-
son  was  a  great liberal...  and  politics  has  been  somewhat
of  a little  hobby with me ...    and I  wanted to do everything
in  my  power that  a  man  like  Lyndon would get  the  Demo-
cratic  nomination  because  I  knew  he  understood  the  threat
of  Communism in the Western  Hemisphere. .  . .
The  CHAIRMAN: Did  any  one  person  make a  promise  to
you?
Mr.  DAVIDSON:  No,  not  one  person,  no  specific  utate-
ment.
The CHAIRMAN: Then this statement is false,  isn't  it?
Mr.  DAVIDSON: No,  I  didn't  say  any  one  person:  I  had
a  promise  from  the  LBJ  policy  board.   I  would say  that  it
would be an  assumption  I  made  from  my  conversations with
many  people  that  LBJ's  team  felt  like  I  did  about  Central
America,  about the communistic element... they were  going
to  clean  house  of  all  these  longhairs  that  were  about  on
Central America....
The  CHAIRMAN:  Did  you  ever  discuss  this  with Lyndon
Johnson  himself?
Mr. DAVIDSON: I did  not.
The CHAIRMAN: He made no such  promise?
Mr.   DAVIDSON:  No,  he  did  not     But  I  was  around
enough  of  his  aids  to  know that  he  thought  like  I  did .  .  .
we  ought  to  have  a  hard  policy  on  Communism,  and  these
leftwingers  in  Central  and  South  America.
—Testimony  before   Fulbright  foreign  agents  inquiry,  re-
printed  in  Congressional  Record June  10 pps.  18857-79.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'* Weekly, June tl, 19SS
. Trujillo's  Lifelong  Shadow,  Balaguer,  Being  Suggested  As New  President
Davidson  finally  admitted  he  had  never  discussed   this   per-
sonally  with  Johnson  or  had  any  such  promise  from  his  aides.
More Than An Idle Boast?
"I  think he was doing  his best,"  Morse  told  the  Senate,  "to
impress Mr.  Somoza with his value  as a lobbyist.   To  what ex-
tent  his  statements about  promises  from  "the  LBJ  policy  board"
were  true  we  did  not  go  into,  since  in  March  of  1963,   when
the  hearing  was  held,  Mr.  Johnson  was  not  President.    But
today  he  is President.    And  inquiries at  the  State  Department
have  been  reported  to  me which  indicate  that  the  Department
is  using  Mr.  Davidson  as their  contact  with  Joaquin  Balaguer
in  dickering  for  a  new  government   for  the  Dominican  Re-
public."
Morse  said  that  "when  the  President  wanted  to  dicker  with
Juan  Bosch"  he  sent  former  Ambassador  John  Bartlow  Martin.
"Surely  it  is  possible,"  Morse  told  the  Senate,  "to  find  some-
one  equally  reputable  and  free  from  financial  involvement  to
dicker  with  Mr.  Balaguer."
At  the  State  Department's  daily  briefing  next  day, June  11,
its  press  spokesman, Robert  McCloskey  would  not  comment  on
Morse's  criticism but  admitted  that  Davidson  had  been  asked
by the Department  to contact Balaguer.   When  one newspaper-
man  pointed  out  that  Balaguer  had  an  apartment .in  New  York
City  and  a  telephone,  McCloskey  said  it  was  "considered  prac-
tical  to  ask  Mr.  Davidson  to  contact  him."    McCloskey  said
the  Department  knew Davidson had  been in  contact with Bala-
guer  "and  could  really  reach  him."
The  Foreign  Relations  Committee  ought  to  inquire  how  the
Department   knew  Davidson  had  been  in  contact  with  Bala-
guer.    If  he  had  contacted  the  Department  earlier  on  behalf
of  Balaguer,   or  if  the  Department   knew  he  was  acting   fos
Balaguer,  then  Davidson  should  have  registered!: the  fact  uader
the  Foreign  Agents  Registration  Act.    Wfey  did  the  State  De-
partment  hasten  to  assure  the  Justice  Department  that  David-
son was  acting  on  ite behalf,  not' Balaguer's ?   This  saved  him
from  the  need  to  register.    It  was  also  as  good  as  money  in
the  bank  for  a  Washington   lobbyist  anxious  to  impress  other
clients,  present  or  potential,  with  the  extent  of  his  influence.
A   year   after   the   lobbying   investigation,   Davidson   also
figured   in  the   Bobby  Baker  hearings   by  the   Senate   Rules
Committee.    These  showed  that  he  acted  as  intermediary  be-
tween  the  Murchison  meat  packing  interests  in  Haiti  and  pur-
In  Defense  of  the  June  14 Movement
We  call  attention to  an article  in  the  May 31 issue  of
New  America,  bi-weekly  organ  of  the  U.S.   Socialist
Party  (1182  Broadway, NYC,  $4 a  year)  by  John  Les-
ter  Lewine,  a  member  of  the  party's  International  Af-
fairs  Committee.   Lewine  was  one  of  the  Americans
evacuated  from  Santo  Domingo  April  27  by  the   U.S.
Navy.    Lewine writes  that  the  evacuation  was  carried
put  with  the  consent  of  festh site  and  that  political
intervention  was  isexeassbSa,
"As  for  the   MeviiBfe?.to   <M  14  SB Jnnis  which  the
U.S.  lafeote  SB  •esEire-iteV  Lewine declares, "it  is  a  left
wfeg  ce-esaiist  movement"  wliieh  supported  Bosch.    "Of
course,"  he  continues,  "it  opposed  the  U.S.  policy  to-
ward  Cuba,   BKS-  urged s long-term  policy  of  socialisa-
tion  in  the  DoraioieaB  Republic,  bat  its  primary   con-
cern  was  the  reestablishntsat  of  a  functioning  democ-
racy  in  the  Dominr.ean  Repsblic  as  an  essential  pre-re-
quisite  for  further  reforms."
9
   The  movement  takes  its
name  from  3wms  14   1959,  when  it  tried  to  overthrow
Trujille.
chasers  in  this  country.    Bobby Baker  and  his  partner,  Tucker,
got   IO  percent   of   the   Murchison   meat  packing   company's
profits  up  to  a  maximum of  $30,000  in  one  deal.   Baker  also
got  $4,000  from  the  purchaser  of  the  meat  in  that  deal.    The
problem  was to  "expedite"  inspection  under  U.S.  Department
of  Agriculture  sanitary  regulations.   The  Republican  minority
report  complained  that  it  was blocked  in  its  efforts  to  find  out
jast what  Baker  did  to earn these  fees.
In  I960,  when  Davidson  claimed  he  tried  to  help  Johnson
get  the  Democratic  presidential  nomination,  Baker  was  John-
son's  right  hand  man.   This  was  not  die  oaly  &ai  in  which
Davidson  figured  in  the  Baker  hearings.    Bake;,  too, had  dose
relations with  the  Murchisons.   What happens  ir.  She Domini-
can  Republic  may  affect   events  in  neighboring   Haiti,  where
the  aged  dictator,  Duvalier,  is  reported  to  be  seriously  ailing.
To  put  Balaguar  into  power  in the  Dominican  Republic  would
be to  set up  a new government  favorable  to  the  oligarchy  and
to  U.S.  capital.    Sooner  or  later,  if  not  from  the  very  start,  it
would  have  to  be  a  military  dictatorship.     Sooner  or  later,  it
would  also  breed  a new revolt.   The  Senate  Foreign  Relations
Committee  would  perform  a  public  service  for  both  the  Do-
minican  people and  our  own if  they threw  a  spot  light  on  this
Davidson   affair  and  headed  off  a  new  disaster.
Even  the  Papal  Nuncio  Assailed  as  A  Red  in  The Witch Hunt  Engulfing Dominica
Santo Domingo—The  "witch hunt" organized by  the junta
of  General  Imbert  Barreras now extends to  all  of  the  Domin-
ican  Republic..  . . The arbitrary arrests  made by the  police
of   the  junta  multiply  despite   the   timid   protests   of   Dr.
Mora,  Secretary General  of  the OAS.... To take the  figures
admitted  by  the  junta,  there  are  already  more  than  2,000
political  prisoners  in  the  capital. ...  In  the  towns  of  the
interior,  the  police,  using  blacklists,  make  house  searches
and  arrests   without  their  reasons  always  being   evident.
Thus  two  imprisoned  Spanish  subjects  have  been  released
thanks  to  the  intervention of  the  Spanish  Ambassador.   He
telephoned  to  the  chief  of  the  police,  Tou  are  crazy.   These
two  are  Franco  followers.   In  any  case they are  Spanish  and
I  forbid  you to  touch them.'..  .
This  repression  is  accompanied  by  a  mounting  wave  of
anti-Communist   hysteria.     The   constant   denunciation  of
'Communist  barbarity'  by  Radio  San  Isidro  takes  on  a
growing  violence.   The  explosion  of  blind hate  is  in  process
of  attaining  limits  hitherto unimaginable.   Thus  a  petition
presently  being  circulated  in  the  zone  of  security  among
families  of  the  bourgeoisie  demands  the  departure  of   the
Apostolic   Nuncio  as   "an  agent   of   international  commu-
nism."
For  the  men  of  the  junta,  the  term  Communist cannot  be
very  definite  since  they hurl it  with the  same  furious oppro-
brium  equally  at  the  Christian  Social  allies  of  the  Domini-
can  Revolutionary Party  of  Bosch,  the  United  Nations,  the
Dominican  Catholic  hierarchy  for  having  suggested  a  solu-
tion  of  moderation,  and  even  the  OAS,  which  is  accused  of
partiality. At  this  rate, one can seriously  ask  if  the America
of  Mr.  Johnson  will  not  soon  be  included  in  the  "Red" list
since  the  Junta  has  begun  to  denounce  "foreign  interven-
tion  in  the  Dominican  Republic."
—Marcel  Niedergang  in  Le  Monde  (Paris)   May  30-31.
9    -;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly, June tl, 198S
McNamara  Says  Our  Only  Object In South Vietnam Is To Allow Free Choice
(Continued  from  Page  One)
ulators  at  die  White  House  won  quite  a  victory  in   getting
Fulbright,  the  idol  of  the  liberals,  rather  than  some  Senator
like  Dodd,  their  bete noire,  to  deliver  this  curtain-raiser  for
die new policy.    But  even  with  it,  die  Administration  did  not
have die  honesty  to  talk  frankly to  the  American  people  about
die real  cost.   Secretary McNamara's press  conference next day
proved  to  be  another  of  die  misleading  performances  which
mark  his  record  all  through  the  Vietnamese  war.    He  spoke
as  if  we  were  embarking  on  a  minor  support  operation.    He
spoke  of  adding  six  additional   combat  battalions  to  die  nine
already  in  South  Vietnam.    He  saw  no  need  for  new  funds,
new  draft  calls  or  industrial,  mobilization,  though   privately
he  is widely  reported  to have  told  Senators  that  300,000  more
men would  be needed.    He  spoke  as if  South Vietnamese army
morale  were  high;  he  even  said  there  had  been  an  increase
in  recruitment f    Only  when  asked  about  desertions,   did   the
truth  begin  to peep  out.    "It  is somewhat  less  than  last  year,"
he  said  ingenuously,  "but   higher   than  desirable."    Richard
Starnes  in  the  Washington   Daily  News  that  same  day  (June
16)   was  less  squeamish  when  he  reported   desertions   were
"running  at  20  to  35  percent  every  90  days"  and  that  "there
is  no  more  fight  left  in  the  army of  South  Vietnam."    This  is
a  major war  on  which  we are  embarking,  but  Johnson  would
still  like  us  to  slip  into  it,  without   noticing.
Under  International Auspices
McNamara  offered  die  peace  movement a  cue when  he  said
at  his  press  conference  that  our  only  objective  was to  give  the
people  of  South  Vietnam a  free  choice of  how they wish  to  be
governed.    If  so,  why  not  offer  a  cease-fire  and  a  withdrawal
of  U.S.  troops  on  condition  of  free  elections  in  South Vietnam
under  international  auspices?   If  we  are  fighting  for  this  peo-
ple's  freedom,  what  more  honorable  way  out  than  to  allow
diem  a  free  choice?    Johnson  may  fear  Republican  criticism
if  he  shifts  back  from  Goldwaterism  to  negotiations.     Those
negotiations,   if  they  are  to  be  successful,   must  mean  some
kind  of   coalition  regime  in  which  the  National   Liberation
Front  will  figure.  The  Republicans  are  already  training  their
guns  on  such  a  solution.    It  would  be harder  for  them  to  at-
Their  Children  and  Ours
" 'Country  club living' and 'paradise' are scarcely  the
way  you  would  expect  someone  to  describe  what  it's
like  to live in  Saigon  in  1965.   Tet  that  was  the  way  it
was according to a young woman who arrived this  week
from  the  Orient.    She  and  her  children  went  to   the
Philippines  while her  husband remained in  Saigon.   Of
all  of  her husband's posts,  life  in  Saigon  was by far  the
most  luxurious.   *We lived in a magnificent  French man-
sion  with  excellent  servants.    Saigon  went  about  its
business  although  at  night  you  could  hear  the  mortar
fire outside  the city.   Inside, there were beautiful  shops,
masses  of  bars  and  good  restaurants.'   American chil-
dren  were  little  affected.    Christopher  continued  with
the  judo  lessons  he  started  in  Africa.   He  and  Karen
studied  piano  and French  and the  little  girl  took ballet.
Evacuation  by  order  of  the  President  was  difficult   to
take.   'It was a great life while it lasted.'"
—Saw  Francisco   Chronicle   Woman's   Page   (abr.),
June  8.
"In  what  was  left  of  Dong  Xoai  the  story  was  the
same  as  it  is  in  all  wars.    Broken  charred  bodies  of
soldiers,  the  enemy,  civilians,  women  and children  were
sprawled in  the debris.   Survivors wandered about look-
ing  for  relatives  and  friends.    Women  held  the  dead
bodies  of  babies.   Children, wounded or  burned,  crouch-.
ed  or stumbled painfully through the  wreckage of  their
homes."
—From Horst  Fast's  graphic account how Dong Xoai
was  retaken  by  our  side  after  aerial and  napalm bomb-
bardment,  Astoeiated  Press, Washington Star, June It.
tack  an  outcome  by  free  elections.     Peace  through  free  elec-
tions  would  provide  a  solid  foundation  of  principle   so  far
lacking  in  U.S.  policy.    It  will  not  be  easy  to  sell  it  to  the
other  side  since  we  cheated  on  the  free  elections  we  promised
in   1954.    They  will  hardly  accept  the  promise  again  unless
the  U.S.   withdraws  its  troops   before  the  elections  and  lets
some  mutually  acceptable   international   body  oversee   them.
But  here  at  least  is  an  honorable  way out,  and  a  practical  and
simple  slogan  for  the  peace  movement.    If  the  ultimate  pur-
pose  is  freedom  of  choice  for  the  people  of  South  Vietnam,
why  kill  more  of  them  and  more  of  our  men  before  reaching
it?   Why  not  offer  peace  through  free  elections  now?
We'll  Be Clad to Send A  Sample  Copy of This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
Why  Net Send The Weekly A* A  Graduation  Gift?
L F.  Stone'8 Weekly      5618 Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  .........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
6/2V60
For  the  enclosed  $6 send  *  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished   D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
D.  C  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'1  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday   except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the   fint   week  in
January  and  Bl-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.W..  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  L  F.  Btonifc&enlation  Manager.  Either  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.;   16   in   Canada;    SiO   elsewhere.     Air   Mall   rates:
115  to  Europe;   120  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED