I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965oct11.pdf

============================================================

Special  Report from  North  Vietnam
So  Now  (We  Suppose)  As  A  Christian  Nation  We'll  Stop  Bombing  the  Vietnamese
And  Urge  the  United  Nations  to  Admit  Communist  China  to  Membership
"To  the  pluralism  of  states,  which  can  no  longer ignore
one  another,  you  offer  an  extremely  simple  and  fruitful  for-
mula  of  co-existence.  .  .  .  You give  sanction  to  the  great
principle  that  the  relations between  peoples  should be  regu-
lated  by  reason,  by  justice,  by  law,  by  negotiation; not  by
force,  not  by  violence,  not by  war.  .  .  .  Your  vocation  is  to
make  brothers  not  only  of  some  but  of  all  peoples.  .  .  .
Strive  to  bring  back  among  you  any  who  have  separated
themselves,  and  study  the  right  method  of  uniting  to  your
pact  of  brotherhood .  .  .  those  who do not  yet  share  in  it.
Act  so  that  those  outside  will  desire  and  merit  the  confi-
dence  of  all;  and  then  be  generous  in  granting  such  con-
fidence."
—Pope  Paul to the  UN  General Assembly  Oct. 4.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  33
OCTOBER  11,  1965
»«       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
What Our Bombers Are Doing to A Helpless Little  Country
By  Chris  Koch
I  made  the  last  leg  of  the  trip  over  the  mountains  from
China  in  the  midst  of  the  late  August  monsoon.    The  wild
clouds  suddenly  cleared  over  the  Vietnam  foothills.    Black-
brown  crags  rose  out  of  lush  green  rice  paddies.    The  Red
River  Delta  stretched  to  the  West  in  patterns  of  green  and
gray,  and  Vietnam  lay below  with die  strange  familiarity  of  a.
land  from  a  childhood  fairy  tale.
The  comfortable  illusion  of  the  fairy  tale  was  shattered  on
the trip  from  the  airport  into  Hanoi.   Vietnam  is a country at
war.     The  road  was  filled  with  young  people  coming  home
from   the  fields  armed  with   rifles.     Trucks   and   cars  were
camouflaged  with  fresh  foliage.    The  bridge  across  the  Red
River   was   heavily   fortified   with   anti-aircraft   guns.     Slit
trenches  and  fox  holes  lined  the  country roads,  and  low,  ugly
bomb  shelters  squatted  near  the  city  streets.
The  Life  of  The  Streets
It  was hot  and  crowded.    Pedicabs, ox  carts,  bicycles,  and  a
few  motor  vehicles  jammed  the  streets.    The  sidewalks  and
stores  were full  of  shoppers.    I  was told  that  50,000  women
and  children  had  been  evacuated  from  Hanoi.    But  if  so  the
evacuation  did  not  seem  to  make  a  noticeable  difference,  and
women  and  children  made up  their  share  of  the  crowds.
The  men  were  dressed  in  light  cotton  shirts  and  washable
pants.     The  women  wore  the  traditional   baggy  pants  and
tightly  fitted  dresses  slit  at  the  waist.    They  sat  at  long  tables
in  the cafes  under  the  glow of  single,  naked  light  bulbs  drink-
ing  beer  or  tea  and  eating  bowls  of  rice with  fried  meat  and
vegetables.    Others  rummaged  about  in  the  sparse  merchan-
dise  or  toiled  in  workshops  over  handicraft  production.    No
more  than  half  of  North  Vietnam's  goods  are  produced  by
modern   industry.
The   old   native   section   of   Hanoi   is  an  ugly  jumble  of
homes  and  shops  in a  dozen  imitation  French  styles,  carelessly
mixed   together   on  long,  narrow   streets.     By  contrast,   the
former  French  Quarter  is still gracious  with  rows  of  19th  cen-
tury  French  mansions  sitting well  bade from  its  shaded  boule-
vards.    These  are   now  government   offices   or   foreign   em-
bassies.    We  stayed  in  the  old  Metropole  Hotel,  a  center  of
the  French, colonialists  before  1954.    Now  the  French  officers
9  *
Piercing  An  American  Iron  Curtain
/.  F.  Stone  is  recovering  from  an  ear  operation  to
restore  the  hearing  in  his  left   ear  (the  right  wot  re-
stored  last  year  by  Dr.  Sam  Rosen.)    This  issue  was
written  by  Chris  Koch, program  director  of    Pacifica's
NewYork  station  WBAI,  who just  returned  from  Viet-
nam.   He  was  one  of  four  Americans  invited  there  by
the  North  Vietnam  Youth  Federation, the  first  Ameri-
cans publicly  to visit  the  country since travel  there was
forbidden    by   the  State   Department   after    the   1954
Geneva  accords.   Life  Magazine (Oct.l)  ran  two  pages
of   pictures  Koch  brought  back   but   none   of   bombed
civilian targets,  and  appended   a  snide  caption.   Except
for   the  New  York  Times  and  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dis-
patch,  the  press  gave  scant  coverage  to  a   conference
held  by  the  four   on  their  return.    NEC   and   WNDT,
New  York's  educational  station,  both had  an  interview
with  Koch,  but  neither  used  it.    A   WNDT    executive
told  Koch  he  was  "political  dynamite."    A  Look editor
told  Koch, "We  know  all we  need  to  know about  North
Vietnam."   Mr.  Koch  is  preparing  a  book  on  his  visit.
and  their  wives,  the  priests  and  the  Western  journalists  are
gone.    The  Metropole,  renamed  the  Unity,  is  full  of  Asians,
a  few  Africans  and  some  Eastern  European  technicians.     We
were  treated  politely,  but  we felt  conspicuously  alien.   Wher-
ever  we  walked  we  were  followed  by  curious  children.
The  days  began  early.   But  as  I  lay  in  bed  before  getting
up  at  six,  I  could  already hear  groups  of  young people singing
as they  returned  from  militia  training  in  the  countryside.  The
preparation  for  war went  on all  day.   Groups  of young  people
dismantled  and  reassembled  rifles  in  the  parks. Others  studied
detailed  models  of  U.S.  aircraft  and  took  aim  at   simulated
targets  gliding  down  guide  wires.
North  Vietnam,  asfter  leaders  are  quick  to  point  out,  is
poor.   Her  shops  have essentials  and  a  few  luxuries,  but  as a
youth  leader  told  me while  we were  standing  in  Hanoi's ma-
jor  department  store  looking  at  a pile of  ugly  suitcases,  "con-
sumer  goods  are  neither  of  good   quality  nor   fashionable."
Then  he continued  more proudly,  "but  we make 90%  of   them
ourselves  and  preserve  our  foreign  exchange  for  heavy  in-
dustry."
(Continued  on  Page  two)
1   2   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  11, 1965
North   Vietnam  faces  formidable  problems  in  industrializ-
ing.    The  division of  Vietnam in  1954 immediately confront-
ed  the  North  with  a  food  shortage.     It  is  one  of  the  most
densely  populated  areas  of  the  world.    The  Red  River  Delta
has  an  average  of  1,256  people per  square mile  compared  with
not  more  than  600  in  the  Mekong  Delta  in  the  South.  Tra-
ditionally  the  South  exported  rice to the  North,  and  the  North
provided  coal  for  the  South.
Despite  this marginal agricultural potential, North  Vietnam
is  trying  to  develop  her  industry  on  the  surplus  that  can  be
wrung  from  agriculture.    This  requires  sacrifice.    The  Party's
theoretician  Le  Duan  gave   some  idea  of  how   far   this   goes
when  he  said  in  1962, "There  will  be  no  harm  if  we  tempo-
rarily  abstain  from  eating  sweets  made  of  groundnuts  and  ex-
port  them  instead to pay  for  machines."
Industry   Still  Marginal
The  leaders claim that food  production  has  increased  by 50%
in  the  last  11  years  and  that  the  share  of  industry  in  total
production  has  risen  horn  11%  to  50%  since  1955.  No  one
is  starving  in  North   Vietnam,  and  there  are  many  new fac-
tories  and  mines.    But  her  industry  is  still  marginal.
The  destruction  outside of  Hanoi  is appalling.    I  spent  two
days  in  Thanh  Hoa  province  and  I  was  shocked  to  find  much
of   it  like  a  huge  battlefield.    Elaborate  defense   precautions
were  taken  everywhere.    Many  of  the  roads  and  towns  were
partially  destroyed.   There  were  always planes  and  flashes  of
bombs  or  ack-ack  somewhere  in  the  sky.   The  Vietnamese   call
these  areas  under  attack  "the front."     There  they  apply  their
experience   of   more   than   twenty  years  of   warfare.     Traffic
moves  at  night  without  lights,  cities  are  partially  evacuated
during  the  day, and  hospitals  and  schools  have been  dispersed
throughout  the  countryside.
We  left  for  Thanh  Hoa  late  one  afternoon  with  our  two
translators,  Quy  Du   and  Trung  Hieu,  and  several  others  in
two  heavily  camouflaged Soviet  jeeps.    Most  Vietnamese  are
remarkably  engaging people,  personally kind and  gentle.  I fre-
quently  marveled  at  the  smiles  they  used  while  telling  stories
of  torture  and  destruction  as  if  to  say,  "Yes, such  things   do
happen,  but  we will  not  let  the  brutality  of  others  destroy  our
humanity,  will  we?"
The  old  French  military  road  to the  South,  lined with  young
trees,  was  crowded  all  night  with  carts,  bicycles  and  trucks
filled with  produce.    Water  buffalo,  tended  by  small children
on  their  backs,  grazed  on  the  strip  of  grass  next  to  the  pave-
ment.    Peasants  in  conical hats  worked  in  the  paddies.  Fisher-
men  flung  their nets  over  the  ponds  against  the  late afternoon
sun.    Modern  and  ancient  tools  were  used  side  by  side.    In
one  field  two  young  women  stood  with  a  basket suspended  be-
tween  them  on  a  long  rope.    They  swung  the  basket  into  an
No  End to  Progress  in  South Vietnam
"Prime   Minister   Nguyen   Cao  Ky  said  today  he   is
considering   opening  pleasure  camps  providing  enter-
tainment,  including  girls  and  bars  for  front  line U.S.
combat  troops.    He  also  said  the  government favors  a
form  of  controlled  prostitution  in  the  Central Highlands
with  U.S.  doctors giving  women regular  medical check-
ups.    The  policy  has  already  been  discussed  in  several
South  Vietnamese  towns  and  in  some  places  is  already
being practiced."
—Reuters  dispatch  from  Saigon, Sept. 27.
One Way  to  Evade  An  Honest   Answer
"For  months  now  the  U.S. Air  Force  has  been  daily
bombing   the   Democratic   Republic   of   Viet-Nam,   in-
discriminately  attacking civilian  and  military  objectives
alike,  thus creating a  situation  of  de  facto  war.   Is  this
—and  I  would  like  an  answer  'yes'  or  'no'—a  violation
of  the  United  Nations  Charter?"
—Huot  Sambath  (Cambodia)  at  the  UN  Oct.  1.
'There  is  no country  more anxious than  mine  to bring
an  end  to  the  conflict,  and  the  destruction and  suffering
it  entails,  in  Viet-Nam.  .  .  .  No  amount  of  distortion
can  change  into imperialism  the  temporary military as-
sistance  which  my  Government  and  others  have  given
to  South  Vietnam.  .  .  .  Our  military  response  has  been
—and  will  continue  to  be—measured   by  the  military
challenge.  .  .  .  Our  ultimate  objective  is  no  more  than
the  establishment of  conditions  under  which  the  people
of  South  Vietnam can  exercise  the  right  of  self-deter-
mination."          —Goldberg  (U.S.)  later  the  same  day.
irrigation  ditch,  over  the  dike  and  into  the  field,  rhythmically
filling  the  paddy  with  water,  a  basketful  at  a  time,  as  their
ancestors  had  done  for  centuries.   In  the  next  field  an  electric
pump  did the  same job  in minutes.
The  towns  along  the  highway  were  bustling  and  cheerful.
The  Vietnamese   seem  to  take  the  air  strikes  in  their   stride.
Nguyen   Cu,  the  young,   intelligent  chairman  of   the  Thanh
Hoa  Youth  Federation  told  me  later,  "We  still  try  to  live  as
we  used  to.    On  moonlight   nights  we  meet  outside  to   sing
and  dance.   When  it  rains we  meet  inside  with  lamps.    And
if  Johnson   comes  we  have  a  special  leaf  we  carry  to  conceal
the  light."    The  Vietnamese  call  the  bombing  planes  "John-
son."    Cu  added,  "we  live at night  now,  but  we  still  have  the
cinema  and  more  artists  and  singers  come  from  Hanoi   than
before.    So  you  see  it  is  the  same."     But  of  course  it  is  not
the   same.    North  Vietnam   looks   as  if   it   is  being  system-
atically  bled  to  death  by U.  S.  bombing.
We  drove  through  Nam  Dinh,  North  Vietnam's  third  larg-
est  city  and  a  new  industrial center  at  dusk.    From  the  jeep  I
saw  a  bombed  pagoda,   a  partially  destroyed  hospital  and   a
school  yard  full  of  craters.    The  famous  Nam  Dinh   Textile
Factory  built  by  the  French  was  a  jumble  of  twisted,  bombed
out  buildings.   But  I  was  most  struck  by  the  working   class
homes  around  the  factory  which  had  been  levelled  to  a pile of
charred  bricks and  bamboo  for  blocks  in  every direction.    The
sun  set  south  of  Nam  Dinh  and  we  drove  into  the  hills  in
darkness  and  silence,  threading  our  way through  a  long,  mili-
tary convoy.
There   are  many  bridges  between   Hanoi   and  Thanh Hoa.
Three  of  the  four  major  ones  have  been  destroyed.    One  of
these  was  almost  rebuilt.     Another   has  been   replaced   by  a
pontoon  bridge  that  is floated out at  dusk  and hidden  under the
trees  at dawn.    The  third,  the Ham  Rong  rail  bridge,  was still
serviceable.    Traffic   moved   slowly  but  steadily  on  the  front.
The  railroad  parallelling  the  highway  was  busy  all  night.
Thanh   Hoa  province  has  been   heavily  hit.   At  Hospital
Number   71  which  was  destroyed  in  three  raids  on  July 8th,
I  talked  with  its  Vice  Director  Nguyen  That.    That  said  the
thirty  building  complex   had   been   a  research   and   treatment
center   for  tuberculosis.    Now   it  was  a  skeleton   against   the
morning  sky.    Forty  doctors  and  patients  were  dead.
We  visited  the  Dai  Thang  agricultural  co-op.    It  is  simply
a  cluster  of  buildings  in  the  middle  of  rice  paddies  far  from
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  11, 1965
any  possible  military  target.    Pham  Van  Ky,  the  old  peasant
who  was chairman  of  the  Party committee, reminded me  of  the
agricultural   workers  of   California   or   the   rural  Mississippi
Negroes.    He  had  a  natural  dignity  and  warmth,  but  his eyes
never  left  your  face  as  he  tested  your  reaction.   "Illiteracy has
been  wiped out,"  he  said,  "the  old  people  have  a shirt  on their
back  and  they  know  they  will  get  their  bowls of  rice.  One  out
of  every  ten  families  has  mosquito  netting."   While  we  took
notes,  the  other  villagers  looked  on,  shyly  smiling  in  proud
confirmation  of  what  he  said.
Ky  described  the  air  strike against  his  village  with  the  sta-
tistical  literalness  of  the  newly  educated.   "There  were  four
raids  in  45  days.   Twenty  children  between  three  months  and
ten  years  were  killed.  Fifteen  elderly  people  were  killed.  One
hundred  twenty-nine houses  were  destroyed;  200  were  dam-
aged.    Three  cows,  one  buffalo,   and  one  horse  were  killed
and  we  lost  one  bicycle."
In  Cold   Figures
These  cold  figures  give  some  idea  of  the  destructiveness  of
one  raid.    Official  Defense  Department  figures  give  some  idea
of   the  number  and  magnitude  of   such  raids.    There  were
1224  air  raids  on  North  Vietnam  in  August,  dropping  2540
tons  of  bombs and  rockets.
While  I  was  there,   U.S.   planes  bombed   the   Ban  Thach
dam  outside  of  Thanh  Hoa  city.  Cu  said  it  was  part  of  a  new
irrigation   and   electric   power   system.    The   destruction   by
bombardment  of  North  Vietnam's  painfully  built  up  system
of  flood  and   irrigation  dams  would   be  genocidal.     Its  rice
crop,  the  mainstay  of  the  people's  diet,  depends  on  a  sufficient
and  well  regulated  supply  of  water.    In  the  Red  River  delta,
the  rivers  are  higher  than  the  land  in  many  places,  and  the
crops  and  people  must  be  protected  by  a  complex  system  of
dams  and  dikes.    Without  them  the  plains  would  be  inun-
dated,  the  rice crop  lost,  and  several  million  could  perish  from
flood and  hunger.
Any  large  building  in  North  Vietnam  may  be  a  target  for
the  U.S.  raids.    Since  the  attacks  began,  North  Vietnam  has
dispersed  its  hospitals  and  schools  throughout  small  villages
In  one  such  small hospital  we talked  with  some  of  the  victims:
a  ten  year  old  boy who  had  lost  his  leg  above  the  knee  while
he  was playing in  his  school  yard; a  27  year old  woman,  seven
months  pregnant,  caught  on  the  highway  during  a  raid,  her
So  Now  We're  Sapping  It
"Unless   major  military  operations  sap  a  substantial
proportion  of  North Vietnam's  national  effort,  a  degree
of  industrial  progress  is  likely  to  be  achieved that  may
well  become  a  more  effective  means  of   political  pene-
tration   in  neighboring  countries  than  direct   military
penetration."
—North   Vietnam   Today:    Profile    of   A   Communist
Satellite,  edited  by  P.  J.  Honey   (Praeger,    1962).
back  was  broken;  a  young  man  who  was  planting  rice  when
his  insides were torn  out.
I  had  expected  to  find  a  great  bitterness  in  the  Vietnamese.
There  was  surprisingly   little,   and   most   of   it  was   directed
against  Taylor,  McNamara,  Rusk, and  Johnson.    Johnson  took
the  brunt  of  it.   When  the  planes  come  the  tiny  children  run
through  the  streets  shouting,   "John's  coming!    John's  com-
ing!"    In  the  monosyllabic  Vietnamese  language  most  people
shorten  Johnson  to  John.    Pictures  of  mangled  children  in  the
newspapers  are  captioned,   "present   from  L.B.J."
One  afternoon  we  sat  in  a pine  forest  in  the  hills  of  Thanh
Hoa  with  a  group  of  young  people  who  asked  us  about   the
peace  movement   in  the  United   States.     They  had  a   surpris-
ingly  detailed  knowledge of  it.    Everyone  knew of  Alice  Herz,
the  American  who  burned  herself  in  gasoline,   emulating  the
Buddhists,  to  protest  the  war  in  Vietnam.    They  vastly  over-
estimated  the  strength  of  the  peace  movement.
We  spent  the  rest  of  the  afternoon  with  them,  and  that  eve-
ning  we  sat  under  a  crescent  moon  together.  We  talked  about
many  other  things,  barely  mentioning  the  war.   I  asked  one
girl  what  she  looked   for  in  a  man  and  she  replied,  "a  fight-
ing  spirit."   They   took   our  hands  later  and  sang  us   songs,
mainly  about   love.,    "You   see  our  girls  are  very  militant,"
Hieu  said  with  gentle  irony,  "but  when  it  comes  to  music they
prefer  romantic  songs."
We  had  our  nearest  aid  raid  that  evening.    They  rushed  us
over  to  a  shelter  and  we  stood  by  the  entrance  watching  the
brilliant  flares  in  the  sky and  the  bursts  of  rockets  and  ack-ack.
It  was  painful  standing  there  to  realize  that  some  of   these
young  people  I  had  come  to  feel  so  close  to  would  be  dead
before  this war  was over,  blown  apart  by our  rockets or  burned
to  death  by  our  napalm.
I   have   not   been   able  to  forget   that   moment.     We   said
A  Captured  U.S.  Airman  For  Whom  Killing  By  Bombardment  Was  "Just Another Job"
The  Vietnamese  let  us  talk  to  Captain  Robert  Daughtrey
whose  F-105D was  shot  down  over  the  Ham  Kong  bridge on
August  2nd.   Daughtrey was  a  career  man.   He  had  served
in  the  air  force  from  1954 to  1958 and  he  returned  to  it  in
1963  after  failing  to  make  a  living  at  farming.    ''You  see
I  love  to   fly.   And  flying  commercial  is  not  the  same thing.
When  I'm  up  there, I'm  all  alone  in  the  plane."  Daughtrey
also  explained  that  the  air  force  paid  well  and  had  generous
fringe  benefits.
We  asked  him  what  he  felt  about  killing  people  and  de-
stroying  things.   He  said  he'd never thought about  it.   Then
he  added,  "I  never  thought  I'd  be  shot  at."    We  asked  him
why  he  thought he'd  been  sent  to  bomb  North Vietnam,  and
he  replied:  "Well,  I  guess  the  war  escalated  and  they  sent
me.    I'm  not  a  politician.    I'm  a  military man.   An  army  is
built  on  discipline.    You  just  follow  orders."    He  said  he
had  not  been  given  any  political education in  the  air  force.
''It  was  just  another  job,  like  working in  a  factory." Daugh-
I 3
trey  said  that  pilots did  not  talk  much  about  their  missions.
After  he was  hit  by anti-aircraft  he  tried  to  get  as  far away
from   the  target  as  possible,  because  his   officers   had  told
him,    "people   are   pretty   mad   right   where   you've   just
bombed."    But  he  landed  near  the  bridge  with  both  arms
broken.    "I  thought  they'd  kill  me," he  said.    Instead, they
put  splints  on  his  arms,  and  fed  him  hot  tea  with  sugar
and  bread dipped  in  condensed  milk.    He  has  been  kept  in  a
hospital  in  Hanoi  since  his  capture  where  he  rooms  with
another  pilot.
Daughtrey  seems  to  feel  that  if  he  maintains  his  pleasant
disposition  and  does  what  he  is  told  to  do,  nothing  serious
can  ever  happen  to  him.   "When  I  get  out  of  this  I  think
I'd  make  a  fine  salesman  for  Sears,  Roebuck."   He  did  not
express  any  strong  emotional  attachment  to  anything  ex-
cept   flying.   When we  asked  if  he  had  any  message  for  his
wife  and  three  children  he  said,  "No,  just  tell  my  dad  I'm
all  right.   He'll  pass  the  message  along."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/,  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 11,1965
(Continued  from  page  Three)
goodby  in  the  middle  of  the  night  on  the  edge  of  the  Song
Chu.   The  stars were bright  and dear  as they  usually  are  only
from  the  highest  mountains.   We  could  still  see  rockets  and
flares in  the  distance.
Someone in  Vietnam discovered  that a  rifle  bullet  can bring
down  a jet.  Now  the  Vietnamese  mass  scores  of  people  in
trenches and fill the air with  bullets when planes  pass  over.   I
have  no  idea  how  much  military  value  these  rifles  have,  but
they have an  enormous psychological  effect.  Everyone  can  now
take  part  in  the  national  defense.    There  is  no  question  but
that they do so willingly.   The only complaints I heard against
the  government  were  from  young  people  who  wanted  to  be
released  from  school  to  join  the  Viet  Cong.   There  is  an  in-
tense new nationalism  in  Vietnam  today.   The  intellectuals  go
back  into Vietnamese  history  and  glorify  the  heroes  of  die re-
sistance  against die  Chinese.   The  youngsters  long  to  emulate
die revolutionary exploits  of their  leaders.
With  Their  Own  Hands
The  Vietnamese  proudly  wear  a  shirt  made  of  their  own,
domestically  produced  doth.    When  the  textile  factory  that
made the shirt  is bombed  it  is an  almost  personal  affront.  The
dams diat  are  bombed  were  built  by hundreds  of  people  who
worked  for  days with  shovels  and  baskets  to  create  an  irriga-
tion  system.   A  dam  is part  of  the  community in  a  way diat
no  power  company dam  built  by  bulldozers  can  ever  be.
I  asked  many  people  how they thought  die  war would  end.
Most  were  confident  of  ultimate  victory.   Victory,  a  univer-
sity  student  told  me,  "means  diat  we want  to  be left  alone  to
settle  our  own  affairs."    The  Vietnamese  that  I  met  were  in
no  mood  to negotiate.   There is a story making die  rounds in
Norm Vietnam  attributed  to  Ho  Chi  Minh.   "Look,  a bandit
breaks  into  your house, 'steals  half  your  belongings,  kills  part
of  your  family, and  then  sits down  and  says,  'let's  negotiate.'
Would  you talk  to him  or  kick him out?"
We  saw  Ho  twice,  once  at  the  20th  anniversary  of   inde-
pendence  where he  sat  on  the  stage with  his  jacket  open  and
his  sandals Off in  amazing  though  dignified  informality.    The
second  time  we  were  at  die  opera,  and  Ho  came  in without
causing  any  disturbance and  sat  in  die  last  row  of  the  first
section  of  the  orchestra.    You  see  fewer  pictures  of  Hoi in
Pointee-Talkee
A  provincial museum  visited  in  Thanh  Hoa  displayed
the  uniform  and  gear  of  a  downed  U.S. flier, with  a
flag  on  which  a  message  had  been  written  hi  several
Asian  languages,  "I  am a  citizen of  the  USA.   I  do not
speak   your  language.    Misfortune  forces  me  to  seek
your  assistance  in  obtaining  shelter  and  protection.  My
government  will  reward  you."   Along  with this  was  an
Asian  phrase  book  entitled  Pointee-Talkee.   Among  the
phrases,  "Will  yon  accept  gold?",  "Where  is  the  near-
est  telephone?"  and  "Where  are  the  friendly  guerril-
las?"   The  last  is  a  question  the  Pentagon   has  been
asking  wistfully  about North Vietnam for  several  years.
Hanoi  diat  you  see of  Johnson  in  Washington.   While  there
seems  to  be  no  "cult"  around  him,  there  is  deep   affection.
Anecdotes  about him  crop  up  in  almost  every conversation.
We_were unable  to  meet  Ho,  but  we  interviewed  Premier
Pham Van  Dong  for  about an hour.   Dong  who extended  the
President's  apologies  to  us,  is  one  of  his  dosest  and  oldest
associates.    He  was waiting  at  die  bottom  of  die steps  to  die
Presidential   Palace  when  our  car  arrived,  dressed  like  every
Vietnamese  in  a  cotton  shirt,  pants  and  sandals  without  a  tie
or  jacket.   We  had  tea  in  die  grand  reception  room,  but  die
Premier  soon  took  us  back  outside  where  he  answered  our
questions  while  we  strolled  through  the  gardens.    He  is very
much  the  French   intellectual,  extremely  urbane  and  witty.
While he  made no new statement to  us, he  spoke with convic-
tion, about  die  course  of  the  war  and  insisted  diat  the  United
States  must  accept  die  principles  of  Vietnamese  unity, sov-
ereignty,  and  independence  before negotiations  can take  place.
As  we  drove  to  die  airport  early  on  die  morning  we  left
North  Vietnam,  True  the  head  of  die  Youth  Federation,  put
his  hand  on  my knee  and  said,  "you  will  tell  the  American
people  about Vietnam."   I  nodded.   "You know,"  he added,
"this  war  can only be  ended  by die  people  .of  both  our  coun-
tries."    I  was too moved  to  reply.   We  were  handed flowers
as  we  stepped  aboard  die  plane.    In  a  few  minutes  we were
aloft.    Hanoi  was below  us, busy with  its  defenses,  waiting  to
be  bombed.   Nine  thousand  miles  away,  back home,  I found
diat  die  bombings  of  North  Vietnam  hardly  make  news any
more,  and  few  have  any  conception  of  what  they  cost  this
brave  and  distant  people.
We'll  Bt  Clod to Send A Sompie Copy of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —  Send A  Stamped Addressed  Envelope
LF.Sto
Please   w
Name  ....
Street  ...
Cttjr  .......
For   the     <
(To)   Nw
Street   ...
City  ........
For   $5.35
ne'e Weekly
MW  (or  eater)
..»......•••........
...... .............
ineloeed  $5
extra  send
Indicate   if
•end
i*18  Nebraafc*  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  2M15
»  rab  (or  the  enclosed  $5:
•  gift  sub  to:
7.nn»   ... ...  St»t«.....
10/11/65'
t
L  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted  FUtlet
announcement  wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5C1I  Nebraska  Ay...  N.  W.
D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F   Stone's  Weekly     Second  Clan  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except   in   August,  the  last  week   in   December  and  the
flrtt  w4k  inJaioaiTr  and  BlAVeekly  during  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   Published  and  e<i,!ed
by  I.F.  Stone:  CircSatlon  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.: «  in   Canada;   *10   elsewhere.    Air  M.il   rate.:
SIB  to  Eurooe:   S20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED