I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965jan18.pdf

============================================================

How  The  Oligarchy  Continues  to Rule  The  Senate, P.  4
The  WSPers  and The  Anti-Negro  Nazi;  When  Is  Contempt  of  Congress  Mere Peccadillo?   Page 2
L F. Stonefs   Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO.  2
JANUARY  18,  1965<oi       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
16   CENTS
The  No.  1 Business  of  Mankind
There  is  a  poem  of  Robinson Jeffers  in  which  he  likens  the
struggles  of  nations  to  the  waves  and  tides  of  the  sea,  and
sees  in  them  as  little  meaning.    This  comes  to  mind  as  one
watches  the  new  crisis  shaping  up  in  Southeast  Asia  over  In-
donesia  and  Malaysia.    It  is  a  mistake  to  view  it  through  the
stereotyped   spectacles  of  either  the  cold  war  or  anti-colonial-
ism.    It   is  better   seen   as  another   example   of   the   endless
anarchy  to  which  the  world  will  be  subject  as  long  as  clashing
national  aspirations  are  left  to  be  determined  by  organized
murder.    In  this  area  Western  imperialism  is  ebbing  and  far
older  forms  of  imperialism,  Chinese  and  Malay,  are  reviving.
No  sooner  is  one  clash  resolved  when  another  takes  its  place,
as  in  waves breaking upon  a  beach.    In  perspective,  the  area  is
one  in  which  the  Malay  peoples  were  conquered   by  Spain  in
the  Philippines,  by Holland  in  the  Indonesian  archipelago and
by  Britain  in  the  Malay  peninsula.    We  pushed  the  Spaniards
out  of  the  first  and  took  over  from  the  Dutch  in  the  second,
though  in  a  much  weaker  form,  and  are  now  being  asked  for
military  aid  to  maintain the  British  in  Malaysia.
Why  The  U.S.  Plays  It  Cool
From  Sukarno's  point  of  view  Malaysia  is  a  neo-colonialist
device  to  maintain British  bases  in  Southeast  Asia, and  to  pre-
vent  the  reunion  of  the  Malay  peoples.    From  the   standpoint
of  the  Malays  in  Malaysia,  this  Federation  is  a  way  to  assure
Malay   predominance   over   Singapore,   which   is  one   of   the
great   Chinese   communities  of  the  world.     From  the   stand-
point  of  Singapore,  where  the  majority  party  is  moderate,  So-
cialist  and  Chinese,   Malaysia  is  preferable  to  rule  by  Indo-
nesia  where  some  2,000,000  Chinese   have  been   exposed   to
mob  violence,   legal  discrimination  and   loss  of  property   be-
cause  they  dominate  the  economic  life  of  100,000,000  Malays.
For  England,  Malaysia,  to  which  she  transferred   Singapore,
Sarawak  and  North  Borneo  only  18  months  ago,  is  a  device
for  keeping  this  area  rich  in  rubber,  tin  and  oil  in  the  sterling
bloc,  and  maintaining  the  last  lifeline  of  its  empire  East  of
Suez  from  Singapore  to  Hongkong.   The  U.S.  is  as  cool  about
Britain's  troubles  with  Sukarno   as  it  was  about  Holland's.
For  we  emerged  from  Sukarno's  struggle  against  the   Dutch
with  the  major  share  of  $1  billion  in  Western  oil  investments
in  Indonesia  and  in  the  quarter  billion  annual  trade  in  Indo-
nesian  oil.   America's  greatest  oil  interests  (Stanvac,  Caltex)
are   fearful   of   offending   Sukarno  lest   he   expropriate   their
properties.    We  have  also  become   Indonesia's   No.   1  sup-
plier;  in  trade  with  the  archipelago,  we  rank  ahead  of  Japan,
Communist  China  and  West  Germany,  in  that  order.     From
the  standpoint  of  the  cold  war,  both  Washington   and  Mos-
cow have  been  swindled;  they  bid  against  each  other  in   offer-
ing  Sukarno  foreign  aid;  we played  for  the  army,  Moscow  for
The  Cost  of  Empire
The  decline  in  U.S.  gold  holdings  and  weakened  con-
fidence  in  the  dollar  are  due  largely   to  our  far-flung
military  commitments  abroad.    Foreign   aid  has  little
to  do  with  the  gold  crisis.    It  is  largely   a  disguised
subsidy  for  U.S.  business,  agriculture  and  arms manu-
facturers.    All   the  military  aid  we  send  abroad,   and
more  than  80%  of  the  non-military, is  purchased  here.
The  dollar  outflow   is   due  to  our  foreign   bases,  our
troops  in  Germany  and  Korea  and  wars  like  Vietnam.
These  eat  up our  huge  surplus  of  exports  over  imports.
In  1963 our  export  surplus  was  $5 billion  but  we  had  a
balance  of  payments  deficit  of  $2.6  billion.    If  it  were
not  for  our  $2.9 billion military  expenditure  abroad that
year,  we  could  have  had  a  $300 million  surplus.   Simi-
larly  in  1964, despite  a  $2 billion  rise  in  our export  sur-
plus,  the  payments  deficit  will  be  at  least  $2.3  billion.
Without  $2.9 billion  in  military expenditure  abroad,  we
would  have  had a  net  gain  of  $600  million.   The  dollar
has  been  weakened by  two  decades  of  trying  to  impose
our  will  on  much  of  the  world;  this  is  the  cost  of  em-
pire.   The  French  economy  on  the  other  hand  has  been
so  strengthened  by  the  "loss" of  Indochina,  Algeria  and
once-French   Africa  that  De  Gaulle  can  shift   his  re-
serves  from  the  unsteady  dollar  to  the  revived  franc,
exchanging  his  huge  dollar  holdings  for  gold  and  thus
adding  to  U.S.  money  troubles.
the  Indonesian  Communist  Party.    The  latter  has  turned   up
in  Peking's  corner,  and  the  Army  likes  the  war  against  Ma-
laysia.    (In  Malaysia,  too,  the  war  threat,  in  the  immemorial
bloody   comedy  of   international   relations,   has   strengthened
"unity").    Our   nightmare   has  been   the   fear   that   Sukarno
would  seize  our  oil  companies  and  sell  the  oil  to  Communist
China.  That  seems  to  be  coming  closer.    Peking  is  winning
out  over  both  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.,  though  Sukarno  has
always  talked  of  his  great  role  in  "containing"  China.     Once
Western    imperialism    is   out   of   the   area,   the   next   clash
will  be between  Malay  and  Chinese.   This endless  vista,  which
began  in  the  era  of  bow-and-arrow,  looks  less  and  less  attrac-
tive  in  the  era  of  the  atom  bomb.
Never  was a world  order  more  urgent.   Yet  this  is  the  mo-
ment  at  which  Indonesia  becomes  the  first  nation  to  resign
from  the  United  Nations.    Sukarno's  walkout  and  our  exclu-
sion  of  China  means  that  three  quarters  of  a  billion  human
beings  are  now  outside  the  community  of  nations  in  the  Far
East.    Its  authority  survives  there  only  on  the  fringes.    Indo-
nesia's  withdrawal   recalls   its  analogue   32  years   ago  when
Japan,  condemned  for  aggression  in  Manchuria,  became_the
first  nation  to  walk  out  of  the  League  of  Nations, setting  an
example  Hitler  Germany  was  soon  to  follow.    We  know  the
consequences.   The  recollection  should  make  the  preservation
of  the UN  the No.  1 business of mankind.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  18, 1965
WSP-ers  Can  Go  to  Jail  for  A  Year  But  A  Nazi  Need  Only  Forfeit  $20  Deposit
When  Contempt  of  the  House  of  Representatives  Is  Treated  As A Peccadillo
If  a  Negro  had  broken  into  the  House  on  opening  day  and
launched  a  tirade  before  he  could  be  ejected,  you  may  be  sure
that  there  would  have  been  a  major  outcry,  an  exhaustive  in-
quiry  into  how   security  was  breached,  and   a  severe  penalty
imposed  on  the  interloper.    But  the  Nazi  who  broke  into  the
House   on   opening   day   in   blackface,   with   a   fur   loincloth
around  his  leotards,  to   insult  the  Negro  people  during   the
Mississippi  challenge,  was  allowed  to  go  free  after   forfeiting
a   $20   deposit   for   disorderly   conduct.     The   intrusion   was
treated  as  a  peccadillo.
Since  this  Nazi  was  pandering  to  white  supremacist  senti-
ment,  we  are  not  surprised  that  dominant  Southern  elements
in  the  House took  the  affair  lightly.    But  we  are  surprised  that
not  one  of  the  five  Negro  Representatives  rose  to  protest.
One  of  20  Such  Incidents
It  was  left  to  Congressman  Charles  S.  Joelson,  D.,  N.J.,  to
urge  action.  In  a letter  to  the  District  of  Columbia  Corporation
Counsel  he  called  attention  to  the  fact  this  was  only  one  in  a
series  of  some  20  incidents  in  which  Rockwell's  Nazis  have
caused  disorder  at  public  meetings  but  have  gone  unscathed
except   for   a   $10   disorderly   conduct    fine.   Joelson's   letter
called  for   prosecution.    Joelson  also  introduced   a  resolution
asking  the  House to  punish  the  intrusion  for  contempt.
The  resolution  has  about  as  much  chance  of  getting out  of
committee  as  Howard   Smith  has  of   being  decorated   by  the
NAACP.    The  indifference  of  the  House to  so plain  a  breach
of   decorum   and   security   came   forcibly   to   mind   when   we
watched  the  arraignment  later  in  the  week  of  Dagmar  Wil-
son,  Donna  Allen  and  Russell  Nixon  for  contempt  of   the
House  Un-American  Committee.    Here  a  mere  refusal  to tes-
tify  in  secret,  though  not  in  public,  was  treated  as  if  it  were  a
major  crime.    The  three  were  set  down  for  trial  respectively
on  March  1,  8  and  15;  and  taken  down  to  the  cell  blocks  to
be  finger-printed.
Even  if  they  win, the  victory  will  cost  months  of  anguish
and   heavy  legal   fees.     Win   or  lose,  these  two  members  of
Women's  Strike  for  Peace  and  the  general  manager  of   the
Civilization's  Defenders  in  The  Congo
"Stanleyville,   the   Congo,   Jan.   6—A   cold   war   has
broken  out  here  between  the  United  Nations  and  Pre-
mier   Moise   Tshombe's    mercenary   fighters.   .   .   .   The
first   [incident]  came  just   48  hours  after   the  mercen-
aries  drove  into  town  following  the  Belgian  paratroop
attack  Nov.  24.    'They  burst  into  the  PX  in  our  head-
quarters   at   the   Hotel   Wacenia   and   walked   off   with
$24,000   worth   of   food,   whiskey,  clothing   and   other
goods,'  Mr.  [Fernand]   Scheller  ["the  Swiss   UN  repre-
sentative  here"]  said.    'You  know  that  the  rebels  never
touched  the  PX  during  the  four  months  they  were  here,
but  the  mercenaries  grabbed  the  stuff   within  two  days.
.  .  .  They've  looted  everywhere  they  can,'  he  declared,
'they've   broken  open   every   safe   in  town  except   two,
and  stolen   millions  of   francs.    They've   looted   stores,
taken   refrigerators,   typewriters   and   every   piece   of
equipment  they  could  get  their  hands  on.'"
—J.  Anthony  Lukas  in New  York  Times, Jan.  7.
National  Guardian  will  be  punished—all  because  they  refused
to  answer  questions  in  secret  about  a  visit  to  the  State  Depart-
ment  where  they  requested  a  visa  for  a  distinguished  Japanese
professor  and  crusader  against  nuclear  war.   The  net  effect  is
to  make  people  wary  of  taking  part  in  peace  activity.
Their  "contempt" of  the  House was  theoretical.    The  con-
tempt  shown  by  the  Nazi  interloper  was  immediate  and  real
He  gets  off  by  forfeiting   $20  deposit  for  disorderly  conduct;
they  could  go  to jail  for  a year  and  be fined as much  as $1,000.*
One   way  to  express  a   sense   of   outrage   is  to  write  your
Congressman   (1)    to  support  the  bill  submitted  on  opening
day  by  Edwards   (D.   Cal.)   with  the  support  of   Ryan    (D.
N.Y.)   and  Moorhead   (   D.  Pa.)   for  abolition  of  the  Un-
American  committee  and   transfer   of   any  legitimate   function
to  House  Judiciary  and   (2)   to  vote  against  the  committee's
appropriation  when  it  comes  before  the  House.    The  vote  will
be  the  measure  of  the  country's  concern  for  political  freedom.
* At   press  time  we   learned   that   D.  of   C.  Corp.   Counsel
Chester   Gray   had  written   Rep.  Joelson   agreeing   with  him
and  ordering   the  forfeiture  set  aside  and  the  Nazi   tried.
Conflicting  U.S.  and  British  Views  of
"Fidel  Castro  has  begun  his  7th  year,  but  there  is  no  joy
in  this   for  anybody.  .  .  .  He  holds  on  because  he  runs  a
police  state."
—"Cuba's  Six   Year   Nightmare",   editorial,   Washington
Daily  News   (and   other  Scripps-Howard    papers)   Jan.   6.
"What's  life  like  in  Cuba?    It  resembles  Europe  in  1945.
There  is  no  bomb  damage  but  thanks  to  the  American  block-
ade  .  .  .  there  are  all  the  other  symptoms—food  rationing,
clothes   rationing,  empty   shop  windows  .  .  .  shabby   offices.
.  .  .  Wages  are  comparatively  high,  and  far  more  fairly  ap-
portioned  than  'before',  but  there  is  little  that  is  off  ration
and  available  to  buy  with  them.  .  .  .
"How  do  people  think?   In  spite  of  all  this  austerity  and
the  feeling   that  there  is  no  real  prospect   of  a  change,   the
Americans   delude  themselves   in  believing  the  population  is
ripe  for  revolt.    The  Cubans  are  a  proud  people   and  while
regretting   the   material  benefits  of   the   old   days   (in   the
case  of  those  who  profited from  them),  they  would  not  want
to  return  to  their  former  dependence.    Of  course,   they  are
dependent  on  what  they  call  the  Socialist   countries,  but  ma-
Castro's  Cuba  on  Its   6th  Birthday
terially   only,   not   psychologically.      They   feel   it   is   their
revolution. ...
"There  is  surprisingly  little  unthinking  anti-Americanism.
.  .  .  Radio  Miami  and  the  Voice  of  America  are  regularly
listened   to   (though   rather   in  the   spirit   that   Britons   lis-
tened  to  Lord  Haw  Haw).  .  .  .  The  permanent  circumnavi-
gation  of  the  island  by  an  electronically-equipped   U.S.  war-
ship  and  the  regular   reconnaissance   flights   of   a   U-2  are
subjects  for  humor.  .  .  .  What  do  they  think  about  Castro?
He  is  still  extremely  popular,  though  far  from  being   beyond
criticism,  except  in  print.    Everyone,   including  government
officials,  refers  to  him  as  Fidel.  .  .  .  Does  the  country   seem
like  a  military  dictatorship?    Not  in  the  least.   .  .  .  They
need  Fidel,  who  is  to  Cubans  what  Churchill  and  the  mon-
archy  combined  were  for  Britain  in  the  Second  World  War.
It  is  frightening  to  contemplate  what  might  happen  to  Cuba
if  anything  happened  to  Fidel.  One thing  is  certain,  though:
it  could  not  be  a  return  to  the  days  'before'."
—J.  Halcro  Ferguson,  Latin  American  expert  of  the   Lon-
don  Observer,  writing  from   Havana  to  that  paper,  Jan.   3.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  18, 1985
LBJ  Quit  Smoking  After  Heart  Attack  But  Won't  Tell   Public   It's   Hazardous
Health  Message  Recommends  Medical  Aid  for  Young  As Well  As  Old
Amidst   the   dazzling  array  of  health   proposals  which   the
President  sent  Congress  last  week  there  was  one  that  promises
a   wiser   direction   in   health   policy.     The   Kennedy   health
program   focused   almost   exclusively  on   health   care   for   the
aged.    President  Johnson  has  added  a  new  dimension  by  rec-
ommending  the  expansion  of  the  Kerr-Mills  program  for  the
aged  to  include  medical  and  dental  care  for  children  in  medi-
cally   needy   families.      A   more   liberal   federal-state  formula
for  participation  would  overcome  the  major  weakness  of   the
present  Kerr-Mills.    The  proposal  still  falls  far  short  of  Presi-
dent  Truman's   goal   of  comprehensive  health   care  for  every
American,  but   it  is  a  long-delayed   step  in  that  direction.
It   takes   on   added   significance   because   of   the   influential
role  that  Wilbur  Cohen,  Assistant  Secretary  of  HEW,   played
in  drafting  the  health   proposals.     Cohen   is  known  to  favor
the  expansion  of  Kerr-Mills  to  all  ages  and  all  but  the  high-
est  income  levels.    This  route  to  universal health  care  would
have   at   least   two   advantages   over   a   similar   expansion   of
medicare.     Kerr-Mills   is  more   progressive   because   it   is  fi-
nanced  out  of  the  general  tax  fund,  not  by  a  flat  tax  on  wages.
Its  benefits  are  also  more  comprehensive;   they  can  cover   all
medical   expenses,   whereas   medicare   is  limited   to   hospital-
centered  bills.    If  expansion  of  Kerr-Mills  is  President  John-
son's  long-range  goal,  he  deserves  enthusiastic  support.
Where  Medicare  Is   Deficient
The  President's  medicare  program  is  less  encouraging.    The
Democrats'   improved  position   in  Congress   and  especially  on
the  House  Ways   and   Means   Committee   offered   the  oppor-
tunity  for  a  more  comprehensive   bill.    Benefits  to  cover   the
cost  of  long-term   illness  might  have  been  added.    There  are
practically  none  in  the  present  King-Anderson   bill,  although
more  than  four  out  of  five  of  the  elderly  suffer  from  at  least
one  chronic  disease.    Benefits  covering  out-of-hospital   drugs,
doctor   services   or   even   annual   check-ups   might   have   been
added,   but  the  President   did  not  do  so.    The  one  step  for-
ward  was  the  elimination  of  the  "dynamic  cost  sharing  plan"
which  had  been  added  to  the  Senate-passed  bill  last   August.
It   would   have   made   the  elderly  responsible  for  paying   the
major  part  of  increased  hospital  costs,  which  are  rising  at  the
rate  of  7%  a  year.    In  place  of  "cost-sharing"   there  has  been
Landrum  and Medicare
The  House  Ways  and  Means  Committee has  domin-
ion  over  political  privilege  in  the  House  and  economic
privilege  in  the  country.   It  presides  over  all  tax  legis-
lation   and  its   Democratic  members  decide  all  Demo-
cratic  committee appointments.    The  "election"  of  Phil
Landrum   (D.   Ga.)   to   this   committee,   thanks   to   sly
footwork  by   Speaker  McCormack,  is   a   major  setback
for  medicare  and  every  other  liberal   reform   bill  that
comes  before  the  committee.   Landrum  is  being touted
as  a  liberal,  but  he's  not.   Congressional Quarterly last
November  ranked him  more conservative than  six  other
members  of  the  10-man  Georgia  delegation.   His  sup-
port  of  the  Poverty   Bill  last   year  now  looks  like  the
bargain  price  he  paid  for  his  seat  on  Ways  and Means.
He  has   promised  not   to   block   medicare   in  committee
but  he  is  not  committed to  voting  for  it  on  the  floor  or
strengthening  it  in  the  future.    He  has  seniority  over
the  two   new  liberal  appointments,  which  means   that
they  will  be  the  first  to  go   when  the  Democrats   lose
seats  in  the  House.    Medicare will  get  through  because
of   Republican  votes,  but  when  these  side  with   the   7
Dixiecrats,  they  will  still  control  the  Ways  and  Means
Committee.
substituted  a  deduction  equivalent  to  the  average  cost  of  one
day's  hospital   care.    This  too  will   be   a  substantial  burden.
One   day's  care  now   costs  $40   and  this  will  double   within
ten  years.
An   even   greater   disappointment  was  the  President's   con-
tinued  silence  on  the  hazards  of  cigarette  smoking.     (He   has
not  smoked   since  his  heart  attack.)     In  its  recent  report  the
President's  Commission   on  Heart  Disease,   Cancer  and   Stroke
noted  that  "reduction   of  cigarette  smoking  offers  great   possi-
bilities  for  the  prevention  of  illness,  disability and   premature
death,  with  regard  to  both  cancer  and  cardiovascular  disease."
The  Commission  recommended   a  three-year,  $10  million  pro-
gram  of  public  education  and  a  network  of  smoking   control
clinics  to  assist  those  who  wish  to  give  up  smoking.    There
.  was  no  word  of  this  in  the  President's  message.     It  did  con-
tain  recommendations  for  the  protection  of  consumers'  health,
including  a  provision  for  more  adequate  labeling of  hazardous
substances.    A  White  House  aide,  when   asked  whether  this
applied   to  cigarette  packages   and  advertising,  could  give  only
an   embarrassed      "No."
Ex-Madison  Ave.  Ad  Man  Advises  Tobacco  Companies  to  "Taper Off" on  Cigarettes
Less   than  a  week  after  the  President's   health  message
appeared  minus  any   allusion  to  the   dangers  of  cigarette
smoking,  the  National  Interagency  Council  on  Smoking  and
Health  issued  its  own  health  report  at  a  meeting  in  Wash-
ington.    The   Council   is   made  up  of   the   nation's  leading
health  agencies   including   the   U.S.  Public   Health   Service.
"The  emerging  medical  opinion," said  Emerson  Foote,   the
Council's  chairman,  "is  not  that  cigarette smoking  seriously
damages  the  health of  some  people  who  practice it,  but  that
[it]   damages   the  health  of   most  people  who  continue  to
smoke."    It  kills  at  least  125,000 Americans  every  year,  he
said,  and perhaps as  many as  300,000.   Foote,  an ex-Madison
Ave.  magnate,  then  offered  the  tobacco  companies some  ex-
pert  advice: Abandon all  cigarette  advertising and  use  this
$200  million  a  year  to  develop  non-tobacco products.
Cigarette  makers  ought  to  see  the  wisdom  in  this.    They
have  been  trying  to  convince consumers  and  stock  market
investors  that  cigarette  consumption is  back  to  normal, but
it  isn't.    If  it  were,  cigarette  sales  would have  to  be  3%  to
4%  ahead  of  1963  because  of  the  increase  in  the  smoking-
age   population.    Instead   sales   are  still   below  their   1963
level.    The  Surgeon  General  told  the  Council  that  one  out
of   every  4  men  smokers  has   quit   in   the   last   ten   years.
So  did  1.2  million  women  last  year.
Remember  the  Cigarette  Advertising  Code  by  which  the
industry  was  going  to  eliminate the  more  perverse  appeals
in  its  ads?     Sen.  Neuberger  (D.  Or)  told  the  Council  that
the  Code's  supervisors  have  ordered  an  end  to  all  tar  and
nicotine  statements  on  cigarette  packages.    These   were  a
major  incentive  to  the  development  of  safer   cigarettes.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  18,1965
Clark's  Attack  on  Southern  Oligarchy  Voted  Down  Even  In  A  Secret  Ballot
The  Senate  Establishment  Makes  A  Strategic  Retreat,  But  Retains  Control
Senator  Clark's  long  campaign  against  the  Senate  Establish-
ment  began  to  pay  off  this  year.    He  has  aimed  at  its  heart,
the   Southern  oligarchy's  control  of  the  Democratic   steering
committee  which  determines  the  size  and  ratio  of  committees
and  assignments  to  them.    This  year,  for  the  first  time,  the
oligarchy  no  longer  felt  secure  enough  to  hold  up  the  assign-
ments  until  after  the  biennial  assault  on  the  filibuster.  In  the
past,  freshmen  Democratic  Senators  have  been  put  on  notice
that  they would  only get  the  choice assignments  they wanted  if
they   voted   right.     This   time   committee   assignments   were
handed  out  in  advance  of  the  filibuster  fight,  which  has  been
put   off  until   March.
Three  Powerful  Northern  Chairmen
What  happened  is  that  three  powerful  Northern  chairmen,
McNamara   of   Public   Works,   Magnuson   of   Commerce   and
Jackson  of  Interior,  in  effect  joined  forces  with  Clark  by  send-
ing  out  a  letter  in  December   to  Democratic  Senators  declar-
ing  the  steering  committee  unrepresentative  of  the  party.  They
asked  that  four  new  members  be  added,  one  each  for  the  East
and  the  Far  West,  two  for  the  Middle   West,  enlarging   it
from   15  to   19  members.    Pastore  later  joined  in  this   call,
which  would   have  given  the  North   10-to-9   control   of   the
committee.
But  pressure  from  Majority  Whip  Mansfield,  as  always  for
compromise,  and  the  election  of  Russell  Long  as  whip  seems
to  have  frightened  these  chairmen  into  retreat.  In  caucus  they
asked  for  only  two  new  members,  leaving  the  South  in con-
trol  9-to-8.*    Clark's  motion  for  four  new  members  was  voted
down  34  to  22—in  a  secret  ballot,  without  fear  of   reprisal
from  the  oligarchs.    This  vote  is  the  real  index  of  how  few
Democratic   Senators   really  want  a  democratic   Senate.
Troubles  We Must Talk  About
There   used   to  be  a  series  of  advertisements   which
used  the  tag  line,  "troubles   people   don't   talk  about."
One  of  the  political  troubles  Americans  don't  talk  about,
lest  this  seem  like  bigotry,  is  the  power  of  the  Roman
Catholic  hierarchy  to  block  action  on  birth  control  and
public  education.    President   Johnson  touched  the  sensi-
tive  nerve  of  the  birth  control  issue  when  he  became
the  first  President  who dared  to  refer  to  it  in  his  State
of   the   Union  message.     Though   the   reference    was
vague—"I  will  seek  new  ways,"  the  President  said,  "to
use  our  knowledge  to  deal  with  the  explosion  in  world
population  and the  growing  scarcity  in  world  resources"
—it  has  already  brought   an  alarmed  protest  from  the
Family  Life  Bureau  of  the  National   Catholic   Welfare
Conference  and  a  reminder  that  the  U.S. hierarchy  op-
posed  any  public  aid  for  birth  control  in  1959.    This,
and  the  hierarchy's   stand  on  aid  to  education,  will  have
to  be  fought  out  in  the  open.    And  one  thing   which
needs  to  be  said  loud  and  clear  is  that  Catholic  educa-
tion  in  the  parochial  schools  and  universities   is gen-
erally  inferior  education,  on  a  low  cultural  level  and
politically   reactionary.
* Actually  the  Southerners  on  the  steering  committee  can
almost  always  count  on  Hayden  (Arizona)   and  Bible  (Nev.)
and  often   on  Mansfield  (Mont.)   and  Dodd   (Conn.).    There
were  only  three  real  liberals  on  it:  Douglas,  Clark  and  Wil-
liams  (N.J.)  to  which  have  now  been  added  McNamara  and
McCarthy.    The  committee  would  have  to  be  enlarged  to  25,
with 8 more  liberals, to be  sure  of  outvoting  the  conservatives.
As  in  the  House,  where  the  Rules  committee  often pro-
vides   a  convenient  graveyard  for   measures  on   which sup-
posed  liberals  want  to  evade  a  vote,  so  it  is  handy  in   the
Senate  to  let  conservative  control  of   key  committees  remain
the  excuse  for   burying  militant  liberal   proposals.
It  is  indicative that  Long—highly  overrated  as a  "Populist"
—had  his  way  on  the  powerful  Finance  committe  on  which
he  is  nominally  No.   2  man  but  chairman  in  all  but  name.
On  his  insistence,  Finance  was  the  only  committee  on  which
the  ratio  of  Democrats  to  Republicans  was  unchanged.    This
ensured  conservative  control   over  vital  money  matters   from
taxes  to  oil  and  gas  depletion   allowances.
The   caucus  and   the   steering   committee  were  shaken   up
enough,  however,  to  get  stepchild  liberals  some  good  commit-
tee  assignments.    Clark  and  Pell  went  on  Foreign  Relations;
Yarborough   on   Appropriations;  Mrs.   Neuberger   on Com-
merce  and  Nelson   on  Labor.
Holiday   Gift   Rates  in   Effect    Until  End   of   January
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Street  .................................
City  .....................................
For  the  enclosed  $5  send
(To)  Name  .......................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a  sub  for  the   enclosed   $5:
1/18/65
a  gift  sub  to:
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
I. E  Stones  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every  Monday  except  the  last  week   in  December   and  the  first  week  in
January  and   Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly   published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.; ?6   in   Canada;    $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail  rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED