I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965apr05.pdf

============================================================

How  Three  Republican Senators  Called for  Negotiation, Pps. 2-3
It  Makes  Good  Pictures  But  Is  It  The Same  As  Real Debate?
"President   Johnson  has  quietly   staged   a  revolution  in
executive  relations  with  Congress.  .  .  .  The  President  in-
vited  every  one  of   the   537  members  of   the   Senate   and
House   to   unprecedented   briefing   sessions   at   the   White
House.  .  .  .  Some  of  the  immediate  impact  can  be  seen  in
the  intent  faces  in the accompanying  nnposed  pictures.  . .  .
One  man  who  heard  the  President   explain  his  Viet  N.im
policy  said  he  could  almost  feel  a  growing  .  .  .  welding  to-
gether.  . . .  Some  Congressmen  choked up. ...     Since  these
sessions  began,  an  administration  official   noted,  agitation
for  negotiation  .  .  .  has  subsided  noticeably."
—Captions  with  pictures, Washington  Star,  March  28.
"The    day  after  his  inauguration,  the  President   held  his
first  leadership  meeting  at  the  White  House  with  members
of  both  political  parties.    As  Chairman  of  the  Republican
Conference,  I  attended.   At  that  time,  we  were  briefed  by
members  of  the  Cabinet  on  such  issues  as  Vietnam.   The
briefing  lasted  for  about  two  and a  half  hours  with no  real
opportunity  to  ask  questions  or  contribute  comments.    At
the  conclusion,  photographers were  called  in  and  the  im-
pression  was  created  that  the  President  had  developed  his
policies  in  consultation  with  Congressional   leaders."
—Rep.  Melvm  B. Laird   (R.  Wis.)  in  a  statement   (abr.)
March  31.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  13
APRIL  5,  1965
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
16   CENTS
On  the  Klan,  the  Reds  and  the  Un-Americans
It  is  characteristic  of  all  human  societies  to  take  effects  for
causes.   This  provides  scapegoats  by which  people  evade  their
responsibilities.    An  example  is  the  uproar  over  the  Klan  in
the  murder  of  Mrs.  Viola  Gregg  Liuzzo.  Klansmen  may  have
pulled  the  trigger,  but  the  bullet,  the  gun  and  the  hate  were
supplied  by  the  South.    In  a  fundamental  sense  the  South  is
guilty:  its  century  of  lawless  resistance  to  full   emancipation,
its  maintenance  of  mores  that  prescribe  the  humiliation   and
degradation  of  the  Negro,  its  elevation  of  racial  purity  and
supremacy  to  a  regional  religion,  all  these  have  fostered  that
sexual  sickness which  made  the  killers  feel  they  were  carrying
out  a  sacred  duty  to  the  white  race.    Mrs.  Liuzzo  was  exe-
cuted  in  her  car because  there  was  a  Negro  on  the  front  seat
with  her:  this  is  the  truth  about  the  murder  people  shy  away
from.    Killing  is  encouraged  by  the  general   feeling  in  die
South,  among  its  "good"  people  as  well  as  its  bad,  whenever
civil  rights  workers  are  slain—that  they  somehow  got  what
they  asked  for,  that  they  had  no  right  to  "butt  in"   on  the
South's  affairs.    The  Klan  and  the  murder  are  the  result.    To
focus  on  the  Klan  is  to  enable  the  respectables   who  know
better  to  put  their  guilt  on  "rednecks"  who don't.   To  propa-
gate  racial  ethics  is  to  foster  racial  murder.
Vulgar Opportunism
On  top  of  this  regional   sickness  is  a  national   sickness—
that  when  anything  goes  wrong  it  must  be  due  to  Commu-
nists.  A  paranoid  corollary  is  that  only  firm  anti-Communists
are   above   suspicion.     This   underlies   the   Administration's
pressure  to  have   the  Klan   investigated   by  the   House   Un-
American  Activities  Committee.     "This  is  because  its  chair-
man,    Mr.  Willis,  is  a  Southerner,"  Tom  Wicker   diclosed  in
the  New   York   Times  March  30,  "and   because  the   commit-
tee's  reputation  would   make  it  immune  to  charges  of   leftist
influence."     Does   it  take  an  -investigation  to  prove   that  an
organization   which   preaches   Anglo-Saxon   white   Protestant
supremacy  is  un-American?    Could  so  obvious  a   proposition
be  regarded   as  "leftism?"      "The   possibility   that  the  Klan
might  also  be  treated  as a  subversive  group,"  Mr.  Wicker  re-
Maybe  We  Ought   to  Bomb  England
Mr.  VAN  DER  LINDEN  (Nashville,  Tenn.  Banner):
Governor  Johnson,  yon  just  said  that  some  of  the  civil
rights  workers  who  came  into  Mississippi last  summer
were  there  to  stir  up  trouble.    The  charge  has  been
made  on  the  floor  of  Congress  that  this  whole  inva-
sion,  so  called,  was  planned  by  the  international Com-
munist  conspiracy.  .  .  .  Do  yon  have  any  proof  that
Communists  really  were  behind  this  movement?
Gov.   JOHNSON (Miss.):  When  this  program  began
last  summer  we  had  sent   some  agents  from  Missis-
sippi who attended the  [freedom]  school in Ohio. We had
learned  from  them  that  there  were  some  Communistic
influences  in  this  group  that  was  coming  to  the  state.
.  .  .  Some  of  these  hard-core  agitators  were  members
of the Communist Party—and were confessed members.
Mr.  VAN  DER  LINDEN:  Has  that  been  brought  to
the  attention  of  the  FBI  and  other  government  agen-
cies—are  they  prosecuting  any  of  these  people?
Gov.   JOHNSON:  No,  sir,  they  are  not.    I  think  that
they   are  keeping  a  very  close  eye   on  these   people.
Some  of  these  people  that  I   speak   about  have  gone
back   where  they   came  from.    There   was   one  there
from   England,  who  participated  in  this  peace  move-
ment  against   our  establishing   our  submarines  in  En-
rope  or  in   England.
—On Meet  the Press, Feb. 14,1965.
ports  White  House  reasoning,  "probably  would  have  to  await
the  outcome  of  a  Congressional   investigation."    Is  study  re-
quired  to  realize   that  organizations   which  preach  hatred  of
Negroes,  Jews  and  Catholics  and  contempt  for  Americans of
"non  Anglo-Saxon"  origin  are  profoundly  disruptive  in  a  na-
tion  like  ours ?   This  was the  strategy  of  Nazi  propaganda  be-
fore  the  war—to  set  Americans  against   each  other   by  anti-
Semitism   and   racism.     To   ask   so  discredited   a   bunch   of
witch-hunting  old  dodoes  as  the  House  Un-American  Activi-
ties  Committee  to  investigate  the  Klan  is  to  demonstrate  how
shaky  is our  own  commitment  to  our  supposed  national  ideals.
It   is  also   to  reveal  the   vulgar   opportunism   in   the  White
House.
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  5,1965
Javits  Says  His Mail  Running  50-to-l  Against  the  War  in  Vietnam  . . .
The  press  has  inadequately  reported  the  break-through   for
peace  in   the  Senate   on  March   25  when   three   Republicans
asked   for   negotiations    on   Vietnam.    We   thought    readers
would  like  to  see  the  main  points  they  made  and  give  them
here  in  excerpted  form.    The  most  significant  speech  was  by
Javits   of  New   York,   who  has  hitherto  been  a  cold   warrior
in  foreign  policy,  though  a  liberal  in  domestic  affairs.     He  in-
troduced  a  resolution  declaring  the  U.S.  ready  for  "honorable
negotiation"   which   was  referred   to  the   Foreign   Relations
Committee.   Interested   citizens  and  organizations   should  de-
mand   open  hearings   on  it.   Senator   John  Sherman  Cooper
(Ky.)  who  joined  in  quite  independently   the  same  day  is  a
liberal  whose  service  as  Ambassador  to  India  made  him  espe-
cially  sensitive  to  Asian  opinion.   The  third  Republican  was
Aiken  of  Vermont.
Sen.  JAVITS:  .  .  .  We  cannot  pull  out  as  we  stand   now.
We  can  only  honorably  perform  our  commitments,  unless  the
ground   is  washed   out  from  under  us  and   it  becomes  abso-
lutely  clear  that  there  is  no  will  to  resist  in  South   Vietnam.
My  added  purpose  in  submitting  the  concurrent  resolution'
stems  from  an  acute  awareness  of  a  grave  danger  that  we  face
in  our  efforts   to  contain  Communist  expansion  in   southeast
Asia,  a  danger  that  is  too  seldom  mentioned,  perhaps  because
it  is  the  one  that  should  most  readily  be  dealt  with.    I  speak
of   the   danger   caused  by  an  erosion   of   support   among   the
American  people  themselves.  .  .  .
Mail  50  to  1  for  Peace
One  gauge   of  the  gravity  of  this  danger   is   congressional
mail,   and   a  recent   survey  by  U.S.  News   &  World   Report
among  the  Senators  of  both  parties  and  all  political   colora-
tions  shows  this  mail  running  against  our  military  action   in
Vietnam.    For  months,  though  it  may  sound  extreme,  my own
mail  has  been   running  in  some  weeks  as  high   as  50  to  1
against    our   Vietnam   operation,    and    contacts   with    other
sources   of  constituent   opinion   bear  out  the   fact  that  much
misunderstanding  exists  on  this  issue.
One   factor  which  contributes  to  misunderstanding   is   the
lack  of  authoritative  information  concerning  the  will  of   the
Vietnamese  people.    More   and   more,   in  recent   weeks,   the
desire  of  the  South  Vietnamese  to  carry  on  the  struggle   and
continue  to  receive  our  assistance  has  been  questioned.     How
can  we  find  out  what   the   South   Vietnamese  people   really
want? ...  I  am  sure  the  President  has  access  to  more  facts
and  more  reliable  information  than  the  rest  of  us.  ...     If  the
We  Didn't  Want  to  Napalm  Our  Own  Men
"Two  of  the  three  military  operations  in  which  non-
lethal  gas   was  used  against  the  Viet  Cong  were  un-
successful  attempts  to  free  American prisoners  held  by
the   Communist  guerrillas,  it   was   learned   yesterday.
.  .  .  Intelligence  reports  had  indicated the  location  of
the  camp  in  which  some  or  all  of  the  Americans were
being  held.   Vietnamese  forces  and  American  advisers
on  Dec.  23  went  after  the  site  somewhere  in  the  Me-
kong  Delta.  .  .  .  The  pursuers  used  gas  in  an  attempt
to  disable  the  Viet  Cong  without  risking  the  Ameri-
cans'  lives.    The  effort  to  liberate  the  prisoners  failed.
They  were  spirited  out—if   indeed  they  were  there  in
the   first   place—before   South  Vietnamese  and  Ameri-
can  troops   on  the   ground  could  close   in.    Two  days
later,  new  intelligence  reports  placed  the  prisoners  at
another  camp.  .  .  .  The  pursuit  operation  was  repeated
on  Christmas  Day,  it  was  said  here,  with  helicopters
spreading  gas  and  ground  forces  moving  in  afterward.
Again  there  were  no  positive  results."
—N,  Y.  Herald-Tribune   from   Washington  Mar.  27.
President  concludes  that  a  majority  of  the  people  are  deter-
mined  to  resist  and  want  our  help—as  I  assume  is  implicit
in  the  continuance  of  our  presence  there—the  announcement
of   this   conclusion   and   the   evidence   on   which   it   is   based
would  serve  to  gain  further  support   for  our  policy.
But  the  principal   cause  of  the  danger  of   loss  of   support
for   our  policy  is  that  many  Americans  are  worried  and   con-
fused  over  our  aims  and  our  plans  in  South  Vietnam.     They
need  reassurance  that  we  do,  in  fact,  have  an  attainable  goal
and  are  taking  all  proper  measures  to  attain  it.
This  danger  of  erosion  of  American  support  can  be  met,  in
my  judgment,  if  the  President  deals  with  this  question:   Since
our  aim  is  not  unconditional  surrender,  what  are  the   general
principles  on  which  we  are  willing  to  negotiate  a  settlement
of  the  Vietnamese  situation?  .  .  .  We  all  know  that  the re-
taliatory  use  of  air  power  alone  is  not  a  policy  in  a  complex
political  and  social,  as  well  as  military  situation. ...  It  is
clear  that  the  political  problems  of  the  south  will  not  be  re-
solved   only   by  military  pressure   on   the   north.     It   is   also
clear  that  we  are  not  engaged  in  South  Vietnam  for  an   "un-
conditional   surrender"   which,   as  everyone  knows,  would   be
impossible  at  this  time.  .  .  .
In  my  view  the  general   principles  for  honorable   negotia-
16 Congressmen  Ask LBJ To Reaffirm  FDR  and  Ike Pledges  Not  to  Use  Gas First  in  War
"Dear   Mr.   President:   The   actions   of   our   military   in
South  Vietnam  in  providing  riot-control  type  gases  appear
to  have  violated  our  long  standing  policy  against   the  first
use  of  gas  in  warfare.   This  policy  was  first  enunciated  on
June  9,  1943,  by  President  Roosevelt, who  said  'Use  of  such
weapons  has  been  outlawed  by  the  general  opinion  of  man-
kind.    This  country  has  not  used  them  and  I  hope  that  we
never  will  be  compelled to  use  them.   I  state  categorically
that  we  shall  under  no  circumstances  resort  to  the  use  of
such  weapons  unless  they   are  first  used  by  our  enemies.'
It  was  reaffirmed  on  January  13,  1960,  by  President   Elsen-
hower  who  said,  when  asked  at  a  press  conference  about
our  government's  policy  on  the  use  of  gas  in  warfare:  'So
far  as  my  instinct  is  concerned,  (it)  is  not  to  start  such  a
thing  as that first.'
"The  first  use  of  gas  in  warfare,  however  innocuous   its
variety  or  effective  its  results,   subjects  the  using  country
to  the  censure  of  the  civilized  world. ...  In  the  hope  that
some  action  may  be  taken  in  the  interest  of  our  national
prestige  and  moral  standing,  may  we  respectfully  suggest:
(1)   That   since   the   area  commander  apparently   had   au-
thority  to  use  these  riot-control  gases ...  an  investigation
be  made  into  the  means  by  which  such  authority  was   ex-
tended ...  (2)  that  exclusive  control  and discretion   over
the  use  of  chemical, biological  and  radiological  weapons  be
restored  to  the  Presidency  and  finally  (3)  that,  in  the  light
of  former  executive  pronouncements,  an  expression  of  this
Administration's  policy  toward  the   use  of  these  weapons
be  made."
—Signed  by  Brown, Burton, Edwards,  Hawkins  and  Wil-
son  of  California;   Conyers  and  Diggs   of  Michigan,   Green
of   Oregon,  Kastenmeier   and   Race   of   Wisconsin,  Mink   of
Hawaii,  Nix  of  Pennsylvania   and  Ottinger, Resnick,  Rosen-
thal  and  Ryan  of  New   York,  all  Democrats.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  5, 1965
. Cooper  Says  U.S.  Prescribing  Unacceptable  Conditions  for  Negotiation
tions  .  .  .  should  include.    1st.  A  cease-fire  halting  both  the
fighting  in  South  Vietnam  and  the  air  strikes  against  North
Vietnam.    2d.  Establishment  of  an  International  Commission
on Vietnam  to  supervise  the  cease-fire.  .  .  .  3rd. Establishment
of  a  government  in  South  Vietnam  with  free  institutions.  .  .  .
4th.  Normalization  of  trade  and  other  economic  relations  be-
tween  North  and  South  Vietnam.  .  . .
Cooper  Asks  Unconditional Negotiation
Sen.  COOPER:  Let  me  emphasize  the  single  point  that  I
desire  to  make.    It  is  that  the  President  make  it  clear  again
that  the  U.S. is  willing  to  enter  into  negotiations. ...  I be-
lieve  that  our  government  is  prescribing  conditions  as  a pre-
requisite  to  negotiations  which  will  not  be  accepted.
The  Communist  Chinese  and  the  North  Vietnamese  have
announced  as  a  condition  of  negotiation  that  the  U.S.  must
withdraw  from   South  Vietnam.    This  is  a  condition  which
the  President  rightfully  says  cannot  and  will  not  be  accepted.
But  our  Government  has  imposed  its  own  condition—that  it
is  not  prepared  to  enter* into  negotiations  until  the  interven-
ion  and  aggression  of  North "Vietnam  ceases. ...  I  think  it
unlikely  that  the  Communists will  agree  to  this  condition, as
we  will  not  agree  to  their  condition.    It  is  a  kind  of  demand
from  both  sides  of  unconditional  surrender.  .'.  .  In  Korea,
and  in  Vietnam,  in  1954  no  such  conditions  were  imposed
by either side....
If  our  bombing  is  accelerated,  it  could  reach  a  point  where
the  intransigeance  of  the  Communists  will  be  hardened,  and
the  intervention  of  the  Communist  Chinese  and  Russia  made
more  likely.  And  I  must  say that  the  use of  harmless  gas  .  . .
is wrong  in  the  present  situation  and  is more  likely  to  harden
the  position  of  the  Communists. ...  At  times  there  are ru-
mors  also  of  the  old  theory  of  preventive war.   Knowing  the
President  as  a  man  of  peace  and  honor,  I  say  categorically
that  it  is  not  his  theory  or  purpose.    But  there  may  be  some
who  hold  to  this  theory.    I  do  not  believe  it  is  consistent
with  the  tradition  of  our  country,  or  with  our  system  of  free
What  Air  Raids Can Do  to  'Dominoes'
Sen.  MANSFIELD  (D.   Mont.):  Is  it  likely  in  the
Senator's    judgment   that    a   settlement    in   Vietnam
would  be  followed  certainly  by  all  the  other  nations  in
southeast  Asia   going   down  the   Chinese   drain,   so  to
speak?  .  .  .
Sen.  AIKEN  (R.  Vt.):  I  do not  believe  that  it  would
be  followed  by  that.    I  do  not  believe  that  the  smaller
countries  of   southeast   Asia  have  any  more  desire   to
become  satellites  of  China  and  come  under  the  control
of  Red  China  than  have  the  countries  of  Eastern   Eu-
rope  any  desire  to  be  satellites  of  Russia,  from  which
they  are  now  gradually  emerging  into  their  own  again
—I  hope  they  are  anyway.   I  believe  that  North  Viet-
nam   has   every   reason   in   the   world  not  to   wish   to
become  a  satellite  of  Red China;  and  that  she  will  not
become   a   satellite   of   Red   China   unless   the   United
States  forces  her  to  become  one.    But,  if  we  continue
raids  over  North  Vietnam  and  continue  the  use  of  the
weapons  which  we  have  been  using  more  or  less  indis-
criminately,  we  may  force   North  Vietnam  to  call  on
China  for  Chinese  troops  by  the  millions.  .  .  .
Sen.  MANSFIELD:  The Senator  is  correct  .  . .  based
on  the  more  than  1,000  years  of  enmity  which  has  ex-
isted  between  the  people  of  Vietnam  and  the   Chinese
colossus.
—In  the Senate, March  25.
government. ...  I  hope  our  country  will  make  it  clear  that
we  are  willing  to  accept  the   offices   of   the  Geneva   Confer-
ence,  or  the  United  Nations,  or  perhaps  a  "community"  of
concerned nations.. . .
It  has  been  a  long  time  ago,  but  in  1954  I  spoke  in  tht
Senate  urging  that  negotiations  be  undertaken  respecting the
problem  of  Vietnam,  rather  than  the  use  of  our  own  troops.
Last  April  I  made  the  statement  in  the  Senate,  that  I thought
it  was time  for  negotiations. ...  I  believe  that  it  is  necessary
for  the  President  to  make  it  clear  that  we  are willing to  enter
true   negotiations   without   conditions   [imposed   by   either
side].  .  . .
—In   the  Senate,  March  25
Aiken Says Time Has  Come to Compromise Article  19 and Put  The UN  Back  Into Business
"Senators, will  recall  that  during  debate  on  the  UN  bond
issue  [in  1962  to  pay  for  the  Congo  operations]  some  of  us
questioned   the   Administration   rather   vigorously   on   two
points:  We  sought  to  learn  from  the  Department  of  State
what  the  American  reaction  would  be  if   the  General  As-
sembly   were  at   some   future  time  to  assess  the   United
States  for  the  costs  of  sending  a  UN  force  into  some  area
where  the  U.S.  had its  vital  interests  involved  on  the  other
side.  .  .  .  This  was  a  question  the  State  Department  did
not  want  to  consider,   let   alone  answer.    The  Department
was   so   concerned   with   rubbing   the   Russian   and   French
noses  into   the  legal  interpretation   of   Article   19;  it   was
so  sure  that  the  General   Assembly   would  never  find  the
U.S.  on  the  minority  side.  .  .  .
"The  second  point  some  of  us  pursued  with  the  Admin-
istration  was  that  the  UN  bond  issue  was  an  unfortunate
device  to  put  off  the  evil  day  when  .  .  .  the  national  inter-
ests  of   a  great   power  would   serve   to  nullify  article  19.
That  day  is  now  here.  .  .  .
"When  the  chips  were  really  down  and  the  U.S.  was  con-
fronted  with  the  alternative  of  forcing  an  Assembly  vote
—Aiken   (R.  Vt.)   to  the  Senate  March  25  in   opposing
on  the  application  of  Article  19  to  Russia  and  France,  with
the  possibility  that  a  winning  vote  might  have  led  to  Rus-
sian  withdrawal, it  backed  away.    The  U.S.  now  recognizes
that   if   it   were   in   the   position   of   the   Russians   or  the
French  it  would  probably  react  in  the  same  way.  .  .  .
"I  want  the  UN  to  survive.    I  want  it  capable  of  action
in   trouble   spots. ...  I  want  UN  bridges  to  be  strong
enough  to  bear  all  kinds  of  traffic  between  East  and  West.
.  .  .  The time  has come  for the  President  to  ...     instruct
his  representative  at  the  UN  to  reconcile  our  position  with
the  Soviet  and  French  position  on  the  assessment  of  mem-
bers  for  peacekeeping  functions.  .  .  .  What  if   article  19
does  become  a  dead  letter  if,  as  a  result,  the  UN  continues
available  as  an  instrument  of  peace?    Unless  some   agree-
ment  is  reached  by  the  great   Powers,   article   19  is  dead
as  a  doornail  anyway.  International  events  of  recent  weeks
seem  to  have  overwhelmed  HCte  capacity  of  this  Government
for  affirmative  action,  except  in  the  military  field.
"The  President  has  a  magnificent  opportunity  to  put  the
U.S.  back  into  the  lead  in  international   diplomacy  by  put-
ting  the  UN  back  into  business."
escalation  in  Vietnam  and  calling  for   negotiations.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stme'g  Weekly,  April  5,1965
The  Strategy  Is to  Divide  and  Discredit  the  Civil  Rights  Movement
(Continued   from   Page   One)
Do  We  Never  Learn?
To  hear  Speaker  McCormack  joining  in  is  to  despair  of
people  ever  learning  from  the  past.    The  Un-American Ac-
tivities   Committee   originated   in   the   Dickstein-McCormack
.resolution  of   1934.    The  "un-American"  propaganda  it  was
supposed   to   investigate   was   the   racist   propaganda  by   the
Nazis  with  assistance  from  native  groups  like  the  Klan.    But
very   soon,   under   the   chairmanship  of   another   Southerner,
Dies   of   Texas,   the   Committee   behind  the   smokescreen  of
anti-Communism  was  attacking  the  New  Deal  and   defeating
such   great   Americans  as  Frank   Murphy,   then   a  pro-labor
Governor  of  Michigan,  later  a  Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court.
In  30  years  of  existence,  the  Committee  has  only  on  rare  and
fleeting  occasions  ever  touched  on  any  menace from  the  right.
Its  staff,  like  that  of  its  counterpart  in  the  Senate,  Eastland's
Internal   Security  Committee,   is  full   of   superannuated   FBI
men  conditioned  to  nothing  but  anti-Communism  and  of  ex-
Communists  who  bring  to  the  hunt  an  exaggerated  notion  of
their   old  party's   importance   and   the  fanatic's  readiness  to
twist  the  truth.    It  is  characteristic  that  the  "dean"  of  the
crowd  is  a  former  business  manager  of  The  Daily   Worker.
Add  the  fact  that  McCarthyism  never  died  out  in  the  South,
that  perjurers  and  psychotics  long  discredited  in  Washington
still  perform  before  "little  un-American  committees"   in  the
legislatures  of  the   deep  South,   and  that  the  whole   area  is
convinced  the  Southern  Negro  would  still  be  getting  off  the
sidewalks  if  it  weren't  for  a  Communist  plot.    This  assures
that  any  Klan  investigation  by  the  un-Americans  will   soon
turn  into  a circus  designed  to  smear  the  civil  rights  movement.
There  is  a  warning  here  for  those  inside  civil  rights  or-
ganizations  who  have  been  leaking  Red  smears  against  CORE
and   SNCC.     Columnists  like  Joe   Alsop,  David  Lawrence,
and  Evans  and  Novack  have  become  their  sounding  boards.
The  youngsters  in  CORE  and  SNCC  have  antagonized  their
elders  by  their  brashness  and   conceit.    But  they  have  also
brought  fresh  vigor  to  the   fight.   The  kind  of  passionate  de-
votion  that  makes  youngsters  ready  to  risk  their  lives  in  the
South  is  not  apt  to  be  accompanied  by  sage  moderation;  if  it
For  Daring  to  Register
"I  would  like  to  tell  you  about  one  Negro  who  tried
to  vote  in  this  county.    She  is  a  woman  named   Mar;
Thomas.    She   said   she   walked  by  the   door   (of   the
registrar)   many  times  but  was  afraid  to  go  in.   One
day  she  felt  her  prayers  were  answered  and  therefore
she  was  not  alone  and  decided  to  go  in  and  register.
She  received  a  very  difficult  test  and  felt  discouraged.
When  she  left  the  room  she  was  photographed  which
Meant   she   would  have   trouble  getting   credit   around
town.    She  had  a  small   business  which  she  used  to
Bupport   herself   and  her  six   children.     She   was   not
back  at  the  store  fifteen  minutes  when  the  sheriff  ap-
peared  and  said,   'I  have  a  warrant  for   your  arrest.'
Fifteen   minutes   after   she  had  tried  to  register.    He
said,  'Yon  are  selling  beer  without  a  license.'  She  said,
'I  have  a  state,  a  city  and a  federal  license.'    He  said,
'Yon  do  not  have  a  county  license.'    She  was  immedi-
ately  taken  to  jail,  locked  up  over  night  in  Jail  with-
out  counsel,  brought  up  the  next  day  and  fined  over
$300  for   not   having   this   $15  beer   license   from   the
county   despite   the  fact  that  she  had  licenses  to  sell
beer  and  had  done  so  for  over  eight   years."
—Reverend  Theodore  Hesburgh, Pres. of  Notre  Dame,
and  member  of   U.S.  Civil  Rights  Commission,    before
House  Judiciary,  March  19.
were,  they  would  have  stayed  at  home.    Only  the  sensitive
the  rebellious,  the  extremist  could  or  would  do  what   these
often    exasperating   but   wonderful   youngsters    have    done.
There  are  neither  ties  nor  resemblances  between  them  and  the
sedate  elderly  people  who  run  the  Communist  Party  in  this
country.  They  reflect,  espouse  and  develop  a  whole  range  of
radical  ideas,  social  and  racial,  some  of  them  wacky with  de-
spair.  But  every movement  of  liberation  requires  its  fringe  of
zealots  and  wilder  men;  otherwise  the  moderates  would  have
no  way  to  scare  the  other  side  into  compromise.    I  saw  the
process  at  work  in  the  Jewish  struggle   against  the  British  in
Palestine  where  a  handful  of  direct  actionists,  there  men  of
the  right,  gave  the  moderates  leverage.    This  is  the  normal
dynamics  of  a  liberation  struggle,  not  a  plot.    The  plot  is  the
plot  to  split  the  movement  and  rid  it  of  the  indispensible
zealots  by .'imposing  some  kind  of  "loyalty"   oath  and  expos-
ing  it  to  defamation  and  discredit  by  the  un-Americans.
We'll  Be Clad  to Send A  Sample  Copy of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send A  Stamped  Addressed Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska   Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ................................................................—..................•••••
Street    ........................................................................................
City   .........................................JEone............State....................
4/B/8S
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's   The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if   announcement  wished  D
LR Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone'1  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  In  December  and  the  first  week  In
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..   N.W..   Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;     *6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mall   rates:
SIS  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED