I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965jul26.pdf

============================================================

Thurgood  Marshall:  The Rabbit  Out  of LBJ's Hat,  P.  2
Warnings  That  We  May Use  New  Gas  and  Nerve Weapons  in  the  Vietnamese  War
"Coincident  with  formation  of  the  new  airmobile division,
the  Army  is  issuing  improved  new  gas  masks  to  its  heli-
copter  pilots.   A  hood to  protect the  head  and neck  against
mustard  and  'V'-type  nerve  gases  which  seep  through  the
skin  is  also  being  developed. .  .  .  Left  unsaid  in  reports  on
the  new  equipment  is  that  it  protects  the  helicopter  crew-
men  from  gas   he  might  be  distributing  as  well  as   from
enemy  chemicals."
—Aviation Daily,  July   IS.
"As  physicians  we  are  particularly  concerned  with  the
use  of  chemical  and  biological  weapons.    As  other  more
conventional  weapons  prove  unavailing,  there  is  certain  to
be  mounting  pressure  for  the  use  of  these  weapons.  Chemi-
cal  and  biological  weapons,  often  mislabelled  'humane,'  are
in  practice  inhumane,  and  represent  a  further  erosion   of
our  moral and political  position.  .  .  .  We urge  you  to  open
the  public  discussion  on  the  present  and  contemplated  use
of  these  weapons  in Vietnam."
—From  a  letter  to  Congressmen  by  Physician*  for  Social
Responsibility,  July  IS.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII, NO. 27JULY  26,  1965
«"       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
German  Nuclear  Arms  and  Harriman's  Talks  In  Moscow
President  Johnson  and  his  advisers  have  set out  on  a  course
in  Vietnam  where  much  can  happen  that  is  beyond  their  con-
trol.    One  gamble  is  whether  Moscow  will  enter  the  war  or
cause  trouble  elsewhere  as  we  commit  an  increasing   portion
of  our  military forces  to  East  Asia.   The  price  being  dangled
before  the  Kremlin   is  the  abandonment   of  the  MLF,  which
would  put  a  German  finger  on  the  West's  nuclear  trigger.
We  suspect  that  the  Russians have  been  told  that  this  may be
their  last  chance  to  block  what  they  and  their  European  allies
fear   most—German   nuclear  armament.    We   ought   to   fear
it,  too.    It  was the  Korean  war  which  led  to  German  conven-
tional  rearmament.    It  was  argued  that  this  was  the  only way
to  protect   our  European  flank  while  we  were   involved   in
Korea.     A  prolonged   Vietnamese   war  might   by  the   same
treacherous  logic  lead  the  U.S.  to  put  nuclear  arms  into  the
hands  of  the  Germans  as  an  additional  deterrent  in  the  West
while we were  bogged  down  in  the  East.   The  price of  a treaty
against  further   proliferation  of   atomic  arms—i.e.  a   pledge
that  we  would  keep  them  from  the  Germans—would  be  an
agreement  by Moscow  not  to  intervene  militarily  in  the  Viet-
namese  war.    We  suspect  that  these  are  the  issues  which  lie
behind  Harriman's  visit  to  Moscow,  the  sudden  Russian  deci-
sion  to  return  to  the  Geneva  arms  talks  and  the  alarmed  cries
from  Schroeder  and  Adenauer  in  West  Germany,  which  fears
deeper  U.  S.  engagement  in  Vietnam  may  lead  us  to  seek  an
accommodation  with  the  Soviet  Union.
The  Biggest  Risk  of  All
It  is  difficult   to  imagine  a  trickier  bit  of  power   politics.
What  Mr.  Johnson  offers  as the  path  to  peace  turns  out  to  be
that  brink  on  which  John  Foster  Duties  would  have  had  us
teeter.    At  almost  every  step  there  is  fresh  danger.    The  one
which  concerns  Washington   most  is  the  possibility  that  hard-
liners  and  military  men  might  take  over  from  the  technocrats
in  the  Kremlin,  and  treat  us  to  the  same  kind  of  eyeball-to-
eyeball  confrontation  over  Vietnam  we  gave  them  over  Cuba.
Their  feelings  must  be  no  different  from  those  which  would
sweep  our military if  ordered  to stand by and  do nothing  while
one  of  our  small  allies  was  being  mercilessly  bombarded  by
the  Soviet  air  force,  as we are  bombing  North  Vietnam.    The
Adlai  Stevenson
It  was  thrilling  to  hear  Adlai  Stevenson  say  in  1952,
"Let's  talk  sense  to  the  American  people.    Let's  tell
them  the  truth."   It  was  a  national  misfortune  that  at
the  UN  he  was  often  forced  to  talk  neither  sense  nor
truth.   He  could  have  been  a  moral  force  if  he  had  re-
tired  to  private life  after  1960,  instead  of  accepting  a
post   in  which   he  was   compelled   to   read   stultifying
scripts  lesser  men  had  prepared.   He  should  have  re-
signed  after  the  Bay  of  Pigs.   His  last  lost  chance  was
to  give  up  the  Job  in  protest  over the  Dominican  affair.
David  Schoenbrun  (Wash.  Post,  July  15)  said   Steven-
son  told  him he  regarded  the  intervention  as  «  massive
blunder,  the  defense  of  which  "took  several  years  off
my  life."   James  Wechsler in  the  New  York  Post  re-
ported  Stevenson  also  had grave  reservations  about  the
air  strikes  at  North  Vietnam;  well  he  might,  since  a
year  earlier  at  the  UN  he  had  criticized  similar  re-
prisals  by  the  British  in  the  Aden  rebellion.    The  hon-
ors   paid  Stevenson   by  Johnson  and  Rusk  attest   the
fact  that  he  had  allowed  them  to  bury  his  integrity
long  before  he  died,  a  shadow   of   the   man  we   once
loved.
No.  1  political  argument  against  these  bombings  is  that  they
humiliate  Moscow  in  the  eyes  of  its  allies  and  make  common
action  with  the  U.  S.  for  a  peaceful  settlement   almost   im-
possible.
Even  if  we  avoid  a  nuclear  war  with  the  Russians,  we  face
another   risk—war  with   China.    Though   the   Chinese   keep
saying that  they will  not  fight  unless  attacked,  there  are  strong
currents  in  the  Pentagon   for  a  preventive  war  with  China.
What  if  the  military  spark  a  wider  conflict  with  some  border
provocation?    An  example  was  provided  by  the  recent   raids
two  days  running  on  a  portion  of  the  Chinese  railroad  system
which  moves  down  into  North  Vietnam  at  Yen  Bay and  then
back  up  into  China.    Only  one  newspaper  has  focussed  at-
tention  on  these  raids.   This  is the  Washington  Star  (July  14)
which  carried a story on  them by Richard  Fryklund,  a  reporter
with  sources  in  the  Air  Force.    "U.  S.  bombers  quietly  ex-
panded  the  Vietnamese war this week,"  was the  way he  began
his  story,  "in  a  way that  directly  threatens  important  interests
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
i o
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  S6,19es
The  Fight   Against   The  Coleman  Appointment  Pays  Off  for  The   Negro
Thurgoodi  Marshall  As The  Rabbit  Pulled  Out  of  LBJ's  Hat
At  the  Senate  Judiciary  Committee  hearings  on  the  nomi-
nation   of   James   P.  Coleman  to  the   Fifth   Circuit   Court   of
Appeals,  Senator  Stennis said,  "He  is  a  devout  believer  in  the
law."     Belief  in  the  law,  in  Mississippi,  is  belief   in  the  in-
genious  use  of  State  legislation  and  judicial  interpretation  to
nullify   civil   rights.     As  Governor,   as  David   Cohen   of   the
ADA   testified,   Coleman  "put   more  anti-Negro  and   segrega-
tion  legislation  on  the  statute  books  of  Mississippi  than  any
other  Governor."     In   large  part  due  to  Coleman's   able  ef-
forts,  while  Congress  has  passed  four  civil  rights  acts  in  the
last  nine  years,  "less  than  10  percent  of  the  adult  Negroes"
(as  Prof.   Thomas   I.  Emerson  of  Yale  testified)   "are    regis-
tered   to   vote   in   Mississippi."     Congressman   Conyers    (D.
Mich.),  in  opposing  the  nomination, cited  a  resolution  by  the
Southern   Regional  Council  last   November   declaring,   "In   a
situation   where  plain  talk   is  desirable,  we  would  report   as
plainly  as  we  can  that  the  progressive  leadership  of  the   South
both  Negro  and  white  would  find  the  appointment  or  pro-
motion  of  any  judge of  well  authenticated segregationist  views
to  be  a  severe  blow  to  regional,  national  and  democratic  in-
terests."
Not  A  Hugo  Black
There  could  hardly  be  a  better  authenticated  segregationist
than  Coleman.    It   is  argued  in  his  behalf  that  in  I960  he
supported  the  Kennedy-Johnson ticket.    So  did  Senators  East-
land  and   Stennis.    This  hardly  qualifies  him   as  a   moderate
by  national  standards.    If   those  standards  are  to  prevail   in
Mississippi,  judicial  appointments  ought  to  be  made  from  the
ranks  of  those  brave few  Mississippians, white  or  Negro,  who
have  opposed   its  identification   of   "law   and  order"  with   the
maintenance  of  white supremacy.   "While  it  is  essential,"   At-
torney  General  Katzenbach  said  in   a  queasy  passage   of   his
testimony   for   Coleman's   confirmation,   "that   judicial   officers
at  all  levels  respect  and  obey  the  law  and  administer  it  fairly,
such  an  approach  to  the   duties  of  the  bench  should   be  as-
sumed   in   the   absence  of   evidence  to   the   contrary."      Cole-
man's  whole  career has  been  devoted  to  preventing  the  Negro
from  enjoying his  rights  under  Federal  law.    Is  this  not  suf-
ficient  "evidence  to  the  contrary"?    It  is,  of  course,   possible
that  Coleman  on  the  bench  might  do  a  complete  reversal  and
become  a  pillar of  civil  rights.    But  if  it  were  at  all  probable,
we  can  be  sure  neither  Senators  Eastland  nor  Stennis   would
be  supporting him.    He  is  not  going  to  break  the  law  on  the
As  the  'Coffin  Nail' Ad Men See  It
"Advertising   agencies   with   cigarette   accounts   gen-
erally   thought   they   got   off  pretty   easily   on  the   bill
Congress    sent   to   the   President    requiring   a   health
warning  on  cigarette   packages.
" The   bill  doesn't  mean  a  damn  thing,'  was  the  way
one  agency  spokesman   put  it.    'Congress  took  the  ciga-
rette   industry  off  the   hook   by  making  the  bill   mean-
ingless.'   This  reference  was  to  the  provision  of  the  bill
that   would  bar  the   Federal   Trade   Commission    from
carrying  out,  at  least  until  July  1,  1969,  plans  to  re-
quire  health  warnings  in  cigarette   advertising.
"The  ad  men  .  .  .  doubted  generally   that  the  warn-
ing  [label  on  the  package]  would  have  any  great  effect
on  sales  of  cigarettes.   'The  first  thing  you  learn  about
labels   in   this   business,'   one   agency    executive    com-
mented,  'is  that  people  don't  read  them'."
—Walter  Carlson, in  the  New  York  Times'  daily  ad-
vertising  column,  July  H.
bench   but   he   is  more  likely  to   bend   a  sympathetic  ear   to
Southern  white pleas  for  deliberation  than  to  the  cause  of  the
Negro  he  has  all  his  life  obstructed.     The   attempt  to  com-
pare  him  with  Justice  Black,  as  John  Lewis  of  SNCC  testified,
is  nonsense.    Black  had   made  a  record   as  one  of   the   most
liberal  Senators  in  the  nation.    Coleman's  record  is  that  of  a
successful  segregationist  Governor.
Realistically,  confirmation  can  hardly  be  blocked,   but   the
hearings  have  had  salutary  effect.     It  is  evidence  of  the  giant
strides  the  Negro  is  making  that  he  can  put  not  only  the  ex-
Governor  of  Mississippi  but  the  senior  Senator,  Eastland,  on
the  defensive, putting  the  spotlight   not  only  on  their   public
record  but  (in  the  latter's  case)   on  his  private  life  as  a  plan-
tation  owner  and  exploiter  of  Negro  labor.    For  the  first  time
in  this  century  an  Attorney  General  had  to  appear  in   person
to  support  a  judicial  nomination,  and  President  Johnson   had
to  pull  a  rabbit  out  of  his  hat  to  appease  Negro   resentment,
taking  Thurgood  Marshall  off  the  Circuit  Court  and   putting
him  in  the  Solicitor  General's   office,  letting  it  be  known  that
he  was  headed  for  the  Supreme  Court.    The   price  of   Cole-
man's  confirmation  is  the  appointment  of  the  foremost  legal
Negro  advocate  of  civil  rights  to  become  the  first  Negro  So-
licitor  General.     This  has  already  been   denounced   as  an  af-
front  to  the  South,  as  Coleman's  nomination  is  an  affront   to
the  Negro.    Two  affronts,  in  this  political  arithmetic,  seem  to
add  up  to  a  little   progress.
Deaths  Rise:  Safety  Subordinated to  Sales  by  Auto Companies Despite  '57  Pledge
Senator   RIBICOFF  (D.,  Conn.):  When  I  was  governor,  I
headed  up  a  governor's  conference   committee  on  highway
safety,  and  I  went  out  to  Detroit,   I  believe  it  was  in  1957,
and  after  spending  two  days  with  all  the  top  officers  of  all
the   automobile   companies,   we   came   to   an  understanding
which   was   made   public   that   the   automobile     companies
would  deemphasize  speed  and  power.
Now  it  is  very   interesting   to  see  what  happened   begin-
ning   in   1957:   In   1957,  38,700  people   were   killed   on   our
highways.    In  1958,  36,900;  in  1959,  37,800;  in  1960,  38,137;
in   1961,   38,091.     In  other  words,   for   five  years  yon  had
almost   stabilized   the   number  of  deaths  on  our   highways
even  though  there  was  a  continued  increase  in  the  number
of  automobiles,   the  number  of  motorists,  and  this  was  one
of  the  best  periods  for  highway  safety  in  the  U.S.     Then
comes  1962,  and  about   that  time   the   automobile   industry
started  with  their  advertising   and  promotions   to  reempha-
size  speed  and  power.    In  1962,  the  death  rate  was  40,800;,
in   1963,  43,500;  in  1964,  48,000;  in   1965,   50,000;   and  the
estimate  by  1975,  100,000  people  will  be  killed  on  our  high-
ways.    Now,  what  is  your  reaction  to  the  automobile  manu-
facturers   starting  to  go  back  to  emphasizing  speed?
Mr.  DONNER   (Chairman   of  the  Board,   General   Motors
Corp.):  .  .  .  We are in  a  very  competitive   market.    That  is
bound  to  affect  advertising,  but  we  have  tried  to  stay  with
the  policy.          —Senate Hearings  on Auto Safety,   July   IS.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

•. Stone's  Weekly,  July  26,1965
Justice  Dept.  Under  LBJ  Abandons  Anti-Monopoly  Positions   Held  Under  JFK  and  Ike
Moving Toward the Big Business Viewpoint on Rail Merger and Patent Policy
The   Johnson   Administration  has   abandoned   two  critical
anti-monopoly  positions  of  the  Kennedy  Administration.    On
July  14,  the  Justice  Department  filed  a  brief  with  the  Inter-
state  Commerce  Commission  in  which   it  virtually  ended   op-
position  to  merger  of  the  Pennsylvania  Railroad  with  the  New
York  Central.    This  opposition   had  been  the  one   stumbling
block   to   what   promises  to   be  the   biggest   merger   in   U.S.
business  history.    The   two  railroads  are  the  first  and   third
largest  in  the  country.   The  25  men  who  will  form  the  board
of   directors  of   the  merged   company  also  sit  as  directors  of
180  other   corporations  with  assets  over   $113   billion.
A  Broad  Hint    to  the  ICC
The   Department   was  careful   not   to  come   out  directly  in
favor  of  the  merger.    In  past  opinions  it  has  warned  that  the
merger  would  give  "one  corporation   an  undue  degree  of  eco-
nomic  power"  and  would  be  "detrimental  to  over-all  rail  com-
petition   in  the  East."     In   its  new  opinion,   the  Department
incorporates  its  past  objections  but  adds  for  the  first  time  that
"other  factors  may  nevertheless   persuade   the   commission   to
conclude   that   the  merger   is  in   the   public   interest."    This
means  in  effect   that  the  government   has  decided   to  yield   to
ICC  discretion.    It  means  too  that   when   the  ICC   approves
the  merger  the  government   is  not   likely   to  challenge  it  in
court.
There  is  also   evidence   that  the  Justice  Department   is  re-
versing  its  position  on  government  patent  policy.    Since   1947
the  Department   has  been  the  most  powerful  advocate  in  the
executive  branch   of   the   idea  that  patents   on   new   products
should  not  be  given  to  private  industry  when  the  government
has  paid  for  the  research  and  development.     Even   Republican
Attorney  General  Brownell  backed  this  position.    In  1961  be-
fore   the   Senate   Small   Business   Committee   the    Department
went  so  far  as  to  warn  that  any  other   policy  would   lead   to
extreme  "monopolization   of  economic  power."    In   1963,   At-
torney  General  Katzenbach,  then  an  assistant  secretary,  took  a
similar  position  before  the  same  committee.     Last  week,   how-
ever,  the  Department   canceled  a  scheduled   appearance   before
the  Senate  Patents  Subcommittee.    Instead  it  will  submit  writ-
ten  testimony  and  a  new  set  of  authors  will  do  the  writing.
Resistance  to  Space  Mania  Dwindles
It  once  seemed  reasonable  to  argue  that  some  of  the
money  being  spent  on  exploration  into  space  could  be
put   to  better   use   here  on  earth.     Last   year   Senator
Fulbright  used  this  argument  in  an  effort  to  cut  $260
million   from   the   space   program.    The   Senate   voted
him  down  by  just  five  votes,  43  to  38.    This  year,  on
July  12,  Senator  Proxmire,  supported  by  Clark,  Morse,
and  Douglas,   used  the  same  argument  to  urge  an  al-
most  identical  reduction—a  mere  5%  of  the  $5  billion-
plus   space   appropriation  for   1966.    This   time,   how-
ever,  the  Senate  defeated  the  amendment  by  45  votes,
61  to  16,  and  the  press  didn't  even  bother  to  carry  the
story.    During  the  debate,  Clark  spoke  of  the   increas-
ing  backlog  of  needs  in  housing,  education  and  trans-
portation.    He  warned  of  the  growing  hostility   of  the
have-not  nations  and  reminded  his  colleagues   that  our
unemployment  rate  is  the  highest  of  any  civilized coun-
try  in  the  world.   Proxmire  revealed  that  there  are  al-
ready  ten  times  more  scientists  working  for  NASA  on
space   than  for   the   National   Institutes   of   Health   on
cancer  and  other  deadly  diseases.    Thus  can  we  meas-
ure  our drift  from  sanity.
The  subcommittee's  Republican  counsel  has  said  the  Depart-
ment  will  take  a  more  pro-business  line.
A  shift  to  the  right  in  business  policy  can  also  be  discerned
in  the  announcement   July  llth  that  five  top   officials   at  the
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  are  resigning.    The  tim-
ing  suggests  a protest  to  tighter  White  House  control  over  the
SEC after  the  Texas  Gulf  Sulphur  case.    One  of  those  leaving
is  Frederick   Moss,  director  of   the   office   of   special   proceed-
ings.     He   played   a  key  role  in   the   expose   of   illegal   stock
transactions   within   Texas   Gulf.     The   Wall   Street   Journal
April  27  reported   that  the  President  roundly  criticized   Com-
missioner  Cohen  and  several  staff   members  for   their   zealous
investigation.     Equally   interesting  in   this   regard   is   a   little
noticed  Senate  speech   (May  26)   by  Sen.  Gore   (D.,   Term.),
He   revealed  that   Clark   Clifford,   an  adviser  in   LBJ's  inner
circle,  was  influential  in  getting  the  Internal  Revenue  Service
to  reverse  a  two-year-old  ruling  related  to  DuPont's  divesti-
ture  of  General  Motors  stock.    The  reversal  resulted  in  a  $56
million  tax gift  to  the  DuPont   family.
Beware  Lest  Blue  Shield  and Blue
In  terms  of  benefits  and  financing,  the  new  medicare  pro-
gram  is  far  superior  to  anything  the  elderly   might  have
hoped  for  last  January.    The  bill  the  White  House   sent
Congress  covered little  more  than  hospital  room  and  board.
Congress   expanded   it   to   include  all   doctor   and  surgical
services  both  in  and  out  of  hospital.    This  is  still  not  com-
prehensive  insurance;  drugs,  dental  care  and  long-term  ill-
ness  are  major  exclusions,   and  so  of   course   are  the  mil-
lions  of  people  under  65  who  cannot  meet  the  high  cost  of
decent  medical  care.    But  for  those  over  65  medicare  now
offers  security  where  there  was  none  before.
The   program's   major  question   mark  is   its  administra-
tion.    Although  Blue  Cross  and  Blue  Shield  fought  medi-
care  bitterly   in  the  past,  they   are  now  eagerly   seeking  a
role  in  implementing  it.    Blue  Cross  pressed   Congress   for
the  job  of  auditing  hospital   costs  and  reviewing   hospital
utilization.    Congress  yielded  in  part  by  leaving  the  assign-
ment  of  these  tasks  to  the  Secretary   of  HEW.    To  refute
the  charge   of   "socialized   medicine"  it   also  required  that
Cross  Try  to  Take  Over  Medicare
the  part  of  the  program  having  to  do  with  doctor  services
should   be   administered   entirely   by   a   non-governmental
agency.    This  will  almost  certainly  be  Blue  Shield.
In  a  Senate  speech  that  went  unmentioned  in  the  press,
Wayne  Morse  warned  against   permitting  private   agencies
to  administer  any  part  of  medicare.    How  can  Blue  Cross
audit  hospital  costs,  he  asked,  when  "Blue  Cross  is   essen-
tially  a  creature   of  the  hospitals.  .  .  .    The  majority  of
Blue  Cross   plan  directors  are  either  directly  or  indirectly
affiliated   with  hospitals."    Furthermore,  Morse  said,  "Blue
Cross   plans  may  be  affected   by  the   amount  of   payments
under   the  Government  program—the   larger   the   medicare
payment  the  less  the  cost  to  be  met  by  Blue   Cross."
The  same  conflict of  interest  will  exist  if  Blue  Shield  be-
comes   responsible   for  setting   doctor  fees   under  medicare.
For  Blue  Shield  is  controlled  by  doctors   as  Blue  Cross   is
by  hospitals.     Blue  Shield  of  Minnesota  already  has  agreed
to   raise   its   standard   of   "customary   and  usual   fees"   in
anticipation   of  medicare.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  t8,1885
What  Fallacious  New  Forecasts  Will  McNamara  Bring  Back  This  Time?
(Continued  from  Page  One)
of   Red  China."     Two  days  later  Morse  in  a  Senate   speech
again  expressed  his  fear  that  "the  Pentagon,  in  its  escalating
war  policies,"  will  continue  "knowingly  to  follow  a  course  of
action   aimed  at  provoking  China  to  commit  an  overt   act."
He  also  warned  that  he  had  heard  "leading  advisers"  of  the
Pentagon  admit  that  the  bombing  and  destruction  of  Chinese
cities  would  not  defeat  China  but  that  we  would   "have  to
meet  them  on  the  ground."    This  could  prove  almost  as dis-
astrous  as  a  nuclear  war  with Russia.
Bombing  Our  Friends
These  are  the  gambles  involved  in  those  "new  and  serious
decisions"  for  which  Mr.  Johnson   is  preparing   the  country.'
Those  decisions  are  in  the  hands  of  a  military,  intelligence
and   diplomatic   bureaucracy  which   has   proven   consistently
wrong   about  Vietnam.     In   1961   McNamara   promised   that
the  Taylor-Staley plan  would  crush  the  rebellion  in  18  months.
Two years later,  just before the  1963  elections,  he  forecast  that
the  war  would  be  virtually  over  by  1965.     What   fallacious
new  forecasts will  McNamara  bring  back  this time?   Only  18
months   ago,   on   Feb.   18,   1964,   he  was  telling   us  that   "a
counter   guerrilla   war  can  only  be  won  by  the   Vietnamese
themselves."     Now  we  are  being  prepared  to  take  over  the
war.    First  it  was  promised  that   counter-insurgency  would
end  the  rebellion,  then  that  the  bombings  of  the  North  would
force  Hanoi  to  call  it off.  Now  we  are  back  to  imitating  mili-
tary  plans  like  Gen.  Navarre's  with  which  the  French,   too,
were  once  promised  victory.   The  fart  is  that  there  has  been
a  steady  degeneration  in  policy.    After  years  of  saying  that
the  war  could  only  be  won  by winning the  hearts  of  the  peo-
ple,   we  are  intensifying   those  tactics  which  can  only  make
them hate  us more. A sample  is provided  by John  T.  Wheeler's
AP  dispatch  (Washington  Post,  July  19)  on  "the  wailing  of
women  and  the  stench  of  burning  bodies"  which  greeted  our
troops  when  they  finally  "liberated"   the  pro-government,  Ro-
man Catholic village of  Bagia after  three  days of  bombardment.
One  Air  Force  officer  admitted  to  Wheeler  that  this  kind
of  bombardment  usually  kills  "more  women  and  kids"  than
War  For  The  Sake of Jobs?
"The  other day a  representative  of  a  great  union aat
in  my  office  protesting  my  position  on  the  war in  Viet-
nam.    I  listened  patiently,  very  much  interested  in  a
point  of  view  that is  held  by  too  many  labor  leaders  in
the  United  States  today.   During  the  conversation,  he
mentioned  the  great  interest  his  union  had  in  the  heli-
copters,  airplanes, munitions,  and war  materiel in Viet-
nam that was being manufactured by their labor.   Sena-
tors  know  that  I  would  be  aghast.    I  was  shocked  to
think  that  even the  thought should go  through his  mind
that  any  change  in  my  position  should  be  dictated  by
the  alleged  benefits  to the  economy  of  the  United  States
by  fighting  a  war in  South  Vietnam."
—Morse  in  the Senate, July  16.
Viet   Cong.    Another  U.S.   adviser,  surveying  the   shattered
homes  and  machine-gunned   church,  protested,  "That's  why
we're  going  to  lose  this  stupid  damned  war.    Senseless,   it's
just  senseless."    The  picture  of  a  woman  in  that  village  cra-
dling  her  baby  and  weeping  as  our  troops  moved  in  is unfor-
gettable,   except  for  those  who  put  realpolitik   above  human
values.    Similar  scenes  lie  hidden  behind  our  claims  of  spar-
ing  civilians in our  raids  upon  the North.    "The  major  horror
of  the  month,"  wrote  Freda  Cook,  a  British  nurse  working  in
North  Vietnam  (London  Tribune,  July  16),  "was  the  bomb-
ing  of  the  big  leper  sanatorium,  an  isolated  settlement  housing
some  3,000  people.  . . .  Five  times  the bombers  came,  killing
more  than  80 invalids  . . . and rendering  2,000  homeless, de-
stroying   50  buildings  and  devastating   clinics,  orchards   and
vegetable  gardens."    Somebody  must  have  mistaken  the  hos-
pital  for  a  bridge.    In  a  posthumous  letter  published  July  26
by   Newsweek,   Col.  Pham   Ngoc  Thao,  a  patriotic  Roman
Catholic,  who  has  just  been  assassinated,  wrote  "The   more
airplanes  and  bombs  you  send,  the  quicker  you  will  lose  the
confidence  of   South  Vietnam  and   of  Southeast  Asia."     He
called  McNamara  "a  very  bad  adviser"  and  said  that  to  win
the  people  the  U.S.  must  back  "a  socialist  or  almost  socialist
program."    Rather than  accept  any such  solution, Johnson  and
his  advisers would  risk  a  world  in  flames.                       July  20.
Why  Not  Send  That  Youngster  Off  to  School  in  The  Fall  With  A  Subscription  to  The  Weekly
Bulletin  Board
The  Weekly  will  not  be  published  in  August.    The
next  issue  will  be  that  dated  Sept.  6,  the  first  Monday
in  September.    We  wish  «t  this  time  to  record  our ap-
preciation  of  the  able  and  devoted service  rendered  the
Weekly  daring  the  past  18 months by a  young  editorial
assistant,  Charles  Nathanson,  who  is  returning  to  col-
lege  to  complete work  on his  doctorate in  sociology. We
wfch  to  thank  readers  who  sent  in  clippings  from  local
papers  we do not  see  and to  apologize  for  our  inability
to  answer  the  huge  volume  of  letters  received.    It  is
impossible  to   pat  oat   the  Weekly  and  respond   per-
sonally  and  we  ask  the  readers'  indulgence.
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
>  Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  CUu  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except   In   August,   the  last  week   in   December   and  th»
Brat  week   In  January  and  Bl-Weekly  during  July  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..   Washington.   D.  C.    An  independent   weekly   published   and   edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  H.   Stone.    Subscription:  K   In  the   U.S.:    *6   In   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mall   rates:
fig  to  Europe;   120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED