I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965may10.pdf

============================================================

The  Supreme  Court  Upholds  Iron  Curtains, P.  4
The  Prize  Remark  of  the  Dominican Crisis
"In  reply  to  a  question  based  on  a  statement  made  yes-
terday  by  former  President  Juan  Bosch  that  his  government
—if  it  came back—would  not  be  Communist,  Mr. Harriman
responded:  The  United States  takes  no part  in  the  political
decision  of  the  Dominican people  in  the  selection  of  their
leadership'."
—From  Bogota, Colombia,  where Harriman, as President Johnson's  Ambassador at  Large,  stopped   over  on  kit   tour  to
drum  up Latin American  support  for   UJS.  intervention  in  the  Dominican Republic, New  York  Times  May  S.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIII,  NO. II
MAY   10,  1965
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15   CENTS
The  Fatal  Lure  of World  Dominion
The  Department  of  Commerce  publishes  a  daily  bulletin  in
which  the  government   advertises   various  wants  for  bidding.
There  in  the  issue  of  April  29,  as  our  Marines  were  landing
in  Santo  Domingo,  appeared  an  ad  which  deserves  to  be  pre-
served  for  the  historian.    Amid  requests  for  bids  on   tires,
spare  aircraft  parts  and  survival  kits,  was  this  item—
Service  and  materials  to  perform   a  RESEARCH  STUDY
ENTITLED    'PAX   AMERICANA'     {capitals   in   original]
consisting   of   a  phased   study   of   the  following:   (a)   ele-
ments  of  National  Power;  (b)   Ability  of   selected  nations
to  apply   the  elements of  National  Power; (c)   A   variety  of
world  power  configurations   to  be  used  as  a  basis  for  the
US.   to  maintain  world   hegemony  in   the  future.    Quo-
tations  and  applicable   specifications   will  be  available  upon
request,  at  the  Army  Research  Office,    3845  Columbia Pike,
Arlington,  Va.,  until  1 May  196}.
Military  Taking  Over  The  State  Dept.
What   better   time  to   study  the   problem   of   maintaining
American  world  hegemony  than  the  moment  when  our  com-
bat  troops  were going  ashore  in  Vietnam  on  the  South  China
sea  in  one  hemisphere  and  in  the  Caribbean   in  the  other?
Coupled  with  this  ad  were three  others  from  the  Army.   One
was  a  study  of  the  foreign  aid  programs  of  the  West  Euro-
pean   nations.    The   second   was   "U.S.   Involvement   in   the
Emerging  Nations,"  a  study  "to  determine  the  quality  and
quantity  of  total  U.S.  presence  and  influence  in  Latin  Amer-
ica,  Africa  and  Asia,  to  identify  salient  trends  and  to  project
the  latter  into  the  1975-1980  time  frame."    The  third  was
the  most  disturbing,  "Investigation   of  the  feasibility  and  de-
sirability  in  the  1970  time  frame,  of  providing  selected   U.S.
allies  a  significant  nuclear  defense  capability  without  neces-
sity  for   maintaining  US.   controls  or  custody   over   weapons
systems  or their employment."  (Our  italics).   These  contracts
provide  an  insight  into  what  is  going  on  within  our  military
bureaucracy,  the  extent  to  which  it  is  invading  the  State  De-
partment's  province  in  making  foreign  policy,  and  the  kind  of
foreign  policy  the  armed  forces  project  for  die  future—one  in
which  they  play  policemen  to  the  world,  even  handing  out
nuclear  weapons  to  favored  allies  in  the  task!   This  is  a  for-
mula  which  can  only  end  by  spilling  the  blood  of  our  best
youth  in  an  endless  attempt  to  dominate  the  planet.    This  is
in  the  background  of  Johnson's  increasingly  militaristic  policy
Glimpses  of  the  Truth
"A  U.S.  Peace  Corps  worker,  who  asked  not  to  be
identified,  said there seemed to be wide countryside  sup-
port  for  the  revolution  to  return  Bosch  to  power.    He
said  the  more than  100  U.S.  Peace  Corps  volunteers  in
the  Dominican  Republic were  safe  and  in  no  danger,
even  in  Santo  Domingo."
—AP from  Santo Domingo in Washington  Post May S
"Diplomatic  sources  said  the  rebels  promised  to  do
their  best  to  make  the  cease-fire  effective.    So  far  they
appear  to  have  done so.   There  was little  shooting  here
today  by  either  of  the  opposing  forces.    Some  diplo-
mats  point to  this  as indicating  the  pro-Bosch  but  anti-
Communist  military  leaders  have  greater  control  of  the
rebel   movement   than  many  observers  here  had  sup-
posed.    U.S.  officials  who  claimed the  Communists  now
dominate  the  rebel  movement,  declined  to  explain  the
ability  of  the  rebel  military leaders  to  achieve  a  cease-
fire,  except  to  say  that  apparent  Communist  obedience
was  simply  a  matter  of  Red  tactics'."
—Dan  Kurzman,  Washington   Post   staff    man   from
Santo  Domingo in  that  newspaper   same  day.
in  Asia  and  Latin  America.    Like  Bismarck,  we  are  resorting
to  blood  and  iron.
Two  of  Kennedy's  utterances  come  to  mind  as  one  watches
the  steady  degeneration  of  policy  under  Johnson.    One  was
in   Kennedy's   American  University   speech   in   June,     1963,
"What  kind  of  peace  do  I  mean  and  what  kind  of  peace  do
we  seek?    Not  a  Pax  Americana  enforced  on  the  world  by
American  weapons  of  war."    The  other  was  at  the  Univer-
sity  of  California  that  year  when  Kennedy  warned,  "We  must
reject  oversimplified  theories  of  international  life—the  theory
that  American  power  is  unlimited,  or  that  the  American  mis-
sion  is  to  remake  the  world  in  the  American  image."    Such
views  are  now  out  of  fashion.    They  are  stigmatized  as  neo-
isolationist  while  ultra-nationalist   ambition  parades  as  inter-
nationalist   idealism.
All  kinds  of  excuses  could  be  made  for  Johnson's  Vietnam
policy.    He  inherited  the  war  from  Kennedy.    He  needed  a
position  of  strength  from  which  to  negotiate.    But  the  Do-
minican  affair   and  the  "Johnson  Doctrine"  put  Vietnam   in
a  different  light.    For  what  Johnson  is  saying  is  that  despite
the  Charters  of  the  United  Nations  and  of  the   Organization
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 10,1965
of  American  States  we  arrogate  to  ourselves  the  right  to  inter-
vene  whenever  and  wherever  we  believe  a  Communist   regime
may   take   over.     This   doctrine   has   two   deplorable    conse-
quences.     Like  the  Vietnamese  war  it  must  tend  to  solidify
the  Communist  bloc  just  when  centrifugal   forces  had   made
an  appearance   within  it;  American  policy  in  Europe   under
Eisenhower  and  Kennedy  had  begun  to  encourage  independ-
ence  within  the  bloc  by  treating  each  European   (though  not
Asian)   Communist   regime   differently.     Now   that  different
types  of  Communism   have  begun   to  appear,   and  with  them
liberalizing  trends,  we  enunciate  a  doctrine   that  no   longer
distinguishes  among  them.    The  effect  may  be  to  risk  a  new
Stalinist   Ice  Age  in  the   bloc  as  its  members   draw   together
again  in  fear  of  the   U.S.
McCarthyism  In  Foreign   Policy
The  implications  are  also  serious   for  the   non-Communist
world.     Social  reform  movements  and  anti-military   uprisings
in  Latin  America  and  elsewhere  will  be at  the  mercy of  Amer-
ican  definitions  of  what  constitutes  Communism.    The   John-
son  Doctrine  is  McCarthyism   in   foreign   policy.    Like  Mc-
Carthyism  at  home,  it  faces  the  same  basic  dilemma  and  that
is  to  determine   who  is  a  Communist.     Foreign   policy   gen-
erally  tends  to  be  to  the  right  of  domestic  policy;  the  familiar
accusation  of  Communism  was  unable  to  block  the  New  Deal
and  the  Fair  Deal  at  home  when  popular  feeling  and  demo-
cratic  institutions   overrode   rightist   propaganda   in  the   press
and  communications  generally.     But  in  foreign  policy,  where
popular  feeling  rarely  registers,  we  often  tend  to  regard   with
suspicion  in  Latin  America  regimes  which  are  no  more  Leftist
than  was  FDR's.   This  is  why  countries  like  Chile,  Uruguay,
Costa    Rica,    Venezuela    and    Mexico—all    non-Communist
regimes—look   with   suspicion   on   our   Dominican    interven-
tion.    The  sources  on  which  the  government  depends  in  for-
eign  policy  decisions  are  all  heavily  weighted  against  the  non-
Communist   reformer.    Big  business,  the  military,  the   intel-
ligence  apparatus  and  the  Foreign   Service  tend  to    share  the
Bosch  Accuses  The  U.S.
Mr.   [Robert]  PIERPONT  (CBS  News):  Mr.  Bosch,
do   you   support   the   presence   of   U.S.   troops   in   the
Dominican  Republic?
Sr.  [Juan]  EOSCH (deposed  President  of  the  Domin-
ican  Republic):  No,  sir.    As   you  or  other  Americans
could  not   support  the   presence   of   foreign   troops   in
your  country.  .  .  .
Mr.  PIERPONT: Do  your  people  there  feel  and  re-
port  to  you  that  American troops  are  supporting Gen-
eral  Wessin  y  Wessin  and opposing  your  return?  .  .  .
Sr.   BOSCH:  When  infantry   landed  in   San   Isidro
they  found  Wessin  y  Wessin  was  defeated.  .  .  .
Mr.   [Richard]  HOTTELET  (CBS  News):  Are   you
saying,  Mr.  Bosch,  the  U.S.  has  invaded the  Dominican
Republic  and  is  changing  the  course  of  the revolution?
Sr.  BOSCH: Of  course,  of  course.  .  .  .
Mr.  PIERPONT: Mr.  Bosch,  you  said  that  you  have
asked  your  forces  in   Santo   Domingo  not   to   fire   on
Americans.    Are  they  following  their  orders?
Sr.  BOSCH:  Not  absolutely.    It  was  impossible  be-
cause   American   Marines  have   shot   Dominicans  and
they  are  going  into  the  city,  the  old  city,  firing,  in  the
first   moment   firing   into   the   air   and  firing  into   the
ground,  not  exactly  at  persons  but  they  are  going   to
disarm  people  who  walk  in  the  streets  and  so  they  are
going  to  kill  people  and  people  are  going  to  kill  them.
Mr.   PIERPONT:  Are    you   saying    the   American
forces  began  the  killing  then?
Sr.  BOSCH: Yes,  sir.  .  .  .
Mr.  PIERPONT:  Does   this   mean,   in  your  opinion,
the  cease-fire  has  broken  down  completely?
Sr.   BOSCH: Yes.      It    was    broken   by   American
Marines.
—Juan  Bosch  on CBS  Face  The Nation, May  S.
views  of  their  opposite  numbers  in  the  countries  with   which
we  deal,  and  in  Latin  America   these  sectors   of   society   are
even  further  right  than  in  our  own.    To  this  influence  must
be  added  that  of  the  Catholic  Church.     Cardinal  Spell/nan—
himself   a  major   factor  in  U.S.   foreign   policy—was  long  a
pillar   of  both  the  Diem  regime  in  South   Vietnam   and   the
How  the  Anti-Castro Obsession Undercut  JKF's  Program for  Latin Social  Reform
"However  enthusiastic Kennedy's New  Frontiersmen  were
in  behalf  of  counterinsurgency  .  .  .  they  did  not  convince
the  Latin  American military  leaders  that  this  was  the  best
way  to  fight  Communism.   The  Administration's thesis  that
Castro's   success   was  due  to  guerrilla-warfare  techniques,
unbeatable  by  the  use  of  conventional  arms,  was  not  ac-
cepted.   Instead, the Latin American generals ... demanded
tremendous   amounts   of   new   equipment—tanks,   jets,   de-
stroyers—to  defend  their  own  country.   The  military,  par-
ticularly  those  of  Brazil  and  Venezuela,  took  advantage  of
the  October,  1962,  missile  crisis  to  double  and  triple  their
demands  for  heavy  military  hardware.  .  .  .
"Latin  America's  armed  forces  were  willing  to  cooper-
ate  with the  U.S.  anti-guerrilla training  missions  and to  de-
vote  a  unit  or  two  of  their  establishments  to anti-guerrilla
warfare  operations   but  .  .  .  the  counter-insurgency   units
did   not  always  perform   as   intended.    In  Peru,   the  anti-
guerrilla  commandos  spearheaded  the  ouster   of   President
Manuel  Prado.   In  the  Dominican Republic, the  U.S.  trained
police  joined  the  Army  in  ousting  President   Bosch,  follow-
ing   which  both   the   police   and   the   anti-guerrilla  units,
trained  during  1963  by  a  44-man  U.S.  Army  Mission,  were
used  to  hunt  down  Bosch's  non-Communist partisans  in  the
name  of  anti-Communism.   In  Guatemala  and Ecuador,  too,
there   was   every   indication   that   the   counter-insurgency
forces,  both  the  police  and  Army  units,  were  being   used
principally  to  stifle  the  political  thrust  of  the non-Commu-
nist  left.  .  .  .  which  Washington  [under  Kennedy]   believed
to  be the  best  defense  against  Communism. .  .  .
"The   [Kennedy]   Administration's   policies   were  not  al-
ways  consistent.    Its  general  policy  was  to  encourage  the
growth  of  responsible   apolitical   military  organizations   so
that  democracy might  have a  better  chance  to  function;  yet,
when  it  wanted  to  isolate  Cuba,  it  did not  hesitate  to  make
political  use  of  the  military against  policies  of  the  civilian
governments  of  Argentina  and  Ecuador.    Also,  it  compro-
mised  democratic  principles  for  the  sake  of  expediency  in
accepting  the  coups   of  Guatemala  and  Ecuador.     Finally,
it  began  to  veer  toward  a  watered-down  definition  of  de-
mocracy  by  going  along  with  vetoes  issued  by  the  military
against  majority-supported civilian  politicians.  .  .  .
"As   military   intervention   in   many   countries    blocked
democratic  social  revolution,  it  gave  added  weight  to  Cas-
tro's  oft-repeated assertion  that  there  is  no  alternative  be-
tween   violent   social   upheavals  and  military  dictatorship.
And  it  was  certainly  true  that,  despite  its  noble  efforts  and
intentions,  the  Kennedy  Administration  accomplished  little
in  furthering  the  cause  of  democracy  in  Latin  America."
—Edwin  Lieuwen:  Generals  vs.  Presidents—Neo  Militarism  in  Latin  America  (Praeger,  1964)  highly   recommended.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly,  May 10,1965
Trajillo   dictatorship   in  the   Dominican   Republic.     If   such
forces  decide  who  is  Communist,  then   social   reform  in   the
hemisphere  and  elsewhere  is  indeed  in  trouble.
Kennedy  Supported  Bosch
Here  we  come  to  a  sharp  difference  between  the  Kennedy
and   Johnson    Administrations.      The   former   was   friendly
to  Bosch  but  Standard  Oil  of  New  Jersey  was  hostile  to him,
as  was  (to   its  shame)   the  AFL-CIO.    While  our  Ambas-
sador,  John  Bartlow  Martin,  warned  the  Dominican   military
against  a  coup  to  unseat  Bosch,  his  warnings  were  undercut
by  our  Military  Mission  in  the  island,  some  of  whose  mem-
bers   agreed   that   Bosch   was  a   Communist.     The   Catholic
Church,  which  had  opposed   Bosch's  election,  was  angered  by
the  adoption  of  a  secular  Constitution.   So after  seven  months,
the  first  freely  elected  Dominican  regime  in  a  generation  was
overthrown.     Bosch  was  all  we  claimed  we  wanted:  a  truly
democratic  social  reformer  absolutely  free  from  any  taint  of
Communism,   as   his   friends   Betancourt   of   Venezuela   and
Figueres  of  Costa  Rica  and  our  own  Norman  Thomas  were
prepared   to  attest.    I  was  in  the  Dominican  Republic  when
Bosch  was  in  power,  and  I  was  impressed   by  his  inspiring
eloquence,  his  devotion  and  his  uncompromising   civil  liber-
tarian  principles.    But  for  the  military  and  big  business  and
the  CIA  to  be  a  genuine  liberal  was  by  definition  to  be  "soft
on  Communism."     Kennedy,  to  his  credit,  shut  off  all  aid
to  the  new  military  regime  after  Bosch  was  overthrown  and
refused   to  recognize  it.     Only   the  military  dictatorships   of
Spain,  Portugal,  Formosa  and  Honduras  extended   recognition
in  the  month   after  the  coup,  while  the  U.S. held  off.   But
Johnson,   soon   after   Kennedy's   assassination,    reversed   that
policy.    The  reader  can  see  from  the  box  at  the  bottom  of
this  page  that  Johnson,  with  Tom  Mann,  swung  away  from
the  social  reform  emphasis  of  the  Alliance  for  Progress  and
toward  military  dictatorships  submissive  to  American  business
Just  One Big  Plot  From  One Big  Switchboard
Mr.  Rowland  EVANS:   Senator  Dodd,  yon  just   said
you  are  very  sure  there  is  a  connection  between  events
in  the  Dominican Republic and  the  fighting  in  Vietnam.
Would  you  document  that  a  little  bit?    Do  yon  mean
there  is  a  central  command  post  somewhere,  perhaps
in  Peking,  that  is  signalling  an  outbreak  of  trouble  in
the  Caribbean at  a  specific  time to  embarrass  President
Johnson  and  the  United  States?
Senator  DODD:  Yes,  I  do. ...     I  am  satisfied   that
this  situation  in  the  Dominican Republic  is  tied  right
into  our  struggle  in  Southeast  Asia.
—On Meet the Press, May  S.
interests—like  Brazil's  which  Rusk   hailed   as  a  victory   for
democracy  and  constitutional   government!
There  is no  country  for  which  U.S. intervention  has  a grim-
mer  meaning  than  the  Dominican   Republic.    The  long  and
bloody  night  of  the  Trajillo  dictatorship  was  ushered   in  by
a   similar  U.S.  Marine   occupation.     That   Caribbean   Nero
was  himself  trained  by the  Marines,  later  armed  by U.S. mili-
tary  aid, and  praised  by  our  Eastlands  and  Ellenders  and  Mc-
Cormacks  during  the  terrible  years  he  imposed  upon  his peo-
ple.    The  cry of  Communism  is familiar to  them;  for  30  years
every  opponent  of  The  Benefactor  was  labelled  a  Communist.
"I   beg  President   Johnson   and  the  American  people," Mrs.
Juan  Bosch,  herself  a  Cuban  aristocrat,  said  at  an  anguished
press  conference here,  "to  understand  that we  are your  friends.
We  are  not  'rebels.'    We  are  democrats  fighting  to  regain
the  liberties  which  were  stolen  from  us  by Gen. Wessin.    We
need  your  help  and understanding,  not your  paratroopers  . . .
not  your  bullets."    Never  was  the  Red  Menace  more  fraudu-
lently  trotted  out  than  against  Bosch  and  his  supporters.  Every
American  who  knows  what  such  interventions  have  cost   the
Latins  in   the   past   must  blush   with   shame   over  Johnson's
revival  of  gunboat  diplomacy.
How  Johnson  and Tom Mann Shifted  the  Emphasis  from  Reform  to  Anti-Communism
of  the  principal internal impediments to  freedom and  social
justice,  namely,  the  military  and  the  oligarchies.     Instead
he  mentioned  that  the  principal threat  to  the  Alliance  was
from   Communism  and  in  unequivocal  terms  pledged  that
'the  full  power  of  the  U.S. is  ready  to  assist  any  country
where  freedom  is  threatened by  forces  dictated from  beyond
the  shores  of  the  continent.'
"But  two  days later, on  March  18  [1964],  at  a  meeting  of
U.S.  Ambassadors to  Latin  America, the  new Assistant Sec-
retary  for  Latin  American  Affairs,  Thomas  Mann,  report-
edly  suggested  that  it  was  unwise  for  the  U.S. to  continue
to  become involved  in  internal threats  to  freedom  in  Latin
America,  since   Kennedy's  policies  had  demonstrated  how
fruitless  it  was  for  the  U.S. to  try  to  impose democracy
upon  Latin  America.    Mann  urged  that  greater  attention
be   paid  to   immediate  national-security interests,  such   as
protection  of  U.S. investments  and  resistance  to   Commu-
nism.    He  suggested  a  less  passionate commitment to  poli-
tical  freedom  and  social  justice.   The  emerging  'Mann  doc-
trine' seemed  to  be that  henceforth the  U.S.  would  no  long-
er  oppose  military  coups  or  rightist  dictatorships.    Thus,
the  new  and  much  narrower  criteria  for  recognizing   and
supporting  new  governments  in  Latin  America  seemed   to
be  anti-Communism  and  security  for  foreign  investments.
Eliminated  were  the  Kennedy  foreign-policy dimensions  of
human  freedom  and  social  justice."
—Lieuwen:  Generals  vs. Presidents  (Praeger,  1964)
"Since  his  very  first  days  in  office,  President  Johnson  has
had  to  deal  with the  problem of  militarism  in  Latin Amer-
ica.   In  the  last  two  months of  the  Kennedy  Administration,
the  U.S.  boycott—diplomatic,  economic and  military—of  the
Dominican  and  Honduran  regimes,   as   intended,   seriously
weakened  the  position  of  the  military  rulers  in  those  two
nations.    But  they  soon  came  up  with  the  magic  formula
for   resisting  demands  to  restore  democracy  and  constitu-
tionalism;  it  was  the  cry  of  Castro-Communism.  Though
Castro-Communism  was  never  a  serious  problem  when  the
democratic  governments of  Bosch  and Villeda Morales were
in'power,  the  new  military  rulers  repeatedly  warned that
Washington's  ostracism of  their regimes  had  given  strength
to  subversive elements  and that  a  Cuban-type  upheaval was
in  store  unless  recognition  and  aid  were  granted.    To  this
blackmail,  the  new  Johnson  Administration succumbed.  On
Dec.  14,  1963, in  exchange  for  assurances  that  some  kind  of
elections  would  be  held  during  1965,  the  juntas  in  the  Do-
minican  Republic  and  Honduras  were  recognized.   During
January  and  February  1964,  the  economic and  military  aid
programs  were resumed.
"During  March  came further evidence that  a  basic  policy
shift   was   under  way   in  Washington.    On  March   16,   the
third  anniversary  of   the  Alliance  for  Progress,  President
Johnson  paid  lip  service  to  the  U.S. continued  devotion  to
the  principles  of  economic  development,  social  justice  and
human  freedom for  Latin  America, but  he  made  no mention
7  j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'* Weekly,  May 10,1985
To  Uphold The  Cuban Travel  Ban la  To  Make  Police  State  Law for  the  Hemisphere
A  Supreme  Court  Decision  To  Match  LBfs  Latin  American  Policy
It  is  most  disappointing  that Chief  Justice Warren and Mr.
Justice  Biennan  abandoned  their  liberal  principles  and  made
possible  a  6-to-3  victory  for  reaction  in  the  Zemel  case.    The
issue  was  the  State  Department's  power  to  erect  Iron  Cur-
tains  around  countries  of  which  it  disapproves,  in  this  case
Cuba,  and  forbid  travel  to  them.    The  Chief  Justice's  deci-
sion  breathes  the  same  Mettemichian  spirit  as  the  Johnson
messages  on  the, Dominican  Republic  and  can  serve  only  to
set  a  bad example  for  the  Americas.
The  Same  Iron  Curtain  Logic
This  is  a  hemispheric   police  state   decision.     "The    U.S.
and  other  members  of  the  Organization  of  American  States,"
the  Supreme  Court  noted,  "have  determined   that  travel  be-
tween  Cuba  and  die  other  countries  of  the  Western   Hemi-
sphere  is  an  important  element  in  the  spread  of   subversion,
and  many  have  therefore  undertaken  measures  to   discourage
such  travel."    But  if  conditions  in  Cuba  are  as  repellent  as
our  government  says  they  are,  what  better  way to  expose  them
than  to  encourage  more  people  to  go  and  see for  themselves?
If,  on  the  other  hand,  progress  is  being  made  under   Castro,
then  our  Iron  Curtain  has  the  same  purpose  as those  of  total-
itarian  regimes—to  keep  their  people  from  seeing  the  truth
about  the  outside  world  and  the  falsity  of  their  own  propa-
ganda.
The  Chief  Justice  recognizes  queasily  that  "the  Secretary  of
State's  refusal  to  validate passports  for  Cuba renders  less  than
wholly  free  the  flow  of  information  concerning that  country."
But  he  and  the  majority  decline  to  accept  the  contention  that
this  is an  invasion of  First  Amendment rights.   They  fall  back
on  the  view  that  "the  changeable  and  explosive nature  of  con-
temporary   international  relations"   justify   the   Executive  in
wielding  greater  authority on  the  world  than  on "the  domestic
scene.
If  travel  can  facilitate  "the   spread  of  subversion"  so  can
the  reading  of  dangerous  books  and  periodicals.   If  the  Presi-
dent  can  shut  off  travel  to  Cuba  or  China  or  North  Vietnam,
as  he  does  under  present  travel  restrictions,  can  he  also  shut
off   publications   from   those   countries?    Or   publications  at
Punished  for  Going  to  Cuba
The  U.S.  seems  to  think  it  has  the  right  to  control
the  travel  to  Cubs  not  only  of  its  own  citizens  but  of
Latin  Americans.   On April  28  immigration authorities
at  Kennedy  Field  hi  New  York  took sway  the  residence
card  of  a  respected  Latin  American  Washington  cor-
respondent,  Leopoldo  Aragon,  on  his  return  from Mex-
ico.     He  was  told  the  action  was  taken  "on  suspicion
of  having  been  to  Cuba" I   Aragon  writes  for  El  Dia
(Mexico),  Ultima  Hora  (Santiago,  Chile),  Epoca (Mon-
tevideo)  and Gestos  (Lima).   His  visit  to  Cuba  was  no
secret   (his  last  previous  visit  there  was  hi  1961)   and
he  is  to  write  a  series  on  Cuba  for  his  papers.    This
means  writing  with  the  threat  of  expulsion  hanging
over  his  head.   Unless  he obtains  a  new  residence  card,
he  and his  family  most  pnll  up roots  and leave  the  U.S.
or  face  separation.   Aragon's wife  is  a  naturalized citi-
zen.    They  have two  American  children.   He is  a  Pan-
amanian.   We  ask  other  papers  to  inquire and  protest.
home  he  deems  friendly  to  them?    Where  do  you  stop  once
you  decide  that  First  Amendment  rights  may be  restricted  for
foreign  policy  reasons?    The  Communists  are  not  the  only
ones  to  use  "salami"  tactics  in  cutting  away  basic  rights.
Black,  Douglas  and  Goldberg  dissented.    The  views  of  the
dissenters   reflect   a  philosophy   suddenly   on   the   wane.     If
travel  is  to  be  barred  to  shut  off  Communist  ideas,  Douglas
and  Goldberg  argued,  we  have  to  deal  with  more  than  Cuba.
There  are  Communist  regimes  on  every  continent  "and  if  we
are  to  know them  and  understand  them,  we  must  mingle  with
them,  as Pope  John  said."   The  dissenters  pleaded  that  "keep-
ing  alive  intellectual   intercourse   between  opposing  groups"
has  "perhaps  never  been  more  important  than  now."
The  First  Amendment,  Douglas  and  Goldberg  declared  in
words  which  recall  Holmes  and  Brandeis,  "presupposes  a ma-
ture  people,  not afraid  of ideas."   That  Amendment, they pro-
test,   "leaves   no  room  for  the   official,   whether  truculent   or
benign,  to  say  nay  or  yea  because  the  ideas  offend  or  please
him,   or  because he  believes  some  political  objective  is  served
by  keeping  the  citizen  at home  or  letting  him  go."  The  words
begin  to  sound  like  the  echo  of  a  vanishing  age.
We'll  Be Clod to Send A  Sample Copy of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —   Send  A  Stamped Addressed  Envelope
The  1964   Index  Is  Ready—You  Can  Have  One  Free  If  You  Send  a  Long  Stamped  Addrewed  Envelop*
I.  F.  Stone'8 Weekly      5618 Nebraska  Ave., N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  snb  for  the  enclosed   ?5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................,.....Zone............State....................
5/10/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............St»te....................
For  S5.35  extern  scad  L  F.  Stone's  The  Hamnte*  FUtiet
Indicate  if  announcement  wished   D
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Ncbraika  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F
Weekly     Second  Clan  PocUce  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  the  but   week   In  December  and  the  flrrt  week   IB
ua      MdBUWiekTy  durin?  JuUTand  AutoM  at  eeWNebraika  Ave.,  N.W    WaAlngton   D   C.   An  Independent  weekly  Published  and  edited
by  L  F   Stone-   Circulation  Manager,  Either  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $6  in   the   U.S.;     SB   In   Canada;    110   elsewhere.    Air  Hail   rat**:
»16  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Alia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED