I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965feb02.pdf

============================================================

Disappointment  for  Appalacbia,  P.  2
Would  It  Have  Seemed  Less  Subversive  If  They  Carried  Banners  Against Democracy?
"One    banner  [in  the  Buddhist demonstration  against  the     Communist  guerrillas,  'We  desire  democracy,  freedom  and
U.S.  and the  Huong  government] paralleled  a  slogan  of  the     peace  for  the  Vietnamese  people'."
—Another  AP  dispatch  from  Saigon  implying  that  the  Buddhists  are fronts  for  the Reds,  N.Y.  Times, Jan,  33.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  4
February  2,  1965<oi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.,
15  CENTS
The  Arms  Lobby  and  LBJ's  Great   Society
Ours  is a  muscle-bound  society.  The  job  of  shaking  it  loose
from  the  conditioned  reflexes  imposed  by  its  huge  vested  in-
terests,   and   giving   it   new   directions,   is   terribly    difficult.
Looked  at  from  within  the  Budget  Bureau,  where  the  pres-
sures  converge  and  the  hard  decisions  are  made,  Mr.  Johnson
and  the  men  around  him  must  feel  that  they  have  made  a
start.    A  poverty  program  has  been  launched,  education  ex-
panded,  a  beginning  of  medicare  is  in  sight,  the   steep  rise
in  military  spending  since the  Eisenhower  Administration  has
been  stopped;   the  arms  budget  is  down  a  little.
Poverty  and  War
But  this  shift  in  emphasis  should  not  put  us  off  our  guard.
The  new  budget  shows  that  the  main  concern  of  the  govern-
ment  is still war; the  main  beneficiary  of  its  vast  expenditures,
still  the  military  bureaucracy  and  its  Siamese  twin,  the  arma-
ments  industry.    The  budget  advertises  a  quadrupled   appro-
priation  for  the  attack on  poverty,  but  the  dimensions  are  still
minuscule.   The  budget  enables  us  to  see in  cold  money terms
the  prime  concerns  of  our  society,  and  the  prime  determinants
of  policy.    At  one  end  of  the  scale,  more  than' $50  billions
for  the  war  machine,  50%  of  the  administrative  budget.    At
the  other  end  of  the  scale,  $1.3  billion  for  that  purely  meta-
phorical  "war  on  poverty",   1.3%  of  the  budget.    The  total
budget  for  space,  that  breeder  of  new  Houston  millionaires,
that  additional  gravy  train  for  missile  and  electronic  makers,
will  get  $5.1  billion  in  the  next  fiscal  year,  or  almost  four
times  as  much  as  the  poverty  program,  though  "quadrupled".
$1.3  billion  divided  among  35  million  living  a  substandard
existence  figures  out  to  a  little  over  $30  a  year,  or  $2.50  ad-
ditional  a  month,  hardly  enough  for  an  extra  beer  a  day.   If
only  somehow  fat  profits  could  be  made  out  of  building  men,
as  they  are   out  of   building   missiles,   the   poverty   program
might  be  something  more  than  a  bone  tossed  from  a  well-
laden  table.    The  fast  buck  is  still  in  making  and  inventing
ways  to  destroy,  to  kill  and  to  waste.
Many grudge  even  the  bone,  and  there  is  already grumbling
from  the  military-industrial  complex.    Its  authentic  voice can
be heard  in  David  Lawrence's  column  (Jan.  25).   The  Presi-
dent  in  his  defense  message  to  Congress  looked  forward  to  a
levelling-off   in   military  expenditures,   so  that   even   "if   we
continue  to  spend  the  same  amount  of  dollars  annually"  this
will  become  a  smaller  percentage  of  a  growing  national  in-
come  and   release   more  funds   "for   other   vital  needs,   both
public  and  private."     But  who  is  to  judge,   Lawrence  asked,
2
When We Last  Saw Churchill
"The   huge  and garish  Presidential  room  of  the  Stat-
ler  was jammed. ...  Sir Winston,  with  that  big cigar,
looking   more  and  more  like  the   late   W.  C.   Fields,
brought  the   house  down  when  he  appeared,  followed
by  Anthony Eden, who  had  the  pleased  and  incredulous
look  of  a  small  boy  allowed  to  go  along  and  watch  a
gifted  grandpa do  card  tricks.   Churchill  was  magnifi-
cent.   I  never  expect  in  my  lifetime  to  hear  and  see  a
greater   man.   Beyond  the  puckishness  and  the  ham-
ming,  there  came  through  with  tremendous  sincerity
the  last,  desperate  effort  of  a  noble  old  man  to  stem
the  tide  toward  war.    His  plea  for  'a  good  hard  try'
at  peace  and  co-existence  could  not  have  been  spoken
in  a  more unfavorable context;  such  talk  has  long  been
regarded   here   as   subversive.     The   atmosphere   was
vividly   indicated   for  all  time  when  Churchill  felt   it
necessary  to  assure  his  audience  that   he  was  not  a
Communist!"
—From  our  Weekly,  July  5,  1954, on  the  press  con-
ference    in   Washington   at   which   Churchill,  at   the
height   of   McCarthyism,   pleaded   unsuccessfully     that
the  death  of  Stalin  called  for   a  reversal  of   Western
policy  toward Russia  and  China.   All  the  obituaries re-
call  that  Churchill was  the  prime  architect  of  the  cold
war;  few,  that  he  was  also  among  the  first  to  propose
its end.
1  5
"whether  the  defense program  is  adequate  and  whether  it  can
be  measured  primarily  by  the  desire  to  spend  more  money  on
'The  Great  Society' ?   Some  of  the  top  men  in  America's  mili-
tary  establishment   do  not  believe  that  such  a  rigid  rule  can
be applied  to defense expenditures.    They  do not  wish  to  leave
a  stone  unturned  to  obtain  the  most  efficient   armament  that
scientific  minds  can  develop."    That  way lies  a  sky's-the-limit
arms  race.
Johnson  and  McNamara,  in  an  effort  to  appease  the  mili-
tary,  seem  to  be  resorting  to  a  qualitative  arms  race.    Looked
at  from  the  viewpoint  of  numbers,  we  have  somewhat  scaled
down  our  projected  strategic  forces.    Instead   of   1200   inter-
continental   ballistic   missiles,   we  are  to  have   1,000.     This
force  will  be  supplemented  by  900  long  range  bombers  and
41  Polaris  submarines,  each  with  16  missiles,   or  656  in   all.
This  adds  up  to  a  strategic  striking  force  of  2,556.    Just  how
stupendous  this  is  may  be  seen  if  we  realize  that  there  are
probably  not  more  than  a  dozen  prime  targets  in  the  Soviet
Union;  if  these  crucial  industrial  and  urban  areas  were  wiped
out,  its  back  would  be  broken.    In  terms  of  numbers,  how-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  2,  1965
Plans  for  Three   Highways  By-Pass  Kentucky's  Poorest  Rural  Counties
This  Year's  Appalachia  Bill  Even  More  Disappointing  Than  Last  Year's
It  is  a  pity  that  the  people  of  Appalachia  have  come, to  ex-
pect  so much  of  the  Appalachia  Development  Bill.    They  will
be  disappointed.   The  bill  as  unveiled  at  Senate  hearings  last
week  is  about  as  resourceful  as  a  surgeon  who  assumes  in  ad-
vance  his  patient  cannot  be  saved.    Administration witnesses
spoke  of  making  Appalachia  "just  like  the  rest  of  the  Nation"
in  20  years,  but  the  bill  betrays them.    If  this  is  really  a  long
range  development  program,  it  is  the  only  one  we  know  of
with  such  short  range  plans.  The  life  of  the  Appalachia  Com-
mission  expires  in  just  six  years.  The  bill  is  so  innocuous  that
the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  other  like  groups  did  not
bother  to  testify  against  it.    It  even  lacks  the  usual  handouts
to  big  business,  which  in  Appalachia  means  coal,  chemicals
and  railroads.    "We  couldn't  come  up  with  any  solutions  that
were  acceptable  to  all  involved,"  said  John  Sweeney,  the  chief
federal  planner,  "and  therefore  we  had  best  avoid  it."    Eva-
sion  is  die  bill's  one  distinctive trait.    (Also  see  box  below.)
A  Self-Defeating  Standard
This  bill  is  even  weaker  than  the  one  the  Senate  passed  last
summer.    A  new  section  has  been  added  which  requires  fed-
eral  funds   to  be  concentrated   in   areas  where  there   is   "the
greatest  potential  for  future  growth,  and  where  the  expected
return  on  public  dollars  will  be  greatest."    Shouldn't  the  gov-
ernment  be  as  interested  in  need  as  in  profit?    Isn't  this  just
a  polite  way  of  saying  that  the  most  impoverished  areas  will
receive  the  least  funds?    If  so,  the  addition  is  superfluous  for
the  entire  administrative  procedure  tends  to  by-pass  the  poor-
est  areas.   The  federal  government  is not  permitted  to  initiate
any  projects.    The  purpose  of  this  is  to  foster  local  self-help,
but  the  effect  is to  give unfair  advantage to  the  well-organized,
administratively   sophisticated   urban   centers   which   already
have  had   some  experience   with  government  programs.    By
the  time  the  more  backward  communities submit  development
plans,  there  will  be  little  money  left.
This   isn't   merely  cynical  speculation.    Near   the   close  of
its  hearings  the  Senate  Public  Works   Committee  heard  testi-
mony  from  two  representatives  of  Jackson  County,  Kentucky.
Jackson  has  the   lowest  median   family   income  in   the   state.
This  means  that  60%  of  its  families  earn  less  than  $2,000  a
year  and   75%   earn   less  than   $3,000.    About   10%   of   its
homes  are  graced  with  hot  running  water.    There  is  maybe
one  lawyer  in  the  county  to  help  with  development   plans.
Jackson's   spokesmen   told   the   Senate   committee   that   what
Taking  The Sting  Out of  Antitrust
"The  Internal  Revenue  Service  Ruling  in  TIR-615  is
bad  law,  bad  public  policy,  and  bad  public  administra-
tion.     It   permits   an   antitrust   offender,   already   con-
victed   of   a   criminal   antitrust    violation,   to    deduct
[from  his  income  tax]   the  treble  damages   paid  to  his
victims.    The  legal   question   before  this  Committee  is
whether  conduct  which  constitutes  a  criminal   antitrust
violation  is  conduct  that  is  'ordinary  and necessary  .  .  .
in  carrying  on  any  trade  or  business'  within  the  mean-
ing  of  the  statute   [governing]  income  tax   deductions.
From  the  standpoint   of   public  policy,  the  question   is
whether  the  'sting'  of   treble   damages   should  be   les-
sened  by  shifting  from  the  shoulders  of  criminal  anti-
trust   offenders  to   the   taxpayers   approximately   one-
half  of  treble  damage  awards.    From  the  standpoint  of
public  administration,  the  question   is  whether  the  In-
ternal   Revenue   Service   by   an   administrative   ruling,
not  subject   to  judicial  review,  should  in  effect   amend
the  antitrust   laws  by  mitigating   treble  damages.  .  .  .
The   attitude  that   a   violation   of   our  antitrust   laws,
even  a  flagrant  criminal  price-fixing   conspiracy,  is  no
worse   than  a   traffic   ticket   is   the   major   premise   of
TIR-615."
—Rep.  Celler  (D.,  N.Y.),  in  a  statement  to  the  Joint
Co-nim.  on  Internal   Revenue   Taxation,  Jan.  22  (abr.).
Jackson   and   its   four   surrounding   counties  need   most   is  a
better  highway.    The  present  one,  U.S.  421,  is  narrow  and
winding.    It  frightens  off tourists  and  makes it  hard  to  market
the  produce  of  the  area.    Highway  construction  is  the  central
program  in  the  Appalachia  Bill  and  one  would  think  that  the
Jackson  region  would  be  a  priority  target.
It  isn't.  'When  these  Jackson  men  visited  the  state  Appala-
chian  planning   office,   they  were  told   of   tentative   plans   to
build  three  highways  all  of  which will  neatly  by-pass the  poor-
est  counties  in  Kentucky.    There  is  no  indication   that   the
state will  revise its  plans,  and  Jackson  is not  entitled  under  the
bill   to   appeal   to   Washington.     All   projects,   according   to
another  new  amendment,  must  come  through   the  state   rep-
resentative.
Appalachia's  planners  envision  flourishing  timber  and  tour-
ist  industries  as  the  foundation  of  the  region.    Even  if  they
are  successful,  the  achievement  is  not  an  inspiring  one.    Tim-
ber  is an  uncertain business  and  some  say demand  is  declining.
Tourism  is  seasonal  and  low-paying.    Surely  this  is  not   the
best  we  can  do.    The  bill  is  a  challenge  to  Congressional  lib-
erals.    We  look  to  them  for  strengthening   amendments.
Appalachia   Gets  Sewage  Systems  But  Needs  "Just  Plain  Water'
Sen.  COOPER  (R., Ky.): ...  Is  there  a  gap in  the  [Ap-
palachia]  bill  in  that  this  section  would  not  be  available  for
the  provision   of  just  plain  water  to  some  community?     I
know,  it  would  provide  sewage  facilities  .  .  .  but there  is  no
provision  for  water.    And  I  know  that  there  are  many  com-
munities   in  my  state,  several  county   seats,  which  do  not
have  any  water   facilities,   they   still  use  wells.    In   many
cases,  it  is  brackish  mine  water  and  very  very  dangerous
to  the  health   of  the  people   and  to  the  children  in  schools
even. ...  I  think  we  should  correct  that.
Mr.  SWEENEY   (Chairman,  Federal  Development  Plan-
ning  Committee  for  Appalachia):  Senator,  let  me  explain
why  it  is  not  in  the  bill.    We  are  aware  of  this.    There  are
also  no  funds  for   school   construction.    It   was  our  judg-
ment  and the  President's  judgment  that  until  Congress  had
resolved  this  question  nationally,  we  ought  not  to  ask  for  a
special  program  in  Appalachia.    When  those  two  questions
are  resolved  and  there  is   a  national   program   for   water
supply  on  a  grant  basis  and  also  for  school  construction,
...  we  [will  be]  in  a  position  to  recommend  the  needs
Appalachia  actually   has.  .  .  .  This  whole  bill  is  an  exten-
sion  of  existing  programs   to  meet   Appalachia's   needs."
-Hearings   on  Appalachian  Development  Bill,  Senate  Public  Works  Committee,  Jan.  19.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  2,1965
Behind  Drug   Magnate   Connor's  Appointment   as  Secretary  of   Commerce
Big  Business  Under  LBJ  Won  A  Privileged  Position  It  Lost  Under  JFK
The  President  has  done  the  country  a  disservice  by making
John   Connor   Secretary  of   Commerce.     Connor   was   vice-
chairman  of  the  Business  Advisory  Council  just  prior  to  his
appointment.    The  Council,  which  is  confined  to  the  elite  of
the   business  world,   enjoyed   privileged   access  to   the   Com-
merce  Department  until  Luther  Hodges   became  Secretary  un-
der  Kennedy.    Hodges  refused  to  "consult"  with  the  Council
unless  the  press  and  small  business  were  represented.    Since
this  meant  an  end  to  its  monopoly  as  an  adviser  the  Council
deserted  both  the  Department  and  the  Administration.  After
Mr.  Johnson  became  President,  the  Council  began  meeting  in
the White  House.    Now  one  of  its  own  rules  the  Department
from   which   it   was  ousted.     It   is  not   surprising  that   Mr.
Hodges   departed   Washington   before  the  Inauguration.
Drugs  and  Patents
Unfortunately,   Secretary  Connor  is  more  than   the  symbol
of  a  new  alliance  with  big  business.    He  is  also  the  just-re-
signed  president  of  Merck  &  Co.,  one  of  the  nation's  leading
drug   firms.   The  lifeblood  of  the  drug  business  is  patents,
and  Connor,  as  Secretary, has  jurisdiction over  the  U.S.  Patent
Office.    At  his  Senate  Commerce  Committee  hearing,  Connor
declared  he  would  leave  all  patent  matters  involving  Merck  to
the  Patent   Office.    This  is  doubly  misleading.     The   present
Patent   Commissioner,   Edward   Brenner,   was   persona   grata
with   powerful   patent   interests.     Before  President   Johnson
appointed  him   last  year,  Brenner  worked   for   Standard  Oil
of  New  Jersey  as  a  relatively  obscure  patent  attorney.    Merck
is  also  located  in  New   Jersey.    So  are  a  host  of  other  drug
companies,   including   Johnson   &  Johnson,   Olin   Mathieson,
Schering,  Hoffman  La-Roche  and  Ciba.    Each  has  a  battery of
patent  attorneys  who  together   with  Esso's  make  up  a   large
part  of  the  New  Jersey  Patent  Bar.    The   Bar  lobbyed  hard
for  Brenner,  while  Connor  on  the  Business  Council  and  soon
to  become  co-chairman  of  a  campaign  committee  for  Johnson-
Humphrey   was  in   a   position   of   great   influence.     Leaving
Merck's patent  problems  with  Brenner  is  as  risky  as Mr.  John-
son's  policy of  leaving  oil  matters  to  the  former  vice-president
of  Humble  Oil,  who  heads  the  Oil  Office  at  Interior.
Connor's  offer   is  misleading   in  a  more  serious  way.    The
major  danger  in  having  him  as  Secretary  is  not  his  ties  with
Merck  but  his  pro-industry  bias  on  drug  patent  policy.    The
drug  companies  have  been  taking  advantage  of  the  govern-
Dept.  of  Humanitarianism  in  the  Congo
"News  correspondents  are  being  kept  out  of  Govern-
ment-reoccupied   territory   in  the  northeastern  Congo.
The  ban  is  apparently   intended  to  prevent  reporting  of
the  killing  of  Congolese  civilians  by  army   troops  and
mercenaries.    G.  McMurtrie   Godley,   the   U.S.   Ambas-
sador,  has  refused   to  permit   correspondents  to  fly  on
the   U.S.    planes   that   carry   mercenaries,   ammunition
and  supplies  for  the  Congolese  forces.    The  transports
provide   the   only   available    transportation   to   Paulis,
Bunia,   Lisala  and  other  northeastern  towns  liberated
from   the   rebels.    Mr.  Godley   and  other  embassy   of-
ficials  insist  that,  although  they  would  like  to  allow
correspondents  on  the  aircraft,  the  ban  is  enforced  by
Gen.  Mobutu,  the  Congolese  army  commander.  .  .  . One
high  ranking   official   said:  'There  are  so  many   things
we  are  trying  to  get  the  Government  here  to  do,  you
can   hardly   expect  us  to  press  them   very   hard  on  a
thing like this'."
—From  Leopoldville  in  the New  York  Times,  Jan.  24.
ment.    No  matter  how  much  money  it  pours  into  developing
a  drug—and  there  is  practically  no  new  drug  without  some
federal   funds—private   industry  gets  the   right   to  patent   it.
Often  this  means  that  the  firm  with  the  patent  is  the  only  one
to  sell  the  drug,  at  virtually  any  price,  for   17  years.    Presi-
dent  Kennedy  a  month  before  he  died  tried  to  end  this  give-
away.   He  issued  a memorandum which  some  officials  at  HEW
interpret  to  mean  that  no  patent  should  be  given  on  any  drug
developed  with  government  funds.    They  are  now  in  danger
of  being  over-ridden  by  the  drug  industry.
The  industry, supported  by Asst.  Commerce  Secretary Eaton,
is  pressing  for   a  Presidential  Commission  to  rewrite   patent
policy.     Secretary   Connor   would   recommend   its   members
and   might   even  become  its  chairman.    It  is  appalling   that
Senators  did  not  question  him  more  closely  on  this.    A  clue
to  his  attitude may be  found  in  the  drug  industry's  poop  sheet
(called  "The   Blue  Sheet")  for  Dec.  23.    Connor,  it  says, has
"long  suggested  that  the  formula  used  by the  National  Cancer
Institute  in  its  chemotherapy  program  could  serve  as  a  model
for   a  compromise  policy."     This  was  no  compromise.     The
drug  companies  refused  to  take  a  single  NCI  contract  until
they  were  assured  practically  irrevocable  patent  rights.     If  a
Presidential   Commission   is  appointed,   and   it   almost  surely
will  be,  Congress  and  not  the  Patent   Office  or  the  Commerce
Secretary  should  set  the  ground   rules.
Connor  Hearing  Disclosed   That  Conflict-of-interest  Law  Was  Weakened  in  1962
An  intriguing  sidelight  on  Mr.  Connor's  appointment   as
Commerce   Secretary  is  the  revelation  that  the  conflict   of
interest  law  for  executive  officers  was  seriously  weakened
by   a   1962   amendment   which   was   generally   assumed   to
have  been  an  improvement.   This  came  to  light  in  a  memo-
randum   written  by   the   Chief   Counsel   for   the   Commerce
Committee  and  included  in  the   official  record  of  that   com-
mittee's  investigation  of   Mr.  Connor.    The  conflict   of   in-
terest  statute  as   amended  has  so  many   loopholes,   wrote
Counsel,  that  it  "raises  the  question  whether  stock  owner-
ship  in  a  corporation  will  ever  suffice  to  establish"  a  vio-
lation  of  the  statute   (18  U.S.C.  208,   209).
The   loopholes   are   subtle   but   substantial.     The    1962
amendment  applies  only  to  action  taken  with  respect  to  a
"particular   matter"  and  thus  excludes  action   on  equally
profitable  matters  such  as  procurement  and  patent  policy.
It  also  fails  to  apply   specifically   to  indirect  financial  in-
terests  and thus  requires  the  difficult  showing  that  a   "par-
ticular  matter,"   such   as  a  government   contract,   has  di-
rectly  influenced   the  value  of  the  stock  held  by  the  execu-
tive  official.  The  amendment  further  fails  to  apply  to  action
taken  by  a  subordinate  even  though  he  may  be  aware  of
his  boss'  financial  interests.
These  omissions  would   allow   McNamara   were  he  today
appointed  Secretary  of  Defense,  to  do  business  with  Ford
Motor  Company   without  selling  his  $1.5  million  holdings  in
its   stock  and  without  violating  any  law.     We  may  never
rid  government  of  corruption,  but why  invite it?
1   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's Weekly, February  S, 1965
The  New  Pied  Piper  Campaign  for  the  Anti-Ballistic  Missile
(Continued  from  Page  One)
ever,  we  can  claim  that  we  are  "levelling  off"  in  our  attack-
ing  forces.    But  to  keep  the  military happy,  the  new  budget
unveils  an  improved  missile  for  the  Polaris  submarines,  the
Poseidon,  with  double  the  warhead  payload  and  eight  times
the  killing  power  of  the  Polaris  A-3  missile.   At  a  cost  of  $2
billion  we  are  planning  to  begin  replacing  the  A-3  with  the
Poseidon  in  1969.  But  if  some  or  all  of  the  656  Polaris mis-
siles  are  to  be  replaced  with  Poseidon,  this  is  the  equivalent
of  a  sharp  quantitative  increase.    One  Poseidon   equals  two
Polaris  missiles  in  payload  and  eight  in  killing  power.
Polaris  Becomes  A First-Strike Weapon
The  Poseidon  also  does  something  else,  which  we hope  will
be  explored   in  Congressional   hearings  on  the  budget.    Up
to  now  Polaris  has  been  described  purely  as  a  second-strike
deterrent,  a  city-killer  which  could  be  used  only  in  revenge
if  and  after  the  Russians  struck  at  us.    Polaris  was  described
as  putting   them   on   notice  that   even   if   they  crippled   the
United  States,  these  hidden  watchdogs  under  the  seas  would
destroy  them.    But  now  it  is  said  that  with  Poseidon,   and
their  increased  payload  and  accuracy, Polaris  submarines  could
strike  harder-to-hit   buried  missile  silos   and  thus  become  a
first-strike  weapon.    This  transformation  of  the  Polaris  from
deterrent  defense  to  an  instrument  of  potential  aggression  is
calculated  to  alarm  the  other  side,  and  to  set  off  the  renewed
arms  race  our  military want.
The  shrewd  masters  of  the  military-industrial  complex  are
old  hands  at  this  game.    Through   Senators  like  Symington
and  journalists  like  Joseph   Alsop,  they  built  up  the  bogey
first  of  an  imaginary  "bomber  gap" and  then  of  an  equally
imaginary   "missile  gap" with  which  to  heat   up  the   arms
race  and  push  up  military  expenditure.    The  extent  of  their
triumph   in   these   scare-campaigns   can   be   measured.     One
measure  is  the  jump  in  the  level  of  arms  spending  from  $45
billion  a  year  under  Eisenhower  to  more  than  $50  billion  a
year  under  Kennedy.   The  Democrats,  on  taking  power  under
Kennedy,  learned  that  there  was  no  missile  gap, but  never-
theless  built  up  a  huge  missile  program  just  as  if  there  had
been  a  gap.   This  was the  election  pay-off  to  the  aviation  and
If  We're Looking for  Gaps to Fill
"A  new  review  by  one  of  the  nation's  leading  nutri-
tion  experts  in  Postgraduate  Medicine,  a  medical  jour-
nal,  re-emphasizes  the   food  gap   between  white  and
Negro.    That  food  gap  probably  accounts  for  a  large
part  of  the  health  gap:  the  Negro  has  a  higher mor-
tality  rate  in  nearly  every  disease  category.   What Dr.
Jean   Mayer,   professor   of   nutrition   at   the   Harvard
School   of   Public  Health,  found   was   appalling.   One
survey   of   the   rural   and  urban   South  revealed  that
60%  of  the  Negroes  and  25%  of  the  whites  had  'obvi-
ously  inadequate'  diets.    For  the  North,  no  figures  are
available  but  Dr. Mayer  checked  hospital  records in  the
North,  talked  with  dieticians  and  health  administra-
tors  and decided that  Negro  slums are  a  maelstrom of
malnutrition.    The  indicators:  anemias,  growth  fail-
ures,  skin  ailments,  accidents  of  pregnancy—all  asso-
ciated   with  malnutrition.    The   worst   fed   were   the
Negro  migrant  workers  who  followed  the  crops  from
Florida  to  New  York.   In  each  group the  children bore
the  brunt  of  the  food  gap."
—Earl  Ubell  in  N.Y.  Herald-Tribune, Jan.  24  (abr.).
missile  lobby.
Now  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  are  pressing hard  for  an anti-
missile   and   shelter   program   which   could   easily   cost   $50
billions.     Johnson   and  McNamara  have  again  turned   them
down,  as  Kennedy  did  before  them.    But  in  Alsop's  column
of  January  13,  one  can  read  the  opening  strains  of  a  new
Pied  Piper  chorus  building  up  for  an  anti-missile  program
next  year.    Should   this  campaign  succeed,  it  would  cut  off
Johnson's  welfare program  in  the  bud  and  subordinate  all  else
to  an  intensified  arms  race  more  costly  than  anything  we  have
yet  seen.    To  the  Russians,  the  launching  of  such  a  program,
on  top  of  our  enormous  first-strike  power,   would  raise   the
spectre  of  preventive  war.    What  little  has  been  gained  in
relaxation   of   tension   would   vanish   overnight.     What   this
means  is  that  the  President   cannot  hope  to  hold  the  arms
budget  stable  very  long.    He  must  educate  the  public  to  the
dangers  and  take  vigorous  steps  toward  arms  control  and  re-
duction,   or  sooner   or  later  our  military-industrial   complex,
with  its  vast  propaganda  resources,  will  succeed.   That  would
end  all  hope  of  a  Great  Society.
We'll Send A  Free Sample  Copy Of  This  Issue To  Friends  If  You  Send Stamped  Self-Addressed  Envelopes
I. F.  Stone's Weekly      5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
2/2/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement wished  D
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ay..,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  !n
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   6618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $3  in   the  U.S.:   $6  in   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:
$15 to  Europe:  $20 to  Israel.  A»ia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED