I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965feb15.pdf

============================================================

If   We  Acted  in  Selnia,  As  We  Do  in  Saigon, Pps. 2-3
The  Best  Way  to  Prevent  A  Negotiated  Peace?
"Clamor  for  a  negotiated  peace was  growing  in  Congress,     blow  at  a  U.S.  installation  in  South  Vietnam  struck  many
among  key  allies  and  even  within  Administration councils.     U.S.  policy  makers,  for  many  different  reasons,  as  just  the
...  In  this  atmosphere,  the  latest,   most  brazen  guerrilla     sort  of  provocation  they  have  been  looking  for."
—"I7.S.  Risk  in  Vietnam",   Washington  dispatch  by  Philip  Geyelin  in  the  Wall  St.  Journal,  Feb.  8.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XIII,  NO.  6
FEBRUARY  15,  1965WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
16   CENTS
There Should  Have  Been A Court Martial,  Not A  Reprisal
Modern  psychology  tells  us  that  men  unconsciously  arrange
what  they  secretly  desire.    Our  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff   and  the
South  Vietnamese military have  agitated  for  months  to  widen
the  war  by  reprisals  against  the  North.    The  guerrilla  attack
on  Pleiku  gave  them  their  opportunity.    From  a  psychological
point  of  view,  it  is  not  at  all  strange  that  the  U.S.  camp  at
Pleiku  was  so  poorly  defended.    If  the  Generals  had  been  as
passionate  about  improving  the  security of  Americans  in  Viet-
nam  as they  are  about  extending  the  war,  the  guerrillas  would
not  have  had  so  easy  a  time.    The  attack  called  for  a  court
martial,  not  a  reprisal  raid;  punishment  for  the  slackness  of
the  U.S.  command, not  a reward for  its incompetence.    A mili-
tary  court  of  inquiry would  begin  with  the  fact  that  this  was
not  the  first  but  the  second  attack  of  its  kind.    Guerrillas  got
away with  a similar  night  attack  Nov.  1 on  Bien  Hoa  air  base
near  Saigon,  killing  five  Americans  and   destroying  five  jet
bombers.    The  attack  focussed  attention  on  poor  security  ar-
rangements,  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  anything  was  done
to  improve  them.    On  the  contrary,  eight  Americans  die  and
more  than  100  are  wounded  three  months  later  in  a  repeat
performance.    Again  it  turns  out  that  the  South   Vietnamese
guards  were  asleep   at  the  switch,  more  than   half   of   them
absent,  perhaps  others  in  cahoots  with  the  raiders.
A  Double  Warning  Ignored
This is only  the  beginning  of  the  story.   The  U.S.  command
was  doubly on  notice  to  expect  trouble  the  morning  the  Pleiku
attack  occurred.    It  came  exactly  two  hours  after  the  end  of
the  Viet  Cong's  one  week  cease-fire  for  the  New  Year  holiday
had  expired.   There  was  a  burst  of  attacks  at  the  same  time
by the  rested  guerrillas.  Guard  arrangements  should  have  been
especially  strict  that  morning.     In  addition   the  Viet  Cong's
clandestine  radio  had  announced   during  the  holiday  that  a
reprisal raid would  be made  for  the  public  execution  in  Saigon
a  week  earlier   of  a   20-year-old  terrorist   (the    Washington
Post  Feb.  7  in  its  news  roundup  from  Saigon).    Since  the
U.S.   was  held   responsible   for   the   execution,   the   warning
called  for  tightened  security  at  every  U.S.  facility.    Secretary
McNamara's  attempt   at  his  briefing   to  brush  off  the   possi-
bility  of  better  security  arrangements  casts  doubt  on  his  judg-
ment.    He  is  losing  in  Vietnam  all  the  respect  he  earned  at
the  Pentagon.     His  remarks  about  security  rank  in  vapidity
with  his  earlier  discoveries  that  only  10  percent  of  the  Viet-
namese  were  Buddhists  and  that  Gen.  Khanh  was  a  No.  1
fine  fellow.     Away  from  computers,   in  contact  with   human
McNamara at  His  Silliest
"The    reasons  for  the  tragic  loss  of  American  men
killed  and  wounded  in  the  Vietcong  attack  on  Pleiku
cannot  be  glossed  over  by  Secretary  McNamara  saying,
The  fact  is  that  the  attack  was  carried  out  in  the  dead
of  night; it  was a sneak  attack.   It's  typical  of  guerrilla
operations.   It's  the  kind  of  attack  that  it's  almost  im-
possible  to  provide effective security  against.  .  .  .'  The
rules  of  war  do  not  limit  the  fighting  to  the  daylight
hours  between  nine  to   five.   Nor  do  the  rules  of  war
require  that  the  enemy  give  us  a  certain   number  of
hours  advance  notice  before  attacking.    That  is  true
whether  it  is  a  conventional   war  or  a  guerrilla  war.
Secretary   McNamara  cannot  gloss  over   the   lack   of
security  at  Pleiku  by  attributing our losses  to  «  'sneak'
attack  which  we  must  expect  because  we  are   fighting
a  guerrilla  war.   Indeed  Secretary  McNamara's  'sneak
attack' characterization  may  well  deserve  the  award for
the  silliest  statement  of  the  year,  if  not  in  the  whole
history  of  statements  from the  Pentagon.   The  warriors
there will know that surprise is an essential concomitant
of  military  action  in  war."                                                                             <
—Gruening  (D. Alaska)  in the Senate, Feb. 8.
realities,  the  Secretary  does  not  do  so well.   The  Pleiku  camp
enjoyed  an  ideal  location  for  security.    The  town  is  set  in  the
center  of  a treeless  plain  and  the  two  U.S.  military   compounds
just  outside  of  town  "command  an  open  view  of  several  miles
in  almost  all  directions"  (Wash.  Post  from  Saigon,  Feb.   7).
When  guerrillas  can  sneak  across  an  open  plain,  cut  through
two  perimeters  of  barbed  wire  and  place  explosive  charges  up
against  a  wall,  they  demonstrate  the  dereliction   of  the  U.S.
command.
• No   one  would   guess  from  McNamara's   briefing  that  this
is what  happened.    He  pictured  the  attack  as  purely  a  mortar
attack  from  a  distance,  withholding  the  fact  that  die  mortars
which  killed  our  men  were  our  own  make.*   As  for  his  re-
mark,  "I  don't  think  it  will  ever  be  possible  to  protect.our
forces  against   sneak  attacks  of  this  kind",  we  would  call  at-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
* Me  George  Bundy also  tried  to  hide  the  truth  about  these
mortars.   "Three  times  Mr. Bundy said  he  did not  believe  the
81-mm  mortars  used  by  the  guerrillas  in  Pleiku  attack  were
American-made,  but  he  referred  the  questions  to  the  Defense
Department," Charles  Mohr  reported  in  the  New  York  Times
Feb.  9.  "A  spokesman  for  the  Pentagon  said  that  it  was  'an
almost  inescapable  conclusion'  that  the  mortars  were  Ameri-
can  because  no other  army in  the  world uses  such  a  caliber."
2  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

One  Way  to  End  the  Dollar  Crisis  Is  to  End  Our  Intervention  in  Vietnam
Q.    Is  the  war  in  Vietnam  a  big  drain  on  U.S.  dollars?        against  the  Communists is  using  up quite  a  bit  of  what  has
A.  Indeed   it   is.     The   cost   of   helping   South   Vietnam      been  saved   elsewhere.
—R.  V.  Roosa, former   Under  Secretary   of  the  Treasury  for  Monetary  Affairs,    U.S.  News  &  World  Report,  Feb.  8.
If  We  Acted  in  Selma  As  We  Act  in   Saigon
Senator  Eastland  of  Mississippi  made  a  speech  in  the  Sen-
ate  Feb.  3.   It  was  entitled  "Communist  Forces  Behind  Negro
Revolution  in  This  Country."    It  was  the  second  major  speech
of  its  kind  by Eastland.   He  made  an  earlier  one  last  July  22
on   "Communist  Infiltration  Into  The   So-called  Civil  Rights
Movement,"   the  latter  remarkable  because  of   its   suggestion
that  the  murder  of  the  three  civil  rights  workers  last  summer
in  Mississippi  might  be  a  hoax.    It  is  instructive,  and  it  may
be  therapeutic,  to  notice  that  Senator  Eastland's  theory  of  why
there  is  trouble  in  our  South  is  exactly  the  same  as  the  theory
propounded   by  Secretary  of   State   Rusk  as  to  why  there   is
trouble  in  South  Vietnam.    The  theory  in  both  cases  is  that
all  would  be  well  if  only  the  North  let  its  neighbors  alone.
Like  the  State  Department,  Eastland  sees  not  rebellion  but
an  invasion,  a  "mass  invasion  of  Mississippi",  as  he  said  last
July,  "by  demonstrators,  agitators,  agents  of  provocation  and
Sen.  Stennis:  This  morning,  as  over  the  past  several
weeks,  I  gained  special  information  about  the  activities
of  the  Communists  in  Vietnam,  on  the  other  side  of  the
world,   where   we   have   sent   many   thousands    of   our
armed   services   personnel.     Many   of   our   servicemen
have  been   killed  trying  to  stem   the  tide  of  this  very
influence  that  the  Senator  from  Mississippi   [Eastland]
is  describing  in  such  detail  is  going  on  in  one  of  the
States  of  the  United  States  on the  racial  question.  .  .  .
Sen.  Eastland:  Why  should  the  Communist  Party  be
permitted  to  take  over  a  State  of  the   Union?
—In  the Senate, Feb.  3.
inciters  to  mass  violence, under  the  cover  of  the  so-called  civil
rights  movements."    Just  as  the  Pentagon  and  State  put  out
figures   recently   to   show   "Troop   Flow   From   Hanoi   Up
Sharply"  so  Eastland  provided  the  names,  the  subversive  rec-
ords  and   the  border  crossing  dates  of   infiltration  from   the
North.     Eastland  even   cited   the   same   alarmist  journalistic
sources.     "By  April  of  this  year,"  Eastland  told   the  Senate
last  July,  "so  much  evidence  had  piled  up  of  Communist  in-
filtration   and   Communist   influence   in   racial   agitations  that
Mr.  Joseph  Alsop  devoted one of  his columns to what he  called
'the  unhappy  secret'  of  Communist  success  in  infiltrating  the
civil  rights  movement."    To  read  the  two  speeches  of  Eastland
and   the   supporting   remarks   of   his   Mississippi     colleague,
Stennis,  is  like  reading  the  speeches  of  Rusk  and  McNamara
about  South  Vietnam  before  Diem  was  overthrown—in  both
cases  the  picture  is  of  a  happy  land  and  a  contented   people
torn  apart  by  outside  agitators.    One  would  never  guess  the
misery,  the  beatings,  the  killings,  the  violations  of  elementary
rights,  the  exploitation,  which  are  the  roots  of  the  rebellions.
No  high  born  Mandarin  from  Hue  could  be  more  sorrowful
than  Stennis when  he  told  the  Senate  Feb.  3 it  was these  Com-
munist  agitators  "who  flouted  all  the  customs  and   traditions
of  a  social  order  to  which  people   had  been  accustomed  and
had  lived  under  for  almost  two  centuries."    Eastland  told  the
Senate  the  same  day  that  95  percent  of  the  Negroes  in  his
Though  the  Negroes  Spurned  Them
Sen.  Eastland:  I  would  say  that  95%  of  the  Negroes
in  the   area   spurned   any   association   with   them    [the
civil  rights  workers]  and condemned their  coming.  They
condemned  everything  that  the   groups   stood  for.    .
Sen.  Stennis:  I  found  the  same  pattern  of   operations
in  the  area  in  which  I  live.    What  we  have  discussed
has  been  confirmed  by  the  police  and  other  responsible
people  in  the  community.  .  .  .
Sen.   Eastland:   I  know  that   members   of   the   [civil
rights]   groups  would  go  to  town  after  town  and  try  to
obtain  quarters  in  a  Negro  home,  and there  was  not  a
Negro  home  in  the  town  that  would  let  the  members  of
the  groups   remain  there.  .  .  .
Sen.  Stennis:  They  were  spurned  by  the  colored   peo-
ple  and everyone  else.  .  . .
Sen.  Eastland:  I  know  of  town  after   town  in  which
that  happened.
Sen.   Stennis:  In  areas  in  which  these  people   were
able  to  stay,  their  activities  would  disrupt  the  business
life,  the  social  and  the  spiritual  life  of  both  races  and
generally  disrupt  the  peace  and  harmony  of  the  people.
Is  that  not  what  the  Senator   found?
Sen.  Eastland:  That  is  correct.
—In  the Senate, Feb. 3.
area   had   "spurned   any  association"   with   the   invaders  and
Stennis  said he found  "the  same pattern"  in his  area.  But  some-
how  by  esoteric  means  these  infiltrators  managed  nevertheless
here  and  there  to  disrupt  "the  spiritual  life  of  both  races  .  .  .
the  peace  and  harmony  of   the  people."    This  is  how  the
South  felt  a  century  ago  about  the  abolitionists:  snakes  in  a
patriarchal  paradise.
The   sickness  of  the  South  is  the  sickness  of  every  ruling
class  in  history.   These  always  see  conspiracy  rather  than  suf-
fering  as  the  mainspring  of  every  upsurge  by  the  oppressed.
Eastland  buttressed  his  speech  with  quotations  from  J.  Edgar
Hoover   and  ideological   police  records  from   the  files  of   the
Un-American  Activities Committee  and  his  own  Internal  Secu-
rity  Committee  just  as  the  State  Department's  "Blue  Book"  in
1961   justified   our   intervention  in   South   Vietnam   by  citing
evidence   of   Communist   conspiracy   against   Diem.     In   one
colloquy  on the  Senate floor Feb.  3 Eastland  and  Stennis  agreed
that  South  Vietnam  and  our  own  South  were  both   confronted
by  the   same   universal    conspiracy.     They  are   as  indignant
about  Washington's  aid  to  the  civil  rights  movement  as Wash-
ington  is  indignant  about  Moscow's  and  Peking's   encourage-
Subversion  by S-x
Sen.  Stennis:  The  white  boys  and  white  girls  would
live  in  Negro  homes.    They  would  sit  in  the  courthouse
square  on  park  benches  and  they  would  love   and  hug
and  go  down  the  streets  holding  hands.  .  .  .
Sen.   Eastland:   I  know  of  an  instance  in  my   home
town  in  which  a  Negro  woman  cut  her  husband  up  be-
cause  of  his  attention  to  one  of  those  white  girls.
—In  the Senate,  Feb.  3.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  15,1965
ment  to  the  guerrilla  fighters  in  South  Vietnam.   One  almost
expects  to  hear  Eastland  and  Stennis ask  how  Washington  can
claim  to  be  for  peaceful  co-existence and  yet  insist  on  support-
ing  "wars  of  liberation"  in  the  South.    Or  accuse  old  Ho  Chi
Johnson   of   persisting  in   his   dastardly  ambition  to   reunify
the  country.
There  are  even  the  same  contradictions  in  both  areas.    Just
as  our  government  in  South  Vietnam  oscillates  between  treat-
"In  typical  Marxist  language,  he  [Jesse  Gordon]  has
called   police  'Fascists',   thus   supporting   one   of   the
long-time  objectives  of  the  Communist  Party,  to  under-
mine  respect  for  the  police  forces  of  the  country.    He
has  told  Negroes,  in  public,  that  colored  men  are  going
to  die,  and  that  it  is  their  choice  whether  they   choose
to  die  in  Vietnam or  Harlem."
—Eastland  in  the Senate  last  July  22.
Palsy  Walsy  Dept.
"To  his  colleagues   it  is  pretty  breathtaking  and  a
little  awesome  to  watch  the  way  Sen.  Robert  F.  Ken-
nedy  is   plunging   into  his   job   and  also  working   for
Robert  F.  Kennedy. .  .  .  RFK is  cementing his  relations
with  a  number  of   Southern  Democratic  Senators,  in-
cluding  the  powerful  chairman  of  the  Judiciary Com-
mittee,  Sen.  James  O.  Eastland  of  Mississippi,  who  is
now   remarking   to   colleagues,   'Bobby   suggests  this,'
'Bobby  thinks  that,'  etc."
—Roscoe  Drummond, Washington  Post, Feb.  8.
ing  the  uprising  as  a  rebellion  and  calling  for  social  reforms
to  conciliate  the  people,   so  Stennis  the  day  after   Eastland's
speech  last  week  put  into  the  Congressional  Record  the  resolu-
tion  passed  by  the  Mississippi  Economic  Council,  calling  for
law  and  order  in  the  State.    That  resolution,  the  expression  of
Mississippi's  better  conscience,  abandoned   conspiracy  theory
and   urged   compliance  with  the   civil  rights   laws.     Stennis,
to  his  credit,  praised  the   Council  for   taking  a   "stand   out
front"   for  that  "obedience  to  law"  which  is  the   foundation
of  "true  liberty."    It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  what  Stennis said
to  the  Senate  on  Feb.  3  with  what  he  said  on  Feb.  4.
Can  we  not  learn  something  from  the  two  situations?    We
see  the  idealism  of  the  volunteers  who  go  south  here.    Can
we  not  see  that  in  Vietnam  we  fight  the  same  liberating  zeal?
In  this  double  mirror,  costly  fallacies  quickly  show  their  face.
If   the   Federal   government   handled   Negro  aspiration   as  it
handles  the  revolt  in  South  Vietnam,  we  would  be  sending
"counter-insurgency"  teams  from   Fort  Bragg  into  the   South
to  kill  civil  rights  agitators.    We  would  be  burning  out  with
napalm  the  Negro  neighborhoods   in  which  we  suspected   that
CORE  or  SNCC workers  were  hiding.
Conversely,  if  the  South  had  an  Air  Force  at  its   disposal,
we  would  be  hearing  a  clamor  in  Mississippi  for  escalation  of
the  war  by  bombarding  the  source  of  all  the  trouble.    Since
Washington  persists  in  giving  aid  and  comfort  to  the  civil
rights  rebels,  why  not  bomb  the  supply  lines  and  the  source?
The  Only  Reporter  Who Pointed  Out  The  Holes  in  McNamara's Air  Strike  Briefing
"The   official  explanations  of  the  events  surrounding  the
American  air  strike  on  North  Vietnam have  left   a  number
of  important  questions  unanswered.  .  .  .  One question in-
volves  the   weapons  used  by  the  attacking  Vietcong  unit.
The  heaviest   were  American-made  81-mm.  mortars.  .  .  .
The   question   is,  therefore,   that   if   the   Vietcong   unit   at
Pleiku  was—  as  is  so  often  the  case—using  captured  weap-
ons,  would  this  sustain  the  argument  that   North  Vietnam
made  possible  this  particular   attack?
"Administration   sources  also  contend  that  the  size  and
intensity  of  the  attack  indicated  that  it  was  a  major  blow
carefully  timed  by  Hanoi.    Yet  reports  from  the  field  indi-
cate that  a  company—or  less—of  Vietcong troops  took  part.
A  Vietcong  company  is  estimated   to  have  200  to  300 men.
This   is  not   a   large   Vietcong  assault.     Many   are   much
larger.    There   were   American   casualties,   but   the  attack
was  not  especially  intense.    On a  number of  occasions  whole
South  Vietnamese  infantry  units  up  to  company  size  have
been  wiped out  by  the  Vietcong  in  night  assaults.
"Another   factor   advanced  by  Government  sources   is  a
belief  that  attacks  launched  the  same  night  at  Tuy  Hoa and
a  group  of  villages  near  Nhatrang  indicated ...  a  pattern
of   over-all   direction,  probably   from   Hanoi.     Since  larger
numbers  of  Vietcong  attacks   have  taken  place  throughout
South   Vietnam   on  other   nights,   it   is  asked,  why  would
this be?
"Secretary  McNamara ...  at  his news  conference  .  . .
said  he  did  not  believe  'it  would  ever  be  possible  to  protect
our  forces  against  a  sneak  attack  of  that  kind'  and  added
that  the  mortars  had  been fired from  a  considerable   distance
and  that  clumps  of  foilage  on  the   generally   open   plateau
had  offered  cover.   Reports  from  Pleiku,  however,  later  es-
tablished  that  the  Vietcong  attackers  had  been  able  to  crawl
right  onto  the  United  States  helicopter  base  to  place   explo-
sive  charges  against  barracks'  walls  on  the  airstrip."
—Charles  Mohr  in  the New York  Times, Feb.  8.
And  Here  Is  The  Story  of  His  Bitter  Experience  in  Trying  to  Cover  the  War  Honestly
"The  most  curious  attack  of  all  on  the  Saigon  press  corps
came  from  Time  magazine.  . . . The Time  reporters  in the
field felt  strongly  that  the  magazine  was  giving  too  optimis-
tic  a  view  of  the  war.    Periodically,   Charles  Mohr,  Time's
chief  correspondent  in  Southeast  Asia   (who  had  once  been
described  by  Henry  Luce himself  as  'A  reporter—and  how!')
would  return  to  New  York  for  conferences   where  he would
argue  for  tougher  coverage  on  Vietnam.    But  his  editors,
who  had  lunched  with  Secretary  McNamara  and  other   Pen-
tagon  officials  and  had  seen  the  most  secret  charts  and  the
most  secret  arrows,  would  explain  patiently  to  him  that  he
understood  only  a  portion  of 'the  big picture'.  .  . .
".  .  .  in  early   September   [1963],  with  Washington   still
searching  for  answers,  Mohr  was  asked  to  do  a  roundup on
the  entire  state  of  the  war  in  Vietnam.    He  and  his  col-
league,  Mert  Perry  . .  .  began  with  this  lead:  'The  war in
Vietnam  is  being  lost.' ...  It  was not  what  the  editors of
Time  magazine  wanted  to  hear.    Mohr's  story  was  killed
in  New  York,  and  an  optimistic  piece  was  printed  instead
bearing  no  relation  to  the  copy  he  had  filed,  and   assuring
the  world  that  'government  troops  are  fighting  better  than
ever.'  . . . Otto  Fuerbringer,  the managing  editor  of  Time,
summoned  a  writer  into  his  office  and  (as  Stanley  Karnow,
Mohr's  predecessor  as  Time  bureau  chief  in  Southeast  Asia,
put  it  in  Nieman  Reports)  with  'nothing  but  his  own  pre-
conceptions  to  guide  him,  dictated  the  gist  of  an  article  for
his   magazine's   Press   Section ...  a   devastating   com-
pendium   of  bitter   innuendoes   and  clever   generalities,   all
blatantly  impeaching  American  correspondents  in  Vietnam
for  distorting  the news.' . . . The upshot  was that  they  both
resigned,   Mohr  eventually   going   to  the  Times,  where  he
soon  became  the  White  House  correspondent,   and  Perry  to
the  Chicago  Daily  News."
—David  Halberstam, in  Commentary,  January.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Seone's  Weekly,  February 15,1885
Destroying  North  Vietnam
(Continued  from  Page  One)
tention  to  an  item  on  the  AP  ticker  Feb.  8  (AP-151)  which
turned  up  in  none  of  the  many  papers  we  read.    "Anyone
who has  ever  gone to war and  fought  on a perimeter  defense,"
this  dispatch  said  of  McNamara's  answer,  "must  be  asking:
What  happened  to  the  night  patrols?    Where  were  the lis-
tening  posts?    Has  the  practice  of  staking  out  enemy  routes
of   approach   been   abandoned?    Was   there  no  illumination
available,  such  as  parachute  flares  or   artificial   moonlight—
searchlights  aimed  against  the  clouds?"     The   AP   dispatch
said  the  questions  "were  asked  of  the  Pentagon"  and  that  the
"official  reply was,  'we don't  know'."    "Whatever  the eventual
answers,"  the  AP  concluded,  "the  explanation  of  the  beating
at   Pleiku  is  going  to  be  difficult."
Madison  Avenue  Clausewitzes
In  this  the  AP  is  wrong.    The  Pentagon  is  accustomed  to
winning by public relations at home  the  battles  it  loses abroad.
The  AP  dispatch  was  seen  by only  a handful  of  people  while
millions  will  read  reassuring  stories  like  the  one  in  the  New
York  Times  Feb.  9  which  quoted  unnamed  Pentagon'  officials
as  saying  that  defense  arrangements  at  U.S.  installations  in
Vietnam  are  "good".   There  will  be  an  inquiry at  Pleiku  like
that  which  followed  the  attack  on  Bien  Hoa  Nov.   1  but  al-
ready  "an   official   U.S.  military  assessment"  has  been  turned
in  declaring  that  "a  'good  job'  was  done  in  protecting   the
area."    A  few  more  such  good  jobs  and  we  will  have  excuse
enough  to  bomb  Peking  as  well  as  Hanoi.    We  believe  the
Pleiku   attack  is  another   in  the   series   of  warning   glimpses'
(like  the  Bay of  Pigs)  which  should  alert  this  country  to  the
fact   that   while  our  military  have  enormous  firepower  and
probably  the  best  press  agents  in  the  world,  they  don't  do  so
well  in  the  test  that  matters.    Their  judgment,  especially  in
guerrilla  war,  where  the  human  factor  counts  more  than  the
technological,   is  faulty.    Their   intelligence  often  turns  out
to  be  poor.    But  they  have  a  great  capacity  for  whitewashing
their  blunders  and  keeping  the  truth  from  the  public.   This  is
how  military  men  have  drawn  great  empires  into  catastrophe
before.
It  is  time  for  the  government  to  stop  lying  to  the  people.
Will  Not   Save  South  Vietnam
GOP  Repulsed Anyway
"Johnson's   call  for  Republican and  Democratic  lead-
ers  to  sit  with  the  [National]  Security  Council  was  in
line  with  his  actions   in  bringing  both  parties  into  the
decision  making  process  on Vietnam.   By  this  device  he
appears  to  have  sidetracked  a  massive   Republican  at-
tack  on  his  Asian  policies.   Before  the  week-end's  mili-
tary  action,  Congressional  Republicans  had  been  wait-
ing  only  for a  Presidential  assessment  of  an on-the-spot
report  from  Saigon   by  his  special   fact-finder   George
Bundy  before  blasting  away  at  Johnson's  course.   They
suspected  Bundy's  recommendations   would  be  for,   as
they  put  it,  'more  of  the  same*  in  South  Vietnam  with
no  spectacular   acceleration   of   American   effort   there.
They  were  poised  in  this  case  to  demand  what  House
Minority   Leader   Gerald   R.   Ford   of   Michigan   called
'forcible  action'."
—AP  in  Washington  Evening Star, Feb. 8.
The  South  Vietnamese regime  is  one  we  have tried  to  impose
on  its  people  against their  will.    The  South  Vietnamese mili-
tary  are  cowardly,  fearful   and  incompetent,  more  concerned
with  intrigue  in  Saigon  than  war  in  the   field.   Their  only
hope  is  to  involve  the  U.S.  directly  in  the  fighting;  that  is
why  they  want  to  "widen  the  war".    Our  military  are  frus-
trated  because  all  their  highly  advertised  and  chrome-plated
"counter-insurgency"  has  failed.   All  they  understand is brute
nuclear   force   and   that  is  what  they  would  like   to   apply.
They  want  to  change  a  war  they  cannot  win  into  a  war  they
believe  they  can  win.    Even  in  this  they  are  wrong. Com-
mand  of  the  air  and  the  levelling  of  all  North  Korea  did  not
save us from  being  pushed  back to the  38th  parallel  and forced
to  make peace.    If  we  bomb  North  Vietnam,  we  can destroy
all  its people  have built up  but  we cannot prevent  Gen.  Giap's
army  from  taking  over  all  South  Vietnam.    And  if  the  war
brings  China  in—there  is  a  military  morass  in  which  sensa-
tional  bombardments will  not  keep  our  best  youth  from  being
bled  slowly  to  death.   The  President  spoke  to  the  Boy  Scouts
about  not  letting  freedom  perish  from  the  earth.    This  is  a
bad  time  for  such  inanity.   It  is  not  freedom  we  are  protect-
ing  in  South  Vietnam  but  our  prestige  and  our  right  to  dic-
tate  to  other  peoples.    The  sooner  we  negotiate  our  way  out
the  better  for  all  mankind.
We'll Send A  Free  Sample  Copy  Of  This  Issue To  Friends  If  You  Send Stamped  Self-Addressed  Envelopes
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
2/15/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
Cfo)  Name  ..............................................................................
Street      ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifttet
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebrwlu  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone'i  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week   In  December  and  the  first  week  In
January  and  Bl-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   »5  in   the  U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:
$15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED