I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965oct04.pdf

============================================================

A  US  Editor's Favorable Report  on  Castro's  Cuba, P.  2
The  Day  Goldberg  Told  the  UN  We Were  Only  Fighting  to  Save Freedom in  Vietnam
"We  seek  only  to  insure  the  independence  of  South  Viet-
nam  .  .  .  and  opportunity  for  its  people  to  determine their
own future ... by the principles  of  self-determination."
—Ambassador  Goldberg  at  the  United  Nations, Sept.  S3.
"At  Da  Nang,  three  persons  .were  executed  by  -a  South
Vietnamese  firing  squad.    The  execution,  held  in  a  soccer
stadium,  was  postponed  at  the  last  minute  until  midnight
.  .  .  because  news  photographers  refused  to  obey  an  order
that   no  pictures  be  taken  until  the   final   shot   had  been
fired.   The  three  were  among  five  persons  arrested Monday
during  a  demonstration  by  about  200  persons  in  downtown
Da Nang.   They were protesting  crop damage from artillery
fire  and  air  strikes  by  U.S.  forces."
—Same  day,  Chicago  Daily  News from  Saigon.
".  .  .  the  fourth  man would be  executed  later,  but  at  the'
moment  he  was  siring  valuable  information.    He  was  de-
scribed  as  '•  singing  bird.' The fifth demonstrator, a woman,
was  sentenced  to  life  in  prison  although  the  demonstration
had  been  so  small  that  few  were  eyen  aware of   it."
:    —From  UPI  account  same  day  Washington  Daily  News.
These  are  the  people  now  described   as  "terrorists"  for
•whose  death  two  Americans  were  killed  in  reprisal.
L R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIII,  NO.  32
OCTOBER  4,   1966
">'       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
15   CENTS
The  Grimy  Foundations  of the  UN's  Shaky  Success
A  few  plain  observations,  free  from  humbug,  may  help  to
clarify  the  continued  crisis  over  Kashmir.    The  first  concerns
the  role  of  China.   This  is the  second  dispute  on  China's  bor-
ders  which  the  U.S.,  this  time  with  the  aid  of  the  U.S.S.R.,
is  trying to  settle  without  Chinese  participation.    If  it  means
peace,  we  hope  they  succeed.    But  in  the  long  run,  China
cannot  be  shut  out  of  such  problems.     It  is  as  if  Russia  and
China,  between  them,  working  through  the  UN,  were  settling
a  quarrel  between  Mexico  and  Panama  while  excluding  us
not  only  from  the  negotiations  but  even  from  the  UN   itself.
We  would  make  trouble  in  such  a  case.    So, within  the  limits
of  its  power,  is  China.   A  further  point  must  be  noted.    The
border  quarrel  over  Sikkim  between  China  and  India  concerns
an  historic  invasion  route;  troops  can  move  south   through
it  into  India,  or  North  through   it  into  China  as  Britain  did
in  the  19th  Century.   The  disputed  Ladakh  area  in  the  north-
west  adjoining Kashmir  also  offers  an  historic  invasion  route
from  Western  Asia  into  Tibet.    The  Chinese  feel  about  our
intrusion  in  these  borderland  quarrels  as  we  did  about  Maxi-
milian  in   Mexico.
Kashmir  and Suez
Our  self-congratulations   about  using the UN  in the  Kashmir
dispute  are  becoming  nauseous.   This  is  another  case  of  using
the  UN  when  it  serves  our  purposes  to  do  so,  as  in  the  Suez
and  Congo  affairs.    We  use  the  UN   as  a  buffer   where  we
do  not  wish  to  take  too  open  a  position  in  a  quarrel  between
friends,  and  where  the  quarrel  threatens  to  upset  our  over-all
strategy  in  our    own  bigger  quarrels   with  Russia  or  China.
In  the  Suez  crisis,  we  didn't  want  to  upset  the   oil-bearing
Arabs  or  too  much  antagonize  the  British  and  French.    Long
before  the  Kashmir  fighting  broke  out,  we  turned  hostile  to
Pakistan  when  it  left  the  cold  war  camp,  sought  Chinese  aid
as  a  counterpoise  to  India  and" gave  China  air  landing  rights.
This  broke  the  wall  of  containment around  China  and  enabled
its  plane  services  to  reach   Africa   and  Europe.     We'd   like
Pakistan  humbled  just  enough  to  bring  it  back  in  our  camp,
but  not  enough  to  drive  it  further  into  the  arms  of  China.
Strange  Lovers  of  Peace
"The  members  of  the  UN,  under the  Charter, share a
common  responsibility  to  demonstrate  to  those  who use
violence  that  violence  does  not  pay."
—Ambassador  Goldberg  at  the  UN  Sept.  SS  arguing
against  admission  of  Communist  China.
"Justice  Goldberg can't  have  it  both  ways.  Who is  at
war  and who isn't?  Are  the  Chinese  fighting anywhere?
They  may  be  doing some propaganda needling  here and
there.    But  it's  you  Americans in  Vietnam  and  British
in  Sarawak  and  Aden,  and  Indians  in  Kashmir.  .  .  .
Now  take Mr. Goldberg's argument  against  self-defense.
.  .  .  Was it  self-defense   when  Britain  and France  in-
vaded  Suez?     When   Russians  started  mowing  down
people  in  Budapest?    Was it  self-defense  to  go  into the
Dominican  Republic?"
—An  African   diplomat  from  one  of  the  10  nations
backing  Peking's  admission  to  the  UN,  as  quoted  in  the
Christian  Science  Monitor  next  day.
This  would  happen  if  we  openly  shelved   the  long   promised
plebiscite  in  Kashmir;  this  can be  done  more tactfully  through
the  UN.    Neither  we  nor  the  Russians  will  press  for  die
plebiscite,   since  that  would   antagonize  India  and  both  see
India  as  an  ally  against  China.    Yet  the  coincidence  of Russo-
American  interests  in  Kashmir,  as in  the  Suez  crisis,  may  again
save  peace  and  establish  a  valuable  peace-keeping    precedent.
The  UN,  like  every  other  edifice,  must  be  forgiven  its  grimy
foundations.
Just  as  the  big  powers  have  an  interest  in  preventing  war
between  India  and  Pakistan,  so  the  small  and  middle   powers
have   an  interest   in  preventing   war   between   the   U.S.   and
China.    They  see  China's  admission  to  the  UN   as  a  means
of  ameliorating  China's  intransigeance,  which  is  more a  mat-
ter  of  words  than  deeds  anyway.    But  here  we  refuse  to  re-
ciprocate,  and  Ambassador  Goldberg's  opening  address  to  the
General  Assembly was given  a  cool  reception  not  only  because
of  its banality  but  because of  its self-righteousness  about  China.
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
1   2   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October ^, 1965
AFL-CIO's  Latin  Labor  Affiliate  Only  Latin  Voice  Raised  In  Favor  of   Interventionism
ADA's  Don  Edwards  Says  Selden  Resolution  Had  "Tacit  Support"  of  LBJ
Those  members  of  Congress  who  understand  the   dangers
implicit  in  our  Latin  American  interventionism ought  not  to
wait  for  a new  crisis before speaking out  again. A  campaign  of
education  is  essential  before  new  crises arise.   One  is building
up  over  the  government's  attempt  to  organize  an  OAS  force
which,  under  the  guise  of  peace-keeping,   can  be  used  as  an
interventionist  tool  against  governments  we  consider  too  left
for  safety.    The  opposition  to  such  a  force  is  strong  in  every
Latin  country  except  those  like  Brazil,  Paraguay,  Nicaragua,
and  Guatemala  which  are  ruled  by  the  military  with  our  aid.
The  second  crisis  may  arise  in  the  Dominican  Republic  if  and
when  it  looks  as  if  Bosch  or  a  Bosch  candidate may  win  over
Balaguer,  the Trujillo  leftover our oil  and  sugar interests favor.
Even  Pro-American  Papers  Protest
The   Selden   resolution   upholding   unilateral   intervention
against   the  threat   of   "subversion"   should   be  regarded   as  a
blessing  in  disguise  for  it  has  awakened  the  whole  hemisphere
to  the  danger.    Even  conservative  papers  in  Brazil,  Colombia
and  Mexico,  which  normally  support   U.S.  policy,  have  con-
demned  it.    Conservative  legislators  joined  moderates  in  the
unanimous  resolution  of  condemnation  passed  by  the  parlia-
ments  of  Peru  and  Colombia.    The  only  voice  in  favor  of  the
Selden  resolution  came  from  ORIT,  the  Latin  American   affili-
ate  of   the  AFL-CIO   (Wash.   Post,  Sept.   26,  from   Mexico
City).     Dodd   criticized   Fulbright   for   not   quoting   ORIT's
statement  in  favor  of  the  Dominican  intervention!
When  Rosenthal  (D.  N.Y.)   told  the" House  in  the  debate
over  the  Selden  resolution  Sept.  20  that  it  threatened  anarchy,
he  was  not  exaggerating.    The   resolution  would   allow  any
country  in  the  hemisphere to  intervene when  it  saw  a  danger
of   "subversion"   in  a  neighbor.    Uruguay,  the  oldest  demo-
cratic:  regime  in  the  hemisphere,  has  been  alarmed  by indica-
tions that the  Brazilian  and  Argentine military were  conspiring
to  intervene  in  Uruguay.   The  military  we  arm  can  carry  on
little  imperialistic  ventures  of   their  own  under  cover   of  so
vague  a  mandate  as  that  afforded   by  the   Selden  resolution.
Alarm  is  increased because our  favorite  Latin  ally is now  Brazil
where  the  military  are  moving  toward  a  Salazar  type  dictator -
The Alliance  Against  Progress
"The big bottleneck  to  progress ...  is  the factions  in
the  nations  of  Latin  America  that  cling  to  the  past  and
to  their  present   power. ...  So  long  as  these  elements
are  aided  and  encouraged  by  the  U.S.  military  aid  mis-
sions  and  CIA  .  .  .  they  will  continue  to  block  essential
economic   reform.  .  .  .  Many  of  these  Lathi   American
oligarchies  and would-be dictators  are  using  the  Ameri-
can  military  to  stay  in  power.    They  count  on  its  gulli-
bility,  and  our  overriding  obsession  with  Communism,
to  hold  back  the  tide  that  would  otherwise  sweep  them
away."
—Morse  in  the Senate  supporting  Fulbright, Sept. 16.
ship,  and  where  the  Tribuna  da  Impresa,  organ  of  the  nation-
alist  Lacerda  has  just  published  the  text  of  an  alleged   secret
document   in  which  Tom  Mann  offered   Brazil  the  command
of  an  inter-American  military  force  (Le  Monde,  Sept.  23).
Brademas   (D.   lnd.~)   one  of  those  who  spoke  out   against
the  Selden  resolution  (passed  315-52)  told  the  House  he  had
been  unable  to  get  the  State  Department   to  say  whether  it
was  for  or  against  the  resolution.   This  was  the  line  to  which
the  liberals  held   in  the  debate  to  avoid  a  frontal  attack  on
the  Administration.   But Don  Edwards  (D.  CW.)  to his  credit
let  out  the  truth   when   he  told   the  ADA's  national   board
(Baltimore  Sun,  Sept.  26)   that  the  resolution  had  the  "tacit
approval"  of  the Administration.
That  lack  of  candor  Fulbright  charged  against  the Adminis-
tration  extends  to  Congress.    Clark  (D.  Pa.)  in  a  speech  sup-
porting  Fulbright  complained  (Sept.  17)  that  even  the  Senate
Foreign   Relations   Committee  was  unable  to  hear   three  key
Administration   witnesses,  albeit   in   executive   session.     One
was  John  Bartlow  Martin,  who  profited  from  his  quick  stay
as  Johnson's  emissary  in  the  Dominican  Republic  by  selling
a  story  to  Life   magazine  which  Clark  called   "highly  inaccu-
rate"  but  which  pandered   to  the   alarmist  views  spread   by
Luce.    The  second  was  special  Ambassador  Ellsworth  Bunker.
The  third  was  McGeorge  Bundy,  the  President's  special  emis-
sary.     "At   one  point,"  Clark  told   the  Senate,"   he  said  he
would  come  and  have  tea  with  us,  but  then  he  refused  even
to  do that."
A  Rare  Friendly  U.S.  Report  on  Cuba
"Cuba  today  is  not  the  island  of  misery,  oppression  and
starvation  pictured  by  many  Americans.    Neither  has  Cuba
achieved  the  unity and economic  success  claimed by  the  sup-
porters  of  Fidel  Castro.    However, a 3-1/2  week  visit  travel-
ling  from  one  end  of  the  Communist  outpost  to  the  other
suggests  that  the  present   reality  lies  closer   to  the   Castro
hopes.  .  .  .  His  popularity  is  immense.  .  .  .
"The  basic  reason  Fidel  and his  revolution  continue  to  be
popular  despite   Cuba's  many  difficulties  is  that  the  people
now  have  something  of  overriding  value  that  they   previous-
ly  lacked—dignity.    Part   of   the  Cuban  resentment   stems
from  the  feeling  that  Cuban  dignity  had  been  affronted  by
U.S.  economic  domination.  .  .  .
"Negroes,  some  30%  of  the  population,  are  particularly
pro-Fidel.  .  .  .  Formerly   landless  farm   workers  .  .  .  are
another  source  of  total  support.  .  .  .  Before  Castro,  Cuban
agriculture   was   dominated  by  immense  sugar   plantations
owned  mostly  by  foreigners,    particularly   Americans.   .  .  .
:  It  Illustrates  What  Fulbright  Meant
Much   of   the   expropriated    land   was    given    to   landless
peasants.  .  . .
"Despite  the  success  of  the  Castro  regime,  there  are  many
opponents  who feel  that  the  improvements  will  be  more  than
cancelled   out  by  the  permanent  loss  of  any   hope   of   ever
building  a  free  society.  They  are  men  who  would  have  built
the  liberal,  democratic  Cuba  which  American   policy-makers
say  they  want.   But  before  the  revolution,  they  were  unable
to  make  headway,  primarily because  of  the  indifference  and
insensitivity  of  the  American  government.  .  .  .
"We  must  understand  that  it  is  in  our  national   interest
to  encourage  certain  revolutionary  changes,  even  when  they
include  nationalizing   American   business  holdings.     If   we
attempt  to  block  the  needed  changes,  we  may  delay   them
temporarily,  but  they  will  inevitably  come,  dictated  then  by
a  new  Fidel  Castro."
—C.  K.  McClatchy,   associate  editor  of   the   Sacramento
Bee,  condensed  in  the  Washington  Post  Sept.  26.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 4, 1965
Only  Strong  Protest  Can  Keep  Us  From   Cultivating  the  Inhumane  Arts  in  Vietnam
Arthur  Miller  Sets  An  Example  All  Sensitive  Americans  Should  Follow
We    salute   dramatist   Arthur   Miller   for    his    telegram
("When  the  guns  boom,  the  arts  die")   to  the  White  House,
rejecting  an  invitation to  witness  the  signing by  the  President
of  the  Arts  and  Humanities  bill.    Like  Poet   Robert  Lowell
four  months  ago,  Mr.  Miller  was  protesting  the  Vietnamese
war.     We  believe  his  example  should  be  followed   by  every
intellectual.    The   "humanities"  are  being  destroyed  without
mercy  by  our  military;  the  arts  for  which  we  are  becoming
world  famous are  the  arts of  burning out  villages  with napalm
and  spreading  carpets  of  devastation  with  B-52s.    We   urge
everyone  to  participate  in  his  nearest  demonstration  Oct.   15
for  Vietnam  Day  and  to  come  to  Washington   in  the  march
being   planned   by  SANE   and  other  organizations   Nov.   27.
How  "Humane"  We  Can  Get
A  numbed  public  opinion  is  passively accepting  the  use  of
"non-lethal"   gases  to  "flush  out"   villagers  from  air  raid  shel-
ters  and  tunnels  "humanely."     If  the  Pentagon  wants  to  be
humane,  let  it end  the  use of  napalm  and  indiscriminate bomb-
ing,   both  violations  of  Geneva  conventions.    If  "non-lethal"
gases  are  accepted,  the  next  step,  also  on  'humane"  grounds,
will  be  to  use  Vietnam  as  a  testing  place  for  new  means  of
chemical  bacteriological  warfare.    The  campaign  to  sell  these
new  weapons  began  earlier  this  year,  and  any  encouragement
will  revive  it.    Some  Americans  in  Vietnam  are  sickened  by
what  we  are  doing  but  many,  as  Georges  Chaffard  reported  in
L'Express,   Sept.  26,  take  the  killings  lightly,  with  an  under-
current  of  racism.   When  he  wondered  at  the  prodigality  with
which  we  shower  bombs  on  minor  targets,   "American  avia-
tors  explained  laughingly  Aat  orders  are  to  get  rid   of  old
stocks  which  date  as  far  back  as  the  war  against  Japan,  and  to
hurry  up  before  they  become   unusable."
When  we knew  we were  losing  the  war,  the  answer to  peace
talk  was  that  we  had  to  have  a  situation  of  strength.     Now
that  we think  we're winning,  the  military  object  to  peace  talks
because  they  think  they  can  impose  terms.     So  Lodge   from
Saigon   (according  to  an  exclusive  by Arnold  Beichman  in  the
The  Stalemate
"The  leaders   of  the  National  Liberation  Front  .  .  .
must  revise  their  previous views.   There  will  be  no new
Dien  Bien  Phu  in  South  Vietnam. .  .  .  The  American
bases  have  a  permanent character  .  .  .  their liquidation
is  no  more  possible  than  that  of  Guantanamo. .  .  . On
the  other  hand,  the  Americans  can  do little against  the
deterioration  of  the  political  climate,  against  the  non-
existence  of  any  power  in  Saigon,  against  the  rise  of
anti-American  sentiments,  against  the  presence  among
the  rural  masses  of  thousands  of   politico-administrative
cadres  who  have patiently woven for  the  Viet  Cong  the
spider's  web of  a  clandestine  State  apparatus.   It  is  too
late  to  try  for  a  'reconquest  of  hearts'.  .  .  .  Sooner  or
later   the  Americans  will  have  to  allow  the  Front  of
Liberation  to  find  legal  political  expression  and  to par-
ticipate  in  power.    The  Viet  Cong  and  its   allies  will
have  to  acommodate themselves  to  the  American mili-
tary  presence  at  certain points along  the  coast. So much
is  obvious.  But  men  may  refuse  to  see  the  obvious  for
20  years."
—Georges  Chaffard    in  L'Express  (Paris),  Sept. 26.
New  York   Herald-Tribune,   Sept  27)  has  protested   Ambassa-
dor  Goldberg's  statement  to  the  UN  that  we  were  ready  for
"peaceful  discussions."    It  may  be  a  good  many  weeks  before
we  know  how  much  of  recent  stories  about  military  victories
were  true  and  how  much  malarky.    U.S.  correspondents  are
inhibited  but  British  correspondents   are  franker.    The   Lon-
don   Observer   (Sept.   19)   reported   from  Saigon   that   news-
men  feel  much  of  what  they  are  getting  is  "transparently  mis-
leading."   The  London  Times  (Sept.  24)  in  a lengthy   special
from  Saigon  says  recent  victory reports,  like  that  of  Chu  Lai,
have  left   some  observers   skeptical.     Not   only  reporters   but
European  military  attaches  are  reported  talking  of   boycotting
briefings   described  as  "painfully  vacuous."    Grimmer   truths
may  be  seen  in  Senator  Stennis's  speech   at  Colombia,   Miss.
(Wash.  Star,  Sept.  26),   saying  we  may  have  to  double  our
forces   to  250,000  and  keep  our  troops  in  Vietnam  for   15
years.    He  wants  the  war  on  poverty  suspended  or  curtailed
to  meet  the  bill.
The  Toll  of  Suffering  and  Hatred  Exacted by Our Bombing Policies  in Vietnam
"I  have  found  very  widespread  disaffection  with  respect
to  both  sides  on  the  part  of  the  Vietnamese  people,  and  I
would  estimate   that  80  to  90%  of  the  people   of  Vietnam
feel  no  real  stake  in  the  war.  .  .  .  Their  outlook  is  focused
on  the  need  for  a  safe  night's  sleep  and  the  opportunity to
keep  a  reasonable  proportion  of  what  their  labor  produces,
but  neither  side  affords  them either  of  these  luxuries.    Feel-
ings are masked both by reason  of  Asian  mores  and of  harsh-
ly  enforced  regulations  against  dissent,  but  it  is  safe  to  say
that  the  American presence  is  widely  misunderstood, widely
mistrusted  and probably  widely  resented.  .  .  .
"There  are  two  policies  now  being  followed  that  have  a
bearing  on  the  problem. .  .  .  The  first  of  these  is  the  'no-
sanctuary'  policy  of   the   Government   of   Vietnam   and   the
U.S.  forces,   and  its  companion  'open  target  areas'  policy.
I  can  understand  the  military  basis   for  the  first  of   these
policies  which  permits  a  commander  in  the  field  to  call  up
air  attack  support  when  his  men  are  being  fired  upon  or
when  he  believes  Viet  Cong  are  taking  refuge  in  a village,
but   more   than   military  considerations   are   in   order.    I
deeply   believe  the   policy  is   wrong  morally,  shortsighted
pragmatically  and  disastrous  in  terms  of  the  bitterness   it
is  creating  among  civilian  Vietnamese,  both  those  whom  it
drives  to  become  refugees  and  those  who  stay  behind.     I
can  see  even  less  justification   for  the  'open  target   areas'
policy,  under which any  aircraft,  unable  to  dispose  of  their
explosives  on  the  designated   target,  and  prohibited  from
landing  with  explosives  aboard,  is  instructed  to  drop  them
within  certain large  Viet  Cong  areas—on  village, rice paddy,
man,  or  beast,  wherever whim  dictates."
—Stephen  G. Gary,  American Friends  Service   Committee,
at  the  Senate  Vietnamese   refugee  hearings,  Sept.   HI.
"The   civilians  who  flee  the  bombed regions  do  not  attri-
bute  their suffering  to  the  Viet  Cong.   It  is  the  'foreigners'
they  hold  responsible.     'If  this  continues,'  a  Saigon  friend
of   moderate  views  told  me,  'we  will  forget  that  the  Viet
Cong  are  Communists   and  finish  by  seeing  them   only   as
compatriots  hunted down by  foreigners,  and  we  will all turn
against  the  Americans.'"
—Georges  Chaffard    in  L'Express  (Paris),  Sept. 26.
\   2  -
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 4,1965
A  Look  at Other  Nation's  Taboos  May  Help  to  Shake  Loose  Our  Own
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Everyone knows the  China, problem  is really a matter of  domes-
tic politics  in  our  country.   Everyone sees  that  U.S.  armies  are
fighting   on  China's  border   in  Vietnam," that  we  assert   the
right  to  unilateral  intervention  where  it  suits  our   purposes,
that  we  seek  to  dominate  both  sides  of  the  Pacific  as  well  as
the  Atlantic,  that  our  Navies  are  in  the  Indian  ocean  and  the
Mediterranean  as  well  as  the  Caribbean.   This  is  a  poor  mo-
ment  to  accuse  China  of  not  being  peace-loving  and  seeking
world  dominion  and  therefore  not  qualifying  for  UN  mem-
bership !   Mao's  30-year-old  remark  as a guerrilla  about  power
growing  out  of  the  mouth  of  a  gun  is  rehashed  by  us  when
we  are  demonstrating  its  unfortunate  truth,  only  we  substi-
tute  napalm  and  B-52s.
Sacred  Cow  and  Sacred   Buck
We  are  asking  Indians  and  Pakistani  to  be  rational  about
Kashmir  but  we refuse  to be rational  about  Communism.    Yet
when  a  Hindu  sees  a  Muslim  eat  beef,  or  a  Muslim  sees  the
erotic  idols  of  a  Hindu  temple,  their  revulsion  is  deeper  even
than  an  American  Rotarian's  when  he  confronts  the  idea  that
a  society  should  be  built  which  does  not  recognize  the  sacred
right  to  make  an  honest  buck.   The  planet  is full  of  "irrecon-
cilable"  quarrels which must be reconciled  if  the  human  race is
to  survive.   That  is  why  the  UN  and  the  building  of  world
law  and  an  end  of  the  barbarism  which  allows  any  nation  to
embark  on  murder  when  it  suits  its  purpose  are  urgent  neces-
Heavy  Majority for  Greater  Peace Effort
The  latest  Gallup poll  (Wash.  Post,  Sept.  23)   should
encourage  the  peace  forces.   Two questions  were  asked.
The  first  was  whether  the  person  would be  more  or less
inclined  to  vote  for  a  candidate  for  Congress  who  "ad-
vocated  sending  a  great  many  more  men  to  Vietnam."
The  vote  showed  38% less  inclined,  33%  more  inclined,
29%   no  opinion.    The  other   was  whether  the  person
would  be  more  or  less  inclined  to  vote  for  a  candidate
who  "said  that  we  should  try  harder  to  reach  a  com-
promise   peace   settlement."     The  result   showed  38%
more  inclined  to  vote  for  such  a  candidate,   14%  less
and  18%  no  opinion.    Gallup  noted  that  the  two  ques-
tions   were  not  mutually  exclusive  since  some   people
believe  "the  best  way  to  achieve  a  peace  settlement"  is
to  build  up  the  ground  forces.    The  poll  showed  little
difference  between  Republicans  and Democrats.   Gallup
commented,  "the  Republicans will  have  a lot  of selling  to
do if  they  adopt  escalation  of  the  war  as  party  policy."
sities.    But  to  build  that  safer  world,  the  big  powers  must set
an  example.   That  means us, above all  on the  subject of  China.
Goldberg was as unpersuasive on disarmament.   He  told  the
UN  we  were  against  proliferation,  but  we  insist  on  the  MLF
which  would  spread  nuclear  weapons  to  Germany.    He  said
we  were  for  peace  in  space,  but  Johnson  has  just  decided  to
let  the military go  ahead  with  their  MOL  project.    This  is  the
first  step  toward  war  in  space,  Buck  Rogers  style.    What  pur-
pose  is  served  by  propositions  so  transparent?
OWNEBSHIP,   MANAGEMENT  AMD  CIRCULATION
(Act  of  October   23,  1962;  Section  4369,  Title  39,  United  States   Code)
1.  Date  of  Filing:  September  26,  1965.
2.  Title  of  Publication:  I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.
3.  Frequency  of  issue:  Every  other  Monday  except  last  in  December  and
first  in  January  and  bi-weekly   in  July  and  August.
4.  Location  of  known   office  of  publication:   5618  Nebraska  Avenue,   N.W.,
Washington.  D.  C.  20015.
5.  Location  of  the  headquarters  or  general  business  offices   of   the   pub-
lishers:   6618  Nebraska  Avenue,  N.W.,  Washington,   D.   C.  20016.
6.  Names  and  addresses  of  publisher,  editor,  and  managing  editor:  I.  F.
Stone,  same  address.
7.  Owner    (If    owned  by  a  partnership   or  other   unincorporated   f.rm,   it*
name   and   address,   at   well   a*  that   of   each   individual   mutt   be   given):
I.   F.   Stone.   5618  Nebraska   Avenue,   N.   W..   Washington,   D.   C.   20016;
Esther  H.  Stone,  same  address.
8.   _ Known  bondholders,  mortgagees,  and  other  security  holders  owning  or
holding  1  percent  or  more  of  total  amount  of  bonds,  mortgages  or  other
securities   (If   there  are  none,  so  state):   none.
9.  Paragraphs  7  and  8  include,   in  cases  where  the  stockholder  or  secur-
ity   holder   appears  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trustee  or  in  any
other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person  or  corporation  for  whom
such  trustee  Is  acting,  also  the  statements  in  the  two  paragraphs  show  the
affiant's   full   knowledge  and  belief   as  to  the  circumstances  and  conditions
under  which  stockholders  and  security  holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the
books  of  the  company  as  trustees,  hold  stock  and  securities  In  a  capacity
other  than  that  of  a  bonafide  owner.
Average No.  Copies
Each Issue During     Single Issue Nearest
Preceding 12 months        To Filing Date
28,500                               26,600
A.  Total   No.   Copies   Printed
B.  Paid  Circulation
1.  Sales  Through  Agents,  News
Dealers  or  Otherwise                        1,337
2.  To  Term  Subscribers  by
Mail,  Carrier  Delivery,  or  by
other  means                                       21,204
C.  Total  Paid  Circulation                               22,541
D.  Free  Distribution  (including
samples)  by  Mall,  Carrier  De-
livery,  or  by   Other   Means   '                 100
E.  Total  No.  of  Copies  Distributed              22,641
F.  Office Use, Etc.                                           859
G.  Total                                                              23,500
1.637
23,363
24,990
150
25,140
1,860
26,500
I  certify  that  the  statements  made  by  me  above  are  correct  and com-
plete.   I.  F.  Stone,  editor.
I. F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N, W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
10/4/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraika  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday   except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December   and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during   July  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.W.,   Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.;  16   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mall   rates:
(15  to  Europe;  (20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED