I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965dec06.pdf

============================================================

Revealing: LBJ Planned  Those  Bombings Before  the Election, P.  3
Mrs.    Martin  Luther  King  Tells  Our  Military  Experts  What  Every  Negro  Knows
"I am  here  as  a Negro....  I  know  what  bombings  do  for
an  oppressed  people.   I  have  seen  oppressed  people  respond
to  bombing and  violence  across  the  South.   I  would  say  to
the  experts  who determine  our military strategy—bombings
only  make  an  oppressed  people  more  determined."
—Mrs.  Martin  Luther  King,  Washington  March,  Nov.  87
I. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  41
DECEMBER  6,   1965
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Law  for  the  Moon, When  The  Earth  Is  Still  Lawless?
Whatever  its  remote  origins,  the  White  House  Conference
on  International  Cooperation   was  primarily  public  relations.
Its  climax  was  a  White  House  reception,  held  in  two  shifts.
There   the   assembled   herd   of   academicians,  business   men,
bankers,   lawyers,  and   social  workers  were  to   undergo   the
Johnsonian  laying  on  of  hands,  and  go  home  glowing.    Care
was  taken-to  invite  no  one  who  might  refuse  to  come.    The
conference  was  calculated  to  put  an  aura  of  idealism,  intellec-
tuality  and  concern  for  peace  around  Lyndon  Johnson  as  he
prepares  for  further  escalation  in  our  savage  efforts  to  impose
our  will  on  a  small  and  distant  people  at  the  risk  of   another
world  conflagration.   The  war  in  Vietnam  cast  its  shadow  on
every  subject  touched  upon,  even  the  most  technical.    How,
for   example,   discuss  "Finance   and   Monetary  Affairs",   one
of  the  thirty panel  topics,  without  reference  to  what  the  rising
cost  of  the  war  is  doing  to  price  stability  at  home  and  the
shaky  character  of  the  dollar   abroad?    The   war  endangers
every  effort  toward  the  international  cooperation  the  confer-
ence   was   supposed   to   foster.     But   the   arrangements,   the
panels  and  the  ground  rules  were  set  up  to  keep  the  whole
affair  antiseptic,  lest  the  breath  of  reality  break  through   and
criticism  explode.
Jay  Lovestone  A  Peace  Dove-nik?
Room  was  found  on  the  list  of  panels  for  such  hot  issues
as   "Meteorology"   and   "Women",   but   there   was  none   on
Vietnam,  as there  was none  on  militarism, though  the  increas-
ing  size  and  power  of  the  military  establishment  in   almost
every  country  are  a  major  threat  to  international   cooperation.
There  was a  panel  on  "Labor"  moderated  (if  that  could  pos-
sibly  be  the  term)   by  Jay  Lovestone,   the   labor   movement's
one-man  CIA,  himself  no  small  obstacle  to  the  amity  of  na-
tions.    There  was,  of  course,  no  panel  on  how  we  carry  on
international  cooperation   in  our  own  Latin  American  back-
yard,  still  seething   over  the  Dominican   intervention,  though
the  Committee  on  Peacekeeping   Operations  did  on  one  page
of  its  24-page  report  mention  our  efforts  there  in  "maintain-
ing  order  to  allow  the  free  election  of  a  non-Communist  gov-
ernment".    Whether  this  remark was foot-in-mouth  or  tongue-
in-cheek  must   be  left   to  Congressional   investigation.     We
searched  through  the  reports  of  the  committees  on  Develop-
ment   of   International   Law," Peacekeeping   Operations    and
Peaceful   Settlement   of  Disputes  without  finding  any  discus-
sion  of  the  Vietnamese  war,  surely  a  new  record  in  scholarly
myopia.    But  our  diligence  was  at  last  rewarded   when  on
page   31  of  the  report  of  the  Committee   on  Social   Welfare
1  1 *
The  Only  Real  Solution
The  people  of  the  earth  having  agreed
that  the  advancement of  man
in  spiritual  excellence  and physical  welfare
is  the  common  good  of  mankind;
that  universal peace is  the prerequisite
for  the pursuit of  that goal;
that  justice in turn is  the prerequisite  of peace,
and peace  and justice stand or fall  together;
that  iniquity  and war inseparably  spring
from  the competitive anarchy of  the national states;
that  therefore  the age  of  nations  must  end,
and the  era  of  humanity begin;
the  governments of  the nations have decided
to  order their separate  sovereignties
in  one government  of  justice,
to which they  surrender  their  arms;
and to establish,  as  they do establish,
• this Constitution
as the  covenant and fundamental  law
of  the  Federal Republic  of  the World.
—From  A   World   Constitution,  published   by  Center
for   Democratic  Institutions,  Santa  Barbara,   Col.
we found  this  scoop:
Recent  reports  by expert  observers  [sic]  of  the  problems
of  homeless  children  and  disrupted  families  in  South  Viet-
nam  reveal  that  there  are  an-  increasing  number  of  home-
less  children  now  being  cared  for  in  orphanages.     Hos-
tilities  there  are creating  the inevitable  chaos.  . .  .  Experts
believe  that  many  of  the  separated  children  are  only  tem-
porarily  homeless  and that  relatives  could  care  for  them  if
the  relatives  could  be  located.
There was no  mention  of  the  contribution  made  by b.....................g
or  n..........._....jro  to  these  child  welfare  problems.    The  commit-
tee,  in  its  formal  conclusions:
1.  Endorse  the  steps  now  being  taken  by  the  U.S. Gov-
ernment  in  dispatching   qualified  social  welfare  personnel
as  part  of  the  present  fact-finding  teams  there.
2.  Recommends that .the  U.S.  Government,  together with
the   South   Vietnamese   Government  establish    emergency
child  and  family  welfare  services  utilising  and  training
Vietnamese   personnel,   with   the   objectives   of   reuniting
families  insofar  as  is  possible  and resorting  to  the  Institu-
tionalization   of  homeless  children  as  little  as  possible.
If   the   Social   Welfare   committee   had  only  had  a  U.S.   Air
Force  consultant   he  might  have  explained  how  easily,  by  a
stepup  in  B-52  raids,  we  could  reduce  the  number  of  both
orphanages and  orphans.
(Continued  on  Page  Pout)
1   6
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  6, 1965
And   Now   A   Greater   Effort   to  Prevent   the   Bombing   of   Hanoi  and   Haiphong
The  Biggest  Peace  Demonstration  in  the  History  of  Washington
The  March   on  Washington  last  week-end  was  the  greatest
peace  demonstration  the  capital  has  ever  seen.    It  was  in  our
country's  best  traditions.    We   believe  the  President   and  the
Secretary  of  State  deserve  credit  for  issuing  statements  on. the
eve  of  the  March  upholding  freedom   of  dissent.    Those  not
inclined  to  give  them  credit  for  anything  need  only  stop  and
consider   whether   they  would   prefer   to  have  them   whipping
up  mob  spirit  against  those  who  oppose  the  war.   The  fight
for  peace  is  a  fight  to  maintain  civilized standards  in  human
relations,  and  to  keep  open  channels  of  communication.    Foe
us  to  protest  with  dignity,  and  for  the  government  to  respond
by   recognizing   the   right   to   protest,   was   a   victory  for   the
moral   values  we   seek   to   affirm.     We   cannot  promote   talks
with  the  enemy  by  creating  an  atmosphere  in  which  we can-
not  even  talk  to  each  other.     In  this  sense,  the  struggle   for
co-existence  begins  at  home.
The  Mangy   Handful  for  the  War
Even  more   effective   than   the   peace   demonstration,   in  in-
fluencing  the  White  House,  was  the  character  of  the  counter
demonstration.     It   is  true   that   Mr.   Johnson   asked   pro-war
organizations  not  to  demonstrate  the  same  day, thus  avoiding
the  possibility of  an  ugly  clash.    But  if  there  was  any  strong
support   for   the  war, Lafayette  Square   at   least  would   have
been  packed  by  a  hostile  throng.     As  it  was  the  only  demon-
trators  in  favor  of  the  war  were  the  usual  platoon   of   Nazi
kooks,   a   handful    of   East   European   anti-Communists   and
three  or  four  Birchite  Republicans.    Any  thoughtful  observer
from     a.  White   House   window  should   have  been   deeply dis-
turbed  by  the  contrast  between  these  mangy  few   hatemongers
and  the  25,000   to  30,000  sober  peace  demonstrators.
The  meeting  at  the  Washington   Monument  was  memorable.
By  far  the  most  eloquent  was  Norman  Thomas,  who  only  a
few   days  earlier  had  celebrated   his  81st birthday.    "I  would
rather   America   saved  her   soul  than  her   face,"   he   cried,   in
demanding  negotiations.     Of   the  havoc  our  forces  wreak   in
Vietnam   he   made   an   unforgettable  comment.    "The   torch
of   liberty,"  Thomas   protested,  "was not   intended  to  set  fire
to villages." Ronnie Dugger,  editor  of  the  maverick .Texas  Ob-
sen-er,   reminded   Mr.   Johnson   of   what   Stephen   F.   Austin,
Peace  Movement  Threatened
"Sterner  measures  on  the  homefront   also  appear  in
the  offing.    Effective  censorship  of  news  reporting from
Vietnam  is  now  favored  by  a  growing  number  of   offi-
cials.    And  quite  certainly,  there  will  be  less  leniency
from  now  on  with  the  kind  of  organized demonstrations
of  dissidence  which  serve  to  comfort  the  enemy, under-
mine  morale  and, in  themselves,  lengthen  the  casualty
lists."
—Crosby   Noyes,   diplomatic     correspondent     of   the
Washington  Evening  Star,  Nov.  29.
that  early  Texan  hero,   had   to  say  about  the   folly  of  trying
to  rule  by  military  dictatorship.    Edwin  T.  Dahlberg  of   the
National   Council   of   Churches,  warned   of   the   effect   when
on  TV-casts  "our children  see  adults  burning  rice  fields,  ex-
ploding  bridges  and   subjecting  each   other   to  torture,"   Dr.
Benjamin   Spock   said,   "We   express   our   love  of   country  by
wanting  to  get  our  troops  back  from  Vietnam  while  they  are
still   alive."     Carl   Oglesby,   president   of    Students   for    A
Democratic   Society,  tried  to  relate, the   struggle   against  war
to  the   struggle   for   a  better  social  order.     Prof.   Joseph   M.
Duffy  of  Notre  Dame  sought  to  apply  the  teachings  of  Popes
John  and  Paul  to  the  war.   Not   a  single  major  civil  rights
leader  had  the  nerve  to  turn  up  but  Mrs. Martin  Luther  King
filled  the  gap  with  a  touching  address.
No  small  part  of  the  success  of  the  March  was  due  to  that
devoted  band  of  young  students  who  have  done  so  much  so
swiftly  to  transform  the  civil  rights  struggle  and  to  energize
the  fight  for  peace.    Frank  Emspak,  chairman  of  the  National
Coordinating   Committee   to  End   the   War   in   Vietnam,    felt
that  the  peace  movement  gained   in  strength   and  unity  from
the   convention   his   group   held   in   Washington    during   the
same   week-end.     It  was,  however,   disappointing   to   many,
especially  from  the  South,  that  so  much  time  was  wasted  in
parliamentary  maneuver  and  organizational  in-fighting and  so
little  on  the  concrete  tasks  of  fighting  for  peace  in  Vietnam.
The  week-end  should  be  a  springboard  for  greater  effort   and
bigger   demonstrations  especially  to  corribat  the  rising  tide  of
savage   proposals   for   bombing   Hanoi   and  Haiphong.   That
crime  against  humanity  may  be  just  around   the   corner.
Ho  Chi  Minh's  Replies  to  Linus  Pauling  and  SANE  Ambiguous  on  U.S. Withdrawal
We  have  the  full  text  of  Ho  Chi  Minh's  reply  to  Linus
Pauling  and  seven  other  Nobel  Prize  winners  and  of Ho's
message   to  Dr.  Benjamin  Spock  and  Prof.  Stuart  Hughes
of   the   National  Committee  for   A   Sane   Nuclear   Policy.
The  former  was  broadcast  by  Hanoi  in  its  English   language
service  at  1682  GMT Nov.  20 and  the  latter  at  0223 Nov.  26.
Neither  embodies  any  change  in  policy  and  both  merely  re-
state  the   Four  Points  of  last   April  8.    Neither   bears  out
the  New  York  Times  page  one  headline  Nov. 24,  "Hanoi's
Insistence   on  A  U.S. Pullout   Dims   Parley   Hope."     That
AP  story  from  Tokyo,  based  on  a  monitoring of  the  broad-
cast   letter   to   Dr.  Pauling   said   it   "appears   to   have   de-
stroyed   hopes   for   a   compromise"   by   making  U.S. with-
drawal  "a  condition  for  a  settlement."    The  text  does  not
bear  this  out  and  the  AP  itself   further  down  in  the  story
admitted  that  Ho  "did not  in  so  many  words  say   that   an
American   withdrawal  was   a   condition   for   talks."
The  Four  Points,  as  reproduced in  Ho's letter  to  Pauling,
are  ambiguous.    Under  any  return  to  the  principles  of  the
1954  agreement,  foreign  forces  would  have  to  be  withdrawn
from  both  sides.    But  the  Four  Points   do  not  make U.S.
withdrawal  a  condition  for  talks.    The  shorter  message  to
Dr.  Spock  and  Prof.  Hughes,  refers  to  the  Four  Points  and
says  that  if  the  U.S. aggression  stops  "peace  will  immedi-
ately   be   restored."     Does   this   mean   that   if   we   stopped
firing,  they  would  too?    This  is  the  kind  of  question pre-
liminary  talks  could  explore.    This  message  refers  to U.S.
withdrawal  in  another  context.    Ho  says,  "I  take  this  op-
portunity   to  warmly  hail  the  American  people's   struggle
for  the  immediate ending  of  the  U.S. Government's  criminal
war  of  aggression  in  Vietnam,  the  cessation   of  the  air  at-
tacks  on  the  territory  of  the  DRV,  the  withdrawal'of U.S.
troops.  . .  ." He thanks  Americans  for  calling  for withdrawal
but  does  not  himself  demand  it  as  a  condition  for  talks.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  6, 1965
McNamara's  Computers  Must  Be  The  Viet  Gong's  Favorite  Substitute  for   Comic  Books
He Says We've Stopped Losing the War  He Told Us in 1962  We Were Winning!
Peace  demonstrations are  not  the  only  things  which  may
hearten  the  Viet  Cong.     A  greater  source  of  encouragement
must  be  the  optimistic declarations over  the  years  of  Amer-
ica's  defense chiefs.    Arthur  Schlesinger,  Jr.,  in  his  "A  Thou-
sand  Days"  recalls  (p.  549)   that  McNamara  on  his  first  visit
to  Vietnam  early  in   1962  said,  "Every  quantitative measure-
ment  we  have  shows  we're  winning  this  war."     Now,  back
in  Saigon  almost  four   years  later,  McNamara  tells  the  press
"we  have  stopped  losing  the  war."      McNamara's  quantifiers
will  end  up  by  ranking  with  Rusk's  antenna.
When   Elephant   Meets   Mouse
A   certain   zany   quality   characterizes   all   the  computations
in  this war.  "U.S.  To  Match Rapid  Viet Red  Buildup" said  an
8-column  headline  across  the  front   page  of  the    Washington
Post   Nov.   30.    The   picture  is  of   our   trying  desperately  to
keep  up  with  a tidal  inflow  of  enemy troops.    The  New  York
Herald-Tribune    story   the   same   day   quoted   intelligence  in
Saigon   as  estimating  "there   are  perhaps  seven  North  Viet-
namese   regiments—14,000   men—   scattered   in   the   central
highlands."    The  number  of  U.S.  troops  is approaching  200,-
000  and  is  expected  next  year  to  reach  300,000.    This  looks
like   a   frightened  elephant   matching   a   belligerent   mouse.
The  North   Vietnamese  troop   infiltration,   as  our  intelligence
estimates  it,  just  equals  the  number  of  South  Korean  troops
sent  in  to  help  us.    The  Herald-Tribune  gives  the  number of
U.S.,   South   Vietnamese,  South   Korean,   Australian  (1,300)
and   New  Zealand   (300)   troops   as  685,600.     Last  July  the
Pentagon  figured  the  total  Communist  forces   in  South  Viet-
nam  at  165,000.     Now   the  Vietcong  strength  is  given  as  at
least   250,000   (London   Sunday   Observer,  Nov.   28).     Even
if  these  figures  are  not  padded,  our  totals  are  almost  3  times
theirs  and  our  own  U.S.  troops  outnumber  North  Vietnam's
regulars  more  than   10-to-l.
Add  our  overwhelming  superiority  in  weapons  and  in  the
air—the  Viet  Cong  don't  even  have  a  few  trainer  planes—and
it's  clear  that  our  record  is  hardly  glamorous.    The   London
Observer's   dispatch  quoted   above   tells  some  obvious  truths
How  Our Generals  See  Victory  in  Asia
"By  now  the  Pentagon  was  developing   what   would
become  its   standard  line  in  Southeast   Asia—unrelent-
ing   opposition   to   limited   intervention   except   on   the
impossible   condition   that   the   President   agree  in  ad-
vance  to  every  further  step  they  deemed  sequential,  in-
cluding  on  occasion,  nuclear  bombing  of  Hanoi  and  even
Peking.     At   one   National   Security   Council    meeting
General   Lemnitzer   outlined   the   processes   by   which
each  American  action  would  provoke  a  Chinese  counter-
action  provoking  in  turn  an  even  more  drastic  Ameri-
can  response.    He  concluded:  'If  we  are  given  the  right
to   use   nuclear   weapons,   we   can  guarantee  victory.'
The   President    sat   glumly   rubbing   his   upper    molar,
saying   nothing.     After  a  moment   someone  said,   'Mr.
President,  perhaps  you  would  have  the  General  explain
to  us   what   he  means   by   victory."    Kennedy    grunted
and  dismissed   the   meeting."
—Arthur  M. Schlesinger, Jr.:  A  Thousand  Days.
not  to  be  found  in  our  press.    It  says  that  the  rapid  buildup
of  U.S.  troops  this  year,  far  from  disheartening  the  enemy,  as
we  hoped,  "has  galvanized  the  North   Vietnamese  into  mas-
sive   counteraction."      Our    highly   advertised   bombings   of
North   Vietnam  and  of  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  trail  in  Laos  has
failed   to  prevent   a  rapid   counter  buildup   of   enemy   forces.
The  Viet   Cong   is. staging  a  general  offensive  all  around   the
country,   and   inflicting   heavy   casualties   on   our   and    allied
forces.    The  widely  ballyhooed  B-52  raids  "against  Viet  Cong
strongholds,  such  as  those  around  Bien  Hoa,"  the  Observer
says,  "have  not  been  particularly  effective."    McNamara   and
his  generals   have  been  proven  wrong  again.    Do  we  cover
up  their  past  mistakes  with  fresh  and  wider  bloodshed?     A
Japanese  journalist back  from  Hanoi  with  whom  I  spoke  here
in  Washington  several  weeks  ago  told  me,  as  he  told  many
U.S.   officials,   the  Vietnamese  would  never  surrender.
And  those  talking  of  bombing  Hanoi  and  Haiphong  may
usefully   be  reminded  that   the  French  held   both  the   capital
and  the  port  all  through   their  war  with  Ho  Chi  Minh   and
yet  lost  it  in  the  end.
LBJ   Planned   Attacks   on  North   Vietnam
"His   [President   Jonhson's]  action  that  night   (Feb.   6)—
the   order   that   sent   U.S.   bombers   roaring   over   a   remote
North  Vietnamese  village  named  Dong  Hoi—was  far  from
impulsive.    As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  had  made  the  momen-
tous  decision   to  bomb  North  Vietnam  nearly   four   months
earlier.    That  decision   was   made,  it  can  now  be  revealed,
in  October,  1964,  at  the  height   of  the  Presidential    election
campaign.  .  .  .  But  he  also  had  good  reasons   for  delaying
the   execution   of   his   decision   to  bomb   north   of   the   17th
parallel.    First,   there  was  the  problem  of  working  with  a
stable   South   Vietnamese   government.   .  .  .   Second,   there
was  the  problem  of  preparing  for  the  bombing  raids.  .  .  .
"These   were   the   only   reasons   for   delay   the   President
mentioned  when  he  told  me  in  May,  1965, that  he  had  made
the   decision   to   bomb  four   months   before  Pleiku.    But   it
is   fair   to   assume   there   were   other   considerations:   One
certainly   was  the  fact  that  the  United  States  was  engaged
in  an  election  campaign.  .  .  .  The  American  public,  though
it  had  reacted  favorably  to  the  one-shot   air-raid  on  North
Vietnam  following  an  attack  on  two  U.S.  destroyers  in  the
!  6
While   Campaigning   As   Peace   Candidate
Gulf   of   Tonkin  in  August,   was   not   prepared   psychologi-
cally,  for  a  deliberate  calculated  step-up  in  the  war  effort.
.  .  .  The  new  policy,  when  put  into  effect,  involved  an  ob-
vious   awesome   risk—that   North   Vietnam  and  Red   China
would  respond  by  sending  hundreds  of  thousands  of   ground
troops  into  South   Vietnam  confronting   President    Johnson
with   'another  Korea.'    This  was  a  risk   he  and  his   inner
circle  of  advisers  had  considered   endlessly   around  the  Cabi-
net  table.    It  was  a  risk  all  were  not  only  willing  to  take,
but  a  necessary   risk,  they  felt,  if  the  United  States  was  to
get   anything   but   humiliation   and   defeat    out   of   its   ten
year  policy  of  blood,  treasure,   honor  and  prestige   in  Indo-
china.  .  .  .
"In the  last  weeks  of  the campaign  he said  as  little  as  pos-
sible  about  the  Vietnamese  war  (he  did  not  want  to  'over-
identify'  with  it,  a  candid  aide  explained  to  me  at  the  time)
but  did  not  hesitate  to  attack  Barry  Goldwater,  by  implica-
tion,  at  least,  as  an  'impulsive'  menace."
—Charles  Roberta  (Newaweek's   White  House   Correspon-
dent)   in  his  new  book:  "LBJ's  Inner  Circle,"  pps.  20-22.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Sterne's  Weekly, December  6,1965
Polite Frustration  Turns to  Rebellion  on  The  Conference  Floor
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Not  A  Group  of  Amateurs
The  one  committee  which  broke  out  of  official  control  was
that  on  Arms  Control  and  Disarmament.    To' the  dismay of
the  State  Department   representatives  on  the  panel  to  discuss
it,  this  report  broached  fresh  initiatives  in  half  a  dozen  stale
deadlocks.     The  committee  was  chaired  by  Jerome  Wiesner
of  MIT, who  was  Kennedy's  assistant  for  science  and  tech-
nology.    It  included  among  its  members Harold  Stassen,  who
r
 paid  with, his  political  career  for  the  genuineness  of  his  com-
mitment   as  Elsenhower's   assistant   on   disarmament.     Prof.
Carl   Kaysen   of   Harvard,'  who  was  assistant   to   McGeorge
Bundy;   Roswell   Gilpatric,   former  Under   Secretary  of   De-
fense,   and   Donald   G.   Brennan  of   Hudson   Institute   were
among  the  other  members.    This  is  not  a  group  whose  views
could   be   dismissed   as   amateur.     It   said   the   failures   of
the  past  could  be  measured  "in  the  trillion   dollars  that  the
world  has  spent  for  armaments  in  20  years"  and  it  urged  a
whole  series  of  interrelated  measures  to  "reverse  the  perilous
trend  of  competition   in  arms  before  new  rounds  of  weapons
development   and   deployment   are  initiated."     Its   most  im-
portant  proposal  was  for  a  3-year  moratorium  on  deployment
of  anti-ballistic  missiles,  a  monstrously  expensive  tack  in  the
arms  race  which  could  cost  easily  $20  billion  and  upset   the
precarious   balance, of  mutual  deterrence.    They  would   drop
"the   creation   of  new  nuclear   forces"   in  Europe  like  MLF
or  ANF  in  favor  of  reaching  an  agreement  with  the  Soviets
on  non-proliferation.     They  would  have  the  U.S.''agree  to
the  bilateral  talks  on  matters  of  mutual  concern  for   which
Peking  has  asked.    The  Committee  recommended  a  compre-
hensive   test   ban,'   and   a   treaty  to   end   all   production   of
weapons-grade   fissionable   material.     It   proposed   that   the
U.S.  and  other  nuclear  powers  commit  one-half  of  one per-
cent  of  their  defense  spending  to  UN   peacekeeping   efforts.
The   committee   recommended   nuclear   free   zones   in   Latin
America,  Africa  and  the  Near   East  and  a  zone  of   nuclear
and   conventional   arms  limitation   under   UN   inspection   in
the  Bering  Straits,  including  comparable  areas  in  Alaska  and
Siberia.    The   State  Department   representatives   reacted   like
The Only Shortage Would Be  People
"Washington—America's  power  industry  could  sur-
vive  direct  H-bomb  hits  on its  206 largest  power  plants
and  have  more  than  enough  generating  capacity  left
to  meet the post  nuclear  attack  demand. . ..  The study
based  on  help  from   1500  utility  companies  and  pub-
lished   last   year,   was   put   together   by   the   Defense
Electric   Power   Administration   (DEPA)   of   the   De-
partment   of   Interior.    Commenting  on   the   Interior
Department  study,  the  editor  of  Science  Trends  notes
that  the  report  takes  into  account  two  "vital  factors"
that  do  not  apply  in  peacetime.   These  are:  The  fact
that  millions  would  die  in  an atomic attack  thus lower-
ing   the  demand  for  power;  and  the  probability  that
the  remaining  population would be  huddled in fall-out
shelters  requiring  only  a  minimum  of  power."
—Miami  Herald,  Nov.  18.
outraged  virgins  to  indecent  proposals.
The   mood  on  the  floor  as  the  conference  moved  toward
its  end  in  the  White  House  reception   changed  slowly  from
polite   frustration   to   open   rebellion.     At   most   panels,   the
panelists  talked  so  long  there  was  little  chance  for  rejoinder
from  the  floor.  But  the  last  morning  the  panel  on  peacekeep-
ing  operations  (Vietnam  unmentioned)  precipitated  open  and
popular  revolt.    Rabbi  Jacob  Weinstein  of  the  Central  Con-
ference  of  American  Rabbis  expressed  a  widespread   feeling
when  he  said he  was impressed  by the  talk  about  the  desalini-
zation  of  the  seas,  but  he  couldn't   see  its  value  so  long  as
that   "great   big  wall"  cut  them  off  from   discussion  of   the
war.    The  climactic  moment  came  when  Arthur  Larson,  once
an  Eisenhower  aide,   rose  to  say  he  had   changed  his  mind
about  the  admission  of  Communist  China  to  the  UN.     He
called   for   its   admission  and   for   negotiations   through   the
United  Nations  to  end  the  war  in  Vietnam.
Perhaps  the  loftiest  inanity of  the  Conference  came  in  the
report  of  the  Committee  on  Space.    This  was  silent  on  our
moves  toward  militarization  of  space  but  urged  an   "interna-
tional   convention  to  govern   human  activity  on  the  moon."
How  do  we  get  the  rule  of  law  on  the  moon  when  we  can't
establish  it  on  earth?                                            Noon,  Dec.  1.
We'll Be Clod to Send A  Sample  Copy of This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
I. R Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebruka  Ave.,  N.  W.
I.  P.  Stone'8 Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C. 20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone.,..........State....................
12/6/85
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ............_...............................................................
Street    ......................................................................;.................
City   .........................................J5one............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement wished  D
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Pottage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday   except  in  August,  the  last   week   in  December  and  the
first  week  in  January  »nd  Bl-Weekly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W..  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and   edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.: $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$16  to  Europe;  |20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED