I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965jun07.pdf

============================================================

Rusk  and  the Dominican Constitutions, P.  2
Nothing  Like Live Target Practice  Against  An  Enemy With No  Planes  of  His Own
major  highways.'.  .  . Commander Morin,  who is  from Wor-
cester,  Mass.,  and Lt.  (jg)  James  Hughes,  25,  of  New  Hyde
Park,  N.Y,   were  sprawled  on  a  couch  in  their  air  condi-
tioned  readyroom.  . ..  'Every  day we get  to fly somewhere,'
he  said.   'It's  been  a  hell  of  a  cruise.   And  we've  only  lost
one pilot.   This is  no more  than you'd expect  on any  routine
operation.'"                           —New  York  Times, May  SO.
"Aboard  the  Coral  Sea—The  North Vietnam  that  Ameri-
can  carrier  pilots  see  almost  every  day  has  become  a  land
where  very  little  traffic   moves  even  at  night,  and  where
people  disappear  at  the  slightest   hint  of   an  approaching
airplane.    'I  ran  a  road  reconnaissance  yesterday  and there
wasn't  a  thing  on  it,'  Commander  James  Morin  said.    'No
trucks,  no  animals  and no  people.    And it  was  one  of  their
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO. 22
JUNE  7,  1965
'<>'       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15   CENTS
A  Man The  Whole World  Has Begun  to Distrust
After  a. year  and  a  half  with  Lyndon  Johnson  as President,
one  thing  can be  said  about  him  with  certainty.   It  is  danger-
ous  to  trust  anything he  says.   His  favorite  stance on  the  plat-
form  is that  of  a  country preacher, brimful of  Gospel.   Events
have shown  that  beneath his  corny brand  of  idealism is a hard-
boiled  operator  who  believes  in  force.   The  difference  between
him  and  Goldwater  is  that  the  latter  candidly  espoused  what
the  former  covertly practices..   The  Arizonian lost  because  he
was more honest  and  less  clever.   But there  is a limit  to clever-
ness,  and  Johnson  has  about  reached  the  limit.
The  Same  Pied  Piper  Banner
The  good-will  built up  by Kennedy for  our  country in every
section  of  the  world  except  East  Asia  has  been  dissipated  by
his  successor.    It  is no  exaggeration  to  say that  Johnson  is  to-
day  distrusted  everywhere:  in  Latin  America,  where  he  has
destroyed  the  hopes  aroused  by  the  Alliance  for  Progress;  in
Western  Europe,  where he  is regarded  as  impulsive  and  high-
handed;  in  India,  where he  affronted  Shastri  by  cancelling  his
visit  rather  than  risk  hearing  an  Asian  dissent  on  our  Viet-
namese  war;  and  in  Eastern  Europe,  where  the  Russians  had
expected  a  continuation  of  the  detente  begun  under  Kennedy
and  the  satellites  had  hoped  for  a  continued  thaw  in  the  cold
war  as their  one  sure means  of  liberation.    Rarely has one  man
blasted  so  many  hopes  so  quickly.
In   Mr.  Johnson's  recent   VE  day  address   to  Europe,   he
touched  on  "the  dramatic  contrast  between  this  20  years  and
the  20  years  which  followed  World  War  I"  and  said  that  on
Nov.  11,  1938,   "Munich  was just  six  weeks  old  and  war  less
than  a  year  away."    Perhaps  he  spoke  too  quickly.    Many  of
his  listeners  must have wondered  whether  a general  war  might
not  again  be  only  another  year  away.    Others  must  have  re-
called  that  it  was  behind  the  Pied  Piper  banner  of  anti-Com-
munism  that  the  Japanese began  their  incursions  into  China  in
the  30s  and  the  Germans  their  mobilization  for  their  second
attempt  in  a  generation  to  rule  the  world.    The  League  of
Nations  was  destroyed  in  the  process  as  the  United   Nations
is  being  destroyed  by  our  own  policy  of  unilateral  military  in-
tervention.    Humanity has long  feared that  some day a  reckless
man  would  have his finger on  the  H-bomb.    Johnson  has  him-
self  to  blame  if  people  are  beginning  to  fear  that  maybe he  is
that  man.
From "liberation" to Plain  Killing
"Saigon—The  Vietcong  have  achieved  a  high  degree
of  immunity.   They  move  freely  through  most  of   the
country  with  little  fear  that  the  local  populace  will  be-
tray  them.   In  many areas,  when wounded,  they  boldly
resort  to  hospitals  run by  the  U.S.  aid  mission.   In  the
last  few  weeks they are known to have used  Nha  Trang,
a  government held seashore  resort  as a rest  and  recrea-
tion  site  for  whole  companies  of  guerrillas.  .  .  • The
Vietnamese  army  has  yet  to  demonstrate  that  it  can
exercise  any  enduring  control  in  the  countryside.    This
has led to a  decision  to  shelve  the pacification  program-
The  focus  of  the  war hag  shifted  from  counter  guerrilla
activity  to  a  more  traditional  form  of  combat,  replete
with fire bombs and supersonic aircraft.... The original
army  advisers  were  well  schooled  in  the  modern  doc-
trines   of   psychological   warfare,   even   though   they
sometimes  seemed to bark  out their lines like a military
command:  'Win  the  hearts and minds of  the  people,  and
that's  an  order,  Sergeant!'  On the  other  hand  the  Ma-
rines  and  paratroopers  recently  landed   see  their  mis-
sion  in  old-fashioned  terms,   "Kill  Vietcong.'"
—Tom  ROM,  Chicago Sun-Timet, May tS.
In  a  flurry  of  recent  speeches   and  press  conferences,   Mr.
Johnson  has  shown  himself  on  the  defensive.    He  is  finding
his  critics  much  less  ready  than  they  were  in  the  campaign  to
be  taken  in  by sweet-talk.    He  has  tried  first  of  all  to  counter-
act  the  widespread   resentment   in  the  press  corps  and  in  the
colleges  over  his  inability  to  take  criticism  and  his  effort   to
stifle  independent  reporting  and  foreign  policy  debate.   He  is
trying  to  sound  like  Jefferson in  public  while  he  sounds  more
like  McCarthy  in  private.   He  told  an  entourage  of  reporters
at  the  White  House  recently  that  he  knew  that   Communists
were behind  the  teach-ins.   He  said he had  instructed  J.  Edgar
Hoover  to  root  them  out.    "How   rare  is  the  land  and  extra-
ordinary  the people," he  said  at  the  National Cathedral  school
May  31,  "who  freely  allow,  and  encourage  as I  have  on  many
occasions,  citizens  to  debate  their  nation's  policies  in  time  of
danger."   But after  so warmly patting  himself  on  the  back,  he
refused   to  answer  at  press  conference  next  day  when   asked
whether   this   meant   that   he   approved   "university    teach-in
techniques."    Even  a  pretended  magnanimity  is  beyond   him.
The  real  Lyndon  Johnson  is  reflected  in  US.  News  &  World
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
8  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  7,19S5
The  U.S.  Prefers  the  Oligarchic  Charter  of  1962  to  the  Dentocratic  of  1963
What Rusk  Did  Not  Say About That Dominican "Constitutional  Controversy"
Secretary  Rusk  was  his  most   specious  on   Meet   the   Press
May  30  in  discussing  the  constitutional  question  in  the  Domi-
nican  Republic.    It  is a  pity  none  of  the  reporters  on  the  panel
effectively  challenged  him.    "There  is  a  very  high  controversy
at  the  moment,"  the  Secretary said,  "between   the  Constitution
of   1963  and  the  Constitution  of  1962."    The  listener  would
hardly  guess  that  the  Constitution  of  1962  was put  into  effect
by  decree  Sept.  16,  1962,  and  drafted  in  private,  without  de-
bate  or  discussion,  by a Council of  State we had  put  into  power.
The  Constitution  of   1963,   on  the  other  hand,  was  written  by
a  Constituent  Assembly  elected  along  with  Juan  Bosch  in  De-
cember  of  1962  and  its  adoption  on- April  29,  1963,   was  the
result  of  extended  public  debate  and  free  decision.    Our  own
Supreme   Court   Justice  Douglas   was  one  of   the   consultants
and  it  was  hailed  in  Latin  America  as  a  model  of  a  democra-
tic and  socially-minded  Charter.
We'd  Like  to  Exile  the  Suspect
The  U.S.  has  thrown  its  influence on  the  side  of  the   1962
Constitution.    The  1963  Constitution  set  up  a  modern  secular
State.    The   1962  Constitution,  on  the  other  hand,   embodied
the  Concordat  with which  Trujillo  bought  the  blessings  of  the
Vatican  in  June,  1954.    The   1963  Constitution  is  also  closer
to  ours  in  providing  full  political  freedom.    Our  Embassy  in
Santo  Domingo  dislikes  Article  66  which  says  no  Dominican
may  be expelled  from  his  country,  as no  native  born  American
can  be  from  ours.    Exile and  statelessness  are  among  the  most
terrible  weapons  of  terroristic  and  authoritarian  regimes.  But
we  would  like  to  exile  from  the  Dominican   Republic  those
considered   politically  dangerous,  just  as  Trujillo  used  to  do.
The   1963   Constitution  was  adopted   after  a  generation  of
suffering   in  despotic  darkness.    The  current  rebellion   shows
that  Dominicans  in  large  numbers  are  willing  to  fight  and  die
for   the   Constitution's   reinstatement.    Were  it  not   for   the
Imbert  Feared  As  Another   Trujillo
Santo  Domingo—A  member  of   the  Roman  Catholic
hierarchy  warns privately,  after ordering  an  eavesdrop-
per outside: "A new military dictatorship is  being  estab-
lished  day  by  day.   If  the  U.S.  permits  this,  it  will  lose
the  people."    Brig.  Gen.  Imbert  has  not  declared  him-
self   a  dictator,  but  neither  did  .Trujillo.  .  .  .  'Tough
Tony' Imbert... was  placed in power by the  Americans.
He  soon  began  to  call  himself  'President'.  .  .  .  He  an-
nounced  plans  to 'broaden' his government .. . along  the
lines  of  the  government  of  Batista  as  an  official  memo-
randum  put it.... Then  Imbert's political  arrests  began,
in  the  manner  of  the  Trujillo  era.    Charges  were  ill-
defined   or   non-existent.     Relatives   were   never    sure
where  the  prisoners  were  taken.  .  .  .  Legal  counsel  was
unheard  of.
—Richard  Dudman  in  St.  Louis Post-Dispatch  May SO
Santo  Domingo—After  a  day  of  travel  through  the
rich  Cibao  Valley  of  the  north  central  part  of  the  Do-
minican  Republic,  a  visitor  carries  away  one  clear  im-
pression:  People  in  this  region  are  vigorously   opposed
to  the junta government headed by  Imbert.   They  see  in
the   Imbert  government   a  reincarnation   of   the   hated
Trujillo  dictatorship.
—Goodsell  in  Christian Science  Monitor  June  1,
timely  arrival  of  our  Marines,  the  oligarchy  would  have  been
defeated.    The  possessing  classes  and  their  military  "gorillas"
we  trained  and  armed  hate  the  1963  Constitution  for  its  social
features;  its  provisions  for  labor  legislation,   for  agrarian  re-
form,  for  limitation  of  large  landholdings  and  for  a  curb  on
foreign  exploitation.    To  stem  the  rebellion  we  are  even  will-
ing  to  talk  about  elections  and  letting  the  people  decide  what
Constitution  they want.    But  only  two  years  ago,  they  did  de-
cide  and  they  did  vote.   Suppose  they  vote  again  for  the   1963
Constitution?    Will  we  let  the  military  overthrow   it   again
the  first  chance  they  get?
Footnotes   in  Farewell  to  A  Time  Magazine  Hero  and  Holy  Warrior  of  Dominica
"The  Dominican  military  has  been   the   strongest   anti-
Communist  influence.   Most  often  it  was  in  the  person  of
Wessin  y  Wessin ...  a  rare  bird  among  the  fine-feathered
Dominican  officers.   He  prefers  fatigues ... a  devout Cath-
olic ... he regards  Communism with  a bleak,  uncompromis-
ing  hatred.    As  commander ...  he  instituted  mandatory
Sunday  mass   for   recruits,  taught  courses   in  how  to  spot
Communists.    He  also  has  at  his  disposal  a  sizeable  chunk
of  the  Dominican Republic's firepower. .  .  .  'As  far  as I'm
concerned,' says  Wessin  y  Wessin,  'Bosch  is  a Communist/ "
—From  Time's  cover story  on the  hero May  7.
"The military fell  apart  in  the  first  five  days  of  the  rebel-
lion  which  started  Aptil  24. ...     The  troops  of  Brig.  Gen.
Elias  Wessin  y  Wessin  came  from  the  San  Isidro  air  base
with  their  tanks  and  fought  at  the  Duarte  bridge  over  the
Ozama  river,  the  main  entrance  into  the  city. ...  A  few
hours  before  the  Marines  landed,  the  rebels   controlled   the
bridge  and had seized  more  than  15 of  Wessin's  tanks.  .  .  .
U.S.  military men ... said  the situation  was chaotic  and the
troops  were  demoralized.   The  myth  of  the  invincible  Wes-
sin ...    was  going  up in smoke.  . . .  'As  the Marines  landed,
the  rebels  dominated  the  capital  and  were  in  a  position  to
spread  out  through  the  countryside,'  one  U.S.   official  said.
The  arrival of  U.S.  troops  probably  restricted  the  rebellion
from  .  .  .  involving  the  whole  country.'"
"Some  say  the  20,000  or  25,000 troops  in  the   countryside
would have just  switched sides."
—A.  "now  it  can  be  told"  dispatch  by  AP   correspondent
Louis   Uchitelle  in  the  Washington   Star,  May  31.
"No  sooner  was  Bosch  in  office  than  the  attack  upon  his
policies  began.    The  press,  TV  and  radio,  all  in  the   hands
of  the  right,  accused  him  of  being  Communist ...  he  at-
tempted  to  enforce  the  legal  limits  upon  the  amount  of  land
that  could  be  held by  one individual. .  .  .  He  challenged  the
legality  of  a  Standard Oil  of  N.J.  contract  .  .  .  and  ordered
confiscation  of  the  South  Puerto  Rico  Sugar  Company's  'ex-
cess  profits'.   The  Church was  threatened  by Bosch's  obvious
determination  to  restrict  its  political  activity. ...  A  group
of  Colonels ... led by Tank  Commander Col. Wessin  y  Wea-
sin  and  a  Catholic  army  chaplain,  issued  an  ultimatum  to
the  President.  .  .  .  The  outcome  was  that  Col.  Wessin  be-
came  a  Brigadier  General  and Bosch  became  an  exile.  .  .  .
Bosch's  programs  were  incompatible with  the  best  interests
of  the  armed  forces  .  .  .  reform,  development  and  welfare
.  .  .  were  bound  to  cut  into  the  lion's  share  of  the  budget
traditionally  reserved  to  the  armed  forces."
—Generals    vs.   Presidents:    Neo-Militarism    in   Latin
America  by  Edwin  Lieuwen  (Praeger,   1964)  pp.  58-60.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  7,1965
Senate  Aide  in  Air  War  College  Paper  Clairvoyant  on  Caribbean  Crisis
Revealing  "Fiction"  Foreshadows  LBJ's  Call  for  the  Marines
Two   years  before  the  Dominican  crisis  a  close   friend  of
Lyndon  Johnson  depicted  him  as belligerent  and  simpleminded
in   his  attitude   toward   Latin   America.     The   friend   is  Bill
Lewis,   administrative  assistant   to   Senator   Margaret    Chase
Smith  (R.,  Me.).    The  revelations  about  Johnson  came  in  an
article  he  wrote  for  the  Air  War  College  called  "Anatomy  of
Decision."    It  reads  like  a  well  informed  version  thinly  dis-
guised  as fiction  of  how  then  Vice-President Johnson  and  other
top  officials  reacted  to  the  Cuban  missile crisis.   Senator  Smith
placed  the  article  in  the  Congressional Record  of  May  1,   1963
and  referred to  it  again  last  month  (May  5)  in  s. speech  on  the
Dominican  Republic.    "What  a  marked  resemblance,"  she ex-
claimed,  between  Johnson  and  Jim  Landon,  the  militant  Vice-
President  of  Mr.  Lewis's  story.
"To  Hell  With  Our  Image"
The  resemblance  turned  out  to  be  more  than  coincidental.
"I've   known  Lyndon  Johnson  for  21  years,"  Mr.  Lewis  told
us  when  asked  about  the  resemblance,  "and  I've  had  some  ex-
perience  with  how  he  works."     Jim  Landon  is  for   shooting
first  and  talking  later.    In  a  Security  Council  meeting  shortly
after  the  President  has  received  word  of  a  Soviet  missile build-
up   on  the   island   of   Caribbea,   Landon   recommends    recon-
naissance  flights  to  confirm  the  build-up.    Secretary  of   State
Burgess  objects  because  of  the  possible  "diplomatic  repercus-
sions."    The  flights,  he  saids,  "could   damage  our  image  in
Latin  America."     "To  hell  with  our  image,"  explodes   Vice-
President  Landon.    So much  for  diplomacy.
Landon's  next  target  is Attorney General  Ken  Roberts.    The
reconnaissance  pictures  have  turned  out  positive,  but  the  At-
torney  General  is  opposed  to  a  full-scale  invasion  or  limited,
pinpoint  bombing.    He  says  that  "would   be  just  as  immoral
as the  Japanese  attack  on  Pearl  Harbor."   The  legal  and  moral
solution, he  says, is to  appeal  to  the  U.N.  and  the  OAS,  but  he
is  "no  longer  completely  opposed"  to a military blockade.   The
Vice-President  responds:  "If  a criminal faces you with  a  cocked
gun  on  the  verge  of  killing  you and  terrorizing your  neighbors
and  your  community, ...  it  is your  moral  duty  to  shoot  him."
So  much  for  morality  and  legality.    "As  for  the  psychological
reaction  of  the  Latinos,"  Landon  adds,  "make no mistake  about
it.    They  respect  power."
The  Secretary  of  Defense  recommends  a  blockade  with  pos-
A  Letter in  Protest
"Dear  Sir—Your  comments  about  "cold  war  and  big
business  types  at  the  upper  echelons"  of  the  poverty
program  [in  the  Weekly  of  April  26]  just  don't  make
sense—to be totally  frank.   To  single  out  a  few  officials
who  have  had  connections  with  business  or  with  the
Defense  Department  and then  conclude  that  our  agency
"could  quickly  become  an  adjunct  of  the  cold  war"  is
sloppy  thinking.
"How  about  the  fact  that  the  top  Deputy  to  Sargent
Shriver  is  Jack  Conway,  right  from  the  United  Auto
Workers  and  the  Industrial  Union  Department  of  the
AFL-CIO?    And  if  1  may,  how  about  the  fact  that  I
am  serving  as  Assistant  Director  of  the  Office  of  Eco-
nomic   Opportunity,  after   twenty   years   in   the   labor
movement,  the  Eleanor  Roosevelt  Foundation  and  gov-
ernment?    And  Lisle  Carter,  outstanding  NAACP  of-
ficial  and  government  administrator?     And  Job  Corps
Director  Otis  Singletary,  Chancellor  of  the   University
of  North  Carolina?    And  Theodore  Berry,  Community
Action  Director,  an  outstanding  Negro  attorney?
"Even  more  importantly,  how  about  the   fact   that,
as  a  result  of  OEO  insistence,  the  poor  themselves  are
being  actively  involved  in  the  development  and  execu-
tion  of  the  poverty  programs?    Out  of  4,266  members
of   top  governing   agencies   of   the  first  144  local  pro-
grams,   1,413  were  direct  representatives  of   the   poor.
And  1,087  of  them,  or  about  25%  were  from  minority
groups.    In  more  than  half  of  all  the  major  community
action  programs  of  the  country,  the  administrators  of
the  programs  are  Negroes,   with  long  personal  records
of  poverty  and  discrimination."
—Hyman  Bookbinder,  Asst.  Director  of  the   Poverty
Program, in  a  letter  to  the  Weekly,  May  27.
sible  escalation   into  an  invasion  or  air  attack.    This  is  the
course  which   the  President   finally   follows,  but   it  does  not
satisfy  Vice-President  Landon.    He  alone  pursues the  conspira-
torial  rhetoric  of  the  cold  war  to  its  logical  conclusion:   "The
only  real  way  to  remove  that  threat—to  cut  out  the   cancer
soon  enough—is  to  overthrow   the  Communist   regime—and
the  only  way  to  do  that  is  by  invasion  and  occupation."     He
ends  with  a  humble  plea:  "So  I  say that  we  shouldn't   throw
away  this  second  chance  to do the right  thing—to  .  .  .  liberate
Caribbea   with  a  free,   democratic  government."     This  fore-
shadows  the  shoot-from-the-hip   spirit  in  which  Johnson  sent
the  Marines  to  Santo   Domingo.
When  Students  at  Cornell  Asked  Harriman  What We'd Do  If  Communists Were  Elected
QUESTION:  What if  the  people  of  the  Dominican  Repub-
lic  elect,  freely,  a  communist government?
Mr.  Averell  HARRIMAN: Well,  that's   a,  that   situation
has  never  been  faced.    There  is  no  indication  that  a  Com-
munist  government  has  the  popularity—
AUDIENCE:  What  about  Guatemala?
Mr.  HARRIMAN:  It  has  never,  no  government  has  ever
come  into—no  Communist  government  has  ever  come  into
power  by  popular election.
AUDIENCE:  Try  it  in  Vietnam.
Mr.  HARRIMAN: Now,  if  you're  Communists, you  can  go
to  some  other  country.  .  .  .
AUDIENCE:   We're  not   Communists.—Would   you   call
that  democracy?—Answer the question, answer the  question.
Mr.  HARRIMAN: I  don't  know,  I  don't  know.    Nobody
knows what will  happen if  there is a Communist government
elected.    It  is  very unlikely.
AUDIENCE:  When  are  you  going  to  stop  this   horrible
lying  and name-calling.
Mr. HARRIMAN: One of  the  principles of  the inter-Amer-
ican  system   is  that  Communism  is  incompatible   with  the
American  system.    Now  that  is  stated  by  twenty  different
countries,  and—
AUDIENCE:  Nine  are  dictatorships.
Mr.   HARRIMAN:  Why   are  these  bleeding   hearts   for
Communists?     How   many   Communists  are   there   among
you?    Will  those  who  are  Communists please  stand  up?
AUDIENCE:  Don't  try  to  slander  us  with  'communism'.
McCarthyist  slanders.    They  won't  work  here.
—Averell  Harriman  At  Cornell, a  transcript,  May  11  (abr.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  7,1965
Even   The New Leader  Debunks  LBJ's  Dominican  Red  Scaire
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Report  (June  7)  which  says,  "The  White  House  is known  to
be  concerned  about  the  number  of  extreme  'left-wingers'  get-
ting  across  their  views  in  newspapers  and  on  television  and
adding  to  U.S.  troubles."    This  will  be news even to  moderate
"left-wingers"   accustomed  to  being  sealed  off  from  access  to
major  communication   media.    Apparently  any  criticism  is  re-
garded   in  the  White  House  as  "extreme"  left-wing.
The  Latin  Stall-In
The  teach-in  on  the  campuses  has  been  paralleled  by  some-
thing  which  might  be  described  as  a  stall-in  in  the  Organiza-
tion  of  American  States.    Here  again  Mr.  Johnson  is  on  the
defensive,  and  trying  to  hide  the  truth  about  our  isolation  in
the  hemisphere.    A  long-winded  filibuster  style  reply  at  press
conference  was  an  attempt  to  hide  the  political  bankruptcy  of
his  Dominican   policy.    Even  as  he 'was  talking  he  was  en-
countering  great  difficulty  in  getting  the  OAS  to  send  an  ad
hoc  advisory  committee  to  Santo  Domingo.     The   revealing
blow  was  when  Gonzalo  Facio,  the  Costa  Rican  Ambassador
to  the  OAS  and  the  only  democratic  representative   suggested
for  this  three-man  body,  declined  to  serve  on  it.    He  said  he
could  not  serve  because  of  his  country's  policies  against  mili-
tary  dictatorship  and  military  participation   in  politics.     The
OAS  meetings,  characteristically, are  held  behind  closed  doors
but  Facio made a public statement  (Washington  Star, June  1).
When  the  three-man  mission  was  finally  approved  after  a  de-
bate  which  lasted  into  the  morning  hours,  the  Ambassador  of
the  rightist  military  dictatorship  in  El  Salvador  had  to  be  sub-
stituted  for  Costa  Rica.   The  other  two  members  will  be  the
U.S.  and  the  Brazilian military dictatorship.    The  biggest  and
most  democratic  regimes  in  the  hemisphere  either  voted   "no"
(Uruguay  and  Mexico)   or  abstained   (Argentina,   Venezuela
and  Chile).
Mr.  Johnson  said at press conference'that  the  other  countries
in  the  hemisphere  had  long  ago  declared  Communism  incom-
patible  with  the  Inter-American  system.   This  does  not  mean
they  agreed  that  the  U.S.  Marines  could  march  in  whenever
and  wherever  we  thought  a  government   leaned  too  far  left.
New  High in  Censorship
"Censorship  and  news  management  at  the  Pentagon
under  Secretary  of  Defense  Robert S.  McNamara  have
reached  the  'far  out'  stage  where  even  a  Democrat,
Representative   George   W.  Andrews  (Alabama),   has
complained,  reported  The  Journal  of  the  Armed  Forces
in  its  May issue.    During  hearings  behind  the  closed
doors  of  the  House  Military  Appropriations Subcommit-
tee,  an  article  from  the  Saturday  Evening  Post  maga-
zine  was  placed  in  the  transcript  of  the  hearings.   The
unclassified,   nonsecurity  material  in  the  article  criti-
cized  what  it  said  were  excessive  numbers  of  support
personnel  in  U.S.  ground  forces.    As  is  customary  be-
fore  publishing  congressional  committee  hearings  in-
volving  military  matters,  the  subcommittee  sent   the
transcript  to  the  Pentagon  to  censor  anything it  deem-
ed  vital  to  national  security.   The  result?    Back  came
the  censored  copy  with censorship  of  part  of  the  article
which  already  had  appeared  without  objection  on  the
newsstands  across  the  country!"
—Senate  Republican Memo, May  20.
Just  how  far  offbase  we  are  in  Santo  Domingo  is  indicated  by
the  fact  that  two  well-known  anti-Communist  Latin  American
experts,   both   violently  anti-Castro,  have  attacked  Johnson's
Red  scare  excuse  for  intervening  in  the  Dominican  Republic:
Theodore  Draper  in  the  May  24 issue of  The  New  Leader and
Robert  J.  Alexander  in  the  May  20  issue  of  New  America,
organ  of  the  Socialist  Party.   The  Administration's  Dominican
intervention  was not  made  to  look  less  silly by Secretary  Rusk's
defense  of it  at press  conference  May 26.   "There was a time,"
Mr.  Rusk said,  to  demonstrate  the  power  of  a handful,  "when
Hitler  sat  in  a  beer  hall  in  Munich  with  seven  people."    The
Washington   correspondent   of  the  London  Times  (May   27)
commented  tartly,  "Apparently,   however,  tens  of   thousands
of  American  troops  are  not  to  be  deployed  whenever   eight
suspicious  men  gather   together   over  glasses  of  beer."
What  we  found  most  repulsive  in  the  press  conference  was
Mr.  Johnson's  unctuous  call  for  plastic  surgeons  to  go  to  Viet-
nam.    An  easier  way to  meet  that  need  would  be to  stop  drop-
ping  napalm  on  its  people.
We'll  Be Clad to Send A  Sample  Copy  of This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
The  1964  Indtx  It  Ready—You  CM  Hay*  One Free  If  You  Send a  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  P.  Stone'3 Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   .........................................^one............State....................
6/7/W
For  the  enclosed  $9  t«nd  a  sift  sub  to: ,
(To)  Name  ...................................................i..........................
City   ..........................................Zone............SUte....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  L  F.  Stone's  The  Htouite*    Flftie*
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D   '
/ E  Stone'sWeekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D. C  200IS
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
F.  Stone'.  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  In  December  and  th«  Ant   week  In
January  and  Bl-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618  Nebraska  Are..  N.W..   Washington.  D.  C.   An  Independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  K   in   the   U.S.;    $6  In  Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mall   rates:
SIS  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED