I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965jan11.pdf

============================================================

Our  Last  Chance  in  The  Congo, Pps. 2-3
The  New  Year  Begins  With  Two  Hopeful  Harbingers  for  A  More  Peaceful  World
The  two  most  hopeful  events  in  the  week  before  we  went
to  press  were  grossly   underplayed  in  the  press.    One  was
the  news  that  the  State  Department  was  closing   down  its
special  office  for  the  MLF; its  head,  Gerard  C.  Smith,  had
already  left   the  government.    This  marks  the  end  of   the
campaign  for  this  nuclear  monstrosity.   The  other  was  the
announcement  Dec.  30  by  Senator  Russell  of  Georgia  that
the  Senate  Armed Services  Committee he  heads  would  hold
hearings  soon   on  Vietnam  and  the   Congo.    "It  would  be
nothing  less  than a  tragedy,"  he  said,  "for  us  to  go  and  get
involved  in  the  Congo  as  we  are  in  Vietnam."   Of Vietnam
he   remarked,   "I  thought  we   made  a   terrible  mistake   in
getting  involved" and  he  said  "the  time  is  about  at  hand
when  we  must  reevaluate  our  position."    President  Johnson
likes  to  "touch  bases"  with  key  figures  in  the  power  struc-
ture  before  embarking  on  major  policy  changes.     Russell
was  at  the  LBJ  ranch  Nov.  25.    This  is  no  longer  Morse
and  Gruening  calling  for  peace  from  the  periphery  of  the
Senate.    This  is   the   most  powerful  figure  in  the   Senate
establishment  speaking.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
>VOL.  XIII,  NO. 1
JANUARY  11,   1965ioi       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
15  CENTS
LBJ's  Great  Society — and  Mrs.  Fannie  Hamer's
The  first  full  Johnson   Administration  has  made  an  auspi-
cious  start.    Even  before  the  Inaugural,  there  were   reassuring
portents  for  better  international  relations:  the  deflation  of  the
campaign  for  an  MLF,  the  discouragement  of  plans  for  wid-
ening  the  Vietnamese  war,  the  announcement  that  we  would
negotiate   a  new  treaty  with   Panama.     The   Inaugural   set  a
useful  precedent  in  picking  prime  TV  time  for  the  President's
message;  there  is  no  reason  why  that  communications  waste-
land  should   not  be  commandeered   more  often.     The   Presi-
dent's  diction  and  delivery  have  improved,   as  has  the  style,
though  it  dragged  a  little  toward  the  end  with  repetition.  The
one  sentence  which  reached  a  truly  high  level  was  "We   seek
the  unity  of  man  with  the  world  he  has  built."    The   passage
which  was  most  revealing  and  touching,   amid  so  much   that
was  corn,  came  when  Mr.  Johnson  said  the  President's   hardest
task  was  not   to  do  what  was  right  but  to  know   what  was
right.    "Yet,"  he  added  sadly,  "the  Presidency  brings  no  spe-
cial  gift  of  prophecy  or  foresight."     This  was  the  man  him-
self   speaking.
No  Mention of  The  Arms  Race
In  the  sphere  of  foreign  policy,  the  Inaugural   recalled  the
cautious  Eisenhower  more  than  the  combative  Kennedy.    Mr.
Johnson  is  taking  up  where  Eisenhower  left  off  with  the  U-2
incident.    His  invitation  to  the  new  Russian  leaders  to  visit
here,  communicated  in  advance  of  delivery  to  the  Soviet  Em-
bassy,  opens  the  door  to  that  first  'Presidential  visit  to  Russia
which   Ike   originally   discussed   with   Khrushchev    at   Camp
David.   The  Communist  menace,  that  standby  of  the  past  two
decades,  was  subtly  subordinated   at  least  in  Eastern  Europe  to
"older  and  deeper  sources"  of  world  unrest.    "In  Asia,"  Mr.
Johnson   said,  "communism   wears  a  more   aggressive    face."
We   hope  the   time  will   come   when   U.S.   policy    recognizes
that  the  more  aggressive  face  we  see  in  the  Far  East  is  in  sub-
stantial  degree  the  mirror   image   of   the  aggressive   face  we
steadily  turn  toward  it.   The  friendlier  face  in  Eastern  Europe
is  largely  a  reflection  of  our  own.    The  discussion  of  Vietnam
continued  the  sham  that  we  are  only  there  to  help  a  friendly
nation  against  outside  aggression,   but  mercifully   it  was  brief
and  left  the  door  open  for  more  flexible  policy  in  the  future.
The   one  distressing  and   perhaps   historic  omission  was  the
1  *
The  Potential  for  Peace
The  latest  Louis  Harris  poll  (Washington  Post,  Dec.
28)   shows   how  strong   is   the   potential   support   the
President  can  muster  if  he  moves  toward  peace.    The
poll  showed:  people  favor  negotiations  with  the  Com-
munists  almost  3-to-l;  83%  favor  the  test  ban  treaty
with   Russia  and   74%  would  negotiate   a  world-wide
ban  to  include  Communist China;  by  more  than  two  to
one,    people  oppose  war  with  China  or  Cuba,  and  only
9%  think  war  inevitable.    On  policy  toward  the   new
Russian   leaders:   55%  were   for   trying   to   negotiate
with  them,  13%  favored  "getting  tougher,"  32%  want-
ed  to  wait  and  see.     Peace   was  the  biggest   issue  of
concern  (65%)  followed  by  race  problems  (43%)  jobs
and  prosperity  (26%).    Only  7%  thought   "Socialism,
Communism  at  home," the  mainstay of  the  witch  hunt-
ers  a  No.  1  concern.
absence  of  any  reference  to  the  arms  race;   we  have  settled
down   comfortably   to  our   annual   $50   billion   dollar   pump-
priming  war  expenditures  and  Mr.  Johnson  is  not  one  to  dis-
turb  the  comforts  of  the  status  quo.     His  is  a  prudent  and
peripheral  idealism.
This  was  evident  in  his  domestic  program.     He  recalled—
in  his  buoyant  optimism   about   U.S.   business—the   inaugural
of  Herbert  Hoover,  which  promised   two  cars  in  every  garage
and  two  chickens  in  every  pot.    There  was  the  same  naive
confidence  that  our  business  civilization  is  the  best  of  all  pos-
sible  worlds,  which  needs  only  to  be  cleaned   up  around   the
edges  to  become  the  Great  Society.    The  most  revealing  pas-
sage  was  the  President's  call  for  "a  new  and  substantial   effort
...  to  landscape   highways"—those   highways   onto   which
General   Motors  and   Ford   can  pour   ever   more  cars   at   the
fabulous   20%   or  more  they  earn  on  net  worth.    But  what
happens   to    prosperity    when    these    roads    are   hopelessly
clogged ?   There  was  no  recognition  in  the  Inaugural  of  those
tougher   problems   before   us   if   full   employment    is   to   be
achieved  in  the  shadow  of  automation  and  profit-maximizing
administrative  prices   in  our   basic   industries.     Mr.   Johnson
spoke   of   "relentlessly"    pursuing   "the   conquest   of   space."
This  makes   new  millionaires  in  Houston   but   there   is  still
(Continued    on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  11,  19G5
UN's  New  Resolution  Offers A Peaceful  Way  Out  of the Congo Civil War  .
The   ideal  solution  for  the  Congo  would  be  a  United   Na-
tions  trusteeship administered  by  the  non-aligned  nations;  it
is  obviously  unready   for   independence  and  self-government.
But   the   Africans   would   never  accept  this.  The   second   best
solution  would  be  an  agreement  between   East  and  West  to
keep  hands off  the  Congo  while  the  African  states  bring  into
being  a  government  of  national  reconciliation   to. hold   fresh
elections  when   its  various  rebellions  have  died  down.     The
Congo  needs  Western   technicians and  Western   capital;  these
now  operate  in  other  independent  African   States;  they  could
operate   safely   in  the  Congo,  too,  were  the  Western   powers
honestly  to  keep  hands  off  and  end  their  constant intervention
in   Congolese  politics.
The  Usual  Vendetta   Spirit
The  resolution  on  the  Congo  passed  by  the  Security  Coun-
cil  at  the  close  of  the  year,  after  three  weeks  of  acrid  debate,
could  be  the  framework  for  such  a  new  start.    As  usual,  the
spirit   of   East-West   vendetta   has   obscured    the   constructive
aspects.    Our   press  has   focused   on   the  Western   victory   in
amending  the  original  resolution  to  take  out  of   it  the   con-
demnation  of  the  Western  powers  for  the  Stanleyville  oper-
ation.    The  rest  of  the  resolution  is being  dismissed  in  a  tide
of  cynical  inspired  stories.
But  to  treat  the  resolution   as  nugatory  is  to  increase  dis-
trust  of  the  Western   powers   in  Africa,   and  disillusion  with
the   UN.     The   resolution   was  passed   10-0,  only  France  ab-
staining.    The  U.S.  and  Britain  voted  for  it.   Will  their  gov-
ernments  treat that  vote  as  an  empty  gesture  in  an  internation-
al  comedy, or  will  public  opinion  in  both  countries  force  them
to   pay  some   attention   to   the   action  pledged?     The   resolu-
tion,   wisely   considered,   offers   the   West   the   advantage   of
putting  the  Congo  up  to  the  Organization  of  African   Unity.
It  appeals  for   a  cease-fire   in  accord  with  the  OAU's   resolu-
tion  of   last  Sept.  10;  it  requests  all  States  to  desist  from  in-
tervention   while   the   OAU   pursues   its   efforts   to   achieve  a
government   of   national   reconciliation  and—most   important
of  all,  as  a  token  of  good  faith—it  "considers"   in  accordance
with  that  same  OAU   resolution  "that  the  mercenaries  should
as  a  matter  of  urgency  be  withdrawn  from  the  Congo."
Just   A  Fine  Bunch  of   Fellows
"One  may  also  hope  he  has   heard  the   last  slurring
reference  in  the  UN   and  elsewhere   to  the  'white  mer-
cenaries.'    Without  them,  God  help  the   Congo."
—Editorial  in  the  Washington  Star, Jan.  3.
ABC's  Moloney:  There  are  a  lot  of  allegations  made
against  the  mercenaries.    I've  heard  stories  about   some
of  them  having  committed  atrocities   .  .  .
Major   Hoare   (leader   of   those   who   took   Stanley-
ville) :  No,  completely  untrue  .  .  .
Moloney:  Well,   one  last   night   told   me  that  he  had
burned  two  villages  because  two  of  his  men  had  been
killed  in  an  attack.    How  would  you  defend  this?
Major   Hoare:     Yes.     Well,   now   it's   a   question   of
how  we  define  atrocities.  .  .  .  The  burning  of  villages,
this  is  punishment,  and  I'm  entirely  in  favor,  when  it
is  required  of  punishing  the  rebels  in  this  manner.  .  .  .
ABC's  Peters:    Wally,  how  do  you  feel   when   you're
out   there     fighting?     How   do   you   feel   about   killing
anyone?
Harper  (a  South  African  mercenary):   The  first time
I  felt   a  bit  squeamish,   but  after   that  it  was  like,  well
I'd  done  a  lot  of  cattle  farming  you  know,  and killing
a  lot  of  beasts,  it's  just  like,  you  know,  cattle  farming,
and   just   seeing   dead   beasts   all   over   the   place.     It
didn't  worry  me  at   all."
—ABC-TV  show  on mercenaries, Dec.  9.
This   is  the   neuralgic   point.     These   white  hired  killers,
mostly  from  South  Africa  and  Rhodesia,  have  sown  a terrible
bitterness  in  Africa  by  their  racist  brutality  in  support  of   the
Kasavubu-Tshombe   regime.    That  Tshombe,  in  Leopoldville,
as  earlier  in  the  Katanga,  has  to  depend  upon  such  whites  for
his  maintenance of  power  robs  him  of  all  legitimacy  in  Afri-
can  eyes.    The  blacks  feel  about  these  mercenaries  exactly  as
Jews  feel  about  the  Nazis  at  Auschwitz.    It  is  essential  that
this  be  understood  if  a  peaceful  way  out  is  to  be  found.
The   obverse   is  that   without   these   mercenaries   the   Kasa-
vubu-Tshombe    regime    cannot    maintain    itself    in    power.
Tshombe  and  Kasavubu  have  already  declared  that  they  will
not  accept  the  UN  resolution.    Their  defiance is  only  possible
as  long  as  they  have  U.S.,  British  and  Belgian  support.  What
Brazil  Provides  An  Ironic  Footnote  on  Wars  of   National  Liberation
Joint    U.S.-Latin   American   war   games   were   held   last
month  in  Peru.    The  Chilean  government  declined  to  let  its
army   participate.    Chile,  with  one  eye   on  Brazil,  fears   a
fresh  rise  of  militarism  in  the  hemisphere.    The  purpose  of
the  maneuvers  was  to  teach  Latin  regimes  how  to  deal  with
"wars   of   national   liberation."     Unfortunately   such   wars
are  rarely  suppressed  by   military   means.     A  wiser   policy
is  not  to  provoke  them.
Brazil  threatens  to  become  a  pilot  model  in  how  to  brew
a  future  uprising.    There  the  military  dictatorship  has  just
given   the   Hanna   Mining  Company   and   Bethlehem    Steel
concessions  they  had  sought   in  vain  from  the  predecessor
democratic  regimes.     For  five  years  both  the  moderate   Left
and  the  Nationalist  right  (including   Lacerda,   the  favorite
Brazilian   of   Readers   Digest)   opposed   the   efforts   of   the
Hanna   Company's   George   H.  Humphrey   to  obtain   control
of   rich  iron  ore  deposits.
A  week  before  Castelo  Branco,  the  new  Brazilian military
dictator,  signed  the  decree   Humphrey  wanted,   the   Alliance
for  Progress  announced   it  would  make  available   $450   mil-
lion  to  Brazil  in  1965.     Humphrey  was   Ike's  Secretary   of
the   Treasury   and  Goldwater's   most   influential   supporter.
Yet   he   seems   to   do   better    under   the   Democrats.     The
"give-away"   policies   his   candidate   deplored   have   bought
Humphrey  concessions  in  Brazil  its  own  Congress  had  re-
fused   to  grant.     Such  are  the  wonders   which   foreign   aid,
it   its   mysterious   ways,   can   perform.
In   April  we   will   hold   the   Second   Special    Inter-Amer-
ican  Conference  in  Brazil.    It  is  to  deal  with  "human   rights
and  measures   to  strengthen  democracy   in  the  hemisphere."
The  site  would  seem  to  be  well  chosen,  since  many  of   Bra-
zil's   leading   statesmen   and   intellectuals    have    been    pro-
scribed,  jailed  or  exiled  by  its  military,  were  it  not  that  the
purpose  is  to  deal  with  Cuba  not  Brazil.    Its  Foreign  Min-
ister   (Reuters   in  Washington   Post,  Dec.   29)   looks   favor-
ably  on  allowing  a  Cuban  government   in  exile  to  establish
itself  on  Brazilian  soil.    The  military  who  destroyed   democ-
racy   in  Brazil   would   then,   by   an   exquisite   turn   of   fate,
provide  the  base  for  restoring  democracy   in  Cuba,  or  if  not
democracy   at  least   United   Fruit.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  11, 1965
... Will We Abide By It or Go On Playing Cloak-and-Dagger Games In Africa?
happens  will  be  determined  not  in  Leopoldville  but  in  Wash-
ington.
Even  with  mercenaries  the  Kasavubu-Tshombe  regime  can-
not  maintain  itself;  there  just  are  not  enough  killers  for  hire
on  the  market  to  hold  down  an  area  as  large  as  Western  Eu-
rope.    They  can  take  cities  but  they  cannot  control   the  coun-
tryside.    Neither   Tshombe's  Kantanga   gendarmes   nor   Kasa-
vubu's  NATO-trained   army  has  proved   capable   of   fighting.
Either  the  U.S.  goes  in  with  its  own  forces,  or  it  disengages.
"Only  by  choosing   to  disengage   from   the  internal  affairs  of
the  Congo,"   says  an  editorial  in  Africa    Today    (Dec.   '64),
organ  of  the  American  Committee  on   Africa,   "can   the   U.S.
emerge  from  this  crisis  with  honor  and  continue  to  act  as  an
influence  for  progress  and  development  in  Africa."  We  agree.
U.  S.  Now  The  Senior  Partner
But  it  would  be  naive  to  expect  so  sharp  a  turn  in  national
policy  to  be  easily  achieved.    In  four  years  the  Congo,  with
its   riches   and   its   strategic   importance,    has   been   converted
under  cover  of  a  UN   operation   from  a  Belgian   to  an  Amer-
ican   sphere   of   influence.     U.S.   capital   was   junior   partner
before   to   Belgian   and   British  interests;   we   are   the   senior
partner   today.
The  murder  of  Lumumba,  the  one  leader  who  might  have
held  the  Congo  together;  the  substitution  of  a  scarcely  veiled
military   dictatorship   in  Leopoldville   for   parliamentary   rule;
the  transformation  of  that  frightened  and  insipid  clown,  Mo-
butu,  into  a  synthetic  military  strong  man;  the  long  delay  in
driving  Tshombe  out  of   the  Katanga   and   his   reappearance
as  the  head  of  the  whole  Congo—all  this  can  be  traced  back
to   the   wire-pullings  of  Washington,   London   and   Brussels.
The  CIA  regards  the  Congo  as  one  of  its  major  successes,  as
may   be   seen   from   the   boastful   account   given   in   Andrew
Tully's  CIA:   The   Inside   Story   (pages  219-29),  which   hails
the  Leopoldville  operation  as  a  triumph  of  U.S.   operatives.
The   pro-Western   Indian    newspaperman,   Frank    Moraes,
whose   Report   on   Mao's   China   several   years  ago    delighted
Western   propagandists,   interviewed   Lumumba   a  few   weeks
Remember  How  Solomon    Picked
The  True   Mother?
"Vinh   Long,   South   Vietnam,   Jan.   2   —   The  Com-
munist  Viet   Gong  have  extended  blanket  immunity   to
American   civilians,   especially   those   engaged   in  cul-
tural   and  economic  activities  in   South   Vietnam.    In-
tercepted  instructions  to  guerrilla  units  in  the  Mekong
Delta  say   that  whenever  American  civilians  are  cap-
tured,  they  are  to  be  released   with  an  explanation  it
was   all   a  mistake  and  that  the   Communists  have  no
quarrel  with  them  or  their  work  in  South  Vietnam.
"The  Communists  in  the  past  have  shown  a  decided
unwillingness  to  damage  or  destroy  this  country's  phy-
sical  assets.    For  example,   whenever  they   attack  the
railroad  running  from  Saigon  north  to  the   demarcation
line,  they  are  careful  not  to  blow  bridges  or  otherwise
damage   the   roadbed  beyond   repair."
—Jim  Lucas in  Washington  Daily  News, Jan.  2.
before  his  murder.     "The    real  problem,"  Moraes  quotes  Lu-
mumba  in  his  new  book  The  Importance   of  Being  Black:   An
Asian  Looks  at  Africa    (Macmillan),   "is  the  problem   of  the
great  powers,  who  do  not  want  a  united  and  neutral  Congo.
The  West  does  not  want   leaders   like  me,  who  want   to  be
neutral.    The  West  only  wants  a  Chief  of  State  100   percent
under  its  guidance."     Moraes'  own  first-rate  summary  of  the
tangled   Congolese  story  concludes  that  "Tshombe's  return  to
the  Congo,  with  the  support  and  connivance  of  his  Western
friends,  must   intensify  the  cold  war  in  that   territory."
If  U.S.  policy  continues  along  these  lines,  the  Congo  may
yet  forge   a  sense  of   nationhood   in  years  of   guerrilla   strug-
gle  against  the  puppet  governments   we  try  to  impose.    These
confused,   ill-armed  and  primitive  bands   may  learn  the   hard
way  the   facts  of  modern   life,  and   the   new   guises   that  im-
perialism  may  assume.     Inevitably  they  will  turn  for  help  to
China,   as  the   country  with   kindred   views   of   the  Western
powers.     These  and  wider  war  are  the  risks  ahead   if  we  do
not  disengage  now.    The  heart  of  Africa  is  a  dangerous   place
to  play  cloak-and-danger  games.
A  War  of  Liberation  in  Which  The  Liberators  Are  Not  Accustomed  to  Be  Welcomed
There  were  rewarding  insights   to  be  found  in  press  cov-
erage  of  the  battle  which  raged   for  several  days   recently
around  the  village  of   Binh  Ghia  in   South  Vietnam.    One
sentence,   in  an  AP   dispatch  (Washington   Star,   Dec.  30),
lit   up  the  truth  about  this  war  as  if  in  a  lightning   flash.
It  said  that  when  the  village  was  retaken  by   government
forces,  "The  marines,  used  to  sullen  receptions  from  villag-
ers  in  Viet  Cong-controlled  areas,  looked  puzzled by  the  en-
thusiastic  welcome."
This   village   was   different   because   settled   by   Catholic
refugees   from   the  North.*    "We  are  friendly  because  we
hate  the  Communists,"  the   same   dispatch  quotes   one  vil-
lager   as  shouting.    A  headline  over  the  Washington  Post
account  (Jan.  2)   said,  "Little  Catholic  Town  of  Binh  Ghia
Still   Paying   Dearly   For  Its   Faith."    It   doesn't   seem   to
have  done  too badly.
This  was  the  fourth  Viet  Cong  incursion  into  this  village
since   the   war   began.     In  counter   guerrilla  action,   as   in
Vietnam  and  the  Congo,  villages  thought  to  be  hostile  are
wiped  out.    We  bombard  first  and  ask  questions  afterward.
But  as  one  of  the  anti-Communist villagers  related  in  the
same  AP  story  in  the  Star  Dec.  30,  "All  Monday  night  we
argued  with the  Viet  Cong  commander to leave  us  alone  . .  .
we  were  so  furious  we  fought  the  man  with  our  fists  and
feet.   .  .  .  They   just   laughed  and  ridiculed  us."    Ridicule
hurts,  but  not  as  much  as  napalm.
As   a   Catholic  anti-Communist  village,   Binh   Ghia   was
given  favored  treatment  by  our  side.  "Much less  heavy  fire-
power  than  usual  was  used  in  the  attacks  on  Viet  Cong  em-
placements,"  the  AP  reported in  the  Baltimore  Sun  Dec.  31,
because   of   the   danger   to   the   anti-Communist   villagers."
The  Washington  Post  story  Jan.  2  said,   "The  Vietnamese
Air  Force  skyraiders  carefully  limited  their  attack  to  Viet
Cong  positions  outside  the  town."    We  are  not  usually  so
tender  with  villages  held  by  the  Viet   Cong.
* Few  Americans  realize  the  extent  to  which  the  war  in
South  Vietnam   has   depended   on  such   Catholic   villages  of
refugees  from  the  North.   This  minority  was  the  main  sup-
port  of  the  Diem  regime.   For  those  who  would  understand
this  more  fully  we  recommend  an  article  by  Robert  Scheer
"Hang  Down  Your  Head,  Tom  Dooley"  in  the  progressive
Catholic  magazine  Ramparts  for  Jan.-Feb.   (1182   Chestnut
St.,   Menlo  Park,  Calif.,   75C
1
)   which  deals  with   a  story  no
other   American   publication   has   had   the   courage  to   tell
fully—the  extent  to  which  this from  the  beginning  has  been
Cardinal  Spellman's   war.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  11,1965
The  Inaugural  Failed  to  Make  An  Appeal  Against  Racism
(Continued   from   Page   One)
nothing  "relentless"  about  the  magnitude of  his  war  on  pov-
erty.    Even  doubled,  as  promised,  it  will  hardly  mean  a bil-
lion  dollars  a  year  in  new  money.   This  is  the  program  of  a
moderate  conservative  Democrat,   offering   fringe  benefits   to
the  less  privileged  sectors  of  society.    In  the  politics  of  con-
sensus  a  little  for  the  poor  makes  it  easier  to  go  on  giving
a  lot  to  the  rich.
The  Old Tory  Coalition  Now  A  Minority
The   most   important  promise  here   is   the   beginnings  of
medicare.     The   huge   Democratic  majority   now  makes  this
possible.    The  vote  in  the  House  against  shelving  the  rules
reform  showed  that  the  coalition  of  Republicans  and  South-
ern  Democrats  has  lost  control.    Though  only  16 Republicans
voted  for  the  new  rules,  and  the  South  was  solid  for  the  old,
the  vote  was  224  to  201  for  the  change.    This  vote  is  the
true  index  to  the  shift  of  power,  and  clears  the  way  for  the
President's    moderate   social   reform   program.      The    rules
changes  themselves  were  in  keeping  with  this  program;   the
reform   was  minimal.     It   gave  the   Speaker  power,   through
the  21-day  rule and  two  lesser  changes,  to  override recalcitrant
committee  chairmen,  especially  in  the  Rules  committee.    But
it  does  not  give  greater  power  to  the  hoi  polloi  on  the  floor.
It  is  the  Speaker  and  the  party  leadership  which  decides  when
to  utilize  these  devices.
That  there  is  a  potential  for   more  drastic  action   in   the
rank-and-file  membership was  indicated  when  two  dozen  rose
with  Congressman Wm.  Fitts  Ryan  of  New  York  to  challenge
the  election  of  the  Mississippi  delegation  and   148  voted  not
to  seat  them,  an  extraordinary vote  for   the  Negro  and   the
Mississippi  Freedom  Party.   This  should  stimulate the  taking
of   depositions  on  how  white  supremacy  procedures  prevent
honest  elections  in  the  deep  South,  and  the  size  of  the  vote
will  make  it  harder  for  the  privileges and  elections  commit-
tee  to  bury  the  challenge.    For   the  first  time  since  Recon-
struction,  the  Negro  from   the  deep  South  made  his  appear-
ance   on   Capitol   Hill,  still  outside   the   door   but   definitely
on   his  way  in.
Alexander  Meiklejohn
We  record  with  sorrow  the  death  at  92  of  Alexander
Meiklejohn,  one  of   the  great  Americans  of   our  time.
As  an  educator,  his  influence  was  not  limited  to  Brown,
Amherst  and  Wisconsin.    He  taught  us  all  by  his  pres-
ence  and  example.   Few  men  have  combined such  deep
conviction  with  such  courtesy  towards  opposing  points
of   view,   such   foreboding   about   man's  fate   with   so
sweet  a  serenity  and  so  ever-fresh   a  joy.    He  was  a
philosopher  in  the  ancient  sense;  his  concerns  were  the
good  life  and  the  good  society.    For  him  as  an  Amer-
ican,  the  First  Amendment  was  the  essence  of  all  that
is   best  in  our  country  and  he  spoke  up  for   it  when
many  were  afraid  to speak.   Fittingly, his  last  message
was   a   letter   protesting  the   contempt   action  brought
by    the    House    Un-American    Activities   Committee
against  Dagmar  Wilson,  Donna  Allen  and  Russ  Nixon.
His  was  never  "a  fugitive  and  cloistered  virtue."    We
will  always  remember  him  with  love.
To  watch  the  Mississippi  Negroes  arrive  in  their  rickety
buses,  chilled  but  eager,  in  the  darkness  before  a  downtown
church  the  night  before  was  to  see  an  oppressed  people  press-
ing  at  last  for  justice.    The  most  disappointing  thing  in  the
Inaugural  was  the  absence  of  any  appeal  against  the  spirit  of
racism;  the  few  meager   words  about  the  right  to  vote  were
no  substitute.    In  such  great  challenges  lie  the  birth  of  great
societies,   and   Mr.   Johnson's   failure  to   give   this   the   lofty
word  .it   deserved   made  his   own  vision   of   a  Great  Society
seem  little  more  than  a  middle  class  suburbanite   dream.  The
whole  world  would  have  applauded   if  America  had  opened
the  doors of  Congress,   at  least  for  opening  day,  to  the  three
women  from  Mississippi.    An  ugly  Nazi  clown,  insulting  the
Negro,  was able  to  get  through  the  strict  security,  but  not  the
three  women  challengers.    Of  all  that  was  said  on  opening
day,   history  may  best  remember  Mrs.   Fannie  Hamer's  bitter
words  outside  the  door.     "Mississippi   Negroes  are  excluded
from  everything except  hanging,"  she  said  as  she  was  turned
away.    "Someday  we  want  to  be  able  to  teach  our   children
that  this  really  is  a  democracy."    Here  is  the  real   blueprint
for  that  greater   society.
IFS  to   Speak  on  Peace  in  Southeast  Asia  Before  the  Washington   Ethical  Society  in  the  Dupont  Theatre,  Connecticut   Ave.   near   Dupont
Circle,  10:45  a.m.   Sunday,  January   IO
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
I/11/C3
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name ..............................................................................
Street     ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  in
January   and   Bi-Weekly  during   July  and  August  at   5618   Nebraska  Ave..   N.W.,   Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;     $6   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED