I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965jul12.pdf

============================================================

Where  The Poverty  Program Fails,  Pps. 2-3
Nowadays  The  State  Dept.  Can't  Be  Too  Careful  How  It  Defines  "Aggression"
Mr.  David  E.  BELL  (Administrator  of  AID):  In  the  case
of  Egypt  it  is  not  our intention by  economic  or  military  aid
to  support  a  military  force  for  aggressive  purposes.
Mr.  Otto  E.  PASSMAN  (D.  La.):  Have  they  ever  used
their  military  forces  for  aggressive  purposes?
Mr.  BELL: It  depends  how  you  describe  their  action  in
Yemen.
Mr. PASSMAN:  How do you describe it?
Mr.  BELL:  The  way  I  believe  the  Secretary  of   State
would  describe  it  is  a  situation  where the  Egyptians  sent
forces in support  of  one side in an internal dispute.
Mr.  PASSMAN: Are  we playing with  a  coin  with a head
on  each side?
Mr.  BELL: No.   I  am  careful  about  the  use  of  the  word
"aggression"  because  the  U.S.  has  put  troops  in  a  country
in  support  of  one  side  in  an  internal  dispute  and  we  do  not
consider  that  aggression."
—Route  App. Com. Hearings  on 1986  foreign  aid, p. 610.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  26JULY  12, 1965
">'       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
16  CENTS
Will We  Do in Vietnam What The Nazis  Did in Holland?
Comedy  and  tragedy  rub  shoulders  as  the  Vietnamese  war
widens.    In  the  wake  of  the  second  of  those  B-52   sledge-
hammer-against-flea  raids by the  Strategic  Air  Command, 2500
troops  invade the  Zone D  jungle  30 miles north  of  Saigon  but
find  no  trace  of  the  elusive  enemy.   The  AP's  first  complete
report  derisively  notes  the  haul  at  the  end  of  this  costly  opera-
tion;  since  this  seemed  to  disappear  from  the  morning  papers
next  day,  we  give  it  here  from  the  Washington  Evening  Star
(July 6):  "Three stacks of  love letters,  tied  in  a yellow ribbon
from  a girl  to  a  Viet  Cong  soldier;  7  Japanese  water  canteens
of  World  War  II  design;  a  Viet  Cong  illustrated  magazine;
one  French  artillery shell  made  in  1932."   A  few  more raids
of  this kind and our  side can establish  a  Flea  Market  in  Saigon.
Our  Own Little Fuehrer
In  London,  the  Daily  Mirror's  Saigon  correspondent  reports
an  interview  (July  4)  in  which  our new strong  man, the play-
boy  Air  Force General  Ky,  now  head  of  the  South  Vietnamese
government,  was  asked  who  his  heroes  were.    "I  have  only
one,"   he  replied,  "Hitler."    This  charming  interview  makes
it  easier  to  understand  why  one  of  Ky's  first  acts  was  to  sus-
pend  virtually the  entire  press  of  his  country,  an  order hastily
rescinded  when  the  effect  was  to  boost  the  circulation  of  the
Viet  Cong's  underground  paper  in  Saigon  (Washington  Star,
July  3).    Such  are  the  antics  of  the  Free  World's  newest
Chief  of  State.
Two  days after  the  London  Mirror  interview was  published
Gen.  Ky  announced  a  "bac  tien"  (march  north)   movement
to   "liberate"  North   Vietnam   (Washington   Post   July   7).
Though  this  was frowned upon  by the  U.S.  Embassy, we  have
extended  our  own  "liberation"  campaign.   When  we hit  Nam
Dinh  July  2, our  bombings of  the  North  reached  a  new  stage.
The  attack on Nam  Dinh  40  miles  southeast  of  Hanoi  was  the
first  on  an  industrial  city  in  the  Hanoi-Haiphong  area,   the
heart  of  North   Vietnamese  population  and  industry.    Nam
Dinh  is  a  center  of  light  industries,  principally textiles.    Our
objective  was  the  oil  storage  tanks  in  the  city.    "Smoke  rose
3,000  meters and  was visible 300 kilometers away," Le  Monde
reported   (July  4-5),  adding  "No  information  was  given  on
losses  inflicted  upon  the  population,  but  it  would  be  astonish-
Somebody's  Not  Telling  The  Truth
"He  (McNamara)  focussed  immediately  on  the  Ko-
rean episode, asserting with confidence  that  any  analogy
to  the  situation  in  Vietnam  is  'false  in  logic  although
significant  in  psychology.'   As to a land war—involving
the  commitment of  larger  units  than  we  have  yet  em-
ployed,  and the  engagement  of  Communist  regulars—he
appreciated  the  dangers,  but  'we  are  not  moving in  that
direction.'"
—From  "Decision  in  Vietnam:  How  Johnson  Makes
Foreign  Policy,"  New  York  Times  Magazine,  July  4,  by
Henry   F.   Graff,    Professor   of  History   at   Columbia,  a
highly  advertised  article  which turned out  to  be a  public
relations  "snow  job" for  the  Administration,
"A  vast  construction  and  supply  program  is  under
way  in  South Vietnam to  provide logistical  support  for
American  reinforcements  that  are  due  to  arrive  in  the
coming  weeks.  New  airfields,  new  port  facilities  .  .  .
military  barracks  and hospitals  .  .  .  there  is  talk  of  a
force  of  250,000 Americans ... many  American  officers
are  convinced that a  'Korea-type' war is  in the making.
They  ask  privately  whether  some  sort  of  'semi-mobili-
zation' should  not be ordered in the United  State*. ...
Perhaps  an  even  greater  indication  of  the  increased
U.S.  commitment ... is the arrival of  an Army  Graves
Registration unit."
—Jack  Raymond from Saigon in N.Y.  Times tame  day
ing  if  only  oil  was  burned  up."    Two  military  missions  were
flown the  same day, it was announced  in  Saigon,  "against  mili-
tary  bases at Dienbienphu"  (New  York  Times, July 3).  Dien-
bienphu,  according  to  a  story  in  Paris  Match  last   November
15  by  the  first  French  journalists  allowed  to  visit  the   place
in ten years, is now a model farm.   A leaflet dropped  on North
Vietnam  the  same day  boasted  endearingly  that  2,788  aircraft
had  dropped  bombs in  89  strikes  from  February 7 until  April
30 and that  "violent  attacks" would  be continued  until  "Hanoi
and   the  Chinese   Communists  stop   their   invasion   of   South
Vietnam."    When  the  spokesman was asked  about  this  he  said
he  did  not  believe  the  Chinese had  invaded  but  the  language
had been chosen "for  its propaganda value"  (N.Y.  Times, July
3).    How  much  propaganda  value  is  there  in  falsehoods   so
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
i  o
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  IX,  1965
War  On Poverty's  Bitter  1st  Birthday
The  war  against  poverty's  first  fiscal  year  has  ended
in  a  torrent   of   bitter   criticism   from   minority   groups
protesting  racism  in  the  administration  of  the  program.
At  the  NAACP's  convention  in  Denver,  the  director  for
labor  affairs,  Herbert   Hill,  called  the  program  "merely
an  extension  of  white  welfare  paternalism."    He  said
the  program  lacked  any  serious  plan  to  deal  with  Negro
unemployment   even  though  the  unemployment   rate  was
124%  higher  for  non-whites  than  for  whites.    In  1947,
the   nonwhite   unemployment    rate  had  been  only  64%
higher.    Hill's  criticism  was  seconded  a  day  later  be-
fore  the  Senate  Subcommittee  on  Poverty  by  Reverend
R.  A.  Hawkins,   a  Negro  civil  rights  leader  from  North
Carolina.     Hawkins   reported   almost   total   disillusion-
ment  with  the  program  among  Southern Negroes. "They
see  the  same  people  in  leadership  roles  from  the  same
old  social   departments   and  agencies   that   have   kept
them  poor  and  dependent  in  the  past," he  said.
Chief  Architect of Harlem's Mobilization for Youth Tells House Committee...
by  Prof.  Richard A.  Cloward *
To  convert  the   [anti-poverty]  program  from  a  strategy  to
aid  casualties  to  a  campaign  against  basic  economic inequali-
ties  will  require  a  good   deal  of  political  pressure  from  low-
income  groups.    Among  the  first-aid programs  to  be  establish-
ed  across  the  country,  for  example,  not  the  least  is  a  plan  to
provide   out-of-school,    unemployed   youth   with   subsidized
work,   especially  in   the   ghettoes  where  last  summer's  riots
broke  out.    It  is  all  very  well  to  provide  subsidized  work  to
unemployed  youth,  but  where  will  they  work  once  the  brief
period   of  subsidization  is  over?    Since  the  anti-poverty  pro-
gram  does  not  deal  with  basic economic  problems,  such  as  the
lack  of  full  employment  or  low  minimum wages,  it  cannot  be
expected  to  shut  off  the  flow  of  future casualties.
Jobs  Not  Welfare
Or  take  the  programs  being  established  in  some  cities  to
deal  with  the  current  crisis  over  welfare  costs.    Some munici-
palities   are  proposing   to  train  welfare  mothers   to  become
dietary  aides  and  nurse's  aides,  thereby  enabling  them  to  leave
the  welfare  rolls.   This  may be an  advance over  their  previous
status,  but  it  must  also  be  said  that  such  measures  reinforce
the  female  as the breadwinner  in  an already entrenched  female-
headed   household.     Men  for  whom  there   are  no  jobs  will
nevertheless   mate  like  other  men,  but  they  are  not  so  likely
to  marry.    Ours  is  a  society  which  has  preferred  to  deal  with
the  resulting  female-headed  families,  not  by  putting  men  to
work,  but  by  placing  unwed  mothers  and  dependent   children
on   public   welfare—substituting   check-writing  machines   for
male  wage-earners.    By  this  means,  we  have  robbed  men  of
manhood,   women  of  husbands  and  children   of  fathers.
A  guaranteed   annual  wage  would  eliminate  poverty;   even
a  system  of  children's   allowances  would   raise  whole  groups
from  poverty.    But  if  we  fail  to  make  a  broad  spectrum  of
institutional    changes,   new   casualties   will   steadily   fill   the
vacuum  left  by individuals who  are  helped  by the  anti-poverty
program.     At  present,   political  pressure  for  basic  economic
change   does  not  appear  to  exist  in  American   society.     The
* Testimony  before  Senate  Subcommittee  on  Poverty,  June
29.   (abr.)    Cloward is Professor  of  Social  Work  at  Columbia
and chief  architect  of  Harlem's  Mobilization  for  Youth.
broad  consensus  favoring  the  anti-poverty  program  is  hardly
proof  of  a  national  determination  to  wipe  out  economic  de-
privation.    It  is true  that  a  consensus  exists,  including  business
and  labor,  Republicans  and  Democrats,  rich  and  poor.     The
very  breadth  of  this  consensus,  however,  merely  lays  bare  the
fact  that  no  vital  institutional  interests  are  threatened.
If  the  political  preconditions  for  major  economic  changes
do  not  now  exist,  the  anti-poverty program  can  have  a  role  in
helping  to  bring  them  about,  precisely  because  of  its  mandate
to  involve the poor.  During  recent  hearings  in  the  House  Com-
mittee  on  Education  and  Labor,   Rep.  Adam  Clayton  Powell
castigated  one city after  another—chiefly  Chicago,   Washington,
Cleveland  and  New  York—for  failing  to  seat  poor  people  on
the  top  municipal  anti-poverty  councils,  where  policy  will  be
formulated  and  funds  allocated  for  programs.    Representation
on  top  policy-making  bodies  may  confer  a  little  prestige   on
the  poor   persons  who  participate,  but  it  will  do  little   more
where  they  are  outnumbered  by  other  individuals   representing
powerful  organizational  interests.
The  possibility  that  the  anti-poverty  program   can  make  a
contribution  to the growth  of  low-income  power  lies  in  deliver-
ing  to  the  poor  and  their  leaders  the  responsibility  for   con-
trolling   the  funds  and  programs   to  be  funnelled   into   their
slums  and  ghetto  communities.    In  the  coming  years,  billions
This  Retired  Texas  Marine Corps General  Seems  to  Be  Offering  LBJ  Some  Good  Advice
tary  considerations  were  secondary  to  political  expediency—
a  situation  which   appears  to  prevail  in  Vietnam  .  .  .  the
brigade deployed to outlying  districts  for the  task  of  policing
the  country  prior  to the  1928  elections.  . . .
"The   result  of  what  was  likely  the  first  honest  election
in  the  history  of  the  republic  was  a  sweeping  Liberal   vic-
tory,  in  which  General  Moncado  [against  whom  we  had  in-
tervened]  was  elected  Pjpsident.  .  .  .  The  U.S.   government
might  have  preferred  a  different   outcome,  but  in  the  event
made no effort  to interfere....  This strictly  neutral  attitude
helped  to  reconcile  the  Nicaraguan  citizenry  to  the  Marine
occupation,  and  facilitated  subsequent  military  operations.
There  appears  to  be  a  lesson  to  guide  possible  future  inter-
vention  in  the  domestic  politics  of  occupied  countries.   If  we
must  intervene,   favor   the  side  of  the  electoral  majority."
—Gen. Megee  (U.S.  Marines,  ret.)  of  Austin  Texas,  writ-
ing  in  the  June,  1965 issue  of  the  Marine  Corps  Gazette.
"The current operations in Vietnam and the Dominican Re-
public   recall   previous   Marine  experience  in   the   field   of
guerrilla  warfare.  .  .  .  Cumulative  experience  in  *banana
wars'  reached  its   peak  in  the  five-year  struggle   against
Sandino  in  Nicaragua—a  region  strikingly  similar  to  Viet-
nam.  .  .  . After  some  preliminary skirmishing  in  the  spring
of   1926  between   the   Conservative   forces,  the  Nicaraguan
civil  war  erupted  on  a  country-wide  scale  during  August.
"In accordance with the  then well-established formula,  the
U.S.  intervened.   Marines .  .  .  landed  to  enforce  a  neutral
zone ...  ostensibly  for the protection  of  American lives and
property.  .  .  .  After  voluble but  futile  protest   against  the
'un-neutral'  action  of  U.S.  forces,   Gen.  Moncado  marched
westward  toward the coffee  tineas.  .  . .
"The  U.  S.  Government,  defending  its  action  as  a  neces-
sary  part  of  the  Monroe  Doctrine,  was  faced  with  consider-
able  political  opposition at  home  and  abroad.   Strictly  mili-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  12,1965
Anti-Poverty Program Fails to Deal With Problems of Race  and Economy
of  dollars  are  to  be  made  available  for  programs  in  depressed
neighborhoods.    To  manage  these  programs,  huge  social  wel-
fare  organizations  will  have  to  be  created,   or  existing  ones
vastly  expanded.    Thousands  of  jobs will  be  created;  the  new
workers  hired  to  fill  them  will  owe  their  allegiance  to  those
who  own  the  organizations.   Through  services that  will  reach
thousands,  broad  constituencies  of  low-income persons will  de-
velop.    The  organizations  to  be  created  or  expanded  will  con-
stitute  a  new  and  potentially  important  source  of  power.
How City Hall Controls  the  Slums
Who  will  derive  that  power ?   The  poverty  structures  being
projected  in  New  York  and  Chicago  are  key  examples  of  ef-
forts   by  governmental   officials   to  dominate  the  forthcoming
programs.    Under  conditions  of  great  secrecy,  both  cities  put
forward  plans  some  months  ago  calling  for  the  establishment
in   designated   slum   neighborhoods   of   decentralized,   multi-
function  public  agencies.    Most  of  the  municipal  antipoverty
programs   are  to  be  operated   from   these   centers.     In   both
cities,  these  projected  centers  are  to  be  responsible  to  a  city-
wide  corporation  dominated  by  public  officials  or  persons  di-
rectly  appointed   by  public   officials.
What  community  groups   are  beginning   to  understand   is
that  their  stake  in the  present  controversy  is the  right  to  mount
autonomous,  self-directed  anti-poverty  programs  in  their  own
slums  and  ghettoes.    In  New  York,  as  a  consequence,  organi-
zations  have  slowly  been  developing:   Central  Harlem's  HAR-
YOUACT, East Harlem's MEND, Bedford  Stuyvesant's  Youth
in  Action,  South  Bronx's  SEBU,  and  the  new  city-wide  organs
of  the  Puerto   Rican  community.    If   these  local  community-
action   groups   could   be  depended   upon   merely  to  carry  out
politically  neutral  social-service  programs  for   the   casualties
in  their  midst,  the  current  dispute  would  generate  somewhat
less  heat.    But  the  trend  toward  neighborhood   control  is  also
coupled  with  the  idea  of  organizing  poor  people  to  work  for
social  change,  and  that  is  a  major  threat.
The  fact  is,  however,   that  today's   slum  and  ghetto   lack  a
radical  tradition  of  any  kind.    The  emerging  controversy  over
the  involvement  of  the  poor  has  its roots  in  relatively  moderate
ideologies—self-help,   local   autonomy,    democratic    moderate
Housing  Bill   20  Years  Behind  Need
"We   face   a   critical   housing   shortage.     Congress
passed  the  Housing  Act  of  1949, which was  intended to
guarantee   a  decent  home  and  living  environment  to
every  American.   But  we  have  failed  to  admit  and  act
upon  the  fact  that  the  housing problem  is  one  of  severe
shortage.   Current data indicate that  housing  starts are
running  at  1.5  million  annually.   This  is  far  too  few.
Even  the  most  conservative  estimates  indicate  that  at
least  1.7 million  units  are  needed in  1965.   Some  sources
estimate  a  need  of  2  million units  in  1965 and  an  aver-
age  of  2.2 million by  1970.    [The  Housing  Act  of  1965]
proposes  60,000 units  per  year for  the  next  4 years, but
only  35,000  of  these   [per  year]   would  be  new  units.
New  York  City  alone  could  use  the  entire  authorization
for  public housing.   This  bill  is  just  about  20  years be-
hind  the  needs  of  the  American  people."
—Rep. Ryan  (D., N.Y.), in  the House,  June  29  (abr.)
action,  and the  importance of  ethnic  separatism.    The  struggle,
in  short,  is in the tradition  of  urban  politics,  and  nothing more.
It  may  be  asking  too  much  of  established   power  groups  to
recognize  the  value  of  this  development,  but  it  must  be  said,
in  any  case,  that  they  are  not  being  confronted  with  anything
resembling  a  revolutionary  movement.
[There  are]  those  who  are  troubled  by the  thought  of  creat-
ing  "separatist"  programs  under  the  aegis  of  the  war  against
poverty.    The  logic  of  this  position  is  that  community  prob-
lems  are  common  ones  and  can best  be  solved  through  coopera-
tion  and  communication.    All  things  considered,  however,  it
is  rather  difficult  to  see  how  the  interests  of  the  Puerto  Rican
slum  tenant  dweller  are  congruent  with  those  of  the  Jewish
landlord  or  those  of  the  unregistered  Negro  with  those  of  the
Italian  political-machine  leader.   Strategies  of  conciliation  and
coalition  will  not  bring  the  poor  into  the  mainstream.    For
within  coalitions  of  unequals,  it  is  not  typically  the  case  that
the  least  equal  have  much  success  in  advancing  their  interests.
Judging  from  the  history  of  ethnic  groups  struggling  to  gain
a  foothold  in  our  pluralistic  society,  it  seems  clear  that  minor-
ity  groups  will  win  acceptance  by  the  majority  only  through
developing  their  own  bases  of  power,  not  by  submerging  their
unorganized   numbers   in  coalitions   dominated   by  others.
Senate  Declines  to  Stop  Drug  Company
Not  since  the  days  of  Estes  Kefauver has  a  U.S.  Senator
dared  to  attack  the  nation's  drug  industry  as  did  Russell
Long  (D.,  La.),  in  debate  June  25th  and  28th  over  a  public
health  bill.    Long  was  battling  for  an  amendment  to  pro-
hibit  the  drug companies  from acquiring patents, i.e., monop-
oly  rights,  on drugs  that are  discovered  and developed solely
with  public  funds.    The  Senate  voted  him  down  55  to  36,
but  the  result  might  have  been  reversed  if  supposedly  lib-
eral  Senators  like Fulbright,  McCarthy, Bayh,  Javits  and the
Kennedy  brothers  had  not  sided  with  the  industry.
Long  hit  the  industry  hardest  with  a  comparison  of  what
U.S.  drugs  might  sell  for  under competitive  conditions with
what  they  now  sell  for  under  U.S.  patent  monopolies.    This
comparison  is   hard  to   come  by   because   drug  companies
don't  reveal  their  costs  of  production, but  Long  achieved  a
close  approximation  by  calculating  from  bulk  drug  prices
in  Europe.    He  found  that  the  ingredients  for  100  tablets
of  Orinase, an important insulin substitute  used  by  diabetics,
sell  in  Europe  for  only  18c.    Here  Upjohn  sells  these  100
Profiteering  on  Publicly  Financed  Patents
tablets  wholesale   for  $7.70.    The  price  to  the  consumer  is
$14.   "Over a  period of  10 years," Long  said,  "the difference
in  cost  to  a  diabetic  might  be  the  difference  between  $1,600
and  $48."   Similarly,  the  ingredients  for  100  tablets  of  the
widely  used  antibacterial drug Furantin in  Europe  cost  only
19c.    Norwich  sells  these  100  tablets  to  druggists   here  for
$29  and  they  in  turn  sell   them  to  the  public  for  $48.34.
Long  analyzed  prices  for  some  15 drugs  and  concluded  that
without   patent  protection  they  could  sell   about   30   times
cheaper.
Long  also  made  public  the  first  evidence  of   collaboration
between  government  laboratory  research  workers  and  the
big  drug  companies.    He  told  how  in  one  case  three  em-
ployees  at  the  National  Heart  Institute  discovered  a  new
anti-hypertensive,  filed  for  a  patent  on  it  with  the  help  of
Merck  &  Co.,  and  failed  to  tell  the  U.S.  Surgeon   General
about  the  discovery  until it  was  too  late  for  the  government
to   exercise   its   option   on  the  lucrative  foreign   licensing
rights.    These  rights  will  now go  to Merck.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  IS, 1885
Bombing  North  Vietnam's  Dikes Would  Drown  and  Starve  Its  People
{Continued  from  Page  One)
blatant  even  we  aren't  gullible  enough  to  believe  them?
How  Dare  They  Defend  Themselves
The  public  is being prepared  for the  bombing  of  the  Hanoi-
Haiphong  industrial complex.    An  AP  dispatch  from  Vienna
(Le  Monde,  July 4-5)  quotes  an  Albanian  labor  union  official
just  back  from  Hanoi  who  declared  with  an  almost  audible
sneer  that  all  the  Russians  had  sent  there  were  "some  medi-
cines,  two  hundred  bicycles  and  five  accordions."     But  our
military  through  Hanson  Baldwin  (New  York  Times,  July  4)
leak  intelligence  reports  of  "huge crates"  being  unloaded  from
Communist-flag  ships at  Haiphong  with  "what  are  believed  to
be  weapon,  ammunition  and  military  supplies"  which  "may
have"   included  latest  model  Migs.     "Unconfirmed  reports"
(they  have  to  be  pretty  "unconfirmed"  to  rank  as  such  with
military  intelligence)   even  say  the. North   Vietnamese   "now
have,  or  will  eventually  be  provided  with,  ground-to-ground
ballistic missiles with  a  range  in  excess  of  1,000  miles".   This
triggered  a  flood  of  similar  stories  and  a  State   Department
statement  July  6  estimating  that  there  soon  would   be   four
SAM  (surface-to-air missile)  sites,  each with  six  missiles,  out-
side Hanoi.    On  July  7, as we write,  House  Republican  Leader
Gerald  Ford  has  just  issued  a  statement  calling  for  air  strikes
"before  the  enemy  uses  the  weapons  against  the  side  of  free-
dom."    Even  slant-wise,  these  missiles  cannot  shoot  further
than  40 miles.    They  are purely  defensive,  but  can shoot  down
even  U2s  at  altitudes  of  at  least  80,000  feet.    In  the  Cuban
crisis  we  at  least  had  the  excuse  that  IRBMs  placed  in  Cuba
could  reach  much  of  the  U.S.  mainland.    Here  all  the  SAMs
can  do  is  reach  our  attacking  planes.
There  may  be  worse  in  the  offing:  bombing  of  the  North
Vietnamese  dikes.    These  support  the  irrigation  works  of  the
Red   River   delta.     Bombing  the   dikes   has   been   discussed
several  times  in  the  French  press  but  has  been  blacked  out  of
the  American.    In   its  July  4-5  issue  Le  Monde   speculates
whether  the  dikes  will  be our  next  target.   In  its July  6  issue
it  carries  ari  article  by  the  famous  agricultural   expert,  Rene
Dumont,  describing  the  enormous  effort  put  into  the  irriga-
Shastri  Doesn't  Feel  Like A  Domino
Mr.  COLLINGWOOD   (CBS   News):  If   South   Viet-
nam,  for  instance,  fell  into  the  Communist   camp,  you
do not think  that  that  would  increase the  threat  to  India
and  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia?
Prime  Minister   SHASTRI   of  India:  I  do  not  think
so,  because  there  are  other  Asian  countries  which  of
course—  they  are  not  Communist  as  such,  but  they  are
progressive  and  radical   in  their  outlook  and  approach.
I  should  not  think  that  once  Vietnam  is  given   freedom
to  live  as they  like, they  would  come  under  the  clutches
of  the Chinese....
Mr.  KALB  (CBS  News):  Yes—but  wouldn't   the  vic-
tory   of  communism   in  South  Vietnam,   a  communism
that  has  been  nourished  and  supported  by  both  North
Vietnam  and  Communist   China,  certainly  whet  the  ap-
petites  of  Communists  throughout  Asia?
Prime  Minister   SHASTRI:  Well,  the  Soviet  Union,
they  are  also  communists.    And  yet  they  believe  in
peaceful   co-existence.  .  .  .  Similarly,   I  think  Vietnam
may  also  adopt  the  same  policy.
—Face  the Nation, June  t7.
tion  system  to  meet  the  needs  of  overpopulated  North   Viet-
nam.   The  most  tempting  moment for  our  military,  especially
if  they  meet  serious  defeats  in  the  South  during  the  summer,
will  come  at  the  end  of  the  rainy  season  in  August,  when  the
waters  are  at  their  height.    Blowing  up  the  great  dikes  to  the
North  of  Hanoi  would  be  comparable  to  an  H-bomb  in  its
effect,  flooding  the  entire  delta  region,  wiping  out  the  sum-
mer  rice crop  and  drowning from  two to  three  million people.
North  Vietnam  could  survive  the  loss  of  the  industries  it  has
built  up  since  1954  but  to  bomb the  dikes  would  mean starva-
tion.    Destruction   of  dikes  was  one  of  the  war  crimes  for
which  Seyss-Inquart,  chief  of  the  Nazi  occupation  in  Holland,
was  hanged   at  Nuremberg.     The   Hague   Convention  years
before  had  made  such  action  a  violation  of  international  law
but  Goering  pleaded  at the  trial,  "In  a  life  and  death  struggle
there  is  no  legality."    Has  this  become  our  viewpoint, too,
even  though  Vietnam  is hardly a life  and  death  matter  for  us?
The  bombardment  of  the  dikes  would  be  genocide.
We'll  Be Clod to Send A  Sample  Copy of This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
The  1964  Index  It  Ready—You  CM  Have One Free  If  You  Send  •  Long  Stamped  Addrmced  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)  •   sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
7/12/68
For  the  enclosed  $5 lend  *  gift  «ub  to:
(To)    Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............SUte....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  L  F.  Stone's  The  Batnted  FUtta
Indicate  if  announcement wished  D
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618  N«brnkj  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  P.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  V.  Stone'i  Weekly.    Second  Clan  Postage  Paid  at  •Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  In  December   and  the  first  week  In
January  and  Bl-Weekly  during  July   and  August  at   6618  Nebraska  AT*.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  Independent   weekly   published  and   edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Either  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   IB   in   the   U.S.:    $6  In   Canada:    $10  elsewhere.    Air  Hall   rate*:
$15  to  Europe;   120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED