I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965nov29.pdf

============================================================

The  Explosion  at  the  Civil Rights Conference,  P.  3
We  Thought  The  State Dept.  Considered  The  Principle  of  Non-intervention  Obsolete
"The   U.S.  is  taking  a  hard  look  at   a  Chilean  proposal     where  the   O.A.S.  would   be  in   a   position   to  investigate
for   the   protection  of   human   rights   in   the   hemisphere     racial  problems in  the  U.S."
because  some  officials  believe  it  might  lead  to  a  situation             —Washington  Star  from  the  Rio  Conference,   Nov. 19
I. P. Stands  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  40NOVEMBER  29,  1965
">'       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
16   CENTS
Delusions  That  Failed  in  Korea  Won't  Work in Vietnam
The  most important  battle  of  the  war  has  begun.    It  is  the
battle  to  convince  the  American  people  that  they  can  win  the
Vietnamese  war  quickly  if  only  the  Air  Force  is  given  carte
blanche  to  "clobber"  the  North.    The  Nixon   interview  on
Pace  The  Nation  last  Sunday  (Nov.   21)   and  General  Curtis
Le  May's  interview  with  the  Associated  Press  the  same  day
(the  fullest  version may be  found  in  the  Baltimore Sun,  Nov.
22)  seek  to  exploit  both  the  widespread  anxiety about  greater
involvement  and   the  widespread   delusion  of  victory  by  air-
powpr     How  powerful  an  election  issue  this  can  become  may
be  seen  from  Stewart  Alsop's  sensitive  and  revealing  opinion
survey  in  the  Saturday  Evening  Post  (Oct.   23)   which  found
almost  three  out  of five persons  polled  thought  "we  should  go
even  further   in  Vietnam,  even  if   it  means  bombing  Hanoi
and  Red  China."
Bombing  Has  Already  Failed
The   bombings  of   the  North   which   began   last  February
were  sold  first  as  a  means  of  forcing North  Vietnam  to  throw
in  the  sponge  at  the  negotiating  table  and  then  as  a  means
of  shutting  off  the  supply  of  men  and  aid  to  the  South.    It
has  failed  in  both  respects.    Gen.  Thomas  S.  Power,  the  re-
tired  Commander  in  Chief  of  the  Strategic  Air  Command,  in
his  book  last  year  "Design  for  Survival"  said  that  by  aerial
ultimatum  and  selected  bombing  of  military  depots  we  could
force  the  North   to  surrender   "within   a  few  days  and  with
minimum   force"   (pps.   224-225).    Now,   ten  months   after
the  Powers'  formula was  adopted,  the  North  has  shown  itself
less  disposed  than  ever  to  end  the  war.   When  it  became  clear
months  ago  that  blackmail  by  bombing  would  not  work,  the
bombing  was  defended  as  a  means  of  destroying  sources  of
supply  and  interdicting  supply  lines.    But  the  only  result  is
that  the  North  is  now  infiltrating  whole  regiments  into  the
South  where  before  there  was  only  a  trickle  of  men  and  sup-
plies.   The  fighting  has shifted,  as the  pro-war  and  pro-bomb-
ing  U.S.  News  &  World   Report  admits   (Nov.   29),   "from
hide-and-seek  jungle warfare  to  savage,  open  battles  involving
well-trained  North  Vietnamese  and  Americans."    The   tempo
of  the  war  has  risen  despite  intense  bombing  of  both  North
and   South.
The  pressure  on  Johnson   to  expand  the  Vietnamese  war
recalls  the  pressure  on  Truman   to  expand  the  Korean  war.
Le  May  is  out  to  play  the  role  of  MacArthur.    The  advice
Le  May  gives  now  is  the  advice  Le  May  gave  then.    "I  hap-
pen  to  believe,"  he  told  the  Associated  Press  pompously  in  his
latest  interview, "we  can  get  the  message  across  better  by  the
1  1
Henry  A.  Wallace
Henry  Wallace  was  an  exasperating   cross  between
a  saint  and  a  village  innocent.   He  never  gave  to  his
work   as   political  leader  or  editor   the   kind  of   hard
grappling  with  fact  that  he  applied  to  corn  breeding.
In  the  1948 campaign, he  often  read  second-rate  scripts
prepared   by  third-rate  Communist  party  liners.    He
could  be  a  most  wooly-minded  man,  and  some  af   his
offhand  remarks  (like  that  on  the  Communist takeover
of   Czechoslovakia)   could  make  the   hair  even  of  de-
voted  followers  stand  on  end.    But  of  all  the  political
leaders  of  the  New  Deal  generation  none  has  proved
a  truer  visionary.    AH  the  major  ideas  he  espoused,
and  for  which  he  was  savagely  ridiculed,  hare  since
become  accepted  parts  of   governmental  thinking  and
policy:   the   ideas   of   the   "ever-normal   granary",   of
food  for  peace  (derided as  a  proposal  to  give  a  quart
of   milk  to  every  Hottentot),   and  of   full  employment
were   Wallace's.    So  was   the   idea   that   the   postwar
world,   in   the   ds  .-line   of   imperialism,  would   be   "the
century  of  the  cc tnmon  man."   The  most  hostile  storm
of  all  was  stirn  1  by  his  anti-cold  war  campaign  for
the   Presidency  i  i  1948.   But  two  decades,  and  many
billions  of  armar  ent  dollars later,  we  and the  Russians
have  come  aroui  d  to  accepting  the  idea  he  espoused
of  peaceful  co-en istence, as  some  day  we  will  with  the
Chinese.    He  applied  to  world  politics  the  best  strain
of  his  native evangelical  Middle  Western  idealism.   We
followed  him  with  love  in  what  we  knew  would  be  a
lost  battle  in  1948.   But  what  he  stood  for  no  longer
looks  lost  today.
use of  airpower  than  by the  use of ground  forces."   The  "mes-
sage,"  of  course,  is  that  the North  Vietnamese had  better  sur-
render  or  we  will  burn  up  their  country.    In  his  newly  pub-
lished  autobiography,   "Mission  With  LeMay,"  he  relates  that
when  the  Korean  war  broke  out  "my  immediate  suggestion"
was  "that we go  up North  and  burn  the  principal  cities,  as we
had  done  in  World  War  II  in  Japan.    I  believed  that  this
would  stop  the  war  very  quickly,  with  minimal  casualties."
(p.  458).   This  is also  his  recipe  for  winning  in  Vietnam.
Le  May  writes  that  for  three  years  in  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff  he had  been  arguing  for  an attack  on the North  (p.  564).
He  was  for  an  ultimatum  warning  Hanoi  "to  draw  in  their
horns  and  stop  their  aggression,  or we're going  to  bomb  them
back  into  the  Stone  Age.    And  we  would  shove  them  back
into  the  Stone  Age with  Air  power  or  Naval power—not  with
ground  forces."   (p.  565).    This  reference  to  the  Stone  Age
is  psychologically  revealing^  for  Le  May  is  a  man  of   brutal
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
t   S
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  29,1965
U.S.  Gives  Up  Its  Stockpile   Weapon  In  Return  for  Aluminum   Price    Rollback
How  Peking  Saved  the  U.S.  From  Defeat  at  the  United  Nations
China's  bid  for   UN   membership  seems  to  have  been  de-
feated  by China  itself.   Were  it  not  for  Peking's  insistence on
a  hard  line  resolution,  there  would  certainly  have  been  a  ma-
jority  instead  of  a  47-47  tie.    It  is  also  possible  that  a  more
tactful  resolution  might  have  changed  the  four  votes  necessary
to  defeat   the  U.S.  motion  declaring  China's   membership  an
"important  question"  requiring  a. two-thirds majority.  It  passed
56  to  49.     Cambodia   led   a  bloc  of   China   supporters   who
wanted  a  simple  resolution  seating  Peking  but  not  specifically
calling  for  the  ouster  of  Formosa.  Actually,  since there  is only
one  China  seat  in  the  UN,  the  effect   would  be  to  oust   For-
mosa.    The  super-Leftist Albanians won  Peking  support  at  the
last  moment  for  the  version  demanding  Formosa's   expulsion.
In  the  voting,  for  the  first  time,  the  U.S.  failed  to  carry  the
Latin  American  bloc.    Chile  defied  Uncle  Sam  and  abstained
on  the  membership   resolution  instead  of  voting    "No."
Why  Africans  Are  Bitter   Over   Rhodesia
When   Cuba   contracted   to  buy  one-third   of   its  oil   needs
from  Russia,  the  world  oil  cartel  imposed   an  embargo  over-
night.    No   country  except  the  Soviet  Union   could   supply  a
drop.    Cuba  is  an  island.    Rhodesia  is  landlocked  and   there-
fore  much  more  easily  shut  off but  the  oil  companies  are  doing
their  best  to  discourage  an  embargo  and  the  new  UN   resolu-
tion  is  vague  on  the  subject.   It  seems  from  Cuba's  experience
that  defying  the  oil  trust  is  a  crime  but  racism  is  a  minor  mis-
demeanor—at  least  as  long  as  it's  white  racism.    When  black
racism  raised  its  head  in  the  Congo,  real,  exaggerated   or  al-
leged,   the  CIA  provided   U.S.  planes   and  anti-Castro   Cuban
mercenary  pilots  to  hunt  down  the  rebels,  missionaries  were
flown out  and  order  restored.  .  .  .
The  U.S.  rolled   back  aluminum  prices  but  to  appease  the
companies  is  agreeing  to  dispose  of  its  remaining  stockpile  at
market  prices  through  the  Big  Three:   Alcoa,   Reynolds  and
Kaiser.    This  means  it  gives  up  its  leverage  in  a  future  price
rise.    It  will  no  longer  be  able  to  threaten  to  put  aluminum
on  the  open  market. This  is what  the  big  producers  have  been
bargaining  for.  .  .  . The  effort  to  make  Chile  rescind  its 2-cent
increase  in  the  price  of  copper  is bound  to  stir ill  feeling  there.
Our  Half-Hearted  Policy  on  Rhodesia
"If  our  government  was  determined  to  apply  econ-
omic  pressures   to  the   extent   we  are   able,   we  would
have   stopped   trade   in   minerals   and   equipment,  the
major  items  exchanged  between  the  U.S.  and Rhodesia.
American   imports   from  Rhodesia  totalled   about   $11
million  last  year;  more  than  half,  chrome  and  asbes-
tos.    About  38%   of  our  chrome  comes  from  Rhodesia
but  we  have  an  adequate  supply  stockpiled.    Exports
to  Rhodesia, on  which  the  government  has  apparently
placed   no   embargo,   amounted  to   $24   million,   about
half  agricultural and  road  machinery."
—George  M.  Houser,  of  the  American  Committee   on
Africa,    Nov.   19  calling   on  the   U.S.   to  bar  all   trade
with  Rhodesia,   to  institute  economic  measures  against
Portugal  and  South  Africa   equivalent  to  any  aid   they
give    Rhodesia,    to   withdraw   recognition   from     both
countries  if  they  recognize  the  rebels  and  to  warn  that
force  will  be  used  if  economic  measures  fail.
The  Chilean  government  has  a  strike  on  its  hands  because  it  is
trying  to  enforce  its  own  guidelines  on  miners'  wages.     In  a
stringent  world   market,  Chile  wants  a  higher   price  to  help
finance  its  plans  to   become   a   refiner   and   fabricator  of   the
metal  instead  of  merely  a  producer  of  the  ore.   .  .  .  We  ap-
plaud  Robert  Kennedy's action  in  turning  down  Castelo  Bran-
co's  invitation to  address  the  cowed  and  purged  Brazilian  Con-
gress  and  for  pointedly  telling  a  Sao Paulo  audience  on  arrival
in  that  country,  "I  believe  in  free  institutions,  free  elections,
freedom  of  protest."    That's  subversive  in  Brazil  today.  .  .  .
Iranians  studying  abroad  have  been  working  desperately  to
save  the  lives  of  two  students  sentenced  to  die  for   supposed
complicity  in  a  plot  to  kill  the  Shah  after  a  trial  foreign  ob-
servers  thought   a  travesty.   For  13  years  Iran  has  been  living
under  a  "state  of  emergency"  in  which  (as  one  exile  described
it)   "a  man  can  suddenly  disappear,  to  be  heard  of  some  ten
years  afterward,  just   because  he   has  made   a  mildly  critical
comment  on  the  prevalent  corruption,  poverty  and  illiteracy."
Readers  can  perform  a  good   deed  for  Christmas  by  writing  a
letter  of  protest   to  the  Iranian  Embassy,  3005  Massachusetts
Avenue,  Washington,   asking   commutation   of   sentence.
Vietcong   Envisage  Free  Elections   in  South  Vietnam  After  U.S.  Withdrawal
"...   a  Vietcong  agent   stressed   American  recognition
of  the  National  Liberation  Front  as  a  prerequisite  to  any
discussions.     Following   that   gesture,   he   said,   the  with-
drawal  of   U.S.   forces  from   Vietnam  could  be   negotiated.
Only  after   U.S.  troops  had  left  the  country,  he  went  on,
could  elections  be  held  to  determine  the  composition  of  a
coalition   government   for   South   Vietnam.     The   Vietcong
official   stated   that   the   Liberation  Front,   itself   composed
of  various  factions,  could  collaborate  with  non-Communist
Saigon    politicians.     But   he   declined   to   specify   which
Cabinet  posts   the   Front   would  claim  in  such  a   coalition.
"Other  sources  indicated, however,  that  the  Vietcong  has
until  now  hesitated  to  label  itself  a  government  lest  it  dis-
courage  possible  deals  with  Saigon  politicians  in  the  future.
Vietcong    leaders    reportedly   believe   that    another   coup
d'etat  in  the  capital  may  uncover  elements   sympathetic  to
their   cause.
" 'We  realize  that  the  prestige  of  the  U.S.  is  at  stake,
and  thus  we  must  have  an  acceptable  solution,'  the   Viet-
cong   official   continued.    'But   the   U.S.   must   also  realize
that  the  people  in  our  liberated  zones  will  not  tolerate  the
presence  of  American  troops  before  a  solution  is  reached.
We   cannot  accept  a  cease-fire,  as   Senator   Mansfield   has
suggested,    because   we   could   not   defend   ourselves.     If
peace  is   established  without  a  guarantee,   it  is   valueless
and  we  may  as  well  continue   the  struggle.    What  is   the
guarantee?     The  withdrawal of   foreign  troops.'
"What   about   North   Vietnamese   troops   in   the   South?
The   answer   was   oblique  and   eva'sive:   'We   cannot   have
foreign   interference  in   our  country,  not   even   by  Hanoi,
which  we  consider  a  foreign  government.    It  is  true  that
all  Vietnamese  recognize  only  one  President,   Ho  Chi  Minh.
But  to  be  politically  realistic,  we  must  solve   South  Viet-
nam's  problem  in  the  South  itself.    Reunification is  for  the
future—perhaps   in   15  or  20  years.'"
—Stanley  Karnow  from   Hong   Kong   ("Washington  Post,
Nov.  19)  reporting   conversations   in  European  and    African
capitals   with  North  Vietnamese   and  Vietcong     spokesmen.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  28,1965
Humphrey's  Moonlight  Ride  With  Negro   Leaders   Proved  Politically   Unromantic
More  Explosion  Than  Planning  in  White  House  Meeting  on  Civil  Rights
Vice-President  Humphrey  invited  Martin Luther King, Clar-
ence  Mitchell  and  several   other  Negro  leaders  for   a  moon-
light  ride  along  the  Potomac  September  21.    The  men  were
to  discuss plans  for  the  mid-November White  House  Confer-
ence  to  "Fulfill  These  Rights"  which  LBJ  had  promised  in  his
June   4  Howard   University   speech.     A   few   days  later,   the
White  House  announced  the  conference  had  been   postponed
until  spring,   1966.     Humphrey,  having  sampled  the  views  of
the  civil  rights  leaders  on  the  way  Washington  was handling
the  new  laws,  decided  that  an  open  conference  would  risk  a
public  relations   disaster.
Padding   the  Guest  List
A  "planning  session"  was  quickly  organized  for  Nov.   17-
18.    The   guest  list  was  delicately  balanced.    Militants  like
John  Lewis  of  SNCC  and   Floyd  McKissick  of  CORE  were
paired  with  scholars  like  Adolph  Berle  and  Leon  Keyserling.
Panelists  arriving  at  the  Washington   Hilton  were  advised  by
conference  officials  that  their  task  was  not  to  seek conclusions
or  make  recommendations.    The  function  of  the  sessions,  they
were  told,  was  solely  to  plan  an  agenda  for  the  spring  meet-
ing.    To   ensure  a   "free   exchange  of   ideas"   the   press  was
barred  from  the  working  rooms.     Information  was  limited  to
briefings  and  plenary  sessions.    Panelists  were  even  requested
not  to  discuss the  meetings with  reporters at  the  numerous re-
ceptions  and  luncheons.
Opening   day,  the  administration's precautions  appeared  to
be  at  least  superficially  successful.    Panelists  joked  about  the
government  sponsored   "old   home   week  for  the  movement."
Reporters  in  search  of  news  seized  on  LBJ's  proposal   for  a
study  of   de  facto   school   segregation   and   an   off-hand   refer-
ence by A.  Philip Randolph  to  a  $100  billion  "Freedom  Budg-
et."     But  beneath  the  convention   atmosphere,   an  undercur-
rent  of   tension   was  evident.    Several  of   the    "background"
papers  commented  on  Washington's   reluctance  to  use  its  full
authority  and  .a  CORE  statement  plainly  derided  the  admin-
istration's  "breakthroughs"   of  the  summer  and  fall  of   1965.
It   said   the   Equal   Employment   Opportunities   Commission,
created  July  2,  had  as  yet  to  file  a  single  order  against  a com-
pany  or  union.  -The  report  complained  that  federal registrars
had  been  sent  to  only  32  of  the  more  than  400  counties  eligi-
ble.    And,  noted  that  despite  the  Office  of  Education's  "guide-
lines"   for   integration,   92.5%   of   Southern   Negro  children
were  still  in  segregated   schools.
By  the  second  morning,  what  the  administration had  hoped
to  avoid  was  plainly  beginning  to  happen.    Panelists  in every
area  comparing  notes  with  colleagues  had  found  the  federal
situation  to  be  worse  than  they  had  imagined.    Proposals  for
family  planning   were  played   down   in  favor  of  declarations
New  Theories  to  Hide  Old  Failures
"It  is   now  fashionable   in  some   circles  to   proclaim
that   the    major    problems   of    giving   to   the   Negro
equality   in   American   society    have   been   solved   and
now  we  must  deal  only  with  the  individual    deficiencies
of   Negroes'  to  make  them   'ready.'    To  mask  the   fact
that   the   economy   has   failed   to   generate   a  sufficient
number  of  new  jobs  we  attribute  the  Negro  unemploy-
ment   rate   of   8.3%    to   the   Negro's   failure   to   train
himself.    To  excuse   the   failures   of   the   public   school
system    we   ascribe    the   Negro's   lack   of   success   in
school   to   the   'fact'   that   he   is   'culturally   deprived'.
To   cover   the   inadequate    supply   of   decent    low-cost
housing   we  invent  the  attribute   of   the   'untenantable'
nature   of   Negro   families.     And   most   recently,   in   a
new   and   all   embracing   canard,   we   hear   about   the
'pathology'  of   the   Negro   family   instead   of   the   sick-
ness   of   American   society.     We   reject   each   of   these
explanations   as  false  and  misleading,  resulting  in   (if
not   actually   designed   for)   the   avoidance   of  the   real
problems.     The   Negro   in   America   continues   to   face
the  double  jeopardy  of  caste  and  class.    The  problems
which   face   us  .  .  are  deep-seated  and  structural  in
nature.    They  demand  bold  and  imaginative   rethinking
and   reshaping    of    many   of   the   institutions   of   our
society.
—CORE  statement,  White  House  conference,  Nov.  17
of   dissatisfaction   with  Washington's   "voluntary   compliance"
policies.     Word   leaked   from   the   education   panel  that   the
group  was  demanding  an  immediate  cut-off  of  funds  to  school
districts with  discriminatory programs.    From  the  voting  panel
came  word  of  a  demand  for  500-600  additional  registrars.
The  strongest  appeal  for  action  came  from  the  panel  on  the
administration   of   justice.    With   the   outspoken   report   on
Southern  law  enforcement prepared  by  the  Civil  Rights  Com-
mission   as  its   basis,   the   group   drafted   a  resolution   urging
Johnson  to  give  his  full  support  to  a  federal  statute  "to  pro-
tect  the  security  of  all  Americans  and   to  replace   segregated
justice."    The  resolution  also  urged  the  President  to  enforce
existing  laws which protect  the  safety  of  Negro  and  white civil
rights  workers  and  to  station  federal  officials  with  the  power
to  make  on  the  spot  arrests  at  the  scenes  of  possible   violence.
The  significance  of  the  conference was  not  in  the  sociologi-
cal  formulae  which   emerged.    Washington  did   not  have   to
be  told  that  fulfillment  of  Negro  rights  will  require  increased
federal  spending   and  improved  job  opportunities.    The   sig-
nificance  of  the  conference  was  the  confrontation  it  produced.
For  the  first  time  the  leaders  of  the  Negro  "establishment"  sat
across  the  table  from  the  top  echelons  of  the  federal  govern-
ment.  What  they  told  them,  in  effect,  was  that  elaborate meet-
ings  and  pious  promises  will  not  earn  the  administration  the
activist  label  it  is so anxious to  get.                                   —P.  O.
The  Big,  Bold,  Brave  FBI  Afraid  It  Might  Get  Hurt  If  It  Defended  Negroes?
"The  Administration  is  not  expected  to  yield  to   growing
pressures   for  a  substantial  increase  in  the  use  of   Federal
police  powers  in  racially  tense  areas   [as   recommended  by
the   Civil   Rights   Commission    and   the   administration    of
justice   panel  at  the  White  House  Civil  Rights   Conference]
.  .  .  Civil  rights  workers  have  long  complained  FBI  agents
stand   by  and   take   notes   while  a   demonstrator    is   being
beaten   .  .  .  Any  effort  to  employ  FBI  agents  in  a  peace-
keeping   role   would   encounter   the   formidable    opposition
of  J.  Edgar   Hoover  .  .  .  Justice   Department   officials   fear
a  situation   where  great  numbers  of  whites  and  local   law
enforcement   officers  might   turn  on  Federal   agents  if  they
stepped   in   and   arrested    persons   harassing   or    harming
demonstrators."                  —New  York  Times,  Nov.  22
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone't  Weekly,  November 29,1965
The  Disillusioning   History  of  "Operation  Strangle"
(Continued  from   Page One)
Stone   Age   mentality.     Strategic  bombing  did   indeed  level
North  Korea's  factories  and  destroy  its  cities.    But  it  neither
shortened  the  war  nor  brought  victory.
We  Won't  Shorten  The  War  By  Widening It
Strategic  bombing  began  on  Aug. 10,  1950, a  month  after
the  war's outbreak  and  was completed  on  Sept.  26.    "In  little
more  than  a  month,"   says  the   official   Ait   Force  History  of
its  role in  the Korean war,*  "the FEAF  (Far  East  Air  Forces)
Bomber  command had  neutralized  all  but  one  strategic  bomb-
ing  objective  contributing  support  to  the  North  Korean Peo-
ple's  Army,"  and  that  was  some  naval  oil  storage  tanks  at
Rashin,  too  close  to  the  Russian  border  to  be  bombed  without
risk.    But  though  we  thus  pushed  North  Korea  "back  to  the
Stone  Age," the  war  went  on  for  three  more  years  and  we
were  pushed  out  of  North  Korea  and  back  behind  the  38th
parallel.    It  was  the  first  war  in  our  history  we  did  not win,
despite  our   crushing   aerial   superiority   and   savagery.    Yet
Le  May  is  still  peddling  the  same  terrible  nostrums.
In North  Vietnam  we  began  with  interdiction  bombing  and
are being  urged  to  go on  to strategic  bombing.    In  the  Korean
war,  after  we  exhausted  the  targets  for  strategic  bombing,  we
went  on  to  interdiction,  i.e. the  bombing  of  supply  lines,  rail
and  road.    It  is  instructive  to  go  back  and  look  at  the   official
U.S.   Air   Force  history  and   read   the   exaggerated   publicity
with  which  the  Air  Force  launched  its  flamboyantly  named
"Operation  Strangle"  and  "Operation  Saturate"  against enemy
supply.    It  turned  out  later  that  "only  7%  of  bombs  dropped
by  Thunderjets  were  cutting  the  enemy's  railway  tracks"   (p.
412).    One  B-26  made  five  separate  attacks  with   500-pound
bombs  at  night  "on  a  well  lighted  South  Korean  motor  pool"
and  claimed  to  have  destroyed  six  trucks  but  it  later  turned
out  that  the  raid  had  only  punctured  the  tires  on  two-jeeps
(footnote,  p. 423).   We  soon  found,  in the words of  one Air
Force  officer,  that  "we  were trading B-26s  for  trucks  in  a  most
uneconomical  manner"   (p.  425).  In  July,  1951,  the  month
the  war  began,  the  Communists  fired  only  about  8,000  rounds
The Truth Catches Up Dept.
The  bombings  of   North  Vietnam   are   supposed   to
have   improved   morale  among  the   South  Vietnamese
forces,  and  cut  the  rate  of  desertions.    Now  an  AP
dispatch   from   Saigon   (Washington  Star,   Nov.   22)
reports  that  the  number  of  these  deserters  has  been
steadily  rising.   It  says  there  were  87,000  in  the  first
ten   months  of   this  year   as   against   72,000   in 1964.
"The  desertion  rate  is  highest  in  the  Popular  Forces,"
the  AP  said,   "particularly   in  contested   areas   .  .  .
When  the  Viet  Cong  move  into  a  village,  mass deser-
tions   for   long   periods   are   not   uncommon."
Only   a   few   weeks   ago   the   Defense   Department
denied  a  Washington  Post  story  (Nov. 4)  that  war-
plane  losses  over  North  Vietnam  were running  slightly
under  7  per  1,000 sorties  or  twice  the  loss  rate  in  the
Korean  war.   It  said  the  rate  was  only  3.2  per  1,000.
Now  Hanson  Baldwin  (New  York  Times  from  Saigon
Nov.  22)  says  the  Air  Force  has  flown  about  9,320
sorties  over   North  Vietnam  and  the   Navy   aircraft
"about  the  same  number."   He  said  total  plane  losses
were  141.  This   figures   out  to   7.5  per  1,000 sorties.
The  Defense  Department  refuses  to  deny  or   confirm
hia   figures.
* The  U.S. Air  Force  in  Korea,  by  Futrell,  Moseley  and
Simpaon  (Duell,  Sloan  and  Pierce,  1961),  p. 184.
of  artillery  and  mortar  but  10  months  later,  despite  "Opera-
tion  Strangle,"  they  were  able  in  May, 1952, to  direct  some
102,000   rounds  against   United   Nations   positions.     By  the
end  of  the  war  they  had  even  built  up  enough  surplus  stocks
to  launch an  offensive  (p.  435).    Surveillance  studies  showed
"the  Reds fixed rail  cuts in  from  two to six hours,  made  bridge
repairs  in  from  two  to  four  days"  and  soon  built  up  enough
anti-aircraft   guns   "to   take  an   unacceptable   toll   of   FEAF
planes  in  Korea."  (p. 437).
The  delusions  that  failed  in  Korea  are  not  going  to  win  in
Vietnam.    Indeed  we  would  do  far  better  to  call  off the  raids
on  the  North  as  a  first  step  toward  negotiation  and  stop  the
saturation  bombing of  the  South  as a first step  to winning back
some  of  its  people.   We  salute  the  New  York  Times  for  ad-
vocating  this  course.    The  Nixon-Le  May route  can  only  lead
by  extension  to  what  Herblock  in  a  brilliant  cartoon  Nov. 23
called  "Total  Peace  Through  Total  Victory  Through  Total
World  Blowup."      Dee  rejected  Nixon's  views  in  1954.   We
hope  Johnson  won't  accept  them  in 1966.
We'll  Be Glodto Send A  Sample  Copy of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped .Addressed  Envelope
I. F. Stone's Weekly5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
11/29/66
For  the  enclosed  |5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ........................................,JBone............State....................
For  $5.35 extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Ntbratlca  Av».,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
t   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Pontage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Publiahed  every   Monday  except  In  August,  the  last  week   in  December  and  the
first  week  In  January  and  Bl-Weekly  during  July  at  6618 Nebraska  Ave..   "J.W..  Washington.  D.  C.   An  Independent  wet&l/  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:   $5  tn  the  U.S.;   56  in   Canada:   *10   elsewhere.    Air   Jtall   rates:
(15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Itj;.t«I.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED