I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965oct18.pdf

============================================================

How  Civil Rights  Worl&rs  Were  Tortured  in Natcbez, P.  2
No Sooner Had  Joseph  Alsop  Announced
"The  grimmest  aspect  of  it  is  that  bombers  and- fighters,
coming  so  swiftly  to  the  rescue  of  almost  any  government
post  that  the  VC  threaten,  repeatedly  transform  well-laid,
well-executed  plans  for  sudden  surprise  attacks  into  perfect
massacres  of  the  attackers."
—Alsop  from  Saigon in N.Y.  Herald-Tribune  Oct. 6.
"A Viet Cong jungle  ambush yesterday  killed or  wounded
every   member  of   a   U.S.  1st  Division  Infantry  squad  of
about  12 men returning  from  a  night  patrol  15 miles north-
east  of  Saigon.   Another  American  patrol  tried  to  rescue
That Ambushes Were A Thing of  the  Past
the   ambushed   outfit.     But  by   the   time   it   reached   the
scene  the  Communists  had  escaped."
—Same Paper, Same  Day.
"Saigon—Vietcong  guerrillas  wiped  out  the  entire   lead
patrol  of  an  American  paratrooper  company  that  walked
into  an  ambush  about  30  miles  north  of  here   today.   The
company  commander was  wounded  and  dead  and  wounded
were  strewn  all  over  the  road.   It  was  the  third  guerrilla
ambush  of  American troops  within  four  days  io  the  jungle
covered  area."       —Reuters in Washington Poet, Oct. 11.
IR  Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIII,  NO.  34
OCTOBER  18,  1965
'«'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
From  the  Black  Man's Point  of  View
From  the  black  man's  point  of  view,  the  world  picture  is
not  a  pleasant   one.    In  England,   despite  the  promise   of  a
multi-racial  Commonwealth,   the  unwelcome  sign   is  up   for
colored  peoples.   The  Labor  Party,  long  the  champion  of  the
colored   man  and   of   anti-colonialism,   has   passed   the   first
legislation  restricting  colored  immigration,  and  done  so  under
clear   pressure   from   white   prejudice.     While   in   England
colored  men  are  not  wanted  even  in  a  precarious  minority
status,  white  minorities  still  rule  the  south  of  Africa.    Rho-
desia  is  following   the  path  of  South   Africa,  which  means
keeping   the   black  man   an   outcast   in   his   own   Continent.
Portugal  holds  vast  neighboring  territories  on  the  same  basis.
Colonialism  Makes  A Come-Back
This  was  supposed   to  be  the  century  that  would  see  the
end  of  colonialism.    The  five  centuries  since  the  discovery  of
America  were  a  period  during  which  white  men,  thanks  to
superior  firepower  and  technology,  disrupted  and   plundered
colored  men's  empires  and  societies  from  Mexico  and   Peru
to  India  and  China.    In  this  century  the  white   Europeans,
weakened  by two  civil  wars  which  we  call  World  Wars,  have
been   forced  to  give  up  most  of  their   colonial  possessions.
But  now  again   superior  firepower  and   technology   seem   to
be   giving   the   white   presence   in   Asia,   Africa   and   Latin
America  a  comeback.    In  this  perspective,   the  vast   deploy-
ment  of  firepower  in  Vietnam  is  a  foretaste  of  what  American
capitalism  can  do  wherever  its  power  is  challenged.    Already
in  Peru,  where  2,000,000  whites  rule  and  exploit  12,000,000
miserable  mestizoes  and  Indians,  the  helicopters   and  napalm
we  supply  the  Latin  military  have  been   used   to  burn   up
rebellious   Indian   mountain   villages   and   guerrillas.     Our
junior  partner,  Britain,  is  imposing   naked  military  rule  on
Aden  at  the  tip  of'the  Arabian  peninsula  in  order  to  main-
tain  a  "lifeline  of  empire"  across  the  Indian  Ocean  to  Singa-
pore.    We  let  the  British  know  that  the  price  of  dollar  aid
for  the  pound  is that  Britain  shall  hold  up  its  end  of  keeping
these  vast  waters  a  white  imperialist   sea.
A  neo-colonialist  American  Century  is  taking  shape.     The
signs  of  it  are  clear  in  Latin  America.    There  our  alliance
with  the  Brazilian  military is  seen  as  a  menace  by  democratic
How  Africans  Feel  About  Rhodesia
"Our   memory is  not  so  short  as  to  make us oblivions
to  happenings  in  Kenya before  our  independence.   We
had  a  strong  settler  minority  government  in   power.
Our  repeated  efforts  for  representation  in  the  Govern-
ment  and  demands  for   independence  were  met   with
nothing  but  evasions.   Constitutional  niceties  and  legal
trivialities  were  the  stock  official  answer  of  the  United
Kingdom  Government  for  many  years.    When  at  last
we  were  forced  to  take  up  arms  against  the  settler
government  of  the  day,  the  United  Kingdom  Govern-
ment  acted  with  haste  and  declared  a  state  of  emer-
gency.    Thousands   of   British   troops   were   flown   to
Kenya  to  maintain  the  so-called  law  and  order.    This
time  it  was  to  enforce  "law  and order"  among  a  rebel-
lious    African    population.     Why   does    the   British
government   hesitate   to   maintain   "law   and   order"
among    the    rebellions    white    settler    minority    In
Rhodesia?"
—Murumbi  (Kenya)  UN  General Assembly, Oct. 7.
elements.    The  recent  gubernatorial   elections  were  a  defeat
for   the  military  and  for   the   banker-led   conservatives   who
sought fiscal stability  at  the  expense of  Brazil's  poorer  classes.
The  military  must now move with  our help  to  more  repressive
measures  or  see  the  return  of  reformist  elements   to  power.
The  Brazilian  military  are  our  only  major  ally  in  our  drive
for  an  inter-American  force  which  can  be  used, elsewhere  as
it  was in  the  Dominican  Republic.    The  extent  to  which  this
is  feared  is  little  realized  in  our  own  country.    In  Santiago,
Chile,  last  week  the  Latin   American  Parliament,    composed
of   legislators   from  Argentina,   Brazil,   Colombia,  Chile,  El
Salvador,  Uruguay  and  Peru,  rejected  the  Selden   resolution
thesis  that  we  have  a  right  to  intervene  in  the   hemisphere
against  governments   we  consider  too   Leftist.    This   means
the  attempt  to  perpetuate   the  privileged   position  of   small
white   oligarchies   and   foreign   white   investors   over   Negro
and  Indian  mixed  peoples,  hardly  risen  above  serfdom.
At  home  the  black  man  must  wonder  why  he  must   be
sent  to  safeguard  the  right  of  self-determination  in  Vietnam.
There  are  jungles   closer   home.    The   South  has   become  a
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
I 3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 18,  1965
Two  New  Incidents  Show  That  When  It  Comes  to  Subverting  Our  Free  Institutions  —
The FBI and the Cl A Do A Better Job Than Any Soviet "Disinformation" Bureau
Admiral  Wm.  F.  Raborn,  the  new  head  of   the  CIA,  has
been  making  the  rounds  on  Capitol  Hill,  trying  to   discourage
proposals  to  establish  a  Congressional  watchdog  committee  to
supervise  CIA  activities.    He  has  taken  Congressional  critics
to  lunch  and   sought  to  represent  criticism  of  the   CIA   and
the  FBI  as  a  Communist  plot.    He  has  circulated  a  memor-
andum   purporting   to  show   that   since   1948   a  major   "dis-
information"   campaign  has  been   launched   from   Moscow   to
discredit   U.S.   intelligence   agencies.     The   memorandum,   at
first  confidential,  was  finally  put  in  the  Congressional   Record
Sept.   28  by  Congressman   Price   (D.   111.)  at  p.   24477.
McCarthy   Style  Selected  Quotation
The   major   objectives  of   this   supposed    campaign   are   to
"destroy   the   confidence  of   the   Congress   and   the   American
public    in   U.S.    personnel    and.  agencies   engaged   in   anti-
Communist  and  cold  war  activity,"  "to  undermine   American
prestige   and   democratic  institutions"  and   to   "sow    distrust"
of  the  U.S.  in  Latin  America and  "the  new  nations  of  Africa
and   Asia."     The   memorandum   is  rubbish   and   reflects   the
paranoia  characteristic  of   all  spy  systems,  our  own   included.
It   is  intended   to   smear  and   silence   critics.    It   singles   out
critical   books   like   "The    Invisible   Government"    by  David
Wise  and  Thomas   B.  Ross  and  links  them  with  Soviet  propa-
ganda   by  McCarthy-style  selected  quotation.  -  The   memoran-
dum   claims  that   Moscow    concocts   forgeries   to   smear   the
CIA  and  the  FBI.    For  all  we  know  maybe  it  does.    But  can
anything    Moscow     concocts    equal    what    our    intelligence
agencies  themselves  do  "to  undermine  .  .  .  American  institu-
tions?"    We  cite  two  new   examples:
In  Federal  Court  in  New  York  City last  week  a  San  Fran-
cisco  schoolteacher,  Richard  D.   Rieman,   was  summoned   by
the  government  as  a  witness  in  its  prosecution  of  three  young
radicals—Levi  Laub,   Stefan  Morisot   and   Anatol   Schlosser—
for   arranging  a  student  trip  to  Cuba  in   1963   in  defiance  of
the   State  Department's   travel   ban.     He   testified  that   as  a
student   at  San  Francisco  State  College,  he  was  paid  by  the
FBI  to  spy  on  campus  organizations and  activities.    In   court
he  said  he  renounced   these  past  activities  and   declared   "if
there   has   been   any  wrongdoing,   it   has   been   the   govern-
ment's."     Since  he,   too,   is  subject  to  prosecution   for   going
to  Cuba,  he  could  have  refused  to  testify   against  the  others
on  Fifth  amendment  grounds.    Instead  he  testified  fully  while
claiming  he  repented  his  activities as  an  informer!    Such  are
the   corkscrew  characters  the   FBI   recruits.    The   lesson  this
affair   teaches  on  every  campus  is  an  ugly  one—that  beneath
the  surface  of  a  supposedly  free  society  is  an  underworld   of
surveillance   and   corruption.     The   Czarist   police   spied   on
students  this  way.    So  does   the  Soviet  police.    And   so   does
the  FBI.    We  cannot  imagine  anything more  truly  subversive
of  faith  in  free  institutions  than  these  police  state   practices.
In   the  same  category   of   the   truly  subversive  is  the  Iron
Curtain  we  operate   to  keep   citizens  in,  and   visitors  out,  if
our   intelligence  agencies   think   contamination   of   ideas  may
occur.    What   Soviet   canards  could   hurt   us  more   in  Latin
America  and  the  new  countries  of  Asia  and  Africa  than  this
travel  ban  trial  itself?
Or  what  happened   the  same  week  to  Dr.   Cheddi   Jagan.
The   former  Prime  Minister  of   British   Guiana   spoke   at   a
teach-in  at  Toronto  last  week-end  and  was  supposed   to  speak
at   the   Berkeley  teach-in   Oct.    15-16.     Dr.   Jagan   told   an'
American   student   in   British   Guiana   last   summer   he   was
willing  to  come  here   in  the  Fall  for  public  speeches   before
his  visa  expired  in  December.     On  Sept.   23  he  accepted   the
Berkeley   invitation  and   arranged   to  fly  from   Canada   after
the  Toronto  teach-in.    On  Oct.   1  Dr.  Jagan   cabled   that  his
visa  had  been  cancelled.   When  the  Vietnam  Day  Committee
protested,   it  ran   into  the  usual  Kafkaesque   fog.     State   De-
partment  denied   it  had   cancelled   the  visa.    It  said   the  visa
had  expired  automatically when  Dr.  Jagan  left   office   because
it  was  a  diplomatic  visa.   When  Dr.  Jagan  applied  for  a  new
visa,   he   found   that  our   intelligence  agencies   classified   him
as  a  subversive under  the  Walter  McCarran   Act,  and  that  he
therefore  could  not  be  admitted without  special  waiver,  which
might  take  up  to  six  months  to  obtain.    So  Dr.  Jagan   could
speak  in  Canada  but  not  in  'the  U.S.    The   affair   is  calculated
to  provoke   cynical  comment   in   Canada   and   Latin   America
on   the  quality  of   our   free   institutions.    What   "disinforma-
tion"    bureau   in   Moscow    could    match    these    self-inflicted
black  eyes?
The  Sadistic  Cruelties  Inflicted  on  Arrested  Demonstrators  in  Natchez,  Miss.
Natchez,  Miss.—Within  the  past  five  days,  close  to  500
people     have    been     arrested     in     Natchez,     Mississippi.
Although   news   of   the   arrests   received   wide   circulation,
the  brutalities   which  the  prisoners  were   forced  to  endure
during   their   stay   in   Parchman   State   Penitentiary   have
until  now  been  kept  secret.
James    Herman     Johnson,    20-year-old     Alcorn    College
junior,  states  that  upon  arrival  at  Parchman,  he  was  forced
to  disrobe  and  to  allow   his   private  parts  to  be  examined
by   a   police   officer.     Johnson   was   then   pulled   up  by   his
beard  so  forcefully  that  some  of  the  beard  came  off  in  the
policeman's   hand.
Phil   Latsansky,   24-year-old   white   FDP   volunteer   from
Seattle,  Washington,  gave  this  report:  "After  our  arrival
at  Parchman,   we  were  admitted  to  the  maximum  security
building   where  we  were  stripped  of  all  our  clothing.    Each
of   us  was   then   forced   to  swallow   approximately  8  ounces
of   laxative.      Naked,    we   were   herded   into   2-man   cells,
with   concrete   floors   and   steel   bunks   minus   mattresses.
The   windows   directly   opposite   our  cells   were   wide   open
and  the   air  conditioning  fans   were  on.    The  temperature
dropped   to  the   low  40's  that  evening.    We  were  kept  in
this   condition    for   approximately   38  hours.
Several   hours  later   we  were  given  our  underwear,   the
only   clothing   any   of   us   had  throughout   our  stay.    The
prison  guards  were  always  insulting  and  constantly  threat-
ening.     Several   people   were   unable   to   bear   the   intense
cold   and   broke   down  into  intense   fits   of   screaming   and
crying.    The  prison  doctor  arrived   several  hours  after   the
victims  were  stricken  and  treated  them  rudely.    In  spite
of  the  fact  that  we  were  all  given  heavy  doses,  we  were
given  a  sparse   supply   of   toilet   paper.    The  only   reason
for   sending   us   to   Parchman    was   the   obviously   sadistic
one   of   degrading    and   dehumanizing   us.     We   were    con-
stantly   shivering   from   the   intense   cold.
—Press  Release from  SNCC  in Natchez,  Oct.  5.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  IS,  1965
On  the  Timid  Initiatives  in  Robert  Kennedy's  New  Foreign  Policy   Speech
The  Dogmas  of  the  China  Lobby  Are  Stronger  Than  the  Voice  of  Rome
Senator    Robert    Kennedy's    speech    last    Wednesday    on
foreign   policy  begins   to   thaw   a   little   some   of   the   frozen
postures  of  U.S.  policy.    But  it  is  disappointing  that  a  young
Senator,   seeking   to   establish  himself   as  a  fresh   and   liberal
voice  in  the  field  of  foreign  policy,  is  so  reluctant  to   speak
plainly.    One  wry  sidelight  is  provided  by  his  proposal  that
we  support   "family  planning"   for  India.    The   Senator  was
not   afraid   to  differ   with  the  Pope  on  birth  control,   but   he
doesn't   have  the  nerve  to  agree  with   the  Pope's  recent  plea
that   UN   membership   be   extended   to   all   the   nations   now
outside  it.    This  was  interpreted,  without   denial,  as  support
for   China's  admission.    But  Kennedy   went   no  farther  than
gingerly  to  suggest  that  we  "explore  new  avenues  of  approach
to  the  question   of  Communist  China"   and   invite  Peking   to
join  in  the  disarmament  talks.    It  is  striking  that  not  a  single
American   Roman   Catholic   voice   of   any   weight   has   dared
support  the  Pope  on  this  issue,  or  even  discuss  what  he  said.
The  dogmas  of  our  China  Lobby  seem  to  be  more   sacrosanct
than  the  voice  of   Rome.
Time  to  Call  A  Fraud  A   Fraud
Reluctance  to  speak  plainly,  was  most  evident  in  the  most
important  part  of  the  speech,   which   dealt  with  nuclear   pro-
liferation.     The   obstacle   is   our   attempt   to   get   the   Soviet
Union   to   sign   a   treaty   against   nuclear   proliferation   while
giving   the   Germans   a  finger  on   the   nuclear   trigger.     The
Germans  want   this,  and   the  Russians  fear   it,  for   the   same
reason:   both   see  it  as  a  first  step  toward   making   Germany
a  nuclear  power.     Kennedy  suggests  that  all  the  nations  con-
cerned    "rethink    their     positions."
This  is  all  to  the  good,  but  it  would  be  even  better  if  the
Senator  talked  frankly.    The  U.S.   treaty  is  a  fraud.    It  is  a
fraud   on   the   Germans   as  well   as   the   Russians   because   it
provides  for  something  no  U.S.   Senate  is  ever  likely  to   agree
to.    There  is  not  space  here  to  go  into  the  intricacies  of  this
tricky   treaty.    But   by  its  terms   the   only   way  the   Germans
could  get  what  they  want  is  if  we  or  the  British  or  the  French
agreed   to   merge   nuclear   forces   with   a   European    force   in
which   Germany  participated  and  give  up  any  veto   over   the
use  of  the  nuclear  weapon.    No   U.S.   Senate  would   ever  give
up  control  over  such  life-and-death  decisions  for  this   country.
The  British  and  the  French   are  no  more  disposed  to  do  so.
We   only  whet   German   appetite   with   something   we   would
Speaking  of  Inhumanity
"Man,  though  he  may  be  accused  of  inhumanity  by
waging  war,  has  nevertheless   sought   throughout   his-
tory  to  establish  certain  rules  of  conduct  which  would
distinguish  him  from   the  beast.     The  prevailing  code
is    incorporated   in   the    Geneva   Convention.     North
Vietnam,  a  party  to  this  convention,   has  shamelessly
and   publicly   violated   it   by   executing   two   more   uni-
formed   American   soldiers.     Its    conduct   once    more
reveals  the  ugly nature of  the  enemy."
—N.  Y.  Herald  Tribune, Sept.  29.
"We  just   rode  Nuongs.     You  can  tell   that   by   the
wire  here,"  he  said.    'Why?'  he  was   asked.     Nuongs
are  Chinese  mercenaries  from  Formosa.     A   battalion
of  them  are  in  Vietnam,  collecting  good  salaries  fight-
ing   for  the  Saigon  government.    One  of   them   works
as  a  guard  at  the  United  States  embassy   in   Saigon.
'They   always  want   the   wire  for   the   prisoners,'   the
kid  said,  'Don't  you  know  that?     They  get   a  VC  and
make   him  hold  his   hands  against   his   cheeks.     Then
they  take  this  wire  and  run  it  through  the  one  hand
and  right  through  his  cheek  and  into  his  mouth.    Then
they   pull   the   wire  out   through  the   other   cheek  and
stick  it  through  the  other  hand.   They  knot  both  ends
around   sticks.     You  never  seen   them  with   prisoners
like  that?    Oh, you  ought  to  see  how  quiet  them  gooks
sit   in   a   helicopter  when   we   get   them   wrapped  up
like   that."
—Jimmy  Breslin, Danang, opposite  page, same  day.
never  give  them anyway.
Kennedy   is  fond  of  using  urgent  quotations  from  the  late
President,   his  brother,   but   his  own  proposals   fall  far   short
of  the  fresh  thinking  required.    In  discussing  the  need  for  a
treaty  to  ban  all  underground  tests,  he  sticks  to  the  conven-
tional    State    Department    position   on    inspections,   though
technological   progress   has  made   detection  possible  down   to
magnitudes  too  small  to  be  of  any  military  significance.     The
main   element   missing   in   the   speech,   which   ranges  widely
but  timidly  over  many  questions,  is  Vietnam.    There  can  be
no  new  approaches  to  Peking,  no  new  agreement  with  Mos-
cow,   while   we   humiliate  both   by   slowly   bombing   one   of
their  satellites  to  pieces.     Here,   too,  he  did  not  dare  follow
the  Pope's  plea   that   all  human   quarrels  be  settled   "not   by
violence,   not   by  war."     Even   our   devout   seem   more   awed
by  the  B-52  than  the   Cross.
How  We  Shot  A  Loyal Deaf  Mute  Boy  And
"Saigon—However  well  the  war  is  going  at  the  moment,
the  American  high  command  seems  unable  to  speak   with
candor   on  battle   activity,  even   after   the   battle   is   over.
"In  a  routine  resupply  of   a  company  by  two   armored
tractors   carrying   ten   men,   the   first   Amtrac  ran  over   a
Vietcong  mine  and  blew  up.    Of  the  four  men  on  the  lead
Amtrac,  one  burned  to  death  in  the  resulting  fire  and  the
other   three   were  burned  or   wounded.    In   retrieving   the
burned   ones   from   the   Amtrac,   the   crew   of   the   second
Amtrac   and   a   handful  of   other   Marines   were   clustered
together.    And  a  second  mine  was  detonated  electrically by
a  lurking Vietcong.    Pour  more  Marines  were  wounded .  .  .
But  the  action  was  not  even  in  the   Marine  Headquarters
nightly   communique  to   the   press.     It   was   added   in   a
supplementary   paragraph   only   after   this   correspondent,
Then  Listed  Him  As  A  Captured  Viet  Cong
having  witnessed  the  incident,  complained.   In  the  belated
codicil,   casualties   were   described   as   light.     Eight   men
dead  or  wounded  out  of   about  15  Marines  involved!  .  .  .
"Even  more  evasive  in  the  same  communique  was   this
item:  'One  Vietcong  was  captured  five  miles  southeast   of
Danang   late   today    (Sept.   16).     After   two   attempts   to
escape,  a  Marine  shot  him  in  the  leg.    He  was  evacuated
and   given  military   aid.'    Fact   is,  this  is   not  the   version
given  to   me  by  the  captain  in  charge  of   intelligence   for
the   Marine  unit  involved.   The  village  chief—the   govern-
ment   representative   whom   the   Marines   were   guarding
against  Vietcong  assassination—identified  the  boy  after  the
shooting  as   not  a  Vietcong.    He  was  a  deaf-mute  son  of
a  loyal  village couple."
—Jack  Foisie, Los  Angeles  Times, Oct.  3.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 18,1965
HEW  and  Justice Department  Dragging  Their  Heels  on  Equal  Rights
(Continued  from  Page.One)
jungle  in  which  the  .Negro  and  his  white  sympathizers  are
fair  game  for  any white hunter.   The  Haynesville,  Ala.,  trial
in   which  the   slayer  of   Jonathan  Daniels   was  acquitted   is
only  the   latest   in  such  denials  of   justice.    More   offensive
than   the   crass   injustice   was  the   complacency  of   Attorney
General  Katzenbach  in  commenting  on  the  acquittal,  "This
is  die  price  you have  to  pay  for  the  jury  system,  but  I  don't
think  it  is  too  high  a  price  to  pay.';
:
;  The  jury  system  is  sup-
posed  to  represent  the  community.   These  lily-white  Southern
juries  merely  represent  the  white  supremacists.     More  than
75%  of  the  people  in  Lowndes  County,  where  the  trial  took
place,  are  Negroes,  but  Negroes  rarely  serve  on  juries  there.
How  can  the  Attorney  General  be  so  smug?
Katzenbach's  Reluctant  Registrars
It   was  not   surprising   to   find   that   Katzenbach  was  the
target  of  angry  criticism  at  the  long  promised  hearing  before
the   "Special   Equal   Rights   Committee"   of   the   Democratic
National  Committee  here  a  week  ago.    Every  Negro   group
from  the  Urban  League  on  the  right  to  the  MFDP  on  the
left   agreed   for   once—in   criticizing   die  Attorney  General's
reluctance  to  send  Federal  registrars  into  die  South.    Clarence
Mitchell  of  the  NAACP  complained  that  he  had   personally
sent  more  than  500  voter  registration  complaints  to  Katzen-
bach  in  die  past  two  months  with  little  result.    Though  die
necessary  number   of   complaints   has   been   filed   from   half
of   Mississippi's   82  counties,   registrars   have  been  sent  only
to  nine.    Joseph  L.  Rauh,  Jr.,  of  ADA,  himself   a  member
of   the   hearing   committee,   told    reporters    afterward   that
Katzenbach   is   opposed   to   Federal   registrars   on   principle.
"He  was  dragged  in  kicking  and  screaming  to  the  acceptance
of   registrars,"  Rauh  said.    Though   their   appointment   was
advocated  by  the  Civil  Rights  Commission  as  early  as  I960,
Justice  Department  held  out  against  ^hem  until  the  murder
of  Mrs.  Viola  Liuzzo  left  it  no  choice.
The   Justice  Department   is  dragging   its  heels  on   voter
registrars  while  the  Department   of   Health,   Education   and
Welfare  is dragging  its  heels  on the  power  given  it  to  enforce
school   desegregation   by  cutting   off  school   funds.    Where
Only  in   America
"Birmingham,    Ala.—A  traffic   accident   in   which   a
Negro  man was  left  at  the  scene  by a  white   ambulance
driver  has  prompted  a  Birmingham   City  Council  vote
to  strike  a  race  clause  from  city  ambulance  contracts
coming   up   for   renewal   Tuesday.     Officials   said   the
driver,  Owen  Tellett,  refused  to  take  the  victim,  Joe
Brace,  63,  a  Negro,  to  a  hospital  after   Brace's  legs
were  severed   in   an   automobile   accident   Wednesday.
Brace  died  later.   The  manager  of  the  ambulance  ser-
vice,  Ed  Entmett,  said  Tollett  had  been  fired  because
of   the   incident.    The  clause   the   council   decided   to
strike   from   the  new  contracts  states  that  the  white
ambulance  service  is  not  obligated  to  pick  up  Negroes.
A  contract  with  a  Negro  ambulance  service  stated  it
was  not  obligated  to  pick  op  whites."
—Though  this  was  an  AP  dispatch  the  only   paper
in  which  we  saw  it  was  the  York,  Pa.,  Gazette.   Most
papers  didn't   seem  to  think  it  newsworthy.
white  racists  in  die  North,  as  in  Chicago,  put  on  the  heat,
die  Department   quickly  caves  in.    But  all   over  die  Soudi
it  has  ignored  Negro  protests  and  accepted  not  only  "token-
ism"  but  "freedom  of  choice"  plans that  continue  segregation.
This  is what  lies  behind  die  Crawfordsville,  Georgia,  demon-
strations.    There  die  whites  have  "freedom   of   choice"   to
attend  all-white  schools  outside  die  county while  die  Negroes
have  "freedom  of  choice"  to  go  on  attending  rundown  Negro
schools.    But  HEW  is  still   "studying"  die  situation.    The
Department   announced  with  fanfare  that  all  but  80  of  die
5,000   Soudiern   school   districts   had   begun    desegregation.
But  a  detailed  study  by  SNCC  shows  diat  92%  of  all  Negro
children  in  die  11  Southern  States  are  still  attending  segre-
gated  schools.    Negroes   are  being  shot  at,  losing  jobs  and
beaten  up  for  trying  to  attend  white  schools,  as  they  are  for
trying  to  register,  yet  somehow  HEW  and  Justice  do  little
more   than   "study"   these   situations.    The   black   man  can
study,   too.     He  knows   from   a  century  of   experience   die
capacity  of  white  supremacists  to  nullify  equal  rights   legis-
lation.     A  volcanic  bitterness  is  building  up.    U.S.   troops,
instead  of  being  in  Vietnam,  ought  to  be  protecting   Negroes
trying  to  register   and  to   attend   integrated   schools.     This
would  really  be  enforcing  self-determination.
In  Reply  to  Friendly  Inquirie*:  Or.  Samuel  ROMH'*  mobilization  «f  stapes  operation  miraculously  restored  hearing  in  my  left  ear  al  it  did
last  year  ta  my    right.—IFS
L F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)  •   snb  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................••...••—....»
Street
City   .........
For  the  enclosed  $5  tend  »  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ....................................................
10/18/W
Street
Ctty
For  $5.35  extra  send  L  F.  Stone's  The  Bmnted  tittle*
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
LR Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F   Stone'i  Weekly     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December  and  the
fir^^         InJaiuaryTnd  BUWeekly  duringJuly  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..   Wasbinrfon   p.   C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited
byL  F" Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   *5   in   the   U.S.;    $6  in   Canada;   $10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
SIS  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED