I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965nov08.pdf

============================================================

The  Real  Error  in  That  Erroneous  Village  Bombing, P.  2
Which  of  These  Expresses  the  "Morally,  Mentally   and  Emotionally"  Immature View?
"DaNang,    South    Vietnam—FBI    Director    J.    Edgar
Hoover   has   assured  a   fighting   young   Marine  lieutenant
here  that  anti-Vietnam  demonstrators  in   the   U.S.  repre-
sent  a  minority   'for   the  most   part  composed  of   halfway
citizens  who  are  neither  morally,  mentally  nor emotionally
mature.    This  is   true   whether  the   demonstrator  be   the
college  professor  or  the  beatnik.'"
—Scripps-Howard   Newspapers,   Nov.   1.
"The     current   anti-Vietnam  war   demonstrations  are   a
'healthy    political   outgrowth   of    ferment*   that   the   late
President   Kennedy   'stirred   up',   former   presidential  aide
and   author   Theodore   C.  Sorensen   told   1000  students   at
Rosary  College,  River  Forest.     'And  I  would   rather  have
this  kind of  ferment  on  our  campuses  than  having  students
interested  only   in  football,   panty  raids  and  parties.'"
—Chicago  Daily  News,  Oct. 29.
"Teachers  and  students  are  citizens,  are  entitled   to  the
same  freedom  of  expression  as  other  citizens  .  .  .  Beyond
their  role  as  citizens,  the  professor   and  the  student  have
a  special  function,  recognized  in  the  concept  of  academic
freedom,  to  pursue  truth  and  to  express  it  to.the  best  of
their  ability  .  .  .  Free  discussion  and full  debate  of  domes-
tic  and  foreign  issues   are  crucial  to  the  decision-making
processes  in  a  democratic  society  and  may  be  expected  to
contribute   to   an  exploration  of   viable  options   of   public
policy."-American  Asso.  of   University   Professors,   Oct.  29.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  37
NOVEMBER  8,  1965
"»       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
Will  Brazil  Some Day  Be Our  Algeria?
The  Washington  Post  is  more  and  more  losing  its  editorial
independence  under  pressure  from  the  White  House  and  the
State  Department.     A  scandalous  example  of  what  this  can
do  to  a  liberal  newspaper   was  its  editorial   Oct.   29  on   the
military  takeover  in  Brazil.    The  less  liberal  but  more  inde-
pendent  Baltimore  Sun   Oct.   31  commented  with   acidity  on
Castelo  Branco's  claim  that  he  was  suspending   the  Constitu-
tion  and  dissolving  Brazil's political  parties  in  order  to  achieve
"tranquillity   for  the  nation's   economic   development."      The
Sun  responded   with  a  defense  of  democracy.    "Repression,"
it  said,   "can   tranquillize  but  hardly  energize   an   economy."
The  Washington   Post,  on  the  other  hand,  published  a  long
and  fatuous  defense  of  the  Brazilian  military.   This  faithfully
reflects  the  line  which  is  being  handed   out  by  the  State  De-
partment  and  by  Lincoln  Gordon,  who  in  his  passionate  ad-
vocacy  acts  like  Brazil's  Ambassador  to  Washington   instead
of  our  Ambassador  to  Rio.
Brazil's  Workers Coddled?
"Doctrinaire   reactions  against  the  role  of  the  military  are
unrealistic,"  said  the  Washington   Post.    Brazil's  workers  had
too  much  "coddling"  under   the  Goulart   regime.     "Brazil,"
it  said,  "was  an  example  of  a  situation  in  which  a militarily-
based  regime  has  proceeded   with   dedication   in  areas  where
politicians  had  failed."    This  recalls  the  language  in  which
Mussolini's  seizure  of  power  in  Italy  was  once  welcomed.
"With  the  mammoth  economic  problems  in  Brazil  and  the
razor  balance  between  reform  and  revolution,"  said  the  Post,
"it  is  especially  important   for  Americans  to  have  a  sympathe-
tic  insight  into  what  President   Castelo  Branco  and  his  col-
leagues  have  been  trying  to  do."     A  better  insight  into  what
the  military have  been  trying  to  do  was  afforded  by  the  stock
market  in  Rio.    The   day  after  the   decrees  wiping  out   free
government  in  Brazil,  the  market  had  the  biggest   and  most
bullish  day  in  its  history.    Bull  markets  are  not  precipitated
by  agrarian  reform  and  higher  minimum  wages.    Democracy
had   to  be  suspended   because  the   Castelo   Branco   regime-is
1   0  *
A  Triple Defeat  for  Rightists
In  New   York  City,  New   Jersey   and  Virginia,   the
election  returns  were  a  resounding defeat  for  rightists.
The    victory    of    Lindsay,   despite    the    Buckley-led
Goldwaterites  on  his  flank,  was  another  major  setback
for  the  lunatic  and  crypto-Fascist  fringe  of  the  GOP.
Lindsay   gives   New   York   City  the   hope  of   creative
government   after   so   many   years   of   stale   machine
rule,  and  opens  the  possibility  of  a  liberal  Republican
alternative   to   Johnson's   suffocatingly   Augustan   age
at   home  and  increased   belligerence   abroad.     Official
Washington  may  well  note  that  Lindsay  (and  Befeme)
were  conspicuous  by  their  absence   from  the  pro-war
parade  in  New  York  on  the  eve  of  the  elections,  and
that    Johnson's    war   stirred   enthusiasm   only   from
Buckleyites.
The  shadow  of  the  Vietnamese  war  also  fell  on  the
New   Jersey   election   where   the   Republican  Dumont
made  it  a  virtual  plebiscite  on  freedom  of  speech  in
wartime.     Dumont  seized   on   the   pro-Viet   Cong   de-
claration  of  one  State   university  professor,   Genovese,
to   stage   a   McCarthy-style  campaign.     Hughes   was
not  afraid  to   pick   up  the  challenge  and  his   defense
of   free   speech   was   rewarded  by   reelection   with   a
Democratic    legislature,    the    first    since     Woodrow
Wilson's.   In  Virginia  rightist  elements  in  a  Conserva-
tive   third   party   tried   unsuccessfully    to   defeat   a
Democrat  with  labor  and  Negro  support.    In  Cleve-
land,  in  a  three-cornered  race,  a  Negro   was  almost
elected  Mayor  over  an  incumbent  Democrat.
putting  the  burden  of  deflation  on  the  backs  of  Brazil's  poor.
They  not  only  have  to  bear  it.    Their  spokesman   are  even
forbidden  to  complain.    The  very  day  the  Washington   Post
wrote  that  editorial   explaining  that  Castelo  Branco  had, not
"interfered   so  far  with  freedom  of  the  press",  severe  restric
tions  were  being  announced  in  Rio.    Newspapers  were   for
bidden  to  publish  news  "likely  to  stir  the  people  against  the
government"   {Baltimore  Sun  from  Rio,   Oct  29).     Presum-
ably  this  would  apply  to  such  items  as  the  40,percent   rise
in  the  cost  of  living during  the  first  nine  months  of  this  year.
(Cct'tinue4  en  Puge  Four)
I  4
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  8, 1965
The  Real  Error  in  That  Bombing  Raid  on  A  Friendly  Vietnamese  Village.
The  real  error  in  that  erroneous  bombing  of  a  friendly  vil-
lage  in  South  Vietnam  has  been  overlooked   in  press  comment
and   official   apology.    The   real  error  is  the  bombardment  of
any  villages,  friendly  or  unfriendly.    "To   bomb   a  village,"
Roger  Hilsman   told   the   Senate   refugee   subcommittee   Sept.
30,   "even   though   the  guerrillas  are  using   it   as  a  base   for
sniping,  will  recruit  more  Viet  Cong  than  are  killed."     Hils-
man  resigned  last  year  as  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for   Far
Eastern  Affairs.     "If  bombing  the  North  has  been  a  bad  mis-
take,"   Hilsman    told   the   refugee    subcommittee,     "bombing
the  South  has  been  a  tragic  one—for  it  has  worked  to  alienate
the  people."     Unfortunately   too  few  of  our  military  agree.
Jack   Langguth   asked   an  unnamed   U.S.   Air   Force   officer   in
the  Mekong  delta  how  the  Viet  Cong  could  be  defeated,  and
got   this   answer    (New    York   Times   Sunday  Magazine   Oct.
17):    "Terror,"  he   said   pleasantly.     "The    Viet   Cong  have
terrorized  the  peasants  to  get  their  cooperation.   .  .  . We  must
terrorize   the  villagers   even   more.  .  .  .  We've  got  to  start
bombing  and  strafing  the  villagers  that  aren't  friendly  to  the
government"
Just  When  "The  Tide  Had  Turned"
Time  Magazine  had  hardly  hit  the  streets  with  a  jubilant
Oct.   22  issue  "The   Turning  Point  in  Vietnam"   ("The    Viet
Cong's  once-cocky  hunters   have   become   the  cowering  hunt-
ed")   when  the  VC's  in  one  week  made  811  attacks,  many  of
battalion  size,  and  destroyed   $10  million  worth  of  aircraft  at
U.S.   bases.    The   Baltimore  Sun   reported   from   Saigon    Oct.
28  that  the  record  high  of  "incidents"  and  the  size  of  the  at-
tacking  forces  ran  counter  to  speculation   that  B-52  pounding
would  force  the  VC  back  to  small  scale  terrorist  action.  While
the   U.S.   press  made   a  Saigon   parade   in  celebration  of   the
second   anniversary  of   Diem's   overthrow   the   occasion    for
another   splurge   of   optimism,   the   London    Observer     (Oct.
31)   reported  from  Saigon  rumblings  of  a  new  coup.     Time
in  that  Oct.  22  issue  described  Gen.  Ky  as  "the   closest  thing
to  a  natiunal  hero  South  Vietnam  has"  and  said  his   "promises
of   social  reform  and   a  vigorous   attack  on   corruption"    have
had  such   effect   that  the  Buddhists  "simply  cannot  find  credi-
ble  grievances  that  will  bring  crowds   into  the  street."    But
Jack  Foisie  cabled  from  Saigon  in  the  Washington  Post    (Nov.
2)   that  two  special  emissaries  sent  out  by  the  White  House
for   a  fresh   look,   Clark   Clifford   and   Prof.  Henry  Kissinger,
were  "returning  home  dismayed  by  the  almost   total   lack  of
political  maturity  or  unselfish  political  motivation  they  found
The  Insanity  Cooking Up
"Cindy    Ludlum    smiled   pleasantly.      'It   is    D-day
plus  30,'  she  said  cheerfully.  ..'We  were  hit  with  400
nuclear   weapons   on   September   27.     Hostilities    have
ceased   and  we   are   trying   to   get   back  on   our   feet.
Would   you  like  to  come  with  me  to  the   war  room?'
"Her  boss,   Anthony  A.   Bertsch,  stood   on  the  deep
beige  carpet   at  one  end  of   the   conference   room  and
pointed   at   a  deceptively  colorful  illuminated  map  of
the  United States.  'As  you  can see  from  the blackboard
over  here  our  losses  were  only  22.5  million—extremely
light.'   For   the   600  business   men  taking  part  in   the
war   exercise   staged   by   the   Commerce   Department's
Business    and   Defense    Services   Administration,   this
was  as  close  as  they   would  ever  like  to  come  to  the
real  thing   .  .  .  Thirty  percent   of  the   Nation's   indus-
trial  plant  was  either  destroyed  or  so  badly  damaged
that  it  was  not  worth  repairing  .  .  .  The  word  of  the
emergency   exercise   came   without   warning   at   11:56
a.m.,  midway  in  the  second  day  of  the  two-day  train-
ing  session   which  has  brought  more  than  1400  execu-
tive   reservists    here   to   perfect   the    production   and
distribution  skills  they   would  use  if   the   nation   were
attacked."                      —Washington  Star,  Oct.  27.
among   current  or  potential   leaders  of  the   South   Vietnamese
government."    The  war,  we  have  been  told  again  and  again,
is  a  war  for  the  loyalty  of  the  peasant.    But  they  found   the
peasants  have  "little  or  no  voice"  in  the  government.       "The
Vietnamese  well-to-do,"   Foisie  wrote,   "and   this  includes   the
army   officer   class,  have  what   approaches   a  loathing   for   the
peasant."     They  found  graft  draining  away  much  of  the  aid
we  send  for  refugees.     Clifford's  mission  is  especially  signifi-
cant  since  he  is chairman  of  the  Foreign   Intelligence  Advisory
Board,  which  is  supposed   to  check  on  the  CIA.     Apparently
the  White  House  is  not   satisfied   with  what  it  gets   through
normal  intelligence   channels.  •
Another  Viet  War  Mystery
Mystery  envelops   a  unanimous  report  by  the  International
Control   Commission   (India,   Poland,   Canada)     condemning
the   South   Vietnamese   for   repeated   violations   of   the   Cam-
bodian  border   and  warning  that  their  continuation  may  lead
to  hostilities.     The  Commission  recommended  a  Geneva-type
conference   to   guarantee   Cambodia's   borders.     The   mystery
is  why  this  report,  dated  July  15,  did  not  become  public  until
now.    The  story  broke  in  Moscow  Oct.   28  in  a  Tass  broad-
cast   in   English   and   the   report   was  given   out   next   day  in
A  New  Respect  for  the  Dedication  and  Bravery  of  the  Viet  Cong  Breaks Through
"The   most  striking  first  impression  of   Pleime  was   the
depth  of   the   professional   respect   the   Americans   had  for
their  enemy,  among   whom  were  hundreds  of   North  Viet-
namese   troops.     Major   Beckwith   [of   Atlanta,   the  camp
commander]  called  the  attacking  troops  'the  finest  soldiers
I  have  ever  seen  in  the  world  except  Americans.    I  wish
we  could  recruit  them,'  he  said.     'I   wish   we   knew   what
they   were  drugging   them   with  to   make   them   fight  like
that.    They  are  highly  motivated  and  highly  dedicated'...
The  defenders  almost  took  a  kind  of  pride  in  the  fact  that
bombing  had  not  silenced  the  heavy  machine  guns  of   their
enemy.     'Old   Charlie   [Vietcong]   just   stands   up   in   his
hole   and   keeps   shooting   back   at   the   whole   Air   Force,'
said  one  man .  .  .
"They   [the   U.S.  soldiers]   had  not  forgotten   the  fight  on
Saturday   when  a   single   Viet   Cong   soldier   had   emerged
from   a  hole,  charged   two   platoons   of   mountaineers   with
a   hand  grenade   and  routed  them.     Major  Beckwith  him-
self   had  fired  seven   bullets   into   the   enemy's   back,  but
he  had  said,  'That  was  a  real  soldier.'  .  .  .
"In  the  brush, the  Pleime  defenders  captured  an  assistant
platoon  leader  of   a  North  Vietnamese  regiment   who  had
been  left  behind  because  he  was  ill.    He  trembled  but  was
treated  kindly  and  given  a  cigarette.     One  American  said,
'We  ought  to   put  this   guy   on  the   north   wall   and  throw
out   these    [South    Vietnamese]    government   troops.     He
could  probably  hold  it  alone."
—Chas. Mohr  from  Pleime  in  New  York  Times,  Oct.  28.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  8, 1965
... New York's Pro-War Parade Was A Rightist Pro-Buckley  Demonstration
London  by  the  Foreign  Office.    Here  Murray  Marder   (Wash-
ington  Post,  Oct.  30)  was  the  only  State  Department  reporter
to  give  the  story  the  coverage   it  deserved.     "Officially",  the
Department  told  him,  the   report  had   not  yet  been   received
in  Washington,  though  a  copy  was  available  at  the  Canadian
Embassy.     Unanimous  reports   by   the   ICC   are   rare.     The
failure  to  make  this  report  public all  these  months  must  have
embittered  Prince  Sihanouk.
The  New  York  Demonstrations
The  press  belittled New  York's  anti-war  parade  of  Oct.  16
and   exaggerated    the   sire   of   the   pro-war   parade   Oct.    30.
Most   papers   out   in  the   country   used   the   figure   of   65,000
for   the  pro-war,  which  its  backers  claimed  in  advance;   New
York   papers   scaled  this  down   to   25,000.     Fact   is  that   the
two  parades  were  about  equal  in  size.    "The   protest   parade,"
Rasa  Gustaitis  of  the  New    York   Herald-Tribune    (Oct    31)
noted  in  the  best  account,  "had   lasted  slightly  longer."  Fifth
Avenue  was   lined  with   a   friendly   crowd   for   the  anti-war
parade.    "But  whole  blocks  were  empty,"  Miss  Gustaitis  noted
of   the  pro-war  parade.     While  the  press  and  TV   focus  on
beatniks  in  peace  ranks,  there  was  little  notice  taken   of   the
fact  that  it  was  a  small  organized  gang   of  young  louts   who
ran  alongside  the  peace  parade,   shouting   insults  and  hurling
eggs   and   paint.     (I   myself   in  the   first   row   of   the   peace
parade   got   hit   with   an   egg,    fortunately   fresh.)       Similar
vigilante   elements   attacked   pro-peace    spectators   during   the
pro-war   parade.      This   was   organized   by   the   New    York
foHrnal-Americaii,   mobilized   professional   anti-Communist   or-
ganizations  and  turned   into   a  pro-Buckley   rally.    No   other
candidate  for   Mayor   appeared   on   the   reviewing   stand,   but
Senator  Javits  turned  up,  explaining  that  he  did  so  to  "show
my  opinion,"   but  added   that  this  did  not  change  his  desire
for   negotiation,  thus  planting  his  feet   firmly   in  both  camps.
Big  Brother  Here,  Too
The  memoirs of  Col.  Penkovsky,  "our  man  in  the  Kremlin",
War  of  Nerves Dept.
"The   RAF   and  the   U.S.   Air   Force   have   produced
a   joint   target   plan   for   all-out   nuclear   and   conven-
tional  attacks  on  China should  the  need  arise.    The  co-
ordinated   plan   could  be   put  into   operation   at   short
notice.    Permission   for  its   execution  has  to  be  given
by   the   Prime   Minister  or   the   President.      The   plan
was  drawn  up  to  avoid  confusion   over  targets,   which
might   have   resulted  in  one  air   force   destroying  the
other   by  an   uncoordinated  attack   on  the   same   place
at  the  same   time.    It  will  also  prevent   'over-kills'  of
targets  and  will  mean  that  no  target  is  overlooked  by
both  countries  .  .  .  The  sort  of  situation  that   would
trigger   it   off  would  be   Chinese   intervention   against
either   Vietnam   or   India.     This   would   mean   instant
retaliation  by  Britain  or  America,  or  both.     Whether
nuclear   or  high  explosive   weapons   were   used   would
depend   on  the   sort   of   attack   made  by   China."
—London  Daily  Telegraph,   Oct.  IS.
are  being  serialized  in  the  U.S.  press.    Frank  Gibney   explain-
ed  in  his  introduction  to  the  second  installment   (Washington
Post,  Nov.   1)  why  this  Soviet  professional  soldier  and   Gen-
eral   Staff    officer   turned   against   his   own   country.      Gibney
said  Penkovsky  was  "increasingly  appalled   by  the  network  of
spies  and  informers"   in  the  Soviet   Union   "fully   eight  years
after   de-Stalinization  had   supposedly   thawed   Soviet  society."
We   seem   to  be  moving   in  the   same   direction.     On  NEC's
"The   Big  Ear"  program   (Oct.   31)   a  former   U.S.   Army  in-
telligence   agent   disclosed   that  he  tapped  Eleanor  Roosevelt's
private  telephone  conversations.     A  society  in  which  snoopers
spy  even  on  a  First   Lady  is  badly  infected   with   totalitarian
attitudes.    That  was  in   1943.      Since   then   our  gumshoe  ap-
paratus  has  mushroomed.     There  are  now   12  different    U.S.
spy  agencies  represented   on  our  U.S.  Intelligence  Board,  with
technical   devices   undreamed   of   a   decade   ago.     The    secret
police  are  more  powerful  in  the  Soviet  Union   than  here  but
the  growth   rate  of  ours  seems  to  be  faster.
British  Press  Reports  Out  of   China  Support Japanese Rather  Than  U.S.  Views
The  Communist Chinese  recently  took  a  group  of  English
writers  on  a  junket  to  Peking.    Their  reports  are  beginning
to  appear  in-the   British   press.    These   seem  to   agree  on
the  whole  with  the  Japanese   rather   than  the   official   U.S.
position  on  China.    The  contrasting  views  were   presented
in   a   debate  at   Arden   House   last   week-end  by   Win.   P.
Bundy,   Assistant   Secretary   of   State   for   Far   Eastern
Affairs,    with   Dr.   Matsumoto,   of    Tokyo's     International
House.    The  former  pictured  Peking  as  irretrievably  ex-
pansionist  and  warlike.   The  latter   insisted   that   we   take
the  belligerent  statements  of  its  leaders  too  seriously,  that
they   are   primarily   concerned  with   internal  development.
This   is   also   the   impression   in   the   first   three   British
reports  we  have  seen:  in  the  London  Times  (Oct.  26);  in
the   Manchester  Guardian  (Washington  Post,   Oct.  28)   and
by  Hugh  Trevor-Roper in  the  London  Sunday  Times  (Oct.
31).    Trevor-Roper's  report,  the  most  critical  of  the  three,
reflects  the  boredom  of  the  foreign  visitor  deluged  by  the
interminable   propaganda  in   China,   and  by   its   smugness
and    parochialism.     But    he   finds   the    comparison  with
Hitler  Germany  unfair:  "The  basic  note  of   aggression   is
lacking."    He  ends  by  predicting   that   the  fanaticism   and
Puritanism,  like  that   of  the  Bolsheviks,  will  give   way   to
more  comfortable  co-existence   policies  "if  capitalism  in  the
rest  of   Asia   is   detached  from   'colonialism'."    This  is   an
important  if.
In  Russia,  revolutionary  intransigeance   began  to  die  out
with   internal   improvement   and   national   security.     "So
long   as   Peking   does   nothing   rash,"   the   London   Times
reported,   "the  days  of   civil   war  and  famine   seem   finally
to   be  over.    Peasants  and  workers   are   guaranteed   some
kind  of  minimal  subsistence  level,  and  this  is  an   enormous
improvement  on  pre-1949  days."    U.S.   policy  hates  to  ad-
mit   that   Communism  can   work   and   our   hard-liners   are
as  unwilling  as  Peking's   to   practice  co-existence   in  Asia.
The  Manchester  Guardian's  reporter  was  "struck  by  the
absence"   in  China  of   "the  appalling  squalor  and  poverty"
in   India   and   Indonesia.     Unless   we   can   help   end   that
poverty,   we   may  find  ourselves   fighting   more   Vietnams.
"If   the  people  of   India,  or  Pakistan,  or   Burma,"  Senator
Robert  F.  Kennedy  said  in  a  thoughtful  plea  for  a  much
greater   foreign  aid  effort   in  New   York  City  Oct.  22,  "do
not  believe  their  system   is   worth  fighting   for,  each  new
crisis"   will   raise   for   us   the   question  of   military   inter-
vention.    This,  the  Senator  said,  would  be  "terribly  costly
in  the  lives  of  our  young  men."    And of  a  wider  conflagra-
tion   in   Asia.     This   is   why   Japan   fears   Peking's    tough
talk  less  than  our  ideological  rigidity  and  military  reflexes.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  November  8, 1965
Brazil's  Military  Consider  Its  No. 1 Social  Reformer  Their  No. 1 Enemy
(Continued  from  Page  One)
despite  the  sacrifices  imposed  on  wage-earners in  the  name of
stopping  inflation.    Newspapers  were  also  forbidden  to  pub-
lish  statements  by  persons  who  have  had  their  political  rights
taken  away  from   them  by  the  military,  persons  like   former
President  Kubitschek.
The  Real  Father  of  The  Alliance  for  Progress
To  focus  on  Kubitschek  is  to  light  up  what  is happening  in
Brazil.    The  Alliance  for  Progress   really  originated   in  Ku-
bitschek's   proposal   two  years  earlier  for   an  Operation   Pan
America.    Under  his  presidency  1956-60,   Brazil  had  one  of
the  greatest  periods  of  development  in  its  history.    Its  growth
rate  was about  double  its  rate  of  population  increase.  Though
this  was  accompanied  by  the  galloping   inflation   endemic  in
Latin  America,  the  benefits  of  prosperity  were  widely  shared.
It  is revealing that  today Kubitschek  is the  No.  1 target  of  the
Brazilian  military.    He  has  been  deprived  of  political   rights
and  subjected  to  constant  interrogation  at  the  expense  of  his
health.    It  was  the  victory  of  his  party  in  five  of  the  recent
gubernatorial  elections  which  led  the  military  to  suspend  the
Constitution,  and  to  forbid  the  press  to  publish  anything  he
might  say.  The   man  who  comes   closest  to  being   Brazil's
hope  for  leadership  in  the  direction  of  democratic  and  peace-
ful   reform  is  regarded   as  No.   1  enemy  by  the  military  we
support.     Our   primary  concern   under   Johnson   and   Mann
is  not  social  change  for  the  benefit  of  the  masses  as  envisaged
by  Kennedy  but  the  maintenance,  by  force  if   necessary,  of
what   is  called   a  favorable  climate  for  U.S. investment   in
Brazil.     Such   climates,   though  made'  favorable   today,   risk
being  paid  for  by  an  explosive  popular  resentment  tomorrow.
Another  primary  concern  of   the  Johnson-Mann  era   is  to
maintain  in  power  in  Brazil  the  one  major  military  force  in
the  hemisphere  on  which  we  can  count  for  such  joint  opera-
tions  as  our  recent  intervention  in  the  Dominican  Republic.
There   is   something   risible   about   a   crusade   to   make   the
Western  Hemisphere  safe  for  democracy  when  its  chief   sup-
porters  with  our  approval  set  up  a  military  dictatorship   in
their own  country.
All  this  merits  more  than  a  casual  glance  as  if  at  a  distant
error  of  policy.   What  if  the  military in  Brazil  were to  be con-
Alliance  for  Militarism—Not  Progress
"News   of   the   seizure   of   dictatorial   power  by   the
Brazilian  military  junta   marks  a  disastrous   reversal
for  liberty  in  Latin  Amerira.    What  is  even  worse  is
the   continuation   of   American   financial  backing   for
such  a  regime.    By  so  doing  we  are  transforming  the
Alliance  for  Progress  into  an  alliance  for   progressive
militarism  in  the  Western  hemisphere.   The  semantics
from  Washington   and  from  the  Brazilian  cabal,  seek-
ing  to  allay   fears  for  democratic   institutions  in  that
great   nation,   will  not  fool   any   but  those   who  want
to  be  fooled.
"Abolition   of   political   parties,   suspension   of   legis-
lative   acts,   destruction   of   constitutional    rights,   and
rule  by  the  fiat  of  those  who  seized   power  by   force
in   the   first   place   are   hallmarks   of    totalitarianism.
They  look  no  better  when  they   are  supported  by  the
U.S.   in  Brazil   than   when  they  are  supported   by  the
Soviet   Union  in  Cuba.    This  military  dictatorship   in
Brazil  will   in  fact   be  a  great   aid  to  Communism  to
the  south,  for  Communism  has  always  fared  best  under
military   dictatorships.    We  will  not  restore  the  true
intent  of   the   Alliance   for   Progress   until   we  restore
the  policy  of  the  Kennedy  Administration   of   suspend-
ing  financial  aid  to  coup  governments."
—Wayne  Morse  (D.-Oregon),  Oct. 29,
fronted   by  a  mass  uprising  for  the  restoration  of  democratic
liberties?   What  if  the  military  were  to  split,  as  they  did  in
the  Dominican  Republic  and  one  faction  to  fight  for  restora-
tion  of  the  Constitution?    What   if  Castelo  Branco  and  his
hard-line  Army  Chief  of  Staff,  Costa  e  Silva,  were  in  danger
of  being  overthrown?    Would  we  be  asked  to  intervene  in
their  defense ?   Would  another   Communist  menace  be  con-
jured   up,   with   the   names  and   addresses   of   57  agitators?
Would  we  be  told  that  American  lives  and  property  were  in
danger?    Whether   in  Brazil  or  elsewhere  in. Latin  America,
future  crises  of  this  sort  can  easily  be  envisaged.    The  time
to  think about them  is now  before  they happen.    "After Indo-
china,"  a  U.S.  Special  Forces  lieutenant  in  Vietnam  told  the
French  novelist  Jean  Larteguy   (Parr's   Match,  Oct  16), "we
will  have  our  Algeria.    It  will  be  South  America."    It  could
some  day  cost  a  lot  of  American  lives  to  try  and  undo  what
our  military  proteges  are  now  doing  in  Brazil.
We   Deeply  Appreciate  The  Diligence   of  Readers  Who  Send  Us  Clippings   from  Their  Local  Papers
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Name  ....................................
Street  . ................................
City  ......................................
For  the  enclosed  $5 send
(To)   Name  ......................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
...Zone.......... ..State....................
11/8/65
a  gift  sub  to:
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
IE  Storie's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday   except  in   August,   the   last  week   in   December   and  the
first  week   in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..   N.W.,   Washington,   D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by   1.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   SB  in   the  U.S.:  $6   in   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED