I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965jun28.pdf

============================================================

Why  Not  A  Negro Federal  Judge  in  the South? P. 3
The One Target  Our Bombers Never Miss Seems to Be The Heart  of the Vietnamese  People
Saigon—As  ever  more  and  more  jet  fighters,  this  week's
B-52   bombers and  even  U.S.  combat  troops  unfamiliar with
Vietnamese   conditions  are   thrown  in,   the   indiscriminate
force  unleashed  is  likely  to  inflict  heavy  destruction  on  the
local  peasantry on  whose  allegiance  winning  the  war  still
depends. ...  A  dangerous  backfiring  effect  was  also in evi-
dence  at  recently attacked Songbe,  when a  Vietnamese sur-
vey  staff  sent  by  the  U.S.  Embassy  attempted  to  learn  the
public  reaction  and  found  that  170  out  of   310  people  ap-
proached  refused  even  to  talk  with them.
—Richard  Critchfield   in  the  Washington  Star  June  22.
"How   long  will  it  take  some  people  to  realize  that  bomb-
ing   Hanoi  or  Peking  will  have  little  or  no  effect   on   the
guerrilla   forces   fighting   a   thousand  miles   away  in   the
jungles  around Saigon. .  .  .  Their strength  is  that  they  arc
a  part of  the people and the  terrain in which  they fight. .. .
To  bomb  them   is   to   bomb  the   women  and  children,   the
villagers  and the  peasants  with  whom  they are intermingled.
Our bombing attacks turn  the  people against  us and feed  the
fires  of  rebellion."
—McGovern  (D.  South  Dakota)  in  the Senate  June  17.
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  26
JUNE  28,  1966
«"       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16   CENTS
What  Should  the  Peace  Movement  Do?
Roughly  speaking,  the  peace  movement  may be  divided  into
three  groups.    One  wants  to  persuade,  to  win  public support
for  an  end  to  the  war  in  Vietnam  and  to  intervention  in  the
Dominican  Republic.   These  might  be  termed  the  democratic
forces.    A  second  group  is  not  so  much  concerned  with  per-
suasion  as  with  testifying,    in  the  sense  that  the  word  has  in
the  Gospels.    The  term  martyr  in  Greek  meant  a  witness;  the
Christian  martyrs  testified   to  their  faith.    These  people  want
to  demonstrate  their  moral  disapproval  of  war  by  disobeying
the  law—refusing  to pay taxes,  or  to  serve  in  the  armed  forces;
by  obstructing  the  draft,  or  tearing  up  their  draft  cards;  or
urging  others  to  do  so.   These  may  be  termed  the  religious
forces,  though  many  among  them  are  not  religious  in  a  con-
ventional  sense.    The  third  group  are  those  who  want  to  ex-
press  their  solidarity with  the  Viet  Cong  and  the  rebels  in  the
Dominican  Republic  by  doing  all  they  can  to  obstruct  the  war
effort  in  this  country.    These  may  be  termed  the  revolutionary
forces;  many  among  them  believe  peace  can  only  be  won  by
getting   rid  of  the  capitalist  order   in  this  country.
The  Revolutionary  Daydreams
It  is  obvious  that  these  three  groups,  though  often  present
in  the  same demonstrations,  would  lead  the  peace  movement  in
very  different  directions.    Those  who  want  to  work  for  peace
may  find  it  useful  first  to  determine  to  which  of  these   three
groups  they  belong.    Only  one  of  them,  the  first,  can  change
public   opinion   for  the  better.    The   revolutionaries,   in  the
context  of  present  political  realities,  can  fulfil  little  more  than
the  role of  agents provocateurs, giving  the  government  an  ex-
cuse  for  repression.     Their   curious  melange   of  Maoism   and
Stalinism  with  Negro  nationalism  may win  a  few  converts  on
the  Left  but  only  at  the  expense  of  strengthening   the  wide-
spread  -mania  about  a  Communist   conspiracy.    Their  tactics
would  have  meaning  only  in~a  revolutionary   situation;   in  as
prosperous   a  country  as  this  with  a  conservatively   organized
labor   movement,   they  couldn't   marshal   enough   men   for   a
putsch;  they'd  be lucky to  seize  one  postoffice.    If  the  cause of
world  peace  depends  on  the  overthrow   of  American  capital-
7  *
Are  They  Our  Puppets,  Or  Are  We  Theirs?
Saigon—A   rocky   marriage   but   no   divorce.    That
about  sums  up the  current relationship between  the  new
military  regime  here  and  the  American mission.    The
young  generals  who  now  run  the  government  .will  be
more  independent  thany  any  regime  since  that  of  Ngo
Dinh  Diem... They  are  not  going  to  brook any  meddling
by  the  U.S.  Embassy  in  South  Vietnamese politics.  And
they  will  protest  strongly  any  American suspension  of
North  Vietnam  bombings  or  the  start  of   any  flimsy
negotiations.
—Walt  Friedenberg  in  Wash.  Daily  News  June  22.
ism,  there  isn't  much  hope  for  the  world.   This  is a  recipe for,
holocaust,  an  apocalyptic  Marxist-Leninist version  of  the  old
belief  in  a  Second  Coming.    In  any  event,  the  intra-Commu-
nist  feuds  of  recent  years,  from   Tito's   to  Mao's,  should  be
enough  to  demonstrate that  wars will  not  end  with capitalism,
that  the  problem  is  deeper  than  social  systems.
As  for  the  religious,  jwe  sympathize  with  them  but  have
little  faith  in  their  efficacy.    They  cannot  accomplish  in  a  few
crucial  months  what  Isaiah,  Buddha, Jesus,  St.  Francis,  Tolstoy
and  Gandhi  could  not  do  in  2500  years.    If  all  hope  of  stop-
ping  a  wider  conflict  disappears,  they  will  perform  a  moral
duty  by  resistance  and  abstention.    But  though  this  will  ease
their  consciences,   it  will  not  affect   the  course  of  events.    I
watched  the  devoted  pacifist  handful  who  held  a  speak-in  at
the  Pentagon  the  other  day  under  the  admirable  Rev.  A.  J.
Muste.    Their   demonstration   had   publicity   value   for   the
peace   movement,   but  I  did  not  think   their   speeches  at  all
effective.     One   speaker   several   times  addressed  the   curious
listeners  as "fellow  workers  of  the  Pentagon",  an  archaic  echo
of  the  Thirties  unlikely  to  do  anything  but  bolster  the  stereo-
type  of  peaceniks as  out  of  this  world.    Secretary  McNamara,
once  an  ACLU-er  in  Detroit,  allowed  them  to  speak  on  the
steps  and  in  the  Concourse  and  gave  them  a  half  hour  inter-
view.    I  don't  think  they  said  anything  that  touched  him.    I
suspect  they  really  had  nothing  to  say  which  was  relevant  to
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
9   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  28,1965
Even  Senate  Liberals  Vote  for  Inter-American  (Inevitably  Anti-Democratic) Force
How  We  Stifle A  Creative  Popular  Revolution  in  Santo  Domingo
The   Dominican   revolution   is   slowly   being   strangled   to
death  by  American  power.    We  are  to  have  our  way  in  Santo
Dominigo   but  we  are  going   to  lose  Latin   America   in   the
process.    There  is  no  better  way  to  see  this  than  through  the
eyes  of  Teodoro  Moscoso,  who  was  Coordinator   of  the  Alli-
ance  for   Progress   under  Kennedy.     In  a  letter  to  the   New
York  Times  (June 9)  Moscoso  made  two points  which  should
not  be lost  sight  of.    Moscoso said  we  invite  anti-U.S.  attitudes
in  the  hemisphere   where  we  "say  that  the  Dominican  people
should   be  free  to  decide  their  own  fate  and  then  proceed  to
tell  the  Dominicans  what  they  should  want  and  what  is  good
for  them."    This  is  U.S.   dictation,  not self-determination.
Birchite  Oligarchies
What  the  U.S.  seems  to  seek  are  governments  far  enough  to
the   right   to  be  safely  anti-Communist.    When   it   comes   to
determining  what  is  Communist  we  are  prepared  to  go  along
with   the   native   oligarchies.     This   brings   us   to   Moscoso's
second   point.     "To   apply   U.S.   standards   of   extremism    to
Latin  America  where  most  societies  are  polarized  between  the
elite   and   the   masses   and   where   social  tensions   are  high,"
Moscoso  wrote,  "is  to  misunderstand  present  events."  Moscoso
said  that  in  many  a  Latin  American  country   "the   equivalent
of   the  John   Birch   Society   is  not  the  lunatic  fringe,   but  a
powerful  influence  in  or  near  government."     This  is  particu-
larly  true  in  the  Dominican   Republic  where,   after  30  years
of  political  deep  freeze  under  Trujillo,  anyone  mildly  reform-
ist  is  regarded   as  suspect  by  the   oligarchy.
In  such  societies,  revolution  may  be  a  necessity,  a  creative
moment   in  the  history  of  a  people.     In  the  Dominican   Re-
public,   Reid   Cabral's   effort   to   cut   down   military   payrolls
angered  the  Army.    Luckily the  Army  split  and  part  of  it  was
for  Bosch's  restoration.    This  made  a  return  to  constitutional-
ism  possible.     Such  opportunities   are  rare.    We   stepped  in,
saved  the  oligarchy  and  the  reactionary  military  from   defeat,
then  proceeded  to  smother  the  revolution.    Under   our  wing,
the  Imbert   forces  were  allowed   to  institute  a  reign  of  terror
in  the  countryside,  and  to  blockade  Caamano's  forces  in  Santo
Domingo.    Now  our  forces,  with  Imbert's,  have  begun  to  cut
into  the  portions  of  the  city  held  by  Caamano.
Familiar  Lesson  in  Algeria
The  lesson  of  the  Algerian  revolt  is  an  old  one.   The
chief   menace   to   freedom   in   any   country   which   has
shaken  off  colonial  bonds  is  its  own  army,  as  the  leader
of  one of  the  first  successful  wars  of  liberation  observed
almost  two  centuries  ago.    Algeria,  like  the  Dominican
Republic,   underscores   the   warning   in   George   Wash-
ington's  Farewell  Address  against  "overgrown  military
establishments."   The  Army  which  brought   Ben   Bella
to  power  resented  his  efforts to  reduce  its  size,  to  divert
its  energies  to  constructive  tasks,  and  to  conciliate  re-
bellious  elements  rathan  than  crush  them  by  force.    In
Latin  America,  democratic  Costa   Rica  and  "Marxist-
Leninist"  Cuba demonstrate  in  their different ways  that
successful  revolutions  can survive only  by  getting  rid of
the  regular  army—and  preventing  a  new  one  from  tak-
ing  its  place.   U.S.  hostility has  forced  Cuba to  mobilize
a  huge  force.   Castro,  who felt  closer  to  Ben  Bella  than
to  any  of  the  Communist  leaders,  must  see  in  Algerian
events  the  need  for  keeping  a  sharp   eye  on  his  own
Army,  too.
As  the  military  noose   tightens,   free  elections  are  offered.
But  one  condition   is  that  the  constitutionalists  give  up   their
arms.    What  if  the  military,  after  the  arms  are  surrendered,
renege  on  the  promises  of  elections  and  amnesty?    Who  will
defend   them?    The  U.S.   and  the  OAS?    We   have   already
shown  that  when  the  chips  are  down  they  stand  with  the  mili-
tary.    It  must  be  painful  for  thoughtful   Latin   Americans   to
see  that  at  such  a  moment  the  U.S.  Senate  voted  unanimously
for   an   Inter-American   military   force   backed   up   with   our
foreign  aid  dollars,  and  that  liberals  like  Morse  and  Gruening
also  voted  for  it.    For  years  both  men  have  campaigned   against
military  aid  to  Latin  America  as  a  breeder  of  rightist   dictator-
ship.    Both  men  have  criticized  our  support  for  the  oligarchies.
But  the   Dominican    affair   shows   us  that  an    Inter-American
military  force  is only  a hemispheric  alliance  of  the  military  and
the  oligarchy.    The  free  countries  are hostile  to  the  idea.    Ex-
cept  for   20  policemen  from  Costa  Rica,  the  troops  are   sup-
plied  by  rightist  military  regimes  we  support   in  Brazil,   Hon-
duras,  Salvador  and  Paraguay.    They  are  crushing  the  hopes of
democracy   in   Santo   Domingo.    They  will   do  it  elsewhere.
The  Clue to  That Cigarette  Warning Is  That  Every Tobacco State  Senator  Voted For  It
The  Senate  has  passed  a  bill  to  warn  the  public  against
cigarette  smoking,  but  the  main  beneficiaries of  the  bill  will
be  the  cigarette   industry  and  its   Madison  Avenue   allies.
They  are  also  its  most  enthusiastic  supporters.     Every  to-
bacco-state  senator  voted  for  it  and  one  of  them,  Morton of
Kentucky,  led  much  of  the  floor  fight  for  it.
The  bill  does  require  a  health  warning  on  each  package,
but  this  is  not  likely  to  give  the  industry  much  trouble.    It
says  only  that  smoking  "may  be  hazardous  to  your  health,"
and  it  will  probably  be  as  inconspicuous  as  it  is  unpersua-
sive.   The  real  key  to  cigarette  sales  is  advertising,  but  the
primary  accomplishment  of  the  Senate  bill  is  to  keep  the
Federal  Trade  Commission   from  interfering  with  it.    The
Commission  is  prohibited  for  three  years  from  requiring  a
health  warning  in  advertising.    If   Congress   then   permits
the  Commission   to  go  ahead  with  a  warning,  its   enforce-
ment  can  be  delayed  another  four  years  by  litigation.    An
amendment  by  Senator  Neuberger  to  limit  the  prohibition  to
one year  was  defeated  49-29, despite  the  strenuous  efforts  of
Robert  Kennedy.   He  together  with Clark  (D., Pa.),  Douglas
(D.,   111.)   and  Nelson   (D.,  Wise.)   voted  against   the   entire
bill  because,   as  Kennedy  put  it,  the  bill  "will  be  of   great
help  to  the  cigarette  and  tobacco   industries."
In  its  report  on  the  bill,  the  Commerce  Committee  made
a  faint  effort  to  offset  the  weakness  of  the  bill  and  the  pro-
industry  bias  of  its   hearings.     It   noted  that  although   39
physicians   and   scientists    tried   to   discredit   the    Surgeon
General's  report  in  their  testimony,  "no  prominent   medical
or  scientific  body  undertaking  a  systematic   review  of   the
evidence  has  reached  conclusions   opposed  to  those  of   the
Surgeon  General's  Advisory  Committee."    Thanks  to  Sena-
tor  Norris  Cotton  (R., Vt.),  the  report  also  encouraged   the
FTC to  take  action  against  companies  which  in  their  adver-
tising  contradict  the  health  warning  on  the  package.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  28,1965
Nazi  Disrupter  Went  Free  on  $20  Bond  But  Ten  Civil  Rights  Demonstrators  Put  Up  $3,000
Mississippi Negroes Find  Themselves Unexpectedly  "At Home" in  the  Capital
Twenty-one  Negroes   from   Mississippi  joined  several  hun-
dred  students  in  Washington   last  week  to  lobby  for  the  un-
seating  of  the  five  Congressmen  from  their  state.    It  wasn't
long  before  they began  to  think  they were  back  in Mississippi.
The  Clerk  of  the  House,  Ralph  Roberts,  first  refused  to  see
them  about  the  printing  of  600  pages  of  testimony  which  is
the   main  evidence  for   the   Congressional   Challenge.     The
printing  has  now  been  delayed  several  weeks.    Roberts  then
promised  the  Mississippians  an  appointment  in  writing,  but
he  failed  to  show  up.    When  the  delegation  decided  to  sit-in
at  his  office  and  wait,  Speaker  McCormack  ordered  10  of  them
arrested.  They  were taken  to  jail,  fingerprinted,  photographed,
stripped   of  all  personal  belongings   including  cigarettes  and
prescription  medicine,  and  refused  legal  counsel.     After  two
nights  and  three  days  in  jail  they  were  released  on  a  total  of
$3,000  bond.    Last  January McCormack  did  not  even  want  to
press  charges   when   a  member  of   the  American  Nazi   Party
broke  into  the  House  to  protest  a  resolution  supporting  the
Challenge.    The  Nazi  was  later  arrested  and  released  on  $20
bond.    "The   only  difference  between  Washington  and  Missis-
sippi,"  said  one of  the  Negroes  after  her  release  from  jail,  "is
that  in  Mississippi  they  'fess  up  to  what  they   are."
Bitter  Memorial
The  arrests  provided  a  bitter  background  to  the  memorial
services  marking  the  first  anniversary  of  the  martyred  deaths
of   Goodman,   Schwerner   and   Chaney.     The   Congressional
Challenge  is the  real  solution  to what  they  died  for.  The  South
won't  continue  to  evade  federal  voting  rights  laws  if  it  learns
that  the  price  of  evasion  is  loss  of  representation in  Congress.
The  House  rules  require  a  floor vote  on  the  Challenge  by July
4,  but  the  delaying  tactics of  the  Clerk  seem  designed  to  post-
pone  voting  until  late  in  the  second  session  when  an  unseating
would  have  little  meaning.     Since  the  Clerk's  office  is  funded
and  supervised  by  the  Southern-dominated  Committee  on  Ad-
ministration,  he  is  not   likely  to  aid  the   Challenge   without
support  from  the  House  leadership.    This  does  not  seem  to
be  forthcoming.     A  protest   from  nine  liberal   Congressmen
led by Conyers of  Michigan  has produced  no  results.    A  strong
stand  by the  Democratic  Study  Group would  be  influential,  but
so  far  it  has  refused  to  commit  itself.
Wm.  F.  Ryan  for  Mayor
We urge our readers to support Wm. F. Ryan for  New
York  City's  Democratic  Mayoralty  nomination  at   the
primary  Sept  14.   No  member of  Congress  has  a.  better,
few  have  as  good  a  record  on  peace,  civil  rights  and
domestic   legislation   than   Congressman   Ryan.     The
problems  of  our  greatest  city  will  not  be  solved  by  con-
ventional  municipal  reform.   The  decay that  has  created
a  human  jungle  in  its  heart  can  only  be  wiped  out  by
novel  measures  on  a  scale  the  Federal  government  has
never  yet  attempted except  for  war  and  space  explora-
tion.   New  York  needs  a  Mayor  with  the  vision  and  the
experience  in  Washington  to  press  for  such  a  program.
Not  only  the  slums  but  a  whole  sector  of  human  lives
needs  to  be  rehabilitated.    Not  since  La  Guardia  has
New  York  had  a  chance  to  obtain  a  Mayor  of  similar
stature.     His   nomination   and   election    would   have
seismic  repercussions  in  State  and  national  politics:  it
would  prove  that  imagination, courage  and  progressiv-
ism  can  pay  off  politically.    Every  major  issue,  from
peace  to  the  poverty program, would be  affected  for  the
better.   Those  who  ring  doorbells  for  Ryan  can  awaken
invigorating  echoes  to  every  area  of  American  politics.
The  response  of  individual  Congressmen   to  the   lobbying,
which  was organized  by the  Student  Non-Violent  Coordinating
Committee,  has  also  been  disappointing.     Liberals  like  Eman-
uel  Celler  (D.,  N.Y.),  Chairman  of  the  House Judiciary  Com-
mittee,  Frank  Boiling  (D.,  Mo.),  a  founder  of  the  Democra-
tic  Study  Group,  and  Frank  Thompson   (D.,  N.J.),  another
founder,  have  been  equivocal  in  their  support.    Celler  said  he
wanted  to  see the  evidence  first,  as  if  there  was  some  suspicion
in  his mind that  Negroes really could  vote  freely  in  Mississippi.
Edna   Kelley,   a   Democrat   from   Brooklyn,   shocked    visiting
students,   who   had   heard   of   her   as  a  liberal,   by   attacking
Negroes  as  well  as  the  Challenge.     "We  can't  even  get  them
to  vote   in  New  York,"  she  said  and  then   rudely   told  the
lobbyists  that  she  didn't  require  their  help  in  voting.    John
Lindsay  of  New   York   was  not   available  for   comment,   but
the  students  reported   that  his  assistant  was  evasive  and  op-
posed  their  seeing  the  Congressman   personally.     "They  sure
change  their  style  when  the  press  leave  and  the  TV  lights  go
off,"  said  one  Mississippi  Negro  about  police  treatment  at  the
jail.    She  might  said  said  it  about  the  Congress   too.
When  Will A  Negro  Judge Be  Named to
The  appointment of  former  Governor Coleman  of  Missis-
sippi  to  the  Fifth  Circuit  Court of  Appeals  is  an  affront  to
the  civil  rights  movement.   One of  the  first  appeals  he will
hear  is  U.S.  v.  Mississippi.   In  this  he  will  be  asked  to  de-
clare  unconstitutional  the  white  supremacy  legislation  he
helped  to  pass  as  Governor.   At  present  he  is  legal  counsel
for   the   five   Mississippi  Congressmen   challenged   by   the
Freedom  Democratic Party.
Homer  Thornberry,  Johnson's  other  appointment  to  the
Circuit,  is  being  billed  as  a  liberal  counterweight  but  his
record  on civil rights  is  not  much more  palatable.   As  Con-
gressman   from   Texas,   he  voted  against   the   1957  voting
rights  act,  for  the  1960 measure  and  abstained on  the  1963
bill  though his  political future had  been made secure by  ap-
pointment   to   a   Federal   district   judgeship.    The  Circuit
Court  has  been  4-to-3  liberal.    It  will  be  a  miracle  if   this
Sit  on  The  Federal  Bench  in  the  South?
does  not  make  it  5-to-4  the  other  way.
Johnson  had  two  options  more  favorable  to  civil  rights.
He  could  have  left   the  two  vacancies  open.    Chief   Justice
Warren  has  been  assigning   northern  judges   to  assist  on
cases  in  the  5th  and this  could  have  been  used  to  put  pres-
sure  on  Eastland not  to  block  the  appointment of  a  Missis-
sippian  friendly to  Negro  rights.   Strange  to  say,  there  are
some.   Among them  are  Robert Parley,  retired  dean  of  Ole
Miss   Law  School;   Leonard  Rosenthal,  a  brilliant   lawyer
who  passed  his  bars  at  19;  and  Dixon  Pyles,  an  able  labor
lawyer   with   AFL-CIO   support.    The   ideal  appointment
would have been  Jack  Young, an experienced Negro  attorney
from  Jackson.   He  has  the  distinction  of  having  been  rec-
ommended  to  the  state  bar  by  Eastland's  good  friend,   U.S.
District  Judge  Harold  Cox.   A  Negro  Federal  judge  in  the
South  would be  a  symbol  of  real  change.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'8 Weekly, June  28,186S
Calling  for A  Teach-in  In  Every  Town  and  City  in  the  United  States
(Continued  front  Page  One)
the  necessities  imposed  upon  him  by  his  position.
Beware  The  Team   Spirit
Only  the  first  group,  in  our  opinion,  can have  some  impact
on  American  public  opinion  and  thus  perhaps  put  some  brake
on  the  war  machine.    We  will  not  create  a  "pause  for  reflec-
tion" by adding  from  our  own  side to hate  and  hysteria.    War
is the  greatest  of  human  sports,  and  it  is a spectator  sport.   As
in  football  or  baseball,  those  who  cheer  for  their  team  from
the  grandstand  enjoy  the  catharsis  of  vicarious  conflict.    Even
the  peace  movement  in  times of  rising  tension  often  becomes  a
disguised  vehicle  for  aggressi6n  and  hatred.   We're  not  going
to  calm  our* fellow  citizens  by  jumping  up  and  down,  scream-
ing.   We're not  going  to aid  the  cause of  peaceful  co-existence
by  demonstrating  that  we  cannot  even  co-exist  peacefully  with
our  own  fellow  citizens.    So  long  as  we  can  still  speak  and
write  and  preach  and  march  and  demonstrate,  it  is  our  duty
to  our  country  and  the  world  to  try  and  do  so  in  a  way which
will  persuade,  not  provoke.    We  must  appeal  to  kindness  and
to  reason.    These  though  slim  are  our  only  hope.
We  hope  the  student  movement  will  not  be  led  astray  by
stunt-mongers  and  suicide  tactics.    We  believe  the  teach-ins
have  made  extraordinary  progress.   The  Washington   teach-in
was  too  diffuse,  the  TV  discussion  with  Bundy  was  too  con-
cerned  with  abstractions.    But  debate  has  been   opened   up.
The  Administration  has  been  put  on  the  defensive.   The  polls
show  that  while  the  majority  is  prepared  to  support   Johnson
wherever  he  leads,  in  the  sheep-like  way  that  human  herds
always  move  toward  war,  the  educated  minority  question  his
course.    Our  job  is by the widening  of  debate  to  increase  their
number.      Add  their  dissent  to a general  anxiety and  we have
leverage  for  peace.    It  is  reflected  in  the  Senate  where  Robert
F.  Kennedy,  in  the  spirit  of  his  brother's  American  University
speech,  was  calling  at  press  time  for  a  fresh  effort   to  bring
China  into  talks  to  end  the  proliferation  of  nuclear  weapons.
It  was  reflected  in  the  unusually  wide  response   that   speech
stirred  from  more  than  a  dozen  worried  Senators  on  the  floor.
Storm  Warnings   Everywhere
"A  chill  wind  is blowing through  the  leading  western
security  markets.   Wall  Street  is  uneasy,  Tokyo is  de-
moralized,  Paris  is  depressed,  and  London  has  little  to
be   cheerful   about.    The   combination  of   widespread
prosperity  and  stock  market  uncertainty has  prompted
several leading bankers recently to draw  rough parallels
with  the late  1920s and early  1930s.   A  true comparison
would,  of  course,  be  wholly  unrealistic  as  world  condi-
tions  and  built-in  safety  valves  have  transformed the
picture.    But  the  view  is  gaining  currency  that  if  the
Austrian  Creditanstslt  crash  of  1931  was  the  obvious
lynchpin  of  the  great  slump,  so  Japan's  present  finan-
cial  malaise  may  start  the  recession  of  1965-66.    With
the  Tokyo  stock  market  once  again  plumbing  new  lows
yesterday,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  pledged  support  for
19  securities  firms  to  meet  withdrawal demands  from
clients."
—City  (Financial)  Editor,  London  Times, June  18.
If  the  teach-ins  can  be  taken  from  the  campuses  to  the  com-
munities,  if  we  can  have  teach-ins  in  every  town  or  city,  we
can  build  up  formidable  pressure  for  peace.
But  this  demands  a  real  effort  to  reach  and  teach,  to  speak
in  a tone  not  of  desperation  but  of  faith  in  the  power  to  touch
the hearts and minds of  our fellow Americans.   The wonderful
students  I  have  seen  at  various  teach-ins,  from   Washington
to  Berkeley,  have  achieved  more  than  any  one  dreamed  was
possible  a  few  months  ago.    They  must  widen  their   efforts.
Their  task   is  not  to  express  alienation,  or  to  bring   about
estrangement,   but  to  make  free  institutions  work  in  foreign
policy.   Their  duty  is  to  help  humanity by  furthering  the  re-
conciliation   on   which   our   survival   depends,   reconciliation
with  our  Communist  rivals  abroad,  reconciliation  in  equality
between  white  and  black  men  at  home,  the  consciousness  of
common  heritage   and  of  common  danger  as  human  beings,
the  urgent  necessity of  brotherhood.    Religious  faith  and  revo-
lutionary  zeal  could  make  a  contribution  if  they  joined  in  this
healing  task.                                                                      June  23
SUMMER   SCHEDULE:  The  Weekly  will  be  published  every  other  week  in  July   (July  12  and  July  26)   and go
on  vacation  at  usual  during  August,  resuming   with  the  first  week  in   September.
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Pleas*  renew   (or  enter)   a  rob  for  the  enclosed  $5:
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C. 20015
Na
6/28/65
Street   .......................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State...
For  the  enclosed  15  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   .........................................J!one............State....................
For  $545  extra  send  L  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted      Fffttei
Indicate  if  announcement wilted   D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ars.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  QMS Pottage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  In  December  and  the  first  week  In
January  and  Bl-Weeldy  during  July  and  August  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..   Washington,  D.  C.    An  Independent   weekly  published  and  edited
by  L  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  H.  Stone.    Subscription:   *6  in   the   U.S.:    $6  In  Canada:   flO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$16  to  Europe;  t20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED