I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965feb08.pdf

============================================================

Double-Pronged  Attack  on HUAC,  P.  4
The Truth About the Vietnamese War in A Dead  U.S. Soldier's Pathetic Last Letter  Home
"The  day  before  he  was  killed,  Army  Sgt.lC   Harold  E.     also  wrote,  a  friend  of  the  family  said,  that  'we  just   don't
Strong  wrote  to  his  wife  in  nearby  Fairfax  County  that  he     know  what   we're   doing   here.'    The   letter   added,   'these
was  glad  to  be  'getting  out*  of  Vietnam  in  April.  .  .  .  He     people'  (the  Vietnamese)  'don't  even  want  us  here'."
—"Wife    Tells  of  Letter  From  Viet   Cong  Victim"   in  the  Washington   Evening  Star,  January   29.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  5
FEBRUARY   8,  1965
101       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
15   CENTS
The  Day  the  CIA's  Crystal  Ball  Cracked  Wide  Open
Washington,  Jan.  26  (UPI)—Sen.  J.  Wm.  Fulbright,
D.  Ark.,  said  today  after  a  briefing  by  Central  Intelli-
gence  Director  McCone  that  there  did  not  appear  to  be
any   immediate  danger  of   the   South  Vietnam  govern-
ment  being overthrown.
This  item   deserves  preservation.     It   came  off  the   United
Press-International   ticker  the  afternoon  of  Tuesday,   Jan.  26.
Few  newspapers  published   it  next  day  though  by  8:30  p.m.
that  night  Washington   was  officially  informed  that  the  South
Vietnamese  government   had  again  been  overthrown.    When
I  was  a  boy  the  favorite  sport  of  enterprising  newspapers  was
to   catch  public   officials   with   their   pants   down.     The   new
game  laws  seem  to  protect  CIA  Chiefs.    Nobody   seemed  to
feel  that  it  was  news  that  our   foremost   intelligence    official
had   been  proven  wrong  within  a  few  hours   of  the  private
briefing  he  had  given  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Commit-
tee  that  day  on  the  situation  in  Vietnam.    Mr.  McCone  is  a
hard-driving   business  man.     If  a  subordinate  had   so  misin-
formed  him  on  an  important  business  deal,  that  subordinate
would   almost   certainly  been   looking   for   another   job.
Coup  Already  Planned  and  Announced
The  flaccidity  of  the  press  is  matched   by  that  of  the  Sen-
ators.    There  was  a  time  when  one  would  have  expected   the
Senate  Foreign   Relations   Committee   to  recall  Mr.   McCone
and  ask him  how  he  came  to  be  so  badly  informed.   There  is
evidence  that  the  new  coup  was  already  in  the  works  at  the
very  time  he  spoke.    For  the  New   York   Herald-Tribune   re-
ported   from   Saigon   Jan.   28,   "Reliable   sources   said    Gen.
Khanh   and   the  powerful   Armed   Forces   Council   which   he
heads   had   originally   planned   the   coup   for   next    Tuesday
[i.e.   Feb.  2]  but  moved  up  the  date  after  General  Taylor  de-
cided  on  a  24-hour  trip  to  Thailand  and  Laos  yesterday   [Jan.
26]."     Indeed   one  of  the  Generals   seems  to  have  publicly
indicated   that   the   coup   was  coming   hours   before   McCone
briefed   the   Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee.      For   in
Paris  Le  Monde,   which  covers  Southeast  Asia  better  than  any
other  paper  in  the  world,  reported  Jan.  28  that  Tuesday   after-
noon,  before  flying  off  to  Saigon,   Gen.  Nguyen   Chanh  Thi,
commander   of   the  first  region,  told   students   demonstrating
against  the  government  in  Hue  that  a  change  of  regime  might
well  occur  next  day.    The  time  difference  between  South  Viet-
nam  and  Washington  is  13  hours.   When  it's  3  p.m.  in  South
Vietnam,  it's  only  2  a.m.  in  Washington.     Mr.  McCone  ap-
peared  before   the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  at  10
a.m.  Washington  time.    By  then  it  was  11  p.m.   in  South
2  *
Auguries  For  Peace?
We  note  some  auguries  for  peace  in  Vietnam.    Jo-
seph  Alsop  is  despondent.    On  Jan.  27  he   complained
that   the   President   on   three   separate   occasions   had
overruled    recommendations    from    Gen.    Taylor    for
strikes  at  North  Vietnam.   On  Jan.  29  Alsop  reported
that  the  "domino theory" was  now  being  treated  scorn-
fully   at   the   White  House.     "The   President   has   evi-
dently   persuaded  himself,   or   at   least   three-quarters
persuaded  himself,"  Alsop  wrote  indignantly,   "that   a
great  defeat  in  South Vietnam need  not  have  the  grave
consequences  outside  Vietnam  predicted  by  the  'Dom-
ino  Theorists'."  The  tone indicated that  Alsop's  patience
was   wearing  thin,  and  that   any   day   now   he  might
stage   a  guerrilla  uprising  of   his   own.
On  the  afternoon  of  that  same  day,  as  if  to  confirm
Alsop's  suspicions,  the  Washington  Star  appeared  with
a   headline,  "Saigon   Coup   May  Be  Beneficial"  over  a
column  by  Joseph  Kraft,  who  also  has  sources   in  the
White  House.    The  coup,  Kraft   speculated,   "far  from
being  an  undoubted  setback,"  could  be  "a  step  toward
the  least  bad  of  all  possible   settlements."    This  would
be  one  that  was  "negotiated  between  the  Saigon   gov-
ernment  and the  Vietnamese Communists,  with  the  U.S.
edged  obscurely  into  the  background,  and  the   Chinese
Communists   excluded   altogether."     This   was   prefer-
able,  Kraft  wrote,  to  a  "Geneva  type"  negotiation  with
Peking  in  which  the  U.S.   might  come  off   second-best
with  "disastrous  impact ...  on  domestic  politics."
Mr.  Kraft   admitted  that   "Khanh's  new  regime   has
not  yet  fixed  its  direction."    He  could  break  with  the
Buddhists  and  "establish   a  military  dictatorship."   But
it   is   possible,   Mr.  Kraft   continued   hopefully,   "that
Khanh  will  stick  with  the  Buddhists,  and  initiate   local
negotiations."    It  sounded  as  if  someone  in  the  govern-
ment   were  trying  desperately   to  send   Khanh  a   mes-
sage,   in  a  plain  unmarked  envelope.
Two   days   later,   in   the   Sunday   New   York   Times
(Jan.   31),    Seymour   Topping   reported   from   Saigon
that  "if  a  relatively  representative  government"  asked
the  U.S.  to  leave,  "officials  here  feel  that  there  would
be  no  choice   but  to  go."    He  added  that   contingency
plans  were  ready   "to  deal  with  a  situation   in  which
Americans  might  have  to  leave  South  Vietnam  hastily."
U.S.   Marines  would   be   airlifted   from   Okinawa   "to
screen  the  withdrawal of  Americans."    The  only   thing
missing  was  an  offer  to  supply  "Americans  Go  Home"
signs  free  of  charge,  with  demonstrators  paid  by  the
CIA  to  wave  them  as  we  left.
Vietnam.    But  no  agent  had  caught  or  sent  this  bit  of  news
(Continued  On  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   February   8,  1965
Like  the  Bay  of  Pigs,  Another  Warning  of  Incompetent  Intelligence
(Continued   from   Page   One)
to  Washington.     Could  it  be  there  were  no  American  agents
around  to  observe  that  student  demonstration,  no   informers
among  them?
$4  Billion  A  Year  on  Intelligence
The   U.S.  spends  a  fortune  on  intelligence.     David   Wise
and   Thomas   B.  Ross  in  their   recent   book,   "The   Invisible
Government"    (Random   House)    report   that   Mr.   McCone
told  a  private  briefing  for  high  ranking  military  men  in  the
summer  of   1963  that  U.S.  intelligence  had   100,000   persons
involved   in  its  work  and  spent  $2  billion  a  year.    That  is
three-quarters  of   a  billion   dollars  more  than   the   new   and
quadrupled  poverty  program.    But  Wise  and  Ross  point  out
that  this  included  only  conventional  forms  of  intelligence  and
not  the  electronic  world-wide  eavesdropping  and  aerial  recon-
naissance  operations  of  the  National  Security  Agency.    They
figure  the  total  bill  at  $4  billions.    A  substantial  portion  of
our  intelligence  network  must  be  in  Vietnam  as  a  crucial  war
zone.    There  must  be  a  swarm  of   U.S.   agents  and   native
informers  assigned  there  by  CIA  and  by the  Pentagon's  DIA,
the  Defense  Intelligence  Agency  which  tries  to  coordinate  the
separate,  often   exasperatingly  conflicting  intelligence  services
of  Army,  Navy  and  Air  Force.  Electronic monitoring  by  NSA
must  go  on  all  the  time  from  those  ships  and  planes  which
constantly  patrol   the   shores   and   skies  of   both   North   and
South  Vietnam.    The  Vietnamese  Armed  Forces  depend   for
their  payrolls  on  the  United   States.     Its  government  would
collapse  overnight  without  U.S.  support.   Yet  a  new  coup  can
be  plotted  in  opposition  to  U.S.  wishes  without  our  far-flung
civilian,  military  and  electronic  spy  apparatus  hearing   about
it  until  too  late.
The  coup  was a  blow  to  Gen.  Taylor's  prestige.    No  sooner
did  he  leave  town  than  the  Huong  regime  he  supported  was
thrown  out  and  Gen.   Khanh,  whom  Taylor  hates,  put  back
into  power.    Obviously  military  intelligence  was  pretty  poor.
Gen.  Taylor  wouldn't  have  left  for  Laos  and  Bangkok  if  he
had   suspected  that  this  was  brewing.    The   coup  must  also
have hurt  Mr.  McCone's  reputation  as  an  intelligence  chieftain
with  the  Senators  who  heard  him  that  morning.     Here  he
North   Vietnam's   Attitude   Toward   Peace
A   dispatch   from   Moscow   in  The  Worker   (Jan.   31)
merits  wider  attention.    Its  correspondent  interviewed
British   Laborite   MP  William  Warbey   when  he  passed
through  the  Soviet  capital  on  his  way  back  from  North
Vietnam.     Warbey   found   Ho   Chi  Minh   still   vigorous
and  well-informed   at  74,    Warbey  said  he  would  report
to  the  Foreign  Office  on  his  talks  with  Ho  and  with  his
Premier,   Pham  Van  Dong.    According   to  Art  Shields,
the   Worker  correspondent,    Warbey   reported   that   the
Premier  "said  his  government   had  no  wish  to  hurry  the
question  of  unification"  and  added,  "the  people  of  South
Vietnam   have   autonomy   and  will  establish   their   own
government   and  carry   out   their   own  policies   in   their
own    way.      The    North    Vietnamese     government,   of
course,"  this  account   continued,  "wants  to  restore   eco-
nomic  ties  with   the   South.    But  it  will   not  pressure
South  Vietnam  to  join  its   planned   economy,   and  the
way  is  open  for  friendship  with  the  United  States  after
the  end of  the  intervention."    This  indicates  that  North
Vietnamese  policy  is  still  the  same  as  that  reported  by
Dr.  Bernard  Fall  and two  other  Western  correspondents
after  interviews  with  Ho  and  Pham  Van  Dong  in   1962
(see   Fall's  The  Two  Vietnams,  p.  199),   i.e.  the   accept-
ance  of  an  independent   neutral   South   in  return  for  re-
sumption  of  trade  and  peace  between  North  and  South.
This   provides   a   favorable    atmosphere   for    Moscow's
newly   announced   mission   to  Hanoi   if   (as  Washington
plainly  hopes)  it  explores  the  possibilities  of  peace.
was telling  the  Foreign  Relations Committee  in  a private brief-
ing  that  there  was  no  immediate danger  of  an  overthrow  just
when  a  change  had  already  been  plotted  and  indeed  publicly
forecast  by one  of  the  Generals.  It  would  hurt  Mr.  McCone's
reputation  even  more  if  the  newspapers  had  done  their  duty
and  focused  public  attention  on  the  incident.    For  he  is  not
only  head  of  CIA  but  chairman of  the  U.S.  Intelligence  Board
which   coordinates   the  activities   of  the  government's    twelve
separate  intelligence  agencies.   As  after  the  Bay of  Pigs  affair,
another  glimpse  of  incompetence  on  the  part  of  our  intelli-
gence,  it  is  time  to  stop  and  consider  this  deeply.    It  is  on
such  misinformation that  American prestige,  treasure and  lives
depend   in  Vietnam.
The War's  No  End  of  Fun  in  Saigon,  But  Not  So Jolly  in  The Villages
"The    U.S.    military   'advisory'   morale   remains   high,   if
chiefly  because  most  'advisers' know  that,  provided  they  sur-
vive,   they   will  have  gained  battle  experience  and  service
promotion.   Approximately   25%  of  the  officers  of  the   Amer-
ican  Army's  16  divisions  are  already  engaged  in  the  South
Vietnam   war.
"With  the  growing  influx   of  Americans,  gracious,  tree-
lined  Saigon  at  night  is  reminiscent  of  Tokyo  under    U.S.
occupation.      Crew-cut   Americans   in  civilian   clothes,   with
all  the  advantages  of  PX  comforts,  parade  and  dine  their
Vietnamese  beauties,  who  are  learning  to  chew  gum,  to  pet
in  public  and  to  wear   skin-tight   slacks.
"There  has  been  a  great  expansion  of  bars  and  cabarets
offering  striptease.  .  .  .  Food  and  service  have  sharply  de-
teriorated  and  prices  are  soaring.   Every  night  the  exhaust
roar  of  crowded   taxis  and  latest  model   limousines,  racing
the   1  a.m.   curfew,   drowns  the   distant   rumble   of   mortar
fire  on  the  outskirts   of  the  city.
"An  average  full-time  investment  in  a  'good-family'  con-
cubine  runs  to  about  £25  a  month.    Any  enterprising   dance
hostess  can  earn  ten  times  the  salary  of  a  Government   sec-
retary.    A  cynical  Saigon  jest  is  'the  Vietcong  occupy  our
countryside  and  seduce  the  peasants;  the  Americans  occupy
our  cities  and  seduce  our  girls'."
—Richard   Hughes,   Saigon,   to   London   Sunday   Times
Jan.   24.
"As   an  aide   shrilly   called  off  names,   Major   Ly  handed
each  old  man  and  woman  a  packet  of  freshly   green  printed
piastre  notes.   Those  who  had lost  a  son  or  daughter,   father
or  wife,  were   given  the   equivalent   of   $40;  a  lost  cow  or
razed  home  brought   half  that  amount.    The  villagers   were
very  grave  and  formal  and  did  not  speak  nor  count  their
money  nor  acknowledge   its  receipt.    It  was  like  an  ancient,
unquestioned   ritual   solemnly   undergone  as  a  memorial   to
the  dead.     Yet  almost  every   old  face  registered  hate."
—Richard   Critchfield    from   Nghia   Hanh   Village,  South
Vietnam,  to  the  Washington  Star,  Jan.   27,  describing   the
payment   of   reparations   five  months  late   "for    the   deaths
and   damage   inflicted    by   the   government's   troops."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   February   8, 1965
Public  Hearings  Begin  on  Enforcement  of  New  Anti-Discrimination  Weapon
Civil  Rights  Commission  Panelists  on  Title  VI  Termed  Too  Lily-White
Civil  rights  and  anti-poverty workers  had  a  rare  opportun-
ity  last  week  to  confront  federal  bureaucrats  en  masse  with
their  protests.    This  at  least  was  the  result  if  not  the  inten-
tion  of  the  U.S.  Civil  Rights  Commission's  national  confer-
ence  on  the  Civil  Rights  Act.    Agency  officials  were  called  on
to  explain  how  they  will "administer  Title  VI,  which  says  that
all  federal  funds  must  be  withdrawn  from  state  and  local  pro-
grams  that  practice  discrimination.   This  can  be  a  powerful
$15  billion  a  year  weapon  against  segregation.
At  the  two  sessions  we  attended   the  audience  showed  it-
self  in  no  mood  for  compromise.    Aaron  Henry,  president  of
the  Mississippi  state  NAACP,   hit   the  most   exposed   nerve.
"There  are  no  Negro  panelists  helping  direct  this  program,"
he  declared to  a  panel  on  elementary and  secondary  education.
"Why  do  you  expect  us  to  do  more  down  South  than  you  do
in   Washington?"     When   Hyman   Bookbinder,   the   special
assistant  to  Sargent  Shriver  in  the  poverty  program,   retorted
that  this  wasn't  a  "useful"   comment,  Clarence  Mitchell   from
the   Washington    Bureau   of   the   NAACP    quipped   that   it
wouldn't  be  very  helpful  in  Mississippi  "if  the  Jackson  Daily
News  came  up  here  and  took  a  picture."
14  Negroes  'Elected'  in  Miss.
The  Agriculture  Department   has  one  of  the  toughest  and
most  important  jobs  under  Title  VI.    Its  services  in  the  rural
South  have  always  been   administered  locally  by  white  men
only.    Assistant  Secretary  John  Baker  announced  that  special
precautions  last  December  resulted  in  the  election  of  14  Miss-
issippi  Negro  farmers  to  a  few  of  the  county  committees  that
administer  the  farm  subsidy  program.    This  was  a  remarkable
first,  but  it  was  just  a  token  victory  compared  to  what  a  fair
election  would  have  produced.    A  young  member  of  the  Na-
tional  Lawyers  Guild  produced   a  briefcase  full   of   affidavits
from  Negro  farmers  telling  how  they  had  been  deprived  of
their  votes.   -Many  weren't  informed  of  the  election;  others
were  directed  to  the  wrong  polls,  and  because  the  polls  were
in  private  stores,  several  civil  rights  workers  who  tried  to  as-
sist  them  were  arrested  for  trespassing.    The  Department  had
asked  the  FBI  to  guard  the  polls  but  the  agency  deferred  to
the  local  police.
The  executive  secretary of  the  National  Sharecropper's  Fund
told  the  same  panel  that  integration  of  the  extension  service
in   South   Carolina   was  being   used   to   downgrade   the   once
independent  Negro  staff  members.    She  said  the   Department
would   never  find  out   the  truth   about   its  programs   unless
"someone  from  the  Federal   office  and  not  tied  to  local   influ-
The  Price  Of  That  Tax  Cut
"Sen.   CLARK:  I  congratulate  President  Johnson  on
the   budget    which   he   sent   to   Congress   yesterday—a
budget  which  calls  for  & $5.3  billion  deficit.    In  view  of
the  prevailing   attitude  in  Congress  toward  Federal  ex-
penditures,   I  recognize  the  political  necessity  which  re-
quired  him  to  hold  his  budget  below   $100  billion;  but
I  deplore  it.    ...
"Sen.   GORE:  .  .  .  Had  Congress  not  passed  the  tax
reduction  bill  last  year,  we  would  now  have  a  surplus
instead  of  a  deficit.  .  .  .  Now  that  we  have  closed  our
eyes  to  the  real  needs  of  our  people  and  reduced  Gov-
ernment  revenue  by  more  than  $11  billion,  we  discover
that   we  have   something  called  poverty,   against  which
we  must  wage  war.    We  discover  that  our  health  facil-
ities   are   inadequate;   that   our   education   is   woefully
inadequate;   that  our  streams  are  polluted;  our  trains
too  slow;  and  that  America  is  badly   in  need  of   beau-
tification.    But  now  we  do  not  have  the  money  to  meet
those  problems  because  we  gave  away  the  revenue  in
an  unwise,  unjustified,   political   tax    cut."
—In  the Senate, Jan.  26.
ence  is  sent  out  to  talk  to  the  Negro  agents  away  from   the
whites."  The  NAACP  field  director  in  South  Carolina  wanted
to  know  why  the  few  Negroes  who  are  appointed   to  agricul-
tural   committees  from   Washington   "in   most   instances  owe
allegiance  for  their  jobs  to  the  local  power  structure  and  can-
not  speak  for  the  Negro  community."  These  complaints  were
themselves  indications  of  progress,  but  progress  so  slow   that
it   embitters.    The   Department,   for   example,   has   failed   to
make  any  Negro  appointments  from  the  list  of  names  that  it
asked  civil  rights  workers  to  submit.    The  list  took  weeks  to
compile,  and  the  Negro  farmers  who  agreed   to  be  part  of  it
—some  of  them  even  from  Neshoba  county—did  so  at  great
personal  risk.
Testimony  from  a  young  idealist  at  the  Office  of  Economic
Opportunity  shows  what  can  be  done.    The  Office  has  refused
to  approve  a  Community  Action  Program   in   Cleveland   be-
cause  its  board  is  not  representative  of  the  community;   one
of  the  two  Negroes  chosen  for  the  22  member  board  was  most
widely  known  for  his  refusal  to  take  part  in  civil  rights  ac-
tivity.    A  quarter-million  dollar  grant  to  Louisiana  has  also
been   held   up   because  the   administrator  there   is  an   ardent
segregationist.    In  Atlanta,  Georgia,  a  Negro  woman   active
in  voter  registration  has  been  given  the  job  of   neighborhood
coordinator  for  the  poverty  program.    These  few  isolated  ac-
tions  show  what  militant  administration  could  do.
Supreme  Court  Justices Startled  by U.S.  Position  in  Mississippi  Voting  Rights  Case
No   less   than   five   Supreme    Court   justices   expressed
amazement   last   week   at   the   government's   argument   in
U.S.  v.  Mississippi.    The  case  involves  the   constitutionality
of  Mississippi's voting  laws,  under  which  only  5%  of  voting-
age  Negroes  in  the  state  have  been  able  to  register.  A find-
ing  of  unconstitutionality  would  eliminate  the  need  to  prove
county   by  county  that  the  laws  are  being  unfairly   applied.
This  has  been  a  painfully   slow  approach.    Justices  Harlan,
Stewart,  White,   Black  and  Goldberg   indicated   readiness  to
rule  on  the  question  of  constitutionality.    Mr.  Justice   Har-
lan  said  the  government's  brief  as  he  read  it  seemed  to  ask
that  "the  laws  be  declared  unconstitutional  on  their  face  by
this  court,"  but  Mr.  Archibald   Cox,   the  Solicitor  General,
replied   that   he  was   not   "pressing"  for   immediate   relief.
He  asked  only  that   the  Court   remand  the  case  to  a  three-
judge  U.S.   District   Court   for  trial.
The  reason  for  Mr.  Cox's  strategy  was  not  made  clear.
Perhaps  he  feared  defeat,   but  remanding  the  case  means  a
two  year  delay.    The  three-judge  court,  with  its  two  Miss-
issippi  justices,  will  almost  certainly  rule  against  the   gov-
ernment,  as  it  did  in  the  original  suit,  and  this  will  make
necessary   a   second   appeal   to   the   Supreme    Court.
2  '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  February   8, 1965
Un-American  Committee  Faces  Two  Separate  Attacks  In  The  House
Attorney  General  Asked  to  Suspend  HUAC  Contempt  Citations
Congressman  Phillip  Burton   (D.,   Cat.)   took  the  first  ac-
tion  in  Congress  last  week  to  overturn  the  Un-American Ac-
tivities  Committee's  contempt  citation  against  two  leaders  of
Women   Strike  for   Peace  and   the  manager  of   the  National
Guardian.    Dagmar  Wilson,  Donna  Allen  and  Russell  Nixon
were  cited   last  December   when  they  refused   to  testify  in  an
executive  session  of  the  committee.  In  a  letter  February  1  to
Attorney  General  Katzenbach,  Burton  noted  that  he  has  in-
troduced  retroactive  legislation  which  requires  House  approval
for   any  contempt  citation.    In  the  current  case,  the  Speaker
of  the  House  certified   the  contempt  citation  when   Congress
was  not  in  session.    In  his  letter,  Burton  asked  the  Attorney
General  for  a  stay  in  the  contempt  proceedings  until  Congress
has  acted  on  his  bill.
To  Avoid  Another   Surprise
More  than  a  dozen  liberal  congressmen  are  currently  plan-
ning  two broader  attacks on  HUAC's  powers.  The  first,  which
should  occur  in  mid-February,  seeks  to  reduce  HUAC's  funds.
This  is  tricky  because  committee  appropriations  are  privileged
motions:  they  by-pass the  Rules  Committee  and  come  directly
to  the  floor  from   the  Committee  on  House  Administration.
This  happened  so  swiftly  last  year  that  every  liberal  but  one
was  caught  off  the   floor.   To  guard  against  a  similar  surprise
move  this  year,  Rep.  Don  Edwards  (D.,  Cat.)  has  asked   to
testify   on   the   HUAC   appropriation.     Liberals  would   then
know  approximately  when  it  was  coming  to  the   floor.   This
year   they  will   also  have  an   ally  inside  the  Administration
Committee  in  freshman  Rep.  Jonathan  Bingham  (D.,  NJV.).
In  the  past  this  has  been  one  of  the  most  conservative  com-
mittees   in   Congress.    Nine   of   its   fifteen   Democrats   are
Southerners.
A  further  complication  is  that  many  liberals who  are  anti-
HUAC   are  reluctant  to  use  committee   appropriations   as  a
weapon  against  it.    They  fear  that  the  precedent,  once  estab-
lished,  could  be  used   against  them   easier  than   against   the
conservatives.    In  fact,  it  already has  been.    Last  year  the  Ad-
ministration  Committee  severely  cut the  appropriation  for  Rep.
Adam   Clayton   Powell's   Education   and   Labor   Committee.
FBI'S  Right  To  Harass?
After   two  weeks  of   24-hour  a  day   surveillance  by
Chicago  FBI  agents,  Mr. Sam  Giancana  sued  for  an  in-
junction   against   the   head   of   the   Chicago   FBI,   Mr.
Marlin  Johnson.     With  only   Mr.  Justice  Douglas   dis-
senting,  the  Supreme   Court  last  week  refused  without
explanation  to  hear  the  case.    The  FBI  agents,   lacking
a   warrant,   had  followed  Giancana  on  some   15  or  16
occasions   to  his   golf   club,  had  informed  his   partners
and   the    club's    manager    that    they    were    "federal
agents,"  and  had  pursued  Giancana  even  into  the  mau-
soleum   where  the  remains  of   his  wife  were   interred.
The  3  to  5  FBI  cars  stationed   within  10  yards  of   his
home  were  equipped  with  telescopic  lens  cameras   for
photographing  its  interior.  A  U.S.  District  Court  grant-
ed   Giancana  a   temporary   injunction  and   found   FBI
chief   Johnson  guilty  of  contempt   for  refusing   to  an-
swer  any  questions  concerning   the  surveillance.  A   U.S.
Court   of   Appeals   confirmed   the   contempt    conviction
but  vacated  the  injunction  on  the  ground  that  a  district
court   has  no  jurisdiction   in  suits   involving   less   than
$10,000.    Giancana  had  failed   to  place   a  dollar  value
on  the  damage  done  to  him.
Powell  had  to  turn  out  anti-poverty, education  and  fair  labor
standards  legislation  with  less  money  for  his  30  staff  members
than  HUAC  received  for  its  nine.
The  second  attack  on  HUAC  seeks  abolition.    Here  there
are  two  approaches.     One  group   of  congressmen,   including
Burton,   Edwards,   Resnick   and   Hawkins   from   California,
Rosenthal  and  Farbstein  from  New  York,  and  Diggs  from
Michigan,  all  Democrats,  has  introduced  resolutions  to  abol-
ish  HUAC  and   give   Judiciary  authority  to   investigate  sab-
otage  and  "overt  acts'affecting  internal  security."  All  HUAC's
records  would  be transferred  to  the  National  Archives  "not  to
be  opened  for  official  or  public  inspection."     A  smaller  group
of   congressmen,   so  far  including  only  Roosevelt   (D.,  Cat.)
and  Lindsay  (R.,  N.Y.)   has  embarked  on  a  bit  of flim-flam.
Their  bills  would  "abolish"  HUAC  but  only  by  transferring
its  existing  authority  to  an  Un-American  Activities   subcom-
mittee  of  House  Judiciary.    This  would  merely  shift  the  evil,
not  eradicate  it.
We'll Send A  Free Sample  Copy Of  This  Issue To  Friends  If  You  Send Stamped  Self-Addressed  Envelopes
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Name  ...................................
Cttrotfit
City   ......................................
For  the  enclosed  $5 send
(To)   Name  ........................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a  sub  for  the   enclosed   $5:
....Zone........... .State....................
2/8/65
a  gift  sub  to:
,
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week   in  December  and  the  first  week  in
January  and   Bi-Weekly  during  July  and   August  at    5618   Nebraska   Ave..   N.W..    Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;     J6   in   Canada;   ?10  elsewhere.     Air   Mall   rates:
S15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED