I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965sep13.pdf

============================================================

Voices  of  Despair from  the Negro  Delta, P.  3
How  We  Enrich  the  Lives  of  Our  Gallant  Allies  in  South Vietnam
"As  battle  rages  we  will  continue  as  best  we  can  to  help
the  good  people  of  South  Vietnam  enrich  the  condition of
their  life.  .  .  ."
—Lyndon  B. Johnson at  Press Conference,  July  28.
"In  Bien  Hoa  province  south  of  Saigon  on  Aug.  16   U.S.
aircraft   accidentally  bombed  a   Buddhist   pagoda   and  a
Catholic  Church ...  it  was  the  third time their  pagoda had
been  bombed  in  1965.   A  temple  of  the  Cao  Dai  religious
sect  in  the  same  area  has  been  bombed  twice  this  year.
"In another delta province there is  a  woman  who has both
arms  burned off  by  napalm  and  her  eyelids  so  badly burned
that  she  cannot  close  them.    When  it  is  time  for  her  to
sleep  her  family  puts  a  blanket  over  her  head.   The woman
had  two  of  her  children killed  in  the  air  strike  that maimed
her.  . . .
"Although   the   daily  air   raids   against   North  Vietnam,
have  received  most  of  the  public  attention,  the  ever  increas-
ing  ferocity  of  aerial  bombardment  in  South  Vietnam  may
have  a  much  greater  ultimate  effect  on  the  outcome  of  the
guerrilla  war  here.    Few  Americans  appreciate  what  their
nation  is  doing  to  South  Vietnam with  airpower  .  .  .  this
is  strategic  bombing in  a  friendly  allied,  country  .  .  .  inno-
cent  civilians  are  dying  every  day  in  South  Vietnam."
—Chas. Mohr  from  Saigon in  the New  York  Times Sept.  5
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  29
SEPTEMBER  13,  1965
«>'       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
15   CENTS
A  7-Point  Program  for  World  Peace
It  is  clear  now  to  everyone that  the  suicide  of  civilization
is in progress. . . . Wherever  there is  lost the consciousness
that  every  man  is  an  object  of  concern for  us  just  because
he  is  man,  civilization  and  morals  are  shaken,  and  the  ad-
vance  to  fully   developed  inhumanity  is  only  a  question of
time. . . . We have  talked for decades  with  ever increasing
light-mindedness  about  war  and  conquest, as  if  these were
merely  operations  on  a  chess-board;  how  was  this possible
save  as  the  result  of  a  tone  of  mind, which  no  longer pic-
tured  to  itself   the  fate  of  individuals,  but  thought  of  them
only  as  figures  or  objects  belonging to  the  material  world?
. . . Only  such  thinking  as  establishes the sway  of  the men-
tal  attitude   of  reverence  for    life    can  bring  to  mankind
perpetual  peace.
—Albert  Schweitzer:  The  Philosophy  of  Civilization   (19SS)
Only  a  few  hours  before,   the  world's  statesmen  had  been
paying  tribute  to  Albert  Schweitzer,  and  to  his  philosophy  of
reverence  for  life.    But  when  war  broke  out  full  scale  between
India  and  Pakistan,  what  appeared  uppermost  in  their  calcula-
tions  was  reverence   for  strategy.    It  was  not  what  the  war
would  do  to  the  peasant  on  both  sides,  his  wife  and  children,
his  cow or  goat  and  his  hopes,  which  stirred  concern  but  what
it  might  do  to  the  balance  of  power.    The  world  was  seen,
just  as  Schweitzer  wrote  four  decades  ago,  as  a   chess-board.
Britain  feared  the  end  of  its  Commonwealth;   Russia,  of  its
friendly  ties  with  neutralist  India;  America,  the  effect  on  its
effort  to  contain  China.
Incinerators  for  Men and Women
This  unconcern   with  the  human  factor  was  as  evident   in
the  area  of  conflict.    To  listen  to  the  propaganda  from  New
Delhi  and  Rawalpindi,  their  struggle was  an  effort  to  preserve
the  freedom  of  the  Kashmir  peasant,  just  as  our  aim  in  Viet-
nam  is supposed  to  be the  freedom  of  the  Vietnamese  peasant.
As  a  practical  matter,  his  wishes,  his  comfort  and  his  life  are
of  the  least concern  in  either  arena  to  his  self-appointed  libera-
tors.   This  is what  Schweitzer'meant  when  he  warned  against
treating  individual  human  beings  as  objects.    It  is  here  that
he  saw the  suicide  of  civilization.    Within  two  decades  of  his
warning,  the  Nazis  set up  crematoria  for  the  mass  incineration
of  races  they  disliked.    Now  all  of  us  live  in   the  shadow  of
8 *
Goldwater, Nixon and Meany
The  Gallup  poll  (Aug.  29)  showed  only  one  American
in  seven  expects  victory  in  Vietnam.   The  majority  be-
lieve  the  war  will  end  in  negotiations.    Samuel  Lubell
(Sept.  7)  says  all  his  surveys  show  "relatively   little
militant  uncompromising  feeling  about  Vietnam."  Eliot
Janeway  in  his  New  York  Daily  News  financial  column
reports  (Sept.  7)   "one  reason  why  the  campus  revolt
against  Vietnam  is  spreading  into  Congress"  is  because
the  business   community  fears   the  cost   threatens  the
Johnson  boom.   Four  voices,  like  the  four  horsemen  of
a   new  Apocalypse,  were  raised  over   the   Labor  Day
weekend  against  this  general  trend.    Goldwater  wants
the  war  intensified  and  Hanoi  bombed.   Nixon  in  Sai-
gon  spoke  out  against  anything  short  of  total  victory.
George  Meany  and  George  Harrison  of   the   AFL-CIO
devoted  their  Labor  Day  broadcasts  to  attacking  talk
of   peace.     Does   organized   U.S.   labor   really   stand
shoulder  to  shoulder  with  Goldwater and  Nixon?   How
long  will  labor's  saner   voices   remain  intimidated  by
Meany's   tight   little   pro-war   dictatorship   over   the
labor  movement?
nuclear  incineration  any  time  our  leaders  deem  this  unavoid-
able  as  a matter  of  honor  or  interest.    Inhumanity  is  so  taken
for  granted,  we  expect  it  even  for  ourselves.
Whatever   the   immediate   outcome   in   India   or   Vietnam,
sooner  or  later  one  of  these  lesser  conflicts may escalate  out  of
control  into  the  big  conflict  we  all  fear.    The  time  has  come
to  recognize  the  general  character  which  marks  most  of  them,
and  the  need  for  general  solutions  in  advance.    The  war  be-
tween  India  and  Pakistan  arose  out  of  much  the  same  circum-
stances  to  be  found  in  Vietnam,  in  Germany,   in  Korea,  in
China  and  in  Palestine.    In  each  of  these  situations,  cease-fire
lines  long,ago  established  have  never  been  turned   into  firm
boundaries  by  peace  treaties.   War  can  erupt  over  these  pre-
carious   lines  at  any  time  as  in  Kashmir.    All   are   divided
countries,  kept  apart  by  deep  religious  or  ideological   differ
ences.    Their  Lilliputian   divisions   have  become  die  symbols
and   the   consequences   of  larger  East-West  divisions.    They
(Continued  on  Pugt   Two)
1   1    'j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  IS,  1965
In  A General Settlement, Problems Large and Small May More Easily Be Solved
(Continued   from  Page   One)
can  best  be  solved  in  the  framework  of  a  world  settlement.
Without   a  world   settlement,  rival  great  powers  will  always
have  some  interest  in  exacerbating them.    In  each  case  specific
solutions  may  be  beyond  the  political  power  of  local  leaders.
The  U.S.  Must  Set  The  Example
In   the   frame  work  of   a  general   solution,  dangerous  big
power  animosities  can  also  be  more  easily  resolved.     Above
all  what  the  smaller   countries   need   is  not  preachment  but
example.    The  feeling  that  the  U.S.  or  Russia  want  to  patch
up  the  Indian-Pakistan  quarrel  only  in  order  to  further  their
own  three-cornered   struggle   among  themselves  and  China  is
conducive  to  cynicism.   This  is  why  we  believe  the  time  has
come  to  offer  a  general  program  for  the  cementing  of  a  new
world  order.    The  U.S.   as  the  world's   greatest   power  must
take  the  lead  in  abnegation.    It  must  show  that  it,  too,  is  pre-
pared  to  sacrifice  politics-as-usual  and  thereby  evoke  a  similar
response   from  other  nations.    So  we  suggest  a  7-point   pro-
gram  for  world  peace:
1.  Settle  territorial  disputes  by  election.    This  would  mean
a  plebiscite in  Kashmir  to  give  its  people  a  choice  of  joining
Pakistan  or  India  or  independence.   It   would  mean  a   free
election  in  South  Vietnam.   In  both  cases  all  foreign  troops
would  be  withdrawn,  including  our own.
2.  Federal  systems,  even  if  on  a  very  limited  basis  to  start
with,  for  all  divided  countries.    This  would  mean  that  Kash-
mir,  Pakistan and  India,  North  and  South  Vietnam,  Formosa
and  mainland  China,  North  and  South  Korea,  West  and  East
Germany,  Israel  and  Arab  Palestine  would  be  encouraged  to
set   up  limited   Federal  institutions  for   such  common  prob-
lems  as  trade  and  cultural  relations,  widening  and  deepening
these  ties  later  as  tension  between  the  two  parts  relaxed.
3.  Universal  membership  in  the  United Nations  for  all  ex-
isting  governments, representing  the  actual  territories  they
control;  the  U.S.  as  a  corollary  to  adopt  the  French  system
of   relations   with   countries  rather  than   governments,  thus
permanently    ending   the   poisonous   practice   of   awarding
recognition  as  a  kind  of  certificate  of  morality  and  merit.
4.  A  universal  declaration  that  no  government  will  hence-
forth  play  politics  with  hunger,  as  we  have  done  by  refusing
to  sell  food  or  to  trade  with  nations  of  which  we  disapprove.
This   would  entail   an  end  of   our  wheat  sale  discrimination
against   the  Soviet   Union  and  our  embargoes  against  China
and   Cuba.     It   would  establish  trade   for   peace  in  place  of
trade  embargoes  for   political   punishment.
5.  A  universal  declaration  that  no  government will  hence-
forth   give  or  sell  military   equipment   to   another,   but  that
this  will  be  diverted  to  economic development instead.
6.  A  world  freeze  on  all  arms  budgets   and  an  end  of  all
nuclear  tests,  above  ground or  below.   We  would  give  up our
fetish  about  inspection as  our  contribution.    These  first  dra-
Why Just Bore  Holes In The Sky,
When You Might (Accidentally) Kit  Somebody?
"Saigon,   Sept.   3    ,.AP)—Viet   Cong   gunners   shot
down  a  troop-carrying  U.S.  Army  helicopter  today  as
it  flew  toward  a  guerrilla  center  that  had  been bombed
by  B-52s. ...  As  in  many  saturation  bombings  by  the
Strategic  Air  Command  fleet,  they  found  no  Viet  Cong
bodies."
—Baltimore  Sun,  Sept.  4.
"There  was  a  belief  on  the  part  of  the  U.S.  military
that  while  the  raid  was  not  successful  in  terms  of  VC
killed   or   installations  destroyed,  it   had   knocked   the
guerrillas  off  balance.  .  .  .  Additionally,  it  was pointed
out   that  the  raids  gave  B-52  pilots  and  crews  opera-
tional  combat  experience;  ditto  for  the  air  tanker  re-
fueling  crews.    These  officers  and  men  would  be boring
holes  in  the  sky,  anyway,  on  training  missions."
—Washington  Star,  P.  IB,  Sept.  5.
matic  steps  ought  to  be  followed  by  a  world  conference  for
arms  reduction  by  stages  with  the  savings  diverted  to  de-
velopment  in  the  poorer  areas  of  the  earth.
7.  Expand  the  World  Court into  a  larger  and  more  flexible
agency  for  conciliation, mediation  and  arbitration,  and  pledge
all  nations  to  submit  disputes  to  the  Court  instead   of  em-
barking  on  hostile  measures.
The  United  States  could  also  make  a  dramatic  contribution
to   ending   world   lawlessness   by   liquidating   two   activities
which   create   world   suspicion.     One   are  our  spy-in-the-sky
satellites;  their  main  function   is  to  map  the  targets  in  other
countries  for  our  bombers  and  missiles  in  the  event  of  war.
These  satellites  offend   our  allies  as  well  as  our  rivals.     The
other  is  the  CIA,  which  is widely  regarded  as  a  source  of  con-
stant  interference  by  the  U.S.  in  other  people's  affairs,  a  me-
chanism  for  bribery  and  corruption,   sometimes  for  the  over-
throw   of   governments   and   even   the   assassination   of   their
rulers.     Greece   is  the   latest   country  where   people   suspect
justly  or  unjustly  that  their  political  life  has  been   poisoned
and  their  democratic  institutions  endangered   by  CIA   opera-
tions.   To  abolish  this  cloak-and-dagger  agency would  enhance
our  reputation  and  improve  world  stability.
Such   moves  on  pur  part  could   indeed   make  this,  in   the
noblest  sense,  the  American  Century,  laying  firm  foundations
for  world  order.    We  appeal  to  President  Johnson,  who  has
shown  such  great  gifts  in  resolving  clashes  at  home,  of  labor
and  capital,  of  white  and  black,  to  consider  some  such  act  of
leadership   abroad.    Not   since   Woodrow   Wilson   has  any
President  had  so  great  an  opportunity  to  serve  mankind.
While  Ky  Liberates  The  North, All  We  Have  to  Do  Is  Liberate  the  South  from  Ky
ANNOUNCER:  General  Ky,   though  Premier   of   South
Vietnam   is  a  native  of   Hanoi,  capital  of  North  Vietnam
and  he recently  proposed  a  new  plan to  hasten  the  defeat  of
the  Communists.
Mr.  CRONKITE:  I'm very  interested  in  this  plan of  yours
to  infiltrate  North  Vietnam  the  same  way  that  the  Com-
munists   have   infiltrated   South  Vietnam.  .  .  .  Going  into
North  Vietnam  with  a  —
Premier  KY:  Yes.
Mr.  CRONKITE: Democratic  liberation  front  of  our  own.
—On  CBS  Face  The  Nation,  July  18.
"The   South  Vietnamese   government   announced   decrees
giving  Premier Nguyen  Cao Ky  sweeping  powers  to  estab-
lish  military  administrations  throughout  the  country.    The
move  was  seen  as  tightening  Saigon's  grip  at  a  time  when
student   unrest  is   simmering   in  the   capital  and  northern
cities.    Observers  said   the   decrees   gave   the   premier  the
power  to  establish  military  zones   in  which  officials  would
have  the  right  to  search  houses  day  and  night,  ban  strikes
and  public  meetings,  censor  the  press.  .  .  ."
—Washington  Post  from  Saigon, Sept. 4.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  13,  1965
The  Coming  Vote  on  the  MFDP  Challenge  and  the  Next  Elections
South  Watching  to  See If  It  Can With  Impunity  Slow  Up  Negro  Voting
A  new wave of  intimidation  is  sweeping many parts  of  the
South  to  discourage  Negro  registration.     Neither  criminal
nor  civil  penalties  will  prove  of  much  effect.    The  one  sanc-
tion  would  be  to  get  Congress to  refuse  to  seat  those  elected
from  districts  in  which Negro  voting rights have  been  denied.
This  gives  crucial  significance  to  the  still  pending challenge
by  the  Mississippi  Freedom  Democratic Party.  The  Southern-
dominated  House Administration Committee has  done  a  good
job  of  delaying  action.    Speaker  McCormack  has   now  told
Congressmen   Wm.   F.   Ryan   (D.  N.Y.)    and   Don  Edwards
(D.  Ca!.), the  leaders  in  the  challenge, that  if  the  Committee
does  not  report   before  September  21,  they  can  bring  to  the
floor a  motion  declaring  vacant  the  seats  of  the  five  elected
Mississippians.    Last  January   4  Congress  voted  149  to  276
to  seat  the  five  pending  investigation.    Last  May  600 deposi-
tions  and   10,000  pages  of  testimony  were   filed.   This  is  a
monumental  record  of  the  violence  and  fraud  used  to  prevent
90%  of  the  State's  Negroes  from  voting  in  the  last  election.
If  the five nevertheless retain  their  seats, Southern politicians
will  be  encouraged to  believe  that  they  too  can  use  terror  to
hold  down  the  Negro  voting  at  next  year's  elections and  get
away  with  it.
From  the  1860s  until  1904, there  were  some forty  cases  in
which  Southern  Congressmen  lost  their  seats  because  Negro
voting  rights  were  violated.    These  precedents  are  set  forth
in  the  Mississippi  Freedom  Democratic  Party  brief,    Mrs.
Victoria  Gray,  of  the  MFDP,  told  a  Washington  press  con-
ference  April  3,  "many  people  risked  their  lives  and  jobs  to
give  evidence  in  February.    It  is  hard  for  me to  describe the
effect  on  our  people  in  Mississippi,  if  people  in   Washington
fail  to  do  the  right  thing."    A  hundred  Mississippians  are
planning  to  come  to  Washington  Sept.  12.   We  urge  every
reader  to  support  their  appeal  by  writing  to  his  or  her  Con-
gressman.    Those  who  would  like  more  specific   information
22 National  Organizations  Appeal
"For   nearly  a  century,  illegal,   unconstitutional   and
inhuman  measures  have been  used  by  the  State  of  Miss-
issippi  to  prohibit  Negroes  from   exercising   the  ballot.
...  To  allow  members,  the  validity  of  whose  election
is  in  question,   to  continue  to  sit  indefinitely  with  no
settlement  of  the  charges  is  to  nullify   the  mechanism
for   ensuring   that   only   legitimately   elected   persons
serve  in  Congress.    It  is  therefore  essential   that  Con-
gress  act on these  challenges  in  this  session.  .  .  . For
the   House   to   fail   to   deal   openly  and  seriously   with
these   challenges  is  to  encourage  Southern  forces   op-
posed  to  Negro  voting  to  disregard   the  Voting  Rights
bill   and    to   invite   continued   political   exclusion   of
Negroes   in  the   South."
—From  a  joint  statement   calling  for  a  vote  on  the
MFD   challenge  by  22  national  organizations,  including
the  ACLU,  the  ADA,   the  Commission  on  Race  &  Re-
ligion  of   the  National  Council  of  Churches,  the   Meth-
odist  Board  of  Social Concern.
on  how  their  Representative   voted  earlier   on  this  question
may  obtain  it  by  writing  the  MFDP  at  926   Pennsylvania
Avenue,   SE,   Washington,  D.  C.    For   those   readers  who
would  like  to  see  how  all  this  looks  from  rural   Mississippi,
we  print  below  a  dispatch   from   a   Delta   town  where   the
mysterious   "hit   and  run"   killing  of  a  Negro  boy  helped  to
slow  up  registration  in  one  of  the  first  two  counties,  Leflore,
to get a Federal registrar.   It  was written by a young  Seattle
English  teacher  who gave  up her job to work with  the  MFDP.
She has  brought  to Washington  for  presentation to  President
Johnson  letters  from  Negroes  in  the  area,  letters  they  were
afraid  to  mail.
Despair  in the Rural  Depths:  Delta Negroes Appeal to LBJ in Mystery Killing
By  Liz Fusco
Sidon,  Miss.—The  discovery  of  the  badly  mutilated  body
of  a  16-year-old  boy  south  of  Greenwood, Miss.,  on   Friday,
Aug.  20  has  raised  protest  in  the  Negro  community.   The
protest  is  being  voiced  out  of  Sidon,  the  nearest  rural  town,
in  spite  of  the  intensification of  fear:  fear  of  walking  alone,
fear  of  the  night,  fear   of  trying   to  register  to  vote.    The
protest  is  being  voiced  in  spite  of  the  terrible,  often  bitter
hopelessness  generally  voiced  whenever the  question  is  raised
of  whether  the  law  in  Leflore  county  will  do  anything:  'A
Negro  get  kill  in  Mississippi.  And  theres  nothing  being  done
about   it."     "Ain't   nothing   ever   been   done  in    Mississippi
about  killing no Negro."   "If  it  was one of them.  . .  ."  Negro
kids  are  being  killed—either  by  hit  and  run  "accident",  as
the  official  coroner's  verdict  declared,  or  by  murder,  'mobbed
up',  as  the  community  feels—how  much  longer?
Freddy  Lee Thomas  was  not  participating  in  the  Freedom
movement  in  Leflore  county.    He was just  a  Negro  kid  walk-
ing  alone too late  at  night.   His  body was  found  on the  high-
way,  so torn  up  that  the  ambulance  driver  who  picked  him
up  said  he  didn't  feel  an  autopsy  was  necessary.    But  an
autopsy  was  performed,  with  such  haste  that  it  was  already
completed  before  the  boy's  mother  knew  her  son  was  dead.
And  the  body  was  buried  with  such  haste,  a  day  ahead  of
the  funeral  arrangements,  that  the  people  who  had  planned
to  attend  the  funeral  as  a  protest,  the  people  in  Sidon  and
the  rural  area  surrounding  Sidon,  were  further  frustrated.
Left  with  no further  kind  of  direct  action, the  people talked
about  refusing  to  be  intimidated  from   registering   to  vote.
But  as  many  talked  about  the  uselessness  of  registering   to
vote.    The  people,  seeing  no  evidence  of  investigation,  even
of  a  hit  and  run,  even  after  a  week,  began  to  write  appeals
to  President  Johnson.
"Dear   Mr.  President:   Please   send  us  to  protect   here  to
help  us.    We  ant  got  no  freedom  here  at  all.    These  White
people  here  treat  us  any  Kind  of  Way  and  if  we  try  to  help
us  selfe  they  get  the  cuecuck  [KKK]  again.    A  Sixteen  year
old  boy was  Kill  and  put  him  on  the  high  Way  so  they  could
say  a  car  hit  him, but  I  know and  the  polices  Know that  car
didn't  hit  .   ..  what  good  are  Federal  registrars  if  kids  are
killed?"
"Dear  President  Johnson:  Being  16  years   old  in  a  land
you  call  your  "great  Society",  I  just  wonder  just  where  in
this  great  Society  do I fit ...    where my race  is  'open  game',
so to  speak.  .  .  .  Maybe you can't  answer  my questions,  Mr.
President,  but  someone should  think  about  them.
"Dear   President  Johnson:   We  are   concerned  here   with
more  than  the  death  of  a  Negro  kid.   We are  concerned with
the  death  of  the  intire  Negro  race.   We  are  concerned  with
the  fact  that  Negro  men, Women  and  Children are  shot down
like  rabbits.  .  . .  Our young  men are  sent  over  seas  to fight
for  freedom that  they  themselves  don't  have.    What  does  it
mean,   Mr.  President,  when  they're  victims   of  hit-and-run
accidents  where  nobody  is  ever  punished?   Accidents  where
Negroes  are  always  on the  receiving  end.  .  . . How long can
this  go on, Mr.  President?  .  .  .  How long  can  one man deny
another  the  rights  he  was  born with?"
"Dear  Mr.  President:   At  the  rate  little  Negro  boys  are
being  killed  in  Mississippi  there  won't  be  any  left  within  a
couple of years.    I'm  a  13-year  old Negro  boy and  I'm  scared,
because  I  don't   know  when  they'll  get   me."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  IS,  1965
Those  Shiny  White  House  Words  to  the  Geneva  Arms  Parley  Turned  Out to  Be  Eye-Wash
Home  Rule  for  D.  of  C.  Johnson's  Biggest  Victory  Over  Racism
Of  all  Johnson's  Congressional  victories,  the  most  spectac-
ular  was  on  home  rule  for  the  District  of  Columbia.    Forty-
eight  hours  before  the  White  House  succeeded  in  getting  218
signatures—a  majority  of  the  House—on  a  discharge  petition,
some  of  the  shrewdest  observers  on  the  Hill  were  sure  this
time  the  President  would  fail.    He  was  bucking  not  only  the
racial  bias which  fears  Negro  majority  rule  in  the  District  of
Columbia  but  the  sacred  committee  system.   The   leadership
and  the  other  committee  chairmen  balked  at  interfering with
the  Southern-dominated  District  committee which had  so  long
bottled  up  home  rule.    Washington  lost  the  vote  in  1874  as
part  of  the  reaction  against  Reconstruction.
Third  Degree  for  Negroes
The  undercurrent  of  racism toward  the  District  of  Columbia
Johnson  had  to  overcome  showed  itself   plainly  in  the  new
criminal  procedure  act for  the  District  which  passed  the  House
last  March  and  the  Senate  last  week.   The  House  bill  repealed
the  so-called  Mallory  rule  entirely.   The  Mallory  rule  sought
to  protect  the  indigent  and  the  ignorant  i.e. mostly  Negroes
from  the  "third  degree".    It  was  laid  down  by  a  unanimous
Supreme  Court  in  1957 in  the  case  of  a  Negro  sentenced  to
death  for  rape,  and  has  since  been  the  target  of  just  that  in-
flammatory mixture  of  sex  and  racism  familiar  in  lynch  mobs.
The  more  sophisticated   Senate  86  to  7  passed  a  less  blatant
but  no  less  unconstitutional  version  which  would  legalize  con-
fessions   obtained   from   suspects   questioned   not   more   than
three  hours  "exclusive  of  interruptions"   before  arraignment.
Arrests  without  probable  cause  are  made  all  too  frequently  in
the  District.   These  build  up  that  hatred  for  the  police  which
appeared-in  Los  Angeles  as  in  every  other  Negro  uprising.
Nuclear  Policy  Still  Frozen
"The  time  is  now.    The  hour  is  late.   The  fate  of  genera-
tions yet unborn  is in  our hands. ..."   So ended  the  eloquent
message  the  White  House  sent  the  Geneva  nuclear  arms  talks
when  they resumed  Aug.  17.   The  words were  eye-wash.   The
Johnson  Administration  has  shown  not  the  slightest   intention
India's Last  Appeal at  Geneva
"The   non-aligned   delegations   have   spoken   on  this
central  theme  on  many  occasions,  namely,  the  unrealis-
tic  and  irrational  proposition  that  a  non-proliferation
treaty   should   impose  obligations  only  on   non-nuclear
countries,  while  the   nuclear   powers   continue  to   hold
on  to  their  privileged  status ... by  retaining  and even
increasing  their deadly  stockpiles. ... In India  we have
a  word  in  our  language  derived  from  the  name  of  an
Emperor  who  lived  at  the  beginning   of  the  17th  cen-
tury.    He  himself   was  a  drunkard,  but  he   prohibited
drinking  in  the  empire.  .  .  .  Our ultimate  objective  is
clear.     In   the    economic   field   the   'have-nots'   have
adopted  for  themselves  programs  of  economic  develop-
ment  so  that  eventually  .  .  .  they  .  .  .  become  'haves'.
Conversely,   in  the  disarmament  field  our  objective   is
to  achieve ...  a  situation  in  which  the  'haves'  reduce
their  war  arsenals  and  eventually   become  'have-nots'.
.  .  .  Institution  of  international   controls  on  peaceful
reactors  is  like  the  attempt  to  maintain  law  and  order
in  a  society   by  placing   all  its  law-abiding  citizens  in
custody   while  leaving   its  law-breaking  elements   free
to  roam  the  streets."
—Mr.  Trivedi  (India)  at  the  Geneva  talks  Aug.  IS.
to  make  the  slightest  change  in  U.S.  policy  for  the  sake  of
stopping  nuclear  proliferation.   The  old  MLF plan reappeared
in   the  intricate  Dulles-style  trickery  of   our  proposal.     The
British  were  appalled  by  our  leaving  the  door  ajar  for  a  Ger-
man  finger  on  the  nuclear  trigger.    The  only  change  brought
about  in  a  frozen  situation  by  our  stale  offer  was  an hysterical
outburst  of  anti-Americanism  by  Adenauer  and  Strauss in  an
otherwise  dull  German  election  campaign;  somehow  in  their
twisted  minds  we  were  undermining  their  security by making
any  offer   at  all!   Strauss  threatened  us  with  a  new  Hitler,
armed  with  nuclear  weapons  "or  worse".    India  (see box this
page),  the  only  nation  with  the  equipment  ready to  build  an
A-bomb  in  the  very  near  future,  made  one  last  hopeless  ap-
peal.    Now  the  Russians have  accepted  an  Egyptian  proposal
for   a  treaty  barring  underground   blasts  above  20  kilotons,
with  a  moratorium  on  the  smaller  ones.    We  can  detect  and
identify  close  to  1 kiloton,  but  we still  say no.
We'll  Be Clad to Send A  Sample Copy of This  litue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
9/13/668
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement wished  D
LE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  AY..,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'*  Weekly.    Second  Clan  Portage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published   every  Monday  except  in   August,  the  last   week   In   December  and  the
firrt   week  In  January  and  Bl-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W..  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.:  $6  In   Canada;   $14  elsewhere.     Air   Mall  rates:
$16  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED