I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965may17.pdf

============================================================

Morse's Gnat  Speedy  In  Opposition  to we  War,  Pps.  2-3
The  Meat  On  Which Our  Caesar  Fads
"While  the  Proudest  irate  the  MM  ef  fnrriiai  to
justify    what  he  has denied  to  4*  there  [a   Vietaaai),  be
is  BBwflnne;  to  aee  the  fine  ianlilat Jinan  ef  the  gerermmemt
he  heads  operate  as  they  are  iotemded  to  eperate. ...
Why  is debate  in  Caagreas  aa feared  dawatowB?  Why  an
cahnet members, tat the PteaideBfs Beraaaal adviaen
op to the  HID every tbae tike wand gets aat that
ber  «f  Caagira »  tttakiac  af  aaestiMB
to he daw fat Asa?"
!Mme,i*  Out Senate, Mag  6.
n_  «Bk_ •         -*  .               »  - - -   •* .   jsas^Mii- fl^«> A^A
la, tae sest  ef  caransflUBtfes  •>  B§ BIBBCBH ler iae
fid to  escape the  Tes-Maa  hazard,   ft  is  easy  Car a
caarfase  his   paaneMBJBi  af  paver  with   the
kaawkdee . . .  PMBP  aad  ebonutaaee add to the
that  the  executive  any  hefieve  his
. . . As Rahert  Lavett has  arid. The
Ihaa  aa  extenul  eacaiy  is  •
sycaphntar."
—Sta§  mtmiw ftp fie  Snafe'a  Nftioxml   Seamt*
aUeerelemfetUmglO.
VOL. xra, NO. is
HAT  17,   1965
.«.       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
CENTS
The  Forms of  Democracy, But  No  Longer The  Reality
The swift  and  obedient  fashion  with  which  Congress  rab-
ber  stamped  Lyndon  Johnson's  moves  tumid  wider  war  hi
two  hemispheres  recalls  those  pages   in  which  Gibbon  de-
scribes  bow  shrewdly  Angnyfriic  laid  die  foundations  of   Im-
perial  nde  in  Rome.    Caesars  heir  was  scrupulous  in  main-
taining  the foons of  the Republic   Augustus sat in the Senate
and  affected  mady to be the first among  equals.   He  and his
«^imH««rt  "consulted  the  great  «at«mal  council,  and  seemed
to  refer  to  its  decision  the  most  important  concerns  of  peace
and  war."   The  italics  are Gibbon's.   It  was  only  later,  after
the  fmirAr  of  Caligula,  ffcat-  "tfae  H***?"
1
  of  liberty"  came  to
an end  "and the  Senate awoke to all  the  horrois of  inevitable
servitude."    Then,  as  the  scene  «fr*»t«
r
  in  another
we  should  take  to  heart,  the  Caesars woke  op  to  find  them-
selves  at  the  mercy  of  the  Empire's  overgrown  armies.  These
began  by  extinguishing liberty  abroad and  ended  by  crushing
it  at  home.    A  new  race  of   "polished   and  eloquent"  syco-
phants  "inculcated  the  duty  of   passive  obedience,  and  des-
canted  on  the  inevitable  mischiefs  of  freedom."    Pick op  al-
most  any  newspaper  and  yon  may lead  Jbhnson's  hide  court
of   ^"TM^mfcM^  Dceacnio£  tFT^ same
Most  Everybody  Bear  His  Brand?
The  way  the  President's  1700,000,000  appropriation  for
Vietnam  was  put  through  tfae  Congress  bore  tfae  f?"**a»fc*  of
a  master manipulator.   The  money by his  own  admission  was
not needed;  what he wanted was a blank check of  authority  to
widen  tfae  war  as  he  saw   fit.   He  could  have  asked  snch  au-
thority  directly.   But  men  the  resolution  would  have  been  a
naked  request  for  war powers  and  it  would  have  had  to  go
tiuongh  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  CnmmMHv     Its  chair-
man,  Fulbright,  and  at  least  eight  other  of  its  members have
grown critical of  the expanding war.   The grant of  power was
wrapped  in  a  request  for  military  foods  so  it  would  pass
through the  less  critical Senate  Apprppifatiofis  CvomrniHfe  and
because it  is  difficult  to vote  against  supplies  for  troops on die
firing line.   This  is a measure die  consequence  of  which may
be war with  China.  Yet  it  was approved by die House within
24  hours  after  75  minutes  of  discussion,  with  less  than  15
minutes  allowed  to  the  opposition.    Io  die  Senate,  die  bill
Look  Again,  Mr.  Bandy
the  very
I/Express, fcy a
ca with  the  vIet
iato  the  Viet  Cmg,  very  largely fey
temr. A few mgndi                "
the  titular  leaden  ef  the
Nahody  ever  heard  ef  the* in
—Wm.  P.  Bndy, A**t  Secretary  of  State  for  Fmr
fatten  Aftarm,  an Fmee  Tk» Natim  Mm*  9.
ef  the Fwrt,  the chief  aaWal  af  the
Viet  COBK: NgByem Bnt Tha ... was mat  lamg  age «se
of  the auat  hriffiaat.  lawieia  ef  the Saigas  her. ...
The Moetary-Keaeral af  the FNL is  aa  architect  af  St
yean. Rayah tan Phat, whs represeal
Party'aa  dM  Cntnl  CMajaittae.   The
reaeatative  af  the  Fraat  ahraad.  wahfiag  ia  Fraftue,  fa
•Y  nraMf    pCwBuBMMaT  •••!  jonauuuty  Ncmrcii  vm  •••**,
42  yean  eld,  leader  af   OK  Radical  SadaBat  Party.'
Of  the five vice  presidexU af  the  Fraat, «0y  eae  ia a
—George* Ckmgmrd ta L'Expreaa, May ft.
m. oic umf  inJAni  with  <jp«W  five
allowed  for  debate.   The  408-7  vote  in  die  House  and  die
88-3  vote  in  die  Senate  resembled  a  stampede  of   steers  in
T
..   ..         4__  ,..........->          -  -      •!•!    A..J                   IIM1I     !•*!!   ll    ------    -'
EXZS.    An  arrogant,  "jj;,"'**'"^  ana  nunpiiiuvcty  possessive
man has put his  IBJ  bond on die  Congress  as he  has on  his
Only  time  Senators,  Morse, Groening and Gaykxd Nelson
of  Wisconsin,  voted  "no."    Many  of  duse  who  voted  "yes"
indicated dieir misgiving.   But fear of  White  House dispkas-
ore proved  stronger.   As we  begin  die descent  into  what may
tycdHUc  *?ttp  OK  F^fTriMy  s    ftvfftf^t        ^TII^IHHMMICTL   troiiT*^^i    COVF—
ardice  won  out  over  conscience.    Even  Stennis  of   Missis-
sippi, who was ftoor manager fc« the  Administration,  admitted
after  Morse's  great  speech  in  opposition  (see pps.  2-3) dot
Morse  was  "brflUant"  and  had  raised  "some  serious  points."
Not  a single Democrat rose to  protest when  Morse  said  John-
son was  following  Goldwater's  course.    Four  Republicans  ez-
(CotaittHed  on Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f .'F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 17,1965
Morse Warns  of World  Hatred  If  We  Try  to  Play  World  Policeman...
By  Senator  Wayne  Morse *
Are  we  really  going  to  take  the  position  that  we  take  it
upon  ourselves  to  police  the  world  in  regard  to  Communist
revolutions?    We   have  neither  the  resources  nor  the  man-
power  for  that  police  job.    If  we  are  to  act  unilaterally  on
the  basis  of  this  statement  by  the  President  and  this  pledge
by  the  House,  I  warn  the  American  people  from  my  desk  in
the  Senate  today  that  we  shall  be  drained  both  in  blood  and
in  economic  power  in  the  decades  immediately ahead.
In  my  judgment,  the  vote  the  Senate  will  cast  tomorrow
can  be  described  as  a  vote  of  destiny  for  the  United   States;
but  it  will  be  a  vote  of  destiny  that  will  start  the  decline  of
this  Republic,  as  great  powers   before  us   in  the   history  of
mankind  declined  after   they  too  became  drunk  with  military
power.    I  say sadly  and  solemnly, but  out  of  deep  conviction,
that   today  my  Government   stands   before   the  world   drunk
with  military  power.    My  Government,  apparently, has  come
to  the  conclusion  that  because  of  military  power   its  dictates
around  the  world  will  have  to  be  obeyed.
What  We  Cannot  Destroy
That  power  will  be  challenged,  and  I  believe  we  are  now
headed   into  decades  of   turmoil  and  strife.    We   shall  win
one   military   victory  after   another;   we   shall   destroy   cities,
industrial  installations,  and  nuclear  installations;  we  shall  kill
by  the  millions.    But  in  my  judgment,  that  course  of   action
will  lay  a  foundation  of  hatred   on  the  part  of  the   colored
races   of   the   world   against  the   American  people.     In   due
course  of  time,  those  installations  will  be  rebuilt,  not  only  on
material  foundations,  but  on  the  foundation  of  intense  hatred
by  Asians  for  the  people  of  the  United  States.    That  hatred
will  even  be  inherited  by  generations  of  American  boys  and
girls  50,  75,   100—yes,  200  years  from  now.    It  will  be  a
foundation  of  intense  Asiatic hatred  that  will  eventually  vent
Bosch  on  U.S.  Aid  to Communism
"Instead   of  stopping  another  Cuba,  they  will  make
another   Cuba,"  Bosch   said.    "They  say   there   are  53
known  Communists.   There  are  going  to  be  53,000 Com-
munists  in  the  Dominican  Republic because  of  the  Ma-
rine  intervention,  and  they  will  be  U.S.-made  Commu-
nists.    I  became  President  in  a  free  election.   I  ran  my
Government   with   democratic   methods.     I   have   said
many  times  I  have  no  use  for  communism.    But  there
are  many people  in  public life  in  the  United  States  who
are  afraid  of  democracy.  .  .  ."
—AP  from  Son  Juan  in  Washington  Post,  May  9.
* From  Morse's  two  speeches  in  the  Senate, May  5  and  6.
its  vengeance  upon  future*  generations  of  American  boys  and
girls.
I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  a  growing  tide  of  deep  concern
on  the  part  of  increasing  millions  of  fellow  Americans  about
the  mistaken  policy  that  the  President  and  Congress  are  fol-
lowing  by  acting  outside  the  framework  of  international  law,
making  war  on  a  unilateral  basis,  and  killing,  killing,   and
killing  human   beings   who,   even  though   they  are   enemies,
are  also  children  of  God  Almighty.
Mr.  President,  I  say  sadly  that,  in  my  judgment,  Senators
who  vote  "yea"   tomorrow  for  the  joint  resolution  will  have
voted  for  an  undeclared  war  and  for  the  continuation  of  an
undeclared  war.    They  will  be  voting,  in  my  judgment,  for
an  increased  draft.    They  will  be  voting  for  the  use  of  nu-
clear  weapons  if  the  President  so desires.    They  will  be  voting
for   thousands  and   thousands  of   American  casualties  in   the
war  that  I  am  satisfied  will  result  on  a  massive  basis  if  we
continue  our  policy  in  Asia.    They  will  be voting  for  all  that
Goldwater  stood  for  in  the  recent  presidential   election.
This  administration knows  and  states,  but  not  publicly,  that
we. cannot  defeat  Red  China  with  airpower.    We  cannot  de-
feat   Red   China   with   bombings,   conventional   or    nuclear.
Therefore,   they   are  preparing   to   meet   Red   China   on   the
Trujillo's  Secret  Police Chief  Scornful  of  U.S.  "Red"  Charges in  Dominican  Revolt
"One  of  the  men  who  should  really  know  if  the  revolt  in
the  Dominican  Republic  is  led  by  Communists is  the  man
who  ran  that  country's  secret  police  force  for  the  corrupt
dictator   Rafael   Trujillo.    That   job  was  held   in   1957  by
Maj.-Gen.  Arturo  Espaillat,  a  graduate  of  West  Point  who
directed  a  force  of 5,000  policemen and spies.  . . .
"From   Lisbon,  where  he  now   lives   in   exile,  Maj.-Gen.
Espaillat  told  me:  They  know  damn  well  that  Mr.  Bosch  is
not  a  Communist.   The  Americans  said  that  Bosch  lost  con-
trol  and that  the  Communists took  over.  It's  not  true.  There
might  have  been  three  or  four  Communists  in  the  revolt.
There  always  are,  all  through  Latin  America.    It  doesn't
mean  anything.    The  U.S.  wants  some  lackey  like   Donald
Reid  Cabral  they  can give  orders  to.  ...     they  don't  want  a
man  of  dignity,  a  man  like  Bosch  who  will  not  take   orders
but  who  will  do  his  own  thinking.'  .  .  .
" 'When  you  were  working  for  Trujillo,'  I  suggested  to
Maj.-Gen.  Espaillat,  'I  suppose  you  knew  about  every  Com-
munist   in   the   country'."
" 'Oh  my  God,  yes,'  he  cried.    'I  had  complete   crossfiles
on  all  of  them.    I  would  say  altogether  there  were  maybe
100'."
—Ron  Haggart,  Toronto Daily Star  columnist, May  6.
"Charges  indicating  close  collaboration  between  the  rebel
government  and  the  Communists have  produced  a  storm  of
controversy  here.  .  .  .  Pena  Gomez,  who was listed  as one
of  the  rebels  present  at  a  meeting  of  rebel  leaders  and  top
Communists  that  was  supposed  to  have  taken  place  on May
4  denied  that  such  a  meeting  had  been  held.
"Particularly   controversial  was  a  U.S.  statement  indicat-
ing   that   three   questionable  personalities  had   been   given
jobs  in  the  new  rebel  government.    Alfredo   Conde  Pausa,
listed   as  the  new  Attorney  General,  was  described   as  'a
known  sympathizer   with  the  PSPD   (the   Communist  Do-
minican  Popular  Socialist  Party).'   A  supreme  court  justice
for   26  years,  Conde  Pausa   said,  weeping,  that  in  the  last
Presidential  election  he  had  voted  for  the  conservative  Civic
Union  Party   and  that   he  had  worked  on  the   democratic
1963  constitution  with  U.S.  Supreme  Court  Justice  William
O.  Douglas.  . . .
"Luis  Homero  Lajara  Surges,   charged   with  associating
with  PSPD  members,  was  listed  as  the  new  director  of  the
National  Department  of  Investigation,   though  he  held  this
job  in  the  Molina  government  and  holds  no  official  position
now.    A  naval  officer,   he  is  regarded   by  conservative   Do-
minicans  as  anti-communist.   Lajara's son  Alejandro  is  listed
as  the  third  questionable  government  appointee.....  How-
ever,  Alejandro,  only  15  years  old,  holds  no  official   position
either."
—Dan Kurzman, in  the  Wash. Post, May  9.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'8  Weekly,  May 17, 1965
,.. Calls  A  Vote  for  Johnson's  Vietnam  Bill  A  Vote for Gold water'  Program
ground,  with  American  troops.    How  many?    To  begin  with,
a  minimum  of  300,000.    As  Professor   Morgenthau,  of   Chi-
cago  University,  said  when   I  lectured   at  that  institution  not
long  ago,  we  shall  have  to  start  with   3  million.     Hundreds
of  thousands  will  come  back   to  the  United   States  in   coffins
in   the  first  18  months.
If   China  Enters   The  War
Let  me  say  to  my  colleagues   and   from   my  desk,   to   the
American  people  today:   Continue  this  escalation,  and  if  Red
China   moves   on  the  ground  and  we  move   in  with   300,000
men,  plus  hundreds  of  thousands  more  as that  war  bogs  down,
in   my   judgment,   we   shall   have   performed    a   criminal  act
against   the   history   of   mankind,   when   it   is  so  unnecessary.
Many  Members  of  Congress  seem  to  think  he  [the  President]
is  doing  the  best  he  can,  but  what  he  is  doing  is  building  up
massive   world   resentment   among  the   very  people  we   have
been  saying  for  many  years  we  want  to  win  over  to  the  cause
of    freedom.
Mr.  President,  are  you  ready  to  tell  the  American   people
that  if  this  course  of  action  brings  this  country  into   conflict
with  China,  and  even  possibly   Red  Russia,  you  are  ready  for
a  nuclear  war?    Are  you  ready  to  fight  a  nuclear  war  over  the
issues  that  have  arisen  in  Vietnam?     I  am  satisfied  that   the
overwhelming   majority  of  the  American   people  will  repudi-
ate  you  if  this  is  what  you  are  willing  to  do.
Mr.  President,  the  American  people  have  only  one  instru-
ment  that  can  prevent  a  misguided,   misadvised,  misinformed
President   from  committing   an  incredible   blunder—a   blunder
ADA  Supports  Morse
"Americans   for   Democratic  Action   supports   your
efforts   opposing   President's    $700  million   request   for
Vietnam.    Such  funds  represent  unnecessary  authoriza-
tion  and  constitute  ratification  by  Senate   of   expanded
conflict  which  may  bring  wider war. ADA  believes  time
is  right  now  for  full  discussion   of  war  in  Vietnam  in
open  foreign  policy  committee hearings  before  further
steps  are  taken."
—Telegram  from   Rep.  Don  Edwards,   ADA    Chair-
man,  to  Sen.  Morse,  May  6.
that  will  destroy  all  the  confidence  in  America  that  has  been
built  up  since  World  War   II—that  instrument  is  the   Senate
of  the  United   States.    But  we  are  not  even   able  to  say  "go
slow,"  even  though  I  would  guess  that  half   or  more  of   the
Members  of  this  body  know  in  their  minds  that  the   President
is   wrong.
Let  me  say  to  Senators  who  claim  that  they  intend   to  be
consulted  again  before  there  is  another  escalation  of  the  war:
You  are  being  consulted   right  now.    This  is  the  President's
consultation.   When  the  President  has  this  consultation  under
his  belt,  he  is  going  to  announce   the  landing  of   thousands
more  of  American  troops  in  Vietnam.    When  he  starts  send-
ing   those  hundreds   of   thousands   of   troops   into   Asia,   the
moment  the  Chinese  start  moving  on  the  ground—that  is  ex-
actly  a  part  of  the  war  plans—he  will  cite  the  pending  joint
resolution  and  the  resolution   of  last  August  which  give  him
that  authority.
Among The Handful Who Spoke Out in The House Against The Vietnamese War Resolution
Rep.  John  DOW  (D., N.Y.):  While we  hold  that  the Viet-
cong  uprising
  ;
s  a  Communist  plot,  others  hold  that  it  is  a
rebellion  of  the  people  against  the  rulers.    Now  there  may
be  places  in  the  world  where  we  should  oppose  communism
—perhaps  in  Russia  or  in  China.    But  let  us  not  attempt  to
do  it  in  those  areas  where  we  may  be  interfering  with  a
revolt  of  people  against  oppression.    For,  if  we  do  this  too
often,  it  will  be  known  all  over  the  globe  that  the common
people  cannot  right  their  wrongs  without  U.S.  opposition.
Rep.  Edith  GREEN  (D.,  Ore.):  There  is  a  point  beyond
which   credibility  simply  will   not   stretch—and   it   is   that
somehow   by  waging   a  wider  war   we  pursue  a  policy  of
peace.     This   vote   represents—in   my   opinion—a   vote   for
that  delusion.  .  .  .  The  high  point  of  these  whole implaus-
ible  proceedings  was  the  speech  of  one  of  my  colleagues  who
—in    one    breath—demanded   withdrawal   of  Government
funds  to  an  educational  project  because   some  of   the  par-
ticipants   criticized  Administration  policy   in  Vietnam  and
then—in   the   next   breath—he   admiringly  quotes   Senator
Vandenberg's  statement  that  "every  foreign  policy  must  be
totally   debated,  and  the  loyal  opposition  is   under   special
obligation  to  see  that  this  occurs"  .  .  .  and  this  in  the  con-
text   of  demanding  for  himself   and  others  of  the  minority
party  a  voice  in  foreign  policy  decisions. ...  I  can  see  we
are  all  going  to  have  an  absorbing  year  if  we  follow  [this]
advice—making  certain  we  don't  subsidize  free  inquiry,  but
only   subsidize  thought  control.
Rep.  John  CONYERS   (D.,  Mich.):   I  question  the  very
basis  for  our  new  policy  in  Vietnam  which  states  that  we
are  dealing  not  with  a civil war,  but  with  aggression  by  one
country  against  another.  .  .  .  All  the  evidence  that  has  been
made  available   to  me  indicates  that  the  only  realistic  ap-
praisal  of  the  situation  is  that  we  are  participating  on  one
side  of  a  civil  war  in  a  particular  country. .  .  .
Rep.  George  BROWN   (D.,  Cal.):  Mr.  Chairman,  I  rise  to
express  my  grave  doubts  about  the  Tightness  of  what  we
propose   to  do  here  today.    1  do  not   say   this  lightly  and
without  having  weighed  it  long  in  my  heart.  .  .  .  But  in  all
good  conscience,  I  must  say:  Mr.  President,  you  are  on  the
wrong  path.    You  are  gambling  the  welfare—yes,  even  the
existence—of  the  United  States  on  an  illusion—the  illusion
that  liberty,  democracy,  and  the  peace  of  mankind  can  be
won  by  the  slaughter  of  peasants  in  Vietnam—the  illusion
that  commuivfgfs  can  be  defeated  by  the  power  of   military
force  alone,  regardless of  the  conditions  and  circumstances
under  which  that  force  operates.
Rep.  William  P  RYAN  (D.,  N.Y.):  The situation  in  South
Vietnam   is   not   simply   a  case   of   aggression  from   North
Vietnam.  .  .  .  This  fight  is  also  an  internal  struggle.   .  .  .
We  cannot  bomb  people  into  democracy;  nor  can  we  bomb
people  into  negotiations.
Rep.  Don  EDWARDS  (D.,  Cal.):  This  effort  to  force  this
appropriation  through  Congress  without  adequate  commit-
tee  or  floor  consideration acts  to  prevent  any  real  dialogue
on   the  pressing   foreign  policy   questions  before   this   Na-
tion.    Serious  questions   have  been  raised.    Are  we  doing
all  that  can  be  done  to  end  the  war  in  Vietnam?    Did  we
act  properly  in  the  Dominican  Republic?
Burton   (D.,  Cal.)  also  voted  'no'  but  did  not  speak.
Rep.  John  LINDSAY  (R.,  N.Y.):   My  vote,  however,  is
not  to  be  construed  as  an  approval  of  the  administration's
whole  policy  in Vietnam. ...  I  hope  the  President   will  rec-
ognize  that  many  of  us  who  vote  in  favor  of  this  resolution
do  so  in  the  hope  that  it  will  contribute,  not  to  the  widen-
ing  of  an  unwanted war,  but  to  the  pursuit of  an  honorable
peace.  . .  .                                                 —In  the House,  May  5.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stmuf*  WetMg.  Mmg  17,19*5
Wifl  the Kennedy  Brothers Provide A  Liberal  Opposition to LBJ?
(Ctnttimmed fmm  Ptge   OK)
latvits fljpBpCtPn feD flDCJKHDff yfi
zatkm foe  combat troops via an appropriation bill;  Cooper  of
and  Ciihmi  of  Kansas  urged  mote  effmt  at  nego-
Aa\en  of   Vermont  opposed  .die  bombing  of   fltc
North.   Gore of Tenoeraina^diat exaction of  die war
to dv North was planned  before  Ifac Fk&n bombing m Feb-
tuuy.   Chmxh  of  Idaho,  Ptfl  of  Rhode  Island  and Ouk  of
Pennsyhania  indicated  Hut  they  woe  waling  "yes"*  with  ir-
lurtanrr;  dark  urged  negotiations widi  die Viet  Gong  and a
„•"., i    .•at' j    ,..• •   I,  -•-—
ccssmoo  OK DODDDDIE  loc
the
The  Twp*ir of  dris  lopsided   ""ddbaHe""  came in  its  daring
moments  whcu  IBflf*
 a
i  Kennedy  of   MKV    KODL  foe  (he  fust
tone spoke oat an foreign policy..  He said he was rotting for die
i boorae Smtfoc Stems had assured the Senate  (hot
100%)  tfnt  dns «as "oat & fahnk check."   He sud
be  thought  "our  iffoilt  far  pcicc rfMMiM eartticne  with  the
fiune inteiiMly  as our dfarts «  Hhc  nriliitMy fidnT" and that: we
ermd  for  soiue  tune   ^ot  icg2innffl^  Voctiinaim  as  |nncly  a
problem."   He  <inh*l  by  imdiifalhaiig  his  »livjg»ttiMriill
with  Johnson,  too, on  die Domioaon frpMOr,     "Oar  deter-
H  iftf     n^^^lftl™iffIT'
How  the  Propaganda  flfilb  Grind  On
The  era  af  the i
what  they  an  teli  ^,  it  appeal*  «ftt«  fahw  «r
thtkMI ofiwpyrttg  that fa gtmg  to
bat Bff»<ir  Mrf*  the  1
"May  thoe  aze  Wtacm  MM ni  15N
te  m  the  itncfai  «f
4V  UK  KaNl
to U Ufin te the atmete at aagr  mm*  tnae. . . . M the
UJS.  Knfeuw/,  «n  the  •%•*  beta*
oqjiei tte ttnitay that • MW called the  1
Beflnjee  "fmtt,  a graaiaf <
12  aadB-rcwd  Dwj
a^  to  cries  «C  "parffcn*  (to  the  wau,  (be  Cuttwlte
eafl)  .were  piinwanlly  mtdtmr-gmmti  to  death  hr  the
•rcant  nhel  Irairr.  CUL  CaanuoMt    N«t  a  •w^fc-  «e-
pwter has towMl laaruli  tnitmrr  of  the epiHce. ..."
—Bmrmmvi.  L.  CMEwr  ^ramt  5ba«*  Oraraf*  m  flU
New  ToA  Hcnld-Triboae.  Jfcv  », «  dbgwtdk  «*&*
waamjmrmmtum.
lar
n
stioe «^ja$tt  became the
targets  of  sodi  Docolar  tHwisanffis  sxtr
^                                 X    JT                               "m,              AP          a
aofnttA   or  Caojonnistled,  «r  ezwr fcziciaurf bastwm  Ctmtmm-
misti tote fait  im them,"   The  italics  ane  OOK.   ft   is  not  easy
to  ay   snth  dungs  in  die  present  attniMH^hRir.,    Bobby  Ken-
nedy  was in  die  inner aides  whikh ram doe Vietnamese var
and  supported  Bosch,  in  die  Dounamscata  B/f|i*J>hc  «hififlg   his
bdDdher's  Adnunntaatian.   His  critastm  is  rigilifiranr.  Taken
in  OMoectfcio  with  Teddy  KenHMsSy's  temfenfcip  in  the  feht
agiinst Jabnson on  poll  taxes,  we hwe  hen; die possUe  no-
ff^^Tt  OK   ft  lufn^rji   flppOSMMTM    tH&yB&d&t     hjHBlijN^MB       clES  TKmff^^^i
jffryjr*^     nobbiy  die  GoMwjetcmilte  Tower  of  Texas,  came
from  die  RepnblKan  side.
Bar it will  lake  mane dan  a  few  fesarraftnoms  .no«!fli  face  Io
bait die drift  tovaid a big war.   Fear of  offending  die  White
House  was  also  ajppaient  among  dtose  who  woe  siknt  or
absent.    Of   eight   absent  Senxbn.  duee—Dodd,  SnndKis
and  SjnMngtom—were  iccooded  in  faror  of  the Johnson  nso-
hdtiiML,    The  fine  odiecs,  snae  of  whom  have  been  critical,
preferred  Io  go  narccorJcd.    These  were  Folbri^ht,  RosseO,
McGomn,,  BnnJick  and  Hfettalf..   And   Senator  Grocniog,
peibajps to babaxe off  bis  opposition  to  Johnson  on  Vietnam,
snpporied  his  action  in  die  Dominican  Republic    Historians
as  patsfflwulrly  anii-Castro as  Theodore  Diaper  (letter  in  die
New  Ywk  Times,  May  12)  and  Robert J.  Alexander  (letter
in die Mew York  Times,  May 9)   have bitterly rejected John-
son's daim that intenention in  Santo Domingo was necessary
to  prevent  a  Ked  takc-oter.   ft   icfleds  die  natnre  of  die
Johnsoa  era diat a  Hbeol who has  fooght  all  his life  against
use of  die Big Stick in Latin America should  fed  it  politically
eapedknt to endorse it  now.                                                    ALtf   12
Wel
To A Fiie«d — Soi A
fne  W TM  Senl a  Lmmm "-'  .'
LF.StoM*sWeekhr
Ave,  9V.  W.
D.C.
Car  eater)  a
Car   the
Qty
IwrOe
latJfitto:
<3ty
Seccnd  doss
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED