I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965may31.pdf

============================================================

The  Supreme  Court  and  Freedom  of  the Mails,  P.  3
A  Subversive  Remark  About  The  Marines  No  Teach-in  Should  Be  Without
"The  people  of   the  world  prefer  reasoned  argument  to
ready  attack.   And that  is  why  we  must  follow  the  Prophet
Isaiah  many times before  we  send  for  the  Marines,  and say,
'Come now and let  us  reason together.'   And this  is  our ob-
jective—the  quest  for  peace  and  not  the  quarrels  of  war.
In  every  trouble  spot  in  the  world  this  hope  for   reasoned
agreement  instead  of  retaliation   can  bear  fruit."
—President  Lyndon B. Johnson, March tS,  1984.
I. P. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XIII,  NO.  21MAY  31,  1966
•'<»«       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.16   CENTS
The  Dominican  Republic  as Lyndon  Johnson's  Hungary
The  parallels between  U.S. action  in  the Dominican  Repub-
lic and the  Soviet Union's in Hungary are  obvious.   Our  Mon-
roe  Doctrine is  like the  Russian  insistence  on  "friendly  neigh-
bors."   The  existence of  fringe  elements—Fascist  in  Hungary,
Communist  in  the  Dominican  Republic—were  used  to  smear
both  revolutions  as  extremist,  though  both were  motivated  by
a  desire  for  democtatization.   Nagy's  appeal to  the  UN,  like
that  of  the  Bosch  forces,  was  opposed on  the  excuse  that  the
matter  should  be  handled  by  regional  organizations:  in  one
case  the  Warsaw  Pact,  in  the  other  the  OAS,  each  securely
dominated   by  its  respective  masters,   Russian   or   American.
Both  great  Powers  explained  their  conduct  in  the  same way:
the  USSR by fear  of  a Western base, the  U.S. by fear  of  a new
Communist base, on  its  doorstep.   In  both  cases  the presumed
strategic  need  of  the  big  power  was  the  excuse  for  riding
roughshod  over  the  wishes of  the  smaller  neighbor,  and  in
neither  were  these  exaggerated  fears  submitted  to  impartial
scrutiny  by  some  international  authority.
FBI Clearance for The Hemisphere
A  less noticed parallel, now unfolding,  is the  naive and  self-
righteous  arrogance  with  which  Washington and  Moscow  re-
spectively  took  it  on  themselves  to  decide  just  what  kind  of  a
government to allow their  small neighbor.   Both  great  Powers
claimed  to  be  avoiding  "extremist"  solutions.    Khrushchev
and  Mikoyan,  themselves engaged in  de-Stalinizing  the Soviet
Union,  did  not  want  to  put  the  Stalinists  back  into  power  in
Hungary.   On the other hand, they did not want the pendulum
of  freedom  to  swing  so  far  that in  their opinion  it  might be-
come  "bourgeois"  i.e.  a  regime  of  basic  rights  for  the  indi-
vidual  instead of  a  milder variety  of  bureaucratic communism.
They hauled poor Kadar  out  of  prison and  once  they had  used
him  to  crush the  revolution, they  did  slowly  allow him  to  ease
up  the  terror  and  permit a  little  intellectual  freedom  on  the
edges.   Similarly  Johnson is  busy  running the  Dominican  Re-
public by remote but  unmistakable  control:  a new government
is being hand-picked from  Washington.   Its  members are  even
subjected  to  FBI  clearance.  We  want, the  All-Highest in the
White  House  says,  neither a  dictatorship of  the  right  nor  of
the  left.    It  cannot be  too  authoritarian  because  that  would
embarrass  us in  our  democratic pretensions.   And  it  cannot be
too  democratic,  because  that  might hurt  U.S. investors.
This  is  the  bitterest  part  of  the  spectacle  for  Latin  Ameri-
cans.    Here  we  are  beginning  to  play  out  again  some  of  the
most  painful  scenes  of  the  Cuban  and  Mexican   revolutions.
6  *
LBJ, The Press and Santo Domingo
The  U.S.  press  never  showed  itself  more  independent
than  hi its coverage  of  the  Dominican affair.   Tad Scul*
and  Homer  Bigart  of  the  New  York Times,  Barnard  L.
Collier  of  the  New  York  Herald-Tribune,  Richard Dud-
man  of  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch,   Dan  Kurzman  of
the  Washington  Post  and James  Nelson  GoodseU  of  the
Christian   Science  Monitor  were  among  the  reporters
who did their  profession  proud.   Scute  deserves a Pulit-
zer  Prize  and  the  New  York  Times  editorial  page,  re-
juvenated  these  past  few  years,  was  magnificent.
The  diligence  of  the  press  was  matched  by  the  fury
of  the  White  House.    President   Johnson  at  one  point
called  in  the  White  House  reporters  for  the  three  big
weeklies,  Time,  Newsweek  and  U.S.  News  & World  Re-
port.    Johnson  treated  them  to  an extensive  and  angry
monologue  on  the  waywardness  of  the  press  in  under-
cutting  the  official  line  that  the  Dominican  Republic had
been  on  the  verge  of  going  Communist.    "The  whole
problem  could  have been  solved," Johnson  is  reported  to
have  told  them,  "if  we  could  have  locked  Tad  Sculz  up
for  three  hours."   In a  book  review  in  the  May 29 issue
of  The  New  Republic,  I  wrote  that  Johnson  acts  aa  if
the  Constitution  made him  not  only  commander-in-chief
of  the  nation's  armed  forces  but  editor-in-chief   of   its
newspapers.    This  is  a  sample  of  his  editing.
8  3
When  the  Cubans,  with  belated  and  equivocal  help  from  us,
overthrew  the  Spanish  yoke,  the  price  they  had  to  pay  for
getting  rid  of  an  American  occupation  was  to  allow  foreign
ownership  of  land:  this  intensified concentration  of  ownership
in  huge  sugar  holdings.     It  fastened  on  Cuba  that  monocul-
ture  which  impoverished  its  countryside  and  which  Jose" Marti
and  the  revolutionaries  were  pledged  to  eradicate.    In  Mexico
we  waged  a  similar  struggle  against  Article  27  of  the  revolu-
tionary  Constitution  of  1917  which  sought  to  recover  mineral
rights  and  peasant  lands  the  dictator  Diaz  had  given  away  to
foreign,  mostly  American,  interests.  We  withheld  the  recogni-
tion  Mexico  needed  so  badly  for  international  credit  reasons.
Not  until  1923,  after private  assurances  that  Article  27  would
be  interpreted  laxly,  did  we  recognize  the  Mexican  Republic.
Now  we are doing something  similar  in the Dominican Repub-
lic.    Though we  claim to be waging  a world-wide  struggle  for
self-determination   and  to  allow  diversity  in  the  world  (such
is  the  language  of  our propaganda),   the  Dominican   Constitu-
tion  is  being  revised  over  long-distance telephone  to. suit John-
son's  ideas.
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 31,1965
Warburg  Gets  No  Support  on  Criticism  of  Our  Policies  in  Vietnam  and  Santo  Domingo
How  Senate  Liberals  "Plan  for  Peace"  While  Acquiescing  in  Johnson's  Wars
A  wide  range  of  liberal  and  peace  organizations—among
them  the  ADA,  SANE,  Women  Strike  for  Peace,  the  World
Federalists  and  the  Church of  the  Brethren—testified  before  the
Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  (May  11-12)  in  support
of  the  "Planning  for  Peace"  resolution   introduced  by  Clark
(D.  Pa.)  and  24  other  Senators,  one  of  them,  Javits,  a Repub-
lican.    It  was  also  introduced  in  the  House  by  nine  Congress-
men*,  all  Democrats.    Its  merit  is that  it  would  ask the  Presi-
dent   to  formulate  "specific  and  detailed"  proposals   for  dis-
armament and  for  an  international  peacekeeping  force,  whether
by  a  revision  of  the  UN  Charter  or  a new  treaty.    Its  sponsors
hope  thereby  to  get  arms  talks  moving  again.
"Peace-Mongering"  Madison  Ave.  Style
Unfortunately  the  hearings  were  chiefly  noteworthy  for  dis-
closing  (1)  the  extent  to which  the Pentagon  controls  the  U.S.
Arms  Control  and  Disarmament   Agency  and  (2)   the  way in
which  Johnson's  warmaking  has  morally  paralyzed  even   those
Senators  who  support  peace  in  the  abstract.    Their  commit-
ment  to  peace,   as  Javits  revealed,   does  not  keep  them  from
supporting   any  or  all  of  Mr.  Johnson's  wars.     "I   support
them,"  Javits  said,  "as  I  know  the  Senator  from  Pennsylvania
does,  and  we must  engage in  them  in  Santo  Domingo,  in  Viet-
nam  and  perhaps  tomorrow  in  other  places."
Javits  admitted  that  these  wars  gave  the  "demagogue"  (as
he  termed  him)  " a  tremendous  credence  when  he  speaks  of
American  war-mongering."     Javits  thought  that  "peace-mon-
gering"  was  "a  mighty  good  business  when  you  are  being  ac-
cused  so  widely  of  war-mongering."    Though  this  treated  the
"planning  for  peace"  resolution  as  a  Madison  Avenue  device,
covering   the   reality   of   global   military  interventionism,   it
evoked  no  objection   from   Senator   Clark.
It  took  James  P.  Warburg,   the  political  historian,  to  point
out  the  contradiction  between  a  resolution  that  calls  for  inter-
national  peace-making  machinery  and  a U.S.  that  bombs  North
Vietnam  and  invades  the  Dominican  Republic  while   ignoring
the  UN  in  one  case  and  protesting   its  "interference"  in  the
*  Multer,   Farbstein,   Rosenthal,   Halpern   and  Ryan,   New
York,   and   Edwards   (Cal.),   Kastenmeier   (Wis.),    Fraser
(Minn.)  and Mrs. Green (Ore.)'
The Little  Pentagon  Inside  ACDA
Mr.  ROONEY  (D.,  N.Y.):  What  connection  does  the
military  branch of  our  Government  have with  the  func-
tioning   of   the   U.S.  Arms  Control  and  Disarmament
Agency?
Mr.   FOSTER  (Director,  ACDA):  We  have  a  very
close  relationship  at  the  staff  level  to  make  sure  that
they  are  active  and informed.   The Defense Department
has  assigned  to  us  13 active officers  headed by  a lieuten-
ant  general  in  the  Air  Force.   Assisting  him is  a major
general  in the  Army  and some  11 other  colonels.    At  the
policy  level  there  is  a  continuing  activity  through  the
Committee on Principals.   It  is  chaired by  the  Secretary
of  State.   The Secretary of  Defense  sits on it,  the Chair-
man-of  the  Atomic Energy  Commission, the  head of  the
CIA,  the  Chairman of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  and  the
Director  of  the  ACDA.   All  the  recommendations  that
the  President  acts  on  have  been  discussed  at  that  level
before  he  takes  a  position.    The  Weapons  Evaluation
and  Control Bureau is  headed by  the  lieutenant  general,
who  is  an Assistant  Director.    He is  in  direct  and daily
contact  with  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  and  their  assis-
tants  at  the  staff  level  in  discussions  on  all  items  which
he  engages  in.    That  Bureau  is  responsible   for,  I  be-
lieve,  the   greatest   dollar  value  of   research   contracts
which  we  place.
—House  Appropriation   Hearings  for  1966, p.  106S-6S.
other.    Clark  was  silent  when  Warburg   suggested  amending
the  resolution   to  protest   both   actions.
The  arms  control   agency  in  its  testimony  was  defeatist;   it
restated  past  proposals   and  thought   that  "given  the  lack  of
consensus  .  .  .  little  use  would   probably  be  served  in  being
more  specific ,now."    Aiken  attacked   the   agency  as   "wishy-
washy"  and  said  it  was  afraid  of  the  President   while   Clark
disclosed  that  the  Agency  rarely  brings  any  disarmament  pro-
posal   to  the  President   Without  the  concurrence   of  the   Joint
Chiefs  of  Staff.    Church  added  that  he  did  not  know  whether
the  agency  was  more  afraid  of  the  President   or  of  Congress
"when   it   comes   to  the   matter   of   forthright   programs   for
peace."   Clark  also  criticized  the  feeble  generalities  offered by
Harlan  Cleveland  for  the  State  Department.    Clark  said  "this
sort  of  timid  approach  will  not  get  us anywhere  in  time  to  save
the world  from  destruction."
Ben  Cohen  (Plainly)  and  U  Thant  (Softly)  Deplore U.S.  Ignoring of  the  UN  Charter
"During  the  last  decade or so,  states have  with disturbing
frequency  resorted  to  force  or  threat  of  force  without  feel-
ing  even  a  sense  of  obligation  to  report  their  action  in  ad-
vance  or  even  subsequently  to  the   United  Nations.    One
need  only  mention  Russia  in  the  case  of  Hungary, India  in
the  case  of  Goa,  and  the  U.S.  in  significant  aspects  of   the
Cuban  and  South  Vietnam  situations.  .  .  .
In  recent  years  there  has  also  been  an  attempt  to  justify
the  evisceration  of  the  Charter  on  the  ground  that  it  does
not  forbid  the  use  of  force  by  one  state  at  the  request  of
another  to  quell  a  rebellion.    Such  a  construction  of   the
Charter  does  violence  to  the  letter  and spirit  .  .  .  whether
the  civil  war  be  called  a  war  of  liberation  or  a  war  in  the
defense  of  freedom. ...  If  different  states  .  .  .  participate
in  the fighting with  opposing  factions,  they  create ...  a
threat  to  international peace.  Events  in  connection  with  the
Spanish   Civil  War  made  this  obvious."
—Benjamin   V.   Cohen,  former   Counsellor   of   the  State
Dept.,  testifying   on the  Planning  for  Peace  resolution.
"For  those  of  us—and  I  believe  we  are  a  majority—who
believe  in  the  aims  and ideals  of  the  UN  Charter  .  .  .  the
present  time  is  a  trying  one.    We  see  ominous  events  and
precarious  situations  on every  side.  . . . We are in  the  posi-
tion  of  the  bomb  disposal   team  which  knows  the   danger,
hears  the  ticking,  and  watches  with  mounting  anxiety   as
others  shake  and jostle  the  dangerous  explosive.  .  .  . The
first  five  months  of  this  year  have  witnessed  developments
which  have  tended  to  undermine the  position  of  the  UN  as
the  primary  agency  for maintaining international  peace  .  . .
the  role  of  the  UN  has  been  ignored  or  evaded."
—UN   Secretary   General  U  Thant,  May  21,  in  a  speech
for  delivery  at  Queens  College,  Ontario.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  31,1965
The  Deeper  Issues  Behind  the  Supreme  Court's  Decision  Against  Screening: the  Mails
A Prize Example of How Anti-Communist Marna Adopts Communist Practices
A  basic  tenet  of  totalitarian society,  whether  Communist  or
Fascist,  is  that  the  government  decides  what  it  is  considered
safe  to  let  the  people  read.    The   foreign  mail  conto>l  law
struck  down  by  the  Supreme  Court  last  week  as  unconstitu-
tional  was  based  on  the  same  philosophy.    It  sought  to   "pro-
tect"  Americans from  foreign  Communistic publications  in  the
mails,  and  to  spot  those  suspect  souls  who  seemed  to  like  such
subversive  literature.   It  was  thus  a  combination of  the  nurse-
maid  theory  of  government  and  a  typical  police  state  practice.
It  should  be  studied  as  a  prize  example of  how  the  anti-Com-
munist  mania  so  prevalent  in  our  country  often  leads  us  to
adopt  the  very  habits  we  are  supposed  to  be   fighting.   If  the
Postoffice   has  a  right  to  screen  foreign  mail  for  dangerous
ideas,  why  not  domestic?    And  if  domestic,  why  may  it  not
bar  the  mails  to  publications  it  considers  subversive?   This  is
the  logical  progression  the  Supreme  Court  tried  to  block  at  its
inception  when  it  declared  such  screening of  the  mails a viola-
tion  of  the  First  Amendment.
Mail  Censorship  SE World  War  I
In  some  respects,  it  is  a  pleasure  to  report,  we  have  made
progress.    The  law, as expounded  by a majority  of  the  Supreme
Court  during  World  War  I,  allowed  the  Postmaster  General
to  bar  the  August  1917  edition  of  The  Masses,  a  radical anti-
war  magazine,  from  the  mails  and  to  suspend   altogether  the
second  class  mail  privileges  of  the  Milwaukee  Leader,  edited
by  the  once  famous  Socialist,  Victor  Berger.    The  Postmaster
General  declared  both  these  publications  seditious.    Mr.  Jus-
tice  Holmes  (with  Brandeis)  protested  this,  dissenting.     "The
United  States,"  the  most  Olympian  of  all  Supreme  Court  jus-
tices  wrote  in  the  Milwaukee  Leader  case,  "may  give  up  the
Post  Office  when  it  sees  fit,  but  while  it  carries on,  the  use  of
the  mails  is  almost  as  much  a  part  of  free  speech  as  the  right
to  use  our   tongues."     This   has   become  the   law   since   the
Esquire  case  in  1946  and  is  again  quoted  as  such  by  Mr.  Jus-
tice  Douglas  in  the  Court's  decision   in  the  Communist   mail
cases.    Since  a  new  period  of  repression  may  lie  ahead,  the
Court  has  thus  given  us  another  weapon  in  the  fight  to main-
tain  freedom.    Corliss Lamont and  the  Emergency Civil Liber-
ties  committee  have  done  a public  service  in  bringing  this  suit,
as did  Leif  Heilberg  in the  companion  case  from  San  Francisco.
It  is  also  sobering  to  reflect  that  this  is  the  first  time  in  our
Baptists  for Talk with  China and Cuba
The  American  Baptist  convention,  most  liberal  of  the
nation's   Baptist   organizations,  unanimously   passed  a
resolution  calling  for  the  opening  of  negotiations   with
all  countries  "to  whic.t  the  U.S.  does  BO!  now  extend
recognition."     Dr.   J.   Lester   Harnish   of   Portland
Oregon, president  of  the  convention,  said  "This includes
Communist  Cf.ina  and  Cube."   The  eonventior.  was  held!
last  week-end  in  Sar.  :?rsr.sisec  where  the  Chronicle
(EJcy  23)  cached  one  member  of  the  eommfttee   whfefe
i.taied  the  rssolution,  Mrs.  George  B.  Martsr.  of  SEIS-
mil, N.J., as saying  "It's  a very realistic thing in today'c
world.   As  Christians  who believe  in  reconeiliction,  we
believe  God  intends   us  to   Calk   to  Communists.    You
must   establish   communications  if   you  are   going   to
reconcile."     The   csaveatiar.   called   for   negotiations
"with  all  concerned  groups" to  end the  war  in  Vietnam,
presumably  including the  VieS Cong.  Its  3,000  delegates
ji    also  condemned  segregation  as  "a  betrayal  o2  Christ."
history  that  a  Federal  statute has  been  struck  down  as in  viola-
tion  of  the  First  Amendment.    Since  the  postwar   anti-Com-
munist  witch-hunt  began  with  the  cold  war  in   1947,   several
major  repressive measures completely out  of  accord  with  Amer-
ican   tradition  have  been   challenged   as  in   violation   of   the
First.    Three  notable  examples  are  the  Smith   Act,  the  first
peacetime   sedition   law   since   the   Administration   of   John
Adams;  the   law  requiring   a  non-Communist   oath   of   labor
leaders   seeking   to   use  the  Wagner   Ace;   and   the   Internal
Security   Act,  which  set  up   a   Subversive  Activities  Control
Board  to  oversee  the  registration  and  labelling  of  Leftist  (but
not  rightist)  movements  and  ideas.    A majority has  been  mus-
tered  on  the  court  to  stem  various  repressive  moves  by  the  in-
vocation  of  procedural  safeguards.    But  a  majority  could  not
be  found  to  strike  down  any  of  these  major  repressive   laws
under  the  First  Amendment,   though   it  says  Congress   shall
make  "no  law .  . .  abridging"  freedom  of  speech,  press  or as-
sembly.    This  Amendment   is  the  cornerstone  of   American
freedom,  the  jewel  in  the  crown  of  Jeffersonian  tradition.   But
the  Court  has  already whittled  away its plain  purport  and  lan-
guage,  and  only  now,  this  once,  has  it  been  invoked  against  a
police  state  practice.    This  does  not  speak  too  hopefully   for
the  future.    How  will  the  Court  react  if  our  little  wars  widen,
and  the  usual  fanaticism  with  them?
Roman  Catholic  Protest  Against  U.S.  Policies   in  Vietnam   and  Latin  America
From  readers  we  have  received  two  clippings  which  ex-
press  Roman  Catholic criticism  of  U.S.  policies  in Vietnam
and Latin America.  The  first  was  an article from  Vietnam in
La  Croix  (April  7),  the  official  organ  of  the  Archbishopric
of  Paris.    La  Croix  denies  that  public opinion  in  the  South
favors  the  "clobbering"  (matraquage)  of  the  North and says
the  great  majority  there  want  only  peace.
"There  is,  of  course,  the  bourgeois  clan,"  the  article  ad-
mits,  "which  lives  in  the  cities  and makes a  profitable  busi-
ness  from  the  war,  but  that  is  only  a  minority  and  not  a
very  interesting  one.    There  are  also  and  above  all  those
Catholic  refugees   [from  the  North]  for  whom  the  war  has
become  & sort   of   crusade  and  who  therefore  approve  all
means  of  carrying  it  on.    Have  they  thought,  blinded  as
they  are  by  hatred  of  Communism .  .  .  that  such  a  war,
which  piles  up  the  dead,  the  wounded, and  destruction,  ma-
terial   and  moral,  becomes   finally   the   best   ally  of   Com-
munism?"
La Croix says  the Vietnamese war must  inevitably  appear
as  a  racist  war  to  the  masses  of  Africa  and Asia.
The  other  item,  from  the  April,  1965,  issue  of  the  Inter-
national  Labor  Review,  quotes  an  address  by  the  Roman
Catholic  Archbishop of  Rio  de Janeiro,  Dom  Helder Camara.
It  was  made  two  years  ago  but  is  given  new  poignancy  by
events  in  the  Dominican Republic.  The  Archbishop  said  the
Alliance  for  Progress   was  dead.    He  blamed  "the  rich  in
Latin  America  who  talk  too  much  about  reform  and  label
as  Communists all  those  who try  to  enforce  it."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, May 31,1965
(Continued  from  Page  One)
LBJ  As  One-Man Constitutional  Convention
Dan  Kurzman  of  the  Washington  Post  has  the  distinction
of  being  the  .first  American  reporter  to  call  attention  to  this
development.    The  1963 Constitution was the  first  ever  to  be
framed  and  adopted  by the  Dominican  people  through  wholly
democratic  processes.    Mr.  Justice  Douglas  was  one  of  those
who  acted  as consultant  in  its  framing.   It  was to  be a  model
for  the  hemisphere  in  establishing   a  secular  State,  with pro-
visions  for  agrarian  reform.    In  a  dispatch  published  by  his
paper  May 25,  Kurzman  disclosed  that  in  the  negotiations  for
a new government,  pressure  is being  applied  to  revise the  Con-
stitution.    One  target   is  Article  19  which  gives  workers  a
right  to profit-sharing  in  both  industrial  and  agricultural  enter-
prises.    Another  is Article  23 which  prohibits  large  landhold-
ings.  A third  is Article  25 which  restricts  the  right  of  foreign-
ers  to  acquire  Dominican  land.'  Another  is  Article  28,  which
requires  landholders  to  sell  that  portion  of  their  lands  above
the  pna-gjtnnm  fixed  by law;  the  excess  holdings  would  be  re-
sold  to the  landless peasantry.   This  is  the  agrarian  reform  we
say  we want in  the  hemisphere.    It  turns out  that,  as in  Guate-
mala  and  in  Cuba and  in  Mexico,  we  oppose  it  when  it  is en-
acted.    An  amendment  is  being  proposed,   Kurzman  reports,
to exempt owners of  sugar  plantations  and  cattle  ranges.  Cen-
tral  Romana, a subsidiary of  the  American-owned  South  Porto
Rico Sugar  Company, holds thousands  of  acres of  the  country's
best  sugar  and  cattle  lands  (see Selden  Rodman's  sympathetic
history  of  die  Dominican   Republic,  Quisqueya).     Such  are
the  conditions  for  American  approval.    And  such  is the  reality
behind  our  claim  to  be  saving  the  hemisphere   from  Com-
munism.
In  the  past  half  century  at  home,  one  basic  social  reform
after  another  has  been  assailed  as  communistic  by  the  masters
of  our  big  business  enterprises;   the  Square  Deal  of  Teddy
Roosevelt,  the  New  Freedom  of  Woodrow  Wilson,  the  Ne
Deal  of  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt  ajl  were  opposed  as unde
ing  property   and   free   enterprise.     At  home  we  have
feated  these  reactionary  forces,  though  far  from  comple
But  abroad  they  continue  unchallenged   to  mold  our  polk
Our  Latin  American  neighbors  have  been  forced  by  military
Two Items on Atrocities
"SAIGON—The  U.S.  Information  Service  here  is  at-
tempting  to  push  undocumented  guerrilla  atrocity  re-
ports  on  reporters.    The  attempt  to  enlist  correspon-
dents  in  the  psychological  warfare  offensive  is  being
made,  at  least  partially, at  the  behest  of  Sen.  Thomas
Dodd  (D.  Conn.)- ... In  the  daily  printed  summary of
the  war,  the  American  high  command  now  is  listing
'examples  of  recently  reported outrages.'   When corre-
spondents  seek  further  details  from  American  sources
they  are  told  the  reports  are  unverified."
—The  Washington  Post, May  £4-
"TOKYO—A  Japanese television  network  has cancel-
ed a series  of  documentary  films  about  the  war in Viet-
nam  because  of  a  deluge of  protests  from  viewers  that
certain  sequences  showed brutality beyond the  limits of
public  decency. . . . The films . . .  under the title  'Rec-
ord of  a  South Vietnamese  Marine  Battalion'  show  . . .
a  soldier  smashing  his rifle butt  into a figure  sprawled
hi  the  pathway,  apparently an  executed  suspect.   Other
soldiers  look  on, and one moves forward  to  cut  a  trophy
from  the  body  with a  knife.   Lastly,  a  soldier  appears
carrying .in  one  hand  what is  clearly a  freshly  severed
head."                               —Same  paper,  same day.
power,  our  own  or  local  forces  we armed,  to  bow  to  the  will
of  Standard  Oil  and  United  Fruit  and  Anaconda  Copper  and
Hanna  Mining  and  any number  of  great  North  American en-
terprises.    What  they have  been  unable  to  block  at  home  by
invoking  the  Red  Menace,  they  succeed  in  doing  among  our
Latin  neighbors.    This  is  why  the  new  Christian  Democratic
regime  in  Chile,  fresh  from  a victory over a  domestic  Popular
Front,  is  yet  so  deeply  hostile  to  what  we  are  doing  in  the
Dominican  Republic.   This  is why the  OAS  force we  are try-
ing  to  muster  as  our  mercenaries  is  made  up  entirely  (except
for  20  policemen  from  Costa  Rica)  of  forces  supplied  by  the
military dictatorships we helped  install in Brazil, Honduras  and
Nicaragua.     The  Johnson   Doctrine  aims  by  force  to  make
Latin  America safe for  U.S.  investment  at whatever cost  to  the
democratic wishes  of  its  people  or  our  own  often  asserted  de-
sire  for  social  reform.   This  is why  it  will  breed  a whole new
generation   of  revolutionaries  in  the  hemisphere,  driving  the
youth  to  despair  of  peaceful  change  and  contempt  for  the  Al-
liance  for  Progress.   This  is  how  we  create  what  we  fear.
We'll  Be Clad to Send A  Sample  Copy of This  Issue To  A  Friend  -r-  Send A  Stamped  Addressed Envelope
TH.  1964  Indw  It  Ready—You  Can Have OM  FnM  If  You Smd a  Long  Stamp**  AddrMted  Envtlop*
L F. Stone's Weekly5618  Nebraska  Are,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew  (or  enter)   a  sob  for  die  enclosed  $5:
B/iVW
Street   ................................
City  .............._.................
For  the  enclosed  $5 send  a  gift  sub to:
Street   ............_......_.............................................................
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  L  F.  Stone's  The  HtauOet  Fitttt*
Indicate  if  announcement wished   D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  0.  C  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone')  Weekly.    Second  Clu*  Portage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  the  hut  week  in  December   and  the  first  week  la
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at  6618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by  L  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Either  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   K   in   the  U.S.;  $6  in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.    Air   Mall   rates:
S16  to  Europe;  (20  to  brad.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED