I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965mar08.pdf

============================================================

Debunking  The  State  Depths  Slanted   Version  of  The   Vietnamese  War,  Pps.  1-4
If  We're Not  Careful,  One of  These Days  We're  Liable  to  Hit  A  Guerrilla
"The  employment  of  jet   aircraft   has  been  a  subject  of
controversy  at  the  Pentagon. ...  It  has  been  argued   that
fighting  guerrillas  with  jet  bombers  in  jungle  areas  will  in-
evitably   prove   unproductive   since   in   most   instances   the
guerrilla  forces  can  disappear  easily."
—New York Times Feb. 25 on the decision  to use jets.
"One   risk   in  using   supersonic   bombers  against   ground
targets  is  that  inevitably  some  bombs  will  fall  on  innocent
civilians,  probably  in  more  instances  than  when  slower  air-
craft  are used."
—Wall  Street Journal same  day.
"B-57  air  strikes  against  the  Viet  Cong  have  been  halted
in  a  Mekong  delta  area  after  the  American  bombers  acci-
dentally  killed  4  South  Vietnamese  troops  and  wounded  13.
. ..  There  were no reports  of damage  to the Viet  Cong.  . . .
The  B-57s  and  Vietnamese  Air  Force  Skyraiders   had  been
pounding  the  area  for  five  days."
—AP  from  Saigon  in  Washington  Evening  Star March 1.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  9
MARCH  8,  1965ioi       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
15  CENTS
A  Reply  to the  White  Paper
That  North  Vietnam  supports  the  guerrillas  in  South  Viet-
nam  is  no  more  a  secret  than  that  the  United  States  supports
the  South  Vietnamese  government  against  them.    The   strik-
ing  thing  about  the  State  Department's  new  White  Paper  is
how  little  support  it  can  prove.    "Incontrovertible  evidence
of  Hanoi's  elaborate program  to  supply its  forces  in  the  South
with  weapons,  ammunition  and  other  supplies,"   the  White
Paper   says,   "has   accumulated  over   the  years."     A  detailed
presentation  of  this  evidence  is  in  Appendix  D;  unfortunately
few  will  see  the  appendices  since  even  the  New   York   Times
did  not  reprint  them,  though  these  are  more  revealing  than
the  report.    Appendix  D  provides  a  list  of  weapons,  ammu-
nition   and   other   supplies   of   Chinese   Communist,   Soviet,
Czech  and  North  Vietnamese manufacture, with  the  dates  and
place  of  capture  from  the  Viet  Cong  guerrillas,  over  the  18-
month  period  from  June,  1962,  to  January  29  last  year  when
it  was  presented   to   the   International   Control. Commission.
The   Commission  was  set  up   by  the   Geneva  agreement  of
1954.    This  list  provides  a  good  point  at  which  to  begin  an
analysis  of  the  White  Paper.
The Pentagon's  Figures
To  put  the  figures  in  perspective,  we  called  the  Pentagon
press  office   and  obtained  some  figures  the  White  Paper  does
not  supply—the  number  of  weapons  captured  from  the  guer-
rillas  and  the  number  lost  to  them  in  recent  years:
Captured From
Guerrillas
1962                                  4,800
1963                                  5,400
1964                                  4,900
3-Year  Total
Lost to Them
5,200
8,500
13,700
15,100
27,400
In  three  years,  the  guerrillas  captured  from  our  side   12,300
more  weapons  than  they  lost  to  us.
What  interests  us  at  the  moment  is  not  this  favorable  bal-
ance  but  the  number  of  guerrilla  weapons  our  side  captured
during  the  past  three  years.   The  grand  total  was  15,100.   If
Hanoi  has  indeed  engaged  in  an  "elaborate  program"  to  sup-
ply  the  Viet  Cong,  one  would  expect  a  substantial  number  of
enemy-produced  weapons  to  turn  up.    Here  is  the  sum  total
of   enemy-produced  weapons   and   supplies  in  that   18-month
3  *
Little  Support  For  Wider  War
The  polls   show   little   support  for  a  wider  war  but
scant  attention  is  being  paid  to  this.   Congressional  de-
bate  continues  to  distort  the  latest  Harris  poll  on  the
Vietnamese  war  (Washington  Post,  Feb.  22).  The  only
figure  being  quoted  is  the  83%  approval  for  the  Pleiku
retaliatory  raids.    A  table  showing  decreasing  support
for  a  wider  war  is  ignored.    Those  polled  were  asked
to  choose  between  three  policies.    One was  to  carry  the
war  into  North  Vietnam  at  the  risk  of  bringing  China
in.   This  got  20%  last  November,  17%  in  January  and
12%  in  February.    A  second  choice  was  to   negotiate
and   get   out.    This   got   20%  in   November,   23%  in
January  and  35% in  February.   A  third  course,  to  hold
the  line  in  South  Vietnam  against   a  Communist  take-
over,  had  40%  in  November  and  January,  46%  in  Feb-
ruary.    Similar  results   turned  up  in  the  last   Gallup
poll    (New    York    Herald-Tribune,    March   1)    where
67%   answered   "yes"   when   asked   whether   they   ap-
proved  of  "action  taken  by  the  U.S.  in  Vietnam  in  the
last   few   days."    When   those   who  voted   "yes"   were
asked   whether  they   favored   continuance  even  at   the
risk  of  nuclear  war,  only  31% said  they  did.
tally  to  the  Control  Commission—
72  rifles  (46  Soviet,  26  Czech)
64  submachine   guns   (40   Czech,   24  French   but   "modi-
fied" in North  Vietnam)
15  carbines   (Soviet)
8  machine  guns  (6  Chinese,  2  North   Vietnamese)
5  pistols  (4  Soviet,  1  Czech)
4  mortars  (Chinese)
3  recoilless 75.mm rifles  (Chinese)
3  recoilless 57.mm  guns (Chinese)
2  bazookas   (1  Chinese,  1  Czech)
2  rocket  launchers  (Chinese)
1  grenade  launcher   (Czech)
179  total
This  is  not  a  very  impressive  total.    According  to  the  Pen-
tagon  figures,  we  captured  on  the  average  7500  weapons  each
18-months  in  the  past  three  years.   If  only  179  Communist-
made  weapons  turned   up   in   18  months,   that   is  less   than
2i/
2
%   of  the  total.    Judging  by  these  White  Paper  figures,
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  8,1965
our  military  are  wrong  in  estimating,  as  they  have  in  recent
months,  that  80%   of  the  weapons  used  by  the  guerrillas  are
captured  from  us.    It  looks  as  if  the  proportion  is  consider-
ably  higher.    The   material  of  North   Vietnamese  origin  in-
cluded  only  those  24  French  sub-machine  guns  "modified"  in
North  Vietnam,  2  machine  guns  made  in  North  Vietnam,  16
helmets,  a  uniform  and  an  undisclosed  number  of  mess  kits,
belts,  sweaters   and   socks.     Judging   by  this  tally,  the   main
retaliatory   blow   should   be   at   North    Vietnam's   clothing
factories.
Not  Enough  for A  Battalion
There  is  another  way  to  judge  this  tally  of  captured  Com-
munist  weapons.    A  Communist  battalion  has  about  450  men.
It  needs  500  rifles,  four  80-mm.  mortars, eight  60-mm.  mor-
tars  and  at  least  four  recoilless  rifles.    The  weapons  of  Com-
munist  origin  captured  in   18  months  would  not  adequately
outfit  one  battalion.    The  figures  in  the  appendix  on  ammu-
nition  captured  provides  another  index.    We   captured   183
(Chinese)   shells  for  a  60  mm.  mortar.    This  fires  about  20
shells  a  minute,  so  that  was  hardly  enough  ammunition  for
10  minutes  of   firing.   There  were  100,000  (Chinese)   cart-
ridges  for  7.26  mm.  machine  guns.    That  looks  impressive
until  one  discovers  on  checking  with  knowledgeable  military
sources  that  these  machine  guns  fire  600  rounds  a  minute.
A   machine  gun   platoon   normally  has   four   machine  guns.
This  was  enough  ammunition  for  about  40  minutes  of  firing
by   one   platoon.     Indeed,   if   the   ratio  of   Communist-made
weapons  captured  is  the  same  for  weapons  used,  then  only
121/2  days  of  those  18  months  were  fought  by  the  guerrillas
on  the  basis  of  Communist made  supplies.
If   these  figures  were  being  presented  in  a  court   of  law,
they  would  run  up  against  a  further  difficulty:  one would  have
to  prove  the  arms  actually  came  from   the  Communist   side.
There  is  a  world-wide market  in  second-hand  weapons.    One
can  buy  Soviet,  Czech  and  Chinese  Communist  weapons  of  all
kinds  only  two  miles  or  so  from  the  Pentagon  at  Interarmco,
Ltd.,  7  Prince  Street,  Alexandria, Va.    Interarmco,  one  of  the
world's  foremost  dealers,  can  provide  more  Communist  weap-
ons  than  we  picked  up  in  18  months  on  Vietnamese  battle-
fields.    Interarmco's  East  European  Communist weapons  come
in  large  part  from  the  huge  stocks  of  Soviet  and  Czech  arms
captured  by the  Israelis  in  the  Suez  campaign.    It  has  Chinese
Communist  weapons  captured  by  our  side  in  the  Korean  war.
It  also  has,  of  course,  a  wide  selection  of  our  own  military
surplus.    This  has  turned  up  in  strange  places.
For  example,  a  book  on  the  Algerian  war,  Les Algeriens  en
The  Lesson  Burma  Can  Teach
"Immediately   after   Burma's   independence    in   Jan.
1948,  the  Burmese  Communists  went  underground  and
started  a  widespread  insurrection.    The  Burmese   gov-
ernment  dealt  with  this   internal   problem   by  its   own
means,  without  asking  for  any  outside  military  assist-
ance.  .  .  .  The  Burmese   Communist  Party  is  still  un-
derground   after  17 years  and still  illegal.    But  let  me
tell  you  there  has  not  been  a  single  instance  of  outside
help  to  the  Burmese  Communists.  .  .  .  Burma  has  over
1,000  miles  of  land  frontier  with  mainland   China.    If
only   the   Burmese   government   had  decided   at   some
stage  to  seek  outside   military  assistance  .  .  .  then  I
am  sure  that  Burma  would  have  experienced  one  of  the
two  alternatives:   either  the  country  would  be  divided
into  two  parts   or  the  whole   country   would  have   be-
come  communist  long  ago.  .  .  .  Not  one  American  life
has  been  lost  in  Burma.   Not  one  American  dollar  has
been  spent  in  Burma  in  the  form  of  military  assistance
in  the  last  17 years.  We  should  ask  the  great  question:
Why 1"
—UN  Sec. Gen. U Thant,  press  con/. Feb. 24.
guerre,  by  Dominique  Darbois  and  Phillippe  Vingneau,  was
published  in  Milan  in  I960  by  Feltrinelli.    It  shows   pictures
of  FLN   (National   Liberation  Front)   Algerian   rebels  wear-
ing  U.S.  Marine  Corps  uniforms from  which  the  "USM"  and
the  eagle  and  globe  insignia  have  not  even  been  removed.  It
shows  Algerians  carrying  U.S.  80-mm.  mortars  and  U.S.  50-
calibre  machine  guns.    Such  photos  could  have  been  used  by
France  to Accuse  the  U.S.  of  supplying  the  Algerian   rebels.
The  State  Department's  White   Paper   says  "dramatic  new
proof  was  exposed   just  as  this  report  was  being  completed"
in  the  discovery of  a  suspected  Viet  Cong  arms  cargo  ship  on
Feb.  16.    The  New   York   Times  commented   astringently  on
this in an editorial  Feb.  28—
Apparently,  the  major  new  evidence  of  a  need  for  esca-
lating  the  war,  with  all  the  hazard  that  this  entails,  was
provided  by  the  sinking  in  a  South  Vietnamese  cove  earlier
this   month  of  a  100-ton   cargo   ship  loaded   with   Commu-
nist-made  small  arms  and  ammunition.   A  ship  of  that  size
is  not  much  above  the  Oriental  junk  class.    The  standard
Liberty  or  Victory  ship  of  World  War  II  had  a  capacity  of
7,150  to  7,650  tons.
The   affair  of  the  cargo  ship  is  curious.    Until  now   there
has  been  little  evidence  of  arms  coming  in  by  ship.    A  huge
fleet  of   small  vessels  patrols  the   coast  and  there  have   been
glowing   stories  in  the  past  of  its  efficiency.    "About  12,000
vessels,"  the  AP  reported   from  Saigon   (New   York    Times,
Feb.  22)  "are  searched  each  month  by  the  South   Vietnamese
coastal  junk  patrol  force  but  arrests  are  rare  and  no  significant
The  Stuff  That  Guerrillas  Are  Made  Of:  Excerpts From  A  Dead  Viet  Cong's Diary
"Leaving  temporarily  the  beloved  North  to  return  to  my
native  South  to  liberate  my  compatriots  from  the  yoke  of
misery  imposed  by  My-Diem  (U.  S.  Diem).    This  has  been
my  ideal  for  a  long  time.  .  .  .  For  the  third  time  my  life
turned  to  war  again.    For  the  liberation  of  our  compatriots
in  the  South,  a  situation  of  boiling  oil  and  burning  fire  is
necessary!  A  situation   in  which  husband  is  separated  from
wife,  father   from  son,  brother  from  brother  is  necessary.
I  joined  the  ranks  of  the  liberation   army  in  answer  to  the
call  of  the  front  for  liberation  of  the  South.
"Now  my  life  is  full  of  hardship—not  enough  rice  to  eat
nor  enough  salt  to  give  a  taste  to  my  tongue,  not  enough
clothing   to  keep  myself   warm!    But  in  my  heart  I  keep
loyal  to  the  Party  and  the  people.    I  am  proud  and  happy.
I  am  writing  down  this  story  for  my  sons  and  my   grand-
sons  of  the  future  to  know  of  my  life  and  activities  during
the   revolution   when  the  best  medicine   available   was   the
root  of  the  wild  banana  tree  and  the  best  bandage  was  the
leaf   of  ran  lui,  when  there  was  no  salt  to  give  a  taste  to
our  meals,   when  there  was  no  such  food   as  meat  or  _fish
like  we  enjoy  in  a  time  of  peace  and  happiness  such  as  I
have  known and left  behind."
—From  the  diary  found  in  the  uniform  of  Do Luc, a  dead  Viet   Cong  soldier  Sept.  S,  1961, and  reprinted  in  Appendix  M
of   Part   II,   the  State  Department's   1961  Blue  Book  on  the   War  in   Vietnam.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  8,1965
amounts  of  incriminating  goods  or  weapons  ever  have  been
found."  This  lone  case of  a whole shipload  of  arms is puzzling.
Few  Northern Infiltrees  Cited
The  White   Paper's  story  on  the   influx  of  men  from   the
North  also  deserves  a  closer  analysis than  the  newspapers have
given   it.     Appendix   C   provides   an   elaborate   table   from
1959-60   to   1964   inclusive,  showing   the   number   of   "con-
firmed"  military  infiltrees  per  year from  the  North.    The  total
is  given   as  19,550.    One  way  to   measure   this   number   is
against  that  of  the  military  we  have  assigned  to  South  Viet-
nam   in  the  same  years.    These   now  total  23,500,  or   25%
more,  and   1,000  are  to  be  added   in  the  near  future.     The
number  of  North  Vietnamese  infiltrees  is  "based  on  informa-
tion  .  .  .  from  at  least  two  independent  sources."     Nowhere
are  we  told  how  many  men  who  infiltrated   from   the   North
have  actually  been  captured.  There  is  reason  to  wonder wheth-
er  the  count  of  infiltrees  may  be  as  bloated  as  the  count  of
Viet  Cong  dead;  in  both  cases  the  numbers  used  are  estimates
rather  than  actual  bodies.
The White Paper  calls the war an invasion and claims "that as
many  as  75%   of  the  more  than  4400  Viet  Cong  who  are
known  to  have  entered  the  South  in  the  first  eight  months of
1964  were  natives of  North  Vietnam."    But  a  careful  reading
of  the  text  and  the  appendices  turns  up  the  names  of  only
six  North   Vietnamese   infiltrees.     In   Part   I   of   the  White
Paper,   Section  B  gives   "individual   case  histories   of  North
Vietnamese  soldiers"  sent  South  by Hanoi  but  all  nine  of  these
are  of  South Vietnamese  origin.  The  next  Section,  C,  is headed
"Infiltration   of  Native   North   Vietnamese."      It   names  five
infiltrees  but  one  of  these  is also  from  the  South.   That leaves
four  North  Vietnamese  natives.    Then,  in  Appendix   C,  we
are  given  the  case  histories  and  photographs  of  nine  other  Viet
Cong   sent   South   by  Hanoi.    The   report   does   not   explain
which  ones  were  originally  from  the  South  but  it  does  give
the  names  of  the  provinces  in  which  they  were  born.    When
these  are  checked,  it  turns  out  that  only  two  of  the  nine  were
born  in  North  Vietnam.    This  gives  us  a  total  of  six  North-
ern  infiltrees.    It  is  strange  that  after  five  years  of   fighting,
the  White  Paper  can cite  so  few.
None  of  this  is  discussed  frankly  in  the  White  Paper.    To
do  so  would  be  to  bring  the  war  into  focus  as  a  rebellion  in
the   South,   which   may  owe  some  men  and   materiel   to   the
North   but  is  largely  dependent   on  popular   indigenous  sup-
port  for  its  manpower,  as  it  is  on  captured  U.S.  weapons  for
its  supply.    The  White  Paper  withholds  all  evidence   which
Still  Evading  The  Idea  of  Free  Elections
"Q.  Mr.  Secretary,   were  we  satisfied  that  all   sap-
plies  and  infiltration  from  the  North  had  been  stopped,
would  the  United  States   be  content   to  solve  the  in-
digenous  aspects,  the  civil  war  aspects,  by  free  elec-
tions   under   international  supervision   in   South   Viet-
nam?
A.  Well,  let's  get  to  the  first  step  first,  and  then  if
we  get  to  that  step,  then  we  will  have  the  luxury  of
indulging  in  the  consideration  of  the  second  step.
Q.  What  are  our  policies  with  regard  to  the  indige-
nous  aspects  of  a  civil  war?    Could  you  enlighten  us
on  this?
A.  Well,  I  think  that  the  indigenous  aspects   of   it
could  be  brought to  a  conclusion  very  quickly,  and  that
the   South  Vietnamese  people  could  turn  back  to   the
problem  of  building  their  country  and  improving  their
constitutional  system,  elevating  the  economic  standards
of   the  country  and  get   on  with  the  modernization of
the  country  which  has  been  their  purpose  from  the  be-
ginning.
Q.  But  only  by  force, Mr. Secretary?
A.  I  am  not  commenting  on  that.    I  think  the  paci-
fication  of  the  country  would  be  easy  if  the   external
aggression  were stopped."
—Secretary  Rusk, at  his press  conference,  Feb. 25.
points  to  a  civil  war.    It  also  fails  to  tell  the  full  story  of  the
July  1962  Special  Report  by  the  International   Control   Com-
mission.     Appendix   A   quotes   that   portion   in   which   the
Commission   2-to-l    (Poland   dissenting)    declared   that   the
North  had  in  specific  instances  sent  men  and  material  south
in  violation  of  the  Geneva  accords.    But  nowhere   does   the
State   Department   mention   that   the   same   report   also   con-
demned  South  Vietnam  and  the  U.S.,  declaring  that  they  had
entered   into  a  military  alliance  in  violation   of   the   Geneva
agreements.  The  U.S.  was  criticized  because  it  then  had  about
5,000   military   advisers   in   South   Vietnam.     The    Geneva
accords  limited  the  U.S.  military mission  to  the  684  in  Viet-
nam  at  the  time  of  the  1954  cease-fire.    The  U.S.  and  South
Vietnam  were  also  criticized  by  the  ICC  for  hamstringing   the
Commission's  efforts  to  check  on  imports  of  arms  in  violation
of  the  Geneva  Accords.
The  reader  would  never  guess  from  the  White  Paper  that
the  Geneva  accords  promised  that  elections  would  be  held  in
1956  to  reunify  the  country.    The   1961   Blue  Book  at  least
mentioned  the  elections,  though   somehow  managing  to  make
them  seem  a  plot.    "It  was  the  Communists'  calculation,"  the
(Continued   on  Page   four)
The  Freedom  We Defend  in  South  Vietnam  Does Not  Include  Fredom  To Ask  For  Peace
"Slightly  unnerving  to  the  Americans  was  today's  peti-
tion  for  peace.    The  police  dispersed  a  gathering  of  50  peo-
ple  who  wished  to  bold  a  press  conference  to  launch  the
appeal.    Their   resolution  calls   on  both   the   Government
and  the  National  Liberation  Front  to  agree  to  as  immedi-
ate   cease-fire.    Dated  Feb.  16  and  distributed  in  Vietna-
mese,   French   and   English,   it   considers   thet   the   war,
increasing  in  intensity,  threatens  to  exterminate  the  Viet-
namese  race  and to  ignite  a  world war  on  its  national  ter-
ritory.  It  further  states  that  the  whole  population demands
a  cease-fire.    The  resolution   is  signed   by  an  author  and
two  doctors.    Vietnamese  Journalists  claim  that  more  than
400    'leading   personalities   and   intellectuals'   have   also
signed.    None  of  the  original  three  was  available  at  home
today  and  one  is  said  to  have  been,  attested."
—The  Times  (London)  from  Saigon  Feb. 26.
"This  is  the  first  snch  [peace]  effort  to  have  dared  come
into  the  open. ...  I  met  tjwlay   someone  who had  signed
the  resolution.  The  police  action,  though  drawing  & request
for   anonymity,  had  not  silenced  him,  and  the  charges  of
communism  were  scornfully   dismissed.  .  . .  My inforntaat
was  eonviBced  that  everyone  was fed ep  with the war.  . . .
All  that   the   people  wanted  was  their   independence:   1st
Vietnamese   talk   to  Vietnamese  without  interference.    It
was not a matter of 'isms.' . . . For the man in the street—
and  my informant  was  not  one—the  only  thing  that  matter-
ed  waa peace."
—The  Times (London)  from  Saigon  Feb.  ST.
3   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  8,1965
Blue  Book  put  it,  "that  nationwide  elections  scheduled  in  the
accords  for  1956 would  turn  all  of  South  Vietnam  over  to
them.  .  .  .  The  authorities  in  South  Vietnam  refused  to  fall
into  this well-laid  trap."    The  White  Paper  omits  mention  of
the  elections  altogether  and  says,  "South  Vietnam's  refusal  to
fall  in  with  Hanoi's  scheme  for  peaceful  takeover  came  as  a
heavy  blow  to  the  Communists."    This  is not  the  most  candid
and  objective  presentation.     From   the  Viet  Minh  point  of
view,  the  failure  to  hold  the  elections  promised  them   when
they  laid  down  their  arms  was  the  second  broken  promise  of
the  West.    The  earlier  one  was  in  1946 when  they  made  an
agreement  to  accept  limited  autonomy within  the  French  un-
ion,  and  welcomed  the  returning  French  troops  as  comrades
of  the  liberation.   Most  of  the  French  military did  not  want  to
recognize   even   this   limited   form   of    independence,    and
chose  instead  the  road  which  led  after  eight  years  of  war  to
Dienbienphu.*
That  "Economic  Miracle" Again
The  most  disingenuous  part  of  the  White  Paper  is  that  in
which  it  discusses the  origins  of  the  present  war.    It  pictures
the  war  as  an  attack  from  the  North,  launched  in  desperation
because  the  "economic  miracle"  in  the  South  under  Diem  had
destroyed  Communist hopes  of  a peaceful  takeover  from  with-
in.    Even  the  strategic  hamlets  are  described  as  "designed  to
improve  the  peasant's  livelihood"  and  we  are  asked  to  believe
that  for  the  first  time  in  history  a  guerrilla  war  spread   not
because  the  people  were  discontented  but  because  their   lot
was  improving!
The  true  story  is  a  story  of  lost  opportunities.    The  Com-
munist  countries  acquiesced  in  the  failure  to  hold   elections.
Diem  had  a  chance  to  make  his  part  of  the  country  a  demo-
cratic  show-case.   The  year  1956  was  a  bad  one  in  the  North.
There   was   a   peasant   uprising   and   widespread   resentment
among  the   intellectuals  over  the  Communist  Party's  heavy-
handed  thought  control.    But  Diem  on  the  other  side  of  the
17th  Parallel  was  busy erecting  a  dictatorship  of  his  own.    In
1956  he  abolished  elections  even  for  village  councils.  In 1957
his  mobs smashed the  press  of  the  one  legal  opposition  party,
the  Democratic Bloc,  when  it  dared  criticize  the  government.
That   was  the  beginning  of   a  campaign  to  wipe  out  every
form  of  opposition.     It  was  this  campaign  and  the  oppres-
The  Cost  of  Playing  Planetary   Gendarme
" 'But  what  are  we  going  to  do,'  asked  Senator  Jor-
dan   (R.  Idaho),  'if   we  don't  get   the  full  cooperation
[of  business  in  curtailing  foreign  investments]  needed
to  bring  our  accounts  into  balance?'
" 'We'd  have  to  look  to  the  whole  program—to  our
military  commitments, our  foreign  aid,  our  credit  poli-
cies,'  [Wm.  McChesney]  Martin  [Jr., chairman  of  the
Federal  Reserve  Board]  replied.
"Later  Senator  Talmadge  (D.  Ga.) asked,  'Don't  you
think  we'll have  to  cut  down  some  of  our commitments
abroad?'    The   Federal   Reserve  chairman  replied,   'I
agree.'    Talmadge  said   we   have  troops   in   some  30
countries  of  the  world  and  asked,  'Don't  you  think  we
should  lighten  this  burden?'
" 'It's  not  for   me  to   say   how  it   should  be  done,'
Martin replied."
Baltimore  Sun  Feb. 27:  Joint   Economic  Committee
hearings  on  the  U.S.  imbalance  of   payments.
sive  exactions   imposed  on  the  peasantry,   the  fake  land   re-
form  and  the  concentration   camps  Diem  set  up  for   political
opponents  of   all  kinds,   which  stirred  ever  wider   rebellion
from  1958 onward  in  the  grass  roots  before   North  Vietnam
gave  support.**   It  was  this  which  drove  oppositionists  of  all
kinds  into  alliance with  the  Communists  in  the  National  Lib-
eration  Front.
Long   before  the  North  was   accused   of   interference,   its
government   was   complaining   to   the   Control    Commission
of  "border  and  air-space  violations  by  the  south  and  infringe-
ments  of  the  Geneva  agreement  by  the  introduction  of  arms
and  U.S. servicemen."  ***  For  four  years  after  Geneva,  both
North  Vietnam  and  China   followed   the   "peaceful   co-exist-
ence"   policy  while  the  U.S. turned   South   Vietnam   into  a
military  base  and  a  military  dictatorship.    It  is  in  this  story
the  White  Paper   does  not  tell,  and  the  popular   discontent
it  does  not  mention,  that  the  rebellion  and  the  aid  from  the
North  had  their   origins.
* See  Jean  Sainteny's  Histoire  d'  une  paix  manquee  (Paria
1953)   and Ellen  Hammer's The  Struggle  for  Indochina (Stan-
ford  1954).
** Philippe  Devillers  in  the China Quarterly, Jan.-Mar. 1962.
*** Survey  of   International  Affairs   1956-58,  by   Geoffrey
Barraclough,  a  publication of  Britain's  Royal  Institute of  In-
ternational  Affairs.    P.  420.
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City   ..........................................Zone..
..State..
3/8/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ....................................................
Street    ..............................................................
City       ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
Send  A  Stamped  Self-Addressed   Envelope
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  In
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,   K.W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.:   16   in   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED