I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965apr19.pdf

============================================================

Gruening  and  Morse  Call LBJ's  "Peace"  Offer    Spurious,  Pps. 2-3
The  Girls  May  Be  Comforting  But  Won't  They  Leave  Even  Less  Time  for  Fighting?
"Air    strikes  in  North  Vietnam  have  both  good  and  bad
effects.     Generally   speaking,  they   have  vastly   improved
South  Vietnamese  morale,  but  in  some  units  feeling   has
risen  that  there  is  no  point  in  risking  death  in  combat be-
cause  the  war  will  be  won by  strikes  on  the  north. ...  A
further  problem  that  continues  to  plague  American  advis-
ers  is  the  Vietnamese  reluctance  to  fight  at  night  unless
attacked.  .  .  .  Some  commanders  have  been  successful  in
keeping   their  troops   away  from   their   families,   but   too
often  the  troops  fight  what  amounts  to  white  collar  work-
ing  hours,  going  home  to  their  wife  and  children  at  night.
Some  officers,  including  Americans, propose  providing  'com-
fort  girls'  if  necessary  to  keep  the  troops  in  the  field  long
enough to  be effective."
—Arthur  Dommen  from  Saigon  to  the  London  Observer  Foreign  Service  in  the  Washington  Post,  April  11.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  IB
APRIL  19,  1965
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15   CENTS
Half  Barry  Goldwater,  Half  Billy  Graham
If  Mr.  Johnson  were  still  running  for  election,  his  speech
at  Baltimore  would  have  been  admirably  designed  for  maxi-
mum   vote-getting.     It  was  half   Barry  Goldwater   and  half
Billy  Graham.    The  first  half   was  fiercely  uncompromising
enough  to  bring  cheers  from  such  journalistic  war-hawks  as
Joe  Alsop,  David  Lawrence  and  Wm.  S. White.   The  second
half  was  as  full  of  Christian  piety  as  a  revival  sermon,  and
has  brought   sighs  of  relief  from  substantial  sections  of   the
peace  movement.    Only  Senators  Morse  and  Gruening   (see
pps.  2-3)  were  not  taken  in  by  it.
Both  "Doves"  and  "Hawks" Cooed
The  reactions  in  the  Senate  were  otherwise  a  tribute  to  Mr.
Johnson's  genius  at  sleight  of  hand.    There  it  was  welcomed
by  a  "dove"  like  Church  of  Idaho  and  a  few  minutes  later
by  a  "hawk"  like  Tower   of   Texas.    Next  day  Douglas  of
Illinois,  American  liberalism's  gift  to  Chiang  Kai-shek,  haled
its   unrelenting   hostility  toward   China   while   Mansfield   of
Montana   was  praising   it   for   "humanity   and   conciliation."
Just  before  the  speech  was  delivered,  unnameable Administra-
tion  spokesmen  were  assuring  the  foreign  press  and  the  hoi
polloi  of  our  own,  though  not  for  attribution,  that  the  speech
was  a  turn  toward  peace  talks.    But  at  private  sessions  later
for  hard-line  U.S.  commentators  emphasis  was  placed  on  the
belligerent  passages  and  on  a  tricky  distinction  between   "dis-
cussions"  and  "negotiations."    Only  the  former,  it  was  ex-
plained,   were  to  be  without   preconditions.
A  speech  which  could  so  cleverly  confuse  so  many  people
at  home  could  hardly  be  expected   to  appear  straightforward
and  sincere  to  the  other   side.    If   it  was  intended—in   the
phrase  currently  fashionable—as  a  "signal"  to  the  enemy,  it
seemed  to  signal  that  we  were  heading  full  speed  ahead  in
two  opposite  directions  at  once.    A  railroad  run  by  such  sig-
nals  would  soon  set  a  record  for  head-on  collisions.
For  a  speech  advertised   as  dropping  all  pre-conditions  for
talks,   it  reminded  one  of   those   accident  insurance  policies
which  cover  all  mishaps  except  those  taking  place  in  moving
vehicles,  on  the  open  road,  at  street  intersections,  during  air
travel  or  while  entering,  or  emerging  from,  a  bathtub.    First
of  all  we  are  ready  to  talk  with  anyone—anyone,  that  is,  ex-
cept  those  whom  we  are   fighting.   This  unwillingness  to  talk
Plane  Losses  Heavier  Than  Expected
For  some  weeks  there  has  been  talk  in  Washington
that   U.S.   plane  losses   in  Vietnam  were   alarmingly
high.    There  was  no  way  to  check  this,  and  one  could
only  note  the  wide  disparity  between  enemy  claims and
admitted  losses  after  each  raid.   Now  John  G.  Morris,
who  covers  the  Pentagon  for  the Washington  Post,  has
filed  a   story   from   Saigon   to   his   paper   (April   11)
which  confirms  the  fact  that   U.S.   plane  losses  have
been  unexpectedly  heavy.    He  disclosed  that  at  least
35   U.S.   and  South   Vietnam  planes   [the   other   side
claims  100]  have  been  shot  down,  and that  these  losses
were  "at a  sortie  rate  comparable  to  that  of  American
aircraft  in  World  War  II  against  the  best  German  and
Japanese  defenses."    All  but  two  of  the  more  than  30
U.S.  jets  lost,  according  to  Norris,  were  shot  down by
ground  anti-aircraft  defenses  which  proved  "consider-
ably   stronger   than  expected."    He  quotes   U.S.   Air
Force  spokesmen  as  saying  that  there  are  37-mm  and
57-mm  guns  deployed  around  Hanoi  which   have   not
yet  seen  action  that  are  radar  controlled  and  able  to
shoot  down  planes  in  the  clouds.    "Air  Force   chiefs
here,"   Norris   reports,   "are   particularly   embarrassed
by  the  shooting  down  of  two  of  the  latest  model  F-105
[jet]   fighters   by  aging   Soviet   designed   Migs."    He
quotes  one  officer   as  saying,   "Something  went  wrong
with  our  people  and those  guys  were  real  pros."   Even
without  Soviet  SAM  missiles,  it  looks  as  if  Hanoi  can
exact  a  heavy  price  for  any  attack  upon  it.
with  the   Vietcong,   as  Jean   Lacouture  notes   in  Le   Monde
(April  9),   recalls  the  French  unwillingness  to  negotiate  with
the  Vietminh  when  negotiations  first  began   in   1954.     The
French  dismissed  the  Vietminh  as  an  "agent"  of  China  as  we
now  dismiss  the  Vietcong  as  an  "agent"  of  Hanoi.     France
finally had  to  deal  with  the  rebels  in  Indochina  and  later  in
Algeria.    Johnson  will  have  to  deal  with  the  rebels  in  South
Vietnam.  "It  would  be  ironic,"  as the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch
said  in  an  editorial  April  8,  "if,  while   insisting  on  South
Vietnam's   right   to  self-determination,  we  refused   to  make
peace  with  anybody  but  outsiders."     Negotiating  its  future
with  Peking  or  Hanoi  is  hardly  the  best  way  to  build  an  in-
dependent  South  Vietnam.
As  for  negotiations,  all  sorts  of  preconditions  were  set  forth
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  19,1965
(Continued   from   Page   One)
or   implied  by  the  Baltimore  speech.     China  was  pointedly
excluded   from   the  plan   for  harnessing  the  Mekong  River,
though    1200   of   its   2800   miles   run   through   China,   and
Peking   could  some  day  divert   the  waters  if   not   consulted.
Hanoi  is  invited to  take  part  in  a  Southeast  Asia  development
plan  which  must  seem  to  China  a  program  for  an  American
protectorate  on  her  borders.    We  need  only  imagine  how  we
would  feel   if  Mexico  and  the  Central  American  States  were
offered   a  Chinese  development  program  if  they  promised   to
abjure  capitalism  and  take part  in  a  Chinese  plan  to  "contain"
the  United  States.   The  isolation of  China  is the  No.  1 objec-
tive  of  the  Administration's strategy.    This  peace  program  is
a  new  cordon  sanitaire,  in  which  we  offer  to  buy  Russian  and
North  Vietnamese  participation.    We   still  do  not  want  to
reconcile  ourselves  to  the  emergence  of  the  new  China.
An  Odd  Kind  of  Self-Determination
The  second  major  precondition is  that  while,  in  Mr.  John-
son's  words,  the  people  of  South  Vietnam  are  to  be   "allowed
to  guide  their  own  country  in  their  own  way,"   they  must
accept  "our  objective,"  "the  independence  of  South  Vietnam,"
which   we  insist  on  regarding   as  an   "independent   nation."
What  if  they  prefer  the  reunification  by  free  elections  prom-
ised  them  in  1954?    We  talk  of  getting  back  to  "the  essen-
tials"   of   the   1954   agreement  but   one  of   its  essentials  was
that  the  military  truce  line  on  the   17th  parallel  was  not  to
become  a  permanent  boundary.
The  most  serious  precondition  is  this  determination  not  to
leave  the  fate  of  South  Vietnam  to  the  free  choice  of  its  peo-
ple.    Over  and  over  again  I  have  put  the  question  at  press
briefings—whether,   if   the  rebels  laid  down  their  arms,   we
would  be willing  to  abide by  the  result of  free  elections  under
international  auspices.    Neither   on  nor   off  the  record   have
I  been  able  to  elicit  a  favorable  response.    "It's  a  rare  student
of   the   South  Vietnamese  scene,"   a   Wall   Si.   Journal   staff
writer  observed   (April   7),   "who   doesn't   believe  that   ulti-
mately  there  will  have  to  be  some  sort  of  reconciliation  be-
tween   the  Communist  revolutionaries,  deeply   entrenched   in
the   countryside,  and   the   established   political   hierarchy   in
Hanoi  and  The   Vietcong
"The  Vietcong  will  take  direction   and  control   from
Hanoi  just  so  long   as  Hanoi's   objective   is  to  aid  the
Vietcong   in  its   civil  war  against  the   government   of
South  Vietnam.   But  Hanoi  cannot  turn  the  civil  war
off   like  turning   off  water  in  a   faucet."
—Gruening   of   Alaska,  in  the  Senate,  April  9.
"While  Hanoi   is   thought   to   have   general    political
and  military  control  of  the  war  in  the  South,  analysts
here   [in   Saigon]   believe   that   the   North    Vietnamese
leadership  would  hare  to  take  into  account  the  wishes
of    Vietcong   field   commanders.    The   Vietcong    have
fought  a  long,  difficult  campaign  which  has  given  their
guerrillas  control  of  more  than  half  of  South  Vietnam.
Their   commanders   would   not   easily    surrender   their
gains.    If  Hanoi  were  to  enter   into  any  peace   agree-
ment,   it   could   assure    disciplined   response    from   all
Vietcong  commanders  only  if  an  avenue  was  kept  open
for  their  eventual  assumption  of  power  in  South  Viet-
nam."
—Seymour  Topping,  in  The New York  Times,  Apr.  11.
Saigon  as part  of  a  broad  program  of  political  reform."  There
is  no   visible  recognition  of   this  anywhere  in   the  Admin-
istration.
Mr.  Johnson  spoke  as  if  our  only  purpose  were  to  defend
the  freedom  of  the  people  of  South  Vietnam.    But  even  so
conservative  a  paper  as  the  Washington   Star  in  an  editorial
(April  11)   voiced  a  "serious  reservation"  about  the   "impli-
cation"   in  the  Baltimore  speech   "that  the  U.S.   rather   than
the  government  and  the  people  of  South  Vietnam  are  to  nego-
tiate  the  terms  of  peace  for  that  country."    This  is  in  the  pat-
tern  of  our  South  Vietnamese policy  all  along,  which  has  been
to  impose  our  views  and   to  shut  off  expression   of   popular
feeling.    There  has  never  been   less  democracy  in   Vietnam
than,  under   our   overlordship.     So  experienced   a  soldier   as
Air  Force  Major  Gen.  Edward  G.  Lansdale  (ret.),  our  fore-
most  anti-guerrilla expert,  once  Diem's  military  adviser,   the
"Quiet  American"  of  Graham  Greene's  novel,  made  a  speech
at  Principia  College  in  Elsah,   111.,  April  9  in  which  he  said
we   could   not  hope  to  win   the  war  until  we  allowed   the
growth  of  representative popular  institutions.
Gruening  Says Peace Cannot  Be  Made  in  Vietnam  Without  Dealing  With  The Vietcong
"The  refusal  to  concede  that  the  fighting  in  South  Viet-
nam  is  essentially  a  civil  war  and  that  to  bring  that  fight-
ing  to  a  halt  it  is  necessary   to  discuss  the  issues  with  the
principals—the  Vietcong—is  tantamount  to  retaining  a  pre-
condition  to  our  willingness  to  negotiate.    In  addition,  our
continued  bombing   of  North   Vietnam  is  not  conducive   to
bringing  about  peace  in  Vietnam—it  is  asking  North  Viet-
nam  to  parley  with  a  gun  at  its   head.
"Furthermore,  our  continued   insistence  upon  a  free  in-
dependent  South  Vietnam  tragically  and  unwarrantedly  dis-
regards  the  clear  commitments  of  the  Geneva   Convention
of  1954  for  free,  supervised  elections  designed  to  unify  the
two  parts  of  Vietnam.  The  elections  pledged   by  the  Geneva
accord   were   rejected   by  the   South   Vietnam    Government
with  the  counsel  and  approval  and  indeed  at  the  insistence
of   the   United   States.     It   was   a   flagrant   violation   of   a
promise   and   commitment.     Then   and   only   then   did   the
civil  war  in  South  Vietnam  begin.  .  .  .
"There  is,  in  the  President's   speech,  the  obvious  attempt
to  downgrade  the  fact  that  there  is  a  civil  war  going  on  in
South   Vietnam.    The  President  said:  'Of   course,   some  of
the  people  of  South  Vietnam  are  participating  in  attack  on
their   own  government.'     That   is   all   the   lip   service   the
President   paid  to  the  basic  civil  war  being  waged  by  the
Vietcong   aimed  at  the  reunification  of  all  of  Vietnam.   That
civil  war  began—let  me  repeat   because   this  is   crucial   to
the  issue—when  the  Diem  regime—at  our  urging—refused
to  carry  out  the  provision  contained   in  the  Geneva  agree-
ment   of   1954   to   hold   elections   for   the   reunification   of
Vietnam.    That  was  one  of  the  underlying  conditions  of  the
Geneva  agreement.    The  United  States  went  back  on  that
agreement.     The  civil  war  began   and  has   continued   with
intensified  fury  ever  since.
"It  is   a   complete   oversimplification   of   the   problem   to
say,   as  the  President   did  Wednesday   'night  at  Johns  Hop-
kins  University,  that  'it  is  an  attack  by  one  country   upon
another.'    Of  course,  North  Vietnam  is  aiding  the   Vietcong
—but  on  a  scale  nowhere   near   comparable   to   our  aid  to
the   South   Vietnamese.     Not   only   that,   but   in  terms   of
measurable  aggression  that  of  the  United  States  is  and has
been  not  only  greater,   but  came  first."
—Sen.  Gruening   (D.,  Alaska),  in  the  Senate, April  9.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  19,1965
"Military   actions   in  North   Vietnam,   skillful   diplomatic
moves   and   mammoth   economic   development   schemes,"   he
maintained,  according  to  the  5/.  Louis  Post-Dispatch   (April
10),   in  what  seemed  a  pointed   reference  to  Johnson's   pro-
gram,  "will   not,  by  themselves,  end  the  Communist  revolu-
tionary  process  among  the  people."    He  said  only  "a  Viet-
namese  cause,  with  an  attainable  national  goal  closest  to  the
hearts   of   the   overwhelming   majority    of   the    Vietnamese,
would  also  give  members  of  the  Viet  Cong  a  reason  to  leave
the  Communists  and  join  their  brothers  on  our  side."    But
this  means  the  risk  of  a  mixed   if  not   socialist  society,  of  a
reunited  nation,  of  a  regime  in  which  Communists,  too,  may
play  a  part.    The  Administration  would   rather  risk  a  wider
war  than   risk  self-determination  for   Vietnam.
Dream  World  Draft
The   announced   plan   to  add   160,000  men  to   the   South
Vietnamese   army  indicates   that   we   are   living   in   a  dream
world.    Only  a few  days ago  Jim  Lucas in  the  Scripps-Howard
press  (Washington  Daily  News,  April  7)  provided  a  glimpse
of  the  difficulties  which  face  any  effort  to  tighten  up  the  draft.
In  the  populous  Mekong  delta,  recruiting  is  "only  pro  forma,"
he  wrote  from  Saigon,  "because  our  side  controls  only  6  per-
cent"  of  the  area.    "In   the  Delta   last  spring,"  he  related,
"authorities    undertook   a   drive   to   round   up   16,000   draft
dodgers"  in  the  area  which  is  under  our  control  but  it  netted
only  3,051.     "Whole  communities  turned   against  the  army.
Old  men  and  women  lay  down  in  front  of  the  trucks  taking
the  draft  dodgers   away.    At  Vinh  Long,   they  started  a  riot
and  600  of  800  detainees  got  away."    We  can  only  end  the
guerrilla  war  in  the  south  by  dealing  with  the  guerrillas.    To
bomb  the  North  and  then  China  can  destroy  their  industrial
facilities  but  only  at  the  cost  of  precipitating  the  same kind  of
popular   struggle   in  those  wider  areas.    If  we  cannot  win  a
guerrilla   war  in   South  Vietnam,   we  certainly  cannot  win  a
guerrilla  war  in  China.    That  is  the  way  we  are  headed.
The  only  clear  way  out  of  this  morass  of  folly,  hatred  and
bloodshed   is  to  agree,  as  Senator  Mansfield  (April  9)   urged,
Facts  Hidden  Even  From  the  White  House
"Public  relations  techniques  still  interfere  with  the
flow  of  facts  about  the  war  in  Viet  Nam  to  the  Ameri-
can  people  and  even  to  President  Johnson.  .  .  .  Official
reports  to  Washington  have  sometimes  been  doctored
to   eliminate   or  soften   bad  news   about   the   way   the
American  effort  is  going.  .  .  .  Johnson  presumably  gets
unglossed  facts  about  the  day-to-day  military  situation
in  Viet  Nam.    But  a  recent  official  report  from  Saigon
to  Washington  on  the  economic  aid  program  was  care-
fully  edited  before  being  sent  off,  to  make  the  situation
sound  better  than  it  was.    One  of  the  deletions  was  a
.  .  .  reference  to  corruption  among   Viet  Namese  of-
ficials  and  their  frequent  failure   to  win  the  good   will
of  the  people.    Province  chiefs  sometimes  have  acted
as  agents  for  landlords  in  areas  newly  cleared  of  Viet
Cong.    The  officials  have  moved  in  with  the  army  and
begun  immediately  to  collect  back  rents  that  had  been
unpaid  while  the  area  was  under  guerrilla  control.  .  .  .
Reports   from   American   representatives   in  the   prov-
inces   are   frank   and  sometimes   bitter,   but   they   are
much  watered  down  by  the  time  they  reach  Washing-
ton."
—Richard  Dudman,  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch,  Apr.   7.
to  reconvene  the  Geneva   conference  on   Cambodia.     Prince
Sihanouk  has  been  asking  for  this  since   1962   to   guarantee
his  borders  and  neutrality.    "A  Geneva  conference  on  Cam-
bodia,"  the  New   York   Times   said  in  an  editorial  April  11,
"could   assemble  all   the   countries  concerned  with   Vietnam
and  permit  informal  exchanges."     Moscow   has  now  joined
Hanoi  and  Peking  in  asking  for  such  a  meeting.    This  would
provide  a  way  to  get  around  all  the  hurdles  of  face  and  pre-
condition.    While  the  conference  formally   dealt  with  Cam-
bodia,  privately  both   sides  could  feel   each  other   out   on   a
settlement   for   Vietnam.     Both   are  heading   down   a   blind
alley;  neither  side  can  win  the  struggle  shaping  up.     Peace
is  their  mutual   interest.    We   still  believe  this  is  what   the
President  wants.    A  Cambodian  conference  would   open   the
way  to   it.
April   12
Morse  Sees  "Grandiose Utopian  Verbiage"  But No Real Promise  of  Peace  In LBJ's  Speech
"Mr.   President,  the  President's  speech  of  last  night   is
being  described  as  the  carrot  that  goes  with  the  stick,  the
offer   and  the  promise  to  go  with  the  use  of   force.      Pre-
sumably,  the  air  raids  on the  North  were  designed  to  force
North  Vietnam  to  & conference  table  more  or  less  on  our
terms.    Now  so  the  argument  goes,  we  can  say  that  we
have  offered  to  negotiate  a  peace  and  if  the  offer  is  not  ac-
cepted  it  is  the  fault  of  someone  else, not the United States.
"I  heard  nothing  in  the  President's  speech  that  suggests
to  me  he  has  any  negotiations  in  mind  at  all.    There  was
a  lot  of  lip  service  paid  to  the  theory  of  peace,  grandiose
Utopian   verbiage   was   plentiful,   and  the   dollar  sign   was
liberally   displayed,  apparently   in  hopes  of  quieting  criti-
cism  from  abroad.    But  there  was  no  language  that    sug-
gested  that  the  United  States  is  going  to  return  to  the  rule
of  law  in  Southeast  Asia  or  that  we  are  actively  seeking  a
peaceful  solution  to  its  problems.    There  was  no  word  that
the  United  States  plans  henceforth  to  observe   either  the
United  Nations  Charter  or  the  Geneva  Agreement  of   1954.
"One   cannot   read   that   address   of   last   night   without
being  struck  by  the  peculiar  shifting  description  of   whom
we  are  fighting  in  Vietnam.    In  one  place  we   read  that:
'The  first  reality  is  that  North  Vietnam  has  attacked  the
independent  nations  of  South  Vietnam.'  Several  paragraphs
later  we  read  that  it  is  the  deepening  shadow  of   Communist
China   that   is   urging   on   the   rulers   in   Hanoi.     Yet   the
enemy  that  the  United  States  must  deal  with  if  there  are
to  be  any  peace  negotiations  for   South  Vietnam  are  the
rebels  within  South  Vietnam.    They   control   much   of   the
territory   and   much   of   the   population   of   the   South.    In
many   districts  they   operate   all   the   functions   of   govern-
ment.   We will  not  have  any  real  negotiations  until  we  talk
to  the  people  we  are  fighting,  and  we  will  not  have  a  genu-
ine  offer  to  negotiate  from  the  White  House  until  the  offer
is   directed   to   the   people   we   are   fighting   and   not   the
shadows behind them....
"Most  of  all  do  I  regret  the  reference  the  President  made
to  the  United  Nations  and  its  Secretary  General.     Clearly,
the  President  sought  to  invoke   the  sanctity  of  the  United
Nations  while  at  the  same  time   repudiating   its  most  vital
function—that  of  keeping  the  peace.    I  say  to  the  Presi-
dent  that  U  Thant  could  use  the  prestige  of  his  office,  and
his  deep   knowledge  of  Asia,  to  initiate  peace  talks.    The
good   offices   of   the   Secretary   General   are   infinitely   more
meaningful     to   peace   than   to   a   billion    dollar   develop-
ment  program."—Sen.  Morse   (D.,  Ore.)  in  Senate,  April  8.
6   ,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  April  19,1965
The  Underlying  Issues  in  the  Conviction  of  The  Two  WSPers  and  Russell  Nixon
Is the House Committee to Be Allowed to Make Talk of Peace "Un-American"?
During  the  second  World  War,  the  House   Un-American
Activities  Committee  became  dormant   Red-hunting  was  in
disrepute   because  of   the  war-time  alliance  with   the   Soviet
Union.    The   Committee's  weak  attitude  toward  Fascist   ele-
ments  had  brought  it  into  disrepute.    To  improve  its  public
relations  it  asked  Brookings  Institution  to  suggest  reforms  in
its  procedures.    These,  as  made  public  in   1945,   included  a
provision  for  executive  sessions  which  said,  "provided,  how-
ever,   that   any   person   charged   with   un-American  activities
should  be  entitled,  as  of  right,  to  an  open  hearing."
Closed  Sessions  as  Dress  Rehearsals
This  was  brought  to  light  by  David  Rein,  counsel  for  Dag-
mar  Wilson,  Donna  Allen  and  Russell  Nixon   in  their   trial
here  for  contempt  of  the  Committee.     All  three  refused   to
testify   in  secret  but   offered   to  do  so  in  public.    We   hope
that,  as  part  of  the  campaign  against  HUAC,   Congressmen
will  move  to  modify  its  rules  by a  resolution  giving  this  right
to  witnesses.   Too  often  the  closed  session  protects  the  Com-
mittee  rather  than  the  witness, screening  it  from  criticism  and
giving  it  the  benefit   of  a  "dress   rehearsal"   before   deciding
whether  to  venture  a  public  performance.    The   last  time  it
had  Dagmar   Wilson  of  Women's   Strike  for  Peace  before  it
in  public  the  Committee   fared   ignominiously.
Federal  Judge  Curran  found  the  three  guilty  within  a  few
minutes  after  the  two-day  trial  ended.    We  believe  the  issues
deserve  fuller  consideration on  appeal.    One  issue  is the juris-
diction  of  the  Committee  over  the  Immigration  and   Nation-
ality  Act  under  which  the  Japanese  peace  worker,  Prof.  Yasui,
was  admitted  for  a  lecture  tour;  the  act  was  framed  by  the
Judiciary  Committees.    A  second  issue  was  whether  the  ex-
ecutive  session  was  properly  held.     A  House   rule   provides
that  executive  sessions  may  only  be  called  on  vote  of  a  full
committee;  here  only  a  subcommittee  acted.    A  third  issue  is
whether  the  Speaker,  when  the  House  is  out  of  session,  may
authorize  a  contempt  prosecution  without  himself  passing  on
its  validity,  as  the  House  is  required  to  do.    Speaker  McCor-
mack  admitted  that  he  merely  "rubber-stamped"   the  citation.
The  basic  issues  involve  First  Amendment  rights.    Even  in
How  to  Deal  With  The  Klan
"The   brutal   crimes   visited   upon   people   who   were
peacefully   pursuing  rights  guaranteed   by  the   Consti-
tution   make  it  imperative  that  the  Congress  strength-
en  the  Federal  criminal  law.    The  nation  cannot   afford
to   stand   by   helplessly   when   murderers   are   charged
with  misdemeanors.   An  immediate  investigation  should
be  undertaken  so  that  legislation  can  be drafted  to  pro-
tect   citizens   from   intimidation,   assault   and   murder
whether  perpetrated   by  members  of  the  Ku  KIuz  Klan
or  anyone   else.    The  proper   committee   to    formulate
those  laws  in  the  House  is  the  Committee   on  the  Ju-
diciary.  That  Committee  has  clear  jurisdiction   and  has
conducted  all  of  the  hearings  on  previous  and  pending
Civil  Rights  legislation.    Such  hearings  and  investiga-
tions  would  be  undertaken   for  the  purpose  of   prepar-
ing  legislation,  not  for  the  purpose   of  exposure.
"We  oppose  an  investigation   of  the  Ku  Klux  Klan  by
the   House   Committee   on  Un-American   Activities  be-
cause  it  is  not  the   proper   committee   to   prepare   the
needed  legislation.    Exposure  for  exposure's  sake  vio-
lates  the  First   Amendment."
—Statement   by  Congressmen  Brown,  Burton,  Ed-
wards,  Hawkins,  Leggett,   Roosevelt,   and   Boybal   of
California;    Cony era,  Diggs,   Wm.   Ford,   Mockie,  and
Vivian  of  Michigan;  Farbstein,  Ottmger,  Powell,  Res-
nick,   Rosenthal   and   Ryan   of   New    York;    Fraser
(Minn.),     Gonzalez    (Tex.),     Green     (Ore.),    Hicks
(Wash.),  Nix   (Pa.),  and  O'Hara   (III.)   all  Democrats.
upholding  the  Committee,  as in  the  Barenblatt  case, the  Court
has  held  that  there  must  be  a  showing  of  Communist  party
activities;   there  was  no  evidence  that  the  three   defendants
were  acting   for   the   Communist   Party  when   they  arranged
Prof.  Yasui's  tour.    The  Court  has  also  held  that  where  First
Amendment  rights  are  involved,  there must  be  a  showing  of  a
legitimate   governmental    interest   outweighing   these   rights.
Here  the  State  Department,   in  granting  Yasui's  visa,  had  al-
ready  decided  that  it  was  more  important  to  let  him  be  heard
than  to  allow  the  U.S.  to  appear  in  Japanese  eyes  as a  country
which  suppressed   free  discussion.    If   the  Committee  has  its
way,  even  to  speak  of  peace  would  be  made  to  seem  somehow
"un-American."
We'll  Be Clad to Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   .......................................,..Zone............State....................
4/19/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifttei
Indicate  if  announcement   wished   D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Portage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday   except  the  last  week  In  December  and  the  first  week   In
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..   Washington,  D.  G.    An  Independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   15   in   the   U.S.;     $6   In   Canada;    $10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
tie  to  Europe;   120  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED