I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965dec20.pdf

============================================================

How  The  Casualty  Figures  are Rigged,  P.  3
The  Quality  of  That  Freedom  Johnson  Claims  to  Be  Defending   in  Vietnam
"We  are  there  because ...  we  remain  fixed  on  the  pur-
suit  of  freedom  as  a  deep  and  moral  obligation. ...  To de-
fend  that  freedom—to  permit  its  roots  to  deepen   and  grow
...  is  our  purpose  ui  South  Vietnam."
—Johnson  to the AFL-CIO  Convention, Dee.  9.
"Saigon,  Dec.  9  (Los  Angeles Times  Service)—The  South
Vietnamese  government  has  closed  down  a  Catholic  weekly
newspaper  that  crusaded  for  a  representative  form  of  gov-
ernment,  it  was  learned  today.    A  Psychological  War  Min-
istry   spokesman  said  the  newspaper  had  been  ordered  to
cease  publication  'for  not  observing  censorship  regulations.'
.  .  .   [It]   has  in  recent  weeks  criticized  the  'undemocratic
government'.  . . .  [It]   was the  official  organ  of  the Greater
Union  Force,  which  purports  to  represent  Catholic  refugees
from  North  Vietnam  and  Viet-Cong  dominated  areas  in  the
South."
—Washington  Post,  Dec.  10.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,   NO.  43
DECEMBER  20,    1966
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
No  Way  to  Celebrate  Christinas
Last  Christmas ive  the  Viet  Cong  blew  up  a  U.S.   Officers'
billet  in  Saigon;  they  killed  two  Americans  and  wounded  68
others.    This  year  they  proposed   a  12  hour  Christmas  Eve
truce.    Our  government  has  brushed  the  offer  aside.    At  first
the   suggested   truce  was  not   even   reported   by  U.S.   corre-
spondents  in  Vietnam,  perhaps   by  voluntary  censorship.     It
was  the  publication by the  Washington  Post  of  a  Victor  Zorza
dispatch  in  the  Manchester  Guardian which  broke  the  block-
ade  of  silence.    In  the  current  atmosphere  of  party-line  ac-
quiescence  in  whatever  the  government  says,  there  was  little
if  any  comment.    Only  Senator  Robert  F.  Kennedy  had  the
good  sense  and  the  humanity to  speak  up.    "I  think  we  are
getting   into  a  more  dangerous   situation   for   all   mankind,"
Senator  Kennedy  said  in  New  York  City.    "We  all  have  re-
sponsibilities  now  to  explore  all  the  positions."    Senator  Ken-
nedy  thought  the  U.S.  should  take  the  initiative and   suggest
a  longer  Christmas  truce  as  a  possible  prelude  to  peace  nego-
tiations.     Only   one  paper,   the  New   York    Herald-Tribune
(Dec.   10)   gave  his  suggestions  the  treatment  they   deserved.
The  outside world  knows  but  most  Americans are  only dimly
aware,  if  at  all,  that  a  Christmas  truce was  proposed.
The  VC  on  Madison  Avenue
From  the   most   superficial   point  of   view,  this  treatment
was  not  very  clever.    Any  junior  public  relations  man  would
have  seen  the   offer   as  the   occasion  for   a  ploy  putting   the
other  side  off  balance.    From  the  standpoint  of  troop  morale,
the  dismissal  of  the  offer  may  prove  unwise  if  there  should
be  a  Christmas  Eve  attack  when  our  troops  are  warming  up
for   a  little  holidaying.    One  spokesman  in  Saigon  told   the
AP  a  holiday  truce  would  be  "nice"  but  "we're  afraid   that
with  these  people  it  will  be  business  as  usual."    (Wash.  Star,
Dec.    12).    But  we  weren't   asked   to   suspend   guard   duty
Christmas  Eve.     An  attack  after  we  had  accepted  would  be  a
black  mark  for  the  other  side  in  the  eyes  of  world  opinion.
If  anyone  thinks  world  opinion  doesn't  count  in  this  war,   he
need   only  look  at  the   reluctance,  even   among  our  NATO
.  allies,  to  respond  to  our  request  for  token  aid  in  Vietnam.
Such  treachery  on  the  part  of  the  Viet  Cong  would  for  once
put  them  in  the  wrong.    Now  if  another  barracks  should  be
That  Amputation  on  TV
A  U.S.   Marine  Colonel  allowed a TV crew  to lake  pic-
tures  of  his  leg  being  amputated  after  he  was  wounded
near  Danang.   "I hope  they  show  that  film  to  the   dem-
onstrators  at  Berkeley,"  a  Marine  standing  nearby  said
bitterly.   Does  he  think  those  opposed  to  this  war  will
be  less  opposed  when  they  see  so  vividly  the  terrible
suffering  it  entails?
blown  up  Christmas  Eve,  people  will  think  we  were  unwise
to  turn  down   the  truce  and   incompetent  to  be  caught  off
guard.    The  net  effect  is to  make it  look  as if  this  little under-
developed  Asian  nation  can  outwit  the  great  l/.S.A.  not  only
in  combat  but  even  in  the  sophisticated  game  of  public  rela-
tions—right  on  Madison  Avenue  as  well  as  in  the  jungle.
We  believe  the  reason  for  this  lies  deeper  than  the  usual
bureaucratic  lack  of  empathy.    The  whole  direction  of   our
policy  is  to  picture  Vietnam's   insurgents  not  as  men  but  as
a  kind  of  vermin  to  be  exterminated;  this  is what  lies  behind
the  loathsome  policy  of  counting   (and  miscounting)   bodies
as  if  this  were  a  rat-killing  campaign.    Some  IBM  Clausewitz
seems  to  think  that  the  war  will  be  won  when  our  computers
show  more  killed   than  theirs.    Suddenly  to  accept  the  hu-
mane  gesture  of  a  Christmas  truce—especially  from  forces  we
like  to  picture  as  godless—would  restore  a  fraternal  face  to
the  enemy  we  want  to  keep  faceless.    When   Secretary  Rusk
was  asked  on  educational  TV  Dec.  9,  what  could  be  offered
the  other  side  as  quid  pro  quo  in  a  negotiated  settlement,  he
dismissed  this  unctuously  as  the  mistaken  notion   "that   the
burglar  or  the  robber  is  entitled  to  something."     But  a  large
part  of  the  neutral  world  thinks  it  is  we  who  are  guilty  in
Vietnam  of  breaking  and  entering.    Unconditional  surrender
obviously  is  again  our  aim,  and  the  threat  of  complete   and
utter  destruction  the  means  by  which  we  hope  to  achieve  it.
Little  by  little  our  escalation  threatens  not  only  to  destroy  the
fighters  but  the  entire  country,  North   and  South,  including
the  innocent  and  the  friendly.    This  is our Christmas message.
How  few  seem  to  recognize  its unholy  incongruity!   In trying
to  dehumanize the  enemy, we have succeeded  in dehumanizing
ourselves.   A  once flaming  faith  has  become a faith  in  napalm.
1   6
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's. Weekly,  December 20,1965
Brazil's  Military  Find  Devices  for  All  They  Need  Except  A  Legal   Opposition
Why  LBJ May Prefer  Rusk to Bundy—What Ayub May Lack the Tact to Say
We  don't  know why McGeorge Bundy left  the White  House
but  we  can  easily  imagine  the  kind  of  rifts  which  arose  be-
tween  a  man  as  vain  as  Lyndon  Johnson  and  a  man  as  smug
as  Bundy.    Johnson   likes   the   men   around   him  psychically
broken  to  take anything he  cares  to  dish  but.    He  doesn't  like
Easterners  anyway,  especially  Harvard  men,  who  rub  his  in-
feriority  complex  the  wrong  way.    I  suspect  the  trouble  be-
came  serious  with  Bundy's  mission  to  the  Dominican  Repub-
lic,  where  he  found  himself  at  cross-purposes  with  Johnson's
favorite  Tom  Mann.    Bundy  proved  right  in  the  end.    John-
son  must   have   found   this  hard   to  forgive.     When  the   full
story  of  Bundy's  work  is  known,  my  guess   is  that  the   most
creditable  part   w'ill  be  his   effort,   slowly  succeeding,  to   un-
freeze  West  Germany's relations with  East  Europe.    Johnson's
preference  for  Rusk  is  revealing;  he  will  never  find  a  trace  in
the   Secretary  of   an  abominable  No-Man.   .  .  .
Embarrassing  Parallel
The   conversation   between   Johnson    and   Ayub   Khan   of
Pakistan   must   have   had   at   least   one   embarrassing   pause.
Pakistan's  claim  to  Kashmir  rests  on  United  Nations  decisions
in   1948   and   1949  which  brought   about  a  cease  fire  on  the
promise   that  the  Kashmiris  were  to  have   a   free   choice  by
plebiscite  of  whether  they wished  to  join  their  fellow  Moslems
in   Pakistan.    No   one   doubts   what   their   choice   would   be.
India.has  had   to   jail  Kashmir's   leaders  and   impose   police
state  rule  on  its  people  ever  since  to  maintain  its  hold.     To
argue  the  point,  must  have  taken  consummate  tact  on  Ayub's
part,  since  India's  course  on  Kashmir  so  strikingly  resembles
ours   on   South   Vietnam:   an   international  body   promised   a
plebiscite  to  win  a  cease-fire;  we  opposed  it  fearing  the  out-
come;  police  state  regimes  have  been  necessary  ever  since  to
combat  popular   unrest.    Yet  Johnson   would  like  Pakistan  to
send  troops  to  Vietnam  to  help  reinforce what  it  objects  to  so
strongly  at  home,  the  denial  of  the  right  to  self-determination.
The   Brazilian  Embassy  sent  us  a  press  release  announcing
Will  of  the  People  Dept
"The  real  problem  is  whether   South  Vietnam  is  going
to  be left  free  to  live  out  its  own  life  as  the  South  Viet-
namese  people  themselves  determine   it  to  be.  ...    You
see,   Mr.  Niven,  that  the  American  people  really   do  be-
lieve  that  simple  notion  imbedded  in  our  Declaration  of
Independence—that  governments  derive  their  just   pow-
ers  from  the  consent  of  the  governed."
—Secretary  Rusk  on Educational  TV  Dec.  7.
"Saigon,  Dec.   10  (French  Press  Agency)—A   popular
demonstration,   recalling   those   of   last   September   in
Quang   Nam,   took   place  on   Dec.   8  in  the  province  of
Binh   Dinh,   460  kilometers   northeast   of   Saigon.     Ac-
cording    to   reports   reaching   Saigon,   several   hundred
peasants  of  An-Nhon  district  organized  a  demonstration
to  protest  against  the  bombardment    of  the  hamlets  in
that  region.    They  went  to  the  district  capital,   where
troops  on  guard  ma le  use  of  their   firearms.   Some  dead
and   wounded   are   reported   among   the   demonstrators.
A  number   were  arrested."
—Le  Monde,  Dec.  11.  Not  in  the  U.S.  press.
another  "constitutional  reform."    Under  it  the  Brazilian Con-
gress  has  to  act  within  45  days  on  any  proposed   legislation
submitted  to  it  by  the  President,  or  it  becomes  law.   Brazilian
legislators  are  to  be  denied  the, privilege   even   of   dragging
their  heels.    Castelo  Branco  already  has  the  power  to  remove
any  member  of  Congress  who  displeases  him,  and  the  govern-
ment   can  jail  anyone  whose   criticism  passes   vague   bounds.
Such   reforms  make  it   easy  to  understand  why  Brazil's  new
military  rulers  are  finding  it  hard  to  organize  their  new   "two-
party  system."    The  pro-government  party  is  ready  to  go,  but
according  to  Nathan   Miller  from  Rio  in  the  Baltimore   Sun
Dec.   11,  there  is trouble  rounding  up  a  legal  opposition.     The
Wall  Street  Journal   Dec.   13  quoted  one  Brazilian  editor  as
quipping  that  this  would  only  give  the  country  a  choice   "be-
tween  a  'yes.'  party  and  a  'yes,  sir'  party."    But  in  Brazil,  as
for  Negroes  in  our  South,  it  is dangerous  not  to  add  the  "sir."
What  the  AFL-CIO Doesn't  Know  And  the  State  Dept's  Alexis  Johnson  Didn't  Tell  Them
A  major   cause  of  trouble  in  South  Vietnam  has  been  the
failure   of  the  Diem  regime  and  its  successors  to  carry  out
a  satisfactory    land  reform.     Yet   Deputy   Under   Secretary
Alexis  Johnson  had  the  effrontery     to  praise  Diem's  pseudo
land  reform   and  that  of  his  successors  in  an  address  to  the
AFL-CIO   convention  Dec.  9.    To  give  readers  a  glimpse  of
just  how  bad  the  land  problem  remains  in  South  Vietnam
and  of  how  landlord-minded   its  ruling  military  continue  to
be,  we  present   this   from   a   rare   interview   by   Richard
Critchfield    (Washington  Star  Dec.  5)  with  Brigadier    Gen.
Nguyen  Due  Thang,  Secretary  of  State  for  Rural  Construc-
tion:
"Q.  How  many  landless  farmers  are  there  in  South  Viet-
nam?    A.  There  are  now  659,000  renting  their  rice  fields
from  others,  565,000  in  the  southern  half  of  the  country  and
94,000  in  Central   Vietnam.
Q.  Since  only  260,000  out  of  1.2  million  farms  are  owner
operated  in  the   Mekong   Delta  and  520,000  farms  entirely
rented,  how  could  this  land  be  redistributed  on  an  equitable
basis?    A,  Laws  governing  land  reform   in  Vietnam  author-
ize   each   individual   to  own  a   maximum  of   100  hectares.
Lands  which  are  not  exploited  by  their   owners  and  rented
to  others  come  to  1,320,000   hectares.    If  the  expropriation
concerning  these  lands  is  necessary  for  an  equal  distribution
or  for  sale  by  installments  to  farmers  who  are  tilling  them,
an  average  price  of  12,000  piastres  (around  $120)   per   hec-
tare  should   be  paid  to  the  landowners.
"Q.  How  much  would  it  cost  to  pay  the  landowners  if  the
U.S.   were  to  underwrite  such  a  land  reform  program?    A.
Nearly  15.8  billion  piastres  (around  $158  million).
"Q.  Land  rents  are  legally  fixed  at  25  percent  of  the  crop
but  villagers  tell  me  they  must  pay  anywhere  from  50  to  70
percent   to  the   owner.     How  can  legal   land  rents  be  en-
forced?    A.  Farmers  who  pay  more  than  the  legal  percent-
age  may  make  a  claim  to  recover  excess  land  rent.    The
fact  is,  rents  from   50  to  70  percent  are  rare;  since  the  in-
came  lies  in  the  hands  of  the  tenants,  how  can  we  oblige
them  to  pay  more  than  the  legal  amount?    Actually,  there
are  now  a  certain  number  of  farmers  who  take  advantage  of
the  insecure  situation  in  the  countryside  and the  complicated
procedures  governing  lawsuits,  and  refuse   to  pay  rent   to
the  landowners."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  20,1965
As  to  the  Viet  Cong:  If  So  Many  Are  Killed,  Why  Are  So  Few  Weapons  Recovered?
How   U.S.   Casualty  Figures  Are  Made  to  Look  Smaller  Than  They  Are
By  Denis  Warner
The  following   article,  from   the  Dec.  7  issue  of  the   Syd-
ney,  Australia, Morning  Herald,  is  by  an  Australian  news-
paperman   who  has  been  covering   the  wars   in   Indochina
since  1S46-   He  is  a  frequent   contributor  to  The  New   Re-
public  and  the  Reporter.   His  most  recent   book  was   "The
Last  Co'iifiician"    (1963),   a  study   of  the  Diem,  regime.
American  Army  public  relations  in  Saigon  are  the  worst  I
have  known  in  any  war  anywhere.    And  for  the  record  that
includes  World  War   II,   the  Korean   War,   the   Indo-China
War,  the  war  in  Vietnam  arid  sundry emergencies  and  revolu-
tions  elsewhere.     It  was  easier  to  tell  the  true  story  of   the
war  in  Indo-China  under  the  strict  censorship  then   applying,
than  it  is under  the  current  Saigon  system.   Even  at  the  worst
periods   of   the   Indo-China  war   the   French   only   concealed
(and  sometimes  expelled),   but  the  current  crop  of  American
public  relations  officers,   led  by  Col.  Ben  W.   Leagre  and   Lt.
Col.  Dan  Biondi,  are  engaged   in  the  business of  turning  de-
feat  into  victory.
McNamara  Always  Surprised
Mr.  Robert  McNamara,  United  States  Secretary of  Defense,
expressed   surprise   at   the   end   of   his   recent  visit   to  Saigon
that  the  Vietcong  and  the  Vietminh  had  been  able  to  mount
such   a   military   effort.     McNamara,   who   was   once  talking
about  sending  some  of  the  American  troops  home  for  Christ-
mas,  1963,  has  been  surprised  for  years.    And  well  he  might
be  if  he  pays  any  attention to  some  of  the  news  as  its emerges
after  treatment  in  the  Saigon  public  relation  mills.
At  a  dinner  in  Saigon  the  night  I  arrived  there  from  Laos
at  the  end  of  October,  Biondi  explained  the  casualty formula.
Under  the  rules  imposed  by  his  organization  there  were only
three   categories   of   casualties,   light,   moderate   and   heavy.
When   announcing  friendly   casualties  the  rules  stipulate  that
losses   in   the   smallest  subordinate  unit   shall  be   diluted  by
measuring  the  rate  against  the  total  force  engaged.     A  com-
pany  may  be  wiped  out  in  its  entirety  in  an  ambush,  for  ex-
ample,  but  if  it  formed  part  of  a  two  battalion  force  then  the
casualties   would   be   only   "light,"   or   at   worst   "moderate"
though  the  remainder  of  the  battalion  neither  fired  nor  were
fired  at.    On   one  occasion  recently,  the   Australian  battalion
Should  We  Now  Add  Censorship  to  Lying?
"One  problem  which  cannot  be  ignored  much  longer
concerns  the  reporting  of  the  war.    No  newspaper  likes
to   ask   for  outside   restrictions.   .  .  .  But,  quite   apart
from   the  serious   matter  of  security,   dispatches  which
are   based   on  incomplete  information  or  faulty  under-
standing,  photographs  which  one-sidedly  emphasize  the
ghastly   aspects  of  combat  and  TV  shows   which  outdo
the  photographs  in  their  sensationalism  can  have  a  dev-
astating  impact  on  home-front  morale.    As  the  casual-
ties   mount—whatever   the   difficulties—the   government
simply  cannot  fail  to  impose  some  reasonable  restraint
on  coverage  of  the   fighting."
—Editorial  in  the  Washington  Sunday  Star,  Dec.  12.
was  thrown  into  the  picture  to  make  up  the  numbers  so  that
extremely  heavy  casualties   suffered   by  two   companies  could
then  be  minimized.   What  was  widely  proclaimed  as  a  tre-
mendous  victory  assumed  a  very  different   countenance when
measured  against  all  the   facts.
A   singularly  unfortunate  emphasis  on   the   kill   ratio,  the
yardstick  by  which  fiends  are  so  unwisely  measured,  seems  to
lie  behind  the  thinking of  men  like  Biondi.   According to  the
original  version,  the  kill  ratio  has  been  mounting  from   less
than  three  earlier  in  the  year  to  about  four   now.     Both   the
kills  and   the  counts  themselves  are  highly  suspect.     In   the
week  ended  November  3  for  example, the  Vietcong  lost  1,264
killed.    Yet  those  who  were so  busy  counting  bodies  managed
to  pick  up  only  317  weapons.
While  such  a  large  discrepancy remains between  Vietcong
killed  and   weapons  captured,  it  is  inevitable  that  suspicions
will  remain  that  the  bodies  are  not  counted  at  all,  but  only
guessed,  or  that  .the  innocent  are  included  among  the  guilty.
In   any  event,  if  the  public  relations  officers   took  time  off  to
study  the  Indo-China war  and  learned  that  the  kill  ratio  then
was  7:1   in  the  French  favor,   they  might  appreciate that  the
numbers  game  in  which  they  have become  engaged  is extreme-
ly  dangerous.    Military  difficulties  and   reverses  are  acceptable
to  most  nations.    What  we  will  not  accept  indifferently,   and
especially  in  a  war  of  this  sort  is  the  persistent  attempt  to  win
by  pretense  what  has  not  been  won  on  the  ground.
What's  More Sacred  Than  The Boston Tea  Party?    But  Don't  Dare  Emulate  It
"Practically   everyone   in   America   pays   homage   to   the
right  of  protest.    The  Boston   Tea  Party   is   taught   in  our
schools  as  an  heroic  event.    The  very  first  amendment  to  the
Constitution  gives  a  high  degree  of  legal  protection  to  the
right   of   protest.     And   no   doubt   pro-McCarthy   historians
will  one day  contend  that  he  was  doing  very  little  more  than
exercising  his  right   of  protest   against   Communists   in  the
Government.    Yet,  despite   all  this,   the  right  of  protest   is
far  from  safe  in  America  today.    Lip  service  is  being  com-
bined  with  erosion  of  its  substance.
"The   President   defends'the  right  of  protest,  but  sets  his
Attorney   General   about  the  task  of  investigating   Commu-
nist   infiltration  among   the  protesters.    The   Secretary  of
State  says  the  Government   should  not  interfere   with   free
discussion  and  free   assembly   and  then   adds   that   Hanoi   is
hoping   American  domestic  pressure  will  somehow   turn  the
—Jos.  L.  Rauh,  Jr.,  vice  chairman  of  ADA  at  the
hand  of  the  United  States.    Mr.  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  head  of
the  Federal   Bureau  of  Investigation,  gives  Fourth  of  July
orations   on  free   speech,   but  uses   the  secret   files   of   his
agency   to  bring  the   public  wrath  down  upon  the   head  of
anyone  who  questions  the  infallibility  of  his   Bureau.    The
House   Un-American  Activities  Committee,  while  mouthing
the  usual  platitudes  about  free  speech,  treats  any  criticism
of  the  Committee  as  proof  of  disloyalty.    Congress, hitting
back  at  protests,  makes  it  a  crime  punishable  by  five  years
in  jail  to  dramatize   protest   against   our  Vietnamese  policy
by  burning  a  draft  card.    And  the  head  of  Selective  Service
approves  the  drafting  of  students  who  sit  in  at  their   local
draft-board  headquarters.  .  .  .  Protest   in  America  has  been
both  a  vehicle   on  the  road  to  justice   and  an  escape   hatch
for   tensions   resulting    from   injustice.     We   stand   by   and
watch  the  erosion  of  the  right  to  protest  at  our  peril."
annual  meeting  of  the  ACLU,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  Dec.  8.
1   7   '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, December 20,1965
How  to  Make  A  Peace  Note  Sound  As  Offensive  and  Unacceptable  As  Possible
Exclusive:  The  Text  of Our Note on  the  Bombing  Lull  and  Hanoi's  Reaction
Here  is  the  text,  as  disclosed  for   the  first  time  by  Hanoi
radio   Dec..  10,  of   the  State  Department   note  to  it   on  the
bombing  lull  last  May  and  of  how  it  appears  in  Hanoi's  eyes.
We  thought  readers would like  to see  both for  themselves:
The  Text  of  the  U.S.  Note
"The  highest  authority   in  this  government  has  asked  me
to  inform  Hanoi  that  there  will  be  no  air  attacks  on  North
Vietnam  for  a  period  beginning   at  noon  Washington   time,
Wednesday,  12 May,  and  running  into  next  week.    In  this
decision,  the  U.S. Government has  taken  account  of  repeated
suggestions  frpm   various   quarters,  including  public  state-
ments  by Hanoi representatives,  that there can be no progress
toward  peace  while  there  are  air  attacks  on  North  Vietnam.
The  U.S.  Government remains  convinced that  the  underlying
cause  of  trouble  in  Southeast   Asia  is  armed  action  against
the  people and government  of  South  Vietnam  by forces  whose
actions  can  be  decisively  affected  from  North  Vietnam.
"The  United  States  will  be  very  watchful  to  see  whether
in  this  period  of  pause  there   are   significant  reductions   in
such  armed  actions  by  such  forces.   The  United  States  must
emphasize  that  the  road  toward  the  end  of  armed  attacks
against  the  people  and  government  of  Vietnam  is  the  only
road  which  will  permit  the  government  of  Vietnam  and  the
government  of  the  United  States  to  bring  a  permanent  end
to  their  air  attacks  on  North  Vietnam.
"In  taking  this  action,  the  United  States  is  well  aware  of
the  risk  that  a  temporary  suspension  of  these   air  attacks
may  be  understood  as  an  indication  of  weakness,  and  it  is
therefore  necessary  for  me  to  point  out  that  if  this  pause
should  be  misunderstood  in  this  fashion  by  any  party,  it
would  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  more  clearly  than  ever
after  the  pause  ended  that  the  United  States  is  determined
not  to  accept  aggression  without  reply  in  Vietnam.   More-
over,  the  United  States  must  point  out  that  the  decision  to
end  air  attacks  for  this  limited  trial  period  is  one  which  it
must  be free  to  reverse,  if,  at  any  time  in coming  days,  there
should  be  actions  by  the   other  side  in  Vietnam  which  re-
quired  immediate  reply.
"But  my  government  is  very  hopeful  that  there  will be no
such  misunderstanding  and  that  this  first  pause  in  air  at-
tacks  may  meet  with  a  response  which  will  permit  further
and  more  extended suspension of  this form  of  military  action
in   expectation   of   equal  constructive   actions   by   the   other
side in the  future."
Were  Five  Days  Enough?
"Was   the  5-day  pause  long  enough? ...  If  the  North
Vietnamese   were   interested   .   .   .   Hanoi   at   the   very
least  would  have  had to consult  Moscow,  placate  its  own
hawks  and  persuade  Peking  to  let   it  accept  the   prof-
erred   American   feeler.     In  a   far   more  clear-cut  and
vital  situation—that  of  Soviet  missiles  in  Cuba—involv-
ing  merely  the  coordination  of  several  Government  de-
partments   within   one   city,   Washington   took  longer
than  that  to  make  up  its  mind."
—Bernard  Fall  in  N.Y.  Times  Sun.  Magazine,.Dec.
12.     He   quotes   Seaborn,   Canadian   member   of    the
Geneva  control  commission,  "If  it  had  been  a  5-month
pause, they might  have attached more significance  to it."
How  Hanoi  Saw  the  Bombing  Lull
"Making  black  white,  the   message   slanderously   charged
North  Vietnam with  aggression  against  South  Vietnam  and
threatened  that  if  the  South  Vietnamese people  did  not  stop
their  self-liberation  fight,  the  U.S. would  continue  to  bomb
the  north.   In  its  essence, the  message  was  an  ultimatum  to
the  Vietnamese people, urging  the  South Vietnamese to  aban-
don  their  patriotic  struggle  as  a  condition  for  a  halt  in  the
bombing  of  the  DRV. .  .  .  Who gives  the  U.S. the  right  to
bomb,  stop  bombing,  then  resume  bombing  North  Vietnam
at  any  moment they  like?    Who  gives  them  the  right  to  in-
vade  South  Vietnam,  massacre  the   South  Vietnam  people,
then  to urge  them to lay down  their  arms  . .  . otherwise  they
should  bomb the north  even more intensively?  . . . Who gives
the  U.S.  the  right  to-urge  the  North  Vietnamese  people  [to]
...  let  the  aggressors  freely  massacre  their  kith  and kin in
the  South? ...  It  must  also  be  pointed  out  that  the U.S.
imperialists   deeds  never   match   with  their   words.    In   the
periods  of  the   so-called  suspension   of   the   bombings   over
North  Vietnam  from   12  to  17  May  this  year,  U.S.  aircraft
and   warships   continued  to   encroach   upon   the   territorial
waters  of  the  DRV  for  spying,  provocative  and  raiding  ac-
tivities.    Two  U.S. F-105  jetfighters  were  down  over   Nghe
on  13 and  17 May  respectively.   Meanwhile, the  U.S. brought
to  South  Vietnam  (?  over  140,000)  more  combat  troops  and
the   U.S.—puppets   intensified  their   ground   and   air   raids
against  the  population.   On  14  May  alone,  U.S. puppet  air-
craft  flew  186 sorties."
The  Weekly  is  not  published the  last  Monday  in  December  and  the  first  Monday  in  January.    Merry  Christmas and  Happy  New  Year  to
all   our  readers,  friend   or  foe
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
12/20/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  lend  a  gift  sub  to:
(T*o)   Name     ..............................................................................
Street     ........................................................................................
City   .........................................Zone............State...........:........
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  O
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED