I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965dec13.pdf

============================================================

Ralph  Lapp  Challenges  Waste  in  Space,  P.  3
After   Ten  Months  of   Severe   and  Highly  Touted  Bombing  North  and  South
"We  never realized until  recently  that  the  enemy  could  reinforce  so  quickly  and  so  greatly.    The  enemy  is   reinforc-
ing  more quickly than we  are."
—Brig.  Gen.  Vinh  Loc,  commander   of   the  South  Vietnamese   II   Corps,   which  includes  the   central   highlands,   as
quoted  by  Hanson  W.  Baldwin,  New  York  Times,  Dec.  6.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  42
DECEMBER   13,   1965
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
IB   CENTS
The Price At Home of the Destruction We  Wreak Abroad
This  war,  this  distant  slaughter  of  a  small  nation,  will  exact
a  price  from  us  in  all  kinds of  ways.   One  is  politically.    We
will  soon  have  as  many  men  engaged   in  Vietnam  as  we  did
in  Korea,  and  it  is  useful  to  look  back  and  see  what  Korea
did.      The   war  broke  out  in  July,   1950.     In   the   Congres^
sional  elections  the  following  November,   the  outpouring  of
voters  was  the  greatest  in  any  previous  non-Presidential  year,
and  the  Republicans  won  a  majority of  the  votes.    They  pick-
ed  up  five  seats  in  the  Senate,  31  in  the  House  and  6  Gov-
ernorships.    The  result  was  that  a  Republican-Dixiecrat coali-
tion   took   over   control   of   Congress,   ending   Mr.   Truman's
hopes   of   enacting  a  progressive   Fair   Deal   program.     Two
years  later,  for  the  first  time  in  20  years,  the  Republicans  won
the  Presidency  on  an  implied  promise  to  end  the  war.    The
Korean  war  poisoned  our  internal  politics;  it  was  the  heyday
of   McCarthyism,  and   it   set  back  the  tasks  of   domestic   re-
form  by  more  than  two  decades.     All  this  is  beginning   to
repeat   itself.     If   the   war   is  still   on   next   November,   the
Democrats  have  little  chance  of  holding  the  gains  they  made
in  last  year's  anti-Goldwater  landslide.
Useful  Scapegoat
Another   effect   is  in   the   economic   sphere.     The   second
World  War  and  the  Korean  war  came  at  a  time  when  Amer-
ican  manpower  and  resources  were  underemployed.    This  one
comes  at  a  time  of   close  to  full  employment.    The   rise  in
the  Federal  Reserve  discount  rate  to  4i/
2
%,  the  highest   rate
in  30  years,  is  an  index  of  the  concern  felt  over  the   infla-
tionary  effect  of  piling  a  major  war  effort  on  an  already over-
heated   economy.    "I   regret,   as  do   most   Americans,"   Mr.
Johnson   said   in   objecting   to   the   Federal   Reserve   Board's
order,  "any  action  that  raises  the  cost  of  credit,  particularly
for  homes,  schools,  hospitals  and  factories."     LBJ  has  rarely
been  more  transparent.    The  coming  escalation  of  the  Viet-
namese  war  to  Korean   proportions   and   perhaps   beyond   it
was  bound  to  reduce  the  number  of  new  homes,  schools;  and
hospitals.    By one  means or  another,  labor  and  resources  must
be  diverted  to  war  tasks  as  the  escalation  goes  on.     If   the
rise  in  the  discount  rate  discourages  home-building and  damps
down  civilian expansion,  that  is  exactly what  the  military  ef-
fort  requires.
Wm.  McChesney  Martin,  chairman  of  the  Federal Reserve
Board,  did  Mr.  Johnson  a  favor  in  raising  the  discount  rate.
Mr.  Martin  provided  the  White  House  with  a  scapegoat  on
which  to  divert  the  anger  of  the  cheap  money  men  in  Con-
1   6
Warning  From The Churches
"More  and  more  the  mass  media  begin  to  reflect  a
psychology  of  inevitable   war,  so  that  every  criticism
of  U.S.  policy  from  any  quarter  is  made  to  sound  like
treason  on  the  ground  that  it  gives  aid  and  comfort
to  the  enemy."
—From  the  Policy  Statement  and  Message  on  Viet-
nam   adopted   by   the   general   board   of   the  National
Council  of  Churches,  urging  a  suspension  of  bombings,
negotiations  to  include  the  National  Liberation   Front
and  freedom  of  choice  for  the  people  of  South  Vietnam,
with  U.S.  forces  to  withdraw   in  favor   of  an  interna-
tional  peacekeeping  force.   Text  in  N.Y.  Times,  Dec.  4.
gress  and  of  the  labor  movement.    "Naked  greed"  was  the
protest  of  George  Meany,  who  supports  a  wider  war.     "Bru-
tal"  was  the  protest  of  Senator  Douglas  of  Illinois,  a  mouth-
piece   since  MacArthur's   time  of  war  on  China.     Do   these
bitter   and  war-hungry  old   men  really  think  we  can  pile  a
major  war  effort  on  a  civilian  boom?    It's  Johnson's  war,  not
Martin's  rise  in  the  rediscount  rate,  which  is  the  heart  of  the
economic  problem.    The  rate  rise  may or  may not  be  the  way
to  deal  with  the  domestic  inflationary   effects.     Economics  is
less  a  science   than   a  modern   form  of   skilfully   ambiguous
Delphic prophecy.   The  rate  rise  seems  to  have  set  off a  new
stock  market  boom,  as  the  speculators   scent  the  inflation  the
rise  in  rediscount  rates  was  intended  to  discourage.     In   the
stock   market's   dizzy   universe,   investors   are   buying   prime
stocks  which  yield   less  than   3  percent   when  they  can  now
earn  5!/
2
  °n  time  deposits.    This  is  rational  only  as  a  form
of  flight  from  the  dollar  in  expectation  of  a  much  bigger  war.
Everywhere  this  is  bad  news  for  the  poor.    For  the  under-
developed   nations,   a   rise   in   interest   rates   is   catastrophic.
Even  the  wealthier   nations  tend   to   catch  pneumonia   when
the  U.S.  gets  a  cold  in  the  head.    The  new   Administration
pressure   against   U.S.   foreign   investments,   and   the   higher
U.S.  interest  rates,  will  cut  down  the  supply  of  dollars  abroad
at  a  time  when   the   pound   sterling   is  shaky.    A  financial
"domino"  effect  is  possible.    At  home,  from  two  ends  of  the
political  spectrum  come  warnings  that  the  "war  on  poverty",
minuscule  as  it  may  be,  is  likely  to  be  the  first  casualty  of
wider  war  in  the  Far  East.    "Defense  spending  is  skyrocket-
ing   as  a  result   of   the   war   in  Vietnam,"   declared   George
Mahon,  the  able  chairman of  the  House  Appropriations  Com-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stme's  Weekly,   December  13,1965
Civil  Rights  Commission  Tries  to  Make  Attorney  General  Face  The  Realities
Getting  Negroes  to  Register  in  The  South  More  Than  A  Legal  Problem
By  Peter  Osnos
Nicholas  DeB.  Katzenbach  is  an  enlightened  man, certainly
no  racist.    But  on  the  issue  of  the  1965 Voting  Rights  Act
he  has  displayed  an  unbecoming  legalistic  stubborness.     He
refuses  to  see  that  implementing  the  new  law  requires  much
more  than  overseeing  the  abolition  of  the  literacy  test  and dis-
patching   several  dozen   Federal  examiners  to  counties   where
"flagrant  violations"  occur.
Economic Reprisals for  Registration
Negroes,  who  have  been   conditioned   by  fear,  intimidation
and   ignorance   for  generations,  cannot   suddenly   be   expected
'to  venture  into  the  home  of  the  white  "man" to  register  (as
they  have  been  asked  to  do  in  some North  Carolina  counties).
In   Jackson,   Miss,   last   weekend,   Negro  tenant   farmers   and
sharecroppers  told  a  U.S. Civil  Rights  Commission  meeting of
threats  that  registration  would  mean   loss  of  their  farms.     It
would  take  an  act  of  great  courage  for  these  people  to  go  to
the  county courthouse  to  register  with  someone  who  may  well
be  the  brother  or  friend  of  their  landlord.    In  North  Caro-
lina,  Mississippi  and  the  rest  of  the  South,  Federal  registrars,
traveling  by  car, should  be  visiting  the  homes  of  Negroes  to
explain  the  law  and  encouraging  them  to  register.
Instead,  Mr.  Katzenbach  adheres  to  the  notion  that  legisla-
tion   alone   will   eventually  lure   all    2   million   unregistered
Negroes.    Rather  than  call  upon  the  resources  of  the  Federal
government   for   a   massive  registration   drive,   the   Attorney
General  would  have  the   civil   rights  groups   again   carry  the
burden  and  take  the  risks     Katzenbach  is  so  anxious  to  foster
local  "voluntary compliance"  that  he  even  refuses  to  announce
the  presence  of  the  few  examiners  he  sends.
According  to  the  U.S. Civil  Rights  Commission   report  on
the  first  two  months  of  the  Voting   Rights  Act, the   Depart-
ment   of   Justice  rejected   as  "inappropriate"    a  Civil  Service
Commission  suggestion  to  send  announcements  of  the  opening
of  Federal  registration   offices   to  all  county  residents.    Justice
also  vetoed  any  "affirmative   effort   of  the  Federal   government
to  publicize  the  programs   in  the  examiner  counties."
Although  based  on  information  compiled   in  early  Novem-
ber,  the  Civil  Rights  Commission  report   is  the  best   measure
to  date  of  the  success  of  the  Voting  Rights  Act.   One  thing
is   clear:   the   presence   of   Federal    examiners—Katzenbach's
What  A  Firm  Federal  Judge  Can Do
The  four  Alabama  convictions  in  no  way  lessen  the
need  for  new  legislation  to  combat  racial  violence.  An-
niston  is  not  a  typical  Alabama  town.   Two  huge  mili-
tary   bases—Fort   McClellan  and   the   Anniston  Army
Depot—  have  attracted   many  outsiders;  including pre-
sumably,  many  moderate  Northerners,     lit  is  the  kind
of   a   town  where  a   $20,000   reward  could  quickly  be
raised:    And, according   to   one   of   the   fund   raisers,
"they  could  have  gotten   $200,000."    Before  a  new  era
of   conscience  can  be   proclaimed,  convictions  must   be
won  in  the  Selmas  and  the   Haynevilles.    So  long   as
they   exist,   Federal  laws   guaranteeing   protection   for
Negro  and  white civil  rights  workers  will  be  necessary.
The  trial  of  the  three  Klansmen  in  Montgomery  illus-
trated   the   efficacy   of   the   Federal   presence.     Federal
District  Court Judge Frank  M. Johnson  insisted,  as  few
state   judges  would  have  done,  that  the  jury  continue
its  deliberations  after  it  had  declared  itself   unable  to
agree.     But   for   his   supervision   and   pressure    there
would   have   been   no   verdict.     The   95-year-old con-
spiracy  law  under  which  the  men  were  tried  is  a  weak
one.    The  last  conviction  in  1947,  was  overturned.    A
new  law  is  in  order.
soft   and   silent   sell   notwithstanding—significantly    increases
registration.     Alabama  is  the  best  example.     During   August
and   September,   21,445   Negroes  were   registered   in   the   six
counties  with  Federal  examiners.    The  total  for  the  other  61
counties  in  the  state  was   12,040.     In  eight  counties  without
Federal  examiners  not  a  single  Negro  was  registered.
The   report   stops   short   of   recommending   that   examiners
be  sent  to  all  counties with  a  history  of  discriminatory regis-
tration  practices.    It  does  recommend  examiners  for  all  "politi-
cal  subdivisions"  in  which  applicants  are  being  turned   away
ostensibly   because  of   inadequate   facilities.    This   would   in-
clude   all   those   counties  where   registration    is   limited   to   a
few   days  a  month—often   working  days.    At  the  very   least,
the  Voting  Rights  Act  should  insure  that  every  Negro  who
wants  to  register  with  a  local   official   shall   have   the   chance.
When  the  commission  report  was  released,  Mr.   Katzenbach
fired  off   a  7  page  letter  criticizing the  authors   for   using   old
figures  and   failing   to  consult  with  Justice.     The  figures  are
old,  the  attitudes  are  the  same.    The  Attorney  General's  ob-
jections,  it  appears,   are  more   to  interpretation    than   to   fact.
U.S.  Farm  Agency Boasts  5,000  Negro  Employes in South But  All But  51 Are Temporary
The  Agricultural  Stabilization  and  Conservation  Service
is  the  branch  of  the  Department  of   Agriculture  that dis-
penses  $2  billion  annually to  Southern  farmers  in  price sup-
port  loans,  direct  farm  subsidies  and  conservation    projects.
Officials   at   ASCS   have   been   boasting   recently   that   the
agency   employed  almost   5,000  Negroes   during  1965.   In
1964,  according  to  the  U.S. Civil   Rights   Commission,   the
number  was  15.    A  few  questions   put  to  ASCS  last  week,
revealed   that   the   agency   really   has   very  little   to   boast
about.    All  but  51  of  the  5,000  Negro  employes  were "tem-
poraries"  hired  for  the  summer  to  measure  crops.    The  re-
maining  51—17  in  county  offices   and  34  in  state   offices—
presently   hold  custodial   or  minor  clerical   jobs.     Not   one
Negro  has  been  given  a  supervisory  or  administrative  post.
For   the   first   time   in   its    history,   ASCS   named   four
Negroes   this  year  to  the  policy  making  state  committees.
However,   two   of   these   were   in   Missouri   and   Maryland,
hardly  the  deep  South.    Although   20%  of  the  farmers   in
the  11  Southern  states  are  Negro,  only  two  men—the  com-
mitteemen  in  Arkansas  and  Mississippi—have  been   elevated
by  Washington   to  a  position  of  influence  in  ASCS.
In  search  of  a  way  to  appease  civil  rights  groups,  ASCS
has   devised   a   system   of   Negro   "advisory"    committees
which  smack  of   Jim  Crowism.    Three   to  five  man   groups
of   Negro   "leaders"—businessmen,  clergymen   and  farmers
—have   been   appointed   in   16  states   to   consult   with   the
regular  committees  on  Negro  farm   problems.     These  ad-
visory   committees   have   no  vote   in   policy,   nor  are   their
recommendations  binding.    ASCS  regulations  require  that
the  two  groups  meet  only  four  times  a   year.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 13, 1965
Britain  Circumvents,  While  U.S.   Still  Ignores,  UN  Oil  Embargo    Resolution
Contrast  Between  Our  Asian  and  African  Policies  Spurs  Black  Racialism
Perhaps   the   most   important   point   made  by  the   National
Council  of  Churches  in  its  truly  Christian  statement  on   Viet-
nam   is   its  warning   that   "no   conceivable   victory   there   can
compensate  for  the  distrust  and  hatred  of  the  United  States"
that  is  being   generated   "because   we  are  seen  as  a  predomi-
nantly  white  nation  using  our  overwhelming  military  strength
to  kill  more  and  more  Asians."     The   picture  will  be   made
worse  if  the  U.S.  continues  to  respond  as  weakly  as  it  has  to
the  growing   crisis   over   Rhodesia.     This   threatens   to   erupt
in  a  racial war  that  can  have  ugly  repercussions  the  world  over.
Zambia's  Whites  Pro-Rhodesian
A   neuralgic  point   is  the   effort   of   Dr.   Kenneth   Kaunda,
president  of   neighboring  Zambia,  to  maintain   non-racialistic
government   in  his  black  republic.    Its  68,000  whites  have   10
of  the  75  seats  in  the  National  Assembly   (pop.   3,600,000),
a  generous   representation,  but   most   ol   them,   especially  the
railwaymen  and  the  miners,  are  of  Rhodesian  cr  South  African
origin   and   in   sympathy  with   the   white  supremacist   rebels
across  the  border.     Dr.   Kaunda,   according  to   Col in  Legum,
writing  from  the  Zambian   capital  in  the  London  Sttntla)   Ob-
server   Dec.    5,  is   fearful   that   the   longer   the   rebellion  con-
tinues  in  Rhodesia  "and  the  more  confident the  whites become
as  the  result,  the  great  will  be  the  dangers  of  a  racial  flareup."
Black  bitterness  is  mounting  over   the   failure  of  the  great
powers   to   honor   the   UN    call   fox  an   oil   embargo.      The
London  Sunday  Times  Dec.  5,  reported  that  British  Petroleum,
in  which  the  United   Kingdom   government   has  a  controlling
interest,  "is  getting  around  the  ban  on  oil  for  Rhodesia  im-
posed  by" Persia,  the   regular   supplier"   by  shipping  oil   from
the  independent   Persian   Gulf   oil  state  of  Abu  Dhabi.     The
British  government   was  informed   five  days  before  the  tanker
shipment   left  but  made  no  objection.    So  far  only  Iran  and
Libya  have  responded   to  the  UN  call  for  an  oil  embargo.  Two
American  companies,   Caltex   and   Mobil,   share  ownership  of
The  Mimeographs  on  Which  Our  Caesar  Feeds
"The  White  House  policy  on  administration  press  re-
leases  is  causing  a  number  of  problems  for  U.S.   agen-
cies  and  their  specialized  'clients'.    Under  Press  Secre-
tary   Bill  Moyers,  the  White  House   insists  on  seeing
press   releases   before   they   are   distributed.     If   some
look  unusually  interesting—or  it  is  a  slow  day  around
the    White    House—Moyers'    office    often    distributes
them.     Otherwise   they   are   returned   to   the   agencies
involved   for   distribution.     All   this   takes   time,   and
many   routine   releases  of   interest   only   to   specialized
journals  are  delayed  as  much  as  weeks  before  they  are
finally   released.     This   has   proved  annoying  to  these
specialists  who  used  to  be  able  to  pick  up  releases  at
a  set  time  each  month,  and  is  equally   bothersome   to
the  harassed   agency  press   officers."
—Washington  Sunday  Star,  Dec.  5.
the  Rhodesian  refinery  with  British  Petroleum  and  other  com-
panies.
Another  source  of  ill-feeling  is  the  kind  of  planes  sent  to
Zambia  by  Britain  Io  protect  it  from  Rhodesia.  The  Zambian
Foreign  Minister  on  arriving  in  Addis  Ababa  for  the   recent
meeting  of  the  Organisation,  of   African   Unity  protested  that
the  British  Royal   Air  Force  sent  Javelins  which  are  "out   of
date"  and  "absolutely  no  match"  for  the  Hawker  Hunters   in
the   Rhodesian   Air   Force   (AP   in  Baltimore  Stiti,   Dec.    5).
The   London   Sunday   Times  Dec.   5  confirms  this,  saying  that
the  Javelins  represent  "little  more  than   a  gesture  of  compli-
ance   with   Dr.   Kaunda's  demands   for   assistance".    It   adds,
"A   force  sufficient   to  intimidate  Rhodesia  could  be   provided
by  the   U.S.,   but   with   the   rapid  escalation  of   the   Vietnam
war   is  scarcely   likely   to   be  embarked  on   with   enthusiasm."
The   Africans   will   be  saying  that  we  have  plenty  of   planes
to  enforce  what  we  claim  is  the  right  of  self-determination  in
South   Vietnam   but  none  to  protect   it  in  southern   Africa.
A  Maverick  Scientist  Questions  The  Value  of  The  Circuses  We  Stage  in  Space
"By  the  time  Apollo  men  land  on  the  moon,  the  U.S.  will
have  spent  $35  billion  on  space.    The  public  may  demand
some  reckoning  of  its  return  on  this  prodigious  investment.
To  date   the   public  has   been   given   unsupported   promises
about   the   practical   benefits  of   the   space   program.    The
public  has  been  told  that  for  every   dollar  spent   on  space,
two  dollars  will  flow  back  to  the  public  benefit.    The  back
flow  is  a  vastly   propagandized  trickle.
"In  their  enthusiasm   to  promote  space   ventures,   NASA
officials  and  advisers  sometimes  make  unearthly  assertions.
Dr.  George  E.  Mueller,  Associate  Administrator,    Office   of
Manned   Space   Flight,   recently   told   a   Senate    committee
'We  may  find  gold  on  the   moon  and  gold   may  be   scarce
enough  by  that  time  so  it  will  pay  us  to  process   it  on  the
lunar, surface  and  bring   it   back  here   to  earth.'    A   lunar
mining  corporation  (one  has  to  assume  that  free   enterprise
will  be  permitted  on  the  moon)  has  to  consider  the  cost  of
transporting  miners  and  equipment  to  the   moon,  working
deposits,   refining  the  metal  and  shipping  it  back  to   earth.
Merely  transporting   a  shovel  to  the  moon  would  cost  twice
its  weight   in  pure  gold.
"NASA   has   already   spent   $1.3  billion  for   research   in
lunar   and  planetary   science.    This   is   high-priced   science
when  we  compare  the  amounts  which  the  National  Science
Foundation  allocates  to  basic  research.   NSF  this  year  has
awarded   a   total   of   $76   million   in   1,300  grants   to   over
5,000  scientists.     No  wonder  that  a  respected  geophysicist
exclaimed:   'This   space   science   research   is   sheer  lunacy!
We're  spending  more  on  Mars  than  to  study  the  earth.'
"It   is   difficult   to   believe  that   the   scientific  community
in  the  U.S.  really  believes  in  the  space  research   program.
I  believe  that  it  has  gone  along  with  the  Apollo  project  [to
land  a  man  on  the  moon]   becau.se  that  was  a   Presidential
decision.     Many   scientists    receive   lavish   NASA   support
and  are  still  unwilling  to  look  a  gift   horse  in  the   mouth.
But   now   Mr.   James    Webb,   NASA   Administrator,   has
called   for   'national   decisions   in   space   to   be   arrived   at
through   a   national   consensus.'     It   would  be   appropriate
for  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences   to  conduct  a  refer-
endum  of  its   members  on  U.S.  space   research.
"Science   is   too   valuable  a   resource   to   be   squandered
needlessly.     If  NASA's  budget  must  be  propped  up  to  keep
full  employment  in  the  aerospace   industry,  one  is  tempted
to  suggest  it   would  be  proper  to  merge   NASA   with  the
Office   of   Economic   Opportunity."
—Ralph   E.  Lapp,   whose  latest   book   "The   New  Priest-
hood",  deals  with  the  relations  between  science  and  govern-
ment, in  a  speech  at  Central  Conn. State  College,  Dec.  2.
1   6  '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stme's  Weekly,  December 13,1965
The  Viet  Cong  Put  Out  A  Possible  Peace  Feeler  For  the  Christmas  Season
(Continued  from  Page   One)
mittee  in  a  speech  in  Texas  Dec.  4  and  called  for  "restraint"
in  domestic  expenditure.    The  assistant  chief  of  the  war  on
poverty,  Joseph   Kershaw,  told  a  conference  in  San  Francisco
two  days  later,  "If  the  military budget  goes  up  anything  like
what  most  people  suspect,  many  of  the  Great  Society  projects
will  have  to  be  severely  cut  back,  if  not  abandoned."
The Price of An Unmanned Trip to Mars
Yet  the  entire  war  on  poverty  budget  is  only  $1.5   billion,
or  just  about  the  cost  of  one  Voyager  unmanned  trip  to  Mars
(see  Ralph  Lapp's  remarks  on  p.  3).    The  same  day  a  con-
servative  group  investigating  the  Watts  uprising  warned  that
racial  tensions  could   "split  our  society   irretrievably,"  especi-
ally  when  anti-poverty  promises  do  not  "live  up  to  their  press
notices."     The  bombs  that  began  to  fall  on  North  Vietnam
last   February  will   end   by  devastating   our   own   slums   and
exacerbating  our own  "colonial"  problem.   .Our  urban  jungles,
too,  may  sprout  terrorists  and  guerrilla  fighters;  this  was  the
wa'rning  of  Watts,  but  it  will  be  lost  in  the  war  alarms.    The
same  voices  which  urge,   like  Mahon's,  cutback  in   domestic
programs  are  beginning  to  lend  a  sympathetic  ear  as he  did  in
his  Dec.  4  speech  to  the  cry  for  an  anti-ballistic  missile  sys-
tem  to  cost  from  $8  to  $20  billions.    The  irrationality  of  war
tends  always  to  emphasize  all  that  is  most  irrational  in  our
own  society.
Younger  voices  in  both  parties  like  Mayor-elect  Lindsay  of
New   York   last  Sunday  on  Issues  and  Answers   and   Senator
Robert  F.   Kennedy   on  Meet   the  Press  express  their   alarm
over  further  escalation  of  the  war.    The  general  board  of  the
National   Council  of  Churches  in  Wisconsin   last  Friday  and
the  East  Asia  Christian  Conference  in  Bangkok  last  Saturday
(New   York   Times,  Dec.  8)   called  for  an  end  to  the  bomb-
ing  of  North  Vietnam  as  an  essential  step  toward  peace.    The
American   correspondents   seem  to  have   ignored   but   Victor
Zorza  of  the  Manchester  Guardian  reports   (Washington   Post,
Dec.  8)   a  Vietcong   offer  of  a  12-hour  Christmas  Eve  truce.
"Once  some  such  preliminary  negotiations  have  taken  place,"
and  the  lull  lengthened,  this  famous  expert  on  Communism
What  Kennedy Learned  in  Latin  America
Sen.  Robert  KENNEDY: There  are  serious  reserva-
tions  about  our  policy  in  Latin  America,  and  I  found
that  in  every  country  that  I  visited,  in  all  walks  of
life  and  in  all  areas.    A  good  part  of   lit  focusses   on
the  problem  of  the  Dominican  Republic,  and  a  part  of
it  the  feeling  that  the  U.S.  might  intervene  in  their
own  policies.  . .  .
Mr.   SPIVACK:  What  were  some  of   the  misunder-
standings  about  our  policy?
Senator  KENNEDY: I  think  basically  the  fact  that
American  business  determines  the  internal  (sic)  policy
of  the  U.S.,  that  the  government  is  in  control  of  Wall
Street,  that  all  of  our  policies  toward  Latin  America,
toward  Vietnam,  toward  the  rest  of  the  world  are  de-
termined  on  the  basis  of  what  is   good  for   American
business,  not on a  humanitarian basis. ...
Mr.  SPIVACK:  What  do  you  consider  the  most  seri-
ous  mistakes  we  have  made  in  Latin America?
Sen.  KENNEDY:  We  have  intervened  in  their  in-
ternal  affairs  over  the  period  of  the  last  75  years   at
various  times.    We  have,  to  the  detriment  of  some  of
the  countries  and  the  peoples  of  the  countries,  backed
up   American  businesses   and  we  were  able  to   do  so
because  of  our own  strength.  .  .  .  [After  emphasizing
land  reform  and  positive  action.]    If  all  we  do  on  the
other   hand  is   associate   ourselves   with   those   forces
which  are  against  subversion  and  against  communism
and  have  rather  a  negative  policy,  then  I  think  it   is
self-defeating   and  will  be  catastrophic  after  a  period
of  a  few  years.       —On Meet  the Press, Dee. 5  (abr.).
suggests,   "a  cease-fire  in  the  field  could  provide  the  atmos-
phere  in  which  the  more  difficult  political  talks  could  begin."
Will   this   possible   peace   feeler   be   exploited,   or   will   this
Christian   country  prefer   to   celebrate   Christmas  with   more
slaughter?    The  latest  Rusk  and  McNamara  statements  indi-
cate  we want  nothing  less  than  unconditional  surrender  as  the
price  of  calling  off the  war.   That  road  leads  toward  war  with
China.    Before  we  head  down  it  irrevocably,  let  us  stop  and
consider  that  while  we  can  indeed   destroy  on  a  scale  Attila
never   dreamed  of,   even   in   victory  retribution  will   exact   a
heavy  price  at  home,  above  all  in  the  brutalization  of   our
hearts.                                                                  Noon,  Dec.  8
To  meet  the  demand  we  are  reprinting  our  special  8-page  Issue  of  Oct  28,  1963.   on  the  origins  and  mythology   of   the  Vietnamese  war   <20c
single  copy,  0  cents  postpaid  In  orders  of  100 or  more)  and  the  Nov.   22,  1965,  Issue  on  past  peace  feelers   (15c  each  or  3c  postpaid  In  orders  of
100  or  more.)
I.  P.  Stone's Weekly     5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
12/13/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   Fttttet
Indicate  if  announcement  wished   D
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December   and   UM
flrst  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   8618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly   published  and   edited
by  1.  F.  Stone:  Circulation   Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;    $6  in   Canada:    $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
S15  to  Europe:  $20 to  Israel.  Asia  nnd  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED