I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965sep20.pdf

============================================================

Another  First-Hand  Report  on  The  Viet  Cong Peace  Terms,  P.  3
An  Error  For  Which  a  Peaceful Village Paid  a  Heavy Price
Saigon—U.S.   Air   Force   B-52  jet   bombers,   flying   their
21st  mission  of  the  war,  yesterday  blasted  an  area  in  the
central  highlands  thought to  be  a  fortified  Viet  Cong  base.
But  UPI  Correspondent Ray  F.  Herndon  flew  into  the  tar-
get  area a  few  hours later  and  reported there were  no signs
of   the  Viet  Cong  having  been  there  recently.    The  B-52s
dropped  hundreds  of  tons  of  high  explosives  on  the  hamlet
of  Phuong  Xa  Tay,  which  lies  about  60  miles  southwest  of
Da  Nang  and  325  miles  northeast  of  Saigon.    The  raid  had
been  ordered  after  intelligence  experts  concluded  the  ham-
let  to  be  a  large  Communist communications  center.    But
Mr.    Herndon   reported   that   what   aerial    photoanalysts
thought  were  sandbagged  bunkers  proved  to  be  an  ancient
wall.    What  had  appeared  to  be  fortified  trenches  turned
out  to  be  seldom-used  oxcart  trails.
—New  York  Herald-Tribune,  Sept.  11.
I. R Stones  Weekly
VOL.  XIII,  NO.  30
SEPTEMBER  20,  1965
'<»       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
16  CENTS
Time  to  Get  A  New  Secretary  of  State
The  contrast  between  Johnson's  record  at  home  and  his  rec-
ord  abroad  reflects  the  difference  between   the  way  domestic
and  foreign  policy  is  made.    The   former   is  invigorated   by
pressure  from  below;  the  latter  is  deadened  by a  damper  from
above.   The  Johnson  domestic  program  is the  fruit  of  a gener-
ation's  agitation,  of  democratic  processes   at  their  best,  of  the
Negro  demand  for  equality  and  the  cry  of  the  aged  for  secu-
rity.    But  in  the  making  of  foreign  policy,  where  new  forces
and  old  resentments  raise  in  giant  and  perilous  form  the  same
challenge,  the  scene  is  dominated  by  stale  ideas,  presided   over
by  a handful of  men  with  a vested  interest  in  past  error,  work-
ing  in  the  State  Department  through  our  most  inert  bureauc-
racy,  and  with  a  huge  "information   service"  i.e.  a  propaganda
apparatus,  at  their  disposal,   to  numb  the  public  mind.    At
home  we  adjust  to  the  future.    Abroad  we  are  stuck  in  the
ruts  of  the  past.
The  Establishment   Closes  Ranks
A  debate  on  this  might  have  been  sparked  by  the   publica-
tion   in   Life   Magazine   recently   of   three   installments   from
Arthur  M. Schlesinger, Jr.'s,  forthcoming  memoirs  of  the  Ken-
nedy   Administration.    The   third   installment   criticized  the
State  Department   and  revealed  that  by  the  summer  of   1963
Kennedy  had  reluctantly  made  up  his  mind  "to  allow  Rusk  to
leave  after  the  1964  election."    Kennedy's  dissatisfaction  with
the  Department  was  his  Administration's  best  known   secret.
Yet  instead  of  discussing  Schlesinger's  restrained  but   devas-
tating  analysis of  the  Department  and  of  Rusk,  the  entire  Es-
tablishment  from  Vice  President Humphrey  down  closed  ranks
to  praise  Rusk  and  condemn  Schlesinger.     Attention  was  di-
verted  from  the  weaknesses  of  the  Department   and  Rusk  to
the   question   of   whether   Schlesinger   should   have   disclosed
Kennedy's  intentions,  and   exposed   Rusk  to   criticism.    But
after  five  years as  Secretary of  State,  during  which  the  policies
he  has  applied  have  proven  disastrously  wrong  from  Cuba  to
Vietnam  to  Kashmir, isn't  it  time for  a fresh  look  at  the  Secre-
tary  of  State?    Schlesinger  would  have  stultified  himself  as  a
historian  if  he  had  suppressed   the  truth.    But  the  effect   has
been  to make it  seem ungentlemanly to criticize Rusk; to  render
him   more   sacrosanct  than   ever.     The   Russians   embalmed
Lenin  after  he  died.    We  seem  to  have  embalmed  our  Secre-
On  The  Eve  of  the  Vote  on  the  Challenge
,  Outside   the   dimly  lit   Negro  church  a  white   civil
rights  worker  from  Chicago just  out  of  Jail  in  Natchez
said,  "They  believe  in  God and they  believe  in  America.
They  believe  God  is  good  and  America  is  Just.    For
them  defeat  of  the  challenge  would  be  like  proof  that
God doesnt exist."   He was talking  of  the  four  hundred
Negroes  with  whom  he  had  come  up  from  Mississippi
to  support  the   Freedom  Democratic  Party   challenge.
The  time  was  Wednesday  night,  Sept.  15.   The  House
Administration  Committee  had  just  voted   19-to-5   for
the  Mississippi  motion  to  dismiss  without  a  hearing  on
the  merits.   The Negroes  were  preparing  for  a  vigil  at
the  Capitol,  still  hoping  the  House  would  reverse  and
uphold them.   Two days of  lobbying had begun to  shake
their  faith.    Many  had  never  been  North  before.    "It
looks  like  we  brought  Mississippi   with  us,"  was  one
comment  often  repeated.    In  many  offices  their   recep-
tion  had  been  cold  and  superior.    "It's  the  same  Mr.
Charlie."   One  Congressman  asked,  "Do  yon  expect  us
to  do  any  more  for  you  people  after  Watts?"    Inside
the  Church one elderly  Negro  preacher cried  undaunted,
"We're  gonna  make  Mississippi  the  best  State  in  the
union."   Winding  up,  Gospel style,  he  admonished,  "You
gotta  love  that  white  man."   An  elderly  Negro  woman
grumbled  from  a  front  pew,  "I  love  him  but  I  sure
don't  trust  him."
tary  of  State  while  he  is  still  alive.
The  Secretary  in  Schlesinger's   portrait   is  a  man  who  has
cultivated  facelessness.    He  wrote  of  Rusk  (Life,   July  30):
His mind, for  all its  strength and clarity, was irrevocably
conventional. ...  He  seemed  actually  to  prefer  stale  to
fresh  ways  of  saying  things. ...  He  was  totally  unem-
barrassed  by  banality;  the  cliches  of  diplomacy  were  his
native  tongue.  .  .  .  The  inscrutability  which  made  him  a
good  aide and a  gifted  negotiator  made  him  also  a  baffling
leader.   When Assistant  Secretaries  brought  him  problems,
he  listened  courteously,  thanked them and let  them go;  they
would  often  depart  little  wiser  than  they  came.    Since  his
subordinates  did not  know  what he  thought,  they  could  not
do what  he wanted.
The  portrait  may  be  completed  with  a  passage  which    Life
omitted  but  which  appeared  in  the  version  published   by  the
London  Sunday  Times  (Aug.  8) :
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
1  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  20,  1965
(Continued  from   Page   One)
Rusk  was  equally  secretive  at  the  White  House. ... He
rarely  had  strong  views  as  to  what  should  be  done  beyond
continuing  what  we were  already  doing.  .  . . "He never  gave
me  anything   to   chew   on,"   the  President   would   say,   "he
never  puts  it   on  the   line.    You  never  know   what   he   is
thinking."
Rusk   Still  Sees  A   Monolith
One  of   those  rare   occasions   in   which   Rusk  inadvertently
allows  one  to  see what  he  thinks  occurred  a  few  days  ago  dur-
ing  a  talk  he  made  before  the  American  Political   Science  As-
sociation  here.    It  was  one  of  those  long,  serenely  banal  and
almost   entirely   uncommunicative   speeches   characteristic   of
the  Secretary.    But  midway  he  made  a  remark  which  gave  the
reporters  and  headline-writers  something  to  fasten  on.     "Rusk
Says  All  Reds  Try  to  Encircle  Free  World,"  said  the  headline
over  the  AP  dispatch  next  day  in  the  Washington  Star  (Sept.
8).    The  story  reported   (quite  correctly)   that  the  Secretary
had  said  that  the  common  strategy  of  all  the  world's   Commu-
nist   powers   was  to  win   control   of   Asia,   Africa   and   Latin
America   "thus  encircling  and  strangling   the  Atlantic  world."
Their  differences,   Rusk  said  "are   about  how  to  get  on  with
their  world   revolution."    This  was  hardly  a  wise  remark  at  a
time  when  U.S.  policy  is  to  play  the  more  moderate  Russians
and  Poles  against   the  revolutionary   Chinese.     It   was   made
particularly  inept  by the  Kashmir  crisis.    It  sounded   like  John
Foster  Dulles  in  its  simple  black-and-white  Manichean   view
of   the   world   and   it   brought   to   mind   another   passage  in
Schlesinger's  memoirs—
I  spent  three  years  in the  White  House  in  a  plaintive  and
unavailing  effort  to  beg  the  State  Department  to  stop  using
the  phrase  "Sino-Soviet  bloc".   This  was  a  typical  Foreign
Service  expression—barbarous  in  form  and  obsolescent  in
content.    A  memorandum  to  the  State  Department  Secre-
tariat   in   January    1963    said:   Whatever   substance   the
phrase  might  once have had as  referring  to  a  unified  Russo-
Chinese  operation  has  surely   been  trickling   away   rather
fast  in  recent  months.    Today  the  phrase  .  . .  suggests  that
those  who  use  it  don't  know  what  is  going  on  in  the  world.
This   unwillingness   to   acknowledge    the   centrifugal   and
pluralist  tendencies  transforming  the  Communist  world  is  the
path  of  safety  in  dealing  with  Congress.     It  also  seems  to  rep-
So  Long  As  They  Only  Spoke  of  Frog's  Legs
"Mrs.  Johnson  and  Mme.  Chiang  discussed  the  beauty
of  this  time  of  the  year  and  the  First  Lady's  most  re-
cent  visit  to  Wyoming.   They  reminisced  at  length  on
the  delightful  visit  of  the  Johnsons  to  Taiwan  in   May,
1961.     Mrs.   Johnson  recalled  the  pedicab  ride  she  had
taken  with  the  Vice  President  in  Taiwan.    Then  they
had  a  discussion  about  the  frog  leg  industry  in  China.
Mrs.   Johnson  recalled  that  canals  used  there  for   rice
paddies  are  also  used  for  raising  frogs.    Both  recalled
what  delicacies  they    are."
—From  the  White   House  release  on  Mme.    Chiang's
visit  to  the  White  House  for  tea  Sept.  14.
resent  Rusk's  real  views.   When  he  shows  his  hand,  it  is  that
of   a  hard-liner,   particularly   on   China   policy.     Indeed    the
strangest  part  of  his  story—a  part  Schlesinger  does  not  tell
and  of  which  the  Kennedy  entourage  to  this  day  seems   un-
aware—is  that  Rusk  left  the  Truman   Administration  in   1951
as  a  hero  of  the  China  lobby,  the  MacArthurites and  the  hard-
line  Republicans.   Yet  he  managed  ten  years  later  to  get  him-
self  named  Secretary  of  State  in  a  new  Democratic  Adminis-
tration   pledged   to   a  fresh   start   in   foreign   relations!     The
story  I  want  to  tell  was  all  blacked  out  in  Orwellian  fashion
when  Rusk  was  appointed  by  Kennedy.    It  shows  how  hastily
Kennedy  picked  his  Secretary  of  State;  he  decided  on   Rusk,
whom  he  had  never  met  before,  "after  a  single  talk",  accord-
ing  to  Schlesinger.   It  also  makes  one  wonder  how  wires  are
pulled  in  our  society so  that,  as the  French  say, the  more  things
change,  the  more  they  remain  the  same.    The  story  is  also  im-
portant  because  it  happened   at  a  turning point  in  the  Korean
war.    Then  as  now,  in  the  Vietnamese  war,  we  had  to  choose
between  negotiation  and   a  limited  conflict   on  the  one   hand
and  a  collision  course  with  China  on  the  other.     It  was  the
collision  course  which  Rusk  favored.
That  was  on.e  of  the  few  occasions  in  his   life  when   Rusk
was  incautious.   It  was  on  May  28,  1951.    The  UN   forces  in
Korea  had  just  fallen  back  from  their  last  remaining positions
above  the  38th  parallel.    This  meant  that  the  North   Koreans
and   the   Chinese   Communist   "volunteers"   had   restored    the
status  quo  ante.    The  way  was  cleared  for  a  settlement.    Tru-
Then,  Too,   They  Were  All  for   Peace   and  Disarmament—They  Only  Wanted   "Equality"
Germans  Ask  Finger  on  Nuclear  Trigger  in  Words  Which  Recall  Hitler's   30  Years   Ago
"The   Christian  Democratic   Union,  in  common  with   the
Government  of  the  Federal  Republic,  believes  that  it  is  un-
acceptable  for  there  to  be  two  classes  of   members  in  the
NATO  alliance.   ;  .  .  In  view  of   the  German  defense    con-
tribution   and  the   situation   of   Germany,   the   Federal   Re-
public  must  be  granted  a  proper  measure  of  co-decision  in
the  question  of  nuclear  weapons.  .  .  .  The  Christian  Demo-
cratic  Union  and  the  Federal  government  are  always  ready
to  support  general  and  controlled  disarmament."
—Christian  Democratic  Presidium,  Aug.   23,   1965.
"Germany  in  any  case  is  not  ready  to  be  regarded  for  all
time  as  a  second-class  nation,  or  nation  of  inferior  rights.
Our  love   of   peace   is   perhaps   greater   than   that   of   other
peoples,   since   we   suffered   most    from    the   frightful     war.
None  of  us  have  the  intention  of  threatening  anyone;  but
every  one  of   us  is   determined   to  ensure   equality   for   the
German  people.  .  .  .  The  German   government   is   ready   to
agree  to  any  limitation   which  leads  to  the  abolition  of  the
heaviest   arms,  especially   suited  for  aggression."
—Adolf   Hitler  to the  Nazi  Reichstag, May  21,   1935.
Thirty  years  ago,   when  Hitler  decreed  universal  military   service  and  began  massive  rearmament  in  violation  of  the
Versailles  pact,  he  deluded  Europe  with  a  peace  speech  in   which   he   claimed  that  he  was   merely   seeking  equality   in
armament.    Now  a  campaign  is  building  up  in  Germany,  again  on  the  plea  of  equality,  to  scrap  its  postwar  promise
to abstain  from  atomic, bacteriological  and  chemical  weapons.   The  MLF  proposal  put  forward  by  our  State  and  Defense
Departments  has  whetted  German  appetite  for  nuclear  weapons.    Germany's  Social  Democrats,  probably  the  least  social-
istic  and  the  most  nationalistic  of  all  the  world's  socialist  parties,  have  begun  to  "me,    too"   this  Christian  Democratic
drive.    Willy  Brandt  has  let  it  be  known  that  if  elected  he  will  ask  the  U.S.   to  share  the  "know  how"   used  in  producing
nuclear  weapons   (New     York   Times,  Sept.   13),   albeit  only  for  peaceful  purposes!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  20, 1965
man  had  just fired MacArthur  for  trying to widen the war, and
had  decided  for  negotiations to  end  it.    Gen.  Omar  Bradley,
then  chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,   stood  firmly  with
Truman  against the  MacArthurites; Bradley  called the  Korean
conflict   the  wrong   war   at  the  wrong   place   and   the   wrong
time.     Rusk   was   then   Assistant   Secretary   of   State   for   Far
Eastern   Affairs.     He   had   been   working   closely  with   John
Foster  Dulles  on  the  Japanese  peace  treaty.   Rusk went  to New'
York  to  address  a  dinner  of  the  China  Institute presided  over
by  Henry  Luce,  without  clearing  his  speech  in  advance   with
the  State Department  or  the  Pentagon  (Washington  Post,  May
22,  1951).    The  two  other  speakers  were  Dulles  and  Senator
Douglas  of  Illinois,  who  was  supporting   MacArthur  and  ex-
pansion   of  the  war.      Rusk  took  the  China   lobby   line,   too,
and  his  speech  made  him  the  hero  overnight of  ':he  Republican
opposition.     Taft   called   the   speech   a   complete   reversal   of
policy  and  an  acceptance of  MacArthurYviews.    On  the  other
hand  Walter  Lippmann  in  a  column,  "Bradley  v.  Rusk"   (May
22,  1951)  protested  that  if the  Rusk policy were  to be  adopted,
"the  war  would  go  on  indecisively  and  interminably."    The
reactions  in  the Pentagon,  then  for  limited war. were  described
as  "sulphurous"  (Wash.  Post  May  22,  1951).    It  was  made
clear  that  Rusk  was  talking  out  of  turn,  and  six  months  later
he  resigned  to  become  president  of  the  Rockefeller Foundation
where  his  friend  Dulles  was  chairman  of  the  board.     Rusk's
salary  was  reported  as  somewhere  between  $50,000  and  $75,-
How  to  Make  Practically  Anything  Incomprehensible
State  Dept's  Top Planner  in  Full  Take-Off
"If   I  may  be  permitted  to  use  a  somewhat  private
vocabulary,  it  can  be  said  that  during  the  past  genera-
tion  we have  had  in  many  parts  of  the  world  a  take-off
in  which  the  leading  sectors  have  been  import-substitu-
tion  industries  in  consumers   goods  fields;  and  for  these
nations  to  move  on into  the  drive  to  industrial  maturity
requires  that  they  convert  their  somewhat  isolated  ur-
ban  industrial  concentrations  into  active,  dynamic  cen-
ters   which   purposefully   diffuse   the   process   of   mod-
ernization   out  across  the  nation,  while  they   generate
the  capacity,  on  this  wider  market   foundation,  to  pay
their  way  as  they  move  to  full  industrialization  of  their
societies."
—W.  W.  Rostow, State  Dept's  Policy  Planning    chief,
in  a  speech   to  the  American  Marketing    Association,
cited   by  the  Washington   Daily  News  Sept.  11  as  the
year's   finest   specimen   of   gobbledygook.
000  a  year,  no  mean  consolation  prize.
This  tricky  episode  and  its  implications  seem  never  to  have
been  brought  to  Kennedy's  attention.    The  fault  seems  to  lie
in  part  with  Acheson,  who  himself   grew  more  and  more  bit-
terly  hard-line   over  the   years,  and   joined  in   recommending
Rusk  to  the  President-elect.     Time  and  U.S.  News  &  World
Report,   which  had  made  a  hero  of  Rusk  in   1951,    protected
him  when  the  appointment  was announced  in  December,  I960
National  Liberation Front  for  Private  Ownership of  Land
Famous British Peace Worker's Account of His  Controversial Viet Peace  Talks  In Moscow
By  Fenner  Brockway*
My   visit   to   Russia   was   private   and   had   no   official   or
even  semi-official  authority.    But  as  Chairman  of  the   Brit-
ish  Council  for  Peace  in  Vietnam  I  took  the  opportunity  to
have  discussions  with  the   Ambassador   of  North   Vietnam,
and  with  representatives   of  the  National  Liberation  Front,
who  are  officially   recognized   in  Moscow.    My  first  surprise
was that  the  Ambassador  stated  that  his  government   would
be  prepared   to  take  part   in  a  reconvened  Geneva   confer-
ence.    I  had  misunderstood  that   the  Soviet   Union,  as  co-
chairman  with  Britain  of  the  Geneva  conference,  declined  to
invite  the  nine  powers  to  reassemble  because  of  the   opposi-
tion  not  only  of  China  but  of  Vietnam.    It  is  true  that   [the
Ambassador]   Mr.  Nguyen  van  Kinh   laid  down  that   four
basic  principles  must  be  accepted,  but  these  do  not  seem  to
be   inconsistent   with  the   Geneva   agreement,   at   least   the
essentials  of  which  even  President   Johnson  has  endorsed  as
the  basis  for  a  peaceful   settlement.
The  four  principles  which  North  Vietnam  asks   are:
[(1)  The  independence and  unity  of  Vietnam;  (2)  While
separate    administrations   continue   in   North   and    South,
neither  to  be  in  any  military  alliance  and  all  foreign  mili-
tary  troops  and  bases  to  be  removed;  (3)   the   people  of
South  Vietnam  to  be  free  to  decide  their  "political   social
and  economic future  without  foreign  interference"  and   (4)
an  eventual  opportunity  to  reunite   without  foreign   inter-
ference.!
I  put  a  number  of  questions  to  clarify  implementation  of
these  principles.    I  was  told  it  was  visualized  that   South
Vietnam   would   have  a   democratic  representative   govern-
ment,  and  the  Ambassador  emphasized  that  it  would  have
a  democratic  freedom  to  choose  whether  it  would  join  the
North  in  one  state  and,  if  so,  when.
* Veteran  British  Laborite,  abridged  from  his  account  of
these  August  talks  in  the  Sept.  10,  London  Tribune.
The  Ambassador   said  one  consideration   in  timing  would
be   the   different   economic  character   of   North   and   South
Vietnam.    As  a  Communist  state  North  Vietnam  has  col-
lectivized  its  agriculture.    The  National   Liberation  Front,
despite   the   assertion   that   it   is   Communist,  stands   for
peasant    proprietorship.
My  second  surprise  arose  from  the  statement  of  the  Am-
bassador  that  his  government had  never  insisted  that  all  the
American   troops   should   be  withdrawn  before   talks   for   a
cease-fire  took  place  or  before  negotiations.    My  third   sur-
prise  was  to  hear   from   the  Ambassador   that   his  Govern-
ment  would  accept  the  International  Commission  set  up  by
the   Geneva   conference,   composed   of   Canada,   India   and
Poland   to   ensure   that   the   cease-fire   was   observed.     He
acknowledged  that  North  Vietnam  was  disappointed  by  re-
cent   findings   by  Canada   and   India,   but   nevertheless   his
Government  had  accepted  the  Geneva  agreement   and  would
abide  by  it  in  letter   and  in  spirit.    The  NLF  representa-
tives  took  a  more  stringent  view.   They  did  not  believe  that
any   international   body   could  prevent   America   from   con-
solidating  its  military  strength   during  a   cease-fire.
The   North   Vietnam   and   NLF    representatives    issued
statements  after  I  had  reported  my  discussions.   The  North
Vietnam  Ambassador  complained  of  misrepresentations   not
by  me  but  by  the  Western  press.    I  am  not  surprised   in
view  of  what  the  Voice  of  America   distributed!
I  must  admit  that  one  major  obstruction  to   negotiations
persists.  The  North  Vietnam  Ambassador  insisted,  and   cer-
tainly  the  NLF   would  insist   even  more  strongly,  that   in
any  negotiations  the  National  Liberation  Front  must  be  ac-
cepted  as  the  spokesman   for  South  Vietnam.    The   North
Vietnam   Government   will  not   concede   that   the  series  of
governments  which  have  been  maintained  in  nominal   office
in  Saigon  have  any  representative   authority  whatever.     It
claims,   on  the  other  hand,  that   the   NLF   which  controls
two-thirds   of   the   territory,  represents   the   overwhelming
majority.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  20, 1965
Rusk's  View  of  China  Proved  To Be  Complete  Nonsense
Secretary  Called  Mao's  Regime
(Continued  from  Page   Three)
by  omitting  the  story of  how  he  had  come  to  leave  the  Depart-
ment  nine  years  earlier.*    When  the  nomination  came  before
the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,  rightists  like  the  Re-
publican   Hickenlooper  and  the  Democrat   Lausche   indicated
with  quiet  approval  their  knowledge   of  Rusk's  China  policy
views.    But  the  liberals  were  taken  in;  even  Morse  told  Rusk
the  American  people  were  "very  fortunate"   to  have  "a  man
with  such  an  outstanding  background"  to  advise  the  President-
elect  on  foreign   policy  "in  the  troubled   years  ahead."
Shoulder  to  Shoulder  With  Luce  and  Meany
The  kind   of  advice  Rusk  was  likely  to  give  was  evident,
but  the  liberal  Senators  weren't  astute  enough  to  see it.    Dur-
ing  Eisenhower's  last  year,  those  like  Luce  and  George  Meany
who  opposed  any  relaxation   of  tension  had  been  opposing  a
summit  meeting  with  Khrushchev.     Rusk  had  made  his  con-
tribution  to  their  campaign  with  an  article  against  summitry
in  Foreign  Affairs    (April,  I960).    Fulbright   did  ask  a  ques-
tion  about  this  article but  Rusk  managed  to  evade  any  search-
ing  inquiry  into  his  views  on  the  subject.    At  one  point,  to
show  his  continued  interest  in  foreign  affairs,  Rusk  volunteered
that  he  had  taken  part  "in  such  study  groups  as  the  Rocke-
feller  Brothers  panels."   But no  one  questioned  him  about  the
step-up   in  the  arms  race  and  the  hard-line  foreign   policies
those  panels  had  recommended.   The  relations  between  Rusk
and  the  Rockefeller  interests  were never  explored.   When  Ful-
bright   asked  the  nominee  if  he  had-any  private  ties  which
might  create  a  conflict  of  interest  in  his  new  post,  Rusk  said
he  did  not  think  so.   But  he  added  that  "at  the  time  of  the
termination  of  my service with  the  Rockefeller  Foundation  the
trustees  expect  to  enter  into  a  trust  agreement  with  the  Chase
Manhattan   Bank   to  provide  severance  pay   for   my  services
over  a period  of  years."    No  one  inquired  into  the  details  nor
into  the  propriety   of  payments  "over   a  period   of  years"   to
a  Secretary  of  State  from  a  bank  like  Chase  Manhattan—the
A  Screen  for  Russian  Takeover
Fulbright's   Warning  on  Dominican Republic
"We  misread prevailing  tendencies  in  Latin  America
by  overlooking  or  ignoring  the  fact  that  any   reform
movement  is  likely to  attract  Communist  support.   We
failed  to  perceive that  if  we are  automatically  to oppose
any  reform  movement  that  Communists  adhere  to,  we
are  likely  to  end  up  opposing  every  reform movement.
.  .  .  One notes  a  general  tendency  on  the  part  of  our
policy  makers not to  look beyond a  Latin American poli-
tician's  anti-Communism.  .  .  . One also  notes  in  certain
government  agencies,   particularly  the  Department  of
Defense,    a    preoccupation   with    'counterinsurgency'
which is  to  say  with the  prospect  of  revolutions  and the
means  of  suppressing  them. .  .  .  The  movement of  the
future  in Latin America is  social revolution...  Whether
it  is  to be Communist or democratic ... depends in  part
on  how  the  U.S.  uses  its  great  influence. ...  In the
Dominican  Republic  .  .  .  hope  must  be tempered by  the
fact  that  the  military  continues  to  wield  great  power
.  . . power which  it  would not now have  if  the  U.S. had
not  intervened to  save  it  from  defeat.
—Fulbright  to  the  Senate  Sept.  15 in  a  great  speech
at  press  time  condemning  Johnson's  intervention.
* The  story  was  told  in  this  Weekly  (Dec.  6,  1960 and Jan.
23,  1961)  in  criticizing  the nomination.
Standard  Oil-Rockefeller  family  bank—with  world-wide inter-
ests  in  foreign  policy  decisions.
Rusk's  speech  on  China  policy  in  1951  is  worth  rereading
now.    It   proved   complete   nonsense.     He   compared  Mao's
regime  to  the  puppet  Emperor's  which  Japan  set  up  in  Man-
churia  before  the  war  under  the  name  of  Manchukuo.    Rusk
called  Communist  China  "a  Slavic Manchukuo."    He  declared
the  Russians  had  taken  over  Inner  Mongolia,  Manchuria,  and
North  Korea  and  turned  the  Peking  regime  into  "a  colonial
Russian  government."    This  "puppet"  regime  has  turned  out
to  be Russia's  most  formidable  rival and  biggest  foreign  policy
headache.  History  records  few misjudgments as whopping,  but
Rusk  remains  the  President's  No.  1  adviser  on  China.
Truman  got  rid  of  Rusk  in  1951.   Kennedy,  we  now  learn,
wanted  to  get  rid  of  him  in  1963.    How  much  longer  will  he
go  on   being  a  faceless  roadblock   in  the   way  of   any  fresh
foreign  policy?
We'll  Be Clod  to  Send A Sample Copy of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —  Send  A  Stomped Addressed  Envelope
I. F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
9/20/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  vend  a  gift  sub  to:
(T\>)   Name   ................................................j.............................
Street   .................................................................*.......................
City   ..........................................Zone............St«te....................
For  $5.35  extern  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Baunte*  FUttet
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
IE  Stone's Weekly
5618   Nebrwka  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone'5  Weekly.    Second   Claw  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except   in   August,   the  last   week   in   December   and   the
fint   week  In  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave,    N.W..  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly   published  and   edited
by  I.   F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   120  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED