I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965mar22.pdf

============================================================

As  the War  in  Vietnam  Widens,  Freedom  Shrinks, Pps. 2-3
The  South  Produces  A  Great  New Humorist In  Its  Hour  of  Crisis
"Many  peaceful  demonstrations  by  Negro  citizens  of  this     have even  had  policemen there  to  see  that  no one  got  hurt."
state  have  been  carried  out  throughout  Alabama. ...  We     —Alabama's  Gov. Wallace  on CBS Face  The Nation Mar. U
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  11MARCH  22,  1966
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
The  Ultimate  Stakes  in  the  Voting  Rights  Struggle
Their  power  of  identification,  and  their  limited   sympathies,
are  wondrous  characteristics  of  men.    When  Wallace's  Ala-
bama  State  Troopers  killed  Jimmie  Lee  Jackson,  the  murder
registered   on  the  national  consciousness  only  as  another   in
the  long  and  familiar  role  of  Negro  slayings  in  the   South.
But  when  racist toughs  in  Selma  a  week  later  took  the  life  of
a  white  clergyman,  the  Rev.  James  J.  Reeb  of  Boston,  they
aroused  a  large  section  of  the  nation.    This  was a  white  man
and  it  was  a  clergyman.    All  over  the  country  (except—sig-
nificantly  enough—in  the  South),  clergymen  identified  with
the  victim.   This was an  attack on  them.     A  highly  articulate
and  respected  sector  of  white  leadership  was  mobilized,  and
led  a sizeable portion  of  the  population  with  it  into  the  streets
of   almost   every  large  Northern   city.    The   result  was  that
joint  night  session  of  Congress  last  week  in  which  the  Presi-
dent  sounded  like  Martin  Luther  King  and  was  warmly  ap-
plauded  when he  picked  up  the  theme  song  of  the  civil  rights
movement,  and   declared   "We   shall   overcome."     That   ses-
sion,  and  the  new  voting  bill  it  promises,  are  a  memorial  to
that  idealistic  young minister.    Rarely has  one  man's  death  so
moved  a whole nation  to  action.   Of  him,  it  may truly be  said,
he  died  to  set  men  free.
A  Tribute  to  Negro   Demonstrations
This   swiftly   summoned   night   session   of   Congress   was
unique  in  that  it  received  not  just  one  but  two  messages  from
the  President  on  the   same  subject.    The  original   message,
which   the  President  sent  up  but  did  not  deliver,  was a  sedate
and  learned  discourse  on  voting  rights  which  read  as if  it  had
been  drafted  in  the  Justice  Department.    The  other—the  one
the  President  read  to  the  joint  session—sounded  more  like  a
sermon  than  a  state  paper.    It  was  the  country  preacher  in
the   President   speaking;   it  was  full   of   evangelical   passion.
He  seems  to  have  begun  work  on  it  at  the  last  moment  in
dissatisfaction  with  the  formal  message,  and  he  himself  made
considerable  changes  even  as  he  spoke.    Even  for  the  skepti-
cal and  the wary,  it was a  speech  (hat  made  one want  to  stand
in  the  darkness outside  the  White  House  and  cheer  the  Presi-
dent  when  he  drove  back.  For  one  thing,   it  was  almost  en-
tirely  free  of  the  ambivalence which marks most  political  utter-
ance.    Only  at  one  point  were  we  given  vulgarized  Holmes
about  the  right  of  free  speech  not  including  the  right to   "hol-
ler  fire"  and  an  echo  of  Southern  cant  about  the  rights  of
demonstration  not  including "the  right  to  endanger  the  safety
of  others  on  a  public  highway."    It  would  be  more  germane
to  say that  the  right  of  highway patrol  does  not  give  the  Ala-
Setting An Example—
For  Mendacity and  Murder
"I  am  against  police  brutality.    I  have  always  been
so,  and  there  has  been  only  one  instance  in  all  of  the
weeks  and months  of  provocation in  this  state  that  the
police  force  of  Alabama have been  charged  or intimated
or  stated  by  the  Justice  Department  to  hare  been  en-
gaged  in  police  brutality."
—Gov. Wallace  on CBS Face  The Nation Mar. U.
"Angered  toughs  in  Selma,  Ala^  have  been  charged
with  the  night-time murder of  a  young  white  minister.
... A nation,  indignant  and  shocked  . .  .  asks,  'Why?'
The  answer  is  a  mosaic.    Certainly  the  men  who  at-
tacked  the  young  minister  had  seen,  or  heard,  of   the
brutalities   of  state  'peace  officers'  acting  on  orders  of
the Governor....  If  the  Governor,  the  sheriff  and other
officials  set  violence  examples,  the  hate  groups  and  the
lawless  feel  they  have  a  certain  license."
—Ralph   McGill   of  the  Atlanta  Constitution  in   the
New  York  Herald-Tribune,   same  day.
bama  state  police  the  right  to  suppress  the  First   Amendment.
But  this  sop  to  the  South  was  more  than  outweighed   when
the  President   paid  tribute  to  the  Negro  demonstrator.     For
the  first  time,  instead  of  the  usual  respectable   cliches   about
taking  the  fight  out  of  the  streets  and  into  the  courts,  we  had
the  President   saying,  "The   real  hero  of  this  struggle   is  the
American  Negro.  . . . His demonstrations  have  been  designed
to  call  attention  to  injustice  .  .  .  who  among  us  can say we
would  have  made  the  same  progress  were  it  not  for  his  per-
sistent  bravery."    The  President  spoke  from  experience.    Un-
til  the  disorders   in  Selma,  he  himself   was  wavering  on  the
timing  and  content  of  a  new  voting  rights  bill.
Uneducated   Negroes  and  foreign   observers  will  be  com-
forted  to  know that  they  are  no  more  confused  than  many of
us here  in  Washington  about  this  need  for a new voting  rights
bill.    Three  times  in  the  last  seven  years  we  have  been  as-
sured  that  the  Negro's  fundamental  right  to  vote  had  at  last
been  guaranteed  by  new  and  hard-won  legislation.    In   1957,
in  I960  and  again  in  1964,  we  were  supposed  to  have  given
the  Negro's  right  to  vote  firm  Federal  protection.     Now  it
turns  out  that  a new  bill  is needed.    The  best  explanation  was
made  by Congressman  Resnick  of  New  York  Feb.  8  when  he
introduced   the   most   comprehensive   and   thoroughgoing  of
all  the  voting  rights  bill  this  session.    He  said  the  first  ob-
stacle was that  the  Federal  district courts in  the  South  (manned
as  they  largely  are  by  Eastland's  hand-picked  little  band  of
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone'a  Weekly,  March  22,1965
News  Censorship  and  Nuclear  Bombing  Now  Planned  for  Vietnam  . . .
Day  by  day  Johnson's  policy  in  Vietnam  becomes  mote  in-
distinguishable  from  Goldwater's.    If  it  ends  in  a  major  war,
as  seems  likely,  the   1964  elections  will  look  like  one  of   the
greatest  frauds   in  American  history.    The  U.S.  Army  Chief
of   Staff,   Gen.  Harold  K.  Johnson,  ended  his  one-week  visit
to  the  battlefront  "enormously  encouraged"  and  told  newsmen
in  Saigon  "Freedom   is  on  the  line  here"   (Washington  Star,
Mar.  12).    But  the  same  dispatch  said  that  one  of  the  sub-
jects  discussed  on  his  visit  was  "the  possibility  of   imposing
military  censorship   or   some  variant  of   this  on   news   corre-
spondents  serving  in  Vietnam."    For  four  years  the   public's
only  check  on  the  consistently  misleading  statements  of   our
high  brass   (like  the  French  before  them)   has  come  in  the
dispatches  of  hard-working  newsmen  on  the  scene.    Now  this
may  be  shut  off.
The  Penalty  for  Advocating  Peace
Gen.  Johnson's  statement  and  the  press  briefing  which  ac-
companied   it  were  in  accordance  with  the   policy   of-  leaking
unpleasant  news  out  in  advance  "without  attribution"   to  test
public  reaction.    But  few  papers  published   this  dispatch  in
full  and  even  fewer  stopped  to  comment  on  its  implications.
"Various  sources  close  to  the  Johnson  mission,"  the  AP  said,
"have  reported   that  items  under  study  included   commitment
of    U.S.  combat  units,  increased  bombing  of  North   Vietnam
and  even  the  selection  of   possible  targets  for   nuclear  bomb-
ing."     (Our  italics.)    With  such  plans  in  the  making,  this  is
a  bad  time  to  let  down  the  iron  curtain  of  military  censorship
around  Vietnam.     As  in  most  wars  to  make   some  place  or
other  safe  for  democracy,  an  early  move  is  to  get  rid  of  de-
mocracy's   inconveniences:   here   the   right   to   known,   there
the.   right   to   speak.     Though   we   are   supposed    to   be   de-
fending   South   Vietnam's   right   to   self-determination,   any
South  Vietnamese  who  tries  to  determine  his  country's  policy
for  himself  is  in  danger  unless  he  agrees  with  the  military.
A  harbinger  of  what  is  coming  appeared   in  a  UPI  dispatch
from   Saigon   (Washington   Daily   News,   March   15)   which
said  Vietnamese Army  officers  in  Danang  "planned  to  deport
three   leaders   of   a   Communist-backed   'peace'    movement."
New  Congo Revolt  Hushed  Up
"Leopolds ille,  the  Congo  (AP)—The  Congolese Army
has  clamped  a  news  blackout  on  the  northeastern  war
zone  after  one   of   its   battalions   there   announced  it
would  refuse  to  continue  to  fight  Congo  rebels.
"Military   sources  had  reported  yesterday   that   the
13th  Commando  Battalion  stationed  at   Bunia  was   re-
fusing   to   accompany  250   of   Prime   Minister  Moise
Tshombe's   English-speaking  white   mercenaries   on   a
northward   move  to   seal   the   Congo's   frontiers   with
Uganda  and  the  Sudan."
—Washington  Evening  Star, Mar.  10.
(In   dispatches  from  Saigon  peace  is  always  put  in   quotation
marks  and  anyone  who  wants  it  is  labelled   pro-Communist.)
The  UPI   said  "three  Vietnamese  professional   men  will   be
taken  over  North  Vietnamese  territory  in  a  plane  fitted  with
parachutes   and  pushed   out,"   an  order   since  cancelled   but  a
foretaste  of  the  future.
In  advance  of  formal  censorship,  the  military  are  already
beginning  to  impose  a  news  blackout.     Beverly  Deepe   pro-
vided  a  vivid  picture of  this  in  her  dispatch  to  the  New   York
Herald-Tribune   March   15  on  the  bombing  of  Tiger   Island.
An  Embassy  spokesman  said  certain  details  on  air  raids  such
as  the   approximate   number   of   planes   and   the   bases   from
which  they  came  would  no  longer  be given  out.    "He  said  the
new   policy,"   Miss  Deepe  cabled,   "was   made   necessary   for
military  security  reasons"  which  he  added,   "I   myself  do  not
understand."    The  spokesman  said  the  new  policy   originated
"in  a  six-page  compilation  of  security  messages  received   from
the  Pentagon."    Miss  Deepe  quoted  an  unnamed  U.S.   official
as  commenting,   "We   have  not   encountered   any   explanation
of  this that  makes any sense."  The  New  York    Herald-Tribune,
after  getting  Miss  Deepe's  dispatch,  phoned  the  Pentagon  for
an   explanation   and   inserted   this   lovely  example  of   typical
military  run-around.    "In  Washington,"  the   Herald-Tribune
reported,  "officials  said  they  had  no  knowledge  of  the  security
directive"  but   "they   defended   the  right   of   U.S.   officials   to
withhold   such  information,  however,  arguing  that  even   dis-
closing  the  reason  for  withholding  it  might  provide  the  enemy
Church's  Version  of  That  Apocryphal Story  About LBJ, Lippmann and Dams for  Idaho
"There  is  one  comment I  fee]  obliged  to  make  concerning
a  story  which  has  been  given  general  currency.   The  story
comes  in  two  versions,  both  of  which  are  too  pungent  to  be
resisted. ...  I  would  leave  the  story  unanswered,  except
that  both versions tend to  discredit  the  President.   The  first
version  was  published  in  the  New  York  Herald-Tribune  on
Sunday,  February  28,  1965,  and  reads:
' "Who'd  you  talk  to  before  giving  that  speech  [on  Viet-
nam]?"  the  President  wanted  to  know.   "Why,  Mr.  Presi-
dent,  I  had  a  long  talk  with  Walter  Lippmann," Church  re-
plied.    "Well,  Frank,"  the  President  shot  back,  "next   time
you  need a  dam in  Idaho, why  don't  you talk to  Lippmann."'
.     "The  second  version  appeared  in  the   March  12th  edition
of  Time  magazine.    It  reads:  'At  one  of  the  White  House
receptions,  Johnson  spotted  Church,  went  over  to  him  and
said:   "Frank,   you've   been   making  some   speeches   that
haven't  been  very  helpful."   Said  Church:  "Well,  Mr.  Presi-
dent,  if  you  read  the  speech  alL  the  way  through,  it  isn't
the  same  as  the  headline."    "The  headlines  are  all  I  read
and  all  anybody  reads.    When  you  were  in  trouble  out  in
your  state,  Frank  I  used  to  come  out  and  give  you  a  hand,
didn't  I?"    Answered  Church  defensively:  "Mr.  President,
what  I've been  saying  isn't  much different  from  what Walter
Lippmann  has  been  writing."   The  President  had  the  last
words.    "Walter Lippmann," he  said,  "is  a  fine  man.    I  ad-
mire  him.   Next  time  you're  in  trouble out  in  Idaho,  Frank,
you  ask  Walter to  come  help."   Church has  since  noticeably
modified  his  criticisms  of  U.S.  policy  in  Vietnam.'
"The  actual  facts  concerning  the  matter  were  given  by
Edward  P.  Morgan,  in  his  radio  broadcast  on  March  5th.
He  said:   'The  President   and  the  Senator  did  have  a  firm
and friendly encounter  on  the  subject  but  a  careful  check  of
White  House  and Senate  sources  reveals  that  no  such  angry
exchange  took  place,  but,  disturbingly  enough,  it   develops
that   one   high   administration   official    had   pointedly   en-
couraged  the  belief  that  it  did.'
"Let  me  add  that,  as  to  my  present  position  on Vietnam,
it  has  not  changed  in  any  way.   The  debate in  the  Senate  on
this  crucial question  isn't  over.   It  has  just  begun."
—Sen.  Frank   Church   (D.,  Idaho),  in  the  Senate,  Mar.  9.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  22,1965
... Day by Day Johnson's Policy  Becomes Indistinguishable from  Goldwater's
with  information."     The  chances  are  that  the  enemy  knows
mote  about  these  raids  than  we  do,  and  that  the  enemy  the
military   is   really  worried   about   informing   is   the   dratted
civilian  back  home.
Loss  of  Faith  in  The  Democratic  Party
The   U.S.   public  may  be  drugged   by  an  acquiescent  press
and  a  rubber  stamp  Congress  but  under  the  surface  there  is  a
growing   uneasiness.     The   latest   Gallup   poll    (New     York
Herald-Tribune,  March  14)  shows  that  while  45%  in  October
thought   the  Democrats   more  likely  than   the  Republicans  to
keep  us  out  of  war,  the  percentage  had  fallen  to  32%.     The
only  consolation  for  Democrats   is  that  the  number  who  had
faith  in  the  Republicans  has  also  fallen  in  that  period,  from
22%   to   20%.     We   wish   more   newspapers  would  try  out
on   their   readers    the   questions   which    the   San   Francisco
Chronicle  put  in  its  area.    These  questions,  unlike   Gallup's,
really  test  opinion  by  offering  a  wide  range  instead  of  simple
alternatives.     The   results   in   the   March   9   Chronicle   show
70%   thought   our  original  intervention  in  1954  unwise  even
though  53%   also  thought  the  result  by  now  would  have  been
a  Communist   takeover.     A  second   question,   on  what  to  do
now,   showed   only  14%   for  the   "whatever   it  takes  to   win"
policy  President   Johnson  is  pursuing.    There  were  24%   for
holding  the  line  against  widening  of  the  war,  53%  for  hand-
ing  the  problem   over  to  the  UN   and  54%   for  pulling   out
altogether.     To  the  question,  "Do  you  feel  it  essential  to  our
security  that  U.S.   armed  forces  remain  in  South   Vietnam?"
80%   answered   "No."      The   vote  was  82%   for   and   15%
against   negotiating   with   Communist  China   along   the   lines
urged  by  de  Gaulle   and  U  Thant.    The   Chronicle  said  this
last  percentage   was  exactly  like  that  of  a  recent  Gallup   poll
on  the  same   question.
Every   once   in   a   while   a   few   dispatches   come   through
which  really  open  a  glimpse  into  the  hell  that  this  war  is  for
the  South  Vietnamese.    Two  AP  stories  of  this  kind  we  saw
only   in   the  York,   Penna.,   Gazette   &  Daily    (March   11).
One  from  Saigon   said  there  are  estimated  to  be  more   than
20,000  homeless  children  in  South  Vietnam.    Many  of   them
live  by  roving  "in  small  bands  specializing  in  petty  thievery."
Feeble  Support  for  A  Feeble  Arms  Agency
The   Senate   last   week   reluctantly   approved  a   two
year,   $20  million  authorization for   the  Arms  Control
and  Disarmament  Agency  but  rejected  the  four   year,
$55  million  request  of  the  President.    The  debate  was
appalling.    It  is  true  that  the  agency  has  been  timid
and  unproductive  and  that  its   funds  have  become   a
boondoggle    for   cold   warrior   research    operations   in
Washington—"so-called  nonprofit  institutions organized
by  former  Government  and  military employees  of  high
rank,"   as   Senator   Ellender   called   them.     Yet   the
agency's   creation   four   years   ago   during   the   Berlin
crisis   at   least   represented  an  uneasiness   in   Congress
over  our  gigantic   military  budget  and  the   danger  of
world  holocaust.     Today  these  concerns  are  even  less
evident.     Despite   the   strenuous   efforts   of   Senators
Clark,  Morse,  Proxmire  and  Javits  and  the   increasing
possibility  of  a  full-scale  war  in  Asia,  only  38  Senators
supported   the   President    in   his   minute   step   toward
making  the  agency   more  independent.    "Perhaps   the
best  part  of  the  Arms  Control  Agency,"  said  Proxmire,
"is  that  it  is  so  intimately  and  directly  tied  to  our  de-
fense  operations.    It  is  not  an  agency  of  idealists  who
want   to  disarm  the   country."    Arguments  like  this,
and  there  were  many,  made  it   difficult   to  distinguish
the   liberal   position   from   that   of   Senator   Fulbright,
who  opposed  the  President's  request.    "No  matter how
desirable   the   goal   of   complete  and  general   disarma-
ment," he  said,  "I consider  it  to  be  such  a  remote  possi-
bility  as  to  be  almost  a  form  of  escapism."    Once  again
the   Senator  has  spelled   out  the   realities   he  does   so
little to  change.
The  other  was  an  interview  with  two  Lancaster  County,  Pa.,
servicemen  just  back  from  duty  in  Vietnam.    They  told  the
AP  civilian  conditions  were  "just  terrible"  but  "the   children
are  the   ones   that   really  get   you.    You  find   them   begging
everywhere.    They  eat  anything  they  can  get  hold  of."     One
of   the  soldiers  said  of   the   South   Vietnamese,  "They  don't
care.    They're  tired  of  the  war  and  the  way  they  live  is  just
terrible."   Were  the  question  put  to  a  vote  there  and  heie,  we
feel  sure  the  verdict  would  be  for  withdrawal  of  our  troops
and  a  negotiated  peace.   That's  why  there  will  be  less  democ-
racy  allowed  in  both  places  as the  war  proceeds  and  widens.
Long's  Truce  Agreement  With  Postoffice  An
It  is  a pity that  Senator  Edward Long  (D., Mo.) is  not  as
vigorous   about  curtailing  government  snooping  as  he  is  in
exposing  it.    This  is  the  conclusion  we  draw  from  his  truce
agreement   last   week  with  Postmaster   General Gronouski.
Long  repeatedly  had  asked  the  Post   Office  to  turn  over  to
his  Senate  investigating  committee the  24,000 names  of  per-
sons  who  have  been  subjected  to  mail  cover  surveillance  in
the  last  two  years.    A  mail  cover,  which  can  be  granted  at
the  request  of  any  law  enforcement  officer,   consists  of  re-
cording  names  and  addresses   on  a  person's   incoming  mail.
The  Post   Office   defends  it  as  a  device  for  tracking down
fugitives  and mail frauds,  but  it  has  been  used  for  less com-
mendable   purposes   such   as   spying   on  welfare  recipients
and  learning   the  identity  of  witnesses  for  the  defense   in
Federal  prosecutions.    Long  wanted  to  examine  the  list  of
names  as  a  prelude  to  corrective  legislation,  but  last  week
he  agreed  to  drop his  request  on  condition  that  the  Post  Of-
fice  tighten  its  own  regulations.
This  sets  a  poor  precedent  for  dealing  with  other  unco-
operative  agencies.    It  is  naive  to  think  that  law  enforce-
Anti-Climax  to  His  Snooping   Investigation
ment   officers,   without  any   statutory   guidelines,   will   give
the  same  concern  to   protecting  constitutional  rights  that
they  do  to  pursuing  criminals.    The  testimony  of  the  Chief
Postal   Inspector,  H.  B.  Montague,  is   revealing.    "I  don't
think  there  is  any  constitutional right  here,"  he  said  in  dis-
cussing   mail  covers  before   Long's   committee.    "We  are
[only]  talking  about  privacy."    When  asked  why  the  Post
Office  never  checked into requests  for  mail  covers,  he replied
that  "there  has  to  be  some  trust  and  mutual  understanding
among  law  enforcement   agencies   or  you  would  never   get
your  work  done.    We  have  confidence  in  these  agencies."
This  should  discourage  any  optimism  about  self-regulation.
What   is   needed   is   strict   legal   prohibitions,  and   soon.
Space  and missile  research  is  now  flooding  the  market  with
sophisticated   and   inexpensive   electronic   spying    devices.
The  demand  for  these  devices  from  federal  agencies  is  be-
coming  so  great  that  one manufacturer confessed  to  Senator
Long  that  he  cannot  produce them  fast  enough,  and has  dis-
continued  sales   promotion.  Long   will   have  support  if   he
meets  the  problem  head-on.  No  one  likes  to  be  spied   upon.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  SS, 1965
How  Long  Will  Johnson  Be  Blind  Abroad  to  What  He  Sees  At  Home?
(Continued  from  Page  One)
white  supremacists),  have   been  dragging   their   heels.     He
said  that  Selma's  Dallas  County  "dramatically  exemplifies  the
ineffectiveness  of  existing  legislation."    Soon  after  the  passage
of  the  I960  act,  the  Justice  Department  filed  suit  against  the
Dallas County  Board  of  Registrars.   "Four  years and five more
Federal  suits  later,"  Congressman  Resnick  said,  "effective  re-
lief  is yet to  be forthcoming,  and  the  first  voting  referee  is yet
to  be appointed.  . . .  Last  week a Federal  district  court  issued
its most  recent  order.   That order  tolerates  a situation  in  which
the  board  of  registration   is  open  only  2  days  each  month."
Resnick's  proposal   is  for  a  Federal  Voting  Registration  and
Elections   Commission   with   full   power   to   end   all   abuses
against  Negro  voting  in  the  South,  and  with  direct  access  for
enforcement  to  the  Courts  of  Appeals.    It  provides  the  best
standard  against  which  to  judge  the  bi-partisan  bill  promised
by  the  President.    Only  such  a  fresh  agency can  put  a  stop  to
the  endless   ingenuity   the  Smith's  lawyers  and   judges  have
shown  in  evading  the  intent  of   Congress.
The  Nazi-Style  Mystique  About  Wallace
This  is  more  than  a  legislative  problem.    The  full  enfran-
chisement  of  the  Negro  in  the  South  is a revolutionary change,
a  century  delayed  when  Reconstruction  ended.    Only  a system
of  Federal  registrars  can get  the  job  done,  and  those  registrars
will  have  to  be  protected  by  Federal  marshals  if  not  troops.
The  killings  in  die  South  only  reflect  the  murderous  hate  in
the  eyes  of  the  white  onlookers  as  Negroes  and  white  sym-
pathizers  parade  and  demonstrate.   The  fact  that  not  a  single
local  clergyman  joined  the  demonstrators  in  Selma  and  not
a  single  local  Church  opened  its  doors  to  them  last  Sunday
indicate  the  fury  in  the  area  at  the  prospect  of  losing  white
supremacy.   A  new  crop  of  politicians,  a  new  and  polite  kind
of  Sheriff,  are  the  minimum  to  be  expected  from  Negro  vot-
ing.    The  maximum is the  revival of  that  Southern  progressiv-
ism  killed  off  when  the  Populist  movement  was  wrecked  by
race  prejudice.     The   opposing   forces   will   not   take   these
changes  lightly.    Alabama's  state  police  and   Sheriff   Clark's
posses  are  the  storm  troopers  of  an  American  Fascism.    Wal-
lace  is  their  Fuehrer.    "We  will  follow  him  because  we  be-
Who'd  Have  Guessed  It  In  Alabama?
"When  asked  why  a  large  force  of  Federal  marshals
had  not  been  dispatched  to  Selma,  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral  said  that  this  would  have  been  possible  only  if  the
Government  had  had  three  or  four  days  notice.  .  .  .
'We had no reason  to believe  that  local  law  enforcement
officials  would  set  upon non-violent  and peaceful  citizens
in  the  way  in  which they  did.' he said."
—New  York  Times, Afar. 12.
lieve,"  so  read  the  official   inaugural  program  when  Wallace
became  Governor  on  Jan.   13,  1963.     "We   believe  stronger
than   the   Communists   or   the   pseudo-liberals,   or   the   mon-
grelizers,  or  the  commanders of  crushing  military  might.    We
believe  God  has  given  us  a  man—and  we  believe."    This
mystique  reads  as  if  translated  from  German,  and  it  indicates
the  ultimate  stakes.    The  fight  to  free  the  Negro  is  also  a
fight  to  free  the  South  and  the  country from  an  un-American,
racist  and  authoritarian  ideology.    The  Negro  is  not  the  only
one  intimidated  in  Alabama,  just  as the  Jew was  not  the  only
one  intimidated  in  Germany.
We  found  it  unpleasant  when  the  President  last  night  tried
to  equate  the  civil  rights  struggle  here  with  his  war  in  Viet-
nam.    Wallace  in  his  Face  The  Nation  appearance  last  Sun-
day  took  the  same  attitude  toward  the  former  that  President
Johnson  does  toward  the  latter.    For  Wallace  the  civil  rights
struggle  is  simply  a  Communist plot,  and  the  Southern  Negro
would  acquiesce  in  inferiority  if  only  the  North  would  with-
draw  its  agitators  and  let  its  Southern  neighbors  alone.    Wal-
lace,  like  the  State  Department  in  its  recent White  Paper  on
Vietnam,  could  supply  the  names of  Northern  agitators  caught
infiltrating  the  South  and  no  doubt  prove  that  some  of  them
are  Communists  of  one kind  or  another.    If  the  South  had  an
air  fleet,  it  could  threaten  to  bomb  the  North  unless  it  called
off   this  covert  aggression.     Can  the  President   not   see  that
"wars  of  liberation"  in  Vietnam  or  elsewhere  are  not  artificial
products   of   alien   "subversion"   but   the   reflection  of   real
grievances  which  must  be  corrected  if  there  is  to  be  peace?
How  long  will  he  remain  blind  abroad  to  what  he  sees  so
clearly  at  home?                                                          March  16
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —  Send A  Stamped  Self-Addressed Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   .........................................JSone............SUte....................
3/22/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(tfo)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted  Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement   wished  D
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  in
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during   July   and  August  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.W.,   Washington,   D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published   and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;    16  in   Canada:    $10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED