I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965may03.pdf

============================================================

The  Supreme  Court  and  Communist  Fronts')  P.  4
The  Two  Faces  of  Lyndon  Johnson
"When  President  Johnson  finished  reading  a  private pre-
view  of  last  week's  [Johns  Hopkins]  Vietnam  speech  to  a
delegation  of  the  liberal Americans for  Democratic Action,
his  audience  burst  forth  into  spontaneous  applause ... he
deliberately  left  the  impression  with  the  ADA'ers  that  he
was  a  Dove  surrounded  by  Hawks ...  he  remarked  sor-
rowfully   that   he   only   hoped  Secretary   of   State   Busk,
Secretary  of  Defense  McNamara  and Presidential  Assistant
McGeorge   Bundy   would   let   him   make   this   speech   in
public."
—Evans and Novack, N.Y.  Herald-Tribune,  April H.
"Lyndon  gibes  at the ADA.   After  •  lengthy  confab  with
the  ultra-liberal group, the President  described it  as  'totally
impractical' to  the  next meeting on his  agenda,  the National
Security  Council  [which  of  course includes'Rusk,  McNamara •
and  McGeorge  Bundy].    To  prove  it,   Lyndon rummaged
through  trash baskets to find notes  the ADA  members wrote
each  other—picking  out  scraps,  reading  and  laughing."
—Washington  Wire:  Wall  Street  Journal,  April  83.
LBJ's  fun  at  the  expense  of  the  ADA has  been   shared
widely  here.   One high  official  related  it  gleefully  to  a  din-
ner  partner  without  realizing she was a  top  ADA'er's  wife!
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO. 17
MAY  3,  1965WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Our  Secretary  of  State and  the  Academic  Community
The   war  to  make  Southeast   Asia  safe   for   democracy  is
rapidly  turning  into  a  war  to  make  the  United  States  unsafe
for  free  discussion  of  foreign  policy.    Secretary  Rusk  picked
a  meeting  of  the  American  Society  of   International   Law  to
deliver  an  attack  on  critics  in  the  academic  community.  That
speech  and  the  follow-up  press  conferences  by  Secretary  Mc-
Namara  and  the  President  have  the  earmarks  of  a  campaign
to  steamroller  criticism.   The  White  House  is  mobilizing  its
satellite  commentators  to  make  dissent  from  its  war  policies
seem  aid  and  comfort  to  the  enemy.    Instead  of  welcoming
the  campus  teach-ins  as  a  means  of  stirring  wider  participa-
tion  in  the  formulation  of  policy,  the  Administration  is  as
anxious  to  shut  off  debate  in  the  colleges  as  in  the  Congress.
Secretary  Rusk  told  the  International   Lawyers  he   wondered
"at  the  gullibility  of  educated  men"  and  their  "stubborn  dis-
regard  of  plain   facts."
Rusk's  Fairy  Tales
Never  have  plainer  facts  been  more  stubbornly  disregarded
than  by Rusk, McNamara  and  Johnson  since  Johnson  in   1961
called  Diem   "the   Churchill  of  Asia"  and  McNamara  spon-
sored  the  Taylor-Staley  counter-insurgency  plan  that  same year
as  a  way to  bring  the  Viet  Cong  under  control  in  18 months!
A  steady  retreat  from  reality  has  accompanied  the  spread  of
the  rebellion.    Only  two  years  ago  Secretary  Rusk  (in   his
April  22,  1963,  speech  to  the  Economic  Club  in  New  York)
was  telling  us  that  "the   strategic  hamlet  program  is  produc-
ing  excellent  results."    The  statement  has  since  proven  ludi-
crously  false.    In  that  same  speech,  only  a  few  months  before
an  exasperated  people  poured  happily  into  the  streets  to  cele-
brate  Diem's  overthrow,  Rusk  was  still  trying  to  tell  us  that
South  Vietnam  under  the  dictator  was  showing  "steady  move-
ment   toward   a   constitutional   system   resting   upon   popular
consent"
It  is  hard  to  match  Rusk's  record  for  "stubborn   disregard
of  plain  facts."    He  added  to  it  in  his  speech  to  the  inter-
national  lawyers.   "There  is  no  evidence,"   he  said,  "that  the
5  *
How  The  White House  Now
Reviews  Book Reviews
LBJ's  eye  on  the  press  seems  to  extend  even  to  book
reviews.   The editors of  the  New  York  Review of Books
received  a  White  House  telephone  call   from   Richard
Goodwin,  a  presidential  speech-writer,  objecting to  I.  F.
Stone's  review  in  its  April  22  issue  of  two  books  on
Vietnam,  one  by  David  Halberstam,  the  other  by Mal-
colm  W. Browne.   When  the  editors  said  they  would  be
glad  to  publish  a  letter from  Goodwin  or any  other Ad-
ministration  spokesman  taking  issue  with  the  review,
Goodwin  replied that  this  would  be  impractical  because
such  a  letter  would  have  to  be  cleared  by  too  many
hands.    Goodwin  said  Stone  was  a-fine-fellow-but  sug-
gesting  that next  time there were books  on  Vietnam  to
be  reviewed, why  not  give  them  to  Joseph  Alsop!
Viet   Cong  has  any  significant  popular   following   in   South
Vietnam."    This  sets  a  new  high  in  overstatement.    We  call
attention  to  the  two most  recent  witnesses  to  the contrary:  one
is  a  comprehensive  account  in  Figaro  Utter aire   (March  3),
(see  box  at  the  bottom  of  p.  3),  the  other  is  Georges   Chaf-
fard's  account  in  the  Paris  L'Express   (April  25)  of  his  recent
visit  to  areas  under  Viet  Cong  control.    When  M.  Chafiard
in  the  first  installment  of  his  series  (L'Express,  April  11)  de-
scribed   tile   serious   damage   done   to   guerrilla   supply   and
morale  by  U.S.  bombings,  bis  report   wa»  welcomed   in  our
press,   among  others  by  Joseph   Alsop.     But  nobody   quotes
M.  Chaflfard's  description  in  the  third  installment  (April  25)
of  the  "harmonious"   relations  he  says  have  long  existed  be-
tween  the  guerrillas  and  the  people,  and  of  the  schools  and
hospitals  they  operate  in  Viet  Cong  territory.   Nor  does  any-
one  quote  his  account  of  how  the  rebellion  originated   in  the
effort  by  Diem  to  take  the  land  back  from  the  peasants  and
in  the  persecution  by  Diem  of  Viet  Minh  veterans  after   1954
in  violation  of  the  Geneva  accords.    "Most  of  the   regular
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May S, 1965
units  of  the  Front,"  M.  Chaffard  writes,  "are  made  up  today
of  relatives  of  the  victims  of  the  Diemist  repression."  *
Disguising  Lawlessness  As Law
Mr.   Rusk's  discussion   of   international   law   matched   his
history.    "Every  small  state,"  he  said,  "has  a  right  to  be  un-
molested  by  its  neighbors  even  though  it  is  within  reach  of
a  great  power."     This  will  add  to  the  Secretary's  fame  as  a
humorist  in  Guatemala  and  Cuba.    In  another  notable   pas-
sage,  Secretary  Rusk  said  "our   assistance"   to  South  Vietnam
"now   encompasses  the  bombing  of  North   Vietnam."   Never
was  a  more   dubious  legal   proposition   more   swiftly   passed
over.    Exactly  one  year  ago,  when  the  British,  fighting  anti-
British   rebels   in   Aden,   struck   across   the   border   into   the
"privileged   sanctuary"  in  Yemen,  Adlai  Stevenson  told  the
Security  Council   the   U.S.   had   repeatedly   expressed   its  em-
phatic  disapproval  of   "retaliatory   raids  wherever  they  occur
and  by  whomever  they  are  committed."     Similarly  when  the
French   in   1958   struck  across  the  Algerian  border  into   the
Tunisian  camps  where  the  Algerian  rebels  rested  and  trained,
Senators   Kennedy,   Humphrey,   Morse   and   Knowland   de-
nounced  the  reprisal  raid  as  a  violation  of  international   law
and  Eisenhower  warned  the  French  we  would  be  unable  to
defend  such  action  before  the  Security  Council.    It  is  a  pity
no   one   arose   in   that   respectable   audience  of   international
lawyers  to  quote  back  at  Rusk  the  sardonic  summation  on  the
subject   to  be  found   in  Schwarzenberger's  Manual  of   Inter-
national  Law.    It  says  "military  reprisals  are  open  only  to  the
strong  against  the  weak."     If  Hanoi  had  an  air  fleet  and  a
navy  to  match  ours,  we  would  never  dare  do  what  we  are
* Similarly   no  one   else   quoted   M.  Chaffard   when   in   Le
Monde   (Aug.   24,  1963)   he  reported  a  clandestine  interview
with  a  National  Liberation  Front  leader  in  Saigon  who  said
it  did  not  wish  to  exchange  "one   dictatorship  for  another",
i.e.  Diem's  for  Ho's   but  to  establish  a  democratic  regime  in
the  South   (see   our  Weekly,  Oct.   28,  1963).    Nor  after  the
Tonkin  Bay  reprisal  raids  did anyone  else  in  this  country  cite
M.  Chaffard'g  account  in  Le  Monde  (Aug.   7,  1964)   of  how  the
U.S.   began  to  train  commandoes  and  infiltrators  for  attack
upon  the  North  in  1957,  'three  years  before  the  rebellion  in
the  South  was  proclaimed  (see   this  Weekly,  Aug.   24,  1964).
We  challenge  M.  Chaffard's   new  admirers  to  discuss  these
earlier  revelations.
Destroying  Bridges and Building  Hate
"It  is  difficult  for  me  to  understand  what  our  Armed
Forces,   our   Defense   Department,   and  our   executive
branch  are  thinking  of  when  they  send  200  planes  to
blow  up  a  bridge.    Is  it  simply  braggadoccio,  our  way
of  saying  this  is  what  we  are  doing  as  an  example,  and
it  is  nothing  at  all  to  what  we  will  do if  those  people  of
North  Vietnam  do not  yield?    Those  people  over  there,
I  suppose,  are  not  in  a  mood   to  negotiate  when  they
see  everything  they   have   worked   for  being  blown  to
pieces  by  a  huge  air  fleet.  Instead  of  capitulating,  they
seem  to be consumed by a  greater hatred  for  the  United
States.    I  realize  there  is  wrong   on  both  sides.   Who
started  this  trend  toward  human  catastrophe  will  prob-
ably   always  be  debatable.    Whether  the   North  Viet-
namese   or   the   South   Vietnamese   or   no  Vietnamese
started  it  is  not  a  question  I  can  answer.    However,  I
believe  it  is  plainly  evident  now  that  unless  this   con-
flict is  stopped, whatever history  there  will be left  to re-
cord  will  show  a  very  black  page."  (Applause)
—Aiken  (B., Vt.), in the Senate, April  SI.
doing.    This  is why we  look  like  a  big  bully  to  Asia.
The  bombings  confessed  the  failure  after  four  years  of  our
effort  to  win  the  war  in  South  Vietnam  by  counter-insurgency.
The  McNamara  press  conference confessed  the  failure  of  the
bombings  in  North  Vietnam  to  force  Hanoi  to  "call  off"  the
war  (in  accordance  with  our  kitchen  spigot  theory  of  the  re-
bellion)   or  at  least  to  stop  the  flow  of  men  and  supplies;
McNamara  claims  infiltration  has  been  stepped  up.    The  Sec-
retary  made  much  of  the  fact  that  by  destroying  bridges  and
roads  we  were  forcing  the  Viets  to  move  from  rail  to  road
and  from  road  transport  to  their  feet.    But  it  was  on  their
feet  that  the  Viet  Minh  defeated  the  French  as it  was on  their
feet,  despite  a  similar  control   of   the  air  and   a  far   greater
destruction  of  highways  and  bridges,  that  the  Chinese   "volun-
teers"   forced  us  back  to  the   38th  Parallel   in  Korea.     Mc-
Namara's   record   for   clairvoyance  is  as  poor  as  Rusk's.     In
October,  1963,  he  told  the  country  that  everything  was  going
so  well   in   South   Vietnam  that   1,000   American    "advisers"
would  be  withdrawn  by  the   end   of  the   year  and   the  war
would  be  brought  under  control  by   1965.
There  is  nothing  left  now  but  to  take  over  the  war  with
our  own  combat  troops,   but  in  this  we  are  encountering  un-
The  Torture  We  Permit  and  the  International  Law  We  Violate  in  South  Vietnam
"The  atrocities  are  not  committed  only  by  the  Communist
forces. ... In one known  case,  two Viet  Cong  prisoners  were
interrogated  on  a  plane  flying  toward  Saigon.   The  first  re-
fused  to  answer  questions  and  was  thrown   out  of  the   air-
plane  at  3,000  feet.    The  second  immediately  answered  all
the  questions.   But he,  too,  was  thrown  out.  .  .  . One of  the
most  infamous  methods  of  torture  used  by  the  government
is   partial   electrocution—or   'frying*   as   one   U.S.    adviser
called  it.  ...    Sometimes  the wires  are attached  to the male
genital  organs,  or  to  the  breasts  of  a  Viet   Cong  woman
prisoner.  .  .  .  Other  techniques,  usually  designed  to  force
onlooking  prisoners  to  talk,  involve  cutting  off  the  fingers,
ears,   fingernails   or  sexual   organs   of   another   prisoner.
Sometimes  a  string  of  ears  decorates  the  wall  of  a  govern-
ment   military  installation."
—Beverly  Deepe  in  Saigon  to  NY  Herald  Trib.  April  25.
"This  conduct   [torture]  has  been  accepted  as  a  matter
of  course  in  the  United  States.    May I  point  out  that  it  is
in  direct  violation  of  provisions  of  the   1949   Geneva  Pris-
oner-of-War   Convention   which   has   been   ratified    or   ad-
hered  to  by  Vietnam   (1953),  the  USSR  (1954),  the  United
States  (1955),  Communist  China   (1956)  and  the  Viet   Minh
(1957),  presumably  the  countries  most  directly   concerned.
(Actually,  by  June   1964,   103  countries  had  agreed  to  be
bound  by this Convention.)
"While  the  1949  Convention  is  directed  primarily  towards
the  regulation  of  international  warfare  and  the  conflict  in
Viet  Nam is,  at  least  theoretically,  a  civil  war,  there  is  one
article  of  the  Convention  which  relates  exclusively  to  civil
wars;  and  it  specifically   prohibits,  with  respect  to  prison-
ers  of  war,  'violence  to  life  and  person,  in  particular  mur-
der  of  all  kinds,  mutilation,  cruel  treatment  and  torture'."
—Howard   S.  Levie,  Colonel    UJS.A.   (Ret.),  and  Assoe.
Prof,  of  Law,  St.  Louis  University  Law  School, in  a letter  to
the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch,  April  9.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 3,1965
expected  resistance.   The  government  in  Saigon  seems  to  be
opposing  our  wish  to  put  U.S.  combat  troops  into  the  country.
Jack  Foisie of  the  Los  Angeles  Times  foreign  service reported
(Washington   Post,  April  25)   that  Ambassador   Taylor   since
his  return  from   the   Honolulu   conference  had   been  to  see
Prime  Minister  Quat  twice  about  the  introduction  of  Amer-
ican   ground   forces.     Dr.   Quat   is   reported   to   be  worried
"about  the  internal reaction to  the  presence  of  more  and  more
Americans"  and   to  feel  that  the   sending   of   infantry   units
"smacks   of   permanency,  of   occupation."     Secretaries  Rusk
and   McNamara   might   fruitfully    study   the   remark   Foisie
quotes  from  an  American  official  in  Saigon  who  said,  "Wash-
ington  can't  understand  Quat's  attitude,  but  we  can.    He  still
thinks  of  this  as  a  civil  war—Vietnamese  against   Vietnamese
—and  he  hates  to think  of  the  effect  of  American involvement
since  it  just  adds  to  the  painful hatreds  being  created  between
North  and  South  Vietnamese."    Dr.  Quat  is  himself  a North
Vietnamese,  though  one  of  the  bitterly  anti-Communist  refu-
gees  from  that  area.    Beverly  Deepe   from   Saigon  the  same
day  (New   York   Herald-Tribune,   April  "25)   reported   "some
of   the   Northern-born   anti-Communists   openly   resent   their
homeland  being  bombed."    She  said  "Vietnamese  of  all  poli-
tical  colors  believe  the  American  military  leaders  are  moving
closer  and  closer  to  the  French  colonial  position  militarily—
thus  incurring  all  the  disadvantages  psychologically  of   being
tabbed  as  colonialists,  but  with  none  of  the  colonialists'   ad-
vantages  of  political  control."
Will  We  Override  Saigon?
This  is  clearly  evident  in  the  troop   question.     Dr.   Quat
"is  known  to  feel"   Jack  Langguth  reported  from   Saigon  to
the  New  York  Times  April  25  that  "the  landing  of  a  large
number  of  infantrymen  would   raise  unpleasant    recollections
of  the  French  colonial  war."    But  Langguth  added  significant-
ly,  "his  opposition  is  not  believed  to  rule  out  further  consid-
eration  of  the  matter."     In  any  showdown,  the  U.S.  and  not
Dr.  Quat  will  make  the  decision,  though   at  the  expense  of
increased  disaffection  in  Saigon.  "Strong  combat  troops  would
be  introduced  into  South  Vietnam,"  the  New  York  Times  re-
ported  from  Washington  that  same  day  on  the  basis  of  one
of  those  "deep  backgrounders"  for  the  favored  few,  "to  pre-
vent  the  United   States'  expulsion   from  the  country."     Does
this  also  apply  if  the  Saigon  government  were  to  initiate  talks
with  the  rebels  for  a  cease-fire  and  ask  the  U.S.  to'  leave?    A
The  Senate and  the  CIA
The  director  of  the  Central   Intelligence  Agency  is
the  President's  eyes  and ears abroad.   He presides  over
the  U.S.  Intelligence Board which coordinates the  work
of  the  government's  12  different  intelligence  agencies,
military  and  civilian.   This  huge  apparatus  has  often
been  disastrously  wrong,  as  in  the  Bay  of  Pigs  affair.
Poor   intelligence   has   been   a   prime  cause   of    U.S.
troubles in Vietnam; two  recent books by  reporters who
served  there,  the  New  York  Times'  David  Halberstam
and  the  AP's  Malcolm  W.  Browne  (see   my  review  in
the  New  York  Review  of  Books,  April  22)  show  that
the  intelligence  chiefs  engaged  in  deliberate  self-delu-
sion,  rejecting  unfavorable  reports  from  their  own  men
in  the   field.   Yet  a  new  CIA  chief  has  just  been con-
firmed  by  the  Senate  without  one  word  of  discussion.
We  know  very little of  Vice Admiral Wm.  Francis  Ra-
born,  Jr.,  ret.; he  had  an  honorable record in  the  Navy;
he  is  a  gunnery expert;  he  helped  develop  the  Polaris
missile;  he  went  to  work  after  retirement  for  Aerojet
General  Corp.,  part  of  the  military-industrial complex.
What  a  man  sees  is  affected  by  the  lenses  of  his  pre-
conceptions.   Yet  the  top intelligence  job  in  the  govern-
ment  is  filled  as  if  it  were a  routine  postraastership  in
Oshkosh.   What's  the  good of  Senate  confirmation when
it's  meaningless?
move  of  this  kind  seems  to  be  feared  by  Americans  arid  bit-
ter-enders  in  South  Vietnam.    Miss  Deepe  reports  them  wor-
ried  about  the  possibility  of  pro-neutralist  trends  in  the  elec-
tions  called  for  the  city  and  provincial  capitals  May  30.    The
prospect  of  free  elections  seems  always  to  fill  the  U.S.  with
anxiety.    The  Acting  Chief  of  State  also  appealed  last  week
for   election   of   a  National   Congress,   but   it   is  feared   this
could   "easily  be  penetrated   by  pro-Communist   and   pro-neu-
tralist  elements,"  possibly  paving  the  way  for   peace.    This
reappearance   of   democratic  institutions  in  which   a   popular
will  for  peace  may  express  itself  is  regarded  by  our  people  in
Saigon   (Miss   Deepe  writes)   as  part   of   an  "invisible,  un-
armed  subversive  war ...  far  more  significant  than  the  vio-
lent,  bloody  guerrilla  war in  the  countryside."    The  self-deter-
mination  Rusk  claims  to  be  defending   in  South  Vietnam   is
what  we  most  fear.    The  refugees  streaming  into  the   cities
from  the  villages  we  are  destroying  in  our  all-out  air  warfare
against  the  rebels  are  hardly  likely  to  favor  a  further  step-up
in  American  intervention.    We  fear  the  popular  will  in  Viet-
nam  and  we  fear  it  at  home.                                      April   26
A  Conservative  French  Newspaperman  on  The  National Liberation  Front's  Appeal
"The  [South]  Vietnamese .  . .  passionately  want  .  .  . not
to  be  subjected to  the  North  Vietnamese  government  which
they  detest. . . . The program of the  [National  Liberation]
Front  could not  be  more reassuring.   To  read it,  it  is  for  a
sort  of  liberal  Socialist  government.   It  is  precise  in  pro-
viding  for  the  retention  of  the  right  to  private property,
that  private  industry will be encouraged. ...  In foreign af-
fairs,  diplomatic  relations  will  be  established  with  all  coun-
tries  'without  distinction  as to political system.'... It  is the
same  as  saying  that  Vietnam  will be  a  friend of  the  United
States.   Lastly,  the  separate  existence  of  South Vietnam  is
promised.  .  .  .  All  observers  agree  on  one  point:  The pro-
gram  and the  conduct of  the  National  Liberation Front have
won  it  the  adherence,  enthusiastic   or  resigned,  of  a  very
large  part  of  the  Vietnamese  population.   This  is  a  fact
which  becomes  particularly clear  when  one  interviews mid-
dle  class  and  intellectual   people  in  Saigon.    One  of  them
summarizes  the  problem in this way:  'We  have  a  choice be-
tween  two  solutions:  to  wage  an  endless  war  while  every
day  placing  ourselves  more at  the  mercy  of  the  Americans,
and without any  guarantees  that  this  will  end in  a cleancut
victory,  or  categorically  to  demand  the  end  of  the  war  and
trust  to  the  good faith  of  the  National Liberation  Front and
to  their  willingness  to  carry  out  a  prograir  which to  us  ap-
pears acceptable....'
"One  thing  at   least  is  sure:  the  fiction  that  American
military  power has  been  introduced upon  demand of  a  peo-
ple  fighting  Communism  no  longer  holds  today."
—Max  Clos, from  Saigon  in  Le Figaro  Litteraire,  March
3,  full  text  in  Congressional Record  April   SI   p.  7860.
6   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  May S, 1965
Radicals  Can  Be  Harassed  Endlessly,   But  Only  in  Federal   Tribunals
The  Supreme  Court  and  Communist  "Fronts": A  Contradiction
Just  below  the  surface  there  is  a  contradiction   between  the
Supreme  Court's  broad  ruling  in  favor  of  the  Southern  Con-
ference  Educational  Fund  against  the  State  of  Louisiana  and
its  narrow  ruling  in  favor  of  two  alleged   Communist  fronts,
the  American  Committee  for  the  Protection   of  the   Foreign
Born  and  the  Veterans  of  the  Abraham  Lincoln  Brigade.  The
SCEF  case  involves  the  witch  hunt  in  a  Southern  State.    The
two  "front"   cases  involve  the  witch  hunt  on  a  national  level.
The  Court  is  willing  to  interfere  with  the  former  but  loath
to act against  the  latter.
A  Compliment  Thoreau  Deserves
In  Louisiana,  where  the  civil  rights  movement  is  regarded
as  a  Communist  plot,  the  State  has  adopted   replicas  of  the
witch-hunting  mechanisms  established  earlier  in   Washington.
The  State  has  a  Committee  on  Un-American  Activities.    It
also  has  a  Subversive  Activities  and  Communist  Control  Law
and  a  Communist  Propaganda  Control  Law.    Under  the  lat-
ter,  the  police  were  empowered  in  a raid  on  the  SCEF to  seize
Thoreau's  Journal  among  other  subversive  literature,   a  com-
pliment  the  philosopher  of  Walden  Pond  would  have enjoyed.
The  two  State  laws  are  modelled  after  the  Internal  Security
Act  which  Congress  passed  over  Truman's  veto  in  1950  dur-
ing  the  anti-Communist  hysteria  which  marked  the   Korean
War.    The  State  laws,  like  the  Federal,  provide  for  the  regis-
tration  of  "subversive"   organizations  under  conditions  which
make  their  survival  impossible.    Three  officials  of  the  SCEF,
including  its  respected  secretary,  James  A.  Dombrowski,  were
indicted  for  failure  to  register.    Without  waiting  for  the  out-
come in  the  State  courts,  the  Supreme  Court,  speaking  through
Mr.  Justice  Brennan,  has  enjoined  prosecution  as  in   conflict
with  the  First  Amendment.
This  took  some  tricky  legal  footwork.    Mr.  Justice  Harlan
(with  Mr.  Justice  Clark)  dissented.    They  thought  the  Court
ought  to  wait  and  see what  the  State  courts  did.    They  noted
ironically  that  the  history  of  the  Smith  Act  in  the   Federal
courts  hardly  bears  out  the  implication  that  they  are  more
trustworthy  than  State  tribunals  in  enforcing  the  First  Amend-
Mr.  Justice  Black  Protests
"The  Subversive  Activities  Control  Act,  on  which  the
Government's  case  here  rests,  violates a  number  of  pro-
visions  of  our  Constitution  and  Bill  of  Rights.    I  think
that  among  other  things  the  Act  is  a  bill  of  attainder;
that  it  imposes  cruel,  unusual  and  savage  punishments
for   thought,   speech,  writing,   petition   and  assembly;
and  that  it  stigmatizes  people  for  their  beliefs,  associa-
tions  and  views   about   politics,  law   and   government.
The  Act  has  borrowed  the  worst  features  of  old  laws
intended  to put shackles on the  minds  and bodies of  men,
to  make  them  confess  to  crime,  to  make  them  miserable
while  in  this  country,  and  to  make  it  a  crime  even  to
attempt  to  get  out of  it.   It is  difficult  to find laws more
thought-stifling  than  this  one  even  in  countries  consid-
ered  the  most  benighted.    Previous  efforts  to  have  this
Court  pass  on  the  constitutionality   of  the  various  pro-
visions  of   this   freedom-crushing   law  have   met   with
frustration  on one  excuse  or  another.    I  protest  against
following  this course again."
—Mr.  Justice  Black  dissenting  in  Committee for  Pro-
tection of  the  Foreign Born  and  Veterans  of  the  Lincoln
Brigade  V.  SACB.
ment.
The  majority,  however,  felt  that  the  Louisiana  defendants
should  not  be  left  at  the  mercy  of  lengthy  State  proceedings
calculated  to  inhibit  First  Amendment  rights  even  though  ulti-
mately  unsuccessful.    By  the  same  considerations,  the  Court
should  have  ruled  differently  in  the  two  "Front"  cases.    The
Protection  of  the  Foreign  Born  and  the  Veterans organizations
have  been  subjected  to  harassment  for  years  by  the  Federal
authorities  for  failure  to  register  as  subversive.   No  criminal
conduct  is  alleged  against  either.    Both  are  self-help  associa-
tions  of  aging  radicals.    The  Veterans  are  a  remnant  of  those
brave  young  men  who  fought  against  Fascism  in  Spain.   But
instead   of   throwing   these   disgraceful   prosecutions   out   as
clearly  in   violation   of   the   First   Amendment,  the   majority
timidly  remands  them—after   12  years  of  litigation!—to  an-
other   turn   through   the  judicial  wringer.     Douglas,   Harlan
and  Black  protested  this  evasion  in vain.
We'll  Be Clod to Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
The  1964  Index  It  Ready—You  Can  Have  One  Free  If  You  Send  a  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Na
Street   .......................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
B/8/68
For  the  enclosed  f 5  aend  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name ..............................................................................
Street  ........................................................................................
City   .........................................JZone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    FlftUt
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington,  D. C  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December  and  the  first  week  in
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  Independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  L  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   15  in   the  U.S.:   $6   in   Canada;   (10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
SIS  to  Europe;   $20  to  bract.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED