I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965mar01.pdf

============================================================

From  the Senate Debate  Over LBJ's  Widening  War,  Pps. 2-3
Conventional?    Anti-Personnel?    The  Pentagon's  Soap-Ad  Semantics  in  Vietnam
"Saigon—The  U.S.  is  assembling  in  South  Vietnam a va-
riety  of  what  are  described  as  'sophisticated'  conventional
weapons.  .  .  .  One of  these,  an  anti-personnel  bomb  called
Lazy  Dog,  has  already  been  used.   It  consists  of  a  canister
of   fluted,  razor-sharp  pieces  of   very   hard  steel.     In  the
words  of  one  American,  it  is  guaranteed  'to  kill  every liv-
ing  thing  above  ground  within  a  city  block.'    These  bombs
were  used  against   suspected  concentrations  of  Viet  Cong
Communist  rebels  which  last  week  inflicted  heavy  losses on
Government  troops  in  Bin  Dinh  province  of  South Vietnam.
They  will  be  used  in  attacks  on  North  Vietnam." .
—Frank  Robertson  in  London  Daily  Telegraph, Feb. 19.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  8MARCH  1,  1965
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
What  McNamara's  Computers  Refuse  to See
In  one  sense  there  was  no  news  in  Secretary  McNamara's
annual  report  the  other  day  on  the  new  defense  budget  and
our  military posture.    Everyone knows  that  nuclear war  would
be  disastrous.    But  the  fact  seems  to  be  stored   away  in  the
back  of  our  minds  like  the  population  of  Ceylon  or  the  date
of  the  Battle  of  Waterloo,  an  item  for  the  World  Almanac
rather  than  a  new  reality  never  to  be  lost  sight  of.    The  very
day  McNamara  made  his  report  to  the  House  Armed  Services
Committee,   Senator   Dirksen   was   marshalling   the   Senate's
Republicans  into  martial  array  behind  a  tough  policy  in  Asia,
with  the  high  rhetoric  of  a  small  boy  reciting  the  Charge  of
the  Light  Brigade.    We  thought  the  last  election  reminded
the  Republicans  that  McKinley  was  dead.    Now  we  find  they
—and  a  lot  of  Democrats,  too—don't  realize the  horse  cavalry
has  passed  away.
The  New  Arithmetic  of  Death
Neither  has  the  New  Fact  registered  on  McNamara  either.
He  presented  complex  projections, computer style, showing  that
with  an  expenditure  of  $25  billions  by  1970  he  could  save
30 million  lives  in a  nuclear  war.   Neither  he  nor  anyone else
rose  to  suggest  that  we  could   save  several  hundred   million
lives at  far  less  cost  by adjusting  our  diplomacy  and  our  think-
ing  to  the  reality  of  what  a  nuclear  war  would  mean.    The
figures  McNam'ara  presented   stupefy  the  imagination:  an  at-
tack  on  our  urban  centers  would  kill  149 million  people*  and
destroy  three-fourths  of  our  productive  capacity.   If  the  enemy
gave  us  an  hour's   leeway  between  a  first  attack  on  missile
bases  and  a  second  attack  on  urban  centers,  which  McNamara
thinks  unlikely,  we  could  reduce  the  number  of  our  dead  to
122  million.    What  should  be  the  most  sobering  news  of  all
is  McNamara's  testimony  that  "there  is  no  defense  program,"
however  expensive  and  elaborate,  "which  could  reduce  fatali-
ties  to  a  level  much  below  80  million."
To  any  reasonable  human  being  this  means  that  we  should
no  more risk  resorting  to nuclear war than to injecting  ourselves
and  our  children  with  the  bubonic  plague.    But  having  told
us  how  catastrophic  nuclear  war  would  be,  McNamara  turns
around  and  tells  us  we  have-no  alternative  to  pursuing   the
war  in  Vietnam.    "Considering  the  great  stakes  involved  in
this  struggle,"  McNamara  testified,  "I  see no  other  alternative
* This  use  of  149 instead  of  150 in  such  sweeping  estimates
fascinates  us.   Is  this  mathematics  or  merchandising?
Will  No  One  Hear  Her Plea?
—Wothington  Star,  Feb.   IB
This  unforgettable  picture,  which  AP's  Wide  World  re-
fused  to sell  us,  carried a caption saying it  showed a peasant
woman,  her  child  in  her  arms,  pleading  with a  South Viet-
namese soldier burning down a Viet  Cong controlled  village.
for  the  United  States."  We  find  McNamara's  dogmatism  puz-
zling.  If  all  the great  non-involved  capitals  of  the  world,  from
London  and  Paris  to  New  Delhi  and  Tokyo,  see  negotiation
as  an  alternative,  it  is hard  to  understand  why  this  should  be
invisible  to  McNamara's  otherwise  perceptive   eye.    There  is
always  time  to  blow  up  the  world  when  and  if   negotiation
fails.    But  this  is  not  the  only  fallacy  hidden  in  the  way Mc-
Namara  puts  it.  What  are the  "great  stakes"  involved?  What
greater  stake  than  the  preservation  of  the  civilization  we  have
built  up?    Is  our  stake  in  Saigon  greater   than  our  stake  in
New  York  or  Detroit?
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  1,1965
Church  Warns  Against  Applying  Cold  War  Methods  to  Asia  and  Africa ...
Senator  CHURCH   [D.,   Id.}*:  I  submit, with  all  deference
to  the  State  Department,  that  there  has  not  yet  been  a  con-
sistent,  clear-cut  definition  of  the  American  purpose. ...  If
our  objective  is  to  immunize southeast Asia  from  Chinese  in-
terest  or  activity,  to  dam  off  this  part  of  the  world  from  what
has  traditionally  been  a  sphere  of  influence  for  China,  then  I
say  that  our  goal  is  unrealistic  and  foredoomed  to  failure,  in
the  long  course  of  events. ...  It  would  be  as  though  the
Chinese  were  to  say  to  us,  "Quit  trying  to  assert  a  dominant
interest  in  Mexico."  .  .  .
Now,   the  best  way  to  contain  the  power  of  Peiping  is  to
ring  China  with  independent,  stable  governments.    I  do  not
think  that,  in  the  long  run,  we  shall be  able to  determine what
the  character  of  those  governments  will  be.    I  do  not  believe
that  this  matters  so  much  as  the  independence  of  those  gov-
ernments.    Therefore,   I  should  think  that  it  would  be  in  the
interest  of  the  United  States  to  begin  to  do  in  Asia  what  we
have  long  been  doing  in  Europe—recognizing  that  the  satel-
lite  countries  are  restless,  that  they  are  not  all  alike,  not  domi-
nated  by the  Kremlin  to  the  same  degree. ...  I  cannot see
why,  in  the  face  of  what  has  happened   to  the  Communist
satellites  in  Europe,  the  same  experience  will  not  also  occur
in  Asia.
Political  Solution   Unavoidable
Therefore,  I  should  like  to  state  that  the  struggle  in  south-
east  Asia  is  one  which  eventually  must  find  a  political  rather
than  a  military  settlement.   .  .  .  We  lost   157,000,   dead  and
wounded,   in  Korea.  The  fighting  cost  us  $18  billion.     But,
in  the end,  we had  to go to  the conference  table.  . . .
Senator  McGEE  [D.,  Wy.~\:  When  the  chips  were  down  in
Western   Europe,  we  did  not  say,  'We  are  ready  to  fight,  but
let  us  sit  down  and  talk  about  it.'    Instead,  we  served  notice
on  Moscow  that  starting  in  Western  Europe,  with  West  Ger-
many  and  in  Berlin,  we  were  ready  to  fight  now  if  the  Rus-
sians  intended  to  move  into  these  areas.  .  .  . The  consequence
was  that  the  Russians  backed off. .  .  .
Senator  CHURCH:  I  believe  it  is important  to draw  a  sharp
distinction   between  Europe  and   southeast  Asia,  and   not   to
paint  the  picture  in  broad-brush  strokes,  as  though  there  were
no  difference  between  Russian  expansion  after  World  War  II
and  the  kind  of  problem  we  are  facing  in  the  jungles  of  Viet-
The Pacific's No  Easy  Ditch  to Leap
"Another  round  of   negotiations   like   1954  and  1962
and   we   shall   find   ourselves   negotiated   right   out   of
Asia  and  right  into  a  really   big  war.    If   we  do  not
man  the  ramparts  of  freedom  on  our  outer  defense  line
from  Korea  to  South  Vietnam,  we  shall  inevitably  be
facing   the   enemy   on  the   inner   line   from   Alaska   to
Hawaii."       —Sen. Dirksen, in  the Senate, Feb.  18.
"Nothing   has  been   said  about   the  character   of  our
problem   in  southeast  Asia   that   so  reflects  how   heat
can   substitute   for  light   than   the   notion   that    South
Vietnam  is  the  last  stand  for  the  United  States  beyond
the  shores  of  Hawaii,  or  even  the  gates  of  Seattle.    If
there   is   nothing   but  a   vacuum   between   Saigon   and
Seattle,  indeed  we  are  in  a  perilous  situation;  but  I  had
thought   that   the   American  Navy   dominated   the   Pa-
cific,  and  I  had  thought   that  the   Pacific  Ocean  was  a
sizeable  moat  to  protect   the  security  interests  of  the
United  States."    —Sen. Church, in  the Senate, Feb.17.
'  Congressional  Record,  February  17,  pps.  2792-2812.
nam  today.  .  .  .  The  reason  why  our  policy  has  failed  to  pro-
duce  the  desired  results  in  so  many  parts  of  Asia  and   Africa
is  that  there  is  so  different  an  attitude  in  Africa  and  Asia  to-
ward  the  Western  World.  These  continents have  just  emerged
from  centuries  of  colonial  bondage.  .  .  .  ["In  many,  if  hot
most,  of  these  emergent  lands,"  Church  said  earlier  that  day,
"it  is capitalism  not  communism which  is the  ugly  word.    The
very  term  evokes  images  of   the  old  colonial  plantation  and
white  man  supremacy.   Furthermore  any  attempt  to  acquaint
Africa  and  Asia  with  the  miracles  of  modern  capitalism  .  .  .
is   relatively  meaningless.     The   underdeveloped   world   lacks
the  private  capital  with  which  to  industrialize.     Government
is  often  the  only  source  available  to  underwrite  development
programs.    Thus  popular   repugnance  to  capitalism  combines
with  economic necessity to  cause  most  of  the  new  governments
in  Africa  and  Asia  to  proclaim  themselves  Socialist  States."]
At  the  moment,  the  Chinese  are  not  [in  Vietnam].    They
have not  come  down  with  their armies. They  have not  dropped
the  Bamboo  Curtain  on  southeast  Asia  and  backed  it  up  with
Chinese  divisions.    The   war  in  Vietnam  has   been  between
North   Vietnam  and   South   Vietnam,  to   determine  whether
the  country  will  be  reunited,  and  under  what  kind   of   gov-
ernment.    Thus  far,  most  of  the  combatants  have  been  South
Vietnamese. ...  It  has  been   essentially  a  civil  war,  even
though  aided  and  abetted   from  the  north.    What  north  are
McNamara  Contradicted:  Expert  Says  Our  Reprisal  Raid  Hit  Mere  Fishing  Village
"Professor   Bernard   Fall,   instructor   in  international  re-
lations  at  Howard  University   here,  has  been  in  Dong   Hoi,
North  Vietnam,  and last  weekend  cited  various  reasons why
it  could  not  be  of  military  value.     Dong   Hoi  was   bombed
by  U.S.  Navy  jets  on  February  7.   Fall  is  a  French   citizen.
"In  a  radio   interview   [ABC,   Feb.   17]  Fall   noted   that
Dong  Hoi  is  a  small  fishing  village  with  only  a  small  road
leading  out  of  it.    Hours  after  the   American  bombing  of
Dong  Hoi,  Defense  Secretary  McNamara  told  a  press  con-
ference   Dong  Hoi  was  a  staging  area  for  sending  soldiers
and  supplies  into  South  Vietnam.
"Fall  stressed  three  facts  which  he  said   indicate    Dong
Hoi  could  not  be  a  staging  area.    First,  he  pointed  out  that
it  has  only  the  one  small   road.    Secondly,  it  can  be  easily
watched  from  the  sea  and  also  could  be  shelled  from  the
sea—which   would   eliminate    any   military    need   for   air
strikes.
"And  thirdly,  a  team  of  the  International   Control   Com-
mission  was  stationed  in  Dong  Hoi  at  the  time.    If  military
activity  was  going  on  in  this  coastal  village,   Fall   pointed
out,  it  would  easily  be  observed  by  the  commission   set  up
by  the  Geneva  conference   to  oversee  border  agreements  on
Indochina.    Fall  noted  that  one  member  nation  of  the  com-
mission  is  Canada,  a  close  ally  of  the  United  States,  which
certainly  would  report  to  this  country  any  hostile  military
actions.     Another   member   is   India,   which   Fall   called   a
'friendly  neutral'  and  the  third  is  Poland.    'For  the  Com-
munists  to  put  depots  in  the  path  of  the  International  Con-
trol  Commission   would  be  unlikely,'  he  said."
—York,  Pa.  Gazette  and Daily, Feb.  19.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 1,1965
... Idea  of A Berlin-Type  Stand  on  17th   Parallel  in Vietnam  Called  Delusion
we  talking  about?   We  are  talking  about  Hanoi.    The  most
significant   help   Peiping   has  given,   thus   far,   is   some   Mig
fighters,  sent  down  recently.    Most  of  the  Chinese  participa-
tion,  so  far,  has  been  verbal  service  to  the  cause.    There  has
been  some  instruction  in  the  art  of  guerrilla  warfare,  but  the
Chinese  are  not  in  there  in  a  physical  sense,  certainly  not  to
the  same  degree  that  we  are  there  in  a  physical  sense.
I  submit  to  the  Senator  from  Wyoming   that  the  Chinese
doubtlessly   desire   the   communization   of   Vietnam,   but   the
method  is  insurrection,  and  the  people  involved   in  the  sub-
versive   effort   are  Vietnamese.     If   we   believe  that   a  white
Western  nation  can  intervene  and  take  over  this  kind  of  war,
convert  it  into  an  American  war,  and  then   settle  it  in  any
durable  way,  I  simply  disagree.    There  are  limits  to  what  we
can  do  in  assisting  a  country  which  is  gripped   in insurrection
involving  brother  against  brother.  .  . .
Senator  McGEE:  The   Senator  from   Idaho   is  so  eloquent
and   well  informed  on  this  question   ihat  I  am  reluctant  to
press  the  matter  further.  .  .  .  What  I  am  saying  to  the  Sen-
ator  is  not  that  I  disagree  with  the  imperativeness  of  negotia-
tion,  but  I  believe  in  negotiation  at  the  right  time,  and  that
now  is not that  time.  . . .
Korea's  Painful  Lesson
Senator  CHURCH:   Once  the  bombing  goes  further  north,
the  danger  increases  that  North  Vietnam  must  respond;  and
the  only  means  she  has  is  on  the  ground.    Saigon  is obviously
too  weak  to  withstand  such  pressures.    So  the  demand  will
follow  for  American  ground  troops.    The  last  time  we  had  a
similar  experience,  this  led  to  Chinese  involvement.    We  can
go  down  that  road  .again,  with  all  the  attendant   pain,   cost
and   tragedy.     But,  in  the  end,   we  shall   come  back  to   the
conference  table,  as  we  did  in  Korea,  with  China  as  well  as
North  Vietnam  to  contend  with;  and  large  parts  of  southeast
Asia  in  Chinese   occupation.
I  disagree  with  the  Senator  from  Wyoming   when  he  says
that  we  should  wait  until  some  time  later,  until  after  the mili-
tary  situation  has   changed.     It   seems  to  me  that,   given  a
spreading  war,  the  military  situation  will  only  worsen.    So,  I
think  we  should  combine  our  military  effort  in  South  Vietnam
with  an indicated  willingness  to negotiate.  .  . .
Senator  McGEE:  I  believe  we  must  announce  and  make  it
irrefutably   clear   that  we  draw   a  firm  line   along   the   17th
parallel—separating   North   Vietnam   from   South   Vietnam;
"It  Won't  Be  U.S.   Senators  Who    Die"
"The   Senator   from   Illinois   [Dirksen]   deplores  the
fact  that  Senator  Church  and  I  spoke  'in  this  chamber
which  echoes  with  the  courageous  words  of  brave  men
now  gone.'    Now,   Mr.  President,  there  are  still  brave
men  in  the  Senate,  and  the  Senator  from  Illinois  isn't
the  only   one.     It  doesn't  require  any  particular  brav-
ery  to  stand  on  the  floor  of  the  Senate  and  urge  our
boys  in  Vietnam   to   fighter   harder,   and   if   this  war
mushrooms  into  a  major  conflict  and  a  hundred  thou-
sand  Americans  are  killed,  it  won't  be  U.S.   Senators
who   die.     It   will   be  American  soldiers  who  are   too
young  to  qualify  for  the  U.S.   Senate.
"It  is  just  possible  that  it  required  more  courage  for
the  Senator  from  Idaho  to  lead  off  this  debate  than  for
the  Senator  from  Illinois  to  try  to  squelch  it.    I  don't
intend  to  be  squelched  by  innuendoes  that  it  is  some-
how  un-American  to  try  to  settle  by  conference  what
we  have  been  unable  to  settle  on  the  battlefield  for  11
years  of   fighting,   in  the  expenditure  of   $4  billion  of
American  resources,  and  in  the  loss  of  several  hundred
of  the  cream  of  oar  American  fighting  force."
—Sen. McGovern  (D., S.D.), in the Senate, Feb. 18.
that  we  make  it  clear  that  we  intend  to  tolerate  no  breaches  of
that  line;  that  we  do  not  intend  to  negotiate  violations  of  the
line.  .  . .
Senator  CHURCH:   If  our  purpose   is  to  cause  the  North
Vietnamese  to  give  up  their  interest  in  the  war  that  the  Viet-
cong  is waging  against  the  Saigon  Government;  I  would  fore-
cast  right  now  that  they  will  not  do  it.    They  have  been  en-
gaged  for  many  years  in  their  revolution,  first,  to  throw  out
the French. ... I have no confidence that  bombing  would  make
it  happen.    We  bombed  North  Korea.    We  bombed  it  in  an
effort   to  break  the  fighting  will  of  the  Communists  there—
the   most   thorough   bombing,   perhaps,   that   has   ever   taken
place  in  history.    We  bombed  their  roads;.we  bombed  their
buildings;  we  bombed  their  bridges;  we  bombed  their  indus-
try.    But  we  never  broke  the  Communist  will  to  fight.
The  Senator  is  calling  on  them  to  quit  and  accept  defeat,
total  and  complete,  in  the  matter  of  South   Vietnam,   as  the
condition  of   further   talks.     If   that   could   be   accomplished,
there  would  be  no  occasion  for  further  talks.    If  our  purpose
is  to  cut  off the  North  Vietnamese  and  to  maintain  an  impreg-
nable   17th  parallel,  we  shall  find  that  this  will  have  to  be
done  with  American  troops,  as  we  found  in  Korea.
McGee,  Defending  Tough  Policy,  Dismisses  Vietnamese  People   As   Secondary
"In  Greece  [in  1947]  ...  it  is  true,  the  government  did
not  have  the   support  of   the   people.    For  the   most  part
Greece  was  in  the  throes  of  a  civil  war,  on  a  considerably
higher  level  than  the  one  now  going  on  in  Vietnam,  but
civil  war  nonetheless.   The  question  that  took  first  priority
was  the  encroachment  from  the  north  of  Communist  forces
across  the  border.    We  had  to  back  not  the  good  guys  but
the  bad guys  in  Greece,  to  put  it  simply   in  the  vernacular.
We  did  not  back  the  people.    We  backed  the  monarchy;  we
backed  those  who  happened  to  be  in  the  driver's  seat  at
that  moment.   We  took  a  chance  of  Greece  raising  its  level
of  economy  and  in  improving  the   quality   of  its   own   gov-
ernment.    It  was  a  case  of  putting  first  things  first.  .  .  .
"I  telieve  we  would  all  get  closer  to  the  nub  of  the  real
problem  that  faces  us  now  in  Asia  if  we  would  not  talk  so
much   about  communism   and  talk  more  about  power   poli-
tics.  .  .  .  That  empire   in  southeast  Asia  is  the  last  large
resource  area  outside  the  control  of  any  one  of  the   major
powers  on  the  globe.    In  the  hands  of  one  it   becomes  a
power  calculation  that  can  upset  the  balance  in  the  world.
Before  we  can talk  or negotiate,  we  must  make  certain  that
there  is  no  equivocation  about  where  we  stand.  .  .  .
"I  believe  that  the  condition  of  the  Vietnamese  people,
and  the  direction  in  which  their  future  may  be  going,  are
at  this  stage   secondary,  not  primary.    I  believe  that   is
where   we   become   confused.    We   must   keep   first  things
first,  as  we  did  in  Greece  in  the  civil  war  there."
—Sen. McGee  (D.  Wyo.),  in  the Senate, Feb. 17.
3   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 1,196S
If  Flexibility  Works  In  East  Europe,  Why  Not  Try  It  In  East  Asia?
(Continued   -from   Page  One)
Perhaps  this  is  a  little  unfair  to  McNamara.    His  formal
presentation   seems  to  have  been  prepared   before  the  White
House  decided  on  the  policy  of  reprisal  advocated  by  Gold-
water,  Nixon  and  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.    McNamara  says
only  "we  should  continue   our  existing  programs"  in   Viet-
nam  "and encourage   other   friendly  nations  to  increase  the
scope  of  their  assistance."    The  wording  suggests  the  earlier
policy  of  trying  to  win  the  war  in  South  Vietnam.    The  new
policy  of  raising  the  ante  by  striking  at  targets  outside  it  may
plunge   us   into   a   game   of   Russian   roulette.     The   scale
of  that  game,  if  our  bluff  is  called  and  it  gets  out  of  hand,  is
shown  by  McNamara's  figures' on  nuclear  war.    We  can  end
up  by  winning  Southeast  Asia  while  losing  North  America.
The  fact  that  Russia  and  China  would  also  be  destroyed  is
news  that  should  bring  cheers  in  any  good  insane  asylum.
A  Costly  Blind  Spot
The  refusal  to  see negotiation  as  an  alternative  is  made  the
more  striking   by  another   aspect   of   the   McNamara  report.
This report  is also an  annual world-wide  survey of  our  foreign
policy.    That  it  should  come  from  the  Secretary  of   Defense
attests  the  extent  to  which  diplomacy  has  become  subordinate
to  the  military.    In  this  survey,  McNamara  takes  great  satis-
faction  in  the  extent  to  which  our  new  friendly  and  flexible
policy  of  trade  and  better  relations  with  the  East  European
Communist  States  has  served  our  national   interests,  weaken-
ing  their  bonds  with  Moscow  and  encouraging   their   liberal-
ization.    But  nowhere  does  he  ask  us  to  consider  whether  a
similar  policy  toward  China  and  South  Vietnam  might  not  be
worth  trying.    This  is  a  blind   spot  and  it  is  a  blind   spot
which  may  cost  us  dearly.
The  debate  over  what  to  do  in  Southeast  Asia  is  really  a
debate  between  two  views of  our  future  relations  with  China.
One  side  believes  that  sooner  or  later  we  must  make  war  on
China.    The  other  side  believes  that  sooner  or  later  we  must
make  peace  with  China.    One  side  says the  longer  war  is  de-
layed  the  harder  it  will  be  to  win.    The  other  side  says  the
longer  peace is delayed  the harder  it  will  be to  negotiate.    We
A  Truth  The  U.S. Recognizes  Only  In  Private
"The  mistake  of  the  Americans  is  to  think  that  the
Vietnamese  affair  is  simply  a  phase  of  the  struggle  be-
tween  the  Communist  and capitalist  worlds  and  to  be-
lieve  that  if  it  were  not  for  a  Machiavellian  plot  by
China,  nothing  would  happen  in  Vietnam.   But  today
the  rebellion  in  Vietnam  is  popular.    North  Vietnam
and  China  support  it,  but  it   has  a  life  of  its   own.
Neither  Hanoi  nor  Peking  commands  the  Vietcong."
—Former  French Premier Edgar  Faure  at  an Anglo.
American press  luncheon in  Paris,  Figaro, Feb. 17.
"The  private  response  of  officials  to  the  appeals  for
negotiation   has   been  the   question,   'When   and  with
whom?'    It  is  based  on  a  belief  that  the  non-Commu-
nist  forces  in  South  Vietnam  are  too  weak  politically
and  militarily  to  negotiate  anything  except  the  sur-
render  of  their  country  to  the  Vietcong.   The  question
is  based,  too,  on a  belief  that  even  if  the  Soviet  Union,
Communist  China  and  North  Vietnam  were   interested
in  guaranteeing  the  'neutrality'  of  South  Vietnam,  they
could  not  persuade the  Vietcong to  lay  down  their arms
without  assuring  them  a  dominant  position  in  future
Saigon  governments—the  equivalent   in  Washington's
eyes  of  defeat."
—"Washington  Still  Rules  Out  Any  Vietnam  Nego-
tiations"  by  Max  Frankel  in  New York  Times,  Feb. 18.
What,  then,  is  left  of  the  official  line  that  all  would
be  well  if  only  Peking  and  Hanoi  left  their  neighbors
alone ?
believe  the  most  urgent  measure  required  to  defend  America
and  safeguard  its  future  is  to  make  our  people  realize   the
facts  of  nuclear  life,  and  the  inescapable  necessity  of  negotia-
tion.   We  have  no  greater  interest  now  than  the  preservation
of   peace.    Even  if  we  could  win  a  war  with  China  with-
out a  nuclear  holocaust, we would  still  have  to  negotiate  peace
with  China  when  it  was  over.    If  we  won,  it  might  not  be a
Communist  China,  but  it  would  still  be  China,  and  any  China
will  resent  our  effort  to  make  its  neighbors  in  Southeast. Asia
an   American  preserve.     China's   expansionism,   it  would   be
well  to  remember,  is  somewhat  older  than  Marxism-Leninism,
though  only  by  about  5,000  years.
Correction:  In  our  Feb.   15  report  of  EastJand's  ipeech a  reference to  Jene  Gray  was  incorrectly  reported  as Jene  Gordon.    Postscript:  We'll
send  free  copies  of  this  week's  issue  to  your  friends  if   you  send   stamped   addressed  long  envelopes.
I. F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
8/1/68
For  the  enclosed  $5 send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Portage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday  except  the  last  week  in  December   and  the   tost.week    In
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July   and  August  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  Published  and  edited
by  L  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.:  S6  in  Canada:   *10   elsewhere.    Air  Hail  rate.:
S15  to  Europe;  *20  to  Israel.  Ana  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED