I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965nov01.pdf

============================================================

A  Priest  Tells  How  Our Bombers Destroyed  His  Village,  P.  3
Except,  of  Course,  in  Those  Distant  Little  Countries We Beautify  By B-52
"As  long as  I  am President,  what  has  been  divinely  given  by  nature  will  not  be  recklessly  taken  away  by man."
—President  Johnson,  as  he  signed  the  Highway  Beautification  Act, Oct.. 22
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO. 36
NOVEMBER  1,  1965
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
IB   CENTS
The  South's  Rebel  Klansmen  and  The  Student  Rebel  Left
In  the  sciences,  fresh  insights are  often  obtained  by  putting
familiar  facts  in  a  fresh  frame  of  reference.    The  nature  of
the  Klans in  the  South,  and  the  repeated, acquittal of  its killers,
may  usefully  be looked  at  in terms of  experience  in  the colonial
world.   In  Palestine,  in  Cyprus, in  Algeria  and  in  South  Viet-
nam,   we  have  seen  the  power  of  a  relatively  few  terrorists  or
guerrillas  to  disrupt law  and  order.    The  handful  can  succeed
only  if  they  have  the  sympathy  and  the  support,  passive  at
least,  of  the  general  population.     The  people  of  whom  the
terrorists  are  an  extremist  wing  may  themselves  abhor  blood-
shed, yet they will acquiesce in  the  means because  they agree so
strongly  on  the  end.  The  Klans,  in  this  perspective,   are  the
Eoka,  the  Irgun,  the  Viet  Cong,  of  the  white  South.    They
terrorize and  murder  in defense of  a system in which the  white
majority  in  the  South  believes.
Colonial  Struggle  in  Reverse
In  Cyprus, in  Palestine,  in Vietnam,  sympathizers hid  terror-
ists  from  the  police.    In  the  South  white  juries refuse  to  con-
vict  Klansmen; white forces of  law  and  order  often sympathize
with,  or  secretly join, them.   The  Klans,  now as during Recon-
struction,  are the white South's way of fighting the white North
in  defense of  its  peculiar  institutions.    This  differs   from—in-
deed  it  is the  exact  reverse  of—the  colonial  struggle  in  that  it
seeks  to  perpetuate  a  colonialism  of  our  own.  Colonialism
degrades  one  people  in  order  to  allow  another people  to  enjoy
the  benefits  of  cheap  labor  in  semi-serfdom.    This  is  the  co-
lonial  relationship  the  Klans  are  trying  to  perpetuate   in  the
South.    This  is  white  supremacy  as  it  is  known  in  Rhodesia
and  South  Africa  as  well  as  Alabama  and   Georgia.
Here,  as there,  the  whites  are  so intent  on  maintaining their
domination  of  the  blacks  that  they  are  prepared  to  give  up
their  own  liberties  and  accept  coercive  systems  to  repress  not
only  rebellious  blacks  but  sympathetic  whites.    So  white  men
in  our  South  who  dare  disagree  with  white  supremacy  find
themselves  forced  out  of  business  by boycott,  threat  and  ostra-
cism.    The  Klans  are  the  secular  arm  of  the  South's   drive
against  racial heresy.    This  is  what  makes  the  investigation  by
the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee,  with  its  em-
phasis  on  petty  stealing  by  Klan  leaders,  so  ludicrously  wide
of   the  mark.    And   this  is  what  makes  proposals   for   new
criminal  legislation  seem  so futile  because  they  all  break  down
on  the  same  rock  of  refusal  to  convict.    Though  limited  and
covert,'  we  are  confronted  here  with  a  kind  of  rebellion—a
rebellion   of   the   white   South—and   rebellions   are  not   put
down  by  legal  means.
Not  All  The  Dying  "Patriotic"
"I  note  with  alarm  the  rise  of  that  journalism  which
accords the  words of  wounded or dead American  soldiers
in  Vietnam  a  sort   of  mystical  and  divine  status  and
thus  uncontestable.   I have heard  men in  the  process  of
dying  in Vietnam  express a  different  point  of  view than
the  'patriotic*  party  line  the  intrepid journalist  usually
selects  for  quotation.    My  own  opinion  is  that  these
men  by  law  or  by  choice  are  killing  machines,  and thus
not  particularly  invulnerable in  discussing  the morality
of  our  position  in  Vietnam.
"The  press  makes  a  valiant  effort   to  convince  its
readers  that  the  Viet  Cong  are  more  destructive  to  the
civilian  population than  our  largely  indiscriminate sat-
uration  bombing  of  heavily  populated  areas.    A  year
in  Vietnam  has   heightened  my  awareness   of   incon-
sistencies  of  our  policy  in  Asia;  and  I  find  it  strange
that  much  weight  is  given  in  current  popular publica-
tions to words on foreign policy and morality by soldiers
whose  peace  of  mind is  dependent upon  their  ignorance
of  both  these  matters."
—Richard  M.  Tellefsen,   Copt.  MC  (resigned)   in  the
Cleveland  Press, Oct.  S3.
1  0
Those   who  would   understand   the  student   revolt   against
the  war  in  Vietnam  must  widen  their  field  of  vision  to  see
that by and  large  the  same student  minority so deeply  involved
in  this  Southern  struggle  is  the  same  student  minority which
feels  so  intensely  opposed  to  the  war  in  Vietnam.    These stu-
dents  compare  the  one  rebellion  with  the  other  and  are  doubly
revolted.    In  the  first  place,  they  cannot  help  but  contrast  the
overwhelming  force mustered  to put  down  the  rebellion  9,000
miles  from  home  while  they  have  difficulty  even  in  obtaining
a  full  contingent  of  Federal  registrars  for  the  South,  much  less
the  Federal  marshals or  soldiers  necessary  to  protect  the  regis-
trars  and  those  who  wish  to  register  with  them.    In  one  place
we  have  150,000  soldiers;  in  the  other  we  do  not  have  150—
or  one-tenth  of  one  percent—as many  registrars,  indeed  we  do
not  have  50.
The  students  have  seen  their  friends  and  comrades  in  the
integration  struggle  beaten  or  killed,  and  the  killers  acquitted,
while  this  same government  claims  to be helpless here  but  asks
them  to  go  fight  against  a  rebellion  there.    In  the  second
place,   these  students   see  the  struggle  in  the  South  and  the
struggle  in  Vietnam  as parts  of  the  same  world-wide  struggle,
the  struggle  of  colored  races  to  shake  off  white  domination.
The  leadership   of  the  struggle   in  Vietnam  may  be  Commu-
nist  and  dictatorial,  but  it  is  the  same .leadership  which  has
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
1  4  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   November   1, 1965
In  Reply to  A  Hostile  Press  Campaign, We  Let  the  Hounded  SDS  Speak  for  Itself
Student  Leader's  Plea  for  Chance  to  Serve  Our  Country  But  Not By Killing
By  Paul  Booth*
National  Secretary,   Students  for  A  Democratic  Society
Students    for    a   Democratic   Society   wishes    to   reiterate
emphatically   its  intention  to  pursue  its  legal   opposition   to
the  war   in  Vietnam.    We   feel  that  the  war   is  immoral  at
its  root,  that  it  is  fought  alongside   a  regime  with  no  claim
to  represent   its  people,  and  that  it  is  foreclosing   the  hope  of
making   America  a  decent  and  truly  Democratic  Society.    The
commitment   of  SDS,  and  of  the  whole  generation  we  repre-
sent,   is  clear.    We   are  anxious  to  help  and  to   change   our
country;  we  refuse  to  destroy  someone   else's   country.     We
are  anxious  to  advance  the -cause  of  democracy;   we  do  not
believe  that  cause  can  be  advanced  by  torture  and  terror.
To  Build  Instead  of  Burn
We   volunteer   to  go  into  Watts  to  work  with  the  people
of  Watts.    We  volunteer  to  help  the  Peace  Corps   learn,  as
we  have  been  learning   in  the  slums  and  in  Mississippi,  how
to  energize  the  hungry  and   desperate   and   defeated   of   the
world.     We   volunteer  to  serve  in  hospitals   and   schools   in
the  slums,  in  the  Job  Corps  and  VISTA.    We  propose  to  the
President   that   all   those   Americans   who   seek   so   vigorously
to  build  instead  of  burn  be  given  their  chance  to  do  so.    We
propose  that  he   test  the  young  people  of  America:   if   they
had   a  free   choice,  would  they  want  to  burn  and  torture  in
Vietnam   or  to  build   democracy  at  home   and   overseas?     I
predict  that   almost  every  member   of   my  generation   would
choose  to  build,  not  to burn;  to  teach,  not  to  torture;  to  help,
not  to  kill.    And  I  am  sure  that  the  overwhelming  majority
of  our  brothers  and  cousins  in  the  army  in  Vietnam   would
make  the  same  choice  if  they  could.
Our  generation  is  not  afraid  of  service  for  long  years  and
low  pay;  SDS  has  been  working  for  years  in  the   slums  of
America  at  $10  a  week  to  build  a  movement  for   democracy
there.    We   are  not   afraid   to   risk  our  lives;  we  have   been
risking  our  lives  in  Mississippi  and   Alabama,  and   some  of
us  died  there.    But  we  will  not  bomb  the  people,  the  women
and  children  of  another  country.
/  have  just  sent  a telegram  to  the  President  and  the  Attorney
Leading  Publisher  Defends  Demonstrators
"Demonstrations  against  war  are  as  old  as  the  cen-
turies.    And in  every  war,  the  super-patriots  assail  and
condemn   those   who   oppose   it.     Today's   unhappiness
over  Vietnam  is  largely  attributable  to  the  manner and
method   of   our   gradual  involvement.    It   began  with
President   Elsenhower,  grew  under  President  Kennedy
and  came  to  full  scale  war  in  the  Johnson  administra-
tion.   During this  period,  only  a  few  newspapers  and  a
handful  of  Democratic senators  spoke  out  against  our
policies.    As  the  Detroit  Free  Press  has  said,  'Behind
the   fluttering   banners  and  the  chants   on  the   asphalt
lies  a  feeling  among  other Americans that  their  nation
ought  to stop  trying to police the whole world. . . .'
"The students, intellectuals,  university professors  and
others  who stage  'teach-ins'  and demonstrate  from  New
York  to  San  Francisco  may  be  serving  no  useful  pur-
pose.    Yet,  they have  a  right  to  be  heard in  a  land  with
our  traditions.   We  are  engaged  in  an  unpopular  and
unnecessary   war.    So  there  will  be  more  demonstra-
tions  and  counter demonstrations to  come.    But  let  not
the  voice  of  dissent  be  stilled,  lest  we  emulate  the  sup-
pressive  measures  practiced  so  long  by  leaders  of  the
Asian  'democracy*  we  are  attempting to  save."
—John   S.  Knight,  of   the  Knight   Newspapers,    3rd
largest   U.S.  chain,  in  Detroit  Free  Press  Oct.  24.
* At  a  Washington press  conference, Oct. 20.
General  asking  to  meet  u-ilb  them  immediately   to  discuss  our
proposal.     Let  me  state  it  again:  that  any  American  who  is
ready  to  risk  his  life,  his  health,  his  career,  and  his  material
possessions  in  order  to  build  democracy  not  be  asked  to  take
(
part  in  a  war  that  is  destroying  democracy.    If  they  do  this,
I   say  again—they   will   find   the   whole   of   our    generation
rejoicing  in  the  opportunity  to  build.     I  hope  the  President
and  the  Attorney   General   will   respond   to  our  request   and
will  meet  with  us  at  once;  for  every  hour  and  day  that  passes,
more  human  beings,  American  and  Vietnamese,  die  needlessly
in  that  ugly  war,  and   for   every  hour   and   day  that   passes,
more  members  of  our  generation   become   desperate.
Until   the  President   agrees  to  our  proposal,   we  have   only
one  choice:  we  do   in   conscience  object,   utterly   and   whole-
heartedly,  to  this  war;  and.we  will   encourage  every   member
of   our  generation  to  object,  and  to  file  his  objection   through
the  Form  150  provided  by the  law  for  conscientious  objection.
Something  Wrong   When  A  Democratic  Senator  Must  Plead  Such  Elementary  Truths
"I  do  not  like  taking a  public  position  criticizing  a  Demo-
cratic  administration  which  in  most  respects  I strongly  sup-
port.    Neither  do  I  like  being  told  that  my  statement  was
'irresponsible'  or  that  it  has  given  aid  and  comfort  to  the
enemies  of  the  United  States. ...  If  that  accusation  is  to
be  pressed  an  interesting  discussion  could  be  developed  as
to  whether  it  is  my  criticisms of  U.S.  policy  in  the  Domini-
can  Republic or  the  policy  itself  which  has  given  aid  and
comfort  to  our enemies.  .  . .
"Insofar  as  it  represents  a  genuine  reconciliation  of  dif-
ferences,  a consensus  is  a fine thing; insofar  as  it  represents
a  concealment of  differences, it  is  a miscarriage of  democra-
tic  procedure.   I  think  we  Americans tend to  put  too  high  a
value  on  unanimity—on  bi-partisanship  in  foreign  policy,  on
politics  stopping  at  the  water's  edge,  on  turning  a  single
face  to  the  world—as  if  there  were  something   dangerous
and  illegitimate  about  honest   differences  of  opinion.  .  .  .
Responsible  dissent  is  one  of  the  great  strengths  of  democ-
racy.    France,  for  example, is  unquestionably in  a  stronger
position  today  in  her  relations  with  the  emerging   nations
of   Asia   and  Africa  because   during  the   years   of   colonial
wars  in  Indochina  and  Algeria  a  large  and  articulate  mi-
nority  refused  to  acquiesce  in  what  was  being  done  and  by
speaking  out,  pointed  the  way  to  the  enlightened  policies  of
the  Fifth  Republic. The British  Labor Party,  to  take  another
example,  not  only  protested   the  Suez  invasion  in  1956  but
did  so  while the  invasion  was  being  carried  out; by  so  doing,
the  opposition  performed  the  patriotic  service   of   helping
Britain  to  recover  its  good  name in  the  wake of  a  disastrous
adventure."                   —Fulbright  in  the  Senate,  Oct.  22.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  1,  1965
From  An  On-The-Spot  Report  in  Paris-Match   (Oct.   2)  By  A  French  Writer  Who Knows  Vietnam  Well
A  Priest  Tells  How  Our  Bombers  Razed  His  Church  and  Killed  His People
By   Jean  Larteguy
Author  of  "The   Centurions"
Near  Due  Co,  17,000  refugees,  for  the  most  part Catholics
from  Tonkin,  had  been  settled  in  some  ten  villages.    Father
Currien  was  their  cure.    He  is  a  stocky,  robust  native  of  the
Vosges.    He  won  the  Military  Medal  for  going  out  among  the
Vietminh  in  1944  to  find  the  wounded  French.    I  found  him
stretched  out  on  a  bed  in  the  St.  Paul  Clinic  in  Saigon.     He
had   been  caught  for   several  hours  under  the  beams  of   his
wrecked  church  and   his  spine  still   felt  the   effects.     In  his
hand  he  held  a small pyx,  a small  round  metal  vessel  in  which
the  Blessed  Sacrament  is  carried,  which  had  been  pierced  by
two  bullets.   He  showed  it  to  me:
the  Host  in  its  bullet  pierced  pyx  and  started  off  for  Pleiku.
Afraid of  What The Refugees Might Say?
"[Sen.  Edward  M.]  Kennedy,  33,  arrived  yesterday
for  a  five  day  tour  and  a  first-hand  look  at  the  refugee
problem.    At  a  refugee  camp  in  Banmethout  north  of
Saigon,  he  told  3500  refugees:  'You  can  be  sure  that no
matter   how  long  this  struggle  goes   on,  the  United
States  is  going  to  continue  to  be  your  friend  in  the
difficult  months  and  years  ahead.'   At  one  point,  Ken-
nedy   complained  that   he  was   not  permitted  to   talk
freely  enough  with  the  refugees.    He  said  Vietnamese
effiKEls  at  the  settlement  were  answering  questions .in-
tended  for  the  refugees."
—AP  from  Dancing,  Washington  Post,  Oct.  25.
"They  Even  Shoot  at   God"
"This  was  the   consecrated   host.     In   this  war  they  even
shoot  God  himself.    It  all  began  one  Monday  at  9  a.m.    The
Viet  Cong  were  in  the  vicinity,  but  not  as many  as  reported—
many  less.    It  was  not  a  regiment  coming  from   the  North.
They  held  the  roads,  it  is  true,  but  like  everywhere  else,  not
the  villages.    We   Catholics  have  little  love  for  them.     We
hardly  ever  saw  them  and  they  left   us  alone.    At  9  I  saw
an  armored  column  arrive.    There  were  lots  of'them.    They
were  commanded  by  a  sub-brigadier.   The  Viet  Cong,  placed
along  the  sides  of  the  roads,  let  the  tanks  pass  and  fell  on
the  troops  in  the  trucks.    The  government  forces  were  three
battalions.    The  Viet  Cong,  from  what  I  could  judge,  were
at  the  most  two  companies.     But  they  were  well   prepared.
Everybody  shot   at  everybody  else,   the  tanks  on   their   own
troops.    At  last  it  ended,  the  Viets  took  off.
"The    sub-brigadier  then   came  to   see  me.     'Now   it   is
finished,'  he  told  me.    'You  and  your  faithful  are  no  longer
in  danger.'    He  left,  leaving  three  armored  cars  in  front  of
my  church.    I  would  have  preferred   that  he  had  put  them
elsewhere.     It  was  5:30   p.m.     The   soldiers  were  taking  a
nap  or  enjoying  a  snack.   Suddenly I  saw  some  50  Viet  Cong
rush  at  them,  weapons  in  their  hands.   I  did  not  know  where
they  came  from.    I  let  out  three  yells.    This  woke  my  Viet
regulars  who  leaped   into  their  armored  cars  and  trucks  and
disappeared.     The   Viet   Cong   also   scrammed.     We   were
left  alone.   No  one was in  the village except  for  some  women,
children   and  old  people   whom  neither  the  Viet   Cong   nor
the  regular  troops  thought  to  pick  up  to  serve  as  coolies.
"I  heard  some  planes.    The  first  bomb  fell  at  6:05  on  my
church.    There  was  nothing  left  of  it.    I  ran  for  shelter  to
the   presbytery,  a  wooden   house   adjoining  the   church.     A
second  bomb  crushed  it  and  I  was  pinned  under  the  beams.
Children   cried,  women  shrieked  and  the  wounded   moaned.
They   were  near  me  but  I  could   not  budge.     Finally,  some
of   the   faithful   who  had   been  looking   for   me   everywhere,
dragged  me  out.    I  made  the  women  and  children  lie  down
under  the  flooring  of  the  house.   There  we  passed  the  entire
night   while   those   accursed   planes   hammered   with   rockets
and  bombs  at my  village.
"There  were  no  longer  any  Viet  Cong  around.    They  had
fled  info   the   forest  long  before.     Next   morning   my  back
hurt  badly,  but  I  gathered   42  women  and  children  and  took
The  bombing  could  start  again  at  any  moment.    On  the  way
I  buried  as  best  I  could  the  bodies  of  my  faithful.     Yes,   I
remember  now  I  buried  seven  of  them  completely  torn   to
bits.    I  had  to  abandon  some  wounded  and  dying.    I  gave
them  absolution.   I  tried  to  keep  alive  those  who  were  still
alive.    The  children  were  exhausted,  the  women  wept;  they
dragged  themselves  along.    It  was a  real way of  the  cross.  .  . .
"A  Vietnamese  Colonel  who  saw  that  I  had  a  great  deal
of   trouble  walking  offered   me  a  ride  to  Pleiku   in  his  heli-
copter.    I  asked  him,  'And  those  who  are  with  me,  shall  I
leave   them   to  shift   for   themselves?'     I   stayed  with   them.
The   march  continued.    The   children   laid   down   along   the
road;   they  no  longer   wanted  to  move.     Finally  we  arrived
at   a   French   tea  plantation   where  they  gave  us  to  eat   and
drink,  and  a  place  to  lie  down."
The  Padre  tried  to  turn   himself   on  his  bed  but  made  a
grimace.    He  showed  his  fist:  "Today  nothing  remains  of  all
that  region.    All  is  razed.    As  for  the  poor  mountain  people
whose  villages  and  rice  granaries  have  been  destroyed,  they
can  live  only  as  wild  boars  in  the  forest.    Before  the  bom-
bardment,  the  loud  speakers,  in  the  planes  above  them,  told
them  not  to  go  into  the  fields  and  to  stay  in  their  huts.    They
stayed  in  their  huts  and  the  huts   were  bombarded   anyway.
Or   again   the   Viet   Cong   obliged   them   to   come   out   and
machine-gunned   them   in   the    fields.    Some   villages   were
warned,  others  not.    I  have  seen  my  faithful   burned  up  in
napalm.     I   have   seen   the   bodies   of   women   and   children
blown  to  bits.    I have  seen  all  my villages  razed.   By God,  it's
not   possible!      (C'est   pas  Dieu   possible')."      Suddenly  the
priest  burst  into  tears.   His  nerves  had  given  way.   He  cursed
the war and  its attendant horrors  and  absurdities.    He  railed  at
the  Americans  in  English,  as  if  they  were  there  to  hear  him.
He  finally  calmed  down:
"They   must   settle   their   accounts   with   God.     When   I
arrived  in  Saigon,  I  could  barely  drag  myself  along.     Two
Americans  wanted  to  give  me  a  lift  to  the  hospital   in  their
automobile.     I   couldn't   stand   it.     Always  before  my  eyes
were  those  burned  up  women  and  children.    I  told  them  to
get  the  H—  out  ("f...le  camp")  because  I  didn't  like  mur-
derers.    They  were  probably  nice  guys  who  wanted  to  help
me.    In  Saigon  they  probably  pound   away  at  typewriters  in
an  air-conditioned  office  and  know  nothing  of  this  war.    They
couldn't  understand what  was the  matter  with  me."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November 1, 1965
For  The  Option  of National  Service  on  More  Difficult  Battlefields
(Continued  from  Page   One)
been   struggling   since  the  last   World   War   against  foreign
armies  and   their  puppets.     The-  students  who  have  shown
their  willingness  to  face  death  in  the  South  are  not  willing  to
face  it  in  Vietnam.    The  latter,  emotionally  and  philosophi-
cally,  is  not  their  war.    That  is  how  they  feel.
Less  Fearsomely  Armed
What  is  the  wise  national  policy  for  dealing  with  this  stu-
dent  revolt,  even  from  the  standpoint  of  those'who  see  the
Vietnamese  war  as a  test of  national prestige  in  a  larger  world
contest  with  two  Communist  rivals,  Russia  and  China?    The
wise  national  policy,  it  seems to  me,  is to  let  those  who  prefer
to  fight  in  the  South  do  so.   Unthinking  enthusiasm,  blind
devotion,  anti-Communist fervor  and  herdlike  conformity may
be counted  on  to produce enough  troops  for  Vietnam.   It  takes
far  more  guts  to  fight  the  civil  rights  struggle  in  the  South.
It  is  lonelier,  it  is  more  exposed,  and  its  chosen  weapons  are
not  napalm  and  bombers  but  non-violence  and  love.
Those few  youngsters who are willing  to  engage  in  this task
are  a  rare  national  asset,  the  real  heroes  of  our  time.    It  is
because  of  them  that  our  country  looks  very  different   in  the
eyes  of  the  world  from  Rhodesia  or  South  Africa.    They  are
the  ones  who  have  stirred  the  Southern  Negro  from  a century
of  submissive  slumber.    They  have  helped   force  the  pace  of
civil  rights  legislation  and  enforcement.    They  have  given
the  world  a  spectacle  whose  value  is  beyond  price  in  a  world
festering  with  racial hatred—the  spectacle  of  young white  peo-
ple  from  privileged  homes  going  out  to  risk their  lives  on  be-
half  of  underprivileged   blacks.    They  have  made  it   possible
for  us  to  boast  that  our  country  is  doing  more  to  eradicate
racism  than  any other  country  on  earth,  white  or  black.    The
kids  of  SNCC  and  CORE  have  served  their  country  well  on
its  most  difficult  and  honorable  battlefield.    It  is  understand-
able  that  the  Stennises  and  Eastlands  would  like  to  root  them
out  and  send  them  off  to  Vietnam  instead.    But  let  not  the
rest  of  us  be  deceived.    This  is  not  a  test  of  their  patriotism
but  of  our  good  sense.
A  substantial portion  of  our  press  is  off like  a lynch mob  in
full  hue  and  cry  against  the  student  rebels.    Their  numbers,
Bombers  In,  Foxholes  Out?
" 'We're  doing  a  lot  more  than  killing  monkeys and
making  kindling wood  out  of  the  jungle,'  said  a  young
[B-52]  pilot  just  back  from  the  5,400  mile  round  trip  to
a  bombing objective in  South  Vietnam.   The  bomber  is
here  to  stay.'   From  Maj.  Gen. W.  J.  Crumm,  comman-
der  of  the  Third  Air  Division  on  Guam,  down  to  the
lowest  ranking  airman,  there  is  a  conviction that  the
[B-52]  operation is  performing a  useful  and important
combat  function  in  Vietnam  and is  proving  the  flexibil-
ity  of  the  manned bomber."
—Hanson  Baldwin  from  Guam in  N.Y.  Times  Oct 25
"For  the  first  time  since  B-52 bombings  against  the
Vietcong began, results of  such a raid were made public.
A  U.S.  military  spokesman  in  Saigon  said  a  raid  Tues-
day  near  Bencat,  30  miles  north  of  Saigon,  killed  two
Vietcong,  destroyed  three  structures,   several  tunnels
and  40  foxholes."
—Washington  Post from  Saigon Oct. 2S.
their  views,  their  actions  are  being  exaggerated  and  distorted;
we invite you to  read  for  yourself  the  actual statement of  their
aims  issued  by the  leadership  of  the  Students for  a  Democratic
Society  on  page  2.    It  is  an  eloquent  one.    This  majority  of
the  rebel  minority  is  seeking  the  right   to  opt  for  national
service,  in  the  slums,  in  the  South,  in  the  Peace  Corps.    They
ask  that  those  who  object to the  war  in  Vietnam  be allowed  to
serve  on  these  other  fronts.    We   believe  nothing  could  be
more  creditable  to  our  country  and  more  useful  to  its  future
than  to  accept  their  offer  and  their  challenge.    This  idealistic
youth  is the  same youth  already  serving  in  Peace  Corps  abroad
and  poverty  program  at  home.    They  are  the  seed  corn  of  a
better  future.   They  embody  that  strain  of  idealism  which  in
every  generation   has  written   the  brightest   chapters   in  our
American  history.    They  are  the  spiritual  sons  of  the   Jeffer-
sonians  and  the  abolitionists.    They  have  already proven  their
mettle,  besieged  as  they  are  by  the  ignorant  rich  of  Birchism
on  one  side  and  the  ignorant  poor  of  the  KKK  on  the  other.
There  could  be  no  greater  folly  than  for  the  government  to
be  drawn  into  a  frontal  conflict  with  the  best  youngsters  of
our  time.    Instead  of  alienating  them  further,  we  ought  to
take  up  their  offer  to  enlist  in  their  own  way.
Extra  Copies This  Issue  Available  in  Bulk  at  Penny  Apiece  Plus  Postage
5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C. 20015
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew  (or  enter)  •   sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   .......;..................................Zone............State....................
  ;
11/1/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................,.....Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every  Monday  except  in  August,  the  last   weclc  in   December   and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,   Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:    SB  in   the  U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rate«:
$15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED