I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965mar29.pdf

============================================================

How  the State Dept.  Tried  to Explain  the  Use of  Gas, Pps.  2-3
"It  Was  Worth  The  Boy's  Dying"—Jimmie  Lee  Jackson's  82-Year-Old  Grandfather
Selma,  Ala.  Mar.  21—It  was  like  a  July  4  picnic  and  a
pilgrimage,  a  protest  and  an  exaltation.    One  82-year  old
black  man  marching  at  the. head  of  the  line  knew   better
what  it  was  like  than  anyone  else.    Cager  Lee  was  the
grandfather  of  Jimmie  Lee  Jackson,  the  26-year  old  Negro
from  nearby  Marion  who  died  nearly  a  month  ago   after
being  shot  by  an  Alabama  State  trooper  following  a  dem-
onstration.    "Yes,  it  was  worth  the  boy's  dying",  said  Lee
as  he  walked  in  the  front  line  with  the  Rev.  Dr.  Martin
Lather  King,  Jr.    "He  was  a  sweet  boy.    He  took  me  to
church  every  Sunday,  worked  hard.   But  he  had  to  die  for
something.   And thank God  it  was  for this.  . . .  There  was
bat  one  white  man  said  he  was  sorry  for  Jimmie  Lee.   He
sent  me  the  biggest  box  of  groceries—rice,  coffee,  sugar,
floor.    And  he  called  me  and  said  'I'm  so  sorry.   I   don't
know  what  to  do.'    Bat  no  other  white  man  said  a  word.
And  I  lived  and  worked  in  Perry  County  every  day  cf  my
life."     —Paul  Good  in  the  Washington Post,  March  gg.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  12
MARCH  29,  1966
ioi       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Straining  At  the  Gnat  of A  Little  "Non-Lethal" Gas
From  one  point  of  view  the  uproar  over  the  use  of   "non-
lethal"  gas  in  Vietnam  is  ludicrous.    Here  we  are,  a  people
prepared  to  incinerate  ourselves  and  the  world  if  our  leaders
deem  it  necessary,  and  we  go  into  a  tizzy  because  a  relatively
minor  disabling  gas  is  used  in  Vietnam!   Our  own  men,  and
the  forces  we  arm,  have  long  been  burning  up  villages  with
napalm;  we  have  begun   to  use  phosphorus   shells,   also  in-
tended  to  burn  alive;  we  have  been  trying  out  "anti-person-
nel"   bombs  which   scatter   sharp   razor-like   fragments   in  a
wide  area  and  a  new  type  of  bullet  which  "somersaults"  on
entering  the  flesh  in  a  way  which  makes  ordinarily  minor
wounds  fatal.
Our   military   have   speculated   about   the   use   of   nuclear
weapons,  and—to  test  public  response—indicated  that  at  some
stage  as  we  raise  the  ante  of  escalation,   we  may  use  them.
This  has  created  only a  minor  ripple  of  momentary  revulsion,
on  the  way from  the  headlines  to  the  more  engrossing  sports
or  women's  pages.    Then  along  comes  the  news  that  we  have
been  supplying  the  South  Vietnamese  with  a  "non-lethal"  gas
not  much  worse  than  tear  gas  and  everyone  acts  as  if  the  war
had  reached  a  new  plateau  of  horror.
Just  A  Problem  in  Brain-Washing
Le  Monde  in  Paris  angrily  takes  issue  with  an  unidentified
U.S.  officer  in  Saigon  who  said  the  problem  was  to  accustom
the  public  to  the  use  of  this  new  gas.    The  officer  was  quite
right.    We  have  accustomed  the  public  mind  at  home  and
abroad  to  accept  much  worse  things.    Our  policy  in  Vietnam
is  based  on  the  view  that  we  have  a  right  to  rain  fire  and
death  on  the  whole  area  (1)   because  we  suspect  its  people  if
given  a  free  choice  would  accept  a  government  in  which  Com-
munists  played  a  leading  part  and  (2)  because  we  think  our
national  interest   demands  that  we  maintain  an  armed  pres-
ence  in  Southeast  Asia  as  a  forward  base  against  China.    The
end  for  us  justifies  the  means,  and  the  public  is  easily  brain-
washed  by  our  multitudinous   "information"  agencies  into  ac-
cepting  both.    Every hour  the "news  tickers  dick  out  dreadful
incidents  which  register  hardly  at  all  on  our  numbed  minds
and  calloused  consciences.    Children  are  killed   in  a  school-
yard  because we  suspected  there  might  be  Viet  Cong  in  the
village.    Fifteen  people  were  killed  and  nine  others drowned
Just   When  We  Started  Getting  Interested
Mr.  Hanson  BALDWIN:  General,  there  is  a  phrase
in  your  book  which  seems  to  me  to  go  to  the  heart  of
this  whole matter  of  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons.   Ton
say  that  we  must  maintain,  and  I  quote  "a  credible
capability  to  achieve  a  military  victory  under  any  set
of   conditions."    Now   how  do  yon   define   "a  military
victory"  in  a  nuclear war?
Gen.   POWER  [retiring   commander  of  Strategic  Air
Command]:  Very  simply.   Ton  have  an  aggressor  who
attacks  you.    You  have  sufficient  strength  to  stop  that
military  action,  destroy  him  militarily  and  still  retain
a  superior  military  posture.    That  is  what  I  mean  by
a  victory.   In  a  true  sense  there  wouldn't  be  any win-
ner.     It  wonld  be  a  hollow  victory,  but  yon  can  stop
the  military  action  and  retain  control.    That  id  what
I mean by a victory.
Mr. BALDWIN:  With how many dead?
Mr.  SPIVAK:  I  am  sorry  to  interrupt  but  onr  time
unfortunately  is  up.
—Meet  the Press, March  21.
because  we  bombed  a  sampan  on  suspicion  only  to  find  that
it  had  legal  clearance  for  its trip and  indeed  three  of  the  dead
were  South  Vietnamese  soldiers.   Fifty  helicopters  and  37  U.S.
warplanes  douse  a  whole  area  of  central  Vietnam  with  bombs
and  gunfire  because  we  thought  guerrillas  might   be  there;
none  were  found  but  there  is  no  mention  of  what  this  did  to
the  people  living  in  the  area.    Respected   South  Vietnamese
who  speak  up  for  a  cease-fire are  separated  from  their   fami-
lies  and  deported  without  trial,  though  ostensibly   the  war  is
being  fought  to  give  the  Vietnamese  the  right  to  determine
their  own  destiny.    If  our  spirits  were'not  so  dulled  by  our
own  propaganda,  we  would  realize  now  shamefully  our  coun-
try  is  acting.
The  blueprint  we  are  following  is  that  application  of  terror
by  bombardment,  of  "victory  by  airpower,"  which  the  Italians
first  tried  out  over  Ethiopia  and  the  Germans  over   Guernica
and  elsewhere  in  the  Spanish  civil  war.    A  war  we  have  lost
on  the  ground  against  poorly  armed  forces  a  fifth  the  size  of
ours  is  being  turned  into  an  air  war  against  a  people  with
few   air  defenses,  no  planes  in  the  South   and   few   in   the
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  29,1965
How  the  State  Dept. Tried  to  Explain  Away  the  Use of  "Non-Lethal"  Gases
The  news  that  the  U.S.  was  furnishing   "non-lethal"   gases
for   rise  by  the  South  Vietnamese  Army  precipitated   a  sharp
session  at   the  State  Department's    daily   briefing    that   day,
March  22.    The  State  Department's   spokesman,  Robert  Mc-
Closkey,  was  subjected  to  skeptical  and  even  derisive  queries.
On  Capitol  Hill,  the  news  provoked  dismay  but  few  would
comment.    Among  the  few  were  Senator  Dodd  of  Connecticut
who  defended   use  of  the  gases  and  Senator  Morse  of  Oregon
who  criticized  use  of  the  gas  as  contrary   to  the  Geneva Con-
vention  of  1925.*   This  was  signed  by  the  17.S.  but  never  rati-
fied  by   the  Senate.    "Its   language  states  quite   correctly,"
Morse   declared,  "that  the  use  of  gas  against   human  beings
'has   been  justly   condemned  by   the   general   opinion  of   the
civilized  world.'    And  this  does  not  mean  only   lethal   gases.
Ones  that  blister  the skin were  commonly  used  in  World  War
1  and   were   among   those  intended   to   be  outlawed   by   this
language.    So,  too,  I   am  sure  are  the  gases  which   induce
nausea,  which  we  are  furnishing   for  use  in  South  Vietnam.
"It  is interesting  to see how  easy  it  is,  once  we  depart   from
the  principles   of  international   law,"  Morse   commented,   "to
violate  more  and  more  of  them.   Almost  daily   we  are  con-
ducting  air  raids  on a  country  with  which  we  are  not  at  war.
These  raids  and  the  use  of  gas,  will  only  further  separate  the
U.S.  from  world  opinion,  including  opinion  in  the  Far  East,
which is  already  rising  against  us for  our policy  in  Vietnam."
The  State  Department's    briefing    follows:
Q:  Bob,  was  the  State  Department   advised  of  the  decision
of  the  military  authorities   to  use  whatever  kind  of  gas  it  is
they are  using in Vietnam ?
Mr.  McCLOSKEY:  I  might  say  tear  gas  in  standard  form
as  well  as  tear  gas  inducing  nausea   have  been  supplied  by
the  United  States  and  used  by  Vietnamese   forces   in  a  few
instances.   For  example,  to  meet  riots  and  in  tactical  situa-
tions  where  the  Viet  Cong  have  mingled  with  innocent  peo-
ple.    In  such  a  situation,  that  is,  like  the  latter,  rather  than
use  artillery,  air   or  other  fire  power  methods,   Vietnamese
forces  have  used  these  types  of  tear  gas.     Such  types  have
only  temporary  effects  and  are  precisely  similar  to  types of
tear  gases  employed  in  riot  control  all  over  the  world.
Q:  In  what  cases  all  over  the  world  or  in  any  part  of  the
world  have  they  used  nausea   type  tear  gas.   .  .  .  Has  this
*  The  Geneva  convention  of   1825  says,  "Whereas  the  use  in  war  at
asphyxiating,  poisonous  or  other  gases,  and  of  all  analogous  liQlllds,
materials   or   devices,   has   been   Justly   condemned    by   the   general
opinion  of  the  civilized  world;  and  whereas  the  prohibition  of  such
use  has  been  declared  In  treaties  to  which  the  majority  of  the  powers
of  the  world  are  parties;  and  to  the  end  that  this  principle  shall  be
universally  accepted  as  a  part  of  international  law,  binding  alike  the
conscience  and  the  practice  of  nations:  Declare,   that  the  high   con-
tracting  parties,   go  far  as  they  are  not  already  parties  to  treaties
prohibiting   such   use,   accept  this  prohibition,   agree  to   extend  this
prohibition   to   the   use   of   bacteriological   methods   of   warfare   and
agree  to  be  bound   as  betwen   themselves  according  to  the  terms  of
this  declaration."
Presumably  They  Wouldn't  Have  Minded
If  They  Hadn't  Been  Prompted
"Prompted  by  Viet  Cong  agents,  villagers  from  the
hamlet  of  Man  Quan  attempted  yesterday  to  use   the
bodies   of   16   children  killed   by   Vietnamese   fighter-
bombers  to  stir  up  an  anti-American  demonstration  at
Da   Nang.     Government  troops   intervened   when   the
group   arrived  by   sampan  with   the   blanketed  dead.
They  dispersed  a  gathering  crowd  on  the  waterfront.
U.S.   officials  said  Americans   had  nothing  to  do  with
the   air   strike   at   the   village,   which  one   source   de-
scribed  as  'sympathetic  to  but  not  dominated   by  the
Viet  Cong'."
—AP from  Da Nang  in  Baltimore  Sun, March  19.
type  ever  been used  in riot control ?
Mr.  McCLOSKEY:  Yes,  it  is  my  information  that  it  has
been  used.
Q: Can you tell us where ?
Mr. McCLOSKEY: I  can't.
Q:  This  goes  back  to  the  question  of  the  Geneva  Protocol
of   1925  against  the  use  of  gas  warfare  which  is  a  prohibi-
tion  against  the  use  of  gas—a  poison  gas,   asphyxiating   gas
or  other  gases.    Now  the  U.S.   signed  the  Protocol  but  the
Senate  never  ratified  it,  so  we  are  not  bound  by  it  legally
although  we  have  usually  adhered  to  it  or  have  always  ad-
hered  to  it  previously.   My question  after  all  this  is  does  the
United  States  consider  the   use  of  these   nauseous  gases  a
violation  of  the  terms  of  the   Protocol   of   1925?
Mr.  McCLOSKEY: The  answer  in  the  first  instance  is  no.
.  .  .  Now,  as  indicated,  and for  example,  by a  statement of
President   Roosevelt   in   1943,   the   United   States  has  inter-
preted  the  criterion   affecting  the  use  of  gases  or  any  other
method  of  warfare   as  outlawing   the  use  of  what  President
Roosevelt  described   as  "inhumane   devices   of  warfare"  and
which   President   Roosevelt   spoke   of   as   "outlawed   by   the
general  opinion  of  civilized  mankind."    Now  the  use  of  tear
gas,  at  least  in  instances  of  the  type  which  I  have  cited,  is
not  contrary   to  international   law  and  practice.
Q:  What  is  the  basis  of  this  statement  that  it  is  not  con-
trary  to  international   law  or  practice?     Is  this  the  judg-
ment  of  the  State  Department   or  are  tear  gases  recognized
by   some  document  as   being   different  than  other  gases  of
the  Protocol ?
Mr.  McCLOSKEY:  Well,  the  basis  for  the  last  statement
cited  by  President  Roosevelt  and  the  judgment   of  the  State
Department  in the present  situation.
Q:  Is  there  any  international   agreement,   understanding,
resolution  or  something  which  recognizes  tear  gas  as  being
How  Those  Who  Dare  Speak  Up  For  Peace  Are  Treated  By  The  Military  In  Vietnam
"The  South  Vietnam  Government, after  a  week  of  coun-
termanding  orders  and  hesitation,  appears  finally  to  have
made  up  its   mind  to  deport  to  North  Vietnam  the  three
men  who  have  become  known  as  'peace-mongers'  for  sign-
ing  a  cease-fire  appeal.    Possibly  through  American  inter-
cession,  though  no  one  can  be  sure,  the  monstrous  plan  to
forcibly  parachute them  into  the  north  has  been  abandoned.
.  .  .  Vietnamese journalists  and foreign  photographers have
been  invited  by  the  Government  to  fly  up  to  record  the  oc-
casion.  .  .  .  The  three—Dr.  Pham  Van  Huyen,   Professor
Ton  That  Duong  Ky  and  a  Journalist, Mr.  Cao  Minh  Thien
—evidently  have  not  been  asked  their  desired   destination.
They  initially  signed  an  appeal  not  to  Hanoi,  like  the  Bud-
dhists,   but  to  the  Communist  'Liberation  Front'  and  the
South  Vietnam  government.    The  Government claims  docu-
mentary  proof  that  they  are  all  linked  with  the  communist
organization,  but  has  not  attempted  to  publish  it.    Neither
has  there  been  any  attempt  to  stage  a  trial."
—From  Saigon in The Times  (London)  March 19.
"They  were  duly  marched  this  morning  across  the  open
bridge  over  the  Ben Hai  river ...  in the  presence  of  their
wives,  who had been  flown  up  from  Saigon.  .  .  .  The  three
men  themselves  were  not  asked  and  were  not  allowed  to
speak  to  the  press.    It  is  understood,   however,  that   two
refused  to  sign  humiliating  pleas  to  remain  in  the   south.
In  the  event,  except  for  one  who  was  jauntily  smoking  a
cigar,  they  trudged  rather  wearily  out  north.    The  end  of
this  sorry  business   is  not  yet  in  sight   for  more  deporta-
tions  are  under  consideration.  .  .  .  One  Army  officer   told
me  today  that  the  idea  was  to  put  the  fear  of  hell  into
anyone  hankering  after  a  'peace  of   communists'."
—From  Saigon  in  The  Times  (London)  March  20.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  29,1965
A  Negro  Congressman  Asks  Us  to  Recall  Those  Nazi  10-for-l  Reprisal  Raids
As  our  bombing  moves  into  the  north,  it  becomes  more
likely  that  [North]   Vietnam  will  have  to  respond  militar-
ily.  Our business  of  reprisal  raids,  which  destroy  a  greater
amount  of  human life  and  property  than  were  destroyed  in
the   Vietcong   raid   originally,  unfortunately   leads   us   to
think  of  the  retaliation  of  the  Nazis  during  World  War  II,
when   they   killed   10   members   of   the   French   resistance
whenever  a  German  soldier  was  killed.    I  am  not  saying
that  our  responses   recently  were  even  nearly  as  inhumane
in  intent  as  the  Nazi's  retaliations,   but  I  do  remind  you
a  device  for  pacification  of  a  population  or  say,  for  use  iis
civic disturbances  and that  sort of thing ?
Mr.  McCLOSKEY:  No,  nothing  has  come  to  my  attention
on the  books in that  specific  respect.
Q:  But  citing  FDR doesn't  prove  anything  legally.  .  . .
Mr.  McCLOSKEY:  Well,  you  have  nothing  stronger   than
my  statement  which  is  the  consensus   of  the  Department  of
State.
Q:  This  might  sound  like  a  facetious  question  but  it  is
not.    If   you  can't  tell  a   healthy   peasant  from   a  healthy
Viet  Cong,  how  the  hell  do  you  tell  a  sick  peasant  from  e
sick VietCong?
Mr.  McCLOSKEY:  Well,  I  don't  accept-rather,  I  do ac-
cept   your   qualification  that  the   question   is  not   facetious.
I  simply can't  answer.
Q:  Do  you  know  how  it  is  used?    If  the  Viet  Cong  take
refuge  in  a  village,  do  you  make  the  village  population  side
and  then  go  in  and  capture  the  men,  shoot  them   or  what?
That  would   seem  to  be  the  implication  of  your  statement.
Mr.  McCLOSKEY: Well,  I  don't  know  about  villages  but
I  have  cited  as  an  example  where  they  have  mingled   with
innocent  people,  villagers  who  may  have  been  in  their  vil-
lage  or  out  of  their  village;  that  it  was  used  in  those  cases.
Q:  There  are  two  different  families   of  this  sort  of   stuff—
there  are  the  chemical  ones  we  are  talking  about  that  go  on
through   the  psycho-chemical;  then,   there   are  also  the   bio-
logical  which  to  the  common mind  usually  means  germ   war-
fare,  but  there  are  biological  that  produce  these  same   symp-
toms  in  some  cases.    Do  you  know  whether—
Mr.  McCLOSKEY:  Thgra  is  one  identification  I  will  give
you  and  then  not  be  able  to  explain  for  this  latter  type  of
gas.    It  is referred  to as CS.
Q: Is that what  we're using?
Mr. McCLOSKEY: Yes,  sir.
Q:  Well,  CS is  the  ordinary  tear  gas  and  not  the  nauseous
stuff.
that  this  kind  of  total  retaliation  to  people  fighting  for  a
cause  can  only  intensify  the  struggle  materially   and  psy-
chologically  and,  in  this  case,  when  a  settlement  must  in-
evitably  be  hoped  for  in  the  hearts  of  all  of  us,  this  pro-
cedure  only  lessens  the  chances  for  peace.    With  a  spread-
ing  war,  negotiation  becomes  more  difficult  and  use  of  nu-
clear  weapons  becomes  a  more  likely  and  monstrous  possi-
bility.  .  .  .  Conference  table  sessions  have  never   been BO
eminently  needed.
—Rep.  Robert  Nix   (D., Penn.), in  the Eouse, March  16.
Elffiw   to  Give  A  Libeira!  More   Confidence
JoEwssoa  City
s
  Tex.—Turning  to   OBC  of  the   [seven]
new  appointees  [named  by  the  Presideat  4® top  Fed-
eral  positions]  he  [Johnson]  said  some  people  "charge
that  you  ere  & left-winger."    To  another  he  said  "you
are  called  a  right-winger."    He  added,  "I  don't  want
you  to  be  any  kind  of   E.  winger.   All  I  want  you  to  do
is  what  is  best  for  America.  . . . For God's  sake, try
to  be ja&cicas."   Johnson  told  why he-bad  held  up  re-
appcisitiiig  Charles  R.  Boss,  Vermont  Republican,  as  a
member  c?  the  Federal  Power  Commission  for   many
mastfeo   cince   his  term   expired  last  June   22.    Ross
listened".  hsienily.    "E dtda't  reappoict  aim   tor  a  long
ticr.3,"  Johzoasi  saisE  of  Ross,  "because  I  was  told  he  is
a  eaEaaraejr'o  advocate.   I  didn't  wast  SB advocate.   I
wanted  a  Judge."   Then  Johnson   said  the  presideot  of
s  MS  EiiMfties  cocspany  and  the  head  of  a  big  gas  com-
pasy   boCSi  told  him  that  Boss  is  "e.  very  fair,   man."
,      "'.3  cdfec".  ibat  Sen.   Aikess  (R.  Vt.),  w&om  he  respects
r    Hgily,  So":,  him  not  to  listen  to  people  describing  Ross
ec  & radical.   The  President  said  he  believes  Ross  will
have  a  "lot   more  assurance  and  confidence."
—Washington  Sunday  Star, March  SI.
Mr.  McCLOSKEY:  I  will  stand  corrected  tten.    Your  in-
formation  is better than  mine.
Q: At least that is what the Pentagon tells me.
Q:  Have  you  received  any  hints  or  murmurs  or  faint  indi-
cations   or  any  other  kind  of  indications  from   North  Viet-
nam   that   they    have    been    impressed   by   our   policy   of
strength  in  North  Vietnam  and  are  considering  talking  to
us?
Mr. McCLOSKEY: I  could not say that they have been.
The  Danger  Signals  That  Warn  of  "Vietnams"  Building  Up  In  This Hemisphere
Danger  signals  fly  in  the  fourth  annual  report  of  the  So»
cial  Progress  Trust  Fund  set  up  by  the  Alliance  for  Prog-
ress.    Population  in  Latin   America  is  growing  at  a  high
rate  (between  2.7  and  2.8%  annually);  total  farm  produc-
tion,  at  a  rate  of  only  1.6%  annually.    The  per  capita  level
of  food  production  is  lower  today  than  10  years  ago.    This
spells  chronic hunger.
The  fundamental   problem  of  this  huge  peasant  area   is
land  reform,  as  the  Alliance  for  Progress  recognized  at  its
inception  but  "to  date  very  little  has  been  accomplished  in
the  field  of  concrete  progress."     The  need  is  illustrated  by
a  chart  which  shows  the  percentage  of  families  either  land-
less  or  with  "minifundia"  land  holdings   too  tiny   for  ade-
quate  subsistence:  Chile  (47.9%),  Brazil  (56.5%) Colombia
(64.2%),  Honduras  (75.1%),  Ecuador   (82.4%),  Guatemala
(83.9%),  Peru  (84.4%),  El  Salvador  (89.2%).    This  spells
a  discontent  that  can  erupt  at  any  time  into  social  revolu-
tion.
The  rural  areas  are  a  sink  of  poverty,  the  urban  areas  a
huge  slum.    A  basic  need  in  the  latter   is   potable  water
and  sanitation.    After  four  years  the  program  in  this  area
is  only  a  third  of  the  goals  originally  set.    The   related
housing  programs  only  scratch  the  surface:  the  report  says
a  reasonable  estimate  of  the  housing  shortage  is  15 million
units  which  would  cost  in  excess  of  $23.5  billions.
Oligarchies  indifferent  to  their  people,  and  unwilling  to
permit  the  breakup of  huge  and  wasteful  landholdings,  are
the  basic  factor  in  this  stagnation.    Pressure  on  them  for
change  has  lessened.    Under  Johnson  the  Alliance   is  less
idealistic  than  under  Kennedy.    We  are  supplying  military
and  police  training  on  an  ever  larger   scale  to  deal  with
popular   unrest.     So   long   as   the   oligarchies   have   these
clubs  at  their  disposal,  they  will  make  little  change.    And
we  may  wake  up  one  morning  to  find  that  they  are  asking
American  troops   to  put  down  "wars   of  liberation."    The
newspapers  will  forget  the  misery  that  bred  them  and  tell
us  they  have  been  caused  by  subversive  agitators,  infiltrat-
ing   from   South   or   North.     Here,   festering,   are   future
Vietnams.    Yet  North  American  opinion  pays  little   atten-
tion  to  the  danger  building  up  on  our  doorstep.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly,  March  t9,1965
Military  Historian  Warns  Against  Letting  Military  Make  Policy
(Continued  from  Page  One)
North.  Our  message  to  them  is  surrender  or  total  destruction.
Bombardment  has  expanded  from  fixed  targets  to   "reconnais-
sance  bombing"  in  which  bombers have  begun  to  go  out  with
orders  to  shoot  up  anything  they  can   find.   Gen.   Maxwell
Taylor,  on  the  eve  of  his  return  to  Washington   for  another
round  of  consultations,  told  the  Saigon  Lions  Club  there  was
no  limit  to  the  potential   escalation  of  the  war.    The  ill-fed
and  ill-armed  fighters  of  the  National  Liberation  Front  have
defeated  us  with  that  same  devotion  under  adversity  that  we
once  showed  at  Valley  Forge  against  a  foreign  power  and  its
mercenaries.     If   Britain   had   acted  then   as  we  do  now  it
would  have  threatened  to  bomb' Paris  unless  the  French  gov-
ernment  shut  off  its  supply  line  and  ordered  the  colonists  to
stop  the  rebellion.    For  the  British  were  as  determined  then
as  we  are  now  to  treat  the  revolt  as  a  subversive  plot  rather
than  the  product  of  long-standing   grievances.
The  Worst  Crime  Is  Silence
The  military,  who  think  force  can  solve  everything,  have
taken  over  the  direction  of  policy.    Pressure  is  being  applied
to  every  maker  of  opinion   to  go  along.    We  even  have  a
reporter   as  able  as  Max  Frankel  of  the  New   York   Times
talked  into  writing  that  escalated  bombing  is  really  a  form  of
negotiation!    Secretary  Rusk,  instead  of  making  policy,  goes
around  like  a  press  agent  lunching  with  editors  to  sell  them
the  Pentagon's  point  of  view.    A  professor  of  humanities  at
Michigan  State,  Thomas  H.  Greer,  who  was  co-author  of  the
seven-volume  "Army  Air  Forces  of  World  War  II"  and  there-
fore  knows  something  of  the  subject,  warns  us  against  this
business  of  following  military  judgment.    In  a  letter  to  the
New   York   Times  last  Sunday  (March  21)   he  reminds  us
how  often  "total  trust  in  the  military"  has  proven  disastrous
for  great  nations:  the  German  general   staff   in  1939   assured
Hitler  of  a  swift  military  victory;  Admiral  Yamamoto,  com-
mander-in-chief  of  the  Japanese  Navy,  was  as  confident; Gen-
eral  MacArthur  told   President   Truman   the   Chinese  would
not  intervene  if  we  escalated  the  war  in  Korea.    "I   could
draw  a  far  longer  catalog  of  errors,"  Prof.  Greer  wrote,   "but
Clarence  Pickett
To  know   Dr.  Clarence   Evan  Pickett  was   to   know
what  the  Friends  mean  by  the  inner  light.    It  shown
from  this  most  unassuming  man.   It  did not  dazzle  but
it  warmed  and  it  was  unforgettable.    Those  whom  the
world  forgot  the  Friends  Service  Committee  under  his
direction  remembered:  textile  strikers  during  the  great
depression,  the  homeless  fleeing  the  Spanish  Civil  War,
Jews  seeking  a  refuge  from  Nazi  Germany,  the  armies
of  the  uprooted  after  World  War  II,  Negro  victims  of
police  brutality.   When  the  Service  Committee  and  Dr.
Pickett  were  awarded  a  Nobel  Peace  Prize  in  1947,  the
Norse   spokesman   said,   "It   is   the   silent   help   from
the   nameless   to   the   nameless   which   is   their     [the
Quaker]  contribution  to  the  promotion  of  brotherhood
among  nations."    Dr.  Pickett  liked  the   phrase.    He
carried  the  torch  of  kindness  from  one  generation  to
another,  a  saintly  figure  in  a  ravaged  world.
these  examples  are  enough  to  dispel  the  myth  of  brass-hat
infallability.  .  .  .  Military  problems  are seldom  strictly  mili-
tary.    They  are  bound  to  involve  matters  of   politics,   eco-
nomics,  legality,  psychology  and  morality—matters  which  sol-
diers  often  find  annoying  and  baffling.    Finally,  war  involves
imponderables  no mortal  can foresee.  .  .  .  Informed  civilians
have an inescapable  duty to speak  out.  . . . The most  insidious
crimes  of  our  time  have  been  those  of  indifference   and  si-
lence."
It  does  the  heart  good  to  see white  men  and  black  march-
ing  together  in  the  deep  South  to  end  ancient  wrong.    But
when  will  Americans  awaken  to  bring  an  end  to  the  crimes
against  humanity  we  are  committing  in  Vietnam?    No  one
asked  the  American  people  whether  gas,  lethal  or  not,  could
be  used.    Who  knows  what  new  horrors  are  being  prepared
behind  the  curtain  of  military  secrecy  while  the   Pentagon's
highest  information  officer   assures  us  of  "complete  candor"?
The  idea  of  victory  in  Vietnam  by  aerial   blackmail   which
Gen.  Power  of  the  Strategic  Air  Command  sets  forth  in  his
new   book  as  "Design   for   Survival"   is  a  design   which  is
bringing   our   country  into   universal   opprobrium   and   can
easily lead  to universal  disaster.
Well  Be Clod Io  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —  Send  A  Stamped  Self-Addressed  Envelope
IFS  and  Senator  Omening  Speak  on  Vietnam  «t  New  York'*  Carnegie  Hill,  8  p.m.,  April  1
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618  Ntbritki  Av«.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C  20015
L F. Stone's Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Pleate  renew   (or  enter)  a  sab  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   .................................
CHy  _.........................................
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)    Name   ...................................................
Street   .............................................................
8/29/66
City   .........................................J5one............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  L  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Clan  Pottage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  the  last  week  In  December  and  the  first  week  In
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  and  August  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An  Independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by  L- F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   *5   in   the   U.S.;    W  In   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rates:
$16  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED