I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965apr12.pdf

============================================================

EXTRA  -  North  Vietnam's  Terms for  Peace, P. 2
For  Once  We  Agree  Whole-Heartedly  With  Barry  Goldwater
"If  Republican  spokesmen  in  the  last  Presidential  cam-     dealing  firmly  with  the  Communists  is  regarded  by  some
paign  had  proposed  the  use  of  non-lethal  gas  in  Vietnam,     commentators  as  warmongering  if  it  comes  from  Republi-
.   .  .  they   would   have   been  depicted  as  dangerous,  hip-     cans,  but  something  entirely  different   if  it  is  carried  out
shooting,  irresponsible  warmongers. .  .  •  Any  proposal  for      by  the  Democrats."
—Barry  Goldwater  in  the New  York  Herald-Tribune April 3.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIII,  NO.  14
APRIL  12,  1966««>«       WASHINGTON,  D.    C.
15  CENTS
Peace  Feelers? Is the Truth About Them  Being Withheld?
At  a  press  conference  April   1,  President  Johnson  gave  a
curious  answer  when  asked   if   he  had   "any  evidence  of   a
willingness  on  the  part  of  the  Communists  to  negotiate"   in
Vietnam.   Mr.  Johnson  replied  that  he  had  "no  evidence that
they  are  ready  and  willing  to  negotiate  under  conditions that
would  be  productive."    (Our  italics.)     It  is  a  pity  there  was
no  opportunity to  obtain  a  clearer  answer.   That  day the  Lon-
don   Times  published   a  letter  from   a  Laborite  member  of
Parliament,   Wm.   Warbey   (see   Page   2),   outlining   North
Vietnam's  offer  of  a  peace  settlement  as  explained  to  him  in
Hanoi  when  he  spoke  with  Ho  Chi  Minh  and  Premier  Pham
Van  Dong  there  ten  weeks  ago.  "They   had  previously  said
it  to  others," he  wrote,  "who  passed  the  message  on  to  Wash-
ington."    Perhaps  this  explains  why  Mr.  Johnson,  instead  of
denying  that  there  had  been  any  peace  feelers,  said  there  had
been  none  he  would  consider  "productive."
Far  from  Candid
This  is  not  the  only  indication  that  the  Administration   is
being  less  than  candid.    In  a  debate  on  the  Vietnamese  war
in  the  British  House  of  Commons  April  1,  a  Laborite  called
attention  to  a  statement by  the  Foreign  Minister  of  Cambodia
which  said  Ho  Chi  Minh  had  responded  favorably to  the  re-
cent  initiative  of  the  non-aligned  countries  for  a  reconvening
of  the  Geneva  conference.   The  Foreign  Secretary  in  his  reply
said  cryptically,  "There  are  now  signs  that  give  more  grounds
for  hope  than  even  a  day  ago."     (The  Times,  London,  April
2).    The  following  day  however  Secretary  Rusk  in  an  inter-
view  with  BBC  did  his  best  to  discourage  hopes  of  negotia-
tion.    He  said  that  in  other  conflicts  such  as  over  Berlin,  Ko-
'rea  and  Laos  there  had  been   "some  private  contact"   which
indicated   that   "a  satisfactory   basis   of  settlement"  could   be
found.    "That  is missing  here," Mr.  Rusk  said.   He  was then
asked  by  the  BBC  man,  "You've  had   silence   completely?"
The  answer  was,  "No   indication  that—despite  a  number  of
contacts of  various sorts—no indication  that  Hanoi  is prepared
to  leave  Laos  and  South  Vietnam  alone."    This  indicates  that
far  from  a  complete  "silence"  there  had  been  "a  number  of
contacts  of  various  sorts"  but  none  which  satisfied  the  Secre-
tary  that  Hanoi  was prepared to  "leave  South  Vietnam  alone."
His  definition  of  this  seems  to  be  that  Hanoi  call  off  the  re-
bellion  in  the  South.    What  did  Hanoi   offer?
Some  indication  is provided  by a New  York  Times  dispatch
from   Moscow  April   1  which  quoted   non-aligned   diplomats
Lying-As-Usual
"In   contrast   to   the   generally   gloomy   conclusions
drawn  by  Senators  and  Representatives  from  Ambas-
sador  Taylor's  testimony  on  Capitol  Hill,  the  Ambas-
sador  presented  an  optimistic  picture  at   the  unusual
press  conference called  by  the  President  in  the  Cabinet
Room  after  the  National Security Council  meeting.   He
said  he  was  'very  much  encouraged'  by  the  new  gov-
ernment  of  Premier  Phan  Buy  Quat.  .  .  ."
—New  York  Times, April  S.
"Saigon,  March  20—The  U.S.  faces  imminent  defeat
in  South  Vietnam.   The defeat  ahead  is  a  military  one.
The  cliche  of  this  war  is   that  the  problem  is  more
political  than  military,  but  the  military  situation  has
been  deteriorating  so  fast   that   political  efforts   have
all  but  collapsed."
—Richard   Dudman  in  the  St.  Louis   Post-Dispatch
March  SO beginning a  six-part  series  on  the  war   after
a  six  week  tour  of  South  Vietnam.
in  that  capital  as saying  that  Hanoi  privately  was not  insisting
on  the  withdrawal  of  U.S.  forces  as  a  precondition  for  talks.
This  supports  Mr.  Warbey's  letter  which  has  not  been   fully
reported  in  this  country.   The  terms,  as  the  reader  will   see,
call  for  neutralization  of  the  North  as  well  as  the  South  and
allow  South  Vietnam  to  determine  its  own  destiny  by  demo-
cratic  means  under  international  guarantees.    Such  terms  can
be  considered   "unproductive"    only   by  those  who   want   to
maintain  a  satellite   military  dictatorship   in  South   Vietnam.
All  this  is  highly  relevant  to  two  new  proposals  put  for-
ward  in  the  Senate  during  the  past  few  days:  One  by  Javits
of  New  York  that  no  combat  troops  be  sent  in  without  first
obtaining  the  approval  of  Congress  by  specific  resolution;   the
other  by McGovern  of  South  Dakota  that  Mr.  Johnson  call off
the  bombing  attacks  and  set  up  an  advisory  council  of   "ex-
perienced  statesmen"  like  Senators  Mansfield,  Russell,  Aiken,
Fulbright  and  Cooper  "who  have  no  personal  stake  in  trying
to  force  the  success  of  our  presently  hopeless  policy."    Mr.
Johnson's   main   advisers,   McNamara,   Rusk,  McCone,   Gen.
Taylor  and  McGeorge  Bundy,  are  men  whose  advice  during
the  past  four  years  on  Vietnam  has  been  consistently  and  dis-
astrously  wrong.    In  any  normal  job  they  would  have  been
fired  for  it  long  ago.    They  ought  not  to  be  allowed  to  com-
pound  past  errors  with  new  and  more  dangerous  adventures
until  the  possibilities  for  peace  have  been  fully  disclosed  and
explored.
5  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  IS,  1965
Both  North  and  South  To Be Neutralized—Separate  Rule  for  South  in  Federal  Union
British Labor MP, Recently Returned from  North Vietnam, on Its Peace Terms
By  Wm.  Warbcy,  MP*
Amid  daily  reports  of  new  horrors  in  the  war  against  the
Vietnamese  people,  one  ray  of  light  breaks  through  from  the
Washington  horizon.    President  Johnson  says  that  he  is ready
to  negotiate  a  peace  settlement,  on  the  basis  of  "a  return  to
the  essentials  of  the  1954  Geneva  agreement."    This  is  pre-
cisely  what  President  Ho  Chi  Minh  and  Prime  Minister  Pham
Van  Dong  said  to  me  ten  weeks  ago  in  Hanoi—as  they  pre-
viously  said  it  to others who  passed  their  message on  to  Wash-
ington.    Moreover,  they  spelt  out  dearly   what  they  meant:
The  South  Would  Govern  Itself
1.  International  recognition  of  the  independence  and  unity
of  Vietnam  as  one  country  and  one  people.    2.  International
recognition   of  the  existence,  daring  a  transitional  phase,  of
two  separate  and  equal  political  administrations in  Hanoi  and
Saigon.    3.  The  right  of  the  people  of  the  Northern  zone  to
live  in  peace  under  a  government   whose  authority  they  have
visibly  accepted  for  11  years.    4.  The  right  of  the  people  of
the  Southern  zone  to  form  and  support  a  government   which
genuinely  represents  all  the  major  sections  of  the   Southern
population.    5.  The  right  of  the  whole  of  Vietnam  to  enjoy
freedom  from  any kind  of  foreign  intervention  in  its  internal
affairs.     6.  The   right   of   the  people  of   Vietnam   to   solve
through  free  and  equal  negotiations  between  the  two  admin-
istrations  the  problems  of  the  reunion  of  divided  families,  of
the  reopening   of.  trade,   communications  between  North  and
South,  of   free   access  to  homes  and   lands,  and  of   eventual
political   reunification  under   a  possibly  federal   government.
7.  The  right  of  each  of  the  two  political   administrations  to
enjoy  economic,  cultural  and  "fraternal"   relations  with  coun-
tries  of  its  choice.    8.  The  reaffirmation  of  the  military neu-
trality  clauses  of  the  Geneva  Agreement,  providing  that  there
shall  be  no  foreign  bases  and  no  imported  foreign  arms,  ex-
cept  as  replacements,  and  that  no  part  of  Vietnam  shall  enter
into  a military alliance with  any foreign  power,  except  in  self-
defense  if  attacked by  a  foreign  power.
In  addition,  Mr.  Pham  Van  Dong   told   me  emphatically
Clear  and  Unmistakable  Evidence:
Vietcong   Weapons  of  Red  Origin
—  Red  American  Indian,  That  Is
El   Paso,   Tex.   (UPI)—Capt.  Francisco  I.   Pena,  an
Army   physician,   may  be  the   first   soldier   since   Gen.
Custer  to  get  the   Purple   Heart   for  an  arrow   wound.
Capt.  Pena,   originally  from  McAllen,  Texas,  was  shot
with  a  crossbow  in  Vietnam.  .  .  .  Two  months  after
Capt.  Pena  was  wounded,  a  lieutenant   in  another  outfit
got  the  same  kind  of  wound.    "I wanted  to  see  him  and
sympathize,"   Capt.  Pena  said.    "I  had  been  kidded   so
much  about  my  wound  that  I  knew  what  he  was  in   for."
—New  York  Times,  April  S.
* British  Labor  MP,  in  a  letter,  London  Times,  April   1.
that  this  time  his  government  will  insist  that  these  rights  and
conditions  shall  be  embodied  in  an  international  treaty  bind-
ing  on  all  the  participants.    I  challenge  any  impartial   per-
son  to  find  anything  unreasonable  in  these  proposals.     They
are  known  to  be  acceptable  to  France,  Cambodia,  the  Soviet
Union  and  China.   They  must  be  acceptable to  Britain.    Now
it  appears  they  are  acceptable  to  President  Johnson  as  well.
What,  then,  holds  up  a peace  conference,  and  the  ending  of
the  slaughter?   North  Vietnamese  insistence  on  a  withdrawal
of  American forces  as  a  precondition?    No.    Mr.  Pham  Van
Dong  was emphatic  that  this  was not  a  pre-condition.  ,  .  .
The  only  precondition  is  the  Americans  and  the  South  Viet-
namese  Air  Force  must  stop  their  attacks  on  North  Vietnam.
Here  is  a  dilemma,  because  the  Americans make  the  same  de-
mand  the  other  way  around.    The  only  way  out  is  surely  a
simultaneous  cease-fire  by  all  the  four  parties  to  the  conflict:
the  South  Vietnam  People's  Liberation  Army;  the  Army  and
Air   Force  of   the   Saigon  Government;   the   Americans;   the
North   Vietnamese   Government.     The   ICC   [International
Control   Commission]   members—India,   Canada,   Poland—
could  arrange this  all-around  cease-fire,  and  supervise  it.    And
all  the  parties,  including  the  Great   Powers  and  the  warring
parties  within Vietnam  could  come  simultaneously  to  the  Con-
ference  table  at  Geneva,  Warsaw,   Paris  or  Rangoon,   at  the
invitation   of—say—Britain,   France,   the   Soviet   Union   and
Cambodia.    Why  not?
Opening  the  ADA  Convention  With  a  Speech  That  Might Have  Been  Given  at  Pentagon
"Ever  since  the  pace  of  the  hostilities  in  Vietnam  acceler-
ated,   and  particularly   since  the  Administration's  decision
to  bomb  North   Vietnam,   there  has  been  a  certain  element
of  hysteria  in  liberal  circles.  .  .  .  What   particularly  dis-
turbs  me  is   the  growth  of  part-time  pacifism,   or  liberal
isolationism. ...  I  recall  distinguished  liberal  and socialist
spokesmen   informing   us   that   Hitler   was  just   a  rational
spokesman  for  German  national  interest.  .  .  .
"This  examination  of  U.S.  options  in  Asia  will  begin  with
an  analysis  of  the  character  of  the  main  enemy—Red  China
.  .  .  the  Red  Chinese  have  been  at  war  with  us  since   1950.
.  .  .  Our power   is  being  dissipated  in  a  Balkan   war.  .  .  .
We  are  in  the  right  war,  but  in  the  wrong  place    The  fu-
ture  of  Asia  cannot  be  determined  in  Indochina. ...  If  a
full  war broke  out,  Vietnam ...  would  be a net liability. ...
"The  Johnson  Administration's  tactics  .  .  .  has been  fero-
ciously   attacked   as   immoral,   vicious   and  provocative   at
innumerable   political  prayer  meetings  in  recent  weeks.  .  .  .
There is nothing  more  immoral  about  bombing staging areas
in  North   Vietnam  than  there  is  in  North  Vietnamese   sup-
port  for  Vietcong  terrorists  in  the  South.  .  .  .  Yet  I  am
opposed  to  it  because  even  if   (as  I  expect  would  be  the
case)  no  general  war occurs.  .  .  .  Hanoi  can  drag  us  from
a   marginal  intervention   (27,000  troops)   into  a  full  scale
Balkan  war  without  overt  Chinese  assistance.  .  .  .  Conse-
quently  we  should  not  raise  the  ante  with  Hanoi,  but  should
intensify  our  commitment  in  the  South  to  the  level  where
only  conventional  techniques   (not   guerrilla  tactics)   could
seriously  hurt  us  ...     and plan  to  hold  on  indefinitely."
—John  P.  Roche  of  Brandeis,  retiring  chairman  of   the
ADA  at  the  opening   of  its  18th  annual  convention in  Wash-
ington,  D.C.  April  2.   The  convention,  after   heated  debate,
adopted   a  resolution  calling  for  a  cease-fire   and  neutraliza-
tion  of  Indochina.    A   sentence  saying,  "ADA    believes  the
Administration's  aims  are  not  different    from  its  own"   was
struck  out  of  the   draft   as  originally   prepared.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  12,1965
Powell  Warns War On Poverty,  Too,  Requires  New  Non-Racist  Officials  in  South
If  We  Void  Elections  for  Reapportionment,  Why  Not  for Civil  Rights?
The  civil  rights  groups  that  know  the  South  best  because
they  are  working  in  its  small  towns  and  rural  areas  have  been
warning  Congress  of  the  need  to  provide  far  more protection
for  the  Negroes  whom  the  Administration's  voting  rights  bill
will  register.    Their  main  proposal   would  require  new  elec-
tions  within  six  to  nine  months  after   a  county  receives  its
federal  registrar.    "How   effective  will  this  bill  be  in  Neshoba
County,  Mississippi,"  a  representative  of  the  Freedom  Demo-
cratic  Party  asked   rhetorically   at  a  House  Judiciary   hearing,
"if   local  law  enforcement  remains  in   the  hands   of   Sheriff
Rainey  and  Deputy  Sheriff  Price  for  four  more  years?"
No  Elections  Until  1968
The   same  question   might   be  asked  of  all  the   Black  Belt
counties   throughout   Alabama,   Louisiana   and   Georgia.     In
none  of  these  will   there   be  new  elections  until   1968,   and
Mississippi's   municipal   officers  will  not  come  up  for  re-elec-
tion   again  until   1969.     "Passage  of  this  voting   rights  bill
without   requiring  new  elections,"   the   Student  Non-Violent
Coordinating  Committee  warned  in  its  testimony,  "will  lead
directly  to  a  degree  of  terror  and  intimidation  yet  unseen  in
the  civil  rights  movement."    "This  bill  in  effect   leaves  vio-
lence  and  intimidation  as  the  only  out  for  those  who  would
prevent  Negro  voting,"  SNCC  said,  pointing  to  the  Ku  Klux
Klan's  reign  of  terror  when  Congress  first  gave  Negroes   the
right  to  vote  after  the  Civil  War.
This  is  the  most  serious  problem  that  the  present  voting
bill   fails  to   face.     Its   only   remedy  makes  intimidation  of
Negro  voters  a  federal  crime  punishable  by  a  $5,000  fine  or
five  year's  imprisonment  or  both.     Although   this  is  an  ad-
vance  over  the  civil  penalties  of  previous  bills,  it  still  relies
upon  the  dubious  premise  of  conviction  by  Southern  juries.
New  elections  would  circumvent  this  problem,  and  both  the
legal   precedent    and   constitutional    authority   for   requiring
them  are  unambiguously  clear.    In  the  reapportionment  cases,
federal   courts  in  New   York,   Connecticut   and  Virginia  are
shortening   existing  legislative   terms  by  requiring  new   elec-
tions  wherever   the  value   of   votes   in  different  districts  has
been  diluted  by gerrymandering  or  population  shifts.    Should
not   this   same   remedy   apply  where   there   has   been   disen-
franchisement  on  the  basis  of   race  or  color?    The   reappor-
Critics  Barred?
There was  some  evidence that  the  White  House want-
ed  its  Conference  on  International  Cooperation,  sched-
uled  for  next  winter,  to  prepare  the  way  for  a  major
breakthrough  in  the  cold war.   The  same  private inter-
ests  that  underwrote  the  recent  Pacem  in  Terris meet-
ing  have  agreed  to  finance  the  preliminary committee
work.    When  the  President   announced  the   Conference
last   month,   he  spoke  of   it   as   leading  to   "new  and
thoughtful  evaluations"  of  what  we  can  do  in  interna-
tional  relations.   But  at  the  first  committee meetings,
March  23,  Leo  Goodman,  an  AFL-CIO  expert  on atomic
energy  and  a  frequent  critic  of  the  AEC,  was  barred
from  attending  the  session  on  atomic  energy.  The  AEC,
Goodman   later   learned,  was   disturbed   that   his   ap-
pointment  had  not  been  cleared  first  with  the  Commis-
sion I If  this is  the  way  government agencies  are  stack-
ing  the  Conference, it  will  be  suspect  from  the  start.
tionment  cases,  it  is  true,  have  been  based   on  court  action
under   the   14th   Amendment.    But   the   15th   Amendment,
which  is the  basis  for  the  voting  rights  bill,  clearly   empowers
Congress,  as  distinguished  from  the  federal  courts,  to  remedy
denial  of  the  right  to  vote  because  of  race  or  color.
There   is  a   second   compelling   reason   for   new   elections.
In   testimony  before   House   Judiciary,  Rep.   Adam   Clayton
Powell,  whose  Labor  Committee  is  in  charge  of  the  Poverty
Program  legislation,  said  that  in  the  South  today  "the   War
on  Poverty  is  completely   stymied  by  these  local  officials.   The
War   on  Poverty  is  for  white  people  only."    SNCC's   testi-
mony  offered  these  statistics:  It  said  that  in  Mississippi,   "the
poorest   state  whose  Negro  population   is  the  poorest   of   the
poor,"  only  one-quarter  of  the  State's  82  counties  allow  sur-
plus  government  food  to  be  distributed  to  the  population   at
anytime  of  the  year.   Discrimination in  the  use  of  local  school
funds,  according  to  the  State's  own  figures  for  1960,   "reached
a  point  of  more  than  $100  being  spent  for  each  white  child
to  $1  for  each  Negro  child."    This   is  the  terrible  cost  of
delaying  local  elections  in  the  South.    Under  pressure  from
the  civil   rights  movement,   Congress  is  now  tightening  the
Administration's  bill  and  extending  its  geographic   coverage.
But  only  a  provision  for  voiding  racially  rigged  elections  can
thwart  the  ingenuity  of  the  white   supremacists.
When  It  Comes  to  The  Klan,  HUAC's  Chairman  Sounds  Like  Mr.  Justice  Holmes
It's  hard  to  teach  an  old  dog  new  tricks.   The  Chairman
of   the   Un-American  Activities  Committee,  in  announcing
that  it  had  voted  unanimously to  investigate  the  Klan,  said
this  would  not  be  enough  to  reestablish  "peace  and  order."
"There  are  other  racial  agitators  at  work  in  all  parts  of  the
country,"   Chairman  Willis   (D.   La.)   said,   "Communist  in-
fluence  is  at  work  in  this   field."   HUAC's  conditioned  re-
flexes  always  lead  it  back  in  the  same  direction.
On  April  3,  to  his  credit,  Attorney  General  Katzenbach
suddenly  called  a  press  conference   intended  to  head  off  a
Red  hunt  into  the  civil  rights  movement.    He  said  it  was
not   true  at   all   that  Communists had  obtained  control  or
influence  over  any  of  the  civil  rights  organizations or  their
leadership.    But  that  won't  keep  the   un-Americans   from
finding  their  favorite   plot.
Though   Mr.   Willis,   in   his   prepared  statement   called
"Klanism  incompatible with  Americanism," he  sounded  like
a  charter member  of  the  American Civil  Liberties Union on
Face  the  Nation  April  4,  in  discussing  his  forthcoming in-
vestigation  of  the  Klan.    "We  are  embarking  in  sensitive
areas.  .  .  .  First  we  have to  dig  hard for  facts,  facts,  facts.
...  By activities I  mean  just  that.   I  don't  mean  thoughts,
beliefs   or  anything   of   the   sort."    HUAC  members  don't
usually  sound  off  like  Oliver  Wendell Holmes.
We  don't  understand this  talk  of  legislation  to  deal  with
the  Klan.    Where  it  commits  crimes,  there  is  no  dearth  of
criminal  laws to  deal with them.   The  difficulty  is  in  getting
convictions  because  white  juries  in  the  South  consider  ter-
ror  against  Negroes  and  civil  rights  workers  more  or  less
meritorious  action.    The  roots  of   the   problem  lie   in  this
atmosphere.    For  this  purpose  a  Presidential  Commission
to   investigate   patterns   of   violence,   as   proposed   by   the
Southern  Christian  Leadership Conference  in  a  telegram  to
the  President  opposing  an  inquiry  by  HUAC,  makes  sense.
5   'I
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  IS,  1965
Saskatchewan  Doctors,  Who  Once  Struck   Against  It,  Find  Social  Medicine  Profitable
Some  Dangerous  Concessions  to  the  AMA  in  the  New  Health  Care  Bill
Rep.  Wilbur  Mills   (£>.,  Ark.)    and  his  Ways  and  Means
Committee  have  produced  a  health  care  bill  for  the  aged  that
is  a  compromise  with  the  AMA.    From   the  standpoint  of
benefits,   the  bill   offers   an  enlarged   version  of  the   liberals'
own  proposals.    It  contains the  Administration's plan  for  hos-
pital  care  under  Social  Security  plus  a  new  voluntary  insur-
ance  program.    In  the  latter,  the  government  will  pay  out  of
general  revenue  half  the  cost  of  all  doctor  services.  The  other
half  of  the  cost  will  be  covered  by  $3  monthly  contributions
from   the  aged.    This  neatly  turns  the  tables  on  the  AMA,
which   campaigned   against   medicare  on  the   ground   that   it
failed  to  cover  doctor  bills.    But  this  progress  is  balanced  off
with  an  AMA-type  plan  of  administration  that  fails  to  pro-
vide  effective  control   over  the  quality  and  spiraling   cost  of
medical   care.
Regulation   By  Self-Audit
The  private   health   insurance  carriers   have   been   virtually
ineffective  in  this  area.    Commercial  carriers  are  timorous  be-
cause  they  depend  on  doctors'  good  will  for  new  customers.
Blue  Shield  is  run  almost  solely  by  doctors,  and  public  rep-
resentation  on  Blue  Cross  boards  is  outnumbered   two-to-one.
Yet  the  health  care  bill  places  in  the  hands  of  these  private
carriers  full  responsibility  for  auditing  the  charges  of  the  doc-
tors   and   hospitals   under   the   voluntary   insurance   program.
This  is  little  better  than  a  self-audit.
The  voluntary  insurance  program   will  be  difficult   to   dis-
mantle  once  it  gets  started.    Vested  medical  interests  will  see
it  as  a  subsidy  and  will  try  to  channel  future  extensions   of
federal   health   insurance  into   it  rather  than   into   the   Social
Security  System,  where  the  danger  of  bankrupting  the  entire
System  would  force  the  government  to  pay  close  attention  to
medical  costs.
A  second  major  concession  to  the  AMA  is  the  treatment  of
medical  specialists  at  work  in  hospitals.    The  hospitals  prefer
to  pay  these  specialists  a  salary  rather  than  permit  them  a
fee-for-service  for  each  patient.    The  reason  is  that  the  spe-
cialists,  particularly  pathologists  and  radiologists,  evaluate  the
performance  of  surgeons  and  other  doctors  who  practice  at  the
Just  A  Cigar  Makers'  Plot
"You  know  tobacco is  a  real  big  money  industry,  one
of  the  biggest   in  the  United  States.    I  remember  im-
mediately  after  the  Surgeon  General's  report,  a  friend
of  mine  asking what  effect  I  thought  it  would  have.   I
said,   'If   I  was   in  the   investment  business,   if   I  had
money  to  invest,  I  would go  buy cigar  stock.'   I  got  the
paper  this  morning.   I  won't  name the  company, but  a
prominent  cigar  manufacturing company,  the  stock  at
that  time  was  on  the  market.   Shortly  after  I  checked
it  at  $27.   Today  it  is  listed  at  $40-  plus.    I  wonder
if  perhaps  some  of  the  real  influence  behind  the  busi-
ness  of  cigarettes  and  leaving  cigars  alone  and  pipes
alone,  I  wonder  if  maybe some  of  it  is  being  inspired
by   some  people  who   are   interested   in   selling   more
cigars."
—Sen.  Rosa   Bass   (D.,  Tenn.),  at   Sen.   Commerce
Committee  hearings  on  Cigarette  Advertising,   Mar. SO.
hospital.  Without  an  independent  salary,  the  specialists  would
become  dependent   for   their   livelihood   upon   referrals  from
the  doctors  whom  they  supervise.   The  health  care  bill  weak-
ens  this  form  of  quality  control  by  refusing  to  reimburse  hos-
pitals  for  the  services  of  its  medical  specialists;  it  forces  the
specialists  to  charge  a  separate  fee  to  each  aged  patient.    For
30  years  the  AMA  has  unsuccessfully  been  fighting  this  sys-
tem  of  quality control.   What  it  has  been  unable  to  do,  Con-
gress  is  about  to  do  for  it.
It  is  time  for  liberals  in  Congress  to  face  this  issue  of  the
quality  and  especially  the  cost  of  medical  care.    If  the  gov-
ernment  is  footing  the  bill,  it  should  pay  the  salary  too.  The
recent  experience   in  Canada  with  socialized  medicine  is  in-
structive.     In   Saskatchewan,   in   1962,   doctors   went   on   a
23-day  strike  to  protest  a  total  health  care  plan.    Today,  ac-
cording  to  the  Wall  Street  Journal  (Feb.  15),   the  plan  has
brought  a '10%  increase  in  the  number-of  doctors   practicing
in  the  province,  and  doctors'   earnings  have  climbed   "due   to
an  increased volume of  service  and  negligible  collection  prob-
lems."    If  the  AMA  were  really  interested  in  the  welfare  of
its  members,  it  would   be  telling   them   about   this  new  way
of  practicing  medicine  in   Canada.
We'll  Be Clod to Send A  Sample  Copy of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I. F, Stone's  Weekly
Please   renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Name
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
4/12/65
For  the  enclosed  15  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(*>)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $545  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fiftlet
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'i  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday   except  the  last  week  In  December  and  the  first  week  In
January  and  Bi-Weekly  during   July   and  August  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
br  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;    *6   In   Canada:   (10   elsewhere.    Air   Mall   rates:
$16  to  Europe:   120  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED