I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965nov22.pdf

============================================================

What  Washington  Hides  About  Viet  Peace  Feelers
Documentary:  How  Peking's  Polemics  Lifted  the  Curtain  on  Soviet  Peace  Efforts,  Page  3
/. R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XII,  NO.  39
NOVEMBER  22,  1965'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15   CENTS
Time  To  Tell  The  Truth  For  A  Change
"We  are  ready  now,  as  we  always  have  been,  to  move
from  the  battlefield   to  the  conference   table.   I  have  stated
publicly,   and   many   times,   again   and   again,   America's
willingness   to   begin  unconditional   discussions   with   any
government  at  any  place at  any  time.   Fifteen   efforts    have
been made  to  start  these discussion^  with  the  help  of  40  na-
tions  throughout  the  world,  but  there  has  been no answer."
—LBJ  announcing troop  buildup in Vietnam July 28.
As  in  the  U-2  incident,   our  government   has  again   been
caught  in  falsehood.    It  owes  the  country  an  honest  explana-
tion  before  more  of  our  sons  die  in  Vietnam.    The  State  De-
partment's  admissions  in  the  wake  of  Eric  Sevareid's  revela-
tions  in  Look  explain  a  cryptic  remark  made  by UN   Secretary
General  U  Thant  last  February  and  a  mysterious  leak  at  UN
headquarters  in  New  York  last  August.    "I  have  been  con-
ducting  private  discussions  on  the  question  of  Vietnam  for  a
long  time,"  U  Thant  told  a  press  conference  Feb  24,  "I  am
sure  that  the  great   American  people,  if  only  they  knew  the
true  facts  and  the  background  to  the  developments  in  South
Vietnam,  will  agree  with  me  that  further  bloodshed  is  un-
necessary."    Then  he  added  sadly,  "As  you know  in  times  of
war   and  of  hostilities   the  first  casualty  is  truth."    He  was
slapped  down  the  same  day  in  a  curt  White  House  statement.
A  Whopper  Sets Off  A  Leak
This brings us to  the  leak,  which  now  falls  into  perspective.
"In  20  months,"  Mr.  Johnson  said  in  a  White  House  speech
Aug.  3,  "we  have  agreed  to  15  different  approaches  to  try  to
bring  peace,  and  each  of  them  has  been  turned  down  by  the
other  side."    This   was" too  much  for  someone  at  UN  head-
quarters.    Someone  called  in  two  UN   correspondents,  Hella
Pick  of  the  Manchester  Guardian  and  Darius  S.  Jhabvala  of
the  New   York   Herald-Tribune   and  leaked   the  story  which
the  State  Department  has  now confirmed, that  only  11  months
earlier  in  Sept.  1964  we turned  down  a  chance for  secret  peace
talks  U  Thant   had  arranged  with  the  North  Vietnamese.*
It  appeared  in  the  Herald-Tribune  Aug.  8  and  in  the  Man-
chester  Guardian Aug.  9.    The  account  in  the  latter   suggests
that  the  source of  the  story was  someone  close  to  Adlai  Steven-
son  and  that  he  told  it  in  such  a  way  as to  put  the  blame  on
the  State  Department  and  avoid  direct  criticism  of  Kennedy
and  Johnson.
The  Manchester Guardian story  said  Washington  had  "cold
shouldered  at  least  two  opportunities  for  contacts  with  North
Vietnam  in  the  last  two  years.    The  first  was  after  the  fall  of
Diem  in  the  fall  of   1963,  when  Hanoi   "was  willing  to  dis-
cuss  the   establishment  of   a  coalition   neutralist   government
* An  earlier  hint  of  this  had  appeared  the  previous  April  18
in  a  dispatch   to  the  St.   Louis   Post-Dispatch  from   its   UN
correspondent,  Donald  Grant.
Historic   Victory
Only  those  who  lived,  and  fought  through,  the  post-
war witch hunt  of  the late 40s will be able fully  to  savor
the   Supreme  Court's  unanimous  opinion  last   Monday
striking   down  the  registration  provisions  of   the   In-
ternal  Security  Act  as  unconstitutional.   The  Act  origi-
nated  in  the  Mundt-Nixon  bill  in  1948,  a  product  of  the
atmosphere   created   by   the   Hiss-Chambers  case.     It
came  out  of  the  House  Un-American  Activities   Com-
mittee,  and  it  was  the  pride  and  joy  of  that  up-and-
coming  young  Congressman  Richard  Nixon.    Some  of
the  country's  most  conservative  lawyers,  led  by  John
W.  Davis,  opposed  the  bill.   Mr. Justice  Tom  Clark  was
then  Attorney  General  and proudly  recalled  ia  his   con-
curring  opinion  Monday   that  he,  too,  opposed  it.    The
Court's  decision  is  a  triumph  for  Harry  Truman.   Just
15  years  ago  as  President  he  vetoed  the  Act  in  an
eloquent  defense  of  civil  liberties  only  to  have  it  passed
over  his  veto.    He  said  its  provision  for  a  Subversive
Activities   Control   Board   would   put   the   government
into  "the   thought  control  business."   The  decision  was
also  a  triumph  for  Warren,  Black,  Douglas  and  Bren-
nan.     Four  years  ago  they  dissented  when  the   Court
upheld  the  registration  provisions  but  declined  to  pass
on  the  question  of  whether  they  were  enforceable  under
the  Fifth  amendment.    Black's  dissent  will  live  as  one
of  the  finest  defenses  of  First  Amendment  rights  ever
handed   down   from   our  highest   bench.     Mr.  Justice
Brennan's  decision  Monday  limited  itself  to  holding  the
registration  provisions contrary  to  the  privilege  against
self-incrimination.    Never   was   an  historic  issue  de-
cided  in  a  drabber  opinion.   But  it  does  finally  bury  the
idea  that  the  government  can  police  ideas  as  it  does
pure  food  and  drugs,  forcing  suspected  Communist  or-
ganizations  or fronts  to  register  and to  label  their  pub-
lications  and radio-TV  broadcasts  as  communistic.  Since
the   judgments   of   the   Subversive   Activities   Control
Board  rested  on  parallels  between  positions  taken  by
Moscow  and those  taken by  domestic  organizations,  and
since  Communists  also  espouse  many  progressive  ideas,
the  way  was  open  to  proscribe  radical  and  liberal  or-
ganizations  of  many  kinds  as  communistic.   The  South-
ern  atmosphere,  where  the  whole  civil  rights  movement
is  regarded  as  a  Communist  plot,  enables  one  to  under-
stand  the  use  that  could be  made  of  such a statute.   So
do  the  current  attacks  on  the  peace  movement.    From
time  to  time  we  are  accused  of  optimism  and  of   undue
faith  in  free  American  institutions.   Such  splendid  vic-
tories  may  help  explain  these  failings.    To  John  Abt
and  Joseph  Forer,  the  Communist  party's  lawyers  in
the   long  fight  against   this   Act,   our  congratulations.
in  Saigon."    Note  that  the  reference  was  to  a  coalition  neu-
tralist  government  and  not  to  a  National   Liberation   Front
government.   This  throws  light  on  another  cryptic  remark  by
U  Thant  at his  press  conference last  February.    "In  my view,"
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
1  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  22, 1965
(Continued  from   Page   One)
he  then  said,  "there  was  a  very  good  possibility  in   1963   of
arriving  at  a  satisfactory  political  solution."     The   second   lost
opportunity  mentioned   in  the   Manchester   Guardian   account
was  the  secret  meeting  to  which  Ho  Chi  Minh  had  agreed  in
September,   1964,  but  which  we  rejected.   The  Guardian  went
on  to  say:
Details  of  these  peace  moves  have  come  from  an  unim-
peachable  source.    The  State  Department,  however,   seems
to  be  dismissing  the  report  of  Ho  Chi  Minh's  willingness  to
talk  last  year  as  irrelevant.    It  says  there  was  no  indica-
tion  that  anything  would  come  of  it,  and  hints  that  Presi-
dent  Johnson  was  not  involved  in  the  matter at  all.    Nor  is
it  clear  whether  the  State  Department ever  informed  Presi-
dent  Kennedy  that  Hanoi  was  willing to  talk  after  the  fall
of  Diem.   MR. ADLAI  STEVENSON  CERTAINLY KNEW
OF  THESE  MOVES,  AND  IT APPEARS  TO HAVE  BEEN
ONE  OF  HIS  GREAT  REGRETS  THAT   WASHINGTON
DID  NOT  REACT  POSITIVELY.   (Emphasis  added.)   The
intermediaries   who  were  involved  in  the   effort   to   bring
about   a  meeting   between   Hanoi  and  Washington   believe
that  the  Communist  position  hardened  as  a  result  of  Wash-
ington's  negative  attitude.
Two  Other  Peace  Efforts
Sevareid's  account  of  his  talk  with  Stevenson  shortly  before
the  latter's  death  last  July  adds  to  the  August  leak.  It  reveals
that  U  Thant  made  two  more  attempts  at  peace.    The  Septem-
ber  meeting  was  rejected  for  .fear   that  it  might   leak  to   the
Goldwater  forces  during  the  election  campaign.    "When  the
election  was  over,"  Severaid  relates,  "U  Thant  again   pursued
the  matter;  Hanoi  was  still  willing  to  send  its  man.    But  De-
fense  Secretary  McNamara,   Adlai  went  on,  flatly  opposed  the
attempt."    The  argument   against   peace  talks  was  that    "the
South   Vietnamese   government    would   have   to   be   informed
and  that  this  would  have  a  demoralizing  effect  on  them;  that
government  was  shaky  enough  as  it  was."    McNamara  denied
this  and  the  State  Department's   spokesman   last  Monday   said
the  Secretary  of  Defense   "did   not  participate  in  the  U.S.   gov-
ernment  handling  of  this  matter."  But  the  spokesman  did  not
deny  that   a  second   Rangoon   meeting  with  the  North   Viet-
namese  was  possible  after  the  election.    U  Thant's  next   effort
was  a  cease-fire  offer  on  U.S.   terms.    On  this,  the  spokesman
was  evasive.    He  said  it  was  not  true  that  U  Thant  "at  any
time  said  he  would  accept  any  formulation  concerning  a  cease-
fire  that  the  U.S.  might  propose—although  he  did  advance  his
own  suggestions."   When  pressed  for  clarification,  the  spokes-
How   State   Dept.   Fogs  The  Peace   Issue
A. ...  On the  basis  of  the  total  evidence  available to
us,  we  did  not  believe  at  any  time  that  North Vietnam
was  prepared for  serious  peace  talks.  .  .  .
Q.  Could  you  help us  understand what were the  issues
that  you  could  identify   for  us  that  would  have  given
the   U.S.   government  the  feeling  that  North  Vietnam
was  ready  for  serious  peace  talks?    What  were  the  in-
gredients  that  were  missing?
A.  The   Secretary  of   State  has  told  you  repeatedly
that   this   is   something  he   would  recognize   when   it
comes  along,  and he  has  his  antenna exposed  and  sensi-
tive  at  all  times.    He  has  not  yet  detected  any   such
signal.  .  . .
Q.  Well,  then,  when  Secretary  Rusk  says,  as  he   is
fond  of  saying,  that  he  could be  in  Geneva or  anywhere
else  tomorrow  if  somebody  really  wanted  to  talk  peace
with  him,  he  does  not  mean  that.    He  means  if   they
wanted  to  talk  peace  with him  on  the  basis  of  some  un-
stipulated   determination  that   he   is   to   make   as   to
whether  this  was  really  worthwhile.
A.  Well again,  I  think  that what we  are  talking about
is—we   have  pointed  out   here—we   hear   all   kinds  of
things  through  direct,  sometimes  indirect  contacts   in
various  parts  of  the  world  that  the  other  side  is  inter-
ested.    But  we  have  not  seen  any  evidence  of  that.  .  .  .
Q.  Bob,  could  you  say  what  could  be  regarded  as  evi-
dence  of  willingness  to  talk  on  the  other  side.  .  .  . What
would  we  consider  evidence?
A.  Well,  I  think  that   you  must  appreciate  that   it
would  not  be well  advised to  get  in  our own  way  by  lay-
ing   down  what   we   would  consider   to  be   specifically
acceptable.
—State  Dept.  press  conference   Nov.  15.
man  would  only  say,  it  would  be  "highly  inappropriate  to  dis-
close  the  details."    The  Department  always  seems  to  consider
candor  inappropriate.    Through  this  bureaucratic  fog  we  can
see  that  the  Department   dares  not  deny  the  second   Rangoon
meeting  it  turned  down  nor  the  offer  of  a  cease-fire.     "Steven-
son,"  Sevareid's  account  continues,  "told  me  that  U  Thant was
furious  over  this  failure  of  his  patient  efforts  but  said  nothing
publicly."
Apparently   U   Thant   persevered   in   his   efforts,   however.
For  if  one  goes  back  and  rereads  the  transcript   of  the   Feb.
24  press  conference  one  sees  that  he  said  he  had  "presented
concrete   ideas  and   proposals"   to  the   principal   parties   con-
cerned,  including the  U.S.  but  that  the  results  "have  not  been
conclusive."    Next  day  UN   headquarters   reported  a   message
Another  Sample of  the  Double-Talk With Which State  Dept. Answers Peace  Feeler  Queries
"Dear  Mr.  Stone:  I  was  curious  about  your  statement  on
Page  4  of  your  October  25  publication  wherein  you  pointed
out  that  Hanoi  had  offered  to  negotiate   for  peace  on  the
basis  of  4  points  which  possibly  did  not  include  prior  with-
drawal  of  American  troops  from  the  battlefield.    I  am  al-
ways  curious  about  many  things  which  you  say.    However,
I   thought   this   particular  item   I   would  investigate.     The
enclosed   reply   was   received  from   the   State   Department
which  would  infer  that  there  is  very  little  validity  to  your
allegation.    I  am  sure  your  readers  would  be  interested  in
the  State  Department  reply."
—Robert  L.  Lcggett  (D.    California).
"Dear   Congressman  Leggett:  Thank  you  for  your letter
of  October  26  to  Secretary  Rusk  enclosing  an  article  from
the  October  25  issue  of  I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  charging  that
the  United  States   rebuffed   a  recent   offer  from  the   North
Vietnamese  to  enter  negotiations  on  the  situation  in  Viet-
nam.    The  United  States  position  on  peace  talks  has  been
frequently   made  clear,   most   notably  by  the   President   on
April  7  and  reaffirmed  again  on  July  28.   As  for  various  re-
ports  such  as  the  reports  referring  to  an  attempt  last  fall,
or  ones  stemming  from  the  recent  suspension  in  our  bomb-
ing  raids  over  North  Vietnam between  May  13  and  May  17,
1965,   the  Department  is  not  aware  of  any  initiatives  that
could  have  been  described  as  an  honest  bid  for  peace  talks."
—Douglas  MacArthur  II,  Assistant  Secretary  of  State.
The  correspondence  refers  to  an  article  by  Sanford  Gott-
lieb  in  our  Oct  25 issue  which  reported  that  on  the  last  day
of  the  six-day   lull  in  the  bombing  of  the  North  last  May,
Hanoi  offered   to  negotiate  but  the  State  Department    said
the   offer   was   not   the   kind   of  message   we   were   looking
for.—IFS
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  22, 1965
from  Hanoi  that  it  was  sympathetic to  the  proposals  U  Thant
had   outlined   (Facts   on  File   for   1965   p.   74E3).     But   the
same  day  at  a  press  conference  Secretary  Rusk  made  clear  U.S.
rejection.    He  said  the  U.S.  would   not  enter  negotiations   to
end  the  Vietnamese  war  until  North  Vietnam  gave  some  "in-
dication"  that  it  was  "prepared  to  stop  what  it  is  doing  and
what  it  knows  it  is  doing  to  its  neighbors."    This  embodied
the  view  that  the  war  was  a  simple  case  of  aggression    from
the  North  and  implied  that  we  would  not  negotiate  until  the
other  side  laid  down  its  arms.
Hanoi's  Terms  for  Settlement
What  terms  was  Hanoi  thinking  of?     In  the  Weekly   last
April   12,  "Peace  Feelers?  Is  The  Truth  About  Them  Being
Withheld?"  we  reprinted  a  letter  to  The   Times  of  London
April   1  by  William  Warbey,  a  British   Laborite   M.P.   back
from  talks  in  Hanoi  with  Ho  Chi  Minh  and  Prime  Minister
Pham  Van  Dong.    Warbey  outlined  their  terms  for  a  settle-
ment   as  told   to  him  and  previously  "to   others  who   passed
their  message  on  to  Washington."    This  called  for  a neutral-
ized  North   and   South,   with   resumption    of   trade   between
them,  but  with  autonomous  regimes  on  both  sides  of  the  17th
parallel.     "The   people  of  the  Southern  zone"  would  have  the
right   "to   form  and  support   a  government   which  genuinely
represents  all  the  major  sections  of  the  Southern   population"
and  each  zone  would  have  the  right  "to  enjoy  economic,  cul-
tural   and   'fraternal'   relations   with   countries   of   its  choice",
i.e.  South  Vietnam  could  be  linked  economically  and culturally
with  the  West  if  it  so  chose  while  North  Vietnam   presum-
ably   would   remain   linked   with   the   Soviet   bloc.      Warbey
wrote  that  the  only  precondition  on  which  the  North  was  in-
sisting  was  the  cessation  of  bombing   attacks  upon  it.    Note
that  these  terms  did  not  call  for  a  government   based   on  the
National   Liberation  Front  but  on   "all   the  major  sections  of
the  Southern   population,"  and  that  it  was  broad  enough   to
envisage  free  elections.     It  was  also  suggested  that  eventual
reunification   might  be   based   on   a  bi-federal   system.     This
would   seem   to   offer   a  solution   which   would   be   democratic
and  honorable  and  a  face-saver  for  the  U.S.    This  may  make
The   Reality  Behind  Our  Peace   Talk
"The  Johnson  Administration has,  of  course,  repeat-
edly  professed   its  willingness  to  go  to  the  conference
table   at   any   time   and   place   for   what   are   vaguely
termed   'unconditional  discussions.'    With  considerably
less   fanfare,   however,  it   has   made   clear   to   Hanoi
through  neutral intermediaries  and  in  the  fine  print  of
its  public  pronouncements that  it  will  not  countenance
a   Communist  South  Vietnam  or  the   creation   of   any
coalition  regime  in  Saigon  which might  lead  to  a Com-
munist  seizure  of  power.   What Washington  thus  seems
to  mean  by  negotiations  is  a  conference  at  which  Hanoi
would  agree  to  cease  its  activities in the  South, abandon
its  attempt to  unify  the  country  under  Communist  rule
and   acquiesce   in   a   permanent  partition  of   Vietnam.
As  this  would  amount  to  abandonment  of  everything
for  which  the  Vietnamese  Communists  have  fought  for
the  last  20  years,  no  one  here  expects  the  North  Viet-
namese,  as  one  senior  diplomat  put  it,  'to  ratify  their
own  defeat'  as  long  as  they  have  some  chance  of  suc-
cess."
—Neil  Sheehan  from  Saigon  in  the  New  York    Times
Oct.  23.    The  Washington  correspondent   of  a   leading
metropolitan  daily   checked  this  with  the  White   House
and  was  told  it  was  accurate.
it  easier  to  understand  what  U  Thant  meant  when  he  told, a
luncheon   last  Tuesday,   the  day  after  the  State  Department's
admissions,  "If  only  bold  steps  had  been  taken  as  late  as   1964
I   feel   that   much   of  today's  tragic  development   could   have
been  avoided."
The  day  the  Warbey  letter  appeared  in  The  Times  of  Lon-
don,  Mr.  Johnson  was  asked  at  press  conference  whether  he
had   "any  evidence  of  a  willingness  on  the  part  of  the  Com-
munists  to  negotiate"   in  Vietnam.     We   called  attention  in
that   same   issue  of  April   12  to  the   curious  wording  of   his
reply.    He  said  he  had  "no  evidence  that  they  are  ready  and
willing  to  negotiate   under  conditions   that  would   be  produc-
tive."     Our   italics.     Last   Monday's   press   conference   at   the
State   Department    suggested   that   what   we   would   consider
"productive"   would   be  restoration   of   an  independent   South
(Continued  on  Page   Four)
How  Peking  Polemics  Lifted  The  Curtain  on  Soviet  Peace  Efforts  in  Vietnam
"In  January  1965  the  U.S.  imperialists  asked  the  Soviet
government  to  use  its  influence to  have  the  government  of
the  Democratic  Republic  of  Vietnam  accept  two  conditions:
1)   stop  supporting  South  Vietnam,  and  stop  supplying  it
with  guns;  and  2)  stop  the  attacks  on  cities  in  South  Viet-
nam.    Faithfully  obeying  the  orders  of  the  U.S. imperialists
the'new  leaders   of  the  CPSU   officially   transmitted  to  the
Democratic   Republic   of   Vietnam  these   preposterous   de-
mands,  which  were  aimed  at  forcing  the  Vietnamese  people
into  unconditional surrender.
"The  new  leaders  of  the  CPSU  have  been  busy  running
errands  for  the  U.S.  aggressors,  who  are  anxious  to  find  a
way  out  of  their  predicament  in  Vietnam.   When  Kosygin,
chairman  of  the  Council  of  Ministers  of  the  USSR,  passed
through  Peking  on  his  visit  to  Vietnam  in  February  1965
and  exchanged  views  with  Chinese  leaders,  he  stressed   the
need  to  help  the  United  States  'find  a  way  out  of  Vietnam.'
This  was  firmly  rebutted  by  the  Chinese  leaders.    We  ex-
pressed  the  hope  that  the  new  leaders  of  the  CPSU  would
support   the   struggle   of   the   Vietnamese   people   and  not
make  a  deal  with  the  United States  on  the  question of Viet-
nam.    Kosygin   expressed   agreement  with   o,;-   views  and
stated   that  they   would   'not   bargain  with  others   on   this
issue.'    However,  the  new  leaders  of  the  CPSU  soon  went
back  on  their  promise.
"Johnson  wanted  to  play  his  fraudulent  game  of  'uncon-
ditional  discussions.'    So  the  new  leaders  of  the  CPSU  put
forward  the  idea  of  'unconditional  negotiations.'   On  Febru-
ary  16 this  year,  the  day  after  Kosygin's  return  to Moscow,
the   Soviet   Government  officially   put  before   Vietnam  and
China  a  proposal  to  convene  a  new  international  conference
on  Indochina  without  prior  conditions,  which  in  fact   was
advocacy   of   'unconditional   negotiations'   on   the  Vietnam
question.     On  23  February,  disregarding   the   stand   which
the  Vietnamese  government  had taken against  this  proposal
and  without  waiting  for  a  reply  from  China,  the  new  lead-
ers  of  the  CPSU  discussed  the  question  of  calling  the  above-
mentioned  international  conference   with   the   President   of
France  through  the  Soviet   ambassador.
"Johnson's  fraud  of  'unconditional  negotiations'  met  with
a  stern  rebuff  from  the  Government of  the  Democratic  Re-
public  of  Vietnam.   The  new  leaders  of  the  CPSU  then pub-
licly  began  to  insinuate  that  negotiations   could  be  held  if
only   the   United   States   stopped   its   bombing   of    North
Vietnam."
—People's  Daily-Red  Flag, Peking, Nov.  10.
1   5  :
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  22,1965
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
Vietnam  under  our  wing.    The  Department's  spokesman  in-
sisted   that  the  Johns   Hopkins  speech  last  April  7  did   not
mark   any  change  in  policy  when   it   offered   "unconditional
discussions."    To  prove  continuity  of  policy  he  read  the  re-
porters   two  previous  Presidential  statements.     In  one, at  an
AP  lunch,  April  20,  1964, Mr.  Johnson  said  "Once war  seems
hopeless,  then  peace  may  be  possible.     The   door   is  always
open   to  any  settlement   which  assures  the   independence   of
South  Vietnam  and  its  freedom  to  seek  help  for  its protection."
This  implies  (1)   that  peace  can  only  come  when  the  other
side  realizes  war  is  hopeless  and  (2)   that  the  settlement   to
which  our  door  is  open  is  one  which  assures  an   independent
South  Vietnam,  which  can  call  on  the  U.S. and  SEATO  for
protection.    The  other  quotation  offered  was  from  Johnson's
message   August   5,  1964,  assuring  Congress   "that  we  shall
continue  readily  to  explore  any  avenues  of  political   solution
that  will  effectively  guarantee  the  removal  of  Communist sub-
version."
Back  to  Unconditional Surrender
Any  compromise  which  would  give  the  National  Liberation
Front  some  role  in  a  coalition  government  would  seem  to  be
ruled  out  by  that  formulation.    It  implies  their  surrender  or
extermination.    The  fact  that  the  State  Department  put  these
two  quotations   forward  as  embodiments  of  our  policy  fore-
shadows  war  to  the  bitter  end  rather  than  negotiation.    When
a  reporter  said,  "Well,  all that  does  not  say that  he  (Johnson)
is   willing   to   have   unconditional   discussions",    the   Depart-
ment's   spokesman   replied,   "Well  I  think  then  that  we  are
hung  up  on  semantics."    This  makes  sense  only  if   "uncondi-
tional  discussions"   means  something  very  different  from  un-
conditional  negotiations,  that  in  negotiations  we  would  still
insist  on  winning  at  the  bargaining  table  what  we  have  yet
to  win  either  on  the  battlefield  or  in  our  dealings  with   the
Vietnamese  people.    When  reporters  at  the  press  conference
tried  to  elicit  what  standards  the  government   imposes  in  de-
termining  whether   peace   feelers  are  "serious"  or  "sincere",
the   spokesman   retreated  behind   a  smoke-screen   of   double-
talk  (see box at  the  top  of  p.  2).   The  truth  I  believe  is that
we  wait  for  a  signal  that  the  other  side  is  ready,  not  to  nego-
tiate,  but  to  surrender.
As  The  Other  Side  Sees  It
"We have been told  here in  this  debate and elsewhere
in  various  terms  that  the  United  States  wishes  for  a
negotiated  settlement  and  that  it  has  made  proposals
for  negotiations.    It  has  even  been  said  that  the U.S.
has  asked  its   allies,  some  of  the  non-aligned  nations
and,  personally, the  Secretary  General to  use  their good
services with  the  Government  of  the  Democratic Repub-
lic  of  Vietnam  [North]  with  a  view  to  initiating talks
on  Vietnam.    And  it  has  been  said  also  that  all  peace
offers  have  been  refused.    The  real  picture  is  entirely
different.    With  full  knowledge  of  the  opinion  of   the
Government  of  the  Democratic Republic of  Vietnam and
that  of  the  National  Liberation Front  of  South Vietnam
regarding  the  war  issues,  I  have  to  state  that  no  real
peace  offer  has  been  made  so  far  on  the  part  of   the
United  States,  either directly or through intermediaries.
Until  the  aggression,  the  bombing raids  and the  threats
of  bombing are  stopped,  no  proposal  for  talks  has  any
value  at all."
—Janos  Peter  (Hungary)   in  the  UN Assembly  Oct. 6.
I  hope   I  am  wrong  because  if  this  is  the  policy  then   it
will  take  a  good  many  years  of  fighting  and  a  lot  of  Ameri-
can  and  Vietnamese  lives.    It  will  poison  our  relations  with
the  Soviet  Union  and  may end  the  hopes  of  preventing  a  new
stepup  in  the  arms  race.    The  Soviets,  as  can  be  seen  in  the
latest  attack from  Peking  (see box  bottom  of  p.  3),  are  under
fire  for  serving  U.S. interests  in  trying  to  bring  about  peace.
Peking  discloses  that  Kosygin  went  to  Hanoi  last  February  6
in  an  attempt  to  bring  about  a  negotiated   settlement.    This
was  also  the  report  carried  by  the  London  Sunday  Observer
February  7  from  Hong  Kong  in  a  dispatch  by Stanley  Karnow
which  reflected   the  judgment  of  the  U.S. intelligence com-
munity  there.    That  was  the  day  Johnson,  under  the  impact
of   the  Viet  Cong  attack  on  our  barracks  at  Pleiku,   ordered
the  bombing  of  the  North  in  accordance  with   contingency
plans  drawn  up  months  earfier  and  long  urged  upon  him  by
the  military.    To  bomb  the  North  while  Kosygin  was  there
virtually  as  our  emissary  trying  to  bring  about  peace,  and  to
continue  the  bombing  indefinitely instead  of  limiting  it  to  a
reprisal  raid,  may  turn  out  to  have  been  the  Big  Mistake  of
the  war.   It  hardly made  the  search  for  peace  easier.   On  this,
too,  the  Administration has  been   deceptive.
Extra  Copies  of  This   Issue  Available  in   Bulk   (Multiples  of  100)  for  3  Cents  Each  Postpaid
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly     5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
11/22/63
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sob  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $545  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement wished  D
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'i  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December   and   Uie
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during   July  at  6618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited
by  L  F.  Stone:  Circulation   Manager.   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  in   the  U.S.:  $6  in   Canada:    J10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED