I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1965
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1965nov15.pdf

============================================================

Humphrey  Smears  The Peace Demonstrations,  P.  2
The  Army  Still  Regards  These  Distant  Asian  Wars  As  A  Blessing
"Korea  has  been  a  blessing.    There  had  to  be  a  Korea
either   here  or  some   place  in  the   world."
—Gen.  James  A.  Van  Fleet,  commander  of  the  l/.S.  8th
Army  in  Korea,  to  a  visiting  Filipino  delegation,  UPl  from
8th  Army  HQ,  New  York  Journal  American, Jan.  1, 1952.
"With   one  eye   on  the   fierce   fighting   in   Vietnam,   the
Army   is  charting  a   major   modernization   program   .  .  .
Detailed   plans  already  call  for  about   $16  billion  of   'hard-
ware'  .  .  .  over  the  next  five  years  .  .  .  Both  the  Army's
spending   plans   and  those   of   the   other   services   promise
added  zip  for  the  nation's   peppy  economy.     The  acceler-
ated   Army  purchasing   alone   may,  if   nothing   more,  tend
to  delay  the  day  of  any  business   letdown ...  If   such
tentative   projects  fail  to  receive  a  green   light,  the  total
will   be   pared   a   bit.     But   more   significant   in   undoing
present   plans  would  be  any  cessation  of  hostilities  in  Viet-
nam,   whether  springing   from   an  agreed-on   cease-fire   or
a   unilateral  disengagement   by  the   Communist  side."
—Wall  St.  Journal  from   Washington  Nov.  4,  1965.
The  main  danger,  in  other  words,  is  peace.
L F. Stone?s  Weekly
VOL.  XII,  NO.  38
NOVEMBER   15,  1965
«>'       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Behind  Johnson's  Fight  With  The Aluminum  Trust
How  little   American  businessmen  know   about  their   own
economy   is  apparent  from   their   defense   of   the   aluminum
companies.    The   president   of   the   U.S.   Chamber   of   Com-
merce   called   the   government's   decision   to   release   surplus
aluminum    "an    unwarranted   attack   on    the    free   market
economy."    Prices   of  aluminum  have  had  little  to  do  with
a  free  market.
U.S.  Industry's   No.  1 Monopoly
From   the   time  Aluminum  Company  of   America   bought
out   its  only  competitor   in   1903  until   a   U.S.   government
loan   put   Reynolds  Metals   into   the   aluminum   business   in
1941,  aluminum  was  the  only  important  American  industry
which  was  a  100  percent   monopoly.     Even  today,  there   is
no  price   competition   in   the   metal.    Alcoa,  with  Reynolds
and   Kaiser,   account  for   almost   90  percent   of  total   output;
they  compete  in  product  development  but  not  in  price.    The
market  is  free  only  in  the  sense  that  they  are  free  to  charge
the   consumer  what  they  think   best.     Aluminum  is  one  of
those    "administered   price"   industries   on   which   the   late
Senator  Kefauver   put  the  spotlight  in  his  famous  anti-trust
investigation   a  few  years   ago.
As  Lyndon  Johnson  moves  toward  open   conflict  with  the
aluminum   industry,   he   can   find   a   useful   ally   in   Harry
Truman.    It  was  Truman's  exposure  of  the  Alcoa  monopoly*
on  the  eve  of  our  entry  into  World  War  II  which   brought
him  into  national  prominence.    When  FDR  in  a  dramatic
message  in  May,  1940,  called  for   50,000  planes,  a  shortage
of   aluminum  proved   to   be   the   bottleneck.     The   Truman
investigation    called   public   attention   to   Alcoa's    restrictive
practices   and   led   the   government   to   break   the   monopoly
and   force  expansion  by  putting   two   new   producers,  Rey-
nolds  and- Kaiser,  into  the   field.   Government  owned   plants
made  it  possible  to  win  the  war  in  the  air.    The   disposal
of   these   plants   after   the   war   established   new   producers.
Unfortunately,   Alcoa's  superior  economic  power  has  inhibi-
ted  price  competition  among  them.
What  Morrison  Wanted  McNamara  To  See
Dear   Mr.  Stone:   I   have   just   sent   this   letter   to
Secretary  McNamara  and  the  Joint   Chiefs  of   Staff:
Gentlemen:  It  is  easy  to  dismiss  Norman  Morrison's
dreadful  act  as  the  meaningless  self-destruction  of  a
deranged   fanatic.    It   was   desperate;  it   was   futile;
but  it  was  not  meaningless.    What  he  was  trying  to
say   was:
"See   what  it  is  like  for  a  man  to  die  by   fire.   See
it   for   yourselves.     You,   who  make   impersonal    war,
devising  strategies  and  tactics  in  your  air-conditioned
offices,   look   and   see!"
This   very   thing   happens   daily   in   Vietnam,   where
our    planes   rain    down   fire   upon   helpless   villages
(occasionally  hitting  a  "friendly"  one  by  mistake,  for
which  we  apologize   profusely),   always   burning  with
dreadful,  clinging  napalm  fire,  burning   human  beings
to   death   regardless   of   age,   sex   or   political   belief.
Norman   Morrison,   at   the   last   moment,   realized   he
could  not   commit   his   infant   daughter   to  a  decision
in  which  she  had  no  part.    But  we  can  and  do  decide
"Better   dead   than   red"   for   North   and   South   Viet-
namese   children.
—Marian  E.  Manly,  M.D.,  Walnut  Creek,   Calif.
*See  my  Business  As  Usual:  The  First  Year  of   Defense
(1941).
It  is  no  accident  that  the  first  clash  between  business  and
government  in  the  Vietnamese  war  should  be with  aluminum.
It   is  required   not   only   for   planes   but   for   bombs   and   a
large  variety  of   other   uses  like  aluminum  matting  for   im-
provised  air   fields.   The  $1,700,000,000  supplementary  ap-
propriation   last  August  for  the  Vietnamese  war  has  sharply
increased   aluminum   requirements.     Since   the   industry   is
already   operating   at   capacity,   the   choice,   as   McNamara
explained,   was   between   releasing   200,000    tons   from   the
government's  surplus  stockpiles  or  "expect  continued  increase
in   imports  from  foreign  sources  and  pressure  on   prices   in
the   domestic  market  or   a  combination  of   both."     Higher
imports  would  put   a  further   strain  on  the   U.S.  balance  of
payments.    Higher   demand  would   stiffen   prices.     If   alum-
inum  gets  away  with  a  price  rise,  steel  will  follow  and   an
inflationary   spiral  begin.
If  Johnson,  as  reported  earlier,  was  "sputtering  mad"   over
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  15,  1965
Attorney   General,   However,   Sees   No   International  Conspiracy  In  Anti-War  Protest
Humphrey  Smears  Peace  Demonstrations  As  Masterminded  by  Reds Abroad
We   are  ashamed   to  report   that  the  most  liberal  member
of   the   Johnson   Administration,  Vice   President    Humphrey,
has  gone   furthest   in  smearing  the  peace   movement.     Secre-
tary   Rusk   Nov.    6   deplored    the   possible    effect   on   Hanoi
but   defended    the   right   to   demonstrate    against   the   war.
Humphrey,   according   to   a   report   in   the   Michigan    Daily
Oct.   23,   said   during   an   appearance   in   Detroit,   "Do   you
think  those  demonstrations  were  organized  by  some  fine  little
social  club?   They  were  organized  by  an  international  appara-
tus.     95   percent   of   the   demonstrators   are   no   more   Com-
munists   than   you   or   I.     But   the   international  Communist
movement  organized  it  and  masterminded  it."    When  Attor-
ney   General   Katzenbach   was   asked   in    Chicago    Oct.    17
whether   he   saw   "any   tie-in"  of   the   peace    demonstrations
"to   Hanoi   or  Peking   or   Moscow   or  overseas?"   he   replied
"In   this  sense   only:  that   whenever  you  have   a  movement
of  this  kind,  which  is  consistent  with  the  views  of  the  Com-
munists,   you   are   likely   to   find   some   Communists   in   it."
He  was  then  asked,  "But  does  that  mean  that  they  are  run-
ning  it?"   and  replied,   "No,    I  don't   think  that  means  they
are  running   it."
THAT   NUMBERS   GAME   ON   PLANE    LOSSES:   On
Oct.   16  Air   Force  Chief  of   Staff   Gen.   McConnell  said  air
force  losses  in  Vietnam  were  "a  little  higher   than  in  World
War  II  but  lower  than  in  the  Korean  war"  (UPI  from  Saigon
in  St.  Louis  Post  Dispatch).     Now   Pentagon   Reporter   John
G.  Norris  reports  (Washington  Post,  Nov.   4)   that  warplane
losses   over   North   Vietnam   "are   running   slightly   under   7
per   1,000   combat  sorties"  or  more  than  double   that  of   the
Korean  war.    Next  day  the  Pentagon   issued  a  denial,  claim-
ing   that   plane   losses   over   North   Vietnam   were   only   3.2
per   1,000   sorties   or  less  than  those  of  the  Korean   war  and
World  War  II.    The  lower  figure  was  obtained  by  including
non-combat  missions:  rescue,   high   level   reconnaissance   (too
high   to  be  shot   at)   and   weather   missions.    In   Korea   the
Air   Force  used  high   level   B-29s  for   interdiction   purposes;
they  flew  too  high  to  be  reached  by   flak.   The   comparable
B-52s  which  bomb  South   Vietnam  are  not   used   over  North
Vietnam,   though   they   can   carry  ten   times   as   much   bomb
tonnage  as  the  F-105s,  because  of  the  surface-to-air  missiles
(SAMs)   developed  since  the  Korean   war.    If   one   brought
Still  Far  From  Victory
"The   massive   buildup   of   American   forces   in  Viet-
nam  so  far  has  accomplished  few  positive  results  .  .  .
Around   Danang   there   have   been   American   Marine
combat   units   since   March.     Yet   late   in   October   the
Vietcong   made   their   most   successful   attack   of   the
war   against   an  air  base—at   Danang  .  .  .  Although
the   control   of   roads   and   the   railroad   has   improved
since   the   low   point   in   July,   parts   of   eight   major
highways  and  the  rail  line  remain  closed  to  military
traffic  . .  .  There  have  been  numerous  forays  by  Ameri-
can   units   against   suspected   enemy   concentrations   in
what  are  called  sweep  and  clear  operations,  but  there
has  been  only  one  smashing   ground  offensive   victory
by   Americans  in  seven  months  since  combat  soldiers
arrived—below   Chu   Lai,    where   they   destroyed   most
of  a  hard  core  Viet  Cong  regiment.    The  area  is  now
in  the  hands  of  Vietnamese  pacification  teams.    Unless
their   effort    to   regain   the   loyalty   of   the   villagers
succeeds  better  than  elsewhere,  the  Marines  will  some
day  have  to  go  back  into  the  area.  .  .  .  On  how  long
the   war   in   Vietnam   will   last,   one  astute   American
official   predicted  'it  will  take  a  generation.'"
—Jack  Foisie  from  Saigon  in  Wash.  Post  Nov.   7.
down   a  B-52  much   secret   gear   on   these   planes,    equipped
for  nuclear  bombing,  would   fall  into  enemy  hands.
AND   WE  THINK   WE   HAVE   TROUBLE  WITH   A
FEW  DRAFT   CARD  BURNERS:   In  praising  the  work  of
the   South   Vietnamese   police,   Richard   Critchfield    disclosed
from   Saigon   in  the   Washington   Star   (Nov.   8)   that   since
October    1964   they   had   arrested   1,733   army  deserters   and
28,307   draft-dodgers.     If   the   war   were   as  unpopular   here
as  it  is  there,  the  U.S.  (with  13  times  the  population)    would
have   22,529   deserters   and   367,991   draft-dodgers!      Even
this  understates  it,  since  no  figures  were  given   on  the   total
number  of  Vietnamese  deserters  and  draft-dodgers  .  .  .
A   MORE   PAINFUL    FIGURE   turned   up   in  Le    Monde
(Nov.   6)   which   reported   from  the  annual  meeting   of   the
International   Social   Service  Council   in   Geneva   that   at   the
beginning   of   the   summer   there   were   more    than    10,000
abandoned   children   in   South   Vietnam,   living   in   some   60
orphanages.    The  comparable  figure  for  our  population   would
be   130,000.
The  Fear   That  if  The  Viet  Cong  Accepted  A  Cease-Fire  They  Could  Win  An  Election
"Saigon—If   the  shooting  stopped  tomorrow  in  Vietnam,
the   Communists    could   well   win   the   goals   for   which   they
are    fighting,    in   the   view   of    knowledgeable   Americans
here.     It   is   ironic   that   some   Americans   now   fear   that
the   Viet   Cong   will   suddenly   accept   the   repeated    offers
for   an  armistice  .  .  .  The  United  States  now  has  almost
150,000   troops   in   South   Vietnam   .   .   .   And   American
officials    are   aware   that   the   presence   of   the   American
military   creates  a  tendency  to  sit   back   and  let  the  Yanks
do   the   fighting   .   .  .
"This  is  bringing  American  troops  into  closer  and  more
frequent    contact   with   the   rural   population.     One  recent
survey   by   the   U.S.I.A.   showed   that   fewer   Vietnamese
respected    American   troops   than   respected   the    regular
Vietnamese  army  which  has  never  enjoyed  much  popularity
among   the   nation's   war-weary   peasantry.
"Veteran   American  advisers  see   the   American  military
buildup   as   simply   a   bigger   and   better   crutch   to   prop
up  a  diseased  government   .  .  .  High  ranking  Vietnamese
officials,   each   denying   his   own   guilt,   readily   admit    cor-
ruption  is   more  widespread  than  any  time  since  the  over-
throw  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem  .  .  .
"The    Viet   Cong   could   decide   to   agree   to   an  armistice
and  send  their   200,000   well   indoctrinated  troops  back   to
their   native   villages   where  they   would   propagandize   for
the  Communist  cause.    There  would  be  mounting  pressure
to   withdraw   American   troops   which   President   Johnson
is   publicly   committed  to  do  ...        When   the   morale  of
America's   allies   hits   rock   bottom,   the   Viet   Cong   could
launch     an     appeal      for—and      possibly      win—national
elections."
—Ray  Herndon   (UPI)    in  the  Chicago  Tribune,  Oct.  31.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  15, 1965
Why  HUAC  Is  Not  The  Right  Vehicle  For  Studying  This  Terrorist   Network
The  Need  for A  New  and  Wider  Congressional Inquiry  Into  The  Klans
We  suggest  that   a  committee   of  respected  lawyers   be  set
up   to   frame   a   resolution   under   which   Congress,   without
infringing    constitutional   rights,   could    investigate   the   Ku
Klux  Klan.     There   have   been   two  previous  investigations,
one  in   1872,  the  other   in   1921.     There  are   several   objec-
tions  to  the  investigation  by  the  House  Un-American Activi-
ties  Committee  which  has   just   recessed   until  Jan.   4.     The
first   is   that   the   mandate   of   this   committee,   to   look   into
"un-American"   activities   and   ideas   is   too   vague   and   in-
fringes  on  First  Amendment  rights.    When   an  organization
trains  and   arms  its  members  to  violate  the   rights  of   others
by  criminal  acts,  it  has   moved   from   the   realm  of   ideas  to
the   realm   of   crime.     Congress   is   fully    v.'ithin   its   rights
to  examine  into   such  organizations  to  determine  what  new
legislation  may  be  needed  to  deal  with  them.
The  Klan  and  the   Police
There  is  a  second   objection   to  the   HUAC   investigation.
Its   staff,   an  ill-assorted  collection  of  retired  hotel   dicks  and
aging   ex-Communists,  share  with  the  Klan   the  tendency  to
see   Communist   conspiracy   everywhere.     They   live   in   the
same  paranoid  universe.     A   different   breed   of   investigator
is  required.   There  are  areas  of  inquiry  which  call  for  courage
and  insight.
One  is  in  the  area  of   cooperation   between  the  Klan   and
the  police.    Donald  T.  Appell,  chief  investigator  of  HUAC,
admitted  in  his  opening   statement  on  October   19,  that   there
had  been   "some   infiltration  of   law  enforcement  agencies  by
the   Klan,"    but   hastened   to   add   that   "the    overwhelming
majority  of  police  and  law  enforcement  officers   in  the   South
are   neither   Klan   members   nor   sympathetic   to   the  Klan."
We   believe   this   was  much   too   sweeping.      In   the   South,
even  where  police   are  not  members   or  sympathizers  of   the
Klan,  there   is  a  tendency  to   regard   Klan   activities  as  for-
giveable   peccadilloes   while   civil   rights    demonstrators   are
dealt  with  harshly.    Some  FBI  men  in  the  South  share  the
same  biases.
A   second   area   of   inquiry  lies   in   examining   the   way   in
which  Klan  terrorists,  through  respectable   connections,   come
to  dominate  whole   communities.     Congressman   Weltner  of
Atlanta,   Georgia,   put   such   a  study   into   the   Congressional
Martin  Luther  King  Turns  Pan-African
Q.   Is   your   activity   exclusively   an   American   civic
action  within  the  strictly   normal   framework   of   your
country's  democracy,  or  do  you  feel  that  your  struggle
against  racial  segregation  links  up  with  the  struggle
of  all  the  oppressed  and  of  the  Africans  in  particular?
Do  you  feel  close  to  the  Africans?
A.  Our problems  are  similar  .  .  .  There  is  no  essen-
tial    difference    between   segregation   and   colonialism
.  .  .  The  discontent  that  rumbles  in  America  and  else-
where   is  the  same  cry  of   despair   and  revolt  as  that
of   the   disinherited   elsewhere   in   the   world.     For   a
long   time   colonialist   Europe,   and  the   rich   societies,
have  dominated  humanity  to  the  disregard  of  all  human
dignity ...  A  great  many  of  our  brothers  of  Africa
and  Asia  have  shaken  off  the  yoke  of  oppression  .  .  .
The   current   battle   of    American   Negroes   is    only
another   chapter   in   this   unfinished    story.     It   is   an
integral  part  of  that  vaster  world  struggle  for  justice
among  men.    You  ask  if  we  feel  close  to  the  Africans.
They   are   our   brothers   from    whom    we   have   never
ceased  to  seek  inspiration  and  comfort  in  our  struggle.
We  expect  a  great  deal  of  them,  for  today  the  pressure
they  can  exert  as  independent  states  on  the  American
government  and  opinion   could   profoundly   change   the
course  of  the  fight  we  are  carrying   on."
—Martin  Luther  King  in  an  interview  with  Jeune
Afrique  (Algiers)   Nov.   7.
Record   Oct.   27   (p.   A6181-2)   in  the  case  of  Bogalusa,   La.
Mr.   Weltner,   one   of   a   new   breed   of   courageous   young
Southern  white  liberals,  was  one  of  those  who  promoted   the
HUAC  inquiry  in  the  first  place.    The  fact  that  he  put  the
Bogalusa  story,  complete  with  names,  into  the  Record  would
seem   to  indicate  that   he  had   lost   a  fight  within  the   com-
mittee  for  just  such  a  community  inquiry.    Judging  by  Mr.
Weltner's   memorandum,  an  inquiry  of   this  kind  would  re-
quire   a   willingness   to   take   on   not   just   "red-necks"   and
petty   racketeers   but   respected   business  and   civic   leaders   in
secret  linkage  with  the  Klan.     Mr.   Weltner   named   Klans-
men  in  the  police,  the  school  board,  the  county  commission,
the  labor  unions,  and  the   city   officialdom.
Most  important  of  all:  a  new  inquiry  ought  to  call  victims
of   the  Klan,  Negro  and  white.    This  sort  of  testimony  has
been  conspicuous  by  its  absence  in  the  HUAC  hearings.
How  the  British   Labor  Party   Left-Wing  Feels  About  Wilson's   Rhodesia   Policy
"With   the    solitary    and   sinister   exception   of    South
Africa,   independence  has  never  before  been  granted  to  any
British  colony  except  on  the  basis  of  majority  rule.    Will
Mr.  Wilson  now  explain  to  us  why  this  firm  rule  is  now
to  be  waived?      Why,   in  this  one  instance,  it   is   accepted
by  his  Government  that  all  that  is  required  is  guaranteed
progress  toward  majority  rule?    Why,  in  this  one  instance,
it  is  acceptable  to  contemplate  handing  over  a  colony  to
the   Government    to   a   white   minority?      Why   he    thinks
that  Mr.  Smith  and  his  settler  colleagues,  after   years  of
repression,  during  which  the  Africans  have  been  systemati-
cally  denied  education,  property,  good  wages  and  political
advancement,  can  now  be  relied  on  to   accept  and  indeed
foster   the   growth  of   political   power  among   the   African
majority?   .  .  .
" 'In   my   talks    with   the    African   nationalist    leaders
fPrime   Minister   Wilson  said],  I  regarded  it   as   my  duty
to  remove   from   their   minds   any   idea   or  any   hope  they
might   have   had   that   Rhodesia's   constitutional   problems
were  going  to  be  solved  by  an  assertion  of  military  power
on  our  part,  whether   for   the   purpose  of   suspending   or
amending    the    1961    constitution,   of    imposing    majority
rule   tomorrow  or  any  other  time—or   for  that  matter  of
dealing   with   the   situation   that   would   follow   an   illegal
assertion  of  independence.'
"Why,    when   there   is   still   every   possibility   either   of
UDI   [a   unilateral   declaration   of   independence]   or   of   a
final  breakdown  in  attempts  to  achieve  a  negotiated  settle-
ment,   does  the  Prime  Minister  so  adamantly   rule   out  the
use  of  force?    Why,  in  other  words,  is  he  prepared  in  the
last  resort  to  see   Britain  abdicate   her  responsibilities  in
the   face   of   the   intransigence   of   a   minority   of   racial
fanatics?"—London   Tribune   (Nov.    5)   organ   of   the    (non-
Communist)  Left-wing   of  the  British  party.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  15,1965
In  The  Long  Run  (And  Not  So Long)  Only  Peace  Can Prevent  Inflation
{Continued  from  Page  One)
the  aluminum price  rise,  he  had  a  right  to  be.    The  govern-
ment  has  been  supporting  aluminum  prices  at  an uneconomic
level   for   years   by  purchases  for   stockpile.     The   stockpile
was  supposedly  for  defense  purposes.    A  major  part  of   the
industry's  business  has  been  created  by  government  spending,
military   and   civilian.     The   industry's  profits   are   at   the
highest  point   in   its  history.
How  the  Stockpile  Program  Was  Rigged
Unfortunately,  the  industry  has  the  government  at  a  dis-
advantage  in  three  respects.    The   stockpiling  program  has
been   rigged   in   favor   of   the   companies.    First  of   all   the
aluminum  in  the  stockpile  is  not  of  the  highest  purity  and
there  are  uses  which  require  purer  metal  than  the  99.50%
to   99-75%   pure   offered    from   stockpile.     There   are   uses
which  require  99.9%.    Secondly  the  aluminum  stockpile  is
in  the  form  of  ingot,  and  there  is  a  limited  market  for  this
outside  the  big  integrated  companies  the  government  is  fight-
ing.    There  are  plenty  of  small  fabricators  but  they  depend
< on   the   big   firms   for   aluminum  sheet,   strip,   wire  bars   or
castings.    Finally  the  law  provides  that  sales  from   stockpile
must  be  at  market  prices.    The  big  companies  fix  this  price.
The   law  was  written  to  keep   the  government   from   using
stockpiles   to  bring  down   prices.     But   there   is  some   sign
that  the  Johnson  Administration is  preparing  to  take  a  tough
line  on  what  is  meant  by  "market  prices."    We  call  atten-
tion   to   a   fascinating  passage   in   the   White   House   press
conference  of  Nov  6:
Q.  Mr. Secretary,  you  say  you  will  dispose  of  this  at  the
current  market  price?     McNamara:  Yes.
Q.  Is  this  the  new  price  that   was  just  established  by
the  aluminum  industry?
McNamara:  The   market   price   would  be  the   price   at
which  buyers  and  sellers  in  the   market  dealing  at  arm's
length  would  agree  on  the  one  hand  to  buy  and  on  the
other  to  sell.
Q.   In  other   words,   the   price  increase   Just   announced
by  the  industry  would  be  reflected  in  your  price?
McNamara:  Not  necessarily.    Many  transactions  take
place  at  other  than  the  published  price.
The  price  fixed  by  the  big  companies  is  hardly  an  "arm's
length"   affair.    To   insist  on  a  real  market  price  could  be
Bircher  Welch  at  Howard  University
Robert   Welch   was   so  anxious  to  come  to  Howard
University  last  week  that  he  waived  his  usual  $3000
speaking  fee.   In  return,  school   officiate   were  deter-
mined   to   accord   the   John   Birch   Society   leader   the
honors   of   a   visiting   dignitary.      A   student-faculty
dinner   was   arranged   (and held   without   incident).
Welch  was  permitted  to  set  the  ground  rules  for  the
question   period   (all   questions   had   to   be   submitted
in   writing).     And   special   police   were   on   hand   to
prevent  demonstrations  (A  SNCC  worker  passing   out
leaflets   announcing   an  unrelated  future   meeting   was
escorted  from  the  hall).    So  careful  was  the  planning,
that   when   Welch   arrived  in   the   auditorium  accom-
panied   by   two   embarrassed   students   and  a   pair  of
dour  professors,   the  audience  applauded  politely.    For
45   minutes,   while  Welch   droned   on   about   the  Com-
munist   menace,   the   audience   barely   stirred.     Then
Welch  started  to  talk  about  Negroes  and  the  delicately
manufactured     atmosphere     crumbled.     "The com-
munists,"   Welch   told   them,   "want   to   terrorize   the
ordinary  loyal  Negro  citizens   into  appearing   to sup-
port   a   drive   for   an   independent   Negro    republic."
Hoots  and  laughter  spread  in  the  hall.    "The  Negroes
in  this   country  are  happy,"  Welch   went  on.    "They
have  more  cars  than  all  the  150  million  Africans  put
together."     The    moderator    scowled,     the    students
roared.    Everyone  knew  that  Howard's  attempt  to  hold
a  tea   party   for  the  opposition  had  failed.—P.O.
an   opening   for   a   vigorous   anti-monopolistic  policy.     The
decision  to  sell   300,000   tons   instead  of   200,000   and  at  a
faster  pace  indicates  that  Johnson   after  a  week  of  wavering,
has   decided   to    fight.    While   the   President   is   receiving
strong   support   from   his   party   on   aluminum  prices,   two
longer   range  points   need   to   be  made.     Insofar   as   peace-
time  is  concerned,  industries  where  prices  are   "administered"
instead   of   reached   on  a  free   market   ought   to  have  their
prices  regulated   like  those  of  public  utilities.  Senator  Hart,
Kefauver's   successor  as  chairman  of   the   Senate  Anti-Trust
Committee,  hinted  at  this  on  TV's  Today   show  Nov.  2.   The
other  is  that  whatever  the  outcome  of  the  battle  with  alum-
inum,  there  is  bound  to  be  inflation  if  the  Vietnamese  war
continues  and  escalates.     And  that  will  be  the  end  of   the
War  on  Poverty  and  the  Great  Society.                  Nov. 10
We   Deeply  Appreciate  The  Diligence  of  Readers  Who  Send  Us  Clippings   from  Their  Local  Papers
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly      5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................•—.....••—..
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone..........»State....................
11/15/65
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
<T»)   Name   ...........................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zbne............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Hamate*   Fi/tte*
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
IE  Stone's Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December   and   th«
flrst  week  in  January   and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Aye.  N.W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5   In   the  U.S.:  $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED