I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956sep10.pdf

============================================================

Why  The  State  Department  Backed  Down  Again  In  A  Passport  Battle,  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO.  34
SEPTEMBER  10,  1966
«°'     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.16  CENTS
The  Real  Meaning   of  The   Attack   on  Javits
When  the  Javits  affair  began,  it  seemed  only  to  be  a  ques-
tion  of  some  scurrilous  reports  being  spread  by  Jules  Sour-
wine  in  Nevada  about  New  York  State's  Attorney  General.
Sourwine  had   been  counsel  to  the  Senate  Internal  Security
Committee  and  it  was  assumed  that  he  was  using  vague  bits
and  pieces from  the  files  to  get  himself  some  publicity in  his
unsuccessful  campaign  for  the  Democratic Senate  nomination.
When   the  Javits  hearing  opened   before  the   Committee  in
Washington  last  week,  both  the  chairman,  Senator  Eastland,
and  the  present  counsel, Robert  Morris,  were  careful  to  note
that  it  was  being  held  at  the  request  of  the  State  Attorney
General  himself.  The   impression  created  was  that   General
Javits  was  merely using  the  Committee  as  a  natural  forum  in
which  to  rebut  charges  of  subversive  association.  These  were
threatening  his  chances  for  the  Republican  Senatorial  nomi-
nation  in New York.
But  a  little  noticed  remark  by  Morris  near  the  end  of  the
hearing,  and  several  facts  which  came  out  afterward,  indicate
that  we  may  be  seeing  a  more  serious  development.    Morris
said  this  hearing  was part  of  an  investigation  into  the  infiltra-
tion  of  political  parties.   Either  Morris,  who himself  has  politi-
cal  ambitions  in  New  York,  was  using  this  to  cover  up  an
isolated  incursion  into the  affairs  of  one  party  in  one  State,  or
the  Committee  was  seriously  extending  its  activities.   The  In-
ternal  Security Committee  has  had  a  whole  series  of  investiga-
tions  labelled  inquiries  into  "infiltration"—a   hobgoblin  word
which  fits  into  the  dramaturgy  of  the  witch  hunt.   It  has  had
hearings  labelled  variously  as  investigations   of    "infiltration"
into  government,  the  schools  and  the  press.   But  so  far  as
could  be  learned  in  talking  to  other   newspapermen,  no  one
here  had  ever  heard  before  of  an  investigation  into  the  infil-
tration of  political  parties.
The  "Ex's"  Were  Activated
The  remark  by  Morris  clarified  something  which  was  be-
coming  evident  as  the  hearing  proceeded.   It  was  soon  appar-
ent  from  the  questions  put  by Morris  that  the  Committee  had
been  actively  investigating  General  Javits.   Its  whole  stable  of
"ex's"  seemed  to  have  been  activated.   Dr.  Bella  Dodd  and
Max  Yergan  had  been  questioned  about  him  in  executive  ses-
sions.  A  web  of  associations  had  been  woven  from  the  files.
Morris  had  also  questioned  old  associates of  General  Javits  in
the  Liberal  party,  most  important  of  all,  Murray  Baron,  its
chairman  in  New  York   County.  After   the  hearing   it  was
learned  that  the  Committee  had  not  only  been   investigating
General  Javits  but  had  summed  up  its preliminary   impressions
in  a  letter  sent  to  Attorney General  Brownell  July  23  but  as
yet unanswered. The  letter  had  asked for  a full  Department  of
Justice  investigation.   Finally  Senator  Jenner,  discreetly  absent
from  the  hearing,   told  the  press  afterward  that  he   thought
"the   case"  should  be  kept  "open"  in  order  to  "resolve  con-
flicts  of  testimony."
Picking  Up  Where  McCarthy  Left  Off
But  keeping  "the  case"  open  may be  enough  to  block Javits
from  being  nominated for  the  Senate  by  the  Republican State
Convention  which  opens  this  week  in  Albany.  We   are  wit-
nessing  the  appearance of  a  new  political  technique.   The  Sen-
ate  Internal  Security Committee,  dominated  by  a  coalition  of
rightist  Democrats   and  rightist  Republicans,   is  in  a  position
by  such  tactics  to  intervene  effectively  in  party  primaries  and
general  elections.   It  need  only  weave together  some kind  of
"allegations"  and  ask  for  more  extended  inquiry  on  the  eve
of  nominations -and   elections  to  affect  the  result  seriously.  This
could  be a  device for  purging  both  parties  of  whatever  liberal
elements  are  left  in  them.    General  Javits  is  not  the  first  tar-
get  in  the  Republican  party;  Senator  Case  in  New  Jersey  was
the  victim  of  a  similar  attack two  years ago  through  his  sister
who  was  "confused"  with  a  supposed  Communist  party mem-
ber  of  the  same name.  The  difference  is  that  such  attacks  can
be  made  more  effective  by using  a  supposed  investigation  into
the  "infiltration"  of  political  parties  as  their  vehicle/The  use
of  the  committee  amplifies  and   dignifies  what  would  other-
wise  be  dismissed  as the  usual  campaign  stuff;  a  canard  can  be
dressed  up  as  a  serious  police  investigation—current  style—
into  dangerous  associations  and   thoughts.
It  is  more  important  to  take  a  good  hard  look  at  the  full
implications  of  what  the  Eastland  Committee  is  doing than  to
run  around  feverishly  in  the  usual  way  to  dig  up  proof  of
General  Javits's  anti-Communism.  The  most  striking  that lie-
produced  for  himself   after  the  hearing  was  a  letter  of  com-
mendation  from  Congressman  Judd,  Chiang  Kai-shek's  most
faithful  friend  in  Congress,  saying that  if  the  Communists  did
help  elect  Javits  they  certainly  made  a  "bad  bargain."   But  to
proceed  in  this  way is to  play  into  the  Committee's  hands.   It
is  to  seek  "clearance"  as  one  seeks  clearance  for  government
employment,  a  job  in  a  defense  plant,  or  a  passport.   It  is  to
concede  that  the  Committee  has  the  right  to  act  as  a  censor of
politics,  to  determine  who  may  or  may  not  safely  be  allowed
to  run  for  public  office.  This  is  the  direction   in  which   the
Eastland   committee  is   moving.    Candidates  are   not   to   be
judged  on  their  record  by the  voters  themselves, but  must  first
pass  the  muster  of  the  Committee. What  McCarthy was trying
to  do  toward  the  last  is what  Eastland  and  Jenner  are  now  at-
tempting—to  make  their  committee  a  kind  of  fourth  branch
of  government  with  power  to  pass  on  Congress  itself.   If  a
Committee  may  investigate  the  "infiltration"  of  both political
parties,  it  may  intervene  not  only  in  elections  but  into  crucial
debates  over  major  legislation.   It  can  investigate  whether  a
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, September  10,1956
The White House Helps The State Dept. Clarify That Ban on Reporters to China
At  his  last  press  conference;  Mr.  Eisenhower  was  asked  why
he  approved  the  State Department's action  in  prohibiting   U.S.
reporters  from  visiting  Communist China.  We  give his  answer
in  full,  since  any  paraphrase  would  open  us  to  the  charge  of
caricature.   "Yet,   I  can  tell  you,"  the  President  replied.  "No
one  in  the  world  would  rather   send   American   newspapers
(sic),  everybody  here   that  wanted  to  go,  to  China,   than  I
would.  I  believe in  the  exchange of  information,  exchange of
visitors  of  all  kinds  and,  particularly,  representatives   of  pub-
licity media."
So far  the  answer  was clear.  It  restated  a point of  view  Mr.
Eisenhower  has  several  times  expressed.   From  that  point  on,
however,  the  reply  became  complicated.   "But,"  the   President
went  on,  "for  over  a  year  we  have  the  spectacle  of  the  Com-
munist  Chinese  holding  a  group  of  our  prisoners   as  sort  of
hostages,  and  then  they  want,  with  the—by  holding  them,  to
get  us  to  make  some  other  move  that  apparently  is  to  be  inter-
preted  as meaning  we have  accepted  that, and  we are not  going
to  be  protesting  it.  And  as long  as  those  men  are  kept  as  sort
of   hostages   for   an   advance   in   our   relationship    with   the
Chinese,  I  simply  can't  go  along  with  it."     This  is  exact,
verbatim,  cross-our-heart text.
We  have  puzzled  over  this  reply  for  a  long  time.  We  have
a  friend  who  has  studied  the  Chinese  classics,  and  has  often
talked  to  us  of  their  difficulty.   One  and  the  same  character,
depending  on  its  relation to  the  rest  of  a  phrase,  may—as we
dimly  understand  it—mean  something   like   "metaphysical",
"very  nicely  done"  or  "young  maiden  under  a  full  moon."
This  gives  us  hope  that  when  Peking  has  finished  translating
this  ingeniously  worded  reply  into  Chinese  characters,  Eisen-
hower  will  prove  no  more  puzzling  than  Confucius.
How  Intelligent   Is  Central  Intelligence?
Adlai  Stevenson  said  he  would  welcome  an  offer  by  Presi-
dent  Eisenhower to  share  with  him  secret  intelligence  reports
on  foreign  affairs.  The  White  House  replied  that  it  was ready
to  supply  him  with  copies  of  the  weekly report  by Central  In-
telligence   Agency.  "Presumably,"  the  New   York   Times  ex-
plained,  "the  aim is to avoid  risking  harm  to  the  national  secu-
rity  through  bitter  partisan  debate  of  delicate  foreign  policy
questions  that  Mr.  Stevenson   would  wish  to  keep  out  of  the
campaign  if  fully  informed."   The  implication   is  that  anyone
seeing  the  CIA  reports  will  know  what  is  really  going  on.
Since we  have  never  read  a  CIA  report,  we  have  no  way of
judging,  but  we wonder.  In  the  September  6  issue  of  The  Re-
porter,  a  correspondent  for  Egyptian papers  at the  United  Na-
tions  has  some  revelations  to  make  that  cast  doubt  on  the  Ad-
ministration's   intelligence  apparatus.   Simon  Malley  points  out
for   example  that  the  scheme  to  nationalize  the  Suez  Canal
Company  dates  back  to  October,  1954,  when  Nasser  created  a
commission   to  study  the  various  problems  anticipated  when
the  company's  lease  expired   in   1968.    "Few   questioned   the
strange  fact,"  Malley  writes,  "that  the  commission  was created
fourteen  years  before  the  concession  was  to  expire."   Where
was  Central   Intelligence?
Malley  also  discloses  that  in  1955  the  Egyptian  Embassy in
Washington   formally  sounded  out  the  State  Department   on
the  possibility  of  hiring  American  pilots  for  the  Suez.   "Sur-
prised  at  such  a premature  move,"  Malley  says,  "the  State  De-
partment   queried  the  Embassy,  which  answered  that  the  aim
One  Sane  Voice
". .  .  The  American  people  may  never  know  the  pre-
cise  circumstances  under   which  a  Navy   patrol  plane
was  attacked  in  midnight  darkness near the Communist
held  Chinese coastal islands north  of  Formosa.  ...   The
Nationalists  use  American-built  aircraft,  and markings
would  be  difficult  to  distinguish  at  night.
"If  the  plane  did  indeed  violate  Red  territory before
it  was attacked  over  the  open sea,  there is  little  ground
for  a  protest.  If  this  country  is  not  making  some  ef-
fort  at  photo  reconnaissance  of  the  important Commu-
nist  airfields  in  this  area,  it  would  be  surprising.  .  .  .
Peiping's  policy  in  the  past  18  months has  been  to  re-
lax,  not  increase,  tensions  in  the  Formosa  area.   A  de-
liberate  and  unprovoked  attack  on  an  American plane
does  not  fit  into  the  pattern."
—Wash. Post Editorial,  "Cold  War  Casualty"  Aug.  24
was  to  prepare  for   1968."   Again   Central   Intelligence  and
simple  intelligence  went  on  sleeping  at  the  switch.
We  fear  that  the  principal result  of  letting  Adlai  Stevenson
see  CIA  reports  on  a  confidential basis  will  be  to  keep  him
from  speaking  out  on  the  weaknesses  of  our  intelligence  in
the  Suez crisis. Why  was  the  State  Department  so  surprised  by
Nasser's   action,  and  so  unprepared  to  cope  with  it?  Would
Secretary  Dulles  have  rejected  the  Aswan  dam  proposal  quite
so  tactlessly  if  he  had  known  Nasser  had  already  been  prepar-
ing  for  two years to  take over  the  canal  company  if  necessary?
What  is the  good  of  all  that high  cost,  hush  hush,  super  duper
gumshoe  operation  at  CIA  if  it  failed  to  notice  what  was  hap-
pening  in  Egypt? The  possibility  CIA  overlooked  was  consid-
ered   in  banking  circles   and   discussed   in  Barren's  financial
magazine  earlier  this  year.  The  least  CIA  Chief  Allen  Dulles
could  have  done  was to  send  out  an  operative  to  buy a  copy  of
Barren's  and  slip  it  quietly  to  his  brother  John  Foster.
We  suspect  Adlai  Stevenson  could  brief  himself  just  as well
by  reading  the  newspapers  at  breakfast.
Our  Ambassador?    Or  Nasser's?
This brings  us to  one  of  those  "delicate  foreign  policy  ques-
tions"  on  which  we  believe  Stevenson  ought  to  leave  himself
a  free hand.  In  his  "Liberation  Day"  address  of  July  26,  Nas-
ser  revealed  that  the  American  Ambassador  in  Cairo  told  him
in  advance  he  could  safely  ignore  a  note  he  was  to  receive
from   the  State  Department  protesting  the  Soviet  arms  deal.
The  Washington  Post  on  July  31  took  note  of  this   passage
and  called  for  investigation  by  the  State  Department.
According  to  the  monitored  translation  of  Nasser's   address
as  made  available at  the  Department,  Nasser  referred  only  to
a  "high  American official."   Malley  in  his  Reporter  article  re-
produces  photostatically  a  portion  of  the  Arabic  text  as  sup-
plied  by  the  Egyptian  Foreign  Ministry  in  Cairo.  And  this
says  "American  Ambassador."  The  Ambassador  referred  to  is
Henry Byroade.
The  State  Department  is  anxious  to  cover  up  the   incident.
The  whole  story  of  how  it  was gulled  by Nasser,  and  the  re-
ports  that  American  diplomats  helped  him  take  power   from
Naguib,  need  to  be aired. The  Democrats  ought  not  to  allow
the  Department   to  choke  Stevenson  off  with  the   American
equivalent  of  the  old  school  tie.
Here  again  we  fear  the  moral  commitments  which  may  be
established  by  letting  Stevenson  see  the  CIA  reports.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly, Sept. 10,1956
Why  The  State  Dept.  Preferred  to  Back  Down  Again In  A Passport Fight
The  State  Department   has  again   demonstrated   that   in  a
showdown  it  would  rather  grant  a  man  a  passport  than  give
him  a  real  hearing.   In  the  case  of  Leonard  Boudin,  as  in  the
earlier  cases  of  Dr.  Otto Nathan  and  Dr.  Clark  Foreman,  the
Department  has  caved  in  and  issued  a  passport  when  it  seem-
ed  no  longer  possible  to  evade  a  court  order  to  hold  a  quasi
judicial hearing.
The  surrender  is  particularly  striking  in  Boudin's  case  be-
cause  it  followed  a  judicial hint  to  the  Department  that  few
seem  to  have  noticed.   This  is  what  we  have  in  mind:  The
original  opinion  by Judge  Youngdahl  in  Boudin's  suit  against
the  Secretary of  State  held  that  a passport  could  not  be  denied
on  the  basis  of  evidence  undisclosed  to  the  applicant.
But  when  the  Court  of  Appeals  upheld  the  Youngdahl  rul-
ing,  it  opened  ample  loopholes  for  the  use of  undisclosed  evi-
dence.   Judge  Washington  said  "in  the  present  posture  of  the
case"  the  court  had  not  yet  reached  the  question  of  whether
the  Secretary of  State could  rely  "on  confidential  information."
The  court  said  that  since this  question  might  arise  later  it was
requesting  the  Secretary of  State  if  he  refused a  passport  after
a  hearing  to  state  whether  he  was in  whole  or  part  acting  on
undisclosed  evidence.
Some  Loopholes  Appear
In  that  event,  Judge  Washington  went  on,  the  Secretary
"should  explain  with  such particularity as in  his judgment  the
circumstances  permit  the  nature  of  the  reasons  why  such  in-
formation  may not  be  disclosed."  A  footnote  added,  "If  con-
siderations  of  internal  security  rather  than  of  the  conduct  of
foreign  affairs  are  involved,  we  think  the  Secretary  should  so
state."  The   District   Court  was  then   instructed   to   consider
"whether  the  Secretary  has  given  reasons  valid   in  law   for
keeping  confidential  any  information."
The   Appeals   court   reasoning   was  a  disappointment.    It
opened  the  possibility  that  confidential  evidence  might  be  al-
lowed  in  passport  cases.  Why,  then,  did  not  the   Department
give  Boudin  a  hearing  and  risk  a  new appeal?  The  answer  is
that  from  the Department's point  of view this would  mean  (1)
more  public  attention  to  its  star  chamber  methods,  (2)   sub-
mission  to  the  scrutiny  of  the  courts,  and  (3)   the  possibility
that  its  excuses  for  not  disclosing  allegations  to  the  accused
might  be held  unsatisfactory even by a  court prepared  in  some
cases  to  allow  such  procedure.
First   the  Department  fell   back  on   its  favorite  tactic—it
stalled.   Boudin's  lawyer, Harry I.  Rand, finally obtained  from
Judge  Matthews  in  Federal  District  Court  an  order  requiring
the  Department  to  appear  on  August  30  and  report  on  the
Passport  "Believe It  or  Nots"
In one passport case before  the  Court  of  Appeals here
in  the  District  of   Columbia  (Walter  Briehl  vs.  John
Foster  Dulles),  one  of  the  "charges"  against  a  distin-
guished  Los  Angeles  psychiatrist  is  that  many  years
ago  he  wrote  an  article,  "Environment  and  Neurosis"
for  the  magazine  Social  Work  Today.  The  State  De-
partment  Hearing  Officer  admitted  he  had  never  read
the  article  or  even  seen  a  copy  of  the  magazine.
In  another  passport  appeal,  that  of  Rockwell  Kent,
one  of  the  allegations against  the  famous  artist  is  that
he once laid a wreath on the  grave of  John  Reed  in Mos-
cow.   The  "evidence" against  Kent  seems chiefly  to con-
sist  of  his  autobiography. "At  the  informal  hearing,"
says  the  appeal  petition,  "no  witness  appeared  to  tes-
tify  against  appellant.  The  [State]  Department  offered
his  recent  autobiography,  'It's  Me,  O  Lord',  into  evi-
dence,  over  an  objection by  appellant's counsel that  the
contents  of  the  book  were  not  relevant  to  Mr.  Kent's
right  to travel."
In a third case, that of  Weldon Bruce Dayton, a young
physicist  who has  sworn  that  he has  never been  a Com-
munist,  was  refused a  passport to  accept  a  position  »t
the  Tata  Institute  in  India,  doing  cosmic  ray  research
which is  neither classified nor secret.  One of  the  charges
against  him is  that he  "is alleged to  have  been  present
on more  than one  occasion" in  an  apartment  which  "has
been  said  to  have  been  used  by  Julius  Rosenberg."  It
is  not  alleged that  he  was  there  when  Rosenberg was,
or that  he knew  Rosenberg. Dayton swears that the only
time  he  was  ever in  that  particular apartment  is  when
he  visited  it  with  FBI  agents  in  June,  1951,  at  their
request.
status  of  the  case,  whether  Judge  Youngdahl's   order  for  a
hearing  was being  obeyed,  whether  a  hearing  had  been  sched-
uled.   On  August  29,  the  day  before  the  Department  was  to
appear  before  Judge  Matthews,  an  unrestricted  passport  was
issued  to  Boudin,  ending  a  two  year  running  battle  with  the
Department.
Question:   If   there   was  a  substantial   reason   of   national
policy  for  denying  the  passport,  and  a  substantial  reason  of
policy  for  not  fully  disclosing  the  basis  for  the  denial,  why
didn't  the  Department  accept  the  invitation  of  the  Court  of
Appeals  to  state  those reasons?
Does  it  fear  to  let  the  courts  see that  it  is operating  in  pass-
port  cases not  for  serious reasons of  national policy but  on  the
basis  of  the  same kind  of  unevaluated  rubbish  which  makes
headlines  for  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee
and  so  often  figures  in  loyalty-security cases?
The  Basic  Issue  in  Paul  Robeson's  New  Passport  Appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court
"The    [non-Communist]  affidavit   requirement  has  become
in  recent  months  a  matter  of  national  concern  because un-
der   the   [State]    Department's   new   passport   procedures
every  American  citizen  henceforth  applying  for  a passport
must  execute  an  affidavit  stating  whether  or  not  he  is  or
ever  has  been  a  member  of  the  Communist  Party.   Since a
half  million  Americans  apply  annually  for  passports,  this
is  a  most  extensive loyalty  test.  .  . .
"This  oath, like  the  regulations in  toto, has  a  detrimental
effect   upon  the  exercise  of   the  First  Amendment   rights,
quite  aside from  the  fact  that  they  punish  persons for hav-
ing   exercised  such  rights.   Citizens  who  desire   to   travel
must  henceforth  be  cautious  in  the  exercise  of  their  First
Amendment  rights  in  order  not  to  be  disqualified  under  the
Department's  board  standards,  and  to  avoid  a  criminal  pros-
ecution  for  a  false  statement  after  executing  such  an  af-
fidavit. The  variety of  evidence  which  is  used  today  to  prove
membership  in  the  Communist  Party  justifies  this  caution.
See,   for  example  .  .  .  the list  of  indicia  of  Party  member-
ship  in  the  Communist  Control  Act  of  1954."
—Paul  Robeson vs.  John  Foster  Dulles, petition  for  certiorari just  filed  in  the  U. S.  Supreme  Court.
1   3  •'
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  10,1956
Brownell  Finds  Himself  A  Target  of  His  Own  Kind  of  Tactics
(Continued  from  Page   One)
man's  vote  on  a  specific measure may not  have  been  the  result
of  some  occult  and  unseen  conspiracy.  It  can translate  the  leg-
islative  process  as  well as  the  elective  process  into  the  kind  of
melodrama  with  which  the  right  has  poisoned  other  areas  of
American  life.  This  would  be  the  ultimate  and  real  subversion
of  constitutional   processes.
No  One Looks  At  The  Record
The   Javits  case  is  fantastic,  and  could   be  taken  seriously
only   in  an   atmosphere   poisoned   by  cold  war   demonology.
Here  is a  man  who  has  been  a  member  of  Congress  for  eight
years and  Attorney  General  of  the  State of  New  York  for  two.
Ten  years  of  public  action  lie  open  on  the  record  with  which
to  judge  him.   Only  paranoiacs  would  dismiss all  this  to  con-
centrate  on  whether   he  took  one  or  more  ferry   boat  rides
across  San Francisco  Bay in  1945  with  Frederick  V.  Field,  and
exgurgitate  the fine filaments linking  him  with  a  woman  who
entertained  a  visiting  Soviet  celebrity who  came  as  representa-
tive  of   the  Ukraine  but  was  really  head  of   the   Comintern,
though   it  had  supposedly  been  dissolved  some  years  before.
Only  fanatics  and  lunatics,  or  unscrupulous  manipulators  of
distrust  and  fear,  would  engage  in  collecting  the  kind  of  fee-
ble  and  tenuous  associational  material  in  which  Javits  found
himself  enmeshed  at  that  hearing.
And  what  a  hearing!   Here  a  man's  political   future  and
honor  were  at  stake.  Yet  all  he  was  given  were  summaries of
what  others had  said about him.  He  did  not  see or  hear  them,
much  less  have  a  chance  to  cross-examine them  through  coun-
sel.   From  time  to  time  Morris  called  on  Mandel,  the  Com-
mittee's  research  chief, a former business manager  of  the  Daily
Worker,  to  read  into  the  record  summaries of  the  careers  of
persons  named!  These,  as  Javits  protested  at  one  point  and
Eastland  agreed,  created  unfair  confusion;  people  it  was  not
alleged  Javits  had  ever  met  had  their  suspect  biographies  de-
tailed.  At  one  joint  even  Morris  cut  off  Mandel  when  he  was
giving  the  birthplace  in  Russia  of  a  Soviet  Consul  in  wartime
San  Francisco  who  is  alleged  to  have  been  a  friend  of   the
woman  Javits  met.  And  in  this  atmosphere  the  recollections  of
ex-Communists  were  taken  as  gospel  truth  while  the  inability
of   the  witness  to  recall  any  such  meetings  or   conversations
after  more  than  a  decade were  suspect  as  self-protection.  And
nowhere   was   there  anything  concrete   except   that   Murray
Baron—and  his  role  here  is  peculiar—  says  that  in   1948  as
well  as  in   1946,   Javits  suggested   the   possibility  of   getting
American  Labor  Party support  in  his  campaigns  for   Congress.
His  Real  Political  Crimes
Congressman  Judd  in  his  letter  to  Javits  said  he  knew  of  no
one  in  Congress  who  had  been  "more  intelligently  anti  Com-
munist."  This  touches the  core  of  the  attack on  Javits.  His  real
crime  is  his  liberalism.  At  the  press  conference  in  New  York
the   day   before   the   Eastland  hearing,   Fred   Woltman,   the
World-Tele gram's  expert  on  Communism,  questioned  Javits
about  two  "complaints"   (as  Woltman  phrased  it).   One  was
that  he  had  voted  against  appropriations  for  the  House  Un-
American  Activities Committee and  the  other  was  that  he  had
been  against  Franco  Spain  but  not  Soviet  Russia.  Another  of
the  Javits  political  crimes  is  that  he  was  one  of  the  few  in
Congress  who  voted  to  uphold  Truman's  veto  of  the  McCar-
ran  Internal Security Act. This  alone  is  enough  to  damn  him.
The  rightist  Republicans  are  striking  through  Javits  at  the
Eisenhower  wing  of  the  party;  this  is  a  continuation  of   the
struggle  which  McCarthy  lost  to  give  the  reactionaries  control
of  the  party.   Brownell,  who  is  an  ally  of  Javits  and  issued  a
statement  dismissing  the  charges  against  him,  is  also  in  the
line  of  fire.  There  is  a  rich  irony in  this.  For  the  Internal  Se-
curity  Committee  is  now  giving  Brownell  and  his  friends  a
taste  of  the  same  medicine  Brownell  dished  out  to   Truman.
This  investigation  of  Javits  is  a  lineal  descendant  of  the  kind
of  tactics Brownell  adopted  when  he  used  this  same  committee
as his  forum in  1954  for  his unfair attack  on  the late  Harry  D.
White  and  through  White  on  Truman  and  the  Democratic
party.  "Warmed  over  spy"  is  the  menu  Jenner  then  proclaim-
ed  for  the  Democrats  in  the  next  election;  Brownell  must  now
sup  on  the  same kind  of  canard  in  Javits's  case;  he  must  either
stand  and  fight  or  abandon  Javits  and  with  it  the  chances  of
electing  a  Republican  to  succeed  Lehman  in  the  Senate.
Next  Week:   What  The  Press  Overlooks  in  Jeering  at  Truman's  Defense   of  Harry   White
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol, Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City                                            Zone           State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name
9/10/56
City                                            Zone           State
City                                         Zone           State
.Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Tea  D    No  D
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED