I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956may21.pdf

============================================================

The  Third  Installment  of  Stone's  Report  from  the  Soviet  Union
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IV,  NO.  18MAY  21,   1956
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15   CENTS
A  Key  Question  in  The  Revulsion  Against  Stalinism
Will  The  Soviet  Union  Really  Reform Its  Criminal  Code?
In  his  History  of  Russia,  Bernard  Pares  tells  us  that   the
efforts  of  Nicholas  I  to  help  the  peasantry  "were  prejudiced
from  the  outset  because  the  work was wholly  entrusted  to  the
bureaucracy  and  kept  secret  from  the  population,  whose  sup-
port  was therefore  never  enlisted."   The  bureaucracy was  hos-
tile  to  the  reforms  and  Nicholas  "-met  with  continuous  resist-
ance, which  even went so far  as the  omission from  new  editions
of  such  statutes  as  established  peasant  rights."   This  passage
comes  to  mind  when  one  discovers  how  secretive  the  present
regime  is  about  reforms  in  the  criminal  code.
One  of  the  most  important  things  one  learns  in  the  Soviet
Union  today  is  that  the  average  Soviet  citizen  is  considerably
less  informed  than  the  foreign  visitor  about  the  changes  being
made  in  Soviet  criminal  law  and  procedure.  The  most  striking
instance of  this  is the  abolition  of  the  dreaded  "Special  Board"
of  the  MVD.
When  I  interviewed  Professor  Sergei  A.  Golunsky,  a  mem-
ber  of  the  commission  now  at  work  on  the  revision  of   the
Soviet  criminal  code,  and  asked  him  what  changes  had  been
made to give  Soviet  citizens greater  protection  against  the  secret
police,  the  first  thing he  cited  was this  abolition  of  the  Special
Board.   This  Board  had  power  to  condemn  without  trial,  on
the  basis  merely  of  documentary  charges  by  the  MVD   and
without  even  seeing  the  accused.  Professor  Golunsky  said  this
had  been  abolished  in  September,   1953.
The  Censor  Said  No
What  I  did  not   learn   until  later  was  the  extraordinary
secrecy  in  which  this  reform  -was shrouded.    It  first  became
known  to  outsiders   last   August  when  Professor   Harold   J.
Berman  of  the  Harvard  Law  School  visited  the  Soviet  Union.
When he asked  Soviet  jurists about  the  Special  Board they told
him  it  had  been  abolished  but  that  the  decree  had  never  been
published.   Professor  Berman  said  no  one  could  explain  why
the  decree  was  kept   secret.   He  mentioned   abolition   of  the
Special  Board  in  a  talk  he  was  invited  to  make  before  the
Institute   of   Law  in   Moscow.    But  when   newspaper   corre-
spondents  tried  to  report  the  abolition  in  their  dispatches,  the
censor  refused  to  permit transmission  of  the  news.
Although   Professor   Berman  on  his  return  wrote  of   this
decree  in  last  December's  issue  of  the  Harvard   Law  School
Bulletin,  it  was  not  until  this  month  that  the  Soviet  censor
allowed  mention  of  the  abolition  of  the  Special  Board.   On
May  4,  in  describing  a  talk  which  a  group  of  visiting   French
Socialists   had  with   Anatoli   Votin,   president   of   the   Soviet
Supreme  Court,   correspondents   were  allowed  to  report  that
Votin  read  the  text  of. this  decree to the visitors  and that  it had
never  been  published  in  the  Soviet  Union.   The  only  known
news of  it  in  the  Soviet  Union  was a  two  line  reference  in  last
January's  issue  of  Sovetskoye  gosudarstvo  i  pravo, the  monthly
law  journal published  by the  Institute of  Law  of  the  Academy
of  Sciences.  This  is, of  course,  a  technical  not  a  popular  pub-
lication.   Even  there,  despite  the  intense  interest  the  reference
must  have aroused  among  Soviet  lawyers, the  text  was not  pub-
lished.
Poor  Journalism  By  Any  Standard
As striking an example  of  the failure  to inform  the  ordinary
Soviet  citizen of  the  changes  being made or  considered  in  crim-
inal  procedure  occurred  a  few  days  before  my  interview  with
Professor  Golunsky.  This  same law  journal,  Sovetskoye gosu-
darstvo  i  pravo, in its April  issue carried  an editorial  criticizing
Vishinsky  and  convictions  by confession.  A  kind  of  grapevine
seems  to  operate  in  Moscow  when  the  regime  wants  it  to,  and
this  editorial  in  an  obscure  legal  journal at  once  found  its way
into the hands of  foreign correspondents.   I  raised  the  question
with  Professor  Golunsky.  I  said  the  editorial  was very  encour-
aging  and  that  full  accounts  had  been  cabled  abroad   where
millions  would  read about it  but that  the  average  Soviet  citizen
would  not  know  about  it  since  the  story had  not  been  carried
in  the  Soviet  press.   He  had  no  explanation  to  offer.
By  any  standards,  both  these  stories  were  sensationally   im-
portant  news.   Only  two months  earlier,  in  his  speech  to  the
20th  Communist Party  Congress,  Voroshilov  had  declared  that
"a  big  role  in  the  struggle  for  socialist  law  belongs  to  our
press"  and  urged  the  need  "for  widely  propagating  Soviet  law
among  the  entire  population."   Even  without   such  urging,
"Special Secret MVD  Board  Abolished"  and  "Vishinsky  Tech-
nique   of   Conviction   by  Confession   Attacked"   would   have
been  legitimate  8-column  lines  across  page one  of  Pravda  and
Izvestia.   Since these  are papers  closely  controlled  by the  Soviet
government   and   the   Communist   Party,   one   wonders  why
neither  story  was printed.   Are  these  changes  in  law  and  atti-
tude  encountering  the  same  undercurrent  of  resistance  in  the
Soviet  bureaucracy  that  the  peasant  reforms  of  Nicholas  en-
countered  in  the  Czarist  bureaucracy ?
II
One  of  the  principal  reasons  I  wanted  to  visit  the   Soviet
Union  was to  learn  what  had  happened  to  the  revision  of  the
criminal  code  promised  after  Stalin's  death  and  whether  new
safeguards  were  to  be  enacted  to  make  the  excesses  and  injus-
tices  of  the  Stalin  period  impossible.   I want to  try and  picture
the  situation  as  it  appears  to  the  ordinary  thoughtful   Soviet
citizen.   The  newspaper   reader   abroad  sees  frequent   stories
about  reform  of  criminal  procedure  in  Russia based  on  articles
(Continued   on   Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, May SI, 1958
(Continued   from   Page  One) .
like  that  in  Sovetskoye  gosudarstvo i  pravo  and  in  interviews
accorded  foreign  visitors.  But  these  articles  and  interviews  do
not  reach  the  ordinary  reader  in  the  Soviet  Union.    He  must
judge  by  what  he  reads  in  the  press  and  the  picture  as  his
press  reports  it  is  a  confusing one.
More  than  three  years  ago, on  March  27,  1953, after  the
death  of  Stalin,  a  general  amnesty  was  declared.   The   same
day  it  was  announced  that  the  Ministry  of  Justice  had   been
"instructed   to  draft  appropriate  proposals"   for  the  reform  of
the  criminal  code and  to  present  these  to  the  Presidium  of  the
Supreme  Soviet  within  30  days.   Since  then,  beginning  with
Beria's  exposure  of  the  "doctors'  plot"  as  a  frameup  and cul-
minating  in  Krushchev's  recent  "secret"  speech  attacking  the
crimes  and  injustices  which  occurred  under  Stalin,  there  have
been  a  series  of  exposes.    Excesses  by  the  secret  police  have
been  denounced  and  victims  rehabilitated,  but  that  promised
revision  of  the  criminal  code  has  not  yet  been   forthcoming,
and  the  outlook  for  law  reform  is  still  confused.   There  is
much  talk  of  reform, but  the  emphasis  is  on  a  shakeup  in  the
personnel  of  the  secret  police  and  in  providing  stricter  super-
vision   from   above  rather  than  in  attacking  the  problem  by
providing  new  specific  guarantees  for  accused  individuals.   The
Soviet  citizen  hears  attacks  on  Beria  and  Stalin  and  on  "the
cult  of  personality"  but  he  hears  little  about  concrete  reforms
to provide new checks on  the  secret  police.   On  the  contrary  he
still  hears  much  that  stresses  the  need-for  continued  security
surveillance  and  builds  up  that  same  atmosphere  of  suspicion
on  which  police  excesses  thrived  during  the  Stalin   years.
The  Enemy  Is   Everywhere
An  example is provided by Krushchev's  speech to the Young
Building  Workers  on  April  11.  "The capitalists,"   Krushchev
said,  "are well  able  to  defend  their  capitalist  world  and  its
exploiting  order  of  things.   They  know  how  to  organize  their
intelligence  service and  smuggle  their  spies  and  saboteurs  into
our  country. .  . . We  must  be able  to  recognize  the  enemy,  to
see  through  all  his  tricks  in  good   time."    If  capitalist   spies
and   saboteurs   may  be  lurking   everywhere,   a  vigilant   and
powerful   secret  police  is  necessary.   This  was  Stalin's   view.
Krushchev's  does  not  seem very  different.   In  that  same  speech
to  the  young  building  workers,  immediately  after  this  refer-
ence  to  "tricks,"   Krushchev   said,  "We   must   strengthen   in
every  way  the  security of  our  state,  be  vigilant  and  nip  in  the
bud  all  enemy  activities.   In  criticizing  the  weaknesses  and
errors  that  have  been  made  in  the  course  of  our  advance,  we
must  first  of  all  see  to  it  that  this  criticism  strengthens   the
Soviet  system."   Criticism must  be  "constructive"   but  who  is
to  determine  whether  a   specific   criticism  is  constructive  or
only  an  enemy  activity  "in  the  bud"?    Krushchev  went  on,
"Our   enemies  hope   that  we   will   relax  our   vigilance  and
weaken  our  state  security  service.   No,   this,"   he  said,  "will
never  happen!   The  proletarian  sword  must  always  be  sharp,
must   always  ably   protect  the   gains  of   the   revolution,   the
working  class,  the  working  people.     (Prolonged   applause)."
This  sounds  remarkably like  Stalin.
Under  Stalin  differences   of  opinion  were  constantly  being
translated  into  this kind  of  melodrama.   It  was  in  this  atmos-
phere  that  the  excesses and  injustices  now  exposed  were  bred.
But  let  us  listen  a^ain  to  Krushchev, this  time  in  his  speech
to  the  20th party  Congress and  the  same  accents may be  heard.
"The  imperialists,"  Krushchev  told  the  Congress,  "had placed
special  hopes  on  their  old  agent,  Beria,  who  had    perfidiously
wormed   his   way  into   leading  posts  in   the   Party   and   the
Government."  (The italics  are  mine.)
Diabolism  Soviet  Style
If  the  "imperialists"   are  so  devilishly  clever  that  they  can
put  an  agent  into the  very highest  circle  of  Soviet  government,
how  can one  live at  peace  with  these  imperialists,  how  can  one
trust  them,  indeed  (for  this kind of  poisonous  nonsense  boom-
erangs)  how  can  one  trust  the  highest   officials  of  the  Soviet
government  itself?  This  picture  of  Beria  "perfidiously"  worm-
ing  his  way  "into  leading  posts  in  the  Party  and  the  Govern-
ment"   is  not  calculated   to  create  that  calmer  atmosphere   in
which  a  repetition  of  Stalinism  may  be  avoided.
But  let  us  listen  again  as  Krushchev  continues.  "The Cen-
tral  Committee,"   Krushchev  declared,   "resolutely  put  an  end
to  the  criminal  conspiracy  of  that  dangerous   enemy  and  his
accomplices  ...    the  destruction  of  this  gang  of  contemptible
traitors  helped, further to strengthen  the Party.  . . . The Party
has  become  still  more  monolithic."    Wasn't  the  Party  already
too  monolithic  for  its  own  good?   Might  not  the  abuses  of
the  Stalin  period  have  been  avoided  if  it  had  been  a  little  less
monolithic?   "The  party's  unity,"   Krushchev  went  on,  "has
been  built  up  over  the  course  of  many  years  and  decades;  it
grew  stronger  in  battle  with  a  host  of  enemies.   The  Trotzky-
ites,  Bukharinites,  bourgeois  nationalists,  and  other  malignant
enemies  of  the  people,  the  men  who  would  restore  capitalism,
tried  desperately  to  undermine  the  Party's  Leninist unity  from
within—and  all  of  them  broke  their  necks."  This  is  the  same
kind   of   rhetorical    hydrophobia   which   marked   the   party
speeches   and   encouraged   the   party  witch  hunt   during   the
Stalin era.
Ill
Another  "20  Years  of  Treason"
For  more  than  20  years,  according  to  Soviet  leaders  them-
selves,   their   secret   police  apparatus  has  been   headed   by  a
series  of  traitorous  monsters.  Yagoda,  Yehzov,  Abakumov  and
Beria  in  turn  were  removed,  disgraced  and  executed  as  foreign
agents  and  frameup  artists.  As each  man  fell  there  were  shake-
ups   in  personnel,   victims  were  rehabilitated,    reforms   were
promised.   Yagoda  came  in  as  a  reformer  in  1934 when  the
old  OGPU  was abolished  and the NKVD  established;  this was
supposed  to  symbolize a  shift  from  the  older  system  of  revo-
lutionary  terror  to  one  of  "Socialist  legality."   In  1939 Beria
was  assigned  to  "purge   the  purgers"  and  to  correct  wrongs
done  by  the  NKVD   under  Yagoda  and  Yehzov.   The  new
leaders  have  executed  Beria and  told  their  people  that  during
the   last  twenty  years  of  his  life  Stalin  was  responsible  for
monstrous  crimes.   The  main  instrument  of  these  crimes  was
the  secret  police,  operating  in  a  legal  system which  gave  their
victims  none  of  the  elementary  safeguards  we  know  in  the
West.
In  any  country  where  public  opinion  could  express  itself
freely  the  result  would  be  the  abolition  of  the  secret   police
and  a  reform  of  the  whole  legal  system.  But  in  Russia  today,
when  one really  tries to find out  what  is happening,  the  results
are  still  vague  and  meager.   The  highest  officer   of  the  new
regime,  the  new  party leader,  Krushchev,  is ambiguous  on  the
subject.   "Experience  has  shown,"  he  told  the  20th  Congress,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone't  Weekly,  May  21,1956
8
"that  the  enemies of  the  Soviet  State attempt  to  use the  slight-
est  weakening  of  Socialist  law  for  their  foul,  subversive activ-
ity."   He  wants  to  "raise  revolutionary vigilance  among  the
Soviet  people  and  strengthen  the  State  security  agencies."
Krushchev's  Significant  Omission
Krushchev's  speech  was  the   official   report  of  the   Central
Committee  and  therefore the  most  important and  authoritative
address  at  the  Party  Congress.   A  section  of  the  report  is sub-
titled,  "Development  of  Socialist  Democracy, Improvement  of
the   State   Apparatus,  Strengthening   of   Socialist   Law."  •  But
Krushchev   does  not  mention  the  promised  revision  of   the
criminal  law. He  talks as if  the  terrible things which happened
were the  results  of  faults  in  personnel  (including,  as  it  turned
out   from  his  later  "secret"  speech,   Stalin)   and  not  in  the
system   itself.
After  discussing  the  frameups in  the  Leningrad case, which
he  blames  on  Beria, Krushchev  said,  "The  Central  Committee
has  drawn  important  conclusions  from  all  this."   But  among
these  conclusions  he  does  not  list  the  need  to  strengthen  the
rights  of  accused  persons,  to  revise  the  hideously  sweeping
law  against  "counter-revolutionary  crimes,"   or  to  cut  down
the  powers  of  the  secret  police.    His  emphasis  is  on   better
supervision  from  above,  and  better  personnel.   "Proper  con-
trol,"  he went  on,  "by the Party and  the  Government  over  the
work  of  the  State  Security agencies  has  been  established.  Con-
siderable  work  has  been  done  to  strengthen  the  State  Security
agencies,  the  courts  and  procurator's   offices  by putting  in  tried
and  tested  people.   The  supervisory  powers of  the  Procurator's
Office  have  been  completely  reestablished  and   strengthened."
"We  Trust  Them"
To  listen  to  Krushchev  was to  believe  that  while  Beria was
a  monster  the  security  system  was  essentially  sound  and  the
secret  police  on the whole  good  fellows.  "It  should  be stated,"
he  told  the  20th  Congress,  "that  because  a  number  of  cases
have  been  reviewed  and  set  aside,  some  comrades have  begun
to  manifest  a  certain  distrust  for  the  workers  of  the  State
Security  agencies.  That,  of  course,
1
'  he  emphasized,  "is  incor-
rect   and   very   harmful.   We   know  that   the  overwhelming
majority   of   our   State  Security  personnel  are  honest   people
devoted  to  our  common cause,  and  we trust  them."
Discussion  of  the  promised  new  criminal  code  at  the  Party
Congress  was  left  to  the  much  less  important  speech  made by
Voroshilov,  and  he  devoted  only  five  paragraphs  to  it.   He
said  that  a new criminal code and  a new  code  of  criminal  pro-
cedure  were  being  drafted  which  would  help  to   "safeguard
the  rights of  citizens."   But  although  Voroshilov  spoke  of  the
need  for  "immense  activity  in  educating our  cadres"  in  Social-
ist  law,  he  did  little  "educating"  himself.  He  did  not  touch
on  any  of   the   rights  to   be  safeguarded—on  the   right   to
counsel,  on  the  right  to  know  why  one  was  arrested,  on  the
right  not  to  be  subjected to  prolonged  interrogation  in  prison
pending trial.  Nor  did  he  speak  of  the  need  for  revising  those
terrible areas of  Soviet criminal law in  which treason and  coun-
ter  revolutionary  crimes  are  so  broadly  defined   as  to  invite
injustice   and   make  dissent  of   any   kind  dangerous.   Like
Krushchev  he  was  specific  on  only  one  point,  and  that  point
stressed  better  supervision  from  the  top.
"In  accordance with  the  directives  of  the  Central  Committee
of   the   CPSU   (Communist  Party   of   the   Soviet   Union),"
Voroshilov  said,  "the  Presidium of  the  Supreme  Soviet  of  the
U.S.S.R.  has  approved  a  new  Instrument  of  the   Procurator's
Office  in  the  U.S.S.R.   Based  on  the  Leninist  teaching  on  the
role  and  tasks of  the  Soviet Procurator's  Office,  the  Instrument
is  a   clear  program   of   activity  for   the   Office,   confronts   it
with  the  task  of  being  principled  and  irreconcilable   in  the
struggle  for   strict  observance  of  law  by  all   establishments,
responsible   persons  and  citizens  of  the  U.S.S.R."
It  Began  With  Peter,  Not  Lenin
This  bit  from  Voroshilov  is  Communist  gobbledegook,   and
will  be  recognized  as  such  by  intelligent  Soviet  readers.  Judg-
ing  by past  history, the  Procurator's  office  is no substitute  for  a
good  criminal  code.   The  Procurator's  office  is  a  peculiar  Rus-
sian  institution,  founded  by  Peter  the  Great.   The   Prosecutor
General  was intended  to  be  the  cleansing  arm  and  inspecting
eye  of  the  autocratic   sovereign,   an  Inspector  General   with
power  to  inquire  everywhere  and  to  punish  whatever  infrac-
tions  of  law  he  uncovered.   The  institution   reflects  the  desire
of  a centralized  autocracy for  efficiency  in  administration—that,
rather  than  justice for  individuals, has  been  its  emphasis  under
the  Communists  as under  the  Czars  before  them.    All  the  ex-
cesses of  the  last  20 years occurred not  only in  spite  of  the  Pro-
curator  General  but  with  his  fervent  collaboration.   Vishinsky
was  Procurator  General  during  the  worst  of  the  30's  and  one
need  only go back  and  read  his  idyllic  description  of  the   office
in  his  "Law  and  the  Soviet State"  (1938)  and  check  it  against
what we now know,  to  see how little  confidence can be reposed
in  assurances  that  the  powers  of  the  Procurator  have  been   "re-
stored."
It  is,  for  example,  worth  recalling  that  the  Procurator  was
represented  on  that  "special  board"  which  has  just  now  been
abolished  and  that  in  1934  when  it was established  the  answer
to  those  who  feared  its  potentialities  was  that  the   Procurator
would  have  a veto  over  its  actions.  It  is also  worth   comparing
Vishinsky's  description  in  his  book  of  the  way any  citizen  may
have  his  rights  vindicated by complaint  to  the  Procurator   with
Voroshilov's   description  at  the  Congress  of  how  complaints
generally  are being  handled.   Voroshilov  spoke  of  an  "inatten-
tive,  harmful attitude  to  applications  and  complaints"  and  said
it  was  "necessary  resolutely  to  put  an  end  to  the  bureaucratic
attitude  toward  the  complaints  of  the  working  people."   Reli-
ance on  the  Procurator  General  is no  substitute  for  a  system in
which  accused  persons  through  private  counsel  and  within  die
framework  of  strictly  defined  crimes  can  defend  themselves  in
open  court.
IV
No  Secret   Police?
Everything  about  my interview with Professor  Golunsky  was
charming.   I  was  even  charmed with  the  nice  lady  at  VOKS
who arranged  it  after  telling  me that  the  Soviet  Union  did  not
have  a  secret  police  "not  in  the  sense  that  you  foreign  news-
papermen  think"  and  after  explaining  to  me  that  while  the
new government  had  admitted  many  "mistakes"  in  this  field  it
had  not  said  that  past  policy was wrong.  (It  was not  till  later
that  I  began  to  realize how  faithfully  these fine  split  hairs ac-
tually  conformed  to  the  official  line.)
Professor  Golunsky gave me no  such  double talk.  He  turn-
ed  out  to  be a  tall,  slim,  aristocratic looking man  in  his  fifties,
a  legal  scholar  with  a  cosmopolitan outlook  and  a  thorough
(Continued   on   Page   Four)
7   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May 21,1956
Still  Reluctant  To  Make  A  Clean  Break  With  The  Past
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
grasp of British  and  American law.  He  teaches law at  Moscow
University  and  it  must be a privilege  to  be one of  his students.
I  listened  to  him with  pleasure  and I  came away with  respect.
If  Russian  scholars  of  his  type  had  a  free  hand  I  believe  one
would  see a welcome  evolution  within the  framework of  social-
ism  back  toward  freedom  of  expression  and  a  fundamentally
safeguarded  criminal  law.  And  I  am  not  at  all  sure,  in  the
light  of  the  swift  and  sensational  developments   since  Stalin
died,  that  there  may not  be a  clean  break  in  this  direction  one
of  these  days.  I  think  we Western  intellectuals  can help  that
process   by  resolutely  refusing  to  mistake  shadows  for sub-
stance,  and  by insisting  on  real  changes  as the  price  of  the  rap-
prochement  the  new  regime desires with  the  liberals,  Socialists
and  independent  Leftists  of  the West.
Still  A  Long  Way  to  Go
But  what  my interview with  Professor  Golunsky  showed  me
was that  the  Soviet  Union  still  has a long way to go.  The  only
two  concrete  reforms  he  could  name were the  abolition  of  the
Special  Board  and  the  newly revised  law of  last year  "strength-
ening"  the  Procurator's  Office.   The  new  code  of  criminal  law
and  procedure  still seems to be bogged  down.  In  March,  1953,
definite  proposals  were  promised  in  30  days.   Last  Fall Pro-
fessor  Berman  was  told  the  new  law  would  be  ready  "about
February."   It  is  now  May  of  1956, and  it  was  clear   from
my  talk  with   Professor  Golunsky  that  many  good  decisions
were still  in  abeyance but that  at  least one bad  one  had  already
been  made.   The  bad  one  is  that  there  will  be  no  revision  of
the  notorious  law  of  counter-revolutionary crimes.
The  day  the  Soviet  Union  repeals  this  law  will  be  the  day
the  world  Will  know  that  the  new  regime  really  means  busi-
ness. The  first  paragraph  is  enough  to  give its flavor and  show
the  blank  check  it  gives  the  police.   "Any  action  is  considered
counter-revolutionary,"  the  law  says, "which  is directed  toward
the  overthrow,  undermining or  weakening  of  the  authority of
the  Workers'  and  Peasants'  Soviets,  or  of  the  Workers'  and
Peasants'  Government   (whether  of  the  USSR  or  of  a con-
stituent  or  autonomous  republic)  ...    or  towards  the  under-
mining  or  weakening  of  the  external  security of  the  USSR  or
of  the  fundamental  economic,  political  and  national  gains  of
the  proletarian  revolution."   This  is  sweeping  enough  to  put
any  critic  in jail,  or  frame  any opponent.
Right  to  Counsel
Among  the  questions  still  in  abeyance  is  whether  accused
persons  shall  have  the  right  to  have  counsel  present  during
their  interrogation  before  trial.   The  question  of  the  point  at
which  private  counsel  may participate  is not  yet settled,  though
it  will  be  an  improvement  over  present   practice  where  the
counsel  does  not  appear  until  the  case  is  brought  into  open
court.   The  question  of  when  a  man  can  have  counsel  is  im-
portant.   As  Professor  Golunsky  explained,  in  ordinary  cases
the  police  will  still  be  able  to  hold  a  man  for  30  days  before
trial  and  in  extraordinary  cases  for  three  months.   This  will
also be an  improvement  since in  practice  the  secret  police  have
been  able  to  hold  a  man  as  long  as  they  liked  without  trial.
But  even  one  month,  much  less  three,  of  unrestricted  interro-
gation  may  be  enough  to  break  a  man  or  force  a  false con-
fession  a  la  Vishinsky.  (The  new  Yugoslav  code  provides  for
8  hours  uninterrupted  rest  during  every  24  hours  in  which  a
prisoner  is held  for  interrogation  by the police). All  trials will
be  public  except  those  involving  sexual  crime  or  military  or
diplomatic secrets—the latter may prove a dangerous  exception.
The  new criminal code will  be a  test  of  the  new regime.  To
make  the  vindication  of  injustice  depend  upon  the  Procurator
General  will  be  to  allow  the  central  autocracy to  decide  what
rights  shall  be^enforced  and  who  shall  get  justice.   To  grant
greater  rights  to  the  individual  would  be  to  weaken  the  cen-
tral  power  and  to  make  it  possible  for   individuals  injustly
treated  to  enforce  their  rights  in  the  courts  against  the  State
as  they  can  in  Western   countries.   Without  revision  of   the
definitions  of  treason  and  counter-revolution,  freedom  of dis-
cussion will not  be achieved.  The  Soviet  bureaucracy and  lead-
ership  are  obviously  reluctant  to  go  that  far  but  ferment  at
home  and  criticism  from  abroad  may  yet  force  them  toward
fundamental  reforms.
Another   Installment   Next   Week   of  Stone's   Visit  to  Moscow  and   Warsaw
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City                                           Zone           State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name                                                                            ™
5/21/56
Street                                                                                 ~
City                                        Zone.          State
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?   Yes  Q    No  Q
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301    E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED