I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956oct22.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on  The H-Bomb
Debunking  The New  York Times Editorial  on Stevenson and  The  Bomb,  See  Box  Page  3
/. F, Stone's Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  40
OCTOBER  22,  1956
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
A  Vote  for Adlai Is  A  Vote  Against The  H-Bomb
We  urge  our  readers  to  vote  and  work  for  the  election  of
Adlai  Stevenson. We  believe that  in  raising  the  H-bomb  issue
he  has  raised  the  most important  issue  in  the  world  today.  The
quarrels  of  right  and  left,  the  rivalries  of  captalist  and  com-
munist  empires all  dwindle into  petty quarrels  beside  the  com-
mon  interest of  humankind  in  the  twin  aspects  of  the  H-bomb
question.  The  first  is  to  protect'the   air  all  living  creatures
breathe  from  the  poisons  released  by  H-bomb  tests.  The  sec-
ond  is  to  save  the  earth  itself   from   the  thermonuclear  war
which  the  rising  tensions  of  a  thermonuclear  arms  race  may
render  inescapable,  once  the  intercontinental  ballistic  missile
with  the  H-bomb  warhead  is  achieved.
In  making the  H-bomb  the  prime  issue of  the  campaign,  in
pledging  himself  to  make  the  ending  of  tests  the  first  order  of
business  if elected,  Adlai Stevenson  has turned  the  election  into
a  referendum  on  the  H-bomb.   He  has  given  us  a  chance  to
vote  on  the  No.  1  issue  of  our  era.   Should  he  be  defeated
now,  after  making  the  election  a  test  of  sentiment  on  this  is-
sue,  his  defeat  will  be  regarded  as  a  mandate  of  confidence  in
the  military  bureaucracy  which  has  taken  over  control  of  the
Ten  Nuclear  Scientists  Speak  Out
"Our  people  must  not  be  shielded  from  the  grim  re-
alties. . . . They  must  realize  in full  the dangers  of ra-
dioactive  fallout. . . . We find it regrettable that  discus-
sions  of  our  military  strength,  of  our  vulnerability  and
our  foreign  policy  in  relation  to  H-bombs  have  thus  far
represented  such  a  small  proportion  of current  political
discussion.  .  .  . We must  realize  that  time  is  running
out—that  our  actions and inactions  during  the  next  four
years  may  well  determine  whether  our  people,  our  na-
tion,  our  civilization  live  or   die."
—Ten  Nuclear  Scientists   (Including   One  Nobel  Prize-
winner)   at   California   institute  of  Technology  in
support   of  Stevenson  on  H-Bomb  Tests,  Oct.  14.
Atomic  Energy  Commission  under  Admiral  Strauss.. A  clique
of  military  men,  with  their  civilian  satellites  and  captive  scien-
tists,  has  been  making  life-and-death  decisions  in  an   atmos-
phere   of   super-secrecy  and   deceptively   reassuring  press   re-
leases.   Stevenson's  defeat  would  give  them  a  blank  check  to
proceed  as  they  please.
The  New  and  Terrible  Poison  They  Tried  to  Keep  A  Secret
A  new  poison,  described  in  the  adjoining  box,  has  been  de-
veloped  by the  use  and  testing  of  atomic weapons.   It  is Stron-
tium  90,  or  radioactive  strontium.  This  is  the  most  dangerous
biologically   of   the   radioactive  substances  which   "fall    out"
from  large  thermonuclear  explosions.   But  for  an  accident,  the
appearance  of  this  new  poison  might  still  be  a  secret.
This  is  the  disclosure  which  Atomic  Energy  Commissioner
Thomas  E. Murray  made  last  November  17  in  a Fordham  Law
School  address.   Mr.  Murray  said  that  before   the  hydrogen
bomb  was  tested  at  Bikini  on  March   1,  1954,,  "The   decision
was made to  issue  only  two  statements—first  an  announcement
that  tests  were  to  be  held,  and  then  a  short  guarded  statement
at  their conclusion."  An  accident, which  Mr.  Murray  attributed
to  Providence,  upset  these  plans.   Radioactive  dust  from  the
explosion   settled   on   a   Japanese   fishing   vessel,   the   Lucky
Dragon,  some  90  miles  downwind.  "The  news  about  the  po-
tential  hazard  of  radioactive  fallout  from  the   thermonuclear
weapons  burst  out  of  secrecy,"  Mr.  Murray  recalled.  "Twenty-
seven  Japanese  fishermen  announced  to  the  world   the  first
fateful   news  about  the  lurking  catastrophe  that  may  possibly
lie  in wait for  all of us ...   the  shock  to world  opinion  rivalled
in  its  own  way  the  blast  of  the  H-bomb itself."
Thus  linked  with  the  issue  of  the  H-bomb  is  the  issue  of
the  American  people's  right to  know. We  have  drifted  a  long
way  from  a  free  society  when  a  handful  of  officials  can  decide
to  withhold   information   of   such   magnitude.    In   that  same,
1 1
Evil  Offshoot  of  The  Atomic  Age
"This  radioactive fallout  as  it  is  called, carries  some-
thing   that's   called   strontium-90,  which   is   the   most
dreadful  poison in  the  world.  For  only  one  tablespoon
equally  shared  by  all  members of  the  human race could
produce  a  dangerous  level  of  radioactivity  in  the  bones
of  every  individual.   In  sufficient  concentrations  it  can
cause  bone  cancer  and  dangerously  affect  the  reproduc-
tive  processes."
—Stevenson at  Chicago, Oct. 15.
"A  sufficiently  large  number  of  such   [thermonuclear]
explosions  would  render the  earth uninhabitable to man.
.  ..  One of  the products released  by a  nuclear  explosion
is  a  substance  that  is  called  radioactive  strontium.  . .  .
Prior  to  the  atomic age  there  was  no  radioactive  stron-
tium  in the atmosphere or the soil.  ...    There  is   a limit
to  the  amount  of  this  strontium  that  the  human body
can  absorb. . .  . There is  a limit  to  the  number of  large
thermonuclear  explosions that the  human race  can with-
stand       "
—AEC  Commissioner  Thomas E.  Murray,  Nov.  17,1955
speech,  Commissioner  Murray  said,  "It  is  true  that  a  handful
of  men—in  science,  in  the  military,  in government—do  under-
stand  that  we have  in  our  hands  a  power  of  limitless  destruc-
tion.   But  the  fact  that  only  a  handful  of  men  possess  this un-
derstanding  is itself  a  dangerous  thing  ...    an  essential  insur-
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 22,1956
{Continued  from  Page  One).
ance  against  the  dangers  inherent  in- nuclear  weapons  is  an
America-wide   public  and  a   world-wide  public  that   fully
realizes  the  cosmic  dimensions  of  this  danger."  In  using  a
presidential  campaign  to  air  this  issue,  Stevenson  is  making
a  major  contribution  to  the  restoration  of  democratic  control
over  thermonuclear   policies.
"Operation  Sunshine" and  AH Is WeU
From  the  first,  the  new  danger has  been  played  down  by
AEC  Chairman  Strauss and  the  majority  of  the  Commission.
The  first  statement  issued  by  Admiral  Strauss  after  his  re-
turn from  Bikini at  the  end of March,  1954, admitted  the  fall-
out  but  attributed  the- skin  lesions  of  the  Japanese fishermen
to- "the   chemical  activity   of  the  converted  material  in- the
coral  rather  than  to  radioactivity."  When   radiostrontium's
danger  was  finally  admitted,  it  was  underestimated.   "Esti-
mates  have  changed  almost  wildly,"  Mr.  Murray  told   hia
Fordham  audience. "A year  ago the public was informed that
the  radiostrontium  presently   in  the  soil  would  have  to  in-
crease  a  million  times   over  before  increased   frequency  of
bone  tumors  from  this  source  could  be  recognized.   Recent
statements   have  revised  that  figure  drastically   and  signifi-
cantly  downward  from  one  million- to  ten  thousand."
When  the  AEC  arranged   for  a   special   study  of  fallout
hazards  from   bomb-  tests,  it   called  the  project  "Operation
Sunshine";  the  name  was unusually, if  unconsciously, reveal-
ing.   Sure  enough,  the  conclusion- (as  disclosed  in  the  AEC's
Highest   Fall-Out  Here  In  U.  &
".  .  .  the  U.S.  probably  has  the  highest  total  fallout
in the world...."
—Dr.   Willard  B.  Libby,  Atomic  Energy  Commissioner,
in  addressing the American  Association for  the  Ad-
vancement  of  Science, Oct.  12.
20th  semi-annual  report  last  August)   "was  that  the  long-
term  effects  of  fallout  from  high  yield  weapons  was  not  as
great  as  generally  supposed."  Indeed  it  was  "insignificant."
This  was  the  section  of  the  20th  semi-annual  report  which
bore  the  footnote,  "Commissioner   Thomas  E.  Murray   does
net  subscribe  to  this  section  of  the  report."
In  the  absence  of  authoritative  investigation  with   access
to  secret  data,  it  is  impossible  from  the  outside  to judge  the
AEC's  conclusions.   But  it  is  interesting  to  piece  together
some  significant  bits  from  the  reports made at  the  same  time
by  British  and  Indian  scientists.   Let  us  begin   with   what
seems  to  be the  key assumption  of  the  AEC study,  that  tests
will  continue  at  the  present  rate. "Thus  it  appears," says  the
conclusion  of  its  section  on the  radiostrontium  hazard,  "that
at  the  present  level  of  weapons'  testing,  the  present  and  po-
tential  contribution   of  strontium  90  to  the  world  ecology  is
not  a  significant  factor."  (Italics  added.)
But  what  if  the  rate  of  testing  rises?  The  British  report
(The    Hazards   to   Man   of  Nuclear   and  Allied   Radiations.
Smythe  Backs  Stevensoin
"Your  clear  and  objective statement on  the  desirabil-
ity   of   stopping, large   H-bomb  tests   by  international
agreement  is  a  service  to this country, transcending the
partisanship  of  the  current campaign."
—Henry   de  Wolfe   Smythe,  member of  the  AEC  when
the  A-bomb  was- developed,   author  of   the   famous
"Smythe   Report."
British  Medical  Research   Council,  June   1956,  HMSGv Cmd.
9780)  says  in  paragraph  231,  "The  most  impressive   feature
of  these  figures  for  exposure  from  fallout  is  the  very  great
effect   of  a  very  few  thermonuclear  explosions.  This  is  not
surprising  since  their  power  is  measured  in  equivalents  of
millions  of  tons  of  TNT  compared with  the  thousands  of  tons
for  atomic bombs. If  the rate of  firing  this type  of  weapon  in-
creases, the radiation  exposure will be altered proportionally."
The  Danger  Point  May  Be  Close
Just  how  rapidly  each  test  steps  up  the  danger  may  be
seen  from  a  passage  on page  121 of the  study  published  by  a
group  of  Indian  scientists  in  June  (Nuclear  Explosions-  and
Their   Effect,     Publications   Division,  Government  of  India.)
"The  maximum  burden  of  strontium  90 that  an  average  per-
son can carry for  lifetime  without  any  risk  of its  causing  any
untoward  effects   (e.g.  malignant  tumors)  is,  as- we have  seen
earlier, 1 microcurie  for  occupational exposure  and 0.1 micre-
curie  for  exposure  of^a  whole  population..   It  is  this  latter
value  of  0.1  microcurie  which  is  relevant  to  global  fallout.
It  is  too  close  to  the  figure  of  0.025  microcurie   which,  ac-
cording  to  our  foregoing  calculation,  is  the  burden   everyone
is  expected  to  carry  as  a  result  of  global  fallout   from  one
single   nominal  high-yield  test   explosion."    If  these  figures
are  correct,  it  would not  take  many  more  big  bomb tests  to
reach  the  threshold  of  danger.
We  have  no way  of  evaluating  these  reports,  but  it  is  in-
teresting to  notice  hi the New  York  rimes last  Monday   (Oct.
15)  a  letter  by a  distinguished   physicist,  W.  Seiove,  on  the
testing  problem.   He  said  that  while  students  agree that  the
genetic  effects  of  radioactive  fallout  as  yet  are  slight  "there
is much less  agreement  with  the  optimism  of  the  commission"
on  strontium.   "From  the  numerical  data  published  by  the
AEC  itself,"  Dr.  Seiove  wrote,  "some  independent  observers
have  reached  the-  conclusion  that  in  certain  areas  of  the
world  the  strontium  90 hazard  may  have  passed the  danger
.point, to  say  nothing  of  the  additional  production  of this  ma-
terial  in further  tests."  If  this  is  true,  then  the  problem  is
urgent.
Confusing  Somatic With  Genetic
The  Atomic  Energy  Committee  and  its  supporters  in  the
scientific  world  have  fallen  back  on the  National  Academy of
Sciences  Report  of last  June.  "Ten  Fold  Rise  in  Testa of  H-
Bomb  Called  Safe,"  said  a  typical  page  one headline  in  the
New  York  Herald-Tribune  last  Monday,  "National  Academy
Official  Figures Show The New  Poison in Midwest Soil Went Up 75 percent in 9 Months
"At the  end of  1955, the  total  deposition  in  the  upper mid-
west  of  the  U.S.  was some 13 mc/mi2 of  SR 90. In the  spring
of  1956, this  total rose  to  about  16 mc/mi2.   Between May 5
and mid-July  of  this  year,  Operation  Redwing  was  conducted
at  the  Eniwetok  Proving Grounds  in  the  Pacific.   Particular
attention  was  paid  to  the  fallout  problem  in  this  Operation
.  . .  the total  deposition in  the stratosphere during  this Op-
eration  was held to a figure very considerably  less  than that
present  in  the  stratosphere before  the  Operation.  .  .  .  [But
at  the  same  time]  the  latitudinal  tropospheric  world-wide
fallout,  which  is  maximized  by  weapons  of  high yield which
do  not  puncture the  stratosphere,  is  increasing.  .  .  .  Such
weapons  have  been  air fired in the last  month.  This  .  . .de-
scends  rather  rapidly  but  all  the.way  around  the  world  in
the  same general  latitude  as  the  firing  site.  Thus,  though it
is  difficult  to  estimate,  it  appears that  this  amounts  to per-
haps  5  additional  mc/mi2  of  SR  90  and  Csl37  in  the  U.S.
Adding  to  this  about  % me/mi  2  for  the  world  wide  tropo-
spheric  fallout  from  the  Redwing Operation  and 1  me/mi 2
for  stratospheric fallout,  we  would  estimate at  present  tlia •
a  total  of  about  22  mc/mi2  of  SR  90  is  to  be  found  in  the
soils  of  the  midwestern. U.S."
—Dr.   Willard  F.  Libby,  AEC  Commissioner to  the  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  Oct.  12.
So in  nine months radioactive  strontium  in  the  soil  of  the  Midwest  rose  almost  75  percent.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October SS,  1958
of  Sciences  Report  Is  Cited  in  Controversy."  The  same  report
is  aJso cited  in  the  New  York  Times  editorial  of  last  Tues-
day,  seeking  to  rebut  Stevenson  on the  H-bomb  (see  box be-
low).    But this has  tended  to confuse  two subjects.   One is  the
somatic  or bodily  effect  of  strontium  90 on living  persons,  the
other  is  the  genetic  effect  on future  generations  of  the  addi-
tional  x-rays  with  which  the  gonads  or  sex  cells  are  being
dosed  by  H-bomb tests. The  former  is  the  menace  which  is of
most  immediate  concern.    The  Washington  Post,  in  an  edi-
torial  last  Tuesday  praising  Stevenson   for  opening  up  the
subject,  says  soberly,  "Whether  nuclear  tests  already   have
poisoned  the  atmosphere  with  radiostrontium   to  a  dangerous
degree  is  a  question  to  which  there  is  no  positive  answer."
There ought to be an  answer  before  more tests  are  made.
The  Only  Safe  Assumption
Even  the  genetic  danger  may  not  be as  slight  as  the  head-
lines  would make  it  appear  to  be.   AEC  Commissioner  Mur-
ray  told  the  Humphrey disarmament  subcommittee  last  April
12 that  while we now know  much  more than  a few  years  ago
about  "contamination  of  atmosphere  and  soil  by  radioactive
strontium", our  knowledge "about the genetic  effects  of radia-
tion  is  even  more  incomplete."   How incomplete  it  is  was  il-
luminated  at  the  special  session  on  "The  Uses  and  Effects  of
Atomic  Radiation" just held  on  Oct.  12 in  Washington  by  the
American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science.    Un-
fortunately   the  .papers  paid  most  attention   to  the  "reassur-
ing"   speech  by  AEC  Commissioner   Libby  and  little  to  the
warnings  -of  other  scientists,  indeed  the   New   York   Times
covered  only  the  Libby  speech.
One  of  the  dissenting  speeches  is  excerpted  in  the  box be-
low.  Another,  by  Dr.  L.  D. Dunn,  professor  of  zoology  at  Co-
lumbia,  warned  that  recent  tests  on  mice—instead  of  fruit
flies—showed that  humans  may -be far   more  susceptible  to
the  bad genetic  effects  of radioactive  fallout  than had  hitherto
been presumed.  Dr.  Dunn  analyzed  some  of  the  implicit  but
dubious  assumptions  in  current  analysis  of  the  genetic  prob-
lem, particularly  the  assumption  "that  radiation  induced mu-
tations  are  like  those  which  occur  spontaneously."  Dr.  Dunn
said "there is evidence  that a  large  category  of mutations  in-
duced  by ionizing  radiations  represent  losses  of function,  less
reparable  on  the  whole  than  those  arising  spontaneously."
Dr. Dunn said  that  for  the  short  run,  before.more  is  known,
"the  safest  assumption  at  present  is  that  the  best  level  of
controllable  radiation  is  none  at    ail."
The Bombs Are  Big Enough Already
"...   It  is my belief that the big  thermonuclear  weap-
ons  which  we  now  have  are  big  enough  for  any  con-
ceivable  military   purpose.  They  are  also  so  big  that
their  use  in  large numbers  would  raise both  medical  and
moral problems chiefly  by reason of  the resultant world-
wide  contamination by  radioactive  substances.  It  is  my
consequent  conviction  that,  as  a  matter  of  policy,  we
should  not  endeavor  to  develop  weapons  larger  than
those  we now have.  ..   . We should  discontinue the  test-
ing  of  multi-megaton  weapons; such tests  are  no longer
necessary.  ...      To  go  on  making  bigger  and bigger
bombs  simply  and  only  because  we  have  the  scientific
and  technological  ability   to   make  bigger   and  better
bombs ...    would  be to  make  science and technology the
master,  rather  than  the  servant,  of  national  military
policies."
—Atomic  Energy  Commissioner Thomas  E.   Murray.
A  Manipulated  Symbol,  Not  A  Leader
Adlai  Stevenson   is  right  when  he  poses  the  problem  of
further  H-bomb tests  as  a  problem of  leadership.  Already,  by
opening  up  the  subject  to  national  debate,  he has  encouraged
dozens  of  scientists  to  speak  up,  who had  hitherto  sunk  into
a  hopeless  silence.  On the  other  hand, those  who have  watch-
ed  Mr.  Eisenhower  here  for  four  years,  know  that  he  has
neither  the  taste,  the  patience  nor the  capacity  for  the  kind
of  hard study  this  problem  requires.  With .all  due  respect  to
Mr.  Eisenhower,  and  with  all  consideration  for  his  personal
good-will,  the  fact  is  that  he  is  a  manipulated  symbol, not  a
leader,  an  optical  illusion  of  American politics  behind which
others  make  the  decisions.   He  likes  his  comfort.   His  ten-
dency  is  to parcel  out  as  many  problems  as  possible  to  his
-staff.   His  tendency  is  to  drift,  and  to  make  no  decisions  of
his  own until  they  become  unavoidable.  But drift  in  this  sit-
uation  may  be fatal.   Mr.  Eisenhower's  effort  to  shut  off  dis-
cussion  would abdicate  not  only his  power but  the  electorate's
to  Admiral  Strauss  and  the  military  "bureacracy.  They  are
determined  to  depend  on  nuclear  warfare   and  to  continue
nuclear testing. We see in  Mr. Stevenson's  election  some hope
of  checking  them  and  of  giving this country  the  kind  of  posi-
tive  leadership  which  measures   up  to  the  H-bomb   era.
Two Authoritative Answers to the  Complacency of the  New  York Times on Tests
"According  to  the  best  available evidence  <a report  of  the
National  Academy  of  Sciences)  the  tests  could  be  continued
at  the  present  rate  over  the  next  thirty  years  without  even
approaching  our average  exposure  to  medical  X-radiation."
—-New   York   Time*  editorial,  Mr.  Stevenson  and   The
Bomb, Oct. 17.
The   present  weapons-testing  programs  present  a  double
threat:  first  the  threat  of  genetic  damage  from  fallout  and
from  radioactive  vapor, and second,  the  threat  that continued
testing  may  progress  to  actual  warfare.  Many  people  accept
the  weapons-testing  program  on  the  basis  that  it  overbal-
ances  the-potential  harm  by strengthening  our military posi-
tion  and  thus  helping  to  insure  peace.   In assessing  the  po-
tential  harm, however,  statements  are  always  qualified  by a
phrase  such  as  'if  the  testing  of  weapons  continues  at  the
present rate... -' This qualification is  usually  obsolete  by the
time  the  statement   is   printed.  THIS   WAS  THE  CASE
EVEN  FOR THE  NATIONAL ACADEMY  OF  SCIENCES
REPORT.  (Emphasis  added).  It  is  a  mistake  to  think  that
we  can  set  our  own  pace  of  nuclear-weapons  testing.  There
is a snowballing  effect  of  any  such  program.  Our tests  cause
other  nations  to  increase  their  pace,  which in  turn increases
ours.  It becomes a self-accelerating  system;  a chain  reaction
of chain reaction, so  to speak.  Only  the international control
of  weapons  testing  can atop  such   acceleration."
—Dr.   Lawrence H.  Snyder,  president  elect  of  the  Ameri-
can  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  ad-
dressing  its  special  meeting  on "The  Uses  and     Effects
of   Atomic  Radiation,"  Washington,  Oct. 12, a speech
not  reported  next  day  in  the  New  York  Times.
""It  is  shocking-to realize  [from  the reports  by the  National
Academy  of  Sciences  and the  British  Medical  Council en  ra-
diation dangers]  that  already  virtually half  of-the maximum
reasonable  allowance  of  exposure  for  the  whole  population
is  preempted by medical and dental diagnostic  and therapeu-
tic  uses  of  ionizing  radiation.  We  must  henceforth   guard
jealously  every  expenditure of  this  radiation allowance.  The
cost  of  negligence   would  be  genetic  bankruptcy,  and  from
that  bankruptcy  there  might  be  no  recovery,  for  nation  or
for  mankind."
—From a  review  of  the  British  and  American  reports  in
the  October  issue  of  the  Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scien-
tists, by  Dr.  H.  Bentley  Glass, professor   of  biology  at
Johns  Hopkins,  a  member of  the  Committee  on Gen-
ctic  Effects    of  Atomic Radiation  appointed  by  the  Na-
tional Academy  of  Sciences to write  the  report  quoted
in  the  New  York  Times  editorial.
1   E
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's Weekly,  October 22,1956
A  Point-By-Point  Rebuttal  Most  Newspapers   Buried  or  Ignored
How  Admiral  Strauss  Misleads The  Public  on  Civilian  Atomic  Power,  Too
On  October  10, Chairman  Strauss of  the  AEC made a speech
to  the New  York  Board  of  Trade.   His purpose  was to  answer.
Stevenson's  charge  that  the  U.S. was  lagging  behind  Britain
and  the  U.S.S.R. in  the  development  of  civilian  atomic  power.
The  Strauss  speech  pictured  the  U.S. as  ahead.   The   speech
brought  a  rejoinder  next  day  from  Senator  Albert  Gore  (D.,
Tenn.),  a  member  of  the  Joint  Congressional  Committee  on
Atomic  Energy.   Most  newspapers   buried  or  ignored   Gore's
answer.   .                                                                     .                                       •
Admiral  Strauss pointed  with  pride  to  the  fact  that  the U.S.
has  built  82  reactors.   Gore  said  Strauss  neglected  to  mention
that  68  of  these  were  low  temperature  reactors  not  suited  for
power,  and  that  the  remainder were  all  of  experimental  or  re-
search  types,  not  full  scale plants.   Gore  called  this  "the same
'numbers'  game  played  last  spring  before the  Joint  Committee
by
;
 a  representative  of  the  private  power  companies"  who  then
gave  the  number  of   reactors  built  as  89,. seven  more  than
Strauss. This witness was challenged  to  name any plant already
built  or building,  which  could  generate  as much  as  5,00(3  kilo-
watts. The  only  one  he  could  name was the  Shippingport,. Pa.,
reactor,  built  with  government  funds,  and  under  government
technical  direction.
Verbal  Legerdemain
In  his  speech  Strauss'said,  "In  terms of  strictly  civilian  [his
italics]  power,  our  program  includes  30  reactors  in  operation
in  the  U.S., under  construction  or  planned,  for  experimental
or  for  actual  full-scale use."  Gore  replied,  "To  say that  30  re-
actors are 'in .operation  . . . under  construction or planned  . . .'
is  like  saying that  one  has  a  thousand  dollars  in  the  bank,  ex-
pected  or  hoped  for."  Gore  challenged  Strauss  to  name  any
reactor  under  construction  able  to  produce  more  than   5,000
kilowatts,  other   than  the  Shippingport  plant.  The   prepared
text  of  the  Strauss speech said that  18 of  these  30 plants  would
provide  commercial power.   But  as  delivered  this  was  changed
to  15. Strauss said three  other  proposals  were still being  studied.
Strauss  asserted  six  of  these  15 plants  would  be  built  with-
out  government  subsidy.  Gore  said  that  though  a  member  of
the  joint  committee,  which  is  supposed  to  be  kept  informed,
he  did  not  know  what  Strauss  was  talking  about.   Gore  said
"presumably"   Strauss  was  referring  to  a  proposal  by a  Penn-
sylvania  power  and  light  group  which  "will  not  be  in  a  posi-
tion   to  decide  until   1958  whether  they  wilt  proceed   with
plans";  a  proposal  by three  Florida  companies  "who have  not
even  decided  what  type  of  reactor  they would  be  interested  in
considering"  and  a  group  of  utilities  in  North  Carolina  and
Virginia  which  was  not  incorporated  until  October  4  of  this
year  "and has announced it  will  have  a  meeting  sometime  this
month  to  consider  making a  proppsal."
Reversing  The  True  Facts
Gore  said  "perhaps   the  most  remarkable  passage"  in  the
Strauss  address  came  when  the  AEC  Chairman  declared  Presi-
dent  Eisenhower broke ground  for  the  Shippingport,  Pa., plant
"within  a  week after  the  new  Atomic Energy Law was enacted.
.  .' .  under  the  kind  of  partnership  between  Government  and
Industry which had long been proposed, but not implemented."
The  Shippingport  reactor,  Gore  pointed  out, was  authorized
and  financed-under  the  Atomic Energy Act  of  1946. "The fact
is,"  Gore  declared,  "that  the Atomic Energy Act of  1954 . . .
far  from  promoting  such  projects,  actually  prohibits  the  initia-
tion  of  another  such  project  by the  Government  in  the  absence
of  specific  authorization  by the  Congress—authorization   which
Admiral  Strauss  not  only  has  declined  to  seek  but  which  he
has .bitterly resisted. This  feature  of  the  1954 law was  one  for
which  the  Admiral fought  hardest."  The  purpose  was to  block
expansion  of  public  power.
Gore  contrasted  the  record  here  with  the  60,000 -kw reactor
which  begins  operation  this  month  in  Britain  at  Odder  Hall.
He  also  said  that  AEC  records  and  Joint  Committee   records
show  the  Russians  plan  to  construct  power  reactors  with  a
capacity  of  between  2  million  and  2,400,000  kw  by  I960.
"In  a  recent  public  statement,"  Gore  concluded,   "Admiral
Strauss  said  that  persons  in  public  life  have  a  responsibility
not  to mislead the  American people.   In  this .position  I  whole-
.heartedly  concur."
                                                                                              t
Week  After   Week  We  Print  Facts  You   Won't  Find  Elsewhere^—Why  Not  Subscribe  With  This  Issue
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D, C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  '$5 :*
Name                          •.
Street                                                                      -         •      •                         ••
City                                             Zone            State.-....;       .;.....
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name                                                                   •'•
10/22/56
City                                        Zone....       State;......      ;....
City                             ;            Zone.....       State
•Shall   »••   Rend   irift   announcement?       Yes    Q•  •• No.   t.-i   -
Room   205
301    E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.-C
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED