I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956apr30.pdf

============================================================

The  Challenge  of  the  Arab  Refugees  to  the  Conscience  of  World  Jewry,  Pages  2  and  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IV,  NO.  15
APRIL  30,  1956
«"      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Israel's  Hopes  and  Fears  of Russian  Intervention
En  Route  to Moscow
Israel  was immensely pleased  by the  news that  Molotov  and
Mikoyan  had  turned  up  at  its  Embassy  in  Moscow for  the  In-
dependence  Day  party.    This   was  a  welcome  change   from
Krushchev's  rudeness  and  gave  Israel  face  in  the  eyes  of  the
Arab  world.    The  new  Russian statement on  the  Middle  East
was issued after  I had  left  Israel but  I believe I  learned enough
in  private  talks  to  be  able  to  assess  the  hopes  and  fears  it
aroused  in  Jerusalem.
The  positive side of  the  statement for  Israel was that  Moscow
was  prepared  to  take a  responsible part  in  the  Middle Eastern
crisis,  that  its  weight  was  thrown  on  the  side  of  peace,  that  it
spoke  of  preserving  the  independence of  Israel  as  well  as  the
Arab  States  and  that  its  only  commitment  on  the  boundary
question  was  to  speak  of  the  need  for  preventing  exacerbation
of  the  situation  on  the  existing  demarcation  line.
So  much  was  good.    But  the  Israelis—in  this  respect  like
the  Arabs—are  ambivalent   in  their  attitude  toward  a  Great
Power  agreement  on  the  Middle  East.   On  the  one hand,  they
both  fear  a  situation  in  which  the  area  might  become  a  new
Korea.   On  the  other  hand,  they  both  fear  that  a  Great  Power
agreement  might   prove  to  be  made  at  their   expense.    The
Arabs  fear  the  loss  of  their  new  found  bargaining  power  be-
tween  East  and  West,  while  the  Israelis  fear  both  East  and
West  in  their  present  pro-Arab  mood  may  try  to  force  grave
sacrifices  on  Israel  as  the  price  of  peace.
Will  Moscow  Champion  1947?
There  is  good  reason  to  fear  that  Moscow  may  turn  up  at
the  conference table  as  the  champion  of  restoring   the   1947
partition  plan.   This  is  wholly  unacceptable  to  Israel,  and  it
can  safely  be  predicted  that  only  an  international  army  pre-
pared  to fight a long  and  final  struggle  could  impose  that  solu-
tion  upon  it.   The   1947  plan  in   effect   left  Israel  split  into
three  parts,  strategically  indefensible,  wide  open  to  enemy  at-
tack.  No  stranger  boundaries were  ever  drawn.  The  plan  left
the  Jews  of  Jerusalem  dependent  on  international  protection,
a  protection which was  immediately  proven  illusory  as  soon  as
Jerusalem  was  attacked.   There  was  not  one  word  of  protest
from  the  UN  when  Jordanian  forces  from  the  north  and  east,
Egyptians from  the  south,  besieged  the  Holy  City.  In  addition
the  1947  plan  envisaged  conditions  which  cannot  be  restored
or  created  on  the  Arab  side—an  independent  Arab  Palestine
linked   economically  with  the  Jewish  State.   Jordan  will  not
give  up  its  part  of  Palestine  or  of  Jerusalem.
The   1947   plan   can  no  longer   be  taken   seriously.    The
Powers  cannot  make  joint  war  on  Israel.   If  Russia  espouses
the  1947  plan,  then  its  intervention  cannot  be  taken  seriously
as a peace  move but  must be regarded  as a play  for  Arab favor.
But  there  is  always  the  possibility  that  in  the  London  talks
something  new might be cooked  up.  For  Israel,  one  advantage
in  Soviet  arms  for  Egypt  has  been  to  increase its  standing  in
London.  But  the  nature of  this  change may  prove  treacherous
in  the  long  run.
Britain  is  playing  a  double  game  in  the  Middle  East.    I
know  from  talks  in  Israel  that  even  Britishers  who  are  anti-
Israel  and  pro-Arab have swung around to the view that  Israel
might  be  a  handy  instrument for  inflicting  a  serious  loss  of
face   on  Nasser,  perhaps  even  for  overthrowing  him.    The
British  hate  Nasser.   But  this  does  not  mean  that  Israel  can
count  on  Britain's firm friendship.
Should  Israel  Fight  for  Nuri  Said?
On  the  contrary  what  Britain  would  like  would  be  to  use
Israel  to  overthrow  Nasser  and  then  to  make  a  settlement  at
the  expense  of  a  weakened  Israel  which  would  enhance  the
prestige  of  Nasser's  rival and  Britain's long-time  puppet,  Nuri
Said,  Pasha  of  Iraq.   Britain would  like to  prove  to  the  Arabs
that  the  Bagdad  pact  under  Iraqi  leadership  and  with  British
help  can  serve  their  aspirations  better  than  Nasser.   This  is
why  the  last  Bagdad Pact meeting, much to  the  anger  of  Paris,
was  allowed  to  discuss  both  the  Palestinian  and  the  Algerian
questions.   France  regards  Algeria  as  an  internal  affair   and
Britain's  action  as disloyal to  its  French  ally.
All  this  is no  doubt well  understood  by the  Russians.  Their
policies  have   been  consistent.    They  supported  the  Jews  in
1947  on  partition  and  helped  them with  arms in  1948  because
this  was a  way to  help  push  the  British  out  of  Palestine.   To-
day  the  Russians have  been  supporting  Nasser   for  the  same
reason,  and  there  is  reason  to  fear  that  they  would  intervene
if  Israel—with  the  tacit  support  of  Britain—attacked  Egypt.
All  this  but  extends  the  pattern  two  centuries  old  of  Anglo-
Russian  rivalry  in  the  Near  East.
This  is,  of  course,  a  most  dangerous  game  in  a  most  inflam-
matory  area.  The  Powers,  if  they  wish  to  avoid  a  world  con-
flagration,  must  understand  the  Israeli  as  well  as  the  Arab
position.   Israel  is prepared  to  accept  the  status quo  and  to  live
within  its present  boundaries,  small  as they are;  but  not  if  the
Arabs  are  allowed  to  continue  a  policy  of  neither  war  nor
peace.   If  the  Arabs  are  not  forced  to  make  peace—and  only
a  forced  peace  can make peace  politically  feasible  for  the  Arab
leaders—then  sooner  or  later  Israel  will  make war  rather  than
live  as an  armed  camp under  conditions  of  boycott, terror  and
imminent  aggression.   For  if  the  Arabs have  ground  for  fear-
ing  Israel,  Israel  has  even  more  ground  in  the, long  run  for
fearing  the  Arabs.   The  fears of  both  must  be  allayed  if  a  se-
cure  peace  is to  be achieved.  The  path  to  peace  is  fairly  clear:
acceptance  of  the  armistice boundaries,  resettlement with  com-
pensation  by  Israel  of  the  Arab refugees,  a  Great  Power  guar-
antee  of  the  status  quo,  normal  trade  and  diplomatic  relations
between   the   Arab   States   and   Israel,   neutralization   of   the
Middle  East.  But  all  this  no  doubt  is too  good  to  be  true.
5   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f.  F. Stone'i  Weekly, April  SO,  1959
New  War  and  New  Victory  Would  (My   Perpetuate the  Cycle  of  Hatred
The  Road  to  Peace  Lies  Through  the  Arab  Refugee  Camps  . . .
Stockholm
I  left  Tel  Aviv  in  the  warm  sunshine  and  arrived  here  the
evening of  the  same day in a  blade  snowstorm.  Before  leaving
for  Moscow  I want to  set  down  my final impressions  in  Israel
and   the   considerations   which   I   believe   must   be  kept   in
mind   by  the  world  Jewish  community  if  progress   is  to  be
made  toward  peace.
I want first to say that I went  to  Israel  in great  anxiety  about
its  future,  and  left  happy with  what  I had  seen  and  felt.   I  be-'
lieve I  realize the  difficulties  which  beset  it  within  and  without
but  I  do  not  understand  the  hysteria  clearly  reflected  in  the
American  papers I  picked  up here.
I  suppose  hysteria  has its  uses,  too,  but  it  tends  to  be  expen-
sive.   It  sometimes  achieves  results,  but  this  may be at  the  cost
of  losing  one's  way to more  permanent  and  fundamental  solu-
tions.  It  seems to be especially  important  for  the world  Jewish
community  to see the  real  outlines  of  the problem  dearly.  It  is
in  this belief  that  I want to  set down  some  observations  which
many  may  find  unpalatable,  as  most  people  always  find  the
truth  unpalatable.  I  need  not defend  myself  for  doing so, but
will say only that  I  speak out  of  love for  Israel and  devotion  to
that  feeling for  justice which is the  best in our  Jewish  tradition.  .
The  Tragedy  of   1948
The  1948  war  between  us  and  the  Arabs was  tragic  in  two
respects.   It  was tragic  because it  was a struggle  of  right  against
right.  This  is  the  essence of  tragedy.  Pure  evil  is  not  tragic;
it  is sick.  Hitler  was not  a  tragic  but  a  pathological   spectacle.
Tragedy  is  when  good  or  normal  men  do  evil  despite  them-
selves  under  the  compulsion  of  necessity,  fate  or  their  own
natural  human  needs  and  aspirations.   The  Jews  had  to  fight
for   their  lives  in   1948  against  Arab  resistance  to  the   1947
UN  decision partitioning Palestine;  if  the  Jews had  not  fought
they  would  have  been  massacred.
But  the  Arabs had  a right  to fight,  too.   From  their  point  of
view,  their  Palestinian homeland  was  endangered  by an  alien
invasion.  They  saw  themselves  swamped  and  reduced  to  sub-
ordinate  status.   They  feared  for  their  lives  and  futures.   We
Jews  must  see them  as  a  natural  and  honorable  foe;  we  must
learn  to understand  and  forgive  if  we  are  to  find  forgiveness.
These were not monsters  against  whom we fought  but men like
ourselves,  in  many  cases  neighbors  of  long  standing.   To  see
this  clearly is to  take  the  first  step  toward  peace.
The  1948  war was tragic in another  respect.  It  was a  tragedy
for   all  of  us  who  belong  to  the  Jewish  people  that  in  the
struggle to make new home for  our  own refugees,  we ended  by
making  refugees  of  other  people.   In  order  to  assert  our  own
right  to  nationhood, to  end  Jewish  homelessness,  we  made an-
other  group  of  people  homeless  in  a  land  dear  to  both  of  us.
The  Price  of  Victory
Perhaps  this  might  have  been  avoided.  Perhaps  if  the  great
powers  had  not  encouraged the  Arabs  to  invade Palestine  and
defy  the  UN  decision, the  transition might  have been  made  in
peace.   Perhaps.   But  the  result  was war,  and  the  kind  of  war
in  which  the  victor emerges morally  in the wrong  because  both
sides  had  a  right  to  fight.   If  the  Arabs  had  won,  they  would
have  been  merciless  and  primitive  in  their  revenge;  the  world
would  have condemned  them,  but  the  Yishuv  would have been
destroyed  and  its  people  slaughtered.   But  we  won,  and  the
price  of  our victory was to find ourselves morally in  the  wrong.
For  there  in  the  camps  across  the  borders  were  new  refugees
whom  this  time  we had  made.
These  refugees  are  a  moral  millstone  around  our  necks as a
people.   We  must  find  a  way  to  make  new  homes  for  them.
This is important  for  several  reasons.  The  first  is to  restore our
good  name in  the  eyes  of  the  world.   The  second  is that  Israel
may  live;  it  cannot  live  normally  without  Arab  friendship;  it
cannot  survive  in  the  long  run  without  Arab  good-will.   The
road  to  peace lies through  the  refugee  camps.  So does  the  road
to  Ask.  Israel  cannot  live  as a Western  outpost,  especially  at a
time  when  Western  power   is  declining   all   over   Asia  and
Africa.  It'can  live  only as part  of  the  new  Asian-African  com-
munity.    To   rejoin   that   community  we  must  resettle   the
refugees   or  at  least   demonstrate  to  the  utmost  our  sincere
desire  to  do  so.
War  No  Solution
War  is no solution  for  Israel.  I  believe  Israel  can win a new
war  now  against  all  the  Arab States  combined,  and  they know
it.  I  believe  Israel  can hold  the  borders  in  the  north  and  east
against  Lebanon, Syria  and  Jordan;  force a quick evacuation of
Western  Palestine  and  the  Old  City  by  the  Jordanians;   take
the  Gaza  strip  and  deliver  a  crushing  blow  at  Egypt  despite
those  new  Czech  arms.  Indeed,  this  is what  tempts  those  who
believe  this  may be  Israel's  last  chance  to  do  so.
                               %
It  is  because  Nasser  knows  this  that  he  did  not  retaliate  ex-
cept  with  a  few  miserable  fedayeen   for  the  bombardment  of
Gaza.   In  terms  of  military  power,  the  global figures on  Arab
population  are meaningless.  The  Syrians have 40,000 to  50,000
soldiers  poorly  prepared  for  modern  war.  The  Arab Legion  of
Jordan  with  its  20,000  men  is  not  much  more  than  a  well-
trained  frontier  police.    These  can  easily  be  held  while  the
250,000  trained  men  Israel  can mobilize  overnight  concentrate
on  Egypt.   A  new  war  will  not  be  the  last  war,  in  which
Egyptians  bombed   Israel   without  aerial   reprisal;   the   aerial
. targets  in  Egypt  are  obvious.   The  damage  done  Israel's  cities
would  be  more  than  matched  by  the  havoc  which  can  easily
be set  loose  in  Egypt.  Nasser's  regime  will  not  survive a  new
war   and  he,  who  has  been  described   as  a  bold   statesman
but  a  cautious  soldier,  knows  it.
Victory  Would  Only  Sow More  Hatred
But  what good  will  a military victory do?  This  is the  sober
question  which has  been cooling  the hotheads  of  Israel. A new
victory  will  make  more  Arab  refugees,  increase  Arab  hatred,
deepen  Arab  national  humiliation,  sow  the  seeds  for  a  third
round—and  this  in turn for  a fourth.  Israel  cannot  live forever
as an  armed  camp. The  Arab world  is a morass in  which it can
hopelessly  bog  down.   In  the  long  run  Israel  cannot  be  secure
without Arab friendship.  Too  much devotion  and  sacrifice  has
gone  into  the  building  of   Israel  to  see  it  live  but  a  short
century  like  the  Crusader  kingdom  before  it.
Then  there  is the  cost  of  victory to  be considered—first,  the
precious  lives  of  more  of  our  best  youth,  the  seed  corn  of  a
(Continued  on  Page  Three)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone't Weekly, April  SO,  1958
The  Lesson  in  the  Crematoria  is  The  Danger  in  National  Egocentricity
.  . .  Theirs  Is  A  Moral  Challenge  to  World  Jewry  and  Israel
generation.  How  many  lives which might  have flowered won-
derfully   for   Israel  were  snuffed   out  in  the   1948   struggle!
Israel  is  like  a  big  family  in  which  everybody  knows  every-
body   else;   sorrow  is  still   fresh  for   those  who  fell   in   the
Palmach  and  in  the  Haganah  and  in  the  Irgun  and Lechi,
Far  More  Destruction  In  A  Second  Round
Then  there  is  the  cost  of  destruction,  in  the  tearing  down
of  so much built  up  so painfully.  The  Egyptians this  time will
wreak  far  more  havoc  than  they  did  last  time.   Both  sides
will  hurt  each  other  more.   The  problem  will  be  not  only  to
find  more  money but  more  energy, to  tap  new  hope, to  revive
worn  spirits.   It  will,  if  necessary,  be  done.   Israel  will  rise
from  any ashes,  but  is it  worth the  cost?
When  I  see what has  been  accomplished  in  the  north  at  the
Huleh  valley  and  in  the south  in  the  Lachish development  and
in  the Negev; when  I see cotton  growing  and oil  beginning  to
flow;  when  it  is  clear  that  Israel  with  ten  years  of  peace  in
its  present  boundaries  can  flourish  and  become  self-sustaining,
I  feel  the  gamble  of  war  would  be  wicked.
If  you  add  the  cost,  not  of  war,  but  of  present  war  and
defense  preparations  to  the  heavy  cost  of  the  Arab  economic
boycott  (don't  let's  fool   ourselves   that   this  boycott  is  not
effective),  you  will  see  that  it  would  be  cheaper  not  just  to
help  resettle   the  Arab  refugees  but  to  pension  them  off  if
thereby  we  could  have  peace.
I  am  not  sure  we  could  buy  peace  that  way.  I  only  say we
must try.  I  spoke about this with a very wise Arab in  Nazareth
and  I  asked  him  whether  there  could  be  peace  between  our
peoples  after  all  that  had  happened.   "If  there  can  be  peace
between   Israel   and   Germany  after   all   the   terrible   things
that  Germany did,"  was his reply,  "there can be  peace  between
the  Jews  and  the  Arabs."
What  did  he  think  was  necessary  for  peace?   He  thought
there    were    two    things    necessary.      One    was    border
changes  to  end  friction  where  villages   and  fields  have  been
split,  and  to  save  face  for  the  Arab  leaders.   The  other  was
compensation  for  the  refugees.  "Few  of  them want  to return,"
he  said.  "They  would  be  glad  to  take  compensation.   But  you
must  not  give the  money  to  the  Arab States.   Their  politicians
would  steal it.  The money should  go directly  to the  refugees."
Our  Future  As  A  People
The  final  and  most  important  reason  for  concerning  our-
selves  with  the  Arab  refugee  problem  is  that  this  will  deter-
mine  our  future  as  a  people  and  Israel's  future  as  a  nation.
Those  who  have  not  suffered  may  be  forgiven  if  they  do  not
feel  sympathy. But  it  would be  unforgiveable if  we  Jews  who
have  suffered   so  much  from  war,  conquest,  persecution,  and
homelessness  were  to  fail  to  find  pity  for  the  Arab  refugee.
Israel's  strength   has  not  been  military  but  moral.   I  too
danced  in  those  indescribably crowded-and joyful  streets  of
Haifa  the night before Independence Day and thrilled with  the
military  spectacle.   But  the  devotion  which  built  Israel  cannot
be learned in  military  manuals.  It  was a moral strength which
enabled  Israel  to  stand  off  the  Arab  armies in  1948  when  it
was  more  poorly  prepared  than  now.   This  strength  can  be
lost  and  it  can  be  lost  in  the  Arab  refugee  camps.
6  1
We  must not  delude  ourselves  with  comfortable  shadow pic-
tures.  We  must face up  to  the  full  human  reality of  Arab bit-
terness  if  we are to find peace  again.  We  dare not  let ourselves
be corrupted  by the  easy robber  ethics  of  conquest;  at  the  next
turn  of  the  wheel  we  may be  the  victims.  Too  many Jews de-
lude  themselves  with  the  easy  rationalization   that  the  Arabs
"left  voluntarily,"  and  that  there  would  be no  problem  but  for
their  leaders.   People flee war  when  they  can;  they  are  bitter
when  they lose  all  they  had.   Is  this  so hard  to  understand ?
Peace will  not  be won in  a day. The  new  Russian  statement,
while  hopeful,  only  opens  a  new  chapter  in  great  power  ma-
neuvering.   There  is  time  in  which  we  will  be  tested.   The
greatest  challenge  of  our  history  is  offered  this  generation  of
Jewry  and  of  Israel.   It  is whether  we  can  rise  above  war  and
struggle  to treat a foe with magnanimity and rachmanos  (pity).
A  Cross-Roads  in  Jewish  History
We  are at a  cross-roads  in our history  as a  people. One way
leads  towards  greater  militarization  and  chauvinism;  greater
hatred  and  fear  of  the  Arab.   This  will  poison  our  relations
with  the  Arabs  within  Israel  and  even  with  the  Jews   from
Arab  countries—if  we  do  not  treat  the  Arab  as  an  equal  we
will  not  treat  the  Arabic  Jew  as  an  equal.    Our  socialism
can  easily  become  like  that  of  Pilsudski's  Poland,  narrowly
nationalist  and  ugly.
The  other  way would  give  us a new and  finer  generation  in
which  we  could  find  our  way  to  peace.   The  attitude  toward
the  Arab  will  determine  the  spiritual  level  of  Jewry  and  of
Israel.   We  dare  not  treat  the  Arab  as  human  dirt  swept  out
of  the  land  without  dirtying  ourselves.   To  treat  him  with  dig-
nity,  respect  and  pity,  to  extend  the  hand  of  friendship  and
help,  would  be to  rise to  all  that  is best  in  our  past.
When  I  was in  Israel  I  visited  the  kibbutz  of  the  Warsaw
ghetto  fighters  north  of  Haifa  and  saw their  exhibition  of  the
struggle  of  the  Jewish  resistance  against  the  Nazis.   I  could
stand  the  relics  of  the  crematoria  as one  can  stand  exhibitions
of  criminal  insanity  but  when  I  came  to  the  pictures  of  the
brave who fought  and  fell,  the poets whose voices  were  stilled,
the  yellowed  little  papers  they  put  out  underground,  I  wept.
The  Lesson  for  Ourselves
What  can  be learn  from  this  outburst  of  human  madness so
recent  and  so  rapidly  being  forgotten?   Surely  nothing  is  so
important   as  to  see  the  evil  ways  into  which  the  German
people  was  led  by  nationalism  and  by  national  egocentricity.
To  see  these  terrible  relics  is  to  see  what  crimes  men  may  be
drawn  to  commit in  the  name of  their  volk.  This  is the warn-
ing  written  in fire, the fire that  devoured our  brothers.
I  see the flowering of  the  land  again  and  I  rejoice  in  it.  I
believe  that  in  peace  the  Law may again  go  out  of  Zion  to  all
the  earth  from  our  beautiful  Jerusalem.   But  only  if  we  rise
to  the  occasion with  compassion  for  others  even  when  Israel
is  endangered  itself.   I  would  like  to  see a  world  Jewish cam-
paign  for  Arab refugees as a first step in  the  creation of  a new
atmosphere.   I  see in  the  striving for  peace and  brotherly rela-
tions  with  the  Arabs  a  challenge  and  an  opportunity worthy
of   Isaiah's   people,   capable  of   creating  a  new  and  greater
generation  of  Jewry.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone'e  Weekly, April  SO,  1956
Was  It  Intended  to  Provoke  Nasser  to  War or  Make  Him  Lose  Face?
The  Truth  About  The  Bombardment  of  Gaza
The  bombardment  of  Gaza  by  Israeli  artillery  provoked  a
great  deal  of  questioning  behind  the  scenes  in  Israel.  So many
different  explanations  were  given  as  to  make  one  suspect   the
truth  has  yet  to  be  told.
Local  Israeli  commanders  have  orders  -which  permit  them,
naturally,  to  shoot  back  if  fired  upon.   But  orders  can  be  in-
terpreted  in  various ways.  One  shrewd  Israeli  with  long mili-
tary  experience  said the  situation  reminded  him  of  the  Yiddish
writer  who  published  a  volume  of  Shakespeare  "as  translated
and  improved"  by  himself.   This  man  said  local  commanders
along   the   Gaza  strip   may  have   been   similarly   "translating
and  improving"  Ben  Gurion's  orders.
Quite  by accident,  I  reached Nahal  Oz  during  the bombard-
ment  with  a  Swedish correspondent  and  a  BBC man.  We  had
been  in  Beersheba  and  drove  east  to  visit  the.frontier  settle-
ment.   It  was almost  5  p.m.  and  we  could  hear  what  sounded
like  very  heavy  mortar  fire  as  we  approached.   We  were  met
by  a  member carrying a gun  who  shouted  that  we must  get  out
because  the  Egyptians were  "zeroing-in,"   i.e.  their  shells  were
beginning  to  drop  on  the  settlement.   Our  driver  insisted  on
our  leaving.
The  Gaza  bombardment  was the  climax  of  a  week  in  which
several  Israeli  soldiers  had  been  killed  while  on  patrol.   One
was  killed  in  an  ambush  on  Monday,  three  more  on  Wednes-
day.  These  killings  followed  several weeks of  shootings  from
the  Egyptian  side.   The  killings  merited  a  military   reprisal;
there  is  no  reason  why  the  Egyptians  should  be  allowed   to
shoot  up  the  border  with impunity.
But  what  stirred  a  great  deal  of  criticism  in  Israel  was  the
nature  of  the  bombardment next  day,  which  was  Thursday.
This  is  the  chief  market  day  of  the  Arabs  since  it  precedes
their  Sabbath,  which  is  Friday.   Israeli  shells  struck  the  Gaza
marketplace,   killing  some   40   persons   and   wounding   100
others,  mostly  civilians,  including  women  and  children  of  the
Arab  refugees.  The  number  of  shells  which  fell  on  the  mar-
ketplace  make  it  unlikely that  this  was  accidental.   According
to  one  source,  Ben  Gurion  ordered  the  firing  stopped  as  soon
as  he  heard  of  it.
The  Gaza bombardment  had two political  aspects.   From  the
standpoint  of  world  public  opinion,  it  is  bad  enough  to  have
Arab  refugees  across  the  border  without  having  them  shelled
by   Israeli   artillery.    Luckily   the   atrocities   committed   by
jedayeen  sent  across  in  retaliation  after  the  shelling  were  so
horrifying  as  to  work  in  Israel's  favor.
The  other  political  aspect  is  not  so  obvious.   The  shelling
of  the  Gaza marketplace had  the  effect  of  calling  Nasser's  bluff
and  hurting  him  with  the  refugees.    Here  he  was  talking
so  big  and  wielding  those  new  Soviet  planes  and  yet  he  was
unable  to  protect  them.
The  Jerusalem  Post  of  April  18  reported  that  there  were
demonstrations  against  the   Nasser   regime  during  the  mass
funeral  of  the  civilians killed.   The  jedayeen  and  the  exagger-
ated  reports  of  the  Cairo  radio  about  the  amount  of  damage
they  did  in  Israel were  intended to  satisfy  protest  of  this kind.
Additional  light  on  this political aspect  of  the  Gaza  shelling
was  provided  by an  article in  the  April  17  issue of   Die   Welt,
an  independent  Essen  daily which  I  picked  up  in  the  Dussel-
dorf  airport  on  my  way  to  Stockholm.   In  a  long  article  from
the  Jordan   side  of  the  border,   a  staff   correspondent  of  Die
Welt  said  the  Arabs were  deeply  disappointed  that  Nasser  had
not  been able  to  tctdiate more  effectively  for  the  Gaza  affair.
This  correspondent  said  a  delegation  of  Arab  refugees  had
made an excited protest to the Egyptian Ambassador in Amman.
The  correspondent  added,   "But   in  leading  circles  of   the
Arab  capitals  they  know  only  too  well  that  despite  Russian
weapon  deliveries  open  war  could  lead  to  catastrophe."   Thus
the  shelling  hurt  Nasser's   prestige.
But   if   these  circumstances  provide  the   clue  to  the   Gaza
affair,  one  may well  ask  whether  it  was  worth  the  price.   The
shelling  of  Arab refugee  encampments  or  markets  is  a  cynical
and  murderous  business.
The  Israeli  Parliament  ought  to  demand  a  full  investigation
and  not  rest  content  with  conflicting explanations.  There  is  no
more important  business  in  a  democratic  country  than  to  make
sure  that  the  military  does  not  make  political  decisions  of  its
own,  especially  the kind  which  could  precipitate  war.
Watch  for  I. F. Stone's  Further  Reports  from  Abroad
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash. 3,
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed
Street
City          ;
Enter  gift  sub
(To)  Name
City
Shall  we  send
Zone.
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
Zone
gift  announcement?
....State
D.  C.
$5:
(1 yr.)  additional:
4/30/50
....State
Yes  D    No
D
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED