I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956may14.pdf

============================================================

Soviet  Documentary: Pravda's  Warning  That  Free  Speech Must Not  Be  Carried Too Far, Page 4.
L R  Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  17
MAY   14,  1956
«>«      WASHINGTON, D.   C.
16  CENTS
Part  Two of  Stone's  Report on  His  Visit  to  the  U.S.S.R.
From   A  Moscow   Notebook
ON  OUR WAY BACK from  our  visit to  the  Kremlin,  I  asked
Natasha  my  tourist  guide  whether  she  had  any  questions  to
ask  about  America.  She wanted  first  to know why  Paul Robe-
son could not get a passport.   I said I had criticized the govern-
ment's  action  in  refusing him  a  passport.   She then  wanted  to
know what I  thought  of  the  condemnation of  the  Communists
in  the  United  States.   I  said  I  had  criticized  that  in  public
speeches  and  in  my  paper.   She  asked  whether  many  people
agreed with me and I  said unfortunately not  many did.   When
she  looked  triumphant,  I  asked  her  a  question.    "How  many
people  in  this  country,"  I  asked,  "would  be willing  to  defend
the  right  of  oppositionists  to  speak  against  the  government?"
To  this  she  had  a  ready answer.
"We  have  no  oppositionists,"   replied  Natasha.
"But  suppose you did?"  I  insisted.
"How   could  we  have  oppositionists,"   she  said.    "A  man
cannot  be  an  oppositionist  for  himself  alone."
"Tolstoy   was  an  oppositionist   on  his  own,"  I  countered.
"No,"   Natasha  replied,  "he  spoke  for  the  people."
"But  the  people  were  voiceless,"  I  replied,  "until  a  few
such  men had  the  courage to  speak  for  them."
"Well,"  Natasha  said,  "if  we  had  oppositionists,  someone
would  defend  their  rights."
To  illustrate  she  began  to  tell  me about  her  trade  union.
"In  our  union,"  she said,  "some  people  are  timid  but  most
of  us  speak  up.   Why  the  other  day we  even got  the  reinstate-
ment of  a  fellow  worker who  had  been  fired."
"We  have  unions  in  America, too,"  I  said,  "and  they often
get  workers  reinstated."
"Yes,"  she said,  "but  in  America unions  cannot  strike."
"That's  not  true,"  I   said,   'there  are  lots  of   strikes   in
America."
"No,"   she said,  "under  the Taft  kw,  workers cannot strike."
"That's  not true," I argued.   "The  effect  of  the  Taft-Hartley
Act  has  been  very  much  exaggerated.   We  have  strikes   all
the  time."
"But   union   leaders   are  afraid   to   call   strikes,"   Natasha
insisted,  "because  they  may  be  heavily  fined."
"There have  been  fines," I  said.   "But  that  has not  stopped
strikes."
By  this  time we  were back  to  the  Metropol  and  the  conver-
sation  was  over.   Natasha  looked  at  me  with  condescension  as
a  benighted  heathen.  The  idea that  something  she had  read  in
the   party  press   might   possibly   be  wrong   obviously  never
occurred  to  her.
I  GOT A DIFFERENT  SORT  of  question  about America and  a
different  reaction  from  a  Red  Army  officer.    I  saw him  sitting
by  himself  in  a  cafe.   I  walked  over  and  asked,  'Sprechen  sie
Deutsch?"   He  answered  in  German,  "a  little."  He  spoke  no
5 *
6  1
English  or  French  and  communication  was  difficult.   He  was a
friendly  man,  with  clear  intelligent  eyes,  and  the  face  of  a
kindly  person.  He wanted to know—after I  told  him I was an
American  journalist  on  my  first  visit  to  Moscow—how many
rooms  the  ordinary worker has in  the  United  States.   This was
his  first  question.    I  said  in  a  city  like  New  York  even  well-
to-do  people  might  have  small  apartments  but  that  in  many
cities  like  Philadelphia  workers  owned  their  own  homes,  and
that  these  were  five  or  six  room  homes.   He  did  not  look  at
me with  pity  as a  victim  of  capitalist  propaganda.   He  looked
pleased,  as  if  I  had  told  him  something which  buttressed  his
own  convictions.   I  asked  him  why  there  were  still  so  many
pictures  of  Stalin  around  and  he  said  this  would  soon  pass
away.   He  said  Russia  was  "going  back  to, Lenin,"  and  that
many  bad  things  had  happened  under  Stalin.   He  looked  in-
credulous  when I  said I  liked  Moscow.  Trying  hard to  express
his  feelings  in  his  inadequate  German, he  said—as if  in  a  few
words  he  was  distilling  the  product  of  long   thought—"the
peasant  here  has a  hard  life."    He  said,  "I  am a  soldier  but
I  believe  in  peace."  Then  he  pointed  to his uniform and  said,
"I  cannot  speak  freely."   He  paid  for  his  drink  and  left.
I   VISITED  Two    GOVERNMENT  BUILDINGS,  the   offices   of
Tass,  for  copies  of  speeches made at  the  20th  Congress,  and  a
Ministry of  Culture  office  on Zhdanova  street where the  Soviet
Information  Bureau  publishes  its  Daily  Review of  the  Soviet
Press.  In  both  there were  uniformed  police guards  inside  the
door  and  no  one  could  get  by  the  guards  without  showing  a
pass  with  a  photograph   on  it.    Workers  coming  down  the
elevator   on  errands  in  the   lobby  showed  their  passes  each
time  they  passed   the  policeman.    It   reminded   one  of   the
Pentagon  in  wartime  Washington.
I  WENT TO THE MINISTRY  OF  CULTURE because  I  wanted
a  translation  of  the  full  text  of  a  long  editorial  which  Pravda
published on  April  5.  The  fragmentary reports  I  had  seen  of
it  in  the  foreign  press  on  my  way to  Russia  were  disturbing.
They  seemed  to  indicate  that  the  Soviet  Union  was  still  a
long  way from  permitting  freedom  of  speech  even  within  the
Communist  party.   On  the  one  hand,  Pravda  did  speak  of  re-
establishing  democratic  principles  in  "Party  life  and  activity"
and  praised  the  "bold  and  principled"  criticism  being  voiced
at  party meetings.    At  the  same time it  criticized  "some  rotten
elements  [which]  are trying to  make use of  criticism  and  self-
criticism  for  all  shorts  of  slanderous  inventions  and  anti-party
assertions."    [See  text  on  Page  Four.]   What  was  most  dis-
turbing  was the  vagueness  of  the  editorial.   I  talked  to  the
official  in  charge  of  translations  at  the  Ministry  of  Culture.   I
told  him  after  reading  the  text  that  I  could  not  make  head  or
tail of  it.  "Suppose,"  I  said,  "I  were a  Soviet  citizen,  honestly
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'* Weekly, May 14,1958
(Continued   from   Page   One)
trying  to  understand  what  was  permissible  free  speech  and
what  was  slanderous  and  anti-party  and  therefore  impermis-
sible,  how could  I find out from  this editorial ?  It  would  only
leave  me confused  and  afraid."   His  answer was that  all  these
matters  referred  to  in  the  editorial  had  already been  explained
at  party  meetings.   "Anyone  who attended  these  meetings  will
know  what  the  article  means,"  he  said.   "But,"  I   insisted,
"what  is  the  use  of  a  newspaper  article  which  can  only  be
understood  if  the  reader  attends  a  private  meeting  to  hear  the
explanation?"   His  reply  was  that  this  was  an  internal  party
matter.   "In  your country,"  he  said,  "there is free  discussion—
no,"   he  interrupted   himself,   "that  is  not  a  good  word—in
your  country  problems  are  first  discussed  in  the  press  but  in
our  country  they  are  first  discussed  in  party  meetings  and  in
factory  meetings  and  then  we decide  how much should  go  into
the  press."   The  talk  was held  in  the  English  translation  bu-
reau,  and  some  of  his  fellow  workers  had  a  hard  time  trying
to keep a straight  face  during  this  conversation.  I  did not find
any  newspaperman  in  Moscow  who  had  succeeded  in  learning
just  what  had  actually  been  said  by  those  comrades  whom
Pravda  rebuked.
THE  RUSSIANS  LIKE  THEIR  CONTACTS  to  be   organizational.
They  like visits by delegations  rather  than  individuals.  Organi-
zational  contacts  relieve  the  individual  of  responsibility.   If  a
visit  turns  out  badly,  the  fault  lies  with  the  organization.   In
addition,  contacts  between  delegations  facilitate  that  exchange
of   slogans,   safe   generalities   and   non-political   pleasantries
which  the  Russians  prefer  to  real  talk,  which  may  become
dangerous.   If  you  reach  a  man  directly  in  his  office,  he  will
call in a colleague  to take part  in the  conversation,  and  provide
a  witness  to the talk.
I  SUCCEEDED IN STARTING  impromptu  discussions with Rus-
sians  everywhere.    I  was  not  rebuffed   once,  and  this—other
foreigners  told  me—was a  complete  change  from  a  few  years
ago  when  it  was  simply  impossible  to  talk  with  Russians  at
all  except  on  strictly  official  business.   But  I  never  succeeded
in  making a date with a Russian for  a  further  talk  alone.  One
man  I  met  through  an  official  organization  for  a  group  talk
seemed  most  intelligent  and  most  eager  for  real  discussion.   I
asked  him  if  he  would  come to  my hotel  for  tea  next  day  and
continue our talk.  He  said he would like  to and that  he would
call me up and let me know.  A half hour  before  the  appointed
time  he  telephoned  to  say he  couldn't  come  because  his  wife
had  a  bad  cold  but  he  would  call  me within  the  next  day  or
so  and  make  another  date.   I  never  heard  from  him  again.
ONE  NIGHT I  STRUCK UP a  conversation with  two Russians
who  turned  out  to be Jewish, very intelligent  young men  both
of  them.   One  taught  Russian  literature  in  a  school  for  defec-
tive  children,  the  other  was  getting  his  doctor's   degree  in
literature.   They  spoke  a  little  Yiddish,  German  and  English
but  with a  Russian-English dictionary we managed.  They  said
the  Jews  had  gone  through  a  difficult  period  in  Stalin's  last
years  and  that  many  Jewish  writers  had  been  killed  but  that
things  were  better  now.   They  insisted  they  were  not  afraid
to  talk  with  a  foreigner.   When  I  asked  whether  they  had  a
friend  who  spoke  English  and  whether we  might  meet again,
they  made a  date  for  the  following  evening.  I  waited outside
the  hotel  for  them.  At  the  appointed  time  one  of  them  show-
ed  up  with  a  new man,  the  latter  well  dressed  and  wearing  a
black  felt  hat.   My  acquaintance  of  the  evening  before  ex-
plained  that  his  friend  was  "nicht  zu  hause"  (not  at  home)
and  that  he  had  been  unable  to  find  the   "camarade"   who
spoke  English.   I  asked  who  the  new  man  was  but  never  did
get  his  status  clearly  except  that  he  seemed  in  command  of
the  situation.    I  thanked   my  acquaintance  for   coming  and
asked  if  he  could  dine  with  me.   He  said  that  he  was  busy.
Could  he  have a  cup  of  coffee?   "No,"   glancing  nervously  at
his  watch,  he  had  to  leave  right  away.  He  explained  he  faced
a  heavy  examination  next  day  in  historical  materialism.   He
was  strained  and  abrupt.   I  had  the  feeling  when  we  shook
hands  and  parted  that  he  was  in  some  kind  of  trouble  and  I
wondered  whether  the  other  man  might  not  be a police agent.
I  HAD A TALK with  two  journalists  on  a well  known  Soviet
publication  which  circulates  widely  abroad.   One  man,  a  top
editor,  was  well-tailored,  slick,  and  intelligent   but  not  an  at-
tractive  type;  he  seemed  very much  like  the  Hollywood  intel-
lectuals  in  the  film  industry,  a  born  yes-man,  with  a   sharp
nose  for  any .change  in  the  wind.   One  felt  that  he  would
never  stick  his  neck  out  for  any man  or  any principle.   He  was
well-stocked  with  glib  answers  for  the  freedom  of  the  press
questions he  expected  from  foreign  journalists;  what  these glib
answers  boiled  down  to  was  that  the  "capitalist"  press  faith-
fully  echoed  the  line  of  its  government,  too.   The  existence of
some  independent  voices  and  of  some  independence  even  in
the  conservative  and  conventional  press  was conveniently  pass-
ed  over.  The  other  man, a  subordinate,  was more  independent
minded.  I  asked  whether  Soviet  writers and  journalists  in  the
future  would  have  more  freedom  but  I  never  did  get a  dear
answer.
"It  would  be wrong,"  said  the  first  journalist,  "to  say that
writers  felt  restricted.   The  young  people  were  a  new  Soviet
generation  which  expressed  what  it  sincerely had  been  feeling.
Now  that  the  party  thinks  it  necessary  for  writers  to  be  more
independent and  to write more naturally and from within, they
will  do so. But it  would  be wrong to say they were restricted."
"So,"   I  suggested,  "it  is  a  question  of  changing  the  habits
of  writers?"
"Yes," was the answer,  "and  of  revising  some conceptions."
Then  he  added  what  I  thought  was a  most  appalling  com-
mentary.   "Our   writers,"   he  said,  "thought  that  to  criticize
our  life  was  not  their  affair.    They  thought  only  to  be  happy
and  not  to  criticize."
When  I  asked  whether  there  would  be  more  freedom  of
speech,  the  first  man  said  there  had  always  been  free  speech
in  Russia.   But  when  I  asked  whether  any  Soviet  journalist
had  criticized the  earlier  attitude  toward  Tito  or  the  "doctors'
plot"  he shifted  his ground  and  said that the  press  in  America
or  England  on  a subject like  the  German problem  all  followed
the  same  line,  too.    "Our  newspapers,"  he  said,  "defend  our
line,  too."
I  said this was not entirely true in  the West. I  said  the  New
York  Times had  criticized the  padlocking of  the  Daily  Worker
just before  I  left.  I  said I  had  criticized the  "doctors'  plot"  in
my  own  paper  because I  felt  there was  something fishy about
it.   I  asked  whether  in  the  future,   if  there  were  a  similar
frameup,  some  Soviet  journalist  would  criticize it,  too.
"If  you  ask  us  about  the  doctors'  plot,"  the  journalist ex-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  May 14,19S6
3
plained,   "now  we  know.   The   facts  were  distorted  and  in-
vented  by the  Beria gang.  Now  that  the  facts have been made
known,  we  have  attacked  the  "doctors'  plot.'   But  you  have
to  know  the   facts."
He  never  did  answer my question  about  the  future.   When
I  cited  the  fact  that  one  man,  like  Zola,  could  force  open  the
Dreyfus   case  in  France,  I  struck  no  response.   The  idea  of
getting  the  facts  on  one's  own  and  of  opposing  the  govern-
ment  in  a  political   or  criminal  prosecution  was  completely
foreign  to  his  mentality.   I  felt  not  merely  opportunism   but
genuine  submissiveness  in  his  attitude.
The  other  journalist  seemed  to  feel  that  something   more
was  needed  to  satisfy  my  questions.   "We  lived  in  a  besieged
fortress,"  he said.  "I  am  now  42.   All  of  my generation  were
accustomed  to  believe  in  the  security  agencies  because   these
were  our   shield   against   real  enemies.    When   we  heard  of
measures  taken  by  these  agencies,  we  were  sure  they  must  be
true.   No  revolution  ever  had  so  many  enemies  as  ours.
"Now,"  he  continued,  "we  know  that  these  revolutionary
bodies  like  the  security  police  can  also  make  mistakes.   The
result  is  a  new  atmosphere.   Our  party  and  the  government
have  hardened  their  control  over  these  agencies  and  put  new
and  good  people  into  them  to  improve  them."
I  suggested  that  one way to  "improve"  the  secret  police  was
to  give  the  individual  citizen  more  rights  against  them,  to  es-
tablish  safeguards  like  our  habeas  corpus  against  the   police.
"In  the  West,"  the  second   journalist  explained,   "it  was
different.   You  had  a  very  long  experience  and  got  used  to
defending  yourselves   against   the  bourgeois   state.    But   here
from  the  beginning  it  was  a  people's  state  and  there  was  no
practical  need  for  such  protective   procedures.   The  last  few
years,  however,"  he  conceded,   "have  showed   the   need   for
some  such  safeguards."
On  the  question   of  Tito,  the  second   journalist  also  had
something  interesting  to  add.   He  said,  "Only a  small  number
of  our  people  ever  went  abroad.   We  had  no way to  judge  for
ourselves.    Now  that  thousands   are  beginning  to  go  abroad
and  see  for  themselves,  it  will  help  to  prevent  such  mistakes
in  the  future."
I  WAS TREATED  RUDELY  only  once  during  my  visit  to  the
U.S.S.R.   I  had  just  come  out  of  the  famous  puppet   theatre
of  Abrasov.  It  was about  11 p.m.  and  raining.   In  my  meagre
Russian  I  asked  a  man  where  I  could  find  the  Mayakovsky
place  station  of  the  Metro.  I  couldn't  understand  his  answer,
but  it was obviously  unfriendly.  A  young girl  standing nearby
was  angered  by  his  "nekulturni"   (uncultured,   a  very  harsh
term  in  contemporary  Russia  as  I  later  gathered)   conduct.  She
motioned  me  to  follow  her,  took  me  down  into  the  subway,
and  even  insisted  on  paying  for  my  ticket.   She  rode  with  me
to  Sverdlov  place  and  showed  me the  exit  nearest  to  my hotel.
In  the  meantime  we  had  acquired  a  drunk  who  spoke  some
English  and  insisted  on  treating  the  girl  as a pickup.   She was
very embarrassed. When  she left  I  took  off my hat  in  (I  hope)
my  best  bourgeois  style,  shook  her  hand  and  said  "spasibo"
(thanks)  to  save  her  face  with  the  drunk.
EVERYWHERE  I  FOUND Russians went  out  of  their  way to  be
helpful  as  soon  as  they  learned  I  was  a  foreigner,  and  there
seemed  to  be  no  prejudice  against  me  when  I  said  I  was  an
American.   I  got  to  the  Bolshoi  theatre  just  as  the  perform-
ance  was  starting  and  the  ushers  were  closing  the  doors.   I
6 I
didn't  know  where  to  go  or  what  to  do  and  was on  the  verge
of  being  shut  out when I  told  an  usher,  "ne  panamayou parus-
ski"   (don't  understand  Russian).  He  at  once  caught  on  that
I  was a foreigner,  found  me a  vacant seat  in  the  darkness and
then  after  the  first  scene  came back  and  took  me  to  my  proper
place.    Perhaps  the   most  striking  bit  of  unexpectedly  non-
bureaucratic  friendliness occurred  when I was leaving.  You  are
forbidden  to  take  rubles  out of  the country.  I  had  seven  rubles
and  30  kopecks  left  when  we got  to  currency control  in  Vilna
on  my  way  out  to  Warsaw.   So  I  marked  down  on  my  cur-
rency  declaration,  seven  rubles  and  30  kopecks.  The  officer  in
charge  shook  his  head  sadly,  and  said  "nyet,  nyet."   He  care-
fully   crossed   out   the   seven   rubles   and   30   kopecks,   then
stamped  the  document  approved.   But  he  made  no  effort   to
take  the  money from  me.
I  WENT  TO Two   PERFORMANCES  in  Moscow.    The  first
was  at  the  huge  Bolshoi  theatre  where  a  ballet  named   "Lau-
renciana"  was being  played  that  night.   I  liked  the  enormous
brightly  colored  theatre,  the  gay  sets,  the  music  and  the  audi-
ence,  which  was enjoying itself.   But  I  found  the  ballet  itself
conventional,  and  the  story  corny;  peasant  boy  saves  peasant
girl  from  advances  of  arrogant  knight  in  medieval  village.   I
was  so bored  I  left  after  the  first  act.   I  didn't  think  it  half  as
much  fun  as just walking  the  streets and  looking  at  the  people.
The  other  performance  was  a  sheer  joy.   I  saw  "The  Girl
With  the  Fluttering  Eyelids,"  a  satire  on  Hollywood,  done  at
the  puppet  theatre  of  Abrasov.   It  had  been  on  a  triumphant
tour  in  England,  and  someone  should  bring  it  to  America.  I
had  never  seen  anything  like  it  before—a  full   length   play
written  for  puppets,  and  the  puppets   specially  designed   for
the  play.  The  satire  was terribly clever—I  heard  later  that  our
Ambassador  Bohlen  had.enjoyed  it  immensely.   In  one  scene
thv ^   are  three  puppet  stenographers  taking  dictation  at  once
from   three  collaborating   writers  in  the  best  frenetic  Holly-
wood  manner.   An  elderly  usher  who  spoke  English  kindly
explained  the  plot  to me before the  play  began;  it  was a take-
off   on  Carmen.   But  after  the  second  act,  when  I  saw  the
smugglers  being  executed  with  a  flame  gun  and  I  asked  her
to  explain,  she  suddenly  went  dead  on  me.   She  hadn't  seen
that  act,  she  didn't  know  what  had  happened,  she  practically
couldn't  speak  English  anymore.  I  gathered  kter  that  Abrasov
was  satirizing  the  Marshall  Plan  and  American  military policy
in  that  scene.  The  usher  was  afraid   of  offending  me  if  she
explained.
I   BELIEVE  THAT  SUBCONSCIOUSLY  or  unconsciously every
American  in  Moscow must feel a  slight  uneasiness,  even a  little
anxiety.   These  are  our  rivals  and  imitators;  the  subway  and
the  skyscrapers and  even more  so the  booster  spirit reflect  their
desire  to  imitate,  to  overtake  and  to  surpass our  own  country.
It  is easy to see on  the  surface how  far  they yet have to go,  and
to  sneer at their nouveau  riche vulgarity as the Nineteenth cen-
tury  English visitor  sneered  (in  much the  same worried spirit)
at  the  new brash giant growing  up  in  America.  But to  see  the
building going  on  and  the  beautiful new department stores,  to
read  the  speeches  of  the  20th  Congress  and  the  stupendous
figures  of  the  new  Five  Year  Plan,  is  to  feel  that  this  new
rival  is a giant,  a  gauche and  slovenly giant  whose manners  it
is  easy  to  ridicule, but  whose capacity  for  huge strides  is not  to
be discounted.
(More   Next    Week)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, May 14,19S6
A  Document Which  Reveals the  Ferment  in  the  Soviet Union
Pravda's  Warning  That  Free  Speech  Must  Not  Be  Carried  Too  Far
"As the  current  meetings  of  Party  activists and  the  meet-
ings  of  primary  Party  organizations  show,  the   Communists
are,  on the  basis  of  broad  inner-party  democracy,  boldly  and
principledly  criticizing  those  who have  not'given  up  their  bu-
reaucratic methods  of  work,  they  are  exposing  existing short-
comings  and  charting out  concrete  ways and  means of  quickly
eliminating  them  so as  to  improve  our  work  in  every  way  in
all  branches   of  economic  and  cultural  construction,   and  to
enhance  the  role  of  Party  organizations   in  the  struggle  for
communism.   This  principled   and  bold  criticism,   permeated
with  the  spirit  of  Bolshevik  Party  consciousness,  and  concern
for   the  great   cause  of  our  Party,  must   be  upheld   and
developed  in  every   way.
"At  the  same  time  we  cannot  disregard  such  facts  when
some  rotten  elements  are  trying to make  use  of  criticism  and
self-criticism  for  all  sorts  of  slanderous  inventions  and  anti-
party  assertions.  Thus,  at  a  meeting  of the  Party  organiza-
tion  of  a  certain  scientific  laboratory,  staff  workers   Avalov,
Orlov,  Nesterov   and  Schedrin  made  use  of  inner-party  de-
mocracy   for   slanderous   statements   directed   against   the
Party's  policy  and  its  Leninist  foundations.   The  members of
the Party  organization have not  displayed  real  Bolshevik  mil-
itant  irreconcilability  to  these  anti-party  demarches. Pr,ovoc-
ative anti-party  statements  were  also  made by L.  Yaroshenko
at  a Party meeting of the  Moscow Regional  Statistical  Board.
Such  statements  are  in  essence  echoing  someone  else's  pro-
nouncements,  repeating  the  hackneyed  slanderous   inventions
of  the  foreign  reactionary  propaganda.
"Pretending   to  condemn  the   cult  of   the  individual  some
rotten  elements  are  trying  to  question  the  correctness  of  the
Party's  policy.   All  the  course  of  the  Soviet  Union's  historic
development refutes  these inventions, utterly  demolishes  such
unworthy  attempts.
Marxist  Mysticism:  'The Party's Collective Wisdom'
"Throughout  its history the Party's policy was and  remain-
ed  a  Leninist  policy.   This  policy  has  been  elaborated  by  the
Party  and its  Central  Committee in the  course  of the  struggle
for  the  victory  of  socialism,  and  it  embodies  the  Party's  col-
lective  wisdom.  Its  great verility  (sic)  has  been tested by the
decades  of  our  people's  great  creative  endeavor.   The  world
historic  successes  of  the  Soviet   people  are  an  explicit  and
conclusive  proof  of  the  correctness  of the  Communist Party's
policy.   The  fact   that  our  Party  has   unfolded  a  resolute
struggle  against  the  shortcomings  in  Party  and  Government
work,  in  economic construction,  to  overcome  the  consequences
On  April  5,  Pravda carried  a  long  editorial  warning
Communists  not to carry free speech too far.  We reprint
here  the  heart  of  that  editorial  as  translated  by  official
Soviet  sources  in  Moscow.   Only  the  italics  are  added.
It  is  worth  a  close  reading.   It  reflects  considerable fer-
ment  within  the  Communist  party; three  different  meet-
ings  are  mentioned  at  which  "slanderous"  and  "dema-
gogic"  remarks went  unrebuked.   The  editorial, though
in   the   Soviet   Union's  leading   party   paper,  is   stale
and  uninspired;  this  is  how  a  tired  hack  writes  when
he  no longer believes  what  he  is  writing.   The  editorial
is  turgid,  verbose and obscure; nowhere does  it  give  the
slightest   hint  of  just  what  these  rebellious  comrades
said  or  why  they  were  wrong  to  say  it.   The  reference
to  "petty  bourgeois  licentiousness"  recalls  pur  own  re-
actionaries,  who are always saying  that liberty is  not  to
be  confused  with  license.    What  Pravda  says   all  too
plainly  is  that  it  is  safer  to  keep  one's   mouth  shut;
of  the  cult  of the  individual  testifies  to  the  great force  of  the
Party  and  its  unshakeable  loyalty  to  Leninism.   The  Com-
munist  Party  is  now  united  more  than  ever  before,  and  is
closely  rallied  around  its  Central  Committee.   All  our  Party
is  unanimous  in  approving   the   wise  Leninist   policy.    But
there are  still facts  when  certain  Party  organizations  by-pass
Philistine,  swampy  moods expressed  by certain  people,  do  not
expose  them,  act  liberally  towards  people   coming  out  with
anti-Party  statements.    Thus,  comrade  Ternovsky  permitted
himself  to  make  an  actually  demagogic  statement  at  a  Party
functionaries   meeting  of  the  Dzerzhinsky  District,  Chkalov.
Despite  this,  the  meeting  participants,  including  the  chair-
man  of  the  Chkalov  Regional  Soviet's  Executive    Committee,
member  of  the  Party  Regional.  Committee's  Bureau,  comrade
Zhukov,  did  not  rebuff    the  speaker.
"The   Party  organizations  must  resolutely  combat   every
deviation   from  the   policy  of  the   Communist  Party,  from
Marxist-Leninist  ideology.  Communist Party  Rules  give  every
Communist  the  right  of  freely  discussing  all  the  questions  of
Party  policy.  But  the  Party has  n«yer  tolerated  and will  not
tolerate bourgeois  licentiousness, the more so anti-Party state-
ments  in its  midst, even  if they are  solitary;  the Party  cannot
permit  the  freedom  of  discussing  problems  to  be  interpreted
as  the  freedom  of  propagating  views  alien  to  the   spirit  of
Marxism-Leninism,   because   this  contradicts  the   provisions
of  the  Party  Rules,  and the  Party  principles."
Coming:  A  Visit  to  A  Kolkhos  and  An  Interview  With  A  Russian  Jurist
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name   •       ..........................................................................*..
Street                -                                                .............
City                                       ....Zone           State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
5/14/66
(To)   Name                    -
Street
City                                        Zone.          State
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?   Yes  Q    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington   3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED