I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956aug06.pdf

============================================================

Some  Defeats  for  Walter  and  the  House Un-American Committee,  Page  3
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO.  29
AUGUST  6,   1956
«>'     WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
The  Down-Grading  of  Richard Nixon  Is  Softly  But  Surely Underway
From  "Delighted"  to  "Perfectably   Acceptable"
Eisenhower  is  standing  firm  on   the  proposition   that  any
American  boy  has  a  right  to  be  Vice  President.  This  in  itself
is  a  triumph  for  Stassen  and  a  mark-down  for  Nixon.  The
President's  gift  for  ambiguity  and  taste  for  caution  are  such
that  some  newspapermen  left  his  press  conference  last  week
honestly  believing he  preferred  Nixon  and  others  convinced  to
the  contrary.   I  am  in  the    latter  category.  A  few  weeks  ago
Eisenhower  was "delighted"  that Nixon would  run again; now
he  is  "perfectly  acceptable."   Stassen  instead  of  being  fired  for
daring  to  suggest  that  Nixon  be  dumped  is  to  get  four  weeks
off  to  devote  himself  entirely  to  that  enterprise.
My  belief,  shared  by  some  experienced  correspondents  here
on  the other  side of  the  fence, is that  Eisenhower would  like  to
shake  Nixon  off  the  ticket  but  hasn't  the  nerve  to  act  openly,
and  that  Stassen  has  probably  started  too  late.    Nevertheless
there  has  been  a  complete  reversal  of  opinion  about  the  con-
vention  since the  Stassen statement  on Nixon and  the  Kefauver
withdrawal  in  favor  of  Stevenson.
A  few  weeks  ago  there  were  rooms  still  available  in  San
Francisco;  most  newspapermen  figured  the  only  story  would
be  in  Chicago.   Now  it  is  felt  that  Stevenson  may  sew  up  the
nomination  quickly  but  that  a  fight  is  not  impossible  in  San
Francisco.   Stevenson's  chances  are  being  steadily  rated   up-
ward,  not  only  for  the  nomination  but  the  election,   though
Truman  prefers   the   cold   warrior   Harriman   and   the  party
bosses  would   like  a  millionaire  candidate  who  could   be  de-
pended  on  to  foot  his  own  deficit.
The  President  did  not  look  too  hale  and  hearty  last  week;
he  is  not  a  well  man;  surprises,  unpleasant   ones,  are  possible
before   November.
No  Pat  Answer  for  That  Crisis  Over  Suez
A  journalist  is  expected   to  be  omniscient,  but  I  am  com-
pelled  to  confess  that  I  have  no  pat  explanations  or  solutions
to  offer  in  the  Suez crisis.   I  could  not  help  but  admire Nasser
for  his  resourcefulness  and  daring  in  pulling  a  new  rabbit  out
of  his  hat  just  when  it  looked  as if  we had  called  his  bluff.   I
am  inclined to think  this  is one  of  those  situations  which  could
be  met  either  by  the  ruthless  application  of  force  to  reoccupy
the  Suez  canal  zone  or  by  magnanimous  action,  but  neither  is
likely.  Anything  in  between  will  be  a  victory  for  Nasser,  a
humiliation  for  the  West,  an  increase  in  his  stature  as  a  Pan-
Arab  leader.  This  spells  trouble.
In  perspective,  the  picture  calls  for  a  Spengler.  This  is  part
of  the  steady  ebb  of  European  power  from  the  Arab  lands  of
the  Mediterranean  and  the  Middle  East.   The  West  has  too
much  social  conscience  and  guilt  complex,  while  Britain  and
France  have  been  too  impoverished  by  war,  to  hold   on  by
force.  At  the  same  time  there  is  not  enough  social  conscience
and  vision  to  launch  on  the  kind  of  politically big-minded and
economically  adequate  program  which  might—but  only  might
—bind  the  ex-colonies  to  the  mother  countries  in  common  in-
ter-racial  partnership.  A  big  moment  is  thus  being  met  with
divided  mind  and  in  response  to  petty  interests.
There  were  many hostile  undercurrents  here  in  Washington
to  the  Aswan  dam  project.   Congress  is tired  of  giving  money
to  foreigners; the  Southerners  saw no  logic  in  a  project  which
would  enable Egypt  to  grow  more  cotton  when  our  own  acre-
age  is  being  steadily  cut  back; the  whole  scheme  smacked  too
much of  Henry  Wallace's  "TVA's on  the Danube"  (why  fight
public  power  at  Hell's  Canyon  and  support  it  at  Aswan?);
there  is, of  course,  strong  opposition  to  more  aid  for  "neuttal-
8  *
ist"  countries  and  there  was  a  really  offensive  atmosphere  of
blackmail and  bazaar bargaining in  the  way Nasser  played East
against  West  while  carrying on  the  most  irresponsible  kind of
radio  propaganda  against  Britain and  France.  The  line of  least
resistance  and  greatest  popularity  for  Dulles  was  to  drop  the
Aswan  project.  That  an  anti-Egyptian action  might  also  please
Jewish  and  Zionist  opinion  on  the  eve of  the  election  was  of
little  weight  in  his  calculations;  he  is  basically  anti-Israel  and
Eisenhower   has  the  typical  Pentagon  attitude  of  hostility  to-
ward  Zionism  as  a  disturbing  factor  in  the  Middle  East.
From  the  standpoint  of  Israel,  to help  Egypt  and  its  people
to  a  better  life  would  be  in  Israel's  long  range  interests,  too.
A  wise  Anglo-American statesmanship might  have  linked  such
projects  as  Aswan with  peace  in  the  Middle  East.  These  same
powers  did  not  lift  a finger to enforce  international   obligations
when  Nasser  barred  Israel-bound  vessels  from  the  Canal.  They
sold  arms  to  Nasser  even  while  he  was  attacking  British  and
American  interests. Their  sensitive point  seems  to  be  fear  that
Nasser  will  use  control  of  the  Canal  to  push  up  oil  tanker
rates,  which  seem  indeed  to  be  disproportionately   low  when
measured  against  Panama  rates and  the  cost  of  the  trip  around
the  Cape.  Above  all  the  oil  interests   fear  the  contagion   of
nationalization.
The  Russians  at  the  moment  seem  to  be  behaving  with  re
straint,  though  it  remains  to  be  seen  what  happens  when Nus-
ser  visits  Moscow.  The  Soviets  would  seem  to  have  a  greater
interest  in  pursuing the  creation  of  a  new  entente  with  Eng-
land  than  in  challenging  the  West  by  bringing  Egypt  within
their  sphere  of  influence.   Perhaps  the  uproar  over  the  Suez, if
(Continued  on  Page  Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  6,1956
That  Collision  In  A  Greater  Fog
Two  liners  collided  in  the  fog  off Nantucket  last  week,  and
the  disaster  became  dinner  table  talk  overnight  in  every  home
in  America.  The  same  night  a  Congressional  subcommittee
after  months  of  hearings  released  a  preview  of  what  will  be
the  greatest  disaster  in  history,  a  Third,  nuclear  and  therefore
final, World War,  and  most papers  did not carry a line  about  it.
The  subcommittee  report,  "Civil  Defense  for  National  Sur-
vival,"  had  a  message  of  hope  as  well  as  terror.   It  concluded
from  expert  studies  that a real  civil  defense  program  was  feasi-
ble.   In  the  words  of  one  scientist  it  might  "mean  a difference
of  60 million  casualties  or more  in the event  of  an all-out  war."
Sixty  million  is a  lot  of  people,  but  no  one  paid   attention.
Was it the Swedish or the  Italian  Captain  who was to  blame?
Or  just  the  fog,  the  sea and  chance?  This  was  debated  every-
where.   But  we  instinctively  avert  our  eyes  from  this  greater
fog  that  veils  the  next  war,  a  fog  in  which  every  thoughtful
human  being  bears  a  steersman's  responsibility.   It  is  as  if  we
turn  with  comfort  to the  ancient  and  familiar  terrors  of  the  sea.
The  Huckster  Gets  The  Hearing
Somehow  the  report  came  out  as  if  to  insure  a  minimum  of
attention.  The  subcommittee  was  under  the  chairmanship  of
Chet  Holifield,  a  Democrat,  of  California,  a  member  from  the
beginning  of  the  Joint  Congressional  Committee  on  Atomic
Energy.  Holifield  is one  of  the  best  informed  men  in  Congress
on  nuclear  problems.  His  subcommittee  worked  hard.  It  heard
212  witnesses.   It  made  a  report  of  almost  100  pages.
But  it  was  not  released  until  the  day  before  Congress   ad-
journed.  The  press  galleries,  overworked  in  the  adjournment
rush,  only  had  one  day's  advance   notice.
The  New   York   Times   barely  mentioned   the  report   and
buried  Holifield's  speech  in  presenting  it.   His  remarks  show
why  the  Administration  was  so  anxious  to  muffle  his  findings.
Holifield    accused    Atomic    Energy   Commission    Chairman
Strauss  of  "huckstering."  He  ridiculed  Strauss's  widely  pub-
licized  intimation  that  "humanitarian"   nuclear   bombardment
without  widespread  fallout  was  now  possible.
But  it  was  the  huckster  who  got  the  public  ear,  the  false
tidings  which  made  the  headlines.
Vested  Interests  in Ignorance
There  are  vested  interests  in  preventing  a  full  public  awak-
ening  to  the  urgent   necessity  of  a  search  for  peace  and  co-
existence.  There  are  interests in  choking  off  full  discussion  of
the  civil  defense  possibilities.  The  most  important  is the  mili-
tary.  "Their   annual  appeals  to  Congress  for   huge   sums  of
money  would  be  less effective,"  the  Holifield  subcommittee  re-
port  says,  "if  they emphasized the importance of  civil  defense."
From  Which  We  Avert  Our  Eyes
Why  The  Public Apathy?
"The   subcommittee's   own  view  concerning   public
apathy  is  that it  is  too  easily  used as  an  excuse for  not
doing  anything  about  civil  defense.  The  subcommittee
does  not  believe  the  American  people,  fully   informed
and  properly  warned,  would  fail  to  act  for  their  own
protection   or   to   put   forth   the   necessary   effort   and
sacrifice  to  obtain  the  protection  that  can  be  achieved.
To  put  it  bluntly,  the highest national  authorities must
regard  the  danger  as  serious,  otherwise one  should not
expect  the  public  to  do  so."  —Holifield   Report
The   Eisenhower   Administration  has  a  double   interest  in
playing  down  the  problems  of  civil defense.   It  is  shifting  for
budgetary  reasons to  dependence  on  nuclear war, and  therefore
wants  to  belittle  the  dangers.   It  does  not  want  the  burden of
an   effective   civil  defense  program,   and   has  therefore   been
stressing  state  and  local  responsibility. This,  as the  subcommit-
tee  report  shows,  is  a  ludicrous anachronism.
One  thing  the  H-bomb  is  sure  to  violate  is  States  Rights.
Yet  the  Civil  Defense  Act,  as the  subcommittee  report  reminds
us,  vests  responsibility  for  civil  defense  "primarily  in  the  sev-
eral  States  and  their  political  subdivisions."  When  deadly  fall-
out  may make  half  the  country  temporarily  unlivable,  how  are
local  or  State  authorities  going  to  cope  with  the  emergency?
"Just  A  Larger   Emergency"
Admiral Radford, in  his  testimony before  the  subcommittee,
said  a  nuclear  attack  on  the  United  States  would  be  "just  a
larger  emergency."   How  large  does  an  emergency  have  to  be
before  it  is a  total  disaster?  How  do  the  armed  forces  expect
to  go  on  operating  when  the  whole  supply  line  of  fuel,  food
and  ammunition  may  be  crippled   overnight?
Civil  Defense  Administrator  Val  Peterson,  in  his  testimony,
foresaw  "vast  elements  of  the  military  that  won't  be  able  to
go  anywhere the morning  after  the attack.  .  .  ."
This  is what  the  subcommittee  means when  it  says that  the
military  decline  to  recognize  that  nuclear  war  "demands  dras-
tic  changes  in  strategy  and  tactics."   Civil  defense  in  this  per-
spective  becomes  military  preparedness;  without  it  the  mili-
tary  machine would  quickly stall  in  giant  helplessness  for  lack
of  supply.   In  addition,  civil  defense  becomes  a  deterrent  as
important  as a  capacity for  retaliation.  To  know that  a country
is equipped  to  carry on  despite  atomic attack is  as  important  as
to  know  that  it  can  strike  back.
But   is   an   effective   civil   defense   possible?   Surprisingly
enough,  the  subcommittee marshals  impressive  scientific  evi-
dence  to  show  that  it  is.  We  will  summarize this  next  week.
The H-Bomb Humanized?  Or Just  Having Its  Face Lifted  by Madison Avenue?
"By eliminating the weapon's most repugnant element, the
mullimegaton  fusion  bomb  has thus  been  'humanized'. . . ."
—"H-Bomb  Improved  by  Fall-out Curb," story  by  William
L.  Laurence,  on  latest  statement   by  AEC  Chairman
Strauss, p.  19, New  York  Times,  July  &9.
"Possibly  the  world-wide  demand  for  cessation  of H-bomb
tests  and  for  outlawing  atomic  bombs  in   war   may  have
prompted  Mr. Strauss  to issue his reassuring statements.   ...
Just  how is  the  danger from  a  nuclear  explosion  minimized
or  localized?  Mr. Strauss  did not explain. . . . Scientists do
not  know  how  the  deadliness  of  a  nuclear explosion can  be
minimized."
—Waldemar  Kaempffert's    column "Science in  Review,"  p.
S,  Editorial  section,  same  day's   New   York   Times.
"I  am concerned over the  repeated pattern of applying  ad-
vertising  agency  techniques  to  alleviate  the  natural fears of
hydrogen  destruction. . . . An atom  or hydrogen  bomb burst
.  . .  without  dangerous radioactive fallout  would  be a mira-
cle.  Such  a  miracle has  not  been  achieved."
—Rep.  Holifield,   speech  in  the  House, July  26.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  August  6,1958
As    Variety   Would Say, the House Committee Lays an Egg (Several  of Them)
Nobody  seems  to  have  noticed  in  the  adjournment  rush  that
the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  beat  a retreat  on
its  effort  to grab  passports.  . .  .  Both  Dr.  Clark  Foreman and
Dr.  Otto  Nathan  refused  to  hand  over  their  passports  on  de-
mand;  the  former  wasn't  cited  at  all,  and  the  Committee  did
not  ask that  Dr.  Nathan  be  cited  for  refusing  to  hand  over  his
passport.  .  .  .  The  Committee  was bluffing  and  when  defied
was afraid  to  risk a court  test.  . . . The Committee  also backed
down on its threat  to cite Paul  Robeson for contempt.  . . As we
pointed  out  at  the  time,  being  contemptuous  of  the  Committee
—as  he  was—does  not  constitute  the  legal  crime  of  contempt.
In   Philadelphia,   the   House   Committee   hearings   boom-
eranged.  .  .  .  Gale  Sondergaard  played  to  packed  houses  in
"Anastasia" thanks  to the  Committee  and the  American  Legion
(which  couldn't  muster the picket line it threatened).  . . . The
ovations  given  her  had  the  kind  of  political  flavor  we  used  to
read  about  in  the Third  Reich, when the  only way people could
demonstrate  against  the  regime  was  to  cheer   such  plays  as
Schiller's  William  Tell and  its invocation  of  the  fight  for  free-
dom.  . . . One way to demonstrate in this country is to support
every  play whose  producers  have  the  courage  to  give  parts  to
hounded  artists  like Miss  Sondergaard  and  Jack Gilford  (Diary
of Anne Frank).   ...
Another  result  of  the  Philadelphia  hearings  is that  nine  dis-
tinguished  Philadelphia   Quakers,  including  Clarence  E.  Pick-
ett,  sent  a  "Dear  Friend"  letter  backing  Plymouth  Meeting  to
every  member  of  the  House  Committee  on  Un-American  Ac-
tivities.  .  .  .  The  letter  makes  the  point  that  the  decision  to
retain  Mrs.  Mary  Knowles  as  librarian   (despite  her  heretical
past  connection  with  the  Samuel  Adams  School  in   Boston)
was  endorsed  by  the  Civil  Liberties  Committee  of  the  Phila-
delphia  Yearly Meeting,  and  that  the  report of  the  Civil  Liber-
ties  Committee  was later  approved  by the Meeting  itself.  . . .
"In  a real  sense,  therefore,"  the  letter  says,  "any  implied  reflec-
tion  upon  the  action  of  Plymouth  Meeting  on  this  matter  is a
reflection  on our whole  Religious  Society  in  Philadelphia."   ...
The  letter  goes on to  say that  "it  is a matter  of  sorrow  to  us
Both  Walter  Bills  Killed
Both  the  Walter bill  on  passports and  the  Walter  bill
to  reverse  Cole  v.  Young  and  subject  all  government
employes  to  summary  discharge  on  "security" grounds
failed  to  pass  at  the  last  session  of  Congress. The Sen-
ate  Postoffice  and  Civil  Service  Committee  report,  like
that  of  the  New  York  Bar Association,  helped  block  the
Walter  bill  on  government  employes,  but  the Hennings
committee—which   had   studied  the  subject—deserves
criticism  for  failing  to  say  a  word  on  the subject.
that  division  in  a  religious  group  should  be  the  subject  of  in-
vestigation  by civil authority"  and  declares that  it  regards  such
inquiries  "as a serious transgression  upon  the  complete  division
between  church and  state,  which  is one of  the  important  foun-
dations of  our  democracy." The  letter  also  says  the  signers find
it  hard  to  believe  the  Committee  seriously thinks  "an  effort  to
express  Christian  belief  by giving  Mrs.  Mary Knowles employ-
ment  should  be  abandoned  because  of  outside  protest.   Is  the
conscience  of  the  church  to  be  subject  to  the  organized  pres-
sure of groups  of people who differ  from  it?"  .  . .
Memo  to  B'nai  Brith  Members
Compare  your  organization's  official  attitude  with  that  of
the  Friends:  "...     it  is  suggested  that  one who  does  not co-
operate  with a Congressional  committee,"  the  Library Commit-
tee of  Plymouth meeting wrote,  "should  be penalized by exclu-
sion  from  employment  in  his  chosen  field.  But,  when  silence
is the  exercise  of  a constitutional right,  to  penalize  that  silence
would  jeopardize  that  constitutional  right.  We  think  it  impos-
sible,  in  the  name  of  the  defense  of  democracy,  to  penalize  in
any  way the  exercise  of  rights  guaranteed  by  our  Constitution.
Such  rights,  however  unpopular,   must  be  available  without
penalty  to  all,  or  they will  mean  nothing  to  any  of  us."   Why
can't  B'nai Brith  take  the  same position  instead  of  declining  to
help  anyone who  takes  the  Fifth  or  declines  to  "cooperate"?
We'd   like  to  hear  from  rank  and  file  members  on  this.
A  Defeat for Adenauer-Dulles and A Nazi  Cartel  Which  Grew  Fat on  Slave  Labor
It  is  a  pleasure  to  record  the  failure  of  the  I.  6.  Farben
lobby  to  push  through  Congress  S.  4205  for  return  of Gen-
eral  Aniline  & Film.  The  bill,  to  return  all  seized  German
and  Japanese  assets,   was  reported by  the  Senate  Judiciary
Committee,  and  its  passage  was  a  prime  concern  of  Chan-
cellor  Adenauer  when  he  was  here.
Interestingly   enough,  little   effort   was   made   to   push
through  S.  2277,  which  provides  for  the  return  of  seized
property  worth  less  than  $10,000. This  would  taken  care  of
legitimate   German   and  Japanese  claims  but  its   passage
would  have deprived  I.  G.  Farben's  lobbyists of  a sentimen-
tal  appeal for  "the little fellow."
Failure  of  S.  4205  to  pass  was  also a  defeat  for Secretary
Dulles,  whose old  firm Sullivan & Cromwell  has represented
many  of  the big  German  cartels.  Though his  plea for  return
of  I. G. Farben's property  was  based on an  appeal  to respect
international  agreements,  he  cynically  waved  aside  Ameri-
can  obligation  under  the  1946 Paris  reparations agreement
not  to  make  such  restitutions.
Dulles's  argument  was  that  this  was  an "executive agree-
ment  . ..   without  authority whatever  to bind  the Congress,"
1  1
that  it  was  "not intended  to  operate in  perpetuity"  but  was
"designed  as a temporary measure perhaps to assure against
a  revival  of  German  militarism  and  the  use  of  German  im-
portant  commercial assets  possibly as  an  instrument of Ger-
man  militarism.  I  think  that  that  danger  has  passed.  .  .  ."
That  is  one  for  the  history books.
General  Aniline  & Film,  already purchased once  from  the
German  American  who  claimed  to  own  it,  was  used  by Ger-
many  to  cripple  American  production  of  synthetic  rubber
and  other  basic  war  materials.  Its  patent  agreements were
an  instrument  of  economic warfare,  the  other  half   of   the
giant  squeeze put  into  operation when  the  Japanese overran
the   natural   rubber  areas  of   Malaya   and  Southeast  Asia.
FDR  was  determined  that  it  should  never  go  back  to Ger-
man hands.
I.  G.  Farben,  the  German  parent  trust,  was  one  of   the
chief  beneficiaries  of  Nazi  slave  labor  and  of  those  "experi-
ments"  in  the  crematoria.  We  are  ashamed  to  report  that
Jewish  lawyers here  in  Washington,  a  Jewish  public  rela-
tions  firm,  and  ex-New  Dealers  took  part  in  the  lobby.    So
soon  do  we  forget.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  6,  1956
(Continued  from  Page  One)
wisely  handled, might  yet  lead  to  an  all-round stabilization  in
the  area.  At  the  moment  there  is  entirely  too  much hysteria;
the  Suez company only had  12 more years of  life  anyway; Nas-
ser  has been physically  in  control  of  the  Canal  since the  British
left  at  Dulles's  urging;  he  cannot  abuse his power  without  en-
dangering  all  his  projects  including  Aswan.  The  situation  is
far  from  being the  disaster  the  headlines picture it,  unless  Mr.
Dulles  makes some more blunders.  So far, in  the  Middle East,
he  has made nothing  but blunders ever since he  tried  to isolate
Nasser  and  punish  his  neutralism  by  organizing  the  Bagdad
Pact.
The  Jury  Sent  to  The  Nearest  Library  for  the    Corpus  Delicti
The  jury  in  New  York's  third  Smith  Act  trial  went  out  at
12:30  p.m. last  Monday.   "Shortly  before  3  p.m." according
to an account next morning  in the New York  Daily  News, "the
jury  sent  for  copies  of Karl  Marx's  works." What  the  jury dis-
covered  in  them  may  have  clinched  the   case  because   after
only ten hours of deliberation  it found all six defendants  guilty.
In  criminal  cases  the  jury  often  asks to  see the  scene  of  the
crime,  or  the  blunt  instrument  with  which  it  was  committed,
or  perhaps  to read again  that portion of  the testimony  in  which
the  accused  wavered  when  asked  where  he  was  on  the  fatal
night.  But  here  is a criminal prosecution  in  which  the  jury, in
trying  to  reach  a  verdict,  sends  out  for  some  books  written  a
century  ago.
Marx's  works would  not  have  been  needed  if  any of  the  de-
fendants  had  been  arrested  for  mounting  a  soapbox  in  Union
Square  and  calling  on  his  listeners  to  overthrow  the  govern-
ment,  or  if  any of  them  had  written  an  article  to  that  effect  in
the  Daily  Worker.  A  witness  to  the  speech,  a  photostat  of  the
article,  would  have  been  enough  to prove  them  guilty  of  advo-
cating  overthrow.   In  the  absence  of  such  testimony,  the gov-
ernment  had  to  put  the  works of  Marx  in  evidence  in  order  to
infer  from  these  works  that  the  defendants  as   self-confessed
Marxists  must  be getting  ready,  i.e. "conspiring,"  some  day  to
advocate  what  their   master   advocated.   In  this  sense   books
were  on  trial.   Men  were  being  tried  for  their  ideas;  not  for
crimes  they  had  committed  but  for  beliefs  they  were  suspected
of  holding.
Even  Twelve Tried and True Ph.iys    ...
Trials   of   this  kind  are  complex   ideological    disputations.
They  strain  the  jury  system.  Any  jury  can  judge  a  murder,  a
theft,  a  lovers'  quarrel,  an  assault.   But when  a  jury  sends  out
for  Marx,  it  is  sending  for  abstruse and  difficult  works over
whose meaning learned  men  dispute. The  literature of Marxist
exegesis  is  as  enormous  as  that  of  Christianity.  Two  world
movements—Socialist  and  Communist—are as bitterly divided
as  Protestants  and  Catholics  over  what  their  master  really  ad-
vocated.  Here  the  question  is submitted to  an  ordinary  jury  of
average  citizens  for  decision  in  a  few  days  or  hours.   We  can
see that jury leafing  through  the  Manifesto,   or  trying  to  puzzle
out  the  Critique of  Political  Economy, or  dipping  in bewilder-
ment  into  the  three volumes of  Das Kapital.  Under the  law  as
changed  at  this  past  session  of  Congress  men  may  be  sent  to
jail  for  as much  as  20  years on  what  a  jury  decides  from  such
evidence.
Does  being a Marxist  commit one to revolutionary action, as
the  Communists  have  insisted  when  they  were  free  to  speak
frankly ?  Or  can a Marxist  be  a gradualist  social  reformer  and
democrat,  as  the  Socialists  have argued ?  Sadly enough,  in  this
instance  the  jury  decided,  as  it  were,  in  favor  of  the  Commu-
nist  interpretation.   Had  this  been  merely  one  of  those old-
fashioned  political debates, Communist theoreticians would  un-
doubtedly have attributed  the  happy outcome  to  the  class  com-
position  of  the  jury.  There  was  only  one  capitalist  on  it,  a
blouse   manufacturer.  The   others   were   proletarians:   three
housewives,  three  salesmen,  a milk  truck driver,  a postal  clerk,
a  locksmith,  a machine  operator  and a  bookkeeper. This would
be  very  funny  if  men  were  not  being  sent  to  jail  in  consider-
able  part  on  what  such  juries  decide  a  German  exile  really
meant  by what he wrote  a hundred years ago in  the  England of
Queen  Victoria.  We  have  slipped  a  long  way from  the stand-
ards of  free  society when we take such trials  for  granted.  They
occur  nowhere  else  in  the  Western  world.    But  prosecutions
for  opinion  grind  on  here,  almost  unnoticed.
Don't  Forget—You  Con  Have  Free  Sample  Copies  for  The  Friends  You  Make  on  Vacation
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wagh.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Street  .....................  . ........................... • ................. ...'«..«............
City  ........................  . ................. Zone. ........... State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)  Name  .............................  ~ ............................................ ...
8/8/66
Street  ....
City                                        .....'.Zone...'.       State
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?   Tea  D    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Cvpitol  St.,  S.  E.
Wothinftoit  3.  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED