I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956sep03.pdf

============================================================

What  the  American  People  Have  Not  Been  Told  About  That  Soviet  Nuclear Test,  Page^
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IV,  NO.  33
SEPTEMBER  3,  1956
«o«      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Does  Adlai  Agree With  Nixon  on  Foreign  Policy?
One  episode  which  counts  heavily  against  Richard  Nixon  is
that  in  the  crisis  over  Indochina  he  sided  with  Admiral  Rad-
ford  and  Secretary  Dulles  for  intervention.   Nixon  was  ready
for  war  rather  than  compromise with  Ho  Chi-minh's  Commu-
nist  forces.   In  the  intra-Administration struggle,  the  war  par-
ty  led  by Nixon,  Radford  and  Dulles  lost  out  to  Secretary of
the  Treasury  Humphrey,   Secretary  of   Defense  Wilson   and
Army  Chief  of  Staff  Ridgway  who  persuaded  Eisenhower  to
keep  hands off and  let  the  French  make  a  settlement.  The  full
story  of  what  happened  is  not  known,  but  if  the  peace  party  in
the  Administration had  not  been  backed  by  an  anti-interven-
tionist  reaction  in  Congress,  Ike  might  have  decided  the  other
way  and  given  us  a  second  Korea  the  year  after  a  truce  had
ended  the  fighting  in  the  first.  So close were we  to  a  new  war.
What  would  the  Democrats  have  done  if  they  had  been  in
power?  Do  they  think  Eisenhower  made  the  wrong  decision?
Does   Adlai  Stevenson   agree  with  Nixon?    Does  Stevenson
think  we  should  have  gone  to  war  over  Indochina ? These  are
fundamental  questions for  all who think  peace  the No.  1 issue
in  this election. They  are  raised by the  statement which was  the
opening  gun  in  Stevenson's  campaign—the  analysis of  the  Re-
publican  platform  which  he  released  from  his  farm  at Liberty-
ville,  Illinois.   It  purports  to  be  a  point-by-point  refutation of
the  GOP  platform.   Point  2  of  the  document   deals  with  the
Republican   claim,   "The   advance  of   communism   has   been
checked."  And  this  is  what  the  document  released  by  Steven-
son has  to say:
"This  ignores  the  Communist  take-over  of  Northern   Viet-
nam,  in  which  the  Eisenhower  Administration  acquiesced  after
saying  that   Indochina   was  indispensable  to  the  defense  of
Southeast  Asia.   It  also  ignores  the  Communist  take-over  of
the  Tachen  islands  in  the  Formosa  straits  after  the  Adminis-
tration  had  forced  Chiang  Kai-shek  to  evacuate  them."
Is  This  "Leadership  and  Truth"?
How  is  this  extraordinary  passage  to  be  read?  "What  this
country  needs,"  Stevenson  said  in  his  acceptance  speech,   "is
leadership  and truth ?" Where is the leadership here  and  where
is  the  truth ? Are  these  words  about  Indochina  and  the  Tachen
islands  to  be  taken  seriously? Does  Stevenson  mean  them?  Or
is  this  just  the  usual  campaign   demagogy?  If  demagogy,  it  is
most  irresponsible.   Stevenson's  acceptance  speech  pictured  "a
new  America  which  everlastingly  attacks  the  ancient  idea  that
men  can  solve  their  differences  by killing  each  other."  Were
those  words  meant  to  be  taken  seriously ?  How  can  Stevenson
a  few  days later  release  as  his  own  a  document  which  implies
that  the  eight  years  of  futile  bloodletting  in  Indochina  should
have  been  continued,  if  necessary  by  an  infusion  of  American
blood?
Where  does  Stevenson  stand  on  the  overriding  issue  of
9  *                                                                                           1
peace?  Does  he  agree  with  Eisenhower  or with  Nixon?  Eisen-
hower  said  in  his  acceptance  speech  that  with  the  new  thermo-
nuclear  weapons   "war  has  become  not  just  tragic  but  prepos-
terous."   Nixon's  was  a  different   tune.   He  showed  himself
still  of  the  same  mind  as  when  he  sent  up  that  trial  balloon
for  American  intervention  in  Indochina,  with  U.S.  infantry  if
necessary.   Nixon  said—and  his  words  deserve  the  closest  at-
tention   against   the   background   of   the   Stevenson   release—
"Great  as the  temptation  may be  at  times  to  think  only of  our
security  at  the  moment,  we  shall  never  resort  to  this  cynical
type  of  compromise  which may  seem  to  promise  peace  for  our-
selves  but  which  would  inevitably  bring  war  or  surrender  for
our  children."
What  Children  Would  Be  Left?
Nixon  thought  the  Indochinese  settlement  a  "cynical  com-
promise."   Do  Stevenson  and  the  Democrats  agree  with  him?
Would  they  have  given  us  a  second  Korea  had  they  been  in
power?   Is  this  how  they  would  react  to  a  similar  crisis  in  the
future?   These  are  the  gravest  of  questions.   For  Eisenhower,
war  has become  not  only  tragic but  "preposterous"  as  a  means
of  settling  human  differences.  But  for  Nixon, war  is still  feasi-
ble,  necessary  and  sometimes  wise.   For  him  the  H-bomb  does
not  exist,  else  he  could  not  talk  of  preferring  the  risk  of  war
now  to  compromises  which  "would  inevitably  bring  war  or
surrender  for  our  children."  What  children  and  what  war  in
the  wasteland  a  third  and  thermonuclear   war  would  make of
this  planet?  This  is the kind  of  thinking  which  makes  us  fear-
ful  of  having  Nixon   succeed  Eisenhower.   But  what  kind  of
choice  do  we  have  if  Stevenson  launches  his  campaign  with
statements  which  agree with  Nixon ?
And  not  only  with  Nixon.   Let  us  go  to  Point  3,  in  the
document  from  Libertyville. This  purports  to rebut  the  Repub-
lican  boast,  "The  Korean  war  was  brought  to  a  close."   And
here  Stevenson   and  the  Democrats  are  not  ashamed  to  take
their  stand  with  Knowland.  All  the  Democrats  have  to  say in
rebuttal  is  this,  "Senate  Republican  leader  Knowland  has  de-
nounced  the  Korean  armistice  as a  'truce without honor' and  is
reported  to  have  denounced   suggestions   by  Eisenhower   and
Dulles  that  the  campaign  in  Korea  was a  victory  for  collective
security."  The  Democrats  and  Stevenson  were  content  to  deal
with  this  crucial question  of  the  campaign  with  this  single  sen-
tence  quoted  from  a New  York  Times  story  of  July  28,   1953
which  reported  how  bitterly  the  China  Lobby  and  the  China
Firsters   reacted   to  peace   in  Korea.   Knowland   and   Chiang
wanted  the war to go on.  Does Stevenson  agree  with  them?  Or
was he just being irresponsible? Does he think  this a serious is-
sue and  a  serious  campaign—or  just a  ball  game  in which  it  is
good fun to yell anything at the pitcher on the opposing  team?
{Continue  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone'* Weekly,  September S, 1956
Stevenson  Most  Shocking  In  His  Sour  Reaction  to  The  Summit  Meeting
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Against  this  background  let  us  go  back  to  Point  2,  and  re-
read   those  extraordinary  words   about   "forcing"   Chiang   to
evacuate  the  Tachen  islands  and  "ignoring"  the  Chinese  Com-
munist  repossession   of  those  islands.  Do  Stevenson  and   the
Democrats  believe  we  should  have  encouraged  Chiang  to  stay
in  the  Tachens?   Do  they  agree  with  Knowland  and  Chiang
that  we should  have  risked  war  with  China,  a major  war,  over
the  insignificant,  rocky,  barren  and  strategically   unimportant
Tachens?   The  evacuation  of  the  Tachens  in  January,   1953,
was the  second  biggest  avoidance of  war  "on  the  brink"  by the
Eisenhower  Administration.   Knowland  was  appeased   by  that
joint   Congressional   resolution   giving   Eisenhower   power   to
wage  preventive  war  over   China   which   only  a  handful  of
Democrats  led  by  Morse  and  Lehman  fought.
The  Need  For   Disengagement
The  most  important  problem  in  the  world  today is  slowly  to
disengage  the  United  States  from  involvement  in  the  Chinese
civil  war  and  the  Chinese  revolution,  to  get  Washington  to
recognize  realities  in  the  Far  East  and  to  permit  the  Pacific  to
settle  down  in  peace.   Stevenson  says  he  is  anxious  to  rebuild
American   prestige   abroad.   The   most   important   single   step
would  be  to  show  that  it  was  again  possible  for  America  to
talk  sense  on  China  and  get  out  of  the  emotional   shackles
welded  by  a  sinister  decade  of  political  propaganda  and  cor-
ruption  by Chiang's  henchmen, who  seek  to redress with Amer-
ican  blood  what  they  lost  by  their  own  incapacity.   Stevenson
knows  the  truth  about  this.   He  is  capable  of  the  leadership.
Will  he  give  us  a  little  of  the  truth  and  leadership  he  prom-
ised ?  Or  will  he  tie  his  own  hands  in  the  future  by  echoing
and  endorsing  all  this  wicked  China  lobby  nonsense?
Algeria  and Indochina:  How Equate  Them?
I want  to turn  for a moment  to  the  colonial  question.   Point
9  of  the  Stevenson  document  accuses  the  Republicans  of  con-
sistently  siding with  the  colonial  powers  and  blames  them  for
backing  France  in  Algeria.    How  can  this  be  equated  with
what  the  Democrats  have  to  say  of  Indochina?   First  of  all
they  talk  of  Indochina  as  if  it  were  not  at  all  a  French  prob-
lem  but  only  an  American problem.   France  was  bleeding  its
best  youth  in  Indochina;  the  longer  the  struggle  went  on,  the
more  Ho  was  pushed  into  dependence  on  Communist  China,
the  less  the  chance of  a  settlement  that  might  have  preserved
some  friendly  linkage  between  a  united  Vietnam  and  France.
The  French  wanted peace.in Indochina as we  wanted  peace  in
Korea;  they  felt  we were forcing them to continue the war  for
our own purposes.  They feel  the  upshot has  been that we  took
Southern  Vietnam from  their empire  and  added  it  to  ours.  All
Asia  sees  our  Indochinese  policy as  colonialism,  blames  Dulles
for  blocking the  peaceful  elections  promised  at  Geneva,  sees  a
divided  Indochina as another  open  wound  in  which the  germs
of  a  new  Korea  fester.  This  is  the  colonialism  Stevenson  and
the  Democrats  pass  over  in  silent  approval  while dismissing
the  far  more complex problem  of  Algeria with  an  oversimpli-
fied  slogan  that  must  deeply  offend  French  pride.  The  Arabs
have  rights  in  Algeria  but  so  do  the  French  and  it  would  be
the  part  of  a  wise  American statesmanship to  help  reconcile
them,  rather  than  to  exacerbate  ill  feeling.   This  again  is un-
worthy  of  Stevenson.
We  leave  to  the  last  the  most  disappointing  and  the  most
disturbing  point  of  all  in  the  Democratic  "rebuttal"  of  the
Republican  platform  insofar  as  it  deals  with  foreign  policy.
This  is Point  4, which  deals  with  "President  Eisenhower's  Suc-
cess  at  Geneva."  Nothing  in  the  statement  released  from  Lib-
ertyville  was more  small-minded.  Let  us remember  that  it  was
Senator  George,  the  Democratic  party's  foreign  policy  spokes-
man  in  the  Senate,  with  an  assist  behind  the  scenes  from  Ste-
venson  himself,  which  overcame  the  animosity of  Dulles  to  a
summit  conference  and  brought  Eisenhower  to  Geneva.  Dulles
had  hoped   by  the  premature  release  of  the  Yalta  papers   to
smear  both  the  Democrats  and  the  idea of  a new top  level  talk.
The  British  and  French  had  been  angrily  pressing  for  such  a
conference.   It  was necessary  to  break  the  stale  ice of  the  cold
war.   It  was urgent  if  mankind  were  to  be  saved  from  drift  to
a thermonuclear  war.
The  Smiles  Were  Mutually  Beneficial
How  Senator  George must  blush  at  the  pettiness  with which
Stevenson  and  the  Democrats  dismiss  what  was  in  large  part
George's  achievement!  All  they  have  to  offer  on  the  complex
problems  involved  is this,  and we quote  it  in its entirety:   "The
Communists actually used the Geneva conference to their propa-
ganda  advantage.  The  New  York  Times  reported,  for  example,
(8/28/55)  that  they  used  'smiling  photographs   of   President
Eisenhower  and  Premier  Bulganin  to  their  own  advantage'  in
Western  Europe  to  give  respectability  to  Communist  parties  in
Western   Europe  and  to  lessen  agitation  in  Eastern   Europe."
No  more than  this  on the turning  point  of  our time,  the  begin-
ning  of  the  slow  tide  back  toward  peace  and  co-existence.
Let  us  look  at  these  two  mangy sentences  more  closely.   Of
course,  the  Communists  actually used  the  Geneva  conference  to
their   propaganda   advantage.    But  so   did   we.   Eisenhower
dramatized  for  all  the  world  to  see  that  the  President  of  the
United  States  was  not  a  warmonger,  that  he  was  prepared  to
meet  in  friendly  spirit  with  the  Communist  leaders,  that  he
was ready to  embark  upon  that  relaxation  of  tension  which  all
the  world's  peoples  desire.   This  image  of  a  peaceful  America
rebutted   a  decade  of  Communist  propaganda   and  neutralist
fear.   It  was  Eisenhower's  greatest  success  and  an  American
triumph.   It  made  us  new  friends  everywhere.   And  far  from
lessening  agitation  in  East  Europe,   it   encouraged   the  thaw
which  is  loosening  the  iron  grip  of  dictatorship  and   offering
some  hope  at  last  of  freedom  in  the  Soviet  bloc.
Too  Much   "Bipartisanship"
Against  this background we  read  with  dismay the complaint
in  the  Stevenson document that  the  Republicans failed  to carry
on  a  bipartisan foreign  policy,  especially  the  statement  "Most
notably,  it  [the  Eisenhower Administration]  has  appointed  no
Democrat  to  the  high  policy  post  in  the  State  Department
which  Dulles  himself  occupied  under  the  Democrats."   Dulles
and  the  Democrats  were much  too  congenial.  The  policies  of
Truman  and  Acheson were  more  in  accord  with  the  views of
Dulles  and  Nixon  than with  those of  Eisenhower and  George.
We  thought  Stevenson  agreed  with  George.   We   looked   to
Stevenson  for  a  continuation of  the  thaw.  We  cheered  him  in
1952   for  his  break with the  stale cliches of  Truman's  cold  war.
We  want  him  now  to  make  clear  that  he  does  not  stand  with
Richard Nixon.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, September  S,  1959
Worm's  Eye  View  of  the  Coming  Campaign  from  A  Vacationing  Capitol
The  campaign begins with  the  Republicans  afraid  of  sound-
ing  reactionary, the  Democrats  of  sounding  too  liberal.  .  .  .
Eisenhower,  a  captive  of  the  Republicans,  would  like  nothing
better than a brain truster  like Stevenson;  Stevenson  would  feel
quite  comfortable as Eisenhower's  Secretary  of  State.  .  . . The
inhibitions  of  both  parties  and  the  basic  agreement   of   both
candidates  make for  a  phoney  campaign.  ...    It  will  be inter-
esting  to  see what  happens  when  it  reaches  the   mud-slinging
stage.  . . .
Can  the  Democrats  Win?
Gin the Democrats  win? ...   I  believe  they  can.  . . . Three
factors  work  in  their  favor:  the  patronage-hungry  South  will
be  regular  this  time;  the  farmers  have  been  doing  badly  and
like  Kefauver; Nixon  will  cost  the Republicans  votes.  ...    In
addition,  no  one  really  knows  what  effect  the  President's  two
illnesses  have  had  on  public  thinking;  one  mild  upset  before
November  might  swing  the election.... There is also that curi-
ous  remark by the  President  that  he was going  to  have  another
checkup  before  the  election,  and  would  then  let  the  country
know  whether he  could  serve.  .  . . The  Democrats  may easily
overdo  the  health  issue;  nobody  really  dislikes  the  President—
except  the  McCarthy  crowd;  exuberant  emphasis  on  a  man's
misfortunes  goes  against  the  grain  of  decent,  ordinary feeling;
there  is danger  of a  boomerang  against  the  Democrats.  .  . .
The  Glamor  Is  Gone
An  important  element  in  the  campaign  is  that  Stevenson  is
no  longer  the  hero  he  was in  1952.  .  .  .  Everywhere one en-
counters  a  vague  dissatisfaction  and  disillusion  with  the  man;
rarely  does  one  come  across  the  enthusiasm  of  four  years  ago.
.  . .  In.part  this  is due to the fact  that  as front-runner  for the
nomination,  Stevenson  was well  advised  to  be cautious;  he  had
everything  to  lose  by saying  too  much.  .  .  .  But one  of  the
problems  now is to reawaken  the old enthusiasm.  . .  . Steven-
son  sounds  as if  he  has  heard  so much  criticism of  his  wit  and
brains  that  he  is afraid  to  use them.  ...    He  lacks  something
usually  essential  in  politics:  a  certain  virile,  regular  guy  qual-
ity.  ...    But a man can only  make up  for  what  he  lacks  by be-
ing  more  fully  and truly  himself.  . .  . Nothing  was more flat-
tering  than  to have  Stevenson  talk  to the  voters  on the assump-
tion  that  they  were  as bright  as he.  ...    I  am in favor  of  a so-
called  high  level  campaign  because  that  is natural  to  Stevenson
and  his only hope  is to be himself.  . . .
Which  Is  Better  on  Israel?
On  the  Israel  issue in the campaign:  the  Democrats  are  more
friendly  to  Israel  than  the  Republicans,  though  that  did  not
keep  the  State Department  bureaucracy from  being  its  own  na-
tural  hostile  self  under  Truman.  . . . The Democratic  platform
promises  the arms  Israel  needs  very  badly.  .  . . Dulles  is basi-
cally  anti-Israel  and  anti-Jewish;  he  took  quite  cozily  to  the
Nazis   and  was  isolationist   and   against   aid   to  Britain  and
France  when it  looked  as if  Hitler  might  overrun  Europe.  . . .
Eisenhower  is a  man  of  quite  a  different  point  of  view,  but  he
accepts  the  Pentagon  attitude  that  basically  Israel  is a  nuisance
which  endangers  bases  in the Arab  States.  .  . .  Unfortunately
Stevenson  has  been  subjected  to  too  much  high  pressure  from
Zionist  friends,  and  tends  to  react  the other  way.  .  .  .  Over-
selling is a  danger  here.    ...
1  3
Tribute  to Lehman
We  join in  saluting  Herbert  Lehman  on his  retirement  from
public  life.  .  .  .  We  know  of  no  man  in  our  time  who has
made  a  more  honorable  and  progressive   record  as  Governor
and  Senator.  ...    He  will  be missed  in the  Senate,  which has
too few men of his stature.  . . . We do not see Mayor Wagner
as a  substitute  nor as the man his father  was.  .  .  . Any Mayor
who  would  pick  Peter  Campbell  Brown  as  his  chief  law  officer
gives no  promise  of  anything  but  adding  to  those  voices  in  the
Senate  which  undermine the Bill of Rights.  . . . While Brown
appeals  the  recent  Allen  decision  that  teachers  need  not  in-
form,  Wagner  cannot  pose  as a liberal.  ..  . We would  vote for
Javits  on  the  Republican  ticket  against  any  Democratic  nomi-
nee  now  in  sight,  just  as  we  would  vote  for  John  Sherman
Cooper  if  we  lived  in  Kentucky, and  for  same  reasons:  both
men  in  Congress  showed  great  courage  and  understanding on
fundamental  civil  liberties  issues.  .  .  . Why don't  the  Demo-
crats  nominate Celler ? We  know of  no  other  Democrat  whose
years  of  service  in  Congress  and  whose  integrity  and  liberal-
ism  better  qualify  him to  step  into  Lehman's  shoes.  .  . .
The  Riesel  Case
We  don't  believe  in  trial  by newspaper  and  dislike  the  kind
of  publicity ballyhoo in  which  the  FBI  and  District Attorneys
customarily  indulge.  .  .  .  Whether  Johnny  Dio  and  Charles
Tuso  arranged  the  acid  attack  which  blinded  Victor  Riesel  is
for  a jury to determine.  . . . But the  case will  not be solved un-
til  the higher-ups who paid  for  this attack have been  convicted.
...   What is already convicted,  however,  is the labor movement
which  has  too  long  allowed  itself  to  be  infested  with  known
racketeers,  gangsters  and  strong-arm  men.  .  .  .  Union  locals
are  too  often  bought  and  sold  for  the  money  which  can  be
milked  from  them,  especially welfare fund  and  insurance prof-
its.  ...    It  is shocking  that  a  newspaperman who has crusaded
against  these  crooks  can  be  blinded  in  the  middle  of  a  great
city  like New York  and arouse  so little public  indignation. . . .
Most  shocking  of  all  is  the  kind  of  silly,  vicious  talk  to  be
heard  from  those  who dislike  Riesel's views.  . . . This  acid at-
tack  was  an  attack  on  a  free  press,  and  a  fundamental  chal-
lenge to  society.  ...    To let the  gangsters  get away with  it  is to
encourage  them  to  expand  their  dictatorship  from  the  cowed
locals they  control  to wider  circles.  . . . The Riesel  case  ought
not to end until public  outcry has forced  the  AFL-CIO to  clean
house;  there  are  already  places  in  the  top  hierarchy of Ameri-
can trade  unionism  where  it  is hard  to  tell  whether  a  man  is a
genuine  union  leader  or  just a  racketeer  who graduated.  .  . .
A  Glance Abroad
London  and  Paris  will  regard  as  most  unfriendly  the  State
Department's  allowing  Egypt  to  recruit  Suez  Canal  pilots  in
this  country. . . . West  Germany,  which  would  like to replace
the  British  and  France  in  Egypt,  is  also  allowing  Kiel  canal
pilots  to be  recruited  there.  ...    In  this,  as on  so many similar
issues,  a  discreet  Washington-Bonn  axis  is visible.  .  .  .  Note
that  censorship  in  Moscow  suddenly broke  off  transmission  of
an  Associated  Press  dispatch  dated  August  23  which  quoted
Krushchev  as  saying  at  a  Rumanian  celebration  that   if  war
breaks  out  over  Suez,  "the  Arabs will  not  stand  alone.    It  will
be  a  just  war and there  will  be volunteers."  .  .  . The man is
really  irresponsible.  . . .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's Weekly,  September 3,1956
What  Our Easy  Detection  of  the  New  Soviet  Nuclear  Test  Really Means
This  May  Be  Humanity's   Last  Chance  and  It  Is  Slipping  By  Unnoticed
Criminal  is  not  too  strong  a  word  for  the  failure  of  our
press  and  political  leadership  to  bring  home  to  the American
people   the   real   significance.  of   our  announcement  that  the
Soviets  had  made a new  nuclear test.   This  is  what  it  means:
1.  The  Russians  cannot  make  such  a  test  without  our  know-
ing  about  it.    2.   This  in  turn  means  that  if  an  international
agreement  is  reached  to  ban  further  thermonuclear  tests,  it  is
enforceable  without  any elaborate  system of  inspection.  A  self-
enforcing  agreement  is still  possible  in  this  limited  but  crucial
area.
3.  It  is in  this  area  that  the  new  terror,  the  intercontinental
ballistic  missile  is  being  developed.   The   IBM  will  have  a
thermonuclear  warhead.  We   could  still  prevent   its  develop-
ment  by world  agreement  banning  further  tests.  According  to
Ralph  Lapp,  the  relatively  small  size of  the  Soviet  blast  means
that  they  were  testing  such  a  missile,  though  not  yet of  inter-
continental  range.
Once  the  IBM  is  developed,  the  world  picture  may be  revo-
lutionized  strategically  in  so  fundamental  a  sense  as  to  trans-
form  the  thinking  of  mankind.   Foreign  bases  and  allies  will
no  longer  be  essential.  The  possibility  of  sudden  attack  will  be
so terrifying that a Fortress  America and  a Fortress  Russia may
glower  at  each  other  in  mutual  panic  across  a world  in-between
which  could  be  rendered  a  wasteland  overnight.
Not  Just  A  Technological   Problem
As  we  get  closer  to  the  IBM,  fear  and  tension will  increase.
This  increase will  make  more  difficult  the  only  solution  which
will begin  to  seem  adequate:  a system of  mutual  inspection,  on
the ground  and  from the air, so much more extensive than any-
thing  yet envisaged  as to  become a  form  of  world  government.
Yet  there  is  no  prospect  whatsoever  of  achieving  such  a  solu-
tion,  given  the  cave-man  era  hates  and  suspicions  which  still
govern  the  heart  of  man,  whether  he  lives  under  capitalism  or
communism,  democracy or  dictatorship.
An  added  complexity  may  soon  make  itself  felt.   Both  the
Americans  and  the  Russians are  expansionist  in  the  same  way,
like  giants spreading  their  limbs  over  a  continent,  but  neither
are  aggressive  militaristic  powers.  What  happens  when   such
weapons—including  the  missile—are in  the  hands  of  peoples
like  the  Germans and the  Japanese with  a strong  military caste
and  tradition ?
In   the   shadow  of  these   vast   changes,   a  Russo-American
agreement   as  the  cornerstone   of  a  world  agreement   against
further  tests  could  save humanity.  The  immediate obstacle  has
been  British  unwillingness   to  foster  such  an  agreement  until
Britain,  too, has  the  H-bomb  and  can  sit  in  on  the thermonu-
clear  Great  Power  poker  game.  With  the  British  tests  of  next
spring,  British  opinion  will  become an  ally  in  the  drive  against
further    testing.
Only  Stevenson  Has  Spoken  Up
In  this  country  the  Pentagon  and  the  Atomic Energy  Com-
mission    (except   perhaps    for   Commissioner    Murray)   are
against  any  ban  on  tests.    One  of  the  reasons  for  the  hatred
and  suspicion  of  Robert  Oppenheimer   is  that  he  was  one  of
those  scientists  who  urged  that  the  U.S., instead  of  embarking
on  a  crash  program  for  the  H-bomb  under  Truman,   try  first
for  a  self-enforcing  no-test  agreement  with  the  Russians which
could  have  shut   the   door   on  development   of   the   H-bomb
altogether.
The  one  American political  figure  who  has  had  the  courage
to  speak  out  at  all  is Adlai  Stevenson  in  his  address  last  April
21 to  the  American  Society of  Newspaper  Editors  in  Washing-
ton.    He  suggested  that  the  U.  S.  call  off  its  hydrogen  bomb
tests  this  year. The  Soviet  Union  formally  proposed  a  ban  on
,  all  hydrogen  weapon  tests  at  London  last  March   31;  Nehru
urged  it  several  years ago.
In  discussing  the new Soviet  test,  the New  York  Times  tried
to  explain  why we,  unlike  the  Russians,  could  not  test  on  our
own  territory:  "We have more  important  cities to consider  . . .
there  are  vast  stretches   in  the  Soviet  Union   where   nuclear
weapons  could  be detonated  safely."   But the  Times  did  not  go
on  to point out  the  corollary:  we are more  vulnerable  than  the
Soviet  Union.  We  have  an  even  greater  interest  than  Moscow
in  putting  a  stop  to  this  race  toward  the  IBM.  Are  there  no
Americans  left  of  sufficient  stature—with  courage  to  match—
who  can  open  up  this  subject  effectively  for  public  discussion?
his  Year  With  Our  Urgent  Independent  Message     Help  Vs  By  Gift   Subs  to  Reach More  Readers  T
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3,  D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street  ....
City                                            Zone           State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name
9/3/56
City                                            Zone           State
City                                        .Zone.          State
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?   Yes  D    No  D
IE   Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D. C
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED