I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956mar26.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive;  The  New  Walter  Bill  to  Deprive  Radicals  of  The  Right  to  Travel,  Page  3.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  12MARCH  26,  1956
""      WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
Stalin's   Exposure  Is   Communism's Self-Exposure
In  The  Muddy  Wake  of The  Moscow  Melodrama
Always  resolutely non-conformist, we are preparing to make
our  own Stalin  awards this  year.   We  are conferring the prize
for  understatement on  William  Z.  Foster  for  his  delicate com-
ment  in  the  Daily  Worker  of  March  16.   Mr.  Foster  ventured
to  assert that  Stalin was guilty of  "incorrect  methods  of work."
This  was  bold  indeed.
Our  Stalin  prize  for  the  most  bewildering historical analogy
of  the  year  goes  to  the  Alsop  brothers.   They  concluded  their
column  of  March  19  on  "The   End  of  Stalin"  by  comparing
Krushchev  with  Marcus  Aurelius.   Even  an  editor  of   Pravda
would  hesitate  blushingly  before  going  that  far.
Of  course,  the  Alsops  did  not  mean  this  as  adulation.   "Of
course,"  they  wrote  indignantly,  "the  Soviet  has  changed.   So
did  Rome  change  when  .  .  .  Vespasian  won Nero's  purple.
The  good  emperors  were certainly  better  than  the  bad  emper-
ors.   But  alas  they  were  not  better  for  Rome's   neighbors."
(Presumably  the  Alsops think  it  would  have been  better  if  the
barbarians  had  been  allowed  to  engulf  Rome  several  centuries
earlier.)  Even the  best  of  those  better  Emperors, Marcus  Aure-
lius,  wrote  his  Meditations  "in  the  field,"  the  Alsops  pointed
out,  "and   the  Romanians of  our  own  day  owe  the  language
they  still  speak  to  the  philosopher-emperor's  career  as  a  stern
conqueror."  (Would  the  Alsops  rather  the  Romanians  spoke
their  original  Slavic dialect  like  the  Bulgarians?)  Dizzily  high
up  on  the  scaffolding  of  their  new  world  history,  the  Alsops
concluded,  "Krushchev  is no  philosopher  ruler,  but  once again
the  parallel  fits."  Try  hard  as  we  can,  the  only  fits  we can see
are  those  fits  of. historical  parallelism  which  sometimes  seize
journalists.
Our  better  columnists  are  not  alone  in being  haunted  by the
fear  that  the  Soviets  may really  be  reforming.  If  the  Russians
don't  stop  fraternizing  with  visiting  Baptists, it's  going  to  be
hard  to get  the  foreign  aid  bill  through  Congress.    In  his  for-
eign aid  message Mr.  Eisenhower  did  indeed  say that  "the  new
turns  and  developments  of  Soviet  policy"  demonstrated   "the
success  of  our  mutual  security  programs"   but  hastened  to  as-
sure  our  lawmakers  that  Soviet  leaders  have  not  abandoned
"their  sinister  designs."   If  Moscow  wants  peaceful  co-exist-
ence with  Washington,  it  could  adopt  no  better  way to  demon-
strate  its  sincerity  than  by  obliging  us  each  spring  at  budget
time with a  few  "sinister  designs"  in  full  view  of  Capitol  Hill
like  those  Soviet  submarines  the  Navy  sights  offshore  when-
ever  Congress  begins  to  get  economical.   We  can  visualize  a
gentlemen's  agreement  arranging  in  return  for  a  few  of  those
"weather  testing"  flights  over  Moscow  if  the  Soviet  Congress
4
Was  Stalin  Killed  By  His  Own  Comrades?
The mystery in  Moscow is  why  the  new  top  leadership
has  gone  so  much  further  than  seems  necessary  in  its
attacks  on  Stalin.   It  is  possible  that  Stalin's  name  is
being  so  thoroughly blackened in  order  to  prepare  the
public   for   a   new  revelation—that  his   own  comrades
were  forced  to  liquidate the  dictator  to  save  themselves
and  Russia.
Notice  that  in  his  address  of  February  25, Krushchev
is  reported to have  told  the  Communist  Party  Congress
that  toward the  end  of  his  life  Stalin  considered  Mar-
shal  Voroshilov  a  British  spy  and  barred  hint  from  the
Politbureau.    Molotov   was   placed   under  house   arrest
and,  according to  these  reports, Stalin  planned to  get  rid
of   Molotov,  Krushchev  and  others   "in  the   immediate
future."
These   leaders   knew,  then,  that   they   were   doomed.
Were  they  prepared to  meet  their  fate  without  resist-
ance ?   Was it only the happy coincidence  that Stalin died
at  that  point which saved  the  top  leadership  from  a  new
blood  purge?  Or  did  they  in  desperation  decide  to  re-
move  the old monster  (as  they  now  paint him)?  Is  this
revelation  to  be  the  climax  of  the  Moscow melodrama?
ever  gets  to  the  point  of  acting  up  over  their  defense  and  for-
eign  aid  budgets.    Bulganin  was  wrong  to  offer  a  friendship
pact. What  we  need  is a  20-year  mutual  menace part.
The  State Department and the White  House are not  the only
branches  of  government  discomfited by  the  new  developments
in  Moscow.  They  also  create  difficulties  for  the  FBI.   Krush-
chev's  revelation  that  Stalin  was  a  bloody  old  tyrant,  suspici-
ous  to  the  point  of  madness,  may  not  lead  to  the  liquidation
of  foreign  Communist  parties  but  must  strike  them  an  irre-
parable  blow.   Their  members  may  be  devoted,  but  they  cer-
tainly  are  exposed  as knuckle-heads taught  to  believe  and  obey
whatever  lies  they were  told  from  Moscow.  (See  for   example
the  naive plaint  of  Alan  Max,  the  Daily  Worker's  managing
editor,  "We  went  overboard  ...     in  denying  any  suggestion
that  civil liberties  were  not being firmly  respected  in  the  Soviet
Union.")  Stalin's  exposure  is  Communism's  self-exposure  and
the  lessons  are  (1)   that  Russia  is  too  backward  a  country  to
provide  leadership  elsewhere,  (2)   that  the  slavish  conformity
of  the  Communist  parties  to  Moscow  has  stultified  a  whole
generation   of  radical  leadership,  and  (3)   it  is  time  for  the
Left  to  break  away  from  all  Communist  influence  and  strike
out  on  a  new  path  determined  in  each  country  by its  own  con-
ditions  and   traditions.    The   liquidation   of   the   Communist
{Continued  on  Page  Four)
4   I
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'$  Weekly,  March  tt,   18ft
Hopeful  Testimony  on  Disarmament   Most  of  the  Press  Ignored
Defense  Secretary  Wilson  Optimistic  About  Arms  Agreement  With  Russia
Because  most of  the  frees  ignored  and  no paper  reported
fully   Secretary  Wilson's  testimony on  disarmament  before
the  Senate's Humphrey  subcommittee  on March  IS,  we  are
here  making  the  salient portions available  verbatim.   They
indicate  that despite  the  general reluctance  of  the  (AS. gov-
ernment  to  enter into  any  real  agreement  for  arms  reduc-
tion as  contrasted  with arms inspection, there are   powerful
figures  in  the  Cabinet  who  take  a  more  hopeful   view.  We
believe  Mr.   Wilson's   testimony  deserves  wide  circulation,
and  confirms   what  we  have  long  reported—that   the  Sec-
retary  of  Defense   is  a  friend  of  peace.
SENATOR   SYMINGTON.  Do  you  believe that  our  chances  for
a  successful disarmament  result  are  better  if  we are  stronger
than  the  Communists, or  do you feel that that  is  not  impor-
tant  to  the  disarmament  negotiations?
SECRETARY   WILSON.  ...      I  -would  think  the  chances of
realistic  discussion  and  progress  in  it  would  be  greater  if
both  parties  felt  they  were  dealing  from  strength.     ...
The  men in this  room will  remember  ...    in the early and
middle  thirties,  we had  a  different  situation  in  our  country
in  the  rise  of  our  labor  movement, and  a  new  conception of
how  labor  should  be treated.
Sees  A  Parallel  in  Labor  Relations
We  started  out  with  the  sitdown  strikes  in  the  automotive
industry;  and  at  that  time very  few people  would have  been
willing  to  bet  that  15 years  later  the  relations  between  the
management and the  unions would have been so improved that
we  achieved  a  five-year  agreement;   and  we  did  not  make
much  progress  until,  No.  1, we were  willing  to  talk  to  them
and,  No. 2, we realized  the  position  that  labor  had  and that
they  could  operate   from  strength  and  force,  and  that  we
were  (sic)  parties,  and  either  could  precipitate  a  disastrous
strike  or  we  could  get  together  and  work  for  the  good  of
the  people  and  for  bur  respective  unions,  management,  and
the  workmen  themselves.
Must  Define  Our  Common  Objectives
Perhaps  one reason,  in  a  peculiar  kind  of  a  way,  I  am a
little  more  optimistic  than   some  other  people,  may  be  be-
cause  in a  peculiar  kind  of a  way they  are  the  same  kind of
problems,  and  you have  to  first  talk  about  it,  you have  to
define  your  common  objectives,  and  let  your  differences  slide
off  into  the  background, instead  of  accentuating  your  differ-
ences  and forgetting  that  you have  many things worth  while
in  common.
And I happen to think that the mass of the people in  Russia
do  not  want  a  war  any  more  than  the  mass  of  Americans
want  a  war,  and  they  hope  and  pray  that  their   respective
leaders  on  both  sides  will  be  smart  enough  and  imaginative
enough  to  find  some way  of  averting  that  disastrous   war.
SENATOR   SYMINGTON,  [evading  the  pointj  Then  as  I  un-
derstand  it  from  your  answer,  you  believe that  it  is  a  good
idea  to  negotiate  from  a  position  of  relative  strength, if  pos-
sible,  instead  of  one of  relative  weakness,  is  that  right?
SECRETARY  WILSON.  That  is  correct.    ...
SENATOR   BARKLEY.  In  regard   to  the  effectiveness  of  this
aerial  inspection, I  think  it  has  been  conceded  by  all  the
witnesses  who have  testified  here  on  the  subject,  that  up  to
no\v  there  has  been  no  device  invented  or  is  now  in  sight
which  would  enable  any  or  either  nation  to  inspect with  any
degree  of accuracy  what  is underground.   ...
"There's  Always  A  Hole"
SECRETARY  WILSON.  You know most things  that  are  under-
ground, there is a  hole that  you can get to  it.
SENATOR   BARKLEY.  But .  .  .  certainly  in a  vast   country
like  Russia  and  a  country  like  China, unless  there  was  some
sort  of  perpetual  inspection,  which probably  would  be impos-
sible  to  get  agreement  on, there might  be vast  areas  in  those
countries  where  they  could  engage  in  a  massive  movement of
concealment  by putting  their  materials  underground,  and we
could  not  detect  them  by  any  form  of  aerial  inspection  now
in  existence,  is that  true?
It's   The Attitude  That  Counts
SECRETARY  WILSON.  If  I  may  say  so,  Senator,  I  think  you
have  overstated  the  thing  a  little  bit.   The real  problem  is
one  of  attitudes  as  between  the  parties.
SENATOR   BARKLEY.  I  did  not  get  that
SECRETARY   WILSON.  I  say,  the  big  problem,  finally  is  one
of  attitude  between the  parties. If  the parties  are  really  try-
ing  to  carry  out  the  agreement,  and  you  have  sufficient  in-
spection  to  audit  it,  you can tell  whether,  without  doing it  to
perfection,  just  like  auditing  the  financial  activities  of  a  big
corporation,  yon can  pretty  well  tell  whether  there  are  any
crooks  in  the  place  or  not.
Somebody may do a  little local  stealing once in a  while, but
you can tell whether  the thing is being run right or not.  . . .
Russia  To  Be  Great  Industrial  Power
I  was trying  to  make  the  point  a  while  ago,  when  I  was
talking  about  negotiating  from  strength  on  both  sides,  that
there is no way that I  can see that we can keep  the  Russians
from  having great industrial power within  a  reasonable  num-
ber  of years.  They have  the  resources  in  their  country,  they
have  the  population,  they  have  the  ambition.
And  while  certainly  we  must  keep  equal  or  ahead  of  the
Russians   in  all  this  new  development  and  in  our  military
power, we must  keep ahead  until  some kind of an  understand-
ing  can  be worked out.  We might  as  well recognize now that
they  are going  to have.  . .  .  great  military  and  industrial
power  some  day,  and  that  we  could  well  afford,  in  all  our
discussions   with  them,  to  recognize   «  relative  equality  of
power,  potentially,  even  if  it  may  not  exist  today,  and  not
try  to put  on the  Russians  or  the  rest of  the  world  any  kind
of  a  position that  is  in  any  sense  dominated by the  fact  that
we  have  this  superior  military  power.  In  my  opinion, if  we
try  that, we would not make  much headway  with  it.    ...
Bigger  and  bigger  military power, in my opinion, is not  the
solution  for  the  problems of  the  world.  It  is  a  necessity  for
our  country,  while  the  present  situation  exists,  to  maintain
this  strength,  and  keep  ahead;  but  if  we  overdo  it,  we  will
not accomplish the  purpose we are starting out to achieve, and
that  is, establish  a  condition  of peace  in the world.  . . .
How  Arms  Races  Lead  to  War
I  happen  to  think,  also, that the  less  the  burden  of  arma-
ments  on  peoples  like  the  Russians  and  ourselves,  the  less
the  likelihood of war.    ...
If  we go into  an  all-out  armaments  race  between  the  Rus-
sians  and  ourselves,  putting  a  bigger  and  bigger   percentage
of  the  productive  effort  of  the  country  into  preparation  for
war  as  against  the  peacetime pursuits  (sic)  being the  stand-
ard  of  living  of  the  respective  peoples,  and  you  carry  that
on  out  to  an  extreme,  you  will have the  people  so  heated  up
in  one way  or  another,  or  in  their  country,  what  has  hap-
pened  in  the  past  history  of the  world might happen  again—
they  will engage in a foreign war  to try  to maintain  the  hold
of  the  people of  either  country,  to  make  them  stand  for  the
big  sacrifices involved in a  tremendous armaments  race. . . .
I  do not  happen  to  go  on  the  basis  of trying  to  work  out
something  by accusing the  other  party  of  bad faith.   I  would
not  start  out on that  basis.  But  I  would  try  to  establish  a
system  so we could  establish  his  good  faith.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'*  Weekly,  March  tt, 1958
Unnoticed  by  the  Press,  Walter  Launches A Weird  Theory and A New  Anti-Travel Bill
A  Conspkacy   to  Apply   for  Passports  In  The  Hope  of  Being  Rejected?
A  moat extraordinary  gap  in  Washington  coverage  was  the
failure  of the  press  generally  to notice  Congressman  Walter's
new  bill  to  give the  State  Department  statutory  authority  to
deny  passports  on  political  grounds  and  to  refuse  passport
applicants  the right  to  confront  their  accusers.
Overwrought  seems to be the charitable way to  describe  the
strange  theory  of  passport  cases  expounded by  Congressman
Walter  in  introducing  the  bill  on  March  14.  "More  and  more
Communists  and  people under  Communist discipline,"  he  told
the  House,  "apply  for  passports  knowing full  well  that  the
Secretary  of  State  has  the  right—the  duty  rather—to  deny
their   applications.   After  denial,  they  take  their  cases  to
court  in  order  to  break  the  doors  to  the  secret  files.  There
they  want  to  find  names  of  those  who keep  an  eye  on  their
activities."
"The  success  of  the  Communist  plan,"  he  went  on,   "has
been greatly  enhanced by some of  the  court  decisions,  holding
that  when  the  Secretary  of  State refuses  to  issue  a  passport
to a  Communist, he must  disclose  to the  applicant  the  source
of  information  which caused  the  refusal."
The fact  is, of course, that in no case  has  the  State  Depart-
ment yet given a passport applicant  that  "quasi-judicial   hear-
ing"  ordered  in  the  Otto  Nathan  case,  or  that  right  to  con-
front  accusers  ordered  by  Judge  Youngdahl  in  the  Leonard
Boudin   passport   litigation.    The   Department   has   either
granted  the  passport  or  appealed  the  decision.
A  Strange  'Day  in  Court'
To combat this  supposed conspiracy  to  apply  for  passports
in the  hope of being rejected,  Mr. Walter  introduced  HE  9991.
The  purpose  of  the  bill,  as  Mr.  Walter  explained  it,  was  to
give every  citizen  applying for  a  passport  "his  day in  court."
The bill  provides for  a  strange  kind of "court."
The  applicant  need  not  be  fully  informed  of  the  charges
against him; he would not get a chance to confront  and cross-
examine  hostile  witnesses;  the  hearings  officer  is  directed  to
use  confidential  information.   "Proceedings,"  the  bill  says,
"shall  be  conducted in  such  manner  as  to  protect  from   dis-
closure  all  information  affecting the  national  security,  safety
and  public  interest  or  the  disclosure  of  investigative  sources
or  investigative   methods."
The  ultimate  irony  about  these  rules  is  that  this  part of
the  bill  is  presented  as  an  amendment  to  the   Administrative
Procedures  Act.   As  our  lawyer  readers  will  remember,  this
Act,  originally  the  Walter-Logan  bill,  was  passed .in  1946  as
the  result  of  a  long  campaign  by  Congressman  Walter  to
guarantee  business  interests  full  and  fair  hearings  before
New  Deal  regulatory  agencies.
The  Administrative  Procedure  Act  provides  that  in  hear-
ings  before  all  administrative  agencies  and  regulatory  bodies,
"Every  party  shall  have  the right  to  present  his  case  or de-
fense  by oral  or  documentary evidence, to  submit rebuttal  evi-
dence,  and  to  conduct such  cross-examination   as  may  be  re-
quired  for  a  full  and  true  disclosure  of  the  facts."
Peculiar Precedent
Mr.  Walter  told the  House his  bill was "partially patterned
on  a  procedure spelled  out  in  section  280  (c)  and  section 242
(b)  of  the  Immigration  and  Nationality  Act,  the  latter  fully
sustained  by  the   Supreme  Court  of  the   United  States  in
Carlos  Marcello v.  John  M. Bonds  (350  E7.S. 858)."
It  is  the  former,  not the latter, however,  which  is  in point
here.   Section  235  (c)  of  the  McCarran-Walter  Immigration
Act  is  the  only  statutory  provision  on  the  law  books  of  this
country  which  permits  the  use  of  undisclosed  "confidential"
information  in a  hearing.  Even the  McCarran-Walter Act did
not  dare  apply  this  to  deportation  cases.  It  applies  only  to
"Too  Many  ADA'ers  On  The  Bench"
Testimony   released   by   the   House   Appropriations
Committee  the  day  after  Congressman Walter's speech
on passports disclosed (1)  his claim that he was respon-
sible  for  the  rehearing before  the  full  Court  of Appeals
bench  here of  the  Watkins  contempt  decision by Judges
Edgerton  and Bazelon and  (2)  that  he looks forward  to
a  "last  great  day"  of  settlement  with  such "personal-
ities"—whom  he  calls  ADA-ers.  Mr. Walter  was  testi-
fying  as  a  member  of  the  Commission  on  Government
Security   and  was  being  questioned  by   Congressman
Andrews of Alabama  (p. 47, 2d Sup. Approp. Bill, 1956):
MR.  ANDREWS.  It  seems like it  is  impossible to  get
convictions  of  witnesses who refuse  to  answer questions
when  they  appear  before  congressional  committees.
MR.  WALTER.  I  think  that is  because so  many mem-
bers  of  the  ADA  are  on  the  bench.
MR.    ANDREWS.  The   Americans  for   Democratic
Action?
MR.  WALTER.  Yes.   The.trouble  is  certain  Circuit
Courts  of  Appeal  lean  over  backwards  to  reverse con-
victions.   It  is  such  an  outrageous  thing  that  the  De-
partment  of  Justice  on  the  insistence  of  your  humble
servant  insisted  on  presenting  a  matter to  a  full  court
to  review  a  decision.  I  invite  you  to  look  at  the  back-
ground  of  the  two  judges that  set  aside this conviction.
MR.  ANDREWS.    Off  the  record.
(Discussion  Off  The  Record).
MR.   WALTER.  Of  course,  we   are   going  very   far
afield  and you cannot deal with personalities such  as  we
are  compelled to  deal  with  until  the  last  great day.
The  ADA's  Washington  representative,   Edward  D.
Hollander,  characterized this  as  an  attempt  by  Walter
to  "bully"  judges.   Walter  counter-attacked on  March
20  by  "exposing"  Mr. Hollander  as  a  one-time  member
of  the  long  defunct  Washington  Bookshop.
"exclusion"  cases,  i.e.  cases  of  aliens  who have  not  yet  been
legally  admitted  to this country and  who as  non-residents  are
not  yet  covered  by  the  basic  constitutional  guaranties  which
otherwise  protect  citizen  and  alien  alike.
The  second  part  of  the  bill  would  amend  the  Communist
Control  Act of  1954  and  add to  it  the  present  State Depart-
ment  provisions  denying  passports  not  only  to  Communists
but  also  to  others  "regardless  of  the  formal state  of  [their]
affiliation   with  the   Communist  party"  who  may  be  going
abroad  to  "advance  the  cause  of  the  Communist  movement."
The  bill  incorporates   verbatim  the  notoriously  vague  and
sweeping  Departmental  passport   regulation   51.135.
The  Walter  bill  reflects  the  fear  of  the  State  Department
and  the  FBI  that  the  pending Robeson  and  Boudin  passport
appeals  may force quasi-judicial hearings in  which applicants
will  have  the  right  fully  to  know  the  charges  against  them
and  to  cross-examine  hostile  witnesses.    Congress,  of  course,
cannot  constitutionally  change  the  historic  meaning  of  the
due  process  clause  to  fit  the  Department's   desire  for  star
chamber  hearings.
There  is  grave  danger,  however, that  this  bill  might  slip
through  without hearings.   Only  the  rightist  press  has  paid
attention  to it—the Chicago  Tribune  in a long story on March
16, the  New  York  Journal-American  in an approving editorial
on  March  19.  Elsewhere we  have  seen  the  story  only  in  a
buried paragraph  on page 47 of the  New  York  Post  on  March
16 and  in  a  one-paragraph United Press  dispatch on  page  41
of  the  New  York   Times  which  was  so inaccurate that  it  did
not  even  mention  passports.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  26,1SSB
Time  to  Recognize  That  Russian  Puppet  Parties  Are  Incompatible  with   Co-Existence
When  Stalin  Growled,   Krushchev   Danced   The    Gopak
(Continued  from  Page  One)
movement  in  the  West  would  destroy   a  tattered   scarecrow
which  reaction  exploits  everywhere;  it  is  incompatible   with
co-existence  for  Russia  to  manipulate  puppet  parties in  other
countries.   The   Communists  stand   exposed   as   prize   idiots
abroad  and  prize  cowards  within  Russia;  the  hierarchy  knew
what  was  going  on  but  dared   not  speak  up.  When  Stalin
growled,  Krushchev  danced  the  gopak.   The  intellectuals   of
the  outside world must continue  to approach  the  great  revolu-
tion  of  our  time  with  sympathy  but  also  with  critical  detach-
ment  and  not with  party  line  subservience. These  are  not  les-
sons  that  Communists  are  capable  of  learning.   They  have
lost  the  habit  of  independent   thinking.
Our  heart  bleeds for  the  FBI  in this turmoil.  Last  year  J.
Edgar  Hoover  was  complaining  to  the  House   Appropriations
Committee that  it  was more  difficult  to watch  the  Communists
because  they   were  going  underground.   This  year  he  com-
plains  that  his  tasks  are  becoming  harder  because  they  are
reducing  "the  size  of the  underground  operations  ...   by  rea-
son of the  general  political  atmosphere  created  as  a  result of
the  Geneva  conference."  (Good  thing that  fellow  Eisenhower
is  not  a  Democrat  or  they'd  have  him  up  on loyalty  proceed-
ings for  his  "associations" at  Geneva).  But  even  if  the  Com-
munists  do  fade  away  in  the  muddy  backwash  of  Moscow's
abandonment  of  "Stalinism,"  the  FBI  need  not  fear  unem-
ployment.    Mr.   Hoover's   definition   of   "pseudoliberals"   is
broad  enough  to  give  him  an  excuse  to  eavesdrop  on hall  the
country.  The  FBI   Chief  told  the  Appropriations   Committee
"pseudoliberals"   were  "individuals   who  are  not  members  of
the  Communist party  and  who  quite  vociferously  deny  any
sympathy  with  Communism but who . . . oppose  security  pro-
grams  and sponsor  liberalizing  security  measures  .  . .  they
advance  the  theory  that  the  menace of  communism is  a  mere
myth  or  hysteria,"  in  short,  to  disagree  with  the  FBI  is  to
demonstrate   disloyalty.
Like  our  British  cousins, we cannot  understand  the  Ameri-
can  government's  failure  to  show  complete  solidarity  with
London  on  the  problem of  Cyprus.  The  ouster  of  ten  families
and  twenty  shopkeepers  from  their  homes  and  shops  in  the
heart  of  Nicosia as  punishment for  refusal  to  inform  on their
fellow  Cypriotes  should not  be unfamiliar  to  Washington.  Un-
willingness  to  inform  has  for  many  months  been  punished
here  by  loss  of  government  employment, denial  of  passports,
and  widespread  blacklisting   in  the  entertainment   business,
.  A  Story  About  General Robert  E.  Lee
With  A  Moral  for  Today's  South
Readers  will  recall  that  what  most  depressed us  about
Miss  Lucy's  treatment  at  Tuscaloosa was  not  the  mob
but  that  there  was  not  one student  with  the  moral  cour-
age  to  get  up  and  sit  beside  her  on  that  lonely  front
bench.
The  other  night,  reading  up  on  the  history  of   the
South  and  Reconstruction,  we  came  across  a  story  of
quite  a  different  sort  about  Robert  E.  Lee.
It  happened in that  first terrible year after  the  South's
final  defeat.    A   Negro,   emboldened  by  emancipation,
dared  walk  into  one  of   Richmond's  most   fashionable
churches,   push   his  way   to   the  communion   altar  and
kneel  before  it.
The  congregation  was  startled. What  happened  next
was  determined  by  one  white  man's nobility.  That  man
was  General  Lee. He  rose  from  his  pew, walked  forward
to  the  altar  and  knelt  in  prayer beside  the  Negro.  The
congregation followed  his lead.
We  wish someone would  get  the  President to  tell  this
story  at  press  conference as  a  lesson  for  the  South  of
today.  Its   greatest  hero   never  showed  his  greatness
more  clearly  than  when  he  knelt in  Christian  fraternity
beside  the  human  symbol  of  his  own  defeat.  We can  see
that  the  South  is  not  wrong  in  worshipping  Robert  E.
Lee's  memory;  the  pity  is  only  that .it  does  not  follow
his example.
newspaper   work,  teaching,   maritime   jobs  and  other   busi-
nesses.  The  day  the  British  resorted  to  expulsions  on  Cyprus
was the  day  a  Federal  judge  in  Washington  found  a  Cornell
University  zoology professor,  Marcus  Singer,  guilty  of  con-
tempt  for   refusing   to  name  others   before  the   House  Un-
American  Activities  Committee  after  admitting  that  he  him-
self  had  once  been  a  Communist.  Lloyd Barenblatt,  a  former
instructor  at  Vassar,  was sentenced  to six months in jail  in  a
similar  case  the  day  before.   What  was  imposed  on  Cyprus
as  an emergency  measure  has  become a matter of course here.
We  must   leave   until   next   week   an   assessment   of   the
Kefauver  victory  in  Minnesota  and  the  danger  that  the  two
best  Democratic  candidates  may  defeat  each  other  and  open
the  door  to  a  Harriman  or  a  Symington.
Jennings  Perry   Will   Do  A  First  Hand  Portrait   of   Kefauver    in  Next   Week's   Issue
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street
City
Enter  gift  aub
(To)   Name  .,
Street
City
Shall  we  send
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Zone
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
Zone
gift  announcement?
....State
(1 yr.)  additional:
3/26/56
....State
Yes  D    No  O
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301    E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED