I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956oct08.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on  Informers  and  The  Smith  Act
Full Text;  Justice  Dept.  Confesses  One of  Its  Snoopeitt  May  lie  A  Perjurer,  Page 3"
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IV,  NO.  38
OCTOBER  8,  1956
">'     WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
16  CENTS
The  Characters  Who  Infest  The  Security  System
The  Department  of  Justice  has  just  filed  an  extraordinary
document.   It  is  the  first  full  length  portrait,  by  the  govern-
ment  itself,  of  one  of  those  ubiquitous  informers  on  whom
the  livelihood,  reputation, and  the  right  to  travel  of  Ameri-
cans  have  come  increasingly to  depend.  The  portrait  is drawn
in  an  unprecedented  motion  which  the  Department  of  Justice
filed with  the  Supreme  Court  on  the  eve  of  this  week's  argu-
ment  in  the  Smith  Act  appeals.    The  Department  asks  that
one  of  these  appeals,  from  the  conviction  of  five  Communists
in  Pittsburgh,  be  sent  back  to  the  trial  judge  for  a  hearing  to
determine the  credibility of  one  of  its  own  principal  witnesses.
The  government's  motion  deals  with  an  informer  named
Joseph  D.  Mazzei.   Its  portrait  of  the  man,  though  damning,
is  far   from   complete.   It  omits  testimony  in  the   Pittsburgh
case  which  disclosed  that  Mazzei  was  first  approached  by  the
FBI  in  December,   1941,   and  told  that  it  had  been  decided,
after  investigation,  that  he  would  be a  good  person  for  under-
cover  work in  the  Communist  party. The  reader  can judge  for
himself,  from   the  government's   own  description  of  Mazzei,
how  good  a  judge  of  character  the  FBI  proved  to  be.   Since
even  the New  York  Timer  did  not  print  the  text,  we are mak-
ing  it  available on page three. We  believe  it  deserves  wide cir-
culation  and  close  study.  For  12  years, until  Mazzei  was  pro-
duced  as  a  witness  at  the  Smith  Act  trial  in  Pittsburgh   on
March  26,  1953,  Mazzei  was  one  of  those  confidential  opera-
tives  shielded  from  cross-examination  in  all  kinds  of  loyalty,
security,  passport,  waterfront,  and  defense  plant  cases  on  the
ground  that  the  disclosure  of  their  identity  would  impair  na-
tional  security.  This  document  proves  how  little  such  trust  is
deserved.
Too  Sacrosanct  to  Be  Questioned
Even  liberal  organizations  like  the  American Civil  Liberties
Union  and  Americans for  Democratic  Action have  come to ac-
quiesce in the view that  such men—as distinct from  "casual  in-
formers"—should  be  exempt  from  the  normal  checks  of  con-
frontation  and  public  testimony.   In  the  Mazzei  document  the
government  itself  admits what kind of  creatures this exemption
has  been shielding.  We would  never have known about Mazzei
if  the  government  were  able  to  handle  criminal  prosecutions
as  it  handles  security,  loyalty and  passport  cases.  To  obtain  a
conviction  under  the  Smith  Act  in  Pittsburgh,  it  had  to  pro-
duce  Mazzei  in  open  court.  Otherwise  the  public  would never
have had  a chance at a closeup.  The  circumstances illuminate a
type  of  character  not  at  all  rare.   The  testimony  in  the  Pitts-
burgh  case  showed  that  in  one  Communist  club,  which  had
shrunk  to  a  membership  of  three,  two  were  FBI  informants.
The  radical  and  labor  movements  swarms with  them;  their  re-
.1   5
ports  must create a  storage  problem.   Mazzei himself  estimated
on  the  stand  that,  during  his  years  of  informing,  his  reports
ran  into thousands of  pages  and  would  fill  "a big room."  After
reading  the  government's description of  Mazzei  on page three,
you  will shudder  to think of  what  that  big  room  must contain.
After   the  faceless  informers  lose  their  anonymity  because
they  have been  produced  in  court,  they  cash  in  as  stars  on  the
Circuit   of   the   Senate   Internal   Security  Committee   and   the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee.  They  obtain  jobs
as  consultants  on  communism to  private  industry;  newspaper
columnists;  witnesses  in  state witch  hunts;  writers,  oracles  and
national  heroes.  These triumphs have their  drawbacks. In  those
big  rooms  where  the  FBI  keeps  its  files,  no  one  ever  knows
how  many  whoppers  are  hidden,  how  many  wacky  fantasies
are  on  record.  But  Congressional  committees  live  on  headlines,
and  in  the headlines  the whoppers  sometimes  grow  too big  for
credibility,  or  involve  people  who  have  powerful  friends  and
can  strike  back.  This  is what  happened  to  Mazzei.   He  got  to
the  point  of  testifying  under oath  in  the  Leo Sheiner  disbar-
ment  proceedings  in Miami that  he  had  once beaten  up  a  U.S.
Senator  for  the  Communists. There are  limits to  public  credul-
ity,  even  about  witches,  warlocks and  Reds.
Not  As  Unaware  As  It  Pretends
The  Department  of  Justice  would  like  it  to  be  believed  that
this  motion  reflects  a  revulsion  on  its  own  part  against  such
people  as  Mazzei.  A  footnote  to  the  government's  motion  is
designed  to  give  the  unwary  reader  the  impression  that  until
quite  recently—"until   less  than  ten  days ago"  in  the  case  of
the  Solicitor  General—the  government  was  unaware  of  Maz-
zei's  record.   But in  the  government's  motion  there  is only  one
episode  which  was  not  covered  in  the  defense  brief  filed  with
the  Court  and  sent  the  Solicitor  General  a  month  earlier.  This
is  the  tantalizing  reference  to  a  secret  proceeding  three  years
ago  in  which  Mazzei  "identified  a  certain  Government  official
as a  long-time  active Communist party  member."   It  would  be
interesting  to  know  how  and  after  what  agonies  this   official
succeeded  in  clearing  himself,  and  why  no  action   (foolish
question!)  was  ever  taken  against  Mazzei  for  perjury.  Appar-
ently  it  is  only  when  informers  recant,  as  did  Matusow  and
Mrs.  Natvig,  that  anything  ever  happens  to  them.
The-  government's  air  of  innocence  is  contrived.  The   fact
that  Mazzei was cracked became obvious during the  Pittsburgh
trial,  when  he  dashed  down  to  Washington  to  testify  before
the McCarthy committee about  a Communist plot  to assassinate
McCarthy.  The  defense  at  that  time moved  for  a mistrial, but
the  government  successfully  opposed  this,  apparently regard-
ing  the  McCarthy testimony as making it  even  less  likely that
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 8,1956
A  Maneuver,  Not  A  Change of Heart,  On  the  Part  of The  Government
(Continued  from  Page  One)
the  jury  would acquit.   Most of  the  material  the  government
uses  was  brought  to  its  attention  a  year  ago  by  the  devoted
research   of  Defense  Counsel  Frank  Donner  and  his  aides.
When  on  October  6,  1955,  the  defense  asked  the   Supreme
Court  for  a  hearing,  its  petition  for  certiorari  included  an
appendix  on "The  Character  of  the  Government's  Witnesses."
The  content  is  indicated  by the  conclusion, "These  revelations
raise  a  compelling  inference  that  petitioners   were  convicted
by  the  testimony  of  pathological  liars."   But  at  that  time  a
brief  in  opposition  by  the  Solicitor  General   (filed  November
10,  1955)   dismissed  the  charges  against   Mazzei  and  other
witnesses  by  saying  snootily  "the  use  of  informers  involves
issues  of  credibility,  not  of  law."  Translated, this  means  that
if  the jury  was satisfied with  these witnesses,  their  credibility
was  no  business  of  the  Supreme  Court.
Twin  Surprise  In  April
But  the  government  got  a  jolt  last  April—two  of  them,  in
fact—which  may  explain this  motion  to  remand.   On April  2,
Chief   Justice   Warren   upheld   the   Pennsylvania    Supreme
Court's  decision  reversing   the   State  sedition   conviction  of
Steve  Nelson,  who  is  also  one  of  the  five  defendants  in  the
Pittsburgh  Smith  Act  case.  And  on  April  30  the   Supreme
Court  remanded  to  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board
a  defense  motion  to  reopen  the  order  requiring  the  Commu-
nist  Party  to  register.  The  motion  attacked  the  veracity  of
three  main  government  witnesses  in  that  SACB  proceeding:
Paul  Crouch,  Manning  Johnson  and  Harvey  Matusow.  The
motion  cited  the  kind  of  evidence  these  men  had  given  on
other  occasions.   "If   these  witnesses  in  fact  committed  per-
jury  in  testifying  in  other  cases  on  subject  matter  substan-
tially  like that of their  testimony in the  present  proceedings,"
Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  ruled,  "their  testimony in  this  pro-
ceeding is  inevitably discredited. . . . We cannot  pass  upon a
record  containing such disputed testimony."  This  implied that
where  witnesses  could  be shown  to have lied in  other  proceed-
ings,  as  Mazzei  did,  the  court  might  order  a  new trial.  The
government  may  have  feared  that  what   happened  in  the
SACB  case  would  happen  again  in  the  Pittsburgh  case.  The
government  may  have  felt  that  it  would  be  smart  to  come
forward   with  a  motion  to  remand  the  case,  not  for  a  new
trial,  but  for  a  hearing  by  the  trial  judge  on the  credibility
of  one  witness!  The  defense  opposes  this  "limited  and  inade-
quate"  proposal, arguing  that  after five years  the  defendants
have  a  right  to  a  hearing  on the  merits  or  a  new trial,  and
that  if  the  government  suspects  Mazzei  of  perjury,  it  ought
to  prosecute him.   We  are  dealing  here  with  a  maneuver on
the  part  of  the  government,  not  a  change  of  heart.
II
The   government   cannot   afford   a   change  of  heart.  The
pleadings  in  the  Smith  Act  appeals  on  which  the  Supreme
Court  is  hearing  argument  this   week  are   full   of  Mazzeis.
Normal  surveillance  of  the   Communist  party  is  too  dull;
only  the  Mazzeis can  supply  the  "hot  stuff"  about  bloodshed,
sabotage  and  assassination   without  which  juries   would  be
bored  to  death.   Legal   decorum  requires   some  evidence  of
revolutionary  intent,  however distant,  to  cover with  propriety
what  would  otherwise  be  too nakedly  a  prosecution for  opin-
ion.  Thus  the  government's  brief  in  opposition last  Fall  cited
testimony  by another  witness  in the  Pittsburgh trial that one
defendant,  Weissman,  had  said  "when  the  time  is  ripe,  sabo-
tage  will be used . . . the  [Kanawha]  Valley must be knocked
out."  The government argued,  "A  conspiracy to  advocate doc-
trines with  such  ultimate  objectives  is,  under  this  court's de-
cision  in  Dennis,  the  sort  of  conspiracy  to  teach  and  advo-
cate  which  may  constitutionally  be proscribed."  Without  this
melodrama,  the  Smith  Act  cases   would  fall  apart.
As the  defense  said  last  week in  opposing the  motion for  a
hearing  on  Mazzei's  credibility,   "The   relief   sought   by  the
government  is  inadequate  on  still  another  ground.  The  con-
siderations  which  becloud  the  credibility of  Mazzei  are  quite
applicable   to   [Matthew]   Cvetic,  who,  as   the   government
should  know, lied  at  the  trial  about  his  record  of  psychiatric
treatment;  to  Mrs.  Mazzei, who was  implicated  in  the  Mullen
imbroglio,  to which the  government  has  made reference  in  its
motion;  to  Dewey  C.  Price,  whose  cock-and-bull yarn  about
sabotaging   the  Kanawha  Valley  is  fully   equal  to  Mazzei's
more lurid  productions;  and  to  Mrs. Sylvia  Hill,  who  insisted
that  petitioner  [Steve]  Nelson selected a  public  meeting  in  a
high  school  auditorium  to  annouce plans  for  taking  over  the
government."  All  four  of  those  named  were  professional  un-
dercover  agents  for  the  FBI  or  military  intelligence,  as  was
Mazzei. The  other  two witnesses  for  the  government  were  ex-
Communists  on  the   government  payroll;   the   late  William
O'Dell   Nowell  who  graduated   from   being  a  lieutenant  of
Gerald  L.  K.  Smith  in  the  early  40's  to  becoming  a  $4500
"consultant" for  the  Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service
in  deportation   cases.  The  other,  John  Lautner,  seems  to  have
gravitated  to  the  FBI  strictly  from  hunger  and  resentment.
He  was  a  $60 a  week  Communist functionary  when  he  was
named  in  one of  the  Stalin  period  Hungarian  frameup  trials
as  an  FBI  agent  and  thereupon  expelled here  from  the  Com-
munist  party.  After  some  eight  months  out  of  work  he  be-
came  a  $20 a  day  "expert"  on  Communism for  the  Justice
Department.   There  was  not  a  single  witness  at  the  Pitts-
burgh  trial  whose  livelihood  did  not  depend  on  coming  up
with  the  kind  of  evidence  the  government  needed.
Lying  for  Malice, As  Well  As  Money
Powerful  protection  encouraged  lying for  malice as  well  as
pay.  The  government  discusses  Mazzei's  involvement  in  bas-
tardy  charges  but  it  does  not  disclose that  he  used  the  Sen-
ate  Internal  Security   Committee  to  smear  the  woman  who
brought   those  charges.   He  told   the   committee   she  was &••
Communist  party  member  assigned  in  1940  as  a  waitress  to
report  on  the  eating   habits  of  Judge   Musmanno.  iBut  her
counsel  furnished  the  Pittsburgh  newspapers  with  proof  that
she  didn't   come  to  this  country  until  1946  and  that  Mazzei
had   threatened   to   "get   even"   with   her  for   bringing   the
charges.  When  last  heard  from,  Mazzei  was  in  contempt  of
court  for  being  $1,000  in  arrears  on  the  $8  a  week  he  had
been  ordered  to  pay  for  the  support  of  this  woman's  child.
These  are  the  kind  of  vermin  set  to  watch  over  us  and  our
political  thinking  by the   FBI.
The  government's  motion  to  remand  cites  the  Mullen  af-
fair,  but  if  Mazzei  was  guilty  of perjury  in  that  case  so were
Mrs.  Mazzei  and  Cvetic.   Mazzei  identified  John  J.  Mullen,
former  Mayor of  Clairton,  Pa.,  and  National  Director  of  the
Political  Action  Committee of  the  Steel  Workers  as  a  Com-
munist.   Luckily for  Mullen, he  was  no  obscure  schoolteacher,
or  friendless  entertainer.   He  denied  the  charges  under  oath
before  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee and  mustered
support  from  Dave  McDonald  of  the  Steel  Workers,  who  de-
clared  he  had   known  Mullen  personally  for   20  years   and
vouched  for  him.  The  committee  itself  found  serious  discrep-
ancies  in  Mrs.  Mazzei's  story  supporting  her  husband's  iden-
tification  and  in  Cvetic's  testimony  that  Mullen  was  a  "non
card  carrying"  Communist.  If  Mazzei lied  in  those  hearings,
so  did  Mrs.  Mazzei  and  Cvetic.
The  pleadings in  the  California  Smith  Act cases,  also  being
heard  on  appeal  by  the  Supreme  Court  this  week,  disclose
the  same  kind  of  informers  as  the  Pittsburgh  case.  One  gov-
ernment  witness,  Scarletto,  testified  that  it  "could  be"  that
a  woman  whose  name  he  reported  to  the  FBI  had  "treated
him  like  a  son."   He  considered  it  "funny,"  when  questioned
about  it  on  the  stand,  that  he  had  succeeded in  soliciting  a
neighbor—whom  he  knew  to  be  anti  Communist—for $5  for
the  People's   World  and  had  then  turned  in  her  name  to  the
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'f  Weekly,  October 8,19S8
For  The  First  Time  The  Government   Confesses  One of  Its  Informants  May Be A  Perjurer
Full  Text  of  the  Motion  to  Remand  in  the  Pittsburgh  Smith  Act  Case
The   Solicitor   General,   on   behalf    of   the
United   States,   respectfully   moves   that    this
case,  now  pending  in  this  Court  on  a  writ  of
certiorari   to   the   Court   of   Appeals   for   the
Third   Circuit,   be   remanded  to   the   District
Court   for   the   Western   District   of   Pennsyl-
vania  for  the  hearing  hereafter  described.  The
facts  on  which  this  motion  is  based,  and   the
reasons  for  granting  it,  are  as  follows:
Joseph  D.  Mazzei  was  called  as  a  witness
for   the  Government  in  the  trial   of  this, case
at  Pittsburgh,   Pa.,   on  March   26,   1953.     He
gave   testimony  which   directly   involved   two
of    the    petitioners,    Careathers   and   Dolsen.
See,  e.  g.,  United   States  v.  Mesarosh,  223  F.
2d449,  454-5,  458  (S. A.  3).
Up    until    March   26,    1953,    Mazzei   had
served   as   a   Government  informant   and   had
reported   to  the   Federal  Bureau  of   Investiga-
tion  on  the  activities  of  the  Communist  Party
in  Western  Pennsylvania since  1942.    Prior  to
his  use  as  a  witness  in  this  case,  his  proposed
testimony  was  as  usual  checked  and   corrobor-
ated,   to   the   extent   possible,   by   independent
sources.    Certain   of  his  testimony  as  to  oral
statements   made   by   Dolsen    and    Careathers
could    not   be   corroborated    by    independent
sources,  but  Government  counsel  had  no  rea-
son  to   doubt,   and  did   not  doubt,   that   this
testimony  was  truthful.   It   is   also  significant
that  those  portions  of  his  testimony  which,  if
untrue,  could  have  been  contradicted  by  per-
sons  other  than  these  five  petitioners  were  not
contradicted;  in  fact,  not  one  item  of  Mazzei's
testimony  was  contradicted   at  the  trial.
Still  Think  He  Told  The  Truth
It   is  still   the  position  of  the   Government
that  the  testimony given  by  Mazzei  at  the  trial
was  entirely  truthful  and  credible.    However,
since  that  testimony,  Mazzei  has  given   certain
sworn    testimony    (before    other     tribunals)
which  the  Government,  on  the  basis  of  the  in-
formation   in   its   possession,   now  has   serious
reason   to   doubt.    While   certain    aspects   of
Mazzei's  later  testimony  are  supported  to  some
degree,    these   incidents,   taken   cumulatively,
lead  us  to  suggest  that  the  issue  of  his  truth-
fulness  at  the  trial  of  these  petitioners   should
now  be  determined  by  the  District  Court   after
a  hearing.   These  incidents  include:
On  June   18,  1953,  Mazzei  testified   before
the  Senate  Permanent  Subcommittee on  Inves-
tigations,  in  Washington,  D.  C.  that  at  a meet-
ing  of  the  Civil  Rights  Congress  on  December
4,   1952,   one  Louis   Bortz  told   him  that  he,
Bortz,  had  been  "selected   by  the  Communist
Party  to  do  a  job  in  the  liquidation of  Senator
Joseph    McCarthy."   Mazzei   further    testified
that    the    said    Bortz   conducted  Communist
Party  classes in  Pittsburgh  to  familiarize  Party
members  with  the  handling of  firearms  and  to
instruct  them  in  the  construction of  bombs.
On   November   14,   1952,   Mazzei  pleaded
guilty  to  charges of  adultery  and  bastardy in  a
Pennsylvania  state court. This  fact  was brought
out  during  his  cross-examination   at  the  peti-
tioners'  trial.   On  October  2,  1953—after   the
completion  of  the   trial—Mazzei  filed  a  peti-
tion  in  the  state  court  to  have  the  guilty  plea
set  aside.   One  of  the  grounds  set  forth  in  his
petition  was  that  he  "was   not  guilty  of   the
charge  to which he was induced to  plead. * * *
but  did   so  only  in  his   official   capacity  (as   a
Government   informant)   at   the   insistence   of
his  superior  in  the  FBI to  avoid  testifying."  At
a   hearing  on  the   above  petition   on   October
6,   1953,  a  Special  Agent  of  the  FBI   denied
Mazzei's    allegations    under    oath.      Mazzei's
petition  was  dismissed  by  the  court  on  October
6,   1953.
"At  A  Secret  Proceeding"
In  November  1953,  Mazzei,  at  a  secret  pro-
ceeding,  identified   a  certain   Government   offi-
cial   as   a   long-time   active   Communist   Party
member.
On  June   10  and   11,  1955,  Mazzei  testified
before   the   Senate   Subcommittee  on   Internal
Security   regarding   possible   Communist   influ-
ences  motivating  attempts  to  discredit   Justice
Michael  Musmanno  of  the  Supreme  Court  of
Pennsylvania.   In  the  course  of  his  testimony,
Mazzei   identified  John  J.   Mullen,    National
Director,    Political    Action    Committee,    Steel
Workers  of  America,  as  a  member  of  the  Com-
munist  Party  in  Pittsburgh  during  the   period
that   Mazzei   was   a   Government    informant.
Mazzei  also  testified   that   since   1942   he   met
Mullen  ten  or  fifteen  times  a  year,  as  a  fellow
Communist  Party   member.
On  July  2,  1956,  Mazzei  testified  in  disbar-
ment  proceedings  against  one  Leo  Sheiner  be-
fore  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  Eleventh  Judicial
Circuit  of  Florida,  in  Miami.   On  cross-exami-
nation,   Mazzei  reiterated   his   charge   that   he
was   induced  to  plead  guilty  to   the  adultery
and  bastardy  charge  in  the  Pennsylvania  state
court  in  November  1952  by  an  Agent   of   the
FBI.    Items   of   his   testimony  as   to   alleged
Communist  activity  are   as  follows:—that   he
visited  Dade  County, Florida,  on  behalf  of  the
Communist   Party   during   each   of   the   years
from   1946  to  1952;  that  the  Communist  Party
in  Miami  had  attempted  to  lease  a  bus   line
which  served  the  Opa-locka  Air  Base;  that  in
1948  the  Communist  Party  made  plans  for  the
armed  invasion  of  the  United  States  on  orders
from   the   Soviet  Union   and  that  he,  Mazzei,
was  selected  to  go  to  Miami  in  1948  because  it
was  a seaport; that he  took courses in  the  Com-
munist  Party  on  sabotage,  espionage,  and  han-
dling    arms   and   ammunition;  that    he   was
taught  by  officers   of  the  Communist  Party  in
Pittsburgh  how  to  blow  bridges,   poison  water
in  reservoirs,  and  to  eliminate  people;  that  he
discussed  with  Sheiner  in  1948  "knocking  off"
a  Judge  Holt   (a   Florida   judge)  whom  they
(presumably  the  Communist Party)  were  hav-
ing   trouble  with,   and   importing   one   Louis
Bortz,  the  strong-arm man  for  the  Communist
Party,  to  do  the  job;  that  he  and  the  Commu-
nist  Party  had  made  plans  to  assassinate  Sena-
tors,  Congressmen, and  even  went  to  Washing-
ton  and  beat  up  a  Senator;  and  that,   to  his
knowledge,  Sheiner was  extensively engaged  in
Communist   Party   activities   in    1945,    1947,
1950,  1951,  and  1952.   None  of  this testimony
?l    5    f
at  the  Florida  proceeding   is  supported   or  cor-
roborated  by  information  in  the   possession   of
the   Government.
$1,000  A  Month  From  The   FBI!
Mazzei   likewise   testified  that   the   FBI   ar-
ranged  to  get  him  into  the  Army  so  that  he
could  watch  a  certain  Communist   Party  mem-
ber;  that  he  never  wore  a  uniform  and  that  he
was  discharged   the  day  after  the   Communist
Party  member  he  was  to  watch  was  discharged.
In   actual  fact,   Mazzei's   career   in   the  Army
was  the  result  of  the  operation  of  the   Selective
Training  and  Service  Act  of  1940  and  the  FBI
had   nothing   to   do   with   his   service   in   the
armed  forces.  He  also  testified  that   sometimes
the  FBI  paid  him  about  $1,000  a  month  for
expenses.   From  the  period   1942  to   1952,  ac-
cording   to   the   Bureau   records,   Mazzei   was
paid  the  total  of  $172.05  as  expense   money.
Mazzei  likewise   testified  that  he  had   never
been  arrested   in  his  life.   In  fact,  he  was  ar-
rested   in   connection   with  the   paternity    case
brought   against   him  in   Pennsylvania   by  one
Irene   Corva.   He   has   been   arrested   several
times  subsequent   to   this   for   his   failure   to
make  support   payments  to  this  woman.
1
In   these   circumstances,   while   we   believe
that  Mazzei's  trial  testimony  was  truthful,  we
also  believe  that  the  interests  of  justice  would
best  be  served  by  remanding  this  case  to  the
District   Court   for  the   holding  of  a   judicial
hearing    at   which   it   would   be    determined
whether  or  not  Mazzei's  testimony  at  the  trial
was  credible.   Cf.  Communist  fatty   v  Subver-
sive  Activities  Control  Board,  351  U.S.    11J.
2
Such  a  remand  should,  of  course,  be   without
prejudice   to  the  right   of  petitioners  to   pre-
serve  and  renew  the  points  presented   in  their
pending  petition  and  brief  in  this  case.
We  need  add  only  that  we  make  this  mo-
tion,  at  this  late  stage,  because  we  feel  com-
pelled  to  do  so  by  our  duties  as  officers  of  the
Court   and   as   public  prosecutors    (Berger    v.
United   States,  295  U.S.  78,   88).
We  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  mere  alle-
gations  of  perjury  would  ever  be  sufficient   to
require  or  warrant  the  hearing  here   proposed.
However,   in   the   particular   circumstances  of
this  case  we  believe that  it  is  the  responsibility
of  the  prosecutor  to  suggest  that  such  a  hear-
ing   would  be  appropriate  in  the   interests  of
justice.     j
   L£E   RANKINi
  Solicitor  General
WM.  F.  TOMPKINS,   Ass't  Attorney   General
September,   1956.
iThe   complete   details   of   Mazzei's   testi-
mony  in  Florida,  as  set  forth  in  this  motion,
did  not  come  to  the  attention  of  the   Depart-
ment  of  Justice  until  September  1956,  and  the
history  of  Mazzei's post-trial  testimony  did  not
come  to  the  Solicitor  General's   attention  until
less  than  ten  days  ago.
2
 The  hearing  would  be  comparable  to  that
held   by  Judge   Dimock  with   respect   to   the
witness  Matusow  in   United   States  v.   Flynn,
216  F.  2d  354  (C.A.2),  certiorari  denied,  348
U.S.  909,   and  that  held  by  Judge   Thomason
in  Jencks  v.  United  States, No.  23,  this  Term.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, October  3, 19.
r
,6
The  FBI  Alone Employs  The  Kind  of Risks  the  Security System  Bars
(Continued  from  Page  Two)
FBI.   Scarletto  admitted  prior  false  statements  under  oath.
He explained  false  testimony  that  he  was  married  in  1948 by
relating  that  he  could  not  get  married  in  church  because of
a  prior  marriage  and  therefore  simply  lived  with  the woman
he  called  his  wife.   Scarletto  testified  that  the  war  in  Korea
and  its  causes  were  discussed  in  November,  1949,  about  six
months  before  the  war  began,  in  a  school  which  ceased  oper-
ating prior  to  the  outbreak  of hostilities.   He too was a Com-
munist  for  the  FBI.
The   political   level   of   these   informers   is   indicated   by
another   California  witness.  This  man  testified  that  he  pos-
sessed  the  mysterious   ability  to  identify  a  Communist  "by
looking  at  him."   But  he  testified  "I  never  knew  and  still
don't know a darn  thing  about  Marxism-Leninism and I  pray
God I  never  do" and  added  that  he "never  listened  very much
unless  some  one  particular  person  made  a  statement  that
might  have  endangered   the  safety   of  the  United  States."
Then  he wrote  it  down!
In  the  California  case,  too,  there  were  informers  recruited
by hunger  and  blackmail.  The  witness,  Saunders,  was  screen-
ed  out  of  the  Coast  Guard  in  1948  for  past  membership  in
the  Communist party.. In  1951,  he  went  to  the  FBI  and  vol-
unteered   to  appear   as  a   witness   in  the   California   case.
"About  the  same time," says the  defense  brief, "he was  clear-
ed  by  the  Coast  Guard  and  permitted  to  return  to  his  work
after  a  hearing  at  which  neither  he nor  anyone  else  testified
on  his  behalf."  The  witness,  Honig,  at  first  refused  to  talk
with  the  FBI.   Shortly before his  change  of heart, he was  ar-
rested  on  a  shoplifting  charge  which he  said  was  a  mistake.
The  charge  was  dropped  and   his   fingerprint   records   de-
stroyed.   Since  then,  he  has  testified.
Ill
I  will  cover  the  hearings  and  the  issues  in  the  Smith  Act
cases  next  week.  What  interests  me here  is  the  glimpse  they
afford—because   they   were  public  trials—of   the   informer
system  and  the  characters  who inhabit  it.   One  of  the  most
striking  features  of  this  underworld  of  secret   police  is  the
way  it  violates  all  those  tenets  not  only  of  loyalty  but  of
security  which  govern  the  hiring  of  personnel   everywhere
else  in  the  government.   Only  the  FBI  seems to  be allowed to
hire  security  risks—people  with  criminal  records,  irregular
sex  habits,  loose  moral  standards  and  dubious  mental  health.
Hospital  records  in  the  Pittsburgh   case  show  that  Cvetic—
hero  of  that  lucrative   radio,  movie  and  Saturday   Evening
Post  classic,  "I  Was A  Communist for The  FBI"—  has  been
under  treatment  for   years  as  an  alcoholic  and   psychotic;
The  Difference
"The  Court  must  recognize  that  there  is  a material
difference  between  a  witness who  is  a  police  officer  and
a  witness who is  a  paid  informer. The  police  officer  is
oath-bound  to  observe  the  Constitution and  the  laws of
the   land.   He  must   conform   to  certain  standards  of
character,   intelligence  and   trustworthiness.    He   will
hold  his  job  whether or  not  a  conviction  is  obtained in
the  pending  case.   None of  this  is  true of informers. As
has  been  frequently  pointed  out,  such  persons   present
problems  of  credibility  far   different  from  those  of  the
ordinary  interested  witness.   For  one thing  their  liveli-
hood  depends  upon  their  ability  to  produce  the  infor-
mation  which  they  have  been  hired  to  report."
—Defense   brief  in  the Pittsburgh  Smith Act cases.
such  a  background  would  rule  him out  at  once  as  a  security
risk  in  any  other  government  job.  This  man  whom  the  FBI
promoted  and  paid for  many years in its  network of political
surveillance  was  termed  "unbelievable  and  incredible"  by  the
U.S.  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  Seventh  Circuit  in  a  deporta-
tion  case  in June  of last  year  (I/.S. v.  Brzovich).  Yet his  re-
ports  were  taken  seriously  for  years by the  FBI  and  he  was
shielded  from  cross-examination  by  his  victims  in  that  fun-
goid  area  of  "security"  in  which  people's  rights  and  reputa-
tions  are  disposed  of  by  administrative   process.
Mazzei's  irregular  sex habits,  would have  ruled  him  out of
any  government  job;  few  employers  would  care  for  such  a
man.  But it  was during  his  work—and his  wife's—as  a  pro-
fessional   FBI   undercover  man  that  he  lived  with  another
woman  on  the  side;  indeed  the  Pittsburgh  record  shows  he
once used a  telegram  from  FBI  headquarters to  hide  the  liai-
son  from  his  wife.   Dewey  Price,  the  witness  who  swore  to
remarks  about  sabotage  in  Pittsburgh,  had  a  police  record
which  included  a  3-year  sentence  under  the  prohibition  act
and  a  drunkenness charge on which he forfeited bond;  this did
not  keep the  FBI  from  hiring  him  to  work  as  a  confidential
informant  in  the  Communist Party.  These  are  the  kind of
people  on  whom  the  whole  security   system  rests,  and  they
are  a  rotten  foundation.  The  record  in  these  cases  ought  to
be  studied  carefully  by  those  who have  been  taken  in  by  the
argument  that  the  government  has  a  right  to  keep  certain
kinds  of  informers secret  and  to  exempt  them  from   confron-
tation.  The  Smith  Act  cases,  where  this  type  had  to  be pro-
duced  in  court,  provide a  series  of  instructive  glimpses.  And
the  Mazzei document lifts  the  curtain  officially  on the  shame-
ful  faces  behind  the  faceless   informer.
Extra  Copies  of  This  Issue   Will   Be  Made  Available  on  Bulk  Order  for   Mass  Distribution
IE   Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Street                                                                                  »••
City                                       .Zone          State
Enter  gift  sub Tor $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name
10/8/56
City
.Zone. ------ ..State.
City ________________________ ............. Zone....... — State.  -------
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yes  D    No
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D. C.
Entered  as
Second Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED