I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jul09.pdf

============================================================

The  Blacklist  and  Its  Spread  to  Newspaper  Business,  Pages  2  and 3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  25
JULY  9,  1956
= '<>'     WASHINGTON,  D.    C.15  CENTS
Krushchev,  Too,  Claims  Russia  Has  More  Freedom  of  Speech  Than  "Bourgeois   Democracy"
Still  Speaking  Stalin's  Language
The   easiest  way  for  an  American  to  visualize  the   ruling
group  in  Russia  today  is  to  picture George  Meany,  David  Du-
binsky,  and  Carmine de  Sapio governing a  country  where there
was  State ownership  of  all  the  means  of  production  and  com-
munication,  with  no  opposition  allowed.   The  men  at  the  top
in  Moscow  are  much  like  the  trade  union  bureaucrats  and  ma-
chine  politicians  we know  so well:  shrewd  and  resourceful  but
of  limited  mentality,  not  without  devotion  to  the  institutions
they  serve but  easily identifying loyalty to  themselves with  loy-
alty  to  the  system.  Like  our  trade  union  leaders,  they  are  accus-
tomed  cynically  to manipulate the  election  machinery on  which
their  jobs  supposedly  depend.   Once  they  get  into  office,  they
expect  to  stay  on  until  they  die;  they  live  among  flunkies  and
their  first  concern  is  with  power,  and  with  the  intrigue  and
fear  that go to maintain it.
With  this picture  in  mind,  one  is  less  likely  to  be  surprised
by  the  low  intellectual level  and  indeed  the  turgidity of  the  re-
ply  broadcast  from   Moscow  by  their  Central  Committee  to
criticisms  from  abroad.   This  is  about  what  one  would  expect
in  a  crisis  from  an  A.F.  of  L.  Council:  a stubborn  repetition of
cliches  by  bureaucrats  so  accustomed  to  be  obeyed  that  they
have  long  lost  or  failed  to  develop  any  capacity to  persuade or
inspire.  The  thoughtful  Soviet  citizen—and  there  are  many,
despite  the   stupefying   atmosphere—will   read   the  statement
with  glee,  nausea  and  hope:   glee,  that  the  Krushchev  crowd
has  been  put  on  the  defensive;  nausea,  at  having  to  read  for
the  umteenth  time  this  same  imbecile  litany  about  "the  Beria
gang"  and  the  "Trotzkyites,  right  wing opportunists  and  bour-
geois   nationalists";   and   hope,   that   maybe  this  crowd   is  so
clumsy  it  will  lose  power.  The  intelligent  Russian will  watch
first  for  the  reaction  from  abroad,  particularly   in  Italy  where
Togliatti  must  compete with  the  Left  Socialist Nenni.  For  this
statement  is  a  challenge  which  says  that  the  Krushchev  regime
has  no  intention  of  making  fundamental  reforms in  the  direc-
tion  of   greater   freedom  of   expression   and   greater   security
against the  State apparatus.
Marxist   Supernaturalism?
Here  it  is  in  black  and  white,  from  the  Central  Committee,
that   "collective   leadership"   from  which,   miraculously,   "cor-
rect"  decisions infallibly flow. The  heart  of  the  statement  is its
warning that  it would  be "a  serious mistake to  deduce  from  the
past  existence  of  the  cult  of  personality  some  kind  of  changes
in  the  social  order  in  the  U.S.S.R.  or  to  look  for  the  source  of
this  cult  in  the  nature of  the  Soviet  social order.   Both  alterna-
tives  are  absolutely  wrong.  .  .  ."  Thus  we  are  led  to  believe
that  the  cult  of  Stalin  was a kind  of  anomalous evil  apparition
unrelated  to  the  conditions  of  Soviet  life  and  Communist  dic-
7  *
9  3
tatorship.  And  now  that  the  evil  man  has  been  removed,  no
changes  need  to  be  made  to  prevent  recurrence.
Thus  supernatural causation  parades  as  Marxism.  To  blame
it  all  on  some  vague  emanation  called   Stalinism  is  to  avoid
changes  which  would  reduce  one's  own  power.
There  is no  evidence  in  the  Central  Committee  statement  of
any  fresh  thinking whatsoever. These  are men who  have  not  or
will  not  learn  the  ABC's  of  free  government,  whether  under
capitalism  or  communism.  They  still  talk  vaguely  of  "the  cult
of  personality"  when  they  should  be  talking  of  the  means  to
check  it—of  independent  courts,  a  free  press,  a  parliament  or
Soviet  in  which  delegates  speak  up  for  the  grievances  of  those
who  elected  them,  freedom  to  demonstrate  in  the  streets,  trade
unions  which  can  voice  worker  grievances.  Theoretically,   all
these  exist  in  the  Soviet  Union.   Had  they  existed  in   practice,
the  evils  of  Stalinism would  never  have  grown  so  enormous;
criticism,  exposure  and  protest  would  have  kept  them  within
bounds.  All  these  issues were  understood and  argued  out  in  the
early  days  of  the  Revolution, when  there  were  still  opposition
parties  with  their  own  papers.    Some  of  the  bitterest   battles
within  the  ranks  of  Bolshevism  were  fought  over  the  issue  of
a  free  press,  i.e.  a  press  which  would  not  be  the  monopoly  of
one  party  or  one  point  of  view.  Originally,  after  the  Revolu-
tion,  Lenin  projected  the  re-allocation  of  nationalized  printing
resources  among  various parties  in proportion  to  their  strength.
Echoes  of  An  Old  Hoax
Fanaticism,  foreign  intervention, civil war, and  old  habits—
Russian  habits—soon  swept  all  this  into  the  discard.  But  it  is
in  these  first  years  that  study  must  begin,  that  lessons  may  be
learned,  from  which  a new Russia can find its way again.  How
much  is  the  de-Stalinization  campaign  worth   when   his  suc-
cessors and  traducers talk exactly as he  did ? The  conclusions  of
the. Central  Committee  sound  extraordinarily  like  those  state-
ments  of  the  30's  which  accompanied  the  adoption  of  Stalin's
Constitution,  statements  which  read  so  painfully  today  in  the
pages  of  friendly observers  like  Beatrice  and  Sidney  Webb be-
cause it  was all  so enormous a  hoax.
The  very  words  might  be  Stalin's.   He  too  if  he  were  alive
and  felt  it  necessary to  defend  himself  would  be  saying  that
the  Soviets  "were  and  remain  organs  of  genuine   popular  au-
thority,"  though  they  ceased  being  organs  of  popular  authority
very  soon  after  the  Bolsheviks  took  power. Today  they  are  the
vermiform  appendixes  of  the  Russia  Revolution,   vestiges  of
spontaneous  uprising  in  1905  and   1917.   Today  the  Supreme
Soviet  neither  legislates  nor  debates;  it  only  applauds.     Stalin,
too,  boasted  in  the  30's  exactly as this Central  Committee  does
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly, July  9,1956
The  Wasteland  The  Blacklist   Has  Created  in  Radio,  TV  and   Movies
John  Cogley's  two volume Fund  for  the  Republic  report on
blacklisting  in  movies,  radio  and  television  is  written   with
verve  and  humor;  its  findings  are  a  rich  store  of   "Ameri-
cana," it  could  all  be enjoyed as  social  comedy  if  it  were  not
so  full  of  broken  lives  and  unsung  heroes.
Observers  not afraid  to  be aware  of the  political nuances  in
the contemporary American scene will  note that the  Fund  for
the  Republic  picked  a  Catholic to head  up  its  study  of black-
listing.  The fact that a man is a  Catholic is nowadays  regard-
ed  as  prima facie  evidence that he can't  be a you-know-what.
But  Cogley  was  executive  editor  of  The  Commonweal, which
is  already  being  described  as  left-of-center.   It  will  be inter-
esting to  see whether, when  Cogley appears  before  the  House
Un-American  Activities   Committee  July   10,  his   inquisitors
are  primed  to  test  his  orthodoxy.
Cogley's study  like earlier  ones for  the  Fund for  the Repub-
lic avoids conclusions. The Fund  obviously is afraid  to  take a
position  and  relies  on the  therapeutic  effect  of  publicity.  The
nearest  Cogley comes to a  suggestion  is  at  the  end of his  pen-
ultimate  chapter  where he  says, "If  the  American  businesses
which  together  comprise the radio-TV  industry  are  to  assume
the  burdens  of  government,  they  must  also  assume  responsi-
bility  for  dispensing  justice."
Cogley's  findings  make one  shudder  to  think  of  a  Madison
Avenue or  Hollywood jurisprudence.  The  outlines  of this  sys-
tem  of  "dispensing  justice"  are  already  clear  in  his   study.
The  keystone  is  "saleability."  As  the  Screen  Actors'  guild
said  after  Gale Sondergaard  asked  it  to fight the  blacklisting
of  those  who used the  Fifth  amendment, "if  any  actor  by  his
own  actions  outside  of  union  activity  has  so  offended  Ameri-
can public  opinion that he has  made himself  unsaleable  at  the
Box  Office,  the  Guild cannot  and  would not  want  to  force  any
employer  to  hire  him."  The  prime  consideration  in  this  cru-
sade against  Godless  materialism  is what  can be "sold":  our
Christian  soldiers  march  to  the  tinkle  of  the  cash  register.
"Muir,  Who's  Muir?"
Nothing  in  the  report  is  more  valuable  than  the  light  it
throws   on  just  what  constitutes  that  "public   opinion"  the
radio,  TV and  movie business  fear  to  offend.  A  vice-president
of  Alcoa said it  did not receive a single letter as a result of an
attack  on the  Murrow program  in  Spotlight.   General  Foods
telephoned branch  sales  offices  during the Jean  Muir furore  to
see how sales were  being  affected  and  got  the  answer,  "Muir,
Who's  Muir?"  Yet  four, letters  were enough to start  the  late
Philip   Loeb's  troubles  on  "The   Goldbergs."
Cogley found that local  radio and  TV broadcasters  in  Syra-
cuse  ignored  Laurence  A.  Johnson,  its  famous anti  Red and
pink  crusading  grocer.   "Few  of Johnson's  fellow  townsmen,"
Cogley  reports,  "can  understand  why he is  taken  so  seriously
on  Madison  Avenue."   Cogley  has  his  own  shrewd   answer.
"The  man  from  Syracuse,"  he  writes,  "saves  the  industry
from  looking like a  punch-drunk boxer  who takes  a  swipe  at
the  air  here  and  there,  then  staggers  back  from  imagined
blows.  With  Johnson in  the  ring,  the  industry  spokesmen do
Galileo  Still  "Controversial"
A  television  director  who  let  himself  be  interviewed
"off  the  record" said,  "You can  find  evidence of  Commu-
nist-thinking  in  almost anything  if  you  are  determined
to find it."   One example he  gave was  an  ad  man's com-
plaint,  "Why  do  you  always  use  stories  about  a  little
man  against  a  big man—it's Communist-like thinking!"
The  other  concerned  the  CBS  history  show  "You  Are
There."  It  put  on  Galileo's  recantation,  but  only  after
carefully   checking  with  clergymen.  "Nowhere  was  it
either  stated  or  implied  that  Galileo  was  tortured  to
exact  his  recantation,"  the  director  said.  "Still  CBS got
a  letter  from  a  priest  denonucing  the  'Communist'  im-
plication  that  Galileo had  been  tortured."
not  have to  feel  foolish  when  someone asks  just  how real  the
'economic' threat  is.  That  argument  is  based  on pleasing  'the
public';  for   purposes  of  defending  blacklisting,   Johnson  is
the  public."
The  report  is  full  of  vivid  phrases  which  illuminate   the
wasteland  into  which a  whole generation  has  been  driven.  A
man  trying  to  get  cleared:  "It's   like  battling  ghosts."  Aeso-
pian  language  to  avoid  the  word  "blacklist":  "Is  he  clean?"
Of  the  plight  of  some  "listed"  non-Communists  (the   Holly-
wood  lawyer,  Martin  Gang, who specializes  in  "clearances" is
talking):  "They  had no way to put  themselves  on record,  like
those  who had been  Communists.  .  .  .  The  [Un-American]
Committee  would  not  hear  them  because  they  had  nothing  to
tell  so they  could not  clear  themselves."   Possible  grounds  for
suspicion:  "If  one lives  in  the  [Greenwich]  Village,  it's   bad.
Sometimes  even  if  you let  it  be known  you are  a  Democrat.
If  you are  a  member of.the ADA, it's  murder."  Conscience:
"He was a fine actor ...  it was a gross  injustice.  . . .  People
cared  about him as a person  too. . . . But what  can you do?"
TV writer: "If  the  sponsor's  wife  doesn't  like people to  die
in  a  play,  people  can't  die."  Another  writer:  "Nowadays  it
would  certainly  be a  mistake  to  let  the  underdog  win  in  the
end.  So I  don't."  Underground: "My wife had  a  copy of  Karl
Marx  that  she  got  when  she  was  16  or  17  years  old.   One
night  we were having a producer and his  wife over for  dinner
and  we  didn't  want  him  to  see  this  book, so  she  removed  it
from  the  shelf."  The only really .safe performer:  One "white"
list  included  Edgar  Bergen's  dummy, Charlie  McCarthy.
Cogley and the  Fund have provided a  most important  study
in  contemporary  history.  The  quick  collapse  of  the  high  lib-
eral  position  first  taken  by  the  movie  industry,  the  rise  of
"clearing"  as  a  new  racket-profession,  the  oily  characters
who  are  its  leading  lights, the artists who went  under  rather
than  abandon their  principles,  the  silence  and  moral  indiffer-
ence  which covered up  their  fate—this  is  the  land  of the  free
and  the  home  of the brave  as  it  really  is  in  the  middle of  the
cowed  Twentieth  Century.
Radio-TV  "Top  Level" Has  Low Opinion  of "Lists" and  "Listers'
Press  coverage of  the  Fund  for  the  Republic report  on
blacklisting overlooked an  appendix containing the  results  of
a poll by Marie Jahoda of New York University.   This showed
that  "top  level"  radio-TV executives took  a  more  sour  view
of  "listing"  than  the  general run  of  those interviewed.'
Everyone of  the  top  level interviewed thought blacklisting
did  more  harm  than  good  and  all  of  them  thought  profes-
sional  jealousy  played  its  part.  To  the  question,  "Are  the
listers  sincere and  patriotic?",  top  level  replies  were:  "sin-
cere but  misguided, crazy,"  37 percent j- "some sincere,  others
not,"   16  percent;  "insincere,   profiteers,  pathological,"   47
percent.
"Top  level"  also  took  a  dim view of what might get  a  per-
son into trouble. One-third thought  past  Communist  or  "fel-
low  traveller"   activities  lay  behind  blacklisting,  but  two-
thirds  replied, "accidental or  personal associations; current
non-Communist,  political  activities;  union  activities,   etc."
Ninety-five  percent  of  the  "top  level"  replies  thought  the
blacklist  situation  was  getting  better  rather  than  worse
while 5 percent replied,  "about  the  same."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's Weekly,  July  9, 1956
.  .  .  And  A  Preview  of  What  It  Is  Doing  to  Newspaper  Business
It  is  not difficult  to  imagine the  lofty  ironies  in  which the
editorial  page  of  the  New  York   Times  would  indulge  if  the
Soviet  press  began  to  purge  its  employe  rolls  of  men  who
were  once  Bukharinites or  Trotzkyites.
But  two  new  decisions—one  by  the  Appellate  division  of
the  New York  State  Supreme  Court,  the other by an  arbitra-
tor—show  that  the  New   York   Times  still  insists  on  firing
staff  members  for  past  political  association with  no  evidence
of  misconduct,  political  or  otherwise,  on  the  job.  These  deci-
sions  also  deserve attention  because they  show  how blacklist
practices  are  creeping up  on  newspaper business, thanks  to
the  thoughtlessness of  newspapermen themselves.
This inability to think past  popular prejudice  is  striking  in
the  case of  Melvin J.  Barnet.  The New  York  Times grievance
committee of the  Newspaper Guild  and  the  membership  of  the
Times  unit  voted  against  taking  Barnet's  case  to  arbitration
after  he  pleaded  the  Fifth  before  the  Senate  Internal  Secu-
rity Committee.
Toward  Company  Unionism
The  executive  board  of  the   New  York  Newspaper  Guild
voted  to  reject  the  actions of the  unit  and  its  grievance com-
mittee,  and  to  take  the  Barnet  case  to  the  arbitration   pro-
vided  by  the  Times  contract.  A  State  Supreme Court judge
held  the  Guild  was  bound  as  an  agent  by  the  decision of  the
unit.   But  a five man  appellate  court  has  just  unanimously
reversed, holding that  this was  an improper  extension of  "the
common  law  rules  of  agency  to  the  internal   affairs   of  a
union."  Obviously  something very  much  like company union-
ism  could  arise  if  a  unit  were  allowed to  reinterpret  its  con-
tract  to  suit  its  mood  and  management's.  The  appeals court
ordered  arbitration  of  Barnet's  case.
But how little this  may be worth was indicated at  the same
time  by Edward F.  Corsi's  decision as  arbitrator  in  the  case
of  another  Times  copyreader, Jack  Shafer,  who  also pleaded
the  Fifth   before   the  Senate   Internal   Security  committee.
Shafer  told  management when  subpoenaed that  he had been  a
member  of  the  Communist  party  from  1940 to  1941 when  he
joined  the  Army, that  he reactivated  his  membership in  1946
and  resigned  in  1949 before  joining the  staff   of  the  Times.
The  Times  contract  allows  discharge  only  for   "good  and
sufficient  cause."  Management claimed  his  job  on the  foreign
copydesk  was  "sensitive."  Shafer  had  been  on  this  job  for
more than  six years but management argued that  its  right to
fire  should  not  be  affected   "merely  because  the  employe's
past  job  performance has  been  unexceptional."
An  Occult  Standard
This  involved  a  man's  right  after  so many years  on  a  job
to  be judged by'his record. "The  stated  cause of  'lack  of con-
fidence'," the  Guild  argued, "related  exclusively to anticipated
guilt  rather  than  actual  misconduct  and  was  wholly  subjec-
tive  and  unreviewable and  a  total  negation  of  the  contract
right  not  to  be dismissed summarily."
Walter  Against Blacklisting?
"It is  immensely  heartening  to have  the  voice  of  Rep.
Francis  E.  Walter  added  to  the  protests  against  the
practice  of  blacklisting.   In  a  press  interview  on  Thurs-
day,   the   chairman  of   the   House   Committee  on   Un-
American  Activities  vigorously  condemned  the  practice
—both  when  it  affects  persons  who  have  invoked  the
Fifth  Amendment  rather  than  testify  regarding   Com-
munist  affiliations and when it  affects  persons  who  have
testified  freely   and  implicated  others.   'It  creates   all
sorts  of  schisms  in  our  society,'  he  said.
"It  must  be  of  concern  to  Mr. Walter,  therefore,  that
the  reports  and  files  of  his  committee  have  been  so  im-
portant  a  source  of  blacklists.  These  reports  and  files
are  filled  with  the  names  of  persons  who have  been  the
targets  of  unchecked  and  unverified  accusations;   and
they  have  been  made  available  with  a  carelessness  and
a  callousness  that  contributed  to  misuse  of  them.  We
hope  that  Mr. Walter's  awareness  of  the  evils  of  black-
listing  will  lead  to  an  abandonment  of  the   practice."
—Washington  Post  editorial,  July  1
There  was  a  revealing moment  in  the  hearing  when man-
agement  was  asked whether  Shafer  would  have  been  fired  if
he  were  employed  on  the  sports  copydesk,  presumably "non-
sensitive."   The  answer  was,  "No."  But  no  move  had  been
made  to  transfer  Shafer  to  a  "non-sensitive" post.   To have
done  so  would  have  left  the  Times  still  subject  to  criticism
from  the  Internal  Security  Committee for  keeping on its  staff
a  man who had pleaded the  Fifth.
Not  Anti-Communist  Enough?
Managing   Editor   Turner   Catledge  testified  unctuously,
"Not  only  must  we be sure  that  the  person  who handles our
[Communist]  news is not pro-Communist. We must be equally
sure that he will not lean  backward to prove that  he is not a
Communist  or  no  longer  a  Communist."  Ruled  Arbitrator
Corsi  after  quoting this  passage,  "Mr.  Shafer  could  give  the
Times  no such assurance, his  record on the  job notwithstand-
ing"  so  the  dismissal  was  justified.   In  other  words  Shafer
could  not  assure  the  Times  he  would  not  be  too  anti-Commu-
nist  in handling Communist news!
To  the  credit  of  the  Times, however, it  has  not  yet  fired
several  staff  members  who admitted  past  party membership
but  pleaded  the  First  amendment rather  than  name  others,
thus  risking  a  term  in jail.  The real  difference  between  the
handling  of  these  cases  and  earlier  firings  is  that  manage-
ment  first  buckled  under  and  then  stiffened   in  its   attitude
toward  the  witch  hunt.  Management itself  has  not  claimed
the  difference  was that between pleading the Fifth  and plead-
ing  the  First,  since  the   Times  editorially   has  consistently
upheld  the  right  to  plead the  Fifth.
When  The  Blacklisted  Are Attacked, They  Cry  "Censorship"!
'Arrogant  attempt  at  censorship'  is  the  label  applied  by
VWARE   Inc.,   anti-Communist   organization   in    entertain-
aent-communications,   to  the   $500,000  libel   suit  filed  last
iteek  by  John  Henry  Faulk,  CBS  disc-jockey   and  2d  VP  of
they actors   union   AFTRA,  against   AWARE,  Vincent  W.
Hartnett    and  Laurence  A.  Johnson.   Faulk  alleges  he  has
been injured by AWARE publication  16 of  last  February  10,
charging  him  with  some  half  dozen  past  Communist   front
connections.
"Said  AWARE  President  Godfrey  P.  Schmidt:  'AWARE
declares  flatly  that  Faulk's  charges,  direct  and by  innuendo
—of  racketeering,   of  extorting   money  nefariously   for  em-
ployment  clearances,  are  desperate   and  irresponsible   lies.
Faulk's  suit  has  no  basis  in  reality  and  AWARE  will  not
suffer  from  it.
" The   true   meaning   of   this   case  lies   elsewhere,'   Mr.
Schmidt  continued.   'Faulk  is  one  of  those  who  will  do  any-
thing  to  prevent  free  public  discussion   of  the  Communist
issue  and  its  more  ticklish  aspect,  Communist  fronts,'  con-
tinued  Mr.  Schmidt.  'AWARE  regards   the  problem  of   the
Communist  fronter—the  non  Communist  who  knowingly  or
unknowingly  allies  himself  with Communist causes—as  basic
to  the  solution  of  the  entire  issue  of  the  operations  of  the
domestic  Communist conspiracy.'  "—AWARE   Press   Release.
1  0 1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  9,1956
Will  Poland's  Rulers Have  the  Good  Sense  to  Meet The  Crisis  With Clemency?
Socialism's   Future  in  East  Europe  May  Depend  on  Poznan
The  Poznan  demonstrations,  like  strikes  under  other  despo-
tic  regimes,  quickly  took  on  a  political  character.  The   whole
affair  had  a  quaint  Nineteenth  Century  flavor.  A  young  girl,
militantly  striding ahead,  was photographed  leading  one  band
of  workers;  they  carried  a  flag  dipped  in  blood.  There  were
barricades  in the  streets. This  was like  1848,  and  even at  a dis-
tance  had  that  genuine  Polish  romantic air;  one  could  almost
hear  someone  playing  Chopin  from  a  balcony  as  the  battles  in
the  streets mounted  in  intensity. Soldiers  fraternized with  dem-
onstrators;  there  were  cries  of  "down  with  the  Russians."  The
main  grievance  was  underscored  by  the  attack  on  the  secret
police  headquarters.  The  workers  of  Poznan  deserve  the  wid-
est support  from  abroad;  this  uprising  is  the  test  of  the  Polish
regime.   How  it  reacts will  determine  its  right  to  survive.   If
the  emphasis  is  on  suppression,  all  its  bright  hope  will  be  de-
stroyed.   If  the  emphasis  is  on  correcting  grievances  and  if  it
has  the  magnanimity to  treat  the  arrested  demonstrators  fairly,
it  will  win  confidence  at  home  and  abroad.
(Continued  from  Page   One)
now  that  "Soviet  democracy"  is superior  to  "bourgeois  democ-
racy"  because it  not  only  "proclaims  freedom  of  speech  and  of
the  press  .  .  .  but  also  insures  them  materially."
The   reference   is  to  Article   125  of   Stalin's   Constitution
which  says  that  the  freedoms  of  speech,  press,  assembly  and
demonstrations  "are  ensured  by placing  at  the  disposal  of  the
working  people  and  their  organizations   printing   shops,  sup-
plies  of  paper,  public buildings,  the  streets,  means of  communi-
cation  and  the  other  material  requisites   for  the   exercise  of
these rights." There is no  record  that anybody  was ever   foolish
enough  to  take this  seriously and ask, please,  could  he print  up
some  leaflets  for  a  protest  demonstration  on  Sverdlov  square
next  Tuesday? This  provision  alone  puts  the  Stalin  Constitu-
tion  among  the  masterworks  of  Russian  humor.   But  is this  the
time to  retell  old  jokes ?
Out  Come  the  Pet  Bugaboos
The  Central  Committee  statement,  oh  the  heels  of  the  Poz-
nan  uprising,  must  shake  confidence  not  only  in  the  sincerity
of  the  Krushchev  leadership  but  in  its competence.' Its  content
and  Moscow's  reaction  to  Poznan  will  add  to  the   disillusion
engulfing  the  Communist parties  abroad. The aroma of  regimes
doped  by their  own  incense-burners  is  evident  in  the  reactions
from  both  Moscow  and" Belgrade;  the  Russians  blamed  worker
discontent  in  Poznan on  "imperialists,"  the  Yugoslavs  on  "Sta-
linists."   Both  trotted  out  their  pet  bugaboos.   Only  in  the  re-
actions  of  the  more  intelligent  Polish  regime  is  there  a  recog-
nition of real grievances.  Where  but in Moscow.would  a  regime
give  out  such  implausible  and  stereotyped  drivel  as Tass's  de
:
scription  from  Poznan,  "Workers  expressed  their  deep  disgust
at the diversionist  actions  directed  against  the peoples' power?"
What  folly  from  Moscow's  point  of  view,  to  give  Washington
credit  for  the  uprising,  to  exaggerate  Allen  Dulles's   impor-
tance,  to  picture  the  conventional minds  and  sedentary  spirits
of  our  State Department and  CIA  as global  Robespierres ?  Even
the  densest Communist must begin to  see that this is the famil-
iar  tactic  of  blaming  every  strike on  sinister  foreign  influence.
Chain  Reaction  Possible
Unfortunately  the  Poles  must  act  within  the  limits  of  their
subordinate relationship with  the  Russians,  and  Moscow   seems
incapable  of  such bigness  of  spirit.   Poznan  may  set  off a chain
reaction  elsewhere  in  Eastern  Europe;  both  the  Czechs  and  the
Hungarians   are   restive   under   wooden-minded   Communist
regimes.  The  pendulum  may  swing  back  to  rigid   repression.
Now  is  the  time  for  Western   Leftist  opinion  of  all  kinds  to
make  its  influence  felt  on  the  side  of  the  Poznan  workers  if
socialism is ultimately  to  survive in  Eastern  Europe.  The  Polish
regime  should  be  challenged   from  abroad  to  permit  foreign
observers  in  Poznan;  there  have  been  no  direct  newspaper  re-
ports from  the city  since  the first day of  the  uprising.  I  would
like  to  see—and  would  be  glad  to  join—a  group  of  persons
friendly   to  Poland  send  a  cable  asking  the  regime  to  allow
full  legal guaranties  for  those  arrested.  The  Polish  regime  and
socialism  itself  will  be  on  trial.   Have  Cyrankiewicz  and  his
colleagues  the  greatness to  see the  real  challenge  of  the  Poznan
uprising  and to meet it—with clemency and reform?
A  Half   Dozen  Free  Samples   to  Any  Reader  for   Summer  Resort  Distribution
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol, Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name                                                                                  •»
Street
City                                         Zone          State              .....
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name
7/0/56
Street
City                                        Zone          State               .....
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement T    Tes  Q    No  Q
Room   205
301    E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Washington   3,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED