I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956apr23.pdf

============================================================

Special  from  Israel
I.  F.  Stone's  First  Report  Direct  From  Beleaguered  Jerusalem
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  14
APRIL   23,  1956
<°«      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
War  May  Come  At  Any  Time
Jerusalem
I  have  been  here  one  week  and  in  that  week  the  situation
has  deteriorated  with  frightful  rapidity.   Writing  for  air  mail,
a  week  ahead  of  press  time,  is  harrowing  because  by  the  time
this  appears  in  print  war  may easily engulf  Israel.  Hammarsk-
jold  has  just  passed  through  here  and  in  his  wake  there  are
rumors  that  Egypt  will  attack  once  his  mission  is  over.    But
these  opening  lines  reflect  the  situation  as  it  appears from  out-
side.    Within  Israel,  the  atmosphere  is quite unlike the  picture
evoked  by  the  headlines  one  reads  in  the  American  and  Euro-
pean  papers  over  one's  coffee  on  a sunny hotel  terrace  in  Jeru-
salem,  even  though  the  terrace  be within  sight  and  gun  range
of  the  enemy  across  the  way  on  the  medieval  battlements  of
the  Old  City.
The  main  impression  here  is  of  tremendous  expansion  and
vitality.  Everywhere the  country is booming.  The  growth since
I  was here  last  in  the  Fall  of  1950  is  enormous.  Though  war
is  uppermost  in  the  minds  of  the  top  leaders  with  whom  one
speaks,  it  seems to  figure  in  the  minds  of  the  rest  of  the  popu-
lation  only  as  a  possibility  so  familiar  as  to  be  discounted.  In
the  buses,  taxis,  streets,  shops,  hotels  and  settlements  the  at-
mosphere  is  one  of  complete  absorption  in  the  tasks  of  recon-
struction  and   development.     Since   1945,   I  have  been   here
seven  times  but  never  has  this  ancient  land  seemed  more  the
new  frontier.    As  compared  with  1950  and  its  ill  fed  "auster-
ity,"  morale  is  high.   The  people,  even  those  poorly  dressed,
seem  well-fed and  look  healthy.   The  youth  in  and  out  of uni-
form  are blooming,  and  the  influx  of  Oriental  Jews—with their
lush  dark-eyed  women—has  considerably  raised  the  level  of
feminine  beauty.   To  walk  the  streets  and  travel  the  roads  of
Israel  is to  feel the  intensity of  a  subway rush  in  Times  Square.
Everywhere  there  are  new  buildings,  new  projects,  new  enter-
prises,  new  commodities,  new  pipelines,  new  roads,  new  tow-
ers.   Remembering  the  tiny  trickle of the  pious  and  the  Quixo-
tic  from  which  this  community  has  grown  in  little  more  than
half  a  century,  it  is  not  hard  to  understand  why  the  Arabs  are
afraid.    From  the  days of  Mohammed  to  those  of  the  Turkish
adventurers  who  took  over  Egypt,  the  passive  millions  of  the
Near  East  have  been  subjugated  over  and  over  again  by  a dy-
namic  handful.   Two  decades  of  peace,  and  Israel—for  all  its
seeming  tininess  on  the  map—may  easily  dominate  this  whole
area.  This  is not a part of  the  world  in which  numbers  count.
Attack  Taken  for  Granted
Amid  all  the  clashing  diversity of  opinion  to be  encountered
in  so  individualistic  a  community  as this,  one  observation  may
be  made  with   assurance.    Israel   is  not   afraid   of   a   Second
Round.   The  preventive  war  spirit  of  six months  ago  has  died
down  but left  behind  a tendency to  take  for  granted  a renewed
attack  by the  Arab  States  when  they  are  ready.  Ben  Gurion,  in
this  as  in  so  many  respects  typical,  is  almost  cockily  ready  to
take  the  Arabs  on  at  any  time.   Indeed  one  foreign   notable
after  a  session  with  the  top  leadership   described   the  tone  as
being  like that  of  the  Russians on  the  eve of  1905,  a  most  un-
happy  parallel.   Israelis  generally  feel  sure  that  they  will  win,
though   they  expect   the  cost  to  be  heavy.    Only  a  minority
would  welcome war;  the majority,  Ben Gurion  included,  prefer
peace  but  will  not  accept  a Munich  as  its  price.
It  would  not  be  accurate to  say that  in  the  meantime  Israel
is  going  about  its business.   It  is rushing  about  its  business.   It
is  not  even  bitter  anymore about  America's  lopsided  arms  em-
bargo  or the  UN's  innocuous maneuverings.   It  takes  for  grant-
ed, that  it  stands  alone;  that  both  Russia  and  America  are  play-
ing  for  the  oil-rich  Arabs;  that  Nehru  too  woos  them  as  does
Tito; that  France  is afraid  to  be too  friendly, that  Burma  seems
to  be  its  one  staunch  friend.    In  all  the  impossible   history  of
Israel,  never  has  its  position   seemed  more  impossible,   more
hopeless,  than  now.   But  a  people who  have  gone  through  so
much  against  such  odds  before  are  understandably   confident.
To  an  Israeli none of  this  seems really  new.   The  fedayeen   be-
ginning  to  creep  across  the  Gaza  border  recall  the  Arab  ter-
rorists  of  the  late  1930's.    The  world  political picture  does  not
seem  so  different  from  the  days  before  1947  when  both  Com-
munist  and  capitalist world  powers  were  anti-Zionist.  The  big
difference  in  Israeli  eyes  does  not  lie  in  the  Soviet  jets  which
Egypt  may  now  fly  but  in  the  fact  of  Statehood;  at  least   the
enemy  is  outside,  and  the  government  within  is  not  in  alien
hands.    There  is an  Army,  a  government,  a  State,  a  people,  a
familiarity  with  overwhelmingly  unfavorable  odds,   and   that
same  weapon  which  was  Israel's  secret  in  1948,   em  brera, no
alternative  but  to  fight  if  fight  it  must.   This  may explain  why
people  here  seem  to  the  visitor  so  strangely  unafraid,  almost
unconcerned.
II
When  I  landed  at  Lydda airport  just  after  midnight  a  week
ago  all   seemed  at  peace,   but  there  were  already  signs  that
the  appearances were  deceptive.  The  airport  was no  longer  the
armed  camp  it  appeared  to  be  in  those  last  years  under   the
British  when  the  CID  (the  British  FBI,  the  Criminal  Investi-
gation  Division)  watched  all  visitors.  A  crowd  was waiting  on
the  darkened  roof  of  the  airport  and  orange  juice  was  served
us in  the waiting  room.  The  movement  through passport,  cus-
toms  and  currency control  was swift  and  efficient;  it  was  shock-
ing  to  learn  that  the  Israel  pound,  once  the  same  as  Britain's,
was  now  worth  only  about  55  cents.    A  taxi  driver  on   the
steps  seeing  my  telltale  typewriter  case  wanted  to  know  why
we  newspapermen  were  frightening  away  the  tourist  trade by
writing  about  war.   "You  will  see  for  yourself  all  is  peaceful
here,"  he  told  me.  But  the  one-sided  distribution  of  the  in-
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone'* Weekly  April  tS, 1958
A  Capital  That  Lives  Within  Gunshot  of  The   Enemy
(Continued  from  Pagt  One)
coming  visitors  and  their  friends  indicated  misgivings.    The
bus  for  Tel  Aviv  was  jammed  to  capacity  with  new  arrivals
and  the  friends  and  relatives  who  had  been  waiting  to  greet
them.    But  in  the  lone  taxi  which  set  off  for  Jerusalem  there
were only two other  passengers  besides  myself,  an  elderly  Ger-
man  Jewish  couple  back  from  a  visit  to  their  son,  a  lawyer  in
Nairobi.  The  capital  of  Israel  is .the  only  capital  in  the  world
which  is  surrounded  on  three  sides  by  enemy  territory.    Its
location,  high  in  the  Judean  mountains  at  the  end  of  a  long
finger  of  territory  extending  into  Jordan,  chills  the  ardor  of
the  tourist.
Up  Into  The  Clouds
It  was  a  wonderful  ride.   Outside  the  airport  the  familiar
desert  palm and  eucalyptus smell  of  Israel  sent  chills of  delight
up  the  spine  of  the  returning  traveller.   To  our  right,  as  we
sped  away  from  Lydda we  could  see  in  the  distance  the  dim
lights  of  Ramie, the  capital  of  Arab Palestine  from  the  Eighth
to  the  Eleventh  centuries.   As  we turned  eastward,  further  on
along  our  left  was  a  huge  cement  factory  sprawled  across  the
plain,  fully  lit,  working  night  and  day.  Beyond  this  we  skirt-
ed' round  Arab-held Latrun,  the  British  police  fortress,  where
only  nine  years  ago  most  of  the  men  now  governing   Israel
were interned  by the  British  in  a final  ineffective  try at a  tough  ,
policy.  Further on  a string  of  lights circled  a  colony  almost  on
the  Jordan  frontier;  the  lights,  our  driver   explained,   were
necessary  to  keep  watch  against  infiltrators.    At   Bab-el-Wad,
the  cleft  in  the mountains where  the  road  to  Jerusalem  begins
its  upward  climb  from  the  plain,  we  sped  past  an  all-night
Shell  service station,  a  banal  note  at  a  spot  of  heroic  struggle
between  Jew  and  Arab  in  1948.   From  then  on  all  was  dark
except  for  the  occasional  lights  of  the  pumping  stations  along
the  pipeline which  carries  water  to  Jerusalem.   The  air  grew
chill  as we climbed  higher.   In  the  starlight  the  craggy  treeless
mountain  tops  looked  like  sleeping  pachyderms.  We  did  not
pass  or  meet  a  single  car.   It  began  to  drizzle  and  soon  we
were  winding  upward  through  low  hanging  clouds.
We  talked  as  we  rode.   The   elderly  couple  had  lived  in
Jerusalem  since  1934,   the  year  they  left  Germany.   The  hus-
band  had  been a  bookbinder  in  Nuremberg  and  carried  on  the
same  business  in  Israel.   Their  son  was  doing  well  in Kenya;
they  were  impressed  with  the  rich  soil  and  business  oppor-
tunities  of  the  East  African  colony;  the  Mau  Mau  were sur-
rendering.  They  had  three  grandchildren  in  Kenya. Our driver
was  Jerusalem  born,  a   sabra  and   once—like   so  many  taxi
drivers—a  member  of  the  terrorist  organization,  the   Irgun.
He  was, as might  have been expected,  a  passionate nationalist.
Was  he  afraid  of  war  with  Egypt  now  that  Egypt  had  new
Soviet  jet  planes?  The  planes  did  not  impress him,   "It's  the
spirit  that  counts,"  he  said,  "not  the  arms."   He  didn't  want
to  see  peace.   If  there  were  peace,  he  said,  we  would  never
recover  the  Old  City.  When  I  asked  him  why  it  was  so  im-
portant  to take the Old  Qty,  he  said  I  asked  strange  questions..
Suppose,  he  asked  in  turn,  my  brother  were  in  the  hands  of
the  enemy?  Would  I  not  try  to  free  him?  The  Old  City was
part  of  our  flesh  and  blood,  he  said  in  Yiddish.  We  must  re-
cover  it.   The  Beth  Hamigdash  (the  Temple)  site  was  in  the
Old   City.    That   seemed  to  him  conclusive.    I   asked  him
whether  he  was  religious  and  he  said  no.   His  emotional  feel-
ing  about  the  Old  City was  purely  nationalist,  and  I  had  rea-
son  to  believe  it  was  not  exceptional.   I  was  to  hear  another
Jerusalem  resident,  a  moderate  man,  born  and  educated  in  the
West, say it  cut him  like  a knife to  see streets  walled  off with-
in  the  city  between  the  Jewish  and  Arab  held  portions.    The
Greeks  in  their  ancient  City  States  must  have  felt  the  way the
Israeli  of  Jerusalem  feel  about  their  city.  For  all  I  know  the
Jerusalem  Arabs  may feel  the  same  way; there  were  rich  and
cultivated  families  in  the  Arab  sections  outside  the  Old  City
which  were  taken  over  by  the  Jews.
Tea  On A  "Brink"
We  drove  past  the  high  promontory   of  Castel  where  so
many  died  in  1948  to  hold  command  of  the  road  and  further
on  the  driver  pointed  out  in  a  valley  along  the  way the  dim
ruins  of  the  Arab village  of  Lifta,  famous  for  its  thieves  and
brigands.   The  dark  and  sleeping  city  into  which  we  finally
drove  after  two  was  at  peace.   But  the  first  thing  we  saw  in
the  morning  from  our  bedroom  balcony  in  the  beautiful  King
David  Hotel  was part  of  Jerusalem's  No  Man's  Land,  at  that
point  a  narrow  stretch  of  green  grassy  valley  rising  upward
to  the  Old  Qty  walls  high  on  the  hill  across  the  way.   The
King  David  is  probably  the  only  luxury  hotel  in  the  world
whose  guests  sleep  and  eat  within  range  of  walls  manned  by
enemy  guns.   Nobody  having  tea  in  the  sun  on  the  broad  ter-
race  seems  to  realize  how  much  depends  on  the  restraint  and
discipline  of  enemy  gunners  hidden  on  the  walls  just  across
the  valley.
On  its  north,  east  and  south,  Jerusalem  works,  plays,  eats'
and  sleeps  within  range  of  enemy  firepower.  Only  eight years
ago  mortar  and  artillery  shells  from  these  surrounding   hills
rained  down  on  Jewish  Jerusalem.   People  dodged  from  door-
way  to  doorway on  their  way to  work; hardly  a house  was left
undamaged.   Water  was  strictly  rationed  and  food  had  to  be
carried  by  volunteers  at  night   over   secret  footpaths   around
Bab-el-Wad.    Gershon   Agron,   an   American  newspaperman
who  came here with  the  Jewish  Legion  in  the  British  Army  in
1917,  managed  to  keep  his  paper,  the  Jerusalem  Post,  going
all  through  that  siege.   Last  year  he  was  elected   Mayor  of
Jerusalem.   When  I  walked  in  on  him  my  first  morning  in
Jerusalem  to  find  him  behind  a  desk  piled  high  with  English
and  Hebrew  monographs  on  municipal  government  and   fi-   *
nance,  he  had  just  had  a visit  from  ^n  editor  of  the  Catholic
Digest  named McCarthy.   "Why  you  son-of-a-gun,"  said  Mc-
Carthy,  "don't  you  remember  me?   We  used  to  cover  police
headquarters  together  in  Philadelphia  40  years  ago  and  you
stole  some  of  my  best  stories!"   Mayor  Agron's  first  words
when  we  began  to  talk  were  of  the  overhanging  threat.   "If
only  it weren't for  the  war,"  he  said, his  very  phrasing  imply-
ing  its  inevitability,  "how  easy  our  problems  would  be.   In
three  years  we  could  settle  them  all.   Instead  of   rebuilding
and  expansion; I  have  to  worry  about  air  raid  shelters."   Yet
he  spoke  with  zest  rather  than  resignation;
Laundry  in  No  Man's  Land
On  the  very  border itself,  all  seems to  be  taken  for  granted.
Chickens  peck  hopefully   between  the  ruins  in  the   Musrara
(Continued  on  Page  Three)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'* Weekly,  April  tS, 1956
.  . .  Homes  and Even  A  Synagogue  in  The  Ruins  Left  In  1948
quarter,  barefoot  children   play  amid  the  grass  and  flowers
of  No  Man's  Land, the slender  cypresses  wave in the wind and
the  sign  in  Hebrew  and  Arabic,  "Danger.   Enemy  Territory  in
Front  of  You.   Forbidden  to  Cross"  holds  up  one  end  of  a
clothesline   on  which  a  fresh   wash   dangles   in  the   breeze.
Small  boys play  ball  along  the  border  but  a  passerby  shouted
angrily  in  Arabic when  we got  up  on  a  pile  of  debris  to  have
a  closer  look  at  the  enemy  positions  across  the  way.  No  sol-
diers  are  visible  on  either  side.   Birds  sing  in  the  chill  spring
air, and the weeds have grown  lustily in the ruins on both  sides.
At  Mandelbaum  Gate,  the  one  point  where  it  is  still  possible
to  pass  between  Israeli  and  Arab  Jerusalem,  we  saw the  fort-
nightly  convoy  come  down  from  the  Hebrew  University  and
Hadassah  Hospital  on  Mt.  Scopus  in  enemy  territory.   A  Jor-
danian  soldier  in  a  kbaffiyeh    checked  passes  on  the  other  side
and  UN  observers  watched  the  armored  cars  pass  over  into
Israel.   The  armistice  agreement  permits  Israel  this  Operation
Caretaker.   Pilgrims  also  pass  through  this  gate  and  we  saw
a  group  of  Finns  who  had  just  come  from  Jordan  waiting  on
the  Israel  side.  Their army bags  bore  hotel  tags  from  Valencia
in  Spain.   They  seemed  unable  to  speak  anything  but  Finnish
and  waited  helplessly   near  the  frontier  post  for  a  guide  to
arrive.    Nearby,   facing  Jordan  from  the  Israel   side,  was  a
large  sign  in  blue  and  white  saying  in  Hebrew,  "Welcome
Within  Thy Gates  O Jerusalem!"
On  the  north  and  east  the  city's  streets  run  into  No  Man's
Land  but  on  the  south,  high  on  a  hill  facing  toward  Bethle-
hem,  is  the  country's  most  fought  over  kibbutz,  Ramat Rahel
(Rachel's  Heights),  a  fortress  settlement  which  I  saw last  in
1948  the morning  of  the first truce when  unburied corpses still
lay  like  blackened  leather  caricatures  of  men  amid  the  rubble
and  the  barbed  wire.   Founded  in  1926,  the  colony  has  been
twice  destroyed,  once  in  the  Arab  riots  of  1929  and  again  in
the  Arab-Jewish  war  in  1948.   It  changed  hands  four  times  in
1948  but  was in  the  hands  of  Israel  again  when  the  armistice
came.   Ramat  Rahel  dominates  the  one  way  into  Jerusalem
from  the  south,  the  road  from  Bethlehem  which  may  be  seen
across  the  green  rolling  hills  in  the  distance.   Reconstruction
began  in   1949  and  there  is  still  much  to  be  done.   In  the
ruined  laundry,  still  torn  open  to  the  blue  sky  above,  a  12
foot  boiler  stands  like  a  rusty  Moloch  in  the  wreckage.   In
_  the  cellar  below  one  can  see  where  mortar  shells  finally  tore
up  the  secret  storeroom  in  which  the  Haganah  once  hid  its
arms  from  the   British.
Sheep  Will  Wander
In  a huge  communal  stone  building,  part  still  under  repair,
part   rebuilt,  we  visited   the  secretary  of   the  kibbutz,  Joel
Nathan,  in  his  small  bare  whitewashed  office.   Nathan  was a
Polish  yeshivab   bocher   (theological  seminary  student)   who
emigrated  to  Palestine  18  years  ago.   He  said  the  colony  lost
12  members  in  the  1948  war,  nine  at  the  kibbutz  itself  and
three  in  battle  elsewhere.   Ramat  Rahel  plans  to  concentrate
on  vineyards,  orchards  and  cattle  raising.   It  has  50  head  of
Holland  cattle  and  5,000  laying hens.  Nathan  explained  that
ordinarily  they would  also  raise  sheep  but  they were too  close
to  the  frontier.   "There  is  no  way,"  he  said  in  Yiddish,  "to
keep  sheep  from  wandering  into  enemy  territory."   The  col-
ony's  pride  is  the  war  memorial  which  now  stands  in  its cen-
5  7
tral  square,  a  statue  of  Rachel  protecting  her  children  with
the  Hebrew  inscription   from  Jeremiah,   "Thy   children  shall
come  again  to  their  own border."
From  Ramat  Mabel  we  went  to  Jewish  Jerusalem's   oldest
Holy  Place,  King  David's  tomb  on  Mt.  Zion.   From  a valley
under  the  walk  of  the  Old  City one  climbs  endless  stairs with
barbed  wire  on  one  side  of  them  to  mark  the  frontier,  and
then  one  descends  deep  into  a  dark  cavern.   Two  Israeli  sol-
diers,  the  first  we  had  seen,  stand  on  guard  at  the  entrance.
Within,  lit  by  candles,  is  the tomb.   On  it  are  crowns  from
ancient   Torahs   and   over   them   a   banner   which   reads   in
Hebrew,   "David   King  of  Israel  Lives  Forever."   A  sturdy
bearded  Rabbi  caretaker  said  that   14  kings  of  David's  line
were  buried  in  the  tomb  and  invited  the  visitor  to  light  a
candle  and  have  a  prayer  said  for  a  departed  parent.
The  Venerable  and  The  Horrible
In  a  nearby cavern  is a  newer  exhibit,  the  hideous  relics of
the  Nazi  concentration  camps  and  crematoria,  torn  and  defiled
Torahs,  objects  made  of  skin,  human  soap.    Not   far   away
within the tame  ancient  cellars  one may see where  the  Haganah
managed  to  blast  a  way through  the  thick  walls  into  the  ad-
joining  Old  City  during  the  war.   Above  all  these  relics,  ven-
erable  and  horrible,  of  human  struggle  one  emerges  again  into
a  sunny  garden  and  the  peaceful  mountains  across  the  deep
cleft  of  the  Jordan  valley  looked  pink  and  diaphanous  in  the
declining  sun like  a huge  setting  for  a  Wagnerian  Gotterdam-
merung.   Church  bells  began   to   ring   from  the  Dormition
Monastery  on  Mt.  Zion  for  evening  prayer.
My  strangest  visit  on  the  Jerusalem  border  occurred  several
days later  on  the  eve of  the  Sabbath  when  I  wandered  into  the
back  street  slums  only  a  few  blocks  from  the  opulent  King
David  Hotel.  Attracted  by ruins  I  walked  down  Bliahu  Shama
street  to  the  walled  off  dead end  directly  on the  frontier.   Ad-
joining  the  new  20-foot  high  frontier  wall  was  a  four  story
house  of  which  the  front  half  had  been  completely  destroyed.
The  stairs  were  still  there  and  led  up  to  rooms  of  which  one
wall  and  a  major  part  of  the  flooring  had  been  torn  away.
These  half  rooms  open  to  the  street  and  sky  were  occupied.
The  street  was  full  of  Oriental  Jewish  children  playing  and
my  questions  in  bad  Hebrew  created  a  hilarious  uproar.   One
bright-eyed  urchin  in  response  to  a  question  said  there  were
33 families living  in  that  ruined  house.
Homes  On A  Ruined  Rooftop
I  was  incredulous  and  asked  whether  anyone  there  spoke
English.  Bright  Eyes motioned  me to  follow  him.   He  led  me
into  an  adjoining  house  and  up  three  flights  of  stairs  to  the
apartment  of  a  Bulgarian  Jew  named  Avigor  who  turned  out
to  speak  French  and  German,  and  was  kind  enough  (after  I
had  had  coffee  and  cake)  to  take  me  on  a  tour  of  the  ruined
house.  The  house,  he  said,  was that  of  a wealthy Arab named
Tannous  now in  America.  He  said  it  was blown  up  one  night
by  the  Irgun  while  officers  of  the  Arab  Legion  were meeting
jthere.   The  tour  of  inspection  started  on  the  roof  where  two
paperboard  dwellings had  been built  near  the  precarious shear-
ed  off  edges  of  the  roof.   In  one  lived  a  Jew  from  Tangiers
with  his  wife  and  baby;  he  was  now  a  member  of  the  Jeru-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly  April  S3,1956
The  World's  Oldest  Continuous  Government  Prepares  for  Invasion
(Continued  from  Page   Three)
salem  police  force.   In  the  other  lived  a  Yugoslav  Jew  from
Zagreb  who  had   been  an  ironworker  in  his  native  country.
Here,  like  so many  in  this  poor  quarter,  he  answered  "kvish"
when  asked  where  he  worked—i.e.  he  worked  on  the  roads.
He  and  his  wife  occupied  the  one  room  on  the  roof.
The  Bulgarian,  a  hatmaker  whose  son  will  graduate  as  a
lawyer  from  Hebrew  University  in  two  months,  belonged   to
the  wealthier  section  of  the  slum;  he himself  had  three  rooms.
He  has  a  family  of  seven  and  arrived  in  Israel  May  15,   1948,
the  very  day  Statehood  was  declared.   He  proudly  showed  me
the  family  furniture  he  had  brought  with  him  from  Bulgaria.
When  we  descended  from  the  roof  and  entered  the  house  of
Tannous   from  the  street  we  found  a  whole  catacomb  of  one
room  apartments  within  it.   Plumbing  was  of  the  most  make-
shift  variety.   At  one  point  there  was  a  huge  can  stuck  in  a
shell  hole in  the  wall.  A  pipe  had  been  let  down  from  above
with  a  spigot  and  this  supplied  water  to  the  occupants.
Invincible  Housewives
The  house  was  entirely  occupied  by Jews from  Persian  Kur-
distan  and  the  housewives  standing  in  front   of  their  doors
politely invited  us to  step  in  and  see their homes.  The  surprise
was  to  see  the  spotless  cleanliness  of  the  rooms  in  this  aban-
doned  house.   The  old  discolored  stone  floors  had  been  scrub-
bed  clean.   The  beds  were  made;  the  tables  set.   The  Sabbath
candles  had  been  lit  and  wine  and  fruit  were  on  the  table.   I
had  to  accept  something  to  eat  or.be  guilty  of  discourtesy.
Higher  up,  on  the  top  floor,  the   biggest  surprise  of  all
awaited  me.  Here,  shoes  piled  up  outside as  before a  mosque,
there  was  a  synagogue,  known  simply  as  the  Congregation  of
Tannous'  house.    In  an  alcove  the  women prayed.   The  main
portion  of  the  synagogue  was  packed  with  dark-skinned  wor-
shippers,  unmistakably  Jewish  in  feature, bright-eyed  and  shy.
Evening  prayers had  begun.   Out  the  broken  windows  on  one
side  the  Old  City  wall  seemed  quite  close  across  the  rubble
of  No  Man's  Land;  out  the  windows  on  the  other  side  one
could   hear   the   children   singing   at  play   in   the   darkening
street  below.
HI
In  this  beleaguered  capital with  its vivid contrasts of  poverty
and  luxury,  its  slums  and  its  tree-shaded  residential  areas,  its
Oriental   beggars   and  its  well-stocked   bookshops,   there   sits
the  oldest  continuous  government   in  the  world.   The   three
concentric  circles  of   the   Government   of   Israel,   the   Jewish
Agency  and  the  Histadruth   (Labor  Federation)  are headed  by
the  same  characters  who  have  governed   the  Yishuv   since  the
Balfour   Declaration   and   in   some   cases   even   before.    Ben
Gurion,   Moshe  Sharrett,  Goldie  Meyerson,  Levi  Eshkol  and
the  lesser  figures  around  them  make  up  the  well  known  cast
of  the  most  solidly  entrenched  bureaucracy  in  the  world,  de-
voted,  energetic,  personally  incorruptible,  and  tenacious  in  the
firm  grasp  of  power.   The  coalitions  shift  but  the  center  of
power  remains  with  the  Mapai,   the  right  wing  of  Socialists
who  control  the  Labor  Federation  and  through  it  most  of  the
institutions   of   this   country.   This   is  a  kind   of   "collective
leadership,"   a  maze  of  interlocking  bureaucratic "empires"  in
which  even  those  at  the  top  must  tread  warily  in  the   effort
to  get  things  done.    Foreign   experts,  particularly  American
Jews,  find  the  maze  both  maddening  and  miraculous—mad-
dening  because  of   its  crustacean-like  capacity  to   resist  new
ideas,  miraculous  in  the  results  which  seem  to  flow  from   it
nonetheless  almost  despite  itself.    As  in  an  army, to  talk  with
those  within   it   is   to   hear   an   endless   story  of   frustration
and  snafu;  to  watch  it  from  outside  and  at  a  distance  is  to
see  what  appears  to  be  a  machine  streamlined  for  victorious
achievement.
Nowhere  else  on  earth  are  people  still  ruled  by  the  same
men   who   governed   them   in   1920.    It   is  as   if   Woodrow
Wilson  still  ran  the  government   in  the   United   States  and
Lloyd  George  in  Britain.
At  the  moment  its  interest and  energies  are  concentrated  on
preparation   for  what  it  believes  to  be  almost  inevitable  war.
But  away  from  the  capital  and  its  top  figures,  energy  is  still
concentrated  on  reconstruction  and  development.   Only  in  the
last  few  days  have  the  minds  of  ordinary  men  turned  toward
war  as  an  imminent  possibility.   But  of  the  development   I
have  seen  and  of  the  shootings  in  the  Gaza  strip  and  of  the
jedayeen  terror  which  threatens  I  must  write  next  week.
Watch  /or  J.  F.  Stone's  Second  Report  from   Israel   in  Next   Week's   Issue
I.  P. Stone's
Please  renew
Street
City
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name
Street
City
Shall  we  send
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for
Zone
for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4
Zone
gift   announcement?
the  enclosed  $5:
....State
(1 yr.)  additional:
4/23/60
....State
Yes  D    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED