I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956sep24.pdf

============================================================

A  Juicy  Scandal  Brownell Tried to  Hide  But  Adlai and the  Democrats  Ignore,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  36
SEPTEMBER  24,  1956
101
     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Campaign  Is  On—But  What's  It   About?
The  first  question  asked  Stevenson  at  his  press  conference
here  last  week  was what he  thought  the overriding  issue of  the
campaign.   He  supposed  it  was  war  and  peace  but  added   "I
think  it's  very hard  to  select  a  single  issue."  The  truth  is that
no  overriding  issue  has  appeared.  For  the  Republicans  the  is-
sue  is  Eisenhower.    For  the  Democrats  it   is  Nixon.   For  a
while  it  looked  as  if  the  issue might  be  Hiss.   Not  since  John
W.  Davis  ran  against  Coolidge  in  1924  has there been  an  elec-
tion  in  which  it  was  harder  to  determine  just  what  the  cam-
paign  was  about—and  then  at  least  there  was  a  third  party
ticket  in  the  field  with  La  Follette.   It  was  really  a confession
when  Adlai  explained  at  Harrisburg",  "when  someone  says  to
me  that  the  two  parties'  programs  are  just  about  the  same  I
say that  so are  two  checks,  signed  by different  people."   Steven-
son  says  "the  question  is  which  one  can  be  cashed  and  which
one  will  bounce."   But  maybe the  real  question  lies  in  the  fact
that  both  are  blank  checks,  and  it  is hard  for  the  voter  to  de-
termine  just  what  he  will  be  getting.
There  may or  may  not  be  a  new  Nixon  but  there certainly
is a new  Adlai.   He  is not  the  figure  he was  four  years  ago.  At
Harrisburg  he  seemed  the  clever  after  dinner  speaker;  he  ap-
pears  to  gravitate  naturally  to  pleasant  generalities.   In   the
Washington   press  conference,  he  seemed   only  a  more   culti-
vated  variety  of  a  type  one  often  encounters  at  the  State  De-
partment,  urbane  but  not  very  vital.  The  "amiable  complac-
ency"  of  which  he  accused  the  Republicans  begins  to  seem  a
self-portrait.   He  even  has  a  streak  of  fatuity,  as  in  his  Harris-
burg  climax:  "So  I  say let  us  be up  and  doing,  probing  cease-
lessly  for  solutions to today's  problems." This might  be  termed
an  after  dinner  mint.   His  prepared  answers were  mostly exer-
cises  in  evasion.  A  great  crisis  is  developing  abroad.   If   the
British  can  debate  it,  why can't  we?  What  is  this  coy business
of  its being  "no  secret"  that  he  doesn't  "think  much of  the  re-
cent  conduct  of  foreign  affairs"  but  is  reserving  comment  till
later?   Surely  there  is a middle  way between  irresponsible  ut-
terance  and  choking  into  silence  on  the  bi-partisan old  school
tie?  There  is  also  a  crisis  developing  at  home  in  the   school
situation.   Stevenson  has  said  the  President  has a  duty  to  create
a  climate  of  compliance.  So does  Stevenson.  But  when  Steven-
son  was  asked  what  he  would  do  as  President,  he  couldn't say
"with  any precision"  because he didn't  know  "what  the  precise
facts"  are.  Does  he  need  a  CIA  briefing  on  the  race  problem?
This  caution  may be politically  wise,  but  it  is  not  inspiring.
It  looks  as  though  Stevenson  has  decided  that  his  chances  de-
pend  on  an  accumulation  of  petty or  regional  irritations  rather
than  on  any  overriding  issues,  and  that  his  best  strategy  is  to
say  as  little  as possible  that  will  antagonize  anybody  while  he
cashes  in  on  the  disaffection  with  the  "ins."  These  tactics  are
tailor  made  for  nonentities;  they  fit  badly on  a  Stevenson,  and
they  make one  feel  sad  at  a  time  when  there  has  been  such  a
vacuum  of   leadership.
On  the  other  side,  the  Republicans  are  starting  off  slickly.
Nixon  at  his  own  press  conference  the  week  before   looked
like  the  clean  cut  type  of  young  man  Fuller  Brushing  his  way
through  college;  he  is competent,  and knows what  he  is  doing.
It  was  smart  to  accept  Stevenson's  reply  on  Hiss  and  to  turn
the  other  cheek  to Mrs.  Roosevelt;  the  latter's  performance  on
Meet  the  Press  the  Sunday  before,  incidentally,  was  magnifi-
cent.   I  wish  she were  running  for  President  instead  of  Adlai.
The  Republican  slogan,   "the   best  four  years  of  our  lives"
should  not  be  underrated.   Nixon  is  out  to  create  a  new  pic-
ture  of  himself   in  the  Eisenhower  image  and  may   succeed.
"Peace   and  prosperity"   may  keep  Ike  in  the  White  House,
though  it  will  not  be  enough  to  recapture  Congress.    Eisen-
hower's  TV   kick-off   speech  had  the  true  synthetic  Madison
Avenue  flavor.  As  one  heard  Eisenhower  repeat  that  he  had
never  tired  or  ceased  in  the  search  for  peace,  one  could   not
help  but  think  that  he  never  has worked  half  as hard  on  peace
as  he  has  on  his  golf.  The  Eisenhower  peace  record  is  inflated
far  beyond  reality;  he  was on  the  edge  of  war  in  Indo-China;
he  went  to  Geneva  most  reluctantly; his  big  play—"aerial   in-
spection"—was   razzle-dazzle.   No   one   knows—himself    in-
cluded—what   he  is  likely  to  do  over  Suez  after  November.
He  is  personally  for  peace  but  has  yet  to  show  readiness   or
capacity  for  the  hard  work  and  hard  thinking  required  to  un-
ravel  the  complexities  of  getting   it.
Dp  We  or  Nasser  Menace  the  World  Interest  in  Suez?
Tepid  little  differences  do  appear  in  the  carefully  qualified
statements  of  Eisenhower  and  Stevenson  on  such  subjects  as
the  draft  and  H-bomb  tests.  These  gentlemanly  controversies
appear   pigmy  against   the   backdrop   of  what   the   Suez  and
school  crisis  may hold  in  store.  To  millions  now  awakening  to
political  consciousness  these  issues  take  on  a  tragically  over-
simplified  form  more  dangerous  to  us  in  the  long  run  future
than  the  Communism with  which  we  are  obsessed. The  poorer
and  darker  peoples   of  the  earth  see  only  that  we  find  new
ways  to  keep  dark  children  from  our  school.-;  and  mobilize  all
our  resources  to  keep  a  dark  people's  ruler  from  using  one of
his  country's  advantages  for  the  benefit  of  his  own  people.
We  draw wealth  and  power  from  the  possession  of  all  sorts of
monopolies  and  gifts  of  fortune,  but  when  one  turns  up  in
Africa  it must  be "international."  The  giant  shadow  of  ancient
resentments  fall  unseen  across  the  London  conference.
From   this   perspective,   in  always  hungry   eyes,   Suez  will
seem  such  a  de  luxe  crisis.   It  will  seem  truly  wonderful  how
comfortably  the  rich West  manages  to  ride  out  for  its  Armag-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, September 24,1956
A  Juicy  Campaign  Scandal  Brownell  Tried  to  Hide  But  the  Democrats  Ignore
The  Contractor's  Diary  on  How  To  Clear  with  GOP   Chairman  Hall
Whether   from  healthy  discretion   or  gentlemanly   anemia,
Stevenson  and  the  Democrats  seem  strikingly  uninterested  in
what  appears  to  be  the  juiciest  scandal  which  has  yet  turned
up  in  the  campaign. This  is the  Cremer  diary,  which  says  that
GOP  Chairman  Hall  arranged  for  party  rake-offs  before  clear-
ing  a  $43,000,000  contract  to  expand  the  government  owned
Nicaro  nickel  plant  in  Cuba.  The  scandal  involves  not  only
Hall  but  Attorney  General  Brownell,  who  stepped  in  and  re-
fused  to  let  a  Congressional   investigating  committee  see  the
diary  when  its  existence  became known  last  February.  Excerpts
from  the  diary  were  released  to  the  press  by Congressman  Jack
Brooks   (D.  Tex.),  chairman  of  the  House  Special  Govern-
ment  Activities  subcommittee,  for  publication,  Saturday,  Sept.
15.   Stevenson  was in  Washington  that  day.  The  Washington
Post was one of  the  few papers  in  the  country  to play the  story
on  page  one.  (The  New  York  Times  and  the Herald-Tribune
buried  it  inside).   Stevenson  was  a  guest   that  night  of  the
Post's  publisher,  Philip  Graham.   But  when  Warren  Unna  of
the Post's staff  asked  Stevenson  about  the  story  at  his  big  press
conference  Monday,  Adlai  pleaded   ignorance.
A  Bipartisan  Hush  Up?
The  form  in  which  Unna  put  the  question  reflected  gossip
on  the  Hill  that  Brooks  had  been  under  pressure  from  the
Democrats  as  well  as  the  Republicans  to  lay off. "Sir,"  Unna
framed  his  query,  "reports  over  the  week-end  brought  out  that
Chairman-Hall  was involved  in  the  award of  a  nickel plant ex-
pansion  in  Cuba.   So  far  there  has  been  a  reservation  on  the
part  of  Democrats  to  point  to  this  or  ask  any  searching  ques-
tions.  There  are  some  accounts  that  the  Democrats  are  so  re-
luctant  because  of  their  own  part  when  their  Administration
was in power.   Is this true?"  "Well,"  Stevenson  replied,  "I  am
unable  to  answer  the  question,  sir,  because  I  am  not  familiar
with  the  case  or  the 'instance  to  which  you refer.   I  just  don't
know  what  the  Democrats  are  going  to  do  about  that.   So  far
as  I  am  concerned,  I  have  no  information."  This  seems  re-
markably  uninformed  for  so  well-informed  a  candidate.
It  may  be  that  Democratic  as  well  as  Republican  bodies  are
buried  in  the  Nicaro  nickel  story.  Or  it may just  be that  Adlai
is  too  fastidious.  The  plant  itself  goes  back  to World  War  II.
The  Brooks  investigation  last  winter  led  to  the  resignation  of
Edward  Mansure as  administrator of  the  General  Services  Ad-
ministration.  The  diary  originally  came from  the  files  of  Ran-
dall  Cremer,  formerly   executive  vice  president  of  the  Fred-
erick  Snare Company, who  testified  before  the  Brooks commit-
tee  last winter. The  excerpts obtained by Brooks despite Brow-
nell's  refusal to let him have the  document cover a trip  Cremer
made  to  Washington  on June  3,  1954,  to  get  the  $43,000,000
Nicaro  expansion contract for  his  company. The  excerpts  have
been  so meagerly reprinted  in  most papers,  give so vivid a pic-
ture of  how  business has  been  done  in  GOP  Washington,  and
provide  so  engaging  a  sidelight  on  the  self-righteous   refer-
ences  of  Brownell  to Truman  era  corruption,  that  we  give  the
salient  portions here  for  the  delectation  of  our  readers:
"8:40 a.m. Arrived  Washington Airport—Took  taxi  to  GSA
[Government  Services Administration].
"9:00  a.m. Called  on Pinkley  [James  P.,  director of  the  In-
dustrial  Reserve Division  of  GSA]. Told  him  of  unsuccessful
Pious   Reflections
The  longer  we  meditate  on  Nixon's  recent  praise  of
the  American  Legion  lor  its  "Back  to  God"  movement,
the  more  convinced we  are  that  the  only  way  to  save
religion   in  this  country  is  to  launch  a  movement  to
keep  some  people  away  from  God.
We  sense  a  kindred  spirit  in  the  Baptist  Joint  Com-
mittee   on  Capital   Affairs   whose  latest  bulletin   asks
some  wry  questions  about  the  new law  making  "In  God
We  Trust"  our  national  motto.    It  asks,  "Might  we ex-
pect  to  reduce  armaments, raise  our ethics.  ..."    as a
result  of  the  new  motto?
One way to  determine  the  answer  would be for  church
people  to  sponsor  a  bill  at  the  next  session  of  Congress
cutting  the  military  budget  in  half  on the  ground  that
we  now trust  in  God.
What  makes  men  distinguished  by their  materialism,
their  hatred  of  progress,  their  support  of  thought  con-
trol  and  their  devotion  to  ever  bigger  bombs  talk  so
much  about  God?  The  real  assumption  behind  the  re-
ligious  drive underway in this country  today  is  not  flat-
tering  to  religion.   It  is  the  belief  that  the  best  way to
keep  the  human  herd  docile  is  to  drive  it  regularly  to
church.
efforts  to  reach  him  by  phone.  Says  he  has  been  run  ragged,
phones  tapped  (including  home)  and  doesn't  know  which way
to  turn.  Gave  him  my  telephone numbers and  asked  him  to
call  me  collect  any  time  from  a  pubUc  booth.   He  said  this
would  solve  many  of  his  problems.  Has  wanted  to  keep  us
posted  but  afraid  to  talk  over  phone. .  .  .  Perhaps  it's  noth-
ing  but  a  bad  case  of  nerves  but  his  condition  is   serious.
Asked  him  what  is  holding  up  award.   He  says  (1)   the  Na-
tional  Committee. .  .  .  Hopes we  can  get  Hall's  [Chairman
Leonard  Hall  of  the  Republican  National  Committee]  clear*
ance  today—thinks  now this  is  essential.  . .  .
"9:50   a.m.  Called   Mr.  Mansure,   told   him   I   should   be
through  with  Hall  by about  12.   Asked me  to  call  then.  .  .  .
"10:00  a.m.  Took  taxi  to  Cafritz  building,  1625  Eye  St.,
NW.   Had to  wait  15 minutes to  see  Hall.  Latter  very pleas-
ant  but  wanted all  the  facts.  Asked  about our  special  qualifi-
cations  for  Nicaro. ...     He  wanted  to  know  about  history  of
the  company  and  its  officers.  Told  him  this  in  full,  also  the
politics  of  all  of  them. .  .  .  Told  him  about  our  52  years  in
Cuba  and the fine organization we have built  up there.  . . .
The  Right  Kind  of  People
"Hall  then  asked  for  information  re  support  of  the  Party.
Went  over  this again, and assured him  we have  no Democrats
in  the  higher  brackets  and  believe  practically  none  in   the
lower.  ...      He  spoke  of  bonds,  insurance,  etc.,  and asked
whether  we  would  be  inclined  to  place  this  where  it  will  do
the  most  good.  I  assured  him  we  want  to  work  with  him  on
this  and will  do anything within  reason. .  .  .
"He seemed  much  pleased with  all  this  and said  he  is  satis-
fied  we  are  the  right  kind  of  people.   I  asked  him  if  we  had
qualified.   He  replied—'You  certainly  have.' .  .  ."
When  the  press  reached  Chairman Hall  the  night  these ex-
cerpts  were  released, his  comment was  "I  can't  help  what any-
one  writes in  his  personal  diary."  This  is not  strictly  true.  We
can  see  the  day  when  applicants  for  government  contracts  are
asked  to  file  a  bond  guaranteeing  that  they  will  not  keep  a
diary  of  the  negotiations.  In  the  meantime, history is  grateful
to  Mr.  Cremer  even  if  the  Democrats  don't  seem  to  be.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  Sit,  1959
Stevenson  Opposes  the  Walter  Bill  to  Permit  Kangaroo   Court  Procedures
Suits Filed by The  Monmouth  Eight  Dramatize  Security-Loyalty  Idiocies
In  his  speech   across   the  river  at  Walnut  Hill,  Va.,   last
week-end,  Adlai  Stevenson  pledged  himself  not  to  support  the
Walter  bill  or  any similar measure  to  circumvent  the  Supreme
Court's  decision  in  the  Cole  case.  This  decision  would  seem  to
limit  the  security  program  to  "sensitive"  jobs.   It  was good  in
the atmosphere  of  Washington  to  hear  a Presidential  candidate
say,  "We  don't  want  to  turn  our  public  servants  into  a  collec-
tion  of  weak  and  spineless  conformists."   This  was  strikingly
different  from  Nixon's  reference  to  the  issue  before  the Amer-
ican  Legion,  when  all  the  Republican  candidate  could  see  that
was  wrong  with  the  security  program  were  "occasional  mis-
takes."  We  hope  that  Adlai  will  go  further.   Public  education
is  needed.  The  Harry  Cain  affair  offers  a  way  to  take  the  of-
fensive   against   the   Eisenhower   Administration;   the   former
Senator   from   Washington  ought   to  be  on   the   Democratic
team,  with  a  free  hand  to  speak  on  security-loyalty  abuses.
The  fundamental  issue  on  the  procedural  side  is  whether  a
man's  reputation  may  be  destroyed  on  the  basis  of  secret  evi-
dence.  Here  there  is no  easy  way to  reconcile  liberty  and  secu-
rity.  A  choice  must  be  made  between  justice  to  the  individual
or  the  security  of  the  State,  and  the  question  is  whether  we
shall  go  on  resolving  it—as  all  tyrannies,  from  Nero's  Rome
to  Stalin's  Moscow  have  resolved  it—at  the  expense  of  the  in-
dividual.    The  issue  is  dramatized  by  the  suits  which  former
Judge  Thurman   Arnold's  law  firm  here  has  just  filed  on  be-
half  of  what  might  be  called  the  Monmouth  Eight—the   eight
civilian   employes  of  the  Army  at  Fort  Monmouth   who  lost
their  jobs  in  the  frenzy  created  by McCarthy  in  1953.   On  this
page  we  give  samples  of  the  kind  of  "allegations"  bred  by
allowing   an  often   politically   illiterate   and  slightly  wacky  se-
cret  police  to  determine  loyalty  and  security  risks.  They  show
that   though   McCarthy   was  defeated   his  standards  are  still
being  applied  under  Eisenhower  and   Brownell.
These  cases  go  much  beyond  Cole's.  They  involve  several
scientists  who  have  made  distinguished  contributions  to  mili-
tary  science.  The  loss  of  such  abilities  is  the  price  paid  for
paranoid  standards,  and  cowardly  acquiescence  in  them.  These
men  had  access  to  "sensitive"  data. They  were  employes  of  the
Army,  one  of  the   11  agencies   specified  in  the  Act  of   1950
which  allowed   summary  discharge.  This  sharply  differentiates
these  cases  from  Cole's,  which  was that  of  a  minor  employe  in
Wives  As  Security  Hazards
"In addition to the written charges  . ..  the Legal Ad-
viser   to   the   [Army  Security]   Board  orally   advised
Plaintiff's  wife  ..   .  that  the  Board had secret  informa-
tion  to  the  effect  that  she  (i)  had  advocated  the  neces-
sity  for  a  revolution in  the  United  States,  (ii)  had  tak-
en  a  stand  against  a  'screening   of   school   books  and
screening  of  speakers'  and  (iii)  had advocated  that  the
U.S.  should  avoid  a  war  with  Russia  by  turning   its
'other  cheek  to  Russia'.   Plaintiff's  wife,  a  registered
Republican,  denied  the  truth  of  the   accusations."
—Complaint  of  Melvin  Morris,  one  of  the  Monmouth
Eight,  against   the  Secretary   of  the  Army.
"That   you   married   and  have  continuously   resided
with  Alice  Chelimer  Ducore,  who:  ...     Is  reported  to
have  expressed  pro-Communist statements."
—Allegations  Against  Harold  Ducore, as  given  in  his
suit  against  the  Secretary   of  the  Army.
the  non-enumerated  and  non-sensitive Department  of  Health,
Education  and  Welfare.  The  suits  challenge  the  constitution-
ality  of  any  act  or  executive  order  which  permits  discharge  as
a  security or  loyalty  risk  without  giving  the  employe an  oppor-
tunity  to  face  his  accusers.   The  suits reveal that  in  these  cases
not  only  the  accusers  were  kept  secret  but  so  were  the  judges.
The   accused  had  no  chance  to  argue  their   cases  before  the
Army  Security  Review  Board  because  the   Army—Jo  protect
Board  members  from  McCarthy—decreed  in  1953  that  hence-
forth  their  identities were not  to  be  disclosed.
It  should  be no  surprise that  anti-Semitism may have  played
its   covert   role   here.   All   eight   are  Jewish.  The   allegations
sampled  in  this  page  reflect  that  kind  of  mentality.  The  ques-
tions  put  at  the  so-called  hearings  are  incredible.  One  electri-
cal   engineer   was  asked   whether   he   believed   in   God   and
whether  his  parents  were  religious.  A  $3,000  a year clerk-typ-
ist  was  asked  what  she  thought  of  public  power  and  how  her
mother  and  father  voted  in  the  last  election.  The  voluminous
complaints filed in District  Court  here uncover  a  festering  nest
of  idiocy as  well  as injustice  in  the  Army's security  procedures.
It  is  worth  recalling  that  not  a  single  indictment  much  less
conviction  emerged  from  all  the  Monmouth  hullabaloo,  and
that   none  of   these  eight   faced  so  definite   an   allegation   as
membership,  past  or  present,  in  the  Communist  party.
Samples of  The "Allegations" on Which
"It has  been  reported  that  you .  . .  thought  that  the Rus-
sian  government  had  the best  method of  handling its  people
and  that  the  U.S.  government  was  too  liberal."
"You failed  to  list  on  your Statement of  Personal History
dated   29  December  1948  your  membership  in   the  Young
Peoples   Socialist   League   from  1936-1939."
"You  and  your  parents  reportedly  attended meetings  at
Carpenter's  Hall,  5th  Street,  Lakewood,  N.  J.,  which meet-
ings  were  believed  to  be  Communistic in  nature."
"While  attending  Brooklyn College you were a  member of
the  Physics  Club  in  1949, of  which Professor  Melba  Phillips
was  the  faculty  adviser.  It  is  reported that  Professor  Phil-
lips  had been dropped from  her  position at  Brooklyn  College
because   of   her  failure  to  testify   before  a   Congressional
committee."
"You   have   maintained   a  close   relationship   with   your
.1   4   5
the  Monmouth  Eight  Lost  Their  Jobs
brother,  Seymour  B              , who is  reported:  ...    To have
declared   the   Communist   party   an   ineffectual   party  that
should be permitted to operate legally  and not be suppressed."
"It  has  been  reported that  in  1946 and  1947, the  name  of
your  mother, Sara  C               ,  appeared as  a  registrant with
the  American  Labor  Party."
"Reportedly   you   were   nicknamed   'Red'   and  'Commie'
while in school because you continually  favored Russia...."
"You  were  employed ...    by the  Egg  Local  No.  1,  Farm-
ers  Union,  Lakewood,  N.  J.,  a subsidiary  of  the  Eastern  Di-
vision  of  the  Farmers  Union  which  purportedly  has  been
used  by  the  Communist  Party  to  publicize  and  carry  out
Communist  Party  farm   policies."
"It  has  been  reported  that  in  July  1946  you  attended  a
social  affair  given  for  the  benefit  of  Russian  children  and
to  collect  clothing  for   the  people  of   Russia."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, September 84,1956
(Continued  from  Page  One)
eddons.  The  non-Egyptian pilots  were given  three  years sever-
ance pay by the  old  Canal  company as inducement  to  quit,  and
compensation  for  any  furniture  and  household  goods  left  be-
hind  them.   Never  have  labor  relations  been  so  enlightened.
Britain  and  France  are  being  offered  the  prospect  of  dollar  aid
in  the  neighborhood   of  a  half  billion  dollars  a  year  by  Mr.
Dulles  if  they  will  promise  not  to  try  and  shoot  their  way
through   the  Canal  but  boycott  it  instead.  The  Gospel  itself
never  envisioned  such  blessedness  for  pacifists.  The  need  for
oil  is made  the  excuse  for  all  kinds  of  Western  claims  in  the
Middle  East  but  suddenly  it  appears  that  by  the  mere  lifting
of  production  quotas—the  turn  of  a  spigot—we  can  produce
at  home  enough  oil  to  make  up  not  only  for  the  longer  haul
around  the  Cape  but  even  for  all  the  petrol  of  Araby  should
its  sheikhs  join  Nasser.  The   embattled   oil  companies,  who
fear  that  nationalization  of  the  Canal  company  may  lead   to
nationalization  of  their  wells,  will  be  allowed  if  necessary  to
raise  domestic  prices   in   compensation—for   the   loss  of   the
extra  profit  they make  by selling  cheaper  Arab oil  at  the  same
fixed  Gulf  price  as  the  more  expensive  domestic  product.   In
what  gilded  chariots  we  modern  Romans ride  forth  to  battle!
So much  escapes  our  lordly  attention.  We  speak  so easily of
providing  $500,000,000  or  $600,000,000  a  year  for  a  Canal
boycott;  the  whole  Aswan dam  project, which could  have been
a  monument  to  our  magnanimity,  would  have  required  only
$400,000,000  in  hard  currency  over  the   12  to   16  years  re-
quired  for  its  completion. We  speak  of  Western  Europe's de-
pendence  on  the  Suez  for  Middle Eastern oil.   India,  Indone-
sia,  Malaya and  the  East  are  as  dependent on  the  great  ditch
for   the  commerce  which  provides  their  bread.   Mr.   Dulles
says  95  percent  of  the  "users"  are  represented  at  London;  but
he  equates  "users"  with owners of  tonnage. What  of  the coun-
tries  like  India  which  have  to  use  the  tonnage  of  other  na-
tions ?  Has  the  West  the  right  to  boycott the  Canal for  its own
purposes  if  this  means  ruining  the  waterway  for   the  East?
Why  can't  they let  Nasser  run  the  Canal  and  wait  until  there
is abuse of  power—in  which  case Eastern and  Western  nations
may  be united against him ?  Is  it  not  because the  real issue  lies
in  Anglo-American fear  that  nationalization will  spread,  the
French  folly  in  believing  that  war  on  Egypt  may make  up  for
the  lack  of  political  wisdom in  Algeria? The  West  is ready  to
wreck  the  canal  if  necessary  (Dulles  by  boycott,  London  and
Paris  by  war)   to  smash  Nasser.   Is  this  upholding  interna-
tional  interest  in  a  world waterway?
The   Right   to   Keep   Other   Human   Beings   "Niggers"
Instead  of  a  slow  but  smooth  road  to  integration  we  are
seeing   the  beginnings. of  a  counter   offensive.   The   painful
scenes  at  Clay and  Sturgis,  where  colored  children  were  turned
away,  are only  the  dramatic  evidence  of  a  wider  tide.  The  Vir-
ginia  legislature,  like  so many  others  in  the  South,  is  enacting
nullification.  A  racist  Congressional  committee  began  hearings
in  the  District  of  Columbia  last  week  designed  to  give  inte-
gration  a  bad  name.   Reactionary  publications  like  U.S.  News
and  World  Report   sprout  scientific  studies  to  show  that  the
Negro  is  intrinsically  inferior.  The  counter  offensive  is  aided
by  the  form  of  the  Supreme  Court  decree  which  depends  on
private  litigation  by  poor  and  humble  people  like  Mrs.  Gor-
don.  Where  are  the  Negroes  of  the  South  to  find  funds  for
new  long  drawn out  legal  battles,  especially  if  by  law  and  un-
official  boycott  the  NAACP  is  forced  out  of  the  South?  The
counter   offensive   is  also  aided  because  neither  major  party
takes  integration  with  sufficient  seriousness;  no  foreign  emer-
gency  more  clearly  called  for  bipartisanship.  But  the  only  bi-
partisanship  visible  is  an  ultimate  indifference.
If  one  listens  to  the  murmurings  of  the  mob  in  Clay  and
Sturgis,  it  is  clear  that  what  the  white supremacist  is  fighting
for   is  the  right  to  keep  other  human  beings  "niggers",  to
brand  them  from  childhood.  The  children  who  play  together
must  separate  at  the  school  door.  The  darker  must  learn  from
his  first  days  that  he  is  an  inferior,  and  not  just  an  inferior
but  a  "nigger."   On  this  there  can  be  no  morally  palatable
compromise  as there  was none  on  slavery. What  Plutarch  tells
us  of  the  Spartans and  their  helots  is  still  the  instinctive  logic
of  the  white mob, sensing an  "uppity nigger."  To  make a child
a  "nigger"  is  the  worst  genocide.   It  is  the  genocide  of  the
spirit.  This  is what  all  Americans of  good  will  in  our  genera-
tion  are  called  upon  to  fight.
Please  Help   V» Reach A  Wider  Audience  This   Year
I. F. Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Name
Street
City
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To)   Name
City
City
301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D. C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
.Zone          State
mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional:
8/24/06
Zone.....      State.
Zone          State.
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?   Yes  O    No  G
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED