I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956mar19.pdf

============================================================

Warning  to  Travellers  (Ocean and Fellow):  The  State  Dept/a  New  Passport   Forms,  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  11
MARCH  19,   1956
<°<      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
A  New  Oath  for  Southern Senators  and  A  Way  to  Get  Arab-Israeli  Peace
Trying  for A  Smile  in  A World  'On  The  Brink'
We  gather   from  last  week's  manifesto  that  in  the  future
new  Southern  members  of  Congress  will  be  escorted  to  the
rostrum,  raise  their  right  hand  and   solemnly   swear   not   to
uphold  the  laws  and  the  Constitution.
A  private  poll   of  our  own  in  the  State  Department   has
turned  up  a  basis  for  peace  between  Israel  and  the  Arabs.   To
the  question  "which  of  the  races of  mankind  do  you  now  find
the  biggest  headache?"  an  astonishingly  large  number  of   offi-
cials  replied,  "Semites."   This  is a  change  from  the  days  when
McCarthy  was riding  high.   At  that  time a  majority  unhesitat-
ingly  had  answered,  "Senators."    Interviews  showed  that   offi-
cials  were  impartially anti-Semitic as between  Jews  and  Arabs.
We   came  away  convinced   that  if   the  Department's  private
conferences  were wired for  sound  and  re-broadcast from  Cairo
and  Tel  Aviv,  the  two  contending  peoples  in  the  Middle East
would  at  once  unite  in  fraternal  indignation.   We   can  see
Nasser   and  Ben  Gurion  riding  forth  side  by  side  in  jehad
against  the  obnoxious  goyim  of  the  State  Department.
It  is  this  feeling  in  the  Department  which  lies  behind  one
of  the  deletions made  by  the  Secretary of  State  in  the  printed
record  of  his  testimony-  before  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations
Committee.   Mr.   Dulles   attributed  some  of   the   difficulty   in
bringing  about  a  settlement  between  Israel  and  the  Arabs  to
"the  bargaining  proclivities of  both  sides," a remark  calculated
to  inflame  all the bazaars from  Baghdad  to Damascus.  This was
deleted.   Mr.  Dulles  seems  to  have  been  particularly  down  on
Semites  that  day;  another  of  the  deletions  later  made  in  his
testimony  was that  the  Arabs hated  the  Jews  because  the  Jews
assassinated  Mohammed.   The   Secretary  seems  to  have  con-
fused'Mohammed   with  the  Arabian  American  Oil   Company
whose  directors  would  indeed  be  well  advised  not  to  wander
off  the  better  lit  streets  at  night  in  Tel  Aviv  or  Brooklyn.
Without  realizing it  Mr.  Dulles  may have  stumbled  in  these
deletions  on  a  new  technique  in  government.   When  asked  an
embarrassing question  at a Congressional  hearing,  give a wrong
answer  but,  with  an  air  of  wanting  to  be  absolutely  accurate,
reserve the  right  to  change  it later.  Make  the  correction  in  the
galley  proofs,  and  by the  time  the  printed  record  appears  pub-
lic attention has  been  distracted  and nobody notices the  change.
But  if  somebody  does,  you  can't  be  accused  of  falsification.
This  is what  happened  when  Senator Morse  began  questioning
Mr.  Dulles  about  the  sale  of  military aircraft  to  Saudi Arabia,
which  is  said  to  have gotten  six B-26 bombers.  As we  pointed
out  in  our  March  5  issue,  the  Secretary first  said  we  had  sent
some  aircraft   "but   not  jets."   When  Morse   asked   whether
fighters  or  bombers,  Mr.  Dulles  replied that  they were civilian
cargo  planes  but added  "I  want  to  confirm  this  and  correct  the
record  if  necessary."   We  discovered  four  days  later  that  the
answer  had  been  changed  to  read  "We  have sold  a very limited
number  [a  mere  half  dozen  bombers?]  of  military  aircraft  of
the  propeller  type"  but  except  for  the New  York  Post no  other
newspaper was interested  enough to  publish  this.  On  March  6
the  New  York  Times finally carried a  dispatch  from  its Wash-
ington  bureau,  "Dulles  Withdraws  Remark  on  Prophet"  but
the  more  sensational  change  about  the  planes  was  omitted.   So
far  as the  general public  is concerned,  it  is still a  secret.  Imag-
ine  the  uproar  if  the  Secretary had  admitted  those  plane  sales
at  the  public  hearing.
The  SEATO meeting at Karachi will add  to the  complexities
of  American  foreign  policy.  Until  then  our  position  had  been
fairly  clear  in  that  part  of  the  world.    We  were  for   Pakistan
as  against  India,  though  just  why  is  obscure.  One  easy way  to
keep  the  two  distinct  is  culinary.   The  Indians,  being  largely
Hindu,  don't  eat  beef.  The  Pakistani  on  the  other  hand,  being
Moslem,  are  kosher  and  don't  eat  pork.  Mr.  Dulles  lined  up
(in  this  case)  on  the  kosher  side.  But  now  we  have  taken  a
firm position  between  the  Pakistani and  the  Afghans  over  the
Pushtus,  and  it's  very  hard  at  this  distance  (and  even  on  the
scene)   to  tell  them  apart.   All  three  are  Moslem  and  equally
abjure  pork.   Let's  try  going  over  it  slowly.   Afghanistan  is
backing  the  Pathans  in their  desire  for  a  separate  Pushtunistan
in what is now Western  Pakistan in order  to get  a friendly out-
let  to  the  sea.  The  Pakistani  insisted  that  the  price  of  allying
themselves with  us against Moscow  was our  taking  a firm stand
with  them  against  the  Pushtus.   This  may seem a  distant  quar-
rel  to  most  of  us,  but  in  case of  trouble we  can  see it  inspiring
Tin  Pan  Alley to tune up a marching song, something like  "On-
ward  Moslem  SEATO  soldiers,  pushing toward  Pushtunistan."
When  we  see the  egg-shell  delicacy  with  which  the  Senate
has been  setting  up  its  investigation  of  campaign  contributions,
we  wonder  what  would  happen  if  this  inquiry  were  handled
witch  hunt  style.  Deeply  as  we  believe that  all  God's  chillun
got  civil  liberties,  we confess we'd  enjoy  the  spectacle  of  seeing
some  Senator  asked,   "Did   you  ever  change  your  mind   about
any  piece  of  legislation  after  receiving  a  hint  from  a  wealthy
contributor?    Come,  come  now,  Senator.    Answer  yes,  no  or
the  Fifth  amendment."
The  most  disturbing  news  of  the  week  on  the  international
front  was  from  New  Delhi  where  a  Soviet  trade  representa-
tive  has  joined  the  local  Rotary  club.  When  Muscovites  begin
turning  up  at  business  men's  luncheons  with  those  big  round
badges  reading,  "Just  call  me  Igor,"  we're  going  down  to  the
State  Department and  join  Mr.  Dulles  in prayer.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly, March 19,1959
A  New  Rule  and  The  Gold  Case  Make the  Robeson and  Boudin  Passport  Appeals Urgent
State Department Will Now Require Non-Communist Oaths of All Travellers
A new form of passport  application  and  the  new decision  in
the  Ben Gold  case  make the  outcome of  the  Robeson  and  Bou-
din  passport  appeals  of  urgent  importance.  The  new form,  to
go  into use about July  1, will require  all  applicants for  pass-
ports to answer  under oath three questions:  (1)  "Are  you now
a  member  of  the  Communist  party?"  (2)   "Have  you  ever
been  a  member  of  the  Communist  party?"  (3)   "If   ever   a
member, state  period  of  membership."
Just  how hazardous  the  making  of  such  an  affidavit  may  be
is  freshly  demonstrated   by  the  4-4  decision  of  the  Court  of
Appeals  for  the  District  of  Columbia on  March  9 in  the  Gold
case.   The  effect  of  the  split  decision  was  to  affirm  the  Gold
conviction  for   falsely   swearing  a   non-Communist   affidavit
under  the  Taft-Hartley   Act.
If  the  Gold  ruling  stands on appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court,
persons  who  sign  such  affidavits  will  be  in  danger  of  convic-
tion  for  false  swearing  even  though  they  are  not  members of
the  Communist party  in  any  ordinary  sense.   There  was  no
direct  evidence,  documentary  or  from  witnesses,  that  Gold
was a  member of the  Communist party  at  any  time  after  his
resignation  on  August  24,   1950.
Firm  Standard   Abandoned
"The  mere  fact,"  the  prosecutor  told  the jury, "that  there
is  no  evidence  before  you  ladies   and  gentlemen  that  Gold
after   1950,  August,  didn't  have  a  party  card,  didn't  attend
meetings  or  didn't  pay  dues,  under  the  testimony  of  the  wit-
nesses  sworn  on oath  before you is not  indicative  that he waa
not  a  member.   None whatever."
Linked  with  this  vague  standard  of  membership  is  the
other  major  question  raised  by the  Gold  case. This  is  whether
people  can  be  convicted of  false  swearing  without  the  strict
proof   traditionally   required  in  perjury  cases  when   falsity
must  be proven  by  two  witnesses  or  by  one witness  and  cor-
roborating  evidence.
In  Gold's  case  the  basis  of  the  conviction  was  circumstan-
tial.  The  post-1950  evidence  was  (1)  that  Gold's  name  was
mentioned  without abuse  (!)   in  the  Daily  Worker  on  six oc-
casions,  (2)  that he marched  with  his  Fur  Workers  Union  in
the  1951  and  1952  May Day  parades  and  (3)  that  he  helped
in  the  defense  of  Irving  Potash,  a  fellow  official  of  the  same
union  tried  on  Smith  Act  charges.
Affidavit  Not  Enough
Despite  these  hazards,  the  making  of  an  affidavit  will  not
automatically qualify the traveller for  a passport.  In this the
new  regulations  differ  strikingly  from  the  Taft-Hartley   Act.
Under  the  Act,  the  making  of  the  affidavits by  union  officials
automatically  qualify  the  union  for  the  benefits  of  the  Na-
tional  Labor  Relations  Act.*   If  the  government  believes  the
affidavit  false,  it  can  initiate  a  separate  proceeding for  false
swearing or perjury.   The union continues  to  enjoy its NLRB
privileges  until the charges are  proven.
Not  so the traveller.  The  government's  position,  aa  spelled
out  in  the  Boudin case,  merits  close  attention.   "The  submis-
sion  of a truthful affidavit,"  the  government  argued,  "no  mat-
ter  what  the  truth  may  be,  will  not  be  conclusive  either  for
or  against  the  issuance  of  a  passport.  It  will  merely  be im-
portant  evidence for  the  consideration  of  the  Secretary  [of
State]. . . ."  Dr. Linus  Pauling  told  the Hennings  committee
he  signed  half  a  dozen  non-Communist  affidavits  but  could
not  get  a  passport  until  he  was  awarded  the  Nobel  prize.
Paul  Robeson refused  to  swear  a  non-Communist  affidavit;
his  case is  of prime  importance  for  it  squarely  tests  the  De-
partment's right under  the First Amendment to refuse  a man
a  passport  because  it  does  not  approve  of  his  political  views
and  associations.   The government  argued  that  it  had  refused
him  passports to  attend  Communist sponsored  peace  meetings
abroad  because  it  thought  such  activities  "contrary  to  the'
best  interests  of  the  United  States."  This  formula,  like  the
Department's   own  regulations,*  'is   broad   enough  to   cover
non-Communists  (like Judge  William Clark)  or  anti-Commu-
nist  radicals  (like  Max  Schachtman).
A  Restraint  on Free  Speech
"Realistically   viewed,"  Robeson's  counsel,  Leonard  Boudin,
argued,  "the  oath  is not  only a  method of denying a  passport
to  those  who refuse  to  take  it.  It  is  also  a  device  to  hold  in
hostage  an  applicant's  liberty,  under  the  possibility  of a  per-
jury  prosecution,  as  a  condition  of  a  passport  grant."
It  is  no  less  realistic  to  observe  that  the  regulations  are
vague  enough  to  punish  lawyers   who  handle  passport  ap-
peals.   Harry  I.  Rand,  who  argued   Boudin's  appeal  for  a
passport  did  not  claim  that  Boudin's  loss  of  a  passport  was
linked  in  this  way  to  Robeson's.
But  Boudin in  the  January  1956 issue  of the  Columbia Law
Review,  discussing  "The  Constitutional  Right  to  Travel,"  re-
lates that  Mrs.  Ruth  B.  Shipley,  then  in  charge  of  the  pass-
port  office,  told  him "that  his  trip  abroad  to  represent  pass-
port  litigants against  the  Department  was necessarily  an  aid
to international  Communism, and also that a  proposed trip to
represent  employes  of  UNESCO  before  the  Administrative
Tribunal  of  the  International   Labor  Organization  was'  con-
v
trary  to  American   policy."
What  the  Court  May  Do
Three  of  the  eight  judges  on  the  Court  of  Appeals  here,
Edgerton,  Fahy  and  Washington,  ruled  in  the   Schachtman
case  last  June  that  travel  was "a  natural  right" but  subject
to  "reasonable   regulation,"   whatever   that  may  ultimately
mean.   Edgerton,  Washington  and  Bazelon ordered  a  "quasi-
judicial hearing" last June  in the Dr. Otto Nathan  case.  Thus
four  judges  hold  views  favorable  to  passport  applicants.
The  State  Department's   basic  position,  however,  is  so ex-
treme  that a  majority  may form against it.  The  Department
contends that  until  an  applicant  for  a  passport  has  answered
all  questions  put  to  him under  oath, he has  not  completed  his
application  and  therefore  is  ineligible  for  a  hearing  of  any
kind!  It  contends  that  a  passport  is  a  license  and that  the
burden of proof  is on the applicant  for  the  license to prove  his
eligibility.  The  Court might  reverse  the  Robeson decision  and
order  the  Department  to  give  him  a  hearing  without  an   affi-
davit,  and  it  could  uphold  Judge  Youngdahl's  decision in  Bou-
din's  case  that  the  Department  cannot  lawfully  deny  a.man
a  passport  without  permitting  him  to  face  his  accusers.
In  any  case,  however  these  procedural  questions  are  de-
cided,  we are  still  a  long  way from  a  clear  ruling  that  the
Department  may not refuse  a  man a  passport  because it  dis-
approves  of  his  political  views.
* It  should  also be noted that unions which refuse to comply
with  the  non-Communist  oath provisions, like the  Mine Work-
ers  and  the  Printers,  can  go  on  bargaining collectively.  In-
deed  their  individual  members  as  distinct  from   the  unions
themselves  may  still  utilize  the  privileges of  the  NLRB,  as
the  Court  of  Appeals here in  Washington  ruled  on  March  8  in
News  1'rinting  Company  v.  NLIJB,  upholding  the  rights  of
union  printers  on  the  I'aterson  (N.-J.)  Evening News.
* See Departmental  Regulation  51.136  "Limitations  on issu-
ance  of  passports  to  certain  other  [than  Communistic] per-
sons.  In  order  to  promote  and  safeguard  the  interests  of  the
United  States,  passport facilities  . . . will be refused  to a  per-
son  when  it  appears  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Secretary  of
State  that  the  person's  activities  abroad  would:  (1)  violate
the  laws of  the  United States; (2)  be prejudicial  to  the order-
ly  conduct  of  foreign  relations;  or  (3)  otherwise  be prejudi-
cial  to  the  interests  of  the   United  States."   (Newly  added
January  10, 1956.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone'i  Weekly, March 19,1958
South  Carolina  Petitions  Congress  to  Put  the  NAACP on The  Subversive  List
On Cyprus  We  Subordinate  Religion  and  Freedom  to  The  Need  for  Bases
The keys to  the  Cyprus  situation  are  simple.   Negotiations
broke  down  because  the  British   did  not  want  to  recognize
majority  rule,  since  four-fifths  of  the  people  are  Greek  and
would vote for  union with the  mother country.  As in Ireland,
the  nationalist  movement  is  grouped  around  the  church,  in
this  case  the  Greek  orthodox.  Union with  Greece,  as  Homer
Bigart  reported  in the New  York  Times of  March 7, "is  being
preached  from  nearly  every  Orthodox  pulpit.  .  .  .  But to
silence  the  pulpit  would require  mass  arrests or  deportation
starting  with  Archbishop Makarios and  the  even  more  out-
spoken  Bishop Kyprianos of  Kyrenia."  And  sure  enough two
days  later  these  leading  clerics  were  seized  and  deported  to
prison  islands  in  the  Indian  Ocean.   So  here  we  have  the
principles  of  majority   rule,  self-determination,   freedom  of
speech  and  the  sanctity  of  the  church  violated  because  the
British—with  our  support—want to  keep  Cyprus  as  a  mili-
tary and naval base.  "The  real  question at  issue," as the New
York   Times  hastened  to  explain  March  10  in  an  editorial
faithfully   echoing  the  State  Department,  "is  not  whether
Cyprus  ought  to  be united  to  Greece if  that  is  what  most of
the inhabitants want, but when and how ..."    i.e.  in the  sweet
bye  and  bye.  The  affair  is  worth  keeping  in  mind  next  time
we  hear  how  They,  unlike  Us,  believe  the  end  justifies  the
means.  In  Cyprus,  as  in  the  Balkans  all  through  the  Nine-
teenth  Century,  British  policy  for  imperial  reasons  is  again
pro-Turk   and  anti-Christian.   That  the  Rev.  John  Foster
Dulles  has  bestowed  his  apostolic  blessing on this  policy  may
be  seen  in  that famous  note  last  year  to  Greece  and  Turkey
which managed  to  deplore those anti-Greek  pogroms in  Turkey
without  ever  saying  one word  in  condemnation  of  the  Turks.
Among the petitions laid before the  Senate  last Monday was
a  joint resolution  of the  South  Carolina  legislature asking  the
Attorney  General  to  put  the 'NAACP on his  subversive  list
"so  that  it  may  be kept  under  the  proper  surveillance  and
that  all  citizens  of the  United  States may have  ample  •warn-
ing  of  the  danger  to  our  way  of  life  which lurks  in  such  an
organization."  The joint  resolution  lists  the  number of  times
various  officers  and  directors  of  the  NAACP  are  "cited"  in
the   House  Un-American   Activities  Committee  files,  among
them  such  respectables  as  Ralph  Bunche, Allen  Knight  Chal-
mers,  Norman  Cousins,  Lewis  Gannett,  Alfred  Baker   Lewis,
Buell  G. Gallagher,  and  Lloyd  Garrison.  We have  long  sus-
pected  that  some  of  these  gentlemen  were  secretly  in  sym-
pathy  with  the  abolitionists.
Another  indication  of  the  dominance exercised  by  Secretary
of  the Treasury Humphrey is the part he is playing  in trying
to  work  out  a  compromise  between  the  Administration   and
The  Vision  of   "Big   Jim"   Farley
"How heartening it  is  for a  world  traveller fo  see  the
widespread distribution of  American products.... May-
be  it's  a  pack  of  Luckies, jealously  hoarded  by  a  Nile
boatman at  Cairo, or a Hershey bar held in the tight fist
of  a hungry little child  in West  Germany.  ..  .  When we
speak  to  a  man in  another country  about  democracy,  he
may  or  may not  understand  us.  But  when  you  give him
a  ride in  your  Buick,  Ford,  or  Chrysler, or  offer  him  a
Chesterfield,  Lucky  Strike, Camel or Old Gold  or a Coke,
he  can  easily  judge  for  himself.  This  is  America  with
its  hard  fist  in  the  eye  of  greedy  ideology.  This  is  the
Lord,  the  image of  man, spreading subsistence, comfort
and  joy."
—The  Hon.  James  A.  Farley,  chairman  of  the   board,
Coca  Cola Export  Corporation,  in  an  address  to  the
Washington  chapter, American Marketing Associa-
tion  (Congressional  Record, Feb. 18, Page  A  1160).
Senators  backing  the  new  form  of  the  Bricker   amendment.
This amendment,  in  curbing  the  treaty making  powers  of  the
President,  concerns  the  Attorney  General  and  the  Secretary
of  State  but  hardly  the  Treasury-   Normally  the  President
would take a  hand if  a  compromise  were  sought.  But in this
as  in  so  many  other  cases  "the  President"  today  is  really
Humphrey  rather  than   Eisenhower;   the  former   has  both
brains  and  money—more,  indeed,  of  either  than  any  other
member  of  the  Cabinet   This  predominance  is  not  a   post
heart  attack  phenomena—it  was  already   observable  before
the  President's  illness.   ...
An  Old Shocker: The familiar,  heart-breaking  contrast  be-
tween how little we spend  for  medical research and how much
we spend for  arms was  brought  up-to-date last  week by  Rep.
Denton.  (D.,  Ind.)   during  a  debate  on  appropriations.  Last
year   $1,407,933,000   was  appropriated  for   defense  research,
while  only  $97.6  million  was  marked  for  research  in  medi-
cine, he said.  While we spent $260 million  to  develop and  test
atomic  weapons,  we spent less than  $19 million  for  heart  dis-
ease  research.  And though  we spend  $216  million  to  build  1
aircraft  carrier,  less  than  $26  million  was  spent  to  study
cancer.
Only  one of  the  many Congressmen  visited  by  the  1,400  or
so   delegates   to   last   week's   Assembly   for   Civil    Rights
made  any  public  mention  of  the  visit.  Rep.  Addonizio  (D.,
N. J.)  told  the  House  he had  met with  a  New Jersey  delega-
tion  and  would  support  all  the  bills  for  which  it  lobbied.
Some Facts  the Press Did Not Report About the  Gammer Contempt  Decision
There  is some very odd business  the  press failed  to  report
behind  the  contempt conviction of  Harold  I.  Cammer which
the  Supreme  Court  reversed  last  Monday.  Cammer  was
counsel  for  Ben Gold in the Taft-Hartley  oath  case  discussed
on page  two.  Perhaps  because  there  was  no direct  evidence
that  Gold  had  sworn falsely,  the  government twice  failed  to
obtain indictments in New York. It  then shifted  to  Washing-
ton, where the  grand jury proved more  amenable.
When  Gold  was arraigned,  Cammer learned from  a  roster
supplied  by  the  court  clerk that  a  majority  of  the members
of  the  grand  jury  were  employes of  the  government.   In
other  cases,  as  Mr.  Justice  Black  pointed  out,  the  courts
have  held  that  the  presence  of  government  employes  on
juries  may  be  challenged if  evidence  of  bias  or  fear  is  of-
fered,  and  that  jurors  may  be  questioned individually.
Cammer  sent  a  questionnaire to  the  grand  jurors  saying
that  as  Gold's  counsel  he  was  attempting  to  learn  whether
bias  or  fear  may  have  played  any  part  in  the  indictment.
Cammer  made  an  offer  of  proof  that  government employes
in  the  present  atmosphere  would  be  afraid  to  rule  against
the  government in  cases  involving  Communist charges.  On
this  basis  he  also  challenged  the  petit  jury  which convicted
Gold; five government  employes and  the  wife  of  a  govern-
ment  employe sat  on that  jury.
These  motions were denied and  Cammer himself  was con-
victed  of  contempt  for  having  sent  out  the  questionnaire.
The  denial  of  the  jury  challenge  motions  will  be  appealed
to  the  Supreme  Court.   So  will  a  contrasting  incident  in
which  the  judge  refused  to  declare  a  mistrial  because  an
FBI  agent  during  the  trial  contacted three  members of  the
jury  and  their  families  in  such  a  way  as  to  give jurors  the
impression  that  they  were being  investigated.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March 19,1956
The  NAM  Explains  Why  It  Wants  Congress  to  Investigate  the ILO
The  Issues  Raised  for  the  Bar  by  the  New  Sacher  Contempt  Conviction
When  Harry  Sacher  was  summoned  as  a  witness  by  the
Eastland  committee  last  year  in  the  Matusow  inquiry,  he  an-
swered  all  the  questions  asked  him  about  the  Matusow  affair
but  declined to  answer  three  questions  about  whether  he  was
or  ever  had  been  a  member  of  the  Communist  party  or  of  a
supposed  lawyers'  section  of  it.  When  Sacher  challenged   the
relevancy  of  these  questions  to  the  matter  under  inquiry,  the
committee   counsel,  Jules  Sourwine,  then   asserted  that  the
committee  was  also  interested   in  possible  legislation  requir-
ing  a  non-Communist oath  for  practice  in the  Federal  courts.
Sacher  still  declined  to  answer  but  did  not  invoke  the  Fifth
amendment.
On  trial  here  last  week  before  judge  Alexander   Holtzoff,
Sacher's  lawyers,  Hubert   Delaney  and  David  Rein,  argued
throe  main  points.   One was that  the  questions  were  not  per-
tinent  to the  matter  under inquiry as stated  by the  committee
chairman.   The  second  was  that  the  committee  was  interfer-
ing  with  a  pending  judicial matter  since  a  motion  for  a new
trial  of  Sacher's clients in the  Flynn  case  had  been  argued  be-
fore  Judge  Dimock in  New  York  and  was  then  under  advise-
ment.   The  third  was  that  under  the  First  amendment   the
Senate   Internal  Security  Subcommittee  had  no  right  to  in-
quire  into  political'beliefs.  Former  Judge  Delaney  also  made
the  point that  since  Sacher  had  had nothing  to do with  either
the  recantation  or  the  Matusow  book  and  figured  only  as  a
lawyer   in  the  whole  affair,  it  was  an  interference  with  the
right of counsel to  summon him.
Judge   Holtzoff   ruled  that  even  without   any  evidence  he
would  uphold  the  committee's  right  to  inquire  into   political
views  under  the  Senate  resolution  giving  it   authority   over
"internal  security."   He  found   Sacher  in  contempt  but   said
that  he  was  imposing six  months  in  jail  and  a  $1,000 fine in-
stead  of  the  maximum  of  one  year  because  he  had  not  been
contumacious.   Obviously  the  appeal  will  raise  fundamental
questions  for  the  bar  as  well  as  in  the  field  of  civil  liberties.
Shocking:  "In   19-14  the   International   Labor   Office   at   a
meeting  in  Philadelphia,  adopted a  set  of  aims  and  objectives
which  became   known   as   the   'Declaration  of  Philadelphia.'
This  Declaration,  which was  incorporated in  the  ILO's  Consti-
tution,  went  far  beyond  tho  original Constitution  and  stated
among  other  things  that  'poverty  everywhere constitutes   a
danger  to  prosperity everywhere,' that  people  have  a  'right'
to  economic security.  .  .  ."—Protest  filed  with  the  House of
Representatives  Foreign  Affairs  Committee  March  15 by  the
National  Association of  Manufacturers  asking  for  "an  imme-
diate  and  thorough  investigation"  of  the  ILO.
Assistant  Attorney  General's
Disbarment    Asked
"A  fighting  mad  Cleveland  Bar  Association  yesterday
announced  it  would  seek  disbarment  of  the  high  Justice
Department  official  in  Washington  who  criticized  free
legal  aid  provided  11  Communists  in  their  recent  trial
here....
"[Eugene  H.]  Freedheim   [president  of  the  associa-
tion]  said  the  Cleveland  bar's  executive  committee  had
authorized  filing  a  complaint  with  the  grievance   com-
mittee  of  the  American  bar  against  U.S.  Attorney   Gen.
William   F.  Tompkins,  chief  of  the  Department's  inter-
nal security division.
"A  Washington  dispatch  Tuesday  reported  Tompkins
criticized  bar  groups  for  furnishing  lawyers  to  Commu-
nists  .  .  .   [and]     specifically    mentioned   Cleveland  in
terming bar groups  'dupes' in a  Communist  drive  to   dis-
credit the Smith Act....
"The  executive  committee,  said  Freedheim,  had  voted
to  cite  Tompkins  for  violating  legal  canons  of  ethics
...   by making  a statement  . .  . containing  false  charges
against  members  of  the  legal  profession."
—Cleveland  Plain  Dealer, March  9, Page 1
Former  Senator  Millard E.  Tydings  of Maryland opened  his
'campaign  for  the   Senate  with  a  speech  in  the   suburbs  of
Washington last  Tuesday night  declaring,  "If  we are  going  to
draft  them  [the  Negroes]  to  fight  and die for  our  country,  if
we  are  going  to  tax  them,  we have  no alternative  but  to  give
them  those  opportunities  afforded   other  citizens."   He  also
took  a  sideswipe  at   loose  security  accusations. by  Senators
hiding behind their  parliamentary  immunity. . . . The day that
France's  Foreign  Minister, Christian  Pineau, predicted  at New
Delhi  that  the  whole world  would  move toward  complete  so-
cialism  in  20 or  50 years,  the  president  of  the  Edison  Electric
Institute  attacked  the  Eisenhower  Administration  for  failing
to  halt  the spread  of socialism in the power industry.  . . . He
warned  that  Attorney   General  Herbert   Brownell,  whom  we
have  long  suspected,  had  gone  "beyond  anything   the  New
Dealers  and Fair  Dealers  ever  conjured up"  in  favoring  rural
electric  cooperatives  and publicly  owned utilities.  ...    As we
were  telling  Senator  Eastland. in  our  last  nightmare,  "Jim,"
we  said,  "it's  those  Republicans  who'll  really  bear  watching."
Resurrect   That  Old  Friend  Politically   By  Giving  Him  A  Gift   Subscription   to  The   Weekly
I.  F. Stone's
Please  renew
Name
Street
City
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street
City
Shall  we  send
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Zone          State
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
3/19/56
Zone          State
gift  announcement?    Yes  D    No  O
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301    E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Washington   3,  0.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED