I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956may07.pdf

============================================================

Stone's  First  Report  from  the  Soviet   Union
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IV,  NO.  16
MAY   7,   1956
WASHINGTON,    D.  C.
15  CENTS
A  Visit  to  Moscow:  Part  One
"It's  like  a visit  to  the  moon,"  said  the  awed  chambermaid
in  Tel  Aviv.  She was from  Shanghai, the  daughter of Russians
who  had  fled  the  Revolution  at  the  very  outset.   I  needed
someone  who  spoke  Russian  to  call  the  Soviet  Embassy  in
Ramat  Gan  about  my  visa.   Excited  by  the   contact,  almost
frightened,  she  was  telephoning  to  ask  whether  word  had  yet
come  from  Moscow about  Gospodin  Stone.  .  .  .
And  now there I  was in  the  low-walled  Finnish  airport  at
Helsinki  waiting  for  the  Soviet  plane  to  Moscow.   My  first
glimpse  of  "Russia"  was  a  rosy-cheeked  plump  bright   eyed
little  blonde  employ of  Aerflot,  the  Soviet  airline.  Two  well-
dressed  Orientals,  one  elderly,  one  young,  were  also  waiting;
they  turned  out  later  to  be  Japanese  diplomats on  their  way to
negotiate  a fisheries  agreement  with  the  Russians.  Then,  just
a  few minutes before our plane  was called,  a gay party of  men
and  women  arrived, the  latter  loaded  down  with flowers.
At  3  p.m.,   we  filed  aboard  a  two-engined   11-12.   There
were  seven  rows  of  seats,  doubles  on  one  side  of  the  aisle,
singles  on  the  other,  21  in  all.   The  seats  were  newly uphol-
stered,  with  fresh  linen  headrests,  large  and  comfortable,  but
the  worn  safety  belts  indicated  that  this  was  not  new  equip-
ment.  I  fastened my belt a  little  apprehensively, remembering
what  I had  read somewhere about the  swift  take-offs  and  land-
ings  of  Soviet  pilots,  but  what  I  had  read  turned  out  to  be
wrong.  At  3:15,  exactly  on  schedule, we made a smooth  start.
Below  us  was  the  black  and  white  northern  landscape,   the
dark  firs  and  the   bright  snow.   We   were  on  our  way  to
the  Soviet  Union.
No  One  Checked  Our  Seat  Belts
There  was much  joyful  visiting  back  and  forth  in  the  aisles
even  during  the  take-off,  and  everybody seemed  to  be  talking
at  once;  the  Russian  sounded  pleasantly  liquid  and  musical.
There  was no  loud  speaker  greeting  from  the  pilot  in  several
languages  as on  American and  West  European  planes;  no  one
checked  to  see whether  we  had  fastened  our  seat  belts.  Wire
racks  overhead  held  our  overcoat  and  hats.   The  interior  of
the  cabin was a  freshly  painted  white  and  blue.   The  engines
throbbed  and  labored,  the  cabin  rattled  slightly.   Across  the
aisle  two  young  men  morosely  read  the  Paris  edition  of  the
New York Herald-Tribune;  their  clothes  and  appearance mark-
ed  them as Americans, the  dirty U.S.  mail bags  squeezed in be-
hind  them  indicated  that  they were diplomatic  couriers.  Heavy
clouds  curtained  off  the  earth  below  us  and  we  fell  asleep.
The  feeling  that  the  plane was coming  down  awakened us.
It  was 4:30  and  we were about to  land  in Leningrad.  Below us
there  was  a  landscape  which  seemed  to  be  chiefly  mud,  a  flat
endless  plain  with  a  few  dirty patches  of  snow  and  some  bare
wintry  trees.   The  first  distant  glimpse  of  Leningrad's  out-
skirts  was of  new  apartment  houses  set  wide  apart.   We  came
down  on  a  paved  cement  airstrip  and  taxied  to  a  stop  near  a
handsome  stone  air terminal  with  Leningrad  written  across  the
top  of  the  entrance  in  Russian  letters.    Aerflot   officials   and
porters   in   blue  uniforms  were  waiting;   the   porters   wore
butcher aprons  over  their  uniforms.  Everybody stayed  in  their
seats  on  the  plane.   Three  officials  came on  board.   One  took
our  passports.   We  were  in  Russia.
The  first  impression  looking  out  the  window  and  coming
off  the plane was that we had  arrived in  the  land of  the  rotund
and  the  retrousse.  Everybody seemed  to  be  round—round  of
face,  round  of  figure.  Everybody seemed  to  carry  a  dignified,
comfortable  paunch  in  front  of  him  and  everybody seemed  to
have a  turned  up  nose.  The  second  impression,  as we  follow-
ed  airline  officials  into  an-airport waiting  room  for  customs
and  currency control,  was  how  old-fashioned everything seem-
ed  to  be. The  waiting room, lit  by two  chandeliers,  was full  of
heavy  stuffed  mid-Victorian furniture protected  by  fresh  linen
dustcovers;  the  decor everywhere was  bourgeois.  As we  looked
about  we thought  that while Stalin might  be dead,  Queen  Vic-
toria certainly lived  on here. The  third  impression, as we began
to  make out  forms  and  go  through  controls,  was  of  friendli-
ness,  not  obsequious  as  in  Germany or  ostentatiously polite  as
in  England,  but  a  plain  kind  of  simple  man-to-man  friendli-
ness.
Any  Hashish  or  Antlers?
The  forms were lengthy, legal size, two pages,  full of  strange
questions.  I  rapidly copied  out a few  samples. The  visitor was
asked  whether  he  had  to  declare  among  his  possessions:
"7.  Wormwood  heads  and  seeds.
"8.  Opium,  hashish,  as well  as  pipes  and  other  devices  for
their  use.
"9.  Horns  of  steppe  antelopes,  Manchurian  deer,  unstuffed
horns  of  maral  and  spotted  deer."
A  pleasant  young  woman,  speaking   fairly  good  English,
came  over  and  asked  if  I  needed  any help  with  the  form.   I
pointed  to  Item  8  about  hashish  and  said,  "I  don't  smoke."
She  giggled.   I  asked  her  to  explain  another  question  which
said,  "Besides   luggage  presented  for  custom  examination,   I
have/do  not  have  slow  luggage  consisting  of         packages."
I  wanted  to  know  what  "slow"  luggage  was.   After  a  while,
with  some  aid  from  pantomine,  I  discovered  it  was  luggage
which  was  coming  by boat  or  train.
After  filling  out  the  form,  I  went  out  into  the high  marble
walled  (even  Washington  does not  seem to have quite  as much
marble  as  I  saw  in  Russia)  main  hall  of  the  terminal  and
looked  around.   In  one  corner,  apparently  as  inevitable  under
communism  as  under  capitalism,  was a  souvenir  stand  tended
by a lady in a  fur  cap.  In  a glass  case were jewelry, small  bot-
tles of perfume,  the  usual station  knick-knacks.  The  only thing
(Continued   on  Page    two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly, May 7,1956
(Continued   from   Page   One)
different   was  the  abacus  on  the  counter;  this  proved  to  be
standard  equipment  everywhere in  Russia^even  beside modern
cash  registers  one  saw  the  abacus.
Walls  A  La  Wedgewood
On  one  side of  the  station  wall  over  the  heavy  carved  doors
leading  to  the  airfield  was a  bas  relief  of  the  Aerflot  network,
covering  the  U.S.S.R.  and  China,  with  its  most  southerly  point
at  Kabul  in  Afghanistan.  An  official  came  to  summon  us  to
dinner  as we were looking  around.   He  led  us  up  dark  heavily
carpeted  mahogany stairs past  an  old-fashioned  oval  mirror  of
the  kind  before  which  Tolstoy's  Katya  might  have   primped,
onto  the  second  floor  of  the  airport.   There  in  a  small  room
just  off the  main dining hall  we were  served  a  full  course  din-
ner.   I  shared  a  table  with  the  Japanese  diplomats  and  then
went  out  to  have  a  look  around:   The  main  dining  hall,  in
which  high  Soviet  Army  officers  were  being  served  by  poorly
dressed  waiters, was heavily opulent,  encircled  by white  marble
pillars.  The  walls had  bas reliefs of  soldiers,  sailors  and  work-
ers  but  done  in  a  neo-classfcal style  like  Wedgewood  figures,
white  on  blue.  There were  old-fashioned  mahogany   sideboards
along the walls with  glassware  and china  in  them.   At  one end
was a  bar with liquor,  caviar,  candy,  cigarettes and  the  inevita-
ble  abacus.   Outside,   near  the  stairs,  were  the  wash  rooms,
marked  in  English  as well  as  Russian,  with  three  lady  attend-
ants  by  the  doors,  one  a  babushka with  a  kerchief   over  her
head.
Downstairs  again  an  officer  returned  our  passports. No  effort
was made  to  check  on  our  currency declarations;  there  was  no
sign  of  a baggage  search by customs.  No  questions  were  asked
about  the  purpose  of  my  visit  to  Russia,  where  I  expected  to
go  or  whom  I  would  see.   (I  didn't  realize  this  absence  of
questioning  until  I  reached  England  on  my way back  and  was
asked  by  the  passport  officer  what  I  had  been  doing  on  the
Continent,  whom  I  was  going  to  see  in  England,  what  my
business  was,  and  what kind  of  paper  I  wrote  for;  my  papers
and  notebooks  were  gone  over  and  the  books  in  my  luggage
examined.)    We   left   Leningrad   at  7  p.m.   sharp,   heading
south  for  Moscow  over  a  dreary  flat  winter  landscape.
We  Meet  A  Soviet  Magician
The  plane  was  bitterly  cold  on  leaving,  and  as  it  warmed
up  so  did  the  passengers.  The  gay party  I  noticed  in  the  air
terminal  at  Helsinki  turned  out  to  be  a  Russian  vaudeville
troupe which had  been  on  a  good  will tour  in  Finland.   They
were on  their  way  back  to  Moscow  and  had  imbibed  freely  in
Leningrad.   When   I  noticed  one  of  them  borrow  a  Herald-
Tribune  from  one  of  the  two  American  couriers on  the  plane,
I  struck  up  a  conversation  in  English  and  German.   He  told
me  he  was  a  "zauber"   (German  for  magkian)  -and  added
modestly,  "They  say I  am  best zatiber  in  Soviet Union.  I  don't
know, maybe  not  but  that's what  they  say."  He  said  the  troupe
contained  two  "beautiful"  singers,  a'balalaika  player, two  jug-
glers,  a  concertina  player  and  a  pianist.  The  magician  said  he
was  from  Georgia,  "very  beautiful  country,  very  beautiful  be-
cause  between  two  seas,  Caspian  and  Black."   His  name  was
Chitaschwini  and  he  had  been  in  Moscow  for  15  years.   He
li.nl  performed   all  over  Scandinavia  and  the  Soviet  bloc,  in-
cluding  Noith  Vietnam  and  China,  and  hoped  some  day  to
visit  America,  "I  have  very  good  tricks."   He  wanted  me  to
come  see  him  perform  in  Moscow  but  didn't  know  where  he
would  be booked  next.   "It's  very hard," he  said,  meaning  the
problem  of   bookings.
The  plump  stewardess  brought  around  hot  tea,  cookies  and
candy.   Everybody, including  the  two  American couriers,  were
"visiting"  all  over  the  plane.  The  concertina  player  sat  down
beside  one  of  the  couriers  to  ask  help  with  his  English  lesson.
The  pianist  came  back  to  join  me  and  the  magician;  his  name
was  Ashkenazi,  he  spoke  a  little  German.   "Me   Georgian,"
said  the  magician,  "my friend  Ivri  (Jewish). We  both  same in
Soviet  Union."   He  demonstrated  the  equality  with  a  gesture.
Then  he  began  to  question  me  about  the  Negro  problem  and
why  visitors  to  America  had  to  be  fingerprinted.  The  pianist
said  he  had  played  everywhere  in  the  Soviet  bloc,  and  all  over
the   Middle   East  except   in   Israel.    One   of   the   American
couriers  said  this  talkative  friendliness  was  a  new   develop-
ment,  and  that  a  year  or  two  earlier  Americans  or  any  other
foreigners  had  found  it  impossible  to  strike up  a  conversation
with  Russians.  By the  time  the  lights  of  Moscow  appeared  be-
low  us  right  on  schedule  at  9  p.m.  we  were  all  old  friends.
Stalin  in  Bronze  and  Oils
The  Moscow  airport  was  even  more  massive  than   Lenin-
grad's  and  had- even  more  marble.   Its  white  walled  main  hall
was three  stories  high  and  it  was  dominated  by a  huge  bronze
statue  of  Stalin.   Stalin  also  stared  down  at  us from  a  painting
over  the  mantelpiece  in  the  richly panelled  waiting  room  into
which  we  were  ushered;  the  painting  showed  Stalin  in  white
uniform,   radiant  in  the  setting   sun.   While  the   travelling
vaudevillians  were being  greeted  Russian  style  by their  friends
—the  men  as  well  as  women  kissing   each  other  with   rich
warm smacks on  both cheeks—we had a chance to  look  around.
There  was  the  same  old-fashioned  middle  class  decor.   On
the  big  center  table  were  copies  of  New   Times,  the  interna-
tional  Soviet  weekly,  in  English,  French  and  German,  and  that
day's  issue  of  Pravda  and  Izvestia.   Their  front  pages   were
identical  in makeup;  the  May Day  statement  of  the  Communist
Party  was  spread  across  both  in  the  same  type  and  with  the
same  headlines.   On  page  two  both  carried  the  identical  pic-
ture,  in  the  identical position, of  Eden greeting  Krushchev  and
Bulganin.  There  were  gayly  colored  copies  of  People's  China
in  Russian  and  of  a  similar  magazine  from  North  Vietnam.
A  friendly  Intourist guide  who  had  been  notified  by  phone
from  Leningrad said  that  he  had  a car waiting for  me.   As  we
walked  out  I  noticed  that  Stalin's  book  on  the  national  ques-
tion  was  on  the  book  stall  in  the  entrance  hall  along  with
books  by  Lenin,  Marx  and  Engels.   The  guide  translated  for
me  the  two  big  red  banners  stretched  around  the  walls  of  the
entrance  hall.  They  said  "Long  Live the  Great  Soviet  Union—-
the  Union  of  the  Soviet  Socialist Republics.   The  Bulwark of
Friendship  and  Glory  of  the  Peoples  of  Our  Country.   The
Indestructible  Pillar  of  Peace  for  The  Whole  World."
The  Avenues  Are  Immense
From   the  Intourist  taxi  which  took  us  into  Moscow   we
could  see  little, in  the  darkness  but  what  we  saw  was  massive.
A  broad  straight  highway  from  the  airport  led  past  the  high
bulk  of  the  new  skyscraper  university  inta  a  city  of  streets
wider  than  any  we  had  ever  seen,  immense arteries  in  which
the  traffic  police  seemed  marionettes  and  pedestrians  dodged
miraculously  in  and  out  among the  speeding  cars.    Here  and
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  7,1958
there  on  the  outer  edges  of  the  city one  saw  log  houses  sand-
wiched  in  amid  the  apartment  houses,  and  darker  areas  in  the
alleys behind  them.  Traffic  lights  blinked  on  and  off like  ours;
the  movie  theatres  were  doing  a  big  business;  the  streets  were
crowded  and  the  crowds  were  full  of  chatter.   On  our  right
we  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  dark  bulk  of  the  Kremlin   walls
as  we  drove  up  to  the  famous  Metropol,  a  huge   cavernous
hotel  filling  a  whole  city  block.   A  room  had  been   reserved
for   us—at  47   rubles;   by  the  legal  rate  of  exchange,   four
rubles to  the dollar,  this  was $11.75 per  day.
A  good-natured  porter  took  our  bags  up  to  the  fourth  floor
in  the  1890-style  lift  and  then  down  what  seemed  like  a  half
mile  of  bare corridors  to  our  room,  or  rather  suite.   There was
a  big sitting  room  with a  radio  (fixed  to  get  only  Radio  Mos-
cow).   In  the  room  was a  mahogany  chiffonier,  a  large  desk,
a  big  wardrobe, a central  table  with  heavy tapestried  cloth  and
frilly  table  lamp.   The  furnishings  were  ornate  and   tasteless.
An  alcove,  curtained  off, held  a  bed  with  another  frilly  lamp
beside  it.   Next  to  this  was  a  private  bathroom,  quite  clean
but  poorly  repaired.   These  were  de  luxe  quarters,  but  there
was  no  toilet  tissue.
II
I  had  six  wonderful  days  in  Moscow  and  three  in  Warsaw
—all  that  my limited  means and  tight  printing  schedule  would
allow.   I  managed  with  a  dozen  words  of  Russian,  an  Anglo-
Russian  dictionary, and  a  mixture of  English,  French,  German
and  Yiddish  to  speak  with  many  people,   officially  and   unoffi-
cially,  through  organizations and  casually,  in the  streets,  parks,
theatres,  cafes  and  restaurants.   I  visited  a  kolkhoz,  a  collec-
tive  farm  just  outside  Moscow  and  I  had  a  long  interview
with one of  the  Soviet jurists who  is helping  to  revise the crim-
inal  code.   I  talked  with  Soviet  journalists,   with   Communists
and  non-Communists.  In  Moscow  I  found  people friendly  and
eager  to  talk  but  still  afraid; Warsaw,  on  the  other  hand,  was
astounding  in  its frank  speech.   I  had  hoped  by visiting  War-
saw  on  my  way  back  to  sample  the  atmosphere  of  a  satellite
capital  and  see  how  it  differed  if  any  from  Moscow.   The  dif-
ferences  were  amazing,  and  provided  unexpected   perspective
on  the new developments  in  the  Soviet  world.   I  had  no brief-
ings  at  the  U.S.  Embassy  either  in  Moscow  or  Warsaw,   and
only  casual  contacts  with  fellow  Americans—I  wanted  my own
fresh  impressions  rather  than  the  second  hand  and  I  decided
to  write them  after  leaving  Russia  rather  than  trust  to  the  pre-
carious  mercies  of  the  often  arbitrary  and  frustrating  censor-
ship  which  still  exists  there.   And  I  want  to  report,  for  what
little  it  may  be  worth,  what  I  managed  to  see  and  hear  and
observe  on  my  own.
No  Real  Uniformity  Beneath  The  Surface
The  people  of  Moscow  and  the  kolkhoz  outside  it  were  a
perpetual  revelation.   Beneath  the  monolithic   dictatorship  of
a  monolithic  party  in  a  country  hermetically  sealed  off  for  a
generation   from  any  foreign   news  or  contact   of  which   the
regime  did  not  approve  there  was  evident  a  wide  variety  of
personality  and  viewpoint.  Though  I  never  had  the  feeling  of
complete  frankness  in  any  conversation   in   Moscow   (unlike
Warsaw),  I  heard  enough  to  feel  that  all  those  years of  con-
trol  and  molding  had  not  produced  a  real  uniformity  of  opin-
ion.   I  found  smooth  careerists whose  yesmanship was  as  slick
as  anything  in  Hollywood,   devoted   Communists  with  hope-
lessly  rigid  blinkers,  and  cynics  who  gave  one  the  feeling  of
n
laughing  up  their  sleeves  at the  monotonous patter of  the  dull,
verbose  and  obscure  Soviet  press.   There  are  fanatics  whose
faces  turn  black  at  the  slightest  criticism,  deeply  thoughtful
and  discontented  people  bursting  to  talk  but  still  fearful,  and
a  few  men  of  truly  cosmopolitan  views neither  ignorant  nor
contemptuous  of  the  West  but  devoted  to  their  country  and
the  building  of  socialism.   I  saw a  young man  blush  when  he
admitted  he  was  a  Komsomol,  as  if  that were a  form  of  time-
serving,  and  finally  say to  me  in  mixed  Russian  and  German
after   a  painfully  slow  conversation  and  as  if  this  were  the
ultimate    distillation    of    his   generation's    experience,   "Hi
schweigen   ili  gefangnis"   (either  silence  or  prison).     And
there  was  still  a  pall  of  fear  over  the  few  Jews  with  whom
I  managed  to  speak  in  Moscow.
A  Peasant  Country
But  these  were the  intellectuals,  the  elite,  the  governing cir-
cles,  the  students,  the  engineers,  the  technicians, and  they  are
only  a  very  small  part  of  Russia.   The  first  vivid  impression
stepping  out with excitement into the streets that first morning,
even  in  the  heart  of  Moscow,  was  that  this  was  overwhelm-
ingly  and  unmistakably a  peasant country.  The  shiny  cars,  the
smart  policeman,  the  overwhelming massiveness of  streets  and
buildings,  the  strange  yellow walled palaces,  the  huge  Bolshoi
theatre  on the  right  and  the  fragment of  old  medieval  wall  on
the  left,  the  New  York  style advertising signs selling vitamins
and  taxi  service,  the  bookshops  jammed  with  technical  works
in  many languages, the  swift  moving purposeful  crowds—none
of  this  struck  one  so  forcibly  as  the  observation  that  this  was
a  land  of  peasants,  of  East  European  peasants,  the  real  peas-
ants,  only  a  few  steps  from  serfdom.   I  had  seen  them  only
once  before,  in  a  marketplace  in  Belgrade, but  they  were un
forgettable—gnarled  creatures, almost like trees,  leathery, worn
by  weather  and  hardship,  tough,  patient  and  submissive  but
stubbornly  and  subterraneously enduring beneath that  submis-
siveness.  Here  the  streets  were filled with them, and  they  did
not  look  at  all  like  those  pictures by Sovfoto   in  which  all  the
faces  are  washed  shiny  and  smiling.   They  looked  as  if  they
could  use soap  and  water.  They  were  poorly  dressed, often  in
the  padded   quilt  jackets  familiar  as  far   east  as  China,   the
women  with  kerchiefs,  many  with  boots,  and  mostly  lean—
those  paunches  that  seemed  so  typical  at  the  airport  in  Lenin-
grad  are  rarely seen on  the  peasants  and  the  ordinary  workers
difficult  to  distinguished  from  them.  Where  there  is  fat  it  is
the  fat  of  women  whose  diet  is  too  largely  bread.
Still   Holy  Moscow
This  city  of  Moscow,  their  capital,  is  strange  and  immense
as  their  country,  endlessly  fascinating  as  they  are  but  unlike
the  people  more than  slightly  repellant.   It  is  not  Europe,  it  is
not  Asia, it  is Russia  as  America  is  America;  Europe  and  Asia
have  affected  both  but  the  product  is new,  sui generis.   And  it
is  easy  to  understand  why  Peter   abandoned   it  in  disgust   to
build  himself  a  new  capital  as  a  window  on  the  West,  and
why   the   Panslavist  reactionaries   of  the   Nineteenth   century
dreamed  of  making it  Russia's  center  again.   For  despite that
marble  subway and  the  new  skyscrapers—the  overlay  of  Com-
munist  Babbitry  engaged  in  making  Moscow  the  best  biggest
and  Bolshoi-est  of  all  cities,  just  like  America only  better  is
their  dream-—the  old  Holy  Moscow  lies  heavy  and  inescapable
(Continued   on   F.tge    Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, May 7,1956
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
on  the  new world  center  of  atheist  communism.   No  city  could
be  more  incongruous,  jumbled,  conglomerate;   so  bedraggled
with  the past  as it  struggles toward  the future.   The  Czars and
Commissars  alike  built  to  strike  the  visitor  with  awe at  its  im-
mensity;  everything  at  first  sight  seems huge,  even  monstrous,
almost  Egyptian.   Then  as one  looks  closer  one  sees  a  general
slovenliness  like  that  of  a peasant  giant  with his shirt  tails  out
of  his  pants.    Elderly  crones  like  caricatures  of   womanhood
endlessly  dibble  dabble  at  the dirt  of  the  streets with  wisp-like
brooms.   The  buildings  are  flaked,  poorly  painted,  in  need  of
repair.   Between  new  apartment  houses  and  skyscrapers  one
sees  the  old   fashioned   Russian  log  houses  like  the   quaint
illustrations  in  old  editions  of  Pushkin,  and  in  the  courtyards
behind  them  are  glimpses  of  slums squalid  beyond  conception.
The  Czars  liked  size,  and  so  did  their  successors.   The  old
yellow  walled   palaces  impress  with  strangeness  rather   than
beauty,  and  the  new  skyscrapers  and  apartment  houses  are
overlaid  by doo-dads and  petty ornament and  pretty pastel  bits
of  color.   The  new university  is a kind  of  Soviet  Empire  State
Building,  impressive  and striking  but a little boring.  "Socialist
realism"  in  architecture  is  about  as vulgar  and  ostentatious  as
Miami  and  just  about  as  socialist;  the  opulent  new  Moskva
hotel  would  fit  perfectly  into  the  Florida  resort  if  it  were  not
built  in  such  a  heavy,  old-fashioned,  dark  kind  of  way.   The
taste  is the  taste of  the  nouveaux riches. In  architecture,  paint-
ing  and  sculpture,  this  revolutionary  society is  utterly  non-rev-
olutionary,  sterile  and  tasteless.   The  visual  climax  are  those
neo-dassic  statues  of  athletes  with—not  just  loincloths—but
full  underdrawers  of  stone  on  them,  and  the  bits  of  cloth  so
prudishly  carved  across  the  navels  of  the  Graces.   In  this, too,
Moscow  is  the  most  mid-Victorian  of  capitals.
The  Kremlin  Dominates   All
But  all  this  modern  overlay  seems  surface.   The  heart  and
soul  of  Moscow  is  still  the  Kremlin.   The  eye,  the  footsteps,
are  drawn  back constantly  to  the  brick-walled  medieval  battle-
ments  of  this  old  fortress  town  on  a  bluff  which  still  domi-
nates   Moscow   militarily   and—one   feels—spiritually.     The
Kremlin  is  a  huge  place,  big  enough  for  the  armed   trading
town it  once was,  set  in  the  heart  of  Moscow.   The  Kremlin  is
a  vast  museum  and  as  vast  a  cemetery  and  at  the  same  time
the  center  of  government,  a  capital  which  is  also  a  Mecca,  to
which  the  devout  from  all  over  the  Union  turn  their   steps
toward  that  black square modernist mausoleum  just outside  the
Kremlin  walls  where  Lenin  and  Stalin  lie  embalmed  side  by
side  like  modem  Pharaohs  to  be  venerated  by  a  people pro-
foundly  necrophile.   It  is  the  character  of  the  Kremlin  as  a
tomb that  is so unexpected  and  revealing.  If  Stalin's portrait  is
still  everywhere,  and  his  body  lies  undisturbed  in  state,  this  is
easier  to  understand  after  one  has  visited  the  Kremlin  church
in which Ivan  lies beside the son he killed  and  Peter  is interred
near  the  son he  had  executed—for  being  a  "reactionary"  as my
Komsomolka  guide  explained.  The  Russians are used  to  crimes
in  their  rulers;  they  are  a  people  like  Job  who  seek  patiently
in  suffering  to  find  some meaning  in  the  inexplicable  cruelties
of   Heaven.
A  Deeply  Religious   People
Red  Square  with  the  brooding  Kremlin,  the  gay candy-stick
pillars  of  that  child's  delight,  St.  Basil's,  the  modernist  mau-
soleum  as  black,  stark  and   strange   as  something   out  of  a
science  fiction  nightmare,  and  the  big  department  store  across
the  way—what  could   be  more  jumbled,  more   incongruous,
more  confusing!   I  believe  that  some  day  Communist  Russia
will  abandon  Moscow  as  Peter  did, and  for  much  the  same
reasons—to  escape  the  dead  hand  of  the  past,  to  open  fresh
windows  on  the  world.   But all  this  paradox  and  piety  is Rus-
sia.  On  a  Saturday afternoon  I  stood  in  line  with  the  patient
to see Lenin and  Stalin,  and  the  next  day I  saw the  same  devo-
tion  in  the  solemn  beauty of  the  Russian  Orthodox  mass  as  it
was  being  celebrated  in  Moscow's  crowded  churches.   It  is  the
Russian  people  to  whom  one feels  drawn  with  love,  still  half-
barbaric,  deeply  religious   whether  as  Christians  or  Commu-
nists,  capable  of  much  senseless  cruety,  and  of  the   deepest
devotion.    This  Russia,  Holy  Russia  in  a  new  sense  to  the
world's  Left  intellectuals,  is unmistakably backward,  no  model
for  the  future,  Byzantine, skvish  and  submissive,  still  enmired
in  the  past,  but  a  giant  from  whom  given  peace  there  will
be  giant  accomplishment.    So much  for  this  first  report.
Don't  Miss  Stone's  Thrilling  Second  Installment  of  First  Hand  Reportage  from  Moscow  Next   Week
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name   ......*.•............                     .•..«•••.•.«..*•
Street
City                                           .Zone           State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
5/7/59
(To)   Name
Street
City                                         .Zone           State
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Tes  D    No  D
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED