I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jun25.pdf

============================================================

Cain:  How BrowneU Added  The  "Faceless  Judgment"  to  The  "Faceless  Informer,"  Page  2.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO.  23JUNE  25,  1956«<"     WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
The  View  Prom  A  (Non-Ivory)  Washington   Tower
HEADNOTE   ON  THE  NATIONAL   MOOD:  Quite  by
accident  we  ran  across an  old  friend  who  gave  us a  glimpse  of
the  mood which prevails in Washington  today among  the  "cru-
saders"  on  both  sides of  the  fence.    He  is close  to  those  who
have  been  campaigning  for  reform  of  loyalty-security regula-
tions.   "But  is the  country  really interested?"  he  asked  gloom-
ily  and  answered himself.  "There  is  no  sign  that  it  is."  There
was  discouragement  in  the  turnout  to  hear  Harry  Cain's  two
days of testimony before the  Hennings  committee; the  big  Sen-
ate  caucus  room  was  only  sparsely  filled,  though loyalty-secu-
rity abuses are or  should  be a burning local  issue in the  District
of  Columbia.*   Cain  at  the  moment  seems  to  be at  a  dead  end
politically.   The  Republicans  that  matter  here  hate  his  guts,
especially  because he  succeeded  in  going  over their heads to  the
President.   In  his native State of  Washington,  waterfront  labor
is  firmly  committed  to  Senator  Magnuson's  reelection,  though
that  frightened  liberal  fathered  the  Act which  permits  faceless
informer  testimony  in  waterfront  cases.  The  only  consolation
is  that,  from  what  my  friend  says,  there  is  the  same  despon-
dency  on  the  other  side,  and  he—by  a  curious  set  of  circum-
stances  which  I  cannot  enter  into—is  in  a  position  to  know.
The  obscure  defectors  paraded  by  Eastland's  Internal  Security
Committee  cannot  hope  to  match  the  exposes  of  Communism
being  put  on  in  Moscow—at  no  cost  to  the  American taxpayer
—by  Krushchev.  "Walter  feels  disgusted,  too,"  my friend  said
of  the  House Un-American  Activities chairman. "He  feels  that
nobody  is  paying  much  attention   to  him  either."  The  Paul
Robeson   appearance   before  Walter's  Committee   drew  even
fewer   people   than  Cain's  performance.   As  we  go  to  press,
Arthur  Miller  is  scheduled  to  go  before  the  Committee  in  the
hope  that  maybe his connection  with  Marilyn  Monroe  will  put
it  back  on  the front  pages.  It  will  take  more  than  that  tedious
dossier  compiled  on Miller  by Aware,  Inc.,  to get  a rise out of
bored  city  editors.  The  country  seems  to  be  apathetic   about
loyalty-security  injustices  but  jaded  with  red-and-pink   sensa-
tions.   It  looks  as  if  the  Miller  appearance  can  turn  the  trick
for  poor  Walter  only  if  the  Committee  pulls  a  real  surprise—
say,   an infra  red  photograph  to  prove  that  Miller  tatooed  atom
bomb  secrets  on  Marilyn's  lovely  bottom,  ready  to  rush  East-
ward  with  it  as  soon  as  the  State  Department  granted  him  a
passport.     EXTRA!
NOT  PREVENTIVE  WAR,  BUT PREVENTIVE   CRISIS:
Ben  Gurion  is  Israel's  Churchill,  Goldie  Mayerson  is a  female
* Last   Tuesday   night,   however,  a   District   of  Columbia
American   Legion   post,   Cooley-MeCullough  No.   22,   unani-
mously  adopted a resolution  praising Cain's "courageous  stand
against  the  injustices  and  inequities  of  the  Federal  loyalty-
security  program."
Gibraltar.   Moshe  Sharrett  is  not  made  of  stuff  as  stern.   The
new  Cabinet  shift   is  not  a  preparation   for  preventive  war;
"B.  G."  feels  too  deeply  about  the  price  of  a  new war  and  a
new  victory:  the  cream  of  this  Israeli  generation's  youth.  But
he  is  not  disposed  to  stand  by and  let  events  drift.  A  preven-
tive  crisis—a  showdown,  let  us  say,  over  the  water  develop-
ment  on  the  Syrian-Israeli border—might  force  a  peace  settle-
ment.  The  alternative  is to drift  while  both  East and West play
to  the  Arabs  and  arm  them  until  they  feel  themselves   strong
enough  to  overwhelm  Israel.   Ben  Gurion  may feel  it  is  better
to  take  the  risk  now  before  the  Arab  States  are   prepared.
"B.  G."  has  always  been  less  impressed  by  the  State  Depart-
ment  than  Sharrett,  and  more  prepared  to  play an  independent
line.   State  Department  rigidity  is  blamed  in  some  Israeli  cir-
cles  for  failing  to  exploit   the  willingness  of  Bulganin  and
Krushchev  in  April  to  back  a  peaceful  Arab-Israeli  settlement
"on  a  mutually acceptable  basis."   If  the  U.  S. had  not  vetoed
the  idea of a four-power  resolution  at  the UN,  a  wedge  might
have  been  driven  between  Moscow  and  the  Arabs.  That  April
statement  hit  Arab  capitals hard.  UN  Soviet  delegate  Arkady
Sobolev,  according  to  a well-informed  source,  approached   the
British  delegation  with  the  idea  of  a  resolution  which  would
have put  the  Security Council  on  record  as stating that  full  ob-
servance  of  the  armistice was  not—as  the  Arab  States  insist—
an  end  in  itself  but  a  preliminary  to  a  general  peace.   Britain
was  ready  to  accept  the  idea  of  a  four  power  resolution  along
these  lines;  so were  the  French.   Dulles  vetoed  the  idea.   The
result  is  the  Shepilov  tour.   But  what  if  Moscow  were  to  pull
a  surprise  and  play peacemaker  in  the  Middle  East? The  ques-
tion  may only  reflect a wistful  Israeli  hope,  but  the  possibility
cannot  be  excluded.   Le  Monde  reported  recently  that  Nasser
was prepared  to  give  up  insistence  on  the  1947  partition  plan
'as a  basis  for  peace,  but  had  run  up  against  too  much  oposi-
tion  from  Syria and  Jordan.
ROUND THE  CAPITOL: The President's  illness  was worth
a  lot  to  the  aviation  industry;  if  the  doctors will only keep  him
in  the  hospital  a  few  weeks  longer,  the  air  lobby  may get  that
full   extra   billion  voted   them   in  the   Senate  Appropriations
Committee.  . . . Note the lineup  on this  issue:  the  Democrats
are  the  backers,  the  Republicans the  opponents,  of  the  air  lob-
byists.  . .  .  That  Turkish  threat  to  invade  Cyprus  is  believed
here to be pre-arranged  with  diehard  circles  in London  looking
for  a  last  desperate  excuse  to  hold  onto  an  island  overwhelm-
ingly  Greek.  . . . The Federal  aid to school  construction bill is
given  some  chance  of  passing  at  this  session,  but  no  one  be-
lieves  the  civil rights  bill  will get  past  Eastland  as  Senate Judi-
ciary  Committee  chairman if  and  when  House  Rules  Commit-
tee  Chairman Smith  finally  lets  it  get  to  ,a vote  in  the  House.
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone't  Weekly,  June  tS, 1969
How  Herbert  Brownell  Imitated  Franz  Kafka—As Told  By  Harry  Cain
Adding  "Faceless  Judgment"  to  "Faceless  Informers"  in  Security  Cases
The  most  serious  aspect  of  Harry  Cain's  two  days  of  testi-
mony  before  the  Senate's  Hennings  committee  got  the  least
attention  in the  press.  He spelled  out the  way security  board
regulations  have  slowly and  quietly  been  changed  during  the
Eisenhower  Administration   so  that  the  reasons  for finding a
man  a  security  risk  are  no  longer  disclosed  to  him.
Few  Americans  realize'  that  to  the  evil  of  the  faceless  in-
former  has  been added  the  evil  of  an  equally  "faceless"  judg-
ment.  Just  as  the  NKVD  under  Stalin  had the  power  to  send
men  to  death  or  labor  camps  without  telling  them  why,  so
Federal  employes in  this  country  have  been  branded  for   life
as  untrustworthy  without  being  told  the  reasons.  This  is  a
great  administrative   convenience;  it  disposes  of  bother  with
appeals,  since  no  man  can  appeal  effectively  against  a  judg-
ment  whose content—Kafka  style—is kept a  secret  from  him.
The  Lowest  Point in  BrownelFs  Record
In  setting forth  this  change  fully  on the  record  before  the
Senate  committee,  former  Senator  Cain  struck  another  blow
in what  has  become a  duel  between  him and  Attorney  General
Brownell.  The  maverick  member  of  the  Subversive  Activities
Control  Board  not  only  showed  that  this  change  was  the  At-
torney  General's  handiwork  but  had  the  temerity  to  link  it
with  the  William Henry  Taylor  case. In  doing this, Cain  put  a
rough  hand  on  the   sorest   point  in  Brownell's   record—the
"twenty   years  of  treason"  campaign   launched  by  Brownell
and  J.  Edgar  Hoover with their  attack on the  late  Harry  Dex-
ter   White  before  the   Senate   Internal   Security    Committee
November  17,  1953.
Taylor,  whom  Brownell  mentioned  in  that  testimony,  was
the  last  member of the  so-called  "White  ring" still in govern-
ment  employ  in Washington. It  was a  defeat  for  Brownell  and
Hoover  when last  January  5 the  International  Organizations
Loyalty  Board  of  the   U.S.  Civil  Service  Commission  found
there  was  no  reasonable  doubt  as  to  Taylor's  loyalty.  Taylor
since  1946, when  he  left  the  U.S.  Treasury,  had  been  an  em-
ploye of the  International  Monetary  Fund  in  Washington.  The
point  Cain  made to  the  Hennings  committee  was that  Taylor,
like  Abraham  Chasanow  before  him,  was  only  able  to  clear
himself  because  he  had  been  able  to  learn  the  reasons  for
earlier  decisions against  him.
An  American  "Bordereau"?
The  inescapable-inference   of  the  Cain  testimony   was  that
Brownell  in  changing  the  regulations  was  making  it  much
more  difficult  in  future  security  cases for  men  to  clear  them-
selves.  The  importance  of  the   change   was  emphasized   by
Cain's testimony that he considered that the  main  item  of  evi-
dence  against  Taylor  "may  have  been  fabricated";  Cain  com-
pared  it  to  the  forged  "bordereau"  in  the  Dreyfus  case.
The original  findings  against Taylor  were based  on Eliza-
beth  Bentley  testimony.  As  a  result,  Cain  said,  "Mr.  Taylor
presented  a  long  and  documented brief  designed  to  point  out
inconsistencies  and  contradictions  in  the  Bentley  spy  revela-
tions  both  as  they  related   to  Taylor   and  to  other   persons
named by  her."
A  Letter  in  Too  Many  Versions
The  hearing  board  thereupon  minimized the  Bentley  story
and found against Taylor  on the  basis of a letter purported  to
have  been  written  by  William   Ludwig  Ullmann.    Ullmann
then   "testified   under   oath  that  he  was  convinced  that  he
neither  typed  nor  dictated  the  letter."   On the  basis  of  this
testimony  and of  evidence  which showed that this  same letter
"had   circulated   in  various   versions   bearing  three  different
dates," there  was a final  decision  completely  clearing  Taylor.
Here  is  how Cain  spelled  out  the  Brownell  changes  for  the
Hennings  committee.    The  Eisenhower   loyalty-security   pro-
Add  Nixon  "New  Look"?
On  ABC's  "College  Press  Conference"  last  Sunday,
June  17, Harry  Cain  said  he  had  advised Vice  President
Nixon  not to use  the communism-in-government  issue  in
the  1956 presidential campaign.  Nixon,  Cain  told  his  in-
terviewers,  "is  not  going  out  in  1956—not  if  I  can  put
words  in  his  mouth—and  say  things  that  are  not  true."
Cain  said  he  had  been  in  correspondence  with  the  Vice
President  and believed Nixon  was  seriously  considering
his views.
gram  (Executive  Order  10450, dated  April  27, 1954)  originally
provided—Cain  said—"that,  in  most  instances,  no  employee
would  be found  by  a  hearing  board  to  be  a  security  risk,  or
continued  on  his  job  after  a  hearing  without  being  told  in
written form  why the  Board  had  reached  its  decision."  (Ital-
ics in  original.)
A  Loophole That  Was  Not  Large  Enough
Sample  regulations  supplied  to  the  head  of  each  agency  on
July  6,  1953,  by the  Attorney  General  "and  designed  to  estab-
lish  minimum  standards"  provided  that  the  decision  of  the
security  hearing board  must  be in  writing, and  that  one copy
must  be sent  to  the  employe  whose  case  was  before  it.
"The  decision  itself," the  regulations said, "will not  contain
the  reasons  why the  Board  reached  its  decision.  A  separate
Memorandum  of  Reasons  will  be prepared  for  that  purpose."
The  reason  for  separating  the  two  soon  appeared,  for  the
regulation  governing  the  "Memorandum  of  Reasons" said, "A,
copy  will  be  made  available  to  the  employee  in  every  case  in
which  it  does  not  contain   reference   to  confidential  informa-
tion,  witnesses  or  material,  the  source  or  existence  of  which
must be protected."
This  loophole  was  not  large  enough,  as  the  Chasanow  case
in  1953.  soon  demonstrated.  The hearing  board  found  that  he
was loyal, trustworthy  and  reliable,  it  was his  Knowledge of
this  decision  and  of  the  reasons  for  it  which  enabled  Chasa-
now  successfully  to  clear  his  name  when  the  head  of  the  de-
partment  ordered  him discharged  as  a  security  risk.*
Decision  in  The  Dark
In  1954,  as  an  obstacle to future  "Chasanow" reversals, two
changes  in  the  regulations were  circulated  to  all  departments
of  the  government  "as  approved  by  the  Attorney   General."
The  first  on July  3,  1954,  eliminated  the  original  requirement
that  the  employe be given  a  Memorandum of  the  Reasons  for
the  decision  in  his  case.  The  second,  on  July  28,  1954,  elimi-
nated  the  previous  requirements  that  the  person  accused  be
given a  copy of the  bare  decision  itself.  The change  in  regula-
tions  added  the  word  "advisory"  before  the  word  "decision."
Henceforth  the  employe  was  to  know  only  the  final  decision
by  his  agency  or  department  head.
The  effect  of  the  change  was  to  deny  the  accused  not  only
a  statement  of  the  hearing  board's  findings  but  even  to  keep
secret  from  him  whether  its  decision  was  favorable  or  ad-
verse.   In  little  more than  a  year, as  Cain  told  the  Hennings
committee,  "the  individual  was  to  go  from  where  he  was  ad-
vised  of  how  and  why  the  decision found  for  or  against  him,
to  darkness,  doubt  and  confusion."     He  was  to  be  told  only
whether  he  was  being  fired  or  retained.
* Cain  told  the  committee  Chasanow  was  now acting  as  ad-
viser  to  Twentieth  Century  Fox  on a  picture  story  of  Chasa-
now'a "life  and troubles with  his government." It  is good  news
that  Hollywood  has  the  nerve  to  tackle  the  loyalty  purge.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone'g Weekly, June  25,1958
The  Lions He Prepared  to  Face May Turn  Put  to  Be  Miserably  Legalistic  AUeycats
Little  Prospect  of  A  Clear  First  Amendment   Ruling  in  O'Connor's  Case
The   Court  of  Appeals   in   Washington   has   nine   judges.
Cases  are  usually  heard  by three. The three  chosen last  week
to hear  Harvey  O'Connor's  appeal  from  a  McCarthy  commit-
tee  contempt  conviction  were  Edgerton,   Fahy,  and  Burger.
Most  legal  handicappers—to   import   racetrack  terminology
into  jurisprudence—would  say  this  favored  O'Connor  to  win
2-to-l.   Edgerton,  the  chief  judge,  is  one of  the  great  liberal
judges  of our  time.  Fahy, one-time  New Dealer, is  mildly  lib-
eral.  Burger,  the  third  member  of the  panel,  is  the  Circuit's
newest  judge;  he  was  an  Assistant  Attorney  General  before
he  was  elevated  to  the  bench  last  April.
So it  looks as  if  there  might  be a  2-to-l  decision for  O'Con-
nor.    Unfortunately—as   the  old  Morning  Telegraph  would
have  put  it—the  favorite  faces  a  muddy track.  To the  naked
lay  eye,  O'Connor's  challenge  to  McCarthy  was  a  clear  one.
The  author   of  "Mellon's   Millions"  and  many  other   famous
works declined to invoke the  Fifth  when asked  about his polit-
ical  views.  O'Connor  took  the  First instead. He thereby  made
himself  a  legal  guinea  pig  to  test  whether  the  First  Amend-
ment  could protect a  man from  Congressional  inquisition.  The
O'Connor  case  is  the  only  First  Amendment  contempt  case
left   in  the  courts,  since  the  similar   challenge  by   Lament,
Shadowitz  and  Unger  was won on a  technicality  and  is  being
appealed  by  the  government  on  a  technical  basis.   O'Connor,
on  the  other  hand,  lost  in  the  District  Court  on  the  First
Amendment  issue,  and  was  fined  $500 .and  given  a  suspended
sentence of one year  in jail.  It  had  been hoped that his  appeal
would  bring  the  issue  squarely  before  the  Supreme   Court,
which  has  yet  to  pass  on a  First  Amendment  contempt  case.
For  Once  The  Courts  Were  Swift
Unfortunately,  while  O'Connor's  chances  of  winning  on  a
lesser  technical  point  are  good, his  chances  of  winning  on  the
First  Amendment  issue  are  close  to  nil.   There  is  no  doubt
that this  is  the  issue  on which  O'Connor  would win  if  Judge
Edgerton  had  his  way.  In  1948,  when the  First  Amendment
issue  got  to  this  same  Circuit  Court  in  the  Hollywood   Ten
and  Barsky   cases,  Edgerton  wrote  a  dissent  in  the  latter
which  ringingly  affirmed  that  ideological  inquisition  by  Con-
gressional  committee  "abridged"  the  basic  freedoms  guaran-
teed  by  the  First  Amendment.  This  dissent  will  some day  be
history  but  is not yet  law.  Last January  26 Edgerton   almost
made  it  the  law  in  a  2-to-l  decision  (Edgerton  and Bazelon)
reversing  the  contempt   conviction  of  John   T.  Watkins,  a
United  Automobile  Workers   official   who  had  admitted   his
own past membership  in  the  Communist party  but  refused  on
First  Amendment and  moral  grounds  to  discuss  the  political
past  of others.  That  Edgerton  decision  promised  well for  the
O'Connor  case  until  a  rehearing  was  ordered  before  the  full
bench.  On April  23, voting  6-2, the full  bench  reversed   Edger-
ton,  held  Watkins  guilty  and  in  sweeping  terms  upheld  the
powers  of  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee.  Edgerton's
liberal   decision  was  expunged  with  a  rare  judicial  celerity...
Thus  chastened, Edgerton  will  hardly venture  to  invoke  the
First  Amendment in  the  O'Connor  case,  though  it  would not
be hard  to "distinguish" between the  almost  venerable powers
of  the  House  Committee  to  inquire  into  "subversion"  and  the
vaguer  and  more  dubious mandate  of  the  McCarthy commit-
tee.  There  are  other  ways  of  skinning  this  particular  cat  if
the  majority  so chooses.  The  McCarthy  committee was  inves-
tigating  the  overseas  library  program  of  the  State  Depart-
ment; this  was in the jurisdiction of the  Senate  Foreign  Rela-
tions  Committee,  which  had  just  finished  investigating   the
library  program.  There  is  no  record  of  a  specific  authoriza-
tion  from  the  full  committee to  the  subcommittee. What  did
O'Connor's  views  have  to  do  with  such  an  inquiry  anyway?
His lawyers, Gerhard Van Arkel and  Leonard Boudin, pointed
out  that  O'Connor not only had  nothing to do with placing  the
books  in  overseas  libraries  but  did not  know they  were  there
A  Wonder  the  Old Republic  Still  Totters On
"'Communist  conspiracy'  has  become  in  recent  years
a  term  of  fixed  and precise  meaning on  the  part  of Con-
gress  and  the  courts.  .  .  .  The  term  'Communist con-
spiracy'  embraces  more  than  mere  membership  in  the
Communist  Party. .  .  .  The present  widespread under-
standing  and  acknowledgment of  the  existing  Commu-
nist  conspiracy  has  gradually  evolved since  the appear-
ance  on  the  American  scene,  prior  to  World War  I,  of
scattered  groups of  anarchists and others  who  advocated
political  violence.  .  .  .  The vulnerability of  the republi-
can  form   of   government   to  conspiracies  guided  from
abroad,  ready to  assume  and keep  total power by  illegal
means  as  soon  as  the  time  became  propitious, became
well  understood in  this country by  the  late  1930's."
—Brief  for  the government in  O'Connor v.  US.,  p. 39
and  did  not  profit  financially from  their  sale.  McCarthy  had
not  asked  O'Connor  if  he  was  a  member  of  the  Communist
party,  perhaps  because  the  answer  was  too  well  known.  He
asked  the  vaguer   and  trickier  question,. whether   O'Connor
was a member  of "the  Communist  conspiracy" when  his  books
were  purchased  "by  the  old Acheson  State  Department."   If
such  a  question  was proper  under  the First  Amendment, was
it  also  proper  under  the  Sixth  Amendment which  guarantees
a  man  the  right  to  be precisely  informed  of  what  he  is  being
accused?  Finally—the  last  ignominious  technicality  on which
the  Court  could rule  for  O'Connor—is whether  the  indictment
was not defective  because "it  failed  to state the  matter  under
inquiry,  to  show  that  the  question  was  pertinent  thereto,  or
to  allege  that  the  Subcommittee  was  authorized  to  conduct
the  investigation."  Such  are  the  dodges  available  in  the  law.
The  Really  Painful  Experience
What  judicial  ingenuity  will  do  with  these  materials  re-
mains  to  be  seen.  Harvey  O'Connor boldly prepared  to  go  to
jail  on  behalf   of  fundamental   principles,   like  a  latter  day
Christian  marching  out  to  face  the  lions.  He may  end up by
finding himself  the  victor  over  a  few  miserable  alleycats. The
First Amendment is full  of a  mighty  music for  the  discerning
ear,  but  who would willingly  be a  martyr  in  the  cause  of  the
non-defective  indictment?   This  is  really  painful.
On July  14 it  will  be three years to  the  day  since  O'Connor
challenged   McCarthy,   but—happily—it  seems  much,  much
longer.   The  full-bodied  flavor  of  those  wacky  days  is  to  be
savored  again  in  the  government's   pleadings.    The  govern-
ment  brief  relates  that  this  particular  McCarthy  inquiry  be-
gan  when  there  were  complaints  that  "instead  of  fighting
communism  .  .  .  the  library   program  was actually  serving
the  cause  of  communism by  using  the  books  of  Communist
authors."  These  were  not  easily  identifiable.   "Some  of  these
authors  were  very  notorious  Communists,  others  not  so  well
known.  Some of  the  books were  definitely   anti-American   and
viciously  pro-Communist."   The  italics  are  ours;  presumably
other  of  the  books, though  by  Communists, were  not   "definite-
ly"   anti-American  nor   "viciously"  pro-Communist.   Appar-
ently  some  of  the  authors  were  crafty,  but  they  did  not  fool
the  McCarthy  subcommittee.   "Books  by  Communist  authors
which  did  not  appear  to  be pro-Communist on  the  surface  to
the  ordinary  reader,"  the  Department  of  Justice  went  on  to
argue,  "were  not  considered  by  any  members of  the  subcom-
mittee  to  be  'innocent'  books  and  it  was  felt  that  they  could
only  advance  the  Communist party  line."  Just  how the  sub-
committee   members  felt   this   is   not   explained.   Perhaps
McCarthy  and  his  colleagues  learned  to  spot  a  subversive
book  quickly  by  the  sheer  "feel"   of  it,  unlike  the  inexpert
ordinary  reader  who  has  to  move  his  lips  wearily  on  from
one  page  to  another.   So  prescient  were  our  mentors  in  the
good  old  McCarthy   era.
9  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, June  &5,1956
Civil  Rights  Given  Little
(Continued  from  Page  One)
. . . Fantastic: the report  here  that the White  House has select-
ed  Senator  Knowland  as  a  delegate  to  the  next  UN   General
Assembly  after  the  election.   .  .  .The   difference  between  the
Adenauer  and  Pineau  speeches  here was quite  clear:  Adenauer
preached   mistrust  and   advocated   continued   tension,   Pineau
called for  relaxation  and  for  taking advantage  of  the  freer  con-
tacts  invited  by  the  Russians.  The  French  Foreign   Minister
said,  logically,  that until  now the Communists had  been  able  to
carry on propaganda  within  France  "whereas, up to  the  present
time,  the  propaganda   of  freedom  and  democracy  has  never
been  carried  on  inside  Russia  and  the  satellite  states.   Why
should  we start  with  the  assumption  that  our  propaganda  does
not  have  in  itself  sufficient  weight  to  convince  those  whom  it
will  reach?"  .  . . The  press  corps,  used  to the Germanic  cold
war  line  (Dulles  and  Adenauer  sound  as  alike  as  twins)  did
not  know  what  to make of  the  French  Socialist.  ...    That was
a  brilliant  piece  Brooks  Atkinson  did  for  the  June  18  Sunday
New  York  Times  but  informed  sources  here  believe  it  was fear
of  German,  not  French,  sensibilities  which  led  the  State  De-
partment  to  discourage  the  American  National   Theatre  and
Academy  from  sending   "The   Diary  of  Anne  Frank"  to  the
Paris  International  Theatre  Festival  this  summer.  .  .  .  John
Foster  Dulles  is  increasingly  unhappy  in  this  Administration,
sees  Stassen  as a  rival  and  has  begun  to  spread  reports  that  he
may  retire  after  the  election.   He  will  retire  happily  if  he  can
help  engineer  the  return  of  General  Aniline  & Film  to  I.  G.
Farben,  as pressed  by Adenauer.  . . . The story of  how Hitler
through  General  Aniline  help  stifle  American  war   potential
has  been  forgotten.  When  Howard  Watson  Ambruster,  one-
time  anti-trust  consultant  here,  author  of   "Treason's   Peace:
German  Dyes  and  American  Dupes,"  the  fullest  account  of
I.  G.  Farben's  operations,  tried  to  testify  before  the  Senate
Judiciary  subcommittee  on  S  995,  which  would  restore   Gen-
eral  Aniline, his testimony was rejected.  . . . Another round of
inflation  is  foreshadowed  by  the  steel  negotiations;  up  to  now
higher  wages have been  followed  by higher  prices  made  possi-
ble  in  turn  by armament stimulation  for  the  steel  industry.  But
what happens  if  the arms race dies  down ? And  isn't it  time  for
labor  to  see that  inflation  robs  the  worker's  pay  envelope,  too?
Chance  at  This   Session
And  that  we  have  to  find  a  better  way  to  maintain  living
standards  and  jobs than  by perpetual  inflation?
MEMO  TO  SENATOR  MANSFIELD:  If  you  look  at  the
budget  for  the  German  Chancellor's  office  which  went  to  the
Bundestag in Bonn last week, you will  notice a new  23 million
mark  item  for  a  German  CIA,  the  notorious  Gehlen  agency,
but  you will  also  see that  this  CIA,  unlike  ours,  is  to  be under
parliamentary  control.  The  Senate  last April  11  defeated  (59-
27)   your  bill  for  a  special  joint  Congressional   committee  to
supervise CIA, but  in  Germany a parliamentary committee will
be  set  up  as  watchdog  over  the  Gehlen  organization.   Each
party  will  be  represented   by  one  member.   Gehlen's  will  be
the   official   external   intelligence  agency,  like  Central  Intelli-
gence  Agency here.  Until  a year ago the  Gehlen  outfit  was un-
der  U.  S. control  and  on  the  U.  S.  payroll.  This  year  for  the
first time  it  becomes an  official  West  German  outfit.   Gehlen—
as you know—was the  Wehrmacht's  intelligence  chief  for  East
Europe,  but  the  foreign  press  is  now  assured  in  Bonn  that  he
was "never  a  real Nazi."   If  Hitler  should  crawl up  out  of  the
ruins  in  Berlin,  it  would  not  surprise  us  at  all  to hear  that  he,
too,  only  joined the  Party because he  needed  a job.
GOOD  NEWS  OF  THE  WEEK  DEPT.:  We  rise  to  ap-
plaud  James  Kutcher,  the  legless  war  veteran,  and  his  lawyer,
ADA  Chairman Joseph  L. Rauh, Jr.,  on the  former's  reinstate-
ment  as  a  clerk  in  the  Veterans  Administration regional   office
in  Newark,  N.  J.   Thus  victoriously  ends  an  8-year  fight  by
Kutcher  against  his  discharge  for  "disloyalty"  because  he  is a
member  of  the Socialist Workers  Party.  . . . And we rejoice in
the  directed  acquittal  of  Marian  Bachrach,  once  our  colleague
on  PM, in  the  current New  York  Smith  Act trial.  .  .  . The
Kutcher  reinstatement was announced  as  in  compliance  with  a
Court  of  Appeals  decision of  April  30 but  that  decision,  like a
previous  one,  was  merely  procedural.   A  new  case  could  have
been  instituted against  Kutcher,  but  somebody in  the  govern-
ment  finally  had  sense  enough  to  see  the  cruel  folly  of  this
whole  proceeding  and  throw  in  the  sponge.    Kutcher's  8-year
battle  was as heroic and  as much a defense of  all  that  is best  in
our  country  as  that  in  which  he  lost  his  legs  on  the  Anzio
beachhead.
You  Can  Still  Start  A  Gift   Subscription   With  Stone's  Series  From  Abroad
L  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D. C.
3'lease  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:  .
Street  .........................................................  « ........................ .....
City  .........................................  -Zone. ........... State ....................
Knter  gift  aub for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name ........................ ..................................... - ..............
6/25/56
Street
i.itv                                           .Zone           State
Shul!  we  send  gift   announcement?      Yea  D     No   D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington   3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED