I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956aug20.pdf

============================================================

Soviet  Geography  Proves  As  Flexible  As  British  Morality  On Israel  at  Suez,  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  31
AUGUST  20,  1966
«»«     WASHINGTON,  D.   C.IB   CENTS
How  Truman  Clinched  The  Nomination  for  The  Man He  Was  Determined  to  Block
A  Serious  Moment  at  the  (Democratic)   Circus
As we went  to  press,  it  seemed  to  be all  over  but  the  official
count.   One  miracle,  perhaps  two,  had  occurred in  that  honky-
tonk  in  Chicago.   The  best  man  had  won  and  a  last  minute
party  split  over  civil  rights  had  been  avoided.   Despite  Harry
Truman,  gleeful  as  a  small  boy bent  on  mischief,  or  perhaps
because  of  him,  the  Democrats  seemed  to  have cleared  the  way
for  the  nomination  of  Adlai  Stevenson  virtually  by  acclama-
tion.  By some  mystic process,  from  the  same assemblage  which
had  whooped  and  hollered  over  Governor  Clement,  probably
the  greatest  hog-caller  since  Demosthenes,  there  had  emerged
as the candidate a civilized and  literate man.  Not  since  Paley's
watch  has  theology  been  provided  with a  better  argument  that
there  must  be  a  Higher  Power,  higher  that  is  even  than  Sam
Rayburn,  who  can  tote  up  6,942  votes  faster  by  ear  than  the
ordinary  Southerner   can  say  Dixiecrat,  yet  always  come  out
with  a  majority  against  Northern   radicals.   Endless  were  the
wonders  on  display  at  this  convention.   What  God  wrought
in  Rayburn  alone  could  never  be  matched  by  UNIVAC.
Early  on  the  morning  of  the  day  for  the  nominations,  the
chief  impressions  left  by the  infra-party  struggle  were  the  pet-
tiness  of  Truman  and  the  magnanimity  of  Estes  Kefauver.   A
piqued  vanity and  an  old  slight were  easily visible beneath  the
rationalizations  of  the  ex-President.  The  politician  so concerned
with  the  party's  chances  was  prepared   to  ruin  them  out  of
spite. The  man  who  was worried  lest  the  Democrats  turn  con-
servative  executed  a  maneuver  that  threatened  for  a  few  hours
to  make  Lyndon  Johnson   its  arbiter,  to  hand  it  over  to  the
leadership  of  the  Texas  gas  and  oil  interests,  to  give  the  man
who  works  in  scandalous  congeniality  with  Knowland  in  the
Senate  the  power  to  dictate  terms  to  Stevenson  or  ditch  him
for  Symington.  The  danger  was  so  obvious  that  the maneuver
boomeranged;   thanks  in  no  small  part  to  Walter  Reuther,  a
new  Northern  bandwagon  movement  to  Stevenson  started'as a
swift  rescue  operation.  Truman  assured  the  candidacy  he  was
determined  to  block.
Truman  Wanted  A  Cold  Warrior
There  never was a phonier  issue than  this one of  moderation.
A  multimillionaire  disguised  as  a  Jacobin,  practically  a  Bol-
shevik,  the  fattest  fat  cat  in  the  party,  the  Union  Pacific's  gift
to  Leftism,  was  trotted  out  as the  man  to  carry  on  the  perma-
nent  revolution,  Vladimir  Averillovitch   Harriman.   His  spon-
sor,  for  all  the  engaging  qualities which  won  our  affections  in
Washington,  always  was  full  of  helium;  the  contrast  between
Truman's  campaign  speeches  and  what he  actually did  in  office
is  not  easily  forgotten  by  those  who  lived  through  it  at  close
range.  The  memory  i/-.ade  all  those  convention tears  about  the
poor  small  business  man  and  the poor  farmer  unusually saline.
Truman's  chief  principle  in  practice often  seemed  to  be  gov-
ernment  by  crony, and  this  reached  its  climax  in  the  elevation
to  the  Supreme  Court  of  Clark  and  Minton,  the  two   most
ignorant  men  ever  appointed  to  the  high  bench,  mainstays  of
all  those  reactionary  interests  Truman  is  always  flailing.  Im-
moderation  in  speech  was  never  more  deliberately  confused
with  radicalism  in  action.   And  in  the  background  was  a  real
issue,  though  carefully  hidden,  Truman's  fear  that  Stevenson
unlike  Harriman  is  not  wedded  to  the  cold  war,  nor  like  the
Aviation  Lobby's  Symington  to  the  virtues  of  perpetual   infla-
tion  via  a  perpetual   arms  race.  Truman's  defeat  at  Chicago
was  in  this  respect  a  victory  for  peace.
The  real  test  of  a  fighter  is  one  that  Truman  failed  at  Chi-
cago.   It  is  easy  to  wield  a  bladder  on  the  heads  of  the  oppos-
ing  forces;  it  is  hard  to  press  the  issues  that  infuriate   one's
own  side.  The  man  who  was so ready to  "give  'em  hell",  who
regards  this as a prescription for  victory, turned  up an  appeaser
lamb  at  the  platform  committee on  the  only  real  issue  before
the  convention—civil  rights.   Here  the  strutting  little  bantam
from  Missouri  might have made a memorable last  performance
in  American  politics.  All  his  prestige  as  an  ex-President  and
his  regular  guy  popularity  might  have  been  put  to  service  in
awakening  the  nation  to  the  inescapable;  an  atmosphere  in
which  it  has  suddenly  become  dangerous  to  defend  the  Su-
preme  Court,  a  situation  which  gives  the  lie  so  vividly to  all
that  campaign  oratory  and  national  myth  about  the  equality
of  man,  were  challenges  to  a  fighter.  Truman   ducked  them,
more  anxious  to  outflank  Stevenson  and  win  the  South   for
Symington  than  to  make  a  final  contribution  of  statesmanship
in  a  world  where  an  awakening  majority  of  colored  men  eye
us  with  cool  detachment.  Their  judgment  will  determine  our
future.
Senator  Foghorn  Come to  Life
The  way  in  which  the  issue  of  civil  rights  transformed  the
sweaty  scene  in  the  early hours  of  last  Thursday  was  a  measure
of  its urgent  reality. Until  that  time the  convention  was a  spec-
tacle  of  such  clownishness  as to make one wonder whether  TV
will  not  end  by ruining  political  conventions  as  it  ruined  Mc-
Carthy.  What  the  professional  politician  takes  as  a  joke  now
comes  into  the  parlor  of  the  average  home  as  serious  political
discussion,  and  as  such  must  be  appalling.  The  keynoter   Cle-
ment  was nauseating;  to  compare  him  with  William  Jennings
Bryan  was  an  insult  to  the  memory of  one  who  still  practiced
oratory,  however  inflated,  in  the  classic and  literate tradition.
The  paraphrase  of  the  cross  of  gold  passage  in  Clement's per-
formance  was  atrocious;  his  attacks  on  the  President  -were  so
(Continued  on  Page  Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August 20,1956
Moscow's  Geography  Shows  Itself  As  Flexible  as  Imperialist  Morality
Morocco,  Yemen  and  the  Sudan  Are  "Adjacent"  to  Suez  But  Not  Israel
The  most  disturbing  aspect  of  the  Suez  conference  on  the
eve  of  its  opening  in  London  was  the  terrible  isolation  of
Israel.   For  all  the  talk  about  international   morality  not  one
Power,  not  England, not  the  U.  S., not  Russia,  nor  India sug-
gested  that  Israel  be  invited.   Shepilov's  note  from  Moscow
spoke  of  the  failure  to  invite  "Arab  states  whose  territories
are  directly  adjacent  to  the  Canal"  and  therefore  "vitally  inter-
ested"  and  then  proceeded  to  mention  among  others  Morocco,
which  is several thousand miles  away at the other  and  Western
end  of  Africa,  and  Yemen,  which  is  at  the  other  end  of  the
Red  Sea.   But  Israel,  the  only  country whose territory  is  adja-
cent  to  Egyptian  Sinai  and  Suez  was passed  over  by  Moscow's
We  Wonder  Why  Dept.
From  a  New  York Times  background  story  (Aug.  10)
explaining  the  "juridical"  difference  between  the  Suez
and  Panama  canals:  "The  United  States  considers  the
[Panama]  waterway  so vital  to its  interests  . . .  that  it
never  has  indicated  any  serious  intention  of  relinquish-
ing control.... The little  state of  Panama  ..  . never has
seriously  displayed  any  aim  to  repossess  the  Canal  that
traverses its  land.   Nor has any other  nation."
eye,  as  if  it  did  not  exist.   Soviet  geography  seems  to  be  as
flexible  as  imperialist morality.
Of  course,  our  own  Mr.  Dulles,  who  usually  oozes  moral-
isms  at  every  pore,  did  not  suggest  Israel  be  asked.  In  an  ad-
joining  column  we  give  in  the  full  flavor  of  actual  text  the
cold-blooded  replies  of  Eden's  Under  Secretary. for   Foreign
Affairs  in  the  House  of  Commons  when  asked  about  Israel.
Only  in  the  French  National  Assembly was Nasser's  discrimi-
nation  against  ships  bound  for  Israel  included  in  the   official
motion  of  protest  passed  by  the  Assembly and  M.  Bidault  for
the  MRP  declared that  failure  to  react against  Egypt's  ban  on
Israel's  shipping  had  emboldened  Nasser  to  go  further.
Shepilov protested indignantly in his note to  London  against
the  by-passing of  the  UN,  but  what  better  example  of "by-
passing"  than one  Shepilov  does  not  mention—the  way Egypt
has  been  allowed  to  violate  the  August,  1951, resolution  of
the  Security  Council?  And  what  more  ignominous  example of
cowardly  scuttle  than  the  way the  British  government   reacted
in  1951  after  the  Egyptians  fired  on  the  British  ship  Empire
Second  Thoughts  in  Britain
"After  a  week  of  mobilization,   punctuated  by  pletho-
ric  grunts  of  triumph  by  Tory  back-benchers,   one  in-
sidious   little  question  insistently  intrudes  itself   upon
the  British  public.  What  exactly  is  all  this  force  meant
to  achieve?   ...    No one denies  that  if  Nasser  were  to
block   the  passage   of  ships  in   the   Canal,   the   nation
against   which   he  discriminated  would  have  the  legal
right  to  send  warships  into  the  Canal.   (This  right  re-
mains  a right even  though  it  is  only  now,  when  Britain's
own  position  is  threatened,  that  we  criticize  Egypt  for
its  long  continued  and  flagrantly  illegal  discrimination
against  Israel.)  But  if  Nasser  does  not  stop  the   free
passage  in  the  Canal—and  the  government  cannot  bank
on  his  being  foolish  enough  to  do so—what  really  is  in-
tended?  . . .  Nasser  cannot  be compelled  to  'denational-
ize'  the Suez company as if it  were  so much British steel."
—Kingsley  Martin  in London  New  Statesman, Aug.  11
Britain  Cold  Shoulders  Israel
SIR  ROBERT  BOOTHBY  asked  whether  in  view  of
the  aggressive  action  taken   by  the  Egyptian   govern-
ment  in  respect   of  the  Suez  canal,  Her  Majesty's gov-
ernment   would  reconsider   their   decision  not  to  allow
the  government  of  Israel  to  purchase  such  arms  as  they
considered  necessary  for  the  effective  defense  of  Israel.
LORD  JOHN HOPE  said  ...    the  Government  saw no
reason  to  change  their  policy  about  the  supply  of  arms
to  the  Middle East.
SIR  R.  BOOTHBY.—Does  the  Under  Secretary   really
mean  to  tell  us  that  in  the  light  of  the  present  situation
the  Government   are  to  make  no  change  in  their  policy
of  refusing  certain  classes  of  modern  arms  to Israel...
and  that   they  do  not  recognize  any  difference  in   the
situation  that  has  arisen  in  the  last  few  days?
LORD JOHN HOPE.—No
MR.  SHINWELL  said ...    if  Israel  had been  properly
supplied,   the  present  impasse   over   Egypt   might  have
been  avoided.
LORD  JOHN  HOPE  said  that   in  the    government's
view  a  balance  had  been  struck—(cries  of  "No!").  .". .
MR.  JOHN  STRACHEY.—Has  not  the  Government's
policy  amounted  to  arming  their  enemies  and penalizing
their  friends?
LORD  JOHN  HOPE—No.
MR.   SYDNEY   SILVERMAN.—Do   the   Government
realize  that  if  they  had  taken  a  firm  attitude  when  the
Suez  Canal'was  first  closed  to   Israeli   shipping,   they
would  be  in  a  very  much  stronger  position  to   handle
their  difficulties  today?    (Opposition   cheers.)
[To  this  there  was  no  answer  by  Lord  John  Hope.]
—House  of  Commons,  August  1.
Roach  bound  with  a  cargo  of  arms  for  Jordan  through  Suez
and  Akaba ? The  British response was  to  legalize the unlawful
blockade  by arranging for  search  and  clearance  of  such  vessels
in  the  future  by  the  Egyptian  authorities  at  Suez.   Ships  of
many  nations bound  for  Israel  (and  in  that  case even Jordan)
have  been  stopped  or  fired  upon  with  impunity.   It  is  only
when  the  great  oil  companies are  aroused  by fear  of nationali-
zation  that  Egypt  becomes  a  matter  of  concern for  these  pur-
veyors  of  international  law  and  morality.
The  most  tragic part  of  Israel's  isolation  is that  as an  Asian
country  she  would  under  other  circumstances  be  on  Egypt's
side  in  this  dispute.    So  long  as  the  interests  of  Sudan  in
Aswan  and  of  the  world  in  Suez  are  protected—and  Nasser
has  not  yet  violated  either—Egypt clearly  has  a  right  to  use
these  revenues  if  it  can  for  projects of  this kind,  which  could
mean so much  to her  poverty-stricken  people.    In  the  long  run
nothing can be better for  Israel than greater stability  and  pros-
perity  in  the  Arab  East.   Nasser  is  not  a  Hitler;  he  has  gone
out  of  his  way  on  several occasions to  demonstrate publicly a
friendly  attitude toward  the  Jews  of  Egypt.  Egypt's needs  for
development  and   Israel's  need  for   peace  might  have  been
linked  in  a  magnanimous program  big  enough  to  take care of
Arab  refugees  and  Arab pride.   But  the  path  ahead  leads  in
quite a different  direction, and  the  cowardly slighting  of  Israel
at  London  by  all  sides  will  be  requited  painfully   by  all, in
that  weakening of  the  UN  and  of  respect  for  law  on  which
the  fate  of  great  Powers  as  well  as  small  ultimately  depends.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, August to, 1958
New  York's  Anti-Informer   School  Decision  and  Some  Mysteries  of  Pedagogy
What  Does  the  20th  Congress Have  to  Do With  The  1st  Amendment?
The  curtain  has  just  rung  down  on  another  scene  in  the
comic  ballet  over  at  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board.
Last  Spring  the  Supreme  Court  returned  to  it  the  case  of  the
Communist  party.  It  was returned  on  the  ground  that  the  testi-
mony  of  three perjurers had  been  used  in  arriving at  the  order
requiring  the  party  to  register  as  subversive.  The  three  were
Paul  Crouch,  Manning  Johnson  and  Harvey  Matusow.
The  Board  has  now  stricken the  testimony  of  all  three  from
the  record,  and  reaffirmed  its  decision.  This  was hardly a  sur-
prise,  since the  Board operates under a statute—the only one of
its  kind—which  virtually  gives  the  name  and  address  of  the
culprit  to  be  convicted  under  it.
The  Communist  party,  in  a  new  delaying action,  had  asked
the right to present  evidence that  since the  20th Congress  there
no  longer  was a world  Communist movement as defined  in  the
Act,  and  that  it  was  now  independent  of  Moscow.
The  Board  declined  to  hear  the  evidence  and  ruled  that  the
reality  of  the  change  could  only  be  tested  "in  the  crucible  of
time."  This was like  sending  a  man  to  jail  with  the  consoling
observation  that  time would  tell whether  he was guilty or  not.
If  due  process is still  due  process,  we think  the  Board will find
this  case  thrown  back in  its  lap  by the  courts.
We  ourselves  don't  see what  the  20th  Congress  has  to  do
with  the  First  Amendment.  Whether  the  Communist  party  is
or  is  not  a  faithful  echo  of  Moscow  is  something  to  be  ham-
mered  out  in  free  political  controversy,  not  to  be  decided  by
calling  in  the  cops. The  new legal  issue  begs  the  question.  Can
the  government  in  a  supposedly  free  society  label  certain  par-
ties  and  their  publications  "subversive",  make  them  wear  a
yellow  badge  and  reduce their  members to  second  class status?
Can  such  registration  be  reconciled  with  the  Bill  of  Rights?
The  question  which  concerns  us  is  not  whether  Stalin  is  dead
but  whether  Jefferson  still  lives.
Pedagogic  Witchcraft
Two  New  York  newspapers   used  the  same  metaphor   last
week  in  deploring  a  decision  by  the  State  Commissioner  of
Education  that  ex-Communist  teachers  cannot  be  dismissed  for
refusing  to  inform.
The  Journal-American found  the  decision  "intolerable"  be-
cause  in  the  public  school  "Communist  poison  can  be injected
subtly  into  the  minds  of  the  young."   The  World-Telegram
argued,  "suppose  you  were  a  teacher  and  saw  somebody  slip-
ping  poison  into  children's  lunch  boxes?   You'd   report  that
person.  Now  is there  any  less  reason  to  report  somebody  slip-
ping  poison  into  children's  minds.   Make  no  mistake  about  it
—a  Communist  teacher  can  do  exactly  that  by  slanting  practi-
cally  any  subject."
This  metaphor  implies  that  while  other  teachers  grow  pre-
maturely  gray  trying  to  drum  such  comparatively  simple  mat-
ters  as  the  multiplication  table  into  the  heads  of  their  little
charges,  Communist  teachers  have  some  mysterious means  for
slipping  the  complex   subtleties  of  Marxism-Leninism  unob-
served  into  the  same  tender  skulls.   One  method  seems  to  be
analogous   to  intravenous   injection—they   "slip"  it   into   the
child  mind.  Another  seems  to  be  by  means  of  a  diabolic  gift
only  Communist  teachers  are  assumed  to  possess,   since  they
can  do  this  "by  slanting  practically  any  subject."
We  pause,  avid  for  more  detail,  over  that  "practically  any
subject."   How  do  they  do  it  in  Latin?  By blaming  the  con-
jugations  on  capitalism ?  Or  in  geology ?  By hinting  that  the
rocks  are  bigger  in  the  Soviet  Union?
Pro-Communism  Charges  Ruled  Libellous  Unless  Proven  Factual  and  Fair  Comment
A  decision of  importance in  the  fight  against  blacklisting
was  that  handed  down  last  week  by  Justice  Saul  Streit  of
the  New  York  Supreme  Court  in  the  $500,000  suit  brought
by  John  Henry  Faulk,  CBS  commentator,  against   Aware,
Inc.,  Vincent  Hartnett  and  Laurence  A.  Johnson, the  Syra-
cuse, N.  Y., grocer.
Justice  Streit, in rejecting  preliminary  motions to dismiss,
laid  down some  helpful   law  in  this  field  and  "distinguished"
the  Faulk  suit  from  that  which  Joe  Julian  lost  7-2 in  the
New   York  Court  of  Appeals  last  month  against  the  pub-
lishers  of  Red  Channels.  We  published  the  first  analysis  of
the  Julian  decision  (as  yet  unreported  officially)    in  our issue
of  July   SO and  here  give  the  heart  of  Streit's  ruling:
"In  Mencher v.  Chesley,  297  NTT 94,  our  Court  of  Appeals
held  that  a false  charge that  one is  a  Communist  is  libelous
and  that  'it  is  of  little  moment  whether  the  statement de-
scribes  plaintiff  as  a  Communist  or  as  one  having  Commu-
nistic  sympathies and  affiliations,  for  "any  difference  is  one
of  degree only" (Grant v. Reader's Digest,  supra,  p.  735, per
Learned  Hand, C.J.).' .. .
"In  the  instant  case,  Exhibit  A  [Aware,  Inc.  Bulletin  of
February  10, 1956]  . . . states  that  plaintiff  was one of the
'middle   of   the   road'  slate   of   officers   elected  by   AFTRA
[American  Federation of  Television  and  Radio  Artists]  a
short  time earlier,  and that  plaintiff  had been quoted as say-
ing  that  'all  (middlers) were  chosen for  their  opposition  to
Communism.'   It  goes  on  to  say:  'In  most  cases,  this  may
1   2
well  be true.  But  how about  [John  Henry]  Faulk  himself?
What  is his public  record?'    ...
"In  the court's opinion, the  enumeration  of plaintiff's vari-
ous  types  of  participation  in  activities  sponsored  by  Com-
munist  front  organizations  . . .  may reasonably  be under-
stood  as  charging  that  'plaintiff  was either  a  Communist or
that  he cooperated in Communistic activities . . .'  (Mencher
v. Chesley). ...    In the  Court's  opinion, the contents  of this
article,  assuming  they  are  untrue,  as  alleged  in  the  com-
plaint,  defame  and  libel  plaintiff.
"The  recent  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  in  Julian  v.
American  Business  Consultants,  Inc.  (July  11,  1956,  not  yet
officially  reported),  is not authority  to the contrary.  ...    In
that  case  the  only  references  to  the  plaintiff  were  found  on
one  page  of a  book  of 213 pages  [Red  Channels]. .  . . The
Court  of  Appeals declared, The  reference to  plaintiff,  when
read  together  with  the  introduction  and  purpose statement
of  Part  II,  are  not  susceptible  of  a  libelous interpretation.'
"The  last  statement  of  the  foregoing  quotation  related  to
the  statement  in  Part  II  of  the  book  that  'many  prominent
actors and artists have been  inveigled to lend their names  ...
to  organizations  espousing Communist  causes . . . regardless
of  whether  they  actually believe  in, sympathize  with  or  even
recognize  the caused advanced.' ...   In the instant case there
is  absent  a statement  . . . indicating  that  the . . .  plaintiff
might  have  been  ...   a  person who advanced  the Communist
cause innocently. . . ."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  20,1956
The  Convention  Came  to  Life  Over  Civil  Rights
(Continued-from    Page  One)
cheap  that  if  repeated  they  will  only  make  votes  for  Eisen-
liOA'cr.  That  this   combination   rdck-and-roller and   revivalist
-hruld  have  been  chosen as keynoter  makes one  dubious of  the
whole Democratic higher  command. Is there  no  one with  good
tasic  in  it?   Clement  was  Al  Capp's  Senator  Foghorn  come  to
life  straight out  of  Little Abner.-  His  runner  up,  Kerr  of  Okla-
homa,  was  painful  where  Clement  was  emetic;  Kerr's  jokes
were elephantine, his  toothy self-satisfaction  whenever  he  drew
applause  was  ludicrous;  he   sounded   like  an  old   fashioned
medicine  man  who  had  been  drinking  too  much  of  his  own
peruna,  in  short  he  bore  a  striking  recemblance  to  the  late
\v'.  C.  Fields,  may his  gifted  soul  rest  in  peace.
Westinghouse  for  President
When  the  readings  of  the  platform  began,  it  sounded  like
more  of  the  same,  though  the  prose  had  been  brushed  up  and
had  its wilder hairs plastered  down. The  attacks on  the Repub-
lican  party  as  responsible  for  all  calamity from  the  Suez  and
Cyprus  back  to  the  Flood  and  the  Fall  of  Man  were  lushly
conventional,  as  were  the  magnificent  promises  to  give   the
farmer—and   everyone'  else—100   percent   of   parity   or   its
equivalent.   One  had  the  distinct  feeling  that  if  General  Mo-
tors  were not  in  the  Eisenhower Cabinet,  the  Democrats  would
have  promised  three  cars  in  every  garage.  The  caterwauling
rhythms  of  the  speakers  provided  fit  music  for  so  flatulent  a
libretto,  and  for  the  first  time  in  our  experience  the  commer-
cials  came  over  TV  as  pleasant,  urbane  and  instructive inter-
ludes.   Like  so  many  other  viewers,  we  began  to  think  that
man  from  Westinghouse  might  after  all  be  the  best  candidate.
He  seemed  so  intelligent.
And  then  came civil  rights.   It  must have  been  hard  in  that
late,  hot  and  weary  hour  to  see what  the  issue was,  or  why  the
platform  was  so  important;  except  for  the  more  conscientous
editorial  writers,  no  one  reads  platforms   anyway.   But  for  a
moment  the  stage  was  taken  by  men  who  burned  with  a  pas-
sionate  sincerity.  Lehman,  mustering  his  strength  for  the  ef-
fort,  was  unforgettable,  trembling  with  an  emotion  the  great
human   issue  deserved.   But   McCormack  on  the   other   side
Lament   Victory   Over   McCarthy
New  York—In  a  unanimous  opinion,  but  with  a  strik-
ing  difference,  the  Federal  Court  of  Appeals  here  has
unanimously   upheld  District  Judge   Weinfeld's    decision
dismissing  the  indictments  of  Corliss  Lamont,   Abraham
Unger  and  Albert  Shadowitz   for  contempt   of  the  Mc-
Carthy   committee.
The  difference  is  that  Chief   Judge  Charles  E.  Clark
(with   Judges   Hincks  and  Waterman)  acted  on   much
broader  grounds.  Judge  Weinfeld's  decision  was  purely
technical—that  the  indictments  were  defective  in  not
alleging  "wilful"   refusal   to  answer  and  in  failing   to
show  a  specific   resolution  delegating  authority   to  the
McCarthy  subcommittee   of  the  Senate  Government  Op-
erations  Committee.  But  the  Court  of  Appeals  held  that
neither  the  parent  committee  nor  the  subcommittee   had
any  power  under  the  Legislative   Reorganization   Act  of
1946  to  inquire  into  subversive  activities.
"How  a  committee   to  promote   retrenchment  and  effi-
ciency  in  governmental   operations,"  Judge  Clark  ruled,
referring   to  the  functions  assigned  to  the  committee by
the  1946  act,  "is going  to  be  aided  in  any  way  by  an  in-
quiry  as  to  the  length  of  time  spent  by  a  private  writer
on  a  trip  to  Russia  must  remain  undisclosed.  The  latest
ruling  of  the  Supreme  Court  seems  clearly  to  forbid  so
extensive,  if  not  purposeless,  an  invasion  of  the  rights
of  the   individual."
spoke  with  equal  heat  and  intensity;  he  shook  his  fist,  he
reread  the  majority  draft.   "Under  the  law  and  Constitution,"
he  read,  and  then  shouted  triumphantly,  "Both  are  in  here."
So  fearless  were  the  drafters.   Truman   came  on  to  say  his
piece  too,  and  turned  it  characteristically  into  boasting.   In  a
few  moments, it  was  all  over.   The  "ayes"  were  called.   Ray-
burn  declared  the  platform  as  written  had  won.   A  rollcall
was  denied.  The  radicals had  at least  made  their  showing,  but
one   wondered  afterwards  at   the   careful   management;    no
Southerner  took  part  and  no  Negro  spoke  until  it  was  over.
Then Dawson  of Illinois was introduced  for  the  closing  speech.
At  first  this  seemed  a  moving  tribute  to  the  Negro  race,  but
the  longer  one  listened  the  more  one  suspected  a  subtler  pur-
pose,  a  deflating  demonstration  in  equality.   The  black  man
proved  as  big  a  windbag  as the  white.
In  Reading  This  Kindly   Remember   The  Weekly  Goes  To  Press  On  Thursday  Mornings
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name
Street
City                                             Zone           State
Knter   <rift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name
I'ity
City
8/20/50
Zone           State
7,'.ne           State
Shall   WP.  send  gift   announcement?      Yea   D
D
IE   Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  0.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED