I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jan09.pdf

============================================================

Text  of  Episcopal  Attack  on  Eastland  as  Himself  Subversive  and  Conspirator,  See  Page 2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IV, NO. 1
JANUARY  9,  1956
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Extra! Press Probe Proves  Daily  Worker  Communist Paper
Washington
For  two  and  a  half   hours  here  last  Wednesday,   the   full
membership   of   the   Senate   Internal   Security    subcommittee
spent  the  morning  listening  to  a  former  managing   editor  of
the Daily  Worker.   This was the  event  of  the  week  in  Congress
before  the  President's  annual  message.  The  press  tables  in  the
huge  Senate  caucus  room  were  jammed,  the  hot  white  lights of
the  movie  camera  men  were  turned  on.   A  small  gray-haired
man  with  glasses was  the  witness.  The  stories  James  S. Glaser,
now  of  the  New  York  Post,  had  to  tell  of  his  attempts  to  run
a  Communist  paper  were  the  kind  to  enliven  any  newspaper-
man's  evening  at  a friendly  bar.  There was the  maddening  oc-
casion when  orders  "from  upstairs"  forced  him  to play  a bazaar
as  the  top  line  on  page  one,  and  the  time  when  nobody  could
locate a cut of  the  late William  Green  of  the  A.F.  of  L.  because
it  had  been  filed  away  mysteriously  under   "P."   When  Glaser
angrily  demanded  to  know  why  Green  was  put  under  "P",   it
was  explained  that  "P''   was  for  "Prominent  Labor  Fakers."
These  were  priceless  anecdotes  for  any  class  in   journalism,
but  one  might  have  wondered   whether  Senators  did  not  have
anything  better  to  do with  their  time.  Glaser, under  the  pseu-
donym  of  "James  Casey,"  edited  the  Worker  for  less  than  two
years  more  than  20 years  ago.  Since  then  he  has  been  an  official
of  the right  wing  Social  Democratic  Federation,  and  a  member
of  the anti  Communist  wing  in  the Newspaper  Guild.  He  said
he  turned   down   fabulous   offers   to  expose  the   Communists
after  he  quit  them,  and  he  lashed  out  at  the  committee  itself
and   at  "degenerate  intellectuals,  journalistic  prostitutes   and
racketeers  who  make  a  business  of  fighting  communism."    He
wanted  to  know  why  he  had  been  "excavated  from   obscurity"
and  put  on  painful   exhibition   when   the  committee   already
knew  from  an  executive  session  that  he  had  no  names  to  give
them.   Senators  Eastland  and  Jenner   hastened   to  assure  him
that  he was making  a  contribution  to  the  U.S.A.  and  "the  free
world."   But the  fact  that the  Daily  Worker  is Communist  and
badly  slanted  is hardly  news,  nor  is  it  a  surprise  to  hear  again
that  Gerhard  Eisler  as  "Moscow's  representative"  dictated   its
policies.   As  for  helping  "the   free  world,"  Radio   Moscow
could  find  no  better  way to  strengthen  the  feeling  in  Western
Europe  that  the  U.S.A.  is  slightly  wacky  than  to  broadcast  a
transcript  of  this  whole  proceeding  deadpan.
One  Cheering  Revelation
The  committee  had  nothing  new  to  elicit  from  Glaser  as  it
had  nothing  new  to  elicit  later  that  d»y  from  John  T.  Mc-
Manus and  James  Aronson of  the  National  Guardian who  have
been  heard  several  times  in  the  past  few  years  invoking   the
First  and  Fifth   amendments  under   harassment.  There   were
mure  obvious  and  more  glamorous  targets  on  the  New   York
Post  than  the copyreader, Glaser,  and  there were fresher  targets
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
Editorial
A  Call  to  Action
Now  is  the  time  to  strike  a  blow  at  the  witch  hunt.
Within  a  few  weeks  the  Senate  Internal  Security  Sub-
committee  and  the  House Un-American Activities Com-
mittee  must  submit  themselves again  to  a  vote  in  Con-
gress.    The  Internal  Security  Subcommittee  must  ob-
tain  a  new  appropriation and  with  it  a  renewal  of  au-
thority.    The   Un-American  Activities   Committee,   a
standing  committee,   must  obtain  a  new   appropriation.
Now  is  the  time  by  personal  letter  and  by  mobilizing
every  organization  you  can  to  bring  pressure  On your
Senators  and your  Congressmen to  vote  against renewed
appropriations  and renewed authority. This is  how  these
excrescences  on  American  life,  these  imitations  of  the
Inquisition  in  a  secular society,  will  some  day  be  wiped
out.   It  will  take  more  than  one  year,  but  now  is  the
time  to  begin.   Public  opinion  has   grown   sufficiently
aware  of  these  evils  and free  traditions can only be pre-
served   on   the   offensive.   McCarthy   has   already   an-
nounced  that  he  will  take  the  offensive   against   new
funds  for  the  Hennings  subcommittee,  the  first  Senate
committee  since  the  pre-war La  Follette  committee  to
defend  civil  liberty. Will we  allow  the  champion of  the
Malmedy  slayers,  and his  friends, to  steal  the initiative
again?    If   you  can  do  no  more  than  write  your  own
Senators,  do  that.   But  do  something  this  year,  now.
There  can  be  no  sober  discussion  in  this  country of
America's  and  the  world's real  problems—especially the
overriding  problem  of  peace  in  the  H-bomb age—until
the  witch  hunt  is  ended.  The  Roman Empire  distracted
its  masses  from  the  duties  of  citizenship  by  bread and
circus.   Here  the  distraction  is  by  Red  and  hobgoblin.
Here in  Washington as  Congress  opens  an ancient  tech-
nique  is  again  being  exploited  by  a  handful   of  men,
some  cynical and  greedy  for  power,  some living in  sick-
minded  nightmares in  which  the  insignificant American
Communist  party  is  blown  up  into  a  shadowy monster
out  of  all  proportion to  reality.  Their  follies far'out-
weigh  those  of  the  Communists; the  latter cannot  elect
a  dogcatcher,  but  the  former  have  a  sizeable minority
in  Congress  as  leverage  with  which  to  undermine  the
Republic.  The  Senate  Internal  Security subcommittee's
mandate  to  hunt "subversive" ideas  and  the  House com-
mittee's  mandate  to  hunt  "un-American" ideas convert
vague  epithets  into  pseudo  legal  standards.  They  give
these  men  excuse   to   turn  a  Congressional  committee
into  a  public  pillory  in  which  to  disgrace  and  harass
those  who  do not  conform  to  their often  twisted concep-
tions  of  what  is  "American." This  is  the  heart  of  the
evil—the  existence  of  committees of  Congress  empow-
ered  to  investigate men's  thoughts and  to stigmatize as
"subversive"'  or  "un-American"  those  on  whom  the com-
mittees  look  with  suspicion. This  is  'he  basis  on  which
to  ask  your  Senators and  Congressmen  to  vote  against
new  funds  for, them.
It  is  a  scandal that last  March  only  Ellender  of  Loui-
siana  rose  on  the  Senate  floor  to  question  the  $260,000
(Continued   OK Pttye  f-j    ,•)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, January  9,1956
Statement  by  Christian  Social  Relations  Dept.  Episcopal Church, N.  Y. Diocese
Eastland  Accused  of  "Subversion"  and  Conspiracy  in  Miss. Terror
This  statement,  which no paper carried in full,  was issued
Dec. 22 by the Director of  Public Relations for  the  Episcopal
Bishop  of  New  York.    It  was  adopted  by  the  Christian  So-
cial Relations Department  of  the  diocese  in  voting  a resolu-
tion  asking  the  Federal government  to intervene  for  the  re-
establishment  of  law  and  order  in  Mississippi.
"The  State of Mississippi today is gripped by a reign of  ter-
ror.   On May 7, the  Rev. George  W. Lee was  killed  in  Belzoni,
Mississippi.   No  arrests  were  made.   On  August   13  Lamar
Smith was killed  in broad  daylight in front  of the  court  house
at  Brookhaven,  Mississippi.  The Grand  Jury  failed  to  return
an indictment.  On August  28 Emmett  Till, a  fourteen-year-old
boy,  was  kidnapped   at   Money,  Mississippi.    His  body  was
found  three days  later in the  Tallahatchie  Kiver. The two men
who  took  the  lad  at  gun  point  from  his  uncle's  home were  ac-
quitted  of murder,  and were not  even tried for  kidnapping.  On
November  25,  Gus  Courts  was  shot  in  Belzoni,  Mississippi,
and  on  December  8  Clinton  Melton  was  killed  at   Glendora,
Mississippi.
"To permit  such  crimes  to  continue  unpunished  in the  State
of  Mississippi  is  to  invite  lawlessness  throughout  the  South,
and  indeed  throughout   the  entire  country.   It  is  to  create
needless,  senseless  and  dangerous  tension  between  our  white
and Negro  citizens.
"Especially   reprehensible   is  the  part  played  by  officers  of
government   in   inciting   lawlessness.     Senator   Eastland  of
Mississippi  has  been  quoted  as  saying,  'On  May  17  (the  day
of  the  desegregation  decision  of  the  U. S. Supreme Court)  the
Constitution  of the  United  States was  destroyed.   You are  not
required  to  obey  any  court  which  passes  out  such  a  ruling.
In  fact,  you are  obliged  to defy   it.'
Eastland  Called Worse  Than  Reds
"This is  subversion  just  as real, and, because  it  comes  from
a  U. S. Senator, far  more  dangerous  than  any perpetrated  by
the  Communist Party.  It  is  a  challenge  not  only  to  the  Su-
preme  Court,  but  to  the   Federal   government,  and  to   the
authority  of  the  4th,  5th,  6th,  8th  and  14th  Amendments  to
the  Constitution   of  the  United  States,  which  provide   safe-
guards  for  all our  citizens.
"This  blatant  defiance  of  government  and  the  reign  of  ter-
ror  which stems  from  it  are  no  longer  problems of  the  State
of   Mississippi  alone.  They  are   problems  of  all   law-abiding
people, both  North  and  South.  They  are  problems which con-
cern  our  churches,  our  schools,  our  labor  unions,  our  indus-
tralists.  They  concern  all  whose  security  depends  upon  the
just,  impartial  administration  of  the  law.  They concern  every
American  who  cherishes  the  ideals  of  freedom  and  fair  play
set  forth  in  the  Declaration  of   Independence.
How  Eastland  Disproves  Marx
"A trite explanation  offered  by the  ill-informed is  that
communism  is  a  product of  inequalities  under  our  social
system.  .  .  .  The misery   theory  of  communism  runs
counter  to  the  actual  facts  in  our  country.   New  York
State,  for  example,  has  approximately 50 percent  of  the
total Communist  Party  membership  and  leads the  coun-
try.   Yet  it  is  second  in  terms  of  per  capita  income  as
well  as per capita  school  expenditures.  . . . Conversely,
Mississippi  is  lowest  in  the  scale  of  Communist party
membership  but  is also lowest  in  per  capita  income. The
misery  theory  of  capitalism   does  not  jibe  with  these
figures.  ..."
—Eastland   Committee  Report   on  the  Communist
Party,  p. 4S.
"The  decent  people  of  Mississippi  have  a  right  to  expect
help  in  this  crisis  from   all  their  fellow-citizens.  Above  all,
they  have  a  right  to  expect  help  from  the  Federal   govern-
ment,  whose  Supreme  Court  has  been  defied  and  whose  Con-
stitution  has been nullified. Yet, to  date  no person  in authority
has  spoken  out  boldly  against  this  reign  of  terror.
Brownell  Criticized, Too
"The  Governor of  Illinois,  of whose State  Till  was  a  citizen,
appealed  to  the  Attorney  General  for  action.  The  Attorney
General  refused  to  intervene, without  so  much  as  an  expres-
sion  of  regret,  let  alone  of  indignation  and  concern.  The  rea-
son he gave  for  inaction, that  no violation  of Federal Statutes
was  involved, was  singularly  unconvincing.
"A  conspiracy  by  private  persons  or state  oflicials or  sena-
torial  or  other  governmental  representatives  of  a  state  which
has  as  its  objective  the  nullification   of  the  Supreme  Court
decision  or  other  provisions  in  our  Constitution  for  the  pro-
tection  of  our  citizens,  are   clear  violations  of  the   Federal
law. The Federal  government  has the  power  and the  responsi-
bility  to  investigate  such  conspiracies  and to  prevent  the  con-
spirators  from  obtaining  their   objectives.
"No  positive  action  has  been  taken  or  proposed  to  meet  a
situation that  is as  explosive  as  dynamite.  Will the conscience
of  the  leaders  of  America—of the  government,  of  industry, of
labor, of the  churches—permit them  to  remain  silent  until  the
dynamite  explodes?  Mr.  Walter  Reuther,  in  his  address  at
the  National  Religious  and  Labor  Luncheon  on  December 13,
pointed  out  the  world-wide implications of  this  situation.  The
United  States  cannot   effectively  exercise  leadership   among
the  nations  of the  free  world, and cannot consistently  criticize
the  brutality  of totalitarian  regimes  as  long  as  the  terror  in
Mississippi  is  unchecked."
Warning  Against  A  Revival  of  "Psychopqlitics"  Via  Eastland  and  Walter  Committees
"If  the  1956  campaign  is  fought  over  taxes,  farm  prices,
electric   power   and   school   construction,   the    Knowland-
Bridges-Eastland-Jenner  school will have small roles  to  play
and  little  ground  to  stand  on.   But  let  the  debate  revolve
around  'Geneva Another Yalta,' a  war  crisis  with Red China
(or  the  appearance of one),  or  'subversion'  rampant, and  the
extremists  will  have  regained  the national  spotlight.  . . .
"Early  in  1956  several  tests  will  occur  in  Congress which
will  determine  whether  the  responsible  leadership  of  both
parties  is  able  to  handle  the  extremist members, or whether
the  resurgent  radicals  are  going  to  break  through.  ...    A
checklist  of  these  tests-  includes:
"(1)   Whether  Chairman  Francis  Walter  and  the  Demo-
cratic leadership  will permit  the  House  Un-American Activi-
ties  Committee to  be  used  as  a  smear-weapon against  the
Fund  for  the  Republic.  Though  Robert M. Hutchins  is  the
apparent  target,  the  real  political  targets  are  Paul  G.  Hoff-
man,  Sen.  Clifford  P.  Case,  and  the  Ford  Motor  Company—
all  important  factors in Eisenhower  Republicanism. . . .
"(2)   Whether  Senator  Eastland's   Internal  Security  Sub-
committee  confines  its  forthcoming  inquiry  into  Communist
influence  in  the  press  to  legitimate instances,  or  tries  to  do
what  some  people already  fear  will  be  a  hatchet  job  on  the
New   York  Times,  the  Washington  Post   and   a  few  other
leading  papers  which  have been Eisenhower  supporters.  . . .
"(3)   How Democrats  and  Republican  hold  together  when
the  Hennings subcommittee  on  Constitutional rights  makes
its   expected  bid   for   continued  additional   existence   and
.funds.   This  subcommittee, like  Sen.  Olin  Johnston's   sub-
committee on Government Employees Security,  has  been  the
target  of bitter  and steady  attack.  .  . ."
—The  National  Committee for  An  Effective   Congress
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly, January 9,1956
The  Effect  Is  To Punish  Newspapermen Who Question the  FBI  Informer  System
What  The  Eastland  Report  Did  Not  Tell  About  The  Matusow  Case
1.  The  theory  advanced  in  the  Eastland  committee  report
on the  Matusow case  is that  propounded by J.  Edgar  Hoover.
The  head  of  the   FBI  told  the  International  Association  of
Chiefs  of  Police in  Philadelphia last  October 3 that there  was
a  conspiracy to  discredit  informers.  He  said  this  conspiracy
was  run  "by  Communist lawyers,  skilled  in  concealing  foul
and  despicable  acts  behind  the  Fifth  amendment" and  work-
ing  through   "pseudo-liberals."
"These  fictitious  liberals,"  he told  the  chiefs  of  police,  "are
the  individuals who through  insidiously slanted  and sly propa-
gandistic  writings  and  reports  oppose urgently  needed  inter-
nal  security  measures;  conduct a  one-sided  campaign  to  dis-
credit  Government witnesses;  present  the  menace of  Commu-
nism  as a myth of hysteria. . .."   By such yardsticks  not  only
most  liberal  but  leading  conservative  papers  are  suspect.
2.  Against  this  background  the  purpose  of  the   Eastland
committee  in   subpoenaing  newspapermen  becomes   clearer.
The  committee  report  concludes that  Matusow's  recantation
was  "a collective product of the Communist  conspiracy ...   to
discredit  government  witnesses,  the  Department  of  Justice,
the  courts,  the  FBI,  and  congressional  investigative  commit-
tees, and thus  to immobilize the  prosecution and  investigation
of  the  Communist  conspiracy."
The  Sly  Uses  of Ambiguity
The  report  links  with  this  conspiracy  all  those  newspaper-
men  and newspapers  who have dared  to  question FBI inform-
ers.   Under  the   slyly  ambiguous  heading  "The  Communist
Press  Chimes In,"  the  report  says  of  Matusow's  turn-about,
"The  Communist press  and  radio  found  highly  advantageous
editorial  expressions  of  a  syndicated  column  by  Stewart  Al-
sop, who had  been chosen by the  publishers  of 'False  Witness'
to  'break'  the story  of Matusow's  alleged  confession. . . .  The
Communist  propaganda   apparatus   made  use  of  quotations
from  the  New  York   Times,  the  Washington Post,  the  New
York  Post,  the  Nation  magazine,  the  Progressive magazine,
the  Saturday  Review  of  Literature,  and  the  Madison   (Wis).
Capital-Times  and others.    ..."
3.  The  report  asks  the  Department  of  Justice  to  lay  the
facts  about this "apparent  conspiracy  to  obstruct  justice"  in
the  Matusow case  before a  grand  jury.   The committee also
wants  the  appropriate  New York  State  authorities  to  disbar
four  lawyers,  Nathan  Witt,  Harry  Sacher,  Mary Kaufman
and  Robert Z. Lewis.   The Eastland  committee  declares them
guilty  in  the  Matusow  affair  of  "an  assault  upon  our  legal
structure  without  parallel  in  its  audacity  and  scope."
Dishonesty  by  Omission
It  is dishonest of the report  not to mention  (1)  that a  Fed-
eral  grand jury  in New York has  been  considering the  Matu-
sow  case  for  months  without  indicting  any  of  these  alleged
conspirators,   (2)  that  two  different  Federal  district  courts
have  split  sharply  on  whether  there  was  such  a  conspiracy
and  (3)  that  the  Supreme  Court  may  soon  decide  the  issue.
The  Eastland  committee report  lays  stress  on the  decision
by Judge Thomason in  Texas last  March. That Judge declined
to  give  Clinton E.  Jencks  of  the  Mine, Mill  & Smelter Work-
ers  Union  a  new trial  on  the  basis  of  Matusow's  turnabout.
Jencks  was  convicted  of  falsely  swearing  a non-Communist
Taft-Hartley  oath  affidavit.   Judge  Thomason sentenced  Ma-
tusow to three  years  in jail  for  contempt, and declared the  re-
cantation part of "a  carefully thought  out  scheme to generally
discredit  by these  means the  testimony of undercover  agents."
But a few weeks later, last April,  Federal  Judge  Dimock on
the  basis  of  Matusow's  recantation  granted  a  new  trial  to
two  of  the  "second  string"  Communist  leaders  convicted un-
der the  Smith  Act.  The two are  Alexander  Trachtenberg  and
George Blake Charney.  Judge  Dimock  rejected the conspiracy
i *
Long  Before  Matusow
"Langhino  Ugolini states  that  a  witness  who should
retract  his  hostile  evidence should be  punished for  false
witness,  but  that  his  evidence  should  be  retained,  and
have  its  full  effect  on  the  sentence."
—Article,  "Inquisition," Encyclopaedia  Britanniea
theory  of  the  Matusow  recantation.   Here  is  his  findings  in
17. S.  11. Flynn  (130  F.  Supp.  416):
"Government  counsel,"  Judge  Dimock  ruled,  "say  that  the
retraction  was the  lie.  They say that persons acting  in the in-
terest of the  defendants  convicted here and  of one Jencks con-
victed in  another case in which Matusow testified, took advan-
tage  of  Matusow's  chronic  need  of  money  and  induced  the
recantation.
"The  charge  is that  these  people paid for  the  recantation  in
the  guise  of  paying  Matusow for  work  on  the  book,  'False
Witness'  which was  to be published under his  name. The  fact
is that  it  was  news of  a  statement  by  Matusow that  he  had
been  giving false  testimony that  led these  persons to  seek  his
aid.  Matusow had  made that  statement  to  Bishop G. Bromley
Oxnam  of  the  Methodist  Church  on  April  27,  1954.   Oxnam
disclosed it  in a speech on June 7.
"Undoubtedly," Judge  Dimock  continued, "the  financial  as-
sistance  given  Matusow  was  a  factor  in  inducing  the  actual
execution  of  the   affidavit   on  which  this  motion  [for  a  new
trial]  is  founded  but  Matusow's admission that  he  had  been
lying  came  first.  That  was  not  induced  by  friends  of  these
defendants      "
Why  the  Long  Delay?
4.  One of the  puzzling things  about this  Matusow  report  is
that the printed  copy is dated  for  release last  April  6, though
it  was  not  finally  released  until  December  31,  almost  nine
months  later.  The  Dimock  decision  was  handed  down  just  16
days  after  the  original  release  date.   But  the  only  revision
made  in  the  report  is  a  two  line  footnote  in  agate  type  on
page  61 which  says  "On  April  22,  [Alexander]  Trachtenberg
was  granted  a  new trial  by Judge  Edward J.  Dimock,  in  the
U.S.  District  Court for  the  Southern District  of  New  York."
We  know  from  Senator  Hennings that  the  report  was  re-
leased without his knowledge and  without waiting  for  his mi-
nority  views.  One wonders whether  the  committee was  ever
fully  informed  by its  staff  and  whether  the  release  was  ever
authorized  by the  full  committee.
6.  In  both  the  New  York  and  the  Texas  trials, Matusow
claimed  that  if  his  original  reports  to  the  FBI  were  brought
into  court, they  would  support  his'  recantation.    Dimock,  be-
fore  deciding the  case,  examined the  original  reports for  him-
self.  Judge  .Thomason declined to  do  so.
Matusow  claimed that  if  his  original  FBI  reports  were ob-
tained  by Thomason they would  confirm  his  testimony  that he
never  identified  Jencks as  a  Communist in  those  reports,  and
that  he told  the  FBI  he did not want  to testify  in  the Jencks
trial  because "I  didn't  feel  my testimony  was  honest."  In  a
petition  for  certiorari  just  filed  on  behalf  of  Jencks  the  Su-
preme  Court  is  being  asked  to  decide whether  a  Judge  may
properly refuse in  such a case to  check a recanting  informer's
story  by  looking at  the  original  FBI  reports  for  himself.
6.  With  the  Smith  Act  retrial  pending  in  New  York,  and
an  appeal  before  the  Supreme Court, the  Eastland  committee
report  and its  current  newspaper  hearings  warn  newspaper-
men—and  perhaps judges—that they may  be pilloried  if  they
dare  question  the  sacred*  institution  of  the  FBI  informer.
• Mr. Hoover, in  his  address  to  the  police  chiefs,  said  th«  use  of  tlu-
confidential   informant  was  "as  old  as  man"  and  that  "tin-  t'.rst  re-
corded  use"  is  to  be "found  In  the  Old Testament."   He  discrwlly for-
bore  to mention  the  better  known  precedent  (or  informing:  to  be  foiiiid
in  tbe New.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'i  Weekly,  January  9,1958
ACLU  "Can't  See"  Danger  to  Free  Press—Upholds  Right  to  Investigate  "Subversion"
New  York  Times  Finally
(Continued  from  Page  One)
than  the  Guardian's editors  available.  The  common  denomina-
tor  that  links  Closer,  McManus  and  Aronson  to  the" commit-
tee's  broader  purposes  is that  all  three  were  once  employed  by
the  New  York  Times.   Of  the  seven  witnesses  put  on  by  the
Eastland  committee  for  its first day of  public  hearings  on  "com-
munism  in  the  newspaper   business"   all  but  one  were   thus
linked  with  the  Times. The  other  three  were a former  member
of   the  Washington   Bureau  who  "told  all"  (which  was  not
much)  to  save his  job;  a copyreader  who  may have lost his by
pleading  the  Fifth;  and  a  proofreader  who  also  pleaded   the
Fifth   but  will  probably  be  saved  by  his  union,  the  I.T.U.
(printers),  from  the  same fate.  The  committee  thereby  proved
that  during  the  past  twenty years  three  Times  staff  men  went
over  to  the  radical  press  and  that  three  present  employes  were
once  members  of  the  Communist  party.*   (The  other  witness
was a  poor  fellow  who-once  ran  a  movie  house  which  showed
Soviet  films,  and  a  bookstore.  The  committee  scored  a  bull's
eye when  he admitted  in answer  to a point  blank  question  that
among  the  publications  sold  in  that  bookstore  was /.  F. Stone's
Weekly.   This was  stirring-news.)
As we wrote  this  in the early  pre-dawn  hours  of  Thursday  in
time  for  our  regular  press  run,  the  Washington  Post  was  de-
livered  on  our  doorstep with  the  cheering  news  that  the  New
York  Times had  finally  struck  back at  the  committee  in  its own
defense  and  in  defense  of  a  free  press.  The  committee's  pur-
pose,  as we show  in  an  earlier  story on page three  of  this  issue,
is  to  punish  those  newspapers  and  newspapermen  who  dare
to  question  the  use  of  secret  political   informers.  The   Alsop
brothers  and  the  New  York  Times  have  the  honor  to  be  the
chief  targets of  the  Eastland  committee in  this  respect.  Not  the
least  of  the  mendacities  in  the  committee  report  on  the  Matu-
sow  case  is  the  false  impression  it  gives,  in  a  long  footnote  on
Speaks  Out—and Hits  Back
A  Call to  Action
(Continued  from  Page  One)
given  the  Internal Security  subcommittee.  It  is  a  scan-
dal  that in  the  House no voice  was  raised  last February
against  the  $250,000  given  the  Un-American Activities
Committee.   The  year  before  at  least  there  were  two
votes,   Celler  of   New   York   and  Wier   of  Minnesota,
against  the  $300,000  then  voted  the  House committee.
Many  who  might  have  voted  with  them  sat  silent  be-
cause there seemed to be no support from  their constitu-
ents for  a vote of  protest.  Let  them hear from  you now.
Do not let  the  old evils revive in  the wake of  McCarthy's
deflation;  do  not  let   Eastland  and  Walter  take  over
where  he left off.  Ask  for  public hearings  in  the  Senate
Rules  committee  this  year  before  Eastland  gets  new
money  and  authorization  for  his  committee.   Ask  for
similar  hearings  in  the  House  Administration before
new  funds  are  authorized  for  the  Un-American commit-
tee.   Ask  your  Senators  and  Congressmen  this  year  to
speak  and vote against  the  witch  hunt.  Now is  the time
to start, and this  issue  of  the Weekly is  entirely devoted
to  ammunition  and  argument with which you  can begin
the  fight  on  this,  the  No.  1  domestic  issue  of  our time.
* The  New  York  Times  thus  seems  to  have  considerably
fewer  ex-Communist employes than the  Internal Security sub-
committee,  and none in  so  prominent  a  position  as Benjamin
Mandel,  formerly  business  manager of  the  Daily  Worker,  the
committee's  research  director.
page   28,   of   Matusow's   affidavit   taking   back   the   fantastic
charges  he  made  for  McCarthy's  delectation  about  the number
of  Communists  on  the  Times.  The  reader  of  the  report would
hardly  guess  that  Matusow  retracted  those  charges, too.
The  newspaper   business   cannot  fight  back  effectively   if  it
takes  the  mealy-mouthed  attitude  of  the  American  Civil Liber-
ties  Union  which  tries  to  keep  its  franchise  as  protector   of
hares while running with the hounds.  The  ACLU's assertion of
the  committee's  right  to  investigate   "subversion"  is  made  to
order  for  Eastland and  Jenner.   Its  inability  to  see any  "direct
evidence"  of  an  attempt  to  punish  the  press  is  eagerly myopic.
This  whole  investigation  is  fantastic.   Never  has  the  radical
and  non-conformist  press  reached  fewer  readers.  Never  were
there  fewer  Democratic  papers.   Never  has the  American  press
been  more  solidly  Republican,  and  less  independent.   Would
Eastland  and Jenner  like a wholly one party press, Soviet style?
Why  all  this nonsense about Red  infiltration  of  the  press when
it's  so hard  to  keep  it  infiltrated  even  with a  few  Democrats?
Order  Extra  Copies  of  This  Issue  for  Vse  in  ike  Fight  Against  New  Witch  Hunt   Appropriations
I. F. Stone's Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street
City                             „..
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(To>  Name                  ...
Street                         ...
City
*  extra  for  Canada.
301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Zone          State
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
Zone....       State       „
1/9/30
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St., S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED