I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956dec03.pdf

============================================================

The  Common  Interests  Which  Link  Nasser  and the  ILS.  Oil  Industry,  See  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  46
DECEMBER  3,  1956
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Why  the  U. S. "Falters" in  Hungary  and  the  Middle  East
The  phone  rang  in  that  sunny  State  Department  office,  and
the  pleasant  elderly woman  in charge  answered.   "Oh,   it's  very
quiet  here  this  week,"   she  assured  her  caller.  The   President
was  golfing  in  Georgia,  the  Secretary of  State  convalescing  in
Florida.  The  Under   Secretary  of  State,  when  not   commuting
between  them,  was  unavailable;  Mr.  Herbert  Hoover,  Jr.,  the
only  Under  Secretary  of  State  who  has  never  held  a  press  con-
ference,   saw  no   reason   to  hold   one   now.    From   Georgia,
America's   ranking  active  statesman,  James   Hagerty,   opined
that the  situation  seemed  to have improved;  he  must  have  been
watching  the  fairway.   In   devastated   Budapest,   the   general
strike  was  in  its  second  month;  90,000  Hungarians  had  fled.
The  whole  Soviet  world  was  tensed  for  the  next  outbreak.  A
new  war  seemed  to  be  brewing  in  the  Middle  F.ast,  this  time
between  Iraq  and  Syria.  In  Egypt,  the  bulk  of  the  UN   police
force  was still  stalled  at  the  Abu  Suweir  airfield.   Europe  was
running  out  of  gas,  and  England  and  France  were  swept  by
anti-American  feeling.   But  it  was  quiet  here  in  Washington.
Ambassadors   desperately   seeking   some  line   on  policy  were
shunted  off  to  assistant   secretaries  who  knew  no  more  than
they  did.  The  sign  on  the  door  knob  read  plainly,  "Do  not
disturb."  The  leadership  of  the  free  world  was  resting.
An  Unspoken Spheres  of  Interest  Agreement?
This  picture  is  not  to  be  written  off  merely  as  the  result  of
illness  or  incapacity.   Inaction,  too,  can  be  a  form  of  action,
and  reflect  fundamental  long  range  policy.  To  glance  back  at
the  events  of  the  past  month  is to  see that  the government's be-
havior,  as  distinct  from  its  utterance,  assumes  a  pattern.   The
pattern  in  Europe  is  to  act  as  if  there  were  a  spheres  of  influ-
ence  agreement  with  the  Russians.  When  the  U.S.   does  not
even  protest  the  abduction  of  Imre  Nagy  and  drags  its  feet  on
Hungary  at  the  UN,  as first Dulles and  then  Lodge  did,  it  sig-
nals  to  Moscow  that  we  have  adopted   a  complete  hands  off
policy  toward  Eastern  Europe,  perhaps  in  the  hope  that  the
Russians will  thus  be  more  ready  to  keep  hands  off   the  Middle
East,  where  our  material  interests  lie.  Those  of  us  who  com-
plained  that  the  U.S.  missed  a  chance  to  help  Eastern  Europe
by  challenging  the  Russians  to  withdraw  their  armies  if  we
withdrew  ours  from  Western  Europe  were misled.  Judging by
its  behavior,  the  U.S.  is  not  interested  in  the  "liberation"  of
Eastern  Europe;  it  is not  prepared  to  give  up  its  forward  bases
in  Western  Europe  as  the  price  of   forcing  a  Russian  with-
drawal.  Washington  is  set  on  West  German  rearmament,  still
hopes  to  force  unification  on  its  own  terms,  fears  that  a with-
drawal  might leave Germany free to make a  deal  with the  East.
U.S.  policy  is satisfied  to  have  Europe  divided  into  two  zones.
To  revise  these  plans  because  Budapest  rose  against  the  Rus-
sians  may  seem  sentimental  nonsense  at  the  Pentagon.
A  similarly hard-boiled  view  may  be  discerned  beneath  the
rhetoric  about  the  UN  and  the  "rule  of  law"  in  the  Middle
Military  Strategy  at  A  Dead  End
What  made  the  headlines in  that  interview  with Gen.
Lauris    Norstad,    the    new    NATO   commander,    was
"Warning  to  Russia: 'We  Are  Not  Bluffing'."  Too  little
attention  was  paid  to  the  revelation that  Gen.  Norstad
takes the  defeatist  view  that  Europe cannot be defended
without  atomic  weapons,  a   form   of   defense  little   of
Europe could survive.  Here  (from the text in  U.S.  News
&  World  Report,  Nov.  30)  is  the  overlooked  warning:
"Q.  Is  it  your  conviction,  General  Norstad,  that  nu-
clear  weapons  definitely  will  be  used  if  a  general  war
comes?
"A.  Our  plans  are  based  on  the  full  and  prompt  use
of  atomic  weapons  in  the  event  of  a  general  war.  .  .  .
"Q.  You  say  your planning is  based  on  atomic weap-
ons.  Has  the  decision been  made that  they  will  be used?
"A.  If  our  forces  are  ordered  into  war,  our  plans—
which  have  been  approved  by  the  NATO Council—call
for  the  use  of  atomic weapons. .  .  .
"Q.  If  you  were  prohibited  from  using  atomic  weap-
ons,   could  you  defend  Europe?
"A.  In  the  event   of   a  general  war,  the  answer   is
'No!'  The answer is  'No!'  .  .  .
"Q. We've  been  talking  about  the  defense of  Western
Europe.   But  does  NATO  have  enough  ready  strength
to  win  a  global  war,  if  Russia  attacked?
"A. It's  very  doubtful  if  anyone  would  'win' a  modern
war.     But I believe that  anyone  who attacked the NATO
family  of  nations  would  be defeated."
But  a  war  nobody  could  win  is  a  war  in  which  both
sides  would be defeated.  This  is  strategy  at  a  dead  end.
East.   Policy there  is made  by oil  and  its premise  is to  win  the
friendship  of  the  Arabs.  We  are  prepared  to  defend  England
and  France  in  Europe  but  not  in the  Mediterranean. There we
conceive  of  them  as  "through"  and  feel  that  the  sooner  their
hold  is liquidated  the  faster  a  new stability can be created.  The
U.S.  oil  industry would  like  to  take  over  the  whole  area;  it  is
not  worried  about  the  Russians,  it  feels  that  it  has  both   the
markets and  the  marketing  facilities without which  Arab  oil  is
valueless.  When  Israel  attacked  Egypt,  the  first  intention  was
to  demonstrate  U.S.  friendship  for  the  Arabs  by  a  special  ses-
sion  of  Congress  and  sanctions  against  Israel.  The  intervention
of  England  and  France  upset  these  plans,  but  in  insisting  on
their  withdrawal  "forthwith"   we  are  pursuing  essentially  the
same  line.   Once  Britain  and  France  are  out,  dollars  can  be
used  to  cement  a  new  kind  of  colonialism;  the  Moslem  world
from  Casablanca to Karachi can  be  brought  into the American
sphere  of  influence;  it  is  anxious  to  enter  the  sunny  orbit  of
the   Treasury.   And   if   Russia  acquiesces,   we   can   help   her
smooth   out  the   difficulties   in   Eastern  Europe.  This   is   the
Grand  Design  visible behind  the  unruffled,  almost  smug,  sur-
face  of  Washington.  The  trouble  is that  it  may  underestimate
the  explosive  nature  of  the  situation,  the  unsteadiness  in  the
Kremlin  and  the  temptations of  the  Middle  East.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December S, 1956
Those  1st  Amendment Contempt  Cases  Can  Only  Be  Won in  the  Court  of  Public Opinion
Nobody  Any  Longer  Seems  to  Remember  Why   the  Pilgrim  Fathers  Left
The  New  York  Times  deserves  credit  for  standing  by  the
three  staff  members  indicted  here  last  week  for  contempt  of
the   Eastland   committee.   They   were  retained   in  their   jobs
after  they  defied  the  committee  last  January.   The  Times  in
a  statement  after  the indictment said their  status as  employes
"will  continue  unchanged  until  there  is  a  final  disposition  of
the  case."  This  is  an  improvement  over  the  paper's   earlier
position  when  it  discharged  employes  for  invoking  the  Fifth
amendment.    But  it  does  not  measure  up to  the  responsibility
which  rests  on  America's  leading  newspaper.   Its  three  staff
members  and the  other  three  persons  indicted  are  the  victims
of  an  inquisition.  Their  conviction is  all  but  a  foregone  con-
clusion;  their  trial  will  settle  nothing  except  the  need  for  a
great  campaign  of  public  education  to  make  America  aware
of  the  issues  at  stake.   Since  freedom  of  the  press  is  among
them,  the  Times  ought  to  take  the   leadership.
With  all  the  weeping  and wailing  over  Hungary,  how  many
Americans  have  been  made  aware  that  the  Senate   Internal
Security  Committee  and  the  House  Un-American   Activities
Committee  have  been  operating  on  the  same  premise  philo-
sophically   as  the  Hungarian  dictatorship?   This  premise   is
that  certain  ideas  are  "subversive"  and  malignant   and  that
those  who  hold these  ideas  ought  to  be  rooted  out,  proscribed,
Not  to  Be  Forgotten
The  dimensions  of  the  fedayeen  problem  which  faced
Israel  is  indicated  by  this   Associated   Press   dispatch
from  Amman, Transjordan,  which  we  saw  only  in  the
Washington  Post  (Nov.  26).  It  said  "An Egyptian  dele-
gation  is  reported  here  to  arrange  the  repatriation  of
about  1200 fedayeen  (Arab commandoes)  from  the Gaza
strip  who  are  said  to  have  reached  Jordan  after  seven
days  wandering  around  Israel.  ...     A  like  number are
said  to  have  been  interned  in  Syria."
Why  Would  They  Be Punished—
For  Failing to Join?
"Fifteen  [New  York City school teachers]  denied  past
or  present   membership  in  the  Communist  party.    No
present  action  is  contemplated against  them."
—From 'a New  York  Times  news  story,  "Schools
Query  59  About  Red  Links"  Nov.  26.
ostracized   and  relegated   to   second   class   citizenship.   The
minds  of  Eastland   and  Walter  are  in  this  respect  just  like
the  minds of  Rakosi and  Gero,  and  we  hope  Chairman Walter
(who  is  capable  of  deeper  insights  on  occasion)  caught  some
glimpse of  this  as  he  stood  recently  at  the  Hungarian  border.
Crime  is  crime  but  ideas  are  ideas.   Conscience  is  a  man's
own.  A healthy  society  rests  on  free  debate.  These  schoolbook
maxims  need  to  be  driven  home  in  the  only  way  which  gives
any  maxims  vitality—by   applying  them  where  it  hurts,  to
ourselves  and  against  our  own preconceptions, and  in  defense
of  our  own  heretics:  Communists, past  and  present,  real  and
suspected.   If  Congress  has  a  right  to  determine  what  ideas
are  safe  in  this  country,  then  all  six  of  these  people  com-
mitted  contempt—and  should  be  hailed  as  heroes  for  it.   In
invoking  rights  of  conscience  and  the  First  amendment  they
invoked   the   most   fundamental   traditions   of   our   society.
These  have  been  tarnished,  corrupted,  dirtied  and  perverted.
When  will  the  respectables  like  the  New   York  Times  really
stand  up  and  say  it  LOUD?
This  fight  will only  be settled  in  the  court  of  public opinion.
The  courts  at  their  best,  as  in  the  Emspak  and  more  recently
the  Lamont  case,   have  fallen   back  on  technicalities   as   if
afraid   to  apply  the  First  Amendment.   Besides  these   six,
there  are  a  dozen or  more  similar  lonely  contempt  cases  now
kicking  around  on  appeal, the  best  known  being  that  of  Har-
vey  O'Connor.   Many  of  these  people  are  friendless  and  lack
funds.   Several  dozen  New  York  City  schoolteachers   are  in
the  same  plight,  victims  of  the  same  neo-inquisitioh.    Is  there
no way  to  bring  together  an  organized  group  to  help  all  these
cases  not  just  financially  but  by  creating  a  new  climate  of
opinion?  The  principle  involved  is  the  oldest  and  most  preci-
ous  of  our great  American  tradition—it  goes  straight  back  to
the  Pilgrim  Fathers  who  fled  to  Holland  and  then  America^
rather  than  submit  to  the  English  Inquisition, and  to  inform
upon  their  friends.   Is  it  not  a  mark  of  national  degeneracy
that  so few  people realize this,  and  so fewer  ever  mention  it?
In  this  connection  we  pause  to  record  with  cheers  the
final  dismissal  of  all  the  indictments   against  the  Louisville
Seven, to  take  our hat  off  to Kentucky  State  Criminal  Court
Judge   L.  R.  Curtis  for  his  decision,  to  ask  whether   the
Louisville   Courier-Journal  will  now   offer    Carl  Braden   his
old   job  back,  and  to  pat   the   Emergency   Civil  Liberties
Committee  on  the  back  for  all  it  did  to  help  these  brave
and  isolated  people.  Their  courage and  ultimate  vindication
of   a  shameless  frameup   should  help  put   backbone  in   the
more  favored   but  less  brave.
Nasser  and the  U. S.  Oil Industry
In  watching  the  Middle Eastern  situation,  it  is important
to  keep your  eye  on oil.  Here  are  some basic  pointers:
Two  pipelines run  across  Syria, one  from  the  British own-
ed  Iraq,  fields,  one  from  the  American owned  Saudi Arabian
fields.  The  former  has  been  put  out  of  commission  by  the
Syrians,  the  second  is  operating normally, delivering almost
325,000  barrels daily  to  Lebanon  in  October.  Royalties from
the  Saudi  Arabian  operations  have  helped  finance  Nasser
and  the  bribing  of  the  Syrian  and Jordanian parliaments. If
Iraq  and Turkey attack  Syria,  it  will  be  to  break  the  Syrian
hold  on  the  pipelines  which  carry  Iraq's  (British)  oil   to
market.
British  and  U.S.  oil  companies  are  rivals  in  the  Middle
East.   U.S.  oil  companies  work  through  Ibn  Saud,  British
through  Iraq's  foxy  old  statesman,  Nuri  Said  Pasha.    U.S.
oil  company  influence  would  be  against  arming  Iraq,  and
may  explain  the  State   Department's  reluctance  to  supply
Iraq  with  arms.  Through  Ibn  Saud  the  U.S.  oil  companies
are allied with  Nasser.
Have  Certain  Interests in  Common
An  oil  famine  is  spreading  in  Western  Europe.  The  gov-
ernment  is  using  that  to  put  the  squeeze  on  Britain  and
France  to  get  out  of  Suez.  An  emergency  supply committee
is  ready  to  go  into  operation but  will  not  dp  so  until  they
evacuate.
But  this  is  not  the  only  reason  for  delay.  The  U.S.  oil in*
dustry  sees  the  Suez  crisis  as  a  way  to  liquidate  heavy  in-
ventories  of  both  crude  oil  and  gasoline.   It  is  therefore  in
no  hurry  to  expand production.  Excess  productive capacity
today,  i.e.  the  additional amounts which could  be  taken  from
existing  wells  without exceeding  MER  (maximum  efficiency
rates)  is  2,000,000 barrels  a  day—as  compared with  the  1,-
880,000  barrels  a  day  West  Europe  has  been  getting  from
the   Middle  East.   Extra  transport,  of   course,   would  be  a
problem  but  not  an  insoluble  one.
The  industry, however, sees  the  Suez  crisis  as temporary,
a  means  of  using  up surpluses  and a  spur  to  higher  oil  and
tanker  prices.  The  U.S.  oil industry and Nasser  have  a com-
mon interest  in maintaining the  squeeze  on Western  Europe.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly, December S, 1958
The  Use  of  Faceless  Informers  in  Passport  Cases  Finally  Heads  For  A  Test
Unproven  Rosenberg  Linkages  Utilized  by  Dulles  to  Hound  A  Physicist
In  Federal  District  Court  here  in  Washington  last  week,
the  State  Department  finally  embarked  on  what  promises  to
be  the  first  test  of  its  right  to  use  "faceless  informers"  in
denying  passports. The case was that of the  physicist,  Weldon
Bruce  Dayton.   Hitherto,  as  in  the  Leonard  Boudin  case,  the
Department  has  preferred  to  back  down and  issue  a passport
rather  than  risk  an  adverse  higher  court  opinion  on  secret
evidence.    So  far   only  one  Federal  judge,  Youngdahl,   has
ruled  squarely  that  confidential  information   could  not  be  the
basis  for  denying  passports.  The  Court  of  Appeals  last  Sep-
tember  13 in  the  case of  Dayton  sent  the  passport  application
back   to   State   Department    with   instructions   to    specify
whether,  what   and  why  anonymous  accusations   were   used.
The  Court  implied  that  it  would  then  pass  on  the  propriety
of  using  undisclosed  evidence.  The  Secretary  of  State  there-
upon  filed  specific  findings.  Motions  for  summary   judgment
by  both   sides   were  argued  before  Judge  McGarraghy   last
Monday.
Dayton  has  been  through  the  mill  of  three  extensive   grand
jury   appearances   in   connection  with   the   Rosenberg   case.
Though  he  was  never  indicted, the  Department  may  be  count-
ing  on  unproven  warmed  over  linkages  with  the   Rosenbergs
to  win  this  case   for   them,  and  establish   a   precedent   for
others.    Dayton  has  not  only  denied  under  oath  any  connec-
tion  with  the  Rosenbergs  or  espionage   but  has  also  denied
that  he was  ever  a  Communist.   Prize  remark  of  the  opening
argument  came  after  Dayton's  counsel,  Harry  I.  Rand,  cited
these  denials.  The young  attorney  for  the  Department  of  Jus-
tice  replied  that  Dayton  might  not  have  been  a  Communist
but he  "had a  proclivity  for  making  friends  of  people left  of
center."  This  is  a  new addition  to  the  criminal  code.
Though   Dayton   emerged   innocent  from   prolonged   grand
jury  inquiry,  the   Department  has  in   effect   convicted   and
punished   him  on  its   own.   Unable   to  obtain  work   in  this
country,  Dayton  several  years  ago  accepted  an  invitation  to
work  on cosmic rays  (non  military)  at  the  famous  Tata  Re-
search  Institute  in  India. The Department  denied him a  pass-
port.  The  four  grounds   specified  by  the  Secretary  of  State
are  (1)  association  with  a  Science  for  Victory  Committee  at
the  University  of  California  in   1943-44;   (2)   that  Dayton
was  associated  at  Ithaca, N. Y., with  another scientist,  Alfred
Sarant,  who fled to  Mexico  in  1950  after  being  interrogated
by  the  FBI  in  the  Rosenberg  case  (the  Secretary  claims  to
It   Will  Be  A  Memorable  Evening
Don't  forget  the  night  of Friday,  Dec.  14, the  Weekly
is  holding  a  public  meeting  at  the  Community   Church,
40  E.  35th  Street,  New York  City, to  commemorate  the
anniversary  of  the  Bill  of  Rights  with  a  panel  discus-
sion  of  its  meaning  in  the  light  of  events  in  Eastern
Europe.    How  can  basic  freedoms  be  preserved   under
socialism?  What can  the  Soviet  bloc learn  from  our  Bill
of  Rights? What  can we learn from  events in  the  Soviet
bloc  about the  danger  of permitting fundamental  politi-
cal  liberties  to  be  eroded   at  home?  To  discuss  these
questions   we  have  invited  editors  of  independent    Left
and  socialist  publications   to  contribute  their  varying
points of view  in a  panel discussion.  I.  F.  Stone will be
moderator.   So  far   A.  J.   Muste  of  Liberation,   Daniel
Roberts  of  the  Militant,  Bert  Cochran  of  the   American
Socialist  and  Hal  Draper  of  Labor  Action  have  agreed
to  participate.   Paul   Sweezy   of  the   Monthly    Review
must  speak  at  Bard  College  that  night  but  will  send  a
message.  There  will  be  a  minimum  of   speech-making
and  a  maximum  of  discussion  encouraged  from  the  au-
dience  itself.  We look  forward  to  a  memorable  meeting.
It  will  start  at  8  p.m.  sharp  and  close  at  11 p.m.  Ad-
mission  $1  (but  50 cents  for  students  and  anyone  who
cannot  afford  more).   Come  and  express  your  opinion.
have  confidential  information  that  Sarant—not  Dayton—was
involved  in the  Rosenberg ring);  (2)  that Dayton was "pres-
ent  on  more  than  one  occasion"  in  a  New  York  apartment
said  "confidentially"   to  have  been  used  on other  occasions by
Rosenberg    for   microfilming;   and   (4)   that   Dr.   Bernard
Peters  with  whom  Dayton  would  work  at  the  Tata  Institute
"is  suspected"  (italics  added)  according  to  the  Department's
confidential   information   "of  being   a   Communist   espionage
agent."
On  the  basis  of  these  findings,  none  of  which  allege  any
wrongdoing  on  Dayton's  part,  the  Secretary  finds  that   "the
applicant  is  going  abroad  to  engage  in  activities  which  will
advance  the  Communist  movement."  This  is  itself   a   lovely
non-sequitur. The net result is to smear  Peters and ruin  Day-
ton.  This is  the  same  Secretary  of State who speaks  so  loftily
about  the "rule of   law."
Documentary:  London  DW Writer Tells How
From  the  Nov.  17 issue  of  the  London  Daily  Express  just
arrived here  we present this excerpt from  a  vivid  document:
Peter Fryer's story telling why he resigned from the  London
Daily  Worker  after  it  suppressed  his  reporting  from  Buda-
pest:
"I  sent  altogether  three  dispatches—from  Budapest  two,
and  one  from Vienna. The  first  story  was  a  straightforward
account  of  what  I  had seen  as  soon  as  I  arrived at  Hegyes-
halom  on  the  night  of  October 26.  I  described  the  rejoicing
of  the  people  at  their  national  revolution  over  a   ruthless
police dictatorship.   I  described,  without in any sense approv-
ing  of  mob justice,  the lynching of  AVH men (secret  police).
"I  described  the  frightful  atrocity  at  Magyarovar, where
12  hours  after  I  crossed  the  border  I  had  been  shown  the
bodies  of  80 working people machine-gunned in  cold blood by
AVH  men, one  of  whom  I  later saw  lynched.  I  described the
election  of  a  new  workers committee which I  saw  at  the  big
State  farm  at  Babolna. And I  described the  general situation
in  Budapest. This dispatch was  not  used. The assistant editor
of  the Daily  Worker instructed me to return home. .  . .
"The  second  dispatch  was   an  interview  with  a   British
Communist  called  Charles Coutts, who is  the  English  editor
of  World  Youth,  published  in  Budapest.  He  had  been work-
His Reports from Budapest Were  Suppressed
ing  in  Budapest  for  three  years,  and he  described  the  causes
and  the  future  prospects  of  the  Hungarian revolution.  .  .  .
"For  the  first  edition  of  the  Daily  Worker it  was  cut  and
cut  ruthlessly . . . Matthews  [acting  editor]  cut out,  for ex-
ample,  Coutts's  reference  to  there  being  no  democratic  dis-
cussion  within the  Hungarian  party.  .  .  .  There  were  many
protests   from  members  of  the  staff   at  the  way  Matthews
had cut this  piece and as a  result  ...    it  was partly  restored.
"The  third dispatch  I filed soon  after  arriving at  the  Bris-
tol  Hotel in Vienna on November 11. ...    It described certain
excesses  committed by  Soviet  troops  in  the  heat  of  battle.  I
saw  the result  of  one  of  them.  I  saw  an  old  man of  70  lying
on  the  pavement as  late  as  Thursday,  dead,  with  a  loaf  of
bread  still  in  his  hand.   He  had  been  shot  by  a  Soviet  tank
as he came away  from  a bread  shop.  .  . .
"I  argued  that  there  was  no  'white  terror'  in  Hungary.  I
asked:  'If  the  Soviet  intervention was  necessary  to  put down
counter  revolution, how  is  it  to  be  explained  that  some  of
the  fiercest  resistance  of  all  was  in  the  working  class  dis-
tricts  of  Ujpest  and  Csepel?'"
[This  dispatch  was  not  published.]   "In  fact   the  editor
[J.  R.  Campbell] who  had  that  day  returned  from  Moscow,
refused  to  let  other  members of  the  staff  read  it."
1   8  .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December S, 1956
A  Page  Devoted  to  the  Higher  Confusions:   Introducing  the  "Moral  Size"  Atom Bomb
The  AECs  Murray  Revises  the  Gospel  for  Nuclear  Warfare
We  confess  ourselves  dismayed  by  the  speech  Atomic  En-
ergy  Commissioner  Thomas  E.  Murray  made  here  in  Wash-
ington  on  November  10 when  he  was  presented  with  the   1956
award  of  the  Catholic   Association   for  International  Peace.
Mr.  Murray  is  the  lone  dissenter  of  the  AEC,  a  man  of  gen-
uine  piety.   He  sparked  the  Stevenson  position   on  H-bomb
tests and  has  probably  done  more  than  any  other  single  indi-
vidual  except  Nehru  to  arouse  world  opinion  to  the  dangers
of  an  H-bomb race.  But  it  seems  to  us that  the  thesis  he ex-
pounded  on accepting  the  Catholic  peace  award  began  with  a
myth  and  ended  in  a  monstrosity;  it  is  appalling  to  see  it
taken  seriously  in  so  many  quarters.
The  myth  is a  "Christian  tradition  of  civilized  warfare"  to
which  Mr.  Murray  would  have  us  return.  To  deflate  this no-
tion is not a tactless exercise  in denigration  but  the  necessary
exposure  of the  painful  fact  that human  slaughter  is  as  often
due  to  good  as  bad  rationalizations.  The  truth  is  that   war-
Almost   As  Bad
"George  Washington  University's   policy  of  limiting
its  faculty to  believers  in  God was  denounced yesterday
from   a   Washington  pulpit.  The  Rev.  Dr.'  A.  Powell
Davies  of  All  Souls'  Church  (Unitarian)  .  .  . reviewed
the  religious attitudes of  George Washington and  Abra-
ham  Lincoln and expressed  doubt  that  either could meet
[GW  President  Cloyd  Heck]  Marvin's  test.  'What  an
awful  headline it  would  make,' Dr. Davies  said:  'George
Washington    Refused    Place    on   George   Washington
Faculty." "                          —Washington  Post,  Nov. 26.
If  Dr. Marvin  wants  to  keep  the  minds  of his  students
really  untarnished,  he  had  better  bar  Unitarians  from
the  faculty  as  well  as  agnostics.
Reassuring   Note
Connoisseurs  of  military  theology  may  find  a  tidbit
worth  filing  away  in  a  plane-side  press  conference  re-
mark  by  General  Alfred  M.  Gruenther  on  returning  to
Washington  Nov.  23.  "There  is  no  better  way  to  pre-
serve   our   religious   civilization,"   the  retiring  NATO
commander  told  reporters,  "than  through   the  alliance
system."  Nobody  was  impious  enough  to  ask  him  if  he
included  the  Warsaw  pact  among  these  celestial  instru-
ments.
The   remark   recalled   a   full   dress   interview   with
Gruenther  last  year by Adelbert  Weinstein,  military ex-
pert of  West  Germany's  leading  paper,  the    Frankfurter
Allgcmeine   Zeitung.  Weinstein   wrote  that  in  talking
with  Gruenther  he  had  a  strange  feeling  he  had  met
someone  like  him  before.  Afterwards   he  recalled  that
the   General's   manner   and   way   of  talking   reminded
him  of  a  Jesuit  with  whom  Weinstein   had  been  in  a
prisoner  of  war  camp.  Weinstein  said  Gruenther   told
him  that  in  his  youth  he  was  attracted  to  the  priest-
hood  (Gruenther  is  of  German  Catholic  origin)  but  de-
cided  on  West  Point  instead.
Thus  should Gruenther  succeed  Dulles,  we  will  again
have  a  Secretary  of  State .in  close  touch  with  God.
fare  has  always  been  least  civilized  when  rooted  in,  or  dis-
guised  by,  religious  or  quasi-religious  motivations.  Christian
warfare   is  a  sub-species  of  ideological  warfare,   and  shares
its  merciless  fury.
Except  for  the  wars  of  the  French  Revolution, which  were
quasi-religious  or  ideological,  the  most  devastating  orgy  of
mass  murder  until  our  own times  was  the  Thirty  Years  War
in  which  Protestant  and  Catholic  ravaged  the  German  lands
in  mutual  hatred.  The  "Christian  tradition  of  civilized   war-
fare"  reached  the  pagan  New  World  in  that  bloody  plunder
of  Aztec  and  Inca  which  first  put  the  Glory  of  God in  West-
ern  Europe  solidly  on  the  gold  standard.  In  our  lifetime  we
have   seen  two  World  Wars-out   of  Christian   Europe,   and
Hiroshima  was  a  product  of  the  same  civilization.
The  rich   genius   of  this  civilization   for   double-talk    and
double-think  is  demonstrated   by  Mr.  Murray  himself.    Ap-
pealing  to  "the  high  principles  of justice  that  lie at  the  heart
of  the  Western  tradition  of  civilized  warfare,"  Mr.  Murray
advocates  "rational  nuclear  armament,"  based, on  the  use  of
the  smaller  sized  atomic weapons which he regards as "moral."
It  would be hard  to equal this  for  lush  confusion.  Just how
can  nuclear  warfare  be  "rational"  and  "moral?"   Mr.  Mur-
ray   leaves  this  worse   confounded  by  arguing  not  for   the
abolition  but  for  the  limitation  of  the  larger  size  weapons.
He  says  "there  are  only  a  limited  number  of  uses,'  militarily
and  morally  justifiable,  to  which  the  larger  bombs  might  be
put."   This  implies that  even  the  big  bombs  may  be  morally
used   on   some  special   occasions,   on  which   presumably    the
Strategic  Air   Command  would  be  justified   in   blowing  all
mankind  to  Kingdom  Come.  When  as   good  a  man  as  Mr.
Murray  slides  into  such  folly,  it  is  a  measure  of how far  hu-
manity in  our  time has  slipped  its  moorings.
Thank  You  For  The  Many  Kind  Messages  Coming  In  With  This  Year's   (Record-Breaking)    Renewals
And
Keep  December   14
Open
(See  Box,  Page 3)
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED