I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956aug13.pdf

============================================================

Why  Is  The  State  Department  Afraid  to  Let  U.S.  Reporters  Visit  China?    See  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IV,  NO.  30
AUGUST  13,  1956
'<»     WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15   CENTS
Eden  Calls  Nasser  A  Hitler, and  Treats  Israel  Like Czechoslovakia
On  Adlai,  Suez  and  Ike's  Latest  Arms  Letter
In  politically  knowledgeable  circles  on  the  Hill,  talk  of  a
Southern  revolt  against  Stevenson  was  not  being  taken  serious-
ly  on  the  eve of  the  Convention. The  last  four  years  have  been
years  without  Federal  patronage  for  the  Democratic  machines
of  the  Sonlh; they  are  job  hungry; "they learned their  lesson  in
1952";  they want  a Democratic victory  this  year; and  to  revolt
against  Stevenson  would  be  to  play  into  the  hands  of  Truman
and  Harriman.   Stevenson  can  afford  to  be  bold.    His  state-
ment  on  civil  rights  nonetheless  took  courage.    For  our  part,
Stevenson's  unexpected  declaration  that  the platform  ought  un-
equivocally  to  endorse   the   Supreme  Court's   school  decision
was the  first  breath  of  fresh air  in a stagnant  campaign.  It  con-
trasts  nicely  with  Eisenhower's  disingenuous  remark  at  press
conference  next  day  that  he  had  given  no  thought  to  how  the
civil  rights  plank  in  the  new  Republican  platform  should  be
phrased.
The  Suez  dispute  will  end  with  a  victory  for  Nasser   and
another  humiliation  for  Britain.   The  only  step  taken  by  the
Egyptian  ruler  which  violates  international  obligations  is  his
continued   refusal  to   pass   Israeli-bound  vessels   through   the
Canal,  in  defiance  of  the  1888   pact  and  a  Security Council  de-
cision.   But  the  Foreign   Office   in  London   last  week,  a  few
hours  before  Eden's  speech,  made  it  clear  that  England  is will-
ing  to let  Egypt  go on  violating  its  international  obligations  in-
sofar  as  Israel  is  concerned.   The  one  nation  with  a  legitimate
grievance  over  the  Canal  is not  even  invited  to  London.  While
Nasser  is  hysterically  compared   to  Hitler,  Israel  is  treated  as
cynically  as  was  Czechoslovakia.   Not  law  but  oil  and  empire
are the  stakes.   Dulles  is worried  lest  Saudi  Arabia  seize Aram-
co,  and  Eden  lest  nationalization  spread  to  Iraq.   Both  would
be  happy  to  serve  up  Ben  Gurion's  head  on  a  platter  if  they
could  thereby  appease Nasser.    Egypt  fears  to  touch  Israel  be-
cause Israel  will  fight  but  it  does  not  fear  the  West  because  the
West  is bluffing,  and  the  more  Eden  talks  the  more  he  builds
up  Nasser  as  a  hero  of  the  colonial  world.   It  is  for  example
slicing  it a bit  thick  to  say that one nation  has no right to  con-
trol  an  international  artery  when  Britain's  power  for  centuries
has  been  based  on  holding  just  such  strategic  passes  at  Gibral-
tar,  Malta,  Suez,  and  Singapore.   If  Turkey  can  be  trusted  to
control  the  Dardanelles   and  the  U.S.  the  Panama  Canal,  why
can't  Egypt  control  the  Suez ?  This  is the  question  which  will
prove  fatal  at  the  coming  conference.   More  than  half  the  peo-
ple   of   the   world   instinctively  see  no   reason   why   Nasser
shouldn't   use   Canal   tolls   to   build   up   his  poverty-stricken
country  if  he  does  not  abuse  his  power.    Since  the  only  in-
stance  of  abuse  has  been   excluded   from  the  agenda   by  the
Election  Bulletin
The  drive  for  the  votes  of  intellectuals   in  this  elec-
tion  is  becoming  intense.   One  learned  journal   which
rarely  pays  attention  to  our  special  problems,  the  Now
York  Daily  News,  argued  earnestly  last  Wednesday  to
those  of  us  who  had  just  finished  reading  Dick  Tracy,
"When  you  come right  down  to  it, the  GOP is  the  right
party  for  any  real  intellectual—meaning a  person  who
prides  himself  justly  on  being  an  independent  thinker.
.  . . Any true  intellectual  who will  give  the GOP a  try
is  more  likely  to  find  himself  happier   there   than   he
ever  was  as" a  Democrat."   (And,  we  timidly  add,  prob-
ably  a  lot better  paid.)
The  Daily   News   argues  that  the  Republican  party
"as  a  rule"  has  been  "hospitable  to  such  thinkers"  and
has   believed  in  ''vigorous,   objective,  courteous  discus-
sion  of  ideas" while the  Democratic  party  under Roose-
velt  and  Truman  "only  paid  lip  service  to  free  speech.
.  . . When you freely  and publicly  disagreed  with  them,
their   practice   was   to   call  you   some  dirty  name(s)
rather  than  answer  with  solid  arguments."  We  hasten
to  pass  this  warm  burst  of  understanding on  to  fellow
thinkers.  We're  even  polishing up  a  slogan,  "There's  no
party  like  the  GOP  for  the  worried  Ph.D."
Here  in  Washington   offices  have  been  opened  for   a
Committee  of  the  Arts  and   Sciences  for   Eisenhower.
We  only  pray  that  it  will  not  get  confused  in  future
loyalty  investigations   with  two arts  and  science  organi-
zations  of  similar  name  in  past  campaigns which ended
up  on  the  Attorney   General's  list.  We  hope  this  chills
no ardor.
Foreign   Office,   other  Asian  and  African   countries  will  con-
clude  the  real  purpose   is  to  retain  control  permanently of  a
waterway  which  was  supposed  to  revert  to  Egypt  in  12 years.
The  Eisenhower letter  to  Bulganin  is about  as  feeble a State
paper  as  ever  came  out  of  Washington.   There  were   reports
here  earlier  in  Stassen's  entourage  that  the  U.S.  would  seize
the  initiative  by  proposing  some  limitation  on  future  nuclear
tests,  but  at  the  last  moment  this was  dropped  ;md the decision
made  to  let  the  correspondence  expire.   The   Pentagon   and
State  both  dislike even  talking about  disarmament, and  Wash-
ington  for  all  its  daily  tidal  inflow  of  news  seems  unaware of
how  deep  is the  fear  the  world  over  of  nuclear  testing and  nu-
clear  war.   The  President  has  just  signed  a  bill  making   "In
God  We  Trust"  the  national motto,  but  the  new  Moloch  with
its  fiery  furnace  is  all  we  really  trust;  our  God  the  Father  is
become   Fission-Fusion.  When   will  the- angels  of  our  better
nature  again  be heard?
! 1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, Auguxt  IS, 1956
Parable:  When A  Geneticist  Falls  Out with  the  AEC on  Fall Out
Two  Theories  (Both  Sinister) on  The  Barring of U. S. Newsmen From  China
If  the  State  Department  is  afraid  to  let  American  reporters
visit  Communist  China,  it  must  fear  that  they  would   get  a
favorable  impression  of  the  country.    This  indicates  that  de-
spite  the  position  the  Department   takes  publicly,  it  privately
believes  the  Chinese  Communists  have  not  done  a  bad  job,
that  there  are  improvements  which  would  impress  American
visitors.  We  conclude  from  this  that  despite  a  decade  of  Con-
gressional  investigation  and  political  purge  the  Department  is
still  staffed  with  Far  Eastern experts  who  secretly  have  a  rather
good  opinion  of  the  Chinese  Communists.   We  hope  Alfred
Kohlberg  is  listening.
On  the  other  hand,  a  source very close  to,  indeed  not  more
than  a few  block away from,  the  Senate Internal  Security  Com-
mittee  has  it  doped  out  this way. The  Eisenhower  Administra-
tion  is  secretly  preparing  to  recognize Communist  China  after
the  election,  and  to  arrange  for  its  admission  to  the  United
Nations.  The  way Senator  Eastland, Robert  Morris  and  our  in-
formant  whom  we can only identify  as Joe  have  it  figured,  the
State  Department  is. afraid  its  plans  will  be  upset  if  American
correspondents  visit  China  next  month  and  tell  the  American
people  about  all  the  terrible things  going  on  there.    Which-
ever  theory  is  true,  a  new  Congressional   investigation  of   the
Department  is urgent.
What's a  "Responsible" Newsman?
We   were  intrigued  by  the  State  Department  press   officer
who  explained  why  the  U.S.,  though  for  freedom of  the  press
and  communication, didn't  want  the  American press  to  com-
municate  about  China.    "We  don't  believe,"  he  asserted  with
pomp,   "any  responsible  American  newsman  will  viokte  the
policies  and   laws  of  this  government."   The   phraseology   is
piquant.  Why  "policies  and  laws"?   Newspapermen   are  not
exempt  from  the  laws,  but  since  when  has  it  been  assumed
that  they  are  also  bound  by  government  policy?    This   par-
ticular  officer  is the  one who  helps  sift  the  "responsible"  sheep
from  the  irresponsible  goats  in  arranging who  shall  and  shall
not  be  admitted  to  those  private  press  briefings  at  which  the
Department  strictly off  the  record  and  not  for  attribution  im-
parts  the  most  startling  generalities  to  a  chosen  few.    Ap-
parently  his  test  of  responsible  journalism  is  whether  it  con-
forms  to  government  policy.  The  Department's   own  concep-
tion  of  a  free  press  is  one  that  freely  serves  up  what  the  De-
partment wants dished  out.
Free  to  Speak  the  Official  Line
Like  the  passport  cases,  the  refusal   of  permission  to  visit
China  is another example of  the  tendency to  shut off  free  dis-
cussion  by  Americans abroad  and  on  questions  affecting  for-
eign  policy.   Only  a  last  minute  change  of  heart   forestalled
another  scandal  of  this  sort  at  the  World  Health  Organization
meeting  in  Copenhagen  last  week.    Prof.  Herman  J.  Muller,
Nobel  prize winning geneticist  and  a  leading  authority on  ra-
diation  effects  upon  heredity,  is  much  more  pessimistic  than
the  majority  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  about  fallout
hazards.  The  AEC would  not  permit him  to  make an  oral  pre-
sentation of  a paper  on  the  subject at the  Atoms-for-Peace con-
ference  in  Geneva  last  August.  When  the  WHO   invited  him
to  speak  in  Copenhagen,  he  filled  out  fingerprint  and  personal
data  forms the  State Department  requires for  U.S.  citizens  par-
ticipating  in  UN  activities.   Prof.  Muller  waited  in  vain  for
At  Sea  Over  The  Suez
There  seems  to  be  a  shortage  of   geography  books
among  the  military  experts  in  London,  at  least  among
those  who  are  briefing  American  correspondents  on  the
Suez.  "Some  military  experts  here," William  Richardson
reported  breathlessly   from   London   in  the   New  York
Post  of   August   3,  "asked  a  very   merciless  question
which  will  have  to  be  faced  sooner  or  later:  'Suppose
Russia  uses  Egypt-held   Suez  to  ship  a  flock  of  subma-
rines  into  the  Mediterranean   to  be  based,  say,  in  Com-
munist   Albania?'   This  is   a  possibility   which    would
literally  change  the  entire  conventional  or  non-atomic
strategic  picture  in  the  world."
We  do  not  wish  to  change  the  whole  world  strategic
picture overnight  either, but  if  Mr. Richardson's experts
can  commandeer  a  geography  book  they  will  find  that
they  have  misplaced  two  seas,  the  Black  and  the  Baltic,
and  that  Russian  submarines  can  reach  the   Mediterran-
ean  and  Albania  from  either  without  going  through  the
Suez.    Russian   submarines   from   Soviet   Pacific   ports
could  also  have  reached  Albania  at  any  time  round  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  or  for  that  matter—since  the  Suez
is  open  to  warships—through  the  Canal  itself  like  any
other  nation's  warships.   We  challenge  Mr.  Richardson
to  document  his  dispatch,  say  with  the  name  of  the  pub
where  he  stumbled  over  these  military  experts.
clearance  and  then  decided  to go  to  Copenhagen  anyway  to  at-
tend  the  meeting  held  there  the  week  before by the  First  Inter-
national  Congress  of  Human  Genetics,  a purely scientific  gath-
ering  not  subject  to  US or  UN  regulations.   Prof.  Muller  was
scheduled  to  speak  last  Tuesday  at  the WHO  meeting.   Cabled
inquiries  from  WHO  finally  exhumed  from  a  reluctant   bu-
reaucracy  its  original  cable  asking  permission for  Prof.  Muller
to  speak.  According to the  Washington  Post  (Aug.  7),  it had
been  marked  "classified"  and  quietly  buried  at  both  the  State
Department  and  the  AEC.  A  last  minute request  via  the  Pub-
lic  Health  Service  got  results  and  the  State  Department   over
the  week-end  cabled  permission  for  Prof.  Muller  to  speak  at
the  WHO  meeting.  The  other  American  geneticist  invited,  J.
V.  Neel  of  the  University  of  Michigan,  had  no  such  clearance
trouble.   "The   State  Department,"  the  Washington   Post  re-
ported,   "saw   no  significance  in  the   fact   that  Neel,   unlike
Muller,  has openly  sided  with  AEC's  views.  .  .  ."
Lesson  for  the  NAACP
Like the  labor  movement,  the NAACP  has taken  a  "neutral-
ist"  attitude  toward  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Com-
mittee  and  the  Senate Internal  Security  Committee.   Both  have
assumed  that  as long  as  they  were  let  alone what happened  to
a  few  unpopular  radicals  or  artists  was  no  business  of  theirs.
But  now  Georgia  and  Alabama  are  beginning  to  demonstrate
how  dangerous  is  the  precedent  which  allows  legislatures  and
courts  to  pillory  unpopular  people  under  the  guise  of  investi-
gating  organizations  suspected  of  "subversion."   The  NAACP
is  being  given  the  "committee"  treatment.   It  would  only  take
a  change  of  atmosphere  to  apply  the  same  techniques  in  the
South  and  elsewhere  to the  labor  movement.  Neither  NAACP
nor  labor  has  paid  any  attention  to  the  Abe  Flaxer  case,  now
being  appealed  to  the  Supreme  court;  this  head  of  a  defunct
Left  union  was  sentenced  to  jail  for  contempt  because  he  re-
fused  to  produce  his  membership  lists,  just  as NAACP  is  quite
rightly  refusing  to  produce  them  in  the  South.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J. F. Stone's  Weekly,  August  IS, 1956
Time  to  Spend  Less  on  Massive Retaliation, More  on  Protecting  The  Home Front
Holifield  Report  Says  Civil  Defense  Not  Hopeless  in  Atomic  War
For  every  dollar  the  United  States now  spends  on  the  armed
forces,  it  spends  one-fifth  of  a penny  for  civil defense.   Yet  in
a  nuclear  war,  the  extent  to  which  the  civilian  population  can
survive  and  carry on  will  be  decisive.   The  propaganda  of  the
armed  forces and  the  aviation industry is focused  on  the  power
of  retaliation.   But  the  power  of  retaliation  is  only  the  power
to  bring  about  mutual  destruction.   The  big  bombers  may  de-
stroy  the  enemy,  but  what   if  they  return   to  a  bombed   out
homeland  with  all  its  supply  lines,  human  and  mechanical,  in
hopeless  chaos ?
The  Holifield  subcommittee  of  the  House  Government  Op-
erations  Committee  in  a  report  filed  the  day  before   Congress
adjourned  tried  to  bring this  reality  home  to the  people  of  this
country.  Unfortunately,  as we  pointed  out  last  week,  scant  at-
tention  has  been  paid  its  report,  "Civil  Defense  for   National
Survival."   The  report  is  especially  important  because  the  sub-
committee,  after  extending  hearings  in  which  it   interrogated
212  witnesses,  concluded  that  a  shelter  program  was  possible,
and  might  make  a  difference  of  60  million  casualties  or  more
in  the  event  of  all-out  war.
Why  Evacuation Is   Nonsense
"As  the   shadow  of   the   impending  intercontinental
ballistics  missile  lengthens  over  the  world,  the  Federal
Civil  Defense  Administration  is  beginning  to  see  that
the  half  hour  or  so  in  which  such  a  missile  can  travel
from  Moscow  to  Chicago or  elsewhere, even  if  allowed
as warning time, is hopeless  as a basis for evacuation....
"In  great  metropolitan  areas  like  Los  Angeles,  sur-
rounded  by  ocean,  mountains,  and  desert,  evacuation  is
regarded  as  absurd. .  . . The deputy chief  of  police,  Los
Angeles,  Arthur  C.  Hohmann,  reminded  the subcommit-
tee,  if  it  needed reminding, that  the  mere  appearance of
a  popular  singer  in  Palm  Springs  caused  a  traffic  jam
from  Los Angeles,  which  took many hours  to  overcome."
—Civil  Defense  for  National  Survival.
One  Area  In  Which Peace  Is  Assumed
The  scientist  who  made  this  estimate   was  Dr.   Merle  A.
Tuve,  a  member  of  the  original  S-Committee  set  up  by  Presi-
dent  Roosevelt  in  1939  for  the  utilization  of  uranium  fission,
now chairman of  the  Civil  Defense  Committee  of  the  National
Academy  of  Sciences.   In  his  testimony  before  the   Holifield
subcommittee  he  criticized  "the  careful  avoidance  of  civil  de-
fense  matters  by our  Air  Force  and  our  AEC  [Atomic  Energy
Commission],  despite  their  daily  concern  with  the   devastat-
No  Place  to  Go
"As  larger  weapons appear, dispersal  distances  must
be  greatly  increased  to  be  effective.   Under  the  dread
circumstances,  entirely  possible,  that  a  few  large weap-
ons  could  contaminate  the  whole  United  States  with
radioactivity  to  casualty  producing  levels,  the  value  of
dispersal  (without shelter)  drops  to  zero."
—Civil  Defense  for  National  Survival.
ingly  grim  facts  of  nuclear  warfare"  and  observed  ironically
that  civil  defense  activities  "are  the  only  defense  activities  of
our  government  . .  . which  seem to be based  .  .  .  squarely on
the  proposition  that  war  is  not  coming."
Dr.   Tuve  was  pessimistic  about  complete  atomic  disarma-
ment.   He  said  "there  is  not  the  slightest  hope  that  civilized
nations  will  destroy, by  common  consent,  their  ability  to  carry
out  nuclear warfare,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  total  stock
of  explosive material  is  already  far  too  large  for  any  detailed
accounting."   He  said  reasonable  men  still  hoped  for  limita-
tion,  but  the  best this  could  do was to  "reduce  nuclear warfare
initially  to  perhaps  a  few  hundred  stupendously big   bangs."
But  he  added  that  "only  50  or  70  of  such  explosions"  would
be  enough  to  make  large  parts  of   the  country  temporarily
unlivable.
"Any  nuclear  war  will  inflict  grave  damage,"  Dr.  Tuve  de-
clared,   "but  60  percent  of  the  casualties  and  deaths  can  be
avoided  ...    if  reasonable  preparations  are made.    A  civil de-
fense  effort  costing  several  billions  of  dollars  and  spread   out
over  a  few  years  may  mean  a  difference  of  60  million  casual-
ties  or  more  in the  event  of  all-out  war."
The  subcommittee  believes  that  the  key measure  is a  shelter
program,  that  a  group  shelter   construction   program   must  be
planned  and financed by the  Federal  government,  that  a  public
investment   of  $2  to  $3  billion  a  year  over  a  6-year  period
"will  accomplish  the  primary  tasks  of  civil  defense"  and  that
this  amount  "even  if  taken  from  the  military budget,  probably
would  return  more  security  dividends,  dollar  for  dollar,  than
they  do  as  military  outlays."
What  $8  Billions  Could  Do
The  direct  expenditure  on  the  armed  forces  today  runs  be-
tween   $35  and  $40  billions  a  year.    One  engineer  witness,
from  American  Machine  & Foundry,  which  has  worked  on  a
special  dome  shelter  design,  estimated  that  the  average  shelter
cost  per  person,  excluding land  costs,  might  be  $50  a  person
or  about  $8  billions for  the  whole  country, about  one-fifth   the
annual  military  budget.
The  Holifield  committee has  performed  a  service  in  show-
ing  there  are  unexplored  possibilities in  civil  defense,  and  the
delusive  folly  (see  boxes on  this  page)  of  depending  on  evacu-
ation.   Unfortunately there  is no  civil  defense bureaucracy like
the  military's  to  press  for  study,  action,  and  expenditure,  and
no  great  business  to  lobby  for  civil  defense  as  the  aviation  in-
dustry  does  for  the  Air  Force  and  nuclear  strategy.
The  Holifield  report  terms  the  1950  civil  defense  act  obso-
lete,  calls  for  new  legislation  to  vest  basic responsibility in  the
Federal  government, proposes  the  creation of  a  Department of
Civil  Defense with  Cabinet level prestige:  "Civil  Defense,"  it
says,  "must  be  as  permanent a  feature  of  our  national  life  as
military  defense."
This  report may  be  used  as  an  effective  focal  point  for  dis-
cussion  not  only  of  civil  defense but  of  the  ultimate  and  only
sure  safeguard   against  the  nuclear  terror—the elimination  of
hate  in  the  human  family  and  the  recognition of  the  necessity
for  co-existence.   Here  is a  point of  departure for  a  new  peace
movement,  beginning at  the  community  level.
t   2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's'Weekly,   August IS,  795fi
A  Quick   Look   Round   The  Capitol  and  Globe
Guide  to  the  Perplexed  Democrat:  McCarthy  predicts  the
Presidential  election  will  be  "very,  very  close"  if  the  Demo-
crats  nominated  Symington  or  Lausche.  .  .  .  Freudian  Slip:
James  Reston, reporting the  President's press  conference (New
York  Times,  Aug.  2),  had  Mr.  Eisenhower saying  "he  would
have  preferred  to  have  Mr.  Stassen  stick  to  his  job  of  disarm-
ing  the  Russians."  The   official  transcript  shows  the  slip  was
Reston's   not  Eisenhower's;   it  unconsciously   reflects   the  real
Washington   attitude   toward   disarmament   negotiations.   .  .  .
Silly  Season  Over  Suez:  Glubb  Pasha  out  of  London   for  the
North  American  Newspaper  Alliance (Aug. 1)  "there are basic
differences  in  outlook  and  character  between  Arabs  and  Egyp-
tians,  who are not in reality  Arabs at all ...    [Nasser]  is  doing
immense  harm" to  genuine  Arab nationalism."  If  the Egyptians
aren't  Arabs,  neither  are  most  of  the  Lebanese,   Syrians  and
Palestinians  since  they  too  were  only  "Arabized"  by  Muham-
med's  proselytizing  armies  out  of  Arabia,  the  ancestors  of  all
four  were  Greek-speaking  Hellenistic  peoples.  .  . .
Plot-oj-The-Week:    The   250-pound  Georgia   prison   guard
who  testified  that  those  poor  rock  quarry  convicts  broke  their
own  legs  in a  "mutilation  plot  .  .  . planned  to  make  it  appear
that  brutality existed."  . .  . Odd  Kind  of  "Civilians":   William
F.  Schnitzler,  Secretary-Treasurer of  the  AFL-CIO  in  a  letter
to  Chairman  Strauss  of  the  AEC,  called  attention  to  a  recent
editorial  in  the  Oak  Ridger  which  said  that  while  the  Atomic
Energy  Act  was  intended  to  remove  the  atom  program   from
military  control.  "General  after  General  has  been  appointed  to
key  AEC posts.  .  .  ."   Schnitzler  accused  Strauss  of  taking  part
in  a  "deliberate"   campaign   to  restore  military  control.   .  .  .
Clerifdiim    in  Israel:  The  Jerusalem  Post  (July  20)   scolded
the  Chief  Rabbis  of  Israel  for  intolerance in  objecting  to  Dr.
Nelson  Glueck's  suggestion  for  Reform  services  (in   Hebrew!)
in  the  library  of  the  proposed  new  Archaeological  School  in
Jerusalem.   The   semi-official   Post  said,  "because  in  the  pecu-
liar  political  structure  of  Israel,  the  Chief  Rabbis  are  able  to
exercise  certain  (dice and  pressure  does  not  derogate  from  the
moral  reprelicnsibility"  of  dictating to  non-Orthodox  religious
Jews.  .    .
Unreported   in   the   US.    Press:   Attlee's  tart   reply  in   the
House  of  Lords July  2?  'o  British  propaganda nonsense about
Cyprus  ;>uly  being  10 miles  from  Turkey so that  it  wouldn't  be
Free  Enterprise   Utopia
"Venezuela  ...     is  a  country, say  Alfred  Jankus and
Neil   M.  Malloy   in  'Venezuela:   Land   of  Opportunity'
where  'the barrooms  are  large  and  always full  of  peo-
ple;  the  libraries  small  and  always  empty.'   Messrs.
Jankus  and  Malloy  consider  it  an  ideal  spot  for  a  for-
ward-looking  business  man."
—Business  Bookshelf,  N.  Y.  Times, Aug.  6
fair  to  return  it  to  Greece:  "It  was most  astonishing,"   the La-
borite  Earl  said,  "for a  representative  of  the  Foreign   Office  to
say  the  possession   of  an  island   40  miles  away  from  another
country  was  a  serious  menace  to  that  country.   This  was  a  re-
markable   statement   from   a   country   that   has   the   Channel
Islands,  Malta,  Cyprus,  Hongkong  and  the  Falkland   Islands."
Up   to  Their  Old  Tricks:  The  Tablet  (London),  probably
the  most  distinguished  Catholic  weekly  in  the   English lan-
guage,   carries  an  article  in  its  July   14  issue  on  the  cynical
devices  by which  West  German  courts  are  denying  compensa-
tion  to  Stateless persons  under  the  new  restitution  law,  .which
provides   payments  for   those   persecuted   by  the  Nazis.     A
gypsy  boy  who  lost  his  mother  and  contracted  TB  in  concen-
tration  camp  was  denied  compensation  on  the  ground  that  he
suffered  not  from  "persecution"  but  merely from  "police meas-
ures  in  line with  the  general  European  attitude  toward  gypsies
as  a-social elements."   The  Bavarian Land  Court  dismissed  the
claim of  a  Polish  Catholic Anti-Nazi on  the  ground  that  "since
the  Nazis  rejected  the  Poles  as  an  inferior  race,  they  would
have  considered  their  political  convictions  as  a  matter  of  no
concern."  ...
Nelson  Decision  Stands:  Another  welcome victim of  the  ad-
journment  rush was the bill  to  reverse the  Supreme Court's  de-
cision  in  the  Nelson  case,  annulling  State  sedition  laws.  .  .  .
Ammunition  Against  the  Un-American  Committee:  The Den-
ver  Post  editorial  in  July  calling  for  its  abolition;   the   New
York   Times  editorial "Hit and  Run" (Aug.  4)   criticizing its
attack  On the  Fund  for  the  Republic;  the  new  Artists Equity
Code  of  Ethics  calling  for  a  boycott  against  any  "activity  in-
volving  discrimination  as to  race, deed  or ideology."  .  .  . And
a  Hal's   Off:    To  Judge  Bigelow  and  his  supporters   in   New
Jersey.
Don't.  Forget—You   Can  Have  Free  Sample  Copies  for   The  Friends  You  Make  on  Vacation
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  sol  R  Capitol,  Wash.  3. D. C.
Picas-'  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
N:inic    ...
SficH     .
Oily                                              Zone        -..Slat*
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (C nios.)  or  $-1 (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name
8/13/r>6
City                                  /«ne          State
v,'ity                                             Zone           State
we  send  sift  announcement?     Yes  O    No  O
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301    E.  Capitol  St.,  S.   E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED