I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956mar12.pdf

============================================================

Washington  Gets  A  First  Hand  Report  on The  Terror  in  the  South,  Page  2
L F. Stone's Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  10MARCH  12,  1956
»'»'       WASHINGTON, D   C.
IB  CENTS
The  New  Menace  Out  of  Moscow  Calls  for  New  Instructions   to  The  CIA
On  The  Need  for  Restoring  Stalinism  in  Russia
Without  our  realizing  it,  Stalin  was  a  stabilizing  influence
in  American  foreign  policy.   So  long  as  he  lived  we  knew
where  we  were;  now that  he  has  really  passed away,  all  is con-
fusion.    In  the  debate  precipitated  here  by the  new anti-Stalin-
ist  line  of  the  20th  Communist   Party  Congress  in  Moscow,
there  is  only  one  point  on  which  Republicans  and   Democrats
agree.  The  new  Soviet  tactics  are  far  more  difficult  to  combat.
So great  is the  alarm  that  as responsible a Democrat  as  Gov-
ernor   Harriman   last  weekend   accused  President  Eisenhower
and   Secretary   Dulles   of   "unwittingly"   helping   "the   Soviet
campaign  for  world  domination."   In  this,  New  York's  Gov-
ernor  merely  echoes  what  most  of  the  Democrats  in  Congress
have  been  saying  since  the, Secretary  appeared  before  the  Sen-
ate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  on  February  24.   Ever  since
they  have  been  joyously  seeing  a  new  "20  years  of  treason,"
this  time  to  be pinned  on  the  GOP.
The  Old  Faith  in  Russia  Crumbles
Until  Mr.  Dulles  appeared  that  day,  the  State Department
had  loyally  insisted  in  the  three  years  since  Stalin  died  that
nothing  had  changed  in  Russia.  Malenkov  came and went;  the
doctor's  plot  was  exposed;  Beria  was  executed;  Tito  was  for-
given—nothing   shook  the  Department's  faith  in the unchange-
able  character  of  the  Soviet  regime.  Then  on  three  successive
occasions  in  the  space  of  five  days,  Mr.  Dulles  suddenly  struck
a  new note. He told the  Senate committee  on the  24th  he  could
see "the  yeast of  change" at work;  "a  greater  tolerance  within"
the  Soviet  sphere;  "new   forces  which  may,  in  the  long  run,
prove  irresistible."   At  Philadelphia  on  the  26th  he  spoke  of
"a  notable  shift  in  Soviet  foreign  policy,"  of  "powerful  liber-
alizing  trends."   He  said  we  can  no  longer   "assume  fatalisti-
cally  that there  can be  no  evolution  within  Russia or  that  Rus-
sia's  rulers  will  always  be  predatory."   At  press  conference  on
the  28th  he  talked  of  "a  very  considerable   burying  of  Stalin-
ism"  as  perhaps  marking  "a  first  installment  toward  a  Russia
that  will  be  a  decent  member  of  the  society  of   nations."
This  was  so  startling  a  change  in  Mr.  Dulles  that  one  can
only  say  it  is  fortunate  for  him  that  he  is  not  a   Democrat.
True,  he  managed  to  create  the  impression  that  the  current  re-
vision  of   Marxism-Leninism  in  Moscow  was  really   brought
about  by the  theoretician  Leonard  Hall  and  the  Old  Bolsheviks
of  the  Republican   National   Committee.   He  warned  against
"guile"  and  "evasion,"  and  he flew off  to  talk  in  Karachi  like
the  old Dulles about  the  need  for  ever greater  military force  to
meet  the  same  Red peril.   But  confidence  has  been  shaken.   If
Krushchev  and  his  colleagues  can  have  this  much  effect  on  as
veteran  an  anti-Communist  crusader  as John  Foster  Dulles  even
while  they  are  still  protesting  their  devotion  to   Communism,
what  will  happen  if  they  go  further  with  the  process  of  what
Mr.  Dulles  described  on  the  24th  as  "conforming  their system
more  closely  to  ours?"   Is  it,  perhaps,  not  a  mistake  to  en-
courage  this  process ?
How  Keep  Them  From  Relaxing?
The  repercussions  are world-wide.  On  the  one hand  we  ap-
peal  abroad  for German rearmament, and  for  the establishment
of  SEATO  armed  forces;  we  prod  the  British  and  French,  we
warn against  "relaxation"  as we did  in  the  days of  Truman  and
Acheson.   On  the  other  hand,  the  Secretary of  State,  for  what-
ever  motives and  on  the  basis  of  whatever  strange  theories,  de-
clares  that  Russia  is  changing,  and  says  it  may  change  further
for  the  better.   If  this  be  true,  our  allies  and  proteges  will  ask,
why  not  negotiate,  ease  the  cold  war,  slow  down  the  arms  race,
give  us  relief   from   its  burdens?   How  combat  that   question
when  President  Eisenhower  himself  goes  on  with  his  Bulganin
correspondence  and,  however vaguely,  does  make  some  reduc-
tion  of  arms  seem  possible?  How  can  the  high  brass  and  the
aviation  lobby  keep  pumping  up  arms  appropriations,  urging
the  need  for  more planes  and  longer  range  missiles  and  bigger
bombs  if  Krushchev  and  his  colleagues  grow  more  "liberal"
and  entice  Eisenhower  and  Dulles  further  into  talks?
True,  all  is not  yet lost.  The  Second  International has  slam-
med  the  door  on  the  Third;  it  will  have  nothing  to  do  with
Fronts,  Popular  or  United,  unless  the  Russians  first  begin  to
free  their  satellites.   But  it  is too  soon  to  cheer.   What  if  Mos-
cow  (as  one  Czech  exile  has  already  warned)  lures  Socialist
emigres  back  to  Czechoslovakia  with  the  promise  of   political
freedom?   The  Vatican  is  still  firm  against  Godless  material-
ism,   but  what  if  Krushchev  now  feels  the  Revolution  secure
enough  to  offer  the  Church  freedom  in  Eastern  Europe  for  a
Concordat?   Who   knows  how  far  the  Russian  Communists
may  go—they  are  by  nature  extremists  even  in  moderation.   If
they  have  managed  to  make  so much  progress with  a firsL few
steps  toward  a more liberal  regime, what  would  happen  if  they
really  took  the  plunge?   The  old  dark  suspicious  Stalinist Rus-
sia  was  easily  contained;  it  contained  itself.  This  new  Russia
is  beginning  to  soften  up  the  Republicans.
The  new  menace out  of  Moscow  calls for  a complete  change
in  American  policy.  "Liberationism"  must be revised.  We  can
still  seek  to  restore  Roman  Catholicism and  capitalism  in  Po-
land—but  further  east  the  Voice  of  America  must  change  its
signals,   the  CIA  its  operatives,   the  balloons   their   message.
What  we  need  in  Mother  Russia  is the  restoration  of  old  fash-
ioned  100 percent  Stalinism.  The  anniversary of  Stalin's  death
may  go  uncommemorated  in  Moscow   but   how   sadly   he   is
missed  here  at  the  Pentagon  and  on  Capitol  Hill!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone'* Weekly,  March  It, 1959
1400   Lobbyists  for  Civil  Rights  Stage  A  National  Assembly  With  Revival  Fervor
Washington  Gets  Accounts  At  First-Hand  Of Terror  In  The  South
By  Marvin  Caplan
For  awhile  it  looked  as  though  nothing  could  be  further
removed from  the  injustices  in  the  South than  the  conference
called  in  protest  of  them.
Roy   Wilkins,  Executive   Secretary   of   the   NAACP  and
chairman  of this National Assembly  for  Civil  Rights, deliver-
ed  the  keynote  address.   As he read  through  a  strong  indict-
ment  of  Southern  wrongs,  the  delegates  who filled the  Inter-
departmental   auditorium  in  Washington   and  stood  in  the
aisles  at  the  foot  of  its  immense, gilt-daubed  columns, listen-
ed  in  respectful   silence.   They  applauded  about  four  times.
The  very  size  of  the  meeting—nearly  1400  delegates   from
35  states,  representatives  of  50  national  organizations—and
the  trappings:  the  photographers  thick  as fireflies about  the
speakers  stand, the  blinding  glare  from  the lights  banking a
movie  camera,  the  microphones, were  all  an  insulation  that
made  it  hard  for  any  speaker  to  convey the  pitiless  terror
that  confronts  Negroes  in  lonely  Southern  towns.
At  the  crowded press  tables,  the  reporter  for  the Washing-
ton  Post  fingered  Wilkins'  prepared  text  and  turned  back  to
the  comic section of a rival  paper.   The Associated  Press man
sat  and  sketched a  lady  delegate  in  an  eccentric  hat.
Then  three  "men  from  the  trenches"—as  Wilkins has  call-
ed Negroes in the  South—came before  the  audience and  spoke.
They  came as  witnesses to a  court of inquiry. George Hunton
of  the  Catholic  Interracial   Council  interrogated   one,  Shad
Polier  of  the  American Jewish  Congress  another  and  Joseph
L.  Rauh  of   Americans  for   Democratic  Action  the   third.
Bulbs  popped, the  cameras  whirred  but  the  awful  dimensions
of  the  South's  injustice  began  to  appear.
Cross-Burning   In  Eltoree
L. A. Blackman, president  of  the  NAACP in  Elloree,  S. C.,
told  of  the  economic  reprisals  against  him  and  35  other  Ne-
groes  who  petitioned  the  school  board  to  begin  integrating
schools.   He  and  his  two  sons  had  been  operating  a  general
contracting business.
When  the  White Citizens Council  ordered him to  sign  a  pa-
per  recanting  his  stand  on  schools,  he  refused.  After  that,
"supply  houses ceased to  sell  me any  material  for  cash."  Un-
der  the  relentless  pressure  his  two  sons  pulled  out  and  left.
"Now   I'm  selling  newspapers,  the  Afro-American  and  Jet
magazine."  The KKK threatened  him.  "They  burned  a  cross
and  got  up  on  a  platform  and  told  200 colored folk  and  100
white:  'L.  A. Blackman has got to leave  Elloree.  L. A. Black-
man  has  got  to  go.'"    What  happened  then?  asked  Hunton.
"I'm  still  in  Elloree!"
Then  young  Rev. Ralph  D.  Abernathy, one  of  the  indicted
leaders of  the  Montgomery, Ala. bus protest  told  the familiar
story  of  the  movement.  The objective, he  said,  is no  longer  a
fairer  and  more  courteous form  of  segregation  on  the  buses.
It  is  the  end  of  segregation  on  all  public  transportation  in
Alabama.   The  protest  leaders  have  brought  a  suit  to  such
effect  in  Federal  court.  To explain  this  change  in  policy  he
told the  story  of a  man  who sold puppies one day  for  25  cents
apiece  and  raised  the  price  the  next  day  to  50 cents.   "How
come  the  price  has   gone  up?"  an   old  woman  asked  him.
"They're  still  the  same puppies you  had  yesterday."   "Yes,"
."aid  the  man,  "but  today  their  eyes  are  open."
Last  Man  On  The  Register
Gus  Courts,  president  of  the  Belzoni,  Miss.  NAACP  came
last  to  tell  what  happened to  the  94 Negroes of  the  17,000  in
his  county, who  finally  became registered  voters.   When  they
tried  'to  vote  they  were  forced  off  the  register  one  by  one.
Only  Courts and  the  Rev. George  Lee refused  to  remove their
naim-s.   They  killed  Lee  and  told  Courts,  "You're  next."   "I
said,  'I'm  gonna  be just  like  him  and  die  a  hero.'"  He  was
Nobody  Mentioned  The  Braden   Case
Andrew  Wade,  the  Negro  veteran  whose home  in  a
white  section  of  Louisville, Ky.,  was  bombed, and  Carl
Braden,  who drew  a  15-year   prison  term  for   helping
Wade,  were  not  invited  to  the  Civil  Rights  Assembly.
Lewis  Lubka,  one  of  the  six  white  persons   indicted
with  Braden on charges  of  "sedition" came as  a visitor.
He  and  four  others  stood  outside  the  auditorium  Sun-
day  night  and distributed  literature  on the  Braden  case.
"Just to remind people,"  Lubka said.
forced  out  of  the  store  he  ran  but  he  opened  a  new  place
across  the  street.
Last  Nov. 25 someone  stuck  a gun  through  the  window and
shot him in the arm,  side and  stomach. His family and  friends
visited him in the  hospital and told him the  man who shot him
had  sworn  to  shoot  him  again  if  he  recovered.   He jumped
out  of bed, started  getting  into  his  clothes  and  said,  "Get  me
back  to  Belzoni."  As  he  struggled  with  members of  his  fam-
ily  he  suffered  a  heart-attack.   He  is  still  the  only  Negro  in
his  county with  his  name on the  voting  register.
In  the  course  of  the  recital  the  audience  was  swept  with
just  that unifying emotion one experiences  in  small  churches
in  the  South.  "Lord,  Lord,"  delegates  murmured when  Aber-
nathy  spoke.  And  when  Courts  said,  "They  told  me  if  you
go up to Washington, Sen. Eastland  take  care of  you," a  deep
and  choral,  "no  suh,  no  SUH!"  swept  the  hall.   At  the  very
end  Autherine Lucy was introduced and  the  delegates  rose  in
a  great  wave  crying,  "Speak,  speak!"   But  she  only  smiled
shyly  and  retired  from  the  stage.
Once  in the  evening there  was  a  glimpse of  something  dark
and  divisive even  within  the  ranks  of  the  warriors  for  civil'
rights.  In  telling  of  the  time  he  was  given  10 days  to  leave
his  store,  Courts  said,  "Man  I'm  renting  from   is  a   Jew."
Many  of  the  white  delegates  were  Jewish  and  a  hurt  silence
seemed  to follow his  remark.  "But  he was more favorable  to
you  than  the  others,  I  think  you  said,"  Rauh  broke  in  and
Courts  acknowledged that.   It  was  a  tiny  flaw.  Any needed
corrective  was  supplied, perhaps,  by  Patrick  Murphy Malin,
of   the   ACLU.   The  final  speaker   gave  a  swift  review  of
the  situations  which confront  various  minorities  throughout
the  country  and  exclaimed:  "This  is  an  American  problem.
Not  merely Negro,  or  Southern,  but  a  human  problem."
Eastland  Cordial  But   Evasive
That  was  Sunday night.   On Monday and  Tuesday the  dele-
gates  did the  real  work of the  conference.  They visited  their
congressmen  and  lobbied for  pending civil rights bills,  asking
support,  particularly,  for  legislation  to  protect  the  right  to
vote  and  to  protect  security  of  person.   Gus  Courts  and  the
Mississippi  delegates  visited  Sen.  Eastland  and  asked  him  to
support  the  bills.  They  reported,  he was cordial  and  evasive,
though  he  did say that  even  as  Chairman of the  Senate  Judi-
ciary  Committee he  couldn't  keep  the  bill  from  the  floor.
On  Monday  night,  in  the  Grand  Ballroom  of  the  Willard
Hotel,  delegates  cheered  and  booed  a  rowdy  set-to  between
Republican   Congressman  Hugh  Scott   and  Democratic  Na-
tional  Committee Chairman  Paul  M.  Butler,  in  which  each
disparaged  the  civil  rights   record  of  his  opponent's  party.
From  the  applause  it  sounded as  if  the  audience  was  pre-
dominantly  Democrat.   However,  there  were  a  great  many
cries  of  "What  about  Eastland?"   when  Butler  spoke.    He
chose to ignore them.
If  one thing  emerged clearly  from  the  exchange  and  from
the  visits  to  the  Hill it  was that  valuable  as  lobbying is,  the
place  where  civil  rights  will  finally  be  won  is  in  each  dele-
gate's  own community.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's Weekly, March  It, 1956
Neither  Republicans  nor  Northern  Liberal  Democrats  Helped  Morse  and  Lehman
The  Senate's Apathy  About  Eastland  Does  Not  Bode Well for  The  Negro
The  scene  in  the  Senate  the  day  it  approved  the   appoint-
ment  of  Eastland  to  succeed  Kilgore  as  chairman  of  the  Ju-
diciary   Committee  indicates  little  interest  in  the  Negro's
struggle  for  equal  rights.   Knowland  as  Republican  leader
supported  the  appointment  on  the  ground  that  the  majority
should  have the  right  to  pick  committee  chairmen  but  he did
not  feel  it  necessary  to  balance  this  by  saying  one word  in
criticism  of  Eastland.   Except  for  Kuchel  of  California,   the
party  of  Lincoln sat  silent  as  the  Senate's  most  violent  advo-
cate of white  supremacy  was  named chairman  of  the  commit-
Eastiandisms
"The  Negro  race  is  an inferior  race."
"Let   me  say  frankly  that  in  my  judgment  the  CIO
and  the  PAC are  Communist organizations."
"New  York for  all practical purposes  is a  Communist
State."
"Our   Supreme   Court   has   been   indoctrinated    and
brainwashed  by  left-wing  pressure  groups."
"I was maneuvered  [after   1950]  . . .  into  the chair-
manship  of the  Civil  Rights   Subcommittee.  .  .  . And
ever  since  then  the  CIO and  these  organizations   have
been  yapping  and  yapping  that  I  was  arrogant  and
high-hatted  with  them, and so I was;  and they  said that
I  broke  the  law,  and so I  did.  ...    Do you know  what
happened?   Why, for  the  3 years  I  was  chairman,  that
committee  didn't  hold  a  meeting."
(As   quoted  to  the  Senate  by  Morse  and  Lehman.)
Ironic  Footnote
During  the  fight  against  Eastland,  Morse  put   into
the  Congressional  Record  a  memorandum  prepared  by
the  Senate  parliamentarian   about  the  three  occasions
on  which the  Senate  failed  to  vote  committee  chairman-
ships  by  seniority.   The  memorandum did  not  give  the
circumstances.
On  checking  back,  we  found  that  the  first  occasion
provides  an  ironic  contrast  with  the  Eastland  case.   In
1870  the  Republicans  at  Grant's urging punished  Char-
les  Sumner  of  Massachusetts  by  deposing  him  as  chair-
man  of  Senate  Foreign  Relations,  a  post  he  had  held
for  ten  years.  Sumner,  friend  of  the  abolitionists,  was
as  much  a  symbol  of  Negro  emancipation  as  Eastland
is  of  Negro  oppression;  he  had  earned  Grant's  enmity
(and   Frederick   Douglass's  praise)   by   blocking   the
annexation   of  Santo  Domingo, a  Negro  Republic.
In  1924 a  coalition  of  Western  Progressives and Dem-
ocrats  ousted  Senator   Albert  B.  Cummins  of  Iowa  as
chairman  of  Interstate  Commerce, a  post  he  had  held
since  1919  on the  ground  that  he  was  too  favorable  to
the  railroads at  the  expense  of the  farmer.   In  1925  the
Republicans  ousted  Brookhart,  Ladd  and  Frazier  from
committee  chairmanships   because   they   supported   La
Follette  for  President  in  1924.
tee  which  supervises  the  Federal  courts.  And  Kuchel  merely
rose  to  say  that  he  agreed  with  Morse  that  "interposition"
was  unconstitutional.
The  Northern  Democrats  were  no better.   Morse  and  Leh-
man  waged  their  fight  against  Eastland  without  a  word of
support  from  the  Northern  liberals;  neither   Neuberger  nor
Humphrey  nor  Douglas  came  to  their  aid.   Only  Barkley  of
Kentucky felt  compelled to  say that though  he was voting  for
Eastland he thought  it  "unfortunate  and regrettable" that a
Senator  should  encourage  defiance  of  the  Supreme  Court.
The  scene  did  not  testify   to  Eastland's  popularity   since
there  was  just  as  much  silence  on  the  other  side.   Only one
Southerner,  his  Mississippi  colleague,  Stennis,  rose  to  defend
Eastland  and  he  was  significantly  restrained.  The  best  that
can   be  concluded  is  that  there   is  no  Southerner   in   the
Senate  today  who is  disposed  to  defend  the  kind  of  irrespon-
sible  racist  demagogy  in  which Eastland  has  been  engaging.
The  award  of  chairmanships  by  seniority  is  a  custom  rather
than  a rule.  Whether  the  custom  should  have  been  broken in
Eastland's  case  is  a  matter  on  which  men  may  reasonably
differ,  but  the  difference  will  depend  on how  deeply  they  feel
the  specific  issue  involved.  Basically  the  Senate  does not  care
enough  about  the  Negro's  struggle  to  break  the  custom.  But
imagine  the  Senate's  reaction  if  seniority  were  about  to  ele-
vate  a  radical  to  the  Judiciary  post!   Morse's  was  a  most
statesmanlike  argument  but  it  had  no effect;  neither   appar-
ently  did fear  of  a  Negro  reprisal  at  the  polls.
The  final  touch  is  Eastland's  decision  to  retain  the  chair-
manship  of  Judiciary's  Internal  Security  subcommittee.   The
Senator   who  is  doing  most  to  subvert  respect  for  law  will
thus  continue to direct  the hunt for  "subversives"—the   Senate
champion of the  White  Citizens  Councils, our  greatest menace
to  internal  peace and  security,  will  be  safeguarding   "internal
security."   This  is  certainly   Mad  Hatter  government.
The Matusow Recantation Finally Reaches  The Supreme Court
The Matusow affair  has  reached  the  Supreme  Court.  The
Court  has  agreed  to  hear  the  appeal  of  Clinton  E.  Jencks.
The  appeal  is a  twofold  one.  It  asks  the  Supreme  Court  to
reverse  his  conviction  for  falsely  swearing  a  Taft-Hartley
non-Communist   oath   affidavit   and  to   reverse   a  District
Court's  refusal  to  grant  him  a  new trial  on  the  basis  of
Harvey  Matusow's  recantation.  Matusow was the  only  wit-
ness  produced by  the  government  who testified  that  Jencks
was  a  Communist after   April  28,  1950,  the  date  on which
the  affidavit  was  made.
Matusow  testified  during  the  hearing  on  the  motion  for
a  new trial  that  in  none of  his  contemporaneous reports  to
the  FBI  did he identify  Jencks  as  a  Communist.  The  court
was asked to order  the  FBI  to produce those  original  reports
but  refused.   Among the  questions  on  which  the  Supreme
Court  agreed  to  pass  was  whether  a  Federal  judge  under
such  circumstances  could  properly  refuse  to  subpoena those
reports.
Jencks  was  convicted  on  two  counts,  for  falsely  denying
-
Communist   "membership"   and   "affiliation."    The   defense
claimed that the trial judge  erred  in not defining  both terms
strictly.  The Court  agreed  to  review  this and to  hear  argu-
ment  on  whether  the  trial  judge  erred  in  refusing  to  in-
struct  the jury  that  the  testimony  of a  paid  undercover in-
former  for  the  FBI  "should  be approached with  caution  and
weighed  with  great  care."
In   appealing,   counsel  for   Jencks   called   the   Supreme
Court's  attention  to  the  decision in  which the  Court of  Ap-
peals  for  the  Ninth  Circuit  on  February   15  reversed   the
similar  non-Communist oath  conviction of  A.  A. Fisher. One
of  the  grounds  for  the  reversal  was  the  failure  of  the  trial
judge to  define  "membership"  and  "affiliation" precisely. An-
other  was  the  judge's  refusal  to  order  the  FBI  to  produce
in  court  the  actual  receipts  signed  by its  chief  informers in
the  case,  Harley  Mores and  his  wife,  Mazie.  They claimed
that  they  received  expenses only;  the  defense  claimed that
the  original  receipts  would  have  shown  that  they  informed
for  profit.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly, March IS, 1956
The  Real  Reason  Dulles  Thinks  Arms  for  Israel  Would  Not  Help  Peace
Watch  for  Nixon  to  Bow  Out  and  Knight  May  Take  His  Place
Nixon,  bitterly  disappointed,  will  bow  out;  they're   telling
him  he's  a  young man  and has  plenty  of  time left  in which to
become  President.  . ".  .  The Eastern  seaboard  Eisenhower Re-
publicans    may   undercut   Knowland   by   picking   Governor
Knight  of  California  for Vice-President.  . . .
A  strong  ticket,  i.e.  Eisenhower  without  Nixon,  is  counted
on to cut down the leverage  of discontent. ...   It  will be  harder
for  fanners   (seeking  high  rigid  supports),  Negroes   (asking
for   action  on  the   South)  and  Jews   (fearful   about  Israel)
to  exercise  pressure  on  a  ticket  which  expects  to  win  over-
whelmingly.  ...    It  is worth  keeping in mind that  a  lop-sided
victory  would  be  bad             Most  of  the  progress  made  un-
der   Eisenhower  was  made  after   the   Democrats   took   over
Congress.  ...
When  Dulles says  that  giving  arms to  Israel  would  not  help
maintain  peace  what  he  means  is that  he  hopes fear  of Arab
rearmament  may  soften  up  Israel  for  the  kind  of  territorial
concessions  Nasser  wants.  .  .  .  The Egyptian   ruler  has al-
ready  said  that  given  the  Negev,  linking  Egypt  with  Jordan
and  cutting  Israel  off  from  the  Gulf  of  Akaba  at  Elath,  he
would  make  peace.  .  .  .  This  is  the  "brink  of war"   gamble
Dulles   is   playing   in   the   Middle   East;   it    underestimates
Israeli  courage.   ...
In  Amman  in  1947  I  had  a  long  talk  off  the  record  with
Glubb  Pasha;  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  his anti-Zionism.
.  .  .  What  got  Glubb  into  trouble  is  that  he is  a  competent
soldier.  . .  . He was unpopular with  the  Foreign   Office  before
1948  because  he  thought  the  Jews  would  not  be overwhelmed
militarily  by the  Arabs  and  he  seems to  have  become unpop-
ular  with  Jordanian  hotheads  for   much  the  same   reasons:
note  the  King's  complaint that  he  advocated  falling  back  be-
hind  the  Jordan  river  in  the  event  of  war with  Israel.  .  . .
What  the  British  are  saying privately about Jordan  is quite
different  from  what  they  are  saying  publicly.  ...    In  British
eyes,  Jordan  will  be  shifting  from  the  British  to  the  Amer-
ican  orbit  if  Jordan  gives  ..p its  British subsidy for  a  subsidy
from  Saudi  Arabia.  . . . The only  place  Saudi  Arabia can get
funds  is  from  Arabian  American  Oil  Company;  the  Foreign
Office  blames  the  State  Department for  allowing  Aramco  to
permit  Saudi  to  draw  on  royalties  several  years  in  advance.
.  . . Arnmco  advance royalties,  according to the  British,, have
provided  the  cash  down  payment on Egyptian  arms purchases
from   Czechoslovakia,  fomented  the  anti-Baghdad  Pact  riots
in  Jordan,  bribed  Syrian  legislators  and  "subverted"  the  loy-
alty  of Sheikhs  in oil-rich  Buraimi. . . .
The  British  see  all  this  as  a  further  step  in  pushing  their
oil  companies out  of  the  Middle  East,  as  they  were  squeezed
out  of their  monopoly  position  in  Iran,  an  operation  in  which
Herbert   Hoover,  Jr.,  figured  and  which  led  to  his   appoint-
ment  as Under  Secretary  of State.  . . . The French  fear we
are  engaged  in  a  similar  operation  in  North  Africa  and  will
take  that  area  over  as  our  own sphere  of  influence  when  the
French  are out. . . . This  was the real  meaning of M. Pineau's
speech  to  the  Anglo-American  newsmen in  Paris  and  its  veil-
ed  reference to the  "other  powers"  waiting  to take  over.  . . .
The  French  regard  the  British  plight  in  the  Middle  East  with
I-told-you-so  pleasure  since  Britain  eased  them  out  of  Syria
in  the same  way. . . . But U.S. oil companies cannot  take  over
in  the  Middle  East  without  demonstrating  that  the   U.S.  is
"really" anti-Israel.  ...
Seen  at  the  Senate  cafeteria:  peacefully  lunching  together
Senator  Eastland  and  his ex-committee counsel Sourwine, who
was  supposed  to  be  running  from  the  Senate  from  Nevada.
. . . That  was a publicity phoney designed to smokescreen his
discharge  in the  wake of the  press  investigation.  .  .  . When
Senator  Welker at  the  Eastland  committee hearing  last  week
told  William H. Hinton he  was  sorry  Hinton didn't  come  back
from   Red  China  ready  to  work  for  the  committee,  Hinton
turned  the  laugh  on  Welker by  saying  he  was  ready  to  do so
anytime  they  launched  an  investigation   of  Mississippi.  .  . '.
The  transcript  of  the  Goldie  Watson  contempt trial  before
Judge  Schweinhaut  shows  that  Prosecutor  William  Hitz,  Jr.,
argued  that  the  Un-American Activities  Committee  could  if
it  chose summon  every  American in the  country before it  and
ask him whether  he was or  ever  had been a  Communist. . . .
Decision  has  been  withheld pending the  Circuit  Court's  ruling
on  the Watkins  and Flaxer  cases  argued  here  last  week. . . .
The  right  of  Congressional  committees  to  engage  in   "expo-
sure"  is  involved  in  both  but  little  attention  has  been  paid
Abe Flaxer's case. ...   As president  of the now defunct  United
Public  Workers he  refused  to  give  the  House  committee  the
names  of its  3,000  members.  .  . .  His grounds:  no relevancy
and breach of trust.   ...
Journalism  Note:  The  New  York  Times  last  week  gave  a
distorted  picture   of  the  fake   elections   in   South   Vietnam;
failed  to carry  a  line  about  the  significant  change  in  Dulles's
Senate Foreign  Relations testimony  admitting  the  sale  of  U.S.
warplanes  to  Saudi  Arabia  (see our last week's issue)  and  de-
leted  (in  its  main edition)  the  tell-tale  remark  in  a  dispatch
from  Guatemala that  Castillo  Armas'  new land reform would
not  affect  "the  big commercial holdings,"  i.e.  United  Fruit Co.
Senator  Humphrey  said  Ike  is  running  again  because  he's
afraid  to retire  to  his  farm  so long  as  Benson  is  Secretary of
Agriculture.  ...
Resurrect  That  Old  Friend  Politically   By  Giving  Him  A  Gift   Subscription  to  The   Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City .......................................... Zone ........ ....State  ....................
Knter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4 .(1  yr.) additional:
3/12/56
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street
City   ...                                        Zone           State
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?    Yes  Q    No   D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED