I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jun11.pdf

============================================================

Full  Text:  Historic  Douglas-Warren-Black  Dissent  on  The  Right  of  Communists  to  Work,  Page  3.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  21
JUNE  11,  1956
«>'      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
16  CENTS
A  Washington-Moscow    Entente?
The  biggest  untold  news  in  Washington  today  is  an  unac-
knowledged  but  growing  entente  between  the  U.S.A.  and  the
U.S.S.R.   The  Eisenhower  Administration  is  afraid   to  admit
any  such development lest  it  endanger  the  foreign  aid  program
and  intensify  the  bitterness of  the  military bureaucracy and  the
anxieties  of  the  aviation  industry.  But  in  London  and  Paris
such  an  entente  is  already,  perhaps  prematurely,  being  taken
for  granted.   The  lifting  of  trade  bars  between  Communist
China  and  Singapore  reflects  London's  belief  that  after   the
elections  further  relaxation of  tension  between  East  and  West
is  to  be  expected.
In  this  perspective,  the  Tito  visit  to  Moscow  is  to  be  ap-
praised  as another  demonstration  by the  U.S.S.R.  that  the  East
European  satellite  States  are  to  be  encouraged  to  develop  in-
ternally  and  externally on  their own,  though  within  the  limits
of   socialist  society   and   a  friendly  alliance   with   the   Soviet
Union.   Moscow  is  wooing  Washington   by  moving   toward
"liberation"  of  its  own  accord.   It  is  foolish  to  speculate  that
Tito  may be  preparing  to  join  up  again  with  the  Soviet  bloc.
On  the  contrary,  in  some  ways  the  Soviet  bloc  is  joining  up
with  Tito.   Moscow  wants Tito  to  remain  independent  (1)   as
an  earnest  to  Washington  of  the  new  Soviet  co-existence  line
and  (2)   as an  object  lesson  to  the  other  East  European  States.
Moscow  is  out  to  "unfreeze"   Eastern   Europe  as  part   of  a
settlement  with  Washington.
Tito  As  Middle-Man
Tito  has  been  playing  middle-man.   He  is  given  credit  for
"re-educating"  John  Foster  Dulles  in  their  talks  last  Novem-
ber  at  Brioni.   The  effects  of  that  conversation  and  the  out-
lines  of   a   new   Soviet-American  understanding   on   Eastern
Europe  can  be  seen  if  one  carefully  examines  the  text  of  the
Secretary's  press  conference  of  April  24.   "Of   course,"  Mr.
Dulles  said,  "the  most  important  characteristic  of  Titoism  is
the  fact  that  it  recognizes  that  Communism  can  be  a  national
organization.  .  .  .  That  was the  view  that  Tito  held,  and he
broke  with  Stalin  on that  issue.  ...    If  the  Soviet Communists
now  say that  it  is  all  right  to  have  Communism  on  a  national
basis,  that  offers  a  great  prospect  to  the  Poles,  the  Czechs and
so  forth,  who  would   much  rather  have  their  own  national
<!   brand  of  Communism than  be  run  by  Moscow."   This  implies
that  the  U.S.  is  prepared  to  settle  for  Tito-style  regimes  in
Eastern  Europe.
Hostile  gestures  serve only to  smoke-screen  the  trend toward
a  rapproachment   between  Washington   and   Moscow  that  is
being  carried  on,  as  it  were,  in  pantomine.   The  State  Depart-
ment  continues  to  quack  publicly  that  nothing  has  changed—
but  privately  its  top  officials  are  impressed  by  policy  changes
on  the  part  of  the  Soviet.    Eisenhower  is  eager  to  recognize
these  changes  and  to  exploit  them  in  the  cause  of  peace.   A
vivid  glimpse  of  attitudes  in  the  Eisenhower  camp  was  pro-
vided  by an  almost  unnoticed  portion of  the  exchange  between
Wiley  and  McCarthy  on  the  Senate  floor  last  week.   Wiley
said  the  election  results  would  show  that  the  people  of  Wis-
consin  were  no  longer  isolationist.   "Milwaukee,"  Wiley  said,
"is  ringed  about  with  Nike sites, five hours  away  from  Siberia
by  fast  plane.   There  are  bombers  in  Siberia."   He  said  the
people  "have  seen  the  march  of  events  and  will  support  me."
He  said  he  would  stand  with  the  President  on  the  real  issue,
"an  issue on  which  the  President  has  staked  his  entire  record,
an  issue which  will matter  more in the  eyes of  history  than  any
other  issue,  the  matter  of  world  peace."   Wiley   said  a  new
war  would  cost  the  U.S.  upwards  of  25 .million  casualties  and
asked  "Does  the  issue  of  preventing  mass  slaughter  on  con-
tinent  after  continent  sound  like  just  'one  more  issue' ?"  This
almost  evangelistic recognition  of  a new war  as  unthinkable  is
important  in  Eisenhower  policy  as  in  Moscow's.   This  is  the
new  and  positive  factor  in  world  politics.
Still  The  Cult  of  Personality
The  version  of  the  Krushchev   "secret"  speech  on   Stalin,
as  translated  out  of  the  Serbo-Croatian  by  the  State  Depart-
ment  (not  always  intelligibly—since  when,  for  example,  has
"collegiality"  been  an  English  word?),  is  intended  to  further
the  "thaw"  in  the  cold  war.   The  full  text  may be  read  in  the
New   York  Times  of  June  5  or  in  the  Congressional  Record
dated  June 4.  It  is as vivid  as anything  in  Suetonius or  Tacitus
on  the  mad  and  bloody  emperors  between  Augustus  and  the
Antonines.    (May  we  hope   some  day  for   a  Soviet   Marcus
Aurelius?)   It  disposes  forever  of  the  "Dostoyevsky  theory"
of  Soviet  confessions—Krushchev  says  it  was  by  torture   and
by  the  "taking  away  of  his  human  dignity"  that  men  were
brought  to  confess  crimes  they  never  committed.  This  terrible
story,  with  the  cries  of  agony  it  records  from  the   innocent,
makes  it  easy  to  understand  why the  Soviet  ruling  group  fear
6  *
again  to  see  "immense  and  limitless  power  in  the  hands  of
one  person."
But  it  is  disquieting  to  read  the  text  and  see  how  fully  it
embodies  the  very  fallacy  it  purports  to  combat—the  cult  of
personality.   One  would  think  from  Krushchev's   exposition
that  the  dictatorship  under  Lenin  was good  because  Lenin was
a  good  man  and  that  under  Stalin  was  bad  because  Stalin  was
a  bad  man.   The  purpose  of  the  speech  was  to  educate  the
masses,  first  of  the  party  and  then  outside  it,  but  the  only
point  on  which  it  really  educates  them  is  that  Stalin  was  bad.
Nothing  is said  of  those  devices which  are  utilized  in Western
society to guard  against  the  appearance  of  monsters  in  the  seats
of  power.   Krushchev  does  not  mention  the  Soviet  Constitu-
tion,  which  Stalin  made  an  empty farce;  nor  the  need  for  law
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  June 11,19S6
(Continued  from  Page  One)
reform,  nor  of  the  role  which  a  free  press  and  free  speech
may  play   in   checking  abuses.    The   Soviet   Union   needs   a
Jefferson.
The  Test  of Krushchev
Perhaps  it  is  too  much  to  expect  such  "bourgeois"  insights
from   Krushchev.   But  there  //   one  aspect   of   this   problem
•which  he  must  understand.   Stalin  was  able  to  make  himself
personal  dictator because as general  secretary of  the  Communist
Party  he  controlled  the  party  machinery—and  that  machinery
is so set up  that* the  secretariat can dominate  the  party, purging
it  of  independent  men  and  staffing  its  key  posts  with  willing
tools.   It   was  not   the   "cult  of   personality"   which   created
Stalinism;  on  the  contrary  it  was  the  structure  and  habits  of
the  party  which  made  it  possible  for  Stalin  to  create  "the cult
of  personality."   Krushchev  now  occupies  the  same  position  as
party  secretary  from  which  Stalin  began  his  rise  to  supreme
power.   Krushchev  is as yet unwilling  to  discuss  reform of  the
party  machine to  make  it  impossible  again  for  the  dictatorship
of  the  proletariat  to  become  the  dictatorship  of  the  man  who
happens  to  be  general  secretary  of  the  Communist  party.
For  the  cult  of  Stalin,  Krushchev  substitutes  the  cult  of
Lenin  and  of  the  Central  Committee and  of   "Marxism-Lenin-
ism."   Instead  of  a  realistic  grappling  with  the  nature  of gov-
ernmental   institutions  one  gets  a  superstitious   reverence  for
the  First  Embalmed One in the Kremlin,  and an  equally  super-
stitious  faith  in  this  new  theology  called   "Marxism-Leninism."
Not  experience  but  holy  text  is the  test.
Moscow,  Too,  Has  A  "Djilas  Affair"
All  parties,  East  or  West,  develop  bureaucracies;  it  is  this
which  makes  the  one-party  system  so  dangerous.   It  confers  a
monopoly  and  gives  the  discontented  no alternative  against  the
party boss.  This is especially  so in a Communist  country where
party  dogma  is  invested  with  quasi  religious  awe.  But  this  is
where  Tito  and  Krushchev  agree.   On  May  28,  the  Moscow
correspondent   of  Paris-Normandie reported  a  "Djilas   affair"
in  the  Soviet  Union—a  new  secret  speech  by  Krushchev  in
What  Neither  Tito  Nor  Krushchev  Will  Admit
"Freedom   for  supporters  of  the  government  only,  for
the  members  of  one  party  only—no  matter  how  big  its
membership  may  be—is  no  freedom  at  all.  Freedom  is
always   freedom  for   the  man   who  thinks  differently.
This  contention  does  not  spring  from  a  fanatical love  of
abstract   'justice,'   but   from   the   fact   that  everything
which  is  enlightening,  healthy  and purifying  in political
freedom   derives  from  its   independent  character,  and
from  the  fact  that  freedom  loses  all  its  virtue  when  it
becomes  a privilege.   ...
"The suppression  of  political life throughout the coun-
try  must  gradually  cause   the  vitality  of   the   Soviets
themselves  to  decline.   Without  general  elections,  free-
dom  of  the  press,  freedom of  assembly,  and  freedom  of
speech,  life  in  every  public  institution slows  down, be-
comes  a  caricature  of  itself,  and  bureaucracy rises  as
the  only  deciding factor.   No  one  can  escape  the  work-
ings  of  this  law.  Public life  gradually  dies,  and  a  few
dozen   party   leaders   with   inexhaustible   energy   and
limitless  idealism  direct  and rule. .... In  the  last  resort
cliquism  develops  a  dictatorship,  not  the  dictatorship of
the  proletariat  [but]  of  a  handful  of  politicians."
—Rosa  Luxembourg,  The  Russian  Revolution   (written
in  the  autumn  of  1918, published posthumously 1922)
Where and How The Evil Began
"During  the  civil  war there  was  at  any rate  some jus-
tification  for  the  view  that  'he  who  is  not  with  us  is
against  us.'  In the  heat  of  battle  it  was  possible  for  the
Communists  to see  in  those  socialists  who were  fighting
against  them  enemies  of  the  revolution,  without  seem-
ing  to  do undue violence  to  truth.  After  1921,  the  lump-
ing  together  of  Mensheviks,  Workers'  Opposition,  seri-
ous  theoretical  critics,  and  malcontents  inside  the com-
munist  party  as  counter-revolutionaries  was  a  falsifica-
tion,  and  everyone  knew  it.
"The  acceptance  of  this  official  He by  almost  the  en-
tire  leadership  of  the  communist  party  inevitably  led  to
the  result that  whoever  among  them  was  strong  enough
to  exploit  it  in  his  own interest  had  the  rest  of  them  at
his  mercy.  What  is  the  difference  between  the attempt
by  Lenin  to  expel  Shlyapnikov  in  1921,  and  the  expul-
sion  of  Trotsky  six  years  later,  if  both  can  be justified
by  the  same  argument—that the  stability  of  the  dicta-
torship  is  the  supreme  law?
"But  this,  in  turn,  leads  to  the  second  main  conse-
quence  of  Lenin's  policy.  For, who has  the  power to de-
cide  by  what  faction  the  stability  of  the  regime  is  to  be
best  served?   Clearly,  he  who  manipulates  the  appara-
tus  of  the party,  and can  thereby  ensure  both the  neces-
sary  majorities  at  the  centre  and  implicit  obedience  to
central  orders  throughout  the  country.   The  malignant
figure of  the  General  Secretary,  Stalin,  has  become  only
too familiar in  its  portrayal  by  disappointed   opposition-
ists,  defeated   by  the   apparatus   which  he   controlled.
But  it  was  Lenin,  with  their  support,  who equipped him
with  the  weapons,  and  started  him  upon  his   path."
•—The  Origin  of  the  Communiat  Autocracy, by  Leon-
ard  Schapird,  London School  of  Economics, 1955.
which  he  rebuked  four  members  of  the  Soviet  Academy  of
Sciences  for  proposing  an  end  of  the  one-party  system.  These
savants,  according  to  this  report,  "advanced  the  idea  that  the
only  sure  way to  check  the  danger  of  a  new  Stalinist  dictator-
ship  was  to  authorize  the  creation  of  an  independent   party"
which  could  "counter   balance  the  unique  and  still  too .dicta-
torial  authority concentrated  in  the  hands  of  the   Politbureau."
The  four  scientists were  expelled  from  the  party  and  deprived
of  their  offices.                 .
This   is  exactly  what  happened   to  Djilas  and  Dedijer  in
Yugoslavia.   In  an  interview  with  Le  Monde  (weekly  airmail
edition  of  May 3-9), Tito  defended  the  one-party system and
said  he  thought  free  discussion  "perfectly  possible"  within  it.
But  the  experience of  Djilas  and  Dedijer  show  this  to  be  un-
true.   Both  were  expelled   from  the  party,  ostracized  and  de-
prived  of  livelihood  for  daring  openly to  discuss  the  problem.
What  Djilas  wrote  in  Borba  in  January,  1953, the  articles
which  ruined  his  political  career,  now  read  very prophetically
in  the  light  of  events  and  apply  as  fully  to  Russia as  to  Yugo-
slavia.   Djilas  said  that  Stalinism  had  been  broken  but  not
annihilated  and  lived  on  "as  'Marxism'  and  'Leninism,' etc.,
as  a  total  of  inherited  and  patented  rules"  and  that  it  was
"possible   only  in  a  free   ideological   struggle"   to  determine
whether  they  "have  become  obsolete  or  not."  But  in  either
country  it  is  a  dangerous  heresy  to  question  these  "inherited
and  patented rules";  only  the  men  at  the  top  are  allowed  to
change  party  dogma.   This  fundamental  problem  is  not  met
by  attacks on  the  cult  of  personality.  Stalin, too, attacked  the
cult of  personality and  he started out with a  good  deal less fan-
fare  and  more modesty than  either Tito  or Krushchev.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  11,1956
The  Full  Text  of  The  Historic  Douglas,  Warren,  Black  Dissent  in  The  Cutter  Case
Can  Communists  Be  Discharged  From  Private  Jobs  on  Political  Grounds?
MB.  JUSTICE   DOUGLAS,  with  whom   THE   CHIEF   JUSTICE
and   MR. JUSTICE  BLACK  concur,  dissenting.
I  believe, with  all  deference, that  the  decision  of  the  Court
abuses  the  rule  that  we will  not  undertake  to  review  a  deci-
sion   of  a  state  court  that  rests  on  an   independent  state
ground.  No independent state  ground  is  present  in  this  case.
Rather,  it  is  easily  demonstrated,  I  think,  that  the  decision
of  the  Supreme  Court  of  California  squarely  raises  an  impor-
tant  question  under  the  First  and  Fourteenth  Amendments.
At  times  we have  ambiguous opinions that  make us  unsure
of  the  precise  grounds  of  the  decision  of  the  state  court.   In
this  case,  however, we are  left  in  no  doubt.   The  arbitrators
found  that  the  employer  discharged   this  worker  because  of
her  labor  union  activities,  using  the  charge  of Communism
as  a  mere  pretext.    The  Supreme  Court  of  California  went
on  no  such  ground.  It  is  clear  from  a  reading  of  its  opinion
(43  Cal.  2d  788),  that  it  approved  the  employer's   discharge
of  this  worker  because  she  was  a  Communist.  The  tactics of
Communists  and  the  dangers  of  Communism  make  up  a  total
of  11 pages  of  the  21-page  majority  opinion  of  the  Supreme
Court.   Among other  things,  the  California  Court  said,
"From  the  array  of  congressional  and  legislative  findings
which   have   been  quoted  above,  if   not   from   the  common
knowledge  of  mankind,  it  must  be  accepted  as  conclusively
established  that  a  member  of  the  Communist  Party  cannot
be  loyal  to  his  private  employer  as  against  any  directive of
his  Communist masters."  Id.,  at  806.  It  went  on to  hold that
"acts  of  sabotage  by  Communists  are   reasonably  to  be  ex-
pected  at  any  time  such  acts  may  be  directed  by  the  party
leader"  (id.,  at  807)  and that  an  employer  has  the  "right  to
discharge  employees  who upon  the  established  facts  are  dedi-
cated  to  be  disloyal  to  him,  to  be  likewise  disloyal  to   the
American  labor  union  they  may  purport  to  serve,  and  who
constitute  a  continuing  risk  to  both  the  employing company
and   the   public  depending  upon  the   company's    products."
A  Stale   Grievance
The  arbitrators  found  that  any  grievance  against  Doris
Walker  was  a  stale  one,  the  employer  having  known  all  her
Communist activities  for two years. The Superior  Court upheld
that  finding.  The  District  Court  of  Appeal  ruled  that  the
employer  "sat   back  for  two  and  a  half  years"  and  then  used
her  Communist activities  as  an  excuse  for  injuring the  union
in  its  lawful  labor   activity.     266  P.  2d  92,  100.    But   the
Supreme  Court  held  that  she  was  discharged  not  for   her
"labor  union activities" but  for  her  "Communist Party  activ-
ities."  43 Cal.  2d, at  808.  It  said  that  the  fact  that  the em-
ployer,  knowing all  the  facts,  did nothing  for  two  years  was
irrelevant,  since  it  was  against  the  "public  policy"  of  Cali-
fornia  to  conclude that there was a  waiver  by the  failure  to
discharge  a  Communist.  Id.,  at  806.   It  is  plain,   therefore,
that   the  Supreme  Court  of  California  sustains   a  discharge
of  this  worker  because  she  was  a  Communist.
The  Court  says  that  the  parties  to  a  collective-bargaining
agreement  may  make  Communist  Party  membership  "just
cause"  for  discharge  of  an  employee, that  discharge  for  that
reason  is  merely  a  matter  of  contract  between  the  union on
the  one hand  and  the  employer  on  the  other,  and  that when
the  contract  is  enforced  no federal  right  is  infringed.   I  dis-
agree  with  that  doctrine.   It  is  a  dangerous   innovation  to
meet  the  exigencies  of  the  present  case.   It   violates  First
Amendment  guarantees   of  citizens  who  are  workers  in  our
industrial  plants.
I  can better  illustrate  my difficulty  by a  hypothetical  case.
A  union  enters  into  a  collective-bargaining   agreement   with
an  employer  that  allows  any  employee  who  is  a  Republican
to  be  discharged  for  "just  cause."  Employers  can,  of  course,
hire  whom  they  choose, arranging  for  an  all-Democratic labor
force  if  they  desire.    But  the  courts  may  not  be implicated
in  such  a  discriminatory   scheme.   Once  the  courts  put  their
imprimatur  on such a  contract,  government, speaking  through
the  judicial  branch,  acts.   Shelley  \.   Kra.em.er,  334 U.  S.  1;
Barrows  v.  Jackson,  346  U.  S.  249.  And  it  is  governmental
action  that  the  Constitution  controls.     Certainly  neither  a
State nor the  Federal  Government could adopt  a  political  test
for   workers  in  defense  plants  or  other  factories.   It  is  ele-
mentary that  freedom  of  political  thought  is  protected  by  the
Fourteenth  Amendment  against  interference  by  the  States
and  against  federal  regimentation  by  the  First  Amendment.
The  Bill  of  Rights  and  The  Right  to  Work
Government  may  not  favor  one  political   group  over   an-
other.   Government  may  not  disqualify   one  political  group
from  employment.  And  if  the  courts  lend  their   support  to
any  such  discriminatory  program,  Shelley  V. Kraemer,  supra,
teaches  that  the  Government  has  thrown  its  weight  behind
an  unconstitutional  scheme  to  discriminate  against   citizens
by  reason  of  their  political  ideology.  That  cannot  be  done  in
America,  unless  we  forsake  our  Bill  of   Rights.
It   has   hitherto    been   assumed   that   Communists,   un-
less  they  violate  laws,  are  entitled  to the  same  civil  rights  as
other  citizens.  In   1937,  Chief  Justice  Hughes  wrote  to  that
effect  for  a  unanimous Court  in  DeJonge  v.  Oregon,  supra.
That  decision held that  a  State  could  not punish Communists
for  having  a  public  meeting  to  discuss  a  matter  of  public
concern.   Chief  Justice   Hughes  said  that  First Amendment
rights might  be abused  "to  incite  to  violence  and  crime."  Id.,
at  364.   But  he  went  on  to  say,  "The  people  through  their
legislatures  may  protect  themselves  against  that  abuse.   But
the  legislative  intervention  can  find  constitutional  justifica-
tion  only  by  dealing  with  the  abuse.   The  rights  themselves
must  not  be  curtailed.   The  greater  the  importance  of  safe-
guarding  the  community  from  incitements  to  the  overthrow
of  our  institutions   by  force  and  violence, the  more  impera-
tive  is the  need  to preserve  inviolate the  constitutional  rights
of  free  speech, free  press and free  assembly  in  order  to  main-
tain  the  opportunity  for  free  political  discussion, to  the  end
that  government  may  be  responsive  to  the  will  of  the  people
and  that  changes,  if  desired,  may  be  obtained  by   peaceful
means.   Therein  lies  the  security   of  the  Republic,  the  very
foundation  of  constitutional  government."   299  U.  S.  3G4-365.
Cutter   Laboratories  is  an  important   pharmaceutical  fac-
tory.   It  may  need  special  protection.   It  may  need  to  estab-
lish  safeguards   against   sabotage   and  adulteration.   It  may
need  special  screening  of  its  employees.   But  there  is  not  a
word  in  the  present   record   indicating   it   needs   protection
against  Doris  Walker.   She  has  no  criminal  record.   She  is
guilty  of  no adulteration, no  act  of  sabotage.   The  factory  in
question  has  not  been  plagued  with  any  such  problem.  It  is
only  the  fear  that  Doris  Walker  might  at  a  future   time en-
gage  in  sabotage  that  is  made  the  excuse  for  her   discharge.
I   do  not  think   we  can  hold  consistently  with   our   Bill  of
Rights  that  Communists can  be  proscribed  from  making  a
living  on  the  assumption that  wherever  they  work  the  inci-
dence  of  sabotage  rises  or  that  the  danger  from  Communist
employees  is  too  great  for  critical  industry  to  bear.
The  blunt  truth  is that  Doris Walker is  not discharged  for
misconduct  but  either  because of  her  legitimate  labor union
activities  or  because  of  her  political  ideology  or  belief.  Belief
cannot  be  penalized  consistently  with  the  First  Amendment.
As  Mr.  Justice  Roberts  wrote  for   a  unanimous  Court  in
Cantwell  v.  Connecticut,  310  U.  S.  296,  303-304,  the  First
Amendment  "embraces  two  concepts—freedom to  believe  and
freedom  to  act.   The  first  is  absolute  but,  in  the  nature  of
things,  the   second  cannot  be.   Conduct  remains  subject  to
regulation  for  the  protection  of  society."   The  Court  today
allows  belief,  not  conduct,  to  be  regulated.    We  sanction   a
flagrant   violation  of  the  First  Amendment  when  we  allow
California,  acting  through  her  highest  court,  to  sustain   Mrs.
Walker's  discharge  because  of  her  belief.
8  J
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, June 11,  1956
A  Visit  to  Washington  May Be  As  Sobering  As  A  Visit  to  Moscow
How Krushchev Could Adopt American  "Democracy"  and Remain A Dictator
A  visit  to  Moscow  makes  one prize  American tradition   as
never  before. But the  return  to  Washington, for  an American
indignant  with  the  lack  of  freedom  in  Russia,  is  also  an  ex-
perience.   To  make  the  familiar  rounds  of  the   Congressional
committees  and  the  courts is  to  see with  fresh  eye how easily
Krushchev  could adopt  democracy as  we now practice it,  and
still  remain a dictator.
It  is  not  hard  to  imagine.    Krushchev  could  start  by  pro-
claiming that  henceforth  every  Russian, like every  American,
was  to  have  freedom  of  speech,  press  and  assembly.   This
proclamation  would  be  suitable  for  oratory  and   engraving,
like our  Bill of  Rights.
At  the  same  time,  Krushchev  could  adopt  all  those  latter
day  American  devices  by  which  we  make  life  difficult   for
those  who try  to  take  our  Bill  of  Rights  at  face value.  These
all flow from  that word "subversive"—a  word I  found  as  fre-
quently  used  in  Russia  as  in  America.   In  both  countries  it
means  someone  who  questions  things-as-they-are,   in  our  case
the  profit  system  and  in  theirs  the  Communist  dictatorship.
There  a  "subversive"  is  vaguely  "counter-revolutionary"   as
here  he  is  vaguely  "communistic."
We're  More  Advanced  Technologically
Living  in  a   technologically  backward  country,   Comrade
Krushchev  may  not  realize  just  how  easily  theoretical   free-
dom  may  be  combined  with  a  ruthlessly  enforced conformity.
A  "free"  Russia,  current  American  style,  would  not  only
have  a  Bill of  Rights.   It  would also have an  Un-Russian Ac-
tivities  Committee and  an  Internal  Security  Committee. With
these  Krushchev would" have  no  difficulty  in  handling  persons
suspected  of  subversive,  pro-capitalist   and—most   important
of  all—anti  Krushchev   sentiment.
It  would  no longer  be necessary,  uncouthly, to  send them  to
labor  camps  in  Siberia.  The  milder  American  system  of  in-
ternal  exile,  public  disrepute   and   second  class   citizenship
would  be  just  as  effective.   By  such  means,  anti-Krushchev-
ites  could  be purged from  government, driven out  of  the  pro-
fessions,  denied  the  right  to  travel,  ousted  from  employment
in  industry.
The  dissenting  opinion we publish  this  week on  page  three
in  the  Cutter  case  reveals  how  easily  such  practices  can  be
reconciled  with  a  Bill  of  Rights.   The  majority  of  our  Su-
preme  Court, speaking  through  Mr. Justice  Clark,  did  not  go
so far  as  to  say  that  a  person  suspected  of  Communism could
be  barred  from   employment  in  private  industry.   But   the
same  result  was  reached  by  deciding that  a  State  Supreme
Court, in upholding such a  discharge  as for  "just  cause,"  was
only  construing  "a  local  contract  under  local  law,  and  there-
fore  no substantial  federal  question is  presented."  A  Russia
which  produced a  Vishinsky can  certainly  develop that  kind
of  juristic  genius,  too.
How  to  Keep  The  Youth  in  Line
The  advantage  of  adopting  the  American  system  would  be
that  Krushchev  could  tell  Russia's  youth  that  they  lived  in
the  freeest  country of the  world—"look at  our  Bill  of  Rights"
—while  dramatizing  for   them   the   consequences  of   taking
those  rights  too  seriously.  The  carrot  should,  of  course,  be
utilized  as  well  as  the  stick;  the  best  trained  youth  could  be
kept  in  line  as  here  not  only by  fear  of  ostracism  but  by  de-
sire  for  fellowships  and  government  jobs.
It  is  not  necessary  to  have  a  one-party  system.    Indeed  it
would  be well to allow an  openly pro-capitalist  party  to  exist,
as  we allow  a  Communist  party  to  exist.  It  is  amazing how
useful  such  a  party  can  be  as  scarcecrow  and  excuse for  re-
pression.  Its  follies  and  abuses  may  be pumped up  out  of  all
proportion  to reality, as Krushchev now says  the  secret  police
under   Stalin  exaggerated   the  "counter   revolutionary"  op-
position  in the  30's.
If  Krushchev will  only send a  technical  commission over  to
study  our  system,  he  will  also  find  to  his  delight  that  funda-
mental  rights  can  somehow  be  twisted  to  permit anonymous
accusation.  An  atmosphere  is  developed  in  which  people  so
believe  in  the  diabolic prowess  of  Communists and/or  count-
er-revolutionaries   that   they   readily   accept   the   idea   that
in  such  politically  dangerous  cases  the  secret  police should
not  be "crippled"  by  being forced  to  disclose  their  evidence.
American  Precedents  for  The  NKVD
Russian  courts  are  already   less  old-fashioned  than   ours
about  permitting  secret  evidence in  the  prosecution of  politi-
cal  crimes.   Krushchev would  have  American  precedents  for
using  faceless  informers  in  Russian  loyalty  hearings,  pass-
port  cases  and  similar  procedures  for  reducing  suspected  op-
ponents  to  second  class  citizenship.
Indeed  bills  by  Congressman Walter  and  Senator  Eastland
to  legalize  anonymous accusation  in  passport  and  denaturali-
zation  hearings  may  pass  this  session  of  Congress.   By such
means the  advantages  of NKVD star  chamber  trials  could be
combined  with  the  advantages   of  apparent   legality.
We  suggest  that  if  Comrade Krushchev will  only overcome
his  prejudices against  democracy and  look  closely  at  how we
actually  practice  it,  he  will  be  surprised  to  see  how  readily
it  could be  adapted  to  his  own peculiar  needs.
You  Can  Still  Start  A   Gift   Subscription   With  Stone's  Series  From  Abroad
I. F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street
City
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street
City
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
. .  .Zone
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
f
Zone
Shall  we  send  gift announcement?
....State               ....
(1 yr.)   additional:
8/11/66
....State
Yes  D    No  D
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington   3,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED