I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956feb20.pdf

============================================================

Why  Krushchev  Revised  Lenin,  Page  2;  The  SACB  Disbelieved  Budcnz,  Page  3.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  7
FEBRUARY  20>  1956
«o«       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Ready  to  Risk  Killing  Ike  In  Order  to  Stay in Power
If  the  President  feels  well  enough  to  run,  and  is  reelected
we pray that  his  burdens will  not  be  too  heavy for  him.   This
is  a  decision he  must  make.   But  the  medical  press  conference
put  on  at  the  White  House  last  week  was about  as  dishonest  a
piece  of  huckstering  as  has  ever  been  staged  in  our  nation's
capital.  The  adjoining box  gives  one  sample  of  an  evasive  and
slippery  reply  by  Dr.   Paul  Dudley  White  to  a  very  serious
question.   In  this  he  was  abetted  by  Jim  Hagerty.  Six  doctors
in  all  took  part,  and  it  should~be  noted  that  their  formal  joint
medical  statement  merely  registered   the  details  of  his  "good
recovery"  and  expressed  no  opinion  about  whether  it would  be
wise for  Mr.  Eisenhower to  risk  a campaign  and  another  term.
It  is a pity there was no way for  the  reporters  to  poll all  six.
Only  Dr.  Howard  Snyder,  the  President's  personal   physician,
and  Dr.  Paul  Dudley  White  answered  questions;  indeed  most
of  the  talking  was done  by the  latter.  Dr.  Snyder  thought  the
President  could serve  "four  or five years or longer"; Dr.  White,
in a personal  statement  written  out on a library  card  just  before
the  press  conference,  gave  him  "another five to ten  years."  Did
the  other  doctors  agree  with  Dr.  White?  If  so, why didn't  they
sign  that  supplementary  statement  or  include  it  in  their  own?
We  infer  that  they wanted  no  rash  predictions  in  their  formal
statement,  and  that  Drs.  Snyder  and  White  ventured  eagerly
but  alone where the other  physicians  feared  to  tread.
At one point  Dr.  White  would  have  left  the  impression  that
the  President  was  taking  no  drugs  of  any  kind  had  not  Dr.
Snyder  broken  in  to  say that  he  was  taking  an  anti-coagulant.
Dr.  Snyder was  candid  enough  to  admit  that  he  also  thought
the  President  in  good  health  just  prior  to  his  heart  attack,  but
this  reminder  was  drowned  out  in  the  headlines  Dr.  White's
optimism  created.  The  most  extraordinary  episode  of  all  was
Dr.  White's  answer to the  reporter  who objected  to the  phrase
"chances  are"  in his  statement,  "We  believe  that  medically  the
chances are that  the President  should  be able  to carry on. . .  ."
Not  Very  Honest   Answers
Q.  Dr.   [Paul  Dudley]  White,  if   the   President   de-
cides  to  run  again,  would  there  be  any  medical limita-
tion  on  the  type  of  campaign he  could conduct?
DR.  WHITE. That is  a political  question more or  less,
and  I  think he  himself, if  he  decides  to  run,  would have
to  answer  that.   What  do  you  say,  Mr. Hagerty?
MR.  [James  C.]  HAGERTY, White House  Press  Sec-
retary.  That  is  right.
Q.  What  is  the  political  aspects  of  a  question  as  to
whether  or  not  there  is  any  medical  limitation  on  his
ability  to  campaign?  We are  asking  now from  a medi-
cal  standpoint  if  it  is  possible  for  him  to  go  through a
campaign.
DR.  WHITE.   Well,  I  don't  know  about  the  rigors  of
a  campaign,. myself.   I  am  not  a  politician,   so   again
somebody  else  will  have  to  answer  that.
—White  House news  conference, Feb.  H.
This  colloquy  followed^
Q.  "Chances are"  is a phrase that sometimes  is  misunder-
stood.
A.  Well,  how do  you want  me to  phrase it?
Q.  Leave  it  out.  Say that,  "We  believe  that  medically  the
President  should  be  able  to."
A.  All  right;  because  we  have already  said  "fully   aware of
the  hazards  and  uncertainties that lie ahead." That's  all  right.
This  may be  good  press  agentry  but  it  is not  sober  medicine.
To  advise a man  in his  sixties after  a heart  attack  to  risk a Pres-
idential  election  campaign  and  four  years  more  amid  the  ten-
sions  and  anxieties  of  the  White  House  is  not  common sense.
We  can  only  conclude  that  the  Republicans  are  so  desperate
that  they  are  ready  to  risk  killing  Eisenhower  if  necessary  in
order  to  stay  in  power.  This  is  the  feeling  which  will  spread
around  the  country  if  they  pressure  him  into  running  as  now
seems  likely.
An  Old  Colored  Lady  and  Adlai Stevenson
Our  favorite  remark  of  the  week,  if  not  the  year,  was made
by  an  elderly  colored  lady who  lives  in  Montgomery,  Alabama.
Aubrey  Williams  reported  it  in  a  speech  last  week-end  to  the
National  Lawyers  Guild  in  Detroit.  She  was  walking  because
of  the  bus  boycott  by Negroes  in  that  city  and  Aubrey,  driving
by  in  his  car,  offered  her  a  lift  which  she  refused.   "I'm   not
tired,"  she  said.  "When  I  used  to  ride  those  buses,  my  feet
rode  but  my  spirit  would  walk.  Now   my  feet  walk,  but  my
spirit  rides."  Our  hat  is off to  that  wonderful old  kdy  and  to
her  example.  Her  words  eloquently  illuminate  the  issue of  the
South,  which  is  a  simple  one:  whether  one  half  of  its  people
are  to  be  allowed  to  walk  or  ride  as  they  please  without  being
humiliated   by  the  other  half.
By contrast  the  remark  of  the  week  we  found  most  sour  was
Stevenson's  prissy  "True  integration   requires  more  than   the
mere presence  of  children  of  two  races  in  the  same  classroom."
With  that  one,  Adlai  came  down  with  a  thump  in  our  once
high  estimation.  The  "mere  presence  of  children  of  two  races
in  the  same  classroom"  may not  be  "true  integration"   but  it's
certainly the  necessary first step.  Stevenson's  nervous  suggestion
that  the  school  integration  issue  be taken  out  of  the  campaign
seemed  to  us  only  another  example  of  the  way so  many  of  our
"better  elements"  are  backing  down  to  mob  pressure.   Steven-
son  put  himself  in  the  same class with  Carmichael of  the  Uni-
versity  of  Alabama  and  Governor   Folsom.   While   that   old
lady's  spirit  rides,  our  hero  Adlai  runs.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

l.f.    Stone's  Weekly, February SO, 4956
The  Shadow of  the  Growing Political  Crisis  in  France and Italy
The  Meaning of Krushchev's  Revisions in  Communist Doctrine
The striking thing about the  Krushchev speech  to the  Soviet
Communist Party  Congress  is that he begins  to admit  that the
danger  of  thermonuclear  war  and  the  consequent  necessity of
peaceful  co-existence  are  incompatible  with  the  older  Marxist-
Leninist  view  of  violent  revolution.   For  violent revolution—
and  this  means  civil  war—in  almost  any  important   country
between  the  two  rival  great  powers  would bring  on  interven-
tion and  make world war  very difficult  to  avoid.  One need only
imagine  what  would  happen  were  revolution  to  break  out  in
India  or  in  Italy,  threatening  to  overturn  the  world  balance
of  power,  to  see  that  if  the  Russians  seriously  want  peace
they  must  at  the  same  time  change  the  tactics  of  the  world
Communist  parties  for  whom  Moscow  is  the  new  Rome.
So those who want  world  peace, and  see mankind's  destruc-
tion  in  a  new war,  must  welcome the  signs  of a  shift  in Mus-
covite  doctrine.   Krushchev departed  from  Lenin,  though  not
necessarily  from'Marx's  later  thinking,  when-he denied  that
force  and  civil war  were the  only paths to  socialism,  when  he
continued  the  new  policy  of  friendliness  to  the  once  reviled
Social  Democrats,  and  when  he  even  suggested   (a  real  her-
esy)   that  "the   parliamentary  form"  might  be  used  (Lenin
said  it  had  to  be smashed)  and  converted  from  "an  organ  of
bourgeois  democracy  into  an  instrument  of  genuine  popular
will."   This  until  yesterday  was  "rightist  opportunism."
In  this  context  perhaps  the  most  interesting   observation
made  by  Krushchev came when he  spoke of  the  possibility  of
using  parliamentary  forms  "for  the  transition  to  socialism"
and  then  added, "For   the  Russian  Bolsheviks,  who were  the
first  to  accomplish the  transition   to  socialism,  this  way  was
excluded."   This   begins   to   recognize   that   the  conclusions
drawn  by  Lenin  from  Russian  experience,  where  parliamen-
tary  forms  under  the  Czars  were  delusive,  do not  necessarily
fit other countries where parliamentary  forms and  democratic
government  have  often  been  the  vehicles  of  peaceful   social
change and  reform.  The reader  should also  notice in this con-
nection  that  Krushchev  speaks  of  "the  right  wing  bourgeois
parties"  as  being  bankrupt,   which  implies  that   left-wing
"bourgeois"  parties  may  be allies  in  "the  peaceful  transition
to  socialism."
A  New  Popular  Front?
The  Krushchev  speech  is  not  to  be  read  merely  as  a  new
encyclical  in  Communist  political  theology.  At  this  very mo-
ment  the  future  of  France  and  Italy  may  well depend on  the
attitude  taken  by their  Communist parties;  they  hold the  bal-
ance  of  power  in  the  former,  and  may  soon  do  so  in  the  lat-
ter.  Despite socialist fears  of communist duplicity, a  new Pop-
ular  Front  may  be  necessary  in  France  to  meet  the  North
African  crisis  and  the  new Fascist  threat  visible  in  Poujade.
In  Italy  the  pro-Soviet  Left  Socialists   of  Nenni  have  been
seeking  alliance  with  the  left  wing  of  the  Christian  Demo-
crats.  Some such coalition may  be necessary  to  unite all  those
in  Italy  who want  social  reform  against  tomorrow's  danger
of  a  new Italian  Fascism.
Such  coalitions  could  only  be  stabilizing  influences  if   the
Communists  in  France  and  Italy  can  provide some  assurance
that  their  support  would  be  something  more  than  a  Trojan
horse  from  which first to  capture  and then  liquidate  (as  hap-
pened  in  the  "popular   democracies")   their  non-Communist
liberal  and  socialist  allies.   Socialist  fears   of  a  Communist
alliance  are  all  too well founded  in  recent  East  European ex-
perience.  Add  the  sudden  shifts  to  which  Communist line  is
subject  and  the  slavishly  abject  dependence  of  the   Commu-
nists  on  Moscow  and  you  begin  to  see  the  real  dimensions  of
the  problem.  Yet  unless there  is  some  way  to  unite the  vari-
ous  kinds  of  people  in  Italy  who want  social  reform, whether
Catholic,  Republican,  anti-clvrir:il,-  Socialist  and  Communist,
Fascism  may  easily   revive  since  fundamentally  nothing  in
poverty-stricken  Italy  has  happened  since  the  war  except  to
shore  up the rotten   foundations.
The  French  situation  is  not  the  same  but  just  as  critical.
The North  African  revolution  deeply  touches  French  national
pride;   without  North  Africa,  she  sinks  into  a  third  rate
power, facing  a  resurgent  Germany.  The  white  colonists  see
the  fruits  of  a  generation's   labor  endangered  by  a primitive
and  barbaric  tide.  To get  them to  give  up  what  they  have, to
conciliate  the  miserable  Arab  masses,  and  to  reconcile them
if  possible  to  a  new-equal life  with  and^wtthin  France  is  the
greatest  task   which  has  faced  French   statesmanship   since
Napoleon. In  the national  bitterness  of failure, a new  Fascism
may  make its  thrust.  But  can  Frenchmen  unite  to  fight  it,  if
they  must  fear  that  part  of  their  ranks  may break  away  at
any  time  on orders  from  a  foreign  source?  This  is  the  ques-
tion  which  haunts  Mollet and  Mendes-France.
The  Road  to  Peace  Runs  Through  Paris
The  international   perspective  is  as  difficult  A  growing  in-
stability  in  France  and  Italy,  coupled  with  an  increase  in
Communist power in  both countries,  would make relaxation  of
tension  between  East  and  West  impossible.  Krushchev  admits
that if  good relations are  not established  between  Moscow and
Washington,  there  is  no way to  cut  down the  arms  race  and
a  tension  that  must  grow  more  warlike.  Yet  such  good  rela-
tions  will be impossible to achieve if there are  crises in  France
and Italy. This  is what  makes  Communist policy in both coun-
tries  so  important  to  peace,  and  this  is  what  makes  Krush-
chev's  revisions   of  Communist  doctrine  in  the  direction  of
peaceful  change  and  social  democracy  so  important.
The  question  which the  Krushchev speech  does not  deal with,
is  how he 'can  reconcile this  responsible  attitude  toward  West
European  problems  with  a  Middle Eastern  policy  which rests
on  arms  shipments  into  so tense  an  area.  The  policy  of  peace
cannot  be  reconciled  morally  or  politically  with  the  kind of
dangerous  fishing  in  troubled  waters  which  Moscow  pursues,
in  the  Middle  East.  There  Russian  policy  encourages   war,
and  discourages  those  who would like  to  see stability  created
by  removing  the  area  from  great  Power  rivalry.
Finally  Krushchev's  discussion  of  the  Beria  affair  and  lib-
erty  within  the  Soviet  state  must  put  liberals  and  Socalists
on warning  against too close a  Communist embrace.  The Com-
munists  still  have  a  lot  to  learn.  Krushchev  is  still   talking
the  kind of  coarse  demonological rubbish  in  which he  engaged
at  Belgrade  on  meeting  Tito.  If  Beria,  the  highest  G-man of
the  Soviet  State  was  an  imperialist  agent—and  we leave this
kind  of  poppycock  to  party  stomachs—then  the  whole secret
police  system  stands  condemned and  a  first  essential   under
communism  as  under  any  other  society is to  give  the individ-
ual  rights  he can  enforce  against  the  police  and  the  state.  The
injustices  Krushchev so conveniently  blames on  Beria  are  the
same  ones which  Beria  blamed in  the  same terms  on his  pred-
ecessors.   Yet   when   Krushchev  says  that   "experience  has
shown  that  enemies  of  the  Soviet  state  attempt  to  use  the
slightest  weakening of  Socialist  law  for  their  foul  subversive
activities"  he  is  talking  the  same  witch  hunt  language  we
know  so  well  in  America  and  opposing  fundamental  reforms
to  make  new  Berias  impossible.  All  the  reforms  Krushchev
mentions  are  mere  purges  from  the  top  in  the  secret  police
apparatus—not  the basic reforms  in criminal  procedure prom-
ised  after   Stalin's  death   and  the  exposure  of  the   doctors
frameup.  The demonology still reflected in  Krushchev's  speech
must  be  gotten  rid  of  if  a  decent  society  is  to  be   created.
Here, too, the  Communists must learn from  the  best traditions
of  the  West  if  there  is  to be progress toward  world  peace  and
stability.  In this  respect,  too, revision of  "Marxism-Leninism"
is overdue.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, February  SO,
An  Unnoticed  Sideligfit  on  the  National  Council American-Soviet  Friendship  Case
Apparently the
Did Not  BeKeve Budenz Where He Was Contradicted
An  unnoticed  aspect  of  the  decision  by  the  Subversive  Ac-
tivities   Control   Board   declaring   the   National   Council  of
American-Soviet   Friendship  a   Communist  front    concerns
Louis  Budenz;  Budenz was the  chief  informer  witness  in  the
proceeding,  and  the  Board's  principal reliance  in   identifying
Council  directors as  Communist.  But  in  every  instance  where
persons  he  accused appeared  before  the  Board  and  entered a
denial,  their  word  was  taken  against  Budenz's.
There  were  seven  such  witnesses  who appeared  to   testify
on  behalf  of  the  Council and  of  themselves.   Six  of  them  con-
vinced  the  hearing  examiner,  David  J.  Coddaire.  These  six
were  Professor   Ernest  Watson  Burgess  of  the  University  of
Chicago,  Dr.  John  A.  Kingsbury,  the  late  Professor   Robert
Morss  Lovett,  Professor   Ralph  Barton   Perry  of  Harvard,
Arthur  Upham Pope,  and the  Rev. William  B,  Spofford.   Al-
though  all  six  were  named  by  Budenz,  neither   the  recom-
mended  decision  by the  examiner  nor  the  final  decision  by  the
Board' included  them  among the  Council directors  whom- the
SACB found  to  be  Communists.
The  seventh  witness was the  Rev.  William  Howard  Melish.
He,  too,  was  named  by  Budenz  as  a  Communist,  and  in  his
case  the hearing examiner  took  Budenz's  word for  it.  But  the
final decision  by the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board   "re-
versed"  the  hearing  examiner  on  Melish and  on  Leo Krzycki.
Coddaire-listed  both  as  Communists in- his  recommended  deci-
sion. The final decision  omitted  both;   Kryzeki,  a  retired  vice
president  of  the  Amalgamated   Clothing  Workers,  was a  di-
rector  of  the  National  Council  from  1947  to  1963.
Testimony  Mostly  Hearsay
In  most  cases  Budenz's  identifications  were  hearsay  or  in-
ferential.  As  David  Rein,  attorney  for  the  National  Council,
told  the  SACB in  his  summation, "the  bulk  of  his  identifica-
tions  were  people  whom  he  had  no  personal  knowledge  were
members  of  the  Communist Party  and  whom, indeed,  he  had
never  met at  all.   But this  was  not  true  in  Melish's  case.
Budenz  testified  that  in   1944  he  met  with  Melish  to  see
whether  the  clergyman  was  loyal  enough  to  the  Communist
Party  to  be  approved  for  the  chairmanship  of  the   National
Council.   Budenz  said  that  Melish  told  him,  "I  am  a  loyal
member"  of the  Communist Party,  speaking  to  yon  as  a  Com-
munist  and  I  would  accept  Communist  party  discipline."
Melish  in  testifying  before  the  SACB  produced  a   diary
which  showed that his  purpose  in meeting  Budenz on that oc-
casion  in  1944 was  to  write  an  article  for  the  Daily  Worker
on the  Church and the  war  effort.   Melish  denied that he had
ever  made  the  statement  attributed  to  him  and  denied  that
he  was  & Communist.
The  Board  Was Dubious
The  hearing  examiner  found  Melish's  denial  "not  credible"
and  listed  him  among the  National  Council  directors  "shown
on the  record  to have been members of the  Communist Party"
but  the  Board  took  Melish's  name out  and  reduced  Coddaire's
finding  on  Melish  to  a  "cooperative   relationship  with  Party
activities  on the  part  of  Melish and  at  least  some  predisposi-
tion  toward  communism."  Obviously the  Board  did  not  take
Budenz's  story  at  full  value.
In  no  instance  during  the  National  Council  case  did  the
SACB take  an  informer's  word  as  to  Communist  party mem-
bership  against  the  word  of  a  witness  appearing  in  his own
defense.   Of  the  31 past  or  present  directors  of  the  National
Council  who were listed  as having been "shown on the  record"
to  be  Communists,  none had  appeared  before  the  Board.   '
Two  conclusions can be  drawn  from  this.  One is that  it  is
demonstrably  not  true  that  the  SACB  will  always believe  an
informer  as  against  an  accused person.  The other  is that  the
Board's  finding  of  party  membership as  "shown  on  the  rec-
2   3
ord"  may be an  injustice  to  many of  those so named.  In  most
cases  the  finding  doe* not  rest  on  the  sifting  of  evidence but
merely .on the  uncontradicted   hearsay  of  an  informer  whom
the Board  itself   disbelieved  in  other instances where his  testi-
mony  was contradicted.
The  Late  Muriel   Draper
Let  us  take  a  few  examples  and  begin  with  the  one  dead
person  on the  list,  Muriel  Draper.   Miss  Draper  died  before
the  hearings.  Three  of  the  Board's  witnesses,  Malkin, Laut-
ner  and  Budenz identified, her  as  Communist.   But  all  three
testified from  hearsay  not  personal Knowledge.
Then there is  the  case of  Elmer  A.  Benson,  once a  Farmer
Labor  Governor  of  Minnesota.    Benson  for   some  time   has
been  so seriously ill that his  physicians forbade  even  the  tak-
ing  of  a  deposition.  He  was  named  as  a  Communist  by Bu-
denz.   Why  was  Budenz's  unsupported   accusation   accepted
by  the  Board?
Of  the  others  named  as  Communists  by  Budenz,  there  are
a  considerable number  who are  recognizably  non-Communist;
we would name them  were it  not  (1)  that this would leave an
invidious  implication  about  the  others and  (2)  to  give  their
names  in  this  atmosphere  is  to  spread  smears.  Apparently
the  standard  applied  by  the  SACB  was  to  accept  Budenz'i
testimony  where  persons  be  accused  of  Communism did  not
appear  to  contradict  him.
The  Case  of  Dirk  Struik
The  evidentiary  yardstick  applied  by  the  Board   fell   far
short of that which-a court  would: apply.  Let us take the case
of  Dirk  J.  Struik,  the  famous  mathematician   who  has  been
awaiting   trial  for   years  on  a   Massachusetts   indictment
charging  him  with  being  a  Communist.  The  Board  decision
listed  him  as  one of  the  Communist directors  of  the  Council.
Struik  was  so  identified  by  the  informer  Glatis.   But  the
defense  complained  that  this was  a  case  of  circular reason-
ing, that Glatis merely  testified  that Struik "must have been"
a  Communist or  he  would not have  been  permitted  to  becomf
chairman   of  the   Council  in   Massachusetts.   This  assumes"
what  the  Board  was  trying  to  prove:  that  the  Council was
dominated by the  Communist party, and then infers  from  this
assumption  that Struik "must have been" a Communist!  (The
inference  in  turn  was  used  to  prove  its  premise. V
Of  the  remaining directors  listed by  the  SACB  as  Commu-
nists,  12 were named both  by  Budenz and  by other  informers,
but  hearsay   does  not  become  more  than  hearsay   by  being
made  multiple.  Corliss  Lament,  for  example,  waa listed  as  a
Communist  by  the  SACB though  he  testified  under  oath be-
fore  the  McCarthy  committee  in  1953  that  he  was  not  and
never had  been a  Communist.  Four  informers,  Budenz, Laut-
ner,  Fletcher  and  Malkin called  him a  Communist before  the
Board.   The  only  witness  who  did  not  speak  from  hearsay
was  Malkin,  and  he  spoke  from  inference.   He  claimed  that
in  the  early  '30s  he  went  to  Lament's  apartment   and  said
that  a  "Comrade"  had  sent  him  for  money.
The  Board  cannot  be  blamed  for  the  failure  to  appear  of
those  named  as  Communists,  though  many  persons  are  un-
derstandably  fearful  of  risking  a  possible  perjury  prosecu-
tion  by pitting their  word  against  a  well-known informer's.
In  this  respect the  Board  deserves  credit.  But  the  Board  can
be  blamed, however, for  damaging reputations  and  livelihood
by  giving the  semblance of  an  evidentiary  finding  of  Commu-
nist  party  membership in  most  of  these  instances.  Were this
a  court  proceeding  to  determine  whether  X  or  Y  wore Com-
munists,  such  proof  by  hearsay   or  inference  would  not  be
sufficient  for  a  verdict  of  guilty.
(The   broader  issues  in  the  National  Council   case  will
be  discussed  here  next  week.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, February 20,1956
Melodramatic  Folly;  Were  Burgess  and  MacLean  Worth  The  "Secrets"  They  Carried  Off?
If  A  Public  Dam  at  Aswan,  Why  Not  at  Hell's  Canyon?
To  buy  Egypt's  'favor  the  Administration  is  ready  to  do
something  it  would  scarcely   dream  of  doing  here  at  home:
build  a  public  dam.  Sen.  Richard  Neuberger  pointed  this  out
as  lie  introduced  an   almost  unnoticed   resolution   requiring
Congress  to match  every  dollar  spent  for  foreign flood control
with  a  dollar  to  control floods .in this  -country.  The  adminis-
tration,  he  declared,  was  willing  to  lielp  Egypt  build  a   $1,-
300,000,000  dam  at  Aswan  on  the  Nile  yet  it  "has   told  the
inhabitants  of  the  Pacific  Northwest  that  we are  too poor  in
purse  to erect a dam costing  $350  million ...   at  Hells  Canyon
along  the  Snake  River."  He  accused  the  Republicans  of chok-
ing  off a  program  of  American  river  improvement.  "The  bud-
get  for  fiscal  1957,"  he  said,  "carries  no  substantial   increase
over fiscal  1956 in funds for  river  control  despite  the fact that
the  past  year  has  been  troubled  by  a  series  of  tragic  and
disastrous   floods.     ..."
Melodramatic Folly.: We don't know what  "secrets"  Burgess
and  MacLean carried  off  with  them  to  Moscow hut  they could
hardly  be worth  the  damage  they  have  done  their  own cause
and  the  cause  of  better  relations.   They  demonstrated  that
Communists  could  not   be  trusted  with   official   secrets   and
they  engaged  in  exactly  the  kind  of  melodrama' which  is  the
greatest  obstacle  to  the  recovery  of  world  sanity.
But,  Of  Course:  And  now there's  a plausible  explanation of
Washington's  current  interest  in  the  soil  bank.  "This Admin-
istration,"  Senator  Humphrey  said  in  a  recent  floor  debate,
"loves  the  soil  bank.  I  guess  it  is  loved  because, the  word
'bank'  is in  it."  . .  .  Typical  of the Eisenhower  Administra-
tion   is   the   appointment   of   former   Congressman  Wesley
D'Ewart  to  be  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Interior  in  charge
of  Indian  Affairs.   D'Ewart  is  anti-Indian.  "We  do not  know
anyone,"  the  Pueblo  tribal  council  protested   in  urging   the
Senate  not  to  confirm  the  appointment,   "whose  records   in
Congress  has shown  him to be more anti-Indian." . . .
Poor  Defenceless Germany: The biggest threat  to  NATO  at
the  moment  is  West  Germany's  refusal  to  pay  her  share of
defense  costs or to stop  dragging her  feet  on rearmament.  The
real  issue  was  disclosed  when  The  London  Times   (Feb.  8)
complained,  "The  result  of  the  delay  in  German  rearmament
is that Germany is enjoying a formidable advantage in  export
markets  because  her  defence programme  is  making  no  appre-
ciable  demands on manp.ower or  materials." What  happens  to
the  theory  that  only  NATO  forces   protect  Germany  from
Russian  invasion  when  the  West  Germans  themselves   don't
take defense seriously  and  exploit  NATO  to  steal  a  march on
their  arms   burdened  West  European  business   competitors!
New  Rosenberg  Case  Fugitive
An  hitherto  undisclosed  figure  in  the  Rosenberg  case
came  to  light  when  Federal  Judge  McGarraghy  upheld
the  refusal  of  the  State  Department  to  grant  Weldon
Bruce Dayton a  passport.   Dayton,  a physicist, has  been
trying  for  almost two  years  to  get  a  passport in  order
to  take  an  appointment  at  the  Tata  Institute  in Bom-
bay,  India.
In  June,  1954,  Mrs.  Ruth  B.  Shipley  wrote  Dayton's
attorney,  Harry  I.  Rand,  that  "in  view  of  certain  fac-
tors"  she  was  not  at  liberty  to  disclose,  Dayton's pass-
port  application  was  being  rejected.   It   now  appears
that  one  of  those  "factors"   was  Dayton's acquaintance
with  a physicist named Alfred  Sarant.  The legal papers
disclose  that  Sarant  fled  to  Mexico  and  disappeared  in
1950  while under investigation  by  the  FBI  in connection
with  the  Rosenberg case.
Dayton's  own affidavit  denies that  he ever was  a Com-
munist  or  ever  engaged  with  Sarant  or  anyone else  in
unlawful  activities.  The  affidavit  also  reveals  that Day-
ton  was  before  grand  juries  on  three  occasions  in con-
nection  with  the  Rosenberg  affair.   He  was  never  in-
dicted,  but  the  investigation  cost  him  his  academic em-
ployment,  and  apparently also.his  right  to  travel.
Iron  Curtain  Note:  The  Chicago  Tribune  has  been  given
permission to  open a bureau  in  Moscow  and  its correspondent
is  on his  way  but  the  State Department  refused  to  give Alan
Max,  managing  editor   of  the  Daily  Worker  a  passport   to
cover  the  Communist Party  Congress  in  Moscow.  .  .  .  Since
the  Worker  was  given  passports  three  times  during  the  past
year,  to  cover  the  two  Geneva parleys  and  the  Winter  Olym-
pics in Italy, the  logic of the  new refusal  is  difficult  to  unravel
unless  based  on new and startling  intelligence.  .  . . This, in-
deed,  seems to be hinted  at  by the  Department  in  its  letter  to
Max,  which says  "This  action  is  predicated  upon   information
that  you  are  currently   the  managing   editor   of  the   Daily
Worker.  . . ." Sooner  or later  those  State  Department   secret
agents find out everything!
Robert  Morss  Lbvett  passed  away  last  week  at  85 after  a
life  of  undimmed courage  and  undeviating  devotion  to  prin-
ciple. To have  lived as  Professor  Lovett  did through  such  ter-
ribly trying  (and  wonderful)  times without  ever  pulling down
one's  flag  was  an  achievement  so splendid  as  to  make sorrow
seem  ungrateful.   How can  one mourn  success?
The  Date  Under  Your  Name  Tells  You  Whether  Your  Renewal  Is  Due
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol.  Wash.  3, D.  c.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street   .
City                                        .Zone....        State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
2/20/56
(To)   Name
Street
..„                                    .Zone           State
Shnll  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  D     No  TD
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St..   S.  E.
Washington   3.  0.  C
-Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED