I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jan30.pdf

============================================================

Annual  Index  In  This  Issue
BrownelFs  Attack  on Harry  Cain  for  "Bias"  Backfires,  See  Page  3
IF.   Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO.  4
JANUARY  30,  1956•«>'      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15 CENTS
No  Time  for Bipartisanship  in  Foreign  Policy
Tremendous  pressure  is  being  exerted  here  on  the  Demo-
crats  not  to  make foreign policy an  issue in  the  campaign. The
George  visit  to  the  White  House  and  the  Dulles  appeal  for  a
moratorium  on  partisan debate of  "one  or  two"  foreign policy
questions are only the  two visible  peaks of a massive movement
to  restore bipartisanship.  But  the  Democrats cannot move back
toward  bipartisanship and  forego  debate on  "one  or  two"  ques-
tions of  foreign  policy without  beginning  to  pull their  punches
on  Dulles.  And  the  most  urgent,  the  main  and  central  issue of
American  foreign  policy today is Dulles  himself.  He  has made
himself  the  issue by boasting that he has on three  occasions  (in
Adlai  Stevenson's  vivid  phrase)   played  Russian  roulette  with
the  peace of  the world. Whether  he was telling  the  truth  is sec-
ondary  to  the  revelation  of  what  really  goes  on  in  his mind—
how  lightly  he  takes  his  constitutional  obligations   and  how
light-headedly  he prances  on the edge of the  abyss. A man who
thinks  it  proper  to  behave  so  secretively  and  so  recklessly can-
not  be trusted on  any foreign policy  matter, much  less  the  "one
or  two"  which  are  most  immediately  important.  To  sink  back
into   bipartisanship   after   his   self-revelations    in   Life    is  not
merely  to  forego   partisan  advantage  after   an   extraordinary
blunder  but  to  abdicate  the  duties  of  responsible  opposition.
Putting  The  Democrats  on  The  Defensive
George's   silence  on  emerging  from  the  White  House  was
eloquent;  he  seemed  in  no  mood  to  immunize  Dulles  from
criticism.   But  a  campaign  cannot  be  won  by  pantomime,  and
unless  the Democrats  take  the  offensive in a big  way they  will
have  lost  their  opportunity.    From  the  standpoint of  public  re-
lations,  the  Administration  has  already  succeeded  in  changing
the  subject.  A volatile  press  and  the  national  mind  have  been
distracted  in  a  way that  somehow  puts  the  Democrats  on  the
defensive.  The  White  House  and  the  State  Department  have
executed  a clever  maneuver. The question  now, as they  twist  it,
is  not  whether  Dulles  shall  be  allowed  to  go  on  endangering
the  peace  of  the  world  but  whether  the  Democrats  will be pa-
triotic  enough  to  give  up  partisanship  on  foreign   policy!
This   is   Madison   Avenue   black   magic.    The    Democrats
can  only neutralize  it  if  leaders  like  George and  Stevenson  be-
gin  to say plainly,  concretely  and  publicly  what  they have  been
saying  obscurely   or  privately.     Peace   is  still  the   overriding
anxiety, the main talking point of  the  Republicans.  The  Demo-
crats can  take  it  from them  but only  if  they  begin  to  talk  sense
on  foreign  policy,  and   above  all  keep  their  fire  -concentrated
on  Dulles.    He  has  succeeded  in  personifying  the   issue  of
recklessness  in  foreign policy,  and -the Democrats  ought  not  to
let  him  escape  the  limelight  he  so  foolishly  focussed  on  him-
self.    At  the very  start  of  a  campaign  that  seemed  devoid of
major  issues,  Dulles  has  created  one  for  the  Democrats.   It  is
made  all  the  more  important   by  the  President's -indications
2
Why  Neutralism  Grows  in   Japan
Those  Offshore  Islands As  Seen From  Tokyo
"Most  of   the  moderate  Japanese   leaders  recognize
that  Formosa proper  is  a part  of  the same  'island chain'
to  which Japan herself belongs and they understand why
the  U.S. pledged  itself  to  defend  it.  True,  some  Ameri-
can  military  experts  (particularly  in  the  Air  Force)
have  begun  questioning  whether  the  'island  chain'  is  as
indispensable  to  our security as  it  seemed before  the ad-
vent  of  the  new  long-range atomic  bombers.  Neverthe-
less  .  .  .  the  Japanese  understand  that  if  the  Commu-
nists  invade  Formosa this  means  that they  are seeking
general  war  and  Japan  will  be  involved^ But  what hap-
pens  if   the'Communists  attack  the   offshore   islands?
The  Nationalist  Government  has  crammed  them  with
men  and  equipment  even  though they  have little strate-
gic  value  except  in  connection  with  an  invasion  of  the
mainland.  With  the  idea  of  deterring a  Communist  at-
tack,  the  U.S.  decided  to  leave  open  whether  or  not  it
would  help  defend   the  islands.   To  the  Japanese  this
seemed  to  entrust  the  final  decision  between peace  and
war  to  the  two  rival  Chinese  governments.   Even warm
friends  of  the U.S.  became  alarmed . . . the basic situa-
tion  which  causes  Japanese  apprehensions  will continue
as  long  as  American bases  exist  on  Japanese  soil;  for
if  the  U.S.  were  at  war  with  mainland  China  its  planes
would   fly  sorties   from   those   bases   and  Communist
Chinese  planes  would  retaliate.  What  is  necessary  is  to
convince  the  Japanese  people  that  the  risks  inherent  in
this  situation  are far less  than  the  risks  they  would run
without  American protection.  ...     On our side  we can
argue  the  proposition  most  effectively  not  by underlin-
ing  the  risks  for  Japan of  trying  to  'go  it  alone*  but  in
demonstrating  that  the  risks  of  the  American  alliance
will  not be enlarged  . .  .  because  of  our  intransigeance
on  a  minor  issue  or  because   the  final  decision  of  our
policy  seemed  to  have been  left  to  third  parties  which
do  not have the  same stake  in  peace  as  do the  U.S.  and
Japan."
—Hamilton   Fish  Armstrong,   "Japan   at  Cross
Purposes,"   Foreign   Affairs,    January  1956.
that  he  will  not  try  to  draft  Warren  and  his  praise of  Nixon.
For Nixon  sided  with  Dulles  in  favor of  intervention  in  Indo-
China.   Should  Nixon  rather  than  Eisenhower  be  the  candi-
date,   recklessness  in  foreign  policy  must  become  the  No.  1
issue  of  the  campaign.
What  have  George  and  Stevenson  been  saying  obscurely  or
privately  which  could  be  the  basis  of  a  vigorous  Democratic
foreign  policy?  First  of  all,  the  need  for  negotiation.  If  there
is  no  alternative to  peace,  there  is no alternative  to  diplomacy.
This  led  George  and  Stevenson  to  help  push  Eisenhower   to-
ward  last  year's  meeting at  the  summit, and  has led  George  to
warn  several  times  that  peace  in  the  Far  East  depended  on  a
{Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

L F. Stone't  Weekly, January 30,1958
While  Ridgway Protests Army Cuts,  the  Air  Lobby  Screams  for  More  Funds
Eisenhower  Leaves Dulles  Out  on  A  Liinb  Over  That   Brink
When  the  President's  remarks at  press  conference  January
19  are  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  testimony  of  General
Ridgway,  as  given  in  the  box below, it  would seem  thai  Sec-
retary  of  State  Dulles  was not telling  the  truth  about any one
of  those  three  occasions  on which he says peace was  saved  by
decisions  to  wage  atomic  war.  The  first  occasion  was  a  sup-
posed  threat  to  atom  bomb  Manchuria if  there  was  no  truce
in  Korea;  the  President  indicated  that  any  such  action  was
out  of  the  question  because  it  would have  "shocked: interna-
tional  opinion." The second  occasion  was  the  Indochinese  war.
According  to  General  Ridgway,  it  was  decided  not  to  inter-
vene  and his  military  objections  (as  reported  at  the  time)
plays  a part  in that  decision.  The third  occasion  was  over the
offshore  islands,  Quemoy  and  Matsu.  Mr. Dulles  told  Life   he
never  doubted that  Eisenhower  would have  regarded  an  at-
tack  on  Quemoy  and  Matsu  as  an  attack  on  Formosa—and
therefore   subject  to  retaliation   in  accord  with  the   special
Formosan  war  powers  resolution   of  last  January.   But  the
President repeated  at  press conference thai there was no way
for  anyone  "unless he is  a  far  greater  genius  than  I  am" to
know  in  advance  "what that attack  was  going  to  mean when
it  came  about."   Either  the  President  or  Mr. Dulles  must be
wrong.
The  Ridgway  articles  in  the  Saturday  Evening  Pott  are
worth  dose  study.    Like  the  Admirals  some  yean  back  in
their  revolt  against  the  B-36  program,  Ridgway  argues  that
mass destruction  by H-bombing would be un-Christian,  though
he  has  no trouble  in  reconciling  tactical  A-bombs  (much less
war itself  of course)  with Gospel. Some Generals have argued
that atomic war is  so terrible  that  future  wars will have to be
fought  with  non-atomic  weapons:  Q.E.D.  the  need for  bigger
armies  and bigger appropriations  for  conventional  arms.  Not
so Ridgway.  He is  almost  exuberant  in  his  description  of  the
way atomic wars will be fought;  his point is that  they will re-
quire  bigger  armies  and that  it  is  therefore  wrong  to  reduce
. the  Army's share  of  the military budget  while increasing  that
of  the  Air  Force.   His  sincerity  need  not  be  questioned  but
he is  certainly  naive  in  complaining  that  he could not get  all
the funds he wanted  because  of  "political"  decisions  by  "civil-
ians" in  charge  of  defense,  especially  his  bete  noire,  Secretary
Wilson.   But  who ever  heard  of  a  General who did  not  want
more funds  than  he was  getting?   Those Democrats and labor
leaden: who- are  echoing  Ridgway ought  to  have  their  heads
examined.  To complain of  "politics^
1
  by  "civilians"  is  to-com-
plain  that-we do not  hand over control of  basic  military  and
budgetary  decisions to  the  military.   Civilian  control  is  writ-
ten  into the  Constitution, and  "politics"  is  the  process  of  ar-
riving  at  the  general  consensus  in  a  free  society.   Generals
are  never  satisfied;  from   1948  through  1957  we  will  have
spent  almost 322 billions of  dollars on the  armed  services.  "If
we  cannot  feel  secure  after  this  astronomical  outlay,"  the
Chicago  Tribune  asked in  a  very  pungent  editorial  (Jan.  20)
on  "Ridgway's  Outcry," "when are  we  ever  going  to  be  able
Yet  He  Still  Hat  Power  to  Set  The  World  Ablaze
Ridgway   and  Dalles  Agree
Knee  Can't  Be  Trusted
"With  600,000  ROK troops  under  arms  in  Korea,  we
felt  that  we  ran relatively  little  risk  of  renewed attack
from  the  Red Chinese in  the event our own Army  forces
were  withdrawn.  However ...     no one knew  what our
old  and belligerent-friend,  Syngman  Rhee, might  do  if
we  were  not  there-to restrain  him.... The possibility
that  Mr. Rhee may  send  his  armies  marching, north  at
any  moment  still  exists.  And  nobody,  so  far  as-1  am
aware,  know* exactly  what  we  would do  if  that should
happen...  the ftareup of  new war in the Far East might
well be the spark that would set  the whole world aflame."
—General Ridgway, Saturday Evening Post, Jan. 28.
"Far  from  wanting  to  end  the  war,  Rhee  wanted  to
renew it.  His goal was to reunify all  Korea. The  release
of  the  prisoners,  he 'hoped,.would force  the  Communists
to break off negotiations  and the war would be resumed."
—Life   Magazine, How Outlet Averted  War, Jan. 16.
to feel  secure?"  A  significant  point  is  that while  labor  gener-
ally  supports  higher  arms  appropriations,  Ridgway complains
of  the  "business  men"  tit  the  Defense  Department.  Appar-
ently at this moment in our history  the  only people who worry
about  the  inflationary  impact  and  fantastic  cost  of  an  arms
race  are  some  of  the  business  men.  The  alliance  of  labor-and
the  military  in  support  of' the  arms  race  does  not  at  all  fit
into Marxist  cliches  about  Waff  Street  warmongers.
Though  history  shows  arms  races  lead  to  war  even  leaden-
as  thoughtful  as Reuther  (much less the  SpeBmanite Meany)
are  content  with  the  drift  so  long  as  it  provides  jobs  for
building   workers,,  mechanics,   truck   driven,   seamen,   etc.
Ridgway's  lament  about  the  stepchild  treatment  given  the
Army  did  net  keep  the  air  lobby  last  week  from  greedily
opening  up  on  its- own.  Though  the  new  budget  lips  obliga-
tional  authority  for  the  air  force  by two  and a  half  billions
and expenditures  by one-billion.  Aviation  Week  screamed  of
"The New Airpower Fraud"  and Air  Force  magazine sees the
137-wing  air  force  program  sabotaged.  The latest  Fact  Sheet
(RD-56-32)  of  the  Democratic National  Committee also com-
plains  that  the air force  is  being  cut. The one sector  of  indus-
try  which  depends  completely  on  world  tension  is  aviation,
and  the  profits  and  backlogs  of  the  big  companies  in  this
period- are  fantastic.    Symington  and  Finletter  among  the
Democrats  are their  sounding  boards.  The whole world has a
vital' interest  in  putting  the  brakes  on the  arms race:  its  in-
flationary  potential and- its  divenion  of  human  and  natural
resources  to  a growing  pile of  rapidly obsolescing  weapons of
destruction and new monsters of  fear  and human self-destruc-
tion.   The  Democrats  had  better  talk  sense  on  this  subject.
Ridgway's  Story  on  Indochina  Disagrees  With  The  Dulles  Account
"The  second time  that  the  U.S.  was  brought  to  the  brink
of  war  came  in  April of  1954. The  French situation in  Indo-
china  had become  desperate.  The  French pleaded for Ameri-
can  intervention  in the  form  of  a carrier strike.  .  .  .  Dulles
concluded that a carrier strike against  Dienbienphu's attack-
ers  was a  poor  way for  the  U.S.  to  get  involved. .  .  . On
April   4,  Dulles  went  to   the   White   House  with  Admiral
Arthur  Radford,  chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,   to
present  Eisenhower with  a  proposal  for  action.  If  Britain
would  join  the  U.S.  and  France  would  agree  to  stand  firm,
Dulles  pointed  out, the  three Western  states  could  combine
with  friendly  Asian  nations  to oppose the  Communist  forces
on   the   ground   in   Indochina  just. as-  the   UN   stepped   in
against  the  North Korean aggression  in 1950....  President
Eisenhower  concurred."
—Life  Magazine, How  Dullf8  Averted  War, Jan. 16.
".  .  .  there  was a  strong  advocacy, in  some  quarters, for
us  to  send  troops  to  Indochina.  I  did  not  share  that view,
knowing  the  military  hazards  it  presented,  in  the  light  of
the  fact  that  the  focus  of  infection  lay  outside  the  confines
of  Indochina. And  I  believe  that  the  analysis  which  I  di-
rected  the  Army  to make  and to present  to  higher authority
played a  considerable part  in  our Government's  decision not
to  embark  on that tragic adventure."
—Gen. Ridgway, Saturday  Evening Post,  Jan.S8.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  January 30,1956
Government  Delaying  Action on  Two Fronts  in  Defense  of  Faceless  Informers
Brownefl's  Attack  on  Hairy  Cain  for  "Bias"  Backfires
Brownell's attack  on Harry  Cain for  bias in the  Washington
Pension  Union  case  has  misfired  badly.   Instead  of  isolating
the  witch-hunter-turned-crusader,  it  has  won him the  unani-
mous  support  of  his  colleagues  on  the  Subversive   Activities
Control  Board.   Instead  of  a  one-man  fight  by  Cam  against
the  Attorney  General's  list  and his  use of faceless  informers,
the  entire  Board  has  been pushed into  a  posture  of  hostility
toward  BrownelL  This  first  open breach between two  agencies
engaged  in  "listing"  may  prove  an  important  political  devel-
opment. The breach  was brought  about, characteristically, be-
cause  Brownell  is  too  tricky;  he  alienates  even  those  who
might generally  be disposed  to  agree  with  him.  In  this  case,
the  Attorney  General  did  not  have  the  honesty  to  ask  for
Cain's  disqualification  on  the  ground  that  he  was  biased  in
favor  of  the  Washington  Pension  Union.  Instead  he took  the
extraordinary  step  of  asking  the  Board  to  reopen  a  motion
for   disqualification  originally   made  against   Cain   by   the
Washington  Pension  Union but  since  withdrawn.  At  the  same
time  the  government  cited  an  article  in  the  November  issue
of  Coronet  and  Cain's  remarks  in  defense of  an  accused  gov-
ernment  employe in  a  security  hearing as  evidence  of bias  in
favor  of  the  Washington  Pension  Union!.  BrowneH's  maneu-
vers  were as  tortuous  as  a  corkscrew.   Since  the  W.P.U.  in-
sisted  that  it  no  longer  wanted Cain  disqualified  and  neither
side  claimed that he  had  been unfair  in  the  actual  conduct of
the  hearings, the  SACB might  have rejected  the  government's
motion  out  of  hand.   It   chose  instead  to  examine  fully   the
charges  of  bias  pro  and  con. The Board ruled  that  insofar  as
Cain's  remarks  about  the  WPU  in  Coronet  are  concerned,  it
saw  nothing in  them  beyond "what  in a  criminal  case would
be termed  the  presumption  of  innocence."  As for  the  security
hearing, it  found  that  Cain  did no more than  declare  that he
was  "not  qualified  to  say"  whether  the  Pension  Union  was  a
Communist  front.  The truth  is  that  Cain  was  once  violently
biased  against  the  Pension  Union  and  other  Left   organiza-
tions,  and  that  this  violent  bias  recommended  him  for  his
present  post.   Close  observation  of  security  excesses  has  led
him  to  adopt  a  more  astringent,  humane  and  skeptical  atti-
tude,  and  it  is  this  which riles the  Justice  Department.   The
attack  on  Cain,  like  the  earlier  attack  on  Judge  Youngdahl
in  the  Lattimore   case,  shows  that  in  Brownell's  lexicon  a
judge  is  biased  who  does  not  start  out  with  his  mind  set
against  the  accused.  The hearings resume  February  16.  Cain
sits  as  hearing  examiner  on the  Attorney  General's  petition
to  declare  the  Pension  Union  a  Communist  front  within  the
meaning  of  the  Internal  Security  Act  and  to  force  its  regis-
tration  with  the  SACB.  (For  the  background  of  this  case,
see  our  issue  of  last  November  28.)
To  Appeal  or  Not  to  Appeal?
The Department of Justice cannot make up its  mind whether
to  appeal  the  Circuit  Court  decision  in  San  Francisco  last
October  against  the  use  of  faceless  informers  in  the  port  se-
curity  program,  or  try  to  wiggle  through  a  tiny  loophole in
that  ruling.  So last  week it  obtained  a  two month  extension
from  Mr. Justice  Douglas of the  time in  which  it  may file an
appeal  to  the  Supreme Court.  The new deadline  is  March 24.
The  loophole is that concluding portion  of the  decision  (Park-
er  v.  Lester, see our  Nov. 7 issue)  in which the  Circuit Court
said  it  was  not  deciding "whether  in  subsequent attempts  to
carry  out  the  objectives  of  the  merchant  seamen  screening
program,  regulations  might be adopted  which  in  some degree
qualify  the  ordinary  right  to  confrontation  and  cross-exami-
nation  of  informers."   The  Court  was  referring  to  the  prac-
tice  of  providing a  resume
1
 of  the  charges  instead of  produc- '
ing  witnesses.  At  the  same time  in a  footnote the  court made
clear  that  counsel  for  an  accused  seaman  should  have  the
right  "to  challenge  the  resume^  furnished  to  him  and  to  re-
quire a  demonstration that  it  is  indeed a  fair  one. We do not
presently  know," the  court  added,  "how  that  could  be  done
without  access  at  least  to  the  investigative  agency's  oripirnl
Lawyers  Rebuff  Witch  Hunters
New  York—The  Association  of  the  Bar of  the  City  of
New  York,  the  most  Important  local  bar  association  in
the  country, voted 57 to  101 last  week  against a propo-
sal  to discipline lawyers for  membership  in  the  Commu-
nist  party  and 60 to  85 against  a  proposal for  disciplin-
ary  action  where lawyers invoke  the  Fifth  amendment
in an  inquiry  as  to  Communist  activities.
The vote was in striking contrast  to recommendations
of  the  Eaatland committee.  Its  Matusow  report  propos-
ed  legislation   barring   from   practice  in   the  Federal
courts  or  agencies  lawyers who  had  not  sworn  a  non-
Communist   affidavit   or  had  refused  to  testify  about
Communist  activities.
The  vote  may  also  set  back  plans  which  the  House
Un-American  Activities Committee  has  for  some  time
had  "under  advisement,"  but  not  yet   put  into   effect.
These  would  require  any  lawyer  appearing before  the
House  committee  on behalf of  a client  to  swear  that  he
was  not  a  Communist.
report."  This  means  counsel could subpoena the  original  FBI
reports  and  check  the  resume  against  them.   But  the  FBI
might  consider  this  worse  than  being  forced  to  produce vnt-
nesses.   The  reason  for  this  touches  on  an  aspect  of  the  in-
former  issue  which has  been  lost  to  sight  in  current  discus-
sion.  The  issue  has  been  debated  as  if  there  were  only  two
clandestine  sources  of information, the  "casual" and the "pro-
fessional"  informer.  There  is  a  third, as  the  evidence in  the
Judy  Coplon  trial  showed.  Slips  were  introduced  citing  in-
formants  T-l,  T-2,  etc.  These "T"  informants  were  wiretaps.
To allow the  accused  in  security  cases  to  see the  original  in-
vestigative  reports  would  disclose  the  extent  to  which  the
various  gumshoe agencies  of  the  government  use  wiretapping
and  other  illegal  or  improper  techniques  of  surveillance.   So
in the  end the  government may be forced  to  appeal,  especially
since  suits  for  back  wages  totalling  hundreds  of  thousands
of  dollars  have  been  started  or  threatened  on  behalf  of  sea-
men denied clearance.
Faceless  Informers  and  Passports
The  FBI always insists that it  merely gathers but  does not
evaluate  information;  this,  it  argues,  is  the  function  of  ad-
ministrative  and judicial  agencies.  But  who evaluates  where
the  source  of  the  information  is  not  disclosed?  This  tantaliz-
ing  question  is  raised  by the  answers  Secretary  of  State Dul-
les  gave  the  Court  of  Appeals  here  in  the  Boudin  passport
case,  answers  which the  Court  rejected  last  week  as  "not  re-
sponsive."  The Court  asked whether  the  attorney  Leonard  B.
Boudin  had  done  anything  advene  to  American  interests
while  abroad  under  his last  passport:  whether  State  Depart-
ment  had  information  which  led  it  to  believe  that  he would
do  something  adverse  to  American  interests  if  given  a  new
passport;  and  if  it  had  such  information,  did  it  know  the
sources  and had  it  evaluated  their  credibility.  The  Secretary
of  State  replied  with  the  one word  "no"  to  the  first  question,
and  with  a  very  vague  and  general  assertion  of  suspicion  to
the  second.  On the  last  question  the  Secretary  of  State  ad-
mitted  that  the  information  came  in  part  from   informants
unknown  to  the  State  Department  "but  whose  credibility  has
been  evaluated  and  made  known  to  the  Department  by  the
Government  agency  furnishing  the  information."    Does  this
mean  the  FBI  is  now evaluating  its  sources  of  information?
This  is a  question which might  well be pressed  when the  case
is  finally argued  before the  Court  of Appeals.   Judge  Young-
dahl's decision was that passports could not  be refused  on the
basis  of  undisclosed  and  anonymous  accusation.   Should  the
Court  of  Appeals uphold  him, a  blow  will  have  been  struck
at  the  faceless informer in  another  vital  section,  that  of  the
right to travel.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, January  30,  1956
Israel,  Unlike  Czechoslovakia,  Will
(Continued  from  Page  One)
meeting at the  Foreign  Ministers'  level-with Communist China.
The  impasse in  the  Formosa straits must lead ultimately to war
or  a  humiliating national  backdown  on  our  part  unless  some
way  is  found  to  get  us  off  the  limb  onto  which  we  climbed
when  we threw a  protectorate  over  Formosa.   Last  year's  S.  J.
Res.  55, sponsored  by Kefauver, Humphrey, Sparkman, Morse,
Mansfield,  Fulbright,  Lehman, Magnuson,  Neuberger  and Hill
offered  a way out  by inviting the United Nations to  step  in  and
bring  about  "a  definitive  settlement  of  the  future  status of  For-
mosa  and   the   Pescadores."   It  was  buried  in   the   fake  war
alarums  with  which  Dulles  pushed  the  Formosan  war  powers
resolution  and  the  mutual  security  pact  with  Chiang  through
the  Senate last year; it  ought  now to  be  revived.
Germans  Pressing  Again  for  Unity
In  Europe the German  issue will  not  be settled  by  continued
insistence  that  we  will  agree  to  unification  only  if  Germany
joins  NATO.  The  West  Germans  are  pressing  for  new  talks
at  the  summit,  and  Stevenson  indicated  that  we  ought  to  talk
instead  of  unification  in  terms  of  genuinely  free  elections.  A
neutralized  Germany  as  part  of  a  neutralized   belt  to   include
the  East  European  satellite  states  would  give  American  diplo-
macy  initiative.  Another  position  from  which  the   Democrats
ought  to  break  away  is the  insistence  on  Eisenhower's  spurious
"open  sky"  plan*  as the  sine qua  non  of  disarmament.  Ameri-
ican  policy is being  associated  in  the  world  today with a whok
series  of  stale  "nyets"  on  Germany,  on  disarmament,  on  H-
bomb  tests,  and  on  the  mutual  lifting  of  iron  curtains.
Not  Surrender  to  A New  Munich
* The  day  Soviet  Premier  Bulganin's  letter  was  delivered
at  the  White House, the  Washington  Evening  Star's  diploma-
tic  correspondent,  Constantine  Brown, reported:  "No  respon-
sible statesman  in  or out  of  the  UN  ever  expected the  Reds to
buy  the  Eisenhower Geneva  proposal  in the  first  place.  Amer-
ican  military  men were aghast  at  the  very  idea  at  first,  until
they  realized, as they  did quickly, that  the  plan  was devoid of
significance  even if  it  were  to  be  approved.  Almost  anything
could  be  hidden  from  the  most  alert  aerial    reconnaissance.
And  would a  squadron  of  aircraft  loading  atomic  bombs on  a
runway  be  distinguished   from   a   similar   squadron   loading
Christmas  presents  for  Hottentots?   But  the  President  and
his  advisers   realized  the  propaganda   value  of  the   suprise
proposal.  ..."
Senator  Confesses
An  agreeable  backwash  of  the  Eastland committee's
investigation  of  the press  is  the  resignation  of  its coun-
sel  Jay  Sourwine.  In his  letter  to  Senator Eastland, Mr.
Sourwine  said  he  was  resigning  "for  personal reasons,"
but  he  told  the  press  he  had written the-chairman of  the
Nevada  State  Democratic  Central  Committee "to clear"
him  (an  odd  choice  of  words  for  a  witch  hunter)  for
nomination  as  U.  S.  Senator  to  fill  the  seat  of   Alan
Bible,  who  will  not  be  a  candidate  for  reelection.  Mr.
Sourwine's  resignation was  dated one  week after  he  re-
leased  the  Matusow  report,  with  its  innuendoes about
the  New   York  Times,  the  Alsops  and  several  leading
American papers.  The release was made, according to the
best  information here,  without  consulting the  committee
and  without  obtaining  the  signatures  of  its  members.
Senator  Eastland in his reply of  January  16 to the letter
of  resignation  insisted  "But  I  need  your  help  a  little
longer"—and  therefore  accepted  the  resignation  as  of
January  31.  The  parting  guest  was  thus  sped  with  the
minimum  two  weeks  notice.   Among  the  tributes  the
Senator  paid  Mr.  Sourwine  was  one  which  hardly  re-
flects  credit  on  the  U.S. Senate.   "I  happen  to  know,"
Senator  Eastland  wrote,  "that  when  Title  II  of  the  In-
ternal Security Act  was  adopted by the Senate, you were
the  only  living  man who knew exactly  what  was  in it."
There  is  finally  the  most  immediate  and  explosive  problem
of  the  Middle East  This will  not  be solved  by sacrificing Israel
to  the  Arab  States, nor  by competing  with  the  Soviets for their
favor.   Both  blocs  at  the  UN  last  week  united  in  high  moral
gestures  against  Israel while  they are  prepared  for  the  sake of
oil  and  power  politics to  curry  favor  with  some  of  the  most
backward, feudal and  corrupt  regimes in the world. The  Soviet
Union  ought  to  be  challenged  on  the  discrepancy between  its
campaign  for  peace  and  its  shipment  of  arms  into  the  area
most  likely  to  explode;  Moscow  and  Belgrade  alike  are  play-
ing  a  game  cynically out  of  keeping  with  their  peaceful  and
neutralist  professions.  There  is  ample  room  and  basis  for set-
tling  the  Arab-Israeli dispute, and  resettling the Arab  refugees,
by  conditioning  economic  aid  on  a  settlement.   But  to  move
toward  a  new  Munich  at  Israel's  expense  as  Eden  and  Dulles
may  be  planning  to  do  is  to  court  trouble.   Israel,  unlike
Czechoslovakia,  will  not  surrender.
Send  A  Gift   Sub  with  Your  Renewal  and  Bring  Some  Friend  Back  to  the  Ranks  of  Active  Liberalism
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City  .........................................  .Zone ............ State ....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional :
1/30/56
(To)  Name ..............................................................................
Street
City         „                                Zone           State         .....
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301    E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington   3,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED