I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956mar05.pdf

============================================================

A  First  Hand  Report  from  Montgomery,  Alabama,  by  Jennings  Perry—Pages   2  and  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  9
MARCH  5,  1956«>'       WASHINGTON, D.  C.15  CENTS
"Peace  and  Prosperity"  Cannot  Be  Reconciled With  ''On  the  Brink" Diplomacy
We're  For  Ike  — But  Not  With  Nixon  and  Dulles
When  the  big  news  from  the  White  House  reached  Cap-
itol  Hill,  Lyndon  Johnson  revealed  unsuspected  gifts  as  a  hu-
morist.   "It  will  be an  arduous campaign,"  the  Senate's  Demo-
cratic  leader  said  solemnly.  At  the  moment  it  looks  as  if  the
only  arduous part  will  be  to  keep  up  a  head  of  steam  in  the
Democratic  candidate  until  he  has  chugged  to  the  bitter  end
of  a  forlorn  course.   If   it  were  simply  the  question  of  four
more  years  for  Ike,  the  Democrats  would  be  well  advised  to
call  off the  campaign  and  put  the  savings  in  a  kitty  for  I960.
But  it  is  still  too  early  to  assess  public  reaction  to  the  Presi-
dent's  health  against  the  background  of  his  closest  associates.
As   in  ancient, Rome,  the   circus  is  still   good   politics,   and
the  President's  TV  appearance was a  circus.  There  was pathos
in  his  assessment of  his  own  health  and  in  his  final  handclasp
with  Mamie,  but  then  the  President—like  the  gladiator—  is
also  a  man  of  flesh  and  blood  who  commands sympathy.
If  the crowds streamed  from  the TV  arena  to the  polls,  there
would  be no  doubt  about  their  decision.   But there  will  be sec-
ond  thoughts between  now  and  November,  and  much  can hap-
pen  in  eight  months.   If  the  situation were not  so  tragic, much
comedy  would  be  inspired  by  Eisenhower's  effort  to  build  up
the  White  House  as  a  kind  of  health  resort  for  cardiac  cases.
There  are  questions  no  skilfully  devised  commercial will  stifle.
What  if  a vote  for  Eisenhower,  who  made  peace  in  Korea,  be-
comes a vote for Nixon,  who wanted  to renew the war  in  Indo-
China?   What  if  sudden  death  substitutes  the  symbol  of  na-
tional   unity   for   the   symbol  of   rancorous  partisan  slander?
Eisenhower's  non-committal  attitude  at  press  conference  is  no
assurance that  Nixon  will  not  be on  the  ticket. The  simple  old
soldier  cannot  be  coupled  palatably  with  the  sly young  fox.
Triumphs  of  Conservatism
Though  we  supported  Stevenson  in  1952,  ours  was  the  first
publication  left  of  center  to  come  out  for  Eisenhower  on  the
peace  issue  (June  13,  1953:  "Challenge to  the  Left:   'Back  Ike
for  Peace'.").   We  believe  four  more  years  of  truly  conserva-
tive government  could  play  a healing  role  at home and  abroad.
The  achievements of  the  past  two  years have  been  triumphs of
bipartisan  conservatism  under  Eisenhower  Republican  leader-
ship.   It  was  this  conservative  coalition   (with   Stevenson  and
George  in  it)   which  finally  extinguished   McCarthy  in   1954;
deflated  Knowland  and  the  China  lobby  in  1955;  and  opened
the  way to  the  long  delayed  meeting  at  the  summit  last  year.
The  comir^  to power  of  the conservative  business men who are
the  hard  core  of  the  Eisenhower  administration  broke  up  the
coalition  right  of  center  and  isolated  the  wild  man  fringe  of
the Republican party.  In  this  perspective,  despite  Brownell  and
Dulles,  the  Eisenhower  years  are  marked  by the  beginnings of
3  *                                                                                            3
a  recovery  of  sanity  at  home  and  of  disengagement  from  the
stalemate  of  hate  abroad.  The  forward march  of  reform  cannot
be  resumed  until  these  preliminaries  have  been  completed.
In  this  context,  Ike  has  been  crucial.  The  vast  popular  con-
fidence  in  him  marvelously  attests  the  continued  irrationality
of  politics  in  a  free  and  literate  society.  In  the  miasma of  fear
stirred  up by the  cold  war, most people  are hopelessly confused
by  real  issues and  look  as trustingly  to  Ike  as  a  Sixteenth  Cen-
tury yeoman to Good  King  Hal  or a Twentieth  Century moujik
to  Papa  Stalin; under  the  surface,  we too  are  comforted  by  the
ancient  magic  of  monarchy.  The  bright  symbol  of  this  simple
General  reassures the  people,  albeit  as irrationally as a  colorful
toy  does  a  baby,  and  they  will  accept   from  him  what  they
would  not  take  from  a  liberal  Democrat  tainted  effectively  if
falsely  in  the  public  mind  with  that  secret  bogeyman  horror
of   "Communism."
Paradox:  A  General  Curbs  The   Pentagon
From  this  springs  the  paradox  that  Ike  is  the  shield  of  the
budget  balancers against  the  military bureaucracy and  the  avia-
tion   lobby;  if   Stevenson   said   we  are  spending   more   than
enough  on  arms he  would  be  suspect,  but  if  Ike  say  so  there
are  none  to  challenge  him.  The  Pentagon  grumbles  privately
against   Ike  and  publicly  against  the  business  men  in  power,
i.e.  principally  Secretaries  Humphrey  and  Wilson,  but  it  can-
not manipulate the the  usual hysterias against  Ike's  image. This
General,  leading  a  conservative  business  man's  regime,  has  a
freedom  of  maneuver in making peace  which  no  liberal  Demo-
crat  could  possibly  have  after  the  years  in  which  suspicion  of
liberals  and  Democrats  has  been  rubbed  deep  into  the  public
mind.  On  the  other  hand,  the  desire  to  erase  this  impression
has  driven  many liberal  Democrats  to  warlike  anti-Communist
frenzy;  their  natural  spending  proclivities  makes  them  the  al-
lies  of  the  aviation  and  armament  lobby;  a  chance  to  accuse
the  Republicans  of  "appeasement"  and  "softness  toward  com-
munism"  is balm  to  their battered  spirits; their  kbor  allies suf-
fer  from  the  same  tendencies.   It  is  for  these  reasons  that  we
see  more  chance  of  peace  in  the  Eisenhower  crowd.
But  if  Ike  is  to  be  a  part-time  President,  as  he  must,  then
the  crises  of  the  past  three  years  in  which  Dulles  and  Radford
were  overruled  by Eisenhower  on the  brink  of  war,  shows  how
precarious  peace  must  be  so  long  as  Dulles  shares  the  helm.
The  distortions  of  his  hate-blurred  eyes  were  evident  again  in
his  new version  of  a  changing  Russia,  and  his  morbid  urge  to
gamble  with  war  (this  time  at  Israel's  expense)   are  obvious
again  in  his Middle  Eastern policy  (see  page  four).  Here,  too,
the  thoughtful  voter will  pause.  "Peace and  prosperity"   cannot
be  reconciled  with  ''on  the brink"  diplomacy.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'* Weekly, March  5,1958
A First Hand Report  from  Montgomery, Once Capital  of the   Confederacy...
By  Jennings  Perry
MONTGOMERY,  ALA.—Flaunting:  pink  and  scarlet  ca-
mellias,  magnolias,  roses,  daffodils,  another spring is  rushing
upon  this  Deep  South  city,  capital  of  the  State  that   bills
itself  on  its  automobile tags  the  "Heart  of  Dixie."   Common
human  jusice  comes on at  a  more pedestrian   pace.
At  February's  end  the  city's  Negro  citizens  still   steadily
"walk  and  pray."  Conceivably the flowers bloom  less blithely
in  Negro yards  than  in white yards. But there can be no ques-
tion  that   Montgomery's   suddenly  and   courageously   deter-
mined  Negro  population  means  to  secure  abatement   of  one
form  of discrimination  that has  become unbearably  obnoxious.
Despite  the  indictment  and  arrest  of  almost  a  hundred of
their  number  for  fostering  a  boycott  "without  just  cause"—
a  charge  preposterous  on its  face—they  gave  no  sign  what-
ever that they  would resume  riding the  buses  until they  were
accepted  "as  good  as  our  fares."   (The  fares  are  mixed  in
one  box.)
"We  are  getting  stronger  in  spirit  all  the  time,"  declared
Rev.  Ralph  D.  Abernathy.   "We  will  continue  to  stand   to-
gether,  asking  for  guidance  and  protection  for  ourselves—
and  understanding  for  them."
Young  Attorney  Fred  D.  Gray,  legal  spokesman  for  the
resolute  Negroes,  said  the  boycott  "is  and  will  go  on  being
99  per  cent  effective."
In  the  whole greening  city, though  the  division  of wills  was
sharp along racial  lines,  there  was no evidence of the violence
lugubriously  foretold  by  Mayor  Tacky  Gayle and  the  county
grand  jury.  The  boycott  was  visible  only  in  the  big  yellow
buses  rumbling through  the streets almost  unoccupied, the few
white  passengers  clustered  in the  very front  seats as if  to  sit
farther  back  even  in  the  empty  vehicle  would  somehow  put
white  supremacy  in  doubt.
Gave  Up  Buses  for  Lent
The  Negroes  speak  of the  situation  with  great  good humor.
They  call  the  buses  "yellow  ghosts."  They do not  say  boycott
but  "protest."   Increasingly  they  like  the  term  "passive  re-
sistance."   One  cook  told  her  mistress,  "Of  course  I'm  not
having  anything to do with that old boycott;  I  don't  want  any
trouble.   I'm  staying  clean  away  from  those  buses."   Asked
about  his part  in the  movement, another  Negro  said  placidly,
"I  gave  up the  buses  for  Lent."
Dangerous  tension   is  admitted   only  on  the  white  side;
Negroes  insist  that  if  there  should  be  "trouble"  the  whites
would  have  to  precipitate   it.   The  Negro  council  halls   are
their  churches;   their'watchword    is  "righteousness";   they
ceaselessly  admonish  each  other  to  firmness  with   serenity,
to  "love  everybody."
It  is  a  baffling  kind  of  resistance.   It  began  Dec.  6 when
Mrs.  Rosa  Parks  was  arrested  for  refusing  to  give  up  her
seat  to a white man and  "move back."  A seamstress,  she had
boarded  the  bus  after  her  day's  work,  tired,  her  arms  full
of  bags.   She  had  no thought  of making a  test  case.  "I  was
just  tired.   I  had  paid  my  money  and  I  was  tired.   All  at
once,  I  just  didn't  do  it."
But  incidents had  been  shaping  to  the  protest  before  that.
Last  March  7, Claudette Coloin,  a  schoolgirl,  was  handcuffed
and  taken to jail  for  not  moving back when  ordered.  In  Octo-
ber,  another  girl,  Mary  Louise  Smith,  was  taken  from  the
Day  Street  bus  and fined $9.  When Mrs. Parks  was arrested
the  long-suffering  Negro community took action  by something
amounting   to   spontaneous  combustion.   That   night   they
"talked  about  it  at  church."  The next  day they  started  stay-
ing  off the buses.
At   first,   white  Montgomery  felt   certain   the  movement
would  fall  through.  "White  and  blacks  have  lived  together
here  for  over  a  hundred  years.  The  Negroes  always  have
behaved."    The  firmness  of  the  protest  is  something  white
Montgomery  yet  cannot  understand.   It  was  genuinely   sur-
prised  when  "mediation"  did  not  end  the  stay-off.  It  looked
to  the  authorities.
Mayor  W. A.  (but  nobody  calls  him  anything  but  Tacky)
Gayle  complied  by  calling  on  the  white  housewives  to  break
the  boycott by refusing  to haul  their  cooks in  their  own cars.
The Mayor should have known better.  Almost all  whites who
are  anybody in Montgomery are  used to having  colored cooks.
The  housewives continued to  uphold this old Southern custom
by  going  for  and  taking  homg  their  servants  every  day.
So  They  "Moved  On"
The  authorities   tried  other   persuasions.    Negroes   using
their  own cars  were  stopped  by  the  police.   Negroes  meeting
to  ride  with  each  other   in  car  pools  were  ordered   not  to
congregate   on  the  streets—to   "move  on."    They  moved  on
to  parking   lots  owned  by  Negroes,  met  their  rides  there.
Others  simply trudged  to  work.
They  do  to  this  day.   The  question   rises:   who  then  is BO
injured  or  discommoded  by  the  protest  that  violence need be
anticipated,  that  criminal   prosecutions  must  be   instituted?
The  housewives have their  cooks, Negroes  working for  other
employers  reach  their  jobs  one  way  or  another.   There  has
been  no  picketing  of  the  buses,  no  attempt  to  damage  white
property.
The  obvious  answer  is  that  the  buses  have  been  hurt  in
their  revenues.  From  60  to  70  per  cent  of  the  bus  patrons
have  been  Negroes.   When  the  Negroes  began  "walking  and
praying"  the  buses  began  losing  about  $3,000  a  day.   The
system  had  a  10 cent fare;  an  emergency  increase  to  15 cents
was  granted.  It  is  estimated  the  system  still  is  losing  $1,200
to  $1,500  a  day.   Some  schedules  have  been  abandoned, some
drivers  laid off.
Negro  leaders  of  the  protest  say  they  are  sorry  for  the
drivers   laid  off.  They  say  they  are   not  against  the  bus
system—that  it  has  just  been  caught  in  the  middle.   "We
are,"  they  repeat—exasperatingly  to the whites,  "just against
injustice."
Though  the  sympathy of the  authorities  for  the  bus  system
may  be taken  for  granted,  the  answer  that  the  bus  plight  is
the  whole cause  of  the  prosecution  of  the  protest  leaders  is
poetic.   What  mainly  has  been  injured  is  white   assurance,
based  on the  past, that  when told  what  to  do Negroes would
"behave."
Once embarked on their unprecedented protest, the  Negroes
sought  guidance  they  could  trust.   Their  teachers  responded
(24 have been indicted)  but  among them their  main  direction
was found  in two young men:  Abernathy, pastor of the  Negro
First Baptist Church, and  Rev. M. L.  (Martin  Luther!)  King,
Jr.,  pastor  of  the  Dexter  Avenue Baptist  Church,  in  whose
flock  are  many  of  the  students   at  nearby  State   Teachers
College.
"Honored"—By   The  Sheriff
Abernathy  is  a  big  man  with  >  well-deep  resonant  voice,
born  27 years  ago at  Linden, in  Marengo County, in  the mid-
dle  of  the  Alabama  Black  Belt.   Educated  entirely  in   the
South,  he  came  to  the  Montgomery church  four  years  ago.
His  composure  (it  is  the  antithesis  of  resignation)   is monu-
mental.   When  waiting  for  the  sheriff   to  arrest  him  at  his
home  "I  felt,"  he says,  "highly  honored.  It  gave  me an  inner
feeling  of call,  that  I  am being persecuted  for  a  great  cause.
I  gave thanks  to  my  Maker."
He  has  endeavored to  share  his  own poise.  He  reprehends
all  violence.  He believes that  if  it  had  not  been for  the  min-
isterial  exhortations  and  guidance  there  might   have  been
violence,  "maybe a  race  riot."  "I  have  told  my people to  try
to  be like  Christ,  when  stones  are  thrown  at  them  to  return
bread."   Of  the  movement  he  says,  "We  are  not  trying   to
tear   down  anything,  we  are  trying  to  improve   something."
He  is  positive  "there  is  less  danger  than  ever  of  any  riot
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, March  5,1958
...  Now  The "Capital" of The Southern  Negro's  New  Gandhi-Style  Revolt
from  our  side.   I  can't  say  for  the  other   side  but  we  pray
for  them,   too."
King  also  is  27, a  native  of  Atlanta  where  his  father  is
pastor  of a large church, as  was his grandfather.  He went  to
Moorehouse  College  at  Atlanta,  then  to  Boston   University.
His  accent  is  less  Deep  South  than  Abernathy's.  His  congre-
gation  is  a  little  better  circumstanced.    But  his  counsel  is
the  same.
He  says,  "There  is  not  a  tension  between  the  Negro  and
whites.  There  is only a  conflict  between justice and   injustice.
If  our victory  is won—and it  will be won—it will  be a victory
for  Negroes,  a  victory  for  justice,  a  victory  for  free  people
and  for  democracy.  . . . We are  using  the weapon  of love."
The  Whites  Had Their "Protest," Too
The  other  outstanding  Negro  leader  is  not  a  minister;  he
is  E.  D.  Nixon,  a  Pullman  porter,  running  between  Mont-
gomery  and  Chicago  for  years.   For  years  he  has  been  a
pillar  of  reason  and  courage  among the  Negroes  of  his  city,
respected   alike  by  Negroes  and  whites.   He  is   big,   solid.
He  has  humor that  can  be  telling  without  biting.   A  former
president  of  the  Alabama  NAACP,  he  knows  how  to  rally
his  people with  a jest:
"You  stopped  riding  the  buses  when  you  were  arrested.
Now  you  are  arrested  for  not  riding."   Of  the  bitter  white
reaction  to the boycott, "They  had a protest at  the  University
of   Alabama  where  Autherine  Lucy  was   protested   out  of
school."    He  makes  his  hearer   laugh   with   such  truth  by
juxtaposition.   His  home has  been  bombed.  He is,  apparently,
imperturbable.
From  the   white  men  of  the   cloth   in   Montgomery,   the
Negroes  have  had  little  open  comfort.   The  Rev.  Robert  S.
Graetz,  pastor  of  a  Lutheran  mission  church,  has  stood  with
his  all-Negro  flock.  Though  sugar  has  been  put  in  his  gaso-
line,  his  tires  have  been  slashed,  and  he  has  been  called  be-
fore  the  Grand  Jury,  he  has  not  been  indicted.   He  is  from
West  Virginia.   Other  white  voices for  moderation  have  been
Rev. Robert  Hughes, ordained  Methodist  preacher  from  Gads-
den,  Ala.,  who is  preparing  to  go to a  mission  in  Africa,  and
Dr.  Thomas Thrasher,  rector  of  the  Episcopal  Church  of  the
Ascension, the  most fashionable church  in town.  Mayor Gayle
is  a  member of  Dr.  Thrasher's  church,  go is  Luther  Ingalls,
organizer   of  the  Central   Alabama  Whit*  Citizens   Council.
Thrasher,   overlooking   the   unconcealed  grumbling   in   his
vestry, has  sought  to  mediate  the bus dispute.
The  Fiction of  "Outside"  Influence
White  Montgomery likes  to think  the boycott  has  been  "put
up  from  outside."  The fact  is  that  it  is  100 per  cent  Negro
and  100 per  cent  local.  The  Negroes  now have  financial  aid
from  the  NAACP for  legal  help.   From  the  beginning  their
representative   has  been  young  Fred  Gray,  one  of  the  two
Negro  lawyers  in  Montgomery.   Gray's  mother  was  a  cook
who  "managed  to  get  us  an  education."   He  studied  at  the
Teachers   College;.  He  took  his  law  at   Western   Reserve  in
Ohio,  working  his  way  through  school,  passed  the  Ohio  bar
and  the  Alabama  bar,  returning  to  Montgomery  18  months
ago.   He  looks  young,  looks thoughtful.   H« has  been  indicted
for  bringing  suit  against  segregation  in  the  buses  but  shows
no  worry  about  that.  The  Negroes  depend  on  his  advice  day
in  and day  out.
The  Negroes  retained  Gray  to  act  for  them  not  only  be-
cause  they  had  confidence  in  him  but  also  because  they  had
nowhere  else  to  go for  counsel.   Ordinarily  a  Negro  "in  trou-
ble"  in  Montgomery  tries  to  get  an   irreproachable   white
Southern  lawyer,  finding  he  fares  better  before  juries  than
if  he has  a  lawyer  of  any  liberal  tinge.  In  the  present  case,
the  white  bar  simply  is  unavailable.   One old-family lawyer
of  sometime liberality  has  confessed  privately,  "I'd   have  to
hava  had  $50,000  for  th«  case—paid  over  the  next five years.
I  wouldn't  have  any  other  business  for  at  least  that  long."
The  situation  of  Negroes   in   Montgomery  has   not   been
markedly  different  from  that  in  other   cities  of  the   Deep
South.   They pay  taxes  (and fares)  for  what  they  don't   get.
Montgomery has,  for  example,  a rather fine park—Oak Park,
with  a  zoo.  Oak  Park  is  bounded on  two  sides  by  a  Negro
residential  district  .  .  .  but the  Negro  children  can't  even
go  into  the  park  to  see the  monkeys.
Whites  Boycott  Whites
Negroes   make  up   about   half   of   Montgomery's   100,000
population.   Scarcely  2  per  cent  of  them  are  registered  to
vote.  The poll  tax  stops  them,  and  various  other  tricky  hin-
drances—including "interpretation of the  Constitution."  Their
disfranchisement  is  a  major  factor  in  their  treatment.  Fred
Gray  says,  "If  only  10 per  cent  could  vote,  we would have  a
different  attitude  at  city  hall."
Gray  may  be right;  but  meanwhile not  only  Mayor  Tacky
Gayle  but  his  two  fellow  commissioners have  openly become
WCCers  [White  Citizens  Council].  The WCC, incidentally,  is
busily  canvassing  business  and  professional men in Montgom-
ery, who fear  that if  they  do not join and  pay  the  $3 fee  they
will  be  blackballed  as  "nigger  lovers"  and  faced   with  a
white  boycott.
One  quaint  and  somehow  little-noticed  angle  of  the  city's
prosecution   attack   on  the  resistance:   three  of  the   99  ar-
rested  under  the  indictment  are  soldiers  at  Maxwell Field—
Master  Sgt.  Booker  T.  Holmes  of  Emerson,  Ark.,  Sgt.  Fred
Ellis  of  Montgomery and  Sgt.  Carlton  Otis  of  Birmingham,
all  of  the  airforce.   Some apprehension is  whispered in  Mont-
gomery  that  Federal  action  might  be  taken,  even  that  the
city  be  posted  "out   of  bounds."   This  would  be  disastrous,
since  the  $54 million last  year  spread  in  the  county by Max-
well  Field  is  just  three  times  the  $17 million  from  all  agri-
culture  in  Montgomery County.
No  Jim  Crow  at  Maxwell Field
There  is  no  segregation   at   Maxwell  Field,  where  white
Montgomerians  work  side  by  side  and  eat  side  by  side  with
Negro  Montgomerians . . .  only  to step  off the Government
grounds  and  pale  with  horror  at  the  thought  of  riding  un-
segregated  in  the  city  buses.   This  is  an  incongruous  thing
of  which the  Negroes  long have  been aware,  though,  it would
seem,  not  to  the  white  Montgomerians.
Returning  to  the  engrossing  issue  of  violence:  if  the  situ-
ation  joined at  Montgomery is not to end that  way then  what
way 7  The  Negroes  patently  have a  strong  case  by  any  rule,
even  Deep  Southern  rules.  In  shunning  the  buses  they  have
not  commited  integration   but  the  opposite.   It   is  hard   to
debate  their  right  not to  ride.  As for  a  conspiracy, "If  white
women  are  mistreated   at  a  store,  they  tell  each  other  about
it  and don't go there," the Negroes  say.  "It's  exactly the same
with  us and  the  buses."   The reasoning  is formidable.
In  Montgomery Negroes are  asking  only  for  "decent  treat-
ment"  which means for  "first  come,  first  serve"  on  the  buses.
Years  ago,  Virginius Dabney of  Richmond  proposed just  this
as  a  gesture  of  some  accommodation from  white  to  black.
What  they  ask  is  the  minimum  of  "right"  and  legal   perse-
cution  won't  change  that  or  move  their   determination.   If
they  do not  win  they  will  walk  and  the  bus  company  will  go
broke  without  them.
Thus  circumstances  have  put  up  to  white  Montgomery a
nice  decision  affecting  the  most radical  threat  of  Deep  South
whites.   They have said  they  will  abolish their  schools rather
than   accept  integration.    But  will  they  actually  in   Mont-
gomery, before  they will agree  to  first  come-first  serve, accept
the  abolition  of  their  buses?
Jennings  Perry,  our  colleague  on PM  and  The  New  York
Compan,  will  cover  th»  South  regularly  for   The  Weekly.
3  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly, March  5,1956
Letting  the  Record  of  the  Sen.  Foreign  Relations  Hearing  Speak  for  Itself
How  Dulles  Misrepresented  Our  Arms Shipments to  Saudi Arabia
Senator  Smith  (R. N.J.)  asked  Mr. Dulles "if  we send  tanks
to  Saudi Arabia, why should we not  send corresponding equip-
ment  to  Israel?"  The  Secretary  replied  that  under  the  1950
agreement  it  had  been the  general  U.S.  policy to  avoid send-
ing-   arms  either  to  Israel  or  its  Arab  neighbors  but  this  was
different   "because  things  like  tanks  cannot  get   across  the
desert."  This  was  Explanation  No.  1, and  assumed that  Sen-
ators,  press  and  public had  forgotten  El  Alamein.
When  Senator  Humphrey  (D. Minn.)  asked  about the  tanks,
Mr.  Dulles amended this  somewhat, saying  he  had  been  "ad-
vised  by  the  military  people,  who  know  about  these  things,
that  they  could  not be gotten  across  the  desert  from  Dhahran
to  Israel."  When  Humphrey pointed  out that  a  National Geo-
graphic  map showed there  is a  road from  Dhahran  "up to  the
very  frontier   of  Israel,  through  the  neighboring  State  of
Jordan,"  Mr.  Dulles  came  up  with  Explanation  No.  2,  that
these  "are  the  kind  of tanks  which are  usable  practically  only
for  training  purposes."*
Humphrey  then  wanted  to  know why  Saudi  Arabia  wanted
the  tanks.   "Do they  just  need tanks  to  feel  good,"  he  asked
Dulles, "I mean if  ...   you cannot  move the tanks against any
particular  foreign  enemy?"  This  evoked  Explanation  No.  3.
"The  purpose  of  the  tanks,  Senator,"  Dulles  now explained,
"is to maintain  internal  security.  . . . There  have  been large-
scale  riots  and disturbances  at  various points in that  area."
Senator  Morse attacked  the  tank  sale  from  another  angle:
Senator MORSE. Is Saudi Arabia a totalitarian  government?
Secretary  DULLES.  It  is  an  absolute  monarchy.
Senator  MORSE. And is  it  a  government  in  which the  in-
dividual  citizens  are  without  democratic  rights?
Secretary  DULLES.  I  would  say  no.
Senator  MORSE.   You  would say  no?
Secretary DULLES.  I  would say they  do not have  the type
of  democratic rights which we have here  in the  United States.
Senator  MORSE.  Is  Israel,  in contrast,  a  democratic state?
Secretary  DULLES. I  believe that  it  has  a  parliamentary
form  of government.  It  does not have our type  of  representa-
tive  government, but  it  has  more the  British  type  of a parlia-
mentary  government....
Senator  MORSE;  Now, Mr.  Secretary,  when we  ship  arms
to  a  monarchy,  such  as  Saudi  Arabia  where  the  individual
A  curious  slip  was  made  by  Secretary  Dulles  before
the  Senate  Foreign Relations Committee  in  seeking  to
excuse  Saudi  Arabian  discrimination  against Americans
of  Jewish  origin.   He  told  the  Committee  that  for cen-
turies  the  Arabs  had  felt  "a  very  particular  animosity
toward  Jews,  because they credited  the  assassination of
Mohammed  to  a  Jew."  An  aide  leaned  over  and  whis-
pered  an  objection  in  the  Secretary's ear.   "Now," Mr.
Dulles  added,  "my  advisers  tell  me  I  am  wrong,  but  I
am  not  sure. .  .  ." Mohammed  was  not  assassinated; he
died  in  the  arms  of  a  favorite wife.
* Hanson  W.  Baldwin  (New  York  Times,  Feb.  29)  called
Mr.  Dulles's  testimony "somewhat  misleading."  According  to
Baldwin, the  tanks  are  the  M-41, "the  standard  light tank of
the  U.S. Army . . . with a  76-mm  high  velocity gun ..  . speci-
ally  useful  for  desert  work."
citizen  does not  possess  democratic  rights  as  we  know  them
.  . . might  they  not very  well  be used  to  keep  down uprising
on  the  part  of  the  dissident  groups  within  the  country  that
seek  to  establish  liberty  for  the individual?
Secretary  DULLES.  It  could  be so used,  Senator,  although
actually  the  demonstrations  which  have  in  the  past  occurred
there  are  believed  to  be of  alien  inspiration  and not  to  be  the
natural  revolt/
Senator  Morse finally succeeded in getting the  Secretary  to
admit  (1) that these  were "shooting  tanks," and  (2) that  they
could  be  transhipped  by  water  to  Egypt   for   an  attack  on
Israel.  Then  Senator  Morse asked  him if  it  weren't  true  that
these  "eighteen  shooting  tanks"  if  "congregated   outside  of
any  major  city  of  Israel"  with  proper   support  then   "the
chances  of that  city  surviving  . . . would not be very  good?"
The  Secretary  declined to  answer,  on the  ground that  this  was
"a military  question."
Now there has been a report  around Washington  for  several
weeks  that  we sent  Saudi  Arabia  in  the  past  year  from  four
to  six  B-26 bombers.  Senator Morse  asked  Mr. Dulles  whether
we  had  sent  American  military  aircraft  to  the  Arab  states
since  1951.   The  first  answer  was  that  there  had  been  "some
shipments  of aircraft,  but  no jets." Then  Senator  Morse asked
whether  these  were  fighters  or  bombers.  To this  Mr.  Dulles
replied  that  he had  been  told  and would  "want  to  confirm  this
and correct  the  record if necessary"  that only cargo planes  for
civilian  purposes  had  been  sent.   But  before  the   transcript
went  to  the  printer,  this  was  corrected  to  "We  have  sold  a
very  limited  number   of  military   aircraft   of  the   propeller
type."  Whether these  were  fighters  or  bombers was  left  un-
answered,  and  the  State  Department  next  day  refused   any
further  information as  "classified."   This,  to  put  it  mildly,  is
no  record  of  shining  candor  or  impartiality.
The  Weekly  Is  Now  Being  Made  Available  at  Bulk  Rates  for  Classroom  Use In  Several  Colleges
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name      •••.••••...••••.•.••«•••.•••.•••»»••••••••*••••••••••••••••.••••••••••••••••••••*«••••••
Street                                    *.........»......        ..*...*
City                                          .Zone           State....
Enter  gift  aub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
3/5/56
fTn^   Name                                               -         »......«».
V***/    »•»••"•»»•    ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••w.™...,.
Street                                                                       ..»......»..«»»
City                                         .Zone.          State.
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Tea  Q    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED