I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956sep17.pdf

============================================================

Can  the  GOP Campaign As  A  Peace  Party—en  The Brink at  Suez?   See  Page 4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO. SB
SEPTEMBER  17,  1956
101
     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.16   CENTS
On  Integration   Ike  Turns  Morally   Neutralist
Neutralism  has  been  made  a  dirty  word  in  American  poli-
tics.     Both  parties  are  against  it.  We   are  constantly  being
treated  to  homilies  from  the  White  House  and  the  State  De-
partment  on  the  wickedness  of  being  morally  neutralist.   But
apparently  these  high  principles  only  apply  to  disputes  be-
tween  the  U.S.  (right)  and  the  U.S.S.R.  (wrong),  in  which
Pandit  Nehru  (by  refusing  to  take  our  side)  demonstrates  in-
corrigibility.
The  President  at  press  conference  the  other  day  delivered
himself  of  an  impromptu  message  on  integration  which  was
afterward  filmed  and  is being  shown  in  the  movie houses.  Mr.
Eisenhower   deplored   the  extremists   "on  both  sides."    We
weren't  hearing  the  people  of  good  will  in  the  South.   "We
hear  the  people  who are adamant  . . .  they  even  resort  to  vio-
lence,"  he  said,  "and  the  same  way  on  the  other  side  of  the
thing,  the  people  who  want  to  have  the  whole  matter  settled
today."
If  we  stop  and  translate  this  into  realities,  we  will  see  that
the  President  is adopting  at  home  the  moral  neutralism he  de-
plores  abroad.  Let us turn  to  Clay, Kentucky. There  last  week
a  mob of  white  miners  and  farmers  massed  near  the  Clay  ele-
mentary  school  to  prevent  any  Negroes  from  entering.  These
were  the  "adamant  people"  to  whom  the  President  referred.
Several  school  days  in  a  row  they  turned  back  a  lone  Negro
woman  who  tried  to  enter  her  son  of  ten  and  her  daughter  of
eight.   Mrs.  Louis  Gordon  finally  gave  up,  and  sent  her  chil-
dren  to  an  all  Negro  school  six  miles  away.  "I  just  couldn't
continue  to  take  them  out  there  every day,"  she  told  reporters.
"They were in  too much danger." Mrs.  Gordon  is one of  those
people whom  Mr.  Eisenhower  described  as  "on  the  other  side
of  the  thing,  the  people  who  want  to  have  the  whole  matter
settled   today."
Right  and  Wrong Were Never  Simpler
We  would  like  someone  to  ask  the  President  how  he  can
take  that  mob  and  that  one  brave  Negro  mother,  and  lump
them  together  as  "extremists."  The  mob  opposes  enforcement
of  the  law;  the  woman  asks  for  her  children the  benefit  of  the
Supreme  Court's decree.   By any standard,  isn't the  mob  wrong
and  the  woman right?   Isn't  Mr.  Eisenhower's  attitude  "moral
neutralism"  of  a  real  and  obnoxious  variety?
Is  it  fair  to  speak  of  Mrs.  Gordon  as  wanting  "the  whole
matter  settled  today?"   Isn't  this  an  invidious  way to  describe
what  is  happening?    The  Supreme  Court  decision  is  three
years  old.    Unless  her  children  are  admitted  "today",  i.e.  at
the  beginning  of  this  year's  school  term,  they  must  wait  an-
other  year.  And  another  year  means,  for  them,  as  for  many
colored  children  in the  South,  another  year  of travelling a long
extra  way  from  home  to  school.  "Six  miles  away"  is  12  extra
miles  of  travel daily, no  small matter for  children of  eight  and
ten.   Do  they  walk  or  ride?  And  if  they  ride,  who  pays  their
fare?  These  are  bread  and  butter  questions   in  most  Negro
homes.
Mr.  Eisenhower  says  we  aren't  hearing  the  people  of  good
will  in  the  South.  Their  voice  is  not  heard  because  the  same
mob  spirit  which  overwhelms  the  Negro  also  cows  them  into
silence.   If  the  President  is  afraid  to  speak  clearly,  what  can
they  (themselves  a  minority)  say with  the  mob  outside?  This
is what  Adlai Stevenson  meant when  he  told  the  Liberal  Party
in  New  York  last  week  that  it  was  the  President's   duty  to
create  "a  climate  of  compliance."  This  was what  Adlai  coura-
geously was trying to  create  when  he  told  a  hostile,  often  boo-
ing,  American  Legion  in  Los Angeles  the  week  before  that  we
could   not  convince  other  nations  that  we  believe  in  justice
"when  mobs  prevent  Negro  children  from  lawfully  attending
school."
No  Persuasion  Without  Some  Force
We  were  sorry  Adlai  had  to  spoil  his  Liberal  Party  speech
by  invoking  that  double-talk  from  the  Democratic  platform
about  rejecting  "all  proposals  for  the  use of  force  to  interfere
with  the  orderly  determination  of  these matters  by the  courts."
There will  be  no  orderly determination  without  some  show  of
force.  A  false  dichotomy has  been  set up  about  force  and  per-
suasion.   Both  are  needed.   Neither  can  succeed  without  the
other.   But  mobs  can  never  be  merely  persuaded.  They  will
overwhelm   the  good  people  of  the  community  unless   dealt
with  firmly.  What  progress  has  been  made  in  Kentucky  and
Tennessee  was made because Governors  Chandler  and  Clement
to  their  credit  called  out  the  militia  to  show  that  they  meant
business.  And  both  Governors  were  able to  act  because  of  the
political   realities  in  these  border  states,  which  differ   sharply
from  the  deep  South  in  two  ways.  The  Negro  votes  in  Ken-
tucky  and  Tennessee.   Both  have  a  two  party  system.
In  the  one party deep  South,  where the  Negro  if  he  votes  at
all  has  no  real  choice,  integration  has  not  made  a  dent.  All
those  fancy  compilations  only hide  the  fact  that  outside  of  the
western  fringe  of  Texas,  which  is  more  western  than  South-
ern,  the  only  progress   is  in  the  border  States.    Everywhere
from  Virginia on,  the South  is preparing to  nullify  the  law,  to
resist it,  and there  are too few  places  where Negroes  have  been
able  even  to  file  suit.  Unless  some  firm  moves  toward  enforc-
ing  compliance  are  soon  made  from   Washington,   the  lines
may  harden  for  a  long,  long  fight  in  which  the  South,  its  des-
tiny  and  its  good  people,  will  more  and  more  come  under  the
control  of  the  worst  elements  and  poison  the  political  life  of
the  whole  country.   Behind  the  school  struggle  is  the  shadow
of  a  conflict  as grave  as slavery created.  The  South  must either
become  truly  democratic,  or  the  base  of  a  new  racist  and  Fas-
cist  movement which  could  threaten the  whole  country  and   il s
institutions.   On  this,  more  than  any other  issue, fresh  leader-
ship  in  the  White  House  is  urgent.
1   3   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  September 17,1859
Some  Questions  the  New York  Post  and  the  Washington  Post  Might  Look  Into
What  Did  J.  Edgar  Hoover   Tell
When  Mr.  Truman  was in  Milwaukee earlier  this month  he
appeared  on  a  local  TV  panel.  One  of  the participants was an
Anthony  T.  fiouscaren,  head  of  the  political  science  depart-
ment  at  Marquette  University.  Bouscaren  baited  the  former
President  about  Hiss,  Harry  White  and  Nathan  Gregory  Sil-
vermaster,  and  Mr.  Truman—being  a  fighter—rose  to  the oc-
casion  by defending  them.  He  said  he  did  not  think  Hiss was
a  Communist  spy,  and  he  said  of  White  and   Silvermaster
"neither  one  of  them  were  guilty  of  anything."
The  result  was a  shower  of  editorial  brickbats  for  Mr.  Tru-
man.  The  silliest  comment  was  that  of  the  New  York  Daily
News,  which  wanted  to  know  whether  Stevenson  if   elected
would  "perchance  pay  off part  of  his  political  debt  to  Truman
by  getting  Alger  Hiss  another  State  Department  job."   Two
liberal  papers  joined in.  The  Washington Post  (Sept.  6)  com-
mented,  "About  all  Mr.  Truman  can  accomplish  is  to  start
charges  flying  again,   embarrass  his  party  and   demonstrate
what  extraordinary blinders  are  worn  by  a  man  who  in  other
matters has been capable of  great vision."  The  New  York  Post
(Sept.  5)  took a similar  tone,  saying that  all Mr.  Truman had
done  was  to  give  "Republican  essayists  the  chance to  rehearse
all  the  weary old  arguments of  the  McCarthy  era."
Why  The  Silence  on White?
We  believe  both  these  liberal  papers  have  been  hasty  in
their  comments.  Both  spoke only of  Hiss.  Neither  mentioned
White  and   Silvermaster,  though  some  readers  of  the   New
York  Post  will think  these  two men  were  included  in  its  criti-
cism  of  Mr.  Truman  for  "his  reluctance  to  believe  that  real
Communists  could  conceivably invade government posts."  Hiss
at  least  had  his  day in  court,  but  the  departed  White  and  the
still  very  much  alive  Silvermaster  were  never  found  guilty  of
anything.
The  papers  in  their  rush  to  condemn  Mr.  Truman  over-
looked  something  new  that  he  revealed  on  that  panel  about
the  White  case.  (The  text  of  the  interview  may be  found  in
the  Sept.  14  issue  of  U.S. News  and  World  Report).   When
Mr.  Truman  said  White  and  Silvermaster  were  not  guilty  of
anything,  Bouscaren  came  back  with,  "J.  Edgar  Hoover  ap-
parently thought  that Harry Dexter  was engaged  in espionage."
A  New Revelation
Mr.  Truman  interrupted,  "No,  he  didn't;  he  never  told  me
that.  And  I  was talking  to  him,"  Mr.  Truman  said,  "just  like
I  talk  to you and  he wouldn't  answer that—"  Here  Bouscaren
interrupted   with   "He   so  stated   in   his   letter   to   General
Vaughan."  Mr.  Truman  insisted,  "No,  he  didn't  say any such
thing."
Now  this is the first time Mr.  Truman  ever  said  that  he  dis-
cussed  the  charges  against  Harry White  face  to  face  with  J.
Edgar  Hoover.   Bouscaren interrupted  before  the  ex-President
could  say  more.   Perhaps  the  editors  of  the  New   York  Post
or  the  Washington Post  will  ask Mr.  Truman  now  to  tell  the
whole story.
But  in  the  meantime there  may be a  clue  in  the  Hoover  let-
ter  to Vaughan.  This was the  famous letter  Hoover  wrote  No-
vember 8,  1945,  the  day after  he first heard Elizabeth  Bentley's
story,  the  letter  Attorney  General  Brownell  made  public  on
Truman  About  Harry  White?
November  12,  1953,  before the  Senate Internal  Security Com-
mittee  to  back  his  "twenty  years  of  treason"  campaign.
If  the  editors will  examine  the  text  of  the  letter   (at  page
1113  of  Part  16  of  the  Internal  Security Committee's  series  of
hearings  on  "Interlocking  Subversion  in  Government  Depart-
ments"),  they  will  see that  Mr.  Hoover  wrote of  White,  Sil-
vermaster  and  the  other  government  employes  named,  "At  the
present  time it  is impossible to  determine exactly how  many of
these  people  had  actual  knowledge  of  the  disposition   being
made  of  the  information"  Bentley claimed  she  collected   from
them  and  transmitted  to  the  Russians.  Mr.  Hoover  added  that
he  was continuing  "vigorous  investigation  for  the  purpose  of
establishing  the  degree  and  nature  of  the  complicity  of  these
people  in  this  espionage  ring."
If  Mr.  Truman  spoke  face  to  face with  Mr.  Hoover  about
the  charges  against  White,  Mr.  Hoover—judging  by  this  let-
ter—was  not  prepared  to  accuse White of  espionage.  The  FBI
had  not  determined  whether White  knew  what  use was being
made  of  information  allegedly  obtained  from  him,  nor  had  it
determined  "the  degree  and  nature  of  the  complicity."  This
may  throw  some light  on  why Mr.  Truman  did  not fire White
and  also  why the  FBI  failed  to  get  an  indictment  against  any
of  the  people named in  that  report.
Three  Who  Gave  Bentley  The  Lie
But  there  is  stronger  and  newer  support  for  Mr.  Truman.
Until  now  it  has  been  assumed  that  those  named  by  Miss
Bentley  pleaded  the  Fifth   either   to  avoid  confessing  or to%
avoid  prosecution  for  perjury  if  they  denied  her  charges.   It
was  also  assumed  that  the  government  could  not   prosecute
until  it  could  force  the  accused  to  relinquish  the  Fifth.
This  year  three  of  those  accused  by  Miss  Bentley  as  part  of
the  White  ring  have  denied  her  charges  under  oath.  William
Henry  Taylor  was  cleared  by  a  government  loyalty  board  in
January  after  he  swore  that  the  Bentley  charges  were  untrue.
V.  Frank  Coe waived  the  Fifth  amendment before  the  Senate
Internal   Security  Committee  on  .May   15  to  testify,  "I   was
never a  spy.  I  am convinced that  Harry  White was not  a  spy.
...     I  am  also  convinced  that  none  of  the  others  named by
Bentley were spies."
Most important of  all  was the  six days of  testimony by  Wil-
liam  Ludwig  Ullmann  before  a  Federal  grand  jury  in  New
York  between  May  23  and  May  31.   Ullmann  was  supposed
with  Silvermaster  to  have  photographed  secret  documents  for
Miss  Bentley.  He  was  the  first  man  granted  immunity under
the  Immunity Act.  He  was  compelled  to  testify—and  he  not
only  denied  espionage  but  denied  that  he  was  ever  a  member
of  the  Communist  Party.  Yet  in  the  intervening  months  the
grand  jury  has  taken  no  action  against  him.
No  indictments for  perjury have  been  obtained  against  Ull-
mann,  Coe  or  Taylor.   Directly  challenged  at  last  by  direct
denials  under  oath,  the government has quietly  turned  tail  and
backed  away.  Has  it  so little faith in  Miss Bentley's  story? Or
did  the  grand  jury  hear her  again,  and  remain  as  unimpressed
as  its  predecessors  from  1946  on?
The  Bentley story is ready to fall  part  and with  it  the Brow-
nell "20  years of  treason"  myth. Why  shouldn't  liberal  papers
join  Mr.  Truman  in  counter-attacking?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'* Weekly, September 17,1956
A  Sensational  Interview Which  Deserves  Wider  Attention
Cain  Now  Believes  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board   Unconstitutional
On  Friday,  August  30,  former  Senator  Harry  Cain  handed
down  his  decision  as  hearing  officer  in  the  Washington   Pen-
sion Union  case,  his  last  official  act  as a member of  the  Subver-
sive  Activities  Control  Board.  He  ruled  that  within  the  terms
of  the  Internal  Security Act of  1950,  the  Pension  Union  was a
Communist  front  and  subject  to  registration  as  "subversive"
with the  Board.
On  Sunday,  September  2,  the  Washington  Star  published  a
sensational  interview  with  Mr.  Cain  which  was  not  merely  an
apologia  for  that  decision  but  marked  a  complete  break  on  his
part  with  the  Board.  As  the  reader  will  see from  the  excerpts
below,  Mr.  Cain  for  the  first  time  declared  it  his  conviction
that  the  Internal  Security  Act  was  unconstitutional.
Since the  Supreme  Court  at this term  may finally pass on  the
constitutionality  of  the  Act,  the  Cain  interview  was  a  major
piece  of  news  but  attracted  little  attention.    It  reflected  the
agony  with  which  the  SACB maverick  did  his  duty as  he  saw
it  in the Pension  Union  case.
"Every  day  that  passed,"  the   Washington  Star   reported,
"made  him  feel  more  like  Dr.  Jekyll  and  Mr.  Hyde.    As  a
Government  official  he was duty bound  to apply  the  law to  the
Pension  Union.   But  as a  thoughtful  American he  felt  the  or-
ganization   posed  no  threat  to  the  nation's  security  and  thus
did  not  merit  the  severe  penalties  which  now  hang  over   it."
Purposes  Need  Not  Be  Bad
The  Pension  Union  was organized  in  the  State  of  Washing-
ton  in  1937.   Cain  found  that  it  came into  existence  "as  a  re-
sult  of  a  desire  on  the  part  of  many  people  in  the  State  of
Washington  for  liberalized  social  security,  particularly  old  age
assistance,"  that  it  brought  about  many  useful  changes  in  the
social  security  kws  of  the  State  and  "rendered  substantial  as-
sistance  to  pensioners  and  claimants."   But  he  also  found  that
it  had  been  a  faithful  sounding  board  of  Communist  party
line,  notably  in  its Hitler-Stalin  pact  shifts  during  World  War
II.   He  found  that  Charles  H.  Fisher,  its  president  since  Octo-
ber,  1953,   was  not  a  Communist  and  that  there  was  no  evi-
dence the  Pension  Union  had  been used  for  unlawful  purposes.
"The   active  or  immediate  objectives,"   Cain  ruled   however,
"need not, under the Act, be 'bad'  or 'evil.' "
This  is  the  ultimate  vice  of  the  act.    An  organization  may
exist  for  sorrie useful purpose,  like  the  advancement of  old  age
pensions.  The  only  evidence  against  it  may  be  activity  other-
Harry  Cain in  The  Campaign
"They  [the  Republicans]  have  talked  about  civil  lib-
erties.   But  when  they  found they  had  put  on  the  Sub-
versive  Activities  Control Board a  man who believes  in
civil  liberties—and who  practices  what  they preach—
they  go  rid  of  him."     —Stevenson  in  Albany, Sept. 10
wise  protected  by  freedom  of  speech,  press  and  assembly.  But
it  must  don  the  yellow  badge  of  registration   because  it  used
these  basic  freedoms  to  advance  what  the  government  regards
as  views  paralleling  those  of  a  party  the  government  has  de-
cided  is subversive,  and  under  circumstances  which  the  govern-'
merit finds shows  domination  by that  subversive party. No  mat-
ter  how  you  slice  this,  it  is  government  regulation  of  politics.
The  assumption  is  that  people  cannot  be  trusted  to  judge
for  themselves.  The  evidence  is  certainly  to  the  contrary.   In
this  particular  case,  the  Pension  Union's  membership  dwin-
dled  from  some  40,000  to  about  800.   Part, of  that  decline was
no  doubt  due  to  the  general  atmosphere  of  fear.   But  part  of
it  was  also  due  to  the  fact  that  many  people  became  fed  up
with  the  way  the  Pension  Union  was  put  through  the  hoops
of  shifts  on  political  issues  which  had  nothing  remotely  to  do
with  the  fight  for  pensions.
Men  have  a  right  to  argue  as  they  please  in  the  political
forum,  but  once  let the  government  decide  which  are  "fronts"
or  "subversive"  and  there  is no  telling who  may have  to  wear
the  yellow  badge  of  registration.
A  future  McCarthy  utilizing   the   SACB  to  proscribe   his
enemies  as  "subversive"  could  operate  exactly  as  Stalin  oper-
ated  in  proscribing  his  critics  as  "counter-revolutionary."  The
Internal  Security Act reflects the  philosophy  of  government  on
which  absolute  monarchs  of  all  kinds,  whether  Czars,  priests
or  commissars  have  always  depended.   It  is  good  that  Harry
Cain  has  finally  seen  this,  enlisted  fully  in  the  task  of  teaching
these  basic  American  principles  anew.
*          *         *
Nothing  so clearly  shows the  real  attitude  of  the  Eisenhower
Administration  on  these  fundamental  issues  than  the   choice
of  a  nonentity  from  the  Federal  Parole  Board,  Dorothy  Mc-
Cullough   Lee,   from   Portland,  Oregon,   as  Cain's  successor.
For  our  part,  we  welcome  the  choice.   We  think  it  better  for
the  country and  its  future  that  the  SACB not  be  dignified  by
appointing  to  it  persons  of  stature.  .
From  the  Text  of the  Interview in  Which  Cain Finally Cut Loose
"Mr.  Cain  tfiinks  that  the  Internal Security  Act   [setting
up  a  Subversive  Activities Control  Board]  is  a  radical  de-
parture  from  the  American  principle  that  government can-
not  interfere with  free  speech.  He  feels  that  it  makes peo-
ple  hesitate to  speak frankly  or  to  join  any  organization, for
fear  that  the  government   will  some  day  label  it  subver-
sive.  ...
"He  feels  it  makes  members  of  proscribed  organizations
'second  class  citizens'  and  deprives  them  of  the  rights  to
government  employment,  travel  abroad  and  jobs  in  defense
industries.
"He  feels  it  defies  the  Fifth  Amendment  by  requiring
members  of  designated groups  to  brand  themselves  with  a
label  which will  cost  them  their reputation and maybe their
freedom.
"He  feels  it  makes  it  almost  impossible for  an organiza-
tion  arraigned by -the  government to  win  an  'acquittal' from
the  Board—.
"Mr.  Cain  has  come  to  believe  that  any  legislation  de-
signed  to  defeat  political concepts is  dangerous. The proper
place  to  challenge  communism,  he  says,  is  in  the  'market-
place  of  ideas'  not in  the  courtroom.  ...    'I believe  with  all
my  heart,' he says,  'that  freedom  is  indivisible, and  that un-
less  we  have it  for  all  we  shall  soon  have  it  only  for  those
with nothing to  say.  I  believe in  democracy enough to  want
to  supply  a  platform  to  its  critics  as well as  its  defenders.' "
—Interview  with  Daniel M. Herman in  Washington  Sunday  Star,  Sept.  S.
1   4   I
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  17,1958
Lucky  for  Javits  He  Wasn't  "Tried"  By  Eisenhower-Brownell  Security   Standards
Can  the  GOP  Campaign  As A  Peace Party—on The  Brink  at  Suez?
If   ever  there  was  a  silly  offspring,   it  was  the   Suez  plan
aborted  at  press  time by Sir  Anthony Eden  and  reluctantly ac-
knowledged  here  by its  putative  parent,  Mr.  Dulles.  Through
the  bitter  eyes of  the  poor,  who  live  in  Africa  and  Asia,  it will
seem  that  the  rich  whites of  America and  Europe would  rather
ruin  the  Canal  than  let  the  Egyptians  use  its  revenues  for  the
improvement  of  their  country.  Through  the  eyes  of  statesmen
like  Nehru,  it  will  seem  that  England  and  France  in  their  de-
cline  have  indeed  lost  their  heads.  This  "users   association",
acting  without  consultation  except  among  the  three  capitals,
and  after  sending  off a  formal  fraudulent  little note  to  make  it
appear  that  they  had  consulted  the  United  Nations,  must  now
add  war  with  Egypt—and perhaps  all  the  Arab  countries—to
the  war  they are  already waging  in  Cyprus  and  Algeria.  Public
opinion  at  home  will  not  support  them;  they  can  boycott  the
Canal  or  make  it  unusable;  they  may  end  by wrecking  Nasser,
but  Eden and  Mollet  will  lose  office  in the  process.  The  "plan"
is  attributed  by London  to  Dulles  himself  and  has  that shyster
quality  which  marks  his  handiwork.   How  will  the  Republi-
cans  campaign  as  a  peace  party  if  Dulles   lets  London  and
Paris  slide  over  the  brink  before  November ?
Why  Not  Hastie  for  the  Supreme  Court?
We  pass on  to our readers, for  whatever  pressure they
may  exert,  the  news  that  William  H.  Denman,  the  re-
spected chief  judge of  the  U.S.  Court  of  Appeals for  the
Ninth   Circuit,  has  asked  the  President  to   appoint  a
Negro  judge,  William  H.  Hastie,   to  fill  the  vacancy
created  by  Mr. Justice Minton's retirement.  Judge Has-
tie  is  qualified  by  learning,  public  service  and  judicial
experience.   He  was  dean  of   Howard  University  Law
School,  governor of  the  Virgin Islands and civilian aide
to  Henry  L.  Stimson when  the  latter  was  Secretary  of
War.   Judge  Hastie  was  the  first  Negro  ever  appointed
to  the  Federal bench, serving  first  on  the  District Court
and  now  on  the  U.S.  Court  of  Appeals  for  the  Third
Circuit, a post to  which  he was  named  by President Tru-
man and in  which  he  has  served with  distinction. We be-
lieve  it  would  derogate  from  true  equality to  suggest  a
candidate  because  he  was  a  Negro.   But  Judge Hastie,
in  attainment and promise,  seems  to  us  the  worthiest of
the  candidates so  far  mentioned.  On  such  a  basis,  his
appointment  would  mark  an  historic  step  forward  for
his  race,  and set  a  moral  example of  integration  at  the
highest level.
Like  The  Old Gray Mare
The  victory  of  Javits  over  the  snares  kid   for  him  by  the
Eastland-Jenner  committee  and  its  counsel,  Robert  Morris,  is a
victory  for  all  who  have  been  striving  for  the  restoration  of  a
sane  politics  in  this  country.  The  old  Red  scare,  like  the  old
gray  mare,  ain't  what  it  used  to  be.  We  hope  Javits  will  re-
member  when he  reaches  the  Senate—as we feel  sure he will—
that  had  he  been  an  obscure  government  employe,  facing simi-
lar  allegations  under  the  Eisenhower-Brownell  security  rules,
he would  have lost  his job,  his  reputation  and  his honor.  Bella
Dodd   would  have  figured  in  the  allegations  as  an  informer
whose  identity  could  not  be  disclosed  for  security  reasons,  and
he  would  have  been  dismissed  on  the  principle  that  since  there
was  some  ground  for  suspicion,  his  retention  was  not   "clearly
consistent"  with  the  national  interest.  The  G.O.P.  system  re-
solves  all  doubts  against  the  accused.
The  Shape  of  Things  to  Come  in  the  Far  East
Those  who  know  how  closely  geared  Brookings   Institution
has  been  to  the  right-of-center  in  American  life  will  take  very
seriously  the  changing  attitude  toward   Communist   China  in
the  survey Brookings  published  last  week:  U.S. Foreign Policy
1945-55.  The  survey  sees  the  need  for  an  "agonizing   reap-
praisal"  of  U.S.  policy  in  the  Fart  East  based  on  the   recogni-
tion  that  Communist  China  has  "consolidated  and   stabilized"
its  power,  and  that  the  U.S.  "cannot  challenge  this  power  in
the  Far  East without  allocating  more  of  its  resources  than  it  is
prepared  to do and  ...    on a  scale  that  would  limit  its  capacity
to act elsewhere."  The  survey  even  dares  to  ask:  "Are  the  U.S.
security  pacts with  the National  Government  of  China,  the Re-
public of  Korea  and  Japan  impediments  or  aids  to  reaching  an
equilibrium?"  This  is handwriting on  the  wall  for  Chiang and
Syngman  Rhee,  and  foreshadows  serious  policy   overhaulings
after  election.
Don't  Forget  Your  Change  of  Address  on  Returning  from   Vacation—If   Will   Not  Be  Changed   Automatically
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol, Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City                                         Zone           State
Knter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name
0/17/58
City                                             Zone           State
City                                            Zone           State
S'lall   we  send  E'ft  announcementT     Yes   O     Nn  ! ;
IE   Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301    E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D. C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington, D.  C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED