I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956feb06.pdf

============================================================

Not  to  Be  Forgotten  in  Israel's  Crisis;   How  Britain  Flouted  the  UN  Over  Palestine,  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  5
FEBRUARY  6,  1956
•°«       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Eden  Comes A  Long  Way  Just  For  A  Boat  Ride
Judging  from  the  final  communique,  nothing—but   nothing
—was  accomplished  by the  Eden  mission  to  Washington.   The
United   States  and  the  United   Kingdom   emerged   from   the
three  days  of  secret  conference firmly united  against  aggression
and  subversion—and  as  firmly  agreed  to  remain  in  a  state  of
friendly  disagreement   on  other  questions  less  lofty  but  more
concrete  than  these  contemporary  synonyms for  sin.  The  com-
munique  indicated  that  the talks were  inconclusive on  the Mid-
dle  East,  the  Far  East,  the  H-bomb  and  even  Germany.
The  U.S.  and  the  United  Kingdom   reaffirmed   their  deter-
mination   to  bring  about   reunification  of  Germany   "in   free-
dom"  but  does  this  mean  "freedom"  to  join  NATO  or  free-
dom  to  hold  elections   in  East  Germany?  They   are  against
"aggressive  expansion"  in  the  Far  East  but  would  an  attack
on  the  offshore  islands  be  aggressive  expansion?  The  extent
of  their  inability to  make  up  their  minds  on  the  Middle  East
is  best  demonstrated  by their  agreement  to  consult  France.  The
Anglo-Saxon  powers  are  not  accustomed  to  consult   France;
when  they  know  what  they  want  they  merely  forward  pre-
digested  decisions  to  Paris.
The  vagueness  of  the  communique  finds  no  compensation
in  the  vapidity  of  the  accompanying  statement,  grandiloquent-
ly  termed  "The   Declaration  of  Washington."   This  illustrates
chiefly  the  low  literary  level  to  which  our  English  friends  are
being  reduced  by  the  American  alliance  at  a  time  when  our
state papers  seem  to  be  drafted  by  those  lesser  minds Madison
Avenue  can  spare  from  the  more  urgent  tasks  of  soap  adver-
tising.  Mr.  Dulles's  unctuous hand  may be  seen  in  the  fulsome
references  to  God.  These  bear  such  an  oily  familiarity to  the
"Gott  mit  uns"   propaganda   with  which  mankind  generally
whips  itself  up  for  mass  slaughter  that  they  can  succeed  only
in   driving  thoughtful   people  to   atheism.    It   is   difficult   to
fathom   the  mentalities   that   seriously  believe  such  tripe  can
have  a  strategic   effect   on  the   miserable,   the   ignorant   and
the  rebellious  in  the  outer  world.
Bulganin  and  Chou  Chime  In
The  Bulganin  note and  the  Chou  speech  threatening  war  if
necessary  for  Formosa  were  quickly  pictured  by  the  State  De-
partment's  public  relations  men  as  attempts  to  split  America
and   Britain.  But  they  may  also   be   regarded   as   efforts   to
strengthen  Eden  on  his  visit  to  the  White  House  by  making
evident  the  need  for  diplomatic  negotiation.  The  basic  differ-
ence  between  American  and  British  policy  is  that  the  former
is opposed  to,  while  the  latter  favors,  negotiation.  This  in  turn
reflects  the  fact  that  while  the  U.S.  finds  the  arms  race  a  vital
boondoggle  for  maintaining business,  Britain  cannot  afford  the
cold  war. The  Bulganin  note  was  nothing  more  than  an  effort
to  shake  hands,  but  by  refusing   it  we  made  ourselves  seem
churlish.  The  threat  in  the  Chou  speech  made  the  headlines
but  its  proposal   for  an  Asian  collective  peace  pact  to  include
2*                                                                                             1
the  U.S.  was  not  so  different  from  Eden's  proposal  two  years
ago  for  a  Far  Eastern  Locarno.  Peking's  proposal  for   recon-
vening  the  1954  Geneva  conference,  with  India,  Canada  and
Poland  added,  to  deal  with  the  deteriorating  situation  in  Indo-
china,  where  Britain  and  France  promised  elections  this  July
is  serious  business.   We  cannot  go  on  brushing  such  things
aside  without  putting  ourselves  in  the  wrong  in  the  eyes  of
world  opinion.  Eden, who  seeks to  act  in  some  degree  as  medi-
ator  between  Washington  and  Moscow,  and  Washington  and
Peking,  wants a resumption  of  negotiations.  He  came to Wash-
ington  in  the  hope  of  bypassing  Dulles  and  appealing  over
his  head   to   Eisenhower,   as  he   did   so  successfully   in   the
Indochinese  crisis in   1954.
In  this  Eden  was  disappointed.  Thanks  to  the   President's
decision  to  "take  it  easy"  while  he  recovers^ from  his  heart  at-
tack,  the  reins  of  foreign  policy  are  firmly  in  the  hands  of
Dulles.   Eden's  one  private  talk  with  Eisenhower  was  little
more  than  a  face-saver.   In  actuality  he  was  pushed  back  to
Eden-Dulles  conversations  on  the  old  level.   In  this  same  stale
atmosphere  Eden  had  to  take  up  his  desire  to  formulate  some
curb  on  future  thermonuclear  tests  once  Britain  has  tried  out
its  own  H-bomb.  But  both  Dulles  and  AEC  Chairman  Strauss
are  opposed.  On  the  eve  of  Eden's  arrival,  R.  H.  Shackford,
Scripps-Howard  foreign  expert,  a  favorite  with  the  State  De-
partment,  was briefed  on  the  subject.  "The  United  States,"  he
reported  on January 27  (Washington  Daily News),  "has  aban-
doned  all  plans  for  seeking   a  disarmament   agreement  with
Soviet  Russia  or  any  other  country  on  thermonuclear   weapons
—hydrogen  bombs."  The  italics  are  added.
Outlook   Bleak
It  looks  as  if  only  an  outbreak  of  fighting  around   Quemoy
and  Matsu  can  break  the  rigidity  into  which  American  diplo-
macy  has   again   fallen.    Eisenhower   seems  to   be   grooming
Nixon  as his  successor,  thanks  to Nixon's  chameleon-like qual-
ity  for  changing  over  from  fire-eater  to  sober  conservative  as a
means of  ingratiating  himself  with the  big  business  men  in  the
cabinet.  Behind  Eisenhower's   cold  remarks  on  Warren  is  be-
lieved  to  lie  a  private  conversation  in  which  the  Chief  Justice
made  it  clear  to  the  President  that  he  really  was  not  a  candi-
date.  Senator  George  is  still  pushing  for  a  meeting   between
Dulles  and  Chou;  the  younger  Democrats  are  restive.  But  it  is
amazing  how  quickly  the  uproar  over  the  "brink  of  wax"  in-
terview  has  died  down.  No  less  than  four  Congressional   com-
mittees  are  preparing  to  investigate   Ridgway's   charges   that
defense  spending  is  being  subordinated  to  "politics"  but  there
is as yet no  sign  of  any inquiry into whether  Dulles was  telling
the  truth  about  those  atomic ultimatums.  It  is a pity the  Senate
liberals  spend   so  much   time  and  talent  on  the   safe   topic
of  natural  gas  when  there   is  such  dangerous  hot  air  to  be
investigated.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

L F. Stone'*  Weekly,  February  6,1956
Confirming    An   Old   Suspicion
From  Mr.  Truman's  Memoirs
"The  Department  of  State's  specialists  on  the  Near
East  were,  almost  without  exception, unfriendly  to  the
idea  of  a  Jewish  State.  .  .  .  Like  most  of  the  British
diplomats,  some  of  our  diplomats  also  thought that  the
Arabs  should  be appeased.  I  am sorry to  say  that there
were  some  among  them  who  were  also  inclined  to  be
anti-Semitic."
—Installment   9,  New  York.  Times,  January  31.
How  Britain  Violated  Its  UN  Obligations  and  Undercut  Peaceful  Partition  of  Palestine
What  Should  Not  Be  Forgotten   In  Israel's  Crisis
As  many  readers  know,  I  saw a  good  deal  of  the  birth  of
Israel.   I  visited  Palestine  every  year  for  six  years  from  1945
to  1950  inclusive.   In  1946  I  travelled  as an  illegal  immigrant
from  the  Polish-Czech  frontier  through  the  British  blockade  to
Palestine.  In  1947  I was on one of  the prison  ships which  took
illegals to Cyprus, and I  celebrated  Passover  in one of  the  Brit-
ish detention camps on that  lovely Greek  island.  I got  to  Pales-
tine  again  in   1948  just  before  Statehood  was  declared   and
stayed  on  until  after  the  first  truce,  covering  the  Arab-Jewish
war  for  PM.   I remember cowering in  an  open  ditch  in  the  bor-
der  settlement  of Negba  when  it was bombed  by the  Egyptians
and  I  remember stumbling along  by starlight  with  the  human
pack  train  that  volunteered  to  carry supplies  at  night  past  the
Arab fortress at Latrun and  over  rocky Bab-el-Wad  to  besieged
Jerusalem.
Though  it was only  as a  newspaperman,  I  had  the  privilege
of  seeing  my people  in  some  of  the  greatest  moments  of  their
long  history—as  they  emerged  from  the  hells  of  Auschwitz
and  Buchenwald,  packed  into  the  old  freighters  which  served
as their Mayflowers  on the  Mediterranean,  fighting  against  odds
which  seemed  overwhelming  to  reestablish  a  Jewish  nation.  I
cannot  write  of  those  years  or  of  Israel with  objectivity.  But
as a new crisis  looms  up  in  its  existence  I  would  like  to  recall
some aspects  of  those  all  too recent  events  which Jews  dare  not
forget,  and  which  I  would  ask non-Jews  in  all  kindness  to  re-
member.
The  Many  Who  Could  Have  Been   Saved
It  is  much  too  early  to  forget  what  happened  with  the  rise
of  Hitler,  the  indifference  of  the  State  Department  toward  the
pre-war   refugees,   the   shiploads   the   British   Foreign    Office
turned  away  from  Palestine  in  1939-41, the  hopeless  who  blew
themselves  up  in  mass  suicide  on  the  Patria  and  the Sirttma,
the  cruel  farce  of  the  Bermuda  conference  at  that  very  mo-
ment  in  1943  when  the  remnants  of  the  Warsaw  ghetto  were
staging  their  uprising.   Had  there  been  the  tiniest  semblance
of  a  Jewish  State  in  Palestine,  it  could  have  saved  many  of
those  who  later  went  to  the  crematoriums.   If  nothing  else  it
could  have  supplied  those  precious  papers   without  which  a
man  was  no  longer  a  man  in  pre-war  Europe  but  stateless,
with  no  right  to  remain where  he was yet no  right  to  go  else-
where. There  have been  too many Hitlers  too  often  to  be  sure
that  new persecutions may not  occur,  in which the  existence of
a  Jewish  State  would  offer  a  haven.    A  bitter  history  warns
us  that  this  might  make  a  difference  to  our  children  or  our
children's  children.
In  this  crisis  it  is  also much too  soon  to  forget  exactly why
and  how  war  broke out  in  Palestine between  the  Jews  and  the
Arabs.. Sixteen  days  before  the  United  Nations  General  As-
sembly  voted  by  more  than  the  required  two-thirds  for   the
partition   of  Palestine  between  them,  Britain's  delegate,  Sir
Hartley  Shawcross said  "If   States  are  to  permit  themselves—
and  to  be permitted—to cooperate with  the  [United  Nations]
Organization  when  it  suits  them  and  to  stand  aside,  or  to  at-
tempt  to  sabotage it when it  does not, this Organization would
.  be  rendered  wholly  abortive ..."    The  occasion  was a debate
over  the  Soviet  veto  but  the  words  applied as  neatly  to  Brit-
ain's  attitude  toward  that  partition  decision.  Bevin  had  asked
the  UN  to act on Palestine.   Every other  member of  the  British
Commonwealth  had  voted  for  partition.  The  UN   resolution
called  for  a  Jewish  and  an  Arab  State  to  be  linked  econom-
. ically.  It  sought  to provide  for  a  peaceful  transition  by direct-
ing  the  British,  as the  mandatory power,  progressively  to  hand
over  the  functions  of  government   to  two  provisional   State
councils,  Arab  and  Jewish.   Bevin  declined  to  cooperate  with
the  UN  and  encouraged  the  Arabs  to  defy  the  UN   decision.
So  did  the  State  Department  by  reversing  the  American  posi-
tion  and  on  March  19,  1948,  asking  the  Security  Council   "to
suspend  . . . the proposed  partition  plan."
The  Pogroms   They  Expected  Did  Not  Happen
Then  as now,  behind  the  moralizing,  was a concern  only  for
oil  and  bases.  The  Arab  States  were confident, and  looked  for-
ward  to  easy pogroms.  "This  war,"  boasted  Azzam Pasha,  the
Secretary  General  of  the  Arab  League,  "will  be  a  war  of  ex-
termination  and  a  momentous  massacre  which  will  be  spoken
of  like  the  Mongol  massacres  and  the  Crusades."  Yet  the  State
Department  six  days  after  partition  was voted  imposed  a  uni-
lateral  arms  embargo  on  the  Middle  East which  had  the  effect
of  shutting  off  arms  to  Israel  while  leaving  the  Arabs  free  to
obtain  arms  from  the  British.  When  Bevin  was  asked  in  the
Commons  on  April  28,  1948,  whether  Britain  would  go  on
supplying  the  Arab  States  with  arms  though  their  armies  were
massing  on  the  Palestine  borders,  his  cynical answer  was  "we
must  honor  our  contracts."  Thus  Anglo-American  influence,
which  might  have  brought  about  a  peaceful  transition,  was
utilized  to  encourage  war  against  the  UN  decision.  The  Jews
had  no  recourse  but  to  fight  for  their  lives,  and  the  war  was
stopped  only  when  the  Foreign   Office  and  the  State  Depart-
ment  suddenly realized  that  the  Arabs were  losing.
The  Arab refugees weigh upon my conscience,  and  I believe
it  the  moral  duty  of  Jews  everywhere to contribute  when  peace
is  made toward  their  resettlement.  They  are  the  tragic  victims
of  a tragic war, in which both  sides felt  that they were  fighting
a  war  of  national survival. But  as  another  crucial  moment  ar-
rives,  when  the  great  Powers  must  again  decide  whether  to
bring  about  peace  or  foment  renewed  war,  it  is  important  to
remember  that the  earlier war might possibly have been avoid-
ed  if  the  Foreign  Office  and  the  State Department  had honored
their  obligations  to  the  United  Nations.
And  qualitatively the  situation is made no  different  because
this  time  the  Soviet  Union  has  embarked  with  zest  on  the
same game, competing with  the West  to furnish  with expensive
arms  poverty stricken feudal  principalities whose  people  need
bread  and  peace,  even  as  do  those  of  Israel.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly,  February t, 195S
After  Eight  Years,  Judge  Edgerton  Strikes  A  Blow at  the  House  Un-American  Committee
Why  Congressional  Witch  Hunters  Are  Upset  by  The  Watkins  Reversal
It  13  not hard  to  imagine the  satisfaction  with  which  Judge
Henry  W. Edgerton  of  the  U.S.  Court of  Appeals  for  the  Dis-
trict  of  Columbia reversed  the  conviction  of John  T.  Watkins
for  contempt  of  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Commit-
tee.  Judge  Edgerton  had  waited  eight  years for  that  moment.
In  November, 1947,  Judge  Edgerton  in  an  eloquent  dissent,
attacked  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  as  al-
together  unconstitutional.   He  said  it  "abridges  freedom of
speech  and inflicts punishment  without  trial"  (Barsky  v.  US.
167  F  2d  241).   But  the  cold  war  had  just  begun.    Judge
Edgerton  remained  a  lonely  objector  as  his  colleagues  in  the
cases  of  the   Hollywood  Ten  and  of  the  Joint  Anti-Fascist
Refugee  Committee  upheld  the  power  of  Congress  to  engage
in  a latter  day inquisition,  to  root  out heretics,  and  to  pillory
those  whose  views  it  regarded  as  suspect.
In  reversing  the  Watkins  conviction,  Judge  Edgerton  also
began  to  reverse  that line  of  cases.  What  had  so long  seemed
a  hopeless minority  opinion began  to  emerge  as  majority  law.
Though  Watkins  did not  plead  the  Fifth  Amendment,  his  re-
fusal  to  identify  others  as  Communists  was  upheld.    Judge
Edgerton  ruled—and  it  was the  first  ruling  of its  kind in this
period—that   the   House  Un-American  Activities   Committee
did  not  have  a  lawful  right  to ask  questions  whose  only  pur-
pose  was  to  expose  the  names of  those  who had  been  members
of  the  Communist  party.
Part  Lottery,  Part  Change
The  ruling  was part  accident, part  reflection  of  a  new  cli-
mate  of  opinion. It  was an  accident  that  put  Judge  David  L.
Bazelon  with  Judge  Edgerton   on  the  panel  of  three  chosen
from   the  full   Court  of  nine  to  pass  on  the  Watkins   case.
Judge  Bazelon,  a  younger  man  and  newer  judge,  a  Truman
appointee,  has  developed  insight,   courage  and  militancy  on
the   bench.    The  result  was  a  2-to-l  verdict  against  the
House   Committee.
The  change  in  the  climate  of  opinion   is  reflected   in  the
Watkins   defense.   Here  was  a  United  Automobile  Workers
organizer  who admitted  that he had  cooperated  so closely  with
the  Communist party  from  1942  to  1947  "that  some  persons
may  honestly  believe  that I  was a  member  of the  Party." He
declined  to  "cooperate"  with  the  Committee.  Yet  he  was  de-
fended  by his  union  and  by  its  counsel,  Joseph  L.  Rauh,   Jr.,
head  of Americans  for  Democratic Action.  Two or three years
ago  Walter   Reuther  would  hardly   have  put   his  union   offi-
cially  behind  the  Watkins   defense.
The  Watkins  decision  touched  a  most  sensitive  nerve.  Ever
since  Martin  Dies,  the  House  Committee  has  claimed  to  be  a
roving  public  grand  jury  with  a  mandate  to  expose Commu-
nists,  present  and  past, real  and  suspected.  One of  its  princi-
pal  aims  has  been  to  compile  a  huge  blacklist  with  which  to
destroy  reputations   and  livelihood.  Judge  Edgerton   pointed
out  that  54  of  the  89  pages  in  the   Committee's  report  for
1052  were  devoted  "to  the  names  and  addresses  of  such  per-
sons"  while its  report  for   1953  "devotes  59  out  of  193  pages
to  a  similar  list."
Warren  Provided  The  Cue
Has  a  Committee of Congress  the  right to  "expose"  persons
whose  political opinions it  dislikes? The  Watkins  decision  be-
gins  to  say  that  it  does  not.   Judge   Edgerton   invoked  the
words  used by  Chief  Justice  Warren  last  year  in  the  Quinn
case  (349  U.S.  155)  saying  that  the  Congressional power of
investigation  "cannot  be  used  to  inquire into  private  affairs
unrelated  to  a  valid  legislative  power"  and  that  "the  power
to  investigate  must  not  be  confused  with  any  of  the  powers
of   law  enforcement."  These   admonitions   say   gently   what
Judge  Edgerton  eight  years  ago  said  boldly—that  Congress
can  operate  neither  an  Inquisition  nor  a  permanent roving
grand  jury.
On this  basis  Judge  Edgerton ruled  that  it  was "vez>  ques-
What  Matusow Won
Last  March 12, at  the  close of  the  hearing  on  the  mo-
tion  for  a  new  trial  for  Clifford  Jencks,  Federal  Judge
Thomason summoned  Harvey Matusow  to  the  bench and
said  "I  am  thoroughly  convinced  that  you  are  in  con-
tempt  of  court  iu that  you, alone or  in  conjunction  with
others,  deliberately, maliciously and  designedly schemed
to  obstruct  justice  ...    by recanting  your  former  testi-
mony. . . .  Before  sentencing  you, however, I  will  give
you a hearing  . . ." At the hearing  four  days  later, Ma-
tusow  was sentenced  to  three  years  in jail  for  contempt.
This  conviction was unanimously  reversed  January  27
by  the  Court  of  Appeals for  the  Fifth  Circuit.   It  held
that   perjury   alone   was   not  contempt—"misbehavior
constituting  obstruction  of  the court  must  also be  estab-
lished."  It  ruled  that  since  Judge  Thomason  alleged  a
conspiracy  between  Matusow  and  others,  he  could  be
convicted  only  after  a  full  trial  on  the  charge.
The  government  now  has  two  alternatives,   neither
easy.   It  can  seek  an  indictment  for  perjury   and  try
Matusow  on  that  charge.   Or  it  can  try   him  for  con-
tempt  on  the  ground  that  he  conspired  with  others  to
obstruct  justice  by  committing perjury.   But  it  cannot,
in  the  light  of  the  Circuit  Court  opinion,  short-circuit
trial  by  imposing summary  penalty for  contempt.  The
decision  was  another  round  lost  for  the  government  in
its  campaign  to  punish  Matusow  for  his  recantation.
tionable"  whether  exposure  of  individuals to  public contempt
or  hostility   is  a  "valid  legislative  purpose."   And  he  added,
"Since  Congress  has  'no  powers of  law  enforcement'  it  would
have  no  power,  in  the  absence  of  a  valid  legislative  purpose,
to  expose  former  Communists, even  if  there  were  a  law  re-
quiring  that  former   Communists  be  exposed."
The  observant  reader   will  notice  that  this   is  limited  to
former   Communists..  The  reason  may  be that  Judges   Edger-
ton  and  Bazelon  sought  a  way  to  reconcile  this  new decision
with  the  past  rulings  of their  Circuit.  They  insist  that  in  the
Hollywood  Ten  case,  the  Circuit  Court  merely  held that Con-
gress  had the power  to inquire  "whether  a  witness  ...    is or
is  not"  a  Communist. They  seek  to  "distinguish"  their  ruling
from  the  Joint  Anti-Fascist  Refugee  Committee  case  by  ar-
guing  that  "to  hold  .  .  .  that  the  [House]   Committee may
inquire  whether  members of an  organization  shown  to  engage
in  propaganda   are  now  Communists  does  not  imply  that  it
may  inquire  whether  members of  a  union  not  shown  to  en-
gage,  in,  or  likely  to  engage  in,  propaganda  were  once Com-
munists."   Such  are  the  hairs  split  by  Judges  who  seek  to
change  precedent  without  appearing  to  do  so.
The  Witness  Decides  What  to  Tell
The  reason  for  the  outcry  among  the  Congressional  witch
hunters  and  their  demand  for   an  appeal   to  the   Supreme
Court  does  not  lie  in  the  implication  that  former   Commu-
nists  may  not  be  exposed.  The  reason  lies  deeper.   It  is  that
under  the  Watkins  case  the  witness  rather  than  the  commit-
tee  might  decide  the  sphere  and  limits  of  investigation.   This
is  made clear  in  Judge  Bastian's  dissent.
"It  would  seem,"  Judge  Bastian  protested,  "that  appellant
[Watkins]  feels,  and the majority  agrees, that  since the  ques-
tions  involve a  time  period beginning  some ten  years  prior  to
the  inquiry, the  case  was  one of exposure for  exposure's  sake.
Are  we to  assume  .  .  . that  information  as  to  Communist
Party  activities  five  or  ten  years  ago  would  be  of  no  use  to
the  Committee at  this  time?  Is  appellant  to  be the  judge  as
to  whether  the  named  persons  are  'to  his  best  knowledge ami
belief  no longer  Communists?  ...    Is he to be the judge  as t»
what  information  the  Committee  feels  it  reasonably  needs?"
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, February 6,1956
The  Case  of  the  Fort  Dix  Eight  Proves  Senator  Hennings  Was  Gulled
The Shadow of Military Thought Control Still Falls Across The Nation's Youth
Though  McCarthy lost  his  fight  with  the  Army  and  ended
up  as  a  dead  duck  politically,  the  loyalty  regulations   the
Army  adopted  to  appease   him  were  not  interred  with  his
bones.  Despite  assurance  by  the  Army,  a  jubilant  statement
by  Senator  Hennings  and  new  assurances   by  Secretary   of
Defense  Wilson at  press  conference last  week, the  danger  that
young men will be branded for  life with  a  less than  honorable
discharge   on  vague  pre-induction   grounds  is  still  with   us.
Perhaps  we  owe a  special  debt  to  the  unknown military  bu-
reaucrat  who served  notice  on  the  Fort  Dix  Eight  that  they
faced  such  a  discharge  just  a  few  days  after   Senator  Hen-
nings  announced that  the  military  had  agreed  to  discontinue
the  practice.    That  notice   served   to  dramatize  the   unde-
pendable  character  of  those   assurances.
A  careful  reading  of  the  exchanges  between  Senator  Hen-
nings  and  the  Defense  Department  shows that  amid  the  tor-
tured  bureaucratic   prose  ample  loopholes  were  provided  to
continue  all  the  practices  of  which  the  Senator  complained.
The military  genius  for  double-talk was  never more  fulsomely
displayed than  in  these  documents. The facts  seem  to  us  very
simple.  The  only  legal  basis  for  anything  like  "loyalty"  pro-
cedures in the Army is a  1950 appropriations  rider  forbidding
the  induction of  persons  who belong to  any  party  which  "ad-
vocates  overthrow  of  the  government  by force  and  violence."
This  is  the  language  and  it  is  at  least  precise.   Nothing  is
said  about  "subversion,"  the  Attorney  General's  list  or  vague
nonsense  of that  kind.
The  Wrong   Kind  of  "Loyalty"
The  evil  arose  not from  this  but  from  the  extension  to  the
Army  of  the   President's  loyalty  order.   The  military   were .
shrewd  enough to  see that  a  simple  extension  would not hold
water  since the loyalty  order  by its terms  is limited  to civilian
agencies.  So  they  simply  "modelled"  their  procedure  on  the
loyalty  order.  But  this  dodge does not get away from  the  fact
that  a  soldier  is  not  a  civil  servant.  It  may  be true  that  no
one  has  a  right  to  government employment, but  it  is equally
true that  no one has  a  right  to  evade the  draft.  A  draftee  is
an  involuntary  employe. The Army has  no statutory  right  or
equitable  reason   for  subjecting  draftees   to  the   derogatory
rubbish  method of  screening  applied to  government employes,
much  less  to take  men into the  Army and  then refuse them an
honorable  discharge  despite  honorable  service  because  they
once  gave  $5 to  aid  Republican Spain  or  invoked  their  rights
under  the  Fifth  amendment  to  protect  themselves  from  the
vague  beartrap   questions  in  the  Army  loyalty  form.  When
Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Army  Hugh  Milton  II  was  before
the  Hennings  committee,  he  admitted  under  examination  by
Lon  Hocker that  such  discharges  had  nothing  whatsoever  to
do with  the  problem of  discipline in  the  Army.
The  character   of  the  discharge  ought  to  be  based  on  the
character  of  the  service  in  the  Army, and  though  this  seems
to have been promised by the  Army correspondence  with  Sen-
ator  Hennings,  there  are  loopholes which  allow  these  prom-
ises  easily  to  be  circumvented.  Redress .in  the  courts  is   diffi-
cult  as  recent  decisions by Judges  Edelstein in  New York and
Youngdahl  in  Washington  have  shown because until  the field
board  hearings  have  been held  "administrative  remedies have
not  been  exhausted."  But  once the  discharge  is  given,  prece-
dents  only  the  Supreme  Court  can  change  do  not  allow  the
courts  to  interfere.  It  is  on this  dilemma  that  the  Fort  Dix
Eight  may founder  in their  current  effort  to get  a  stay  from
Supreme  Court  Justice   Harlan.
The  Defense  Department  can  prove  its  sincerity   only  by
withdrawing  the  notices  to  the  Fort  Dix  Eight,  and  by em-
bodying  in  specific  new regulations  the  assurances  given  Sen-
ator  Hennings.  One  need  not  doubt  Mr.  Wilson's  personal
sincerity  to  suspect  that  in  the  Army there  are  high   officers
who  see  the  value  of  the  less  than  honorable  discharge  pro-
cedure  in  controlling  the  nation's  youth.  The  present  system
puts  a  young man  on  notice that  any  political   "indiscretion"
not  only before induction but  during his  period  in the  reserve
can  be  utilized  to  brand  him  undesirable.   Thought  control
comes  natural  to  the  military  martinet.
Salute  and  Snort
We  salute  Congressman  Roy  Wier  of  Minnesota  for  being
again  the  only  member of  the  House  to  vote  against  the  an-
nual  appropriation for  the  Un-American Activities Committee
and  we wonder again  when this  country  will  pick  up  enough
courage  and  conscience  to  get  rid  of  this  legislative  excres-
cence.
In   Memoriam
We  raise  our  hat   in  mourning  at  the  passing  of  H.  L.
Mencken,  the  best  writer  newspaper  work  developed in  our
generation,  the  kindliest  editor  and  (for  all  his  lusty  preju-
dices)   the  most  discriminating  and  catholic  of  critics.   His
thinking  stemmed  from   Nietzsche's  and  led  him  far   to  the
right,  but  he  gave  a  joyful  illumination  to  many  aspects  of
our  time.
Send  A  Gift   Sub  with  Your  Renewal  and  Bring  Some  Friend  Back  to  the  Ranks  of  Active  Liberalism
I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Street
City
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
(Tal   Name
Street
301  E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Zone
mos.)   or  $4
City                                       .Zone
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?
....State
(1 yr.)  additional:
2/6/56
....State.
Yes  D    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Wathington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED