I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jul23.pdf

============================================================

James  Bnrnham  As  Philosopher  Turned  Informer  for The Attorney  General's  List,  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO.  27
JULY  23,  1956'«'     WASHINGTON, D.  C.
16  CENTS
Challenging  the  B'nai  Brith  In  the  Arthur  Miller  and  Otto  Nathan  Contempt  Cases
Should An Anti-Defamation  League Encourage Defamation?
In  his  testimony  at  the  blacklist  hearing  in   Washington,
Arnold  Forster,  general  counsel  of  the  B'nai  Brith  Anti-Defa-
mation  League,  tried  to  run  with  the  harassed  hares  of  the
Fund  for  the  Republic  and  at  the  same  time  hunt  with  the
hounds  of  the   Congressional   witch  hunt.   He  thought   the
blacklist  was  "dreadful"  but  praised  the  Madison  Avenue and
journalistic  specialists  who  first  smear  artists  and  then   help
them  to "clear"  themselves.  Forster  said he thought  it was the
obligation  of  an  organization  like  his  to  help  artists  who  had
been  unfairly discriminated  against.   But  at  the  same  time  he
emphasized  that  the  Anti-Defamation  League  helps  no  one
who  has  pleaded   the  Fifth  amendment,  refused   to  give  the
FBI  any information  he may have on  Communism, or  declined
to appear  as a cooperative witness before the  House  Committee
on  Un-American  Activities.   In  plainer  language,  the  Anti-
Defamation  League  will  help  only  those  prepared  to  inform
and  crawl.
We  wonder  how  many members  of  the  B'nai  Brith  realize
that  by these  standards  its  Anti-Defamation League  could  not
help  two  outstanding  members  of  the  American  Jewish  com-
munity  whom  the  House  Committee  has  just voted  to  cite  for
contempt.   Arthur  Miller  does  not  measure  up  to  the  Anti-
Defamation  League  standard  because  he  refused  to  be  a  coop-
erative  witness  and  "name   names."    Professor  Otto  Nathan,
the   executor  of   Albert  Einstein's  estate,  probably  the   great
physicist's  oldest and  closest  friend,  does  not measure up  to  the
Anti-Defamation   League  standard  because  he  also  refused  to
be  a  cooperative  witness  and  declined  on  moral  and   political
(including  First  but  not  Fifth  amendment)  grounds  to  permit
himself  to  be subjected  to political  interrogation.
We  believe  that  if  Forster's policy  statement were submitted
to  a vote of  the  B'nai  Brith rank  and file, it  would  be  rejected.
We  urge those  of  our  readers who  are  members of  B'nai  Brith
to  insist  that  this  pro-blacklist  policy  be  submitted  to  internal
debate  and  scrutiny.  Do  the  members of  B'nai  Brith want  this
organization  to approve  the blacklisting  of  an  artist because  he
exercises  his  constitutional  rights?   Do  they  believe  a  self-ap-
pointed  group  should  be  allowed  to  act  as  unofficial   censors
over  entertainment  and  the  arts,  smearing  here  and   clearing
there,  often  as a  means  of  livelihood?   Does  the  membership
of  B'nai  Brith  think  it  ought  to  be  defending  Arthur  Miller
and  Dr.  Otto Nathan—or  joining  hands  with  Chairman  Wal-
ter  of  the  House  Committee?
Why  should  an  Anti-Defamation  League  end  up  by  encour-
aging  those  whose  business  is  defamation ?  What  difference  is
there  in  principle  between  liquidating  Jewish  artists  in  Nazi
Germany  and  later  in  Soviet  Russia.on  political  grounds,  and
blacklisting  artists  in  this  country  on  political  grounds?   Is  it
Why  Not  Harriman  and  Nixon?
Governor  Harriman  was  not  quite  correct   when  he
told  the  National  Press  Club  that  he  alone,  of  all  the
candidates  for  the  Presidency,  was  totally  invulnerable
to  the  charge  of  Communism.  In  a  sense  there  is  one
other—Richard  Nixon,  whose  fitness  for  the   Presidency
may  be  the  deciding  issue  of  the  campaign.   Except  for
one  slip,  that  recent  commencement   address  at  Lafay-
ette  College,  Nixon—unlike  Eisenhower  and  Stevenson
—is  as  immune  as  Harriman to  any  suspicion  of  want-
ing  to  make  peace  with  Moscow.
Should  the  Democrats  nominate  Harriman,  however,
a  serious  question will arise.  He is  as old as  Eisenhower.
If  fate  should strike  Harriman down in  office,  how  could
voters  be  sure  that  he  would be  succeeded  by  a  man  as
pristine   in   his  anti   Communism?   These   misgivings
would  be  allayed  if  for  once a  little  logic  were  brought
into  our two  party  system.  What  we  are  suggesting  is
that   the   Democrats   nominate  Harriman  and   Nixon,
while  the  Republicans run  Eisenhower  and   Stevenson.
The  voters  would  then  have  a  clear  choice  between  a
"soft  on  Communism" ticket and a  ticket  guaranteed   to
stand firm even if  Krushchev  in  wily  desperation  offered
to  take  holy  orders  and  turn  the  Soviet  Air  Force  over
to  Consolidated Vultee.
Both  Ideologically  Rugged Men
A  witty  Frenchman after  a  visit  to  this country  went
home  and  reported  that  in  America  the  working  class
was  Democratic,   the  middle  class  Republican  and  the
millionaire  Communistic.   We like  to  think  of  Ave  Har-
riman   as   the   austere   exception,   the  Multimillionaire
Who  Never  Fell  for  Marx.
In the  presidential  race  as  we visualize it,  Nixon  could
be  built  up into  as  ideologically   rugged  a  figure.  Ex-
cept  for  that  plumber whose  name escapes  us,  Nixon  is
the  only  poor boy  who sat  with that  Cabinet  of  Million-
aires,  the  only  one  who  could  never  afford  a   Cadillac,
yet  emerged  untainted.  While  Charlie  Wilson  grew  so
convivial  with Molotov at  Geneva that  he began  to think
what  was  good  for  the  Soviet  Union  might  be  good  for
General  Motors, and Secretary  Humphrey let  four  years
pass  without  making  a  single  speech  against  Commu-
nism,  and Oveta Culp  Hobby defended  the  right  to  read
the  Daily  Worker,  and even  John  Foster  Dulles  (on  al-
ternate   Tuesdays)    was   equivocal   about    neutralism,
Nixon plodded  on unswervingly,  the  Barefoot  Boy of  the
Millionaire  Cabinet.   Here  is  the  one  man  with  whom
Harriman  can  run  without  fear  of  guilt  by  association.
to  the  advantage  of  any  minority to  encourage  the  totalitarian
spirit  in  this country, to weaken basic constitutional  guarantees,
to  join  hands  with  forces  which  tomorrow  can  as  easily  turn
against  them?   What  greater  folly  for  a  Jewish  organization
than  to  help  weaken  in  any  way  the  Bill  of  Rights ?
.1   0
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly, July  23,  1956
And  Speaking   of  Democracy,   Who   Elected   Krushchev?
The  biggest  disappointment   of  the  week  was  the  special
session  of  the  Supreme  Soviet  in  Moscow.  Many hoped that
it  was  being  called  to  ratify  the  new criminal  code  promised
by  the  Ministry  of  Justice  "within   30  days"  on  March  27,
1953.   But  the  session,  like  those  of  the  Stalin  period, rapidly
rubber  stamped  a  series   of  decrees  and  made  some  minor
changes  in  the  new  pension  laws.  There  was  no  sign  of  the
kind  of  free  debate  which  marked  the  Polish  Sejm  in  April.
Moscow  seems to be putting  the  lid  on discussion  in  the Com-
munist  parties  abroad  and  this  will  be the  real  test  of  their
independence—not  that  wailing  over  the  sins  of  Stalin  which
Krushchev  orchestrated.
The  fall   of  Rakosi  in  Hungary   is  a  triumph  for   Tito,
another  episode  in  the  wooing of  Belgrade.   But  it  is  not  yet
clear  what  it  will  mean  internally  for  Hungary.  The Pravda,
editorial  of July  15 calling  on the  Communist  parties to  close
ranks  behind  Moscow  spoke  sharply  of  those  intellectuals   in
Hungary  who "tried  under  the  guise  of  discussion  to  spread
anti-party  views." The same editorial  also  said  the  "past  mis-
takes  and shortcomings  in connection with  Stalin's  cult  . . .
have already  been rectified by the  CPSU  Central  Committee."
This was fast  work.
We urge  honest  Communists sincerely  and  deeply  upset,  as
so many  were,  by the  Krushchev  speech  to  keep  open  mind  a
little  longer.  They  need  trust  nothing  but  their  own  judg-
ment  and  Moscow's words. We advise  them  to  read  for  them-
selves  the  text  of  Pravda's  editorial,  "International  Forces of
Peace,  Democracy and  Socialism Are  Growing and  Strength-
ening," and  ask themselves whether  this  sounds  like  the  writ-
ing  of people trying to grapple  with real  problems.  According
to  Pravda,  on the  Poznan affair,  for  example, "It  is  now uni-
versally  known  that  this  provocation  was  brought  about  by
enemy  agents"  and  is  now  "unanimously condemned  by  the
Polish  people."    Unanimous, no less.
Correction   from  Poland
The  Polish  poet,  Wladyslaw  Broniewski,  writes   us
from  Warsaw that  his  poem,  "Police  Dogs,"  which we
published   (June  4)   from   a  recent   issue  of   Trybunw
Ludu  was  written  in  1932  about  a  Ukrainian Commu-
nist  tortured  in  a  Polish  prison.   In  common  with  the
London  Times  (where we  first  saw  mention of  it  on  our
way  back  from  Poland)  we misunderstood and  thought
it  a  contemporary  poem. After  seeing  the  reference  in
the  Times,  we asked  both  the  press  officer  of  the  Polish
Embassy  in Washington and  the  Polish  press  service  in
New  York about the  poem  but  never  heard  from  either.
As  a  result  we had  to  depend on volunteer  translating
help.   Had  someone  studied  the  rest  of  the   page   in
Trybunu  Ludu  for  us, we we would have  been  informed
of   a   note  explaining  when  the   poem  was   originally
written.  We regret  the  error,  and  send  our  respects  to
M.  Broniewski, who  is  held  in  deservedly  high  esteem
in  Poland  and  abroad.
Those  who  fall  back  upon  the  old  apologetics,  those  who
have  not really learned that the  lesson  of the past few  months
is the  danger  of not thinking for  themselves, will  wake up one
of  these  days to find they have been as  bitterly  deceived about
Krushchev  as  they  were  about  Stalin.  His latest  on the  lack
of  free  elections  in  Guatemala  and  Indochina  is  demogogy,
not  serious  discussion.  If  free  elections  are  so desirable,  why
are  they  not  held  in  the  Soviet  Union?  Who  elected  Krush-
chev?   Who chose him  to  be the  world  spokesman  of  a  whole
movement?   How  many  people indeed  ever  heard  of  him  be-
fore   he  suddenly  appeared   after   Stalin's   death?   Is   this
democracy?
Walter  "Faceless  Informer"  Passport   Bill  On  Shelf  for  This  Session
The  effort  of  the  State  Department's, passport  division  to
legalize  its  restrictive travel  regulations  and,the  use of  anon-
ymous  informants  seems  to  have  been  defeated,  at  this  ses-
sion  of  Congress  anyway.  The  House  Judiciary  Committee
met  in  executive session  last  Wednesday but  again  failed  to
act  on  the  Walter  passport   bill   (HR  9991,  revised  as  HR
1582).  The subcommittee in  charge  of the  measure  reported  it
favorably  to  the  full  committee  several  weeks  ago,  but  it  is
still  bottled  up,  with  no companion  measure  out  of  committee
in the  Senate.
The  only two  witnesses  who turned  up  for  the  bill  at  the
subcommittee   hearings   in   May   were   Scott    McLeod   and
Francis  Knight  of  the  passport  division.  The bill  was opposed
by  the  American  Bar  Association,  the  Association  of  Immi-
gration  and  Nationality  Lawyers  and  the  Emergency  Civil
Liberties  Committee, though  a  statement  by  Clark  Foreman,
director  of  the  ECLC,  was  churlishly  left  out  of  the  printed
record.                                                                                                            •
Whether  as  face-saver,  delaying  action  or  the  beginning of
a  new try  at  such  legislation,  the  new  Commission on  Secu-
rity  set  up  a  subcommittee  on June  17 to  deal  with  passports
(as  well  as  international   organizations  and  port  security).
Walter,  a  member of the  full  Commission, declined a  place on
the  subcommittee,  which  is  made  up  of  Under  Secretary  of
Commerce  Louis  S.  Rothschild,  Dr.  Susan  Riley  of  Peabody
College   and   Congressman  William  M.  McCulloch   (R.)   of
Ohio.  Walter,  it  is  now  said,  will  not  press  his  measure  but
wait  for  this  subcommittee  to  report.
This  Commission is  the  one  set  up  under  the  Humphrey-
Stennis  resolution  and  opposed by  the  Attorney  General  and
the  FBI.   Eight  of  the  twelve  members  were  picked  by  the
White  House  and  Nixon  with  Brownell's  advice  so  the  pos-
sibility  that  it  may turn  in  a  ringing  defense of  the  right  to
travel  is  too small  to  be  calculated  without  an  IBM  machine.
Just  to  keep  everything  in  order,  the  Commission's  staff  di-
rector,  D. M. Ladd, turns out to be a  retired  FBI  man,  son of
the radical  Non-Partisan  League  Senator  from  North  Dakota,
one  of  the  elder  La  Follette's  lieutenants.
One  the  Papers  Didn't  Print: How  the  Nazis  Hoped  to  Buy  Off Jim  Farley
A  story  no  newspaper  or  wire  service  seems  to  have  cov-
ered  is worth  the  attention  of  the  historian  interested  in  the
Roosevelt  period.  At  page  1,079  of  State  Department  release
No. 375  (Documents on German  Foreign  Policy,  1918-45.  The
Last  Months of  Peace)  for  July  15 was  a  Nazi  memo  which
tells   how  the   American  publisher,  Ralph   Beaver   Strass-
burger,  "ready  to  do anything which would serve  the  German
cause,"  was trying  to  split  the  Democratic  party  and  create
"an  open  breach"  between  Roosevelt  and  Farley  before  the
1940  elections.
The  wealthy  Norristown,  Pa.,  publisher  met Farley  in  Ger-
many  in  August   1939  and  "offered  Farley  a  post  with  a   sal-
ary  of  $50,000  a  year,  in  order  to  make the  breach  with  Roo-
sevelt  easier  for  him."   Farley   declined.  The  Strassburgers
were  indignant  because  R.  H.  Geist,  then  first  secretary  of
the  U.S.  Embassy in  Berlin,  took  Farley  out  to  see a  concen-
tration camp; they thought  this  showed a  "lack  of taste." The
Strassburgers   tried  to  draw  Farley's  attention  to  "various
things"  in  Hitler's  Reich  "which  had  impressed  them"  but
"Farley  had  not  noticed  any  of  these  things."  Strassburger,
according  to  the  memorandum, "regards  the  U.S.  Ambassa-
dor in Paris, the half-Jew  Bullitt, as the  chief  American   war-
monger  in  Europe"  and  was  collecting  material  on Bullitt  "to
use  in  the  election   campaign   next  year."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, July  S3,1956
A Story  The Press  Did Not  Cover and  the  Rest  of  the  Left  Is  Foolish  to  Ignore
The  Attorney  General  Ends  the  First  Hearing  on  His  Notorious  "List"
The  government  of  the  United  States  never  looked  more
ludicrous  than   in  the  year  long  hearings   which  have  just
ended  to  determine whether the  Independent Socialist  League
shall  remain  on the  Attorney  General's  list.  The  average  well
informed  American,  if  asked  about  this  list,  would  say  that
it  was  intended to keep off the  Federal  payroll members of  or-
ganizations  which  might  pipeline secrets to  Moscow  or  try  to
overthrow  the  government by  force  and  violence.
But  the  organization picked to be the  guinea pig  of the  first
such  hearings  ever  held  by  the  Attorney  General  is  the  one
least  likely  to  steal  atom  bombs  for   Moscow,  the  most  anti-
Muscovite of all  the  Left  splinter  groups.  In  addition, though
staunchly  revolutionary  in  its  ideology, the  Independent  So-
cialist  League  constitutes  a  somewhat  unclear  and  only mi-
croscopically  present   danger.   It  has  200  members.
Technically  speaking,  the  ISL  originated  as  the  Right  op-
position  to  the  Left  opposition  to  orthodox  Communism.  It
was  a  minority  which  seceded from  the  Trotzkyist   Socialist
Workers  Party  in  1940  as  a  protest  against  the  Russian  at-
tack  on  Finland   and  Trotzky's  view  that  the  Soviet  Union,
though  "degenerate,"  must  still  be  defended.
In   1949  the   Voice  of  America  broadcast   to  17  countries,
and  U.S.-supplied  bombers dropped  over  Communist China,  a
leaflet  called "Stalinism  Is  Not  Socialism,"  of which the  ISL's
leading  figure,  Max Schachtman,*  was a signer.  Since the  or-
ganization  was already  on the  Attorney  General's  list  at  that
time,  a  future  McCarthy  may  use the  incident  to  prove  that
in  1949  the  Democrats  were  so far   gone  in  treason  that—de-
spite  the  clear  warning  of  the  Attorney  General's   list—they
permitted  the  Voice of  America  and  American  bombers to  be
used  by known  subversives  in  spreading  abroad  revolutionary
doctrines  so extreme  that  they  were  too  much even  for  Leon
Trotzky!
Members of the  ISL were triply  pariah—the government  re-
garded  them  as  Reds,  the  Reds  as  Trotzkyists,  and the  Trot-
zkyists  as  renegades;  never  did  so few  stagger  around  under
so  many  scarlet  letters.   It  is  a  tribute  to  their  calibre  that
the  government  until  a  few  weeks ago  was  unable  in  a  year
of  trying  to  recruit  a  single  witness  from  among their  past
or  present  membership.   Its   only  witness   was  a  Professor
Geroid  T.  Robinson  of  Columbia,  one  of  those  Russian  ex-
perts.  He  read  long  excerpts  from  Lenin into  the  record  but
admitted  on  cross-examination  by  Joseph  L.  Rauh,  Jr.,   the
League's  counsel, that  he  had  never  heard  of  the  organiza-
tion  against  which  he  was  testifying!
Then  for  "rebuttal" the  government produced James  Burn-
ham,  whose  testimony  the  reader  can  sample for  himself  in
two  boxes on  this  page.  This  Trotzkyist  turned  McCarthyite
* It   was  Schachtman's  successful  passport   suit  last  year
which  forced  the  government  to  hold  these  hearings.
Fifth  Amendment: FBI  Variety
Q.  [by  Joseph  L.  Rauh]  Did  you  ever  say  in  public
that  the  Workers  Party  advocated  the  overthrow of  the
government  by  force  and  violence?
A.  [by  James  Burnham]  I  don't  remember  that  the
occasion  ever  arose.
Q.  Since  it  is  a  violation  of  the  law,  wasn't  it  your
duty  to tell  the FBI?  . . .
A. I  don't  object  to  answering  personally,  but  what-
ever  small  relations  I've  had  with  the  FBI  are  a  matter
of  confidence. . . .
[When  Rauh  pressed  for  an  answer,  the  government
insisted  internal  security  might be  endangered  if  Burn-
ham  were  forced  to  answer.  Objection  was  overruled.]
Q.  You  testified  here  that  the  ISL  advocates  over-
throw  by  force  and  violence?  Did  you  tell  that  to  the
FBI?
A.  In  the  same  sense  as  I  testified  to  in  this  hearing
—yes.
Q. You don't  talk  to the FBI in that  language.   I know
them, they  want it  in English;  now I want  to  know just
what  you  said.
A.  I  must  decline  in  general  to  discuss  my  relations
with the  FBI.
—Attorney  General's list  hearing, July  10
admitted  that  he  had  been  a  member  of  the  ISL  only  for  a
few  weeks  after   it  was  formed  and  rarely  read  its   scrappy
organ, Labor  Action.  Burnham's  way of proving  that the  ISL
advocated   overthrow   was   pungently   summed  up   by  that
paper's  editor,  Hal  Draper,   as  "a  police  agent's   inference
from  an  implication  of  an  hypothesis  about  a  theory  of  class
relations."
The  extended   hearings—before   a  trial   examiner—should
disillusion   those  who  think  that  "due  process"  may  correct
the  evils  of  the  Attorney  General's  list.  The  hearings   turned
into  a  long  Talmudic  exploration  of  Marxism,  a  doctrine  as
multiform  as  Christianity;  the  Attorney  General  might  just
as  well  use  due process  to  determine  which  views  of  the  vir-
gin  birth  are   heretical.
We  take  our  hat  off to  those  who appeared  as  defense  wit-
nesses  for   the  ISL:   Norman  Thomas,  Harry    Fleischman,
Daniel  Bell  of  Fortune  and  Dwight  Macdonald of  the   New
Yorker.    Macdonald  as  a  former   member   deserves   special
praise for  his  courage.
We  note  finally  the  extraordinary   indifference  of  the  rest
of  the  Left  to  this  whole  proceeding,  though  it  will  test  the
right  of  the  Attorney  General  to  set  up  an  index   expurga-
torius  in  American  politics,  blacklisting  independent  radicals
as  well  as  Communists.
James  Burnham, As Government Witness,  on  The  Virtues of  Official  Lying
Q. [by  Joseph  L. Rauh, Jr.,  counsel  for  the  Independent So-
cialist  League]. Did you ever say  anywhere  that  you had  to
use  Communist  methods  to  defeat  them  [Communists] ?
A.  [by  James  Burnham].  I  didn't  know  whether  I  used
that  phrase, but  I have  said  in  effect  that some of  the  meth-
ods used by Communists are  appropriate to  struggle  against
Q.  And  lying  is  one  of  them,  isn't  it,  Mr.  Burnham?
A. On some  occasion, yes . . .
Q. All  right, I  will  ask  you: You have  indicated  it  was  all
right  to  lie in  fighting  Soviet  Communism.  Is  it  all  right  to
lie  in  fighting  other  communisms?
A.  It  could be.
Q.  [by Government Attorney Kirk Maddrix, in  an  effort  to
1
repair  the  damage]. I  am  asking  you whether  in  your  opin-
ion it  is justifiable  for  any  witness to  come into this particu-
lar  hearing and tell a  falsehood  against  these organizations?
A.  No.
Q.  [by Rauh]. .  .  .  Where  would  it  be proper  to  lie, Mr.
Burnham,  against  either  official  or  unofficial  communism?
A. In the conduct  of a national  struggle. . . .
Q. You mean  only  governments  could  lie, not  individuals?
A.  Individuals  working  as  agents  of  the  government  or
officers  of the government  under  instruction.  .  . .
—Attorney  General's list hearing,  July  11
We  wonder  how  many  government  informers  have  been
indoctrinated  with  the  idea that  perjury  may  be  patriotism.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's Weekly, July  S3,1956
How  to  Handle  Politically   Unreliable  But  Inventive  Geniuses
We've been in continuous staff  meeting for  a  week with  the
problem  put  before  a  House  Government Operations subcom-
mittee  by former  Assistant Air  Force  Secretary  Trevor  Gard-
ner.   Government  security  officers  are  having  trouble  with  a
brilliant  scientist   who  keeps  inventing  "top  secret"   ideas,
though  he  himself  has  not  been  cleared.   They  have  denied
him  access  to  his  own secrets  but  "unfortunately,"   Gardner
said, "this man has  such  an  inventive ability  he keeps  coming
up  with  top  secret  ideas."  What  to  do?  His  passport  should,
of  course,  be  cancelled  immediately.   Beyond that  we  can  see
only  one  sure  precaution,   an  adaptation   of  the   New  York
State "Baumes  law"  which automatically  sentences  fourth  of-
fenders  to  life  imprisonment. Any  scientist  convicted for  the
fourth  time  of  discovering  a  top  secret  idea  could  be  put
away permanently  under  guard,  still free  to invent,  of  course,
but  not to  roam.
The  Fascist-Racist  Axis  in  the  Senate:  The  opposition  to
Sobeloff's   nomination  to  the  Court  of  Appeals  sprang  not
only from  his  anti-segregation   views but from the  hostility  to
faceless  informers and the  witch hunt  which he  showed in  the
Peters  and  Lattimore  cases;  he  is  a  man  of  integrity   and
deep  respect   for  law.  The  19  votes  against  him  measures
about  the  full  strength  that  the  Crypto-Fascists   of  the Sen-
ate  can  muster  when  allied  with  the  white  supremacy  senti-
ment  of  the  South.   On the  Republican side,  only Jenner,  Mc-
Carthy,  Welker and  Williams of  Delaware voted against him;
the  last  named responded to  racist  feeling  in  Delaware;  the
first  three  make up  the  screwball rightist fringe  of the  G.O.P.
Were  it  not for  the  race  issue,  their  Democratic  counterpart,
Eastland, would not  have been able to  swing more than  three
votes  on his  own  side  of  the  fence.  But  as  it  is  race  hatred
forced  true  conservatives  like  George and  Russell  and  South-
ern  liberals  like  Sparkman  and  Lister  Hill  into- the  lineup
against  Sobeloff.   Delaware,  Virginia,  North  Carolina,  South
Carolina,  Georgia,  Alabama,  Louisiana  and  Mississippi  were
solid  against  him.   Fulbright  of  Arkansas  and  Smathers  of
Florida  voted for  him while  McClellan  of  Arkansas  and  Hol-
land  of  Florida  were  recorded  against.  The  border  states of
Kentucky, Tennessee, Oklahoma, Missouri and  Maryland were
recorded  for   Sobeloff.  Among the  surprises:  the  two  favor-
able votes from  Texas;  Chavez, spokesman of the  Latin  Amer-
ican  minority, voted  against  a  man friendly to  the  Negroes;
Butler  of  Maryland, McCarthy's  protege,  voted  for   Sobeloff.
New  Reds-in-State-Dept.  Scenario?   The  Hearst  press  has
been  tipped  off that  Eastland's  Senate  Internal  Security  Sub-
committee  questioned in  executive session three  former Jus-
tice  Department  "bosses"  of  Judy  Coplon, two  of  them  now
employed  in  State.   Chief   Counsel  Robert  Morris  said  this
was  an  attempt  "to  discover  how  Miss  Coplon  got  her job."
One of those questioned, now a  Foreign  Service officer,  was  re-
stored  to  his  post  last  December after  security   hearings.
Not  Kosher, Like Martin Luther: For  the  second time in  re-
cent months, the  Roman Catholic Legion of Dencency has  used
its  power of  unofficial  censorship over  the film industry  to  af-
fix its  little  yellow  badge  on a  film  for  other  than  supposed
moral  reasons.  The  first  was  in  the  case  of  "Martin  Luther"
which  it  labelled  "unacceptable"  for  its  theology.  Now it  has
turned  thumbs down  on "Storm  Center" which will star  Bette
Davis  as  a  librarian  who  refuses  to  remove a  book  on Com-
munism  from  her  shelves.  The  Legion  judges  the  film  "high-
ly  propagandist^,"  "controversial,"  "warped,  oversimplified
and  strongly  emotional."   Must  be good.
Eye-Witness  in  Poznan:  Le  Monde   was  the  only  French
newspaper   which  had  a  correspondent   in  Poznan  when  the
recent  riots  occurred.  Thoughtful  students  will  find  his  tele-
phone  dispatch  in  the  July  4  airmail  edition  of  that  paper
worth  attention.  He  blames the  riots  on the  sudden  suppres-
sion  of  the  special  allowances paid  at  the  Stalin  steel  works
and  other  Poznan factories  and  to  the  imposition of  taxes on
overtime pay  which had hitherto  been  tax  exempt. Those with
whom  he  talked  claimed  that  arms  were  obtained  from  the
militia  and  from  the  sacked  prison;  and  that  Poles  have  al-
ways  had  the  habit  of  "stashing  away"  arms  for  an  emer-
gency.   He  also  reported  that  students  of  the  Poznan  Poly-
technique  joined  the  demonstrators,  bringing  with  them  the
arms  they  used  for  military  training.
Ambassador  Passes  Loyalty  Test:  At  a  closed  meeting  of
the  Senate  Appropriations Committee July  13, McCarthy con-
fronted  U.S. Ambassador  to  Yugoslavia,  James  W.  Riddle-
berger, with a  newspaper clipping quoting him as having  said
to  Krushchev  during a  two hour  talk  when the  latter  visited
Belgrade,  "We have our  McCarthy, you had your  Beria.  It  is
too bad  we cannot  take care of  McCarthy  in  the  same  fashion
you  took  care  of  Beria."   Riddleberger  first  evaded  and  then
denied.  .  .  .  And while  we're  on the  subject,  the next  time
George  Sokolsky comes  up  for  an  appropriation  we'll  be  glad
to  lend  McCarthy  an  INS  clipping from  the  Hearst  Journal-
American  of  July  12 about  John  Cogley's  appearance  before
the   House  Un-American  Activities   Committee  which  says,
"Sokolsky  accused  Cogley  of  using  tactics  that  he  said  have
come  to   be   known   as   'McCarthyism.'    Sokolsky   said   the
writer,  in   his   report   [on  blacklisting],   made   accusations
without  adequate   proof."    Subversives  keep  popping  up  in
the  strangest  places.
Don't  Forget—You  Can  Have  Free  Sample  Copies  for  The  Friends  You  Make  on  Vacation
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E. Capitol, Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Street  .......................................................................  .................
City  .........................................  .Zone ............ State  --------------------
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)    Name  . _______ .... __________________ ................. _____ .....
7/23/56
Street
City                                       .Zone.         State.
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?   Yes  D    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301    E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington   3,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED