I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jun04.pdf

============================================================

A   Visit  To  Warsaw
Poland's  Leading  Communist  Poet  Pens  Bitter  Attack  on  Secret  Police,  See  Page  4.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO.  20
JUNE   4,  1956
'<»      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
16  CENTS
Poland  Has  Begun  to  Liberate  Itself
The  first  thought  which  came into  my mind  as I  drove  into
Warsaw  from  the  airport  was,  "I'm   in  Europe  again."   Some
of  the apartment  house  fronts  on  the  streets  through  which we
passed  recalled  Paris;  others,  Italian  palazzi. The  people  in  the
streets were not  only better  dressed  but  looked  chie.  At the  air-
port  limousine  station  I  was  met  by  a  Polish  gentleman  who
spoke  English with  an  Oxford  accent rendered  subtly  different
by  an  undertone  of  the  softer  and  slower  intonations  of   the
Slav.   He  had  the  grand  manner  whose  impress  the   lordly
Polish  aristocracy  have  left  on  their  country,  a  manner  more
seignorial than  anything  to be encountered  in London  or  Paris.
There  were still terrible  scars and  ruins  amid  the newly  rebuilt
areas—apartment  house  fronts  sheared  away  as  if  by  a  giant
hand,  exposing  the  rooms  within  in  all  their  pitiful  vanished
intimacy.   I  was  taken  to  the  Bristol  Hotel  which  escaped  the
war  with  little  damage  since it  was  the  German  headquarters.
All  foreigners  now  stay there.   It  gave  one a strange  feeling  to
check  into  the  rooms  from  which  SS and  Wehrmacht  directed
the  deliberate  extermination   of  so  many  millions  of  human
beings.
A  Portent  in the  Coffee  Houses
The  Bristol,  small  and  provincial,  was  quite  a  contrast  to
the  enormous  caverns  of  the  Metropol   in  Moscow,  but  the
Bristol  was in  better  repair,  and  the  furnishings  were modern.
The  prices, at four  zlotys to  the  dollar,  were  fully  as  expensive
as  Moscow,  and  I  copied  down  a  few  at  breakfast.   Coffee  was
8  zlotys,  $2;  ham  and  eggs  were  12  zlotys,  $3;  tea  cost  65
cents  a glass  and  a pat  of  butter,  a  quarter  dollar.  There  were
a  half  dozen  Chinese  in  the  dining  room,  but  though  they
spoke English  I never  succeeded in  talking  to them. The  news-
paper  stand  at  the  Bristol,  like  that  in  the  Metropol,  carried
only  Communist  publications,  but  the  Bristol  had  Western  as
well  as  Eastern  Communist  papers.   There  was  Le   Drapeau
Rouge  from  Belgium,  L'Unita  from  Italy,  L'Humanite  from
France and  an  old  copy of  the New  York  Daily  Worker  as well
as  Pravda,  Neues  Deutschland  and  Rude  Pravo.  But  I  soon
learned  that  the  great  event  on  the  intellectual  front  in  War-
saw  was  that  for  two  months  at  five  main  cafes,  it  was  now
possible  to  read  the  Manchester  Guardian, the  London   Times,
Le  Aionde,  L'Information    and  L'Express.    A  limited  number
of  copies were  also  on  sale  daily  at  the  book  stalls  adjoining
these  coffee  houses.   I  went  to  one  of  them,  a  big  coffee  house
in  the  Central European tradition,  its walls  lined  like  a library
with  newspapers and  magazines neatly racked for  the  use of  its
customers.  There  were  as yet  no  American publications  except
the  Daily   Worker  and  Masses  and  Mainstream.                         7
Warsaw  is now the  first  Soviet  capital  in  which  foreign,  i.e.
"capitalist"  papers can be read in  the  coffee  houses  and  bought
on  the  book  stalls.   Only  those  who know  Central  Europe  will
fully  appreciate  what this  means.  On  the  Continent,  where in-
tellectuals  customarily read  several  languages,  people  read for-
eign  papers  far  more  than they do  in  the  United  States,  and  a
visit to a cafe in  Prague  or  Vienna  was a chance to get  a  quick
bird's  eye view  of  the  world  press.   I  am  sure  that  nothing  so
irritated  the  Czech intellectuals  with  the  Communist  regime  in
that  country  as  that  they  could  no  longer  read  the   London
Times  or  even the  New  Statesman and Nation.  They  still  can't
in   the   Prague   coffee   houses.   The   appearance   of   Western
papers   in  Warsaw   symbolizes  better  than   any  other   single
event  the  change  taking  place  in  Poland,  and  the   difference
between  Warsaw  and  other  Soviet capitals.   I  expected  to find
some  slight  variations.   I  found  instead  a  completely   different
atmosphere.   I  have  nowhere  in  the  world,  East  or  West,  not
even  in  Tito's  Belgrade  in  1950,  heard  Communists  talk  as
they  are  talking  in  Warsaw,  without  Communist  cliches  or
party  cant,  and  a  good  deal  more  freely  than  in  the  loyalty
purge  haunted  government circles of  Washington.  My visit  to
Warsaw  was a  revelation  and  a  pleasure.
Others  Report The  Same  Surprise
Those  who  may  be  tempted  to  write  this  impression  off  as
enthusiasm  will  find  similar  reports  in  politically  diverse  cir-
cles.   Richard  H.  S. Grossman of  the  New  Statesman and  Na-
tion,  who  was in  Warsaw  a  few  days  before my visit,  and Syd
Gruson  of  the  New  York  Times,  who  was  there  a  few  days
later,  both  reported  much  the  same  impressions.   The  London
Observer  (May  13)  and  Hamburg's  Die  Zeit  (May  17),   both
independent  conservative weeklies, carried  long  articles  treating
the  changes  in  Poland  with  surprise  and  respect,   indeed  the
latter  (though  usually  an  Adenauer supporter)   seriously  dis-
cussed  diplomatic relations  between  Bonn  and  Warsaw  on  the
ground  that  Warsaw  could  no longer  be regarded  as "nur  eiae
Filiale  Moskaus"   (only  a  branch  office  of  Moscow).   I  am
sure  that  Poland  remains in  many  fundamental  ways a  satellite
of  Moscow,  but  there  is  nevertheless an  atmosphere  in  War-
saw,   a  change  in  the  government  and  a  spirit  in  the  Polish
press which  goes  far  beyond  the  regimented  de-Stalinization  in
Moscow  or  the  obedient  but  tepidly  cautious  imitations  duti-
fully  arranged  in  East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Hungary anil
Bulgaria.  Germans will goose-step in  any direction, the  Czechs
are  as  submissive as  Russians, the  Hungarians have  been poli-
tically   devitalized   by   one   dictatorship  after   another  since
World  War  I.  'Jut the traditionally  and  historically  rebellious
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stoned  Weekly,  Jims 4,1858
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Poles—invited  to speak  up by Stalin's detractors—have answer-
ed  with  a  loud  and  enthusiastic roar.
Polish  Communists  talk  a  language  one  does  not  hear  else-
where.   "We  have  our  own  McCarthies,"  said  a  Polish  party
journalist   at  lunch;   no   Russian,  no  American  Communist,
would  admit  that  there  were  "McCarthies"  among  his  com-
rades.   "You  can't  knock  Marxism  into  people's  heads  with  a
hammer,"  a  second  echelon  party  functionary told  me  in  de-
scribing  the  difference  between  the  Polish  and  the  Russian ap-
proach  to  the  peasant  problem.   Even  during  Stalin's  heyday
Poland  avoided  the  "Bolshevik  logic"  he  applied  to  the  peas-
antry  with   such  singularly   disastrous   results—as   Krushchev
now  testifies in  discussing  the  Russian farm problem.  "The  So-
cialists  have  good  reason  to  mistrust  us,"  said  another  Polish
Communist   in   discussing   the   desire  to  revive  the   Popular
Front,  "we  have  to  prove  to  them  that  this  time  joint  action
will  not  mean  their  political  liquidation."   A  Polish   official,
discussing  the  Gomulka  affair,  said  "We  disagreed with  Gom-
ulka  before  and  we  disagree  with  him  now.   But  we  never
thought  him  a traitor.   Our  secret  police  are  experts  at  faking
evidence.   They  produced  all  kinds  of  material   incriminating
Gomulka.   It  had a fishy smell  but we didn't  know how to  dis-
prove  it.  At  least  we didn't  stage  a trial  and  force  a  confession
and  kill  him  and  we're  proud  now  that  we  can  release   him."
No  Russian  official  would  admit,  simply,  that  the  secret  police
were expert at faking evidence.  I got no double-talk  in Warsaw.
A  Polish  Krushchev?
Not  that  Marxist-Leninist  gobbledegook  has  been  abandon-
ed.   The  new  First  Secretary  of  the  Polish   United  Workers
Party,  Edward  Ochab,  sounded  a  little  like  Krushchev  in  his
speech  of  April  6  to  the  party  activists  in  Warsaw.     "The
Third  Plenum,"  he  said,  "served  as  a  starting  point  for  the
struggle  to  eliminate  a  number  of  distortions  in  our  State  ap-
paratus,  particularly  in  the  security  organs,  military  informa-
tion  and  prosecutor's  office.  It  served  the  Party  and  Party  ap-
paratus  as a signal  to return  to the Leninist party norms.  . .  ."
This  reference to  the  abuses  of  the  past  as mere   "distortions"
to  be corrected  by a  "return  to  Leninist  norms"  (the  Cheka?)
has  a Russian rather than  Polish  flavor.  So did  his PravJa-like
alarm about the freedom  of  speech  cropping up  in  Poland.   "It
seems  advisable,"  Ochab  said,  "to  draw  attention  to  the  fact
that  it  looks  as  if  some  of  our  comrades  were  losing  their
sense  of  balance and  also  their  sense  of  proportion—between
correct  criticism  and  utterances  from  positions  which  cannot
bring  any  benefit  to  the  Party.  This  is  also  occurring  in  the
columns  of  our  press."   (Apparently  the  Polish  press,  unlike
the  Russian,  was  acting  up.)     "The   fact,"  Ochab  went  on,
"that  statements are made in  the  press  against the  Party proves
the  existence of  unhealthy manifestations, of  a  loss  of  a  sense
of  Party  responsibility, of  a  confusion  of  ideas."   Ochab  said
such  utterances "were  hysterical, they  signify  an  anti-Party at-
titude."   This  Russian  style  idolatry of  the  Party makes it  easy
to  believe  the  report  that  Ochab  was  picked  by  Krushchev  to
succeed  Beirut, who  contracted influenza  and  then heart trouble
after  hearing Stalin downgraded  in  the  20th  Congress  in  Mos-
cow,   a  striking  case  of  political  psychomatic illness.    (Many
Poles  believe  Beirut  committed suicide.)
If  Ochab's  speech  was  intended  to  dampen  down  enthusi-
asm,   it  did  not  succeed in  its purpose.   The  week  I was  there,
that  which  began  on  April  23,  saw the  first  meeting  of  a  Com-
munist  parliament  in  which  there  was  real  debate,  real  differ-
ences  of  opinion  and  real  criticism  of  the  government.   This
was  no  Supreme  Soviet,  invariably  unanimous  even  in  con-
demning  its  own  past.  The  Sejm meets in  a building  of  chaste
and  refreshing simplicity after  the  Byzantine baroque  of  Mos-
cow;   plain  Doric  columns  surround  the  huge  semicircle  of  a
sky-lighted  Chamber  in  which  the  delegates  convene.   It  was
built  by Pilsudski in  1928  and  reconstructed  in  1946-47.   The
lovely  white  building  contains  no  "icons"—no  busts  or  paint-
ings  of  governmental  leaders;  Poland,  unlike  Stalin's  Russia
and  Tito's  Yugoslavia,  never  really  had  a  "personality  cult."
The  day  I  was  there  the  session  of  the  Sejm  looked  about  as
bored  and  desultory  as a normal  session  of  Congress  in  Wash-
ington;  the  press  galleries  looked  equal  "normal,"  i.e.  bored.
The  discussion during  my visit was on  science  and  the  schools.
A  Deputy  Zofia  Zemanek  boasted  that  higher   education  in
Poland  had  outstripped  Britain;  that  while  there  were  only  30
higher  school  students per  10,000  in Britain, there were  52 per
10,000  in  Poland.   Even  in  this  a  new  note  was  struck.   The
official  summary  quoted  her  as  saying  "a  certain  degradation
of  science had  been  evident  in  the  past  few  years.  Schematism
and  vulgarization  had  led  to  the  ossification of  science  which,
deprived  of  broader  contacts  with  foreign  countries,  without
polemics,  could  not  develop  properly."  (Italics  added).
Plenty  of  Polemics  Now
There was  no  dearth  of  polemics  at  the  session.   The  Prime
Minister,  Cyrankiewicz,  invited  them  in  his  opening   address.
His  tone  was quite  different  from  Ochab's.  The  Prime  Minis-
ter  welcomed  "the   sound  wave  of  criticism"   sweeping   over
Poland,  said  it  meant that  "every  conscious  citizen  is becoming
an  activist,"  and  he  demanded  a  new  attitude  on  the  part  of
the  government  toward  the  Sejm.   "Undoubtedly,"  Cyrankie-
wicz  said,  "we  will  have  to  break  with  the  practice  by  which
the  overwhelming majority  of  legal  acts  come -into life  in  the
shape  of  decrees, without  previous  discussion  at  Sejm  commit-
tees."  The  Sejm  was no longer  to  be a rubber  stamp.   Instead,
like  any normal legislature,  it  was to  exercise  "control  over  the
organs  of  the  executive power  and  the  activities of  the  Govern-
ment."   Such  control was  "a  no  less  essential  factor  in  consoli-
dating  the  rule of  law."   But  in  order  to  do  so the  members of
the  Sejm  "must  have  access to  sources of  information"  and  in
this  respect  "the  situation  was  bad  in  the  past."    Questions
from  Sejm  members had  been  treated  in the  past  "as  an  irritat-
ing  nuisance."   He  promised  an  end  to  such  practices,  "Coop-
eration  with  the  Sejm  will  be,  and  must  be,  a  fundamental
rule  for  all  organs  of  Government."
Cyrankiewicz  is  one  of  the  Socialists  who  joined  with  the
•  Communists  in  the  formation of  the  "United  Workers  Party,"
indeed  the  last  one  left  in  high  position.   His  speech  had  a
non-Communist  flavor  in  its  discussion  of  civil  liberties.    He
thought  "the  vigilant  reaction of  public opinion  to  each  viola-
tion  of  binding laws and  civil rights can be  of  great  assistance"
in  maintaining  "the  strict observance of  the  rule  of  law."   He
said  debate  was  taking  place  in  Poland  in  a  society  "where
there  still  exist  class  antagonisms  and  where  the  class  enemy
undoubtedly  is still active."   But  the  lesson  he  drew from  this
echoed  the  rationale of  classic liberalism.  He  said  that  "in  the
atmosphere of  political activisation, when  in  the  course  of  this
great  debate the  political  armor  is growing  more perfect,  when
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  U, 1956
the  maturity  of  the  masses  is  certainly  growing  at  a  double
rate,  while  complaints  and  grievances  are  being  revealed  and,
thanks  to  this,  can  be  overcome,  the  enemy  is  finding  it  in-
creasingly  difficult  to  operate.  ...     Of  what  importance,"  he
asked,   "are   insinuations,  slanders,   gossip,   whispering  cam-
paigns  and  intrigues  at  a  time  when  all  of  us  are  openly  ex-
posing  all  shortcomings  and  errors  .  .  .?"   Strikingly  absent
was  any implication that  "democracy"  was to  be  limited  to  the
Party,  much  less  that  it  was  to  be  channelled  within  "correct"
limits  of  "Marxism-Leninism,"  Russian  style.
Against  A  "Droplet"  Press  Policy
The  week  before  the  Sejm  opened,  the  government  had  al-
ready  begun  to  activate  this  policy  by providing  real  informa-
tion  to  the  parliamentary  committees;  for  the  first  time  in
Polish  postwar  history,  these  committees  began  to  discuss  and
work  on  pending  legislation.   When  the  session  opened,  the
deputies  were  not  slow  to  take  advantage  of  the  cue  given
them  by  the  Prime  Minister.    A  newspaperman  deputy,  Os-
manczyk,  launched  a  vigorous  attack  on  press  policy.   He  said
too  much  space  was  consumed  by  "tremendously  long  official
statements"  and  so-called  "original  articles  telling  us  the  same
thing  in  slightly  different  words."   He  protested  that  the  gov-
ernment was  "still  providing  mere  droplets  of  information  for
the  Press,  meted  out  according  to  the  various  strata  of   the
population—the   larger  the  circle  of  readers,  the  smaller  the
droplet."   This  is  a  perfect  description  of  Soviet  press  policy.
Another  deputy,  Drobner,  once  a  Left  Wing  Socialist, assailed
the  system  under  which  the  Sejm  passed  decrees  "as  if  at  a
military  command—get  up,  sit  down,  get  up  again,  sit  down
again,  and  make  ourselves  the  laughing  stock  of  the   com-
munity."
Two  Catholic  deputies  spoke  up  on  behalf  of  non-Commu-
nist  Catholic  opinion.   Deputy   Horodynski   said  millions  of
believing  Catholics  were  helping  to  build  socialism  and  pro-
tested  "the  false  division of  the  nation  into  Marxists  and  Cath-
olics."   The  former  Count  Lubienski,  a  member  of  Pax,  the
Roman  Catholic  organization  which  supports  the  regime,  asked
that  Catholics  be  allowed  to  set up  their  own  youth  organiza-
tion  or  that  the  Communist  Youth  Union  be  transformed  into
"an   organization  of  young  people  embracing  various   world
outlooks."  This challenge  to the monistic and monolithic  char-
acter  of  a  Communist  regime  drew  replies  from  two  deputies.
One,  Gwiazdowicz, dwelt  on  the  hostility  of  the  clergy  to  the
people  and  the  anti-clerical  traditions  of  the  peasantry.   The
other,  Deputy  Helena  Jaworska,  accused  the  clergy  of  intoler-
ance  and  of  exercising  pressure  on  young  people.   She  said
young people were free  to join the  official  Youth  Union  or  not
as  they  pleased  and  that  persuasion  was  the  only  method  of
ideological  influence  it  used.  The  tone  of  this  debate,  the  fact
that  it  took  place  at  all,  was  significant.  It  was  equally  note-
worthy  that  five  Catholic  deputies   voted  against  the  bill  to
legalize  abortion.  There was unanimity—but  it  was  genuine—
in the  approval  accorded  the amnesty under  which  30,000  poli-
tical  prisoners  are  being  freed  and  compensation  will  be  paid
the  wrongfully  imprisoned.   And  there  was unanimity  within
the  Sejm as  well  as without  in  the  summary  dismissal  of  Rad-
kiewicz,  former  head  of  the  secret  police;  of  the  public  prose-
cutor,  and  of  the  chief  military  prosecutor.   Most  indicative of
all  was  the  decision  to  restore  the  full  civil  rights  of  all  who
fought  in  the  rightist  Polish  Home  Army during  the  last  war.
The  Jews  in  Poland
It  was  a  pleasure  to  find  Jewish  cultural  life  flourishing  in
Poland.   There  is  a  Yiddish  press  and  a  Yiddish  theatre—
indeed  the  Jews  of  Poland  even  during  the  last  days  of  Stalin
suffered  no  such period as befell  the  Jews  of  the  Soviet Union,
a  period  in  which  Jewish  artists  and  writers  were  liquidated,
and  Jews  themselves made targets  of  public  scorn.   In  this  re-
spect,  too,  the  Polish  record  is the  best  in  Eastern Europe  and
notably  better than  in  the  neighboring  Czechoslovakia  with  its
Slansky  frameup  and  the  long  imprisonment  of  the  now  freed
Israeli  journalist, Mordechai  Oren.   The  leaders  of  the  Jewish
community  in  Warsaw  speak  with  none  of  those  apprehensive
inhibitions  one  feels  in the  Jews  of  Moscow  even  today,  and  it
was  an  encouraging experience  to  start  up  a  conversation  with
a  stranger  at  a  book  stall,  to  find  that  he  was  a  Jew  and  to
walk  about  Warsaw  with  him  talking  Yiddish.
For  me  the  high  point  of  my  visit  to  Warsaw  was  to  see
what  the  Poles  are  doing  to  rebuild their  capital.   Before  leav-
ing  it  the  Germans  systematically  destroyed  what  was  left,
house  by  house  and  building  by  building.   The  Poles  are  re-
building  the  old  Warsaw  exactly  as  it  was.  The  ancient  mar-
ket,  the  old  churches  and  monuments  are  being  reconstructed
in  precise  and  loving  replica  of  the  past.   The  new apartments
are  being  built  and  planned  to  fit  in  with  the  old;  Poland  is
an  architect's  paradise  and  socialism  is  demonstrating its  great
advantage  in  this heroic task  of  rebuilding and  resurrecting  the
old  city  treasures.   No  effort  is  being spared  to  make  Warsaw
rise  again  from  the  ashes  of  Germany's  wanton  malevolence.
In  this  resurrection  of  their  beloved  and  lovely  capital,   the
Poles  demonstrate a national will  to live that  must stir  all  who
believe  in  courage  and  in  indestructible  spirit.   Their  one  big
architectural problem is what to do with that  huge  Soviet super-
duper   Roxy  theatre,  that   stupefyingly   huge   and  tastelessly
opulent  Palace of  Culture and  Science which  Stalin gave  them.
The  problem  of  how  to  make  it  fit  into  the  quiet   elegance
of  Warsaw  seems  to  be  an  insoluble  one.
Poland  was  the  first  of  the  Soviet  satellites  to  react  vigor-
ously  to   the  down-grading   of   Stalin.   Just   four   days   after
Krushchev's  speech  attacking  the  dead  dictator,  a  speaker  on
Radio  Warsaw  called  for  greater  freedom  of  thought  and  de-
clared  that  Poland  had  been  too  long  "spoonfed  on  an  insipid,
messy  hash  of  slogans.  .  .  .  Today  everyone must  realize  that
he  has  not  only the  right  but  the  duty  to  think  and  to  express
his  thoughts.  .  .  ."   Every  Communist  leader  there  goes  out
'of  the way to assure the visitor that  this  does not  mean a break
with  Moscow,  that  on  the  contrary the  new  line  will  make  it
easier  for  Poland  to  remain in friendly  alliance with  the  Soviet
Union.   The  Polish  leaders  feel  that  the  old  policy  of  trying
to  play  an  independent  role  between  Germany  and  Russia  is
bankrupt,  that  Poland  must  for  its  own  safety  stand  with  the
U.S.S.R.   But  they  are  determined  to  find  a  way  within  these
limits  to  a  freer  society.  For  them  this  does  not  mean  the  res-
toration  of  capitalism—or  that  mixture of  feudalism,  fascism,
clericalism  and  capitalism which  was prewar  Poland—but they
see no  reason why  socialism  cannot  be  combined  with  freedom
of  thought  and  security of  the  person.    This  is  a  struggle  to
liberate  Poland  which  deserves  sympathy from  all  liberals  and
socialists  abroad.   And  in  my  opinion  it  may  far  better  than
Tito's  Yugoslavia   provide  model  and   inspiration   elsewhere
in  Eastern  Europe.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, June  4,1956
A  Vivid  Document   Published   Here  For  the  First  Time  Abroad
•*
Poland's Leading Communist Poet Pens A  Bitter  Attack  On  Its  Secret  Police
Last   year  a  political  sensation  was  created  in  Poland
when  the  poet,  Adam  Wazyk,  dared  write  and  the  Polish
magazine, Nowa Kultura  (New  Culture),  dared  print  a bit-
ter  poem  of  protest  against  the  regime  called  "Poem  for
Adults."    A  similar  sensation  was  created a few  weeks ago
on  April   29  when  Trybuna  Ludu,   Warsaw's   official    Com-
munist   newspaper,   published   a   poem,  "Psy Policyjne"
(Police  Dogs)  by Poland's leading Communist poet,  Wladys-
law  Broniewski.   This  is  a  somber and  horrifying   attack  on
the  secret  police  and  those  practices  which  are  referred   to
vaguely   in  the  Soviet  press  as  "impermissible"  means  of
obtaining   confessions.
Except  for  a  brief   reference   in  the  London  Times  of  May
19, Broniewski's  poem seems to have gone unnoticed abroad.
We  publish  it  here for  the  first  time  in  English  as  a  docu-
ment  which  strikingly   manifests  the  new  spirit  of  Poland.
The  poem  and  the  fact  that  it  was  published in  an     official
newspaper  reveal  a  great  deal  about  the  all  too recent  past
and  tumultuous  present  of  that  country.   Unfortunately  this
translation  is  only   a  literal  line-by-line  rendition,  an  im-
promptu  and volunteer  performance  with the  aid  of  a  friend
who  knows  Polish.   It   does  so  little  justice  to  the  rhymed
quatrains  of  the  original  that  should  Mr.  Broniewski  ever
read  it,  he may  find  this  translation  a  torture  more  exqui-
site  than  anything  the  secret police could  think  up  for him.
But,  still, here it  is—IPS
Police  Dogs
By  Wladyslaw  Broniewski
Transform   tears  into   stone
Prick  up  your  ears  and  listen
Police  dogs  are   howling
Steadily,  hoarse   and   deafening.
Why  are  they  being  heard  here
When  night  falls  over  Poland
Although  the  sound  of  hobnailed  boots
Police  and  military  march.
Although  they  shout,  "Long  live
Freedom  gained  at  last!"
One  hears  the  howling  of  police  dogs
In  Lutsk  and  in  the  police interrogation  centers.
The  training  of  dogs,  tedious and  skilful,
Is  the  fort&  of  Commissar  Zaremba-
Dogs  can  grab  by  the  genitals
The  prisoner,  who clenches his  teeth.
As  Commissar  Zaremba  interrogates,
One  hears  the  creak  of  the  cords  being  twisted.
"Hit   him  on  the  kisser,  Poatowicz!  What,  what  does  he
say?
Do  you  want   more,  carrion-kite?    Give  him  more,  pour
it on."
The  throat,  distended  with  water,   aches.
Strength   ebbs,  strength  gives out.
The  heart  slows  down.   It  dies.
The  police  dog  in  the  corner   growls.
"Out  with  him!  Next!    Mr.  Commissar
"Here  are girls. . . . One  who'd  say nothing. . . .
"If  Mr.  Commissar  would  only  give  the  order
"A way would be found.   Perhaps  . . . this. . . ."
Naked,  numb, a  stranger  to  pain,
Legs  and  arms  tied  straight  as  a  stick.
Eyes!   Eyes!  . . .  Wolves in a dog kennel!
"Now  with  a  whip!   Tkaczuk, strike!"
The  police  dog  howled  long,
In  the  prison  yard  during  the  night.
Because  he  smelled  blood  from  the  cut  veins
He  whimpered  and* howled:  Help!
He  howled  again,  drawn  out, muted,
Frightening—almost   human—
They  tied  him  on  a  chain
•And  it  was  quiet  again  in  Lutsk.
I  heard  the  howling  and I  hear  it  yet
The heart  beats faster  in resistance.
Friends, I  speak  more  and  more  quietly
But  my whisper  can be heard  afar.
Because  with  this whisper  I  ask for  strength
And  the  whisper  summons up  anger  again,
My  song,  rebellious  and  beaten,
Just  like  you, Comrade  Nina.
Next   Week:   Stone  Resumes  Coverage  From    Washington
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol, Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                           Zone           State                 ~
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name
6/4/BB
Street
City                                        Zone          State
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Tea  D    No  D
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED