I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956apr02.pdf

============================================================

Inside;  The  Douglas-Black   Dissent  on  The  Immunity  Law  and  Jennings  Perry  on  Kefauver
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  13
APRIL  2,  1956'<"      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
16  CENTS
While  Russia  Moves  Toward  Political  Freedom,  We  Stage  Red  Raids
Why  Not Move Stalin's Mummy to BrownelTs Washington?
To  the  objective  observer  in  the  uncommitted  lands  of  the
earth  it  must  have  seemed  last  week  that  the  U.S.A.  and  the
U.S.S.R.  were  beginning  to  exchange  political   systems.    In
Russia,  Pravda  for  the  first  time  gave  authoritative  confirma-
tion  of  the  anti-Stalinist views Krushchev was reported to  have
expressed.   Pravda  accused  Stalin  of  "monstrous"   excesses  in
his latter years.  Stalin's  terror began with the  murder of  Kirov
in  1934,  a  murder  which Trotzky  blamed  on  the  Soviet  secret
police.   The  murder  frightened   Stalin  into  a  series  of  execu-
tions  and  political  trials  which made  a  farce  of  the  1936   Con-
stitution.   But  now  comes  word  from  Leningrad
(
  where Kirov
was  party  leader,  that  at  the  Kirov  museum  in  that  city  the
murder  is  no  longer  blamed  (as  in  the  Great  Soviet  Encyclo-
paedia)  on  "a  Trotzkyite  degenerate,"  but  only  on  "an  enemy
of  the  people,"  identity and  motive unknown.   A  new  view of
Kirov's murder must  lead  to  a new view of  the  Left  and  Right
opposition  to  Stalin  and  that  in  turn  to  a new  attitude  toward
the  right  of  opposition.
The  Giant  That  Fears  A  Mouse
This   historic  moment  when  the   Soviet  Union  is  turning
toward  political  and  intellectual  freedom  could  be  a  moment
of  triumph  for  America. It  is  a  moment  for  magnanimity  in
foreign  policy  and  for  example  in  democratic  behavior.   In-
stead  we  saw  an  act  of  frantic  folly—the  nationwide  "income
tax"  raids  on  Communist  party  headquarters,  the  padlocking
of  the  Daily   Worker.   The  spectacle  of  the  American  giant
rearing  in  fright  before  such a  mouse  as  the  harried  Commu-
nist  movement  in  this  country  must  make  us  look   ludicrous
abroad.  It  must make us  seem to  be in the  grip of  forces  much
like  those  which  ruled  Russia under  Stalin—an  intense  fear of
"subversive"   ideas,  an  insane  suspicion  of  the  opposition,   a
readiness  to use any device to  destroy  opponents.   In  our  mild-
er  fashion,  we  are  continuing  the  practice  of  the  "purge."
Though  so  far  only  Communists  have  gone  to  jail,  thousands
of  others  have  been  reduced  to  second  class  citizenship,  de-
famed,  "exiled"  internally  (as  in  Russia),  deprived  of  reputa-
tion  and  livelihood,  held  up  to  public  contumely.   This  was
Stalin's  way with  the  opposition,  and  it  is now ours.  When  the
Russians  come  to  the  point  of  evicting  Stalin's  mummy  from
the  Kremlin,  perhaps  they  will  send  it  here  to  the  more  con-
genial  atmosphere  of  Brownell  era Washington.   We  might  in
turn  send  them  the  Jefferson  memorial;  it  may  inspire   them,
at  the moment  it  only  embarrasses  us.
In  the  same  pattern  with  the  Red  raids  was  the  Supreme
Court's  7-2  decision  upholding  the  new  immunity  law.   This
will  allow  dozens  perhaps  hundreds  of  persons  to  be  brought
k  *
before  grand  juries  and  Congressional  committees  in  order  to
force  them  to  inform  on  fellow  radicals  on  grant  of  immunity
from  prosecution.   They  will  be  confronted  with  a  choice  of
talking and  running the  possible  gauntlet  of  a perjury  frameup
(where  they  really  have  nothing  to  tell)  or  to  be  silent  and
bike a sentence for  contempt  (up  to  $1,000 fine or  one year in
jail)  rather  than  inform.  Of  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter's  opinion
for  the  majority  one  may say what  Mr.  Justice  Holmes  said  in
his  most  perceptive  remark  about  the  essence  of  adjudication.
"General  propositions,"  Mr.  Justice  Holmes  said,  "do  not  de-
cide  concrete  cases.   The  decision will  depend  on  a  judgment
or  intuition  more  subtle  than  any  articulate  major   premise."
Seven justices gave in  to the tide of  reaction; two  (like  Holmes
and  Brandeis in their  time)  stood  out against  it.  From  the  rich
warehouse  of  diverse  judicial  precedent,  each  side  chose  the
rationalizations  —  those   "general    propositions"    of   which
Holmes  spoke—to  buttress  the judgment with which  it  started.
This  "law"   from  our  national  Sinai  was  only  an  exercise  in
piecing  together  the  broken   fragments  of  ancient   tablets  to
suit  individual   preconceptions.
An  Immunity  That  Does  Not  Immunize
For  each  general  proposition   put  forward  by  Mr.   Justice
Frankfurter,  there  was  a  countervailing proposition  at  hand  if
the  majority  had  chosen to use it.   It  is true that  sixty years ago
the  Court held  immunity laws constitutional, but sixty years ago
it  also  ruled  that  segregation  was constitutional.   It  is also  true
that  for  a century and  a half  in  American and  English  law,  the
privilege  has  extended  only  to  possible  criminal  prosecution
and  not  to  the  disclosure  of  matters  which  would  damage  a
man's  reputation.   But  the  Constitution,  as Marshall  said,  was
meant  to  endure  and  therefore  to  be  adapted  to  changed  cir-
cumstances.   Our  Congressional  committees  have  revived  the
ancient  practice  of  condemning  men to  "infamy."   If  the  Fifth
amendment  privilege  is  to  remain  a  reality,  what  good  is  an
"immunity"  which cannot protect  a man  from  those  non-crimi-
nal  but  no  less  terrible  sanctions  enforced  against  radicals—
loss  of  rights  to  government  employment,  to  work  in  defense
plants, to  labor  on the  docks,  to  travel.  What  good  is an  "im-
munity"  which  leaves  the  witness  to  be  blacklisted?   Which
forces  a  man  to  inform  on  his  family  and  friends?
America's  Oldest  Freedom
The  majority  chose  to  read  the  Fifth  amendment  narrowly
in  terms  of  a  half  century  of  precedents  rather  than  broadly
(as  did  Douglas and  Black)  in  terms of  its  historic  origin.   Its
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
5  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stow*'* Weekly, April  2,  1958
Like  "Holmes  and  Brandeis, Dissenting"  This  Too  May  Some  Day  Become  The  Law
The  Heart  of  The  Douglas-Bkck   Dissent  on  the  Immunity  Act
Mr.  Justice  Douglat  (with  Black)  dissenting  in  Ullmann
v.  U.S.:
I  would  reverse the judgment  of conviction.    I  would  base
the  reversal  on  Boyd  v.  United  Statet,  116 U.  S.  616,  or,  in
the  alternative,   I  would overrule  the  five-to-four  decision of
Brown  v.  Walker,  161 U.  S.  691,  and  adopt  the  view  of  the
minority  in  that  case that  the  right  of  silence created  by  ths
Fifth  Amendment is  beyond  the  reach  of  Congress.
Like  Unlawful  Search  and  Service
First,  as  to  the  Boyd  case.    There  are  numerous  disabili-
ties created  by federal  law that  attach  to  a  person  who is  a
Communist.   Thege  disabilities  include  ineligibility   for  em-
ployment in the  Federal  Government and  in  defense  facilities,
disqualification  for  a  passport,  the  risk  of  internment,   the
risk  of  loss  of  employment  as  a  longshoreman—to  mention
only a few.  These  disabilities imposed by federal  law  are  for-
feitures  within  the  meaning  of  our  cases  and  as  much  pro-
tected  by  the  Fifth   Amendment  as  criminal  prosecution  it-
self
Boyd  v.  United  States, supra,  involved  a  proceeding  to  es-
tablish  a forfeiture  of  goods alleged  to have been  fraudulently
imported  without  payment  of  duties.  The  claimants  resisted
an  order  requiring  the  production  of  an  invoice  to  be  used
against  them  in  the  forfeiture  proceedings.   The Court  in  an
opinion  by  Mr.  Justice  Bradley  sustained  the  defense  of  the
Fifth  Amendment   The  Court  said,  "A  witness,  as  well  as  a
party,  is  protected  by  the  law  from  being  compelled to  give
evidence that  tends  to  criminate  him,  or  to  subject  his  prop-
erty to forfeiture."  116  U. S., at  638.  . . .
Citizenship  As  Important  As  Property
The  forfeiture  of  property   on  compelled  testimony  is  no
more  abhorrent  than  the  forfeiture  of  rights  of   citizenship.
Any  forfeiture  of  rights  as  a  result  of  compelled  testimony
is  at  war  with  the  Fifth  Amendment.
The  Court  apparently  distinguishes  the  Boyd  case  on  the
ground  that  the  forfeiture  of  property  was  a  penalty   affixed
to  a  criminal act.   The loss  of a job and the  ineligibility  for  a
passport  are  also  penalties   affixed  to a  criminal  act.  .  . .
The  Court  may  mean  that  if  disqualification  for   govern-
ment  employment or  ineligibility  for  a  passport  is  a  forfei-
ture  within  the  meaning  of  the   Boyd   ease,   Congress   has
lifted   these  disabilities   in  exchange  for  the  witness'  testi-
mony.  Congress, I  think, will be surprised  to  hear  this.  There
is  nothing in the  legislative  history  that  would  suggest  that
Congress was willing to pay  any  such price for  the  testimony.
If  the  disabilities  which  attach  under  existing  law  are  for-
feitures,  the  Court  should  strike  down  the  Act.   If  Congress
chooses  to  enact  a  new  Immunity Act  broad  enough  to  pro-
tect  against  all  forfeitures,  it  is  free  to  do  so.  The  Court
seems  to  commit  Congress  to  a  policy  that  there  is  no  indi-
cation  Congress  favors.  . . .
Uncertainties  Left  to  Litigation
The  Court  leaves  all  those  uncertainties  to  another  day,
saying that the  immunity granted  by  Congress  will extend  to
its  constitutional limits  and  that  those  constitutional   limits
will  be  determined  case  by  case  in  future  litigation.   That
means that no one knows what  the  limits  are.   The Court will
not  say.  Only  litigation  on a  distant  day can determine it.....
(2)   The  guarantee  against  self-incrimination contained in
the  Fifth  Amendment  is not  only  a  protection against convic-
tion  and  prosecution  but  a  safeguard  of  conscience  and  hu-
man  dignity  and  freedom  of  expression as  well.  My  view  is
that  the  Framers  put  it  beyond  the  power  of  Congress  to
cumpt'l  anyone  to  confess  his  crimes.  The  evil to  be  guarded
against  was  partly  self-accusation   under  legal  compulsion.
But  that  was  only  a  part  of  the  evil.   The  conscience  and
dignity  of  man  were  also  involved.   So  too  was  his  right  to
freedom  of  expression  guaranteed  by. the  First  Amendment.
The  Framers, therefore,  created  the federally  protected  right
of  silence  and  decreed that  the  law  could not  be  used  to  pry
open  one's  lips  and make him a witness  against  himself. . . .
(3)  This right of  silence, this right of  the  accused  to  stand
mute  serves  another  high  purpose.   Mr. Justice  Field,  one of
the  four  dissenters  in  Brown  v.  Walker, stated  that  it  is the
aim  of  the  Fifth  Amendment to  protect  the  accused from  all
compulsory  testimony  "which  would  expose  him  to  infamy
and  disgrace,", as  well as that which might  lead  to a  criminal
conviction.  . . .
Designed  To  Protect  Against  Infamy
The Fifth  Amendment  was designed  to  protect the  accused
against  infamy  as  well  as  against  prosecution.   A   recent
analysis  by  Professor   Mitchell  Franklin  of  Tulane   illumi-
nates  the  point.   See The  Encyclopedist* Origin  and  Meaning
of  the   Fifth   Amendment,  IB  Lawyers   Guild  Eev.  41.   He
shows  how the  Italian  jurist,  Beccaria,  and  his  French  and
English  followers,  influenced  American  thought  in  the  criti-
cal  years following  our  Revolution.   The history  of  infamy  as
a  punishment was  notorious.  . . .
The  Beccarian  attitude  toward  infamy  was  a  part  of  the
background  of  the  Fifth  Amendment.  The  concept of  infamy
was  explicitly  written  into  it.   We need  not  guess  as  to that.
For  the  first  Clause  of  the  Fifth   Amendment contains   the
concept  in  haee verba: "No person  shall  be held to  answer  for
a  capital  or  otherwise  infamous   crime  unless  on  a  present-
ment  or indictment  of a Grand Jury  ...."    (Italics added.)  .  ..
Beccaria,  whose works  were  well  known  here  and  who  was
particularly   well  known  to  Jefferson,   was  the  main  voice
against  the  use  of  infamy  as  punishment.   The  curse  of  in-
famy,  he  showed, results  from  public opinion.  Oppression oc-
curs when infamy  is  imposed  on the  citizen  by the  State. The
French  jurist,  Brissot  de  Warville, wrote  in  support  of  Bec-
caria's  position,  "It  is in the  power of the  mores rather  than
in  the hands  of  the  legislator that this terrible  weapon of  in-
famy  rests,  this  type  of  civil  excommunication,  which  de-
prives  the  victim  of  all  consideration,  which  severs  all  the
ties  which  bind him to  his  fellow  citizens,  which isolates him
in  the  midst  of  society.  The  purer  and  more  untouched  the
customs  are,  the  greater  the  force  of infamy."   I  Theorie  des
Loix  Criminelles  (1781)   188.  . . .
The  Penalties  of  Disclosure
There  is  great  infamy  involved  in  the  present  case,  apart
from  the  loss  of rights of citizenship  under  federal  law which
I  have  already  mentioned.   The disclosure that a  person  is a
Communist   practically   excommunicates  him   from    society.
School  boards  will  not  hire  him.  See Adler  v.  Board  of  Edu-
cation, 342 U.  S.  485.  A lawyer  risks  exclusion  from  the  bar
(In  re  Anastaplo,  3  111. 2d  471,  121 N.  E.  2d  826);  a  doctor,
the  revocation  of  his .license to  practice.   Cf. Barsky  v. Board
of  Regents,  347 U.  S.  442.  If  an  actor, he  is  on  a  black  list.
See  Horowitz,  Loyalty  Tests  for  Employment  in  the  Motion
Picture  Industry,  6 Stan.  L.  Rev. 438.  And  he  will  be able to
find no  employment in  our  society  except  at  the  lowest level,
if  at  all
The  Fifth  Amendment  stands  between  the  citizen  and  his
government.   When  public  opinion  casts  a  person  into  the
outer  darkness,  as  happens  today  when  a  person  is  exposed
as  a  Communist,  the  government brings  infamy on  the  head
of  the  witness when  it  compels  disclosure.  That  is  precisely
what  the  Fifth  Amendment  prohibits.
No  Issues  for  The  Next  Two  Weeks  While  I.  F.  Stone  Goes  Abroad
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'i  Weekly, April t, 1958
What  A  Handshake  Will  Do:  "Some  Call It  Corny,  But  People  Seem  to  Like  It"
Kefauver  Just  Hasn't  Heard  Democracy  Is  for  the  Birds
By  Jennings  Perry
Nashville,  Tenn.—When  the  party's big  mules  moved in  to
stomp  down  Estes  Kefauver'a  alarmingly  strong  bid for  nom-
ination  at  the  last  Democratic convention, a  rueful  helper  at
the  candidate's  headquarters  scrawled a sign:  "Nobody want*
Estes  but the  people."
The  stop-Kefauver  swivit  that  began  the  other  day  imme-
diately  on  the  news  from  Minnesota—the  flat  editorial   as-
sumptions  that  "the  bosses  won't  have  it,"  the  hurried  shop-
ping  about  for  dark   horses—suggests  that  the  tall,   brash
Tennessean  may again in  '56 be stuck  with  nothing more than
popular  support.
Apart from  the  easy  question  of why the  bosses  are  against
the  man,  proved  vote-getter  that  he is,  it  is  pertinent  to  in-
quire  why  the  people  who  take  part  in  the  primaries  are
spectacularly for him?
The  answer  is  being  whittled  at  on many facets,  likely and
unlikely.  The probable  nub is that  the  people like  him for  a
certain  old-fashioned  quality:  his  corny persistence  in  believ-
ing  in  "the  people,"  in  the  prerogative   of  citizens'  choice.
Grandpa  Was  A  Baptist  Preacher
Kefauver's  grandfather  was  a  Baptist  preacher,  of  a  de-
nomination that  cleaves  to  the  concept of free  will.  Kefauver
himself  it  an  almost  primitive  fundamentalist   where  demo-
cratic  doctrine  is  concerned.  No sooner  had  he arrived  in  the
House  in  1940 than  he  became one  of  the  few  Southern  con-
gressmen—one  of  two  or  three—to  fight  for  Federal  legisla-
tion  to  strike  down the poll tax.   In  the  Senate  he has  sought
to  ban  filibusters,  to  break  the  dead  hand  of  raw   seniority
precedence,  to  institute  the  election  of  congressional  commit-
tee  chairmen  by  the  committees  themselves.   He  has   urged
reform  of  the  electoral   college  to  provide  a  direct   popular
vote for  President.
He haa  a  naive,  copy-book belief  in the right of  any  man  to
"offer  for  office"  and  acts  on  this  belief  without  timidity  or
mock-humility.   The  dyspeptic   Chicago   Tribune   twits  him
with  running  "on  nothing  but  his  ambition."   Neither  Ke-
fauver  nor,  apparently,  a  host  of  would-be sovereign  voters
considers candidacy in a republic a sinful presumption.
Actually  this  old,  at  least  early-American fancy  is  one of
the   mystifying   links   between   Kefauver   and   the   wistful
plebea.  Cynical newsmen do not  understand this;  quite lowly
citizens  do.  In  a  New  Hampshire  hamlet  the  gangling,  be-
spectacled  aspirant  walks  into  the  shoemaker's   shop,  saying,
"I'm   Estes   Kefauver.   I'm  running  for   President."     "For
what?"  "For  President." "Good God," exclaims the  astounded
cobbler,  "why did  you  come  here?"   It  is  a  thing  completely
beyond  his  experience  or  expectation—but patently  not  be-
yond his liking.
"The     Great   Handshaker"
Owlish  observers  marvel  at   Kefauver's   "technique,"  dub
him  the  Great  Handshaker.  Indeed  he  has  pumped  millions
of  hands from  one end of  the  land to  the  other—until his  arm
is  corded.  The  device  is  not  mere  mumbo-jumbo:  with  Kefau-
ver  it  is  a  means  of  communication  man  to  man,  worth  a
speech, or  better.  His doting admirers (and by now,  no doubt,
others  as  well)  are  convinced  that  "if  only  Estes  could shake
every  hand,  he  would  sweep  all  the  polls."
And  what has  the  man  to  communicate  that  seems to sit  so
well  with  so many?  He is  not  a  magnetic  speaker,  though  he
has  a  mountain-man's grace-note  sense  of  humor  and  flair
for  rustic  hyperbole;  he  is  not  part  of  a  rabble-rouser,  not
much  of  an  entertainer  even.   He  has  and  projects  above  all
a  feeling  of  human  kinship  and  sympathy.   The  man  whose
hand  he  has  just  gripped  and  to  whom  he  has  addressed  only
gome ordinary  remark  often  goes  away  persuaded  he haa  met
a  person   surely   "for   me,"  sometimes  that  he  has  touched
fingers with  a  great  man.   Though  in  a  hall  he  may  put  a
fourth  of his  audience to  sleep,  the  other  three-fourths  is  apt
to go away certain  if not of his ability,  at least of bis sincerity.
An  Unabashable  New  Dealer
Kefauver   was  and  is  an  unabashable   New  Dealer:   the
term  has  not  for  him  gone  stale.  He  is  a  champion  of  the
TV A—and  other  TV As;  he  was  against  Taft-Hartley,   has
stood  up  for  the  civil rights  programs—save  FEPC.   He was
not  even  asked  to  sign  the  Manifesto,  upholds  the  Court's
ruling  on equality  in  education  as  the  law of the  land  and on
principle,  and  defends  as  a  first  article  of  faith  the  right of
every  citizen  to  vote.  His  liberal  positions  have  brought  him
under  vociferous attack  in  his  own State  for  "leftism."   Yet
only  two  years   ago,  after  a  primary  race  in  which  every
dunged  tab  in  the  Bourbon  lexicon  was  wasted  on  him,  the
people  of  Tennessee  returned  him  to  the  Senate  with  an  un-
precedented  majority.
His  position—as  a  contender  for  the  presidential  nomina-
tion—on  world  questions  has  not  been  spelled out—perhaps
not  even yet thought  out.  As front  runner  now in  the  prefer-
ence elections he will have to  speak  up.  Last  year  he traveled
in  Russia  and  India,  reporting  to  his  own  constituents  that
he  found  men  everywhere  "concerned  for  and  working  for
peace  and  the  improvement of  their   lot."
I  am  on« of  his  constituents:  I  have  known  and  watched
him  closely  for  twenty  years.  And  I  would  ascribe  his  suc-
cesses  thus  far   in  taking  his  ambitions  to  the  man-in-the-
street  to  a   calculated  audacity—hastening  to  explain  the
word  "calculated"  thus:  "Because  nobody  can  be that  lucky."
FDR's  Sense  of  Timing
He  must  be  credited,  I  think,  with  an  unusual  ability  to
analyze  the  political circumstance,  with  something of  Roose-
velt's faculty  of sensing the  right  time.  In  point, his  decision
to  buck  and  break  the  storied  Crump  machine  in  1949 when
no  other  political  figure  in  Tennessee  suspected  that  the  20-
year  reign  of  the  Memphis  boss  was  ripe  for  a  fall.  In  point
also,  New  Hampshire  in  '52—and  Minnesota  in  '56.
But  "luck"  or  "perception" in  these  matters,  there  is little
room  to  mistake  his  capacities  in  other,  more personal equa-
tions,  without  which  in  the  kind  of  campaign he  makes,  and
his  independence compels  him  to  make, his  national  political
career  hardly   could  have  gotten  off  the  ground.  First,   the
curious effectiveness  of  his  unorthodox  door-to-door and man-
to-man  canvassing  of  the  electors,  the  rapport  he  seems  to
be  able  to  weld  with  a  handclasp.   Second,  his  remarkable
gift   (a  sort  of  hallmark  of  leadership)  for  attracting  and
holding  fervent  loyalty.  His  supporters  tend  to  become  dis-
ciples  rather  than  followers,  to  become  devoted  to  him  33  a
"cause," and  hence  to  tender him  services that  could  not pos-
sibly be bought.
Even-tempered,  deliberate, passably fatalistic,  screnfi  in  his
addiction  to  little  d  democracy,  Kefauver  lias  shown  ev^n  the
most  skeptical  that  he  is  a  terrific  campaigner.   Whether  he
is  just  the  "perfect  professional  ham,"  as  some  have  called
him,    or  whether  campaigning  is  second  nature  to  him, may
be debated.  His  stature  as  statesman  is  yet  to be fully  meas-
ured by events or  by his own acts  and  pronouncements.  Those
most keenly  for  him  privately  even  now cross  their  fingeis  on
his   chances   of   being   "allowed"   to   win   the   Democratic
nomination.
But  though  experiences  has  taught  them  to  hedge—unwill-
ingly—on  this  score,  their  frank  estimation  of  the  man him-
self,  to  which  I  subscribe,  is  that  if  elected  he  would  be  a
good  President.
Next  Issue  April  23  Will  Be  From  Israel  —   After  That  (We  Hope)  From  Moscow
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, April  &, 1956
The  Eastland  Report  on  the  Harry  White  Papers  Deflates  Itself
Is  The  Stage  Being  Set to  Revive  The  "Twenty  Years  of  Treason" Myth?
(Continued  from  Page  One)
origin  was in  the  revulsion  of  England  against  the  English  In-
quisition  which  Elizabeth  had  launched  and  which  forced  dis-
senters  and  Catholics  to  go  to  jail  or  inform  on  their  friends
and  families.  It  was this which drove the  Pilgrim  Fathers first
to  Holland  and  then  to  America.  When  the  Supreme  Court
turned  its  back  on  the  origins  and  spirit  of  the  privilege,  it
turned  its  back  on  the  oldest  strand  in  the  American  tradition.
It  refused  to  read  the  privilege  as a  protection  against  our  lat-
ter  day  Inquisition  and  our  latter  day public  pillories  as  oper-
ated  by  Congressional  committees  and  the  Department  of  Jus-
tice.   Of  course,  there  are  some  real  as  well  as  imaginary dan-
gers  in  the  Communist  movement,  just  as  there  were  real  as
well  as  imaginary  dangers  that  dissenter  and  Catholic  might
with  foreign  allies  undermine  the  English  Protestant  throne.
But  the  fundamental choice of  a  free  society is whether  to  take
the  risks  of  freedom or  the  risks  of  repression;  the  risks  of  re-
solving  the  doubt  against  the  accused  or  the  risks  of  empha-
sizing  the  protection  of  the  innocent.   The  choice made  by  the
Court  was  philosophically  the  same  choice  made  by  Stalin—
resolve  the  doubts  in  favor  of  the  State,  place  "security"  and
"defense"  ahead  of  the  rights  of  the  individual.   It  is this  pol-
lution  of  the  atmosphere  of  American  thought  to  which  the
Court  has contributed.  We  believe that  some day America will
see  the  law  as  Douglas  and  Black  see  it  in  their  dissent  from
which we publish  excerpts on page  two.  The kind  of  revulsion
which  ruined  McCarthy  will  some  day  sweep  away this  deci-
sion, too.
A  Very  Strange  Coincidence
This  revulsion  would  be  hastened  if  there  were  fuller  pub-
lic  knowledge  of  the  circumstances and  content  of  the  report
released  last  week  by the  Eastland  committee  on  the  Harry  D.
White  papers.   It  was  this  committee,  remember—the  Senate
Internal  Security subcommittee—before which  Herbert  Brow-
nell  and  J.  Edgar  Hoover  launched  the  "twenty  years of  trea-
son"  campaign with  an  attack on  a dead  man  unable  to defend
himself.   By a  very  strange  coincidence,  the  report  was  made
available  to  the  press  over  the  preceding  week-end  for  release
on  the  very  morning  in  which  the  papers  were  to  carry  the
Supreme Court's  decision on  the  immunity law appeal,  brought
by  White's  old  associate,  William  Ludwig Ullmann.   The  de-
cision  and  the  report  set  the  stage  in  an  election  year  for  re-
vival  of  the  twenty years of  treason  smear.   But  the  report  it-
self  deflates the  myth that Harry White  was the  center  of  a spy
ring.    For  the  committee  ransacked  White's  private   papers
after  they  had  been  seized  from  his  summer  home  by  Louis
Wyman,  New  Hampshire's   witch  hunting  Attorney  General.
They  Found  Nothing
Yet  the  committee did  not  uncover a single document which
showed  misconduct  of  any kind  by the  late  Under  Secretary of
the  Treasury.   It  is a  ludicrous confession  of  failure  when  the
Eastland  committee devotes  70  of  the  500  pages  of  the  report
to  photostatic  reprints  of  songs  from  some  Soviet  song  books
found  in  his  library.  It  is  also  a  confession—that  there  was
"nothing  there  but  us  chickens"—when  Eastland  says  coyly  in
his  introduction,  "Those  who  are  looking"—in  these  papers—
"for   an  array  of  informative  witnesses  regarding   the  inner
workings  of  the  Communist  conspiracy  are  doomed  to  disap-
pointment."   In  short,  nothing  was found.  The  sheer  volume
of  private  letters  and  memoranda  reprinted  cannot  mask  the
trivial  results  of  this  gargantuan  search  through  a  dead  man's
personal  effects.
Ullmann,  faced  with  the  choice  of  six  months  in  jail  or
testing  his word  against Elizabeth  Bentley's,  can purge  himself
by  going  before  a  grand   jury  and  answering  the  questions
asked  him  in  November  1954.   If  he  talks,  he  will  be  saying
again  what  he  has  several  times  told  grand  juries—that  he
never   passed   secret   documents   to   Miss   Bentley  on  Harry
White's  behalf  or anyone else's.   Perhaps  the  outcome may end
by  finally  debunking  in  open  court  the  story with  which  Miss
Bentley  has  over  and  over  again  failed  to  persuade  a  grand
jury  to  indict  any  of  White's  associates.
Don't  Miss   The  Startling   Special   Announcement   in  the   Box   Below
Stone  Going  Abroad
I.  F.  Stone  was scheduled  to  fly  to  London  on  March   30,
the  day  after  this  issue  went  to  press.    He  will  write  from
Israel  on  the   tense  situation  in  the  Middle   East  and  then
hopes  to  visit  Moscow  and  report  on  the  "democratic  revo-
lution  from  above"  taking  place  in  the  Soviet  capital.
Ordinarily   this   Weekly   does  not   appear   the   last   two
weeks  of  August.    Because  of  the   Republican  and   Demo-
cratic  conventions  this  year,  which  Stone  will  cover  in   per-
son,   the   postoffice   is  permitting   him   to   suspend   far   two
weeks  now  instead  in  order  to  give  him  time  to  get  abroad
and  write   from  there.   The  next   issue  will  be  that  dated
April  23  and  it  will  be a  full  four  page  on-the-spot  report
from  Israel  which  Stone  knows  well  from  six  previous  trips,
on  one  of  which  he  covered  the  Arab-Jewish   war  in    1948.
Next  Report  Will  Be  From  Israel
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Woihinfton  3,  D.  C.
Entered   as  .
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED