I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956nov19.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive Text:  How Peking  Backed Poland  (and  For Three  Hours)  Hungary, Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO.  44
NOVEMBER  19,  1956
«o«       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
A World  Crisis  Finds  Washington  Paralyzed
The  President's  press  conference,   the  first  since  his  reelec-
tion,  was  jammed.   He  looked  a  little  more  tired  than  when
last  seen during the campaign.  He  had  the  solemnity of  a man
who  feels  the  burden  of  a  world  crisis,  and  he  was  obviously
very  worried.  No  one  could  listen  carefully  to  his words  with-
out  sympathy; his  modesty  is  impressive,  his  desire  for  peace
unmistakable,  but  the  quality of  leadership  is missing.  The  re-
porters,  trooping  out  afterward,  came away with  the  same im-
pression  gathered  by the  eleven  members  of  the  Senate  Foreign
Relations  Committee  at  their  secret  briefing  Monday,  and  the
23  Congressional  leaders  summoned  to  the  White  House  the
preceding  Friday.  This  is  that  the  U.S.  is  drifting,  without  a
policy,  unable  to  make up  its mind what  to  do  either  in  Egypt
or  Hungary,  the  focal  points  of  the  crisis.
The  most  striking  evidence  of  this  irresolution  came when
Merriman  Smith  of  the  United  Press  asked  Mr.  Eisenhower
what  form  American  opposition  to  aggression  would  take  if
new   armed  forces  were  introduced   into   the   Middle   East.
"Well,"  the  President  replied,  "I  can't  tell  what  it would   be."
The  United  Nations  was not  limited  to  resolutions;  in  one  in-
stance,  at  least,  had  shown  that  it  was  not  so  limited.   "So  I
don't  know exactly what we would  do.   It  would  depend  upon
the  circumstances."   Mr.  Eisenhower's  reference  to  that   "one
instance"  was  a  reference, of  course,  to  Korea,  and  for  a  mo-
ment  the  shadow  of  Mr.  Truman  fell  across  the   President's
desk. This  is not  how the  little man  from  Missouri would  have
reacted   to   the   threat   of   "volunteers"    from   Moscow   and
Peking.    It  will  be  tragic  if  the  Russians are  led  by  this  hesi-
tation  to  believe  that  they  can  safely  intervene  by  subterfuge.
Egypt  Is  No Korea
The   geography   of   the   situation   is  its   danger.    Egypt  is
neither  a  Hungary  nor  a Korea  into  which  troops  can  easily be
marched  over  a  contiguous  frontier.   Russian  warships  would
have  to  move through  Turkish  waters,  Russian planes  through
Turkish  skies.  Turkey  would  be  outflanked and  shut  off  from
its  Western  allies  were  Russian  power  to  establish  itself   in
Egypt  and  Syria.  Turkey  would  be  the  first  to  be  drawn  in.
Then  how  are  Soviet  volunteers  to  reach  Egypt  without  run-
ning  into  the  Anglo-French  blockade  in  the  Eastern  Mediter-
ranean   and  the   Anglo-French   forces   already  in   the   Canal
Zone?
The   chain   reaction  potential   of   Russian   intervention   in
Egypt  is so serious  that Nasser  himself  is reluctant  to  set  it off.
If   Egypt  and   Israel  have  one  interest   in  common  it  is  the
avoidance  of  a  war  between  the  two  great  Powers  for   pre-
dominance in the Middle  East; there will  be little left  of  either
Israel  or  the  Arab  States  if  such  a  conflict  reaches  the   stage
even  of  small  "tactical"  atomic  weapons.  This  mutual   interest
12                                                                                                     t  7
in  the  avoidance  of  a  common  disaster  might  be  the  leverage
of  a  swift,  forceful  and  constructive  diplomacy  for  peace.   But
of  this  there  is  no  sign.  The  roles  have  been  reversed.   It  is
now  Moscow  which  threatens  something  like  massive  retalia-
tion  against  England  and  France,  while risking the  kind  of  in-
terventionist  adventures  once  feared  from  Mr.  Dulles.   That
dove  flutters  weakly  over   Washington.
Deterred  By  Our  Own  Deterrents?
At  this  historic  juncture,  Washington   seems  to  be  para-
lyzed.  This  paralysis  may  be  linked  to  the  fact  that  American
military  strategy  is  now  committed  to  the  use  of  weapons  so
terrible  that,  as  the  President  said,  they  "make  the  thought  of
global  war  include  almost  a  sentence  for  suicide."   Reliance
on  such  "deterrents"  has  ended  by  deterring  ourselves.   The
diplomatic  immobility  derives  from   the  military  immobility.
But  a  diplomacy  which  can  no  longer  depend  on  threats  of
military  action  is not  necessarily powerless.  The  very  threat  of
Russian  intervention  may  be  utilized  to  win  Asian  neutralists
and  to  persuade  Arabs  and  Israeli  how  much  both  stand  to
gain  by  a  peaceful  settlement;  a  regional  water   development
program  is given  new  attractiveness  by  the  imminent  prospect
of  becoming  a  Big  Power  battleground.    In  Europe,  there  are
also  possibilities  for  a  vigorous  diplomatic offensive.   One  fact
stands  out  in  bold  relief  there,  etched  in  blood  and  fire  over
Budapest.  The  key  to  freedom  in  Eastern  Europe  is  the  with-
drawal  of  the  Russian  armies.   Like  the  French  after    1789,
these  came to  liberate  and  stayed  on to  oppress.
The  Way  to  Liberate Hungary
Junior  voices  within  the  Administration  have  been  urging
vainly  that  the  U.S.  seize the  initiative by offering  to  withdraw
our  troops  from   Western   Europe  if  the  Russians  withdraw
from  Eastern;  to  dissolve NATO,  if  they  abandon  the  Warsaw
pact;  to  make a  united  Germany  the  cornerstone  of  a  neutral
zone;  and  to  free  Poland  from  vassalage  to  Russia  by  guaran-
teeing  the  present  frontiers.   Such a challenge,  on  the  heels of
the  demand  by the  four  Asian  Premiers  for  Soviet  withdrawal
from  Hungary,  would  give  the  U.S.  a  way to  liberate  without
threat  of war.
In  default  of  such  bold  or  any  other  policies  the  U.S.  has
fallen   back  on  the  United  Nations.   But  the  sudden  attach-
ment  to the  UN  is not  evidence of  principle  but  of  bankruptcy
on   Washington's   part.    "Everything  we  brought   up,"   one
Democratic   Senator   complained   after   last   Monday's    secret
briefing  by Acting  Secretary of  State  Hoover,  Allen  Dulles  and
Admiral  Radford,  "was  termed  a  matter  for  the  United   Na-
tion.    We  couldn't  get  anything  specific."  The  crisis  \as  un-
covered  a  vacuum  in  Washington.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, November 19,1958
You  Don't  Help  Strikers  By  Encouraging  Them  To  Throw  Bricks   Through  Windows
What  Is  The  Real  Role  of  Radio  Free  Europe  and  CIA  in  Eastern  Europe?
We  hope there  will  be pressure,  when  Congress  meets,  for
an   investigation  of  the   role  played  by  Voice  of   America,
Radio  Free  Europe  and  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency  in
the  Central  and  East  European  uprisings.  The  West  Euro-
pean  press  is  critical  of the  two propaganda  agencies  and  the
West  German  government  has  already  begun  an  official   in-
. quiry  into  charges  by  the  right  wing  German  Free  Demo-
cratic  Party  that  Radio  Free  Europe  must  bear  "a  goodly
share  of  the  guilt  for  the  blood  bath  in  Hungary"  because of
its   "aggressive   propaganda   and   irresponsible   promises."
Tapes  of the  broadcasts  are  being studied.  The outcome could
be  serious  for  Radio  Free  Europe  since  its  operates   from
West  German territory.
Complaints  have  come from  sober  observers  irrespective of
their   political   orientation.   "American   propaganda,"   Larry
Rue  reported  to the  Chicago  Tribune  (Nov. 13)  from  Vienna,
"is  being blamed here  as  designed  to  encourage anti-commu-
nist  revolt  behind  the  iron  curtain,  where  such  a  revolt  is
doomed  beforehand to fail."   Michel Gordey,  one of  the  ablest
of  French  journalists,  fresh  from  Budapest, cabled his  paper,
Franee-Soir,  the  same  day,  "We  heard  a  lot  of  false  news
about  what  was  going  on inside  Budapest.  We  also  heard  on
Radio  Free  Europe,  broadcasting  from   Munich  toward  the
satellite   countries,  programs   whose  impassioned  tone   and
desperate  calls  to  revolt  certainly   did  a  lot  of  wrong."
False  Hopes  Created
Chet Huntley on NBC's "Outlook,"  a half hour TV program
on  Hungary   (Sun.  Nov.  11)  asked  "Should  our  radio  have
dangled  freedom  where  we  ourselves  were  not  prepared   to
follow?"   Several  days  earlier,  from  Vienna,  Walter  T.  Rid-
der  of  the  well known publishing family, reported  to  the  Rid-
der  owned St.  Paul Pioneer  Press  (Nov. 8),  "It  is  difficult  to
describe  the bitterness  which the failure  of the  U.S.  to live up
to its  promises, real  and implied, has  engendered in this part
of  the  world."   Ridder blamed Radio Free  Europe  more  than
the  Voice of America. "The  point"  he  wrote was "not  that  the
U.S. failed  to aid  Hungary"  but that  these  propaganda  agen-
cies painted  a  "rosy  picture ...    of U.S.  aid to freedom  fight-
ers  which evaporated  under  the  stress  of  reality."
Entirely  too  little  is  known  about  the  operations  of  these
agencies,  though  their  blunders  may  create  situations  from
which  the  U.S.  cannot  retreat.  What  are  the  political  direc-
tives  under  which  they  operate?  Who sees  to  it  that  the  di-
rectives  are   obeyed?  These  agencies  derive  from  the  worst
days  of  the  cold  war,  and  the  concepts  of  containment  and
"liberation."  The  premises  of  the  period in  which they  origi-
nated  was that  communism  was  entirely  evil  and  that  peace-
ful  co-existence with  it  in  any  form  was  impossible.  But  the
real  premises of  national  policy  for  many months have been
acceptance  of  co-existence,  a  belief  that  successful  violent
revolution  against  the  U.S.S.R.  was  impossible,  and  the  idea
that  "liberation"   could  best  be  furthered  by  a  "thaw"  in
which  the  satellite  states  would  slowly  become  more  inde-
pendent  though  still  communist  and  then  more  democratic.
These  are  the  ideas  which  Tito  sold  Dulles.  They  are  also
the  natural   corollaries  of  a  dangerous  atomic  stalemate  be-
tween  the  two great  Powers.   But  one suspects  that  right  or
wrong they little  accord with  the  desperate  and  irreconcilable
temperament  of  the  kind  of  men  likely  to  be  recruited   by
CIA, or  of the  exiles who staff  Radio Free Europe.  The  politi-
cally  naive  or  reactionary   big  oil  companies  which  largely
finance  Radio Free  Europe  can  hardly  be  satisfied  with  "na-
tional  communism."  Neither  can  the  exiles,  some  of  whom
represent  obsolete, rightist  and  adventuristic  points  of view.
Provocation  Is  An  Old Game
Perhaps  the  most  serious  aspect  of  this  whole  situation  is
that  through  irresponsible  use  of  American funds  and  facili-
ties  these  people may  create  the  situations  which  serve  their
purposes.  Provocation is an  old game;  the  secret  police under
the  Czars  (and Stalin)  were in a  position through  infiltration
of  terrorist  groups  to  bring  about  the   kind  of  assassina-
tions   and  hopeless  revolts  which  only   stiffened   repression
whenever  there  was  the  danger   (from  the  police  point  of
view)   of  liberalization.  Trotzky  suspected  and  Khrushchev
seems  to  confirm  that  this  was  the  real  story   behind  the
Kirov assassination  in  1934.
Similar  patterns  may appear  in more recent  events.  A  thaw
would  end  the  hopes of  the  desperate.  To  provoke the  easily
provoked  Russians  back  into  repression  would  serve  the  pur-
poses  of  those  who  see a  new  war  as  the  only  way  out.  The
East  German  rising  of   1953  created   a  reaction   in   Russia
against  the  mild policies of  Malenkov.  The  Hungarian   affair
may  be  the  end  of  Khrushchev  and  restore  the  "Stalinists"
to  power  in  the  Kremlin.  This  is  what  Tito  fears.
Always  Easy  to  Blame   Conspirators
This  is  not meant to  imply that  the  East  European  upris-
ings  came  about  because  of  American-supported  conspiracy.
This  is  the  type  of  viewpoint which  appears  wherever  unin-
telligent  rulers  are  too lazy-minded  to examine the  real  facts,
or  too  incompetent  to  change  them.  Just  as  some  business
men  in a strike  at  once blame "Communists" or  "malcontents"
because  that  is  easier  and  cheaper  than  raising  wages  and
correcting  bad  working  conditions, so  Moscow  falls  back  on
American  conspiracies.
There  are  always  people  ready  to  exploit  grievances   for
good  or  bad  reasons.    But  the  important  point  always  lies  in
the  grievances.   Men. do  not  go  out  on  prolonged  strikes  or
engage  in  hopeless  uprising  unless  they  have  been  driven
desperate  by  bad  conditions  and  ill   treatment.
But  one  does  not  help  desperate  strikers  by  encouraging
them  to throw  bricks  through  windows and  give the  police an
excuse  to  smash  the  strike.   To what  extent  have  our  propa-
ganda  and  undercover agencies  served  to  set  back  the  strug-
gle  for   freedom   in  Eastern   Europe  by  provoking  reckless
actions?  This  is  the  question we must  ask  ourselves.
7.  F.  Stone  will  speak  on  "Why  The  Uprisings   in  East-
ern  Europe"  for   the  Community  Church  at  Conservatory
Hall,  31 Hemenway St.,  Boston, Sun.,  Dec. 2, at  10:30 a.m.
Another  Sample  of  the  Madison  Avenue
The  kind  of  folly  our  radio  psychological  warriors  may
commit   abroad  is  illustrated   by  the  kind  they  commit   at
home.  An  example   was   "The  Day  North   America   Is   At-
tacked"  which  the   U.S.   Air  Force  put  on  over  Channel   2
with  CBS  on  Sunday,  Nov.  11,  directly  after  an  hour  long
summary  on  the  same  channel  about  events  in  Hungary  and
the  crisis  in  the  Middle  East.
The  show  was  constantly   interrupted  by  flashing  across
the  screen  the  notice,  "An  attack  is  not  taking  place." The
Mentality  at  Work  in  A Dangerous  Area
purpose  was  to  advertise  the  Air  Force.  Two  high  officers
took  part:  Gen.  Twining,  the  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff  and
Gen.  Partridge,   of  the  Continental  Air  Defense   Command.
"In using  what  would  be  civilization's   most  fateful  hour—
the  opening  of  atomic  warfare—as  a theatrical  backdrop  for
a  commercially   sponsored  television  show,"  Jack  Gould  said
next  day  in  his  New  York  Times  radio-TV  column,  "the  Air
Force   displayed    lamentable   judgment."   This   is    another
sample  of  the  Madison  Avenue  mentality  at  work.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November 19,1958
Peking's Rebuke to  "Big  Nation  Chauvinism";  A Story  The  U.S.  Press  Ignored
How  Red  China  Backed  Rebellious  Poland  (and  For Three Hours)  Hungary
On  several  occasions  Warsaw  has  reported   sympathetic
support  from  Peking  in  the  struggle  for  greater   independ-
ence  from   Moscow.   But   the   first  public  evidence  of   this
went  unnoticed  in  the  U.S.  press.   On  November  1  Peking
radio   broadcast  an   official    statement   by   the  Communist
Chinese  government.   Under  cover of  the  Soviet  declaration
of   Oct.  30,  Peking  attacked  "big  nation  chauvinism"  and
supported  Poland and  Hungary.  We  print  the  text  here, in-
cluding  the  "correction"  broadcast  three  hours  later  delet-
ing   the  reference    to  Hungary.   That   was   the   day   Nagy
threatened  to  withdraw  from  the  Warsaw  pact  and  Soviet
intervention  was  resumed.
"Peking,  Nov.  1—The  Government of  the  People's Republic
of  China  today  issued  the  following statement  on the  declara-
tion  issued by the  Government of the  Soviet  Union  on  Oct.  30:
"The  Government of  the  Soviet  Union on  Oct. 30,  1956,  is-
sued  a  declaration  on the  foundations  of  the  development and
further    strengthening    of   friendship   and   cooperation   be-
tween  the   Soviet  Union  and  other   Socialist   countries.  The
Government  of  the  People's  Republic of  China  considers  this
declaration  of  the  Government of  the  Soviet  Union  to  be  cor-
rect.  This  declaration  is  of  great  importance  in   correcting
errors  in  mutual  relations   between  the   Socialist   countries
and  in  strengthening  unity  among  them.
"The  People's  Republic  of  China  maintains  that  the  five
principles  of  mutual  respect  for  sovereignty   and  territorial
integrity,  non-aggression,  non-interference  in  each  other's  in-
ternal  affairs,  equality  and  mutual  benefit,  and  peaceful  co-
existence   should  be  the  principles   governing   the  establish-
ment  and  development  of  mutual  relations  among  the   na-
tions  of  the  world.
Independence  Necessary  to  Fraternity
"The   Socialist    countries   are   all   independent,   sovereign
States. At the  same  time  they  are  united  by the  common ideal
of  Socialism  and  the  spirit  of  proletarian   internationalism.
Consequently,  mutual   relations   between   Socialist   countries
all  the  more  so should  be established  on the  basis  of these five
principles.   Only  in  this  way  are  the  Socialist  countries  able
to  achieve  genuine  fraternal   friendship  and  solidarity  and,
through  mutual  assistance  and  cooperation,  their  desire  for
a mutual  economic upsurge.
"As  the  declaration  of  the  Soviet  government  pointed  out,
the  mutual  relations  between  the  Socialist  countries  are  not
without  mistakes.  These  mistakes  resulted  in  misunderstand-
ings  and  estrangement  between  certain  Socialist  countries.
Some  of  these  countries  have  been  unable  to  build  Socialism
better  in  accordance  with  their  historical  circumstances  and
special  features   because  of  these  mistakes.
"As a  result  of these  misunderstandings  and  estrangement,
a   tense  situation   has   sometimes  ocurred   which   otherwise
would  not  have  occurred.  The  handling  of  the  1948-49  Yugo-
slav  situation  and  the  recent  happenings  in  Poland  and  Hun-
gary  are  enough  to  illustrate  this.
[Three  hours  later,  at  1822 Greenwich mean  time  Peking
radio   broadcast  a   "correction"  deleting   "and   Hungary"
from  that  last  sentence—IFS.]
"Following  the  Soviet-Yugoslav  joint  declaration  issued  in
June,  1955,  the  Soviet  government  has  again  taken  note  of
this  problem  and  in  its  declaration  of  October  30,  1956,  indi-
cated  its  willingness  to  solve  various  problems  in  mutual  re-
lations  on the  basis  of  the  principles  of  full  equality,  respect
for  territorial  integrity, national  independence and  sovereign-
ty,  and  non-intervention in  each  other's  internal   affairs  and
by  friendly  negotiations  with  other  Socialist  countries.  This
important  step  is  clearly  of  value  in  eliminating  estrange-
ment  and  misunderstandings  among  the  Socialist   countries.
It  will  help  increase  their  friendship  and  cooperation.
"The  Government of  the  People's  Republic  of  China  notes
that  the  people of  Poland  and  Hungary  in  the  recent happen-
ings  have  raised  demands that  democracy, independence, and
equality  be  strengthened  and  the  material  well-being  of  the
people  be  raised  on  the  basis  of  developing production.  These
demands  are  completely  proper.   Correct  satisfaction  of  these
demands  is  not  only  helpful  to  consolidation  of  the  people's
democratic  system  in  these  countries  but  also  favorable  to
the  unity  among  the  Socialist  countries.
Reactionary  Elements Called  "Extremely  Small"
"We  note  with  satisfaction  that  the  people  of  Poland  and
their  leaders  have  taken  notice  of  the  activities  and  danger
of  reactionary  elements  who  attempt  to  undermine the  peo-
ple's  democratic  system  and  unity  among  Socialist  countries.
We  consider  it  absolutely  necessary  to  take  note  of  this  and
to  differentiate  between  the  just  demands  of  the   broadest
masses  of  the  people  in  the  struggle  and  the  conspiratorial
activities   of  an  extremely  small  number  of  reactionary  ele-
ments.   The  question of  uniting  the  broadest  mass  of  the  peo-
ple  in  the  struggle  against  an  extremely  small  number of  re-
actionary  elements  is  not  only  a  question  for  an  individual
Socialist   country,  but  one  deserving  attention  by  many  So-
cialist  countries,  including  our  country.
"Because  of  the  unanimity  of  ideology and  aim  of  struggle,
it  often  happens that  certain  personnel  of  Socialist  countries
neglect  the  principles  of  equality  among nations  in  their  mu-
tual  relations.    Such  a  mistake,  by  nature,  is  the  error  of
bourgeois  chuavinism.  Such  a  mistake,  particularly  the  mis-
take  of  chauvinism  by  a  big  country,  inevitably  results  in
serious  damage to the  solidarity  and  common  cause of  the  So-
cialist  countries.   For  this  reason,  leading  members and  per-
sonnel of  our  government  and  the  people  of the  entire  country
must  at  all times  be vigilant  to prevent the error  of big nation
chauvinism  in  relation  with  Socialist  countries  and   others.
"We  should  at  all  times  carry  out  education  resolutely  to
oppose  big  nation  chauvinism  among  our  personnel  and  the
people  of the  entire  country.  If  such  an  error  is  committed it
should  be  corrected  promptly.  This  is  the  duty  to  which we
should  pay  the  utmost  attention  in  order  to  strive  for  peace-
ful  coexistence with  all  nations  and  to  promote  the  cause of
world peace."
But Three Days Later Peking Relapsed Into Stalinist  Gibberish on Hungary
From  a  People's  Daily  editorial  broadcast  by Peking  Nov.
4:  "The  good  news  has  been  received  of  the  founding  of  a
new  worker-peasant  revolutionary  government in  Hungary
under  the leadership  of Janos  Kadar.  . . . With  the assist-
ance of Soviet  forces  . . .  this  has overthrown the reaction-
ary  Nagy  regime. . . . The  Chinese  people . . .  congratulate
the  Hungarian people.... The position adopted by the  Soviet
Union  in  the  Hungarian  affair  was  entirely  a  just  position
of  proletarian   internationalism.  The Soviet  Union  . . .  does
not  interfere  in  Hungary's  internal  affairs.  .  .  .  There  are
some  people who  . . . underestimate the necessity  for com-
plete  solidarity  of  the  Socialist  countries  and  the  need  for
the  Warsaw  treaty.  . . . The rapidity  with  which the Hun-
garian  people  were  able  to triumph . . .  demonstrated  that
the  counter-revolutionary adventurers  represented  only  the
dregs  of the Hungarian  nation.  . . . Democracy for the peo-
ple  and  dictatorship  over  the  enemy  are  two  sides  of  one
question. ...   To consolidate  this  victory  requires ...   on  the
basis  of a broad  people's  democracy . . . establishment  of a
genuinely  powerful  revolutionary  dictatorship."
1   7  'I
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, November 19,1956
Moscow  Is  Paying  A  Heavy  Price  for  Its  "Victory"  in  Budapest
The  Hungarian   Rebels  Have  Destroyed  The  Last  Illusions   of  An  Era
It  is  not  easy  to  see  the  really  momentous  events  of  one's
time  while   they  are   happening.    Budapest   is  the   biggest.
Abandoned  by  the  West,  shunned  fearfully   by  their  Eastern
neighbors  (even  the  Polish  press  is afraid  to  let  go  and  show
its  sympathy),  fighting  the  world's  biggest  army  with  home-
made weapons,  the  Hungarians  seem  doomed  and  in  one  sense
perhaps  are.  But  in  another  sense,  they—alone—have  brought
the  new  Russian  empire  low  in  a  literal  sense,  low  in  the
minds  of  men  everywhere.
The  world  will never be the  same again whea this  prolonged
battle  and  general  strike  is  over.   An  era  is  dying,  the  era  in
which  many  of  us  intellectuals  grew  up,  the  era of  the Russian
Revolution,  the  era  in  which—for  all  its  faults  and  evils—de-
fense  of  that  revolution  was  somehow  the  moral  duty  of  all
progressive  minded  men. That  is  over,  and  with  it  the com-
panion  notion—especially  powerful  in  the  East—that  Russia
was  not  an  imperialist  power.
What  emerges  from  the  ruins  in  Budapest  is  the  old  Ivan,
the  bewildered   peasant   soldier   of  a  bureaucratic  despotism,
heavy  handed,  cruel  in  a  slovenly  way, and  not  too  sure  of  it-
self,  weakly reforming  and  brutally repressing  in fits and  starts.
The  Archaic  Red  Dean
The  full  flavor  of  the  change  can  be  sampled  in  the  state-
ment  made  by  the  Dean  of  Canterbury.  "The danger  of  a  re-
lapse  into  fascism,"  said  the  Dean,  "was something  that  no
eastern  workers'  state  could  tolerate."  This  is  an  archaic survi-
val from  a world which has vanished  in the Budapest fighting.
The  reality  appears  in  the  dispatches  of  the  past  few  months
from  Poland  and  Hungary.  There  is  the  item  from   Warsaw
(London  Times, Oct. 19)  that  the Warsaw  branch of  the Com-
munist  run  youth  movement  had  put  forward  among  its  de-
mands,  "the closing  of   exclusive  shops  for  officials."   What
kind  of  a  workers'  state  is  it  in which the  better  things  of  life
are  reserved  for   officials?
There  is the  item in  the  demands put  to Nagy  by the work-
ers  of  the  Borsod  district  (London  Times,  Oct. 27)  demand-
ing  not  only  better  wages  and  working conditions,  and  a Par-
liament  no  longer  to  be  a  rubber  stamp  but  also   (curiously)
"the   publication  of  the  Hungarian-Soviet  trade   agreement."
Everywhere  in  Eastern  Europe  the  Russians  are  accused  of
using  their  power  to buy cheap and  sell  dear  to  their  satellites;
the  Poles  claim  they  have  been  forced  to  sell  their  coal  to
Russia  at  half  the  price  it  could  bring  in  Scandinavia  'Or  Eng-
land.  This  is  what  capitalist  countries  do  (when  they  can  get
away  with  it)   in  their  colonies.
One  of  the  grievances  in  Hungary  (on  which  there  is  an  il-
luminating  item  in  Claude  Bourdet's  France-Observateur   for
Nov.  I)   is Russian  control  of  Hungary's  uranium mines.  Hun-
gary  is poor  in  power  for  its industries, looks  to  civilian atomic
use,  and  believes  Rakosi  "sold  out"  exclusive  control  of  its
uranium  to  Russia.
Deportations  Again
Then  there  is  that  item  from  Radio  Budapest  as  we  go  to
press  which  admits,  "according  to  the  latest  reports   prisoners
have  been  transported  to  the  east  in  locked  railway  cars  and
for  that  reason  the  railwaymen started  to  strike  again."  What
a  world  of  terror  in  one  banal  sentence!   For  the  Nineteenth
century,  to  be  "transported"  meant  in  Russia  transported   to
Siberia.   Post   Stalin  amnesty  and  revelation  have  since con-
firmed  what  dismal  hells  the  secret  police  operated  in  Siberia
for  political  prisoners  in  the  mines  and  timber  stations  of  the
icy  North;  the  ride  there  in  locked  cars  like  cattle  was  the
prologue  of  the  ordeal.
It  is  easy  to  understand  why  the  sight  of  those  locked  cars
going   east  drove  the  Hungarian   railwaymen  to  strike  again
and  saboteurs  to  blow  up  stretches  of  track.  ...    If  there  is a
danger  of  a  relapse  into  reaction  in  Eastern  Europe,  the Rus-
sians  and  the  Stalinist  Communists  have  created  that  danger.
They  will  never  live  this  down.    Budapest  is  worse  than  the
Khrushchev  speech  because  the   speech,   for   all   its   revealed
horrors,  bore the  implied  promise of  real  change  for  the  better.
Budapest  months later  demonstrates  how  unwilling  the  Stalin-
ist  bureaucracy is  to  make  real  changes  at  home  and  abroad.
What  happened  in  Budapest will  some day happen  in  Moscow.
Solve   Your   Christmas   Problem  By   Giving  That  Friend  A  Subscription   to  the    Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol, Wash. 3,  D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street                                               *
City                                           Zone           State           .....
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:.
(To)   Name
11/19/56
City                                           Zone.          State
City                                           Zone           State.
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?    Ten  Q    No   D
IE   Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3, 0.  C
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED