I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jun18.pdf

============================================================

Documentary:  Cain  Warns  Against  the  Danger  of  Fascism  in  the  U.S.A.,  Page  3.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IV,  NO.  22
JUNE  18,  1966
'<><      WASHINGTON,  D.    C.
15  CENTS
Washington  in  The  Shadow  of The  President's  Illness
Washington
The  illness  of  the  President  overshadows  all  else  here.   The
assurances  of  the  physicians  that  he  is better  than  ever  are  the
bitter  joke  of  the  press  corps,  though  little  enough  of  their
skepticism  gets  into print.    The  White  House  entourage  is do-
ing  all  it can to  create the  illusion that  Mr.  Eisenhower is active
again,  but  the  Hagerty  sleight-of-hand is  clumsy.  The  glimpse
of  the  President  being  fed  intravenously, with  a  tube  through
the  nose  for  stomach  exhaust,  indicates  the  painful  nature  of
his  ordeal.   The  President  and  Mrs.  Eisenhower  have  had  a
hard  and  lonely  lot,  and  we  would  wish  them  the  happy  re-
tirement  at  Gettysburg  they  deserve  if  he  were  not  so  badly
needed  at  this  critical  juncture in  American and  world  affairs.
Though  Adlai  Stevenson  commands  deserved  respect   and
gives  promise  of  gifts  far  superior  to  Eisenhower's,   the  pros-
pect  of  a change  in  the White  House  at  this  time is  discourag-
ing.   The  appearance  of  George  Meany  at  the  FBI   National
Academy  graduation  services—the  first  labor  chief   to  be  so
honored—and   the   inflammatory  speech  he  made  there  may
serve as a reminder of  the  kind  of  labor  leadership  and  rightist
Catholic  opinion  which  wields  influence  in  the   Democratic
party.   A  combination  of  that  pressure with  "20  years  of  trea-
son"  slurs  would  allow  Stevenson  too  little  leverage  for  peace
were he  in  the White  House.  The  Democratic  party is also  the
main  instrument  of  the  aviation  lobby  and  of  the  Air  Force
with  their  twin  vested   interests  in  maintaining  tension   and
alarm.    Should  a  Harriman  or  a  Symington  win  the  nomina-
tion,  they would  do their  best  to resume the  cold  war. The  new
National  Academy of  Sciences  report  on  atomic radiation  em-
phasizes  the  need  for  new  attitudes;  peace  is  the  No.  1  issue
for  mankind.    This  our  soldier  President   understands.
States  Within  A  State
With  the  President  ill,  the  situation  is  precarious.   All  he
has  achieved  in  the  first  beginnings  of  a thaw  in  our  relations
with  the  Soviet Union  and  China are endangered.  The  military
bureaucracy, the  dominant  groups  in the  State  Department,  the
FBI  and  its  two  Congressional  sounding  boards—the  Senate
Internal  Security  Committee and  the  House  Un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee—are  deeply  opposed   to  any  relaxation  of
tension.   Their  efforts   are  being  intensified.   The  almost  an-
archistic  headstrongness  which  government   departments  cus-
tomarily  display  in  Washington   is  more  evident  than   ever.
Where  else  would  a  subordinate  Air  Force  General  go  off  on
his  own  as  General  Le May  has  just  done  in  asking  an  addi-
tional  $3,800,000,000   for  the  Strategic  Air  Command   over
and  above its agreed  $5,000,000,000  budget?  Air  Force  Chief
Twining   admitted  to  a  reporter  last  week  that  this  was  Le
May's  "own  program."
In  the  Far  East  two  new  developments  hold  the  seeds  of
crises  which  could  serve  to  renew  tension.   The  public  is  not
being  told  the  full  story  either  about  negotiations  with  Com-
munist  China  or  about  the  unilateral   expulsion   of  the  truce
units  in  Korea.   The   State  Department   last  week  released  a
statement  about  the  U.S.  reply  to  a  Communist   proposal  at
Geneva  for  a  conference  about  Formosa  on  the  Foreign  Min-
isters'  level.   But  the  text  of  the  proposal  was  not  given  out
so that  it  is  impossible  to  tell  just  what  the  issue  is.   In  Korea
there  is  an  equal  lack  of  full  explanations.   The  U.S.  would
look  better  in  the  eyes  of  Asia  if  the  Swiss  and  Swedes  had
asked  for   discontinuance  of   the  truce  teams  on  which  they
serve.  But  they,  though  critical of  the  often  high  handed  con-
duct  of  the  North  Koreans  and  the  Chinese  Communists,  have
always  felt  it  was better  for  the  work  of  the  truce teams to  go
on.  Syngman  Rhee  has  wanted  the  truce  teams  out  as  a  first
step  toward  "revising"  the  armistice  agreement  altogether  so
that  he  could  bring in  atomic  weapons.   Korea  spells  trouble
again.
Adenauer,  Too,   Needs  Tension
Foremost  among  those  chafing  under  Eisenhower   policies
are  the  Germans;  Adenauer's future  depends on  resumption of
tension.  Now  as  always  bad  relations  between  East  and  West
are  primary  aims  of  German  policy.  If  a  deal  is  to  be  made
with  the  Russians,  they  want  to  make  it.  Dulles   is  their  old
friend  but  Eisenhower has never  been popular with them. They
saw themselves  bypassed  at  Geneva  and  they are terribly alarm-
ed  by  the  recent  suggestion   from  former  U.S.  High  Commis-
sioner  John  J.  McCloy,  an  Eisenhower  confidant,  that  West
Germany  renounce  its  claims  to  the  Oder-Neisse  territories.
Such  a  renunciation  would  serve  Western  policy  in  two  ways
(1)   by  lessening  the  likelihood  of  a  new  Russo-Gerrnan deal
paid  for  by  a  new  partition  of  Poland,  and  (2)   ease  Polish
and  Czech  fears  and  thereby  their  dependence  on  the  Soviet
Union.  On   top   of   this,   Eisenhower's   friendly  word   about
neutrals  in  his  last  press  conference  strengthened  those  Ger-
mans  who  want  a  demilitarized  neutral  Reich.
So we  have  Dulles  calling  neutralism  "immoral"  a  few  days
after  the  President  recognized  that  for  some  countries  it  might
be  expedient  and  wise.  The  only  Eisenhower  man  who  seems
to  be  speaking  out  in  the  government  is Nixon.  His  speech  at
Easton,  Pa.,  on  June  7  is  worth  study.  He  called  for  greater
exchange  of  visits  with  the  Soviet  Union,  expressed  sympathy
for  the  colonial  countries,  and  warned  of  the  danger  that  we
might  be  isolated  "if  it  is  made  to  appear  that  our  primary
concern  is military  hardware."   He  even went  so  far  as  to hold
up  to  us as an  example  those  areas  of  the  world  in whkh  "the
intellectual  is  not  dismissed  as  an  egghead.  The  artist  is  not
called  a  longhair."  This  sounded  like  a  play  for  Adl.ii  Steven-
son.   Nixon's,  too,  is a  "new  look"  worth  watching.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, June  18,1956
To  Show  Contempt  For  The  House Committee Is  Not  Crime  of "Contempt"
The  contempt  Paul  Robeson voiced last  week  for  the  House
Un-American  Activities  Committee was  richly  deserved  and if
it  is  foolish  enough  to  go  ahead  and  prosecute  him  for  con-
tempt,  it  will  merely  be  inviting  another  humiliation.   The
crime  of contempt  is failure  to appear  or  to  answer   questions.
Robeson  did  not fail  to  do either.  To voice one's  contempt  for
a   Congressional   committee  is  not  "contempt"  in  this  legal
sense,  and  the  only way  Robeson could be punished  for  calling
the  committee  "un-American"—which   it  certainly  is—would
be  by  summoning him  before  the  bar  of  the  House  of  Repre-
sentatives.    We do not  think  the  House  is  silly  enough  to  let
itself  in for  such a  spectacle.
Paul  Robeson  is  a  great  artist,  and  a  deeply   sympathetic
human being. His own success  did not  blind  him to the  wrongs
suffered  by  his  race.   His  emotionalism  and  political   imma-
turity  have  led him  into  a. blind pro-Sovietism  but  that  is  his
affair.   To deny him the  right  to  travel,  to  sing  and  to  speak
as  he  pleases;  to  put  him  in  the  pillory  of  a   Congressional
committee  and  let  lesser  men  bait  him,  is  more  hurtful   to
American prestige abroad  than  any  intemperate statement he
ever  made.  America  should  be proud  that, despite all,  a  Robe-
son  could  be a football  hero  and a  great artist in our  country,
and  speak  up  for  his  less  fortunate  fellows.  To gag  and  bait
him  is really  to  sabotage  this  country's  interests  abroad.
Last  week's  hearings  were  a  demonstration   of  disrespect
for  law  as  well  as  political  folly.   Robeson,  Clark   Foreman,
Dr.  Otto  Nathan  and  Leonard Boudin were  haled  before  the
Committee  to  punish  them  for  their  temerity   in  suing   the
State  Department  for  passports  and  their  right  to  travel.
Chairman  Walter   has  every  right  to  submit   a   bill  which
would  legalize  all  the worst  practices  of  the  passport  division,
including  the  use  of  anonymous informants,  as  he  has  done.
But he is too able a lawyer not to be aware  that  it is  improper
to  interfere  with  passport  cases  before  the  courts,  as  Robe-
son's  and  Boudin's  are,  or  to  try  and  "reverse"  recent  court
decisions  by  demanding  that  Dr.  Foreman  and  Dr.   Nathan
hand  over  to  the  committee  the  passports  granted  them  as  a
result  of  judicial order.   Here,  again,  the  threat  of  contempt
proceedings  may  prove an  empty  one.   We  believe the  courts
will  hold  that  the  Committee has  a  right  to  examine but  not
to  icize passports, as  a  few weeks ago  it  seized the  passports
of  two  young women and  refused  to  return  them.
Cain's  Duel  With   Brownell
On  the next  page  we print  an  important  excerpt  from
former  Senator  Harry  Cain's  two days  of testimony last
week  before  the  Hennings committee.  He was just  com-
pleting his appearance as  we went to press, and  full  cov-
erage  must  wait until next  week.  It  was an  unforgetta-
ble  experience  to  hear  this  tense,  thin-faced  man  with
the  wispy, wavy  hair;  this  ex-McCarthyite who has  be-
come  Washington's  foremost  champion of  the  forgotten
men  lost  and  destroyed  in  the  callous  gears  of  the  loy-
alty-security  program.   The real  America  we all  believe
in  spoke through  him.  He  had  just  managed  to  go  over
the  heads  of  Attorney  General  Brownell  and  Sherman
Adams; he had reached  the  President  the day  before  his
illness  began;  his  story  had  led  the  White  House  to  in-
tervene  at  once  in  two  particularly  dreadful cases;  and
he had made the  President  realize  what  was  really  hap-
pening  in  his  Administration.   Now the  Hennings  com-
mittee  had  come  to  life  again  to  give  this  crusader  a
forum,  and in  it  he carried a  step further  his  duel  with
the  Attorney General.  The  most  sensational  item  in  his
testimony  was  his statement  that  the  key  Ullmann  let-
ter  in  the  famous  Taylor  loyalty  case  "may  have  been
fabricated."   He  compared  it  to  the  infamous  "border-
eau"  in  the Dreyfus  case; here  Cain  was striking  at  the
very  heart  of  Brownell's  "twenty  years  of  treason."  His
detailed  analysis  of  the  steady  degeneration  in  loyalty
standards  under  Brownell was  another  blow,  as  was  his
derisive  description  of  the  Attorney  General's  list.
The  character   of  the  questions  asked  these  witnesses   and
Henry  Willcox clearly  invade  First  Amendment rights.  What
business  is it  of the  committee what  an  American  citizen  says
at  home  or  abroad?  The  effect  is to  browbeat  non-conformity,
and  in  Boudin's  case  to  put   into  the  pillory  a  courageous
young lawyer  whose efforts  have  created  new judicial  support
for  the  right  to  travel.   This  is  to  use  a  Congressional  com-
mittee  to  revenge  a  defeat  in  the  courts,  and  to  serve  notice
on  litigants  that  if  they  dare  sue  for  their  passports  they
may  be  hauled  up  for  a  smearing  and  forced  to  hand  them
over  to  the  House  committee.
The  Supreme  Court's  Cole  Decision  and  the  Security  Mania
The   frenzied   activity  of  the   two  witch  hunt  committees,
House   Un-American and   Senate  Internal   Security,  reflect
their  desperation.  They feel  that  the  cold war  is ending, that
the  anti-Red hysteria  has  given  way  first  to  public  indiffer-
ence  and  now  to  public  distrust  of  the  witch  hunters  them-
selves.   They  fear  a  detente  abroad  and  they  are  especially
worried—and  correspondingly furious—because  of  the  chang-
ing  attitude of  the  courts.  Here  the  racial  animosities  of  men
like  Eastland  merge  with their  generally  reactionary outlook
in  an  outburst  of  criticism of  the  Supreme Court.
Last  week's  decision in  the  Cole  case  added  to  the  fury  of
the  Eastlands  and  Walters,  and  those  circles  in  the   Depart-
ment  of  Justice  and  the  FBI  whose views they  share.   What
the  Cole  case  really  means  remains  to  be  seen.   But  politi-
cally  it  was  a  block-buster.  Attorney  General  Brownell  had
abolished  the  loyalty  procedures, with  their  system  of  review
boards,  and  persuaded  the  President  to  blanket  the  whole
government  in  under  a  1950  Act  which gave  eleven  specified
agencies  powers  of  summary dismissal  without  a  hearing  to
protect  "national   security."   Cole  was  a  food  and  drug  in-
spector  in  the  Department  of  Health,  Education  and  Welfare
alleged  to  have  (in  the  gibberish  of  the  witch  hunt)   "main-
tained   a   continued  and   sympathetic  association   with   the
Nature  Friends  of  America"  which  is  on  the  Attorney  Gen-
eral's  list.
The  Supreme  Court  5-3 upheld  Cole's  appeal.   What  must
have  hurt  most  at  the  Justice  Department  is  that  the  judge
who  wrote  the  majority  opinion  was  Brownell's   own  latest
choice for  the Court, John  Marshall  Harlan,  hand-picked  after
a  Smith  Act  decision  on the  Circuit  Court  which  was  so  far
right  that  it  seemed to guarantee that he would  be "reliable."
The  facts  in  the  Cole  case  seem  to  have  been  too  much  for
Mr. Justice  Harlan's  sense  of fair  play.   He  pointed  out  that
Congress  in passing  the  1950 statute named  11 agencies which
are  really  "sensitive"  and  argued  that  it  could  not  have  in-
tended  to  allow  similar  summary  firings  in  other   agencies
without  a  determination that  the  specific  jobs  involved  were
equally  "sensitive."   There  had  not  been, and  there  could  not
have  been,  any  such  determination  in  Cole's  case,  since  his
duties  were  miles  removed from   "security."
The  summary procedures of  the   1950  Act  were  never  in-
tended  to  be used  as  a  substitute  for  "loyalty  hearings."   In-
deed  the  Act  specifically  provided that  dismissal by one  agen-
cy  under  these  procedures  "shall  not  affect  the right  ...    to
seek  or  accept  employment"  in  any  other,  non-sensitive  gov-
ernment  position.  Brownell  and  the  Eisenhower  Administra-
tion  seized  on  this  Act  to  save  themselves  the  trouble  even
of  giving  employes suspected of disloyalty the  inadequate type
of  hearings   provided  by  "loyalty"  procedures.   These  hear-
ings—and  the  faceless  informers  who  figured  in  them—were
attracting  too much  attention  from  the  Courts,  and  Brownell
preferred  to  get  rid  of  them  altogether.  The  Cole  decision  as
a  minimum means  a  little  more  protection,  a  little  more  jus-
tice,  for  the  Federal  employe.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June 18,1956
From  Last  Week's  Testimony  By  The  Fighting  Maverick  of  the  Eisenhower  Administration
Former  Senator  Cain  Calls  Fascism  Greater  Danger   Than  Communism
As  a  member  of  the Subversive Activities  Control  Board,
a  former  follower   of  McCarthy  in  the   UJ5.  Senate  and  a
man  who  probably   knows  more  than  any  other   official    in
Washington   about   the   loyalty-security    program,   former
Senator Harry  Cain is  worth listening  to  when  he says that
Fascism  is  a  greater  menace  to  the  U.S. than  Communism*
Because  remarkably  little  attention was  paid  in  the  press
last  week  to  Cain's  warning  on  this  point   before   the Hen-
nings  Committee  on  Constitutional  Rights,  we  reprint  the
salient  sections here. The italics are  from,  the  original.—1FS
"On  occasions  in  the  past,  segments  among  our  people  and
their  governments  have  been  persuaded,  but  only temporarily,
that  some  of  the  tools  of  what  has  been  called  Fascism  since
1922  offered  solutions  in  periods  when  our  nation's  security
was  to  some  extent  in  jeopardy.   Conspicuous  examples  took
place  with  the  Alien  and  Sedition  Acts  shortly  after  the  first
government  of  the  United  States  was  established;  during  and
following  the Civil War;  through  and after  World War  I; and
from  about  the  close  of  World  War  II  until  the  present.
"I  find  it  provocative  that  the  prevailing  era  of  departure
from  traditional  concepts  and  procedures  has  already  lasted
longer  than  any of  the  other  eras  by several  years.  When  this
awareness  is related  to  our  far  larger  population  with  its grow-
ing  reliance  on  government  in  one way or  another,  and  to  the
troubled  and  uncertain  condition  of  the  world,  one  has  reason
to  wonder   about  the  direction   in  which  the  United   States
seems  to be headed.  . . .
"As  a  people  we  are  strongly  anti-Communistic.   We  are
opposed  to  die  level  of  mass  mediocrity  required  by  Com-
munism's  demand  for  total  obedience  and  loyalty to  the  State.
In  our  Republic,  our  government  is expected  to  be  responsible
and   loyal   to  us,  the  people,  and   to  the   spirit   and   letter
of  the   Constitution.
"From  the  Top  Down"
"But  Fascism  is  also  opposed   to  Communism  though   for
reasons  far  different  from  our  own.  Should  we fail  to  have  a
clear  appreciation   of  the  difference  between  the  reasons,  we
can  become so anti-Communistic as to become  pro-Fascist.  . . .
Though   Fascism  tends  to  impose  its  dictatorship   from   the
top  down  while  Communism moves from  the  bottom  up,  each
employs  the  same weapons  for  its  progress  and  success.
"Chief   among  these  are  fear,  conformity, the  closed  mind,
superstition,  using  each  other  as  the  primary  excuse  for  addi-
tional  grants  of  executive  power,  discrediting  the  legislative
and  judicial process  in  favor  of  administrative procedures  and
so-called  people's   courts,  and   always   justifying    every   totali-
tarian  step  in the name and need  for  total  security.  .  .  .
"We  are  told  by  law,  Executive Order  and  Congressional
interpretation   that   a   conspiracy  called   international   Com-
munism, which  aims to  overthrow  our  government  and  destroy
our  free  institutions  by whatever  means  it  may  find  available,
constitutes  a  clear  and  present  danger  to  our  society.
"So  what!    We  have  always  been  threatened   by  outside
forces  of  one kind  or  another.  .  .  .  It  makes  sense  that  we
recognize a  danger  so that  we may deal  with  it.  If  the  fashion
in  which  we  deal  with  the  danger  is shortsighted,  stupid,  dic-
tatorial   or  foolish,   let  us  blame  ourselves   rather  than   the
danger  for  our  mistakes,  unawareness  and  inaptitude.
"I  am  probably a  fairly  well-informed  and  patriotic  citizen,
or  at  least  I  think  I  am.  This  knowledge  and  my devotion  to
liberty  leads  me  to  believe  that  our  nation  has  less  to  worry
about  from  the  clear  and  present danger  of  Communism  than
from  the  secret  and  more pernicious danger  of  Fascism.
Harder  to  Identify
"Will you agree that  it  is  easier,  though  difficult,  to identify
a  Communist  than  a  Fascist?   The  Communist  can  be  tied  to
an  international   conspiracy;  he  sometimes 'carries  a  card,  or
belongs  to  a  cell  in  which  the  government  has  an  undercover
agent,  or  subscribes to  the  Daily  Worker  or  the  New   Masses,
or  was against the  war  in  Korea  and  wants  to  outlaw  the  atom
bomb,  or  advocates  admission  of  Red  China  to  the   United
Nations.    Some  of   these  standards   cover  those  who  are  as
loyal  as  you  or  I,  but,  anyway, they  are  leads.
"It  is  much  harder  to  find  a  Fascist.   In  the  first  place,  no
one  is  looking  for  him.   The  Attorney  General,  for   example,
prosecutes  cases  against  alleged  Communist front  organizations
but  he  has  no  legal  authority  for  proceeding   against  alleged
Fascist   organizations.    It  is  seldom   remembered  that   six  or
seven  hundred   Fascist  organizations,  with  American  citizens
as  members,  were  operating  here  during  the   1930's.
"Many  who act like Fascists  do so only because of their  total
desire  to  impose  injury  on  the  Communist  course.   To  them
the  end  justifies  any  means.   These  are  the  people  who  have
forgotten  why  and  how  our  Bill  of  Rights  was  forged  from
valleys  of  blood,   vast  suffering  and  -sacrifices   long   endured.
This  Fascist-minded  person  is  often  best  known  by  the  con-
tradiction  between  what  he  says  and  what  he  does.   He  has a
unique  facility   for  applauding  freedom  publicly  while abusing
it  privately.  This  fellow  carries  no  card  and  belongs   to  no
cell  but  when  taken  in  the  aggregate,   he  has  done  much
more  to  harm  liberty's  cause  here at  home  during  our  postwar
decade  than  has the Communist.  . . .
"Whenever  we employ a  Fascist  tool  in  our  struggle  against
Communism,  we  have  impregnated  a  cancer  cell  in  the  body
of  our  society.   Let  that  cell  remain  undetected  or  permit   it
to  spread  after  detection and  the  body it  occupies,  our  Repub-
lic,  can  only  look  forward  to  an  agonizing  and  certain  death."
Praise  from  The  London  New  Statesman  for  The  Weekly
The   London  New  Statesman   and  Nation's   famous  "Critic,"
its   gifted   editor,   Kingsley  Martin,   in  his  "London   Diary"  for
June   2   summarized   for   its  readers  Stone's  recent  series   from
Moscow   and   Warsaw.      He   introduced   it   by   saying—pardon
our  blushes—"I've  always  respected  I.   F.  Stone  as  one  of  the
most  honest,  courageous  and  often  attacked of  American  liberals.
I   respect  him  all   the  more   for  his  remarkable   report  on  his
recent  trip  to  Moscow,  which   has  just  appeared  in  his   weekly
8
newsletter."    This  is  the  prize  item  in  a  collection  of  bouquets
and   brickbats  from  which  we've  been  hoping  to  print  samples
as  soon  as  not  quite  so  much  is  happening.     We   just  had   to
break   into   print  with  this   one,   since  the   NS&N   is  the   pub-
lication  we  would  most  like  to  be  in  our  next  incarnation.      In
the  meantime  you can  still  start  a  gift  subscription for  a  friend
with  Stone's  series  from  abroad.    It'll  help   our  circulation  and
his   blood   pressure    (unless  too   high  already).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  18,1956
Stalin's  Frameups  Cited  to  Show  The  Danger  of  Permitting  Faceless  Informers  .
Krushchev   Makes  His  Debut  in  American  Constitutional  Law
Krushchev's  attack  on  Stalin  made  its  debut  in  U.S.  con-
stitutional   law  last   week.   Its   description   of  how  "honest
Communists"  were  framed  under  Stalin  was  quoted  by  Mr.
Justice  Black  in  Jay  v. Boyd.   Black  protested  that  "the   use
of  anonymous information . . . against  those  who  are obnoxi-
ous  to  the  rulers"  has  always  been  used  to  maintain   totali-
tarian  power,  and  coupled  Krushchev  with  a  famous  letter
from  the  Emperor  Trajan  instructing  Pliny  the  Younger  not
to  use  anonymous  information  against  persons  suspected  of
being  Christians   because  this  would  be  "a  very   dangerous
precedent  . . . quite  foreign  to the spirit  of our  age."
It  may  have  been foreign  to  imperial  Rome .but has  grown
to be taken  for  granted in latter day Washington. Anonymous
accusation  is  an  accepted  feature  of  loyalty,  security,  pass-
port,  and  draft  board  hearings.  The  Supreme  Court  has  al-
ready  allowed anonymous information  in three types  of cases:
conscientous  objector   hearings,   exclusion  of  aliens   and  de-
termination  of sentence  by  a judge  after  convictions of  crime.
Jay  v. Boyd  last  week  added  a  new  category:  hearings  for
suspension  of  deportation.
Familiar  Cold  War  Formula
The  law  entitles  a  deportable  alien  to  suspension  of  depor-
tation  "in  the  discretion"  of  the  Attorney  General.   But  the
alien  to  qualify  must  "prove"  that  during  the  preceding  ten
years  he  has  been  a  person  of  good moral  character.  The  At-
torney  General  set  up  hearing  procedures.   But  these  permit
the  decision  to  be  based  on "confidential  information  ...    if
. . . the disclosure of such information would be prejudicial  to
the  public  interest,  safety  or  security."  This  is  the  formula
grown  familiar  in  American  cold  war  law.
The man  before the  court  was  65.  Cecil  Reginald  Jay  came
here  from  England  in  1914,  and  had  been  here  ever  since  ex-
cept  fur  service in  the  Canadian Army  during  World  War  I.
In  1952 he was  ordered  deported because  he had  been a mem-
ber   of  the   Communist  Party  from   1936  to   1940,  although
Congress  did not  make such membership grounds  for  deporta-
tion  until  1950.   Jay   applied  for  suspension  as  a   hardship
case,  and  the  hearing  officer   found  that  deportation   would
separate  him  from   relatives   and  friends,   leaving  him  up-
rooted  and  without  support.
Jay  established  his  good  moral  character  "to  the  complete
satisfaction  of  the  hearing  officer,"  Black  pointed  out.    "But
the  hearing  officer  'after  considering confidential  information'
refused  to  suspend  deportation."   Jay's  counsel  claimed  that
this  was  nothing more than  the  appearance  of  his  name  on  a
list  circulated by the  American  Committee for  the  Protection
of  the  Foreign  Born  which  has  been  held  subversive  by  the
Attorney  General.   This  the  government  denied.
"He  Was  Forthright   in  His  Opinions"
Some  light  may  be cast  into  the  fog  from  which Jay  tried
to  extricate  himself.   There  is  a  revealing  sentence  in  an  af-
fidavit  from  the  Seattle  Housing  Authority  which  employed
him.   This  called  him  "conscientous  and  faithful."    "His  hon-
esty  was  ,unquestioned."    "Not  one  complaint  had  ever  been
filed against  him."   But  "he  was  forthright  in  his  opinions."
Who  knows  what  some  informer  overheard  or  twisted?
This  painful  story,  with  its  tragedy  and  shame,  split  the
Court  5-4.  The majority  through  Mr. Justice  Reed held  that
suspension  of  deportation  was  a  matter  of  grace  and  there-
fore  the  Attorney  General  could handle  it  as  he  pleased.   Mr.
Justice  Frankfurter   held  that  while this  might unfortunately
be  true,  the  Attorney  General  could  not  exercise  his  discre-
tion  through   subordinates  by  setting  up  regulations   for  a
hearing  and  then  depriving that  hearing  of  real  meaning by
permitting  the  decision  to  be  made  on  undisclosed  charges.
Three  other  members of the  Court went  further  in separate
dissents.  The  Chief  Justice  denied that  the  Attorney  General
had  "unfettered   discretion."    Mr.  Justice  Douglas  held  that
the  statute  implicitly  required  a  hearing  and  protested  "A
hearing  is  not  a  hearing  in  the  American  sense  if  faceless  in-
formers  or  confidential  information may  be used  to  deprive  a
man  of  his  liberty."  Mr. Justice  Black  argued  that  irrespec-
tive  of  the  statute  "prosecution  of  any  sort  on  anonymous in-
formation"  is  unconstitutional*
Often  Anonymous  Rubbish
Scornfully   Mr.  Justice   Black  asked,  "What  is  meant  by
'confidential  information'?   According to  officers   of  the   Im-
migration  Service  it  may  be  'merely  information we received
off  the  street";  or  'what  might  be termed  as  hearsay  evidence,
which  could not be gotten  into the  record  ..  .';  or 'such things,
perhaps,   as  income  tax   returns,  or  maybe  a  witness  who
didn't  want  to  be disclosed.  .  . .'  No nation  can remain  true
to  the  ideal of liberty  under law  and  at  the  same  time  permit
people  to  have  their  homes  destroyed  and  their  lives  blasted
by  the  slurs  of  unseen  and  unsworn  informers."
The  vigor  of  the  dissents,  the  close  vote,  the  changing  cli-
mate  and  the  narrowness  of  the  majority  opinion  offer  some
hope  for  the  future.   It  is  not  likely  that  five  votes  could be
marshalled  on  this  court  for  the  use  of  anonymous  informa-
tion  in  a  wider  context  than  the  Attorney   General's   discre-
tion  to  suspend  deportation.    Deportation  itself  must  be  on
grounds  proven  in  open  court.
You  Can  Still  Start  A  Gift   Subscription  With  Stone's  Series  From  Abroad
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City                                            Zone           State               —
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name
0/18/58
Street
City                                            Zone           State
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?   Tes  D    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301    E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Washington   3,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED