I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956oct15.pdf

============================================================

The  "Unmentionable"  Weapon  Behind  The  H-Bomb  Testing  Controversy,  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IV,  NO.  39
OCTOBER  15,   1956
l0
'       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
Beginning  of  The  End   for  The   Smith  Act?
The  scene  when  the  Supreme  Court  opened  this  year  was
the  familiar  one.  The  same gray  heads  and  black  gowns  filed
in  among  the  same  marble  pillars  and  red  velvet  hangings.
The  Chief  Justice  made  his  immense  kindliness felt  even  in
the  routine  formality  of  greeting  the  lawyers  newly  admitted
to the  bar.  When  argument began,  Mr.  Justice Frankfurter was
as  irrepressibly  ebullient  as  ever  and  Mr.  Justice  Harlan  was
again  impressive  in  the  pointed  clarity  of  his  questions.   Mr.
Justice Minton  sat there  for  the  last  time,  ill  and  impatient  for
retirement.   Of  the  dissenters on  the Court's  far  left,  the youth-
ful  Mr.  Justice  Douglas  seemed  his  old  amused  almost  cynical
self,  while  Mr.  Justice   Black  growled  occasionally   from  his
lair  in  the  lowest  seat  at  the  bench,  almost  invisible, often  in-
audible,  but  as inexorable  as conscience,  the  same First  Amend-
ment  fundamentalist,  determined  as  ever  to  hang  on  until  the
tide  turned.
The  Court  demonstrated,  within  the first three  days, that  the
turn  evident  last  term  in  such  decisions  as Slochower and  Nel-
son  was about  to  take  on  momentum.  The  Court  is  no  longer
refusing  to  hear  the hard  ones;  the  grant  of  a  hearing  to  Wat-
kins,  Gold  and  Siveezy  showed  at  once  that  the  Warren  court
unlike  Vinson's  would  not  back  away  from  politically   explo-
sive  cases.   But  the  dramatic  evidence  that  a  fresh  wind  was
blowing  through  that  formal  hall  and  those  sometimes  formal
minds  came  when  the  Court  reached  the  Smith  Act  appeals,
the  first  to  be heard  since  the  original  Dennis  case  was  argued
in  December,   1950.
Freedom  of  Press  An  Issue
Four   different   Smith   Act   prosecutions   were   before   the
Court:  the  fourteen  Communists  convicted  in  California  and
the  five  convicted  in  Pittsburgh  of  "conspiracy  to  advocate";
the  two convictions  for  "membership"—Scales  in North  Caro-
lina,  Lightfoot  in  Illinois.   Heard  with  them  was  an  appeal
from  the  heavy  penalties  for  contempt  imposed  on  one  Cali-
fornia   defendant,   Oleta   O'Connor   Yates,  for  refusing  time
after  time to identify other  persons  as Communists. Within  the
framework  of  the  California  cases,  the  Court  also  heard   two
separate  issues.   Augustin  Donovan,  a  leader  of  the  California
bar,  argued  that  freedom  of  the  press  was  endangered  by  the
kind  of  evidence  utilized  against  the two  California  defendants
who  are  Communist newspapermen.  California's one  time At-
torney  General,  Robert  W.  Kenny,  argued  that  the  evidence
and  the  issues  in  the  conviction of  one  California  defendant,
William  Schneiderman, had  already  been  settled  in  his  favor
by the Supreme Court thirteen years ago when Wendell  Willkie
successfully   argued  against  Schneiderman's  denaturalization.
Even  before   the  historic  climax  on  Wednesday  afternoon
when  the Court  6-3 reversi'J  all five Pillsburgh convictions and
remanded  them for  a new trial, the tenor  of  questions  from  the
bench  indicated a  new  atmosphere  and  held  little  comfort  for
the government. Not  only the  Schneiderman case but  the  spuri-
ous  solemnity of  all  the  Smith  Act  prosecutions  were  consider-
ably  deflated  by  a  wry  question  from  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter.
When Judge Kenny was explaining  that one of  the  government
informers  had  testified  that  he  quit  the  Communist  party  in
Leftist  disgust  because  of  Schneiderman's  reformist  leanings,
Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  asked,  "You  mean  the  evidence  showed
he  was  soft  on  Communism?"  Schneiderman's  plea  that  his
Smith  Act conviction  should  be reversed  under  the  doctrines of
res  judicata and  collateral  estoppel  (i.e.   as  already  decided  by
the  Court  in  his  favor  last  time)  was given  impetus  by a ques-
tion  from  Mr.  Justice  Harlan.   He  asked  government   counsel
whether  Schneiderman  could  have  been  convicted  this   time
without  the  use  of  the  evidence on  which  the  Supreme  Court
had  already passed  in  1943  and  got  a  spontaneous  answer,  "I
think  not",  which  survived  subsequent  efforts  to  qualify  it.
A  New  Trial  in  California,   Too?
It  looks  as  if  there  is  a  good  chance  that  the  Schneiderman
conviction  may  be  reversed  and  the  other  California  cases  re-
manded  for  a  new trial. The  crucial  weakness of  the  California
prosecution  seems  to  have  been  the  extraordinary  refusal  of
the  trial  judge  to  instruct  the  jury  that  there  had  to  be  some
evidence  of  "incitement"  though   such  an  instruction  was  re-
quested   by  the  government   as  well  as  the  defense.   It  was
amusing  to  hear  Defense  Counsel,  Ben  Margolis,  in  his  able
presentation  of  this  issue,  base  himself  squarely  on  Judge Me-
dina's  charge  to  the  jury  in  the  Dennis  case.  The  bete  noir's
utterance  now  turns  up  as  defense  gospel.   Fearing  a  reversal
under  the  First  Amendment,  that  shrewd  old  fox  Medina  in-
structed  the  jury  that  mere  advocacy of  revolutionary doctrines
was not  enough  for  conviction;  there  had  to  be  some  evidence
of  words   reasonably  calculated  to  incite  action.  This   subtle
formula,   which  would  delight  a  Duns  Scotus  but   probably
succeeded  only further  in  confusing  a  jury  already  drugged  by
days  of  listening  to  the  government  expound  Marxism-Lenin-
ism,  was piously  echoed  by all  the  learned  judges  nodding  af-
firmance  on  the  Circuit  and  Supreme  Courts  in  Dennis  as  a
necessary ingredient of  conviction.  Only  Rabelais could  do  full
justice  to  this  lovely  legal  hair.  The  failure  of  the   California
trial  judge  to  split  it  properly  may  lead  to  a  new  trial  and  a
new  trial  in  a  new  atmosphere  may  lead  to  an  acquittal.     On
such  tenuous  filamenls  doth  justice hang.
I   must  leave   until   next   week   the   similarly  metaphysical
arguments  on  which depend (lie  Scales  and  Light'foot   member-
ship  cases,  which were still  being  argued  as this  issue  went  to
press.  The  Court  seemed  impressed  by  Telford   Taylor's   elo
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone't Wtekly,  October IS, 1»S9
The  Military  Feed  The  President  A  New  Excuse  for A  Nuclear  Arms Race
The  "Unmentionable"  Weapon  Behind  The  H-Bomb  Testing  Controversy
When the  President  was questioned  about  the  H-bomb  at his
press  conference on  October  5,  he  turned  to  Jim  Hagerty  and
asked,  "Is that  report  I got going to be published?"  On  getting
a  nod from  his press secretary, Mr.  Eisenhower told  newspaper-
men  "quite a  long  report  on  this  whole  subject"  would  be re-
leased  that  afternoon.  This  sounded  as if a technical  report  had
been  prepared  for  the President.  It  was a surprise  to  the  press,
and perhaps  also  to Mr.  Eisenhower, to find that  the  document
was written  as a report  by the  President.  "I  speak  as the  Presi-
dent,"  it  said,  with  pomp,   "charged   under  the   Constitution
with  responsibility for  the  defense and  security  of  our  nation.
..."   This  sounded  like  another  instance  of  absentee  landlord-
ism  in the White  House.  Who  spoke  through  the  President  in
that  document? Whose  was the  pen  and  the  decision?
The  tone  reflected  that  cult  of  personality  nourished  by  the
Republican  high  command  and  the  military. The  heart  of  the
document  was  the  paragraph  which  spoke  of  the  President's
responsibility,  with  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  and   the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  "to  weigh,  at  all  times,  the  proper  em-
phasis  on various  types and sizes of  weapons.  .  .  ."  One could
almost  see  Mr.  Eisenhower,  with  Chairman  Strauss  and  Ad-
miral  Radford—the  shades  securely drawn—having  a  look  at
the  weapons  in  a  White  House  hideaway. "This  specific  mat-
ter,"   the  document  had  the  President  saying,  "is  manifestly
not  a  subject  for  detailed public  discussion—for  obvious  secu-
rity  reasons."  At  this,  an  awed  electorate was  presumably ex-
pected  to  slink  away,  blushing at  Mr.  Stevenson's  uncouthness
in  bringing up  the  subject  at  all.
But  this  is  too  important  to  be  left  to  anonymous  experts
drafting  presidential  utterances while Mr.  Eisenhower putts  on
the  White  House  lawn.  We  are  not  dealing  here  with  mere
"various  types  and  sizes  of  weapons,"  as  the  White  House  re-
lease  disingenuously phrased  it.   Mr.  Stevenson has  opened  up
the  most  momentous single  question of  our  time,  but  even  he
has  yet  to  touch  upon  the  security-veiled  inner  heart  of   the
matter.  The  issue  of  further  H-bomb  tests  is  linked  with  the
issue  of  whether  there  shall  be  a  world  race  for  an  intercon-
tinental  ballistic  missile with  an  H-bomb warhead,  a  new  ter-
ror  to  haunt  the  uneasy  sleep  of  mankind.  If  there  are  to  be
no more H-bomb tests,  there can be no  intercontinental missile
because  no  one  can  be  sure whether  it  will  work  until  it  has
been  tested  with its warhead.
It  was  no  surprise  that  Mr.  Truman  disagreed  with  Mr.
Stevenson  on  the  cessation of  tests.  This,  in  a  new  context,  is
Last  Chance
"Failure  to  stop  production  of  atomic  bombs  in  the
early  days  following  World  War  II  has  led  to  an  arms
race  which  is  about  to  be  duplicated  in  the  case  of  the
[intercontinental]  ballistic-type missile.   Once  a  nation
had  made  a  successful  test  of   such  a  weapon,  other
countries  will  not  rest  easy  until  they,  too,  have  the
capability  of  making  the  weapons."
—Staff    Study  No.  4, Subcommittee  on  Disarmament,
Senate  Foreign Relations Committee, Oct. 7,1958.
the  same  controversy which  arose under  Mr.  Truman  when  the
Soviets  caught  up  with  us  and  exploded  their  first  atom  bomb.
The  question  which  Robert  Oppenheimer  then  ruined  himself
with  the military by pressing  was whether we  should  not  strive
for  a  self-enforcing agreement  with  the  Russians against  fur-
ther  tests  or go  on  to  the  next  horror,  the  H-bomb.   Mr.  Tru-
man  and  the  Pentagon  decided for  the  H-bomb,  as Mr.  Eisen-
hower  privately  has  decided  for  the  ICBM.  All  those  news-
paper  ads  frantically  calling  for  more  engineers  and  physicists
reflect  a  stepped  up  race  for  the  Missile.   Once  discovered,  it
will  be  too  late,  every  great  Power  will  want  one.  The  cave-
man  mind  of  the  military  will  wield  a  planetary  club.
This  is the  nightmarish reality behind  the  deceptive  phrases
in  the  presidential  release  about  reduced  fallout  and  the  de-
velopment  of  devices  "not  primarily  for  vaster  destruction."
The  italics  are  ours;  the  adverb  is  revealing.   Senator  Hum-
phrey,  in  releasing  a  staff  study  for  the  disarmament  subcom-
mittee of  which he  is chairman, emphasized  the  agonizing  fact
that  precious  time  ticks away. A  ban  on  tests  is  self-enforcing;
not  only  the  health  of  mankind  but  its  continued  existence
may be at stake; we can still  save the air we breathe from pollu-
tion  and  our  nights  from  fear  of  the  Missile.  The   military,
playing  for  time  on  its  own,  came  up  in  the  presidential  re-
lease,  with  a  new  argument,  as  tortuous  as  a  shyster  lawyer's
trying  at  all  costs  to  block  a  contract.  The  document  admits
"tests  of large weapons  . . . may be detected  when  they occur"
but  what  if  a  country  secretly  works  on  a  new  weapon  and
then  tests  it?  This  ingenious objection  so triumphantly  unveil-
ed  is  really  only  another  way  of  saying  that  a  no-test  agree-
ment  can  be  broken  by  a  test.   But  any  agreement  can  be
broken.   It  will  take  more  than  one  test  to  develop  this  new
monster,  and  the  price  of  a  momentary advantage  would  be
the  ill-will  and  distrust  of  mankind.
This  whole  subject  cries out  for  debate while  there  is  time.
The  Press  Ignored  This  Criticism of  Ike  and Strauss  By An Atomic  Scientist
"I  do  not  believe  that  the  development  of  a  50-megaton
weapon   or  a   100-megaton   weapon   will  really  make   that
much  difference  in  our  Sunday  punch.  I  believe  there  is  the
element  of  saturation  and  that,  to  me,  is  the  real weakness
of  the  statement  which  was  made   [by  the  President]  last
Friday  with  respect to  H-bomb  tests.  .  .  .
"If  we  are  in  the  process  of  developing larger weapons
than  those  which  we  presently  have,  then  we  are  clearly
coming  much  closer to  the limits  which  we  can  tolerate with
regard  to radioactive  material.  ...    Its ultimate  effect,  when
it  accumulates  in  the  bone  in  sufficient  quantity,  is  to  pro-
duce  bone  tumor  and cancer.  .  .  .
"I  would  like  to  propose  that  we  adopt  a  kind  of  global
sanitary  code on atmospheric  pollution, with regard to'radio-
active  substances. ...    I  would  like  to  propose that an  inter-
national  limit  for  all  nations,  total,  be  set  at  ten megatons
of fission  product  material,  or its  equivalent  per year. ...    I
believe  this could be a safe limit. ...    I  would  prefer  to have
all  tests  cease,  personally,  as  a  citizen.  .  .  .
"I  think  that the  record  of  candor  on  the  part  of  the AEC,
specifically  with  regard  to  radioactive  effects  of  weapons is
a  record  of  too  little  information  too  late.  .  .  .  Under  the
regime  of  Admiral  Strauss,  atomic  energy  has  become  an
extremely  political subject."
—Dr. Ralph E.  Lapp,  interviewed  on  CBS  "Face  The  Nation,"  Oct. 7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October IS, 1856
Dixiecrats  Invade Washington  While  Yankees Electioneer
Set  Out  To  Prove  Negro  Children  "Depraved",  Not   "Deprived"
By  Dan  Wakef ield
The  congressional  subcommittee  which  set  itself  the  task  of
investigating  the  integrated  public  school  system  of  the  Dis-
trict  of  Columbia  has  concluded  its  hearings after  nine  days of
public  questioning  with  53 witnesses.  The  essence  of  the  pro-
ceeding  was  captured  in  a  bit  of  dialogue  between  Rep.  John
Bell  Timmerman   (D.,  Miss.)  and  Mrs.  Bessie  Wood  Cramer
(white),  director  of  supervision  and  instruction  in  District  of
Columbia  Elementary  schools.
Mrs.  Cramer:  I  had  not  realized  that  little  children  were  so
seriously  deprived,  socially  and  economically,  as  was  revealed
when  we  saw them  in  the  schools.
Rep.  Williams:  Deprived,  did  you  say,  or  depraved?
Mrs.  Cramer:  Deprived.
Rep.  Williams:  Deprived?
Mrs.  Cramer:  Yes.
The  image  of  Mississippian  Williams,  straining  to  hear  the
word  he  wanted—rather  than  the  word  pronounced—was  a
focussed  image  of  the  whole  Dixiecrat-stacked  committee try-
ing to pound  home  the Klannish  "moral"  that  Negro  children
are  somehow  unfit  associates for  white.   Some teachers  agreed;
Separate  and Unequal
"It  is  not  strange  that  the  white  teacher  must  over-
come  a   tremendous  psychological  barrier   when  con-
fronted  with  the  task  of  teaching  Negroes  and  white
children  side  by  side  in  the  same  classroom.  But  it  is
this  very  factor  which  should  make  him  appreciate the
magnitude of  the  psychological barrier facing the Negro
student  and  to  which  much  of  his  misbehavior can  be
attributed.   Society  is  now  paying  the  price  for  'separ-
ate  but  equal.'"
—From  a  letter  to  the  Washington  Post,  by  Moddie
D.  Taylor.
The  Dimensions  of  The  Handicap
"In 1949-50 and  1950-51,  the  only two years for  which
figures   are   available,  the   D.C.  school  system   spent
$68.94  and  $84.03  less  to  educate  each  negro  child  in
average  daily  attendance,  than  was  spent  on  the  aver-
age   white  child.  The  enormity  of   our  debt   to   these
young  Negro citizens can only be guessed  at  when  these
figures  are  put  up against  the  average  daily attendance
figures for  Negro children during the past  decade, which
adds up to  417,907 children."
—Gerhard  van  Arkel,  chairman of  Washington Com-
mittee  on Public Schools, a  group  of  civic and  religious
leaders  newly  formed   to  combat  the  Davis  committee.
others  were  not  afraid  to  challenge  it.   One  of  the  recurring
scenes at the hearings  was the middle  aged  teacher,  brought  up
in the  Dixie tradition, who  showed  a new awareness  that  poor
conditions   rather   than   racial  inferiority  accounted   for   the
Negro  student's  lower  scholastic  record.
Such  revelations  in  the  testimony were no  fault  of  the  sub-
committee's  careful  planning.    Headed  by  Rep.  James  Davis
(D.,   Ga.),   a  legislator   credited  with  halting  integration  of
D.  C. firemen during the Truman  era, the group was composed
of  six  men,  four  of  whom  had  signed  the  Southern  manifesto
defying   the   Supreme  Court  desegregation   order.  The   only
committeeman  from  north  of  the  Mason-Dixon  was  a  fellow
from  Nebraska  who  never  made  it  to  the  hearings.
Add   to  this  outfit   the  services  of  William   E.  Gerber,  a
Memphis  lawyer  and  oldtime  henchman  of   E.  H.   "Boss"
Crump,  as  subcommittee  counsel,  and  you  have  the  distin-
guished  and  qualified  board that  judged  the  capital's two-year-
old  integration program.  Gerber  gave  his  credentials as a vet-
eran  minority  fighter  himself, born  in  Russia  a  Jew  and there-
fore  a  man  with  "a  natural  inclination to  be  in  favor  of  any-
thing  favoring a  minority  race."  He  told  reporters he  came to
the  hearings out  of  Memphis with no preconceptions about  in-
tegration;  although  he  was happy to announce once things  got
underway  how  proud  he  was  of  his  own  city's public  schools:
segregated.
'1  5
This solid  Dixie contingent  was unhampered  by the presence
of  Yankees  in  the  capital  for  most  were  busy  campaigning.
The  Davis  committee  must  have  experienced   the   swooning
deliciousness  tasted  by losing  armies who  come upon  an  unde-
fended  city  by surprise.  Washington  lay before  them,  the  first
big  city with  over  fifty  percent  Negro  school  enrollment  to  in-
tegrate,  asked  by  the  President  to  serve  as  a  "model"  for  the
rest  of  the  country.   Counsel  Gerber  took  no  chances  in  strik-
ing  home  fast,  introducing  in  the  first  day's  hearing  a  letter
from  a  local  principal  who  retired  due  to  illness  "directly" at-
tributable"  to  problems  arising  from  integration   in  his  high
school.  Washington,  wrote  the  principal,  "cannot  be  held  out
as any model  to  any community that  has not,  as yet,  integrated
its own  system."
The  Witnesses  Were  Pre-Sifted
It  all,  unfortunately,  couldn't  be  conducted  by  letters,  but
human  unpredictability  was  coped  with  by  holding   500  pre-
liminary  interviews  and  culling  from  them  53  choice  witnesses
for  the  hearings.   Out  of  the  8  school  board  members,  only
Superintendent  Melvin  Sharpe  was called  and  he  told  the  first
day's  session  he  thought  integration  had  come  about  too  fast.
The  superintendent  can  vote  only  in  board  ties  and  did  not
cast  a  ballot  in  the  6-1 adoption  of  integration.  None  of  the
other  members,  including  three  Negroes  on  the  board,  were
asked to testify.
Despite  the  advance  groundwork  in  selection  of  witnesses,
the  testimony was seldom as  black  and  white  as  the  committee
might  have  liked.   Junior  High  Principal  Arthur  Storey  told
of  having  to  call  the  police  fifty  times  kst  year  to  enforce  or-
der  in  his  integrated  classes.  And  then  there  was  Miss  Helen
Masson,  a  faculty  member  at  Taft  Junior  High  for  21  years
who  said  that  integration  had  caused  no  unusual  problems  of
discipline and  that  although  it wasn't  easy, things  were  "going
well."
School  Principal  Dorothy Tripp  offered  without  request  her
"wish  to  say that  I  think  integration  is  right.   If  Negro  men
are  willing  to  die  for  my  liberty  and  so  on,  I'm  willing  to ac-
cept  it.    But  putting  it  into  practice  is  difficult.    I  think  we
need all the help we can  get."
None  of  that  help  was  likely to  come from  the  Davis  com-
mittee.  When  the  hearings were over,  counsel  Gerber  had  no
encouragement  to  offer   the  overworked  teachers  of  the  Dis-
trict  of  Columbia. The  integrated  schools  of  Washington,  he
said,  were  "a  disgrace  to  the  nation."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 15,1956
The  New  Pittsburgh  Trials  Will  Be  A  Chance  to  Smash  The  Informer  System
J.  Edgar  Hoover  and  Brownell  Disagree  on  Value  of  The  Smith  Act
(Continued  from  Page One)
quent  argument  for  Scales  that  it  ought  to  outlaw  membership
convictions  altogether  on  the ground  that  Section  4  (f)   of  the
Internal  Security  Act  forbids  conviction  for  being  a  member
or  official  "per se"  of  the  Communist  party.   Of  the  caviarish
legal  nuances  in  that  "per se"  and  of  the  government's   argu-
ment  that  it  protects  only  "unknowing"   or  indeed  unconscious
members  of  the  Communist  party,  more  later.   I  will  only  note
now  how  instinctively the  court  shuns  the  wide  but  dangerous
spaces  of  the  First  Amendment  for  the  cozy  comforts  in  these
obscure  procedural  and  statutory  casuistries. The  majesty  of  the
law  seems  most  often  upheld  in  its  miniscule,  almost  illegible,
footnotes.
A  Hero  of  Our  Time
There  was nothing  miniscule,  however,  in  the  searching  in-
terrogation   by the  Chief  Justice  of  the  Solicitor  General  which
led  up  to  the  reversal  of  the  Pittsburgh  decisions,  nor  in  the
issues  involved. When  the  mists  clear, it will be  seen  that  Steve
Nelson,  the  leading  figure  in  the  Pittsburgh  case,  is  perhaps
the  most  long  suffering  and  heroic  figure  of  this  whole  witch
hunt  period.  Despite years  of  persecution and  slander  by  Con-
gressional  committee and  by the  crummiest bunch  of  local  poli-
ticians  and  psychotic  perjurers  this  country  has  seen,  Nelson
rose  from  solitary confinement in  a Pittsburgh  dungeon  to  twin
victories  this  year  in  the  Supreme  Court,  last spring  against  his
State  sedition  conviction,  this  week  against  his  Smith  Act  con-
viction.  His  real  crime  was his  service  as a  political  commissar
in  the  Spanish  civil  war  and  he  is to  be  saluted  on  his  endur-
ance:  his  counsel,  Frank  Donner,  on  his  brilliant  and  devoted
lc|-,.il  work.  Nelson  might  also  for  his  own  good  and  his par-
ty's  consider  long  and  hard  that  his  triumph  attests  that jus-
tice  is  still  possible   in  this  country  for  oppositionists   whose
counterparts  in  the   Soviet   Union  would  not   have  a  dog's
chance  even  today.   A  Soviet  Steve  Nelson  would  be  lucky  to
reach  Vorkuta  alive.   Socialism  needs  a  First  Amendment, too.
The  Pittsburgh  reversals  for  a  new  trial,  the  rejection  6-to-3
of   the  government   motion  to  remand  only  for  a  credibility
hearing  on  one  informer,  Mazzei,  mark  a  real  turn,  not  only
Extra  Copies  Still  Available  of  Last  Week's  Special   Issue   on  Informers   and   the  Smith   Act
as the  first  Smith  Act reversals  but  as reflecting a profound dis-
gust  among  both  liberals  and  conservatives  on  the  Court  with
the   dirty   informer   system   and   its   disingenuous   apologists.
Chief  Justice  Warren,  an  old  time  prosecutor,  elicited  gently
but   inescapably   from  the   Solicitor   General   admissions   that
swung  the  Court  against  him.  One  was  that  the   government
was  still  prepared  to  defend  the  credibility  of  Mazzei's   testi-
mony at the trial.  Another  was the  convenient  theory  that  Maz-
zei had  only  gone  wacky  since the  Pittsburgh  trial,  although  as
the  Chief   Justice  emphasized   over   and  over  again  Mazzei's
screwball  testimony  about  a Communist plot  to  assassinate  Mc-
Carthy  occurred  in  the  middle  of  the  Pittsburgh trial  in 1953.
The  third  admission  was that  the government  proposed  to pre-
sent  evidence  partially  in  camera,  \.  e.  at  a  secret  hearing,   "to
protect  people who  might  get  hurt",  i.  e.  faceless  informers  in
a  new  guise.  After  that,  only  Frankfurter,  Burton  and  Harlan
voted   for  a  credibility  hearing;  six  reversed  for  a  new  trial
after  a  short  recess,  probably  the  first  reversal from  the  bench
in  the  court's  history.  The  new  trial  should  have  the  widest
support  as a  magnificent opportunity  to  expose  the  whole  poli-
tical  informer  system,  and  put  the  brakes  on  Smith  Act  prose-,
cutions  altogether.
End  of  A  Handicap?
Even  in  the  Supreme  Court,  the  Department  of  Justice can-
not  resist  the  sly  practice  of  trying  its  cases  in  the  press.   At-
torney  General   Brownell   chose  the   day  the   Supreme   Court
began  to  hear  the  new  Smith  Act  appeals  to  issue  a  press  re-
lease  disguised  as  a  memo  to  the  President  on  the  virtues  of
the  Smith  Act  in  suppressing  Communism.  But  a brief  amicus
submitted  to  the  Court  by the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union
in  the  Pittsburgh  and  California  appeals  discloses  that  J.  Edgar
Hoover   does  not  agree  with  Mr.  Brownell.    It  quotes   Mr.
Hoover's  testimony  to  a  House  Appropriations  subcommittee
in  1953  that  the  Smith  Act  prosecution  by  driving  the Com-
munists  underground  had  made  the  FBI's  job  "more   difficult
than  it  has  ever  been  in  the  history  of  this  country."   It  looks
as  if  the  Supreme  Court  is  preparing  to  help  the  FBI  to  get
rid  of  this  handicap.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City  ..........................................  Zone. ........... State ....................
ISnter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
10/15/56
City  .........................................  .Zone ............ State ............... .....
(ity   ....................................   2*;ne ...... ......State  ....................
.•'b;,"l   «e   send  gift   announce-ill ei    ?     "«<• .  :          "'••<   L)
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol   St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3  *   C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED