I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956may28.pdf

============================================================

The   Whole  Truth  Out  of  Moscow
Stone Finds  Russia's  New Rulers Still  Reluctant to  Break  With The Past
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO.  19
MAY  28,  1956
<°<      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
STALINISM  IS  FAR  FROM   LIQUIDATED
The  way home from  Moscow has been agony for  me.  I  have
been  reading furiously  in  Russian  history  and  a  little  in  Rus-
sian  law  and  in  past  Communist  controversy  in  an  effort   to
evaluate  what  I  have  seen.   The  deepest  questions  of  history
and  morality are  raised by Russia, the  terrible intermingling of
good  and  evil  in  the  evolution of  society,  history's endless  rid-
dle  of  whether-it-might-have-been-otherwise.     My  knowledge
is inadequate, my ignorance is vast, my only credentials are that
these  conclusions  represent  what  one  man  has  seen  and   felt.
I  want  to  set them  down  as  simply  as  I  can  before  I  pass  on
next  week to  my quite  different  experiences  in  Warsaw.
All  sorts  of  advice  has  poured  in  on  me  from  my  friends,
and  from  what  I  know  my friends  would  say.  All  the  inhibi-
tions  of  expediency have  been  urged  upon  me,  the  inhibitions
of  the  most worthy expediency—the  fight  for  world  peace.  But
I  hate  the  morass  into  which  one wanders when one  begins  to
withhold  the  truth  because  the  consequences  might  be  bad—
this  is,  indeed,  the  morass  on  which  the  Russian  Communist
State  is built.   I  am not  wise  enough,  and  perhaps  no  one  else
is  either,  to  know  how  much  truth  may  wisely  be  given  the
public  with  our  eye-droppers.   I  am  only  a  reporter  and  one
does  not  go  to  Moscow  every  day.  This  is  what  I  think,  not
what  I believe may wisely be told  the  reader.  It  may be  wrong
but  it  is  not  synthetic.
Not    A  Good  Society                                       i
I  feel  like a swimmer underwater  who  must  rise  to  the  sur-
face  or his lungs  will burst. Whatever  the  consequences,  I  have
to  say what  I  really  feel  after  seeing  the  Soviet  Union  and
carefully  studying  the  statements  of  its  leading  officials.    This
is  not  a good  society  and  it  is  not  led  by  honest  men.
No  society  is  good  in  which  men  fear  to  think—much  less
speak—freely.   I  don't  care  how  many  tons  of  steel  the  Rus-
sians  produce.   It  is  not  by  the  volume  of  its  steel  but  by  the
character  of  the  men  it  produces that  a society must  be  judged.
The  kind  of  men  Russia  has  produced  is  the  kind  which  must
always  be wary,  quick  to sense any change  in  the  wind  and  ad-
just  to  it,  careful  never  to  give  way  to  the  anguish  of   seeing
injustice,   always  guarding  one's   tongue,   alert   to  survive  at
whatever  cost  to  one's  neighbor.
This  society  is  a  paradise  only  for  a  rather  stupid  type  of
Communist  party  member,  good  but  sharply  limited.   If  you
believe  everything  you  read  in  the  papers,  lack   imagination,
and  feel  no  need  to  think  for  yourself, you  can  be  very  happy
in  the  Soviet  Union  and  engage  in  useful  devoted  work.   Or
you  can shut yourself  up  in  a scientific laboratory and  work  on
your  own  scientific  problems  and  close  your  eyes  and  ears  to
what  is  going  on  outside  or  maybe  even  to  your  unlucky  col-
league  next  door.  But for  the  journalist, the  writer,  the  artist,
the thinker,  the man who cares deeply about the  basic  questions
of  humanity  and  history,  the  USSR  has  been  a  hermetically
sealed  prison,  stifling  in  its atmosphere of  complete,  rigid  and
low  level  thought  control.  In  this  atmosphere  has  been  bred  a
whole   generation   of   sycophants,  and   yes-men,  and   writer-
politicians.
The  Soviet Press
It  is impossible  to  imagine unless  you have  been  there  what
it  means  to  live  in  a  country in  which  you  do  not  know  what
is going on  outside.  The  Soviet press  is matchless for  turgidity
and  obscurity;  it  prints  only  what  the  men  at  the  top  think
people  ought  to  know  and  it  is  written  by  uninspired   hacks
scared  to  add  a thought  of their own  lest  they  get  into  trouble.
I  invite readers  to  check  this  for  themselves  by  reading  three
authoritative  expositions  of  the  new  line—Pravda's  article  of
March  28,  "Why  Is  The  Cult  of  the  Individual Alien  to  The
Spirit of Marxism-Leninism?" (It  can be found  in  full  English
translation  in  the  March  30  issue of  the  now  defunct  Comin-
form  weekly,  "For  A  Lasting Peace,  For  A  People's   Democ-
racy");   Partiinaya  Zhizn's   article  of  March   1956,   "Wherein
Is  The  Harm  of  The  Cult  of  The  Individual?"  (English  Text
in  the  April  12 issue  of  the  Soviet  Information  Bureau's  Daily
Review  of  Soviet  Press);  and  Kommtmist's  article  of  March,
1956,  "Fully  Reestablish  and  Develop  Leninist  Standards  of
Party  Life"   (English  text  in  the  April  4  issue  of  the  Daily
Review  of  Soviet  Press).    They  are  as  alike  as  if   all   three
were  the  results  of  a  party  briefing  at  which  the  writers  took
down  the  words from  on high  in  as verbatim a manner as  pos-
sible.   The  same  thoughts,  the  very  same  phrases,  reappear  in
the  same kind of  repellent  gibberish.
When  you ask  in  Moscow  where foreign  papers can  be  pur-
chased,  the  answer  is  that  your  book  stall  in  the  hotel  carries
all  kinds  of  foreign  papers.   But  when  you  watch  the  stall  in
the  Metropol  or  the National  or  the  Savoy  (the  three  Intourist
hotels)  all  you  see  are  the  East  European  and  Chinese  Com-
munist  party  publications  and  that  completely  empty  waste  of
paper,  the  Moscow  News.     I  don't  know  what  it  was  like
when  Anna  Louise  Strong  edited  it,  but  there  is  certainly  no
news  in  it  today.    I  could  not  even  buy  Western   Communist
papers  like  L'Humanite.  When  I picked  up  a  copy of  the  Lon-
don  Daily  Worker  in  the  Prague  airport  on  the  way  back,  I
got  the  full  flavor  of  what  I  had  experienced  in  journalism.
The  London  Daily  Worker  seemed  like  a  bright,  newsy,  real
newspaper  after  the  Soviet  press.   In  Warsaw,  as  I  will  tell
next week,  they have begun to sell  Western  "capitalist"  papers.
It  will  be a sign  of  real  change when  this happens  in  Moscow.
It  is  indicative  that  a  Communist  intellectual   with  whom   I
discussed  this  problem  in  Eastern  Europe  admitted  to  me  that
he "couldn't  live" without  the New  York  Times.   It was a  con-
(Continued   on   Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly, May SS, 1958
(Continued   from   Page   One)
f ession  and  a tribute.   Whatever  the  shortcomings  of  the  West-
ern  press,  there  is  no  comparison  between  it  and  the   Soviet
press.  Out  of  the  variety of  news and  opinion  in  the  Western
press  one  can sift  even  the  most unpopular  truths.  To  read  the
Soviet  press  one  has  to  become  expert  in  decoding  a  peculiar
kind  of  party  language,  developed  to hide  the  facts rather  than
to  make  them  public.
Why  Was  The  Cominform   Dissolved?
Again  I  invite readers to  check  this  for  themselves.   I  cite as
an  example  the  dissolution  of  the  Cominform,  a  major  news
and  political  event  of  the  Soviet  world.   The  full  text  of  the
joint  statement  by  the  Bulgarian,  Hungarian,   Italian,  Polish,
Rumanian,  Soviet,   Czech  and  French  parties  explaining   fee
dissolution  may  be  found  in  the  final,  April  17,  issue  of  the
Cominform  bulletin,  which  I  bought  in  Moscow  but  which  is
on  sale  in  New  York.    The  front  page  also  carries  an  article
on  the  dissolution  snappily  entitled,  "For  The  Further   Devel-
opment   and   Strengthening  of  the   International   Communist
Movement."    I  challenge  anyone  to  read  these  two  pieces  of
drivel   and  find  in   them  any  real   explanation   of  why   the
Cominform  was  dissolved.
This  is  why  I  am  compelled   to  conclude  that  the  present
leaders  of  the  Soviet  Union  are  dishonest.   I  mean   dishonest
with  their  own people,  not  only with  the .non-party  masses  but
with  their  own  Communist  party  members.   If  they  want  to
make  a  clean break with the  Stalinist past,  they  can  best  dem-
onstrate  it  by  telling  their  people  what  they  are  doing  and
why.   How  can  you have "democratic centralism"  in  the  Com-
munist  party,  i.e.   free  discussion  within   the  limits  of  party
discipline  (what  Lenin  meant  by  the  phrase)  when  the  party
members  themselves  aren't   told   what  is  going   on?
Why  Was  Beria  Killed?
I  die  as  a  major  example, the  Beria  business.  No  one  out-
side  a  very  small  circle at  the  top  really knows why  Beria  was
executed.   Those  who  study  the  tortuous,  veiled  and   contra-
dictory  language  of  the  various  statements  published   in  the
Soviet  press  will  find  themselves  completely  confused.    Only
persons  rendered  permanently  idiotic  by  complete   submerg-
ence  in  party  line literature will  take  at  face  value  the  charge
that  he  was a  British  or  imperialist agent.   This  is how  Stalin
operated;  he  never met  an  opponent  on  the  ground  of  honest
discussion;  first  slander  and  then  the  firing  squad  were  his
answers.   And  everybody  turned  out  to  be  a  foreign  agent!  It
is  a  wonder  the  Soviet  Union  survived,  since  for  20  years  its
secret  police  apparatus  was  run  by  men  who  were  each  in  his
turn  accused of  being  a  foreign  agent  and  executed.
Now,  if  the charge  was meant seriously, why didn't  the  new
rulers   demonstrate  their  intention  to  operate   differently  by
presenting  their  evidence  against  Beria  in  open  court?   Why
was  he  tried  secretly  and  so  swiftly  executed?   Was  not  the
treatment  of  Beria  in  the  true  Stalinist tradition ? And  nothing
was   more   truly   Stalinist   than   the   obscure   and   slanderous
verbiage  of  the  various  statements  on  Beria.
I  cite  as  another  major  example,  the  attack  on  Stalin  him-
self.   Nobody  yet knows just  why  and  how  it  was  decided  to
go  so  far  in  the  denigration  of  Stalin.   After  his  death,  the
press  began  to  play  him  down.  But in  1954  and  again  in  1955
his  picture  appeared  with  Lenin's  on  the  front  page  of  the
November   7  issue  of  Pravda,  celebrating  the  anniversary  of
the  Revolution.   Zhukov  in  Red  Square  paid  tribute  just  last
year  to  the  party  of  "Marx-EngeIs-Lenin-5'/<j//»."  As  recently
as  last  December  21,  Pravda  published  a  2,000  word  article
on  the  76th  anniversary of  Stalin's  birth,  an  article  full  of  the
most  lavish  praise  of  the  dead  dictator  in  Marxist  theory  and
in  practice,  in  industry and  in  agriculture.   The  language  was
that  of  the  Stalin  cult.
Why  Was Stalin  Denigrated?
What  happened  between  the  end  of  December  and  the  20th
Party  Congress  in  February?   Indeed  why  did  Krushchev  con-
fine  himself  to  generalities  about  the  "cult  of  leadership"  in
his  report  to  the  Congress  on  behalf  of  the  Central   Committee
February  14—only  to make a  savage  attack on  Stalin  at a secret
session   11  days  later,  on  February  25?   Why  was  it  secret?
Why  did  Communist  newspapermen  leak  the  gist  of  this secret
session  deliberately  to other  newspapermen  in  Moscow?   Why
was  the  Soviet  censor  so  "sticky"  about  passing  these  reports
until  after  they  had  leaked  from  abroad?   Why  did  Mikoyan
open  the  attack  on  Stalin  at  the  Congress  in  his  own  public
speech?  Why  did  Krushchev  lag behind  Mikoyan and  then go
so much further?  Is there  any truth  in  the  speculation  that  one
of  the  men  named  by Mikoyan  as  an  innocent  victim  of  Stalin
was  personally  liquidated  by Krushchev?   Did  Krushchev  fear
that  he might  have  to  do a  crawl  himself  and  therefore  choose
to  swing  over  and  lead  the  attack  against  Stalin  in  order  to
outflank  his  own enemies  in  the  Central  Committee?  No  one
knows.  Indeed  it  is amazing how  little  anyone  knows  of  what
really  goes  on  in  Moscow.
What  one  does  see is that  somehow  the  attack on  Stalin  has,
the  same  crass,  crude  air  as  Stalin's  own  attacks  on  his  own
victims.   Stalin had  a  series  of  scapegoats  on  whom  he  blamed
the  abuses  of  his  regime  in  his  periodic  relaxation?.   His  suc-
cessors  act  the  same  way.  Their  scapegoat  was  Beria  and  then
Stalin  himself.   By blaming  all  the  evils  of  the  regime  on  the
dead  dictator,  they  may hope  to  increase  their  own  popularity.
But  to  blame  the  evils  of  Stalinism  on  Stalin  is  obviously  in-
adequate.   It  is not  merely that  they  were his  accomplices;  their
cowardice  is  understandable.   It  is  that  Stalinism was  the  nat-
ural  fruit  of  the  whole  spirit  of  the  Communist   movement.
The  wanton  executions,  the  frameups,  the  unjust   convictions
and  exiles—these  would  not  have  been  possible  except  in  a
movement  whose  members  had  been  taught  not  only  to  obey
unquestioningly  but  to hate.  The  average Communist  was  pre-
pared  to  believe  anything  about  anyone  who  differed   with
him  in  the  slightest;  the  liquidation  of  the  opposition  was  not
just  a  duty  but  a  savage pleasure.   And  if  "errors"  were  occa-
sionally  made, these were the  unavoidable sacrifices  of  the  rev-
olution.   This  was  the  spirit  the  Communist  movement  bred.
Stalin  embodied  that  spirit.   To  change  it  one  must  do  more
than  hang  Stalin  in  effigy,   or  to  defame  him  in  self-serving
panic  as  Krushchev  is  doing.
It  Started  With   Leninism
Stalinism  also  grew  naturally  out  of  Leninism.   "Back   to
Lenin"  is  a  popular  slogan  in  the  Soviet  Union  today,  as  it  is
among  those  who  have  fled  the  Revolution   since  the   war.
Lenin  personally was more  humane  and  cultivated  than  Stalin;
in  the  late  20's  people   still  spoke   rather  freely   in   Moscow
from  what  I  have  been  able  to  learn.   But  Stalinism  was  the
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone'» Weekly, May 28,1956
natural  second  generation  to  be  expected  after  the  revolution
was  made.   In  every  great  institution,  the  first  generation  of
saints  and  zealots  is  followed  by a  second  generation  attracted
largely  to  the  new faith as a means of  obtaining  and  exercising
power.   The  symbols  fanatics  created  out  of  zeal  now  become
symbols  to  be  manipulated  by  the  shrewd  and  cynical;  they
carry  on  the Revolution or.the  Church  but the  spirit  has  begun
to  evaporate.   This,  too,  happened  in  Russia.
But  that  is  not  the  whole  story.  To  go  back  and  study  it  is
to  see  that   Stalinism  followed   naturally  from  Lenin's  own
peculiar  brand  of  Marxism.   Lenin  emphasized  not  the   eco-
nomic  determinism  of  Marxism  but  its  hidden  "idealism"—
that  is,  its  appeal  to  men  to  take  their  destinies  in  their  own
hands  and  change  the  world.   Lenin  believed  that  the  revolu-
tion  could  not  be brought  about  by the  working  class but  only
if   conscious   revolutionaries  drawn  from   the  old  possessing
classes  -forced   the  revolution  on  the  working class  from  above,
against  their  natural  instincts.
Lenin  Didn't  Trust  The  Working  Class
Those who  think  I  exaggerate  are  invited  to  read  or  reread
for   themselves   Lenin's  famous   pamphlet   "What  Is  To  Be
Done?,"  particularly   that   famous  passage   which   (in    1902,
when  it  was written)  already  had  the  germ  of  the  whole  Bol-
shevik—as  distinct   from   the  Menshevik—movement.     "The
history  of  all  countries,"  Lenin  wrote,  "shows  that  the  work-
ing  class,  exclusively  by its  own  effort,  is  able  to  develop  only
trade  union  consciousness,  i.e.  the  conviction  that  it  is  neces-
sary  to  combine  in  unions,  fight  the  employers  and  strike  to
compel  the  government  to  pass  necessary labor  legislation,  etc.
The  theory  of  socialism,  however,  grew  out  of  the  philosoph-
ical,  historical  and  economic  theories  that  were  elaborated  by
the  educated  representatives  of  the  propertied  classes,  the  in-
tellectuals.   According  to  their  social  status,  the  founders  of
modern  scientific  socialism,  Marx  and  Engels,  themselves  be-
longed  to  the  bourgeois   intellectuals.   .  .  .  The  spontaneous
working  class  movement  is  trade  unionism,  and  trade  union-
ism  means  the  ideological  enslavement  of  the  workers  by  the
bourgeoisie.  Hence  our task  is ...    to  divert the working  class
movement  from  this  spontaneous  trade  union  striving  . . . and
to  bring  it under  the wing  of  revolutionary  Social  Democracy."
In  Lenin's view revolution  was to be imposed  on the workers
and  peasants  from  above.  The  instrument was  to  be  a  small,
tightly  knit,  well  disciplined, conspiratorial minority  organized
in  a  party governed  inexorably by its  central  committee,  i.e.  by
its  leaders.  Decisions  once reached  were to  be carried  out with-
out   question.   The   decision   of   the   central   committee  was
sacred;  to  go  against  it  treason.   Who  ruled  the  central  com-
mittee  ruled  the  party,  and  through  the  party  the  proletariat.
This  was the  dictatorship of  the  proletariat. The  slightest devi-
ation  even  in  the   realm  of   the  most  distant  topics—meta-
physics,  for   example—was  feared   by  Lenin.   He   sought   to
create  an  absolutely monistic view of  the  universe to  go  with
a  monolithic party; he  erected the  Party  (with  capital P)   into
a  God  with  the  Central Committee as the  governing hierarchy.
The  habits bred  by such a  movement, intolerant  of  the  slight-
est  deviation,  ruthless  with  any  critic,  led  naturally  to  all  the
abuses  of  Stalinism  which  Krushchev himself  has  disclosed.
Changes  in  habit,  changes  in  doctrine,  changes  in  the  very
form   of   the   State,  are   necessary   if   those  evils  are   to   be
corrected.
Lenin's  Roots  in  Russia's  Past
I  do not  presume—in  my ignorance—to  say all  this in  criti-
cism of  Lenin.  The  more one studies  Russian  history  the  more
one  sees  how  deep were  the  roots  of  Leninism  in  Russian  rad-
ical  thinking  of  the  Nineteenth  century  as  well  as  in  Czarist
habits.    Lenin  was  fashioned  by  the  weight  of  many genera-
tions.  Given  the  conditions of  Russian life,  it  may be that  only
a  man  like  Lenin  leading  a movement  like  the  Bolshevik  could
have  brought  about  the  Revolution  successfully.   It  may  well
be  these  evils were  the  inescapable  obverse  of  the  good  Lenin
created.  Czarism was evil.   Given  Russian conditions  I  believe
the  fall  of  the  Bolsheviks  would  very  soon  have  given  us  a
racist,  Fascist,  imperialist  and  aggressive  Russia.   But  whether
Lenin was right  or wrong  (and  whether  so complete  a  dictator-
ship  was  really  necessary)  is  beside  the  point.   The  point  is
that  the  Revolution  has  succeeded;  socialism  in  Russia  is there
to  stay;  capitalism  will  never  be  restored;   even  among   the
escapees  the  only major  criticism is  of  collectivization.  Russian
industrialism,  despite  Russian sloveliness and that  callous  waste
of  men  and  manpower  one  feels  in  Russia,  has  advanced  on
giant  boots  thanks to  economic  planning.   Now  Krushchev,  in
revealing  the  extent  to  which  the  abuses  had  grown   under
Stalin,  shows  that  these are not figments of  hostile propaganda.
("Multiply  all  you  have  read  abroad  by  ten,"   a  Communist
said  to  me,  ''and  you will  get  the  dimensions  of  Krushchev's
revelations about  Stalin"). The  problem  has been  posed by the
new  regime  itself.  How is a repetition  of  these  terrible  evils  to
be  avoided?  How  indeed  are  they  to  be  wholly   eliminated?
It  is  in  seeking  the  answer  to  these  questions  that  I  found
Russia  and  its  leaders  most  disappointing.   These  are  the  very
competent  managers  of a great industrial empire; their speeches
at  the  20th  Congress  show  their  grasp  of  concrete  industrial
problems.   They  get  down  to  brass  tacks  in  studying  steel  out-
put  or  railroad  management.   But  they  do  not  show  the  same
spirit at all in grappling with the  evils they have  themselves  ex-
posed.   These   socialist   industrialists,   these  lifelong  Marxists,
drift  off  into  vague  mysticism  and  into  personality.   When  a
system  breeds  monsters,  as  they  say  their  secret  police  system
has bred  monsters for  20 years, then  something  must  be  wrong
with  the  system.  But  as yet  I  see no  willingness  on  their  part
to admit  this.   If  Yagoda,  Yehzov and  Beria were  all  monsters,
should  not  the  ordinary  citizen  be  given   greater   protection
against  the  police  in  the  future,  greater  rights  of  his  own?
Should  not  the  public be educated to  understand  the  reason  for
these  rights  and  their  existence?  Should  not  the  press  be  en-
couraged  to  criticize when  it  suspects  frameups ? The  questions
which  confront  Russia  today  under  communism are  like  those
who  confronted  the  framers  of  our  own  Constitution.   Indi-
vidual  rights  are  no  less,  perhaps  more,  necessary  under  com-
munism  than under capitalism; the  coercive power of  the  new
State  is  greater.   These  questions  are  not  yet  even  being  dis-
cussed  in  Russia.
What  Is  Collective Leadership?
Instead  we  come across a  lot  of  vague talk  about  "collective
leadership."   But  Stalin  as  well  as  Lenin  talked  of  collective
leadership and  its virtues.  Lenin, by sheer intellectual superior-
ity  and   fanatic  drive,  dominaled  his  fellow  members  of   the
Central  Committee;  Stalin  did  so by  fear.   In  both  cases collec-
tive  leadership boiled  down  to  individu.il  leadership.  Lenin's
(Continued   on   Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 28,1956
(Continued   from   Page   Three)
was  milder;  Stalin's  grew  positively  mad.  But  this  was  the
reality  behind  the  same  phrases  Krushchev  now  again  uses.
And  what  does  collective  leadership  mean?   Again  I  urge
the  reader  to examine the  basic documents  for  himself.  An  11-
man  Presidium  may  be  just  as  wrong  as  a  one-man  dictator.
Pravda  said  April  5  "Throughout  its history  the  Party's  policy
was  and  remained  a  Leninist  policy."   Pravda  says  the  Party's
policy   has  always   been   "correct."    (A   revealing   Bolshevik
word;  it  implies  an  absolute  standard  of  measurement,  like  a
yardstick;  how  can  this  wooden  mentality  be  reconciled   with
the  rich,  complex  and  dynamic views  of  a  man  like  Marx?).
But  what  sense  does  it  make  to  say that  the  Party  has  always
been  correct  when  you admit  that  for  the  last  20  years  of Sta-
lin's  life  he  used  the  Party  as his vehicle  for  all  kinds  of  injus-
tices  and  abuses?   Obviously  the  Party  was  incorrect  when  it
allowed  itself  to  be  frightened  into  silence,  acquiescence, col-
laboration  and  submission  by  Stalin.   The  Party  and  the Cen-
tral   Committee  for   these  people  are  mystical  concepts;   the
whole  is different  from  its parts;  the  leaders may be rotten  and
the  members  cowardly  but  put  them  together   and   they  are
miraculously   the   bearers   of   the  future!    Instead   of  rights,
guarantees,  free  discussion,  Russia  is  told  to  repose  faith  in
the  Central  Committee,  that  is  in  the   11-man   Presidium,   in
"collective  leadership."
What  Is  Marxism-Leninism?
The  comrades  (but not  yet  the  general  public)  are  told  to
speak  freely  but  warned  already  (Pravda,  April  5)  not  to  go
beyond  the  bounds  of  Marxism-Leninism. And  what  is  Marx-
ism-Leninism ?  Whatever  the  men  at  the  top  of  the  party say
it  is.  When  Stalin  was  alive,  he  decided  what  was  Marxism-
Leninism  and  woe  betide  those  who  disagreed!   Now  his  old
colleagues  of  the  new  Central  Committee  Presidium  will  de-
cide.  How  can there  be  free  speech,  free  journalism, free writ-
ing,  free  thinking in  such an  atmosphere?  The  speeches  of  the
new  leaders  are  wholly  inadequate  to  the  correction  of   the
evils  they  have  exposed.   So  long  as  there  is  only  one  party,
and  it  has  a  monopoly of  government  and  controls  all  expres-
sion,  there  cannot  be  freedom.  Russia is strong  enough,  secure
enough,  to  move  away  from  the  one  party  system.   We   have
two  parties  which  do  not  differ  in  essentials;  they  could  have
two  parties, too.  Their  society is stable  enough  for  stable  poli-
tics.  The  kind  of  one party rule which may have been necessary
to  achieve  the  revolution  has  become  a  positive  hindrance;  this
is  the  real  lesson  of  the  revelations  about  Stalin.
Krushchev   Cruder  Than  Stalin,
I  came  away  from  Russia  with  the  strong  conviction  that
Krushchev  is  more  crude  and  vulgar  than  Stalin,  and  will  if
given  the  chance  take over  completely.  I  believe  his  colleagues
have  forced  him  into  the  attack  on  Stalin  and  talk  of  "collec-
tive  leadership"  to  prevent  a  return  to  one-man  rule.   In  the
process  they  have  intensified   the  ferment  which  began   with
Stalin's  death  and  set  in  motion  events  whose  momentum  they
may  not  be  able  to  control.  The  new  policies have opened  Rus-
sia's  windows  on  the  West  and  given  us  a  chance  to  resume
contact  with  this  huge  and  wonderful  segment  of  humanity.
In  the  interests of  peace,  and  of  peaceful  change  in  Russia, we
ought  to  strive  to  keep  the  windows  open,  and  to  help  along
the  process which may ..some  day carry Russia  forward from  the
current  relaxation^  f^eer  institutions.  I  believe  not  only  her
people  but  her  rulers  want  peace;  and  I  believe  that  given
peace  they  will  slowly  liquidate  Russia's terrible  backwardness
and  unholy  past.
But  this  process  will  not  be  helped  by  indulging  in  delu-
sions,  or  by quickly  forgiving  and  forgetting  Stalinism  in  the
belief  that  Russia  has  now  fundamentally changed.    Changes
there are, and  given  the  natural  extremism of  the  Russian tem-
perament,   no   one  knows  how   much  further   they  may  go
tomorrow.   But  we will  not  help  the  Russian people  by letting
this  crowd  of  leaders  soft-soap  us;  in  any  free  country,  after
similar  revelations,  a  whole  new  set  of  men  would  have  been
swept  into  power  as  earnest of  real  change.   Nor  will  we  help
ourselves,   and  our  power  to  fight  for  a  better  world  and  a
better  society,  by  joining  hands  with  the  poor  deluded  house-
broken  Communist  parties  of  the  West.   They  remain  Russian
puppets;  they  will  jump  back  through  the  hoops  as  soon  as
they  get  new  orders.  Their  members  cannot  be freed  from  in-
tellectual   bondage   until  the  parties  themselves  have  disinte-
grated. Nothing has yet happened  in  Russia to  justify  coopera-
tion  abroad  between  the independent  Left  and the  Communists.
Next   Week:  Stone  Finds  Warsaw  Outspoken   and   Rebellious
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly, 301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City                                         Zone           State...
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name                                                                   :—
B/28/58
Street
City                                         Zone           State
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?   Yes  Q    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED