I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jul30.pdf

============================================================

Thanks  to  Lewis  Strauss,  Nuclear Warfare  Grows  Ever  More  Salubrious,  See  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  28JULY  30,  1956WASHINGTON,   D.  C.15  CENTS
Our  Own  (Exclusive)  Explanation  of the  Nixon  Mixup
The  problem  which  tantalizes  us  political  scientists here  in
Washington  is trying to determine just who //  President. Some
days  it  seems  to  be  Hagerty.   Other  days  it  seems  to  be  Sher-
man  Adams.  Occasionally Leonard  Hall  acts as  if  he  were  the
leader  of  the  Administration as  well  as  the  party. The  armed
forces  keep  complaining that the  Secretary of  the  Treasury has
taken  over, and  several times the  man  at  the  desk  in  the  Execu-
tive  Mansion  has  clearly  been  Herbert  Brownell.     Eisenhower
himself  turns  up  on  the  more  ceremonial  occasions,  when  he
is in  town.
All  this  leads  us  to  suspect that  the  real  explanation of  the
Nixon  mixup is  that  Stassen  must  have  consulted  Eisenhower
on  one  of  those  days  on  which  somebody  else  was  President,
probably  Hagerty.  This  seems  to  us  a  much  more  plausible
hypothesis  than  that  advanced  by  our  distinguished  colleague,
John  O'Donnell  in  last  Wednesday's  Daily  News.  "Probably,"
O'Donnell  wrote,  "as  those  closest  to  Ike  in  the  Cabinet  and
on  Capitol  Hill  now  insist,  the  President  realized  that  he  had
made  an  error  last  Friday  when  Stassen  told  him  that  he  was
going  to urge Herter  as a replacement  for Nixon. . . ." We be-
lieve the error was Stassen's;  he just didn't notice  that  the  little
brass  plate  bearing  the  legend  "Mr.  President"  was on  one of
the  desks  in  the  outer  lobby  that  day.
The  effect  on  the  average  voter,  who  tends  to  be  old-fash-
ioned,  may be  unsettling.  Untrained  in  philosophical  abstrac-
tions  and  unable  to  grasp  the  advantages  of  a  pluralistic  ap-
proach  to  the  Presidency,  he may feel  it  would  be  safer just  to
elect  one  man  to  the  job  in  November  and  have  done  with  it.
Herter's  reaction  to  Stassen's  nomination  may help  further  to
confuse  and  disaffect  him.  Not  only  do  none  of  these Repub-
lican  Presidents,  all  nominally  Eisenhower,  seem  to  know  how
to  run  their  own  official  family,  but  now  this  fellow  Herter
seems  to  be  getting  ready  to  run  for  Vice  President  by  nomi-
nating  Nixon  for  the  job.  And  wasn't  there  something  in  the
papers  about  Nixon  reciprocating  by nominating  Herter  in  re-
turn?   It's  bad  enough  not  to  be  quite  sure  at  any given  hour
just who  is President,  but  what  if  come November  we were  no
longer  sure  who  was  Vice  President  either?   We  predict  that
this  will  make  votes  for  the  Democrats,  and  that  Stassen  by
November  will  look  prophetic,   though  a  successful  prediction
of  Republican  defeat  may  not  endear  him  at  last  to  the  party
machine.
How  the  House  Passed  and the  Senate  Buried  the  Civil  Rights  Bill
Rarely has  the  cause of  civilization been  so warmly defended
as  in  the  week  of  debate  during  which  the  House  passed  the
Administration's  civil  rights  bill.   Mr.  Colmer  of  Mississippi
struck  the  keynote at  the  very  start  when  he  said  he  harbored
no  hatred  for  "my  colored  brother"  but  it  was  impossible  by
legislative enactment  "to  place  overnight  a race of  people,  who
until  a  few generations  ago were unenlightened  human  beings,
running  wild  in  the  jungles of  Africa,  on  an  equal  plane  with
another  race  of  people  who  for  thousands  of  years  have  en-
joyed  the  benefits  of  civilization,  education,  culture  and  Chris-
tianity."  Could  we have been  transplanted (like  Walter  Mitty)
to  the  House  floor  at  that  moment,  we  would  have  asked  the
gentleman  from  Mississippi  courteously  to  yield  so  that  we
might  supplement  his  learned  argument  by pointing  out,  as  a
prime  example,  that  these  poor  benighted  heathens,  until  they
came  to  our  hospitable  shores,  had  never  even  heard  of  lynch-
ing.  Theirs  was a  stone  age  culture, suh,  which  knew  neither
rope nor  faggot.
Southern  tools  and  technology  also  figured  in  the   debate,
when  Ivf r.  Haley  of  Florida protested  the  amount of  time spent
discussing  "the  unsolved  murder of  a  couple  of  members  of
the  NAACP"  in  his  State  whose  home  had  been  blown  up.
"No  mention  is made,"  Mr.  Haley  said  indignantly,  "that  it  is
a  fact  that  the  use  of  a  bomb  as  a  murder  weapon  is  alien  to
the  people  of   the  South."   Southern  members  felt   that   the
South's  critics were  unwilling  to  consider  such evidence  fairly.
1   1
They  saw their  civil  liberties  endangered  by the  new commis-
sion  the  bill  would  have set up  to  investigate  racial discrimina-
tion,  and  they  began  to  sound  like a  Carnegie  Hall  rally.   Mr.
Bennett  of  Florida  feared  "a  witch  hunt  atmosphere."    Mr.
Lanham  of  Georgia  declared,  "We  could  be jailed  ...    at the
instigation   of   faceless   informers."    Mr.   Rains   of   Alabama
warned  that  "a  politically  minded  partisan  Attorney  General"
could   punish   a  man   for   "political   opinion,"   undermining
"freedom  of  thought."   Mr.  Dies  said  the  proposed  Commis-
sion  could  investigate mere  "allegations."  In  anguish  Mr.  Dies
cried  out,  "I  am  shocked  that  the  ADA  is  not  here  opposing
this  measure and  that  the  Civil  Liberties Union  is not  here op-
posing  it."  Mr.  Celler  of  Brooklyn, who performed with  devo-
tion  the  thankless  task  of  piloting  the  bill  through  the  House,
must  have  been  startled  to  discover  that  Martin  Dies  was  so
passionate  about  the  Bill  of  Rights.
Both  sides  in  the  debate  leaned  heavily  on  Marxism-Lenin-
ism.  There were  moments  when  Southern  members  seemed  to
imply  that  Brownell  wrote  the  bill  on  instructions  from   the
Kremlin.    "Suppose,"  argued   Mr.  Dorn   of   South  Carolina,
"we  pass this  bill  and  do  everything  else  that  Communist Rus-
sia says we must do  . . .?"   Mr.  Shelley  of  San Francisco,  as an
old  A.F.  of  L.  man,  skilled  in  such  casuistry,  said  that  on  the
contrary  all  the  world  would  see that  "the  message  contained
in  these documents offers  a greater  chance for  a better  life than
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone't  Weekly,  July  SO, 1356
Nuclear  Warfare  Grows   Even  More   Humane
Unlike the gentle rain  from  heaven,  which  falls  on  just  and
unjust  alike,  radioactive  fallout  is  becoming  selective.    A  tri-
umphant  announcement  by  Chairman  Strauss  of  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission  implies  that  thanks  to  a  new  advance  in
science,  nuclear  weapons  may  be  used  to  harm  our   enemies
without  hurting  our  friends.   As  one  enthusiastic  Washington
correspondent   (Don   Whitehead   of  the  New  York   Herald-
Tribune)   put  it,  nuclear   weapons   have  become  "even  more
selective."
This  announcement  was intended  to  reassure  our  friends  in
Western  Europe,  alarmed  by  recent  estimates  that  if  the  wind
shifted   after   an  attack  on  Soviet  Russia  several  millions   of
them  would  die,  too.   (But  not  every  one  of  them,  however,
which  is  perhaps  what  Mr.  Whitehead  had  in  mind  when  he
said  "even  more selective.").
But  what  of  the  people  who  live  in  the  Soviet  bloc,  with
whom we have no  quarrel,  who are indeed  just waiting  for  the
H-bomb  to  liberate  them?   The  next  discovery,  just  one  short
step  ahead,   should   be  an  even  more  selective  weapon,   one
which  will  unerringly  drop  its  deadly  dew  on  Communists
alone,  humanely  sparing  the  rest  of  the  population.
Nor  can science  in its universal  benevolence  stop  here.  Since
no  technical  advance  can  remain  a  secret  long,  we  may expert
Mosow  to  come  up  soon  after  with  a  similarly  selective  weap-
on,  but with  the  screw turned  in the  other  direction,  so that  it
will  harm  capitalists  and  counter  revolutionaries  but  not  the
party  faithful  or  the  workers  patiently  waiting  to  rid  them-
selves  of Wall Street's  yoke.
Neither   side  of  course  can  be  sure  that  such  weapons  will
work  exactly  as  advertised  until  tried.  We  shall  have  to  wait
"All  I  Am  I  Owe  To  My—Security  Officer"
The average American used to  think  the  Bill of  Rights
or  the  Constitution or  the  Public  School  or  Motherhood
the  cornerstone of  our  country's strength.  At  page  169
of  the  report  on  the  Federal security program by  a Sen-
ate  Post  Office  and  Civil  Service  subcommittee  we  read,
"The  personnel security officer  is  the  cornerstone of  our
Nation's  effort  to  remain strong  and free."  We half  ex-
pected   the   subcommittee   to   add  sentimentally,  "The
hand  that  rocks  the nation's  security  risks  rocks the  na-
tion's cradles."
The  cradle,  too, has  become  hazardous,  since  a child's
future  right  to  a  Federal job  may  depend  on  what  or-
ganizations  his  parents join.  On page  194  of  the  same
report,  we  came  across  a  very  constructive proposal.
"After   the   man  passes   the   all-important   age   of   21
years,"  one  witness suggested,  "he  can  hardly  be  held
accountable  for  his  parents' actions, can  he?"  The new
rule,  we  take  it,  would  make a child  responsible for sub-
versive  affiliation  by its  parents only until  it  reached  the
age  of  21. After  that, Ma and Pa  would  be on their own.
hopefully  and  see what happens.   How,  indeed,  can we  ever  be
sure  that  the  right agonies  happened  to  the  right  people ?  Per-
haps  a pragmatic  test  will  have  to  be applied,  as in  the  medie-
val  ordeal  by water  and  fire.  If  the  judges  held  the  old  lady
underwater  for  half  an  hour  and  she  came  up  smiling,  or  if
she  was  pushed  through  the  fire  and  emerged  unsinged,  she
was  automatically  cleared  of  witchcraft. We  suppose  that  after
the  next  war  those  who survive may be  regarded  by the  victors
as  having  sufficiently  proven  their  political  reliability.  Nuclear
warfare  is  growing  so  humane,  we  can  hardly  wait.
Only  4,372,393  Killed  and  1,698,293 Injured  in  New  York  City
lances  standing  by,  which  must  have  cheered  the  hypothetical
The  beneficial effects  of  the  Strauss  announcement  were  not
fully  appreciated  until  the  following  day,  when  the  nation's
third  annual  civil  defense   exercises  were  held.   In  the  New
York  City area  only  4,372,393  people  were  killed  and  1,698,-'
293  injured.  If  it  had  not  been  for  the  Strauss announcement,
"hypothetical  casualties  would  have been  larger."   Fortunately
the  tests  were  "cued",  as  the  press  reported,  to  the  new  AEC
policy statement "minimizing the  effects  of  radioactive  fallout."
Major  General  Robert  E.  Condon,  New  York  City's  civil  de-
fense  director,   explained   that   otherwise   "both  civil   defense
workers  and  the  surviving population  would have to  remain in
shelters  until  the  radiation wore off."  Just  how  many  days  or
weeks this might take was not  explained,  nor how the survivors
were  to  be fed  during this period.   We  suggest  that  on  the  eve
of  next  year's  tests  Chairman  Strauss  issue  a  supplementary
policy  statement,  permitting  Schrafft's  to  fill  telephone  orders
for  hot  luncheons during  and  after  nuclear  attacks.
For  a city which was disrupted only a few  day earlier  by  one
teeny  little fire at Wanamaker's, New  York City came through
the attack with flying colors; even the  IRT was running on time
a  few  minutes after  it  was over.  The  test,  according  to  one ac-
count,  "was  pronounced  an  unqualified  success  by  city,  state
and  national civil  defense  officials."  At  Washington  Square  a
15-man  police detail  and  two  police  vans  were  waiting  to  ar-
rest  19  "professed"   Pacifists  (the  adjective suggests  that  per-
haps  they  were  arrested  because the  authorities doubted  their
sincerity)   and   Bellcvue  Hospital  had  two  additional  ambu-
1,698,293 injured  no  end.  One  encouraging  sign  of  technolo-
gical progress  in  this  year's  test was the  ability  of  the  authori-
ties  within  minutes  of  the  attack  to  supply  the  newspapers
with  figures  on  the  dead  and  injured  which  were  exact  down
to  the  last  digit.
Here  in  Washington,  at  the  very  nerve center  of  the  nation,
nothing was left  undone to meet the  emergency. The  President
held  an  expanded  National  Security  Council meeting  "devoted
entirely  to  discussion  of the  test,"  although  it  was  thoughtfully
assumed  that  Washington   had  been  evacuated  before  it  was
devastated.  Later in  the  evening, after  it was seen how  success-
fully  the  test  had  been  met,  Admiral  Radford  flew  off  to  the
Far  East where he will  confer with Chiang Kai-shek, secure in
the knowledge that  if  the  worst happens our  own civil defense
is in well-oiled working order.
That night,  perhaps as a  result  of  eating  a  welsh  rarebit  af-
fected  by  radioactive fallout,  we  dreamt  that  President  Eisen-
hower  had  gone  on  the  air  after  the  test.  We  heard  him  say,
"My  fellow  countrymen, I  speak  to  you  as  a  soldier.  This  test
shows that a new world conflict  would  not  be war, but  a plane-
tary  Maidanek,  a. crematorium  that  would  burn  up  most  of
mankind.  There  is  now  no  alternative  to  co-existence, and  we
who  call  ourselves  Christian  must  purge  our  hearts  of  hate.
This  is  the  only civil defense—"  but  at  this point  we woke up
in  a  cold  sweat, alarmed  at  the  subversive  thoughts lurking  in
our unconscious.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly, July  30,1958
Should  A  Secret  Police  Chief  Take  A  Hand  In  Molding  Foreign  Policy?
J. Edgar  Hoover,  in  TV  Debut,  Joins  in  Attack  on  Fund  for  The  Republic
One  of  the  events  of  the  week  was  Mr.  J.  Edgar   Hoover's
first  televised  news interview.  In  nearly  44 years  of  govern-
ment  service,  Mr.  Hoover  has  rarely  been  interviewed  over
any  medium, though  he  has  often  written  articles  for  publi-
cation.   He  appeared  on  Congressman  Kenneth  B.  Heating's
(R.,  N.Y.)  regular  Sunday TV program  for  six  upstate New
York  stations.  The  interview  deserves  attention  on 3  counts:
1.  Mr.  Hoover  went  on  TV  to  declare  that  he  saw  no  im-
proved prospects  for  peace in  the  new policies  of  the  Kremlin.
We  believe  it  highly  improper  for  the  head  of  the  FBI  to
move  in  on  the  Secretary  of  State,  to  give interviews  on  for-
eign  policy,  and  to  make  propaganda   for  a  point  of  view
which  undercuts the President's search  for  peace.  It  seems to
us  elementary  that  a  secret  police chief  ought  to  keep  out of
politics. The atmosphere  is  already  such  that to  disagree  with
the  FBI  chief  is  hazardous,  and  few  commentators  will  dare
to  criticize  this  foray  into  foreign  policy, though  many  will
be struck  by its  impropriety.
2. Mr. Hoover followed  his  attack  on the  Kremlin with  a de-
fense  of  the  FBI's  right  to  use  secret  informers  in  dealing
with  security,  "subversion"   and  the  politically  suspect.  This
revealed  a  curious incapacity  to  see the  mote in  his  own eye.
Mr.  Hoover  criticizes  Krushchev as  a  man  who served  Stalin
for  26 years  and  was  in  charge  of  some  of  his  worst  purges.
We share  the  low opinion of Krushchev but  these  purges  were
made  possible  by the  use  in  Russia  of  practices  to  which  the
FBI  and  its  sounding  boards  in  Congress  have  begun  to  ac-
climate  the  American  people:  the  identification  of   political
opposition  with  crime,  the  prosecution  of  opinion,  the   aban-
donment  of  overt  act  as  the  standard  of  proof,  the  reliance
on  vague  charges  of  conspiracy  as  in  the  Smith  Act  cases,
the  relegation  of  dissidents  to  an  outcast  status,  the  use  in
security  hearings  of  secret  informers  whom  one has  no right
to  confront  and  cross-examine.  It  was  the  supremacy  of  the
secret  police which bred the  evils of the  Soviet  regime;  it  was
a  philosophy which placed the  security  of  the  State  above the
rights  of the  individual.   But  Mr.  Hoover  and  his  supporters
are  spreading  the  same  noxious ideas  in  America;  for  them,
too,  "security"  not  liberty  or  justice  is  god.
3. In  the  most cautious and conservative circles  there  is now
agreement  that  the  use  of  secret  informers  has  often  led  to
injustice  in  security  cases,  and that  at  least  where  the  source
is  little  better  than  neighborhood or  office  gossip,  anonymity
should  not  be  allowed  because  it  may  invite  malice  and  en-
courage   careless   accusation.   There   are   misgivings   at   the
spread  of  the  security  miasma beyond government  and  sensi-
tive  positions  into  the  arts  and  professions.    Ex-FBI  men
flourish  in  the  new businesses  of  "listing",  clearance  and  in-
dustrial  security  sifting.  Under  the  circumstances  one might
have  expected  Mr.  Hoover  to  use  his  first  TV  appearance
seriously  to  discuss  recent  criticism,  perhaps  to  admit  some
past  excesses,  or  to  disassociate  himself  and  his  organization
from  the  abuses  of  blacklisting.   Instead,  all  he  did  was  to
"hit  back at  such critics  of his  use of alleged  'faceless  inform-
ers'  as the  Fund  for  the  Republic which he said  refused to di-
vulge  the  sources  of  some  of  its  information  before  a  Con-
gressional  committee."   The analogy  is spurious but the  "pub-
lic  relations"  effect  is  clear  enough.   It  adds  the  weight  of
the FBI's  prestige  to the  campaign against  the  Fund  for  the
Republic.  The  House  Committee  on  Un-American  Activities
is  out  to  make  it  so  uncomfortable  for  John   Cogley,  who
wrote that  report,  and for  Robert Hutchins,  who had the  tem-
erity  to finance it,  as  to  intimidate  other  respectable  organi-
zations  and  foundations;  to  make  them  afraid  to  challenge
witchhunt,  blacklist  and faceless  informers.   Mr. Hoover used
his  first  TV  appearance  to  chime  in.
New  York's Highest Court Decides  Red  Channels  Engaged  in Tair Comment'
The  unfairness  of  the  blacklist  and  the  bias  of  the  courts
may  be seen  in  the  unfavorable  decision which has  just ended
Joe Julian's libel suit against American Business  Consultants,
Inc.,  publishers   of  Red  Channels.  The  7-2  decision  against
him  by the  New York  State highest  tribunal, its  Court  of Ap-
peals,  has  been  given  scant  attention  in  the  press.
Julian  is  a  gifted  radio-TV  writer  and  actor  who had  the
misfortune  to  be  given  two  listings  in  Red  Channels, one  for
a recitation  at  a  Second Front rally in October,  1942, the  other
—but  this  one we must  give  in  the  full  flavor  of  the  original
—"Attended  meeting  to  abolish  House  Un-American  Activi-
ties  Committee,  Hotel  Commodore,  New  York  City,  1/9/46.
New  York  Journal-American,   10/30/48."
The  truth  of  these   two  "allegations"  were   admitted   in
Julian's  suit.   He  asked  for  damages  on  the  ground  that  his
listing  "created  the  impression"  that  he was a  "Communist,
sympathizer,  dupe,  tool  .  . ."  and hurt  his  earning  power.
The  trial  judge  granted  a  motion  to  dismiss.  Julian  ap-
pealed  on the  ground  that  the  case  should  have  gone  to  the
jury.  The  Court  of  Appeals  held  that  since  Julian   admitted
the truth  of the  "listings"  the  rest  was  "fair  comment."
Julian's lawyer, the late Arthur  Garfield  Hays, filed a  simi-
lar  suit  30 years  ago against  a  pamphlet  which tried  to  link
third  party  La  Follette  supporters  with  a  Communist con-
spiracy.  He  lost  and  that  old  decision  (252 NY  266)  turned
up  against  him  now, though  the  1926  case  did  not  involve  a
firm engaged  in blacklisting.
When  Judge  Burke's  decision  is  laid  beside  Judge  Fuld's
dissent, it  is hard to believe they  are  discussing  the  same  case.
Did  Julian   suffer   financially?   Burke  says  that  in   1950-54
"the  plaintiff  appeared  on  all  four  major  networks."   Judge
Fuld  says  after  Red  Channels appeared  in  1950  Julian's  in-
come  fell  from  $17,000  a  year  to  $1,630  in   1953.
1
Were  the  authors of  Red Channels careless in making their
compilation?   Burke  did  not  think  so  despite  what  he  called
"evidence  of an  admission made by one of the  defendants that
the  book was not perfect."   Fuld: ". . . although  the introduc-
tion  emphasized  that  the  publishers  had  taken  care  to  note
any  'anti-Communist  action  or  condemnation of  Communism
. . . made by an individual  mentioned in the . . . report' . . .
no  such  notation  was made  .  .  .  despite  the fact  that he
[Julian]  had  taken  a  leading  role  in  a  well-publicized  anti-
Communist  play."
Are  the  publishers  of  Red  Channels  entitled  to  the  same
privileges  as  a  newspaper?  "Proof  that  the reporters  are  in
a  profit  making  venture  is  not  proof  of  malice,"  Burke  said.
"Newspapers   and  magazines  are   profit  making  ventures."
But  Fuld  argued,  ".  .  . the particular  circumstances  of  this
case  bring   into  play  a  much  stricter  standard  of  liability.
The  charge  here  in  question  was  made  of  a  radio  and  televi-
sion  performer  in a booklet directed to management  to be used
as a  guide in screening  personnel in the industry  . . .  [and]
because  of  the  industry's  widespread  practice  of  not  hiring
anyone listed  in  Red  Channels."
There  is  a  rich  vein  of humor  in  the  Burke decision.   After
summarizing  the   claim  in  Red  Channels  that  Communists
monopolize  the  entertainment  industry  and  reward  their  sup-
porters   with   stardom,   Judge   Burke   says   "the   described
secret  discrimination,  if  it  exists,  is  the  rankest  type  of  big-
otry  and  intolerance."  Whimsy:  "Free  speech,"  he  says  at
another  point,  "is  not  the  sole  property  of  special  classes  of
our  people,  such  as  radical  or  liberal  dissenters."   Dry  wit:
"To  characterize  the  defendant's  political  activities   [in  Red
Channels}  ...   is not to determine his professional fitness for
employment,  it  is  mere  opinion."  They'll  be  chuckling  over
that  one for  many  a  day  along  Madison  Avenue.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, July  30,1956
(Continued  from  Page  One)
the   false  dogmas  proclaimed  by  the  teachings  of  Marxism-
Leninism."   By  a  skilful   riposte,  the  South  unmasked  these
hollow  sophistries.   An  innocent  little amendment  was  offered
by  Mr.  Fountain  of  North  Carolina  to  "bar investigations  of
allegations  by  Communists  or  other  disloyal  persons."  This
would  merely have  required  the  Commission in  each  case  first
to  investigate  the  loyalty  of  the  complainant.   It  was  voted
down,  thus  confirming the  South's  suspicions.   Its  representa-
tives  over  and  over  again  termed  the  bill  a  "rape"  of   State
sovereignty.  The  reiteration  of  the  word  would   have  fasci-
nated  a  psychoanalyst,  and  began  to  make  the  bill  seem  some-
how  an  affront  to  white  Southern  womanhood.
Everyone  realized,  of  course,  that  in  'a  way  this  was  only
good  clean  fun  because  the  bill  would  never  pass  the  Senate.
One  spoilsport,  a  Congresswoman  from  St.  Louis,  a Mrs.  Sul-
livan,  even  objected  on  the  last  day  of  the  debate  that  when
after  four  years "these  few  crumbs  of  legislation"  had  finally
reached  the  floor,  they  were  "made   into  a  subject  of   great
humor  and  levity.  There  is  nothing  funny,  Mr.  Speaker,"  she
protested,  "about  the  deprivation  of  civil  rights.    Civil  rights
to  some Americans means  the  right  to  live."
But  when  Lehman  of  New  York  next  day  in  the  Senate
vainly  tried  (with  help  only  from  Douglas  and  Hennings)   to
move  a  resolution  discharging  Eastland's  Judiciary  Committee
from  the  civil  rights  bill  it  had  been  bottling  up  all  session,
Lyndon  Johnson  of  Texas  could  not  resist  a  little  more  "fun-
ning,"  as the  Southern-locution  has  it.  A  Senator,  he  lectured
Lehman,  "cannot  reach  up  and  get  one out  of  the  sky, and say,
'Here  is one  [bill]  I have heard  of that  no committee  has con-
sidered  or reported.' " You just can't  up and do that  under  the
Senate  rules.
Dropped—For  Devotion  to   Justice
When   President   Truman   appointed   a  liberal   Republican,
Charles  La  Follette  of  Indiana,   to  the   Subversive   Activities
Control  Board,  the  Senate  refused  to  confirm  him. When  an-
other  SACB member  unexpectedly  turned  into  a  liberal,  Presi-
dent  Eisenhower refused to reappoint  him. This  is the  perspec-
tive  in which to view Harry Cain's  "resignation." The  letter  by
Cain  so hastily  released  by the  White  House  last  week  was  not
so much a  resignation a* a  request  to  know whether he  would
be  reappointed.   "Mindful,"  Cain  wrote,  "that  it  was  a  fixed
term to which you named me ...    I  hereby  offer  my resignation
.  .  .  effective  August  9 ...     should  you wish  my assignment
then  to  expire."   Eisenhower's  reply  was  a  rapid  fire  "here's
your  hat, what's  your  hurry?"   If  Ike  cared  at  all  about  fair
play  for   government  employes,  he  would   have reappointed
Cain  and  made  him  an  adviser  on  security  reform.   Cain  by
now probably knows more than any other  single man  in  Wash-
ington  about the cruelties and  abuses of  the  system;  he has gen-
erously  aided  dozens  of  persons.   We  salute  in  Harry  Cain  a
man  dropped  for  his  courage  and  integrity,  a  man  whose pas-
sionate  search  for  justice in  the  past  few  years has  been  in  the
best  American tradition.  We  wish the  good  people  of  the  State
of  Washington  would  send  him  back here  as  a  Senator.
Revolt  in  The  House,  Sparked by Marilyn
For  the  first  time  in  many  years  there  has  been  a  revolt  in
the  House  against  a  contempt  recommendation  by  the  Un-
American  Activities  Committee.  The  roll  call  demanded  and
the  nine  votes  cast  against  the  citation  of  Arthur  Miller  may
seem  pigmy  gestures  but  to  those  who  know  the  mob spirit of
the  House,  especially  as adjournment  nears,  they  are  a portent
of  trouble  for  Chairman  Walter  and  his  colleagues.  We  are
sorry  there  was no roll  call  on  the  seven  others  cited, including
Einstein's  executor,  Dr.  Otto  Nathan.   Apparently  Marilyn's
curves  are more  potent  in  our  politics  than  those  of  Einstein.
These  two  citations  are  welcome  as test  cases  certain  to  attract
a  maximum of  attention.  The  headline-hungry  Committee,  in
latching  on  to  a  world  famous  honeymoon,  made  a  mistake.
The  issues posed  by Miller's  refusal  to  name names will  prove
as  easy  to  grasp  as  calendar  art.  Marilyn  Monroe  has  some-
thing  the  due  process   clause  never  had  and  the  Miller con-
tempt  case may put  the  issues  into  practical  politics  at  last.   Is
the  test  of  a  man's  Americanism  to  be  his  readiness  to  betray
his  friends?   Are  Judas  and  the  stoolpigeon   to  be  the  new
models  for  American  youth?  Must  Marilyn's  husband  go  to
jail  if  he  refuses  to  "squeal"?   As  for  Dr.  Nathan,  he  took
Einstein's  position,  and  simply  refused  on  principle   (without
citing  the  Fifth)  to  allow  himself  to  be  questioned  about  his
political  views.  What  business  are  they  of  Congress ?
Don't  Forget—You Can  Have  Free  Sample  Copies  for  The  Friends  You  Make  on  Vacation
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street                                                  •
City                                       .Zone.         State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name
7/30/86
Street
City                                           Zone           State          .....
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED