I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jan16.pdf

============================================================

A  Sensational  Affidavit:  When  Eliz.  Bentlcy  Called  Her  Autobiography  "Fiction,"  See  Page  2
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  2
JANUARY  Irt, 1950
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Pope's  Plea  for  Nuclear  Disarmament  Finds  No  Echo  in  Washington
As  "Dynamic  and  Flexible" As A  Dinosaur
The  sterility  of  American politics is  reflected  in  the  absence
of  any  response  last  week,  either  in  the  President's Stale of  the
Union  Message  or  in Democratic  criticisms  of  it,  to  the  Christ-
inas  Eve  proposals  made  by  the  Pope  on  nuclear disarmament.
Except  for  a  feeble  Voice  of  America broadcast  on  December
29,  the  Vatican's  appeal  has  been  hastily  brushed  under  the
national  rug.   Yet  the  Pope's  initiative  strikingly  changes  the
political  balance  of  forces  abroad  and  at  home.  His  Holiness
spoke  just  one  day  after  informed  sources  in  London  let  it  be
known  that  Nehru,  with  Soviet  approval,  was  trying  to  pro-
mote  new  East-West   talks  on  disarmament and  for  a  ban  on
nuclear  tests.   One  week  after  the  Vatican's message,  Bulgamn
warned  against  the  delusion that  the  mutual  possession  by  East
and   West   of   such   terrible  weapons   automatically  excluded
their  use;  he  suggested  new  talks  in  an  effort  to  agree  on their
prohibition.    The  positions  of  Nehru,  the  Pope  and  Bulganin
on  nuclear  disarmament are  not  the  same;  where  they  agree  is
where  all  thoughtful  human  beings  agree,  that  this  is the  over-
whelming  menace  of  our  time,  and  that  new  efforts  must  be
made  to  cope  with   it.  When  neutralist  India,   the   Catholic
Pontiff  and  the  Soviet  Premier  agree,  the  lineup  of  forces  for
new  negotiations  is  formidable.
A  Blow  to  Spellman  and  Meany
The  Pope's  initiative  also  changes  the  balance  of  forces  at
home  and  makes  it  politically  feasible  to  adopt  a  more  en-
lightened   policy  than  brandishing   bigger  and  better  bombs.
The  Pope's  message  undercuts  the  one  important  popular  bloc
in  American  life  favoring   a  belligerent   foreign  policy.  The
Vatican's  initiative,  and  the  terms  in which  it  is  couched,  are  a
blow  to  men  like  Cardinal  Spellman  and  George  Meany  who
have  identified  Roman  Catholicism   in  this  country,  not  alto-
gether   fairly,  with  an  inflammatory  and  intransigeant  opposi-
tion  to  co-existence.   It  must  be  especially  painful  to  the  head
of  the  AFL-CIO  that  ten  days after  his  coarse  and  intemperate
speech  attacking  "anti  anti-communism,"  Nehru   and  neutral-
ism,   the  supreme  head  of  his  Church  should  have  chosen  the
most   solemn   moment   of   the   Christian   year  to   join   forces
with  Nehru  against  nuclear   tests,  to   survey  the   Communist
East  and  the  capitalist  West with  impartial eye,  and  to  win  the
applause  of  Moscow  and  the  Italian  Left.   Meany  could hardly
have  been  more  surprised  if  he  had  caught  Cardinal Spellman
in  a  May Day parade.
The  Vatican's  initiative was not  unprepared.  The  one Catho-
lic  member  of   our   Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Thomas  E.
Murray, has  been  at loggerheads with his  fellow  commissioners
on  the  genetic  dangers  of  new  nuclear tests.  The  Pope's  warn-
ings  against  radioactivity  echoed  those made  by  Commissioner
Murray  on  November   1.7 in  a  major  address  on  the  subject  at
Fordham  University. Then,  in a letter  to  the New  York  Times
(Dec.  14),  the  Rev.  Edward  A.  Conway,  S.J.,  the  first  official
Catholic observer  at  the  United  Nations,  followed  up  the  Mur-
ray  speech  with  a  plea  for  a  "crash  program"  of  atomic   dis-
armament  this  year.  Father  Conway  warned  that  the  new  Rus-
sian  fission-fusion-fission  bomb  explosion  of  November  23  and
Russian  progress   in  I!K  i.-.-e  for  the  intercontinental   ballistic
missile  "have  drastically  telescoped  the  timetable  for   disarma-
ment."   Father  Conway said  the  President's proposal  for  aerial
reconnaissance  would  be worthless  and  "the  ultimate  impasse"
reached  once  IBM's  with  atomic warheads  had  been  deployed.
Father  Conway called  for  the  suspension  of  election  year  poli-
tics  on  the  ground  that  "the  Administration  would  find  it  al-
most  impossible  to  negotiate  meaningfully  with  the  Russians
while  fighting  the  Democrats  in  its rear."
What  Did  Stassen  Tell  the  Pope?
There  are  signs  that  the  scene  was  being  set  for   important
moves.  According  to  the  New   York   Times  of  December  30,
Stassen  as the  White  House  assistant on  disarmament  discussed
the  problem  with  the  Pope  "several  weeks  ago."   L'Osservatore
Rot/ttitio   gave  prominence  on  December   28  to  reports   from
Washington  that  Eisenhower,  Dulles and  Stassen  had  discussed
the  Pope's  message.  There  were  rumors  here  that  the  Presi-
dent's  message  was  being  revised  as  a  result  of  the  Pope's ini-
tiative.  But  there  was no  sign  in  the  message  or  anywhere  else
of  any change  in  policy.
According  to  one  report  Stassen  proposed  that  the  U.S.  call
for  a  one  year  moratorium on  further  tests  but  was  overruled
by  Dulles  and  the  military.   Dulles  himself   started   the  New
Year  by letting  the  New  York   Times  know  (Jan.  2),   that  it
was  still  American  poliq'  to  use  nuclear  weapons   against  ag-
gression  "no  matter  what  weapons  the  aggressor  chose."   The
President   in  his  State  of  the  Union  message   said  our  policy
"must  be  dynamic as  well  as  flexible"  but  the  continued  reli-
ance on  "the  awesome  power  of  the  atom"  which  he  enunciates
is  about as dynamic and  flexible  as  a  dinosaur.  What's  flexible
about  a weapon  you can't  use without  killing  yourself ? Yet  all
the  talk  here  is  of  a  new  "super  H"   bomb  of  30  to  50  mega-
tons  soon  to  be  tested,  and  Gen.  Taylor  at  his  first  press  con-
lerence  I.:  i  v cck  emphasized  modernization  of   the  Army   for
atomic  combat  and  an all-out  effort  to  achieve  a  1500-mile  bal-
listic  missile.   Krishna Menon  appeals to  the  U.S.  to  cancel  the
new  bomb  test  and  Dulles  turns  him  down   flat.  Radford  says
we  ,uc  prepared  io  use  the  atom  bomb  in  Korea.    For  all  our
pretension  to  moral  leadership, this  capital is still  run  by  small
boy  mentalities,  fascinated  by  big  firecrackers.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

2
/.  F.  Stone'* Weekly,  January  IS, 1956
A  Chance  to Hit  Back  at  the  20  Years of  Treason  Myth
The  Challenge  to  the  Democrats  in  the  Taylor  Vindication
An  important  aspect  of  the  William  Henry  Taylor  case  is
the  cowardice of the  Democratic party leadership which had so
much  to  gain in his  fight against  the  Elizabeth  Bentley  espio-
nage  charges.   From  Harry  S.  Truman  down,  not  a  single
Democratic party figure lifted  a finger to  help  Taylor, though
hii  victory  is  the  first  major  blow  at  the  "20 Years  of  Trea-
son"   myth  Attorney  General  Herbert   Brownell  and  F.B.I.
Chief  J.  Edgar  Hoover launched  two years  ago.   When  the  In-
ternational  Organizations  Loyalty  Board  reversed  itself    (Jan.
6)  and  found  there  was  no "reasonable  doubt"  about  William
Henry  Taylor's loyalty, it  also  reversed  Brownell  and Hoover.
Brownell  on  November   17,  1953,   before   the  Senate  Internal
Security  Committee  declared  Taylor  guilty  of  espionage  and
Hoover  vouched  for  Elizabeth  Bentlsy's  credibility.
The  verdict  was  more  than  the  vindication  of  a  single  indi-
vidual.  The  Board   reversed  after  hearing  sworn  testimony
from  two others—Frank  Coe and  Ludwig  Ullmann—named  by
Brownell  and Hoover  as part of a supposed  spy ring centering
around  the  late  Harry  D.  White.   It  heard  the  painstaking
analysis  of  the  discrepancies  in  the  whole   Bentley  story  by
Taylor's  courageous  counsel,  the  former  New  Deal  Congress-
man  from  California,   Byron  Scott.  The  Board  was  impressed
when   Scott   discovered   and  McCarthy  made  available  testi-
mony  before  an  executive  session  of  the  McCarthy  committee
in  which  Bentley  denied  she  had  ever  known  Taylor  "person-
ally,"  though  she  was  supposed  to  have  received  secrets  and
those  famous  currency  plates  from   him.
The  clincher  was  a  supposed  letter  by  Ullmann  to  Taylor,
which  purported  to  prove  that  Ullmann  got  Taylor  his  job  in
the Treasury. The trouble with this letter is that  two  different
carbon  copies  with  different  dates  and  texts  got  before   the
Board, and a third version with  a third  date and text  seems to
have  been  used  by  Roy  Cohn  before  a  Federal  grand  jury  in
December,   1952.  The  Board  may  have  felt  there  was  some-
thing fishy about a letter  which  appeared  in so many   different
forms.  Coe testified  that  he  and  not  Ullmann  got  Taylor  his
job.  Neither Taylor nor  Ullmann  remembered  any  such letter,
and  Ullmann  said  he  didn't  think  he  ever  wrote  it.   Was this
a  forgery?
The  Attorney  General  owes  Taylor  the  apology  his  lawyer
demands,  and  he  has  the  power  to  open  the  1952  grand  jury
minutes  and investigate this mysterious letter.  The Hennings
subcommittee  ought  to  subpoena  Brownell,   Hoover  and  Bent-
ley  and  thoroughly  examine  this  whole  affair.   Not  the  least
important  document   is  the  affidavit  we  publish  below,  never
made  public  before.   It  figured  in  Taylor's  half  million  dollar
libel  suit against  the  Washington  Daily  News  for  calling him
part of an  espionage ring. The paper  settled  out  of  court just
as trial  was about  to  begin last  Tuesday  here in Washington.
(Not  a  single  newspaper  covered  the  story.)  If  the  Bentley
story  was  in  whole  Or part  "fiction,"  the  country  has  a  right
to  know  it,  especially  on  the  eve of  a  presidential  campaign
in  which  Brownell  and Jenner  have  often  threatened  to  serve
up  "warmed  over   spy."
Full  Text  of  Sensational  Affidavit  in  W.  H.  Taylor's  Suit  Against  Wash.  Daily  News
Lawyer  Swears Eliz. Bentley Called Her  Supposed Autobiography  "Fiction"
"State  of  Louisiana,  Parish  of  St. Landry
"Be it  known  that  on  this  seventeenth   (17th)  day  of  May
in  the  year of  Our Lord one  thousand nine  hundred  and  fifty-
four  (1954),   the  undersigned  Notary  Public  in  and  for  the
parish  and  state  aforesaid,   there  personally   came  and  ap-
peared  HOWARD  B. DEJEAN, JR., a  resident  of  Opelousas,
St.  Landry  Parish,  Louisiana,  who,  after  being  duly   sworn
did  depose  and  say:
I
"That  he  is  an  attorney  at  law  practicing  at   Opelousas,
St.  Landry  Parish,  Louisiana,  and as  such  was  instrumental
in  affecting  personal  service  on  Miss Elizabeth T.  Bentley  as
per  a  subpoena issued  from  the  United  States  District  Court
for  the  Western  District  of  Louisiana,  and  which  said  sub-
poena  had  been  issued  for  the  purpose of  eliciting testimony
in  regard to that  certain  civil  suit  known as  William H. Tay-
lor  vs.  Washington  Daily  News  its the  United  States  District
Court  for  the  District  of  Columbi«,  Civil  Action  No.  5394-53.
II
"That  in  keeping  with  the  aforesaid  subpoena  there  ap-
peared  at  the  office  of  appearer  in  the  Shute  Building,  220
South  Court  Street,  Opelousas,  Louisiana, on  May  17,  1954,
at  one  o'clock  PM  the  following  persons:  Miss  Elizabeth  T.
Bentley;  counsel  for  Miss  Bentley,  a  Mr. Lapeyre and  a Mr.
Weggman,  who  identified  themselves  as  being  New  Orleans
attorneys;   Mr.  Mark  P.  Friedlander,  attorney  for  the  de-
fendant,   Mr.  Charles  Walker,  attorney  for   the  defendant,
both  of  Washington,  D.  C.;  and  the  plaintiff  in  this   cause,
Mr.  William  H.  Taylor,  accompanied  by  his  attorney,  Mr.
Byron  N.  Scott,  of  Washington,  D.  C.
Ill
"That  certain  testimony  was  elicited  after   numerous  ob-
jections  had  been  made  by  both  counsel  for  Miss   Bentley
and  for  the  defendant   newspaper   whereupon  the  attorneys
entered  into  a  discussion  on  the  propriety  of  continuing  this
deposition  at  some  later  date  when  Miss  Bentley  would  have
available  to  her certain  notes  and documents  for  the  purpose
of  refreshing  her  memory.
IV
"That  during  the  time  in  which  Mr.  Byron  N.  Scott  was
enumerating into  the  record certain  documents  and evidences
of  public hearings,  etc.,  which  he  would  be  interested  in  in-
terrogating  Miss  Bentley  about,  he  (Mr.  Scott)  referred  to
Miss  Bentley's  book, 'Out of  Bondage',  published  by  the  Dev-
in-Adair  Company in  1951,  whereupon  Miss  Bentley  did,  in
the  presence  of  said  appearer  and  all  other  persons   in  at-
tendance  at  the  aforesaid  taking  of  this  deposition,  say,  'I
don't  see  why  any  reference is  being made to  my book, that's
fiction',  or  certain  words  to  the  effect  that  her  book  herein-
before  referred  to  was  fictional  and  not  factual.
"THUS  DONE  AND  SIGNED at  my  office  at  Opelousas,
St.  Landry  Parish,  Louisiana, on  the  date  and  place  herein-
before  set  forth  in  the  presence  of  the  hereinafter named
and   undersigned  competent  witnesses   who  have  hereunto
set  their  names  after  due  reading  of  the  whole.
(s)   Howard  B. DeJean,  Jr.,
Signature  of  Appearer
WITNESSES:
(s)   June  W.  Campbell
(s)   Willie King(s)   Lillian Soileau
Notary  Public
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly, January 18,1958
A  Proposal  for  Mr. Sulzberger  in  the  Wake  of  His  Jan.  5  Editorial
Why   Not  A  Special  Panel  to  Arbitrate  Those  Times   Firings?
In  the  wake  of the  Eastland  investigation  it  is  a  pleasure
to report, as of the time we went to  press, that the New  York
Times  had  discharged   neither   the  editorial   employes  who
pleaded  the  First  amendment nor  the  press  room  employes
who  took  the  Fifth.   Our  hat  is  off to  Mr.  Sulzberger  for  the
editorial  in  which our  greatest newspaper  finally fought  back,
and  it  is  good  to  see  how generally  the  press  supported  the
Times,  once  it  decided to  defy  Eastland.
Against  this  background, we offer  a  suggestion  to  Mr.  Sulz-
berger.  The  Times  discharged  three  men before  it  decided  to
fight,  Melvin  Barnet  last  summer, Seymour  Peck  and  Nathan
Aleskovsky last month. Why not make it  possible  for  them  to
benefit  retroactively  by the principle that the  paper  will judge
men  "by  the  quality  of  their  work?"  Would it  not  be ft fine
and  honorable  gesture  to  set  up  a  small  panel  of  three  men,
a  newspaperman  of  high  standing,  a  lawyer  of  stature  and
perhaps  a  member  of  Congress.   Let  this  panel  decide on  the
basis  of  the  evidence whether  these  three  men  were guilty of
any  dereliction  of  duty  as  employes of  the  Times  and  decide
whether  they  should  be  reinstated.   Should  their  careers  be
destroyed  and  their  bread  taken  from  them  because  the  New
York  Times was a  little  slow  in  taking  the  position  it  finally
did? And, we might  add, why should the  Times lose three very
capable  employes?  Would readers  pass  this  suggestion  on  to
Mr.  Sulzberger?
We  intend  to  return  to  this  subject  when  the   Newspaper
Guild  decides what it  will do in  the  cases  of  Bill  Price  of  the
Daily  News  and Dan  Mahoney  of  the  Mirror,  both discharged
after  their  appearance before  the  committee.  We have  space
now  only  to  praise  the  New  York  City  Civil  Liberties  'Union
for  its  statement  on  freedom of  the  press,  which  contrasted
refreshingly  with  the  ambiguities  of  that  issued  by  the  na-
tional   organization.   Finally  we  make  our  bow  to  Walter
Lippmann  for  clearing  the  air  with  his  great  column  of  Jan-
uary  10 on why  it  is  the  duty of  newspapermen to  fight  Con-
gressional   inquisition; Mr.  Lippmann,  with  his  unequalled
perspicacity,  argued  the  case for  the  traditional  and absolute
libertarian  point  of  view to  which  our  own  lonely  pages  are
devoted.
Elections  in  Our  "Free  World"
"Guatemala  had national  elections  last  week  ...    an
election  in  which  the  cards  were  all  stacked in  favor  of
the  Castillo  government.  The result  .  .  .  was  that  the
Administration bloc won all 66 Congressional seats.  .  ..
No  opposition parties participated  . . . the vote  was ex-
tremely  light  .  .  .  illiterates—a  large  majority  of  the
voters—were  not  allowed a secret ballot  and had  to vote
orally  and  publicly.  This  meant, of  course,  they  had  to
vote  for  the  government  .  .  .  Yet  the  great  nation  of
India  . . .  proved  several  years  ago  that  there  could  be
democratic  election for  a  largely  illiterate electorate."
—New   York   Times  editorial,  Dec.   g-9
"The    chairmen  and  members  of  the  election boards
totally  ignored the  most elementary rules of  voting pro-
cedure.  . .  .  The election boards received  explicit orders
to  count  98  percent  for  Diem  and 2  percent  for  Bao Dai.
.  .  .  The system of  open  baskets (into  which  the  voters
were  made  to  throw  their ballots  carrying  the  name  of
Bao  Dai)  placed  under  the  vigilant  surveillance  of  the
police,  has  no  parallel  anywhere  in  the  world.  .  .  .  For
the   coming  legislative   elections,   the  candidates   must
present  a  complete  dossier with  a  certificate  of  loyalty
issued   by   the   government,   which   will   automatically
eliminate  all  opposition  and   non-official   candidates."
—Phani  Van  A'poi,  secretary  of  the  Socialist  Party
of    Vietnam,   describing    the    recent    fleet  ions
there  in  Labor  Action,  December  19.
Too Many  Informers  for  Their  Own Good
"..  .  the  secret  military  police  forced  so  many  Japa-
nese to become secret  informers that they defeated their
own   purpose.  Thousands  of   informers  with   no  real
knowledge  smothered  eounterintelligence with  so  many
reports  and  documents  that  it  was  impossible  to  study
and  appraise them  with  any  degree  of  accuracy.  I  am
convinced  it  was  this  passion  for  investigating  petty
espionage  that  enabled  .  .  .  [Richard]  Sorge  ...     to
escape  discovery  for  so  long."
—Quoted  from  "The  Man  With   Three  Faces"  by
Hans-Otto  Meissner in  a  review  by  Tom Don-
nelly,  Washington  Daily  News,  Jan.  7.
There  is  no  way  to  have  a  free  press  without   permitting
"subversive"  views,  whether  those  of  Communists  in  a  capi-
talist  society  or  of "counter-revolutionaries"  in  a  Communist
society.   Experience  has  shown that  an  exception,  once made
starts  a  momentum  toward  total  and  abject  conformity.   In
our  own immediate  situation here  in  America,  we can  see how
this works.   It  is  perfectly  obvious  that  no major  newspaper
or  newspaper   writer  in  this  atmosphere   will  dare  espouse
openly  Communist views.  One must  therefore  watch  for  opin-
ions  which,  while  not  Communist, .may  aid  them  or  (in  the
opinion  of  the  secret police)  move in  the  same  direction.  One
must  then  determine  whether  a  man who attacked  secret  in-
formers  did so because  he  secretly  sympathizes  with  the  Com-
munists   or  from  sincere   conviction.   J.   Edgar  Hoover  and
Senator  Eastland  think  a  network  of  "pseudo-liberals"  were
set  in  motion  by the  Communists in  the  Matusow affair.  The
New  York  Times  and  the  Alsopa  attacked  secret   informers.
Were  they  "pseudo"  or  "genuinely"  liberal  in  doing  so?  This
is  the  real  question  the  witch  hunters  raise  and this  is not  a
question  which can really be answered.  To permit the  question
to be raised is to permit  the  State to police opinion, and if  cer-
tain  opinions  are  to  be  suspect  then  it  is  safer  not  to  voice
them.  These  dangerous  opinions,  notice,  are  not  Communist
but liberal. The momentum has  already  taken  us quite  a  way.
A  Sheaf  of  Victories
Within  the  space  of a  few  days, there has  been  a  series of
victories  for  civil  liberties. There  was the  Taylor  vindication,
which  we  discussed  on page  two.  Federal  Judge  Bailey  Aid-
rich  in  Boston  acquitted  Leon J.  Kamin of  contempt,  and  his
decision  will  probably  also  free  Associate  Professor  Wendell
H.  Furry  of  Harvard.  Both  men  admitted  past  membership
in  the  Communist party  but  declined to become informers  be-
fore  the  McCarthy committee.  Here  in the  District, the  Court
of  Appeals   (speaking  through  Judge  Prettyman,  who sits on
the  far  right  of  the  bench  politically)  reversed  the  perjury
conviction  of  Louis Weinstock,  one of  the  original  Smith  Act
defendants.  The  Court  held that  an  alleged  misstatement  by
Weinstock   before  the   Subversive   Activities   Control   Board
was  of  too  little  importance  to  be "material."  In  Cleveland,
a  Federal  judge  directed  a  verdict  of  acquital  for  one Smith
Act  defendant and  indicated  that  he  might  free  another.   In
Connecticut,  where  another  Smith  Act trial  is  going  on,  the
Judge has ruled that the defense  can examine the  FBI  reports
in  the  case.   Best  of  all,  the  Veterans  Administration  was
forced   by  public  pressure  to  rescind  the   move  to  deprive
James  Kutcher, the  legless  war  veteran, of his  pension on  the
ground  that  a  secret   informer  said  he  said  critical   things
about  the  government during the  Korean  war.   Special  men-
tion  is  due  Joseph  L.  Ruth, Jr.,   Kutcher's  counsel,  for  the
vigor  with  which  he  argued  the  case.  We  hope  to  say  more
about  its  implications  later,  and  about  the  reed  for  a  cam-
paign  to get  Kutcher's government job  bad;.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  16,1956
The  Two  Key  Groups—Farmers  and  Negroes—Disappointed  by  the  President's  Program
The  Chances  Are  That  Eisenhower  Will  Not  Run
Will  the  President  run  again?   The  question  is  so  fascinat-
ing that  the  eager  microscopic  analyses  of the  experts  tend  to
overlook  the  obvious.   Mr.  Eisenhower   said   on  leaving  Key
West, "it is not merely  . . . what  the doctors  say to me"  and
went  on  to  stress  the  danger  of  something  "untoward"   hap-
pening  when there is  an unexpected  change  in  the  Presidency.
.This means that he, rather than  the  doctors,  will make his de-
cision
1
  and  that  he  will  not  run  if  he  fears  he  cannot  survive
another  term.  My guess  is  that  he  will  not  run,  and that  he
will  be  swayed  by  the  thought  that  he  can  still  exercise   a
beneficial  influence  from  outside  the  White  House in the  cause
of  peace.
Whom  will  the  Republicans  run?  There  is  general  agree-
ment  here  that  they  can  win  only  with  Warren.   If   Warren
cannot  be  prevailed  upon to  run,  the  Eastern  seaboard  Eisen-
hower  Republicans  will  pick  a  "liberal"  Republican  and gar-
nish  him  with  the  name  of  Eisenhower  by  putting  the  Presi-
dent's  brother,   Milton,  into   the   second  place.   Among  the
"dark  horse"  possibilities,  Governor Knight  of  California  has
the  advantage  of labor  support,  of being in the  Warren  image,
and  of  undercutting  Knowland.  Governor Stratton  of  Illinois
might  draw  votes  in  that  key  state  from  Adlai   Stevenson.
Herter   of  Massachusetts   and  Stassen   are  also, hopeful.    As
for  Nixon,  it  is  recognized  that  his  nomination  would  be  a
party disaster.
How  does  the  State  of  the  Union Message  affect  the  politi-
cal  outlook?  Very  poorly  for  the  Republicans. The only  issues
at  the  moment that  count  decisively  in the  political  scales  are
domestic, and both are  minority  issues—farm  relief  and  Negro
rights.  The  message   was  disappointing  to  both  the   farmers
and  the  Negroes.  The best  barometer  of farm  opinion was  the
disappointed reaction  of  Congressman  Hope, Republican, Kan-
sas,  former  chairman  of  the  House  Agriculture   Committee,
"I  am  sorry  that  there  is nothing  in  the  message  which holds
out  any  hope of  increased farm  income  for  1956 when  farmers
need it  so badly."
What  of  the  Negro?   Like  every  other  minority  trying  to
change its  status,  he finds both  parties  playing to  the  (white)
majority.  (In  this  respect  his  position  is  like  that  of  Israel,
which  finds  both  East  and  West  playing for  the  favor  of  the
Arab  majority).  All  Eisenhower offered  to  meet  the  situation
"in   some   [localities]    where   allegations  persist"  (Are the
Mississippi  murders mere allegations?)  that  Negro rights  are
being  violated  is  a  commission of  inquiry  to  be  "created  by
the  Congress."  This  is  double buck-passing,  (1)  to  a commis-
sion  and  (2)  to  Congress.  The  Republicans, if  they  were  will-
ing  to  drop  the  new millionaires  of  Texas,  might  \vin an  elec-
tion  by .a bold  civil  rights  program,  for  the  Nego  vote  holds
Toynbee  on the  German  Problem
Even    Senator    George   on   "Reporters'   Roundup"
(MBS)  last  Monday  night  parrotted  the  State  Depart-
ment  nonsense about  Geneva having "proved"  that  there
could be  no reunification  of Germany "except  on Russian
terms."   Compare  this  American  "party  line"   rubbish
with  the  considered opinion  of  the conservative  historian
Toynbee  in  Colliers  (Jan.  20):
"Germany  can  be  reunited  only  by  the  common con-
sent  of  Russia  and  the  West,  and  surely  it  is  evident
.now that  the  only condition on  which we shall  be able  to
agree  on  the  reestablishment  of  a  power  that  is  poten-
tially  so formidable  is  a self-denying ordinance by which
we  give one another  a  mutual pledge  not  to  admit  Ger-
many  into  either  camp.    It  would  allay  both   Russian
and  West  European  fears."
the  balance  of  power  in  several  key  States.    But  there  is  no
sign  of  such  a  program.
Where can the Negro turn? The furthest  that Adlai Steven-
son  would venture  when  asked  about  the  commission  idea  on
"Face  The  Nation"  last  Sunday was  a  sideswipe  at  Brownell.
"I  should imagine,"  Stevenson said,  "the agencies  at  the  com-
mand  of  the  Attorney  General  are  quite  sufficient  to  deter-
mine the facts,  if that  is all this  commission is intended to  do."
Then  he  added, "Maybe the  commission is  intended  to  investi-
gate  the  Attorney  General.  If  so,  I  would  say  that  I  would
defer  to  the  President's  greater  wisdom."  An essential  bipar-
tisan   indifference  leaves  the  Negro  little  choice  between   the
two  parties.  This  means  the  Democrats  will  continue  to  get
most  of  his  vote  in the  North,  as  the  party  more  favorable  to
the poorer  elements.
Will  peace play no role  in  the  election?   Only vaguely.  The
most  encouraging poll of the  week  was  Gallup's  survey  of  Re-
publican  county chairman  (published January  6)  which  show-
ed  that  of  2,853  polled  and  1,683  who  answered,  the  largest
number,  1,170,  said  "peace"' was the  strongest  argument  their
party  could use  against  the  Democrats.  (Only  186 cited "the
Republican  record"  and  nobody seems  to  have  cited  the sup-
posed  "cleaning  out  of  Communists"  from  the   government).
But  "peace"  still  seems to  mean  Korea, for  only  70  mentioned
"foreign  policy" and  there  is no  sign  that  the  Democrats  are
prepared  to  exploit  the  peace  sentiment  by  taking  the   offen-
sive  against  the  Republicans on  foreign   policy.  The  liberal
democrats  are  pressing  for  higher  military  expenditures  and
the  conservative  Democrats  for  lower  foreign  aid. And  no-
body, but  nobody,  criticizes  H-bomb policy.    The  Bomb is  our
national  totem,  and  talk  of  it  is  taboo.
Why   Not   Give  A   Gift   Subscription   to   Your   Local   Newspaper   Editor?
I.  P. Stone's  Weekly,
Please  renew  (or  enter)
•Street
City
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6
To)   Name
Stri'ot                                            • .
City
"  t.xtra   Sr.i.    i ''unu;H.
301  E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D.  C.
my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Zone           State
mos.)  or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
/one               Slate
1/l'V.M)
I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED