I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jul16.pdf

============================================================

That  Donovan  "Inside  Story":  Clio  Becomes  The  G.O.P/S Kept Woman, Pages 2 and 3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO. 26
JULY  16,  1956
°
101
     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Capitol  Doubts  Ike,  With  Nixon,  Can Now  Beat  Adlai
The  Republicans  hope  to  whip up  a  bandwagon psychology
behind  Eisenhower's  announcement  he  will  run   again.   But
there  is  a  new  air  of  confidence  around  Democratic headquar-
ters  here  in  Washington.   Privately  the  Republicans are  far
from  being  as  sure as they  sound  in  public.  Newspaper  corre-
spondents  and  political  analysts are  beginning  to  doubt  that
Eisenhower,  if  he  runs with Nixon,  can now  defeat  Stevenson.
Reactions  from  home  to  Congressmen  indicate  the  White
House  press  staff  and  its  medical entourage were too  clever  in
their  "better  than  ever"  line.  Few  people  can be  expected  to
believe  that  Eisenhower's  chances  of  surviving a  second  term
have  been  improved  by  a  heart  attack  and  an  ileitis operation.
Silliest  journalism  of  the  week  was  David  Lawrence's  "third
term"  boom  for  Ike;  presumably  Lawrence  expects  one  more
serious  illness to make the President  "even  more fit" by  1960.
The   latest  Roper  poll,  the  day  before  the  President's  an-
nouncement,  showed  7  percent  less  inclined  to  vote  for  Eisen-
hower  since  his  operation;  many  elections  have  been  lost  on
much  less  than  7  percent.   It  was  a  bad  blow  for  the  GOP
when  Time's  medicine  department  (July  16)   admitted  insur-
ance  actuaries  figure  a heart  attack  cuts  life  expectancy  at  least
one-third  and  that  in  half  the  ileitis  cases  there  is a  relapse  in
five years.  Add  to  this  the  Newsweek  survey  (June  25)   which
reported  that  Eisenhower's illness  had  tightened  the  presiden-
tial  race  in  30  States with  309  of  the  531  electoral  votes,  and
that  "Nixon  is  the  reason  in  23  States,"  including his  native
California.    (Newsweek   must  have  leaned  over  backwards  to
be fair to Nixon  because it  listed New  York  as one State  where
Nixon's  running  would  not  be  a  factor!)
Those  who  know  Knowland's  warm  dislike  of  Nixon  guess
that  what  really  made him  happy  at  Gettysburg  was  to  be  able
to  tell  the  reporters  that  the  Vice  Presidential  nomination  was
not  discussed.   Officially  the  statement  of  April  26  still  stands.
Eisenhower  was then  "delighted"  to  hear  that  Nixon  was will-
ing  to  run  with  him.   Nobody  has  had  the  temerity  to  ask
whether  he  would  be  equally  "delighted"  if  Nixon  suddenly
decided  to  take  a year  off and  catch  up  on  some  of  those  good
books  he  hasn't  been  reading  lately.  While  Hagerty  deadpans
the  Nixon  question  in  public,  White  House  aides  in  private
have  fed  several newsmen the  idea that  maybe it  would  be  log-
ical  if  Sherman  Adams—who has  been  doing  most  of  the  work
anyway—were  put  into  the No.  2 post,  ready to  step  into  Ike's
shoes.   Others  hope  all  that  foreign  touring  will  make  Nixon
realize how  much fun  it would be  to  become Secretary of  State,
and  be  a  big  man  like John  Foster  Dulles.  These  wistful  day-
dreams  have  made  Nixon's  friends  apprehensive.
Bipartisan  Pusillanimity
This  is going  to  be a  difficult  election  in  which  to  make  up
one's  mind. The  bankruptcy of the  better  elements in  both  par-
ties  was  demonstrated  here  again  last  week  in  the  collapse  of
the  Eisenhower  forces  and  the  Democratic  leadership  on  the
loyalty-security  issue. The  Supreme Court's  decision in the  Cole
case and  the  report  released by the New  York Bar  Association's
special  committee  offered  safe  auspices  for  the  beginnings of  a
return  to  sanity.  The  Court,  speaking  through  an  Eisenhower
appointee, Harlan,  and  the  Bar  Association through  a  most re-
spectable  and  non-controversial  if  not  downright  stuffy  group
of  leading  lawyers,  would  cut  the  security  program  down  to
1,500,000  employes  in  sensitive agencies.  But though  the secu-
rity  mania  has  gone  beyond all  bounds and  this  is  a  chance  to
make  a  stand,  neither  party  leadership  has  the  courage.  The
Administration  has knuckled under  to  the drive for  the Walter
bill  in  the  House  and  the  companion Eastland-Mundt-McCar-
thy  measures  in  the  Senate.  These  would  blanket  the  entire
Civil  Service  under  the  summary suspension  procedure  of  the
1950  Act.
The  rest  of  the  Civil Service would  still be subject to  legisla-
tion  which  makes  it  a  crime  for  a  Communist  to  work  or  to
seek  employment  in  the  government.  The  reason  for  the  near-
hysterical  campaign  of  misrepresentation  indulged  in  by  the
Civil  Service  Commission  is  that  under  the  Cole  decision  em-
1   0
ployes  in  non-sensitive  positions  would  have  to  be  given  some
semblance  of  a  hearing  and  statement  of  charges.   Passage  of
the  Walter-Eastland  legislation  would  make  it  possible  to  fire
anyone  in  the  government  without  telling  him  why  he  was
being  fired.  From  a  practical  political  point  of  view  in  this
fetid   atmosphere,  the  easiest  way  to  block   the  Walter   bill
would  be  to  support  the  Rees  bill.  This  would  reestablish  a
system  of  loyalty  boards  with  some  semblance  of  trial  proce-
dure  for  non-sensitive positions.   But  the  "reactionary"  Rees of
Kansas  has  been  unable  to  muster  any  support  from  the" lib-
erals  in  either  the  House  or  Senate,  and  the  labor  movement  is
too  frightened  or  indifferent   to  take  a  hand.  The  Tennessee
Democrat,  Murray, who  heads  the  House  Post  Office  and  Civil
Service Commission is a bush league  Eastland. The  only hope is
that the legislation may get lost  in the  rush before adjournment.
I  read  the  full  text  of  the  Bar  Association  report  in  New
York,  and  found  it  highly  overrated  and  disappointing.  Ex-
amined  carefully the  recommendations would  still  leave the ac-
cused  employe  with  no  rights  of  subpoena,   defense  or  con-
frontation  except  those  the  hearing  boards  and  the  FBI  choose
to  give  him.  The  investigation  made  by the  bar  committee was
cautious  and  superficial. This  whole  novel  area of quasi-crime,
dealing  with  the  probability  of  future  misconduct,  a  kind  of
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Sterne's  Weekly, July  18,1956
How  Sherman  Adams  Set Up  Clio in  A White  House Hideaway  . . .
Robert  J.  Donovan's  "Eisenhower:   The  Inside  Story"  re-
sembles  those  reports  on  the  loyalty  of  Federal   employes
turned  in  by the FBI. It  throws  together  the trivial and the
momentous,  the  dubious  and  the  true,  without  evaluation  or
perspective,  in  the  prose  style  of  an  overworked investigator
slapping  it  all  down  before  he  can  be interrupted  by  a  bank
robbery.   The Donovan report  differs,  however,  in one respect
from  Washington's  most  famous  cold  war  literary  form.   It
contains  no  derogatory   information.
The jacket  blurb says that  for  the first time in history  "an
administration  while  still  in   office   has  permitted  a  distin-
guished  journalist   to  compile  an  authentic,   independent  ac-
count  of  its  conduct  of  affairs  of state."  But  the  closest  Don-
ovan  ever  comes to  criticism  of  Eisenhower  is  when  Senator
Lister  Hill  discovers that  Adolphe H. Wenzell of First  Boston
Corporation,  financial  agent  for  Dixon-Yates,  had  also  been
acting  secretly  as  consultant  to  the  Budget  Bureau  in pre-
paring  the  government  contract  with  his  clients.
On  the  heels  of  this  discovery,  Eisenhower  told  the  press
Wenzell  had  "no  connection  at  all  with  Dixon-Yates"; Hag-
erty  had  to  "amplify"  this  blooper  by  saying  that  Wenzell
had  only  given  the  Budget  Bureau  "technical  advice"  on  the
Dixon-Yates  contract;  and  Budget  Director   Hughes  had  to
spoil  it  all by testifying that  Eisenhower knew all  about  Wen-
zell,  "In  fact  he  approved him  before  we got  him  down  here.
.  .  ."  At  this  point  in the story,  Donovan's equanimity  gives
way  and  he  sternly   comments,  "Things  were  mixed  up  for
fair."
A  Discreet  and   Cozy  Bower
This  sample  shows Sherman  Adams  did  not  act  recklessly
last  summer  when  he  picked the  White  House  correspondent
of  the  New  York Herald-Tribune,  the  country's  leading pro-
Eisenhower  Republican paper,  to prepare  an  election  year  ac-
count of  the  Eisenhower  Administration.   With  New England
caution,  Adams  also  had  him  investigated  by  the  FBI, and
given  a  "Q"  clearance.   Thus  certified  as  free  from  political
impurity,  Mr.  Donovan  was  provided  by  the  White  House
with  an   office  and  allowed  access  to  its  files,  some  of  them
anyway.   In  this  cozy  bower  the  Muse  of  History  could  not
help  becoming Sherman  Adams's  kept  woman.
The  by-blow of this  summer  romance is  no Thucydides.  But
'it   is   revealing.  The  Cabinet'meeting   minutes  from  which
Donovan  excerpts  so fully  and  incautiously  are  often  gems of
Mrs.  Hobby  and  The  Daily  Worker
"When  the  [security]  program  was  next  discussed  in
the  Cabinet  on  November  12,  1953,  Mrs.  Hobby  com-
plained  that  too  much  trivia  sometimes appeared  in  the
case  reports  of  security  officers.  ...     In  particular  she
cited  statements such  as  that  the  person  under  investi-
gation  read  the  Daily  Worker.   Many  people  have  to
read  the  Worker  as  part  of  their  jobs,  she  said."
—Robert  J.  Donovan: The Inside Story,  p. 289.
unconscious  humor.  Here,  for  example, is  a  bit  from  the dis-
cussion  which  took  place  after  Eisenhower  read  his  Cabinet
the  first draft  of his inaugural  address.   It  deserves  extended
quotation  as  an  early  and  intimate  glimpse  of  the  Adminis-
tration's  foremost  minds  at  work.  It  shows  Charlie  Wilson's
enthusiasm,  John  Foster  Dulles's  emphasis  on  the  spiritual
side  of  things,  and  Henry  Cabot  Lodge, Jr.,'s gift  for  incisive
analysis.   The President  had just finished:
"  'You flew the flag'"  Wilson exclaimed. 'It  was  wonderful.'
"Dulles  expressed  his  own concern that  too much  emphasis
in  the  address  was  placed  upon economics.
" 'But  we  must  remember  also  today,'  Eisenhower   count-
ered, 'that  unless  we  can  put  things  in  the  hands  of  people
Brownell  Hints at  Secret
Evidence  on Rosenbergs
"The  Attorney  General  [at  a  Cabinet  meeting  called
to  consider  whether  clemency  should  be  granted  the
Rosenbergs]  said  that  information which corroborated
the  guilt  of  the  Rosenbergs  was  in  possession  of   the
government  but  that  it  could  not  have  been  used  in  the
trial."       —Robert  J. Donovan: The Inside  Story,  p. 85.
who  are  starving  to  death,  we can  never  lick  Communism.'
"A picture  he got  of China, he said, was one of  claws  reach-
ing out to grab anyone who looked as though he had five cents.
" 'I  am  convinced that  we have  got  to  do something  about
production,'  he said.   'Maybe I  am wrong.'
It's  Those Intellectuals Who Cause Trouble
" 'In  India  today,'  Dulles  pointed  out, 'the great  peril  of
Communism  comes  from  the  intellectual  centers.'
"The  next  to  express  his  views  was  former  Senator  Henry
Cabot  Lodge, Jr.,  who  was  to  become  the  chief  of  the  U.  S.
mission  to  the  United  Nations  and  who would,  in that  capac-
ity,  regularly  attend  meetings  of  the  Cabinet.   He objected  to
a  reference  to  Moscow  in  the  current  draft  as  having  been
the  center  of  autocracy  and  as  being  presently  the  center of
revolution.   Lodge  felt  that  this  implied  that  autocracy  no
longer  reigned  in  Moscow, and  beside,  he  said,  lots  of  down-
trodden  people  in  the  world  would  like  to  have  a  revolution.
" 'Despotism?'  the  President  suggested.  'You  are  right'
" 'If  you give  us  a flip from  autocracy  to  despotism,'  Wil-
son  told  [Emmet]  Hughes  [former  Life   editor,  who had  been
hired  as  ghost  writer],  'it  would  be better.'
"Finally,  the  passage  was  flipped  out  of  the  address  alto-
gether."
Even  a  Hollywood story  conference  is not more  remorseless
in its  search for  le mot juste.
II  »
In  dealing  with  military  matters,  the  President  is  down to
earth  but  the  Cabinet  minutes  show  him starry-eyed  in  civil-
ian  affairs.  During  the  review  of the  first  State of the  Union
message,  "Eisenhower  declared  that he wanted  to work  in   ...
a  strong  passage  about  free   enterprise  which  would  help
counteract  the  tendency,  he  said,  of  newspaper  columnists  to
regard it  as  something  opposed to humanitarianism  and inimi-
cal  to  labor."   Donovan's  researches  did  not  carry  him  far
enough  to  discover  where  Ike  learned  that  the  papers  were
full  of  columns hostile  to  free  enterprise.
Sometimes  this  idealism  was  too  much for  the  President's
closest  associates.   Preparing  to  address  the  Future  Farmers
of  America,  Eisenhower  "wanted  to  deliver  a  purely  inspira-
tional  type  of  address  to  the  young farmers.  That  was  what
most youths would be interested in, he argued. . . . The Presi-
dent  was stubborn  but  they finally persuaded  him that  young
men  and  women  on the farm  have  a  lively interest  in  govern-
ment  agricultural   policies.   So  he  pitched   in  and  defended
Benson  against  his critics.  . . ."  It  may be that  in  this  case
the  President  should  have  stuck  to  the  inspirational.
Though  the  President  attacked  "creeping socialism," social-
ists  seem to have no difficulity  in  creeping  up  on him. After  a
talk  with  Walter  Reuther,  Eisenhower  informed  the  Cabinet
he  was  impressed  and  "had detected  none  of  the   socialistic
views  he  had  heard   attributed   to  Mr.  Reuther."   Norman
Thomas  was  even  more  successful.
Ike  and  Dulles  Clash
Norman  Thomas  called  to  protest  Scott  McLeod's  state-
ment  that  he  would never  clear  a  Socialist  for  a  policy-mak-
ing  job.   Eisenhower  assured  Thomas  he  had  no  doubt  about
the  loyalty  of  Socialists.   "Dulles,"  Donovan relates, "remind-
ed  the  President  that  the  Socialist  Party  platform   had  a
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, July  16^1956
. . . And Got Himself  An  Election  Year  Account  of Eisenhower
plank  which, he said, equated capitalism  with warmongering."
But  Eisenhower  stood  his ground,  replying that  the  term So-
cialist had  "taken  on a very broad  meaning  and that  some So-
cialists  were  in  reality  more conservative  than  some  middle-
of-the-roaders."
On  other  aspects  of  Marxism, however, the  President  looks
up  to  Dulles as  a  great  scholar.   Donovan reveals  that  Eisen-
hower  "has  recommended to  associates that  for  a penetrating
insight  into  Soviet  philosophy they  ought  to  have  Dulles give
them  a  20-minute summary of  Stalin's  Problems of  Leninism,
something the  President  once -listened to  with  admiration."
Though  firmly  briefed  on  Marxism-Leninism,  the  President
sometimes  has   difficulty   in  understanding   capitalism.    "Fol-
lowing  the  silent  prayer  * at  the  meeting  of  the  Cabinet  on
June  5,"  Donovan reports,  "the  President  remarked  that  he
needed  spiritual  help to  preserve  his  disposition  ...    it had
come  to  his  attention  that  the  National  Association  of Manu-
facturers  and  the  U.  S.  Chamber  of  Commerce  had  opposed
extension  of  the  excess  profits   tax."
A  Subversive   Remark  in  the  Cabinet
Eisenhower  complained  to  his  Cabinet that  "these  business
organizations  . . . did not seem  to realize that  the middle-of-
the-road  course  he was  pursuing  was  the  only  one that  gave
them  any  chance  of  having  a  fair  share  of  legitimate  influ-
ence  with  the  government."    In  trying  to  comfort  him,  two
members  of  his  official  family  verged  almost  on  the  subver-
Why  Ike  Kept  Nixon
"The  truth  may  lie  somewhere  along  the  line  that
Eisenhower  was  trying  to  keep  the  Vice-Presidential
nomination  open  until  Nixon's  standing  with  the party
could  be  tested,  but  that  by  April  it  was  clear that  his
strength  among regular  Republicans  was  so  firm  that
leaving  him  off  the  ticket  would  have  been  a   difficult
business."
—Robert  J. Donovan: The Intide  Story,  p. 406
sive.   "Taking  a   practical   view,"   Donovan  reports,   "both
Lodge and  Benson observed that no stand taken  by the  Cham-
ber  or  the  NAM  could  do  Eisenhower  much  harm."   Lesser
employes  of  the  government have  been rechecked for  security
.after  such  remarks.
The  President  was often  dismayed by the  rightists,  and  like
many  generals  in  politics  several  times  thought  of forming  a
party  of  his  own, a  kind  of  American  de  Gaullist  movement.
"As  he  conceived it,"  Donovan  relates,  "such  a  party  would
have  been  essentially  his party. . . . The President  even  went
so  far  as  to  think  of  a  name for  it,  but  never  hit  upon  one."
From   these   "ruminations,"   Donovan  tells   us,    originated
"some  of  those  celebrated  phrases   of  his,  like  'progressive
moderates'  . . . and 'dynamic  conservatism.'"
Privately,  we  learn,  Eisenhower  went  further  Left  in  de-
scribing  his  own views. When Mrs.  Hobby complained one  day
that  the  House  Appropriations  Committee  had  cut  $426,000
from   Office   of  Education  funds,  "Eisenhower  declared  that
every   liberal—'including   myself'—would  take  exception   to
this  reduction."  He  declared that  if  the  Cabinet  did  not  ob-
ject,  "the  administration  [unlike Louis  XIV, Ike  never  seems
to  talk  as  if  the  State  were  him]  would  take  forthright  ac-
tion  to have the  funds  restored."  It  is heartening  to discover
that  "the  Cabinet  agreed."   The liberals  had  won.
Ill
Eisenhower  seems to  have  been  less  successful  in  impress-
ing  his  foreign  policy  views on his  Cabinet; in  this  sphere  he
Why  Ike  Picked  Warren
"The  President  was  attracted  by  Warren's  positions
on  certain questions  of  law and government . . . his op-
position  to  Roosevelt's  'court  packing' proposal,  his  in-
dorsement  of  the  Supreme Court  decision  in  1952 hold-
ing  that  Truman  had exceeded his  powers in  seizing  the
strike-threatened  steel  industry,  and  his   advocacy  of
state  rather  than  Federal jurisdiction  of  the  off  shore
oil  lands."
—Robert  J. Donovan: "The  Inside Story,"  p. 162
*  Donovan  discloses  that  Eisenhower  adopted  the  idea  of
opening  Cabinet  meetings with  a  moment  of  silent  prayer  at
the  suggestion  of  Secretary of  Agriculture  Benson, perhaps
as  the  member of  the  Cabinet  most in  need of  divine guidance.
seems  to  have  been overruled.  At  one  of  the  very  first  Cabi-
net  meetings  we see Eisenhower  arguing  with  Charlie  Wilson
for  freer  East-West trade.
"Remember  this," the  President  is  quoted  as  saying,  "You
are  trying  to  set  up  out  of  Moscow what  you  might  call  a
series  of  centrifugal   forces.  The  last  thing  you  can  do is  to
begin  to  do things that  force  all  these  peripheral   countries—
the  Baltic States, Poland,  Czechoslovakia and the rest  of them
—to  depend on  Moscow  for  the  rest  of  their  lives."  But  Wil-
son  objects  that  he  himself   is  old-fashioned.  "I  don't  like"
Wilson  says,  "to  sell  fireams  to  the  Indians."    Eisenhower
comes  back  at  him,  "How  are  you going  to  keep  them  inter-
ested  in  you?  If  you trade  with  them,  Charlie,  you  have  got
something  pulling  their  interest  your   way."
Left  to  himself,  this  book  shows,  the  President  would  even
be  disposed  to  recognize  Red  China.  This  is  Donovan's  one
major  revelation.  When  Knowland and  Taft  were  advocating
a  blockade of  China,  Eisenhower  was  telling a  Cabinet  meet-
ing  it  would  be  "naive"  to  suppose  that  China  could  be  de-
feated  by blockade:  "Instead, greatly  to  the  detriment  of  the
free  world,  he  declared,  it  would  compel  China  to  rely  to  a
greater  extent  on  Russia  for  the  products  it  needed."
From the minutes  of a  White  House  staff  meeting  in  March,
1953,  Donovan reports that the President "was  not  convinced"
that  American  vital  interests  were  served  "by prolonged  non-
recognition  of  China."  He asked  whether  it  would not  be  the
best  policy  "to  try  to  pull  China  away  from  Russia  rather
than  drive  the  Chinese  ever  deeper  into an  unnatural  alliance
unfriendly  to the United  States."  He did not  feel  the moment
had  come for  recognition  but  "he felt  it  was unfortunate  that
a  climate  had  developed in which, so it  seemed to  him,  it  was
looked  upon almost  as  un-American  even  to  debate  the  merits
of  recognition."
Kennanism  at  The  White  House?
Donovan  does  not  notice  the  difference  between  this  atti-
tude  and  the  high  moral  objections  to  co-existence  of  John
Foster   Dulles  but  he  does  record  that  Eisenhower   at  this
same  staff  meeting  "regretted  that  President  Wilson  had  in-
troduced  a  moral  precedent   [into  the  question  of  diplomatic
recognition]  in  refusing  in  1913  to  recognize  the  revolution-
ary  regime  of  President  Victoriano  Huerta  in  Mexico."  This
sound  as if  George Kennan, though  ousted  from  the  State De- .
partment,  has  been  infiltrating   the  White  House.
But  the  best  the  President  has  been  able  to  do, as  Donovan
correctly  reports it,  has  been to  fight  off Congressional  riders
which   would  have  maneuvered  him  "into  a  rigid,  uncom-
promising,  unalterable  position  with  respect  to  future  rela-
tions  with  Red  China."  The  difficulties  were  enormous.   At
one White House  conference with Senators  a  "leader" [Know-
land?]  explained to  the  President  that  "the  Senate  was con-
cerned  . . . that if  Red China  could  shoot its way into the UN,
it  might  then  shoot  up  the  UN."
Acheson's  metaphor  about  not  letting   the   Chinese  shoot
their  way  in  the  UN  had  run  wild.  A  pity  no  one  suggested
as  a  compromise  that  Communist  China  be  admitted  to  the
United  Nations  on  condition  that  her  delegates  check  their
firearms  in  the  outer  lobby.
*!   Q   s
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  16,1956
The  Police  State  Machine to  Create  and  Protect   Informers
The  Drive  for  More  and  More  "Nanies"  to  Extend   the  Blacklist
:
               (Continued  from  Page   One)
detention  camp  jurisprudence,  to  which  normal  due  process  is
inapplicable—how   prove  something   which  hasn't  happened
yet  and  may  never  happen?—was   worth  the  most   searching
kind  of  discussion.   It  was  passed  over  with   question-begging
truisms  about  reconciling   liberty  with  security.    To  reconcile
oneself   with  the  loss  of  liberty  is  not  reconciling  liberty  with
security.  How  would  these  lawyers react  if  the  SEC or  the  Fed-
eral  Trade  Commission  or  the  Pure  Food  and  Drug  Adminis-
tration  decided  to  "reconcile  liberty  with  security"  by  holding
hearings in  which  accused  corporations  were  not  told  just  what
they  were  being  accused  of  doing,  and   denied—as  Federal
employes  are  denied—even  a  statement  of  why  they  have  been
found  guilty?
But  I  must  confess  that  after  two  days of  immersion  in  the
atmosphere  of  Washington  I  began  to  look  upon  the  Bar  As-
sociation  report  with more  charitable  eye.   Weak  and  cautious
as  it  was,  the  report  was  still  braver  than  the  prevailing  atti-
tudes  of  both  parties.  What  are  they  waiting  for—a  joint  de-
marche  by the  American Legion,  the  DAR  and  Cardinal  Spell-
man  against  the  security program  before they pluck  up  enough
courage  to  act?
A  New  National   Institution
The  past  week  had  a  nightmarish quality.  Washington  was
dominated  by the  drive to  make and  protect  informers. Arthur
Miller  was  cited  for  contempt—because  he  refused  to  name
"names."  John  Cogley  was  treated  as  some kind  of  a  criminal
by the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee for  daring  to
write  that  Fund  for  the  Republic study  of  the  whole  ugly  use
made  of  "names"   in  blacklisting  artists  of  all  kinds  who  will
not  inform.  No  small  part of  the hysteria  behind  the  drive  for
the  Walter   bill  is  the  fear  that  without  summary  procedures
for  discharge the  Courts may some  day demand that  informers
be  produced  in  ordinary  Civil  Service  loyalty-suitability  cases
in  non-sensitive  positions.
Without  discussion or hearings a  bill  (S.  374)   has  been  re-
ported  to the  Senate extending  from  three  to  six years the  stat-
ute  of  limitations  on  false  swearing  by  government  employes
"with  respect   to  subversive  activities  and' connections."  The
excuse  for  this  Eastland-Jenner bill  (see  Senate  Report   2112)
is  that  "it  is  sometimes  necessary to  defer  prosecution  beyond
the  present  3-year  limitation  until  such  time  as  identity  of  in-
formants  ceases  to  be  of  importance  to  the  national  security."
(The  Department  of  Justice  through  Deputy  Attorney  General
William  P.  Rogers  approved  the  idea  of' extending  the  statute
of  limitations  to  ten  years;  this  was  too  much  for  the   Senate
Judiciary  committee,  which  reduced  it  to  six.)   The   Informer
has   become   a  major   national   institution,  a  major   national
concern.
The  Only  Word  For  It
The  trouble  with  the  Cogley  study  is that  it  failed,  perhaps
out  of  tact  or  timidity, to  trace  the  blacklist to  its  real  origins.
This  is in  the  work  of  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  its
allied  organizations. Through  its  Committee  on  Socialism  and
Communism,  the  Chamber  started  out  in  1946  to  drive  non-
conformists  of  all  kinds  from  entertainment  and  the  profes-
sions. 'The  blacklist was proposed  by the  Committee  in  its  sug-
gestions  for  "community  action,"  a chrome-plated,  more  suave
version  of  the  vigilantism the  country experienced  in  the  early
20's.  To  discuss the  problem  weakly  and  defensively  in  terms
of  security and  the  Red  menace is  to  accept  the  premises of  the
Chamber  and  the  witch  hunters.  We  have  all  been  retreating
so  far  on  this  issue that  soon  we  will  have  no  firm  footing  on
which  to stand.                                      ;
The  blacklist, the  House  Committee on  Un-American  Activ-
ities,  the  McCarran  Internal  Security  Act  (the   old   Mundt-
Nixon bill), and  the  Smith Act can be  understood  only  against
the  background  of  the  Chamber   of  Commerce  master   plan.
We  need  to  recall that  the  U.S.  C. of  C. fathered  all  this  legis-
lation  and  engineered  the  Hollywood  inquiry  which   launched
the  blacklist. The  proof  of  this  is  available  in  any  file  of  the
annual  reports  made  by  the  Chamber's  Committee  on  Social-
ism  and  Communism.  The  objective  of  this  program  is  per-
manently  to  fasten  thought  control  on  this  country,  a  chrome
plated  American version  of  Fascism.   It  is time  to  use the  word
again—and  to  fight  what  it  stands  for.
Next  Week:  Philosopher  Turns informer—James  Burnham  Testifies   Against The  Independent  Socialist  League
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301  E.  Capitol,  Wash. 3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City                                         Zone           State
Knter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional;
(To)   Name
7/18/86
Street
City                                          Zone           State
Shall  we  send  si'i   announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED