I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956feb13.pdf

============================================================

2500 Appeal  for  Justice  in  Miss?  Page 3
Chou  En-Lai's  Surprise  Offer  to  Chiang Kai-Shek; Amnesty  and  Negotiations,  See  Page  Four
. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  6FEBRUARY  13,  1956'«'       WASHINGTON, D. C.IB  CENTS
Bad  Day  for  The  White  Race:  Alabama  and  Algeria
February  6,  1956,  was  a  bad  day  for  the  white  race.    In
Alabama  and  in  Algeria,  its  better  elements  surrendered  to  its
worst.   In  Alabama,  the  State  University  gave  in  to hoodlum-
ism  and  under a  shower  of  eggs  and  tomatoes expelled  its  first
Negro student.  In  Algeria,  the  new French  government of  the
Socialist Guy  Mollet  gave in  to hoodlumism and  under  a  show-
er  of  tomatoes  and  manure  accepted  the  resignation  of   Gen.
Georges  Catroux  as  Minister  Resident  in  Algeria.   In  the  eyes
of  a  world  two-thirds  colored,  watching  those   demonstrations,
the  supposedly  more  civilized white  race  bespattered  itself.
The  issues  are  both  complex  and  simple.  The  complexities
arise  because  it  is  impossible  to  correct  one  wrong  without
committing  another;  the  colons  in  Algeria,  like  the  whites  in
Alabama,  fear  being  swamped  in  a  rising  sea  of  color.   The
simple,  common  and  fundamental  characteristic of  the  crisis in
both  places  is white  resistance to  equality  because with  equality
the  whites  will  no  longer  be able  to  live  off the  cheap  labor  of
the  blacks  and  browns.   The  colored  in  both  places  exist  in  a
stage only halfway from  slavery.
Peoples  and  nations  are  made  glorious   by  those  men  who
are  willing  to  stand  up  against  their  own  in  defense  of  justice
for   minority   elements.    Milton   opposing   his  own   Puritans,
Voltaire  and  later  Zola, defying the  French  mob,  Gandhi  living
with  the  untouchables—such   are  the  incidents  which  give  a
people  honor  in  the  eyes of  mankind.  But where was Southern
chivalry  when  Miss  Autherine  Lucy  arrived   in   Tuscaloosa?
Worse  than  the  ignorant  mob  was  that  scene  her  first  day  in
class—"She  sat alone on  the  front  bench."  How wonderful  it
would  have  been  for  the  South,  if  a  few  students,  a  handful,
two  or  three,  even  one,  had  deliberately  sat  down  beside  her
as  a  demonstration  of  human  kindness and  contempt  for  the
mob  mind   The  world  would  have  known  that  in  the  section
which  produced   Jefferson   and  Madison  the   old   spirit   still
flickered.
Perhaps  the  greatest  problem  of  our  time,  greater  than  the
transition  to  socialism,  is  peacefully to  effect  the  change  from
a  world  in  which  the  white  race  is  dominant  to  one  in  which
it  will  itself  some  day  be  in  danger  of  minority  status.   The
treasures  of  civilization must  be  passed  on  to  the  half-educated
and  the  primitive.  New  loyalties which can weld  men  together
irrespective  of  color  must  be  forged.   Fears  must  be  faced  and
hatreds  prevented.    In   this   perspective   the   British   Queen's
colorful  procession  through  self-governing  Nigeria  is  a  happy
portent.
But the  way In which the  French  are  losing  all hold  on  half-
barbaric North  Africa,  where they could  still perform  a civiliz-
ing  mission, and  the  way our  South  drifts  to  a new  outburst  of
race hate and  race war, foreshadow calamity. That  French  mob
cut  the  ground  from  under  the  French-educated  Arabs  who
had  still  hoped  for  cultural ties in  an equal  French  union.  That
Tuscaloosa   mob,  and  the  cowardly  way  the  University   and
Governor  Folsom  gave  in  to  it,  is doing  the  same  to  the  mod-
erate  elements in  our  own Negro  community.  The  longer  that
responsible  white  leadership  delays  the  unpopular   step  of  en-
forcing  educational  integration  which  is  now  law,  the  harder
it  will  become,  the  stronger  the  mob  will  grow.   This  lawless-
ness  is  a  monster  best  killed in  its  cradle.   In  this  country  the
Tuscaloosa  outburst  strengthens  the  case for  the  Powell amend-
ment;  better  no  school  aid  at  all  than  aid  to  those  who  defy
the  law.
The  Same Old  Squeeze  Play  On  Israel
The   real   pattern   of   events   in  the   Middle   East  becomes
visible  if  one  looks  closely  at  what  happened  in  Ottawa  the
day  John  Foster  Dulles  released  his  letter  giving  a  polite
brush-off   to  the  40  Republican   Congressmen  who  made  an
appeal  for  arms to  Israel. That  same day the  Canadian  govern-
ment  lifted  its  embargo  on  arms  exports  to  the  Middle  East.
This means that  while  the  U.S.  maintains an  undeclared  em-
bargo  on  arms to  Israel,  Canada  is joining Britain as a  supplier
of  arms  to  Egypt  and  the  other  Arab  States.   Significantly, the
Canadian  action  was  taken  only  a  few  days after  Eden's  visit.
Britain  recently  doubled  the  amount  Egypt  is  allowed  to  draw
from  its frozen  sterling  balances  in  London,  and  these  expand-
ed  payments  are  being  used   for  arms  purchases  in  Britain.
Canada,  after  the  Eden  visit,  decided  to  get  in  on  the  business.
Ostensibly  either  side  can  buy  in  Canada,  but  the  lifting  of  its
embargo  releases  shipments  whose  relative  dimensions  are  re-
vealing.   The  Egyptians get  12 more  trainer planes,  the  Israeli
$30,000  worth  of  25-pourider  ammunition.
In  1948  there was a similar squeeze  play on  Israel.  The  U.S.
imposed  a  unilateral  arms  embargo  on  the  Middle  East  which
shut  off  American  arms  to  Israel,  while  Britain  supplied  the
Arabs  in  the  expectation  that  they  would   easily  destroy  the
new  State.
The   difference   between  the  present  situation  and  that   in
1948  is  that  then  Israel  was  able  to  obtain  arms  in  Czecho-
slovakia.  This  time  Britain  and  Russia are  actively  competing
with  arms  for  Arab  friendship  at  Israel's  expense—and  the
latest  Soviet  contribution  to  the  "relaxation   of   international
tension  and  the  cause  of  peace"  is to  offer  arms  to  half  savage
Yemen  at  the  far  end  of  the  Arabian  peninsula.   Is  Moscow
trying  to  build  socialism by  financing  a  jihad?   How  is  peace
furthered   by  taking  steps  which  may  set  the   Middle   East
ablaze?   Moscow  makes its world  peace  policy  questionable  by
the  dangerous  game  it   is  playing  at   the  most  inflammable
point  on  the  globe,  the  one  spot  where  a  local  conflagration
would  be  most  difficult   to  contain.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly, February  IS, 19S6
Lyndon  Johnson's  Honor  System;  A  New  Way  to  Run  An  Investigation
If   Any  Senator  Has Been  Bribed, Will  He  Please  Stand  Up  and  Confess"
A  charming  suggestion  was  made by  Majority Leader  Lyn-
don  Johnson in  the  Senate  during the  last  stages of  the  vote
on  the  natural  gas  bill.  He and  Minority Leader  Knowland—
fraternally  bipartisan  on  this  issue,  too—had  introduced  a
resolution for  a  select  committee to investigate  Senator  Case's
charge  that  a  $2500  effort   had  been  made  to  influence  his
vote.   The  resolution  was  so  drawn  as  to  restrict  the   select
committee's  jurisdiction  to  this  one  instance  and  no  others.
Senator  Hennings pleaded with  Johnson  to  accept  an amend-
ment which  would  broaden the  select  committee's  authority  to
cover  any other  "improper  attempts  ...   to influence  the vote
of  any  Senator"  on the  natural  gas  bill.
It  was at  this  point, in  rejecting  the  Hennings amendment,
that   Lyndon  Johnson   made  a   counter-proposal   which  the
newspapers  seem to  have  overlooked but  which deserves  to be
preserved  in  the  handbooks on  how to  conduct  a  Senate  in-
vestigation.   "If  there  is  a  member of  the  Senate,"  Johnson
said,  "—  and  I  believe most  of  the  members  are  present  in
the  Chamber—who has  been  the  subject of  an  attempt  at  im-
proper  influence,  I  should be  very  glad  to  have  him  rise  in
his  seat  at  this  time  to  divulge the  information.   We would
then  be  very  glad  to  include his  episode  in  the  authority  of
the   resolution."
World's  Biggest  Bargain
The  most  striking  aspect  of  the  Case  affair  is  how little  it
costs  to acquire a friend  in the  Senate.   Here  is  a  body which
votes  on  disbursements  of  some  40  billions  of  dollars  a  year
in  government funds.   Bills like the  natural  gas  measure  can
create  private  fortunes  overnight;  it  is  said  that  this  par-
ticular  bill  will  add  600  millions a  year  to  the  revenues  of
the  natural  gas  companies  and  enhance  the  value  of  their
reserves  by  12 billions.   Yet  25 one hundred  dollar  bills  in  an
envelope may swing pro  or  con the  votes that  determine  these
billions.   Archimedes—or  whoever  it  was  who  discovered  the
principle  of  the  lever—would  have  been  delighted  with  this
example  of  how a  small force strategically  applied  may  move
a  large  body  in  politics  as  well  as  mechanics.
Unfortunately  neither  the  Republican  nor  the  Democratic
leadership  in the  Senate seems in a  mood  to pursue  such  phil-
osophical  observations.   Judging  by  the  way  the  natural  gas
bill  was pushed  through the  Senate  unabashed, and  the  celer-
ity  with  which  Vice  President  Nixon  ruled  that  the  "select
committee"  had  priority  in  questioning  Senator  Case,  there
Let's  All  Go  Into  Gas
Mr.  FULBRIGHT  (Replying   to  a  charge  of   monop-
oly).   In addition to  the  more  than  8,000  competing  pro-
ducers  in  the  industry  ...     is  it  not  a  fact  that  every
citizen  of  the  United  States  is  free  to  undertake  to find
additional  sources  of  gas?
Mr. PAYNE.  Of course,  that  is  correct         This  Beld
represents  a  wide-open  opportunity.  .  .  .
Mr.  FULBRIGHT.   I  think  the  Senator  from   Maine
made  the  point  very  well  .  .  .  anyone  who  thinks  there
are  fabulous  profits  to  be  made  in  this  business  is  free
to enter it  any time  he wishes.
—U.S.  Senate,  Jan.  27  (Con. Record, p.  1S68).
must be a  lot of hidden  levers  in that  Senate  chamber.   John-
son  and  Knowland are  fighting  hard  and  skilfully  to  prevent
a  fuller  investigation   by  the  Senate  subcommittee  on  privi-
leges  and  elections  which  Senator   Hennings   heads.    What
they  fear  is  indicated  by  a  Washington  Post  editorial   sug-
gesting  that  the  President  ought  to  veto  the  natural  gas  bill
since  it  would  be  most  embarrassing  if  it  later  were  deter-
mined that  its  passage  was tainted.
The natural  gas interests were  cheated  of their  prize by  a
Truman  veto  in  1950  and  the  Case  revelations  on  the  eve of
passage  by the  Senate  this  year  must  have  driven  them  into
a  frenzy  of  last-minute   activity.   It  was  hardly  discreet  to
force  a  vote in  the  Senate  before  investigating,  nor  to  indulge
as  the  Senate  leadership  now is doing in  a  transparent  effort
to  sidetrack  the  Hennings  subcommittee.   The  gas  interests
and  the  leadership  fear  Hennings.   He has  been  campaigning
for  a  long  time  to  revise  and  tighten  the  Federal  corrupt^
practices   act.   S  636,  a  bill  for  this  purpose  by   Hennings,
was  reported  to  the  Senate  last  June  but  never  came  to  a
vote.   A  minority  report  was  made  to  the  Senate  from  the
Rules  committee  opposing  this  election  law  reform  on  the
ground  that  it  "may  violate  the  Bill  of  Rights,"  particularly
"the  constitutional  provision  guaranteeing  the  rights  of  free
speech  and  peaceable assembly."  Among the  four  names sign-
ed  to  this  Paul  Revere-ish  attempt  to  warn  the  Senate  and
the  country  of  this  danger  were  those  two  redoubtable  and
vigilant  friends  of  civil  liberties,  Senators  Jenner   and  Mc-
Carthy.  We welcome them  to the  fold.
DOWNTRODDEN   WORKING   CLASS  NOTE:   Walter
Reuther   at   Miami   Beach   lifted   a  curtain   on  the   present
state  of  the  American labor  movement  when  he complained
that  the rival building trades  sent  "eight  Cadillacs filled with
pickets"  to  the  Packard  plant  in  Detroit  in  a   jurisdictional
dispute  with  the  UAW. ...     We wonder  whether the UAW
will  retaliate  by sending its pickets  in Rolls  Royces.  . . .
FILE  FOR FUTURE  TROUBLE  NOTE: "The  National-
ists  have  been  more  aggressive  in  looking  after  their  water
interests  in  the  Matsu  area."—Vice Admiral  S.  H.  Ingersoll,
U.S.  7th  Fleet  Commander  in  an  interview  at  Taipeh  on  the
present  situation  in  the   Formosa  straits,  Neiv  York  Times,
Feb.  7.   The  Admiral's  phrasing—"water  interests"—is cap-
tivating.   The principal  Nationalist  interest  in  the  waters off
DOSSIER   ON  A  DANGEROUS  FELLOW:  Some  gum-
shoe  agency  which  compiles  dossiers on  suspected  citizens  is
worried  about  Dr.  James  R.  Killian, Jr.,  president  of  M.I.T.
whom  Eisenhower  recently  appointed  chairman  of  a commis-
sion  to  keep  tabs  on  the  Central  Intelligence Agency.  Data
on  the  sinister fellow  has  been  fed  out  to  Fulton  Lewis,  Jr.
This  shows  that  in   1U47  Dr.  Killian  opposed  establishment  of
a  State  Un-American  Activities  Committee  and  a  State  "At-
torney  General's  list"  of  subversive  organizations  in  Massa-
chusetts;  that  in  1948 he  opposed  a  bill  to  bar   Communists
from  teaching  in  that  State;  that  in  1949 the  Daily  Worker
quoted  Dr.  Killian in the  Struik  case  as saying  that  it  would
be  a  violation  of  academic freedom  to  remove  an   instructor
for  his personal  political beliefs; and that in  1954 he testified
on  behalf  of J.  Robert  Oppenheimer at  the  special  AEG  Per-
sonnel  Security Board hearing.   "Some  members of  Congress
concerned  with  security  hearings,"  Mr.  Lewis  said,  "are  be-
ginning  to  wonder."   We're  beginning  to  wonder  too,  but
pleasantly.                                 *
WORLD'S  MOST  AGILE  TURNCOAT  TURNS AGAIN:
Schacht, who helped betray the German  Republic to the Nazis,
and  now  claims  he  tried  to  betray  Hitler  to  the  Americans,
indicated  to  Edward  C. Burks  of  the  Baltimore Sun  in  an  ex-
clusive   interview   (Feb.  6)   that   he  is  turning  Eastward.
Schacht  thinks  the  Reich  should  "go  east"  for   reunification
and  talk  directly  with  the  East  Germans  as  well  as  Russia.
His  comment  on  his  own  people  was  sour.  "The  Germans,"
he  told  Burks,  "always  feel  what  they're  ordered  to."
BENEFICENT   INFLUENCE   OF    NIXON   IN    PRE-
SERVING  LATIN  AMERICA  AS  BASTION   OF  FREE-
DOM:  Our  glorious  Vice  President  had  hardly  left   Brazil
when  the  police  were  ordered  to  confiscate  all  copies  of  the
Communist   newspaper,  Imprensa   Popular,  for   an   article
indirectly  criticizing the  new  President,  Dr.  Kubitschek.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I~F. Stone's  Weekly, February IS, 195$
A  Text  No  White  Newspaper   Thought   Important   Enough  to  Print
2500  Americans  Ask  Hennings  Committee  to  Hold  Hearings  in  Mississippi
Though  a  growing  crisis  in  which  blood  has  already   been
thed  face*  this  country  over  integration,  most  white  paper*
in  Washington  and  the  UJS.A.  dismissed  as  "colored  people's
news"  (and  therefore   worth  only  a  few   buried  paragraphs)
the  presentation of  an  historic petition on February  S  to  Sen-
ator  Langer.   The  petition,  signed  by  2500  persons in  the  48
States, including SI 6 educators  and  124 ministers of  all  faiths,
asked  the  Hennings  subcommittee on  constitutional rights  to
hold  hearings in  Mississippi.    The  petition  was  presented  by
Methodist  Bishop Edgar  A.  Love of  Baltimore (the Baltimore
Sun  alone  gave the  story  full  coverage), and among the sign-
ers was  the famous  Prof.  J.  B.  Rhine  of  Duke  University  who
thereby  demonstrated  that  an  interest  in  the  extra-sensory
did  not  blunt ordinary  sensitivity  to justice.  The  text  follows:
We  appear  before you to  present  a  petition  signed  by some
2,500  persons  who  reside  in  all  48 states  of  the  Union.   The
signers  of  this   document,  acting  as  individuals,  urge  this
committee  to  conduct, as  soon  as  possible,  investigations  into
the  tragic  denials  of  constitutional  rights  now taking  place
in  the  State  of  Mississippi.
The  rights  and  liberties  guaranteed  by  the  United  States
Constitution   belong  to  all  living  American  citizens,  regard-
less  of race or  color,  not  merely  to  white  citizens  living  today
and  Negro citizens who may be born  at  some indefinite  future
time.  In- the  State  of  Mississippi,  a  dominant faction  is  defy-
ing  the  Constitution  of  the  nation,  flouting  the  authority  of
the  .Supreme  Court,  perverting  state  institutions  of  justice,
condoning  the  murder  of  Negro  citizens  who attempt  to-exer-
cise  their  civil  rights,  and  driving  f airminded  white  citizens
into  frightened  silence  by  economic boycott  or  the  menace of
physical  violence.
They  are  doing  this  in  contempt  of  the  declaration   under-
lying  our  national  independence,  that  all  men  are  created
equal,   endowed  by  their   Creator   with   inherent   and   un-
alienable  rights  to  life,  liberty  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness.
They  are  doing  it  in  disregard  of  the  Fourteenth   and   Fif-
teenth  amendments  of  the  Constitution,  which  declare  that
no  State  shall  deny to  any  person  the  equal protection  of  the
laws,  and  that  the  right  of  citizens  of  the  United  States  to
vote  shall  not  be  denied  or  abridged  on  account  of  race  or
color.  They  are  doing  it  in  defiance  of  laws  of  Congress  for
the  protection  of  the  civil  rights  of  citizens,  and  of  Supreme
Court  decisions  upholding  those  constitutional  rights.
Aren't  Negroes  People,   Too?
It  is  said  in  defense  of  these  systematic  violations  of  basic
law  and  human rights  that  the  relations  of  the  races  are  a
matter  of  "the  people of  Mississippi"  to  deal  with.   But  who
are  the  people  of  Mississippi?   Forty-five  per  cent  of them—
986,000—are  Negroes,  and  the  principal  purpose  of  constitu-
tional  guarantees  is  to  protect  minorities.  If  past  custom  is
to furnish  the rule  of present  and future  conduct, 45 per  cent
of  the  people must  continue  to  forego  rights  guaranteed   to
them   by  law,  in  order  that  65  per   cent  may  perpetuate
wrongs  in  violation  of  law.
Thousands  of  white  Mississippians desire  justice  and  fair
treatment  for  the  victims of this  oppression.  But  these  white
citizens  are  condemned  to  silence  by  the  same  lawless  forces
that  have  turned  the  whole  apparatus  of  state  government
against  the  colored  people.   How  can  the  Negro  citizens  of
Mississippi  hope  for   protection  through  the  machinery of
state government, when  the legislature  of that state is  under-
taking to assess penalties against all  persons, including agents
of  the  F.B.I.,  who  are  found  to  be  "interfering   with  state
law  under  the  color  of  federal  authority"?
What  confronts   us  in  Mississippi, with  active  efforts   to
spread  the  infection  to  other  states,  is  not  a  simple continu-
ation  of  past  abuses.   It  is  an  insurrection  against  the  Con-
"I  Tremble  for  My  Country..."
"With  them  life  is  cheap—a  Negro's  life  being  leas
than  nothing—not even worth  consideration. With  them
the  laws  are  made, not  definitely  to  be  obeyed,  but  to  be
either  respected  or  flouted  and  trampled  underfoot  as
suits   their  fancy.     Like   the   woozy,  Saturday  night,
small-town  bully  who  is  so  souped up  that  he  wants  to
take  on  the  whole  town,  Mississippi  (and  South  Caro-
lina,  if   you  please!)  has  placed  itself   outside  of  and
above  all  ethics  and law.  .  .  .  The lot  of  Negroes  in
Mississippi is becoming more hopeless and helpless  every
day.  I  beg  this  committee to  go  into  the  state  of Mis-
sissippi  for  the sake of  Negroes  now marked  for slaugh-
ter.  .  .  .  Did not  Thomas Jefferson  say,  'I  tremble for
my  country  when  I  reflect  that  God is  just  and Justice
does  not  sleep  forever'?"
—Mrs.  Andrew  W. Simkins,  NAACP  State Secretary
for  South  Carolina,  to  the  Hennings  committee.
stitution  and  laws  of  the  United States.  Says  Bouvier's  Law
Dictionary:  "Any  open  and  active  opposition  of  a  number  of
persons  to  the  execution  of  the  laws  of  the  United  States,
of  so  formidable  a  character  as  to  defy,  for  the  time  being,
the  authority  of  the  government,  constitutes  an  insurrection,
even  though  not  accompanied  by  bloodshed  and  not  of   suffi-
cient  magnitude  to  make  success  possible."   By  legal   defini-
tion,   the  uprising   in   Mississippi  is  an   insurrection,   even
apart  from  the  violence which  accompanies  it.
We  Live  in  A  World  Two-Thirds  Colored
The  problem  is  indeed  a  local  one,  not  made so by  the  spe-
cious  appeals  to  state  sovereignty  and  sectional  customs,  but
because  the   wrongful  conduct  and  the   resulting   suffering
are  local.    It  is  likewise  a  national  problem,  involving  the
capacity  and  willingness  of  Congress,  the  Executive  and  the
Judiciary  to  exercise  their  constitutional   powers.   And it  i I
finally  an  American   national  problem  in  the  world   vMhfc,
for  the  way  Negro  citizens  are  treated  in  Mississippi  and
other  parts  of  the  United  States  will  be  watched  closely  In
the  world  community  that  is  two-thirds   colored  and  one-
third  white.
Faced  with  these  blended  issues  of  simple  morality,  global
reputation  and  the  integrity  of  our  government,   we  appeal
to the  Congress  of the  United States not  to stand  aloof.  Least
of  all,  we believe, ought  the  Judiciary  Committee of  the  Sen-
ate  to  stand   aloof   when  the  Supreme  Court  of  the   United
States  is  under  systematic  attack,  not  for  any  misdeed,  but
for  courageously  upholding  the  equality  of  Americans  under
the  law.
"The  Congress,"  says  the  concluding sentence  of  both  the
Fourteenth  and  Fifteenth  amendments, "shall  have  power  to
enforce  this  article  by  appropriate   legislation."    Through
hearings  in  Mississippi,  the  Senate  Subcommittee on  Consti-
tutional  Rights  can  determine  whether  new  laws  are  needed
to  deal  with  the  crisis  in  civil  rights.  It  can  stimulate  more
effectual   enforcement  of  existing  federal  statutes.   And  the
committee  can  do  more.   By  throwing  light  upon  the  dark
happenings  in  that  state,  it  can  marshal  a  local, a  sectional
and   a  national  public  opinion   which  would  encourage  the
fairminded  white  people  of  Mississippi to  exercise their  own
constitutional  liberties and  help  to  establish  the  orderly  su-
premacy  of  law.   What  we  are  witnessing in  that  state  and
elsewhere  is  not  the  rise  of  new  forces  of  oppression but  the
desperate  flare-up  of  ancient prejudices which  the American
people,  North,   South,  East   and   West,  are   casting  out  of
their  minds  and  hearts.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's Weekly,  February  IS, 1956
A  Striking  New  Proposal  from  Peking  the  American  Press  Played  Down  or  Ignored
Chou  En-Lai  Offers  Chiang  An
Last  July  30  in  a  speech  at  Peking,  the  Communist  Chinese
Premier  Chou  En-lai.said  in  discussing Formosa  "If   possible,
the  Chinese  Government  is  willing  to  enter  into   negotiations
with  the  responsible  local  authorities  of  Formosa  to  map  out
.concrete  steps  for   Formosa's  peaceful  liberation."   This  was
the  first  hint  that  Chou  might  be  willing  to  negotiate  with
Chiang.   But  at  the  time  it  was left  ambiguous  by  the  phrase,
"local  authorities."   Did  this  mean  Formosan  local   authorities
or  did  it  mean  the  Nationalists?
This question  has  now  been  answered  by Chou  En-lai  in  his
speech  of  January  30,  but  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  the
answer  in  the  American  press  and  no  American  newspaper
provided  the  text  or  even  portions  of  it.   The  American  press
treated  the  January  30  speech  simply  as  a  threat  to  take  For-
mosa  by  force  if  necessary.  But  the  January  31  issue  of   the
London  Times  in  a  dispatch  from  Formosa  gave  the  text  of
Chou's   offer  to  Chiang.
"If  the  Kuomintang military and  political  authorities  come
to  see  the   inevitable   trend   of  developments,"  Chou   En-lai
said,  "and  are  willing  to  liberate  Formosa  by peaceful  means,
help  their great motherland  to  eliminate the  tension  and  bring
about  her  complete  unification,  they  will  not  only  perform  a
meritorious  service  to  their  motherland  but  also  contribute  to
Asian  and  world  peace.   The  Chinese  people  and  the  Chinese
Communist  Party  stand  for  unity  of  the  entire nation  against
its  external  enemies."
Chou  Suggests  "Bipartisanship," Too
Chou  went  on  to  make clear  that  he  was  not  merely asking
members  of   the  Kuomintang  to  defect   but  offering   a  truce
between  the  two  parties against  the  United  States as  they  had
once  had  a  truce against  Japan,  and  an  earlier  alliance  against
the  warlords  and  for  Chinese  unification.
"In   China's  history,"  Chou  declared,  "the   Chinese  Com-
munist  Party  has  twice cooperated  with  the  Kuomintang.  Dur-
ing  these  two  periods  of  cooperation the  Communists  and  the
Kuomintang  members fought  shouder to  shoulder  against  im-
perialism.    Even  during  China's  revolutionary  war  the   Com-
munist  Party,  while  engaged   in  the  war  of  liberation,  never
once  suspended  its  efforts  for  peaceful   negotiations."
Extra  Copies   of  This  Issue  Are  Available   for
Amnesty  and Direct  Negotiations
With  this  went  an  unconditional   offer   of  amnesty.    "All
those  who  want  to  take  the  road  of  peaceful   liberation   for
Formosa,"  Chou  promised,  "no  matter  whom  they  may be,  or
how  serious their  crimes  were,  will  be  treated  leniently  by  the
Chinese  people,  without questioning  their past.  All  those  who
perform  meritorious  services  in  the  liberation of  Formosa  will
be  duly  rewarded  by  the  Chinese  people  in  accordance  with
the  degree  of  their  merits.   All  those  who  come  back  to  the
motherland  peacefully  will  be  provided  with  appropriate  jobs
by  the  Chinese  people."
The  London  limes  seemed to feel that this was the most im-
portant  part of  the  Chou  speech,  for  its  headline  was  "Peking
Wooing   Chinese  Nationalists"   while  the  New   York    Times
headline  was  "Chou  Asks  Vietnam  Talks;  Threatens  War  for
Taiwan."   The  American press,  responsive in  this, to  State  De-
partment  guidance,  is disregarding  a maneuver which  (1)   will
impress  neutral  Asia and  (2)   marks a  sharp  new departure  in
the  campaign  Peking  radio  has  been  waging  to  undermine
Nationalist morale.
We  Overlook  National  Pride
Responsible quarters  in Washington  have been more worried
about  this  campaign   than  one  would  gather  from  the  slight
attention  given  it  in  the  press.   We  have  underestimated  na-
tionalist  feeling  in  the  Formosan  situation;  Chinese,  irrespec-
tive  of  how  they  felt  about  Communism,  have  been  proud  of
China's  military  successes  in  Korea  and  her   emergence  as  a
major  power  in  world  diplomatic  councils.  The  natural  long-
ing  for  home, the  feeling  that  Chiang's  cause  is  hopeless,  and
a  distrust  of  American  intention  have  all  contributed  to  an
eating  away  of  Nationalist  morale.
The  new  speech  marks  a  sharp  departure  in  that  for  the
first  time  Peking  asks  not  defection  or  what  the  Communists
call  a  "united  front  from  below"  but  direct  talks  with  Chiang.
There  must be quite a few  people  on  Formosa  who  believe  that
Chian^  \vould be better  off to  make  terms with  Peking  than  to
pursue  a course  in which  an aging Nationalist army will die on
the  vine  or  succeed  only  in  plunging  their  common  country
disastrously  into  war.
Bulk  Orders  of  100  or  More  at  5  Cents  Each
I.  F. Stone's
Please  renew
Street
City
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street
Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Zone
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4
City                                         Zone
Shall   w<> send  gift  announcement?
....State       -
(1 yr.)  additional:
2/13/56
....State
Yes  D    No  D
/.  F. Stone's   Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED