I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956oct01.pdf

============================================================

Louisville's  School  Head  Criticizes  Both  Parties  For  Ducking on Integration,  Page  2
VOL.  IV,  NO.  37
OCTOBER  1,  1956
<«>'     WASHINGTON,  D.   C.15  CENTS
Jefferson's   Real  Kin  Are  in  The  NAACP
Nowhere  in  the  world  more  than  in  our  South,  nowhere  in
the  South  more  than  in  Virginia,  is  pride  of  race  so  strong.
"Family"  overawes  money,  and  a  Chinese  would  find  himself
at  home  amid  the  ancestor  worship  of  Virginia's First  Fami-
lies.  Their  reverence  for  their  forbears  is  justified;  we Ameri-
cans,  old,  recent  or  new,  are  all  the  spiritual  sons of Virginia.
Jefferson,  who  wrote  the  Declaration;  Washington,  who  led
the   Revolution;   Madison,   the   father   of   the   Constitution;
George  Mason,  who  drafted  the  Virginia  Bill  of  Rights  in
1776  and  later  much  of  the  Federal  Bill  of  Rights  modelled
upon  it—all  were  Virginians.  Their  words  indeed  belong  to
mankind.  As  all  modern  men  are  to  some  degree  Greeks  and
Hebrews  so  they are  all  to  some  degree  Virginians;  wherever
men   struggle   for   their  freedom,  Virginia   is  .part  of   their
inspiration.
The  descendants  of  these  men  have just  demonstrated  in  an
unintended  way  the  fallacies  of  racism.   If  it  was  blood  that
counted,  then  the  men  in  whose  veins  there  literally  flows  the
blood  of  Jefferson  and  Washington  and  Madison  and  Mason
could  not  possibly  have  done  what  they  just  did  in  the Vir-
ginia  State  Legislature  at  Richmond.  They  voted   to  cut  off
funds  to  any  local  school  district  which  decided  to  obey  the
Supreme  Court and  extend  equality to  education. They,  whose
ancestors  believed  above  all  in  free  debate,  passed  a  kw   to
penalize  organizations "attempting  to  influence  public  opin-
ion"  in  favor  of  integration.  They  acted  in  the  spirit  of  that
White   Citizens  Council  handbill  which   affirms,   "We   hold
these  truths  to  be self-evident that  all  whites are  created equal
with  certain  rights;  among  them  are  life,  liberty and  the  pur-
suit  of  dead  niggers."   As  these  ugly  words  caricature  Jeffer-
son's  noblest  phrases,  so  these  legislators  caricatured  the  an-
cestry  they  worship.   In  their  frenzy  to  shield  the  purity  of
their  blood,  they  have  mongrelized  their  spirit.  Their  fathers,
in  striving  to  liberate  themselves,  helped  to  liberate  mankind;
the  sons,  in  striving  to  degrade  others,  degrade  themselves.
When  Jefferson's  race  could  act  as  the  Legislature  of  Virginia
acted,  it  is  clear  that  race  is  a  myth.    Jefferson's  real  kin  are
in the  NAACP.
Neither  Party  Dares  to  Mention  the  H-Bomb's  Corollary
Mr.  Acheson's  re-appearance  in  the  political  arena  last  week
contributed,  if  nothing  else,  the  finest  mixed metaphor  of  the
campaign.  After  saying that  we  appeared  to  be  "playing  Rus-
sian  roulette  with  an  atomic  pistol,"  he  added  that  "through
this  mile-wide  hole  in  the  line  the  Russians  scored  again  and
again  with  the  ball  carried  by  the  dove  of  peace."   We  ex-
pected  in  another moment  to  hear  that  while  the  dove of  peace
carried  the  ball,  Krushchev  was  preparing  to  steal  home  from
third  base.
The  former Secretary of  State  also  succeeded  in  further  con-
fusing  the  debate,  if  it  can  be  called  such,  over  the  question
of  the  draft.   Mr.  Acheson  thinks  we  ought  to  have  twice  as
many  combat-ready divisions  in  the  Army  as we  now  have and
is worried about  the  Radford  plan  to  reduce  the  Army  further
and  rely more on atomic retaliation.   But how does the Radford
plan  differ  from  Mr.  Stevenson's  belief  that  in  the  future  the
armed  services  will  need  mostly  specialists  and  can  dispense
with  the draft?   How  does  Stevenson  differ  from  Radford,  and
does  Acheson  disagree  with  Stevenson?
Much  that  Mr.  Acheson  had  to  say  in  criticism of  the  Re-
publicans  made  good  sense.   But  he  also  succeeded  in  high-
lighting  the  limited  alternatives  offered  by  the  Democrats.   It
is  true  that  Eisenhower   and  Dulles  often  left   "our    closest
friends  and allies ..  . scared to death"  but so, on crucial  occa-
sion,  did  Truman  and  Acheson.  As  the  campaign  shapes  up,
tin:  Republicans want  to  rely  on  an  ability to strike with over-
whelming  destruction;  the  Democrats  seem  to  think  we  need
10*                                                                                                    .;  i
an  even  more  overwhelming  atomic air  force  for  bigger  occa-
sions plus a larger  army for  smaller  operations,  though  Steven-
son says we  can mobilize  it  without  a draft.    Our  friends  and
allies  are  alarmed  by  either  alternative.
Nowhere  in  Mr.  Acheson's  speech  or  in  Mr.  Stevenson's  is
there  recognition  that  what  most  terrifies  our  allies  and  the
neutrals  is  American  unwillingness  to  see  that  the  only  sane
corollary  of  the  H-bomb  is  peaceful  co-existence.   How  keep
little  wars  from   becoming  big  ones;  an  army  using   small
atomic  weapons  from  shifting  to  large  ones;  hatred  from  be-
coming  tension  and  tension, war;  an  arms race,  from  a cosmic
blowup?  Mr.  Acheson still  talks the  language  of  the  cold  war,
and  the  cold  war  means  a  heavy  arms  burden  for  our  allies
and   costly  disruption  of   normal   trade.    What  primes   our
pump  is  breaking  their  back.
Mr.  Stevenson  has finally spoken out  on foreign  policy, with
a slap  at  Peron  and a hint that  he also  means Nasser.  But Mr.
Dulles  is  right  in  asserting that  Peron  was a  bipartisan  prod-
uct;  and  so  is  Nasser.  The  important  point  seems  to  us  that
what  Mr.  Stevenson says  of  Peron  applies  to  Chiang  Kai-shek,
Franco  and  most  of  the  governments  below  the  Rio  Grande.
Peron  was  not  the  only  dictator  who  took  American  aid  and
pocketed  much  of  the  proceeds.  This  is the  secret  of  the China
Lobby's finances and  an old  Latin American custom.   Does  Mr.
Stevenson  object  only when  the  S.OJ3.,  to  echo  a  famous  re-
mark  of  PDR's,  is  not  really  ours?   Does  he  object  only  to
fcuying  dictatcn 3 who  "will  not  stay  put?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone't  Weekly,  October 1,1958
Pupils  As  Seen Through  Friendly  Eyes
The  Little Noticed Testimony  of  Louisville's  Superintendent  of  Public  Schools
The  Lag Between  Negro  and White
MR.  HOTTELET: Dr. Carmichael..  . There has been  a lot
of  figures  in  the  press,  of  late,  about  the  alleged  racial  inferi-
ority  of  the  Negro.  In  your  long  experience  as  an  educator  in
the  South,  have  you  seen  any  proof  that  the  Negro  is  biologi-
cally  or  intellectually  inferior  to  the  white?
DR.  CARMICHAEL:  Well,  now, I  am  not  competent  to
pass  on  any question  of  that  kind,  but  let  me  answer,  not try-
ing  to  evade,  but  generalizing.
First,  I will  accept  the  anthropologists  and the  psychologists
who  say there  is  no  difference  among  races.
Then  let  me  say  that  there  is  a  vast  difference,  even  in  a
school  such  as  ours,  where,  for  ten  years^  we  paid  equal sal-
aries,  the  same class  size,  the  same  equipment,  the  same  library
facilities,  the  same  everything  that  we  could  make  equal,  and
teachers  with  proper  training,  our Negro  teachers  have  slightly
better,  slightly  more  degrees and  more  semester  hours  of  credit
than  do  our  white  teachers,  and  yet  at  sixth  grade,  for  exam-
ple,  our Negro  children,  the  median  Negro  child  is  practically
one  year  and  a  half  behind  the  white  child.
Now,  let  me  explain,  that  is  not  dealing  with  capacity,  na-
tive  capacity,  it  is dealing  with  achievement,  and  you have  this
whole cultural  poverty  in  which  the  Negro  lives, and, some of
you  are  sure  to  ask  it,  the  Negro  teacher  is  not  as  competent
as the white  teacher.    ...
MR. NOVINS . . . This problem  of the Negro children, be-
cause  of  the  environmental   differences   or  any  other   cultural
Both  Parties Failed
DR.  CARMICHAEL:  If  both parties  had  come  out  in
their  platforms, had come with  a  clear-cut endorsement
without any reservations, I guess everybody in the South
would have been helped immeasurably.  Each party fail-
ed  in  an  obligation  to  the  public  in  this  case.
MR.  MADIGAN:  What  would  you  say, which  party
failed  the  most?
DR.  CARMICHAEL.   I  have  no  way  of  saying  that.
They  ought  to  have  gotten  together,  and oh  something,
the   greatest   human  problem  of   our  generation,  they
ought  to  have  got  together  and  come  out  with  a  com-
mon platform-"
—Dr. Omer Carmichael, Superintendent  of  the  Louis-
ville, Ky., Schools  on  CBS  "Face  The  Nation,"
Sept.  ZS
differences,  being  a  grade  and  a  half  or  so  behind   the  white
children,  isn't  that  a  very  real  problem  now, when  you  are
trying to  integrate?
DR.  CARMICHAEL:  It  is  a  real  problem,   but  it  is  not  as
great  as  many  people  feel.
For  example,  if  you will  take  any sixth  grade  and  apply  any
standard  test  you  please,  the  spread  of  children  from  high  to
low  on that  standard  test  will  be much  greater  than  the  spread
between  the  median  for  the  Negro  and  the  median  for  the
white.   ...
—Dr. Omer Carmichael  on  CBS  "Face  The  Nation"
Eight  Johns  Hopkins and  Goucher  Teachers  Answer  Charge of  Negro  Inferiority
Socio-Economic   Status  Creates  Wider  Gap  Than  Race
Eight  members  of  the  faculties  of  Johns  Hopkins  Univer-
sity  and  Goucher  College,  teachers  of  psychology  and  educa-
tion,  took  the  editor  of  the  Baltimore  Sun  to  task  in  a  letter
printed  by that  newspaper  on  September  25.   They  challenged
his  acceptance  of  "data  recently  published  by  Dr.  McGurk  in
the  V.S. News  and  World  Report   [Sept.  21]   purporting  to
demonstrate that  Negroes  as a  group  are  intellectually  inferior
to  whites  as  a  group"and  that  integration  therefore  threatens
school  standards.
The  writers,  who  included  the  chairman  of  the  psychology
department  at  Johns  Hopkins  and  the  chairmen  of  the  educa-
tion  and  psychology  departments  at  Goucher,  challenged   both
Dr.  McGurk's  methods  and  his  conclusions.
Dr.  McGurk  cites  several  studies  which  show  that  Negroes
achieve  lower  intelligence scores  than  whites when  tested  with
standard  psychological  intelligence  tests.  These  critics  object
that  these  tests  have  been  standardized  on  white  samples  and
"thus  the  use  of  these  tests  on  any  but  white  children  is  sub-
ject  to  question."
Dr.  McGurk  contends  that  even  after  Negro-white  students
are  equated  for  socio-economic status,  the  whites  are  superior
at  the  higher  (but not  the  lower)   level.   But  this,  the  critics
object,  "assumes  the  possibility  of  a  social  equation   between
members  of  minority and  majority  groups  in  a  segregated cul-
ture.   It  is  extremely unlikely  that  such  equality  is  attainable"
under   segregation:   "In   Baltimore  for   example,   there  were
many  years  when  a  Negro  of  any  social  status  could  not  see a
A  Negro  Educator's  Reply
".  .  .  Negro  youth  in  Ohio,  where  there  are  better
schools available, measured higher in  the comprehensive
intelligence  tests  for army recruits  than the white youth
of  every state  in  the  South except  Florida,  where there
has  been  much  migration from  the  North.
"With historical  one-third'of the educational facilities,
Negro  youths have managed to do at  least  two-thirds as
well  as  Southern  white students  on  their  own  grounds.
It  is  a  tortuous  logic  that  would  use  the  tragic  results
of  inequality  to  establish  the  need of  continuing it."
—Dr.  Charles  S.  Johnson,  president  of  Fisk  Univer-
sity,  in  the N.Y. Times Sunday  Magazine, Sept. US
play  at Ford's from  a good  seat."
"And  now  to  your  concern,"  the  critics  write,  "about  what
integration  is going  to  do  to our  educational  system.  Permit  us
to point  out that  even  Dr.  McGurk's figures  show  that  the  dif-
ference  in  intelligence  scores  between  whites  of  high  and  low
socio-economic  status  is  greater  than  between  his  total  Negro
and  white  population  or  between  the  Negro  and  white  popu-
lation  of  high  socio-economic status.
"If  therefore  your  concern  for  the  best  standards  in  educa-
tion  were  genuine  you  should   be  just  as  concerned  with   the
possible  depressing  effects  of  the  poor  white  population  upon
the  schooling  of  the  rich  white  population  as you are with  the
effect  of  the  total Negro population  upon  the  total white  popu-
lation."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  October 1,1956
Glimpses  of  the  Labor  Movement:  A  Report  from  San  Francisco
Machinists  Union  Weak  on  Peace,  Civil  Liberties  and  Negro  Rights
By  James  Higgins
San   Francisco—Civil  rights,   civil  liberties  and   foreign
policy  continue  to  be  the  weakest  links  in  the  American  labor
movement,  the  two-week  convention  of  the  International  As-
sociation  of  Machinists  here  demonstrated.    The  resolution  on
civil  rights,  which  announced  the  union's  intention  not  to  get
"involved   in  any  of  the  current  controversy  regarding  the  in-
tegration  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court,"  was  hardly  distin-
guishable  for  pious  moderation  from  those  passed  at  the  politi-
cal  conventions  a  few  weeks  previously.  The  civil  liberties  is-
sue arose only  indirectly, when  the  appeals  committee  reported
on  the  case  of  five  members  of  a  Seattle  lodge  who  had  been
expelled  from  the  I AM  and fined $1,000  each  after  conviction
on  charges  brought  under  the  union's  constitutional  denial  of
membership  to  "anyone  who  advocates  or  encourages  Commu-
nism,   Fascism,  Naziism,   or   any   other   totalitarian   philoso-
phy  or  ism."   It  need  hardly  be  specified  which  one  of  these
the  accused  were  charged  with  advocating.
The  committee  report  made  much  of  the  fact  that  in  the
course  of  the  trial  conducted  by the  executive  committee  of  the
local  lodge  the  accused  were  accorded  the  right  to  testify  and
their  lawyers  the  right  to  cross  examine  the  undercover  agents
who  testified  against  them.   But  the  refusal  of  some  of  the  ac-
cused  to  testify,  and  their  failure  to  appear  "though  invited"
before  the  convention  appeals  committee,  were  given  the  same
significance   as  it  would  have  been  by  the  Un-American   or
Internal  Security   committees.
Dues  The  Big  Issue
The   Machinists'   convention   was  in  many  ways  attractive
and   impressive.   The   approximately   1500   delegates   worked
hard;  were  seriously  attentive  to  such  speakers  as  Stevenson,
Morse,  James  Roosevelt,  Patton  of  the  Farmers  Union,  Meany
and  Leon  Keyserling;  debated  frankly  and  reasonably,  for  al-
most  a  day,  before  voting  by  a  rather  dose  margin  to  double
the  monthly  dues,  in  part  to raise a strike  fund  of  two million.
But  the  issue  of  the  "disloyal"  Seattle  members   raised  not  a
word  of  debate.  And  of  course  no  delegate  challenged  the  use-
fulness   or  the  democratic  morality  of  the  constitutional   pro-
vision  itself.
Innocents  Abroad  and  at  Home
"Surely  we  of  Canada  and  the  U.S.   had  no  hand  in
bringing  this  danger  (of   global   war)   upon  ourselves.
Aside  from   occasional  involvements  in  the  troubles  of
the  Old  World,  we  have  devoted  ourselves  to  gaining
and  perfecting  freedom  in  our  own  political  and   eco-
nomic lives,"
—Pres. Al  Hayes  at  the Machinists  Convention
STATEMENT  REQUIRED  BY  THE  ACT  OP  AUGUST   24,  IBli,  AS
AMENDED  BY   THE   ACTS   OF  MARCH   3.  1933.   AND   JULY   2,
1946  (Title  59,  United  States  Code,  Section  2S3),  SHOWING   THE
OWNERSHIP,   MANAGEMENT    AND    CIRCULATION    OP
I.   P.   STONE'S  WEEKLY  published  Weekly   except   the   last   two
weeks  in  August and  December  at  Washington, D.  C.   1.  The  names
and  addresses  of  the  publisher,  editor,  managing editor,  and  business
managers  are:   Publisher,  Editor,  Managing  Editor,  I.  F.  Stone,  5618
Nebraska  Avenue,  Washington, IX  C.  15.   Business  Manager,  Esther
M.  Stone,  5618  Nebraska  Avenue,  Washington,  D.  C.  2.  The  owner  is
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  Inc.,  301 E.  Capitol  Street,  Washington, D.  C.,
I.  F.  Stone,  Esther   M.  Stone,  5818  Nebraska  Ave., Washington,  D.  C.
3.  The  known   bondholders,  mortgagees,  and   other  security  holders
owning   or   holding  1  percent  or   more  of   total   amount  of  bonds,
mortgages,   or  other   securities   are:   (If   there   are   none,   so   state.)
None.   4. Paragraphs  2  and  3  include, In  cases  where the  stockholder
or  security  holder appears  upon  the  books  of  the  company as  trustee
or  in  any  other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person  or corpora-
tion  for  whom  such  trustee  is  acting;  also  the  statement  in  the  two
paragraphs   show  the   affiant's   full   knowledge  and   belief  as   to   the
circumstances  and  conditions under  which  stockholders and  security
holders   who   do   not   appear   upon   the   books   of  the   company   as
trustees,  bold  stock  and  securities  in  a  capacity  other  than  that  of  a
bona  fide  owner.    5  The  average  number  of  copies  of  each  issue  of
this  publication sold  or  distributed,  through  the  malls  or otherwise,
to  paid  subscribers  during  the  12 months  preceding  the  date  shown
was  10,082.    (s)  I.  F.  Stone,  publisher.   Sworn  to  and  subscribed be-
fore  me  this  25th  day  of  September,  1956.    (s)  Bernard  M. Eshleman
[Seal]  (My  commission  expires  8/14/S7.)
.1   4  3
The  contrast  between  the failure  to  appreciate  what the  pen-
alty  of  expulsion  might  mean  to  the  worker  and  his  family  if
he  has  one  and  the  resolved  determination  to  enhance  union
members'  security,  pension  and  retirement  rights  was  one  of
those  ironies  which  the  Cold  War  anti-communist  hysteria has
introduced  all  through  American  institutional  life.    Nor   did
union   president   Al   Hayes  see  any  connection   between   the
union's  repressive  "basic  law"  against  advocacy  or  encourage-
ment  of  "isms"  and  the  nation's  "restrictive  laws  and  web  of
red  tape"  with  which  he  said  unions  were  beset.
Lily  White  Till   1948
One  of  the  convention  resolutions  cutely  proposed  to  add
the word  "segregation"  to  the  things members are barred from
advocating  or  encouraging.  This  device  got  the  cold  shoulder
from   the  combined  law  and   resolutions  committees,  as  did
another  proposal  which  referred  to  the  "ill  advised premature
action  of  such  organizations  as  the  National   Association  for
the  Advancement  of  Colored  People."  The  committee's  reso-
lution  on  civil  rights  was what  might  have  been  expected  from
an  organization  whose  leaders  state  the  relationship  between
discrimination  and  low  wages  but  who  head  a  union which  up
until  1948  retained  in  its constitution  a  clause restricting mem-
bership  to  white  machinists.
It  is  possible  Adlai  Stevenson  added  an  unfortunate  section
to  his  address  before  the  International  Association  of  Machin-
ists  here  after  he  had  been  apprised   of  AFL-CIO   President
George  Meany's  remarks  at  the  same  convention  the  day  be-
fore.  At  any  rate  Stevenson  inserted  a  few  paragraphs  which
were  not  in  the  printed  text  distributed  to  newsmen  wherein
he  paid   respects   to  Meany's  comments  on  the   international
situation  and  said,  among  other  things,  of  the  Eisenhower Ad-
ministration  "Why  don't  they  tell  us that  the  menace  of  Com-
munism  has  been  growing,  that  neutralism  is  spreading,  that
the  realities  are  grim  and  that  we  can  lose  the  cold  war with-
out   ever  firing  a  shot?"   This  was  practically  a   paraphase,
though  a  shortened  one,  of  Meany's  firebrand  attack  on  the
Geneva   atmosphere.
Meany  has  consistently  been  a  belligerent  cold  warrior and
Hayes,  who  seems otherwise to  have  a  great  deal  of  sense,  felt
obliged  to  devote  a  third  of  his  formal  speech  on  the  conven-
tion's  first  day  to  warnings  of  nuclear  conflict,  declaring  that
"the  danger  is now  more  intense  than  in  1952"—a  year when
the  Korean  war  was  still  with  us.    Strange  stuff.    I  heard  the
Stevenson   speech  and  was  torn,  as  I  usually  am  when  the
Democratic  candidate  addresses  himself  to  foreign  policy,  be-
tween  feeling  that he  believes it would  be  disloyal to  the party
to  praise  the  drift  toward  peace  and  feeling  that  he  actually
means  what  he  says.   Either way  it's  not  good.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, October 1,1956
Sidelight  on  Inflation
The  UAW last  week  issued  but  few  papers  published
an  analysis  of  the new  price increases  announced by  the
Big   Three  auto  companies.   UAW  pointed  out  that
GM's  annual  rate  of  profit  on  net  worth  for  the  first
half  of  this  year  was  23.7  percent  after  taxes;  Ford's
was  14.1  percent.   UAW  said  had  wholesale  prices  of
cars  and  trucks  been  cut  $100,  GM  would  still  have
earned  19.4 percent on  net  worth  after taxes;  Ford, 9.1
percent.  Steel  Magazine last  month estimated  the  steel
price  rise  .would  add  $14  to  the  cost  of  a  $2500 car.
Ford  has  raised  V-8  prices  by  $99 and  GM has  made  a
similar  increase.  Dealers  fear  a  volume market  in 1957
will  be  impossible with  higher  price tags;  labor fears  a
car  market  slump. UAW  points out  business  executives
making  price  decisions  also  are  active  in  the Adminis-
tration  and  it  therefore  shares  the  blame  for inflation.
White  House  Press  Corps Thinks  Ike  Did  Concur In  That  "Off Their Butt" Remark
It's  More  Than  "Sectarianism"  That  Ails  American  Communists
Not  Just  "Sectarianism":  How far the American  Com-
munists  still  are  from  understanding  their  own  isolation  may
be  seen  in  the  "Draft  Resolution"  for  their  National  Conven-
tion  next  February.   Nothing   is  said  in  its  discussion  of  the
Bill  of  Rights  about  the  Party's  main  vice—the  double  stand-
ard  by which  it  fights  for  civil  liberties  when  Communists  are
involved  but  stays  silent  or  applauds  when  other  factions  of
the  Left  are  persecuted.   Behind  this  silence  is  the  same  atti-
tude  toward  opposition  and  independent  Left  criticism  obvious
in  Krushchev's  Stalin-style  attacks  on  "Trotkyites,   Bukharin-
ites,"  etc. The  Communists  do  not  really  believe in  civil  liber-
ties,  except  for  themselves.   Indeed,  when  in power,  they don't
even  allow  free  speech  to  themselves.  The  Draft   Resolution's
discussion  of  the  Progressive  Party  is  appalling  in  its  smug
blindness.  The   Communist  talk  as  if   sectarianism  somehow
trapped  them  into  supporting  the  Progressive  Party.   Not  a
word  is said of  the  way in which Communist fractions  strategi-
cally placed  in  the  tail  of  the  party wagged  the whole  dog  into
sectarian  formulations  and  attitudes.  These  stultified  the Pro-
gressive  Party  and  compromised  the  fight  for  peace.  A  desire
faithfully  to  echo Moscow's  cliches  was dominant  in  that  oper-
ation.  The  same  unwillingness  to  look  at  the  whole  truth  is
evident  in  the  discussion  of  the  trade unions.  The  Resolution
says  "It  [the party]  rejects  any  policy  of  interference  in  their
internal  affairs."  This  is a  joke.  Even trade  unionists  friendly
to  the  Communists  have  had  to  fight  such  interference con-
stantly.   In  the  trade  unions,  as  in  the  Progressive  Party  and
other  mass organizations,  Communists  make  it  very  difficult  to
work  with  them  because  they  set  up  fractions  which  do  all
they  can  secretly  to  control  the  organization irrespective  of  the
rank  and  file  membership.  This  is what makes it  impossible  to
envisage  a  new  progressive  party  so  long  as  there  is  a  Com-
munist  party; the  Communists will  enter  the  new  organization
not  as  progressives  but  as  Communists, pursuing  purposes  of
their  own.  Even a  man  as  far  Left  as Marcantonio found  that
he  could  not  get  along  with  them in  the  ALP.  They  don't be-
lieve  in  majority  rule.  They  believe  in  manipulation  by  frac-
tion  in  accordance with  decisions  from  the  top  down,  their  top
not  the  top  of  the  organization  in  which  they  are  working.
"Off  Their Butt": Despite  frantic  disclaimers  from Hag-
erty,  newspapermen  on the White  House  beat  believe  the  Pres-
ident  did  express  agreement  when  George  Spence  of   Nash-
ville, a  candidate for  Congress  in  Tennessee's  Fifth,  suggested
that  small  farmers  "have  to  get  off their  butts  and  go  to work
like  everybody  else."    This  is  what  happened.    When   the
22  Republican  Congressional  candidates  emerged   from   their
meeting with  Eisenhower  last  Monday, they were  "divided   up"
among  waiting  newspapermen.    Spence   was  interviewed   by
Garnett   D.   Horner,   veteran   reporter   for   the   conservative
Washington  Star, which  is pro-Eisenhower.  The  Star  reprinted
Horner's  notes  verbatim  after  Hagerty's  special  press  confer-
ence to  "correct"  the  Spence  story. The  "off  their  butt"  phrase-
ology  reflects  the  big  farmer viewpoint  of  the  GOP  and  Eisen-
hower  himself;  both  feel  instinctively  that  if  a  farmer—or  in-
deed any other  man—is  poor,  it  must  be  his  own  fault.
Hat's Off: To MIT, where Prof.  Dirk  J. Struik,  last  week
resumed  the  teaching  of  mathematics,  in  the  wake of  the  Su-
preme Court  decision  last  May in the Nelson  case. That  the case
against  Struik  was a  fraud  is evident from  the  fact  that  Massa-
chusetts  authorities  never  had  the  nerve  to  submit  his  indict-
ment  (five  years ago, in  September  1951) to  the  test  of  a trial.
Next   Weeks   The  Outlook  for   The  New  Smith  Act   Appeals
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly, 301 E. Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed $5:*
Name  ....
Zone           State               ...
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name
10/1/08
City                                           Zone           State           .....
City                                         .Zone.          State.
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement 7    Yes  O    No  D
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St., S.   I.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED