I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956nov26.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive  Text:  How State  Dept.  Tried  to  Censor  the  SEPost  on  Franco  Spain,  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IV,  NO.  46
NOVEMBER  26,  1966«o«       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
16  CENTS
When  Tito  Jailed  Djilas,  He  Destroyed  Titoism
In  the  adjoining  box,  the  reader  will  find  the  essence  of
three  viewpoints  now   struggling   for   dominance  in   Eastern
Europe.  The  outcome  of  this  conflict  of  ideas  is  more  impor-
tant  than  anything  else  happening  in  the  world  today.   With-
out  socialism,  the  underdeveloped  countries  of  the  earth  can-
not  hope  to  develop  their  basic  resources and  raise their living
standards. The  risks of  development  are too great,  the resources
of  private capital  too  small,  the  enterprise  of  individual busi-
ness  men  too  haphazard,  for  so  gigantic  a  task.   But  unless
socialism  can  be  disentangled   in  the  minds of  men  from   the
horrors  of  the  police  state,  particularly its  Russian form,  reac-
tion  may set  in  and  hold  back  a whole  generation.  To  try  and
clarify  the  ideas  contesting  for  dominance  in  the  Soviet  zone
is the  most  urgent  political  task  of  our  time.
The  first  viewpoint,  on  which the  Soviet  leaders  for  all  their
differences  seem  in  agreement,  is  to  make  as  little  change  as
possible,  to  muffle  talk  of  destalinization.  In  Suslov's  speech,
commemorating the  November  Revolution,  Stalin was no  long-
er  the  monster that  Khrushchev  portrayed  last  February.  He  is
now  "a  prominent  Marxist"   (has  a  sense  of  humor  vanished
from   the  land  of  Gogol?)   who  performed.great   service  in
fighting  "enemies  of  the  people,"  warning phrase.  Yet  some-
how   the   cult   of   his   personality   led   to   "serious   mistakes"
(vague  and  growing  vaguer)   but  now  that  "Leninist  norms"
have  been  restored,  Party work  is  becoming  "livelier"   (had  it
been  dull?)  and  the  Soviet  people  are  "rallying   even  closer
(applause)"  around  their  Communist  Party.   In  this  Panglos-
sian  best  of  all  possible  Marxist  worlds,  Molotov  reappears  to
lecture  artists  on  the  need  for   "socialist   realism"   (not   like
that  decadent  Picasso)  and  Khrushchev  hints to  students  that
only  those  who  toe  the  party  line  may get  an  education.  These
are  again  the  lineaments  of  a  regime  of  "gendarmes  and  bu-
reaucrats"  as  the  Petofi  circle  in  Budapest  so  eloquently  stig-
matized  it.  But  events  will show  it  is no  longer  politically pos-
sible  even  in  Russia,  the  happy  land  where  there  is  always
unanimity.
Tito's  speech  at  Pula  five  days later  reflected  the  more pene-
trating  views  of  the  Yugoslav  dictator.  This  speech  merits  the
closest  study.  The  breath  of  reality  moves  through  it.  It  begins
to  lift  the  curtain  on  Tito's  mysterious  sudden  trip  to  Russia
with  Khrushchev.   He  found  there  "erroneous  and  defective
views"  of  what  was  happening  in  East  Europe,  a  ludicrous  re-
liance  still  on  that  gamey  old  scoundrel  Rakosi  ("They  said
that  ...     he  is honest")  and  the  folly  of  insisting that  if  he
were  replaced,  Gero  must  succeed  him.  ("Not   at  all  different
from  Rakosi"  is  Tito's  description.)   Tito  gives  us  a  glimpse
of  Hungary's   impact  on  the  Soviet  leaders:   "It   has  become
crystal  clear  to  them  that  not  only  the  followers  of  Horthy,
but  also  workers  from  factories  and  mines,  the  whole  people
1  2  *                                                                                                17
Three  Views  In  Conflict
"The  cult  of  personality  is  connected,  as   is  known,
with  the  name  of  Stalin. The  services and role  of  Stalin
in  the  October  Revolution,  in  socialist  building,  and  in
the  struggle  against  the  enemies  of  the  people  and  the
enemies  of  the  working class are commonly  known. Sta-
lin  was  a  prominent  organizer and a  prominent Marxist.
Yet  the  cult  of  personality  of  Stalin  brought  about  seri-
ous  mistakes and numerous  acts of  violation  of  socialist
legality.  .  .  .  Now, when  the  Lenin  norms  of  Party life
and  the  principles  of  the  Soviet  socialist  democratism
are  being  restored. .  .  .  Party  and Soviet  work  has  be-
come  considerably  livelier. . . . The entire  Soviet  people
are  rallying  even  closer  around  their  own  Communist
Party.  (Applause)."
—Suslov,  main  speaker  at  this  year's  celebration  in
Moscow   on   the   eve   of   the   anniversary   of    the
•   Revolution,  Nov.   S.
"It  is  not  only  a  question  of  the  cult  of  personality,
but  that  of  a  system  which  rendered the  emergence  of
the  cult of  personality  possible.  ...    It is  there  that  the
roots  of  the  evil  lie. .  .  .  Where  are  these  roots?  They
are  to  be  found  in  the  bureaucratic apparatus,  in  the
methods  of  leadership and  in  the  so-called one-man rule
and  in  the  ignoring of  the  role  and  wishes  of  the  work-
ing  masses."
—Tito's   speech   at   Pula,  November  11.
"Yugoslav  national  Communism  was,  above  all,  the
resistance  to  Moscow  of  the  Communist  party,  that  is,
of  its  leaders.  Not  that  the  people  opposed  this  resis-
tance,  not  that  they  did  not  support  it  and benefit  from
it—quite  the  contrary.   But  the  interests  and the  initia-
tive  of  the leaders played a crucial  and leading role.  . . .
In  Yugoslavia,  therefore, the  entire process was  led and
carefully  controlled  from   above,  and  tendencies  to   go
further—to  democracy—were relatively weak.. ..  Yugo-
slavia  supported  this  discontent  [in  Eastern  Europe]  so
long  as   it   was  conducted  by  Communist  leaders,  but
turned  against  it—as  in  Hungary—as  soon  as  it  went
further.  .  .  . This  revealed  that  Yugoslav  national Com-
munism  was  unable in  its  foreign  policy  to  depart  from
its  narrow  ideological and bureacratic class  interests    ...
it  was  ready  to  yield  even  those  principles  of  equality
and  non-interference in  internal affairs  on  which all  its
successes  in  the  struggle  with  Moscow had been  based."
—Milovan  Djilas,  once  vice  president  of  Tito's   Yugo-
slavia,  writing   on  "The  Storm  in  Eastern   Eu-
rope"  (the  New  Leader, Nov.  19),  an  article  for
which  he was  jailed  on Nov.  19.
are  fighting  in  Hungary.   Soviet  soldiers  are  going  into  this
fight with  a  heavy  heart  and  unwillingly."  The  most  damning
remark  of  all  came  when  Tito  said  there  would  have  been  no
need  for  intervention  if  it  were  not  that  "they,  unfortunately,
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone't  Weekly, November £6,1956
Can  We Support  "National  Communism"  in  East  Europe, But  Not  East  Asia?
What  Happens  to  U.S.  China  Policy If Peking  Demonstrates Independence?
What  If   Communist  China  "Rebels/'  Too?     This  is   the
question  which  most  disturbs  the  already  well-haunted   slum-
bers  of  State  Department   officials.   Last  minute  revisions  in
the  text  of  speeches  already  made  available  for  release  have
disclosed to  the  press  corps that the  Department  is  unable  to
make up its  mind how to handle increasing  evidence of  Peking
support  for  the  Polish  revolt  against  Moscow.  The  Depart-
ment  is  afraid  to  have  attention   focussed  on  the  wide  and
growing  gap  between  our  policy in  East  Europe  and  in  East
Asia.   In   East   Europe,  both  the  President   and  Secretary
Dulles have made it  clear  that we are  prepared to give  friend-
ly  support  to  national  communist  movements  which demon-
strate some independence of the  U.S.S.R.   In  East Asia,  there
are  no  such  nuances  of  policy.  There  we  are  against  Peking
period,  though  it  has  long  been  clear  that  Communist China
by  sheer  bulk  and manpower was never  a satellite  in the  East
European  sense,  where  Russians  could  act  as  a  superior  and
occupying  power.   It  is  also  well  known  that  Mao came  to
power  by disregarding  Stalin's  advice. What  happens  if  some
dramatic  event  makes  Communist  China's  independence  evi-
dent  to  the  ordinary   newspaper  reader?    How  continue  to
throw   good  money  after   bad   on  Chiang   Kai-shek?   How
avoid  a  fight  with  the  China  Lobby  at  home?  The  business
community  is  already  restive  about  the  trade  blockade of Red
China,  as  may  be seen  in  the  box below,  a  major  news  story
to  which  scant  attention  was  paid  in the  press.
Fade-Out  of  A  Hero:  Saddest  note  of the  week  was  the  an-
nouncement  on  the  real  estate  page  of  the  Washington  Post
(Nov.  17)  that  "Harry  P.  Cain,  former  U.S.  Senator   from
Washington  and  recent  member  of  the  Subversive  Activities
Control  Board,  has  been  appointed  vice  president   of  Indian
Lake  Estates,  Florida, a  resort  area  now under  development
by  Leon Ackerman  of  Washington,  D.  C."   Cain  will  operate
from  an   office  in  Dayton,  Ohio.  The  former  Senator  ruined
himself  with  the  Republicans  by  speaking  out  against  secu-
rity  abuses;  the  Democrats  were  too  cowardly  to  use  him  in
the  campaign and  exploit  the  issue.  Some of his  friends  had
hoped that  if  the  Democrats  won, a  place  would be found  for
him  in  the  new Administration.   Cain  sacrificed his  career  to
his  principles.   He  has  had  no  profession  other  than  that of
public  service  since  he  was  Mayor  of  Takoma,   Washington,
after  the  war.   He is  not  a  man  of  means  and  needed  a  job.
Shattered  Monolith:  The  Worker  last  Sunday  (Nov.  18)
said  its  $50,000 fund  appeal  has  slumped so badly  "we  do not
know  at  the  moment  how to  continue  publication."  A  front
page  appeal  admitted,  "In  part, the  slump is due to the  sharp
divisions  in  political  view  among  our  readers.   Many  do  not
agree  with  the  paper's  position  on  events  in  Hungary,  and
are  withholding support for this reason." A sample was a  let-
ter  of  protest  published  the  preceding  Friday  which  began,
"Your  editorial  sharply  condemning the  Soviet  Union for  the
use  of  the  Red Army  in  Hungary  ripped  through  me  like  a
jagged   knife   cutting  away  at   innards.   It   was  a  terrible
piece." To meet the  crisis the  Worker printed  an  appeal  from
"four   Communist  Party  leaders,   who  have  differing   view-
In  Memoriam
As  one  who  was  a  member of  the  staff  of  the  News-
paper  PM,  we mourn  the  death  of  Marshall  Field   III.
He  was  an  unusual  and  admirable  human  being  in  his
kindness,  his  instinctive  sympathy  for  the  less  privi-
leged,  his  troubled  conscience over  the  great  wealth  to
which  he  had  been  born,  his  sense  of personal  responsi-
bility.   It  is  something  to  remember  that  America's one
independent  non-conformist paper  of the  40's  was  made
possible  by  the  heir  to  one  of  America's  greatest  for-
tunes.   Field's  vision  gave  Ralph  Ingersoll's  genius  its
chance,  and  to  those  who had  the  privilege  of  working
on  PM  the  news of  Mr.  Field's  death  was  as  the  loss of
an  old and  honored friend.
points  on issues  vital  for  their  party  . . ." but united  on the
need for  supporting  the paper. The four  were William Z.  Fos-
ter,  national  chairman;  Eugene  Dennis,  the  General  Secre-
tary;  Benjamin  J.  Davis,  National  Committeeman,  and  John
Gates,  editor  of  the  Daily  Worker.  The  admission,  much  less
the  existence,  of  sharp  differences  in  the  party  hierarchy  is
something  new in  American  Communist annals.   Gates  is  the
"liberal";  Foster  the  standpatter.
Buzzing  Round  The  Capitol  Dome:  Democrats  are  gloomy
and  see  control  of  the  Senate  soon  passing  to  the  Republi-
cans;  at  least  one  elderly  Democratic  Senator  is  so  ill  that
his  death  or  retirement  is  expected  momentarily,  and  a  Re-
publican  Governor  will  name  his  successor,  making  the  Sen-
ate  48-48. . . . The Democratic  National  Committee is bitter
against   Senator   Gore  of   Tennessee,   feels  that   he  helped
frighten   campaign  contributions   away  from  his  own party.
...   A fierce struggle is being  waged  behind  the  scenes  to de-
cide  who  shall  succeed  Dulles  as  Secretary  of  State;   the
G.O.P.  "liberals" are  backing  Walter  Bedell  Smith,  the  right
is  grooming  General  Gruenther.  .  .  .A   bench  made  up of
Judges  Edgerton,  Bazelon  and Prettyman  (2-1 liberal)  heard
the  Rockwell  Kent  and  Walter. Briehl  passport  cases  in  the
Court  of Appeals here. . . . The Senate  Judiciary  hearing on
the  appointment  of  William  J.  Brennan  to  the.U.S.  Supreme
Court  will  give  the  reactionaries  on this  committee  a  chance
to  punish  him  for  a  speech  he  made  before  a  Boston  Irish
group  during  the  height  of  the  McCarthy  furore  attacking
the  witch  hunt,  and  a  later  speech  in  New Jersey  defending
the  Fifth  Amendment  and  criticizing  abuse  of  Congressional
investigation.  .  .  .  Observers  are  puzzled by the sudden re-
tirement  of  Martha  M. Eliot,  head  of  the  Children's  Bureau,
immediately  after   her  announcement  of  a  committee  to  in-
vestigate  the peril  of radioactivity  to children.  . . . One  way
to  hit  back  at  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee
is to lend a friendly hand  to the  American Committee for  the
Protection  of the  Foreign  Born.  The ACPFB  and  its  devoted
director,  Abner  Green,  is  for  the  umteenth time  a  target  of
Walter's   alien-hating  inquisitors.   No  hounded  organization
has  done  more  to  help  the  helpless  than  the  ACPFB.
Big Business  Spokesman  (To The  Left  of Geo. Meany) Advocates Trade  With Red China
Mr.  [Wm.}  McGaffin  [Chicago  Daily  News]:  "Well,  as  an
advocate of world  trade. . . . Would  you be in favor  of trade
with  Communist  China?"
Mr.  [John  S.]  Coleman  [President  of  the  U.S.  Chamber of
Commerce]:  "Yes,  I  am  in  favor  of trading  with  Communist
China.  I  feel  that  in  the  case of  Communist  China, if  China
wants  to  trade  in  those materials  that  are  non-strategic  in
their  nature,  that  we should  trade."
Mr.  [Jim]  Lucas  [Moderator]:  "What  is  a non-strategic
material,  Mr. Coleman?"
Mr.  Coleman: "Well,  a  non-strategic  material  would  be
one . . . that  could not be readily  converted so that  it  could
be  used  against  you  in  armed conflict."
Mr.  McGaffin:  "Well,  it  would  require  a  revision  of  pres-
ent  laws  to  permit even that much  trade?"
Mr.  Coleman: "I  think  it  would,  yes,   sir."
Mr.  [Ernest  K.]  Lindley  [Washington  Chief, Newsweek]:
"Are  you  suggesting  that  our  trade  with  Red  China  should
be  put  on  the  same  basis  as  our  trade  with  Russia  and  the
Eastern  European satellites?"
Mr.  Coleman: "Approximately,  yes."
—Reporters  Roundup from  Washington, Sun., Nov. 18
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  26,1956
Exclusive  Documentary:  Text  of  A  Letter  Showing  One  Form  of  Governmental   Crypto-Censorship
How  Pentagon  and  State  Dept. Tried  to  Censor  SEP  Article  on  Spain
Bureaucracy  is  bureaucracy  the  world  over,  and   the  State
Department  if  it  could  get  away  with  it  would  act  exactly  as
does  the  Foreign  Office  in  Moscow.  As  it  is,  State Department
and  Pentagon  operate  through  57  sour  varieties of  crypto-cen-
sorship  to  restrict  freedom  of  the  press.  One  way is to  get cor-
respondents  who  touch  on  military  matters to  submit their copy
voluntarily  for  security  clearance,  and  then  take  advantage  of
the  opportunity to  suggest  policy  changes.   Publications which
resist  this treatment  find  difficulties  in  negotiating  for  permis-
sion  to  send  correspondents  to  military  bases,  naval   exercises,
etc.,  and  may  be  barred  from  off  the  record  briefings as  "un-
reliable."
Rarely  has  it  been  possible  to  document  such  methods  of
indirect  censorship.   But  on  Thursday,  Nov.  15,  the  Moss  sub-
committee  of  the  House   Government  Operations  Committee
came  up  with  a  prize  exhibit.   This   subcommittee  has  been
studying  government  information  policies.    It  made  public  a
letter  in  which  Pentagon  and  State  Department  tried  to  force
general  revision  of  an  article written for  the  Saturday  Evening
Post  by  James  P.  O'Donnell  after  a  visit  to  U.S.  air  bases  in
Spain.   They  thought  it  might  offend  Franco.
The  article  was  submitted  Nov.   18,  1955,  and   published
Jan.  28,  1956,   by  the  Post  despite  these  objections  and  with
only  one  non-security  change   (see  below).  We  believe  evi-
dence of  an  attempt  to  censor  America's foremost  family week-
ly  is  news,  but  few  papers  seemed  to  agree  and  none  printed
the  letter  sent  the  Saturday  Evening  Post,  so  we  are  making
it  available  here.
Sample  SEP  "Indelicacy"
"There  was one sticky problem, however, that  General
Kissner  and  the  Spanish  tried  to  negotiate  by  sailing  a
bit  too  close  to  the  wind.   Spain  is  a  Roman  Catholic
country,  and  church,  or  canon,  law  is  the  law  of   the
land—above  all  in  such civic matters  as  marriage.  Most
Spanish  girls  are  baptized  Catholics.  .  .  .  Most  of the
American  airmen, however . . . are Protestant.  General
Kissner  requested,  and  seemed  about  to  get  a  "proce-
dural  agreement'  governing mixed marriages. The  deli-
cate   powwows  were  secret.  ...     It  is  hard  to  say in
Spain  where  the  government ends  and  the  Church  be-
gins.  . . .  When the New York  Times  broke  this  story
on  Christmas Sunday morning,  1954,  things  were  really
in  the  fan.  American Protestant  Churchmen  blew  a 1'oud
whistle,  heard  all  the  way.from  Washington  to  Madrid.
The  negotiations were  dropped. . . ."
—James   P.   O'Donnell,  "The   American   Invasion  of
Spain,"  Saturday   Evening  Post,  Jan.  28, 1956.
The  letter  itself  only  embodies  part  of  a  detailed  memoran-
dum  criticizing the  article.  This  memo  was  declared   "classi-
fied"  so it  could  be kept  from  Congressional  investigators.  We
suggest  that  the  Moss  committee  ought  to  follow  this  up  by
canvassing  U.S.  magazines and  newspapers  generally to try  and
learn  how  many  similar  cases  have  occurred.  What   happens
with  editors  who  have  less  character,  or  are  in  a  weaker  posi-
tion than  the  SEP ? We  will  be reporting  further  on  this  inves-
tigation,  and  on  the  Coolidge  report  with  which  the  Pentagon
is  trying  to  head  it  off  but  here  is  the  letter:
Text of the  "Security  Review" Letter  to the  Saturday Evening Post
[From}   Office    of  Ass't Secretary  of   Defense
[To]   Mr.  Hugh  Morrow,  Assoc.  Editor,  Saturday   Evening
Post                                              16  December 1955
Dear Mr.  Morrow :
The  Department   of  Defense  and  the  Department  of  State
agree  that  publication  of  the  O'Donnell  article  in  the  Post
would  seriously  react  against  the  national  security  interests
at  this time  of the  United  States.  We feel  there  is  a  possibil-
ity  that  publication  of  this  article  would  be  considered  offen-
sive  by Spanish  authorities  to the  point that  U.S.  interests in
Spain  might  be  prejudiced.
"Overall  Approach"  Called  Wrong
Our  objections  lie  more  in  the  overall  approach  than  in
specific  details.   Certainly  the  piece  could  be  quickly  cleared
up  insofar  as  military  security  is  concerned.  It  is  the  rather
sneering  approach  to  the  problems  and  limitations   of  the
Spanish  people about  which  we are  greatly  dubious.
For  example,  herewith  are  some comments  which  we  have
been  authorized  to  send  along  from  the  Department  of  State,
and  I  might  add that  they  reflect  my thinking  also:
"O'Donnell,  himself,  recognizes this  Spanish  trait  but  then
proceeds  throughout  the  article  to  make jibes  and  cheap  re-
marks at  the  expense of the  Spaniards—in  substance  to  ques-
tion  their  technical   ability,  their  war-making  potential  and
even  their  honesty.    A  few  specific  examples will  suffice:
'Franco,  that  Cincinnatus with  no  plow  to  go home to  ..."
'Spain  was  declared  a  pariah  country  by  the  united  Na-
tions,  an  outfit  including  such  history-making  peoples  as  the
Afghans  and the   Byelorussians.'
'.  .  . the  penalty  for  premature  anti-communism curiously
severe.'  (This  comment  is typical  of the  article,  in  that  refer-
ence  is obscure).
'.  . . second  place  in the Iberian  League.'   (This  would seem
1   8
to  be  a  promotion  of  Portugal   that  would  be   particularly
galling.)
'In  this  corner   the  Americans,  who  believe  that  time  is
money,  over  against  the  Spanish  who  regard  making  money
as  a  waste  of  time.'
Tough  World  for  Senoritas
'For  a  Spanish  senorita  to  make  a  decent marriage  today,
she  has  either  to  be  born  rich,  win  the  national  lottery,  or
latch  onto  a  successful  bullfighter.'  [Of  all  the  remarks  ob-
jected  to,  this  was  the  only one  which  did  not  appear  in  the
final article  when  it  was  published last  Jan.  28—IFS.]
'Some  graft  there  may  have  been,  since  Franco's  reputa-
tion  for  honesty  does not  extend  to  prominent  members  of  his
entourage.'
'. .  . a  pastoral,  donkey  economy.'
'. . . a  country  where filling stations  are rarer  than  cathe-
drals.'
'.  . .  it  is  ludicrous to  conceive, in a  wartime  situation, of
Spanish  pilots  mounting to  ward  off Soviet  bombers while  our
jet  Hot  Shots  stay  back  in  the  barracks  playing  canasta.'
"The  above is just  a  sample.   Mr. O'Donnell has  not  missed
a  single  chance to insult the  Spaniards  in their  most  sensitive
spots,  and  if  occasionally   accuracy  is  sacrificed,  he  seems  to
feel  that  the  purpose  condones this.  A  good  example  of  this
technique  is  the  crack  about  gas  stations  in  relation  to  cathe-
drals,  which  is  a  wild  exaggeration."
•   The   Department   of   Defense  recommends  deletion   of    the
following  on  the  grounds  of  strict  military  security:
a.  Last  sentence,  page  xxxxxxxx.
b.  Last  sentence,  first  paragraph,  page  xxxxxxx.
Sincerely,  Lee  Hargus
Acting  Director,  Office    of  Security  Review
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November £6,19SS
Tito  Wouldn't  Even  Let  Djilas  Write  Freely  Several  Thousand  Miles Away
In  Yugoslavia, Too,  Only  One  Point  of  View  Is  Permitted
(Continued  from  Page  One)
still  believe  that  military  power  solves  everything."   It  is  no
wonder that Pravda reacted violently;  this shatters  the Krem-
lin's  idealized  image of  itself.
Yet when the  chips are  down Tito  feels  obliged  to  stand by
this  same  leadership.  This  is  why  the  Pula  speech  appalled
the  Poles.  When  the  Hungarian  revolt  demanded  free  elec-
tions,  it  struck  at  the  foundations  of  his  regime  as  well  as
theirs.   He  is  against  Soviet  intervention;  he  fought  it  hard
in  his  own country;  but  he  approves  it  in Hungary  if  the  al-
ternative  is  the  overthrow  of  the   communist   dictatorship,
even  if  this  is  what  the  overwhelming majority  of  the  people
want.  Tito  admits  in the  speech that  in excusing Soviet  inter-
vention   he  is  being  inconsistent.    But,  he  asks  unhappily,
"what  is  the  lesser  evil,  chaos,  a  civil  war,  a  counter-revolu-
tion  and  a  new world, or  the  intervention  of  the  Soviet  troops
which  were there?"  He  adds,  "If  this  saves  socialism in Hun-
gary,  then  we will  be  able  to  say,  Comrades, that  .  .  . the
Soviet  intervention  was  necessary."   But  what  if  it   doesn't?
Has  it  not  already  shattered  the  Communist  movement  the
world  over?  Can  socialism be built with  bayonets?   Can Rus-
sian  soldiers  run  striking  Hungarian  factories?   Can  Poland
trust  Soviet  soldiers on its  soil  when this  is how they  will  act
in  a  crisis?. What  happens  to  the  keystone  of  Marxism-Len-
inism,  the  idea  of  a  temporary   dictatorship  of  the  toiling
masses  over  a  small  minority  of  the   exploiters,   when  one
sees  nakedly the  dictatorship  of a  foreign  power  over  a whole
rebellious  people, including its  own  Army  and  its  own Com-
munist  party?
Tito  is  closer to  the  people than  the  heavy-handed Kremlin
bureaucrats,  insulated  from  reality  by their  own  propaganda
and  security  apparatus.   But  Tito  is  no  more  disposed  than
they  to  translate  his  sharply  analytical  words into  actual  re-
forms  when  his  own  power  is  threatened.   He  said  at   Pula
that  they acted  as  they  did because  they  were afraid  of reac-
tionary  forces  in  East  Europe  and  did  not  have   "sufficient
confidence  in  the  internal  revolutionary forces  of  these  coun-
tries."  He felt  that  this  lack  of faith  was  "at  the  root  of  all
the  later  mistakes."   But  he  showed  the  same  lack  of  faith
and  made  the  same  kind  of  mistakes  when  eight  days  later
he  arrested  his  old comrade-in-arms  Djilas  for  a  critical  ar-
ticle  in  the  New  Leader  last  week.   Tito  said  at  Pula  that
the  evil  lies  not  with  "the  cult  of  personality"  but  with  the
system  that  makes  it  possible.   Djilas,  unlike  Tito,  has  gone
one  step  forward  and  discussed  the  question  of  what,  then,
does  one  do  to  reform  the  system?   Djilas  fell  from  favor
Readers  Are  Invited
Readers  of  the  Weekly  in  the  New York area  are  in-
vited  to  attend  a  special  meeting  in  the   Community
Church,  40  E.  35th  Street,  Manhattan,  on  the  night  of
Friday,  Dec.  14, the  eve  of  the  anniversary  of  the  Bill
of  Rights.   Events  in  Eastern   Europe  have  given  new
meaning   to   the   basic  freedoms  and   safeguards   em-
bodied  in  it.   How can  these  be carried  over into  Social-
ist  society?  To discuss  this question  the  Weekly  invited
a  group  of  independent  Left  and  Socialist  publications
to participate  in a panel  to  discuss  "The  Meaning of  the
Bill  of  Rights:   Socialism  and   Democracy:  East   and
West"  and  to  answer  questions  put  from  the  floor.  In-
vitations  were  sent  to Liberation,  the  Monthly  Review,
the  Militant,  Labor  Action,  the  American  Socialist  and
the  Socialist  Call  in  the  belief  that  it  would  be  inter-
esting  to  hear  their  diverse  points  of  view.  All  but  the
Socialist  Call  have  so far  accepted  the  invitation.   I.  F.
Stone  will be moderator,  and it  is hoped  to have  a  mini-
mum   of  speech-making  and  a  maximum  of   fraternal
discussion.  We want  especially  to  hear  from  our  read-
ers;  full  opportunity will be given  the  audience as  well
as the panel.
several  years  ago  when  he  advocated  abolition  of  the   one-
party   system.
This,  the  third  and  militarily   weakest  of  the  three  ideas
struggling   for   dominance  in  East   Europe,  will   ultimately
prove  the  strongest.  Titoism   is  only  valid  as  a   half-way
house.   Socialism  cannot  cleanse  itself  of  the  evils  of  Stalin-
ism  until  it  is  willing  to  abide  by  the  majority  will,'to  per-
suade  rather  than  to  coerce,  to  accept  a  step  backward  if
necessary  to  prove  its  democratic  sincerity.  What  is  "popular
democracy" but  a  fraud  if  the  people are  free  to  discuss  only
one  point  of  view, the  Party's,  with  a  capital  P,  like  the  G
in  God?  Tito  betrayed  himself  and  all  who looked  to  him  for
leadership  when  he  jailed   Djilas.   If  Titoism  will  not  allow
such  questions  to  be  discussed  even  several  thousand  miles
away   in   an   obscure   right-wing   Socialist   publication   few
Yugoslavs   (and  not  too  many  Americans)   ever   see,   then
Titoism  is  not  different  enough  from  Stalinism  to  be  a  model
for  the future of East  Europe.  Tito  has  demontsrated  Djilas's
point.  The  one  party   system  is  the  evil.   If  the  Revolution
after  all  these  years  is  still  afraid  of  the  popular  will,  it  is
time  something  better  were  constructed.
IFS Speaks  in Boston on  Eastern  Europe  for  The  Community   Church  Next  Sunday  (Dec.   2)
1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301  E. Capitol, Wash.  3,  D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed $5:*
Name
Street
City  ............  . ............................. Zone .......... ..State  ....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name ..............................................................................
11/28/56
City  .........................................  .Zone ............ State ....................
City  ..........................................  Zone ...... . ..... State ...... . ........ „..
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?    Tea  D     No  D
IF.Stone's   Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED