I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956oct29.pdf

============================================================

Eisenhower's  H-Bomb  "White  Paper":  A  Pompous  and  Hollow  Fraud,  See  Pages  2  and  3.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  41
OCTOBER  29,  1956
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Why   The  Workers   Rise  Against  The  Workers'  State
For  those  of  us  who  have  all  our  lives  regarded  socialism
as  our  ideal,  it  is humbling  to  see that  the  leading  role  in  the
convulsions  sweeping   Eastern  Europe  is  being  taken  by  the
working  class,  and  by  the  factory  workers  in  particular.  Those
to  whom  socialism  in  the  Nineteenth  century  most  appealed,
the  workers,  the  idealist  students,  the  intellectuals  with  a  con-
science,  these  are  the  elements  at  the  head  of  the  risings  in
Poland   and   Hungary   today,   as  they   may  be   tomorrow   in
Czechoslovakia  and  the  Soviet  Union.   It  is  not  the  ghost  of
the  dispossessed  bourgeoisie  nor  the  resistance  of  the incorrigi-
ble peasant  to  whatever threatens  his hold  on the  land;  it  is  the
reaction  against  Marxism-Leninism  by  those  very  elements  it
sought  to  serve  and  to  inspire.  These  risings  in  the  middle  of
the  Twentieth  Century  are  a  caricature  of  what  happened  in
1870,   in   1905   and   in   1917.   The   workers  rise  against   the
workers'  state.  The  epic  of  the  Paris  Commune and  the  Mos-
cow  Soviet  is  played  out  again  in  reverse.
Emancipators   Can  Become  Oppressors
It  is instructive to  notice  that  workers may be  aroused  to  the
same  kind  of  fury  against  their  socialist  managers  as  against
any  capitalist  oppressor.  This  will  not  surprise  those  of  us  who
have  been  in  Eastern Europe  and  caught  that  aroma  of  ruling
class complacency which  rose  from  the party  apparatus  whether
in  Stalinist Russia or Titoist  Yugoslavia.  The  men who  devoted
their  lives  to  the  emancipation  of  the  oppressed  are  too  often
and  too  soon  succeeded  by  men  who  now  take  it  for  granted
that  they  shall  have  the  Cadillacs,  the  dachas,  the  more  spaci-
ous  apartments,  the  fine  linen  and  the  servants.   Sometimes  it
is  even  the  same men.  This  would  not  have  surprised  the  great
anarchists  of  the  last  century; from  Bakunin to Kropotkin,  they
foresaw  that  a  socialist  bureaucracy could  also  oppress  and  ex-
ploit.  There  was  an  echo  of  their  warnings  in  a  contemptuous
reference  which  Gomulka  made  in  his  speech  to  the   Polish
Central  Committee  on  October  20.    He  spoke  of  those  in  the
leadership  of  the  Communist   Party  who  "felt  more  strongly
linked  with  their  comfortable  posts  than  with  the   working
class."   It  is  the  bureaucrat,  the  bureaucrat  with  secret  police
and  censor  at  his  disposal   to  protect  that  comfortable  post,
who  is  the  universal  focus  of  the  long  pent  up  anger  among
the  masses  in  the  Soviet  world.   More  fundamental  than  the
economic  problem  is  the  moral  and  institutional problem  im-
plicit  in this  picture;  men  will  suffer  want  together  in  the  pur-
suit  or  defense  of  an  ideal.   It  is  an  unjust  inequality of  sacri-
fice, a  high-handedness  among  those  who  claim  to  serve  them,
that  embitters  and  provokes.  ..No   condescending  stereotypes
about   "bourgeois   democracy"   can  hide  the   giant   lesson   of
events—the   worker   needs   the   secret  ballot,   the  opposition
party,  "due  process"  of  law  and  the  free  press  fully  as  much
"Liberationism"  Revised
How   Dulles  Welcomed  Gomulka
Mr.  NOVINS:  Well,   Mr.  Secretary,  you  have  been
talking  about  liberty  and liberation  . . . but this  isn't  the
situation  currently   [in  Poland]  is  it?    It's  a  case  of
changing  one  kind  of  Communist  leaders  for  another
kind.. . .
Secretary  DULLES: .  .  .  The  important  thing  from
the  standpoint of  the  United  States  is  to  see  a  breakup
of  this  great  so-called  monolithic structure ...     of  the
Soviet  Communistic  world,  because  that  is  a  great  dan-
ger  to  the  United States.
Now,    there  is  another  problem,  that  is,  what  is  the
internal  government  of  States?  A  great  many  countries
have  an internal government  that  we  don't  like  .  .  . but
we   do  not  believe   that   democracy   is  something  that
ought  to  be  imposed,  or that,  whether  or not  a  nation  is
democratic,  in  our  sense  of  the  word,  ought  to  deter-
mine  whether or  not  we  are  going  to  have friendly  re-
lations  with  that  country.
Mr.  NOVINS: But  if  a  nation-
Secretary  DULLES:  If  we  had  that  test,  we  would
have  friendly  relations  with  very  few   countries.
—CBS  "Face   The  Nation,"  Oct.  21.
1   1  *
.1  6
under  socialism  as  under  capitalism.  Otherwise  he  has  merely
changed  bosses.
How  Hard  The  Worker  Was  Driven
The   new  bosses,  sure  of  their  jobs,  secure  from   criticism,
fearful   only  of  purge  from  above,  may  mess  up  an  economy
and  hide  their  own  incompetence  from  view.   Gomulka  in  that
same  speech  acidly  analyzed  the  reality  behind  the  boast  that
in  1955  at  the  end  of  the  Polish  Six Year  Plan  the  output  of
coal—the  key  item  of  the  Polish   economy—was  20  million
tons  higher  than  in  1949  at  the  end  of  the  Three  Year  Plan.
This  is  the  sort  of  figure  that  is  customarily trumpeted  abroad
as  evidence  of  success.   But  Gomulka  showed  that  more  than
14 million  tons of  this  increase  was due  to  overtime work,  that
output  per worker per working day in coal  mining had  dropped
12.4  percent  in  1955  as  compared  with  1949,   and  36  percent
as  compared  with  1938.   "The  economic  policy  in  relation  to
the  mining  industry,"  Gomulka  said,  "was  marked  by unpard-
donable  thoughtlessness.  The  system of  work  on  Sundays  was
introduced,  and  this could  not but  ruin the health  and  strength
of  the  miners,  and  at  the  same time  made  it  difficult  to  main-
tain  colliery installations in proper  working  order.  The  practice
was  also  introduced  of  employing  soldiers  and   prisoners  in
some  of  the  collieries.  .  .  ."  This  glimpse of  the  actual  condi-
tions  in  Poland's  most  important  industry  tells  us  more  than
any  abstractions of  why  it  became  politically  necessary  to  put
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly, October 89,1958
White House Statement on H-Bomb Tests Begins With A   Fakificadon
All  day  long  last  Tuesday  the  telephones  in  the  press  room
at  the White  House kept  ringing. All day the  answer  was the
same.   No  hour  had  been  set  for  the  release  of  the  White
Paper  Eisenhower  had  promised  on  the  question  of  H-bomb
tests.  It  was not until after  6 p.m. that the paper was  finally
given  out,  for   immediate   release,  presumably  too  late  for
Adlai to  get  a  quick fill-in by telephone  and  revise  the  speech
he  was  preparing  to  give  that  evening  in  New York  City.
The  document started  impressively,  in  that  high  pompous
style  thought  by  Eisenhower's  ghost  writers  to  be  called  for
when  he  discusses  nuclear  arcana:  "I  have  concluded it  to be
in  the  public  interest"  (this  sounded  more  like  II  Duce  than
Ike)  "to  place  before  you—the American  people—and before
the  world—a full  and explicit  review.  . . ."  But what  report-
ers  got were  18 mimeographed  pages  hastily stapled together,
of  which nine were  merely  a  chronological  digest  of  disarma-
ment  negotiations  since  1945  such  as  could be compiled  (with
two exceptions)  from the  World Almanac or  any  other  handy
desk  reference  work.  With  this  was  a  four  page  statement
from  the President and a five page  document headed,  "Memo-
randum—Weapons  Tests  and  Peaceful   Uses  of  the  Atom,"
the  kind  of  outline  one prepares  for  a  busy  executive  who
does  not  wish  to  be bothered  with  too many  details.  The  only
new  revelation  came  in  the  chronology  which  showed that  in
June  1954 and  again  in June.  1955  the  question  of  suspending
H-bomb  tests  was  discussed  at  Cabinet  level  and  rejected.
Only  Limitation   Promised
The  Eisenhower  statement  began  with  a  major   falsifica-
tion.  To say  that  the  government  "has  repeatedly  stated  its
readiness, indeed  its  anxiety, to  put  all  nuclear  weapons  per-
manently  aside—to stop  all tests of such  weapons . . ." is not
true.  American  military policy  is today  based squarely on the
use  of  nuclear  weapons.   The  chronology  states  the  case  cor-
rectly  when  it  summarizes  our  latest  disarmament   offer   as
made by Stassen  on April  23 to  the  UN subcommittee  in  Lon-
don.  We are  "prepared  to  agree  to restrictions on the  testing
of  nuclear  weapons provided there has  been agreement  on  an
effective   limitation  of  nuclear   weapons  under  proper   safe-
guards  .  .  .  and provided  this  agreement  limiting  nuclear
weapons has  been satisfactorily  carried  out."  (Italics  added.)
The  Eisenhower  Administration  has  never   gone  beyond  an
offer  to  limit  tests  and  limit  nuclear  weapons.
II
It  is  because  the  military  are  trying to  commit  us  irrevo-
cably  to  nuclear  war  that  so much  stress  is  being  placed  on
the  need  for  testing  in  order  to  develop  "humane"  bombs.
"The   most  recent  tests,"  the  President  said,  "enable  us  to
harness  and  discipline  our  weapons  more  precisely  and  ef-
fectively—drastically  reducing their  fallout  and making them
more  easy  to  concentrate,  if  ever  used,  upon  military  objec-
tives." This  amount  of fallout  can be reduced by reducing  the
ratio of fissionable uranium  in  the fission-fusion-fission bomb;
and  smaller  bombs  are  not  as  terrible  as  bigger  bombs.  But
it  is  a  delusion to  believe that  if  war  comes, the  bigger  and
more  terrible  bombs  would  not   ultimately   be  used.   Lord
Montgomery,  deputy  chief  of  NATO, said  recently  "If   any-
one  in  the  world  starts  aggression   we  shall  give  them  the
works from  the word go, with  Atom and  Hydrogen bombs, and
the  biggest  things  we've  got ...    I  wouldn't  mind  the  conse-
quences."
This  effort  to  improve the  public  relations  of  the  H-bomb
was  dealt with  at  Atlanta  on  October 10 in  a  speech made to
the  annual  conference  of  the  U.S.  Civil  Defense  Council  by
Congressman  Chet  Holifield   of  California.  As  a  long  time
member  of  the  Joint  Congressional Committee on Atomic  En-
ergy  and  chairman  of  the  House  subcommittee  which held  ex-
tensive hearings  on civil defense this year,  Holifield  can  speak
Rugged  Individualism  in  The  Nuclear  Age
Every  Man  for   Himself
If  the  H-Bomb  Falls
"Survival  in  such  an  unhappy  eventuality  [of  an  H-
bomb  attack]  would  depend  largely  on  what  prior  pre-
cautions  had been  taken  by  individuals  and  families  for
their  own  safety,  in  line  with  the  recommendations  of
the  civil  defense  authorities.  .  .  .  The Government,  re-
gardless  of  the  extent  of  its  planning  or  of  how  many
billions  of  dollars  it  might  spend  on civil  defense,   can-
not  assume responsibility  for  the safety  of its  individual
citizens after  the  bombs or missiles  have  started  falling.
At  that  point,  survival  will  depend  largely  on  how  well
we  have  learned  the  lessons  of  civil  defense,  as  indi-
viduals  and families—to  what  extent  we  have  prepared
home   shelters,   stocked   emergency   supplies   and   ac-
quainted  ourselves  with  decontamination  procedures.  It
will  depend  also  on  how  well  we  understand  the  prob-
lems of  the lingering dangers  of fallout.  If  a  nuclear  at-
tack   should  be  made  upon  us,  the  decision  of  life  or
death—for   the  individual—may  have  long  since  been
made  by  him,  in  indifference  or  in  healthy  solicitude."
—AEC   Chairman  Strauss   to  the  Joint    U.S.-Canada
Civil Defense  Committee, Battle Creek, Mich, Oct. 19
Ours  not  to  question  why when  the  secret  decisions
are  made  that  may  precipitate  nuclear  war,  but  once
the  bombs  fall—we're  on  our  own.
with  authority.   "The  representations   by  Admiral  Strauss,"
Holifield  said,  in  a  speech  which  has  been  given  little  news-
paper  attention, "to  the  effect  that  the  fallout  hazard  can be
minimized  and  nuclear  war  made  more  humanitarian,   over-
looks one  important  factor.  . . . The cold, hard,  brute  facts of
planning in a  nuclear  age argue  in favor  of the  'dirty'  weap-
on  because it  gives far  more 'bang  for a buck'.. . . Those who
are  responsible  for   civil  defense  planning   in  this   country
would  be  unrealistic  if  they   assumed  other  than  that  the
worst  kind  of  weapon would be  used  and  that  the  worst  pos-
sible  fallout  conditions would follow  a  nuclear  attack  on this
country."
A  great  Indian   statesman,  C.  Rajagopalachari,   the  last
Governor  General  of  India, writing in  Peace  News  (London)
Sept.  28  put  this  whole  campaign  into  perspective  when  he
said, "Military  activities in  research  on both  sides  at  present
appear  to  be  assiduously  engaged  in  the  designing  of  rela-
tively  milder nuclear weapons. . . . The hope is that a  nuclear
war  can  be  designed  which  will  not  mean  the  wiping  out of
civilization. . . . But the hard  truth is that war in the atomic
age cannot be limited.  ...    At the  moment when the  crisis of
defeat  is  reached  and  surrender  must  be faced, no  considera-
tions will have weight  enough to  deter  the  use of  the  thermo-
nuclear  H-bomb. .  . ."  The notion that  H-bomb  warfare  can
somehow  be made humane is  a  menace to  the  future  of man-
kind.
Ill
Coupled  with  this  notion  is  the  new argument  for  H-bomb
tests  put  forward  by  AEC  Chairman  Strauss  and  echoed  in
the  White  House statement.  This  is that  the  tests are  needed
because,  as  Eisenhower  said,  they  develop  "knowledge  vital
to  our  whole program  of  civil  defense."  This  argument  was
unveiled  and  developed  by  Admiral  Strauss  the  week  before
in the  speech  he made to the Joint  U. S. Canada  Civil Defense
Committee  at  Battle  Creek, Michigan, on October 19.  "In  or-
der  to  provide our  people with  the  guidance and  instruction
which  may later  save their  lives," .Strauss declared,  "the  civil
defense  authorities   need  constant  access  to  new  and  up-to-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone'*  Weekly,  October  t9,19S8
. . . And Inadvertently  Discloses A Lost  Opportunity  to Win The Initiative
date  information   about  the  effects  of  nuclear  weapons  of  all
types  and sizes.... The only source  of this data  so necessary
to civil  defense planning," he continued,  "is  the  actual testing
of  nuclear  weapons.  . . . The survival  of our own people and
the  civilian  populations  of the entire free  world  depends . . .
on  information  which is  derived  from  our  own carefully  con-
trolled  nuclear  tests."
This  is  without  a  doubt the  largest  explosion  of  thermonu-
clear  hot  air  yet  to  be staged by the  Atomic  Energy  Commis-
sion.   The  answer  is  threefold.  1.  We  have  no  real  civil  de-
fense  to  speak  of.  2.  Secrecy  and  red  tape  keep  its   officials
from  knowing what  the  AEC is  doing.  3. It  makes  little dif-
ference  to civilians whether  they are hit by a ten kiloton  or a
ten  megaton  bomb; they  won't  know the  difference.
A  Phantom   Program
The  best  picture  of  civil  defense  realities  comes  from  the
chairman  of  the  Congressional   subcommittee  which  has  just
finished  investigating  it.  In that  speech  at  Atlanta,  Georgia,
Congressman  Holifield told  the  fifth  annual  conference  of  the
U.  S.  Civil  Defense  Council, "We have  in  this  nation  today  a
kind  of  'make  believe'  civil  defense,  directed  by well  meaning
bureaucrats  in  Washington  who scurry  around  with  an  im-
portant  air  but who don't  quite  know what  they  are about....
There  is  nothing  facetious,"  he  went  on,  "in  my  remarks
about  this  'phantom'   civil  defense  program.  ...    No one has
yet  invented  any  magic  formula  for  moving  millions  of  peo-
ple  from  congested  metropolitan  areas  in  a  few  minutes,  or
even  in a few hours.  . . . No one has yet devised  any means
for  sheltering  people from  lethal  fallout  radiation  along  exit
routes."
Last July  27 the  Holifield  Committee  (the Military  Affairs
subcommittee  of  the  House  Government  Operations  Commit-
tee)  released  a report, "Civil  Defense for  National  Survival."
This provides some glimpses which show one how hollow is  the
Strauss  picture  of  AEC  and  civil  defense  working  hand  in
hand  to  use  bomb  tests  for  the  protection  of  civilian  popula-
tions.  "While  the  AEC insists,"  the  report  says  at  page 12,
"that  its  information  is  available  for  civil  defense  purposes,
the  subcommittee notes  that  publications  dating  back  7 or  8
years  on biological  and  medical  effects  of  radiation  only  now
are  being  released." Again,  on page 61, the  report  says,  "The
FCDA  [Federal  Civil  Defense  Administration]  is  not  in  a
position  to  utilize  fully  and  properly  the  enormous  resources
of  the  military  agencies  and  the  AEC  [Atomic  Energy  Com-
mission]  partly  because  of  its  lack  of  scientific  and  technical
personnel   and   partly   because   of   security   requirements."
Those who know, say  this  is understatement.
It  wouldn't  make  much  difference  anyway.    Let  us  turn
again  to  the  report.   At  page  80-81  are  words  which  some-
body  ought  to  put  into  every  newspaper  in  America  so  peo-
ple  could  realize  the  full  gravity  of  what  is  involved  in  this
controversy.    "A  close  reading  of  [Civil  Defense]  Adminis-
trator  Peterson's  testimony,"  the  report  says,  "strongly sug-
gests  that  he entertains  great  doubt  about  the  value  of  civil
defense  planning in  the  face  of the  high  yield nuclear weapon
threat.   He  came  out  early  in  his  prepared  statement  with
this  dramatic   description   of  his  occupation:   'I   have  been
staring  into  hell for three  years.  . . .'  He envisaged  a  bleak
wasteland,  with  tens  of  millions  of  dead  and  injured,  the
desolate  survivors  living  in  the  most  wretched  way,  eating
gruel,  covered  with  rags, sleeping anywhere  they  can. He in-
sisted  to  the  committee that  he  would not  be a  party  to  any
pretense  that  America can 'delegate, and  by planning, and by
thinking*  ready  itself   for  this  holocaust  by  normal  peace-
time  methods."   Finally,  and  this  applies  to  Strauss  and  the
whole  Eisenhower  Administration,  Peterson  "stated  his  con-
tempt  for  anybody who  attempts  to  minimize the  sheer  de-
structiveness  and  death  and  desolation  that  will  befall  man-
kind  if  these  weapons  are  dropped."
.1  6
Sample  Warnings  Ike  Ignores
"The  [National  Academy  of  Sciences]  report  states
that,  except  for  accidents,  the  biological  damage  from
peacetime activities,  which include the  testing  of atomic
weapons,  has  been 'essentially  negligible.'   For  a  fuller
statement  .  .  .  the  entire  report  of  the  National  Acad-
emy  of  Sciences  should  be  examined."
—Memorandum  released  by  the  White House, Oct. 24.
"At present, the  amount  of  SR  90  in  the stratosphere
from  nuclear weapon tests  is  far  too small  to approach
maximum  permissible  concentration  even  if  it  were  all
to  be  deposited now.  However,  if  the  testing  programs
of  the  several  countries producing thermonuclear weap-
ons  were  to  intensify,  stratospheric  storage  time  may
become  a  critical item in  terms of  hazard to mankind."
—Page  60,  Summary  Reports,  National  Academy of
Sciences.
"The  fall-out  from  weapons testing  has,  so  far,  led  to
considerably   less   irradiation  of   the   population  than
have  the   medical   uses—and  has   therefore  been  less
detrimental.   So  long  as  the  .present  level  is   not  in-
creased  this  will  continue to  be  true; but  there remains
a  proper  concern to  see  to  it  that  the  fall-out does not
increase to more serious levels....  We ought to keep  all
of  our expenditures of  radiation as low as possible. .   ..
From  the  point  of  view  of  genetics  they  are  all  bad."
—p.  SO, Same.
"First,  since  any  additional radiation  is  genetically
undesirable  the fall-out dose is  genetically undesirable."
—p.  27, Same.
"It  appears, then, that  strontium 90  is  not  a  current
threat,  but if  there were  any  substantial increase in  the
rate  of  contamination  of  the  atmosphere,  it  could  be-
come  one."
—p.  81, Report  to the Public, National Academy.
IV
Against  this  background,  the  treatment  of  the  Bulganin
letter  by the  White  House for  a  supposed  political  advantage
in the final wrassle of the campaign  was cheap press  agentry.
It  is a  measure of our national  sickness that  debate suddenly
switched  to  who  Bulganin  was  for—Eisenhower  or  Steven-
son.   Everybody in  this  country  strives  to  follow  Communist
party  line  counter   clockwise;  the   compass  of  our   destiny
swings  in  reaction  to  Moscow;  the  lodestar  of  our  policy  is
not  our  national  interest  but  a  panicky  determination  never
to  be caught  agreeing  with  the  Russians.
But  the  proposal  to  end  H-bomb  tests  began  in  the  British
House  of  Commons  after  the  Bikini fallout  in  March  1954.
The  first  figure  of  world prominence to  take  it  up  was Nehru,
on  March 29 of that  year.   Moscow  was  at  first  as  opposed  as
we. When  Hearst  interviewed  Bulganin  in  Moscow  on  Febru-
ary  12 of  last  year,  Bulganin  dismissed  a  ban  on tests  as  un-
important.   "If  we limited  or  discontinued  altogether  the  ex-
periments  in  that  field,"  Bulganin  told  Hearst,  "what  would
that  give  to  the  people?  In  fact  nothing  because  both  sides
would  retain"—their  bombs.   It  was  not  until  November 28
of  last  year,  two  days   after   Russia  tested  what  it   claimed
was  the  biggest   H-bomb  ever,  that  Moscow  declared  itself
ready  to  negotiate  an  end  of tests.  Apparently  the  Russians
were  unwilling  to  stop  testing  until  they  had  tested  their
own  new bomb.
If  Eisenhower in June,  1954, had  decided to  call  for  a  world
halt  of  tests,  he  could  have  had  the  moral  initiative  then—
and  perhaps  blocked  a  test  of  the  new  Russian  weapon.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 29,  1956
This  Is  The  1848  of  the  Soviet  World
(Continued  from  Page  One)
a  man  like  Gomulka  at  the  head  of  the  Polish  regime,   indeed
it  explains  why the  regime  and  the  Russians  needed  Gomulka
so  badly  that  he  could  bargain  and  insist  on  his  own  terms.
When  I  was  in  Warsaw  last  spring,  the  same  people  who
boasted  that  they  had  resisted  Russian  demands  for  a  "show
trial"  of  Gomulka   and  saved  his  life  were  as  insistent   that
Gomulka  would  never  come  back  in  the  party  or  the  govern-
ment.   Obviously  they,  like  the  Russians,  underestimated  the
strength  of  the  tide  set  in  motion  by  the  Twentieth   Congress
in  the  Soviet  Union  and  overestimated  the  power  of  the  party
apparatus  to keep  the  popular  upsurge  of  hope  within  the  safe
bounds  of  comfortably  vague  fulminations  against  "the  cult  of
the  individual."   I  felt  then  that  Poland,  because  of  its  spirit
and  traditions,  would   (rather  than  Yugoslavia)   take  the  lead
in  the  Soviet  world  toward  more  concrete  changes.   It  is  clear
now  that  economic  disintegration   and  popular  discontent  had
been  growing  to  the  point  where  a  Gomulka  in  Poland  and  a
Nagy  in  Hungary  had  become  urgent  necessities.  They  were
necessary  as  symbols  of  some  real  change.   No   one,   perhaps
not  even  Gomulka  or  Nagy,  really  know  what  they  stand  for
in  terms  of  a  program;  both  are  perhaps  too  old  in  Commu-
nist  party  ways  really  to  understand  the  cry  for  freedom.   But •
their  political  power  in  this  juncture  arises  from  the  need  of
the   masses  to  see  at  the  head  of  the  government   someone
whose  sincerity has  been  certified  by  persecution,  whose  spirit
has  been  purged  by  suffering.  Above  all  in  Warsaw  as  in  Bu-
dapest  the  masses  wanted  someone  who  had  suffered   at  the
hands  of  the  Russians  and  their  stooges  and  could  therefore  be
trusted  to  express  wounded  national   sensibilities   against   the
occupying  Power  and  the  Russian-style Communist  bureaucrat.
The  Holy  Alliance  of  Communism
This  is  the   1848   of  Communism.   In   1848,   the  February
revolution   in   Paris   set   off  a   chain  reaction   across   Europe
against  that  hated  combination  of  secret  policeman  and  priest
which  was  symbolized  in  the  Holy  Alliance  and   Metternich.
Within  a  few  months  half  the  thrones  in  Europe  had  been
overturned  and  constitutions  exacted  from  the  remainder  by  a
revolutionary  bourgeoisie  sick  of  the  decayed  alliance  of  feu-
dalism  and  clericalism. A  century later  we  see a  similar  rising,
this time by the  working  class  in Eastern Europe against a simi-
larly  ubiquitous  secret  police  enforcing  a  new  sacred  dogma
and  maintaining a  new  lay priesthood  in  power  under commu-
nism.  Poznan and  Poland  have ignited  a  new  revolt  under  far
more  difficult   circumstances,  though  remarkably alike  in  sur-
face  detail.  Thus  in  the  boasted  age  of  atomic  bomb  and  jet
plane,  the  urban  mob,  the  student  rally,  even  the  barricade
make their  reappearance  and  exert  their  power.  Tito,  who  led
the  first  revolt  against  Stalinism,  now  holds  back;  it  is his  own
heretic,  Dedijer,  who hails the  Polish  revolutionaries.  The  Yu-
goslav  and  Russian  bureaucrats  discover  a  mutual  interest  in
putting  the  brakes  on  this  revolt  against  bureaucracy,  and  in
Budapest  for  the  first  time  the  demonstrators  demand  an  end
of  the  one-party  system—an  historic  moment.   For  without  a
legal  opposition,   there  can  be  no  real  reform  of  communism,
no  real  democratization.
The  Danger  To  and  From  Moscow
Danger  besets  this  new  revolution  on  every  hand.  There  is
the  danger  of  sliding  back  into  an  East  European  morass  of
black  clerical  reaction  supported  by  the  West,  as  Horthy  and
Pilsudski  once  were.  There  is  the  danger  that  Russia,  fearing
the  loss  of  its  new  cordon  sanitaire  in  Eastern  Europe,  may
intervene    more   openly,   precipitating    international    conse-
quences.  There  is the  danger  that  the  Russian rulers,  unsure  of
themselves,  divided in their  counsels,  may turn  back from  their
hesitant  dip  into  liberalization  and  restore  Stalinist  harshness,
fearing  that  the  revolutionary  ferment  may  even  reach   and
arouse the  long  submissive and  terrorized workers and  intellec-
tuals  of  the  Soviet  Union.    Polish  revolt   has  often   sparked
Russian  uprising.   In  Moscow  alone  there  is  no  Tito,  no  Go-
mulka,  no Nagy,  to  symbolize a  real  break  with  the  past;  there
•  alone  Stalin's  collaborators  survive in  power.  What  if  Trotzky
had  never  been  exiled  and  murdered,  what  if  Bukharin  had
never  been  liquidated!  What   a  different  picture  there  might
be  in  Moscow  today!  How  differently  Russia  could  deal  with
its  rebellious   satellites   and  protect   its  legitimate  interests  if
they  saw  in  Moscow  new  faces  they  could  trust!
Extra   Copies   Still  Available  of   Our   Special   Issue   on   The   H-Bomb
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
• City                                            Zone           State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name
10/29/56
City                                            Zone           State
City                                            Zone           State...
Shall  we  send   i^ift   announcement?     Yes  D     No   D
IE   Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol   St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3.  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED