I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jul02.pdf

============================================================

How  The  House  Committee  "Blackmailed" Arthur  Miller,  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO.  24
JULY  2,  1956
«>«      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Time  for  New  Tactics  on  Rosenberg-Sobell,  Too
While  the  Communists are  taking  a  second  look  at  so much
in  their  recent  past,  we  suggest  they take  a  second  look  too  at
the  Rosenberg-Sobell   case.   If  they  really  want  to  help  poor
Sobell,  the  time  has  come  for  a  change  of  tone  and  tactics.
The  Rosenberg  case  suffered  from  the  fact  that  it  became  a
propaganda  weapon  in  the  cold  war.  The  agitation  was  con-
ducted  in  so  shrill,  hysterical  and  mendacious a  way  as  to  of-
fend  many who  might  have  been  won  over  by  sober  presenta-
tion;  the  intent  was  so  clearly  to  defame  the  United  States  as
unnecessarily to antagonize.
It  should  be  evident  now  even  to  the  Communists  in  the
light  of  the  Krushchev  revelations  that  the  Rosenbergs  were
treated  a  good  deal  more  fairly  here  than  Slansky  and  other
Jewish  victims of  Stalinist  justice.  By American •standards, the
Rosenberg  case  is unsatisfactory. The  discovery of  the  console
table  merited  a  new  trial;  the  Supreme  Court  never  reviewed
the   case;  the   way  the   Douglas   stay  was  steamrollered  was
scandalous;  the  death  sentence—even  if   they  were  guilty—
was a  crime.
Equating  Truman  With  Hitler!
But  the  Communists  also  have  cause  for  shame.  The  false
cry  of  anti-Semitism, the  eagerness  abroad  to  use  the  Rosen-
bergs  to  equate  the  U.S.A.  of  Truman  with  the  Germany of
Hitler,  the  wild  cries  of  frame-up,   sacrificed  calm  considera-
tion  of  the  Rosenberg  case  to  the  needs  of  world  Communist
propaganda.  After  all,  no  picket  lines  circled  the  Kremlin  to
protest  the  executions  of  Jewish  writers  and  artists;  they  did
not  even  have  a  day  in  court;  they  just  disappeared.  Slansky
was  executed  overnight  without  appeal  in  Prague.   How  the
same  people  could  excuse  Slansky and  the  "doctor's plot"  and
at  the  same time  carry  on  the  Rosenberg  campaign  as they  did
calls  for  political  psychiatry.
Yet  the  same tactics  are  evident  in  the  campaign  to  free  So-
bell.  The  30 years to which he  was sentenced  are  fantastic; his
incareration  in  Alcatraz cruel;  the  proof  against  him  far  from
conclusive.   But  that  letter  of  Bertrand  Russell's  to  the  Man-
chester  Guardian in  March,  with  its  comparison  of  Nazi  and
FBI  "atrocities,"   is  in  the  strident  and  hysterical tradition  of
the  Rosenberg  campaign.   Jean  Paul  Sartre's  in  the  New  York
Times  of  June  15  was  not  much  better.   Such  letters—for  all
their  good  intention—will  not  help  Sobell  nor  will  they  help
in  the  struggle  to purge  men's  minds  of  fear,  hysteria and  hate
so that  we  may live  together  on  the  one  planet.
The  result  of  the  kind  of  campaign  reflected  in  the  Russell
and  Sartre  letters   is  the  kind  .of  intemperate  decision  Judge
Kaufman  handed  down  last  week  rejecting  Sobell's  appeal  for
a  new  trial.   From  the  first  page,  which  speaks  of  the   "ava-
lanche  of  evidence"  against  the  Rosenbergs  to  that  final  foot-
note which  claims for the  FBI a "reputation  for  high  standards
of  fairness,"   the  Kaufman  decision  reacts  with  febrile  over-
statements  of  its  own.
The  FBI  certainly  does  not  have  a  reputation   for   "high
standards  of  fairness"  as scores  of  loyalty  cases  in  Washington
testify.   On  the  other  hand,  it  is  vicious  nonsnse  to  compare
the  FBI  with  the  secret  police  of  Germany  and  Russia.   God
help  us  if  we  ever get  to  the  point  where  the  FBI  can  do here
what  the  Gestapo  did  in  Germany  and  the  secret  police  can
still  do in the  Soviet  Union.
The Kaufman decision will  be appealed.   Legally  I am afraid
that  Judge  Kaufman  has the  better  of  the  argument;  I  did  not
think  the  Sobell  pleadings  substantial  enough  for  a  new  trial
when  I  first  saw them.  These same  questions  should  have  been
raised  at  the  original  trial;  they  are  not  new;  they were  raised
five  days  after  the  trial  on  a  motion  in  arrest  of  judgment.
False  Hopes Raised
False  hopes  were stimulated,  false  impressions  given,  by this
motion   for  a  new  trial.   It  was  not  based  on  new  evidence
tending  to  clear  Sobell;  it  claimed  that  his kidnapping  in  Mex-
ico was a  violation  of  our  extradition  treaty  with  that  country
and  therefore  if  this  was  proven  true  at  a  new  trial  he  should
be  released.  The  Sobell  defense  will  have  to  do  better  if  it  is
to  free  him.
We  suggest  that  the  first  step  in  freeing  Sobell  would  be  to
free  his  case  from  the  burden  of  using  it  to  prove  the  Rosen-
bergs  victims of  a  frame-up.  Three  books  have  now  been  writ-
ten  on  the  Rosenberg  case  but  none  of  them  prove  this.   Wil-
liam  A.  Reuben's  tried  to  prove  too  much—that  there  never
was  any  atomic  espionage.   John  Wexley's  is  brilliant   but  a
quicksand  of  surmise  and  dubious  inference.  The  new  one,  by
Professor  Malcolm  P.  Sharp,  "Was   Justice  Done?",  helps  to
demolish  its  predecessors  but  is  itself  inconclusive.
We  just  don't  know  enough  yet.   Both  the  Rosenberg  and
Sobell  cases are  so unsatisfactory because it  is a  question  of  one
man's   word—one   alleged    conspirator's   word—against   an-
other's.  Who  was telling  the  truth—the  Rosenbergs  or  Green-
glass?  Who  was telling  the  truth—Sobell  or  Elitcher?   It  will
be  a  long  time,  if  ever,  before  we  know  for  certain.   We  may
wake up  one morning  to learn  that  the  Rosenbergs  were guilty.
We  may wake up  to learn  that  they were innocent.  But  I  doubt
whether  we  will  ever  find  there  was  a  deliberate   frame-up.
Fanaticism  had  the  same momentum  on  both  sides.
But  guilty or  innocent,  Sobell  has a case for  clemency,  as  did
the  Rosenbergs.   The  30-year  sentence   is  beyond  all  reason.
The  time  has come  to make an  appeal  for  the  man  Sobell,  and
to  divorce  his  case  from  the  Rosenberg   cult   and   cold   war
political  frenzies.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, July  a, 1956
Why  Wilson  Was  Talking  Plain  Sense  When  He  Called  The  Budget  Fight  "Phony"
The  Fundamental  Issues  Posed  by  the  Air  Force  Victory
The  vote  in  the  Senate  last  week  increasing  the  Air  Force
budget  by  almost  a  billion  dollars  is  a  political  event  of  the
first  magnitude.  It  shows  the  effect  of trying to run  the  gov-
ernment  without  a President  well  enough  to lead.  It  indicates
that, from a sickbed at  least, even General  Eisenhower's  great
prestige  as  a  soldier  is  not  enough  to  overcome the  efforts  of
the  aviation  lobby  in  Congress.  It  demonstrates  a  dangerous
tendency  by  the  military  successfully  to  go over  the  heads  of
the  civilians  in  supposed  command  at  the  Defense  Depart-
ment.  It  indicates  that  even  as  against  big business  men like
Charles  Wilson  and  George  Humphrey,  the  Air  Force  crowd
can  win—imagine  what  they  could  do  with  liberals  in  com-
mand,  susceptible  as  they  would  be  to  Eed  smear.  The  vote
also  threw  a  spotlight  on  where  the  Democrats   stand—for
the arms race,  with  Malone, Welker  and McCarthy, the  Right-
ists of the  Republican party. And the arms race  means  a  drift
to war.  The aviation  industry  and the Air  Force  have a  vested
interest  in world  tension  and  an  emotional  readiness  for  war.
Charlie  Wilson  may  lose  his  job  for  not  obeying  the  first
rule  of  successful  politics—which  is  never  to  upset  that  deli-
cate  balance  of  mutual  pretense  and  hypocricy  which  main-
tains  a  respectable  facade  for   Congress  and  its  members.
There  never  was  a  more  phoney  campaign  than  this  one for
more  Air  Force  funds.  The  Air  Force  has  more  money than
it  can use now; neither  aviation  plants nor Air  Force  person-
nel  are  adequate   now  to  its  vast  appropriations.    Senator
Byrd  gave  the  figures  to the  Senate  in  a  last  ditch  effort  to
block an increase.  They are fantastic.  He said that as of July 1
this  year,  the  end .of the  fiscal  year,  the  Air  Force  had  $13,-
600  millions  in  unexpended  balances   for   aircraft   procure-
ment,  of  which  $4,600 millions  were  unobligated.   He  said  the
Air   Force   will  actually  spend  $6,400  millions  for  new   air-
craft  this year, which  would  leave  $13,000,000,000   unexpend-
ed  at  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year.
Encouraging  Extravagance
"To  add  another  billion  dollars to appropriations,"  Senator
Byrd   pleaded,  "would  simply  mean  increasing   balances   in
carryover   appropriations,  which  cannot  possibly  be  spent  in
the foreseeable future.   It  would not,"  he added, "in  my  judg-
ment, bring  a  single  additional aircraft  off the  production  line
next  year  or the year  after  next. ...    To increase  these  huge
unexpended  balances  would  merely  increase  funds  available
to  spending  agencies  for  expenditure  in  subsequent  years,
with  virtually  no  control  by  either  the  Appropriations  Com-
mittee  or  by Congress.  Extravagance inevitably  is  the  result
of  unnecessary  appropriated    balances."
Yet  though  these  figures  are  well  known  and  none  chal-
Nothing  Like  A  Nice  Cool
Non-Sequitur  On  A  Hot
Day  in   Congress
Mr.  TUMULTY.   Has  any  study  been  made  or  any
projection  been  made of  how much foreign  aid  will  cost
by  the  year  2,000  or  aid  to  Tito  by  the  year 2,000?
Mr.  LONG.  No, but  I  should  say  that  cost  would  be
in  excess of $200 billion.  . . .
Mr. WILLIAMS.  I  requested  the  Library  of  Congress
some time ago  to furnish  me certain statistical informa-
tion.  . . . Amazingly enough I  found  that  we had given
away  some $51 billion to  foreign countries  in  the  last 10
years.   The  cost  of  our  entire  veterans'  pension   and
benefit  programs  from   the  Revolutionary  War  to  the
present  time amounted to  little  over  $93 billion.
—House  of  Representatives,  June  26.
lenged  them,  nobody  spoke  up   to  defend   V,"  <-a for   using
plain  language  about  it.  When  Senator  Russell  of  Georgia
said  indignantly  that  Wilson  "has   sought  to  intimidate  the
officers   of  the   armed   services  from  fully  expressing  their
opinions  to,  and  advising  with,  the  Congress  of  the   United
States,"  no  liberal  or  conservative  rose  to  puncture  this  in-
flated  language.   Does  Russell  believe  it  good  practice  to  en-
courage  anarchy  in  the  armed  services,  to  destroy   civilian
control  and  sound  budgetary  practice  by  inviting  the  various
services to indulge in a scramble for funds on Capitol  Hill?
Buying  Obsolete  Planes
The  leader  of  the  successful fight was  Symington,  the  avia-
tion  lobby's  man.  The  most  serious   technological   aspect  of
these  bloated  figures  is  the  encouragement  they  give  to  mass
production  of  obsolete  planes.  To  provide  funds  now  which
cannot  possibly  produce  planes  for  several  years  is  to  make
contracts   now  for   planes   which  will  be  out  of  date  when
they  finally  come off the  production  lines.
The  only  answer  to  this  is -the  kind  of  hysterical  nonsense
in  which  Byrd  indulged  when  he  told  the  Senate  the  vast
sums  spent   on  the  now  obsolete  B-36's   ($6  million  apiece)
were  not  wasted  because  "the  shadow of the  B-36 in  the  skies
is  what  kept  Russians  behind  the  Iron  Curtain."  The  main
front  at  home in  the fight for  peace  is  the  fight  against  this
aviation  lobby, and  here  the  Democratic  party  as  a  whole  is
on  the  wrong  side  of  the  fence.
New  German and  Chinese  Policies
There  are  signs  here  in  Washington that  after  the  elec-
tion  the  Administration  is  planning for  new  policies  on  the
two   world   lotfjams—China   and   Germany.    The  marathon
talks with  Ked China  at  Geneva  are  to  go until after  Novem-
ber,  when  serious  consideration of  a  meeting between  Chou
En-lai  and  John  Foster  Dulles  (if  he  is  still  Secretary  of
State)   will  begin.   Renewed  warfare  in  Korea  can  alone
block a  conference of this kind, and  therefore Korea—Chiang
Kai-shek's last  desperate trump card—is the danger point to
watch.
On  Germany,  sentiment is  building  up  within  the  Admin-
istration  for  reunification  in  return  for  neutralization. Two
years  ago  when  Senator  Flanders  of  Vermont  first  broached
this  idea  he  found  "monolithic"  (his  word  for  it) opposition
in   State  Department  and  White  House.   He  indicated  in
bringing  the  proposal up again  last  week  in  a  Senate speech
that  he  is  no longer  alone  in  Republican  ranks  in  this  point
to Be Unveiled After  the Election
of  view.  A  similar  idea  is  to  be  found  in  White  House  Ad-
viser  John  J.  McCloy's foreword  to  the  book,  "Russia  and
America",  recently  published  by  the  influential  Council on
Foreign  Relations.   McCloy  went  further  than  Flanders  by
advocating  acceptance  of  the  Oder-Neisse  line  as  part  of
such  a  deal.
Dulles  and  Adenauer still  oppose  such  a  solution,  and  a
breaking  off  of  relations  between  Bonn  and  Moscow—if  it
could be achieved—might serve to "refreeze"  this part of  the
cold war, temporarily  at  least. But  such a move would be un-
popular  in  Germany.  Flanders  said  his speech two years  ago
brought  unexpected  response  from  the  Germans  themselves.
"These  correspondents,"  he  told  the  Senate  of letters  he  re-
ceived,  "had  had  enough"  of  German  militarism.  Flanders
also  told  the  Senate, "When  I  was  in Paris  last  summer, a
high  placed  public  figure  said  to  me,  'We  are  in  favor  of
German  reunification,  but  not  too  soon.'"
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  2, 1956
How  The  House  Un-American  Committee   "Blackmailed"  Arthur  Miller
Arthur  Miller  came  out  oi  his  own "Crucible"  poorly.   It
was  a  painful  experience  to  see  him  before  his  inquisitors.
His  only  ringing  affirmation   was  on  Republican  Spain;  he
wasn't  too  intelligent   in  his  replies  on  the  Smith   Act;  and
when  he  was  asked  whether  it  was  true—Crime  No.  1—that
he  had  opposed  the  House  Un-American   Activities  Commit-
tee,  he  responded  with  a  mumble instead  of  a  challenge.
Miller's  difficulty  was  that  he  had  been  "blackmailed." The
Committee  was  able  to  put  the  screws  on him  (1)  because  he
had  misrepresented   to  the  New  York  Youth  Board  in   1950
the  nature  of  the  non-Communist  oath  he  had  taken  at  the
State  Department   several  years  earlier  for  a  passport  and
(2)  this oath was itself  brought  into  question  because  he had
once   applied   for   membership   in  what   Committee   counsel
claimed  was the  Communist party and  Miller  said  was  only  a
Marxist  study  group  for  writers.  There  was hardly  grounds
here for  a perjury  prosecution,  but the  Committee might  have
threatened  him  with   one  anyway—and   the  Lattimore  case
shows  how  much  trouble   they   can  create  with   how  little
substance.
The  Committee  may  make  a hero  of  Miller  yet  if  it  insists
on citing him for  contempt  because he refused  to  name  others
at  a  Marxist writers'  session  he attended.  Chairman  Walter,
at  first  hesitant,  seems  to  have  been  put  under  pressure. The
history  of  inquisitions—from those  of  Spain  to  those  of  Stalin
—shows  that  a  suspected  heretic  can  only  be  broken  morally
and  made  fully  captive  by  forcing  him  to  inform  on  others,
especially  those closest to him.  Can the  Committee  overlook  re-
fusal  to  name  names  in  Miller's  case  and  continue  to  apply
the  squeeze  on  others?
The  Committee  taints  all  it  touches.   Honest  differences  of
opinion  with  the  Communists, honest  disagreements, and final
disillusion—Miller's  experience  like  that  of  so many  other  in-
tellectuals—are  all  made  to  sound  hollow, false  and  cowardly
when a  man has  to discuss  them  in  such  a forum.  This  is  the
way the  Committee  dwarfs  the  moral stature of the  anti-Com-
munist  and  makes  him  seem  a  heel.   This  is  the  Committee's
own  secret  contribution  to  Communism.
What  would  we think  if  a  leading   Russian   dramatist—of
Miller's  prestige—were  forced  publicly  in  Moscow to  explain
that he was anti-capitalist, with  the threat  of a perjury  pros-
ecution  hanging  over  him if  he didn't?  What  a  belly-laugh  we
would  get out of the  spectacle?  But isn't that just what  Wal-
ter  and  his  colleagues   did  in  the  Miller  affair?
There were  several  amusing  moments  the  press did not  cov-
er.   One was  when  ex-FBI  man  Velde,  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee  under  the  Republicans,  assured  Miller  that  it  was no
crime to  be against  the  Smith  Act.  Another  was  when  Chair-
man   V\ alter  admitted  that  he,  too,  had  once  made  contribu-
tions  to  the  Joint  Anti-Fascist  Refugee  Committee  "to  help
Deed-of-The-Week
If  the  Voice  of  America  weren't  frightened  to  death
of  the voices-for-Fascism which infest  our Congress,  its
main  propaganda feature of  the  week  would  have  been
the  decision by Peter J. Hoegen, legal  referee  of  the  So-
cial  Security  Administration, restoring  the  old  age pen-
sion benefits  of  William  Z. Foster  and six  other  Commu-
nist  party  leaders  or  their wives  under  the  Social  Secu-
rity Act.
That  an  unknown  minor  official  should  still  have  the
courage  and  the  power  in  times  like  these  to  reverse  a
decision  by  the  Department of  Health,  Education  and
Welfare  in favor of  these seven  elderly radicals is  some-
thing  which  would  really  encourage  America's  friends
abroad.   If  there  was  equal  conscience  in  Congress,  an
investigating  committee  would find out who was respon-
sible  in  the  first  place for  initiating  so  mean,  petty,  vin-
dictive  and  dangerous  an  action.
These  Communists  paid  their  social  security  benefits
all  these  years  and  are  entitled  to  their  pensions; once
let  the  witch  hunters apply  political standards  to  social
security   and  they  will  be  hounding  in  their   old   age
everybody   who  once  gave   $5  to  Republican  Spain  in
their  youth.   Our  hat  is  off  to  Mr. Hoegen.
get  Jewish  refugees  out  of  Germany."    It  seems  we  all  have
dark spots in our past.
Screwiest   scene  of  all  was  the  appearance   of  Committee
Counsel  Ahrens,  who belongs  among the  lesser  clowns  in  Bar-
num  &  Bailey,  as  a  great  white  knight   of  liberalism.    He
wanted  to  know why Miller hadn't  defended  the  civil  liberties
of  Ezra  Pound  or  protested  when  a  1950  civil  liberties  meet-
ing  run   by  the  Communists   (and  stampeded   into  folly  by
Paul  Robeson)  had  refused  to  defend  Trotzkyites  too  under
the  Smith  Act.  (A  Committee  member  had  to  remind  Ahrens
that  Pound  was  convicted  of war  time  treason—and  not  just
put  away,  as  Ahrens  would have  one believe, for  writing  anti-
Communist  pamphlets.)   Someone  should  have  gotten  up  and
drawn  a  diagram  for  Ahrens.  If  Miller  was wrong  not to de-
fend  the  civil liberties  of  Fascists  and  Trotzkyites,  how much
wronger  is Ahrens  who won't defend  anybody's  civil liberties?
P.S.  We wait  to  see whether  the  Committee  by a  contempt
citation  and  the  State  Department  by  refusing   a  passport
will  have  the  nerve  to  trample  on America's  deepest   feelings
—is  there  a  red-blooded  American  boy from  six to  sixty who
does  not  hope  some day  to  marry  Marilyn  Monroe?—and  up-
set   Miller's   honeymoon  plans.    Surely,   as   at    Lexington,
there  is  a  point  at  which  America  will  stand  and  fight.
Thanks  to  the  Supreme  Court,  The  Braden  Case  Has  A  Happy  Ending
Nothing  illustrates  more vividly  than  the  Braden case  the
Supreme  Court's wisdom in deciding in the Steve  Nelson  case
that  the  Federal  government should have  exclusive  jurisdic-
tion  to  prosecute  for  sedition.  The  15-year  prison  sentence
thrown  out  by  the  Kentucky  Court  of  Appeals on  the  basis
of  the  Nelson decision was  striking  evidence  of  how terribly
State  sediti6n  laws  can  be  abused.  When  Carl  Braden  and
his  wife  helped a  Negro  couple buy a  home only to  see  that
home  dynamited by  hostile  whites, who would  have dreamed
that  the  authorities—instead of  punishing  the  dynamiters—
would  send  Braden  to  jail  for   "sedition"?
State  sedition  prosecutions,  like  the  Louisville  and  Pitts-
burgh cases,  and those  of  the  20's  under similar State crimi-
nal  syndicalism  laws,  show  that  the  closer  one  gets  to  the
"grass  roots"  of  society  the  more one is  at  the  mercy  of  the
lynch  spirit  and  official  lawlesness.  The  Federal  government
operates  on a higher level .of sophistication and in  an  atmos-
phere  which  eliminates the  cruder kinds of  frameup.  This  is
worth  consideration by  those  given  to  rhetorical democratic
flights   of  fancy  about  "the  common man" and  "the  people."
The  Kentucky  "common man" couldn't  have  cared  less.
The  Kentucky  decision  will  also  upset  the  indictments  of
Mrs.  Braden and  five  other  whites  for  "sedition"  in connec-
tion  with  the same bombing.  But will  the Louisville  Courier-
Journal,  one  of  our better and braver newspapers, give  Carl
his  job back  as  a copy-reader? The American Civil Liberties
Union   deserves   applause   for   defending   Braden  and   the
Emergency  Civil  Liberties Committee for  raising  his  $40,000
bund.   But  why  did  the  National  Association  for  the   Ad-
vancement   of   Colored   People   take  so   chilly  an   attitude
toward  this case?  And  will Kentucky now  find  the  men  who
dynamited  the  Wade house  and  prosecute  them?
9  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  July  2,1956
The  Untold  Story  of  The  Tense  Day  Before  the  President   Fell 111
Better  Than  Leaving  Federal  Employes  to  The  Mercies  of  Brownell
In  all  the   discussions  of  the  President's  illness,  no  one
seems  to  have mentioned the  extraordinary  emotional  strain
to  which he was  subjected  the  day before  his  attack  of  ileitis.
Mr.  Dulles that  day forced him to  issue  a  statement  "correct-
ing"  his previous  day's  press  conference remarks  on  neutral-
ism,  a  reversal  that  made  Mr.  Eisenhower  look—and must
have made  him feel—very  foolish.  His  Attorney  General  also
added  to  his  strain  that  day.  Originally  Harry  Cain  was  to
have  seen  the  President  at  8:30 a.m. but  at  the  last  minute
the  appointment was put  off until  3:30 p.m. Mr. Brownell took
the  8:30 a.m.  appointment himself and at  11:30 a.m.  the  chair-
man   of  the   Civil  Service  Commission  went  to  the   White
House  in order to "prime" the President  against  Cain. . . .
Quis custodiet?:  Four  classes  of  government employes only-
are  exempt  from  loyalty-security   clearance  in  the  Eees  bill
(HE  11841)  to  establish  a  loyalty  review  system  covering  all
Federal  workers.  The four  exempt  classes  are  (1)  the  Presi-
dent  or Vice President,  (2)  any  officer  appointed by  the  Presi-
dent  by  and with the  advice of  the  Senate, or  by the  President •
alone, '(3)  temporary  construction  or  maintenance  workers
employed  at  hourly rates and  (4)  "an  officer  or employe in  the
Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation."   Since  the  whole  loyalty
program  depends on the  integrity  of  the  FBI  in  collecting so-
called  "derogatory"   information,  it  seems  strange  that  the
FBI  should be  exempt  from  loyalty  surveillance.  We  suspect
a  loyalty  check would  turn  up  a  lot  of  strange  characters on
the FBI rolls
Better  Than  The  Walter-Eastland  Bill
This  Eees bill  merits, close study.  The Walter-Eastland  bill
(HE  11721  in  the  House), introduced  immediately  after  the
Supreme  Court's  decision in  the  Cole  case,  is  a  skeleton  stop-
gap  measure  designed  to  "reverse"  that  ruling  and  declare
that  all  government  employes without  exception  are  subject
to the  1950 Act permitting  "security" suspensions in  the "ab-
solute  discretion"  of  department  heads.  The  Eees  bill,  intro-
duced five days later, is a comprehensive measure for  meeting
the  situation  created  by  the  Cole  decision,  which  limited  the
1950  act  to  "sensitive"  positions.  It  acquires  weight  in Con-
gress  because its  sponsor, Eees  of Kansas, is the  ranking  Ee-
publican  on  the  Post   Office  and  Civil  Service Committee.
Some  strange  history  lies  back of this  Eees  bill.   Everyone
seems  to  have  forgotten  that  it  was  a  similar  Eees  bill  in
1947,  when  he  was  chairman  of  this  same  committee,  which
led  to  the  promulgation  of  the  Truman  executive  order  set-
ting  up  the  first  Loyalty  Eeview Board.  The  executive  order
was  a  last-ditch  effort  by  the  Democrats to  block  passage  of
the  Eees  bill,  and  the .maneuver succeeded.  But  as  I  pointed
out  in  the  newspaper  PM  at  the  time,  the  Eees  bill  actually
gave the  Federal  employe a little more protection  against un-
founded  accusation  and  unfair  hearings  than  did  the  execu-
tive  order.
In  any  case,  so far  has  the  drift  gone, that  the  "reaction-
ary"   of  1947,  sponsoring  much  the  same  bill  as  then,  now
seems to  offer  the  one hope of affording  some basic  safeguards
to  Federal  employes  in  the  "non-sensitive"   departments  not
covered  by the  1950 Act. The Walter-Eastland  bill  would  give
Federal  employes no rights  whatsoever;  whether  and  how  to
suspend  or  fire  them,  how much  of  the  charges  against  them
would be disclosed—all would  depend, on the  department  head.
A  hearing  of  a  sort  would  be provided, but  the  word  "hear-
ing"   is  a. misnomer  when  there   is  no  right  to  know   the
charges,  to  examine, the  accusers,  or  to suspoena  witnesses  in
one's  own defense.
Small,  But  Still  Mercies
There  are, by  contrast,  small  mercies  in  the  Eees  bill  for
which  the  Federal  employe may  be  grateful.  And  those con-
cerned  with  protection  of  Federal  workers  would be  well  ad-
vised  to  fight  out  their  battle  in  Congressional   legislation
rather  than  to  leave  the  new loyalty  rules  to  be  worked  out
privately,  as  they  otherwise will be, by  Herbert  Brownell and
J.  Edgar  Hoover. The existence of the  Eees  bill might  be used
to  block  the  Walter-Eastland   measure,  and  hearings  before
the  House  and  Senate  Post   Office  and  Civil  Service  commit-
tees  can  be utilized to  press  for  salutary   amendments.
It   would  be  better,  of  course,  if  we  could  shake  off  this
whole  loyalty  nightmare  at  least  in  "non-sensitive"   positions
but  that  is  still  a  long way off.  We do not  advocate  the  Eees
bill  but  in  several  respects  it  is  superior  to  Brownell's  prac-
tices.  The basic standard  of the  bill  is better: "whether, baaed
on  all  the  evidence,  there  is  a  reasonable  doubt  of  loyalty."
At  present  any  doubt is  enough for  discharge.  The  FBI field
report  would  be required  to  give  "all evidence"  pertaining  to
loyalty,  not just  "derogatory" information.  The  Loyalty  Ee-
view  Board  would be  allowed to  disclose  sources  of  informa-
tion  when  in  its  discretion  "the  interest  of  justice   so  re-
quires." At  present  "security" and not "justice" is the  stand-
ard  in  withholding sources.   In  addition  the  Board  could  re-
quire  the  Attorney  General  to  explain  why  an  organization
had  been "listed" by him as  subversive.  These provisions, fee-
ble  as  they  are, would still  give  an  employe more  protection
than  he has now.
Next  Week:  Some  New Angles  on  The  Fund for  The  Republic  Report  on  The  "Blacklist"
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City .................................... . ..... Zone ............ State  ...................
Knter  sift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name ........................................................ .  .....................
7/2/56
Street
City              ;                            Zone.          State
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?    Yes  D    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capital  St.,  S.  E.
Washington   3.  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED