I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956dec10.pdf

============================================================

Extra;  Smith Act  Defense  Counsel Named Attorney  General  of  Pennsylvania,  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO.  47
DECEMBER  10,  1956
">'      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15  CENTS
Some  Clues  to A  Smoldering  World  Crisis
The  UN:  It  succeeded in  stopping  the  war  in  Egypt and  ob-
taining the withdrawal of  the  invading armies only because  the
two  great  Powers  were  united  and  supported   the  UN  with
threats;  the  U.S.  of  economic  sanctions,  the  U.S.S.R.  of  mili-
tary  action. There  was also success because the  aim was  simple:
the  withdrawal  of  armed  forces  from   another  country.   But
now  the  situation  is completely different.  The  issues  which  re-
main  are  complex:  the  reconciliation  of  international  interest
and  Egyptian rights  in  the  Suez;  the  making  of  a  firm  peace
between  Israel  and  the  Arab  States.  These  objectives  are  not
susceptible  of   solution   by  a  simple  command.  And   in  ap-
proaching  them the two great  Powers at  once divide. The   U.S.,
as  the  great   Power  which  benefits  by  the  status  quo,  wants
stability and  peace  in  the  Middle  East  in  order  to  exploit  the
oil  and  maintain  its  bomber   bases.  The  U.S.S.R.,   the   great
Power  which  loses  by this  status  quo,  wants  to  disrupt  it.   For
both  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.,  Israel  is  expendable  if  necessary  in
this  game.   Neither  will  support  a  UN  peace  plan  at  the  ex-
pense  of  antagonizing  the  Arabs  and  neither  will  support  a
new  Suez  plan  unsatisfactory  to  Nasser  since  he  emerges  the
most  powerful  figure  in  the  Arab  world.   In  this  context  the
UN  will  again  prove  impotent.  The  Middle  Eastern  crisis  is
not  over;  it  is just  beginning.
India  and  Hungary:  India  fears  UN  intervention  in  Hun-
gary  might  be  a  precedent  for  UN  intervention  in  Kashmir,
where  Nehru  still  opposes  the  plebiscite   India  promised  the
UN.  The  "elections"  India  plans  in Kashmir  next  spring  will
bar  parties  favoring union with Pakistan  or  independence;  UN
observers  will  not  be  permitted.   Kashmir,  not  pro-Sovietism,
is  the  key  to  India's  attitude  toward  Eastern  Europe,  her  ab-
stention  with the  Arab-Asian bloc  on  Hungary.  The  rest  of  the
bloc  doesn't  care  what  Russia  does  in  Hungary,  i.e.  its  own
colonial  domain, as long  as Russia supports  Egypt.  Here  again,
in  the  face  of  Soviet obduracy, the  UN  is  powerless.
The   US.   and  Eastern  Europe:  The  inability  of  American
firms to  get  export  permits  for  cotton  to  Poland  and  the  delay
in  discussing  the  credits  President  Eisenhower  appeared  to  be
offering  in  October  is attributed  here  to  divided  counsels  with-
in  the  U.S.  government  on  satellite  policy.  All  factions  wel-
come  the  weakening  of  ties  between  the  Soviet  Union  and  Po-
land  but  differences   arise  on  just  when,  where  and  how  to
help   along   that   "evolutionary   process"   to  which   Secretary
Dulles  referred  in  his  press  conference  at  Augusta,  Georgia.
Some  officials  believe  it  is  to  U.S.  interest  to  strengthen  Go-
mulka,  others  that  it  would  be  better  to  wait  in  the  hope  that
rising  distress  and  tension  in  Poland  will  add  to  Russian dif-
ficulties.  A  few  would  like  to  see  other  "Hungaries"  in  East
Europe while  others believe the  result  of  such  outbreaks  would
only  be  to  restore  a  "hard"  policy  in  the  Kremlin.   Cardinal
Wyszynskt's  forthcoming visit  to  the  Pope  will  bear  watching
in  this  connection;  the  Vatican  would  gain  great  leverage  in
Eastern  Europe if  it  could  act as  middle  man  between  Warsaw
and  Washington.
Twentieth  Congress and Eighth  Plenum: An  anguished self-
criticism  quite  unlike  the  vague  "cult  of  personality"  concept
with which the Russians blamed it on Stalin at the  20th  Congress
is  evident  in  the  text  now  available of  the  Polish  Communist
Party's  eighth  plenum  in  October.  A  sample  is  the  speech  of
Leon Wudzki,  of  the  party control  commission. "Theory  is  one
thing  but  practice  has been  another,"  he  told  the  plenum.  "In
practice  we  had  such  phenomena   as  unwillingness  to  work,
shirking  of  duties,  fanaticism,  opportunism,  chauvinism,  anti-
semitism,  and  falsehood.  The  masses  dared  not  criticize  us;
their  mouths  were  locked  and  they  turned  away from  us.    ...
We  said  one thing  and did another.  We  liked  power.  ...    In-
stead  of  teaching  people  to  think,  we  taught  them  to  repeat
slogans."   No  one  in  Moscow—or   Belgrade—has  yet  dared
talk  in  such  terms,  or  operate  on  the  principles  they  imply.
This   is  why  Poland   offers   hope  of  real  change  in   Eastern
Europe.
South  Africa:   The  State  Department  was  appalled  by  last
week's  mass  roundup  in  South  Africa.   It  is  believed  these  ar-
rests,  including a white  member  of  parliament  who  represents
Negroes,  will make  immeasurably more  difficult  the  healing  of
relations  between  the  white  West   and  the   colored   colonial
world.   South  Africa  is  thought  to  have  timed  the  raids  delib-
erately  to  take  advantage  of  the  fact  that  the  UN  is  too  busy
with  Hungary  and   Egypt  to   focus   full   attention   on   South
Africa.  The  use  of  the  Suppression   of  Communism   Act  to
strike  at  various  kinds  of  Left  organizations,  religious  leaders
and   political   figures   friendly   to   the  Negroes,   Asians  and
colored  is  a  more  advanced  variety  of  the  technique  Eastland
exploits   with  the   Senate  Internal   Security  Committee  here.
The Subversive Activities Control  Board has a similar potential.
Clinton,  Tenn.:  The  South  is  still  solid  against  integration.
If  it  cannot  be  achieved  in  border  State,  Tennessee,  it  will  be
set  back  a  generation.  The  beating  of  a  Baptist  minister  who
escorted  six  Negroes  to  school  shocked  better  elements.   The
overwhelming defeat of  the White  Citizens Council  candidates
in  the  Clinton  elections showed there  is a majority  for  law  and
order.  There  can  hardly  be  a  better  opportunity  for  a  show-
down  and  the  Attorney General  for  once  deserves  credit.  The
swift  arrest  for  contempt  of  the  White  Citizens  Council  chair-
man  and  15  others  is  the  kind  of  resolute  action  long  called
for;   the  South  is full  of  grown  up  retarded adult  "juvenile  de-
linquents"  impervious  to  moral  pressure;  the  sooner  some  of
them  are  put  in  jail,  the  better  the  chance of  avoiding trouble
elsewhere.  Without  force  against  the  lawless  minority  there
will  be  no  peace  in  the  South.
'  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone't Weekly, December 10,1956
AFL-CIO  Editors  Hold  Their  First  Convention   Since  The  Merger
More  "House  Organ" Conformity  Than  Crusader  Spirit  in  Labor  Press
By  A  Dubious  Delegate
The  American  labor  movement  spends  $20,000,000  annually
to  support   about   1,000  national   and  regional   publications.
Last  Friday,  side  by  side  with  the  Retired   Officers   Associa-
tion  and  the  American  Rheumatism  Association,   the  Inter-
national  Labor  Press  Association,   AFL-CIO's  editorial   arm,
opened  its  first  convention   since  last  year's  big  merger.
Under   the   gilt   balconies   and   elaborate   chandeliers  of
Washington's   Mayflower  Hotel  the  delegates  attended   clinics
on  journalistic  technique.    They  attended  a  George  Meany
press  conference.   They  heard  assorted  speakers,  drank  cock-
tails  and  held  a   10-dollar-a-plate   banquet.     They   took   a
guided  tour  of  what  one delegate  referred  to  as  "that  marble
mausoleum,"  the  AFL-CIO  building.
But  during  the  entire round of activities,  except  for  a  brief
period,  there was  no serious  attempt  to  discuss  the  content of
labor  journalism,  its  ideological  line  and  function.    The  sole
refreshing    exception  to  this  rule,   during   which   delegates
heard  a  sharp  attack  on conformity  in  the  mass  media,  was
provided  by  a  non-labor  guest,  a  representative  in  fact,  of
the  "capitalist"  press.
Applauded  But  Not   Emulated
It  was  74-year-old  William  Evjue,  publisher  of  the  Madi-
son,  Wisconsin, Capital  Times, who, in  an  after  dinner  speech,
described  how  hoodlums recently  tore  from  the  wall  of  the
University   of  Wisconsin  a  plaque  commemorating  academic
freedom.    Evjue  spoke  of  crusading  journalism  and  the  one-
party  press.    He  evoked  applause.
But  private  conversation  with  many  of  the  labor   editors
present-indicates  that  crusading  spirit  is  not  negotiable  in
today's  labor  press.    Conformity,  many  admit,  is   perhaps
more  deeply  entrenched  in  union  newspapers  and  magazines
than  in  the  commercial  press  itself.
It  is  true,  of  course,  that  labor  editors  can  swing   freely
at  the  economic  evils  of  big  business.    But,  for   many,  at-
tacks  on  racism  are  out  of  bounds.   Mention of  racketeering
in  unions  is  delicate  to  touch.   Criticism  of  labor's  reign-
ing  hierarchy  cannot even be whispered.   Labor  editors  know
their  employers,  and,  like  house  organ  editors   everywhere,
they  go  one  step  beyond  the  safe  side  of  discretion.   They
flatter.
Thus  the  AFL-CIO  News,  the  most  official  of  the   official
labor  press,  abounds in  praise  of  Mr.  Meany,  nourishing,  a
cynic  might  add,  the   cult   of  the   personality.    (Though  to
UWA  members,  Reuther  is  always  Walter;   Meany  always
seems  to  be  "Mister.")
Even  A  Few  Shop  Workers
The  delegates  formed  a  mixed  group.    Among  them  were
a  handful  of  honest-to-goodness   shop  workers.    One,  a  big
punch  press  operator  who has  managed  to  survive  31  years
in  GM's Cleveland Fisher  Body plant,  was  heard  to  remark:
"I  told  the  AFL-CIO  News  our  people  don't  want  to  see so
many  pictures  of  dignitaries  at  a  banquet.    How about  pic-
tures  of workingmen?"
But  for  the  most part, the  editors  were  of  a  smoother  cut,
professionals  and  "technicians,"  as  one  of  them  likes  to  put
it.   It  is  not  for  the  technician  to  suggest  or  qualify  policy,
but  only to  execute  it.   The labor  press,  according  to Gordon
Cole, ILPA's  outgoing president,  must  serve  as  a  line of com-
munication  from  leadership  downward—with  no  feedback.
Consequently,  the  labor  press  today,  with  only  a  handful
of   exceptions,   consists  of   dull  papers,   poorly  read.     This
idea  was  advanced  gently  by  another  guest.    He  was  Lloyd
Whitbrook, a  public relations man who pointed  out that  labor
press  readership  averages  under  one  person  per  copy  of  the
20  to  30,000,000 published  each  month.    This,  he  noted,  con-
trasts  sharply  with  the  3.2 readers  per  copy  in  the  commer-
cial press.
That  Regal  Extra  Inch  and  A  Half
"It  has  been  observed  by  newspapermen that  all  the
chairs  around  the  conference  table  are  exactly  alike.
The  only way  you can tell  which is  Mr. Meany's is  that
the  back  of  his  chair  is  one  and  one-half  inches  higher
than  the  others."
—Saul  Miller,  managing  editor,  AFL-CIO   News,
while   conducting  a   labor   press   tour   of   the
AFL-CIO   Building.
How  effective  the  labor  press  is  has  never  been  scientifi-
cally  determined.    But  there  are  solid  indications  that  thou-
sands  of  unionists  to  whom the  papers  are  sent  as  an  auto-
matic  part  of  membership  do not  read  them  at   all.
The   Democratic  Party's  former   labor   advisor,   Thomas
Byrne,  once  a  union functionary  himself,  has  estimated  that
only  10 to  15 per  cent  of  union  members  bother  to  read  their
organization's   periodical.
How  to  overcome this  was,  indeed,  one  of  the  subjects  of
the  meeting.   But  the  advice  doled  out  by  ILPA  leaders  and
experts  like  Whitbrook  concerned  itself   almost  totally  with
format  rather  than  content.    No  one suggested  the  injection
of  controversy  as  a  possible  solution.
The  question  of  internal  conformity  among  labor's  com-
munications  specialists  was  touched  upon  only  once.    Both
Edward   P.  Morgan  and  John   W.  Vandercook,   AFL-CIO's
two  radio  commentators,  made  a  point  of  telling  the  dele-
gates  during  a  brief  appearance  that  their  sponsor  does  not
censor  them.    This  has  been  a  tender   area  since  the  AFL
curtly   dismissed   Morgan's    predecessor,    Frank    Edwards.
Edwards  left  charging  crass  censorship  by  the  Meany  high
command;  he  claims  they  put  a  "political  commissar"  at  his\
elbow.
"I  have  had  my differences  of  opinion  with  the  AFL-CIO,"
Vandercook  said.    "But   nobody  has  told  me  what  to   say."
The  remark  evoked skepticism.    Vandercook's  contract  is  up
for  renewal soon.
The  Slick  and  Soporific   Preferred
The  editor   of  the   slick   but   soporific  Electrical   Workers
Journal  won an  armload  of  prizes  for  journalistic  excellence.
Brownie  Cuthbert,  editor   of  the  Chattanooga  Labor   World
and  one  of  the  few  women in  the  field,  was  triumphant,  too.
Brownie  had  just  bought  a  Thunderbird.
There  were  old  socialists   turned   practical   and   ex-news-
papermen  who  were  always  practical.    There  were   honest,
overworked  editors  who  take  pride  in  their  product.    And
there  were  editors  who turn  over  the  complete  job  of writing,
production  and  distribution  to  a  Washington    assembly-line
publishing  house  which  handles  over  30  union   periodicals,
thus  relieving  editors  of  the  need  to  edit.
There  were  crew  cut  young men  and  old timers  who  spoke
with   a  trace  of  an  accent,  there   were  tweed  jackets  and
shiny  blue  serge.    Among  Washington   editors,   one  might
even  have found  a  sprinkling  of  colorful  vests  in  the  fashion
affected  by  Mr.  Meany  himself.
For  the  "country  editors"  who had  not  had  the  privilege
before,  there  were  conducted tours  of  the  AFL-CIO  building.
There  Saul  Miller,  managing   editor  of  the  AFL-CIO   News,
showed  them  the  huge  mosaic  mural  in  the  front  hall  as
piped  strains  of "Oklahoma"  filled  the  air.    In  the  anteroom
to  the  executive  council  conference  room,  a  life-size  portrait
of  George  Meany,  weskit  and  all,  hung  in  glowing   oil.
The   inlaid  floors,  the   carefully   matched   draperies,   the
wood  panelled  auditorium—all  this,  according  to  a  brochure
handed  the  editorial  visitors,  reflects  "the  philosophy  of  free
trade  unionism."   But  the  decor  is  no  longer  early  working
stiff.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone'* Weekly, December JO, 1958
The  Real  Question  in  the  UAW  Campaign  Expenditures   Case  Before  the  Supreme  Court
Wouldn't  Labor  Be  Stronger  Politically  on  Voluntary   Contributions?
It  would be difficult  to  match  the  United  Automobile Work-
ers  case  argued  before  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  here  last
•week  for  semantic  nonsense  and  legalistic  hypocrisy.  This  is
its  background.  In  1907  Congress  passed  a  Corrupt  Practices
Act  which forbade  any  corporation  to  make  a  "contribution"
in  any presidential  or  Congressional  election.  No statute  has
been  more  easily  and  generally  evaded;  the  same  results  are
achieved   by  obtaining  contributions  from  the   officers   and
dominant  families  of  the  great  corporations   instead   of  di-
rectly  from  the  corporate  till.  In  1947 the  Taft-Hartley  Act
added  two phrases  to the  Corrupt  Practices  Act:  "or  any  la-
bor  organization"  and  "or  expenditure."   These  changes  were
intended  to  cripple  labor  politically  and  hamstring  the  kind
of  coalition  between  the  trade  unions  and  the  Democratic
party  by  which  union  treasuries  helped  finance  the  election
campaigns  of  Roosevelt  and  Truman.
Money, however, is  not  the  only potent  force  in  our  society.
The  courts,  which had  so often  frustrated   and  nullified  social
reform,  in  this  case  cheated  Senator  Taft  of  his  victory  and
opened  to labor  its  own avenues for  evading the  Act.  The  ar-
rival  of  trade  unionism  as  a  political  force  of  major  dimen-
sions  was  reflected in  June  1948  by  the  Supreme  Court's  de-
cision  in  U.S. v.  CIO  and  Philip  Murray  (SS5 U.S. 106).  The
CIO  out  of  its  general  funds  had  made an  "expenditure"   for
the  publication in  its  CIO News  of a front  page  statement  by
Murray  urging  the  election  of  a  certain  Congressional  can-
didate  in  Maryland; extra  copies were run  off and  distributed
to  the public.
Five  to  Four,  But  All  on  Labor's  Side
The CIO and Murray  were  indicted  but  the  indictment  was
dismissed.   The Supreme Court split  5-4 in upholding the  dis-
missal,  but  was  unanimously  on  labor's  side  in  the  contro-
versy.  The difference  was that  a minority  of  Rutledge, Black,
Douglas  and  Murphy  wanted  to  uphold the  dismissal  on  the
ground that  the  statute  as  applied violated the  First  Amend-
ment  while  the  majority  speaking  through  Mr.  Justice   Reed
with  Mr. Justice  Frankfurter   concurring,  preferred  to  rule
that  it  was "unwilling  to  say"  that  Congress had intended by
the  word  "expenditure"  to  outlaw  "such  a  publication." This
was  a  striking  example of  the  way  the  judicial  crystal  ball
tends  to  becloud  the  question  of  Congressional  intent  to  suit
the judges peering  into  it.  There  is little  doubt that  Senator
Taft  and  his  supporters  had  so intended.
In fact  when the next  case came up, that of  I7.S.  v. Painters
Local  (178 F.  2d 854) in the  Second Circuit in  1949, the  Court
ruled  for  labor  despite  a  specific  statement  by  Senator  Taft
on  this  precise  question  when  the  Act  was  being  debated  in
Congress.     The  painters  case  involved  expenditures   by  a
union  in  an  election to  buy  newspaper  space  and  radio  time.
Glen  Taylor, then  a  Senator  from  Idaho,  asked  Taft  whether
he  would  outlaw  radio  programs  sponsored  by  labor  unions
in  elections.    Taft  replied  that  it  would  be  illegal  for  Gen-
eral  Motors to have  a  man  speaking  on the  radio  to  endorse
a  specific  candidate  and  it  should  be  illegal  for  labor.    The
Circuit  Court  nevertheless  upheld the  dismissal  of  the  paint-
ers'   indictment  on  the  ground  that  such  an   "expenditure"
was  "impossible,  on  principle,  to  differentiate"  from  that  in
the  CIO case.   Two years  later  in a third  case, where a union
Meaning  Hiroshima?
"Atomic  war  has  not  been  stalemated  to  the  degree
that  we  can  afford  to  tailor our military  forces  primar-
ily  to  the  requirements of  limited  or  little  wars.   Any
thought  that  under  present conditions  nations  will  rule
out  a  nuclear  conflict  on moral  grounds ignores  the  les-
sons  of  history,  some  of  which  are  recent  history."
—Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  Quarles,  Nov.  28.
The  Financial   Odds  Against   Labor
"Congress  has  tremendously  increased  the  political
strength  of  those opposed to  labor by  selecting  only  la-
bor  unions  for  restrictive  legislation,  while  associations
of  management  and employers .  .  .  are left completely
unfettered.  Yet .  .  .  20,000,000  organized  workers and
their  families,  representing   a  major  segment   of   the
total  population,  have  contributed less  than  10 percent
of  all  campaign  funds.  .  .  .  Employer  and employer
minded  groups are  the  major  source of  funds  for feder-
al  campaigning  expenditures. Assets of  wealthy families
often  support  anti-labor candidates. .  .  .  Furthermore,
employer  minded  groups  have  influence  often  merging
on  control  of  the  media  of  mass  communication. .  .  .
Employer,  business  and  management  groups  enjoy  tre-
mendous  political  advantages by  the  use  of  almost  un-
limited  corporate funds expended as  part  of  the  cost  of
doing  business."
—Brief   for  the  UAW  in  the Supreme Court.
had  used  its  general  funds  to  support  its  business  agent  in
his  candidacy  for  Congress,  a  Federal  Court  again  held (101
F. Supp.  869) that  in the light  of the  two earlier  cases it  was
"difficult   to  believe"  that  Congress  had  "intended"  to   bar
such  expenditures.  The  will  to  disbelieve had  waxed  with  the
political  power  of  labor.
So when the  UAW was  indicted  for  buying  television  time
out  of  general  funds  in  the   1954  Congressional  election  in
Michigan,  it  was  easy  for  Federal  Judge  Picard  last  Febru-
ary  to  dismiss  this  indictment   on  the  basis  of  the  earlier
cases.    He  said  he  could  not  distinguish   between  the   radio
time  in the  painters'  case  and  the  TV time  in  the  auto  work-
ers';  if  it  was legal  to buy one, it  was legal  to  buy the  other.
The  Justice   Department   appealed  directly  to  the   Supreme
Court,  no doubt  in  the  hope of  a  decision  before  the  election
and  in any  event  to worry  labor  a  bit  about  its  campaign ex-
penditures   for   Adlai   Stevenson   and   the   Democrats.    But
whether  by  foresight  or  accident  the  Court  did  not  hear  the
appeal  until  last  week.
Ample  Devices  for  Evasion
The  law,  as  it  stands,  provides both  capital  and  labor  with
devices  for  evasion.  The  real  issues  are  political.  The  UAW
brought  forward statistical studies to show how much greater
and  more  pervasive   is  the  power  of  capital   in  influencing
public  opinion.  "If  this  indictment is valid," Joseph  L. Rauh,
Jr.,  counsel for  the  UAW argued,  "then  Hearst,  Howard  and
Sarnoff   decide  what   gets  heard."   Rauh  insisted  that  the
union  was  merely  "expressing   its  views"  under  the  First
Amendment  by  buying  TV  time.  When  he  admitted  to  Mr.
Justice  Frankfurter  that what  John  L. Lewis and the  miners
"are  reputed  to  have  done"  in  the  1936  campaign  would  be
illegal  under  the  Taft-Hartley  Act,  the  Justice  asked,  "Why
wasn't  that  'expression  of  views', too?"
Perhaps  the  real  issue  is  a  subtler  one,  which labor  must
face  sooner or later. The law only restricts expenditures  from
general  union  funds.   Labor  can  spend  all  it  pleases  if  the
money  is  raised'  by  voluntary  contributions  from  members.
Wouldn't  labor  be  a  greater  force,  wouldn't  trade  unionism
draw  new  strength  from  its  roots,  if  it  depended  on  educa-
tion  and  voluntary   contributions   from   its   members?    It's
easier  to  check  off  the  dues  and  use  them  as  one  pleases.
But  not a  few workers who "contribute"  in this way  vote  the
other  way  in  the  privacy  of the  ballot  box.  Labor  leadership
will  win a  big battle for  the  mind of the  public  when  it  wins
the  mind of its  own rank  and  file.  Compulsory contributions,
like  compulsory  unionism,  make  for  weak  political  founda-
tions.
1  8  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, December 10,1956
Now  It  Can Be  Told:  Why  Chairman  Walter  Failed  in  His  Attempt  to  Smear  Thomas  D.  McBride
Smith  Act  Defense  Counsel  Becomes  Attorney  General  of  Pennsylvania
Though  unnoticed  by  the  press  outside  the  State,  the  ap-
pointment   of  Thomas  D.  McBride  as  Attorney   General  of
Pennsylvania   is  another  index of a  changing  climate  of  opin-
ion.   McBride  was  chief  defense  counsel  in  the   Philadelphia
Smith  Act  trials.  Governor  George  M. Leader  in  announcing
the  appointment  praised  McBride as  "a  great   humanitarian
and  a  great  liberal."  McBride was  chosen  on the recommen-
dation  of  the  outgoing  Attorney  General,  Herbert  B.  Cohen,
elected  to  the  State  Supreme  Court  in  November.  The  choice
reflects   the  outlook  of  the  Governor,  one  of  the   promising
young liberals  in  the  Democratic  party.
McBride  has  long  been  outstanding  as  a  criminal   lawyer.
He  is  Chancellor  of  the  Philadelphia  Bar  Association  and  a
director  in  the  local  branch  of  the  American  Civil  Liberties
Union.  He was  Gale Sondergaard's  counsel  before  the  House
committee  last  summer.   He  has  recently   been  in  a  public
controversy  with  a  fellow  ACLU  director,  Victor  Blanc, now
District Attorney  of  Philadelphia,  over wire-tapping to  which
McBride is strongly  opposed. Tapped wires are  playing  a part
in  a  Philadelphia   vice  cleanup;  their  use  has  recently  been
upheld by the  State  Supreme  Court.  In  court,  wit  and  learn-
ing  have  been  McBride's weapons rather  than  the flamboyant
tactics  usually  associated  with  criminal   lawyers.
An  Informer    Misinforms
The  appointment   recalls   the  attempt   to  smear   McBride
made  by  Chairman  Walter  of  the  House  Un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee  on  August  2  of  last  year.   Herman   E.
Thomas,  of  Allentown,   Pa.,   was  on  the  stand.  Thomas,  a
Communist  from  1937  to  1939,  went  back  into  the  party  in
1944  on urging  of the  FBI  to  serve  as  an  undercover inform-
ant.   He  appeared  as  a  prosecution  witness  in  the  Philadel-
phia  Smith  Act trial.
Thomas  testified  before  Walter  that  he  heard  a   Commu-
nist  say  "McBride's,  the  attorney's,  fees  would  be  $60,000."
"The  fact  of  the  matter  is,"   Walter   commented,  "that  the
court  appointed  counsel  on the  representation that  these  peo-
ple  had  no  money.  ...     So that  the  application  for  counsel
because they  could  not retain  anyone,  not  having  any  money,
was  a  fraud   practiced   upon  the  court?"  Thomas   replied,
"That  is correct"
But  that  was  not  correct.   Walter  must  have  been  a  sur-
prised  man  when  he  picked  up  the  Philadelphia  papers  next
morning  and failed  to  see a  single  line  linking  McBride  with
fraud.   The  story   of  what  happened  can  now  be  told.  The
Philadelphia  papers  checked with  Bernard  D.  Segal, who was
Apology  and   Correction
A  respected  reader  complains quite justly  that in last
week's  issue  we  should  have  given  the  American  Civil
Liberties  Union credit,  too, for  the  victory in  the  Brad-
en  case  and  noted  that  the  New  York  Civil   Liberties
Union  had  come to  the  support  of  two of  the  New  York
Times  men  indicted  for  contempt.
Chancellor  of  the  local  Bar  when it  arranged  for  the  defense
of  the  Philadelphia  Smith  Act  victims.   Segal  made  the  files
available  and  after  examining these,  Philadelphia  editors  de-
cided  the  charge  was  so untrue  and  unfair  that  it  would be
wrong  to  print  it.  The  press  for  once  declined  to  privilege
Congressional  slander.
The  facts  were  that  the  Philadelphia  accused found  them-
selves  unable to  get  counsel  because  of  the  general  political
atmosphere  and  because  of  the  contempt  sentences  and  dis-
barment  proceedings against  the  defense lawyers in the  Foley
Square  trials.  In  at  least  one case,  a  retainer  had  been  paid
and  a  total  of  $60,000  promised  to  a  Philadelphia  law  firm
only  to  have  them  return  the  advance  payment  next  morn-
ing.  The bar  association  decided that  it  would  make the  right
of  counsel  effective.   Defense  counsel  were  obtained  by   the
Association  and  appointed  by  the  court  so that  they  could,  if
criticized,  say  that  they  were  defending Communists on  the
request  of  the  bar  and  the  judiciary.  McBride,  however,  in
becoming   chief   defense   counsel,  rejected   this    "protective
cloak"  and  served  directly  at  the  request  of  the  accused.
A  fund  of  $60,000  was  raised  for  counsel fees.  When  the
trial  was  over,  the  sum  which remained  after  the  heavy  ex-
penses   was   divided   among   defense   counsel.     But   Mc-
Bride  asked  Segal  as  Chancellor  and  C.  B.  Rhodes  as  Vice
Chancellor  of  the  Bar  Association  at  the  time  the  defense
was  arranged  to  decide how the  remaining  funds  were  to  be
divided.   McBride, always  generous,  probably  spent  as  much
or  more than  he  obtained  as  his  share.
The  nine  Philadelphia  defendants  were  convicted.   Their
appeal  will  soon be  heard  in  the  Third  Circuit.   McBride has
not  yet  decided whether  he  will  argue  them.
Another  "Philadelphia,  Story"  in  Washington  last  week
was  the  imposition  of  a  $1,000  fine  and  a  suspended   jail
sentence  on  the  Philadelphia  school  teacher, Goldie  Watson,
for   contempt  of   the   Un-American  Activities  Committee.
She  invoked  the  First  Amendment  and  will  appeal.
Early   Renewals  Appreciated—Why    Not  Send  Yours  In   Today?
Don't  Forget
Our  Get  Together   on  Dec.   14
At  Community  Church,  40  E. 35th  Street,  New York  City,
at  8  p.m.  sharp that  night  the Weekly  is  holding  a  get  to-
gether  with  readers to  celebrate  the  anniversary of  the  Bill
of  Rights by a  panel  discussion of  its  meaning  in  the  light  of
East  European  events  since  the  death   of  Stalin.    How  can
socialism  be  combined  with  intellectual  freedom  and  funda-
mental   guaranties?  This  is  the  question  a   panel  of   inde-
pendent  Left  and  Socialist editors—and   the  audience—will
discuss.  A.   J.  Muste   of   Liberation,   Daniel   Roberts  of  the
Militant,  Bert  Cochran  of  the  American  Socialist  and   Hal
Draper  of   Labor  Action  will  be  among   those  taking  part.
IPS  will  be  the   immoderate   moderator.    Come  and  join  in
what  promises to  be  an   ideological   free-for-all.    No  holds
barred   (but  spare  the  chairs).   Admission  is  $1   (50   cents
for  students and  anyone  who  cannot  afford  more).
IE   Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  0.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED