I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956jan23.pdf

============================================================

The  Press  in  The Soviet  Bloc:  An  Open  Letter  to  Tass  on  the  Marton  Case,  See  Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  3
JANUARY  23,   1956
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15 CENTS
Where  the  Democrats  Really  Agree  With  Dulles
In  the  uproar  over  the  Life   interview  with  Mr.  Dulles,  the
realities of  American foreign  policy  are  being  overlooked.  This
account  of  how  war  was  ended  in  Korea  and  Indo-China  and
peace  maintained  over  Quemoy  and  Matsu  is  a  day-dream  put
on  by Mr.  Dulles  to  allay  Life's   suspicions  about  the  Republic-
cans.   The  editorial  in  the  same  issue  shows  Life   is  disturbed
because  "Ike's  new  message  sounds  nostalgic  for  the  spirit  of
Geneva."   It  believes  "the  Democrats  will  do  us  all  a  service
by concentrating  their  vigilance  and  their needling  on  any  signs
of  softness  ...     in  our  foreign  policy."   But  because  of  the
Dulles  interview,  Life   concludes  that  "the  case  against  Repub-
lican  complacency  toward  the  Communist  threat  is not  an  open
and  shut  one."    Such  are  the  uses  of  bedtime  stories.
Dulles  Lost  in  The Showdowns
Mr.   Lippmann   commented  that  U.S.   foreign   policy   "has
been  more  realistic  and  more  responsible  than  any  one  would
suppose"  from  reading  the  Life   article.   He  might  have  added
that  this  is  so  because  Mr.  Dulles,  though  Secretary  of  State,
has  very  fortunately  not  been  the  prime  molder  of  American
foreign  policy;  on  the contrary, peace  has been  made and  main-
tained  because  he  has  on  the  crucial  occasions  been  overruled.
One  such   occasion  was  that  hectic  conference  in  Paris  with
Eden  and  Mendes-France   July   13-14,   1954,   when  the  latter
wanted  American  support  for  his plan  to  end the  Indo-Chinese
fighting.   Dulles,  checking  twice  with  Eisenhower  by transat-
lantic  phone,  largely  reversed  his  resolve  to  'dissociate'  the
U.S.  from  the  Indo-Chinese  phase  of  the  Geneva  conference.
A  second  occasion  was  at  the  National  Security  Council  meet-
ing  in  Denver  in  September  of  1954  when  Eisenhower  over-
ruled   the  Dulles-Radford   proposal   for   aerial   attack  on   the
Chinese  mainland  in  defense  of  Quemoy-Matsu,   and   decided
instead  to  see what  could  be  done  by UN  mediation.  The  Ad-
ministration  has  wavered  and  wobbled  but  in  the  showdowns
Mr.  Dulles  has  been  on  the  losing  side  with  Radford,  Know-
land  and Nixon.
Nixon's  Foolhardy  Defense
The  Vice  President's  defense  of  the  Secretary  of  State  indi-
cates  what  really  happened;  nobody  seems  to  have  noticed  that
Mr.  Nixon  put  his  foot  in  his  mouth  as  energetically  as  Mr.
Dulles.  "The  test  of  a  foreign  policy,"  said  Mr.  Nixon,  "is  its
ability  to  keep  the  peace  without  surrendering  any  territory  or
any  principle."    By  this  test  the  Eisenhower  Administration
comes  out  badly.   It  "gave  away"  half  of  Korea  and  half  of
Indo-China  for  the  sake  of  peace,  and  has hinted  that  it  would
"give  away"  Quemoy  and  Matsu  if  Peking  acquiesced  in  our
possession  of  Formosa.   Indeed  most  Democrats,  far  from  ap-
plauding  the  defeat  of  Mr.  Dulles  on  these  occasions,  have
grumbled  about  the  price.   Just  last  week,  Senator  Humphrey
in  his  attack  on  the  Life   interview,  spoke  of  the  peace  in  Indo-
China   as  "that  very  unfortunate  settlement."   The   dominant
Democratic-Liberal-Labor   view,  in  all   its  opportunist  dema-
gogy  and  dangerous  contradiction,  was expressed  by Reuther  at
the  CIO  convention  in  December,   1954  when  he  compkined
that  "Dulles  .  .  .  frightened  the  free  world  with  his  talk  of
massive  retaliation"  (a  complaint  which  seemed  to  imply  sup-
port  for  peace)  but  added  in  the  next  breath  that  "in  Indo-
China  America's  policy  seemed  closer  to  appeasement  than  to
all-out  militant  resistance"  (which  implied  that  it  would   have
been  preferable  to  intervene  and  step  up  the   fighting).
The  Idiot's  Refrain
The   Democrats,   for   all   their   criticism,   really   agree   with
Nixon  that  the  test  of  a  foreign  policy  is  its  ability  "to  keep
the  peace  without  surrendering any territory or  any principle."
The  American public has  been  sold  the  idea,  first  by Mr.  Ache-
son and  then  by Mr.  Dulles, that if  only we pile up  big  enough
air fleets and  bombs we  can  dictate  terms,  without  ever  having
to  meet  our  adversaries halfway  in  negotiations.  This  view  is
so  strongly  entrenched  by  now  that  the  crises of  the  past  three
years  have  had  to  be  resolved  almost  surreptitiously.   George
and  Stevenson  and  Russell  and  Byrd  on  the  Democratic   side,
Secretaries   Humphrey   and   Wilson    and   former    President
Hoover   on  the  Republican   side,  have  all   played  a  part   in
holding  Eisenhower's  hand  on  a  course toward  peace.   But  no-
body  has dared  to  express the  view  publicly  that  peace requires
compromise.    Compromise   is   "appeasement."     This   is   the
idiot's  refrain  that  drowns  out  every  attempt  to  talk  sense.
Axis  Appeaser Turned  "Christian  Crusader"
I  have  always  regarded  Mr.  Dulles  with  repugnance  as  an
unctuous  old  fraud.   His  ability to  switch  over  from  his  cynical
prewar  defense  of  Japanese  and  German  expansion   (1932   to
1941)   and  reappear   (from  1943  on)   as  a  Christian   crusader
shows  how  easily  the  American  press  can  be  duped.   It  would
be a national  blessing  if  the  Life   article  should  force  Mr.   Dul-
les  out  of  his  job.  But  I  see  no  disposition  on  the  part  of  the
Democrats  to challenge him  on any of  the fundamental  issues of
foreign  policy—on  H-bomb  tests,  on  Formosa,  on  our  insist-
ence  that  a  unified  Germany  must  join  NATO,  or  on  his  de-
termination  to  prevent  elections  this  year  in  Indo-China.   Not
to  grapple  with  any  of  these  concrete  and  urgent  problems,   to
leave  all  these  time bombs ticking  away,  to  be  vocal  only  about
the  need  for  ever  bigger  arms  appropriations,   to  provide   a
claque  for  the  aviation  lobby  and  Ridgway,  is  to  drift  toward
war  and  hope  that  on  the  brink  the  adversary  will  give  in
rather  than  fight.  This  is,  as  Stevenson  termed   it,   "Russian
roulette."  The  trouble  is that  the  Democrats  play  it,  too.     Life
and  Dulles  have  merely  stated  it  too  baldly  for  their  comfort.
1  i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly, January  M, 1956
Checking  Dulles's  Version  of  the  Korean  Truce  Against  the  Known  Facts
Was Ike  "Calm  and Ready" to  Start  World  War  m  at Rhee's  Pleasure?
The  Dulles  article  in  Life   said  Eisenhower  decided  while
returning  from  Korea  on  the  battleship  Helena  in  December
1952  that  if  truce  negotiations  failed  we  would  attack  Man-
churia  with  atomic  weapons.  Our  allies in  the  UN  command,
the  article  said,  "would  be  informed  of  these  decisions when
and  if the  time came to implement them...." Notice that  they
were  to  be  "informed,"   not  consulted.
The  Republicans had  been extremely  critical of Mr.  Truman
for   taking  us  into  the  Korean  "police  action"  without  the
declaration  of  war  by  Congress  which  the  Constitution  re-
quires. These  decisions  would have meant  war  with  China,  and
therefore  possibly  with   China's  ally,  the  Soviet   Union,  i.e.
World  War  III.  Can  Dulles  have  been  serious  in  telling   Life
the  new Administration  was prepared  to plunge  in this with-
out  consulting either  our  allies  or  Congress?
Secretary  of the  Treasury  Humphrey, Secretary of  Defense
Wilson  and  Gen.  Lucius  D.  Clay  were  among  those  partici-
pating in the  conferences  on the  Helena.  The Senate  Foreign
Relations  Committee ought  to  ask  them  whether  this  story  is
true.   If  it  is,  then  the  incoming  Eisenhower    Administration
was guilty  at' its  very inception  of plotting  to  violate  its  obli-
gations  to  Congress,  and  to  the  United  Nations  under  whose
authority  we were  presumably  fighting  the  Korean war.
Just  A Secret  Between  Us and Peking
This story  is made to  look silly by what follows  immediately
after.    Our  allies would be "informed  of  these  decisions  when
and  if  the  time  came  to  implement  them,  but  meanwhile  it
was  urgent  to  make sure  that  the  Reds would  not  again  act
out  of  miscalculation."  We weren't  telling  our  allies  but  we
were  going  to  tell  Red China!
The  Life   article  says  that  "characteristically"  Dulles "un-
dertook  personally  to  see that  this  was  done."   He  went  to
New  Delhi  and  told  Nehru,  feeling  sure  about  the  latter's
"ability  to communicate speedily with  Peking."  Sure  enough,
"within  two  weeks  after   his  trip  to  New  Delhi,  Dulles  re-
ceived  word  from  Korea  that  the  Reds  appeared  to  have  be-
gun  to negotiate  seriously."
The  stumbling  block,  according  to  the   Life   article,  was
Peking's  insistence  that  "22,000"  North  Korean  and  Chinese
prisoners  be returned  whether  they wished to  go home or  not
"Dulles  had  made  it  clear,"  Life   said,  "that  the  U.  S. wa»
standing  firm  on  a  principle  of  justice  and  that  no  prisoner
would  be  returned  against  his  will.  So it  was  necessary   for
the  Communists to retreat  on this issue  if  a  resumption  of the
war  was  to  be  avoided."  While a  way  out  was  sought,  Rhee
released   the  prisoners,  hoping—so  the  Life   story   relates—
that  this  "would force  the  Communists to  break  off the  nego-
tiations  and  the  war  would be  resumed."
So what happened then?  "Dulles  picked up  the  direct  phone
to  the  White  House,"  Life   says,  "and  asked  the  White  House
operator  to  awaken  the  President.   He  told  Eisenhower  of
Rhee's action  and  briefly  stated  the  implications.  Dulles found
the  President  calm  and  ready.  The Helena  decision  was  reaf-
firmed.  The  Manchurian targets  had  already  been  carefully
selected  so  as  to  limit  them  to  areas  of  clear  military   im-
portance.
"But  the  North Koreans and  the  Red Chinese did  not  walk
out  of  the  conference," Life   goes on. "They continued to  nego-
tiate.  .  . . They did so, Dulles  believes,  because they  had had
unmistakable  warning  that  further  delays  would  no  longer
So Ike  Knows  How The  Press Feels
"More  accustomed  to  the  quick,  crisp  manner  of  a
military  briefing  officer  than  to  the  thoughtful  pauses of
Dulles,  Eisenhower  was  once  heard  to  exclaim,  'Why
doesn't  he  [Dulles]  speak  up  faster  and  say  what  he
has  on his mind?'"
—Life's   article,  "How  Dulles  Averted   War"
A  Rescue  Worse  Than  Defeat
'There  is  no doubt that Radf ord had alerted the Navy.
One  officer  aboard  a  carrier  was  prepared  to parachute
into  Dien  Bien  Phu  to  instruct  the  French  garrison  on
how  to  protect  itself  once  the  atomic bombs  began  to
fall  around  the  fort."
—Washington  Pott  (Jan.  14)  on the  Life   article.
"Whether  or  not  it  would ever  have  been  practical  to
use atomic tactical  weapons in  the battle  must  remain  a
matter  for  dispute.  But many people felt,  and still  feel,
that  in a  situation  such as  that  in  Dien  Bien  Phu where
the  besiegers  were  in  close  contact  with  the   besieged,
and  in  some cases  had  actually  overrun  them, an  inter-
vention  with atomic weapons would have caused  greater
death  and  destruction  than  was caused  in  the  battle  it-
self,  without  achieving  anything."
—Paris dispatch on Life,  London Times, (Jan.   IS).
be  met  with  U.S.  indecisiveness.  Thirty-nine   days  later  the
truce was signed."
This  certainly  distorts  the  sequence of  events.   Dulles vis-
ited   Nehru  May 20 to  May  22 of  1953.   But  Chou  En-lai  had
already  given  in  on  the  principle  of  voluntary  repatriation
almost  two  months earlier  on  March  30  in  a  statement  ap-
pealing  for  a  resumption  of the  truce  talks  and  an  exchange
of  sick  and  wounded  prisoners  held  by  both  sides.   On  April
26, April  29 and  May 8 further  concessions were  made  by  the
Communist  negotiators.
It  Was  Seoul That  Needed  Threatening
By  the  time  Dulles  reached  New  Delhi  on  May  20, the  re-
maining  obstacles  were  not  with  Peking  but  with  Seoul.  Ad
soon  as  an  agreement  came  into  sight,  Rhee  threatened  to
carry on the  war  alone, and finally boycotted  the  Panmunjom
sessions. All through  May and into  June,  the  Eisenhower  Ad-
ministration's  headache  was  Rhee's  intransigeance.  When  the
prisoner   of  war   agreement   was  finally  signed  by   Generals
Harrison  and  Nam  II on June  8, Rhee's representative did  not
sign  it,  though  even  Taft  and  Knowland  pleaded  with  Rhee
to go along.
It  strains  the  limits  of  credulity  to  be  told  that  after   all
those  weeks of anguished negotiation  with  Rhee, Dulles found
the  President  "calm  and  ready" to  drop  atom  bombs  on  Man-
churia  when  the  Secretary   of  State  woke  him  up  with  the
news  that  Rhee  had  upset  the  apple  cart  by  releasing  the
prisoners  just  as peace came into  sight.  It  is  easier  to  believe
that  the  President's  reaction  was sulphurous, and that it was
Rhee  on whom  he  felt  like  dropping a  bomb  that  morning.
If  the  President  was ready to drop bombs on Manchuria,  he
certainly  kept  it  a  secret.  A  world-wide wave  of  alarm  was
stirred  by  Rhee's action.  President  Eisenhower at  once  sent a
"secret  but  sharply  worded  message"  of  protest  to  Rhee  (N.
Y.  Times, June  19, 1953).
There  was  an  alarmed  session  of  the   National   Security
Council  on  June  18 after  which  Dulles  described  Rhee's  ac-
tion  as  "a  violation  of  the  authority  of  the  UN command."
That  night  he  tried  to  reassure  a  meeting of  all  the  Ambas-
sadors   representing-  those  countries  with  troops  in  Korea.
World-wide condemnation  of  Rhee  saved  face  for  Peking,  and
made  it  possible  to  bring  about  a  cease-fire  on  July  26.
Everything  the  Administration  did  in  those  hectic  hours
gave  Congress, the  country, our  allies  and  the  world  the  im-
pression  that  the  Eisenhower  Administration  would  not  per-
mit  Rhee  to  upset the  truce  talks just  as  they  neared  comple-
tion.  There  was  not  the  slightest  hint  of  a  decision  to  meet
the  situation by threatening an  atomic  bombardment  of Man-
churia.   Either  the  Administration  engaged  in  an  extraordi-
narily  elaborate  deception  or  Dulles is  not  telling  the  truth.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  iS,  1956
An  Open  Letter  to  The  Editors of  Tasa  on  the  Marion  Case
The  One World  of  Co-Existence  Requires  One  Standard  of  Justice
To  the Editors of  Tats:
There  are  American  citizens  working  in  this  country  for
Tass  and  the  Soviet  press.   Suppose  one  of  them  were  sud-
denly to disappear.  Suppose that  weeks later there  was a  curt
announcement  by  the  American  government that  he had been
arrested  on  suspicion  of  espionage  for  the  Soviet  intelligence
service.  Suppose Tass  made efforts  to  learn  the  exact  charges
without  success,  was unable to  contact  its  employe or  obtain
legal  advice for him.  Suppose months later it  were announced
that  he  had  been tried  by  an  American military  court,  found
guilty  and  sentenced  to  six  years  in  prison.
Would  you be  content  to  accept  that  verdict  without know-
ing where and  when  the trial had  been held, the  nature  of  the
evidence,  the  character  of  the  proceeding ?  You may rest  as-
sured  that not  only newspapermen  like  myself  but  many con-
servative  American papers would protest  such  conduct by  our
authorities  as  high-handed,  and  demand  the  fullest  kind of
investigation.
The hypothetical  case  put  before you is  almost  exactly  that
of  the  Hungarian  newspaperman, Endre Marton,  correspond-
ent  of the  Associated  Press in Budapest  during  the past  eight
years.   Indeed  the  Marton  case  is  worse  because  the  police
also  arrested' his  wife,  Ilona,  correspondent  for  the  United
Press. Their  two smalt  daughters  were  "orphaned"  by the  ar-
rests.  If  our  authorities  had  acted  this  way,  would  you  not
have  denounced  them  as   barbarous?
Your  Police Have Been  Wrong Before
Dr.- Marton  dropped  out  of  sight  11 months  ago.   The  last
telephone  contact  with  his  wife  was  June  19. The  Hungarian
government  announced July  9 that  both  had been  arrested on
suspicion  "of  having  carried  out  espionage  for  the  American
intelligence service."  Then  almost  seven  months  later  came
an  announcement by the  Budapest  radio  January  14 that  Dr.
Marton  had  been  sentenced  by  a  military  court  to  six,  bis
wife  to  three  years  in  jail.
Even  the  date  of  the  trial  was  not  given.  The  Associated
Press  said  reports  reaching  Vienna  last  Fall  declared  the
Marions  and  three  other  persons  had  been  tried  November
28  "but  that  Hungarian  authorities   prohibited   disclosure  of
the verdicts in the press."
For  all  we know  the  Martens  may be guilty.  But we would
not  accept a  verdict  from  our  own government under  such  cir-
CORRECTION
Through  an  error  last  week  Seymour  Peck  was  re-
ferred  to  as  one  of  the  three  men  discharged  by  the
New   York  Times  last  year  after   appearances   before
Congressional   committees.   This  was  an  error;   Jack
Shafer  should  have  been  named as  one  of  the  three  on
whose  behalf  we  appealed.
cumstances.  That  your  secret  police are  as prone  to  error  and
injustice  as  any  other  was dramatically  shown by the  reversal
of  the  "doctors' plot" and later the  execution  of  Beria himself
as  an  "imperialist  agent";  Hungary  confessed  error   when
it  freed  Noel and  Herta  Field,  who had  been  convicted in  the
famous  Raik  trial.   This  could be an  "error,"  too.
If  There Is  To  Be Co-Existence
We  asked  the  Hungarian  Embassy   whether  the  Mart on s
were  tried  publicly  or  secretly,  whether  they  had  counsel,
whether  they  had  a  right  of  appeal,  whether  a  transcript of
the  trial was available.  The Embassy  through  its  press secre-
tary  said  all  it  knew  was  what  the  American  papers  had
printed  the  day  before.   Maybe  Tass  can  find  out  what  the
American  press  can't.
At a time when press relations between East  and West have
been  improving,  the  Marton  case  is  a  setback.   If  the charges
are  to  be  taken  seriously,  then  the  Hungarian  government
owes  it  to  world  opinion  and  to  the  cause  of better relations
to  publish  the  full  facts  and to  give the  Associated  Press and
the  United  Press the  right  to  contact  their  employes  directly
in  prison,  to  retain  counsel  for  them,  and  to  bring  an appeal
if  they  believe  one justified.
It  is  in  the  profound  conviction  that  peaceful coexistence
is  the  most  urgent  necessity  of  the  human  race  that  we  ap-
peal  to  Tass  to  investigate.  The  world  must  slowly  become
one,,  and  if  it  is  to  be  one  we  cannot  have  one  standard of
justice  on  one  side  and  another  standard  on  the  other.
Particular  emphasis  must  be  laid  on  freedom  of  informa-
tion  and  of  communication.  Of  course,  this  does  not  give  a
right  to  spy.  But  newspapermen  must  not be at  the  mercy of
espionage  charges  by  governments  which  may  not  like  what
they  write  nor  at  the  mercy of  laws  which equate  news gath-
ering  with  espionage.                                       —I.  F.   STONE
Could  the  Prohibitionists Have  Investigated the  Press  for Alcoholics?
A  Senator,  Himself A Newspaperman, Attacks Congressional  Inquisition Into The Press
"Of  course,  Mr.  President,  the  hearings  which  have  re-
cently  been concluded,  but  which  may  be  revised  soon,  I  un-
derstand,  have  been  defended  as  an investigation not  of  the
press,  but  of  communism.  We have  recently  lived through a
period  when,  apparently, any  person  or  institution could  be
pilloried  by  investigation if  charged in  any  quarter whatso-
ever  with  alleged  communism.  There  have  been  investiga-
tions  of  charges  of   Communist  infiltration  into  churches,
but,  of  course,  not  an  investigation  of  churches.  Yet,  Mr.
President,  under  the  open-book  charges now  in  vogue,  what
is  to prevent  a committee which is  bigoted against a certain
church  or religion from  looking for  communism  in  that par-
ticular  church?  .  .  .  What  if  some other  committee  decided
to  probe  alleged  disloyalty  on  the  staffs  of  certain  news-
papers  which  were  suggesting  opposition  to  a  unanimous
verdict  of  the United  States  Supreme  Court?  . . .
"But, Mr. President, it  is  both  wrong and dangerous  to  en-
courage  the  inference  that  occasional  newspaper  employees
with  Communist  backgrounds  have  shaped  the  press  into  a
tool  of  a  totalitarian  conspiracy.   It  is  wrong,  because  it
takes  no congressional investigators  to  know  that  the  exact
1
opposite  is  the  case.   It  is  dangerous, because  it  points  the
way   to  coercive  pressure  on  the  editorial  policies  of  any
newspaper  which  offends  temporarily  anyone  in  the position
to  investigate.  It  creates  the  threat  that,  by  the  very  act of
investigating  one  newspaper  and  not  another,  a  congres-
sional  committee or  grand jury  may single  out a segment of
the  press which reports facts  or favors editorial policies not
in  agreement  with  those of  a  particular  committee.
"A  committee  in  favor  of  public  power  could  probe  the
personnel  of  a  newspaper  sympathetic  to  the  private  utility
companies.  A committee with  a  majority  favorable  to  racial
integration  might   decide  to  question  the  employees  of  a
newspaper   which  promoted   continued  segregation  in   the
public  schools.  If  a newspaper supports  liberalization  of  our
immigration  laws,  a  committee  opposing  that  step  may  de-
cide  to  investigate  whether  foreign-born  citizens  have con-
spired  to  infiltrate  the  press.  When  many  newspapers sup-
ported  the  21st amendment,  should congressional supporters
of  continuing  prohibition  have  undertaken  the  investigation
of  alcoholism  among  journalists  and  linotype  operators?"
—Sew. Richard Neuberger (D. Ore.) in the Senate, Jan. 12
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

f.  F. Stone's  Weekly, January  23,1956
On  the  Civil  Liberties  Front:  The  Real  Issue  in  the  Lightfoot   "Membership"   Decision
Ex-Communist  Screen  Writer  Gets  Passport  Without  "Naming   Names"
The backdown of  the  State Department in the  Carl  Foreman
case  was  a  defeat  not  only  for  the  Department  but  for  the
Senate  Internal  Security  Committee.  The rule  applied  by  the
Department  in  the  past  to  passport  applicants  who claim  to
be ex-Communists is that set forth  by the  Eastland  committee
in  its  latest report on the  Communist party. "A test of the  in-
dividual's  sincerity,"  the  report   says,  "is  his  willingness  to
expose  his  associates  in  the  ranks  of  the  Communist conspir-
acy."*   Foreman,   the   screen   writer   who  produced  "High
Noon"  and  "Home  of the  Brave"  (and  has  been  living  in  the
home of the  braver  British),,was  refused renewal  of his  pass-
port  when  he  declined  to  "prove  his  sincerity"  by  naming
others.   Suit  was  brought  on  his  behalf  by  Sidney  E.  Cohn
and  Eugene   Gressman  but  the  Department  cabled  our  Em-
bassy  in London to issue  a passport  for  Foreman  and his wife
just  as  the  case  was  about  to  be  tried.   No  doubt  it   feared
another   adverse  decision  like  that  in  the   Leonard  Boudin
passport  case  in, which  the   Court  of  Appeals  has   already
ruled  that the  Department  in denying passports  must  produce
its  evidence  and  cannot  rely  on faceless  informers.
The  conviction  of  Claude  Mack  Lightfoot  under  the  mem-
bership  clause  of  the  Smith  Act  was  unanimously upheld  by
the  U.S.  Court of  Appeals in  Chicago last  week. This  was  the
second  ruling  of  its  kind,  the  first  being that  in  the  case  of
Junius  Irving  Scales  whose  conviction was  upheld  last  Fall
by  the  Court  of  Appeals  in  Baltimore  (see the  Weekly   last
November  17  for  comment).  Lightfoot  like  Scales  was  not
only  a  member but  an  official  of the  Communist party  and  the
Court  stressed  the  fact  that  he  was "not a  mine-run member
.  . . nor was he an innocent worker  . . . Lightfoot was an in-
telligent,  crusading  Communist. . .  ."  We hope  the  Supreme
Court  will  pass  upon these  membership cases.  All  the  earlier
convictions  were  for   conspiracy   to  advocate  at  some  future
date;  Scales  and  Lightfoot  were  convicted for  membership in
a  party  which  is  presumed  (on  the  basis  largely  of  books
written  by  Marx,  Engels,  Lenin and  Stalin)  to  teach  and  ad-
vocate.   Nobody  has  yet  been  prosecuted  for  actually  himself
* In  this,  as  in  other  respects,  the  current  inquisition  re-
calls  its  older  ecclesiastical  counterpart.   "The accused,"  the
Encyclopaedia  Britannica  says  of  the  Inquisition,  "was  bound
to  denounce  all  those  who  were  partners  of  his  heresy,  or
whom  he  suspected  or  knew  to  be  heretics.   If  he  confessed,
and  denounced  his  accomplices, relatives  or  friends,  he  was
'reconciled'  with  the  Church."
Why  the  New  H-Bomb  Blast
Washington—That  flood  of  stories  about  the  new  H-
bomb  explosions being  for  defensive  purposes  is  based
on  off  the  record  not-for-attribution  interviews with  fa-
vored   reporters  designed   to   allay   public  misgivings
about  further  tests.  The  real  reason  for  the  tests (and
the smaller size)  H-bomb  to  be  used  seems  to  be that  we
have  not  yet  tested  an  H-bomb  by  dropping  one  from  a
plane  as  the  Russians did.  Our last  H-bomb  blast  was
of  a  monster  so  huge  and cumbersome  that  it  had  to  be
set  up  on  the  ground  for  detonation.   It  could  be  used
in  war if  the  enemy  kindly  consented to  let  us  put  it  up
alongside  the  target  and  granted  visas  to  the  techni-
cians  required to  set  it off.
advocating  revolutionary  doctrine.   No  matter  how  you  slice
it,  whether  by  conspiracy  or  membership, this  is  a  long way
from  the  traditional  idea  that  a  man  may  advocate  what  he
pleases,  so  long  as  he  does  not  by  overt  act  commit  or   at-
tempt  to  commit  a  crime  against  public  order.
There  was  further  evidence last  week  of  an  improving  cli-
mate  in  the  courts.  The  Supreme  Court  granted  a  hearing  to
Oleta  O'Connor Yates,  one  of  the  California  Smith  Act vic-
tims,  from  a  one year  sentence for  contempt;  Mrs.  Yates  was
in  and  out  of  jail  for  months  as  she  steadily  refused  while
herself  on trial  to  identify  others  as  Communists.  The  Court
last  week,  speaking  through  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter,   held
that  a  naturalized  citizen  could  not  be  required  under  the
McCarran-Walter  Act to appear  as  a  witness  in  a  proceeding
which  might  lead  to  his  own  denaturalization.  A  5-4 decision
in  another  case  indicated  the  lineaments  of  a  new  moderately
liberal  majority  and  of  a  rightist  minority.   Harlan   (with
Reed,  Burton   and   Minton)   dissented   from   an   opinion  by
Douglas strictly  construing  the  search  and  seizure  safeguards
of  the  Constitution  against  the  prosecution  and  in  favor  of
the  accused  in  a  marihuana  case.  The  immediate  issue  was
highly  technical,  but  the  Court's  lineup pretty  accurately  re-
flected the  sympathies  of  the  Judges.   The  new 'Justice,  Har-
lan,  gravitates  naturally   to  the  right,  as  we  predicted  he
would  when  he  was  appointed.  ...    In  another   encouraging
ruling  here last  week, the  U.S.  Court of  Appeals  reversed  the
contempt  conviction of  Saul  Grossman, an  official  of  the  Mich-
igan  Committee for  the  Protection  of  the  Foreign  Born.
Send  A  Gift   Sub   with    If our  Renewal   and  Bring  Some  Friend  Back  to  the  Ranks  of  Active   Liberalism
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 B.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City
...Zone............State....................
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
1/23/56
(To)   Name                              _
City                                        .Zone.         :State.
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yes  Q    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.. S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED