I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956feb27.pdf

============================================================

U.  S. Army  Chief  Says  "Unrestricted  Nuclear  War May Be  Total  Disaster  for  All  Participants,"  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL;   IV,  NO.  8FEBRUARY  27,  1956
'<»       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
On  The  Need  for  Allowing  A  Little  Trade  in  Virgins
A  Reuters  dispatch  from  Versailles   says  the   Consultative
Assembly  of  the  French Union  has  ordered  a  full  investigation
of  reports  that  slaves  are  being  taken  in  French  Africa  and
sold  in  Saudi  Arabia.    According  to  Emmanuel  le  Graviere,
who  made  a  preliminary  report  to  the  Assembly,  the  main
item  of  trade  is  in  young Negro  virgins under  15.    These  he
said  "bring  from  200,000  to  400,000  francs  (about  $570  to
$1140)  each  in  Saudi Arabian slave  markets."
This   could   involve  troublesome  diplomatic  complications.
The  French government can  be  expected  to  act only after  con-
sultation  with  its  allies  in  London  and  Washington.    But  pri-
vate  organizations of  a  less  responsible  character  are  already
at  work.  Two  days  after  this Reuters dispatch  from  Versailles,
the  New  York  Times  (Feb.  21)  carried  a  cable  from  London
saying  that  Charles  W.  Greenidge,  secretary  of  the  Antislav-
ery  arid  Aborigines  Protection  Society  was  preparing  a  report
for   submission  to  the  United  Nations   Economic  and   Social
Council  in  April  on  what  he  described  as  an  increasing  traffic
by  "Saudi  Arabian  slave  dealers,  seeking  concubines  for   the
harems  of  wealthy  customers."   Apparently  one  result  of  the
oil  boom  is that  Saudi  Arabians  are  now  able  to  afford  better
stocked  harems.
The  Practical   Considerations
This  is  not  funny.   Aside  from  the  morally  repugnant  as-
pects  of  trade  in  human  beings,  there  are  wider,  serious  and
more  practical considerations  to  be kept  in  mind.  Our  lease  on
those  bomber  bases  in  Saudi  Arabia  expires  in  June.  Negotia-
tions  for  renewal will  not  be made  easier  if  in  April  a  debate
is  precipitated  at  the  United  Nations  on  this  .delicate subject.
The  honor  of  our  good  and  dear  friends  in  Saudi  Arabia  will
inevitably  be  involved.   The  reluctance  of  the  Saudi  Arabian
government  to  discuss  this  question  at  all  is apparent  from  the
London  dispatch.   This  quotes  Mr.  Greenidge  as  saying  that
both  Saudi  Arabia  and  Yemen  "have  not  answered  repeated
United  Nations  and  other  inquiries concerning  slaves,  although
both  are  member  nations."    There  is  the  danger  of  a  show-
down  between  the  UN  on  the  one  side  and  Saudi  Arabia  and
Yemen  on  the   other.
We  bring  this  up  in  an  effort  to  alert  the  State  Department
in  time.  Is there  some way to  postpone  this  investigation  until
after  the  bomber  base  leases  are  signed?   What  position  will
our  government  take  if  this  spring  it  must  stand  up  and  be
counted  for  or  against  Saudi Arabia? Cannot  steps  be  taken  to
prepare  public  opinion  if  practical  necessities  require us  to  take
a  somewhat  broad  view  of  the  slave  trade?   It  would  be  dis-
astrous  if  we  vacillated.   It  would  damage  us  perhaps  irrepar-
ably  were some  shipment  of  African  virgins  to  be  held  up  on
the  Zambesi  or  the  Congo  by  a  last-minute  switch  of  policy
from  Washington,   only  to  have  the  girls  reloaded   two  days
later  when  Saudi  Arabia  insisted  in  an  ultimatum  which  could
only  be  summarized as,  "no  girls,  no  bases,  no   oil."
It  would  be  well  if  Mr.  Dulles,  wherever  he  is,  could  be
summoned  home  for  consultation.   His  Under  Secretary,  Mr.
Herbert  Hoover,  Jr.,  as  an  experienced  oil man,  can  be  trusted
to  see  this  situation  clearly.   But  Mr.  Dulles  has  so  stressed
the  moral  and  Godly  aspects  of  our  foreign  policy  as  to  create
some   difficulties   in   preparing   to   take  a   practical    position.
These   difficulties  are  not,  however,  insurmountable.   The  first
step  should  be  to  summon as  soon  as  possible  a  series  of  those
private  briefing  sessions  at  which  representatives   of   leading
American  organizations are  prepared  in  advance to  understand
our  government's  foreign  policy,  which  is  sometimes  confus-
ing  to  the  lay mind.
No  Spiritual   Danger
It  must  first  be  made  clear  that  the  spiritual  welfare  of
these  girls  is  in  no  danger;  the  Moslems  into  whose   homes
they,  will  come  believe  in  God  as  devoutly  as  we  do.    Indeed
for  many  of  the  poor  creatures  this  transfer  of  title   (as  so
skilled  a  lawyer  as  Mr.  Dulles  might  term  it)   will  mark  a
distinct  spiritual  advance,  since these  virgins  come  from  Equa-
torial  Africa  where many of  the  tribes are  still  pagan  and  have
no knowledge  of  the  one true  God  whom we and  the  Moslems
both  worship,  Allah  Ilahu.   (Prayer  rugs  might  be  spread  at
this  point  in  the  briefing; Aramco, we are  sure,  would  be  gkd
to   supply   them  on   loan   to  the   State  Department   for   the
purpose).
The  briefing  sessions  should  enable  Americans  to  see  this
matter  in  perspective  and  in  the  way it  appears  to  allies  living
in  a  different  culture.  There  is little  on  which  the  Saudi  Ara-
bian  can spend  his  oil  revenues;  he  soon  tires  of  Cadillacs.  The
nights  in  Arabia  are  long  and  dull.    The   Moslem,   leafing
through  his  Scripture, like  a listless travelling  salesman  thrown
back  on  his  Gideon  Bible  for  amusement  in  some  one-horse
town,  reads  of  Solomon  (blessed  be his  name!)  and  his  thou-
sand  wives  and  concubines.   His  Koran  promises  him  in  the
after  life  a  paradise  of  houris.   Our  diplomats  and  oil  men
tell  him  that  oil  revenues  can  build  him  a  paradise  on  earth.
But  for  a  pious  Moslem,  reading  his  scripture  literally,  like  a
Methodist   fundamentalist   in   our  own   beloved   Mississippi,
paradise  is  not  paradise  without  those  virgins.   Would  it  not
be  impious,   almost  atheistical,   to  interfere  with   the   ancient
customs  and  devout  pastimes  of  our  Saudi  Arabian  allies?
Of  course  the  professional  politicians  of  the  NAACP,  like
the  Zionists  on  similar  occasions,  may  be  expected  to  protest
this  effort  to  reconcile  national  interest  with  the  highest  moral
and  religious  principle.   But  are we to  endanger  bomber  bases,
oil  reserves,  and  the   solvency  of  the   sterling   bloc   for   the
sake  of  domestic  politics?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.Stone't   Weekly,  February *7,  l»5g
The  New  Walter Hearings  and  the  Goldie  Watson  and Watkins Cases  Pose  An  Old Question;
Is  Defamation  of  Character  A  Proper  Legislative   Purpose?
Could  n  Congressional   committee  ask  a  bank  president
whether  he  ever  committed larceny—and explain  that  it  was
only  asking  in  order  to  frame  better  laws  against   theft?
Could  it  subpoena citizens  and  ask  them  whether  they  ever
committed  adultery on the  excuse  that Congress  was  studying
the  divorce problem ? Would  it  not be recognized that  the  ask-
ing  of  such  questions cast  an  indelible stain,  that  the  power
of  investigation was  being used as  an instrument for  defama-
tion ?  Would  it  not  be seen  that while a  legislature  may make
laws on larceny and divorce, the  job of  enforcing them  against
individuals  belonged  to  grand  juries,  operating  in  secrecy  to
protect  reputations  from  unwarranted  charges,   and  to  the
courts?
This  is  an  issue  the  Supreme  Court  has  dodged  ever  since
it  refused  to  hear the  Hollywood   Ten and Barsky  cases.  This
is  the  issue  with  which  it  will  be  confronted  again  now that
the  Court  of  Appeals here  has  granted  the  government's  peti-
tion  for  a  rehearing  before  its  full  bench of  the  2-to-l  Wat-
kins  decision  which  held  that  the  House  Un-American  Activ-
ities  Committee   could  not  hold  a  witness,  in  contempt   for
refusing  to  give  it  the  names of  persons  he  had known  in  the
Communist   party.   The  witness   in   that   case   had  pleaded
neither  the  First  nor  the  Fifth;  he  had  admitted  past  mem-
bership;  he  refused  to  name  others  on moral  grounds.  Judges
Edgerton  and Bazelon  upheld him on the  ground  that a legis-
lative  committee  has  no  right  to  ask  questions   purely   for
the  purpose  of  "exposure."
Aid  to  What  Kind  of  Education?
In  so ruling  the  two liberal  judges  of  this  circuit  struck  at
the  very  heart  of  the  witch  hunt.   Martin  Dies  at  its  very
beginning  declared  it  his  purpose  to  act  as  a  roving  public
grand  jury.  The  idea  was  to  punish  by  infamy  those  who
could  not  be  reached  by  the  criminal  law  since  they   were
guilty  of  no crime  but holding  views a  Congressional  commit-
tee  thought  "un-American."  This  was  and  remains  far  from
any  normal  legislative  purpose.  This  was  evident  again  when
the  government  was  challenged  the  other  day  in  the  Goldie
Watson   case  to  explain   the   House   Committee's  legislative
purpose  in  questioning  that  Philadelphia  school  teacher   (who
pleaded  the  First).  One of  the  lame  theories  put  forward  by
the  prosecutor  was  that  Congress  might  want  to  know  about
her  possible  Communist past  and associations  in  order to  help
it  decide on the  aid to education bill!  (Judge Schweinhaut has
asked  for  briefs  on the  point to  help him  make  his  decision.)
The  purpose  of   defamation  was  again  apparent  in  last
week's  House  Committee  hearings  when   four  lawyers  who
worked  for  the  National  Labor  Relations Board  in  the  late
30's  or early  40's  were questioned. The range  of  questions put
by  Chairman  Walter and  Counsel Richard  Arens  swung  in  a
wild  buckshot orbit.  One question dragged  in  the  name  of  a
man  who had earned their enmity  by heading up  a  committee
to  study  revision  of  the  McCarran-Walter immigration  act
which  Arens helped to  frame.  One line  of  questioning seemed
to  imply  that  the  NLRB's  anti-company  unionism  was  the
product  of  Communist conspiracy.  Another line  of  questions
smeared  the  Israel  bond drive.
Investigating   Israel  Bonds?
A  witness  refused  to  name those  who got  him a  job in  that
drive,  pleading  the  Fifth  as  his  protection.  After  a  long  line
of   harassing  questions   about  his   own  views   and  those  of
others,  he  asked  the  committee  not  to  draw  unwarranted  in-
ferences  from  his  use  of  the  Fifth.   Walter,  with  almost  sav-
age  pleasure,  said  he  would  draw  any  inferences   he  liked.
What  business   is  it  of  a  Congressional   committee  who  is
hired  by  a  private  bond  drive?  The  real  purpose  here  is  to
deprive  radicals,  present,  past  or  suspected,  of  livelihood  and
to  frighten  any  employer  from  hiring  them.
The  hearings  also  gave  the  House  committee  an  excuse  to
put  into  the  pillory  a  member  of  the  tost  Washington  law
firm which  still  has  the  courage  to  defend  the rights- of Com-
munists,   real  as  well-  as  alleged.  In  asking   David  Rein,  a
member  of  Forer & Rein,  about  his  political  views  and  those
of  his  wife,  the  committee  was  able  to  settle  scores  with  a
lawyer  who has  often  represented  witnesses before  it.  This  is
a  particularly  obnoxious  form of intimidation,  since  it  inhibits
the  right  to  counsel.   These  hearings   into  the  NLRB's  past
are  the fruit  of  a form  of  blackmail;  men like  Herbert  Fuchs
were  led to testify  against  others  under the  threat  of  perjury
prosecutions  for  failing  to  disclose  past  Communist member-
ship  on  government  personnel  forms.  This  is  dirty  business.
It  remains  for  the  Supreme  Court,  in  a  changing   climate,
to  call  a  halt.
"Too  Many  Americans  Neglected  Their  Own  Sick  and Wounded"
Army, Psychiatrist  Denies  Torture
Q.  Most  people  have  the  idea  that  prisoners   who  were
brainwashed  were  subjected  to  tortures  such  as  starvation,
solitary  confinement,  etc.   Was  there  much  of  that?
A.  No,  this  third  [a  third  of  all  U.S.  prisoners  in  Korea
admit  they  turned  "progressive"  in  Communist  camps,  ac-
cording  to  Major  Mayer]  that  I  am  talking  about  were  not
subjected  to  physical  torture,  according  to  their  own  state-
ments.
Q.  So you don't count  torture  as  an essential  part of  brain-
washing?
A. Definitely not....
Q.   Did   the   Japanese   try   brain-washing  our   prisoners
in  World  War  II,  or  did  the  Germans?
A.  As  long  as  we  understand  precisely   that  by  brain-
washing  we  are  simply  using  a  coined  word to  apply  to  an
indoctrination  and  education  process,  I  can  say  that  every
prisoner-holding  power  in  every  major  war  has  engaged  in
this  kind  of  activity.   This  is  permitted  under  the Geneva
convention.   The  Communists  simply  went  about it  more in-
tensively,  more  systematically.  . . .
Q.   Didn't   the   Americans   take  care   of   their  sick   and
wounded?   •
Was  Part  of  "Brain Washing"
A-  Of  course  they  did,  in  many  cases.   But,  in  a  disturb-
ingly  large  number of  instances,  evidently  they  did not.  The
reluctant  conclusion   must  be  drawn  that  this  fact  is   the
principal  one  in  explaining  the  deaths  of  the  hundreds  of
Americans  who failed  to  survive.  .  .  .
Q.  Do  you  mean  that  these  prisoners  expected  to  be  tor-
tured,  and  then, when they  were  treated  with  seeming  kind-
liness  instead,  they  were  more  prone  to  accept  the  Commu-
nists'  ideas?
A. Yes....
Q.  Did  they  try  to  make  prisoners  into  Communists?
A.  Never.   One  of  the  largest  areas  of  public  misunder-
standing  has related  to just  this  problem. . .  .
Q. Why was  that?
A.  ...    From the very  beginning,  they  told  these  soldiers
they  merely wanted  to  show  them  the  truth as  they  saw  it,
and   they   wanted  to  enlist  these  soldiers   as   fighters   for
peace...."
—Interview  with Major  William  A.  Mayer,  an Army  psy-
chiatrist  who  questioned .nearly  1,060 U.S.  soldiers cap-
tured  by  the  enemy in  Korea, during  a  four  year  study
of  "brain washing,"  U.S. News  & World  Report,  Feb. 24.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  27,  1956
U.  S.  Army  Chief  Says  "Unrestricted  Nuclear  War  May Be Total  Disaster  fur  All  Participants"
So Why  Not  Try  to  Stop  the  Race for  Weapons  Too  Dangerous  To  Use?
Those  papers, like  the  New York  Times, which depended on
the  Associated  Press for  coverage  omitted  the  most  important
part  of the  testimony  given  the  Senate  Armed  Services Com-
mittee last  Monday  by  U.S.  Army  Chief  of  Staff  Maxwell  D.
Taylor.  This  was  Taylor's  statement  that  it  was  becoming
"increasingly  apparent  that  unrestricted  nuclear   war  may
be  total  disaster  for  all  participants."
Unfortunately  the   official  synopsis  issued  to  the  press  by
the  committee  after  the  session,  which was  held  behind  closed
doors, gave  no more than  this  short  cryptic  quotation  on this
point. It  was supplemented,  however, by  an excerpt  from  the
testimony  of  Secretary  of  the  Army  Wilbur  M. Brucker.  The
latter,  obviously  rebutting  Air  Force  talk  of  a  quick,  short
war,   told  the  committee   a  new  war  "may  be  a  long,   des-
perate and exhaustive  struggle."
The  purpose  of  the  testimony   and  the  unusual  release  of
a  synopsis  was  to  plead  against  Army  cuts.  While  General
Taylor  said  the  Army  wanted  atomic  weapons,  he  said  that
in  the  main   world  trouble  spots  where   limited  wars   were
likely  to  break  out,  "Any  military   action  .  .  .  would  be es-
sentially  a  land  operation   with  a  very  limited  role,  if  any,
for  weapons  of  mass  destruction."
Taylor  did  not  name  these  "trouble  spots"  but  obviously
places  like  Korea,   Indochina,  Cyprus,  Israel,  or  even   Ger-
many  are  too  small  for  using  the  new  weapons  of  mass  de-
struction  without  destroying  ally  and  enemy  alike.
But  the  main  point  made  by  General  Taylor,  that  "unre-
stricted  nuclear warfare  may be total  disaster" for  both  sides
raises  a  crucial  question. If  these  new weapons  are  too  dan-
gerous  to  be  used  by either  side,  why not  negotiate  an  agree-
ment  not  to  use  them  and  thus  ease  tension?  And why  go on
developing  new  weapons  of  the  same  kind,  like  an  intercon-
tinental  ballistic  missile  with  a  thermonuclear   warhead?
This  new terror  involves  new  unsolved  technical   problems.
A  ban  on further  thermonuclear  tests  would  make  it  impos-
sible  to  test  one  with  a  thermonuclear   warhead.    Thermo-
nuclear  tests  are   detectible  and  therefore   a  ban  on  them
would be self-enforcing.   Krushchev  in his  speech  of  Feb.  24 to
the  Soviet Party  Congress  offered  "pending  agreement  on  the
major   questions  of  disarmament   .  .  .  cessation  of  tests of
thermonuclear  weapons."  Why  can't  Nehru  ask  the  Pope  to
follow  up  on  his  Christmas  message  with  a  new  appeal  to
U.S.   and   U.S.S.R.  to   negotiate   such   a  moratorium?      It
would  be  a  first  step  in  easing  world  tension.
Perspective  on  Missiles
"The  Russians  today  have  plenty  of   medium  range
bombers  that  have all  the  [U.S.]  bases  in  Europe that
we  are  talking  about  within  their range,  and  that have
the  capability  of  delivering atomic bombs against  basea
with  more  precision  than  we  can  expect  them  to  have
with  a  ballistic missile  for  some  time  to  come.  There-
fore,  they  know  and  we  know  that  the  mere  addition  to
their  arsenal  of  the  1,500  mile  missile  to  do  the  same
job  would  not  materially  affect  the  balance of  power  be-
tween  the two blocs.  .  .  .  And they  know  that  the addi-
tion  of  even  an  intercontinental   [ballistic  missile]   of
any  accuracy that  they  arc  apt  to  have  within  the  next
decade  will  be only  a  marginal advantage  to  them  over
their  bomber  force  and  not  a  completely  new  and revo-
lutionary  thing.  .  .  .  The  point  that  I  am  making  then
is  that we have gotten this  thing completely  out  of per-
spective.   We  have  scared  our  people  to  death  about
something  that is,  to  be  sure,  a  horrifying  weapon; but
it  does  not kiil  you  any  deader than  a  bomber  does  with
an  atomic bomb; and nobody  is  going  to  start  a  war be-
cause  they have this  kind of  weapon  unless they can  see
a  way  out that  will  avoid destruction to  themselves, and
the  addition of  this  weapon  to  their arsenal  whether  or
not  we  then have it  will  not  avoid  destruction to  them-
selves  ...    we are recognizing it  as  a  very potent addi-
tion  to  our  arsenal, but  we  are  not  recognizing  it  as  a
weapon  that  will  revolutionize warfare,  whichever  side
gets  it first."
—Donald  A. Quarles, Secretary  of  the Air  Force,  testi-
fying   before  a House Appropriations   subcommittee.
A" main  obstacle  is  opposition  from  Britain,  which  does  not
want  to  stop  tests until  it  has  an  IBM with  a  thermonuclear
warhead   of  its  own.   The  Times  of  London  in  an   editorial
-Feb.   18 said  this  was  "a  sad  gloss  on  the  state  of  Anglo-
American  relations"  since  Britain  would  merely  be  duplicat-
ing  U.S.  efforts.   The  Atomic  Energy  Act  prevents  the   U.S.
from  giving  such  nuclear  secrets  even  to  an  ally  as  close  as
Britain.  But  must  the  British  for  reasons  of  prestige  have
this  terrible  and  expensive  military  toy?   Its   use  would  be
the  end  of  countries  as  small  in  area  as  Britain.
Most  of  Nation's  Press  Ignores  Petition  for  Basic  Review of  Foreign  Policy
Except  for  the  New  York  Times,  most  of   the   nation's
press  and  the  wire  services  ignored  a  petition  to  Congress
and  the  White  House  last  week-end  for  "a  fundamental re-
view"  of  foreign  policy.  The  petition signed  by  100  Ameri-
cans,  including  46  editors  and  clergymen,  was  initiated  by
Miss  Emily  Greene  Balch,  Dr.  Henry  F.  Grady, Dr.  Mordecai
W.  Johnson  and  E.  Raymond Wilson.
The  petition  said  events  since  the  summit  meeting  last
July  showed that  "the  alternative to  peaceful competition is
too  horrible  to  contemplate."  It  said  "the  will  to  negotiate
must  be  emphasized  so  that  the  Spirit  of  Geneva  will  not
die."   It  declared  "Our  allies  have  been  critical  of  our  reli-
ance  mainly  upon  a  system  of  military  aid  and  global mili-
tary  alliances."   It  urged  that  the  time  had  come  "to  prove
with  the  ploughshares  of  peace  which  economic  system  can
bring  greater  benefits  to  the  peoples who now  look  to  the  in-
dustrial  giants,  whether  capitalistic  or  communistic,  for  aid
in  promoting  their  welfare."
"It  is  with  a  sense  of  disappointment," the  petition  said.
"that   we  note   the  failure   of   the  big   powers  to  respond
positively  and  with  alacrity  to  the  Christmas  Message  of
Pope  Pius  XII  in  which  he  decried  the  immorality  and  in-
humanity  of nuclear warfare  and suggested  a negotiated ban
on  the  use  of  such weapons.  We  also  regret  recent unfortu-
nate  references  by  our  Secretary  of  State  to  'brink  of  war'
diplomacy.  The spirit  of  give  and take is  the  only  assurance
that  we  may  all  LIVE  AND  LET  LIVE.  [Capitals  in  origi-
nal,  IFS.]
"Our  President,"  the  petition  went  on,  "'was   profoundly
impressed  with  the  need  for  all  of  us  to  avoid  discourage-
ment  merely because our own proposals,  our own approaches,
and  our own beliefs are  not  always immediately accepted by
the  other  side.'   Whatever  criticism  one  may  have  of   the
Soviet  position  at  the  Geneva  Foreign  Ministers  Conference,
according  to  Walter  Lippmann,  'Western  terms  at  Geneva
had  in  them no  room  for  maneuver, no material for bargain-
ing,  no  chance  for  trading.'   Our  own  policies  must  be  in-
fused  with  imagination  and a creative new approach."
3  '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly, February  27,1956
McCarthy   Opposition  Collapses  and  Hennings  Committee  Gets  $100,000
Senator  McNamara  Introduces  Bill  to  Repeal  Taft-Hartley  Oath
A  bill  (S.  3187)  to  repeal  Section  9  h,  the  non-Communist
oath  provision  of  the  Taft-Hartley   Act,  has  been  introduced
(almost  unnoticed  in  the  press)  by  Senator  McNamara  (D.
Mich.)  and referred   to  the  Senate   Labor  committee.  .  .  .
Though  Senator  Hennings  spoke  of  investigating  secrecy  in
government   in  asking  the  Senate  to  give  his  Committee  on
Constitutional  Rights another  $100,000 last  week, the  commit-
tee  can  investigate  any  threat  to  the  Bill  of  Rights.   Mc-
Carthy's  threatened  fight  against further  funds for  Hennings
collapsed  and the money was approved  unanimously. . . .  CIA
On  The  Brink,  Too:  Resentment  against  John  Foster  Dulles
is building up  strong  support  for  the  Mansfield  bill to  subject
his brother's CIA to Congressional  watch dog  supervision.  . . .
The  neutralist  majorities  in the  North  Rhine  Westphalia  and
Greek  elections  also  did  not  help  the  Dulles  brothers.
Four  Steps Forward:  The private  school that  Senator  East-
land's  children  attend,  Sidwell  Friends,  will  start  admitting
Negroes  next  year.  .  .  .  Et, Tu, Perle?:  Mrs.  Perle  Mesta,
former  Minister  to  Luxemburg,  is  back  from  a  visit  to For-
mosa where she was  the  guest  of the  Generalissimo  and Mme.
Chiang.   Mrs.  Mesta  told  the   D.C.  Business  and  Professional  •
Women's  Club at  a  "brunch"  last  Sunday  she  found  the  firm
belief  of  the  Nationalists  that  some  day  they'll  return  to  the
Chinese  mainland "a little pathetic." . . . Strategy: The John-
son-Knowland  bipartisan  alliance  first  tried  to  protect the  na-
tural  gas  lobby  and  themselves  by  narrowing  the  investiga-
tion  into  the  charges by Senator  Case.   Now, their  strategy  is
to  bury  the  gas  scandal  by  broadening  the  investigation   to
cover  "all" lobbying,  controlling  the  committee  to  make  the
inquiry  and  arranging  for  no report  until  after  the  elections.
Will  Leader  Lead?  Political  scuttlebutt   in  Washington  in-
creasingly  swings  to the  view that  a dark  horse  candidate  will
get  the  Democratic  nomination.   Young,  progressive   George
Leader,  Governor  of  once  solidly  Republican   Pennsylvania,
with  the fourth  largest  electoral  vote, has  become  a  possibil-
ity.  . . . New Dixiecrat  Movement? As tension  rises  over the
integration   issue,  it  is hard  to  see how the  Democratic  party
can  avoid taking  a  stand  strong  enough  to  compete  for  the
pivotal  Negro vote in the  North.  But any  such  stand  this  year
may  easily  push  the  respectable  leaders  of  the  party  in  the
South, the  Georges,  Russells  and  Byrds into  a new and great-
er  Dixiecrat  movement.  . . .
Repeal  of  the  Smith  Act:  Prof.  Alexander  H.  Frey,  presi-
dent   of  the   Greater   Philadelphia   Branch  of  the  American
Civil  Liberties  Union, has  written  a  letter  to  Senator   Hen-
nings  calling  for  the  repeal  of  the  Smith  Act  on  the  ground
The  Balloon  In  Our  Own  Eye
The simple  way to  figure  out  the  balloon  situation  for
yourself  is  to  imagine  the  uproar  in  this  country if  the
Russians    were   sending    balloons    with     photographic
equipment  over  the  United  States  and  explaining  that
they  were  only  taking  pictures  to  study  the  weather!
Balloons  equipped for  studying  the  weather can  also  be
utilized  for  aerial   espionage  and  the  only  reasonable
conclusion  is  that  if  such  weather  study  is  useful,   it
ought  to be carried  on by  the  United Nations.    Interna-
tional study is  also  called  for  into the  problem of  "free-
dom  balloons."   Here,  again,  the  subject  is  simplified  by
imagining our reactions  if  heavy  loads  of printed matter
were  being  dropped  on our  air  lanes  by  Soviet  balloons
on  the  excuse  that  they had  a  moral  right  to  encourage
the American  proletariat  to hope for  eventual   "freedom"
from  "capitalist  oppression!"  These  headlines about  the
balloon  flights  having  been  "stopped"  were  deceptive.
Only  weather  balloons  were  involved  in  that  decision,
the  stoppage   was  only  "provisional"  and  the   promise
merely  that  we would "seek  to  avoid"  (why not  "stop"
if  that's  what  we mean?)  "the launching  of  additional
balloons,  which on the  basis  of  known  data, might  tran-
sit  the  Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics"   (note  sent
Moscow,  Feb. 8).   This  is  vintage  double-talk.
that  prosecutions  for   mere  membership  in  the  Communist
party  open the way to mass  arrests.  . . .  "Protests  Increase
Against  Shipping  Tanks  to  Arabia,"  screamed  a banner  head-
line  across the  top  of page  1 in last  Monday's Daily  Worker.
But  Soviet  war  planes  for  Egypt,  we  suppose,  are  just  doves
of  peace.  . . . Soviet  Footnote: The disturbing  thing  about the
"thaw"  visible  at  the  Communist Party  Congress  in  Moscow
is that everything  is still being  done unanimously. . . . Caveat
to  the Press: The  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee is  still
itching for  an inquiry  into the  press.  Its  ex-counsel  Sourwine
made  the  mistake  of  starting  with  the  New  York  Times  and
lost  his  job  in  the  uproar;  his  shrewder   successor,  Robert
Morris, is starting at the other  end,  with  Tass. . . . That arti-
cle we promised on the  SACB had  to be held up till next week.
Obituary:  We regret  the  death  of  Mrs.  Katherine  Van  Or-
den,  former  head  of  the  League   of  Women  Shoppers   and
Progressive  party  candidate  for  Senator  from  New Jersey  in
1952;  hers  was  an  untiring  devotion  and  an  unfailing  sweet-
ness of spirit.. . .
Copies  of  This  Issue  Are  Not  Being  Mailed   to  Subscribers  in  Saudi  Arabia,  Yemen  or  Lower  Eritrea
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 £.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City ......................................... .Zone ............ State  ....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
2/27/56
Street
City                                        .Zone          State
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Yea  D    No  D
/.  F. Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED