I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956dec17.pdf

============================================================

Special  6-Page  Issue
Full  Text:  Israeli  Foreign  Minister  Golda Meir's  National  Press  Club  Speech,  Pages  Four  and Five
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  IV,  NO.  48
DECEMBER  17,   1956
'<"      WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Paradoxical  Moment In  Budapest  That  Made  1956 Historic
When  The  Soviet  Government  Smashes  Soviets
We   wonder  how  many  readers,  scanning  the  news  from
Budapest,  remembered  that  "Soviet"  means council  in Russian
and   that  Soviets  originated  in   the  workers'  councils  which
sprang  up  in  the  factories  of  Moscow  during  the  Revolution
of   1905.  The  workers'  councils  whose  dissolution  the  Soviet
government  and  its  feeble  Hungarian  puppet  have  been trying
to  enforce  with  blood  and  fire  are  the  direct  descendants  of
those  workers'  councils  through  which  the  Communists  first
came  to  power  in  1917.  These  factory  councils  proved  as pow-
erful  against the  Kremlin  and  Kadar  as they once were  against
the  Czars and  Kerensky.  December,  1956,  will be remembered
in  the  history  books  as  the  time  when  a  government  which
calls  itself  Soviet  turned  its  guns  in  panic  on  Soviets.  In  this
vivid  scene perished  the  delusion that mistook a  dictatorship of
bureaucrats  and   gendarmes   for  a  working  class  Utopia.   If
events  are  to  be  gauged  by their  impact  on  men's  minds,  this
was  the  most  important  event  of  the  year,  outranking  even
Khrushchev's  posthumous  attack on  Stalin.  Whatever  happens
inside  Hungary,  its  workers  have  succeeded  in  bringing  about
a new  revolution.
Proletarian,  But  Not  A Mob
Yet  for  those  of  us  who  look  back with  filial  piety  on  our
ideological  forbears and  who  glory  (despite  Walters  and  East-
lands)  in  the  tradition  of  our  country,  it  was  a  joy  to  see  in
this  new  revolution  far  off upon  the  Danube  the  rebirth  of  our
own  Jeffersonianism.   One  of  the  two  major  demands  of  the
workers'  councils  in  their  ultimatum to  the  Kadar  government
was  the  right  to  establish  a  labor  press,  free  from  control  by
the government. The  Sage of  Monticello,  a philosophical  coun-
try  gentleman,  always  distrusted  the  urban  proletariat  but  he
would  have  felt  an  immediate  kinship  with  the  workers  of
Budapest.  They  acted  out  of  old  and  festering  grievances  in
the spirit of  Jefferson's often  repeated emphasis on  a  free  press
as  the  primary  safeguard  of  liberty. The  workers of  Budapest
destroyed  another  Stalinist  delusion—that   the   Soviet  system
(as  embodied  in  the  Stalin  Constitution)  is  "even  more  demo-
cratic"  than  ours  because  it  not  only  guarantees  a  free  press
but  makes  available  presses  "free"  to  the  workers.   Outside
Poland,  nowhere  in  the  Soviet  zone,  can  a  worker  get  any-
where  near  that  dangerous  weapon  the  press,  and  in  Russia  it
has  been  a  long  time  since  any  protesting  worker  dared  print
even  a  mimeographed   leaflet.
A  Capitalist   Neo-Trotzkyism
In  the  wake  of  this  new  revolution,  still  convulsing  and
spreading  in  East  Europe,  even  making itself  felt  in  Lithuania,
there  reappears  in  reverse  another  well-known  phenomena  of
politics.  In  the  20's,  though  it  preached  world  revolution,  the
Stalin  government  cold-shouldered and  soft-pedalled  the  revo-
lutionary movement, first in Germany and  then  in  China, when
it  looked  as  if  revolution  were  at  last  possible.   This  was  the
"sell-out"  in  which  Trotzkyism was born. Today  we are  seeing
a  similar  tendency  on  the  other  side.   Faced  at  last  with  the
possibility  of  that   "liberation"   they  so  long  preached,  Mr.
Dulles  and  his  friends  in  West  Germany  are  soft-pedalling
the  anti-Communist revolution.   From  the  NATO  meeting  in
Paris  we  are  told  that  Bonn  has  given  its  agents  in  East  Ger-
many  strict  orders  to  avoid  anything which  might  lead  to  an
insurrection  there;  Mr.   Dulles's   emphasis  on  "morality"   as
the  sole  weapon  is regarded  as  a  signal  to  Moscow  that  it  can
crush  the  new  revolution  without  fear  of  our  intervention  in
its  behalf.
Just   as   Stalin   once   feared   that   revolution   in  Germany
and  China  might  lead  to war with  the  West,  so the  West now
fears  that  the  new  revolution  in  Eastern  Europe  may  lead  to
war  with  Russia.  In  both  cases  revolutionary  phrases  evapo-
rated when  it  became a question  of  taking risks to  fulfill  them;
crisis  showed  Dulles  like  Stalin  was  a  cautious   conservative
not  an  adventurer. This  is understandable  when  nuclear  weap-
ons  are  poised  for  action. We  merely note  the  reappearance  of
a  pattern.   But  already  from  the  bombed  out  cellars  of  Buda-
pest  one may hear  the  same  anger  and  disillusion  with  Wash-
ington  that  betrayed  German  and  Chinese  revolutionists  once
felt  with  Moscow.
The  (Worried)  Watch  on The  Rhine
West  Germany,  American  capitalism's  junior  partner,  pre-
fers  Stalinist  stability  in  East  Europe;  here  Ulbricht  and  Ad-
enauer  see  eye  to  eye.   Business  is  booming  in  the  Ruhr,  and
the  men  who  served  Hitler   Fascism  so  faithfully  are  in  no
mood  to  take  risks  for  freedom.  This  is  a  prime   determinant
of  U.S.  policy.   One  reason  for  loans  to  England  is  to  keep
British  divisions  in  West  Germany;  otherwise  England  must
withdraw  from  the  Rhineland  as well as Suez.  Next to British
anger  with  the  U.S.  over  Egypt  is  its  anger  with  West  Ger-
many,  which  prefers  to  let  England  shoulder  the  burden  of
defending  the  Reich  while  it  pursues  its  export  business  un-
burdened  by armament. The  shift  from  Hoover  to  Herter may
be  viewed  as a  shift  from  an  isolationist  and  pro-German  per-
sonality  to an  internationalist  and  pro-British  one;  a new  Mar-
shall Plan  may be  in  the  offing.   But this,  if  one  watches  close-
ly,  is as  necessary  now  for  German  as American  interest.  Bonn
fears  the  collapse  of  NATO.  It  also  fears  the  collapse  of  the
Warsaw  pact.   While  business  is  so  good,  the  masters  of  the
Ruhr  are  for  politics  as  usual.
5   3
1   9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly,  December 17.1956
Now  That  President   Eisenhower  Has Invoked  It  for  Hungary . . .
When  Are We  Going  to  Ratify  That  UN  Bill  of  Human  Rights?
Memo  to  the  White House:  In drafting  that  new set  of  reg-
ulations  for  government  security  procedures  necessitated  by
the  Cole  decision,  we  hope  the  President's   indictment  of  the
Hungarian  regime on United Nations  Human  Rights  Day  will
be  remembered: "It  denies the  right  to  fair  and public  hear-
ings  by  an  independent  and  impartial  tribunal,"  Mr_  Eisen-
hower  said  of  the  Kadar  regime.  (Harry Cain lost  his  job  for
daring  to  make  just  that  observation  about  the  way  govern-
ment  employes are tried in  Washington  for  loyalty  and  secu-
rity.)  .  .  .  Remember  Genocide? And this  is  a  good  point  at
which  to  recall  that  the  U.S.  has  never submitted to  the  Sen-
ate  for  ratification  the  convention embodying that  UN  Decla-
ration  of  Human  Rights the  President  invoked. The U.S.  posi-
tion  has  always  been  that  the  UN  should  concern  itself  with
the  relations  between
1
 nations,  not  between  nations  and  their
citizens.  The  same  reasons  were  given  for  U.S.  opposition  to
the  UN  pact  against  genocide.  If  the  Declaration  of  Human
Rights  is  applicable  in  Hungary, why not in the  USA?  .  .  .
Free  Right  of  Entry:  We  suspect  the  same  kind  of  qualms
arose  when  Senator  Humphrey last  week  suggested  that  the
U.S.  sponsor a  resolution  allowing  the  UN  Secretary  General
and  his  agents  full freedom of  movement for  inspection  with-
in  a member State  whenever as in  Hungary's  case  it  had been
subjected  to- a  "special  charge."   Humphrey's  proposal  was
made  to  Lodge  and  is  "under  consideration"  in  Washington,
which  may  in  this  connection be  more worried  about  Bricker
than  Budapest
New  Angle  on  That  Second  Front:  According  to  a  speech
by  Retired  Lt.  Gen. Albert  C.  Wedemeyer in  Omaha  Dee.  8,
East  Europe would be free  of  the  Russians  today  if Churchill.
had not  delayed the  opening  of  a  second  front  in  Europe. The
General  said the  U.S.  wanted to  invade Normandy in  1948 be-
fore  the  Russians  could  get  beyond  Poland  but  the   British
were  more  concerned with  the  Mediterranean.  So  those  who
advocated  a  second  front  were,  we  suppose,  premature  un-
conscious  anti  Communists. . . .  Add Profits of  Scarcity:  The
shipping  industry  is  preparing  to  lobby  against  new  legisla-
tion  at  the  next  session  of  Congress  allowing the  government
to  sell  some  of  the  2,000  vessels  in  its  "mothball"  fleet.  At
present  special  legislation  is  required for  each  sale.  With the
Suez closed,  shipping  is  tight  and demand heavy from  foreign
governments  and  U.S.  companies which  now  need  new  ton-
nage   quickly.   But  the   shipping   industry   naturally   would
rather  restrict  the  supply.  .  . .  Leftward  on Power:  In  fairly
well  informed sources  (believe it  or not)  there  is  expectation
of  a  leftward  shift  by  the  GOP  on  power,  abandoning  the
"partnership"  with  private  enterprise  formula  for  more pub-
lic  projects;  Far  Western  election  returns  are  credited  with
Notorious  Subversive
"Thanks  to  the  Walter  McCarran Act  and  the  so-
called  Un-American Activities  Committtee, we  have  so
far  forgotten  whence  we  sprang  that  if  our  Lord  were
to  be here  He would  be  deported  and  if  He  were  to  ap-
ply  for  admission,  He  would be  denied."
—The  Rt.  Rev.  Walter  Mitchell,  former    Episcopal
Bishop  of Arizona, addressing  a meeting in  Lot
Angeles Dee. 4  to protest  House  committee  sub-
poenas for  the  Los  Angeles Committee  for  Pro-
tection  of  Foreign  Born,  of  which  he  is  hon-
orary  chairman.
the  reported  shift.  . .  .No  Ike Veto This  Time?   The  natural
gas  lobby hopes  to  succeed at  the  next  session  in enacting  ex-
emption from  Federal  control;  the ways  are being  greased  for
smooth  and decorous  action  to  avoid  scandal  and an  Ike  veto.
Signs of  the Times:  Archibald Macleish at a recent  reading
in  the  Library of  Congress  read  a  poem in  honor  of  Laurence
Duggan,  the  brilliant   young  State  Department  official  who
committed  suicide  (to  the  glee  of  Senator Mundt)  during  the
witch  hunt  a  few  years-ago.  ...     On the  Other  Hand: The
Emergency  Civil  Liberties   Committee  found  only  one  radio
station in  New York  (Hearst's  WINS)  willing  to  sell  it  time
for  a  speech  by  the  economist  J.  Raymond Walsh  commem-
orating  the  165th  anniversary  of  the  Bill  of Rights.  WINS  in-
sisted,  however,  on prior  approval  of  the  script  and turned  it
down  as "controversial."  The ECLC has put it  on a platter  for
civil  liberties   groups  which  can  be  obtained  free  from  the
committee  at 421 Seventh  Avenue, New York  City.  .,  .
Fast  Work: The  UAW complains  that  though  a  teat  elec-
tion  law case  is  pending  against  it  (see  last  week's  issue)  in
the  Supreme  Court,  a  new  one  based  on  the  same  facts  has
been  launched  without  waiting   for  the  decision.   "The  day
after  election,  almost  as  if  the  Eisenhower  victory  had  been
the  signal  to  act,"  the  UAW board protested,  "agents for  the
Federal  Bureau of  Investigation   appeared  at  five  UAW  local
union  offices  and  at  the  Flint  CIO  Council  office  to  demand
the  books  ...     as  part  of  a fishing expedition  by  the  U.  S.
Attorney  General."  The  UAW  points  out  that  no  effort  has
been  made  to  investigate  the  well  known  devices  by  which
corporations   get   around  the   Federal   law  forbidding   direct
campaign  contributions,  including  "the  fake  bonus  .  .  .  the
substantial  contribution  by  the  boss's  secretary,  the  pressure
on  sales  outlets  to  make  contributions.". . .
AFL-CIO  Publications  Director  Protests  "Dubious  Delegate's"  View  of  Labor  Press
Dear  Izzy:
With  man}' of  the  views  expressed  by  Dubious  Delegate
[in  the  Weekly  of  Dec.  10],  I  disagree—as I  am sure would
a  large  proportion  of  the  ILPA  [International  Labor Press
Association]  members.  Dubious Delegate  is  entitled  to  his
opinions—but  his  concept  that  labor  should  live  in  an  un-
heated  garret  is  essentially unsound.
There  are  some factual  errors  that I do not believe  should
go   unchallenged:                         ,                     .                         :
1.  The  AFL-CIO  News  does  not  "abound  in  praise"   of
George  Meany.  He  is  the  President  of  the .AFL-CIO,, and in
any  labor  paper,  he makes news. We  dp not  participate.in a
"cult  of  personality" type  of   worship—and  I  suspect  Mr.
Meany  would  be  the  first  to  crack  down  on  any  such  policy.
2.  An anonymous editor is  quoted as suggesting  that  there
aren't  any  pictures of  working  men  in  the  AFL-CIO  News.
A  re-reading might  be  in  order for  the complainant.
3.  More  serious  is  the  alleged  skepticism  concerning  John
Vandercook's  assertion   that  "nobody  has  told  me  what  to
say."  The  skepticism,  if  it  did  exist  among  the  editors,  ia
ill-founded.   Both Edward Morgan  and John Vandercook are
employes  of  ABC radio, not  of  AFL-CIO. They  are  not  told
what  to say;  and each of  them has  been known to say,  vigor-
ously, things  that conflict  with official  AFL-CIO policy.'  But
neither  Morgan nor  Vandercook is  'an official, spokesman  of
the  AFL-CIO; they  are  sponsored  news  commentators and
analysts.                -.                                        •   •      .       .....
Dubious  Delegate  says,  "Vandereop.k's contract  fa  tip  for
renewal  soon." The fact  is  that the contract fer in the process;
now,  of  being  formally  renewed.  .  ,       ...... ....
 ;
  .  .  ....  .. • .
Sincerely  Yours,
Henry  C. Fleisher
Director,  Dept. of  Publications,  AFL-CIO.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, December 17,1956
The  Daily  Worker Is  Accused  of  Red-Baiting  and New  York  Teachers  Complimented
Only  A  TVA  of  TV  Can  Protect  the  Public  Interest  in  Television
A  TVA of  the  TV  Waves?  The  scanty  coverage  given  UN
sessions  on  Hungary  and  the  Middle  East  was  criticized  by
the  seven judges  who made the  Sylvania  TV awards  for  1966.
They  touched  on that  "direct  conflict" which  arises  "between
commercial interests and TV's obligation  to provide important
services."  No one seems  to have the  temerity  to  suggest that
instead  of  giving  away  all  the  nation's  TV channels  to  these
commercial  companies,  at  least  one  be  recovered  for  public
ownership  and  public  service.  A  public  corporation   independ-
ent of political  control could easily  be established to run  a  na-
tional  channel  of  this  kind,  and  the  existence  of  commercial
channels  would  assure  a  healthy  competition  between  them.
Red-Baiting  Daily  Worker?  Letters  to  the  editor  in  the
Daily   Worker  accusing  it  of  "red-baiting"  are  no  longer  a
novelty.   Editor  John  Gates  and  his  staff  have  been  doing  an
extraordinarily   independent  job,  but  the  rumor  is  that  they
are  slated  for  a  purge  as  soon  as  Foster's  old  guard   feels
Too  Busy  Joyously  Acclaiming
"The   Hungarian   working  people   are   joyously  ac-
claiming  reports  of the  increasing  aid to  Hungary  from
the  Soviet  Union,  People's   China,  Czechoslovakia  and
other  socialist  countries.    Currently,  from   550  to  600
boxcars,  loaded  with  the  most  diverse  commodities,  ar-
rive  in  Hungary  daily  via' Zahon station  alone.   In  or-
der  to  unload the  freight  trains  at  Zahon  Station  gov-
ernment  agencies  have  appealed  to  workers,  peasants
and  the  youth  to help  in  this  important  state  matter."
—"The  Situation  in  Hungary,"  Izvestia,  Dee. 1.
If  everything  were  not  so  joyful,  we  would  suspect
that  the  freight  handlers  were  on strike,  too.
stronger.   In  circles  which  reflect  Stalinist  standpattism,  I
even  heard  the  Daily  described  as  now an  "anti  Communist"
paper!  ...    A Tribute  to Teachers: In a  public  letter to New
York  City  Board  of  Education  President   Charles  H.  Silver,
Rose  Russell  of  the  Teachers  Union  called  attention  to  a  re-
vealing  passage  in  an  affidavit  by  the  Board's  "special  inves-
tigator" Saul  Moskoff.  "During  the  course  of the  entire  inves-
tigation,"  Moskoff  recited,  "no  teacher  has  ever  appeared  vol-
untarily  for  the  purpose  of  furnishing  information  with  re-
spect  to  subversive  activities in the  New York City school  sys-
tem."  The  affidavit  was  attached  to  the  Board's  petition  to
the  courts,  asking  reversal  of  the  State  Education  Commis-
sion  James E. Allen, Jr.'s   ruling that  teachers  cannot  be  dis-
missed  for refusing  to inform. . . . "Precautionary": A Long
Island  school district last  month cancelled a forum which was
to  have  been  addressed  by  Prof.  Henry  Steele  Commager  on
"The  American  Presidency."  A  school official  explained  "some
people"  felt   he  became  "controversial"  when  he  signed   a
Smith  Act  amnesty  petition  and  the  school  board  cancelled
How  Lenin  Differed  From  Stalin
No  one knows yet  whether  Molotov's recent  appoint-
ment  as  Minister  of  State  Control  was  a  step  up  or
down,  a  move  which  strengthens  the  Stalinists  or  the
reformers.    Potentially,   this   Ministry   could   evercise
vast  power;  actually,  it  has  in  latter  years  been  not
much  more  than  an  audit   and  control   agency.   The
Ministry  originated   in  the   Commissariat   of   Workers
and  Peasant  Inspection  set  up  after   the  Revolution,
and  known  from  its  Russian  initials  as  "Rabkrin."   It
was  as  the  head  of  Rabkrin from  1919  until  he  became
party  general  secretary  in  1922  that  Stalin   began  to
lay  the  foundations for  his  power.
Leonard  Schapiro  in  his  illuminating "Origins  of  the
Communist  Autocracy:  Political  Opposition  in  the  So-
viet  State:  1917  to  1922"  published in  London  last  year
describes  Rabkrin  as  "a  vast  bureaucratic   engine  for
control  over  the  administration   of  economic life."   He
quotes  from  a  letter  about  Rabkrin  which  Lenin  wrote
to  Stalin  (Sept.  29,  1921)  as  illustrating  the  difference
between  the  two. "The  task  of  Rabkrin,"  Lenin admon-
ished  Stalin   (p.  340 of  Schapiro's  book),  "is  not  only,
indeed  not  so  much  as  at  present,  to  'catch'  and   'ex-
pose'  people  ...     as  to  know  how to  improve  them."
the  forum  as a "precautionary" measure.  . . .
And   So  It   Goes:  Latest  in  that   local   controversy   over
George Washington  University's  ban  on faculty  members who
do not  believe in  God was  a  sermon last  Sunday by  an  Epis-
copal minister  saying  this missed  the  point.  What  really  mat-
ters he  said  is  what  kind  of  God the  faculty  member  believes
in.  Why not  be  sure  and just  bar  all  teachers  who do not  be-
lieve in  transubstantiation?   (Look it  up;  it  was  once a  fero-
cious test  of  orthodoxy—and  if  the  revival  of  theological non-
sense spreads  could be again).  . ..  New Way to Frighten  Fed-
eral  Employees: Jerry Kluttz,  who covers  the  civil  service  for
the  Washington Post, disclosed  in a copyrighted  story  Decem-
ber  9  hitherto  secret  Department  of  Justice  rulings  that  a
government  employe  could  be  prosecuted  under  the  "conflict
of  interest"  statute  for  helping  a  discharged  colleague  get
back  his  job.  One  official  told  Kluttz  former  Senator  Harry
Cain  could  have  been  prosecuted  for  helping  victims  of  the
witch hunt  in government while he  was himself  an  "employe"
on  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board.  The  statute  was
intended  to  keep government officials  from  cashing  in  on their
influence  by  representing   private  claimants  against  the  gov-
ernment,   but   Brownell   and   Warren   Olney   beginning    in
August,  1953,  turned  it  into  a  device  to  intimidate   Federal
employes  organizing  informal  aid to  workers  fired  for  "secu-
rity" and  other  reasons. ..  .
A  Document  Which  Helps  Explain  Why  Workers  Rebel  Against  A  "Workers"  State
"Poland's chief labor body  has called for direct representa-
tion  of  trade  unions  in  the  country's Parliament (Sejm)  to
help  shape legislation  especially  on wages,  employment  and
other  features  of  economic and  social  life.
"The  proposal  was  embodied  in  a  resolution  adopted  by
the  Central Council of  Trade  Unions after a  three day meet-
ing  in  Warsaw  last  month  during  which  strong  criticism
was  voiced  of  bureaucratic methods and of  leaders who  kept
the  unions from  playing an  independent role.
"The  Council  elected  Ignacy  Loga-Sewinski as  its  new
chairman  in  place of  Wiktor  Klosiewicz  and recalled several
members  of  the  Council secretariat.  The  size  of  the Council
was  increased  to 157.
"Mr.  Loga-Sewinski,  the  CCTU's former  secretary,  is  42
years  old  and  has  long  been  active  in  trade  union  affairs.
During  the  Nazi  occupation  he  was  the  leader  of  an  anti-
fascist  workers'  organization in  Lodz  and after  the  war  he
headed  the  district  union  council  in  Wroclaw.   He  has  been
a  member  since  last  October  of  the  Political  Bureau  of  the
Polish  United Workers Party.
"Much  of  the  criticism voiced  at  the  Council  session  was
directed, at  what  was  described  as  bureaucratic centralism
which  distorted  the  functioning of  unions  and  undermined
their  independence.  THE  UNIONS, IT  WAS  SAID,  HAD
TURNED    INTO    INSTITUTIONS   DIRECTED     FROM
ABOVE   AND   HAD   NOT  ADEQUATELY   PROTECTED
WORKERS."  [Emphasis  added.]
—Polish Embassy press release, Dec. 10
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly, December 17,1956
Full  Text:  Golda  Meir's  Speech  at  the  National  Press  Club,  December 11
Israel's  Famous  Woman  Foreign  Minister  States  Its  Case
The  Middle  Eastern  crisis  is  far  from   over.
Last  week  at  the  National  Frets  Club  in  Wash-
ington,  Mrs.  Golda  Meir,  a  one-time   Milwau-
kee  school  teacher,  now  Israel's   foreign    Min-
ister,  delivered  an  address  which  states  Israel's
case  for  the  October  29  attack  and  its  warning
that  trouble  lies  ahead  if   the   UN   merely  re-
stores  the  status  quo  ante.   Her  directness  and
simplicity   made  a  deep  impression  on  an  audi-
ence  not  easily  impressed  and  since  it  was  not
published   in  full   elsewhere  we  are  reprinting
it   here  as  indispensable  for   an  understanding
of   coming  events.   Mrs.  Meir,  whom  I  first  met
in  Israel  in  194),   is  one  of  the  great  pioneer
women   of   that   country;  it   is   easy  to   under-
stand   Prime   Minister   Ben    Guriotfs    remark
about  her,  "the  best  man  I've   got."—IPS
I  greatly  value  the  opportunity   of   speaking
from  this  platform  today.    The  friendship  be-
tween  America  and  Israel  has  deep  and  endur-
ing  foundations.    When  your  great  nation  was
itself  still  young  in  freedom  and   independence,
over  140  years  ago,  its  second  President,  John
Adams,  wrote:  "I   really  wish  the  Jews  again
in   Judea,   an   independent   nation   restored   to
an   independent   government."     That   tradition
of   American  sympathy  for   the  restoration  of
Israel  has  never  been  broken.    Its  roots,  which
lie  in  our  common spiritual  heritage,  have  been
nurtured   by  our   common   historic   experience
and  our  common  devotion  to  democracy.    The
people   of   Israel   have  indelible   memories   of
the   great   moral   and   practical   aid   that  your
nation   has  given   us   from   the   day  our   State
was  re-established.     Whatever  differences  may
arise  in  our   appraisals  of  Middle  Eastern  de-
velopments,   they  do   not,   I   know,   affect   the
essential   friendship  between   our   nations,   and
our  community  of  beliefs  and   interests.
May  I   add  here  that  I  am  deeply  grateful
foe   the  great  understanding   shown  by  Ameri-
can  public  opinion  since  this  crisis  began,  and
for   the   countless   messages   of   encouragement
that  have  reached  me  since  I  came  here  a  few
weeks   ago.
If   I  recall  now  the  events  that  led  to  that
action,  it  is  not  only  in  the  hope  that   I  may
help  provide  a  clearer  view  for  those  who  are
remote   from   our   region,   but   also  because  of
my  conviction  that   the   world   may  yet   pay  a
tragic   price,   as   it   already   has  done   in   our
generation,  if  it  fails  to  judge  aright  the  reali-
ties  that  created  this  crisis.
The  Question on  Oct.  29
For   the   Government   and   people   of   Israel
the  question  which  hung   in   the   balance  on
29th   of   October   was   grim   and   inescapable:
destruction,  on  the  one  hand,  or  survival  and
the   peaceful   pursuit  of  constructive   tasks,  on
the  other.    It  was  a  source  of  deep  distress  to
us  that,  in  the  face  of  the  mounting  crisis,  so
much  apathy  and   so   many  facile   assessments
and   delusions   about   the   real. issues   pf   the
Middle   East   continued  'to   exist  in.  the   free
world.      Revolutionary   changes    were:  taking
place   in   this   strategically-placed  area.     In   a
region    where    dictatorship,    oppression     and
feudal   regimes  were   the   rule,   where  democ-
racy  has  never  flourished,  where,  in  the  midst
of   vast   oil   wealth,   the   great   masses   of   the
people   live  in   a  state  of   sodden   misery  and
poverty—here   Israel   came   to   rebirth   again
eight   years   ago   in   its   ancient   homeland,  a
nation    dedicated    to    democracy,    peace    and
progress.    To  the  dictators  and  feudal   rulers
around  it,  the  symbol  that  Israel   represents   in
a  democratic,   human,  social  sense  was  highly
disturbing.      Under    one   pretext   or    another,
they   rejected   our   offers   of   peace   and   sought
every  means  to  make  peaceful  life   impossible
for   us.    Their  hostility  was  directed  not  only
against  Israel  and  the  values  its  stood  for,  but
also  against  all  who  cherish   similar  values.
When  the  royal  regime  of  Egypt  was  over-
thrown  in   1952  by  revolutionaries  whose  pur-
pose  seemed  to  be  to  lift  their  people  to  a  new
and  better  life  we  held  out  a  hand  of  friend-
ship  to  them.    For  we  have  no  wish  to  be  the
only   modern,   progressive,   democratic  state  in
our  area.    The  Prime  Minister  of  Israel,   Mr.
David   Ben   Gurion,    addressed    himself   from
our  parliament  to  those  young  Egyptian  lead-
ers  on  that  occasion:   "Israel  wishes,"  he  said,
"to   see  Egypt   free,   independent,    progressing.
There   have  been   no  grounds,   nor   are   there
now,  for  any  quarrel  between  Egypt  and  Israel.
There  is  no  cause  for  territorial   disputes,  nor
any   reason   for   political   or   economic   differ-
ences."
Then  Nasser  Came  to  Power
Then  Colonel  Nasser  came  to  power.  Driven
by  the  obsession   that  he  was  the  chosen  instru-
ment  to  dominate  all  the  Arab  nations,  all  of
Islam,  to  lead   Asia  and  North  Africa,  he  be-
came  the   vehicle  by  which  Soviet   power   en-
tered   the  Middle  East.    The   Arab-Israel   con-
flict  was   the   pretext.     The   real   motive  was
Nasser's  limitless  thirst  for  power.
For  Israel,  the  menace  of  Arab  hostility   un-
der  the  direction  of  Colonel  Nasser  took  on
deadly   new  dimensions.     The   precarious   sta-
bility  that  had  existed   previously   in  spite  of
Arab   hostility  was   now  gravely  impaired   by
the   vast   quantities    of   Soviet   arms    pouring
into   Egypt.    "Israel   has  no  right   to   exist,"
Nasser   proclaimed,   and   under   his   direction
the  state  of  war  against  Israel  which  the  Arab
States  had  declared  was  given  new  force.
I  shall  not  elaborate  here  on  the  blockade  in
the   Suez  Canal  and  Gulf  of  Aqaba,  the  war-
like   acts   committed   by   land   as   well   as   by
sea;   the   constant   blockade   and   boycott;   the
attempts    at    strangling    us    economically   by
every  means,  even  to  the  extent  of  blackmail-
ing   other   nations   that   traded   with   us:   the
endless  threats  of  annihilation  that  his  regime
directed  at  us.   Above  all,  Col.  Nasser  savagely
intensified   the  operations   of  the  trained  mur-
der   gangs   sent   day  in,   day   out.   across   our
frontiers..   In   October  of   this   year,   after   he
had  concerted   military  plans  with  Jordan  and
Syria   for   an   assault   against   us   from   three
sides,  his  Chief  of  Staff  announced,  "We  shall
choose   the   day."
200  Times  Discussed
At   the   Security   Council,   the    Arab-Israel
conflict   had   been   discussed   200  times   in   all
these  years.    The .United  Nations  seemed   pow-
erless  'to  do  more  than  consider  each   isolated
.^incident  after'H  had  arisen.
This,  then,  was  the  situation  that   faced. us
on  October  29-^-to  resign  ourselves  a?  the  at-
tack   grew   in  ferocity  until  Nasser  chose'.the
day  for   the  final  blow,   or,  having  found   no
other   remedy,  to   exercise  our   inherent   right
of   self-defense.
I  would  remind  you  gentlemen  that  in   the
long   history   of   the  Jewish   people,   from   the
days  of  antiquity  until  Hitjcr,  we  have  found
ourselves  too  often  the  object  of  physical holo-
caust,    and    thereafter   the    subject    of   moral
eulogies.    Now,   having  been  entrusted  by  our
people  with  responsibility  for  the  integrity  of
the   State   and   the   security  of   its   people,   we
were   determined   that   our   State  should   live,
and  decided  to  act  for  our  survival  today,  not
wait  and  provide  a  subject  for   a  postmortem
tomorrow.
Not  to  Acquire  Territory
We  did  not  enter  the  Sinai  Peninsula  to  ac-
quire  territory  but  to  wipe  out  the  bases  of  at-
tack   against   us.    What   we   found   there   re-
vealed   that  the  danger   was  greater   and   more
imminent  than  we  had  realized.  The  prepara-
tions  were   more  elaborate,   the   concentrations
of   offensive   strength    and   equipment   greater
than  we  had  known,  and  among  the  military
directives  to  the  Egyptian  commanders that  we
captured   we   found   this   order:   "Every  com-
mander  is  to  prepare  himself  and  his  subordi-
nates  for  the  inevitable  campaign  against  Israel
for   the  purpose   of  fulfilling   our  exalted   aim,
which  is  to  annihilate  Israel  and  bring  about
her   destruction   in   the   shortest   possible  time
in  the  most  brutal  and  savage  battles."  These
documents  have  been  submitted  to  the  United
Nations.
At  the  request   of  the  United   Nations,   and
on   the   recommendation   of   President    Eisen-
hower,   we   have   undertaken   to   remove   our
troops  from  the  territory  of  Egypt immediately
upon   the   conclusion   of   satisfactory  arrange-
ments  with  the  United  Nations   in  connection
with   the   emergency   international   force.     We
are  executing  our   obligation   and   have   com-
pleted  a  part  of  it.    But  the  point  that  must be
stressed   again   and   again   is  that   the  imple-
mentation   of   this   request   of   the  United   Na-
tions  must  ensure   peace  for  the  future.  That
i$  the  crux  of  the  issue.    That  is  the  real  chal-
lenge.     If   the   United   Nations    will   merely
clear  the  way for  Nasser  to  return  to  Sinai  and
Gaza  with  new  fury,  new  resources  and  vastly
greater   outside  aid,   if   it  will  attempt  to  re-
store   the   resumption   of   the   blockade  in   the
Suez  Canal  and  Gulf  of  Aqaba  to  Israel  ships
and  the  shipping  of  other  nations  trading  with
Israel,  then  the  setting  will  merely  have  been
created  for  a  conflagration  far  graver  than  the
last.
Will  Not  Be  A Passive Victim
Israel,  I  would  emphasize,  will  never  be  a
passive   victim.    But   Israel    is   only   Nasser's
first   intended    victim.    His   ambitions   in   the
Middle  East,  in  the  whole  of  the  African  Con-
tinent,   have  been   publicly  expounded.   As  re-
cently   as   June   19,  he   said:   "We   must   be
strong  to  liberate  the entire Arab land from Mo-
rocco  to  Baghdad  and  to  retrieve  the  rights  of
Palestine's    people."   Whom,   one   might   ask,
does   he  plan  to  liberate?   Morocco   from   the
Moroccans?   Iraq  from  the  Iraqis?
The  subversion  and  tension  that  Col.  Nasser
set  in  motion  in  the  Middle  East  is  still  run-
ning  its  course.    Against  whom,  for  example,
are  intended  the  Soviet   arms  being  massed  in
Syria?   If   it  is  mainly  on  the  crisis  of  Egypt
that   the   eyes  of   the  world   are  focused,  this
hour  is  one  of  decision  for  the  whole  of   the
Middle   East.    The   United  Nations   dare  not
allow  itself  to  be  deflected  now  from  the  basic
issue.   The   issue   is  not   merely   one  of   with-
drawal.   The  question  is  what  situation  should
(Continued   on  Ptigf    3)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 17,1956
"Will The  UN  Set  The Stage  for  A  Greater  Conflagration   By  Unconditional   Withdrawal?"
Arab  Leaders  Accused  of  Not  Wanting  to  Solve  The  Refugee  Problem
(Continued  from  Page  4)
the   United   Nations   create   in   the   course   of
implementing    its    resolutions.     For    us    the
answer  is  clear.
What  Israel  Wants
There    must   be   real   assurance   for   Israel
against   aggression.    There  must   be   freedom
of  navigation  for  all  nations  through  the  Suez
Canal  and  Gulf  of  Aqaba.  There  must  be  no
possibility   whatever  of   Egypt   threatening   or
conducting   hostilities   against   Israel   from   the
previous   positions    occupied    by   its    armies.
The  United  Nations  is  in  a  position,  if  it  ap-
proaches  the  question  in  a  constructive  spirit,
to   assure  these   legitimate  aims.    Beyond   the
settlement   of   these   specific   problems   lies   the
question   of   a   permanent   settlement.    Here,
the   most  effective   contribution  of  the  United
Nations  can  be  to  call   Israel   and  her   neigh-
bors  to  direct  negotiations  for   peace.
If  the  United  States  has played  a distinguish-
ed  role  in  sponsoring   Israel's  independence,  it
has  also  played  no  small  part  in  the  emanci-
pation  of  the  Arab  people.    In  little  more  than
a  generation,   ten  sovereign,  independent   states
have   arisen   in   a  vast   area   of   three  million
square  miles.    That  achievement owes  much to
American  sympathy  and   support.   A  vigorous
American   policy  of   peace   in   the    ArabJsrael
problem   does   not   imply  a   partisan   attitude.
Nor   is  it  partisanship   to  recognize  that  in  a
peaceful   progressive  Middle  East,  the  right  of
statehood   and  sovereignty  belongs  to  Israel  no
less  than  to   each   and   every  one   of   the   ten
Arab  states.
The  Refugee   Problem
While   Israel   cherishes  its  freedom  and  in-
dependence   and    is   determined   to    preserve
them,  it  does  not  begrudge  its  Arab   neighbors
their   freedom   and   the   great   territories   they
have  inherited   as  sovereign   states.     We   are
ready  today,  as  we  have  always been,  to  nego-
tiate  a  just  and  honorable  peace.   But  it  must
be   a   peace  by   agreement,   a   peace   in  which
they  recognize   that   we  have  the   same   rights
and  freedoms  in  our  tiny  area  that  we  recog-
nize  they  have  in  theirs.    There  are  no  practi-
cal   problems   between    the   Arabs   and   Israel
which   are  insoluble,   given   only   the   wish   to
solve  them  fairly.  The  Arab  states  cannot  envy
us  any  portion  of  our  very  small  territory,  less
than  one  three-hundredth  part  of  theirs.  Should
any  Arab  leaders  be  genuinely  fearful  of  Israel,
what  better  safeguard  could  they  have  than  a
freely-negotiated   peace  agreement,  or  even,  as
an   alternative   we  have   previously   offered,   a
non-aggression   pact  guaranteed   by  the   United
Nations?   If  they  seek  to  justify  their   rejection
on  the  grounds  of  the  Arab  refugee   problem,
they  know  well  that  not  only  was  that  problem
of    their   making   when   they   launched    war
against  Israel  on  the  day  of  its  birth,  but  also
that  this  problem,  bitter  as  it   is,  is  no   less
susceptible  of  solution  than  the  much   bigger
refugee  problems  that  arose  in  India  and  Pak-
istan,  in  Greece  and  Turkey,  in  Europe   after
World  War  II.    AH these  have  been  solved  by
resettlement.
Indeed,  Israel  itself  has  demonstrated  a  solu-
tion  of  a  refugee  problem,  not  smaller  numer-
ically  than  the  Arab  refugee  problem.   I  hope
you  will   bear  with  me  if  I  dwell  for   a  few
minutes  on  our  refugee  problem.  We  were  a
people   of   650,000   when   the   State   of   Israel
was  established  in   1948.   Above  the  chaos   left
by   the   departing  mandatory  Government   was
the  terrible  havoc  caused  by  the  Arab  invasion.
The  country  itself,  8,000  square  miles  in   area
and  more  than  half  of  it  desolate,  was  poorly
endowed    with    natural    resources.    The   ma-
chinery  of  government  was  in  its  infancy.  Yet
within   18  months  we   had   absorbed    350,000
refugees,   the   remnants  of   Hitler's   concentra-
tion  camps,  within  two  and  a  half  years  the
figure   had   risen   to   550,000,   and   year   after
year   they   continued  to   pour  in.     It   is   now
850,000.    As  many   as  350,000   of   them  Were
forced  to  flee  from  the  Arab  countries.   It  was
not  our  actions  that  had  made  all  these  people
into  refugees.  We  might  have  had  grounds  to
do  nothing  but  nurse  a  bitter grievance  against
those  who  had  exiled  our  people.   Instead,  we
did  everything  in  our  power  to  build a  new  life
for  them.   Our  poor  rations  were  divided with
them  and  the  whole  country  lived  through  a
period  of  rigorous  austerity.   Before  proper  ac-
commodations  could  be  provided,  we   heavily
reduced  our  existing  living quarters  so  that  an
average  of  2  and  3  persons  lived  in  a   room.
Fired  by  the  vision  of  service  to  these  unfortu-
nate  kinsmen,  the  best  of  our  youth  went  out
to   help   and  train   them.   We   grappled   with
stupendous   social   problems,  for   these   people
came  from  countries a  thousand  years  apart  in
social  customs  and  experience.    We   had  great
help  from  the  outside,  from  the  Jewish  people
in  other  lands  and  from  friendly  governments,
especially  your own.   But  the  main  burden  was
ours  and  we  shouldered  it  eagerly.
Arab  Treatment  of   Arabs
Compare   this  with   the   Arab   treatment  of
the   Arab   refugees.    Here   are   gigantic   Arab
territories   with   vast,   underpopulated    spaces
and   great    unharnessed   rivers   for   irrigation.
Here  is  oil  wealth  amounting  to  over  880  mil-
lion  dollars  per  annum.  The   United   Nations
voted  a  fund  of  $200,000,000  for  Arab  refugee
resettlement.  The  Eric  Johnston  Jordan  project
of   the  United  State  Government   would   have
provided   homes   for   300,000   Arab   refugees.
Israel,  for  its  part,  announced  its  readiness  to
compensate  the  refugees  for  the  property  they
abandoned.   All  the  conditions  existed  for  the
Arab   governments   to   solve   this   problem   if
they  really  wished  to  do  so.
An  Open  Sore
Why  then,  has  the  Jewish  refugee  problem
ceased  to  exist  and  the  Arab  refugee  problem
still  plagued  the  Middle  West  and  the  world?
It   is  because  we  wanted   to  solve  the   Jewish
refugee  problem  and  the  Arab  leaders  do  not
want  to  solve  the  Arab  refugee  problem.   It  is
the  shocking truth  that  to  maintain  hostility to
us  the  Arab  governments  are  sacrificing every
opportunity   of   restoring   their   kinsmen  to   a
decent,   productive  life.    Instead,  with  the  ex-
ception   of   Jordan,  they  have  erected   an   im-
penetrable  barrier  between  these  fellow-Arabs
and   themselves,  only   in   order,   as   a   former
representative   of   the   United   Nations    relief
organization   has  said,  to  preserve  the   refugee
camps  "as  an  open  sore,  as  an  affront  against
the   United   Nations   and   a   weapon   against
Israel."
Mr.   Chairman,   the   absence  of   peace,   and
the  deterioration of  the  situation  to  inevitable
explosion  point,  is  due  solely  to  the vindictive
and   barren   refusal   of   the  Arab  leaders,  with
Colonel   Nasser  as   their   head,   to   accept   the
existence  of   Israel  as  an  unchangeable ttality.
This     hostility    is   deliberately   fostered    and
nurtured.   One  Arab  ruler,  King  Abdullah of
Jordan,  recognized  that  peace  was  in  the  Arab
no  less  than  the  Israel  interest.   We   had  actu-
ally  reached  agreement with  him  on  the  terms
of  peace.    But  the  former  Mufti  of  Jesusalem,
now   one   of   Nasser's   band   of   international
troublemakers   in   Cairo,   saw   to   it   that   that
agreement  should  be  frustrated   by  the   assassi-
nation  of Abdullah.
Today,  the  future  in  the  Middle  East  is  still
in  suspense—open  for  disaster  if  the statesmen
of   the  world  fail   to  ensure  that  the   clock   is
not   turned   hack;  and   open   to   peace,   if   no
one  is  left   in  doubt  .that,  peace  in  the  Middle
East   is  one   of   the   most  urgent   international
objectives  of  our  time.
We Wish All Our  Readers  A Merry Christmas  & A Happy  New  Year
The  Weekly   is  published  only  48  times  a  year;  it   does
not  go  to  press  the  last  two  Thursdays   in  December   or
August.   The  next  issue  will  go  to  press  on  January  3.   It
•will  be  Vol.  V,  No.  1, and  we  are  grateful  as we  approach
that  milestone.   This  experiment  in  independent  journal-
ism,  carrying  on  through  one  of  the  worst  periods  for  non-
conformity   in  American  history,  has  succeeded.    Returns
this  fall  are  30  percent  above  last.   You  can  help  us  reach
more  readers  by  giving  the  Weekly   as  a  Christmas   gift.
We  are  offering  it  at  the  special  rates  of  $4  for  one;  $7.50
for  two;  $10  for  three.  We  hope  1957 will  see a  lessening
of   conflict  abroad   and   a  further   abatement  of   the  witch
hunt  at  home,  and  we take advantage of  this  occasion again
to  thank  readers  for  the  many  kind  notes  coming  in  with
renewals.   It  has  been  a  joy  these  last  four  years  to  cover
such  tremendous  events  for  so wonderful an  audience  from
so  congenial  a  ringside  seat,  free—thanks  to  you—to write
as I please.
Your  friend.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, December 17,1958
Congressional  Inquisition  Cannot  Be  Fought  With ACLU-ADA Ifs  and Buts
The  Watkins  Case  Defense  Only  Undermines  The  First  Amendment
The  briefs  filed  in  the  U.S. Supreme  Court  in  the  Watkins
case  are  most  disappointing,  and  reflect  the  philosophical   con-
fusions  of  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union   (which  filed
the  brief  amicus)  and  the  ADA   (Americans  for   Democratic
Action)   whose  head,  Joseph  L.  Rauh, Jr., is  defense  counsel
for  the  UAW  organizer. This  is a test  of  the  First  Amendment
as applied  to  inquisition  by the  House  Un-American  Activities
Committee.  But  the  pleadings make so many  concessions  as  to
leave  no firm ground  on  which to fight. Watkins  denied  mem-
bership  past  or  present,  admitted  close  associations  with  the
Communists  but  declined  on  First  Amendment grounds  to  in-
form  on  past  associates.
A  vast gulf  is  opened  up  when  the  main  defense  brief  says,
"We  do  not  challenge  the  contention that  the  substantiality of
congressional  need  for   information  may,  on  occasion,   justify
the  compulsion  of  disclosures  which  normally  would  be pro-
tected  under  the  First  Amendment.  But  we  do  say  that  un-
justifiable   abridgment of  liberties  of   association  and   expres-
sion,  forbidden to  Congress  by  the  First Amendment, may  no
more  be  achieved by the  legislature's  power  of  inquiry than  by
its  power to  legislate."  (Italics added).    But the  First  Amend-
ment   does   not   say  that   Congress   may   not   "unjustifiably"
abridge  freedom  of  speech,  press  and  assembly.   It  says  that
Congress  "shall  make no  law abridging"  them.  The  fact  that
the  Courts  have  blurred  these  clear  words  is  no  reason   for
abandoning them.  Indeed,  once  they  are abandoned, the  battle
is lost.
The  Deceptive  Test  of  "Normalcy"
For  Chairman Walter  and  Senator  Eastland  also  believe  or
think  they  believe in  the  First  Amendment. They  regard  the
struggle   against  Communism   and   "subversion"   as  a   crisis
which  justifies   what  would  normally  be  an  infringement  of
free  political association.
If  the  First  Amendment only  protects  under  "normal" cir-
cumstances  and  against  "unjustifiable"  abridgment,  experience
has  shown  how  easily,  sincerely  and  "honestly"   fundamental
liberties  will  be  whittled  away  every time  they  are  put  to  real
test. The  brake of  tradition  is weakened  if  those  who believe in
liberty  agree  in  advance  as  both  briefs  do  that  it  is  all  a  ques-
tion  of  degree.
This  is  the  course  charted  when  the  ACLU  brief  proposes
to  apply  the  "clear  and  present"  danger  test  to  the  question  of
Congressional   impact  on  First  Amendment  freedoms.   This
test, a pragmatic pitfall  from  the start,  has  been  robbed  of  use-
fulness  by the  Dennis  case,  which  the  ACLU  cites.   For  as  ap-
plied  by Chief  Justice  Vinson  in  upholding  the  Smith  Act, the
danger  may be far  from  clear  and  not  at  all  present.  The  new
form  of  the  rule  as adopted  from  Judge  Learned  Hand  is  that
in  each  case  the  Courts  "must  ask  whether  the  gravity  of  the
'evil',  discounted  by  its  improbability,  justifies  such   invasion
of  free  speech  as  is  necessary  to  avoid  the  danger."   Never
were fundamental  liberties  left  to  a mistier  guidepost.
The  Conspiracy   Theory
The  root  of  the  evil  is  the  ACLU-ADA  view,  implicit  in
both briefs, that  the  Communist party  is a  "conspiracy"  and  as
such  to  some  degree  outside  the  law.  This  leads  the  main  brief
to  concede  that  under  certain  circumstances  it  is  proper   for
Congress  to  inquire  into  Communist  party  membership,   and
the  ACLU  brief  to  concede  that  in  some  cases  Congress  might
even  inquire  into  "personal  beliefs."    But  the  Congressional
witch  hunt  only  acquires  a  new  franchise  from  these   conces-
sions.  The  new Inquisition  can only be  fought  by insisting  that
it  is a prior  restraint  on  freedom  of  expression,  that  Congress
has no right  to  "inquire"  into the  political  and religious  belief*
guaranteed  by the First  Amendment, that  it has no  more  power
lawfully  to  ask  a  man  about  his  politics  than  about  his  views
of  the  Virgin  Birth.  The  second  firm  line  of  defense  is  that
under  the  Constitution  and  separation  of  powers  a  Congres-
sional  committee  cannot  act  as  a  public  grand  jury,  with  a
roving  commission  to  hunt  and  pillory  political  heretics.  The
defense  in the  Watkins  case only  provide new weapons  against
the  freedom  it  seeks  to  defend.  The  dangers  of  communism  in
no  way rebut  the  proposition  basic  to  the  Bill  of  Rights.  This
is  that  freedom  is  unobtainable  without  risk.
Extra  Copies  of   This  Issue  Available  at  Special   Rates  on  Bulk   Order
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3,  D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed $5:*
Street  ........................................................................................
City  .........................................  .Zone. ........... State. ...................
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ...........................................................................  ~.
12/17/86
City  ..........................................  Zone ............ State ....................
City  ..........................................  Zone. ........... State... __________ .....
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement T    Tea  Q    No   D
IE   Stone's  Weekly
205
301  I.   Capitol  St., S.  I.
Washington  3,  D. C
Entered  as
Second  Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Entered  as  Second  Class Matter  at  Washington, D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Pre-dated  Mondays  but  published
every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December at  301 B. Capitol  St., Washington  3, D.  C.  An  Independent  weekly pub-
lished  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone; Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  IS  In  the  U.S.; $8  In  Canada;  *-10 elsewhere.   Air  Hall
rates:  *15 to Europe; |20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED