I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956aug27.pdf

============================================================

The  Platforms  Compared on  Peace,  Racism  and  Civil Liberty,  Pages  2  and  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  32
AUGUST  27,  1966
'<>•     WASHINGTON,  D.   C.16  CENTS
Nobody  Like  Ike  Since Joe  Passed Away
We  found  ourselves  happy  during  that  climactic session  at
San  Francisco  that  the  proceedings  were  not  being  telecast  to
Moscow. The  startled  Soviet  viewer might  have  imagined  that
the  U.S.  had  taken  over  the  cult  of  personality.  That  parade
of   "little  people"  seconding  the  nomination  of  Dwight   D.
Eisenhower  would  have  recalled  the  mass  meetings  at  which
steel  workers  and  collective  farmers  bounded  for  a  moment
out  of  obscurity to  hail  the  boundless  virtues of  one  who  had
now  best  be nameless. There  was a Mrs. Schneider from  Texas
telling  why  "we  mothers"   loved   Ike;  a  coach  from   Notre
Dame  who  said  Ike  always made  "the  right  play  at  the  right
time";  a  little  business  man  from  Louisiana who  put  his  hand
over  his  heart  and  said  he  "whole-heartedly"  accepted  every
jot  and  tittle  of  Ike's  platform;  a  worker  who  said  of  Dee "It
makes you proud  just  to  look  at  him";  a nice Jewish  lady  from
Boston  who haled  him  as "the  best  President we ever had"  and
quoted   her  beloved  Rabbi  on  something  we  did  not  catch,
probably   Ike's  astounding   grasp  of   the  finer  points  of   the
Mishnah.   Not  since  Joe  passed  away  has  any  people  had  such
a  paragon   for   leader.
It  would  all  have  seemed  too  familiar  to  a  viewer  in  Mos-
cow,  right  down  to  the  virtues  of  "democratic  centralism"  in
which  the  opposition  is allowed  to  cut  its  own  moral throat  in
public  before  being  sent  to  the  sub-Arctic  gold  mines.  There
was  Comrade  Stassen  grateful  for  the  favor  of  being  allowed
to  second  the  nomination  of  Comrade  Nixon  against  whom
he  had  long  been  plotting,  probably  at  the  instigation  of  a
foreign  power,  since  no  evidence  of  domestic  support  had  been
uncovered.  There  was  Comrade  Knight   joyfully  dancing  the
kupak   for  Nixon   at  the  head  of  the  California   delegation,
probably  in  the  hope  that  he  would  only  get  a  ten  year  sen-
tence.  There  was  Joe  Martin's  indignant  roar,  "who  does  he
want  to  nominate?",  when  a  foolish  comrade  from   Nebraska
tried  to  disrupt   democratic  unanimity  by  nominating  some-
body  else.  The  only other  subversive  note,  injected  before any-
one  was quite  aware  of  what  he  was  saying,  came in  the  invo-
cation  offered  by  the  Episcopal  Bishop.   His  prayer for  Eisen-
hower  was  a  sly  one.   "Grant  him,"  he  intoned,  "an  added
measure  of  insight  and  understanding."   This  shows  the  dan-
ger  of  allowing  political  freedom  to  the  clergy.
This  Diogenes   Succeeded
Our  favorite character  among  those  sedately tumultuous Re-
publicans was uncovered  by a  Diogenes  for  CBS.  In  the  wings
he  found  a  bevy  of  lightly  spangled  nymphs  from  a  nearby
night  club  waiting  with  Nixon  banners.  (At  the  last  moment
their  enthusiasm  seems  to  have  been  cruelly repressed  because
they  never  appeared   on  the   floor.)   When   he  asked  one  of
them,  "Are  you  Republican?",  she  tee-heed  uncertainly  and
snid  "Yes",  obviously  a  girl  with  quite  a  memory  span.  But
9                                                                                                  '
next  to these  lovely politicoes  were  two  Chinese  children wait-
ing  with  Nixon  banners and  when  the  CBS man  asked  one  of
them,   "Who   are  you  demonstrating  for?",  he  answered   in
honest  bewilderment,  "I  don't  know."  The  delegates  on  the
floor were  better  informed. They  knew the  names.  But  of  the
reality  behind  "Eisenhower"  and  "Nixon",  the  real  capacities,
the  real  intentions,  the  real  men, the  "dinger  an  sich"?
There  must  have  been  no  more  than  a  dozen  men  on  that
floor who  really knew the  labors of  propping  up  an  old  soldier
into a  statesmen, of  interrupting  golf  and  bridge  to  get  papers
signed,  of  painfully  briefing  him  in  the  mysteries  of  the  tariff,
and  straightening  him  out  on  the  farm  problem.  There  may
have  been  even  fewer  who  knew  the  real  story  which  reached
its  climax  when  Eisenhower  and  Stassen  called   off  that  anti
Nixon  campaign  like  two  small  boys  shamefacedly  caught  by
teacher.  As  Eisenhower told  the  reporters  "Well,  you will  re-
member  for  quite  a little while,  I didn't  know that  Mr.  Nixon
was going  to  run  again, he  took  quite a considerable'time  after
he  and  I first talked  it  over,  to  make up  his mind.  ..."     Sup-
pose  Dee had  been  left  at  the  last  moment  without  a  running
mate?   No  doubt  this  anxiety  explains  his  announced  willing-
ness  to  interview  any  applicants  for  the  job  in  San  Francisco.
The  help  problem  in  the  White  House  is  terrific.
Memorable  Moments
This  Republican convention,  though  it  did  move  somewhat
slowly,  and  often  seemed  a  concert  interspersed  with  political
speeches,  had  its  memorable  moments.  There  was  that  boast
from  Dewey,  just  a  hundred  years  after  Lincoln,  the  glad  tid-
ings  of  a  new  emancipation,  "Guatemala   is  now  free."  There
was  Herter,  plodding  with  gentlemanly   desperation   through
those  encomiums  of  Nixon.   If  ever  anybody  had  a  psychoso-
matic  sore  throat  it  was  the  Governor  of  Massachusetts  nomi-
nating  another  man  for  Vice  President  when  he  would  rather
have  stayed  in  bed  with  a  nice  case  of  pneumonia.  There  was
Martin  shouting  to  the  only  rugged   individualist  who  had
turned  up  in  years  at  a  Republican  convention,  "You  take  Joe
Smith  and  get  out  of  here."  And  there  was  Martin  at  press
conference  earlier  in  the  day  dismissing  questions  about  Ike's
health  as "rather  morbid."  There was Dee  telling the  press  that
Stassen  would  second  the  nomination of  Nixon  and  asking  the
reporters,  "Is  it today?"  and adding  (possibly  after  a whisper-
ed   assist   from   Hagerty),   "Yes—this  afternoon."    And  Dee
being  asked  whether  he  thought  it  was  "possible  to  nominate
a  stronger  candidate  than  Mr.  Nixon"  and  answering,  "Well,
I  wouldn't  know."
The  strangest  spectacle  of  all  at  this  convention  was  the  ap-
pearance on  the  plaform  of  a darkly handsome  man who  look-
ed  like  a  young  Italian  tenor,  but  turned  up  to  speak  rather
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone'* Wetkly,  Augutt  27,1856
On  Foreign  Policy  the  GOP  Platform  Is  More Hopeful,  Less  Belligerent
Truman  was  unable  to  dictate  the  candidates  but  his  spirit
dominates   the  party  platform,   especially   on  foreign   policy.
This  is  extraordinarily   demagogic  and  irresponsible.   "Candi-
date  Eisenhower's  1952  pledges  to  'liberate'  the  captive  peo-
ples,"  it   says,  "have   been   disavowed  and  dishonored."  At
another  point  the  Democrats  seem  to  be compkining  that  the
Republicans   did   not   really   "unleash   Chiang   Kai-shek"   as
promised.  The  Administration  is  accused  of  "standing  silent
when  the  peoples  rise  in  East  Germany  and  Poland."  The
Democrats  are  if  anything  more  rigid  than  the  Republicans  in
opposing  the  admission  of  Communist  China  to  the   United
Nations.    Knowland,   Bridges   and   the   Republican    rightists
would  be  happier  with  the  Democratic  platform.
The  most  striking  and  the  crucial  difference   between   the
two  platforms  is  in  their  interpretation  of  events  in  the  post-
Stalin  Soviet  Union.   Both  have  that  weird  irrationality  that
marks  American  foreign  policy,  but  at  least  the   Republicans
are more hopeful  and  less  belligerent  than  the  Democrats.  All
the  Democrats  have to  offer  is summed up  in  their  reference  to
"the  new  style  political  and  economic offensive  of  the  Soviets,
which  represents   potentially   an  even  graver   challenge   than
Stalin's  use of  force."  This view that  the  Soviet  Union  is more
dangerous  because  less  intransigeant   is  the  view  of  the  arms
lobby,  the  FBI,  the  Adenauer  government,  and  the  anti-Com-
munist  lunatic fringe—that  is,  of  all  those whose interests  are
linked  with  the  maintenance  of  tension,  fear  and  suspicion.
It   is  the  theory  of  Eastland  and  of  Walter,  not  of   George
and Stevenson.
The  Republican  platform  is  silly  as  history;  it  credits  the
changes   in  Soviet  policy,  domestic  and  foreign,   not  to  the
death  of  Stalin  and  the  sharp  turn  made  by his  successors,  but
to Eisenhower's  magic smile  at  the  summit.  "That summit con-
ference,"  it  says,  "set  new forces  into  motion.  .  . . Then  fol-
lowed  a repudiation of  Stalin, the  growth  of  doctrinal  disputes
within  the  Communist  party,  and  a  discrediting  of  party  au-
thority  and  its  evil  power.   Forces  of  liberalism   within   the
Soviet  bloc  challenged   the  brutal  and  atheistic  doctrines,  of
Soviet  Communism.  .  .  ."   Even  Stalin's  historians  were  not
more  sycophantic  than  Eisenhower's  in  their  version  of  how
things  happened.   But  such  light-headed  flattery  and  campaign
handbook  bedtime  stones are a small  price  to pay for  the  prac-
tical  consequences  which  flow  from  this  interpretation.
Where  the  Republicans  in   1952  all  but  committed   them-
selves  to  "liberation" via a third  world  war,  this  time  they are
talking  of  "positive  evidence that  forces  of  freedom  and  liber-
ation  will  inevitably  prevail."   They  are  "confident   that  our
peaceful  policies,  resolutely  pursued,  will  finally  restore   free-
dom  and  national  independence  to  oppressed  peoples  and  na-
tions."  While  the  Democrats  urge  that  the  way to  peace  is  to
"forego  bluster  and  bluff"  they do  not  seem  to  realize  that  the
bluster  and  bluff  of  Dulles  and  Nixon  find  more  embodiment
in  the  Democratic  pktform  than  in  the  Republican.  The  form-
er  looks  toward  continued  cold  war,  the  ktter  toward  co-exist-
ence—though  of  course  the  drafters  would  never  have  dared
use  so  suspect  a  word.   It  is  now  the  Republicans  who  say
"technical  and economic assistance . . . provide  the best way to
create   the  political   and   social  stability   essential  to   lasting
peace."    It  is  the  Republican  platform  which  speaks  of   the
importance  of  cultural  and  informational  exchanges   "between
the  free   peoples  and  the  captive  peoples."  The   Republican
stand  on  foreign  policy  is  dearly  superior  to  the  Democratic.
One  reflects  Eisenhower,  the  other  Truman.
The  Democrats Want  "Peace Through  Strength," An  Atomic  Arms  Race
The  Democratic  planks  on  national  defense  reflect  the  same
premises  as  the  planks  on  foreign  policy.    The  platform  de-
mands   "return   to  the   Democratic  policy  of   peace   through
strength."    The   Air   Force   has   been   "stifled",   the   Army
"starved."    The   Democrats  want   "national   defense  outkys
based  upon  our  national  needs,  not  permitting  false  economy
to jeopardize, our very survival."   In  practice  this  means  letting
the  Pentagon  pretty much write its  own  ticket.  The  Democrats
are  for   disarmament  because  "time  and  distance  can  never
again protect  any nation of  the world"  but until there is  "force-
able international control  of  weapons,  we must jnaintain  armed
strength  to  deter  war."   How  is war  to  be deterred?  By main-
taining  armed  forces  "so  clearly  superior  in  modern  weapons
to  those  of  any  possible  enemy  that  our  armed  strength  will
make an  attack  upon  the  free  world  unthinkable and  thus  be a
major  force  for  world  peace."  This  in  practice means an arms
race and  increased world  tension.  It  assumes naively that  every
other  nation will  be  as easily convinced  as  we  are  that  all  this
piling  up  of  weapons  is  only  with  the  best  of  intentions.  We
are  to  enforce  a  Pax  Americana on  the  world.   History  shows
such  efforts  breed  the  wars they  claim  to  prevent.
The  Democrats  want  more  and  bigger  atom  bombs.  Their
atomic  energy pknk  calls  for  an  increase in  the  production  of
fissionable material  to  use  in  a stockpile  for  peaceful  purposes
"and  for  an  ever present  reserve"  of  nuclear  weapons;  there  is
good  reason  to  believe  that  we  already  have  more  fissionable
materials  than  we could  use for  peaceful  purposes  in  a  genera-
tion.  The  Democrats  want  to  make  "the  maximum  contribu-
tion"  to  defense  by  accumulating  "a  balanced  and  flexible
stockpile  of  nuclear  weapons,  containing  a  sufficient  number
and  variety to  support  our  armed  services  in  any  contingency."
This  means  to  widen  instead  of  limiting  atomic  war.   As  for
testing,  the  Democratic  platform  wants  "a  comprehensive  sur-
vey  of  radiation  hazards  from  bomb  tests  and-reactor  opera-
tions  to  determine  what  additional  measures  are  required  to
protect  existing  and  future   generations   from   these   invisible
dangers."  This  implies  that  testing  can  safely  go  on  and  that
all we need  are  "additional  measures"  to  protect  "existing  and
future  generations."   It  would  be interesting  to know  just who
played  the  major  role  in  writing  these  provisions.    Certainly
it  was  not  AEC  Commissioner  Murray,  the  one  Democrat  left
on  the  Atomic Energy  Commission.
The  Republican platform,  on  the  other  hand,  paints  a  false
rosy  picture  of  the  progress  being  made  in  developing   the
atom  for  peaceful  uses,  particukrly  in  the  claim  that  the  AEC
is  encouraging  "a  vigorous  rural  electrification program  by co-
operatives"—a  new  high  in  GOP  mythology.   But  at  least  it
stresses peaceful  development and  touches  on  the  danger  of  an
atomic  "arms  race  with  the  prospect  of  eventual  catastrophe"
for  the  whole  world.    On  the  atom  the  GOP  is  "a  shade  less
worse"  than the  Democratic pktform.   Like so much  else  in  it,
this  pktform   is  hardly  in  keeping  with  the   candidates.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone'* Weekly, August  S7,1958
The 'Tarty of Jefferson"  Showed Remarkably Little Interest in the Bill of Rights
An  historian  who  had  only  the  1956  Democratic  and  Re-
publican  platforms  to  go  by would  never  guess  that  this was a
period  in  American history  during  which  basic  freedoms were
seriously  eroded.   Civil  liberty,  as distinct from  the  racial prob-
lem  of  civil  rights,  is mentioned  in  neither  platform.   Neither
speaks  of  problems  created  by  use  of  the  Fifth  amendment,
employment  of  faceless  informers,  the  discharge  of  teachers
suspected  of  "subversion",  the  spreading  blacklist  in  the  arts
nor  the  need  to  curb  the  excesses  of  such  Congressional  inves-
tigating  committees  as  House  Un-American or  Senate  Internal   •
Security.    And  there  is  no  discussion  of  the  right  to  travel.
The  Democratic platform  does mention the  Bill  of Rights at
one  point  but  only in  connection with  the  easing  of  entry quo-
tas  for  immigrants.  "Proper  safeguards  against  subversive  ele-
ments   should   be  provided,"   the   Democratic  platform   says
piously,  but  then  balances  this  off with,  "Our  procedures must
reflect  the  principles of  our  Bill  of  Rights."  The   Democratic
platform  calls  for   "progressive   immigration  policies"  but  is
silent  on  those  provisions  of  the  McCarran-Walter  law which
allow  deportation   and   denaturalization   for  present   or  past
membership  in  radical  organizations.
The  Democratic platform  does  not  make an  issue  of  the Re-
publican  "numbers  game."   It  condemns  the  Eisenhower  ad-
ministration  for  viokting  the  rights  of  government  employes
"by a  heartless  and  unjustified  confusing of  'security'  and  loy-
alty'  for  the  sole purpose  of  political  gain" and  it  vaguely pro-
poses  "A  fair  and  nonpolitical  loyalty program,  by law,  which
will  protect   the  nation  against  subversion  and  the  employe
against  unjust  and  un-American  treatment."   But  it  does  not
get  specific  about  the  right  to  confront  an  accuser  or  to  know
precisely  the  charges.   It  does  not  mention  the  notorious  Cha-
sanow  or  Ladejinsky  cases,  the  "revolt"  of  former  Senator
Cain,  nor  the  speed  with  which  he was dropped  by Eisenhower
How  The Party  Platforms Compare on
On  civil  rights,  both  parties  went  back to fundamentals. The
Republicans  "unequivocally  recognized"  that  the  Constitution
is  "the  supreme  kw  of  the  land."  The  Democrats  with  equal
forthrightness  said  the  Federal  government  "must  exercise  the
powers  vested  in  it  by  the  Constitution."    On  the  Supreme
Court  both  parties  expressed  themselves  less  radically.    The
Democratic  pktform  "recognizes"  the  Supreme  Court  "as  one
of  the  three constitutional  and  coordinate branches  of  the  Fed-
eral  government."  The  Republican  pktform  "accepts"  the Su-
preme  Court's  decision  that  racial discrimination  in  the  public
schools  must  be  "progressively  eliminated."  The  Republicans
also  "concur"  that  this  should  be  accomplished  "with  all  de-
liberate  speed."  The  Democratic  pktform,  by contrast,  merely
notices  that  "recent  decisions  . .  .  rekting  to segregation"  in
the  schools  "have  brought  consequences  of  vast   importance,"
an  observation  on  which  Mississippi  and  Harlem  can  agree.
On  the  other  hand,  while  careful  neither  to  oppose  nor  en-
dorse  the  Supreme  Court's   school   decision,   the   Democratic
pktform   says  "We  condemn  the   efforts   of  the  Republican
Party  to  make  it  appear  that  this, tribunal  is  a  part  of  the  Re-
publican  Party."  This  cryptic sentence  serves  notice that  above
the  Mason-Dixon  line  the  Democrats  do  not  intend  to  let  the
Republicans  take  all  the  credit  for  Chief  Justice  Warren.  This
accords  with  traditional  Democratic  opposition  to  monopoly.
1  2  3
Cheerful  Note
"The  truth  is  that  both  the  Democratic and  Republi-
can  parties  are socialistic.  .  .  .  Both  parties are so far
gone  in  Marxism  that  even  the  word  'moderation' .  .  .
took  on a  dirty  meaning in  Chicago. .  .  .  The so-called
Democratic  party  must  continue to  shove  to  the  left-
ward  and the  Republicans will  follow  .  .  .  and the  peo-
ple,   if    they   could   express   themselves,   undoubtedly
would  want  it  so. .  . ."
—Westbrook  Pegler,  N.  Y.  Journal-American,  Aug. SO.
despite  all  that  talk  about  Wild  Bill  Hickock  and  the  right
not  to  be  stabbed  in  the  back.
The  Democrats  did  not  mention  the  extended  hearings  held
or  the  abuses uncovered by a Senate Post  Office  and  Civil Serv-
ice  subcommittee  which  investigated  the  loyalty  program  nor
take  credit  for  establishing  under  Senator  Hennings  of  Mis-
souri  the  first  Senate  subcommittee  to  look  into  the  abuse  of
constitutional   rights.   These  omissions  eloquently  describe  the
present  state  of  "the  party of Jefferson."
The   "party  of  Lincoln"  on  the  other  hand   says  not  one
word  about  correcting  loyalty-security abuses.   It  reaffirms  the
principle  of  discharging  all  those  whose  employment  by  the
Federal  government  is  not  "dearly  consistent  with  national
security",  a  rule  under  which  all  doubts  are  resolved  against
the  employe.   In  keeping  with  this  attitude  is  a  pknk  which
praises  the  FBI  "as  well  as  all  other  government  intelligence
agencies"  and  pledges  the  GOP  never  to  rekx  these  efforts  to
insure  "that  we are  protected at  all  times against  subversive ac-
tivities."  No  such pknk  appears  in  the  Democratic  platform.
Either  the  Democrats  remembered the  role pkyed  by J.  Edgar
Hoover  in  backstopping  Brownell's  "20  years  of  treason"  at-
tack  on  Harry  D.  White,  Truman  and  the  Democratic  party.
Or  maybe the  FBI  was  too  choosy  to  ask  Democratic  support.
The  Supreme Court  and  Civil Rights
The  Republicans,  for  their  part,  outflanked  the  Democrats
by including  a sentence in their pktform  which  sympathetically
echoes  the  South's  criticism of  the  Supreme Court.   It  refers  to
"the   complex  and  acutely  emotional  problems"   which  have
been  created  by the  school  decision  "in  certain  sections  of  our
country  where  racial  patterns  have  been  developed  in  accord-
ance  with  prior  and  long-standing  decisions  of  the  same tri-
bunal."  This  is  worded  tenderly  enough  to  imply  that  segre-
gation  developed  in  the  South  as  a  result  of  earlier Supreme
Court  decisions  it  loyally  obeyed  only  to  have  them  rudely
overturned  by  the  Court  itself.
On  the  question  of  whether  the  Supreme  Court  decision
should  be  enforced  or  just  left  to  simmer,  the  two  pktforms
agree  again.   Both  are  opposed  to  the  use  of  force.  The  only
other  noteworthy  passage  in  the  civil  rights  planks  is  a  puzz-
ling  sentence  in  the  Republican  platform.   "This  administra-
tion,"  it  says,  "has  impartially  enforced  Federal   civil   rights
statutes,  and we pledge  that  it  will  continue  to do  so."   Impar-
tially  means  with  no  partiality  to  either  side.  To  enforce  the
right  to  vote  impartially would  seem to  mean  that  the Admin-
istration  is  ckiming  it  did  just  as  much  to  protect  Negroes
kept  from  the  polls  by whites  as  it  did  to  protect  whites  kept
from  the  polls  by Negroes.  This  we  believe  to  be  statistically
accurate.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. f.  Stone'a Weekly, August S7,1956
All  Depends  on  Ike's  Health  — And  Nixon's  Change  of  Stance
(Continued  from  Page  One)
than  sing.  The  absence of  jowls^ the high  intellectual  forehead,
the  frizzly  hair-do  and  the  graceful  manner  made  him  seem
altogether  alien  among  the  GOP's  solid  citizenry, taking  time
off   from  real  estate  and  embalming  for   politics.
No  Place  for  An  Egghead
Only  a  day  before  James  Reston  in  the  New   York  Times
had  reported,  perhaps  tongue  in  cheek,  that  Eisenhower would
now  be  able  to  articulate  his  thoughts  better  because  Emmet
John   Hughes   of   Time-Life-Fortune—the  drafter  of   the   "I
shall  go  to  Korea  speech"  in  1952—had  rejoined  him  tempo-
rarily  as a ghost writer.  Here was Hughes being  introduced  to
make  a  speech  on  his  own  as  an  "independent"  for  Eisen-
hower,  and  taking  himself  quite  seriously,  the  young  idealist
given  his chance to  tell  off those  politicians  at  last.  Though  ob-
viously  in  no  danger of  losing, his  job  for  addressing  a Repub-
lican  convention,  Hughes  was  determined  to  prove  his  inde-
'  pendence.   He   leaned   hard   and   tactlessly  on  Negro   rights,
made  a  posthumous  attack  on  McCarthy,  and  drew  a  deadly
blank  when he  said  there  was a  danger  that  loyalty  was  being
confused  with  conformity.  It  wasn't  so  much  what  he  said  as
how;  this  evident  foreigner  seemed  somehow sincere.  The  con-
vention  was  first  puzzled,  then  bored.  The  scattered  applause
said  clearly  that  it  couldn't  care  less.   Hughes,  laboring  hard
against  the  palpable  indifference,  mopped  his  brow  and  hur-
ried  out  as  if  in  search  of  a  stiff  drink  and  a  friendly  Demo-
crat.  The  experiment  in  letting  a  ghost  talk  had  failed.  This
was  no  place  for  an  egghead,  even  one  on  the  payroll.
Campaigning   on  Korea
Of   the  1952  slogan  about  corruption,  Korea  and  commu-
nism,  the  first  and  third  have been  muted. There  is a  truce  on
corruption,  since  Dixon-Yates may  easily cancel out  mink  and
deep  freezes.   Communism was  noteworthy by  its  almost com-
plete  absence.    Joe  Martin  was  alone  and  old-fashioned  in
speaking  of   the   "indelible   stain  of  corruption  and  commu-
nism"  and  even  he  explained  to  the  press  afterward  that  he
did  not  mean  the  Democratic  party.   Knowland  and   Nixon
have  given  the  party  a  clean  bill  of  health.  "There  is only  one
party  of  treason  in  our  country,"  Knowland  said,  "and  that  is
the  Communist  party."   Nixon  said  of  those  people  in  Chi-
cago,  "I'm  sure  they  are  all  loyal  Americans."  The  tide  of  re-
action  is  receding  and  the  Democratic  party  is  legal   again.
What  the  Republicans  are  running  on  this  year  is  Korea—
Korea  and  prosperity.   Ike  is  the  man  who  ended  the  war  in
Korea  without  starting  a  new  one,  the  man  who  proved  we
could  have  prosperity  without  war.  This  was  the  theme  song
of  the  convention,  woven  into  almost  every utterance.  And  un-
less  Dee turns  ill  before November,  it may prove potent  enough
—and  true enough—to  win.
The  Double  Miracle  at  Chicago
The  Democrats,  by a double  miracle,  have  come up  with  two
superior  and  enlightened  men.  It  would  be a  pleasure  to  have
Stevenson  and  Kefauver  replace  the  fumbling  crew  of  Boy
Scouts  who  run  the  country  in  Eisenhower's  name.   Both  are
men  of  peace  and  firm  friends  of  civil  liberty.   Stevenson  has
the  makings  of  a  great  President,  and  Kefauver  is  a  Jack  the
Giant   Killer   who  won   against   the   opposition   of   the   city
machines,  the  big  money interests  in  the  party  and  the  South-
erners  who  will  not  forgive  him  for  breaking  ranks  on  segre-
gation.  To  watch  him  win  the  nomination  despite  them   all,
down  to  Mississippi's  last  desperate  gesture  of  swallowing  an
old  bogey and  voting  for  a  Roman  Catholic  to  block  him,  was
to see a Horatio  Alger  story come to life.   I  stood  and  cheered.
But  the party behind  these  men  is,  like  its  platform,  more  bel-
ligerent  than  the  Republican.  Ike has a  common  touch  Steven-
son  has  yet  to  develop.  The  latter's  acceptance  speech  was  a
bad  anti-climax; he  fears to  be  his  own  witty  self  and  yet can-
not  bring  himself  to  plunge  into  the  healthy  banalities.  The
GOP  still  has  the  peace  issue,  and  the  Democrats  will  make
fools  of  themselves  if  they  try  to  picture  the  country  as  some-
how  in  calamity.  This  is  no  time  for  phoney  Armageddons;
Stevenson's  problem  is  a  difficult  one.   His  chance  to  win  de-
pends  on  the  President's  health—and  Nixon.   And  Nixon  is
smart  enough  to  become a reformed  character  for  the  occasion.
Help   Us  Reach  New  Friends  On  Your  Vacation—Send  For  Sample  Copies
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  301 E. Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name                                             •
Street
City                                        Zone          State
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name
8/27/B6
City                                      .<;      Zone           State
City                                            Zone           State
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?     Yes  D     No  (J
IE   Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Copitol  St.,   S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED