I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956nov12.pdf

============================================================

The  United  Nations  Seems  to  Be  Celebrating  International  Hypocrisy  Week,  See  Page 4
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   IV,  NO.  43
NOVEMBER  12,  1956
«o«      WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
15   CENTS
Is  This  Bulganin's  Notion  of  Responsibility?
In  his  message  to  Eisenhower,  Premier  Bulganin  said  the
Soviet  Union  and  the  U.S.   as  "the   two  great  powers  which
possess  all  modern  types  of  arms,  including  the  atomic  and
hydrogen  weapons  .  .  .  bear  particular  responsibility for  stop-
ping   war  and   reestablishing  peace   and   calm."   The   Soviet
Premier  displayed  a  strange  conception  of  that   responsibility
in  the  tone  and  content  of  the  message  he  sent  next  day  to
Prime  Minister  Eden.   In • demanding  that  England  withdraw
its  troops  from  Egypt,  Bulganin  warned  "there  are  countries
now  which  need  not  have  sent  a navy  or  air  force  to  the  coast
of  Britain  but  could  have  used  other  means,  such  as  rocket
techniques.   If  rocket  weapons  had  been  used  against Britain
and  France,"  he  continued,  making the  implied  threat  plainer,
"they  would  probably  have  called   this  a  barbarous  action."
Bulganin's  conclusion  was  couched  in  the  language  of  a  su-
perior  addressing  an  inferior.   "We  are  fully  determined   to
crush  the  aggressors,"  Bulganin  declared,  "and  restore  peace  in
the  East,  through  the use of  force.  We  hope  at  this  critical mo-
ment  you will  display due  prudence  and  draw  the  correspond-
ing  conclusions  from  this."  This  is  the  phrasing  of  an  ulti-
matum,  not  an  appeal  for  peace.
Bulganin's  words  must  have  recalled  to  Englishmen, may
have  been intended  to  recall,  Khrushchev's  speech  at  the Birm-'
Even  in  Victory,  The  GOP  Still
Eisenhower's  victory was  a  foregone  conclusion,  but  the  di-
mensions  were  a  surprise.  They  show  that  despite  Ike's  over-
whelming popularity,  the  GOP  remains a minority party.  This
was  the  first  time  since Wilson's  reelection  in  1916  that  a vic-
toriously   reelected   President  failed  to  carry  the  House   with
him.   The  country  split  its  ticket,  and  split  it  wisely.  The  com-
bination  of  Eisenhower  and  a  Democratic  Congress  is  not  a
bad  one  in  a  crisis.   If   Clements   is  defeated   in  Kentucky,
Lausche will  not  be doing  Eisenhower  a  favor  to  leave  him  at
the  mercy  of  a  Republican  Senate.
The  Democrats  may  end  by  being  thankful  that  they  did
not  win  this  election.   Painful  adjustments  lie  ahead  even  if,
when  and  as the  current war  crisis  is  resolved.   Can  the  boom
go  on  forever? There  will  have  to  be  recognition  of  Commu-
nist  China  and  a  modus vivendi with  the  Soviet  Union.  Eisen-
hower can get the  country to swallow  these bitter pills far  more
easily than  Stevenson could;  the Democrats  will  be less warlike
and  more  sensible  backstopping  Eisenhower  than  they  would
have  been  on  their  own.
Stevenson  had  an  impossible  task.  Thanks  in  large  part  to
the  reforms  of  the  New  Deal  and  their  acceptance  by  the  Re-
publicans,  the  country  has  been  enjoying  extraordinary pros-
perity  and  social  stability. The  war  scare plus  contentment  plus
a Negro revolt  (as in Virginia)  against  the Democrats  gave  Ike
1  7
ingham  trade  fair  during  his  visit  to  England  with  Bulganin
last April.  At that  time  Khrushchev  boasted,  "It  is a  fact  that
the  Soviet  Union  was  the  first  to  explode  a  hydrogen  bomb
from  an aeroplane.  ,.  . I am quite  sure  that  we will  have  the
guided  missile  with  an  H-bomb  warhead  which  can  land  any-
where  in  the  world."  Though  Bulganin  did  not  speak  of  nu-
clear  rockets  in  his  letter  to  Eden,  he  could  hardly  have  been
surprised  that  the  British  press  at  once  saw  in  this  a  threat  of
long  distance bombardment  by  nuclear  missiles.   This  is unex-
pected  from  the  Power  which has  been  campaigning  since  the
Stockholm  Appeal  for  a  ban  on  the  use  of  nuclear   weapons.
Does  Bulganin  think  he  serves the  cause of  peace  by talking so
quickly  and  lightly  of  measures which  would  unleash  a  world
nuclear  war?  Does  he  think  Russia  could  bomb  Britain  with-
out  provoking  retaliation  from  America?  It  is  easy  to  imagine
the  outcry  if  Eisenhower,  in  a  message  of  similar  tone,  had
threatened  to  bomb  Russia  unless  its  troops  evacuated   Hun-
gary.  The  U.S.  would  be  accused  of  rattling  the  atomic saber,
and  of  seeking  to  dictate by terror.   It  is  Bulganin,  not  Eisen-
hower,  who  fails  in  the  awful  responsibility entailed  by posses-
sion of  the  new weapons.  The  first  element of  that  responsibil-
ity  is  restraint.   The  Missile  is  not  an  instrument  of  guided
diplomacy.
Proves  to  Be A  Minority  Party
Why  Not  Replace  Dulles  With  George?
In  view  of  the  Democratic  majority  in  the  new Con-
gress,  the  gravity  of  the international  situation,  and  the
serious illness of  John  Foster  Dulles,  we believe  former
Senator  George  would make  an  ideal  successor  as  Sec-
retary  of  State.   No  man  has  had  more  experience  of
foreign  affairs  or  has  more prestige  in  Congress.   He  is
closer  to  Eisenhower's   position  on  peace  than   Dulles.
George  helped bring  about  the  summit meeting.   A new
one  may  soon  be  necessary.
all  but  Missouri  and  the  deepest  of  the  deep  Southern  States.
It  is  a  pleasure  to  see  the  election  to  the  Senate  of  Javits,
John  Sherman  Cooper,  and  former  Mayor  Clark  of   Philadel-
phia;  to  have  Morse  returned  by  Oregon  and  Wiley  by  Wis-
consin;  to  see Welker  defeated  by Church  in  Idaho.  They  help
to  counterbalance  the  victor  of  Capehart  in  Indiana,  the  reap-
pearance  of  Revercomb from  West  Virginia  and  the  debut  of
Talmadge from  Georgia.   One  unfavorable  result  of  the  elec-
tion  will  be  to  weaken  Reuther  as  against  Meany  in  the  labor
movement.  When  the  UAW   failed   to  carry  Michigan   for
Stevenson,  despite   "Soapy"  Williams  reelection  as  Governor,
it was a  blow  to  those  who  wanted  labor  to  take  a  more  'mili-
tant  part  in  politics.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's Weekly,  November 12,1956
Among  The  Directors  of  Leading  U.  S.  Corporations  Almost  All  Gave  to  The  GOP
In  The  World  of  The  Big  Money,  Democrats  Are  Few  And  Far  Between
The  report  on  campaign  contributions   made  public  last
week  by  a   Senate   Privileges   and   Elections  subcommittee
shows  how  lopsidedly big  business  and  high  finance  in  this
country  favor  the  Republicans.   One  of  the  voluminous ex-
hibits  released  with  this  report   gives  the  contributions  of
$500 or  more made by officers  of  our  225 largest  corporations.
This  reveals  that  while they  gave  $1,031,067  to  the  Republi-
cans  this  year,  they  gave  only  $38,100  to  the   Democrats.
Since  reported   contributions   make  up  a  minor  portion  of
total  campaign  expenditures,  this  understates  the  extent  to
which  moneyed men prefer  the  GOP.*
In  the  oil industry,  of-54  oil company officials  or  directors
who  reported  contributions  of  $500  or  more,  only  two  con-
tributed  to  the  Democrats:  Jacob  Blaustein  (Amoco)  of  Bal-
timore  gave  $5,000  and  C. Jared  ingersoll  (Atlantic   Refin-
ing)  of  Philadelphia  gave  $500.  Again, among the -directors
of  the  25 largest  commercial banks  who contributed  $344,356
to  the  Republican party,  only  two  were  shown  as  contribu-
tors  to  the  Democrats.   One was  the  same  C. Jared  Ingersoll
(as  a  director  of  New York's  Hanover  Bank)  and  the  other,
Marshall  Field,  one  time  backer  of  PM, who is  a  director  of
Chicago's  First  National.  (See  box this  page).
Only  One  Utility  Man
Of  the  25 largest utilities  in the  country,  only  one  director,
Harry  Wall,  Lewiston,  Idaho,  of  Consumers  Power,  lists  a
-contribution  to  the  Democrats.  He gave  $500. The 25 largest
insurance   companies  show   only  three   contributors   to   the
Democrats:   John   M.  Budd,  St.   Paul   (New  York   Life),
$1,000;  R.  E.  Gross,  of  Burbank,  Cal.  (Penn  Mutual),  $500
and   Dr.   Robert   L.  Johnson  of   Philadelphia,   Pa.    (Penn
Mutual),  $1,600.
The nation's 25 largest transportation companies are  equal-
ly  denuded  of  Democrats.  They  show  only  three   directors
contributed  to  the  Democrats  and  one  is  the  same  C. Jared
Ingersoll  of  Philadelphia,  who reappears  here  as  a   director
of  Pennsylvania  Railroad.  The other  two mavericks  are  Solon
B.  Turman  of  New  Orleans,  a  director  of  Illinois  Central
($500),  and  James  McCahey  of  Chicago,  a  director  of  the
Nickel  Plate  ($1,000).
Even  in  merchandising,  the  25  largest  corporations  show
very  few Democratic  contributors.  Kroger's  lists  one Demo-
crat,  Warren  E.  Carter  of  Akron,  who gave  $2,000;  Sears.
Roebuck  has  one Democrat,  Edgar  B. Stern  of  New Orleans,
* The  subcommittee heard testimony from  its  political  sci-
ence  consultant,  Dr.  Alexander  Heard,  that  the  campaign of
1952  actually cost  $140,000,000, of  which  60 percent was  spent
by  the  Republicans  and  40  percent  by  the  Democrats.  This
year's  real expenditures are expected to be somewhat less but
still  of that  magnitude.
Political   Contributions
From  The World of  Journalism
To  the  Republicans: Gardner  Cowles  (Look),  $2500;
Mr.  and  Mrs. Marshall  Field,  Jr.  (Chicago Sun),  $5500
(and  $500  to  the  Democrats);  Henry  R.  Luce   (Life),
$12,500  (and  Clare  Luce, $1500; Eugene Meyer  (Wash-
ington  Post),  $500;  William  S.  Paley  (CBS),  $12,000;
Whitelaw  Reid  (New  York  Herald-Tribune),  $500;  M.
Robert   Rogers   (WGMS),  $2,000;  De   Witt   Wallace
(Reader's  Digest),  $4500.
To  the  Democrats:  Barry  Bhigham <Louisville Cour-
ier  Journal),  $3,000; Gilbert  A.  Harrison  (New Repub-
lic),  $3,000;  Mrs.  Walter  Lippmann   ($1,000);   Gifford
Phillips  (California  Frontier),  $500;  Michael  Straight
(New   Republic), $500.
To  Americans for  Democratic Action: Dorothy  Schiff
(New   York  Post),  $3,000.
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Marshall  Field  (one time backer of  the
newspaper  PM)  gave  $14,000  to  the  Democrats,  $2,000
to  Americans for  Democratic Action, and-$1,000  to  the
National -Committee  for  An  Effective  Congress.
who  gave  $1,000;  and  the  Davis  family,  of  Florida,  which
controls  the  Winn  Dixie  stores,  gave  the  Democrats $4,000.
Among the 'wealthy families  of  the  country,  almost  all  are
Republican.  The  Rockefellers  gave  the  G.O.P.  $100,500;  the
Mellons,  $99,150;  the  du  Fonts,  $88,300;  the  Pews,  $46,000.
The  Vanderbilts gave the  Republicans $33,800 and  the  Demo-
crats  $5,000.   The largest contribution to the  Democrats from
a  family group  came from  the  Reynolds  family, of  Reynolds
Metals,  which  owes  its  rise  to  New  Deal  anti-trust  action
against  Alcoa.  They  contributed  $41,250  to  the   Democrats.
The Kaiser  family  is similarly  indebted but  Edgar  F.  Kaiser
appears  in  the  Republican column  with  $1,000.
With  the  bulk  of the  big money on the other  side, it  is  sur-
prising that  the  Democrats  manage  as  well  as  they  do. The
report-showed  the  Republicans  had  spent  $7,750,000 by  Octo-
ber  21 of  this  year  and  the  Democrats,  $3,887,428.  The  Re-
publicans  had -cash  on hand  at  that  time  of  $3,678,000 while
the  Democrats  had  $1,091,000.  The  new power of  labor  tends
somewhat  to  lessen  the  imbalance. The report  showed that of
$1,500,000  spent  by  labor  groups  this  year,  "virtually   all"
went to help the-Democrats.  To frighten  labor  off,  a  test  case
against  the  United  Automobile Workers  under  Section  610 of
the  Corrupt  Practices  Act -has  been brought  by  the  Depart-
ment  of  Justice  and   is  now  pending  before   the   Supreme
Court,  "There  has  never,"  the  report  notes,  "been  an  indict-
ment  of  a  corporation  under  this  section."  The  big  money
would  like  to  see labor's  funds  barred  from  politics.
Names  Make News: Here  Are The  Handful  of  Liberals  Among  Contributors
Among the  contributors  of  $500  or  more  to  Democratic  or-
ganizations  who may  be  of  interest  to  New  Dealers  and  lib-
eral readers were:  Frank  Altschul,  $1,000;  Thurman  Arnold,
$1,500;  George W.  Ball,  $1,000;  Wm. Benton,  $5,500;  Joseph
Borkin, $1,000;  Arde  Bulova, $6,000 Mr.  and  Mrs.  Will  Clay-
ton,   $9,300;  Thomas  G.  Corcoran,  $2,900;  Richardson   Oil-
worth,  $500;  Albert  M. Greenfield,  $1,000;  W. Averell  Harri-
man,  $1,000;   David  Lloyd  Kreeger,  $1,000;   Mr.  and   Mrs.
Ferdinand  Kuhn,  $1,000;  Herbert  Lehman, $4,000;  David  E.
Lilienthal,  $1,500;  Eleanor  Lowenthal  (Mrs.  Max L.)   $4,500;
Dr.  Isadore  Lubin,  $600;  Leo J.   Margolin,  $1,000;   Herbert
S.  Marks,  $1,250;  Henry  Morgenthau,  Jr.,   $2,000;  Paul  H.
Nitze,  $3,000;  Louis Niter,  $1,000;  Edwin W. Pauley,  $4,000;
Mr. and  Mrs. Ralph  Pomerance, $3,500;  Mr. and  Mrs. George
D. Pratt, Jr.,   $12,000;  Dr. Louise  L. Rauh,  $600;  Edward  J.
Steichen,  $500;  Philip  M.  Stern,  $3,500;  Dewey  D.  Stone,
$8,000;   Mr.  and   Mrs.   Michael  W.  Straus,   $1,000;   Max
Swiren,  $500.
Chief  ADA  Contributors
Americans for  Democratic Action listed  $23,063 in  receipts
of  $500  or  more from  the  following individuals:  Saul  Brod-
sky,  Croton  on  Hudson,  $500;  Albert  S.  Coolidge, Belmont,
Mass.,  $1,000;  Marshall  Field,  $2,000; Louis Grodsky, Croton
on  Hudson,  $500;  Adriel  Harris,  Croton  on  Hudson,  $500;
Jane  Harris,  NY,  $500; Mrs. Jack  Kaplan,  NY,  $500;  Mrs.
David  M.  Levy,  NY,  $4,500;  Louis  Lubin,  Peekskill,  $500;
Robert  R.  Nathan,  Wash.,  D. C.,  ^3,500;   George  D.  Pratt,
Jr.,   Bridgewater,  Conn.,  $1,000;  Joseph  L. Rauh, Jr.,   Wash.,
{Continued  on  Page  Three)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, November IS, 195S
Why  Israel  Hesitates  and  Why  Russia  Clamped  Down in  Panic on Hungary
Some  Clues  to  the  News  in  The  Middle  East  and  Eastern  Europe
Israel:  It  already  had  a  quarter  million  Arabs,    Occupa-
tion  of the  Gaza strip gave  it  another  quarter  million.  If  war
comes  with  Jordan,   Syria  and  Iraq,  Israel  will  extend   its
frontiers  to  the  Jordan  river, thus  taking in  all  of what  was
Palestine.   But  in  so doing-it will acquire another  half  million
Arabs.  This  would  give a  State  with  about  1,600,000 Jews,  a
huge minority of  1,000,000 Arabs.  Under  such  circumstances,
a  bi-national  State,  using  both  Hebrew and  Arabic as  its  of-
ficial languages  (as  Canada  uses  English  and  French)  would
become  a  political  necessity.   But  the  successful  operation  of
a  bi-national  Palestine  would require  a  change of  attitude on
the  part  of  both peoples  which  it  would  be Utopian  to  expect.
This  is  the  political  dilemma which holds  Israel  back.
The  notion  of  a  solid  Arab  bloc  ready   for  jehad,  or   holy
war:  When, the  chips  were  down, dynastic  ambition  and  oil
profits  counted  for  more  with  the  Arabs  than  the  plight  of
Egypt.   Iraq  moved into Jordan  to  counter  Egypt, not Israel.
Saudi   Arabia   is  fearful   of  seeing   Ibn   Baud's   rivals,   the
Hashemite  family,  unite  Iraq  and  Jordan.  That  movement of
Saudi  troops  into  Jordan  was not a  movement against  Israel.
The  Jordanian-Saudi  border  has  never  been  demarcated  and
Saudi  Arabia  is anxious  to push  it  as far  west  as  possible  be-
fore Iraq takes  over.
The   Revolt   Against   Stalinism:   In   Hungary   the  revolt
against  Stalinism  reached  a  third  and  climactic  phase.  The
first  phase  was  Titoism;  this  is  a  form  of  national  commu-
nism  which  differs  from  Stalinism  only  in  a  milder  attitude
toward  its  heretics.  In  Yugoslavia,  as  in  Russia,  there  is no
sign  of free  discussion;  indeed  the  "cult  of  personality" still
survives  in  Belgrade  after   its  destruction   in  Moscow. The
Polish  revolt  is  not  Titoism  but  a  second  stage  in  the  reac-
tion  against   Stalinism.  This  stage  is  no  longer  purely   na-
tional.   In  Poland  there  is  vigorously  free  discussion  in  the
press;  free  debate  in  Parliament;  movement toward  restora-
tion  of  parliamentary   rule  rather  than  government   by  de-
cree;  and  a  reinvigoration   of  the  surviving  non-Communist
parties, though  still within  the  framework  of  Communist  pre-
dominance  and  a  one-slate  electoral  system.   The  Hungarian
revolt  went  into  a  third  stage,  with  the  demand  for   free
elections.
Hungary:  The last  free  elections  in  Hungary,  in November
1945,  gave  the  Communists less  than  17 percent  of  the  vote.
The  Social Democrats  got  slightly more.  Together  they  polled
about  35 percent,  compared  to  the  right-of-center   Smallhold-
ers  Party,  which  polled  over  57  percent.  The  chances   were
that  the  Marxist  Left—even with  a  "national", "Titoist" and
"liberalized"  Communist  wing—would  poll   less  than   that
now  in  a  free   election.   Socialism's  good  name  has   been
blackened   by  Communism's rigid  and  arbitrary  rule.  The
Right  would  have won at  the  polls.  The demand for  free  elec-
tions  was thus  the  prelude,  in  Russian  eyes,  to  an  anti-Rus-
sian  and  anti-Communist  regime.   A  free  Hungary  threat-
ened  to  be  a  hostile  bridgehead  in  the  East,  the   cornerstone
Footnote  to  the  Testing  Dispute
Senator  Clinton  P.  Anderson, chairman  of  the  Joint
Congressional  Committee on Atomic Energy,  fn Nevada
to  campaign for  Alan  Bible,  told  newspapermen there
(Las  Vegas  Sun, Oct. 30),  "We have more super bombs
than  we  know  what  to  do  with  and  we  have developed
bombs  so  big  we  don't  dare test  them."
of  a  new  cordon  sanitaire.
Poland:  There  is  a  crucial  difference  between  nationalism
in  Poland  and  nationalism  in  Hungary.  The former  stands  to
gain  by  maintenance  of  the  status  quo.  The  Poles  are  con-
cerned   above  all  else  with  retaining  the  territories  taken
from  Germany; their  hope of  rebuilding  a  prosperous  indusr
trial  country  depends  on holding the  Oder-Neisse  lands.  For
this  they  require  a  Russian  understanding  against Germany;
to  become again  a  power  hostile  to  Russia  would  be to  invite
a  new  Russo-German  partition.   Stalin  was  never  shrewder
than  when  he  gave- Poland  the   Oder-Neisse  territory  and
thus  made  it  dependent  on  Russia.   But  Hungary,  an- enemy
country,  lost by the last war.   For  her,  recovery  of  "the  lands
of  the  crown  of  St.  Stephen", the  inevitable  goal  of  a  renas-
cent  nationalist  Hungary,  means  the  recovery   of   Transyl-
vania  from  Rumania  and  of  Croatia  from  Yugoslavia.  This
would make her  the natural  spearhead  of  a  new anti-Russian
crusade.  Tito  as  a  Yugoslav  is  as  much  opposed  by  national
interest  to  the  reappearance  of  that  kind  of  a  Hungary  as
is  Moscow. This  explains  Belgrade's  cold  attitude  toward  the
Hungarian  uprising.
(Continued  from  Page  Two)
D.  C.,  $563;  Dr.  Loufse  W.  Rauh,  Cincinnati,   Ohio,  $600;
Marvin  Rosenberg,  N.  Y.,  $1,000;  Mrs.  Dorothy  Schiff   (New
York  Post),   $3,900;   Morton  Wolovsky,  NY,  $600;  Reginald
H.  Zalles,  Bethesda,  Md.,  $1,000.
The  National  Committee for  An  Effective    Congress listed
$17,000  in  contributions  of  $500  or  more  from  the  following r
Laird  Bell,  Chicago,  $500;  Marshall  Field,  $1,000;   Charles
Gutwirth,  NY,  $600;  Susan  M. Lee,  NY,  $1,000;  Isadore  Lip-
schutz,  $1,000;   Yoland  D.  Markson,  Los  Angeles,   $1,000;
Mayer  Family,  NY,  $3,000;   George  D.  Pratt,  Jr.,    Bridge-
water,  Conn.,  $4,000;  Charles   Rose,  NY,  $500-Herbert  M.
Rothschild  NY,  $500;  Richard  Salomon,  NY,  $500;   Sidney
H.  Scheuer,  NY,  $1,500;   Joseph   D.  Shane,   Beverly  Rills,
Cal.,   $1,000;  John   Stahl,  Los  Angeles,   $500;  Ben  Zukor,
Beverly  Hills,  $500.
The  AFL-CIO  Committee on Political Education lists  only
one  contribution   over  $500:  Max  Lowenthal,  New   Milford,
Conn.,  $4,000.   Railway  Labor's  Political  League  also  lists
Max  Lowenthal  as  its  only  contributor  in  the  $600  or  over
bracket.   He gave  $5,000.
Cardinal  Mindszenty — A Brave
"A  brave and obstinate man, a  narrow Hungarian nation-
alist,  and a  conservative with  little understanding for  social
issues,  Mindszenty  was an  almost medieval  figure,  a  prelate
from  the heroic times of the  Turkish invasions.  He  antagon-
ized  not  only  the  Communists  but  the  large  number  of Hun-
garian  democrats  who ...    in  any case  wished  as strongly
as  the  communists  themselves to  transform  the  semi-feudal
and  chauvinist  Hungary  which  the  Cardinal seemed  to  de-
fend."
—Hugh  Seton-Watson:  The  East  European Revolution
(1950).
"In  looking back, there is little doubt  that his uncomprom-
Man  But A Political  Anachronism
ising stand  and  outspoken sympathies for  a  vanished politi-
cal order  would have embarrassed many  a  conservative Gov-
ernment;  would  have  driven  most  liberal  Administrations
into a Kulturkampf  against him...."
—Gordon Shepherd: Riissia's Danubian Empire  (1954).
"Mindszenty  and   the   government   came   to  preliminary
fierce clash  on two paramount  issues.  First,  the  land reform.
Second,  nationalization  of  the  schools.  The  Church  was  a
very  important landowner  in  Hungary; it  was  the  biggest
in  fact,  owning  about  900,000  ucres. . . . Mindszenty  himself
was  implacably  opposed  to  the  land  reform."
—John  Gunthcr: Behind  The Iron Curtain (1949).
1   7  ''.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone'* Weekly, November IS, 1956
Humanity  Seems  to  Be  Celebrating International  Hypocrisy  Week  at  The  United  Nations
The  Terrible  Truth  About  The  World  Crisis (And Me)
dren,  but  the  pistols  are  no  longer toy.
If  only  we were all  saints like the  Indians,  breathed  deeply,
and  meditated  on  the  infinite  wisdom  of  certain  sacred  sylla-
bles. . . . We are grateful  for Nehru.  But the old Adam  lives
in  him, too.  He  is  a  Kashmiri.  Kashmir's  high  lovely  vales
are  home to  him. Nehru,  like the  rest  of  us,  finds  abnegation
easiest at a  distance.  He  can be altruistic about Sinai and  Buda-
pest.   But when  Kashmir is at  stake?  Nehru  has just  arranged
for  a  puppet  "constituent  Assembly"  (dissident  members  in
jail)  to  declare  Kashmir  part  of  India, though  Nehru  himself
once  promised  that  he  would  abide  by  a  plebiscite's  decision
between  India  and  Pakistan.   In  Kashmir  a  Hindu  minority
has long  ruled  a Muslim majority  and  a plebiscite  would mean
that  Nehru  might  rule an  India  with  its  most  beloved  portion,
his  home,  torn  from  it. . . . So are we all.
The  terrible  observation  in  the  world  crisis  is  that  nations,
peoples,  and  individuals  take  the  law  into  their  own  hands
when  they  feel  that  their  really  vital  interests  are  at  stake.  To
listen  to  the  debates  at  the  UN,  one  could  well  believe  that
humanity  was  celebrating   international  hypocrisy  week.  One
of  the great  discoveries  in  industry was that  of  interchangeable
parts.  Listening  to the  oratory, one could  speak  of  interchange-
able  moral  phrases.  What  the  Russians  said  in  condemnation
of  the  British  in  Egypt  was  exactly  what  the  British  said  in
condemnation   of  the  Russians  in  Hungary.   Russia  thought
the  conditions  Britain  and  France  attached  to  their  acceptance
of  the  cease fire "incompatible  with  the  national sovereignty of
Egypt."  Insert  the word  "Hungary," and  you see what we mean.
The  Mote  In  Mine  Own  Eye
Since  every man  is a  microcosm,  in  whose  heart  may  be read
all  that  sends  armies  marching,  I  must  admit  I  am  no  better.
Because  so many bonds attach me to  Israel,  I  am ready to con-
done  preventive war; I  rejoiced when  my side won. Though  I
preach  international  understanding  and  support  for  the  UN,  I
found  all  the  excuses  for  Israel  that  warring  nationalisms  al-
ways  find  to  excuse  breaches  of  the  peace.   Should  they  wait
until  the  enemy  is  strong  enough  to  attack  them?   Is  it  not
mere  prudence  to  anticipate  the  blow?  What  better  time  to
save  Israel  than  in  concert  with  Britain and  France,  on  the eve
of  the  American  election,  and  before  the  winter  rains  made
the  Negev  and  Sinai  impassible  for  tanks?   Israel's  survival
seemed  worth  the  risk  to  world  peace.  And  this  is  how  it  al-
ways is and how  it starts, and  I offer  up the mote in my own eye.
The  Russians and  the  Egyptians say Israel  was the  aggressor,
and  so  it  was. But what were  all  those  Migs  for, which Mos-
cow  poured  into  Egypt  in  exchange  for  its  precious  cotton?
What  was Nasser  doing  when  he  boasted  that  he  would  soon
exterminate  Israel?  .  .  .  And  from  the  Arab  side  I  can  hear
the  recriminations  about   the  homeless  refugees  it  was  their
sacred  duty  to  revenge  and  put   back  into  repossession.  The
quarrels  of  nations  are  as  difficult  to  unravel  as  those  of  chil-
Sic  Semper  (The Other  Fellow's)  Tyrants
What the  Russians  are  doing  in  Budapest  is so dreadful  that
even  the  Indian,  Icelandit  and  American  Communist   parties
protest.   Moscow  is  ready  to  do  anything in  order  to  keep  in
its  "zone  of  security" governments politically  satisfactory to  it.
But  haven't  we just  finished  a  campaign in  which  the  Repub-
licans boasted of  the  quick  way we toppled  the  Arbenz govern-
ment  in  Guatemala?  Moscow  doesn't  want  anti-Russian and
anti-Communist. governments  in  Eastern  Europe.  We  in  the
Caracas  agreement  tried  to  ensure  that  no  anti-American and
anti-capitalist governments could be formed  in our  hemisphere.
How we honor  brave fighters for freedom . . . until  they shoot
down  our tyrant  friends,  as  recently  in  Nicaragua.
The  fact  that  H-bombs  now  exist  and  that  a  new  war may
ruin  the  earth  .  .  .  this  is  forgotten  when  vital  interests  are
touched,  when  it  seems  a  matter  of  life  and  death  for   one's
own.  .  .  .  This  is  the  fatal  phrase  "one's  own."  Perhaps  it
will  take a  new  menace from  outside  the  planet  to  make men
feel  at  last  that  all  who inhabit  it  are their  own. .  .  . But be-
ware  of  these  fine  phrases.    I,  too, like  the  rest  of  them (and
maybe  even you), am  a  hypocrite.
Advt.  (Not  So  Cosmic):  That  Friend  Who  Always  Borrows  The  Weekly—  Why  Not  Get  Him  to  Subscribe?
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  S, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed $5:*
Street ........................................................................................
City  .........................................  .Zone ............ State....................
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name ..................... . ........ . .......................................... .....
City
11/12/56
...Zone           State.
City                                          .Zone          State.
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Tea  D    No  Q
IE   Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol   St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second Class Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED