I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1956
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1956nov05.pdf

============================================================

The  Father  of  The  H-Bomb Now  Advocates  Vest  Pocket  Atomic  Bombs,  See  Page  3.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    IV,  NO.  42
NOVEMBER  5,  1966
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15   CENTS
America's   Satellites  Turn  Desperate,  Too
If  the  world's  situation  were not  so explosive,  one  could  see
the  humor  in  the  past  week's  events.   Titoism  suddenly spread
to  London  and  Paris  from  Warsaw  and  Budapest.   Eden  and
Mollet,  with  an  assist  from  Ben  Gurion,  joined  Gomulka  and
Nagy   in  satellite   rebellion.    Eden's   understatement,  in   the
House  of  Commons  last  Wednesday,  "It  is  sometimes  a  gov-
ernment's duty to make decisions for  its own country,".was  the
English  gentlemanly  equivalent  of  a  whole  mob  of  cheering
Poles  or  Magyars.   This  was  England's  declaration  of   inde-
pendence  from the United  States.  The  State Department's  glee
over  the  national  risings  in  Eastern  Europe  turned  to  dismay
when  they  spread  westward.
Then  there  were  the  scenes  at  the  United  Nations  Security
Council   when   Lodge   and   Shepilov   stood   together   against
Britain,  France  and  Israel.   It  was  almost  as  if  a  fellow  feel-
ing  for  once  bound  together  the  two  great  Powers when  con-
fronted  by  rebellious  feudatories.   For  months  Nasser  and  the
Arab  States  had  been  proclaiming  their  preparations  to  crush
Israel.  Despite the warlike  intent,  the  U.S.S.R.  had  been  pour-
ing  arms  into  Egypt  and  Dulles  more quietly  had  been  supply-
ing them  to  Iraq  and Saudi Arabia.  Now that  Israel had  struck
a  blow  without  waiting  for  the  Egyptians to  learn  how  to use
those  new  Soviet  planes  and  tanks,  Moscow  and   Washington
were  as  indignant  as  if  they were  wholly  innocent  bystanders.
When  Dulles  Couldn't  See
Only  two weeks before, when Syria began  to  move arms into
Jordan  and  Iraqi  troops  moved  up  to the  border  in  preparation
for  what  looked  like  an  attack  on  Israel,  Mr.  Dulles  saw no
reason  for  alarm.   He  was  asked  at  his  press  conference  on
October  16 "Are  we at all  disturbed  by this  Syrian move, sir?"
Dulles replied,  "We  can't  complain  over the  fact  that  countries
which  have  mutual  security  pacts  help  each  other  in  terms  of
equipment  ...   we do the same."  This  signalled  Baghdad  that
it  could  supply  American arms to  Jordan  for  use against  Israel
without  rebuke  from  Washington.   No  advance warning mes-
sages  were  sent  off to  Iraq.  On  the  contrary, Mr.  Dulles  began
to  provide  himself  with  escape  clauses  in  the  event of  an  Iraqi-
Jordanian  attack.  He  said  "a good  deal depends  upon  what  the
real  purposes  and  intent"  of  the  arms  transfers  were;  if  for
aggression,  we  would  assist  the  victims.   But  "of  course,"  he
added,  the  trouble  is  that  aggression  is  not  always easy  to  de-
fine and  arms that  are  given  in  advance for  defensive  purposes
may  perhaps  be  used  for  other  purposes.   So,"  he  concluded,
"we  don't  feel  really  in  a  position  to  judge  whether  that  is a
justifiable  and  helpful  move  or  whether  it  has  dangerous  im-
plications."   Never  was  myopia  more  cheerfully  endured.
The   Israeli   Ambassador  informed  Mr.  Dulles   on  Sunday
that  Israel had  information which  led  it to  fear  a  recrudescence
.1  6
Our  Election  Choices
For  Stevenson and Kefauver;  for  the  Democrats gen-
erally;  but  in  the  Senate  races  for  four  Republicans:
Javits  in  New  York,  John  Sherman Cooper  in  Kentucky,
Wiley  in  Wisconsin; and  Prescott  Bush  in Connecticut.
We are  for  Javits because of  his  record; for  Cooper, be-
cause  of  his  liberalism; for Wiley,  as  a final  blow  to  the
McCarthyites;  and  for  Bush  because  Thomas  E.  Dodd,
his  Democratic  opponent,  was  the  chief  architect of  the
Nixon-like   foreign  policy   portion   of   the  Democratic
platform.
of  jedayeen  incursions  on  a  large  scale  in  the  wake of  the  Jor-
danian  elections  and  the  military  agreement  reached  by  Egypt,
Syria  and  Jordan.   These  terrorist  squads  are  Nasser's   special
pride;  they  operate  under  Egyptian  military  command  from
bases  in  Egyptian territory; I  know  from  what  I  saw in  Israel
last  spring  what  havoc  they  can  wreak.  The  President's  mes-
sage  to  Ben  Gurion  for  restraint  would  have  been  immeasur-
ably  more  powerful,  it  would  have  had  an  immediate   effect
within  Israel  itself,  if  it  had  been  accompanied  by  a  similar
warning  to Nasser  not to  resume  the nocturnal  invasions  of  the
jedayeen.   "No  one,"  Ambassador Eban  could  complain  with
justice  at  the  United  Nations  last  week,  "ever  called  a  session
of  the  Security  Council  to  condemn  these  penetrations  or  to
call  for  their  withdrawal."   This  one-sided  attitude  has  a  sim-
ple  explanation.   Both  Washington   and  Moscow  have  been
wooing  the  Arab  States;  oil  and  bases  are  the  prize they  seek;
both  regard  not  only  Israel  but  the  interest  of  Britain  and
France as expendable  in  the  contest  to  decide whether  the  U.S.
or  the  U.S.S.R.  shall  be  the  Paramount  Power  in  the  area.
The  Anglo-French  Viewpoint
The  threat  to the  Atlantic Pact  must be seen from  the British
and  French  point  of  view.  It  is one  thing  to  seek  to  maintain
peace,  and  to  mediate  the  quarrel  over  Suez,  it  is  another  sur-
reptitiously  to  support  Nasser  by allowing him  to  hire  Ameri-
can  pilots,  by keeping  dollar  revenues  open  to  him  and  by  re-
suming  American  aid  as was  done  only a  few  days  ago.   From
the  British  and  French  viewpoint,  this  meant  that  while  re-
straining  them,  we  were  helping  Nasser.   The  whole  picture
cannot  be seen  unless one  steps  back and  looks  at  how  the  U.S.
is  slowly  taking  over  the  dominant  role  in  all  North   Africa
from   Casablanca  to  Cairo  as  Anglo-French  power  there   is
liquidated;  the  new  governments  in  Morocco  and  Tunis  hope
to  become  American financial dependents.   Nasser  has  Wash-
ington  bidding  against  Moscow  for  his  friendship  and  allegi-
ance.  This  is  what  created a  common  interest among Britain,
France  and  Israel;  what  looks  like  an  ungrateful conspiracy  to
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  S, 1956
The  New  Deal's  Leading  Water-and-Power  Expert  Finds  Egypt's  Dam  Scheme  Unsound
Famous  Engineer  Asks Whether Aswan  Dam Project  Is "Panacea  or  Politics?"
Completely  new light  is  cast  on  the  Aswan  Dam  project  by
a  report,  "Panacea  or  Politics?",  released  by the  Public  Affairs
Institute in  Washington  last  week  (312  Penn.  Ave.  S.E.,  25c).
The  report  is  given  weight  by  its  authorship.   It  was  written
by  the  engineer  Morris  Llewellyn  Cooke,  a  lifelong   progres-
sive  and  one  of  the  world's  outstanding  authorities  on  water
resources.   He  was  chairman  of  the  President's  Water  Re-
sources  Policy  Commission  under  Truman   and  the  first  di-
rector  of  the  Rural  Electrification  Administration   under   FDR.
The  study  is  based  in  part  on  hitherto  unpublished  memo-
randa  of  the  International  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Devel-
opment.   It  doubts  the  economic feasability  of  the  dam and  re-
gards  its  motivation  as primarily  political.  "The  High  Aswan
Dam  scheme,"  Cooke  writes,  "offered  Nasser  a  symbol around
which  to  rally  and  hold  Egyptian  political  support  for  his  re-
gime.  The  West  on  the  other  hand  made  its  offer  of  aid  pri-
marily  for  the  political  purpose  of  inducing  Nasser  to  curtail
his  dealings  with  the  Communists."
Regional  Plan  Proposed   Instead
Cooke  proposes  instead  a  $500,000,000  United  Nations  Re-
sources  Development  Board  for  Africa  and  the  Middle  East.
He  calls for  a regional  water and  power  program  for  the Nile,
taking  into  account  the  interests  of  all  the  countries  in  which
it  rises  and  through   which  it  flows:  Uganda,    Tanganyika,
Kenya,  the  Belgian  Congo,  Ethiopia  and  the  Sudan  as well  as
Egypt.
Cooke  calls  attention  to  the  most  comprehensive  scheme of
this  kind  ever  developed—by  three  Western   experts  on  the
staff  of  the  Egyptian  Ministry  of  Public  Works.  Their  report,
"The  Future  Conservation  of  the  Nile"  was  published  by  the
Ministry  in  1946.    Perhaps  the  most  striking  feature  of  this
proposal  was the  use of  the  Central  African  lakes  from  which
the  Nile  flows  as  the  natural  storage  centers  to  conserve  the
water  and  smooth  out  cyclical  variations  in  the  flow.
The  Sudanese government, which believes the Aswan project
hydrologically  unsound,  makes  the  point  that  there  is  little
evaporation  in  the  area  of  the  lakes  whereas  "the   rates  of
evaporation  loss  on the  Main Nile, north  of  Khartoum,  and  at
Aswan  in  particular,  are among  the  largest  in  the  world."   A
Sudanese  statement cited  by  Cooke  points  out  that  the  average
Another  Romantic  Moment
In  The  Glamorous  Annals
Of  The  U.S.  Foreign  Service
"Still  dependent  on  frequently  conflicting  newspaper
reports  for  its  best  information,  the  State Department
continued  to  proceed with  caution  today  in  reacting  to
the   week-old  Hungarian   revolution.    U.S.   Counsellor
Barnes  reported  as  late  as  yesterday  from  Budapest
that  his  legation  is  'very  unclear  about  the  outline  of
military  development' in  Hungary.  His  entire  staff,  he
said,  has  been concentrated in  the  American legation  'as
a  precautionary  measure.'  .  .  .  State  Department   offi-
cials here  [i.e.  in Washington] have the  impression that
few  of  its  legation personnel are  venturing  out  into  the
streets  of  Budapest,  so  their knowledge  of  goings-on  is
largely  confined  to  what  they  can see  out  the windows."
—Washington  Evening Star,  Oct. 29.
annual  loss  by  evaporation  from  the  surface  of  the   proposed
Aswan  reservoir  would  be  equivalent  to  a  layer  of  water  ten
feet  deep.
Inflation's   Danger  In  A  Poor  Country
Cooke  believes  the  withdrawal  of  the  U.S.  offer  to  finance
the  dam was sound  but  that  "the  sudden and  peremptory man-
ner"  was wrong.  He  says that  "in  a  rich  country with  a  stable
and  experienced  government,  the  expenditure  of  $1,350,000,-
000  on  one  irrigation  and  power  dam  would  be  a  matter  of
the  most  serious  concern.  Not  even  the  U.S.  has  ever  under-
taken  a  single  project  of  such  magnitude."    He  sees  such a%
project  in  a  poor  country as  involving  the  most  serious  threat
of  inflation  unless  accompanied  by  the  strictest  control  of  the
budget  and  the  economy.
Instead  Egypt has  authorized  scores  of  other  industrial  proj-
ects,  mortgaged  her  main  cash  crop  cotton  to  the  Soviet  bloc
for   arms  and   increased   military  expenditures   to  the   point
where they amount to $10 a year per capita  "in  a nation  where
the  per  capita  income, according to Nasser  himself,  is $67.20."
Cooke  concludes  that  between  the  arms-for-cotton  deal  with
the  Soviets  and  the  huge  internal  military  budget  "it  would
now  appear  impossible  for  Egypt,  with  or  without  Suez  canal
revenues,  to  mobilize the  financial  resources necessary to  com-
plete  the  project."
U.  S.  Press Ignores H-Bomb Discussion in British House  of Commons
Though  of  obvious  relevance  to  the  H-bomb  debate in  the
American  presidential  campaign,  the  U.S.  press  virtually
ignored  discussion  of  the  subject  in  the  British  House  of
Commons  on  Oct. 24.   The  parliamentary  report  in  the  air-
mail  edition  of  The  Times  of  London  (Oct.  25)  shows  that
the  British  government, unlike the American, is  prepared to
discuss  the  question  of   limiting   nuclear  tests  separately
from   a  general   disarmament  convention  "if   that  meets,"
Selwyn  Lloyd  said  in  response  to  a  question from  Laborite
Arthur  Henderson, "with  the  approval  of  the  other  powers
concerned  and  appears  to  offer  better  prospects  of  agree-
ment."
When  another  Laborite  pointed  out  that  in  a  few  years
there  would be  five  or six  other nations in  Europe  beside the
Big  Three  "capable  of  making  these  beastly  things"  and
asked whether  this did not  "make it  all  the  more urgent that
some  decision  should  be  arrived  at  quickly,"  the  Foreign
Secretary  replied,  "I  entirely  agree."  When  another  Labor-
ite  asked  whether  the  British  government  would  take  the
initiative  toward  a limitations  agreement,  Lloyd  replied  that
"no open  public  initiative" had been  taken. This may  hint  at
private talks.
Questions  were  also  raised  about  Field  Marshall  Mont-
gomery's  statement  in  the  Times  of  October  11  [quoted in
our  last  issue,  IFS]  that  in  the  event  of  war  he  would  not
hesitate  to  use  A  and  H  bombs,  adding  "personally I  would
use  them  first  and  ask  afterwards."  A  Laborite  wanted  to
know  "whether  this  was  a  serious threat of insubordination
or  simply  a  piece of  self-advertising  buffoonery"  and wheth-
er  it  "shows  the  Field  Marshal  quite  unfit"  to  be  deputy
NATO  commander.   Mr. Lloyd  disclaimed  responsibility for
Montgomery's statements.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly, November 5,1956
The  Army's Chief  of  Staff  Seems  More  Sensible  Than  The  Army's Fans
The  Father  of The H-Bomb Becomes Advocate of Safe Vest Pocket Atomic  War
Firemen  have  their  "buffs,"   afficianadaes     of  conflagration,
who  leap  from  bed  at  night  to  follow  the  engines  when  the
alarms  come in.  The  Association  of  the  U.S.  Army  is made  up
of  the  "buffs"  of  infantry war;  it  is  the  cheering  section,  the
sounding  board,  of  the  U.S.  Army.  It  held  its annual  meeting
here  last  week-end and the main topic of  discussion was  nuclear
war;   the  main  speaker,  Dr.  Edward  Teller,  "Father  of  the  H-
bomb."
The  concern  was  not  with  the  dangers  of  nuclear  war;  in-
deed  there  was a  hint  in  the  address  of  General  William  G.
Wyman, Commanding General  of  the  Continental  Army  Com-
mand,  that  such  talk  might  be  "the  corrosive  words  of  the
enemy's agents  and their fellow travellers in this  country."  The
concern  of  the  gathering  was  with  the  fascinating  new  prob-
lem in  the  game of war:  how  to  adapt  tactics  to  nuclear  weap-
ons.   The  small  boy mentality is  never far  from  the  surface of
the  warrior  mind,  and  here  was a wonderful  new  toy,  the  big-
gest  boom-boom  of them  all.
The  problem  is  a  cute  one.   Mass  armies  will  be  sitting
ducks,  big  fat  juicy  targets,  in  a  nuclear  war. The  problem  is
to break  up  one's own forces  into  small  highly  equipped  units
yet at the  same time force  the  enemy to concentrate  into  masses
large  enough  to  make  atomic  attack  pay.
The  problem  in  the  gobbledygook  of  the  military  is  "target
acquisition."  The  Army's Chief  of  Staff,  General  Maxwell  D.
Taylor,  stressed  the  need  for  developing  and  holding  "a  rela-
How  Much Is  A Nuclear  "Minimal"?
"There  is  not  one  among us  who  did  not  have  night-
mares about the future conflict  in  which the  full  fury of
nuclear  bombs might  be  loosed.  The  thinking  of  many
has  been paralyzed by this  prospect.  We have  been  led
to distinguish in a way  which  to  me seems arbitrary be-
tween  conventional  warfare  and  nuclear  war.   Many
have  jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  nuclear  bombs  as
such are  weapons of  terror and cannot be used except  to
create  wholesale  destruction.  ...     I  am convinced that
nuclear  bombs  can  be  used  for  defense  in  the  strictest
sense  of  the  word. They can be used in a way  which will
do  minimal  damage to  the civilian  population. .  .  ."
—Dr.   Edward  Tetter  addressing  the  Association  of
the  17.S; Army,  Washington,  D.  C.,  Oct.  86.
Psychiatric  Note
"Washington,  Oct.  27  (U.P.)—The  Government   an-
nounced  today  that  it   was  developing   programs   for
banks  and  top  industrial  leaders  to  follow  in  event  of
an atomic  attack."
What  do they  do, just jump into the nearest  Cadillac?
tive  advantage in  the field of  so-called  target  acquisition."   He
explained   that   without   this   "relative   superiority  in  atomic
weapons  has little meaning."
"Past  difficulties  in  locating  targets  for  conventional  weap-
ons,"  General  Taylor  explained,  "have  been  compounded  in
the  case  of  the  vastly  more  efficient  atomic weapons.  The  ex-
penses  of  these  weapons,  their  great  destructiveness, and their
potential  hazard  to  our  own  -forces   [italics  added]  are  potent
reasons  against  their  promiscuous  employment."
The  New  "Hazard"
Professional  soldiers  have been  able  to  regard  with  equani-
minity the  fact  that  until  now in  war  it  has  been  impossible to
avoid  killing  civilians in  the  process of  killing  enemy soldiers.
But  nuclear  war  holds  a  new  nightmare.   It  becomes  difficult
to  keep  from  killing  one's  own  soldiers  in  the  process  of  kill-
ing  the  enemy's.  This  is  the  new  "hazard"  to  which  General
Taylor referred.
How  deal with  it?   How  move the  human pieces  effectively
under  the  new  conditions?  "The   efforts   of  technology  will
never  suffice  alone,"  General  Taylor  said,  "they  must  be  sup-
plemented  by  tactics  designed to  cause the  enemy  to  create  re-
munerative  targets.  .  .  .  The  purpose  of  land  maneuver be-
comes that of  finding  or forming  [italics  added]  suitable enemy
atomic targets."  The  enemy must be forced  to  concentrate, per-
haps  by  threat  of  break-through,  perhaps  by  threat  of  para-
.1   6
troop   invasion.   But  how  force  him  to  concentrate   without
concentrating  one's  own  forces  in  the  same area?
The  Generals  seem  more  hesitant  than  their  civilian  fans.
While Secretary  of  the  Army Brucker's  address  showed  the  ex-
tent  to  which  our  armed  forces  are  being  reequipped  for  nu-
clear  war,  General  Taylor  stressed  that  the  Army "must not  be
completely  dependent  on atomic weapons.  There are many con-
ceivable  situations,"  he  warned,  "when  it  may be  to  our  own
interest  to  establish  restrictions  on  the  use  of  these  destructive
weapons."  One  of  them  is when  "in  the  resistance  to  aggres-
sion  we are  likely to find  ourselves  in a friendly  country  where
we  have  come  in  response  to  an  appeal  of  help. We  will  have
every  reason  to  wish  to  cause  minimum destruction  to  accom-
plish  our  military  ends.   Hence  the  indispensable    either-or-
capability."
The Atom  Bomb As Liberator
The  Army  Chief  of  Staff  was much  less  sanguine  than  Dr.
Teller. The  "Father  of  the  H-Bomb,"  the  darling  of  the  reac-
tionaries  in  the  Robert  Oppenheimer   case,  is now stuck  with  a
weapon  too big to  use.   Dr.  Teller  is now the  advocate of  the
vest  pocket  atomic weapon.  His  was an  enthusiastic  picture  of
small  mobile  units  of  electronic  specialists  armed  with  small
atomic  weapons  with  which  "They  could  powerfully  help  to
liberate  oppressed  peoples  without  bombing  them  to  bits."  But
what  if  we use little ones  and  then  the enemy uses bigger  ones,
so we retaliate.  .  .  ? And in any case isn't  the virtue  of  these
little  ones that  they pack  so much terrible  destructive capacity?
How  could  we  use  them  in  Budapest,  for  example,   without
killing  an  awful   lot   of   innocent  bystanders  waiting   to   be
liberated  on  earth,  rather  than  in  Heaven?
The  Army  Chief  of  Staff  is a more thoughtful  man  than  the
scientist.  In  a  speech  next  day at  Lafayette  College,  he  added
a  sober  footnote  to  the  meeting  of  army  enthusiasts.  "In  con-
sidering  the  probable  nature  of  future  wars,"  General  Taylor
warned,  "one  is increasingly impressed with  the  fact  that  gen-
eral atomic war is the greatest hazard to mankind today. At  the
same time,  offsetting  this  ominous fact  is  the  feeling  that  it  is
becoming  increasingly improbable that any nation will  deliber-
ately  embark upon  such a  war.   The  danger  of  suicide  is  too
great  for  any  country to  stake its  existence upon  the  dubious
results  of  general  atomic  war.  ..."    We  italicized the  word
"feeling"  because  if  this  is  true,  why  depend  just  on  a  com-
fortable  "feeling"—why  not  try  and  negotiate?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, November  5,1956
A  New  Summit  Meeting  Urgent  to  Prevent  Intervention  by  Soviet  "Volunteers"
The  First  Step  Towards  Peace  Is  To  "Contain"  The   Conflict
(Continued  from  Page  One)
us  seems  a  necessity  of  self  preservation   to  them.   All   three
felt  that  a  double  game  was being  played  at  their  expense  and
to  their  ultimate  undoing.
Israel Lucky  Not  to  Stand  Alone
In  this  juncture  we  cannot  have  "non-involvement"   merely
by  declaring   it.   Mr.  Eisenhower's  address  Wednesday  night,
while  full  of  good  will  to  all  and  sundry, was  a  confession  of
weakness  and  of  incapacity for  the  leadership  fate  has  thrust
upon  the  United  States.   If  Britain  and  France had  not  taken
advantage of  the  Israeli  thrust  against  the  fedayeen  bases in  the
Egyptian  desert  to  attack the  Canal  Zone,  the  U.S.  might  have
and  still  may  shut  off  aid  to  Israel.   But  how  shut  off  aid  to
Britain  and  France?  That  would  be  the  end  of  the  Atlantic
Alliance.   Israel  is  lucky  that  it  does  not  stand  alone.
All  we  can  hope  for  now  is  if  the  deed  were  done,  'twere
well—as  Lady Macbeth  said—it  were done  quickly.   If  Nasser
Society  Column
Among  the  guests  at  the  dinner  to  honor  the  70th
birthday  of  Chiang  Kai-shek  in  the  Chinese  Embassy
here  last  week  were  Mr.  and  Mrs.  George  Meany.   Mr.
Meany  is said  to be connected  with  the  labor  movement.
If  It  Had  Only  Happened  in  Budapest
The American press  is  full  of praise  for  those  fighting
political  oppression  in  Budapest  and  Hungary  but sil-
ence  engulfs  the  fate  of  heretics  at  home.  It  is  so much
easier  to  denounce the  other  fellow's  despotism,  and  to
fight  for   liberty   at   a  safe   and  comfortable  distance.
Thus  most  papers   ignored   the  brave   act   of   Edward
Fitzgerald,  a  one-time  New  Deal  economist,  who went
to  jail  for  six  months  last  week  in  contempt  of  court
rather  than  answer  questions  under  the  new Immunity
Act.
Fitzgerald  was  once  named  by  Elizabeth  Bentley  as
a  member  of  a  wartime  espionage  ring.   When  offered
immunity  if  he  would  testify,  he  declared  that  he  was
prepared  to  swear  that  he  had  no knowledge of  espion-
age  but  would  not  answer  questions  about  his  own  poli-
tical  beliefs  or  those  of  people he  knew  lest  they  be  ex-
posed  to  blacklist  and  persecution.
This  is  in  the  great  tradition  of  the  Puritan   hero,
John  Lilburne, but  who cares  about  heroes—unless  they
are  dead  or  at  a  distance?   How our  press  would  ring
with  Fitzgerald's  praises  if  he  were  a  suspected   anti-
Communist  protecting  his  friends  in  Budapest  or  War-
saw!
could  be toppled  before the  other  Arab States join in  the  melee
and   Soviet   zone  "volunteers"   begin  arriving  to  man   those
planes  and  tanks, peace  might  be  patched  up.
It  is  a  pity  that  at  this  juncture  France  should  have  com-
mitted  the  folly  of  arresting  those  Algerian  nationalist  leaders
on  their  way  to  peace  talks.   The  North  African  leaders  are
not  too  fond  of  Nasser;  they  could  have  been  separated  from
his  influence;  France  could  have  used  the  Tunisian   moderate
Borguiba  as  mediator for  peace  in  Algeria.   The  arrests  look
like  treachery  to  the  North   African   Arabs;  it  is  another  ob-
stacle  to  hope  of  a settlement.
War  threatens to  engulf  the  world  because  empires  old  and
new  are  crumbling;  the  British  and  French  in  the  West,  the
Russian  in the  East.  To  prevent  the  conflagration from  spread-
ing  it  is  essential  first  to  get  agreement  between  the  two  big
powers,  the  U.S. and  the  U.S.S.R.,  not  to  intervene.   If  they
agree  not  to  intervene,  and  the  danger  now  is  of  Soviet  inter-
vention  by  "volunteers,"  the  conflict  can  be  limited  and  then
mediated  and  brought  to  an end.  A new summit talk  is  urgent
and   the   best   that   can   be   said   of   Eisenhower's   broadcast
Wednesday night  is that  its conciliatory tone  paves  the  way  for
friendly   discussion.   It   is  unfortunate  that   the   crisis   comes
when  Russia  itself  is  unstable.   For  the  revolution  against  Sta-
linism  has  reached  a  new  and  dangerous  stage  in   Hungary
and  the  new  "time  of  troubles"   in  East  Europe  may  be  just
beginning.
Get   Your   Renewal  In   Early   If   You   Can —  It's   A  Big    Help
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly,  301 E.  Capitol,  Wash.  3, D. C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Street                                                                                            •••
City                                        .Zone.          State.
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name
11/5/58
City                                        .Zone.         State.
City                                        .Zone.          State.
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?    Tea  D    No  Q
IE   Stone's  Weekly
Room   205
301   E.  Capitol  St.,  S.  E.
Washington  3,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D. C.
Post  Office
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED