I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960jun06.pdf

============================================================

Special  Issue  on  the  U-2  Inquiry
Some  of  the  Inside  Story  As  Disclosed  Unwillingly by Herter's  Slippery Testimony,  See  Pages  2-3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  22
JUNE   6,   1960«o«     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Ike  Posed   (With  A  Hatchet  He  Never  Used)   to  Look  Like  George  Washington
Hagetty  Preferred  A  Fake  Truth  to  An  All-Too-True  Lie
The  key  to  the  U-2  affair  lies  in  a  paradox.    Ordinarily,  so
grave  a  mishap  would  have  been  handled  by  a  diplomatic  lie.
The  diplomatic  lie  would  have  been  that  the  head  of  the  gov-
ernment  knew  nothing  about  it.    The  diplomatic lie  was  not
used  in  this case because it would  have been  too  painfully  true.
The  record,  as  it unfolds  in  the  Senate Foreign  Relations Com-
mittee   inquiry   underway   as   this   is   written,   indicates  that
neither  Mr.   Eisenhower   nor   Secretary  of   State  Herter  knew
that  a  U-2  was  heading over  Russia  May  1 only two  weeks  be-
fore  the  summit  meeting.   There  has  never  been  an  occasion
on  which  the  diplomatic  lie  could  have  been  resorted  to  more
truthfully.
Too  Embarrassingly   True
Why  was  the  diplomatic lie  not  used?    There  is  a  growing
consensus  of  opinion  in  the  press  corps  here  that  it  was  not
used  because  Mr.  Eisenhower's  public  relations  man,  Hagerty,
was  afraid   this  all-too-truthful  diplomatic  lie  would   be   too
damaging  to  Mr.  Eisenhower.   This  was  one  diplomatic  lie
everybody'would  have  believed,  reinforcing  the  popular  im-
pression  that  Mr.  Eisenhower  is  a  kind  of  absentee  tenant  of
the  White  House,  spending  more time on  the  links than  on  his
job.     The   diplomatic  lie  would   have   saved  -face   for   Mr.
Khrushchev   in  Russia  and  might  have  allowed   the  summit
and  Ike's  visit  to  proceed  as  planned.    International  relations
were  sacrificed  to  public  relations.    Under  Hagerty's  influence,
Ike  decided  for  a  falsehood  that  could  be  dressed  up  glamor-
ously  as  a  picture  of  a  Chief  Executive bravely  taking  respon-
sibility  for  the  truth,  come-hell-or-high-water,  just  like  George
Washington   did  with  the  cherry  tree,  though  in  this  case  our
hero  was  innocently  sleeping  under  the  tree  when  it  fell  over
on him.
Mr.  Khrushchev  shrewdly  put  his  finger  on  the  point  in  his
speech  in  Moscow  May  28.  In  a  passage  the  New  York  Times
tactfully  omitted  from  the  text  it  published  but  which  I  found
in  The  Times  of  London  for  May  30,  Mr.  Khrushchev  said  of
Ike,  "I  am  still  of  the  opinion  that  he  did  not  know.   But  as
President  he  found  it  awkward  to  admit  that  he  did  not  know
—for  what  would  the world  and  the  American  people think of
a  President  who  did  not  know  what  was  going  on  in  his  own
country?"   This  is  the  point  Senator  Fulbright  seemed  to  be
aiming  at  by  indirection  when  he  kept  harping  away  on  the
question   of   why   the   President   or   any  other   head   of   State
should  take  responsibility  for  espionage.   The  trouble   is  that
this  puts  it  wrongly.    The  U-2  was  not  ordinary  espionage.
The  Russians  could  have  arrested  an  American  agent  in  Mos-
Herter  Makes  Some  Admissions
"As  to  what  led  the  Soviets  to  this  extreme  position,
in  regard  to  the  summit  meeting  which  had  previously
appeared  to  be  so  much desired  by  Mr.  Khrushchov,  we
enter  into the realm of  pure speculation ...  in his Baku
speech  on April 25, he ...    began  for  the first time  seri-
ously  to  cast  doubts upon  the  success  of  the  summit."
—Herter's   prepared   statement  for   the  Senate   For-
eign  Relations  Committee  inquiry  into  the  U-S,  May  27.
Senator   MANSFIELD:  Were   there   any   indications
that  Khrushchov  planned  to  scuttle  the  conference  be-
fore  the  U-2  plane  was  shot  down on  May  1?
Secretary  HERTER: No.
Senator     MANSFIELD:    Did    Khrushchov's     Baku
speech   precede  or   follow   Mr.  Dillon's   speech   at   the
AFL-CIO  convention?
Secretary  HERTER: It  followed  it.    ...
Senator  MANSFIELD: Have  Russian  experts  in  the
executive  branch  suggested  the  possibility  that  Khrush-
chov's   position  at   home   may   have   become   seriously
undermined?
Secretary  HERTER: Yes.
Senator  MANSFIELD: Do  you  believe  the  U-2  may
have  been  a  contributing  factor  in  this  undermining?
Secretary  HERTER: It  may  have  been.
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee, May  27
cow  with  a  suit  case  full   of   ICBM  plans  and   it  would   have
been  regarded  as  clean  fun  by  normal  rules  of  espionage.    No
one  would  have  asked  or  expected  the  President  to  take  respon-
sibility  for  it.
Herter  Left  Holding  the  Bag
The  President  took  responsibility  for  the  U-2  because  it  was
not   ordinary   espionage,   but   a   most   dangerous   invasion  of
another  nation's  airspace  on  the  eve  of  important  negotiations.
To  allow  such  a flight  at  such  a time  was a grave matter,  which
ordinarily  would  not  be  permitted  except  on  fullest  considera-
tion   at  top   levels.    Mr.   Eisenhower   had   to  choose  between
telling  the  truth  that  he  was  unaware  of  what  was  going  on,
and  had  thus  committed  a  colossal  blunder,  or  pretending  that
he  knew  about  it  all  the  time,  and  claiming  it  was  an  act  of
high  statecraft.   Hagerty  decided  the  latter  would  be  less  dan-
gerous  to  Ike's  reputation.   What  made  the  decision   all  the
more  striking  is that  with  Hagerty's  deft  help  Mr.  Eisenhower
has  managed   to  dodge  responsibility  for  activities  much  more
normal  than  espionage.  The  question  Senator  Fulbright  might
like  to  ask  Hagerty  is how  come  a  President  who  had  managed
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  8, I960
Evasiveness  Rather  Than  Candor  Marked  the  Secretary  of  State's  Replies
THE  CHAIRMAN    (FULBRIGHT) :  Mr.  Secretary,  why  do you
think  Chairman  Khrushchev  left  a  way out  for  the  President
by  suggesting  in  one  of  his  earlier  statements   that  he  be-
lieved  the  President  did  not  know  about  these  flights?
SECRETARY  HERTER:  I  can  there,  of  course,  only   speculate
that  he  had  himself  committed  himself  very  strongly  in  Rus-
sia  with  regard  to  his  friendship  for   the   President,   and
wished  to  in  that  way  continue  the  possibility  of  the  Presi-
dent  disclaiming  any  responsibility  for  the  flight.
THE   CHAIRMAN:  What  was  the  reason   for  not   accepting
this  way  out  on  our  part?   Why  didn't  we  accept  that  sug-
gestion?
SECRETARY  .HERTER :  Mr.  Chairman, that  was  a  question,  as
you  know  of judgment.  . . .
THE  CHAIRMAN:  Was  it  not  after  the  President  said  that
he  did know and  took full  responsibility  for  these  flights  that
Chairman  Khrushchev  became  completely  intransigeant   and
wrecked  the  conference?
SECRETARY  HERTER:  That  is very  difficult  to  determine.  . . .
Did Nuclear Arms for Germany Play A Part?
SENATOR   HUMPHREY:  Mr.  Secretary,  on  page  four  of  your
statement  you  indicate  under  the  title  "Summit   Prospects
Dimmed",  a  series  of  developments that  you  believe  indicated
a  change  in  the  position  or  a  possibility  of  a  change  in  the
position    of   the    Soviet   representatives,   particularly   Mr.
Khrushchov  about  the  summit.    In  the  third  paragraph you
say  "but  clouds began  to gather even then", referring  to some
developments  in  the  Soviet  Union.    If  you  will  recall  that
period,  isn't  this  about  the  same  time  that  the  United  States
was   considering    offering   nuclear   weapons   again   to   West
Germany?
SECRETARY  HERTER:  I  can't  recall  that  we  have  ever  done
that. . . .  Under  the law we cannot  do that.
SENATOR   HUMPHREY:  I  understand  that.    There  has  been
considerable  discussion  here  in  the  U.  S. of  changing  the  law
and  offering  weapons  to  our  NATO allies.
SECRETARY   HERTER:  There  may  have  been  discussions  on
that  subject,  Senator,  but  we  have  never  made  any  specific
proposals  on that  point. ...
SENATOR    HUMPHREY:   Is   there  not   a  great  fear   in   the
Soviet   Union  of   the   possibility   of   the   spread   of   nuclear
weapons  to  Western  Germany?
SECRETARY   HERTER:  I  think  that  is  true.   I  am not  sure  it
is  confined  to  Western  Germany.   I  think  that  it  applies  to
the  spread  of  nuclear  weapons  in  other  nations  and  it  might
well  include  Communist  China.
SENATOR  HUMPHREY:  Yes,  indeed. ...
The  Source  of  These Excerpts
The  excerpts here  given  from  the  questioning of  Sec-
retary  of  State  Herter  May  27  by  the  Senate  Foreign
Relations   Committee   in   its   investigation  of   the   U-2
incident   and  the   breakdown  of   the   summit  talks  are
based  on  the  censored text  as  released  to  the  press  and
not  on  the  three  pages  of  selections  published by  the
New  York  Times May 28.   There  is  much  here  that  did
not  appear  in  the  Times,  though  until   the  committee
has  published  the  complete  text,  the  Times  version  is
the  fullest  available.
If  We Saw A Russian Plane Overhead
SENATOR   HUMPHREY:   Mr.  Secretary,  what   do  you   think
would  happen in  the  United  States  if  on our  radar  screen  we
should  discover  a  plane  flying  at  high  altitude  in  this  age
of  the  fear  of  surprise  attack,  over  our  territory.
SECRETARY   HERTER:   I  think  we  would  do  everything   we
could  to  identify  it  right  away.
SENATOR   HUMPHREY:  Just  identify  it?
SECRETARY   HERTER:  Yes,  identify it.    ...
SENATOR   HUMPHREY:  Have  we  ever  shot  down  any   Soviet
planes  over  American territory  or  over  any friendly territory
in  which  we  have  bases  or  alliances?
SECRETARY   HERTER:  Not that  I  am  aware  of.    ...
Russian Fears of Attack
SENATOR   MORSE:   Mr.  Secretary,  do  you  think   this  public
knowledge   now  of   these   American   spy   plane   flights   over
Russia  has  played  into  the  hands  of  Communist propaganda
with  the  Russian  people  themselves  by  increasing  the  fear,
no  matter  how unfounded we know  it  is,  the  fear  of  the  Rus-
sian  people  that  our  real  objective  is  to  make  war  against
Russia?
SECRETARY   HERTER:  I  think  that  the  Russian   government
will  do its  best  to  work  along  that  line.  .  . .
Influence  of  Harder Peking Line
SENATOR   MORSE:  To  what  extent,  if  any,  do  you  think  Red
China  has  put  pressure  on the  Russian  leaders  to  follow  this
adamant  course  of  action?
SECRETARY   HERTER : That  again, sir, is a matter  of  specula-
tion.
SENATOR   MORSE:  You  have  no  evidence?
SECRETARY   HERTER-:  But  the  articles  which  have   appeared
in  the  [Chinese]  Red  Star  magazine,  which  is  their   official
publication,  have  been  of  such  a  highly  critical nature  of  the
Herter  Reluctant  to  Admit  That  Khrushchov  Has  Seemed  Sincerely  for  Peace
The  CHAIRMAN  (Fulbright):  [In  your  prepared  state-
ment]  you  say  as  follows:
"Proponents  within the  Communist bloc  of  an  aggressive
course  must not  be  encouraged  by  signs  of  weakness  on  our
part.   Proponents of  a peaceful course  should  be  encouraged
by  our  readiness  to  get  on  with  outstanding  international
business  in  a  sober  and rational  manner."
In  which  of  these  do you  include Mr. Khrushchov?
Secretary  HERTER:  That  I  think  would be  very  difficult
to  answer categorically . . .  [Whole page  deleted by censor].
...  I  think  that  events  are  likely  to  show  which  of  these
groups  he  belongs  to.
The  CHAIRMAN:  Who  did  you  have  in  mind  when  you
wrote  that?    Maybe  you  can't  categorically   for  all   time
designate him, but  what  has  been your  view  and the  view of
the  Department as  to  which  group  he  belongs  to.    I  think
that is rather important as  to how we treat  him.   Is  it  in oar
interest  to  discourage  him?    If  he  was  a  member  of  the
aggressive  course,  I  suppose  it  would be.   If  he is  a member
of  those  who  are  proponents  of  the  peaceful  course,  then  it
would  be  to  our  advantage  to  encourage  or  be  cooperative
within  limits.   I  wondered why  you  put  that  in  there  if  you
didn't  have  some  idea  of  who  does  belong  to  these  groups
or  how  they  are  constituted.
Secretary  HERTER:  What  I  was  trying  to  describe  here
was  in  effect  a  middle  course.   Insofar  as  Mr.  Khrushchov
is  concerned, I  think  those  who have  dealt  with him directly
are  convinced that  he  is  genuinely  in  favor  of  a  disarma-
ment  program, that  he  genuinely  wants  for  the  sake  of  de-
veloping  the  economy of  Russia, a  reduction both  in  expense
from  a  monetary  point  of  view  and  from  a  human point  of
view,  of  the  great  burden of  armaments.    Certainly  there  I
would  put  him  in  the  second  category.    His  more recent  be-
haviour,  however,  has  shaken  my  belief  that  this  is  entirely
genuine,  and,  as  I  say,  I  think  that  only  the  events  of  the
next  few  years  can  give  a  final  answer  to  what  you  have
asked."
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,  May   &7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  6,1960
Principal Attempt  at Falsification: The "Decision Not  to Suspend"  Flights
whole   policy   of   so-called   peaceful   co-existence,   the   whole
detente  policy, that  Mr.  Khrushchev  seemed to  have  been fol-
lowing, that  they  may  well have had  a  considerable  influence.
Long's  Embarrassing  Question
SENATOR  LONG:  When  we  plead guilty  to  espionage  in  this
case,  how  can  we  plead  guilty  on  the  one  hand  and  contend
that  there  is  no  punishment  in  order,  when  we  plead  guilty
to  violating  international  law?
SECRETARY  HERTER:  We have said that  we pleaded guilty  to
it  entirely  on  the  ground that  for  ourselves  and  for  the  free
world  it  was  essential  for  us  to  get  information  with  regard
to  dangers  of  surprise  attack  or  aggression.
SENATOR  LONG:  The  thought  that  occurs to  me is  that,  and
I  am  not  sure  that  we are  in  position  to  be  completely  self-
righteous  about  passing  judgment  on  ourselves  in  our  own
case. ...  I  don't  very  well  see how we  are  going  to  plead
guilty   in  the  matter   and  then  take  the   attitude  that  no
apology  is forthcoming. . . .
Future Flights of U-2?
SENATOR  CARLSON:  Will  that  [the  breakdown  of  the  sum-
mit]   influence  our  course  of  action  in  getting  information
that  is essential  for  our  security?
SECRETARY  HERTER:  I  think  we  will  do  whatever  we  feel  is
essential  for  our  security.    I  am  not  saying  in  that  respect
that  we  are  going  to  deliberately  utilize  the  U-2  again.    I
have never  said that. . . .
That  Decision Nobody Ever Made
THE  CHAIRMAN:  Mr.  Secretary  [you  say  in  your  prepared
statement]   "The   decision  not  to  suspend   this  program  of
flights, as the  summit  meeting  approached,  was  a  sound  deci-
sion."   Can you tell  us  who made that  decision  and  when and
of  the  circumstances?
SECRETARY   HERTER:   That  is  a  decision  that  I  think   has
been  a  decision that has  carried  over  the  whole 4-year  period.
THE  CHAIRMAN : I don't think I make  myself  clear  . . . this
statement  seems to  leave  the  implication  that  a  specific  deci-
sion  was  taken  not  to  suspend  them  in  view of  the  conference
approaching.    Was  such  a  decision  taken?
SECRETARY   HERTER:  That  I  can't  tell  you.    I  was  not  a
party  to it.  ...    May I  read  what  the President  said  on that
subject?    He said,  "As  to  the  timing,  the  question  was  really
whether  to  halt  the  program  and  thus  forego  the  gathering
of  important   information  that  was  essential  and  that  was
likely  to  be unavailable  at  a  later  date.   The  program  went
forward."     [Actually,  though  this  last  sentence  was  in  the
prepared   advance  text,  in  the  speech  as  the  President  de-
livered  it,  he substituted  the  sentence  "The  decision was that
the  program  should  not  be  halted".    The  original   sentence
was  truthful,   for   it   implied  that   the   program   continued
without   decision.    The  substituted  sentence  seems  to   have
Abusing Security  Censorship
The  U-2  hearings   before  the  Senate  Foreign  Rela-
tions  Committee are  made public only  in  censored  form.
Such  censorship  is  supposed  to  be  for  security  reasons
only  but  is  often  abused  to  withhold  embarrassing   in-
formation.     We   give   a   rather   transparent   example
from   the  first  day's  hearing  May  27:
Secretary  HERTER:  All  espionage  is  a  violation  of
sovereignty,  all  forms  of  espionage.
Senator   LONG:  [Question  deleted  by  censor].
Secretary  HERTER:  [One  word  deleted].   However,
the  Chicago  convention  which  is  the  principal  conven-
tion  dealing  with  this,  has  never  been  accepted  by  the
Russians  nor  have  they  accepted  any  bilateral  agree-
ment  with  regard  to  air  space  over  their  country.
Senator  LONG:  [Question  deleted].
Secretary  HERTER:   Yes.
The  Chicago  civil  aviation   convention  negotiated  in
the  40's  made  it  a  violation  of  international  law  to  in-
vade   another   nation's   air   space   without    permission.
The  U. S. ratified but  the  Russians  didn't.   It  is  obvious
that   Senator   Long  was  asking  whether   aerial   recon-
naissance was not  a  violation  of this treaty  to  which we
are  a  party.    The  questions  and  answers  bear  no  rela-
tion  to  any  kind  of  security,  except  security  from  public
criticism.    We  hope  some  member  of  the   committee,
who   attended   the  hearings,  will   study   the    deletions
when  the  hearings  are  over  and  report  on  any  abuses
of  censorship—IFS.
been  untruthful,  in  implying  a  definite  decision—IFS.]
[Whole  page  deleted   by   censor."]
THE   CHAIRMAN:   Then  that   decision  was   made   by   the
President?
SECRETARY   HERTER:  Oh,  he  was   certainly   consulted   with
regard  to the  continuation  of the  program.  .  . .
SENATOR   GORE:   Did   you  participate   in   a   conference   or
were  you  aware  of  a  decision?   Did  you  make  a  decision?
What  is  the  full  extent  of  your  knowledge of  a  decision  that
the  flights  would  not  be  discontinued?
SECRETARY  HERTER:  I  know  of  no  conference  at  which  the
matter  was discussed.  . . .
Flippant  Finale
THE   CHAIRMAN:  Mr.  Secretary,  one  last  thing.    Do  you
think  we have  learned,  not  just  we  but  all  of  us,  including
you  and  the  Administration, anything  from  the  U-2 incident?
SECRETARY   HERTER:  Not  to  have   accidents.
THE  CHAIRMAN:  Is  that  all  we have  learned?
SENATOR  GORE:  Not  what?
MR.  MACOMBER  [State  Dept.]:  Not  to  have  accidents.
Herter  Disingenuous  on  The  Key  Question  in  the  Breakdown  of  the  Summit
The  CHAIRMAN: Mr/Secretary,  what  were  the  consider-
ations  which led  to  the  decision,  not  only  to  assume  respon-
sibility  for  the  flight,  but  to  imply  that  the  flights  would
continue in the future?
Secretary  HERTER:  I  have  to  take  responsibility  for  the
statement  that was [so]  interpreted . . . and it seems to me
it  was pretty  far-fetched  interpretation.
The  CHAIRMAN: Then do you mean . . . that you did not
intend  to  convey the  view  or  the  possibility  that  the  flights
would  be  continued?  Is  that  correct?
Secretary  HERTER:  No,  what  I  was saying  there  is just
what  I  have  testified  to  today;  that  from  the  point  of  view
of  our  own interests  and  that  of  the  whole  free  world,  it  is
essential  for  us  to  do whatever  we properly  can  in  order  to
acquire  information  to  avoid  surprise  attack  or  to  be  pre-
pared  for  it.
The  CHAIRMAN: But  in  view  of  that  statement,  do  you
think  that  Mr.  Khrushchov could  accept  it  and  continue  the
conference?
Secretary  HERTER:  Yes, I  certainly  do if  he had  wanted
to.
The  CHAIRMAN: Do  you  think  our  President  would  ac-
cept  such  a  statement  from  any  other  power?
Secretary  HERTER: If  he wanted  to  go to  a   conference?
Certainly.
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee, May  £7
&
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  6, 1960
The  Secretary  of  State  Was  Second  Only  to  the  President  in   Unawareness
Were  They  Going  to  Continue  U-2  Flights  While  Ike  Was  in Russia?
(Continued  from   Page   One)
to  evade  responsibility  for  almost  everything  else  which  has
gone  wrong  in  his  Administration,  decided  to  march  up  and
shoulder  this  one.   Unfortunately the  Senate  Foreign  Relations
Committee  can  question  Cabinet:  officers   but  not  Presidential
aides.  The  result  was to  leave Secretary Herter  holding  the  bag
for  Hagerty,  and  the  Secretary of  State  proved  second  only  to
the  President  in  unawareness  of  what  has  been  going   on.
Flights  Stopped During  Suez Crisis
There  is  evidence  that  at   moments  when   somebody  was
minding  store,  official  Washington  was  aware  that  U-2  flights
were  in  a  dangerous  special  category.   Chalmers  Roberts  in  a
special  account  in  the  Washington  Post  May  27,  the  day  the
hearings  began,  said  U-2  flights  were  suspended  during  the
Suez  crisis  negotiations  with  the  Russians in  September,   1956.
John   Foster   Dulles  was  then   Secretary  of   State.    Somebody
seems  to  have  realized that  a  strange  plane  suddenly  appearing
over  Russia in that  tense situation might  have  triggered  trouble.
According  to  a  New   York   Times  story  May  30  by  Hanson
Baldwin,  U-2  flights  were  "temporarily  suspended  just  prior
to.  during and  after  Premier Khrushchov's  visit  to  the  United
States"  last  September but  resumed  "with  the  subsequent  delay
of  the  summit  meeting  and  of  President  Elsenhower's  sched-
uled  visit  to  the  Soviet Union."   If  true,  on  that  occasion,  too,
somebody  realized that  a  U-2  flight  would  risk  upsetting nego-
tiations.   Mr.  Roberts,  in  his  account,  also  reported,  "ClA  of-
ficials  contend  that  there was  to  be  a  cut-off  of  U-2  flights  be-
fore  the  Summit",  the  only  question  being   "how   much  time
constituted   a  margin  of  safety"
Was the  May 1 Flight to Be The Last?
It  is  hard  to  believe that  even  in  this  capital  officials  would
be  idiotic  enough  to  continue the  U-2  flights  at  the  very  time
On  the  Public's Right  to  Know
"It  has  been  the  policy of  each  Secretary  of  State  un-
der  whom  I  have  been  honored  to  serve,  going  back  to
Cordell  Hull,  that, not  only  are  the  American  people!  en-
titled  to  know  the  facts—within  the  limits  of  essential
and  legitimate security requirements—but  it  is  essential
that   they   have  an   understanding   of   the   alternatives
that  face  this  Nation  .  .  .  there  is  not  only  a  right  to
know—there  is  an  obligation   on  the  part  of  the   good
citizen  to  seek  out  the  facts.  .  .  ."
—The  News  Division of  the  Dept.  of State, by  Lincoln
White,  press   officer    since  1939,  Dept.  Pub.   t'859.
Senator  GORE:  You  say  now  that  on  the  5th  you  re-
ceived  this  information  that  the  pilot  was  probably  alive
and  yet,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  6th,  this  Mr.  Lincoln
White,  official  spokesman  for  the  department,  said  this:
"There  was  absolutely  no  deliberate  attempt  to  violate
the   Soviet  Air  Space   and  there  never  has  been."   Did
you  authorize that  statement?
Under  Secretary  DILLON:  No,  not  specifically.
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee, May  37
the   President   was  conferring   in  Paris  or  would   send   them
overhead  when  he  was  visiting  Russia.    When   Senator  Ful-
bright  asked   Secretary  Herter   "Was   any  moratorium  agreed
upon  prior to  May  1, to  be  effective  at  any  time  after  May  1,"
the  Secretary  gave  the  curious answer  "I  have  heard'reports  to
that  effect,  but  of  my  own  knowledge  I  do  not  know."   When
Fulbtight  asked  him  at  another point  whether  there  had  been
any  moratorium during the  Camp  David  talks,  Herter  replied
that  so  far  as he  knew  there  was  no  such  moratorium.  But  it  is
evident  from  the  record  that  the  Secretary of  State  knew  little
and  could  do  less.   When   Senator  Humphrey  asked   whether
he  could  not  have  vetoed   the  flights,  he  answered   "1  could
only  have  given  my  advice  to  the  President."
(More  Next   Week}
Why   Not  Start  A   Gift   Subscription   With   This   Issue?
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Xame      ........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
6/6/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I    F.   Stone'B   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  at  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  tut   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December   at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  IB.  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
M  In  the  D.  S.:  S6  In  Canada:  «0  elsewhere.     Air  Hall  rates:  SIS  to  Europe:  120  to  Israel.  Ada   and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED