I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960may23.pdf

============================================================

The  U-2 Affair    in  the House of  Commons, P.  2
Dean  Griswold of  Harvard  Law  School  Defends  Dr.  Uphaus  and  the  Right  to  Privacy,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  20
MAY  23,   1960'01     WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Q  and  A  of  A  World   Crisis
What  wrecked  the  summit?
Eisenhower's  avowal  of  responsibility  for   aerial  reconnais-
sance  and  his  declared  intention  to  continue  it.
Did  Khrushchov  go  to  Paris  intending  to  blow  up  the  con-
ference?
Yes.    His  terms,  by  including a  public  apology  and  punish-
ment  for  those  responsible,  were  impossibly  humiliating and
he  knew  it.    Eisenhower  was  responsible.
Why  did  Khrushchov  take  so drastic a  position?
I  believe  he  was  offended  and  angered,  that  he  really  liked
Eisenhower  and  felt  personally  let  down.    He  had  given  the
President  an  out  in  his  speech  of  May  7  in  which  he  said  that
perhaps  Eisenhower  had  known  nothing  about  the  U-2  flight
and  it had  been the  independent  work  of  "madmen  in  the Pen-
tagon."    This  accorded  with  Herter's  statement  that  same day,
"Specific  missions of  these  unarmed  civilian  aircraft  have  not
been  subject  to  presidential   authorization."
When  the  Summit  Could  Still  Have  Been  Saved
Could  the  summit  conference   still  have  been  saved?
At  that  point  yes.   On  May 8 the President  met with  Herter
to  prevent   the  incident   from   wrecking   the  summit   meeting
and  though  no announcement was made  James  Reston  reported
in  the  New   York   Times   next  morning,   "elsewhere   it  was
stated  on  responsible  authority  that  the  President  had  ordered
a  halt  to  all  flights  over  or  near  Communist  frontiers  pending
an  executive  investigation  of  the  entire  intelligence  apparatus
of  the  government."  Had  the  Administration  allowed  this  re-
port   to   stand   uncontradicted,   it   would   have   satisfied   our
alarmed  allies  about  the  U-2  flights  and  provided  a face-saver
for  Khrushchov  with  his own people.
Why   did  Herter  next  day  indicate  instead  that  the   flights
would  go  on?
This  is the  key point  at  which  a  future  Congressional  inves-
tigation,  as foreshadowed  by Mansfield  in  the  Senate  last  Tues-
day,   ought  to  begin.    Reston  is  a  responsible   and  able  news-
paperman,  bureau  chief  for  our  leading  paper,  with  more  ac-
cess  than  any  other  publication  to  official  channels.    Who  was
the  "responsible  authority"  who  assured  Reston  the  evening of
May  8  after   the  Eisenhower-Herter  meeting  that   overflights
had  been  halted ?  Why  was  it  decided  instead  to  have  Herter
next  day  issue  a  statement  which  invited  the  belief  that  over-
flights  would  continue?   It  was  the  President's   affirmance  of
Herter's  statement  on  May  11  that  was  followed  by  Khrush-
chev's  angry  remark  in  Moscow   that   Eisenhower  would   no
longer  be  welcome.
What  led  the  Administration   to  take  so  tough  a  line?
Perhaps  two  factors  played  a  part.    One  could  have  been  a
typical  press  relations   gimmick:   we  turn  a  liability  into  an
asset  by taking  our  admission  of  aerial  espionage,  which  leaves
Two  Slippery   Fellows
On  A  Slippery   Slope
Q.  Mr.  Bohlen,  did  we  offer   to  make  the  statement
public  that  the   flights   would  not   be  resumed during
this  period  of  discussion  when  it  still   was   not  clear
whether   he   [Khrushchov]  was   going   to   publish  his
own  statement?
Mr.  BOHLEN:   I  would   say   it   is   a  fair  inference
that   the  statement   [Eisenhower's   on  no  more  flights
over  the  Soviet  Union]  could have  been  made  public ...
Q.  Jim   [Hagerty]  can  you  tell  us   why   it   was,  or
give   us • the   background,   the   fact   that  these    flights
were   suspended  and   were  not   to   be   resumed—why
that  was  not  announced  in  view  of  the misunderstand-
ing   you   mentioned?
Mr.   HAGERTY:   Well,   I   thought  that   it   was,   by
some  of   our  people  in  our  government, in  some  con-
versations   that  they  have  been  having,  but  that's  the
only  answer  I  can  give.
—Press  Briefing   in Paris, New  York  Times  May 16
us  in  the  wrong,  and  put  Russia in  the  wrong  instead  by claim-
ing  that  its  secrecy made  such  surveillance necessary,  a  service
to  the  world,  a  form   of   "open  sky"  operation  designed   to
bring  about  an  "open  society."   Thus  we  become  the  cham-
pions  of  "open-ness"   a  good  word  against  "secrecy"   a  bad.
This  is  the  kind  of  slick  Madison  Avenue  operation  to  which
this  Administration has  always  been  prone.    A  second  argu-
ment  discernible in  the  line  being  leaked  out  by  the  Pentagon
1
is:  we do  a switch, say that  the  ease of  the  U-2  operation shows
how  open  the  Russians are  to  attack, we still have  more  bomb-
ers  than they do,  they still  don't  have  the  advantage  in  missiles
they'll  have  a  few  years  hence,  this  is  the   "deterrent    gap"
when  we can still smash them  and  they  know  it,  let's get  tough
while  we can.  This,  we  suspect,  is how  the  military  argued.
How   do  you  reconcile  this  speculation  with  Eisenhower's
statement  at  Paris  on  May  16  that  on  May  12  he  had   ordered,
all  overflights   permanently   ended?
Judging  by the  surprised  reaction in  Washington,   that  order
of  May  12  was  so  secret  that  it  must  have  been  a  soliloquy.
The  Vice  President's  explanation  at  Auburn,  N.Y.,   May   17
only  adds  to  reasons  for  skepticism.    Nixon  said  Eisenhower
went  to  Paris  prepared  to  give  up  aerial  surveillance  but  only-
if   East   and   West   agreed   to   substitute   a   United    Nations
"open  skies"  program.    (New   York   Times,   May  18,  p.  14,
col.   6,   City   Edition).     I   believe  this   was  another   in   the
series   of   "little   white   lies"   which   have   marked   this   U-2
affair   from  the  beginning.    The   impression  is  strengthened
by   the   curious   evasiveness  of   "Chip"   Bohlen's    discussion
of  it  at  the  Paris  press  briefing   (see  box  above).
(Continued   on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 28,1960
(Continued  jrotn  Page  One)
That  Sudden  Combat  Alert
What  is  the  meaning  of   the   "secret"   world-wide   combat
alert  ordered  by  Secretary  of  Defense   Gates  from  Paris  which
took   place  during   the  night  and   early   morning   preceding
the  meeting  of  the  Big  Four?
This   seems  further   evidence  that  Eisenhower  had  been
sold  a  tough  line  by  the. military.    Obviously  a  world-wide
alert,  especially  at  our   bases  abroad,  could  not   be  kept  a
secret  from  the  Russians  even  if  it  hadn't  been  conveniently
leaked  at  Denver  and  San  Diego.    This  was a  bit  of muscle-
flexing  intended  to  throw  a  scare  into  the  Russians.    It  was
a  most  irresponsible  and  dangerous  kind  of   maneuver.    It
might  easily  have  led  the  Russians  to  believe  that  a  major
surprise  attack  on  them  was  in  the  making,  and  led  them
to  try  a  pre-emptive blow  to  ward  it  off.  .In  my  opinion  a
show  of  this  kind,  even  more  than  the   U-2  flight,   forced
Khrushchev  to  take  a  hard  position  lest  he   be  suspected
at  home  and  abroad  of  weakness.
Do   you  believe  that  the   U-2   affair    alone  was  enough  to
make  the  Russians  decide  to  scuttle  the  summit  meeting?
No.   I  believe  it  was  only  the  final  straw.   The  Russians
had  ample  reason  to  doubt  our  sincerity in  talks  on  disarma-
ment,  nuclear  testing  and  Berlin.    Our  attitude  toward  the
summit  was  frivolous;  the  idea  was  that  if  the  Russians  had
any  more  concessions to  make,  we  would  be  glad  to  receive
them.   There  was  no  real  preparation  for  negotiation.   On
disarmament,  as  Gaitskell  noted  in  the  House  of  Commons
May  13, the  Western plan  emphasized  control and inspection,
leaving  actual  disarmament  to  the  distant  future.     Our  an-
nouncement  of   resumed  testing  May  7  was  an  affront   after
Investigation of  NASA  Asked
Leonard  G.  Wolf  (D.  Iowa)  wrote  Chairman  Overton
Brooks   of   the   House   Science   and  Aeronautics Com-
mittee   May   13,  expressing   "concern   over   the   recent
revelations  that  NASA  is  being  used  as  a  cover-mp  for
spying   activities   by   the   Central  Intelligence   Agency
.   .   .   We   have   been   under  the   impression   that   the
activities  of   NASA   were   to  be  of  a  purely  peaceful
and  non-military  nature ...  I  strongly   urge  a  full-
scale  investigation  to  ascertain   (1)   whether  there  are
other  activities  which  are   hiding   under  the   cloak  of
NASA,   and   (2)   in  what  other  instances   NASA   has
given  out  information  which  is  at   variance   with   the
facts  .  .  ."
Another  member  of  this  same  committee,  whiclh  has
jurisdiction   over   NASA,   E.   Q.  Daddario   (D.   Conn.)
issued  a  statement  May  11  expressing   disappointment
over   the   use   of   NASA   for   such   purposes.
"I  must  sympathize with  those  who  express  concern
that  it  is  difficult   to  tell  a  reconnaissance   effort  from
one  that   might   be  carrying   nuclear   weapons," Rep.
Daddario   said,   adding  that   "even   if   someone   should
position  a  satellite  with  a  thermonuclear  weapon  like
a   sword   of   Damocles,   over   the   world,  it   could   well
have  the  appearance   of  a  peaceful   satellite."     He  de-
clared  the  U-2  incident  emphasized  the  importance  of
an  agreement  on  the   peaceful   use   of   outer  space.
the  Russians  a  few  days  earlier  at  Geneva  had  made  fresh
concessions.   Then  there  was  Elsenhower's  remark  to  George
Meany  May  6,  about  his  projected  Moscow  trip,  "//  /  go."
It  requires  no   esoteric  theories  about  pressure  from   Stalin-
ists  and  Peking  to  explain  Khrushchev's  anger.    I  think  he
decided   that   nothing  was  to   be  gained   from   the   summit
meeting  with  Eisenhower,  that  he  would  only  be  giving  him
Labor  Party  Leadership Critical  of  U
Mr.  SWINGLER  (Lab.):  I  am  sure   people   are   entitled
to   know   whether   it   is   accurate,   as   reported   in   today's
press  that  the  RAF  was  participating  in  these  [reconnais-
sance]   activities   until   12   months   ago   when   the   Prime
Minister   is   said   to   have   countermanded   the   order   and
stopped   them.
Mr.   WARD  (for  the   government):   It   has   long   been
accepted   practice   by   successive    governments    from   both
sides  of  the  House  that  matters  of  this  kind  are  not dis-
cussed  in  public.    I  see   no  reason  to  depart   from   that.
—House   of  Commons May  11  (The  Times,  London, May   12)
VISCOUNT   STANSGATE:   There   is   a   vast   difference
between   sending   a   man  to   try   to   collect   information   in
a   foreign   country   and  sending   an  aircraft   which   might
be   armed   over   the   other   person's   territory.
—House   of  Lords  May   12  (The  Times,  London,  May   13)
Mr.  GAITSKELL  [Leader  of  the  Labor  Party]:  He  saw
no  purpose   in  being   hypocritical  or  mealy-mouthed   about
intelligence    work  and  espionage ...  It  was   undeniable
that   the   Soviet   Union   practiced   espionage   on   a   grand
scale.
Having  said  that,  however,  he  felt,  as  he  believed  many
Americans  felt   that  it  was  a  singularly  inept   and  stupid
thing  to  allow  flights  of  this  kind  to  take  place  just   before
the  summit  talks  .  .  .
He  hoped  he  was  wrong,  but  it  seemed  that  .  .• .   State
Department   spokesmen   had  suggested  that   the  U.S.  Gov-
ernment   regarded   itself   as   legally    entitled   to   send   its
aircraft    over   Soviet   air   space,   and  that   it   intended   to
do  so.    That  seemed  an  almost  untenable   position.
He  would  have   thought   that  it  was  clearly   a   violation
of  international  law, and  he  hoped  the  British  Government
,S. on U-2 Policy in British Parliament
.   .   .  would  urge   second   thoughts   on  the   United   States
if  ...      they  proposed  to  continue  with  these   practices.
This   particular  type   of   intelligence   work  was   peculiar
in  that  it  involved  risks  not  only  for  the  pilot  or  photog-
rapher  but  for  the  whole  world.    Such  forms  of   espionage
did  not  merely  discover,  or  fail  to  discover,  enemy  secrets,
but  the  process   of  attempting  so  to  do  could  conceivably
trigger   off  a  nuclear  war  .  .  .
For  these  reasons   (he  said)   I  have  to  record  my  view
that  this   kind  of   thing  should  not  be   done  without con-
sultation   with,   and  the   approval   of,   the   whole   Atlantic
Alliance.     It   is   not   right   that   one  country   should   take
such  risks  in  the  absence   of  the  consent   of  its   allies.
Mr.   GRIMOND   (Lab.):   The   point   of   this   particular
incident  was  not  that  it  was  espionage,   but  that  a  hostile
or  what  might  have  been  a  hostile  aircraft  got  1,000  miles
into  Russia   and  might  have  set   off  the  whole  machiinery
which  in  turn  might  have  caused   a war.
Mr.  HEALEY   [Labor's   chief   foreign   policy   spokesman
in   the   House]:   It   was   quite   impossible   to   justify   the
statement   made  by  Mr.  Herter ...  in  which  he  claimed
the  U.S. determination   systematically   to  violate   interna-
tional   law  for   her  own  strategic  convenience.     This   was
a  new  and  dangerous   doctrine.    (Opposition  cheers.)
Mr.   Herter   was   challenging   the   precarious  framework
of   world   order.     Moreover,   it   seemed   unlikely   that   the
U.S.   would  be   able   to   continue   these   operations    except
from   bases  provided  by  allies.     If   the  U.S.  persisted   'on
the  course   to  which  Mr.  Herter   appeared   to  commit  her
then  there.were  grave  risks  to  the  solidarity  of  her  alli-
ances,  including  NATO.
-—House  of  Commons  May   12  (The  Times,  May    IS)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  2*, 1960
the  mantle  of  peace  with  which  to  elect  Nixon  in  November,
and  that  it  would  be  better  to  exploit  the  U-2  affair  and  call
off   the  talks  until  after   a  new  President  had   been   elected.
Stevenson's  Chances Now
Who's   your  candidate  -for   President?
Adlai  Stevenson.
Do   you   think   the   collapse   of   the  summit   has  improved
his  chances?
Yes  and  no.    Some  people  will  feel  that  the  country  needs
a  really  big  man  in  the  White  House  for  a  change  now  that
we  may  be  in  a  crisis.    Others  will  feel  that  we  need  some-
body   who  can  talk   tough   to   the   Russians.
What  about   Kennedy?
His  youth  will  hurt  him   now.
Do  you  think   Kennedy's   a  man  of  peace?
He   moved  leftward  to   defeat   Humphrey,   and  until   the
summit  collapse  he  had  to  stay  that  way  to  cut  the  ground
from   under  Stevenson.     But   if   he's   really  that  much   of  a
liberal,   why  has  he   been   such   a  favorite   of   Henry   Luce?
Do  you  think  the  collapse  of  the  summit  will  help  or  hurt
the  Republicans?
Hurt  them.    Not  just  because  they've  lost  the  peace  issue
but  because  they  have  no  commanding  figure  left  in  whom
the  people  have  confidence.    If   they  had  a  new   glamorous
soldier  candidate,  they  might  do  well  on  a  brink-of-war  cam-
paign.    Nixon  looks  too  young,  shallow,   tricky.
What   does  the  summit   collapse  do  for  the  Democrats?
Put   them  on  a  very  difficult   spot.    To   campaign   as  the
peace  party  when  the  Russians  are  acting  tough  opens   them
to  the  charge  of  appeasement.     The  Democrats  are  split  wide
open   between   those  who   believe   there   is  no  alternative   to
peace  and  those  who  think  we  ought  to  have  a  super   arms
race  and  then  "negotiate  from  strength,"   i.e.   threaten   Rus-
sian  extinction  if  they  don't  surrender  on  U.S.   terms.   The
convention  will  be  a  bitter   one.
Do  you  think  the  Republicans  might   turn  to   Rockefeller?
Possibly.   Because  the  collapse   of  the  summit  is  a   defeat
for   the   conservatives   of   the   party.     Rockefeller    favors   a
On Frisco's Rioting Students
"Riots  are  always  ugly;  and  the  riot  that  took  place
last  Friday  in  San  Francisco's  City  Hall  against   the
House  Committee  on  Un-American  Activities  was  no
exception.    The  blame  for  it   ought  not  to  be  placed
solely   on  the  students  who  were  involved.    There   is
nothing   to   indicate  that   they   planned  any   disorder.
They   assembled  for   an   entirely   proper  purpose:   to
protest  against  the  Committee's  bringing  its  portable
pillory   into   Northern  California  .  .  .  The  police,   it
seems   clear,  acted  with   unnecessary   severity.
Regrettable  as  the  violence  was,  there  is  one  heart-
ening  aspect  to  the  student  demonstration.    It   affords
one   more  sign  that  students  are  beginning   to  rouse
themselves    from    the    irresponsible    and   frightened
apathy   of   the  postwar  period—an  apathy  induced  in
no  small  part  by  the  relentless   effort  of  the  Un-Amer-
ican  Activities  Committee  to  silence  dissent  and  extir-
pate  every  form  of  unorthodoxy.   This  demonstration,
however  tragically  it  got  out  of  hand,  was  not  without
kinship   to   the   student   demonstrations   which   have
taken  place  recently  in  Southern cities—and  even, per-
haps,  to  those  in  Turkey  and  Korea.
"Students  ought  to  protest  against  a  Committee  of
Congress   which   has   long  since   ceased   to   serve  any
purpose  but  punishment  by  publicity.   It  is  heartening,
despite  the  excesses,  to  see  American students behaving
once  more  like  American students—and  not  like  robots
or  zombies."
—"Coming  to  Life".Wash.   Post  editorial,  May  17.
radical  increase  in  arms  spending,   and  a  radical  reorganiza-
tion  of   the  armed   services,   at  one  and   the   same  time   for
thermonuclear  preventive  war  power  and  mobile  limited  nu-
clear  war  to  defend  American  interests   (especially   oil  inter-
ests)   in  the  hot  spots  of  the  world.    He's   willing  to  rally
popular  support  by  combining  a  garrison   state  with  a  social
welfare   state.     He's   made  to  order   for   the  George  Meany
mentality  in  labor.
Can  a  peace  candidate  be  elected?
Only  if  the  Russians  do  not  create  a  new  crisis  over  Berlin.
The  signing  of  a  separate  treaty  before  the  election,   especially
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
Dean  Griswold  Protests  Uphaus  Case
"Congressmen   and  Senators   are   not   magistrates   with
roving  commissions  to   go   about  the   length   and  breadth
of  the  land  hailing  people  before  them  to  respond  to  what
they  will.   Congressmen  and  Senators  are  legislators  with
very  important  functions  to  perform  in  that  capacity.  They
are  entitled to  make inquiries  and examine  facts  in  support
of  their  work  as  legislators.    They  can  get  all  the  infor-
mation   they   need   about   any   topic   without   asking   any
person  about  his  own past  thoughts,  beliefs  or  associations.
"Recognizing  the  privilege  in  these  cases  is  frustrating
to  those  who  want  to  conduct  broad-scale  public  inquiries.
But  is  that  important  when  measured  against   the   rights
of   personality  which  are  recognized  in   'the   right   to  be
let   alone'?     Consider  the  problem  of   the  witness.    Most
of  those  summoned  involuntarily  to  appear  before  Congres-
sional  committees  should  not  have  been  there   at  all.   In
this  situation,  the  sure  haven  of   the  citizen  against   the
unbridled  power  of  the  government  was  to  claim  the  pro-
tection   of   the   Fifth   Amendment—taking   the   Fifth,'   it
was   called  by   those   who  did  not  fully   appreciate   what
was  involved.
"There  was  the  witness  before   the  committee,  often  a
rather  little  man.   He  was  usually  frightened,  and  under-
standably  so.    If   he  answered   the  questions   he  could  be
in  Upholding  "Right  to  be  Let  Alone"
in  trouble.    He  might  be  prosecuted   on  the  basis   of   his
answers;  or  he   might   be   prosecuted   for   perjury   if   his
answers  were  felt  to  be  untrue.    If  he  refused  to  answer
on   general  principles,   or   as   a   matter   of   conscience,    he
was   also  in  trouble.    He  could  be  prosecuted,   and  often
has   been,   for   contempt   of   the   investigating   committee.
The  sad  case  of  Dr.  Uphaus  is  a  currently  painful example,
which  will,  I  think,  long  leave  a  scar   on  the  good  name
of  the  fair  State  of  New  Hampshire  .  .  .
"Commentators  have  said  that  many  claimed  the  privi-
lege  when  they  had  no  real  right  to  do  so—the   witnesses
knew   that   the   testimony   withheld  would   not   have  been
incriminating  in  the  strict  legal  sense.    There  is  no  doubt
that  this  is  so.   But is  it  surprising?    Is  it  even  desirable?.
If  the  question  should  not  have  been  asked,  is  it  not  good
that  there  was  a  way  to  thwart  the  questioner?    Is  there
not  something  rather  American when  the  individual  citizen   ,
holds   the   government  at  bay   on  a  matter  of   conscience
and  belief?"
—Dean   Erwin   N.   Gnswold   of   Harvard    Law    School
speaking   on  "The  Right   to  Be  Let   Alone"   at   the   North-
western    University    Law    School   Centennial   in    Chicago
May   IS.
8  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 23,1960
Elsenhower  and Khrushchev  Have  Destroyed  Each  Other  Politically
{Continued  from  Page   Three)
if   followed   by  trouble  between  the  East  Germans  and   our
military,  will   play   into   the   hands   of   the   war   party   here.
The  Russians  cannot  force  the  U.S. into  a  humiliating  back-
down   at  Berlin  and   expect  peaceful  negotiations   no  matter
who  is  elected.
Is  it  possible  to  put  Russo-American  elections  into  a  sort
of   deep-freeze    until   after   the   elections?
Possible  but  not  probable.    Given  the  realities  of  mankind
and  its  easy  descent  into  mutual  recrimination  and  suspicion,
no  such  happy  solution  is  likely.    It  is  more  likely  that   the
collapse  of  the  summit is  the  opening  of  a  new  and  dangerous
era  in  world  history,  and  one  which  could  easily  be  the  last.
Can  the  Nuclear  Test  Talks  Survive?
Can  the  nuclear  testing  and  disarmament   negotiations  go
on   after    the   summit   has  collapsed?
Theoretically,  yes.   Practically, no.    Insofar  as  foreign pol-
icy  is  concerned,   all  countries  have  a  two-party  system—the
"hards"  and  the  "softs."     We  are  moving  into  a  period  in
which  the   "hards"   will  probably  be  dominant  in  both   the
U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.    The  Soviet  leaders  in  their  new  mood
are  less  likely  than  ever  to  allow  foreign  monitors  and  on-site
inspections   on  their   soil.
What   do   you   see  as  the   most   important   lesson  for   the
American  people  in  the  last  jew  days?
The   extent  to  which  our  fate  is  at  the  mercy  of  a   huge
military  and  intelligence  machine  which  can  create  incidents
and   manipulate  events;   the   extent   to   which,   through   the
press,   they   can   brain-wash  the   country.    They   easily   sold
papers  as enlightened as  the  New  York  Times  and  the  Wash-
ington  Post  the  fantastic  line  that  aerial  overflights  in  viola-
tion  of  international law  in  a  trigger-tense thermonuclear  age
are  a  form  of  public  service.    If  they  can  sell  this  line,  can
one  be  sure  they  can't  sell  the  idea  of  preventive  war?
Do  you  see  a  step up  in  the  arms race?
Yes,   and  we  are  only  a  few  years   away  from  the   stage
of   technology   in  which  we  may  see  garrison   states   rise  on
Hat's  Off to  Senator  Morse
In  our  issue  of   May  2,  we  called  attention  to edi-
torials  in  the  New   York  Times  and  the  Washington
Post  on  the  pointless  cruelty  of  the  deportation order
against    a   Portland,   Oregon,   house   painter,     VVillia
Niukkanen.    Though  born  in  Finland,  he  came  to  this
country  as  an  infant.    Now  at  52  he  is  to  be  deported
for   membership  in   the   Communist   Party   from 1937
to  1939.   The  Supreme  Court  5-to-4  upheld  his  depor-
tation  under  the  1950  Internal  Security  Act.   We:  sug-
gested  that  a  bill  be  introduced  in  Congress cancelling
the  Niukkenan  deportation.    We  are  happy  to  report
that  Senator  Morse in  an  act  of  characteristic human-
ity   introduced  such  a  bill  (S.3543)  on  May  13.
both  sides,  digging  deep  into  the  earth  to  give  their
1
  citizens
shelter  and  reaching  high   into  the  skies  with  space  stations
from  which  to  aim  missiles  at  each  other.    The  black  day  of
May  17,  I960,  may  bring  nearer  the  vision  of  Orwell's 1984.
Coming  developments  can  be  a  bonanza  for  the  secret  police
business   and   the   paranoids  on   both   sides.     Stalinism  and
McCarthyism  may  have  their  recrudescence  together.   World
rivalry  and  many  basic  similarities  have  made  Siamese  Twins
of  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.    If  poison  runs  in  the  veins  of
one,  it flows into  the  veins  of  the  other.
Can  Khrushchov  survive   a.  sharp   turn  of   events?
Just  as  it  was  a  political   asset  during  the  period  of  thaw
for  ambitious  leaders  to  demonstrate   by  visits  and  talks  that
they  could  get  along  with  their  opposite  numbers,  so  in  the
coming   months   it   may  become   an   asset   on   both   sides   to
demonstrate  that  one  can  "talk  tough"  with  the  other.   Eisen-
hower's  tragedy  stems  from  his  weaknesses  of  character,  his
essential   laziness   of   mind.     Khrushchov   in   anger   has   de-
stroyed   Eisenhower;   Ike   ends   a   failure.     But   Khrushchov
may   go  down  with  him   if   there  is  a  turn   for   the  worse.
It  will  not  be  easy  for  Nikita  "Kukuruchik,"  the   expansive
extrovert,   contemptuous   of   stuffed    shirts   and   bureaucratic
hacks,  to  become  a  Stalinist  style  wooden  Indian.   We  suspect
neither  man  will   long   survive  the  collapse   of  their   mutual
hope.    They  have  ruined  each  other.                Noon,  May  18.
If   You  Send  A  Stamped  Self-Addressed    Long  Envelope,   We'll   Send  A  Free  Copy   of  This  Week's  to  A  Friend
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ......__...................................................._.................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ......._...............................Zone..._.......State....................
6/23/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name  ......................._......„.............................._......._...
Street   ..................................................._.._.._..........__.....
City    ...............«.......................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1870.    Post-dated  Mondays  bat  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Annat  and  December   at  5618  Nebraska   Are..  N.  W.,  Washington  16,  D.  C.
'      '          ••          -----        -     ...   -    -      -   ^,
   8tone
.  circulation  Manager.  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.  _.   ———,    ———————    ———_.
d  m  the  XI.  8.;  (6  In  Canada:  »0  elsewhere.    Air  lull  rates:  S15 to  Europe:i  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED