I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960nov28.pdf

============================================================

/r  Agitation  for  Rules  Reform   Subversive?  P.  4
Braden  and  Wilkinson  Before  the  Supreme  Court,  P.  2;  New  Light  on  Our  Envoy  in  the  Congo,  P.  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  43
NOVEMBER  28,  1960
101
      WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
Just  What  Are  We   Cooking  Up  in  the   Caribbean?
There  are  several  alarming  aspects  to  our  establishment  of
a  naval  blockade  off  Central  America.    The  first  is  the  light
it  throws  on   the   free-and-easy  wheeling  methods  by  which
foreign   policy  can   be  made   in   Washington.     Though   the
President's  order  for  the  blockade  was  issued   from   Augusta
on  Thursday  afternoon,  Nov.   17,  the  Navy  Department  had
teed  off  several  days  earlier.    According  to  the  Pentagon  cor-
respondent  of   the   Washington   Post   (Nov.    18),   the   Navy
said  its  P2V  aircraft  had  begun  patrolling  the  Central  Amer-
ican  coast  on  Monday  and  the  ships  for  the  patrol  had  started
out  the  week-end before  the  Presidential  declaration.    Accord-
ing  to  E.  W.  Kenworthy's  dispatch  in  the  New   York   Times
(Nov.   20)   Guatemala  and  Nicaragua  that  week-end   "made
an  oral  request  for  the  naval  patrols  and  the  Navy  promptly
responded."     Mr.  Kenworthy  reported   that  many  diplomats
in   Washington   "both   in  the   State  Department   and   in   the
Latin-American   embassies   were   unhappy  at   the    confusion
and  melodrama  which  attended  the  White   House  announce-
ment."
No  Evidence  Castro  to  Blame
Another  disturbing aspect  is  the  unilateral character  of  the
intervention,  which   recalls   the   days  of   gunboat   diplomacy
Even  the  Republican  New   York   Herald-Tribune   in  an  edi-
torial   (Nov.   19)   said  "It   would   have  been  better  had  the
dispatch  of  naval  vessels  .  .  .  been  conducted   under  a  man-
date  from  the  OAS"  and  the  Washington  Post  editorial   (Nov.
18)   also  said  "It  would  be  far  better  if  any  necessary military
action   had   the   cloak   of   international   sanction."     Unfortu-
nately  such  cloaks  can  be  obtained  only  with  some  semblance
of  evidence.    The  Washington   Star  reported,  however    (Nov.
18)   that  the  State  Department    "has   no  firm  evidence   that
Central  American  invasion  forces  are  at  sea"  while  Marguerite
Higgins  wrote  in  the  New  York   Herald-Tribune   (Nov.   15)
that  "there  is  no  hard  evidence  that  the  central  direction  of
the  rebel  movement  comes  from  Havana."     Little  more  than
a  year  ago,  in  June,   1959,   Nicaragua   went  to  the  OAS  with
a  complaint  that  Castro's  Cuba  was  behind  a  revolt  which  had
just   been   attempted   against   the   Somoza  dictatorship.     The
OAS,  over  Cuba's  objections,  appointed  an  investigating  com-
mittee  but  it  failed   to  bear  out  the  charge   and  found   that
the  rebels  had  obtained   their   arms  on  the   black   market  in
Costa  Rica.    This  time  evidence  is  again  lacking.     Kenneth
Colegrove  of  Scripps-Howard   reported  from  Guatemala  City
Nov.   19   (Washington   Daily  News)   that   when   the   rebels
surrendered   in   Puerto   Barrios,   "there   was  no   evidence   of
Castro-type  activities  there.   .  .  .  Nor   was  there  evidence  of
Cubans  supplying   arms."
Puerto  Barrios,  last  stronghold  of  the  Guatemalan   rebels,
surrendered  on  Wednesday,  Nov.   16  and  the  same  day  Nica-
What  We're  Protecting  in  Nicaragua
"There   has  been  little   political  change  or  develop-
ment   in   Nicaragua  since   1936.    In   that   year,  Gen.
Anastosio   Somoza,   the   head  of   the   national  guard,
seized  the  presidency  and  ruled  as  a  dictator  for  the
next   generation.     Like  his   counterpart,   General  Tru-
jillo,   in   the   Dominican   Republic,   Somoza's   monopoly
on   the   means  of   violence   was   used   to   promote  the
selfish  ends  of   the  family.    Systematic  graft   and  the
accumulation  of  vast  commercial  and  agricultural  hold-
ings  through  use  of  political  power  made  the  Somozas
one  of   the  wealthiest  families  in  the  Americas.
"Following  the  assassination  of  the  dictator in  1956,
his   two  sons   have   tried   to  carry  on.     Luis  Somoza
is   now  President,   and  his   younger  brother,  'Tachito,'
heads  the  National  Guard.    During  the  past  year, there
have  been  indications—notably  popular demonstrations
and  an  attempted  invasion  by  exiles—that  the  Somoza
family  may   not  be  able  to  continue  to  dominate  and
exploit   Nicaragua   in   the  manner  they  have  so   long
become  accustomed  to."
—Post  War  Political  Developments   in  Latin  Amer-
ica,  a  study   for   the  American  Re-publics   subcommittee
of   Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee   prepared   by
the  University   of  New  Mexico  School  of  Inter-American
Affairs     and   made   public  November   19,  1959.
ragua  announced  that  its  revolt  was  crushed.    Why,  then,  the
flamboyant  announcement  from   Augusta  the  following  day?
The  election  is  over.    So  is  the  revolt.    Why,   then,  the  mar-
shalling  of  a  33,000   ton  aircraft  carrier  and   four   destroyers,
a  huge  armada  against  the  mosquito   boat  fleets  available  in
the  Caribbean ?   Is  this  really  a  tryout  for  the  more  dangerous
game  of  throwing  a  blockade around  Cuba ?   Hanson  Baldwin
in  the  New  York   Times  last  Sunday  (Nov.   20)   said  it  could
be  a  precedent   for   such   action.     To   interfere   with   Soviet
freighters  carrying supplies  to  Cuba  would  invite  serious  com-
plications.
There   is  also  some  ground   to  fear  that  the  CIA  may  be
preparing  an  invasion  of  Cuba.    The  Nation  (Nov.   19)  said
Dr.   Ronald   Hilton,   director   of   the   Institute  of   Hispanic-
American   Affairs   at  Stanford,  was  told  on  a  recent   visit  to
Guatemala  that  the  CIA  had  acquired  a  $1,000,000  tract  of
land  near  the  seacoast  which  was  being  used  to  train   Cuban
counter   revolutionaries   for   an   invasion.     From    Guatemala
City  a  New  York  Times  correspondent  Nov.  20  quoted  Presi-
dent  Ydigoras   as  denying  this  report  and  insisting  that   the
land  was being  used  by his  army for  guerrilla  warfare  training
and  that  the  project  was not  U.S.  subsidized.    But  when  oppo-
sition  deputies  asked  for  an  investigation   after  these   reports
were  published   in  the   Guatemalan   newspaper,   La  Hora,   it
was  refused  on  the  grounds   of  military   secrecy.    Just   what
are  we  cooking  up  in  the  Caribbean?                            Nov.   22
1   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  November  28, 1960
Little  Prospect  of  Clear  Decision  on  Pillorying  of  Critics  by  House  Un-Americans
Outlook  Poor  for  Braden  and  Wilkinson  in  Supreme  Court
By  Daniel  M.  Berman *
Libertarian   principles  seldom   win   vindication  these   days
in  the  Supreme  Court.    Worse  yet,  those  who  defend  them
keep  out  of  jail  only  if  they  can  rest  their  appeals  on  narrow,
technical  grounds  that  can  be  used  to  benefit  no  one  else. Last
week's   argument   in  the   Braden   and  Wilkinson   cases  indi-
cated  that  Carl  Braden  may  gain  at  least  a  temporary  victory
against  the Un-American  Activities  Committee.   But  the  prob-
able grounds will  delight  only  specialists  in  legal  hairsplitting.
Frank   Wilkinson,    whose   case   presents   almost   unavoidable
constitutional  problems,  may  be  headed  for  the  penitentiary.
The  two  men  deserve  better  than   this.    Braden  is  being
persecuted  for  his  devotion  to  integration  and  civil  liberties;
his  current  ordeal  follows  hard  on  his  "sedition"  prosecution
in  Kentucky  for  helping  a  Negro  to  buy  a  home  in  a  white
neighborhood.     Wilkinson   is  being  punished   for   leading   a
nationwide  campaign  to  abolish  the  Un-American  Committee.
The  Balancing   in   Barenblatt
Whether   Braden   will   win   probably   depends   on   Justice
Stewart,  who  cast  the  deciding  vote  that  sent  Lloyd  Barenblatt
to  prison.    In  that  case,  the  Court  used  Justice  Frankfurter's
handy  balancing  test  to  determine  that  the  Government's  in-
terest  in  protecting   itself  from  violent  overthrow  outweighed
Barenblatt's  right  to  be  free  from   official  harassment  for  his
political  views.   Thus  questions  about  connections  with  Com-
munism, the majority  said through  Justice Harlan,  were  proper.
But  the  question  on  which  the  Court  of  Appeals  based  its
affirmance   of   Braden's   conviction  had  nothing  to   do   with
the  Communist  Party.    It  concerned  the  Emergency  Civil  Lib-
erties   Committee.     Braden's   appeal   might  be  won  on   that
distinction.    Or,  since  he  declined  to  answer  another  question
that  did  relate  to  Communism,  the  Supreme  Court  could  re-
mand  his  case  to  the  Court  of  Appeals,  which  upon   second
thought  might  base  an  affirmance  on  that  ground.     On   the
other hand Wilkinson's  conviction rested on  a  question  directly
related  to  Communism and  thus  offers  the  Court  no  easy way
to  distinguish  the  case  from  Barenblatt.
There  is  little  hope  that  the  Court  will  deal  with  the  most
critical  problem   which   the   two   cases  present:   whether   the
Un-American  Committee may  pillory  people  whose only crime
is  their  opposition  to  the  Committee  and  what  it  stands  for.
Even  McCarthy  in  his  heyday  had  trouble  selling  the  theory
that   opposition   to  him   was  evidence  of   subversion.    Will
Walter  succeed  where  McCarthy  failed?
The   Un-American  Committee's   counsel,   Richard   Arens,
had  made  no  effort  to  conceal  the  reason  for  subpoening  Wil-
kinson.    It  was because he  had  been  sent  to  Atlanta  ".  .  . by
the  Communist Party  for  the  purpose  of  developing  a  hostile
sentiment  to  this  committee  and  to  its  work.  ..."    In  the
Supreme  Court,  the  Government   defended   the   Committee's
right  to  summon  its  critics.    The  reasoning:  "This  committee
constantly  has  before  it  the  issues  whether  it  should   be  abol-
Warning  the  Supreme  Court
"One   Louisiana  legislator  suggested  that   the  House
Un-American  Activities  Committee   investigate  Justices
of   the   Supreme    Court.     Rep.   James   Pfister   of   New
Orleans,  chairman  of  a  similar  committee   in  the   Louis-
iana  legislature,  asked  U.S.   Rep.  Edwin  Willis,  a  mem-
ber  of  the  Congressional  committee,  why  such  a  check
hasn't   been  made  on  the  Justices  before   now.
"Willis  on  a  visit  to  the  legislature  said,  'There  has
not   been   any   evidence   brought  before   us   that   would
justify  it.    If  the  evidence  is  there  and  it  is  presented,
it   is   our  policy   to   pursue   the   Communist   conspiracy
wherever   it  might   lead.
"But   Willis  quickly   added:  'I  am  not  saying  and  I
wouldn't   dare   say   that   any   member   of   the   Supreme
Court   is   of   this   color  or  that   color.    We   must   have
supporting   evidence   to  ask  that  question."
—Washington  Post  dispatch  from  Baton  Rouge,  La.,
Nov.  17,  early  editions   only.
* I   was   unable   to  cover   the   argument   in   the   Supreme
Court   because   of   a   previous   engagement   to   speak   at   a
meeting  in  St.   Louis  against  the  Congressional  witch  hunt
and  asked  Dr.  Berman,  assistant  professor  of  political  science
at   Washington   College,   to   cover   it   for   the   Weekly—IFS.
ished,  continue  its  present  course,   or  change   or   expand   its
activities."    The  Committee may  "evaluate"  the  source  of  pro-
posals  that  it  be  done  away  with.
Chief  Justice Warren  was  appalled.    Could  the   Committee
wring   testimony  from   anyone  who  promoted  opposition   to
Congressional  policies ?   The  Government  counsel  replied  that
the  Committee would  have  to  have  a  valid  legislative  purpose
for   its  questions  and  reason  to  think  that  the  witness   could
further   it.    Would   it   be   reason   enough,   inquired   Justice
Brennan,   if   the   Committee   counsel   merely   asserted,    "The
Committee  has information that  you are a  Communist"?    Yes,
replied  Assistant Attorney  General  J.  Walter  Yeagley.
Although   Justice  Frankfurter  commented   that   he   might,
as  a  private citizen,  "sympathize  with  the  effort  to  get  rid  of
the  Committee,"  he  made  it  plain  that,  as  a  Justice  he  would
defend  the  Committee's  right  to  compel  testimony  from  those
who  try  to  influence  Congress.    A  Senate  committee,  he  noted
tartly  had  once  done  the  same.    "That  was  my   committee,"
said  Justice Black  quietly.   Black,  as  Senator  directed  a   1935
investigation  into  the  origin  of  faked  telegrams  against   the
public  utilities  holding  company  act.
There  was  little  in  Frankfurter's  comparison,  for  the  Un-
American  Committee  has  never  received  the  specific  Congres-
sional  mandate to  investigate lobbying  which  Black  had.    But,
if   the  analogy  had   scant  logical  value,   it  had   considerable
psychological  importance as  a  clue  to  Frankfurter's   thinking.
To  him  there  is  no  significant  difference  between  the  activities
of  a  public  utility  and  those  of  a  social  critic.     Government
may  regulate both,  in  spite  of  the  First  Amendment.
Black,  on  the  other  hand,  interprets  the  First  Amendment
as prohibiting  any legislation  to  discourage  or  punish  political
utterances.     Since  Congressional   investigations   are   supposed
to  pave  the  way for  legislation  and  since laws  in  First  Amend-
ment  fields  would  be  unconstitutional,  he  concludes  that  the
type   of   inquiry   pursued   by   the   Un-Americans   cannot   be
justified.    Questions  about  one's  political  beliefs,  expressions,
and  associations,  he  says,  are  never  pertinent  to  a  valid   legis-
lative  purpose.     But  Black's  view  of  the  Bill  of  Rights  does
not  command the  support  of  a  majority On the  Court.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   November   28, 1960
Labor  Spokesman  on  Nuclear  Energy  Calls  on  Kennedy  for  Effective  Action
No   Clear  Authority  for  Protecting  Public  From  Radiation  Hazards
Remarkably  little  attention   was  paid   by  the  press  to   the
release  last  week  of  a  report  by  the  Holifield   subcommittee
of   the   Joint   Committee   on   Atomic  Energy.     It  dealt  with
"Radiation  Protection  Criteria  and  Standards:  Their  Basis  and
Use."     One   reason   is  that  the  subcommittee  was  too  timid
or  too  busy  to  issue  a  real  report  on  the  seven  days  of   testi-
mony  it  heard  on  this  problem  last  May  and  June.    Instead
it  released  a  weak  "Summary-Analysis"   of  the  hearings.
The   summary   shows   that   despuite   the   establishment    in
August   1959   of  a  Federal  Radiation  Council  there  is  almost
inextricable  confusion  in  the  business  of  protecting  the  public
from  the  growing  health  dangers  involved  in  the  use  and  dis-
posal  of  nuclear  materials.    The   Council   is  a  model  of  how
easily  good   intentions   can  be  undercut  by  a  desire  to  keep
everybody  happy.    The  powers  of  the  Council;  its  relations  to
the  military,  the  AEC  and  private   industry,   remain   unclear.
The  Chief  Obstacles
One  obstacle  to  clarity  is  Republican  nonsense  about  giving
control  of  radiation  hazards  to  the  States;  another  is  the  usual
industrial  resistance  to  effective  regulation,  a  third  is  the  un-
willingness  of  the  military  to  let  a  civilian  agency  tell   them
how  much  radiation  it  shall  be allowed  to  add  to  the  amounts
already  in  the  atmosphere.
Clearer  guidelines  are  coming  from  labor.    Leo  Goodman,
secretary   of   the   atomic   energy   technical   committee  of   the
AFL-CIO,  made  an  illuminating  speech  Nov.   15  to  Pennsyl-
vania's   Occupational   Safety  Conference   in  Harrisburg.     He
called  on  the  President-elect,  in  the  course  of  reviewing  regu-
latory  agencies,  to  take  a  fresh  look  at  the  nuclear   field.   Mr.
Goodman  urged  repeal  of  these provisions  in  the  1954   Atomic
Energy  Act  which   allow   the   AEC  to  transfer    responsibility
to  the  States.     He  proposed  a  separate   Federal   agency  with
power   to   control   and   regulate   radiation   hazards   from   all
sources.    He  challenged   as  a  public  relations  myth  the   idea
that   atomic   industry   has   "a   perfect    record   of   safety",    as
claimed  by the  government  in  the  Detroit  Edison  case.   Good-
To  Eisenhower  for  Morton  Sobell
Eight  years  ago  when  President  Truman  was  in  the
closing   days   of   his   Administration,  we   appealed   to
him  in  the  pages  of  the  New  York  Daily  Compass  to
prevent   a   savage   sentence   and   commute   the   death
penalty   imposed   on   the   Rosenbergs   to   the   30-years
which   was   the  alternative  fixed  by   the   statute.    We
hope  readers  by  personal   letter   to  the   White   House
will  join  in  asking  President  Eisenhower  in  the  closing
days   of   his   Administration  to   commute  the   30   year
sentence  imposed  on  Morton  Sobell  to  the  more  than
ten  years  he  has  already  served.    Two  such   appeals,
one   signed   by   1200  clergymen   and   another   by   600
other   Americans,   were   made   public   at   a   conference
in  Washington  last  week-end,  as  was  a  cable  of  sup-
port   from   Bertrand  Russell.     Dr.   Reinhold  Niebuhr,
Norman  Thomas  and  Martin  Luther  King  were  among
those   participating  in   the   appeal.    Prof.   Thomas   I.
Emerson   of   Yale   Law   School   in   a   panel    discussion
during  the  conference  reviewed  the  two  bases  of   the
appeal.    One  is  the  tenuous  character   not  only  of  the
evidence  against   Sobell  but  even  of  the  charge.    The
other  is  that  even  if   guilty  the  sentence  was  all  out
of  proportion to  the  charge  and a  reflection  of  hysteria.
In   the   more  temperate   atmosphere   of   England,   Dr.
Klaus  Fuchs  was  given  only  14  years  and  Allan  Nunn
May,   10  of   which   he  served  less   than   seven   though
theirs  was  a  proven  crime  of  atomic  espionage.   David
Greenglass,   given  only  15  years  on  charges  more  seri-
ous  than  those  brought  against   Sobell,   has  now  been
released.    It  is  time  Sobell  were  freed,   too.
man   declared   that   there  had   been   some   300   accidents   in
nuclear  industry,  and  that  many  had  been  kept  from  the  press.
He  charged  that  nuclear  workers  were  being  subjected  to  four
times  as  much  radiation  as  previously.
A  Pandora's  box  of  evils  has  been  opened  by  the  discovery
of   nuclear   energy;   this   will   haunt   mankind.     It   may   do
irreparable   harm  even  without  war  to  our  species.    This  is
an  area  which  cries  out  for  more  public  knowledge  and  more
effective   public  action.
Unfit  to  Print  (Except  in  Britain)  About the  U.S.  Envoy  in  the  Congo
The  portrait of  Clare  Hays  Timberlake, U.S.  Ambassador
in  the  Congo,  which  the  New   York  Times  published  Nov.
28  was  as  friendly  but  more  discreet   than  an  earlier  one
which  the  London  Daily  Express  published  Sept.  21.   That
paper's  correspondent in  Leopoldville  described  him  as  "the
man   who  called  in   the   UN   airlift—the   American  airlift
under   UN's   colors."    He  reported   that   one  night   in   the
turbulent    days    after    independence   Timberlake   phoned
Washington  and  said,  "You've  got  to  get  the  United  Na-
tions  in,  or  the  Russians  take  over."    The  Daily   Express
account  said  this  was  relayed  by  Under  Secretary   Dillon
to  Eisenhower  and  "History  will  probably  record  that  was
the  night  the  West  saved  the  day  in  the   Congo."
"There  is   no  doubt  whatever   in  my  mind,"  the   British
correspondent   wrote   of   Timberlake,   "that   he   will   be   a
great   success   in  the  diplomatic  world  of   today,  where  it
is  a  straight  fight   between   West   and  East.   Whether  or
not  he  will  prove  a  good  friend  of  Britain  remains   to  be
seen.    He  is  known  to  be  immensely  pro-German.   His  last
post   was   Bonn  and  men  who  know  him   say   it   has   left
its   mark.     There   is   also   talk—nothing   more   yet—of   a
'holding  company'  composed   of   Americans,   Germans  and
British  (in  that  order  I  fear)  operating  the  vast  interests
of  the  Union  Miniere."
Writing   shortly   after   Mobutu   seized   power  and  drove
the   Russians   and   Czechs   out   of   Leopoldville,  the   Daily
Express   man  wrote,  "He  knows  Mobutu  and  there  is  con-
stant   contact—not   necessarily   at   the   top—between   both
camps.    It  is  said  that  the  Congolese,  who  were   ignorant
of  procedure  sought   American  guidance  before   they  knew
how  to  go  about  the  throwing  out  of   the   Russians."
The   British   correspondent   also   recorded   some   Timber-
lake   frustrations:  "Mobutu—ex-reporter   and   graduate   of
the   military   school   at   Luluabourg—is   by   no   means   the
all-powerful   figure   he   would   seem   following    his    high-
handed   treatment  of   the   Russians  and   Czechs.     So   far
Timberlake's  influence  has  failed  to  persuade   Kasavubu's
nominee   for   Prime   Minister,  Joseph   Ileo,   to   move   into
the   official   prime  ministerial   residence  and  behave  in   the
manner  his   office   demands.    Even  so,  it  is  hard  to  blame
Timberlake   for   the   failure   to   consolidate   his    week-end
diplomatic  victory  over  the  Russians.    The  Congolese  seem
incapable  of  producing  a  man  of  lasting  decision—and  all
Timberlake  can  do  is  keep   trying."
1  7 3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   November  28,  I960
Dodd  Says  Those   Who  Demand   Rules   Reform  Are   A  Menace  to  Representative   Government
Rayburn  Reassures   the  Nation  on  Radicalism   and  Texas  on  Oil  Depletion
Speaker  Rayburn  has  given  his  first  post-election  interview
(US.   News  & World  Report  Nov.  28).   The  most  interesting
thing  in  it  is  the  absence  of  any  reference  to  changes  in  the
rules.    He  said  he  hoped  Congress  would  close  any  tax  loop-
holes  but  added  that "the  oil  people"  have  no  cause  for  fears
about  their  27l/
2
  percent  oil  depletion  allowance.    "I   don't
look  upon  it,"  he  said,  "as  a  loophole."    He  thinks  the  new
Congress  will  pass  a  housing  bill,  a  minimum  wage  bill  and
a  school  construction bill, but  not  with  aid  for  teacher  salaries
because   "a  great   many  people"  believe  this  would   lead   to
Federal   dictation.    "Do   you  foresee,"   he  was  asked, "any
action  by  Congress  that  might  be  called   'radical'?"     Speaker
Rayburn  said  he  did  not, and  that  he  never  had  considered
himself  a  radical.    We  are  glad  to  be reassured.
Mansfield  Reverses   Himself  on   Filibuster
While  the  Speaker  stands  firm  against  innovation,  the  man
in  line  for  the  majority  leadership  in  the  Senate  seems  to  have
come  full  circle on  the  question  of  rules  reform.    On   Youth
Wants   to  Know  Oct. 16,  Senator  Mansfield   said  he  was  in
favor   of  maintaining  the    filibuster.    But   on  Nov. 17  in  a
radio   interview  over   Time-Life's    midwestern  stations,   the
Senator  said  "offhand   I'd  like  to  see  something  done  on  the
order  of what Senators Douglas  and  Clark  recommended at  the
beginning  of  the  86th  Congress  .  .  .  sixteen  Senators  could
sign  a  petition  and  that  way  bring  an  end  to  debate  by  ma-
jority  vote."     The   Senator  is  a  mercurial  fellow;   he   voted
against  the  Clark-Douglas  proposal  at  the  time.
Democratic  party  platform  pledges  on  reform  of  the  rules
are  not   only  being  shelved  but  Senator  Dodd,   who  was  a
member  of  the  platform  committee,  went  so  far  (in  a  speech
before  the  New  England  Society  in  New  York  Nov. 21)   as
to  attack  the  idea  that  "platforms  ought  to  mean   something"
—his   italics.     "Should   this   idea   become  widely  held,"   he
observed,  "it  would  constitute  a  great  threat  to  the  represen-
tative   system."     As   vice  chairman  of   the   Senate   Internal
Security  Committee,  Dodd   is  of  course  an  expert  on  threats
to  our   form   of  government,  and  there  was  an  almost big-
brother-is-watching-you  chill about  his  attack  on  those  "liberal
U.S.  Intellectuals   Support   French
Two   months   ago   a   group   of   French   intellectuals,
including   Jean-Paul   Sartre,   Francoise  Sagan,   Simone
Signoret  (the movie  actress),  Claude  Roy  and  Simone
de   Beauvoir,   published    a   manifesto    upholding   as   a
sacred   duty   refusal   to   serve   in   the   Algerian war.
They   were   subjected    to   loss   of   jobs   in    government
institutions  and  cultural   projects  and  are  now  threat-
ened   with   indictment   on   criminal   charges.
On  November  20,  a  "statement   of  faith"   supporting
them  was  released  by  52  professors   of   Harvard,  MIT,
Brandeis  and  Boston   Universities.     Paul  Tillich,  Perry
Miller,  David  Riesman,  Aldous  Huxley,  Gordon  AHport
and  Harry  T.  Levin   were   among   those  who   declared,
"We  senior   members   of   the  American   academic com-
munity   express   our  admiration   for   those    Frenchmen
who  courageously   signed   a  manifesto   against  military
service  in  the  Algerian  war  on  grounds  that  it  violates
their  conscience,  and  who  are  now  facing  the   sanctions
and   punitive  actions   of   the   state."
The  other  signers   were:
Harvard:  Herbert  Dieckman,  Richard  Durbin,  Frank-
lin  L.  Ford,  H.  Stuart  Hughes,  Dorothy  Lee, Barrington
Moore,  Jr., and  John  Wild.
MIT:    Noam   Chomsky,   Giorgio   de   Santillana,   and
Huston   Smith.
Brandeis:  David  S.  Berkowitz,   Leo  Bronstein,  Lewis
Coser,  James  E.  Duffy,  Richard  M.  Held,  Irving   Howe,
Edgar   N.   Johnson,   James   B.   Klee,   Henry    Linschitz,
Frank  Manuel,  Herbert   Marcuse,  Abraham   A.  Maslow,
Harry  Rand,  John  R.  Roche,  David  Sachs,  Milton  Sacks,
Morris  S.   Schwartz,   Marie   Syrkin,   Maurice  R.   Stein,
Eugene   Victor  Walter,   and   Kurt   H.   Wolff.
Boston:   Harrell   F.   Beck,   Theodore   Brameld,   Allen
Knight  Chalmers,  Robert  S.  Cohen,  Paul   K.  Deats,  L.
Howard  De  Wolf,   Nils   Ehrenstrom,   Paul   E.   Johnson,
Louis   Lowy,  Camillo  P.   Merlino,   Herbert   B.   Myron,
Jannette  E.  Newhall,   Gene  K.  Phillips,   S.  Paul   Schill-
ing,   and  Armand  Siegel.
innovators"  who   "whittle   away  at   the   deliberative   process,
when  they  attack  the   committee  system   in   Congress,   when
they  condemn  its  rules  as  antiquated."     We   began   to   feel
downright  subversive for.having  even  mentioned  the  subject.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington    15,  D.   C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   .....................................................................—•—..—....—.•
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
11/28/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name   ......;.............................................»...—..................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   .........:................................Zone............State....................
Shall   we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
Reprints   Bertrand  Russell's  Article  on  Why  British  Labor  Went  Unilateralist  Still  Available  $2  Per  Hundred
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
NEWSPAPER
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,   D.  C.
1   F   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of   AuBust  and  December  «t  6618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly
published   and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.  S.:   6  in
Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:   $15   to   Europe:    $20   to   Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED