I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960jul13.pdf

============================================================

On  Kennedy  and  The Democrats,  P.  4
Eisenhower's  New  "Plan"  for  Latin  America  Vague  and  Hasty   Reshuffle  of  Familiar  Nothings,  Page  Two
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  28
JULY   13,  1960        =fT3>io,     WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Mr.  K,  the  RB  47  and  the  Monroe  Doctrine
Bertrand  Russell, in  a  letter  which the  London  New  States-
man  and  Nation  published  July  2,  said  prophetically  of   the
stoppage  of  U-2  flights  over  Russia.  "American militarists  are
pretty  certain  soon  to  find  something  which  the  Russians will
dislike  as  much  as  U-2    flights."    The   issue  had   hardly  ap-
peared  when  the  news  came that  a  U.S.  RB  47 reconnaissance
bomber   with  six  men   aboard   was  missing  'while   making
electro-magnetic  surveys  for  mapping  purposes"  in  the  Arctic
Ocean.    "A  report  that  the  aircraft   had   been  seen  near  the
Kola  peninsula,  in  the  extreme  northwest  of  European  Rus-
sia,"    said  a  dispatch  from   Bodoe,   Norway,  in   the   London
Obserrer July  3,  "must  have  been  due  to a misunderstanding."
The   misunderstanding was  not  too  far  off  the  mark.    The
Soviet  government  revealed   on  July   12  that  the   plane  was
shot  down  22  kilometers  (14   miles)   from   the northwestern
coast  of   Russia  while  we  claim,  though   without supporting
detail,  that  it  had  never  flown  closer  than  30  miles  to  Soviet
territory.    Since  the  Russians  have  claimed   12  miles  as   the
limits  of  their  territorial  waters,  it  is  on  this  quibble  about  a
few  miles that  "we  base  our  self-righteous claim  that  the  Rus-
sians   "lied"   and   that   the   plane  was   shot   down   over   the
high  seas.
We  Recognize  No  3-Mile  or  12-Mile  Air  Limit
In  these  trigger happy  times,  30  miles  is much too  close  for
a  bomber  to  approach  Soviet  territory even  on  a  purely scien-
tific  mission.   That  this  one   was  interested  only  in   electro-  '
magnetic  currents  will  be  doubted.    One  need  not  approach
Soviet  territory that  closely  to  measure  them.   The  Associated
Press  reported  from  Washington  July  2  (New   York   Times.
July  3),  these  RB  47  customarily  have  their.bombing  equip-
ment   removed   for   reconnaissance  purposes   and   "then   the
plane  is  packed  with  long  range  cameras,  mapping  cameras
and  electronic equipment  for  checking  sites  and  frequencies of
aircraft  detection  systems."   The  purpose  of  this  checking  is
to  test  the  anti-aircraft  defenses  of  the  Soviet  Union,  and  is
thus  a form of  espionage.   We  would  accept  no  quibbles  about
a  few  miles  and  no  talk  about  studying  electro-magnetic waves
if  we  caught  a  Soviet  bomber  that  near  our  shores.   We  called
attention  in  our  issue  of  June  13  last  to  the  fact  that  the  U.S.
recognizes  no  3-mile  or  12-mile  limit  on  our  own  air  defense.
A  special  issue on  space  law  of  the  Journal  of  the  Judge Advo-
cate  General  of  the  Navy  (February   1959)   makes  this  very
clear.   "The  U.S.,"  Loftus  Becker,  then  Legal  Adviser  of  the
Department  of   State,  wrote  in  that  symposium,  "has   never
considered  that  it  is  limited  in  the  protection  of  its  security  in-
terests   to   the   air   space  above   our   territory  and   territorial
waters.   For  example  "we  have  established  coastal  air  defense
identification   zones  extending  200  and  even  500  miles  from
our  shore  although  our  territorial  sea  is  only  three  miles  in
breadth."   This  flight  can  only  be  considered  a   provocation,
perhaps  the  work  of  military  men  who  felt  frustrated  by  the
President's  ban  on  U-2  flights.
What  If  Ike  Declared  the  Warsaw  Pact  Dead?
If  the  purpose was  to  worsen  the  international  atmosphere,
it  was  certainly  helped  along  by  the  reckless  remarks  which
Premier  Khrushchov  made  at  his  Moscow  press   conference
July  12.  The  grave warnings contained  in  his  carefully written
formal  statement  were  drowned  out,  as  so  often  happens   in
his   press  conferences,   by  inflammatory   impromptu   remarks.
Many  Americans  who  might  have  seen  the  justice of  his  com-
plaint  about  the  RB  47  will  be  antagonized by his  declarations
on  the  Monroe  Doctrine.   It  is  one  thing  to  recognize,  as  so
many  Americans  do,  that  the  Monroe  Doctrine  is  obsolete  and
must  be  replaced  by  more  equal  community  relations  in   the
Western  hemisphere.   It  is  quite  another  for  Premier  Khrush-
chov,  under cover  of  an  attack  on  the  Monroe  Doctrine  and  a
defense  of  the  Cuban  revolution, to  seem  to  be  extending  his
sphere  of  influence  into the  Western  hemisphere. On  the  heels
of  his  earlier  threat of  rockets to  protect  Cuba  (see  page  two),
these  are  moves  that  do  not  fit  into  the  pattern  of  the  peace
and  co-existence he  has  been  preaching.    Soviet  policy  since
the   war   has  excused  its  refusal  to   allow   free   elections   in
Eastern  Europe  on  the  ground  that  the  Russians  had  a  right  to
friendly  neighbors.   What  if  Elsenhower  were  to  hold  a  press
conference,  announce that  the  Warsaw  Pact  was  obsolete,  and
threaten  to  bomb  the  Soviet  Union   if  it  interfered  in  Polish
or  Hungarian  affairs ?
Bitter  Lessons  for  Satellites  on  Both  Sides
The  argument between the  U.S. and  the  U.S.S.R.  over  Cuba
is  a  pot-and-kettle  argument.   Moscow  is  no  more  willing  to
risk  having  "international capitalism"  establish a  base  near  its
borders  than  we  are  to  allow  "international  communism"  near
ours.   The  Russians kidnapped  and  executed  the  head  of  the
Hungarian  Communist  State,  Nagy,  when   he  threatened   to
withdraw  from  the  Warsaw  Pact;  it  holds  Gomulka  on  a  more
flexible  leash  but  even  in  its  relations  with   non-Communist
Finland  it  imposes  limits  on  that  neighbor's   freedom  of  ac-
tion.  What  applies  to  the  liberation  of  Eastern  Europe  applies
equally  to  the  full  liberation  of  Latin  America.  It  can  only  be
carried  out  in  an  atmosphere  of  international  detente  in  which
neither  of  the  great   Powers   is  alarmed  lest  the   others  may
make  serious  inroads  on  its  sphere  of  influence.   The   smaller
countries  struggling  for  greater  freedom  on  both  sides  must
act  with  caution;  Cuba  can  deal  with  Russia  economically  as
Poland   does   with   us,   but   within   discreet  limits.    Premier
Khrushchov  helps  neither  world  peace  nor  Cuba  by  challeng-
ing  the  U.S.  in  its historic sphere  of  influence.   Noon.  July   13
I     1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  July  18, 1960
Elsenhower's  Feeble,  Belated  "Marshall  Plan"  for  Latin  America   Proves  A  Dud
Khrushchov  Helps  The  Enemies  of  Cuba  and  of  Peace  by  Rocket-Rattling
I  hope  that  all  those  who,  like  myself,  have  supported  the
cause  of  peace  and  co-existence  will  find  some  means  to  ex-
press   their  disapproval   of   the   offhand   way  in   which   Mr.
Khrushchov  in  his  speech  to  the  teachers  in  Moscow  threat-
ened  to  "support  the  Cuban people"  with  rockets  "should  the
aggressive  forces  in  the  Pentagon   dare  to  start  intervention
against   Cuba."    This   is  doubly   irresponsible.   This   sort  of
rocket-rattling  does  not  advance  the  cause of  world  peace,  and
it  does  not  help  the  Cuban  people.
World  War  III  Over  Cuba?
If   the   threat   is  meant   seriously,  it   means  that  Premier
Khrushchov  is  willing  to  unleash World  War  III  over  Cuba;
this would  be pure  idiocy, since  Cuba  is hardly  a vital  Russian
interest;  in  any  case,  we  need  to  develop  an  atmosphere  in
which  it  is  recognized  on  both  sides  that  no  dispute  today  is
worth  a  war,  and  that  all  differences  must  be  negotiated.   Mr.
Khrushchov  talks  as  if  this  were  still  the  age  of  howitzers.
If  the  threat  was  not  meant  seriously, and  merely  designed  to
make  it  look   as  if  Russian  rockets  had   prevented  the   U.S.
from  staging  a  military  attack  the  Eisenhower Administration
is certainly  not  planning to  make,  then  it  is  an  effort  to  bolster
Soviet military prestige  at  the  expense  of  exacerbating our rela-
tions  with  Cuba.    Mr.  Khrushchov   cannot  be  an  advocate  of
peace  one  day,  and  an  irresponsible  trouble-maker  the  next,
without  losing  assets  of  goodwill.   Moscow's  habit,  since Suez,
of  rattling  rockets,  is  a  bad  one.   If  it  wants  to  help  Cuba,  it
will  confine  itself  to  economic  aid  like  ours  to  Poland,  and
avoid  even  the  appearance  of  seeking  to  make  Cuba  a  Soviet
satellite   on  our  doorstep.   Nothing   could   be  worse  for   the
Cubans  than  to  become  expendable pawns  in  the  Khrushchov-
Eisenhower quarrel.
In  the  meantime  the  unveiling  of  Mr.  Eisenhower's  long
awaited  "Marshall  Plan"  for  Latin  America will  only  deepen
distaste  below  the  Rio  Grande  and  stiffen   reluctance to  take
sides  with  us  against  Castro.   The  "plan"  is  so  vague  it  does
not  merit  the  name;  it  is  ludicrous  to  think  that  the  Cubans
will  be  intimidated  by  the  threat  to  exclude them  from  it.   In
the  sphere  of  development,  it  still  suggests  that  they  rely  on
Plus Ca Change...
"The   President's   proposal   seemed   to   reverse    the
long-standing   U.S.   policy   that  Latin  America  should
depend  largely  on  private  enterprise    and.  the   Export-
Import   Bank  for  its   economic  development."
—New   York   Times,  from   Washington,   July   12.-
"The   only   real   investment   that   is   going   to   flow
into  countries  that  will  be  useful  to  them  in  the  long
run  is  private investment. .  .  .  Some  additional  [public]
sums   would   be   probably   necessary.      But   there   are
many  ways  in  which  they  could be  done.    For  example,
all   nations  could   agree   to   increase   the   capital  and
the  lending  capacity  of   the  American  bank."
—Mr.   Eisenhower's    press    conference    on   his   new
Latin  American  plan,  New   York   Times   same   day.
private  investments though  experience  has  richly  shown  that
these  are  more  interested  in  quick  and   easy  exploitation  of
mineral  wealth  than  in  developing  basic  industry.   The   Presi-
dent's  "plan"  is  most  revealing  in  its  discussion  of  agrarian
reform,  which  stresses  "the   opening  of  new   Areas  of  arable
land    (our  italics)  not  the  subdivision of  the  great  la.tifundia.
It  never seemed to strike Mr.  Eisenhower that  his remark  about
leaving  each  nation  free  to  "resolve   its  own  social  problems
in  its  own  way  and  without  the  imposition   of  alien  dogmas"
applies  as  much  to  U.S.  style  "free  enterprise"   as  it  does  to
Russian  style  Communism.
There  will  also  be  a  sour  humor  for  Latin  America in  the
President's  discovery  that  the  U.S.  "with  its  tradition  of  de-
mocracy  is  opposed   to  tyranny  in  any  form—whether  of   the
Left  or  of  the  Right."   We  had  found  it  all  too  easy  under
both   Eisenhower  and   Truman   to   shelve   that   "tradition   of
democracy"  so  long  as  we  had  to  deal  only  with  dictators  of
the  right  serving  U.S.  oil,  sugar  and  fruit  interests.   It  is only
when  a  revolutionary  dictator  suddenly  makes  his  appearance
•with  a  program  designed  to  help  the  masses  of  the  people
that   we   begin   to   lecture   Latin   America  on   the   virtues  of
democracy   This  heavy-handed  lack  of  imagination  and  sym-
pathy  is  paving  the  way  for  a  severe  defeat  of  U.S.  Policy  in
the  hemisphere.                                                 Noon,  July   12
Recommending  Huberman  and  Sweezy's   "Cuba—Anatomy  of   A   Revolution"
For  readers  who want  an  antidote  to  the  steady  stream  of
anti-Castro  coverage   in  the   U.S.   press  we  warmly   recom-
mend  the  latest   double  issue   of  The  Monthly  Review   (333
Sixth  Avenue,  NY  16)  in  which  its  editors,  Leo   Huberman
and  Paul  M.  Sweezy  report  on  their  recent   trip,   "Cubai—
Anatomy  of  A  Revolution".   This  173-page   volume  will  ap-
pear  in  book  form  July  26  at  $3.50.
The  first  two  parts  of  this  three  part  study  deal  respec-
tively  with  the  background  and  the  making  of   the   Castro
revolution.   They  are  superb,  with  that  genius  for  vivid  ex-
position  of  complex  economic  issues  which  made  Mr. Huber-
man's  Man's  World  Goods a  world famous  classic  of  its  kind.
Part  II  contains  the  fullest  version  we  have  seen  in'English
of   Fidel   Castro's   speech   to   the  Batista   court   which   con-
demned  him  to  prison  in  1953.  This  is  an  eloquent,   passion-
ate  and exact  picture of  Cuba's  past  and  problems  by  a  man
who will rank  as  one  of  the  great  revolutionaries   and  libera-
tors  of  human  history  whatever  the  outcome  of  his   growing
clash   with  the   U.S.
The  third  section  of  the  book,  which  is  called  "The  Revo-
lution  in  Power"  is  not  quite  on  the  same  level.   This  book
is  the   product   of  a  love  affair.   These  two  lifelong    inde-
pendent   Marxists,  Huberman   and  Sweezy,  lost  their  heart
to  the  Cuban revolution,  and  as  in  most  love  affairs  this  did
not  generate  objectivity,  though  it  provided  a  better   (Frame
for  understanding   than  the  obtuse  dislike  for  social  reform
and  socialism  which  marks  so  many  U.S.   reporters.
Enthusiasm  and  the  difficulties  of  covering   so  swift  and
chaotic   a   picture   as   any   revolution    must   present    have
created  certain  gaps  in  the  book.   It  is  curiously   blank  on
the  urban  trade  union  movement,  not  entirely  candid  in  its
discussion  of  the  Communist  Party's  peculiar  past  in  Cuba,
naive   in   its   discussion   of   civil   liberties,   overanxious   to
prove  Castro  really  socialistic,  and  fails  to  make  the  scene
come  alive.  But  these  are  minor  defects.   We  found  the  first
two  parts  thrilling  to  read,  the  third  most  informative.   We
believe  this  book  essential  reading   for  all  Americans  who
want  to  understand  what  is  happening  in  Cuba.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   July   IS,  1960
A  Page  of  Civil  Liberties  News:  Victory  for  Four  Philadelphia   School   Teachers
New  First Amendment Contempt Decisions Soft on Women, Hard on Newsmen
The   dominant  majority   on  the  Court  of   Appeals  for   the
District  of  Columbia  may  be  a  little  wobbly  on   the  Bill  of
Rights  but  no  one  can  say it  is lacking in  old-fashioned courtli-
ness.   Of   the  nine  First  Amendment  contempt   of   Congress
convictions  it  has  handed  down   in  the  past   few  weeks,   two
involved   women.    Their   convictions  were   chivalrously  re-
versed.   The  court  held  that  Mary  Knowles,  the   Quaker  li-
brarian,  and  Goldie  E. Watson, the  Philadelphia  schoolteacher,
were  never  fairly  apprised  (under  the  Watkins  ruling)  of  the
pertinency  of   the  questions  put   to  them   respectively  by   the
Senate  Internal Security  Committee and  the  House Un-Ameri-
can   Activities  Committee.   The   "pertinency"   question   is  of
a  subtlety  that  would  delight  a  medieval  theologian  and   we
shall  not  attempt  to  enter  into  its  intricacies  here  except   to
say  that  to  a  gross  and  cynical  eye  it  would  appear  that  ques-
tion  pertinent  enough  to  convict gentlemen  were  not  pertinent
enough  to  convict  ladies.
They  Wouldn't  Name  Others
While  the  gallant judges  relied  on  Watkins  to  free  the  two
women  defendants, they  refused  to  apply  the  Watkins  ruling
to  the  cases  of  Alden  Whitman  and  Bernard  Deutch.     Both
these  witnesses,  like  the  UAW  official  Watkins,  were  -willing
to  speak  freely  of  their  own  past  relationship  with  the  Com-
munist  party  but  unwilling  to  answer  questions   about   other
persons.   The  other  five  cases,  those  of  Robert  Shelton,  John
T.  Gojack,  Herman  Liveright,  William   A.  Price  and  Norton
Anthony  Russell,  were  of   witnesses  who   refused   to  answer
political   questions,  about    themselves   and    others    on    First
Amendment   grounds.    Mr.   Liveright,   then   a  New    Orleans
radio  announcer,  was  subpoenaed   by  the  Eastland  committee
on  suspicion  that  he  had  been  sent  South  by  the   Communist
party  to  disaffect   the  happy  Negro  population   of  that  area.
Mr.  Gojack,  a  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.,  local  UE  official,  was   sub-
poenaed   by  the  Walter   committee  on  the   eve  of  an  NLRB
election,  in  what  he  charged  was  an  effort  at   "union-busting."
Three  of  the  cases  involved  newspapermen,  Alden  Whit-
man  and  Robert  Shelton  of  the  New   York   Times,  and  Wil-
lian  A.  Price,  formerly  of  the  New   York   Daily  News.    All
three  took  the  First  Amendment  in  the  hearings  held  by  the
Senate  Internal  Security  Committee  in  the  winter  of  1955-56.
These  hearings  seemed  designed  to  smear  our  leading  news-
paper,  The  New   York   Times,  as  that  publication  charged   in
an  editorial,  January  5,   1956.
The   1st  Amendment  Rights   of   Veterans
In  recent  years  there  has  been  a  growing  tendency
to   punish   political   dissenters   by   depriving  them   of
social   security  or   veterans'  benefits.   An   example  of
this  trend  is   the  case  of   Robert  G.  Thompson,  which
has  just  been  decided  here  by  a  three-judge  court  con-
sisting  of  Federal  District  Judges  Holtzoff   and  Keech
and   Circuit  Judge  Fahy.    Mr.  Thompson,  one  of   the
Communist   leaders   convicted   under   the   Smith   Act,
had  been  receiving  compensation  for  tuberculosis   con-
nected  with  his  service  in  World  War  II  when  he  won
the   Distinguished  Service   Cross.    The  Veterans'   Ad-
ministration   deprived  him   of   these   benefits   on   the
ground  that  he  had  made  speeches   opposing  the  Ko-
rean  war.   Its  action  was  based  on  a  statute  providing
for   forfeiture   of   disability  benefits  upon   a   showing
satisfactory    to   the   Administrator  that   the   veteran
had   been   "guilty   of    mutiny,   treason,   sabotage    or
rendering  assistance  to  an  enemy  of  the  United  States
or  of  its  allies.  .  .  ."    Mr.  Thompson  was  found  culp-
able   under   the   "rendering  assistance"   clause.    There
was  no  proof  that  this  "assistance"  went beyond  speech
and  writing.    "I  am  not  willing  to  hold  that  in   this
context,"   Judge   Fahy   dissented,   "Congress   provided
that   a  veteran  receiving  disability  benefits  could  not
criticize  the  Government's  participation  in  a  war.   The
grant  by  Congress   of  disability   benefits  is  not  to  be
construed  as  an  attempt  to  withdraw  a  veteran's   First
Amendment   rights."    The  case   is   being   appealed  to
the  Supreme  Court.    The  ruling,  if   upheld,  could  be-
come  a  dangerous  precedent.
The  excuse  for  the  hearings,  in  the  words  of  Senator  East-
land,  was  the  theory  that  the  "international   Communist   con-
spiracy  has  as one  of  its primary aims  the  influencing  of  public
opinion,  thus  carrying  on  its  psychological  warfare  against  the
United  States  and  its  institutions  from  inside  by  methods   of
penetration."   There  are  circles   in  Washington  which   really
believe  that  such  newspapers  as  the  New   York   Times  and  the
Washington  Post  and  even  Time  magazine  are  run  by   Com-
munists.    If  these  people  had  their  way,  the  press  would  be
subjected  to  serious  onslaught.    Because  the  reasoning  of  these
new  contempt   decisions  would  clear  the  way  for  a  witch  hunt
in  the   American  press,   the   outcome   of   their   appeal   to   the
Supreme  Court  should  be  of  vital  interest  to  every   thoughtful
newspaperman.     We   respectfully   suggest  that   the  American
Newspaper  Guild   consider  filing   briefs   amicus   citriae   when
they  reach  the  Supreme  Court.
Un-American  Activities  Committee Suffers  Defeat  in  Pa.   Supreme  Court
The   House   Un-American  Activities  Committee  has   suf-
fered   a  defeat  in  the  Pennsylvania  Supreme  Court.   Chief
Justice  Jones  in  two  decisions  for  that  State's  highest   tri-
bunal  June  30  ordered  the  reinstatement   of  four   Philadel-
phia  school  teachers  who  had  been  dismissed  in  1954  as  "in-
competent"  after   their   appearance  before   the  Committee.
Three  of  them,  Angelina  Intille,  Thomas  Deacon   and  Sadie
T.   Atkinson,   had  pleaded  the   Fifth;  Goldie  Watson,   the
First.   It  was  Mrs. Watson's  second  victory in  a  month, com-
ing  soon  after  the  Circuit  Court  (see   above)   had  reversed
her  contempt  conviction.   Justice   Musmanno  was   the   lone
dissenter  in  the  5th  amendment cases  but  was  joined  by  two
others  in  the  Watson  case,  which  was  decided  4-to-3.
The  full  text  of  the  opinions  may  be  found  in  the  Legal
1  1
Intelligencer   of   Philadelphia   for  July  5.   This   discloses  a
novel  point.   The  Supreme  Court  of  Pennsylvania  ruled  that
to  discharge  teachers  for  having  invoked their   constitutional
rights   before   a   Congressional    committee   "constituted   an
abridgment  by  State  action  of  a  privilege  of  appellants'  na-
tional  citizenship  available  to  them  in  a  Federal   proceed-
ing."  This  is  believed  to  be  the  first  ruling  of  its  kind.  The
Court  held  that  invocation  of  either  the  5th  or  1st   amend-
ment  could not  be  held  proof  of  "inconipetency."  It  said  the
Philadelphia  Board of  Education  tried  to  use  this  as  a  device
to  avoid.the  requirement  of  the  Pennsylvania   Loyalty  Act
"that  disloyalty  or  subversion  as  a  ground  for  the  discharge
of  a  public  school  teacher,  must  be  proven  'by  fair.prepon-
derance  of  the  evidence.'"
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   July  18, 1960
At  Least  There  Is  The  Promise  of  Bigness  in  Kennedy
The  strongest  testimony  to  the  collective  intelligence  of  the
delegates  at  the  Democratic  convention  was  their   indifference
to  the  proceedings.   We  do  not  remember  ever  seeing  before
so  inattentive  a  convention,  and  we  regard  the  inattention  as  a
sign   of  growing  national  maturity.   The   convention   showed
itself  too  sophisticated  for  the  elocutionist nullities of  Idaho's
Senator  Church,  who  started  on  the  road  to  fame  by  winning
an  American  Legion  oratorical  contest  and  demonstrated  at  the
convention  how  richly  he  deserved  that  prize.   Governor   Col-
lins  of  Florida  turned  out  to  be  commonplace;  Chester  Bowles,
without  lift  and  unimpressive.   Only  Governor   Pat  Brown  of
California,  with  his  plea  that  we  stop  pretending   that   Com-
munist  China  does  not  exist,  dared  touch  on  any  real  issue.
Eleanor  Roosevelt  Overshadowed   the  Rest
It  was  not   until   the   demonstrations   for   Adlai    Stevenson
that  the  convention   came  to  life,  though  this  was  in  part  an
illusion   created   by  the   galleries.    Two   speakers   only,    Mrs.
Roosevelt  and  former  Governor  Lehman  in  their  hopeless  ap-
peals   for   Stevenson,   achieved   a   passionate   and   memorable
sincerity.   Mrs.  Roosevelt  drew  deep  down  within  herself   for
strong  powers  of  utterance  quite  extraordinary  for  her  years,
and  by her  power  overshadowed  every  other  participant  in  the
proceeding  including Stevenson  himself,  who  emanates  an  air
of  preciosity.  By  far  the  biggest  man  available—what  a  pleas-
ure  it  would  have  been  to  see  in  the  White  House  a  man  of
stature  and  education  suited  to  the  dimensions  of  our  country
and  its  power—yet  it  must  be  admitted  the  man  lacks  some-
thing  in  the  way  of  virility  and  fire.   This  unfavorable   view
consoles  one  in  his  defeat,  as  does  the  hope  that  he  may  be-
come  Secretary  of  State  if  Kennedy  wins.
With  Humphrey   (if   only  Stevenson   had  his  fighting  en-
ergy!)    defeated,   Kennedy   seems   clearly   the   best   of    those
available.   Amid  such  empty  figures  as  the  moronic  Symington
and  the  sophomoric  Jackson,  and  even  beside  so  able  a  man
as  Lyndon  Johnson,  Kennedy  shines.   His  grace,  his  tact  and
his  intelligence  are  unmistakable.  His  press  conference  reply-
ing  to  Mr.  Truman's  rather  wild  charges  was  a   demonstration
of  high  skill  in  the  management  of  men  and  events.    His  en-
counter with Johnson  before the  Texas  delegation  left  Johnson
Plank   Against   Faceless   Informers
The  complete  text  of  the  Democratic  platform,  more
than   20,000   words   was   not   available  as   we   went   to
press,  but  apparently  it   contained  some  civil  liberties
planks   not    mentioned   in   the    "abbreviated   text"   or
"basic   platform"  published  by   the   New   York   Times
July   13.   According   to  a   Washington   Post   story   that
same  day,  the  complete  platform  contains  a  plank  fav-
oring   "a  full   and  fair  hearing,  including  the  right   of
confrontation,   to   any   person   whose   public  or  private
employment  or  reputation  is  jeopardized  by  a   loyalty
or   security   program."   According   to   the    Washington
Post   account   the   platform  also   opposes   student   dis-
claimer  oaths  and  calls  "for   the  improvement   of    con-
gressional   investigating   procedures   and  for   fewer   re-
strictions  on  travel  or  trade   abroad."
looking  small  and  petty.  Though  his  nomination  is  the  prod-
uct  of  money  and  a  Madison  avenue  machine,  Kennedy  added
ingredients  of  personal  appeal  and  power  without  which   he
could  not  have  succeeded.   He  has  attracted  to  his  banner  men
and  women  we  trust—Mrs.  Edith  Green  of  Oregon,  to  name
one.    In  the  gamble  that  is  the   inescapable  nature  of   every
presidential  choice, Kennedy  is promising.   He  might  turn  out
to  be  a  big  man.  This  cannot  be  said  of  his  close  rivals  in  the
last  lap  at  the  convention, nor  can  it  be  said  of  Nixon.  Never
did  our  country and  the  world  need  a  big  man  in  the  White
House  more.
The  platform  on  which  Kennedy  will  run  is outstanding  in
its  civil  rights  program,  which  includes  a  cheer  for  the  wave
of  sit-ins  by  which Negro  youth  and  its  allies  have  done  more
for  the  Negro  in  a  few  breath-taking  months  than  three  gen-
erations  of  normal  political  activity.   Otherwise  its  liberalism
is  of  the   ADA   and  George  Meany  variety,  i.e.  it   combines
social  welfare   measures  with   a  stepped   up   arms  race.    We
hope  the  Russians noticed  the  undercurrent of  belligerence  and
alarm  over  Mr.  K s  latest on  the  Monroe  Doctrine. The  Demo-
crats  will  be  tougher  to  deal  with  than  the  Republicans.    We
hope  the  Russians have  the  good  sense  not  to  engulf  our  elec-
tion  campaign   in  reckless  talk.   The   Congo   affair   on  top  of
everything  else  as  we  go  to  press  gives  the  world  the  atmos-
phere  of  a  bar-room on  the  verge  of  a  brawl.     /;//v  14,  9  a.m.
I.  F.
Pleast
Name
Street
City
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
______»«_
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1
we  send  gift   announcement?
""""•f/Ts/'eiJ
yr.)   additional:
y
a
es "n  ' No'n
IPS   Flying   Off   to  Cuba  For  Virst-Hand   Report
LF. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March   3,  1871).    Post-dated  Mondays   but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday   except:   the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in  the  U.  S.;  $6  in  Canada;   ?10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  ?15  to  Europe;  ?20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED