I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960sep05.pdf

============================================================

German  Generals Demand  Atom  Arms,  P.  4
Mansfield's  Wise   Program  for  Africa,  P.  2;  The  "Eastland"  Connecticut  Sent  the  U.  S.  Senate,  P.  3
L F.  Stone's   Weekly
VOL.    VIII,  NO.  31SEPTEMBER   5,   1960
101
     WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
After   Our   Failure   on   Cuba   at  San  Jose
The  maintenance of  a  true  hemispheric  solidarity  is  worth
a  great  deal  to  the  United  States  and  the  other  peoples  of  this
hemisphere.    But  it  will  not  be  achieved  if  we  continue to  let
our  vision  he  clouded  by  our  own  U.S.  propaganda apparatus,
if  we  take  such  paper  declarations as  were  achieved  by  carrot-
and-stick  tactics at  the  O.A.S.  meeting  as  marks  of  esteem  and
if  we  are  not  prepared  to  treat  our  Latin  American  neighbors
as  real  equals  and  to  see  the  world  through  their  eyes  as well
as  our  own.    Among   the  obstacles  is  the   U.S.   press  which
often  seemed  to  be  covering  the  San  Jose  conference  as  if  it
were  a  claque  for  Secretary  Herter.    Another  is  a  tendency  to
demagogy   much  like  that  which  we  deplore   in  Dr.   Castro;
Senator  Kennedy,  in  particular,  seems  so anxious to  make  anti-
Eisenhower  political  capital  of  the  Cuban  situation that  he  is
indulging   in   the   kind   of   over-simplified   anti-Red   rhetoric
which  may  tie  his  own  hands  against  more  sensible  policies
if  elected.
Solidarity,  Not  Monopoly
Hemispheric  solidarity  will  best  be  achieved  if  we  North
Americans  do  not  over-reach  ourselves.    It  is  too  much  to  ask
underdeveloped  Latin  American nations to  forego  what under-
developed   nations  elsewhere   enjoy—a   chance   to   deal  with
both  sides  in  the  East-West  competition.    We  will  fail  if  we
try  to prevent  the  Cubans  or  the  Venezuelans  or  the  Brazilians
from   doing  in  this  respect  what   the   Indians,  the   Egyptians
and  the  Africans  are  doing.   Hemispheric  solidarity  will  break-
down  if  made  a  mask  for  U.S.  monopoly,   especially  when  the
Latin  Americans  feel  that  it  is  only  the  emergence  of   Castro
and  the  beginnings  of  Soviet  economic  aid  which  have  stam-
peded   us  into  a  belated  and   inadequate  Latin  American  aid
program.   Our  aim  should  be  to  prevent  the  Soviet  bloc  from
obtaining  military  bases  or  military  allies   in  this  hemisphere,
and  in  this  aim  we  will  find  ourselves  helped   by  the  natural
good  sense  of  our  neighbors  if  we  deal  with  them  wisely.    It
was  not  wise  to  raise  the  Red  scare  against  Dr.  Castro  at  San
Jose,  especially  on  the  basis  of  the  flimsy  "evidence" Secretary
Herter  offered.    It  was  silly  to  ask  little  Cuba  to  "renounce"
the  threat  of  Soviet   military  aid  in  event  of  an  attack  by  its
colossal   neighbor,   especially   when   that   same   neighbor   was
making  implied  threats  about  "going  it  alone"  against   Cuba
if  the  O.A.S.  did  not  cooperate.   The  Cuban  Foreign  Minister
to'd   the'O.A.S.  "The    threat   coming  from  Communist   coun-
tries  outside  the  American continent  is,  to  say the  least  hypo-
thetical,  while  the  aggressions  and  threats  of  the  United   States
are  very  real."   (Le   Monde,   Aug.   27).    That   is  how  many
Latin  Americans  feel.
Our  strategy  at  San  Jose  has  failed.   It  was  hoped  by  the
State  Department   that  if  we  supported   action  against  our  old
friend   Trujillo,  the  Latin  American  States  would  join  us  in
If  Not  For That  Fellow  Castro
Senator  LAUSCHE:  This  book  shows  that  Cuba  had
the  highest   per  capita  gross  national   product  of   any
country  in  South  America   [sic]    while  Batista  was  in
power. ...  To  what  [then]  do  you  ascribe  the  success
of   the  Communists  in  Cuba?
Under   Secretary  of   State   DILLON:   Well,   I   think
the   reason   for   the   social   revolution   in   Cuba,   which
is   not  necessarily   the   same   thing   as   the  success  of
the  Communists,  was  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  this
gross  national  product  was  not  divided  in  what  many
Cubans  felt   was   a  fair  way.   The  great  majority  of
the   Cubans   who   lived   in   the   fields,   the   campesinos,
the  agricultural  people,  the  producers,  didn't  own  their
own  land  and  worked only  a  certain  number  of  months
a   year—it   is   the   nature  of   the  sugar  business—and
were   out   of   work   the   rest   of   the   time.   They   didn't
think  that  they  had  a  fair  share.
—Before   Sfnati
1
    Foi'dffii     Relations,  Any.  15,  on  the
President's   request  for   a   $500,00(),(il>l)   Latin  aid    fund.
Rep.    FASCELL   (I).,  Via.):  Was  it  after  the  expro-
priation   of   all   properties   of    America   in   Cuba   that
the   U.S.   finally   announced   this  program?
Under   Secretary   DILLON:   I   think   that   was   just
an   unfortunate   coincidence.
—lief  ore  House   f'oi-i'ii/n    Affairs     on  name,  Aug.    3-!.
''Although   there   is   no  immediate   need   for   the   ex-
penditure  of  funds  under  this  program,  the  authoriza-
tion   for   the   appropriation   of   such   funds   is   urgent.
There   has   been   acceleration   of   interest   on   the   part
of   Latin  American  governments  in  social  development
during   recent   months.    The   behavior   of   the   Castro
regime   in   Cuba   has   undoubtedly   contributed   to   this
interest."
——HOHSI'   Report     Mff.i,     Aug.     J.T,   recommending    ap-
proval   of   the   President's     $5')/>,OH'i,/>00   req'iest.
sanctions  against  our  new  challenger  Castro.   We   must  now
prepare  to  go  it  alone  against  Cuba,  know ing  that  every  overt
step  will  arouse Latin  America against  us,  or  we  must  change
our   course.    The   Cuban   Foreign   Minister   at   San  Jose  said
Cuba  was  ready to  resolve  its conflict  with  us  by  bilateral  nego-
tiations.    Mr.  Elsenhower,  who  continues  to  speak  of   Cuba
with  a  praiseworthy  restraint,  indicated   at  his  last  press  con-
ference  that  the  door  to  talks  was  still open.    Nothing  would
win  us  greater  esteem   in  Latin  America  at  this  time  than  to
take  the  Cuban  Foreign   Minister  at  his  word   and  formally
propose  negotiations.    It  would   help   to  wipe   out   the   ugly
memory   left   by   the   way   John   Foster   Dulles   strong-armed
Guatemala.    It  would   prove   Dr.   Castro   wrong   in   charging
that  we  plan  armed  aggression.   To  make  peace  with  the  man
who  is  Latin  America's  hero,  to  accept  social  reform  in  Cuba,
would   lay   the   foundations   for   a   new   friendship  with   our
neighbors.     The  longer  we  let  this  quarrel  go  on.  the  more
costly  will  be  its  resolution.
1   2
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  S,  1960
From  His  Historic  Senate  Speech  Aug.  29 Proposing  East-West  Cooperation  In  UN  For   Development
Mansfield  Asks  U. S. to  Insulate  Africa  From  the  Cold  War
By  Senator  Mike  Mansfield  (D.  Mont.)
"I  believe  the  emerging  African   peoples  have  had  enough
of   the   role  of  pawns  moved  on  the   chessboards  of   others.
They  will  not  meekly  assume  that  role  again  and   they  will
react  against  those who  seek  to  return  them  to  it.    It  may  be
too  much  to  expect  but  it  is  not  too  much  to  attempt  to  in-
sulate an  emergent  Africa  from  the  international, political  and
ideological  storms  which  now  sweep  the  rest  of  the  world.
Not  Pro-Communist  or Pro-Western But  Pro-African
"I  would  suggest  that  our  policies must  flow  from  the  fol-
lowing  principles:  First.  This  Nation  should  give  its  support,
diplomatically  and   otherwise,  to  the  end  that  independence
and  human  equality  will  eventually  be  achieved   throughout
Africa.  .  .  .  Second  .  .  .  This  Nation  should  use whatever in-
fluence  it  can  against  a  centrifugal  fragmentation  of   existing
political   units   in   Africa.    However   powerful   the   divisive
forces  of  an  ancient tribalism  may  still  be,  they  are  the  forces
of  a  dying  Africa.  .  .  .  We  should   resist  these   tendencies,
however,  if  they derive from a narrow  tribalism or  a  sweeping
racist  Pan-Africanism. . . . Third  . . . We must  learn,  quickly,
as much as we  can  about  the  emergent  African  leadership and,
if  we  are  to  learn  accurately,  we  will  eschew  such  inapplicable
frames  of  reference  as  pro-Communist or  pro-Western.     The
leadership  that  matters  for  the  future of  Africa  will  be neither
one nor  the other.    It  will  be pro-African  in  the finest sense of
the  term  in  that  it  will  be  dedicated   to  the  welfare   of  its
own  people.  . . .
"The  challenge of  Africa  is not  a call  to  greater  propaganda
battles  between  us  and  the  Soviet  Union.   The   challenge  of
Africa  is to  the  world.   It  is a challenge  to  help  open  in  peace
the  doors  of  modern  life  for  the  peoples  of  Africa,  for  their
benefit  and  for  the  still unfathomed  benefits  which may flow to
mankind  from  that  opening.
Specifics  of  A  U.  S. Policy
"First.    That  all  requests for  military  training  missions and
military  aid  from  the  African  nations  henceforth  be  referred
to  the  United  Nations  and  that  such  missions, as  approved  by
the  Security  Council,  be  supplied  solely  under  the  aegis  of  the
UN.  .  .  .  Second.  That  the  United  States  seek  agreement  with
the  Soviet  Union  to  the  end  that  both  nations  shall  refrain
We Just  Can't  Stop Giggling
As We Think  of That Next  War
DUGWAY,   UTAH,   Aug.   27—The   reason   that   the
hitherto    restricted     Dugway    Proving    Ground    was
opened  to  reporters  this  week  was  the  Army  hope  that
more   public  education   about   CBR   [chemical,   bacteri-
ological  and  radiological]  weapons   would  destroy  some
popular  illusions.
The  Army   made  one  point  well:  It  is  more  humane
to  incapacitate  people   with  present  chemical   weapons
than   atom    bombs   with   fire   bombs,    flame-throwers,
artillery  shells  or  all  standard  accepted  military  weap-
ons.   .  .  .  Given  a  choice  of  ways  to  die,   any  reason-
able  person   would  take  'GB,'  the  new  nerve  gas.  .  .  .
GB  death  is  quick.  .  .  .
The  Army  Chemical  Corps  also  is  experimenting  with
non-lethal  gases.    In  the  laboratory   they  paralyze  ani-
mals  or  muddle  their  brains  without lasting  harm.  Most
of   the  gases  are  painless;  some  are   actually    fiuii   for
the  giggling  volunteer  soldiers  trying   them   out.
—Washington   Star,  August   28:   "Army   Wants   to
Show  Gas  War  Is    Merciful."
from  seeking  military  bases  in  Africa  and  from  sending  mili-
tary  forces  to  any part of  Africa  except  as the  Security Council
may  direct.  .  .  . Third.  That  the  UN  effort  in  the  Congo,  and
similar  efforts  which  may  be  required  and  sought   elsewhere
in   Africa,   henceforth  be  financed  by  a  four-quartern   fund:
one  quarter  supplied  by  the  U.S.;   one-quarter  by  the  Soviet
Union  and  Eastern  Europe;  one-quarter  by  Western   Europe
and   one-quarter  by  other   members  of   the  United   Nations.
"Fourth.  That  the  four  quarters  fund  be  used,  further,  as
the  principal  instrument for  financing  a  substantial  program
of  technical  aid  to  Africa  .  .  .  with  technicians  and  teachers
supplied  on  a  similar  four-quarter division,  under  the  general
direction  of  the  UN   Secretary  General;  and  further,  as  this
effort   comes  into  operation,  that   bilateral   assistance:  to   all
nations  in  Africa  be progressively curtailed. ...
"The   difficulty  which  confronts  our  policy  is  not  only  that
we  may  do  too  little  but  that  we  may  be  impelled  to  do  too
much  and   in  ill-adapted  ways  and   hence,  contribute  to   the
creation  on  the  African  continent  of  still  another  front  in  the
cold  war.   We  shall  not  be  thanked  by  the  Africans  if  that  is
the  effect  of  our  contribution."
Senate  Duet  in  Praise  of  Trujillo,  Franco  and  Strong   Arm  Government
Mr.   EASTLAND    (Miss.):  Is   it   not   true   that   Trujillo
has  been  a  friend  of  the  United  States?
Mr.   ELLENDER  (La.):  I  do  not  believe  there  is  any
doubt   about  that. ...
Mr.  EASTLAND:  Did  the  Senator  from   Louisiana  find
that   the   people   there  were  happy   and  contented?
Mr.  ELLENDER:   I  saw  no  evidence  of  unrest.  .  .  .
Mr.   EASTLAND:   Is   it   not   true   that   the   Dominican
Republic  has  had  more  revolutions  than  any  other  country
in  the  history  of  the  world,  and that  Trujillo  has  given  the
country  stability—something  it  never  had  before?
Mr.  ELLENDER:   There  is  no  question  about  that.
Mr.   EASTLAND:  Is   it   not  also  true   that   it   takes  a
strong  arm  to  rule  in  countries' of  that  sort  and  in  Latin
America?
Mr.   ELLENDER:   .  .  .  Based   upon   my  observation  of
conditions    in   the   Dominican    Republic   as   compared   with
conditions   in  some  of  the  other  countries  I  visited  in  that
area,  it  might  be  said  that  a  little  of  that  same  kind  of
leadership  should  be  applied  in  some  additional  areas.  .  .  .
Mr.  EASTLAND: After  Franco  came  into power  in  Spain,
we  applied  economic  sanctions  against  his  government,  .  . .
When  the  realities  of  the  cold   war  forced  us  to  a  recog-
nition   of   the  necessity  that  we  establish  bases  in  Spain,
we   found   that   we  had  to  spend  hundreds  of   millions  of
dollars  to  assist  in  the  improvement  of  the  Spanish   econ-
omy   in  order   to  make   Spain  the   strong   and  dependable
ally   which   she   is   today.     If   we   help   to   tear   down   the
present   regime  in   the   Dominican   Republic,   the   day   will
come   when   we  shall   have   to  spend  hundreds  of   millions
in  an  effort,  possibly  a  vain  effort,  to  restore  the  economy.
—V.  S.  Senate,  August  24.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September   5,  I960
We  Rise  to  Applaud
The  Democrats  of  Tennessee  for  renominating  Ke-
fauver,   a  setback   to  segregationists,  ensuring   return
to  Washington   of  one  of   the  ablest  and  bravest  men
in  the  Senate;  the  bi-partisan   Senate  coalition  which
ratified   the   Antarctic   treaty   66-21,   a   precedent   for
further   advances   toward   peace,  since  it   removes  one
continent    from   the   great   Power  struggle   and  opens
all  its   installations,   Soviet   and  American,  to  full   in-
spection;  President   Elsenhower,   for   deciding   against
the  wishes  of  Pentagon  and  AEC  to  continue  with  the
nuclear  test  ban  talks  rather  than  risk  breaking  them
up  by  underground  nuclear  explosions;  the  President,
again,    for   naming    James   J.   Wadsworth,   a   sincere
champion    of   disarmament,    to   succeed   Henry   Cabot
Lodge  as  our  representative  to  the  UN.
Dodd's  Attack  on  Dr.  Pauling  Calls  For  A  Fight  Back  From  the  Grass  Roots
Time  to  Make  Connecticut  Aware  It  Sent  An  Eastland  to  the  Senate
As  we  go  to  press,  A.  L. Wirin  is  about  to  argue  a  motion
before  the  Court  of  Appeals  in  the  District  of  Columbia  ask-
ing  it  to  enjoin  Senators  Eastland  and  Dodd  from  enforcing
an  order  requiring Dr.  Linus Pauling  to  give  the  Senate  Inter-
nal  Security  Committee  the  names  of  all  persons  who  helped
to  circulate  his  famous  petition  to  the  United  Nations  for  a
cessation  of  nuclear  testing.    The  two  Senators  are  named  as
chairman   and   vice-chairman  respectively   of   the  committee.
The  motion  has  already  lost  in  the  District  Court,  and  its
chances  are  slim  in  the  Circuit Court.    An  unusually  firm line
of  precedents  is  against  interference  by  Court  injunction  with
Congressional   investigation.    Mr.  Wirin   relies  upon  the  dis-
tinction  that  he  is  asking  the  Court  to  enjoin  a  specific  order
not  a  general  line  of  questioning.     The  probable   answer  of
the  Circuit  Court  will  be  that  nevertheless  it  cannot  act  until
Dr.  Pauling  refuses  to  obey the order  and  is cited  for  contempt.
Appeal  to  Supreme   Court  Likely
Dr.  Pauling  has  been  ordered  to  appear  before  the  Commit-
tee  September   15.    His  counsel   will  probably   try  to  get  an
order  staying  the  hearing  pending  an  appeal  to  the  Supreme
Court.    The  prospects  for  this  are  also  poor.
We  do  not  have  the  space  to  enter  into  a  legal  discussion
of  why  this  is  so.    The  power  of  investigation,  though   sav-
agely  abused  for  witch  hunting  purposes  in  our  generation,   is
one  of  the  essential  powers  of  any  legislature.    Its  use  to  ex-
pose  basic  social  and  economic   evils  made  possible  much  of
the  reform  brought  about  during  Roosevelt's  New  Deal  and
Wilson's   earlier  New   Freedom.
The   Courts  may  ultimately  hold   that  the  Senate  Internal
Security  Committee  went  beyond   the   proper   bounds   of   in-
vestigation  in  asking  Dr.  Pauling  for  the  names  of  those  who
helped  circulate  his  famous  petition   but  the  Courts  are  un-
likely  to  enjoin  the  committee  in  advance  from  asking  for  the
names.     One   of   the  strongest   and   most  famous  precedents
against  such  judicial  action  lies  in   the   unsuccessful  suit  by
William  Randolph  Hearst   to  prevent  Senator  (now  Supreme
Court  Justice)  Black  from  exposing  the  fake  telegrams  with
which  Congress  was  flooded  in  the  fight  against  the  Public
Utility  Holding  Company  Act  during  the   30's.
Fortunately  not  all  the  remedies  for  the  abuses  of  govern-
mental  power   lie   in  the   courts.     In   this  case  remedies  are
available  in  the  political   field.   The  investigation   launched  by
the  Internal  Security  subcommittee  into  the  public   campaign
against  nuclear  testing  is  the  pet  project  of  Thomas  J.  Dodd,
a  Democrat  to  the  right  of  Eisenhower,  as  he  again  demon-
strated  a  few  days  ago  when  he  joined  the  most  benighted  of
the  Southerners  to  vote  against  the  Antarctic  treaty.
We  wish  we  knew  just  how  the  liberal  Democrats   of  Con-
necticut  came  to  choose  as  successor  to  Chester  Bowles  a  man
like  Dodd  whose  outlook  was  molded  by  his  long  service  in
the  FBI.    Senator  Dodd  in  his  opposition  to  the  cessation  of
nuclear  testing  approaches  the  issue  like  a  typical  FBI  man.
He  tends by occupational training to  see things  under  the  bed,
to  view  science  as  well  as  politics  in  terms  of  conspiracy, as  a
cops-and-robbers melodrama.
The  result  is  a  recrudescence  of  McCarthyism,  the  appear-
ance  in  the  Internal  Security pillory  of  a  distinguished  scien-
tist,   a   series   of   private   hearings  preparatory   to   a   public
attack   on   the   National    Committee   for   A   Sane   Nuclear
Poliq'—all  under   the  aegis  of   Senator  Dodd.   Though   the
public  policy  of  the  United  States  as  set  by  President  Eisen-
hower   is  to  strive  for   international  agreement   permanently
ending  all  nuclear  tests,   those  who  support   this  policy  are
to  be  smeared  as  Red,  pink  or  duped.   We  think  it  time  for
a   series   of   public   meetings   in   Connecticut   to   fight   back
against  these  tactics  and   let  its  people  know  what  kind  of
man  they  sent  the  U.S.  Senate.
Des  Moines  Tribune  Appalled  by  Witch  Hunter  Ike  Has  Just  Kicked   Upstairs
On  Sept.  1  Richard  Arens,  formerly  staff  director  of  the
Un-American  Activities  Committee,  was  "kicked  upstairs"
by   appointment  of  President   Eisenhower   to   a   $19,000   a
year   job  as   Commissioner  of  the   Court   of   Claims.    This
editorial   from   the   Des  Moines  Register,  reprinted   here
in  abridged  form  from  the  Washington   Post  of  August  27
may  serve  as  his  valedictory  and  as  a  reminder  that  pow-
erful  newspapers  in  this  country  want  the  committee,  not
just  its   staff  director  eliminated.—IPS
"Richard   Arens,   staff   director  of   the  House  Committee
on  Un-American  Activities,  gave  an  astounding  speech  in
Des  Moines  before  the  National  Conference  of  Police  Asso-
ciations.     It   reinforced   our   belief   that   this   committee,
which  is  now  headed  by  Rep.  Francis  E.  Walters  (D.   Pa.)
should   be  abolished.
"Arens  said  that  President  Eisenhower's  patriotism  was
somewhat  questionable  because  Mr.  Eisenhower  introduced
1  2
his   grandchildren    to  Nikita  Khrushchov.    He  said  it   was
'morally  wrong'  to  invite  Khrushchov  to  the  United  States
last  Fall.   He  was  angry  because,  he  said,  there  were  109
employes  now  in  the  State  Department   who  had  been  fired
previously  as  security  risks.
"He  was  critical   of  the  Supreme   Court   for  its  opinions
in  several  security  and  passport  cases.    He  said  the  Amer-
ican  Association   of   University  Professors   was   not   to  be
trusted.    He  also  said  editors  of  some  newspapers  which
have  been  critical  of  his  committee  were  not  to  be  trusted.
Arens'  suspicious,  fears  and  undocumented  charges  would
not   be   worthy   of   mention   if   they   represented   only   his
personal  viewpoint.    But  unfortunately  this  is  not  the  case.
This   is   the   approach   which   the   Un-American   Activities
Committee   has  taken  generally.   The  Committee  seems  to
think   that  anyone  who  criticizes  its   methods  of  operation
is  a  Communist   or  a  Communist   'dupe.'"
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  September  5.  1960
U.  S.  Press  Silent  But  Western  Europe  Alarmed  by  Memo  Demanding  Nuclear   Arms
The  German  Generals  Reappear  Openly  in  West  German  Polities
Little   attention   has   been   paid   by  the   American   press   to
the  memorandum  published   by   the  West   German    generals
Aug.   19  demanding nuclear  arms  for  the  Bundeswehr.   This
(as  can  be  seen  from  the  adjoining  box)   created  alarm   in
Western  Europe   and  in  Germany   itself.    It  was   disturbing
for  three  reasons,  first,  in  that  it: openly  demanded  arms  which
German}-  was  supposed  to  have   foresworn  in   1955   on   the
eve  of   its  admission  to  NATO;  secondly,  because  it  marked
the   first   open   intrusion   of   the   Bundeswehr    generals    into
politics,  breaching  its  facade  of  civilian  control,  and,  thirdly,
because  this  may  foreshadow  a  change   in  NATO   strategy.
Aggressive  Arms  For  An  Aggressive    Diplomacy
Originally.  NATO's  forces  were  supposed  to  be  a  defen-
sive  "tripwire,"  bringing  into  play   against   any  invader   the
full   force  of  American  power.     But  if  the  Germans   within
NATO   arc   to   have  atomic  arms,  particularly  the   Polaris
missile,   they   will   be   in   a   position  again  to   engage   in   an
aggressive   diplomacy.
In  this  connection,  too  little  attention  has  also  been   paid
to   the   pending   recommendation   of   General   Norstad,    the
NATO  commander,  that  the  Western   allies   lift   the   restric-
tions  which   limit  German  naval  vessels  to   3,000   tons.    The
German   press  is  already  discussing  proposals  to  build  6,000
ton  destroyers  which  would  be  big  enough   to  carry  nuclear
missiles.     It   is   said   'reassuringly   that   the   warheads  would
remain   in   American  custody,   but   the   Si/dde/itsche      Ze/frtng
(Aug.    2*i~)   .tsked   ironically  whether  "on   every  German   de-
stroyer  there  would  be  an   American  passenger  with  the  key
to  an   atomic  warhead  chamber  in  his   pocket."
German   political  aims   keep  pace  with   these  military  de-
velopments.     On   July   9  at  Dusseldorf,  Dr.   Adenauer  told
an   audience   of   voung   people  that   ''if   the   German    people
stood   fast   with   the  West   then   the   day  would   come   when
East   Prussia   would   again   be  free."    And   on   Aug.   28,   his
Vice  Chancellor.  Krhard,  told  a  refugee  rally  in  Cologne  that
Upper   Silesia,   now   held   by  Poland,   "is   German   and   will
remain   so."    (B<ill/i>/ore   Stni.   Aug.   29.)    In   Poland   and   in
Russia  these  words  will  be  read  as  warning  signals.
Voices  of  Alarm  in  West  Europe
"The   publication of   a  pamphlet  by  the   BundeHwehr
leaders  demanding  that  their  forces  should  be  equipped
with   nuclear   weapons ...  is  a  serious   matter   .  .  .
the  German  generals  appear   to  be  telling   the  political
leadership  what  must  be  done.    It  is  only   four   years
since   the  Soldatengesetz,   the  legal  basis  for  the  new
Bundeswehr,   was   approved.     One  of   its   main    aims
was  to  prevent  the  army  from  ever  again  becoming   a
state   within   the  state."
—The   Times   (London)    Aug.   22
"Denouncing  the  memorandum  as  'the  generals'  first
massive  intrusion  into  politics,'  the  Social   Democratic
military   expert,   Herr   Merten,  has   asked   whether   the
Bundeswehr  is  now  reaching  for  the  nuclear   warheads
that   are   at   present   in   American   keeping."
—The  Economist  (London)   Aug.  27
"In  no  country   is  it   desirable   for  the  military   au-
thorities  to  use  their   official   position  to  canvass   con-
troversial   views   to   the   general   public.   This   is   par-
ticularly    the   case    in   Germany,   where   the   political
power   of   the   armed   forces   was   so   recently   and   so
frightfully   misused  to  serve   the   ends   of   the  Nazis."
—The  '\ews   Chronicle   (London)    Aug.   26
"In  the  name  of   the  Bundeswehr  and  with  the  sup-
port   if   not  of   the   Federal   government,  at  least  with
that   of   Minister   of   Defense   Strauss,   the   authors   of
the  memorandum   for  the  first  time  clearly   formulate
a   demand   that   violates   the   agreements    reached    in
1955   between   the   Federal    Republic   and   its    future
NATO  allies.   According  to  these ...  the  BundeHwehr
was  not  to  have  any   ABC  (atomic,  bacteriological   or
chemical)   arms."
—Le   Monde   (Paris)   Aug.  21-2.2
"If  this  is  called  democracy  in  Bonn,  then  one  must
worry   about  the   future   of   the   Bundesrepublik.  .   .  .
The  Bundesrepublik entered  NATO  on  the  understand-
ing   that  her  armed  forces   would  remain  limited  and
would  not  try  to  take  over  the  political  leadership  of
NATO.    If  this  is  to  be  changed,   much  else  must   be
called  in  question.  .  .  .  From   the   day   on  which   the
German  army  autocratically  disposes  of  nuclear  arms,
the   third  world  war   will   no  longer   be   avoidable
1
."
—Alytmccn    Handelsblad    (Amsterdam)     quoted    in
tin:  Suddeutsche   Zeitung   (Munich)    Aug.   25
Many   Thanks   for   the  Kind   Notes  Coming   In   With   Renewals   and    /VVir   Subs
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.   W.
Washington   15,  0.   C.
I.  F.
I'loase
City
Enter
(To)
Street
Citv
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.  N.  W.
Washington   15.  D.  C.
renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
. .............................. ..Zone..... .......State.. ..................
n -o/fio
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
........................................Zone..:.........State...................;
we  send  gift   announcement?           Yes  D    No  D
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,    D.  C..  under   the  Act   of  March  3.   1ST1I.    Post-dated   Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every   Thursday   except   the  last   two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5018  Nebraska  Ave..   >".  W..  Washington  Io,  D.  C.
An    independent    weekly    published   and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone:  Circulation   Manager.   Esther   M,  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the   U.  S.:  $0  In'Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to   Israel.  Asia  and   Africa
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED