I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960nov21.pdf

============================================================

From  the Black and  Douglas Dissents  in  Uphaus,  P.  2
Are  Herbert  Hoover  and  Joseph  P.  Kennedy  to  Be  Elder  Statesmen  Now?  P.  4.    Dulles  and  J.  Edgar,  P.  3
/. K Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  42
NOVEMBER  21,  1960
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Bitter  Harvest  in  Central  America
A   revolutionary  wave  is  sweeping  over  Central  America,
but  the  State Department's  reactions  show  that  it  has  learned
nothing  useful  from  the  Cuban  experience.    On  Oct.  26  the
Lemus  regime,  which  had  grown  increasingly  harsh  and  au-
thoritarian,  was  overthrown  in  El  Salvador.    On   November
11  an  uprising  began   in  Nicaragua   and   two   days  later   in
Guatemala.    It  would  not  be  at  all  surprising  if  trouble  were
to  erupt  next  in  Honduras.    These  four  tiny  republics—lands
which  live  on  coffee  and  bananas—are  alike  in  being  sinks  of
human  misery  in  which  the  old  Latin  American  triumvirate
of   landowner,  General  and  priest  has  long  held   back  basic
reform.    In  two  of  them,  Guatemala  and  Honduras,  they  have
had  the  aid  of  the  two  big  American fruit  companies,  United
Fruit  and  Standard Fruit. These  revolts  are their bitter  harvest.
Nobody  Cared  So  Long  as  There  Was  Quiet
So  long  as  the  Army was  strong  enough  in  these  countries
to  hold   down   discontent,   the   State  Department   paid  little
attention  to  them.    No   reporters  were  called   in  for   private
briefings  to  spread  alarm  about  the  violation  of  basic human
rights.    It  is  only  when   popular   revolt   breaks  out  that   the
U.S.  takes  a  hand,  and  then  only  to  spread  alarm  about  the
dangers  of  Communism  and  now  of  that  new  bugaboo  Cas-
troism.    Of  the  four,  the  most  miserable  is  El  Salvador.    No-
where  in  Latin  America  is  the  gulf   deeper  between  the  few
rich  at  the  top  and  the  many  poor  at  the  bottom.    Our  gov-
ernment,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  adjoining  box,  viewed  the
situation  with  a  self-deceiving  equanimity.    But  now  that  the
Lemus  regime  has  been  overthrown,  the  prisons  opened   and
reform  promised,  the  U.S.  has  decided  not  to  recognize  the
new  regime  "until"  as  the  New  York  Times  reported  Nov.  5
"it   is  satisfied   with   the   political   coloration   of   the   civilian
members  of  the  junta"  which  took  over  "and   of  their  inde-
pendence  from  Leftist  groups."    The  government  fears  that
it  will  fall   unless  recognized   and  its  members  are   reported
(New   York   Times  Nov.   11)   as  "particularly   resentful   that
their  political  leanings  are  being  questioned   while  they  have
not  had  a  chance  to  expound   their  views."    They  deny  that
they  are  either  Communists  or  Castro  followers  but  the  denial
will  do  them  little  good  in  dealing  with  diplomats   determined
to  see  Red.
Instead  of  scare  headlines  about  Castro's   hand   in  Central
America,  the  Department  and  the  press  ought  to  be  educating
the  American  people  on  the  facts  of  life  in  Central  America.
Only  Costa  Rica  with  a  relatively  wider  distribution  of  land
and  a  high  level  of  literacy  has  had  stable  democratic  govern-
ment.    The  other  four  have  economies  in  which  the  bulk  of
the  land  is  in  the  hands  of  a  few  great  landowning   families
or   U.S.   corporations,    dependent   on  a  pool  of   uneducated,
landless  rural  proletarians   for  their  harvest  help.    The  aver-
1   6
The  Realities  Break  Through
"El   Salvador   has   enjoyed  more   than   a   decade  of
political,  social  and  economic  stability.  .  .  .  The  Con-
stitution  adopted  in  1950  guarantees full  political,  eco-
nomic  and  religious  freedom.    It  provides  for  the  en-
couragement  and  protection  of  private  enterprise. .  .  .
The   present  administration   of   President  Jose   Maria
Lemus  .  .  .  has  enacted  special  legislation designed  to
encourage  the  investment  of  private capital,  both  do-
mestic  and  foreign  in  the  country."
—Investment  in  El  Salvador,  World   Trade   Informa-
tion  Service,   U.S.  Dept.  of   Commerce,  July   1960.
"The   little  coffee  growing country  had  been  seething
for   months   with   demands   for   social   and  economic
change.    The  great  majority  of  the  2'/
2
  million people
are  impoverished  peasants  dominated  by  a  small num-
ber  of  wealthy,  plantation  owning  families.  .  .  .  One
of  the  first  acts  of  the  new  regime  was  to  begin  free-
ing   political   prisoners,   many   emerging  from   behind
bars  looked  emaciated  and  showed  signs  of  mistreat-
ment."
—AP  dispatch  from  San  Salvador  on  the  overthrow
of   the  Lemus  regime,  Washington  Star,  Oct.  27.
age  annual  income  per  capita  is  about  $200  a  year,  a  very
deceptive  figure  since  it  includes  many big  incomes  at  the  top;
in  El  Salvador  a  third  of  the  people  have  an  annual  income
of  less  than  $200  per   family.
None  of  us  North  Americans  have  any  conception   of  the
hateful  memories these  revolts  awaken  among  our  Latin  neigh-
bors.  The  Somoza  dictatorship  in  Nicaragua,  one  of  the  oldest
in  the  hemisphere,  was  established  in  the  thirties  by Anastasio
Somoza,  one  of  the  leading  figures  in  the  National  Guard  our
U.S.  Marines  organized  in  their  long  fight  to  put  down  the
national  hero,  Sandino,  who  rebelled  against  U.S.  control  of
Nicaragua.    The  Somozas  thus  began  as  U.S.   stooges  against
their  own  people,  and  have  ruled   over  them  since  with  our
support.     The   Guatemala   memories   are  more   recent.     We
helped  overthrow  the  Arbenz  government   in  1954   and  then
looked   on  complacently   as  its  successors   undid   the   Arbenz
reforms,  reforms  we claim  to  favor.    Arbenz  enacted  a moder-
ate  income  tax  in  1954;  it  was  soon  afterward  abolished  by
Castillo   Armas;   "the   agrarian  reform  was  halted   and  most
of   the  land   expropriated   under   the  Arbenz  regime  was  re-
turned  to  the  landowners"  (Robert  J.  Alexander:   Communism
in  Latin  America).     Is  it  any  wonder  that   Castor   is  a  hero
in  Latin  America,  and  that  we  appear  to  be  the  main  obstacle
to   aspirations   for   a  more   decent   life   below   the   border?
Yankee  imperialism,  to  our  shame,  is  not  just  a  propaganda
slogan   in  Central   America.     It   is  a  reality.     To    recognize
this,  and  to stop blinding  ourselves  with  nonsense  about  Cuban
plots,  is the  first  essential  to wiser  policies  and  better  relations.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   November   21,  I960
Supreme  Court  Majority Little  Disposed  to  Give  Radicals  Full  Measure  of  Justice
Supreme  Court  Refuses  Even  to  Hear  New  Plea  by  Willard   Uphaus
A   system   which  grants  full   freedom  only  to  those  who
cannot  be  suspected  of  disagreeing  with  its  principles  is  not
a  really  free  society,  and  in  two  cases  the   Supreme   Court
last  Monday  showed that  a  majority  of  its  present  members
are  little  more  disposed  than  the  average  American  to  ex-
tend  the  full   benefit  of  legal  guaranties  to  radicals.
In  both  the   Willard  Uphaus  and  Arthur   McPhaul  cases
the  majority  failed  to  give  appellants   the  benefit   of  strict
construction.      It   upheld   the   contempt   conviction   of   Mr.
McPhaul  for   refusing   to  produce  the   records   of  the   Civil
Rights  Congress  in  Detroit   for  the  Un-American   Activities
Committee,   though   as   Douglas   dissenting   (with   Warren,
Black   and   Brennan)   objected   the   government   was   never
compelled  to  prove  that  he had  the  records  in  his  possession.
In  the  Uphaus   case  the  majority   refused  even  to  hear  an
appeal  in  which  that  imprisoned  preacher  of  peace  claimed
that  his  one-year  sentence  for  contempt  of  New  Hampshire's
Attorney   General  was  unlawful  since   it   was  imposed   (as
civil  contempt)  to  make  him  produce  information   the  Attor-
ney  General  was  no  longer  empowered  to  require,  the  State
law  having
1
  been  changed   since  his  original   conviction.
Dr.  Uphaus  has  been  in  jail  since  last  December  14  and
may  be  thrown  into  jail  again  if  he  still  refuses  to  supply
the  names  of  guests  at  his  World  Fellowship  summer  camp.
It  is  a  disgrace  to  our  country  and  our  time  that  this  min-
ister  (who  denied  that  he  himself  was  a  Communist)  should
have  served  out  his  sentence  with  so  little  outcry  or  protest.
The  case  demonstrates  that  McCarthyism  is  far  from  dead,
and  that  few  people  in  our  society   really  care  about  basic
freedoms  of  expression   and   association.
In  a  third  radical   case,  that  of  Peter  Chaunt,  the   Court
did  unanimously agree  with  Mr.  Justice  Douglas  in  stopping
a   deportation    action   against   an   ex-Communist   but   the
grounds  were  too  shamefully  flimsy—the  distribution  of  leaf-
The  Negro  and Gerrymandering
The  growing  political   power  of   the  Negro  and  its
impact  on  the  Supreme Court  are  evident in  the  unani-
mous  ruling  by  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  in  the  Tuske-
gee  case.   Fourteen  years  ago  in  Colegrove  v.  Green,
Mr.   Justice   Frankfurter   ruled   (with   Black,  Douglas
and  Murphy  dissenting)  that  unfair  districting  within
a   State   [Illinois]   for   voting   purposes   could  not   be
remedied  in  the  Courts.    Ten  years  ago,   in  South  v.
Peters  (with  Black  and  Douglas  dissenting)  the  Court
refused  to  rule  unfair  the  Georgia County  Unit system,
though   the  dissenters  pointed  out   that  this  "heavily
disenfranchises"  the   urban   Negro.     Now   Mr.  Justice
Frankfurter   finds   the  Courts  can  interfere   when   the
effect   is  to  "despoil  colored  citizens  and  only  colored
citizens"  of  their  voting  rights.    The  Alabama  statute
redrew  the  boundaries of  Tuskegee  to  exclude  from  the
city  all  but  four  or  five  of  its  400  Negro  voters.    But
if   it  is  a  violation  of  the  15th  amendment  to  deprive
Negroes    of   their   voting   rights   by  gerrymandering,
why   isn't   it   a   violation   of   the   14th   amendment   to
discriminate  against  any  voters  by  similar  procedure?
The  Tuskegee ruling  brings  closer  the  day  when unfair
districting   may  be  fought  in   the   courts.    That   will
be  a  day  of  liberation  from   rural  domination  in  Con-
gress   and   in   many   State   legislatures,  especially   in
the  South.
lets   20  years   ago.     However  the   case   was   remanded   and
the   way  left   open  to   deport   him  on  other  grounds.     The
ruling   is  far   from   a  final  defeat   of  our   vindictive   Immi-
gration   Service.
From  the  Eloquent  Dissents  of  Black  and  Douglas  in  the  Willard  Uphaus Case
"I  think   the  summary  dismissal  of-this   appeal  without
even  so  much  as  the  benefit   of  oral  argument,  when  the
abridgement  of  the  rights  of  free  speech  and  assembly   is
so  obvious,  is  a  sad  indication  of  just  how  far  this  Court
has  already  departed  from   the  protections  of   the  Bill  of
, Rights  and   an  .omen  of   things   yet   to  come.    Such  retro-
gression,  of  course,  follows  naturally  from  the  Court's  re-
cent  trend  toward  substituting   for  the   plain  language   of
the  commands  of  the  Bill  of  Rights  elastic  concepts  which
permit  the  Court  to  uphold  direct  abridgements  of  liberty
unless  the  Court  views  those  abridgements  as   'arbitrary,'
'unreasonable,'  'offensive  to  decency'  or  'unjustified  on  bal-
ance,'   for   these   concepts   reduce  the   absolute   commands
of  the  Constitution  to  mere  admonitions.  .  .  .
"My  guess  is  that  history  will  look  with  no  more  favor
upon   the   imprisonment  of   Willard  Uphaus   than   it   has
upon  that  of  Udall,  Bunyan or  the  many  others  like  them.
For  this  is  another  of  that  ever-lengthening  line  of  cases
where   people   have   been   sent   to   prison   and   kept   there
for  long   periods  of  their  lives  because  their  beliefs  were
inconsistent  with the  prevailing views  of  the  moment.   I be-
lieve  the  First  and  Fourteenth  Amendments  were  intended
to  prevent  any  such  imprisonments  in  this  country.  .  .  .
"It  may  be  true,  as  the  Attorney  General  of  New  Hamp-
shire  suspects,   that   Dr.  Uphaus   has  at   some   time   been
in   the   company  of   Communists,  or  that   the   people   who
have  been  in  his  camp  have  been  in  the  company  of  Com-
munists.    But  even  if  it  is  true  and  those  associates  are
as  bad  as  they  are  suspected   to  be,  it  is  my  belief   that
our  Constitution  with  its   Bill  of  Rights  absolutely   forbids
the  imposition  of  pains  and  penalties  upon  him  for   peace-
ably  assembling  with them.   That  great  charter  was  drafted
by   men  who  were  well   aware  of   the  constant  danger   to
individual   liberty   in   a   country   where  public  officials   are
permitted   to  harass   and  punish  people  on  nothing  more
than  charges  that  they  associate   with  others  labelled  by
the  government  as  publicans  and   sinners."
—Mr.  Justice   Black   dissenting   (with   the   Chief    Justice
and  Mr.  Justice  Douglas  concurring)  in  Uphaus  v.   Wyman.
"When  Alabama  asked  the  National  Association  for  the
Advancement  of  Colored  People  to  disclose  its  membership
list,   we  held  that  disclosure  was  not  required  because   if
compelled  it  might  well  abridge  the  rights  of  ...      lawful
association.     What   we   said   there   was   not   designed,   as
I  understood  it,  as  a  rule  for  Negroes   only.  .  .  .
"In  Bates  v.  Little  Rock ...  We  said:  'public   identifi-
cation ...  as  members  .  .  .  had been  followed by  harass-
ment  and  threats  of  bodily harm.   There  was  also  evidence,
that   economic  reprisals   would  follow   public   disclosure.'
.  .  .  Can  there  be  any  doubt  that  harassment  of  members
of   World  Fellowship   [Dr.   Uphaus's  organization]  in   the
climate  prevailing  among  New   Hampshire's   law   enforce-
ment   officials   will   not  likewise   be  severe?   .   .   .   World
Fellowship ...  is  as  law-abiding  as  NAACP.    The mem-
bers  of   one  are  entitled  to  the  same   freedom  of  speech,
of   press,   of  assembly  and  of  association   as  the   members
of   the   other.    These  rights  extend   even   to  Communists,
as  a  unanimous  Court  held  in  De  Jonge  v.  Oregon.    What
is   an  unconstitutional  invasion   of   freedom   of  association
in  Alabama or  Arkansas  should  be  unconstitutional  in  New
Hampshire."
—Mr.  Justice  Douglas  dissenting  (with  the  Chief   Justice
and  Mr.  Justice   Black  concurring)   in   Uphaus   v.   Wyman.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  November  21, 1960
Kennedy's  Swift  Announcement  Helping  to  Build  Up  A  Dangerous   Precedent
Why  Should  the  Heads  of  FBI  and  CIA  Automatically   Be Reappointed?
Hopeless  as  it  may  seem  to  be,  we  want  to  question  the
precedent  being  built  up  by  President-elect  Kennedy's   im-
mediate  announcement that he was retaining  J.  Edgar  Hoover
as  the  head  of  the  FBI  and  Allen  W.  Dulles  as  the  head
of  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency.    The  Baltimore  Sun,  in
welcoming   the   announcement,  said   (Nov.  11)   "because   of
security  necessities  neither  man, particularly  Mr.  Dulles,  has
operated  in  the   full   public  eye.    But  those  legislators   who
are  informed  on  the  country's  security  and  intelligence  and
police  activities   have  indicated  satisfaction  with  what  they
found."   Who?   Where?   When?
The  truth  is  that  members  of  Congress  know  little  about
the  operations  of  the  FBI  and  even  less  about  those  of  the
CIA.   The   cloak-and-dagger   operations   of  the   latter   have
long  been  a  source  of  concern  to  thoughtful  legislators  like
Senator   Mansfield   who  has   campaigned  unsuccessfully   for
a  Joint   Congressional  Committee  on  Intelligence  to   super-
vise  such activities  as  the  Joint  Committee on Atomic  Energy
supervises   the   AEG.    An   agency   like  CIA   empowered   to
take  a  hand  in  foreign  political  activities   and  to  overturn
governments  we  do  not  like  by  criminal  methods  can  create
situations  which may  draw  us  into  war.    Its  activities  should
be  supervised.   Its  heads  should  not  be  regarded   as  sacro-
sanct.   They  should  not  have  life-time  tenure.
At  Least  A  Quadrennial  Overhaul
At  the  very  least  it  would  be  wise  to  establish  the  custom
of   having  all  our  intelligence  agencies   (there   are   others)
subjected   to  a  quadrennial   review  on  the   accession   or   re-
election  of  a  President.    He  should  have  the   advice  of  an
outstanding  citizens  committee  before  deciding  whether   to
retain   or  change  the  men  heading  these   agencies.     Secret
service   chiefs  may  easily   become  a  state   within   a  state,
especially  when built  up  as  national  heroes  by  skillful  public
relations.   Their  secret  funds  and their  knowledge  of  private
misdeeds  may  give  them   or  their   successors   an  unhealthy
power  over  the  government.
Mr.  Kennedy  acted  without  accurate  knowledge even  of  the
elementary  facts  about  these  two  office-holders.    Mr.  Ken-
nedy  gave  the  impression  that  Mr.  Dulles  had  been  in  the
government  since  Wilson's  day.    It  is  true  that  Mr.  Dulles
entered    the   diplomatic   service    in    1916    but   he   left    it
ten  years  later  in  1926 to  join his  brother  John  Foster  Dulles
in  the   law  firm  of  Sullivan   &  Cromwell,  where  he   stayed
until  his  service  in  the  OSS during  World  War  II,  and  came
back  to  Washington  as  deputy  head  of  CIA  in  1951.    He  was
also  wrong  in  saying  that  Mr.  J.   Edgar   Hoover's   tenure
in  the  Federal  service  began  under  President   Hoover.   Actu-
ally  the  FBI  chief  entered  the  Justice  Department  in    1917.
Ours  is  the   only  country   outside   the   Soviet   bloc  under
Stalin  where  spy  chiefs  have  been  glorified  in  the  press  and
turned  into  glamorous  and  feared  public   figures.   Elsewhere
intelligence   chiefs  are   neither   seen   nor  heard.    Here   the
heads  of  both  the  FBI  and  the  CIA  are  constantly   making
pronouncements  on  foreign,   and  in   Mr.  Hoover's   case,  on
domestic  policy.
The  tradition  of  the  Secret   Service  is  to  stay  strictly  out
of  politics;  its  head  therefore   deserves  to  be  put  on  a  con-
tinuous   civil   service   basis.     But   Mr.   Hoover   has   had   a
finger  in  politics  for  a  long  time.   The  close  liaison  between
the  FBI  on the  one hand  and the  House  Un-American  Activi-
Backward  Ho
"President-elect    Kennedy  has   loaded   up   the   first
wagon  for  the  New Frontier.   And,  behold,  the   freshest
faces   on   the   buckboard   belong   to   those   promising
young  pioneers,   J.   Edgar   Hoover  and  Allen  Dulles."
—Murray  Kempton  in  the  New  York  Post,  Nov.  11.
Dr.  Wilson's  Poisonous  Surmise
AEC  Commissioner Robert  E.  Wilson  has  been  going
around  the  country  making  speeches  in  which  he  hints
that  the  Russians  have  been  testing  nuclear   weapons
secretly.    The  latest  occasion   was  before  the   Ameri-
can  Philosophical  Society  in  Philadelphia  Nov.  10.  We
thought  our   readers   would  be  interested   in  knowing
just   when   this   campaign  by   Dr.   Wilson   began   and
of   the  very  effective   answer  made  to  it   at   the  very
start  by—of  all  people—Chairman  McCone  of  the  AEC.
It   was  at   a  hearing   of  the   House   Appropriations
Committee  last  April  19  on  the  AEC  budget  for   1961
that  Dr.  Wilson  first  launched  the  tenuous  surmise  on
which  he  chiefly   relies   in  his  speeches.     "The   impor-
tant  thing,"  Dr.  Wilson  told  the  committee  (pps.  122-3,
Pt.  3,  Public  Work  Approp.  for  1961),  "is  to  be  sure
that   the  other  people  are   not  testing   or   allowed   to
go  on  with   testing   while  we  are   forbidden.    I   am
reminded  of   the   announcement  by   the   Soviets   some
3  months ago  of  a  remarkable  new  weapon.    They  did
not  go  into  any  details,  but  they  said   they  had   per-
fected   a   remarkable  new  weapon.    Now,"  he   asked,
"how  did  they  perfect  it  without  testing  it?     I  think
they  must  have  conducted  some  sort  of  test,  presum-
ably  underground  tests,  to  be  able  to  say  that   they
had   this   remarkable   new   weapon.    Yet   during   the
period  we  were  still  under  the  moratorium,  which  we
agreed   to."
Dr.  Wilson  has  been  repeating  this  in  speeches  ever
since.   We  hope  the  members  of  the  American  Philo-
sophical  Society  remembered  enough  of  their   elemen-
tary   logic  to   see  how  full   of   holes   it   is.    For   the
benefit   of  other  future  audiences  we  call  attention   to
Chairman   McCone's  reaction  to  it.    He  was  asked  by
Chairman   Cannon   of   the   Appropriations   Committee
what   he  thought  of   Dr.   Wilson's   surmise.    "I   have
no  opinion  whatsoever  on  what  he  was  talking  about,
Mr.  Chairman,"  Mr.  McCone  replied  (p.  130).     "Com-
missioner   Wilson  was  pointing  out  that   if   it   was  a
nuclear  device  which  had  been  dramatically  improved,
that  can  only  be  done  by  the  conducting  of  tests,  in
our   opinion.   On  the   other   hand,  it   might   be  some
other   kind   of   weapon.    It   might   be   a   satellite,   it
might   be  a   missile,   it   might  be   a   nuclear   powered
aircraft  or  it  might be  a  means  of  conducting biological
warfare,   it   might  be   anything."
ties  and  Senate  Internal   Security  Committees  on  the   other
has  made  available  to  the  latter  a  series  of  witnesses   they
have   used—always   to   discredit   liberal   Democrats.     Such
activities  began  with  the  House  Committee  hearings  which
helped   defeat   Frank   Murphy  for   reelection    as   Governor
of  Michigan  in   1938.
Mr.  Hoover's   friendship  with  McCarthy  and  his  appear-
ance   in   1954   before   the   Internal    Security    Committee   to
backstop   former   Attorney   General   Brownell's   20-years-of-
treason   charges   against   Mr.  Truman   and   the   Democrats
showed  how  far   he  was  from  being  non-partisan   and  how
little  he  deserves  automatic  reappointment  by  a  new  Demo-
cratic   President.
There  are  even  stronger   reasons  for  regarding  the  head
of  the  CIA  as  a  political  post  to  be  changed  by  a  new  Ad-
ministration.     The  head   of  the   CIA  plays   a  key   role   in
many  policy  decisions.   The  presentation  of  intelligence   find-
ings  is  strongly  colored  by  a  man's  own  political   outlook.
Mr.  Dulles  is  a  conservative  Republican  who  spent  most  of
his  life  as  a  top  Wall  Street  corporation  lawyer.    There  is
as  much  reason  for  changing  the  head  of  the  CIA  as  there
is  for  changing  the  Secretary  of  State.
1   6
   r
,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   November  21,  1960
Kennedy  Campaigned  for  Strong   Presidential   Leadership  But  Shies  Away  from  Rules  Fight
That  Fresh  Wind  Blows  Back  Herbert  Hoover  and  Joseph  P. Kennedy
Our  two  party  system  never  looked  cozier  than  in  the  Ken-
nedy  visit  to  Nixon,  and  foreign  observers  may  conclude  that
the   presidential  contest  was  something  like   touch   football.
We  are  all  for  magnanimity,  but  must  there  be  quite  so  much
affection?     It  will  break  the  hearts  of  those  who  voted   for
Kennedy  because  they  couldn't  stand  Nixon.
On  the  eve  of  the  get-together,  the  story  spread  in   Wash-
ington   (see  Doris  Fleeson's  column  in  the  Washington  Star
Nov.   14  and  the  New   York   Herald-Tribune   next  day)   that
the   visit   was   arranged   by   former   President   Hoover   with
Joseph  P.  Kennedy,  the  President-elect's  father,  who  was  kept
in  the  closet  during  the   campaign.
Somebody  Slipped  Up  on  the  Signals
Nixon   was   asked   if   the   story   were   true.     His   answer
seemed  to  indicate  that  he  and  Kennedy  had  discussed  what
to  say if  this question  were  put  to  them  afterward by the  press.
Nixon  held  his  press  conference  after  Kennedy's  and  seemed
to  think  that  Kennedy  had  already  given  the  answer.    Nixon
said,  "I   understand  that   Senator  Kennedy   was  asked   about
this,  and  his  answer,  of  course,  is  the  one  that  I  will  stand
on."    Nixon  said  it  would  be  "inappropriate"  for  him  to say
whether  "such  a  call"  i.e. by  Herbert  Hoover  to  Joseph  Ken-
nedy  "was  or  was  not  made."    We  hope  that  the  new  wind
blowing   into   Washington    will   not   deposit   these   two dis-
credited  old  fossils  around  here  in  the  role  of  elder  statesmen.
Senator  Kennedy  campaigned  on  the  theme   that  the U.S.
needed  strong  presidential  leadership  to  end  drift   and   stag-
nation.    But  when  asked  at  his  first  press  conference  in  Hyan-
nis  whether   he  favored   doing   something   about   the   House
Rules  Committee he  was  evasive.    He  said  this  was  up  to  the
House,  and  he  didn't  sound  a bit  like  Woodrow  Wilson  when
he said  it.   The  New  York  Times  next  day  (Nov.   11)  quoted
an  unnamed  "House  Democrat  much  concerned  with   obstruc-
tion   by  the  Rules  Committee"   as  commenting   "in   contrast
that  the  backing  of  the  President  was  indispensable  to  Rules
Committee  reform."
There  are  signs  that  the  new  leadership  intends  to  duck
this  battle.     Senator  Mansfield,  who   is  expected   to   be  the
new  majority  leader,  told  the  New   York   Times  the  same day
Better   Keep  This  A   Secret
The   idea  of  less   secrecy   in   science   is   a  congenial
one  but  when  we  came  across  an  article  by  Dr.  Edward
Teller   (in   the   New   York   Times   Magazine  Nov.   13)
apparently   pleading   this   thesis   we   found   ourselves
reading  it  with  a  distrustful  eye.  Dr.  Teller   seemed
to  have  two  purposes.     One  was   to   clear   away   that
"secrecy   in   nuclear   weapons"   which   creates   "a  bar-
rier  between  ourselves   and  our  allies."    The   Pentagon
will  probably make  another  effort  at  the  next  Congress
to  get  legislation   allowing  a  wider  sharing   of   atomic
know-how   and   weapons.     Dr.   Teller's   other    purpose
was   public  enlightenment.      "Lack   of   public  informa-
tion,"  he  wrote,  "has dangerously   distorted   our  view
of   possible   future  uses   of   nuclear   explosives.      It   is
generally   believed   that   any   nuclear   war   will    result
in  the  end  of  civilization and  in  the  possible  extermina-
tion  of  the  human race."    Dr. Teller  termed these  views
"mistaken."    They  might,  he  wrote,  "prevent  us  from
developing  powerful  defensive   weapons   and  may,   in-
deed,   lead   to   world   domination   by   Russia."     These
"misunderstandings"  would  be  cleared   up  "if  all   rele-
vant  facts  could  be  put  before  the  public."    Here   we
found   ourselves   holding  back   in  alarm.    We   thought
the   barrier   to   Soviet   world   domination   lay   in   our
nuclear  weapons.   If  nuclear  weapons  and  nuclear  war
are   not   that   dreadful,   what   happens   to   deterrence?
What   if   the   Chinese   Communists   read   that    Teller
article   to  the   Russians   and  said,   "Aha,   what   did  we
tell  you?    Why  all  this  fear  of  atomic  war?"    Hadn't
we  better  keep  this  one  a  secret?
that  a rules  fight  at the  opening  of  Congress  "might  bog  down
Mr.  Kennedy's  legislative  program  at  the  worst  possible  time."
The  only  time  when  the  rules  can  be  changed  is  at  the  begin-
ning  of  an  Administration  when  there  is  fresh   presidential
leadership,   using  the  patronage  at  the  disposal  of  a  new  ex-
ecutive.
It  needs  to  be  repeated  that  the  platform  promised   reform
of  the  rules  in  both  House  and  Senate,  and  recognized   that
otherwise  its  promises  could   not  be  kept.    We  urge  again:
for  next month  in  Washington,  a  National  Conference   to  End
Minority   Rule   of   Congress,  to  build  up  pressure   for   action
while  there  is  still  time.    The  President  elect  needs  pushing.
Reprints  of  Bertrand  Russell's  Inspiring   Peace   Message  Still  Available  at  Only  $2  Per  Hundred
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City ..........................................Zone............8tate....................
11/21/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street  ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift   announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
IFS   Speaks  on  Cuba  and  Congo  Crisis  Hotel  Kenmore,  Boston,  8:45  p.m.  Nov.  25
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED