I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960aug01.pdf

============================================================

Report  on A   Trip  to Cuba
Fidel  Castro  Bringing  About   A  Humane  and  Gentle  But  Genuine  Social  Transformation
/. K Stone's  Weekly
VOI,.  VIII,  NO.  29
AUGUST   1,  1960
'»'     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Not  A  Revolution  Imposed  From   Above
I  came  back  from  Cuba  tremendously  impressed  with  what
I  saw.   I  believe  Fidel  Castro  and  his  able  group  of  young as-
sociates  are  bringing about  a  social  revolution  of  an admirably
humane  quality  with  amazing  swiftness  and  order,  that  they
deserve  the  esteem  felt  for  them  by  the  masses  all  over Latin
America,   and   that  the   reestablishment  of   friendly   relations
with  Castro's Cuba  would  do  more  than  a  "Marshall  Plan"  to
win  the  hearts  of  our  Latin  American  neighbors.
Though  I  know  only  a  few  words  of  Spanish  and   spent
little more than a week in  Cuba,  I brought  some useful perspec-
tives  to  the  scene.  I  have gone  many  times to  the  underdevel-
oped  Middle East.  I have been  in  such  poor  countries as Mex-
ico  and  Italy and  India.   I  have  also  seen  a  little  of  the  Soviet
States   and   of   Yugoslavia.    By  comparison  with   the   Soviet
States,  and  even Tito's,  there  is in  Cuba an  atmosphere  of  pop-
ular  enthusiasm  and  participation which  reflects  a  deep  grass
roots  support  the  Communist  States  do  not  enjoy;  Castro's  is
not  a  revolution imposed  from  above  by  a  minority  on  a recal-
citrant  peasantry  and  a  cowed  intelligentsia.   By  comparison
with   the   hysterical  demogogy   of   the   Arab   States   and   the
phoney  Leftist  oratory  of  Mexico,  the  Cuban  leadership  seems
sober  and  restrained.   Except  for  the  absence  of  a multi-party
press  and  a  multi-party politics,  Cuba  seemed  most  like  Israel
in  its  ebullience.   The  cooperatives  in  the  countryside,  the  de-
voted  technicians  in  the  government,   reminded   me  strongly
of  Eretz.   The  young  soldiers  and  the  friendly  public  attitude
toward  them  recalled  the  Haganah   rather  than  the  Pretorian
mercenaries  familiar  in  Latin  American dictatorships.
Havana  Safer  Than  New  York
I was in  Cuba  once  during  the  middle  30's  and  again  in  the
late  40's.   This  time what  struck  me  first  of  all  in  that  lovely
country  was  the  order.    I  saw  few  policemen   and  except  in
front  of  a  few  public  buildings  even  fewer  soldiers.    I  was
accosted   only   twice   by  beggars,   one   of   them   an   old   lady
known   as  The  Duchess  who  seems   to  survive  as  a  kind  of
national  institution.  The  pimps  are  still  there  and  the  prosti-
tutes  but  they  do  not  swarm  all  over  the  place  as  in  former
years.   There  are  no  signs  of  inflation;  prices  in  the  shopwin-
dows  are  about  the  same  as  the  United   States;  my  remaining
pesos  were  exchanged  for  dollars  at  the  airport  bank  when  I
left.   Only  once was I  offered  black  market money exchange  on
the   streets.    Though   my  accent   and   clothes   marked   me  a
Yankee  and   the   streets   are  decorated   with  banners   against
U.S.  policy,  at  no  time  did  I  encounter  any  unpleasantness.
The  Cubans are  the  least  xenophobiac  people  I  have ever  seen.
Americans  can  walk  about  at  night  in  Havana  far  more  safely
than  in  certain  sections  of  New   York.
I  sa*  a  bit  of  the  slums,  urban  and  rural,  of  Cuba;  I  saw
the  toothless  children  and  the  telltale  marks of  parasites.  But
8*                                                         '
Castro  on Communism
"I  am  not  a  Communist,  and  neither  is   the  revolu-
tionary   movement   communistic,   but   we   do  not  need
to  say  we  are  not  Communist  just  to  fawn  on  foreign
powers.    Why   is   the   phantom   of   Communism   raised
now?   We  are  expected to  persecute Communists.  Why
should we?  Do we persecute Catholics or Rotarians... ?
"Capitalism   may   kill   man   with  hunger.    Commu-
nism  kills  man  by  wiping  out  his  freedom.    Cuba  has
a  revolution  that  satisfied  man's  material  needs  with-
out   sacrificing   his  freedom."
—Castro  in  mid-July  of  1959 when  he  forced   Urrutia
out  of  the  Presidency   after   the  latter  made  a  state-
ment  against  Communism  in  Cuba.   Quoted  from   Ray
Brennan's   book,   Castro,  Cuba  and  Justice,   p.  281.
by  comparison with  the  underdeveloped  countries  of  the  Mid-
dle  East  and  overpopulated   India,   Cuba  seems  rich,  rich  in
water,  grass,  soil,  climate  and  resources.   By  comparison  with
other   Latin   American  countries,   she   seems   favored   too   in
being   a  nation;   there   are  no  unassimilated   communities   of
Indios  in  her  hinterland,  speaking  no  Spanish,   cut  off  from
the  rest of  the  community, as in  Guatemala  or  even  in  Mexico.
Cuba  has  a  people  united  by  a  common  language,   by  the  re-
membrance   of   past   struggles  against   Spaniard   and  North
American,  with  common  traditions  and  heroes.  Though  color
consciousness  and   discrimination  have   not  altogether   disap-
peared,  the Negro  is not  a  man  apart  in  Cuba,  but  fully  of  the
Cuban  nation.   The  banners  that  proclaim  "Patria  o  Muerte"
(Our  country or  death)  are  more  than  rhetoric,  as one  can see
in  the  serious  faces  of  the  workers  doing   their  militia  drill
after  hours.   By comparison  with  many other  countries  in  Asia,
Africa  and  Latin  America,  Cuba  has  a  high  rate  of  literacy,  a
large  and  growing  number  of  technicians,  a  considerable  mid-
dle  class,  and  a  high  level  of  sanitation.   Cleanliness  indeed  is
almost  a  fetish  with  Cubans  and  at  least  in  Havana  I  found  I
could  eat  at  the  street  stalls  and  drink  freshly  squeezed  fruit
juice  without  the  dysentery  almost  unavoidable   even   in   the
best  hotels  of  Egypt  and  of  Mexico.   Highly  urbanized,  with
an  industrialized  agriculture,   Cuba—given  peace—has   assets
for  quick development  most  other  "backward"  countries  would
envy.   The  Cuban  campesino  is  at  a  much  higher  stage  of  con-
sciousness  than  the  Mexico  peon  and  a  long  distance  from  the
Egyptian  fellah.   In  Fidel  Castro,  he  has  found  a  leader  un-
equalled   in  Latin  America  since  Mexico's  Indians   produced
their  own  compassionate  and  brooding  Lincoln  in  Juarez.
How  Different  It  Looks  Through  Communist  Eyes
While  there  are  Americans  who  regard   Cuba  as  practically
a Communist  State,  to the  Communist  bloc newspapermen  who
{Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F,  Stone's   Weekly,  August  1, 1960
{Continued  from   Page   One)
were  arriving  for  the  celebration  in  the  Sierra Maestra  July  26
Cuba   must   look   quite   conventionally   bourgeois.    Heretical
works  like  Djilas's  The  New   Class  in  Spanish  translation  are
prominent  in  the  book  store  windows.  The  busts  to  be  found
everywhere  are  not  of  Marx  or  Engels  but  of  Jose  Marti,  the
outstanding  leader  of  the  revolt  against  Spain  and  the  ideo-
logical  patron  saint  of  the  Castro  revolution.   Shop  windows
display  items  like  $100  straw  hats  which  only  the  very  rich
could   afford.    The  fashionable  restaurants  are  well  filled  at
lunch.   In  the  American  Club  on  the  Prado,  they  still  throw
dice  on  the  bar  in  lordly  sahib  fashion  to  see  who  shall  pay
for  the  drinks.   In  luxurious  Miramar,  where  the  rich  live  in
Miami-style   opulence,   the   Biltmore   Yacht   Club   has   been
turned  over  to  the  proletariat—on  the  basis  that  Batista  put
$800,000  of  public  money  into  building  it—but  the  nearby
Havana  Yacht  Club  is  still  the  private  preserve  of   Havana's
oldest   and   most  snobbish   families.    At   the   Havana   Yacht
Club, which  now  boasts that  Batista never  succeeded  in  gaining
membership,  a  servant  in  livery  opens  the  door  of  one's  car
and  a guide  from  the  Foreign  Ministry  (herself  a  member, by
old   family  connections)   takes   one  through   the   luxuriously
cool  marble  halls  to  the  private  beach  crowded  with  the  chil-
dren  of  Havana's  best  families,  their  mamas  and  their  nurse-
maids,  safe  from  vulgar  eyes.
The  Proletariat  Can  Even  Play  Golf
If  the  social  revolution   looks  very  gentle   at  the   Havana
Yacht  Club,  it  looks  nonetheless   real  at  the  rival  equally  af-
fluent  Biltmore Yacht  Club a few  blocks  away.  Over  its  Moor-
ish   columns   big   banners  proclaim  "unity",   "fatherland   or
death"  and  "we  shall  prevail."   Inside  the  bulletin  board  an-
nounces  prices within  the  reach  of  all.   Admission  to  the  club
and  beach  is  50  cents weekdays and  $1  on  week-ends.   Towel
and  soap  is  20  cents.   Boats  can  be  rented  at  40  cents  an  hour
while  golf  is  available  at  $1.50  an  hour.   Those  with  incomes
of  less  than  $100  a  month  can  buy  a  family  membership  at
$2  a month.  Those with  incomes  above  $100  a month  pay $3.
When  it was a private club,  it  had  1,600  members.  Now  it has
22,000.   There  is  no  racial  discrimination  and  framed  on  the
wall  near  the  entrance  are Marti's  words:  "There  are  no  black
Cubans  or  white  Cubans.   There  are  only   Cubans."
The  administrator, a  gentleman  in  a  beret  from  the  Gastro-
nomical  Workers  Union,  made  a  little  speech  of  welcome  and
introduced  me to his  assistant, the first barbudo I  met  in  Cuba,
a  Nicaraguan  exile  named  Alfonso  Salomon  whose  father  was
an  Arab from  Jerusalem.   Salomon walked  with  a  slight  limp
from  a bullet  wound  suffered  while  fighting  with  Fidel  Castro.
"When  we  triumph,"   he  said  of  his  own  Nicaraguan  com-
rades,  "to  whom  will  we  be  grateful?   We  can't  get  near  the
U.S.  Embassy.  They  call  us  Communists."    Salomon  proudly
showed  us  the  yacht basin  of  the  club" with  several  abandoned
yachts  being  overhauled.   "Fidel,"  he  said,  "wants  us  to  put
these  yachts  in  shape  and  enter  them  in  the  annual  regatta  on
behalf   of  the  club  just  as  it  used  to  do."    To  talk   to  this
barbudo  with  his  scraggly  beard  and  fiery  eyes was  to -believe
oneself  back  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  of  Garibaldi  and  the
Latin  America of  Conrad  and  O.  Henry.   "They  can kill  us,"
he  said,  speaking  of  the  U.S.  military  intervention   which  so
many  seem  to  fear,  "but  they  can never  kill  the  idea  for  which
we  stand."   This,  too,  seemed  like  a  naive  echo  of  Mid-Vic-
torian  optimism,  a  refreshing  breeze  from  an  earlier  time  be-
fore  the  H-bomb  made us  fear  that  men  and  ideas alike  might
be  destroyed  forever  in  one  holocaust.
Why  U.  S.  Radicals  Like  Cuba
Perhaps  one  reason  for  the  euphoria  that  seems  to  engulf
North  American  radicals in  Cuba,  whether  from  the  violently
anti-Communist  New   Leader  sector   on  the   "right"   to   the
Trotzkyites  of  The  Militant  on  the  far  Left,  is that  Cuba  offers
an   escape  from   problems   of   the   nuclear  arms  race,  which
often  seem  insoluble.  To  visit  Cuba  is  to  step  into  a  simpler
world   of   relatively  easy  challenges—illiteracy,  bad   housing,
seasonal  unemployment,  one-crop  agriculture,   and   the   need
for   industrialization.  The  Cuban  revolution  is  refreshing  in
another  respect.   For  almost  two  decades  we  have  lived  in  a
stale  atmosphere of  Fifth  Amendment radicalism;  no  one  is  a
Communist,  few  admit  themselves  Socialists, nobody  owns  up
to  reading  Marx  and  practically  everybody  on  the  Left  claims
only  to  be  a  liberal,  nothing   more;   the   word   "radical"  is
avoided   as  a  bad  word.   It   is  refreshing  to  step  from   this
world  of  phonies  to  a  land  in  which  the  leader  is  a  man  who
has  never  hidden  his  intentions;  who  announced  to  Batista  in
advance  just  what  he  was  going  to  do;  who  proudly  avowed
his  revolutionary aims.  Nothing  else  could  prove  so certainly
to  the  politically  sophisticated  that  Fidel  is  not  a  Communist.
As  a  social  revolutionist, Fidel  is  pragmatic rather  than  doc-
trinaire.   In  this  he  strongly  resembles  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt,
except  that  operating  in  a  poorer  country  Fidel  is  more  so-
cialistic  and  U.S.  pressure,  by  putting  the  economic  squeeze
on  him,  has  been  pushing  him  further  Left.   For  one  who  re-
members  the  New   Deal   as  I  do,  there  was  a  nostalgically
familiar  atmosphere  in  the  institutes  for  agrarian  reform  and
for  savings and  housing,  and  in  the  departments  of  education,
and  social  welfare.  Talking  with  officials  one  found  the  same
zeal  and  devotion  that  marked  New  Deal  Washington.   One
felt  that  Fidel  has  saved  a  whole  generation  of  Cubans  from
despair  and  given  them  a means to  serve  their  people.   In  edu-
cation,  the  number  of  classrooms   and   teachers  has   doubled
and  the  number  of  pupils  in  school  has  risen  from  600,000
to  1,000,000.  New  hospitals  are  going  up  all  over  the  island.
I  visited a  model  prison  for  juvenile  delinquents  and  a  volun-
tary  home  for  wayward  girls,  established   in  the  rich  country
villa   of   a  Batista  collaborator   who   fled   the   country.    The
Agrarian  Reform  Institute  has  established  some  1500  coopera-
tives  and  some  2,000  people's  stores.   I  visited  three:  of  these
cooperatives  and  hope to write  more  of  them  in a  second  issue
on  Cuba.   This  Institute,  known  as  INRA  from  its  initials  in
Spanish,  has  taken  over  not  only  the  lands  but  the  businesses
of  those  found  guilty  of  misappropriating  public  funds   and
of   "war  crimes"  against  the  people  of   Cuba  under  Batista.
It  is  the  main  instrument  of  Cuban  socialization.
The  Demonstration  Outside  the  Cathedral
Perhaps  my most  interesting  experience  was  to  see the  anti-
Soviet   demonstration   outside   the   Cathedral   in   Havana   on
Sunday,  July  17.  I  believe  I  was the  only  foreign  correspond-
ent  there.   It  was my  first  Sunday  in  Cuba.   I  had  started  out
by bus from  the  rich residential  section  of  the Vedado  to  spend
a  day roaming around  old  Havana.   We  had  been  winding  for
some  time  through  cool  narrow  streets  just  wide  enough  for
one  bus  when  suddenly  women  began  pounding  on  the  sides
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  August  1, 1960
of  our  bus  screaming  "Cuba,  si"   (Cuba,  yes)  and  something
else  I  was  unable to  catch.   I  jumped  off  the  bus  and  pushed
my  way  through  the  crowd  to  a  tiny  square,  on  one  side  of
which  stands  the  ancient  Cathedral  of  Havana.   Worshippers
pouring  out  from  mass  were  demonstrating on  the  steps  with
shouts  of  "Cuba,  si;  Russia, no"  (Cuba  yes;  Russia,  no).*  A
young man  rushed up  to me when he  saw me taking  notes  and
screamed  excitedly,  "latifundista,  latifundista"   (big  landown-
ers)  and  then with vivid  gestures  showed  me that  he  had  been
beaten  by  the  police under Batista.
Dangerous  Credentials
Police had  already  begun arriving and  were  breaking  up  the
demonstration,  chasing the  demonstrators  up  the  streets  lead-
ing  into  the  square.   I  saw the  occupants  of  one  station  wagon
angrily  pulled  out  of  their  car  by  the  police  and  roughed  up,
apparently  for  responding  to  the  demonstrators  with  cries  of
"Cuba  si;  Russia  no."    After  an  angry  scene  the   frightened
motorists  and  their  women  folk  were  allowed  to  get  back  in
their  car  and  make  off.   I  heard  a  shot   from   an   adjoining
street  and  ran  over  to  see a  crowd  running along  the  cathedral
with  a  policeman  in  pursuit.  The  demonstrators—mostly  well
dressed  women—  had  hardly  been  dispersed  when  I  saw  a
new  crowd, this time  of  poorly  dressed  young  men  and  a  few
girls  rushing  down  the  street  toward  the  Cathedral,  yelling
"Cuba  si;  yanquis,  no"  (Cuba,  yes;  Yankees,  no).   The  dem-
onstration  swept  around  me,  and  I  ran  with  it  back  to  the
front  of  the  Cathedral.   The  front  steps  had  now  been  taken
over  by  pro-government  demonstrators.    A  young  man   was
making a violent speech in  Spanish of  which  I  could  not  catch
a  word  and  before  I  could  try  and  find  out  a  crowd  formed
around  me.   A  young man  flashing  some kind  of  official  pass
asked  who I  was and  when  I  said  "periodista,  norteamericano"
(North   American  journalist)  he  wanted  to  see  credentials.
All  I  had  was  my  State  Department  correspondents'  associa-
tion  card  which  with  its  gold  American  eagle  looked  uncom-
fortably  official  for  use  in  that  crowd.   Nevertheless  I  showed
it,  curious  to  see what  reaction  would  follow.
"Not  Communist   But  Humanist"
The  crowd  closed  in.   A  young  girl  pulled  a  Catholic  medal
out  of  her  blouse  and  said,  "I'm   a  good  Catholic.    I'm   for
Fidel.    Those   other   people   were   counter   revolutionaries."
Another   girl  waved  a   copy  of   Giovanni  Papini's   Life  of
Christ  in  Spanish translation  at  me and  said,  "You  see.   I,  too,
am a good  Catholic.   But we are Fidelistas.  We  are  humanists,
not  Communists."   Everywhere  in  Cuba  I  found   people  re-
sentful  and  defensive about  the  charge  of  being  Communists.
These   demonstrators   were   no  different.    "We   are  not  im-
perialists,"  one  young man  shouted  at  me.  "We  are  not  Com-
munists.    We   are   Cubans."    Another   young   man   pushed
through   angrily   and   shouted   something   about  lies   in   the
American  press.   "You  write this  down,"  he  said  peremptorily,
pointing at  my pad.   "You  write it  down.  We  are  not  against
the  American people.   We  are  only  against  your  government."
I  wrote  it   all   down.   Another  young  man  said,   obviously
about relations with  the  Soviet  Union,  "We  want to  be  friends
with  everybody,  slaves  to   nobody."
*Next   day   Revolucion,   organ   of   the  July   26   movement,
said  the  demonstrators  had  cried  "Yanquis,  si;   Russia,   no."
This  was  untrue.
1   1  7
Police   were   pouring   into   the   square,   breaking   up   the
counter  demonstration  too.   A  police  car  bore  down  on  us,
scattering  my mass  interview.   I  could  see a  little plaster  saint
hanging  in  front  of  the  window  of  the  police  car.   A  militia-
man  and  a  young Negro  who  had  helped  me  as  a  volunteer
translator  moved  with  me  to  the  sidewalk' The  young  Negro
turned   out   to   be  of   Jamaican  origin   though   Cuban   born,
which  explained  his  English.   "American  newspapermen,"  he
said,   "never   speak  to  plain  people."   While  his  friend,   the
militiaman  looked  on  approvingly, he  said  "Come  I  show you
how  people  live;"   I  went  along.
The  Submerged  Half  in  Havana
Thus  began   for  me  an  informal  Cook's  tour  of  how  the
other  half  lives  in  Havana.   The  young  Negro's  English  vo-
cabulary  was  limited,  his  friend  the  militiaman's  non-existent.
The  young  Negro  was  named  Raul  King.   Intelligence   and
sympathy  shown  unmistakably in  his  fine  black  face.   He  was
a  structural  steel  building  worker,  20  years  old.   "When  the
revolution  came,"  he  explained,  "I  went  back  to  school."   He
was  in  the  seventh  grade.   I  never  did  succeed  in  finding  out
what  the  militiaman did.  His  name was Fernando  Almanares,
a  handsome friendly  fellow.   They  began  by  taking  me  into  a
block  of  "solares."   The  name  in  Spanish  means  an  ancestral
• mansion,  built  Latin  style  around  a  central  patio  open  to  the
sun  and  sky,  hence  the  "sol"   (sun)   in  "solar".   But  in  Latin
American  Spanish a  "solar"  (PI.  "solares")  has  come  to  mean
a  tenement  house,  because  in  Havana  as  in  many  other   Latin
American  cities  these  town  houses  have  been  converted  into
tenements,  human  rabbit  warrens  in  which  there  are  as many
families  as rooms.  The  "solares"  are  everywhere, behind  little
shops  on  the  streets  and  sandwiched  in  between  other  similar
buildings  used  as  commercial  or  professional  offices.   A  major
portion  of  Havana's  population   live  in  them.
We  entered  a  doorway between  two  stores  and  found  our-
selves  in  a  dimly lit,  ill-smelling  interior  swarming with  chil-
dren.   Ancient  rugs  or  tapestries  covered  the  entrances  to  each
room.   Insfde  one  of  the  better  rooms  was  a  big  bed,  a  re-
frigerator,   an  old  sideboard,   and  a  TV   set,  all  quite   clean
considering  the  circumstances.   In  others,  there  were  two  beds
separated  by  a  curtain.   On  each  floor  there  were  two  toilets,
and  a  large   stone  tub  with  one  spigot,  the  common  water
supply.   There  were  holy  pictures  in  most  of  the  rooms  we
saw,  occasional pictures  of  Cuba's  hero  of  the  war  with  Spain,
Jose Marti,  and  pictures  of  Fidel  Castro  torn  from  newspapers.
A small boy was doing his arithmetic  lessons on  an   improvised
desk  in  the  light  from  the  sky.  On  a  second  floor  landing  an
old  crone  worked  at  a  battered  sewing  machine.   An  elderly
woman  explained  that her  "solar" had  20 rooms with  a  family
in  each.  The  tenement  had  to  raise  a  total  of  $150  a  month.
Some  tenants,  single  men  with  small  rooms,  paid  as  little  as
$7.50  a month.   Some  families paid  as much  as  $12  a  month.
There  was  one  old  woman  who  had  been  there  for  years  and
was still  permitted  to  pay her  old  rent  of  $3 a month.   Swarms
of  half-naked  children  followed  our  tour  with  fascination.
No  Water  Except  From  The  Creek
The  people  who  live  in  the  solares, ill-lit  and  ill-smelling
as  these  habitations may be,  are  not  the  poorest  of  the  poor  in
Havana;  They  are still part  of  the  city's  life.   In  the  mornings,
going  by  in  buses  or  taxis,  one  looks  on  with  surprise  to  see
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  August  1, 1960
Unofficial  Guided  Tour  of  Havana's  Slums  and  Squatter  Shanty-Towns
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
how  the  delectable  girls  pour  out  of  these  tenements   looking
miraculously  clean  and  smart.   The  sharp  division  is  between
the  tenement  dweller  and  the  thousands  who  live  in  the  make-
shift  shanty towns  which  have  sprung  up  over  the  past  quarter
century   on   the   outskirts   of   Havana.    These   shanty   towns
are   called   "barrios  de   indigentes"   or   "indigent    neighbor-
hoods."    My  two  guides  took  me  to  see  the  most  notorious
of   these  squatter   settlements,   "Los   Yuagas."    We   took  a
taxi  to  a  section  of   the   city  called   Lugano   Habana,   drove
down  to  the  end  of  one  street where  open  fields  began,  turned
sharply  right  up  a  steep  hill  on  what   seemed   to   be   little
more  than  a  goat's  path  and  stopped   on  the  crest.    There,
stretched   below  us  on  the   hillside  and   down  to   a  narrow
valley  through   which  a  creek  ran  was  a  squatter   settlement
of  makeshift  one-story  houses  made  of   old   tin   cans,  aban-
doned   concrete   blocks   and   palm   fronds  which   are   called
"yaguas"   whence  the  name  of   the  settlement.
Children  Almost  As  Naked  As  India's
As   we   started   down   the   narrow  pathways  between   the
shanties,   children   gathered   behind   us   almost  as   naked   as
those  I  had  once  seen  in  the  streets  of  Bombay.  The   people
of   "Las  Yaguas"  unlike  those  of  the  solares  we  had  visited
seemed   unfriendly   and   suspicious.    The   shanty   town   was
built   on   the   side   of   what   is  known   as   "Donkey's   Hill"
(Loma  del  Burro)   and  the  only  water  supply  was  the  creek
down   in   the   valley  from   which  people   brought   up   water
in   old   cans.     Goats   were   tethered   outside   some   of   the
shanties.     Here   and   there   wash   hung   on   lines.     Many  of
the   older   children   here   as   elsewhere   among   the   poor   in
Cuba   when   they   smiled   showed   empty   gums   where   they
had   lost  teeth;  apparently   this  was  the   result   of   bad   diet,
lack  of  milk  or  other  sources  of  calcium.  We  saw  one  lovely
mulatto   girl   in   rags,   just   budding   into   womanhood,    but
when  she  opened  her  mouth  she  was  as  toothless   as  an  old
hag.    We   stepped   into   several   houses.    All  were   one-room
affairs  with  rnud  floors,  holes  in  the  wall  for  windows,   and
no  facilities  of  any  kind.    Here  and  there  in  the   settlement
were  tiny  shanties  set  up   as  grocery  stores  and   restaurants.
We   were  shown  one  building  of   concrete   blocks  in   which
On  Last  Week's  Missing  Issue
It    proved   impossible    under   the   somewhat     hectic
circumstances  to  make  copy  in  Cuba  and  get   it   back
in  time  for   the  issue  of  July  25  and  we  were  forced
to   skip   it.    We   hope   readers    will    understand!   and
excuse.
the   shanty  town's   first   school   had   been   established   since
the  revolution.  There  seemed  to  be  about   1,000   shanties   in
"Las    Yaguas"   and   in  these  the  people  lived   rent  free.    It
was  explained  to  me  that   earlier  in  the   days   of   Machado
such   people   used   to   sleep  in   the   streets   and   in   doorways
on  old  newspapers.   As  we  left,  a  touching  thing  happened.
A  ragged  little  boy  ran  up  with  a  handful  of  cigarettes  as
a  gift   for  the  visitors.  We  thanked  him  and  left   in  a  hail
of   warm  "adios"   from   a  mob   of  urchins.
The  Numbers  That  Betokened  Hope
I  now  come  to  what  was  at  first  a  very  tantalizing part
of  my  story.   The  shanties  all  had  numbers  on  them.   One
I  marked  down  as  a  sample  was  "B   2—C   33—P  8."     I
thought  at  first  this  must  be  for  the  convenience  of  postmen,
so   they   could   tell   one   shanty   from   another   in   delivering
mail.    I  asked  my  guides  and  they  asked  the  children,  follow-
ing   us  what   the   numbers  were.    The   children   said   these
were   the   numbers  of   the   new   houses   being   built   by   the
government   for   them.    We   stopped   and   asked   a   woman
occupant  what  the  numbers  on  her  shanty  meant.    She  gave
the   same  answer—this  was  the  number  of   the   new   homes
being  prepared  for  them.    The  B  denoted  the  block  in  which
they  would  be  located  in  the  new  settlement.    A  certa.in  pride
was  evident  in  her  answer,  the  pride  of  a  prospective  home-
owner,  the  feeling  of  being  a  person  about  whom  the  gov-
ernment  cared.    But  next  day  when  I  reported   this  to  the
public  relations  office  at  the  Foreign  Ministry  and  they  took
me  to  INAV,   the   public   savings   and   housing    corporation
which  is  engaged  in  slum  clearance  and  low  cost  home  con-
struction,  nobody  seemed  to  have  heard  of  any  such   project
to  replace  "Las  Yaguas."    I  began  to  believe  that  the  shanty
town  dwellers  were  the  victims  of  false  hopes.
(To  Be  Concluded  Next    Week)
If   You  Send  A  Long  Stamped  Envelope,   We'll   Send  A  Free   Copy   of   This   Issue   to  A   Friend
I.  F.
Please
CtfnAt
City
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
•  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for   the  enclosed  $5:*
..;.....................................Zone............State....................
8/1/60
gift  sub for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)  additional :
........................................Zone............State....................
we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
IF. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   IS,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class   Matter  at  Washington,  D.   C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every   Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays   of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D  C
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$3  in  the   U.  S.;  $8  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED