I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960apr25.pdf

============================================================

Labor  and  the Summit
Special  On-the-Scene  Report:  The  AFL-CIO Conference  on  World  Affairs  in  New  York  April  19-20
/. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  16
APRIL  25,  1960
101
     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
As  Fearful  As Adenauer  Lest  The  Cold  War  Abate
New   York
If   the   leaders  of   the   AFL-CIO  could   afford   a  sense  of
humor,  there  would  have  been  an  irrepressible  snort,  at  one
passage  in  the  speech  with  which  Mr.  George  Meany,  their
president   and   leader,  opened   his   AFL-CIO   Conference  on
World   Affairs  here  last  Tuesday  morning.
"The  stakes in  this crisis,"  Mr.  Meany  began,  "are  too  high
to  entrust blindly  to  a  few  leaders  at  the  Summit  without  the
advice  and  consent  of  the  people  they  represent."    Such  im-
peccable  democracy, like  charity,  should  begin  at  home.    The
members  of  the  Executive  Council,  sitting  in  a   well-behaved
row  at  the  rear  of  the  dais,  amid  the  gilt  mirrors  and  under
the   ornate  chandeliers  of   the   Commodore   Hotel's  Century
Room,  must  have  wondered  mutinously  why  Meany  couldn't
have   consulted  them   even   if   Eisenhower   and   Khrushchov
don't.    For  this conference was  a  Papa  Knows  Best  operation
in  an  organization  notoriously  afflicted   with  cult  of  person-
ality.    The  stakes of  the  American worker in  the  issues  of  war
and  peace are  also  too  high  to  be  entrusted  blindly  to  a  few—
a  very  few—leaders   at  the  summit  of  the   AFL-CIO.     Mr.
Meany   and   his   foreign   policy  adviser,   the   ex-Communist
leader  Mr.  Jay  Lovestone,  advised  and  consented   only  with
Mr.  David  Dubinsky  in  arranging  this  conference.    The  CIO
leaders,  who  do  not  see  eye  to  eye  with  them,  had  about  as
much  to  do  with  picking  the  speakers  and  determining  the
general   line   as   Molotov   and   Malenkov   do   with   editing
Khrushchev's  proverbs.
A One-Sided Speakers List
Not  a  single  speaker  differed  in  essentials  from  Mr.  Meany.
No  place  was  made  on  the  program  for  any  speaker  who  ad-
vocates  relaxation  of  tension,  cessation  of  nuclear  testing, dis-
armament  or  a  fresh  look  at  relations  with  Communist  China,
much  less  co-existence, that  dirty word.    The  general  tone  was
well  to  the  right  of  "the   Eisenhower   Administration.      Mr.
Walter   Reuther's  adherents  seemed  to  regard  it  as  a  signal
victory  that  he  had  been  able  to  slip  Under  Secretary  of  State
Douglas  Dillon,  a  notorious  appeaser  and  Wall  Street  Leftist,
in  as  speaker  at  a  banquet  after   the  conference  was  over,  and
even  to  make  a  speech  himself,  an  eruption  from  below  on
which  Mr.  Meany had  not  counted.   Though  the  declared  pur-
pose  of  the  conference,  in  Mr.  Meany's  opening  words,  was
"to  weigh  the  facts,  to  analyze  the  problems",  the  set  speeches
offered   more  in  the  way  of  inflammation  than   information.
The  speeches  are  to  be  reprinted  in  a  special  Sunday  supple-
ment  to the New  York  Times May 8  which  will  cost  the  labor
movement  somewhere   between   $50,000  and  $60,000.    The
total  bill  for  the  conference,  with  its  500  delegates,  from  what
used  uncouthly  to  be  called   the  pork-chop   echelons   of   the
5
,       Not  Even A  Limited Nuclear  War
With  Clean Bombs?
"I  am  not  saying  we  should  fight  a  war  to  bring
about   the   reunification   of   Germany."
—Dr.  Henry   A.  Kissinger,  to  the  AFL-CIO   World
Affairs     Conference,   April   20.
labor  movement,  will  probably  be  more  than  $100,000.   It  is
hard  to  see what  purpose will  be served  except  to  create  public
anxiety  about  "appeasement"  on  the  eve  of  the  Summit  meet-
ing,  to  feed  Mr.  Meany's  sense of  importance,  and  to  sell  Dr.
Adenauer's hard  line.
Meany: "We Know the  Score"
Mr.  Meany,  looking  like  a  late  Roman  Emperor  with  his
strong-beaked  predatory  face,  launched  the  proceedings  with
warm  self-commendation.   After  "a  long  and  hard  apprentice-
ship,   the   American  trade   union   movement,"    which    Mr.
Meany  identifies  with  himself,  is  "qualified   to  consider   the
issues  of  the  current  world   crisis  at  this  conference  not  as
amateurs,   but   as   full-fledged    journeymen.   We   know   the
score. ..."  The  score sounded  like  a posthumous  composition
by  John  Foster  Dulles.   "The   threat  to  human   survival  and
progress  stems from  one  source  and  one  source  only—Soviet
Russia."    The   Soviet's   "offer   of   peaceful   co-existence   rings
hollow."   Russia's  "entire  national  effort   is  concentrated   on
achieving    superiority   in    aggressive    military   production."
Khrushchov's  disarmament offers  are  "alarming."   Moscow  is
"desperately  concentrating  on  producing   the   means  to  end
freedom  on  earth."   It  is  time  "for  the  leaders  of  the  world
to  tell  the honest truth ... no matter  how painful  it may  be."
"Smiling  photographs  and  public  handshakes  can  perpetrate  a
monstrous  fraud."  We  must serve notice  on Khrushchov  "that
the  free  world  will  proceed,  at  whatever  cost,  to  achieve  over-
whelming  superiority—militarily,  economically   and  technolog-
ically.  . . . Only  then  will  the danger  of war be reduced.  .
Only  thus  will  it  be possible to prevail  upon  the  Soviet  regime
to  accept  an  effective  and  enforceable  disarmament  program."
In  the  meantime, until  that  happy  day when  we  can  dictate  an
unconditional  surrender  in  the  Kremlin  and  lead   Khrushchov
to the  baptismal font,  the  free  nations  must  not  even  "begin  to
retreat"  at  the  Summit  "on  the  future  of  Berlin  or  any  other
major  issue."
But  having  marched  stalwartly  up  the  hill  with  Adenauer,
Acheson  and  the  shadow  of  Dulles,  Meany  rapidly  marched
down  again.    If  the  Russians  are  so untrustworthy,  if  our  only
safety  lies  in  a  race  to  overwhelming  armament,   if  any  retreat
on   any  issue  would   be  perilous,   if   agreement   is  only  safe
(Continued   on  Page   Two")
6  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  25,1960
{Continued  from  Page  One)
when  we  can  dictate  the  terms,  why  negotiate?    How  negoti-
ate ?   It  was not  only  anti-climactic  but  confusing  to  have  him
end  by saying that  the  trade  union  movement  "firmly  believes
that  our  government  should  negotiate  with  Soviet  Russia  at
the  Summit  and  at  every  other  level."   It  was  bewildering  to
have  him  add  that  "every  effort  must  be  made  to  secure  even
limited  reduction  of. armament"  and  that  the  goal  must  be  "the
banning  of  military  atomic  tests,  an  end  to  production  of  nu-
clear  and  other  means  of  mass  destruction   and  the   genuine
reduction  of  land,  sea  and  air  forces."   Mr.  Meany  began  to
sound  at  the  end  as if  he  were a  candidate  for  President.    His
conclusions  seemed  to  cancel  out  his  premises.   How  do  you
build  up  that  overwhelming  force  needed  to  beat  the  Russians
to  their knees if  in  the  meantime you negotiate  "limited  reduc-
tion  of  armament"?   Or  was  this  eye-wash?
By Coincidence, the Anniversary  of  Lexington
The  opening  remarks  by  George  M.  Harrison,  as chairman
of  the  AFL-CIO Committee on  International  Affairs,  indicated
that  the  conference  was not  stage-managed  to  give  Eisenhower
a  cheery  sendoff  to  Paris  and  Moscow.   He  spoke  as  if  it  had
been   planned   as   emotional   mobilization   for   a   period   of
stepped  up  world  tension  in  which  it  was  the  labor  move-
ment's  duty  to  risk  its  all.   "We  meet,"  he  said,  "on  an  his-
toric  day."   The  day  turned  out,  by  some  Madison  Avenue
coincidence,  to  be  the   185th  anniversary  of   the   Battles  of
Lexington  and  Concord.   "Too  few  Americans,"  he  said,  "are
sufficiently  aware"  of  the  Communist  threat,  a  remark  which
made one wonder where they had  been  since  1948.   If freedom
is to be "protected  and promoted  in  I960" the  ordinary  citizen
will  have to  show  "as much concern  over  freedom  as our  fore-
fathers  did  when  they  fought  the  Revolutionary  War."    We
want  peace, of  course, but  we must  "be  on  guard  against  wish-
ful   thinking  and   self-deception."     American  labor   and   the
American  people "do  not want  peace with  chains and  slavery."
They  want  "peace  and  freedom,  not  the  peace  of  the  prison
or  the  cemetery."   In  thus  passing  over  the  large  number  of
Americans  who  merely  wish  to  avoid  mutual  thermonuclear
incineration  with  the  Russians,  Mr.  Harrison   hardly  set  the
stage   for   sober   thinking   about   negotiation.    This  railway
brotherhood  executive  is  a  victim  of  discrimination.   Chancel-
lor  Adenauer  should  have  given  him  a  medal,  too,  when  he
decorated  Meany  and  Lovestone  in  Bonn  last  December.
Not  all  the  speakers  were  as  outspoken  as  Messrs.  Meany
and  Harrison.   The  speaker  to  whom  they assigned  "Africa
and  the  Near  East"  produced  a  speech  in  which  no  mention
could  be  found  either  of  South  Africa  or  of  the  Arab-Israeli
problem.   Dr.  Ernest  C.  Grigg,  chief  of  the  United  Nations
Community  Development  Group,  managed  to  confine  himself
to  generalizations  and  concluded  safely  that  Africa   and   the
Near  East  "are  in  the  midst  of  a  great  social  change."   The
one  good  speech  at  the  conference  was  Professor  Frank  Tan-
nenbaum's  on  Latin  America.  Here,  however  defensively, one
could  still  find  vestiges of  the  idealism  and  honest  indignation
which  once  marked  the  labor  movement.
China Lobby Viewpoint
The  worst of  the  first day's speeches  was that  of Prof.  David
N.  Rowe of  Yale,  who  was assigned  the  Far  East.  The  AFL-
CIO  could  hardly have  picked  a  spokesman  more  satisfactory
to  the  China  Lobby than  Prof.  Rowe who  was one  of  the  star
performers   for   the  late  Senator  McCarran  and  his   counsel
Robert  Morris  in  their  attack  on  the  Institute  of  Pacific  Rela-
tions  and  Owen  Lattimore.   Prof.  Rowe  began  with  a  defense
of   the  nation-state  system.   He  pointed   to  the   "remarkable
proliferation  of  nation-states"  in  the  Far  East  and  South  Asia
since  the  war  and  said  this  had  occurred  "at  the  very  time
when  many  of  our  supposedly  most  advanced  thinkers  had
already  concluded  that  nationalism  was  the  root  of  all  evil,
and  could  only  result  in  increasing  strife  between  nations,  to
the  detriment of  us  all."   Prof.  Rowe moved  on  from  this  bit
of  illumination to a favorite theme of  the  extreme  right.   Here
he  struck what was the  most  incongruous note  of  all  at a  labor
conference.    Prof.  Rowe  was  arguing   against   reductions   in
military  aid.
Chiang's  Old Refrain
Prof.  Rowe  said  "the   chief  agitators  against  measures  of
military  defense  against  Communist aggression  in  the  Far  East
seem  to  advocate "an  unbalanced degree  of  trust  in  the   efficacy
of   economic  measures."    (Such  as  higher  wages   and  better
living conditions?)  "It  is perhaps,"  Prof.  Rowe  continued,  "a
mark  of  the  susceptibility  in  certain  intellectual  circles  to  the
doctrines  of .primitive  Marxism,  that  so  many  of  our  thinkers
have been led  to  believe in  the  determining power  of  economic
factors.   To  them,"  the  Professor  went  on,  perhaps  in  the  ab-
sent-minded  belief  that  he  was addressing  the  National  Asso-
ciation  of  Manufacturers,  "the  answers  to  problems  of  social
and  political  stability,  particularly  in  those  areas  which  they
describe  as 'underdeveloped',  are  to  be  found  in  economic im-
provement."   Mr.  Meany  himself  is  a  primitive   Marxist  by
Even  the  Pentagon  Would Find  No  Fault  With This  Labor  Catechism on  Foreign  Policy
"How  does  the  AFL-CIO  view  the  Soviet   campaign  for
'co-existence  and  cultural  relations'?
"The  Kremlin  leaders  are  now. again   turning   to   their
so-called  peaceful  co-existence strategy  for  furthering  their
basic  aims  through   encouraging   the  spread  of  neutralism,
the  relaxation  of  vigilance  in  the  West,  and  the  Communist
infiltration  of   free   labor  organizations.
"What  does  the  AFL-CIO  consider  as  the  test  of  demo-
cratization  behind  the  Iron  Curtain?
"The  new  Khrushchov  course,  which  aims  at   extending
and  tightening  the  hold  of  the  Communist  Party  on  every
walk  of  life,  is  away  from  liberalization   and  democratiza-
tion.   It  is  rather  a  move  towards  darker   reaction.
"What  is  the  AFL-CIO attitude  towards  the  Soviet  cam-
paign  for  'banning'  the  manufacture  and  tests  of   nuclear
weapons?
"The   Soviet   rulers   are   supplementing   their   efforts   to
destroy   NATO  with  a  large-scale   drive   to  end   Western
superiority  in  the  nuclear  field.  While  frantically   speeding
up  the  Soviet  development  and  production  of   atomic  and
hydrogen   weapons,   the   Communist   dictators   are   propa-
gandizing  a  ban  on  the  manufacture  and tests  of  H-bombs.
"Where  does   American   labor   stand   on  the   question  of
national   defense?
"An  all-out  effort  must  be  made  to  regain  any  military
advantage   that  has  been   lost   to  the  Soviet   Union   .  .  .
.The  country  will  support  and  can  well   afford   to  pay   the
sums  needed  to  improve  the  nation's  military  posture.
—Q  and  A  on American Labor and  World  Affairs,   pamphlet  distributed  at  last  week's  AFL-CIO  Foreign  Policy  Meeting.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April 25,1960
Prof.  Rowe's  high  philosophical   standards.    "No  one  should
doubt,"  the  professor  added,  "the  social  and  political  impact
of   economic  development  in  the  Far  East,  even  if  he  must
wonder  just what  [his  italics]  the  impact  really  is.  But  one of
the  facts  of  life  in that  region  today  is that  military  security  is
an  absolute  prerequisite  to  economic  development,   and   that
until it can be locally supplied ... it may have  to be supplied
from  outside."    This  is  Chiang  Kai-shek's  old  doctrine,   that
guns  must  take  precedence  over  butter,  a point  of  view  which
facilitated  his  retirement  from  the  mainland.
A Burst of Proletarian Snobbery
This  being   an  era  of  destalinization,  some  semblance  of
democracy  was  given   the   proceedings   by  allowing   a   short
question-and-discussion  period  after  each  speech.   The  leader-
ship,  however,  astutely  planned  the  New  York  Times  supple-
ment  so that  it  will  reproduce  only  the  set  speeches  and  avoid
publicizing  any  demonstrations   from  the  floor  by  anti-party
elements.   The  first  sign  that  disaffected   forces  were  present
came   from   the   electrical   workers—Carey's,   not   Emspak's.
James   Carey,  president  of   the   IUE,   suggested   that   Russia
might  have  real  fears  about  hydrogen  weapons  and  Al  Hart-
nett,  his  secretary-treasurer, expressed  the  opinion  that  Ameri-
can  labor  should  "learn to live" with  the fact that Communism
is  in  the  world  to  stay  for  some  time.   When  Mr.  Hartnett
went  further  and  proposed  that  workers  take  part  in  cultural
exchanges,  he  drew  a  burst  of  that  temper  for  which  Mr.
Meany  is  famous.   Mr.  Meany  replied  angrily  from  the  dais
that  he  would  have  no  part  in  "fraternization  with  jailers",
adding  in  a  surge  of  true  blue  proletarian  feeling  that  such
exchanges  "might  be  all  right  for  bankers",   always an  unre-
liable  class  element,  "but  not  for  the  trade  union  moyement."
Poor  Leaderless  India
Deviationism   raised   its  head   again  in  the  wake  of  Prof.
Tannenbaum's  speech  on  Latin  America  which  had  discreetly
omitted  any reference to  Castro.   Serafino  Romualdi,  the  AFL-
CIO's  leading  authority  on  Latin  American   affairs,   rose   to
correct  the   deficiency   by  saying  that  the   greatest   threat   to
Latin  America came from  the  Communist  conspiracy  and  urg-
ing  united  action  by  the  Organization  of  American  States  to
isolate  Castro's  Cuba.   This  led  Victor  Reuther  of  the  Auto
Workers  to  warn  against  "oversimplified  slogans"  which  at-
tribute  all  the  difficulties  in  Latin  America  to   Communism.
Mr.  Reuther  said  its  troubles  antedated  the  Russian  Revolu-
tion  and  added  that  these had  as much  to  do with  the  United
Fruit  Company  as  with  Marxism-Leninism.    He  even  hit  be-
low  some  belts  among  those  present  by  asking  why  the  labor
movement  had not  done more  against  Batista and had  found  it
"comfortable  to  consort  with  pro-Batista  labor  leaders."    Mr.
Reuther  skilfully  left  unclear  whether  he  was  for  or  against
the  isoktion  of  Cuba  but  his  remark that  'Castro  was  "an  ex-
cellent revolutionist  but a lousy  administrator"  sounded  almost
like a testimonial  in  that  gathering.   It  began  to  look  as if  Mr.
Meany had  made a mistake in  allowing  diverse flowers to  con-
tend.    Fortunately,  in  the  next  discussion  period,  after  Prof.
Rowe's  speech  on  the  Far  East as viewed  from  Taiwan,  honest
workers  took   the   floor.   Harry  Goldberg,   emissary  to  East
Asia  of  Lovestone's  Counter-Comintern, spoke  about  the bene-
ficial political   effects  on  India  of  Peking's  take-over  in  Tibet.
This  moved  Joseph  Keenan  of  the  IBEW  to  point  out  that
India  had  no  George  Meany  and  to  wonder  why  we  couldn't
get  in  there and  give  them  some  leadership.
The General Gets A Standing  Ovation
The  opening  speaker  at  the  second  day  session  received  a
standing  ovation when  he  finished.  He  was Major  General  J.
B.  Medaris,  former  commander  of   the   U.S.  Army  Missile
Agency.   Either  the  leadership  of  the  American  labor  move-
ment  has  drifted  a  long  way  from  its  moorings,  or  it  wasn't
•  listening.   For  General Medaris  belongs  to  the  far  right  fringe
of  the  military,  who  see little  men  gnawing  their  way  through
the  woodwork everywhere.  He  began  by warning  them  against
the  "subversive  elements  constantly  at  work  among  us"  in-
cluding   the   "equally   dangerous   subversion   that   saps   our
strength  and  our  will  to  defend  our  way of  life  by knowingly
or  unknowingly  fostering  deficiences  in  our  society  that  oper-
ate  to  impair  our  unity."   This  may  not  have  been  too  clear
but  it  was  certainly  far  flung.  His  exposition  of  the  military
function   displayed  exactly  the   frame   of   mind  which  Latin
America  fears.    Gen  Medaris  dwelt  on  the  "provocation  and
assaults  upon  our  sovereignty which have  become almost  daily
occurrences  in  this  period   of  burgeoning  nationalism".    He
complained  that  "in  our  naive desire to  make cause with  those
who  seek  independence ... we seem  to  forget  that  American
citizens  must have the  right  to  expect proper  consideration  for
their   property."    This   was   Clausewitz   repackaged   by   the
United  Fruit  Company,  but  no  one  seemed  to  notice.
To  support  what  used  to  be  called  dollar  diplomacy,  Gen.
Medaris  said  we  need  "an  assortment  of  resources"   so  as  to
permit  "judicious  and  selective application  of  the  means neces-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
Surprise  Attack  by  Gen. Medaris on  the
"In  my  considered   opinion,   the   combination   of   atomic
striking  power  represented  by  the  Strategic  Air   Command
and  other  elements  of   the  retaliatory  capability   satisfies
a  reasonable  counter-strike  requirement.   Given  any  means
by   which  50  to   100  megatons   of   atomic   destruction  can
be  placed  on  the  territory  of  a  potential  enemy  it  is   obvi-
ous  that  the  potential  damage  is  so  severe  that  he  cannot
afford  to  pay  the  price.    Beyond  that   reasonable  amount
of   assurance,   and  perhaps   with   even   less,   there  is  no
further   justification    for   continuing   to  pile   up  relatively
useless  destructive  force ...
"Three  separate   ICBM  systems   are  simply   too  many.
By   what   logic   we   continue • to   pursue   two   more  beyond
one  "already  having   operational   capability,  I  do  not  under-
—Maj.  Gen. J.  B.  Medaris  (Ret.)  former   commander  of  the
"Numbers Racket" of  the  "Missile Gap"
stand.   It  appears  that  the  fear  engendered  by  the  rattling
of  Soviet  rockets  has  destroyed  prudent   judgment,  for  it
is  exclusively  in  this  area  of  massive  retaliation  that  such
expensive  duplication  is  permitted  to  exist.   A  prominent
Senator  recently   estimated   that   our  present   stockpile  of
atomic  weapons  represented  the  equivalent  of   10  tons  of
TNT  for  every  man,   woman  and  child  on  earth.   We  seem
to   be  preparing   hot   for   retaliation  but  for   obliteration.
[Emphasis  added.]
"Those  who  play  the  numbers  racket  by  advocating  more
and  more   ICBMs  without  regard  to  the  limited  nature  of
the   requirement,   and  with   an   apparent   total   disregard
of  the  cost  in  time,  labor,  material   and  money,  I  believe
are  rendering  a  disservice  to  the  nation."
IAS.  Army  Missile  Agency,  before   the  AFL-CIO,  Aprtt  SO.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  25,1960
CIO Leaders  Put  Up  Little Fight  Against  Meany  and  Lovestone
(Continued  pom   Page  Three}
sary  to  stop  incipient  trouble  in  its  tracks."   In  his  opinion  "a
capability for lightning  intervention  must exist. .. and it must
be  sufficient  to  meet  and  cope  with  any threat  anywhere."    He
wants  a  mobile  army  corps  for  swift  limited  war  wherever
American  interests  are  endangered.   To  finance  this,  he  would
—like  the  Army  generally—cut  down  on  funds  for   massive
retaliation   by  the  big  bombers  and  big  missiles  of  the   Air
Force.  His  attack  on  the  "missile  gap" [see box  page  3]  de-
molished   the  favorite   stock  in  trade  of  the  Man  Who   Mr.
Harrison  and  Carey  are  supporting  for  President,  Stuart  Sym-
ington,  but  nobody  seemed  to  notice  that  either.  The  audience
rose  as  one  for  prolonged   applause.   When  a  lady   delegate
from  the  ITJE  in  Canada  piped  up  that  there  the  labor  move-
ment  was working  for  disarmament through  negotiation,  there
was  one  handclap  in  a  far  corner.   "Well,  General,"   said  Mr.
Harrison,  the  chairman,  "it  seems  you  have  done  so  good  a
job  there  is nothing  left  to  say."  When  Jim  Carey  nevertheless
said  something  about  "weapons  for  peace",  his  remarks  were
coldly  received.
A Testimonial from  The  Chancellor
The  chairman  then  read  a  cablegram  to  Meany  from  Aden-
auer,  hailing  "the  unswerving  position  of  the  American  trade
union  movement".     A  fuller  exposition  of  the   Chancellor's
views  was left  to  the  next  speaker,  Dr.  Henry  A.  Kissinger  of
Harvard,  best  known   for  the  theory  of  limited  nuclear  war
he  developed   as  research  chief  for  the  Rockefeller  Brothers
Fund.   Peace,  he  said,  was  not  an  issue;  everybody was  for  it.
There  were,  he  admitted,  peculiar   psychological   and   moral
problems   involved   in   the   German   question.    The   Soviets
realized  and  were  exploiting   this.   But  our  government  was
not  doing  service  to  peace  in pretending  that  a  change  of  tone
by  Moscow  implied  a  change  of  policy.   The  President  had
been  unwise  in  saying  that  nuclear  war  was  unthinkable.   All
of  us  who  have  memories  of  World  War  II  cannot  be  happy
at the prospect  of another war in Central  Europe  but . . . "I'm
not  saying that  we  should  fight  a  war  for  the  reunification of
Germany."   But  Europe  could  not  be  defended  without  Ger-
many.  The  hope  of  the  world  was  to  "tie Germany  so  closely
to  the  Western  community as  to  overcome  "those  hysterical
and  irrational tendencies which  undoubtedly exist  there."   If
the  Germans felt  abandoned in  their hour  of  need, they would
resume  their  old  game  of  playing  East  and  West  against  each
other.   To  this  theme  was  added  Bonn's  familiar  doctrine on
the  dangers  of   relaxation  and  disengagement     As  in  1955,
when  we  thought  the  cold  war  had  ended,  a  general  atmos-
phere  of  good  will  was  demoralizing to  the  free  world. "I'm
not  asking for  continuation of  the  cold  war,"  said  this  bright
young  man  in  his  pompous  bass  voice  with  the  faintly  Ger-
manic  accent,  "but for  responsibility  in  negotiation."    If  we
had  built up  a  strong  enough  force  in  Europe,  if  NATO  had
done  its  duty,  there  would never  have  been  a  threat  to  Berlin.
This  is  how  Adenauer  sees  the  world,  a  world  in  which  Ger-
many  is  the  victim  of  Soviet  machination and  Western  weak-
ness.   This   presentation  was  the   climax  of   the  pre-summit
labor  conference  as  planned  by  Mr.  Meany.
What Adenauer  Fears
It  was  disappointing  that  when   Walter   Reuther  rose  to
speak  after  Dr.  Kissinger,  he  endorsed  this  Germano-centric
view  of  the  world  so warmly.  That  the  Germans have  reason
to  fear  the  Russians  is  true.   It  is  also  true  that  the  Russians
have reason  to  fear  the  Germans,  as do  the  rest of  us. Amid all
Mr.  Reuther's glittering  liberal  generalizations,  there  was  no
mention  of  the  fears  aroused  at  the  prospect  of  a  new  Wehr-
macht  armed  with  nuclear  weapons.   Like  Dr.  Kissinger,  Mr.
Reuther  insisted  that  the  Russians  could  not  really  be  afraid
of  reunification  because  there  was  "no  difference  of  opinion"
on  guarantees  that  Germany  would   never  again  disturb  the
peace  of  the  world.   This  is  untrue;  the  insistence  on  a  re-
armed   Germany  and   on   a   Germany  rearmed  with  nuclear
weapons  makes  any  treaty  guarantees  scraps  of  paper.    The
German   fear   is  that  East  and  West  may  be  by-passing  the
difficult  German  problem  in  the  search  for  peace.  This  is why
Adenauer  fears  the   Summit.   The   real   question   is  whether
Germany  shall  have  priority,  as  a  condition  for  a  world settle-
ment,  or  whether  Germany  is  to  be  left   divided  until  in  a
better  atmosphere not  only Germany but  Europe may be united
again.  The  labor  movement  has been  lined  up  on  the  German
side  by Meany's  belligerence and  Reuther's weakness.
The  1959 Index  Is  Ready   and  You  Can  Get  A  Free  Copy   If  You  Send  A  Stamped   Self-Addressed    Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's
Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Are,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Street  ..............
City   ................
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ...
Street   ..
City   ...............
Shall  we  send
___j———
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1
gift  announcement?
'""""4725/60
yr.)  additional:
Yes'D   No'n
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington    15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  &,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December   at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W..  Washington  U,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
»  In  tie   U.  8.;  16  In  Canada;  «0  •UmrUn.   Ait   Mall  rates:  115  to  Europe;  120  to  Israel.  Alia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED