I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960may30.pdf

============================================================

Why  Russia  Fears  the  U-2,  Page  2
Elsenhower  On TV, like Khrushchov  in  East  Berlin,  Adopts  Moderate Line,  See  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO. 21
MAY  30,  1960
"oi      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
On  This  Business   of  Surprise  Attack
Two   interrelated   fallacies   are   being   sold   the   American
people   by  the   formidable  public   relations,  i.e.   propaganda,
machine   at   the   disposal  of   our   government.     One   is  that
aerial   reconnaissance   in  another  nation's   airspace   is  no  dif-
ferent  from  ordinary  espionage.    The   other  is  that  this  can
protect   us  from  surprise  attack.    The   first   proposition   has
already  been  subjected  to  counter-attack  as  contrary  to  inter-
national   law   and    common   sense;   penetration   of    another
country's   skies   is  a  form   of   invasion,  very  risky  in   a  time
when   the  two  great  powers  sit  with  thermonuclear triggers
cocked.
The  other  proposition, however,   has  passed  unchallenged.
The   picture  created  in  our  minds  by  propaganda   is  that  of
a  brave  American aviator  peering  down  on  the  Soviet  Union
so  he  can  notify  us  at  once  if  he  sees  a  surprise  attack  com-
ing.      It   is   implied  that   our   national  survival   depends   on
such   surveillance;  that   it   inhibits  the   Soviet   Union    from
attacking;  and   that,   as  such,   aerial   reconnaissance  performs
a  public service to  all  the  world,  preventing  war  from  break-
ing  out.    Thus  the  U-2,  as  our  public  relations  experts  por-
tray  it,  is  practically  Picasso's  dove  of  peace,  in  a   technolog-
ically  perfected   form.
It  Began  With  the  Baruch   Plan
Let  us  put   aside  the  question   of   just  what  we  do   when
we  know  that  a  surprise attack  is  on  the  way;  time  in  which
to  retaliate  in  mutual  suicide  is  hardly  a  form   of   assuring
national  survival.   Let  us  address  ourselves  only  to  the  ques-
tion  of  whether   aerial  reconnaissance   is,  indeed,  a  means  of
detecting  surprise  attack.     An  examination   of   the   literature
on  the  subject  does  not   support   the  dazzling oversimplified
publicity  gimmick of  "open  skies"  as  a  guaranty  of  a  peaceful
world.    Aerial  reconnaissance  has   a   part   to   play  some  day
in   a   system  of   world   law   and   world   disarmament   but   by
itself   is  no   guaranty   against   surprise   attack.     The   idea  of
such  reconnaissance  as  a  policing  action  was  first  put   forward
in  the  Baruch  plan   for   a  world  atomic   energy   authority  in
1946.   There  it  was  said  that  "aerial  surveys"  would  be  "par-
ticularly  useful  for  determining  the  existence  or   non-existence
of   industrial   installations   in   an   area   in   which    clandestine
activities  are  suspected"   but  it  was  added  that  "direct  ground
inspection"   would   be   needed   "to   determine   accurately   the
character  of  the  operations."
Despite   much   technological  progress   in  photography  and
reconnaissance,  this  remains  the  situation   today.    The   fullest
and  most  expert  international   discussion   of  the  problem  oc-
curred   at   the    1958    East-West   conference    in   Geneva   on
means  of  preventing   surprise   attack.    The  final  report  made
public  at   the   United   Nations   January   5,   1959,    shows   the
limitations  of   aerial  reconnaissance.     In   Annex   6,   a  paper
6  *
Despite  That  Iron Curtain
"We  do know  where  their  major  air  bases  are;  where
their   major   government  control  centers   are;   where
their   air   defense   centers   are;   where   their   sensitive
industrial  centers  are;  where  their  gasoline   refineries
and  storage  sites  are," i.e.,  in  the  Soviet  Union.
—Gen.  Thomas   D.  White,  Chief    of   Staff,     U.S.   Air
Force,  Feb.  17,  1959,  before   the  House   Appropriations
Committee  on  the  1960  Defense   Budget,  Part  1,  P.  840.
"The   United States  will  have,  in  the  1959  fiscal  year,
something   like   4,000   to   5,000   aircraft,   each  capable
of  carrying  a  thermonuclear weapon of  megaton  range.
.  ,  .  Collectively,  this  represents  a  tremendous  factor
of   safety,   and   a   gigantic  'over-kill'  capacity.    There
are  less  than  200  cities  with  populations  of  more  than
50,000  in  the  Soviet  Union;  of  these,   many  are  .  .  .
inconsequential.     There   are   actually   no   more   than
about  60  to  100  prime  targets.  .  .  .  Thus,  the  United
States  has  today   the  theoretical  capability  of  wiping
out  each  prime  target  in  Soviet  Russia  40  to  50  times."
—Hanson  W.  Baldwin:  The Great  Arms  Race,  pps.
39-42.
submitted   by   the   Western   experts,   one   finds   that   cloudy
weather,*  night-time  and   camouflage  can  hamper   such  sur-
veillance.    This  document  also  speaks  of  "the   inherent  delay
in  converting  photographic  data  to  useful  information"   and
Annex  13,  another  Western   document,   says  "to  make  aerial
search   techniques   effective   they   must   be   complemented   by
observation    on   the   ground.      Ground    observers   verify   the
information   received   from  aerial  search  and  provide  the  best
means  of  critical  observation of  intentions or  indications which
in  turn  would  provide  warning  of  any  surprise  attack."   This
seems  painfully  slow  when  compared   with   our  Buck  Rogers
comic  strip   picture  of   a  Powers   triumphantly   radioing  back
an  instant  warning  from   over   Sverdlovsk  before  the  enemy
can  press  the  button.
The  Eisenhower   "open  skies"  proposal  was  first  put   for-
ward  as  a  public  relations  dazzler  at  the  first  summit   confer-
ence   in   1955.     It   was   the   handiwork   of   a    psychological
warfare   group   headed   by  Nelson   Rockefeller.      The    most
deflating   postscript   to   it  may  be   found   in   the    Rockefeller
Brothers  Report  on  International  Security:  The  Military  Aspect
three   years  later   in  which   Nelson   Rockefeller   participated.
"There  is  no  doubt,"  the  report   says,   "that  the  danger  of
surprise  attack  contributes  to  the  tensions  of  the  nuclear   age.
But   with   evolving    technology    it   is   questionable   whether
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
*  "The  USSR   is   enveloped  in   clouds   far   more  than   the
United  States;  in  some  parts  of  Russia  there  are  only  two
or  three  clear  days  a  year,"  Philip  W.  Quigg,  "Open  Skies
and   Open  Space,"   Foreign   Affairs   Quarterly,   Oct.    1958.
8  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 30,1960
Target-Finding  and  Muscle-Flexing  Are  the  Real  Functions  of  the  U-2
(Continued   from   Page  One)
aerial  inspection  will  significantly  reduce  the  element  of  sur-
prise  .  .  .  even  a  foolproof   inspection  system  will  tell  largely
what  is  already  known:  that  the  opponent  possesses  the  capa-
bility  to  launch  a  devastating  attack  on  very  short  notice  and
with  a  minimum  of  warning."
Second   Use  of  the   "Open  Skies"  Gimmick
The  current  debate  at  the  United   Nations   represents   the
second  time  we  have  trotted  out  the  "open  skies"   gimmick
in  that  forum  in  reply  to  Russian  alarms.    The  first  occasion
was  in  1958  when  an  inaccurate  United   Press  report  implied
that  SAC  bombers  loaded  with  thermonuclear  weapons  wing
out  over  the  Arctic  toward  Russia  frequently  in  response   to
"ghosts"  on  our  radar  warning  screens.    Then,  too,  we  sug-
gested  that  if  the  Russians were  really  worried  about  surprise
attack,  they  ought  to  accept  the  President's   open   skies  pro-
posal.  ' One  of  the  Air  Force's  own Rand Corporation  scholars,
Albert  Wohlstetter,  commented  on  this  suggestion   in  Foreign
Affairs     for   January   1959,   that   it   "conceals   an   absurdity."
Writing on  "The  Delicate  Balance of  Terror,"  he  said  "Aerial
photography   would   have  its  uses  in  a  disarmament  plan—
for   example,   to   check   an   exchange   of   information   on   the
location   of   ground   bases.     However,   so   far   as  surprise   is
concerned,  an  'open  skies'  plan  would  have  direct  use  only
to  discover  attacks' requiring  much  more  lengthy,   visible  and
unambiguous  preparations   than  are  likely   today.  .  .  .  Not
even   the   most   advanced   reconnaissance  equipment   can  dis-
close   an   intention   from   40,000   feet.     Who   can   say  what
the  men  in  the  blockhouse  of  an  ICBM  base  have  in  mind?
Or,  for  that  matter,  what  is  the  final  destination  of  training
flights  or  fail-safe  flights  starting  over  the   Pacific  or  North
Atlantic from  staging  areas?"
•  At   present,   in   my   own   opinion,  for   whatever  it   may   be
worth,   we   are   much   more   heavily  armed   than   the   Soviet
Union  and   could  smash  it  many  times  over  if  we   wanted.
No   Iron   Curtain  can  hide   the   major   targets   for   thermo-
nuclear   destruction.    These,   as   General   White's  testimony
in  the  box  on  page  one  indicates,  are  known  to  us.    There
are,   after   all,  maps  of   Russia   and   the  position   of   Moscow
is  not   a  military   secret.     We   have  our   own   agents   in   the
Soviet  Union,  too.    What  we  don't  know,  as  General  White
went  on  to  say  in  that   same  appearance  before   the   House
Appropriations   Committee,   are   the   sites   of   Russia's   new
All  That  New  Spy-in-the-Sky  Can Do
Is  Tell  Us  When We're  Doomed
"A   perfected   Midas   would  be   capable   of  detecting
the   heat   radiation   of   the   huge  rocket  engines   of   a
long-range   ballistic   missile  as   it   ejected   flame   and
rose  into   the  sky."
—New   York   Times,  May  25,  "Satellite   to  Spot   Mis-
sile  Shots  Put  Into  Orbit  in  Air  Force  Test."
intercontinental   ballistic   missiles.     Unless    these   could    be
smashed  first,  the  Soviet  Union  could  retaliate  in  deadly  form
against  an  attacker.    This  is  what  deters  even  our  advocates
of  preventive  war.    We  might  "overkill"   the  Soviets  40  to
50  times  as  Hanson  Baldwin  points  out  but  they  could  wreak
havoc  on  our  cities  and  cripple  our  country  in  return.   If  we
could  pin-point  their  missile  bases,  the  way  would   be   clear
for  preventive  war,  for  a  first  strike  from  our  side.    This  is
why  the  Russians  fear  aerial  reconnaissance and  this  i:; how  it
threatens  to  upset  that  delicate balance of  terror.
Postscript
We  would   call   attention   in  this   connection   to   an   Asso-
ciated  Press  dispatch  from   Washington  which  appeared   in
the    Baltimore   Sun   May   23.     It    quoted   an    unidentified
"group   of   American  experts   on   Soviet   affairs"   as   being
very   much  alarmed  lest  the  Administration  adhere   to    "its
ban  on  U-2  flights  over  Russia."    Significantly,  the&e  anon-
ymous  experts   said   nothing  about   needing  the   U-2  as   a
guard  against  surprise  attack.   They  gave  two  reasons.  One
was  that  the  flights  "mapped  vital  targets  for  the  Strategic
Air   Command."    The   other   was   "Second—and   most   im-
portant—the   Kremlin   was   well   aware   of   the   U-2's   role
and   efficiency,   and  respected   it."    This  second  reason   seems
to  regard  it  as  important  to  flex  our  muscles  over   Russia's
skies.    "Although   the   targets   could   be   defined   by   other
sources   of  intelligence,"  the   AP  dispatch   went   on  to   say,
"the   Strategic   Air  Command  has   found   the   U-2  thus   far
the  best,  most  reliable  and  comprehensive  tool  for  tMs  pur-
pose."   Apparently  the  SAC  likes  the  U-2  not  only  because
it   locates  targets  for   it  but  because  it   does  so  in  a  way
which   shows   the   Russians   we  can   over-fly   their   country.
This  is  the  "tough  guy"  attitude  which  can  be  so  dangerously
provocative  in  the  thermonuclear   age.     "Some  Defense  De-
partment  experts,"  the  AP  said,  "are   reported   worried  by
the   possible   reafflrmation   in   the   United   Nations   Security
Council  of  President   Elsenhower's  Paris  announcement  call-
ing  off the  spy   flights."   They  argue  that  since  Khrushchev
"rejected   Elsenhower's   gesture  in  Paris   .  .  .  the   United
States  is  no  longer  bound  by   it."
Why  the  Soviets  Would  Be  Mad to  Risk
"It  appears  that  the  principle  obstacles  to  a  Soviet  sur-
prise  attack  in  the  missile  gap  period  .  .  .  arise  from  the
practical  difficulty  of  effectively  destroying  a  large  number
of   dispersed  targets   almost   simultaneously,    a.  feat   neces-
sary   in   order   to   prevent   a  retaliatory  counter-attack  of
major  proportions  on  the   Soviet  Union.
"These  targets  include SACs  overseas  bases,  NATO  tac-
tical  air  forces  whose  planes  can  deliver  nuclear  weapons
against   Soviet  targets  of  strategic  importance, a. handful
of   intermediate  range   missile   sites   in   Western  Europe
and  Britain,  and  those   U.S.   naval  carriers  in  position  to
launch  strategic   attacks.    The  number  of   these   weapons
that   might   escape   destruction   from   Soviet   missiles  and
aircraft  .  .  .  poses  a  retaliatory  threat  that   should  intro-
duce  a  note  of  caution  into  Soviet  calculations.    No   sane
A  Surprise  Attack  on  the  United  States
government  would  view  lightly  the  placing  of  even  a  dozen
thermonuclear  bombs  on  its   major  cities.
'The   execution   of   a   coordinated   surprise   attack  pre-
sents  an  additional  element  of  uncertainty,  as  many  of  the
preparatory  moves  could  give  the  show  away  if  misphased.
If   the   first   Soviet   intermediate  range   missiles,    for   ex-
ample,  struck  one  of  our  overseas  airbases  even  20  minutes
ahead   of   an   ICBM   strike  against   SAC's   domestic   fields,
a   force   of   several   hundred  U.S.   bombers   (now   or   15-
minute   'ground   alert')   could   be   airborne   and   on   their
way  to  Soviet  targets  before  their  bases  were  destroyed."
—Developments  in  Military   Technology  and  Their  Impact
on  t/.S.  Strategy,   Report  No.  8  to  the  Senate  Foreign  Re-
lations  Committee,  December  6,  1959, p.  55.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 30, 1960
From  the  Liberal Project  Manifesto
"The  1958  elections  brought   to  Washington  57  new
Democratic  Congressmen  who,  for  the  most  part,  were
elected  because   the  American  people  felt  that   a  new
kind   of   leadership   and   new   ideas   were   desperately
needed  in  politics. ...  As  part  of  this  resurgence   a
group  of  Congressmen  has  joined  together  with  a  dis-
tinguished   group   of   scientists,   scholars   and   experts
to   formulate   new   domestic   and  international  policies
applicable   to   the   1960's.     This   group   and   its   work
has  come  to. be  known  as  the  Liberal  Project ...  to
formulate  a  positive  political  position  which  will  seek
solutions   that   are   not   tainted   with   political   oppor-
tunism  or  false  moderation."
12  Congressmen  and  46  Scholars  Join  in  Launching   A  New  "Liberal   Project"
New  Liaison  Between  Progressives  and  the  Learned  Community
A  new  effort  to  bring  about  close  liaison  in  policy  formula-
tion  between  liberals  in  Congress   and  liberals  in  the  learned
community   made   its  public  debut   here   last   week   with   the
release  by  The   Liberal  Project  of   a  foreign  policy  study  by
James  P.  Warburg.    This   is  to   be  the   first   in   a   series  of
special   studies   in   basic   policy   questions.    These  are   to   be
published   as  "The   Liberal  Papers"   early  in  the   Fall.    The
Liberal   Project   also   expects   to   circulate  a   70-page   booklet
with   a   draft   platform   and   general   policy   recommendations
for   the  Democratic  Party  at  its  convention   in  July.
The   core  of   the   new  group   are   12   Congressmen    aided
by  46  scholars   (see  box  below)   in  various   fields.   The   aim
is  not  to  form  a  new  action  group  competitive  with  Americans
for  Democratic Action nor  to  organize  a  Congressional  "bloc."
The   strategy  is  to  keep   the  group   small  enough   so  that   it
can  hammer  out  specific  programs  without  too  much  of   the
"watering   down"   process   inevitable  in  collective   action   and
use  these  to  stimulate  public  discussion.
A  German  Solution  Bypassed  By  Events
The  Warburg   foreign  policy  paper  contains  few  surprises
for   those   familiar   with   the   work   of   this   gifted   long-time
crusader   for   a   more   humane   and   rational   foreign    policy.
Unfortunately   parts  of  it,  notably  on  the   German   question,
appear   to  be  "dated"  not  merely  by  the  breakdown   of   the
summit  but  by  Russian  attitudes  obvious   many  months   ago.
Mr.  Warburg's  formulation,   that   the   U.S.   must   decide  be-
tween   "a   German   military   contribution   to   NATO,  or   the
reunification   of   the   two  German   states"   seems   to  have  be-
come  obsolete.    German  Social  Democrats  with  whom  I  spoke
in   Bonn   last   year   after   their   visit   to   Moscow   came   back
with  the  bleak  view  that  the  Russians  were  no  longer   inter-
ested  in  reunification  but  only  in  obtaining  Western  recogni-
tion  of  a  permanently  split  Reich.    Mr.  Warburg   advocates
a  variant  of  the  Rapacki  plan,   calling  for   a  neutral   belt  in
Central   Europe,  with   the  U.S.   offering  to  withdraw   behind
the Rhine if  the  Russians withdraw  behind  the  Oder.  Though
these   solutions   look   wistfully  Utopian  at   the   moment,   Mr.
Warburg's  presentation   and  analysis  are  trenchant   and  may
help  to  pave  the  way  for  meaningful  negotiation.
In  the  Far  East,  Mr.  Warburg  is  for   admission   of   Com-
munist  China  to  the  United  Nations  if  it  reaffirms  the  renun-
ciation-of-force   pledge   it   took   at   Bandung.     He    advocates
withdrawal  from  the  offshore  islands,   a  5-year  UN   trustee-
ship  over  Taiwan  and  then  a  plebiscite  to  determine   whether
the   population   wants   to  be   independent   or   join    mainland
China.    He  admits,  "This  solution  will  at  first  appeal  neither
to  Peking   nor   to  the  Nationalist   regime   on  Taiwan,"   but
would  use  as  a  bargaining   point  U.S.   readiness  to   withdraw
from  Okinawa  and  Japan   "at  the  appropriate   phase  of  uni-
versal   disarmament."
Like  any  effort   to   rearrange   the   realities  of   international
life  more  sensibly,  this  has  an  inevitable  flavor  of  pie-in-the-
sky.   The   report   is  perhaps   most   Utopian  where   most  pain-
fully   true—in   its  discussion  of   disarmament.     "So   long  as
nations  subject  to  no  supra-national  law  possess  any  offensive
armaments  whatever,"   Mr.  Warburg  writes,  "we  believe   that
wars  will  recur."    Mr.  .Warburg's  solution,  universal  disarma-
ment  coupled  with  a  new  world  organization  that  can   enforce
law,  may  be  unattainable  but  short   of  that  the  problem  of
war  looks  insoluble.
Membership  of  the  Newly  Formed  "Liberal  Project"  to  Map  New  U.S.  Policies
Twelve   Democratic   Congressmen:   Robert   W.   Kasten-
meier,  Wis.,  chairman; Byron  Johnson,  Col.;  George  Kasem,
Cal.;  Clem  Miller,  Cal.;  Wm.  Meyer, Vt.;  Wm.  Moorehead,
Pa.;   James   O'Hara,   Mich.;  Charles   Porter,   Ore.;   Henry
Erich  Fromm;  Paul  Goodman,  novelist  and  social   scientist;
David  Haber,  Prof,  of  Law,  Rutgers;  Stuart  Hughes,   Har-
vard;  Robert  M.  Hutchins,  head  of   the   Fund  for   the   Re-
public;   Erich   Kahler,   philosopher,   author   of    Man,   The
Reuss,  Wis.;  James  Roosevelt,  Cal.;  Frank  Thompson,   N.J.;      Measure,  erstwhile  member  Institute  for  Advanced  Study;
Leonard   G.  Wolf,   Iowa.    Marcus  G.  Raskin,  Group   Sec-
retary.
Non-Congressional  Participants:  Hannah  Arendt,  philos-
opher;   Thurman  Arnold,  former   Federal   Appeals   judge;
Clarence   Ayres,   U.   of  Texas  Prof.,   Governor  of   Federal
Reserve  Board;  Daniel  Bell,  Columbia;  Merwin  Bohan,  spe-
cialist  in  Latin  America  and  former  Ambassador;   Kenneth
Boulding,  author  of  The  Economics  of  Disarmament,   Univ.
of   Michigan;  Stuart  Chase,   economist;   Willard   Cochrane,
president  of   Farm   Economics  Association,   Dean   of  Agri-
tulture,   Univ.  of   Minn.;  John  Cogley,   former   editor,   The
Commonweal.
Kingsley  Davis,  sociologist;  Vera  Micheles  Dean,  Foreign
Policy  Assoc.; Reuel  Denney, tlniv. of  Chicago;  Clark  Eichel-
berger;   Oscar   Ewing,   former   head   of   Federal   Security
Simon  Kuznets,  economist;  Harold  Lasswell,   Yale.
Alexander   Liveright,  director  adult  education,   Univ.  of
Chicago;  Michael  Maccoby,  ass't  to  dean  of   faculty,   Har-
vard;   Myres   McDougal,  Prof,   of   Law,   Yale;   S.   L.   A.
Marshall,   General   (ret),   military  analyst;   Seymour   Mel-
man,   engineer    and   specialist    in   disarmament   controls;
Martin  Meyerson,  MIT,  Harvard;  Walter  Millis;  F.  S.  C.
Northrop,  Yale;  Nathaniel  Peffer,  Columbia;  Thomas   Phil-
lips,   General   (ret)   and  military   analyst.
Eugene  Rabinowitch,  editor  Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scien-
tists;  David  Riesman,  Harvard;  Fred  Rodell,  Yale;  Bernard
Schwartz,  New  York  Univ.;  Edward  Shils,  Chicago;  Harvey
Swados,   novelist;   Frank   Tannenbaum,   Columbia;   Harold
Taylor,   former  pres.   Sarah   Lawrence;   Immanuel   Waller-
stein,  Columbia;  James  P.  Warburg;  Norbert  Wiener;  Hurt
Administration;   John   Hope   Franklin,   Brooklyn   College;     Wolff,   Brandeis;   Quincy  Wright,  Univ.  of  Virginia.
8  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May SO,  I960
Eisenhower  Joins  Khrushchev  In  Switching  to  A  Moderate  Line
Mr.  Elsenhower's  TV  report  on  the  collapse  of  the  summit
was  as  feeble  in  its  explanations  of  the  U-2  flight  as  his  hold
on  the  controls  of  the  government  he  heads.    But  his  almost
wistfully   moderate   reaction  to  the  Soviet   attacks   upon   him
are  praiseworthy   and  hopeful.    The  key  to  the  world  situa-
tion,  as  the  President  well  said,  lies  in  the  catastrophic  nature
of   a  nuclear   war.     "Recognition   of  this  mutual  destructive
capability,"   Mr.   Eisenhower    said,   "is   the   basic   reality  of
our   present  relations."    He  pledged  continuance  of  present
negotiations  on  disarmament  atrj<|
:
 testing  urideterred   "by  bad
deportment"  and  he  remains  convinced   that   "the   basic  long-
ings  of   the   Soviet   people  are  much   like  our   own."    These
longings  are  frustrated,  however,  when   slipshod  handling  of
the  reins  in  the White  House  undercut!  the  tttemlin  moder-
ates  rind  plays into  the  hands  of  the   Stalinists.
Germans  Make  Trouble  on  Both  Sides
We  hope  the  tone  of  Mr.  Elsenhower's  address  will  bring
Soviet  propagandists  to  their  senses.     To  confuse  Mr.  Eisen-
hower  with  Adenauer  is  to  play  into  the  latter's  hands.   Folly
and  accident  not  malevolence  and  design  explain  his  handling
of   the   U-2   affair.     We   were   also   happy   to   see  that   Mr.
Khrushchev,   after   his   violent   and   vulgar   press   conference
in   Paris,  calmed   down   in   East  Berlin,   much   to   the  disap-
pointment  of  the  East  German   Communists.    These,  like  the
West   German   leaders,   are  alike   in   favoring   tough   policies
which  can  only  increase  world  tension.    The  Soviet   Premier's
East  Berlin  speech,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  President's,
should  encourage  UN   efforts  at  mediation.    Mr.  Khrushchev
s.iid  he  would  do  nothing  to  aggravate  the  situation  and  added
that   "the   Western   States,   our   partners   at  the   summit  con-
ference,   must   understand   our   position   correctly.     For   their
part   they   also   must   abide   by  the   principle   not   to   permit
any   unilateral   moves   that   would   prevent   the   heads-of-gov-
ernment   meeting   in   six  or   eight   months'    time."     This   in
our  opinion  means  above  all  no  moves  to  give  nuclear   arms
to   the  West   Germans.     This   makes   particularly    disturbing
the   interview   given   the   Associated   Press   in   Paris   May   19
by   "a  high   official"   of  NATO  forecasting  an  easing  of   the
Happy  Ending
"In   the   light   of   the   blowup   of   the   long-awaited
summit   meeting   and   a   grim   turn   for   the   worse   in
the  international  situation  last  week,  the  stock   market
staged   a   remarkable   performance.   .  .  .   Traders  de-
cided   that   the   'cold   war'  was  due  to  heat   up.  .  .  .
This  logically  led  to  renewed  investor  interest ...  in
the   stocks   of   companies   engaged  in   some   aspect   of
military   work—notably,   aircraft,   electronics   and  mis-
sile*- >•   .  The  uplift  wag  • the  most  exciting  week  for
the  'stock  nta&tt  |n"»«riy  months. ...  It  was  a  week
in   which,  after   many   months   of   disappointment  and
confusion,   the   bpljg   received    strong   encouragement.
The   news  t«*|ed   out,   after   all,   to   be   good   news."
survey,  New  York  Times,  Sun.  May  22.
arms  restrictions on  West  Germany  in   view   of   the  summit
failure.    Such  a  step,  consistent  with  Adenauer's  plan,  would
darken   any   prospects   for   resumed  negotiations.
Stevenson  Takes  the  Lead
In  his  United  Nations   presentation,  too.  Gromyko  showed
signs  ot   a   cooling-off   process   and   Henry   Cabot   Lodge   was
kept  significantly   restrained.    Whether  the   situation   has  de-
veloped   beyond   repair   in   the   near   future   is  the   question,
however.    Rockefeller's  sudden   "availability"   as  a  candidate
opens   a  challenge  from  the   right   to  Eisenhower's  summitry
and  desire to hold  the  arms  race within bounds.    Adlai  Steven-
son's  courage  in  speaking   out,   on  the   other   hand,   seem   to
he   giving   him   the   leadership   he   deserves   but   it   is   much
too  early  to  predict  that  the  bulk  of  the  Democrats  will  form
ranks  behind  him.    Truman   and  Symington  still  believe  that
the  answer  to  the  summit  collapse   is  stepped  up  arms   spend-
ing  in  an  effort   to  reach  a  new  "situation  of  strength."    Ful-
bright   is  playing  a  cautious  game   midway   between   Lyndon
Johnson  and  Adlai  Stevenson.    The  revolt  of  57  House  Dem-
ocrats   led   by  Kowalski   of- Connecticut   who   demand   clear
answers   to   the   questions   raised   by   the   U-2   fiasco   is   most
encouraging.    There  are  signs  of  a  national  awakening  which
Stevenson  could  lead  toward  peace.                        7  p.m.  May 2.5
Ir  You  Send  A  Stamped  Self-Addressed    Long  Envelope,   We'II   Send  A  Free  Copy   of  This  Week's   to  A  Friend
1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City     .......................................Zone..._......^tate....................
5/30/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name  ...........................................................~..~..-....~..-
Street   .....................................„............_.._.........._..___.......
City    ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  tbe  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.   Stone.    Subscription:
M  In  the  U.  S.:  *0  In  Canada;  WO elsewhere.    Air  Hall  rates:  S15 to  Europe;  120 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED